Copyrighted Maten
Fundamentalsof
Veterinary
Clinical Pathology
Second Edition
Steven L.Stockham and Michael A.Scott
Analytco
Blackwell
Publishing
Fundamentals of
VETERINARY
CLINICAL
PATHOLOGY
SecondEdition
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Thispageintentionallyleftblank
Fundamentals of
VETERINARY
CLINICAL
PATHOLOGV
Second Edition
Steven L.Stockham·MichaelA.Scott
Blackwell
Publishing
Steven L.Stockham,DVM,MS,Diplomate,American College ofVeterinary Pathologists(Clinical Pathol
ogy); Professor in the Department of Diagnostic Medicine/Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas.
Assistant Professor in the Department of Pathobiology and Diagnostic Investigation, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan.
@2008 BlackwellPublishing
All rights reserved
Blackwell Publishing Professional
2121 State Avenue,Ames,Iowa 50014,USA
Orders:1-800-862-6657
Office:1-515-292-0140
Fax:1-515-292-3348
Web site:www.blackwellprofessional.com
sesman
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Tel.: +44 (0)1865 776868
Blackwell Publishing Asia
550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
Tel.:+61(0)3 8359 1011
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients,
is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license
by CCC, a separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee code for users of the Transactional Report
ing Service is ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-0076-9/2008.
First edition,@2002
Second edition, @2008
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Stockham, Steven L.
Fundamentals of veterinary clinical pathology / Steven L. Stockham, Michael A. Scott.2nd ed.
p.;cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13:978-0-8138-0076-9 (all.paper)
ISBN-10:0-8138-0076-5 (alk paper)
[DNLM:1. Animal Diseases-pathology.2. Clinical Laboratory Techniquesveterinary.
3.Pathology,Veterinary-methods. SF 772.6 S864f 2008]
SF772.6.S76 2008
636.089'607-dc22
The last digitisthe printnumber:987654321
CONTENTS
Prefacevii
Acknowledgmentsix
1Introductory Conccpts3
2
2Leukocytes53
4
Platelets223
5
Hemostasis 259
6
Bone Marrow and Lymph Node323
7Protcins369
8Urinary System415
6
9MonovalentElectrolytes and Osmolality495
10Blood Gases,Blood pH, and Strong Ion Difference559
11CalmPshrusMasiumndThirRegulaorne93
12Enzymes 639
13Liver Function 675
14
Glucose,Ketoamines,and Related Regulatory Hormones 707
15
Exocrine Pancreas and Intestine 739
16
Lipids763
17
Thyroid Function 783
18
Adrenocortical Function 805
19
Cavitary Efusions 831
coursesman
￥
Color platesbetweenpages494and495
Index869
CourseSmart
This page intentionallyleft blank
PREFACE
Writing this second edition was motivated by our desire to synthesize and incorporate newer
information related to fundamentals of veterinary clinical pathology,and it was driven by the
same goals as the first edition: to explain the physiologic,pathologic,and analytical conditions or
disorders responsible for abnormal laboratory data,and to do so using consistent terms and a
uniform format. Whenever posible, diseases and conditions are grouped by common mecha-
nisms orprocesses topromote a conceptualunderstanding of laboratory data that canbegener
ally applied acrossmany species.
The contentof thefisteditionwaslargelypreservedbut the secondedition contains add
tional disorders,diagnostic tests,illustrations,references, and pathophysiologic explanations.
There are four major changes: (1) the analytical aspects in Chapter 2 of the first edition are now
distributed into their respective chapters on leukocytes, erythrocytes, and platelets (Chapters 24),
(2) the Hemostasis chapter of the first edition is split into two chapters, one focused on nonhemo-
stasis aspects of platelets (Chapter 4) and the other on hemostasis (Chapter 5）,(3）a new chapter
on cavitary effusions (Chapter 19) focuses on the pathophysiologic processes that create cavitary
effusions and relates them to infammatory,renal,hepatic, electrolyte, protein, and lipoprotein
disordersand(4)the color plate sectionisrevised and expanded to includemicroscopicimages
of bone marrow,lymph nodes, and cavitary effusions.
Even though the second edition contains more information than the first,it remains focused
on disorders occurring in North America and does not address some of the more specialized
aspects of veterinary clinical pathology such as therapeutic drug monitoring and molecular
diagnostic assays. Coverage of diagnostic cytology is limited because a second volume would be
required to do justice to itLastly,material is again restrictedmostly o dogscats,horses and
cattle because these species provide the basis for a fundamental understanding of veterinary
clinical pathology.
Regrettably, we willikely uncover mistakes in the second edition as we did in the first.
Corrections for these mistakes will be available at this textbook'sWeb site (search FVCP
Stockham or FVCP Scort), which is linked to the publisher's Web site and the authors'Web sites.
Also available in the textbook'sWeb site are lists of suggested specific objectives thatmay be used
as study guides,and electronic copies of the book'sfigures available exclusively for educational
purposes.
Once again,wefound the writingof the second edition to bea great learning experience and
hope thatour effortsfacilitate thelearningofothers.
CourseSmarn
coufsesmar
vii
Thispageintentionallyleffblank
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FIRSTEDITION
Many people directly and indirectly assisted in the writing of this book. We thank our fantastic
families for providing the never-ending support for our professional pursuits.We thank our
excellent veterinary and graduate students for their active participation in their learningtheir
questions frequently provided stimuli for finding better explanations,and their answers provided
insight into what they were or were not learning. We thank our mentors (Drs.Jan Krehbiel,
Doug Weiss,Harold Tvedten,and Julia Stickle) and coresidents at Michigan State University,
who provided excellent specialty training.We thank Dr. Jenni Donald,who actively participated
in the planning,reviewing,and critiquing of chapters.We also thank the technologiss in the
Clinical Pathology Laboratory at the University of Missouri, and especially Kathy Curtis, MT
(ASCP), for helping us pursue many unanswered questions and for documenting certain abnor-
malities.We also appreciate the assistance of Howard Wilson and Don Connors during the
generation of the plates and figures.
The senior author would not have accepted the challenge of writing this text without the
persistent encouragement of a longtime friend,colleague,and excellent teacherDonald A.
Schmidt,DVM,PhD,Diplomate,ACVP,ProfessorEmeritus.Veryfewpeoplehave theopportu
nity to work with such a great person who was also one of the pioneers in the specialty of
veterinary clinical pathology.His statement that “students must come first, they are the reason we
are hereprovided the justification formany career decisions.Forover 25years at the University
of Missouri,veterinary students (and this senior author) were extremely fortunate to have Dr.
Schmidt as a teacher.
The specialty inveterinary clinical pathologygrewout of the increased use of laboratory tests
in veterinary medicine,was promoted in the early 1960s by a society now known as the Ameri-
can Society for Veterinary Clinical Pathology (ASVCP), and then formalized in the early 1970s
by the American College of Veterinary Pathologists (ACVP). The authors extend thanks to the
ASVCP and ACVP members (and especially charter members and contemporary colleagues) for
their leadership,investigations, and instruction.We have made great advances in our understand
ing of diseases of domestic mammals in the past 40 years, but there are many facts we do not
know and processes we do not understand. The clinical laboratories, their dedicated personnel,
and their expanding analytical procedures will play a key role in future advances.
SECONDEDITION
We are still greatly appreciative of the many people who directly or indirectly assisted in the
writing of the first edition, and we extend sincere thanks to colleagues, students,and family who
supported our efforts to produce the second edition. We appreciate the faculty in our depart
ments and colleges who value the scholarly activities of teaching and the writing of a textbook,
and we are especially thankful for the unwavering support of our spouses and for the encouraging
feedback offred by veterinary students,residents,and fellow clinicalpathologists
ix
Thispageintentionallyleffblank
Fundamentals of
VETERINARY
CLINICAL
PATHOLOGY
Second Edition
Thispageintentionallyleffblank
Chapter1
INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
Clinical Pathology...
Samples...
5
I.Blood Samples and Specimens.
5
Il.Urine Samples.
7
Ill.OtherBody Fluid Samples
7
Major Types of Laboratory Assays.
7
Significant Figures.
9
Units.
10
Reference Intervals.
16
QualityofLaboratoryResults
20
1.Major Determinants
20
Il.Analytical Properties ofAssays.
21
Ill.Quality assurance.
25
Differences in Laboratory Methods and Their Results.
29
Comparison ofAssays.
31
Which Laboratory Do You Use?.
35
Evaluating andValidatingLaboratoryMethods
36
Diagnostic Properties and Predictive Value of Laboratory Assays.
38
Receiver Operating Characteristic(RoC) Curves.
45
Herd-based Testing for Cattle.
48
4
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 1.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
[fT4]ed
Free thyroxine concentration by equilibrium dialysis
[x]
x concentration (x=analyte)
BHB
β-Hydroxybutyrate
Ca²+
Calcium
CLSI
Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute
CV
Coefficient of variation
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
fCa²+
Free ionized calcium
FN
False negative
FP
False positive
fT4
Free thyroxine
IFCC
International Federation of Clinical Chemistry
IUPAC
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
K,EDTA
Dipotassium salt of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
K,EDTA
Tripotassium salt of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
Na,EDTA
Disodium salt of ethylenediamineretraacetic acid
NCCLS
National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards
NEFA
Nonesterified fatty acids (farty acids)
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
PV(-)
Predictive value of a negative test
PV(+)
Predictive value of a positive test
ROC
Receiver operating characteristic
sd
Standard deviation
SI
Systeme International d'Unites
T3
Triiodothyronine
tCa²+
Total calcium
TE
Total error allowable
TN
True negative
TP
True positive
TRH
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
tT4
Total thyroxine
U
International unit
USD
Usual standard deviation
WRI
Within reference interval
Note:SeeTable1.4for abreviations ofunits ofmeasurement and the figurelegends for abbrevia
tions unique to figures.
CLINICALPATHOLOGY
I.
What is clinical pathology?
A.Definitions'
1.Pathology is the branch of medicine that deals with the basis of disease, especially
those structural and functional changes in organs and tissues causing or caused by a
disease." In general terms, it is the study of disease.
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
2.Clinical pathology is a “subspecialty of pathology that deals with the use of labora-
tory methods (clinical chemistry,microbiology,hematology,..) for the diagnosis
and treatment of disease.” In general terms, it is the study of disease in the clinical
environment by use of laboratory assays.
B.As currently certified by the American College of Veterinary Pathologists,veterinary
clinical pathologiss are specialists in thedisciplines ofbasic pathology,hematology
(srudy of blood),clinical chemistry (study of physiologic and biochemical reactions）,
cytology (study of cells),and surgical pathology (study of disease via microscopic
analysis of tissue samples obtained during surgery).
C.Vererinary clinical pathologists andotherlaboratory profesionals (medical technolo-
gists, medical laboratory technicians, and veterinary technicians) often work in a clinical
laboratory that limits its assay “menu” (offered tests) to hematologic assays, clinical
chemical assays,urinalysis,and clinical cytologic orhistologic examinations.Other
assays or diagnostic laboratory procedures are offered by specific laboratories (e.g
microbiology,histopathology,and toxicology)that are supervised by microbiologists,
histopathologists,and toxicologists,respectively
II.
Laboratory tests should be used with other diagnostic procedures.Before laboratory tests
a complete history, and (2) perform a complete physical examination. With knowledge
gained from these two basic procedures, a diagnostician can select diagnostic procedures to
clarify or classify identified problems.Veterinarians frequently use the laboratory assays in
conjunction with other diagnostic methods to identify or classify pathologic states that
develop in domestic mammals. Some body systems (e.g., integument,nervous, skeletal,and
cardiovascular) are relatively easily evaluated via visual or imaging methods (physical
examination,radiography, and ultrasonography),whereas other body systems (e.g.,hemic,
immune, urinary, and endocrine) are better evaluated by laboratory tests.
III.
What are the major reasons for analyzing patient samples via laboratory procedures?
A.To detect an unidentified pathologic state
B.Todenelassifyorconrmapahophysiologicdisorderordisease stat
C.To eliminate (rule out) a possible cause of the animal’s illness
D.To assesschangesina pathologic state either due to natural progression of thedisease
or because of medical or surgical therapy
SAMPLES
Blood samplesand specimens
A.Most clinical laboratory assays are designed to detect or quantify substances or cells
in blood samples, the substance or cell of interest is called the analye.Obtaining useful
results for theanalyterequires appropriate samples.Whenever thereis doubt about the
appropriate sample for a particular test at a particular laboratory, the
laboratory shouldbe contacted prior to sample collection.(See Quality of Laboratory
Results, section I.A.)
B.Blood
1.Blood and its major components are frequently used as samples for laboratory
assays. Blood must be collected and processed properly so that assay results reflect
the true composition of blood rather than artifactual changes.
6
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.Blood is composed ofblood cellserythrocytes,platelets,and fivemajorleukocyte
types) and plasma.Blood withdrawn from a blood vessel must immediately be
mixedwith an anticoagulant to prevent initiation of clot formation and tomaintain
cells and other components in suspension.
3.Analysis or processing of whole blood must be relatively rapid because the cells die
within a few hours, and thus a sample will become unacceptable for analysis. What
constirutes adequate sample handling varies with what is to be quantified or
evaluated; occasionally, samples must be analyzed within minutes, usually within
hours, rarely within days.
C.Plasma
1.Plasma is the fuid component of blood that is harvested after centrifugation of an
anticoagulated blood sample. Plasma will contain the anticoagulant that can
interfere with some assays.
2.Anticoagulants used for blood sample collection
a.Calcium-binding agents prevent Ca² from participating in the formation of a
blood clot.
(1)EDTA (as NaEDTA,KEDTA,orKEDTA)
(a)EDTA is the preferred anticoagulant for almost all routine hematologic
tests, including the complete blood count (CBC) assays.
(b)EDTA chelates Ca²and other divalent cations (Mg²,Cu²+, and Pb²+)
but the other anticoagulants do not. A chelating agent wraps around
and attaches to the metallic ion in two or more places.EDTA attaches
to Ca²+ in six places.
(2)Citrate (as sodium citrate)
(a)Citrate is the preferred anticoagulant for most tests of the coagulation
system.Ca²+is added to the citrated plasma to override the effects of
citrate and enable coagulation enzymes to function. Citrate's anticoagu
lant activity is achieved byits forming an ionic bond with Ca².
（b）Because it has low toxicity,itrateis also preferred forcollectionf
whole blood to be used for transfusions.
(3)Oxalates (as lithium, ammonium, and potassium salts)
（a)Oxalateis used for a few laboratory tests;forexample,oxalate is the
anticoagulant in sodium fuoride tubes that are used for glucose and
lactate assays.Generally,oxalates distort morphologic features of
leukocytes anderythrocytes and thus are unsuitable for hematologic
samples.
(b)Oxalate's anticoagulant activity is achieved by its forming an ionic bond
with Ca²+.
b.Heparin (as lithium,ammonium, potassium,or sodium salts) activates thrombin
(sometimes called antithrombin IIl),which then inhibits the activity of several
coagulation factors (including thrombin). It also forms an ionic bond with Ca²+,
but its major action is through antithrombin.
(1)Used for several special laboratory assays (such as blood gas analysis) and can
be used for many clinical chemistry assays
(2)Major disadvantages
(a)Alters morphologic features and staining of leukocytes
(b)Allows clotting as effects are slowly overridden by the coagulation system
(c)Allows platelet clumps to form
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
3.Plasma has two major components.
a.Water: about 92-95% of plasma volume,100mL of plasma contains 92-95 mL
of H,O.
b.Solids:about 5-8 % of plasma volume.Most solids are proteins on a weight per
volume (weight/volume) basis. Other solids are glucose, urea, electrolytes,and
other chemicals.
4.Generally, the chemical composition of plasma is very similar to interstitial fuid in
most tissues.Plasma and interstitial fuid are the extracellular fuids, one intravascu-
lar and one extravascular.
D.Serum
1.Serum is the fuid component of blood that is harvested after centrifugation of a
coagulated (clotted)blood sample.As described in Chapter 5, the clotting involves
platelets and coagulation proteins. To get the maximal amount of serum from the
clotted sample, centrifugation should not be started prior to the retraction of the
clot which typically takes at least30 min if a clot activator is not present in the
tube）f samples are centrifuged prior toclotretractionsome serum willbetrapped
in a soft fibrin clot.
2.Serum has essentially the same composition as plasma except serum does not
contain most of the coagulation proteins. The major protein (on a weight/volume
3.During the clotting process,substancesreleased from cellsalter the analyte concen
trations in serum. For example, platelets release K, and thus serum K] is greater
than plasma [K+] (see Chapter 9).
II.Urine Samples
A.Other than blood,urine is the most common sample analyzed by laboratory assays.As
with blood,urine must be collected and processed properly so that the assay results
reflect the true composition of the product of the urinary system.
B.To prevent artifactual changes in urine,it should be processed soon after collection.
General guidelines for the collection and processing of urine for routine analyses are
described in Chapter 8.
III.Other Body Fluid Samples
A.Pleural fuid, peritoneal uid, synovia, and cerebrospinal fuid samples are collected o
characterizebodycavityeffusions,jointdiseasesand centralrvoussystem isorders,
respectively.
B.The processing and handling of cavitary fluids are described in Chapter 19
MAJORTYPESOFLABORATORYASSAYS
1.
Many laboratory tests or assays involve the analysis of body fluids (blood, serum,
plasma,urine,peritoneal fuid,pleural fuidcerebrospinalfuid,and synovia)tissu
samples,orfces.Mostclinical laboratory procedures fall into one of three large groups
(examples follow subdivisions); many procedures could be classified into more than one
group.
A.Clinical hematology assays: Most assays are completed on whole blood samples.
1.Quantitation of cell concentrations in blood: total leukocyte concentration (count),
erythrocyte concentration, and platelet concentration
courseSman
8
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.Semiquantitation of cell concentrations:calculated absolute leukocyte concentration
andplateletestimate fromblood film examination
3.Defining or classifying cells by microscopic features: toxic neutrophils, reactive
lymphocytes, polychromatophilic erythrocytes, poikilocytes, microcytes, hypochro
mic erythrocytes,and leukemic cells
4.Assessing the coagulation properties of blood: clotting times and platelet function
assays
B.Clinical chemistry assays: Most assays are completed on serum or plasma samples
1. Detecting or quantifying the concentration of a chemical substance
serum concentrations of glucose, sodium, protein, creatinine, and urea) and
Figures section)
b.Semiquantitative analysis: Results are “within the ballpark” (eg,urine glucose,
protein, and bilirubin concentrations by reagent pad chemistry assays) and may
be reported as approximate numerical values or in a categorical scale (e.g., 1+,
2 +, or 3 +) that represents ranges of numerical values.
C.（
Qualitative analysis: Results indicate that a substance is or is not present (e.g., fat
detectedmicroscopically in pleural fuid with a Sudan stain）and are reported as
“present”or “absent”or as “positive” or “negative.”
2.Detecting or quantifying the activity of a chemical substance
a.Quantitative analysis: Results are close to true activity (e.g.,measured activities of
serum enzymes such as alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, lactate
dehydrogenase, and creatine kinase).
b.Qualitative analysisesults indicate that activity is or is not present (eg,hemes
peroxidase activity or leukocyte esterase in urine)
C.Clinicalmicroscopy
1.Clinical cytology:The study of cell populations and their microscopic features in an
alttempt to define or classfy abnormal tissue or fuid (eg., lymph node aspirates to
diagnose lymphoma or histoplasmosis,aspirate of a skin tumor todetermine
whether it is an infammatory or neoplastic lesion, and analysis of peritoneal fuid to
determine if it is a transudateexudate,orother typeof effusion
2.Surgical histopathology:The study of frozen orfixed tissue in an attempt to define
or classify abnormal tissue (ie., infammatory,neoplastic, and toxic disorders) and
perhaps establish an etiologic diagnosis
3.Urine sediment analysis: Microscopic examination of urine to detect or semiquantify
the preencefuktesyhroytcastsbacteriarystalrth sut
4.Clinical parasitology: Microscopic analysis of fecal, urine, blood, or other sample to
detect ova, larvae,or other microscopic forms of parasites
I1.
Actual descriptions of the numerous laboratory methods are beyond the scope of this
textbook.However, an understanding of basic principles and methods is frequently needed
to interpret results of a laboratory assay. Such principles are located in several parts of the
textbook.
A.Chapters 2-5 contain the basic principles and concepts of the common hematologic
assays.
B.Chapter 6 contains the guiding principles and overview of the analysis of bone marrow
and lymph nodes, the rwo major tissues involved in hematopoiesis.
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
6
C.Chapters 7-18 have short sections that describe analytical principles that apply to other
individual analytes.
D.Chapter 19 contains basic principles pertaining to the analysis of cavitary effusions.
SIGNIFICANTFIGURES
1
Results of many laboratory assays consist of a number, often calculated, accompanied by a
unit of measure and reference intervals. The number should be reported to the appropriate
number of digits by following three basicrules for reporting significant figures.
A.Retain only as many significant figures in a result as will give only one uncertain figure
Zero is not a significant figure if it only preserves a space in the number.
B.When reporting results from multiplications or divisions that use two or more numbers
with appropriate significant figures, the final calculated result should have no more
significant figures than the number(s) with the fewest significant figures. For 1.23 × 2.4
=2.952, the product should be reported as 3.0.
C.Whenreporingresultsfromadditionsor subtractions thatusewo ormorenumbers
with appropriate significant figures, the final calculated result should have no more
significant figures than the number(s) with the fewest significant figures. For 1.23 + 2.4
=3.63,the sum should be reported as3.6
II.
It is frequently necessary to round numbers so that only significant figures are reported.
The recommended rules for rounding numbers when the last digit is 5 are as follows.
A.Add 1 to the last retained digit if it is odd (round up).
B.Do not add 1 to the last retained digit if it is even (round down).
C.Examples with two significant figures; the thirdexample does not require therounding
rule because 45is thenumber to berounded—not 5.
1.1150→1.2×103
2.1250→1.2×103
3.1145→1.1×10²
IIl.How many significant figures are in a number? See Table 1.2.
IV.
Using the rules of significant figures for reporting results is one way that laboratory
personnel can communicate the known precision of the laboratory’s assay result.The first
rule of significant figures (see Significant Figures, sect. I.A) is to retain only one uncertain
figure. But how is that uncertain figure determined? The following illustrates the process.
A.One sample is analyzedmany times (e.g.,2o).The mean and standard deviation of the
data are calculated.
B.For the first assay, the mean value was 125.345 and standard deviation (sd) was 0.578;
thus, the interval that represents mean ± 2 sd is 124.189-126.501.With this degree of
analytical precision, we are confident that the assay can readily distinguish between 100
and 200 and between 120 and 130, but it may not be able to distinguish consistently
between 125 and 126. Thus,we are uncertain of the value in the ones place and should
report the measured value to the nearest whole number (e.g., 125).
C.For the second assay, the mean value was 125.345 and standard deviation was 9.111;
thus, the interval that represents mean ± 2 sd is 107.123-143.567. With this degree of
and 200,butit probably cannot reliably distinguish berween 120 and130.Thus,we
10
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 1.2.Examples of significant figures
Number
Significant figures
Reason
124
3
All digits imply significance.
124.0
4
The zero was not needed for the whole number. Its addition
indicates that it is a significant figure.
120
2or3
If the zero is just conserving space,it is not a signicant digit.
setting (e.g.,121), then the zero is a significant figure.
120.0
4
The zero in the tenth space indicates it is a significant figure.
Thus, the zero in the ones place is also a significant figure.
0.12
2
The zero is only preservinga space and isnota significant
figure.It is written by convention so the “" is recognized as
a decimal point and nota period,fy dirt,orother
extraneous material.
0.02
The zero in the tenths placeis just conserving space and isnot
1
a significant figure.
0.020
The zero in the thousandths place indicates it is significant.
are uncertain of the tens value and should report the measured value to the nearest tens
unit (e.g, 130).
D.Understanding significant figures becomes important when laboratory data are inter-
pretedIf oneunderstands that we are uncertain about the last reported significant
figure,then it is lesslikely that a 120 in today'ssample and a 130 intomorrow's sample
will be considered a true biologic change. Unfortunately, there are several reasons that
all results are not reported this way:
1.It may not be the policy for some laboratories.
2.Analyzers and data management programs may not follow rules of significant figures
and may not be modifiable.
3.The appropriate number of places after the decimal point may vary for a particular
analyte, depending on the magniude of the value, but analyzers and sofrware may
not allow such variability. An example is shown in Fig. 1.1.
UNITS
SI units versus non-SI (conventional)units
A.Forseveral decadesthere hasbeen an attempt to switch toa metric system of units
throughout the world.Other than the United States, the conversion is mostly complete
in a modified practical form.During the 1970s and 1980s, several organizations in the
United States attempted to convert members of the medical communities to SI units
but had limited success.Because there is a lack of consistent use of the SI unit system,
veterinary medical professionals need to be familiar with both SI and non-SI units.
B.In the context of units used for laboratory data,the basic units of measurement are
listed in Table 1.3. Many clinical laboratory and professional organizations have agreed
to use liter as the preferred unit for volume instead of the SI unit of cubic meter because
such a volume as the latter (1 m²=100o L) is rarely clinically relevant.Even the use of
liter for a volumeunit has limited relevance in the clinical laboratory when the sample
volume for many assays is less than 0.1 mL.
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
11
Measured values
WBCconcentration=21.5×109/L
WBC diff. count: 73 % neutrophils, 12 % lymphocytes, 9 % monocytes, 4 % eosinophils, 2 % basophils
Calculations and resultant significant figures
Neutrophils:(21.5x109/L)×0.73=15.695x109/L=16x109/L
Lymphocytes: (21.5×109/L)×0.12 = 2.58×109/L = 2.6×109/L
Fortheseresults:3significantfiguresx2significantfigures=2significantfgres
Mon0cytes:(21.5×109/L)x0.09=1.935×109/L=2x109/L
Eosinophils: (21.5x109/L)x0.04=0.86x109/L= 0.9x109/L
Bas0phils:(21.5×109/L)×0.02=0.43×109/L=0.4×109/L
For these results:3significantfigures xI significant figure=I significantfigure
However, most computer-based reporting systems will require reporting analyte's
value consistenty to a defined decimal point and thus significant figure rules will
not be consistently applied.
Results using
Results using
significant figure rules
consistentdecimalpoints
Total WBC
21.5×109/L
21.5×109/L
Neutrophils
16×109/L
16.0×109/L
Lymphocytes
2.6×109/L
2.6×109/L
Monocytes
2×109/L
2.0×109/L
Eosinphils
0.9×109/L
0.9X109/L
Basophils
0.4×109/L
0.4×109/L
provided.However, computer-based reporting systems may not enable the flexibility to report only signif
cant figures. diff, differential; and WBC, white blood cell(leukocyte).
Table 1.3.Examples of measurement in SI units and conventional units
SIunits
Conventional units
Amount of substance
mole (mol)
gram (g)
Length
meter (m)
yard,foot,inch
Mass
kilogram (kg)
pound (b),grain
Time
second (s)
minute (min), hour (h)
Volume
cubic meter (m)
liter(L)
Because the reported units for amount or concentration of substances vary considerably,
a veterinary medical professional should know the common abbreviations for the major
units (Table 1.4).
C.The National Instirute of Standards and Technology (NIST) provides rules and style
conventions for the use of the SI units to reduce ambiguity in scientific communica-
tions.Examples of the NIST unit conventions used in this book are in Table 1.5.
D.Table 1.6 contains the formulas for the conversion of analyte values from non-SI units
to SI units, only analytes presented in this textbook are included. The table contains
two types of formulas: (1) formulas thar show the simple conversion factor that is used
12
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 1.4. Common units and abbreviations for laboratory values
kg
kilogram,10g
mol
mole
L
liter
g
gram
TP
deciliter, 10-L
mmol
millimole,10-mol
mL
milliliter, 10-L
mg
milligram, 10-g
umol
micromole,10-mol
μL
microliter,10-L
g
microgram,10-6g
nmol
nanomole,10mol
nL
nanoliter, 10-9 L
ng
nanogram,10g
pmol
picomole,10mol
pL
picoliter,10-²L
Pg
picogram,10-12
fmol
femtomole,10-mol
femtoliter,10-5L
fg
amol
attomole,10-mol
aL
attoliter,
10-181
Table 1.5.ExamplesofNISTstyle for writing units compared to other styles
Rules
NIST style
Non-NIST
Symbols unaltered in theplural
20Pg
20pgs
4h
4hrs
Symbols not followed by period unless end of sentence
2L
2L.
6yr
6yr.
There is space between the numerical value and unit symbol
10%
10%
37°℃
37°C,37°℃
15g/dL
15g/dL
National Institute of Standards and Technology
bTheNISTsystem has two styles forarange ofnumbers;for example,5% to10%or(5to10） %T
save spaoe and to conform to common use in veterinary literarure, the numbers will be displayed as follows
in this textbook:5-10%.
to calculate the numerical value of the SI unit,and (2) formulas that show the
conversion of the numerical value and units. When available, the recommended
smallest reportable increment of the SI unit is provided.Similar information is
contained in the analytical concept sections of each chapter.
IL.
Amount versus concentration: One important basic concept forinterpreting laboratory data
what is really being measured, it is important to understand what the numbers and units
represent.The following examples illustrate the concepts.
A.A dog acutely lost alarge amount of blood because ofan injury.Because whole blood
including erythrocytes was lost,thenumber of
rythrocytes in the body is decreased.
the erythrocyte concentration
(number of erythrocytes per volume of blood） in the dog initially will not be decreased,
and thus the dog is not initially anemic.fterfuid shifts restore plasma volume,the
dog will have fewer erythrocytes in its body and a lower erythrocyte concentration in its
blood.
B.You are told that a cat's serum sodium level was increased.Does this mean the cat has
more sodium in its body? Well, it might. However, the increased serum sodium
concentration might be due to less water in the body, and the amount of sodium may
not be increased.In fact, the total amount of sodium in the body could be decreased if
there was relatively more water loss than sodium loss.
Table 1.6.Conversion of non-SI units to Sl units
To convert
Analyte"
From
To
Multiply byb
Complete conversion formulas
Incrememt
Acetoacetate
TP/o
μmol/L
99
mg/dLx 9.9 μmol/mg× 10 dL/L = μmol/L
ACTH
Pg/mL
pmol/L
0.2202
Pg/mL + 4541 pg/pmol × 1000 mL/L = nmol/L
1pmol/L
Albumin
g/dL
g/L
10
g/dLx10 dL/L=g/L
1g/L
Aldosterone
ng/dL
pmol/L
27.74
Hg/dL + 360.5 μg/μmol x 1000 nmol/μmol x 10 dL/L
10pmol/L
=nmol/L
β-Hydroxyburyrate
mg/dL
μmol/L
97
mg/dL× 9.7 μmol/mg × 10 dL/L = μmol/L
Bile acid （total)
mg/L
μmol/L
2.547
mg/L + 392.6μg/μmol × 1000 μg/mg = μmol/L
0.2mol/L
Bile acid (total)
mg/mL
mmol/L
2.547
mg/mL+392.6mg/mmol ×1000 mL/L= mmol/L
0.2mmol/L
Bt
mg/dL
μmol/L
17.10
mg/dL + 584.8 mg/mmol x 1000 μmol/mmol × 10 dL/L
2μmol/L
=μmol/L
Cholesterol
mg/dL
mmol/L
000.02586
mg/dL +386.7mg/mmol x10 dL/L= mmol/L
0.05mmol/L
CI-
mEq/L
mmol/L
1
mEq/Lx1mmol/mEq=mmol/L
1 mmol/L
CI-
mg/dL
mmol/L
0.2817
mg/dL+35.5mg/mmol×10dL/L=mmol/L
1mmol/L
COP
mmHg
pascals
133.322
mmHg × 133.322 pascals/mmHg = pascals
Cortisol
Hg/dL
nmol/L
27.59
μg/dL + 362.45 μg/μmol × 1000 nmol/μmol x 10 dL/L
10nmol/L
=nmol/L
Creatinine
mg/dL
μmol/L
88.4
mg/dL + 113.1 mg/mmol × 1000 μmol/mmol ×10 dL/L
10μmol/L
=pumol/L
Cyanocobalamin
Pg/mL
pmol/L
0.7378
Pg/mL+1355pg/pmol x1000mL/L=pmol/L
10pmol/L
fCa²
mg/dL
mmol/L
0.2495
mg/dL + 40.08 mg/mmol x 10 dL/L = mmol/L
0.01 mmol/L
fCa²+
mEq/L
mmol/L
0.5
mEq/L x0.5mmol/mEq=mmol/L
0.01 mmol/L
Fe
Hg/dL
μmol/L
0.1791
μg/d x 0.01791 μmol/μg × 10 dL/L = μmol/L
1μmol/L
Ferritin
ng/mL
Hg/L
1
ng/mLx 1μg/1000 ng×1000mL/L = μg/L
10μg/L
Fibrinogen
mg/dL
g/L
0.01
/=T/TP01×0001/xTP/
0.1g/L
Continues
Table 1.6. Conversion of non-SI units to SI units (Continued)
To convert
Analyte"
From
To
Multiply by
ontormulas
Fibrinogen
mg/dL
μmol/L
0.0294
mg/dL x 0.00294 μmol/mg x 10 dL/L = μmol/L
Folate
ng/mL
nmol/L
2.266
ng/mL + 441.3 ng/nmol × 1000 mL/L= nmol/L
2nmol/L
fT
ng/dL
pmol/L
12.87
ng/dL +777ng/nmol x1000 pmol/nmol × 10 dL/L
1pmol/L
=pmol/L
Globulins
g/dL
g/L
10
g/dLx 10 dL/L =g/L
1g/L
Glucose
mg/dL
mmol/L
0.05551
mg/dL+180.1mg/mmol×10 dL/L=mmol/L
0.1mmol/L
HCO-
mEq/L
mmol/L
1
mEq/Lx 1 mmol/mEq=mmol/L
1mmol/L
Hgb
g/dL
g/L
10
g/dL x 10 dL/L=g/L
1g/L
IRG
Pg/mL
ng/L
1
Pg/mL+ 1000 pg/ng ×1000 mL/L= ng/L
10ng/L
IRI
μU/mL
pmol/L
7.175
μU/mL +139.4 μU/pmol x 1000mL/L = pmol/L
5pmol/L
IRI
Hg/L
pmol/L
172.2
μg/L + 5.807 μg/μmol × 1000 pmol/μmol = pmol/L
5pmol/L
K+
mEq/L
mmol/L
1
mEq/Lx1mmolmEq=mmol/L
0.1mmol/L
K+
mg/dL
mmol/L
0.2564
mg/dL+39mg/mmolx10 dL/L=mmol/L
0.1mmol/L
L-lactate
mg/dL
mmol/L
0.112
mg/dL × 1.11 mmol/mg × 10 dL/L= mmol/L
MCHC
g/dL
g/L
10
g/dLx10 dL/L=g/L
Na
mEq/L
mmol/L
mEq/Lx 1mmol/mEq=mmol/L
1mmol/L
Na*
mg/dL
mmol/L
0.4348
mg/dL + 23 mg/mmol x 10 dL/L = mmol/L
1mmol/L
NEFA
mEq/L
mmol/L
1
mEq/L x mmol/mEq = mmol/L
NH,
Hg/dL
μmol/L
0.5871
μg/dL + 17.03 μg/μmol × 10 dL/L = μmol/L
5μmol/L
NH*
Hg/dL
μmol/L
0.5543
Hg/dL + 18.04 μg/μmol x 10 dL/L = μmol/L
5μmol/L
Pi
mg/dL
mmol/L
0.3229
mg/dL + 30.97 mg/mmol × 10 dL/L = mmol/L
0.05mmol/L
Platdet
#,000/
#×10/L
109
#000/Lx10μL/L=#×10/L
10×10/L
RBC
#×10°/μL
#×10/L
10
#x10/μL×10μL/L=#×10²/L
0.02 mmol/l
0.02mmol/L
0.02 mmol/L
0.02mmol/L
0.05 mmol/L
0.1nmol/L
1μmol/L
mmol/L
0.1mmol/L
lnmol/L
I nmol/L
ocyte); SI, Systeme International
mg/dL + 60.06mg/mmol × 10 dL/L = mmol of urea/L
μg/dL x 0.01791 μmol/μg × 10 dL/L = μmol/L
mg/dL + 24.31 mg/mmol x 10 dL/L = mmol/L
mg/dL + 150.1 mg/mmol × 10 dL/L = mmol/L
phorus, RBC, red blood cll(erythr
mEq/L x 0.5mmol/mEq =mmol/L
mEq/L x 0.5 mmol/mEq = mmol/L
#/μLx10²μL/L=#×10/L
g/dLx10dL/L=g/L
=nmol/L
onium; Pi, inorganic phos
0.01536
0.01129
19990'0
15.36
0.1791
0.3570
0.1665
S'0
01
901
mmol urea/L
mmol urea/L
×10/L
mmol/L
mmol/L
mmol/L
T/lowu
mmol/L
nmol/L
T/lowu
/ow
μmol/L
ng/mL
T/lowu
TP/NN
urea/dL
T/ad
Tp/au
TP/ar
ng/mL
Tp/ou
TP/3
#/pL
面
智
au
Tniglyceride
TIBC
WBC
asopx
HSI
3
Urea
15
16
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
C.You are told that a horse's serum enzyme level was decreased. Does this mean the horse
has less of that enzyme? It might. However, it could be that the amount of enzyme (the
protein) was not decreased, but the enzyme's activity was inhibited or maybe the
structure of the enzyme was defective.
D.You are told that a cat's reticulocyte percentage is increased. Does this mean that the cat
has more reticulocytes in its blood? It might or might not. A percentage is always
relative;the same number in the numerator (e.g.,number of reticulocytes counted) and
a smaller number in the denominator (e.g-, total number of erythrocytes counted) will
result in an increased percentage.
E.You are told that the myeloid ro erythroid ratio in a cat's marrow is increased.Does the
increased ratio mean the cat'smarrow contains more myeloid cells,fewer erythroid cells
or both? Or is the ratio increased because the number ofmyeloid cells is increased more
than theincrease in erythroid cells?A calculatedratio is always a relative number and
must be interpreted accordingly
F.You are told that a dog's urine has an increased protein concentration. Because the
concentrations of all substances in urine depend on the conservation of water by the
kidneys, the increased protein concentration could have resulted from increased water
conservation and not increased protein loss via the urinary system.
REFERENCEINTERVALS
1.
Reference intervals and their purpose
A.Results of laboratory tests （laboratory data) on patient samples would be very
difficult to interpret without reference interuals, which are the results we expect to find
in healthy animals.These intervals are used to help detect pathologic states. Other
terms that are used as synonyms include normas,normal values,normal range,and
reference range.
B.In an attempt to establish uniform usage of terms, the following terms and definitions
have been recommended by an Expert Panel of the International Federation of Clinical
Chemistry."
1.Reference individual: an animal selected by using defined criteria
2.Reference populatior: all possible reference individuals
a.Usually, the number of such individuals is unknown.
b. In the case of captive wild animals, the total number of animals may be known.
3.Reference sample group: an adequate number of reference individuals selected to
represent the reference population
4.Reference value. a value (result) obtained by observation or measurement of a
particular substance in a reference individual
5.Reference disriburion: the distribution of reference values,which is not necessarily
Gaussian (a bell-shaped curve)
6.Reference limits. the lowest value (lower reference limit)and the highest value (upper
reference limit) of the reference interval, as derived from a reference distribution
7.Reference interval: an interval berween and including the rwo reference limits
8.Observed value. a value obtained by observation or measurement that is to be
compared to thereference interval
C.Use of the term reference range is discouraged for two reasons.
1.Statistically, a range is the difference between highest and lowest observations; for
example, the range is 40 if the highest observation was 50 and the lowest was 10.
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
17
2.Some consider a range to include all measured values (reference values) from the
lowest to the highest (e.g-,10-50).A reference interval does not include all reference
values; it contains the values between two reference limits.
D.Using the terms normal and abnormal to describe laboratory test results can be mislead-
ing and is discouraged.
1.A laboratory result can be WRI but still reflect a pathologic process. For example, a
serum sodium concentration thar is WRI in a dehydrated animal indicates that the
animal has lost both water and sodium from its body.
2.Sick animals usually will have some laboratory results that are WRl. Conversely,
some apparently healthy animals will have laboratory results outside of the reference
interval. Because thelaboratory test results for certain diseases overlap between “sick
and “healthy” animals, it is inappropriate to classify a patient as “normal based just
on test results.
3.It is diffcult to definenormal” because many variations that may appear to be
“abnormal”are caused by physiologic,dietary,environmenral, or other nonpatho-
logic factors.
Establishment of reference intervals: A complete description of the process of establishing
reference intervalsisbeyond the scope of thisbook,soreaders arereferred o other
publications.s The major steps in the process are as follows:
A.Select criteria for reference individuals. Criteria could include species,age,and method
of determininghealth status.
1.Initially,thismay seem like a simple task because the criteria define clinically healthy
adult animals. Generally, we want to sample a broad group of animals so that the
reference interval is useful for a broad group of patients. However, it can become
more complex when potentially clinically relevant differences occur because of
variations in:(1)breed (e.g.,some Akitas have smaller erythrocytes）,(2） physiologic
state （e.g,milking versus nonmilking cattle or high altitude versus sea level),or
(3)nutritional state.
2. Even if a laboratory is successful in establishing reference intervals for adult animals,
how about appropriate rference intervals for neonates,ursing animalsrwean
lings? Critical assessment of patient values requires that criterion-matched reference
intervalsbeestablished
B.Establish a reference sample group. It is preferable to have at least 60 animals that meet
selected criteria
1.Authorities state that at least 120 individuals are needed, but obtaining such
numbers is often not accomplished in veterinary medicine. A more realistic number
of 60 qualified individuals may be suffcient if a Gaussian distribution is present.
Attempts to establish reference intervals with fewer individuals frequently result in
weak intervals that are often questioned by clinical observations. A total of 40
reference individuals is a minimum requirement for some methods of establishing
reference limits, but the reduced number of individuals probably will not provide
the same reference interval as 60 or 120 individuals.
2. Obraining quality samples from 60 qualified individuals is the most diffcult aspect
of establishing reference intervals.Typically, samples are collected from animals that
are seen because of yearly vaccinations or for elective surgical procedures. Collecting
many samples from one kennel,one cattery,one stable,or one herd is typically not
recommended because the animals may lack the breed and other physiologic
18
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
variations needed for representative reference intervals.For example,reference
intervals established for 60 beaglesmay not be appropriate forhealthy dogs of other
breeds, but they would be appropriate reference intervals for beagles. Similarly,
reference intervals established for cows from one dairy may not be representative of
healthy cattle in other dairies or in beef herds.
C.Collect and process the samples.The sample processing should be defined and reflect
the processing used for clinical samples. Consideration should be given to the
following
1.Method and site of collection （e.g., jugular versus cephalic vein versus indwelling
catheter)
2.Type of sample tube/container or anticoagulant and volume of the sample
3.Storage time and temperature of samples prior to testing
D. Measure or determine the reference values.Analyze the sample for the substance of
interest (analyte).
1.This is the most expensive aspect of establishing reference intervals. For example,
glucose tests of 60 sera at $5 each cost $300. Since we might measure 20 analytes
in sera,with each costing the same amount,$6000 would be spentand this is
for only one species.If the analyses were completed for each major species (bovine,
caninequineandfline）,$4oowouldbespentforherouinechemical
assays. A similar amount might be spent for hematologic assays and special
assays.
2. This expense is magnified when a laboratory changes laboratory equipment and
must establish new reference intervals for a new instrument every 5-7yr (the
expected life span of most instruments).
E.Determine the reference distribution.Apply statistical methods to determine whether
data have a Gaussian or a skewed distribution.
1.Many analyte concentrations will fit a normal (Gaussian) distribution, especially
those analyte concentrations that are tightly regulated by physiologic systems (e.g
glucose,Na,K, and fCa²concentrations).
2.Many analyte concentrations (e.g., serum enzyme activities) will not fit a Gaussian
distribution; their data may have positive or negative skewness.
F.Determine reference limits and reference intervals.Use methods to remove outliers
(e.g,the range test)and then select the central 95 %of the reference values.
1.Limits may be defined by a stated fraction of reference values thar are less than or
equal to a certain result. For example, 2.5 % of the values are > 150, and 2.5 % of
values are<50,so the referencelimits are 50 and 150.The reference intervalwould
be 50-150.
2.When datahavebeen shown tofit a Gaussian distribution,parametric ornonpara
metric methods can be used to establish reference limits.Parametricmethods
generate values that represent the mean ± 2 sd.Nonparametric methods may be
more appropriate than parametricmethods when the number of reference
individuals is low.
3.When the distribution is not Gaussian,the data should either be transformed into a
Gaussian distribution, or, more commonly, the data within the top and bottom 2.5
percentiles are removed by nonparametric methods.
4.Figure 1.2 shows the differences between Gaussian and skewed distributions and the
referenceintervals obtained from such distributions.
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
19
Gaussian
Positivelyskewed
distribution
distribution
25
25
median
20
=mode
20
e
15
esqo
15
90
10
10
品
Bottom
Top
Bottom
EI
Top
No.
2.5 %
2.5%
'ON
2.5%
2.5 %
center95%
center95%
mean±2sd
mean±2sd
Analyte concentration
Analyte concentration
Fig.l.2.Reference distribution
· In the left graph, the reference values conformed to a Gaussian distribution. If data have this distribution,
then mean ± 2 sd will represent the central 95 % of the reference values and thus the reference interval. If
values have a Gaussian distribution, the mean, median, and mode values will be equal.
In the right graph,th reference values had positive skewnessIf data have this distribution,nonparamet
ric methods are used to determine the central 95 % of the values. If the interval represented by mean
2sdwerecalulated,hewerfrenelimitouldbeelowthelwestrfrenceauandthp
reference limit would exclude more than the top 2.5 % of the reference values. Therefore, mean ± 2 sd
would not be anaccurate representation of the values expected in healthy animalsThemean,medin,
and mode values will be different if the reference values have a non-Gaussian distribution.
III.
Use of reference intervals
A.It is important to understand that most reference intervals represent results expected in
95 % of the healthy animals (ie., in 19 of 20 healthy animals).
1.Therefore, 1 of 20 healthy animals is expected to have ameasured value outside of
the reference interval.The value that is outside the reference interval but still
represents a value from a healthy animal is expected tobe close to thereference
limits.A marked difference from the reference interval probably represents a
pathologic state.
2.When examining multiple test results for one animal, it is important to remember
that this 95 % chance of a value from a healthy animal falling WRI applies to each
result separately
aThus,in a panel of 20 assays,each with a 5% chance of being outside of the
reference interval even without pathologic change, there is a 64 % chance for at
least one value to be outside the reference interval (see Reference Intervals, sect.
IL.A.2.b).With a panel of five results,there is a 23 % chance.However,that
value should be closeto the lower or upperreference limit.This concept is
yearly health profle or a geriatric profile.
b.This concept can also be explained using multivariate comparison calculations.
Because there is a 95 % (0.95) probability in healthy animals that each result is
20
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
WRI, the probability that all “n”values areWRI is 0.95°,and the probability
thatnot all valuesare WRIis 1-0.95"（where n is the number of observations)
Thus, for a panel of 20 test results, 100 x (1-0.952°) = 64%, so there is a 64%
chance that at least one value is outside the reference interval.
B.Not all reference intervals accurately reflect expected findings in a population of
interest. This may be because of such problems as an inadequate procedure of establish-
ing the valuesa difference beweenreference and test populations,ora changen
methods or instrumentation by the laboratory without an appropriate change in
reference intervals.
C.Laboratories should provide information about their reference values when requested.
Such requests are particularly appropriate when first contemplating use of a laboratory
This enables evaluation of how likely it is that the values refect health in the popula
tion of interest.Requested information might include the following:
1.Number of reference individuals
2.Ages,breeds, and genders of reference individuals
3.Criteria for inclusion as a reference individual
4. Methods for establishing reference intervals
IV.Reference limits versus decision thresholds (limits)
A.As defined above (Reference Intervals, sect.I.B.6),reference limits are the highest value
or lowest value of the reference interval as derived from a reference distribution; a
reference interval includes values expected in95% of the healthy animals.These values
that is above or below the reference limits may indicate the presence of a pathologic
state.
B.A decision threshold (sometimes called decision limit or cutoff point or cutoffvalue) is a
value that is used to classify a result as positive ornegative for a disease orto decide
whether to treat or not to treat.As described in the section on Diagnostic Properties
and Predictive Value of Laboratory Assays, a decision threshold may not be a reference
limit.Decision thresholds can also beused to estimate a cost to benefit ratio for
C.The term decision limit isalso used in the context of a critical decision limit,which is a
value that is used for making critical therapeutic decisions.For example, a critical
decision limit for serum calcium concentration may be 15.0 mg/dL, meaning that
15.0mg/dL.In contrast,the uper reference limit might be 12.0 mg/dL,and a decision
threshold for a hypercalcemic disorder might be 12.5mg/dL
QUALITYOFLABORATORYRESULTS
1.
Major determinants:Laboratory test results will be of the most benefit if they are consis-
tently correct from patient to patient, day to day, and month to month. Three major
factors determine whetherresults are valid: (1)quality of sample,(2）quality of analysis,(3)
quality of laboratory and patient records.When results are not what a veterinarian expects
he or she might say,“I do not believe those results; there must have been a lab error.
When such conclusions are formed,it is important to remember that there are many
potential reasons for an erroneous laboratory test result.Errors maybe preanalytical
analytical, or postanalytical.
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
21
A.A laboratory test result can only be as good as the sample.Preanalytical errors, which are
relatively common, arise from problems with sample collection and processing.These
errors can be minimized with attention to the following:
1. Sample collection
a.Properly prepared patient (e.g.,the animal should be fasted for at least 8h prior
to collection of most blood samples)
b.Proper collection technique (e.g., atraumatic venipuncture to minimize hemolysis
and activation of clotting proteins and platelets)
c.Proper collection container (e.g., sterile versus nonsterile or clot tube versus an
EDTA tube)
d.Proper anticoagulants when needed (e.g., EDTA versus heparin, or sodium
heparin versus lithium heparin)
e.Adequate volume for assays (e.g.,to obtain 1mL of serum,a volume of at least
3mL of blood is usually needed)
2.Sample handling
a.Proper labeling of all specimens (e.g,animal identification by name or number,
date, and time of collection)
b.Samplekept at apropriatemperature riro and afterprocessing,dring
shipment,or during storage(e-g,25°℃,4°C,or-25°C)
C.Prompt processing (e.g, for a labile analyte, process immediately so the analyte
B.Analyticalerrors should be minimized by attention to the following:
1.Method appropriate for species (e.g., an instrument designed to measure the
relatively large human erythrocytes may not provide accurate measurement of
smaller erythrocytes from the domestic mammals)
2.Quality of instruments and equipment (i.e.,generally “you get what you pay for,
maintained)
3.Quality of reagents (e.g, fresh and within the expiration date,being used according
to instructions)
4.Quality of laboratory technique（e.g,person-to-person variation,training of person,
and inherent procedural diffculty)
5.Quality control program (quality assurance program)(e.g, the laboratory personnel
subscribe to and adhere to internal assesment procedures to assure thar all pars of
the quality analysis of the sample are maintained daily)
C.Posanalytical errors can beminimized with attention to the following:
1.Transcriptional errors minimized (e.g., errors can be made during manual transcrip-
tion of results to a laboratory report or during keyboard entering of data into
computers)
2. Data presented in a report that is easy to read and thus reduces the likelihood of
incorrect interpretation
Analytical properties of assays:From the analytical perspective, the best clinical laboratory
assay is one that consistently measures the true concentration of the substance and at
concentrations that are clinically relevant.When evaluating and comparing laboratory
assays,five properties can be assessed:
A.Analytical precisior: the ability of an assay to get the same result if a sample is analyzed
several times;also called reproducibiliy or random analytical error(Fig.1.3a)
22
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
a.Analytical
b.Analytical
c. Analytical
d.Analytical
e.Detection
precision
imprecision
precision and
specificity
limit
(systematic
(random
accuracy
error)
error)
Fig. 1.3. Illustrations of analytical properties of assays.
shooter was precise even though consistently inaccurate.
b.Anatyrical imprecision (random error):Because the holes in the target are evenly distributed, the average of
ten shots is exactly in the middle of the target area. Thus, the shooter was statistically accurate but
imprecise.
C.Analyricalprecision and accuracy Because all ten holes in the target are tightly clustered in the middle of
the target, the shooter was aocurate and precise.
the ten observations, the shooter probably created seven,and three were created by other factors.Thus,
the presence of holes in the target is not specific for the shooter's actions.
e.Derection limir and analyrical sensitivity. How many holes can you see in the target?The smallest hole that
you can reliably detect is the detection limit of your eyes. Analytical sensitivity in this context is the
smallest change in hole sizes that your eyes can reliably differentiate. If your eyes can reliably detect the
different sizes of all holes, then the sensitivity limit has not been reached. If your eyes can differentiate
the changes in the four largest holes but not the other holes, the sensitivity limit is berween the fourth
and fifth holes. Each shot was made with a bullet whose diameter was 75 % of the previous shot.
1.The need for analytical precision depends on the degree of variation that can be
accepted as random variation (error).When management of a case requires that
small changes in concentration refect a biologic change and not analytical variation,
an assay needs to have high precision. However, if a wide range of measured values
can be accepted,then high precision is not needed
2. Control solutions are used to assess assay performance.Repeated analysis of control
solutions enables assessment of precision.
a.A control solution contains an analyte's concentration that can be a known
specific concentration (like a standard solution),but more frequently the
concentration is determined by multiple measurements using the same assay for
which precision is being assessed.
b. If results for a control solution are within acceptable limits, then the assay was
probably performed correctly and thus the patient's result is probably valid.
Control solution results that are outside acceptable limits suggest instrument
malfunction,deterioratedreagents,or poor analytical techniques.The patients
result determined by the same assay may or may not be accurate.
3.Precision is frequently expressed in clinical laboratories by the method’s CV
(Eq. 1.1).
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
23
standard deviation
CV (expressed as a percentage)=
×100
(1.1.)
mean
a.A method’s CV is determined from replicate analysis within an assay run and
between different runs of the same assay.
(1)A within-asay CVrepresents the random error that is expected when one
sample is analyzed multiple times in one run of an assay. If an assay has a
poor within-assay CV,the samples analyte concentration is determined by
analyzing the sample in duplicate or triplicate and then calculating a mean
concentration.
(2)A between-asay CVrepresents the random error within one run of the assay
plus the error from additional runs of the assay by using the same sample.
The within-assay CV will be smaller than the between-assay CV
b.The clinical relevance of an assay’s CVis determined by many factors
(1)If critical clinical decisions are made when changes in an analyte's concentra-
tion are minimal, then the assay must have a very low CV (high precision).
Otherwise, the diagnostician would not know if the change in analyte
concentration is due to a true change that occurred in the animal or if the
change represents analytical error.
(2)An assay's CV will typically vary with the analyte's concentration.Higher
CV values may be found at the lower and upper limits of the assay's
analytical range.Within the analytical range, CV values are typically higher
at the lower analyte concentrations because CV values are expressed as
percentages.
(a)If an assay has a CV of 10 % at all concentrations, then the assay’s
standard deviation would be 0.1 mg/dLat an analyteconcentrationof
1 mg/dL,1 mg/dL at an analyte concentration of 10 mg/dL,10 mg/dL
at an analyte concentration of 100 mg/dL,etc.Depending on the
analyte and the amount of biologic variation, a CV of 10 % can be
completely unacceptable analytical variation or be very acceptable.
(b)If an assay's standard deviation is 10 mg/dL at all concentrations,
the assay's CV values would be 50 % at a mean concentration of
20 mg/dL, 10 % at a mean of 100 mg/dL, and 1 % at a mean of
1000 mg/dL.
(3）Knowing the amount of analytical variation for an assay is helpful when
trying to determine whether a change in a patient's data represents analytical
variation or a true biologic change. One way to approach this decision is
using an assay'sUSD.USD is an average of standard deviation values from
36 consecutive months of quality assurance values. If a change in a
patient's data is les than twice the UsD, the change may be only analytical
assay’s USD, then the change is probably due to biologic variation.The three
times USD is an estimate of significant change limit;a change in data of at
least three times the USD is probably a significant biologic change and not
simply analytical variation.
(a)If the USD for sodium concentration at 150 mmol/L is 1.5 mmol/L
anda patient's sodium concentration is150mmol/L on day1 and
148 mmol/L on day 2, then the change of 2 mmol/L may be due to
24
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
analytical variation since it is less than twice the USD.However,a value
of 145 mmol/L on day 2 (a change greater than three times the USD)
(b) If the USD for blood neutrophil concentration is 1000/μL at a neutro-
phil concentration of 10,000/μL,then neutrophil concentration in a
second sample needs tobe<7000/μLor>13,000/μLtobereliably
considered a biologic change if the first sample had a neutrophil
concentration of10,000/pL
(4)The CV percentages and USD values may vary considerably between assay
methods, and the percentages or values are frequently not known by the
diagnostician.However,such information can improve the interpretation of
laboratory data because changes can be recognized as potential analytical
variation or confidently classified as biologic change.
B.Analytical accuracy (IFCC definition): the closeness of the agreement between the
measured value of an analyte and its “true”value (Fig. 1.3c)
1.The methods of establishing the “true” values vary considerably.At times, the true
value is established by a reference method (e.g-, a method developed by the NIST)
If such standards have not been developed,the“true”value might represent the
mean concentration derermined by numerous observations using an assay that is
accepted as the best available.
2.Typically, accuracy of a clinical assay is assessed by comparison of its results to the
results of an acceptedrefrencemethod,amethod that has been accepted bya
as the reference method is also precise so that only a few observations are needed to
determine the true value (Fig. 1.3c)
3.Standard solutions
a.The accuracy of the clinical assay may be assessed by measuring an analytes
concentration ina reference standard solution whose concentration was deter-
mined by a reference method.
b. Reference standard solutions are not the same as calibration standard solutions.
Calibration standard solutions are commercially prepared, are used to calibrate an
instrument or method,and should closely agree withreference standard
solutions.
C.Analytical specificitythe ability of an assay to detect only the substance of interest
(analyte) or freedom from interfering substances (Fig. 1.3d)
1.Analytical specificity is related to analytical accuracy because an assay cannot be
accurate if a nonspecific reaction is occurring.
2.Theneed for analytical specificityvaries directlywith thelikelihood ofinterfering
substances. A serum glucose assay may be designed to react with all hexoses. Such
specificity may be acceptable if glucose is the only hexose in serum that is at a
sufficient concentration to be detected by the assay. Other glucose assays may be
designed to react only with glucose even if other hexosesmight be present in the
sample.
3.Substances may interfere with an assay in many ways.
a.The substance may be very similar chemically, and the assay may react with
either the analyte or the interfering substance.
b.The substance may produce the same response that is detecred in the assay
system.
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
25
(1)The presence of glucose may be detected when a chemical reaction produces
hydrogen peroxide (HO).A substance may interfere with the assay by
having the same oxidizing properties as H,O2
(2）In spectrophotometric assays,the presence of lipids,bilirubin,orhemoglo
bin may interfere with light transmission through a sample,and thus the
results of the assay are changed by artifactual spectral changes and not by a
chemicalreaction.
4.Depending on how a substance interferes with an assay,it may lead either to falsely
increased or to falsely decreased concentrationspositiveinterference ornegative
interference,respectively.
D.Detection limit (IUPAC definition):the smallest concentration or quantity of an
analyte that can be detected with reasonable certainty for a given analytical range
(Fig. 1.3e)
1.An assay's detection limit involves the ability of the assay to differentiate background
“noise”from a true change because of the presence of an analyte.The detection limit
defines the lowest value of an assay's analytical range;analyticalrange is therange of
values over which the assay can provide reliable results.
2.If an analyte is relatively abundant (e.g., serum Na), then a detection limit of
100mmol/L may be adequate.For substances that are relatively rare (e.g.,aldoste-
rone), a detection limit of 100 pmol/L may be needed to be clinically useful.
E.Analytical sensitivity (IUPAC definition): slope of the calibration curve and the ability
of an analyticalprocedure to produce a changein the signalfora defined change of the
quantity
1.In other terms, an assay’s analytical sensitivity is how much change of the analyte
（concentration,property,etc.） is neeed for the assay to detect the change.or
example,anassay that can differentiate50 mg/dLfrom51mg/dLhas better
analytical sensitivity than an assay that can only differentiate 5.0 g/dL （or
5000mg/dL) from5.1g/dL(5100mg/dL).
2.Analytical sensitivity should not be confusedwith detection limit. The two are
related because both relate to small changes in concentration. However, analyrical
sensitivity applies to changes within an assay's analytical range, whereas derection limit
applies to the lowest limit of the analytical range.
III.
Quality assurance
A.Quality assurance concepts
1.Every laboratory assay has the potential to produce erroneous results because of a
varietfanalytical ftorseg,agentroration,pettingrrorscubatn
errors, and electronic interference). To detect errors, every laboratory or clinical
practice that analyzes samples should have a quality assurance program thatis
designed to detect unacceptable errors in its assays and assure that only quality
results are generated.
2.Each laboratory assay has some random analytical error (see Quality of Laboratory
Results, sect. II.A). Typically, manual assays have more random errors than do
automated methods because people generally cannot reproduce their work as
well as a machine can. Variations in results that are caused by random error
should have a Gaussian or normal distribution (see Fig. 1.2). With that
distribution,95% of the results should fall within the interval that is equal
to mean ± 2 sd. If the same sample is analyzed 20 times, 19 of 20 results are
26
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
expected to be within that interval. But it is also important to recognize that 1 of 20
results is expected to be outside of that intervaleven when the assay is performing
well!
3.Another key concept in quality assurance programs is that acceptable random error
for a clinical assay should be based on what is considered to be a biologically
significant change in the result. If within-individual and berween-individual biologic
variations of a particular analyte are small, and clinical decisions are made when
there is only a minor change in a laboratory test result, then the random error of the
assay needs to be relatively small. However, if clinical decisions are made only when
there is a marked change in a laboratory test result, a larger random error may be
acceptable. Two examples illustrate these concepts:
a.Serum [Na] in most healthy mammals is near 150 mmol/L. If a patient has a
serum[Na]of150mmol/Londay1and160mmol/Lon day 2,mostclinicians
will conclude that something has happened in the animal to alter the serum
[Na] significantly or that there has been change because of biologic, pathologic,
or therapeutic reasons.Therefore,for the serum Naassay to be clinically
valuable, its acceptable random error definitely needs to be < 10 mmol/L
Otherwise,erroneous decisions may be made because of random analytical
error.
b. Serum [glucose] in most healthy mammals is near 100 mg/dL. If a patient has a
serum[glucose]of 100 mg/dLon day 1 and 110 mg/dLon day 2,most clini-
cians will conclude that such changes are within expected biologic variation; that
is, there has not been a change for biologic, pathologic, or therapeutic reasons.
Therefore, for the serum glucose assay to be clinically valuable, its acceptable
random error can be larger than the random error of the serum Na assay.
B.Westgard rules. James O.Westgard, Ph.D., is a leader in the field of quality assurance
programs for clinical laboratories.He has developed a system that is designed to decide
whether an assay's run (all patient samples assayed at the same time as the control
com).
1.A quality assurance program should be designed so that it detects analytical errors
that may be of clinical significance.All measurements contain errors, and the two
major types are random error and systematic error.Random error is caused by
factors that randomly affect the measurements,such as variations in dispensed
volume of reagent or sample. Systematic error is a reproducible inaccuracy that will
consistently result in values that are too high or too low.The Westgard system is
designed to detect both types oferrors.
2.Westgard rules are a series of rules that are applied systematically, either singly or in
combinations.This systemis applied to the results obtained for control samples
that are analyzed concurrently with patient samples. In his abbreviation system,
“s” stands for standard deviation.
a.l. rule: A run is rejected when a single control measurement exceeds the mean
plus 2s or the mean minus 2s of previous control sample values, or it serves as a
warning system to initiate additional inspection of control data.
b.1rule:A run is rejected when a single control measurement exceeds the mean
plus 3s or the mean minus 3s of previous control sample values. This rule is
primarily sensitive to random error.
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
27
c.2,rule:A run is rejected when two consecutive control measurements exceed the
same mean plus 2s or the same mean minus 2s of previous control sample values.
This rule is primarily sensitive to systematic error.
d.R4,rule: A run is rejected when one control measurement in a group exceeds the
mean plus 2s and another exceeds the mean minus 2s. This rule is primarily
sensitive to random error.
e.4, rule: A run is rejected when four consecutive control measurements exceed
the same mean plus ls or the same mean minus ls control limit. This rule is
primarily sensitive to systematic error.
f.10rule:A run is rejected when ten consecutive controlmeasurements fall on
one side of the mean (this rule is sometimes modified to either an 8rule or a
12 rule). This rule is primarily sensitive to systematic error.
3.Selection of the appropriate Westgard rules to control an assay depends on the
analytical precision of the assay and the acceptable random analytical error.The less
imprecise the assay is, the more likely it is that a high or low control sample value
will truly indicate a problem with the assay and the less stringent theWestgard rules
need to be to keep the assay in control. The more imprecise the assay is,the more
difficult it is toknowwhether ahigh or low control samplevalue is causedby
4.When an assay’s run is rejected, the results for the control samples were unacceptable
and thus the results for the patient samples may be erroneous because of an analyti-
cal error.When the control sample results are unacceptable,laboratory personnel
should isolate the factor thar is causing the error.The error could be related to(1)
the operator, (2） the protocol, (3） the reagents and marerials,or (4) the analyzer.
When the problem is found, appropriate corrective actions are taken (e.g., change
reagents,clean pipette,orrecalibrate the machine),and then the control samples
and patient samples are reanalyzed.
5.A common method of monitoring the results of the control samples is to plot them
in a Levey-Jennings control chart (Fig. 1.4).However, such plots do not help us
6.Dr.Westgard has also addressed this issue inhis work using concepts of total quality
management and Six Sigma Quality Management (http://www.westgard.com/
sixsigmabook.html）.These concepts have been accepted by some international
groups as the preferred quality assurance method. The understanding and applica-
tion of the SixSigma Quality Management system requires considerableeffort;a few
key concepts introduce the topic:
a.Sigma refers to the Greek letter O,which stands for standard deviationa
statistical index used to express random deviation from the mean (central
tendency).
b.A sigma classification for a test refers to its precision relative to the amount of
acceptable error (total random and analytical variation that is acceptable). If,
based on knowledge of biologic variations, we interpret two values that are
within 10 mg/dL of each other at a decision threshold to be the same, then we
will consider such error as acceptable or allowable. Thus, the allowable total error
(TE) for an assay is 10 mg/dL at a decision threshold.Errors of that magnitude
or less will not affect interpretation of the results. TE, must be determined at
clinical decision thresholds,thevalues at which decisions about the presence or
absence of disease are made.
28
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
115
110
(7P
105
E
100
2
[2
95
90-
1
85-
5
6
8
10
11
Days
values within acceptable limits (90-110 mg/dL)
valuesbeyond acceptablelimits
Fig. 1.4. Levey-Jennings control chart for a glucose control solution. Quality assurance data for 12 d of
testing are displayed; each day, the measured glucose] in the control solution is plotted on the chart.
Previous analyses established that the acceptable limits for the control solution are 100 ± 10 mg/dL (mean
± 2 sd). On days 5 and 9, the first measured concentration (1) was outside acceptable limits. After corrective
(2) was within acceptable limits so values measured in patient samples could then be considered reliable.For
someassaysateastwcontrolsoluionsareanalyzedwitheachsetfpatintamplandresultsfah
control solutions are plotted in separate Levey-Jennings control charts. For other assays, control solutions
might be analyzed with each shift (e.g., day and night) or each day.The frequency of analyzing contol
solutions isdererminedby several factorsbutwith theprimary goal of detectingunacceptable assay
performance before a patient's result is used for diagnostic or therapeutic decisions.
c.For theoretical assay A with a TEof 10 mg/dL,analysis of control solution with
an analyte concentration near the decision threshold reveals a standard deviation
of 5mg/dL.Assuming there is no systematic error (bias), this assay would be
called a two-sigmd assay because the TE divided by its standard deviation is 2.
When designing a quality assurance program for this assay, there would be strict
criteria established with several control solutions so that unacceptable errors
could be detected when present.Byrandom error alone,about 1 of 20 values is
expected tobeunacceptable.
d.For theoretical assay B,also with a TEof 10 mg/dL,analysis of control solution
with an analyte concentration near the decision threshold reveals a standard
deviation of 2mg/dL.Assuming there isno systematic error (bias),this assay
would be called a five-sigma assay because the TE, divided by its standard
deviation is 5.When designing a quality assurance program for this assay, there
would berelatively loose criteria establishedwith two control solutions because it
is very unlikely that its random error would create changes that are clinically
relevant (ie., less than one unacceptable value per million assays).
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
29
e.In this system,the ideal assay is a six-sigma assay because an unacceptable error
standard deviations of variation are within the acceptable tolerance limits of
the process.
C.Every clinical laboratory (from large reference laboratories to small in-house laborato-
ries) should have a quality assurance program to monitor the performance of each assay.
To do so, several steps must be taken:
1.There must be a commitment by laboratory staff to use the program.
2.There must be a financial commitment to the program because the analysis of
control samples results in an expense that must be incorporated into the cost of
analyzing patient samples.
3.The laboratory staff needs to decide which assays will be included in the program.
Some assays/procedures are very difficult to monitor because there isnot a suitable
controlmaterial （e.g.,urinalysis sediment examination）.In such situations,other
methods may be used for quality assurance (e.g.,replicate analysis of the same
sample by two people).
4.Laboratory staffmust decide on the appropriate decision criteria for accepting or
rejecting a run (or the results for control samples).
5.For optimal use of quality assurance materials,their use should mirror operation of
the instrument for patient samples.
a.The person who will analyze the patient sample should analyze the control
material because one of the most common sources of analytical error is the
operator.
b. The control material should test the entire operation of the analyzer and not
just be what is called an electronic control a control that may simply ensure that
the instrument's circuitry is functioning without actually running a sample
through it.
DIFFERENCESINLABORATORYMETHODSANDTHEIRRESULTS
Not only do veterinarians face challenges of species variations,they also must deal with the
different results generated by different laboratories and different laboratory methods.There
are many potential reasons for the differences; some of the differences are due to random
errors that are not preventable, others are caused by analytical or systematic errors (bias),
and others are because ofpoor analytical methods that produce inaccurate results.
I1.
Examples of differences
A.Figure 1.5 illustrates results of a survey completed by theVeterinary Laboratory
Association (VLA)as part of a quality assurance program.For the survey,theVLA
distributed aliquots of a pooled serum to laboratories that subscribed to its quality
assurance program.Afer analysisof the istributed sampleeach subscribing laboratory
sent its results to the association for compilation and analysis. The association then
distributed the results of the analyses.Thetype of program is sometimesreferred to as a
profciency testing program and can be used to determine the validity of a laboratory’s
assay.Ideall,theresults of an individual laboratory could becompared to theresults
established by a laboratory that analyzed the same sample by using a recognized
reference method. Without such a value, the proficiency testing provides a method of
periodically monitoring an assay's performance compared to other laboratories.
30
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Lowest
Highest
value
value
ALT (U/L)
口
55
Albumin (g/dL)
2.4xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx1
3.9
ALP(U/L)
107
KXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX!
280
AMS(U/L)
385
KXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX1
1258
C-(mmol/L)
96
1XXXXxxxxxxxxxxXxxxxxXxXxXX1117
Cholesterol (mg/dL)
CK(U/L)
53
Creatinine (mg/dL)
1.7
3.7
Glucose (mg/dL)
99
Lipase (U/L)
53
xxx×2x×x1978
Phosphorus(mg/dL)
4.8
KOXOXOXXYXOYXOY
6.8
Potassium (mmol/L)
3.6
5.4
Sodium (mmol/L)
tCa2+(mg/dL)
7.6
10.4
tCO(mmol/L)
17
Total protein (g/dL)
6.8
Urea (mg/dL)
51
Results of allmethods (n =73-126)
Results of same method on different instruments (n =19-111)
Results of same methodon same instrument (n=12-15)
Fig. 1.5. Results from similar and different assay methods that analyzed aliquots of one canine serum sample
as partof one survey completed by theVeterinary Laboratory Association (VLA) during 2000.Ranges for
most measured analyte concentrations or enzyme activities were extracted from graphs within the survey's
report, but data for ALP, AMS, and LPS activities were obtained from the VLA because graphed bars were
too small to be reliably interpreted.
•For nearly every measured analyte, the difference berween the lowest and highest values would be
considered clinically relevant if they represented values obtained from the same animal but different
samples.
·The greatest differences occur when different assay methods are used, but frequently there were large
differences when the same assay method was used on different machines (e.g., ALT, ALP, AMS, choles-
terol, CK, glucose, sodium, and tCa²).
·For the data used in this figure, the “results of the same method on same instrument” represent data for
the same dry chemistry reagent system on the same type of instrument. Even so,the lack of agreement
emphasizes the need for the establishment of reference intervals by each laboratory.
ALT, alanine transaminase; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; AMS, amylase; Cl, chloride; CK, creatine kinase;
tCa²+, total calcium; and tCO,total carbon dioxide.
B.Careful review of the data in Fig. 1.5 can be disturbing because there are marked
differences in the results generated by laboratories.It is beyond the scope of this
textbook to describe the possible reasons for the differences in detail. In general, the
resultsmay varybecauseof one ormoreof thefollowing:
1.Commercial standard solutions vary and may be poorly calibrated. Although there
are strict requirements for development of human assays, there are not the same
requirements for veterinary assays.
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
31
2.For assays that measure enzyme activity or depend on enzymatic activity within the
assay, there can be marked differences in enzyme activity because of different
substrates (reagents), reaction temperatures, or pH of assay systems.
3.Even though rwo laboratories might have the same chemistry instrument and assay
method,the laboratoriesmight purchase reagents from different companies.The
reagents might have the same constituents but at different concentrations.
C.Because of the potential marked differences in results determined by laboratories,
several recommendations are made:
1.Sample collection,processing,and transport should follow policies that minimize
the chances of sample damage.
2.Samples should be submitted to veterinarylaboratories that adhere to stringent
quality assurance guidelines
3.Your patient's results should be compared against appropriate reference intervals
established for the same assay method in the same laboratory.
a.Reference intervals established for another assay can be very misleading.
Comparison against reference intervals published in textbooks is discouraged.
However, if done, the potential differences due to analytical variation must be
considered.
b. Reference intervals provided by the manufacturer of an instrument should be
carefully scrutinized. The manufacturer should provide details about the reference
intervals, including the criteria used to select reference individuals, the number of
animals in the reference sample group,and the method of determining the
reference limits.If the manufacturer's reference intervals are going to be used,
then split samples should be analyzed by the manufacturer andyour laboratory
to ascertain whether there is excellent agreement in the assays'results.Alterna
tively,samples from20healthy animals couldbe assayed;only 1 of 20values
should fall outside the reference interval if it was based on the central 95 % of
the reference population.If more than one value is outside the manufacturer's
reference interval,thereference nterval may not be appropriate.
4.A good diagnostician detects and confirms abnormalities.If a laboratory result is not
consistent with your impression of the case,you should ask the laboratory to repeat
the assay or you should submit another sample to confrm a significant abnormality.
5.You should establish a strong professonal relationship with your laboratory's
personnel. The quality laboratory will strive to provide you quality and timely
results. You should strive to provide the laboratory with quality samples.
COMPARISON OFASSAYS
I.
As described in the previous section (Quality of Laboratory Results,sect.II.B),it is
sometimes necessary to compare the results of assays to determine the degree of agreement
between two assays. Assays are in agreement when they produce essentially the same result
from the same sample.
A.Importantly,resultsmay be strongly correlated butnotin agreement.Linearregression
can be used to establish a relationship between independent and dependent variables. If
two assays are attempting to measure the same analyte,they should have a relationship,
butneither measuredvalue is a dependentvariable.
B.Themethods of comparing assays and guidelines for completing a comparison were
recentlyreviewed.'3
32
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
NCCLS BlasPlot
Altman-Bland BlasPlot
Comparison ofResults of TwoHCOAssays
Comparison ofResults of TwoHCOAssays
1-
1-
methods
Zero bias
0
Zero bias
98
Average
Q
Average
2
.difference
6
-2
-difference
口
nce
L
Differ
5
5
5
15
25
35
5
15
25
35
Method 1 (mmol/L)
Mean of methods 1 and 2 (mmol/L)
Fig.1l.6. NCCLS and Altman-Bland bias plots. The results were tabulated and entered in a software
program (Analyse-it) to generate the bias plots.
·In the NCCLS bias plot, the differences between HCO,concentrations measured by two assays (method
2-method 1 in this example) are plotted on the y-axis; the concentrations measured by method 1 are
plotted on the x-axis. The average difference for all samples is calculated; in this comparison, the average
difference is 2mmol/L (bias2mmol/L）.Lines representing ±2 sd of the differences are also displayed.
The NCCLS bias plot is the preferred plot when a second method is being compared to a reference
method or an established method.
·The Altman-Bland bias plot is the same as the NCCLS bias plot except the average of the two measured
values (average of method 1 and method 2 concentrations) are plotted on the x-axis. The advantage of the
Altman-Bland bias plot is that neither method is considered to be the more accurate method.
HCO,,bicarbonate.
II.
There arefour major methods of assessing agreement of assays.It is beyond the scope of
this book to address the application of these methods,but veterinarians should be aware of
what these methods provide.
A.Bias plots (Fig. 1.6)
1.NCCLS or CLSI bias plot (NCCLS is an abbreviation for National Committee for
Clinical Laboratory Standards that has been renamed the Clinical Laboratory
Standards Institute)
a.The NCCLS plot displays the degree of agreement between a new method and
the old method (or reference method）.The values determined by the old/
reference method are plotted on the x-axis, and the difference between values
determined by the new and old method is plotted on the y-axis.Besides plotting
the paired data points, the mean and standard deviations of the differences are
also plotted.
b.The graph displays a positive bias (mean difference >O） or a negative bias (mean
difference <O), and may indicate either a constant bias (a difference between the
results that is constant overall values) or a proportional bias (a differencebetween
the results that changes proportionately with the magnitude of the result).
2.The Altman-Bland bias plot is similar but different: the average of the two values is
plotted on the x-axis and the difference berween the two values is plorted on the
y-axis.This method does not assume that either the new or the old method is more
accurate.
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
33
Deming Method Comparison
Passing&BablokMethod Comparison
Comparison of Results of Two HCOAssays
Comparison of Results of Two HCOAssays
40
Identity.ine
40
dentty ine
35
35
30
30
25
25
20
15
15
10
y=0.9481x-0.8349
10
y=0.9571x-0.9143
15
25
35
15
25
35
Method 1 (mmol/L)
Method 1 (mmol/L)
Fig. 1.7. Deming and Passing & Bablok method comparisons. The results were tabulated and entered in a
software program (Analyse-it) to generate the comparison graphs. The analysis of the two graphs reveals a
mild proportional bias; that is, the absolute difference between the two methods increases at higher
concentrations.
•In the Deming method, the results of the two assays are plotted on the y-axis and the x-axis, and a best-fit
regression line is drawn and compared to the identity line (y = x). The equation for the best-fit line (y=
mx + b) and associated confidence intervals are used to detect constant bias or proportional bias. In this
method of comparison, imprecision of the assays should be normally distributed.
need not be normally distributed and can have nonconstant variance over the sampling range.The 95 %
confidence interval of the best-fit line is also displayed.
HCO,,bicarbonate.
B.Deming method comparison (Fig.1.7)
1.In theDeming method comparison,the values obtained for a given sample are
plotted with the new method on the y-axis and the old (or comparison) method on
the x-axis.An equation for the best-fit line (y=mx + b)and the 95 % confidence
intervals for the slope and y-intercepts are calculated.
a.Aproportionalbiasis detected if the95%confidence interval for the slope does
not include 1 (i.e., slope of the identity line)
b.Aconstant bias is detected if the 95% confidence interval for they-intercept does
not include O (i.e.,y-intercept of the identity line).
a.
Regression analysis is designed for the x value to be an independent variable and
the y value to be dependent on x.However,the results of two methods are both
independent variables.
b.
Regression analysis to compute a correlation coefficient (r value) is designed to
doesnot make sense that there isnorelationshipif rwo assays are designed to
measure the same analyte concentration.
34
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
c.The correlation coeffcient depends on the range of data in the sample.5A large
range of data will tend tohavea higher correlation than will a small range,even
when most values are clustered in a narrow range and a single value stretches the
rangemore broadly.
d.Figures 1.6 and 1.7 show excellent correlation (r = 0.98) between data sets, but
the bias plots illustrate there is a bias between the assays.
3.In the Deming method, imprecision is allowed in both methods and the variances
must be normally distributed (i.e., it is a parametric analysis method). The data
from thecomparison areimproved if thecompared data areobtained from duplicate
measurements by both methods
C.Passing and Bablok method comparison (Fig. 1.7)
1.The Passing and Bablok method is similar to the Deming method in that impreci-
sion is allowed in both methods and their
However,the Passing and Bablok method does not require that the variances in the
data sets have normal distributions (i.e.
it is a nonparametric method).
2.This method also includes a plot to assess linearity. If several data points fall on one
side of the identity line, then the relationship between the two methods may not be
linear.
1.This method can be used when laboratory results are in a categorical scale such as
1+,2+,3+,and 4+or trace,mild,moderate,and marked A2+value may not be
twice that ofa 1+,and a 4+ may not be twice the value of a 2+.
2.The calculated kappa value provides a guide to the degree of agreement. The size or
degree of disagreement is not considered with the standard kappa method,but it is
with the weighted kappa method.
Comparison of Urine Heme Reactions:
Reflectance PhotometricversusVisual Grading
Reflectance PhotometricGrading
negative
trace
1
2
negative
25
1
0
0
0
trace
15
3
0
0
0
6
15
0
6
2
0
0
5
5
1
3
0
0
0
2
9
Weightedkappa value:0.78
Interpretation guidelines
Kappavalue
Agreement
0.80-1.00
Very good
0.60-0.79
Good
0.40-0.59
Moderate
0.20-0.39
Fair
0.00-0.19
Poor
Fig. 1.8. Kappa-agreement data for urine heme reaction. After dipping the reaction pad in 100 urine
samples, the color changes in a heme-reaction pads were assessed by two methods (refectance photometry
and visual examination) and graded as negative, trace, 1+, 2+, or 3+. The results were tabulated and entered
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
35
III.After the quantitative aspects of the assays are compared,a decision is made as to whether
the degree of agreement is acceptable or unacceptable
A.Visual inspection of graphed data may reveal that the results differ sufficiently so that
the rwo assays cannot be considered the same.Thus, there would need to be different
reference intervals and decision thresholds for the two assays
B.
Because both assays willinherently not be 100 % precise, some differences are expected
even if the assays have excellent agreement. The amount of inherent difference can be
assessed by calculating a combined inherent CV.3
C.Theacceptabilityof a newassay can also be assessed using amedical decision chart
WHICHLABORATORYDOYOUUSE?
I.
Many factors must be considered before you decide how you will obtain laboratory data for
your patients.Basically,there are three major options:in-house laboratory,veterinary
reference laboratory,and laboratory in local human hospital.Fourmajor questions must be
considered:
A.How will the results affect the care of the patient?
B.Can the laboratory consistently provide quality analysis of the sample?
C.How much will it cost to analyze the sample?
D.How important is a short turnaround time?
II.
In-house laboratory (in a veterinary clinic or hospital)
A.Advantages
1.May allow24h aocess tolaboratory data
2.Shorter turnaround times, which are sometimes required for emergency cases
3.Fresh samples and thus fewer concerns about sample deterioration
B.Disadvantages
1. Capital expenditure of several thousand dollars is required and equipment depreci
ates rapidly.
2. Need to maintain inventory of reagents and supplies
3.Need personnel trained to operate and maintain equipment
4.Need to follow a quality assurance program (You may be legally responsible for
documenting quality of laboratory data.)
6.Reference intervals typically are provided by the manufacturer of instruments or
assay and may or may not be quality reference intervals.
7.May need to ship a malfunctioning instrument to the manufacturer for repairs and
thus need a replacement instrument or backup methods
C.Excellent in-house testing can be provided, but the quality and value of the results are
ofteninferior to those provided byveterinary reference laboratories.Sources of error
include thefollowing
1.Inappropriate sample is tested rather than rejected (e.g, because of wrong tube,
wrong volume, or interferent present such as lipemia).
2.Sample processing is inappropriate (e.g., sample not mixed adequately).
3.Analyzer is not maintained adequately.
4.Outdated reagents are used.
5. Personnel do not follow a standard operating procedure.
6.Control samples are not tested or are not tested frequently enough to trust results.
36
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
7.For hematology,microscopic evaluation is not done, or it is done by someone with
less experience than referral laboratory personnel.
III.
Veterinaryreferencelaboratory
A.Advantages
1.Laboratory personnel are typically trained to provide quality analysis of veterinary
samples and recognize samples that may lead to inaccurate results.
2.Diagnostic support may be available from veterinary clinical pathologists in the
laboratory.
3.Reference intervals should be appropriate for the species.
4.Most laboratorieshave a quality management system in place to help ensure quality
results. The system often includes proficiency testing by an external group such that
performance can be compared to that of peers.
5.Many more diagnostic assays are typically available than are available in an in-house
laboratory.
6.The cost for sample analysis is more clearly determined and thus can be charged to
the client on a sample-by-sample basis.
B.Disadvantages
1.Notall analytes are stable and thus some deteriorate during shipment. Some analytes
require special shipping.
2.Turnaround times vary with location: some are available the same day, and most are
available the next day except for special tests. Some laboratories offer courier service
and results reported via fax machines or e-mail.
IV. Laboratory in local human hospital
A.An advantage is that turnaround times can be within hours.
B.Disadvantages
1.Quality reference intervals for veterinary samples may not be established by the
laboratory.
variations or diseases that are unique to veterinary samples.
4.Pathologists who specialize in human patients frequently are very interested in
helping, but lack the training in the diseases of domestic animals and variations seen
in veterinary samples.
5.The fees charged by laboratories may be relatively high.
C.Testing in local laboratories that specializein human medicine should generally be
avoided.
EVALUATINGANDVALIDATINGLABORATORYMETHODS'6
I.
Reasons for evaluating laboratory methods
A.New or revised laboratory methods may be evaluated for clinical use when the follow-
ing are true: (1) recent research findings suggest a better approach, (2) newer assays
mightbemore accuratemorepciselessxpensiverlssdiffcultr）annst
ment was purchased to replace an outdated or malfunctioning instrument.
B.A clinical perspective needs to be considered for new or revised laboratory methods. Is
the method practical? What are the equipment and space needs? Are personnel trained
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
37
for the method? Will it improve patient care at a reasonable cost? Has there been
adequate study of the method to prove its clinical value or is the method still in the
development stage? Are the requirements for sample collection, processng, and
handing practical?
II.
What are the sources of analytical error?
A.Each assay system has it own inherent random error (see Quality of Laboratory Results,
sect.II.A). Typically, the more precise the assay is, the better it is, but sometimes the
most precise methods are too expensive or time consuming.
B.Besides random error, a method may not provide accurate results because of systemaric
error(bias).For example,the mean concentration of a new method might be consis-
method.
C.Accuracy is a relative term, and an assay's analytical accuracy is sometimes difficult o
assess in a clinical laboratory. An assay’s resulr may be compared against one of rwo
"true”values:
1.The mean concentration determined by the reference method (a gold standard)
2.The mean concentration determined by numerous analyses by comparative methods
(all laboratories using the same instrument and reagents)
D.Acceptable analytical performance
1.Thmost curatisecif,r snitiveassay ticallystedd
clinical environment.However,the assay does need to meet requirements for a
clinically useful assay.
2.Criteria for acceptable performance of clinical assays have been proposed, and they
vary considerably among analytes. A hematocrit method might be considered
acceptable if it provides results within 6 % of the target value (e.g., 37.642.4 % for
a hematocrit of 40 %). Or a cortisol method might be considered acceptable if
III.Validation methods:After available information has led to a conclusion that a new or
revised assay should be evaluated, three stages of validation have been recommended.
A.Familiarization:This stage includes establishment of a working procedure,initial
assessment of the analytical range,and calibration.
B.Preliminary validation:In this stage,several studies are completed,including
within-run replication, interference studies, and recovery studies.
C.Detailed validation:If initial results are satisfactory,then the finalvalidation
includesreplication studies,comparison ofmethodsstatistical analyses,
determination of acceptableperformance criteria,and establishment ofreference
intervals.
IV.
Implementation phase
A.If results of the validation procedures indicate that the assay will be used in the
laboratory,then it needs tobe incorporatedinto thedailyroutine of the laboratory,
including equipment maintenance, reagent inventory, and a quality assurance
program.
B.When the assay is finally ready for clinical use, clinicians are notified of its availability,
expected precision at major decision thresholds,and characteristics of reference
intervals.
38
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
DIAGNOSTICPROPERTIESANDPREDICTIVEVALUEOFLABORATORYASSAYS
I.
As mentioned earlier, a frequent purpose of analyzing a patient's sample is to detect or
confirm the presence of a disease state.Butif a laboratory test result is outside thereference
interval,how likely is it that the patient has a certain disorder?Similarly,if a laboratory test
result is WRI, how certain are we that the animal doesn't have a certain disease or patho.
logic state?The following information is an introduction to the diagnostic value oflabora
tory assays and the predictive value theory, which involve concepts or procedures that are
used to answer these questions.
II.
There are four classifications of test results relative to the presence or absence of a disease:
A.TP (true positive): a result that correctly identified a patient as having a specified
disease
B.TN (true negative): a result that correctly identifed a patient as not having a specifed
disease
C.FP (false positive）: a result that incorrectly identified a patient as having a specified
disease
D.FN (false negative): a result that incorrectly identified a patient as not having a specifed
disease
III.To classify test results into one of the four categories, two factors must be known:
A.What criterion is used to separate a positive from a negative result? Is it a positive result
when the result is above the appropriate reference interval? Or is it a positive result
when thevalue exceeds a certain decision threshold that could bewithin or outside of
the reference interval?
B.What determines whether an animal has the disease of interest?That is,what is
the gold standard that allows us to say that the animal definitely does or does not
have the disease?For many spontaneous diseases, there may not be a pure gold standard
and thus the diagnostic value data must be considered to be relative to an imperfect
standard.
IV.After test results are appropriately classified as TP, TN,FP, or FN, several calculations
are made in an attempt to characterize the diagnostic properties or predictive value of
the assay.
A.Diagnostic sensitivity
1.Definition: the frequency with which a test is positive in patients that have the
disease of interest (Eq. 1.2a)
2.A test that has high diagnostic sensitivity is a good one for screening for the
presence of a disease because the test has very few FN results. If the animal has the
disease, there is a high probability that the test will be positive.
3.Diagnostic sensitivity must be differentiated from analytical sensitivity.
number of true positive
TP#
Diagnostic sensitivity (as %) = -
-×100
(1.2a.)
number with specified diseaseTP#+FN #
number of true negative
TN#
Diagnostic specificity(as %) =
×100
(1.2b.)
number without specified disease
TN#+FP#
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
39
number correctly classified
TP#+TN#
Diagnostic accuracy (as %) =
X100
number of animals in study
#I+#+#+#
(1.2c.)
number of true positive
TP#
Predictive value of postive test(as %） =
x100
(1.2d.)
all positive results
TP#+FP#
number of true negative
TN#
Predictive value of negative test(as %）=
X100
(1.2e.)
all negative results
TN#+FN#
B.Diagnostic specificity
1.Definition: the frequency with which a test is negative in patients that do not have
the disease of interest (Eq. 1.2b)
2.A test that has high diagnostic specificity can be a good one for confirming
that an animal has a disease because the test has very few FP results. If the
result is positive, there is a high probability that the animal will have the
disease.
3.Diagnostic specificity must be differentiated from analytical specificity.
C.Diagnostic accuracy
1.Defnition: the frequency with which a test correctly classifies an animal as having or
not having the disease (Eq. 1.2c)
2.A test has high diagnostic accuracy when it has relatively few FP and FN results
compared to TP and TN results.
D.PV（+),hepredictivevalue fa positive test,positive predictive vale
1.Definition:the probability that a positive test result indicates that the animal has the
disease (Eq.1.2d)
2.A test that has a high PV(+) is one that has very few FP compared to TP results.
Thus, a positive test result strongly suggests the presence of the disease.
E.PV(),the predictive value of a negative test,negatve predictive value
1.Definition: the probability that a negative test result indicates that the animal does
not have the disease (Eq.1.2e)
2.A test that has a high PV() is one that has very few FN compared to
TN results.Thus,a negative test result strongly suggests the absence of the
disease.
Basic concepts of predictive values.Threemajorquestions are considered when the
diagnostic properties of an assay are evaluated:
A.What is the prevalence of the disease in the studied population?The effect of preva
lence isillustrated inFig.1.0.Basically,whenthe isease prevalenceisvery low,itis
more likely that there willbeFPresults.Conversely,when thedisease prevalence isvery
high, it is more likely that there will be FN results.
B.What method is used as the gold standard for establishing the presence or absence of
disease? Having an excellent gold standard is sometimes very difficult for spontaneous
diseases and thus comparison against a poor gold standard may lead to questionable
results. Also,consider this question: What would be the results of a comparison study if
the new assay is actually better than the existing gold standard?
40
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
A
B
C
25
Disease
25
Disease
25
Disease
absent
absent
20
absent
20
Disease
15
Disease
15-
Disease
present
present
present
10
10
TN'FF
TP
N
ON
TN
TP
EN
FP
Analyte concentration
Analyte concentration
Analyte concentration
=decision threshold
Fig. 1.9. Effects of different decision thresholds on dassifying test results.In these examples, the distribution
of observed values in the animals without the disease appears to be Gaussian; such a distribution may or
may not be true in real studies. The distribution of data in the diseased group is not Gaussian; typically
such data are not Gaussian but may not be skewed as shown in this example.
A.The decision threshold is near the me
analyte concentration found in the animals without the disease.
With such a decision threshold
The diagnostic sensitivity would be 100 % because there are no FN results
use of the many FP results.
uldb
The PV(+)would be poor beca
e of the many FPresults
ThePV(-)would be 100 %be
re are no FN results.
B.The decision threshold is at the hig
value found in the animals without the disease.
poor (about 60 %) because there are relatively many FN results.
•The diagnostic specificity would be 100 % because there are no FP results.
oor because of the many FN results.
•The PV(+) would be 100 % because there are no FP results
The PV(-) would be poor because there are many FN results.
C.The decision threshold is at a concentration where the least overlap between the groups oocurs.
·This decision threshold represents a compromise to obtain the best combination of diagnostic
sensitivity and diagnostic specificity and provides the best diagnostic accuracy because there are
relatively few FP and FN results
·The values for PV(+) and PV(-) would be high but not 100 %.
C.What is going to be the decision threshold that separates a positive result from a negative
result?Extensive evaluation of an assay is sometimes needed to find the best decision
threshold. The effects of changing the decision threshold are illustrated in Fig. 1.9.
VI.
Application and interpretation of predictive value concepts
A.The clinical value of the calculated diagnostic properties isinfuenced by the prevalence
of a disease.For examples A and B inFig.1.10,assume the diagnostic sensitivity of a
test is 90 % and its diagnostic specificity is 80 %.
1.In example A of Fig. 1.10, with a disease prevalence of 30 %:
a.The PV(+) is 66 %; for all positive test results, 66% will be TP results.
b.The PV() is 95 %; for all negative test results, 95 % will be TN results.
2.In example B of Fig. 1.10, with a disease prevalence of 1 %:
a.The PV(+) is 4.3 %; for all positive test results, 4.3 % will be TP results.
b.The PV() is 99.9 %; for all negative test results, 99.9 % will be TN results.
ExampleA-30%diseaseprevalence
Disease
Disease
Disease
Disease
Totals
Step1
present
absent
Step2
present
absent
Positive test
[(TP)
270
(FP)
140
Positive test
[(TP)
270
(FP)
140
410
Negative test(FN)
30(TN)
560
Negative test(FN)
30（TN）
560
590
Totals
300
700
Totals
300
700
1000
Step3
TP#
270
Predictive value of positive test (as %) =
x100=
100=66%
TP#+FP#
410
#NI
560
Predictive value of negative test (as %)=
x100=
x100=95%
#+#N
590
ExampleB-1%diseaseprevalence
Disease
Disease
Disease
Disease
Totals
Step1
present
absent
Step2
present
absent
Positive test
(TP)
9(FP)
198
Positive test
(TP)
9(FP)
198
207
Negative test (FN)
1(TN)
792
Negative test (FN)
1(TN)
792
793
Totals
10
990
Totals
10
990
1000
Step3
Predictive value of positive test (as %) =
TP#
9
×100=
x100=4.3%
#+#
207
#NL
792
Predictive value of negative test (as %)
×100=
100=99.9%
#N+#N
793
Fig. l.10. Examples of diagnostic properties of assays. For each example, the values for diagnostic sensitivity
and specificity are 90 % and 80 %, respectively.
In exdmple A, we discovered (via a gold standard) that 30 % of1000 dogs have the disease.Based on the
prevalence, what is the test's positive predictive value? Whar is the test's negative predictive value?
Stepl: Construct a table from the available information.Because 30% of the dogs have the disease
300 dogs have the disease and 700 dogs do not. As the diagnostic sensitivity is 90 %,then 90 % (270)
of the 300 diseased dogs will have a positive test result (TP) and 30 will have a negative test result
(FN). Because the diagnostic specificity is 80 %, then 80 % (560) of 700 dogs will have negative results
(TN) and 140 will have a positive result (FP).
Step 2: Add the values for the number of positive and negative results.
formulas.
In exampleB,we discovered （via a gold standard) that 1 % of 1000 dogs have the disease. Based on the
prevalence, what is the test's positive predictive value? What is the test's negative predictive value?
+Step l: Construct a table from the available information. Because 1 % of the dogs have the disease, ten
dogs have the disease and 990 dogs do not. Because the diagnostic sensitivity is 90 %, 90 % (nine) of
the ten diseased dogs will have a positive test result (TP) and 10 % (one) will have a negative test result
(FN). Because the diagnostic specificity is 80 %, 80 % (792) of 990 dogs will have negative results
(TN) and 198 will have a positive result (FP).
Srep 2: Add the values for the number of positive and negative results.
formulas.
41
42
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
3.By comparing the results of the two examples, these conclusions are formed:
a.As the prevalence of the disease dropped from 30 % to 1 %, the PV(+) decreased
from 66 % to 4.3 %. Thus, the PV(+) is less when the prevalence of the disease
is lower.
b.As the prevalence of the disease dropped from 30 % to 1 %, the PV() increased
from 95 % to 99.9 %.Thus, the PV(-) is greater when the prevalence of the
disease is lower.
B.The predictive value concepts are used to compare the diagnostic value of two labora
tory tests.To illustrate this application,data were extracted from an article that
compared the diagnostic value of serum [tT4] and [fT4]a for diagnosing feline hyper-
thyroidism.7As described in Chapter 17, serum[tT4] and[fT4]may increase in sera
of cats with hyperthyroidism, but other factors can infuence [tT] and [fT4]d
1.Gold standard for this study
a.Cats were classified as having hyperthyroidism by using the following clinical or
laboratory findings:
(1) Clinical signs consistent with hyperthyroidism
(2)Palpable thyroid nodule
(3) Good clinical response to treatment for hyperthyroidism
(4)Basal [tT4] increased or basal [tT] not increased, but positive results of
triodothyronine-suppression or thyrotropin-releasing hormone-stimulation
test
b.Cats were classified as not having hyperthyroidism if they did not meet hyperthy
roidism criteria. These cats had clinical signs suggestive of hyperthyroidism (e.g,
weight loss, vomiting, diarrhea,and polyuria),bur none had a palpable thyroid
mass, none had increased [tT4], and all had a diagnosis other than
hyperthyroidism.
2.Classification of results
a.tT resulrs were classified as positive if [tT] was >48 nmol/L. fT4 results were
classified as positive if [fT4la was > 51 pmol/L. Decision thresholds represented
the upper reference limits determined from 172 healthy cats.
b.Results were classified as negative if they did not meet positive criteria.
3.Based on these criteria for the 1138 cats,
a.917 cats had hyperthyroidism. Of these, 837 had an increased [tT4] and 903 had
increased [fT4]ed
b.221 cats did not have hyperthyroidism.Of these,none had increased [tT4] and
14had increased[fT]ed
4.From the data provided, tables were constructed to show the classification of test
results.From the tabulated data,the diagnosticproperties and predictive values of
[tT4] and [fT4]ea were calculated (Fig. 1.11).
5.Based on the evaluation of reported data and application of the aforementioned gold
standard and decision thresholds,these conclusions can be drawn:
a.Serum [fT4] had better diagnostic sensitivity (98 %) than did serum [tT]
(91 %) for detecting feline hyperthyroidism. Thus, serum [fT4l would be a
will have increased [fT4]a than increased[tT].
b.Serum [tT] had better diagnostic specificity (100 %) than did serum [fT]d
(94 %).Thus, an increased serum[tT] is more indicative of feline hyperthyroid
ism than is an increased serum[fT4]; that is,[tT]had fewer FP results.
[tT4]in feline sera
HyperthyroidismHyperthyroidism
present
absent
Totals
Positive test
(TP)
837(FP)
0
837
Negative test(FN)
80(TN)
221
301
Totals
917
221
1138
TP#
837
Diagnostic sensitivity (as %)=
x100
=
x100=91%
#+#
917
#NI
Diagnostic specificity (as %)=
x100
TN#+FP#
221
#NI+#1
1058
Diagnostic accuracy (as %)=
×100
×100=93%
+#+#+#
1138
TP#
Predictivevalue of postive test(as %)=
837
×100
二
x100=100%
TP#+FP#
837
#NI
221
Predictive value of negative test (as %) =
x100=
x100=73%
#N+#N
301
[fT4leg in feline sera
Hyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
present
absent
Totals
Positive test
(TP)
903(FP)
14
917
Negative test(FN)
14
(TN)
207
221
Totals
917
221
1138
TP#
Diagnostic sensitivity(as %)=
903
x100=
x100=98%
TP#+FN#
917
#NL
Diagnostic specificity (as %) =
207
×100
100=94%
TN#+FP#
221
#N1+#1
1110
Diagnostic accuracy (as %) =
x100 =
x100=98%
TP#+FP#+TN#+FN#
1138
TP#
903
Predictive value of postive test (as %)=
x100=
x100=98%
TP#+FP#
917
Predictive value of negative test(as %)=
TN#
207
x100
100=94%
TN#+FN#
221
Fig. 1.1l. Analysis of the diagnostic properties of serum [tT] and [fTle. The source of the data for this
figure is explained in the text. Also, conclusions from the analyses are presented in the text.
[T] data
From the data provided,a table was constructed to show the classification of test results.
•From the tabulated data, the diagnostic properties and predictive values of serum [tT were calculated.
[fTala data: The same procedures were completed.
43
44
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
c.Serum[fT4]had better diagnostic accuracy(98%) than did serum[tT]
(93%).Thus,if only[tT]or[fT4] can be determined,serum[fT4]has a
better chance of correctly classifying the cat as having or not having hyperthy-
roidism.However,measuring [fT4l is more expensive than measuring [tT].
d.The PV(+) for increased [tT] was 100 %, and it was 98 % for [fT]e
e.The PV()s for [tT4] and for [fT4]a were 73 % and 94 %,respectively.These
results indicate that a [fT]e that isWRI would strongly suggest that a cat does
not have hyperthyroidism because there were very few FN results.
fNotethat theresultsof such studiesmayvarywithdifferentassaysdifferent
populations,different gold standards,and diffrent decision thresholds.
(1)[tT4] was used to determine the presence or absence of hyperthyroidism.
The gold standard used (or method of establishing the presence of hyperthy.
roidism) in the study is considered an excellent method of establishing the
presence of felinehyperthyroidism,but it would have been interesting o
learn whether the diagnostic value data for[tT] would change if [tT] had
not been used to help determine the presence or absence of
hyperthyroidism.
(2)Most cats in the study had been referred to specialists for treatment of
hyperthyroidism.Thus, there was a high prevalence of hyperthyroidism in
the study's population. A high prevalence increases the PV(+) of diagnostic
tests and lowers the PV(). Accordingly, the predictive values of [tT] and
[fTlawould probably be different in a nonreferral veterinary practice.
VII.Application of the aforementioned methods to evaluate and compare diagnostic methods
requires careful planning,appropriatechoices of theanimal populationsdiseasedversus
nondiseased), and availability of an excellent gold standard.
A.A deficiency in the diagnostic properties and predictive value theories is that a positive
result is given the same weight or importance if thevalue is only slightly increased or if
it is extremely increased. Such a weighting process (ie., lack of weighting) frequently is
not appropriate in the clinical decision process.
B.After a diagnostic test (assay)has been thoroughly studied,six criteria should be
fllledbforethdagnosticproprties（predictivevaluediagnostic accuracy,tc.）are
transferred to another clinical setting:
18
1.The definition of the disease is constant, and the diagnostic criteria are applied in
the same way such that rwo dogs with the same abnormalities in two different
settings would be diagnosed with the same disorder.
2.The same test is used. As described in earlier sections, there may not be complete
agreementbetweentwo analytical assays evenif thesameinstrument andreagents
areused.
3.The decision thresholds between categories of test results are constant； that is, two
different observers should agree on results that are positive and on results that are
negative.
4.The distribution of test results in the disease group is constant, that is,the data
should have the same average and same distribution curve. It may be difficult to
fulfll this criterionperhaps animals are presented early in an illness in one
location, but, in another location, animals are not presented until the animals are
severelyill.Data for animals with amild diseasewill probably be different from
those of a group with severe disease.
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
45
5.The distribution of testresults in the nondisease group is constant；that is,the data
should have the same average and same distribution curve. It may be difficult to
fulfill this criterioncertain FP disorders may be rare in a primary care clinic but
very common in a referral clinic.
6.The ratio of disease to nondisease (pretest probability) is constant. Again, this
criterion may be difficult to fulfillcertain disordersmay be rare in a primary care
clinic but very common in a referral clinic.
RECEIVER OPERATINGCHARACTERISTIC(ROC)CURVES1920
ROC curves were originally developed to assess the abiliry of radar images to detect enemy
1
aircraft in World War Il, and therefore to assess the ability to detect true signals from
background noise.In the context of laboratory tests, the ROC curves display the relation
ship between a TP rate and a FP rate.
A.TP rate is equal to diagnostic sensitivity expressed as a decimal.For example, when the
diagnostic sensitivity is 90 %, the TP rate is 0.9; results are positive in nine of ten
diseased animals.
B.FP rate is equal to 1 minus the diagnostic specificity expressed as a decimal. For
example, when the diagnostic specificity is 70 %, the FP rate is 1-0.7 = 0.3, and three
of ten nondiseased animals would have an FP result. When the diagnostic specificity is
100%,therewould be noFPresults and thus the FPratewould be 0.0.
C.Figure 1.12 shows theoretical results from the comparison of two assays: assay A and
assay B.
II.
The clinical value of the comparison of diagnostic procedures by ROC curves depends on
many factors. Major issues to be addressed include the following:
A.The assays should be analytically valid and applicable to clinical investigations.
have similar clinical features (e.g.,both have polyuria, vomiting,or anemia) so that the
abiliry of the assays to differentiate disordersisevaluated.Conversely，comparison of a
sick group versus a healthy group is probably not appropriate or needed (the animal
was defined as healthy without laboratory tests).
C.The accuracy of the comparison is very dependent on the accuracy of the gold standard
procedure that is used to differentiate disease-present from disease-absent groups. As
there are very few“pure gold”procedures, results of the comparison need to be
interpreted accordingly.
1.A visual inspection of Fig. 1.12 reveals that the ROC curve for assay A is closer to
the topleft corner than assay B,and thus assayA has better diagnostic accuracy
than assay B.
2.A more objective comparison can be accomplished by calculating the area under the
curve for each assay.22However,thesevalues should beinterpreted carefully if the
shapes of the ROC curves differ.
E.ROC curves can be used to help establish a decision threshold to rule in or rule out a
diagnosis (Fig.1.13). Other than being used to establish decision thresholds, Fig. 1.13
also provides information that should be considered when interpreting the test results of
assay C.
AssayA Distribution Curves
AssayBDistribution Curves
25
Disease
25
Disease
absent
absent
220
20
Disease
15
present
10
Disease
ON
present
1
2345
2
3
45
Analyte concentration
Analyte concentration
AssayADiagnnstirProperties
AssayRDiagnnsticProperties
Decision threshold
1
2
3
4
5
Decision threshold
1
2
3
4
5
Dx.sensitivity
1.00
0.980.90
0.800.60
Dx.sensitivity
0.90
0.700.50
0.350.20
Dx.specificity
0.50
0.600.90
0.971.00
Dx. specificity
0.52
0.70
0.90
0.971.00
1-Dx.specificity
0.500.400.10
0.03 0.001-Dx.specificity
0.48
0.300.10
0.030.00
AssayA'sROC Curve
AssayB'sROC Curve
1.0
2
1.0
0.8
80
2
2
0.6
0.6
0.4
0
0.4
二
tru
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1 -Diagnostic specificity
1-Diagnostic specificity
(false-positive rate)
(false-positive rate)
Fig.1.12. Comparison of diagnostic value of rwo theoretical assays by ROC curves.
Theinitial step of the evaluation is the analysis of samples from two groups of animals (disease present and
disease absent) by the two assays. The presence or absence of disease is established by agold standard procedure.
The data are plotted to obtain the distribution curves (top curves in figure).To gather data for the ROC
curve, multiple decision thresholds are selected that will provide different diagnostic sensitivity and
specificity values. The decision thresholds are then used to classify actual measured concentrations as being
TP,FP, TN, or FN results. For the illustration in the top graphs, five decision thresholds were selected,
and the dashed lines represent the separation of positive and negative results at each decision threshold.
•From the classified data, the diagnostic sensitivity (TP rate) and specificity values are calculated for each
decision threshold. (For this illustration, the number of animals in both groups were estimated from the
graphs with an assumption that the total number in each group was equal.) The FP rate is calculated by
subtracting diagnostic specificity from 1
•The decimal fractions for TP rate and FP rate are plotted (bottom graphs). The 45° dashed line represents
disease present or disease absent).The best ROC curve approaches the topleft corner of thegraph whre
assayBfor detectingacertain disease.
Dx., diagnostic.
46
Assay C'sRoCCurve
1.0
0.9
10mg/gL
20 mg/dL
0.8
30mg/dL
0.7
40 mg/dL
0.6
0.5
-0
0.4
50mg
0.3
0.2
0.1
p/bwf09
0.1
0.2
0.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
1-Diagnosticspecificity
(false-positiverate)
Fig.1.13. Selecting decision thresholds with ROC curves.In this theoretical assay C, the analyte concentra
tions are plotted on the ROC curve for assay C.
The top-leftmost point provides the best balancebetween diagnostic sensitivity and diagnostic specificity
and is often chosen as a decision threshold to conclude that a patient has a particular condition. Values of
> 40 mg/dL would be considered evidence of the disease.With this decision threshold, the assay would
have a diagnostic sensitivity of 73 % and a diagnostic specificity of 78 %.
•For use as a screening test, one might choose to set the decision threshold for disease at 20 mg/dL
accepting only 10 % FNs (ie, 90 % diagnostic sensitivity).Values of > 20 mg/dL would suggest the
presenceof the diseaseWith this decision threshold, the assay would have a high diagnostic sensitivity
(90 %),but a diagnostic specificity of only 37 %.
▪For a confirmatory test, the decision threshold for disease may be set at 50 mg/dL to accept only 10 %
FPs (i.e., 90 % diagnostic specificity, or an FP rate = 1.0 -0.9 = 0.1). Values of > 50 mg/dL sugest that
the animal has the disease. With this decision threshold, the diagnostic specificity would be high (90 %),
but the diagnostic sensitivity would be only 40 %.
One could also use the ROC curve to determine upper and lower decision thresholds. A value of
20mg/dL might be chosen as the lower decision threshold, so animals with values of20 mg/dL
would be considered likely not to have the disease. A value of 50 mg/dL might be chosen as the upper
decision threshold,so animals withvalues of >50mg/dLwould be considered likely tohave the disease.
Based on this theoretical example,what would be the decision thresholds if you decide to accept 5 % FNs
and5 %FPs?
47
48
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
1.Consider a patient with clinical signs suggestive of the disease of interest and an
assay Cresult of40mg/dL
a.At 40 mg/dL, assay C has a FP rate near 0.22,or a diagnostic specificity of 78 %.
In other words, of 100 dogs that do not have the disease of interest, about 22
will have an analyte concentration of >40 mg/dL (22 % of those without the
disease classified as diseased). Therefore, the patient may or may not have the
disease,but disease is more likely than not.
b.At 40 mg/dL, assay C has a TP rate near 0.73, or a diagnostic sensitivity near
73 %. So, of 100 dogs that do have the disease of interest, 73 will have an analyte
concentration of>40mg/dL(73%of those with the disease classified as diseased).
Therefore, despite a value that is not >40 mg/dL, the patient may still have the
disease because 27% of patients with the disease have values of 40mg/dL or less.
c.This example emphasizes that for many diagnostic tests,animals with and
without the disease of interest may have the same assay result.
2.Another key concept related to this illustration is that each ROC curve represents
the results obtained from one sampling of the defined populations by using one
assay as it compares to one gold standard. Another sampling using the same
selection criteria, the same assay,and the same gold standard probably will not
produce the same ROC curve.
F.Factors other than the probabiliry of correctly classifying an animal as having or not
having a disease can influence where decision thresholds are established:
1.If the mortality rate is very high for a disease that is not treated promptly,the
decision thresholdmay be changed so that there are fewer false negatives.
2.If the disease is known to cause pain or unreasonable discomfort, the decision
threshold may be changed so that there are fewer false negatives.
3.If the treatment is known to have severe side effects, the decision threshold may be
changed so that there are fewer false positives.
4.If the financial cost of a certain diagnosis is great, the decision threshold may be
changed so that there are fewer false positives
HERD-BASEDTESTINGFORCATTLE
I
Other than using results of laboratory assays to help detect or establish the presence of
pathologic states in individual animals clinical laboratory assays also are used to evaluate
the nutritional and metabolic status of groups of cattle. These evaluations should comple
ment other management tools such as ration evaluation, milk composition analysis, and
body condition scoringThe goal is to detect subclinical laboratory abnormalities that
reflect correctible nutritional management practices so that changes canbe instituted prior
to adverse clinical and economic consequences.Metabolic profilingmay bemost applicable
to large herds where (1) adequate sample sizes are available, (2) costs are diluted across
more animals, and (3) correcting a suboptimal nutritional state could translate into
considerable economic savings.
II.
The approach to group testing differs in several ways from individual animal testing with
A.Emphasis is placed on evaluating and monitoring subclinical rather than clinical
disease. Clinically ill cartle are excluded from herd-based testing because their
results may be indicative of an individual disease problem rather than a herd
problem.
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
49
B.Individuals to be tested must belong to defined groups of similarage and lactation stage
under similar environmental conditions and nutritional management (e.g,prefreshen-
apparentfinclusioncrieriaaretobroadthusallowingagreater degreeofphysiologic
variation.
C.Useful information requires adequate group representation and therefore an adequate
sample size for the group of interest. Sampling multiple animals from a defined group
helps reduce variation unrelated to nutritional state.
1.Sample sizes of7-12 have been advocated as reasonable pools to provide useful
information ormost purposes,regardless of herd size.However,reaternumbers of
test individuals would provide results with tighter confidence limits and may be
necessary to adequately represent target groups in large herds.
2.Herd size may limit the number of animals in a relevant group that can be tested at
one time (e.g, too few prefresh cows）.However,useful information may be
obtained in these groups by testing over time as animals enter the group.
Interpretation must then include considerations of temporal variables.
3.Economic pressures encourage smaller test groups and pooling of samples,but
pooling may be undesirable.
a.In one study, 5 of 21 analytes (including tCa²+ and BHB concentrations) had
pooledmean values that differed from mean values of the individual animals in
somepools.28
b.Unexpected marked abnormalities in one or more samples may bias the pooled
results, especially if unequal volumes of sample from each individual are used.
c.Individual animal data cannot be generated,so only mean values rather than
ranges of values or proportions of abnormal results above or below a decision
threshold can be assessed (see Herd-based Testing for Cattle, sect.II)
D.Analytes measured by herd-based metabolic profiling tests should refect metabolic/
nutritional status.Typically, they are not tightly regulated by hormonal or other
physiologic factors. For example, metabolic pathways attempt to maintain glucose
concentration within a certain rangeeven if there is amarked difference in the intake
of carbohydrates; thus, serum glucose] is not a good analyte for assessing carbohydrate
intake or digestibility. In contrast, plasma [BHB] is not tightly regulated, and increased
also important that analytical variation is small compared to changes caused by altered
nutritional states.Examples of tests and results that may be useful include the following
1.Low blood hematocrit values in the first 8 wk of lactation suggest the need to
evaluate energy and protein nutrition.
2.Serum [urea at any lactation stage is an assessment of ruminal balance of energy
and available protein
3.High serum β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) concentration at about 5-50 d into lactation
isassociatedwithsuboptmalenrgyandglucosebalance and,linicallyeducedmilk
production, increased clinical ketosis, displaced abomasums, and reduced fertility.
Samples should be collected at a consistent time relative to feeding: for example,
45 h after the first meal of the day,when rumen butyric acid production is high
4.High serum or plasma nonesterified fatty acid (NEFA) concentrations in prefresh
evidence of a negative energy balance. Samples should be collected shortly before
feeding time. One can draw and freeze multiple samples and send those that fulfill
the 2-to 14-d precalving criterion once this is known.
50
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
5.Low serum [tCa²] 1224 h after calving by multiparous cows indicates clinical or
subclinical parturient hypocalcemia.
III.
Interpretation
A.Abnormalities in herd-based test results must be interpreted with attention to all the
variables that can affect them, not just nutritional factors. Other factors include
preanalytical samplevaration,analyticalvariationbiologicalvariation,circadian
prandial variation,seasonal variation,variation in physiologic states,occurrence of
pathological states, and other environmental and management factors.Most of these
variations are controlled by careful group selection criteria and appropriate procedures
for sample collection, processing, and analysis.
B.Most herd-based test results willfall within diagnostic reference intervals because the
sampled individuals lack clinical signs of disease.Therefore,a different set of interpre
tive guidelines is necessary to detect subclinical abnormalities. Currently,interpretive
andresearch.Given theinterlaboratory variabilityinassayresults,itisnotclearto the
authors how widely applicable specific recommendations are.
C.Data have been evaluated in several ways.
1. Mean herd values may be compared to mean values of reference herds. When
metabolic profiling was first described, the reference interval for an analyte was
defined as the mean of its means for reference herds,±2 sd.However,these herd
reference intervals are not readily available because of the expense of testing and
difficulties identifying suitable reference herds
2.Mean herd values may be compared to an established expected mean result for the
analyte and groupofinterest.For exampleithas ben suggested thatmean urine
pH should be 6.o-7.0 in prefresh cows fed anions to help prevent milk fever. A
mean pH of 6.0-7.0 supports appropriate acidification of the group.When the
herd’s mean ± an uncertainty interval does not include 6.0-7.0, a herd's urine
pH is considered inappropriate.When the herd’s mean value is not 6.07.0, but
the mean ±uncertainty interval overlaps this target, the results are considered
borderline.A75 %confidenceintervalhasbeen suggested as a useful guide for
metabolic profiling and a reasonable compromise between 95 % confidence and
practicality.
3.The percentage of individual results above or below an established decision threshold
may be calculared and compared to what is considered an acceptable percentage of
high or low values. A percentage (±uncertainty interval) greater than the accepted
percentage signals a problem. A percentage and confidence interval overlapping with
the accepted percentage is a borderline result.Decision thresholds may be somewhat
artificial in that the risk for some conditions increases continuously with the
magnitude of the analyte (e.g, NEFA concentration and displaced abomasums).
4.Others have suggested using processcontrol charts to graphically monitor changes of
ananalyte ina particular group over timerunning raphofmeanvalues and
high-low ranges of individual values can be plotted over time to evaluate for group
changes that signal problems. Fluctuations must be assessed relative to established
limits to determine when action should be taken.
D.Just as diagnostic testing reference intervals are often imperfect, recommendations for
analytes used in herd-based metabolic profiling are also imperfect.However, this does
not prevent the acquisition of useful information.
28.
27.
26.
25.
213415
References
1/INTRODUCTORYCONCEPTS
20.
18.
10.
4.
2.
1.Bennington JL. 1984.Saders DictinaryandEnyclopediaof LabratoryMedicineandTecblogy
Oetzel GR. 2004. Monitoring and testing dairy herds for metabolic disease.Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract
HerdtTH00.Vriabily charateristis andtestselectininhd-leveuriionlandmetabolic pfle tesing
and total tridothyronin incats withhyperthroidismandcatswithnonthyroidaldisase.JAmVetMed Asoc
Lundberg GD,Iverson C, Radulescu G. 1986.Now read this:The SI units are here.J Am Med Aassoc
Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
VetPathol 36:487 (abstract).
Tornquist S], Van Saun RJ. 1999.Comparison of biochemical parameters in individual and pooled bovine sera.
Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 16:387-403.
Boyd JC. 1997. Mathematical tools for demonsrating the dinical usefulness of biochemical marker. Scand J Clin
ClinLabInvest53:693-699.
La
Textbeok of Clinieal Chermistry, 3rd edition, 310319. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Irwig L,Bossuyt P, Glasziou P, Gatsonis C,Lijmer J. 2002.Designing studies to ensure that estimates of test accuracy
218:529-536.
Peterson MEMelin C,Nichols R.2001.Measurement of serum concentrations of free thyroxine,total thyroxine,
Passey RB. 1996. Quality control for the clinical chemistry laboratory. In: Kaplan LA, Pesce AJ, eds. Clinica
edition,1
theory ofrefer
Saris NE, Grasbeck R, Siest G, Wilding P, Williams GZ, Whitchead TP. 1979. Provisional recommendation on the
ntz
SA.2001. Primer of Biestatisties, Sth edition. New York: MeGraw-Hill.
12-15. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Willkins.
ence values(1978).Clin Chem 25:1506-1508.
lon in method comparison studies: Is it limited
nMed 1:177-182.
Thispageintentionallyleffblank
Chapter2
LEUKOCYTES
PhysiologicProcesses Involving Leukocytes.
54
Analytical Principles and Methods.
60
1.Complete Blood Count (CBC)
60
ll.Leukogram.
62
Ill.Principles of Determining Leukocyte Concentrations
62
IV.Relative versus Absolute Changes in Leukogram Results
69
Abnormal Leukocyte Concentrations in Blood
70
1.
Abnormal Neutrophil Concentrations
70
Il.Abnormal Lymphocyte Concentrations
81
Ill.Abnormal Monocyte Concentrations
85
IV.Abnormal Eosinophil Concentrations.
86
V.Abnormal Basophil Concentrations.
88
Vl.Abnormal Mast Cell Concentrations..
88
Leukogram Patterns.....
90
Abnormal MorphologicFeatures of Leukocytes.
92
1.
Changes Associated with Inflammatory Diseases.
92
Il.Leukocytes That Contain Miscellaneous Inclusions
94
Ill. Organisms in Leukocytes. .
95
IV.Leukocyte Agglutination/Aggregation
86
V.Hereditary DisordersThat Have Leukocyte Inclusions.
66
Other Nonneoplastic LeukocyteDisorders
100
53
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 2.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
[x]
x concentration (x=analyte)
ASVCP
American Society forVeterinary Clinical Pathology
BFU-E
Blast-forming unit-erythroid
BLV
Bovine leukemia virus
C5a
Complement,fragment 5a
CBC
Complete blood count
CFU-Baso
Colony-forming unit-basophil
CFU-E
Colony-forming unit-erythroid
CFU-Eo
Colony-forming unit-eosinophil
CFU-G
Colony-forming unit-granulocyte
CFU-GM
Colony-forming unit-granulocyte/macrophage
CFU-M
Colony-forming unit-monocyte
CFU-Mast
Colony-forming unit-mast cell
CFU-Meg
Colony-forming unit-megakaryocyte
CLP
Circulating lymphocyte pool
CNP
Circulating neutrophil pool
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
FeLV
Feline leukemia virus
f-MLP
n-Formylmethionine leucyl-phenylalanine
G-CSF
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
GM-CSF
Granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor
IgE
Immunoglobulin E
IL-x
Interleukins (x for Arabic numbers)
INFy
Interferon gamma
LTB4
Leukotriene B4
MatNP
Maturation neutrophil pool
MLP
Marginated lymphocyte pool
MNP
Marginated neutrophil pool
MPS
Mucopolysaccharidosis
nRBC
Nucleated erythrocyte (nucleated red blood cell)
PAF
Platelet-activating factor
ProNP
Proliferation neutrophil pool
SNP
Storage neutrophil pool
TNFo
Tumor necrosis factor alpha
TNFB
Tumor necrosis factor beta
TNP
Tissue neutrophil pool
URL
Upper reference limit
WBC
White blood cell (leukocyte)
WRI
Within the reference interval
PHYSIOLOGICPROCESSESINVOLVINGLEUKOCYTES
I
Leukonlllukcytesnananimalncudinglukocyteprecursorsleukocytsnlod
and lymph vessels, and tissue leukocytes
A.Bonemarrow contains recursors orneutrophils,osinophilsbasophilsmonocyte,
lymphocytes, and mast cells (considered tissue leukocytes).
2/LEUKOCYTES
55
B-lymphocyte
Pluripotential
Lymphoid
stem cell
stem cell
T-lymphocyte
NK-lymphocyte
囍
Platelet
CFU-Meg
ryocyte
Erythrocyte
BFU-E
Neutrophil
CFU-GEMM
CFU-GM
Monocyte
Eosinophil
Basophil
CEU
Mast cell
CFU-Mast
Fig.2.1. Differentiation of pluripotential stem cells to the committed cell lines of the hematopoietic system.
Major features of the hematopoietic system include the following: (l) Proliferation of myeloid and lymphoid
and three major types of lymphoid cells are produced by the system.In this figure, all cells are part of the
leukon except those of the erythrocyte and platelet lineage.
1.Leukopoiesis is part of hematopoiesis,which is a complex system involving stem
cells that are capable of self-renewal or differentiation toward a committed cell line
(Fig. 2.1).
2.Stem cells look like small lymphocytes via light and transmission electron micros-
copy andarepresent nloodandthrtissuenldingbnmarrow,leenan
liver.
3.Specific stimuli and regulators govern leukocyte differentiation and production.
B.Lymph nodes, spleen,and thymus contain precursors for B-lymphocytes, T-
lymphocytes, and null-lymphocytes.
C.Leukocytes in blood are in transit from sites of production to sites of function or
destruction.
56
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
D.Tissueleukocytes
1.Granulocytes (neutrophils,eosinophils,and basophils)perform their roles in host
defense and die.
2.Lymphocytes may undergo blastogenesis,return to blood via lymphatic vessels,or
die.
3.Monocytes transform into histiocytes or macrophages that are capable of mitosis,
perform their host defense functions, and die.
4.Mast cell precursors differentiate into tissue mast cells, perform their roles in host
defense,and die.Subsets are known.
II.
Neurrophil pools and kinetics (movement ofneutrophils)(Fig.2.2)
Blood
Tissue
Marrow
CFU-G
Mb
Mc
Mc
Mmc
B
S
MatNP
CNP:free flowing
Adhesion
SNP
MNP: adhered
molecule
Fig.2.2. Neutrophil kinetics in health. Marrow has three major neutrophil pools: (1) self-renewal stem cells
(CFU-G);(2) ProNP,or mitotic pool,that contains myeloblasts (Mb),progranulocytes (Pg),and myelocytes
(Mc); and (3) MatNP, or postmitotic pool, that contains metamyelocytes (Mmc), band neutrophils (B), and
segmented neutrophils (S). A SNP is within the MatNP and contains segmented neutrophils.When
neutrophils leave the marrow and enter blood, they distribute between the MNP and CNP.After neutro-
phils bind to adhesion proteins on endothelial cells, they migrate into tissues to form the TNP.In the TNP,
the neutrophils perform their protective functions and die.
2/LEUKOCYTES
57
A.Marrow neutrophils
1.IL-1,IL-3,IL-6,GM-CSF,and G-CSFstimulate CFU-Gto differentiate into the
neutrophilic cell line and to enter the ProNP (mitotic pool).
2.Myeloblasts,progranulocytes (promyelocytes）,and myelocytes divide and mature in
the ProNP. Programmed cell death occurs in the myelocyte stage to limit neutro-
poiesis in health. During enhanced neutropoiesis, fewer cells die in this stage, and
thus more enter the MatNP (postmitotic pool). In healthy mammals, neutrophil
precursors are in this pool for about 3 d.
3.In the MatNP,metamyelocytes mature to band neutrophils and then to segmented
neutrophils.Segmented neutrophils that are ready for release tomarrow sinusoids
are in a subpool called SNP (storage neutrophil pool). Neutrophilic cells are in the
MatNP for 2-3 d in dogs and for4-6 d in people. The MatNP:ProNP ratio is
about 46,meaning that the number of cells in the MatNP is 46 times the
number of cells in the ProNP.
4.In health, segmented neutrophils are released from the MarNP to marrow sinuses
and then to peripheral blood. Neutrophil-releasing factors include chemoattractants
(C5a, IL-8, f-MLP, LTB4, and PAF) and cytokine leukocytosis factors (IL-1, IL-6,
TNFo,TNFβ,G-CSF,and GM-CSF).
B.Blood neutrophils
1.In health, neutrophils have a blood half-life of about 5-10 h before they enter
tissues.
2.Blood neutrophils are distributed into two pools as determined by their location in
vessels.
a.Neutrophils that are free flowing in blood (and thus collected in blood samples)
are in a CNP (circulating neutrophil pool).
b. Neutrophils that temporarily adhere to endothelial cells are in the MNP (margin-
ated neutrophil pool), which is located primarily in small capillaries and veins in
whichneutrophilshave themost opportunity to contact endothelial cells.After
adhesion, neutrophils may break loose and reenter the CNP or migrate into the
TNP.
(1)  Infammatory cytokines (including IL-1 and TNF from macrophages and
IFN from lymphocytes) stimulate endothelial cells to produce and express
adhesion proteins (selectins) that mediate migration and “rolling."
(2)Endogenous chemical mediators, including LTB and PAF, activate neutro-
phils, leading to expression of high-affinity membrane integrins, which bind
to endothelial cell receptors that mediate the process of migration into
tissues.
c.In most mammals, the MNP:CNP ratio is near 1. In cats, the ratio is 3.
d.Major processes that influence measured blood neutrophil concentrations
(l)Production
(a) Stem cell proliferation and differentiation
(b)Effectiveness of maturation in the myelocyte stage
(2)Release from marrow：The oldest ormost mature neutrophils preferentially
leave the marrow.
(3)Distribution of neutrophils between the CNP and MNP
(4)Migration from blood to tissues: Compared to immature neutrophils,
mature segmented neutrophils have more potential to emigrate to
tissue.
58
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Bloodvessel
Lymph
epou
blood
blood
vessel
vessel
Tissue
node
Efferent
lymphatic vessel
Afferent
lymphatic vessel
lymphocyte production but also potential destinations of blood lymphocytes. Blood lymphocytes are
Lymphocytes that enter nonlymphoid tissue may remain ormay enter the afferent lymphatic vessels and be
transported to regional lymph nodes and then perhaps to blood via the thoracic duct.
C.Tissue neutrophils
1.Chemotactic substances such as C5a,IL-8,LTB4,and PAF promote neutrophil
migration to specific sites. Once in tissue, neutrophils generally do not return to
blood.
2.In the absence of disease, most of an animal's neutrophils die in respiratory and
alimentary tissues.
III.
Lymphocyte pools and kinetics (Fig. 2.3)
A.Lymph nodes and other lymphoid tissues
1.Mediators stimulate differentiation and proliferation of B-lymphocytes and
T-lymphocytes.
2.Lymphocytes leave lymph nodes via efferent lymphaticvessels and enter blood via
the thoracic duct.
B.Blood lymphocytes
1.Like neutrophils, lymphocytes are distributed into two pools: CLP and MLP.Most
lymphocytes in blood are T-lymphocytes.
2.From blood, lymphocytes enter lymph nodes and other tissues.
2/LEUKOCYTES
59
C.Lymphocytes in lymph nodes
1.Lymphocytes migrate to lymph node cortices via specialized postcapillary venules
(high endothelial venules). They then migrate through lymph nodes, exit via efferent
lymphatic vessels, and return to blood.
2.About 25 % of blood lymphocytes enter lymph nodes each day through postcapil-
lary venules, which have unique tall endothelial cells and receptors.
D.Lymphocytes in other tissues
1.Lymphocytes emigrate to tissues to perform functions. There they may undergo
blastogenesis, enter lymphatic vessels to return to blood,or die.
2.Like neutrophils,migration to tissues involves lymphocyte chemotaxis and binding
to endothelial cell receptors.
E.Major processes that influence measured blood lymphocyte concentrations
1.Production
a.Stem cell proliferation and differentiation
b.Blastogenesis
2.Distribution of lymphocytes berween the CLP and the MLP
a.Migration from blood to lymph nodes and other tissues
b.Migration from lymph nodes via efferent lymphatic vessels to blood
F.Lymphocyte life span varies from hours to years.
IV.
Monocyte pools and kinetics
A.Monocytes and neutrophils share a common bipotential stem cell (CFU-GM) that is
stimulated to differentiate by infammatory cytokines
B.Monocytes develop from monoblasts and promonocytes. When released from marrow,
monocytes distribute between marginated and circulating pools.
C.Like other leukocytes,monocytes emigrate to tissues after binding to endothelial cells
Once in tissues,monocytes may differentiate into cells of the mononuclear phagocyte
system:macrophages (includingKupffer cellsalveolar macrophages,and typeA
synoviocytes),microglial cells,or dendritic cells
1.The resting macrophage is sometimes called a histiocyte or fixed macrophage.
2.Dendritic cells are antigen-presenting cellsExamples include the Langerhans cellsof
the skin and interdigitating cells in lymph nodes.
V.
Eosinophil pools and kinetics
A.Eosinopoiesis is stimulated by specific mediators, including IL-5 (eosinophil differentia-
tion factor) and GM-CSF from mast cells, macrophages, and lymphocytes.
B.Marginated and circulating blood eosinophils remain in blood from minutes to hours
and die in tissues (the duration in tissues not established but may be weeks or longer).
C.Eosinophils have phagocytic and bactericidal properties,inactivate mediators from mast
cells, and attack larval and adult stages of a few parasites.
VI.
Basophil pools and kinetics
A.Basophils originate in bone marrow, where their production and differentiation is
controlled by IL-3 and other cytokines.
B.The marrow transit time of basophils is at least 2.5 d, their circulating half-life is about
6 h, and they may survive for as long as 2 wk in tissues.
C.Basophil emigration to tissues is promoted by IL-1, TNFo, and endotoxin and is
similar to the process used by neutrophils. Basophils are activated by IL-3 and IgE
60
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
binding.Basophil granules contain substances that promote hypersensitivityinfamma
tory reactions and attract eosinophils.
VII. Mast cell kinetics
A.Mast cell precursors are found in marrow and are derived from a committed stem cell
that is different from the basophil's committed stem cell.
B.Undifferentiated but committed mast cells leave marrow and circulate in blood but are
recognized only by special methods that are not used clinically.Finding differentiated
mast cells in the blood of domestic mammals is considered a pathologic state.
C.Oncentissuesmastcell precursorsdifferentiateintomastcellsundergomiosisr
die.Mast cellsplayrolesnhypersensitivityreactionsbrosisandthernammatry
responses in tissues. Mast cells are considered long-lived cells.
ANALYTICALPRINCIPLESANDMETHODS
I.
Complete blood count(CBC)
A.Numerical and microscopic data of blood leukocytes are components of mammalian
CBCresults.The primary purposes of theCBC are to screen the hemic system for
abnormalities or its response to a disease and to confirm or define the presence of a
hematologic disorder.
B.Major components of the CBC
1.Leukogmm (meaning“leukocyte picture”):results of laboratory assays and calculated
data thar characterize theleukocytes in blood
2.Erythrogram (meaning“erythrocyte picture”): results of laboratory assays and
calculated data that characterize the erythrocytes in blood (see Chapter 3)
3.Thrombogram (meaning“platelet picture”): results of laboratory assays and calculated
data that characterize the platelets in blood (see Chapter 4)
C.Basic information obtained from the results of a CBC
1.If CBC results are WRI, the net effect of a disease on the hematopoietic system has
been minimal.
2.Ifa cell concentration is increased,the disease is causing at least one of the
following:
a.Increased production of that cell type
b.A shift of that cell type from a storage or noncirculating pool to circulating blood
c.An increased circulating life span of the cell type because the rate of cell loss to
tissues or rate of cell death is decreased
3.If a cell concentration is decreased, the disease is causing at least one of the
following:
a.Decreased production of that cell type
b.A shift of that celltype from the circulation to a noncirculating pool
c.Decreased circulating life span of the cell type
4.If morphologic features of a given cell type are abnormal, either (1) a defect in
hematopoiesis has caused the production of abnormal cells, or (2) morphological
abnormalities have been acquired as the cells circulate in the body.
D.Blood sample for leukocyte evaluation
1.Blood is collected into a tube containing either KEDTA or K,EDTA and immedi
ately mixed by slowly inverting the tube at least ten times. To obtain complete and
accurate results, the sample must be free of clots and platelet clumps.
2/LEUKOCYTES
61
2.Stability of cells:[WBC] is usually considered to be stable for several hours at 25 °C
and for up to 24 h at 4 °C.
E.Microscopic examination of stained blood films
1.Microscopic examination of a stained blood film should always be a part of a CBC,
even if an instrument provides an automated leukocyte differential count. A detailed
description of the preparation, staining,and examination of theblood flm is
beyond the scope of this chapter. The basic components of the processes are as
follows:
a.A blood film is made to obtain an even distribution of cells and an adequate
"counting window” (ie., that part of the smear where there is a monolayer of
erythrocytes that occasionally touch each other and where nuclear and cyto-
plasmic features of leukocytes are distinct). Cells will be separated more in the
counting window of blood films from anemic individuals.
b.The air-dried blood flm is stained with a Romanowsky-type stain (e.g.,Wright
Wright-Giemsa,Diff-Quik, or Quik-Dip) that provides differential staining of
cells.
C.A blood film examination includes scanning with 4x or 10xobjectives and more
critical evaluation with high-dry (40x) or oil objectives (40x, 50x,or 100x).
(1)Are the cells evenly distributed and properly stained?
(2) Are there abnormal large structures in the blood (frequently concentrated in
the feathered edge)such asmicroflaria,platelet clumps,macrophages
epithelial cells,endothelial cells,ormegakaryocytes?If so,record ther
presence.
(3)Do the erythrocyte and leukocyte densities correspond with the known cell
concentrations in the sample?If not,check the accuracy of the cell
concentrations.
the expected values.Record the presence of giant or shift platelets (platelets
larger than erythrocytes in most species) or platelet inclusions.
(5）Evaluate erythrocytes for abnormal shapes, sizes,colors, inclusions,or
associated organisms.
(6)Complete a leukocyte differential count (see Analytical Principles and
Methods, sect.IIl.E) and record it.Evaluate the observed leukocytes for
morphologic abnormalities and record the findings.
2.Microscopic examination of a stained blood film is especially important in sick
patients and those with abnormal concentrations of leukocytes,erythrocytes,or
platelets. Defects found in the blood cells are described in Chapters 24
F.Staining ofblood cells
1.Romanousky stains,which are the best for staining blood cells,were described by
Romanowsky (1891) as a combination of eosin and methylene blue to produce a
spectrum of colors from blue to reddish orange,depending on the pH of the cell's
content.
a.Wright sain is a combination of eosin and oxidized methylene blue.The oxidized
methylene blue stains are called azure dyes.
b.Other Romanowsky stains include Giemsa,Wright-Giemsa,and Wright
Leishman,which are various combinations of azure dyes and eosin
stain and not the original Wright stain
62
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.What are the contents of cells that are stained?
a.Acidic structures (e.g,DNA and RNA) attract the basic azure dyes, which stain
structures various colors from purple to blue.
b.Alkaline structures (e.g,hemoglobin,and eosinophil granules）artract the acidic
eosin dye and stain structures from red or pink to orange.
3.Terms used to describe colors or staining properties
a.Neutrophilic. neutro (neither alkaline nor acidic) plus philic (loving”)
b.Eosinopbilic loves eosin (acidic) dye; will be red to orange
c.Basophilic: loves basic (alkaline and azure) dyes; will be blue to purple
d.Azurophilic: loves azure dye; will have a blue to purple to reddish purple to pink
color depending on the substance's pH
II.
Leukogram
A.Morphologic(microscopic)evaluation
1.A microscopic evaluation of stained leukocytes is animportant part of the leuko
gram,especiallywhen thereis a leukocytosis or leukopenia.It helps confrm or
refute automated quantitative results, and provides additional diagnostic and
prognostic information that cannot be obtained withoutmicroscopy.
2.Later sections of this chapter describe the clinical significance of leukocytes
with abnormal nuclei, cytoplasms, sizes, inclusions, or other eatures. Besides
those changes associated with pathologic states,invitro changes caused by
poor sample handling canmake accurate identification of leukocytes nearly
impossible.
B.[WBC]
1./WBC is the number of leukocytes per unit volume of blood (in clinical jargon,
commonly referred to as WBCcount).The[WBC] by itself is of limitedvalue
without assessing the concentrations of each type of leukocyte.
2.By some methods, the[WBC] actually is a total nucleated cell concentration. If it is,
the [WBC] must be corrected when nRBCs are present (see corrected [WBC] in
Eq.2.1).
3.Unit conversion:#/μLx10°μL/L=#×10°/L（SIunit)
C.Differential leukocyte count
1.A differential leukocyte count is a method of determining the relative numbers (or the
percentages) of the leukocytes in blood.
plus the WBC] are used to calculate the concentrations of each type of leukocyte in
a blood sample.
II1. 
Principles of determining leukocyte concentrations
A.Hemocytometer method
1.A hemocytometer (Fig.2.4) is used to determine [WBC] by diluting the blood
(usually with the Unopette system) and then dispensing the diluted blood into the
hemocytometer chambers formed beneath a cover glass. The leukocyte diluent
contains a lysing agent that ruptures the erythrocytes so they do not interfere with
the nucleated cell enumeration.
2.The chamber is examined with a microscope, and leukocytes are counted within the
0.9 μL volume of fluid demarcated by the nine large squares. To obtain a leukocyte
concentration, the number of leukocytes counted is first multiplied by 1.1 to
2/LEUKOCYTES
63
Hemocytometer
top vlew)
1mm
coverglass
counting chamber
(slde vlew)
(0.1 mm depth)
Fig.2.4. Hemocytometer. The hemocytometer has two components: the thicker glass with special grids on
each side and a cover glass. Each grid has nine 1 mm² squares used for leukocyte counting, and each central
square is divided into 25 smaller squares that are used for erythrocyte and platelet counting. The distance
between the grid surface and the coverslip is 0.1 mm; thus, the volume of the space above the grid is
0.9mm²(0.9 μL).
calculate a concentrationin the diluted blood.Thisproduct is then multiplied by
the dilurion factor (e.g., 100) to calculare the [WBC] in the blood.
3.Counts should be done in both chambers of the hemocytometer,and the mean of
thetwo values should be used.Markedly different values on therwo sides suggest
uneven sample distribution and potential error.
B.Impedance cell counters (eg,Coulter counters,Baker System, Cobas Minos ST-Vet,
Mascot Multispecies Hematology System,CELL-DYN,andHeska CBC-DiffVeteri-
nary Hematology System)
1. Basic principles (Fig. 2.5)
a.When a nonconductive particle (e.g, cell) passes through an aperture, it creates
an electrical interference in a current that is fowing through a conductive liquid.
b.The number of particles detected within a defined volume of diluted blood
represents a cell (particle) concentration.The degree of interference depends on
the apparent volume(and possibly shape) of the particle,and apparent volumes
areused to differentiate particles.The volume of each particle is recorded so that
an average volume can be calculated.
c.Most impedance cell counters are designed to evaluate human blood cells and
need to be modified to evaluate domestic mammal blood. Erythrocytes of some
species (eggoatsheep,and some horses）are too small tobereliably detectd.
Also, large platelets (as commonly seen in cats)may be counted as erythrocytes
instead of platelets.Lysing solutions and procedures may also needmodification
2.Typically, blood is processed along two paths.
a.Erythrocyte path: mean cell volume,[RBC],and platelet concentrations are
determined in diluted blood
b. Leukocyte path
64
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
laser
anode
cathode
beam
light
bath
scatter
laser
sample
stream
sheath
aperture-
stream
diluent
Fig.2.5. Schematic representation of cell counting principles.
Left: Impedance principle: Blood cells (solid circles) suspended in an isotonic diluent enter a bath, pass
through a small aperture (about 100 μm diameter), and then leave the bath (fow shown by dotted arrows).
Concurrently,electrons (e）are moving from a cathode,through the aperture,to an anode.When a cell
passes through the aperture, it displaces electrons and interrupts the current briefly, thus creating a voltage
peak than can be viewed via an oscilloscope (rop). Each voltage peak represents a cell(a particle) passing
through the aperture; the height of the peak corresponds primarily to the volume of the cell. Particles within
other particles are not recognized as cells (if the instrument has a “voting out program). The mean cell
volume represents the average volume detected within the erythrocyte range. The erythrocyte concentration
represents the number of particles (within the erythrocyte range) per volume. Another bath is used for
determining leukocyte concentration. After addition of lysing agent to remove erythrocytes and platelets, the
leukocyte nuclei and fuid pass through an aperture and the instrument considers those particles to be
leukocytes.
Right: Flow cytometry principle: Blood cells suspended in an isotonic diluent are injected into a special
flowing fluid. The fuid dynamics in the system create a sheath around the diluent to form a sample stream.
Cellsinthe samlestream asshoughalaserbeammostlyneatatimeEachcell scatters thelighn
different directions, depending on the cell's size and contents. Sensors detect the scattered light at various
locations. Computer programs analyze the data from the sensors to determine which cell has passed through
the laser beam.
(1)The[WBC]and the blood[hemoglobin] are determined in diluted blood
after cells (leukocytes, erythrocytes, and platelets) are lysed but nuclei remain
as particles.
(2)In classic impedance methods, the [WBC] is really a total nucleated cell
concentration because the nuclei from leukocytes and nucleated erythrocytes
arenotdifferentiated
C.Optical or laser fow cell cytometers (e.g., CELL-DYN instruments,ADVIA, and
IDEXXLaserCyteHematology Analyzer)
1.Basicprinciple(Fig. 2.5)
2/LEUKOCYTES
65
a.Laser light is scattered when it hits a cell. The type of scatter depends on cell size,
internal structure, granularity, and surface structure, and these features are used
to differentiate cells.
b.Instruments may be able to differentiate the major leukocytes,but computer
programs must be specific for each species.Abnormal and some normal leuko-
cytes may not be correctly classified.
2. Some instruments (e.g., CELL-DYN) use both impedance methods and optical
methods to determine results: the white cell impedance count (WIC) and the white
cell optical count (WOC). When the WIC and WOC disagree (e.g., when nRBCs
are present), an error message is generated by the instrument.
3.The ADVIA uses a combination of methods to determine a [WBC] and concur-
rently a differential leukocyte count.
a.Peroxidase channel: After lysis of erythrocytes,blood leukocytes are exposed to
HO and a chromogen (4-chloro-1-naphthol). Leukocytes with peroxidase
activity (i.e.,neutrophils,eosinophils of some species,and monocytes) initiate
reactions that produce a black precipitate in those cels.The leukocytes (stained
and unstained) then pass through a beam of tungsten light, and sensors detect
increased light absorbance (due to stained cells) and light scatter (due to the size
of cells).The peroxidase channel provides a [WBC] and percentages of eosino-
phils (3+ peroxidase), neutrophils (2+ peroxidase), monocytes (1+ peroxidase),
lymphocytes (small,negative peroxidase), and large unstained cells (large,
negative peroxidase）.Because cat osinophils lack peroxidase activity,theymust
be classified by using a special stain (oxazine 750) that is also used for detecting
reticulocytes. Eosinophils of some greyhounds, Great Danes, and other dogs have
low peroxidase activity and are misclassified as monocytes. Basophils are not
accurately classified in domestic species.
b.Basophil channel: By using a different lysing agent,erythrocytes and leukocytes
other than basophils (in human samples) are lysed,and then the fluid passes
through a laser beam. Light scatter is used to differentiate particle sizes (intact
human basophils versus other cell nuclei) and nuclear density or lobularity.The
basophil channel provides a [WBC] and percentages of minimally lobulated cells
(lymphocytes, monocytes, immature granulocytes, and blastic cells), basophils (in
human samples), and polymorphonuclear cells (neutrophils and eosinophils)
Canine and feline basophils are not detected by the basophil channel.
c.If there are erythrocytes that are resistant to lysis,the[WBC] of the peroxidase
channel will be falsely increased,but the basophil channel [WBC] should be
accurate.The presence of nucleated erythrocytes is suggested if thepolymorpho-
nuclear cell concentration from the basophil channel is greater than the sum of
the neutrophils and eosinophil concentrations from the peroxidase channel
(except in cats, because their eosinophils lack peroxidase activity).
d.In contrast to the microscopic differential leukocyte count, this electronic
differential count differentiates thousands of leukocytes, and thus sampling error
istypically not a problem. However, the electronic methods must be species
specific and may not be accurate when atypical cells (e.g., toxic neutrophils, and
reactive lymphocytes)are present.Automated differential counts may be con
sidered reliable when cell populations are clearly separated as indicated by
certain defined criteria
D.Quantitative buffy coat (QBC) analysis(QBCVetAutoread)
66
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Floal
Plasma
Plasma
Platelets
Agranulocytes
Buffy coat
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Granulocytes
Eosinophlls
Neutrophlls
Basophlls
Erythrocytes
Erythrocytes
Fig. 2.6. Schematic representation of IDEXX QBC VetTube after centrifugation of whole blood. Centrifugal
forces separate the components of blood into five layers (plasma, platelets, agranulocytes, granulocytes, and
erythrocytes）based on their relative densitiesThe buffy coat (composed of platelets and leukocytes） is
expanded by a float that has a density similar to buffy coat cels. Layers are recognized by use of fluorescence
markers forDNARNA,and lipoprotein,and the thickness of each cell layer is used to derive cell conen
trations (see the text).
1.A special capillary tube that contains a plastic cylinder or foat is used. Because of
the cylinder'sdensitytwilloatintheregionofhebuffycoat cellswithcentrifu
gation.Because of the cylinder's diameter,thelength of the buffy coat is expanded
around the foat (Fig. 2.6). Fluorescence is used to differentiate cell layers on the
basis of lipoprotein,RNA,and DNA contents.
2.If the quantiry of blood that is pur into the capillary tube is constant and the mean
volumes of each cell type are relatively constant, then the concentration of a given
cell type willcorrelate with thethickness of the layer for that cell type.Based on
these assumptions, the thickness of a layer is multiplied by a conversion factor to
obtain an approximate cell concentration.
3.Results generated by the IDEXX QBCVetAutoread hematology system and the
basic principles of each evaluation
a.Total [WBC] is calculated by adding the granulocyte and combined lymphocyte/
monocyte concentrations.
b.Granulocyte concentration is determined by the thickness of the cell layer with
characteristic DNA and RNA/lipoprotein fluorescence for granulocytes.An
eosinophil concentration may be reported for dogs and cattle because their
eosinophils show detectablymoreRNA/lipoprotein fuorescence than do their
neutrophils andbasophils
2/LEUKOCYTES
67
c.Lymphocyte/monocyte concentration is determined by the thickness of the cell
layer above the granulocytelayer that has theDNA fuorescence characteristicof
lymphocytes and monocytes.
4.The accuracy of the partial leukocyte differential count depends on the staining
reactions of the leukocytes and their densities.Atypical staining or densities will
result in erroneous values.
E.Differential leukocyte count by microscopy
1.A microscopic differential leukocyte count is done by differentiating 100 or more
consecutive leukocytes on a stained blood film.Results of the differential count are
percentages.A differential leukocyte count should be done in a blood films counting
window. This region is where the leukocytes lie fat enough for their nuclear and
cytoplasmic features to be distinct, and where erythrocytes form a monolayer and
occasionally touch each other (cells will be more widely spread in samples from
anemic patients).
2.This differential leukocyte count is only an estimate of the leukocyte percentages in
a blood samplebecause of twomajor factors.
a.Sampling error: In the microscopic differential count,only a small percentage of
allleukocytesinabloodsample are differentiated;the differentiated cellsmay
not be representative. This sampling error can be reduced if more leukocytes are
included in the differential count, but this process also requires more time. As a
rule of thumb,the count should differentiate 100leukocytes for every 10,000
leukocytes/μL to obtain representative percentages.
b.Identification accuracy: A skilled laboratory technologist/technician should be
able to identify most leukocytes accurately during themicroscopicexamination
ofmammalian blood,but it can be very difficult to classify the leukocytes in
some samples; for example, toxic neutrophils versus monocytes, and atypical
lymphocytes versus monocytes.
3.Accuracy and precision of themicroscopic leukocyte differential count
a.Assuming proper sample collection and handling and that cels are identified
correctly, the accuracy and precision of the leukocyte percentages are determined
by the number of leukocytes included in the differential count and the actual
leukocyte percentage in the blood.A confidence interval table of leukocyte
differential counts has been generated (Table 2.2) that addresses those two
factors.
b.Evaluation of the data in Table 2.2 reveals several key concepts.
(1)The confidence interval becomes smaller as the number of cells in the
differential count increases.However,it is not practical to do a 10o0-cell
microscopicdifferential count inmost blood films.
(2)The confidence intervals are large enough (especially for the 100-cell count)
to yield considerable uncertainty in the results （Table 2.3）.Thus, the blood of
an animalmay have exactly the same leukocyte concentrations on 2 different
days, but the differential leukocyte counts may differ considerably simply
because of encountering different cells during the differential cell counts.
c.The absolute or calculated concentrations of the leukocytes are much better values
to interpret compared to thedifferential count percentagesbut the absolute
concentrations should be considered estimates in most CBCresults,and thus
differences (compared to reference intervals or compared to serial results) should
be interpreted accordingly.
68
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 2.2.The 95 % confidence limits for percentages obtained in differential
leukocytecountsbe
Number differentiatedd
Number differentiated
100
200
1000
100
200
1000
0
0
4
0
2
0
1
10
4
18
6
16
8
13
1
0
6
0
4
0
2
15
8
24
10
21
12
18
2
0
8
0
6
1
4
20
12
30
14
27
17
23
3
0
9
1
7
2
5
25
16
35
19
32
22
28
4
1
10
1
8
2
6
30
21
40
23
37
27
33
5
1
12
2
10
7
35
25
46
28
43
32
39
6
2
13
11
4
8
0
30
51
33
48
36
44
7
2
14
3
12
5
9
45
35
56
53
41
49
8
16
4
13
6
10
50
39
61
42
58
46
54
9
4
17
5
15
7
11
80
70
88
73
86
77
8
Confidence intervals forthe actual percentage of a given leukocyte if the specifed number of cells were
differentiated and the observed percentage was O.
Source. Rimke
Ifobserved percentage xisgreater than 50 %,then confidence limits areobtained by subtracting the
confidence limits of (100-x) from 100.For example, if x= 80 % in a 100-cell count, then the confidence
limits for20(100-x)are subtracted from 100 (100-30or100-12) togivereferencelimitsof 70% and
88 %, respectively.
Number(100,200,or 1000） of leukocytes differentiated in a blood flm
Ot is the percentage of a given leukocyte found in a differential count
Table 2.3.Potential differences in absolute leukocyte concentrations due to random error
ofmicroscopic differential leukocyte counts if the total leukocyte concentration was
20.0×10²/μL
Canine
Low confidence
High confidence
reference
limit values
Actual values
limit values
interval
%
×10/uL
%b
×10²/μL
%a
×10/μL
x10/μL
Neutrophils
70
14.0°
80
16.0°
88
17.6°
3.0-11.5
Neutrophils
30
6.0
40
8.0
51
10.2
3.0-11.5
Eosinophils
4
0.8
10
2.0°
18
3.6°
0.1-0.8
Eosinophils
0
p0'0
0
0.0d
4
0.8
0.1-0.8
*Percentages for the confidence limits obtained from Table 2.2
bThe actual percentage is determined by examining all of the leukocytes in the blood film.
The calculated concentration is above the reference interval.
dThe calculated concentration is below the reference interval.
F.Correction of [WBC] for the presence of nucleated erythrocytes (nRBCs) if the [WBC]
isreally a total nucleated cell concentration
1.Microscopic and some electronic methods determine[WBC] by counting nucleated
cells or nuclei (either of leukocytes or nRBCs）.By these methods,a measured
[WBC]represents the sum of nucleated cell concentrations (leukocytes +nRBCs).
2/LEUKOCYTES
69
2.If nRBCs are observed during the examination of the blood film, they are
enumerated by counting thenumber of nRBCsseen while 10oleukocytes are
differentiated and counted. The conventional method of recording the number
of nucleated erythrocytes is the number of nRBCs/100 WBCs(e.g
10nRBCs/100WBCs)
3.Rule of thumb:If there are 10 or more nRBCs/100 WBCs,the measured[WBC] is
corrected for the presence of nRBCs. The error in the measured [WBC] is usually
clinically insignificant when there are fewer than 10 nRBCs/100 WBCs.However,
the correctionmaybe donewith fewer than 10nRBCs/100 WBCs
4.Basis of corrected[WBC]equation (Eq.2.1)
100
corrected[WBC]=measured[WBC]x
(2.1.)
100+#nRBC/100WBC
Example:measured [WBC]=20,000/uL,nRBC=25/100 WBC
100
100
corrected[WBC]=20,000/uLx
=20,000/uLx
16,000/uL
100+25
125
a.While 100 leukocytes were counted,25 nRBCs were also counted.Thus,there
were actually100leukocytes out of a total of125nucleated cells.Therefore,100
of125 nucleated cells (4of 5) must be leukocytes.
b.If the measured[WBC] was20.0x 10²/uL,then 4of 5ofthe nucleatedcells
were leukocytes, and thus the corrected [WBC] is 16.0× 10² leukocytes/μL
5.The concentrations of the individual types of leukocytes are calculated after calcula
tion of a corrected [WBC].
IV.
Relative versus absolute changes in leukogram results
A.Except for the centrifugation method, the leukocyte concentrations are calculated by
multiplying the total leukocyte concentration by the percentages obtained from the
differential count. These calculared concentrations are used to detect absolute changes in
the leukogram, but it is important to understand that these calculated concentrations
can only be as accurate as the values used to calculate them.
B.Relative changes in leukocyte populations may not reflect true changes.
1.As shown in Table 2.4, detection of true changes in a leukocyte population should
be based onevaluation of the calculated concentrations of theindividual leukocyte
types.
2.If a leukocyte percentage is increased or decreased compared to reference intervals,
the finding can be described as a relative change, that is, relative neutrophilia or
relative lymphopenia.However, such descriptions are not recommended because
they can be confused with true changes in leukocyte concentrations.For example,
dog 2 in Table 2.4 has a relative neutropenia,but the results actually indicate the
dog has a neutrophilia (the neutrophil concentration is above the reference interval).
When interpreting dog 2's CBC results, one should consider potential causes of a
neutrophilia,not of a neutropenia.
C.The concepts of relative changes are presented to clarify why they should not be used
when interpreting a leukogram. In all other sections of this book, terms used to
describe leukogram findings refer to absolute changes; that is, abnormal concentrations
rather than abnormal percentages.
70
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 2.4.Relative versus absolute changes in leukocyte values in CBCresults
Dogs
Units
1°
2b
3°
4
Reference interval
Neutrophils
%
30
30
70
70
60-80
Lymphocytes
%
70
70
30
30
20-35
WBCs
×10°μL
2.0
50.0
2.0
50.0
6.0-17.0
Neutrophils
×10/μL
0.6
15.0
1.4
35.0
3.0-11.5
Lymphocytes
×10²/μL
1.4
35.0
0.6
15.0
1.0-4.0
lymphocyte percentage because of an absolute neutropenia.
Dog 2:Based on percentages,relative eutropenia andrelative lymphocytosis are present.There is a low
neutrophil percentage because of themarked absolute lymphocytosis.A mild absoluteneutrophilia is also
present
“Dog 3's leukocyte percentages are within reference intervals. The dog has an absolute neutropenia and
absolute lymphopenia.
Dog4's leukocyte percentages are within reference intervals.The doghas an absolute neutrophilia and
an absolute lymphocytosis.
ABNORMALLEUKOCYTECONCENTRATIONSINBLOOD
Abnormal neutrophil concentrations
A.Left shift
1.A lefi shift (shift to the left） is an increased concentration of nonsegmented neutro
phils (usually bands) in blood.When there is great demand for neutrophils in
tissues,younger stages (metamyelocytes,myelocytes,and rarely progranulocytes) may
be present in the left shift.
a.Left shifts occur when release of neutrophils from marrow diminishes the SNP,
and younger cells are then released from the MatNP. The capability of neutro-
phils to respond to stimuli and migrate increases as they mature; thus, segmented
neutrophils respond first and immature forms respond later.
b.Because itusually occursinresponse torelativelyintense,often acuteinfamma
tory stimulia left shiftisfrequentlyconsidered thehallmark ofacuteinfamma
tion.Such infammation is typically caused by infectious agents (e.g,pyogenic
bacteria,or fungi） but can be caused by noninfectious disorders (e.g.,necrosis,
immune-mediated disease, or neoplasia). Glucocorticoid hormones and endo-
toxins also stimulate release of neutrophils and thus may cause a mild left shift.
2.Left-shift classifications
a.Severity:Two different features might be considered when describing the severity
ofaleft shift.Since the terms can describe different findings,onemust be careful
in interpreting or using the terms.
metamyelocytes (2+ or moderate); and band, metamyelocytes, and myelo-
cytes (3+ormarked)6
(②）
Magnitude of nonsegmented neutrophil concentrations: mild (< 1.0 x
10°/μL),moderate (1.0-10.0x10/μL),and marked (>10.0x10²/μL)
Ranges are provided as examples and such guidelines vary with species.
2/LEUKOCYTES
71
b.Regenerative versus degenerative left-shift classifications
(1)When first described by Dr. O.W. Schalm (father of veterinary hematology)
specific criteria for classifying left shifts were not provided.6
(a)A regenerative left shift is“characterized by a leukocytosis due to
neutrophilia and with the appearance of immature neutrophils in
peripheral blood" (p. 272).
(b) In a degenerative left shift, “total leukocyte count remains within the
normal range or is only slightly elevated, while the occurrence of young
granulocytes in the circulation is prominent” (p. 272).
(2)In the 1986 edition of Schalm's Veterinary Hematology,these states are
described asfollows:
(a)“Regenerative left shift is characterized by a leukocytosis due to neutro-
philia and with the appearance of immature neutrophils in peripheral
blood.... In the typical regenerative left shift, the proportion of various
immature neutrophils is orderly and follows a pyramidal distribution,
with the most immature cell being the least numerous. Usually the
mature neutrophils outnumber the immature cells" (p. 824).
(b)The main feature of a degenerative left shift is the occurrence of young
neutrophilic granulocytes in the circulation in numbers exceeding
mature neutrophils. The WBC count is often suggestive of leukopenia,
but it may sometimesbewithin thenormal rangeor,rarely，levated
(p.824).
(c)These descriptions allow for the classification of most left shifts.
However, a neutropenia with mature forms exceeding immarure forms
does not fall within the classifications but has been considered by some
to be a degenerative left shift.
(3)Clinical significance
(a)A regenerative left shift indicates that a neutrophil response to the
inflammatory state is appropriate and, at the time of sampling,
neutrophil production and release are adequately responding to the
demand.
(b)A degenerative left shift suggests that neutrophil production and release
are not adequately responding to the demand.
(4) Samplings from multiple days will berter characterize the neutrophil
response.If the regenerative left shift persists, then neutropoiesis is regener-
ating a replacement population of neutrophils that are being used in tissues
to fight the invader. If it progresses to a degenerative left shift or if a
degenerative left shift persiststhen there isinadequate neutropoiesis and the
animals condition is probably deteriorating (or degenerating).
B.A right shift (shift to the right) is an increased concentration of hypersegmented
neutrophils in blood. Hypersegmented neutrophils have five or more nuclear lobes and
usually indicate older cells that have aged in blood because of increased circulation
time. The presence of hypersegmented neutrophils in blood is typically recorded as a
comment in the CBC results and not as a separate part of a leukocyte differential
count.
1.Glucocorticoid hormones (endogenous or exogenous) decrease emigration of
neutrophils to tissue by down-regulating adhesion molecules and thus can cause a
right shift.
72
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 2.5.Diseases and conditions that cause neutrophilia
Infammatory neutrophilia
*Infections: bacterial, fungal, viral, protozoal
*Immune hemolytic anemia
*Necrosis:hmolyishmrrhagefarctbunsplasiastrilnammatn
Sterile foreign body
Steroid neutrophilia
*Stress (physical or neurogenic)
Hyperadrenocorticism
*Glucocorticoid therapy
Adrenocorticotropic hormone administration
Physiologic (shift) neutrophilia
Catecholamine injections:epinephrine ornorepinephrine
Chronic neutrophilic leukemia
Paraneoplastic neutrophilia
Othersor unknown mechanisms
Neutrophilia of leukocyte adhesion deficiency
G-CSF administration
Estrogen toxicosis (early)
*Relatively common disease or condition
2.Other causes of a right shift: Poodle marrow dyscrasia,FeLV-associated myelodys
crasiaequine idiopathichypersegmentation,vitamin Bdeficiency in giant
schnauzers with an inherited malabsorption syndrome,2 folate deficiency in a cat,3
occasionally chronic inflammatory diseases, and in vitro aging due to delayed
analysis.
C.Neutrophilia (increased measured blood neutrophil concentration) (Table 2.5)
1.Acute infammatory neutrophilia
a.This neutrophilia results from changes in neutrophil kinetics that are caused by
acute inflammatory mediators.The net result is an increased CNP that may
contain a left shift (Fig. 2.7B).
(1)Release from SNP occurs within hours after onset of infammation and
causes initial neutrophilia if release exceeds neutrophil emigration to
infamed tissue.
(2)Release from MatNP causes a left shift and occurs after reduction or
depletion of SNP.
(③）
Increased production from the myelocyte stage:It takes 2-4 d before effects
are seen in peripheral blood.
(4) Increased production via stem cells: This will lead to granulocytic hyper-
plasia.It takes about 5 d before effects are seen in peripheral blood.
b.Acute refers to the type of infammatory reaction and not the duration of the disease.
The acute inflammatory pattern can be seen in an animal with a prolonged infam
matory state if there remains an active need for neutrophils in the inflamed tissue.
c.Infammatory mediarors must enter systemic blood and stimulate marrow cells
for a neutrophilia to develop.
Circulatingneutrophils
A.Normal neutrophil kineticsand pools
ProNP
MatNP
Marginated neutrophils
B.Acute inflammatory neutrophilia
ProNP
MatNP
C.Chronic inflammatory neutrophilia
ProNP
MatNP
D. Steroid neutrophilia
ProNP
MatNP
?
E.Physiologic(shift) neutrophilia
ProNP
MatNP
F. Chronic myeloid leukemia
ProNP
MatNP
?
?
?
?
Fig.2.7. Neutrophilia kinetics.
A.Neutrophil kinetics in health (a reduced version of Fig. 2.2).
B.Acute inflammatory neutrophilia: Neutrophilia occurs because the release of neutrophils from the
marrow exceeds the migration of neutrophils to the inflamed tissue. A left shift is created by the release
of band neutrophils from the MatNP.
C.Chronic infammatory neutrophiliaNeutrophilia occurs because therelease of neutrophils from the
marrow exceeds the migration of neutrophils to the inflamed tissue. A left shift may not be present
because granulocytic hyperplasia maintains the SNP.
D.Steroid neutrophilia:Neutrophilia occurs because of a shift of neutrophils from the MNP to the CNP,
decreased migration of neutrophils to tissue, and release of neutrophils from the SNP and sometimes the
MatNP.
E.Physiologic (shift) neutrophilia: Neutrophilia occurs because of the shift of neutrophils from the MNP
to the CNP.
F.Chronic myeloid leukemia:Neutrophilia oc
oecause of an uncontrolledproliferation of a clone of
neoplastic cells may not be easily recognized as being of neutrophil lineage
73
74
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 2.6. Species differences in the magnitude of infammatory neutrophilia
Reference
Common
Occasional
Uncommon
intervals
magnitude
magnitude
magnitude
Dogs
3.0-11.0a
12.0-30.0
30.0-60.0
>60.0
Cats
2.0-12.5
13.0-25.0
25.0-40.0
>40.0
Horses
2.2-8.6
9.0-20.0
20.0-30.0
>30.0
Cattle
0.6-4.0
4.0-10.0
10.0-20.0
>20.0
* Neutrophil concentrations are expressed × 10²/μL of blood.
(1)A neutrophilia is expected if there is substantial acute infammation of
subcutaneous tssues or internal tissues（respiratory tract,pancreas,perito
neal or pleural cavity,and occasionally uterus,liver,or intestine),because
mediators can easily access systemic blood.
(2)Infammation of brain,spinal cord,superficial cutaneous lesions,and lower
urinary tract may not cause a neutrophilia, because mediators are lost (to
urine or skin) or do not leave the protected environment (brain or spinal
cord)
interpretation of specific concentrations differs among species (Table 2.6).
e.Theinflammatorybovine neutrophilia results primarily from increasedproduc
tion (granulocytic hyperplasia) and not from release of stored neutrophils,
because cattle have a small SNP.
f.The term leukemoid response has been used to describe any extreme inflammatory
leukocytosis that is leukemia-like but proven not to be leukemic.The term can
be applied only retrospectively.
(1)
Classically, disorders associated with a marked inflammatory neutrophilia
included focal suppurative lesions (e.g., canine pyometra, pleuritis or
pyothorax,eritonitisrstatitismoniandabscessesandhmlyi
anemia (especially immune mediated).
(2)Other disorders recognized as causing an extreme inflammatory neutrophilia
include canine rectal neoplasms,canine pulmonary neoplasms,canine
g.An animal that has an acute infammatory neutrophilia usually has a lymphope
nia,often an eosinopenia, and occasionally a monocytosis or toxic neutrophils. In
dogs, a mastocytemia may be found.
2.Chronic inflammatory neutrophilia
a.This neutrophilia results from changes in neutrophil kinetics when an infamma
tory process continues for at least a week during which inflammatory mediators
stimulate development of granulocytic hyperplasia (Fig.2.7C).If the SNP is
replenished, segmented neutrophils are released instead of band neutrophils, and
thus the left shift diminishes. In addition, other defense mechanisms become
active, and thus the need for neutrophils in tissues may diminish. However, if the
infammatory stimulus ismoreintense,alef shiftmay ersist,r achronic
infammatory pattern may never be reached.In these disorders, there is increased
production of neutrophils because of granulocytic hyperplasia and increased
neutrophil release from SNP in response to infammatory mediarors. When the
2/LEUKOCYTES
75
rate ofneutrophil release frommarrowis greater than the rate of neutrophil
margination and emigration to tissues, a neutrophilia develops.
b.Chronic indirectly refers to the duration of the disease;the infammatory process
has persisted long enough to result in granulocytic hyperplasia.
c.
When an animal has a chronic inflammatory neutrophilia,other leukocyte
abnormalities may include lymphocytosis (with or without reactive lymphocytes),
monocytosis,eosinophilia,basophilia,aleft shift,aright shift,and oxic
neutrophils.
3.Steroid （stress)neutrophilia
a.This neutrophilia results from changes created by the effects of endogenous or
exogenous glucocorticoids on neutrophil kinetics (Fig. 2.7D). Although this
neutrophilia is frequently called a stress neutropbilia, it should not be confused
with the physiologic(shif）neutrophilia caused by the stress-induced release of
catecholamines.
(1)Neutrophils shift from the MNP to the CNPbecause the production of
adhesion molecules is down-regulated.
(a)This process can potentially double the measured neutrophil concentra-
tions in canine, equine, and bovine blood. Greater increases in measured
neutrophil concentrations may occur in feline blood because of the
larger feline MNP.
(b)Because of this shift,fewer neutrophils emigrate to tissues,and thus
neutrophils have an increased circulating life span. The older neutro-
phils may become hypersegmented
(2)Increased release ofneutrophils from marrow:Mostly segmented neutrophils
are released, but glucocorticoids may cause release of band neutrophils and
thus amild leftshift
b.Classic steroid leukograms are seen most frequently in dogs,where they consist of
a mature neutrophilia (24xURL),lymphopenia,monocytosis,and eosinope-
nia.The magnitude of neutrophilia varies with different glucocorticoids and
dosages. The effects on neutrophil kinetics diminish with chronic elevations in
glucocorticoids.
c.Blood may have a mild left shift (typically band neutrophils<10oo/μL), a right
shift, or no shift.
d.Typical glucocorticoid effects differ among species of animals (Table 2.7).
Table 2.7. Expected leukocyte concentrations in animals with steroid leukograms
Leukocyteconcentrations
Dogs
Cats
Horses
Cattle
Total WBCs(x10²/μL)
15.0-35.0
20.0-30.0
15.0-20.0
8.0-18.0
Segmented neutrophil
WRI-T
Band neutrophil
WRI-slight↑
WRI
WRI
WRI
Lymphocyte
↑
↓-WRI
↓-WRI
↑
Monocyte
WRI-T
WRI-↑
WRI
↓WRI
Eosinophil
WRIb
WRIb
↓-WRI
Decreased eosinophil concentrations inroutine CBCresults are typicallynot reliable because of the
imprecision of leukocyte differential counts; also, lower reference limit may be 0/μL
Eosinopenia isnot typically recognized because the lower reference limit for eosinophils is 0/μL.
76
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
4.Physiologic (shift) neutrophilia
a.This neutrophilia results from effects of catecholamines (typically associated
with fear, excitement, and exercise) that cause a shift from the MNP to the CNP
(Fig. 2.7E). The shift may be caused by the change in fuid dynamics that results
from increased blood fow rate, especially in lungs.7 Neutrophil adherence to
endothelial cellsmay also be reduced
b.The magnitude of neutrophilia may be up to twice the URL for canine, equine,
andbovine blood,and potentially up to 34xURL for a cat because of a cat‘s
larger MNP.
c.It is seen most frequently in healthy animals and mostly in cars. Leukocyte
concentrations return to reference intervals relatively fast (within an hour) if the
stimulus disappears.
d.Because the increased blood flow rate alters kinetics of other leukocytes, there
alsomay be increasedconcentrations of other leukocytesespecially lymphocytes.
The entire response results in a physiologic leukocytosis.
5.Chronic myeloid leukemia (Table 6.5)
a.Neutrophilia is caused by a clonal proliferation of neutrophils. To be recognized
as a neutrophilia, the cells would be well-differentiated neutrophils in a chronic
myeloid leukemia; this condition is difficult to differentiate from nonneoplastic
neutrophilias. There may be an extreme leukocytosis with a left shift that is more
apparent in the bone marrow (Fig. 2.7F).
b.In acute myeloid leukemia, the cells would be immature granulocyte precursors
that may not be classfied as neutrophils in leukogram resulrs.
6.Paraneoplastic neutrophilic leukocytosis
a.Neoplastic tissues produce G-CSF or a similar substance that stimulates neutro
poiesis. The neutrophil concentrations of the blood may resemble either an acute
or a chronic infammatory neutrophilia.
b.Canine neoplasms associated with extreme neutrophilic leukocytoses include
rectal adenomatous polyp, renal tubular carcinoma, and metastatic
fibrosarcoma.1
7.Other conditions or unknown mechanisms
a.Neutrophilia of leukocyte adhesion deficiency in cattle and dogs (see details in
the Other Nonneoplastic Leukocyte Disorders section)
b.Neutrophilia induced by G-CSF administration
c.Neutrophilia of estrogen toxicosis: Neutrophilia occurs 2-3 wk after estradiol
injections.22
D.Neutropenia (decreased measured blood neutrophil concentration) (Table 2.8)
1.Infammatory neutropenia (Fig.2.8B)
a.Typically, this neutropenia occurs during an overwhelming or severe acute
infammatory disease.If associatedwith endotoxemia,margination of neutrophils
may be a dominant change in neutrophil kinetics.
b. Neutropenia results when margination in vessels or emigration of neutrophils to
infamed tissue exceeds the release of neutrophils from marrow.
(1)Cytokines and chemoattractants stimulate margination and emigration of
large numbers of neutrophils to infamed tissue. This movement may occur
within hours of introduction of an infectious agent. Cytokines also stimulate
increased production of neutrophils,but the blood changes caused by this
stimulation arenotexpectedfor atleast2d
2/LEUKOCYTES
77
Table 2.8.Diseases and conditions that cause neutropenia
Infammation
*Overwhelming bacterial infections: equine salmonellosis
*Some viral infections: canine and feline parvovirus, equine infuenza
*Variety of infammatory states in cattle:mastitis,pneumonia
Peripheral destruction
Immune-mediatedneutropenia
Hemophagocytic syndromes
Granulocytic hypoplasia
*Infectious: parvovirus (dogs and cats),FeLV,Toxoplasma,Ebrlichia
Neoplastic: primary or metastatic
Toxic
*Predictable:estrogen,chemotherapeutic drugs,chloramphenicol (cats)
Idiosyncratic:phenylbutazone,bracken fern,griseofulvin
Marrownecrosis
Myelofibrosis
Ineffective production
Immune-mediated neutropenia
Diphenylhydantoin and phenylbutazone toxicosis (suspected in animals)
Chronic idiopathic neutropenia (G-CSF deficiency)
Cyclic hematopoiesis
Cyclic hematopoiesis of grey collies
Cyclichematopoiesis associated with FeLV
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specific disorders or conditions are not complere but are provided to give examples.
Some dogs of the Belgian Tervuren breed have lower neutrophil concentrations than reference intervals
for most dogs.130
(2)Neutrophil-releasing factors stimulate a sudden release of neutrophils from
the SNP.After the SNP is depleted,cells in the MatNP are released,and
thus a left shift is typically present.However, there may not be a left shift
even with the release ofcells from the MatNP,because the totalmeasured
neutrophil concentration may be less than the URL for the band neutrophil
concentration. If bone marrow is examined during the illness, cell popula
tions reflect the changes in the leukon.
(a)Early: depletion of SNP and possibly decreased MatNP
(b)2-3 d:increased ProNPwithout increased MatNP
(c)5-7 d:granulocytichyperplasia from increases in both ProNP and
MatNP
c.Infammatory neutropenia is common in adult cattle because they have a
relatively small SNP.Once there is a demand for neutrophils, there is not a
sudden release of neutrophils from bone marrow to create a neutrophilia. Also,
experimental data indicate that it takes longer for cattle to generate neutrophils
once thereserve pool is depleted.23
(1)The following sequence is the expected bovine response with acute inflam-
mation induced by introduction of Enterobacter aerogenes into lactating
quarters.
Circulating neutrophils
A.Normal neutrophil kineticsandpools
SNP
ProNP
MatNP
Marginated neutrophils
B.Inflammatoryneutropenia
→ProNP
MatNP
?
C.Endotoxin neutropenia
ProNP
MatNP
?
品
D.Peripheral-destruction neutropenia
1
ProNP
MatNP
E.Granulocytic-hypoplasia neutropenia
ProNP
MatNP
?
F.Ineffective-production neutropenia
ProNP
?
Fig. 2.8. Neutropenia kinetics.
A.Neutrophil kinetics in health (a reduced version of Fig. 2.2).
B.Infammatory neutropenia (overwhelming tissue demand): Neutropenia oocurs because the margination
and migration of neutrophils into the infamed tissues exceed the release of neutrophils from marrow.
C. Endotoxin neutropenia: Neutropenia occurs because endotoxins stimulate the margination of neutro-
phils (sequestration of neutrophils in the MNP). With the concurrent inflammatory response, a variey
of changes in neutrophil kinetics are possible. Endotoxins may also affect marrow cells to cause increased
release of neutrophils (see the text).
D.Peripheral destruction neutropenia: Neutropenia occursbecause neutrophils are being destroyed by
macrophages, perhapsbecauseof antineutrophil antibodiesIf persistent,granulocytic hyperplasia will
develop.
E.Granulocytic hypoplasia neutropenia: Neutropenia occurs because neutrophil production is decreased.
F.Ineffective production neutropenia: Neutropenia occurs because a disorder prevents an orderly matura-
tion of neutrophil precursors in the marrow and thus neutrophil production is decreased. This may
occur at different stages of neutrophil maturation. It may be caused by immune-mediated cell destruc-
tion in some cases.
78
2/LEUKOCYTES
79
(a)Initial neutropenia (within 6h)
(b)Significant left shift (by 24 h)
(c)Nadir of neutropenia (by 31 h)
(2)The severity of the neutropenia typically will be greater in bacteremic than
nonbacteremic cattle with mastitis.24
2.Neutropenia caused by endotoxemia (Fig. 2.8C)
a.Whenever an infection with Gram-negative organisms causes an endotoxemia,
endotoxins initiate changes in the leukon.
b.This neutropenia occurs because endotoxins cause the rapid shift of neutrophils
from the CNP to the MNP. This effect lasts for 1-3 h after a single exposure.
Endotoxins also induce the release of infammatory mediators (e.g,TNF and
IL-1) that promote the adhesion of neutrophils to endothelial cells. Concurrent
activation of the neutrophils may cause oxidative damage to endothelial cells.25s
c.Because of several factors, a neutropenia may no longer be present when a
veterinarian examines an endotoxemic animal
(1) Endotoxins stimulate release of neutrophils from bone marrow in about
8-12h.
(2）
Endotoxins stimulate increased production of neutrophils,which affects
blood neutrophil concentrations in about 3-5 d.
(3) Other infammatory mediators may concurrently alter neutrophil kinetics.
d.Most studies ofendotoxin-induced changes in neutrophil kinetics involved
injectionfendotoxins.Inspontaneousinfectionsothermediators areprobably
also altering neutrophil movement.
3.Peripheral destruction neutropenia (Fig. 2.8D)
a.Immune-mediated neutropenia26.27
(1)Antineutrophil antibodies bind to neutrophils that are then destroyed by the
mononuclear phagocytic system.
②)
Factors that induce the pathologic process are not established in domestic
mammals.
(3）Animals may be responsive to glucocorticoid therapy or other immunosup-
pressive agents.28
(4)Examination of marrow may reveal granulocytic hyperplasia
(1)Neutropenia may be one of multiple cytopenias associated with phagocyte
hyperplasia.
(2)In people, the acquired syndromes are associated with a variety of infectious
and neoplastic states.32
4. Granulocytic hypoplasia neutropenia (decreased-production neutropenia)
(Fig.2.8E)
a.Granulocytic hypoplasia occurs when either stem cells or cells of the marrow
microenvironment are damaged. The hypoplasia causes decreased neutrophil
production.
b.This form of neutropenia is usually differentiated from other neutropenias by
persistence of neutropenia usually without a left shift, though secondary
infections may cause left shifts) and bone marrow examination findings of
granulocytic hypoplasia.Typically, maturation within the neutrophilic cell line is
complete and orderly.Because the disease may damage other cell lines in the
marrow,concentrations of other blood cells (e.g.,erythrocytes or platelets) may
80
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
be decreased There may not be a lymphopenia,because lymphopoiesis in other
lymphoid tissues may not be impaired.
C.Chemotherapeutic agents can be cytotoxic to many rapidly dividing cells,
including neutrophil precursors. Thus, neutropenia can result from the adminis-
tration of chemotherapeutic agents such as vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophos-
phamide, cisplatin, and carboplatin. The onset of the neutropenia depends on
several factors but typically occurs 7-10 d after the last dose.
5.Ineffective production neutropenia (neutropenia of ineffective neutropoiesis)
(Fig. 2.8F)
a.Ineffective production occurs when neutrophil precursors are defective or
damaged and die before they are released from marrow.
maturation arrest (e.g.,hyperplasia up to one stage and then hypoplasia after that
marow). These patterns occur in some dogs in which immune-mediated
directed immune-mediated anemia.
c.Ineffective neutropoiesis is characterized by a persistent neutropenia (with litte or
no left shift) concurrent with marrow hyperplasia prior to the defective stage. A
monocytosis may be present because stimulation of CFU-GM results in more
cells differentiating toward monocytes and neutrophils.Lymphocyte concentra
tions typically are WRI.
d. Chronic idiopathic neutropenia was reported in a rotrweiler that had a G-CSF
deficiency.The dog's marowhad granulocyte andmononuclear cell popula
tions indicative of a maturation arrest. The findings suggested that G-CSFwas
needed for terminal neutrophil differentiation.
6.Cyclic hematopoiesis
(1)Canine cyclic hematopoiesis is a hereditary disorder of grey collies and grey
collie crosses. Its diagnostic features are caused by 11 d to 14 d cycles of
neutrophil, erythrocyte, platelet, and monocyte production that result from
cyclic differentiation of stem cells toward committed stem cells.The cycle of
neutrophil production is out of synchrony with the other cycles.
(2)Affected dogs are susceptible to infections because of recurrent neutropenia
and usually grow ill prior to 6 mo of age. Anemia is usually mild because
the life span of erythrocytes is longer than the 11-to 14-d cycles.A
thrombocytosismay bepresent,and defective platelet function hasbeen
described.
(3)People with cyclic neutropenia have mutations in the gene that encodes the
serine proteinase neutrophil elastase. Mutations to this gene were not
detected in affected dogs.
(4) Affected dogs do have defects in the intracellular trafficking of neutrophil
elastase such that it becomes incorporated into the plasma membrane rather
than into granules.These dogs have a decreased production of the β-subunit
of adaptor protein complex3 (AP3),which is a cargo protein for neutrophil
elastase."s It is hypothesized that transmembrane elastase degrades unknown
local target protein(s) important in hematopoiesis (e.g.,hematopoietic
2/LEUKOCYTES
81
Table 2.9.Diseases and conditions that cause lymphocytosis
Chronicinfammation
*Bacterial infections, especially anaplasmal (e.g,Ehrlichia canis)
Fungal infections, primarily systemic
Viral infections:FeLV,BLV,equineinfectious anemia virus
Protozoal infections, especially babesial and theilerial
Physiologic (shift) lymphocytosis
*Fighr-ligrons:excitmnt,fright,ain,xrcis,nxi
Catecholamine injections: epinephrine or norepinephrine
Lymphoproliferative disorders
*Lymphoma (BLV,FeLV,and idiopathic),leukemic phase
Lymphoid leukemia
Persistent lymphocytosis of cattle (BLV)
Hypoadrenocorticism
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specifc disorders or conditions are not complete but are provided to give examples.
Puppies,kittensand foals havehigher lymphocyte concentrations than do mature animals of the
respective species.
cytokines or receptors),resulting in decreased hematopoiesis. When neutro
penia develops, there is less elastase-induced inhibition of hematopoiesis,
thus allowing a new wave of progenitors to develop until the cycle repeats.
b.Cyclic hematopoiesis associated with FeLV infection
II.
Abnormal lymphocyte concentrations
A.Lymphocytosis (increased measured blood lymphocyte concentration)(Table 2.9)
1.Chronic inflammatory lymphocytosis (Fig.2.9B)
a.This lymphocytosis is caused by increased lymphopoiesis in response to chronic
antigenic or cytokine stimulation.Reactive lymphocytes may be seen.
b.Lymphocytosis is part ofa hyperplastic lymphoid system.There may be concur-
rent enlarged lymph nodes or lymphoid hyperplasia in other tissues.
c.Lymphocytosis is usually mild to moderate (2-3 × URL). Occasionally there will
be a marked lymphocytosis(>30.0 x 10/μL in dogs).
d.Concurrent leukogram abnormalities commonly include a neutrophilia (mature,
perhaps with right shift or left shift) and/or a monocytosis and occasionally an
eosinophilia and/or basophilia.
2.Physiologic (shift) lymphocytosis (Fig. 2.9C)
a.This lymphocytosis is caused by shifting of lymphocytes from the MLP to the
CLP (especially from the spleen) that is promoted by exogenous or endogenous
catecholamines. The lymphocyte shift is probably mediated through both
increased blood flow rate and decreased lymphocyte adherence to endothelium.8
b.The magnitude of lymphocytosis may be up to 2 x URL, and the lymphocytosis
usually lasts minutes to hours.
C.Morphologic changes in lymphocytes are not expected,but there are data to
indicate that the catecholamine effect is mostly on natural killer cells,which may
82
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
A.Lymphocytekinetics in health
yvmphocvtosis
C.Physiologic(shift) lymphocytosis
Blood vesse
®
nesse
lymphatlevessel
Fig. 2.9. Lymphocytosis kinetics.
A.Lymphocyte kinetics in health (a reduced version of Fig. 2.3).
B.Chronic infammatory lymphocytosis: Lymphocytosis occurs because of increased lymphopoiesis
od e si s  e u   asr    o
lymphoid hyperplasia.
C.Physiologic (shift) lymphocytosis: Lymphocytosis occurs because of the shift of lymphocytes from the
MLP to the CLP.
D.Lymphoproliferative neoplasia:A lymphoid leukemia results from an uncontrolled proliferation of a
lymphoid cell clone. This figure ilustrates the leukemic manifestation of lymphoma; see the text for
other lymphoid leukemias.
d.As with shiftneutrophilia,shift lymphocytosis is seen most frequently in cats,
young horses,and healthy animals.
3.Lymphoproliferative disorders (Table 6.5 and Fig.2.9D)
a.This lymphocytosis usually is caused by a neoplastic proliferation of lymphoid
cells in lymph nodes, bone marrow, or other tissues.
b.F
BLV and FeLV are known to induce neoplastic transformation of lymphocytes,
but not all forms of lymphoid neoplasia in cats and cattle are caused by these
viruses. Causes of lymphoid neoplasia in other domesticmammalsare not
known.
c.BLV infections may also induce a persistent polyclonal B-cell lymphocytosis
without the other features of lymphoid neoplasia (e.g.,blast transformation,and
tissue manifestations of lymphoma).
2/LEUKOCYTES
83
d.In domestic mammals,lymphoid leukemias usually represent the leukemic
manifestations of lymphoma; that is, the neoplasia started in the lymph nodes (or
other lymphoid tissues) and spread to the blood.
e.Leukemia is classically characterized by a marked or extreme lymphocytosis with
many lymphocytes having abnormal or“immature”morphologic features.The
diagnosis is easiest if both criteria are present and difficult when they arenot.
4.Lymphocytosis of hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
a.This lymphocytosis may be caused by an absence of glucocorticoid hormones,
which normally inhibit lymphocyte production or alter lymphocyte distribution
in the body.
b.Dogs with hypoadrenocorticism may have a lymphocytosis.Always think of
hypoadrenocorticism if an obviously stressed dog has a neutropenia and lympho
cytosis (stress should cause the opposite—neutrophilia and lymphopenia),
especially in azotemic dogs.
The classic leukogram of hypoadrenocorticism consists of a low-normal to
decreased neutrophil concentration,high-normal to increased lymphocyte
concentration, a normal monocyte concentration, and a high-normal to increased
eosinophil concentration.
5.“Lymphocytosis” of young animals
a.Puppies,kittens, calves, and foalshave greater blood lymphocyte concentrations
than do adult animals. Lymphocyte concentrations in cattle increase until about
1 yr of age, and then gradually decrease over the years in adults.
b.Compared to adult reference intervals, the apparent lymphocytosis may be up to
2xURL.
B.Lymphopenia (decreased measured blood lymphocyte concentration) (Table 2.10)
1.Acute infammatory lymphopenia (Fig.2.10A)
a.This lymphopenia is caused by changes in lymphocyte kinetics stimulated by
acute inflammatory mediators that reduce the CLP.37
Table 2.10.Diseases and conditions that cause lymphopenia
Acute infammation
*Acute bacterial infections
*Acute viral infections
Endotoxemia
Steroids
*See the list for steroid neutrophilia in Table 2.5
Depletion
Lymphoid effusion: chylothorax,and feline cardiomyopathy
Loss of lymph: alimentary lymphoma, enteric neoplasms,granulomatous enteritis,
paratuberculosis,protein-losing enteropathy,lymphangiectasia,ulcerative enteritis
Lymphoid hypoplasia or aplasia
Immunosuppressive drugs or whole body irradiation
Destruction of lymphoid tissues: multicentric lymphoma, generalized lymphadenitis
Combined immunodeficiency of horses (Arabian and Appaloosa) and dogs (basset hound,
Cardigan Welsh corgi, and Jack Russell terrier)
Thymic aplasia of black-pied Danish cattle
* A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specific disorders or conditions are not complete but are provided to give examples
84
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
A.Acute inflammato
B.Steroid lymphopenia
mph.nod
BBI
Aferen
ymphatic
C.Depletion lymphopenia
D.Lymphopenia of lymphoid hypoplasia or aplasia
Bloodvessel
?
Blood vessel
®
-ymp
Dissue
blood
looc
ere
ymphatlc
ATEr
Arferer
ymphalicw
Fig.2.10.Lymphopenia kinetics.
A.Acute infammatory lymphopenia: Lymphopenia occurs because of (1) increased migration of lympho
cytes to inflamed tissue, (2) homing of lymphocytes to lymphoid tissues, and (3) decreased movement of
lymphocytes from lymph nodes back to blood
B.Steroid lymphopenia:Soon after administration of glucocorticoids,lymphopenia occurs because of the
movement of lymphocytes to lymphoid tissues and decreased efflux of lymphocytes from lymph nodes.
With persistent administration,glucocorticoids can become lymphotoxic and thus destroy lymphocytes
in lymph nodes and other tissues.
C.Depletion lymphopenia: Lymphopenia occurs
becauseIvmp
hocytes are lostfrom the vascular system
with a loss of lymph or lymph-rich fuid.
D.Lymphopenia of lymphoid hypoplasia or
urs because of decreased lymphocyte
production.
(1)Increased margination and emigration of lymphocytes to infamed tissue
(2)Homing of lymphocytes to lymph nodes by increasing the rate of migration
through postcapillary high endothelial cells
(③）
Reducing the rate of lymphocytes leaving lymph nodes via efferent lym-
phatic vessels
b.Most acute inflammatory leukograms with neutrophilia or neutropenia also have
prognostic sign.
c.Historically,lymphopenia was considered to be caused by the stress associated
with acute infammation rather than caused by the inflammatory process itself.
2/LEUKOCYTES
85
The stress of an illnessmay induce thelymphopenia,but documentation of such
a pathogenesis was not found.
2.Steroid (stress) lymphopenia (Fig.2.10B)
a.This lymphopenia is caused by the changes in lymphocyte kinetics caused by
endogenous or exogenous glucocorticoids.
(1)Immediate: shift of lymphocytes from the CLP to other pools.Once the
effects of the glucocorticoids diminish,the lymphocytes return to blood.
Some reports indicate the lymphopenia is caused by decreased efflux of
lymphocytesfromlymphnodeswhereasother dataindicatearedistribu
(2)Later: Lymphotoxic effects cause lymphoid hypoplasia and thus decreased
lymphopoiesis. Sensitivity of lymphocytes to glucocorticoids varies with the
species and also with the stage of lymphocyte development.1
b.Typical causes are the same as mentioned for steroid neutrophilia, and it is
usually considered the most common lymphopenia in all species. The severity
and duration of lymphopenia are generally proportional to dose and/or duration
of increased glucocorticoids
3.Depletion lymphopenia (Fig.2.10C)
a.This lymphopenia is produced by a loss of lymphocytes from the body via a loss
of lymphocyte-rich lymph or because of an incomplete lymphocyte circulation
pathway (e.g.,repeated removal of chylothoracic fluid from a cat).
b.Disorders that cause this lymphopenia are not common.
4.Lymphopenia of lymphoid hypoplasia or aplasia (Fig.2.10D)
a.This lymphopenia is caused by either congenital or acquired lymphoid hypo
plasia or aplasia that decreases lymphocyte production.
b.Because most blood lymphocytes areT-lymphocytes, selective aplasia of T
lymphocytes will cause a more severe lymphopenia than will a selective aplasia of
B-lymphocytes.
5.Lymphopenia of lymphoma
a.Lymphopenia is common in animals with lymphoma.
b. The lymphopenia may be caused by decreased production (damage to lymph
nodes) or altered lymphocyte kinetics (disrupted circulation patterns).
II1.
Abnormal monocyte concentrations
A.Monocytosis (increased measured blood monocyte concentration) (Table 2.11)
1.Infammatory monocytosis
a.Acute and chronic inflammatory diseases may cause monocytosis by cytokine
stimulation of monocyte production and release.
b.Monocytosis generally reflects a need for macrophages in diseased tissue or blood.
2.Steroid (stress)monocytosis
a.Glucocorticoid hormones or drugs are a common cause of monocytosis in dogs
and cats, but they cause minimal to no changes in horses and cattle.
b.Monocytosis is probably caused by a shift in monocytes from a marginared pool
to a circulating pool.
3.Neoplastic monocytosis (monocytic leukemia)
a.This is typically characterized by a marked monocytosis. Monocytes may appear
abnormal orrelatively normal,but when atypical and immature, they would
probably not be categorized asmonocytes.
86
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 2.11.Diseases and conditions that cause monocytosis
Infammation
*Infections bacterial (including anaplasmal and rickertsial),fungal,protozoal
*Necrosis:hemolysis,hemorrhage,neoplasia,infarction,trauma
Steroids
*Stress (physical or neurogenic)
Hyperadrenocorticism
*Glucocorticoid therapy
Adrenocorticotropic hormone administration
Neoplasia:monocyticleukemia
Secondary to immune-mediated neutropenia
Cyclic hematopoiesis
G-CSF administration
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specific disorders or conditions are not complete but are provided to give examples.
b.Thisis a relatively uncommon form ofleukemia when compared to granulocytic
and lymphoid leukemias.
4. Secondary to immune-mediated neutropenia: Because neutrophils and monocytes
share a common bipotential stem cell, there may be increased monocytopoiesis when
there is ineffective neutropoiesis.
herald increases in blood neutrophil concentrations.
6. G-CSF: This may be administered to promote neutropoiesis, but it will also
promote monocytopoiesis.
B.Monocytopenia:This is difficult to document because healthy domestic mammals may
have relatively few blood monocytes.Monocytopenia is not considered a diagnostic
problem.
IV.
Abnormal eosinophil concentrations
A.Eosinophilia (increased measured blood eosinophil concentration)
1.Most eosinophilias appear to be related to eosinophil anti-inflammatory functions or
to the attraction of eosinophils to tissues after mast cell or basophil degranulation.
2.An eosinophilia suggests the possibility of many disease states (Table 2.12)
a.In the hypersensitivity disorders, typically there are clinical signs associated with
the involved tissues; for example, pruritus with fea bite or staphylococcal
dermatitis.
b.Both internal and external parasites are frequently blamed for an eosinophilia,
but many animals with similar parasitic infections do not have an eosinophilia.
Persistentmild eosinophiliais occasionally seenin clinicallyhealthymammals in
which parasitism or other subclinical disease cannot be detected. When an
eosinophilia is caused by a parasitic infection, it is likely a reaction to a parasite
(adult or larva) in tissues and not in the blood or the lumen of the intestines.
Organisms that infect blood cells(e.g,hemic Mycoplasma,Babesia,Cytauxzoon
and Hepatozoon) are not expected to cause an eosinophilia.
c.Eosinophilia has been associated with infammation in a variety of mast cell-rich
tissues, although establishing a direct causal relationship may be difficult.
2/LEUKOCYTES
87
Table 2.12.Diseases and conditions that cause eosinophilia
Hypersensitivity (allergic) disorders
*Flea-bite dermatitis
Hypersensitivity to staphylococcal or streptococcal proteins
Millk allrgy in ruminants
Asthma and eosinophilic respiratory disorders
Parasitism
Ectoparasites
*Heartworms
*Tissue nematodes,trematodes, and protozoa
Dogs:Diroflaria,Acanthocheilonema(Dipetalonema),Spirocerca,Strongyloides
Tricburis, and Paragonimus infections; larval migration of hookworms and
roundworms;Habronema
Cats: Paragonimus,Aeleurostrongylus
Horses: Strongyloides
Cattle: Sarcocystis
*Mast cell degranulation caused by inflammation: cutaneous,respiratory,intestinal
genital, urinary
Hypoadrenocorticism
Idiopathic eosinophilic conditions
Dog:eosinophilicmyositiseosinophilicgastroenteritis,eosinophilicpanosteitis,
eosinophilic pneumonitis,eosinophilic granuloma complex in Siberian huskies
*Cat: eosinophilic granuloma complex,eosinophilic enteritis,hypereosinophilic syndrome
Paraneoplastic eosinophilia (including mast cell neoplasms)
Eosinophilic leukemia
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specific disorders or conditions are not complete but are provided to give examples.
d.Eosinophilia is found in some dogs with hypoadrenocorticism. The pathogenesis
probably involves the lack of cortisol.
e.There are several idiopathic eosinophilic conditions (Table 2.12).Typically,there
are clinical signs associated with the involved tissues.
fIdiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome is occasionally found in cats, dogs, and
horses.42-45
(1)The syndrome is characterized by persistent marked eosinophilia of undeter
mined cause, lack of immature myeloid precursors in blood suggestive of
leukemia, and eosinophilic infiltration of tissues.Differentiation from
eosinophilic leukemia is not clear,but animals classified as having hyper-
eosinophilic syndrome tend not to have anemias, thrombocytopenias,or
neutropenias.4s
(2）
There is not an established threshold at which an eosinopbilic syndrome
becomes a bypereosinophilic syndrome, but most will consider eosinophil
concentrations>20.0x10²/uLtobehypereosinophilic.
3.Paraneoplastic eosinophilia
a.Mast cell neoplasms and adjacent tissues frequently contain eosinophils because
of chemoattractants released from mast cells. There may be a concurrent
eosinophilia.
88
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 2.13.Diseases and conditions that cause eosinopenia
*Steroids (see Table 2.5)
*Acuteinflammation
Diseases causing a hypoplastic to aplastic marrow
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Low eosinophil concentrations in routine CBC results may not be reliable because of the
imprecision of leukocyte differential counts and sometimes a lower reference limit of O/μL
b.Eosinophilia may also be linked to other neoplasms. The eosinophilia may be
caused by the release of eosinophilia-inducing factors (e.g., interleukin 5).
Paraneoplastic eosinophilias have beenreported indog,cats,and horse7
dogsT-cell lymphoma, thymoma, mammary carcinoma, oral fibrosarcoma, and
rectal adenomatous polyp; cats—transitional cell carcinoma,T-cell lymphoma,
and alimentary lymphoma; and horsesintestinal lymphoma.
4.Eosinophilic leukemia (Table 6.5):This form of chronic myeloproliferative disease is
very uncommon. In cats, it has been linked to a retroviral infection.
B.Eosinopenia (decreased measured blood eosinophil concentration)
1.By iselfeosinopeniaisof littl diagnostic significance.Howeverosinopeniamay
be part of either an acute infammatory or steroid leukogram (Table 2.13)
2.Because eosinophil concentrations in healthy animals are typically low, and a
calculated eosinophil concentration in CBCresults may not be accurate,the
observed eosinopenia in CBC results may not truly represent a pathologic state
Also, reference inrervals for eosinophil concentrations in some species may have
O/uL as the lower reference limit.
V.
Abnormal basophil concentrations
A.Basophilia (increased measured blood basophil concentration)
1. Only substantial or persistent mild increases in basophil concentrations above 200-
300/uL should be considered definitive basophilias,because of the imprecision of
leukocyte differential counts (especially when dealing with a minoriry cell
population).
2.A cause of basophilia may not be apparent but can be associated with allergic,
parasitic, and neoplastic stares (Table 2.14).
B.Basopenia (decreased blood basophil concentration): This cannot be documented with
routine leukocyte differential counts because basophil concentrations are typically very
low in domestic mammals. Basopenia is not known to be clinically significant.
VI.
Abnormal mast cell concentrations
A.Mastocytemia (mast cells detected in peripheral blood)
1.Findingone mast cell in a blood film or buffy coat preparation of domestic
mammals is considered to indicate the presence of mastocytemia. The term rmastocy
temia is preferred over mastocytosis because mastocytosis may refer to increased mast
cellnumbers in tissues other than blood.Either termmay refer to neoplastic or
nonneoplastic mast cell populations.
2. Disorders that may cause a mastocytemia (Table 2.15)
a.Mastocytosis in cats occurs in two forms, systemic and splenic,and mastocytemia
may be seen in either.53
2/LEUKOCYTES
89
Table 2.14.Diseases and conditions that cause basophilia
Allergic reactions (immediate or delayed)
Drugs,foods,inhalants,and insect stings or bits
Parasitism
Fleas
Gastrointestinal parasites such as nematodes
*Vascular parasites such as Diroflaria immitis and Acanthocheilonema (Dipetalonema)
reconditum
Neoplasia
Basophilic leukemia
Mast cell neoplasia
Feline myeloproliferative diseases
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
Essential thrombocythemia
Polycythemia vera
*Arelatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specifc disorders or conditions are not complete but are provided to give examples.
Table 2.15.Disorders reported to be associated with mastocytemia
Neoplastic disorders
Cutaneous mast cell neoplasms
Visceral mast cell neoplasia
Mast cell leukemia
Nonneoplastic disordersin dogs
*Infammatory
Enteritisespecially parvovirus
Fibrinous pericarditis and pleuritis
Bacterial peritonitis
Aspiration pneumonia
Acute pancreatic necrosis
Immunehemolytic anemias
Renal failure associated with acute inflammation
Skindsasebithrsnstivitytpaopimangeanddalgym
with secondary pyoderma
Hemorrhage secondary to hemophilia in dogs
Gastric torsion in dogs
*A relatively common disease or condition
b.Cutaneous mastocytoma,which is a common neoplasm of dogs,may spread to
c.Mast cell leukemias are rare.
d.Several nonneoplastic mastocytemia disorders have been reported in dogs
（Table 2.15）.Most such disorders are associated with acute infammatory
diseases.55-58
3. Some articles thar describe mastocytemic animals report the number of mast cells
found per blood film.This number per blood film should be considered descriptive
90
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
and not quantitative because the amount of blood examined is not constant or is
unknown.For example,finding 30 mast cells per slide on day 1 and 15 mast cells
per slide on day 2 should not be interpreted that the animal is responding to
treatment, because perhaps a smaller drop of blood was used on day 2 or perhaps
the quality of blood film on day 2 prevented a complete examination.
B.Because no mast cells are expected in the blood of healthy domestic mammals,
decreased concentrations donot occur.
LEUKOGRAMPATTERNS
Although each type of leukocyte is unique,alterations in blood leukocyte concentrations
frequently occur in predictable patterns that are summarized in Table 2.16. The characteris-
tic features of most patterns are seen in all domestic mammals, but there are significant
species differences.
A.Dogs
1.Typically, dogs have the most pronounced acute infammatory leukocytosis.
2.The classic steroid or “stress pattern is probably most common in dogs.
B.Cats
to a physiologic leukocytosis.
2.FeLV-induced changes create alterations in cell concentrations and appearance
C.Horses
1.Horsesfrequently have littleto no neutrophilia or lirtle to no left shift during
infammatory states.
2.A pronounced left shift is uncommon unless toxic changes are present.
D.Cattle
1.Common acute infammatory states in adult cattle (such as mastitis or pneumonia)
cause aninfammatoryneutropeniabecauseof therelatively smallneutrophil storage
pool, but neutrophilia may occur in calves with acute infammation and in adults
with chronic suppurative diseases.
2. Infammatory states can cause marked lymphocyte atypia that can be very diffcult
to differentiate from neoplastic changes.
IL.
Hemic neoplasia
A.Leukogram patterns in animals with hemic neoplasia are extremely variable.
1.Extreme leukocytosis due to numerous poorly differentiated cells is indicative of an
acute leukemia.Occasionally,theinitial microscopic findings suggest the poorly
differentiatedcelsarefleukocytelineagebutadditionaltestingestablishesthe
neoplastic cells to be of erythroid or megakaryocytic lineage.
2.Extreme leukocytosis due to numerous well-differentiated cells is suggestive of
chronic leukemia, but a marked inflammatory leukogram must be excluded.
3.Low numbers of atypical cells in peripheral blood, particularly if accompanied by
cytopeniasggestshenedtoexaminebonemarrow,lymphnodesorsleenor
the source of the atypical cells. Hemic neoplasia may be prominent in the bone
marrow, lymph nodes, or spleen when it is not obvious in the blood
4.Marked inappropriate rubricytosis is an indication for bone marrow examination to
evaluate for hemic neoplasia of erythroid origin (typically in cats).
5.Hemic neoplasia may be present without any alterations in CBC results.
Table 2.16.Major leukogram patterns (see the text for species differences,especially for cattle)
Segmented
Leukogram pattern
Total WBCs
neutrophil
neutrophil
Lymphocyte
Monocyte
Eosinophil
Acute inflammatory
T
↓
WRI-T
↓-WRI
Chronic inflammatory
↑
↑
WRI-T
WRI-T
WRI-↑
WRI
Steroid leukocytosis
十
↑
WRI-slight ↑
↓
↓
Physiologic leukocytosis
↑
WRI
↑
WRI-↑
WRI
Acute overwhelming inflammatory
↓
→
WRI-T
WRI
↓-WRI
Acute inflammatory with endotoxemia
↓
↑
WRI-T
↓
WRI
↓-WRI
Granulocytic hypoplasia
↓
↓
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
Ineffective neutropoiesis
↑
WRI
WRI
WRI-T
WRI
Hypoadr mocorticism
WRI
↓-WRI
WRI
WRI-↑
WRI
WRI-↑
Hemic neoplasia
？
2
？
* The neoplastic celline is expected to be increased. Other cell lines typically are WRI or decreased.
92
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
3500) may provide clues as to the type of hemic neoplasia present. This is because
neoplastic cells often have similar light-scatter properties as their nonneoplastic counter-
C. Multiple methods are used to characterize neoplastic hemic cells in an attempt to
establish their lineage. Other than the microscopic examination of routinely stained
blood, marrow, or lymph node samples, several other methods are used to evaluate cells
(see Chapter 6).
1.Enzyme cytochemistry or histochemistry
2.Immunocytochemistry or immunohistochemistry
3. Immunophenotyping via fow cytometry
4. Antigen receptor gene rearrangement assays to detect clonal cell populations
III.
Recognizing a leukogram pattern aids in the understanding of an animal’s illness. However,
not all disorders will produce classic patterns, concurrent processes can complicate patterns,
and some patterns overlap considerably. All leukogram results may even be within reference
intervals when the animal has an inflammatory or even infectious disease.
ABNORMALMORPHOLOGICFEATURESOFLEUKOCYTES
I.
Changes associated with inflammatory diseases
A.Toxic neutrophil (Plate lA-C [for all plates,see the color section of this book])
1.Toxic neutropbils are neutrophils with any or all of the following characteristics that
are called toxicchanges.
a.Foamy cytoplasm is cytoplasmic clearing due to dispersed organelles. (Note: Similar
cytoplasmic appearancemay becaused by invitro changesrelated to sample
deterioration. The foamy vacuolization should not be confused with the clear,
discrete vacuoles that develop in neutrophils exposed toEDTA for a few hours.
b.Difuse cyoplasmicbasophiliaisretention orpersistence of cytoplasmicRNA
during maruration.If cytoplasmic basophilia is caused by toxic change,it should
be presentinboth segmented and nonsegmenred neutrophils.Cytoplasmic
basophilia in only the nonsegmented stages may refect the immaturity of the cell
and not a toxic change.
C.Cytoplasmic Dohles inclusion bodies (focal cytoplasmic basophilia,also referred to
as Dohle bodies) are irregular, round to angular, blue-grey cytoplasmic structures
that are aggregates of rough endoplasmic reticulum that contain RNA.
d.Asynchronous nuclear maturarion occurs in nuclei that have finely granular lobes
(suggesting immaturity) separated by flaments or pronouncedindentations
(suggesting maturity).
Gian neutrophil are largerneutrophils that are released frommarrow because of
e.
asynchronous cellular maturation
fHyalinized nuclei have been considered a toxic change but may also represent
deterioration or autolysis.
gToxic granules are primary granules that are still visible in the later stages (usually
not seen after the progranulocyte stage). They are uncommon in domestic
mammals and seen mostly in horses
2. These structural changes in neutrophils represent maturation defects that occur
during rapid neutropoiesis.
2/LEUKOCYTES
93
3.Apparently healthy cats may have neutrophils with Dohle's inclusion bodies
ThereforefelineDohle'sinclusionbodieswithout other toxicchangesgenerallyare
not reported as a toxic change in cats unless they are frequent and prominent (a
subjective interpretation).
4.Neutrophils with toxic changes are commonly associated with severe bacterial
infections but can be found in noninfectious states,after GCSF administration,
in turpentine-induced infammation,6² and in dyscrasias induced by cefonicid or
cefazedone. However, it should be noted that just the presence of a left shift is not
a toxic change
5.Toxic changes can be graded based on rypes and degrees of toxic changes,but
classification systems have not been standardized.Probably the more severe the toxic
changes are, the more severe the infammatory state is in the animal. Severe toxic
6.Toxic neutrophils (especially band and metamyelocyte stages) can be confused with
somemonocytes.
a.If a cell is a toxic band, similar toxic changes should be present in segmented
neutrophils.
b.If a cell is amonocyte,it should be distinguishable from a segmented neutrophil
that has the clear to pale pink cytoplasm.
C.In some cases,immature toxic neutrophils cannot be reliably distinguished
from monocytes on a Wright-stained blood film. In these cases, accuracy of a
leukocyte differential countmay not be as importantasrecognizing that left
shifts and toxic changes indicate that animals have severe inflammatory
diseases.
B.Giant neutrophils (Plate 1C)
CourseSmart
1.Giant neutrophils are segmented or band neutrophils with a diameter of 1420 μm
They are larger than typical blood neutrophils,with diameters of 11-13 μm.They
probably form because of a skipped cell division in neutropoiesis.
2. Giant neutrophils may be associated with increased neutropoiesis caused by inflam-
mation, in which case they represent a toxic change. They are seen most commonly
in cats.
3.TheyaloareseenintheodlemarowdyrasiaFVnctionsandaf
administration of chemotherapeutic drugs that inhibit cell division.
C.Hypersegmented neutrophils (Plate 1D)
1.Hypersegmented neutrophils have a nucleus with five or more definitive lobes sepa
rated by filaments.
2.They typically represent old neutrophils and are seen with increased blood concen-
trations of glucocorticoids (see Abnormal Leukocyte Concentrations in Blood, sect
I.C.3）.The aging effect can also be seen as an in vitro artifact of delayed sample
analysis. Their cause is unknown in horses with idiopathic neutrophil
hypersegmentation.
3.They may occur with myelodysplastic syndromes or leukemias involving the
neutrophil series and are also seen in the poodle marrow dyscrasia. Giant hyperseg
mented neutrophils have been observed in dogs after cyclophosphamide treatments
(authors²observation) and experimentally in rats.64
D. Reactive lymphocytes (Plate 1E-H)
1.Reactive lymphocyres (plasmacytoid lymphocytes,immunocytes,and virocytes)
represent either stimulated T-lymphocytes orB-lymphocytes and can be found in
6
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
the blood of animals with a variety of acute and chronic inflammatory diseases.
Reactive lymphocytes, which are more common in chronic than acute inflammatory
states, can be found in most blood samples, but an increased number of them can
indicate an infammatory disease. They are common in young animals.
2.Reactive lymphocytes may have a variety of structural features that are considered to
be reactive changes: an increased amount of cytoplasm; an enhanced cytoplasmic
basophilia; a perinuclear halo; a prominent focal Golgi zone; and eccentric, enlarged,
cleaved,convoluted,lobulated,or bilobed nuclei.The most consistent changes are
an increased amount of cytoplasm and an increased cytoplasmic basophilia, a
relatively large amount of cytoplasm without basophilia is not clear evidence of
more cytoplasm than other lymphocytes and should not be considered reactive
individually,but an increased concentration of granular lymphocytes mayindicatea
reactive process.
3.Reactive hyperplasia can result in medium and large lymphocytes and lymphoid cells
with mitotic nuclei in the peripheral blood.
4.Individual reactive lymphocytes can be impossible to distinguish from neoplastic
lymphoid cells,especially in cattle.Themore pleomorphic the cells are, themore
likely they represent neoplasia and not hyperplasia.
E.Changes in monocytes associated with infammation (Plate 1I)
1.Monocytes can have increased cytoplasmic basophilia and hyperchromatic nuclei
Suchreactivemonocyesareseenin someinfammatorydiseasesepeciallysystmic
fungal diseases and immune-mediated disorders.During microscopic examinations,
they can be confused with typical and reactive lymphocytes.
2.Monocytes can also acquire the features of macrophages, with abundant grey to
blue-grey cytoplasm,with or without vacuoles,and largeround to oval nuclei.Cells
with this appearance are usually associated with systemic infections such as histoplas-
mosis,ehrlichiosis,or leishmaniasis.
儿.
Leukocytes that contain miscellaneous inclusions
A.Sideroleukocyte (Plate 1J)
1.A sideroleukocyte is a neutrophil or monocyte containing hemosiderin. On Wright
stained blood films, hemosiderin is a blue-green or yellw-brown pigment. Its
presence can be confirmed with an iron stain (Prussian blue).
2.Sideroleukocytes are rarely found but can be seen with hemolytic anemias (e.g
equine infectious anemia or immune-mediated hemolytic anemia) and after transfu
sion.The hemosiderin in blood leukocytes may represent hemosiderin engulfed by
those cells while they were in a spleen or other tissues.
B.Erythrophage (Plate 1K)
1.An erythropbage is typically a monocyte or neutrophil that has engulfed an
erythrocyte.
2.It is occasionally seen in immune hemolytic anemias such as idiopathic immune
hemolyticanemianog,equinenectiousanmindnatal isoerythrolyis.
C. Lupus erythematosus (LE) cell
1.A LE cellis a neutrophil that engulfed nuclear antigen-antibody complexes. With a
Wright stain,thismaterial appears as pink or paleblue homogeneous inclusions of
variable sizes.Newmethylene blue staining produces more prominent LE inclusions
with homogeneous staining
2/LEUKOCYTES
95
2.Rarely seen in domestic mammals even in the LE cell test designed to produce the
cell in vitro.
D.Neutrophils containing mast cell granules: Rarely, blood and marrow neutrophils
contain mast cell granules. In one described case, the cat had splenic mastocytosis and
rare intact mast cells in the peripheral blood.66
III.
Organisms in leukocytes
A.Bacteria other than those in the family Anaplasmataceae
1.Rarely, bacteria may be found within neutrophils of bacteremic patients (Plate 1L)
2.When these bacteria are found in blood,one must artempt ro determine
whether the bacteria represent a bacteremia or a sample contaminated with
bacteria.
B.Bacteria in the familyAnaplasmataceae (order Rickettsiales）:Morulae of Ebrlichia spp.
and Anaplasma spp. (Plate 2A-C)
1.For many years, anaplasmal agents that infected leukocytes were classified within the
genus of Ebrlichia. Molecular diagnostic methods and 16S rRNA analyses resulted
in the reclassification of several organisms that previously were considered ehrlichial
agents. Some have been moved to the Anaplasma genus; others to Neoricketsia. The
appropriateness of anomenclature system purely dependent on such genetic
sequences has been questioned.67
2.These agents can invade and multiply in the blood leukocytes of many species
(Table 2.17). The host range of the monocytic anaplasmal species tends to be
limited,but the granulocytic forms are not as host specific.
3.Anaplasmal species that infect domestic mammals are usually considered separate
from those thatinfect people （Ebrlichia chaffeensis and Neoricketsia sennetsu),but
human isolates have been found that could not be distinguished from E.ewingii by
previously thought to be sparate species (E.equi,E.phagocytopbila,and human
granulocytic ehrlichia) are now considered to be one organismcalled Anaplasma
phagocytophilum.70.71
4.Ehrlichia spp.and the leukocyticAnaplasma spp.are located in cytoplasmic vacuoles.
The resulting clusters of organisms (2 to > 20) are called morulae,which typically
have diameters of 1.5-4.0 μm and stain pale to dark blue-grey with a Wright stain
In granulocytic forms,there may be more than one morula per leukocyte.Morulae
should not be confusedwithDohle's inclusion bodies,platelets lying on leukocytes
or blebs of nuclear membrane.
C.Canine distemper inclusions (Plate 2D)
cytoplasmicinclusions found nneutrophilsmonocytes,lymphocytesanderythro
cytes (see Chapter 3). Quick stains (e.g., Diff-Quik) stain the viral particles better
than do traditional Romanowsky stains (e.g.,Wright or Wright-Giemsa), which
typically produce pale blue inclusions.
2.They probably occur in the early viremic stage and before clinical illness.They are
rarely observed in the United States.
D.Hepatozoon americanum (Plate 2E)7273
1.This is a protozoon whose gametocytes infect canine neutrophils and monocytes.
Prior to 1997, the North American organism was classified as H. canis.7² In North
America, it is found mostly in the Southern or Gulf Coast states. Clinical signs of
Frequency of finding morulae in
more recently diagnosed cases
0.1-10 % of neutrophils in frst
ae (order Ricketsiale) that infect domtic mamlinleukocytes Other anaplasml gnts infet
1-50 % of neutrophils in first
few days of illness rare
few days of illness
blood leukocytes
thereafter
Very rare
cosinophil, very
Cells infected
lymphocyte
Monocyte,
Neutrophil,
Neutrophil,
cosinophil
Neutrophil,
cosinophil
Monocyte
Hosts (common
(sg pos
People
Horses
Sheep
Goats
Horses
SE
(tropical pancytopenia)
Equine ehrichiosis, tick
Canine chrlichiosis
Canine granulocytic
fever and bovine
Equine monocytic
ehdichiosis and
Disease name
chrichiosis
s
Anaplasmal species
A.phagocnophilun
Nerickei risici
E.ewingi
E.canis
Genogroup
三
96
2/LEUKOCYTES
97
infected dogs include fever,pain,lameness, and ocular discharge.The illness is
severe, and the prognosis is guarded.
2.Finding gametocytes of H. americanum in blood leukocytes is very uncommon in
clinical cases; when present in peripheral blood,there is typically a very low percent-
age of infected leukocytes. Gametocytes are oval to elliptical,pale blue,and are
about 9 μm x 4 μm.They may fill a cell's cytoplasm and cause peripheral displace
ment of the cell's nucleus. The organism may escape from the cell and leave a
nonstaining area surrounded by a capsule.
3.Encysted forms of the protozoa are common in skeletal muscle,anda skeletal
muscle biopsy is one method of confirming a diagnosis.
4.Common laboratory data in clinical cases include neutrophilic leukocytosis (some-
times extreme or leukemoid),a normocytic normochromic nonregenerative anemia
thrombocytosis,increased serum alkalinephosphatase activity,and hypoglycemia
(which may be caused by glucose consumption by leukocytes in vitro),hypoalbu-
minemia, and corresponding hypocalcemia. There is poor cross-reactiviry between
H.americanum antibodies and H.canis antibodies.
E.Hepatozoon cani3
1.This is a protozoon whose gametocytes infect canine neutrophils and monocytes.
It is found in dogsofEurope,AsiaAfricaand SouthAmericaandpossibly in
Brazilian cats.
2.Infected dogs frequently lack obvious clinical signs but can be febrile and lethargic
In contrast to H.americanum,gametocytesmay be commonly found in the blood
leukocytes; sometimes a high percentage of the neutrophils and monocytes are
americanum except that H. canis structures are a little longer (= 11 μum). Encysted
forms of the protozoa are rare in skeletal muscle.
with H.canis(ora very similar organism）.776Anearly identical organism has been
found in domestic cats..78
F.Histoplasma capsulatum (Plate 2F)
1.The yeast phase of H. capsulatum can be found singly ormultiply in the cytoplasm
ofmonocytesormacrophages),neutrophilsandoccasionally eosinophilf
peripheral blood. Cells containing Histoplasma can usually be more easily found at
the feathered edge of blood films (because larger cells are concentrated in the
feathered edge)or on buffy coar preparations.
2.The organisms are round to oval, about 2-4 μm long, with a prominent cell wall
Their internal structures are commonly eccentric and stain pale blue and/or dark
pink to purple.
3.When found inblood,the infection has advanced to disseminated histoplasmosis,
and organisms can typically be found in macrophages of bone marrow, spleen, liver,
lymph nodes,and other tissues.
G.Leishmanid spp. (Plates 9I and 10H)
1.Leishmania is a kinetoplastid protozoon that is found primarily in Mediterranean,
Central American, and South American countries. However, it has been found in
research colonies in Ohio and Oklahoma,79a in Texas and Maryland dogs,81. and
in dogs from other Southeastern states.3
2. Organisms (amastigotes), which appear as oval to teardrop structures in macro
phages,are2-3μm long with eccentric reddish nuclei and small cytoplasmicred
86
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
bars (kinetoplasts).Leishmania amastigotes must be differentiated from amastigotes
of T. cruzi and the yeast form of Histoplasma, which is about the same size and has a
thicker cell wall but does not have a kinetoplast.
3.Macrophages laden with amastigotes areusually numerousin bonemarrow,lymph
nodes, spleen, and liver.
H.Trypanosoma cruzi
1.Two species of Trypanosoma are found in the United States: Trypanosoma cruzi and
T.theileri (basonym: T.americanum).Trypanosoma cruzi infects dogs in the Americas
soma theileri infects cattle in the United States, Canada,and Australia and is
typically not considered to be a pathogen. The fagellated trypomastigotes can be
numerous in bovine blood.
2.Like Leishmania,T.cruzi is a kinetoplastid, so the amastigotes of these protozoa are
similar microscopically.Amastigotes of neither are expected to be found in blood
samples, but both can be found in macrophages of lymph nodes. However, amas-
gotes were found in buffy coat preparations of a puppy with trypanosomiasis; the
blood also contained many trypomastigotes.86
I.
Mycobacterium spp. (Plate 2G and H)
1.Rarely, a mycobacterial infection may become systemic and mycobacterial organisms
will be found in peripheral bloodneutrophils or monocytes.
2.Mycobacterial bacilli are unique in that they do not stain with a Wright stain
(negative staining reaction) and thus appear as clear bacterial rods within neutrophils
or macrophages.
J.Sarcocystis spp.
1. Large oval merozoites of Sarcocystis can be found in bovine mononuclear cells during
experimental infections.7as Merozoites are about 34 μm × 10-12 μm and contain
azurophilic nuclear material.
2. The hematogenous merozoite is not a reported observation during natural
infections.
K.Toxoplasma gondii (Plate 2I)
1.Tachyzoites of Toxoplasma gondi are rarely found in blood neutrophils and mono-
cytes of dogs and cats with acute toxoplasmosis.
2.They are more common in macrophages of infected tissues (lung and intestine)）
IV.
Leukocyte agglutination/aggregation
A.Occasionally，small aggregates of315leukocytes are found with the bodyofa
well-prepared blood film. Typically they are mixtures of neutrophils and small lympho-
cytes with fewer eosinophils and monocytes.They should be suspected when leukocytes
are distributed in relatively dense streaks at the transition between the monolayer area
and the feathered edge of the blood film, running parallel with the long axis of the
smear.These streaks areaggregates that have been disrupted.The body and the thick
end of the smear should be inspected to confirm leukoagglutination. The diagnostic
significance of the finding is not established, but a few points should be considered
when they are seen. They should not be confused with the groups of leukocytes that
tend to concentrate across the feathered edge of a bloodflm due to the smearing
technique.
B.The published studies of leukocyte aggregation are for human samples.The aggregation
2/LEUKOCYTES
99
tionmay ormaynot occurincitrated orheparinized samples9When aggregatin
was seen in room temperature samples but not in samples kept at 37 °C, the neutrophil
aggregation was due to an IgM.
concentrations can be erroneous. The aggregated leukocytes may not be enumerated
correctly by the instruments that use impedance or laser methods if theleukocytes do
not break apart in the diluent, and thus the total leukocyte concentration would be
lower than the true value (ie., pseudoleukopenia).The aggregated leukocytes may be
poorly distributed in a blood film, and thus the differential leukocyte count may be
inaccurate if one type of leukocyte is preferentially aggregated.
and, in some samples, the aggregation was EDTA dependent (ie., seen in EDTA
samples but little to none seen in citrate samples).Aggregation increased with lower
sample temperature and with increased storage time. The authors are not aware of
published investigations of neutrophil or lymphocyte aggregations for domestic
mammalsbut such occurrences are mentioned in veterinary textbooks.9
V.
Hereditary disorders that have leukocyte inclusions (rare)
A.Chediak-Higashi syndrome3
1.This is a hereditary disorder of blue-smoke Persian cats, Hereford cattle, other
nondomestic mammals,and people.
2.Diagnostic features include large specific granules in cytoplasms of neutrophils,
eosinophils, and basophils.Abnormal granules reflect fusion of granules (lysosomes)
B.GM gangliosidosis9
1.This hereditary disorder of Friesian cattle, Siamese and Korat cats, English springer
deficiency of β-galactosidase.
2.Diagnostic features include small, distinct, clear cytoplasmic vacuoles in lymphocytes
in Wright-stained blood films.
1.Thisis a hereditary disorder ofYorkshire pigs,German shorthaired pointersgolden
retrievers,and cats that is caused by a deficiency of β-hexosaminidase
2.Diagnostic features include dark blue granules in neutrophils and prominent
azurophilic granulation orvacuolization in lymphocytes.
D.Hereditary anomaly of neutrophil granulation in Birman catso
1.This anomaly is an autosomal recessive trait in purebred Birman cats.
2.Diagnostic features include prominent fine eosinophilic granulation in the cyto-
plasms ofneutrophils that must be differentiated from toxic granules and inclusions
of MPS type Vl. Ultrastructural morphologic features of granules are normal.
E.MPS type I102.103
1.This is a hereditary disorder in domestic cats, dogs,and people that is caused by a
deficiency of α-L-iduronidase.
2.In some studies,leukocytic cytoplasmic inclusions were seen via transmission
electron microscopy but not in routine light microscopy. Others have found that
feline neutrophils have abnormal cytoplasmic granulation (small pink granules).
F.MPS type IIB104
1.This is a hereditary disorder in schipperkes that is caused by a deficiency of lyso
somal glycosidase N-acetyl-0-D-glucosaminidase (a-N-acetylglucosaminidase).
100
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.Blood lymphocytes and marrow macrophages, lymphocytes, and plasma cells were
described as having abnormal dark-staining granulation.
G.MPS type VJ10s
1.This is a hereditary disorder in Siamese cats, domestic shorthair cats, and dachs
hunds that is caused by a deficiency of arylsulfatase B.
2. Diagnostic features include the presence of large reddish purple granules in neutro-
phils that should not be confused with toxic granules (toxic neutrophils have other
toxic changes). Cytoplasmic inclusions (granules) represent an accumulation of
mucopolysaccharide.
1.This is a hereditary disorder caused by a deficiency of β-glucuronidase.
2.Neutrophils of dogs and cats with MPS type VII have inclusions like those found in
MPS type VI.
I.Fucosidosis109
1.This is caused by a deficiency of c-L-fucosidase, an enzyme in glycoprotein
metabolism.
2.Lymphocytes of dogs with fucosidosis have cytoplasmic vacuoles.
J.Other storage diseases have been recognized in domestic mammals, but leukocyte
abnormalities have not been seen in these. These include MPS type IIIA in wirehaired
dachshundslo and a New Zealand huntaway dog.11
OTHERNONNEOPLASTICLEUKOCYTEDISORDERS
I.
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD)l12
A.LAD has been recognized in Irish red and white setters and in Holstein cattle; the
disorders are referred to as canine LAD (CLAD) and bovine LAD(BLAD).Both
nucleotide substitutions that are different in the two species.The defect prevents
formation of functional CD11/CD18 complexes, which are needed for adherence,
migration, and aggregation of leukocytes.
B.Dogs with CLAD have a persistent neutrophilia beginning as pups and have a
bility to infections.Before the specifc defect was established,the disorder was called
canine granulocytopathy syndrome. A PCR assay was developed to detect dogs with
CLAD.115
C.Cattle with BLAD have a marked neutrophilia and recurrent infections6.117 PCR
assays are commercially available to detect cattle with BLAD
I1.
Bonemarrow dyscrasia of poodlesl1a
A.This is a hereditary disorder seen in miniature and toy poodles.The developmental
defect in cell production is not known,and there is not a clinical problem associated
with the syndrome.
B.Diagnostic features of the syndrome
1. Hypersegmented or giant neutrophils
2.Macrocytic normochromic erythrocytes without anemia or reticulocytosis.Their
mean cell volumes usually are 80-110 fL (in most unaffected dogs, 60-77 fL), their
mean cell hemoglobin concentrations are usuallyWRI,and their mean cell hemo
globin values are increased (compared to those of most unaffected dogs)
2/LEUKOCYTES
101
III.
Idiopathichypersegmented neutrophils of horseso.1
A.The diagnostic feature of this syndrome is hypersegmented neutrophils and has been
described in two horses of the quarter horse breed. In one report, neutrophil nuclei had
311 definitive lobes separated by filaments, and about 70 % of nuclei had 710 lobes.
Other cases have been similar.
B.Hypersegmentation is not associated with the common causes of hypersegmentation;
that is,hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing’s disease)and exogenous glucocorticoids.The
cause of the syndrome has not been determined. The possibility that hypersegmentation
is caused by vitamin B or folate deficiency hasnot been excluded. Clinical significance
isnotknown.
IV.
Pelger-Huet anomaly19-123
A.This is a hereditary disorder that occurs in several breeds of dogs, domestic shorthair
cats,and in Arabian horses.Most clinical cases involve heterozygotes for the anomaly, a
homozygotic kitten was stillborn.120
B.The disorder is characterized by hyposegmentation of neutrophileosinophiland
basophil nuclei. The nuclei are round, oval, spectacle shaped, or occasionally have
chromatic but lacks the paler appearance of typical band neutrophils (Plate 2J-L)
The various nuclear shapes can be graded (round or oval to two or more lobes) to
C.Decreased lobulation of monocyte nuclei has been described,but recognizing the
change requires a grading system that is not commonly used.125
D.Pelger-Huer neutrophils should not be classified as band neutrophils (or younger
forms), because such classifications will result in a left shift and thus indicate an
inflammatory disease.
V.
Pseudo-Pelger-Huet neutrophils and eosinophils
A.Pseudo-Pelger-Huet neutrophils are seen in cows,occasionally in dogs with severe
represents asynchronous neutrophil maturation; some neutrophils look like Pelger-Huet
cells,but others do not.Usually other toxicchanges arepresentwith severe
infammation.
B.PseudPelger-Huosinophilshavebeen describedincatle andahorseInca
they were found concurrent with pseudo-Pelger-Huet neutrophils.In the horse,they
were found concurrentwith a marked extreme inflammatory eosinophilia.
VI.
A.Canine eosinophils typically contain numerous round eosinophilic granules of varying
diameters, along with a few cytoplasmic “vacuoles.” In some breeds (especially grey
hounds, but also golden retrievers and Shetland sheepdogs), the eosinophils contain
either poorly stained granules,or the nonstaining granules appear as cytoplasmic
vacuoles that sometimes have central foci ofeosinophilic staining.The cytoplasms of
eosinophils. Altered staining represents a modified chemical composition; the altered
composition is associated with ultrastructural changes (authors' unpublished data)
B.There is noknown clinical or pathologic significance to the presence or absence of
these eosinophils other than the potential for incorrectly identifying the cells
102
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
1.Microscopically,they are sometimes incorrectly identifed as toxic neutrophils or
monocytes.
2.Affected eosinophils also have low peroxidase activity and are usually misclassified as
monocytes when analyzed in the peroxidase channel of the ADVIA (see the Analyti-
cal Principles and Methods Sect.III.C.3)(authorsunpublished data). Some
greyhounds' eosinophils contain eosinophilic granules but lack peroxidase and are
therefore also misclassified by the ADVIA.
References
1. Prasse KW, Kaeberle ML, Ramsey FK 1973. Blood neutrophilic granulocyte kinetics in cats. Am J Vet Res
34:1021-1025
2.McEwen BJ. 1992. Eosinophils: A review. Vet Res Commun 16:11-44.
3. Brown SA, Barsanti JA. 1988. Quantitative buffy coat analysis for hematologic measurements of canine, feline, and
cquine blood samples and for detection of microfilaremia in dogs. Am J Vet Res 49:321-324.
4.Levine RA, Hart AH, Wardlaw SC. 1986. Quantitative buffy coat analysis of blood collected from dogs, cats, and
horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:670-673.
5. Rumke CL. 1959. Variability of results in differential cell counts on blood smears. Triangle 4:154158.
6. Schalm OW. 1961. Veterinary Hematology, Ist edition. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
7. Jain NC. 1986. Schams Veterinry Hematelgy, 4th edition. Philadelphia: Lea &Febiger
8. Schalm OW. 1976. Erythrocyte macrocytosis in miniature and toy poodls. Canine Pract 3:55-57.
9. Raskin RE, Krehbiel JD. 1985. Myelodysplastic changes in a cat with myelomonocytic leukemia J Am Vet Med
Assoc187:171-174.
10. Prase KW, George LW, Whitlock RH. 1981. Idiopathic hypersegmentation of neutrophils in a horse. J Am Vet
Med Assoc178:303-305.
11.Ramaiah SK, Harvey JW, Giguere S, Franklin RP, Crawford PC. 2003. Intravascular hemolysis associated with liver
disease in a horse with marked neutrophil hypersegmentation. J Vet Intern Med 17:360-363.
12.Fyfe JC, Jezyk PF, Giger U,Patterson DF. 1989. Inherited selective malabsorption of vitamin B in giant
schnauzers. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc25:533-539
13. Myers S, Wilks K, Giger U. 1995. Macrocytic anemia caused by naturally-occurring folate deficiency in the cat.Vet
Pathol 32:547 (abstract).
14.Knottenbelt CM, Simpson JW, Chandler ML. 2000. Neutrophilic leucocytosis in a dog with a rectal tumour
J Small Anim Pract 41:457-460.
15. Tomlinson MJ, Jennings PB, Wendt JB, Meriwether WA, Crumrine MH. 1973. Adenocarcinoma of the lung with
secondary pericardial effusion and leulkemoid response in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 163:257-258.
16. Lobetti RG. 1995. Leukaemoid response in two dogs with Babesia cauis infection. J S Af Vet Assoc 66:182-184.
17.Foster NK,Martyn JB,Rangno RE, HoggJC,Pardy RL.1986.Leukocytosis of exercise: Role of cardiac output and
catecholamines. ] Appl Physiol 61:2218-2223.
18. Benschop RJ, Rodriguez-Feuerhahn M, Schedlowski M. 1996. Catecholamine-induced leukocytosis: Early
observations, current research, and future directions. Brain Behav Immun 10:7791.
19. Thompson JP, Christopher MM, Ellison GW, Homer BL, Buchanan BA. 1992. Paraneoplastic leukocytosis
associated with a rectal adenomatous polyp in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:737-738.
20. Lappin MR, Latimer KS. 1988. Hematuria and extreme neutrophilic leukocytosis in a dog with renal tubular
carcinoma. J AmVet Med Assoc 192:1289-1292.
21. Chinn DR, Myers RK, Matthews JA. 1985. Neutrophilic leukocytosis associated with metastatic fbrosarcoma in a
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 186:806809.
22.Gaunt SD, Pierce KR. 1986.Effects of estradiol on hematopoietic and marrow adherent cells of dogs. Am J Vet Res
47:906-909.
23. Valli VE, MeSherry BJ, Robinson GA, Willoughby RA. 1969. Leukopheresis in calves and dogs by extracorporeal
circulation of blood through siliconized glass wool. Res Ver Sci 10:267278.
24. Wenz JR, Barrington GM, Garry FB, Dinsmore RP. 1999. Differentiation of bacteremic and non-bacteremic cows
with acute coliform mastitis. In:Proceedings of the 17th ACVIM Forum, Chicago, 693.
25.Wagner JG,Roth RA. 1999.Neutrophil migration during endotoxemia. J Leukoc Biol 66:10-24.
26. Chickering WR, Prasse KW. 1981. Immune mediated neutropenia in man and animals: A review. Vet Clin Pathol
10:6-16.
2/LEUKOCYTES
103
27. Jain NC, Vegad JL, Kon CS. 1990Methods for detectionf imue-mediated neuopenia in horses, using
antineutrophil serum of rabbit origin.Am J Vet Res 51:1026-1031.
28. Perkins MC, Canficld P, Churcher RK, Malik R. 2004. Immune-mediated neuropenia suspected in five dogs. Aust
Vet]82:52-57
29. Hirsch VM, Mitcham SA, Dunn JK. 1983. Multiple cytopenias associated with monocytic proliferation in a dog
Vet ClinPathol13:16-20.
30.Stockhaus C, Slappendel RJ. 1998. Haemophagocytic syndrome with disseminated intravascular coagulation in a
dog. J Small Anim Pract 39:203-206.
31.Walton RM, Modiano JF, Thrall MA, Wheeler SL. 1996. Bone marrow cytological fndings in 4 dogs and a cat with
hemophagocytic syndrome. J Vet Intern Med 10:7-14.
32. Tsuda H. 1997. Hemophagocytic syndrome (HPS) in children and adules. Int J Hematol 65:215226.
33.Lanevschi A,Daminet S, Niemeyer GP, Lothrop CD Jr.1999.Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor defciency in a
rottweiler with chronic idiopathic neutropenia. J Vet Intern Med 13:7275
34.CampbellKL. 1985. Canine cydlic hematopoiesis. Compend Contin Educ 7:57-62.
35. Horwitz M, Benson KF, Duan Z, Li FQ, Person RE. 2004. Hereditary neutropenia: Dogs explain human
neutrophil elastase mutations. Trends Mol Med 10:163-170.
feline leukemia virus infection in two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:93-96.
37. Imhof BA, Dunon D. 1995. Leukocyte migration and adhesion. Adv Immunol 58:345416.
38. Bloemena E, Weinreich S, Schellekens PTA. 1990. The infuence of prednisolone on the recirculation of peripheral
blood lymphocytes in vivo. Clin Exp Immunol 80:460-466
39.Fauci AS. 1975. Mechanisms of corticosteroid action on lymphocyte subpopulations. I. Redisribution of circulating
T and B lymphocytes to the bone marrow. Immunology 28:669-680.
40. Sackstein R, Borenstein M. 1995. The effects of corticosteroids on lymphocyte recirculation in humans: Analysis of
the mechanism of impaired lymphocyte migration to lymph node following methylprednisolone administration.
J Invest Med 43:68-77.
41. Claman HN. 1972. Corticosteroids and lymphoid cells. N Engl J Med 287:388-397.
42.Aroch I, Perl S, Markovics A. 2001. Disseminated cosinophilic disease resembling idiopathic hypereosinophilic
syndrome in a dog.Vet Rec 149:386-389.
43. Center SA, Randolph JF, Erb HN, Reiter S. 1990. Eosinophilia in the cat: A retrospective study of 312 cases (1975
to 1986). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:349358.
44.Sykes JE,Weiss DJ,Buoen LC,Blauvelt MM,Hayden DW. 2001. Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome in3
rottweilers.J VetIntern Med 15:162-166.
45.Latimer KS, Bounous Dl, Collatos C, Carmichael KP, Howerth EW.1996. Extreme cosinophilia with disseminated
cosinophilic granulomatous disease in a horse.Vet Clin Pathol 25:23-26.
46. Weller PF, Bubley GJ. 1994.The idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome.Blood 83:2759-2779.
47.Marchetti V,Beneti C,Cit S,TacciniV.005.Paraneoplastic hyereosinophila ina dog with intestinal T-cell
lymphoma.Vet ClinPathol 34:259-263.
48.Lewis MG,Kociba GJ, Rojko JL, Stiff MI, Haberman AB,Velicer LF, Olsen RG. 1985. Retroviral-associated
cosinophilic leukemia in the cat. Am J Vet Res 46:1066-1070.
49. Madewell BR, Gunn C, Gribble DH. 1983. Mast cell phagocytosis of red blood cells in a cat. Vet Pathol
20:638-640.
50. Weller RE. 1978. Systemic mastocytosis and mastocytemia in a cat. Mod Vet Pract 59:41-43.
51. Confer AW, Langloss JM. 1978. Long-term survival of two cats with mastocytosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
172:160-161.
52.Guerre R, Millet P, Groulade P. 1979. Systemic mastocytosis in a cat Remission after splenectomy. J Small Anim
Pract 20:769-772.
53. Liska WD, MacEwen EG, Zaki FA, Garvey M. 1979. Feline systemic mastocytosis: A review and results of
splenectomy in seven cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:589-597.
54.O'Keefe DA, Couto CG,Burke-Schwartz C, Jacobs RM. 1987. Systemic mastocytosis in 16 dogs.J Vet Intern Med
1:75-80.
55.Stockham SL, Basel DL, Schmidt DA. 1986. Mastocytemia in dogs with acute infammatory diseases. Vet Clin
Pathol15:16-21.
56.MeManusP.1997.Caninmastocytemiaandmarrowmastocytosis：Disease associations,incidence and severity.Vet
Pathol34:474(abstract).
57.Cayatte SM,MManusPMMiller WH J,ScottDW.1995.Identication ofmast cells in buffy coat preparations
from dogs with infammatory skin diseases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:325326.
104
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(1995-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:355-357.
59. Fernandes PJ, Modiano JF, Wojcieszyn J, Thomas JS, Benson PA, Smith R IIl, Avery AC, Burnen RC, Boone LI
Johnson MC, PierceKR.2002.Use of the Cell-Dyn 3500 to predict leukemic cllineage in peripheral blood of
dogs and cats. Vet Clin Pathol 31:167-182.
60. Gossett KA, Carakostas MC. 1984. Effect of EDTA on morphology of neutrophils of healthy dogs and dogs with
infammation.Vet Clin Pathol 13:22-25.
61. Aroch I, Klement E, Segev G. 2005. Clinical, biochemical, and hematological characteristics, disease prevalence, and
prognosis of dogs presenting with neutrophil cytoplasmic toxicity. J Vet Intern Med 19:64-73.
62. Gossett KA, MacWilliams PS. 1982. Ultrastructure of canine toxic neutrophils. Am J Vet Res 43:16341637.
63. Bloom JC, Lewis HB, Sellers TS, Deldar A, Morgan DG. 1987. The hematopathology of cefonicid- and cefazedone-
induced blood dyscrasias in the dog. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 90:143155.
64.KotelnikovVM,PogorelovVM,BergerJ,Kozinets GL1988.Cyclophosphamide induced generation of giant
hypersegmented granulocytes in rat bone marrow: Cell cyde distribution and silver nucleolar staining. Folia
Haematol (Leipz) 115:737-745.
65. Gaunt SO, Baker DC. 1986. Hemosiderin in leukocytes of dogs with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia Vet
ClinPathol 15:8-10.
66. Casimire-Etzioni AL, Raskin RE, Langohr I, Brenner D. 2005. Mastocytosis with phagocytized mast cell
granules. (unpublished case report, ASVCP slide set)
67. Uilenberg G, Thiaucourt F, Jongejan F. 2004. On molcular taxonomy: What is in a name? Exp Appl Acarol
32:301-312
68. Buller RS,Arens M, Hmiel SP, Paddock CD, Sumner JW, Rilkihisa Y, Unver A, Gaudreault-Keener M, Manian FA,
Liddell AM, Schmulewitz N, Storch GA. 1999. Ebrfichia ewingii, a newly recognized agent of human ehrlichiosis
N Engl J Med 341:148-155.
69. Sumner JW, Storch GA, Buller RS, Liddell AM, Stockham SL, Rikihisa Y, Messenger S, Paddock CD. 2000. PCR
J Clin Microbiol 38:2746-2749.
70.Massung RF, Owens JH, RossD,Reed KD, Perovec M, Bjoersdorff A, Coughlin RT, Belz GA, Murphy CI. 2000.
71. Chae JS, Foley JE, Dumler JS, Madigan JE. 2000. Comparison of the nucleotide sequences of 16S rRNA, 444 Ep-
ank, and groESL heat shock operon genes in naturally occurring Ebrlichia equi and human granulocytic ehrlichiosis
agent isolates from Northern California. J Clin Microbiol 38:1364-1369.
72. Vincent-Johnson NA, Macintire DK, Lindsay DS, Lenz SD, Baneth G, Shkap V, Blagburn BL. 1997. A new
Hepatezoon species from dogs: Description of the causative agent of canine hepatozoonosis in North America.
J Parasitol 83:1165-1172.
73.Vincent-Johnson NA. 2003. American canine hepatozoonosis. Vet Clin North Arn Small Anim Pract 33:
905-920.
74. Rubini AS, Paduan KS, Cavalcante GG, Ribolla PEM, O'Dwyer LH. 2005. Molecular identifcation and character
ization of canine Hepatozoon species from Brazil. Parasitol Res 97:9193.
75.Paludo GR,DellPorto A, de Castro eTrindade AR,McManus C,Friedman H. 2003.Hepatozoen spp:Report of
some cases in dogs in Brasflia, Brazil. Vet Parasitol 118:243248.
76.Forlano MD,Teixeira KR,Scofeld A,Elisei C,Yotoko KS,Fernandes KR,Linhares GF,Ewing SA,Masard CL
2007. Molecular characterization of Hepatozoen sp. from Brazilian dogs and its phylogenetic relationship with other
Hepatozoon spp.Vet Parasitol 145:21-31
77. Rubini AS, dos Santos Paduan K, Perez RR, Ribolla PEM, O'Dwyer LH. 2006. Molecular characterization of feline
Hepatozoon species from Brazil. Vet Parasitol 137:168171.
78.Perez RR, Rubini AS, ODvryer LH. 2004. The frst report of Hepatozoon spp. (Apicomplexa, Hepatozidae) in
domestic cats from Sao Paulo state, Brazil.Parasitol Res 94:83-85.
79. Swenson CL, Silverman J, Stromberg PC, Johnson SE, Willie DA, Eaton KA, Kociba GJ. 1988. Visceral leishmani-
asis in an English foxhound from an Ohio research colony. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:1089-1092.
80. Anderson DC, Buckner RG, Glenn BL, MacVean DW. 1980. Endemic canine leishmaniasis. Vet Pathol 17:9496.
81. Gustafson TL, Reed CM, Long TM, McGreevy PB, Pappas MG. 1984. Cutaneous leishmaniasis acquired in Texas.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:328 (abstract).
82. Eddlestone SM. 2000. Visceral leishmaniasis in a dog from Maryland. J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:16861688.
83. Enserink M. 2000. Infectious diseases: Has leishmaniasis become endemic in the U.S.? Science 290:1881-1883
84.Fox JC, Ewing SA, Buckner RG, Whitenack D, Manley JH. 1986. Trypanesoma cruzi infection in a dog from
Oklahoma.J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:1583-1584.
2/LEUKOCYTES
105
85. Barr SC, Van Beck O, Carlisle-Nowak MS, Lopez JW, Kirchhoff LV, Allison N, Zajac A, de Lahunta A, Schlafer
DH, Crandall WT. 1995. Tryponosoma crwzi infection in Walker hounds from Virginia. Am J Vet Res
56:1037-1044
86. Russell KE, Barnhart KF, Fryer JS, Craig TM. 2002. Buffy coat smear from a puppy. Vet Clin Pathol 31:912.
87. Fayer R. 1979. Multiplication of Sarcocystis bovicanis in the bovine bloodstream. J Parasitol 65:980982.
S8. Fayer R, Leek RG. 1979. Sarwcytis transmitted by blood transfusion. J Parasitol 65:890893.
89. O’Connor BM, Shastri KA, Logue GL. 1991. Spurious neutropenia: Ethylenediaminetetracetate-dependent in vitro
neutrophil agglutination. NY State J Med 91:455456
90. Lesesve JF, Haristoy X, Thouvenin M, Latger-Cannard V, Buisine J, Lecompte T. 2000. Pseudoleucopenia due to in
vitro leukocyte agglutination polynuclear neutrophils: Experience of a laboratory, review of the literature and future
management. Ann Biol Clin (Paris) 58:417424.
91. Bizzaro N. 1993. Granulocyte aggregation is edetic acid and temperature dependent Arch Pathol Lab Med
117:528-530
92.Thrall MA, Baker DC, Campbell TW, DeNicola D, Fettman MJ, Lassen ED, Rebar AH, Weiser G. 2004
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &c Willins.
93.Prieur Dj, Collier LL. 1978. Chediak-Higashi syndrome.Am J Pathol 90:533-536.
94. Saunders GK, Wood PA, Myers RK, Shell LG, Carithers R. 1988. GM-gangliosidosis in Portuguese water dogs:
Pathologic and biochemical findings. Vet Pathol 25:265-269.
95.Yamato O, Endoh D, Kobayashi A, Masuoka Y, Yonemura M, Hatakeyama A, Satoh H, Tajima M, Yamasaki M,
Maede Y. 2002. A novel mutation in the gene for canine acid beta-galactosidase that causes GMl-gangliosidosis in
Shiba dogs.J Inherit Metab Dis 25:525-526.
96. Singer HS, Cork LC. 1989. Canine GM-gangliosidosis: Morphologic and biochemical analysis. Vet Pathol
26:114120
97. Kosanke SD, Pierce KR, Bay WW. 1978. Clinical and biochemical abnormalities in porcine GM-gangliosidosis.
VetPathol 15:685-699.
98. Yamato O, Matsuki N, Satoh H, Inaba M, Ono K, Yamasaki M, Maede Y. 2002. Sandhoff disease in a golden
retriever dog.J Inherit MetabDis 25:319-320.
99.Yamato O, Satoh H, Matsuki N, Ono K, Yamasalki M, Maede Y. 2004. Laboratory diagnosis of canine GM-
gangliosidosis using blood and cerebrospinal Auid. J Vet Diagn Invest 16:3944.
100. Yamato O, Matsunaga S, Takata K, Uetsuka K, Satoh H, Shoda T, Baba Y, Yasoshima A, Kato K, Takahashi K,
Yamasalki M, Nakayama H, Doi K, Maede Y, Ogawa H. 2004. Gugangliosidosis variant 0 (Sandhoff-like diseasc)
in a family of Japanese domestic cats. Vet Rec 155:739-744.
101. Hirsch VM, Cunningham TA. 1984. Hereditary anomaly of neutrophil granulation in Birman cats. Am J Vet Res
45:2170-2174.
102.Shull RM,Helman RG,Spellacy E,Constantopoulos G,Munger RJ,Neufeld EF.1984.Morphologic and
biochemical srudies of canine mucopolysaccharidosis I. Am J Pathol 114:487-495.
103. Haskins ME, Aguirre GD, Jezyk PF, Desnick RJ, Patterson DF. 1983. The pathology of the feline model of
mucopolysaccharidosis I. Am J Pathol 112:27-36.
104. Ellinwood NM, Wang P, Skeen T, Sharp NJH, Cesta M, Decker S, Edwards NJ, Bublot I, Thopson JN, Bush W,
Hardam E, Haskins ME, Giger U. 2003. A model of mucopolysaccharidosis IIIB (Sanfilippo syndrome type IIB):
N-acetyl-0t-D-glucosaminidase deficiency in Schipperke dogs. J Inherit Metab Dis 26:489-504.
105.Haskins ME,Jezyk PF,Desnick RJ,Patterson DF.1981.Mucopolysaccharidosis VI.Am J Pathol 105:191-193.
106. Haskins ME, Desnick RJ, DiFerrante N, Jezyk PF, Patterson DF. 1984. β-Glucuronidase deficiency in a dog
A model of human mucopolysaccharidosis VIl. Pediat Res 18:980-984.
107. Schultheiss PC, Gandner SA, Owens JM, Wenger DA, Thrall MA. 2000. Mucopolysaccharidosis VII in a cat.
VetPathol37:502-505.
108. Silverstein Dombrowsli DC, Carmichael KP, Wang P, O'Malley TM, Haskins ME, Giger U. 2004. Mucopolysac
charidosis type VIl in a German shepherd dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 224:553-557.
109.Keller CB,Lamarre J. 1992. Inherited lysosomal storage disease in an English springer spaniel J Am Vet Med Assoc
200:194-195.
110. Jolly RD, Ehrlich PC, Frankin RJM, Macdougall DF, Palmer AC. 2001. Histological diagnosis of mucopolysac
charidosis IIIA in a wire-haired dachshund Vet Rec 148:564-567.
111.Yogalingam G,PollrdT,GliddonB,JollyRD,Hopwood JJ.2002.Identicationof amutation causingmucopoly
saccharidosis type IILA in New Zealand Huntaway dogs. Genomics 79:150-153.
112. Gu YC, Bauer TR Jr, Ackermann MR, Smith CW, Kehrli ME Jr, Starost MF, Hickstein DD. 2004. The genetic
immunodeficiency disease, leukocyte adhesion deficiency, in humans, dogs, cattle, and mice. Comp Med
54:363-372.
106
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
113. Debenhar SL, Millington A, Kijas J, Andersson L, Binns M. 2002. Canine leucocyte adhesion deficiency in Irish
red and white setters. J Small Anim Pract 43:7475.
114. Trowald-Wigh G, Hikansson L, Johannisson A, Norrgren L, Hard af Segerstad C. 1992. Leucocyte adhesion
protein deficiency in Irish setter dogs.Vet Immunol Immunopathol 32:261-280.
115.Verfaillie T, Verdonck F, Cox E. 2004. Simple PCR-based test for the detection of canine leucocyte adhesion
deficiency.Vet Rec 154:821-823.
116. Nagahata H. 2004. Bovine leukocyte adhesion defciency (BLAD): A review. J Vet Med Sci 66:1475-1482.
117. Muller KE, Bernadina WE, Kalsbeek HC, Hoek A, Rutten VP, Wentink GH. 1994. Bovine leukocyte adhesion
deficiency: Clinical course and laboratory findings in cight affected animals. Vet Q 16:2733.
118. Canfield PJ. Watson ADJ. 1989. Investigations of bonc marrow dyscrasia in a poodle with macrocytosis. J Comp
Pathol101:269-278.
119. Feldman BF, Ramans AU. 1976. The Pelger-Huer anomaly of granulocytic leukocytes in the dog. Canine Pract
3:22-30
120. Latimer KS, Rowland GN, Mahaffey MB. 1988. Homozygous Pelger-Huet anomaly and chrondrodysplasia in a
stillborn kitten.VetPathol25:325-328.
121. Latimer KS, Rakich PM, Thompson DF. 1985. Pelger-Huet anomaly in cats. Vet Pathol 22:370-374.
122. Gill AF, Gaunt S, Sirninger J. 2006. Congenital Pelger-Huet anomaly in a horse. Vet Clin Pathol 35:460-462.
123.Grondin TM, Dewitt SF, Keeton KS. 2007. Pelger-Huet anomaly in an Arabian horse. Vet Clin Pathol 36:306-310.
124. Latimer KS, Duncan JR, Kircher IM. 1987. Nuclear segmentation, ultrastructure, and cytochemistry of blood cels
from dogs with Pelger-Huet anomaly. J Comp Pathol 97:61-72.
125.LatierKS,DuncanJ,Kircher IM.987.Morphology and ytochemisty of caninePeer-Huet bled cet
Clin Pathol 16:9 (abstract).
126.Osburn BI, Glenn BL. 1968.Aoquired Pelger-Huet anomaly in cattle. J Am Vet Med Assoc 152:11-16
127. Toth SR, Onions DE, Jarrett O. 1986. Histopathological and hematological findings in myeloid leukemia induced
by a new feline leukemia virus isolate. Vet Pathol 23:462-470.
128. Jones RF, Paris R. 1963. The greyhound eosinophil J Small Anim Pract 4(Suppl):29-33.
129. Iazbilk MC, Couto CG. 2005.Morphologic characterization of specifc granules in greyhound cosinophils.Vet Clin
Pathol 34:140-143.
130.Greenfeld CL,Messick JB,Solter PF,Schaeffr DJ. 1999.Leukopenia in six healthy Belgian Tervuren. JAm Vet
Med Assoc 215:11211122.
131. Troy GC,Vulgamott JC, Turnwald GH. 1980. Canine ehrlichiosis: A retrospective study of 30 naturally occurring
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:181187.
132. Pusterla N, Huder J, Wolfensberger C, Braun U, Lutz H. 1997. Laboratory findings in cows after experimental
infection with Ehrichia phagocytophila. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 4:643-647.
Chapter 3
ERYTHROCYTES
Physiologic Processes.
110
Analytical Principles and Methods.
120
I.
Complete Blood Count..
120
1.
Erythrogram.
120
l.
Methods...
124
MorphologicFeatures of Erythrocytes:Clinical Significance and Pathogeneses
135
Assessment......
135
Il.
General Features.
136
Ill.
Erythrocyte Color..
137
IV.
Erythrocyte Organisms.......
138
V.
InclusionsOther Than Organisms.
138
VI.
Abnormal Erythrocyte Volume. .
142
Vll.Abnormal Erythrocyte Shape.
143
Anemia
151
I.
General Information.
151
IIl.
Classifications of Anemias.
151
A.Classification by Marrow Responsiveness.
151
B. Classification by Erythrocyte Indices..
153
C.Pathophysiologic Classification..
158
Nonregenerative Anemias..
159
I.
General Concepts.
159
I.
Disorders That Cause Nonregenerative Anemias.
160
Blood LossAnemias
167
Causes of Blood Loss..
167
1
Classifications Based on Duration and Location.
167
Hemolytic Anemias
170
1.
Concepts and Classifications.
170
Il.
HemolyticDisorders and Diseases...
176
A. Immune Hemolytic Anemias (Not Associated with Infections)
176
B.Infectious Hemolytic Anemias...
181
C.
Erythrocytic Metabolic Defects (Acquired or Inherited)
186
D.Erythrocyte Fragmentation in Blood Creating Schizocytes,
Keratocytes,orAcanthocytes.
191
E.HemolyticDisorders of Other orUnknown Pathogeneses..
191
Erythrocytosis and Polycythemia.:
193
Terms and Concepts
193
l.
ErythrocytoticDisorders and Conditions.
193
Other Erythrocyte Disorders..
198
Methemoglobinemia.
198
II.
Cytochrome-b,Reductase(Cb,R)Deficiency...
199
ll.
Familial MethemoglobinemiaAssociatedwithGRDeficiency
in a Horse
199
IV.
Hereditary Stomatocytosis
199
V.
Hereditary Band 3 Deficiency in Japanese Black Cattle.
200
VI.
Hereditary Elliptocytosis of Dogs Due to Protein Band 4.1
Deficiency....
200
Vll.
Elliptocytosis in a Mixed-breed Dog Due to Mutant Spectrin.
200
107
108
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Vlll.Spectrin Deficiency in Dutch Golden Retrievers..
201
IX.
Megaloblastic Anemia
201
X.
Sideroblastic Anemia in Dogs.
202
XI.
Distemper Inclusions in Dogs
202
Laboratory Methods for Assessing Iron (Fe) Status...........
202
1.
Serum [Fe].
202
Il.
TIBC and UIBC
205
Ill.
Percent Transferrin Saturation (% Saturation)
206
IV.
Stainable Fein Macrophages of Marrow,Spleen,or Liver....
207
V.
Serum Ferritin Concentrations
207
VI.
Reticulocyte Hgb content (CHr)and volume(MCVr)
208
Vll.
.Comparative Fe Profile Results
208
Blood Typing and Crossmatching
208
MethodsforDetecting Erythrocyte Surface Antibody or Complement....
.211
Table 3.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
[x]
x concentration (x=analyte)
2,3-DPG
2,3-Diphosphoglycerate
AID
Anemia of inflammatory disease
ATP
Adenosine triphosphate
Bc
Conjugated bilirubin
Unconjugated bilirubin
C3
Complement protein3
Cb,R
Cytochrome-b,reductase
CBC
Complete blood count
CH
Cell (corpuscular) hemoglobin content mean
CHCM
Cell (corpuscular)hemoglobin concentration mean
CHCMr
Cell (corpuscular) hemoglobin concentration mean of reticulocytes
CHDWr
Cell (corpuscular)hemoglobin distribution width of reticulocytes
CHr
Cell (corpuscular) hemoglobin content mean of reticulocytes
CRP
Corrected reticulocyte percentage
DEA
Dog erythrocyte antigen
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
ECF
Extracellular fuid
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
ELAV
Equine infectious anemia virus
Epo
Erythropoietin
ESAIg
Erythrocyte surface-associated immunoglobulin
urseSmar
FAD
Flavin adenine dinucleotide
Fe
Iron,either Fe²+or Fe+
Fe2+
Ferrous iron
Fea+
Ferric iron
FeLV
Feline leukemia virus
G6PD
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
GR
Glutathione reductase
GSH
Glutathione
Table 3.1.continued
HC
Hemoglobin concentration (in individual erythrocytes)
HCO
Bicarbonate
Hct
Hematocrit
HDW
Hemoglobin concentration distribution width
HDWr
Hemoglobin concentration distribution width of reticulocytes
Hgb
Hemoglobin (iron in Fe² state)
Hgb-Fe3+
Methemoglobin
Hgbddta
Hemoglobin delta (measure of free plasma[Hgb] by ADVIA)
IgA
Immunoglobulin A
IgG
Immunoglobulin G
IgM
Immunoglobulin M
IL-x
Interleukin 1, 6,8
IMHA
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
MCH
Mean cell hemoglobin
MCHC
Mean cell hemoglobin concentration
MCV
Mean cell volume
MCVr
Mean cell volume of reticulocytes
NADH
Reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NADPH
Reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NI
Neonatal isoerythrolysis
NMB
New methylene blue
nRBC
Nucleated erythrocyte
P.cO2
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood
P.O
Partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood
PCR
Polymerase chain reaction
PCV
Packed cell volume
PFK
Phosphofructokinase
pH
-log[H+]
PK
Pyruvate kinase
RBC
Red blood cell (erythrocyte)
RC
Reticulocyte concentration
RDW
Red cell distribution width
RDWr
Red cell distribution width of reticulocytes
RMT
Reticulocyte maturation time
RNA
Ribonucleic acid
RP
Reticulocyte percentage
IS
Systeme International d'Unites
TIBC
Total iron-binding capacity
TNF
Tumor necrosis factor
Unbound iron-binding capacity
UIBC
WBC
White blood cell (leukocyte)
WRI
Within thereference interval
Goursesman
109
110
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
PHYSIOLOGICPROCESSES
I.
Eryzhron: all erythroid cels in an animal, including precursors and erythrocytes in blood
vessels and sinuses of spleen,liver,and marrow (Fig.3.1)
A.Erythrocyteprecursors
1.Erythropoiesis is part of hematopoiesis which is a complex system involving stem
cells and cytokines (see Fig. 3.1). Several cytokines work synergistically with Epo to
stimulate the replication and differentiation of blast-forming unit-erythroid (BFU-
E) to committed stem cells (e.g, colony-forming unit-erythroid or CFU-E),which
inhibits apoprosis.
interstitial cells produce Epo in response to renal hypoxia.Renal hypoxia may be
R
Spleen
Blood
Rc
Hgb
Marrow
Tissue
Rb
CFULE
(mostly in marrow),blood erythrocytes,and splenic erythrocytes.After stimulation byEpo,colony-forming
unit-erythroid cells (CFU-E) differentiate into rubriblasts (Rb) and the precursors proliferate (via mitosis)
and mature until erythrocytes (E) are formed. An orderly maturation process produces a pyramidal
distribution of erythroid cell populations (only the top half is shown).After release to the blood,erythro-
in the spleen of most mammals. Senescent erythrocytes are destroyed by macrophages.
M,macrophage;Mr,metarubricyte;Pr,prorubricyte;Rc,rubricytes; and Rt,reticulocyte.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
111
caused byanemia,poor oxygenation ofblood (e.g，high altitude or pulmonary
disease),or poor renal perfusion.
3.After a CFU-E differentiates into a rubriblast, two major cell processes occur.
a.Cellsundergo mitoses to produce more and smaller cellsEvidence suggests that
as [Hgb] increases in the developing cell, DNA synthesis decreases and thus
fewermitoses occur.
b.Cells produce messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA） for synthesis of Hgb and
cytoskeletal proteins.
4.In the later stages of mammalian erythropoiesis, a metarubricyte nucleus is extruded
and engulfed by a macrophage. The resulting anucleate cell is a rericulocyte when
stainable RNA is still present.
5.When a nucleated erythrocyte loses its nucleus and ability to produce mRNA for
protein synthesis,it soon loses the ability to produce Hgb and enzymes.The
activities of erythrocytic enzymes are greatest in young erythrocytes and decrease
slowly with age.Mitochondria deteriorate so that glycolysis becomes theATP
producing pathway in most animals (except pigs, which use an alternate energy
pathway involving inosine).
B.Blood erythrocytes
1.Major features of erythrocytes in different species are compared in Table 3.2.
2.Erythrocyte destruction in health (senescence)
a.About 250 million erythrocytes die per hour per kg body weight.
b. Old erythrocytes have very little metabolic machinery (enzymes) to keep them
selves functional and deformable.Near death,they may become morerigid,
spheroid, and less capable of passing through sinuses.
C.Age-related changes in erythrocyte membranes expose antigens that are bound by
naturally occurring antibodies that may mediate erythrocyte destruction.4
C.Splenic erythrocytes
1.Spleensofdogs,horses,and catlehave sinusoids andredpulp that arefullf
erythrocytes,for example, 5060% of a horses erythrocytes can be within its
spleen. Damaged or less deformable erythrocytes are removed by macrophages that
are adjacent to sinusoids or present in the red pulp.When splenic contraction
occurs,erythrocytes are forcedinto the systemic blood.
Table 3.2. Comparison of typical blood erythrocytes in mature healthy animals
Dogs
Cats
Horses
Cattle
Reticulocyte concentration (x10²/μL)
50
40°
0
0
RBC concentration (x10°/μL)
7
7-8
9
7
RBC life span (d)
100
70
150
150
RBCs in bloodb(x1012)
5.6
2.2
450
280
RBC diameter (μm)
7
6
5-6
5-6
RBCvolume (fL)
70
45
45
50
RBC central pallor
Prominent
Mild
None to mild
Mild to moderate
Counting only aggregate reticulocytes
Estimates are based on 40 mL blood/Ib body weight and average-sized animals.
Note: All numbers represent approximate averages to illustrate similarities and differences. They are not
reference intervals.
112
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.Cat spleens are thought to have closed circulation (blood does not fow through red
pulp), which is less efficient at removing damaged erythrocytes.They also do not
have large reserve erythrocyte pools.
3.Most metarubricytes and reticulocytes that are released frommarrow each day are
temporarily trapped in mammalian spleens (except for cats).
IL.
Erythrocyte kinetics
A.A blood [erythrocyte] is established by the relative rates of erythrocyte production,
shifting of erythrocytes to and from splenic sinuses, and erythrocyte destruction
B.Erythrocyte production depends on the degree and duration of Epo stimulus and the
capability of precursor cells to respond to Epo.
III.
Hgb: structure, function, synthesis, and degradation
A.Hgb structure
1.Hgb is a tetramer with each globin linked to a separate heme thar binds
O;its relative molecular mass is near 64,000.Globins are polypeptides and,
in mature healthy mammals, each Hgb molecule contains two Qchains and
basis.
a.Rates of synthesis of heme and globin are balanced and regulated by each other.
If a precursor has very little heme and Fe²+ is available,heme and globin synthe
sis should increase.
b.If synthesis of a globin chain is decreased, an animal has a thalassemia.
c.If gene mutations produce abnormal amino acid sequences in the globins, an
animal has a hemoglobinopathy.
2.Fe in heme is in the ferrous state (Fe²) and is kept in the reduced state by enzy-
matic reactions catalyzed by Cb,R (NADH-methemoglobin reductase, commonly
called just methemoglobin reductase) and NADPH diaphorase (NADPH-
methemoglobin reductase).
3.Amino acids in the globin chains are maintained in a reduced state by reductive
reactions involving GR and catalase.
B.Hgb function (Fig.10.3)
1.Hgb (with Fe²) transports O from lungs to tissues. In health, Hgb is 100 %
saturated with O in arterial blood.Hgb-Fe+ does not transport O
2.Hgb plays two major roles in the transport of CO from tissues to lungs.
a.When CO diffuses into erythrocytes, carbonic anhydrase catalyzes its reaction
with HO to form H+ and HCO.Hgb acts as a buffer (H++Hgb→HHgb)
to remove the H, and HCOdiffuses from the cell to the plasma.The buffer-
ing of H+ by Hgb facilitates the additional conversion of CO to HCO,-.When
erythrocytes return to lungs,reactions are reversed and CO is released for
expiration.About 70 % of the CO,formed in tissues is transported to lungs via
this system.
b.When CO diffuses into erythrocytes, some binds with Hgb to form carbamino-
hemoglobin.About 20 % of the CO formed in tissues is transported to lungs
via this system.
C.Hgb synthesis
1.This ocurs in erythrocyte precursors (rubriblasts through reticulocytes) in a series of
reactions (Fig.3.2).
3/ERYTHROCYTES
113
Hemoglobin Synthesis in Erythrocyte Precursors
5-ALA synthase&Bg
glycine + succinyl CoA
8-ALA
porphobilinogen
5porphyrin reactions
protoporphyrin Ix
ferrochelatase
protoporphyrin IX+Fe2+
+
heme
heme
ferriheme
4 ferrihemes +4 globins
methemoglobin
methemoglobin
hemoglobin
HemoglobinDegradation in Macrophages
hemoglobin
heme
biliverdin→bilirubin (unconjugated)
Fe2+
CO
globins
amino acids
Fig.3.2. Hemoglobin synthesis and degradation.
·Hgb synthesis in erythrocyte precursors: The synthesis of Hgb has three major stages: (1) a series of
four ferriheme and four globin molecules to form hemoglobin.
·Hemoglobin degradation in macrophages: In health, senescent erythrocytes are engulfed by macrophages
and heme is split from globin chains. Heme is degraded to bilirubin, Fe²t, and carbon monoxide (CO).
The globin chains are degraded to amino acids
2. 5-Aminolevulenic acid synthase is the major rate-limiting enzyme. It requires
vitamin Bs(pyridoxine) as a cofactor,and is inhibited by greater heme
concentrations.
3.5-Aminolevulenic acid synthase, porphobilinogen synthase, ferrochelatase, and
coproporphyrinogen oxidase are inhibited by lead.
a.In lead toxicity,nhibition of these enzymes leads to greater concentrations of
heme precursors in erythrocytes. Collectively,porphobilinogen through protopor-
phyrin IX are called porpbyrins.
b.Porphyria,which is a condition in which concentrations of porphyrins in
erythrocytes, plasma, or urine are increased,can be acquired (as in lead toxicity)
or congenital.Animals with porphyria are prone to photosensitivity.
4.Thematuration rate of erythrocyte precursors is affected by[Hgb] in their cyto-
plasms.If Hgb synthesis is incomplete, additional mitoses during a cels develop-
ment will produce smaller erythrocytes.3
D.The type of Hgb synthesized in an individual can vary with the animal's age and
health. In people,there are three major types:(1） embryonal with mostly two α-and
two ε-globins, (2) fetal with two α- and rwo y-globins, and (3) adult with mostly rwo
O-and rwo β-globins. Embryonal Hgb is replaced by adult Hgb during fetal develop
ment in dogs,cats,and horses; these animals do not have fetal Hgb.Neonatal rumi
nants are thought to have a mixture of fetal Hgb (with two O- and two βF-globins)
and adult Hgb but only adult Hgb (with rwo α- and two βA-globins) after a few
postnatal months.6
114
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
E.Hgb degradation and bilirubin metabolism:After erythrocyte death in macrophages
of spleen, liver,or marrow,Hgb is degraded to Bu, amino acids, and Fe (Figs.3.2
and 3.3). Bu and Bc are excreted or degraded, whereas the amino acids and Fe are
recycled.
Peripheral
BUIAJD
BwAIb
blood
Ub
Bc
J
Dthertissues
Hepatocyte
patoc
Kidney
BUIA
UDP-G
Bc
Bu/AIb
UD
Hepatic arteries
Bie
Portalveins
C
UD
Urine
Spleen
Intestine
Fig.3.3.Bilirubin metabolism
·In health, erythrocyte destruction in macrophages of spleen, liver, or marrow results in Bu formation.
Small and usually clinically insignifcant amou
of Bu are formed from heme degradation associated
with ineffective erythropo
er heme-containing molecules (catalase, peroxidase,
and cytochromes). As Bu leaves a macrophage,it forms a noncovalent association with albumin and is
transported to hepatocytes. Bu is relatively
insoluble prior to binding to albumin (Alb).
.When Bu enters the liver and its protein-perme
leable sinuses, it probably binds to hepatocyte membrane
tide(OATP) family,enters hepatocytes without albumin,
and binds to Y-protein (ligandin,
sive but facilitated process; binding proteins enhance the
doplasmic reticulum,where it is conjugated with glucuronide
(>60%with glucose
einh
to form bilirubin monoglucoronide or bilirubin diglucuronide, collec-
tively called Bc. It then diffuses
to the canalicularmembrane.
·Bc is transported from the hepatocytes into the canaliculi (the rate-limiting step in bilirubin excretion) by
anion transporter (cMOAT).
•Bc in bile enters the intestine and is degraded to urobilinogen (colorless), which can be passively absorbed
in the intestine and then enter the hepatocytes for excretion in the bile, or bypass the liver and be excreted
in the urine. Urobilinogen can also be degraded to stercobilinogen (dark brown) and excreted in feces.
• If Bc escapes the hepatocytes and enters the blood, it can pass through a glomerulus and be excreted in
the urine. Because albumin does not pass through the glomerular filtration barrier of most mammals, Bu/
Alb does not enter urine in those animals.
Bu/Alb, Bu associated with albumin; Mo, macrophage; Sb, stercobilinogen; Ub, urobilinogen; and UDP-G
uridine diphosphoglucoronide.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
115
IV.Fe
A.Total body Fe is distributed in three major sites in health:(1)about 50-70 % in
erythrocyte Hgb, (2) about 2540 % in storage, and (3) the remainder in other
molecules (e.g.,myoglobin, cytochromes, and enzymes).
B.Physiologic processes or concepts (Fig.3.4)
C.The intestinal absorption and cellular release of Fe are regulated by hepcidin, a small
peptide hormone that is synthesized primarily by hepatocytes. Canine hepcidin has a
molecular structure similar to that of human hepcidin. When hepcidin binds to
membrane ferroportin (aproteininvolved inFe export from vertebrate cells) on the
basolateral membranes of small intestinal villus enterocytes, the ferroportin is internal-
ized and the cell loses its ability to export Fe from the cell to the circulation.Accumu-
lated intracellular Fe inhibits the expression of divalentmetal transporter l and ferric
reductase (duodenal cytochrome b)on the brush border, so Fe absorption into the cell
is also decreased. The synthesis of hepcidin is influenced by hypoxia,Fe availability,and
IL-6.9
1.When hepatocytes detect hypoxia, the decreased formation of hepcidin causes a
lower [hepcidin] and thus increases the availability of Fe for erythropoiesis; that is,
the increasedmovement of Fefrom enterocytes to plasma andincreased release of Fe
from macrophages to plasma through a similar mechanism.
2.Fe loading by diet or transfusion increases the formation of hepcidin, whereas Fe
deficiency decreases its formation.
3.During inflammation, cytokines are released, including IL-6. IL-6 promotes the
synthesis of hepcidin; it binds to ferroportin which is then internalized. Thus the
amount of ferroportin available for the export of Fe from cells (including macro-
phages is reduced. This process tends to sequester Fe in macrophages, and thus it is
less available for erythropoiesis and for infectious agents.
V.
Mature erythrocyte metabolism (Fig.3.5)
A.Glucose is the major energy source for mature erythrocytes in most species.
B.Pig erythrocytes lack a functional glucose transporter and use inosine instead of
glucose.
VI.Reticulocytes
A.Reticulocytes are nonnucleated, immature erythrocytes with stainable cytoplasmic RNA
1.When erythrocytes are incubated with NMB prior to the making of a blood film,
the NMB precipitates and stains the RNA and mitochondria to yield punctate or
reticulated (hence the term reticulocyte) basophilic structures.
2.On a Wright-stained blood flm,the RNA willgive the polychromatophilic erythro-
cyte itsblue or basophilic tinctorial properties.Not all reticulocytes have enough
RNA to be detected on a Wright-stained blood film.
B.The life spans of circulating reticulocytes of nonanemic dogs and people are 1-2 d,
after which the cells are mature erythrocytes.The life spans of cat reticulocytes are more
variable.In health,carte and horses do not have circulating polychromatophilic
erythrocytes, because maturation is more complete in the bone marrow.However, some
hematology analyzers detect low concentrations of reticulocytes in horses.10
C.Types of reticulocytes
1.In most species, any nonnucleated erythrocyte that contains RNA (stainable with
NMB,other vital stains,or Wright stains)is called a reticulocyte.
Blood
ferritin
transferrin
transferrin
Fe2
Fe
3
Diet
Intestine
Hepatlc
hemcslderln
Bonemarrow
&ferrtln
Fe
Fg3+
Fe2
Splenlc
hemoslderin&ferritn
feces
Fig. 3.4. Fe kinetics in healthy animals.
•Absorption: Diets of domestic mammals may contain Fe+ or Fe+. Ingested Fe is converted to Fe²+ by
ferricreductase（duodenal cytochomerDcyt）a sufaceenzymepriorto enteringenterocytes via
divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1). If there are low intracellular concentrations of hepcidin, there is
related to ceruloplasmin, transports theFe to plasma transferrin in the form of Fe.Apoferritin in
mucosalepithlialcellsbindstoFetoformmucosalferritinwhichappearstobe lostintotheintestine
when mucosal cells are sloughed. In most mammals, the rate of intestinal absorption is infuenced by the
need for Fe by the body, that is, if Fe is needed, more Fe is absorbed. In healthy adults, the amount of Fe
absorbed per day is a very small percentage of total body Fe stores.
Transport: Nearly all Fe in plasma is bound to aporansferrin, a transport protein β-globulin) produced
by hepatocytes. When Fe is bound to apotransferrin, the complex is called transferrin. Transferrin carries
Feto and from tissues foruse by cells or forstorage）In health,about one-third of transferrin’sFe
bindingsitesareoccupidbyFe.Many cellshave transferrinreceptorsbut especiallymarrowerythrid
cells and hepatocytes.
Use in erythroid cells: After transferrin binds to and enters erythroid precursors,Fe dissociates from
apotransferrn and binds to cytoplasmic apoferritin (to form ferritin) or is incorporated into heme (Fe²)
and then hemoglobin. Most apotransferrin escapes degradation and is returned to plasma. In health, about
50-70 % of total body Fe is within erythrocytes.
Storage: Fe+ is stored in two protein-Fe complexes: ferrtin (plasma and tissue) and hemosiderin (tissue
macrophages). In health, about 2540 % of total body Fe is within storage forms. Young animals
(especially neonates) have low amounts of stored Fe.
Ferritin consists of apoferritin complexed with Fe+and is a relatively soluble,mobile source of Fe
There are several forms of apoferritin because of various combinations of H or L subunits.Plasma
ferritin is a glycosylated polymer that is relatively Fe poor. Tissue ferritin, which is nonglycosylated and
relativelyerich,s produdbymany epriarilymacropagepatoytesinestinalmul
epithelial cells, and erythroid precursors. Synthesis of apoferritin by hepatocytes and macrophages is
increased by infammation (apoferritin is a positive acute-phase protein) and when Fe storage is
increased.
Hemosiderinis arelativelyinsolublepoorlymobile source ofFeandrepresents themajorstorage
macrophages in the spleen, liver, and marrow of most mammals. A healthy cat's marrow does not have
enough hemosiderin to be detected by routine staining methods.
Tissue forms:Arelatively sall quantity ofFe is present in myoglobin,catalase,peroxidases,and
cytochromes.
116
3/ERYTHROCYTES
117
2.In cats, reticulocytes stained by NMB may be classified by two systems.
a.The more commonly used system differentiates reticulocytes into punctate and
(1)Punctare:cells with two to six small granules of reticulum
(2)Aggregate: cells with large aggregares of reticulum
b.TypeIIandIII reticulocyte
(1)Type I (lightly reticulated,oldest form): Cells are uniform in size and stain
light green with faint blue stippling. Their circulating life span is 3 d, and
the maximum concentration occurs abour 10-12d after the onset of
anemia.
(2)Type II (moderately reticulated): Cells vary somewhat in size and stain
light green with large dark granules. Their circulating life span is about
12 h, and the maximal concentration occurs about 4 d after the onset of
anemia.
(3）Type II (heavily reticulated,youngest form): Cells generally are
larger than nonreticulated cells and have blue-green cytoplasm and
a heavy dark blue granular network. Their circulating life span is 12 h,
and the maximal concentration occurs about 4 d after the onset of
anemia.
D.Reticulocytosis:increased RC, CRP,or polychromasia
1.A reticulocytosis is the best semiquantitative evidence of increased erythropoiesis
(in species other than horses).
a.Cattle: After acute blood loss, a reticulocytosis is expected within 34 d, and
peak production is expected in 714 d. A few large or shift reticulocytes may be
seen in theblood before a reticulocytosis is present.5
b.Dogs: The response after acute blood loss is not clearly established but is
response can be seen prior to 7 d.
c.Cats: The acute removal of erythrocytes by repeated phlebotomies to create a Hct
of 50% of baseline in five cats resulted in the following:12
(1)An aggregatereticulocytosis occurred by day 2,peaked at day4,and
returned to baseline by day 9,even though the cats were still anemic (Hct in
thelow20s).
reticulocytosis occurred from days 7 through 14,and punctate RP did
not return to baseline until after Hct returned to prephlebotomy values
(after 3 wk).
d.Horses:They very rarely have circulating polychromatophilic erythrocytes.The
clinical value ofautomated reticulocyte concentrations inassessing equine
anemias is investigational.
2.The degree of increased polychromasia should correspond to the degree of reticulo-
cytosis in dogs and cartle and to aggregate reticulocytosis in cats.
VIl. Blood groups or types
A.General concepts
1.Erythrocytes can be grouped into different blood groups or types based on the
presence or absence of erythrocyte surface antigens, which are sometime called
Glucose
ATP
HK
ADP
HMP Shunt
PGD
R-5-P
G-6-P
NADP+NADPHNADP+NADPH
FAD
F-6-P
ATP
GR
PFK
GSH
GS-SG
ADP
F-1.6-DP
colysis
Prot-S-S-Prot
Prot-SH
2
G-3-P
G-3-P
G
PO
NAD+
Fe2+Cb
Hgb-Fe3+
LMB
NADP+
robic
FAD
Cb-R
NADPHD:
NADH
Fe3+Cbs
Hgb
MB
NADPH
1,3-DPG
An:
ADP
DPG Shunt
2.3-DPG
HgbO2
ATP
3-PG
Hgb
2-PG
PEP
ADP
PK
ATP
Pyruvate
NADH
Lactate
Lactate
Fig.3.5.Major biochemical reactions in erythrocytes.
Anaerobic glycolysis (also known as the Embden-Meyerhof pathway) provides the biochemical skeleton for
erythrocyte metabolism and generates ATP and NADH. Because of the split of F-1,6-DP into two
molecules of G-3-P for two paralll pathways, glycolysis consumes two molecules of ATP and produces
four molecules of ATP. PFK is the rate-limiting enzyme, and its activity is enhanced by alkalemia and
reduced by acidemia.PK catalyzes the lastreaction,resulting in a net ATP production via anaerobic
glycolysis.NADH is used to reduceHgb-Fe3+
The hexose monophosphate shunt (also known as the pentose shunt and the pentose phosphate pathway)
generates NADPH that is used to keep GSH in a reduced state in areaction catalyzedby GR(with
cofactor FAD). GSH and NADPH are the major reducing agents in erythrocytes and are used to
maintain Hgb and other proteins in a functional reduced state.G6PD is the rate-limiting enzyme of the
shuntR-5-P,which is also formed from inosinein pig erythrocytes,can undergo a series of reactions
yieldingF-6-P and G-3-P for glyoolysis.
·Cb,R uses FAD and NADH to catalyze the conversion of two molecules of Fe+Cb to two molecules of
Fe+Cb.The Fe²+Cb reduces Hgb-Fe+ to Hgb in a nonenzymatic reaction.Because of the second
reaction, Cb,R is sometimes called methemoglobin reductase (or NADH methemoglobin reductase)
• NADPH D also catalyzes conversion of Hgb-Fe to Hgb and thus is another methemoglobin reductase.
However, this is a very minor reaction in physiologic states and requires an electron acceptor.Therapeuti
cally, MB can be used as the electron acceptor and is converted to LMB; LMB then reacts nonenzymati-
cally to reduceHgb-FetoHgb
118
3/ERYTHROCYTES
119
blood-groupfactors.Nearlyallblood-groupfactors are determined bygeneticsand
each specieshasdifferent antigens.Inpeople,blood-groupfactorsmayfunctionas
membrane transporters,receptors, ligands,or structural roteins.
2. A variety of nomenclature systems have been used for some blood types. These are
themore common systemsused
B.In dogs,at least a dozen blood groups have been described,andnine are currenty
named using the dog eryzhrocyte antigen prefix: DEA. The blood groups that have most
clinical relevance are DEA 1.1 and DEA 1.2, which are also called type A1 and A2,
respectively. Incidences vary with the breed, but about 50 % of dogs in the United
Stateshave DEA 1.1 and 20 % have DEA 1.2.
C.Catshave one blood-group system,the AB system,that has three blood phenotypes:
type A, type B, and type AB. Type A is the most common in cats (> 90 % in nearly all
breeds),and those cats have a natural anti-(B hemagglutinin) antibody.Type B is rare
in many breeds but relatively common (25-50 %) in a few (e.g,Devon rex,Cornish
rex, and exotic and British shorthair), and those cats have a natural anti-(A hemaggluti
blood-type antigens.
D.Theblood-group systems of horses are relatively complex, with over 30 identifed
blood factors belonging toatleastthe seven blood systemsthathavebeenrecognized
by the International Society for Animal Genetics: A, C, D, K, P, Q, and U. Blood
typesare describedbyacapital letter to denotethe system,and alowercaseletter to
denote the specific factor;for example,Qa,Qb,and Qc.The incidence of some blood
types varies markedly among breeds.Factors Aa,Ac, Ca, and Qa have particular
clinical relevance. Horses that lack Aa,Ac,or Ca may have narural anti-Aa,anti-Ac,
or anti-Ca antibodies, so plasma donors should be positive for these factors so that the
natural antibodies are not present. Types Aa and Qa are commonly associated with
neonatal isoerythrolysis. Mares may develop anti-Qa antibodies after foaling a type
Qafoal.
Fig.3.5.continued
·The diphosphoglycerate (DPG) shunt (also known as the Rapaport-Luebering cycle) provides 2,3-DPG at
the expense of ATP production; 2,3-DPG decreases Hgb affinity for O2 and thus promotes O2 delivery to
tissues.Speciesvary in the 23DPG content of their erythrocytes:Concentrations are high indogs and
horses but very lowincattle and cats.
1,3-DPG,1,3-diphosphoglycerate; 2,3-DPG,2,3-diphosphoglycerate;2-PG,2-phosphoglycerate;3-PG,3-
phosphoglycerate; 6-PG, 6-phosphogluconate; ADP,adenosine diphosphate; ATP,adenosine triphosphate;
Cb,R, cytochrome-b, reductase; DPG, diphosphoglycerate; F-1,6-DP, fructose-1,6-diphosphate; F-6-P,
fructose-6-phosphate;FeCbs,ferrocytochrome b；FeCb,ferricytochrome bs;G-3-P,glyceraldehyde-3-
phosphate; G-6-P, glucose-6-phosphate; G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; GSH, glutathione,
reduced; GS-SG, glutathione disulfide; Hgb, deoxyhemoglobin; Hgb-Fe, methemoglobin; Hgb-O2,
oxyhemoglobin; HK, hexokinase; HMP, hexose monophosphate; LMB, leukomethylene blue; MB, methy-
lene blue;NAD*,nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NADH,reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide;
NADPt, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; NADPH D, NADPH dehydrogenase; NADPH,
reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; PFK, 6-phosphofructoki-
nase; PGD, phosphogluconate dehydrogenase;PK,pyruvate kinasePOphosphate;Prot-SH,protein with
reduced sulfhydryl groups; Prot-S-S-Prot, protein with disulfide bridges; and R-5-P, ribulose-5-phosphate.
120
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
E.The blood-group systems of cattle arevery complex,withover 70oknown blood-group
factors in at least 11 blood systems.With this degree of genetic diversity,it is essentially
impossible to find two cattle with the same blood type.
ANALYTICALPRINCIPLESANDMETHODS
Complete blood count (CBC):Major concepts pertaining to a CBCare in Chapter 2
1.
(Analytical Principles and Methods, sect. I).
II.
Erythrogram
A.Morphologic evaluation
1.A microscopic evaluation of stained erythrocytes is an important part of the
erythrogram, especially when anemia is present.
2.In the Morphologic Features of Erythrocytes section, the clinical significance of
erythrocyteswith abnormal colors,sizes,shapes,nclusions,orotherfearures s
described.
B.Hct (synonym, PCV): hemato-(*blood") -crit (denoting“separation")
1.Het is the percentage of blood volume filled by erythrocytes and therefore a measure
of the O-carrying capacity of the blood.If there are100mL of blood with a Hct of
45 %, then erythrocytes occupy 45 mL.
2.A Hct will accurately reflect the [RBC] in a blood sample if the MCV is WRI
3.A Hct will accurately reflect the blood[Hgb] in a sample if the MCHCor CHCM
is WRI.
4.Unit: vol % (commonly just %); and 40 vol %= 0.40 (the SI expression is a
unitless decimal fraction)
C.Blood [Hgb]
1.The blood Hgb/ is the grams of Hgb per 100 mL of blood.Essentially all Hgb in
blood is in erythrocytesexcept in a fw pathologic states e.g,intravascular hemoly
sis causing hemoglobinemia) or after treatment with Hgb-based O carriers (e.g
Oxyglobin).
2.The blood [Hgb] will accurately reflect the [RBC] and Hctr if the MCHC (or
CHCM) and MCV are WRI and hemoglobinemia is not present.The blood
[Hgb] is a more direct measure of blood’s O-carrying capacity than is Hct or the
[RBC].
3.Unit conversion: g/dL x 10 dL/L = g/L (SI unit,nearest 1 g/L）6
D. [RBC]
1.The /RBC/ is the number of erythrocytes per unit volume of blood (in clinical
jargon,commonly referred to as RBCcount).
2.The[RBC] will accurately reflect Hct and the blood[Hgb] if theMCV and
MCHC (or CHCM) are WRI.The [RBC] is used to calculate MCH and can be
used to calculate the MCV if the MCV is not directly measured.
3.Unit conversion:(#×10/μL)×10μL/L=#×10²2/L(SI unit)
E.Wintrobe's erythrocyte indices: MCV, MCHC, and MCH
1.The Wintrobe's erythrocyte indices are three values that are used to characterize
erythrocytes in peripheral blood The MCHC (or CHCM)and MCV are used to
classify anemias (see Anemia, sect. II.B).
a.MCV is the volume per average erythrocyte expressed in femtoliters (L) or cubic
micrometers (um)
3/ERYTHROCYTES
121
b.MCHC is the cellular Hgb concentration per average erythrocyte expressed as
grams of Hgb per 100 mL of erythrocytes (g/dL);g/dLx 10 dL/L=g/L (SI
unit)
C.MCH is the quantity of Hgb per average erythrocyte expressed in picograms (pg)
2.In most blood specimens,not all erythrocytes are the same (ie., the erythrocytes
have different volumes,Hgb concentrations,and Hgb contents）.It is important t
remember that theMCV,MCHC,andMCHrepresent the averages orall erytho
cytes in the sample.
3.Relationship of indices
a.Because the MCH represents how much Hgb is in an average erythrocyte, and the
MCV represents the volume of an average erythrocyte,theMCHC of an average
erythrocyte can be calculated by dividing the MCH by the MCV (Eq. 3.1a).
MCH
MCHC
(3.1a.)
MCV
Example:MCH=20pg,MCV=60 fL
20pg
20×10-12g_20,000×10-15
MCHC:
6
=333g/L=33.3g/dL
60fL
60×10-1L
60×10-5L
Hctx10
[Hgb]x100
[Hgb]x10
MCV:
MCHC=
MCH=
(3.1b.)
[RBC]
Hct
[RBC]
MCV×[RBC]
Hct=
(3.1c)
10
b.When originally described by Wintrobe, the indices represented the calculated
interrelationships of three measured values: Hct (reported as a %), blood [Hgb]
(reported as g/dL), and [RBC] (reported as 10/μL) (Eq. 3.1b).
4.TheWintrobe formulas are used to calculate some of the results generated by
impedance and light-scatter cell counters.
a.Hct is calculated from the measured MCV and [RBC] (Eq. 3.1c).
b.MCHC is calculated from the measured blood[Hgb] and calculated Hct
(Eq. 3.1b).
c.MCH is calculated from the measured blood [Hgb] and measured [RBC]
(Eq.3.1b).
5.Relationship of blood [Hgb] and MCHC
a.Sample 1:Hct=50%andblood[Hgb]=15g/dL
(1)If you have 100 mL of blood with a Hct of 50%and a blood [Hgb] of
15g/dL (grams of Hgb per 100 mL of blood), then you have 50 mL of
erythrocytes, 50 mL of plasma, and 15 g of Hgb in the erythrocytes.
(2)Therefore,you have 15 gof Hgb per 50mL of erythrocytes,or 30g of
Hgb per 100 mL of erythrocytes, and thus the MCHC= 30 g/dL
b.Sample 2:Hct =33%and blood [Hgb]=10 g/dL
(1)If you have 100mL of blood with a Hct of 33 %and a blood [Hgb] of
10 g/dL (grams of Hgb per 100 mL of blood), then you have 33 mL of
erythrocytes, 67 mL of plasma, and 10 g of Hgb in the erythrocytes.
122
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(2）Therefore,you have 10gof Hgb per33mLof erythrocytes,or30gper
100mL of erythrocytes,and thus the MCHC=30 g/dL
C.Relationship of Hgb and Hct (with conventional units)
(1)When the MCHC is 33.3 g/dL, the blood[Hgb] numerical value will be
one-third of the Hct numerical value(e.g.,Hgb =15 g/dL and Hct = 45 %,
orHgb=8g/dLand Hct=24%).
(2)Because MCHC values in most blood samples are about 32-36 g/dL, the
Hgb numerical value typically will be about one-third of the Hct numerical
value.
6.RDW
a.The RDW is a calculated value (usually expressed as a percentage) that reflects
the amount of variation in the erythrocyte volumes (see Morphologic Features of
Erythrocytes,sect.VI).
b.It typically represents the coefficient of variation of the erythrocyte volumes
that are used to determine theMCV,and is calculated from the MCV and
standard deviation of theMCV; that is,(standard deviation of MCV +MCV)
x100.
c.Increased RDW reflects increased anisocytosis.
7.The Bayer Technicon and ADVIA analyzers calculate the MCHC as just described
but also measure the [Hgb] of each individual erythrocyte by analysis of Hgb-
induced light scatter.This provides the following additional erythrogram results for
theADVIA:
a. CHCM is the average of the cellular Hgb concentration measured in each
erythrocyte,with the same concentration and units as the MCHC but deter-
mined directly by light scatter.
(1)The CHCM is unaffected by most of the spectral interferences that can
cause a falselyincreased MCHC
(2)Heinz bodies will falsely increase the CHCM because of altered light
scatter.'7
b.CH is the average Hgb content of erythrocytes, as is MCH, but it is the mean
Hgb content of individual cells as calculated from direct measurements of each
cell's volume andHgb concentration.
C.HDWreflects the amount of variation in the erythrocyte Hgb concentration. It is
the coefficient ofvariation of the Hgb concentrations measured in each erythro
cyte. Increased HDW is called anisochromasia.
F.nRBCs
1.The nRBCs observed during the examination of a blood flm are enumerated
by counting the number of nRBCs seen while 100 (or more) leukocytes are
differentiated and counted.The conventional method of recording thenumber
of nucleated erythrocytes is number of nRBCs/100 WBCs (e.g-
10nRBCs/100WBCs)
2.Manual and some electronic methods determine the[WBC] by counting
nucleated cells or nuclei (either of leukocytes ornRBCs）.By these methods,a
measured /wBC/ represents the sum of nucleated cell concentrations (leukocytes
plus nRBCs), and correction of the measured [WBC] is necessary to obtain a
more accurate [WBC]
3.A [nRBC]can be calculated from the measured [WBC],the corrected[WBC]
or both.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
123
(1)The most direct method is shown in Eq. 3.2a.
#nRBC/100WBC
[nRBC]=measured[WBC]x
(3.2a.)
100+#nRBC/100WBC
Example:measured[WBC]=20,000/μL,nRBC=25/100WBC
25
[nRBC]=20,000/μL×
4,000/μL
125
#nRBC
[nRBC]=corrected [WBC]x
(3.2b.)
100WBC
Example:corrected[WBC]=16,000/μL,nRBC=25/100WBC
25nRBC
.JO
100WBC
16,000WBC
25nRBC
4,000nRBC
[nRBC]
X
=4,000/μL
μL
100WBC
μL
[nRBC]= measured [WBC]- corrected [WBC]
(3.2c.)
(2)A [nRBC] can be calculated from the corrected [WBC] (see Eq. 2.1) by using
Eq.3.2b.
(3)If the corrected [WBC]and measured [WBC] are known,the [nRBC] is easily
calculated by using Eq.3.2c.
4.The conventional method of reporting the enumeration of nRBCs in blood is
relative to 100 leukocytes. This method is useful for correcting a measured [WBC]
but may give a false impression of the number of nRBCs in blood.
For example,two blood samples each have50 nRBCs/100WBCs.If one
sample has a WBC] of 50,000/μuL and the second sample has a [WBC] of
500/μL, then the [nRBC] in the first sample is 100 times as great as the
[nRBC] in the second sample. Therefore, reporting the [nRBC] instead of the
conventional method will provide a more consistent indication of the degree of
rubricytosis.
G.Reticulocytes
1.Enumeration ofreticulocytes inblood can be an important aspect of an erythro
gram, especially in anemic dogs, cats, and cattle.
2.These are the three common methods of enumerating bloodreticulocytes
a.The reticulocyte concentration (RC) is the concentration of reticulocytes in blood
expressed as the number of reticulocytes per μL (or L) of blood.The RC is the
preferred method for evaluating marrow response to anemia.The RC is also
called the reticulocyte count.
b.The reticulocyte percentage (RP) is the percentage of erythrocytes that are reticulo-
cytes in a blood sample.For example, if there are 10 reticulocytes per 1000
erythrocytes, then the RP is 1.0 %. The RP is also called the reticulocyte count.
C.The corrected reticulocyte percentage (CRP) is a calculated percentage that repre-
sents the RPif the animal were not anemic bur had the same RC (see the
following secr. III.K).
124
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
III.
Methods
A.Microhematocrit
1.Oneof theeasiestmost accurateandmostreproduciblemethodsofassessing
[erythrocyte] in blood is by the centrifuged microhematocrit.
2.When first described,the term hematocrit (Hct) was the name of the procedure used
to separate blood into its major components:packed erythrocytes, buffy coat layer,
and plasma. With common use of the procedure, Hct started to indicate the major
result of the procedure (i.e.,Hct or PCV).When a small capillary tube was intro-
duced forthe procedure,itbecame themicrohematocritmethodtodifferentiateit
from the larger Wintrobe Hct tubes.Today,the terms hematocrit and packed cell
volume are frequently used as synonyms. However, some people differentiate the
centrifuged microhematocrit from the calculated Hct by referring to the former as
the PCV or spun Hct and to the latter as the Hct or calculated Hct.
3.High-speed centrifugation (about 13,000×g)of blood in a microhematocrit tube
separates theblood cellsinto layers based on the densiry of cells.The buffy coat
layercontainslatletslympocytsmnoytesosinophiurophilbaspils,
and nucleated erythrocytes (listed from least to most dense). The buffy coat cells
typically occupy about 0.5-1.0 % of the blood volume.The erythrocytes are below
the buffy coat.
4.Because of potential inaccuracies of measuring the [RBC] and MCV, which are used
for the calculated Hct, the microhematocrit tube method (centrifuged or spun) is
generally considered the gold standardfor determining the blood Hct.
5.Erroneous microhematocrit results can be produced by the following:
a.Inadequate mixing of blood before the microhematocrit tubes are filled could
produce either falsely high or falsely low Hcts.
b.With an inadequate volume of blood in the EDTA tube, the hypertonic salt
shrinks the erythrocytes and thus gives a falsely low Hct.
c.Inadequate centrifugation may cause a falsely high Hct because plasma remains
within the loosely packed erythrocytes.
d.Misreading of the Hct, including misidentifying the interface between erythro-
cytes and buffy coat, may result in erroneous values.
6.Use of the microhematocrit also enables visual subjective evaluation of plasma for
hemolysis, lipemia, and icterus.
B.Impedance cell counters
1.The basic principles of impedance counters are described in Analytical Principles
and Methods,sect.III.B,in Chapter 2. Most impedance counters measure MCV,
blood Hgb],and [RBC].From those measurements,most instruments calculate
Hct, MCHC,MCH, and RDW (see Eq. 3.1 for the Wintrobe equations).
2.Impedance cell counters may not be able to determine erythrocyte features accu
rately because an animal’s erythrocytes are too small (e.g., in sheep and goats) or
because its erythrocytes and platelets have similar volumes.
3.For most samples, a properly adjusted and calibrated impedance cell counter
can provide reliable data for these cells if clots and platelet clumps are not
presenr.1a.19
a.Forcanine blood,most counters cantypically differentiate erythrocytes and
platelets and thus can provide reliable erythrocyte and platelet data. However,
numerous large platelets or small erythrocytes (e.g., in Fe deficiency) can result in
false data.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
125
b.For feline blood,most counters cannot reliably differentiate erythrocytes and
platelets because of the overlap in cellvolumes.Because the instrument classifies
large platelets as erythrocytes,the[platelet] isfalsely low.Because of relative
numbers,thedegree ofinaccuracy in the erythrocyte data is typically low except
when there is a marked anemia
c.For equine blood, most counters can typically differentiate erythrocytes
and platelets and thus can provide reliable erythrocyte and platelet dara.
The major exception is when the MCV approaches 30 fL (seen primarily in
foals).
d.Forbovinebloodmost counters can typically differentiate erythrocytes and
platelers and can provide reliable erythrocyte data. However, the platelet volumes
are so low that the [platelet] may be falsely decreased.
C.Optical or laser fow cell cytometers (e.g.,CELL-DYN,Bayer Technicon H1,ADVIA,
and Sysmex)
1.Basic principles (see Chapter 2,especially Fig.2.5).The flow cytometric aspects of
the CELL-DYN are used in addition to impedance to evaluate leukocytes,whereas
the ADVLA uses only fow cytometric methods to evaluate leukocytes,erythrocytes,
andplatelets.
2.The ADVIA uses unique optical methods of evaluating erythrocytes and reticulo-
cytes. With a special diluent, erythrocytes are isovolumetrically sphered before they
pass through a laser beam in which they scatter light.Sphered cells scatter light in a
measure or calculate results.
a.As an erythrocyte or platelet passes through the laser beam, its presence is
detected by light scatter. The low light scatter (2-3°) is used to determine a cell's
volume,whereas highlight scatter (5-15°)isused to determine the cell's refrac
tive index.The refractive index is used to differentiate erythrocytes and platelets
(platelets have lower refractive indices than erythrocytes)and to determine the
Hgb concentration in individual erythrocytes (a greater erythrocyte [Hgb] causes
a greater refraction of light).
b. From the data gathered as each erythrocyte passes through the fow cytometer,
the following erythrocyte features are measured or calculated:
(1)Vis the volume of individual erythrocytes.
(2)MCV is the average of the individually measured erythrocyte volumes.
(3)RDwis the coefficient of variation of the individual erythrocyte volumes
(4){RBC/ is the number of erythrocytes detected in a given blood volume.
(5)Hct is the percentage of blood volume occupied by erythrocytes as deter
mined from MCV and [RBC] data (see Eq.3.1C).
(6)HC is the Hgb concentration in individual erythrocytes.
(7)
CHCM is the average Hgb concentration in erythrocytes (mean of HC
values).
(8)HDw is the standard deviation of HC values.
individual erythrocytes is calculated from each cell's HC and V (i.e., Pg/fL
xfL=Pg)
c.Data from erythrocyte analysis can be graphically displayed by the instrument.
For example, an erythrocyte cytogram is constructed from the volumes (V) and
the [Hgb] in individual erythrocytes (HC) (Fig 3.6). The displayed data provide
126
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
RBCYHC
RBCVHC
(W)
Erythrocyte volume (V)
Erythrocyte
vil
Vili
i
VII
[Hgb] in erythrocyte (HC)
[Hgb] in erythrocyte (HC)
Feline erythrocyte cytogram
Canineerythrocytecytogram
Fig. 3.6. Erythrocyte cytograms (ADVLA) from a healthy cat and an anemic dog: The volume (V) and Hgb
concentration (HC) of each erythrocyte (RBC) is graphically displayed in an RBC VHC (volume hemoglo-
binconcentration）grid（tic-tac-toedisplay）Inthese cytogramsmost erythrocytesare within section,
indicating they are normochromic normocytes. Macrocytes are displayed in regions i, i, and i; microcytes
cytes are in regions i,i, and x.Shifts in the erythrocyte distribution represent changes in erythrocyte
populations.
·A healthy cat: There are no erythrocyte population shifts from the central normochromic normocyte
region (region z). Erythrocyte indices from this nonanemic cat were WRIs.
A dog with regenerative anemia (Het = 28% and reticulocytes = 266× 10²/μL): A population of
are hypochromic macrocytes. The shift may be noted prior to changes in MCV, MCHC, and CHCM
because those values reflect the mean values of the erythrocytes. This anemic dog had a mildly increased
MCV, mildly decreased MCHC and CHCM, and moderately increased RDW and HDW.
a visual representation of the morphologic classification of erythrocytes (see
Anemia,sect.II.B).
d.A dye (oxazine 75o) that stains cellular RNA can be used with the special diluent
todifferentiatereticulocytes from mature erythrocytes byabsorbance spectros-
copy.The dye interacts with RNA in reticulocytes,which are then identifed by
their increased light absorption.With this differentiation, the instrument can be
used to determine average Hgb content and average cell volumes of mature
erythrocytes and reticulocytes separately. The reticulocyte features generated by
the ADVIA include the following:
(1)#RETIC is the number of reticulocytes detected in a given volume (same as
RC).
(2)MCVr is the average of the individually measured reticulocyte volumes.
(3)CHCMr is the average Hgb concentration in reticulocytes.
(4)RDWris the coefficient ofvariation of the individual reticulocyte volumes
3/ERYTHROCYTES
127
(5）HDWr is the standard deviation of Hgb concentrations in individual
reticulocytes.
(6)CHr is the average amount of Hgb in reticulocytes.
(7）CHDWr is the distribution width of Hgb concentration in individual
reticulocytes (values used for calculating CHr).
e.Like the other instruments, the ADVIA lyses erythrocytes and uses the cyanmet-
hemoglobin (or alternate chemical) method to determine the total blood [Hgb]
With this blood [Hgb] and other data, it calculates the following:
(1)MCHC using the blood [Hgb] and the blood Hct (see Eq.3.1b): The
MCHC should agree with the CHCM if the measured values are accurate
and free Hgb is not in the blood’s plasma.
(2)MCH using the blood [Hgb] and the blood [RBC] (see Eq.3.1b): The
MCH should agree with the CH if themeasured values are accurate and
free Hgb is not in the blood’s plasma.
f.The ADVIA also determines the [Hgb] contributed by erythrocytes but not
plasma by using a calculation involving the CHCM, [RBC], and MCV. The
difference between this blood[Hgb] and the blood[Hgb] obtained from the
cyanmethemoglobin method is the plasma[Hgb],referred to as HgbaHgba
may be increased with intravascular hemolysis, with in vitro hemolysis, or after
infusion of Hgb-based O carriers (e.g.,Oxyglobin).
D.Quantitative buffy coat (QBC) analysis
1.Major concepts that pertain to the QBCanalysis are described in Analytical
Principles and Methods, sect.III.D,in Chapter 2.Erythrogram data generated by
the QBC analyzer include the Hct,blood[Hgb],MCHC,and RP for dogs and
cats. The presence of nRBC may be noted in some samples.
2.The QBC Hct is obtained by centrifugation,and the result should agree with the
result obtained by the microhematocrit method.
3.The QBCMCHCis an estimate and is determined by the relationship between the
MCHC and the density of the erythrocytes.The lower the MCHC is, the less dense
the erythrocytes are.
a.The analyzer measures the erythrocyte density by determining the depth of the
plastic float in the erythrocyte layer.A lower erythrocyte density allows the float
the instrument calculates a QBC MCHC
b.Platelet clumps or blood clots in the sample can accumulate above or below the
plastic foat and thus alter the depth of the float in the erythrocyte layer.In such
samplesthe QBCMCHCcould beeitherfalsely decreased(if plateletsorclots
pushed the foat down into the erythrocytes) or falsely increased (if platelets or
clots prevented the float from sinking)
4.The QBC blood Hgb] is calculated from the QBC Hct and the QBC MCHC by
using a Wintrobe index formula (Eq. 3.1b).
aIf the QBCMCHC is falsely decreased,the QBCblood[Hgb] will be falsely
decreased.
b.If the QBC Hct is falsely decreased, the QBC blood [Hgb] will be falsely
decreased.
5.RP is based on increased RNA fluorescence at the top of the erythrocyte layer,and
the presence of nRBCs is suggested by increasing DNA fluorescence toward the top
of the erythrocyte layer.
128
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
E.[RBC] by thehemocytometer method
1.A hemocytometer can be used to measure a RBC] in blood. Blood is diluted
（usually in a Unopette system),and then the diluted blood is used to charge the
hemocytometer chamber (Fig. 2.4).A microscope is used to enumerate the erythro-
cytes, and then a [RBC] is calculated.
2.Determination of the[RBC] by the hematocytometer method is typically imprecise
and thus is not recommended for routine assessment of [RBC].
F.Hct and blood [Hgb] determined by conductivity
1.Some electrochemical instruments that are designed to measure blood gas analytes
(e.g,Po,Pco and pH; see Table 10.1 for abbreviations) or electrolytes (e.g,Na,
K,and Cl) will also generate a Hct and blood[Hgb] as part of their profile
results.
2.The Hct is determined by measuring the electrical conductivity of the blood and
then converting that value to a Hct, based on an inverse relationship between
conductivity and blood cell concentration; that is, electrical conductivity of blood
decreases with greater blood cell concentration. Because the [RBC] is typically much
greater than the[WBC] or[platelet],a blood sample's conductivity depends
sample's conductiviry changes inversely with itsHcr.Some analyzers correct for
changes in electrolyte concentrations.
3.For some analyzers, the Hct that is derived via conductivity is converted to a blood
[Hgb] byusingWintrobe's MCHC formula (Eq.3.1b) and an assumed MCHC
(e.g.,33g/dL）.If the blood samples MCHC is not 33 g/dL, then the conversion
yields an incorrect blood [Hgb].
4.Other instruments (e.g, NOVA CCX) determine the Hct by conductivity and
determine theblood[Hgb] byadjusting the conductivity data based on aphotomet
ric measurement of the percentage of Hgb saturation with O (So see the Analyti
cal Concepts Sect. I.A.5, in Chapter 10).
5. The Hct and blood [Hgb] derived by conductivity should be considered estimates.
Any change in the blood thar alters its conductivity will alter that derived Hct and
blood [Hgb]; for example, marked leukocytosis yields a falsely increased Hct, and
marked hypoproteinemia yields a falsely decreased Hct.
G.Blood[Hgb]
1.Blood [Hgb] has been measured by photometric methods for many years. In a
variety of current blood analyzers, the blood [Hgb] is typically measured by a
cyanmethemoglobin assay using spectrophotometry.Because of concerns of working
with or disposing of minute amounts of cyanide, other methods have been devel
oped. High concentrations of cells or the presence of particles that interfere with
light transmission may result in a falsely increased blood [Hgb] for that sample (see
Anemia, sect.II.B.12)
2.Portable hemoglobinometers have been used for many decades for measuring blood
[Hgb].The Spencer hemoglobinometer was battery powered and,with proper
techniques,provided a good estimate of blood [Hgb].More recently,another
portable hemoglobinomerer was developed (HemoCue AB). It determines the blood
[Hgb] by measuring the absorbance of azide methemoglobin at two wavelengths
Evaluation at two wavelengths may decrease the false increases caused by spectral
interference. It has been shown to have good agreement with blood [Hgb] measured
by cyanmethemoglobin spectrophotometry.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
129
Table 3.3.Potential effects of selected sample and patient conditions on hematocrit (Hct)
andvaluesused to calculateHct
Condition
Spun Hcr
Calc.Hetb
MCVc
[RBC]
Cond.Hcr
Inadequate mixing
↓,↑
↓,↑
↓,↑
↑
↑
ExcessEDTA shrinksRBCsin blood
↑
Clots in sample
↓，↑
个
In vitro hemolysis
↑
↑
↑
↓
Inadequate centrifugation
↑
NA
NA
NA
NA
Agglutination
↑
NA
Very small erythrocytes
↓,T
↑
个
Hyponatremia
↑
Hypernatremia
个
Leukocytosis
Thrombocytosis (marked)
↑
Hyperproteinemia (marked)
Hypoproteinemia
Spun Het is the Het determined by centrifugation,either themicrohematocrit method or the QBC
method.
Calc.Ht is the Het calculated by impedance cell counters aftermeasuring MCVand RBC].
dCond.Het is the Het determined by electrochemical instruments that measure the conductivity of
blood.
most other instruments (see the text).
NA,not applicable
3.The LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer determines blood [Hgb] by measuring the
transmirtance of light from two light-emitting diodes: one for whole blood and one
for hemolyzed blood.
H.Differences n erythrocyte data determined by centrifugation,mpedance,optical,and
conductivity methods
1.A Hct properly determined by centrifugation of microhematocrit tubes is consid
ered the best method ofassessing blood[erythrocyte]in domestic animals.As a
quality assurance method, the centrifuge Hct（often called spun Hct) can be
compared to theHct calculated by impedance counters (calculated Het)or by
conductivity methods (conductivity Het). Discrepancies among Hct values can be
caused by a variety of factors (Table 3.3）.As a rule of thumb, calculated Hct and
spun Hct should agree with each other within 3percentage points;for example,if
a spun Hct is 38 %,a calculated Hct of 3541 % should be obtained
2.Inadequate mixing of blood prior to filling a microhematocrit tube can cause an
erroneous Hct.Erythrocytes tend to settle if the anticoagulated blood is left
standing in a tube rack, especially with pronounced rouleaux.
a.Filling themicrohematocrit tube with the top portion of that blood willyield a
falsely decreased Hct by any method,whereas filling with the bottom portion
will yield a falsely increased Hct.
130
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
b.The Hct values may differ between methods because the blood was properly
mixed prior to one assay but not the other.
3.Collcting or transferring an inadequate amount of blood into an EDTA tube (e.g
0.5 mL of blood into a tube designed for 3 mL of blood) results in a relative excess
amount of EDTA. The excess EDTA creates hypertonic plasma and erythrocytes
shrink because of osmosis; the smaller erythrocytes occupy less volume, and thus a
spun Hct is falsely decreased. However, when these erythrocytes are suspended in
an isotonic diluent prior to impedance counting, they quickly gain volume, and
thus the calculated Hct may notbe affected. The conductivity Hctmay be falsely
decreased because the greater concentration of cations and anions from the
anticoagulant will increase the conductivity.
4.The presence of small clots can have adverse affects on all methods of determining
Hct. The clotting removes erythrocytes from suspension, and thus the Hct on the
remaining nonclotted blood will be falsely decreased.However, very small clots
could enter themicrohematocrit tube andresult in incomplete erythrocyte packing
and thus falsely increase spun Hct. The effects of clots are less predictable with
impedance and conductivity methods because the clots may not allow proper
sampling by the instrument ormay
plug the small orifices or tubing.
5.All three Hct methods will yield falsely decreased Hct if erythrocytes were lysed
during blood collection or handling: the Hct may be correct for the sample but the
sample isnotrepresentativeof the animal’sblood.Mildhemolysis would have a
minimal effect,but gross hemolysis would create larger errors.
6.A spun Hct will be falsely increased if centrifugation of the microhematocrit tube
is inadequate because of an inadequate g-force or inadequare time of centrifuga-
tion. The spun Hct does include a very small amount of trapped plasma (< 3 %
centrifugation would leave more plasma mixed with the packed erythrocytes.
7.
The presence of agglutinated erythrocytes (either autoagglutination or agglutination
induced by heparin) can falsely decrease the [RBC] determined by impedance
because of two factors: (1) clustered erythrocytes are counted as one large erythro-
an erythrocyte and is electronically excluded during the counting.Depending on
the size of the erythrocyte cluster and the instrument's size limits for inclusion, the
MCV determined might be suficiently erroneous to give a false calculated Hct
(ie., the falsely decreased [RBC] times a falsely increased MCV may yield a nearly
correct calculated Hct).
8.Some erythrocytes of animals （e.g,sheep,goats,andyoung horses）maybe t
small to be recognized as erythrocytes by impedance. If the smaller erythrocytes are
not included in the MCV determination, the instrument will generate a falsely
increased MCV. Concurrently, the [RBC] will be falsely decreased. Because the
calculated Hct is the product of the MCV and[RBC],the calculated Hct could be
falsely increased or decreased depending on which of the measured values has the
greatest error.
9. When an animal has a persistent and marked decrease in plasma osmolality
(because of hyponatremia and hypochloremia),the osmolality within erythrocytes
also decreases. When those erythrocytes are placed in an isotonic diluent prior to
impedance counting,the erythrocytes shrink as HOmoves from the cells via
osmosis. Thus,the MCVmeasured is falsely decreased,and thus the Hct
calculated is falsely decreased.The opposite osmosis occurs when an animal has a
3/ERYTHROCYTES
131
persistent and marked plasma hyperosmolality and thus the calculated Hct is falsely
increased. The conductivity Hctmay also be affected by marked changes in
plasma [Na] and [Cl], although analyzers may be designed to correct for such
abnormalities; that is, hyponatremic and hypochloremic samples may have less
conductivity, which results in a greater conductivity Hct.
10.Autologous blood transfusions may cause a falsely decreased conductiviry Hct. In a
study using an infusate containing washed patient's erythrocytes in saline, the
infusate's greater electrolyte concentrations and lower protein concentrations
(compared to plasma) increased its conductivity and thus resulted in a falsely low
conductivity Hct; the infusate's spun Hct was near 51 %,but the infusates
from administered infusate, then a patient's conductivity Hct could be falsely
decreased.
11.The presence of marked leukocytosis,marked thrombocytosis,or marked hyper-
proteinemia can reduce the conductivity of blood and thus cause a falsely increased
conductivity Hct.If the impedance cell counter cannot differentiate platelers from
erythrocytes and thrombocytosis is marked, the measured [RBC]will be falsely
increased and probably the MCV will be falsely decreased.If the error in the
[RBC] is greater than the MCV error, then the calculated Hct will be falsely
increased.
12.Marked hypoproteinemia will increase the conductivity of blood,and thus the
conductivity Hct will be falsely decreased.
13.The MCV may be decreased by in vitro events or phenomena in addition to the
aforementioned effects of osmolality.
a.A falsely decreased MCV may occur when an electronic cell counter
cannot differentiatelargeplatelets from erythrocytes.This is primarily a
problem when there is a marked thrombocytosis and a concurrent marked
anemia.23
b. Such erroneous results can be suspected or recognized by other findings.
(1)The red cell distribution width is increased.
(2)Microscopic examination of the blood does not confirm the presence of a
microcytosisbut does identify marked thrombocytosis
(3）
The MCH will be falsely low (assuming the blood [Hgb] is correct)
because the [RBC] will be falsely increased.
(4)The calculated Hct might be correct, depending on the measured values;
that is,a falselylow MCV times a falselyincreased[RBC]could provide a
calculated Hct that is close to a spun Hct.
I.Reticulocyte concentration (RC)(also called absolute reticulocyte count)
1.The RCis the concentration of reticulocytes in blood expressed as number of
reticulocytes per μL (or L) of blood
2.RCequation (Eq.3.3a):
RC=RPx[RBC]
(3.3a.)
patient's Hct
CRP=RPX
(3.3b.)
average Hct for species
CRP
RPI=
(3.3c.)
RMT
132
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
J.Reticulocyte percentage （RP) （sometimes called reticulocye count)
1.The RP is the percentage of erythrocytes that are reticulocytes.For example, if there
are 10 reticulocytes per 1000 erythrocytes, the RP is 1.0 %.
2.It is used to calculate RC or CRP.It indicates nonregenerative anemia if not
increased and possible regenerative anemia if increased
3. Percentages may be affected by agglutination.
4.Basics of procedures
a.Manual (microscopic) procedure
(1)Equal volumes of blood and NMB stain aremixed andkept at room
temperarure for at least 15 min. NMB is a vital stain (ie.,it stains living
cells) that penetrates erythrocytes and stains (and precipitates) cytoplasmic
RNA.A smear of the blood-NMB mixture is made and air-dried for
microscopic examination.
(2)The number of reticulocytes observed while counting1000 nonnucleated
erythrocytesisrecorded.Forcatssomelaboratoriescount only theaggregate
reticulocytes,whereas other laboratories count aggregate and punctate
reticulocytes and report both.
b.Automated techniques
(1)
QBC-VetAutoread: Canine QBC RP is estimated by determining the
thickness of RNA fluorescent cells that are at the top of the erythrocyte layer
and below the granulocytelayer.
(2)Flow cytometric methods
(a)In some CELL-DYN analyzers (e.g., 3200 and 3700) and after staining
with NMB and sphering in a special diluent, reticulocytes are enumer-
ated by a unique light scatter created from precipitated ribosomal RNA.
RP is determined by the percentage of erythrocytes with the light-
scattering property. Fluorescence rather than light-scatter methods are
used with the CELL-DYN 4000.24
(b)In some flow cytometers and after staining reticulocytes with a fluores-
cent nucleic acid-binding dye （thiazole orange),erythrocytes pass
through the instrument that identifies fuorescent and nonfluorescent
cells.RPis determined by the percentage of erythrocytes that are
fluorescent.
（c)The ADVIA uses a different stain (oxazine 750)to differentiate reticulo-
cytes from mature erythrocytes (see Analytical Principles and Methods,
sect. IIl.C.2.d). It also has the ability to classify reticulocytes as most
immature(bighabsorption),intermediate（mediumabsorption),or most
mature (low absorption)reticulocytes based on their staining intensity
(the most immature have the greatest staining and therefore greatest
light absorption)
(d)RC and RP may be affected by agglutination.
5.An increased RP does not always indicate the presence of a reticulocytosis, especially
in moderate to severe anemias, because a relative increase may be due to a decrease
in the concentration of mature erythrocytes rather than to an increase in the
concentration of reticulocytes. Table 3.4 provides examples of RP data. Conversely,a
marrow may be responding to a mild anemia without generating an increased RP
because the reticulocytesmature in the marrow before release,and thus reticulocyto-
sis is not seen but the Hct steadily increases. The circulating life spans of reticulo
Table 3.4.Evaluation ofreticulocyte data
Reference
Canine
Units
intervals
Dog 1°
Dog 2b
Dog3°
Hct
%
37-55
15
15
15
RP
%
0.0-1.0
2.0
9.0
0.0
CRP
%
0.0-1.0
0.7
3.0
0.0
[RBC]
×10°/μL
5.5-8.5
2.0
2.0
2.0
RC
×10²/L
0-80
40
180
0
Reference
Feline
Units
intervals
Cat 1d
Cat 2e
Cat 3f
Car4
Cat5h
Hct
%
24-45
12
12
24
12
12
RP(aggregate)
%
0.0-1.0
6.0
2.0
0.6
1.2
0.1
RP(punctate)
%
0.0-10.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
6.0
1.0
CRP(aggregate)
%
0.0-1.0
2.0
0.7
0.4
0.4
<0.1
CRP (punctate)
%
0.0-10.0
10.0
10.0
20.0
2.0
0.3
[RBC]
×10%/μL
5.0-10.0
2.0
2.0
4.0
2.0
2.0
×10/μL
0-80
120
40
24
24
2
RC(punctate)
×10²/μL
5-500
600
600
1200
120
20
Dog 1: Evidence of increased erythrocyte production is not present. If the marrow is currently respond-
ing to the anemia, it is not refected by the blood reticulocytes. The RP is increased because fewer erythro-
cytes, rather than more reticulocytes, are in the blood; that is,RP is increased because the [reticulocyte] is
WRI and the RBC] is decreased.
Dog 2:There is evidence of increased erythrocyte production,and the marrow is currently responding to
the anemia.The RP is increased because fewer erythrocytes and more reticulocytes are in the blood than
there are in health; that is,the RP is increased because the [reticulocyte] is increased and the[RBC] is
decreased.
Dog 3: There is not evidence of increased erythrocyte production. As reticulocytes were not seen,
decreased production of erythrocytes may be one reason for the anemia. Or,it could be too early (<34 d)
for a reticulocyte response.
Cat:Thereisvidenceofincreasederythroyte productionTheaggregateeticuloytosisindicaes
increased erythropoiesis in the past 36 d (approximately). The punctate reticulocytosis (T punctate RC) is
punctate CRP is a borderline percentage and thus difficult to interpret by itself.
°Cat 2: The duration of the anemia must be known to interpret the results. If the onset of anemia was
within the past 23 d, then the results are consistent with the punctate reticulocytosis that occurs before an
regenerative response.
Cat3:Themagnitude of the punctate reticulocytosisindicates anEpo stmulus ocurred at least7-10 d
ago and erythroid hyperplasia is present (resolving anemia). Absence of an aggregate reticulocytosis suggests
that there is no longer an increased release of aggregate reticulocytes.
Cat 4:Evidence of increased erythrocyte production isnot present despite an increased aggregate RP.
Decreased production of erythrocytes is probably at least one reason for the anemia if there has been
sufficient time fora marrowresponse.
Cat5:Evidence of increased erythrocyte productionisnot present.Decreased production oferythrocytes
is probably contributing to the anemia, as the reticulocyte concentrations are WRI or decreased.
Reference intervals for reticulocyte concentrations are based on data from themicroscopic analysis of
blood samples from 45 healthy cats (M.A.S.unpublished data).
133
134
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
cytes and the relationships between marrow stimulus and marrow responses (see
Physiologic Processessect.VI)need to be considered when blood reticulocyte data
are interpreted.
6.Microscopic determination of RP has relatively poor analytical precision.Therefore,
RP should be considered an estimate.Values that are calculated using the micro-
scopic RP (ie., RC, CRP, and RPI) should also be considered estimates.
7.The degree of increased polychromasia should correspond to the increase in RP
(except for feline punctate reticulocytes).
K.Corrected reticulocyte percentage (CRP) (also called absolute reticulocyte percent and
absolute%reticulocytecount)
animal were not anemic.This is necessary for appropriate interpretation of RP if RC
is not calculated. If reticulocyte production was unchanged but anemia developed
due to loss or destruction of mature erythrocytes, the RPwould be increased
because of a decrease in total erythrocytes, not because of increased reticulocyte
production and release.The CRP determines whether the increased RP is enough to
show regeneration or whether the increased RP is only due to the anemia.
2.The CRP equation is Eq. 3.3b. The CRP is needed only if the RP is increased and
anemia ispresent.
3.In theory, the reference interval for CRP should be the same as the RP reference
interval.Therefore,if a CRP is greater than the reference interval for RP,there is a
reticulocytosis.
4.Just as the RP must be corrected for the severity of the anemia, the degree of
increased polychromasia needs to beinterpreted with knowledge of the Hct when
the degree of polychromasia isreportedbased on visual inspection ofmicroscopic
fields containing somewhat standardized erythrocyte numbers (seeMorphologic
Features of Erythrocytes,sect.I.A)
L.I
Reticulocyte production index (RPl)(also called correctedreticulocyte count and reticulo
cyte index)
1.During accelerated erythropoiesis,younger reticulocytes (called shift reticulocytes)
may be released. In comparison to older reticulocytes, they may have longer
circulating life spans before becoming mature erythrocytes. Thus, the CRP may be
increasedbecauseof theincreased lifespanofreticulocytesandnotnecessarily
increased production. Some people recommend the CRP be adjusted for the
prolonged life spans by calculating the RPI
2.Equation forRPI (Eq.3.3c).
a.Application of the RPI requires that a RMT be known for each species in health
and during accelerated erythropoiesis.RMTvalues frequently written for human
reticulocytes are as follows:When Hct = 45 %, RMT =1.0 d;Hct =35 %,
RMT=1.5d;Hct=25%,RMT=2.0 d；andHct=15%,RMT=2.5d
b.Very few RMT values for domestic animals are available.
(1)In healthy dogs,reported values include a mean of 31 h, with an interval of
19-43 h.14 Values for anemic dogs are not known but probably are longer
and thus RMTs in anemic dogs are probably different from RMTs in
anemic people.
(2）In cats,reported RMTs (as reticulocyte life span) are about 12 h forType II
reticulocytes and 3.5 d for Type I+II reticulocytes, and thus use of the
human RMT values is not appropriate for calculating a feline RPI.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
135
3.Until the validity and clinical value of the RPI is established,the CRP or RC should
be used to assess regenerative status. When interpreting the CRP and RP in an
anemic animal, the possibility of a longer RMT should be considered.
4.Evaluation of reticulocyte percentages and concentrations is presented in Table 3.4.
MORPHOLOGICFEATURES OF ERYTHROCYTES:CLINICALSIGNIFICANCE
ANDPATHOGENESES
I
Assessment:Morphologic features of erythrocytes are evaluated as part of a routine CBC or
as a separate procedure.For abnormalities in size,shape,and color,relative quantities of
each abnormality per 100x objective microscope field are usually reported on a 3- or 4-plus
scale. This microscopic assessment is subjective because of varied regions selected for
evaluation, varied criteria for categorizing abnormalities, and varied grading systems. These
are the two major methods of selecting microscopic fields for assessment:
A.By number of erythrocytes in field (provides an estimate relative to erythrocytes in
blood)
1.If the features are always evaluated in regions of the blood film where erythrocytes
occasionally touch one another but do not overlie one another, then the evaluation
will be done in thicker areas of blood films from anemic animals as compared to
nonanemic animals.With this approach,the number of erythrocytes per microscope
field stays somewhat similar, but the volume of blood assessed per field is greater
withanemiabecausemore fluidvolumewas depositedin thicker regions of the
smear. An increase in an abnormality reflects an increased percentage of that
abnormality; for example, “1+ polychromasia” in an anemic animal would be a
relative increase (similar to increased RP) and not good evidence of a regenerative
response without the anemia beingconsidered.
2.The assessment can also be adjusted based on number of erythrocytes per field. If a
1+ grade is based on finding six poikilocytes in a field of 300 erythrocytes, then a
1+ grade would be given if there were three poikilocytes in a field of 150 erythro-
cytes.Thismethodisalsoarelative system,sointerpretationmust include th
severity of anemia.
3.Some grading systems have different grades based on the blood Het.For example,
the 1+grade of poikilocytes (as just discussed) would apply if the Het is40 %,but
six poikilocytes in a field of 150 erythrocytes would be a 1+ grade if the Hct is
20 %(similar to the CRPsystem)
B.By thickness of blood film area (provides an estimate of the concentration in blood)
1.If the features are evaluated in areas of the smear that are always of about the same
thickness and therefore contain similar blood volumes per field, there will be fewer
and more separated erythrocytes in evaluated fields of blood from anemic animals.
With this approach, an increase in an abnormality would more closely refect an
increased concentration of that abnormality;“1+ polychromasia”would reflect a
regenerative response (more reticulocytes per volume of blood).
2.This method does not require uniform methods of preparing blood films, but does
require recognition of areas of similar smear thickness. This is typically based on the
priate areas, and are broken in areas that are too thin. The location of these areas on
a blood film willvary with the sample and technique(e.g.,protein concentration
and length of blood film).
136
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
II.
General features
ADiscocytes. Mature erythrocytes of each domestic mammalian species are disks with
different degrees of biconcavity that creates a central pallor (Table 3.2). When these
erythrocytes have normal volumes,they are called normocytes.
B.Rouleau,rouleaux(pl.)(French for“roll” or “rolls"): a linear branching or nonbranching
color section of this book])
1. Common in some species (especially horses and cats)
2.Its formation involves charge interactions between erythrocytemembranes and
plasma macromolecules and is therefore affected by erythrocyte factors (shape and
membrane composition),albumin factors (glycation),globulin factors(charge,size,
and number), lipid content of plasma and perhaps erythrocyte membranes, pH
(affects cell and protein charges),and exogenous macromolecules (dextrans）.s
3.Increased rouleaux tend to occur if there is hyperglobulinemia or hyperfibrinogen-
emia.An increase in rouleaux is evident when they extend to near the feathered edge
of a blood film and thus reduce the width of the effective monolayer area.
4.Rouleauxmay occurinvivo and contribute to blood hyperviscosity,thus decreasing
effective blood flow and tissue oxygenation.
1.Autoagglutination is seen in some immune hemolytic anemias, in cold agglutinin
disorders,and occasionally in animals without evidence of hemolysis.The agglutinin
(a substance causing the agglutination） is typically a cold antibody that is,an
antibody thar has maximalactivity at 4-20°C
2.The erythrocyte clusters formed by autoagglutination must be differentiated from
rouleaux, which classically appear as stacks of erythrocytes but can appear as piles or
fallen stacks of coins.When examined macroscopically in a tube or as a drop on a
slide, blood containing the agglutinated erythrocytes or rouleaux has a fine to coarse
granular appearance.
3.One method to differentiate agglutination from rouleaux is the saline dilution
(dispersion) test, in which blood is diluted with saline and a wet preparation of the
diluted blood is examined (Plate 7A-C). Microscopic examination may lead to the
false conclusion that agglutination is present.
a.This test is appropriate when clumping is apparent,but it is not indicated to
look for agglutination when clumping is not apparent.
b.Rouleaux should disperse into individual erythrocytes when the plasma [total
protein]is lowered by dilution of bloodwith saline.A dilution of 1 part blood to
1part saline（12dilution）willoftendserserouleauxbutoccasonallyreatr
dilutions (1 part blood to 9 parts saline) are needed to disperse rouleaux.At least
1 part blood to3 parts saline (1:4 dilution) is recommended as a starting point.
C.
The erythrocyte clusters of autoagglutination do not disperse with saline dilution
(but there may be fewer clusters because of dilution)
4.Heparin may induce agglutination of equine erythrocytes.
5.Agglutination may interfere with the electronic or optical evaluation of erythrocytes
when groups of erythrocytes pass through the counting chamber as “large cells.” In
such cases,the measured MCV and[erythrocyte] are erroneous (unless programs
exclude outlier values), as are the values calculated from those measured values
Automated RCs may also be unreliable.
D.Rubricytosis (also known as metarubricytosis or normoblastemia) (Plate 3C)
3/ERYTHROCYTES
137
1.Rubricytosis is an increased concentration of nRBCs in blood. Usually, most are
metarubricytes,a few may berubricytes,and younger precursors arerarely seen.
may be seen also in nonregenerative anemias and in nonanemic animals without
reticulocytosis (inappropriate rubricytosis）.Therefore,rubricytosis should not be
considered a consistentlyreliable indicator of a responsive marrow.
a
Appropriate rubricytosis isrubricytosis concurrent with regenerative anemia (with
reticulocytosis). The nRBCs are released as a response to increased Epo stimulus.
(1)It occurs during accelerated erythropoiesis. Not only is the release of
reticulocytes increased,but so is the release ofnRBCs to blood
(2)
It is seen in regenerative anemias of dogs, cats, carttle, and pigs, and seen
occasionally in horses.
b.Inappropriate rubricytosis is rubricytosis in the absence of reticulocytosis; for
example,concurrent with nonregenerative anemia or in the absence of anemia.
（1）
）It occurs primarily when there is a loss of the finely controlled release of
nRBCs from marrow or other erythropoiesis sites:nRBCs escape from
marrow or other erythropoiesis sites without nuclear extrusion and before
maturing to reticulocytes.
(2)Disorders or conditions that cause inappropriate rubricytosis
(a)Marrow damaged by necrosis, infammation, endotoxemia, hemic or
nonhemic neoplasia, or hypoxia: Nucleated erythrocytes gain entrance
intomarrowsinusesthroughdamagedsinusoidalendothelium
release of cells before nuclear extrusion.
(c)Splenic contraction: Splenic blood contains nucleated erythrocytes that
are completing maturation.
(d)Splenectomy: The few nRBCs that are normally released from marrow
are not“caught” by the spleen
(e)Lead poisoning in dogs, perhaps the result of damage to marrow
sinuses
(f)Bone marrow dyscrasia in poodles with macrocytosis (see Other
NonneoplasticLeukocyteDisorders,sect.IIin Chapter2）6
III.
Erythrocyte color
A.Central pallor refers to the pale central region of an erythrocyte that is due to the
relative thinness of the area created by the cell's biconcave shape.
1.Increased central pallor is usually indicative of hypochromasia.
2.Decreased central pallor usually indicates abnormally shaped erythrocytes (poikilo
cytes,including spherocytes）.It is also commonly seen near a blood flm'sfeathered
edge because of artifactual distortion of erythrocyte shape.
B.A ghost cell sanextremely pale-staining erythrocyte consisting prmarily of cellmem
brane with only a small amount of residual peripheral cytoplasmic Hgb (Plate 3D).
1. Ghost cells are usually formed during complement-mediated intravascular hemolysis.
Membrane attack complexes form membrane pores through which Hgb leaks out.
2.Ghost cells may form in vitro as a result of smearing trauma.These artifactual ghost
cells are often distorted
C.A bypochromic erythrocyte is a poikilocyte with increased central pallor and more faintly
stained Hgb than usual (Plate 3E)
138
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
1.Hypochromasia is an increased number of hypochromic erythrocytes, which may be
enough.
2.Hypochromic erythrocytes result from a decreased intracellular Hgb concentration.
When visually evident, they usually are associated with Fe deficiency. However,
hypochromasia based on the MCHC or CHCM alone (without microscopically
apparent hypochromic erythrocytes) is usuallyassociated with the incomplete Hgb
synthesis of immature erythrocytes (i.e., regenerative anemias).
3.Hypochromic erythrocytes of Fe deficiency are typically microcytes and leptocytes.
They are prone to structural changes such as irregular membranes, loss of circular
shape, and fragmentation.
D.A polychromatophilic erythrocyte (polychromatophil) is a nonnucleated, immature ery-
throid cell (reticulocyte) with enough cytoplasmic RNA to stain with a Wright stain
(Plate3C)
1.Polychromatophilic erythrocytes would be aggregate reticulocytes after vital staining
with NMB.A cells polychromasia (many colors） is the result ofits cytoplasmic RNA
(basophilic staining) and Hgb content (eosinophilic staining).
2.If the concentration of polychromatophilic erythrocytes inblood is increased,there
is increased polychromasia that refects accelerated erythropoiesis.However, a subjec-
tive assessment of polychromatophilic erythrocytes in blood films may refect the
percentage or the concentration of polychromatophilic erythrocytes, depending on
how it is done (see Morphologic Features of Erythrocytes, sect.I). If assessed as a
percentage, the increase should be interpreted as for a RP, in light of the degree of
anemia.
3.Note in the preceding two paragraphs that polychromasia can refer to the appearance
of an individual erythrocyte (i.e.,a cell with polychromasia) or a population of
erythrocytes (i.e.,increased polychromasia).
E.A reticulocyre is a nonnucleated,immature erythroid cell with stainable cytoplasmic
RNA (Plate 3Fand G)
1.A reticulocytes cytoplasmic RNA may be visualized after staining with NMB stain
punctate)based on the staining pattern of the RNA.
2.A reticulocytes cytoplasmic RNA may also bevisualized after staining withWright
stains, in which case reticulocytes will appear as polychromatophilic erythrocytes. All
polychromatophilic erythrocytes are reticulocytes,but not all reticulocytes have
3.Reticulocytosis (increased blood RC),like increased polychromasia, is an important
indicator of accelerated erythropoiesis.
IV.
Erythrocyte organisms
A.Identifying features are listed in Table 3.5.
B.Major aspects of the anemias or disorders caused by organisms are included in the
Nonregenerative Anemia and the Hemolytic Anemias sections.
V.
Inclusions other than organisms (Table 3.6)
A.Basophilic stippling (punctate basophilia) (Plate 4G)
1.Basophilic stippling is the presence of fine to coarse,blue to dark purple dots of
aggregated ribosomes (RNA) dispersed within the erythrocyte cytoplasm.Basophilic
protease activity, decreased cell pliability, and
Pathogcnesis of the anemia may be multifaceted
protease activity, deasd ell pliabilty, and
Immune hemolysis (but has low virulence)
Immune hemolysis, posibly others
possibly hemolysis in some cases)
Immune hemolysis, posibly others
Associated pathogenic processes
oxidative damage
oxidative damage
Immune hemolysis
Immune hemolysis
Immune hemolysis
Marginal body is a small, dark-staining coccus about 0.5 μm in
abrane and
outer thin rim
lasms); sizes vary with species (see the
and eccentric nucleus may resemble signet ring or safety
Typically thin chains of cocci on membrane that may form
Typically cocci (0.10.2 μm) (individual or in short chains)
 pear-shaped (pyniform)
pears, and Maltese crosses (Plate 4F)
teardrop or
trophozoites (piropl
Identifying features
(Plate 4A and B)
intr
Rou
BasonymHaemebartenella fls
Myaplasmd spp.of cattle
Myoplasma haemocanis
Myoplasma haemofeli?
Anaplasma marginale
Anaplasma cemrale
Distemper in dogs
ux
Theileriaspp.
Organism
Babesia spP.
139
Ocars with hemoglobinopathies in people
Oxidants overwhelm reductive capacity of
Nuclear remnant that ramained free in the
erythrocyte if the spleen does not pitit
Fe accumulates in damaged mitochondria
Associated pathogenic processes
or in autophagocytic vacuoles
5'-nucleotidase
None in domestic mammals;
most frequent in cats (and
decreased splenic function
Excess Fe in body, plumbism
in dogs; myeloproliferative
disease, usually unknown
Ingeased erythropoiesis,
Clinical significance
cattle),plumbism
Exposure to oxidants
camelids)
*Appeaacea seen on a Wight-tained blood lm unlesstated otherwise
amembrane
stains blue with NMB stain (Plate
 do s 
hemoglobin that forms a pencil,
polyhedron within erythrocytes
with Fe stains (Prussian blue)
Intensely stained, crystallized
structure that creates 
Identifying features'
（H
(Plate 4J)
(Plate 5B)
(D
Hemoglobin crystals
*Basophilic stippling
*Howell-olly body
Siderotic granules
Heinz body
Inclusions
140
3/ERYTHROCYTES
141
stippling must be differentiated from siderotic granules,which are usually located in
clusters.
2.Basophilic stippling is seen with regenerative anemias, especially in cattle,but also in
dogs and cats.
3.When seen without corresponding polychromasia or reticulocytosis, or in nonane-
mic animals,plumbism is a common cause,especially in dogs.Lead inhibits the
pyrimidine 5'-nucleotidase that helps degrade nucleotides in RNA.
B.Heinz bodies (Plate 4H and I)
1.Heinz bodie are aggregates of denatured Hgb caused by oxidative damage.
2.Heinz bodies are visualized with NMB stain as pale blue, protruding, rounded
structures associated with erythrocyte membranes.In Wright-stained films, Heinz
bodies have nearly the same staining features as normal Hgb but appear as slightly
pale structures that create membrane defects or protrude.Heinz bodies may detach
from erythrocytes and occur as free bodies in a blood film.
3.Except in cats,the presence of Heinz bodies in an animal with a hemolytic anemia
indicates Heinz body hemolysis. Small single Heinz bodies (diameter = 0.5 μm; see
the smallest forms in Plate 4l) can be found in the erythrocytes of cats without
clinical anemia or hemolysis.
C.Hgb crystals (Plate 4J)
1.These are seen occasionally in domestic mammal erythrocytes (including dogs and
cats),but their significance is unknown. Some may form in vitro because of sample
storage conditions.
2.Hgb electrophoresis has failed to demonstrare abnormal Hgb molecules in domestic
mammals that have had Hgb crystals.
D.Howell-Jolly bodies (Plate 4K and L)
1.A Howell-Jolly body is a nuclear remnant that has remained free in the cytoplasm
after mitosis of an erythrocyte precursor.The Howell-Jolly body is nuclear material
that was not incorporated into a new nucleus.
2.Howell-Jolly bodies can be found in healthy mammals, frequently in cats and
occasionally in dogs and horses. The number of Howell-Jolly bodies in blood
increases during accelerated erythropoiesis and also may increase in mammals with
decreased splenic function (including after splenectomy).
E.Refractile artifacts (Plate 5A)
1.Erythrocyte refractile artifacts are frequently found in stained blood films.
Objects are refractile when they change from dark to shiny as the focal plane
is changed; refractile artifacts are recognized by focusing up and down and
assessing for this property.They may appear as crescents or as small to large,
irregular shapes within the erythrocytes.Erythrocyte refractile structures in blood
films stained with Romanowsky-type stains are always artifacts.The defect that
creates the refractile structure develops during the drying or staining of the
erythrocytes.
2.When refractile artifacts are in a plane of focus that makes them resemble black
structures,they canbe confusedwith erythrocyte inclusions or parasites.
3. Refractile artifacts are different from erythrocyte refractile bodies as described
by Schalm.27 Erythrocyte refractile bodies are Heinz bodies seen on air-dried
blood flms by using a wet NMB stain under a cover glass. In these preparations,
Heinz bodies appear as erythrocyte refractile bodies in erythrocytes; the bodies
are dark fociin one focal plane butbecomerefractilewhen slightlyout of focus
142
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Heinz bodies are not refractile in films stained with a Romanowsky-type stain (e.g
Wright,Wright-Giemsa, or Wright-Leishman).
F.Siderotic granules (Pappenheimer bodies) (Plate 5B)
1.Siderotic granules inWright-stained erythrocytes are basophilic granular strucrures
that represent Fe-laden mitochondria Siderotic granules may be diffcult to differen-
tiate from basophilic stippling on Wright-stained bloodfilms.Siderotic granules
tend to occur as loose basophilic aggregates that are often palely stained. Basophilic
stippling tends to be dispersed throughout an erythrocyte's cytoplasm, and staining
is often more prominent. Confirmation of siderotic granules requires identification
ofpositive-blue staining of granuleswith a Prussianblue stain.
2.A siderocyte is a nonnucleated erythroid cell (reticulocyte or mature erythrocyte) that
contains one or more siderotic granules.If the siderotic granules are in a nucleated
erythrocyte,the cell is a sideroblas,if the granules encircle thenucleus,thecell isa
ringedsideroblast.
3.A transient siderocytosis has been associated with chloramphenicol therapy in dogs
Siderocytosis and sideroblastosis may be related to Fe overload and also have been
reported as features of sideroblastic anemias.An association with hemolytic
anemias has been suggested,9 but, in many cases, siderocytes occur without a known
cause.
VI.Abnormal erythrocyte volume
A.Erythrocytesapearwo-dimensional onaWright-stained blood lmand thusacels
diameter isfrequently considered to refecr its size.However,it isimportant to recog
nize that two cells with the same diameter, but with different thicknesses, have different
volumes. An erythrocyte's thickness is reflected by the cell's staining intensity. A thin
cell will be lightly stained (hypochromic), whereas a thick cell will be stained more
intensely (hyperchromic).
B.Anisocytosis is variation in the volumes of erythrocytes
1.Anisocytosis can be caused by macrocytes,microcytes,or both.Because of their
spherocyte volumes are not decreased.
2.Its diagnostic significance depends on the cells that are creating the anisocytosis (see
the next sections on macrocytes and microcytes）.It is commonly associated with
macrocytosis and thus regenerative anemias.
3.RDW(see Analytical Principles and Method,sect.II.E.6) is an automated measure
of anisocytosis based on volumes,not on the microscopic assessment of cell
diameters.
C.A macrocyte is an erythrocyte that has increased volume (Plate 5C).
1.Macrocytosis is an increased concentration of macrocytes in peripheral blood, which
can be reflected by a shift in the erythrocyte cytogram or by an increased MCV. If
normocytes or microcytes arealso present,therewill be anisocytosis and theRDw
will be increased.
2.Macrocytosis is frequently seen with accelerated erythropoiesisbecauseimmature
from a skipped mitosis in disorders of abnormal erythropoiesis.
3. Poodles with hereditary poodle marrow dyscrasia (see Other Nonneoplastic Leuko
cyte Disorders, sect. Il, in Chapter 2) have uniform normochromic macrocytes
(MCV:85-95fL)
3/ERYTHROCYTES
143
D.A microcyte is an erythrocyte that has decreased volume (Plates 5D and E and 6B)
1.Microcytosis is an increased concentration ofmicrocytes in peripheralblood,which
can be reflected by a decreased MCV. If normocytes or macrocytes are also present,
there will be anisocytosis and the RDw will be increased.
2.Causes ofmicrocytosis include Fe deficiency (concurrent hypochromasia is usually
probably copper deficiency (see Anemia, sects. II.B.6 and 7).
3.As seen with Fe deficiency,microcytes are created by increased erythroid cell
divisions that occur because the cellular Hgb concentration is not great enough to
inhibit mitosis.A microcyte can have a normal diameter bur increased central pallor
because of its thinness (a bypochromic microcyte and leptocyte).
4.Dogs in some breeds (e.g., Akitas, Shibas, and possibly Jindos, chow-chows, and
shar-peis)may have erythrocytes whose MCVs are50-60 fL,though most breeds
have MCVs of 60-77 fL.Young horses (up to 6 mo of age) have lower MCVs
than mature horses. Young kittens have lowerMCVs thanmature cats.32
but their volumes are typically WRI, and MCVs for the sample may be WRI or
increased because of a regenerative response.
6.Sideroblastic anemias occurring in association with other diseases in dogs may be
microcytic (see Other Erythrocyte Disorders, sect.X).28
VIl.Abnormal erythrocyte shape (Table 3.7)
in this section,as well as shapes for which there are no accepted labels. Poikilocytosis is
an increased concentration of poikilocytes in blood. The significance of poikilocytosis
depends on the type ofpoikilocytepresent,so specificterms should be used whenever
possible.Poikilocytes can represent artifacts or pathologic cells.
1.Erythrocytes of neonatal calves (especially if anemic) can have spiculated erythro-
cytes with features of acanthocytes, echinocytes, or schizocytes.The pathogenesis of
the changes is not established but may be related to the presence of a unique Hgb
molecule or its interactions with erythrocyte membrane proteins.3 Fe deficiency may
also contribute to the anemiaand poikilocytosis.334
2.Erythrocytes in some ill cats assume an irregular, elongated form that may have a
broad appendage (Plate 5F).Although these poikilocytes have not been specifically
described or named (often described as some combination of ovalocytes,elliptocytes,
acanthocytes,burr cells,and keratocytes),and their pathogenesis（es) is (are)
unknown, they have been noted repeatedly in cats that have hepatic disease.
3.There are substantialdifferences among veterinary laboratory professonals and
clinical pathologyresources regarding identication,naming,semiquantitation,an
interpretation of poikilocytes. The poikilocytes are typically defined by their
identifying microscopic features (see Table 3.7).
B.Acanthocyte (spur cell and burr cell) (Plates 5G and 6J)
1.Acanthocytes are most common in dogs. In dogs,acanthocytosis is associated with
splenic and hepatic disorders, especially splenic hemangiosarcoma and other
infiltrative splenic disorders. Why acanthocytes form in these disorders is not
known.
2.Poikilocytes that have the microscopic features of acanthocytes (see Table 3.7) have
been seen concurrently with keratocytes and schizocytes in cases of lymphoma,
Table 3.7.Poikilocytes identifying features, clinical significance, and pathogeneses in domestic mammals
Poikilocyte
Other name
Identifying features
Clinical significance
Pathogemesis
Acanthocyte
Spur cell, burr cel
120 irregularly spaced,
Hemangiosar coma;
Unknown in domestic
(mds =o)
osd 
occasionally splenic,
mammals can form from
variable lengths; projections
hepatic, and renal
changes in membrane lipids;
sqnp ro smds uniq aq feu
posibly fragmentation
(Plate 5G and 6J)
*Codocyte
Target cell,
Central focus of Hgb that is
Typical with regenerative
Exces membrane relative to
(codo= “hat")
Mexican hat cell
surrounded by a ring of
anemias; also seen with
Hgb content; may occur
pallor that separates it from
hepatic, renal, and lipid
with membrane lipid
peripheral Hgb: one form of
s
dhanges
leptocyte (Plate 5H)
Dacryocyte
Teardrop shaped (Plate 51
Marrow diseases such as
Unknown except artifacts
(dacyro, dary = “tear")
and J)
myelofibrosis and
Sump uuons Aq posneo
neoplasia; also may be an
film prcparation
Eccentrocyte
Bite cell, cross-
Eccentric dense-staining Hgb
Overwhelming exposure to
Fusion of membranes damaged
bonded cells,
o seds rea ee p
oxidants; also rare cases of
by oxidants
hemighost
crescent (Plate 5K)
G6PD or FAD deficiencies
*Echinocyte
Burr cell
Vary from irregularly shaped
Hyponatremic dehydration.
Multiple causes (see the text)
(echino= “spiny”)
cells (type I), to regularly
doxorubricin toxicosis,
spaced blunt projections
anionic drugs
(type ), toregularly spaced
pointed projections (type
III) (Plate 5L)
Crenated
Crenated cells are artifacts
Prolonged exposure to alkaline
erythrocyte
glas while drying
Elliptocyte
(See ovalocyte)
*Keratocyte
Helmet cell
Notched,Hattened margin
Vasculitis, intravascular
Unclear: trauma,oxidative
(uoq = oy)
betwem two membrane
coagulation,
injury, and vesiculation have
projections (horns); variant
hemangiosarcoma, caval
all been proposed
has one horn (Plate 6A)
syndrome, endocarditis
Leptocyte
Thin cll that appears as a
Fe deficiency
Incomplete hemoglobin
(u中,=d)
hypochromic cel with
synthesis
increased cemtral pallor
(Plate 6B)
Ovalocyte
Elliptocyte
 o o no 
Protein band 4.1 deficiency
Abnormal membrane proteins
(olo=“egg")
6C)
in dogs,mutant spectrin
in hereditary form,
in a dog, myelofibrosis,
otherwise unknown
idiopathic in cats,iron
Pincered cell
Button or knob joined to rest
PK deficiency, intravascular
Unknown
of cell by a pinched area
trauma
(Plate 6D)
Pyknocyte
Irregularly
Overwhclming exposure to
Unclear; may form from
(psupuo=ofd)
contracted cell
condensed or contracted
oxidants: also rare cases of
eocentrocytes
Hgb and perhaps small tags
G6PD or FAD deficiencies
of fragmented membrane
(Plate 6E and F)
Continues
Table 3.7.cowtimed
Poikilocyte
Other name
Identifying features
Clinical significance
Pathogemesis
*Schizocyte
RBC fragment,
Triangular, comma-shaped,
Intravascular coagulation,
Same as keratocyte
(n=oz)
schistocyte
small round, or irregularly
vasculitis,
shaped piece of an
hemangiosarcoma, caval
erythrocyte (Plate 6G)
syndrome, endocarditis
Selenocyte
A damaged erythrocyte that is
Associated with hemolytic
Artifact (See the text)
（uoom=os)
e sq pue podeqs-uos
anemias, fragile
large dear space
erythrocytes
*Spherocyte
Decreased central pallor,
Immune hemolysis,
Membrane loss due to action
(punou =ouxyds)
fragmentation hemolysis,
of macrophages or trauma
increased Hgb staining
envenomations, clostridial
or abnormal cytoskeleton
intensity, and smooth
infections, hereditary band
margins (Plate 6I and J)
Stomatocyte
Elongated (slitlike or
Young erythrocytes or
Folding of exces membrane
（qnom=owes)
mouthlike) area of
hereditary stomatocytosis
cytoplasmic pallor (Plate
saop o
6K)
Torocyte
Punched-out, central clear
None; do not confuse with
jnuop,=ao)
space that creates a donut-
hypochromia
shaped")
shaped cell (Plate 6L)
*A relatively common poikilocyte
3/ERYTHROCYTES
147
hemangiosarcoma,cirrhosis,pancreatitis,intravascular coagulopathy,and glomerulo
nephritis.The concurrent finding of acanthocytes,keratocytes,and schizocytes
suggests that the acanthocytes may represent another form of poikilocyte formed by
intravascular trauma.35
3.In people, acanthocytic change is considered the result of abnormal lipid composi-
tion (high cholesterol to phospholipid ratio) acquired within an erythrocyte's
membrane during circulation. Similar findings have not been described for domestic
mammal acanthocytes.
4.Some acanthocytes may be dificult to distinguish from echinocytes.
C.Blister cell (see eccentrocyte and keratocyte in the following sects. H and K)
D.Burr cell is common name for many spiculated erythrocytes.
1.Echinocytes, acanthocytes, and other spiculated erythrocytes (those with membrane
projections) are called burr cells by different people.
2.Because the term may refer to several types of poikilocytes,its use may lead to
confusion and thus its clinicalvalue islimited.
E.Codocyte (target cell or Mexican hat cell) (Plate 5H)
1.A codocyte's shape results from a central bulge in the cell caused by an increased
ratio of cell membrane to Hgb content.
2.Codocytosis is commonly seen in regenerative anemias because young erythrocytes
have excess membrane and a decreased cellular Hgb concentration. When not
associated with a regenerative anemia, codocytosis is seen in hypochromic states
(e.g.,Fe deficiency) and when erythrocytes have excess membrane (e.g, hepatic,
renal, and lipid metabolism disorders)
F.Crenated erythrocytes (see echinocyte in the following sect.I)
G.Dacryocyte (Plate 5I and J)
1.Dacryocytosis is occasionally seen in animals with marrow diseases such as myelofi-
brosis and neoplasia
2.Artifactual dacryocytes may form because of erythrocyte stretching during blood
ilm preparation.Artifactual dacryocytes tend to have sharp points, occur in streaks,
and tend to point in the same direction because directional forces of the slide
preparation create them.
3.Some people use the term dacryocyte for cells that others would callkeratocytes
(with one horn) or even just poikilocytes.
H.Eccentrocyte (bite cell, cross-bonded cell, or hemighost cell) (Plate 5K)
1.Eccentrocytes form when oxidation leads to a bonding of erythrocyte membranes
and results in a collapsed,peripheral,crescent-shaped region of the cell （sometimes
called a blister) and the cell's Hgb is displaced eccentrically.
2.The membranes are damaged by some of the same oxidants that cause Heinz body
anemias.
3.Eccentrocytes may form when reducing pathways in erythrocytes are defective (e.g,
in G6PD-deficientorFAD-deficienthorses).
4.If enough erythrocytes in a blood sample are eccentrocytes, the sample's CHCM and
MCHC may be increased.
I.Echinocyte (burr cell) (Plare 5L)
1.The number and shape of spicules classify echinocytes: type I (irregular or angular
cells lacking distinct spicules), type II (multiple regularly spaced blunt spicules), and
type III (multiple regularly spaced sharp projections）.s39 This classification is similar
148
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.Echinocytes are thought to form when the surface area of the outer lipid layer of the
cellmembrane increases relative to that of the innerlipid layer because ofinsertion
of lipids or amphipathic drugs. They may also form secondary to increases in pH,
erythrocyte ATP depletion, damage by phospholipases, and cellular dehydration.
3.Pathologic echinocytosis has been associated with several disorders.
a.Erythrocyte dehydration (especially with hyponatremia and hypochloremia in
horses)38.41
b.Strenuous exercise (in racing horses)*
c.Doxorubicin toxicosis2
d.Reaction to anionic drugs such as phenothiazine3
g.Hemolytic anemia caused by clostridial infection in a horse
4.Artifactual echinocytes are called crenated erythrocytes and may have features of type
I, II, or II echinocytes. Clinically, an echinocyte is often considered a crenated
erythrocyte until proven otherwise. Crenation occurs after blood is collected and
while the blood film is drying: The membrane changes are probably due to the
alkalinity of glass9Erythrocytes of some sick animals are more prone to crenation.
lysolecithin formation).t9
5.Differentiation of artifactual and pathologic echinocytes can be difficult. These three
methods might assist with the challenge:
a.Make another blood film and use a hair drier or other means to dry the blood
quickly.
b. Examine blood films prepared on plastic slides or coverslips. Crenation is less
likely to occur on plastic.
c.Examine erythrocytes in a wet mount of blood on a slide. If echinocytes are not
present, those seen in the stained film can be considered artifacts.
Elliptocyte (see ovalocyte in the following sect. M)
1.Elliptocytosis (ovalocytosis) in domestic mammals can be caused by either acquired
or congenital disorders.
2.Oualocytosis and elliptocytosis are typically considered synonyms.Some prefer one
term over the other,using ovalocytefor plumper cells and elliptocyteformore
elongated or elliptical cells.
K.Keratocyte (helmet cell) (Plate 6A)
1.Keratocytosis may be caused by trauma to erythrocytes within the vascular system;
the same processes may create schizocytes. Other mechanisms may also be involved.
Keratocytes and schizocytes are both seen in Fe deficiency when the cells are more
fragile and less deformable.Keratocytes have also been reported in feline liver
disease,°doxorubicin toxicity in cats,and canine myelodysplastic syndrome52
Keratocytosis is also described as an in vitro change that occurs in feline blood
collected in EDTA,but the mechanism was not provided.29
2.An intermediate form sometimes called a prekeratocyte (blister cell) has a
cytoplasmic clear space (blister) that may represent a vacuole or a hole through
the cell. Others suggest it represents fusedmembranes.Scanning electron micro
scopic assessment of these cells has revealed holes, not vacuoles or fused membranes
(M.A.S.unpublished observations). The mechanisms by which these cells form are
not certain.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
149
3.Some forms of keratocytes, such as those with one horn,have also been classified as
budding fragmentation, acanthocytes,or dacryocytes.
L.Leptocyte (Plate 6B)
1.Some codocytes and most hypochromic erythrocytes are leptocytes (see codocytes
and hypochromic erythrocytes,in Morphologic Features of Erythrocytes, sects.II1.C
and VII.E)
2. Some people consider leptocyte a synonym for codocyte or a term for a hypochro
mic erythrocyte. Codocytes and hypochromic erythrocytes may be leptocytes, but
not all leptocytes are codocytes or hypochromic erythrocytes.Also,immature
erythrocytesmaybehypochromic,basedon the CHCMorMCHC(butnot
microscopically),or codocytic,without being leptocytes.
M. Ovalocyte (elliptocyte) (Plate 6C)
1.Acquired ovalocytosis is seen in dogs with myelofibrosis and in animals with Fe-
deficiency anemias (along with other abnormal erythrocyte features).
2.Ovalocytosis has been found incats withhepatic lipidosisporosystemic shunts
and doxorubicin toxicity.51Ovalocytosisis occasionally seen in blood flmsof cats
with other disorders. Erythrocyte membrane analysis has failed to detect qualitative
or quantitative defects (unpublished reports).
3.Two types of canine hereditary ovalocytosis (elliptocytosis) have been reported: one
associated with a protein band 4.1 deficiency and one with mutant membrane
spectrin.5 Clinical aspects of these disorders are presented in this chapter Other
Erythrocyte Disorders, sects.VI and VII)
4.Elliptocytes have been subclassified:Type I isnearly circular,type I is val, and typ
III ismore elongated.149
5.Healthy camelid,avian,reptilian,and amphibian species have ovalocytes as h
expected erythrocytes.Round discocytes would be poikilocytes in these species.
N.Pincered cell (Plate 6D)
1.Pincered cells have been associated with erythrocyte trauma and PK deficiency in a
Cairn terrier (unpublished case report) but is rarely reported.
2.In people, pincered cells have been associated with erythrocyte fragmentation,
hereditary spherocytosis, and erythroleukemia.s
O.Pyknocyte (irregularly contracted cell)(Plate 6Eand F)
1.Pyknocytosis is seen concurrently with eccentrocytosis in dogs and horses and
probably will be seen in other animals. Pyknocytes likely form from eccentrocytes,
but oxidative damage might cause both directly.
2.Pyknocytes stain more intensely with NMB stain than do discocytes or spherocytes
at least in horses.
3.Via lightmicroscopy,ome pyknocytes look like spherocytes.However,these
spheroid pyknocytes are usually accompanied by eccentrocytes and pyknocytes
with membrane tags,so the pathologic changes can be recognized.Via electron
microscopy,pyknocytes hadmembrane irregularities or tags and were not perfect
spheres.36
P.Schizocyte (schistocyte or RBC fragment) (Plate 6G)
1.Schizocytosis occurs when rigid structures or rheologic forces traumatize
erythrocytes.
2.Pathologic states associated with schizocytosis include intravascular coagulation,
vasculitis includingglomerulonephritis and hemolytic uremic syndrome,hemangio.
sarcoma,caval syndrome of dirofilariasis,endocarditis,liver disease,heart failure,
150
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
hemophagocytic histiocytic disorders, acquired dyserythropoiesis, and Fe deficiency.29
Schizocytosis may become prominent after splenectomy.29
Q.Selenocyte (selenoid bodies)(Plate 6H)
1.Selenocytes are not a commonly recognized poikilocyte in domestic mammals but
have been found in anemic and nonanemic animals (M.A.S. and S.L.S.
observations)
2.Their formation is described as a rwo-step process: (1) a hole is formed in the
erythrocyte membrane, and (2) the hole becomes much larger while the cell is
spreading on the slide,and the remaining erythrocyte appears as a large lightly
formation.s9
R.Spherocyte (Plate 6I and J)
1.For domestic mammals,spherocytes are most easily recognized in canine blood films
because erythrocytes of most dogs have enough central pallor to contrast clearly with
the spherocytes that lack central pallor. With careful evaluation, however, sphero-
cytes can be recognized or suspected in other species. A moderate to marked
spherocytosis is typically associated with IMHA.
2. In IMHA, the spherical shape results from the loss of erythrocyte membrane
without a corresponding loss in erythrocyte volume. These cells cannot fatten on a
slide,so theirdiametes are decreased and they appearmicrocytic,buthervolumes
are typically not altered appreciably.
3.Spherocytes are frequently seen in immune hemolytic anemias and may be seen with
s
created by fragmentation may have decreased volume (microspberocytes). They also
arereported tooccur inPK-deficient dogs,inbee-sting anemiaswith some
snake envenomations,in hereditaryband 3 deficiency inJapanese black cattle,and
4.Spherocytosis may be falsely detected if one assesses cells too near the
feathered edge of a smear where artifactual distortion of erythrocytes makes
erythrocytes lack central pallor.Pyknocytes may be falsely considered
spherocytes.
5.Processes that produce spherocytes may also produce spheroid cells that are not
perfect spheres and have small amounts of central pallor that cannot be definitively
categorized as spherocytes.These may be called stomatospherocytes.
S.Stomatocyte (Plate 6K)
1.Stomatocytes result from folding ofexcess membrane to form an elongated area of
pallor (a slit or stoma) instead of a circular central pallor.Young erythrocytes
(polychromatophilic erythrocytes or young macrocytes) frequently are stomatocytes,
although this is typically not noted in CBC reports.
2.Stomatocytosis also can be caused by a hereditary defect in the erythrocyte mem
brane: hereditary stomatocytosis of Alaskan malamutes with concurrent chondrodys-
plasia, Drentse patrijshonds with concurrent hypertrophic gastritis,miniature
schnauzers (asymptomatic), standard schnauzers (asymptomatic),6 and a Pomera-
nian (see Other Erythrocyte Disorders, sect. IV).
T.Torocyte (Plate 6L)
1.Represents an artifactual shape change
2.Torocytes should not be confused with hypochromic cells that have marked central
pallor.A torocyte has a sharply punched out center and a dense ringofHgb staining
3/ERYTHROCYTES
151
in its periphery,whereas a hypochromic cell has a paler ring of peripheral Hgb
staining that fades into central pallor.
ANEMIA
I.
General information
A.Anemia is a decreased [RBC], a decreased blood [Hgb], or a decreased Hct.
B.A blood’s Hct, blood [Hgb], and [RBC] generally change proportionately because they
are all assessments of the erythrocyte content of blood. However, they may not be
uniformly decreased,because of variations in reference intervals or the presence of
abnormal erythrocytes;that is,an abnormal erythrocyte volume orintracellular Hgb
concentration.
C.Anemia is a pathologic state or diagnostic problem rather than a disease. Its major
significance is a reduced capacity of blood to transport O to tissues.Anemia develops
when there is one or more of the following:
1.Increased erythrocyte loss due to blood loss
2.Accelerated erythrocyte destruction (pathologic hemolysis)
3.Decreased effective erythrocyte production
D. Clinical signs caused by anemia reflect decreased O-carrying capaciry and
include decreased exercise olerance, weakness, depression,and rapid respiration
(tachypnea).
E.The major physical examination finding is pale mucous membranes (gingival,
conjunctival, or vulvar) due to anemic blood in capillaries.With a marked anemia,
blood becomes less viscous andmay cause a systolicheart murmur.
II.
Classifications of anemias
There are three common classification systems, each with its advantages and limitations in
certain clinical situations.
A.Classification by marrow responsiveness
1.This classification system is primarily based on the presence or absence of reticulocy-
tosis in blood,but other blood film and marrow findings may influence the
classification.
aRegenerative anemia is anemia with a concurrentreticulocytosis.Marrow
may be responsive prior to a reticulocytosis (preregenerative anemia)
Until there is a reticulocytosis (or progressive Hct increases),one cannot
be certain that erythropoiesis will be effective and the anemia will be
regenerative.
b. Nonregenerative anemia is anemia without a concurrent reticulocytosis.
2.Reticulocytosis is typically established by finding an increased RC, increased CRP, or
increased polychromasia (see Analytical Principles and Methods, sects. I1.I and K,
and Morphologic Features of Erythrocytes, sect. Il.D).
a.Documenting reticulocytosis is the most reliable,single routine method of
establishing accelerated erythropoiesis (except in horses).
b.In most species, reticulocytosis is expected about 34 d after Epo stimulates
marrow.Peak production is expected about 7-10 d after stimulation. The
reticulocytereponse incats isdifferent.fIna studywithfive cats and aftera
single episode of blood loss the aggregate reticulocytosis peaked 4 d later and
then diminished to pre-blood loss concentration by day 9.The punctate
152
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
reticulocytosis peaked 9 d after blood loss and did not return to baseline until
after day 21.12
(1)Dogs have a great ability.RC or CRP may increase sixfold to eightfold in
response to severe anemia.
(2）
Cats have moderate ability (maybe threefold to fivefold).
(3) Carttle have mild ability. Increased polychromasia is frequently accompanied
by erythrocytes with basophilic stippling
(4)Horses very rarely release polychromatophilic erythrocytes from marrow, so
attempting to establish peripheral blood reticulocytosis hasnot been
valuable. However, horses with an erythropoietic stimulus may release
reticulocytes that are detectable by automated analyzers (e.g.,ADVIA 120):
RCswere5-10×10²/uL after phlebotomy induced anemia in horses,and
the RCwas 57x10²/μL in a horse with a hemolytic anemia.*The presence
ofmacrocytesinequineblood suggest,but doesnotprove,marrow
responsiveness to Epo in most clinical situations.Bone marrow examination
may provide evidence for marrow Epo responsiveness in horses. Similarly,
early marrow responses may be noted in other species prior to
reticulocytosis
3. The following erythrocyte abnormalities would support a regenerative status, but each
may also be found in nonregenerative anemias: macrocytic and/or hypochromic indices,
anisocytosisHowell-Jollybodies,rubricytosiscodocytosisorbasophilic stipplng
4.Mild to moderate bone marrow erythroid hyperplasia without a reticulocytosis may
reflect a pending regenerative anemia, particularly when the erythroid series is left-
shifted. Marked erythroid hyperplasia with a moderate to severe anemia and without
a reticulocytosis is usually caused by ineffective erythropoiesis.If there is a mild
anemia,erythroid hyperplasia could represent the later stages of effective erythropoi
esis when there is increased release ofmature erythrocytes.
5.A progressively increasing Hct, even in the absence of a reticulocytosis,indicates a
animals that have mild anemias or that are in the resolving stages ofmore severe
anemias. Once an anemic animal has established erythroid hyperplasia and its
anemia improves, the Epo stimulus is reduced; therefore, more erythrocytes will
mature in the bone marrow before being released, and a reticulocytosis will diminish
or disappear.
6.Regenerative anemia (responsive anemia)
a.This occurs primarily in response to blood loss or hemolysis. It is rarely associ-
atedwith erythroid neoplasia in cats.It may occur withresolution of some causes
of nonregenerative anemia.
b.Regenerative status indicates that a bone marrow is regenerating a replacement
population of erythrocytes.
C.Regeneration may be blunted by concurrent conditions associated with nonre-
generative anemias
7.Nonregenerative anemia (nonresponsive anemia)
a.This occurs diseases that directly or indirectly cause defective or reduced erythro
cyte production.(During the first few days after hemolysis or blood loss,an
anemia will be classified as nonregenerativebecause the marrow has not had time
to produce a reticulocytosis.)
3/ERYTHROCYTES
153
erating a replacement population of erythrocytes.A severe,nonregenerative
anemia typically reflects severe and prolonged damage to erythroid cell
precursors.
c.Findings in bone marrow examinations include erythroid hypoplasia, marrow
aplasia, red cell aplasia, myelofibrosis, myelitis, myelophthisis, relatively normal
erythroid series (hypoplasia may be toomild to detect),mild to moderate
hyperplasia with or without maturation arrest in conditions ofineffective
erythropoiesis
d.Most nonregenerative anemias are normocytic normochromic anemias without
poililocytosis or other erythrocyte abnormalities. However, blood may contain
the following erythrocyte abnormalitiesrelated to the underlying disease process:
Howell-Jollybodiesrubricytosis,codocytosisbasophilic stippling,macrocytes r
microcytes,or hypochromic erythrocytes
B.Classification by erythrocyte indices (morphologic classification)
1.This classification system is based on MCV and MCHC (or CHCM) (Table 3.8).
Classification should be further characterized by examining erythrocytes on a
Wright-stained blood film. In the original classification system, there was not a
category for blood samples with increased MCHC values because such values were
considered to be erroneous. However, an increased MCHC or CHCM may be
valid and reflect a pathologic state; thus we have added them to the system. (Note:
The MCV and MCHC or CHCMvalues are used mostly to characterize erythro
cytes in anemic blood, but abnormal values can also be found when anemia is not
present.In such samples,theyare frequently related to dyserythropoiesisor in viro
artifacts.)
2.Generalconcepts
a.The Hgb concentration within the cytoplasm of a developing erythrocyte
provides negative feedback on both DNA and RNA synthesis. In physiologic
35 g/dL),negative feedback stops DNA synthesis (thus no more mitoses） and
RNA synthesis (thus no more Hgb synthesis).However until that optimal
concentration is reached, the immature erythroid cells may continue to divide
（and thus produce microcytes) or may make more Hgb than usual (i.e.,more
Hgb is needed to reach the optimal concentration in larger erythrocytes).
b.MCV and MCHC or CHCM suggest the type of erythrocyte that is being
produced by the marrow, although postproduction processes can influence the
values if severe enough.
(1)Normocytic:Erythroid cell maturation is not defective
(2)Macrocytic:Young erythrocytes are present or erythrocyte maturation is
defective.
(3)Microcytic: Mitoses during erythropoiesis may create smaller cells.
(4)Normochromic:Hgb synthesis is complete.
(5)Hypochromic: Hgb synthesis is incomplete (young erythrocytes or defective
synthesis).
(6)Hyperchromic: Erythrocytes were not hyperchromic when produced.
Either they lost volume (in vivo orin vitro) or there is an erroneous
MCHC.
154
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 3.8. Causes of anemias classified by erythrocyte indices (MCV and MCHC
orCHCM)
Disorders or conditions that cause
Anemia classification
MCV
MCHCor CHCM
the anemia
Normocytic normochromic
WRI
WRI
If persistent,then typically
disorders that reduce
erythropoiesis; most anemias
begin as normocytic
normochromic
Macrocytic hypochromic
Regenerative response after blood
loss or hemolysis
Macrocyticnormochromic
WRI
Regenerative response after blood
loss or hemolysis, occasionally
due to defective erythropoiesis
(FeLV induced, poodle
macrocytosis); in vitro changes
Microcytic hypochromic
↓
Fe defciency, pyridoxine deficiency
Microcytic normochromic
WRI
Fe deficiency,hepatic failure
including portosystemic shunts,
in vitro changes"
Normocytic hypochromic
WRI
Rarely een, suspectr
Normocytic hyperchromicb
WRI
MCHCor CHCMmaybe
Macrocytic hyperchromic
↑
factitiously increased or a
Microcytic hyperchromicb
↑
pathologic state may cause true
increases (see the text for
explanation)
See the text for the cause of in vitro changes that can produce higher or lower MCV values.
Theyperromic classification wasnot part of theoriginalmorphologicclassicationsystem because
increased MCHC values were considered to be erroneous. However, the increased MCHC or CHCM rarely
may represent a pathologic state (see the text) and thus we have added byperchromic to the system.
Note: Erythrocyte concentrations in juvenile animals typically are lower than in mature animals.
c.Because MCV and MCHC or CHCM are averages, erythrocyte cytograms or
blood film examinations are typically more sensitive methods of detecting
macrocytic,microcytic,or hypochromic cell.With eithermethod,it is possible
tohave anormocyticnormochromic anemia with detectable macrocytic,
microcytic,or hypochromic populations.
3.Normocyticnormochromicanemias
a.Blood film findings:Erythrocytes are typically uniform but may occasionally
have morphologic abnormalities.
b.Most anemias begin as normocytic normochromic anemias.When marrow
releases many larger or smaller erythrocytes with normal or decreased Hgb
concentrations, then MCV or MCHC (and CHCM) will change. MCV or
MCHC (and CHCM) must be outside of reference intervals before the
morphologic classification changes.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
155
c.Persistent normocytic normochromic anemias are expected to be
nonregenerative.
d.Most anemias in horses are normocytic normochromic because their marrows
release few reticulocytes. If sufficient macrocytes are released, the anemia will
become macrocytic.
4.Macrocytic hypochromic anemias
a.Blood film findings: One can expect polychromasia (except in horses),
macrocytosis, and anisocytosis.Visual hypochromasia is not expected because
reticulocytes are large and contain a normal mass of Hgb (MCH is not
decreased); they do not spread thin enough to have an increased central pallor.
b. Concurrent macrocytosis and hypochromasia support the presence of
immature erythrocytes,and thus the anemia is probably due to blood loss
or hemolysis.
cells.67
d.In automated hematologic instruments,theMCHCis calculated from
the measured blood [Hgb] and a Hct that is calculated from a measured
MCV and[RBC]. If the [RBC] is accurate and the MCV is falsely increased
(see the following sect. 5.c), then the calculated MCHC will be falsely
decreased.
5.Macrocytic normochromic anemias
a.Blood film findings: One can expect polychromasia,macrocytosis,and
anisocytosis.
b.Disorders or conditions
(1) They are common in regenerative anemias because of blood loss or
hemolysis.
(2)They are sometimes associated with defective erythropoiesis.
(a)FeLV-infected cats may have defective erythroid maturation that yields
megaloblastic cells (Plate 9L) with defective DNA synthesis and thus
decreased mitoses; megaloblastic cells mature to macrocytes.
(b)Folic acid and cobalamin (vitamin B2) deficiencies cause defective
nucleic acidmetabolism that could cause macrocytosis （possible,but
have a normocytic or macrocytic anemia due to a cobalamin def-
ciency.6 Cobalt is an essential component of cobalamin. Cobalamin
deficiency depresses the activity of a methyltransferase that blocks
folate metabolism by trapping a methyl group in 5-methyltetrahydro-
folate.Thus,in the absence of cobalamin, a functional folate defi-
ciency may exist even though the serum [folate] may be WRI.
(5-Methyltetrahydrofolate is detected in folate assays, see the Folate
Concentration in Dogs and Cats section in Chapter 15.)
Poodles with the poodle marrow dyscrasia (see Other Nonneoplastic
Leukocyte Disorders, sect. II, in Chapter 2) will have a macrocytosis
and may have an anemia due to another pathologic process. The
pathogenesis of the macrocytosis is not established.
(d）Erythroleukemia
Hereford calves69
156
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
c.The MCV may be increased by certain sample or patient conditions
(1)Erythrocyte agglutination: An electronic cell counter may detect an
aggregate (mostly doublets and triplets) of erythrocytes to be one large
erythrocyte, agglutination could be mmune-mediated or, n horses,
induced by heparin.However,if the electronic cell counter is programmed
toexcludeparticles thatareunrealisticallylarge,theagglutinated cellsmay
be ignored.
(2)Cell swelling during storage before testing: This occurs most frequently
with mail-in samples. The MCHC (and CHCM) may be decreased
(3)In vivo hyperosmolar states (e.g.,hypernatremia) can lead to increased
intracellular osmolality.Whenthebloodwithinthe analyzer is dilutedby
fuid of lower osmolality (approximately isoosmotic with normal plasma),
HO moves into the cells and causes acute swelling. The MCHC (and
CHCM) may be decreased.21
(4)Excess dipotassium-EDTA anticoagulant may cause erythrocyte swelling
and decrease the MCHC (CHCM) with the Bayer Technicon instrument
when the cells mix with analyzer diluent. Excess tripotassium-EDTA did
not have the same effect.7.71
6.Microcytic hypochromic anemias
a.Blood film findings:Expect microcytosis,leptocytosis, codocytosis,hypochro
masia, and anisocytosis. Other poikilocytes may include ovalocytes, schizocytes
and folded erythrocytes.Polychromasia may be present but less than expected
for the severity of the anemia.
b.Microcytosis and hypochromasia may be due to defective Hgb synthesis caused
by the following:
(1)Fe deficiency (see Blood Loss Anemias, sect. I.B)
(2）
However,an experimental Cu deficiency in dogs produced a normocytic
normochromic anemia.73
(3)Potentially, vitamin Bg (pyridoxine) deficiency
c.Hepatic failure (rarely, more likely microcytic normochromic)
d.The MCV may be decreased by certain sample or patient conditions
(see Table 3.3)and microcytic hyperchromic states (see the following sect.11).
7. Microcytic normochromic anemias
a.Blood film findings vary from those seen in microcytic hypochromic anemia to
normocytic normochromic anemia.
b.Causes of microcytosis
(1)Fe deficiency (early or mild): Prior to causing a microcytic hypochromic
anemia, Fe deficiency may produce a microcytic normochromic anemia,
but the MCH is decreased.
(2）
Hepatic failure due to hepatic disease or portosystemic shunts: The cause
of microcytosis is not known, but data suggest a defect in Fe transport to
erythrocyte precursors.MCH is decreased, but the MCHC (CHCM)
typically remains WRI.
③
4
Some healthyAkitas and Shibas have lower MCVvalues (in the 50-60 fL
range) than do dogs of other breeds.The same may be true of some dogs
belonging to other Asian breds (e.g., Jindos,chow-chows, and shar-peis)
3/ERYTHROCYTES
157
Also,foals and kittens have lower MCVvalues than do adult animals of
therespective species32
8.Normocytic hypochromic anemias
a.These are uncommon. If found, one must consider that the data may be
inaccurate or that the reference intervals may be inappropriate.
b.They can be found when erythrocytes are hypochromic (because of immaturity
or Fe deficiency) and the MCV has not changed enough to be outside of
reference interval. Examination of blood film may reveal marked anisocytosis,
but overall there were not enough macrocytes or microcytes to increase or
decrease the MCV.
9.Macrocytic hyperchromic anemias: Typically, the MCHC is falsely increased (see
the following sect. 12). Compare to the CHCM, if available.
10.Normocytic hyperchromic anemias: Typically, the MCHC is falsely increased (see
the following sect.12). Compare to the CHCM if it is available.
11.Microcytic hyperchromic anemias
a.Falsely low MCV and high MCHC (CHCM) may be produced when erythro
cytes areinhypoosmolal plasma7Erythrocytes adjust in vivo to the hypo-
osmolal environment caused by hyponatremia and hypochloremia by having
decreased cytoplasmic osmolality.When placed in a diluent prior to counting,
osmosis results in H,O leaving the erythrocytes and thus decreasing volume of
erythrocytes.
b.If the MCHC (or CHCM) is falsely increased for other reasons, then potential
causes of a pathologicmicrocytosis should be considered.
12.Increased MCHC or CHCM
a.In theory, it is not physiologically possible to produce hyperchromic erythro
cytes because Hgb synthesis stops in an erythrocyte precursor when an optimal
[Hgb] is reached within its cytoplasm.
b.Most increased MCHCs are falsely increased,and the blood samples'MCH
values also are falsely increased. CHCMs are more reliable but can also be
falsely increased. Causes offalsely increased MCHC,CHCM,and MCH
include the following:
(1)Pathologichemoglobinemia:Blood [Hgb]is used to calculate MCHC and
MCH, and it would include Hgb from erythrocytes and the Hgb in
plasma. The CHCM would nor be affected. A more accurate MCHC
could be calculated by correcting the blood [Hgb] by using a value for
Hgbdet
(2)Oxyglobin:The free Hgb from therapeutic use of Hgb-based Ocarriers
causes an overestimation of intracellular Hgb and falsely increases the
MCHC.The CHCM is not affected.A more accurate MCHC could be
calculated by correcting theblood Hgb] by using a value for Hgbat
(3）In vitro hemolysis: Blood [Hgb] is used to calculate the MCHC,and it
truly represents the blood [Hgb], but the Hct and [RBC] for the sample
arefalsely decreased and thus theMCHC and MCH are falsely increased.
4
Spectral interferences in the blood Hgb assay: Interferences that produce a
falsely increased blood[Hgb] include lipid droplets in grossly lipemic
samples,pigments in markedly icteric samples,nuclei or intact WBCs
in samples with extreme leukocytosis,Heinz bodies (due to incomplete
erythrocyte lysis),and precipitates of immunoglobulins (e.g.,immuno
158
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
globulin A).7This wouldyield a falsely increased MCHC.The CHCM
may also be falsely increased when many Heinz bodies are present
because Heinz bodies alter the light-scattering properties of affected
erythrocytes.7
(5）
As discussed in the preceding section 11,the MCHC and CHCM may be
falsely increased because of cell shrinkage related to in vivo hypoosmolal
states (e.g.,hyponatremia) followed by cell contact with a relatively
hyperosmolal diluent in the analyzer.
c.The ADVIA methods of evaluating erythrocytes can detect whether a MCHC is
erroneous or reflects an uncommon hyperchromic state.
(1)If theMCHCis increased and the CHCM is not,then the MCHCis
probably falsely increased because of Hgb in plasma or because of a
spectral interference in the blood [Hgb] assay.
(2
If both the MCHC and CHCM are increased, then theremay truly be a
hyperchromic state.
d.Pathologic conditions that can cause true increases in MCHC (and CHCM) are
rare.
(1)Blood with eccentrocytosis and pyknocytosis sometimes has an increased
MCHC because oxidative condensation of Hgb and fusion of cell mem-
branes cause a loss of cell volume without a proportionate loss of cell
Hgb.76 These cells may also be microcytic.
2）
Spherocyte populations with increased MCHCand CHCM may poten-
tially form insome spherocytic anemias if the spherocyticprocesscauses
loss of cell volume in excess of Hgb. These cells may also be microcytic.
Generallyoweverspheroctesinomestic speciesonlyappear
hyperchromic and microscopically small because of their thickness,and
their MCHCs,CHCMs,and MCVs are WRI
C.Pathophysiologic classification
1.It is based on the pathologic mechanism or process that produced the anemia.
Multiple pathologic processes may contribute to an anemia.
a.Blood loss anemias can be acute (hours to days) to chronic (weeks to months).
(1)In external blood loss anemias,erythrocytes are lost from the body or lost into
the alimentary or urinary tract.
(2)In internal blood loss anemias, erythrocytes move from the intravascular to
the extravascular space (typically into peritoneal or pleural cavities).
b.Hemolytic anemias
(1)In extravascular hemolysis,there is erythrocyte lysis outside of blood vessels
(in macrophages). It does not include hemorrhage.
(2）In intravascular hemolysis, there is erythrocyte lysis within the blood vascular
pass through the sinuses of the spleen,liver, or bone marrow.
C.Anemias caused by decreased erythrocyte production
(1)Infammatory diseases
(2)Renal disease
(3）Marrow hypoplasia or aplasia
(4)Erythroid hypoplasia or ineffective erythropoiesis
ways:
3/ERYTHROCYTES
159
↓Hct,↓[Hgb].or↓[RBC]
Reticulocytosis or
increased polychromasia
Present
Absent
Regenerative anemia
Nonregenerative anemia
Blood loss
Blood lossorhemolysis<3-4 d
External
Acute
Reduced erythropoiesis
Chronic
Decreased erythropoietin
Internal
Refractory to erythropoietin
Acute
Bone marrow damage/replacement
Chronic
Ineffective erythropoiesis
Hemolysis
Destruction of erythroid precursors
Extravascular
Defective erythrocytes
Intravascular
- defective heme synthesis
-abnormal erythroid maturation
Erythroid neoplasia(rare)
-defective nucleic acid metabolism
Fig.3.7. An approach to problem-solving anemias: After anemia has been detected or confirmed, the
presence or absence of aregenerative response is determined by assessing RC or CRP or detecting increased
polychromasia (see Anemia, sect. II.A). If it is a regenerative anemia, then the anemia is probably due to
either blood loss or hemolysis. If the anemia is nonregenerative and has been present for several days, then it
is due toreduced or ineffective erythropoiesis.
a.It serves as a differential diagnosis list or to answer questions such as “What are
the basic causes of anemias？”(Fig. 3.7)
b.It is used to group specific diseases based on the method or methods by which
they cause anemia.
NONREGENERATIVEANEMIAS
I.
General concepts
A.The major reason for a persistent nonregenerative anemia is decreased erythrocyte
production; defective erythropoiesis can also contribute. Since erythrocytelife spans of
domestic animals are generally 2-5 mo,an anemia will take several weeks to months to
develop if it is caused only by decreased erythropoiesis.For example,a dog's erythrocyte
life span is about 100 d. In health, half of its erythrocytes are > 50 d old and half are
< 50 d old. If a disease stopped erythropoiesis completely and did not alter erythrocyte
life span, it would take 25 d for the dog's Hct to drop from 40 % to 30 %, and about
50 d to drop from 40 % to 20 %.Because cat erythrocytes have shorter life spans
(approximately 70 d), such anemias would develop quicker. Likewise, production-failure
anemia would develop slower in horses and cattle because their erythrocytes have longer
life spans (approximately 150 d).
160
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.Most diseases do not stop erythrocyte production completely but only decrease the rate
of production. Therefore, nonregenerative anemias may take even longer to develop.
However, many diseases that reduce erythropoiesis also shorten erythrocyte life span,
and thus anemia may develop quicker than expected from reduced erythropoiesis alone.
clinical signs are detected.Because the anemia is chronic,the disease or disorder causing
the anemia is chronic. Severity of a nonregenerative anemia will depend on duration of
the disease, degree of decreased erythropoiesis, and presence of other processes that
shorten erythrocytelife span.
D.When a persistent nonregenerative anemia is detected,most erythrocytes in the animals
blood were produced when the animal had the disease that caused the anemia.Thus
characteristicsof the circulating erythrocytes may help determine the cause of the
persistent nonregenerative anemia (see Anemia, sect.II.B).
I1.
Disorders that cause nonregenerative anemias (Table 3.9)
A.Inflammatory disease
1.Inflammation causes AID (also called anemia of chronic disease and anemia of chronic
inflammation). It is the most common nonregenerative anemia of domestic
mammals and varies from mild to moderate severity.Typically, it is a normocytic
normochromic anemia but, rarely, is microcytic.
Table 3.9.Disorders and conditions that cause nonregenerative anemias
Reduced erythropoiesis
Infammatory diseases (primarily chronic)
*Infectiou:bacterial,fungal,viral,protozoal,parasit
*Noninfectious
*Renal disease (chronic)
Diseases causing marrow hypoplasia or aplasia
Infectious agents bacterial,fungal,viral,protozoal
Toxicosis chemotherapeutic agents,estrogen,bracken fern,phenybutazone
Irradiation:whole body or environmental
Marrowneoplasia orreplacement:neoplasia,myelofbrosis,osteopetrosis
Diseases causing selective erythroid hypoplasia or aplasia
Pure red cell aplasia (including immune-mediated mechanisms)
*FeLV-induced erythroid hypoplasia
*Endocrine:hypothyroidism,hypoadrenocorticism,hypoandrogenism
*Liver disease or failure (including portosystemic shunts)
Ineffective erythropoiesis
Nutritional: Fe, copper, cobalt, folate, or vitamin B deficiency
Immune-mediated nonregenerative anemia (includes at least some pure red cell aplasias)
FeLV-induced erythroid neoplasiaa
Dyserythropoiesis of English springer spaniels
Congenital dyserythropoiesis of polled Hereford calves
*A relatively common disease or condition
* FeLV may cause hypoplasia or ineffective erythropoiesis.
Note:Blood loss or hemolysis ofless than 3-4d duration must be differentiated from conditions
causing nonregenerative anemias (see Fig. 3.7).
3/ERYTHROCYTES
161
2.AID is of relatively little clinical significance after it is recognized. Most diagnostic
efforts are directed toward the primary disease and not the secondary abnormalities
caused by the inflammatory disease.
3. Almost any chronic disorder with an infammatory component will initiate the
processes that cause the anemia.
a.Chronic infections: bacterial (including anaplasmal), fungal, viral, and protozoal
b.Noninfectious disorders: immune, toxic,and neoplastic (usually a malignant
neoplasm that causes necrosis and/or infammation around or within the
neoplasm)
4.Pathogenesis of the anemia involves these three concurrent mechanisms initiared by
inflammation:7
a.Shortened erythrocyte survival
(1)Pathologic events are not understood entirely but are associated with
increased [IL-1].
(2)Oxidant damage to erythrocyte membranes and subsequent binding of
immunoglobulin molecules may accelerate the removal of erythrocytes.78
b.Impaired Femobilization or utilization
(1)Hepcidin production by hepatocytes is stimulated by IL-6,and the binding
of hepcidin to ferroportin in cell membranes internalizes ferroportin.
Without membrane ferroportin,the macrophages cannot export Fe.9
(2)Alterationsin ferritin production and alterations in transferrin receptors
increase Fe storage and therefore decrease the availability of Fe for Hgb
synthesis.
(3)Cytokines involved in altered Fe kinetics include IL-1, IL-6, interferon, and
TNF.
c.Impaired erythrocyte production
(1)Erythroid cells become refractory (nonresponsive) to increased Epo because
of the effects of inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, interferon, and TNF) on
precursors.
(2)Blunted Epo response to anemia (Epo production is increased but not as
much as expected) is due to actions of IL-1, TNF, and tumor growth factor
'd
5. These laboratory findings support the conclusion that an animal has AID:
a. Mild to moderate normocytic normochromic anemia with litle to no
poikilocytosis
b.Chronic infammatory leukogram:mature neutrophilia,lymphocytosis, or
monocytosis
c.Hyperproteinemia due to increased concentrations of -globulins or positive
acute-phase proteins
d.Marrow that contains essentially normal to mildly reduced erythroid population,
mild tomoerate ranulocytichypeplasiaossiblyplasmacytosisand abudant
hemosiderin (except in feline marrow, where it is not expected)
e.Hypoferremia, serum [ferritin] WRI to increased, and adequate to increased
stainable Fe in tissues (marrow except for cats, spleen, or liver)
B.Renal disease (chronic)
1.Most patients with chronic renal disease are anemic. The anemias are slight to
moderate in severity, and essentially all are normocytic normochromic.
2.Pathogenesis of anemia
162
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
a.Inadequate Epo production: Chronic renal disease damages the kidneys suff-
production is inadequate. (Epo therapy is effective.)
b.Decreased erythrocyte life span (mild): Substances not cleared by the kidneys
may decrease erythrocyte life span.
c.Decreased marrow response to Epo
d. Other factors: hemorrhage caused by uremic ulcers or vascular damage; poor
nutritional status
3.Laboratory findings
a.Normocytic normochromic,nonregenerative anemia
b.Evidence of chronic renal disease or dysfunction,such as azotemia,urine specif
gravity in the isosthenuric range,and electrolyte disturbances
C.Diseases causing marrow hypoplasia or aplasia of multiple cell lineages
1.Major concepts
a.Damage can be to one or more of the components of the marrow’s microenvi-
ronment: blood vessels and/or sinusoids, reticular adventitial cells, marrow stroma
(fat cells or fibrocytes), or hematopoietic stem cells. The resulting marrow will be
hypoplastic or aplastic.
b.Damage may be irreversible or reversible and may cause aplastic anemia (hypo
plastic pancytopenia)
2.Disorders
a.Marrow hypoplasia or aplasia in domestic animals often has an unproven
disorder (idiopathic). In people, aplastic anemia is usually immune mediated.
b.Infectious agents may suppress hematopoiesis through direct hemic cell infection,
myelitis, or secondary effects such as immune reactions.
(1)Suppression may occur with bacterial septicemias,ehrlichiosis, disseminated
mycoses (e.g,histoplasmosis),viral infections (e.g.,EIAV or FeLV infec-
(2)Infections with Cytauxzoon felis are somewhat unique among these infectious
agents because the agent has piroplasms in erythrocytes and schizonts in
macrophages.9 Clinically, cytauxzoonosis is often a rapid and highly fatal
disease, but a few cats do survive natural infections.i
(a)When blood erythrocytes contain the piroplasms, cats may or may not
be anemic. When present, anemias can range from mild to severe, are
nonregenerative, and probably are caused by AID and damage to
marrow, spleen,and liver.
(b)Fever and icterus are common clinical findings. The moderate to
marked hyperbilirubinemia and resultant bilirubinuria are primarily
caused by hepatic damage and cholestasis. Erythrophages are found in
many organs,but hemolysis usually is considered aminor contributor to
the anemia.79
(c)Other laboratory findings may include the following: thrombocytopenia,
leukopenia (sometimes with toxic changes), large macrophages laden
with schizonts in the blood films (rarely), and other hematologic and
clinical chemistry abnormalities caused by hepatic, splenic, lymph node
and marrow damage associated with the schizont stage of the parasitic
infection.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
163
c.Toxicosesinvolving compounds suchascheotherapeuticagentsestrogen
phenylbutazone4.8and chemicals inbracken fern(Pteridium aquilinum)
d. Irradiation damage produced by whole body therapeutic or environmental
exposure toX-rays,gamma irradiation,orbeta irradiation
e.Marrow replacement
(1)Diseases may cause anemia and other cytopenias by replacing hematopoietic
cells in the marrow.Such anemias are commonly called myelophthisic
dnemias.
(2）Disorders that may cause myelophthisis(myelo-marrow”plus -phthisis
"wasting")
(a)Myeloproliferative diseases: granulocytic,monocytic,erythroid,or
megakaryocytic neoplasia
(c)Metastaticneoplasia
Lymphoproliferative neoplasia (primary in lymph nodes, spleen, or
other tissues)
(ii)Mast cell neoplasia
(ii) Carcinomas and nonhemic sarcomas can metastasize to marrow,
but such lesions are not expected to cause suffcient marrow
damage to produce anemia.
(d)Nonneoplastic cell proliferation
(i)Myelofibrosis is fibrous tissue proliferation, usually for unknown
reasons.It may occur after inflammation and/or necrosis,with
myeloproliferative disease, or with a chronic erythropoietic
stimulus.
(ii)Osteopetrosis: bone proliferation into medullary space
D.Diseases causing selective erythroid hypoplasia or ineffective erythropoiesis (without
generalized marrow hypoplasia)
1.Pure red cell aplasia
a.Pure red cell aplasia is a descriptive term for disorders in which a nonregenerative
anemia is caused by marked erythroid hypoplasia or aplasia,but other hemato
poietic celllines are not defective. It has been recognized in dogs,cats, and
people.
b.Pathogenesis of the anemia
(1)In people, there is often either a viral infection of erythroid cells or an
antibody-mediated or T-lymphocyte-mediated destruction of erythroid
precursors that has been associated with T-lymphocyte clonal disorders.
Antibodies may even be directed against Epo.
(2)Some dogs have had a demonstrable serum substance(probably antibody)
that inhibits erythropoiesis in vitro,but other dogs do not.7
c.Thedisorder may be responsive to immune-suppressive dosages of glucocorticoid
compounds or other immunosuppressive therapy, but therapy may take 2 wk or
longer before evidence of response (e.g.,reticulocytosis). Some dogs require long-
term therapy to prevent recurrence of an anemia.
d.Laboratory findings
(1)Typically,they include normocytic normochromic anemia and sometimes
spherocytic anemia.
164
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(2)Nonregenerative anemia
(3)A Coombs’ test might yield a positive result.
(4)Marrow examination reveals marked hypoplasia or aplasia (absence) of the
erythroid cellineage, with preservation of the other lineages.
a. Immune-mediated nonregenerative anemia is similar to pure red cell aplasia with
the exception that the erythroid series is present in marrow and characterized by
either a left shift and maturation arrest or by persistent erythroid hyperplasia
concurrent with anemia.
b.The disorder may respond to immunosuppressive therapy
c.Laboratory findings
(1)Typically, they include normocytic normochromic anemia and sometimes
spherocytic anemia.
(2)Nonregenerative anemia,often severe
(3)A Coombs'test might yield a positive result.
(4)Marrow examination reveals variations from erythroid hypoplasia with an
incomplete left-shifted series (maturation arrest) to erythroid hyperplasia,
often with subtlebut detectable phagocytosis of intact erythroid precursors
at the latest stage of orderly developmenr (Plate 9G). The production of
other cell lines is effective.
3.FeLV-induced erythroid hypoplasia
a.FeLVmay selectively damage erythroid cells to cause erythroid hypoplasia or
transform a cell into a neoplastic cell line.
b. Pathogenesis of anemia
(1)If erythroid precursors are selectively damaged, then erythroid hypoplasia or
aplasia develops and thus erythrocyte production decreases.
(2）If erythroid cells undergo neoplastic transformation, the proliferation of cells
maybemarked,but their function,cell metabolism,and maturation will be
defective.Accordingly，the cells may not mature or they may die before
maturing to erythrocytes,and thus anemia develops because of decreased
effective erythropoiesis.
c.Laboratory findings
(1）There may bemild to severe,nonregenerative anemia;eithernormocytic
normochromic or macrocytic normochromic.
tic syndrome with erythroid predominance (MDS-Er).
③）
Marrowfindingsmay vary from erythroid hypoplasia to neoplasia of any
marrow cell lineage.
(4)Megaloblastic erythroid cells may be found in blood or marrow (megaloblas
tic anemia)(Plate 9L).Megaloblastic cells have asynchronous maturation of
nuclei and cytoplasms: Cytoplasms mature but nuclear maturation is
incomplete. The defective maturation produces larger erythroid precursors
with atypically large nuclei for the degree of cytoplasmic maturation.
4.Nutrient deficiencies
a.Fe deficiency
(1)This occurs because of chronic external blood loss (e.g.,alimentary tract
blood loss because of ulcers or parasites or cutaneous blood loss because of
feas or ticks) or inadequate dietary Fe intake (especially in neonates).
3/ERYTHROCYTES
165
(2)When diagnosed，the anemia is classically microcytic hypochromicbutmay
be microcytic normochromic (for its pathogenesis,see Blood Loss Anemias,
sect. II.B).
b. Copper deficiency
(1)This is uncommon in domestic mammals but has been reported in pigs and
in dogs. Erythrocyte abnormalities develop because of defective Fe transport.
(a)Ceruloplasmin (ferroxidase) and hephaestin are related Fe oxidases that
contain copper and promote the conversion of Fe² to Fe+ during Fe²+
transport out of macrophages and enterocytes,respectively.
（b）Ifan animal isdeicientncopper,thereisessferricoxidase activityes
Fe+absorption from the intestine,less release from macrophages,less
Fe² available for heme synthesis,and thus defective Hgb synthesis.
Because of the copper dficiency,there is a functional Fe deficiency,and
thus a microcytic hypochromic anemia can develop. Serum Fe concen-
trations should not be decreased.
normochromic anemia.7 The pathogenesis of the anemia was not
established.
(3)An iatrogenic copper deficiency was created when trientine hydrochloride
was used to treat copper storage disease.7²A microcytic hypochromic anemia
persisted after treatment for an Fe deficiency.The anemia resolved and the
ceased. Interpretation of the case dara was complicated by evidence of
hepatic dysfunction.
(4)Microcytichypochromic anemias do develop in copper-deficient pigs.
c.Folate or cobalamin（vitamin B)deficiency
(1)Folate and cobalamin are required for DNA synthesis,and thus deficiencies
might cause abnormal erythrocyte development.Folate and cobalamin
deficiencies may cause a macrocytic anemia in people but rarely are such
disorders found in domestic mammals.
(2)Cats with experimental folate deficiency had megaloblastic marrow erythroid
min deficiency had normocytic erythrocytes.
(3)Giant schnauzers with an inherited malabsorption of cobalamin had a
cobalamin deficiency and a normocytic nonregenerative anemia. Marrow
samples contained megaloblastic erythroid cells, and macrocytes and
ovalocytes were found in blood films. Reportedly, an increased MCV was
not present because of concurrent microcytosis;an explanation of the
microcytosis was not provided. Dysplastic changes in the myeloid cells
included hypersegmented neutrophils and giant neutrophils. Methylmalonic
aciduria was also present.
(4)A Border collie with inherited malabsorption of cobalamin had a normo-
cyticnormochromic anemia.91
(5)Cartle that develop a cobalamin deficiency from grazing on cobalt-deficient
soil may develop a normocytic normochromic anemia.92
d.Pyridoxine (vitamin B) deficiency: A dietary pyridoxine deficiency in growing
kittens resulted in anemia,but the features and pathogenesis of the anemia were
not described.93
166
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
5.Endocrine disorders
a.Hypothyroidism
(1)Seen primarily in dogs, this causes a mild normocytic normochromic
anemia.
(2)Pathogenesis of the anemia: Decreased [total thyroxine] and [trotal triodo-
thyronine]result in a decreasedmetabolicrate and thus a decreasedneed for
O in peripheral tissues. The decreased need for O leads to decreased Epo
production and thus less erythrocyte production. A new homeostasis
develops inwhich metabolicneeds for Oaremet by a lower blood[RBC]
(3)Laboratory findings
(a)Mild normocytic normochromic, nonregenerative anemia
(b)Evidence of thyroid dysfunction, such as decreased [total thyroxine],
decreased [free thyroxine], and increased [thyroid-stimulating hormone]
b.Hypoadrenocorticism
(1)Seen primarily in dogs, this may cause a mild to moderate normocytic
normochromic anemia.
(2)Pathogenesis of the anemia is not established, but glucocorticoids have been
reported to stimulate erythropoiesisin vitro,so their absence may be
relatively marrow suppressive. Gastrointestinal blood lossmay enhance the
anemia.
(3)Laboratory findings
(a)Mild normocytic normochromic anemia, which may be masked by
hemoconcentration caused by hypovolemia
(b)Evidence of adrenal dysfunction, such as hyponatremia, hyperkalemia,
azotemia, hypocortisolemia, lymphocytosis, and eosinophilia
c.Hyperestrogenism
(1) Blood [estrogen] may be increased because of excessive production by a
neoplasm (e.g,Sertoli cell tumor or granulosa cell tumor) or by the
administration of estrogen compounds.
(2)Besides developing clinical signs of feminization,manifestations of hyperes-
s e an   pe s ) s u u
nonregenerative anemia as part of the pancytopenia of estrogen toxicosis.
6.Liver disease or insufficiency (including portosystemic shunts)
a.Mammals with chronic and usually progressive liver disease or portosystemic
shunts frequently have mild tomoderate anemia.Typically,the anemias are
normocytic normochromic, but decreased MCHC values have been reported.
When the disease causes hepatic insufficiency in dogs, some will have a micro
cytic normochromic anemia
b.Pathogenesis of anemia
(1)The normocytic normochromic anemia could be an AID in some cases.
(2)Other potential mechanisms include defective amino acid and protein
synthesis and abnormal lipid metabolism, which affect erythrocyte lipid
content and life span.
(3)In dogs with hepatic insufficiency, the microcytosis is not caused by total
bodyFe deficiency.However,defective protein synthesismay create a
functional Fe deficiency because of defective Fe transport.
c.Laboratory findings
(1)Mild to moderate normocytic or microcytic normochromic (or rarely
hypochromic) anemia
3/ERYTHROCYTES
167
(2)Evidence of liver disease (e.g.,increased serum hepatic enzyme activities)or
hepatic dysfunction (e.g., decreased serum [urea], hypoproteinemia, hypoal-
buminemia, increased serum [bile acids], hyperammonemia, or ammonium
biurate crystalluria)
7.Dyserythropoiesis in English springer spaniels4
a.Thismultisystemic disorder is characterized by dyserythropoiesis,polymyopathy
with megaesophagus, and varying degrees of cardiomegaly. The clinical findings
in the young dogs included regurgitation and decreased muscle mass.
b.The pathogenesis of the familial disorder is unknown.
c.Laboratory findings
(1)Features of peripheral blood includedmicrocytic(MCV near 50 fL)
normochromic nonregenerative anemias with rubricytosis, spherocytosis,
codocytosis,dacryocytosis,schizocytosis,and“vacuolated erythrocytes."
(2）
Marrow findings indicated ineffective erythropoiesis.The findings included
hyperplasia of early erythroid cells, frequent binucleated and mitotic nuclei,
and macrophages containing erythroid cells and abundant Fe.
8.Congenital dyserythropoiesis and progressive alopecia of polled Hereford calves69
a.The two major aspects of this syndrome are macrocytic normochromic anemia
and cutaneous lesions characterized by a hyperkeratotic dermatitis with dyskera-
tosis in stratum spinosum and follicular infundibuli.
b.The pathogenesis of the disorder is unknown but appears to be related to
impaired cytokinesis during terminal cells divisions.
c.Laboratory findings
(1)Features of peripheral blood included macrocytic (MCV near 54 fL in
affected calves and MCV near 41 in unaffected calves) normochromic
anemia (Hct near 16 %) and rubricytosis.A mild reticulocytosis was
considered inappropriate for the severity of anemia.Hyperferremia was
present with normal TIBC.
(2)
Marrow findings included erythroid hyperplasia, multinucleated erythroid
cells, irregular chromatin patterns,and slight megalocytosis.There appeared
to be a maturation arrest in the laterubricyte stage,but with cytoplasmic
staining indicating nearly complete Hgb synthesis in the rubricytes. Nuclear
buds were common in the rubricyte nuclei. Hemosiderin was abundant.
BLOODLOSSANEMIAS
I.
Causes of blood loss
A.Hemorrhage
1.Blood vessels damaged by trauma,ulceration,neoplasia, or other means
2.Acquired or congenital coagulation factor deficiencies or von Willebrand disease
3.Thrombocytopenia(marked)
B.Parasitism: hookworms and whipworms (dogs), haemonchosis and ostertagiasis (rumi-
nants)occidiosisikdukinliceandeasdgcaandca
C.Removal of blood that is to be used for a transfusion
II.
Classifications based on duration and location
A.Acute blood loss anemia
1.This occurs when blood is lost from the vessels in a fewhours. Anemia results from
the dilution of erythrocytes that remain in vessels (Fig. 3.8).
168
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Marrow
Marrow
Blooi
Fe3
Time
Extravascular
Fe3+
Fe
ECF
Extravascular
Spleen
ECF
Spleen
A.Sudden loss of blood from
B.Shift of ECF into vessels dilutes
vessel creates hypovolemia
erythrocytes and causes anemia;
splenic contraction reduces
severity of anemia
Fig.3.8.Erythrocyte kinetics of acute blood loss.
A.Immediately after whole blood is lost,Hct and[total protein] should not change because erythrocytes
and plasma are lost proportionately. However, blood volume is decreased.
B. Hypovolemia stimulates thirst to replenish ECF volume and induces movement of ECF from the
extravascular space to the intravascular space, thus expanding blood volume. The fluid shift dilutes
oaap  ap (d ) ee  e d ed e a
anemia depends on the quantity and duration of hemorrhage and the time period from the onset of
hemorrhage. Splenic contraction will diminish the severity of the anemia because splenic blood is rich in
erythrocytes (especially in horses and dogs).
a.The severity of an anemia caused by hemothorax or hemoperitoneum may be
diminished by resorption (autotransfusion)of about 65%of erythrocytes within
2d and 80 %within 1-2wk.Also,animals do not become Fe depleted,
because erythrocytes are absorbed(autotransfusion) or destroyed and theFe is
reutilized.
b.Sudden anemia creates tissue hypoxia that stimulates Epo production.If marrow
isresponsive,reticulocytosis should be present 34dafter blood loss (exceptin
horses)
2.Clinical data that support a conclusion that an anemia is caused by acute blood loss
(major diagnostic features) include the following:
a.Blood loss was observed (historical or physical examination).
(1)Gross external hemorrhage is seen.If there is gastrointestinal hemorrhage,
then the feces may be tarry (melena) or occult-blood positive (heme
present）.If there isurinary tract hemorrhage,there are erythrocytes in the
urine sediment or a heme-positive reaction.
(2)Hemothorax orhemoperitoneum
b.Regenerative anemia,if sufhcient time for response
C.
Hypoproteinemia with a proportionate decrease in [albumin] and [globulin]:
Hypoproteinemia caused by intracavitary hemorrhage tends not to be as severe as
external hemorrhage because proteins may return to plasma via lymphatic vessels.
B.Chronic blood loss anemia that leads to Fe-deficiency anemia
1.Chronic blood loss occurs when blood is lost from the body (including into the
gastrointestinal tract or urinary tract) over several weeks to months.Anemia results
from a combination of factors but is primarily the result of Fe deficiency (Fig.3.9).
3/ERYTHROCYTES
169
Marrow
Marrow
Blood
Blood
Fe3
Fe
Fe
Extravascular
Fe3
Extravascular
Fe3+
ECF
ECF
Spleen
Spleen
Fe
Fe
A.Compensatory erythropoiesisprevents
B.As Fe deficiency develops
the development of anemia during weeks
Time
effective erythropoiesis diminishes
to months of blood and Fe loss.
and mild anemia develops.
Marrow
Blood
Spleen
Extravascular
ECF
C.When Fe deficient,there is decreased effective erythropoiesis
and marrow releases microcytic hypochromic erythrocytes.
Fig. 3.9. Erythrocyte kinetics of chronic blood loss that results in Fe deficiency.
A.Initially, there is a continual loss of small quantities of blood over weeks to months.Anemia does not
develop as long as compensatory increased erythropoiesis (using stored Fe) replaces lost erythrocytes.
B. After prolonged blood loss, Fe deficiency develops (decreased total body Fe). When Fe deficiency is severe
enough, effective erythropoiesis decreases sufficiently so that the compensation for blood loss is inad-
equate, and thus anemia ensues.Concurrently, the erythrocyte life span decreases because of increased
erythrocyte membrane fragility. Fe deficiency affects many organs and is present before anemia occurs.
C.Microcytosis and hypochromasia result from the defective heme synthesis caused by Fe deficiency.
Hypochromasia develops because the amount of Fe that is available is inadequate for incorporation into
heme for Hgb formation. While attempting to reach optimal cytoplasmic Hgb concentration, erythroid
precursors are thought to undergo additional mitoses,somicrocytes are formed (microcyticnormochro-
mic anemia). With severe Fe depletion, precursors are eventually unable to reach optimal cytoplasmic
Hgb conoentration, and then hypochromic cells are formed (microcytic hypochromic anemia).
a.Once Fe deficiency is present, maturation and release of erythrocytes are impaired
hyperplasia.The ongoing blood loss in the presence of Fe deficiency also
contributes to the anemia,but the amount of blood loss itself typically is not the
major factor.
b.During Fe deficiency,the erythrocytes becomemore fragile and less deformable;
these changes decrease erythrocyte life span.The reduced deformability was
170
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
attributed to increased membrane rigidity,but the reason for the rigidity was not
explained.The presence of keratocytes and schizocytes in blood of an Fe-
deficient animal is microscopic evidence of this pathologic process.
2.When Fe deficiency develops,reticulocytosis is usually present but less than expected
for the degree of anemia (marrow is poorly responsive）.Developing erythrocytes
3. Clinical data supporting a conclusion that an anemia is due to chronic external
blood loss include the following:
a.One may find tarry feces (melena), urine or feces may be heme positive, and
frankhemorrhageisnotobservedIf theanemiaiscausedbyparasitism,onemay
find intestinal nematode ova,feas,or other parasites.
b. Poorly regenerative anemia or nonregenerative anemia
c.Microcytic normochromic to microcytic hypochromic anemia
d.Decreased CHr and MCVr
e.l
Erythroid hyperplasia in marrow but ineffective erythropoiesis because of the
maturation defects
f.Mild to moderate hypoproteinemia
g.Hypoferremia,decreased totalbodyFe（depleted storage sites）,and decreased
serum [ferritin]
h.A history of frequent blood donations
4.Young animals are more prone to develop Fe-deficiency anemias than are mature
animals because young animals store relatively little Fe,consumeless Fe while on a
milk diet, and require a large amount of Fe during growth.
HEMOLYTICANEMLAS
I.
Concepts and cdassifications
AHemolysis (erythrohysis) is erythrocyte necrosis and oocurs at the end of every erythro
cyte's life. When the rate of in vivo hemolysis increases, then it is a pathologic state.
Pathologic hermolysis may be defined as an increased rate of erythrocyte destruction that
decreases erythrocyte life span.
B.Extravascular versus intravascular hemolysis
1.Major differences
a.Intravascular hemolysis
(1)Erythrocyte destruction occurs in the blood within blood vessels or heart
not including phagocytosis by tissue macrophages while erythrocytes pass
through sinuses of the spleen, liver, or bone marrow.
globinemia and hemoglobinuria (or,ifmeasured,decreased serum
[haptoglobin]).
b.Extravascular hemolysis
(1)Erythrocyte destruction occurs outside of the arterial-capillary-venous system
and is unrelated to hemorrhage. It has been called intracellular hemolysis
because destruction occurs in macrophages near venular sinuses of the
spleen,liver,and bone marrow.Splenic macrophages have greatest contact
with erythrocytes in the red pulp (except in cats). Macrophages also can
attachto erythrocyteswithin blood by reaching throughnoncontinuous
capillary walls and then binding, engulfing, and lysing them.
(2)Exrravascular hemolysis does not cause hemoglobinemia or hemoglobinuria
3/ERYTHROCYTES
171
2.Why differentiate intravascular hemolysis from extravascular hemolysis?
a.Establishing a major site of erythrocyte destruction may be a diagnostic clue; that
iscertaindiseases typicallycause extravasularhemolysiswhereasotherstpically
cause intravascular hemolysis (Table 3.10)
b. Differentiation may be helpful in determining prognosis and treatment. Intravas-
cular hemolysis usually occurs with life-threatening diseases, so its presence
suggests apoorer prognosis,and immediate treatmentandmanagement of the
case are indicated.
3.Problems with classification system
a.“Diseases”don'tread the book；that is,a disordermay be described as causing
extravascular hemolysis, but your case may be the uncommon exception with
intravascular hemolysis that was not mentioned.
b. Diseases may cause anemia by both intravascular and extravascular hemolysis.
Extravascular hemolysis typically accompanies intravascular hemolysis.
c.Disorders may switch from one to another (i.e., an intravascular hemolytic crisis
can develop in an animal that has a mild extravascular hemolytic disorder).
4. Major features of the hemolytic disorders are listed in Table 3.11.
C.Thorough examination of erythrocytes in a blood film is an essential diagnostic
procedure for suspected or confirmed hemolytic anemias. A well-made and well-stained
blood smear and a good microscope with a 100x oil objective are needed for such
examinations. One may see organisms or definite clues of a hemolytic process.
1.Organisms:Mycoplasma,Anaplasma,Babesia,and Theileria
2.Clues of a hemolytic process: spherocytes, Heinz bodies, eccentrocytes, pyknocytes,
schizocytes,keratocytes, and acanthocytes
D.Hemolytic icterus (jaundice) (Fig.3.10)
1.Pathologic hemolysis leads to increased Hgb degradation, thus increased bilirubin
formation,and perhaps development of icterus. Icterus may develop in animals with
either intravascular or extravascular hemolytic disorders.In both forms,Hgb
degradationncreasesbut the sitesof erythrocytedestruction differIterusmay
develop in animals with intravascular hemolysis because of concurrent extravascular
hemolysis.
2.Hemolytic hyperbilirubinemia occurs when Bu travels through the blood from tissue
macrophages to the liver. Except for uncommon situations, the capacity for Bu
uptake greatly exceeds that of bilirubin excretion, so uptake is not rate limiting.If
Bu formation exceeds an animal’s ability to excrete it into the bile as Bc,hyperbiliru-
binemia will develop.If the capacity of the liver for Bu uptake,conjugation, and
excretion (the rate-limiting step） are not exceeded, serum [bilirubin] may remain
WRI even though pathologic hemolysisis present.
3.The rate-limiting step in bilirubin excretion is the transport of Bc to the biliary
system. Once the transport maximum is reached,Bc is“regurgitated”out of
hepatocytes and into plasma.
4.Bu and Bc compete for the same receptors on hepatocytes.Thus,once the excretion
systembecomes saturatedbothformsncreaseinplasmaGenerallywithicterusf
hemolytic origin, [Bu] > [Bc]. In longer-standing hemolytic disorders (1 week or
longer), the [Bc] may equal or exceed the [Bu],especially if there is liver damage
（caused byhypoxia or other insults)
E.Bilirubinuria (bilirubin in urine)
1.Bc is HO soluble and is not protein bound,so it easily passes through the glomeru
larfiltration barrier and is not resorbed (it has a low renal threshold).
Table 3.10.Hemolytic disorders and conditions
Immune hemolytic disorders
*Idiopathic (includes autoimmune)
Drug induceda
Vaccine associated
DuuSeSnan
Alloimmune
Neonatal isoerythrolysis
Blood transfusion reactions
Hemolysis induced by bacterial and viral infectionsa
*Mycoplasma spp.
*Anaplasma spp.
Leptospira spp.
Bacillary hemoglobinuria（Clostridium haemolyticum or C.noryi)
Yellow lamb disease (Clusridium perfrtngens,type A)
Clostridial infections in horses
EIAVab
FeLVb
Hemolysis associated with other infections (e.g,ehrlichial)b
Erythrocytic metabolic defects (acquired or inherited)
Oxidative damage
Heinz body hemolysisa
Eccentrocytic hemolysis (acquired or inherited)
Defects in ATP generation
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
Phosphofructokinase deficiency"
Hypophosphatemic hemolysisb
L-sorbose intoxication
Defects in heme synthesis that result in porphyria
Bovine congenital erythropoietic porphyria
Feline erythropoietic porphyria
Erythrocyte fragmentation in blood creating schizocytes, keratocytes, or acanthocytes
*Intravascular coagulation (localized or disseminated)
*Vasculitis
Hemangiosarcoma
Rheologic processes
Caval syndrome of dirofilariasis
Cardiac valvular disease
Hemolytic anemia of other or unknown pathogeneses
Protozoal infections
Babesia spp.ab
Theileria spp.b
Trypanosoma spp.
Heparin-induced hemolysis
Iatrogenic hypoosmolar hemolysis
Envenomation (snakes.spiders.insects)
Hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma
Idiopathic nonspherocytic hemolytic disorders with increased osmotic fragility
Hereditary nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia of beagles
Idiopathic hemolytic anemia of Abyssinian and Somali cats
Hemolytic syndrome in horses with liver diseaseab
*A relatively common disease or condition
* Hemoglobinuria or hemoglobinemia may be present because of marked intravascular hemolysis.
b Other mechanisms may also contribute to anemia in these infections.
172
3/ERYTHROCYTES
173
Table 3.11.Major features of intravascular and extravascular hemolytic disorders
Predominantly extravascular
Feature
Clinical intravascular hemolysis
hemolysisb
Site of hemolysis
Within bloodvessels orheart
Macrophages near blood
sinuses of spleen, liver,
or marrow
Degree of RBC damage
Marked
Mild to marked
directly caused by the
hemolytic agent or process
Severity of anemia
Marked orrapidlyfalling
Mild to marked
Onset of illness
Hours to days
Days to weeks
Reticulocytosis
Usually after initialpresentation
Usually at initial
presentation
Hemoglobinemia
Yes,but may not be grossly
No
visible
Hemoglobinuria
Yes
No
Hyperbilirubinemia
No or yes
Usually at presentation;
Bu>Bc
Bilirubinuria
No or yes
Usually at presentation
Clinical intravascular hemolysis is recognized by fnding pathologic hemoglobinemia and pathologic
hemoglobinuria. In most of these disorders, there will be concurrent extravascular hemolysis.
During these disordersintravascular hemolysismay beoocurringbut not severely enough to cause
hemoglobinemia or hemoglobinuria.
Soon after the onset of intravascular hemolysis, hyperbilirubinemia and bilirubinuria will probably not
excess bilirubin formation and thus hyperbilirubinemia or bilirubinuria.Hyperbilirubinemia and bilirubi-
nuria would be more expected when there is concurrent extravascular hemolysis of sufficient duration and
severity.
2.Bu is HO insoluble and is bound with albumin in plasma, so very little Bu
penetrares the glomerular filtration barrier in most animals (reflecting a high renal
threshold).
3.Dogs have a very low renal threshold for bilirubin, and thus some bilirubin is
present in theurineofhealthydog.ThebilirubinmaybeBcbecause it frelypases
through theglomerularfltration barrier.However,many apparentlyhealthy dogs
also have a mild albuminuria,and thus the bilirubin detected may be Bu bound to
albumin.
4.Bilirubinuria usually occurs before clinical hyperbilirubinemia (icterus) because Bc is
excreted in urine as soon as its concentration in blood starts to increase, and clinical
icterus is usually not recognized until serum [bilirubin] reach 1.5-2.0 mg/dL.
However, bilirubinuria may be missed because of false-negative urine bilirubin
results.
F.Urobilinogenuria
1.Renal urobilinogen excretion increases in hemolytic anemias, but urobilinogenuria is
not recognized frequently, perhaps because urobilinogen is unstable in urine.
174
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Peripheral
Bu/AIb
Bu/Alb
blood
Bc
UD
Bc
Othertissu
Hepatocyte
BwAIb
Kidney
BUA
UDP-G
BWAII
BUAIb
Hepatic arteries
UD
Bie
Portalveins
Spleen
Urine
B
Intestine
-eces
Fig.3.10.Hemolyticicterus:Accelerateddestruction of erythrocytesinmacrophagesof spleen (also liver
and marrow) increases the production and delivery of Bu to the hepatocytes. If the rate of Bu formation
exceeds the liver's ability to clear Bu from plasma, hyperbilirubinemia with increased [Bu] develops.
Increased delivery of Bu to hepatocytes also increases Bc formation and biliary excretion. If Bc formation
exceeds Bc transport to canaliculi, then excess hepatocellular Bc diffuses to sinusoidal plasma. The increased
[Bc] in plasma will increase the Bc excretion in urine (bilirubinuria). If there is persistently increased plasma
[Bc], there may be increased formation of B8 (see the Bilirubin Concentration section in Chapter 13)
Bu/Alb,Buassciatedwithalbumin;M,macrophagSb,sterobilinogen;Ub,robilinogenandUDPG
uridine diphosphoglucoronide.
2.Urinary urobilinogen excretion increases because all the pathways associated with the
excretion of heme degradation products are enhanced.
G.Hemolytichemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria (Fig.3.11)
1.A key to recognizing intravascular hemolysis is differentiating the pathologic causes
of red,brown,orblack urine.These are primarilyhmoglobinuria,hmaturia,and
myoglobinuria.These pigmenturias can typically be classified by criteria listed in
Table 3.12. Other causes of pigmenturia are described in Physical Examination of
Urine, Sect. I.C., in Chapter 8.
2.Hgb nephropathy is a pathologic state seen in intravascular hemolytic disorders
characterized by proximal tubular degeneration that may result in acute renal
insufficiency. Hgb casts may be present in renal tubules and/or urine. Evidence
suggests that the renal damage is primarily due to altered renal blood fow associated
with the erythrocyte stroma and not with the Hgb; the altered renal blood fow
might be due to release of vasoactive substances or consumptive coagulation initiated
by the erythrocyte stroma.9However,a study in rats indicated that stroma-freeHgb
could also be toxicto proximal tubular epithelial cells.00
Primary
Secondary
Overflow
Blood
Hgb
Hgb
Hgb
Hgb dimer Hgb dimer
Metheme
Hgb dimer Hgb dimerI
Hpt
Hpx
Hpt/Hgb dimers
Metheme/Hpx
Glomerular
Hpt/Hgb dimers
Metheme/Hpx
capillary
Hgb dimer
Proximal tubular
heme
epithelial cell
Hgb dimer
Hgb dimer
Bu
heme
Bc
Hgb dimer
Bu
in urine
Hepatocyte
Bc
Fig.3.1l.Pathogenesis of hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria during intravascular hemolysis.
•The normal physiological processes that conserve Fe released during intravascular hemolysis can be divided
into primary and secondary systems. These systems are not saturated during health, and thus hemoglobi-
nemia is not seen in health.In pathologic states, saturation of the primary and secondary systems leads to
hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria (loss of Hgb and Fe).
The primary system of Fe conservation (the most important, which may become saturated or
overwhelmed)
▪ Intravascular erythrocyte damage or death causes release of Hgb to plasma. The unstable Hgb tetramer
splits into dimers and immediately binds to Hpt (if available). The Hpt/Hgb dimer complexes are
cleared from plasma primarily by hepatocytes,
acids252253Thereisevidence thatmacrophageshaveareceptorfortheHp/Hgb complex and thusmay
Plasma [Hgb] or Hgb/Hpt] may be high enough to cause the plasma to be pink, and thus hemoglobi-
nemia is recognized. Plasma will appear pink when plasma [Hgb] as low as 50 mg/dL.
•The secondary system of Fe conservation (becomes more important after plasma [Hpt] decreases)
+Continued or more severe intravascular erythrocyte damage or death causes release of more Hgb to
plasma. The plasma Hgb may oxidize to form methemoglobin,which dissociates and releases metheme
and globin. Metheme binds to Hpx to form a metheme/Hpx complex.251
Metheme/Hpx complexes enter hepatocytes,where the complexes are degraded to Bu,amino acidsand
Fe3+251
In people and nonhuman primates, metheme also binds to albumin, and the metheme/albumin
complex enters hepatocytes so that Fe can be conserved. However, albumin molecules of dogs, cattle,
horses, and other domestic mammals do not bind metheme, and thus this pathway is not functional in
those animals.25s
· Overflow (which occurs when Fe conservation systems are saturated and results in marked hemoglobine-
mia and concurrent hemoglobinuria)
+If the rate of hemolysis exceeds the ability of Hgb-binding proteins to conserve Fe, free Hgb dimers
accumulate in plasma (hemoglobinemia). The transport maximum of Hpt for Hgb dimers is near
150 mg/dL.
+Hgb dimers pass through the glomerular fltration barrier and are excreted in the urine (hemoglobin
uria).Proximal tubule epithelial cellshave some ability to resorb Hgb dimers and degrade them toBu
for conjugation and urinary excretion.
Hpt, haptoglobin; and Hpx, hemopexin.
175
176
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 3.12.Differential features ofhematuria,hemoglobinuria,and myoglobinuria
Hematuria
Hemoglobinuria
Myoglobinuria
H
WRI
Decreased
WRI
Plasma color
Not pink to redb
Pink to red
Not pink to red
Urine color
Pink to red
Pink to red
Pink to red
Urine heme reactioned
Positive
Positive
Positive
RBCs in urine sediment
Yes"
NoF
Nof
Information to support muscle damage
No
No
Yes
Unlessthere is an associated disorder that causes extensive hemorrhage
bUnless there is concurent in vivo or in vitro hemolysis
“Heme typically is red but may become brown to black (with degradation or oxidation) because of
metheme formation. Metheme will produce a positive urine heme reaction.
The ammonium sulfate precipitation test does not reliably differentiate Hgb from myoglobin (see
Chemical Examination of Urine, sect.VI.B.3, in Chapter 8).
Erythrocytes may lyse after they enter urine (especially in diluteurine) and thus may not be seen in a
urine sediment examination.
There couldbe concurrent hematuria because of another pathologic process orto sample collection.
Informationmayincludehistorical orphysical evidence ofmuscle damagee.g,stiffnessor trauma）r
increased serum creatine kinase activity
II.
Hemolytic disorders and diseases (Tables 3.10 and 3.13)
A.Immune hemolytic anemias (not associated with infections)
1.Concepts
a.Immune hemolytic anemias occur when an animal's immune system produces
antibodies that bind directly or indirectly to its own erythrocytes (ESAIg)and
lead to erythrocyte destruction.The process may be initiated by a defective
immune system,defective erythrocytes,or adsorbed antigens from drugs,
infectious agents,or neoplasms.Factors that initiate the process are usually not
known.
b.Hemolysis may occur through three major processes as described in Fig. 3.12.
lar hemolysis,or both.ESAIg molecules of immune hemolysis may be IgG,IgM,
immunoglobulins are engulfed by macrophages. If the immunoglobulins fix
complement, the membrane attack
complex (C5b-9) may form and cause
intravascular hemolysis.This complex consists of complement proteins C5b,C6,
C7, C8, and multiple copies of C9, which form a ring in the membrane and
enable free diffusion of molecules into and out of the cell.Variations in antibody
involvement create variations in clinical manifestations.
d.Direct antiglobulin tests (Coombs test or fow cytometric methods) may be used
to detect the presence of ESAlg or complement on a patient's erythrocytes (see
the section on Methods for Detecting Erythrocyte Surface Antibody or
Complement).
e.To understand some of the clinical manifestations and laboratory findings in
immune hemolytic anemias, the major features of warm and cold antibodies need
to be understood
3/ERYTHROCYTES
177
Table3.13.Recognized hemolytic anemias of dogs,cats,horses,and catle
Type of anemia
Dogs
Cats
Horses
Cattle
Immune-
IMHA
IMHA
IMHA
IMHA
mediated
Drug-induced
NI
Drug-induced
Transfusion
1ou)
NI
Transfusion
NI
infectious)
Transfusion
Transfusion
Infectious
Mycoplasma
Mycoplasma
Babesia
Mycoplasma
Babesia
FeLV
Leptospira
Anaplasma
Ehrlichia
Ehrlichia
Equine
Babesia
Cytauxzoonb
infectious
Theileria
anemia
Leptospira
Ehrlichid
Clostridium
Clostridium
Trypanosoma
Metabolic
Heinz body
Heinz body
Heinz body
Heinz body
Eccentrocytic
PK deficiency
Eccentrocytic
Hypophosphatemia
PK deficiency
Erythropoietic
Congenital
PFK deficiency
porphyria
erythropoietic
Hypophosphatemia
porphyria
Traumatic
Angiopathy
Angiopathy
Angiopathy
Other
Envenomation
Idiopathic
Heparin-induced
Hypoosmolar
Hemophagocytic
(↑fragility)
Liver disease
histiocytic
sarcoma
Hereditary
nonspherocytic
Firm evidence of hemolytic anemia was not found by the authors.
Hemolysis may be a minor contributor to the anemia (see Nonregenerative Anemias, sect I.C.2).
(1)Warm antibodies (usually IgG)
(a)Maximal binding activity at 37-39°C
(b)Warm antibodies are more common than cold antibodies.Warm
antibodies may bind submaximally to erythrocytes at room temperatures
and thus can cause autoagglutination in samples at routine handling
temperatures.
(2)Cold antibodies (usually IgM)
(a)Maximal binding activity at 4-20 C
(b) Cold antibodies may be able to bind in vivo while passing through cool
extremities, and thus they can activate complement and initiate immune
cool during or after collection. Not all cold antibodies are pathologic in
vivo, even if they cause autoagglutination in vitro.
2.Disorders
a.IMHA (also called idiopathic immune hemolytic anemia or IIHA)
(1)IMHA is the most common hemolytic anemia of dogs.It is also occasion-
ally found in cats,horses, and cattle.
Lymphocyte
Attach to
Partial
macrophages
Ant-erythrocyte
phagocytosis
antibodles
YY
Y
Erythrophagocytosis
Blood
Erythrocyte
Complement:
Extravascular
hemolvsis
Spherocyte
Hgb
Bu
Intravascular
hemolysis
Spleen
Bu
Ab
'Ghost
HgbIn
erythrocytei
plasma
Bu/Alb
Fig.3.12.Pathogenesis of immune hemolysis.
• Erythrocytes coated with ESAlg and/or C3 are converted to spherocytes by macrophages removing the
erythrocyte membrane. Spherocytes undergo either extravascular or intravascular hemolysis because of
their rigidity and fragility,respectively.
·Some ESAIg may bind complement (especially IgM), which activates the complement cascade and leads
to intravascular hemolysis via the membrane attack complex (C5b-9). Damaged cells will be removed
from circulationbymacrophages.
ESAIg,erythrocyte surface-associated immunoglobulin; C3,third component of complement;and C5b-9,
complex ofcomplement factors5b through9.
178
3/ERYTHROCYTES
179
(2)IMHA is commonly referred to as autoimmune hemolyticanemia（AIHA),
although the factors that initiated the immune hemolysis are unknown.
Typically,it is assumed that the hemolysis is an autoimmune process because
known causes of immune hemolysis are not found. However, conditions
referred to as IMHA or AIHA have been associated with infections,neopla
sia, and vaccinations and may not be autoimmune. Autoimmune cell
destruction results from immune responses to normally occurring self
epitopes.When the epitopes are from foreign antigens or alloantigens,the
body’s own cells are destroyed,but the process is not strictly speaking
autoimmune inpathogenesis
(3）Classic laboratory fearures of IMHA:regenerative anemia(mild to severe),
icterus,possibly hemoglobinuria, spherocytosis （difficult to recognize in
species other than dogs),positive Coombstest,positivefow cytometric
methods for ESAlg,infammatory leukogramincluding neutrophilia with
regenerative lft shift andmonocytosis,and absence ofevidence ofother
immune hemolytic anemias
(4)Exceptions to classic features
(a)Anemia may be nonregenerative if it lasts <23 d, if antibodies also
artack marrow erythrocyte precursors (egpure red cell aplasia),orf
another disease process interferes with erythropoiesis.
(b)Evidence of extravascular hemolysis (icterus,bilirubinuria,etc.) may not
be present if the rate of erythrocyte destruction is only slightly increased
orif accelerated hemolysis isbrief.
(c)Spherocytosis may not be present because spherocytes may not accumu-
late in blood if their rate of formation is less than the rate of their
removal.
oe  o ss (
ESAIgor technical problems,includingprozone reaction,poorreagents
or poor sample.
(5)Other laboratory or diagnostic features of some IMHA cases: erythrocyte
autoagglutination,ghost erythrocytes,thrombocytopenia,and splenomegaly
b.Drug-induced immune hemolytic anemias
(1)Drugs are thought to induce immune hemolysis through these three major
mechanisms:103
(a)Drug adsorption: A drug (e.g., penicillin) binds covalently to erythro
cyte membranes and stimulates hapten-dependent antibodies. Such
antibodies still bind to erythrocytes after the erythrocytes have been
exposed to the drug and then washed.
(b)Autoantibody induction: A drug (e.g, methyldopa and procainamide
in people) induces formation of autoantibodies for erythrocyte mem-
brane proteins.Antibodies bind to normal erythrocytes in the absence
(c)Drug-dependent antibody induction: A drug (e.g., quinidine in people)
induces antibodies that bind to erythrocytes only when soluble drug is
present.
(2)Drugs reported to initiate IMHA in domestic mammals include penicillin in
horsespropylhiouracil incatscphalosporinsinogs(supraphar
180
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
macologic doses),1o7trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in horses,10levamisole
c.Vaccine-induced immune hemolytic anemia
(1) Some clinicians have associated the onset of immune-mediated anemia in
dogs with recent vaccinations,but little data have been generated to support
a cause-and-effect relationship.One retrospecrive study provided evidence to
support the linkage.2
(2)An immune-mediated spherocytic anemia was found in a cow after it had
been vaccinated with a polyvalent botulism vaccine.113
d.Alloimmune hemolysis
(1)NI (neonatal isoerythrolysis, also known as hemolytic disease of the
newborn)
(a）In NI, ingested maternal colostral alloantibodies are absorbed by the
intestine, enter blood, and then attach to the neonate's paternally
derived erythrocyte surface antigens. The antibody-coated erythrocytes
are then lysed by macrophages or complement.
(b) In cats, NI occurs when a queen with type B blood passes her anti-A
alloantibodies to her type A or type AB kittens via colostrum. Type B
erythrocytes are uncommon in American domestic shorthair cars
（<5%）,and the highest incidence is found in British shorthair (41 %).
Devon rex (40 %), and Cornish rex (34%) cats.4 Anti-B alloanti-
bodies of type A cats typically have weak activity and thus are not
associated with NI.TypeAB cats do not have alloantibodies.15
(c)In horses, NI may occur if a mare is negative for Aa or Qa antigens, she
has acquired alloantibodies against such antigens during prior pregnan-
cies or transfusions,and her foal is positive for the Aa or Qa alloantigen
(paternally derived）.Other alloantigens typically induce too weak an
associated with several, including the Ab, Qb, Qc, Dg, and Pa alloanti-
were detectedvia hemolyticor agglutination tests in 20 % of the
Standardbred and 10 % of the Thoroughbred mares.However, most of
the antibodies were anti-Ca;only 1 % ofThoroughbreds and 2%of
Standardbreds had either anti-Aa or anti-Qa antibodies.Anti-Ca
antibodies do not appear to mediate NI.
(d)Mules, from a donkey sire and a horse dam, are more likely than horses
to have NI because all horses appear to lack an immunogenic donkey
factor.
(e)In dogs, NI may occur if a DEA 1.l-negative bitch develops anti-(DEA
1.1) antibodies after being transfused with DEA 1.1-positive blood.
Dogs arenot known to have clinically significant naturally occurring
alloantibodies to DEA 1.1, and other acquired alloantibodies probably
do not cause hemolysis.s
(2)IMHA secondary to incompatible blood transfusions
(a)Transfused donor's erythrocytes are attacked by the recipient's(patient's)
circulating anti-erythrocyte antibodies. Transfused erythrocytes are
recognized as foreign because the donor and recipient have different
3/ERYTHROCYTES
181
antigens on their erythrocyte membranes.These are alloantigens causing
alloimmune hemolytic anemia.
(b) The alloantibodies that cause hemolysis are the same as those that cause
NI. In dogs and horses,the alloantibodies are acquired antibodies hat
sions.In cats, the antibodies are natural alloantibodies.
(c)To reduce the possibility of a hemolytic transfusion reaction, blood
typing or crossmatching may be used (see the Blood Typing and
Crossmatching section).
(3)Early attempts to develop a vaccine for bovine anaplasmosis resulted in
production of anti-erythrocyte antibodies because of bovine erythrocyte
stroma within the vaccine.li9 These antibodies were passed in colostrum and
led to NI.2Purification of blood-derived vaccines reduced the stroma
problem,but the vaccines became unavailable during the 1990s.9
B.Infectious hemolytic anemias
1.Hemotropicmycoplasma species
feline infectious anemia
(1)Mycoplasma haemofelis: This organism was originally called the Ohio or
Florida strain of Haemobartonella felis and is more pathogenic and larger
than theother feline hemotropicMycoplasmaspp.
(2)“Candidatus Mycoplasma haemominutum": This organism was called the
smaller form or California species ofHaemobartonella felis.It is less patho
genic than the M. haemofelis, and typically is considered an opporrunist.
(3）Another hemotropic Mycoplasma sp.that resembled the rodent hemotropic
mycoplasmal organisms was identifiedin a cat inSwitzerland.124
(④）
Parasitemia is usually present during hemolysis,but it may suddenly
disappear (within hours）.Also, organisms will fall off erythrocytes in vitro
and thus it is advisable to examine blood films made from fresh blood.
b.Canine hemic Mycoplasma spp.
(1)Mycoplasma haemocanis (basonym,Haemobartonella canis)
(a)Parasitemia is usually seen in splenectomized and in immunologically
(b)Like the feline hemotropic mycoplasmas,M. haemocanis may detach
from erythrocytes as the sample ages and it is difficult to identify the
organisms in plasma.
(2)“Candidatus Mycoplasma haematoparvum"
(a)This small organism was found in a splenectomized dog.125
(b)Genetic analysis indicates the organism is more closely related to
“Candidatus Mycoplasma haemominutum”than to Mycoplasma
haemocanis.126
C.Other hemic Mycoplasma spp. (all previously called Eperythrozoon)
(1)Mycoplasma haemosuis and M.paruum in pigs
(2)Mycoplasma Wernyoni in cattle
(3)"Candidatus M. haemolamae” in llamas and alpacas
d. Pathogeneses of these hemolytic anemias are thought to involve immune-
mediated mechanisms.Antibodies bind to the parasitized erythrocytes either
because of bound parasite antigens or antigens exposed on altered membranes.
182
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
e.Major laboratory findings
(1)These include Mycoplasma spp.on erythrocytes in films of fresh blood.
Parasites aremost numerous when Hct is falling. Organisms may detach
from erythrocytes invitro, so the best chance to detect and identify organ-
isms is in blood films made immediarely after blood collection.
(2）Laboratory findings also includemoderate to severe anemia,reticulocytosis
and polychromasia, mild to moderate hyperbilirubinemia and bilirubinuria,
positive direct Coombs’ test, spherocytosis (dogs),autoagglutination, and
PCR positivity forMycoplasma spp.Findings may vary when associated with
underlying disease.
2.Anaplasma spp. (erythrocytic species)
a.Anaplasma marginale (cattle),A.ovis (sheep and goats),and A.centrale (cattle of
South America,Africa,and the Middle East)
b.Anaplasma marginale are most numerous when Hct is falling: 45 d later, it is
difficult tofind organisms.Vialight microscopy,themarginal bodymay appear
to protrude from the erythrocyte membrane,but the organism is an intracellular
pathogen.
C.Pathogenesis of anemia is mostly immune mediated.Antibodies bind to erythro
cytes damaged by the anaplasmal infection and cause extravascular
hemolysis.127.128
d.Major laboratory findings
(1)Organisms (marginal bodies) found early in disease
(2)Moderate to severe anemia, reticulocytosis, increased polychromasia,
basophilic stippling, mild to marked hyperbilirubinemia and bilirubinuria,
and PCRpositivity for Anaplasma spp.
3.Leptospira spp.
a.Leptospira interrogans serovars pomonaand icterohemorrhagica do notinfect
erythrocytes,but vasculitis and infection of kidneys or liver can lead to a
hemolytic state.
Leptospira spp. are not known to be in vivo hemolysins in dogs and cats.
c.Pathogenesis of the anemia is not established but may involve an immunologic
response associated with an IgM cold agglutinin132,133 or leptospiral phospholipase
activity.134-137
d.Major laboratory findings: moderate to severe anemia, hemoglobinemia and
hemoglobinuria, hyperbilirubinemia and bilirubinuria,neutrophilia, leptospiral
spirochetes detected in urine or other fuids by direct dark-field microscopic
examination,at least a fourfold increase in convalescent titer to either pomona or
icterohemorrhagicaserotypesCRpositivityforLptospiraspandLptospr
not found in blood films.
4.Clostridium spp.
a.Clostridium haemolyticum and C.novyi type D
(1) Disease: bacillary hemoglobinuria in cattle and sheep (red water disease and
Nevada red water)
(2）Clostridium baemolyticum and C.noryii type D are normal inhabitants of
soiland mayremain dormant incattle until anaerobicconditionspromote
their growth.In the United States,bacillary hemoglobinuria is seen primar
3/ERYTHROCYTES
183
ily in poorly draining areas of Gulf Coast and Western states,and there is a
reported association with liver flukes.
[3）
Pathogenesis of anemia: Erythrocyte damage is caused primarily by a β-toxin
(produced by either C.haemolyticum or C.nouyii type D） that has phospho-
lipase C or lecithinase activity.The β-toxin thus degrades membrane lecithin
and causes lysis of erythrocytes. Other relatively minor hemolysins (lipase,
proteinase,and another lecithinase)have also been reported as productsof
C.haemolyticum.38
(4）Majorlaboratory fndings:acute severe anemiahemoglobinemia,and
hemoglobinuria
(5)Confirmatory diagnostic findings: postmortem lesions, Gram-positive bacilli
in tissues (liver and spleen) or fuids (blood and peritoneal fuid),
C.haemolyticum cultured from liver,and phospholipase Cactivity （β-toxin）
detected in tissues
b.Closridium perfringens type A (C.welchit) in ruminants
(1)Disease:yellow lamb disease in calves and lambs (also know as enterotox-
emic jaundice or the yellows)
(2)Clostridium perfringens type A is part of normal intestinal fora in animals,
but multiplication has been associated withhighly proteinaceous diers,
overfeeding, and starchy foods. In the United States, yellow lamb disease is a
lethal disease that occurs in spring nursing lambsinnorthern California and
in Oregon.39 It also occurs in lambs and calves of other regions (e.g,
Canada,Australia,New Zealand, and South Africa).
(3)Pathogenesis of anemia:An a-toxin that has phospholipase C activity and is
lipids and thus lyisoferythrocytes,leukocyte,platelets,ndothelial cel,
(4)Major laboratory findings
(a)Acute severe cases: anemia,hemoglobinemia,hemoglobinuria,and
icterus
(b）Less severe forms:anemia,polychromasiabasophilic stipplingrubriy
tosis,and leukocytosis
C.Clostridium perfringens type A (C.welchin）) in horses
(1)A horse with a clostridial abscess had a Coombs'-positive anemia with
spheroechinocytes and autoagglutination. Retrospectively, other horses with
clostridial myositis were also found to be anemic.4
(2)The exact relationship between the clostridial infection and the immune
mediated hemolysis hasnotbeen established but probably isrelated to
erythrocyte membrane injury.
（3）
Acute intravascular spherocytic anemia caused by a C. perfringens infection
occurs in people.141
5.EIAV
a.ElAVis a retrovirus that infects cells of the mononuclear phagocytic systems of
horses, ponies, donkeys, and mules. The disease is called equine infectious anemia
(also know as swamp fever, equine malarial fever, mountain fever, and slow
fever).
b.Persistent replication of ELAV in macrophages and a horse's response to the
184
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
disease may be an acute hemolytic state or a chronic debilitating disease caused
by the recurrent episodes.
C.Anemia pathogenesis: both decreased erythrocyte production and hemolysis
(1)Production decreases because of TNF and other cytokines that inhibit
erythroid precursors.
(2) Hemolysis is due to immune complexes or complement fragments adhered
to erythrocytes,which are then destroyed by macrophages.
d.Major laboratory findings
(1)Anemia may appear as an acute intravascular hemolytic anemia in acute
stages.More commonly,it is a chronic extravascular hemolytic anemia or a
chronic normocytic normochromic anemia.
(2)Other findings: hemoglobinemia (acute), perhaps anisocytosis and macrocy
tosis,perhaps spherocytosis,thrombocytopenia,neutropenia or neutrophilia,
Coombs’test positivity,and Coggins'test positivity
6.FeLV
a.Most anemias associated with FeLV infections are caused by decreased erythro-
most data in the study could have represented ineffective erythropoiesis (ery-
throid hyperplasia) and dyserythropoiesis (macrocytosis andrubricytosis）.15
b.A FeLV infection may predispose a cat to certain infections (e.g.Mycoplasma
spp.) or be associated with immune hemolytic processes.
7.Babesia spp.
a.The expected number of piroplasms per infected erythrocyte is noted after each
species and its host: B. bigemina,cattle (1 or 2); B. caballi, horse (2 or 4); B.
canisdog（1,2,4,or 8）,B.gibsoni,dog（1or 2）.Another small canineBabesia
has not been named.146 Babesia canis has three recognized subspecies (B.canis
vogeli,B.canis canis,and B.canis rossi),and the proposed name for another
organismfoundincatsinIsrael isB.canis presenti7Othersmallbabesial
b.Sizes:Babesia ibsoni and other small Babesia spp.are2μm,whereas others are
2-4μm long.
c.Parasitemia: It may be difficult to find organisms in chronic forms of disease.
They are more frequently found in capillary blood ear sticks, toenail clips,or in
adhesion molecules that bind to endothelial cells.The binding may concentrate
cells in capillary beds and also sequester them away from the animal's mono-
nuclear phagocytic system.150
d.Pathogenesis of anemia appears to involve nonhemolytic and hemolytic mecha-
nisms.sHemolysis may involve proteases produced by the invading parasite,an
immune reaction to parasitized cells, and/or oxidative damage to erythrocytes.
e.Major laboratory findings
(1)Chronic form: few to rare organisms in blood, mild anemia, mild lympho-
and PCR positivity for Babesia spp.
(2）In acute or subacute forms：many piroplasms inblood,moderate to severe
anemia, reticulocytosis, increased polychromasia,macrocytosis,hyperbiliru
binemiabilrubinuriapossiblyhmoglobinuriaometmes sphrocyosis,
and occasionally eccentrocytosis
3/ERYTHROCYTES
185
8.Theileria spp.
a.Erythrocyte piroplasms are intracellular and highly pleomorphic, depending on
species and stage of parasitemia.Many forms resemble Cyranxzoon,but others
resemble small babesial piroplasms.
b.Theileria equi (basonym,Babesia equ)15 infects horses and is endemic in many
tropical and subtropical areas. The infected horse may have a subclinical disease
or may have pathologic states,including intravascular hemolytic anemia, icterus,
c.In the United States (Missouri,Texas,North Carolina,and Michigan),bovine
were present in clinically ill cows; piroplasms were rare in subclinical cases.
Pathogenesis of the anemia is not established and may include both decreased
erythrocyte production and decreased erythrocytelife span (because of either
immunologic or oxidative damage).Major laboratory findings are piroplasms in
erythrocytes,macrocytosis,polychromasia,basophilic stippling,lymphocytosis,
and hyperbilirubinemia and bilirubinuria.
d.In other countries,many Theileria spp.are recognized as causing hemolytic
anemias in cattle and other ungulates.Erythrocytic piroplasms are the major
pathogenic forms in T. mutans, T. orientalis, and T. sergenti. The major patho-
genic stage of T. parwa is in the intralymphocytic schizont, whereas erythrocytic
and lymphocyticformsare considered important forT.annulata.57ssATheile
ria sp. was found in Swiss cattle that were concurrently infected with large
Babesia sp.,Anaplasma marginale,Mycoplasma wenyoni,and A.
phagocytophilum.159
e.In Spain, 21 dogs were reported to be infected with B. microti-like organisms,
but analysis ofribosomal RNA from organisms in three dogs indicated that the
losing glomerulopathy.
f.PCR testing can be used to differentiate similar organisms.
9.Trypanosoma spp. (Plate 8K and L)
a.These are fagellated protozoa that occur as free-living fagellated trypomastigotes
in blood and as amastigotes in pseudocysts or macrophages in other tissues.
The pathogenicity of the parasitic species varies,and the host specificity is
minimal.16i
b.In the United States,T.theileri (basonym,T.americanum) is found in cattle and
typically is not considered a pathogen. There are reports of finding it in Kansas,
Wyoming,Okahoma,Louisiana,Missouri,Illinois,Pennsylvania,andNewYork.
It is also found in other countries.
c.Trypanosoma cruzi infects dogs and cats in South and Central America and in the
southern United States of America. Trypomastigotes are found in blood in the
acute stages, but most lesions involve amastigotes in nonhemic tissues (heart,
Trypanosoma cruzi causes Chagas disease in people.
d.Major African trypanosomes of veterinary significance are T. congolense,T.vivax,
T.brucei,and T. simiae.A subspecies of T. brucei causes African sleeping sickness
in people.
(1)In the acute stages of T.vivax infections in cattle, the animals may have an
acute hemolytic anemia,leukopenia,and thrombocytopenia.Phagocytosis of
186
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
hemic precursors and platelets is a prominent finding in marrow, and thus
(2）
Trypanosoma congolense infections in cattle and sheep have resulted in the
coating of erythrocytes and leukocytes with trypanosomal antigen-antibody
complexes.164.165
C.Erythrocytic metabolic defects (acquired or inherited)
1.Oxidative damage
a.Heinz body hemolytic anemia
(1)Heinz bodies are foci of denatured Hgb,and their formation appearsto
(a)Erythrocytes are exposed to an oxidant thar overwhelms the reductive
pathways that keep Hgb in a reduced state (Fig.3.5),and thus erythro-
cytic Hgb is converted to Hgb-Fe3+
(b)Hgb-Feundergoes spontaneous conformational changes to form
hemichromes (Hgb-Fe+ with unique binding of Fe to nitrogenous bases
of globins) or to form a heme-depleted Hgb.
（c)Hemichromes or heme-depleted Hgb molecules precipitate and aggre-
gate to form Heinz bodies.Oxidation of sulfhydrylgroups and forma-
tion of disulide bonds occur during the precipitarion process.The
Heinz bodies are frequently associated with the erythrocyte membrane
through hydrophobic bonds.
(2）Many oxidants or substances containing oxidants are reported to cause
Heinz body formation in domestic mammals.
(a)Dogs: acetaminophen, benzocaine, hydrogen peroxide, onions (sodium
n-propylthiosulfate,npropy disuldeandother suldesitamin
K（phytonadione),vitamin K,(menadione),naphthalene,phenylhydra
zine,possiblyingarlic（Allum atum）,Chinesechive（Allum
tuberosum）,7andpossibly skunk spray
172
(b）Cats acetaminophen,benzocaine,methionine,methylene blue (in old
urinary antiseptics), onions (Alliurm spp.), phenazopyridine, propofol,
and propylene glycol173
（c)Horses: onions,phenothiazine,wilted or dry red maple (Acer rubrum）
and redmaple hybrid leaves (gallic acid and other oxidants)，7possibly
other maple leaves, and garlic (Allium sativum）17s
(d)Ruminants: Brassica spp. (kale and rape), copper,hydrogen peroxide
(intravenous), onions, and ryegrass (red maple leaves in alpacas)
(3)Cats are very susceptible to acetaminophen because they lack a glucuronyl
transferase that is used by most animals to conjugate acetaminophen.
Without the conjugation, acetaminophen is converted to reactive metabo-
lites that deplete glutathione concentrations and therefore decrease protec
tion from oxidative injury.
(4）Pathogenesis of theanemia may involvemultiple mechanisms6
(a)Erythrocytes containing Heinz bodies are less deformable and are
trapped and lysed in the spleen.
(b)Structural damage caused by oxidation of membrane proteins or binding
of Heinz body to erythrocyte membrane leads to fragile cells that may
lyse within vessels or sinusoids.
(c)Binding of hemichromes to band 3 proteins of the erythrocyte mem-
brane causes a redistribution of band 3 proteins and formation of an
3/ERYTHROCYTES
187
antigen that is recognized by autologous antibodies.After antibody
binding, the defective erythrocyte is removed by splenic or hepatic
macrophages.
(5）Majorlaboratory features:mild to severe anemia,polychromasia and
reticulocytosis,Heinz bodies in peripheral blood (NMB or an other vital
stain may help confirm the presence of Heinz bodies), eccentrocytosis,
hyperbilirubinemia and bilirubinuria, hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria
in acute severe cases, and perhaps methemoglobinemia (dark or chocolate-
colored blood)
(6)FelineHeinz bodies
(a)Clinically healthy,nonanemic cats and cars with nonhemolytic
anemias frequently have circulating erythrocytes that contain single
small Heinz bodies (diameter =0.5μm)that areof little to no clinical
significance.Typically,a minority of the erythrocytes contain Heinz
bodies. Larger Heinz bodies or multiple Heinz bodies per cell in an
anemic cat should alert one to the likelihood of a Heinz body hemolytic
anemia.
(b)Feline Heinz bodies were described as erythrocyte refractile (ER) bodies
by Schalm.27 In the NMB-stained blood flms (NMB applied to a dried
blood flm), Heinz bodies were dark-staining strucrures in one focal
plane but became refractile when the focal plane was adjusted.(Do no
confuse with refractile artifact on Wright-stained smears.)
Heinz bodies
(i)Feline erythrocytes containing Heinz bodies are probably not
removed from the circulation as rapidly as in other species because
the cat's spleen has a closed circulation.Therefore,erythrocytes do
not flow through the red pulp in which pitting of Heinz bodies is
thought to occur in other species.
(i)Because feline Hgb has more sulfhydryl groups than other species,
it may be prone to form more disulide bridges and thus more
denatured Hgb
(ii) Feline erythrocytes may have less reductive capacity.
(d)Cats that eat semimoist food containing propylene glycol have more
Heinz bodies, and their erythrocytes have shorter life spans, but
clinically significant anemia is not expected.
(e)Cats with a variety of disorders e.g, diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism,
and lymphoma) may have increased percentages of erythrocytes contain-
ing Heinz bodies.
(f)Diagnosis of Heinz body hemolytic anemia in cats requires findinga
regenerative anemia,evidence ofhemolysis (usually hyperbilirubinemia
or bilirubinuria), and demonstration of Heinz bodies in erythrocytes.
Known exposure to an oxidant is very helpful.
b.Eccentrocytic hemolytic anemias (acquired or inherited)
(1)Pathogenesis of the anemia probably involves multiple mechanisms
(a)Eccentrocytes are more rigid and thus less able to pass through splenic
sinusoids, where they are trapped and removed by macrophages.
(b)Eccentrocytes may be more fragile because of the damaged membrane
or cytoskeleton and thus may spontaneously rupture in blood.
188
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(2)Acquired states
(a)Oxidative damage to erythrocytes may cause formation of eccentrocytes,
Heinz bodies, or both (for recognized oxidants, see Hemolytic Disorders
and Diseases, sect. C.1.a).
(b）Factors that determine the outcome of oxidative damage are not
understood. Oxidants reported to cause Heinz bodies in one animal
may cause eccentrocytosis or methemoglobinemia in another.
(3)G6PDdeficiency
(a)This X-linked defect is common in people and was found in one
American saddlebred colt.* The nonsense mutation occurred in the
colt's damand is not a breed problem because none of the colt's male
siblings lived to produce progeny. One dog was reported to have
erythrocytes with decreased G6PD activity (44 % of normal), but the
dog did not have a clinical disorder related to the defect.77
(b)Pathogenesis of anemia: G6PD is the rate-controlling enzyme for the
hexose monophosphate shunt from which NADPH is produced (Fig.
3.5). NADPH is a potent reducing agent that keeps GSH, and indi-
rectlyother substancesinareduced state.Withreduced GPDactivit，
thus, the cells are prone to eccentrocyte and pyknocyte formation and
reduced life spans.
(c)Major laboratory findings in horses: persistent macrocytic normochro
mic anemia (Hct near 20 %), eccentrocytosis and pyknocytosis,
macrocytosis,and persistent icterus (primarily increased [Bu])
(d) Confirmatory diagnostic findings: greatly reduced erythrocyte G6PD
activity,decreased erythrocyte[GSH]and [NADPH],and increased
blood [Hgb-Fe3+]
(4)Erythrocyte FAD deficiency
(a)A defective biochemical pathway in the erythrocytes of a Spanish
mustang mare created a FAD deficiency.TheFAD deficiency led
to deficient activiry of Ch,R and GR, enzymes that contain FAD
(Fig.3.5). Hereditary aspects of the defect were not determined.
（b）Major laboratory findingsinhorses:eccentrocytosis,pyknocytosisHgb
crystals,and methemoglobinemia
2.Defects in ATPgeneration
a.PK deficiency
（1）PKdeficiency isahereditary disorderinpeople,several breeds of ogs
(basenjis,beagles, cairn terriers,West Highland white terriers,American
The clinical illness typically is seen in dogs in the first few weeks to months
of age,but less severe deficiencies can be found in older dogs.
(2)Pathogenesis of anemia: Normal erythrocytes have R-type PK isoenzyme (R-
PK) (R for RBC) that normally catalyzes the last ATP generation step of
anaerobic glycolysis (Fig.3.5).Without R-PK activity, erythrocytes become
ATP deficient, erythrocyte membranes become defective, and hemolysis
occurs. In this disorder,young erythrocytes have a littleR-PK, the RPK
content decreases as the cell ages, and erythrocytes have a greatly decreased
life span.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
189
(3）Major laboratory findings include moderate anemia,moderate to extreme
reticulocytosis (RP=40-60 %),and mild to moderate icterus.Spheroechi-
nocytes are reported to occur but are uncommon in canine cases. Pancytope
nia may develop in later stages if myelofibrosis develops.
(4)Confirmatory diagnostic findings include decreased erythrocyte R-PK
activity.Total erythrocyte PK activity may be increased because of increased
heat-labile,M-type PK isoenzyme (M2-PK)(M for muscle).PCRtesting
can confirm some PK deficiencies.4
b.PFK deficiency
(1)This was first recognized in English springer spaniels with erythrocyte PFK
muscle fibers) were also deficient in PFK.It was more recently recognized in
American cocker spaniels7 and mixed-breed dogs (which may have had
spaniel parentage).
(2)
Pathogenesis of anemia: PFK is a rate-controlling enzyme of glycolysis
(Fig.3.5). A deficiency in PFK results in less downstream formation of ATP
and 2,3-DPG, the major impermeable anion in erythrocytes.
(a)Decreased ATP impairs erythrocyte functions and contributes to
premature destruction. Studies of PFK-deficient human erythrocytes
suggest they have a defective Ca²+ pump that needs ATP to function,
and thus erythrocytes accumulate Ca+and become less deformable.1ss
However, mechanisms that link the Ca²+-transport defect with the
alkaline-induced hemolysis and increased erythrocyte[Cl]were not
found.
(b)Decreased 2,3-DPG results in greater intracelular [Cl], greater pH,and
enhanced alkaline fragility (normal canine erythrocytes are generally
sensitive to alkalinity). The low 2,3-DPG decreases O delivery to
tissues such that Epo production is increased.This results in a compen-
sated regenerative state.When hyperventilation occurs because of
excitement or exercise, blood P,co decreases and alkalemia may lead to
a hemolytic crisis.
(3)The major laboratory findings are anemia, hemoglobinemia, and hemoglo
binuria after hyperventilation (producingrespiratory alkalosis）,andhemo
lytic icterus. When not in an active intravascular hemolytic state, dogs have
mild regenerative anemias or reticulocytoses without anemias (compensated
hemolysis).
(4)Confrmatory findings:PFK-deficient erythrocytes,decreased erythrocyte
[2,3-DPG], and increased [CF]. PCR testing can confrm PFK deficiencies.
c.Hypophosphatemic hemolysis
(1)Postparturient hemoglobinuria in cattle
(a)Occurs 3-8wk after calving
(b）Pathogenesis of anemia:Defective mobilization of phosphorus from
bone and increased phosphorus loss via milk cause a pronounced
hypophosphatemia.Without plasma phosphorus, the ATP production
by erythrocytes is defectivewhichresults inATP eficiencyunstable
erythrocyte membranes, and hemolysis.
(c)Major laboratory findings: hypophosphatemia, hemoglobinemia,
hemoglobinuria, and moderate to marked anemia
190
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(2)There are sporadic reports of concurrent hypophosphatemia and severe
decrease erythrocyte ATP production and thus produce unstable
alsoplay a role by making cells more susceptible to alkaline-associated
hemolysis.4
(3）Bilirubin interference can cause artifactual hypophosphatemia with some
assay methods, so one must be careful about interpreting the concurrent
presence of hypophosphatemia and hemolytic anemia.
hypophosphatemia by promoting movement of glucose and phosphate into
cells other than erythrocytes. (Glucose transport into erythrocytes is not
phosphate, decrease ATP production, and cause hemolysis.
d.L-sorbose intoxication192.193
(1)Dogs that have low-K+ erythrocytes (most breeds) develop a hemolytic
anemia after ingestion of L-sorbose, a sugar substitute.Dogs with high-K
erythrocytes (e.g.,someJapaneseAkitas and Japanese Shibas) and human
erythrocytes are resistant to the effects of L-sorbose.
(2)Evidence indicates that the hemolysis is due to ATP depletion that results
from the strong inhibition of hexokinase by sorbose-l-phosphate in dogs
with low-K+erythrocytes.Sorbose-l-phosphate isalso formed within high
Kerythrocytes but hasless effect on their hexokinase193
3.Defects in heme synthesis that cause porphyria
a.Porphyrias are a group of hereditary and acquired disorders in which porphyrins
accumulate in cells and body fuids because of deficient enzyme activity in the
heme synthetic pathway (Fig.3.2). Collectively, porphobilinogen through
protoporphyrin IX are called porphyrins. Some authors define porphyria as an
(1)Some forms of porphyria produce a hemolytic anemia, but others do not.
The accumulation of certain porphyrins in erythrocytes reduces erythrocyte
life span and thus causes a hemolytic anemia The mechanism of erythrocyte
destruction is not firmly established but may relate to porphyrin-induced
damage of membrane lipids or photolysis when erythrocytes are near the
skin surface.s.96when certan porphyrins absorbultraviolet light,excita
tion of the molecule leads to oxidative damage to cells.Another common
manifestation of oxidant damage is the dermatitis of photosensitivity.
(2)Congenital(hereditary)porphyrias can be classfied as either erythropoietic
or hepatic depending on the major expression of the enzymatic defect in
(3)The acquired (secondary) hepatic porphyrias are more common; for
example, cattle and horsesmay develop porphyria and the resulting photo-
sensitization when severe liver disease decreases excretion of phylloerythrin
(a porphyrin derived from the breakdown of chlorophyll).
b.Congenital erythropoietic porphyria
(1)Bovine congenital erythropoietic porphyria
(a)The homozygous calves with this autosomal recessive disorder have
reddish brown discoloration of teeth and bones, photosensitivity,and
3/ERYTHROCYTES
191
anemia of varying severity.The disorder is found primarily in Holsteins,
but also in shorthorn and Jamaican cattle.19s
(b)The porphyria is caused by a hereditary deficiency of uroporphyrinogen
I cosynthase, an enzyme that catalyzes one of the first porphyrin
reactions shown in Fig.3.2
(2)Feline erythropoietic porphyria
(a)Erythropoietic porphyria was diagnosed in a female Siamese cat and rwo
male offspring.The cats had photosensitivity,hemolytic anemia, and
renal disease.197
(b)The specific enzymatic defect was not established in the cats.
C.Other hereditary erythropoietic porphyrias have been diagnosed in catte,pigs,
and cats;however,anemia was not reported as a feature of these forms.95.i9s,99
Lead poisoning creates an acquired porphyria because lead inhibits enzymes in
the heme synthetic pathway. Anemia may be present in plumbism but is not
considered a hemolytic anemia caused by the porphyrin accumulation.
4.Hypoosmolar hemolysis
a.Rapid infusion of hypotonic fuid intravenously (such as sterile HO) or the
ingestion of large quantities of water by calves (water intoxication) can cause
rapid intravascular hemolysis.
b. Pathogenesis of the anemia: Infusion of a hypotonic solution or absorption of
large quantities of water creates hypoosmolar plasma.Rapid movement of HO
os
c.The major laboratory findings are anemia,hemoglobinemia,and hemoglobinuria
the severities of which depend on the severity of the hypoosmolar state.
D.Erythrocyte fragmentation in blood creating schizocytes, keratocytes, or acanthocytes
1.Erythrocyte damage is thought tobe due to trauma caused byrelatively rigid
structures (fibrin) or by rheologic forces (see Table 3.10 for disorders),but other
factors may be involved.
2.Pathogeneses of anemia: Because the erythrocyte trauma is a consequence of other
pathologic states, processes that cause the anemia may be multifaceted.
a.Erythrocyte trauma either directly causes lysis or creates poikilocytes that have a
shortened life span.Acanthocytes may form in the circulation because of
membrane lipid changes rather than mechanical orrheologic forces,but these
forces may contribute to the accelerated fragmentation of acanthocytes (budding
fragmentation).
b. Primary diseases are frequently infectious or noninfectious inflammatory disor-
dersand thus the infammatory state may be producing anemia (seeNonregen
erative Anemias, sect.II.A)
3.Major laboratory findings may include mild to moderate anemia with no reticulocy.
tosis or moderate reticulocytosis and polychromasia, schizocytosis,keratocytosis
acanthocytosisand thrombocytopenia.There may be other evidence of a consump
tive coagulopathy. There may be evidence of renal failure with hemolytic uremic
syndrome.
E.Hemolytic disorders of other or unknown pathogeneses
1.Heparin-induced hemolysis
a.Heparin anticoagulant therapy in some horses can cause erythrocyte agglutina
tion,mild to moderate anemia,and increased biliary bilirubin excretion that
refects increased Hgb degradation.
192
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(1) Pathogenesis of the decreased Hct is not established but probably involves
hemolysis. In vivo erythrocyte agglutination appears to trap and destroy
erythrocytes.200
(2)When determined by Coulter cell counters, in vitro erythrocyte agglutina
because a group of agglutinated cells is considered one large cell (a particle)
Therefore, the falsely decreased measured [RBC] can produce a falsely low
calculated Hct. The effects of heparin can be inhibited and reversed in vitro
by trypsin administration.2o1
(3)When analyzed by the CELL-DYN, the group of agglutinated cells is also
recognized as one “large cell during impedance counting.However,
volumes of the “large cells” that are outside the expected distribution
curve are excluded from the data used for determination of theMCV.
Thus,the derived MCV may be nearly correct but the[RBC]will be falsely
decreased because many cells were not counted. Accordingly, the calculared
Hct will be falsely decreased, and the MCHC and MCH will be falsely
increased.
b.Major laboratory findings:In experimental studies, spun Hct (microhematocrit)
and then returned to baseline percentages by day 5. Bilirubin concentrations
increased fromnear0.6mg/dL to1.4mg/dLwithin24 hof heparin
treatment.200
2.Envenomation
a.Venoms from some animals (e.g., snakes, spiders, and insects) cause hemolysis.
Mechanisms include complement activation with subsequent destruction (e.g
cobra venom factor) and direct hemolysis from hemolysins (includingphospholi-
b.Spherocytic hemolytic anemias may occur after bee stings.The hemolysis may be
due to hemolysins present in the venom: phospholipase Ag and melittin. The
spherocytosis may be related to altered membrane structure or antibody-mediated
3.Histiocytic neoplasia:When anemia accompanies hemophagocytic histiocytic
sarcoma (malignant histiocyrosis),extravascular hemolysis by neoplastic cells is one
contributing factor to an animal's anemia.
4.Idiopathicnonspherocytichemolytic disorders with increased osmoticfragility
a.Hereditary nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia in beagles
(1)Affected beagles had mild chronic anemia (Hct values of 30-39 %),
persistentreticulocytosissplenomegaly,erythroid hyperplasiainmarrow
samplesshortenederythrocytelifespansandincreased erythrocyteosmotic
fragility.202.203
(2）Studiessuggest that thedefectisanautosomalrecessive trait,but thespecifc
defect has not been established.
b.Idiopathic hemolytic anemia inAbyssinian and Somali cat4
(1)A total of 18 cats (13 Abyssinian and 5 Somali, male and female) had
macrocytic,regenerative anemias(Hct values of 525%),splenomegaly,and
increased erythrocyte osmotic fragility.
(2) Studies suggest that the defect is an autosomal recessive trait,but the specific
defect has not been established.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
193
5.Hemolytic syndrome in horses with liver disease205
a.Nine horses with evidence of hepatic or hepatobiliary disease had intravascular
hemolytic anemiasFivehorseswereconsidered tohavepyrrolizidine alkalod
toxicity,but the causes in the other four were not determined.
b.The cause of the hemolytic states was not determined.
ERYTHROCYTOSISANDPOLYCYTHEMLA
I
Terms andconcepts
A.Erythrocytosis is an increased [RBC] in peripheral blood. It is detected by finding an
increased Hct,increased [RBC],or increased blood [Hgb].
B.Hemoconcentration is an increased concentration of blood components (including
erythrocytes)because of decreased plasma volume.
C.Polycythemia
1.Polycythemia vera (polycythemia rubra vera) is a clonal myeloproliferative disorder
characterized by neoplasticproliferation of all marrow cell precursors that produces
erythrocytosis, leukocytosis, and thrombocytosis. In this context,polycythemia
2.In common use,polycythemiamay refer to an erythrocytosis or increased toral
erythrocyte mass (i.e., an increased number of cells in the erythron because of either
erythroid hyperplasia or erythroid neoplasia).However, there may or may not be a
leukocytosis or thrombocytosis.Such use leads to confusion and misunderstandings.
In this context, these are the two types of polycythemia:
a.Relative polycyrbemia: Erythrocytosis occurs because of hemoconcentration or
splenic contraction.It is also called pseudo-pobycytbemia or spurious polycythemia to
emphasize that the state is really not an absolute increase in erythrocyte mass.
b.Absolute ortrue polycyzbemia:Erythrocytosis occurs because of increased erythro
cytemassand there is concurrent erythrocytosis.Polycythemia vera isone form
of this type but also includes secondary erythrocytotic disorders
3.In this textbook,erythrocytosis and polycythemia are not considered synonyms.
Erythrocytosis is an increased[RBC] in blood, just as a leukocytosis is an increased
[WBC] in blood.Polycythemia will be used only in the context of the neoplastic
state of polycythemia vera.
4. Some people have combined terms and concepts to form another classfication system.
a.Relative erythrocytosis. The definition is the same as for relative polycythemia.
D.Extreme erythrocytosis may cause sludging of blood and thus impaired blood fow and
membranes,congested retinal blood vessels,and seizures
II.
Erythrocytotic disorders and conditions (Table 3.14) (Fig.3.13)
A.Hemoconcentration
1.Dehydration
a.The most common cause of erythrocytosis in mammals, dehydration occurs as a
mild to moderate erythrocytosis of no direct pathologic significance.
b.Erythrocytosis is present, but it is not due to an increased mass of erythroid cells
in the body.
c.Pathogenesis of the erythrocytosis of hemoconcentration is shown in Fig. 3.14.
Table3.14.Disorders and conditions that cause erythrocytosis
Hemoconcentration
*Dehydration
Endotoxic shock
*Splenic contraction
Secondary appropriate erythrocytotic disorders
Right-to-left shunts,congenital or acquired
Chronic pulmonary disease
Hyperthyroidism
Secondary inappropriate erythrocytotic disorders
Renal neoplasms, cysts, or diseases
Other neoplasms (hepatoma)
Primary erythrocytotic disorders
Primary erythrocytosis
Polycythemia vera (polycythemiarubra vera)
Idiopathic erythrocytosis
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Animals that live at higher altitudes or perhaps those that have been physically trained (e.g.
racing animals) have an increased need forHgb to transport O to tissues andmay producemore
erythrocytes. In addition, certain breeds of dogs and horses have greater Hct values than other animals
of the same species (see list in Erythrocytosis and Polycythemia, sect. IL.C.4)
Hct,↑[Hgb],or ↑[RBC]
Hemoconcentration
Increased total
Physiologic erythrocytosis
Dehydration
erythrocyte mass
Splenic contraction
Endotoxic shock
Primary erythrocytosis
Secondary erythrocytoses
Erythroid neoplasia
Polycythemia vera
Secondary appropriate
Secondary inappropriate
erythrocytosis
erythrocytosis
(hypoxic erythrocytosis)
Renal neoplasms
Cardiacfailure
Non-renal neoplasms
Respiratory disease
Hyperthyroidism
Fig. 3.13. An approach to problem-solving erythrocytoses: After erythrocytosis has been detected or
confirmed,the animal is examined for evidence of the most common causes:hemoconcentration or splenic
contraction. If they are not found and the erythrocytosis is persistent, then diagnostic plans are formulated
to pursue identification of secondary or primary erythrocytotic disorders.However, the erythrocytosis may
be idiopathic.
194
Healthy animal
Marrow
Blood
00
00
10
Extravascular
0
-F
ECF
国
Spleen
HOloss
Epinephrine
release
Marrow
Blood
Marrow
Bloo
?
Extravascula
EOF
Extravascular
ECF
HO
Spleen
Spleen
Erythrocytosisofhemoconcentration
Erythrocytosisdue to spleniccontraction
↑Epo
Neoplastic
transformation
Blood
Blood
Marrow
Marrow
Extravascular
Extravascular
ECF
Spleen
ECF
Spleen
Secondary erythrocytosis
Primary erythrocytosis
Fig.3.14.Pathogeneses of the erythrocytoses.
·Erythrocytosis of hemoconcentration:Dehydration (decreased total body water)results in a decreased ECF
volume and thus a decreased plasma volume. With a decreased plasma volume but no change in number
of blood erythrocytes, the [RBC] is increased. Loss of plasma H,O because of increased vascular perme
ability in endotoxic shock also causes an erythrocytosis via hemoconcentration.
Erythrocytosis due to splenic contraction (physiologic erythrocytosis): The fight-or-fight response or
exercise causes the release of epinephrine.Epinephrine administration causes the contraction of splenic
smooth muscle and thus the release of splenic blood to peripheral blood vessels. Splenic blood with a high
Hct (7080 %) is mixed with peripheral blood (Hct = 40-50 %) and causes erythrocytosis.
Secondaryerythrocytosis:IncreasedEpoactivitystimulateserythropoiesistocauseerythroidhyperplasia
and erythrocytosis associated with an increase in total body erythrocyte mass. Increased Epo production
may be appropriate (if stinmulared by tissue hypoxia) or inappropriate (if not stimulated by tissue hypoxia).
Several disease states can cause a secondary erythrocytosis (see Erythrocytosis and Polycythemia, sects.Il.C
and D).
• Primary erythrocytosis: There is a proliferation of erythroid cells in the absence of increased Epo produc-
tion that causes an erythrocytosis and increases total body erythrocyte mass.This may be neoplastic or
nonneoplastic. Nonneoplastic primary erythrocytosis caused by defective Epo receptors has been reported
in people. If erythrocytosis is concurent with a neoplastic proliferation of leukocytes and megakaryocytes,
then polycythemia vera is present.
195
196
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
d.Laboratory findings that support a conclusion that erythrocytosis is caused by
dehydration
(1)Hyperproteinemia with possibly a concurrent hyperalbuminemia
(2）Hypernatremia and hyperchloremia if dehydration is hypertonic (loss of
hypotonic fuid)
2.Endotoxic shock
a.The blood of some animals with endotoxemia may become hemoconcentrated
because of the shift of HO from intravascular to extravascular space.
b.Pathogenesis of the erythrocytosis: Endotoxins damage endothelial cells so that
reduce the oncotic pressure gradient,which promotes the shift of plasma HO
from intravascular space to extravascular space, thus causing a decrease in plasma
volume and an erythrocytosis.
c.Laboratory findings that support endotoxic shock
(1)Erythrocytosis is usuallymild to moderate and of no direct pathologic
significance.
(2)Infammatory leukogram (either neutropenia or neutrophilia)
(3）Thrombocytopenia
B.Splenic contraction (physiologic erythrocytosis)(Fig.3.14)
1.This state is called physiologic erytbrocytosis because it results from normal physiologic
responses toexcitement,fright,andexercise thatcause epinephrinereleasefom
adrenal medullae.
and high concentration of erythrocytes in equine and canine splenic blood. After
epinephrine injections in cats,Hct values were about 25% greater than preinjection
Hct values.14
3.Erythrocytosis is not due to an increased mass of erythroid cells or erythrocytes in
the body,but the erythrocyte number and concentration is increased in the periph
eral blood
4.Laboratory findings
a.Erythrocytosis is mild to moderate and of no direct pathologic significance.
b.Erythrocytosis is transient.The Hct returns to WRI after the stimulus is
removed.
C.One may see a physiologic leukocytosis (mature neutrophilia and
lymphocytosis).
C.Secondary appropriate erythrocytosis (sustained hypoxic erythrocytosis)(Fig.3.14)
1.This state is called secondary because erythroid cellproliferation is stimulated byEpo
rather than being autonomous.It is called appropriate because Epo is increased by
renal (usually systemic) hypoxia rather than being autonomous.
2.Erythrocytosis and erythroid hyperplasia are due to increased production stimulated
by Epo.
3.Disorders that cause hypoxic erythrocytosis
talright to left shunt)
b.Pulmonary disorders that cause persistent poor oxygenation of blood
c.Hyperthyroidism that increases the metabolic rate and thus increases the need for
O, in tissues. In one study, about 45 % of 131 hyperthyroid cats had an erythro
cytosis (Hct values from 38% to 57 %).206
3/ERYTHROCYTES
197
d.In theory, a defective Hgb molecule that has decreased ability to transport or
release O, could cause an erythrocytosis. Acquired disorders (such as cyanide
poisoning, carbon monoxide poisoning, and nitrate poisoning) are typically acute
and thus of insuffcient duration to produce increased Hct. Hereditary Hgb
disorders (hemoglobinopathies) are not documented in domestic animals.
4.Physiologic processes
a.Mammals that move to high altitudes may develop tissue hypoxia. The hypoxia
stimulates Epo production and erythropoiesis,resulting in erythroid hyperplasia
and erythrocytosis that resolve the tissue hypoxia. Mammals that live at high
altitudes are expected to have greater Hct values than mammals that live ar sea
level,butwithouttissue hypoxia or pathologic consequence.Such animalsreally
do not have erythrocytoses;rather,reference intervals for high altitudes are
greater than those for low altitudes.However,one study involving dogs indicates
that the erythrocytosis one expects does not always occur.207
b.Prolonged exercise training in horses has produced differing results. In some
studies the trained horses had greater Hct values but in other studies they did
not.Increased Odemand during training might stimulate erythropoiesis,but
C.Some breeds have greater erythrocyte concentrations than others.
(1)Thoroughbreds,Standardbreds,and quarter horses have greater Hcrs than
draft horses.
(2)Greyhounds,Afghan hounds, salukis,and whippets have greater Hcts than
most other dogs.The Hcts of the former average in the high 50s to low
60s,21 whereas most other dogs have average Hcts in the 40s in health.
Poodles, German shepherds,boxers,beaglesdachshunds,and Chihuahuas
are also mentioned as having Hcts greater than those of most dogs.211
5.Pathogenesis:Hypoxemia or increased tissue O consumption (hyperthyroidism)
causes sustained tissue (renal)hypoxia,which leads to increased Epo production,
increased erythropoiesis via erythroid hyperplasia, and,with time, erythrocytosis.
6.Clinical data that would support secondary appropriate erythrocytosis
a. Clinical history or evidence of a right to left shunt, chronic pulmonary disease,
or hyperthyroidism
b.Decreased Po（strongly if<70mmHg2²or<60 mmHg1)
c.Hemoglobinopathy(rare)
D.Secondary inappropriate erythrocytosis (Fig. 3.14)
1.This state is called secondary because erythroid cell proliferation is stimulated by Epo
rather than being autonomous. It is called inappropriate because the increased Epo
production is autonomous rather than being caused by systemic hypoxia.
2.Disorders in this erythrocytotic group can cause mild to marked erythrocytosis and
erythroid hyperplasia.Marked erythrocytosis may cause sluggish blood that leads to
poor tissue perfusion.
3.Pathologic causes (both rare or rarely recognized)
a.Inappropriate Epo production by renal tissue because of renal cysts,renal
neoplasms, and, rarely, other renal disease
b. Inappropriate Epo production by other benign or malignant neoplasms (e.g
hepatoma, hepatoblastoma, schwannoma, or leiomyosarcoma)
4.Clinical data that would support the conclusion that a persistent erythrocytosis is
secondary and inappropriate
198
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
a.Known associated pathologicdisorders are found
b.Serum [total protein] and Poare WRI.
E.Primary erythrocytosis (Fig.3.14)
1.This state is called primary because erythroid cell proliferation is autonomous rather
than secondary to Epo.
2.Disorders in this erythrocytotic group can cause mild to marked erythrocytosis that
may cause sluggish blood, poor tissue perfusion, and therefore secondarily increased
Epo production.
3.Disorders
a.Primary erythrocytosis is either a neoplastic or nonneoplastic condition in which
the total number of mature erythrocytes in the body and blood is increased
without increasedproduction ofEpo
b.Polycythemia vera isneoplasia of erythroid,myeloid,andmegakaryocytic cell
lines. Primary erythrocytosis may be a presenting form of polycythemia vera.
and congenital nonneoplastic primary erythrocytosis.This has not been identified
in domestic mammals but should be considered as a potential cause.
4.Information that would support these disorders
a.Absence of other causes of erythrocytosis
b.With polycythemia vera, bone marrow with too many erythroid cell, myeloid
cell,and megakaryocyte precursors
c.Theoretically,blood [Epo] would not be increased with primary erythrocytosis
but would be increased with secondary erythrocytosis. However, blood [Epo]
may be increased because of hypoxia induced by primary erythrocytosis, and
blood [Epo] may not be increased with secondary erythrocytosis if erythrocytosis
hasresolved tissue hypoxia such that here is little or no stimulus for increased
Epo production at the time of testing.
F.
Idiopathic eryzhrocyrosis is the classification for patients whose erythrocytosis cannot be
classified.
OTHERERYTHROCYTEDISORDERS
I.
Methemoglobinemia
A.Methemoglobinemia is the condition in which Hgb-Fe+ accumulates in erythrocytes.It
may be hereditary or acquired.
1.Hereditary
a.CbR deficiency in dogs (several breeds) and cats
coursesmar
b.Associated with erythrocyte FAD deficiency in a horse (see Hemolytic Disorders
and Diseases, sect.II.C.1.b)7
C.GR deficiency in a horse214
2.Acquired
a.Nitrate poisoning
(1) In ruminants, ingestion of feed with high nitrate content increases rumen
formation and absorption of nitrites.
(2)Nitrite (NO) binds to oxyhemoglobin and results in the release of O and
linked chain reactions that form Hgb-Fe,hydrogen peroxide,nitrous
dioxide radical,and more nitrite.
b.Erythrocyte exposure to oxidants
3/ERYTHROCYTES
199
(1)A variety of toxicants are oxidants that overwhelm the reductive capacity of
erythrocyte pathways and thus can lead toconversion ofHgb toHgb-Fe3+
(2)Many of these oxidants also damage the Hgb molecule and lead to the
formation of Heinz bodies (see Hemolytic Disorders and Diseases,
sect. C.1.a).
B.Diagnosis of methemoglobinemia
1.Spot tesr. A drop of blood is placed on white filter paper. Methemoglobinemic blood
has a brown discoloration compared to blood containing primarily oxyhemoglobin.
2.CO-oximeter. This instrument uses polychromatic light to detect oxyhemoglobin
deoxyhemoglobin,carboxyhemoglobin, and Hgb-Feby means of their different
absorption spectra. The results are expressed as a percentage of total Hgb; for
example, 20 % Hgb-Fe (see Analytical Concepts, sect. IIl, in Chapter 10).
3.Pulse oximeter. This device also uses the absorption spectra to measure percent Hgb
saturation with Hgb (Spo2).Unfortunately,the pulse oximeter cannot differentiate
Hgb-Fe+ from oxyhemoglobin, so the Spo is falsely increased when methemoglo-
binemia is present.Methemoglobinemia should be considered if the Spo is signif
cantly greater than the So（percentage of Hgb saturated with O) determined by
blood gas analysis (see the Analytical Concepts section in Chapter 10).
Cytochrome-breductase (CbR) (NADH-methemoglobin reductase) deficiency215-20
1.
A.Cb,R catalyzes the primary reaction involved in the conversion of Hgb-Fe+ to Hgb. It
uses FAD as a cofactor (Fig. 3.5).A Cb,R deficiency allows Hgb-Fe+ to accumulate in
erythrocytes.
B.It is a hereditary disorder in people. The genetics are not known for dog and cats
(reported in purebred and mongrel dogs)
C.Classic features
1.Young and old dogs with clinical signs of hypoxia because of poor Oz-carrying
capacity of methemoglobin
2.Methemoglobinemia (dark to chocolate blood) and usually Heinz bodies present
3. No anemia or mild anemia; may be a compensatory reticulocytosis
III.
Familial methemoglobinemia associatedwith GRdeficiency in a horse14
A.GR catalyzes the conversion of glutathione disulfide to GSH. It uses FAD as a cofactor
(Fig.3.5).A deficiency in GR can lead to a decreased [GSH] in erythrocytes,thus
making them more susceptible to oxidants.
B.A young mare and her dam both were exercise intolerant and had similar abnormalities.
C. Clinical features
1.Methemoglobinemia
2.Mild anemia (Hct near 25 %)
3.GR deficiency (about 30 % of activity of healthy horses)
4.Reduced [GSH](about 50 %of healthy values)
5. Cb,R activity and NADPH dehydrogenase activity were not decreased. (Note: Some
methods give false values.)37
IV.
Hereditary stomatocytosis
A.Hereditary stomatocytoses have been recognized in three canine breeds: Alaskan
malamutes,Drentse patrijshonds,and schnauzerThe specific erythrocyte dfects ar
not established，clinically，the dogs probably have different disorders.
200
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.In the Alaskan malamutes,there is a concurrent short-limb dwarfism.1 The erythro
cyte disorderischaracterized bymild anemia,mild tomoderatereticulocytosismild to
moderate stomatocytosis, and shortened erythrocyte life span.
C.In the Drentse patrijshonds,the concurrent findings include hypertrophic gastritis,
polycystic renal disease, and regenerative macrocytichypochromic anemia due to
hemolysisStudiesoferythrocytemembranesandplasmasofaffecteddogsindicat
that abnormal fatty acid composition in plasma phospholipids leads to abnormal
D.Among the miniature and standard schnauzers, those with stomatocytosis were not
anemic,but their erythrocytes were macrocytic and hypochromic.The amount of
stomatin (erythrocyte membrane protein 7.2b) in erythrocytes of standard schnauzers
with stomatocytosis was variable but similar to the amount found in dogs without
stomatocytosis. The erythrocyte [Na] and [K+] were increased; the stomatocytosis
appeared to be due to erythrocyte overhydration caused by a defective cation
V.
Hereditary band 3 deficiency in Japanese black cattle
A.Homozygous cattle for this autosomal dominant disorder have a chronic hemolytic
anemia, spherocytosis, and metabolic acidosis. They also suffer from retarded growth.
B.Erythrocyre band 3 is a membrane protein that has two major functions: (1) it serves as
an ion-exchange protein for the rapid exchange of Cl and HCO, to allow the transport
of COfrom tissues to lungs, and (2) it contributes to the erythrocyte cytoskeleton.
VI.
Hereditary elliptocytosis in dogs that is caused by protein band 4.1 deficiency5.224
A.Elliptocytosis is caused by qualitative and quantitative defects of erythrocyte membrane
protein4.1,a protein that isneeded to stabilizethe cytoskeleton of the erythrocyte
membrane by providing an anchor for the spectrin-ankyrin complex.
B.Classic features of canine disorder
1.Marked elliptocytosis is present.
2. There is slight anemia but with moderate reticulocytosis (compensated anemia).
3.In cases reported so far, the disorder was not a major problem for the dogs.
increasedratioof spectrin dimers compared to spectrin tetramers in erythrocyte
membranes.
B.Spectrin,a major protein of the erythrocyte cytoskeleton, is composed of heterodimers
tetramers. Molecular defects in either C-spectrin or β-spectrin can reduce this associa-
tion, and thus more dimers are present in the membrane. In people, the location of the
Elliptocytosis occurs when there is a defective horizontal interaction of membrane
proteins, whereas spherocytosis occurs when the vertical interaction of membrane
proteins is defective.
C.Clinical features of the canine disorder
1.Elliptocytosis:Many erythrocytes are involved but to a varying degree. Typical
findings are 40 % type I elliptocytes (nearly circular cells),35 % type II elliptocytes
(oval cells), and 25 % type IIl elliptocytes (elongated cells)
3/ERYTHROCYTES
201
2.The dog was clinically healthy, not anemic, and thus its elliptocytosis was a subclini
cal disorder.
VIII. Spectrin deficiency in Dutch golden retrievers
A. Spectrin is a membrane protein that is a major component of an erythrocyte's cytoskel-
eton. In people, a spectrin deficiency causes a disorder known as bereditary spherocyosis.
Concurrently, these peoplehave a hemolytic anemia and increased erythrocyte osmotic
fragility.
B.A partial spectrin deficiency was detected in a group of Dutch golden retrievers after
they recovered from hemolytic anemias (three immune mediated and rwo of unknown
mechanisms).2sIt was discovered because of the persistence of increased erythrocyte
osmotic fragility. The erythrocyte [spectrin] in the affected dogs was 50-65 % of the
concentrations found ingoldenretrievers without altered erythrocyte osmotic fragility
Afterrecovery from the hemolytic anemias,the dogs with partial spectrin deficiency
were not anemic. Spherocytes were detected only in dogs diagnosed with immune
mediated hemolytic anemia.A cause-and-effect association between spectrin deficiency
and hemolytic anemia was not established in these dogs. Pedigree analysis indicated an
autosomal dominant inheritance.
IX.
Megaloblastic anemia
A.A megaloblastic anemiahas the concurrent findings of anemia andmegaloblastic
erythroid precursors in bone marrow or blood.
B.Megaloblastic erythroid precursors form because of asynchronous maturation of nucleus
and cytoplasm (Plare 9L). Nuclear maturation is arrested, so nuclei are large, with
exaggerated euchromatin regions that persist to late rubricyte stages.Cytoplasmic
maturation isrelatively more complete, soHgb is apparent in cellswithrelatively
immature nuclei. The cells have relatively abundant cytoplasm and thus are larger than
would be expected for the maturity of the nucleus.
C.Causes
1.The exact defect is rarely documented. It may be the result of neoplastic transforma-
tion of erythrocyteprecursorsdefectivenucleicacidmetabolismcausedby folateor
vitamin B deficiency, or defective metabolism.
2.In cats, there is a high clinical association with FeLV infections (especially subtype C)
D.Frequently, cats with this disorder have a nonregenerative, macrocytic normochromic
anemia (mild to marked severity)
1.Nonregenerative because of defective and reduced erythrocyte production
2.Macrocytic because megaloblastic metarubricytes become macrocytes with erythro
cyte diameters 112 times those of healthy cats
3.Bone marrow findings in cats
a.Erythroid cell numbers: variable,increased to decreased
b.Erythroid cells: frequent megaloblastic rubricytes and/or megaloblastic
metarubricytes
C.Granulocytic cells: occasionally hypersegmented neutrophils
E.Classfication of megaloblastic disorders in cats that is based on exclusion of underlying
diseases until cytogenetic markers of neoplastic transformation become available (see
Bone Marrow Classifications,sect.IXB,in Chapter )
1.Acquired secondary dyshematopoiesis: Erythrocytes are dysplastic but are not
neoplastic.
202
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.Erythroid neoplasia
a.Acute myeloid leukemia: erythroleukemia or erythroleukemia with erythroid
predominance
b.Primary myelodysplastic syndromes: myelodysplastic syndrome or myelodysplas
tic syndrome with erythroid predominance
X.
Sideroblastic anemia in dogs28
A.A diagnosis of sideroblastic anemia was based on the concurrent presence of > 15 %
sideroblasts in marrow and of ringed sideroblasts
B.Of the seven dogs, six had nonregenerative anemias, one had a regenerative anemia,ive
had hypochromic anemias, and two hadmicrocytic anemias.Dysplastic features in
marrow included dyserythropoiesis (asynchronous nuclear maturation, binucleation
and nuclear fragmentationorlobulation),asynchronousmaturation inmegakaryocytes,
and dysmyelopoiesis (giant neutrophils and hypersegmentation).
C.The anemias were not caused by Fe deficiency,because Fe stores in marrow were
considered increased or normal.The siderocytes and sideroblasts indicated defective Fe
metabolismandwere associatedwithacutehepatitis,ancreatitislomerulonephriis,
sepsis, and myelofibrosis.
XI.
Distemper inclusions in dogs (Plate 4A and B)
A.Erythrocyte distemper inclusions are generally rare findings.They may occur in the
early viremic stage and before clinical illness in dogs. They may appear as pink or pale
blue amorphous inclusions of varying shapes and sizes, are rarely observed in the
United States, and are usually more easily detected with the quick-dip stains (e.g
Diff-Quik) than the Wright stains.
B.Rarely,similar cytoplasmic inclusions are found in bloodneutrophils and lymphocytes
(see Plate 2D)
LABORATORYMETHODS FORASSESSINGIRON (Fe)STATUS
Evaluation of an animal'sFe statusmay be helpful in confirming anFe-deficient or anFe-
overload state, but serum [Fe] alone is an unreliable reflection of body Fe stores.
I.
Serum [Fe]
A.Analytical concepts
1.Because nearly all Fe in nonhemolyzed serum is bound to transferrin, serum [Fe]
typically represents the amount of Fe bound to transferrin.Fe in ferritin may
contribute significantly to serum [Fe] if the hyperferritinemia is marked.
2.Unit conversion:μg/dLx0.01791 μmol/μg×10 dL/L=μmo/L (SIunit,nearest
1μmol/L)16
3.Sample
a.Serum is preferred.
b.SerumFe]isrelatively stablef the samesrefrierated,frozen,ork
room temperarures for a few hours.
4. Common principle of serum Fe assays: Fe+ is liberated from transferrin in an acidic
environment and then is reduced to Fe² by ascorbic acid. Fe² reacts with a dye or
other compound to form a colored complex that is detected by photometric
methods.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
203
Table 3.15.Disorders and conditions that cause hyperferremia
Fe overload due to excess intake
Iatrogenic:excess Fe injections or oral hematinics
Genetic defect in regulation of Fe absorption
Release of Fe from tissues
Hepatocyte damage
Increased glucocorticoid hormones: iatrogenic or endogenous (horses and dogs)
Note: Serum [Fe] can be falsely increased with hyperferritinemia or hemoglobinemia (in viro or
pathologic) as discussed in the text.
B.Hyperferremia (increased [Fe] in blood) (Table 3.15)
1.Excess Fe intake
a.Iatrogenic
(1)Excess ingestion of a hematinic in calves7 and ingestion of a digestive
inoculate (Primapaste) in foals22s have produced Fe toxicosis.
(2）
Fe injections may be administered inappropriately to animals suspected of
beingFe deicient,especially toracehorses2IfFe cannot be excreted fast
enoughby urine and feces,hyperferremia will develop.
b.Hereditary hemochromatosis was reported in cattle of the Salers breed.23 In
people,primary hemochromatosisoccurs becauseintestinal absorptionofFeis
not appropriately regulated.
2.Increased glucocorticoid hormones:Hyperferremia occurs after administration of
dexamethasone in horses (doubling within 2-3 d)² and in dogs, but hypoferremia
occurred in cattle. The reasons for changes in [Fe] are not known.
3.Release of Fe from tissues
a.Hepatocytes typically contain Fe-rich ferritin.When hepatocyte damage occurs,
the Fe that is released may cause hyperferremia.
b. Intravascular and extravascular hemolytic states are associated with increased
serum[Fe].Fereleased from degraded Hgb is available to bind to transferrin so
Fecanbe transported in plasma foreitherreutilization or storage.
4.False increases
a.The Fe in plasma Hgb (hemoglobinemia) has very little influence on serum [Fe]
because Fe is not released from Hgb for derection by most clinical assay methods.
However,the Hgb moleculemay cause spectral interference to cause erroneous
measurements (false increases in most assays）.232
b.Fe liberated from ferritin can cause hyperferremia when determined by some Fe
assays.The amount of increase is minimal unless serum ferritin concentrations
are greatly increased.233
5.Neonatal foals had serum Fe concentrations>400 μg/dL,but the [Fe] decreased to
adult concentrations (about 125-130μg/dL) by 3 d of age.31
C.Hypoferremia (Table 3.16)
1.Increased Fe loss caused by chronic external blood loss
a.Because each mL of blood contains about 1 mg of Fe,blood loss results in a loss
of Fe from thebody.Hypoferremia may develop when Fe stores become depleted
from chronic blood loss.
b.Causes of blood loss that result in Fe deficiency include intestinal parasitism
(hookworms and whipworms in dogs), feas and ticks (in dogs, cats, and calves).
204
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 3.16.Disorders and conditions that cause hypoferremia
Fe deficiency
*Increased Fe loss: chronic external blood loss
Decreased Fe inrake or intestinal absorption
Shift ofFe to storage sites
*Acute inflammation
*Chronicinflammation
Other or unknown mechanisms
Dexamethasone injections in cattle
*Young animals (foals, kittens, calves)
Dogs with congenital portosystemic shunts
*A relatively common disease or condition
chronic gastrointestinal hemorrhage(caused by neoplasia,ulcers,or other
lesions),and excessive donation of blood.
C.
Acute blood loss isnot expected to cause hypoferremia,becauseFe is mobilized
from storage sites and carried in the plasma by transferrin.
2.Shift of Fe to storage sites
a.In inflammatory diseases, serum[Fe] is decreased because of the sequestration of
Fe in macrophages of liver, spleen, or marrow. IL-1 and IL-6 are involved in the
altered Fekinetics:IL-6promotes the synthesis of hepcidin,and thus the amount
of ferroportin available for the export of Fe from cells (including macrophages) is
reduced.9
b.The altered state of Fe kinetics in infammation that causes hypoferremia has
been called a pseudo-Fe deficiency.4 In this condition, blood may be Fe deficient
but the body is not.
3.Decreased Fe intake or intestinal absorption
a.Veal calves are purposely fed an Fe-deficient diet that can produceFe defciency.
b.Extensive intestinal mucosal disease that leads to impaired absorption of Fe will
contribute to an Fe-deficient state.
4.Glucocorticoids in cattle caused a hypoferremia (from about 140μg/dL to
5.Portosystemic shunts in dogs
a.Dogs with congenital portosystemic shunts may have a microcytic anemia and
some may have concurrent hypoferremia.236In experimental studies,the serum
[Fe] did decrease in a group of 16 surgically induced portosystemic shunts (from
a mean of 129 μg/dL to a mean of 92 μg/dL), but the individual serum[Fe]
remained WRI.237
b.The pathogenesis of the hypoferremia isnot established,but data support
the concept of defective transport of Fe because of decreased production of
transferrin by hepatocytes.236
6.Young animals
a.Of the 2-to 4-wk-old kittens in a specific-pathogen-free colony, 70 % had
hypoferremia (relative to adult concentrations) that was associated with microcy-
tosis. This suggests a transient Fe-deficient state during early growth.
b.In 18 dairy calves (<3 d old), serum Fe concentrations were lower in calves with
Hct values <25 % than in those with Hct values > 25%. Only the most severely
3/ERYTHROCYTES
205
anemic calf (Hct =9 %) had clinical signs of anemia.The cause of the apparent
congenital hypoferremia and Fe-deficient state was not determined34
C.Relative to adult MCV values, foals have a peak microcytosis between 3 mo and
5mo of age. However, their serum Fe concentrations were equal to or greater
than concentrations found in healthy adult horses. Stabled Dutch warmblood
foals (1-3 mo of age) thar were fed freshly cut grass had lower blood [Hgb], Hct,
blood[Fe],and percentage transferrin saturation than similar foals raised on
pasture.The data provided evidence of Fe deficiency in the stabled foals.
7.Because plasma Fe is transported in transferrin, disorders that cause a loss of or
decreased production of plasma proteins could cause hypoferremia.Renal disease,
late pregnancy,andhypothyroidismhavebeenlistedashypoferremic disorders
but supportive data for domestic mammals were not found.
II.
TIBC and UIBC
A.Analytical concepts
1.Terms and units
a.TIBC, a measure of plasma capacity to carry Fe, is the maximum concentration
of Fe that can be bound by plasma or serum proteins. Because most plasma Fe is
in transferrin (a complex of Fe and the protein apotransferrin), serum [Fe]
depends on and correlates with the serum [transferrin].
b.A transferrin molecule can contain two Fe+ ions,but,in health,Fe+occupies
only about a third of all plasma or serum transferrin Fe-binding sites.UIBC, a
measure of the total unused (open) Fe-binding sites on transferrin, is the [Fe]
that could be protein bound in the sample in addition to the[Fe] already
present.
c.Unit conversion:μg/dLx0.01791 μmol/μgx10 dL/L=μmol/L（SIunit,
nearest 1 μmol/L)6
2.Sample
a.Serum is preferred.
b.Serum TIBC] is stable for a few days if the sample is refrigerated or kept at
room temperarures,and it is stable for months if frozen.
3.Principles of serum TIBC and UIBC assays
a.Transferrin concentrations can be measured directly,but this rarely is done in
veterinary medicine
b.Typical method
(1) Excess Fe citrate is added to serum to saturate all Fe-binding sites,and then
the bound-Fe and free-Fe fractions are separated by chemical methods. The
Fe+in the saturated transferrin molecules reacts with a dye to determine the
bound [Fe],which represents the TIBC.
(2)The UIBC is calculated:UIBC=TIBC-serum [Fe].
c.In some clinical assays, plasma Hgb (hemoglobinemia) may cause spectral inter-
ference in assays that measure[Fe] (see Laboratory Methods for Assessing Iron
Status, sect. I.B.4) and thus could result in erroneous TIBC and UIBC results.
B.Increased serum TIBC (Table 3.17)
1.Fe deficiency
a.People with Fe deficiency may have an increased TIBC because of the increased
production of transferrin to carry available Fe to cells.
b.Fe-deficient dogs typically do not have increased TIBC.
206
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 3.17.Disorders and conditions that cause increased TIBC
Increased apotransferrin production
Fe deficiency:species variable
Other or unknown mechanisms
Young animals (foals)
Table 3.18.Disorders and conditions that cause decreased TIBC
Decreased apotransferrin production
*Infammation
Hepatic insufficiency
Increased transferrin loss (protein-losing nephropathies,potentially other protein-losing
states)
*A relatively common disease or condition
2.Young foals,especially near 1 mo of age,have much greater TIBC (> 600 μg/dL)
than neonates or adult horses. Colostrum is transferrin rich, but colostral intake
does not explain the entire increase in TIBC during a foal's first month of life.
C.Decreased serum TIBC (Table3.18)
1.Decreased transferrin production
a.Infammation: Apotransferrin is a negative acute-phase protein (i.e., its produc
tion is decreased by actions of infammatory mediators such asIL-1),so infam-
mation may lead to hypotransferrinemia.
b.Hepatic insufficiency: Because transferrin is a β-globulin produced by hepato-
cytes, liver disease that causes hypoproteinemia may cause hypotransferrinemia.
Hypotransferrinemia may play a role in themicrocytosis that develops in some
animals with hepatic insufficiency.
2.Increased transferrin loss
a.Severe glomerular lesions that produce a protein-losing nephropathymay cause
hypotransferrinemia. The relative molecular mass of transferrin is only slightly
greater than albumin's.
b.Potentially,other protein-losing states (e.g,severe protein-losing enteropathyand
hemorrhage) could also cause the loss of plasma transferrin and thus decrease
serum TIBC.
III. Percent transferrin saturation (% saturation)
A.Analytical concepts
1.Percent transferrin sturation is a calculated percentage that estimates the percentage
of Fe-binding sites on apotransferrin molecules that are occupied by Fe.
2.Percent transferrin saturation =(serum [Fe]×100)+TIBC
B.Because the % transferrin saturation is a calculated percentage,changes depend on
changes in the serum [Fe] and TIBC.
1.Greater % transferrin saturation occurs when serum [Fe] is increased, TIBC is
decreased, or both.
2.Lower % transferrin saturation occurs when serum [Fe] is decreased, TIBC is
increased,or both.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
207
IV.
Stainable Fe in macrophages of marrow, spleen,or liver
A.Inmicroscopic examinations of formalin-fixed tissue or air-dried cytologic preparations,
hemosiderin is seen as a yellow to brown granular or globular pigment in macrophages.
B.
the use of an Fe-specific stain (such as Prussian blue) enables a more definitive assess-
ment than does the use of routine stains.However, the process is subjective and
requires knowledge of how much Fe is expected in tissues of healthy animals.
C.The marrow of healthy cats does not contain stainable Fe, so feline marrow cannot be
used to assessFe stores.Fe storesmay also beundetectable orminimal in young
growing animals without clinical Fe deficiency.
V.
Serum Ferritin Concentrations
A.Analytical concepts
1.Unit conversion:ng/mL×1000 mL/L×1 μg/1000 ng=μg/L（SI unit，nearest
10μg/L)16
2.Sample: Serum is preferred. A [ferritin] is reported to be stable for 7 d at 2-8 °C
and for 6 mo at -20 °C. Repeated thawing and refreezing is not recommended.
3. Principles of serum ferritin assays: Species-specific immunoassays and other immu-
ferritin concentrations in horses increased with exercise. The exact mechanism for
the increased [ferritin] isnot established but appears to berelease from tissues other
than liver.1 Samples for theassessment of Fe stores shouldbe drawn at least 2d
after strenuous exercise.
B.Hyperferritinemia (Table 3.19)
1.Associated with increased total body Fe
a.If neither infammation nor hepatic disease is present, serum or plasma ferritin
thetypical ferritin assay willmeasure tissue ferritinreleasedfrom damaged cells,
and thus the amount of Fe storage will be overestimated.
b.In a group of 95 dogs, there was a weak but statistically significant correlation
(r =0.37) berween serum [ferritin]and nonheme-Fe content of liver and spleen,
but none of the dogs had increased Fe stores.3A similar correlation (r= 0.365)
Table 3.19.Disorders and conditions that cause hyperferritinemia
Associated with increased total body Fe
Iatrogenic: excess Fe injections or oral hematinics
Genetic defect in regulation of Fe absorption
Increased apoferritin production
*Infammation
Neoplasia: histiocytic sarcoma (malignant histiocytosis)
Shift of ferritin from tissue to plasma
Liver disease
Hemolysis
Exercise in horses
*A relatively common disease or condition
208
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.Increased ferritin production
a.Infammation: Because apoferritin is a positive acute-phase protein, cytokine
(e.g, IL-1) stimulation of hepatocytes may cause hyperferritinemia. In people,
b.Neoplasia:Hyperferritinemia has been considered a marker for several human
neoplasms andmay be caused by infammation,accelerated erythrocyte turnover
(hemolysis),or increased production by neoplastic cells.Hyperferritinemia has
been associated with disseminated histiocytic sarcomas (malignant histiocytosis)
in dogs.* It may also occur in reactive hemophagocytic syndrome.
3.Shift of ferritin from tissue to plasma
a.Liver disease such as hepatitis and necrosis:Tissue ferritin is released from
damaged hepatocytes and is measured by ferritin assays that do not selectively
measure glycosylated (or plasma) ferritin.22Most clinical assays probably measure
glycosylated and nonglycosylated ferritin.
b.Hemolytic diseases:Hyperferritinemia may relate to underlying infammation or
to increased transport demands due to Fe recycling from lysed erythrocytes.
C.Hypoferritinemia
1.Decreased Fe storage
a.Serum or plasma ferritin concentrations decrease as Fe stores decrease.
b.In people,ferritin concentrations decrease early in Fe deficiency and before decreased
blood[Hgb],microcytosisor decreased serumFe]is detected.OnceFe stores are
depleted,the decreased plasma ferritin concentrations remain relatively constant
while hematologic evidence of the deficiency (anemia or microcytosis) develops.
2.Because serum ferritin concentrations may be the net result of opposing processes,
an Fe-deficient animal with inflammatory disease may not be hypoferritinemic.
VI.
Reticulocyte Hgb content (CHr)and volume (MCVr)
A.The ADVIA 120 hematology analyzer directly measures individual reticulocyte Hgb
concentration and volume by light scatter.From these measures,CHr (the average
amount of Hgb in reticulocytes) and MCVr (average reticulocyte volume) are calculated.
B.Decreased CHr and MCVr were associated with typical findings of Fe deficiency in
dogs.Thesevaluesmay proveuseful as early detectors ofFe deficiency,when the
circulatingmature cells lack evidence of Fe deficiency (i.e.,theMCV and CHCM or
MCHC are WRI) but the forming cells have a decreased CHr and MCVr.
VIl.Comparative Fe profile results
A.Assessment of the Fe status of an animal is enhanced if the laboratory assays are
grouped as a profile.
B.
As shown in Table 3.20,the rwo major causes of hypoferremia can be differentiated by
the assessment of Fe stores (either by stainable marrow or serum ferritin concentra
tions).However, the other conditions or disorders that can alter serum [Fe],TIBC,and
Fe stores need to be considered.
BLOODTYPINGAND CROSSMATCHING
Blood typing
A. Blood groups are important for transfusion medicine and NI.
1.If the transfused erythrocytes are recognized as having foreign surface antigens, these
are the two major consequences:
3/ERYTHROCYTES
209
Table 3.20. Comparative Fe profle results
Stainable Fe in
Serum[Fe]
Serum TIBC
marrowa
Serum [ferritin]
Fe deficiency
个
WRI-T
个
Infammation
↑
↑
Overload ofFe due to
↑
WRI-T
↑
↑
excess intake (diet
or iatrogenic)
Increased
↑
？
glucocorticoids
(except cattle)
Pathologic hemolysis
WRIb
WRIb
WRI-T
↑
(in vivo)
Young animals
↑（foals)
↑
↑
(compared to
mature)
Hepatic insufficiency
？
↓个
Hepatocyte necrosis
2
？
？
个
Protein-losing
？
↑
？
？
nephropathy
Marrow samples of healthy cats do not have stainable Fe.
 Plasma Hgb may cause erroneous values (see the text).
[Ferritin] could be decreased because of decreased production or it could be increased because of
hepatocyte damage.
a.If there are circulating antibodies in the recipient, those antibodies can attach to
the transfused cells, which then results in a transfusion reaction and/or hemolysis
of the transfused cells.
b.If there is not a circulating antibody in the recipient, the recipient's immune
system will be triggered to produce one.
2.Anti-erythrocyte antibodies may be naturally occurring (ie., present without
previous exposure), or acquired if they develop after exposure to foreign erythrocyte
antigens.
3.Knowledge of blood groups is needed to understand NI. In this hemolytic state of
neonatesantibodies in the colostrum are absorbed and then bind to the neonate's
erythrocytes and mediate their destruction.
B.Blood typing involves methods to detect the erythrocyte blood-group factors on the
surface of the erythrocytes.Most methods involve antibodies that are produced in
laboratory animals by injecting the blood-group antigen.For many years,blood typing
was limited to a few specialized research laboratories that produced or developed blood-
typing reagents(either polyclonal or monoclonal).Blood typing in horses is stillimited
to a few laboratories.
C.Blood-typing cards have been developed commercially for dog and cat blood In these
tests, a small drop of blood is added to a white card impregnated with an antibody (or
other agglutinin). If there is a positive reaction, the erythrocytes agglutinate.
1.For dogs,the blood-typing card is used to determine whether the dog is DEA 1.1
positive or negative. The agglutinin is an antibody.
210
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.For cats, the blood-typing card is used to determine whether the cat is type A, B,or
AB. Type A antigen is detected with an agglutinating antibody, type B antigen is
detected with a wheat germ lectin.
Il.
Crossmatching
A.Crossmatching procedures are used to help determine whether an animal’s blood can be
safely transfused into anotheranimal.Crossmarching is similar to blood typing in that
the laboratory assays involve antibody reactions to erythrocyte antigens. However, they
are different in that the antibody is present in a recipient’s plasma (for major cross-
match) or in the donor's plasma (for minor crossmatch).
B.The basic aspects of the assay are as follows:
1.Blood is drawn from a patient that needs a blood transfusion (the recipient) and
from a donor. Plasma or serum is separated from the erythrocytes, and the erythro
cytes are washed in saline several times to remove loosely bound proteins.
2.Major crossmatch
a.The procedure involves mixing and incubating a dilute suspension of potential
donor's erythrocytes with the recipient's serum. Antibody binding is detected by
agglutination,hemolysis,oraCoombstt.
b.A comparible major crossmatch indicates that alloantibodies against the donor's
erythrocytes were not detected. An incompatible major crossmatch indicates that
alloantibodies against the donor's erythrocyteswere detected.
c.There is not a standard crossmatching procedure in veterinary medicine,so
results may vary. An incompatible crossmatch may occur when the alloantibody
detected is not clinically significant. Conversely, some significant alloantibodies
are not detected by agglutination and require complement reactions or Coombs
testing for detection.
3.Minor crossmatch (not done as frequently as the major)
a.The procedure involves mixing and incubating a dilute suspension of recipient's
erythrocytes with potential donor's serum.
b.An incompatible minor crossmatch is usually not a clinical concern because it is
not expected to cause a major transfusion reaction.
III.
Species variations
A.Natural antibodies against DEA 1.1 and DEA 1.2 have not been reported, and thus
rejection of the first transfusion of blood of unknown type is not expected. However, if
the donor dog is DEA 1.1 positive and the recipient is DEA 1.1 negative (about a
25 % chance), the recipient will develop acquired anti-(DEA 1.1) antibodies. The DEA
3 system does have natural antibodies that can attack transfused erythrocytes: About
6%of US dogs are DEA 3positive, and about 20 %of DEA 3-negative dogs have the
B.Cats have natural isoantibodies against the antigen they are lacking: that is, type A cats
have anti-B antibodies, type B cats have antiA antibodies, and type AB cats do not
have isoantibodies.If blood types are not known or if a cat hashad a previous transfu
C.Blood-type systems in horses are more complex, and crossmatching procedures are not
as simple as those for dogs and cats. Some of the antibodies are agglutinins, but others
are poor agglutinins and thus require complement as a reagent to detect antibody
binding.
247
3/ERYTHROCYTES
211
1.Horses that lack an erythrocyte antigen may have natural isoantibodies.248
a.Horses lacking erythrocyte antigen A (EEA) may have anti-Aa or anti-Ac
antibodies.
b.Horses lacking erythrocyte antigen C (EEC) willtypically have a low titer of
anti-C antibodies.
c.Isoantibodies to other erythrocyte antigens D, K, P, and U are rare to infrequent.
2.Horses may be sensitized to erythrocyte antigens via blood transfusions or during
pregnancy. The acquired antibodies that cause transfusion reactions or NI are
primarily against EEA,EEQand EEC.The antibodies may cause an incompatible
reaction in the major crossmatch
D.Blood-type systems in cattle are extremely complex, and thus it is essentially impossible
to give a compatible transfusion.
METHODSFORDETECTINGERYTHROCYTESURFACEANTIBODY
ORCOMPLEMENT
I.
Coombs'test (direct antiglobulin test)
A.Purpose: To detect ESAlg or complement on a patient's erythrocytes,usually to help
diagnose immune hemolytic anemia
B.Method for the direct Coombs'test
1.A patient's erythrocytes arewashed three times with saline to remove nonbound
proteins.
2. Antiglobulin is added (species-specific anti-IgG, anti-IgM, and/or anticomplement)
Sera that contain rwo or more types of antiglobulin are called polyualent antisera.
Antiglobulins will bind to any IgG,IgM, or complement on the washed
erythrocytes.
3.A source of fresh complement proteins is needed for a hemolytic reaction in the
equine Coombs' test.The hemolytic reaction is needed because equine erythrocytes
may not agglutinate in the direct Coombs' test.
4.Positive reactions
aAgglutination indicates that a patient's erythrocytes are coated with hundreds of
immunoglobulin or C3 molecules and that the binding of the antiserum's
immunoglobulin was suficient to cause agglutination (Fig. 3.15).
(1）Foragglutinationto occur,theremust be the appropriateratio of antigen
and antibodies.To reduce the possibiliry of false-negative results caused by
the prozone response, Coombs tests are frequently completed with multiple
dilutions of antiglobulin sera.
(2)If there is a prozone reaction, the Coombs’ test might be negative with a
low dilutionbut positive athigher dilutions;forexample,negative at a 1:2
antiserum dilution,weakly positive at a l:4 dilution,and strongly positive
at a l:8 dilution.
b.Hemolysis suggests that immune complexes formed between the antiserum
immunoglobulin and the ESAlg and that these immune complexes led to
complement activation and erythrocyte lysis.
c.Coombs' tests are not standardized and are often unnecessary, given other clinical
and laboratory findings. Negative results are common in cases that present,
progress, and respond like immunehemolytic anemias.Positive results do occur
in samples from animals without clinically significant hemolysis.
212
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Dog's
erythrocytes
+Antiglobulin
Agglutination
6antio
Fig. 3.15. Agglutination reaction of a positive canine Coombs' test. Washed canine erythrocytes are
incubated with rabbit anti-dog immunoglobulin）.If the dogs washed erythrocytes are coated with dog
immunoglobulin, the antiserum will cause agglutination of the dog's erythrocytes when the concentration of
rabbit anti-(dog immunoglobulin) is appropriate.Tests may also detect erythrocyte-bound complement
proteins by using anti-(dog complement) inmunoglobulin.
Flow cytometric detection ofESAIg
A.Purpose: To detect ESAIg or complement on a patient‘s erythrocytes, usually to help
diagnose immune hemolytic anemia.
B.
Analytic principles
1.EDTA blood is the preferred sample and should be kept cool during transport.
Erythrocytes are washed at least three times with saline or phosphate-buffered saline
prior to a dilute erythrocyte suspension being made.
2.Washed erythrocytes are incubated with fuorescein-labeled antibodies against IgG,
IgM, or complement.
3.If the patient's erythrocytes are coated with antibodies (or complement), the
fuorescein-labeled antibodies will bind to them to make those erythrocytes
fuorescent.
4.Flow cytometry identifies those erythrocytes that are fuorescent and those that are
not.A positive result has been identified by an increased percentage of fuorescent
cells or by an increasedmean fluorescence intensity of the erythrocyte
population.250
C.Disorders with ESAlg
1.Any of the immune-mediated hemolytic disorders can result in an accumulation of
erythrocytes with increased ESAIg. These include idiopathic IMHA,drug-induced
IMHA,vaccine-induced IMHA,NI,incompatible blood transfusion,and IMHA
induced by bacterial and viral infections.
2.Finding erythrocytes coated with increased ESAlg supports a conclusion of an
IMHA but does not establish a diagnosis.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
213
References
1. Koury ST, Bondurant MC, Semenza GL, Koury MJ. 1993. The use of in situ hybridization to study erythropoietin
gene expression in murine kidney and liver. Microsc Res Tech 25:29-39.
2.Stockmann C, Fandrey J. 2006. Hypoxia-induced erythropoietin production: A paradigm for oxygen-regulated gene
expression. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 33:968979.
3.Dessypris EN. 1999. Erythropoiesis. In: Lee GR, Foerster J, Lukens J, Paraskevas F, Greer JP, Rodgers GM, eds.
Wintrobe* Clinical Henatology, 10th edition, 169192. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Willkins.
4. Harvey JW. 1997. The erythrocyte: Physiology, metabolism, and biochemical disorders. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW,
Bruss ML, eds. Clmical Biochemstry ofDomestric Anmas, 5th edition, 157203. San Diego: Academic
5.Retig MP,LowPS,Gimm JA,Mohandas N,Wang JChristian JA1999Evaluation ofbiochemical changes
during in vivo erythrocyte senescence in the dog, Blood 93:376384.
6. Kaneko JJ. 20o0. Hemoglobin synthesis and destruction. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Shafm's
Veterimary Henatolog, 5th cdition, 135-139. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &c Wilkins.
7. Smith JE. 1997. Iron metabolism and its disorders. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML, eds. Clinical Biechemistry
ofDomestie Anmals,5th edition,223-239.San Diego: Academic
8. Fry MM, Liggett JL, Baek SJ. 2004. Molecular cloning and expression of canine hepcidin. Vet Clin Pathol
33:223-227.
9. Ganz T. 2005. Hepcidin: A regulator of intestinal iron absorption and iron recycling by macrophages. Best Pract Res
Clin Haematol 18:171-182.
10.Cooper C, Sears W,Bienzle D. 2005. Reticulocyte changes after experimental anemia and erythropoietin treatment
of horses. J Appl Physiol 99:915921.
11. Cramer DV, Lewis RM. 1972. Reticulocyte response in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 160:61-67.
12. Alsaker RD, Laber J, Stevens J, Perman V. 1977. A comparison of polychromasia and reticulocyte counts in
assessing erythrocytic regenerative response in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 170:3941.
13.Schalm OW, Jain NC, Carroll EJ. 1975.Veterinary Henatolog, 3rd edition. Philadelphia: Lea &Febiger.
14. Fan LC, Doer JL, Hoffmann WE 1978. Reticulocyte esponse and maturation in experimental acute blod loss
anemia in the cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:219224.
BovinePract 1:10-17.
16. Lundberg GD, Iverson C, Radulescu G. 1986. Now read this: The SI units are here. J Am Med Assoc
255:2329-2339.
17. Tvedten HW, Holan K. 1996. What is your diagnosis? Peripheral blood from a 13-year-old Abyssinian-mixed breed
cat. Vet Clin Pathol 25:148-149 and 153-154.
18.Weiser MG. 1983. Comparison of two automated multi-channel blood cell counting systems for analysis of blood
ofcommon domestic animals.Vet Clin Pathol 12:25-32.
19. Weiser MG. 1987. Modification and evaluation of a multichannel blood cell counting system of blood analysis in
veterinary hematology. J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:411415
20. Magona JW, Walubengo J, Anderson I, Olaho-Mukani W, Jonsson NN, Eisler MC. 2004. Portable haemoglobi-
nometers and their potential for penside detection of anaemia in bovine disease diagnosis: A comparative evaluation.
Vet J 168:343-348.
21. Boisvert AM, Tvedten HW, Scort MA. 1999. Artifactual effcts of hypernatremia and hyponatremia on red cell
analytes measured by the Bayer H*1 analyzer. Vet Clin Pathol 28:91-96.
22.McMahon DJ, Carpenter RL.1990.A comparison of conductivity-based hematocrit determinations with
conventional laboratory methods in autologous blood transfusions. Anesth Analg 7l:541-544.
23.Green RA. 199.Spurious platelet effects on erythrocyte indices using the CELL-DYN 3500 automated hematology
system.Vet Clin Pathol 28:47-51.
24.Schisano T, Van Hove L.2002. Abbotr Cell-Dyn reticulocyte method comparison and reticulocyte normal reference
range evaluation. Lab Hematol 8:85-90.
25. Cicha I, Suzuki Y, Tateishi N, Maeda N. 2001.Enhancement of red blood cell aggregation by plasma triglycerides
ClinHemorheol Microcirc24:247-255
26.Canfield PJ, Watson ADJ. 1989. Investigations of bone marrow dyscrasia in a poodle with macrocytosis. J Comp
Pathol 101:269278.
27.Schalm OWSmith R 1963.Some unique aspects of feline hematology in disease. SmallAnim Clin 3:311318.
28. Weis DJ. 2005. Sideroblastic anemia in 7 dogs (19962002). J Vet Intern Med 19:325-328.
29.Harvey JW. 2001. Atas ofVeterinary Hematology: Blooed and Bene Marrow ofDomestic Animak. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders.
214
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
30.Gookin JL, Bunch SE, Rush LJ, Grindem CB. 1998. Evaluation of microcytosis in 18 Shibas. J Am Vet Med Assoc
212:1258-1259.
31. Harvey JW, Asquith RL, Sussman WA, Kivipelto J. 1987. Serum ferritin, serum iron, and erythrocyte vales in
foals. Am J Vet Res 48:1348-1352
32. Weiser MG, Kociba GJ. 1983. Sequential changes in erythrocyte volume distribution and microcytosis associated
with iron deficiency in kittens. Vet Pathol 20:112.
33. Okabe J. Tajima S, Yamato O, Inaba M, Hagiwara S, Maede Y. 1996. Hemoglobin types, erythrocyte membrane
skeleton and plasma iron concentration in calves with poikilocytosis. J Vet Med Sci 58:629634.
34.Tennant B, Harrold D, Reina-Guerra M, Kancko JJ. 1975. Hematology of the neonatal calf I1. Frequency of
congenital iron deficiency anemia. Cornell Vet 65:543-556.
35. Weiss DJ, Kristensen A, Papenfuss N. 1993. Qualitative evaluation of irregularly spiculated red blood cells in the
dog.Ver Clin Pathol 22:117-121.
36. Stockham SL, Harvey JW, Kinden DA. 1994. Equine glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Vet Pathol
31:518-527
37. Harvey JW, Stockham SL, Scott MA, Johnson PJ, Donald JJ, Chandler CJ. 2003. Methemoglobinemia and
eccentrocytosis in equine erythrocyte favin adenine dinucleotide deficiency. Vet Pathol 40:632-642
38. Weiss DJ, Geor R, Smith CM Il, MeClay CB. 1992. Furosemide-induced electrolyte depletion associated with
echinocytosis in horses.Am J Vet Res 53:1769-1772.
39. MeClay CB, Weiss DJ, Smith CM Il, Gordon B. 1992. Evaluation of hemorheologic variables as implications for
cxercise-induced pulmonary hemorrhage in racing thoroughbreds.Am J Vet Res 53:1380-1385
40.Brecher G,Bessis M. 1972.Present status of spiculated red cells and their relationship to the discocyte-echinocyte
transformation: A critical review. Blood 40:333-344.
41.Geor RJ, Lund EM,Weiss Dj. 1993. Echinocytosis in horses: 54 cases (1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:976980
42. Badylak SF, Van Vleet JF, Herman EH, Ferrans VJ, Myers CE. 1985. Poikilocytosis in dogs with chronic doxorubi-
cin toxicosis.Am J Vet Res 46:505-508.
43. Smith JE, Mohandas N, Shohet SB. 1982. Interaction of amphipathic drugs with erythrocytes from various species.
Am J Vet Res 43:1041-1048.
44. Chandlr FW Jr, Prasse KW, Callaway CS. 1975. Surface ultrastructure of pyruvate kinasedeficient erythrocytes in
the basenji dog. Am J Vet Res 36: 1477-1480.
45. Prasse KW, Crouser D, Beuter E, Walker M, Schall WD. 1975. Pyruvate kinase deficiency anemia with terminal
myelofibrosis and osteosclerosis in a beagle. J Am Vet Med Assoc 166: 1170-1175.
46. Walton RM, Brown DE, Hamar DW, Meador VP, Horn JW, Thrall MA. 1997. Mechanisms of echinocytosis
induced by Crotalus atrax venom. Vet Pathol 34:442449.
47.Marks S, Mannella C, Schaer M. 1990. Coral snake envenomation in the dog: Report of four cases and review of
the literature. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:629634.
infection.Vet Clin Pathol 32:22-26.
49. Bessis M. 1977. Blod Smears Reinterpreted. Berlin: Springer International.
50. Christopher MM, Lee SE. 1994. Red cell morphologic alterations in cats with hepatic disease. Vet Clin Pathol
23:7-12.
51.OKeefe DA,Schaeffer DJ. 1992.Hematologic toxicosis associated with doxorubicin administration in cats J Vet
Intern Med 6:276-282
52.Weiss DJ, Lulich J. 1999.Myelodysplastic syndrome with sideroblastic differentiation in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol
28:59-63.
53. Hoff B, Lumsden JH, Valli VEO. 1985. An appraisal of bone marrow biopsy in assessment of sick dogs. Can J
Comp Med 49:3442
54. Scavelli TD, Hornbuckle WE, Roth L, Rendano VT Jr, de Lahunta A, Center SA, French TW, Zimmer JF. 1986.
Portosystemic shunts in cats: Seven cases (1976-1984). J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:317-325.
55. Smith JE, Moore K, Arens M, Rinderknecht GA, Ledet A. 1983. Hereditary elliptocytosis with protein band 4.1
dehiciency in the dog.Blood 61:373-377.
56.Di Terlizzi R, Mohandas N, Dolce K, Rowland K, Wilkerson MJ, Stockham SL. 2007. Canine elliptocytosis due to
defective spectrin.
57.Cazzola M,Dacco M, Ascari E 1981. Pinered red cell and hereditary spherocytosis. Haematologica 66:498502.
5 8. Domingo-Claros A, Larriba I, Rozman M, Irriguible D, Vallespi T, Aventin A, Ayats R, Milla F, Sole F, Florensa L
Gallart M, Tuset E, Lopez C, Woessner S. 2002. Acute erythroid neoplastic proliferations: A biological study based
on 62 patients.Haematologica 87:148-153
59. Cuadra M. 1959. Mechanism of formation of selenoid bodies. Aeta Haematol 22:103111.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
215
60. Chapman BL, Giger U. 1990. Inherited erythrocyte pyruvate kinase deficiency in the West Highland white terrier
J Small Anim Pract 31:610-616.
61. Wysoke JM, Van-den Berg PB, Marshall C. 1990. Bee sting-induced haemolysis, spherocytosis and neural
dysfunction in three dogs. J S Afr Vet Assoc 61:29-32.
62. Noble SJ, Armstrong PJ. 1999. Bee sting envenomation resulting in secondary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:10261027.
63. Inaba M, Yawata A, Koshino I, Sato K, Takeuchi M, Takalkuwa Y, Manno S, Yawata Y, Kanzaki A, Sakai J, Ban A,
Ono K, Maede Y. 1996. Defective anion transport and marked spherocytosis with membrane instability caused
by hereditary total deficiency of red cell band 3 in catle due to a nonsense mutation. J Clin Invest 97:1804
1817.
64. Hlland CT, Canfeld PJ, Watson ADJ, Allan GS. 1991. Dyserythopoisis, polymypathy, and cardiac disease in
three related English springer spaniels. J Vet Intern Med 5:151-159.
65. Slappendel RJ, van der Gaag I, van Nes JJ, van den Ingh ThSGAM, Happa RP. 1991. Familial stomatocytosis
hypertrophic gastritis (FSHG), a newly recognised disease in the dog Drentse patrijshond). Vet Q 13:3040.
66.Brown DE, Weiser MG, ThrallMA, Giger U, Just CA. 1994. Erythrocyte indices and volume distribution in a dog
with stomatocytosis.Vet Pathol 31:247-250.
67. Bonfanti U, Comazzi S, Paltrinieri S, Bertazzolo W. 2004. Stomatocytosis in 7 related standard schnauzers. Vet Clin
Pathol 33:234-239.
68. Smith SE, Loosli JK. 1957. Cobalt and vitamin B in ruminant nutrition: A review. J Dairy Sei 40:1215-1227.
69. Steffen DJ, Elliot GS, Leipold HW, Smith JE. 1992. Congenital dyserythropoiesis and progressive alopecia in polled
Herfor aeHmlgic,bichil nerwlg,ehric,andwtmetin
J Vet Diagn Invest 4:31-37.
macrocytosis induced by excessive Ky-EDTA concentration. Clin Lab Haematol 14:268269.
71. Goossens W, van Duppen V, Verwilghen RL. 1991. K- or KEDTA: The anticagulant of choice in routine
hematology? Clin Lab Haematol 13:291-295.
72. Seguin MA,Bunch SE. 2001. Iatrogenic copper deficiency asociated with long-term copper chelation for treatment
of copper storage disease in a Bedlington terrier. J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:15931597.
that produced by iron deficiency. Bull Johns Hopkins Hosp 93:4149.
74.Bain BJ.1995.Detecting erroneous blood counts. In:BloodCell:A Practie Guide2nd edition,132146.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Science
75. Roberts WL, Fontenot JD, Lehman CM. 2000. Overestimation of hemoglobin in a patient with an IgA-kappa
monoclonal gammopathy.Arch Pathol Lab Med 124:616-618.
76.Ham TH, Grauel JA,Dunn RF,Murphy JR, White JG,Kellermeyer RW. 1973. Physical properties of red cells as
related to effcts in vivo. IV. Oxidant drugs producing abnormal intracellular concentration of hemoglobin
(eccentrocytes) with a rigid-red-cell hemolytic syndrome. J Lab Clin Med 82:898-910.
77.Means RT Jr. 1999.Advances in the anemia of chronic disease. Int J Hematol 70:7-12.
78.Weiss DJ,MeClay CB.1988.Studies on the pathogenesis of the erythrocyte destruction associated with the anemia
of infammatory disease.Vet Clin Pathol 17:90-93.
79. Meinkoth JH, Kocan AA. 2005. Feline cytauxzoonosis. Vet Clin North Am Srmall Anim Pract 35:89-101.
80.Hoover JP,Walker DB, Hedges JD.1994. Cytauxzoonosis in cats:Eight cases (1985-1992).J Am Vet Med Assoc
205:455-460.
81.Meinkoth J, Kocan AA, Whitworth L, Murphy G, Fox JC, Woods JP. 2000. Cats surviving natural infection with
Cytauxzoen falis: 18 cases (1997-1998). J Vet Intern Med 14:521-525.
82. Gaunt SD, Pierce KR. 1986. Effcts of estradiol on hematopoietic and marrow adherent cells of dogs. Am J Vet Res
47:906-909.
83. Legendre AM. 1976. Estrogen-induced bone marrow hypoplasia in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 12:525-527.
84. Watson ADJ, Wilson JT, Turner DM, Culvenor JA. 1980. Phenylbutazone-induced blood dyscrasias suspected in
three dogs. Vet Rec 107:239-241.
85. Schalm OW. 1979. Phenylbutazone toxicity in two dogs. Canine Pract 6:47-51.
86.Stokol T,Blue JT, French TW. 20o0.Idiopathic pure red cell aplasia and nonregenerative immune-mediated anemia
in dogs: 43 cases (1988-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1429-1436.
87. Weiss DJ. 1986. Antibody-mediated suppresson of erythropoiesis in dogs with red blood celaplasia. Am J Vet Res
47:2646-2648.
88. Thenen SW, Rasmussen KM. 1978.Megaloblastic erythropoiesis and tissue depletion of folic acid in the cat. Am J
Vet Res 39:1205-1207.
216
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
89. Vaden SL, Wood PA, Ledley FD, Cornwell PE, Miller RT, Page R. 1992. Cobalamin deficiency associated with
methylmalonic acidemia in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1101-1103.
90.Fyfe JC,Jezyk PF, Giger U, Patterson DF. 1989. Inherited sclective malabsorption of vitamin B in giant
schnauzers. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:533-539
91. Battersby LA, Giger U, Hall EJ. 2005. Hyperarmmonaemic encephalopathy secondary to selective cobalamin
deficiency in a juvenileBorder collie. J Small Anim Pract 46:339-344.
92. Watson ADJ, Canfield PJ. 2000. Nutritional deficiency anermias. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schal's
Veterinary Hemaology, 5th edition, 190195. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &c Wilkins.
93. Bai SC, Sampson DA, Morris JG, Rogers QR. 1989. Vitamin B-6 requirement of growring kittens. J Nutr
119:1020-1027.
94. Dryden MW, Broce AB, Moore WE. 1993. Severe Hea infestation in dairy calves. J Am Vet Med Assoc
203:1448-1452
95. Clark CH, Woodley CH. 1959. The absorption of red blood cells after parenteral injection at various sites. Am J
Vet Res 20:1062-1066.
96. Anderson C, Aronson I, Jacobs P. 2000. Erythropoiesis: Erythrocyte deformability is reduced and fragility increased
by iron dehciency. Hematology 4:457-460.
97. Burkhard MJ, Brown DE, MeGrath JP, Meador VP, Mayle DA, Keaton MJ, Hoffman WP, Zimmermann JL, Abbott
induced iron deficiency anemia Vet Clin Pathol 30:76-85.
98. Steinberg JD, Olver CS. 2005. Hematologic and biochemical abnormalities indicating iron deficiency are associated
with decreased reticulocyte hemoglobin content (CHr) and reticulocyte volume (rMCV) in dogs. Vet Clin Pathol
34:23-27.
99. Stone AM, Stein T, LaFortune J, Wise L. 1979. Renal vascular effects of stroma and stroma-free hermoglobin. Surg
Gynecol Obstet 149:874-876
100. Chan WL, Tang NLS, Yim CCW, Lai FM, Tam MSC. 2000. New features of renal lesion induced by stroma free
hemoglobin. Toxicol Pathol 28:635-642
101. Slappendel RJ. 1979. The diagnostic signifcance of the direct antiglobulin test (DAT) in anemic dogs. Vet Immunol
Immunopathol 1:49-59.
102.Barker RN,Gruffydd-JonesTJ,Stokes CR,Eson CJ.1992.Autoimmune haemolsis in the dogRelationship
between anaemia and the levels of red blood cel-bound immunoglobins and complement measured by an enzyme
linked antiglobulin test. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 34: 120.
103. Petz LD, Mueller-Eckhardt C. 1992. Drug-induced immune hemolytic anemia. Transfusion 32:202-204.
104. McConnico RS, Roberts MC, Tompkins M. 1992. Penicillin-induced immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in a
horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1402-1403.
105. Blue JT, Dinsmore RP, Anderson KL. 1987. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia induced by penicillin in horses.
Cornell Vet77:263-276.
106.Aucoin DP,Peterson ME,Hurvitz AI,Drayer DE,Lahita RG,Quimby FW,Reidenberg MM.1985.Propylthioura
cil-induced immune-mediated disease in the cat. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 234:1318.
107. Bloom JC, Thiem PA, Sellers TS, Deldar A, Lewis HB. 1988. Cephalosporin-induced immune cytopenia in the
dog: Demonstration of erythrocyte-, neutrophil-, and platelet-associated IgG following treatment with cfazedone
Am J Hematol 28:71-78. [Erratum in Am J Hematol 1988;29:241.]
108. Thomas Hl, Livesey MA. 1998. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia associated with trimethoprim-sulphamethoxa
zole administration in a horse. Can Vet J 39:171-173.
109. Arwell RB, Johnstone I, Read R, Reilly J, Wilkins S. 1979. Haemolytic anaemia in two dogs suspected to have been
inducedbylevamisole.Aust Vet J55:292-294.
110. Jackson JA,Chart IS,Sanderson JH, Garner R 1977.Pirimicarb induced immune haemolytic anaemia in dogs.
Scand J Haematol 19:360-366
111.Schwartz RS, Silberstein LE, Berkman EM. 1995.Autoimmune hemolytic anemias. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr,
Shattil SJ, Furie B, Cohen HJ, Silberstein LE,eds. Hemtelogy Basic Principle and Practice, 2nd edition, 710-729
New York: Churchill Livingstone
112. Duval D, Giger U. 1996. Vaccine-asociated immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in the dog. J Vet Intern Med
10:290-295
113.Yeruham I,Avidar Y, Harrus S,Fishman L,Aroch I. 2003. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia and putative
haemolytic anaemia associated with a polyvalent botulism vaccination in a cow. Vet Rec 153:502504.
114. Oalley DA, Giger U. 1997. Just their type: Feline transfusions and blood donors. Vet Tech 18:747-752.
115.Giger U. 2000. Regenerative anermias caused by blood lossor hemolysis. In:Etinger Sj,Feldman EC, edsTextbook
ofVeterinary Internal Medicine Diseases ofthe Dog and Cat, 5th edition, 17841804. Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
217
116. Morris DD. 1998. Disease of the hemolymphatic system. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, eds. Eqaine Intemaf Medicine
lst edition,558601.Philadelphia:WB Saunders
117. Boyle AG, Magdesian KG, Ruby RE. 2005. Neonatal isoerythrolysis in horse foals and a mule foal: 18 cases (1988-
2003). J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1276-1283
118. Bailey E. 1982. Prevalence of antired blood cell antibodies in the serum and colostrum of mares and its relation
ship to neonatal isoerythrolysis. Am J Vet Res 43:1917-1921.
119. Kocan KM, Blouin EF, Barbet AF. 2000. Anaplasmosis control Past, present, and future. Ann NY Acad Sci
916:501-509
120. Luther DG, Cox HU, Nelson WO. 1985. Screening for neonatal isohemolytic anemia in calves. Am J Vet Res
46:1078-1079.
121. Kewish KE, Appleyard GD, Myers SL, Kidney BA, Jackson ML. 2004. Mycoplasma baemefelis and Mycoplasm
haemominuran detection by polymerase chain reaction in cats from Saskatchewan and Alberta. Can Vet J
45:749-752
haemoplasma infection in Australian cats using a real-time PCR assay. J Feline Med Surg 6:345-354.
123. Sykes JE. 2003. Feline hemotropic mycoplasmosis (feline hemobartonellosis). Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
33:773-789
124.Willi B, Boretti FS, Cattori V, Tasker S,Meli ML, Reusch C, Lutz H,Hofmann-Lehmann R. 2005. Identifcation
molecular characterization, and experimental transmission of a new hemoplasma isolate from a cat with hemolytic
anemia inSwitzerland.J ClinMicrobiol 43:2581-2585.
125.SykesEBailfNLBallLMForemanOGeoreWFryMM.004Identifcationofaovel hti
mycoplasma in a splenectomized dog with hemic neoplasia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 224: 1946195 1.
126. Sykes JE, Ball LM, Bailiff NL, Fry MM. 2005. “Candidatus Mycoplasma haematoparvum", a novel small haemo-
tropic mycoplasma from a dog. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 55:27-30.
127.Swenson C, Jacobs R. 1986.Spherocytosis associated with anaplasmosis in two cows. J Am Vet Med Assoc
188:1061-1064
128. Giardina S, Aso PM, Bretana A. 1993. Antigen recognition on Anaplasma marginale and bovine erythrocytes: An
electron microscopy study. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 38:183-191.
129. Hartskeerl RA, Terpstra WJ. 1996. Leptospirosis in wild animals. Vet Q 18(Suppl 3):S149-S150.
130. Carlson GP. 1996. Leptospirosis. In: Smith BP, ed. Large Animal Interaa/ Medicine, 2nd edition, 12221223.
St Louis: CV Mosby
131.Timoney JF, Gillespie JH Scott FW,Barlough JE 1988. The spirochetes. In: Timoney JF,Gillespie JH, Scott FW,
Barlough JE, eds. Hagan and Bruner's Microbiology amd Infrctious Diseases of Dometic Amimals, Sth edition, 4560.
Ithaca, NY: Comstock.
132.Decker MJ,Freeman MJ,Morter RL.1970.Evaluation of mechanisms of leptospiral hemolytic anemia. Am J Vet
Res 31:873-878.
133. Bhasin JL, Freeman MJ, Morter RL. 1971. Properties of a cold hermagglutinin associated with leptospiral hemolytic
anemia of sheep. Infect Immun 3:398404.
134. Keenan KP, Alexander AD, Montgomery CA Jr. 1978. Pathogenesis of experimental Leptespira interrogans, serovar
bataviae, infection in the dog: Microbiological clinical, hematologic,and biochemical studies.Am J Vet Res
39:449-454
135. Chorvath B, Bakoss P. 1972. Studies on leptospiral lipase. II. Lipase activity of virulent and avirulent leptospirae.
J HygEpidemiol Microbiol Immunol 16:352-357
136.Kasarow LB.1970.Degradation of the erythrocyte phospholipids and haemolysis of the erythrocytes of different
animal species by leptospirae. J Med Microbiol 3:29-37.
137. Trowbridge AA, Green JB III, Bonnett JD, Shohet SB, Ponnappa BD, MeCombs WB II. 198 1. Hemolytic anemia
associated with leptospirosis: Morphologic and lipid studies. Am J Clin Pathol 76:493498.
138. Lozano EA, Smith LDS. 1967. Electrophoretic fractionation of Clostricdium bemolyzicum toxic culture fuids. Am J
Vet Res 28:1569-1576.
139. MeGowan B, Moulton JE,Rood SE. 1958.Lamb losses associated with Clostridium perfringens type A. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 113:219-221
140. Songer JG. 1996. Clostridial enteric diseases of domestic animals. Clin Microbiol Rev 9:216234.
141.Pun KC,Wehner JH 1996. Abdominal pain and massive intravascular hemolysis in a 47-year-old man. Chest
110:1353-1355
142. Ishii S. 1963. Equine infectious anemia or swamp fever. Adv Vet Sci 9:263-298.
143. MeGuire TC, Henson JB, Quist SE. 1969. Viral-induced hemolysis in equine infectious anemia. Am J Vet Res
30:2091-2097.
218
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
144. Cotter SM. 1979. Anemia associated with feline leukemia virus infection. J Am Vet Med Assoc 175:1191-1194.
145. Mackey L, Jarretr W, Jarrett O, Laird H. 1975. Anemia associated with feline leukemia virus infection in cats. J Natl
Cancer Inst 54:209-217.
146.Kjemtrup AM, Kocan AA,Whitworth L,Meinkoth J, Birkenheuer AJ, Cumming J, Boudreaux MK, Stockham SL,
Irizarry-Rovira A, Conrad PA. 20oo. There are at least three genetically distinct small piroplasms from dogs. Int J
Parasitol30:1501-1505.
147. Baneth G, Kenny MJ, Tasker S, Anug Y, Shkap V, Levy A, Shaw SE. 2004. Infection with a proposed new
subspecies of Babesia canis, Babesia canis subsp. presenti, in domestic cats. J Clin Microbiol 42:99-105.
148. Penzhorn BL, Schoeman T, Jacobson LS. 2004. Feline babesiosis in South Africa: A review. Ann NY Acad Sei
1026:183-186.
149. Irwin PJ, Hutchinson GW. 1991. Clinical and pathological fndings of Babeia infection in dogs. Aust Vet J
68:204-209.
150. O'Connor RM, Allred DR. 2000. Selection of Babesia bovis-infected erythrocytes for adhesion to endothelial cell:
coselects for altered variant erythrocyte surface antigen isoforms. J Immunol 164:20372045.
151. Furlanello T, Fiorio F, Caldin M, Lubas G, Solano-Gallego L. 2005. Clinicopathological findings in naturally
occurring cases of babesiosis caused by large form Babeia from dogs of northeastern Italy. Vet Parasitol 134:7785.
152.Mehlhorn H,Schein E.1998.Redescription of BabeiaquiLaveran,1901 as Thileria equiMehlhorn,Schein
1998. Parasitol Res 84:467-475.
153. Camacho AT, Guitian FJ, Pallas E, Gestal J, Olmeda AS, Habela MA, Telford SR II, Spiclman A. 2005.
Theileria (Babeia) equi and Babeia caball infections in horses in Galicia, Spain. Trop Anim Health Prod
37:293-302.
154. Chae J, Lee J, Kwon O, Holman PJ, Waghela SD, Wagner GG. 1998. Nucleotide sequence heterogeneity in the
small subunit ribosomal RNA gene variable (V4) region among and within geographic isolates of Theileria from
catte, ellk and white-tailed deer. Vet Parasitol 75:41-52.
155. Stockham SL, Kjemtrup AM, Conrad PA, Schmidt DA, Scott MA, Robinson TW, Tyler JW, Johnson GC, Carson
CA, Cuddihee P. 200. Theileriosis in a Missouri beef herd caused by Theileria buffeli Case report, herd investiga-
tion, ultrastructure, phylogenetic analysis, and experimental transmission Vet Pathol 37:1121.
156. Cossio-Bayugar R, Pillars R, Schlater J, Holman PJ. 2002. Theileria buffeli infection of a Michigan cow confirmed
by small subunit ribosomalRNA gene analysis.VetParasitol 105:105-110.
157. Irvin AD. 1987. Characterization of species and strains of Theileria. Adv Parasitol 26:145197.
158. Shimizu S, Yagi Y, Nakamura Y, Shimura K, Fujisaki K, Onodera T, Minami T, Ito S. 1990. Clinico-hematological
observation of calves experimentally infected with Theilerid sergenni. Jpn J Vet Sci 52:1337-1339.
159. Hofmann-Lehmann R, Meli ML, Dreher UM, Gonczi E, Deplazes P, Braun U, Engels M, Schupbach J. Jorger K
Thoma R, Griot C, Stark KD,Willi B, Schmidt J, Kocan KM, Lutz H. 2004. Concurrent infections with vector-
borne pathogens associated with fatal hemolytic anemia in a cattle herd in Switzerland. J Clin Microbiol
42:3775-3780.
160. Camacho AT, Guitian EJ, Pallas E, Gestal JI, Olmeda AS, Goethert HK, Telford SR Il, Spielman A. 2004.
Azotemia and mortality among Babesia microtilike infected dogs. J Vet Intern Med 18:141146.
161. Radostits OM, Gay CC, Blood DC, Hinchcliff KW. 2000. Diseases caused by protozoa In: Radostits OM, Gay
CC,BloodDC,HinchcliffKW,eds.Verinary Medicine,9th edition,1289-1338.London:WB Saunders.
162. Barr SC. 2000. Trypanosomiasis: American trypanosomiasis. In: Greene CE, ed. Infectioms Diseases ef the Dog and
Cat, 2nd edition, 445-448. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
163. Anosa VO, Logan-Henfrey LL, Shaw MK. 1992. A light and clectron microscopic study of changes in blood and
bone marrow in acute hemorrhagic Trypamosema vivax infection in calves. Vet Pathol 29:33-45.
164. Kobayashi A, Tizard IR, Woo PT. 1976. Studies on the anemia in experimental African trypanosomiasis. Il. The
pathogenesis of the anemia in calves infected with Trypamesoma congolense. Am J Trop Med Hyg 25:401406.
165. Mackenzie PKl, Boyt WP, Nesham VW, Pirie E. 1978. The aetiology and significance of the phagocytosis of
erythrocytes and leucocytes in sheep infected with Trypanesoma congolens (Broden, 1904). Res Vet Sci 24:47.
166. Winterbourn CC. 1990. Oxidative denaturation in congenital hemolytic anemias: The unstable hemoglobins. Semin
Hematol 27:41-50.
167. Yamato O, Hayashi M, Yamasaki M, Maede Y. 1998. Induction of onion-induced haemolytic anaemia in dogs with
sodium -propylthiosulphate. Ver Rec 142:216219.
168.Munday R, Munday JS.2003. Comparative haemolytic activity of bis(phenylmethyl) disulphide,bis(phenylethyl)
disulphide and bis(phenylpropyl) disulphide in rats. Food Chem Toxicol 4l:1609-1615.
169. Munday R, Munday JS, Munday CM. 2003. Comparative effects of mono-, di-, tri-, and tetrasulides derived from
plants of the Allium family: Redox cycling in vitro and hemolytic activity and Phase 2 enzyme induction in vivo.
Free Radic Biol Med 34:1200-1211.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
219
170. Luttgen PJ, Whitney MS, Wolf AM, Scruggs DW. 1990. Heinz body hemolytic anemia associated with high plasma
zinc concentration in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1347-1350.
171.Yamato O, Kasai E, Katsura T, Takahashi S, Shiota T, Tajima M, Yamasaki M,Maede Y.2005. Heinz body
hemolytic anemia with ccentrocytosis from ingestion of Chinese chive (Alium twberosum) and garlic (Aliu
stivum) in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 41:6873
172. Zaks KL, Tan EO, Thrall MA. 2005. Heinz body anemia in a dog that had been sprayed with skunk musk J Am
Vet Med Assoc 226:1516-1518.
173. DesNoyers M. 2000. Anemias associated with Heinz bodies. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Srbabn?
Veterinary Hematolog, 5th edition, 178184. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
174. Boyer JD, Breeden DC, Brown DL. 2002. Isolation, identifcation, and characterization of compounds from Acer
rubrwm capable of oxidizing equine erythrocytes. Am J Vet Res 63:604610.
175.Pearson W, Boermans HJ, Bettger WJ, McBride BW, Lindinger MI. 2005.Association of maximum voluntary
dietary intake of freeze-dried garlic with Heinz body anemia in horses. Am J Vet Res 66:457465.
176. Nonneman D, Stockham SL, Shibuya H, Messer NT, Johnson GS. 1993. A missense mutation in the glucose-6
phosphate dehydrogenase gene is associated with hemolytic anermia in an American saddlebred horse. Blood
82(Suppl 1):466a (abstract).
177. Smith JE, Ryer K, Wallace L. 1976. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in a dog. Enzyme 21:379-382.
178. Giger U, Mason GD, Wang P. 1991. Inherited erythrocyte pyruvate kinase deficiency in a beagle dog. Vet Clin
Pathol20:83-86
179.Andresen E. 1977. Haemolytic anaemia in basenji dogs. 2. Partial deficiency of erythrocyte pyruvate kinase (PK; EC
2.7.1.40) in heterozygous carriers. Anim Blood Groups Biochem Genet 8: 149-156.
180. Schaer M, Harvey JW, Calderwood-Mays M, Giger U. 1992. Pyruvate kinase deficiency causing hemolytic anemis
with secondary hemochromatosis in a Cairn terrier.JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 28:233239
181. Harvey JW. 1996. Congenital erythrocyte enzyme deficiencies. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
26:1003-1011.
182. Ford S, Giger U, Duesberg C, Beutler E, Wang P. 1992. Inherited erythrocyte pyruvate kinase (PK) deficieney
causing hemolytic anemia in an Abyssinian cat. J Vet Intern Med 6:123 (abstract).
184.WhiteyKM,Lothrop CD J. 995.Genetic tst for pyruwate kinasedeficincy ofbasenjis. J AmVet MedAsc
207:918-921.
deficiency in dogs with hyperventilation-induced hemolysis: Increased in vitro and in vivo alkaline fragility of
erythrocytes.Blood 65:345-351.
186. Giger U, Harvey JW. 1987. Hermolysis caused by phosphofructokinase deficiency in English springer spaniels: Seven
cases (1983-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:453-459
187.Giger U,Smith BF,Woods CB,Patterson DF, Stedman H. 1992.Inherited phosphofructokinase deficiency in an
American cocker spaniel J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1569-1571.
188. Ronquist G, Rudolphi O, Engstrom I, Waldenstrom A. 2001. Familial phosphofructokinase defciency is associated
with a disturbed calcium homeostasis in erythrocytes. J Intern Med 249:8595.
189. Stockdale CR, Moyes TE, Dyson R 2005. Acute post-parturient haemoglobinuria in dairy cows and phosphorus
status. Aust Vet J 83:362-366.
190. Adams LG, Hardy RM, Weiss DJ, Bartges JW. 1993. Hypophosphatemia and hemolytic anemia associated with
diabetes mellitus and hepatic lipidosis in cats. J Vet Intern Med 7:266271.
191. Justin RB, Hohenhaus AE. 1995. Hypophosphatemia associated with enteral alimentation in cats. J Vet Intern Med
9:228-233.
192.Goto I, Shimizu T, Maede Y. 1992. L-sorbose does not cause hemolysis in dog erythrocytes with inherited high Na
K-ATPase activity.Comp Biochem Physiol [C] 101:657-660
193.Goto I, Inaba M, Shimizu T, Maede Y. 1994. Mechanism of hemolysis of canine erythrocytes induced by L-sorbose.
Am JVetRes55:291-294.
194. Kaneko JJ. 1997. Porphyrins and the porphyrias. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML, eds. Clinial Biochemistry ef
DomesticAnma,5thedition,205-221.SanDiego:Academic.
Veterimay Hemaology5th edition,1002-1007.Philadelphia:LippincottWilliams &Willkins.
196. Sassa S. 2001. The hematologic aspects of porphyria. In: Beutler E, Lichtman MA, Coller BS, Kipps TJ, Seligsohn
U,eds. Walliams Hematelogy, 6th edition, 703-720. New York: McGraw-Hill.
197. Giddens WE Jr, Labbe RF, Swango LJ, Padgett GA. 1975. Feline congenital erythropoietic porphyria associated with
severe anemia and renal disease: Clinical, morphologic, and biochemical studies. Am J Pathol 80:367386.
220
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
198. Glenn BL, Glenn HG, Omtvedt IT. 1968. Congenital porphyria in the domestic cat (Felis catus): Preliminary
investigations on inheritance patterm. Am J Vet Res 29:1653-1657.
199. With TK. 1980. Porphyrias in animals. Clin Haematol 9:345-370.
200. Engeking LR, Mariner JC. 1985. Enhanced biliary bilirubin excretion after heparin-induced erythrocyte mass
depletion.AmJ VetRes46:2175-2178.
201. Moore JN, Mahaffey EA, Zboran M. 1987. Heparin-induced agglutination of erythrocytes in horses. Am J Vet Res
48:68-71.
202. Maggio-Price L, Emerson CL, Hinds TR, Vincenzi FF, Hanamond WR. 1988. Hereditary nonspherocytic hemolytic
anemia in beagles. Am J Vet Res 49:1020-1025.
203. Pekow CA, Hinds TR, Maggio-Price L, Hammond WP, Vincenzi FF. 1992. Osmotic stress in red blood cells from
beagles with hemolytic anemia. Am J Vet Res 53:1457-1461.
of erythrocytes in Abyssinian and Somali cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:14831491.
205. Tennant BC, Evans CD, Kaneko JJ, Schalm OW. 1972. Hepatic failure in the horse. Mod Vet Pract 53:4042.
206.Peterson ME,Kintzer PP, Cavanagh PG,Fox PR,Ferguson DC, Johnson GF,Becker DV.1983.Feline hyperthy-
roidism: Pretreatment clinical and laboratory evaluation of 131 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:103-110.
207.Glaus TM, Hassig M, Baumgartner C, Reusch CE. 2003. Pulmonary hypertension induced in dogs by hypoxia at
different high-altitude levels. Vet Res Commun 27:661-670.
209.Lykkeboe G,Schougaard H, Johansen K. 1977. Training and exercise change respiratory properties of blood in race
horses. Respir Physiol 29:315-325.
210. Hilppo M. 1986. Some haematological and clinical-chemical parameters of sight hounds (Afghan hound, saluki and
whippet).Nord Vet Med 38:148-155
213.Nunn JF. 1987.Applied Respiratery Physiology,3rd edition.Bostor: Butterworth.
214. Dixon PM, MePherson EA. 1977. Familial methacmoglobinaemia and haemolytic anaemia in the horse associated
with decreased erythrocytic glutathione reductase and glutathione. Equine Vet J 9:198-201.
215. Letchworth GJ, Bentinck-Smith J. Bolton GR, Wootton JF, Family L. 1977. Cyanosis and methemoglobinemia in
two dogs due to a NADH methemoglobin reductase deficiency. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:7 5-79.
216.Harvey JW, Ling GV, Kaneko JJ. 1974. Methemoglobin reductase deficiency in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
164:1030-1033.
217. Atkins CE, Kaneko J, Congdon LL. 1981. Methemoglobin reductase deficiency and methemoglobinemia in a dog
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:829-832.
218. Baker DC, Gaunt SD. 1985. Nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotidemethemoglobin reductase activity in erythrocytes
from cats. Am J Vet Res 46:13541355.
219.Harvey W.2000.Hereditary methemoglobinemia. InFeldman BF,Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. ScbamVeterinay
Hematology. 5th edition, 10081011. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
220.Fine DM, Eyster GE,Anderson LK,Smidey A 1999. Cyanosis and congenital methemoglobinemia in a puppy.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:33-35.
221.Pinkerton PH, Fletch SM, Brueckner PJ, Miller DR 1974. Hereditary stomatocytosis with hemolytic anemia in the
dog.Blood 44:557-567.
222. Slappendel RJ, Renooij W, de Bruijne JJ. 1994. Normal cations and abnormal membrane lipids in the red blood
cells of dogs with familial stomatocytosis-hypertrophic gastritis. Blood 84:904909.
223. Paltrinieri S, Comazi S, Ceiliani F, Prohaska R, Bonfanti U. 2007. Stormatocytosis of standard schnauzers is not
associated with stomatin defciency.VetJ173:202-205.
224. Conboy JG, Shitamoto R, Parra M, Winardi R, Kabra A, Smith J, Mohandas N. 1991. Hereditary elliptocytosis due
to both qualitative and quantitative defects in membrane skeletal protein 4.1. Blood 78:24382443.
225. Gallagher PG. 2005. Red cell membrane disorders. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 13-18.
226. Slappendel RJ, van ZR, van LM, Schneijdenberg CT. 2005. Hereditary spectrin deficiency in golden retriever dogs.
J Vet Intern Med 19:187-192.
227. Ruhr LP, Nicholson SS, Confer AW, Blakewood BW. 1983.Acute intoxication from a hematinic in calves. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 182:616618.
228. Mullaney TP, Brown CM. 1988. Iron toxicity in neonatal foals. Equine Vet J 20:119-124
229. Lewis HB, Moyer WA. 1975. Iatrogenic iron overload in the horse In: Kitchen H, Krehbiel JD, eds. Procedings of
Practitioners.
3/ERYTHROCYTES
221
230. House JK, Smith BP, Maas J, Lane VM, Anderson BC, Graham TW, Pino MV. 1994. Hemochromatosis in Salers
catde.JVetIntern Med 8:105-111.
231.Smith JE,DeBowes RM,Cipriano JE.1986.Exogenous corticosteroids increase serum iron concentrations in
mature horses and ponies. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:1296-1298.
232.Grafmeyer D, Bondon M, Manchon M, Levillain P.1995. The influence of bilirubin, haemolysis and turbidity on
20 analytical tests performed on automatic analysers: Results of an interlaboratory study. Eur J Clin Chem Clin
Biochem 33:31-52
233. Yamanishi H, lyama S, Fushimi R, Amino N. 1996. Interference of ferritin in measurement of serum iron
concentrations: Comparison by five methods. Clin Chem 42:331-332.
234. Smith JE, Cipriano JE, DeBowes R, Moore K. 1986. Iron deficiency and pseudo-iron deficiency in hospitalized
horses.J AmVet Med Assoc 188:285-287
235. Wecks BR, Smith JE, DeBowes RM, Smith JM. 1989. Decreased serum iron and zinc concentrations in cattle
receiving intravenous dexamethasone.Vet Pathol 26:345-346
236. Bunch SE, Jordan HL, Sellon RK, Cullen JM, Smith JE. 1995. Characterization of iron status in young dogs with
portosystemic shunt.AmJVet Res 56:853-858.
237.Laflamme DP, Mahaffey EA, Allen SW, Twedt DC, Prasse KW, Huber TL. 1994. Microcytosis and iron status in
dogs with surgically induced portosystemic shunts. J Vet Intern Med 8:212-216.
238. Brommer H, van Oldruitenborgh-Oosterbaan MM.2001. Iron deficiency in stabled Dutch warmblood foals. J Vet
Intern Med 15:482485.
239.Kaneko J.1980.Iron metabolism.In:Kancko JJ,ed CinicaBiochemistry ofDometic Anima,3rd edition, 649
669. San Diego: Academic
240. Andrews GA, Chavey PS, Smith JE. 1994. Enzyme-linked imrmunosorbent asay to measure serum ferritin and the
relationship between serum ferritin and nonheme iron stores in cats. Vet Pathol 31:674678.
241. Hyyppa S, Hoyhtya M, Nevalainen M, Poso AR. 2002. Effect of exercise on plasma ferritin concentrations:
Implications for the measurement ofiron status.Equine VetJ Suppl 34:186-190.
242. Baynes RD. 1996. Assessment of iron status. Clin Biochem 29:209-215.
243.Weeks BR, Smith JE, Northrop JK. 1989. Relationship of serum ferritin and iron concentrations and serum total
iron-binding capacity to nonheme iron stores in dogs. Am J Vet Res 50:198-200.
244. ten Kate J,Wolthuis A,Westerhuis B, van Deursen C.1997.The iron content of serum ferritin: Physiological
importance and diagnostic value. Eur J Clin Chem Clin Biochem 35:5356.
245. Newlands CE, Houston DM, Vasconcelos DY. 1994. Hyperferritinemia associated with malignant histiocytosis in a
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:849-851.
246. Andrews GA. 2000. Red blood cell antigens and blood groups in the dog and cat. In: Feldman BF, Zinld JG, Jain
NC, eds. Scha’ Veterinary Hematlogy, 5th edition, 767-773. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Willins.
247. Wardrop KJ. 2000. Clinical blood typing and crossmatching. In: Feldman BF, Zinld JG, Jain NC, eds. Schabn'
Veterinary Hematolog, 5th edition, 795798. Philadelphia Lippincott Williams &c Wilkins.
248. Bowling AT. 2000. Red blood cell antigens and blood groups in the horse. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds.
SchaVeterinary Hematelogy,5th edition, 774777.Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &Wilkins.
249. Wilkerson MJ, Davis E, Shurman W, Harkin K, Cox J, Rush B. 2000. Isotype-specinc antibodies in horses and dogs
with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. J Vet Intern Med 14:190-196.
250.Kucinskiene G, Schuberth HJ,Leibold W,Pieskus J. 2005.Flow cytometric evaluation of bound IgG on erythro
cytes ofanaemic dogs.VetJ169:303-307.
251.Bonkovsky HL.1991.Iron and the liver.Am J Med Sci 301:3243.
252.Zuwala-Jagiello J, Osada J. 1998. Internalization study using EDTA-prepared hepatocytes for receptor-mediated
cndocytosis of haemoglobin-haptoglobin complex.Int J Biochem Cell Biol 30:923-931.
253.Kino K, Mizumoto K, Watanabe J, Tsunoo H. 1987. Immunohistochemical studies on hemoglobin-haptoglobin
and hemoglobin catabolism sites. J Histochem Cytochem 35:381-386.
254.Kristiansen M, Graversen JH, Jacobsen C, Sonne O, Hoffman HJ, Law SK,Moestrup SK. 200 1. Identifcation of
the haemoglobin scavenger receptor. Nature 409:198-201
255. George JW. 1988. Methemalbumin: reality and myth. Vet Clin Pathol 17:43-46.
Thispageintentionally lef blank
Chapter4
PLATELETS
PhysiologicProcesses
224
Analytical Principles and Methods
227
1.Complete Blood Count (CBC)
227
Il.Thrombogram..
227
ll. Methods.
229
MicroscopicFeatures ofPlatelets.
232
Thrombocytopenia.
233
Thrombocytosis
244
Platelet Volume.
246
Reticulated Platelets
247
Tests for Immune-mediated Thrombocytopenia (IMT)
249
223
224
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 4.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
[x]
x concentration (x=analyte)
ATP
Adenosine triphosphate
DIC
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
Fc
Fragment (crystallizable)
IL-6
Interleukin 6
IMHA
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
IMT
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
MPS
Mononuclear phagocyte system
MPV
Mean platelet volume
PDW
Plateler distribution width
PSAIg
Platelet surface-associatedimmunoglobulin
QBC
Quantitative buffy coat
RNA
Ribonucleic acid
SI
Systeme International d'Unites
SLE
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Tpo
Thrombopoietin
WRI
Within the reference interval
PHYSIOLOGICPROCESSES
Platelets are small cytoplasmic fragments of megakaryocytes (mega=“large,”karyon =
“nucleus,”and cyte=“cell') that are derived from pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells
(seeFig.2.1）.Mammalian platelets share most of the following components,although with
species variations:
A.A phospholipid membrane containing glycoproteins important in cell-cell interactions
and phospholipids important for coagulation
B.An open canalicular system of membrane invaginations that serves as a conduit for
substances moving between platelets and plasma (not developed in horses and cattle),
and that contributes to a marked increase in external platelet surface area after
activation
C.A cytoskeleton,associated with a peripheral microtubular ring and abundant actin and
myosin, that maintains discoid shape and allows for shape change and pseudopod
formation with activation
D.A dense tubular system of endoplasmic reticulum that stores Ca²+for platelet activation
and that isimportant in thromboxane synthesis
E.a-Granules that store numerous proteins involved in hemostasis and vessel repair and
whose contents are secreted with appropriate stimuli
F.Dense ranules containing Ca,Mg,adenosine diphosphate,ATP,and serotonin, all
of which are secreted with appropriate stimuli
G.Glycogen stores and mitochondria for energy
II.
Platelet production:The process of generating circulating platelets from hematopoietic stem
cells can be divided into megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis. Adequate megakaryopoiesis
4/PLATELETS
225
isreflected by adequate numbers of megakaryocytes in the bone marrow but does not
guarantee adequate thrombopoiesis.
A.Megakaryopoiesis, the proliferation and maturation of megakaryocytes, occurs in
to cytokines,primarily Tpo,by undergoing proliferation and maturation.Limited
baseline megakaryocyte production occurs in the absence of Tpo.
B.Thrombopoiesis, the formation of platelets from megakaryocytes and their delivery to the
circulation,is also primarily mediated by Tpo, but baseline platelet production can
occur in the absence of Tpo.Tpo is also important for maintaining adequate hemato
poietic stem cell populations.
1.Thrombopoiesis occurs in the bone marrow and ar other sites of hematopoiesis
(e.g-,the spleen）.It also occurs in the lungs,where megakaryocytes lodge after
circulating from the bone marrow (see Plate 4A [for all plates,see the color section
of this book]).3
2.Platelets form from late-stage megakaryocytes. They appear to shed directly into the
blood by cytoplasmic fragmentation or by the periodic constriction of megakaryo-
cytic cytoplasmic pseudopodia that extend into vascular sinuses.
C.Tpo is produced primarily in hepatocytes,renal tubular epithelium, and stromal cells of
the bone marrow.
1.In health, Tpo is produced constantly and is cleared by receptor-mediated uptake
and destructionbyplateletsandmegakaryocytes.Thrfore,platelet andmea
karyocyte masses exert control over plasma [Tpo], and there is generally an inverse
relationship berween [platelet] and blood and bone marrow [Tpo].
a.With decreased platelet mass, more Tpo remains unbound and is available to
stimulate megakaryocytes. However, when megakaryocyte hyperplasia accompa
nies thrombocytopenia, more Tpo will become bound by megakaryocytes and
the blood[Tpo] will be lower than expected based solely on the [platelet].
b.As the[platelet] increases,more Tpo is bound and removed from the circulation,
so there is less stimulation of megakaryocytes or other stem cells.
2.Tpo production increases in certain pathologic states:4
a. Infammation causes increased IL-6, which induces hepatocytes to produce more
Tpo,which in turn may cause thrombocytosis.Because of increased Tpo
production,the plasma [Tpo] is greater with inflammatory thrombocytosis than
expected, given the[platelet].
b.Marrow stromal cells are induced to produce more Tpo in at least some throm
bocytopenic states.
3.Activated platelets may release intact Tpo in vivo, thus increasing blood concentra-
tions duringplatelet consumptive states.
D.Reticulated platelers: Just as the RNA content of circulating young erythrocytes
(reticulocytes）isused toassess erythropoiesis,circulating reticulated plateletshave
have increased cytoplasmic RNA and have been shown to be less than 24 h old in
dogs.10
III.
Platelet kinetics
A.The blood [platelet] is generally established by the relative rates of platelet production.
consumption,and destruction,andby the shiftingof platelets to and from the circula
tion (Fig. 4.1).
Lungs
Bone
Spleen
marrow
Endothelialcell
Blood vessel
Plateletplug
M
Liver
Megakaryocyte
Vd
=Platelet
Fig. 4.1. Blood platelet concentrations are established mostly by the relative rates of platelet production,
consumption, and destruction, and by the shifting of platelets to and from the circulation. In pathologic
states, combinations of these factors often contribute to abnormal platelet concentrations.
·Production: Most megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis occur in the bone marrow, and new platelets
enter systemic circulation via marrow sinusoids. Some megakaryocytes appear to become lodged in the
lungs after release from the bone marrow.Thesemegakaryocytes release platelets into the blood,but the
contribute to the circulating platelet mass in health and disease. Hematopoietic focimay also arise in the
liver and contribute to the circulating platelet mass.
▪Consumption: Platelets may be removed from circulation during normal maintenance of vascular integrity
or during accelerated consumptive states (e.g,thrombotic disease and vasculitis).
▪Destruction: Macrophages (Mp), primarily in the spleen and liver, may destroy platelets that carry surface-
associated antibodies or complement. Aged or damaged platelets may be similarly destroyed.
splenic contraction may increase it. Pulmonary sequestration of platelets has been associated with severe
hypothermia and endotoxemia.
Massive transfusion with blood products or other fuids may cause a dilutional decrease in platelet
concentration.
226
4/PLATELETS
227
B.Platelet production is affected mostly by the degree of cytokine stimulation and the
number of responsive cells. In rodents and people, the total megakaryocyte maturation
time ranges from about 2 d to 10 d.1
C.Plateler consumption is ongoing because of the continuous repair ofminor vascular
defects.Mean platelet life span appears to be decreased in any markedly thrombocyto-
penic state, even when thrombocytopenia is caused by decreased production.This can
be explained by a fixed platelet requirement formaintenance ofvascular ntegrity,so
when marked thrombocytopenia is present, a substantially greater percentage of the
circulating platelets is consumed during routine maintenance.
governing platelet life span areunclear,but the spleen is important in determining
platelet life spanin dogs.Splenectomized dogs had almost 50% longer platelet life
spans (8 d) than healthy nonsplenectomized dogs (about 5-6 d）.13
E.Human and rabbit spleens have been shown to harbor about 33 % of blood
mobilize these plateletsto irculation,while splenic engorgement can trapmore
platelets there.7Splenic pooling andmobilization of platelets are expectedin other
species,too.7
IV.Platelet functions (see Chapter 5 for details regarding the roles of platelets in hemostasis)
A.The major function of platelets is to help repair vascular damage and prevent hemor
rhage by participating in the formation of hemostatic plugs. Platelets are consumed in
this ongoing process.
B.Energy for platelet functions is derived from ATP generated by aerobic glycolysis and
oxidative phosphorylation. Glucose enters platelets by facilitated diffusion.
C.Nonhemostatic platelet functions:Platelets are important in infammation and wound
healing.They interact with leukocytes and release vasoactive amines, cytokines,
mitogens, and growth factors.
ANALYTICALPRINCIPLESANDMETHODS
Completeblood count(CBC):Quantitativeandqualitative dataregarding blood platelets
1.
areroutinely included in mammalian CBCresults.Major concepts pertaining to the CBC
are in Chapter2.
II.
Thrombogram:those portions of a CBCrelated to platelets (thrombocytes)
A.Blood film evaluation
1.Microscopic evaluation of platelets on a stained blood film is an important part of
the thrombogram,especially in bleeding patients or when thrombocytopenia or
extreme thrombocytosisis present.
2.It serves three major purposes:
a.It enables detection of platelet clumps, which may falsely decrease [platelet]
values. Some analyzers detect the presence of platelet clumps and report their
presence, but others do not.
b.It enables estimation of[platelet] for corroboration of automated values or when
automated measures are unavailable or unreliable
c.It enables evaluation of platelers for abnormal features.
sesal
228
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.Platelet concentration
1.The platelet concentration is the number of platelets per unit volume of blood (in
clinical jargon, commonly referred to as platelet count).
2.Unit conversion:(#×10²/μL)×10μL/L=#×10°/L (SIunit；suggest reporting to
nearest 10 x 10°/L)
C.MPV
1.MPVis the average apparent volume of all the particles in a blood sample that are
counted as individual platelets
2.Because MPV is an average,populations of large or small platelets may be present
and detectable by microscopy when the MPV is WRI.Also,large platelers may be
seen microscopically but excluded from analysis by the instrument.
3.Unit:fL （μm)
D.PDW
1.PDWis an assessment ofplatelet anisocytosis calculated from the distribution of
individual platelet volumes.
2.There are several different methods of calculating PDW
a.For ADVIA instruments, it is the standard deviation of the distribution of
platelet volumes recorded as a percentage of the MPV; that is, 100 × (standard
deviation ofMPV)/MPV.
b.For other analyzers, the calculation may exclude a certain proportion of the
largest and smallest platelets.
3.Units:%
E.Thrombocrit:thrombo-(platelet") plus-crit (from krinein,meaning“to separate”);also
called platelet crit
1.Thrombocrit, like hematocrit, is the percentage of blood volume filled by platelets
(typically < 1 %). It is an assessment of circulating platelet mass.
2.Unlike hematocrit, thrombocrit values have not been routinely reported but have
become available with modern automated analyzers.
3. Thrombocrit values are calculated from the MPV and [platelet], so abnormalities or
errors with either of these measurements affect the thrombocrit value (see Eq. 4.1).
10 fL/platelet×300,000platelets/μL=3,000,000 fL/μL=0.003μL/μL=0.3%
(4.1)
4.Compared to the [platelet],thrombocrit may better represent the total platelet
functional potential and the thrombopoietic stimulus.1s
5.Units:% or decimal form (L/L or unitless)
F.Several other platelet values are generated by some analyzers and may be reported,
although they are currently used mostly for investigative purposes.
1.MPC: mean platelet component concentration
a.The MPC is an approximation of the average platelet density based on rwo-angle
light scatter of individual platelets (ADVIA)
b.It is used to assess platelet activation,which leads to granule secretion and a
decreased MPC.
C.Values are affected by anticoagulant, sample age,sample storage emperature, and
iatrogenic activation, so they must be interpreted cautiously.
d.Unit:g/dL
2.PCDW:mean platelet component concentration distribution width
a.Variation in the MPC
b.Unit:g/dL
4/PLATELETS
229
3.Values for mean platelet mass (pg), variation in mean platelet mass,large platlets,
III.
Methods
A.Blood film evaluation of platelets
1.Scan the feathered edge and smear body for plarelet clumps.If clumps are present,
the following estimation of [plateler] will provide only a minimum value that may
markedly underestimate the true [platelet].
2. One method of estimating the concentration of individualized platelets requires first
finding the appropriate counting window,where leukocytes are fattened like fried
eggs to expose nuclear and cytoplasmic detail.
a.
Appropriate counting windows contain fields of similar blood thickness and
therefore similar volumes of blood per field. Differences in cell number per field
will reflect differences in cell number per volume of blood (i.e., concentration).
b.Smear thickness can be judged by the degree to which cels are flattened out
(friedeggappearance)rather than bythe proximity of cellstoone another.
c.If fields are chosen to normalize the density of erythrocytes, thicker areas of the
smear (with more blood volume per field) will be evaluated in anemic animals
and the [platelet] will be overestimated.
3.Using the 100x oil objective (1000x magnification), again assess for the presence
that smear estimates and machine values for[platelet] in the sample may befalsely
decreased.
4.If platelets are well distributed,estimate the average number of platelers per 1000x
feld in at least 5 (preferably 10) felds.
5. Convert the average number of platelets per field to an estimated [platelet] by using
the following conversion factor:1platele/1000xfield=15,000-20,000platelets/μL.19
For example, if the mean number per 1000x field was 4, then the estimated [platelet]
would range from about 4 ×15,000 platelets/μL = 60,000 platelets/μL to about
4×20,000 platelets/μL=80,000 platelers/μL
a.The area represented by a 10oox microscopic field varies with the optics of
microscopes.The diameter of thefield ofviewvaries directly with thefield
number of the oculars, and field numbers vary considerably.
b.Because of this,the appropriate conversion factor varies considerably.The
1:20,000 conversion may be more appropriate for regular oculars, and the
1:15,000 conversion may be more appropriate for wide-field oculars.Either
should provide a useful estimate.
6.The estimated [platelet] should then be compared to species-specific reference
intervals for interpretation.To exclude thrombocytopenia, dogs (most breeds),cats,
and cattle should generally have at least 810 platelets per 1000xfield,and horses
should have at least5 platelets per 1000x field.
7. Other methods may be used to estimate [platelet]:
a.Some people advocate enumeration of platelets in 10 thick and thin areas of the
flm and use of a 1:80o0 conversion factor to estimate [platelet] (the lower
conversion factor refects assessment of thicker areas with greater blood volume
and more platelets per field).
b.Others compare the ratio of platelets to either erythrocytes or leukocytes in
several fields,and then use either the erythrocyte concentration or leukocyte
230
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
concentration to calculate the estimated [platelet](e.g.,for 5 platelets per
leukocyte and a [leukocyte]of 20,000/μL,the estimated[platelet]= 5×
20,000/μL = 100,000/μL). These methods require quantitative erythrocyte or
leukocyte concentrations.
8.While estimating [platelet], platelets should be assessed for morphologic abnormali
ties (see the following section).
B.Platelet concentration
1.Sample
a.EDTA anticoagulation of venous blood is routine for CBCs (see Analytical
Principles and Methods, sect. I.D, in Chapter 2）,but citrated venous blood
(1 part citrate to 9parts blood) can be used (e.g.,when EDTA-induced platelet
clumping is suspected). Citrate dilution requires that the measured [platelet]
be corrected(corrected platelet concentration=measured platelet concentration
X1.1)
b.Heparinized samples shouldnot beused,because platelet clumping frequently
occurs.
C.Platelets can be easily activated during blood collection, and activation causes
clumping.Platelets can clump because they are hyperactive, because of slow or
poor venipuncture technique, or because of delayed or inadequate mixing of
blood and anticoagulant.Platelets of cats and cattle are very prone to clumping.
d.Blood collection tubes containing citrate, theophylline, dipyridamole, and
adenosine (CTAD tubes)provideplateletinhibitoryfactors thathelpreduce in
vitro platelet activation.2 These may be particularly useful in cats.
e.There are various reported statements regarding the stability of platelet concen-
trations1Onaverageconcentrations appearreasonably stableorhatroom
temperature and for 48h at 4 °C. However, concentrations may increase or
fForallplatelet quantitationmethodsplatelet clumping must beabsent tobe
confident that a [platelet] is accurateIf platelet clumps arepresent,measured
values should be consideredminimum values.Ifmore accuratevalues are
required (e.g., to confirm an apparent decrease), a new sample should be
collectedin such a way as to minimize platelet activationand therefore clumping
(see Coagulation Sect. II.C,in Chapter 5).
2. Impedance cell counters (see Chapter 2 and Fig. 2.5 for basic principles and
analyzers)
a.Typically, [platelet] is measured in the same path as erythrocyte parameters and is
the concentration of particles that are within a defined particle volume interval
(e.g, 2-30 fL) based on their electrical impedance.
b.For most samples,a properly adjusted and calibrated impedance cell counter
provides reliable platelet concentrations for most dogs, horses, and cattle.
c.However, impedance cell counters cannot always accurately assess platelets; in
some samples, they cannot differentiate small erythrocytes from platelets (e.g., in
iron deficiency),or large platelets from erythrocytes (e.g., cats and Cavalier King
Charles spaniels). Cats have a greater variation in platelet volume, with more
largeplateletsthanother specie,soimpedancemethodsareproblematior
determining [platelet] accurately in cats.24
3.Optical or laser fow cell cytometers (see Chapter 2 and Fig. 2.5 for basic principles
and analyzers)
4/PLATELETS
231
a.Assessment of low-angle (volume) and high-angle(refractive index) light scatter
enables better differentiation of platelets from erythrocytes than does the use of
electrical impedance.
b.Platelets are defined as particles with certain light-scatter characteristics, and the
number of these particles in a given volume of fuid is the [platelet].
c.However,other particles,such as lipid droplets,can scatter light similarly and be
counted as platelers.
4.QBC (see Chapter 2 and Fig. 2.6 for basic principles)
a.The QBC detects the thickness of the cell layer above the lymphocyte and
monocyte layer that has characteristic fuorescence of RNA or lipoprotein.
b.The thickness of this layer (essentially a thrombocrit) is converted to a [platelet]
based on correlation studies with other analyzers.
c.Because the value is affected by platelet size,it may not always match platelet
concentrations based on other methods.
d.The analytical method is less affected by small platelet clumps than are imped
ance methods.23
5.Hemocytometer (see Chapter 2 and Fig.2.4 for basic principles)
a.Platelets are enumerated microscopically in defined grid regions after sample
dilution and lysis of erythrocytes.
b.This manual technique is relatively labor intensive and has much lower precision
than automated methods,but it is adequate formost diagnostic uses and may be
preferred when many giant platelets are present.
c.It does not enable measurement of other platelet parameters.
d.As with anymethod,plateler clumping prevents accuratemeasurement of
[platelet].
C.MPV
1.MPV values vary among analyzers and methods. Electrical impedance methods
may exclude large platelets from evaluation,and the diluting fuids used to sphere
platelets in optical analyzers may falsely decrease the values.-2s
2.MPV values also vary with the anticoagulant, the sample storage temperature, and
the sample storage time,though not necessarily in the same manner with every
analyzer.
a.These variables usually have relatively minor effects (< 20 % differences),but the
effects should be considered when values are interpreted, particularly for values
near the upper or lower reference limits. Reference samples may have been
handled differently from patient samples.
b.With impedance measurements, EDTA was shown to induce artifactual and
time-dependent increases in MPV that occurred within 5 min and could result in
Artifactual increases also occur when EDTA samples are refrigerated (at 4 °C).30
c.MPV increases over time in citrated samples stored at room temperature or 4 °C,
but the increase is less than with EDTA samples.26
d.When analyzed over time on the ADVLA, MPV values increased after an initial
decrease, and the changes were slower at 4 °C. MPV was relatively stable when
samples were anticoagulated by a mixture of EDTA and citrate, stored at 4 °C
and analyzed from 1 h through 3 h after blood collection.3
3.Some impedance analyzers cannot generate reliable MPV values in severely throm-
bocytopenic patients, so the values may be unavailable when of interest.
232
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
4.Particulates such as lipid droplets or cell fragments may be detected as platelets,
leading to false MPV values with either impedance or laser methods.
MICROSCOPIC FEATURES OF PLATELETS (seePlate 7 and 8)
General
A.In blood films, platelets are present individually or in small to large clumps (see
Plate 7J-L).
B.Clumps usually result fromn vitro platelet activation,but anticoagulant-induced
agglutination of nonhuman platelets has been reported.² Clumps are most frequent in
feline and bovine samples. They may be found throughout a blood flm but are best
found at its feathered edge, sides,and base.
II.
Features
A.Shape
1.Nonactivated platelets are discoid and appear mostly round, oval, or elongate in
blood films made from non-anticoagulated blood (see Plate 7F).
2.Platelets become spheroid with EDTA anticoagulation (also with citrate, but to a
lesser degree) and more commonly appear round.
3.Elongate platelers, which probably represent undivided megakaryocyte pseudopod
segments (proplateles),may be more numerous during stimulated thrombopoiesis
(see Plate 7E)
4.Activated platelets may have peripheral pseudopodia (see Plate 8A-C).
B.Size
1.In most healthy individuals, platelets are fairly uniform in size.
2.The diameter of feline platelets,which is greater andmore variable than in other
ity is refected by a greater PDw in cats than in other domestic mammals.
3.There is not a universal definition of a giant platelet (large platelet, shift platelet,
stressplateletmegaplateletmegathrombocyte,ormacrothrombocyte）orowmany
must be seen to report them. However, platelets larger than normal erythrocytes are
typically classified as giant,and when the number of such platelets appears increased
to the microscopist,they may be reported.
4.Because MPV is an average for all platelets, subpopulations of large platelets may be
present without an increased MPV. Also, large platelets may not be included in
MPV calculations if they are too large to be detected as platelets.
5. On some blood flms, many platelets appear larger than normal but not larger than
erythrocytes.These platelets maynot be reported as large,but the MPV may be
increased.
6.An increase in the number of giant platelets suggests accelerated thrombopoiesis
withinafewdaysof samplecollctionusuallybecauseofadestructiveorconsump
tive thrombocytopenia. It may be accompanied by an increased MPV (see Platelet
Volume, sect.II.A）.However, an increased number of giant platelets does not
confirm adequate numbers of megakaryocytes and may occur with congenital
platelet disorders,clonal hemic disorders,splenic contraction,and some acute feline
leukemia virus infections.
C.Inclusions
1.Granules
4/PLATELETS
233
a.With Wright staining,nonactivated platelets have clear to pale blue cytoplasms
containing small pink to purple granules. These granules contain numerous
substances that can bereleased to promote platelet functionsincludinghemosta
sis and repair.
b.With activation, the granules may be centralized (see Plate 8A and C) or absent
(secreted) (see Plate 8B). Granules tend to be most prominent in feline and
bovine platelets and least prominent in equine platelets.
C.Abnormalities in granule size, shape,and staining may be rarely seen with
dysthrombopoiesis.More often,abnormalities are noted in megakaryocytes.
2.Anaplasma plarys (basonym Ehrlichia plarys)morulae may be present in platelets (see
Plate 8E). They must be differentiated from stain precipitate and fragments of
nuclear material (see Plate 8F). When they are suspected, specific analysis by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) may be used for confirmation.
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
I.
General concepts
A.Thrombocytopenia isa pathologic state in which[platelet] is less than a valid lower
referenclimitplateleclumpsmustbabsent）Somehealthygreyhound3and
perhaps Shiba Inus have lower platelet concentrations than other dogs.
B.Thrombocytopenia reflects a pathologic process and is a diagnostic problem, not a
disease.Its major significance is the potentiation of bleeding when platelet concentra
tions are markedly decreased.Also, its presence may suggest specifc disorders or
diseases.
C.Clinical signs: Petechiae and ecchymoses are the hallmarks of severe thrombocytopenia.
Mucosal bleeding (pistaxis,hematocheziaormelena),hmaturia,hyphema,and
prolonged hemorrhage after accidental or intentional trauma (e.g., venipuncture) are
common.
D.Thrombocytopenia can occur in many diseases, but there are limited pathogenic
mechanisms to be considered (see Fig. 4.1).
I1.
Diseases and conditions (Table 4.2)
A.Pseudo-thrombocytopenia is false thrombocytopenia that may occur when not all the
platelets in a sample are counted. It can be suspected when automated analyzers
indicate the presence of platelet clumps.It can also be recognized whenmicroscopic
examination reveals platelet clumps or yields an estimate of [platelet] that is substan-
tially greater than the measured [platelet].
1.It often occurs because blood collection causes platelet activation and aggregation
Therefore, platelets are clumped and not counted individually.
2. It also occurs with automated analyzers, particularly impedance analyzers, when
many large platelets are present (e.g., in cats and CavalierKing Charles spaniels) but
not detected because they exceed the upper size limit of detection. For such samples,
platelet concentrations should be determined by microscopic methods.
3.It can occur with cold agglutinins or anticoagulant-induced, antibody-mediated
agglutination of platelets.Anticoagulants,especially EDTA, can unmask nonpatho
logic antigenic sites on platelet membranes so that immunoglobulins bind and
bridgeplatlestgethenvitrloughraelyrporedinveriarypc
it is quite common with human samples.
Table 4.2.Diseases and conditions that cause thrombocytopenia
Abnormal platelet distribution (sequestration): splenomegaly,severe hypothermia
Decreased platelet production (myelosuppression of one to all hemic cell lines)
Acquired amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia
Drugs (toxicants)
*Predictable: chemotherapeutic agents, estrogens in dogs (exogenous, endogenous), bracken
fern poisoning （ruminants), trichothecene mycotoxins
Idiosyncratic:phenylbutazone,meclofenamic acid,trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,
griseofulvin
Infectious (usually multifactorial; see the text)
Irradiation (whole body or extensive):prior to autologousmarrow transplantation
Marrow replacement: bone marrow neoplasia (primary hemic or metastatic), myelofibrosis
osteopetrosis
Megakaryocytic leukemia
Myelonecrosis:infections,neoplasia,toxicants
Decreased platelet survival (accelerated platelet destruction and consumption)
Immunologic
*Primary (idiopathic) IMT
Secondary IMT
Drug induced: gold salts, sulfonamides
Infectious (usually multifactorial; see the text)
Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia
Neoplasia (usually multifactorial; see the text)
Posttransfusion purpura
Systemic immune-mediated disease: SLE,Evans’ syndrome
Nonimmunologic
Blood loss, acute and severe: anticoagulant rodenticides
Platelet activation with accelerated consumption or utilization
Localized intravascular coagulation:hemangiosarcoma,hemorrhage, thrombosis
*DIC: envenomation, hepatic disease, infections, massive necrosis, pancreatitis,neoplasia,
overheating,septicemia
Drugs: protamine sulfate
Envenomation (without DIC)
*Vasculitis/endocarditis:Rocky Mountain spotted fever,canine herpesvirus infection,
hemolyticremicsyromediroflariasisangiostrongylosisbacteralndocarditis
hemolytic uremic syndrome (cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy of
greyhounds)
Hemodilution: massive infusion with colloids, crystalloids, platelet-poor blood products
Idiopathic mechanism or multifactorial (decreased production and decreased survival)
Idiopathic thrombocytopenia of Cavalier King Charles spaniels
*Infections:Anaplasma platys,Anaplasma phagocytophilum,Babesia canis,Babesia gibsonibovine
viral diarrhea virus, canine distemper virus canine parvovirus, Cyauxzoon felis,
Ehrliciasp,qitiousiaviruslinaru
immunodeficiencyvirus,Histoplasma capsulatum,Leishmania spp.,Leptospira spp.,
Theileria spp.
Endotoxemia
*Neoplasiacarcinomashemangiosarcoma andother sarcomas,lymphomaleukemias
Drugs
Hypophosphatemia associated with hyperalimentation
Anaphylaxis
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specific disorders r conditions arenot complete but are provided to give examples.Platelet
concentrations in greyhounds and Shiba Inus may be lower than for other breeds of dogs.Pseudo-thrombo
cytopenia caused by platelet clumping or giant platelets should be considered before pursuing causes of true
thrombocytopenia.
234
4/PLATELETS
235
B.Abnormal platelet distribution (sequestration)
1.Platelets may become reversibly redistributed into thevascular system of certain
tissues (e.g., spleen),and therefore the concentration of freely circulating platelets is
decreased.This thrombocytopenia occurs without decreased total body platelet mass
and therefore does not stimulate thrombopoiesis.
2.The term sequestrarion is often used for either reversible platelet redistribution or for
irreversible trapping of platelets in organs because of destruction by the MPS.
However, in this textbook,irreversible removal of platelets from circulation is
regarded as decreased platelet survival, not sequestration.
3.Abnormal platelet distribution may contribute to or (rarely) cause marked
thrombocytopenia.
4.Disorders
a.Splenomegaly appears to cause splenic pooling of an exchangeable platelet fraction
in some human conditions,though platelet survivals may also be decreased.44
Similar effects of splenomegaly have been presumed to occur in other species.
b. Severe hypothermia (e.g,a rectal temperature of 20 C）may cause reversible
plateletredistibutionto liver and spleen in dogs
c.Endotoxemia has been associated experimentally with transient pulmonary
platelet pooling in dogsbut plateler consumption also occurs.447
C.Decreased platelet production
1.Adequate platelet production requires a healthy megakaryocyte population; there
must be enough megakaryocytes and they must be shedding platelets. Megakaryo
cytes can be unhealthy because of generalized bone marrow diseases or because of
megakaryocyte-specific diseases that either diminish megakaryopoiesis or impair
thrombopoiesis.Unexplained bicytopenia and pancytopenia suggest the possibility of
generalized bone marrow disease.
2.Idiopathic thrombocytopenia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels is likely caused by
decreased platelet production rather than a compensated consumptive state,but it is
included below (see Thrombocytopenia, sect. I.F.1) under idiopathic conditions
until bertter characterized.
3.Acquired amegakaryocytic hrombocytopenia israrelyreported in dogs and cats.0
Some cases may be immune mediated,as in people.
a.Bone marrow aspirate and core samples must be of excellent quality to conclude
reliably that megakaryocytes are absent.
b.In people, it may occur with antibody-mediated or cell-mediated destruction of
megakaryocytes or their precursors,or with antibody-mediated destruction of
required cytokines.5253
C.
Antimegakaryocyte antibodiesmay alsoimpair thrombopoiesis455without
megakaryocytic hypoplasia or aplasia.Dogs injected with rabbit anti-[canine
platelet] antiserum developed marked thrombocytopenia with morphologic
changes in megakaryocytes that suggested the possibility of impaired megakaryo-
with IMT inhibits megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis in cell cultures.
4.Drugs (toxicants)
a.Drugs with predictable and dose-dependent myelosuppressive effects (examples)
(1)Antineoplastic chemotherapeutic agents, including alkylating agents,
antimetabolites, and antibiotics (e.g., doxorubicin), frequently induce
thrombocytopenia 1-2 wk after drug administration.57.58
236
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(2)Estrogens from exogenous sources or endogenous sources (e.g., testicular
Sertoli cell neoplasm,rare ovarian granulosa cell neoplasms, andrare
interstitial cell neoplasmsin dogs)can induce thrombocytopenia or aplastic
pancytopenia. Suppressive doses cause thrombocytopenia after a week or
more, and thrombocytopenia may persist for weeks. Myelosuppression may
be mediated by an inhibitor produced by thymic stromal cells in response to
estrogen.63
(4)Albendazole has been implicared in a dog.
b.Drugs (toxicants) with idiosyncratic (ie., sporadic and unpredictable) myelosup
pressive effects (examples)
(1)Idiosyncratic myelosuppression is suspected much more often than it is
proven.Relapse of thrombocytopenia with rechallenge after initial recovery
would support a cause-and-effect relationship,but such rechallenges are
avoided. When suspected, potential offending drugs are withdrawn, but
subsequent improvement may or may not be due to drug withdrawal.
(2)Phenylbutazone and meclofenamic acid are nonsteroidal anti-infammatory
drugs that have been associated with bone marrow hypoplasia and bicytope
nia or pancytopenia in dogs and probably in horses (only
phenylbutazone).67-69
(3)T
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine and trimethoprim-sulfonamide have been
uncommon and unpredictable at doses commonly used. However, potenti-
ated sulfonamides predictably inhibit sequential steps in folate pathways,
thus suppressing DNA synthesis.This may contribute to aplastic anemia
and thrombocytopenia in affected dogs. Thrombocytopenia caused by
myelosuppression should be differentiated from immune-mediated platelet
destruction caused by trimethoprim-sulfa-dependent antibodies
5.Infections: The pathogenesis of thrombocytopenia associated with many infections is
multifactorial (see Thrombocytopenia,sectI1.F.2）but often includes decreased
platelet production. Several mechanisms of decreased production may be involved
a.Direct infection of megakaryocytes or other hematopoietic precursors may
decrease megakaryopoiesis or thrombopoiesis. Examples are infections with
bovine virus diarrhea virus (immunotolerant cattle persistently infected with
bovine virus diarrhea virus do not have thrombocytopenia) and canine distem-
per virus.76
b.Myelosuppressive cytokines may be produced in response to infection (e.g
C.Some infections (e.g.,chronic ehrlichiosis caused by Ebrlichia canis and canine
parvoviral infection) are associated with generalized bone marrow hypoplasia and
thrombocytopenia, but the mechanisms are not clear. Canine parvoviral infec-
tionsmay cause suppression thrombocytopenia by direct infection of hematopoi
etic precursor cells. However, viral antigen has minimally and inconsistently been
was not in recognizable cells of the megakaryocyte series.7so Thrombocytopenia
4/PLATELETS
237
may also be caused by septicemia and/or endotoxemia associated with severe
enteritis.
d.Production failuremay contribute to thrombocytopenia occurring in some cats
with feline leukemia virus infections, but the effects may be indirect via second-
ary disorders, including hemic neoplasia
sion and thrombocytopenia through widespread cell death. Thrombocytopenia was
prolonged (weeks to months) and severe in dogs receiving autologous bone marrow
metastatic),myelofbrosis, and osteopetrosis may each induce myelosuppresson.
Mechanisms may include physical replacement of normal cell populations,
competition for nutrients, obstruction of blood supply, lysis of marrow cells, and
secretion of inhibitors. Megakaryocytic leukemia may be associated with throm-
bocytopenia,3-s probably because of dysthrombopoiesis and decreased
thrombopoiesis.
8.Myelonecrosis (with or without myelofibrosis):Infections, neoplasia, or toxicants
D.Decreased plateler survival (accelerated platelet destruction or consumption)
1.If increased platelet production does not compensate for accelerated platelet
destruction or consumption, thrombocytopenia will ensue.
a.Platelet consumption usually refers to the use of platelets during hemostatic
functions, whether physiologic or pathologic.
b.Platelet destruction usually refers to the death of platelets by other means,usually
immune-mediated destruction.
2.Immunologic causes of decreased platelet survival
a.General concepts
(1)IMT usually occurs when an animal’s immune system produces antibodies
that bind directly (e.g., autoantibody or alloantibody) or indirectly (e.g
adsorbed antigen) to its own platelets (PSAIg). This leads to accelerated
platelet destruction by the MPS.Destruction is mediated by PSAIg,platelet
surface-associated complement,or both.The process maybe initiated by a
defectivemmune ystm,dfective platelets,radsorbedantigensrom
drugs, infectious agents, or neoplasms. The cause is usually unknown.
(2) Thrombocytopenia is often clinically classified as immune mediated based
on clinical findings and response to immunosuppressive therapy.Detection
of increased PSAlg by a validated direct assay, it available,would provide
more support for the conclusion.
(3)The abbreviation ITP is also used for IMT. It originally was used for
“idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura” in human patients, but it came to
be used for “immune thrombocytopenic purpura” once an immunologic
mechanism was demonstrated.However, purpura may not be present in
patients with IMT, and idiopathic thrombocytopenia may not always be
immune mediated.
(4)IMT not associated with a detected disease or condition is idiopathicIMT,
which is often called primary IMT. It may be autoimmune, but antibody
specificiry to normal self-epitopes is rarely documented in veterinary
medicine.
238
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(a)Destruction of one's own cells is an autoimmune phenomenon only if
the body's immune system is directed against autoantigens.
(b)Alloantibodies from colostrum or transfusion are directed toward
alloantigens and cause alloimmune thrombocytopenia.
(c)Antibodies to adsorbed antigens cause secondary IMT that is neither
autoimmune nor alloimmune.
(5)IMT that is part of a more widespread disease (e.g., SLE) is also often called
secondary IMT despite an autoimmune pathogenesis.
b.Idiopathic IMT (primary, often presumed to be autoimmune)
(1)Idiopathic IMT is well documented and relatively common only in dogs
ting and immunoprecipitation studies have confrmed a role for platelet
membrane antigen targets inat least some cases of canine idiopathicIMT.
Antibodies may also target megakaryocytes.Diagnosis is primarily by
exclusion,but increased PSAlg or positive megakaryocyte immunofluores-
Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia section).
(2）Common laboratory featuresare thrombocytopenia(usually<50×10/μL
and often <10 x 10²/μL); MPV increased,decreased, or WRI; anemia (in
about 50 % of cases); and megakaryocytic hyperplasia (megakaryocytic
hypoplasia can occur).
c.Drug-induced IMT
accelerated platelet destruction because of the production of drug-dependent
or drug-independent antibodies.
(a)Drug-independent anribodies do not require the drug for binding; they
may bind to a platelet epitope that is cross-reactive with the drug or a
metabolite.
(b）Drug-dependent antibodies,which are more common in people than in
domesticmammals, can theoretically bind to any of the following:a
drug ora metabolire adsorbed tothe platelet surface,a platelet surface
antigen exposed by the presence of the drug or a metabolite,or a
combined drug-platelet neoantigen on the platelet membrane.
(2)Drug-induced IMT is suspected when otherwise unexplained thrombocyto-
penia,usually evere, develops a few days after drug exposure, and when the
thrombocytopenia resolves rapidly after drug withdrawal.
(3）Strict criteria to bemet for confirmation of drug-inducedIMT by drug-
dependent antibodies are the following:
(a)Increased PSAIg in a patient thar developed thrombocytopenia at least a
few days after drug exposure
(b)Patient plasma antibodies that bind in vitro to platelets or platelet
antigens in the presence,but not in the absence, of drug or a metabolite
(c)Resolution of both thrombocytopenia and increased PSAlg after drug
withdrawal
(d)Relapse after reexposure to the drug (not recommended)
(4)Numerous drugs have been suspected to cause IMT in dogs. Gold salts
(auranofin,gold sodium thiomalate,and possibly aurothioglucose)9and
4/PLATELETS
239
implicated in dogs. Platelet antibody assay results have been supportive of
drug-induced IMT.
(5）Methimazole and propylthiouracil havebeen incriminated in cats,oand
penicillin and trimethoprim-sulfadoxine may have led to IMT in horses.3
(6)Heparin, a common cause of immune complex-induced IMT in people,has
not been reported to produce an analogous condition in veterinary species
The pathogenesis of heparin-induced IMT involves plateletFc receptors for
d.IMT associated with infection (usually multifactorial; see Thrombocytopenia,
sect.II.F.2)
(1)Pathogeneses of thrombocytopenias associated with infection are usually
multifactorial orunknown,but many bacterial,viral,fungal,and protozoal
diseases havebeen associated with IMT in people.Similarassociations are
likely in domesticmammals.
(2)Infection-associated IMT may be caused by cross-reactive antibodies,
bacteria-induced production of autoantibodies,exposure of otherwisehidden
platelet membrane antigens by the organism, binding of antiorganism
antibodies to the infectious agent attached to the plateletmembrane, or the
induction ofimmune complexes that adhere to the platelet membrane.
(3)Infection-associated IMT may occur with acute canine ehrlichiosisand,by
extension, infections with related organisms of the genera Ebrlichia and
Anaplasma.Other infectious diseases with a likely immune component to
the thrombocytopenia are Rocky Mountain spotted fever,o6 histoplasmo-
tion7equine infectious anemia, and babesiosis.
(4)Some people have considered vaccination a precipitating event in clinical
canine IMT, but supporting data are lacking.
e.Neonatalalloimmune thrombocytopenia
(1)Thrombocytopenia occurs when passively acquired (mainly via colostrum)
maternal alloantibodies to paternal epitopes on a neonate's platelets circulate
in the neonate's blood and mediate platelet destruction. The maternal
alloantibodies are produced when the dam is sufficiently exposed to fetal
platelets possessing paternally derived antigenic determinants that are
recognized as foreign. It has been described in horses,mule foals,and
pigs.112-114
(2)It must be differentiated from other causes of thrombocytopenia in neo
natesespeciallysepsisConfrmation entailsdetection of increasedPAlgn
the neonate but not in the dam, and demonstration of the presence of
antibodies in the dam’s blood that react with paternal and neonatal,but not
maternal, platelets.Validated tests may be unavailable
(3)Thrombocytopenia concurrent with neutropenia and ulcerative dermatitis
has been described in neonatal foals and may have an alloimmune
pathogenesis.115
fNeoplasia (usually multifactorial; see Thrombocytopenia, sect.II.F.3)
(1)Thrombocytopenia occurs commonly in animals with neoplasia.The cause
is often multifactorial but may include immunologic mechanisms.
(2)Antibodies,possibly in the form of immune complexes,have been indirectly
implicated in mediating thrombocytopenia in some dogswith a variety of
240
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
hemic and nonhemic neoplasms. IMT has been associated with lym
phoma in dogs and horses.2.17
g.Posttransfusion purpura
(1)In human transfusion recipients, this condition occurs about 1 wk after
plarelet-reactive alloantibodies that mediate the destruction of transfused,as
well as the patient's own platelers.
(2)Rarely,posttransfusion thrombocytopenia has been reported in dogs,but the
pathogeneses have not been established.
h.Systemic immune-mediated diseases such as SLE are caused by general B-
lymphocyte activation and the production of autoantibodies directed against
multiple targets,one of which may be platelets.
(1)In dogs with SLE,there is evidence, though rarely documented,of increased
PSAIg. Primary IMT and SLE may be different disorders within a
spectrum of autoimmune diseases.
(2)
Evans' syndrome
(a)This was first described in people as idiopathic immune hemolytic
term is now used to refer to concurrent IMT and IMHA.
(b)In at least some human patients, the antibodies mediating the two
cytopenias are distinct.2Information is unavailable for animals.
(c)IMHA with concurrent presumed IMT occurs in dogs (first reported in
196512i).An immune pathogenesis has been implicated in some cases by
indirect assays for platelet-reactive or megakaryocyte-reactive antibodies
in patient plasma.96
(d)Dogs with IMHA are often prothrombotic, so thrombocytopenia in
some of them may refect platelet consumption instead of, or in
3. Nonimmunologic causes of decreased platelet survival
a.Blood loss, acute and severe
(1)When bleeding accompanies severe thrombocytopenia, hemorrhage is
probably secondary to the thrombocytopenia rather than severe thrombocy
topenia being caused by the bleeding.However,platelet loss and consump
tion at sites of hemorrhage may cause or contribute to thrombocytopenia.
(2)
In dogs,experimental acute, severe blood loss via phlebotomy caused mild
tomoderate thrombocytopenia （up to50 % reduction in [platelet]）.123-125
(3)Thrombocytopenia is sometimes present in bleeding dogs that have antico-
agulant rodenticide toxicosis.126Platelets are probably consumed at an
accelerated rate by use at sites of hemorrhage throughout the body. With
extensive hemorrhage, platelet loss contributes to thrombocytopenia, and
thrombocytopenia may become more severe during routine treatment with
fuids, transfusions, and vitamin K
b.Platelet activation with accelerated consumption or use: Any disorder associated
with increased platelet activation may accelerate plarelet consumption and lead to
thrombocytopenia if platelet production does not compensate.
(1)Localized (controlled) intravascular coagulation (e.g., with hemangiosar-
coma,thrombosis,orhemorrhage)may be associatedwith platelet consump
tion at the site(s) where coagulation occurs.
4/PLATELETS
241
(a)Activation of the coagulation cascade leads to the generation of throm
bin (factor Ila), a potent platelet activator.
(b)Thrombin activates platelets, and activated platelets release platelet-
activating substances that recruit and consume more platelets. Throm
(2)DIC: Widespread, uncontrolled activation of the coagulation cascade may
produce thrombocytopenia in the same way as localized coagulation, but the
likelihood of thrombocytopenia is greater. DIC may be caused by envenom
ation,hpatic isase,inctions,massiverosisanceatitisnoplasia
overheating,or septicemia
(3)Drugs and foreign materials: Some drugs cause or contribute to thrombocy
topenia by directly activating platelets.
(a)Protamine sulfate,used to reverse the effects of heparin,can induce
severe thrombocytopenia in heparinized and nonheparinized dogs,
(b）Foreign materials used within the vascular system （e.g.,tubing and
catheters) are tested and chosen to minimize platelet activation, but
accelerated consumption may occur.
(4)Envenomation (without DIC): The numerous types of venoms from
numerous animal species differ in their effects. Venom from some snakes
may contain platelet-activating factors that induce thrombocytopenia in the
absence of DiC.129 Other venoms induce DIC.130
(5)Vasculitis or endocarditis: Infammation of blood vessels or endocardium can
alter endothelial cells or lead to exposure of subendothelium,eachofwhich
canlead to a prothrombotic state and platelet adhesionaggregation,and
secretion.Vasculitis asinfectiousmmune-mediated,andchmical causes.
(a)Infectious causes of vasculitis include Rocky Mountain spotted fever,
canine herpesvirus infection, dirofilariasis,angiostrongylosis,infectious
canine hepatitis, and equine viral arteritis.
(b)Thrombocytopenia is commonly associated with bacterial endocarditis
and may have a multifactorial pathogenesis.
(c)Endothelial cel damage and necrosis lead to thrombocytopenia without
DIC in dogs with hemolytic uremic syndrome (e.g., cutaneous and renal
glomerular vasculopathy of greyhounds associated with ingestion of Shiga
is important to recognize that their platelet concentrations in health are
often lower than commonly reported canine reference intervals.
E.Hemodilution:Massive dilution of blood with platelet-poor fuids (e.g,crystalloids
colloids,plasma, or packed erythrocytes)may cause mild to moderate decreases in
blood[platelet].136-138
F.Idiopathic or multifactorial mechanisms
1.Idiopathic thrombocytopenia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels (inherited giant
plateletdisordernCavalierKing Charles spaniels3
a.A congenital disorder reported to have an autosomal recesive inheritance
patternl41
b.The disorder is common in the breed. It is associated with large platelets
(macrothrombocytes),particularly when platelet concentrations are<100,00o/μL
It may be referred to as a macrothrombocytopenia.
242
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(1)Therelationshipbetween thrombocytopenia and macrothrombocytosis is
unclear because investigatorshave used varied definitions of thrombocytope-
nia and macrothrombocytosis.
(2)These definitions also cloud the differentiation of affected from unaffected
dogs.
c.Platelet concentrations of 50-100x 10²/μL are common, and they may be
<25,0oo/uL in some dogs. However, thrombocrit may not be decreased when
platelet volumes are increased in thrombocytopenic dogs.
d.Affected dogs have no clinical bleeding problem
e.This breed also has a high incidence of mitral valve disease,but there is no clear
relationship berween the conditions.
fRecognition of this condition is important to prevent unnecessary therapy and to
employ appropriate methods for accurate platelet concentrations.
(1)Microscopic hemocytometer counts or estimates from blood smears are
useful.
(2)Automated methods,particularly impedance methods,are unreliable
when a substantial number of platelets are larger than the analyzer's
upper threshold (which varies with the analyzer).Although the QBC
VetAutoread may provide falsely increased platelet concentrations when
platelets are large, the reported values will reflect the thrombocrit and
functional platelet mass.
2.Infections
a.Thrombocytopenia is commonly associated with endotoxemia42.143and
infections.38.39,41,144.145
(1)Etiologic agents frequently associated with thrombocytopenia include certain
bacteria(Ehrlichia spp.and Anaplasma spp.),fungi(e.g.,Histoplasma spp.).
viruses (e.g,equine infectious anemia virus),and protozoa (e.g.,Leishmania
spp.,Babesia spp.,andTheileria spp.)
(2)Thrombocytopenia occurs somewhat less frequently, but not unexpectedly,
with other organisms (e.g., Leptospira spp. and feline immunodeficiency
virus).146.,147
b.Infectious thrombocytopenias may be caused by various combinations of
suppressed platelet production (e.g.,direct infection,mmune suppression,or
local effects of inflammation within the bone marrow), altered plateler distribu-
tion, increased platelet consumption, and immune-mediated or nonimmune
platelet destruction.
C.Anaplasma platys (formerly Ehrlichia platys) organisms are rickettsial bacteria that
infect platelets and cause canine infectious cyclic thrombocytopenia.
(1)Infection may be subclinical or have clinical manifestations.4
(2)Parasitemias may be marked but are often mild, so organisms in blood films
may be difficult to identify definitively.
3.Neoplasms51
a. Many types of neoplasia are associated with thrombocytopenia, including
carcinomas,sarcomas,lmphomasandleukemias.In onestudy,approximately
10 % of dogs with neoplasia were thrombocytopenic, though sometimes because
of concurrent infections or therapy.152
4/PLATELETS
243
b.Thrombocytopenia may result from many mechanisms, alone or combined. In
specific cases, causes are usually speculative.Potential mechanisms include the
following:
(1)Decreased production
with multiple myeloma, acute leukemia, or chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Other cytopenias are sometimes present.
(b)Myelodysplasia
(c)Estrogen secretion by the neoplasm
(d)Chemotherapy
(2)Decreased platelet survival
(a)DIC occurs in some cancer patients and may contribute to throm-
decreased platelet survival (kinetic studies) had hyperfibrinogenemia,
DIC
(b)Vasculitis or thrombosis within a neoplasm (e.g,hemangiosarcoma,a
malignancy of endothelial cells) may accelerate plateler consumption.
(c)Secondary IMT may also occur and has been incriminated in dogs with
certain types of neoplasia (e.g.,lymphoma) by use of indirect platelet
(d)Other contributors may include hemorrhage secondary to a neoplasm,
sepsis secondary to immunosuppression, and destruction (phagocytosis)
by neoplastic macrophages (e.g., malignant histiocytic neoplasia).
(3）Abnormal platelet distribution:Splenomegaly or hepatomegaly induced by
neoplastic infiltration (e.g.,hemangiosarcoma) or secondary organ conges-
tionmay be associatedwith platelet sequestration.
4.Drugs: As already noted (Thrombocytopenia, sects. I.C.4, D.2.c, and D.3.b), the
thrombocytopenia associated with drugs may be caused by myelosuppression,
accelerated platelet destruction (immune or nonimmune), or multiple mechanisms.
In somecases,the pathogenesisof drug-induced thrombocytopenia isnot clear.s6
5.Hypophosphatemia caused by hyperalimentation in starved dogs decreased platelet
a.Thrombocytopenia was associated with decreased platelet ATP concentrations,
probably because of an associated decrease in glycolysis.The specific mechanism
of accelerated platelet clearance was not determined.
b. Cats receiving total parenteral nutrition also developed thrombocytopenia, but
6.Anaphylaxis (type I hypersensitivity)
a.This is an immune-mediated reaction, but the mechanism of thrombocytopenia
b.Anaphylactic thrombocytopenia may be caused by infammatory mediators, DIC,
or immune-complex interactions with platelets.Membrane receptors forimmu
noglobulin E (IgE) exist on a subpopulation of human platelets and mediate
infammatory plateletreactionsinsome species.59
244
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
THROMBOCYTOSIS
I.
General concepts
A.Thrombocytosis is a [platelet] greater than a valid upper reference limit.
B.It may result from redistribution or increased production of platelets. Increased
production may be associared with hemic neoplasia involving megakaryocytes, or it may
oocur as a secondary reaction to other conditions.Familial thrombocytoses including
those caused by mutations of the Tpo receptor occur in people but have not been
reported in animals.
C.Appropriate reference intervals forplatelet]may be shifted upward for individuals at
high altitudes.160
D.Serum [K+] may become increased in vitro (a type of pseudo-byperkalemia) by the
increased amount of platelet Kreleased during clotting.
II.
Diseases and conditions (Table 4.3)
A.Hemic neoplasia (clonal thrombocytosis)
1.Primary (essential) thrombocythemia: a rare chronic myeloproliferative disease that
a.Platelet concentrations have been markedly increased (1000-5000×10²/μL)
b.Large,pleomorphic,or hypogranular platelets may be present and similar to
those seen with some megakaryocytic leukemias (see Plate 8G).
c.Increased numbers of mature megakaryocytes are in the bone marrow, and
cytes may have atypical features.
d.7
Though not proven in dogs andcats, the human condition involves a clonal
exclusion of other causes ofpersistent thrombocytosis
Table 4.3.Diseases and conditions that cause thrombocytosis
Hemic neoplasia (clonal thrombocytosis)
Primary (essential) thrombocythemia and other chronic myeloproliferative diseases
Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
Reactive thrombocytosis (secondary,nonclonal)
Redistribution
Exercise
Epinephrine
Increased production
*Infammation: infection,immune mediated,surgery,trauma
Nonhemicneoplasia
*Iron deficiency
Vinca alkaloids (vincristine,vinblastine)
*Recovery from thrombocytopenia(rebound):withdrawal ofmyelosuppression,recovery
from IMT
Splenectomy (post)
Blood loss
*A relatively common disease or condition
4/PLATELETS
245
e.Data are lacking regarding the prevalence of thrombotic or hemorrhagic tenden-
cies in animals with clonal thrombocytosis.
2.Other chronic myeloproliferative diseases: polycythemia vera, primary erythrocytosis,
and chronic myeloid leukemia
3.Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (M7 subrype of acute myeloid leukemia) has been
reported rarely in dogs and cats (see Plate 8G-I).
a.In contrast to essential thrombocythemia,≥30% of nucleated cells in the
marrow are megakaryoblasts, marrow fbrosis may be present, and neoplastic
b.Thrombocytosis or thrombocytopenia may be present.
4.Myelodysplastic syndrome is sometimes associated with thrombocytosis.
B.Reactive thrombocytosis (secondary,nonclonal): Reactive thrombocytosis occurs
secondary to other conditions and does not involve neoplasia of themegakaryocyte cell
line.In most cases, thrombocytosis is mild to moderate and poses no threat to the
patient. It is a nonspecific indicator of certain underlying abnormalities.
1.Redistribution: Mild and transient physiologic thrombocytosis,even when corrected
forhemoconcentration,mayoccurnsome pecies（e.g,dog,cats,andpeople）
appearstoresulr primarilyfromrelease of platelets from the spleen,but exercise may
induce thrombocytosis in asplenic patients.17 There is evidence for platelet redistri-
2.Increased production
a.Infammation: Infammatory cytokines, including IL-6, stimulare Tpo production
and,therefore,increased thrombopoiesis in a wide variery ofinfectious and
noninfectious infammatory conditions, including surgical and nonsurgical
trauma in people.175.176 Thrombocytosis is frequently associated with inflamma-
b.Nonhemic malignant neoplasia: Thrombocytosis may result from accompanying
infammation or from production of thrombopoietic cytokines (eg, IL-6) by
neoplastic cells.179-181
c.Iron deficiency: Thrombocytosis is a common but inconsistent finding in canine
and human patientswithiron defciency.The specific cause isnot known,but
blood concentrations of measured thrombopoietic cytokines (e.g.,Tpo and IL-6)
have not been increased in human patients with iron deficiency and thrombocy
tosis.1s2 Cross-reactivity of Epo with Tpo receptors is also apparently not the
cause.183
d.Vinca alkaloids: Vincristine and vinblastine stimulate thrombopoiesis that can
lead to thrombocytosis without increased MPV.is4.iss In patients with IMT, these
drugs may lead to increased platelet concentrations by other mechanisms,
including inhibition of the MPS and therefore decreased platelet destruction.
e.Recovery from thrombocytopenia (rebound thrombocytosis):Thrombocytopenia
may stimulate enough thrombopoiesis that production exceeds consumption/
destruction and blood concentrations transiently overshoot the upper reference
limit during recovery.This can occur after withdrawal of myelosuppression,with
recovery from IMT,or after blood loss.123.18-188
f.Postsplenectomy: Splenectomy causes thrombocytosis, sometimes marked,
associated withincreased thrombopoiesis and increased blood concentrations
ofTpo.-19 Thrombocytosis is transient butmay persist forweeks.Other
246
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
mechanisms that may contribute to the thrombocytosis include decreasedplatelet
destruction or decreased sequestration.192
g.Blood loss, especially chronic,has been associated with thrombocytosis in several
speciesburnfcinynmmationoundomboyosisrlas
may cause or contribute to thrombocytosis in many of these cases.Thrombocyto-
sis associated with blood loss may require the presence of a spleen; it occurred
with repeated phlebotomy (chronic blood loss) in nonsplenectomized rabbits that
were supplemented with iron, but did not occur in iron-supplemented, splenec
tomizedrabbits.193
h.Hypercortisolemia:Hyperadrenocorticism and exogenous glucocorticoids have
been associated with thrombocytosis in dogs,7but a cause-and-effect relation-
ship is not clear. Thrombocytosis may relate to underlying or concurrent
conditions.Prednisone administration to healthy dogs resulted in no increase84
or a questionable increase9 in platelet concentrations.
PLATELETVOLUME
Interpretation of MPV values is limited by inaccuracies and inconsistencies of routine MPV
measurement and limited knowledge of factors infuencing platelet size26195 especially in
domestic species.
A.Values shouldbe interpretedrelative toreference intervalsgenerated from samples
handled in the same manner as the patient samples.
B.Anticoagulant, storage time, storage temperarure, and analyzer all affect the resuls.
II.
Among individualspopulations,and speciesplatelet volume is generally inverselyrelated
to the[platelet],8andMPVvalues tend to be greater with thrombocytopenia and lower
A.IncreasedMPV
1.This usually suggests accelerated thrombopoiesis causedby anincreased stimulus for
platelet production.26
a.In people,MPV tends to be greater in patients with thrombocytopenia caused by
shortened platelet survival (e.g.,IMT) than with thrombocytopenia caused by
bone marrow disease (e.g., aplastic anemia). A sufhciently increased MPV may
have useful negative predictive value for excluding bone marrow disease.9s
b.Accelerated thrombopoiesis is usually associatedwith increased megakaryopoiesis.
c.Although there are reports to suggest postproduction size modification of
production and not dramatically alteredin thecirculation.2619Therefore,
increased MPV may reflect accelerated thrombopoiesis occurring any time within
510 d (platelet life span in health) before testing. Increased MPV may precede
2.Increased production of abnormal platelets in essential thrombocythemia and other
clonal disorders may lead to an increased MPV or an unexpectedly high MPV for
the degree of thrombocytosis.25.26
3.Abnormally large platelets are produced in certain congenital platelet disorders, so
MPVmay be increased.Large platelets were reported in the first dogs described with
otterhound thrombopathia2oand they are present inmany CavalierKing Charles
spaniels (see Plate 8C) 139,140,201.202
4/PLATELETS
247
4.MPV may increase with physiologic thrombocytosis,possibly because of mobiliza
tion of thesplenicplatelet pool,whichisthought to be overrepresented bylarge
platelets in some species.26
5.Increased MPV is associated with hyperthyroxinemia in people andmice.
6.Acute infection with theKawakami-Theilen strain of feline leukemia virus induced
production of macrothrombocytes.3 This was associated with decrements in
[platelet] bur no signifcant change in platelet mass.
B.Decreased MPV
1.Dogs with IMT may have decreased MPV values more often than dogs with
thrombocytopenia for other reasons,but values may also be increased or WRI.20
Increased numbers of platelet microparticles are detected by fow cytometry in blood
of dogs with IMT.
2.With severe thrombocytopenia (<5x 10²/μuL),MPV may be affected by nonplatelet
debris in the sample or instrument if special precautions are not taken.This debris is
insignificant except at very low platelet concentrations when it can affect values from
light scatter or impedance methods.
3.Bone marrow failure and chemotherapeutic myelosuppression have been associated
d
with primarybone marrow disease,and increased in two ofnine.Thelarter two
dogs did not have megakaryocytic hypoplasia.204
III.
An increased PDwindicates anincreased population of large plateletsanincreased
population of small plarelets, or both.
CouTseSmai
IV.
Platelet volume is also subjectively assessed by microscopic inspection of blood flms (see
Microscopic Features of Platelets, sect. II.B). Populations of large platelets can be detected
even when automated analyzers miss them.Interpretation is similar to that for increased
MPV.
RETICULATEDPLATELETS
Reticulated platelets:young platelets containing increased RNA;analogous to
1.
reticulocytes
A.Assessment is primarily a research tool at this time,but testing may be available in
specialized laboratories.
B.Reticulated platelet percentage
1.Percentage of platelets that have increased RNA
2.Unit:%
C. Reticulated [platelet]
1.Concentration of reticulated platelets in blood calculated as the product of[platelet]
and platelet reticulocyte percentage (in decimal form)
2.Units:(#×10²/uL)×10°μL/L=#×10/L（SIunit)
II.
Method
A.Platelets are typically incubated with thiazole orange,which binds to platelet RNA and
granule nucleotides and emits a fuorescence that is detected byfow cytometry.The
percentage of plateletswithincreased fluorescenceis determined,andareticulated
[plarelet] can be calculated.
248
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.An increase in fuorescence may relate to an increase in platelet size or to an increase in
RNA concentration within the platelets, depending on how the threshold limit for
increased fuorescence is defined and the method used (e.g., thiazole orange concentra
interpretation of reported findings.
C.With some methods,reticulared platelet percentages increase with sample fixation and
with sample storage for 18h at either 4°C or 21°℃.
III.
Interpretation
A.In theory,increases in reticulated platelets suggest increased thrombopoiesis and may
thereforehelp with the following:
1.Differentiating consumptive or destructive thrombocytopenias from at least some
production-failure thrombocytopenias
2.Differentiating reactive thrombocytosis from primary thrombocythemia
3.Identifying when a patient is recovering from bone marrow suppression (e.g., after
chemotherapy)
B.The few studies reported to date generally support the aforementioned theory.
1.Increased reticulated platelet percentageshave been present,when evaluated,n
most dogs and horses with thrombocytopenias caused by decreased platelet
survival.8.111,208
2.Erythropoietin administration to dogs was associated with increased numbers of
reticulated plateletsand platelet hyperreactivity.209
3.In one study, four dogs with decreased [platelet] after carboplatin-induced myelo-
suppression didnot have increased reticulated platelet percentages.However,the
magnitude of the decrement in [platelet] was not reported.
4.In people,reticulated platelet percentages are sometimes increased withmarrow
aplasia,but minimally compared to increases associated with thrombocytopenic
disorders caused by platelet destruction or consumption.1 Human patients recover-
ing from myelosuppressive chemotherapy also had increases in reticulated
platelets.2l1
5.Non-thrombocytopenic dogs with a variery of illnesses had reticulated platelet
percentages and concentrations similar to those in healthy dogs.This suggests that
abnormalreticulated plateletresultsmay have some specificity for platelet disorders.
However, samples with increased reticulated platelets were not reported in this study
to confirm that an increase in reticulated platelets could be detected.
C.Reticulated platelet values have usually been reported and interpreted as percentages
rather than as concentrations.
1. Analogous to interpretation of immature erythrocytes (reticulocytes), one must
consider the possibiliythatreticulated platelet percentage increasesmayberelative
and not truly indicative of increased platelet production.
2.However, even with accelerated thrombopoiesis, reticulated platelet percentages may
be increased in severe thrombocytopenias without increases in reticulated platelet
concentrations because there may simply be too few platelets for even a high
reticulated platelet percentage to yield an increased reticulated[platelet].20
a.Reticulated platelet concentrationsmay also be suppressed by the markedly
reduced platelet life spans in severe thrombocytopenias.The relatively few
plateletsmust be consumed at an acceleratedrate to maintainnormalvascular
integrity.12212
4/PLATELETS
249
b.Also,the pathologic process consuming or destroying platelets may target young
and old platelets alike.
D.The clinicalutility of reticulatedplatelet assessment in domestic mammals is unclear
and awaits further study in a variety of disorders.
TESTSFORIMMUNE-MEDIATEDTHROMBOCYTOPENIA(IMT)
I.
A variety of specialized assays have been developed to aid in the diagnosis of canine
IMT, but the diagnosis remains primarily one of exclusion. Even in human medicine,
where assays have been extensively evaluated, testing for antiplareler antibodies is not
considered a necessary part of the recommended diagnostic procedure for suspecred
primary IMT.213
II.
Sample conditions（e.g,anticoagulant, storage time,and storage temperature)may affet
results. For example, a few hours exposure of citrated blood samples to room temperature
or refrigeration led to variable but sometimes marked increases in PSAlg in canine
therelative contributionofanticoagulant,storage temperature,andotherfactorsto hese
increases is not known.
III.
Platelet assays
A.Direct platelet assays that test for antibodies on the surface of a patient's platelets
PSAIg)are recommended
1.Most current assays are fow cytometric; PSAIg is detected by fuorescence-tagged,
species-specific,anti-immunoglobulin antibodies.9403.15.106.1.26-218
2.Positive results generated from properly processed samples by using reliable assays
support antibody-mediated platelet destruction but do not differentiate primary
IMT from secondary IMT.
3.Negative results suggest the need to search for a nonimmune pathogenesis for the
thrombocytopenia.
B.Indirect assays resting for antibodies in a patient's plasma or serum that can bind to
normal” platelets from healthy animals have been used but are not recommended.
They have less diagnostic sensitivity and specificity for IMT than direct assays.Indirect
assays do not differentiate autoantibodies from immune complexes,immunoglobulin
aggregates that can form in frozen sera, or acquired and naturally occurring alloanti
bodies to platelet antigens.
IV.
Direct megakaryocyte immunofluorescence assays have been used to detect the presence of
megakaryocyte-associated immunoglobulins on a patient's megakaryocytes, usually on
A.Testingrequires ood bonemarrow aspirates with amplemegakaryocytes,so samples are
not always adequate.
B.If antibodies directed against platelets also bind shared epitopes on megakaryocytes,
results may be positive.20
C.False-positive results may occur if megakaryocytes are damaged and cytoplasmic
immunoglobulin rather than surface immunoglobulin is detected.
D.The cumulativereported diagnostic sensitivity for clinical diagnoses of canineIMT is
about 50 %,which is too low to recommend.96
250
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Colrsesmal
References
1. Alexander WS. 1999. Thrombopoietin. Growth Factors 17:1324.
2.Gainsford T, Nandurkar H, Metcalf D, Robb L, Begley CG,Alexander WS. 2000. The residual megakaryocyte and
platelet productionin Mpdecintmiceisnot dependent on th actions ofinterleukin-6,interleukin-1l,or
leukemia inhibitory factor. Blood 95:528-534.
3. Zucker-Franklin D, Philipp CS. 2000. Platelet production in the pulmonary capillary bed: New ultrastructural
evidence for an old concept. Am J Pathol 157:69-74.
4. Kaushansky K. 2005. The molecular mechanisms that control thrombopoiesis. J Clin Invest 115:3339-3347.
in the rat. Br J Haematol 105:478485
6. Zent CS, Raajczak J, Ratajczak MZ, Anastasi J,Hofman PC, Gewirz AM. 1999.Relationship beween mega-
purpura. Br J Haematol 105:452-458.
7.Folman CC, Linthorst GE, van Mourik J, van Willigen G, de Jonge E, Levi M, de Haas M, dem Borne AEGK.
2000. Platelets release thrombopoietin (Tpo) upon activation: Another regulatory loop in thrombocytopoiesis?
ThrombHacmost 83:923-930.
8. Russell KE, Perkins PC, Grindem CB, Walker KM, Sellon DC. 1997. Flow cytometric method for deteting
9.Smith R III, Thomas JS. 2002.Quantitation of reticulated platelets in healthy dogs and in nonthrombocytopenic
dogs with clinical disease. Vet Clin Pathol 31:26-32
10.Dale GL,Friese P,Hynes LA,Burstein SA.1995.Demonstration that thiazole-orange-positive platelets in the dog
are less than 24 hours old. Blood 85:1822-1825.
11.Stenberg PE, Hill RJ. 1999. Plareles and megakaryocytes. In: Lee GR, Foerster J, Lulens J, Wintrobe MM, eds.
Wntrobr' Climical Hematology, 10th edition, 615-660.Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Willkins
12. Hanson SR, Slichter S]. 1985. Platelet kinetics in patients with bone marrow hypoplasia: Evidence for a fixed
platelet requirement. Blood 66:1105-1109
13. Dale GL, Wolf RF, Hynes LA, Friese P, Burstein SA. 1996. Quantitation of platelet life span in splenectomized
dogs.Exp Hemarol 24:518-523
14. Zoghbi SS, Thakur ML, Sostman HD, Greenspan RH, Gottschalk A. 1988. Indium-111oxinate labeled swine
platelets and their survival in vivo. Lab Anim Sci 38:444447.
biotinylation and fow cytometry. Artif Organs 22:799803.
16.Aster RH. 1966. Pooling of platelets in the spleen: Role in the pathogenesis of hypersplenic thrombocytopenia
J Clin Invest 45:645-657.
17.Freedman ML,Karpatkin S. 1975.Heterogeneity of rabbit platelets.V. Preferential splenic sequestration of
megathrombocytes.Br J Haematol 31:255262.
18. Kuter Dj. 1996. The physiology of platelet production. Stem Cells 14(Suppl 1):88-101.
19.Tvedten H, Grabski S, Frame L. 1988. Estimating platelets and leukocytes on canine blood smears. Vet Clin Pathol
17:4-6.
20. Norman EJ, Barron RC, Nash AS, Clampitt RB. 2001. Evaluation of a citrate-based anticoagulant with platelet
inhibitory activity for feline blood cell counts.Vet Clin Pathol 30:124-132.
21.Tietz NW. 1995. Cliwical Guide to Laboratory Tests, 3rd edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders
22. Tvedten H, Kociba G. 1999. Hemostatic abnormalities. In: Willard MD, Tvedten H, Turnwald GH, eds. Smalf
Animal ClinicalDiagmesis by Laboratory Methods,3rd edition,75-89.Philadelphia:WB Saunders
23.Kopli SL, Scott MA, Cohn LA. 2001. Effects of platelet clumping on platelet concentrations measured by use of
impedance or buffy coat analysis in dogs. J Am Ver Med Assoc 219:1552-1556
24. Zelmanovic D, Hetherington EJ. 1998. Automated analysis of feline platelets in whole blood, including plateler
count, mean platelet volume, and activation state. Vet Clin Pathol 27:2-9.
25. Jackson SR, Carter JM. 1993. Platelet volume: Laboratory measurement and clinical application. Blood Rev
7:104-113.
26. Threatte GA. 1993. Usefulnes of the mean platelet volume. Clin Lab Med 13:937-950.
27. Reardon DM, Hutchinson D, Preston FE, Trowbridge EA. 1985. The routine measurement of platelet volume:
A comparison of aperture-impedance and flow cytometric systems. Clin Lab Haematol 7:251257.
28. Ross DW, Bentley SA. 1986. Evaluation of an automated hematology system (Technicon H-1).Arch Pathol Lab
Med 110:803-808.
4/PLATELETS
251
29. Macey MG, Carty E, Webb L, Chapman ES, Zelmanovic D, Okrongly D, Rampton DS, Newland AC. 1999. Use
w is ooq oI  o uo uoe d mseu o uoos ed ueu go
38:250-255
30. Handagama P, Feldman B, Kono C, Farver T. 1986. Mean platelet volume artifacts: The effect of anticoagulants and
temperature on canine platelets. Vet Clin Pathol 15:13-17.
31. Macey M, Azam U, MeCarthy D, Webb L, Chapman ES, Okrongly D, Zelmanovic D, Newland A. 2002.
Evaluation of the anticoagulants EDTA and citrate, theophylline, adenosine, and dipyridamole (CTAD) for assessing
platelet activation on the ADVIA 120 hematology system. Clin Chem 48:89 1-899.
32. Hinchlif KW, Kodiba GJ, Miten LA. 1993. Diagnosis of EDTA-dependent pseudothrombocytopenia in a horse.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1715-1716.
33. Norman EJ, Barron RC, Nash AS, Clampirt RB. 2001. Prevalence of low automated platelet counts in cats:
Comparison with prevalence of thrombocytopenia based on blood smear estirnation. Vet Clin Pathol 30: 137
140.
34. Sullivan PS, Evans HL, MeDonald TP. 1994. Platelet concentration and hemoglobin function in greyhounds. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 205:838-841.
35. Clark P, Parry BW. 1997. Some haematological values of Irish wolfhounds in Australia. Aust Vet J 75:523-524.
36. Couto CG, Lara A, lazbik MC, Brooks MB. 2006. Evaluation of platelet aggregation using a point-of-care
instrument in retired racing Greyhounds.J Vet Intern Med 20:365-370.
37.Gookin JL, Bunch SE,Rush LJ, Grindem CB. 1998.Evaluation of microcytosis in 18 Shibas. J Am Vet Med Asoc
212:1258-1259.
38. Jordan HL, Grindem CB, Breitschwerdt EB. 1993. Thrombocytopenia in cats: A retrospective study of 41 cases.
J VetInternMed 7:261-265.
39. Sellon DC, Levine J, Millikin E, Palmer K, Grindem C, Covington P. 1996. Thrombocytopenia in horses 35 cases
(1989-1994). J Vet Intern Med 10:127-132.
40. Russell KE, Grindem CB. 2000. Secondary thrombocytopenia. In: Feldman BF, Zinld JG, Jain NC, eds. Sobam'
Veterimay Hematology, 5th edition, 487-495. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &c Willkins.
41. Grindem CB, Breitschwerdt EB, Corbett WT, Jans HE. 1991. Epidemiologic survey of thrombocytopenia in dogs:
A report on 987 cases.Ver Clin Pathol 20:38-43.
42.Schrezenmeier H, Muller H, Gunsilius E, Heimpel H, Seifried E. 1995. Anticoagulant-induced pseudothrombocy
topenia and pseudoleucocytosis. Thromb Haemost 73:506513.
HW, ed. Multi-species Hematology Atlas Technicon H-1E System, 134135. Tarrytown, NY: Miles.
44. Warkentin TE, Trimble MS, Kelton JG. 1995. Thrombocytopenia due to platelet destruction and hypersplenism.
In:Hoffran R,Benz EJ Jr,Shattil SJ,Furie B, Cohen HJ, Silberstein LE,eds.HetlogyBasic Prineiples ad
Practice,2nd edition,1889-1909.NewYork:Churchill Livingstone
45.Pina-Cabral JM, Ribeiro-da-Silva A, Almeida-Dias A. 1985. Platelet sequestration during hypothermia in dogs
treated with sulphinpyrazone and ticlopidine: Reversibility accelerated after intra-abdominal rewarming. Thromb
Haemost54:838-841
46.Gutmann FD,Murthy VS,Wojciechowski MT, Wurm RM,Edzards RA.1987. Transient pulmonary platelet
sequestration during endotoxemia in dogs. Circ Shock 2l:185-195.
47. Sostman HD, Zoghbi SS, Smith GJ, Carbo P, Neumann RD, Gottschalk A, Greenspan RH. 1983. Platelet kinetics
and biodistribution in canine endotoxemia Invest Radiol 18:425-435
48. Murtaugh RJ, Jacobs RM. 1985. Suspected immune-mediated megakaryocytic hypoplasia or aplasia in a dog. J Am
VetMed Assoc186:1313-1315.
49. Gaschen FP, Smith Meyer B, Harvey JW. 1992. Amegalkaryocytic thrormbocytopenia and immune-mediated
haemolytic anemia in a cat. Comp Haematol Int 2: 175-178.
5 0. Lachowicz JL, Post GS, Moroff SD, Mooney SC. 2004. Acquired amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia: Four cases
and a literature review. J Small Anim Pract 45:507-514.
5 1. Gewirtz AM, Sacchetti MK, Bien R, Barry WE. 1986. Cell-mediated suppression of megakaryocytopoiesis in
acquired amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenic purpura. Blood 68:619-626.
52 Hofman R, Zaknoen S, Yang HH, Bruno E, LoBuglio AF, Arrowsmith JB, Prchal JT. 1985. An antibody cytotoxic
to megakaryocyte progenitor cells in a patient with immune thrombocytopenic purpura. N Engl J Med
312:1170-1174.
53. Hoffman R, Briddell RA, van Besien K, Srour EF, Guscar T, Hudson NW, Ganser A. 1989. Acquired cyclic
amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia associated with an imm unoglobulin blocking the action of granulocyte
macrophage colonystimulating factor. N Engl J Med 321:97102.
252
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
54.Ballem PJ, Segal GM,Stratton JR,Gernsheimer T,Adamson JW, Slichter SJ. 1987.Mechanisms of thrombocytope-
nia in chronic autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura: Evidence of both impaired platelet production and
increased platelet clearance. J Clin Invest 80:3340.
81:94-99
56. Joshi BC, Jain NC. 1977. Experimental immunologic thrombocytopenia in dogs: A study of thrombocytopenia and
megakaryocytopolesis. Res Vet Sci 22:11-17.
57. Kisseberth NC, MacEwen EG. 2001. Complications of cancer and its treatment. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG,
eds. SmallAmimal Clinical Oncology, 3rd edition, 198232. Philadelphia WB Saunders.
58. Anderson KC. 2001. Hematologic cormplications and blood bank support. In: Holland JF, Bast RC Jr, Morton DL,
Frei EI, Kufe DW,Weichselbaum RR,eds.Cancer Medicin,4th edition,31553177. Baltimore: Williams &
Williams.
59. Aranda E, Pizarro M, Pereira J, Mezzano D. 1994. Accumulation of 5-hydroxytryptamine by aging platelets: Studies
in a model of suppressed thrombopoiesis in dogs. Thromb Haemost 71:488492.
60. Sherding RG, Wilson GP III, Kociba GJ. 1981. Bone marrow hypoplasia in eight dogs with Sertoli cell rumor.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 178:497-501.
61. MeCandish LA, Munro CD, Breeze RG, Nash AS. 1979. Hormone-producing ovarian tumours in the dog. Vet Rec
105:9-11
62. Suess RP, Barr SC, Sacre BJ, French TW. 1992. Bone marrow hypoplasia in a feminized dog with an interstitial cell
tumor. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1346-1348.
cells exposed to estrogen.Am J Vet Res 54:1366-1373.
64. Dalton RG. 1964. The effects of batyl alcohol on the haematology of cattle poisoned with bracken. Vet Rec
76:411-416.
65.Parent-Massin D.2004.Haematotoxicity of trichothecenes.Toxicol Lett 153:7581.
66. Stokol T, Randolph JF, Nachbar S, Rodi C, Barr SC. 1997. Development of bone marrow toxicosis after albendazole
administration in a dog and cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1753-1756
67.Watson ADJ, Wilson JT, Turner DM, Culvenor JA. 1980. Phenylbutazone-induced blood dyscrasias suspected in
three dogs. Vet Rec 107:239-241.
68. Schalm OW. 1979. Phenylbutazone toxicity in two dogs. Canine Pract 6:4751.
69. Weiss DJ, Klausner JS. 1990. Drug-asociated aplastic anemia in dogs: Eight cases (19841988). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 196:472475.
70. McEwan NA. 1992. Presumptive trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole associated thrombocytopenia and anaemia in a
dog. J Small Anim Pract 33:27-29.
71.Weiss DJ, Adams LG. 1987. Aplastic anemia associated with trimethoprim-sulfadiazine and fenbendazole adminis
tration in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:1119-1120
72. Fox LE, Ford S, Allman AR, Homer BL, Harvey JW. 1993. Aplastic anemia associated with prolonged high-dose
trimethoprim-sulfadiazine administration in two dogs. Vet Clin Pathol 22:89-92.
73. Rottman JB, English RV, Breitschwerdt EB, Duncan DE. 1991. Bone marrow hypoplasia in a cat treated with
griseofulvin.J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:429-431.
74. Kunkle GA, Meyer DJ. 1987. Toxicity of high doses of griseofulvin in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:322-323.
75.Wal PH, Bell TG, Steficek BA, Kaiser L, Maes RK, Baker JC. 1999. Experimental model of type II bovine viral
diarrhea virus-induced thrombocytopenia in neonatal calves. J Vet Diagn Invest 1l:505-514.
76. Axthelm MK, Krakowka S. 1987. Canine distemper virus-induced thrombocytopenia. Am J Vet Res 48:1269-1275
77.Crawford TB, Wardrop KJ, Tornquist SJ, Reilich E, Meyers KM,MeGuire TC. 1996.A primary production dehcit
in the thrombocytopenia of equine infectious anermia. J Virol 70:7842-7850.
78. Tornquist SJ, Oaks JL, Crawford TB. 1997. Elevation of cytokines associated with the thrombocytopenia of equine
infectious anemia. J Gen Virol 78:2541-2548.
79. Macartmey L, MeCandlish LA, Thompson H, Cornwell HJ. 1984. Canine parvovirus enteritis 1: Clinical,
haematological and pathological features of experimental infection. Vet Rec 115:201210.
80. Macartmey L, MeCandish IA, Thompson H, Cornwell HJ. 1984. Canine parvovirus enteritis 2: Pathogenesis. Vet
Rec 115:453-460.
81. Abrams-Ogg AC, Kruth SA, Carter RF, Valli VE, Kamel-Reid S, Dube ID. 1993. Preparation and transfusion of
canine platelet concentrates. Am J Vet Res 54:635-642.
82.AbramsOgg AC,Kruth SA,Carter RF, Dick JE,ValliVE,Kamel-Reid S,Dube ID. 1993. Clinical and pathological
findings in dogs following supralethal total body irradiation with and without infusion of autologous long-term
marrow culture cells. Can J Vet Res 57:79-88.
4/PLATELETS
253
83. Colbatzky F, Hermanns W. 1993. Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in one cat and two dogs. Vet Pathol
30:186194.
84. Pucheu-Haston CM, Camus A, Taboada J, Gaunt SD, Snider TG, Lopez MK. 1995. Megakaryoblastic leukemia in
a dog.J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:194196.
85. Ledieu D, Palazzi X, Marchal T, Fournel-Fleury C. 2005. Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia with erythrophagocytosis
and thrombosis in a dog.Vet Clin Pathol 34:52-56.
86. Janssens AM, Offner FC, Van Hove WZ. 2000. Bone marrow necrosis. Cancer 88:1769-1780.
87. Weiss DJ. 2005. Bone marrow necrosis in dogs: 34 cases (19962004). J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:263267.
88. Garon CL, Scott MA, Selting KA, Cohn LA. 1999. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura in a cat. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 35:464470.
89. Tasker S, Mackin AJ, Day MJ. 1999. Primary immune-mediated thrombocytopenia in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
40:127-131.
90. Humber KA, Beech J, Cudd TA, Palmer JE, Gardner SY, Sommer MM. 1991. Azathioprine for treatment of
immune-mediated thromabocytopenia in two horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:591594.
91. Socket DC, Traub-Dargatz J, Weiser MG. 1987. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia in a
foal. J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:308-310.
92. ReefVB,Dyson SS,Beech J. 1984. Lymphosarcoma and associated immune-mediated hemolytic anemia and
thrombocytopenia in horses.J AmVet Med Assoc 184:313-317.
93.Yasuda J,Okada K, Sato J, Sato R,Tachibana Y,Takashima K,Naito Y. 2002. Idiopathic thrombocytopenia in
Japanese black cattle. J Vet Med Sei 64:87-89.
94.Kohn B, Linden T, Leibold W. 2006. Platelet-bound antibodies detected by a fow cytometric asay in cats with
thrombocytopenia.JFelineMed Surg8:254-260.
95. Lewis DC, Meyers KM. 1996. Studies of platelet-bound and serum platelet-bindable immunoglobulins in dogs with
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Exp Hematol 24:696-701.
96.Scott MA. 2000. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. In: Feldman BF, Zink JG, Jain NC, eds.Schabn’ Veterinary
Henatologr. 5th edition, 478486. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &c Wilkins.
97. Rizvi MA, Shah SR, Raskob GE, George JN. 1999. Drug-induced thrombocytopenia. Curr Opin Hematol
6:349-353.
98.Bloom JC,Blackmer SA, Bugelski PJ, Sowinski JM, Saunders LZ. 1985. Gold-induced immune thrombocytopenia
in the dog. Vet Pathol 22:492-499.
99. Lewis DC, Meyers KM, Callan MB, Buicheler J, Giger U. 1995. Detection of platelet-bound and serum
platelet-bindable antibodies for diagnosis of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
206:47-52
100. Sullvan PS, Arrington K, West R, MeDonald TP. 1992. Thrombocytopenia associated with administration of
trimethoprim/sulfadiazine in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 20l:1741-1744.
101.Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Hurvitz AL. 1988. Methimazole reatment of 262 cats with hyperthyroidism. J Vet Interm
Med 2:150-157.
102. Peterson ME, Hurvitz AI, Leib MS, Cavanagh PG, Dutton RE. 1984. Propylthiouracil-associated hemolytic anemia,
thrombocytopenia, and antinuclear antibodies in cats with hyperthyroidism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:806-808
103. MeGurrin MKJ, Arroyo LG, Bienzle D. 2004. Flow cytometric detection of platelet-bound antibody in three horses
with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 224:8387.
104. Sinha RK, Santos AV, Smith JW, Horsewood P, Andrew M, Kelton JG. 1992. Rabbit platelets do not express Fc
receptors for IgG. Platelets 2:35-39.
bound antibodies in beagle dogs after artifcial infection with Ehrlicbia canis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
77:145-150
106. Grindem CB, Breitschwerdt EB, Perkins PC, Cullins LD, Thomas TJ, Hegarty BC. 1999. Platelet-associated
immunoglobulin (antiplatelet antibody) in canine Rocky Mountain spotted fever and chrlichiosis. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 35:56-61.
107. Kucera JC, Davis RB. 1983.Thrombocytopenia asociated with histoplasmosis and an elevated platelet associated
IgG. Am J Clin Pathol 79:644646.
108.Slappendel RJ.1988. Canine leishmaniasis A review based on 95 cases in the Netherlands.Vet Q 10:1-16
109.Terrazzano G,Cortese L,Piantedosi D,Zappacosta S,Di LA,SantoroD,Ruggiero G,CiaramellaP.006.Presence
of anti-platelet IgMand IgG antibodies in dogs naturally infectedby Leishmnia nfantumVet Immunol Immuno
pathol 110:331-337.
110. Clabough DL, Gebhard D, Flaherty MT, Whetter LE, Perry ST, Coggins L, Fuller FJ. 1991. Immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia in horses infected with equine infectious anemia virus. J Virol 65:62426251.
254
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
111. Wilkerson MJ, Shuman W, Swist S, Harkin K, Meinkoth J, Kocan AA. 2001. Platelet size, platelet surface
associated IgG, and reticulated platelets in dogs with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. Vet Clin Pathol
30:141-149
112. Buechner-Marwell V, Scott MA, Godber L, Kristensen A. 1997. Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia in a
quarter horse foal. J Vet Intern Med 11:304308.
113. Stormorken H, Svenkerud R, Slagsvold P, Lie H. 1963. Thrombocytopenic bleedings in young pigs due to maternal
isoimmunization.Nature 198:1116-1117.
114. Ramirez S, Gaunt SD, MeClure JJ, Oliver J. 1999. Detection and effects on platelet function of anti-platelet
antibody in mule foals with experirmentally induced neonatal alloirmmune thrombocytopenia. J Vet Intern Med
13:534-539
115. Perkins GA, Miller WH, Divers TJ, Clark CK, Belgrave RL, Sellon DC. 2005. Ulcerative dermatitis, thrombocyto-
penia, and neutropenia in neonatal foals. J Vet Intern Med 19:211216.
116. Kristensen AT, Weiss DJ, Klausner JS, Laber J, Christie DJ. 1994. Detection of antiplatelet antibody with a platele
immunofluorescence assay. J Vet Intern Med 8:36-39.
117. Keller ET. 1992. Immune-mediated disease as a risk factor for canine lymphoma. Cancer 70:23342337.
118.Wardrop KJ, Lewis D, Marks S, Buss M. 1997. Postransfusion purpura in a dog with hemophilia A J Vet Intern
Med 11:261-263.
activity of the disease. I. The significance of thrombocytopenia and leukopenia. Blood 4:1196-1213.
120. Pegels JG, Helmerhorst FM, van Leeuwen EF, van de Plas-van Dalen, Engelfriet CP, dem Borne AE. 1982. The
Evans syndrome: Characterization of the responsible autoantibodies. Br J Haematol 51:445-450.
121. Lewis RM, Schwartz RS, Gilmore CE. 1965. Autoimmune diseases in domestic animals. Ann NY Acad Sd
124:178200.
122. Carr AP, Panciera DL, Kidd L. 2002. Prognostic factors for mortality and thromboembolism in canine immune
mediated hemolytic anemia: A retrospective study of 72 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 16:504509.
123. Ingram M, Coopersmith A. 1969. Reticulated platelets following acute blood loss. Br J Haematol 17:225229.
124. Ljungqvist U. 1971. The platelet response to haemorrhage in splenectomised dogs. Acta Chir Scand 137:97-102.
125. Minter FM, Ingram M. 1971. Platelet volume: Density relationships in normal and acutely bled dogs. Br J
Haematol 20:55-68.
126. Lewis DC, Bruyette DS, Kellerman DL, Smith SA. 1997. Thrombocytopenia in dogs with anticoagulant rodenti-
cide-induced hemorrhage: Eight cases (1990-1995). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:417422.
127. Marder VJ, Feinstein DI, Francis CW, Colman RW. 1994. Consumptive thrombohemorrhagic disorders. In:
Colman RW,Hirsch J, Marder VJ, Salzman EW, eds. Henostasis and Thrombosis: Basic Principles and Clinica
Practice, 3rd edition, 1023-1063.Philadelphia: JB Lippincott.
128.Kresowik TF, Wakefield TW, Fessler RD, Stanley JC. 1988.Anticoagulant effects of protamine sulfate in a canine
model. J Surg Res 45:8-14.
after envenomation by western diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus atrax). Blood 63:1-14.
130. Schaeffer RC Jr, Briston C, Chilton SM, Carlson RW. 1986. Diseminated intravascular coagulation following Ehis
carinatw venom in dogs: Effects of a synthetic thrombin inhibitor. J Lab Clin Med 107:488497.
131. Cowan LA, Hertzke DM, Fenwick BW, Andreasen CB. 1997. Clinical and dinicopathologic abnormalities in
greyhounds with cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy: 18 cases (1992-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc
210:789-793.
132. Hertzke DM, Cowan LA, Schoning P, Fenwick BW. 1995. Glomerular ultrastructural lesions of idiopathie
cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy of greyhounds. Vet Pathol 32:45 1-459.
133.Holloway S, Senior D, Roth L, Tisher CC. 1993.Hemolytic uremic syndrome in dogs. J Vet Intern Med
7:220-227
134. Raife T, Friedman KD, Fenwick B. 2004. Lepirudin prevents lethal effects of Shiga toxin in a canine model.
Thromb Haemost 92:387-393.
135.DelOrco M,Bertazolo W, Pagliaro L, Rocabianca P, Comazzi S. 2005. Hemolytic-uremic syndrome in a dog.
Vet Clin Pathol 34:264-269.
136. Jones PA,Tomasic M, Gentry PA. 1997.Oncotic,hemodilutional, and hemostatic effects of isotonic saline and
hydroxyethyl starch solutions in clinically normal ponies. Am J Vet Res 58:541-548.
137. Jutkowitz LA, Rozanski EA, Moreau JA, Rush JE. 2002. Massive transfusion in dogs: 15 cases (19972001). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 220:16641669.
138.Glowaski MM, Moon-Massat PF,Erb HN, Barr SC. 2003.Effects of oxypolygelatin and dextran 70 on hemostatic
variables in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 30:202-210.
4/PLATELETS
255
139. Singh MK, Lamb WA. 2005. Idiopathic thrombocytopenia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels. Aust Vet J
83:700-703.
140.Cowan SM, Bartges JW, Gompf RE, Hayes JR, Moyers TD, Snider CC, Gerard DA, Craft RM, Muenchen RA
141. Pedersen HD, Haggstrom J, Olsen LH, Christensen K, Selin A, Burmeister ML, Larsen H. 2002. Idiopathic
asymptomatic thrombocytopenia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels is an autosomal recessive trait. J Yet Intern Med
16:169-173.
142. Tsuchiya R, Kyotani K, Scott MA, Nishizono K, Ashida Y, Mochizuki T, Kitao S, Yamada T, Kobayashi K. 1999.
Role of platelet activating factor in development of thrombocytopenia and neutropenia in dogs with endotoxemia.
Am J Vet Res 60:216-221.
143. Yilmaz Z, lcol YO, Torun S, Ulus IH. 2006. Intravenous administration of choline or cdp-choline improves plarelet
count and platelet closure times in endotoxin-treated dogs. Shock 25:73-79.
144. Kettner F, Reyers F, Miller D. 2003. Thrombocytopaenia in canine babesiosis and its clinical usefulness J S Afr Vet
Assoc 74:6368.
145. Garcia ATC. 2006. Piroplasma infection in dogs in northern Spain. Vet Parasitol 138:97-102.
146. Shelton GH, Linenberger ML, Grant CK, Abkowitz JL. 1990. Hematologic manifestations of feline immunodefi-
ciency virus infection. Blood 76:1104-1109.
147.Goldstein RE, Lin RC, Langston CE, Serivani PV, Erb HN, Barr SC. 2006. Infuence of infecting serogroup on
dlinical features of leptospirosis in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 20:489-494.
148.Harrus S, Aroch I, Lavy E, Bark H. 1997. Clinical manifestations of infctious canine cydic thrombocytopenia.
VetRec141:247-250
149. Martin AR, Brown GK, Dunstan RH, Roberts TK. 2005. Anaplasma platys: An improved PCR for its detection in
dogs. Exp Parasitol 109:176180.
150. Sirigireddy KR, Ganta RR. 2005. Multiplex detection of Ebrlichia and Anaplasma species pathogens in peripheral
blood by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. J Mol Diagn 7:308316.
151.Chisholm-Chait A. 2000.Mechanisms of thrombocytopenia in dogs with cancer. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
22:1006-1018.
152. Grindem CB, Brcitschwerdt EB, Corbet WT, Page RL, Jans HE. 1994. Thrombocytopenia associated with
neoplasia in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 8:400-405.
153. O'Keefe DA, Couto CG, Burke-Schwartz C, Jacobs RM. 1987. Systemic mastocytosis in 16 dogs. J Vet Intern Med
1:7580.
154. O'Donnell MR, Slichter SJ, Weiden PL, Storb R. 1981. Platelet and fibrinogen kinetics in canine tumors. Cancer
Res 41:1379-1383.
155. Slichter SJ, Weiden PL, O°Donnell MR, Storb R. 1982. Interruption of tumor-associated platelet consumption with
platelet enzyme inhibitors. Blood 59:1252-1258.
156. Bloom JC,Lewis HB, Sellers TS,Deldar A,Morgan DG.1987.The hematopathology of cefonicid-and cefazedone-
induced blood dyscrasias in the dog.Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 90:143-155.
157.Yawata Y, Hebbel RP, Silvis S, Howe R, Jacob H. 1974.Blood cell abnormalities complicating the hypophosphate
mia of hyperalimentation: Erythrocyte and platelet ATP defciency associated with hemolytic anermia and bleeding
in hyperalimented dogs. J Lab Clin Med 84:643653.
158.Lippert AC,Faullner JE, Evans AT,Mullaney TP. 1989.Total parenteral nutrition in clinically normal cats. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 194:669-676.
159.Hasegawa S,Pawankar R, Suzuki K, Nakahata T, Furukawa S, Okumura K,Ra C. 1999. Functional expression of
the high affnity receptor for IgE (FeeRl) in human platelets and its [sicl intracellular expression in human
megakaryocytes.Blood 93:2543-2551.
160. Hudson JG, Bowen AL, Navia P, Rios-Dalenz J, Pollard AJ, Williams D, Heath D. 1999. The effect of high altitude
on platelet counts, thrombopoietin and erythropoietin levels in young Bolivian airmen visiting the Andes. Int J
Biometeorol 43:85-90.
161. Bass MC, Schultze AE. 1998. Essential thrombocythemia in a dog Case report and literature review. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 34:197-203.
162. Hopper PE, Mandell CP, Turrel JM, Jain NC, Tablin F, Zinkl JG. 1989. Probable essential thrombocythemia in a
dog. J Vet Intern Med 3:79-85.
163.Hammer AS, Couto OG, Getzy D, Bailey MQ. 1990.Essential throbocythemia in a cat. J Vet Intern Med 4:87-91.
164. Fialkow PJ, Faguet GB, Jacobson RJ, Vaidya K, Murphy S. 1981. Evidence that essential thrombocythemia is a
clonal disorder with origin in a multipotent stem cell Blood 58:916919.
165.Messick J, Carothers M, Wellman M. 1990.Identification and characterization of megakaryoblasts in acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia in a dog. Vet Pathol 27:212-214.
256
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
166. Cain GR, Kawakami TG, Jain NC. 1985. Radiation-induced megakaryoblastic leukemia in a dog. Vet Pathol
22:641-643.
167. Hamilton TA, Morrison WB, DeNicola DB. 1991. Cytosine arabinoside chemotherapy for acute megakaryocytic
leukemia in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:359-361.
168. Park HM, Doster AR, Tashbaeva RE, Lee YM, Lyoo YS, Lee SJ, Kim HJ, Sur JH. 2006. Clinical, histopathological
and immunohistochemical findings in a case of megakaryoblastic leukemia in a dog. J Vet Diagn Invest
18:287-291.
169. Field ME. 1930. The effect of emotion on the blood platelet count. Am J Physiol 93:245248.
170. Chamberlain KG, Tong M, Penington DG. 1990. Properties of the exchangeable splenic platelets released into the
circulation during exercise-induced thrombocytosis. Am J Hematol 34:161-168.
171. Freedman M, Alszuler N, Karpatkin S. 1977. Presence of a nonsplenic platelet pool. Blood 50:419425.
172. Lepherd EE. 1977. Efect of exercise on platelet size and number in ponies. Vet Rec 101:488.
173. Dawson AA, Ogston D. 1969. Exercise-induced thrombocytosis. Acta Haematol 42:241246.
174. Schmidt KG, Rasmussen JW. 1984. Exercise-induced changes in the in vivo distribution of "In-labelled platelets.
ScandJ Haematol32:159-166.
175. Margiotta MS, Kasabian AK, Karp NS, Ting V, Dublin BK, Sagiroglu J, Dublin BA. 1998. Humorally mediated
thrombocytosis in major lower extrermity trauma. Ann Plast Surg 40:463-468.
176. Folman CC, Ooms M, Kuenen BB, de Jong SM, Vet RJ, de Haas M, dem Borne AE. 2001. The role of thrombo-
poietin in post-operative thrombocytosis. Br J Haematol 114:126-133.
177. Hammer AS. 1991. Thrombocytosis in dogs and cats: A retrospective study. Comp Haematol Int 1:181-186.
178. Sellon DC,Levine JF,Palmer K, Millkin E, Grindem C,Covington P. 1997. Thrombocytosis in 24 horses (1989
1994). J Vet Intern Med 11:2429.
179.Gastl G,Plante M,Finstad CL,Wong GY, Federici MG, Bander NH, Rubin SC.1993. High IL-6 levels in ascitic
fuid correlate with reactive thrombocytosis in patients with epithelial ovarian cancer. Br J Haematol 83:433441.
180. Hogan DF, Dhaliwal RS, Sisson DD, Kitchell BE. 1999. Paraneoplastic thrombocytosis-induced systemic
thromboembolism in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:483486.
181.Levine SP. 1999. Thrombocytosis. In:Lee GR, Foerster J, Lukens J, Wintrobe MM, eds.Wntrobe Cliniea/
Hemarelogr, 10th edition, 1648-1660. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Willkins.
182.Alkan H, Guven N,Aydogdu I,Arat M,Beksac M,Dalva K.2000. Thrombopoietic cytokines in patients with iron
deficiency anemia with or without thrombocytosis. Acta Haematol 103:152156.
183.Geddis AE,Kaushansky K.2003. Crosreactivity between erythropoietin and thrombopoietin at the level of Mpl
does not account for the thrombocytosis seen in iron deficiency. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 25:919-920.
184. Mackin AJ, Allen DG, Johnstone IB. 1995. Effects of vincristine and prednisone on platelet numbers and function
in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 56:100-108.
185.Mandel EM,Besser H,Djaldett M.1977.Effeet of a low dose of vincristine on platelet production in mice.Exp
Hematol 5:499-504.
186.Corash L,Mok Y, Levin J, Baker G.1990.Regulation of platelet heterogeneity: Effects of thrombocytopenia on
plateletvolume and density.ExpHematol 18:205-212
187.Hunt P,Zsebo KM,Hokom MM,HornkohlA,Birkett NC,del Castillo JC,Martin F.1992.Evidence that stem
cell factor is involved in the rebound thrombocytosis that follows 5-fluorouracil treatment. Blood 80:904911.
188. Kraytman M. 1973. Platelet size in thrombocytopenias and thrombocytosis of various origin. Blood 41:587-598.
189. Ichilkawa N, Kitano K, Shimodaira S, Ishida F, Ito T, Kajilkawa S, Tahara T, Kato T, Kiyosawa K 1998. Changes in
serum thrombopoietin levels after splenectorny. Acta Haematol 100:137-141.
190.Jain NC.1986. Qualitative andquantitative disorders of platelets.In: Jain NC,ed.SchalnVeterinary Hematlgy
4th edition, 466486. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
191. Bessler H, Notti I, Djldetti M. 1981. The effect of partial splenectomy on platelet production in mice. Thromb
Haemost 46:602-603.
192. Tanum G, Sonstevold A, Jakobsen E. 1984. The effect of splenectomy on platelet formation and megakaryocyte
DNA content in rats. Blood 63:593597.
193.Weintraub AH, Khan I,Karptkin S.1976. Evidence for a splenic release factor of platelets in chronic blood loss
plasma of rabbits. Br J Haematol 34:421-426.
194. Moore GE, Mahaffey EA, Hoenig M. 1992. Hematologic and serum biochemical effects of long-term administra
tion of anti-inflammatory doses of prednisone in dogs. Am J Vet Res 53:10331037.
195. Corash L. 1989. The relationship between megakaryocyte ploidy and platelet volume. Blood Cells 15:81107.
196. Levin J, Bessman JD. 1983. The inverse relation between platelet volume and platelet number: Abnormalities in
hematologic disease and evidence that platelet size does not correlate with platelet age. J Lab Clin Med
101:295-307.
4/PLATELETS
257
197. Weiser MG, Kociba GJ. 1984. Platelet concentration and platelet volume distribution in healthy cats. Am J Vet Res
45:518-522
198. Bowles KM, Cooke LJ, Richards EM, Baglin TP. 2005. Platelet size has diagnostic predictive value in patients with
thrombocytopenia Clin Lab Haematol 27:370-373.
199. Thompson CB, Love DG, Quinn PG, Valeri CR. 1983. Platelet size does not correlate with platelet age. Blood
62:487-494.
200. Catalfamo JL, Dodds WJ. 2000. Thrombopathies. In: Feldrman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm²s Veterinary
Hematolog, 5th edition, 1042-1050. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &c Wilkins.
201. Brown SJ, Simpson KW, Baker S, Spagnoletti MA, Elwood CM. 1994. Macrothrombocytosis in Cavalier King
Charles spaniels.Vet Rec 135:281-283.
Cavalier King Charles spaniels: 11 cases (1983-1993). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:411-415.
203. Boyce JT, Kociba GJ, Jacobs RM, Weiser MG. 1986. Feline leulkemia virusinduced thrombocytopenia and
macrothrombocytosis in cats. Vet Pathol 23:1620.
204. Northern J Jr, Tvedten HW. 1992. Diagnosis of microthrombocytosis and immune-mediated thrombocytopenia in
dogs with thrombocytopenia: 68 cases (1987-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:368372.
205. Balduini CL, Noris P, Spedini P, Bellerti S, Zambelli A, Da Prada GA. 1999. Relationship between size and thiazole
orange fuorescence of platelets in patients undergoing high-dose chemotherapy. Br J Haematol 106:202-207.
206.Joutsi-Korhonen L, Sainio S,Rikonen S, Javela K, Teramo K,Kekomaki R 2000.Detection of reticulated platelets
Estirmating the degree of fuorescence of platelets stained with thiazole orange.Eur J Hacmatol 65:66-71.
207.Robinson M, Machin S, Mackie I, Harrison P.2000.In vivo biotinylation studies: Specifcity of labelling of
reticulated platelets by thiazole orange and mepacrine. Br J Haematol 108:859-864
208. Weis DJ, Townsend E. 1998. Evaluation of reticulated platelets in dogs. Comp Haematol Int 8:166-170.
209. Wolf RF, Peng J, Friese P, Gilmore LS, Burstein SA, Dale GL. 1997. Erythropoietin administration increases
production and reactivity of platelets in dogs. Thromb Haemost 78:1505-1509.
210. Abe Y, Wada H, Sakakura M, Nishioka J, Tomatsu H, Hamaguchi Y, Oguni S, Shiku H, Nobori T. 2005.
Usefulness of fally automated measurement of reticulated platelets using whole blood. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost
11:263-270.
211. Salvagno GL, Montagmana M, Degan M, Marradi PL, Ricetti MM, Riolf P, Poli G, Minuz P, Santonastaso CL,
Guidi GC. 2006. Evaluation of platelet turnover by flow cytometry. Platelets 17:170177.
increased RNA content (reticulated platelets): A measure of the rate of thrombopoiesis. Am J Clin Pathol
98:637-646.
213. British Committee for Standards in Haematology General Haematology Task Force. 2003. Guidelines for the
investigation and management of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura in adults, children and in pregnancy. Br ]
Haematol 120:574-596.
214. Scott MA, Kaiser L, Davis JM, Schwartz KA. 2002. Development of a sensitive immunoradiometric assay for
215. Wilkerson MJ, Shuman W. 2001. Alterations in normal canine platelets during storage in EDTA anticoagulated
blood.Vet Clin Pathol 30:107-113.
216.Kristensen AT, Weiss DJ, Klausner JS, Laber J, Christie DJ. 1994. Comparison of microscopic and fow cytometric
detection of platelet antibody in dogs suspected of having immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. Am J Vet Res
55:1111-1114.
217.Lewis DC, MeVey DS, Shuman WS, Muller WB. 1995. Development and characterization of a fow cytometric
assay for detection of platelet-bound immunoglobulin G in dogs. Am J Vet Res 56:1555-1558.
218.Nunez R, Gomes-Kellr MA, Schwarzwald C, Feige K 2001. Assessment of equine autoimmune thrombocytopenia
(EAT) by flow cytometry. BMC Blood Disord 1:1.
219. Joshi BC, Jain NC. 1976. Detection of antiplatelet antibody in serum and on megalkaryocytes of dogs with
autoimmune thrombocytopenia. Am J Vet Res 37:681-685.
220.Hyde P, Zucker-Franklin D. 1987.Antigenic differences between human platelets and megakaryocytes. Am J Pathol
127:349-357.
Thispageintentionallyleffblank
Chapter5
HEMOSTASIS
Hemostasis
261
Platelets (Thrombocytes)
262
.
Physiologic Processes
262
Il.
Platelet Concentration
262
ll.
Platelet Function Tests.
263
von Willebrand Factor (vWF)
265
Physiologic Processes..
265
Il.
von Willebrand Disease (vWD).
265
IIl.
Analytical Concepts.
266
IV.
Decreasedvon Willebrand Factor toAntigen (vWF:Ag)Ratio.....
267
V.
Interpretive Considerations..
268
VI.
GeneticTests.
268
Coagulation.
268
Physiologic Processes..
268
Il.
Analytical Concepts
274
IIl.
Whole Blood Clotting Times..
279
A.Lee-White Method.
279
B.Activated Coagulation (Clotting) Time (ACT).
279
C.Synbiotics SCA2o0o Veterinary Coagulation Analyzer.
280
IV.
Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time(PTT,APTT,oraPTT)
280
V.
Prothrombin Time (PT)
282
VI.
Thrombin Time (TT).
284
Vll.
Fibrinogen.
285
VIll.OtherpecificCoagulationFactorActivities （ll,Vl,Vlll,X,,XI,Xl,
PK,and HMWK)
286
IX.
Proteins Induced by Vitamin K Antagonism or Absence (PIVKA).
287
X.
Russell'sViper Venom Time (RVT)
288
XI.
Endogenous Anticoagulants.
288
A.Antithrombin (AT).
288
B.ProteinC
291
C.Protein Z.
291
XIl.
Coagulation Factor Antibodies (lnhibitors)
292
XIlll.Anti-(phospholipid-protein)Antibodies.
292
Fibrinolysis.
293
.
Physiologic Processes.
293
Il.
Fibrin or Fibrinogen Degradation Products (FDPs).
293
ll.
Fibrin Fragment D-Dimer.
299
IV.
Other Assays.
300
Blood Vessels (Endothelial Cells).
300
MajorBleeding Disorders:Findings and Pathogeneses
300
.
Diagnosis.
300
Pathogenesis.
304
!
Thrombosis.
310
259
Table 5.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
[x]
xconcentration （x=analyte)
ACT
Activated coagulation （clotting) time
ADP
Adenosine diphosphate
APC
Activated protein C
AT
Antithrombin (antithrombin III)
ATP
Adenosine triphosphate
BMBT
Buccal mucosal bleeding time
Ca²+
Calcium
DDAVP
1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin
DIC
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
EDTA
Ethylenediamineretraacetic acid
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
fCa²+
Free ionized calcium
FDPs
Fibrin or fibrinogen degradation products; fibrin fragments +fibrinogen
fragments
GPIb
Glycoprotein Ib
Hct
Hematocrit
HMWK
High molecular weight kininogen
INR
International normalized ratio
ISI
International Sensitivity Index
1-XIII
Inactive coagulation factors one through thirteen; terminal a” denotes that the
factor has been activated (e.g, Ila)
LMWH
Low molecular weight heparin
MPS
Mononuclear phagocyte system
M,
Relative molecular mass
PAI
Plasminogen activator inhibitor
PIVKA
Proteins induced by vitamin K antagonism, absence, or deficiency
PK
Prokallikrein or prekallikrein (synonyms)
PT
Prothrombin time
PTT
Activatedpartial thromboplastintime
PZI
Protein Z-dependent protease inhibitor
RMSF
Rocky mountain spotted fever
RVVT
Russell's viper venom time
SI
Systeme International d'Unites
TAFI
Thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor
TAT
Thrombin-antithrombin complexes
TF
Tissue factor,tissue thromboplastin factor
TFPI
Tissue factor pathway coagulation inhibitor
t-PA
Plasminogen activator,tissue type
TT
Thrombin time
TTchus
Modified TT for [fibrinogen] by using the method of von Clauss
u-PA
Plasminogen activator, urokinase type
vWD
Von Willebrand disease
vWF
VonWillebrand factor
vWF:Ag
Von Willebrand factor as detected antigenically
vWF:CBA
Von Willebrand factor collagen-binding activity
WRI
Within the reference interval
260
5/HEM0STASIS
261
HEMOSTASIS
I.
Hemostasis is the arrest of bleeding or the interruption of blood fow through a vessel. The
term is also usedmore generally torefer to theintricate and balanced physiologic processes
thatmaintain blood in a freely flowing state but allow the rapid formation of localized solid
plugs to seal injured vessels.Normal hemostasis depends on the complex interactions of its
major components:plateletscoagularion factors,fbrinolyticfactorsandbloodvessels
(Fig.5.1).
II.
Abnormal hemostasis causes hemorrhage or thrombosis.Laboratory testing of the indi-
vidual components of the hemostatic system may be used to discover, explain, monitor, or
prognosticate these pathologic states.
Platelets
Primary
hemostatic
plug
Bloodvesselsi
Secondary
Coagulation
hemostatic
Bnid
Fibrinolysis
Fig. 5.1. Hermostasis in health. Normal hemostasis is maintained by the numerous and complex interactions
ofblood vesselsplatelets,coagulation pathway,and thefbrinolytic system that lead t the formation and
resolution of a secondary hemostatic plug after vascular injury.The following events occur with blood vessel
damage:
Vasoconstriction reduces blood loss, and activated endothelial cells express both prothrombotic functions
to limit bleeding and antithrombotic functions to limit clotting.
•Platelets adhere to exposed subendothelium, spread to patch the defect, release products that activate other
platelets, and aggregate to form a primary hemostatic plug. Their secretory products also help maintain
vasoconstriction and promote coagulation,and their membranes are an important source of phospholipid
to accelerate coagulation
·The surface-induced and TF coagulation pathways are activated, leading to the production of thrombin
and subsequent conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin within the primary hemostatic plug. This forms a stable
TAFI.
Whencoagulation pathways areactivatedbrinolyssisals.irinolysishelcntoltheextentf
coagulation by breaking down fibrin, thus contributing to the formation of an appropriate secondary
hemostatic plug and promoting eventual removal of the plug to maintain normal blood fow.
Abnormalities of anycomponent of this system canupset the balance andlead to either hemorrhageor
thrombosis.
262
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
PLATELETS(THROMBOCYTES)
Physiologic processes
A.SeeChapter4forplatelet structureroduction,kineticandnonhemostat
functions.
B.Hemostatic functions
1. Platelets are required for formation of primary hemostatic plugs to repair small
vascular defects.They amplify minute stimuli into explosive production of fibrin to
form more secure secondary hemostatic plugs.
2.Platelet hemostatic functions can be divided into five major categories:
a.Adhesion:Platelets adhere to and spread over (patch) perturbed endothelium or
exposed subendothelium, mostly via vWF that binds to platelet GPIb and
collagen in the vessel wall.
b.Aggregation:When adherence or platelet agonists (e.g,ADP,collagen,platelet
activating factor,or thrombin) activate receptors for platelermembrane glycopro-
tein omPs platelets aggregate via fibrinogen or vWF bridges that bind to omβs
on neighboring platelets.
c.Release (secretion):Activated platelets can release preformed granular contents
(egfbrinogen,factor V,ADP,ATP,and plasminogen）and newly formed
mediators such as thromboxane A, and arachidonic acid. These products help
mediate thehemostaticprocess.
d.Facilitation of coagulation:When platelets are stimulated,anionic membrane
phospholipids thar support coagulation move from the inner membrane to the
outer membrane,where they are available for use as cofactors in the coagulation
pathways. These phospholipids include phosphatidylserine and are referred to as
plateletfactor3.2Platelets provide specifichigh-affinity binding sitesforcoagula
tion enzymes, cofactors, and zymogens. Platelets also release platelet agonists that
activate other platelets.
e.Clot (coagulum) retraction: Platelets within a thrombus facilitate wound closure
and vessel patency by a contractile process involving activated platelets,inter-
platelet bridging via the fibrinogen receptor XmBs and platelet actin and
myosin.3
3.Mediators released from platelets during the hemostatic process contribute to local
tissue repair.
IL.
Platelet concentration （often called platelet count in clinical jargon）
A.See Chapter 4 for analytical concepts and disorders associated with thrombocytopenia
and thrombocytosis.
B.Thrombocytopenia may cause mucocutaneous hemorrhage when severe. Hemorrhage
from thrombocytopenia alone is not expected with a [platelet] above about 30 × 10²/μL
and may not occur witha[platelet]<5× 10²/μL.
1.Thrombocrit may be a better reflection of platelet hemostatic potential than is
2.Hemorrhage may occur at greater [platelet] if there are concurrent platelet func
tional deficits or increasedvascular trauma
C.Thrombocytosis has been associated with thrombosis or hemorrhage in people. Similar
reports are rare in domestic mammals.
1.Thrombosis is not expected with reactive thrombocytosis.
5/HEM0STASIS
263
2.Thrombosis associated with human clonal thrombocythemic disorders may relate to
altered function of platelets,endothelial cells,orleukocytes.It is not predictable
based solely on the [platelet].4
3.Hemorrhage in clonal thrombocythemic disorders of people may relate to altered
platelet function or acquired vWD.4
III. Platelet function tests
A.BMBT is a standardized in vivo test of primary hemostasis used in dogs and cats.
Mucosal membranes or skin siteshave been used in large animals.The skin bleeding
time is less repearable,and cuticle bleeding times assess secondary hemostasis in
addition to primary hemostasis.
1.Analytical concepts
a.Units are not standardized.Results are sometimes reported in seconds (e.g
202 s),minutes and seconds (e.g.,3min 22 s）,orminutes （e.g.,3,3.4,or
3.37 min). Interobserver and intraobserver imprecision? suggests it would be
most appropriate to report to the nearest minute.The BMBT of healthy dogs
has been reported to range from1 to5min,but it usually is less than4min.67
b. Procedure: The upper lip is rolled out and usually secured with a gauze strip
around the maxilla. Timing begins when a standardized cut (or duplicate cuts) is
made in the mucosal surface of the upper lip byusing a spring-loaded device
(e.g,Surgicutt devices).The cut is small enough (5 mm x 1 mm) for primary
hemostasis alone to resolve the bleeding,coagulation and generation of fibrin are
not necessary. Filter paper is used to blot away excess blood without touching or
disturbing the incision itself. The end point is when bleeding ceases and a
crescent of blood no longer forms on the filter paper.
2.Prolonged BMBT: The BMBT test is relatively insensitive, but BMBT will be
prolonged (> 45 min in dogs) with moderate to marked defects of primary
hemostasis.
a.Thrombocytopenia (Table 4.2): Marked thrombocytopenia is a contraindication
to BMBT because it is already known that BMBT will be prolonged. The degree
of thrombocytopenia required to prolong the BMBT is not clear,but it is
commonly stated thatBMBT prolongations may occur with platelet concentra-
tions of<70-100x10²/uL.This decision threshold varies with other factors,
such as mean platelet volume, vWF : Ag, and Hct.
b.Thrombopathia (plateler dysfunction) (Table 5.2)
(1)Terms used to describe a disorder of abnormal platelet function include
thrombopathia,thrombopathy,trombocytopathy,andthrombocytopathia.The
precise definition and usage of each term vary.Tbrembopathia is used herein
as a general term to indicate any disorder of platelet function.
concentrations,Hct,andvWF:Ag values are WRI
(a)Hereditary thrombopathias are uncommon.Additional reading is available
(b) Acquired thrombopathia occurs concurrently with diseases or conditions
that are usually diagnosed by other findings. The thrombopathia may be
subclinical or it may contribute obviously to morbidity.
C.vWD: BMBT can be used as a screening test for vWD in breeds predisposed to
the disease (e.g.,Doberman pinschers).BMBT should be prolonged when
WF:Ag<20% andmay beprolongedwithgreatervalues.
264
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 5.2.Diseases and conditions that cause thrombopathias
Hereditary: Ca² diacylglycerol guanine nucleotide exchange factor Imutations (basset hound
thrombopathia, Simmental hereditary thrombopathia,Spitz thrombopathia), Chediak
Higashi syndrome (Persian cats; Hereford,rangus,and Japanese black cattle),cylic
hematopoiesis (grey collie), dense-granule storage pool disease of American cocker
spaniels,Glanzmann's thrombasthenia (great Pyrenees,otterhounds,horses),idiopathic
thrombopathia in a Thoroughbred, platelet procoagulant defect of German shepherds,
thrombasthenic thrombopathia (orterhounds-original variant)
Acquired
*Drug exposure: anesthetics (barbiturates),anti-infammatories (nonsteroidal anti
inflammatory drugs), membrane-active drugs (local anesthetics,β-adrenergic blockers,
antihistamines),antibiotics (penicillins and cephalosporins), antiplatelets (ticlopidine)
dietary factors (garlic, ethanol, caffeine)
Envenomation (certain venoms)
*Increased FDPs (increased fibrinolysis, DIC)
Hepatic disease
Hyperglobulinemia (multiple myeloma,ehrlichiosis)
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (some antiplatelet antibodies)
Infections: bovine virus diarrhea virus,feline leukemia virus
Neoplasiainvolvingmegakaryocytes:myeloproliferative diseases,acutemegakaryoblastc
leukemia
*Renal failure (uremia)
Synthetic colloids(dextran,hetastarch)
*Arelatively common disease or condition
Note: Thrombopathia (decreased platelet function) should be considered when (1) petechiae,
ecchymoses, or mucosal hemorrhages occur without marked thrombocytopenia, or (2) bleeding time or
clot retraction is prolonged in the absence of thrombocytopenia (also consider vWD).
d.Anemia: This may prolong BMBT.Proposed mechanisms include (1) the lower
erythrocyte concentration enables more platelets to circulate centrally and forces
fewer platelets to circulate near the vessel wall where they can readily interact
with it, and (2) fewer erythrocytes result in decreased erythrocyte ADP, a platelet
agonist.9,10
e.Vascular disease:BMBT rarely may be prolonged with certain vascular diseases.
f.Antiplatelet drugs: Aspirin increased forelimb cutaneous bleeding times in horses
and also increased canine BMBT values, although the latter were still WRI.
Other antiplatelet drugs often do not prolong theBMBT.-13
g
Afibrinogenemia: BMBT may be prolonged in patients with afibrinogenemia,
3.Defects restricted to secondary hemostasis and the formation of fbrin (e.g.,hemo-
philia, but not afribinogenemia) should not prolong BMBT unless a larger vessel is
cut.17
4. Bleeding time has not been useful as a screening test for predicting the occurrence of
excessive surgical bleeding in human patients.12
B.Clot (coagulum) retraction is mediated by platelets, so some thrombopathias (e.g,
Glanzmanns thrombasthenia)(Table5.2)or marked thrombocytopenia (Table 4.2)
prolong clot retraction. This may be noted by a decreasedyield of serum after
5/HEM0STASIS
265
60-90min of clotting but is more reliably determined by standardized tests of clot
retraction:18
1.Blood(0.5mL) is collected into cold saline (4.5mL) and maintained at 4°Cuntil
being transferred to a glass tube and mixed with thrombin (10 U/mL final).
2.The tubes are then placed in a 37°Cwater bath.At 1 h,2 h,and 4 h,clot retrac-
tion is graded 1+ (the least retraction) through 4+ (the most retraction) based on
the size of the clot and the volume of surrounding serum.
3.Testing should not be done if the patient has thrombocytopenia or has recently
received aspirin or other cyclooxygenase inhibitors, because poor clot retraction is
expected.
4.Clot retraction is not impaired in vWD
C. Other specialized tests are used to assess platelet responses in vitro.These tests are
available in labs with specialized expertise and equipment including fow cytometers,
detecting and characterizing decreased platelet function, these tests can also detect
hyperactive platelets as may occur with infections (e.g.,feline infectious peritonitis or
heartwrmdisease),maligancies,tephroticsyromeandthrdisrder
A suspected specific thrombopathiamay be demonstrable by specific testing: for
examplebasethoundthrombopathybyplaeletaggregationandsecreionsudier
by molecular genetic detection of the mutation.
VONWILLEBRANDFACTOR(VWF)
I.
Physiologic processes
A.WF is a large multimeric plasma glycoprotein (M, =500,000-20,000,000) important
in platelet adhesion and aggregation.
1.Adhesion: vWF bridges platelets to injured vessel walls via platelet GPIb and
exposed subendothelial proteins such as collagen.
2.Aggregation: vWF contributes to platelet-platelet bridging via GPIb and the platelet
integrin OmPs
3.The largest multimers of vWF are the most functional.23
B.Most vWF is produced by endothelial cell25and secreted constitutivelyor stored
and secreted later upon endothelial cell activation.Megakaryocytes also synthesize
vWF.Megakaryocytes and platelets contain a substantial percentage of total
circulating vWF in most species (e.g., cats and people),but canine platelets contain
very little.26.27
C.Secreted vWF forms noncovalent complexes with coagulation factor VIll and serves as
a stabilizing and protective carrier molecule for factor VIII.28
II.
von Willebrand disease (vWD)
A.vWD,which is a disorder of primary hemostasis caused by a deficiency in functional
WF, is the most common hereditary bleeding disorder in dogs but is rare in cattle,29
cats,and horses.31-33
B.vWD is usually aninherited disorder,but acquiredvWD occurs rarely inpeople5
Acquired vWD has not been clearly documented in veterinary species.
1.One of the diseases associated with human acquired vWD is hypothyroidism, and
deficiencies.36
266
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.An association between hypothyroidism and vWD has also been suggested in dogs,
particularly in Doberman pinschers.However,studies have produced conflicting
results,and the concurrence ofcommon diseases does not prove a cause-and-effct
relationship.23 The finding of vWF:Ag values that were WRI for hypothyroid dogs
before treatment with levothyroxine and significantly decreased (not increased) after
treatment indicates that there is not a predictable association berween hypothyroid-
ism and vWD in dogs.3s
C.Three general types of vWD have been defined (though subtypes exist）:9
1.Type 1: All vWF multimers are present but at decreased concentrations. The severity
of type 1 vWD varies. It is the most common form and occurs in many dog breeds,
2.Type 2: This severe, uncommon form is a deficiency of vWF with a disproportionate
decrease in large multimers. It occurs in German shorthaired pointers and German
wirehaired pointers and has been reported in horses.31.33
3.Type 3: This severe form, which involves an absence of all vWF multimers, occurs
particularlynChsapeakeBayrereversDutchkoikerscottishriersn
D. Clinical and laboratory signs of vWD
1.Mild to severe mucosal hemorrhage (epistaxis, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, or
prolonged estral bleeding),cutaneous bruising, and prolonged hemorrhage from
nonsurgical or surgical trauma (e.g.,tail docking, dewclaw removal in puppies,or
tooth extraction);hemarthrosis andhematomasinhorses
2. Absence of petechiae may help differentiate vWD from platelet disorders.
3.Prolonged BMBTwithour thrombocytopenia andwithout prolonged coagulation
times
4.PTT may bemildly prolonged because decreased factorVllI coagulation activity
(which may be denoted FVIlI:C) occurs secondary to reductions in circulating
vWF,a carrier molecule for factor VIIl.However, in contrast to human patients
with vWD, FVIII : C in dogs with vWD is usually > 30 % of the activity in
III.Analytical concepts
A.Sample
1.Plasma from blood drawn into sodium citrate orEDTA;citrate tubes should be
filled to give a 1 : 9 volume ratio of citrate to blood. The vWF: Ag may be
markedly decreased in samples with clots or in vitro hemolysis,but lipemia has
no significant effect.47
2.The vWF:Ag is reportedly stable for at least 8h in canine plasma or whole blood
stored at room temperature.7 However, values are significantly increased at 24 h
after collection when whole blood samples are stored at room temperature, and
values are increased at 48 h (but not 24 h) after collection when plasma is stored at
room temperature. These increases did not occur when samples were refrigerated.
It is generally recommended that plasma be collected promptly after blood collec
tion, frozen, and shipped overnight with ice.
B.Units: %,U/dL,or U/mL relative to 100 %,100 U/dL,or 100 U/mL,respectively,of
vWF: Ag in pooled plasma from healthy individuals of the same species. Units may be
written to indicate the species of the patient and reference samples (e.g., CU/dL for
5/HEM0STASIS
267
canine(C) samples).Variations in the composition of pooled plasma from the reference
animals can affect results.
1. ELISA: vWF is usually measured by a quantitative ELISA with species-specific
antibodies to vWF (i.e.,vWF:Ag).Values <50 % are usually considered decreased
ELISA testing has largely replaced electroimmunoassay methods involving electro-
phoresis of plasma vWF in agarose gels containing antibodies to vWF.
2.Multimeric analysis (immunoelectrophoresis)
a.vWF multimers are separated by agarose electrophoresis so that the relative
amounts of different sized multimers can be determined.
b. Differentiates type 1 vWD (high molecular weight multimers present) from type
2 vWD (high molecular weight multimers absent)
3.Functional assays
a.Botrocetin cofactor assay:Platelets agglutinate in the presence of botrocetin and
vWF.The rate of this vWF-dependent platelet agglutination correlates well with
the amount of plasma vWF :Ag except with type 2 vWD. In type 2 vWD,
botrocetin cofactor activity may be markedly reduced while the amount of
plasma vWF: Ag may be WRI or mildly decreased. This is because the more
functional large multimers are deficient.
b.vWF collagen-binding activity (vWF : CBA) may be measured in canine plasma
by an ELISA that detects only the vWF that can bind to collagen. The assay
therefore measures the quantity of functionalvWF and preferentially detects the
more functional large multimers. The ratio of vWF : Ag to vWF : CBA may be
increased in type 2 vWD because of a decrease in large multimers and therefore a
greater decrease in functional vWF than in vWF antigen.
IV.
Decreased von Willebrand factor to antigen (vWF:Ag)ratio (Table 5.3)
A.Decreased plasma vWF :Ag is indicative of the vWD trait or a carrier state for it,
depending on the degree of the decrease. Clinical signs of impaired hemostasis may not
1.Dogs with vWF : Ag values <50 % are considered carriers of the vWD trait. They
are at risk for clinical disease and are likely to transmit the trait to offspring.The
risk of clinical vWD is greater at lower vWF : Ag values.
2. Dogs with borderline vWF : Ag values of 50-69 % are at little or no risk for clinical
disease but may be carriers that can transmit the trait to offspring.Repeated testing
may clarify if affected (value <50 %) or not (value>69 %).
Table 5.3.Diseases and conditions that cause decreased vWF:Ag
vWD:vWF:Ag usually<35%
*Type I: all vWF multimers present but proportionately deficient
Type II: deficiency of vWFmultimers with high M
Type III: absence of all vWF multimers, vWF : Ag = 0 %
*vWD carrier (rarely symptomatic):vWF :Ag usually 30-70 %
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Hemolysis or dlotted samples may cause marked false decreases in vWF : Ag values. vWF : Ag
268
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
3.Dogs with type 3 vWD have essentially novWF:Ag.
4.Most dogs that bleed because of vWD have vWF: Ag values <35 %.
B.Dogs with at least 70 % plasma vWF: Ag are considered free from the vWD trait.
They are not at risk for clinical disease and have a very low risk for transmitting the
trait to offspring.
C.Multimer analysis is necessary to document type 2 vWD.Functional testing may be
suggestive.
V.
Interpretive considerations
A.See the foregoing section (Analytical concepts, sect. IIl,A) for effects of improper
sample processing.
to vary considerably from day to day when healthy or diseased (vWD) dogs are
sampled serially.47
C.Exercise: Amounts of the plasma vWF:Ag in dogs may be increased after very
strenuous exercise.555 The vWF : Ag in horses increased as much as 100 % within
minutes after strenuous exercise.56
D.Pregnancy: Substantial increases occurred in bitches at parturition,with lesser increases
in the last trimester of pregnancy and for the first 12 wk after parturition.57
E.DDAVP (1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin):54
1. DDAVP increases the plasma vWF: Ag in dogs with type 1 vWD or in dogs
withoutvWD by releasingvWF from stores,probably in endothelial cells.58
Improved hemostasis afterDDAVPmay not be due to preferential release of larger
multimers as in people. In one study, the vWF : CBA increased proportionally tc
the vWF : Ag after DDAVP administration to dogs, without a disproportionate
increase in largemultimers.52
2.DDAVP can be used effectively to increase the amount of vWF in blood donor
animals when administered 3090 min prior to blood collection.9
F.vWF:Ag valuesmay also be increased by epinephrine,endotoxin,azotemia,6liver
disease,and other illnesses.
VI.
Genetic tests have been developed that can detect some vWF gene mutations in several
breeds of dogs andmay be useful in detecting carriers in specifcbreeds.636
COAGULATION
1.
Physiologic processes65.66
A.Coagulation is not synonymous with hemostasis. It is only one component of hemosta
sis and although intimately associated with endothelial cells,platelets,the fibrinolytic
system,andotherblood cellsitisdistinct from these components and canbeevaluated
independently in vitro.
B.Coagulation involves an interconnected series of enzyme-activating steps that form
thrombin (factor IIa) and convert soluble fibrinogen (factor I) into an insoluble fibrin
plug called the secondary hemostatic plug.
C.Most steps involve an enzyme, a substrate (fibrinogen, fibrin, or proenzyme forms of
coagulation enzymes)anda cofactor(e.g,factorVaorVllla）assembledand localized
on a phospholipid surface (e.g., platelet, leukocyte, or endothelial cell membranes) in
the presence of fCa²+.
D.The coagulation cascade or web can be divided into three pathways that can be assessed
separately in vitro but that have considerable cross talk in vivo (Fig. 5.2).
5/HEMOSTASIS
269
1.TF(extrinsic)pathway
a.This pathway is initiated by TF expressed on vascular smooth muscle cells,
activated monocytes, or other extravascular cells. Endothelial cells do not
normally express TF, and it is not certain whether they do when stimulated.
b.It activates factor X at the start of the common pathway.
c.It is inhibited by TFPI
d.It is important in initiating thrombin generation.
2.Surface-induced (intrinsic) pathway
a.This pathway is initiated when the contact coagulation factorsHMWK,PK,and
factor Xll contact negatively charged surfaces (e.g-, collagen).
b.It activates factor X at the start of the common pathway.
c.It is inhibited by AT,protein C,protein S,and protein Z
d.It is also activated secondary toTF and common pathway activation.
(1)TF-VIla activates factor IX.
(2)Thrombin activates factors XI and VIII
e.It is important in propagating and amplifying thrombin generation initiated by
the TF pathway.
3.Common pathway (common continuation of surface-induced and TF pathways)
a.This pathway is initiated by activation of factor X to factor Xa by either the
surface-induced pathway or the TF pathway.
b.It leadsto the formation of thrombin from prothrombin by the prothrombinase
complex.
c.Thrombin acts on fibrinogen to generate fibrin monomers and then multimers,
which are cross-linked via factor Xllla.
d.The pathway is inhibited by AT,protein C,protein S,and protein Z.
e.Thrombin activation of factorV amplifies the common pathway.
E.Coagulation factors (Table 5.4)
1.Enzymatic coagulation factors circulate as inactive proenzymes (zymogens) until they
are activated.
a.They are produced primarily in hepatocytes.The production of factors II,VII,
IX, and X is vitamin K dependent (Fig. 5.3). The “K" in vitamin K is derived
from the German Koagulations Vitamin (i.e.,“coagulation vitamin").6s
c.Half-lives of proenzymes in health: In people, half-lives range from a few hours
(factorVI) to several days (factors II and XIII),with most ranging about
1-2 d. Half-lives of coagulation factors in domestic animals are presumed to be
similar. The half-life of factor VII was <5 h in factor VII-deficient beagles
transfused with plasma from healthy dogs.69
d. Most enzymatic factors are not directly destroyed during coagulation (they are
present in serum）.The activated factors are complexed by inhibitors,and the
complexes are cleared by hepatocytes or the MPs.Enzymatic degradation of
some enzymatic factors (e.g., factor XIlI by plasmin) does occur. Some
thrombin bound to thrombomodulin is internalized and destroyed by
endothelialcells.
2.Nonenzymatic coagulation factors includeTF,fbrinogen,protein pro-cofactors
(factors V and VIll),fCa², and phospholipid.
a.
TF is the transmembrane cellular receptor and cofactor for factors VII and VIla
and the major activator of coagulation in vivo. It can mediate cell signaling and
kalikrein
HMWK
Negative
PK
charge
XII
XI
TF-V/la
fCa2+
fCa2
IX
PL
IXa
fCa2+PL
Vllla
X
十
fCa2+P
va
V,VII,XI
fibrinoger
fibrin
cross-linked
IIX
fCa2+
fibrin
Xilla
surface-induced (intrinsic) pathways, and results in the formation of cross-linked fibrin by the common
·TF pathway: It was originally thought to require extravascular activation and was therefore named
etrinsic. This pathway is initiated by TF released from, or exposed on, damaged tissue or activated
monocytes, macrophages, and possibly endothelial cells. These cells can be activated by endotoxin and
certain inflammatory cytokines. Cell membrane TF binds to factor Vll (and Vlla) in the presence of
fCa, and the resulting activated TF-VIla complex rapidly activates factor X (common pathway) and
factor IX (surface-induced pathway) in the presence of fCa²+ and phospholipid (PL). TFPI rapidly
inactivates TF-VIla, but not until thrombin is generated through the common pathway. Thrombin
activates factor XI and the amplification pro-cofactors V and VIII for sustained production of factor Xa
via the surface-induced pathway.
•Surface-induced pathway: It was originally considered the pathway activated by intravascular (intrinsic)
factors. This pathway is initiated by so-called contact activation, which is the activation of factor Xll by
contact with a negatively charged surface. In vivo, this could be subendothelial collagen exposed at the site
ofvascular njury.Invitro,kaolin,silicacelit,diatomaceous arth,rlass sufaesmaybenvolve.
Once formed, surface-bound factor XIla facilitates the binding of HMWK to the activating surface
probably by enzymatic cleavage of HMWK. Because HMWK circulates in association with PK and
factor XI,factorXI and the three contact activation factors (PK,HMWK,and factor XIla) become
closely associated.
●Factor Xlla activates PK to kallikrein, which enzymatically produces more kallikrein and more factor
Xlla in a potent amplification pathway.
Factor Xlla cleaves factor Xl, yielding factor Xla, which deaves factor IX in the presence of fCa² to
form factor IXa. Factor IXa then binds to the PL surface (in the presence of fCa²) to form the tenase”
or“Xase”complex with factor VIIla (activated mostly by thrombin),which cleaves factor X to form
factor Xa.
In vivo, the TF pathway is thought to initiate thrombin generation through activation of factors X and
X, and the surface-induced pathway is thought to propagate coagulation via thrombin feedback on
factors XI, V and VIll. Surface activation plays a minor role in activating coagulation in vivo; patients
with single contact factor deficiencies (e.g., factor XIl, HMWK, or PK) do not have clinical bleeding
disorders.
270
5/HEM0STASIS
271
metastasis).
b.Fibrinogen is a positive acute-phase protein produced by hepatocytes. It has a
half-life of 2-3 d in healthy dogsand is consumed during coagulation as it is
converted to fibrinby thrombin.
c.FactorsV andVIIl markedly accelerate coagulation by facilitating surface
attachment and localization of coagulation factors.
(1)Factor V may be produced in hepatocytes, megakaryocytes, lymphocytes,
and vascular smooth muscle cells.7 It has a half-life of about 0.51.5 d and
is consumed by APC during coagulation.
(2)FactorVIll may be produced inmultiple cell types,but hepatocytes appear
to be most important.
(a)It is sex linked. Its gene is on theX chromosome.72
(b)It circulates in a noncovalent complex with vWF but is distinct from
vWF.
(c)The half-life of human factor VIlI is about O.5 d, but it is less in the
absence of vWF, its carrier protein.
(d)It is consumed by APC during coagulation.
(e）It is a positive acute-phase protein,increasing in plasma with exercise
and infammation.7374
(3)Factors Vand VIll are consumed during clotting and are not present in
serum.
d.EDTA,oxalate, and citrate function as in vitro anticoagulants by binding fCa²+
and preventing it from interacting with coagulation proteins. In vivo, there is
always enough fCa²+ for coagulation even with hypocalcemia.
F.Physiologic inhibitors of coagulation help prevent excessive coagulation.Deficiencies of
these anticoagulants are associated with thromboembolic disease. Some of the inhibitors
can be measured.
Fig.5.2.continued
Common pathway: This is the common continuation of the TF and surface-induced pathways,beginning
with activation of factor XFactor Xa complexes with factor Va (activated mostly by thrombin) and fCa²
on a phospholipid surface to form the active prorhrombimase complex, which results in the enzymatic
conversion of prothrombin (factor II) to thrombin (factor Ila).Thrombin then activates platelets and
cleaves its many substrates (not all shown), which include the following:
•Fibrinogen: Fibrinopeptides A and B are cleaved from fibrinogen to form fibrin monomers, which
polymerize into fbrin polymers (see Fig. 5.6).
Factor XIII:Proteolytic cleavage of factor XIIl leads to activation.Factor XIIla,in the presence of fCa²,
cross-links fibrin and reinforces the secondary hemostatic plug.
Protein pro-cofactors (factors V and Vll): Proteolytic cleavage leads to cofactor activation and
accelerated coagulation.
Factor Xl: Thrombin activation provides positive feedback on the surface-induced and common
pathways through factor Xla.
Protein C: APC inactivates factors Va and VIlla, and promotes fibrinolysis via t-PA
TAFI:TAFIa formed via thrombin and thrombomodulin inhibits fibrinolysis by cleaving plasminogen
binding sites from fibrin.
Cofactor: TF binds and activates VIl, and the TF/VIla complex
sed g a sd pe uqg sso ex zu
Negatively charged platelet membrane lipoproteins important for
q s d   sr  
Proenzyme: Ila (thrombin) cleaves fibrinogen and activates V,
Pro-cofactor for IXa; cofactor after activation to VIIla
activation to Va
from HMWK. and leads to plasmin generation
Substrate for thrombin—converted to fibrin
VI,XI, XII, protein C, and platelets
Cofactor for Ila, VIla, IXa, Xa, and XIIa
Cofactor for activation of Xll and XI
in vivo activation of X and I
Proenzyme: Xla activates [X
activates IX and X
degradation
Proenzyme:
Proenzyme:)
Proenzyme:
Function
Surface,common
Pathway
Common
Common
Common
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
TF
Table 5.4. Coagulation factors, abbreviations, and roles
Platelet factor 3, mostly phosphatidylserine
* Parenthees indicate that the Roman numeral is rarely used.
Tissue factor (TF), tisue thromboplastin
Stuart factor, Stuart-Prower factor
Plasma thromboplastin antecedent
Antihemophilic factor
Fre ionized calcium
Christmas factor
Fitzgrald factor
Fletcher factor
Prothrombin
Proaccelerin
Fibrinogen
HMWK
Factor
自
PF3
272
5/HEMOSTASIS
273
Liver
Q2
Proenzymes of
Carboxylated
Factors II, VII, IX, X
FactorsI,VI XX
witamin K-dependent
ca/Doxylase
reduced vitamin K
vitamin K epoxide
itaminKredue
vitamin K
Cholestaro
Bile
Blle aclds
Dietary vitaminK
vitaminK
Carboxylated
BacterialvitaminK
Factors ll,Vll,IX,X
Intestine
Blood
Fig.5.3.Synthesis of vitamin K-dependent factors. Coagulation factors I (prothrombin),VII, IX, and X
•Vitamin K is ingested and also produced by intestinal bacteria. As a fat-soluble vitamin, it is absorbed
with lipid that is digested by lipase and ennulsified by the action of bile acids.
·In hepatocytes, vitamin K becomes reduced to its active form (reduced vitamin K). Reduced vitamin K is
a cofactor for vitamin Kdependent carboxylase, the enzyme responsible for postranslational gamma-
carboxylation of glutamic acid residues in these coagulation factors. Carboxylation is needed so that the
factors can bind fCa²,which induces conformational changes and enables binding to phospholipid
membranes.
·Reduced vitamin K becomes oxidized to vitamin K epoxide during carboxylation, requiring enzymatic
reduction before it can again function as a cofactor for vitamin K-dependent carboxylase.
·Carboxylated factors Il, VIl, IX,and X enter the blood, where they can be activated to participate in
enzymatic reactions of the coagulation system.
Vitamin K reductase is also known as NAD(P)H dehydrogenase (quinone).
1.AT (short for ATII) is the major inhibitor of coagulation enzymes. (Note: The
inhibitory activity of fibrin on thrombin is sometimes referred to as anrithrombin 
activity.)
a.It is a protein (M, =58,000) produced primarily by hepatocytes.
b.It binds, inactivates, and removes most coagulation enzymes from the circulation,
most importantly thrombin (factor Ila),factor IXa,and factor Xa.
C.AT-enzyme complexes are rapidly cleared via receptors on hepatocytes.5
274
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
d.AT activity is markedly enhanced by heparin (exogenous,or endogenous from
mast cells) and heparan sulfate on endothelial cells (Fig.5.4).
2.Protein Cis a vitamin Kdependent proenzyme anticoagulant and profibrinolytic
agent (M，= 62,oo）.The Cstands for the third (a,b,and c)fraction eluted from a
column.76
a.It is produced in hepatocytes and circulates in plasma with a half-life of 8-10 h
in people.
b.It can be activated by thrombin,primarily when thrombin is bound to
thrombomodulin,a thrombin receptor present onmost endothelial cell
membranes.
C.APC then inactivates factors Va and VIlla by proteolytic cleavage in the presence
of factor V and membrane-bound protein S (the Sstands for“Seattle,”where
the protein was first described）.76
d.Protein S is a vitamin K-dependent,nonenzymatic cofactor produced by
endothelial cells, hepatocytes, and megakaryocytes.
e.Additional anticoagulation occurs by this pathway because thrombin bound to
thrombomodulin cannot cleave fibrinogen, and the complex is internalized and
degraded by endothelial cells.
f.APC also promores fibrinolysis by inhibition of PAl.
3.TFPI (M,=40,000) is produced by endothelial cell,monocytes, macrophages, and
hepatocytes.It also circulates inplatelets and in plasma,mostlybound tolipopro
teins. In the presence of fCa², TFPI inhibits TF-VIIa by forming a stable quater-
nary complex: TF-VIla-factor Xa-TFPI.78 This inhibits further generation of factors
IXa and Xa via TF-VIla
4. Other circulating inhibitors of coagulation include PZl,heparin cofactor II,
O-macroglobulin,and a,-proteinase.
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Assay optimization for one species (e.g., humans) does not necessarily optimize for
and many are not optimized for the species being tested. This compromises their
sensitivity in detecting impaired coagulation.
B.Proper sampling and samplehanding are critical for accurateresults from most
coagulation assays.
C.Sample collection
1.For most tests, use a citrate vacuum tube or plastic syringe containing the right
amount of citrate for thevolume of blood to be drawn.Drawing into a syringe
without anticoagulant and then transferring the sample to a citrate tube is not
recommended,because coagulation may begin during venipuncture and progress far
enough to alter hemostasis test results prior to mixing with the citrate.
2.Sampling through nonheparinized catheters may be done, if necessary, after flushing
the catheter with 5 mL saline and discarding at least the first 5 mL of blood
removed (at least six times the catheter dead space).84
3.Sampling through heparinized catheters should be avoided, though a similar fush
and-discard approach produced results forhealthy dogs that did not differ signif.
cantly from direct venipuncture results.8s
4.Care should be taken to minimize activation of platelets and the coagulation and
fibrinolytic systems.
Liver
网
网
endothelial cell
Blood
Kidney
prothrombin
thrombin
AT
thrombin-ATcomplex
unfractionated heparin
&heparansulfate
primarily by hepatocytes and circulates in the blood,where it can inactivate thrombin (shown here) and the
other coagulation enzymes. As shown schematically, AT activity is markedly enhanced in the presence of
circulating unfractionated heparin or heparan sulfate on endothelial cells (1). Heparin or heparan sulfate
that increases its affinity for thrombin.Thrombin, generated from the activation of prothrombin,then binds
to the heparin-AT complex, forming a covalent l:1 complex with AT (3). The thrombin-AT complexes
(TAT) dissociate from the heparin or heparan sulfate and are cleared from circulation by hepatocytes. The
heparin and heparan sulfate act as catalysts and are available (4) for forming more complexes. Anticoagula-
tion by AT and heparin limits exoessive clotting, but AT and heparin do not inhibit coagulation enzymes
bound to fbrin or platelets.Therefore, localized and controlled coagulation can proceed where needed.
LMWH molecules also induce conformational changes in AT that enable it to bind to and inhibit factor Xa,
but not thrombin.
·Decreased plasma AT activity and concentration occur via consumption when intravascular coagulation is
increased or after injection of exogenous heparin. Decreased concentrations may also occur from decreased
hepatic production or from excessive loss due to protein-losing nephropathy or enteropathy.Decreased AT
produces a prothrombotic state that heparin cannot counter well because heparin requires AT for most of
its function.
Increased plasma AT activity and concentration may occur with increased hepatic production of AT. This
may occur secondary to the production of inflammatory cytokines.
Note: Nonphysiologic pathways are represented by dotted arrows.
275
276
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
a.Traumatic venipuncture exposes blood to TF, thus initiating coagulation that can
produce clotted samples or cause platelet activation and clumping.
b.Freely flowing blood should be collected by “clean” venipuncture on the first
attempt.Probing with the needle, sampling through ahematoma,or exiting and
reentering the vein will expose the blood to TF and activate the pathways to be
tested.
c.If collection is difficult, a new vein should be selected.
d.An excessive vacuum may cause turbulence and platelet activation.
e.The first few drops or a complete tube of blood may be discarded to decrease TF
in the test sample,but this is not necessary with“clean sticks.
5.Theblood and anticoagulant should be mixed immediately and thoroughly,but
gently.
D.Sample
1.Most coagulation tests: citrated plasma
2.Point-of-care instruments: citrated whole blood or citrated plasma
3.ACT:whole blood in special ACT tubes containing diatomaceous earth
4.Lee-White clotting time: non-anticoagulated whole blood tested immediately
5.Citrated samples
a.Siliconized glass tubes have been used routinely for hemostasis resting, but the
use of plastic tubes is becoming common. Although statistically significant
differences in test results have been documented in comparisons of plastic and
glass tubes with human samples,differences have been small and rarely of clinical
significance.86
b.Plasma or whole blood should be anticoagulated with trisodium citrate at a 1:9
(anticoagulant to blood）) ratio by using 3.2 % or 3.8 % citrate tubes (check with
the laboratory for apreference).
c.The citrate concentration significantly affects the results of coagulation tests on
human samples3.2%isusuallyrecommended.sanditcanhave significant
effects on some results with canine samples. The magnitude of the effect is not
knownformostconditionsormostspeciesbuta standardcitrateconcentration
with reference intervals generated by using that citrate concentration, instrument,
andmethod isrecommended.
d.Similarly, it is important to maintain the 1:9 citrate to blood volume ratio
because overcitrated samples (too little blood) may have reduced coagulation
activity (prolonged times) and undercitrated samples (too much blood) may be
hypercoagulable (reduced times).Problems associated with suboptimal filling of
human samples appear to be greater with 3.8 % citrate tubes than with 3.2 %
citratetubes.90
e.Even with the correct blood volume,Hct may affect the appropriate amount of
citrate to use.91
(1)With anemia, plasma may be undercitrated because there is more plasma
with the same amount of citrate. This may result in falsely shortened
coagulation times, but the degree of the effect was of questionable clinical
significance when PT and PTT results for unadjusted samples from anemic
human patients were compared to PT and PTT results from paired samples
adjusted to3.8% citrate.92
(2)With erythrocytosis,plasma may be overcitrated because there is less plasma
with the same amount of citrate.Thismay prolong coagulation times
5/HEMOSTASIS
277
because the excess citrate binds toomuch of the Caadded to the assay
system.
(3)Decreased citrate to blood ratios are recommended when Het >55% in
peopleIneasedrriosmaybeindicatedorHt25%buhed
has not been clearly shown.9
(4)The following formula (Eq. 5.1) may be used to calculate the citrate
volume required for anticoagulating a volume of blood with a given
Hct>55%:
C=0.002x（100-Hct)xV
(5.1.)
C: citrate volume (mL)
Hct: blood hematocrit (%)
V:collected blood volume (mL)
E.Sample processing and stabiliry4
1.Time and temperature before processing4
a.Exceptforwholebloodottingassaysstudiefhumanbloodindicatetht
whole blood samples may berefrigerated or kept at room temperature for up to
8-12 h (PTT assay for nonheparinized patients, TT assay, and coagulation factor
b.However,a goodgeneral recommendationisto centrifuge andremove plasma
within 1 h (room temperature storage)and test within 4 h of sample collection,
because thistime frameisnecessary for certain tests and certain samples57
2.Centrifugation and plasma harvest
a.After confrming the absence of clots in the sample,blood should be centrifuged
for10-15min at high g-force （e.g,15min at 1500xg),and the platelet-poor
plasma should be removed by plastic pipette.
b.Plasma that cannot be tested within 4 h should be frozen.
C.
Excessive platelets (10-200× 10²/μuL)remaining in the plasma because of
inadequate centrifugation forces will not interfere with PT and PTT assays for
routine diagnostic work but will interfere with heparin monitoring (via PTT
assay) and testsfor other inhibitors of coagulation.98.99
3.Plasma storage time and temperature
a.Plasma should not be placed in a serum tube containing a clot activator. This
will promote coagulation.
b.Frozen samples
(1)Human plasma may be stored for3mo at-24°Cor for 18 mo at-74°C
before testing,but theuse of frost-free freezers should be avoided.o0
(2)The results of stability studies of common hemostatic analytes in canine
c.Room temperature plasma storage
(1）Plasma from bealthy dogs yielded stablehmostasis results PT,PTT,TT,
AT, specific coagulation factors, and D-dimers) for 48 h when stored at
24 °C, except for mild decreases in [ibrinogen] at 48 h (it appeared to start
dropping by 24 h).94
(2)However, similar storage of human plasma resulted in stable [fibrinogen] for
7d,and TT,PTT, and factorVIII activity were decreased by 8h in samples
from beparinized patients.97
278
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
d.Refrigerated plasma storage
(1)Plasma from healthy dogs had less stability at 4°C than at room tempera-
ture. Values for factors VIII and IX were decreased by 48 h (they appeared
to be dropping by 24h),and PTT was prolonged by 72 h (it appeared to be
dropping by 48h).94
(2)In a similar study of human plasma, PT was stable for only 24 h ar 6 °℃,
and factor VIlI activity was decreasing by 8 h. Samples from beparinized
patients were stable for 8 h, although activities of factors V and VIlI were
dropping by 8 h.97
e.Stability of values in samples from sick or heparinized dogs has not been reported
and may differ from stability in samples from healthy dogs.Effects of heparin
f.When mailing samples for testing,frozen plasma should be packed in ice and
mailed to arrivefrozenwithin24h
(1)Samples should be tested promptly after thawing, and thawing should be
rapid tominimize cryoprecipitate formation and therefore loss of hemostatic
factors.
(2)Concurrently collecting, processing, and mailing a sample from a healthy
patient of the same species can be used as evidence that sample handling did
not induce abnormal results.
4.Hemolysis:Samples hemolyzed by in vitro factors should not be tested because
coagulation and platelets may have been activated by the same factors responsible for
hemolysis.
F.Instruments: A variety of automated coagulation analyzers, including point-of-care
instruments, are replacing manual and fbrometer methods of measuring coagulation
times for human and veterinary samples. Specific methods and sample requirements
vary with the analyzer. End-point detection of a fibrin clot varies with the type of
analyzer.
1.Electromechanical methods
a.Electrical conductance:Increased electrical conductance is detected between a
stationary electrode and a moving electrode as fibrin forms (fibrometers)
b.Electromagnetic viscosity:Analyzers detect decreased movement of a small metal
ball suspended in the sample as it oscillates in an electromagnetic field.
2.Photooptical methods detect changes in light transmission or light scarter as fibrin
forms.
inaccurate results when optical interferents are present (e.g., lipemia, Oxyglobin,
hemolysis, or icterus).
4.Synbiotics SCA200o Veterinary Coagulation Analyzer:The clotting end point is
based on optical detection of decreased movement of a small volume of blood as it
is pumped back and forth within a channel in the test cartridge.
G. General analytical approach: In vitro analysis enables independent testing of different
parts of the coagulation web (simplified to a“Y”) so that defects may be localized
within the surface-induced (intrinsic),TF (extrinsic),or common pathways (Fig.5.5)
Testinggenerally beginswith common screening tests,withmorespecialied tests used
when indicated.
5/HEMOSTASIS
279
XII
XI
IX
M
VIII
X
PTT
'PT
PTT
PT
ACT
ACT
工
Fibrin
Fibrin
surface-induced pathway (factors XIl, XI, IX, and VIIl) and in the common pathway (factors X, V, II,
and I). PT evaluates the short TF pathway (factor VII) and the common pathway. TT (and TTchus) assesses
only the conversion of fibrinogen (factor I) to fibrin with the addition of thrombin. Factor Xlll is not
assessed.
done at or near normal body temperature, so routine assays may not identify
hypothermia-induced coagulation abnormalities.
III.
Whole blood clotting times
A.Lee-White method102.13
1.This is a standardized,but rarely used, insensitive method of screening for defects in
the surface-induced and common pathways that uses non-anticoagulatedwhole
blood immediately after collection.Activation of coagulation is initiated by the glass
tube.
2.Protocols require multiple analyses, standardization of blood volume, clean glass test
tubes of a standard size,and a water bath (25-37°C).Several modifications of the
method have been used.1oVariations in protocol,including venipuncture technique,
bloodvolume,glass tubes size and coatingtemperature,and sample Hct,nuence
the results.
3.Reported reference values are 415 min for horses and cattle,3-13min for dogs,
and about 8min for cats. Longer times (821 min) were found in a group of nine
healthy dogs.105
4.When confounding variables are controlled, prolonged times indicate severe defects
in the surface-induced and/or common pathways, including those caused by
coagulation inhibitors (see Coagulation, sect.IV).
B.Activated coagulation (clotting) time (ACT)
1.Point-of-care wholeblood screening coagulation test of the surface-induced and
common pathways
2.Several ACTmethods are used in human medicine, largely formonitoring
heparinization.Negativelychargedparticulate materials suchaskaolin,celiter
diatomaceous earth are used to activate the contact factors.
3.Principle and method (conventional visual method)
280
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
a.Surface-induced activation:Blood (2 mL) is drawn by atraumatic jugular
（diatomaceous) earth,which activates the surface-induced (intrinsic) pathway.
b.The blood is mixed by five inversions, and the tube is incubated (37 °C) for 60 s.
The tube is then checked (visually while tipping it) every 5or 10 s for the first
definite evidence of a clot.
c.The time from contact of blood with silaceous earth to theinitial definite signs
of a clot is the ACT.
d.Units: seconds (nearest 5 or 10 s, depending on the frequency of inspection)
4.Interpretive considerations
a.Interpretation is similar to that for PTT (see Coagulation, sect.IV), but the tes
has less diagnostic sensitivity and may require > 90-95 % deficiency of a single
factor for a prolonged result.
b.Severe thrombocytopenia (<10×10²platelets/μL) is commonly stated to
prolong ACT, because of decreased phospholipid availability. However, ACT
values may beWRI with severe thrombocytopenia, andmoderate thrombocyto-
penia has no effect.10s.107
c.A standard protocol should be followed because modifications of the protocol
may affect expected values. Variations have related to syringe versus vacuum
collection,incubation temperature (various axillary temperatures versus aheating
block), length of initial incubation period, and frequency of inspection for clots.
5.A prolonged ACT indicates decreased in vitro function of the surface-induced or
common pathways(seeTable5.5).
6.ACTmay be used to monitor heparin therapy.
7. Automated point-of-care instruments are available, and manufacturer recommenda-
tions should be followed.
C.Synbiotics SCA2000 Veterinary Coagulation Analyzer
1.This is a point-of-care analyzer that measures PT, PTT, and ACT in whole blood or
plasma.
2. Manufacturer recommendations should be followed.
3.Reference intervals may be markedly different from those of other methods
IV.
Activated partial thromboplastin time (PTT,APTT,or aPTT）0
A.A screening coagulation test of the surface-induced and common pathways
B.Principle and method
1.Surface-induced activation: Citrated test plasma is incubated (37 °C) with an excess
of procoagulant phospholipids(partial thromboplastin) and a surface activator(e.g,
kaolin, silicates, or ellagic acid) to activate the contact factors.The chelation of fCa²+
by citrate in the sample limits activation beyond factor XIa.
a.The partial thromboplastin reagent consists of procoagulant phospholipids devoid
of TF, and therefore the reagent is unable to activate the TF pathway (factor
VII).
b. In the original PTT assay, the glass tube (rather than added particulates) was the
surface activator.1o To differentiate tests with and without added particulates, the
current testisreferred to as the actiuatedpartialthromboplastintime(APTTor
aPTT).However, PTT is used as the abbreviation in this text for simplicity. The
original test without added particulates is no longer used, so there should be no
confusion.
5/HEM0STASIS
281
Table 5.5.Diseases or conditions that may cause prolonged PTT
Deficiencies of functional surface-induced or common pathway coagulation factors
Acquired (usually multiple defects)
Decreased production
*Hepatic disease(necrosis, cirrhosis,portosystemic shunt)
Vitamin K antagonism or absence
*Decreased vitamin K recycling in hepatocytes: anticoagulant rodenticide
ingestion,coumadin overdose,moldy sweet clover ingestion (Meliletus spp.）,
phenoprocoumon toxicity
DecreasedvitaminK absorption:biliary obstruction,infiltrative bowel disease,
chronic oral antimicrobials,exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Increased coagulation factor inactivation and consumption
*Disseminated intravascular coagulation or coagulopathy
Localized consumptive coagulation or coagulopathy
Dilution of coagulation factors: acute,massive blood loss treated with massive
transfusion of plasma-poor fluids; e.g. packed RBCs and crystalloid or colloid
fluids, including Oxyglobin solution
Hereditary (usually single defect,but may be multiple)
Intrinsic pathway: PK, XII, XI, IX, VIII
Common pathway:X,V, II, I
*Inhibition of surface-induced or common pathway coagulation factors: heparin,FDPs,
anti-(phospholipid-protein) antibodies,antibodies to coagulation factors
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: ACT may also be prolonged in most of these conditions, but ACT prolongation requires
greater deficits in factor activities.
2.After a defined incubation time, a measured amount of prewarmed (37 °C) calcium
chloride is added to counteract the effects of citrate and enable the cascade of
coagulation to proceed to the formation of fibrin monomers,which polymerize to
form an insoluble fibrin clot that is detected optically or electromechanically,
depending on the instrument.The timefrom addition of calcium chloride to clot
detection is thePTT
3.Units: seconds (usually reported to nearest O.1 s, though reporting to the nearest
half-second or second may be more appropriate for somemethods)
C.Interpretive considerations
1.Values greater than a valid upper reference limit should be considered prolonged.
Values are sometimes interpreted by comparing them to values from a concurrently
tested healthy animal of the same speciesbut this is notrecommended.Neither is
requiring a 25% increase over theURL to conclude that the PTT is abnormal.
2. Laboratory-specific and species-specific reference intervals must be used because
results vary substantially with variations i spcies, analyzers, reagents, an
protocols.
3.As equine data indicate, values in healthy newborns (< 24 h old) may be greater
than reference intervals established for adults.o,
4.The test is relatively insensitive, bur, for optimized assays,results should be
prolonged when there is about a 70 % decrease in the activity of a single
282
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
coagulation factor(30 %of expected activity).In one study ofvarious PTreagents
and methods, the factor VII activity needed to keep PT WRI varied from 16 % to
39%.112
5. Milder reductions in individual factor activities may be detected when multiple
factors are affected.
6.PTT assayed at 37 °C may overestimate in vivo coagulation in markedly hypother-
7.Lipemia, hemolysis, Oxyglobin solution, and icterus interfere with PTT assays that
detect clot formation optically.
8.Excessive citrate orimproper handling (delayed processing,an old sample,or an
inappropriate temperature)may prolongPTT.
D.A prolonged PTT indicates decreased in vitro function of the surface-induced or
common pathways (see Table 5.5)
1.Pure deficiencies of either factor XII or PK are typically not associated with clinical
hemorrhage,but they are associated with prolonged PTT results in most assay
systems. A prolonged PTT caused by PK deficiency may be corrected by increasing
the incubation time of plasma with the particulate surface activator or by using
ellagic acid for surfaceactivation.1s
2.Carriers of hemophilia cannot be detected by PTT because they have only a
moderate decrease in factor activity (approximately 50 % of normal).
3.Unexplained prolongations in PTT, without other evidence of impaired hemostasis,
have been reported in cats.116
E.
Shortened PTT is not reliable for detecting hypercoagulability, though increases in
fbrinogen,factorV,or factorVIll with infammationmay shorten thePTT.17
F.PTT has been used to monitor unfractionated heparin therapy, but targets of
prolongation used for people (e.g., 1.5-2.5 times baseline) do not appear to reflect
appropriate anticoagulation in animals.Target prolongations vary with the PTT
assay and reagents,in partbecause partial thromboplastinreagents have different
a given plasma heparin activity,possibly because of greatrer factorV andVIII
activity.i2 LMWH has minimal effect on PTT because of reduced anti-factor Ila
activity.121
V.
Prothrombin time (PT), also called one-stage prothrombin time (OSPT)
A.A screening coagulation test of the TF and common pathways
B.Principle and method
1.Test plasma and a Ca²-thromboplastin reagent (containing phospholipid and excess
TF) are separately prewarmed (37 °C).
2.A measured amount of the prewarmed Ca²+-thromboplastin reagent is forcibly
added to a measured amount of the prewarmed plasma so that TF will activate
factor VlI in the TF pathway. Activation should proceed along the common
pathway so as to form fibrin monomers, which polymerize to form an insoluble
fibrin clot that can be detected optically or electromechanically, depending on the
instrument.The time from plasma-thromboplastin mixing to clot detection is the PT.
3.A heparin inactivator is generally included in PT assays.
affected by PIVKA,which interfere with the generation of thrombin and inhibit
coagulation in vitro
5/HEM0STASIS
283
Table 5.6.Diseases or conditions that may cause prolonged PT
Deficiencies of functional coagulation factors in the TFor common pathway
*Acquired (usually multiple defects); see Table 5.5
Hereditary (usually single defect)
TF pathway: VII
Common pathway:X,V, II, I
*Inhibition of coagulation factors in the TF or common pathway:FDPs, anti-(phospholipid
protein) antibodies, antibodies to coagulation factors, sometimes heparin
*Arelatively common disease or condition
5.Reagents and plasma may be diluted to prolong PT and increase the analytical
sensitivity for detecting abnormalities.Fibrinogen may be added to diluted samples
to ensure adequate fibrinogen concentration.
6.Point-of-care instruments are available,and manufacturer recommendations should
be followed.
7.Units
a.Seconds （usually reported to nearest O.1 s, though reporting to the nearest half-
second may bemore appropriate for some methods)
b. PT may be reported as a unitless INR for monitoring warfarin therapy (see
Coagulation, sect.V.G)
C.Interpretive considerations are the same as previously described for PTT.Unless used to
monitorwarfarin therapy,PTvaluesarebestinterpretedrelative to avalidreference
interval.
D.Prolonged PT indicates decreased in vitro function of the TF or common pathways
(see Table 5.6). PT is typically not sensitive to heparin because of the presence of
heparin inactivators in most thromboplastin reagents, but it may be prolonged with
certain thromboplastin reagents when blood contains therapeutic heparin
E.Shortened PT is not reliable for detecting hypercoagulability but may occur with
increased [fbrinogen] or factor V.117
F.PT is used to monitor warfarin therapy (target PT = 1.52.0 times baseline).
G.INR is a unitless ratio(Eq.5.2)used widely in human medicine to help standardize the
reporting of PT values to help correct for differences in thromboplastin reagents among
laboratories.25In Eq.5.2,reference PTis themean of a valid reference interval for the
species in question,not a random control sample value.The ISI (International Sensitiv
ity Index) is a number determined and provided by the thromboplastin reagent
manufacturer for each lot of reagent by using a particular PT method.The ISI, which
reflects the relative sensitivity of the reagent to factor deficiencies, is determined by
calibration against an international reference preparation.Thromboplastins with higher
ISI values are less sensitive than are thromboplastins with lower ISI values.
Patient PT
LS
INR=
(5.2.)
Reference PT
1.The INR was developed and used formonitoring oral anticoagulant therapy
(warfarin) in people.
284
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.It may enable more meaningful comparisons of PT results among laboratories but
does not eliminate significant interlaboratory differences.26
3.A reliable reference mean for the species in question is required for valid use of the
INR.
a.If a local human hospital is used for coagulation tests of veterinary patients,INR
results may be reported by using a human reference mean. Such values are not
valid for nonhuman samples.
b. Substituting a control sample value for the reference mean is not acceptable.
4.Examples using the INR
a.Different patients and different thromboplastin reagents but the same PT value
(1)Patient 1,ISI= 1.5:PT= 12.0 s;reference mean = 8.0 s (Eq.5.3a)
(2)Patient 2,ISI=2.3:PT=12.0 s;reference mean =8.0 s (Eq.5.3b）
(3)Patients 1 and 2 had the same PT(12.0 s) when patient 2 was testedwith a
less sensitive thromboplastin reagent (which had a greater ISI). The amount
of anticoagulation was acrually greater for patient 2, despite the same PT
value. This is reflected by a greater INR.
b.Different thromboplastin reagents but the same patient sample
(1)Patient 1,ISI=1.5:PT=12.0 s;reference mean =8.0 s (Eq.5.3a)
(2)Patient 1,ISI=2.3:PT=10.3 s;reference mean =8.0 s (Eq.5.3c)
greaterISI),the PTwas only10.3s,but theINR,and therefore degreeof
anticoagulation,wasunchanged.
12.0
Patient#1INR
1.8
(5.3a.)
0'8
12.0
Patient #2INR
=2.5
(5.3b.)
8.0
Patient #1 INR
10.3
=1.8
(5.3c)
VI.
Thrombin time (TT), also called thrombin clorting time (TCT)
A.This assesses the thrombin-induced conversion of fibrinogen to an insoluble fibrin clot
without being affected by thrombin generation. It differentiates hypofbrinogenemia,
dysibrinogenemia, and effects of heparin,FDPs, and paraproteins from other causes of
prolonged PT and PTT.
B.Principle and method
1.Thrombin is added to prewarmed test plasma (37 °C). Thrombin cleaves fbrinogen
to form monomers,which polymerize into an insoluble fibrin clot that can be
detected optically or electromechanically,depending on the instrument.Therime
from thrombin addition to detection of a fibrin clot is the TT.
2.Units: seconds (usually reported to nearest 0.1 s)
C.Interpretive considerations
1.TT should be differentiated from TTc(see Coagulation, sect.VIl),which uses
diluted plasma andhigh thrombin concentrations tobetter measurefunctional
[fibrinogen] with less interference by heparin and FDPs.127
5/HEM0STASIS
285
2.Lab-specific reference intervals should be used for interpretation because of method
variations.120
D.Prolonged TT128
1.Hypofbrinogenemia or afbrinogenemia: There is an inadequate amount of
fbrinogen to form a normal fibrin clot.16.129-132
a.Increased consumption from localized coagulation or DIC
b.Congenital or hereditary deficiency (rare)
C.Possibly because of hepatic failure and decreased fibrinogen production
2.Dysfibrinogenemia: Polymerization of fibrin is impaired because of abnormal
fibrinogen molecules.130-132
a.Hereditary or acquired production of abnormal fibrinogen (rare)
b.Acquired form that may occur with a variety of liver diseases
3.Heparinized patient or sample:Unfractionated heparin interferes with thrombin
activity via AT, so TT can be used to monitor unfractionated heparinization.12 TT
prolongation by heparin can be normalized with heparin neutralization.TT is
affectedrelatively littlebyLMWH.121
4.Increased [FDPs]: This interferes with fibrin polymerization and thrombin's action
5.Paraproteinemia:Abnormal immunoglobulins from multiple myelomasmay
interfere with fbrin polymerization.13
6.Systemic amyloidosis (reported in people): Plasma from affected patients may
contain an inhibitor of fbrin polymerization.13s
7.Hyperfibrinogenemia: Rarely, in people, hyperfibrinogenemia has prolonged the TT
but the cause is not clear.136.137
8.TT is unaffected by decreased activity of any coagulation factor (including factor
XIII) other than fibrinogen.
E.Shortened TT:This may occur with increased or activated clortting factors, or
with solublefibrin in the sample,but it is not a reliable measure of
hypercoagulability.
VIl. Fibrinogen
1.Calculated from TTclu amodification of the TT
a.Plasma is diluted so that fibrinogen is rate limiting.
b.Greater concentrations of thrombin are used to override much of the inhibition
caused byheparin and FDPs.
C.TTclus values of samples with a known [fibrinogen] and therefore activity
are used to construct a reference (standard) curve from which a test plasma
[fibrinogen] can be estimated.
2. TTclau is inversely proportional to [fibrinogen] when high concentrations of
inhibitors and dysfibrinogenemia are absent.
3.TTclus is measured in seconds, but values for [fibrinogen] are read from the
reference (standard) curve and reported in units of mg/dL or μmol/L.
4.Unit conversion:mg/dLx 0.0294=μmol/L (SI unit)
5.Heparin will not interfere at clinically therapeutic concentrations in human samples,
but it will interfere at high concentrations occurring after a bolus injection, with
inappropriate blood collection from a heparinized catheter,or with blood collected
into a heparinized tube
286
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
6.FDPs have a minimal effect on TTcu in human samples unless present at high
concentrations concurrently with hypofibrinogenemia.
B.[Fibrinogen] may be measured by detection of fibrinogen antigen
1.Anti-fibrinogen antibodies are used to detect fibrinogen antigen by immunoassay.
2.Prolonged TT and TTau with decreased fbrinogen antigen indicate
hypofibrinogenemia.
3.Prolonged TT and TTclaus without decreased fibrinogen antigen support the
presence of a dysfibrinogenemia (rare).
C.[Fibrinogen]by heat precipitation isnot precise or accurate enough technique foruse
in hemostasis testing.
D.Interpretive considerations
1.Plasma [fbrinogen] reflects the balance between production and consumption, not
production or consumption alone.
2.Accelerated consumption of fibrinogen during hypercoagulable states may be masked
3.As equine data indicate, values in healthy newborns (<24 h old) may be lower than
reference intervals established for adults.1.
VIII. Other specific coagulation factor activities (II, VII, VIII, IX,X,XI,XII, PK, and HMWK)
A. Other specifc coagulation factor assays may be used in specialized veterinary laborato-
ries if screening tests and clinical findings suggest factor deficiencies. The assays may be
used tocharacterize acquired deficiencies but usually are done toidentify hereditary
deficiencies Table5.7）.40.41
Table 5.7. Hereditary or congenital coagulation factor deficiencies reported in animals
Expected Test Results
PathwayFactor
Condition
Species
PTT
PT
TT
Tissue factor
VII
FactorVII deficiency
Dogs
WRI
WRI
Surface-induced
PK
PK deficiency
Dogs, horses
↑
WRI
WRI
IIX
Hageman trait
Dogs, cats
↑
WRI
WRI
XI
Factor XI deficiency
Dogs, cats, cattle
↑
WRI
WRI
IXa
Hemophilia Ba
Dogs, cats
WRI
WRI
VIIla
Hemophilia A*
Dogs, cats, cattle,
↑
WRI
WRI
horses
Common
X
Factor X deficiency
Dogs
WRI
ⅡI
Hypoprothrombinemia
Dogs
↑
↑
WRI
I
Hypo- or afibrinogenemia
Dogs, goats
↑
↑
↑
Combined
Vitamin K-dependent
Cats (Devon rex),
牛
II, VII, IX,X
WRI
multifactor deficiency
possibly dogs
These conditions have an X-linked recessive transmission and rarely oocur in females.
Note: Hemorrhage is not associated with isolated PK or factor XII deficiency. Factor XI deficiency is also
called hemophilia C.Multiple hereditary or congenital factor deficiencies also occur.
5/HEM0STASIS
287
B.Factor deficiencies are indicated if a l:1 dilution of test plasma with normal plasma
corrects prolonged PT or PTT (provides the missing factor or factors),whereas failure
to correct coagulation times supports the presence of an inhibitor see sects. XII and
XIII).
1.PTT is used for evaluating surface-induced and common pathway factor
deficiencies.
2.PT is used for evaluating TF or common pathway factor deficiencies.
3.Prolonged PTT or PT of the known factor-deficient plasma usually corrects with a
1:1 dilution of patient plasma if the patient plasma contains the missing factor.
However, the PTT or PT will not correct if the patient plasma has the same factor
deficiency.
4.To determine the amount of factor activity in the test plasma,a reference curve
(coagulation time versus reference plasma dilution） is generated from mixtures of
known factor-deficient plasma and serial dilutions of species-specific pooled plasma
considered to have 100 % factor activity prior to dilution.
a.By using the reference curve, observed clotting times for dilutions of the test
plasma are converted to % activity relarive to the reference plasma pool.
b.Units of U/dL or U/mL relative to the plasma pool that is considered to have
activity of 100 U/dL or 100 U/mL, respectively, are also used
D.Chromogenic assays assess the capability of a factor or cofactor to lead to enzymatic
cleavage of a chromogenic substrate, thus producing a detectable color change that is
1.Prothrombin activity can be assessed this way by using citrated plasma or EDTA
anticoagulatedplasma.144
2.Factor Xa activity can be used to assess the activity of unfractionated heparin or
associated with increased inhibition of factor Xa and therefore decreased formation
of a chromogen from a substrate for factor Xa.
IX.
Proteins induced by vitamin K antagonism or absence (PIVKA)
A.PIVKA are the incompletely gamma-carboxylated vitamin K-dependent coagulation
factors (e.g, des--carboxy prothrombin, often referred to as PIVKA-II because pro-
thrombin is coagulation factor II) that are produced by hepatocytes during periods
of vitamin K antagonism, absence, or deficiency (see Major Bleeding Disorders,
sect. II.B).
B.In these conditions,plasma concentrations of normally carboxylated coagulation factors
are decreased, and PIVKA are secreted and circulate in the blood at increased concen-
trations.The potential of PIVKA to become activated to functional coagulation
enzymes is severely limited.
C.Human assays
1. Clinical immunoassays are used in human medicine to specifically and directly
measure plasma [PIVKA], but they are not used in veterinary medicine.They can
detect abnormalities in thevitamin K-dependent factors that PIVKA-sensitive
2.Charge differences between PIVKA and their carboxylated forms also enable
288
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
3.Increased plasma [PIVKA] may occur with vitamin K deficiency,vitamin K antago-
nism,or as aresult of production bymalignant hepatocytesinhuman patientswith
hepatocelular carcinomas.147
D.The Thrombotest PT, a modification of the PT assay that is PIVKA sensitive, has been
referred toas a PIVKA test,but it isnot specific forPIVKA and does not directly
measure[PIVKA].148.149
1.It is a PT test that detects decreased activities of coagulation factors Il,VIl,and X
from any cause. Factor V and fbrinogen are not assessed because they are provided
in the assay.
because PIVKA appear to act as competitive substrates that delay the generation of
thrombin.PIVKA do not appear to interfere with functional factors in vivo.1so
3.Causes of a prolonged Thrombotest PT
a.Vitamin K antagonism or deficiency: The Thrombotest PT may have greater
sensitivity (than the regular PT) to detect mild vitamin K antagonism or
deficiency,and it may help differentiate these conditions from other coagulopa-
thies when appropriately high decision thresholds are used.However,when the
investigators’recommended decision thresholds were used,diagnostic sensitivity
Thrombotest PT (78.6 % and 99.7 %,respectively) and a traditional PT (83.3 %
and 97.2%,respectively).151,152
b.Other acquired and hereditary coagulopathies as for PT,excluding factorV and
factor I deficiencies (seeTable 5.6)22153.154
c.Cats with a variety of hepatic, biliary, or infammatory bowel diseases had
prolonged Thrombotest PT values, often without clinical evidence of a bleeding
tendency.148
(1) In a subset of these cats treated with vitamin K,Thrombotest PTvalues
wereWRI3-5d after treatmentwasinstituted,indicating that prolonged
Thrombotest PTvalues were at least transiently vitamin K responsive.
(2）Although the assay appears sensitive in cats,its diagnostic specificity for
clinically significanr bleeding tendencies is unknown.
X.
Russell's viper venom time (RVVT): The test is not widely offered. Direct activation of
factor X by venom of the Russell's viper leads to a clot.Prolonged clotting times indicate
an abnormality of the common pathway (factor X,V,II, or I).
XI.
Endogenous anticoagulants
A.Antithrombin (AT), also known as antithrombin II (ATII), is assayed to provide
information about a patient's anticoagulant status
1.Plasma AT is usually measured by chromogenic (functional) assays rather than
immunoassays that detect AT antigen but not function.127
2.Principle and method
a.Test plasma is added to a reagent containing heparin, excess thrombin or factor
Xa (depending on the assay), and the corresponding chromogen-labeled substrate
for thrombin or factor Xa
b.Increased AT in the test plasma causes less activity of thrombin or factor Xa and
therefore less color change (measured spectrophotometrically)
5/HEM0STASIS
289
Table 5.8.Diseases or conditions that cause decreased antithrombin (AT) activity
Decreased production
Hereditary (not reported in animals)
Acquired
Hepatic disease
Infammationpossibly,nsomespecis
Hyperestrogenism
Loss
*Protein-losing nephropathy
Protein-losing enteropathy
Severe hemorrhage
Consumption:increased hepatic clearance of AT-enzyme complexes
Localized coagulation (e.g., hemorrhagic trauma) or thrombosis
*DIC
*Sepsis
*Heparin administration
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Neonates may have lower AT values than adults.
3.Units
a.Units are % activity compared to either a species-specific or human plasma pool
considered to have 100 % activity.Because of species differences in AT activity,
reference and reported values vary with the species used for the reference
pool,155-157
b.AT also has been reported in U/mL or U/dL,where 1 U/mL or 100 U/dL
respectively, is arbitrarily assigned as the mean value of the reference sample pool.
4.StabilityAT appears to be stable in citrated plasma for 6mo at -70°C and for
6wk in wholeblood stored at 4 °C.157
5.Interpretive considerations
a.Foals and human neonates have been shown to have plasma AT activities that are
substantially lower thanadult values.sThismust beconsideredwhen
interpreting AT values in young patients, especially in the absence of age
matched reference intervals.
b.AT activity may be overestimated when measured by some thrombin chromo-
genic assays because heparin cofactor lI activity maybe detected in addition to
AT activity.157.159
6.Decreased AT activity155157.160 (Fig.5.4 and Table5.8)
a.Decreased AT activity may be either a cause or an effect of hypercoagulable
(prothrombotic) states.Other clinical and laboratory findings should beused to
help determine its pathogenesis.
b.Decreased production
(1) Inherited deficiencies have not been reported in animals but occur in people
as type I (decreased antigen and activity, a quantitative disorder) and type II
(decreased activity butnormal amounts of antigen,a qualitative disorder）
(2）Liver disease (including portosystemic shunts)6may cause or contribute to
AT deficiency in several ways, including decreased AT production related to
decreased hepatocellular mass.
290
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(3)Infammation may decrease AT production in some species.ATwas shown
to be a negative acute-phase protein in human liver cells and in baboons,163
but increasedAT activity has been suggested to reflect a positive acute-phase
responseinrabbiandcat.
（④）
Estrogens may contribute to AT deficiency by causing a mild to moderate
decrease in AT synthesis158.167
c.AT loss
(1)Like albumin,AT may be lost from the body in animals with protein-losing
nephropathy and with protein-losing enteropathy.168
utes to severe thrombotic disease in nephrotic syndrome patients, though
other factors are involved.169
(3)Severe hemorrhage may contribute to AT loss.
d.AT consumption: increased hepatic clearance of AT-enzyme complexes
(1)Localized coagulation or disseminated consumptive coagulation states (see
Thrombosis,sect.Il) may cause decreased plasma AT activities when hepatic
(2) Sepsis has been associated with a prothrombotic condition and decreased AT
activity.111.171
(3)Heparin therapy (unfractionated and LMWH) accelerates the use and,
thrforinedivi
Because AT is required for heparin’s full anticoagulant effects, patients with
subnormal AT activities are expected to have diminished responses to
heparin and may be heparin resistant.174
7.Increased AT activity
a.This is of unknown diagnostic utility and not considered a problem.
b.Exogenous cortisol administration to dogs was associated with mildly to moder-
ately increased AT synthesis,but dogswith hyperadrenocorticism had
c.Inflammation may increase AT synthesis as part of the positive acute-phase
d.Cats that were made taurine deficient had greater plasma AT activities than they
had prior tobeing fed a taurine-deficient diet,and cats with cardiacdisease
and hyperthyroidism had increased AT activities.166A role for thyroid hormones
in increasing plasma AT activities in cats has not been reported but could be
considered.176-179
8.Thrombin-antithrombin complexes (TAT)
a.These form whenever thrombin is generated in the presence of AT.
b.The[TAT]ismeasured to assess for activation of coagulation,especially latent
coagulation that is not otherwise apparent.
c.Increased plasma [TAT] indicates an increase in local or systemic thrombin
generation, which is associated with thromboembolic disease or hypercoagulable
states.180-182
d.Decreased hepatic clearance of TAT could theoretically contribute to increased
plasma [TAT].
e.Increased [TAT] may occur without appreciable decreases in AT activity.
fEquine and canine plasma TAT havebeen measured with a human ELISA,
primarilyforresearchpuose75s
5/HEM0STASIS
291
g.Units:μg/L orng/mL
h.TAT may readily form in vitro if collection techniques are poor and coagulation
occurs.186
B.Protein C
1.This is infrequently assayed in veterinary medicine but provides information about a
patient's anticoagulant and fibrinolytic status.Low plasma concentrations or
activities predispose individuals to thrombosis because of decreased inactivation of
factors Va and VIlla and because of decreased fibrinolysis.
2.Antigen concentration can be measured immunologically （by ELISA，radioimmuno
assay,or Laurell rocker electroimmunoassay),or activity can bemeasured by cot
a.Antigenic assessment does not detect functional deficiencies, including those
induced by vitamin K antagonism or deficiency (protein Cis vitamin K
dependent).
b.Results of functional assays vary with themethod,and species-specifc
functional aspects of the molecule and do not directly measure its capability
of inactivating factors Va and VIIla.However, these assays are less sensitive
than clot-based assays to coagulation inhibitors such as heparin. Some human
patients have had abnormal clot-based results but normal antigen and amidolytic
test results.
3.Results are reported as % activity or antigen relative to a reference plasma pool
considered to have 100% activity or antigen.
4.Decreased protein C activity
a.Decreased production
(1)Hereditary deficiencies (type I, antigenic; or type II, functional): A
(2)Vitamin K antagonism or deficiency (protein C is vitamin K dependent)
(③）
Decreased protein S (cofactor of protein C, which also is vitamin K
dependent)
(4)Liver disease with decreased functional hepatic mass
b.Decreased survival:consumptive coagulation and its predisposing causes (see
ThrombsisI
c.Inhibition: Anti-(phospholipid-protein) antibodies may inhibit the function of
protein S,protein C,or factorV16.90.19s
d.As equine data indicate, protein C activity (not antigen) values in healthy
neonates (< 24 h old) may be greater than reference intervals established for
adults.110,1
C. Protein Z
1.Protein Z is a vitamin K-dependent protein that serves as a cofactor for PZI.PZI,
first isolated from bovine plasma,9forms a complex with proteinZ on membrane
phospholipids and degrades factor Xa.PZI also degrades factor Xla but indepen-
dently of protein Z.
2.Roles for PZI and protein Z in health and disease are not clear, but mutations of the
PZI gene and deficiencies of protein Z or PZI have been associated with abnormal
3.Protein Zis similar to albumin in molecular mass, and plasma concentrations have
correlated positively with AT and negatively with proteinuria in people with
292
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
nephrotic syndrome. Urinary loss of protein Z may contribute to the prothrombotic
state seen in some patients with protein-losing nephropathy.
4.Protein Z and PZI have not been assessed in veterinary patients.
XIl.Coagulation factor antibodies (inhibitors)
A.Antibodies to coagulation factors are commonly referred to as inhibitors.These inhibi-
tors must bedifferentiated from endogenous physiologicanticoagulants,exogenous
anticoagulants, and anti-(phospholipid-protein) antibodies.
B.Conditions associated with coagulation factor antibodies
2.Antibodies may result from repeated transfusions to hemophiliacs who develop
antibodies to the deficient factor.
C.Coagulation factor antibodies may predispose patients to hemorrhage.
D.Approach to detecting coagulation factor antibodies
1.Coagulation factor antibodies prolong whichever coagulation times are dependent
on thetargetfactor,usuallyTT,ounexplanedrolongationsofPTTPTor
should prompt consideration of relevant deficiencies and inhibitors.
2.When PTT is prolonged but PT is not, unfractionated heparin should be considered
a potential cause.Resampling,analysis with aheparin inactivator,or evaluation of
TT (prolonged with heparin) could be considered
3.If heparin cannot be incriminated, the coagulation times should be determined by
use of mixing studies that assess the effects of diluting the sample 1:1 with platelet
free normalplasma. Coagulation times should be assessed immediately and after a
1-2hincubation at37°Cbecause some antibodies aretime and/or temperature
dependent.
a.Immediate correction of the coagulation time, with no prolongation upon further
incubation,supports a factor deficiency (including those caused by vitamin K
antagonism)rather than a coagulation factor antibody.Factor analysis can be
done to identify the deficient factor(s).
b.Failure to correct the coagularion time supports the presence of a coagulation
factor antibody or an anti-(phospholipid-protein）antibody （or heparin,if not
already excluded)
c.Immediate correction,but with inhibition after incubation,supports a coagula
tion factor antibody.
4. If mixing studies suggest an antibody, specialized rests can be done to assess for the
presence of anti-(phospholipid-protein) antibodies. Specific coagulation factor
antibodies can be assessed by combining mixing studies with specific factor assays.
XIII.Anti-(phospholipid-protein) antibodies
A.Rarely reported in veterinary medicine, these antibodies are immunoglobulin G
(IgG),IgM,or IgA associated with phospholipids (e.g.,cardiolipin,phosphatidylcho-
line,phophatidylserine,andphosphatidylethanolamine),but they appear to react with
specific proteins that bind to the phospholipids (eg,prothrombin,HMWK,factor XI,
protein C, and protein S).
B.Lupus anticoagulants area subset of anti-(phospholipid-protein） antibodies that inhibit
phospholipid-dependent coagulation tests (e.g, PT and PTT), thus prolonging times if
the test plasma is sufficiently devoid of platelets (and therefore phospholipid).Despite
the name,they are not restricted to patients with lupus erythematosus.
5/HEM0STASIS
293
C.Although inhibitors of in vitro coagulation, clinical manifestations are thrombosis or
thromboembolism,not hemorrhage.99
D.A series of specialized tests may be required to identify and characterize anti-(phospho-
lipid-proteinantibodiesbur the following support their presence:
1.Prolongation of a phospholipid-dependent coagulation assay
2.Failure of normal, species-specific,pooled,plateler-poor plasma to correct the
prolonged coagulation times when mixed with patient plasma197
3.Neutralization of the inhibitor by increased phospholipid in the test system
4.Exclusion of other coagulopathies
FIBRINOLYSIS
Physiologic processes
A.Fibrinobysis is the enzymatic degradation of fibrin.It counteracts coagulation and helps
restore normal vessel architecture and patency after hemorrhage has been controlled
with a secondary hemostatic plug.
B.Thefbrinolytic system,like thecoagulation system,is a complexnetwork of zymogens
enzymes, activators, and inhibitors (see Table 5.9).
C.Fibrinolysis is initiated simultaneously with coagulation and is normally localized to the
hemostatic plug.
1.When coagulation occurs, plasminogen (inactive zymogen) binds to fibrin.
2.t-PA released from stimulated endothelial cells binds to the fibrin-plasminogen
circulating cells or damaged tissue may play a similar role.
3.Plasmin enzymatically degrades fibrin, fibrinogen, factors Va and VIlla, vWF,
HMwK,and other prothrombotic factors
4.Plasmin released into circulation is rapidy inhibited,primarily by plasmin inhibitor
(ol-antiplasmin), and cleared by the liver.
D.The activation of plasmin is promoted by APC and inhibited by PAI, which APC
inactivares.
E.Plasmin degradation of fibrin and fibrinogen produces FDPs (Fig. 5.6), which can be
measured to assess fibrinolysis.
F.FDPs appear to be cleared from circulation by the liver (hepatocytes and macrophages)
and kidneys (via catabolism or excretion）.ss-2o Nonhepatic parts of the MPS may also
be involved.202.203
II.
Fibrin or fibrinogen degradation products (FDPs) (fibrin fragments + fibrinogen
fragments)
A.Purpose: The measurement of FDPs is primarily used to derect increased fibrinolysis
associated with excessive coagulation.It also may be used to detect increased
fibrinogenolysis.
B.Sample: serum or plasma
1.Serum assays: Blood is collected into special tubes containing thrombin or Botrox
atrox venom (reptilase), either of which can be used to consume fibrinogen via
and therefore in vitro FDP formation.
2.Plasma assays: Blood is collected as for screening coagulation tests (see Coagulation
sect. I); citrated plasma is used.
Fibrinogen
Plasmin,
Fragment X
Fragment Y
E
Thrombin
口口
sepuede epdo
Bβ42
FbrnopapldeA
Fibrinmonomer
Fragment X
Fragment Y"
口
Plasmin
Noncovalent
sssociation
BP42
2-stranded protofibril
E
E'
Factor XllefCa+
Cross-linked fibrin protofibril
E
D口
口
1
E
口
E
DXD
3
3
3
口
Plasmin
X-oligomer=D(X'）)Y/Y(X')Y
E
口
DXD
3
口
口
口
Plasmin
DD/E'Fragment
Y'D/DY'Fragment
Y"YDX'D Fragment
DXDN
E
+ other fibrin degradation products
3
Fig. 5.6. Schematic representation of the formation of cross-linked fibrin from fbrinogen (rbin arrvus) and of the plasmin-mediated degradation of fibrinogen and
fibrin to form FDPs (abick arroues).
•Fibrin formation: Fibrin is formed from fibrinogen, an elongated molecule that has a central E region and peripheral D egions (named for presence in the D and
E fractions of FDPs eluted from an ion-exchange column). When thrombin is generated, it dleaves fibrinopeptides A and B from the E region of fibrinogen to
form fbrin monomers. Unlike fibrinogen, fbrin monomers can polymerize (noncovalently) to form protofbrils of two or more strands (rwo are shown here).
Thrombin also activates factor XllI to factor Xllla, which cross-links adjacent D regions of diffrent fbrin monomers to form stable cros-linked fbrin protof-
brils. These can asociate to form larger fibrin fibers (not shown) and a stable dot or thrombus.
pu upqg se o paaa fpapaoo qusey ulouqg + suey uqg uoy o sas ogpads e usouqg pue upqg saap uus uoeg d *
fibrinogen degradation products (FDPs).
01 pppny X ue epuddeod o pue  se o paau sy es pu uy ey o pp ss o 
fragments D and Y, and fragment Y is degraded to fragments D and E.
 Non-cros-linked fibrin: Note that the degadation of non-cros-linked fbrin is similar, differing only because of the removal of fibrinopeptides A and B from
zsdg suy eus pue  sley y o ppp e sqgod p-oou pue s upq qg jo uoey q up uloqg
e  p y    pp  de ed
+ Cross-linked fibrim Plsmin-mediated degradation of crosslinked ibrin produces a diffrent set of FDPs because of the covalent bonds formed by factor XlIla
 ss  g oe
segments. These may be further degraded to other FDPs, incluing frngments DD/E' (the major teminl breakdown product), YD/DY, and YY/DX'D,2
• Antigenic similarities of FDPs produced from fbrinogen and fbrin make the current FDP asay nonspecific for ibrinogenolpsis or fbrinolysis with or without
296
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 5.9.Fibrinolytic factors and their major functions
Factor"
Function
a-Macroglobulin
Binds,inhibits,and clears plasmin from circulation
Fibrin
Major protein in a stable thrombus; source of FDPs
Fibrin fragment D-dimer
FDP that contain D-dimer moieties generated by
factor XIlla-mediated cross-linking of fibrin;
includes high and low molecular weight products
Fibrin fragments + fibrinogen fragments
Fragments of fibrinogen or fibrin produced from
(FDPs)
enzymatic degradation (fibrinolysis or
fibrinogenolysis); inhibit platelets, thrombin, and
fibrin polymerization
Fibrinogen (factor I)
Required for coagulation to progress to fibrin,
converted to fbrin via thrombin (factor Ila)
Plasmin
Major enzyme that breaks down fibrin; also may
degrade fibrinogen and other proteins
Plasmin inhibitor (PI,o-antiplasmin)
Binds,inhibits,and clears plasmin from circulation
Plasminogen
Inactive plasma protein precursor of plasmin; becomes
localized to thrombi by binding to fibrin and
fibrinogen
Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1
Inhibitor of fibrinolysis produced by endothelial cells;
(PAI-1)
inactivates t-PA and u-PA
Plasminogen activator,tissue type (t-PA)
Converts plasminogen to plasmin;important in
fibrinolysis within the vasculature
Plasminogen activator, urokinase type
Converts plasminogen to plasmin; important in tissue
(u-PA)
remodeling
Thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis
Zymogen activated by thrombin and
inhibitor (TAFI)
thrombomodulin;TAFla cleaves plasminogen-
binding sites from fibrin,thus inhibiting fibrinolysis
The nomenclature follows recommendations made jointly by the Scientific and Standardization
Committee of the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis and the Committee (Commission)
on Quantities and Units (in Clinical Chemistry) of the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry
(IFCC) and the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC).73
3.As with other tests of hemostasis,care must be taken to prevent or minimize
coagulation during collection and processing.When plasma is the test sample,
clotted samples should be discarded.
4.Stability:It is often recommended to test plasma within 24 h when it is stored at
4°C andwithin 20 d when it is frozen at-20°C.
C.Analytical concepts
1.Latex agglutination immunoassays are used.2o Dilutions of test serum or plasma are
incubated with latex beads coated with antibodies to human FDPs. Agglutination of
the beads indicates increased[FDPs].
2.Antibody specificity
a.The specific reactivity of assay antibodies with different FDP fragments from
veterinary species is not known, but cross-reactivity of some polyclonal reagents
with canine FDPs has been shown.2o5 Clinical correlations with disease also
5/HEM0STASIS
297
b.Two FDP assays, one serum and one plasma, did not appear to have clinical
utility in identifying fibrinolysis in horses with colic because there were positive
results in healthy horses and few increased values in horses suspected of having
DIC.206
c.The plasma assay uses a monoclonal antibody to FDPs that does not react with
fbrinogen,thus alwing theuse of plasmawhichcontainsbrinogen）as th
test sample.
thus necessitating the in vitro removal of fibrinogen by means of reptilase or
thrombin.
3.Unit: usually μg/mL (may also be reported in ng/mL or μg/L)
4.Reported semiquantitatively as the following:
a.Less than a low decision threshold (e.g,<5μg/mL with plasma tests and
<10μg/mLwith serum tests),belowwhichvalues are considered normal)
b.Increased (5-20μg/mL with plasma tests and 10-40 μg/mL with serum tests)
c.Increased more (>20μg/mL with plasma tests and >40μg/mLwith serum tests)
5.Interpretive considerations
a.Prozone: With a high [FDPs],agglutination may occur at the greater dilution but
not at the lesser dilution.
b. False results
(1)Serum assay results may befalsely decreased by FDP incorporation into the
clot as it forms.207
(2) Serum assays may be falsely increased by incomplete removal of fibrinogen
from the sample due to the presence of dysfibrinogenemia (rare) or heparin
(if thrombin rather than reptilase is used to activate clotting）.20s
(3)Generation ofFDPs during blood collection can cause false increases with
plasma or serum assays.
(4)Results may be false if antibodies do not bind to target FDPs or if they bind
to other proteins.
c.As equine data indicate, values in apparently healthy neonates may be greater
thanreferenceintervalsestablished foradult
d.Valuesinapparentlyhealthyelderlypopleareoftenincreasedprobablyrelatd
to changes in clearance rates or toanincreased incidence of ocult disease2
D.Increased[FDPs]occurs in numerous diseases and conditions in which at least one of
the following is present (see Table 5.10）：210
1.Increased fibrinolysis
a.Localized intravascular coagulation (e.g., isolated thrombosis or thromboembo-
lism, following surgery)
b.Disseminated intravascular coagulation
c.
Sepsis71 and probably many inflammatory conditions:2 The prothrombotic
statemayprogress to consumptivecoagulation,but clinicallyrecognizable
thrombi or associated signs are often absent when inflammation is associated
with an increased[FDPs]
d.Hemorrhage: Bloody fuid collected from body cavities after hemorrhage contains
high concentrations of FDPs, and an increased blood [FDPs] has been measured
in such affected patients. Increased [FDPs] and [D-dimer] have been detected
in the serum or plasma of dogs with hemorrhage,but valueswere usuallynot as
great as those in dogs classified as having thromboembolic disease or DIC.23.214
298
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 5.10.Diseases or conditions that cause increased concentrations of FDPs
Increased fibrinolysis
Localized intravascular coagulation
*Disseminated intravascular coagulation
*Sepsis and other inflammatory conditions
Internal hemorrhage
Increased fibrinogenolysis
Envenomations
Administration of plasminogen activators
Excessiverelease ofPA(hypotensive shock,surgical trauma,heatstroke
Decreased FDP clearance
Liver disease
Renal failure
*Arelatively common disease or condition
FDPs include D-dimers, but increased fibrinogenolysis alone will not increase [D-dimer].
However,an increased serum[FDPs] was not detected in dogs when hemorrhage
into tissue was experimentally mimicked by pumping blood from the jugular
vein to the peritoneal cavity or to muscle.215
2.Increased fibrinogenolysis from hyperplasminemia or high local concentrations of
plasmin
a.Certain envenomations216
b.Administration of plasminogen activators (eg, t-PA or streptokinase）27
C.
Excessive endothelial release of t-PA,for which causes arenot clearly defined but
may include hypotensive shock, surgical trauma, and heatstroke21s
consider this very unlikely.220
3.Decreased FDPclearance
a.Decreased hepatic clearance may contribute to the increased [FDPs] in some
patients with liver disease.2o
b.Decreased renal functionmay contribute to increased [FDPs] in some patients
with renal failure.98
c.Theoretically, decreased MPS activiry could contribute to increased [FDPs]
E.Effects of increased [FDPs] on other hemostatic functions and tests
1.Prolongs values for tests with clot end points (PT, PTT,TT,ACT, and Lee-White
clotting time)
2.Impairs platelet function
3.Mechanisms of anticoagulation and antiplatelet effects
a.FDPs compete with fibrinogen for the active site of thrombin and thus may
b.FDPs compete with fbrinogen for platelet-binding sites and thus may inhibit
platelet aggregation.223
c.FDPs associate with fbrin monomers and may disrupt normal
polymerization.133.224
4.An increased concentration of FDPs promotes an antithrombotic and prohemor
rhagic state.
5/HEM0STASIS
299
III.
Fibrin fragment D-dimer
A.Theory:It can be used to assess increased fibrinolysis associated with coagulation.It
should not detect fibrinogenolysis because antibodies should react only with fibrin
cross-linked by the action of factor XIlla (Fig.5.6)
B.Sample
1.The sample is usually citrated plasma collected and handled as described for FDP
analysis and coagulation assays. As with the FDP assay, when serum samples are
used, in vitro D-dimer formation must be prevented and D-dimer fragments may be
lost into the clot.
2.Stability:It is recommended to test plasma within 24 h when stored ar 4 °C and
within 20 d when frozen at -20°C.225
C.Analytical concepts
1.Although a canine assay was developed,2 it is no longer available, and routine
assays used to detect fibrin fragment D-dimer were developed for human D-dimer
measurement. These assays are immunoassays.
a.Reultsvary amng assaybeause theassay varyinmethodsalend
antibody used, and have lacked standardized and universal calibrators.
b.The diagnostic utility of the assays in animals is being explored and varies with
the asay and species6
c.Immunoturbidimetric,ELISA,card immunofiltration,and latex agglutination
agglutination is most widely used and can be run as a point-of-care test.
2.Antibody specificity: Most kits use monoclonal antibodies to human D-dimers that
do not react with human fibrinogen,fibrinogen fragment D, or other FDPs lacking
D-dimer domains.22s
a.Although the assay name suggests that only terminal D-dimer fragments are
measured, assays detect D-dimer domains on a spectrum of human fbrin
compounds.228
(1)Compounds include high molecular weight cross-linked fibrin complexes,
fibrin X-oligomers,and fibrin fragment DD/E'(Fig.5.6).
(2)Antibodies vary in reactivity, some preferentially reacting with high
molecular weight fibrin oligomers, and others preferentially binding to low
molecular weight D-dimer compounds.
3)D-dimer assays are specific for fibrin formation,but antibodies in some kits
bind human D-dimer domains without plasmin-induced degradation.229
(4)Some antibodies detect D-dimer moieties produced by cathepsin or elastase
activities.
b.The target molecules detected by D-dimer test antibodies in veterinary samples
are uncharacterized,and the specificity of the test antibodies for D-dimer
domains of veterinary species has not been proven.However, certain assays
appear useful
(1)Clinical correlations with disease suggest at least partialreactivity,although
these studies usually assess for positiveresults in animals suspected of having
DIC based on imperfect criteria.
(2)A point-of-care immunochromatographic assay with a monoclonal
antibody for canine D-dimer (not currently available) compared well to
ELISA and latex agglutination assays with anti-(human D-dimer)
antibodies.213
300
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
3.Unit: μg/mL, ng/mL, or μg/L, reported variably as D-dimer units (D-DU) or as
fibrinogen equivalent units (FEU); 1 ng/mL D-DU = 2 ng/mL FEU.
D.Increased plasma D-dimer]:Interpretationis similar to that for increased[FDPs]
except thatvalues should reflect only increased cross-linked fibrin formation and
fibrinolysis (not fibrinogenolysis) or decreased clearance of fibrin degradation products
(not fibrinogen degradation products) by the liver or MPs.230.23
1.In human medicine, D-dimer assays have been most useful in excluding clinically
significant thrombotic disease; such conditions are rare when [D-dimer] is not
increased.However,latex agglutination assaysmaynot detectmild increases
detectable with other assays and therefore cannot be used to exclude thrombotic
disease in people.
2. As for increases in the [FDPs], a variety of conditions cause increases in [D-dimer]
without overt DIC or thrombotic disease; for example,with inflammation,with
a.Testing serial sample dilutions of up to 1:8 and using increased decision thresh
olds increase the diagnostic specificity of results for clinically significant throm-
botic or thromboembolic disease.214
b. Diagnostic specificity for thromboembolic disease was 94 % in one canine study
using a decision threshold of 1000 ng/mL and including postsurgery dogs and
dogs with hepatic disease, renal disease, cardiac disease, and neoplasia. Diagnostic
sensitivity was still 80 % with this decision threshold.
3. Unlike in dogs and people, healthy horses have a detectable [D-dimer] when current
assays are used.Detectable concentrations are therefore abnormal only when
exceeding a defined decision threshold (e.g, >1000 ng/mL).206
IV.Other assays may be used tomeasure fbrinolytic components (e.g, plasminogen,plasmin
inhibitor, t-PA,and PAI-1) (see Table 5.9) or fbrinolytic activity (euglobulin lysis time
test),but they are notwidely used in clinical settings.Thromboelastography and resonance
thrombography are more global in vitro tests of hemostasis that assess the functional
contributions of platelets,coagulation,and fbrinolysis to the hemostatic process.Further
reading about these specialized techniques is available23-235
BLOOD VESSELS (ENDOTHELIAL CELLS)
Although blood vessels (especially the endothelial cells) are very important in maintaining normal
hemostasisviaprothrombotic and antithromboticpropertietheir assessment nthe clinical
pathology laboratory is limited primarily to tissue biopsy and histologic evaluation (e.g,for
vasculitis or thrombosis).Vascular lesions are usually obvious when hemorrhage is the result of
surgical or accidental vascular trauma. Diseases involving small vessels, such as RMSF and equine
purpura hemorrhagica, may be associated with petechiae and ecchymoses caused by combinations
of direct vascular damage, thrombocytopenia, and thrombopathia.Hemostasis testing may help
exclude other disorders but will not provide a specific diagnosis.
MAJORBLEEDINGDISORDERS:FINDINGSANDPATHOGENESES
I.
Diagnosis: The diagnosis of bleeding disorders requires knowledge of the general types of
bleeding disorders,considerationof clinicalfndings,accurate interpretationofhemostasis
test results,and recognition of hemostasis test patterns.
5/HEM0STASIS
301
A.Types of bleeding disorders
1.Blood vessel disorders are typically identified by nonhemostatic tests (e.g.,gross
examinationmagingerologyandbipsy)utmostatictstsareusfulr
excluding primary blood disorders and may provide diagnostic clues because of
secondary changes in blood constituents (e.g., thrombocytopenia with vasculitis).
a.Large vessels: surgical or nonsurgical trauma, invasion,aneurysms, and anomalies
b.Small vessels:vasculitides (infectious,immunemediated,and chemical) and
vasculopathies (rare)
2.Blood disorders: typically identified by hemostatic tests
a.Impaired primary hemostasis:thrombocytopenia,thrombopathia,andvWD
b.Impaired secondary hemostasis: hereditary or acquired defects in coagulation
c.Excessive fibrinolysis: DIC and some envenomations
B.Clinical findings are essential for establishing a final diagnosis, but the bleeding pattern,
breed, age, and gender may be of particular value in directing diagnostic plans.
1.Bleeding pattern
a.Petechiae and ecchymoses should prompt consideration of severe thrombocytope
nia or thrombopathia, though concurrent defects in secondary hemostasis may
also be present. Vascular diseases may cause similar hemorrhages.
b.Subcutaneous hematomas and hemorrhage into body cavities suggest defects in
secondary hemostasis, especially when petechiae and ecchymoses are absent.
However, hematomas may form with platelet defects.
c.Hemorrhage through mucosal surfaces (e.g.,epistaxis,gastrointestinal hemor
rhage, or prolonged estral bleeding) may occur with thrombocytopenia, thrombo
pathia,vWD,or defects in coagulation.Prolonged hemorrhage secondary to
venipuncture or surgical or nonsurgical trauma is also not specific
2.Breed and age
a.Breed predispositions for inherited diseases may help in selection of appropriate
diagnostic tests.237
b.Hemorrhage in a young animal should prompt consideration of an inherited
defect of platelets (Table 5.2), vWD, or coagulation factor deficiency (Table 5.7)
ifanothercauseisnotapparent.Molecular geneticstingmaybeavailable
for some characterizedmutations in some affected and carrier animals (e.g
vWD).238
3.Gender
a.Hemophilia A (factor VIII deficiency) and hemophilia B (factor IX deficiency)
are sex-linked (X chromosome),recessively inherited disorders.
(1)Males are either affected or not. They are not carriers.
(2）Females may be free of the defect,carriers (heterozygous）,or,rarely,affected
(homozygous).
(3）About 50 % of the offspring of carrier females mated to unaffected males
will inherit a defectiveXchromosome, so50%ofmale offspring will be
affected and 50 % of female offspring will be carriers.
(4)All female offspring of a clear female and an affected male are asymptomatic
carriers.
(5)Female offspring from a carrier female and an affected male can be
affected.
b.Therefore,these disorders almost always occur in males.Hemorrhage in females
is unlikely to be caused by one of these disorders.
302
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 5.1l.Possible causes of abnormal results for the major tests ofhemostasis
Test or analyte
Result
Possible causes
ACT
↑Time
Defect in surface-induced and/or common pathways
AT
↓Activity
Renal or intestinal loss,consumptive coagulation,
heparin administration, or decreased production
BMBT
↑Time
Thrombocytopenia, thrombopathia,vWF deficiency,
anemia
Clotretraction
↓Extent
Thrombocytopenia,thrombopathia
Coagulation factors
↓Activity
Hereditary or acquired factor deficiencies
(hypocoagulable state)
D-dimers
↑Concentration
Coagulation and fbrinolysis,decreased clearance
FDPs
↑Concentration
Increased fbrin(ogen）olysis,decreased clearance
Fibrinogen
↓Concentration
Decreased hepatic production, increased
consumption (may be hypocoagulable)
↑Concentration
Inflammation,hypovolemia (dehydration)
Protein C
↓Activity
Decreased hepatic production, abnormal production
(vitamin K antagonism or absence),loss,
consumption (may be hypercoagulable)
PT
↑Time
Defect in TF and/or common pathways
PTT
↑Time
Defect in surface-induced and/or common pathways
RVVT
↑Time
Defect in common pathway
TT
↑Time
Hypofbrinogenemia, dysfibrinogenemia, heparinized
patient or sample,increased FDP
vWF:Ag
↓Concentration
vWD orvWD carrier
↑Concentration
Exercise,excitment,prenany,vasopressin
* Chromogenic assays assess activity, but there are immunologic assays that assess concentration. Proteins
may be present but not functional.
Forassessmentfhemostasis,brinogenconcentrations areusually determindfromTTavals
which are inversely correlated with fibrinogen concentrations unless prolonged by high concentrations of
heparin or high concentrations of FDPs when fibrinogen concentrations are low.
Chromogenic assays assess activity，but mmunologic assays assess cncentration.Concentrationmay be
WRI while activiry is decreased if there is abnormal production of protein C (eg,vitamin K antagonism or
absence).
C.Hemostasis tests: A summary of available screening and specialized hemostasis tests is
presented in Table 5.11 to aide in selection and interpretation of specific tests.
D.Major patterns of hemostasis test results: Hemostasis in bleeding patients is best
evaluated by multiple tests (hemostasis profiles).Examples of the major patterns of
common hemostatic test results in bleeding patients are listed in Table 5.12.
1.Pattern 1:Prolonged BMBT without thrombocytopenia or severe anemia suggests
vWD or a thrombopathia. vWF analysis or platelet function studies may be
ally be prolonged with canine vWD if factorVIll is concurrently deficient enough
and it may be prolonged in horses with vWD.
2.Pattern 2:Prolonged BMBT associated withmoderate to severe thrombocytopenia
can be explained by the thrombocytopenia, though concurrent defects in platelet
5/HEMOSTASIS
303
Pattern
PT
PTT
FDPsb
Fibrinogen
Platelets
BMBT
Interpretationd
1
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
↑
Thrombopathia,vWD
2
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
↑
↑
Thrombocytopenia
3
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
Intrinsic pathway defect
4
个
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
Factor VlI deficiency
5
↑
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
Common pathway defect
or multiple defects
6
WRI
↑
WRI
WRI-T
Dys- or afibrinogenemia
7
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
Fulminant DICe
ACT would mirror PTT results in most diseases,but has less diagnostic sensitivity and therefore may be
WRI.
Plasma [FDPs], including D-dimer], may increase with hemorrhage (see the text).
 For assessment of hemostasis, fbrinogen concentrations are usually detemined from TTc, values,
heparin or high concentrations of FDPs
 See the text (Major Bleeding Disorders, sect. I.D) for expanded interpretive comments.
PTT may be prolonged in horses and occasionally in dogs with vWD if factor VIlI is concurently
deficient.
 This pattern applies only to the severe, fulminant form of DIC.
function orvWF cannot be excluded.BMBT testing is not indicated in patients
with moderate to severe thrombocytopenia because prolongations of BMBT are
expected and thus will not add new information.
3.Pattern 3: Isolated prolongation of the PTT indicates a surface-induced pathway
defect, though insensitivity of the PT assay may mask other abnormalities.
a.Acquired PTT prolongations: This may be caused by hepatic disease, heparin
contamination of the sample (e.g., inappropriate collection from a heparinized
catheter),or heparin therapy,and rarely is caused by vitamin K antagonism.Rare
surface-induced pathway coagulation factor or anti-(phospholipid-protein)
antibodies should be considered.
b.Inherited or congenital PTT prolongations (Table 5.7)
(1)Hemophilia A and B caused by deficiencies of factorVIlI and factor IX
respectively,are the most common inherited causes and may be associated
with severe hemorrhage. They are extremely rare in females because they are
X-linked recessive traits.
(2)Deficiencies in factor XII and PK are not associated with hemorrhage when
either occurs alone.
(3)Deficiency of factor XI is associated with mild hemorrhage, usually in
response to trauma. Hemorrhage may be delayed.
(4)Deficiencies may be multiple (e.g., factor XlI plus factor IX deficiency).
4. Pattern 4: Isolated prolongation of PT indicates a TF pathway (factor VIl) defect.
a.Acquired PT prolongations: Hepatic or hepatobiliary disease and vitamin K
antagonism or deficiency should be considered.FactorVIIhas the shortest half
life of the vitamin K-dependent factors,and three of the five factors in the
combined TF and common pathways are vitamin K dependent. Therefore, the
304
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
PTmay be affected by vitamin K antagonism or absence before the PTT,
especially when aPIVKA-sensitive PTmethod is used.
b. Inherited or congenital PT prolongations (Table 5.7): Factor VII deficiencies are
rare and associated withmild hemorrhage,usually inresponse to surgical or
nonsurgical trauma
5.Pattern 5: Prolonged PT and PTT without other screening abnormalities
suggestmultiple factor deficiencies or a common pathway defect (excluding
afbrinogenemia or dysfibrinogenemia, which would be recognized by a low
[fbrinogen])
a.Acquired disorders: Combined deficiencies of vitamin K-dependent factors
(II, VII, IX, and X) caused by vitamin K antagonism or deficiency may lead tc
gen] and decreases in [FDPs] have been reported in people receiving warfarin and
may occur in other species.Hepatic disease should also be considered,especially
if [fibrinogen] or activity is low-normal.Variations of this pattern seen with
hepatic disease include combinations of increased [FDPs],decreased [fbrinogen],
thrombocytopenia, and prolonged BMBT.
b. Inherited or congenital disorders (Table 5.7): Rare inherited factor X or factor II
deficiency could be considered andmay be associared with severe hemorrhagic
tendencies.A similar clinical and laboratory pattern could be caused by rare
hereditary defects in vitamin K-dependent carboxylase (so-called vitamin
K-dependentmultifactor deficieny,reportedinDevonrexcatsand ossibly
found in a Labrador retriever).239.240
6.Pattern 6:Prolonged PT and PTT with hypofibrinogenemia and possibly prolonged
BMBT
a.Acquired disorders:Hepatic disease is a consideration for this pattern (see the
discussion of pattern 5）. Consumptive coagulation (e.g,DIC) could also be
considered,but thrombocytopenia and increased[FDPs] and/or [D-dimer] are
usually expected with DIC.
b. Inherited or congenital disorders: A marked decrease in [ibrinogen] along with
prolonged PT and PTT should prompt consideration of rare inherited dysfibrin
BMBT maybe prolonged.
7.Pattern 7: Prolonged PT and PTT with increased [FDPs], hypofibrinogenemia, and
thrombocytopenia are typical of fulminant DIC, whatever the cause. Such a patient
hepatic failure could be similar.
II.
Pathogenesis: The pathogeneses of hemorrhagic defects in primary hemostasis relare to
specificabnormalitiesordficienciesinplatelets,WForthevessel wall.Inheriteddisorders
of secondary hemostasis are caused by various genetic alterations that result in decreased,
absent, or abnormal hemostatic factors. Acquired bleeding disorders often have a more
complex pathogeneses.The pathogeneses of hemostatic abnormalities are discussed for the
following selected acquired bleeding disorders:
A.Hepatic diseasel6
1.Liver disease can cause defects in the production and clearance of procoagulants,
anticoagulants,profibrinolytics,and antifbrinolytics.Thenetresult is often clini
cally silent despite abnormalities in hemostatic laboratory tests.
5/HEM0STASIS
305
2.Bleeding is uncommon but may occur if hepatic failure is severe or associated with
DIC. Other laboratory evidence of hepatic failure would be expected in a patient
bleeding because of the hepatic failure.
3.Potential abnormal hemostatictest results and their causes
a.Prolonged PT,PTT,ACT,or TT
(1)Decreased hepatic production of coagulation factors because of decreased
functional heparicmass(includingportosystemic shunts)
(2)Abnormal production of vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors because
of decreasedvitaminKabsorption secondaryto cholestasisor,possibly
decreased food intake
b.Increased [FDPs] and/or[D-dimer]
(1) Decreased hepatic clearance of FDPs and plasminogen activators
(2)Increased FDP production(fibrinolysis) because of accompanying intravas-
cular coagulation, which is sometimes disseminated
c.Thrombocytopenia
(1)Increased splenic sequestration caused by portal hypertension, splenomegaly,
and possibly decreased thrombopoietin production
(2) Consumption secondary to accompanying intravascular coagulation
d.Prolonged BMBT
(1)Thrombocytopenia
(2）Acquired thrombopathia
e.Decreased [fbrinogen]
(1)Decreased hepatic production
(2)Consumption secondary to accompanying intravascular coagulation
f.Decreased AT activity
(1)Decreased hepatic production
(2)Consumption secondary to accompanying intravascular coagulation
gThrombopathia: increased [FDPs] or unknown causes
4.Laboratory findings may mimic consumptive coagulation and/or consumptive
coagulopathy.
prothrombotic processes is not altered as much as the function of the isolated
processes that are tested. Similarly, bleeding secondary to biopsy procedures in dogs
and cats does not appear to be predictable from PT and PTT results, although, in
cats, there was an association between major complications and PTT prolongation
of at least 1.5x themean of thereference interval.23Bleeding complications in dogs
and cats are more strongly associated with thrombocytopenia than with prolonged
PT and PTT.
B.Vitamin K antagonism or deficiency
1.Vitamin K antagonism: Bleeding is common and may be external and obvious or
internal and occult. It usually oocurs 3-7 d after exposure.
a.Viramin K antagonists may be ingested in several forms:
(1)Hydroxycoumarins or indanediones in anticoagulant rodenticide
products;for example,warfarin,bromadiolone,brodifacoum,and
diphacinone (specifically detectable by high-performance liquid
chromatography).
306
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(2)Sweet clover or sweet vernal grass containing bishydroxycoumarin, a
metabolite produced from the actions of certain mold4245
(3)Therapeutic coumadins: From an overdose,because of displacement from
plasma proteins by additional protein-binding drugs (e.g, phenylbutazone),
or by ingestion of medication intended for human patients (includes
(4)Excess sulfaquinoxaline, a coocidiostat with vitamin K antagonistic
effects247-249
b.Once absorbed,these compounds inhibit the enzymaticrecycling of oxidized
vitaminK back to its reduced and functional form in hepatocytes,thus leading
to production of coagulation factors with decreased functional potential
(Fig. 5.7). when normal coagulation factors in the circulation (t = 640 h)
decrease enough,coagulation times become prolonged (within 24 h)25 and
hemorrhage may occur.
2.Vitamin K deficiency (hypovitaminosis K) is rarely deficient enough to cause
hemorrhage.
a.Vitamin K is absorbed in the intestine after ingestion or production by intestinal
bacteria.
b.Causes of clinically significant vitamin K deficiency have not been clarified in
most species, but the following should be considered:
ute to vitamin K deficiency.In contrast,normal diets contain excess vitamin
K.251,252
(2)Gut sterilization by antimicrobials may cause or contribute to vitamin K
deficiency.251.253
(3）Malabsorption of vitamin K (a fat-soluble vitamin）14s
(a)Intrahepatic or extrahepatic cholestasis (decreased fat digestion and
absorption, and therefore decreased vitamin K absorption)
(b)Intestinal malabsorption diseases (e.g., infiltrative bowel disease)
(c)Exocrine pancreatic insuficiency (decreased fat digestion and absorp-
tion, and therefore decreased vitamin K absorption)
c.Diminished,but not absent,vitamin Kmay lead to a subclinical mixture of
normal coagulation factors andPIVKA.VitaminK supplementation was
associated with a correction of prolonged PIVKA-sensitive PT values in cats with
intestinal or hepatic diseases.148
3.Causesof abnormal hemostatic test results
a.Prolonged PT,PTT,or ACT
(1)Decreased amounts of functional vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors
participating in the surface-induced (factor IX),TF (factor VI), and
common (factors X andIl) pathways
(2)Although PT is expected to be prolonged before PTT,there may be
prolongation of PTT alone, PT alone, or both values, depending on the
opizanfasaynal
b.Thrombocytopenia
(1)If present, thrombocytopenia probably results mostly from consumption at
multiple sites of hemorrhage.
(2）
When moderate or marked,BMBTprolongation would be expected,
especially if the patient is anemic.
Liver
CO2
Proenzymesof
Poorly carboxylated
FactorsIl,Vll,IX,X
FactorsIl,VI,IX,X
carboryjiase
vitaminKepoxide
vitaminK
Cholesterol
Bile
duct
Coumarins
Bile acids
Dietary vitamin K/
Coumarins
vitamin K
BacterialvitaminK
Poorly carboxylated
Intestine
Factors Il,VIl,X,X
Blood
(PIVKA)
Fig.5.7.Effects of vitamin K antagonism or deficiency on hepatocyte production of vitamin K-dependent
that result n production of defective actorsII,VIIX,andX:
1. Antagonism: Ingested anticoagulant rodenticides or other coumarins are absorbed in the intestine. In
hepatocytes, they inhibit the enzymatic reduction of vitamin K epoxide back to reduced vitamin K,
which is the form of vitamin K required for the vitamin Kdependent carboxylase enzyme to carboxylate
the coagulation proteins.Failure to recycle vitamin K leads to decreased amounts of reduced vitamin K
and increased amounts of vitamin K epoxide. Factors Il, Vll, IX, and X are still produced, however. They
enter the blood and circulate in a permanently hypofunctional or nonfunctional state.These poorly
carboxylated or noncarboxylated coagulation factors are known as PIVKA (proteins induced by vitamin
K antagonism) and in people can be measured with specific antibodies. Plasma vitamin K epoxide
concentrations increase (not shown). Vitamin K administration overrides competitive inhibition of
vitamin K reductase and enables functional factors to be produced.
2. Absence because of cholestasis (intrahepatic or posthepatic): Impaired bile fow reduces fat absorption
because not enough bile acids are reaching the intestine to emulsify ingested fats properly. Consequently,
fewer fat-soluble vitamins, including vitamin K, are absorbed, and a vitamin K deficiency may develop.
The deficiency causes impaired carboxylation of vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors despite normal
activiry of reducing enzymes. Noncarboxylated factors are produced and enter the blood, where they are
known as PIVKA (proteins induced by vitamin K absence). Amounts of vitamin K epoxide would not
increase in this case.
3.Absence because of other causes: Anorexia (decreased dietary intake of vitamin K), decreased vitamin K
production by intestinal bacteria (e.g., after antibiotics), intestinal malabsorptive disease, or exocrine
pancreatic insuffciency can contribute to,or rarely cause,vitaminK deficiency.
307
308
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
c.Factor analysis is typically not necessary, but deficiencies in vitamin Kdependent
factors would be noted.
d.Other abnormalities have not been widely described, but decreased [FDPs],
including D-dimer, and increased [fbrinogen] may result from decreased
coagulation and consequently decreased fibrinolysis. Prolonged TT reported in
4.Rare hereditary defects in vitamin K-dependent carboxylase (vitamin K-dependent
multifactor deficiency) produce similar hemostatic abnormalities, but vitamin K is
C.Consumptive coagulopathy
1.Consumptive coagulation is the process of accelerated or unbalanced coagulation that
may cause a disorder of deficient coagulation referred to as consumptive coagulopathy.
2.Consumptive coaguloparhy results from local or disseminated consumptive coagulation
when procoagulant blood components are destroyed or removed from circulation
(consumed) and FDPs are generated.
3.It may arise from DlC, in which case bleeding is common.
a.DIC is a syndrome of consumptive coagulation occurring throughout the
vasculature(disseminated and intravascular).
b.It is always secondary to a condition that causes unbalanced or excessive
coagulation.
(1）Causesinclude everetissueecrosis,angiostrongylosis,heatstroke,dissm
nated noplasianotoxemia,psis,pancreatitis,hpatic isease,r som
envenomations.
(2)Coagulation is often initiated by TF release from damaged tissues, neoplastic
cells,or endotoxin-stimulated cells or by surface-induced activation caused
bymassive endothelial cell damage or activation.Many snake venoms
c.It may be acute or chronic, compensated or uncompensated
d.When production of procoagulant factors does not keep up with consumption,
excessive coagulation can lead to defective coagulation (i.e., consumptive
coagulopathy)
4.Consumptive coagulopathy may arise from localized consumptive coagulation, in
a.Excessive coagulation in a localized area or organ can produce laboratory signs of
consumptive coagulation and,rarely,clinical bleeding. Correction of the localized
problem maybe curative
b.Human examples include aortic aneurysm and large hemangiomas.With these
conditions,disseminatedintravascular coagulation doesnot occur,but localized
hemostatic abnormalities may lead to a coagulopathy.Large cutaneous and
splenic hemangiomas and hemangiosarcomas may be examples of localized
consumptive coagulation in dogs.However,the changes have usually been
interpreted as DIC.
5.Clinical signs vary from subclinical to serious hemorrhage, shock, or signs of
multiple organ failures caused by thromboembolism or hemorrhage. Signs of the
underlying disease may also be present.
6.Consumptive coagulopathy can be recognized when the typical laboratory and
are thrombocytopenia,prolonged PT and PTT, increased[D-dimer]and [FDPs],
5/HEM0STASIS
309
decreased AT activity, or trends toward these abnormalities with serial measure-
ments.However,combinations of these abnormalities can occur without consump-
tive coagulation/coagulopathy, and the patterns of laboratory abnormalities vary
considerably and depend on severity, duration, and underlying or concurrent
disorders.
7.Causes of abnormal hemostatic test results
a.Hypofbrinogenemia: Fibrinogen is consumed as it is transformed into fibrin
during excessive coagulation. Because fibrinogen is a positive acute-phase protein,
increased hepatic production may occur in inflammatory states and mask the
hypofibrinogenemia typical of consumptive coagulation.
b. Thrombocytopenia: Platelets are consumed as they patch exposed vascular
defects,become incorporated into thrombi,or become activated secondary to
thrombin andotherplatelet agonistsformedin theblood
c.Prolonged PT, PTT, and ACT: Hypofibrinogenemia, increased [FDPs], and
decreased functional coagulation factors may all contribute
(1)Once the nonenzymatic coagulation cofactors V andVIlI become activated
to factors Va and VIlla, they are inactivated by APC. Decreased factor V
andVilI concentrations will develop if activation and inactivation occur at a
greater rate than production and secretion.
(2) Coagulation enzymes in the surface-induced and common pathways are
bound by AT or other antiproteases and removed from circulation by
hepatocytes.Thrombin also binds thrombomodulin on endothelial cell
membranes,and the complex is internalized and degraded.If the rate of
enzyme inactivation and removal remains greater than the rate of production
and release of new proenzymes, plasma activity of these coagulation factors
decreases.
(3) FDPs from fibrinolysis interfere with fibrin formation
d.DecreasedAT activity:AfterAT binds to activated coagulation enzymes,the
complexes are removed from the circulation by hepatocytes. If the rate of removal
remainsgreater than the rate of production andrelease ofnew AT,plasma AT
activity decreases.
e.Increased [FDPs] and[D-dimer]:With activation of coagulation pathways,cross-
linked fibrin forms, with concurrent activation of fibrinolysis and plasmin-
mediated degradation of fibrin and possibly fibrinogen.This leads to the
increased formation of FDPs and D-dimers
f.Prolonged TT and TTclm This can be caused by hypofibrinogenemia and
increased [FDPs].
gProlonged BMBT: This can be caused by thrombocytopenia and increased
[FDPs].FDPs interfere with platelet function.
h.Erythrocyte fragmentation:This occurs from intravascular trauma (microangio
pathic fragmentation).Schizocytes,keratocytes,and lownumbersof spherocytes
may be found in blood films.
D.Dilutional coagulopathy:Infusion of large volumes of colloid fuids, crystalloid fuids,
plasma-poor packed erythrocytes, or Oxyglobin solution (a hemoglobin-based oxygen
carrier) to treat massive, acute blood loss expands blood volume and transiently dilutes
bloodcomnentnludingcoagulainfactrslalesWndringen
Thismay result in prolonged coagulation times and contribute to hemorrhage,but it
alone is not expected to cause hemorrhage.259-261 Compared to saline, high molecular
310
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
weight colloids (dextrans,oxypolygelatin, and hetastarch) may have additional effects
on hemostasis, such as causing greater decrements in the amount of plasma fibrinogen
and vWF:Ag. The effects depend on the fuid infused, the rate of infusion, and the
fibrinogen,brin clots cannot form,hus prolonging PT,PTT,ACT,and TT.Because
fbrinogen isthemajorinterplateletbridge during aggregationBMBTmaye
prolonged.
F.Inhibition of functional coagulation factors263
1.Heparinization
a.Heparin administration or release from neoplastic mast cells may prolong
mechanism of action).
b.Unfractionated heparin prolongs PTT and ACT values but typically not PT
values. PT assays generally contain a heparin inactivator.
c.LMWH decreases factor Xa activity and may or may not prolong PTT.
d.AT activity decreases after heparin administration.
and TT), and decrease platelet function.
3.Antibodies to coagulation factors264
a.As with human hemophiliac patients receiving multiple transfusions,dogs
transfused for hemophilia A and hemophilia B have also produced antibodies to
thefactor they lack.265,26
b. Antibodies may also form as an autoimmune phenomenon, and they may have
reactivity to coagulation factors other than factorsVIlI andIX.
C.Antibodies can prolong coagulation times of the affected pathway or pathways
because of antibody-mediated inhibition of the target protein.
d.Normal pooled plasma does not correct the prolonged coagulation times when
mixed with patient plasma; prolonged coagulation times reflect an increased
propensity to bleed.
THROMBOSIS
I.
Thrombosis is the formation of thrombi within the vascular system. Thrombi are in vivo
"clots” but adherent to the vessel or heart wall and composed of varying amounts of fibrin
and blood cells.Thrombi that form under high-fow conditions (arterial) contain more
platelets. Thrombi that form under low-flow conditions (venous) contain more erythrocytes
and fewer platelets.
II.
Thrombi formwhen the normal balance between prothrombotic factors and antithrom
botic factors shifts to favor thrombosis (i.e.,thrombophilia).The specific reasons for this
shift are not completely understood for many conditions.
A.The shift may occur with disorders involving one or more of the following
mechanisms:
1.Endothelial cel activation or damage
2. Platelet activation
3.Activation of coagulation
4.Blood stasis
5/HEM0STASIS
311
5.Inhibition of fibrinolysis
6.Deficiencies or abnormalities in anticoagulant proteins (e.g.,AT,protein C,protein
S,factor V,and possibly protein ZorPZl)or abnormalities in coagulant proteins
(e.g.,prothrombin)267
B.Acquired conditions associated with thrombosis include the following
1.Vasculitisendocarditisntravascular cathetrization,andinjection of chemial
irritants
2.
Congestive heart failure, feline cardiomyopathy, and vascular defects
3.
Surgical or nonsurgical trauma
4.
Malignant neoplasia
5.
Sepsis, endotoxemia, and equine colic and colitis
6.
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in dogs
7.
Hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism
8.
AT deiciency from protein-losingnephropathy,enteropathy,blood lossorlive
failure
9.
Protein C deficiency
10.Anti-(phospholipid-protein) antibodies (antiphospholipid antibodies)
III.
Thrombi may cause clinical signs by obstructing blood fow and causing ischemia, by
forming emboli (fragments) that travel to distant sites and cause ischemia, or by consuming
platelets and other hemostatic factors, which may lead to hemorrhage. Thrombi may occur
in a single area because of local disturbances (e.g, chemical irritants injected into the
jugular vein) or at multiple sites because of more systemic abnormalities (e-g., DIC).
IV.
Clinical signs are variable and depend on the underlying disease and location and severity
of the lesion(s).Dyspnea may occur with pulmonary thromboembolism,hematuria with
renal infarction, edema of the head with cranial vena cava thrombosis, and distal aortic
thrombosis may cause rear-limb weakness and pain,decreased femoral pulse pressure and
quality,and cool extremities72
V.
Potential hemostatic abnormalities
A.Increased [D-dimer] is evidence of cross-linked fibrin formation and degradation and
thereforeintravascular coagulation.
B.Increased [FDPs]can be evidence of fibrin degradation, but it could be the result of
fibrinogenolysis without intravascular coagulation.
C.Decreased AT activity can be evidence of consumption caused by intravascular coagula
tion,but itmay result from AT loss or decreased production and may contribute to
intravascular coagulation.
D.Increased [TAT] is evidence of increased thrombin generation and therefore intravascu
lar coagulation.
E.Decreased protein C activity can be evidence of consumption caused by intravascular
coagulation,but it may also result from other causes, such as vitamin K antagonism or
hereditary deficiency, in which case it may contribute to intravascular coagulation.
F.Thrombocytopenia can be evidence of consumption caused by intravascular coagula-
tion,but there are many other causes.
G.Decreased [fibrinogen] can be evidence of consumption caused by intravascular
coagulation,but increasedproduction associatedwithinflammation may maskshort
ened fbrinogen survival.
312
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
References
1.Dachary-Prigent J, Toti F, Satta N, Pasquet JM, Uzan A, Freyssinet JM. 1996. Physiopathological significance of
catalytic phospholipids in the generation of thrombin. Semin Thromb Hemost 22: 157-164.
2. Solum NO. 1999.Procoagulant expression in platelets and defects leading to clinical disorders. Arterioscler Thromb
VascBiol 19:2841-2846.
3. Osdoit S, Rosa JP. 2001. Fibrin clot retraction by human platelets correlates with alpha(IIb)beta(3) integrin-
dependent protein tyrosine dephosphorylation. J Biol Chem 276:6703-6710.
4. Elliot MA, Tefferi A. 2005. Thrombosis and hacmorrhage in polycythaemia vera and essential thrombocythacemia
Br J Haematol 128:275-290.
5. Kopp KJ, Moore JN, Byars TD, Brooks P. 1985. Template bleeding time and thromboxane generation in the horse:
Effects of three non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Equine Vet J 17:322-324.
6. Forsythe LT, Willis SE. 1989. Evaluating oral mucosal bleeding time in healthy dogs using a spring-loaded device.
Can VetJ30:344-345.
7. Sato I, Anderson GA, Parry BW. 2000. An interobserver and intraobserver study of buccal mucosal bleeding time in
greyhounds.Res Vet Sei 68:41-45.
Hematlog,. 5th edition, 1042-1050. Philadelphia: Lipincott Williams & Wilkins.
9. Blajchman MA, Bordin JO, Bardossy L, Heddle NM. 1994. The contribution of the haematocrit to thrombocyto-
penic bleeding in experimental animals. Br J Haematol 86:347 -350.
10.Valeri CR,Cassdy G,Pivacek LE,Ragno G,LiberthalW,CrowleyJP,Khuri SF,LoscalzoJ.2001.Anemia
induced increase in the bleeding time: Implications for treatment of nonsurgical blood loss. Transfusion
41:977-983.
11. Jergens AE, Turrentine MA, Kraus KH, Johnson GS. 1987. Buccal mucosa bleeding times of healthy dogs and of
dogs in various pathologic sates, including thrombocytopenia, uremia, and von Willebrand’s disease. A J Vet Res
48:1337-1342
12.Lind SE.199 1.The bleeding time does not predict surgical bleeding.Blood 77:2547-2552.
13.Forsyth SF, Guilford WG, Lawoko CR. 1996. Endoscopic evaluation of the gastroduodenal mucosa following non-
steroidal anti-infammatory drug administration in the dog. NZ Vet J 44:179-181.
14. Gugler E, Lischer EF. 1965. Platelet function in congenital afbrinogenermia. Thromb Diath Haemorrh
14:361-373.
15.Rodgers GM, Greenberg CS. 1999. Inherited coagulation disorders. In: Lee GR,Foerster J, Lukens J, Wintrobe
MM, eds. WitrobeClinical Hemarolog,10th edition, 16821732. Philadelphia:Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.
16. Wilkerson MJ, Johnson GS, Stockham S, Riley L. 2005. Afbrinogenemia and a circulating antibody against
fibrinogen in a bichon frise dog. Vet Clin Pathol 34:148-155.
17. Brooks M, Catalfamo J. 1993. Buccal mucosa bleeding time is prolonged in canine models of primary hemostatic
disorders.Thromb Haemost 70:777-780.
hounds. Am J Vet Res 62:1797-1804.
19. Boudreaux MK, Dillon AR, Spano JS. 1989. Enhanced platelet reactivity in heartworm-infected dogs. Am J Vet Res
50:1544-1547.
with nephrotic syndrome. J Am Vet Med Assoc 186:485-488.
21. Boudreaux MK, Weiss RC, Toivio-Kinnucan M, Cox N, Spano JS. 1990. Enhanced platelet reactivity in cats
experimentally infected with feline infectious peritonitis virus. Vet Pathol 27:269273.
22. Thomas JS, Rogers KS. 1999. Platelet aggregation and adenosine triphosphate secretion in dogs with untreated
multicentric lymphoma. J Vet Intern Med 13:319322.
23. Thomas JS. 1996. von Willebrand's disease in the dog and cat. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
26:1089-1110.
24.Meinkoth JH,Meyers KM. 1995.Measurement of von Willebrand factor-specifc mRNA and release and storage of
von Willebrand factor from endothelial cells of dogs with type-I von Willebrand's disease. Am J Vet Res
56:1577-1585.
25. Smith JM, Meinkoth JH, Hochstatter T, Meyers KM. 1996. Differential distribution of von Willebrand factor in
canine vascular endothelium. Am J Vet Res 57:750-755.
26. MeCarroll DR, Waters DC, Steidley KR, Clift R, MeDonald TP. 1988. Canine platelet von Willebrand factor:
Quantification and multimeric analysis. Exp Hematol 16:929-937
5/HEMOSTASIS
313
27. Parker MT, Turrentine MA, Johnson GS. 1991. Von Willebrand factor in lysates of washed canine platelets. Am J
Vet Res 52:119-125.
28. Benson RE, Johnson GS, Dodds WJ. 1981. Binding of low-molecular-weight canine factor VIIl coagulant from von
Willebrand plasma to canine factor VIlI-related antigen. Br J Haematol 49:541-550.
29. Sullivan PS, Grubbs ST, Olchowy TWJ, Andrews FM, White JG, Catalfamo JL, Dodd PA, McDonald TP. 1994.
Bleeding diathesis associated with variant von Willebrand factor in a Simmental calf. J Am Vet Med Assoc
205:1763-1766.
30. French TW, Fox LE, Randolph JF, Dodds WJ. 1987. A bleeding disorder (von Willebrand’s disease) in a Himalayan
cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:437439.
31. Brooks M, Leith GS, Allen AK, Woods PR, Benson RE, Dodds WJ. 1991. Bleeding disorder (von Willbrand
disease) in a quarter horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:114-116.
32.Laan TT, Gochring LS, van Oldruitenborgh-Oosterbaan MM. 2005. Von Willebrand's diseasc in an cight-day-old
quarter horse foal. Vet Rec 157:322-324.
33. Rathgeber RA, Brooks MB, Bain FT, Byars TD. 2001. Clinical vignette: Von Willebrand disease in a thoroughbred
mare and foal. J Vet Intern Med 15:63-66.
34. Hennessy BJ, White B, Byrne M, Smith OP. 1998. Acquired von Willebrand’s disease. Ir J Med Sci 167:8 1-85
35. Rinder MR, Richard RE, Rinder HM. 1997. Acquired von Willebrand’s disease: A concise review. A J Hematol
54:139-145.
36. Michiels JJ, Schroyens W, Berneman Z, van der Planken M. 2001. Aequired von Willebrand syndrome type 1 in
hypothyroidism:Reversal after treatment with thyroxine. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost 7:113-115.
37. Avgeris S, Lothrop CD Jr, MeDonald TP. 1990. Plasma von Willebrand factor concentration and thyroid function
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:921-924.
38.Panciera DL, Johnson GS. 1994. Plasma von Willebrand factor antigen concentration in dogs with hypothyroidism
J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1550-1553.
39. Sadler JE,for the Subcommittee on von Willebrand Factor of the Scientific and Standardization Committe of the
International Society on Thrombosis and Hacemostasis. 1994. A revised classification of von Willebrand disease.
Thromb Haemost 71:520-525.
40. Brooks MB, Erb HN, Foureman PA, Ray K. 2001. Von Willebrand disease phenotype and von Willebrand factor
marker genotype in Doberman pinschers. Am J Vet Res 62:364369.
41.Brools M,Raymond S, Catalfamo J. 1996. Severe, recessive vonWillebrand’s disease in German wirehaired
pointers. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:926929.
42. Slappendel RJ, Beijer EGM, van Leeuwen M. 1998. Type IIl von Willebrands [sil] disease in Dutch kooilker dogs
Vet Q 20:93-97.
43. Johnson GS, Lees GE, Benson RE, Rosborough TK, Dodds WJ. 1980. A bleding disease (von Willbrand’s disease)
in a Chesapeake Bay retriever.J Am Vet Med Assoc 176:1261-1263.
44. Raymond SL, Jones DW, Brooks MB, Dodd WJ. 1990. Clinical and laboratory features of a severe form of von
Willebrand disease in Shetland sheepdogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1342-1346.
45.Venta P), Li J, Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan V, Brewer GJ, Schall WD. 2000. Mutation causing von Willerand's disease in
Scottish terriers.J Vet Intern Med 14:10-19.
46.Stokol T, Parry BW, MansellPD. 1995.Factor VIll activity in canine von Willebrand disease. Vet Clin Pathol
24:81-90.
47. Moser J, Meyers KM, Meinkoth JH, Brassard JA. 1996. Temporal variation and factors affecting measurement of
canine von Willebrand factor.Am J Vet Res 57:1288-1293.
48. Mansell PD, Parry BW. 1991. Stability of canine factor VIll activity and von Willebrand factor antigen concentra-
tion in vitro.ResVet Sci 51:313-316.
49. Johnson GS, Turrentine MA, Kraus KH. 1988. Canine von Willebrand’s disease: A heterogeneous group of bleeding
disorders. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 18:195229.
50. Johnstone IB. 1999. Plasma von Willebrand factor-collagen binding activity in normal dogs and in dogs with von
Willebrand's disease. J Vet Diagn Invest 1l:30s-313.
51. Johnstone IB. 1997. Multimeric analysis of von Willbrand factor in animal plasmas using sodium dodecyl sulfate
agarose gel electrophoresis, semidry electrotransfer, and immunoperoxidase detection. J Vet Diagn lnvest 9:314317.
52.Callan MB, Giger U, Catalfamo JL. 2005. Effect of desmopressin on von Willebrand factor multimers in
Doberman Pinschers with type 1 von Willebrand disease.Am J Vet Res 66:861-867.
53. Broolks M. 1992. Management of canine von Willebrand’'s disease. Probl Vet Med 4:636646.
54.Meyers KM,Wardrop KJ,Dodds WJ, Brassard J. 1990.Effect of exercise,DDAVP, and epinephrine on the factor
VIII:C/von Willebrand factor complex in normal dogs and von Willebrand factor deficient Doberman pinscher
dogs. Thromb Res 57:97-108.
314
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
55. Turrentine MA, Hahn AW, Johnson GS. 1986. Factor VIll complex in canine plasma after submaximal treadmill
cxercise. Am J Vet Res 47:39-42.
56.Smith JM, Meyers KM, Barbee DD, Schott H,Bayly WM. 1997. Plasma von Willebrand factor in thoroughbred
in response to high-intensity treadmillexercise. Am J Vet Res 58:7176.
57. Moser J, Meyers KM, Russon RH, Reeves JJ. 1998. Plasma von Willebrand factor changes during various
reproductive cycle stages in mined-breed dogs with normal von Willebrand factor and in Doberman pinschers with
type I von Willebrand’s disease. Am J Vet Res 59:111-118.
58. Johnstone IB. 1999. Desmopressin enhances the binding of plasma von Willebrand factor to collagen in plasmas
from normal dogs and dogs with type I von Willebrand's disease. Can Vet J 40:645-648.
59. Sato I, Parry BW. 1998. Efect of desmopresin on plasma factor VIll and von Willebrand factor. concentrations in
greyhounds. Aust Vet J 76:809812.
60. Novotny MJ, Turrentine MA, Johnson GS, Adamms HR. 1987. Experimental endotoxemia increases plasma von
Willebrand factor antigen concentrations in dogs with and without fre-radical scavenger therapy. Circ Shock
23:205-213.
61. Brassard JA, Meyers KM. 1994. Von Willebrand factor is not altered in azotemic dogs with prolonged bleeding
time. J Lab Clin Med 124:55-62
62. Badylak SF, Dodds WJ, Van Vleet JF. 1983. Plasma coagulation factor abnormalities in dogs with naturally
occurring hepatic disease. Am J Vet Res 44:2336-2340
63.Brooks M. 2000.Von Willebrand disease. In:Feldman BF,Zinkl JG,Jain NC, eds. Schalm² Veterinary Hematology,
5th edition, 509-515. Philadelphia: Lippincot Williams & Wilkins.
64.van Oost BA, Versteeg SA, Slappendel RJ. 2004. DNA testing for type II von Willebrand disease in Dutch Kooiker
dogs.JVetIntern Med 18:282-288.
65.Greenberg CS, Orthner CL. 1999. Blood coagulation and fibrinolysis.In: Lee GR,Foerster J, Lukens J,Wintrobe
MM, eds. Wmtrobe ClinicalHematology, 10th edition, 684764.Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
66.Gentry PA.2004.Comparative aspects of blood coagulation.Vet J 168:238-251.
67. Maggio-Price L, Dodds W]. 1993. Factor X defcieney (hemophilia B) in a family of British shorthair cats. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 203:1702-1704.
68. Feldman DG, Brooks MB, Dodds J. 1995. Hemophilia B (factor IX dehcieney) in a family of German shepherd
dogs J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1901-1905.
69. Dodds WJ, Packham MA, Rowsell HC, Mustard JF. 1967. Factor VII survival and turnover in dogs. Am J Physiol
213:36-42
70. O'Donnell MR, Slichter SJ,Weiden PL,Storb R. 1981.Platelet and fbrinogen kinetics in canine tumors. Cancer
Res 41:1379-1383.
71.Rodgers GM. 1988.Vascular smooth muscle cells synthesize, secrete and express coagulation factor V. Biochim
Biophys Acta 968:17-23.
72.Clark P,Parry BW. 1997.Cytogenetic analysis of German shepherd dogs with haemophilia AAust Vet J
75:521-522.
73.Stirling D,HannantWA,Ludlam CA.1998.Transcriptional activation of the factorVIIl gene in liver celines by
interleukin-6.Thromb Haemost 79:74-78.
74.Topper MJ, Prasse K 1998.Analysis of coagulation proteins as acute-phase reactants in horses with colic. Am J Vet
Res59:542-545
75. Wells MJ, Sheffield WP, Blajchman MA. 1999. The clearance of thrombin-antithrombin and related serpin-enzyme
complexes from the circulation: Role of various hepatocyte receptors. Thromb Haemost 81:325-337.
76. Griffn JH. 2001. Control of coagulation reactions. In: Beutler E, Lichtman MA, Coller BS, Kipps TJ, Seligsohn U,
eds. Wlliams Hematelogy, Gth edition, 14351449. New York: MeGraw-Hill.
77. Shen L, He X, Dahlback B. 1997. Synergistic cofactor function of factor V and protein S to activated protein C in
the inactivation of the factor VIlla-factor IXa complex: Species specific interactions of components of the protein C
anticoagulant system. Thromb Haemost 78:1030-1036.
78. MeVey JH. 1999. Tissue factor pathway. Bailliere's Clin Haematol 12:361-372
79. Genty PA, Feldman BF, O'Neill SL. 1992. An evaluation of the effect of reagent modification on routine
laboratory coagulation tests.Equine Vet J 24:30-32.
80.Mischke R, Nolte I. 1997. Optimization of prothrombin time measurements in canine plasma Am J Vet Res
58:236-241
81.Lisciandro GR,Brooks M,CatalfamoJL.200o.Contact factor defcieney in a German shorthaired pointer without
clinical evidence of coagulopathy. J Vet Intern Med 14:308-310.
82. Mischke R. 2001. Optimization of coagulometric tests that incorporate human plasma for determination of
coagulation factor activities in canine plasma. Am J Vet Res 62:625629.
5/HEM0STASIS
315
83. Mayo DJ, Dimond EP, Kramer W, Horne MK IIl. 1996. Discard volumes necessary for clinically useful coagulation
studies from heparinized Hickman catheters.Oncol Nurs Forum 23:671-675.
84. Arkin CF, Bowie EJW, Carroll JJ, Day HJ, Joist JH, Lenahan JG, Marlar RA, Triplett DA. 1998. Collection,
odueum usudpeds
Approved guideline. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards, 18:124.
85.Millis DL,Hawkins EJager M,Boyle CR.1995.Comparison of coagulation test results forblood samples obtained
by means of direct venipuncture and through a jugular vein catheter in clinically normal dogs. J Am Vet Med Asoc
207:1311-1314
S6. Kratz A, Stangamelli N, Van Cott EM. 2006. A comparison of glass and plastic blood collection tubes for routine
and specialized coagulation assays: A comprchensive study. Arch Pathol Lab Med 130:3944.
87.Adcock DM, Kressin DC, Marlar RA. 1997. Effect of 3.2% vs 3.8% sodium citrate concentration on routine
coagulation testing. Am J Clin Pathol 107:105-110.
88. von Pape KW, Aland E, Bohner J. 2000. Platelet function analysis with PFA-100 in patients medicated with
acetylsalicylic acid strongly depends on concentration of sodium citrate used for anticoagulation of blood sample.
Thromb Res 98:295-299.
89. Stokol T, Brooks MB, Erb HN. 2000. Effect of citrate concentration on coagulation test results in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc217:1672-1677.S
90.Adcock DM, Kressin DC, Marlar RA. 1998. Minimum specimen volume requirements for routine coagulation
testing: Dependence on citrate concentration. Am J Clin Pathol 109:595-599.
91.O'Brien SR,Sellers TS, Meyer DJ. 1995. Artifactual prolongation of the activated partial thromboplastin time
associated with hemoconcentration in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 9:169-170.
92. Siegel JE, Swami VK, Glenn P, Peterson P. 1998. Effect (or lack of it) of severe anemia on PT and APTT results.
Am J Clin Pathol 110:106-110.
93. Marlar RA, Potts RM, Marlar AA. 2006. Effect on routine and special coagulation testing values of citrate
anticoagulant adjustment in patients with high hematocrit values. Am J Clin Pathol 126:400-405.
94. Furlanello T, Caldin M, Stocco A, Tudone E, Tranquillo V, Lubas G, Solano-Gallego L. 2006. Stability of stored
canine plasma for hemostasis testing. Vet Clin Pathol 35:204-207.
95. Adcock D, Kressin D, Marlar RA. 1998. The effect of time and temperature variables on routine coagulation tests.
Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 9:463-470
thromboplastin time tests under different storage conditions. Clin Chim Acta 300:1321.
97. Heil W, Grunewald R, Amend M, Heins M. 1998. Influence of time and temperature on coagulation analytes in
stored plasma. Clin Chem Lab Med 36:459-462.
98. Carroll WE, Wollitzer AO, Harris L, Ling MCC, Whitaker WL, Jackson RD. 2001. The significance of platelet
counts in coagulation studies.J Med 32:83-96
100.Woodhams B,Girardot O, BlancoMJ,Colesse G,GourmelinY.2001.Stability of coagulation proteins in frozen
plasma. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 12:229-236.
101. Bateman SW, Mathews KA, Abrams-Ogg ACG, Lumsden JH, Johnstone IB. 1999. Evaluation of the effect of
storage at -70 degrees C for six months on hemostatic function testing in dogs. Can J Vet Res 63:216-220.
102. Schalm OW, Jain NC, Carroll EJ. 1975. Blood coagulation and fbrinolysis. In: Schalm OW, Jain NC, Carroll EJ,
eds.Veterinary Hematology, 3rd edition, 284300.Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
103. Johnstone IB. 1988. Clinical and laboratory diagnosis of bleeding disorders. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
18:21-33.
104. Sirridge MS. 1964. Pitfalls in the performance and interpretation of laboratory studies for hemorrhagic disorders.
Am J Med Technol 30:399-410.
105. Byars TD, Ling GV, Ferris NA, Keeton KS. 1976. Activated coagulation tirme (ACT) of whole blood in normal
dogs. Am J Vet Res 37:1359-1361.
106. Rodgers GM, Bithell TC. 1999. The diagnostic approach to the bleeding disorders. In: Lee GR, Foerster J, Lukens
J,WintrobeMM,edsWintrbeCliniealHematlogy10thedition,15571578.Philadelphi:LippincotWilliams
&Willkins.
107.Ammar T, Fisher CF, Sarier K, Coller BS.1996. The effects of thrombocytopenia on the activated coagulation time
Anesth Analg 83:1185-1188.
108.ArnCFieWCaDayHoistHnJGMaRAtA6.a
prothrombin time (PT) test and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) test Approved guideline. National
Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards, 16:1-17.
109. Proctor RR, Rapaport SI. 1961. The partial thromboplastin time with kaolin. Am J Clin Pathol 36:212219.
316
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
110. Barton MH, Morris DD, Crowe N, Collatos C, Prasse KW. 1995. Hemostatic indices in healthy foals from birth to
one month of age. J Vet Diagn Invest 7:380-385
111. Barton MH, Morris DD, Norton N, Prasse KW. 1998. Hemostatic and fbrinolytic indices in neonatal foals with
presumed spticemia. J VetIntern Med 12:26-35.
112. Mischke R, Diedrich M, Nolte I. 2003. Sensitivity of different prothrombin time assays to factor VII deficiency in
canine plasma. Vet J 166:79-85.
113.Reed RL I,Bracey AW J,Hudson JD,MillerTA,FischerRP.1990.Hypothermia and blood coagulation:
Dissociation between enzyme activity and dotting factor levels. Circ Shock. 32:141-152.
114. Felfernig M, Blaicher A, Kettner SC, Felfernig D, Acimovic S, Kozek-Langenecker SA. 2001. Efects of temperature
on partial thromboplastin time in heparinized plasma in vitro. Eur J Anaesthesiol 18:467-470.
115.Geor RJ, Jackson ML, Lewis KD, Fretz PB. 1990. Prekallikrein deficiency in a family of Belgian horses. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 197:741-745.
116. Lisciandro SC, Hohenhaus A, Brooks M. 1998. Coagulation abnormalities in 22 cats with naturally occurring liver
disease. J Vet Intern Med 12:7175.
117. Kurata M, Sasayama Y, Yamasali N, Kitazawa I, Hamada Y, Hori I. 2003. Mechanism for shortening PT and
APTT in dogs and rats: Effect of fibrinogen on PT and APTT. J Toxicol Sdi 28:439-443.
118. Mischke R. 2003. Heparin in vitro sensitivity of the activated partial thromboplastin time in canine plasma depends
on reagent.J Vet Diagn Invest 15:588-591.
119.Brooks MB. 2004. Evaluation of a chromogenic assay to measure the factor Xa inhibitory activity of unfractionated
heparin in canine plasma Ver Clin Pathol 33:208-214.
Vet Sci70:101-108.
121. Mischke R, Grebe S, Jacobs C, Kietzmann M. 2001. Amidolytic heparin activity and values for several hemostatic
variables after repeated subcutaneous administration of high doses of a low molecular weight heparin in healthy
dogs. Am J Vet Res 62:595-598.
122.Hall DE. 1970.Sensitivity of different thromboplastinreagents to factorVII defcieney in theblood of beagle dg
Lab Anim 4:55-59.
factor deficiencies in equine plasma.Vet J 171:114-119.
124. Lech BF, Carter CJ. 1998. Falsely elevated INR results due to the sensitivity of a thromboplastin reagent to
heparin. Am J Clin Pathol 109:764768.
125. Riley RS,Rowe D,Fisher LM. 2000. Clinical utilization of the international normalized ratio (INR). J Clin Lab
Anal 14:101-114.
126. Adcock DM, Duff S. 2000. Enhanced standardization of the International Normalized Ratio through the use of
plasma calibrants: A concise review. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 1l:583-590.
127.Baterman SW, Mathews KA,Abrams-Ogg AOG, Lumsden JH, Johnstone IB, Hillers TK, Foster RA. 1999
Diagnosis of disseminated intravascular coagulation in dogs admitted to an intensive care unit J Am Vet Med Assoc
215:798804.
128. Santaro SA,Eby CS. 1995. Laboratory evaluation of hemostatic disorders. In: Hoffman R,Benz EJ Je, Shattil SJ
Furie B, Cohen HJ, Silberstein LE, eds. Hematology: BasicPrinciples and Preice, 2nd edition, 16221632. New
York: Churchill Livingstone.
129. Fecteau G, Zinkl JG, Smith BP, O'Neil S, Smith S, Klopfer S. 1997. Dysfibrinogenemia or afibrinogenemia in a
Border Leicester lamb. Can Vet J 38:443444.
130.Dodds WJ. 2000. Other hereditary coagulopathies. In:Feldman BF,Zinld JG, Jain NC, eds. SehabnVeteriary
Hematelogy, 5th edition, 10301036. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Willins.
131. Grosset ABM, Rodgers GM. 1999. Acquired coagulation disorders. In: Lee GR, Foerster J, Lukens J, Wintrobe
MM,eds.Wimtrobe Clinica/ Hematology,10th edition,17331780.Philadelphia:Lippincott Williams &c
Wilkins.
B,Cohen HJ,Silberstein LE,ds.Hematelogy Basie Priniple ndPractie,2nd editon,17031717.New York:
Churchill Livingstone.
133. Willams JE, Hantgan RR, Hermans J, MeDonagh J. 198 1. Characterization of the inhibition of fbrin assembly by
fibrinogen fragment D. Biochem J 197:661668.
134. O'Kane MJ, Wisdom GB, Desai ZR, Archbold GPR 1994. Inhibition of fibrin monomer polyrmerisation by
myeloma immunoglobulin. J Clin Pathol 47:266-268.
135. Gastineau DA, Gertz MA, Daniels TM, Kyle RA, Bowie EJW. 1991. Inhibitor of the thrombin time in systemic
amyloidosis: A common coagulation abnormaliry. Blood 77:2637-2640.
5/HEMOSTASIS
317
136. Carr ME Jr, Gabriel DA. 1986. Hyperfbrinogenemia as a cause of prolonged thrombin clotting time. South Med J
79:563-570.
137. Fricke WA, MeDonagh J. 1983. Thrombin cloting time and fibrinogen concentration in patients treated with
coumadin.Thromb Res31:23-28.
138.Day HJ,Arkin CF,Bovill EG,Bowie EJW, Carroll JI, Joist JH,Lenahan JG,Marlar RA,Triplett DA.1994
Procedure for the determination of fibrinogen in plasma: Approved guideline. National Committee for Clinical
Laboratory Standards,14:1-13.
139. Concannon PW, Gimpel T, Newton L, Castracane VD. 1996. Postimplantation increase in plasma fibrinogen
concentration with increase in relaxin concentration in pregnant dogs. Am J Vet Res 57:13821385.
140. Mansell P. 2000. Hemophilia A and B. In: Feldman BF, Zinkd JG, Jain NC, eds. Sohalm's Veterinary Hematology, 5th
edition, 10261029.Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
141.Genty PA. 2000.Factor XI defciency. In:Feldman BF,Zind JG, Jain NC, eds. Sohad’s Vterinary Hematolog 5th
edition, 1037-1041. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
142. Arkin CF, Bowie EJW, Carroll J, Day HJ, Joist JH, Lenahan JG, Marlar RA, Triplett DA. 1997. Determination of
factor coagulant activities Approved guideline. National Cormmittee for Clinical Laboratory Standards, 17:1-21.
143. Topper MJ, Prasse KW. 1998. Chromogenic assays for equine coagulation factors VII, VII:C, IX, and X, and C1-
esterase inhibitor. Am J Vet Res 59:538-541.
144.Gentry PA, Christopher MM. 2001. Determination of prothrombin in feline plasma.Vet Clin Pathol 30:53-56.
145.Widdershoven J. Kollez L, van Munster P, Bosman AM, Monnens L. 1986. Biochemical vitamin K deficiency in
carly infancy: Diagnostic limitation of conventional coagulation tests.Hel Paediatr Aeta 4l:195201.
hrombin by high-performance liquid chromatography.Anal Biochem 137:227-229.
147.Huisse MG,Leclerq M,Belghiti J, Flejou JF,Suttie JW, Bezeaud A,Stafford DW, Guillin MC.1994.Mechanism
of the abnormal vitamin K-dependent gamma-carboxylation process in human hepatocellular carcinomas. Cancer
74:1533-1541.
148.Center SA, Warner K,Corbett J, Randolph JF,Erb HN. 2000.Proteins invoked by vitamin K absnce and clotting
times in clinically ill cats. J Vet Intern Med 14:292297.
149. Hemker HC,Veltkamp JJ,Hensen A, Loeliger EA. 1963. Nature of prothrombin biosynthesis: Preprothrombinemi
in vitamin K-deficieney. Nature 200:589-590
150. Arnesen H, Smith P. 1991. The predictability of bleeding by prothrombin times sensitive or insensitive to PIVKA
during intensive oral anticoagulation. Thromb Res 61:311-314.
151. Mount ME, Kim BU, Kass PH. 2003. Use of a test for proteins induced by vitamin K absence or antagonism in
diagnosis of anticoagulant poisoning in dogs: 325 cases (1987-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:194198.
152. Giger U. 2003. Differing opinions on value of PIVKA test. J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:1070-1071.
153. Mount ME. 1986. Proteins induced by vitamin K absence or antagonists (*PIVKA"). In: Kirk RW, ed. Carrent
Veterimary Therapy IX-Smal Amimal Practice, 513515. Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
154.Rozanski EA,DrobatzKJ, Hughes D, Scotti M, Giger U. 200 1. Thrombotest (PIVKA) test results in 25 dogs with
acquired and hereditary coagulopathies. J Emerg Crit Care 9:73-78.
155.PusterlaN,Braun U,Forrer R,Lutz H. 1997.Antithrombin-ll activity in plasma of healthy and sick cattle.Vet
Rec 140:17-18.
156. Mischke R, Nolte IJA. 2000. Hemostasis: Introduction, overview, laboratory techniques. In: Feldman BF, Zink JG,
Jain NC, eds. Scbalm's Veterimary Hematolog, 5th edition, 519-525. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &c Wilkins.
158. Johnstone IB, Physick-Sheard P, Crane S. 1989. Breed, age, and gender differences in plasma antithrombin IIl
activity in clinically normal young horses.Am J Vet Res 50:1751-1753.
159. Demers C, Henderson P, Blajchman MA, Wells MJ, Mitchell L, Johnston M, Ofosu FA, Fernandez-Rachubinski F,
Andrew M, Hirsh J, Ginsberg JS. 1993. An antithrombin Ill assay based on factor Xa inhibition provides a more
reliable test to identify congenital antithrombin III deficiency than an assay based on thrombin inhibition. Thromb
Haemost 69:231-235.
160.Vinazzer H.1999.Hereditary and acquired antithrombin deficiency. Semin Thromb Hemost 25:257-263.
161. Rodgers GM. 1999. Thrombosis and antithrombotic therapy. In: Lee GR, Foerster J, Lukens J, Wintrobe MM, eds.
Wentrbe* Clinical Hematology, 10th edition, 1781-1818. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
162.Thomas JS, Green RA. 1998. Clotting times and antithrombin Il activity in cats with naturally developing diseases:
8 5 cases (19841994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:1290-1295.
163. Niessen RWLM, Laping RJ, Jansen PM, Prins MH, Peters M, Taylor FB Jr, de Vijlder J, ten Cate JW, Hack CE
Sturk A. 1997.Antithrombin acts as a negative acute phase protein as established with studies on HepG2 cells and
in baboons. Thromb Hacmost 78:10881092.
318
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
164.Plesca LA, Bodizs G,Cucuianu M, Colhon D. 1995.Hernostatic balance during the acute infammatory reaction;
with special reference to antithrombin IIl.Rom J Physiol 32:71-76.
165. Welles EG, Boudreaux MK, Tyler JW. 1993. Platelet, antithrombin, and fibrinolytic activities in taurine-defcient
and taurine-replete cats. Am J Vet Res 54:1235-1243.
166. Welles EG, Boudreaux MK, Crager CS, Tyler JW. 1994. Platelet function and antithrombin, plasminogen, and
fibrinolytic activities in cats with heart disease. Am J Vet Res 55:619627.
167. Kobayashi N, Takeda Y. 1977. Studies of the effects of estradiol, progesterone, cortisol, thrombophlebitis, and
typhoid vaccine on synthesis and catabolism of antithrormbin II in the dog. Thromb Haemost 37:111-122.
168. Clare AC, Kraje BJ. 1998. Use of recombinant tissue-plasminogen activator for aortic thrombolysis in a hypopro
teinemic dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:539-543.
169. Joist JH, Remuzzi G, Mannucci PM. 1994. Abnormal bleeding and thrombosis in renal disease. In: Colman RW,
Hirsch J, Marder VJ, Salzman EW, eds. Hemostasis and Tbrombosis Basic Prineiples and Clinical Practice, 3rd edition,
921-935.Philadelphia: JB Lippincott
170. Welch RD, Watkins JP, Taylor TS, Cohen ND, Carter GK 1992. Disserminated intravascular coagulation associated
with colic in 23 horses (19841989). J Vet Intern Med 6:29-35.
171. de Laforcade AM,Freeman LM, Shaw SP,Brooks MB, Rozanski EA, Rush JE. 2003.Hemostatic changes in dogs
with naturally occurring sepsis. J Vet Intern Med 17:674679.
172. Hellebrekers LJ, Slappendel RJ, van den Brom WE. 1985. Effect of sodium heparin and antithrombin Il
concentration on activated partial thromboplastin time in the dog. Am J Vet Res 46:1460-1462.
173. Marciniak E, Gockerman JP. 1977. Heparin-induced decrease in cireulating antithrombin-Il. Lancet 2:581584.
174. Levy JH, Montes F, Szlam F, Hillyer CD. 2000. The in vitro effects of antithrombin Ill on the activated coagulation
time in patients on heparin therapy. Anesth Analg 90:1076-1079.
175. Jacoby RC, Owings JT, Ortega T, Gosselin R, Feldman EC. 2001. Biochemical basis for the hypercoagulable state
seen in Cushing syndrome. Arch Surg 136:1003-1006
176. Chapital AD, Hendrick SR, Lloyd L,Pieper D. 2001. The effects of triodothyronine augmentation on antithrom-
bin III levels in sepsis. Am Surg 67:253255.
177. Niessen RW, Pfaffendorf BA, Sturk A, Lamping RJ, Schaap MC, Hack CE, Peters M. 1995. The infuence of
insulin, beta-estradiol, dexamethasone and thyroid hormone on the secretion of coagulant and anticoagulant
proteins by HepG2 cells. Thromb Haemost 74:686-692
178. Rennie JA, Bewsher PD, Murchison LE, Ogston D. 1978. Coagulation and fibrinolysis in thyroid disease. Acta
Haematol 59:171-177.
179.Erem C,Ersoz HO,Karti SS, Ukinc K,Hacihasanoglu A,Deger O,Telatar M.2002. Blood coagulation and
fibrinolysis in patients with hyperthyroidism. J Endocrinol Invest 25:345-350.
180. Hock JA, Sturk A, ten Cate JW, Lamping RJ, Berends F, Borm JJJ. 1988. Laboratory and clinical evaluation of an
assay of thrombin-antithrombin Ill complexes in plasma Clin Chem 34:2058-2062.
181.Pelzer H, Schwarz A, Heimburger N. 1988. Determnination of human thrombin-antithrombin Ill complex in
plasma with an enzyme-linked imm unosorbent assay. Thromb Haemost 59:101-106.
182.Hoek JA,Nurmohamed MT, ten Cate JW, Biller HR,Knipscheer HC,Hamelynck KJ, Marti RK, Sturk A.1989
Thrombin-antithrombin Ill complexes in the prediction of deep vein thrombosis following total hip replacement
Thromb Haemost 62:1050-1052.
183. Topper MJ, Prasse KW, Morris MJ, Duncan A, Crowe NA. 1996. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for
thrombin-antithrombin Il complexes in horses. Am J Vet Res 57:427431.
184. Topper M], Prasse KW. 1996. Use of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to measure thrombin-antithrombin III
complexes in horses with colic.AmJ Vet Res 57:456-462
185. Maruyama H, Watari T, Miura T, Sakai M, Takahashi T, Koie H, Yamaya Y, Axano K, Edarmura K, Sato T, Tanaka
tumours. Vet Rec 156:839-840
186. Bartels PC, Schoorl M, van Bodegraven AA. 2001. Reduction of preanalytical errors due to in vitro activation of
coagulation. Clin Lab 47:449-452.
187. Welles EG, Prasse KW, Duncan A, Morris MJ. 1990. Antigenic assay for protein C determination in horses. Am J
Vet Res 51:1075-1079.
188.Welles EG,Prasse KW,Moore JN.1991.Use of newly developed assays for protein C and plasminogen in horses
with signs of colic.Am J Vet Res 52:345-351.
189. Johnstone IB,Martin CA.2000.Comparative effcts of the human protein C activator, Protac, on the activated
partial thromboplastin cotting times of plasmas, with special reference to the dog. Can J Vet Res 64:117-122.
190. Johnstone IB. 2000. Coagulation inhibitors. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Scbadm* Veterimary Heato/
gy, 5th edition, 538-543. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Willkins.
5/HEM0STASIS
319
191. Edens LM, Morris DD, Prasse KW, Anver MR. 1993. Hypercoagulable state associated with a deficiency of protein
Cin a thoroughbred colt. J Vet Intern Med 7:190-193.
192. Madden RM, Ward M, Marlar RA. 1989. Protein C activity levels in endotoxin-induced disseminated intravascular
coagulation in a dog model. Thromb Res 55:297-307.
193.Esmon NL, Safa O, Smirnov MD, Esmon CT. 2000.Antiphospholipid antibodies and the protein C pathway
J Autoimmun 15:221-225
194. Prowse CV, Esnouf MP. 1977. The isolation of a new warfarin-sensitive protein from bovine plasma. Biochem Soc
Trans 5:255-256.
195.Van de Water N, Tan T,Ashton F, O'Grady A, Day T, Browett P, Ockelford P, Harper P. 2004. Mutations within
the protcin Z-dependent protease inhibitor gene are associated with venous thromboembolic disease: A new form of
thrombophilia. Br J Haematol 127:190-194.
196. Stone MS, Johnstone IB, Brooks M, Bollinger TK, Cotter SM. 1994. Lupus-type “anticoagulant" in a dog with
hemolysis and thrombosis. J Vet Intern Med 8:57-61.
197. Clyne LP. 1986. Species specificity of lupus-like anticoagulants. Blut 53:287292.
198. Iio A, Rutherford WE, Wochner RD, Spilberg I, Sherman LA. 1976. The roles of renal catabolism and uremia in
modifying the clearance of fibrinogen and its degradative fragments D and E. J Lab Clin Med 87:934-946
199. Pasqua JJ, Pizzo SV. 1983. The clearance of human fibrinogen fragments X and Y in mice: A process mediated by
thefragment D receptor.Thromb Hacrmost 49:78-80
200. Pizzo SV, Pasqua J. 1982. The clearance of human fbrinogen fragments D, D, D; and fibrin fragment D, dimer
in mice. Biochim Biophys Aeta 718:177-184.
201.Ardaillou N, Yvart J, Le Bras P, Larrieu MJ. 1980. Catabolism of human fbrinogen fragment D in normal subjects
and patients with liver cirrhosis. Thromb Haemost 44:146149.
202. Rajagopalan S, Pizzo SV. 1986. Characterization of murine peritoneal macrophage receptors for fibrin(ogen)
degradation products. Blood 67:1224-1228.
203. Ahlgren T, Berghem L, Lagergren H, Lahnborg G, Schildt B. 1976. Phagocytic and catabolic function of the
reticuloendothelial system in dogs subjected to defibrinogenation. Thromb Res 8:819-828.
204.Stokol T,Brooks M,Erb H,Mauldin GE. 1999.Evaluation of kits for the detection of fbrin(ogen) degradation
products in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 13:478484.
205. Slappendel RJ, van Arkel C, Mieog WH, Bouma BN. 1972. Response to heparin of spontaneous disseminated
intravascular coagulation in the dog. Zentralbl Veterinarmed [A] 19:502-513.
206. Stokol T, Erb HN, De Wilde L, Tornquist SJ, Brooks M. 2005. Evaluation of latex agglutination kits for detection
of fbrin(ogen) degradation products and D-dimer in healthy horses and horses with severe colic. Vet Clin Pathol
34:375-382
207. Gaffney PJ, Perry MJ. 1985. Unreliability of curent serum fibrin degradation product (FDP) assays. Thromb
Haemost 53:301-302.
208. Connaghan DG, Francis CW, Ryan DH, Marder VJ. 1986. Prevalence and clinical implications of heparin-
associated false positive tests for serum fibrin(ogen) degradation products. Am J Clin Pathol 86:304-310.
209. Hager K, Platt D. 1995. Fibrin degeneration product concentrations (D-dimers) in the course of ageing. Gerontol
ogy41:159-165.
210. Raimondi P, Bongard O, de Moerloose P, Reber G, Waldvogel F, Bounameaux H. 1993. D-dimer plasma concentra
tion in various clinical conditions: Implication for the use of this test in the diagnostic approach of venous
thromboembolism. Thromb Res 69:125-130.
211. Shorr AF, Thomas SJ, Allins SA, Fitzpatrick TM, Ling GS. 2002. D-dimer correlates with proinfammatory
cytokine levels and outcomes in critically ill patients. Chest 121:1262-1268.
212.Broadie TA,Glover JL,Bang N,Bendick PJ,Lowe DK,Yaw PB,Kafoure D. 1981.Clotting competence of
intracavitary blood in trauma victims. Ann Emerg Med 10:127-130.
213. Griffn A, Calln MB, Shofer FS, Giger U. 2003. Evaluation of a canine D-dimer point-of-care test kit for use in
samples obtained from dogs with disseminated intravascular coagulation, thromboermbolic disease, and hemorrhage.
Am J Vet Res 64:1562-1569.
214.Nelson OL,Andreasen C. 2003. The utility of plasma D-dimer to identify thrormboembolic disease in dogs. J Vet
Intern Med 17:830-834.
215.McCaw DL,Jergens AE,Turrentine MA, Johnson GS. 1986.Effect of intermal hemorrhage on fibrinogen)
degradation products in canine blood. Am J Vet Res 47:1620-1621.
216. Budzynski AZ, Pandya BV, Rubin RN, Brizuela BS, Soszka T, Stewart GJ. 1984. Fibrinogenolytic afbrinogenemia
after envenoation by western diamondback rattesnake (Crotalus atrua). Blood 63:114.
217.Weitz JI, Leslie B, Ginsberg J. 1991. Soluble fbrin degradation products potentiate tissue plasminogen activator
induced fibrinogen proteolysis. J Clin Invest 87:1082-1090.
320
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Hirsh J,MarderVJ,Salzman EW,ds.Hemstasis adThrombsis Basic Prineiples and Clinicat Ptiee3rd editin,
1076-1103.Philadelphia:JB Lippincott.
219. Takahashi H, Wada K, Hamano M, Niwano H, Takizawa S, Yazawa Y, Shibata A. 1992. Fibrinolysis and fbrinoge-
nolysis in patients with thrombotic disease. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 3:193196.
220. Gaffney PJ. 2001. Fibrin degradation products: A review of structures found in vitro and in vivo. Ann NY Acad Sci
936:594-610.
221. Bouton MC, Jandrot-Perus M, Bezeaud A, Guillin MC. 1993. Late-fibrin(ogen) fragment E modulates human 0
thrombin specifcity. Eur J Biochem 215:143-149.
22. Mischke R, Wolling H. 2000. Infuence of fbrinogen degradation products on thrombin time, activated partial
thromboplastin time and prothrombin time of canine plasma. Hacmostasis 30:123130
223. Gouin I, Lecompte T, Morel MC, Lebrazi J, Modderman PW, Kaplan C, Samama MM. 1992. In vito effect of
omr sspouaouqy q pes oae jo uou ued u uoy d ueq uo uused
85:935-941.
224. Khavkina LS, Rozenfeld MA, Leonova VB. 1995. Mechanism of inhibition of fbrinolysis and fbrinogenolysis by
the end fbrinogen degradation products. Thromb Res 78:173-187
225. Caldin M, Furlanello T, Lubas G. 2000. Validation of an immunoturbidimetric D-dimer assay in canine citrated
plasma.Vet Clin Pathol 29:51-54.
226.Welles EG. 1996. Antithrombotic and fibrinolytic factors: A review. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
26:1111-1127.
disseminated intravascular coagulation.Am J Vet Res 61:393-398.
228. Dempfle CE,Zips S, Ergil H, Heene DL, for the FACT Study Group. 2001.The Fibrin Asay Comparison Trial
(FACT): Evaluation of 23 quantitative D-dimer assays as basis for the development of D-dimer calibrators. Thromb
Haemost 85:671-678.
229. Dempfe CE. 2005. Validation, calibration, and specihcity of quantitative D-dimer assays. Semin Vase Med
5:315-320.
230. Sato N, Takahashi H, Shibata A. 1995. Fibrinogen/ibrin degradation products and D-dimer in clinical practice:
Interpretation of discrepant results. Am J Hematol 48: 168-174.
231. Gordge MP, Faint RW, Rylance PB, Ireland H, Lane DA, Neild GH. 1989. Plasma D dimer: A useful marker of
fibrin breakdown in renal failure. Thromb Haermost 61:522525.
232. Mischke R. 2003. Alterations of the global haemostatic function test *resonance thrombography in spontaneously
traumatised dogs. Pathophysiol Haemost Thromb 33:214220.
233.Mischke R,Wohlscin P, Schoon HA.2005.Detection of fbrin generation alterations in dogs with haemangiosar
coma using resonance thrombography. Thromb Res 115:229-238.
234.Winberg B, Jensen AL, Rojkjaer R, Johansson P, Kjelgaard-Hansen M, Kristensen AT. 2005.Validation of human
recombinant tissue factor-activated thromboelastography on citrated whole blood from clinically healthy dogs. Vet
Clin Pathol34:389-393.
235. Mischke R, Schulze U. 2004. Studies on platelet agregation using the Born method in norrmal and uraemic dogs.
Vet J168:270-275.
236. Michiels C. 2003. Endothelial cell functions. J Cell Physiol 196:430-443.
237.Giger U. 2000. Hereditary blood diseases. In:Feldman BF,Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schaim’s Veterinary Hematelogy
5th edition,955-959.Philadelphia:LippincottWilliams & Wilkins.
238.Mostoskey UV,Padgett GA,Stinson AW,Brewer GJ,Duffendack JC.2000.Caninemolecular genetic diseases.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 22:480-489.
239. Soute BA, Ulrich MM, Watson AD, Maddison JE, Ebberink RH, Vermeer C. 1992. Congenital defciency of all
vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation factors due to a defective vitamin K-dependent carboxylase in Devon rex
cats.Thromb Haemost G8:521-525.
240. Mason DJ, Abrams-Ogg A, Allen D, Gentry PA, Gadd KR. 2002. Vitamin K-dependent coagulopathy in a black
Labrador Retriever.JVetIntern Med 16:485-488.
241.Niles JD, Williams JM, Cripps PJ. 2001.Hemostatic profiles in 39 dogs with congenital portosystemic shunts.Vet
Surg30:97-104
242.Gerlach H, Slama KJ, Bechstein WO,Lohmann R,Hintz G,Abraham K, Neuhaus P,Falke K 1993.
Retrospective statistical analysis of coagulation parameters after 25o liver transplantations. Semin Thromb Hemost
19:223-232.
243. Bigge LA, Brown Dj, Penninck DG. 2001. Correlation between coagulation profile findings and bleeding
complications after ultrasound-guided biopsies: 434 cases (1993-1996). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:228233.
5/HEM0STASIS
321
244. Bartol JM, Thompson LJ, Minnier SM, Divers TJ. 2000. Hemorrhagic diathesis, mesenteric hematoma, and colic
associated with ingestion of sweet vernal grass in a cow. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1605-1608.
245. Puschner B, Galey FD, Holstege DM, Palazoglu M. 1998. Sweet dover poisoning in dairy cattle in California. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 212:857-859.
246. Lutze G, Romhild W, Elwert J, Leppelt J, Kutschmann K 2003. Case report Phenprocoumon (Marcumar,
Falithrom) as an unusual reason for coumarin poisoning in a dog [in German]. Dtsch Tierarzd Wochenschr
110:31-33.
247. Neer TM, Savant RL. 1992. Hypoprothrombinemia secondary to administration of sulfaquinoxaline to dogs in a
kennel setting. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:13441345.
248. Patterson JM, Grenn HH. 1975. Hemorrhage and death in dogs following the administration of sulfaquinoxaline.
Can Vet]16:265-268.
249. Green RA, Roudebush P, Barton CL. 1979. Laboratory evaluation of coagulopathies due to vitamin K antagonism
in the dog: Three case reports. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:691697
250. Woody BJ, Murphy MJ, Ray AC, Green RA. 1992. Coagulopathic effects and therapy of brodifacoum toxicosis in
dogs.JVet Intern Med 6:23-28.
251. Lipsky JJ. 1994. Nutritional sources of vitamin K. Mayo Clin Proc 69:462466
252. Strieker MJ, Morris JG, Feldman BF, Rogers QR. 1996. Vitamin K deficiency in cats fed commercial fish-based
diets. J Small Anim Pract 37:322-326
253. Conly J, Stein K. 1994. Reduction of vitamin K, concentrations in human liver associated with the use of broad
spectrum antimicrobials. Clin Invest Med 17:531-539.
254.Boermans HJ, Johnstone I, Black WD,Murphy M. 1991. Clinical signs, laboratory changes and toxicokinetis of
brodifacoum in the horse. Can J Vet Res 55:21-27.
255. Schaeffer RC Jr, Briston C, Chilton SM, Carlson RW. 1986. Disseminated intravascular coagulation following Echis
carinatms venom in dogs: Effects of a synthetic thrombin inhibitor. J Lab Clin Med 107:488497.
256.Mammen EF.2000.Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).Clin Lab Sci 13:239-245.
257. Marder VJ, Feinstein Dl, Francis CW, Colman RW. 1994. Consumptive thrombohemorrhagic disorders. In:
Colman RW, Hirsch J, Marder VJ,Salzman EW,eds.Hemostasis nd Tbrobosis:BasicPrinciples and Clinicad
Practice, 3rd edition,1023-1063.Philadelphia: JB Lippincott.
258. Jutkowitz LA,Rozanski EA, Moreau JA,Rush JE.2002. Massive transfusion in dogs 15 cases (1997-2001). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 220:16641669.
259. Jones PA, Tomasic M, Gentry PA. 1997. Oncotic, hemodilutional, and hemostatic effects of isotonic saline and
hydroxyethyl starch solutions in clinically normal ponies. Am J Vet Res 58:541-548.
260. Concannon KT, Haskins SC, Feldman BF. 1992. Hemostatic defects associated with two infusion rates of dextran
70 in dogs.Am J Vet Res 53:1369-1375.
261.Brooks M. 2000. Coagulopathies and thrombosis. In: Ettinger SJ,Feldman EC,eds.Texrbook ofVeterinary Intemal
Medicine:Diseases ofthe Dog and Cat5th edition,1829-184l.Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
262.Glowaski MM, Moon-Massat PE, Erb HN, Barr SC. 2003.Effects of oxypolygelatin and dextran 70 on hemostatic
variables in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 30:202210.
263. de Gopegui RR. 2000. Acquired coagulopathy IV: Acquired inhibitors. In: Feldrman BF, Zinkd JG, Jain NC, eds
SchabnsVeteriary Heratelogy, 5th edition, 571573. Philadelphia: Lippincot Williams &cWilkins.
264. Sahud MA. 2000. Laboratory diagnosis of inhibitors. Semin Thromb Hemost 26:195-203
265. Tinlin S, Webster S, Giles AR. 1993. The development of homologous (canine/anti-canine) antibodies in dogs with
haemophilia A (factor Vll deficieney): A ten-year longitudinal study. Thromb Haemost 69:21-24.
266.Brooks MB, GuW,Ray K.1997.Complete deletion of factor IX gene and inhibition of factor IX activity in a
Labrador retriever with hemophilia B. J Am Vet Med Assoc 21l:1418-1421.
267. Federman DG, Kirsner RS. 2001. An update on hypercoagulable disorders. Arch Intern Med 161:1051-1056.
268. Morley PS,Allen AL, Woolums AR. 1996. Aortic and iliac artery thrombosis in calves: Nine cases (19741993).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:130-136.
269. Laste NJ, Harpster NK. 1995. A retrospective study of 100 cases of feline distal aortic thromboembolism: 1977-
1993. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:492-500.
270. Boswood A, Lamb CR, White RN. 2000. Aortic and iliac thrombosis in six dogs. J Small Anim Pract 41:109-114
271.Brianceau P, Divers TJ.2001.Acute thrombosis of limb arteries in horses with sepsis: Five cases (1988-1998).
Equine Vet J 33:105-109.
272. Norris CR, Griffey SM, Samii VF. 1999. Pulmonary thromboembolism in cats: 29 cases (1987-1997). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 215:1650-1654.
273. Blomback M, Dybkaer R, Jorgensen K, Olesen H, Thorsen S. 1997. Properties and units in the clinical laboratory
sciences. V. Properties and units in thrombosis and haemostasis. Pure Appl Chem 69:1043-1079.
Thispageintentionallyleffblank
Chapter6
BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
Bone Marrow.Major Concepts and Terms.
324
Bone Marrow Classifications.
334
I.
Bone Marrow Hyperplasia.
334
I.
Bone Marrow Hypoplasia
338
ll.
Bone Marrow Lymphocytosis
340
IV.
Bone Marrow Mastocytosis.
340
V.
Myelofibrosis..
341
VI.
Myelitis
341
Vll.Bone Marrow Necrosis
341
VIlll. Myelophthisis.
342
IX.Bone Marrow Hemic Cell Neoplasia.
342
Interpreting Results of Bone Marrow Examinations
357
Lymph Node: Major Concepts and Terms.
358
Lymph Node Classifications.
363
Hyperplastic Lymph Node.
363
II.
Reactive Lymph Node
363
ll.
Lymphadenitis..
363
IV.
Lymphoid Neoplasia (Lymphoma and Lymphosarcoma)
363
V.
Nonlymphoid Neoplasia (Typically Metastatic).
365
VI.
OtherFindings.
365
323
324
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 6.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
ALSG
Animal Leukemia Study Group
AML
Acute myeloid leukemia
CBC
Complete blood count
CD
Cluster of differentiation
CMMoL
Chronicmyelomonocytic leukemia
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
Epo
Erythropoietin
Fe
Iron
FeLV
Feline leukemia virus
G:E
Granulocytic to erythroid
G-CSF
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
GM-CSF
Granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor
M:E
Myeloid to erythroid
M6-Er
Acute erythroleukemia with erythroid predominance
MDS
Myelodysplastic syndrome
MDS-EB
Myelodysplastic syndrome-excess blasts
MDS-Er
Myelodysplastic syndrome-erythroid predominance
MDS-RC
Myelodysplastic syndrome-refractory cytopenia
MPD
Myeloproliferative disease
MPO
Myeloperoxidase
NK
Natural killer
TCRoβ
oβ-Antigen-binding heterodimer of the T-lymphocyte receptor (T-cell receptor)
TCRy8
8-Antigen-binding heterodimer of theT-lymphocyte receptor (T-cell receptor)
WHO
WorldHealth Organization
BONEMARROW:MAJORCONCEPTSANDTERMS
Composition ofbone marrow (medulla ossea)
A.Bone marrow is the tissue enclosed by cortical and cancellousbone,and it consists
mostlyofhmatopoieticcellsaposetissueandsupportivetissueWhenhmatopi
etic cells predominate, as in young animals, the marrow appears red. When adipose
tissue predominates,as in the diaphyseal regions of long bones in healthy adults,the
marrow appearsyellow because ofitshighfat content.Theextent of red marrow (active
hematopoiesis) diminishes as neonates grow to adult size, but red marrow remains
within bones of the axial (ilium,ribs, sternebrae,and vertebrae) and proximal appen-
dicular (humeri and femurs) skeleton.Yellowmarrow can convert to redmarrow during
pathologic states that stimulate hematopoiesis.
B.1
Nutrients are delivered by vessels branching from one or more nutrient (medullary)
arteries that enter through the cortical bone. New hemic cells enter blood through the
walls of medullary sinuses.
C.Hematopoietic cells develop ina supportive extravascularmicroenvironment controlled
by a myriad of local and systemic cytokines.
II.
Hematopoietic cells are precursors to hemic cells found in the blood or tissue. Microscopi
callyrecognizablehematopoietic cells include cellsin the proliferation pools and the
maturation pools of the megakaryocyte, erythrocyte, and leukocyte lineages.
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
325
Table 6.2.Nomenclature of the erythroid series
Rubricyte systema
Erythroblast systemb
Normoblast system
Rubriblast
Proerythroblast
Pronormoblast
Prorubricyte
Basophilic proerythroblast
Basophilic normoblast
Basophilic rubricyte
Basophilic erythroblast
Basophilic normoblast
Polychromatophilic
Polychromatophilic
Polychromatophilic normoblast
rubricyte
erythroblast
Normochromicrubricyte
Early orthochromatic
Early orthochromaticnormoblast
erythroblast
Metarubricyte
Late orthochromatic
Late orthochromaticnormoblast
erythroblast
* The usual nomenclature in veterinary medicine
Nomenclature used primarily in human medicine
A.Megakaryocyte lineage
1.Megakaryocyes account for1 %ofhematopoietic cells,but they are very large
polyploid cells, each with the capabiliry of producing many platelets.
2.Thrombopoietin and other cytokines (see Chapter 4) stimulate the formation of
mature megakaryocytes from megakaryoblasts through endomitosis:the nucleus
divides repeatedly without cytokinesis to form cells of progressively greater ploidy
(most about 16N).
a.Megakaryoblasts, which are the first microscopically recognizable cells of the
series,are similarin size torubriblastsmyeloblasts,and monoblasts,andave
single nuclei and deeply basophilic cytoplasms thatmay form blebs
b.Promegakaryocyres develop from megakaryoblasts andhave what appear to be two
or four nuclei and scant amounts of basophilic cytoplasm that may form blebs
(Plate 9A [for all plates, see the color section of this book]).
C.Megakaryocytes vary in size and ploidy. As they develop from promegakaryocytes,
they become larger, have more nuclear lobulations, and have more abundant,
paler cytoplasms that break up into anucleate platelets. Mature forms predomi-
nate (Plate 9B)
B.Erythrocyte lineage (Table 6.2)
1.In veterinary medicine, the nucleated erythroid precursors are usually named using a
rbri-prefixThecellswithin the serisaretherubriblast,prorubricytebasophilc
rubricyte, polychromatophilic rubricyte, normochromic rubricyte, and metarubri-
cyte,although there is a continuum of development making cell subclassification
diffcult at times.Metarubricytes give rise to reticulocytes and mature erythrocytes.
2.As cells proliferate and mature (see Fig. 3.1） from the first recognizable stage, the
rubriblast, they decrease in size and cytoplasmic basophilia while increasing hemo-
globin content and associated eosinophilic staining (Plate 9C).
3.In human medicine, and sometimes in veterinary medicine, the nucleated erythroid
precursors are named by using either erythroblast or normoblast terms (Table 6.2).
4.Accordingly, an increased concentration of nucleated erythroid precursors in the
bloodmay be called rubricytosis in veterinary medicine,but it is sometimes called
either erythroblastosis ornormoblastosis as inhuman medicine.
326
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
C.Nonlymphoid leukocyte (myeloid) lineages
1.Nonlymphoid leukocyte precursors are often collectively labeled myeloid cells.
However, there are different meanings of myeloid and the prefix myelo-. Thus, a word
beginning with myelo-must be interpreted in context.
a.Myel-or myelo-meanings:
(1) Combining form denoting the relationship to bone marrow
(2)Referring to the nonlymphoid hemic cells of the megakaryocyte,leukocyte,
and erythroid series (as in myeloproliferative disease)
(3)Referring to granulocytes, as in myelomonocytic leukemia
(4)Often used in specific reference to spinal cord
b.Myeloid meanings:
(1)Pertaining to or derived from bone marrow
(2）Pertaining to all nonlymphoid leukocyte precursors,as in the myeloid to
erythroid ratio
(3)Pertaining to nonlymphoid hemic cells of the megakaryocyte, leukocyte, and
erythroid series,as in acutemyeloid leukemia which includes pure
erythroleukemia)
(4)Having the appearance of the myelocyte
(5）Pertaining to spinal cord
C.Myelocyre meanings:
(1)Intermediate precursor cell of thegranulocyte series
(2)Any cell of the grey matter of the nervous system
d.Myelitis meanings:
(1)Infammation of bone marrow
(2)Inflammation of spinal cord
e.Myelogenous meanings:
(1)Produced in bone marrow
(2）Pertaining to nonlymphoid hemic cells of the megakaryocyte, leukocyte,and
erythroid series, as in acute myelogenous (myeloid) leukemia
2.Nonlymphoid leukocytes: monocytes, granulocytes (neutrophils, eosinophils, and
basophils),and mast cells (see Chapter 2 and Fig. 2.1).
a.Neutrophils predominate.The mature neutrophils in the bone marrow are
collectively referred to as the neutrophil storage pool.
secondary granules at the myelocyte stage (neutrophil myelocyte, eosinophil
myelocyte, and basophil myelocyte) (Plate 9D).
C.
Monocytes develop from monoblasts and promonocytes, populations that are
inconspicuous in bone marrow from healthy animals. Macrophages, derived from
monocytes, are present in low numbers.
d.Mast cell precursors are not detectable in the bone marow, but low numbers of
resident mast cells derived from hemic stem cells may be present.
D.Lymphocyte lineage
1.Lymphocytes and plasma cells are present in relatively low numbers.
2.All lymphoid cells are derived from a commonbone marrow precursor cell
(Fig. 2.1).
3.Cells destined to be B-lymphocytes mature in the bone marrow or in some other
tissues,whereas cells destined to be T-lymphocytes migrate to the thymus and
mature there.
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
327
E.Dendritic cells
1.Dendritic cells arespcialized foruptaketransportprocessing,and presenting
antigens to T-lymphocytes.There are several subtypes,including Langerhans cells,
interstitial dendritic cellsand plasmacytoid dendritic cells.
2.All dendritic cells are bone marrow derived,but their origins are not completely
understood and their precursors arenot recognizedmicroscopically.
3.Dendritic cells are believed to originate from both myeloid and lymphoid
precursors.3
F.Bone marrow nucleated cell differential count in health
1.The expected ratio of nonlymphoid leukocytes to erythroid precursors (myeloid to
erythroid ratio) varies with the species and the individual. Average ratios in healthy
dogs,cats,horses, and cattle are reported to be 1.25,1.63, 0.93,and 0.71
respectively.4
2.In health,cells of the neutrophil and erythroid series predominate,and the majority
of cells in each lineage are the more mature cells.4
a.Myeloblasts and promyelocytes account for<4 % of the nucleated cells.
b.
Segmented and band neutrophils are the predominant leukocytes.
C.Cells of the eosinophil series usually account for<5 % of the nucleated cells,
whereas cells of the basophil series are rare.
d.Rubriblasts and prorubricytes account for < 4 % of the nucleated cells.
e.Metarubricytes and late-stage rubricytes are the predominant nucleated erythro-
cytes. Polychromatophilic erythrocytes are present.
fLymphocytes usually account for <5 %of the nucleated cells except in cats. Up
to about 20 % lymphocytes have been reported in healthy cats.
g.Cells of the monocyte series constitute <2 % of nucleated cells.
III.
Indications for bone marrow examinations
A.Whenever the following are unexplained and persistent:
1.Decreased cell concentrations
a.Nonregenerative anemia
b.Neutropenia
c.Thrombocytopenia
d.Pancytopenia
2. Increased cell concentrations
a.Lymphocytosis, especially if atypical lymphocytes are seen in blood films or there
is other evidence of lymphoid neoplasia
b.Thrombocytosis, especially extreme
c.Erythrocytosis,especiallyif thereisnoevidenceofhemoconcentration,splenic
contraction, or cardiopulmonary disease
d.Granulocytosis or monocytosis if chronic leukemia is suspected
e.Mastocytemia
3.Atypical or immature cells in blood films
4.Hyperproteinemiaespecially if thereisno evidence of hemoconcentration or
dehydration
5.Hypercalcemia
1.Evidence of metastatic neoplasia, especially of lymphocytes and mast cells
2.Evidence of Fe storage,especially when considering Fe deficiency
328
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
3.Evidence of specific diseases:histoplasmosis, leishmaniasis,plasma cell myeloma,or
lysosomal storage diseases
IV.
Methods
A.Complete descriptions of a bone marrow biopsy (collection,fixation, staining,and
examination of bone marrow from a living animal) are beyond the scope of this text.
Procedures of a bone marrow biopsy are described in several sources.41
B.Bone marrow collection and processing
1.Typically, bone marrow samples are collected from sites that are expected to have
active hematopoietic tissue.
a.In dogs and cats, such tissue is expected in theiliac crest or in the medullary
cavitiesofproximal femurs or humeri
b.In horses,such tissue is most accessible in the sternebrae.In cattle,medullary
cavities of proximal ribs can be sampled.
2.The two major methods of collecting bone marrow samples are aspiration and core
collection,
a.Aspiratior: A Rosenthal or Illinois biopsy needle is inserted into a bone marrow
site, the stylet is removed, and bone marrow is aspirated into the needle and
perhaps syringe bynegative pressure.Excessive hemodilution is limited by
terminating aspiration as soon as blood is seen entering the syringe. The Rosen-
thal andIllinois needles are straight shafted with a beveled end.Nondisposable
b.Core curting A Jamshidi biopsy needle is inserted into the cortical bone adjacent
to bone marrow, the stylet is removed,the needle is advanced 1 inch or more
into the bone marrow with a forceful twisting motion, the needle is rotated 360°
several timesand then the needle is withdrawn.After the needle is withdrawn,
the stylet is used to push the core sample out the top of the needle (not the tip
end thatis narrower than mostofaJamshidi needle'sbore);thispromotes
retrieval of a cylindrical core of tissue.
3.Processing bone marrow aspirate samples
aTo reduce clot formation and autolytic changes,it is critical that such samples be
processed (sample distributed and fixed onto glass slides) within seconds of
collection.A variety of smear,squash”, roll, and imprint methods may be used
to produce slides that have monolayers of intact cells and foci of bone marrow
particles that may be stained and examined.
(1)After aspiration, drops may be placed on a series of glass slides and quickly
spread by either a wedge blood smear technique or a horizontal “squash"
technique.The latter better spreads cells that are present within particles.
However,dropsmay belarge,resulting in smears that are too long or oo
thick.Therefore, one should consider lifting parts of each drop up with the
end of a spreader slide and then using the spreader slide to make squash
preparations with this smaller amount of sample. Repeating this process can
yield many good smears.
(2) Other techniques can be used to decrease hemodilution of the final smears
and maximize cellularity and marrow particle density.
(a)Aspirated fuid can be expressed at the top of inclined slides so that the
blood flows downward,leaving more particles and less blood at the
application point.The short edge of a spreader slide can then be used to
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
329
lift particle-rich material repeatedly from the top of the slide and make
horizontal squash preparations.
(b)Alternatively, collected material can be placed in a watch glass or Petri dish
with anticoagulant,and the particles can be extracted and spread onto
slides without the concern of clotting. Anticoagulants may induce artifacts.
b.Aspiration may yield a “dry tap” containing essentially no material, in which case
not indicate that themarrow is hypocellular; they may occur with bone marrow
hypercellularity in a variety of disorders
c.For routine microscopic examinations, the air-dried samples are stained with a
stain that is used for blood films (a Romanowsky stain such as a Wright stain or
Diff-Quik). A Prussian blue stain may be applied to assess the amount of
stainable Fe in a sample.
d.Processing requirements for cytochemical or immunocytologic procedures should
be obtained from the relevant laboratory.
4.Processing core biopsy samples
a.After making imprints by touching or rolling the core on a glass slide, the core
sample is placed in a fixative.B5 or Zenker's fixative is preferable,but routine
buffered formalin is adequate. (Note: keep the air-dried samples far away from
the fixative because formalin fumes can severely alter the staining properties of
cells).The fixation procedures vary with the type of fixative fluid that is used.
b.The fixed core sample is submitted to a hematology or histology laboratory that
can process and stain the sample for microscopic examination. Core samples
require decalcification before the sample can be sectioned and prepared for
staining. A variety of stains, including immunohistochemical stains, may be
applied to demonstrate the types of cells or other contents of the sample
C.Bonemarrow examination
1.Gross examination
a.Aspirated bone marrow samples will contain peripheral blood cells, but the best
samples have very lirtle contaminant blood. A representative sample typically
contains small pieces of tissueknown as bone marrow fragmenrs,bone marrow
units,bone marrow grains,bone marrow particles, or bone marrow spicules.The
bone marrow fragments that contain adipose tissue will glisten.Bone marrow
fragments should not be confused with clotted blood or platelet clumps.
b.The appearance of bone marrow core samples will vary from hypercellular red
tissue to hypocellular fatty tissue to cortical bone or blood clots.
2.Microscopic examination: A complete microscopic examination of bone marrow
samples involves the characterization of the bone marrow tissue architecture,
differentiation and enumeration of cells, and evaluation of individual cell structure.
Such examinations are best completed on quality stained histologic and cytologic
samples with a quality microscope by a person who is trained for such examinations.
A complete examination with differential cell counts and special stains can be time-
consuming.Frequently,just asmuch clinically useful information can be learned
from a subjective assessment of cell populations by an experienced hematologist. The
following bone marrow features are assessed:
a.
Hematopoietic cellularity is the percentage of the marrow cavity occupied by
hematopoietic cellsrather than by adipose tissue or stroma (assessed at low
magnification)
330
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(1)Thehematopoietic cellularity of bone marrow fragments reflects the
hematopoieticcellularity of thebone marrow,and the more fragments there
are to examine, the better is the a
cellularity ofbonemarrowisbes
ed in a core sample,especially
when there is bone marrow hypocellularity and it is unclear whether
fragments of fat are from the bone marrow or from extramedullary
adipose tissue.
(2)Cellularity of the preparation is not the same as the hematopoietic cellularity
of the bone marrow. If bone marrow fragments, on average, are < 25 %
adiposetissue,the bonemarrow is hypercellular (Plate 9E).If bone marrow
fragments,on average,are >75 % adipose tissue,the bone marow is
hypocellular (Plate 9F). If bone marrow fragments are not present and the
preparation is very cellular, the bone marrow is likely hypercellular and
unlikely hypocellular. If bone marrow fragments are not present and the
preparation is not very cellular, the bone marrow may be hypocellular or the
sample may be poorly representative of bone marrow tissue.
b.Hematopoietic populations (see Figs. 2.1 and 6.1)
(1)Number and structure ofmegakaryocytes
(a)The expected number of mature megakaryocytes in a sample varies
among species and is highly dependent on the quality of the sample,
especially the number of bone marrow fragments in aspirates. In health,
hyperplasia is present. If fewer are present, then megakaryocytic
hypoplasia is probably present.
(b)An increasednumber of immature forms of themegakaryocytic series
(i.e.,megakaryoblasts or promegakaryocytes) usually indicates increased
early response before there is clear-cut hyperplasia.It may also occur
with dysplastic diseases and megakaryocytic neoplasia.
(2)G:Eratio (M:Eratio)
(a)A G:E or (M:E) ratio is often estimated but may be calculated using
(or myeloid)and nucleatederythroid precursors and then dividing the
number of granulocytic (or myeloid) cells by the number of erythroid
cells.For example,ifout of 500 countedcells there were 300 cells of
the granulocyte series and 200 nucleated erythrocytes, the G:E ratio
wouldbe300/200=1.5.
(b)Most authors seem to use G:E and M:E as synonyms.However, a
M:E ratio may include monocyte precursors or megakaryocytes in the
myeloid category, and a G:E ratio may exclude these cells even though
it may be difficult or impossible to definitively differentiate monoblasts
and promonocytes from granulocyte precursors. The difference berween
theseratioswould usually be insignificant because there are usually few
recognizable cells of the monocyte series and relatively few
megakaryocytes.
(c)Other cells (e.g, lymphocytes,macrophages,mast cellsand stromal
cells)are not included in the G:E or M:E ratios.
Neutrophil component of
granulocytic or myeloid pools
Erythroidpool
osinor
Monocy
Masto
Lymphocyte
Megakaryocyte
Plasma cell 
G:E=41:63=0.65
M:E=43:63=0.68
Fig. 6.1. Schematic representation of the hemic cells that may be found in bone marrow of healthy
mammals. The two major pools are cells of the neutrophil series in the granulocytic pool and cells of the
erythroid pool. Eosinophils and basophils and their precursors are also components of the granulocytic pool.
Monocytes are part of the myeloid pool but not the granulocytic pool. Megakaryocytes may be considered
part of the myeloid pool or may be evaluated as a separate cell line and not included in the M:E ratio. Mast
cells are terminally differentiated tissue cells rather than hematopoietic cells and are not included in the
M:E ratio. Lymphocytes and plasma cells belong to the nonmyeloid lymphoid pool.
B,band neutrophil; CFU-E, colony-forming unit-erythroid; CFU-G, colony-forming unit-granulocyte;
Mb,myeloblast; M,myelocyte;Mmc,metamyelocyte Mr,metarubricyte; Pg,progranulocyte;Pr, prorubri-
cyte; Rb, rubriblast; Rc, rubricyte; and S, segmented neutrophil.
331
332
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(d)A G:E or M:E ratio is estimated in histologic samples,but it is
subjective and based mostly on the more mature granulocytic and
erythroid cells.Immature cells are diffcult to differentiate definitively
into the appropriate cellines.
(e)The G:Eor M:E ratio (Plate 9D)may be increased because of
the marrow hematopoietic cellularity is increased, granulocytic or
myeloid hyperplasia is contributing to the increased G: E or M:E ratio.
If hematopoietic cellularity is decreased, erythroid hypoplasia is contrib-
uting to an increased G:E or M:Eratio.If the hematopoietic cellularity
is not clearly increased or decreased, CBC results may help with
interpretation. For example, concurrent neutrophilia supports granulo-
cytichyperplasia,whereas concurrent nonregenerative anemia supports
erythroid hypoplasia.
The G:E or M: E ratio (Plate 9C) may be decreased because of
granulocytic (myeloid）hypoplasia,erythroid hyperplasia,or both.If the
marrow hematopoietic cellularity is increased, erythroid hyperplasia is
contributing to the decreased G:E or M:Eratio.If hematopoietic
to the decreased G:E or M:E ratio. If the hematopoietic cellularity is
tation. For example, concurrent neutropenia supports granulocytic
hypoplasia, whereas concurrent regenerative anemia supports erythroid
hyperplasia.
(3)Maturation progression
（a)Because nearly all cells of the erythroid series can undergo mitosis, there
should be many more of the late stages than the early stages a pyrami-
dal distribution; see Figs. 2.1 and 6.1). There also should be an orderly
and synchronous maturation between nuclei and cytoplasms. As nuclei
become smaller and chromatin denser, the cell size decreases, the
cytoplasmicbasophilia decreasesand the eosinophilic stainingof
hemoglobin increases.
and 6.1). The early pool (proliferation pool) contains cells capable of
mitosis, and thus more myelocytes are expected than myeloblasts or
progranulocytes. Most of the granulocytes are segmented neutrophils in
thematuration pool (including the storage pool).There should be an
orderly andsynchronousmaturation betweennuclei and cytoplasms
throughout the series.
(4)Lymphocytes:Most of the lymphocytes in bone marrow of healthy animals
are small,but occasional larger forms and plasma cells can be found
Hematopoietic stem cells have the appearance of small lymphocytes but are
expected to be present in very low numbers.
c.Other cells: Mast cells, macrophages, fbroblasts, osteoclasts, osteoblasts, and
other stromal cells are usually present in very low numbers. Their numbers may
be subjectively categorized as normal or increased. Increased numbers can
indicate or suggest certain pathologic processes.
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
333
d.Fe
(1)In aspirate and core samples, the Fe pigment in hemosiderin will range from
yellow to yellow-green to yellow-brown (Plate 9E).A more complete
assessment of Fe storage can be determined if the samples are stained with
an Fe stain such as Prussian blue.
(2)The amount of Fe pigment in the sample is estimated and reported by using
a variety of terms:
(a)Absent or decreased
(b)Adequate,within normal lmits,ormoderate
(c)Increased or abundant
(3)Healthy cats lack detectable marrow Fe stores,but Fe may be present
because of hemolytic disorders, after a transfusion, and in myeloproliferative
disorders.213 Storesmay be absent in healthy young animals of any species.
3.Comparison of histologic and cytologic examinations
a.Histologic examination of core samples
(1)Advantages
(a)Tissue architecture (how cells are arranged), necrosis, infltrative
patternsocal lesions,and myelofbrosis can be better assessed.
(b)Bone marrow celulariry can be better assessed.
(c)Megakaryocyte number can be better assessed.
(d) Abnormalities of bone and vessels can be better assessed
(e)Further tissue sections can be cut for special stains.
(2)Disadvantages
(a)It is more expensive, with greater turnaround time.
（b）Cell differentiation smore diffcultespeciallyif sections arenot ut
thin enough (target = 3 μm).
(c)Phagocytosis of hematopoietic cells is difficult to detect.
(d）Many dysplastic features are diffhcult to detect.
(3)Potential problems with core samples include short samples ofuncertain
representation,samples consisting mostly of cortical and subcortical bone,
sample damage related to prior aspiration, crush artifact from traumatic
collectionroperixationandthickectionsordamageinducedduring
sectioning.
b.Cytologic examination of aspirate samples
(1)Advantages
(a)Individual cells and cell populations can be critically differentiated and
evaluated,enabling better assessment of the G:E (M:E) ratio and the
maturation progression.
(b）Phagocytosis of hematopoietic cells or organisms can be better detected.
（c)Dysplastic or neoplastic cell features can be better detected
（d）The processing cost is relatively little;most of the technique expense is
in the collection procedure.
(e)The technique can be used for cytochemical staining and immunocyto-
chemistry, including use of antibodies that do not work on fixed tissues.
(2)Disadvantages
(a)Tissue architecture can be minimally assessed
(b)Necrosis or myelofibrosis are difficult to detect
334
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(c)Interpretations are limited if marrow particles are not obtained.
(d)It may be difficult to determine whether a sample is representative
(i.e., to differentiate a poor sample from hypocellular bone marrow).
(3)Potential problems with cytologic preparations include collction of extra-
medullary samples,“dry taps,”excessive hemodilution, clotted samples, thick
smearslyed cell,andpoor stainn.
c.Combining examinations of core and aspirate marrow samples provides the most
complete information.
(1)Cytologic evaluation of aspirates is almost always indicated
(2)Histologic examination is useful when marrow architecture is required to
reach a diagnosis,myelofibrosis is suspected (connective tissue exfoliates
poorly), or hypoplastic states are suspected (e.g., when pancytopenia is
not be distinct from poor sampling.
(3)When both samples are collected,care should be taken to avoid the first
collection procedure from diminishing the quality of the second sample. A
core can be artifactually altered when collected after an aspirate in the same
area,and an aspirate may be more hemodiluted if collected after a core
sample at the same site
4.Postmortem bone marrow samples
a.Hematopoietic cells undergo autolysis rapidly because the insides of bones stay
warm much longer than most tissues,andprecursors of leukocytes contain many
proteolytic and lipolytic enzymes that enable the digestion of cells.
b. Samples should be collected as soon as possible after an animal's death so the
they will be adequate for evaluation (guideline: < h for cytologic assessment)
c.Samples should be collected from cancellous bone in the proximal humerus or
femur,or from the axial skeleton (e.g.,ilium,rib,or sternum）.Although itis
easier to collect samplesfrom the diaphysis of long bones,theseregions arenot
reliably representative of hematopoietic activity.
5. Flow cytometry has been used to assess bone marrow aspirates and provide partial
differentialsbut isnotroutinely used for clinical cases and cannot replacemicro-
scopic evaluation.
BONEMARROWCLASSIFICATIONS
I.
Bone marrow byperplasia is a term that indicates an increased number of nonneoplastic
hematopoietic cells in bone marrow because of a stimulus that causes one or more cell
lines to proliferate.The stimulus usually results from an increasedneed for cells butmay
occur secondary to aberrant production of stimulating cytokines (Table 6.3).
A.Erythroid hyperplasia (erythroblastic or normoblastic hyperplasia)
1.Effective erythropoiesis Epo stimulation of precursor cells leads to a proliferation of
erythroid cells, erythroid hyperplasia, and increased release of reticulocytes, nucle
ated erythrocytes, or erythrocytes into blood.
a.It is usually secondary to hemolytic (Table 3.10) or blood loss disorders (see Fig
3.8).The mechanisms that lead to erythroid hyperplasia begin immediately after
the onsetof anemia,but theresultant erythroid hyperplasiamay not bepresent
until a few days later.The degree of erythroid hyperplasia should correspond to
the duration and severity of the anemia.
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
335
Table 6.3.Disorders and conditions that cause erythroid,granulocytic,or
megakaryocytic hyperplasia in marrow
Erythroid hyperplasia
Effective erythropoiesis
*Secondary to hemolytic or blood loss disorders
Secondary appropriate erythrocytotic disorders
Right-to-left shunts, congenital or acquired
Chronic pulmonary disease
Hyperthyroidism
Secondary inappropriate erythrocytotic disorders
Renal neoplasms, cysts,or diseases
Other neoplasms (hepatoma)
Ineffective erythropoiesis
*Immune-mediated nonregenerative anemia
*Nutritional:Fe,copper,folate,orvitamin Bdefcieny
Cyclichematopoiesis of grey collies and FeLV-infected cats
Granulocytic hyperplasia
Effective granulopoiesis
Inflammatory
*Infections: bacterial, fungal,viral,protozoal
*Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
*Necrosis:hemolysis,hemorrhage,infarcts,burns,neoplasia,sterileinfammation
Sterile foreign body
Others or unknown mechanisms
Paraneoplastic neutrophilia
Neutrophiliaof leukocyte adhesion deficiency
G-CSF administration
Estrogen toxicosis (early)
Cyclic hematopoiesis of grey collies and in FeLV-infected cats
Ineffective granulopoiesis
Immune-mediatedneutropenia
Diphenylhydantoin and phenylbutazone toxicosis (suspected in animals)
Chronic idiopathic neutropenia (G-CSF deficiency)
Megakaryocytic hyperplasia
*Recovery from thrombocytopenia: withdrawal of myelosuppression or in response to a
disorder that causes decreased platelet survival
Inflammation:infection,immune-mediated,surgery,trauma
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Information about eosinophilic, basophili, mononuclear-phagocytic, lymphoid, mast cell, and
generalized marrow hyperplasia is provided in the text. Lists of specifc disorders or conditions are not
complete but are provided to give examples.
b.Secaryapprpriateeryryticdisrde：Persistenthypoxiaornreasedtis
demand for O promotes Epo release, which causes erythroid hyperplasia and
erythrocytosis (see Chapter 3 for disorders).
C.
Secondary inappropriate erythrocytotic disorder: Inappropriate Epo production in
the absence of hypoxia causes erythroid hyperplasia and erythrocytosis (see
Chapter 3 for disorders)
336
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.Ineffctive erythropoiesis Erythroid hyperplasia occurs concurrently with a nonregen-
erative or poorly regenerative anemia.
a.Immune-mediated destruction of nucleated erythroid cells
(1)These disorders are typically considered immune mediated based on the
phagocytized erythroid precursors.In some cases,theresultsof a concurrent
Coombs' test are positive.
(2)In bone marrow samples, the erythroid series can have the appearance of
maturation arrest with erythroid stages prior to the target cell stage being
numerous.Macrophages containing mid- to late-stage nucleated erythro-
cytes may be found on cytologic and rarely histologic preparations (Plate
9G). When earlier stage cells are targeted, generally too few erythroid cells
are present to yield erythroid hyperplasia despite expansion of stages
preceding the target stage.If erythroid stem cells are the target of an
immune-mediared attack, there may be pure red cell aplasia (see Bone
Marrow Classifications,sect.II.B)
b.Nutritional deficiencies
(1)Fe-deficiency anemia: In the Fe-deficient state, anemia develops despite
erythroid hyperplasia.Erythropoiesisisdefective,late-stage erythroid precur-
sors do not mature properly, and erythrocytes are not released adequately into
the blood.Reticulocytosis may be present,but the release of reticulocytesis
not enough to meet the need.As the deficiency progresses, the rubricytes
(2)Rare cases of copper, folate,and cobalamin deficiencies416 Cobalamin
deficiency,which may occur secondary to abnormal intestinal cobalamin
receptors,has beenreported ingiant schnauzers,beagles,Border collies,and
Australian shepherds.7 Dysplastic changes may be present.
B.Granulocyticbyperplasia:Unless stated otherwise,granulocytic hyperplasia （also called
myeloid byperplasia) typically is characterized by an increased number of neutrophil
precursors.An orderly and complete proliferation and maturation series is expected
withhyperplasiabutgranulocytichypeplasiamayoccuwithapletedstorageool
and a left shift. Other forms of granulocytic hyperplasia are identified as eosinophilic
granulocytichyperplasiaandbasphilicgranulocytichyperplasia（rare)ecause early
stages of neutrophil andmonocyte precursors arenoteasily differentiated,monocytic
hyperplasia may or may not be recognized when there is neutrophilic granulocytic
hyperplasia.
1.Effective granulopoiesis Continual stimulation of neutrophil precursors by G-CSF,
GM-Crceainlukineadsrauloicylasaeasedeas
of neutrophils toblood, and typically a neutrophilia (with or without a left shift)
(see Chapter 2).
a.Infammatory:The granulocytichyperplasia is typically caused by an infamma
tory process that results from any of a wide variety of infectious and noninfec-
tious diseases.
b. Other or unknown mechanisms of granulocytic hyperplasia are listed in Table 6.3
and Chapter 2.18
2.Ineffective granulopoiesis. This form of hyperplasia is recognized when there is a
neutropenia and concurrent granulocytic hyperplasia.There may be a left shift with
too few of the latest stages to complete the pyramidal maturation sequence.
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
337
a.Immune-mediatedneutropenia:19-21 Granulocytic hyperplasia results from
persistent differentiation and proliferation of neutrophil precursors in an attempt
to replace neutrophils being destroyed before or soon after release from bone
neutrophil stage.Phagocytosis of neutrophils may be detected in bone marrow,
liver, or spleen.Factors that lead to the generation of antineutrophil antibodies
typically are not known but might be drug induced in some cases.
b.Drug-induced neutropenia: There have been rare reports of ineffective granulo
poiesis associated with anticonvulsant (phenobarbital or primidone) treatments.
The mechanism of the neutrophil destruction has not been established but might
be immune mediated.2
c.Chronic idiopathic neutropenia caused by G-CSF deficiency: The bone marrow
in the rottweiler with this disorder had numerous myeloblasts and progranulo-
cytes,but myelocytes and later neutrophil stages were rare.The defect in
maturation resulted from G-CSF deficiency, and G-CSF is needed for terminal
neutrophil differentiation.23
C.Megakaryocytic hyperplasia,anonneoplasticincrease n megakaryocytes,occurs when
megakaryopoiesis is persistently stimulated.Thrombopoiesis is concurrently stimulated.
Platelet concentrations may be decreased,increased,or within the reference interval.
1.Recovery from thrombocytopenia
a.In response to thrombocytopenia, stimuli (stem cell factor, thrombopoietin,
interleukin3,and GM-CSF)promote the proliferation ofmegakaryocytes to
replace the missing platelets.
b.The thrombocytopenia frequently is caused by disorders that decrease platelet
survival. When thrombocytopenia is caused by a myelosuppressive agent or
process,theremay beareboundmegakaryocytic hyperplasia afterremovalof the
suppression.
2.Mild megakaryocytic hyperplasia may be found concurrently with one of the several
forms of reactive or secondary thrombocytosis,including inflammation andnon-
hemic neoplasia (see Chapter 4).
D.Eosinophilic granulocyticbyperplasia ischaracterized by increasednumbers ofeosinophils
and eosinophil precursors in bone marrow.
1.Specifcmediators,including interleukin5 (eosinophil differentiation factor)and
GM-CSF frommast cellsmacrophages, and lymphocytes,stimulate eosinopoiesis.
2.Eosinophilic hyperplasia may or may not be recognized in animals with eosinophilia
(see Table 2.12).
3.Cats with MDS may have eosinophilic granulocytic hyperplasia with or without
peripheral blood eosinophilia.24.2s
E.Basophilic granulocytic byperplasia is characterized by increased numbers of basophils and
basophil precursors in bone marrow. This type of hyperplasia is rarely recognized but
might be found in animals with basophilias (see Table 2.14).
F.Monocytic hyperplasia is a hyperplastic state that is present when monocytic precursors
are increased in the bone marrow.It typically isnot seen as a primary bonemarrow
finding but may be found concurrently with granulocytic hyperplasia, particularly when
there is a macrophagic or granulomatous component to the infammatory process.
G.Generalized bone marrow byperplasia is present when there is concurrent granulocytic,
erythroid, and megakaryocytic hyperplasia. It is seen in some cases of immune-
mediated hemolytic anemia in which thrombocytopenia and infammatory neutrophilia
338
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 6.4.Disordersand conditions that cause hypoplastic states in marrow
Generalizedmarrow hypoplasia
*Infection in bone marrow: bacterial,fungal,viral,protozoal
Toxicosis: bracken fern, cephalosporins, chemotherapeutic agents, estrogen, griseofulvin,
mycotoxins,phenylbutazonetrichloroethylene,timethoprimsulfadazie
Irradiation:whole body or environmental
*Marrow necrosis caused by ischemia,infections,or other states
*Marrowreplacement:neoplasia,myelofbrosis,osteopetrosis
Selective erythroid hypoplasia
*Pureredcellaplasia:mmunemediatedafterecombinantpotreatment,ossbly
parvovirusinfection
*FeLV-induced erythroid hypoplasia
Endocrine:hypothyroidism,hypoadrenocorticism,hypoandrogenism
Drug induced: chloramphenicol
Selective granulocytic hypoplasia
Infectious: parvovirus (dogs, cats),FeLV, Toxoplasma,Ehrlichia (chronic)
Toxic:bracken fern,chemotherapeutic drugs,chloramphenicol (cats),estrogen
griseofulvin,phenylbutazone,diphenylhydantoin
Immune-mediated neutropenia
Selective megakaryocytic hypoplasia
Toxic:bracken fern poisoning (ruminants),chemotherapeutic agentsestrogens in dogs
(exogenous,endogenous),griseofulvin,meclofenamic acid,phenylbutazone,
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
Immune-mediated:amegakaryocyticthrombocytopenia
* A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specific disorders or conditions are not complete but are provided to give examples.
are concurrent. It can be seen whenever there is a need for a proliferation of neutro-
phils,erythrocytes,and platelers.Ir should not be confused with polycythemia vera,a
neoplastic state that involves the same celllines and concurrent erythrocytosis,leukocy
tosis, and thrombocytosis.
11.
Bone marrow bypoplasia is a nonspecific term that indicates a decreased number of hemato-
poietic cells in the bone marrow. Hypoplastic disorders may be caused by absence of
stmulatinggentreencefnhibitorsdrectamagethmarrowrdrectama
to individual cell lines (Table 6.4).
A.Generalized marrow hypoplasia
1.Aplastic anemia (aplastic pancytopenia) is the pathologic state in which severe
generalizedmarrow hypoplasia causesnonreenerative anemia,neutropeniaand
thrombocytopenia.
2.Generalized marrow hypoplasia is most reliably identified with a good core bone
marrow biopsy sample that consists of what should be active marrow spaces.
Tangential cores sometimesyieldmostly subcorticalmarrow thatmay not be
representative of the hematopoietic state.
3.Many disorders or conditions cause generalized bonemarrow hypoplasia,and other
disorders have been associated with it2627 but identifying and proving the cause of
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
339
the disorder is frequently difficult.The insult to the bone marrow may have
occurred weeks before the animal became clinically ill.
B.Selective erythroid hypoplasia is a pathologic state in which the number of erythroid
precursors is decreased but the granulocytic and megakaryocytic cell lines are not.
1.Pure red cell aplasia is a pathologic state in which there is selective erythroid aplasia
or severe hypoplasia. It causes development of normocytic, normochromic, nonre-
generative anemia.28
a.Primary pure red cell aplasia is considered an immune-mediated disorder and may
be seen concurrently with immune spherocytic hemolytic anemia. The sera of
affected dogs can suppress erythropoiesis.Bone marrow examinations reveal
and rare reports in cats2
b.Secondary pureredcell aplasia has occurred secondary to treatment withrecombi
nant human Epo in dogs,3 horses,333 and cats. The selective erythroid
hypoplasia that occurs in some FeLV-infected cats and possibly in parvovirus-
infected or parvovirus-vaccinated dogs is also considered a form of secondary
pure red cell aplasia.28
2.Immune-mediated destruction of nucleated erythroid cells: When anemia is caused
by destructionof early erythroid precursors （e.g,prorubricytes）,anerythropoietic
stimulus expands the rubriblast compartment,but erythroid hypoplasia will e
present because cell destruction prevents the accumulation of many later stage
erythroid cells.The series will be left-shifted and have the appearance of a matura
tion arrest beginning at the targeted stage.
3.FeLV-induced erythroid hypoplasia
a.The Kawakami-Theilen strain of FeLV (A, B,and C subgroups present) causes
severe erythroid hypoplasia in neonatal kittens but not in weanling or adult
Cats.34
b.Weanling cats and older cats infected with another strain of FeLV (A and C
subgroups present) also can develop erythroid hypoplasia and nonregenerative
anemia.35
4.Anemia of infammatory disease (see Chapter 3):Decreased erythropoiesis is part of
the pathogenesis of this nonregenerative anemia. Erythroid hypoplasia may not be
recognized because it is mild or because concurrent granulocytic hyperplasia may
make it difficult to determine whether there is an absolute or a relative decrease in
erythroid precursors. However, the presence of nonregenerative anemia in the
absence of erythroid hyperplasia supports suppressed erythropoiesis even when
erythroid hypoplasia is not apparent.
5.Selective erythroid hypoplasia caused by endocrine disorders:The nonregenerative
anemias of hypothyroidism,hypoadrenocorticism, and hypoandrogenism are caused
by erythroid hypoplasia, but the degree of hypoplasia in bone marrow samples can
be very mild and not recognized in routine bone marrow examinations. The
presence of nonregenerative anemia in the absence of erythroid hyperplasia supports
suppressed erythropoiesis.
6.Drugs: Chloramphenicol can induce a transient erythroid hypoplasia in dogs
and cats.7 There may be concurrent myeloid andmegakaryocytic hypoplasia in
cats.
C.Selective granulocytic hypoplasia(agranulocytosis)is a pathologic state inwhich the
number of granulocyte (neutrophil)precursors is decreased,but the erythroid and
340
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
megakaryocytic cell lines are not.There are not enough eosinophil and basophil
precursors in health for a decrease in these lines to cause granulocytic hypoplasia.
1.Several infections and drugs havebeen reported to cause selective granulocytic
hypoplasia (Table 6.4).However, since many of them have also been associated with
hypoplasia ofother cellines, theremay be the appearance of selective granulocytic
hypoplasia,but damage to other cell linesmight not be detected in the same
marrow sample.In parvovirus infections,the granulocytic hypoplasia could be
because of excessive tissue demand, or endotoxin-induced damage to marrow
cells.3s39In canine monocytic ehrlichiosis(Ebrlichia canis)，hypoplasia （typically
generalized) may be seen in chronic infections, whereas hyperplasia is seen in acute
infections.
2.Animals with immune-mediated neutropenias can have either selective granulocytic
hypoplasia accompanied by a left shift (early-stage to midstage destruction) or by
ineffective granulopoiesis with granulocytic hyperplasia (late-stage destruction).
D.Selective megakaryocytic hypoplasia isa pathologic state inwhich thenumber of mega
karyocytes is decreased,but the erythroid and granulocytic cell lines are not.
1.Several infections and drugs have been reported to cause selective megakaryocytic
hypoplasia (Table 6.4)
2. Rare cases of apparent immune-mediated amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia have
may contribute to thrombocytopenia secondary to immune-mediated damage to
megakaryocytes.
III.
Bone marrow lymphocytosis is a neoplastic (see Bone Marrow Classifications, sect.IX.C) or
nonneoplastic accumulation of lymphocytes in the bone marrow.Nonneoplastic lymphocy
tosismay occur from infltration or local hyperplasia.In tissue sections of bone marrow, the
lymphoid cells may occurin nodules,n germinal centers, or as a difuse population.
A.Because bone marrow is a lymphoid tissue,an infammatory disease may cause lym-
phoid hyperplasia in bone marrow samples, as well as lymph nodes and spleen. The
hyperplasticlymphocytes aretypically small lymphocytesbur larger forms and plasma
cellsmaybeprominent.
B.Small lymphocytes may be up to about 20 % of the nucleated cells in bone marrow
samples from healthy cats,but the mean value is about 5-10 %.In contrast,<5 %
(usually < 1 %) are expected in dogs, cattle, and horses.
C.A variety of disorders that involve stimulation of the immune system may cause
bonemarrow lymphocytosis.Examples include canine ehrlichiosis,systemic lupus
erythematosus, and griseofulvin toxicosis.3 When bone marrow lymphocytosis in
cats was defined as> 16 % lymphocytes with > 50 % hematopoietic cellularity, it was
associated most commonly with immune-mediated anemia and pure red cell aplasia.
LymphocytesweremostlyB-lymphocytes andwere often present in aggregates,as
opposed to diffusely distributed T-lymphocytes in.cases of feline chronic lymphocytic
leukemia.
D.When there is granulocytic and erythroid hypoplasia, the lymphocyte population may
appear more prominent but be relatively increased rather than absolutely increased
IV.
Bone marrow mastocytosis is a neoplastic (see Bone Marrow Classifications, sect. IX.B.5) or
nonneoplastic accumulation ofmast cells in thebone marrow.Nonneoplastic accumula
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
341
tions may be called mast cell hyperplasia, but mast cells may accumulate by homing of
mast cell progenitor cells rather than by increased production of mast cells through cell
divisions.
A.Undifferentiated mast cell precursors originate in bone marrow but are not recognized
as a separate cell population in routine bone marrow examinations. Occasional mast
cells are found in the bone marrow of healthy dogs, cats, and horses and probably
represent a resident population.
B.Bonemarrowmastocytosishas beenreported indogswith aplasticanemia,regenera
tive anemiaFe-defciency anemia,hypoplasia secondary to a Sertoli cell umor,and
lymphoma.45
C.Bone marrow mastocytosis probably represents a reactive state associated with an
infammatory process. Concurrent plasmacytosis is common.
V.
Myelofibrosis
A.Myelofibrosis is a pathologic state of increased fibrous connective tissue and collagen in
the bone marrow (Plate 9H).
B.In dogsmyelofibrosis is often accompanied by a moderate to severe nonregenerative
or poorly regenerative anemia without other cytopenias.However, with extensive
myelofbrosis, there is a deficiency in all hematopoietic tissue, and an aplastic anemia
(pancytopenia) may develop.
C. The cause of myelofibrosis is usually unknown in domestic mammals. It may be
secondary to focal or widespread bone marrow damage,or it may be secondary to a
clonal disorder of hemic cells (e.g., MDS), in which mediators from the hemic cells
stimulate fibrocytic hyperplasia.
VI.Myelitis
A.Myeliris, in the context of hemic disorders,is bone marrow infammation. Some people
use theword osteomyelitis to differentiate bonemarrowmyelitisfrom spinal cord
myelitis, whereas others use the word to indicate concurrent bone inflammation and
bone marrow inflammation.
B.There are several agents that can cause myelitis; the infammatory populations vary with
the agent.
1.Fungal myelitis (histoplasmosis and blastomycosis)
2.Protozoal myelitis (leishmaniasis)(Plate 9I)
3.Bacterial myelitis, usually caused by bacteremia or a penetrating wound
VII.Bone marrow necrosis
A.Criteria for establishing the presence of bone marrow necrosis vary, as does the extent
and relative significance of necrosis when it is reported.The term bone marrow necrosis
may be restricted to bone marrow samples in which necrosis is the primary and
predominant abnormality, or it may be applied when necrosis is not the major patho.
logic process.
B.Bone marrow necrosis must be differentiated from collection and processing artifacts,
both cytologically and histologically.
1.Cytologically, staining and preservation artifacts can mimic cell death, as can cell
trauma and lysis during smearing.
2. Crush artifact and plasma pools have been interpreted as evidence of necrosis in
sections of bone marrow cores.
342
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
C.Bone marrow necrosis has been reported in association with many disorders,including
toxicants,bacterial sepsis,monocytic ehrlichiosiscanine parvovirus infection,fline
panleukopeniasystemiclupus erythmatosus,lymphomaissminated intravascular
coagulation,andhypoxia.7However,the extent of thenecrosishasnot always been
reported, cause-and-effect relationships are generally unproven,and the clinical signif-
cance of the finding is often unknown.
D.Bone marrow necrosis has been considered idiopathic when unassociated with an
underlying disease or withdrug exposure, though association with a disorder does not
make it a cause-and-effect relationship, so it is usually idiopathic in those cases, as well.
Eight of nine dogs classified as having idiopathic bone marrow necrosis had evidence of
individual cell death rather than coagulation necrosis;the extent of cell death was not
reported. These dogs also had marked anemia (sometimes with neutropenia or throm-
bocytopenia), mild to marked myelofibrosis, and sometimes a prominent macrophage
population.The significance of cell death in these cases and its contribution to the
hematologic abnormalities are not clear.
E.Myelofibrosis may be the “healing” stage or chronic stage of some bone marrow
necrosis disorders.
VIII.Myelophthisis
A.Strictly speaking, myelophthisis means“marrow wasting”(myelo- plus -phthisis) or
wasting of the spinal cord.
B.The term is commonly used to indicate failure of the bone marrow to producecells
because of replacement or displacement ofbone marrow by abnormal tissue. Causes of
myelophthisis include neoplastic cell proliferation,myelofibrosis, and osteopetrosis.If
the disease process has affected most bone marrow sites, animals will develop anemia,
neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia (aplastic anemia; also known as aplastic
pancytopenia).
IX.
Bone marrow hemic cell neoplasia
A.General concepts and terms
1. Neoplasia of bone marrow hemic cells is not as common as many other forms of
neoplasia in domestic mammals. The general diagnosis of hemic cell neoplasia is not
difficult when there are numerous poorly differentiated cells in a blood or bone
marrow sample, but establishing the cell of origin can be difficult. It can also be
difficult to differentiate neoplasia of well-differentiated hemic cells from inflamma-
tory conditions.Specific diagnoses may be reached by a combination of exclusionary
tests,immunophenotyping and possibly cytochemical staining ofblood or bone
marrowbymeansofpanelsofantibodies andstainsbonemarrowexamination,and
molecular genetic testing (Fig.6.2)
(see Table 6.5) has generally followed developments in understanding and
classification of similar human neoplasms, many of which are now defined by
specific genetic mutations.5 The human model has provided useful insights into
the forms of hemic neoplasia that may occur in domestic animals, but substantial
investigation is needed in veterinary medicine to reach a similar degree of
characterization.
3.Bone marrow hemic cell neoplasia may arise in the bone marrow (e.g.,acute
myeloid leukemias) or spread to the bone marrow (e.g., lymphoma).
Table 6.5. Classificationsofhemic cell neoplasia involving blood or marrow
Classification
Cell type
Lymphoproliferative neoplasia
Lymphocyte
*Acute lymphocytic leukemia
B-,T-,or NK-lymphocyte
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
B,T-,or NK-lymphocyte
*Lymphoma
B-, T,or NK-lymphocyte
Plasma cell myeloma
B-lymphocyte
Myeloid neoplasia
Nonlymphoid hemic cell
Acute myeloid leukemiasa
Nonlymphoid hemic cell
Acute myeloblastic with minimal differentiation (Mo)b
Granulocyte
Acute myeloblastic without maturation (M1)
Granulocyte
Acute myeloblastic with maturation (M2)
Granulocyte
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (M3)
Granulocyte
*Acute myelomonocytic leukemia (M4)
Granulocyte and monocyte
Acute monocytic leukemia (M5)
Monocyte
Acute erythroleukemia (M6)
Erythrocyte, nonlymphoid
leukocyte,megakaryocyte
Acute erythroleukemia with erythroid predominance
Erythrocyte, nonlymphoid
(M6-Er)
leukocyte,megakaryocyte
Megakaryoblastic leukemia (M7)
Megakaryocyte
Acute leukemia of ambiguous lineage
Unknown,mixed,ormultiple
(see the text)
Chronic myeloproliferative disorders
Nonlymphoid hemic cell
Chronic myeloid leukemia
Neutrophil
Eosinophilic leukemia
Eosinophil
Basophilic leukemia
Basophil
Primary erythrocytosis
Erythrocyte
Polycythemia vera
Erythrocyte, neutrophil, and
megakaryocyte
Thrombocythemia
Megakaryocyte
Myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative disease
Nonlymphoid hemic cell
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemiaf
Neutrophil and monocyte
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Leukocyte,erythroid cell,
and/or megakaryocyte
Mast cell neoplasiab
Mast cell
*Metastatic mast cell neoplasms (cutaneous or visceral)
Mast cell
Mast cell leukemia
Mast cell
*A relatively common disease or condition
* Modified from the classification system recommended by an Animal Leukemia Study Group of the
myeloidleukemianototherwisecategorized50
bThe “M" abbreviation system is used in the French-American-British classification and was used by the
ALSG but is not used in the current WHO nomenclature. The ALSG classification omitted acute myelo-
blastic leukemia with minimal differentiation, a diagnosis requiring immunophenotyping and ultrastructural
evaluation that were not available to the study group.
Human acute promyelocytic leukemia is typically associated with defined mutations and is therefore
categorized asAML with recurrent genetic abnormalities rather than as an otherwise uncategorized leukemia
dThe ALSG did not separate M5 into acute monoblastic leukemia (M5a) and acute monocytic leukemia
(M5b) because of difficulties in differentiating monoblasts from promonocytes, but others have made the
distinction in animals as is done in human classification schemes.
The current human WHO system includes a pure erythroid leukemia.
CMMoL is classified here acording to the WHO system, which recognizes that this condition has
features of a myeloproliferative disease and a MDS
See the text for proposed MDS classifications.
Because mast cells originate from a myeloid stem cell (see Chapter 2),mast cell neoplasia is considered
myeloid neoplasia.
343
Hemic neoplasia suggested by increased concentration ofa cell type inblood or bone marrow
Mostly well-differentiated
Nucleated cells
Plasma cells: multiple myeloma
granulocytes,erythrocytes,orplatelets
with undifferentiated
or reactive plasmacytosis
and immature features
(e.g. canine ehrichiosis)
Mast cells: mast cell neoplasia
Chronic myeloproliferative
Nonneoplastic causes of
Neoplastic disorders
Nonneoplastic causes
or reactive mastocytosis
disease (see Table 6.5)
granulocytoeis, erythrocytosis,
or thrombocytosis
(e.g., reactive lymphocytosis,
inflammatory neutrophilia,
Dysplasticcells:MDSorCMMoL
(Chap 2, 3, & 4)
reactive megakaryopolesis,
if criteria for acute leukemia and
regenerative anemia)
chronic myeloproliferative
Immunophenotyping and/or
diseases are not met
cytochemical staining
(see text and Tables 6.6 & 6.7)
Lymphoid phenotype
Non-lymphoid phenotype
No differentiating markers;or
mixedormultiplephenotypes
CD34(-)
CD34(+)
<50%of
≥50 %of
"all nucleated cells*
“all nucleated cells*
Acute leukemia of
CLL
ALL
areerythroid
are erythroid
ambiguous lineage
Lymphoma
Granular cell ALL
≥30(20）%of
< 30 (20) % of
≥30 (20) % of
<30 (20）%of
<30 (20) % of
≥30 (20) % of
"all nucleated cells
"all nucleated cells"
nonerythroid cells
nonerythroid cells
"all nucleated cells"
'all nucleated cells"
are “blasts"
are“blasts"
are *blasts+rubriblastsare‘blasts'+rubriblasts
Acute myeloid leukemia
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Erythroleukemia
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Erythroleukemia with
(not erythroleukemia)
Chronic myeloid leukemia
with erythroid predominance
erythroid predominance
"blasts* Ihcludes myeloblasts, megakaryoblasts, monoblasts +l- promonocytes, and alyplcal promyelocytes; eocludes rubrlblasts and lymphoblasts
Fig. 6.2. The algorithm to use when hemic neoplasia is suspected because of an increased concentration of well-differentiated or atypical cells in blood or bone
marrow
Anince cnenatinfwelifeetited erythroy platelets lmhesmncysneutrphils, esinhilsrbasphil colb ela
nonneoplastic.
eo sda  sqde epoddep so s dou 
• Exclusion of nonneoplastic disorders or conditions incriminates one of the chronic myeoproliferative diseases (see Table 6.5), but confrmatory cytogenetie tests
are currently unavailable.
• An increased population of nucleated cell with undiffrentiated and immature features may be neoplastic or nonneoplastic. Neoplasia may or may not be obvious,
depending mostly on the size of the population.
infammatory reaction, reactive megakaryocytic hyperplasia, or markedly stimulated erythropoiesis in a severe regenerative anemia.
staining of blood or bone marrow by means of panels of antibodies and stains.
  qA ouod  e s sn   pde aq 
leukemia, lymphoma involving bone marrow and/or blood, or ALL of granular lymphocytes.
oqe o s e peeg a a  do opo  
include those consiting of more than one distinct atypical population (eg- lymphoid blasts and myeloid blasts) or of one population of atypical cells
 p pepd )   
 If cells have a nonlymphoid phenotype, they may be identifed as megakaryoblasts, rubriblasts, monoblasts, myeloblasts, or myeomonoblasts. Bone marrow
analysis is needed to classify these proliferations.
• If erythroid cells are the minority of all nucleated cells? and at least 30 % (or 20 % using the current human guideline) of “all nucleated cells? are *blasts,a then
the patient has an acute myedloid leukemia other than erythroleukemia.
▪If the erythroid cells are the minority of °all nucleated cells and less than 30 % (20 %) of *all nucleated oells are “blasts, one should consider MDS or a chronic
sp spo  ss a p  ns sq  p essp  
chronic myeloid leukemla.
•When erythroid cells are at least half of all nucleated cells,* either the percentage of nonerythroid cels that are *blasts” or the percentage of “all nucleated cells
that are “blasts” plus rubriblasts is used to determine whether there is erythroleukemia, erythroleukemia with erythroid predominance, or MDS with erythroid
predominance.
• If the atypical cels are clearly plasma cell, reactive plasmacytosis must be differentiated from a plasma cell myeloma.
• If the cells are clearly mast cells, reactive mastocytosis must be differentiated from metastatic mast cell neoplasia and mast cell leukemia.
• If dysplasia is prominent and the cells do not falfll criteria for acute myeloid leukemia or one of the chronic myeloproliferative diseases, then a MDS or myelodys
plastic/myeloproliferative disease (e-g., CMMoL) should be oonsidered.
All mcted cd& includes ganulocytic, erythroid, and megakaryocytic ces and ercludes lymphocytes, plasma cells, monocytes, macrophages, and mast cells.
Nenerybreid celb means °all nucleated cel that are not nucleated erythroid cells and last means mydoblasts, megakaryoblasts, monoblasts ± promonocytes, and
atypical promydocytes but not rubriblasts and lymphoblasts ALL, acute lymphocytic leukemia; CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukemia; MDS, mydodyplastic
syndrome, and CMMoL, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, classifed by the WHO spstem for hemic neoplasia as a mydodysplastic/myeoproliferative disease rather
than MDS or one of the chronic myeloproliferative diseases
346
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
4.The term leukemia is from the Greek leukos (white”)+ haima (*blood”) =“white
bloodand refers to an increased buffy coat layer. It is the presence of neoplastic
hemic cells in either blood or bone marrow because of a neoplastic proliferation
originating in the bone marrow or, sometimes,the spleen.Not allhemic neoplasia
originating in the bone marrow is considered leukemia; for example,myelodysplastic
syndrome,plasma cell myeloma, and some chronic myeloproliferative iseases such
as essential thrombocythemia are not leukemias.
5.Acute leukemia is a relatively more rapid proliferation of less differentiated hemic
cells. It typically consists of many blast cells, and the illness is brief (unless treated).
The microscopic criteria used for considering cells to be blasts are neither clear nor
uniformbut CD34expression supports classification as anacute leukema
6.A blast cell is an immature cell with replicative potential.Blasts typically have
smooth or finely stippled chromatin and lack features of well-differentiated cells.
a.The term is often used for certain relatively large cells with basophilic cytoplasms
and visible nucleoli eg,myeloblasts, monoblasts,rubriblasts,megakaryoblasts,
and some lymphoblasts).
b.However, the term also refers to cells of small to intermediate size that lack
increased cytoplasmic basophilia and prominent nucleoli (e.g., pluripotent stem
cells).
c.Commonly,lymphoblasts are defined as large lymphocytes with basophilic
in the context of lymphoproliferative neoplasia, lymphoblasts are defined as small
lymphocytes with finely stippled chromatin patterns and inconspicuous or absent
nucleoli. Therefore, the term ymphoblast may be used to refer to cells with
different microscopic appearances.
d. CD34 expression supports the blastic nature of a hemic cell.
e.Note that the term eryshroblast refers to any nucleated erythrocyte in human
medicine.
7.Chronic leukemia is a slower proliferation or accumulation (decreased apoptosis) of
relatively well-differentiated hemic cells that are similar in appearance to the mature
cells (e.g., neutrophils or lymphocytes).An animal may live for months affer
diagnosis,even without treatment.The microscopic criteria used for considering
cells to be well-differentiated are neither clear nor uniform.
8.The term myeloproliferative disease isused specifically in a restricted context referring
to those clonal conditions classified as cbronic myeloproliferative disease (see Bone
marrow hemic cell neoplasia in the following sect.B.4). However, it is often used
more generally to refer to any proliferative neoplastic disorder ofnonlymphoid
hemiccellnludingeurophilsosinohilsbasophilsmonocyterythro,
9.Lymphoproliferative disease refers to a proliferation of lymphocytes, usually implying a
neoplastic proliferation.Lymphoproliferative neoplasia (lymphoid neoplasia) clarifies
that the proliferation is not reactive infammation and includes any neoplastic
proliferation of any type of lymphoid cell,including plasma cells.In some condi
tions, the major reason for increased lymphocyte numbers may actually be decreased
cell death rather than increased cell proliferation.
B.Myeloid neoplasia: Classification of myeloid neoplasms in dogs and cats was described
in 1991 by the ALSG, a multi-institutional group of veterinary clinical pathologists
using human classification systems that have since been modified.245o It is also
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
347
addressed in a publication of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology (AFIP) and the
WHO (AFIP/WHO classification) as part of a series on histologic classification of
tumors ofomestic animalsHowever,asnoted inarecentreview,further investa
tions are needed to define appropriate classifications and diagnostic criteria for myeloid
neoplasia in domestic animals.Until that occurs,the ALSG,AFIP/WHO,and human
classifications are useful guidelines to understand the types of myeloid neoplasms that
may affect veterinary patients.These guidelines were used to construct the algorithm
presented in Fig. 6.2.
1.AMLs are acute leukemias involving nonlymphoid leukocyte, erythroid, megakaryo
cyte,orundifferentiated precursors.Diffrentiation refers to commitment toa
particular lineage
a.In the human classification scheme, except in cases of erythroid leukemias or
when a specific genetic mutation is identified that defines a human leukemia as
AML,blasts or so-called blast equivalents (myeloblasts, megakaryoblasts, mono-
blasts ± promonocytes, and arypical promyelocytes)must account for > 20 % of
all nucleated cells in the bone marrow (excluding plasma cells, lymphocytes,
macrophages, and mast cells).
(1)The blast percentage decision threshold used to be 30 %, and that is what
was adopted by the ALSG for animals. However, human conditions with
clinically like those with 30 % or more blasts (AML) (Fig. 6.2).
(2）In erythroid leukemias, when >50 %of the nucleated cells in the marrow
are erythroid,there may be too few blasts orblast equivalents to meet
criteria for AML.Different criteria are used in these cases (Fig. 6.2):
(a)Blasts (myeloblasts, megakaryoblasts, monoblasts ±promonocytes, and
atypicalpromyelocytes)are enumeratedrelative to thenumber of
nonerythroid cells rather than all nucleated cells.When at least 20 %
(30 % previously and according to the ALSG) of the nonerythroid cells
are blasts, acute erythroid leukemia can be diagnosed.
(b) In cases of rare erythroid leukemia with little or no myeloblastic
component, criteria for pure erythroid leukemia (also referred to as
DiGuglielmo disease, acute erythremic myelosis, or “true erythroleuke-
mia) have been established in people and criteria for erythroid leukemia
with erythroid predominance (M6-Er) have been defined for dogs and
cats （usually cats). According to the ALSG,criteria for M6-Er are
fulfilled in cats when blasts (myeloblasts, megakaryoblasts, monoblasts ±
cells, but these blasts plus rubriblasts are at least 30 % of all nucleated
cells.
b. Five general categories of AML have been described in human medicine. They
are provided here as a basis for understanding categories that may be defined in
domestic mammals.
(1)AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities This classification requires identifi-
cation of specific recognized clonal genetic abnormalities (translocations or
inversions) that define the neoplastic population.
(2）AML withmultilineage dysplasia:These leukemias either arise following
MDS or MDS/MPD,or they have dysplasia in at least 50 %of the cells in
rwo or more myeloid lineages.
348
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(3)Therapy-related AML and MDS:These clonal proliferation arise months to
years after therapies ncludingalkylating agentsradiation,and topoisomr
ase inhibitors.
(4)AML not otherwise categorized: This category is used for AMLs that do not
fit into one of the other categories, including when genetic information is
lacking,and iswheremost veterinary AMLsfall.Classificationissimilar 
the French-American-British system and is based mostly on lineage(s) and
the degree of maturation, where mdturation refers to microscopic structural
changes associated with development of cell functions. The current WHO
classification is similar to the ALSG classification,burwith several differ-
ences (Table 6.5).
(a)The WHO now uses only names and not M numbers (ie., M1 to M7)
to classify AMLs.
(b）The WHO does not include the acute promyelocytic leukemia category.
(c)The WHO also includes the following: acute myeloid leukemia,
minimally differentiated; acute monoblastic leukemia; pure erythroleu
kemia, acute basophilic leukemia; acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis;
andmyeloidsarcoma.
(5)Acute leukemias of ambiguous lineage: Blast cells lack identifying character-
istics and can appear lymphoid. This category includes bilineal leukemias
consisting of two distinct blast populations, combined myeloid and lym
phoid leukemias,undifferentiated acute leukemias lacking lymphoid or
myeloid markers,and biphenorypic acute leukemias with lymphoid and
myeloid markers.
2.Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs）are a group of clonal disorders in which there is
typically ineffective hematopoiesis (marrow proliferation of a cell line concurrent
with cytopenia of the same cell line)and microscopic evidence in blood or bone
marrow of abnormal maturation of hemic cells (i.e.,dyshematopoiesis such as
dysmyelopoiesis). Involvement of multiple cellines appears to stem from neoplas
tic transformation of multipotential hematopoietic stem cells.
a.To be classifed as MDS,blasts (dened as myeloblasts,megakaryoblasts,
monoblasts ±promonocytes,and atypical promyelocytes) can account for only
up to 20 % (30% according to the ALSG) of all marrow nucleated cells (exclud-
ing plasma cell, lymphocytes,macrophages, and mast cells) when <50 % of all
marrow nucleated cells are erythroid; with ≥ 20 % (or ≥ 30 %) blasts, the
diagnosis would be AML. When erythroid cells account for > 50 % of all
marrow nucleated cells,MDS-Er is defined by blasts (myeloblasts, megakaryo
blasts,monoblasts ± promonocytes,and atypical promyelocytes)being<20 %
(30 %) of nonerythroid cellsand rubriblasts plus blasts (as just defined）) being
<20 % (30 %) of all nucleated cells (Fig.6.2).
b.The dysplastic changes thatmay be observed in MDS include thefollowing.2452
(1)Dysmyelopoiesis (Plate 9K):giant cell size,abundance of azurophilic granules,
or Pelger-Huet cell features (hyposegmentation)
(2)Dyserythropoiesis (Plate 9L): multiple nuclei, nuclear fragmentation,
megaloblastic appearance, excessive cytoplasm relative to the nucleus,
abnormal distribution of siderosomes,macrocytosis,or unequalnuclear
division
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
349
(3）Dysmegakaryopoiesis(Plate 9M)and dysthrombopoiesis:nonlobed large
nucleus,multiple small nuclei,dwarf megakaryocytes(micro-
megakaryocytes), megaplatelets, or abnormal cytoplasmic granularity
orvacuolation ofplatelets
c.Microscopic detection of dysplastic changes is subjective,and the degree of
veterinary medicine is unknown.It is the authors'experience that there is a great
deal of variation in the stringency of individual clinical pathologist's criteria for
labeling changes as dysplastic as opposed towithin the normal spectrum of
variation.
d.Classifications
(1)A basic veterinary MDS classification proposed by the ALSG divided MDS
modified by Raskin by dividing MDS into two groups (MDS-RC and
MDs-EB), thus generating four classifications of MDS in mammals:
MDS-RC, MDS-EB,MDS-Er, and CMMoL. Three categories of MDS
are described in theHistological Classification ofHematopoietic Tumors of
DomesticAnimals:idiopathicmyelofibrosis/myeloid metaplasia (categorized
as a chronic myeloproliferative disease), CMMoL, and refractory anemia
CMMoL has most recently been categorized as a myelodysplastic/
myeloproliferative neoplasia in people (see the following sect. 3 and
Table 6.5), not a MDS.
(2)The WHO classifications of human MDS are provided here because there is
no clear consensus on the classification categories or criteria for MDS in
domestic animals
(a)Refracrory anemia (RA）:bone marrow with<5%blasts,<15 %ringed
sideroblasts (nucleated erythrocytes with a ring of stainable Fe around
the nucleus),and erythrodysplasia
(b)Refractory anemia with ringed sideroblas (RARS): similar to RA but with
at least 15 % ringed sideroblasts
(c)Refractory cytopenia with mulrilineage dysplasia (RCMD):cytopenias with
<1000monocytes/μL;andbone marrowwith<5%blasts,<15 %
ringed sideroblasts, and bilineage or trilineage dysplasia
（d）Refractory cytopenia withmultilineage dysplasiaandringedsideroblasts
RCMD-RS):similar toRCMD butwith atleast 15%ringed
sideroblasts
(e)Refractory anemia with excess blasts 1 (RAEB-1): cytopenias with <1000
monocytes/μL and<5 % blasts in blood，one or more dysplastic cell
lines,and 5-9 % bone marrow blasts
(f)Refractory anemia with excess blasts 2(RAEB-2): like RAEB-1 but with
< 19 % blasts in blood and 10-19 % bone marrow blasts
g）Myelodysplastic syndrome,unclassified(MDS-U）:cytopenias with granulo-
cytic or megakaryocytic dysplasia and < 5 % blasts in bone marrow
(h)MDSassociatedwithisolateddel(5q):anemia with<5%blasts in blood
and normal to increased platelet concentration; also with normal to
increased numbers of megakaryocytes with hypolobulated nuclei in bone
marrow,<5 %blasts, and isolared del(5q)
350
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
e.Domestic mammals and people with a MDS may develop AML, and thus MDS
has been considered a preleukemic disorder.
fMDS must be differentiated from nonneoplastic congenital dyshematopoiesis
disorders:
(1)Hereditary poodle marrow dyscrasia (poodl macrocytosis)
(2)Malabsorption of cobalamin (vitamin B) in giant schnauzers,Border
collies, Australian shepherd dogs, and beagles
(3）Dyserythropoiesis in English springer spaniels
(4)Congenital dyserythropoiesis and progressive alopecia of polled Hereford
calves
(5)Possibly idiopathic thrombocytopenia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels.ss
g.MDSmust also be differentiated from acquired secondary dyshematopoiesis
disorders in which dysplastic changes are neither congenital nor clonal.56 Dysplas
tic features should resolve with alleviation of the underlying condition.Dyshema-
topoiesis had been reported in association with the following acquired conditions
in dogs and cats:53-55
(1)Toxicants: lead toxicity,chemotherapeutic drugs,estrogen, cephalosporins,
chloramphenicol,phenobarbital, and colchicine
(2)Nutritional deficiency:Fe deficiency
(3) Immune-mediated disease: immune-mediated hemolytic anemia and
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia(dysmegakaryopoiesis)
(4）Infammation (sideroblastic anemias）: septicemia,pyometra,pancreatitis,
hepatitis,glomerulonephritisandfelineinfectiousperitonitis
(5)Neoplasia: lymphoma,multiple myeloma, and polycythemia vera (primary
erythrocytosis by the criteria of this textbook)
（6)Myelofbrosis,although dyshematopoiesis associated with myelofibrosis may
prove to be neoplastic in some cases
3.Myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative diseases (Table 6.5) include conditions that may
have myelodysplastic and/or myeloproliferative features.
a.Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia fulfills the criteria and occurs in dogs.There is
typically leukopenia and nonregenerative anemia with a hypercellular bone
marrow and atypical hypersegmented monocytoid cells in blood, bone marrow,
and often lymph nodes.Fewer than 10 % of the nucleated cells are blasts, and
the disorder has a chronic course.
b. Other conditions described in human patients have not been recognized in
animals: atypical chronic myeloid leukemia, juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia,
and unclassifiablemyelodysplastic/myeloproliferativedisease.
4.Chronic myeloproliferative diseases:This group,which includes several specific chronic
clonal disorders of pluripotential stem cells,is characterized by excesive proliferation
or accumulation of differentiated neoplastic cells that have few orno microscopic or
functional abnormalities (Table 6.5）.Tools to detect clonality and prove neoplasia
are generally unavailable for these conditions in domestic animals. Diagnosis is often
based on exclusion of other conditions,but differentiation fromnonneoplastic
conditions is difficult because the cells are well differentiated (Fig. 6.2).
a.
Chronic myelogenous leukemia （also known as chronic granulocyticleukemia or
chronic myeloid leukemia) is characterized by a neutrophilia and typically a left
shift.Chronic eosinophilic leukemia (and possibly hypereosinophilic syndrome)
and chronic basophilic leukemia are variants.
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
351
b.Polycythemia vera and primary eryhrocyrosismust be differentiated from other
causes of erythrocytosis (see Chapter 3).
Megakaryocytemyelosis or essentialthrombocythemiamust bedifferentiated from
C.
marked megakaryocyte hyperplasia and reactive thrombocytosis.
d.Chronic idiopathic myelofibrosis with extramedullary bematopoiesismust be differen-
tiated from secondary myelofibrosis.Proof thar idiopathic myelofibrosis is a
neoplastic entity in domestic animals is curently lacking.
5.Mast celldisease (mastocytosis): Mastocytemia may be reactive (nonneoplastic) or
neoplastic.When neoplastic, it is usually associated with solid tissue mast cell
tumors and rarely caused by mast cell leukemia.Mast cell leukemia is characterized
by a bone marrow and blood distribution of mast cells with secondary infiltrates in
other organs, particularly liver and spleen. Cells may be atypical, and myelophthisis
may be severe.
C.Lymphoid neoplasia (Fig. 6.2) is neoplasia of undifferentiated or differentiated lymphoid
cells, including plasma cell.Lympboyricneoplasia,neoplasia of lymphocyteshas been
classically divided into lymphomas(solid tissue origin）and leukemias (primarily bone
marrow and blood origin and distribution）.Lymphomas may enter a leukemic phase
with bone marrow and blood involvement, but a predominant tissue distribution and
late development of blood involvement signal lymphoma.
1.Lymphoid leukemias may be divided by cell type into B-lymphocyte,T-lymphocyte,
orNK-lymphocyteleukemias(seeTable6.5).Immunophenotyping isrequired to
identify the celltype (see the following sect.E.4 and Table 6.7）.They may be acute
or chronic.
a.Granular lymphocyte leukemias consist of lymphocytes with cytoplasmic
granules. The cells are either T-lymphocytes or NK-lymphocytes, and the
leukemias may be acute or chronic.
b. Clinical studies incorporating immunophenotyping and assessment of involved
organs supports that chronic lymphocytic leukemia ofB-lymphocytesin dogs is a
primary bone marrow disease, but acute and chronic lymphocytic leukemias of
granularT-lymphocytes appear to originate in the spleen with later marrow
involvement."7
the Lymph Node: Major Concepts and Terms section).
3.Plasma cell myeloma is a clonal proliferation of differentiatedB-lymphocytes within
the bone marrow, typically at multiple sites (multiple myeloma)）. Circularing plasma
cells are rarely seen (Plate 9N).
a.Although the cells are diffrentiated,theymay have varying degreesofmatura
tion and may not have a mature plasma cell appearance.
b.These neoplasms are often associated with osteolysis and monoclonal gammopa-
thies due to excessive production of immunoglobulin A (IgA), IgG, or IgM.
c.Other laboratory abnormalities may includeBence Jones proteinuria,hyper-
calcemia,hypoalbuminemia,azotemia,and hyperviscosity
d.A cutaneous or noncutaneous proliferation of neoplastic plasma cells outside of
the bone marrow is an extramedullary plasmacytoma.
D.Histiocytic neoplasia:Histiocytic malignancies consist of cells that are derived from
monocytes.Dendritic cells are specialized for antigen presentation,andmacrophages are
more specialized for phagocytosis.The functions of these two cell types arereflected by
their immunophenotypes.
352
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
1.In dogs,hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma is a proliferation of splenicred pulp and
bone marrowmacrophages that express,among other markers,CDlld and,
inconsistently,CD1c and CD11c.5
a.Neoplastic cells in the bone marrow cellsmay appear relatively well differentiated
or atypical.Neoplastic cells are consistently present in the spleen,where they may
have more atypia. Other tissues may be involved (e.g, liver and lung).
b.Most dogs have a regenerative anemia,thrombocytopenia,hypoalbuminemia,
and hypocholesterolemia
2.Malignant histiocytic sarcoma (malignant histiocytosis) of dendritic cell origin is a
malignant proliferationofinterstitial dendriticcellswhich express,among other
markers,CD1cand CD11c,but not CD11d.59
a.Pleomorphic populations of neoplastic cells are present in bone marrow and
spleen, lungs, liver, or lymph nodes. Phagocytosis may be present.
b.Other fndings are variable andnonspecic,including anorexialethargy,weak
ness, and weight loss.
3.These malignancies must be differentiated from (1) systemic histiocytosis,(2)
nonneoplastic hemophagocytic syndromes occurring in association with infections
and other malignancies,(3）immune-mediated destruction of hematopoietic cells,
and (4) macrophagic inflammation.
a.Malignant histiocytic proliferations typically have atypia, though it may be more
apparent in other tissues (Plate 9O）.The number of cells in the bone marrow is
typically greater than in other conditions, and cells are more likely to be in
clusters.
b.Phagocytic activity appears nonselective in hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma
and hemophagocytic syndrome (authorsexperience)(Plate 9O）,but is typically
selective for a particular lineage andmaturation stage in marrow-directed
immune-mediated anemia (Plate 9G) and neutropenia.
c.With infammation,other inflammatory cellsmay be present along with organ
isms or necrotic cells.
d.Attemprs have been made using flow cytometry to differentiate malignant and
benign histiocytic bone marrow proliferations.
E.Methods of classifying hemic cell neoplasia (Fig 6.2)
1.The major goal of classification schemes is to determine and communicate the cell
of origin with hopes that it can be used to reliably provide prognostic information
schemes are (1) the most simple and inexpensive method,microscopic appearance
on a Wright-stained sample, has major limitations and can be inaccurate, and
(2) other methods are not widely available and are expensive.
2.Microscopic evaluation ofWright-stained blood flms or bone marrow preparations
a.The primary value of these evaluations is to detect the presence of neoplastic
hemic cells.This may be obvious when there is a large population of atypical
cells, but it may be difficult when there are fewer cells or when neoplastic cells
have mature features compatible with an infammatory population.
b.Finding cells that have nuclear or cytoplasmic features that are unique or more
common in certain differentiated cell lines is thefirst step in characterizing the
neoplasia.When the cells are mmature orlack differentiation,it can be very
difficult to classify the cells reliably by their light microscopic appearance;that is,
blast cells could be of one of several cell rypes.
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
353
Table 6.6. Expected cytochemical staining reactions of normal or neoplastic hemic cells in
dogs and cats
Cytochemical stainsa
Cell
PO
SBB
CAE
LAP
NBE
Neutrophil
+
+
+
+(immature)
一
Lymphocyte
_b
-/focal+
一
Monocyte
-b
+(diffuse)
Eosinophil
+in dog
+in dog
士
-in cat
-in cat
Basophil
一
+
干
Megakaryocyte
一
士
POperoxidase; SBB,Sudan black B;CAE,chloracetate estrase;LAP,leukocyte alkaline phosphatase
and NBE,α-naphthyl butyrate esterase
bPositive results have been reported.
Note:Negative staining does not exclude cellines positive staining supports cetain cellines; ± indicates
that weak or sporadic staining may occur in normal or neoplastic cells.
C.The neoplasia is classified most accurately by other methods after first being
identifiedby visual inspection.
3. Cytochemical stains4861
a.These are helpful for differentiating the lineage(s) of leukemic cells.
b.The basic premise behind the use of cytochemical stains is that leukemic cells
may contain enzymes or compounds that are common or unique to certain cell
lines. For example, neutrophils and monocytes contain peroxidase, whereas
lymphocytes, erythrocyte precursors,and megakaryocytes do not.However,
poorly differentiatedmyeloid precursors may not contain enough analyte fora
positive reaction, or staining may be equivocal.
c.
Staining may be more prominent in immature cells than in mature cells. For
example, alkaline phosphatase activity is present in canine myeloblasts but not
mature neutrophils.
d.The use of cytochemical stains fordifferentiation of leukemias is limited to a few
special hematology laboratories and is of most value when a panel of stains is
used (Table 6.6) and when assessed in conjunction with other findings.
e.Positive staining of acute leukemia cells for peroxidase,phospholipid,chloracetate
esterase, leukocyte alkaline phosphatase, or Q-naphthyl butyrate esterase (diffuse)
supports a nonlymphoid lineage. Staining with α-naphthyl butyrate esterase
that appear lymphoid in Wright-stained marrow or blood often prove to be
myeloid/monocytic when cytochemical stains are applied.
f.s
Some cytochemical stains can be used on appropriately fixed plastic-embedded
tissues.4s
4.Immunophenotypingis the use of antibodies to etect cellular epitopes that help
to classify cell types. It is typically used to characterize neoplasia,not to confirm it
a.The use of monoclonal antibodies has enabled the identification of surface
antigens on a variety of cell types. If a group or cluster of monoclonal antibodies
recognizes the same antigen, that antigen is assigned a CD number (Table 6.7).
Cdl marker
Function
Cells detected
Commmnts
CD1 (a-c)
Antiga-presenting
Cortical thymocytes, dendritic cells;
Useful to detect dendritic antigen presenting
molecules
CD1c is expresed on some
cells; not expressed by mature T-lymphocytes
monocytes and B-lymphocytes
CD3(CD3e)
Part of the TCR complex
Mature T-lymphocytes, activated NK-
Useful to identify T-lymphocyte leukemia/
lymphocytes (cytoplasm)
lymphoma; αβ- and y6-T-lymphocytes not
differentiated
CD4
Protcin that associates with
MHC class Irestricted T-helper cells,
Monocytes, macrophags, dendritic cells can
TCR
neutrophils
express when activated
CD8
Dimenic protein associated
MHC dass I-restricted cytotoxic
A subset of NK-lymphocytes may express
with TCR
T-lymphocytes (usually CD8oxβ
(CDsoo. homodimer)
heterodimer)
CD11*
αSubunit of the leukocyte
CD11a: All leukocytes
Useful as a panleukocyte marker
adhesion molecule family
CDllb:Granulocytes,monocytes,
Useful as a marker of nonlymphoid leukocytes
of βintegrins
some macrophages
CD11c Granulocytes, monocytes,
Useful to recognize histiocytic neoplasms of
dendritic antigen-presenting cells
CD11d: Macrophages and T-
Useful to recognize hemophagocytic histiocytic
lymphocytes in splenic red pulp
sarcoma
granular lymphocytes including
NK-lymphocytes
CD18
β-Subunit of the leukocyte
All leukocytes but les expression in
Useful to confrm the hemic cell origin of round
adhesion molecule family
lymphocytes
cells in tissue; deficient in Irish setters with
of β-integrins
leukocyte adhesion deficiency
CD21and
Complement receptor
Mature B-lymphocytes, folicular
Useful to identify B-cell lymphoma and B-cell
CD21-like*
(CR2)associated with the
dendritic cells of germinal centers
leukemia
BCRcomplex
CD34
Surface glycoprotein that
Lympho-hematopoietic stem cells and
Helps differmtiate ALLb from lymphoma; CLLb,
binds selectins
progenitor cells
lymphoma, myeloma cells are negative
CD41
O-Integrin (GPIIb)² of the
Megakaryocytes (and plarelets)
By flow cytometry, cells may appear positive
fibrinogen receptor
because of adherent platelets
CD45*
Membrane tyrosine
All hemic cells but erythroid cells; cells
CD45RA isoform detected in fixed tissues but
phos phatase
express different isoforms
not expressed on alleukocytes some
T-lymphocytes)
CD61
By-Integrin (GPIIa) of the
Megakaryocytes, platelets; other cells
By flow cytometry, cels may apear positive
fibrinogen receptor
include endothelial cells
because of adherent platelets
CD79a
Part of the BCR complex
B-lymphocytes plasma cells;
Useful for B-cdlleukemia andB-celllymphoma
megakaryocytes also positive
Calprotectin*
Cytoplasmic calcium-
Neutrophils, monocytes, and
Also expressed by some nonhemic cells
(MAC387)
binding protein
macrophages
(epithelial)
MPO
Myeloperoxidase
Granulocytic and monocytic cells
Helpful for identifying AML (nonlymphoid
leukocytes)
vWf"
von Willebrand factor
Megakaryocytes, platelets
Intracytoplasmic location; relatively low levels in
saop
calprotectin, and vWE
ALL acute ymphocytic leukemia; BCR, B-cell receptor, CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukemis; GP, glycoprotein; and MHC, major histocompatability
complex
Note: Not all targets are currently detectable by all methods (How cytometry, immunocytochemistry, immunohistochemistry on fxed tsues). Reactivities and
antibody availability vary with species.
356
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
b.The CD antigens are best characterized on human and mouse cells,but many of
the same CD antigens are found on cells of domestic mammals
C.Cells from blood,bone marrow, or other tissues may be immunophenotyped by
fow cytometry,immunocytochemical staining of air-dried preparations,or
immunohistochemical staining of fixed or frozen histologic sections.Some
antibodies can be used on unfixed tissue butnot on fixed tissue,and some
antibodies are not available with fuorochromes for fow cytometry.
d. Immunophenotyping should be done with panels of antibodies to detect
constellations of antigen expression that reflect the cell lineage and stage of
maruration.Parterns are more likely to predict outcome than individual antigen
reactiviry.Individual antigen reactivity may bemisleading because most immuno
phenotyping antibodiesreact with cells of multiple lineages,andneoplastic cells
may have aberrant antigen expression.
e.The following panel has been recommended as a minimal immunophenotyping
CD11b for myeloid cells,MPO for myeloid cells, CD41 for megakaryoblastic
cells, CD1c for dendritic cells,and CD34 for acute leukemia (hemic blast
cells).
f.Immunophenotyping results should be interpreted in light of all historical
clinical,microscopic,cytochemical,cytogenetic,and molecular genetic findings
that are available.
g.Canine chronic lymphocytic leukemias:Immunophenotyping indicates thatmost
are T-lymphocyte neoplasms, including many granular lymphocyte leukemias.
They do not express CD34.57.64
(1)Nongranular T-lymphocyte leukemias are typically proliferations of TCRoβ
cells that lack a consistent pattern of CD4 and CD8 expression. Granular
cell leukemias are typically CD8+ and CD11d+, and express TCRaβ about
twice as often as TCR8
(2）
B-lymphocyte leukemias express CD21 (without T-lymphocyte markers) or
CD79a and usually CD1c.
h.Canine acuteleukemiaswhether lymphoid ornonlymphoidusually express
CD34 (except for granular lymphocytes).
(1)Nongranular acute lymphocytic leukemia is usually of B-lymphocyte
(CD79a+) origin.
(2)Granular lymphocyte leukemias may consist of either T-lymphocytes
(CD3+,TCRaβ+, CD8αβ+,and CD11d+) or,probably, NK-lymphocytes
(CD3-,CD11d+,and CD8a+)
(3)MPO expression supports an acute myeloid leukemia other than pure
erythroleukemia. MPO expression has not been detected in some leukemias
of megakaryocyte or monocyte lineage.63
i.B-lymphocytes and T-lymphocytes of lymphomas are CD34,so this marker is
helpful in differentiating primary acute lymphocytic leukemias of agranular
lymphocytes (CD34+) from leukemic phases of lymphoma.
j.Aberrant expression of CD18 and CD45 has been evaluated for recognizing and
classfying atypical cell populations.6.66
5.Electron microscopy may be useful in some leukemias to provide evidence of a
particular cell line;for example,the ultrastructure of leukemic cell cytoplasmic
granules may be distinctive orbasophil,osinophil,or mast cellgranules.Rarely,
immunogold staining may be used to detect lineage-selective markers.
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
357
6.Molecular and cytogenetic studies may be employed to detect genetic abnormalities
that may predict behavior and outcome of some neoplasms. Chromosomal abnor-
malities in canine leukemia cells have been detected by karyotyping but have offered
little prognostic value to date. Chromosomal banding studies and molecular genetic
techniques are being evaluated. These include fuorescent in situ hybridization,
comparative genomichybridization,andmicroarrays.Currently,hemostused
genetic technique is the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for assessment of
clonality.5767
a.Withonlyrareexceptionsneoplasia oflymphoidcellsisanuncontrolled
proliferation or accumulation of one clone of lymphocytes.
b.Antigen-binding regions of B- and T-lymphocyte receptors are encoded by the
CDR3 region of the immunoglobulin and TCR genes. The CDR3 region is
produced by various recombinations of several genes,generating numerous
genetic combinations.Primers are used to amplify conservedregions of these
genes,and the products are separated by size.If there is a clonal expansion
of cells with one particular CDR3region detectable with the test primers,
separation will yield a dominant band.
C.Polymerase chain reaction assays for B- and T-lymphocyte antigen receptor gene
rearrangements are useful to help differentiatrelymphoid neoplasia from inflam
matory conditions.
T-lymphocyte gene rearrangements usually occur in neoplasms of the
respective cell types.
(2) The absence of a detected gene rearrangement does not exclude lymphoid
neoplasia.
(3) Clonal rearrangements of the TCR gene have been detected in dogs with
Ehrlichia canis infections,and lymphocyte receptor gene rearrangements
sometimes occur in nonlymphoid leukemias.67
(4)The assay sensitivity varies with the tissue and proportion of lymphocytes
that are neoplastic, but clonality can be detected when as little as
0.1-10.0 % of sample DNA is from neoplastic cells. Therefore, it can be
used to detectresidual disease after treatment or otherwise undetectably
small amounts of neoplasia during staging.
(5)Smallsamples may yield discrete bands that appear to be clones; these are
called pseudoclones. Duplicate testing with separate DNA extractions can be
done to decrease thelikelihood of misinterpreting pseudoclones as real
clones. Detection of clones should be repeatable.
INTERPRETINGRESULTSOFBONEMARROWEXAMINATIONS
1.
Interpretation of theresults of bone marrow examinations is easier if one uses the bone
marrow examination to answer specific questions:
A.Why does an animal have a nonregenerative anemia?
B.Why does an animal have a persistent neutropenia?
C.Why does an animal have a thrombocytopenia?
D.Is there a neoplastic process in the bone marrow?
IL.
Complete interpretation of most bone marrow samples is only possible when there are
CBCresults for the day thebone marrow was collected
358
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
A.Hyperplastic and hypoplastic conditions can usually be recognized independently of
CBC ndings,but the CBCfndings help explain the disorder.For example,a hypr-
cellular bone marrow with an increased G:E (M: E) ratio indicates there is myeloid
hyperplasia (rarely neoplasia) no matter what the CBC fndings are. However, the CBC
may indicate there is ineffective neutropoiesis (granulocytic hyperplasia with severe
neutropenia) or effective neutropoiesis (granulocytic hyperplasia with a marked neutro
philia).The former case suggests immune-mediated neutropenia whereas the latter case
supports an inflammatory process.
B.When marrow cellularity isneither learly increasednor clearly decreased and there is an
abnormal G:E (M:E) ratio, the CBC provides clues as to the cause of the abnormal ratio.
1.If the G:E (M:E) ratio is increased,it may be due to erythroid hypoplasia, granulo
cytic (myeloid) hyperplasia, or both. A nonregenerative anemia would support
erythroid hypoplasiawhereas a neutrophilia and hematocrit within thereference
interval would support granulocytic(myeloid) hyperplasia
2.If the G:E (M:E) ratio is decreased,it may be due to erythroid hyperplasia,
granulocytic （myeloid）hypoplasia,orboth.Aregenerative anemia or erythrocytosis
would support erythroid hyperplasia,whereas aleukopenia would support granulo
cytic (myeloid) hypoplasia.
C.Unless a condition is clearly chronic and stable,it is important that CBC results are
collected the same day as the bone marrow sample.
1.An animal may have a nonregenerative anemia one day but a regenerative anemia
the next day (or the reverse).
2. An animal may have a neutropenia one day but a normal to increased neutrophil
concentration the next day (or the reverse).
3.An animal may have a thrombocytopenia one day but a normal to increased platelet
concentration the next day (or the reverse)
D.Examples of the correlation of CBC and bone marrow results for five dogs are shown in
Fig.6.3.Findingsmust alsobe interpreted inlight of other clinical findings.
LYMPHNODE:MAJORCONCEPTSANDTERMS
I
Terms and conditions
A.Lymphadenopathy is a pathologic state involving a lymph node.In dlinical diseases, the
lymphadenopathies typically cause enlarged lymph nodes (ie., mphadenomegay).Frequently,
but inaccurarely, lymphadenopathy and enlarged lymph node are considered synonyms.
B.The primary reason for a lymph node biopsy is to determine the pathologic process
that is causing lymphadenomegaly.Pathologic processes may be present in lymph nodes
that arenot enlarged,butnot asfrequently.Thefollowing aremajor isordersor
conditions that cause enlarged lymph nodes:
1.Hyperplasia of lymphoid cells
2.Inflammation involving lymph nodes
3.Neoplasia of lymphoid cells
4.Neoplasia of nonlymphoid cells (typically metastatic neoplasia)
I1.
Methods
A.Complete descriptions of a lymph node biopsy (collection, fixation, staining, and
examination of lymph node tissue from a living animal) are beyond the scope of this
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
359
B.Major features of a lymph node biopsy
1.Sample collection and processing
aTypically,lymphnode samples are collected from enlarged peripheral lymph
nodes:mandibular,rescapular,axillary,popliteal, inguinal and,ccasonally,
facial. Internal lymph nodes are also sampled,usually by ultrasound-guided
aspiration or during a celiotomy or thoracotomy.When multiplelymph nodes
are enlarged, it is wise to sample multiple nodes.
b.Samples may be collected from the lymph node by fine needles, Tru-cut needles,
wedge incision, or lymph node excision. After the sample is collected, it may be
prepared formicroscopicanalysistissue sectioning,culturing,or other
procedures.
c.Fine-needle collection is a relatively simple procedure for obtaining cytologic
samples,but many errors can be made that result in inadequate or suboptimal
samples. The following steps may be used as a guide for collecting cytologic
samples from lymph nodes or other superficial masses:
(1)Slides should be made ready.
(2）
Select a 22 gauge needle and a 5-12 mL syringe.
(3）1
Prepare the skin as for a venipuncture.
(4)Isolate and stabilize the lymph node with one hand.
(5)Insert the needle into the skin and lymph node. (A syringe is not necessary
at this tme,but ifusing a needle attached to a syringe,moderate sution
can be applied after the needle is in the lymph node to help hold cores of
tissue in the needle.Forceful aspiration should be avoided, particularly
while leaving the needle in one place, because this can cause significant
hemodilution.)
(6)Cut a core of tissue with a sharp forward cutting motion followed by an
optional rotation of the needle to help free the core, withdraw the needle
without leaving the node,and repeat up to three times in different direc-
tions to obtain a representative sample.
7
Withdraw and attach syringe(relieve suction before withdrawing if using a
needle and syringe).
(8）
Place theneedle against a slide,bevel down,and express the sample na
pool.Do not spray small droplets onto the slide
(9)
Spread the material by one of several techniques to obtain areas on one or
more slides that contain monolayers of intact cells.
(a)A wedge blood smear technique may be used for thin (more fuid)
samples.
(b)Horizontal or vertical “squash” techniques can be used for thicker
samples.A wavy spreading motion can be used with a horizontal
technique in order to obtain thin zones of cells.
(c)Lymph node samples are often very cellular and thick,sometimes too
thick for evaluation,so care should be taken to spreadmaterial well.If
the drop is moderate to large, instead of spreading it all into one thick
smear, some of the material can be picked up on the edge of another
slide and spread by a horizontal spread technique onto one ormore
other slides.
(10) The air-dried slides should not be fixed (with heat or other fixative)prior to
staining or submission, and they should not be exposed to formalin fumes
CBCresults
Dog1
Dog2
Dog3
Dog 4
Dog5
Ref.Int
(%）10H
10
10
10
15
10
99-26
Reticulocytes (#/μL)
10,000
200,000
10,000
200,000
10,000
0-80,000
Neutrophils (#/μL)
8.000
8,000
500
30.000
1.000
3.000-12.000
Platelets (#/μL)
300,000
300,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
155,000-393,000
Atypical cels (#/μL)
0
0
0
0
100,000
none
Bone marrow biopsy results
Hematopoietic cellularity (%)
20
08
10
85
90
25-75
G:E
2.4
0.5
1.0
0.7
3.5
0.9-1.8
Megakaryocyte pool
?
Granulocytic pool
Erythroid pool
Fig. 6.3. Schematic examples of the interpretation of CBC and bone marow bicpsy results. Reference intervals and other expected results for healthy
ioofresau seuaus go azps pue aqumu a Aq pusdan s sioorexelar aoueur jo Jaqunu aq eo aqu ap ug papod are slop
Granulocytic and erythroid pools are represented by pool diagrams that are miniatures of those shown in Chapters 2 and 3. GE ratios were
calculated from the number of cellsillustrated in the granulocytic and erythroid poolst
 Dog 1: Decreased fnagment hematopoietic celularity and an increased G:E ratio indicate erythroid hypoplasia. CBC results of a nonregenerative
anemia without abnormal platelet or neutrophil concentrations support that it is selective erythroid hypoplasia.
• Dog 2: Increased fragment hematopoietie cdlularity and a decreased G E ratio indkcate erythroid hyperplasia. CBC data indicate it is associated
with a regenerative anemia; therefore, it is probably caused by blood loss or hemolysis. If CBC data indicated a persistent nonregenerative anemia,
one would have to consider causes of ineffctive erythropoiesis (see the tert).
Dog 3: Decreased fagnent hematopoietic celllarity, a G:E ratio within the reference interval, and decreased megalkaryocytes indicate generalized
marrow hypoplasia CBC data support the presence of an aplastic anemis (aplastic pancytpenia).
Dog 4 Increased frgnt hematopoietic cdlularity with a decreased GE rati indcates erythrid hyperplasia. Inceased densiry of megakaryocytes
indicates megalaryotic hypeplasia CBC data further indicate effective erthropoiis (reticulcytoeis) and a stilus for megakaryocytic
 p  dq 
but the erythroid series is expanded more. The regenerative anemia is probably caused by blood loss or hemolysis, the neutrophilia is caused by an
infammarory prces, and the thrmbcytopeniais causd b decreaed platele suial. his dg's inamatory neuphili could be aociad
with an immune-mediated anemia and immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.
* Dog 5: Increased fragment hematopoietic cellularity and an increased G:E ratio with a predominance of atypical immature granulocytic cells
indcates gracytic neplasia A paucity ofmeakaryocytes and erythroid lls suests the psbiliy of mpelophhisic megakaryocytic and
Aq pseo s equadon pdrap s oddr y aue aeudarou pue euadofooqr po supuy  eedodq pporf
defective neutropoiesis (neoplasia).
Het,hematocrit.
36
362
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
because the gas can severely alter the staining properties of the cells.Keep
them clean,covered,and at ambient temperature.
d.To process samples for histologic evaluation, thin slices of excised samples should
be placed in fixative for paraffin-embedded sectioning. Formalin is used most
often, but B5 fixation improves cell detail.
2.Cytologic examination of lymph node aspirates and imprints
a.This involves the differentiation and characterization of nucleated cells and the
identification of organisms or other noncelular structures (e.g., hemosiderin).
(1)The types of lymphocytes are determined by their nuclear diameters,
chromatin patterns,the presence of enlarged nucleoli, and cytoplasmic
features. In health, most lymphocytes should be small lymphocytes with
clumped chromatin patterns, scant cytoplasms, and inapparent nucleoli.
(2)Other cells are identified by their unique features. Nonlymphoid cells
include neutrophils,macrophages,eosinophils,mast cells,metastatic
neoplastic cells,and hematopoietic precursors.
b. Examinations are best completed on a quality stained sample with a quality
microscope by a person who is trained for such examinations.
3.Methods involved in the histologic examination of lymph node sections are beyond
the scope of this textbook.Such examinations should be performed by veterinary
pathologists.
E.Cells in lymph nodes of healthy mammals
1.Lymph nodes from healthy mammals are not commonly evaluated. However,
microscopists should have a clearimage of what should be seen in normal lymph
nodes so that abnormal cell populations or other significant findings will be
recognized (Plate 10A).
2.The expected cell populations in lymph nodes vary with the location of the lymph
node. Mandibular and mesenteric lymph nodes in healthy mammals typically have
greaterrcentagesfesientmarophagesasmacellsutrophisandl
lymphocytes than do other lymph nodes.
3.Lymph nodes from healthy animals consist of a heterogeneous population of cells.
Small to intermediate lymphocytes account for the vast majority of the cells, and
therearelowpercentageoflasmacellsargelymphocyteeutrophilsosin
phils,and macrophages.
4. The size of lymphocytes should be judged where cells are well spread (diameters are
maximized). They can be measured with a micrometer or compared to “cellular
micrometers” to estimate sizes: canine erythrocyte diameter is about 7 μm; canine
neutrophil diameter is 12-14 μm; and mature plasma cell nuclei have diameters
similar to erythrocytes.
a.（
One system classifies canine lymphocytes by nuclear diameter relative to canine
(1) Small:1-1.5 times the diameter of erythrocytes(=7-10 μm)
(2)
Intermediate: 22.5 times the diameter of erythrocytes (=1418μm)
(4)Erythrocytes from other species are smaller, so the classification scale must
bemodified accordingly
b.Others have used different numeric diameters for classification7
(1）Small:<10μm
(2)Intermediate:10-15μm
(3）Large:>15μm
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
363
5.Large lymphocytes with basophilic cytoplasms,finely stippled chromatin,and
nucleoli are often refered to as hymphoblasts as is consistent with the termsmyelo
blast, monoblast, and rubriblast.However, others reserve this term for the relatively
small lymphocyte without conspicuous nucleoli that proliferates in lymphoblastic
leukemia/lymphoma.
LYMPHNODECLASSIFICATIONS
Hyperplastic lymph node
A.Lymph node byperplasia is characterized by increased numbers of B-lymphocytes,T-
lymphocytes, or both.The proportions of different types of lymphocytes may appear
normal, in whichcase hyperplasia is suggestedby normal cell populations in association
with lymphadenomegaly. There may be increases in large lymphocytes and/or plasma
cells,in which case the terms reactive or reactive hyperplasia are often used in place of
hyperplasia, though the nodes are enlarged because of hyperplasia.
B.A variery of infectious and noninfectious diseases, including bacterial, viral, fungal, and
neoplastic disorders,can lead to the stimulation and proliferation of lymphocytes.If there
isgeneralized lymphnodehyperplasiaasystemicillness should be considered.Ifonly one
node is hyperplastic, a disease within the drainage field of that node should be considered.
C.There may or may not be a concurrent infammatory lymphocytosis in mammals with
hyperplastic lymph nodes.
II.
Reactive lymph node
A.A node classified as reactive typically has increased numbers of plasma cells and/or large
lymphocytes (Plate 10B). The percentage of large lymphocytes is expected to be < 50 %
in a reactive node and is usually < 10 %.An increase in plasma cells indicates B-
lymphocyte stimulation.
B.The causes of a reactive lymph node are essentially the same as those for lymph node
hyperplasia.
III.
Lymphadenitis
A.Lymphadenitis is characterized by an increased number of nonlymphoid inflammatory
cells in a lymph node. One inflammatory cell type might dominate (e.g., neutrophils),
or there can be a mixture of infammatory cells (e.g.,neutrophils,macrophages,and
eosinophils)(Plate 10Cand D)
B.The cause of the inflammatory state may be within the lymph node or, more com-
monly,in the node's drainage field.For example,an allergic dermatitis may lead to an
eosinophilic lymphadenitis, or a lymph node draining a necrotic hemorrhagic lesion
may have many macrophages containing cell debris and Fe pigments.
C.There may or may not be a concurrent inflammatory leukocytosis.
D.Organisms such as pyogenic bacteriaMycobacterium sp.(Plate 10E),Histoplasma sp.
(Plate10F),Blastomyces sp.(Plate 10G),Leishmaniasp.Plate10H),Prototheca sp.,and
Neorickettsia sp.may be present.
E.Lymphadenitis is often associated with reactive (proplastic) changes, and the term
reactive lymphadenitis is sometimes used to reflect both changes.
IV.
Lymphoid neoplasia (lymphoma and lymphosarcoma)
A.Anatomic classification,histologic classfication,and staging of lymphomas are beyond
the scope of this book.
364
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.Cytologically,lymphoma can be diagnosed when there is nearly a single population of
atypical lymphocytes rather than the heterogeneous mixture of typical cell types present
in normal, reactive, or inflamed lymph nodes. However, depending on the appearance
of the cells, lymphoma can be an easy or diffcult diagnosis cytologically.
1.When cytologic preparations consist of single populations of large lymphocytes with
prominent nucleoli, the diagnosis of lymphoma is clear (Plate 10I and J).
2.The diagnosis is more difficult when the cells are small to intermediate in size or
when substantial numbers of nonneoplastic cells are intermixed with neoplastic cells
because of a nondiffuse form or a recent onset (Plate loK). In these cases, histologic
examinationmaybenecessaryfor a diagnosis
3.A lymph node is unlikely to be reactive and likely tobelymphomatous if>50 %of
the lymphoid cells are large lymphocytes.
C.Over the past 30yr,several classification systems forlymphomas havebeen based on
tissue patterns,cell sizes,nuclear shapes,nucleolar sizes,and cytoplasmic ranulation.
Most classifications were formulated for the classification of human lymphomas,and
their application to other mammalian lymphomas has been inconsistent.Ideally,a
classification system would differentiate neoplasms of differing clinical behavior and
prognosis such that they could receive the most appropriate management.
1.The Rappaport classification is based primarily on sizes of the lymphocytes and
patterns of cell growth (nodular and diffuse).
2.The Kiel classification is based on lymphocyte sizes and nuclear and cytoplasmic
features,and separates lymphomas into B-lymphocyte and T-lymphocyte neoplasms
3.The Lukes-Collins classification is based on the sizes and shapes of the nuclei (e.g,
small,large, cleaved,noncleaved, and convoluted) and on cellular features (small,
immunoblastic, plasmacytoid, and histiocytic), and separates lymphomas into B-
lymphocyte and T-lymphocyte neoplasms.
4.The Working Formulation system uses growth patterns (follicular and diffuse),
nuclear outline （cleaved,noncleaved,and convoluted),and cell sizes to classify the
lymphomas into three grades (low, intermediate, and high).
5.The revised European/American Lymphoma (REAL) system divides lymphomas into
B-lymphocyte or T-lymphocyte lymphomas on the basis of immunophenotyping,
by theWHOmodified theREAL system by incorporating aspects of theprior
classifications (B-lymphocyte, T-lymphocyte, and NK-lymphocyte).73 A similar
veterinary histologic classification of lymphoid neoplasia in domestic animals has
been published by theAFIP in cooperation with the American Registry of Pathology
and theWHO Collaborating Center forWorldwideReference on Comparative
Oncology.4s
D.Lymphomas can be evaluated by using methods described previously (Bone Marrow
Classifcations, sect.IXE)forother hemicneoplasiaalthough cytochemical staining
would be useful only to exclude a nonlymphoid cellineage.
1. Microscopic evaluation of stained cells is the easiest method of evaluation and has
themost clinical application,but classification of lymphoma is limited without
further information. Microscopic appearance does not consistently differentiate B-
lymphocytes and T-lymphocytes or predict genetic abnormalitiesbut it does provide
information important for classification.
2.Immunophenotyping is used primarily to differentiate B-lymphocyte lymphomas
from T-lymphocyte lymphomas, but it may also help differentiate acute lymphoblas
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
365
tic leukemias (CD34+)from lymphoma with bone marrow and blood involvement
(CD34). However, CD34+B-lymphocyte lymphomas have been reported.74
a.At a minimum, a B-lymphocyte marker and a T-lymphocyte marker should be
assessed (often CD79a and/or CD21 for B-lymphocytes and CD3 for T-
lymphocytes).T-lymphocyte lymphomas have a poorer prognosis.74
b.Direct cytologic smears may be used for immunocytochemistry.Alternatively,
cells can be collected into fuid for evaluation by a number of techniques:
(1) immunocytochemistry on concentrated preparations of the cell suspensions,
(2）immunohistochemistry on cell blocksmade from cell suspensions by pelleting
and fixing cells,or (3) fow cytometry.Immunohistochemistry may also be used
on frozen or fixed tissue sections.
C.Coexpression of CD3 and CD21 or CD79a has been reported，and cells have
had eitherTCR or immunoglobulin receptor gene rearrangements.This aberrant
expression may be a useful diagnostic marker for malignancy.
3.Polymerase chain reaction analysis for rearrangements of the immunoglobulin and
TCR genes can aid in detection of lymphoma (see immunophenotyping of hemic
neoplasia in Bone Marrow Classifications, sect.IX.E.4）It is likely that cytogenetic
and molecular techniques will be of diagnostic and prognostic value.
V
Nonlymphoid neoplasia (typically metastatic)
the node. Metastatic cells can also be found during biopsies of lymph nodes that do not
appear enlarged.
B.Many neoplasms have the potential to spread to regional lymph nodes. Those seen
more frequently in the peripheral lymph nodes include squamous cell carcinoma,
mammary carcinoma or adenocarcinoma,melanoma,mast cell neoplasia, and some
hemic neoplasms (Plate 10L-N)
VI.Other findings
A.Edema may be suggested in aspirates by the loose arrangement of cels that suggests
dispersion of cells by fluid.
B.The presence of nonlymphoid hemic precursors (rubricytes, megakaryocytes, and
granulocytes) indicates extramedullary hematopoiesis or, rarely, nonlymphoid hemic
neoplasia involving the lymph node. Lymph node hematopoiesis may occur when bone
marrow damage is extensive and stimuli promote proliferation of hemic precursors in
extramedullary sites.
C.The presence of erythrocytes in the sample indicates hemorrhage. If only erythrocytes
are founditmay be difficult to differentiate pathologic hemorrhage fromhemorrhage
caused by sampling.The presence of erythrophages and siderophages supports the
conclusion of pathologic hemorrhage either within the lymph node or its drainage
field.
D.A diagnosis of metastatic melanoma should be considered any time melanin pigment is
found However,melanin pigment can be found in macrophages(melanophages）when
the lymph node's drainage field contains a melanoma,necrosis,or inflammation of
pigmented tissue.
E.Various combinations of multiple abnormalities may be present.
366
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
References
1. Zenke M, Hieronymus T. 2006. Towards an understanding of the transcription factor network of dendritic cell
development.Trends Immunol 27:140-145.
2. Wu L, Dakic A. 2004. Development of dendritic cell system. Cell Mol Immunol 1:112-118.
3.Adolfsson J, Mansson R, Buza-Vidas N,Hulquist A, Liuba K, Jensen CT, Bryder D, Yang L,Borge OJ,Thoren LA,
Anderson K, Sitnicka E, Sasaki Y, Sigvardsson M, Jacobsen SE. 2005. Identification of Flt3+ lympho-myeloid stem
cells lacking erythro-megakaryocytic potential a revised road map for adult blood lineage commitment. Cell
121:295-306
4. Harvey JW. 2001. Ata ofVeterinary Hematology Blood and Bone Marrew of Domestic Animals. Philadelphi: WB
Saunders.
5.Tyler RD, Cowell RL, Meinkoth JH. 2001. Bone marrow. In: Cowell RL, Tyler RD, Meinkoth JH, eds. Diagnasti
Cytology and Hematology of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edition, 284304. St Louis: CV Mosby.
6.Wellman ML, Radin MJ. 1999. Bane Marrew Esaluation in Deg and Cas. Sr Louis Gloyd
7. Jain NC. 1993. Essentials of Veterinary Hematology, Ist edition. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
8.Cowell RL, Tyler RD. 1992. Gytology and Hamatology of the Harse, Goleta, CA: American Veterinary
9. Grindem CB. 1989. Bone marrow biopsy and evaluation. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 19:669696.
10. Jain NC. 1986. Scbam? Veterimary Hemtelogy, 4th edition. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
11. Grindem CB, Neel JA, Juopperi TA. 2002. Cytology of bone marrow. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
32:1313-1374.
12. Stokol T, Blue JT. 1999. Pure red cell aplasia in cats: 9 cases (1989-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:75-79.
13. Harvey JW. 1981. Myeloproliferative disorders in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1l:349-381.
14. Weiss DJ. 2004. Flow cytometric evaluation of canine bone marrow based on intracytoplasmic complexity and CD45
expression. Vet Clin Pathol 33:96-101.
in dogs: 43 cases (1988-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1429-1436
16. Watson ADJ, Canfeld PJ. 2000. Nutritional deficiency anemias. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Scbabm
Veterinary Hemarology, 5th edition, 190-195.Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
17.Battersby IA, Giger U, Hall EJ. 2005. Hyperammonaemic encephalopathy secondary to selective cobalamin
deficiency in a juvenile Border collie. J Small Anim Pract 46:339-344.
18.Dole RS, MacPhail CM, Lappin MR. 2004. Paraneoplastic leukocytosis with mature neutrophila in a cat with
pulrmonary squamous cell carcinoma. J Feline Med Surg 6:391-395.
19. Brown CD, Parnll NK, Schulman RL, Brown CG, Glickman NW, Glickman L. 2006. Evaluation of clinicopa
(1990-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 229:87-91.
20.Perkins MC, Canfield P, Churcher RK,Malik R. 2004. Immune-mediated neutropenia suspected in five dogs.Aust
VetJ82:52-57.
21. MeManus PM, Litwin C, Barber L. 1999. Immune-mediated neutropenia in 2 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 13:372-374.
22. Jacobs G, Calvert C, Kaufman A. 1998. Neutropenia and thrombocytopenia in three dogs treated with anticonvul-
sants. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:681-684.
23.Lanevschi A,Daminet S, Niemeyer GP, Lothrop CD Jr. 1999. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor deficiency in a
rottweiler with chronic idiopathic neutropenia. J Vet Intern Med 13:72-75.
24. Jain NC, Blue JT, Grindem CB, Harvey JW, Kociba GJ, Krehbiel JD, Latimer KS, Raskin RE, Thrall MA, Zinkl JG.
1991. Proposed criteria for classification of acute myeloid leukemia in dogs and cats. Vet Clin Pathol 20:6382
25. Jain NC.1993. Classification of myeloproliferative disorders in cats using criteria proposed by the animal leukacmia
study group: A retrospective study of 181 cases (1969-1992). Comp Haematol lnt 3:125-134
26.Weiss DJ. 2006. Aplastic anemia in cats: Clinicopathological features and associated discase conditions 1996-2004.
J Feline Med Surg 8:203-206.
27. Brazzell JL, Weiss D]. 2006. A retrospective study of aplastic pancytopenia in the dog: 9 cases (19962003). Vet Clin
Pathol 35:413-417.
28. Weiss DJ. 2000. Pure red cell aplasia. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Sehan' Veterinary Hematology, 5th
edition,210-211.Philadelphia:Lippincott Williams &Wilkins.
29.Weiss DJ, Stockham SL, Willard MD, Schirmer RG. 1982. Transient erythroid hypoplasia in the dog: Report of fve
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:353359.
canine erythropoletin with that of recombinant human erythropoietin in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res
60:636-642.
6/BONEMARROWANDLYMPHNODE
367
31. Stokol T, Randolph J, MacLeod J. 1997. Pure red cell aplasia after recombinant human erythropoietin treatment in
normal beagle dogs. Vet Pathol 34:474 (abstract).
32. Piercy RJ, Swardson CJ, Hinchcliff KW. 1998. Erythroid hypoplasia and anemia following administration of
recombinant human erythropoietin to two horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:244-247.
33. Woods PR, Campbell G, Cowell RL. 1997. Nonregenerative anaemia associated with administration of recombinant
human erythropoietin to a thoroughbred racehorse. Equine Vet J 29:326328.
34. Rojko JL, Olsen RG. 1984. The immunobiology of the feline leukemia virus. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
6:107-165.
35. Jarrett O, Golder MC, Toth S, Onions DE, Stewart MF. 1984. Interaction between feline leukaemia virus subgroup
in the pathogenesis of erythroid hypoplasia Int J Cancer 34:283-288.
36.Watson AD. 1977. Chloramphenicol toxicity in dogs. Res Vet Sci 23:66-69.
37. Watson ADJ, Middleton Dj. 1978. Chloramphenicol toxicosis in cats. Am J Vet Res 39:1199-1203.
38.Smith GS. 2000. Neutrophils. In: Feldman BF, Zinld JG, Jain NC, eds. Schabn's Veterinary Hematofog, 5th edition,
28 1296. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &c Willkins.
edition, 212-215. Philadelphia: Lippincot Williams & Wilkins.
40.Lachowicz JL,Post GS, Moroff SD, Mooney SC. 2004.Acquired amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia: Four cases and
a literature review. J Small Anim Pract 45:507-514.
Med 19:855-859.
42. Felchle LM, MePhee LA, Kerr ME, Houston DM. 1996. Systemic lupus erythematosus and bone marrow necrosis in
a dog. Can Vet J37:742-744.
griseofulvin. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:429-431.
44. Walker D, Cowell RL, Clinkenbeard KD, Feder B, Meinkoth JH. 1997. Bone marrow mast cell hyperplasia in dogs
with aplastic anemia. Vet Clin Pathol 26:106-111
45. MeManus P. 1997. Canine mastocytemia and marrow mastocytosis: Disease associations, incidence and severity. Vet
Pathol 34:474 (abstract).
46.Lichtman MA. 2001. Idiopathic myelofbrosis (agnogenic myeloid metaplasia).In: Beutler E,Lichtman MA, Coller
BS,Kipps TJ,Seligsohn U, edsWilliams Henatolgy, 6th edition, 11251136.NewYork: McGraw-Hil.
47.Weiss DJ. 2005. Bone marrow necrosis in dogs: 34 cases (19962004).J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:263-267.
48. McManus PM. 2005. Classification of myeloid neoplasms: A comparative review. Vet Clin Pathol 34:189-212.
49.Valli VE, Jacobs RM, Parodi AL,Vernau W, Moore PF.2002. Histologicaf Clasification ofHematopoietic Tamers of
Domestic Animak. Washington DC: Armed Forces Institute of Pathology.
50.Vardiman JW, Harris NL, Brunning RD. 2002. The World Health Organization (WHO) classication of the
myeloid neoplasms.Blood 100:2292-2302
51.Blue JT. 2000.Myelodysplastic syndromes and myelofbrosis. In:Feldman BF,Zink JG,Jain NC, eds. Schal
Veterinary Hematology, 5th edition, 682G88. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Willkins.
52. Raskin RE. 1996. Myelopoiesis and myeloproliferative disorders. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
26:10231042.
53.Weiss DJ. 2005. Recognition and classification of dysmyelopoiesis in the dog: A review. J Vet Intern Med
19:147-154
54. Weiss DJ. 2006. Evaluation of dysmyelopoiesis in cats: 34 cases (1996-2005). J Am Vet Med Assoc 228:893897.
55.Weiss DJ,Aird B. 2001. Cytologic evaluation of primary and secondary myelodysplastic syndromes in the dog.Vet
ClinPathol30:67-75.
56. Blue JT. 2003. Myelodysplasia: Differentiating neoplastic from nonneoplastic syndromes of ineffective hematopoiesis
in dogs. Toxicol Pathol 31(Suppl):4448.
57.Vernau W,MoorePF.1999.An immunophenotypic study of canine lukemias and preliminary assessment of
clonality by polymerase chain reaction. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 69:145 164.
58.Moore PF,Affolter VK,Vermau W. 2006.Caninehemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma: A proliferative disorder of
CD1ld+macrophages.Vet Pathol 43:632-645.
59.Affolter VK, Moore PF. 2002. Localized and disseminated histiocytic sarcoma of dendritic cell origin in dogs.Vet
Pathol39:74-83.
60.WeissDj.2002.Flow cytometric evaluation of hemophagocytic disorders in canine bone marrow.Vet ClinPathol
31:36-41.
61. Raskin RE, Valenciano A. 2000. Cytochemical tests for diagnosis of leukemia. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC
eds. Scbaom Vererinary Hematelogy, 5th editon, 755-763. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wllias & Willkins.
368
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
62. Dean GA 2000. CD antigens and immunophenotyping. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Scbabn’* Veterinary
Hematology,5th edition, 689695. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
63.Vernau W. 2004. Flow cytometric assessment of hematopoietic neoplasia in the dog. In: 55th Annual Meeting of the
American College of Veterinary Pathologists (ACVP) and 39th Annual Meeting of the American Society for
Veterinary Clinical Pathology (ASVCP), Orlando,FL, 2428.
64. Workman HC, Vernau W. 2003. Chronic lyrmphocytic leukemia in dogs and cats: The veterinary perspective. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 33:1379-1399.
65. Comazzi S, Gelain ME, Riondato F, Paltrinieri S. 2006. Flow cytometric expression of common antigens CD 18/
CD45 in blood from dogs with lymphoid malignancies: A semi-quantitative study. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
112:243-252.
66. Comazzi S, Gelain ME, Spagnolo V, Riondato F, Guglielmino R, Sartorelli P. 2006.Flow cytometric patterns in
blood from dogs with non-ncoplastic and neoplastic hematologic diseases using double labeling for CD18 and CD45.
Vet Clin Pathol 35:47-54.
67. Burnett RC, Vernau W, Modiano JF, Olver CS, Moore PF,Avery AC. 2003. Diagnosis of canine lymphoid neoplasia
using clonal rearrangements of antigen receptor genes. Vet Pathol 40:32-41.
68. Baker R, Lumsden JH. 2000. The lymphatic system. In: Colr Atlas of Cytology ef the Dog and Cat, 7194.St Louis:
CV Mosby.
69. Mills JN. 1989. Lymph node cytology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 19:697-717.
70.Duncan JR. 1999. The lymph nodes. In: Cowell RL, Tyler RD, Meinkoth JH, eds. Diagrostic Cytology and
Hematology ofthe Dog and Cat,2nd edition, 97-103.St Louis: CV Mosby.
71.Raskin RE,Meyer DJ. 2001.Atlas ofCanime nd Feline Cytology.Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
72.Cowell RL, Dorsey KE, Meinkoth JH.2003.Lymph node cytology.Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 33:47-67.
73.Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Diebold J, Flandrin G, Muller-Hermelink HK, Vardiman J. 2000. Lymphoma classification
From controversy to consensus: The R.E.A.L. and WHO classification of lymphoid neoplasms. Ann Oncol 11(Suppl
1):S3-S10
74.Willerson MJ, Dolce K, Koopman T, Shuman W, Chun R, Garrett L, Barber L,Avery A. 2005. Lineage differentia
tion of canine lymphoma/leukemias and aberant expression of CD molecules. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
106:179-196.
75. Sueiro FA, Alessi AC, Vassallo J. 2004. Canine lymphomas: A morphological and immunohistochemical study of 55
cases, with observations on p53 immunoexpression. J Comp Pathol 131:207-213.
Chapter7
PROTEINS
General Concepts for Total Protein,Albumin,and Globulins.
370
Analytical Principles for Total Protein,Albumin,and Globulins
372
Hyperproteinemia.
379
Hypoproteinemia
385
Hyperalbuminemia
390
Hypoalbuminemia
391
Hyperglobulinemia.
392
Hypoglobulinemia
392
PositiveAcute-PhaseProteins...
392
392
ll.Fibrinogen..
393
Ill.OtherAcute-PhaseProteins.
396
Immunoglobulins..
398
Colloidal OsmoticPressure(COP)(OncoticPressure)
405
369
370
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 7.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
(TP:Fib),
Total protein to fibrinogen in plasma
[x]
xconcentration （x=analyte)
ADH
Antidiuretic hormone
AL
Amyloid light chain
Alb
Albumin
APP
Acute-phase protein
BCG
Bromcresol green
BCP
Bromcresol purple
C3
Complement factor 3
COP
Colloidal osmotic pressure
CRP
C-reactive protein
DIC
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
ECF
Extracellular fuid
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
Fc
Crystallizable fragment
FPT
Failure of passive transfer
Hgb
Hemoglobin
IgA
Immunoglobulin A
IgE
Immunoglobulin E
IgG
Immunoglobulin G
IgG(T)
Immunoglobulin G, subtype T (T is for tetanus)
IgM
Immunoglobulin M
M,
Relative molecular mass
Na,SO,
Sodium sulfite
NH+
Ammonium
PLE
Protein-losing enteropathy
PLN
Protein-losing nephropathy
PP:F
Plasma protein to fibrinogen
pTPre
Plasma total protein byrefractometry
RID
Radial immunodiffusion
SAA
Serum amyloid A
SI
Systeme International d'Unites
SLADH
Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
SPE
Serum protein electrophoresis
sTPref
Serum total protein by refractometry
TPrf
Total protein by refractometry
TP
Total protein
WRI
Within reference interval
ZnSO4
Zinc sulfate
I
Physiologic processes
A.Proteins are polypeptide chains of amino acids.Over 1ooo individual proteins have
been characterized in serum.Most are not biochemically pure proteins; they are
proteins combined with other substances.For example, lipoproteins are composed of
7/PROTEINS
371
proteins, triglyceride, and cholesterol, whereas glycoproteins contain proteins and
polysaccharides (sugar).
B.Plasma contains albumin and globulins, including fibrinogen and other clotting factors.
A major difference berween serum and plasma is that serum does not contain
fibrinogen.
C.Most plasma proteins (albumin and globulins) are synthesized by hepatocytes.The
major exceptions are the immunoglobulins that are produced by B-lymphocytes and
plasma cells. The plasma half-life of albumin varies among species and generally
increases with body size；reported values include 8.2 d in dogs,23wk in cattle,and
an average of 19.4 d (n = 5) in horses.There is a large variation in the half-life of the
various proteins in the globulin fraction, and there are very few publications regarding
half-lives for the plasma globulins in domestic mammals.The average -globulin half
life in horses (n = 5) was 11.0 d in one study, whereas the half-life of IgG in foals was
26 d.
D.In addition to a wide variety of specific functions, proteins also contribute to COP,
which helps maintain intravasular fuid volume.
II.
Protein disorders
A.Protein dyscrasia is a condition where there is an abnormal protein (abnormal structure).
B.Dysproteinemia is the presence of normal protein at abnormal concentration or abnor.
mal protein (dyscrasia) in blood.
1.Selective or nonselective dysproteinemias
a.Nonselective byperproteinemia: All protein concentrations are increased (panbyper
proteinemia). It results from hemoconcentration.
b.Selective byperproteinemia.The [total protein] is increased,and some protein
concentrations are increased more than others. Typically, it results from inflam-
mation or B-lymphocyte neoplasia.
C.Nonselective bypoproteinemicThe[total protein] is decreased,and all protein
concentrations are decreased (panbypoproteinemia). Its cause is a proportional loss
of proteins or proportional decrease in synthesis.
d.Selective bypoproteinemia:The[total protein] is decreased,and some protein
concentrations are decreased more than others.Its cause is selective loss （typically
small proteins selectively lost) or selectively decreased synthesisof one ormore
proteins.
2.To determine whether the dysproteinemia is selective or nonselective, serum protein
electrophoresis may be needed to evaluate therelative concentrations of protein
groups, especially in the globulin regions.An animal with hypoproteinemia,
hypoalbuminemia, and hypoglobulinemia may or may not have a nonselective
hypoproteinemia.
a.If hypoalbuminemia and hypoglobulinemia are present and electrophoresis results
indicate that all protein fractions are decreased proportionately, then there is a
nonselective hypoproteinemia.
b.If hypoalbuminemia andhypoglobulinemia are present and electrophoresis results
selective hypoproteinemia.
C.The same concepts apply to hyperproteinemia evaluations.
C.Other than the hyperproteinemia of dehydration,the most frequent dysproteinemias
are caused by alterations in protein concentrations during infammatory diseases. There
372
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
are three major groups of proteins whose plasma concentrations change because of
infammation.
1.Positive APPs are those proteins that have increased plasma or serum concentrations
because of an infammatory process. SAA and CRP concentrations may increase in
<1 d.56 Concentrations of other APPs may be increased within 2 d after the onset
of infammation. Their concentrations increase because of increased production by
hepatocytes after stimularion by cytokines such as interleukin 6 and interleukin 1.
The major positive APPs and some of their physiologic functions follow.
a.Fibrinogen, the precursor of fbrin,is used to form secondary hemostatic plugs at
sites of vascular injury. It is absent in serum.
b.C-reacrive protein promotes binding of complement to bacteria and induces
cytokine production
c.Serum amyloid A promotes recruitment of inflammatory cells to infammatory
site.
d.Haptoglobin binds Hgb dimers so thar iron is not available to organisms.
e.Q-Acidglycoprotein has several anti-infammatory activities.
f.
Ceruloplasmin isan enzyme that transports copper and has oxidase activity.It also
helps convert ferrous iron into feric iron for transport in the plasma in associa
tion with transferrin
g.Ferritin serves as a storage form of Fe (in Fe form）.Most fertin is in tissues,
but small amounts leave cells and enter plasma.9
2.Negative APPs are those proteins that have decreased plasma or serum concentrations
because of an infammarory process. Their concentrations decrease because of
decreased production by hepatocytes due to the actions of cytokines such as
interleukin 6 and interleukin 1. The major negative APPs and some of their
physiologic functions follow.
a.Albumin is the major contributor to plasma COP, serves as a source of amino
acids, and transports many cationic substances (e.g., Ca², Mg, and drugs).
b.Transferrin is the major transport protein for iron.
3.Delayedresponse proteins are proteins for which plasma or serum concentrations
increase 1-3wk after onset of infammation.The twomajor delayed response
proteins are immunoglobulins and complement.
a.Immunoglobulins are produced by B-lymphocytes or plasma cells and are classified
by their heavy chains as IgG,IgM,IgA,or IgE. Subclassifications also exist.
b.Complement proteins (primarily C3), part of the innate immune system, accumu-
late in plasma in some infammatory conditions.
ANALYTICALPRINCIPLESFORTOTALPROTEIN,ALBUMIN,ANDGLOBULINS
I.
[Total protein]
A.Refractometry for measuring [total protein](plasma or serum)
1.Principle: The degree of light refraction in an aqueous solution is proportional to
the quantity of solidsinsolution.Becausemost solidsinplasma areproteinshe
degree of light refraction is highly dependent on protein concentration.
2.The refractometer's total protein scale is calibrated with the assumption that changes
in refractive index reflect changes in protein concentration alone. A temperature
compensated refractometer is recommended over a non-temperature-compensated
refractometer for two reasons:
7/PROTEINS
373
a.It does not require daily adjustments based on ambient temperatures.
b.It will probably be more accurate.If compensated and noncompensated refrac
tometers are calibrated to agree at 68 °F, they will disagree by about 0.3 g/dL at
75°F and by about 0.7g/dL at 85°C(Leica TS400 Total Solids Refractometer
literature).
3.Interferences
a.Because the refractive index of a solution depends on the concentration of solids
in the sample,high concentrations ofa variety of substances(e.gglucose,urea,
Na,and Cl) could increase the refractive index and thus the total protein
reading.The total protein reading is reported to be falsely increased by 0.6 g/dL
if the plasma glucose concentration is approximately 700 mg/dL (or 0.7 g/dL) or
b.Gross lipemia will increase therefractive index and thus falsely increase the total
protein reading.
C.Hemolysis causing a plasma [Hgb] of 0.5 g/dL did not interfere with refractive
index values butmade reading of the dividing line in the refractometer more
difhcult.!1
d.Bilirubin concentrations at 0.4 mg/dL did not interfere with refractive index
values. However, icterus is commonly listed as a cause of falsely increased values
in clinical chemistry textbooks. Perhaps interference occurs at higher
concentrations.
4.Unit conversion:g/dL ×10 = g/L (SI unit,nearest 1 g/L)2
5.Comments
a.The[TP is also referred to as the plasma total solids concentration because the
value is affected by solutes other than protein.However,most refractometer
scales are calibrated for protein concentration,not total solids,and thus other
substances (e.g., urea or glucose) are interferents rather than the targets of
measurement.
b.Determination of the [TPed is part of a complete blood count (CBC) in many
veterinary laboratories because it is a simple, quick, and inexpensive method for
detection of hyperproteinemia and hypoproteinemia.
c.Most refractometers are calibrated for the normal proteins in human plasma. The
calibration scale will vary among speciesbecause of the different composition of
plasma proteins, but the difference is typically considered clinically
insignificant.
d.The [total protein] in serum may also be estimated with a refractometer. The
serum concentration will be lower than the plasma [total protein]because of the
absence of fbrinogen in serum.However, there are other factors that cause
differences between plasma and serum[total protein] even if measured by the
same method.13
(1)HO diffuses from erythrocytes during clotting and thus lowers serum [total
changes.
(2)Some anticoagulants (e.g., citrate, oxalate, and fuoride) cause H,O to
diffuse from erythrocytes,but heparin (if used in appropriate amounts) does
not. The solutes of the anticoagulant will add to the refractive index.
e.As light refraction is a physical property, the [total protein] determined via
refractometry may not be the same as determined by biuret reaction.In fact,it is
374
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
frequently mildly different ( 0.3 g/dL) but occasionally different by as much as
2.0 g/dL in samples that are not hemolyzed, icteric,or lipemic (authors
observations).
B.Biuret reaction for measuring [total protein] (serum)
1.Principle: Copper binding to peptide bonds creates a violet complex; the number of
peptide bonds, and therefore amount of color change, is proportional to total
proteins are pure polypeptides that contain the same amount of nitrogen by weight.
Therefore,[total protein] determinations are not completely accurate.
2.Interferences:In some assays,hemolysis may cause a positive interference (e.g.,Hgb
ar 400 mg/dL will produce a 12 % bias). Dextran (polysaccharide used as a plasma
expander) may also cause a positive interference. Small peptides may react but
contribute very little to total color change.NHmay interferewith the biuret
3.Unit conversion:g/dL×10= g/L(SI unit,nearest 1 g/L)2
4.Comment:The biuret or modified biuret reaction is the most common spectropho
tometric method of measuring serum [total protein].
II.
Albumin concentration
A.BCG dye-binding reaction (serum)
1.Principle: BCG preferentially binds to albumin and produces a color complex.The
quantity of BCG-albumin complex is proportional to the [albumin], though binding
varies among species,for example,thebinding of BCG to bovine albumin is much
stronger than to canine and feline albumin.15
2.Interferences
a.The binding of BCG to globulins will result in a falsely elevated [albumin]. The
nonalbumin binding may lead to significant errors when the true serum
[albumin] is very low(<1 g/dL) compared to the concentration of interfering
globulin (e.g.,C-macroglobulin).
b.In some assays, Hgb at 0.4 g/dLwill cause a positive 24 %bias, whereas triglyc-
erides at 0.8 g/dL willyield a negative interference of abour 0.2 g/dL.
c.SomeCGmethodsbutotthers,areaffcted by thepresence ofanticoag
lants. Measuring [Albumin] in heparinized plasma resulted in greater albumin
values compared to serum with a standard BCG assay (median difference,
0.2 g/dL; -0.6 g/dL to 1.2 g/dL),but lower values (median difference,-0.1 g/dL;
0.9g/dLto 0.1g/dL)with a modifiedassay.About50%of the difference
in the standard assay was due to the presence of fibrinogen.
dUnit conversion:g/dL×10=g/L (SI unit,nearest 1 g/L）2
3.Comment: BCG dye binding is the most common spectrophotometric method of
measuring serum [albumin].
B.BCP dye-binding reaction (serum):BCP binding is used in some human medical
laboratories, but BCP does not reliably bind with all mammalian albumin molecules.
BCP assays may give falsely low (sometimes markedly low) results in some domestic
species (e.g., dogs).
C.HABA (2-[4'-hydroxyazobenzene]-benzoic acid) dye-binding reactions (serum):
unreliable in domestic mammal serum,but the reagents are still available
D.Protein electrophoresis can be used to determine [albumin], but is used more for
quantitating globulin fractions.
7/PROTEINS
375
III.
Total [globulin]
A.This is typically determined by subtraction (serum).
1.Principle: All proteins in serum other than albumin are globulins.
2.[Globulins] = [total protein] -[albumin].
B.Protein electrophoresis (see the next section)
C.Unit conversion:g/dL×10= g/L (SI unit,nearest 1g/L）²2
D.Comments
1. [Globulin] will be only as accurate as the measured [total protein] and [albumin].
2.[Globulin] represents the total concentration of all serum proteins other than
teins,and immunoglobulins)
IV.
Serum protein electrophoresis (SPE) for determining protein fractions
A.Principles
1.Serum proteins separate into46major groups of one or more bands based
on their ability to migrate through cellulose acetate or agarose in an electrical
field.The degree of migration toward the anode (positively charged terminal) is
based on electrical charge and a protein’smass and shapeIn domestic mammal
sera, albumin migrates the farthest because it is small and very anionic. Smaller
proteins may not migrate as far because they lack the marked negative charge.
cause an anodal migration. Some immunoglobulins are large and cationic and
thus migrate toward the cathode (negatively charged terminal) or do not migrate.
The pH of the electrophoresis medium affects the charge and migration of
proteins.
2.Major variations
a.The same protein groups in each animal species have slight to moderate differ-
ences in migrations.
b.Electrophoresis using cellulose acetate separates the proteins into 5-9 protein
A protein bandmay represent one protein or several proteins that have migrated
the same distance.
C.Protein bands that represent globulin proteins are grouped into electrophoretic
regions.Via routine cellulose acetate methods,the common groups for domestic
animals are as follows (note: a protein concentration >0.1 g/dL is needed before
it can be detected by this method):
(1）In most dog,cat,and horse sera,ive globulin regions can be seen:,
β,β2,and y.
(2)In most cattle sera, only three globulin regions are seen: ,β, and .
B.Calculating concentrations of the protein fractions
1.The protein concentration of an electrophoretic group is the product of the [total
protein] (preferably from a biuret reaction) and the percentage of total protein
occupied by a region. When a stained cellulose acetate strip is scanned with a
densitometer, stained proteins cause less light to be transmitted through the strip to
a detector.The decreased transmittance is recorded as a deflection on a densitometer
scan or tracing. After the cellulose acetate strip is scanned, the resulting curve
represents the relative quantities of proteins (Fig.7.1).The area under the curve
represents the total quantiry of stained protein.
376
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Darkestlinerepresents densitometer scan
ofcelluloseacetate strip
1
Ab
AIb
OLAT
MG
C3
lgG
PA
αLPaACT
Hpt
Tf
βLP
IgMIgA
CRP
anode (+)
migration
cathode (-)
Celluose acetate strip
Application
(shaded areasrepresent stained proteins)
point
Fig. 7.1. Schematic representation of SPE results (cellulose acetate strip and densitometer tracing).Proteins
are separated during electrophoresis in an allkaline medium on cellulose acetate. Albumin migrates the
farthest toward the anode,and globulin fractions separateinto bandsor fractions (e.g,Cglobulins,
globulins,P-globulins,β-globulins, and -globulins).After electrophoresis,the strip is stained with a
protein stain (e.g.,Ponceau S). Bands that contain the most protein stain the darkest.When scanned with a
densitometer, the tracer pen draws a line that corresponds with the intensity of protein staining. The darkest
band causes the highest peak on the tracing, and other peaks are relatively lower depending on the relative
albumin) or may represent the sum of multiple proteins (e.g., the α-globulin region contains Hpt and
O-macroglobulin). CaACT, -antichymotrypsin; OAT, α-antitrypsin; LP, -lipoprotein; αMG,
O-macroglobulin; βLP, β-lipoprotein; and PA, prealbumin.
2.Older densitometers are calibrated so that complete transmittance through the
acetate strip does not defect the needl (zero response）.In addition,densitometers
may be calibrated so that the most blockage of light caused by the darkest protein
band deflects the needle nearly 100 % (maximum response). The darkest band (or
the maximal response) is normally the albumin band but can be found in the
globulin fractions. Newer systems use fat-bed scanners to obrain digital data that are
transformed into relative percentages (e.g.,Helena QuickScan 2000).
7/PROTEINS
377
3.The percentage of the total area under the curve for each region is calculated to
determine the percentage of [total protein]represented by each electrophoretic
region. Then, the percentages are multiplied by the [total protein] to determine the
approximate protein concentrations in each electrophoretic region.For example,if
the [total protein]is 6.0 g/dL and electrophoresis results indicate that 50 % of the
stained protein is in the albumin band, then the [albumin] is calculated to be
3.0 g/dL.
4.The concentrations of the protein fractions determined by electrophoresis will vary
becauseof severalfactorsvariableaffnitiesofstainsfrcertainproteinsaccuracyof
the measured[total protein],accuracy of densitometry,and the sometimes substan-
tial differences in marking of protein fractions. Coomassie brilliant blue and amido
black stains have greater capabilities of detecting small amounts of protein than do
Ponceau S stain and thus tend to be used in high-resolution electrophoretic systems.
C.Proteins that are the major contributors to the electrophoretic pattern are shown in
Fig.7.1 and listed in Table 7.2.Migration regions are for human proteins;there is
evidence of similar migration in domestic mammals. When using agarose gel electro
phoresis for canine sera, the protein migrations were similar to those listed in Table 7.2
except C3was a βi-globulin and transferrin was aβ-globulin.8For some sera(e.g
bovine), only three or four globulin fractions will be detected.
D.Comments
1. SPE has limited diagnostic value. It may be helpful in differentiating the causes of
hyperproteinemia, characterizing hypoproteinemias into selective or nonselective
hyperproteinemic sera,and providing a more accurate estimation of [albumin] when
globulins interfere with the BCG assay. Analysis of serum proteins by SPE is not
common in clinical medicine, but understanding SPE results aids in understanding
routine serum concentrations of total protein,albumin,and globulins.
2.The protein bands on the cellulose acetate or ararose should be examined in
addition to the densitometric findings, because the tracings do not always demon-
strate the abnormalities in the protein fractions.
3.The calculated concentrations of the electrophoretic fractions are at best estimates
The true value is usually within 0.3 g/dL of the calculated value (assuming proper
marking of fractions). The calculated concentrations are frequently not needed to
classify or interpret dysproteinemia patterns.
V.
Immunoelectrophoresis
A.This is a method of identifying the presence of specific proteins or protein components.
It can be used to identify the presence ofimmunoglobulin classes or subclasses,heavy
chains, or light chains.
B.The serum proteins are first separated by electrophoresis.Appropriate antibodies are
added to long troughs cut parallel to the electrophoretic separation.The antibody and
the electrophoretically separated serum proteins diffuse toward each other and form
precipitant arcs if there is a reactive antigen (e.g., heavy chain of IgG) for the antibody.
VI.
Sia euglobulin test
A.A euglobulin is a protein that does not dissolve in pure water. The Sia euglobulin test is
simply adding 1 drop of serum to demineralized HO;formation of aprecipitate or
focculates isa positive test.When first described by Sia in 1921,the euglobulin test
Table7.2.Serum proteins that contribute toelectrophoreticregions
M. (in
Region
Proteins
thousands)
Function and other information
Pre-albumin
Not recognized in routine SPE of
animal sera; includes thyroxine-
binding albumin and retinol-binding
protein
Albumin
Albumin
69
Major contributor to oncotic pressure;
transports Ca², Mg², unconjugated
bilirubin,fatty acids,thyroxine,and
many other substances
a-Lipoprotein
180-350
Transports lipids (especially cholesterol);
also called HDL;relatively very low
concentrations in domestic mammals
when compared to people
α-Antitrypsinb
54
Inactivates proteasesincluding tysin,
and thus is an anti-infammatory
protein
O-Antichymotrypsinb
68
Inactivates proteases,including
chymotrypsin, and thus is an
anti-infammatory protein
O-Macroglobulinb
Inactivates proteases and thus is an
anti-infammatory protein
Haptoglobinsb
80-160
Bind and transport free hemoglobin
β
Transferrin"
76
Binds and transports iron; measured as
total iron-binding capacity in
chemical assays
β2
β-Lipoprotein
2400
Transports lipids (cholesterol and
triglyceride);also called LDL
Complement (C3a)b
180
Promotes inflammation; chemotactic
substance
IgM and IgA
IgA:160
Bind to specific antigens;
IgM: 900
concentrations are too low in health
to be seen via routine SPE
IgG
150
Binds to specific antigens; many
Y
different isotypes and idiotypes of
IgGgive a broad and usually
indistinct gamma region
C-reactive proteinb
110
Positive acute-phase protein; rarely seen
inmammalian sera via routine SPE
Negative acute-phase protein
Positive acute-phase protein
Note: Most information is based on human plasma proteins.Proteins in domestic mammal plasma are
but their concentrations are too low in physiologic and pathologic states to alter the electrophoretic pattern
in cellulose acetate electrophoresis. If plasma is electrophoresed, fbrinogen (M: 341,000, a positive acute-
phase protein) should migrate in the cathodal end of the βBz-region.
Soure: Ritzmann andDaniels6
378
7/PROTEINS
379
was a screening test for macroglobulins.However,analyses of human sera indicate that
thepositive testmayresult from avariety of monoclonal and polyclonal gammopathies
and thus is not diagnostically useful.9 A modified Sia test (using weak electrolyte
solutions)formacroglobulinsresultedinfewer false positives but more false negatives.
B.1
Recognizing the precipitant property of immunoglobulins is important in two situa-
tions.First, this property can be used to separate immunoglobulins from other serum
proteins; the precipitated immunoglobulins can then be dissolved in saline. Second, the
precipitates can interfere with the analysis of sera or blood samples; for example,falsely
increased serum phosphorus concentrations （Chapter 1l),falsely increased blood [Hgb]
(Chapter 3）, and falsely increased serum bilirubin concentration (Chapter 13).
HYPERPROTEINEMIA(INCREASEDTOTALPROTEINCONCENTRATIONINSERUM
OR PLASMA)
The diseases and conditions that cause hyperproteinemia are listed in Table 7.3.
I.
Hemoconcentration is a common cause of hyperproteinemia.
A.Pathogenesis:Hyperproteinemia results from the concentration of plasma proteins
caused by the loss of plasma H,O.The plasma HO loss and resultant decreased ECF
volume may be due to vomiting, diarrhea, impaired renal concentrating ability,
sweating,insensible loss via respiration, increased vascular permeability,or decreased
H,O intake combinedwithnormal losses
B.If proteins were the only solids inplasma,then plasma would contain about 93 %HO
and 7 % proteins and the[total protein] would be about 7.0 g/dL in health.If dehy-
dration led to a 10 % decrease in plasma volume, the[total protein] would increase to
about 7.8g/dL (7.0/0.9=7.78).
C.All proteinsare concentrated by loss of plasma HO;therefore,hemoconcentration
results in a nonselective hyperproteinemia.Concentrations of albumin,globulins,and
fibrinogen are proportionately increased if dehydration is the only cause of the dyspro-
teinemia (Plate 12B).
D. Other expected laboratory findings
1.Erythrocytosis
2.Prerenal azotemia
3.Hypersthenuria, if renal concentrating mechanisms are functional
Table 7.3.Diseases and conditions that cause hyperproteinemia
*Hemoconcentration
Increased prorein synthesis
Infammatory diseases
*Infection: bacterial, viral, fungal, protozoal
*Noninfectious disease: necrosis,neoplasia, immune-mediated disease
B-lymphocyte neoplasia
Plasma cell: multiple myeloma, plasmacytoma
Lymphocyte: lymphoma, lymphocyticleukemia
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: All of these diseases or conditions may cause hyperglobulinemia, but only hemoconcentration
will cause concurrent hyperalbuminemia.
380
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
II.
Increased protein synthesis
A.Inflammation is a common cause of hyperproteinemia but does not necessarily cause
hyperproteinemia.
1.Pathogenesis: Infammation (caused by infections or other processes) stimulates the
synthesis of certain globulins by hepatocytes and perhaps immunoglobulins by B-
lymphocytes. Several cytokines,especially interleukin 6,alter protein synthesis in
or protein release from,hepatocytes. Cytokines primarily regulate transcription
(either up-regulate or down-regulate) to alter protein production to produce these
changes.
a.Increased concentrations of the positive APPs (see General Conceprs for Total
Protein,Albumin,and Globulins,sect.II.C)
(1)Production of these proteinsmay increase within hours and may persist as
long as an inflammatory process is present. Increased plasma or serum
concentrationsmay be seen by 2 d after the onset of inflammation.
(2)Individually,fbrinogen and haptoglobin concentrations can increase enough
to increase[total protein] (e.g.,[fibrinogen]may increase from O.3 g/dL to
> 1.0 g/dL,and [haptoglobin] may increase from 0.3 g/dL to 0.9 g/dL). The
concentrations of other APPs are relatively much less in health, and thus a
marked increased in an individual protein concentration adds little to the
[total protein] (e.g., [C-reactive protein] may increase from 1 mg/dL to
50 mg/dL, and [serum amyloid A] may increase from 0.2 mg/dL to
100 mg/dL).s
b.Decreased concentrations of the negative APPs
(1) Negative APPs are proteins whose plasma or serum concentrations decrease
because of decreased production by hepatocytes during inflammation. This
group includes albumin and transferrin.
(2)Due to the plasma half-life of albumin in various animals (e.g.,= 8 d in
dogs and =19 d in horses) and the variable degrees of reduced production,
an infammatory hypoalbuminemia may not be seen until inflammation has
persisted for at least several days in dogs and at least 2 wk in horses. The
magnitude of decrease is typically mild (i.e., a decrease by <30 %; e.g，from
3.0g/dLto 2.4g/dL) ifinflammation is the onlyreasonfor the
hypoalbuminemia.
(3)The plasma half-lives of transferrin are not firmly established in domestic
species.However, decreased total iron binding capacity (as a measure of
transferrin concentration) may not be seen until inflammation has persisted
for at least a week.
c.Delayed-response proteins
(1)These are proteins whose plasma or serum concentrations increase 13 wk
after the onset of infammation; the increase is caused by increased
production.
(2)This group includes all immunoglobulins (IgG mostly) and complement
(C3). Increased synthesis of a variety of immunoglobulins by many clones of
B-lymphocytesproduces apolyclonalgammopathy.
(3)The magnitude of increases in [C3] (as detected by β-globulin increase） is
typically < 1.0 g/dL. The magnitude of increases in [immunoglobulin] can
be mild (< 1.0 g/dL) to marked (> 4.0 g/dL)
2.Expected dysproteinemia patterns
7/PROTEINS
381
a.Acute-phase response:hyperproteinemia caused by acute infammation lasting
2-7d
(1)Mild hyperproteinemia caused by hyperglobulinemia (increased α and/or
O-globulins and hyperfibrinogenemia)
(2)Possibly mild hypoalbuminemia or low-normal serum albumin
concentration
b.Delayed response: hyperproteinemia caused by infammation lasting more
than 7 d
(1)Hyperproteinemia (mild to marked) is caused by hyperglobulinemia
(increased positive acute-phase and/or delayed response proteins).A poly
clonal gammopathy may or may not be detected by SPE (Plate 12C-F).
(2) Mild to moderate hypoalbuminemia may be present.
(3)The net change in protein concentrations may produce a dysproteinemia
with a lower [albumin] and greater concentrations of some globulin fractions.
(4)A polyclonal gammopathy with a restricted migration has been called an
oligoclonal gammopathy (Plate 12D). In human medicine,it is not consid-
ered a monoclonal gammopathy because its proteins do not meet the criteria
for monoclonal proteins (i.e.,increases in K-or -light chains,not both)
The “monoclonal” gammopathies that some authors have described in
animals with infectious diseases (e.g., ehrlichiosis and leishmaniasis) may
oclonal gammopathies because of the
narrow spikein anelectrophoreticpattern,and the authors established that
the gammopathy was primarily caused by one class of immunoglobulin (i.e.,
IgG)via immunoelectrophoresis or
radial immunodiffusion.However, the
gammopathy could includemore than oneimmunoglobulin subclass and
clonality.
(5)A biclonal pattern (electrophoretic O and β-spikes) caused by an increased
[IgG;] was found in a horse. The gammopathy disappeared after the horse
was treated for a strongyle infection. IgG is also referred to as IgG(T).
c.A monoclonal expansion of T-lymphocytes has been found in dogs infected with
Ehrlichia canis that concurrently had gammopathies with narrow electrophoretic
spikes.We are not aware of cases in which a clonal expansion of B-lymphocytes
could be producing a truemonoclonal gammopathy.
3.Other laboratory data associated with infammatory hyperproteinemias
a.Anemia of infammatory disease may develop if inflammation persists.
b.Infammatory neutrophilia or neutropenia may develop.
For example, there can be a concurrent increased fibrinogen production because of
inflammation and increased fibrinogen consumption because of intravascular
coagulation. Or, there can be concurrent inflammation and hemoconcentration or
inflammation and protein-losing states.
B.B-lymphocyte neoplasia
noglobulin; typically, there is one neoplastic cell line or one clone of neoplastic
382
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Heavy chain
(ay.8,e,orμ)
-Light chain
(Kora)
Disulfide bonds
Fc
Fig. 7.2. Schematic structure of an immunoglobulin. Immunoglobulin consists of two heavy chains of the
but not both). The combination of a light chain and the slanted segment of a heavy chain is a fragment (F)
that contains an antigen-binding site (ab) (F + ab = Fab). The tail of the Y (vertical segments of two heavy
chains) is called the crystallizable (c) fragment (F + c = Fc)
lymphocytes. The single clone of lymphocytes produces an electrophoretically,
structurally, and antigenically homogeneous immunoglobulin or a comparably
homogeneous immunoglobulin subunit. The resulting dysproteinemia is called a
monoclonalgammopathy.
2.Proteins produced by B-lymphocyte neoplasia are sometimes called M proteins (for
monoclonal proteins）. M protein has also been used as an abbreviation for myeloma
proteins or macroglobulin,and thus one must interpret “M protein” in context.An
intact monoclonal immunoglobulin consists of two heavy chains of the same class
(egIgM) and subclass (e.g,IgGorIgG)and rwo light chains of the same type
(either K or 入 but not both) (Fig. 7.2).7 The neoplastic cells may produce intact
immunoglobulinsfreelightchainsnlyeavy chainsrabnormal fragmentsh
urine, or tissues areparaproteins.
3.Types of B-lymphocyte neoplasia that may cause a gammopathy
a.Plasma cell neoplasia: multiple myeloma (most frequent cause) or extramedullary
plasmacytoma
b.Lymphocyte neoplasia: lymphoma or lymphocytic leukemia
4.Expected dysproteinemia pattern
a.Mildtomarked hyperproteinemia produced by hyperglobulinemia that contains
a monoclonal gammopathy. The monoclonal protein may migrate in β- or 
globulin fractions.
(1)IgG typically migrates in the -globulin fraction, whereas IgM and IgA
typically migrate at the β- junction or in the β-globulin fraction (Plate
12G).29 In a horse with a plasma cell myeloma, a monoclonal spike was
found in the O-globulin fraction and single radial immunodiffusion
indicated the paraprotein was IgGIgG, is also referred to as IgG(T).3o
(2)Atypical electrophoretic migrations may be caused by protein degradation
immunoglobulin binding to other proteins, formation of immunoglobulin
complexes,or production of incomplete immunoglobulins （e.g.,light chains
7/PROTEINS
383
heavy chains, or abnormal fragments).7 Two electrophoretic peaks were
detected in a dog's serum that had an IgA-producing myeloma; the two
peaks were determined to be complexes of IgA （dimers, trimers,or tetra-
mers）.3 Similar biclonal peaks were found in a cat with IgA-producing
myeloma,but only one peak (thus suggesting a monoclonal peak) was
the authors concluded that their data indicated thar rwo clones of IgA
producing plasma cells were present.33
③）
Concentrations ofimmunoglobulins other than themonoclonalprotein
frequently are decreased.
b. Mild to moderate hypoalbuminemia may be caused by decreased albumin
synthesis due to inflammatory cytokines, or by a negative feedback mechanism
involving an oncotic pressure receptor on hepatocytes.Increased concentration of
Y-globulins (either by infusion or endogenous production) does decrease albumin
5.The presence of a monoclonal gammopathy in domesticmammals is rarely
confirmed
a.Serum protein electrophoresis
(1)An increased concentration of an immunoglobulin is called a gammopathy
regardless of where the immunoglobulin migrates with SPE. It could be in
the o,β-, or-globulin regions.
(2）The presence of a narrow protein band or the resulting narrow spike in a
densitometer scan (i.e., resembling an albumin band or albumin peak) in
either β-globulin or Y-globulin regions after serum electrophoresis is
such findings can be due to either oneimmunoglobulinor a group of
proteins that are migrating in the same region. Serum electrophoresis is
lacks sufhcient specificity toreliablydifferentiateamonoclonal
gammopathy from arestricted or compactpolyclonal or oligoclonal
gammopathy.
（a)Anarrow globulin spike in the -globulin fraction could be a monoclonal
gammopathy (caused by B-lymphocyte neoplasia) or an oligoclonal (or
(b)A narrow globulin spike that is not in the -globulin fraction is prob-
ably a monoclonal gammopathy since such bands are usually due to
either IgA or IgM and not to IgG.High concentrations of IgA or IgM
are not expected in a nonneoplastic immune response.
(3)Compared to cellulose acetate methods, agarose electrophoresis or high-
resolution electrophoretic methods will improve detection of protein bands;
that is, what appears to be one band on cellulose acetate may be seen as two
not confirm the presence of a monoclonal gammopathy.2s
b.Immunoelectrophoresis
(1)If amonoclonal gammopathy is suspected,then immunoelectrophoresis
with species-specific anti-IgG (including subclasses), anti-IgM,anti-IgA
anti-（K-chain),or anti-(-chain) antibodies is needed to differentiate
monoclonal and polyclonal gammopathies by protein analysis.
384
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(2)If immunoelectrophoresis results indicate that nearly all of the gammopathy
is due to IgM or IgA,then the gammopathy very likely is monoclonal. If
nearly all of the gammopathy is due to IgG, then it could be either mono-
clonal or polyclonal with multiple classes of IgG; such a polyclonal state was
found in a dog with canine ehrlichiosis.39If the gammopathy is due to only
one IgG subclass, then it is probably monoclonal.
(3)If there is a monoclonal gammopathy, then the increased concentration
of one heavy-chain class (or subclass) will be associated with either K- or
-chains because a lymphocyte clone produces either K-or A-chains,not
both.27
(4)A potential monoclonal gammopathy associated with canine ehrlichiosis was
investigated by analysis of urinary light chains.Finding both K- and A-light
chains (in a 2:1ratio) in the dog's urine suggested that the gammopathy
was polyclonal and not monoclonal. The light-chain concentrations were
measured by an immunoprecipitation assay designed for human light
and canine light chains, but the degree of cross-immunoreactivity is not
known.
electrophoresis and, like immunoelectrophoresis, requires monospecific (and
possibly species specific) antisera to IgG,IgM,IgA,and free and bound Kor
A-chains.28
dRID
(1)RID assays for [IgM] and [IgA] may be used to support a monoclonal
expected in inflammatory states.
(2)However,like immunoelectrophoresis,RID assays for total [IgG]cannot be
used to differentiate an IgGpolyclonal gammopathy from an IgG monoclo-
nal gammopathy because the IgG gammopathy may contain more than one
subclassofIgG
6.Identification of light chains
a.Immunohistochemical assays using anti-(human A-light chain) antibodies and
anti-(human k-light chain) antibodies have been used to characterize neoplastic
plasma cells in dogs and cats. Out of 117 canine plasmacytomas, 114 were 
positive and threewereK positive.In several feline cases,nearly all were
positive.Establishing significance of these reactions is complicated by the
distribution of A-light chains and K-light chains in domesticmammals.Results of
studies using anti-(human A-light chain) and anti-(human K-light chain)
antibodies for immunohistochemical analysis of plasma cellsin lymphoid organs
of healthy dogs,horses, cats,and cattle indicated the to K ratios were about
9:1.3Therefore,a dominance of A-light chains (when antibodies to human light
chain are used) in tissue or serum could potentially be either a polyclonal or
monoclonal proliferation in dogs, cats, horses, and cattle.
b.Considering the need for species-specific antisera for the analysis of many
proteins and polypeptides,the results of the aforementioned studies would be
strengthened by establishing the degree of cross-reactivity of the anti-(human
light chain) antibodies with domesticmammal light chains,especially with K
light chains.
7/PROTEINS
385
7.Associated laboratory or clinicalproblems
a.Bence Jones proteinuria (BJ proteins = light chains of immunoglobulins)(see
Chapter 8) (Plate 12J.2)
b.Hyperviscosity syndrome
(1)High immunoglobulin concentrations may cause the plasma to become
viscous.Hyperviscosity syndrome is seen with high concentrations of IgA,
IgG, or IgM.
(2)Viscous plasma leads to sluggish blood flow in capillaries and causes poor
perfusion and thus tissue hypoxia (stagnant hypoxia). Major tissues affected
include brain, eyes, and kidneys.
(3)The high plasma [total protein] may also cause abnormal plarelet function
that may lead to clinical bleeding.
c.Hypercalcemia may be found in some lymphoproliferative disorders (see
Chapter 11).
d.Animals can develop systemic AL amyloidosis. AL-type amyloid is composed of
immunoglobulin light chains.A horse with multiple myeloma was found to have
systemic AL amyloidosis with an amyloid that reacted with anti-(human A-chain)
plasma cells were producing A-chains and not intact immunoglobulins.AL
amyloidosis was also diagnosed in a cat that had an extramedullary plasmacy-
toma.Peptideswithin the amyloid had amino acid sequencesvery similar to
sequences of human A-chains.
8.Amplification of variable regions of immunoglobulin genes by polymerase chain
reaction is being used to characterize the clonality of B-lymphocyte neoplasia.6
However, analysis of small biopsy samples from reactive lymphoid tissue may yield
what appears to be a monoclonal proliferation because of clonal expansion within a
Pseudoclonality is present if amplification produces one or more distinct bands,but
the results are not reproducible.
HYPOPROTEINEMIA(DECREASED[TOTALPROTEIN]INSERUMORPLASMA)
The diseases and conditions that cause hypoproteinemia are listed in Table 7.4.
I
Increased protein loss from vascular space
A.Blood loss (primarily external hemorrhage; acute or chronic)
1.Pathogenesis:Hypoproteinemia occurs when the remaining plasma proteins are
diluted by movement of extracellular fuid from extravascular space to intravascular
space (see Fig.3.8）.Hypoproteinemia will persist as long as the rate of protein loss
exceeds therate of protein production.
2.Major laboratory findings
a.Panbypoproreinemia, which is a decreased [total protein] with decreased concen-
trations of albumin and globulins, is a nonselective hypoproteinemia
b.Anemia: The type of anemia depends on duration and magnitude of blood loss
(see Chapter 3).
B.PLN
1.Pathogenesis: Renal glomerular damage (e.g.,by immune complex or amyloid
deposition) causes either a retraction of podocytes or loss of the selective permeability
386
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 7.4. Diseases and conditions that cause hypoproteinemia
Increased protein loss from vascular space
*Blood loss
*Protein-losing nephropathy: glomerulonephritis, amyloidosis
*Protein-losing enteropathy: small intestinal mucosal disease, lymphangiectasia,intestinal
blood loss
Protein-losing dermatopathy: burns,generalized exudative skin disease
Plasma loss: peritonitis, pleuritis, vasculitis
Decreased protein synthesis and/or increased protein catabolism
*Hepatic insufficiency
*Malabsorption or maldigestion:intestinal mucosal disease,exocrine pancreatic
insufhiciency
*Cachectic state:chronic iseases,noplasiamalnutrition,starvation
Lymphoid hypoplasia or aplasia
Failure of passive transfer (FPT)
Hemodilution
Excess administration of intravenous fuid
Edematous disorders: congestive heart failure, cirrhosisnephrotic syndrome
Excess ADH secretion:SIADH
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Total protein concentrations in healthy pups, kittens, calves, and foals may be 1.02.0 g/dL
less than those found in mature animals
of the glomerular basement membrane. Either or both lesions allow larger andmore
negatively charged proteins through the glomerular filtration barrier.When proteins
enter the filtrate at a rate greater than proximal tubules can resorb, then proteinuria
occurs.When therateof proteinloss exceeds protein production,hypoproteinemia
not lost through glomeruliand thus a selective hypoproteinemia occurs.Because
dogs and cats normally have very little β-lipoprotein, the β-globulin fraction
typically is not relatively increased as it is in people with a PLN.
2.Diseases
a.Animals with a PLN (as defined in this section) have a glomerulopathy. Glomer
ulonephritis or renal amyloidosis may be apparent histologically.
b. Soft-coated Wheaten terriers have an increased incidence of PLN and PLE.49
3.Major laboratory findings
a.Mild to marked hypoproteinemia with hypoalbuminemia and normoglobu
linemia (occasionally hypoglobulinemia)
b. SPEresults:There is a selective hypoproteinemia pattern with -globulins WRI
or only mildly decreased (but appear relatively increased). Other protein fractions
are typically definitely decreased (Plate 121. 1). The degree of decrease of the Y-
globulin fraction will depend on the porosity of the glomeruli.
c.Moderate to marked proteinuria dominated by albuminuria (Plate 12l.2)
d.Perhaps evidence of renal insufficiency (azotemia or isosthenuria) if the disease
has destroyed enough nephrons
7/PROTEINS
387
e.Hypercholesterolemia and peritoneal transudate if nephrotic syndrome has
developed
C.PLE
1.Pathogenesis
a.Intestinal secretions, which are relatively protein rich,typically are
digested and absorbed in the small intestine, and then transported to the
portal system and lymphaticvessels.When generalized small intestinal mucosal
teins, the proteins are lost in feces. When the rate of protein loss exceeds the
capability of theliver and lymphocytes to produce proteins,hypoproteinemia
occurs.
b. In some disorders, infammatory exudation and decreased protein intake contrib-
ute to the hypoproteinemia.
c.Intestinal blood loss because of parasitism is one form of PLE.
2.Diseases
a.Generalized small intestinal mucosal diseases: lymphoma,histoplasmosis,and
lymphocytic/plasmacytic/eosinophilic enteritis
b.Horses with acute enteritis
c.Lymphatic disease: lymphangiectasia or lymphoma
d. Intestinal blood loss: hookworms, whipworms, or neoplasia
3.Major laboratory findings
a. Mild to marked hypoproteinemia with hypoalbuminermia and hypoglobulinemia
(or normoglobulinemia)
b.SPE results: The pattern is usually nonselective but may be selective.
C.Other findings may indicate or suggest the inciting pathologic state (e.g,
Histoplasma organisms orneoplastic lymphocytesinbiopsy samplesormelenaor
other evidence of blood loss).
D.Protein-losing dermatopathy
1.Pathogenesis
a.Thermal or chemical burns allow plasma proteins to exude from cutaneous
lesions at a rate greater than the rate of protein production.If the animal is not
seen soon after the injury,the dysproteinemia will reflect a mixture of cutaneous
b.Generalized exudative skin disease can cause a hypoproteinemic state,but the
dysproteinemia probably reflects a mixture of protein loss and an infammatory
dysproteinemia.
2.Major laboratory findings
a.Early:nonselective hypoproteinemia
b.Later: nonselective hypoproteinemia masked by either an acute or chronic
infammatory dysproteinemia
E.Plasma loss caused by peritonitis,pleuritis,or vasculitis
1.Pathogenesis
a.Pleuritis and peritonitis: Acute infammation of pleura or peritoneum allows for
extravasation of protein-rich fuid into the pleural and peritoneal cavities,
respectively.Such protein loss is sometimes referred to as third-space los.Subse
quent hemodilution causes hypoproteinemia.
b.Vasculitis: A similar loss of protein-rich Huid can occur with vasculitis; the fuid
enters the interstitial fuid adjacent to the infamed vessels.
388
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.Major laboratory findings
a.Early:nonselective hypoproteinemia
b. Later: nonselective hypoproteinemia masked by either an acute or chronic
infammatory dysproteinemia
II.
Decreased protein synthesis and/or increased protein catabolism
A.Hepatic insufficiency (or hepatic failure)
1.Pathogenesis: A marked reduction in functional hepatic mass (< 20 % remaining)
decreases the synthesis of nearly all plasma proteins except immunoglobulins.
Normal protein catabolism combined with decreased protein synthesis produces the
hypoproteinemia.
2.Disorders
a.Cirrhosis
b.Hepatic necrosis or inflammation (not acute)
c.Hepatic atrophy secondary to portosystemic shunts
d.Neoplasms that damage the liver extensively
3.Major laboratory findings
a.Hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, and normoglobulinemia orhypoglobulinemia
b.SPE results: The pattern is frequently nonselective, but there may be a relative
excess in β- or Y-globulins because of one of two theories:
(1)There may be a compensatory increased synthesis of immunoglobulins to
attempt to maintain a colloidal osmotic (oncotic) pressure in thevascular
system.
(2)The liver removes antigenic material and IgA from the portal blood. With
hepatic insuffciency,the antigenicmaterial gains entrance to peripheral
bloodand induces a systemic immuneresponse (increased IgM,IgA,or
IgG).Because IgM and IgA migrate in the β-globulin fraction and IgG in
the -globulin fraction,there may not be a clear distinction between β and
Y-globulin fractions (called a beta-gamma bridge).
4. Other chemical findings of hepatic disease or dysfunction: increased hepatic enzyme
activities,decreased urea concentration,or increased bile acid or ammonium
concentrations
B.Malabsorption or maldigestion
1.Pathogenesis: A malabsorptive or maldigestive state results in a deficient intake of
basic body fuels (carbohydrares, proteins, or lipids) to replace fuels used by meta-
bolic pathways for daily energy. Once depleted, protein catabolism and the use of
amino acids for gluconeogenesis lead to a deficiency in energy and amino acids for
hepatocellular and lymphocytic protein synthesis.When catabolism exceeds produc
tion,hypoproteinemia occurs.
2.Disorders
a.Malabsorption: Small intestinal diseases with generalized mucosal involvement
may cause malabsorption of digested proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids.
b.Maldigestion: Exocrine pancreatic insuffciency (because of chronic pancreatitis
Or pancreatic atrophy) creates deficiencies in proteases, lipase, and amylase and
thus maldigestion of proteins, lipids (fat), or carbohydrates (starches)
3.Major laboratory findings
a.Hypoproteinemia,hypoalbuminemia,and normoglobulinemia or
hypoglobulinemia
7/PROTEINS
389
b.SPE results: The pattern typically is nonselective (Plate 12H).
c.Other findings dependent on the primary pathologic state (e.g., decreased
trypsin-like immunoreactivity with exocrine pancreatic insuficiency, or poor
xylose absorption with malabsorptive states [see Chapter 15]
C.Cachectic states
1.Pathogenesis: When the rate of protein catabolism exceeds protein production, the
negative protein status causes hypoproteinemia.Before hypoproteinemia develops,
glucose and most serum protein concentrations (especially albumin) are maintained
at the expense of other tissues. Therefore, this hypoproteinemia is expected when
body weight has been lost due to decreased fat and muscle mass.
2.Disorders
a.Chronic diseases such as chronic infections and malignant neoplasia (Plate 12J.1)
b.Marked malnutrition or starvation
3.Major laboratory findings
a.Hypoproteinemia,hypoalbuminemia, and normoglobulinemia or
hypoglobulinemia
b. SPE results: The pattern typically is nonselective.
C.Other findings dependent on the primary pathologic state
D.Lymphoid hypoplasia or aplasia
1. B-lymphocytes produce immunoglobulins and not other major plasma proteins. A
mild hypoproteinemia potentially can be created by lymphoid hypoplasia if concen-
trations of other proteins are WRI.
2.Expected dysproteinemia
a.The [total protein] is WRI to slightly decreased. The [albumin] is WRI, and the
[globulin] is WRI or slightly decreased.
b.SPE results: The [Y-globulin] is decreased.
3.Disorders
a.Combined immunodeficiency occurs in horses (Arabian and Appaloosa) and dogs
（bassethounds,CardiganWelshcorgisandJackRussell terriers）.Quantitative
immunoglobulin techniques are needed to confirm decreases or deficiencies of
immunoglobulins (see the Immunoglobulin section).
b. Chemotherapy or infections may cause lymphoid hypoplasia
III.FPT
A.Neonates who fail to ingest or absorb colostral antibodies will have lower serum or
plasma [total protein] because of lower [gG]. However, infammation or dehydration
can increase the [total protein] in such animals and thus mask the FPT.
B.This relationship between[IgG] and [total protein] has been explored and resulted in
the following findings in sera from 1- to 8-d-old calves when compared to an [lgG]
decision value of1000mg/dL.52
1.With a [sTP of 5.0 g/dL as a decision limit, 83 % were correctly classified
regarding passive transfer status.
2.With a[sTP of 5.5 g/dL as a decision limit, 82% were correctly classifed
regarding passive transfer status.
IV.
Hemodilution: increased ECF volume
A.By itself,increasedECFis a very uncommon cause of hypoproteinemiabut itmay
lower protein concentrations that were already decreased because of another problem.
390
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.Disorders or conditions
1.Excess administration of intravenous fuid (too fast or too much)
2.Edematous disorders (congestive heart failure, cirrhosis, and nephrotic syndrome)
3.Excess ADH secretion (SIADH)
4.Use of plasma expanders,when extravascular fuid is pulled into plasma soon after
administration (may not result in increased ECF volume but does dilute the plasma
protein concentration)
HYPERALBUMINEMIA
The diseases and conditions that cause hyperalbuminemia are listed in Table 7.5
I.
Hemoconcentration (dehydration):decreased ECF volume
A.Decreased plasma HO leads to greater concentrations of those substances (including
albumin)that have circulating life spans longer than thetimeit took to become
dehydrared.
B.Hemoconcentration is the most common reason forhyperalbuminemia. Concurrent
Induced synthesis by glucocorticoid therapy
I1.
A.Glucocorticoid therapy might causemild hyperalbuminemia in dogssand in cats
（unpublished S.LS.data）.In dogs given prednisone (0.55mg/kg,q12h)for4wk,the
[albumin] and [total protein] increased more in the prednisone-treated dogs than in a
control group. In another study with dogs receiving prednisone(0.55 mg/kg, q12h)
for 4 wk, [albumin] and [total protein] increased along with a concurrent increase in
[haptoglobin]; the changes in [albumin] were not significantly different from the
changes in the control dogs. The [albumin] may be increased because of increased
production or possibly increased albumin life span.
B.
One study reported a large increase in [albumin] (about 2 g/dL) after 45 d of treat-
ment with methylprednisolone (4mg/kgIMq24h).However,the [albumin]was
measured byabiuretmethod afterNaSOprecipiration,so the increasemay have
included proteins other than albumin (e.g.,haptoglobin).The [total protein] increased
concurrently，but the[globulin] (calculated by subtraction）did not.
III.
Falsely increased concentration determined by the BCG dye method
A.BCG dye preferentially binds to albumin.However, it also binds to some α-globulins
and β-globulins, and thus a measured albumin concentration represents the dyebinding
to albumin and some globulins.7 The binding of BCG to globulins is reduced if the
assay's incubation time is reduced.s Falsely increased [albumin] is also found in
heparinized plasma because of the binding of BCG with fibrinogen.16
Table 7.5.Diseases and conditions that cause hyperalbuminemia
*Hemoconcentration
Increased albumin synthesis induced by glucocorticoid drugs or hormones
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note:If [albumin] is determined by the BCG method, the BCG dye may bind to proteins other
than albumin and thus yield a pseudo-hyperalbuminemia.
7/PROTEINS
391
B.The anomalous [albumin] may not be recognized in hypoalbuminemic samples; that is,
the hypoalbuminemia is more severe than indicated by the measured concentration. For
example, in sera of dogs with PLN, the [albumin] from SPE may be considerably less
than the BCG value.
HYPOALBUMINEMIA
This commonly occurs with hyperproteinemia and hypoproteinemia but also can be seen
when there is normoproteinemia.
II.
The diseases and conditions that cause hypoalbuminemia are listed in Table 7.6.Pathogen-
eses of the hypoalbuminemic states are described in the appropriate dysproteinemia sections
(see the Hyperproteinemia and Hypoproteinemia sections).
A.Hypoalbuminemia may be found in hyperproteinemic states not related to
hemoconcentration.
1.Infammatory hypoalbuminemia occurs because albumin is a negative APP. The
following two major concepts are related to inflammatory hypoalbuminemia:
a.The hypoalbuminemia does not develop until the inflammation has persisted for
days to weeks, especially in horses because equine albumin has a plasma half-life
of nearly 3 wk.
b.If inflammation is the only cause of the hypoalbuminemic state,hypoalbumin
emia is expected to be mild.
neoplasia vary and may relate to inflammatory cytokines, response to increased
colloidal osmotic (oncotic) pressure caused by hyperglobulinemia, or damaged
tissues such as liver,ntestines,orkidnys.
Table 7.6. Diseases and conditions that cause hypoalbuminemia
Decreased albumin synthesis
*Infammation
*Hepatic insufficiency
*Malabsorption and maldigestion
*Cachectic states
Hypergammaglobulinemia
Increased albumin loss
*Blood loss
*Protein-losing nephropathy: glomerulonephritis, amyloidosis
*Protinlingnerpathyallnestinlucosaldisaslhangctasintl
blood loss
Protein-losing dermatopathy: burns,generalized exudative skin disease
Hemodilution
Excess administration of intravenous fuid
Edematous disorders: congestive heart failure, cirrhosis, nephrotic syndrome
Excess ADH secretion:SIADH
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: [Albumin] in healthy pups, kittens, calves, and foals may be 0.51.0 g/dL less than those
found in mature animals.
392
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.Hypoalbuminemia is commonly found concurrently with hypoproteinemia. As
described in the Hypoproteinemia section,hypoalbuminemias are usually caused by
decreased production of albumin, increased loss of plasma albumin, or both.
HYPERGLOBULINEMIA (see the Hyperproteinemia section)
1.
Hyperglobulinemia is typically present concurrently with hyperproteinemia. In fact,the
reason for the hyperproteinemia is typically the hyperglobulinemiaHowever,it isnot
uncommon to find hyperglobulinemia with normoproteinemia because of concurrent
hypoalbuminemia
II.
There are four major concepts to consider:
A.The major causes of hyperglobulinemia are hemoconcentration, inflammation (espe-
cially chronic),and B-lymphocyte neoplasia.
B.By way of routine clinical chemistry methods, the globulin concentration is determined
by subtraction; that is,[total protein] minus [albumin].Thus, errors in those values can
result in erroneous globulin concentrations.
C.Because the routine [globulin] represents the sum of the concentrations of all proteins
other than albumin, hyperglobulinemia may result from the increased concentration of
one or more different globulins.
D.SPE results typically will differentiate the hyperproteinemias of hemoconcentration
from hyperglobulinemias of infammation and lymphoid neoplasia,but they may not
be able to differentiate inflammatory from lymphoid neoplastic hyperglobulinemias.
HYPOGLOBULINEMIA (see the Hypoproteinemia section)
1.
For animals other than neonates,hypoglobulinemia commonly occurs concurrently with
hypoproteinemia and might be seen with normoproteinemia, whereas it is not expected
with hyperproteinemia if reference intervals are appropriate.
II.
As with the hypoproteinemic disorders,themajor causes of hypoglobulinemia fall into rwo
categories:
A.Globulin production is decreased. Remember that most globulins other than 
globulins are produced by hepatocytes.
B.Plasma globulin loss is increased because of blood loss or loss via damaged glomeruli
intestinal mucosa, or skin.
POSITIVEACUTE-PHASEPROTEINS(APPs)
I.
General concepts
A.Major aspects of the stimulated production of positive APPs are described in earlier
sections of this chapter (see General Concepts for Total Protein, Albumin, and Globu-
APP assays in domestic mammals have been reviewed.67
B.Essentially any injury that produces an acute infammatory reaction can increase
concentrations of the positive APPs. These injuries can be due to infections (e.g,
bacterial, viral, fungal, or protozoal) or noninfectious conditions (e.g., physical trauma
burns,or necrosis）.As a group of proteins,the increased concentration of positive APPs
7/PROTEINS
393
can increase [total protein] and [globulin]. Individually, the magnitude of increase varies
considerably.
C.Positive APP results typically are valuable for two reasons:
1. Other methods of detecting infammation (ie, pyrexia or neutrophilia) may be too
insensitive or nonspecific for the pathologic state of interest.
2.They provide another method of monitoring an infammatory process either for
therapeutic decisions or for prognostic classification.
D.Other factors need to be considered when interpreting concentrations of positive
APPs:
1.If chronic infammation is considered to be the persistence of acute infammation,
then it is easy to understand that concentrations of positive APPs can be increased
in animals with chronic infammatory disorders.
2.Concurrent with the pathologic state that is increasing the concentration of the
positive APP, there may be processes that are decreasing the concentrations.
a.Disorders that cause the loss of plasma proteins (e.g, blood loss or glomerular
disease) can lower positive APP concentrations.
b.Disorders that activate plasmin or thrombin can lower [fibrinogen] by fibrinoge
nolysis and coagulation.
c.Intravascular hemolysis will lower [haptoglobin]
II.
Fibrinogen
A.Physiologic process
1.Fibrinogen is a plasma protein that is produced by hepatocytes.
2.When enzymatic processes in plasma convert prothrombin to thrombin, thrombin
then promotes the conversion of soluble fibrinogen to insoluble fibrin. Interactions
of fibrin, platelets, and endothelial cells help prevent blood loss from blood vessels.
Fibrin formation is limited by plasmin-induced fibrinolysis.
3.Because fibrinogen is a positive APP,plasma [fibrinogen] is expected to increase
during infammatory states.However,when inflammation is concurrent with
coagulation and fibrinolysis,increased fibrinogen consumption may mask increased
fibrinogen production and vice versa.
B.Analytical concepts
1.Heat-precipitant method
a.Principle: The difference in the [TP,l in a sample before and after removal of
fibrinogen via heat precipitation (56-58°C) and centrifugation estimates the
[fbrinogen].
b.Unit conversion: mg/dL x0.01 = g/L (SI unit, nearest 0.1 g/L)2
c.Comments
(1) It is a semiquantitative technique used to screen plasma for hyperfibrinogen-
emia. It is usually applied to bovine and equine samples because infamma
tion is less reliably detected by infammatory leukograms in these species
compared to dogs and cats. (Note: Reporting heat-precipitant fibrinogen
results in mg/dL units [e.g., 300 mg/dL instead of 0.3 g/dL] implies much
greater precision than the assay can deliver.)
2）
The method’s analytical sensitivity (ie., capability of detecting small
changes) is inadequate to document hypofibrinogenemia. As each refracto-
metric reading is at best only accurate to the nearest 0.1 g/dL,the calculated
fibrinogen value should be considered to be ar best within 0.2 g/dL of the
394
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
true value. In most species, the lower reference limit is either 0.1 g/dL or
0.2 g/dL.
d.Outline of the heat-precipitant method
(1)Fill rwo microhematocrit tubes (at least three-quarters full) with EDTA-
anticoagulated blood. Spin tubes in a microhematocrit centrifuge (as for
hematocrit) for 5 min.
(a)First tube: Determine the [pTP to the nearest O.1 g/dL.
(b）Second tube:Place it ina 5658°C HO bath for3min, spin it in a
microhematocrit centrifuge (for at least 1 min) to pack the precipitated
fibrinogen, and then determine the [total protein] via refractometer to
the nearest 0.1 g/dL
(2)Calculate the [fibrinogen].
(a)The estimated [fibrinogen] =[pTP of the first tube-[TPe] of the
second tube.
(b)Example: 7.0g/dL-6.7g/dL=0.3g/dL
2.Thrombin time, von Clauss modification
a.Principle: A [fbrinogen] can be determined from the time required for fibrin
formation after theaddition of a high concentration of thrombin to diluted
citrated plasma. This time primarily depends on the [ibrinogen]: the lower the
[fibrinogen] is, the longer will be the time until clot formation.
b.See Chapter5for details pertaining tomeasurement of fibrinogen concentration.
3.Some people have attempted to calculate a[ibrinogen] by determining the
difference between the [pTP of EDTA-plasma and the [sTP from a serum
sample. Such a method is not recommended because solutes other than fibrinogen
alter the refractive index and thus cause differences between plasma and serum
[total protein]（see the section on Analytical Principles for Total Protein,Albumin,
and Globulins). Errors can arise when two different samples are collected and
compared.
C.Hyperfibrinogenemia (plasma)(Table 7.7)
1.Two major causes:
a.Hemoconcentration: decreased plasma HO
b. Infammation: increased fibrinogen production by the liver
2. The [total protein] is usually also increased with these disorders but may be WRI
Unless fibrinogen consumption is increased enough, the [fbrinogen] increases
relatively more than the[total protein] in infammation.With dehydration,the
increases in the[total protein] and [fibrinogen] should be relatively the same; for
example, they both increase by 5 %.These concepts led to the development of the
PP:F ratio (Eq.7.la).s9 The ratio was simplified a few years later by not subtracting
the [fbrinogen] from the [TPe] (Eq. 7.1b).6o
Table 7.7. Diseases and conditions that cause hyperfbrinogenemia
Increased fibrinogen production
*Inflammation
*Hemoconcentration
*A relatively common disease or condition
7/PROTEINS
395
[plasma TP]-[fibrinogen]
PP:F ratio =
(7.1a.)
[fibrinogen]
[plasma TP]
（TP:Fib),ratio =
(7.1b.)
[fibrinogen]
Example: [pTP] = 8.8 g/dL & [ibrinogen] = 0.8 g/dL
8.8g/dL-0.8g/dL
L8.0g/dL
PP:F ratio =
10
0.8g/dL
0.8g/dL
8.8 g/dL
（TP:Fib),ratio =
11
0.8 g/dL
3.PP:Fratio or (TP:Fib),ratio
a.These ratios help in differentiating hyperfibrinogenemias of inflammation and
dehydration.
b.The original interpretive guides and reference intervals were established
with the PP:Fratio.s61 The PP:F ratios in healthy mammals varied
among species and by age group,mostly because of different total protein
concentrations.2
(1)Cattle:If the ratio is > 15,hyperibrinogenemia is probably caused by
dehydration.If the ratio is<10,hyperfibrinogenemia is probably caused by
infammation.
(2）Horses: If the ratio is >20, hyperfibrinogenemia is probably caused by
dehydration.If theratiois<15,hyperfibrinogenemia is probably caused by
infammation.
(3)If the simpler calculation, (TP:Fib), ratio, is used, a “1” should be added to
guideline values to be consistent with guidelines determined by using the
PP:F ratio (e.g,> 16 in cattle is probably dehydration).
c.Guidelines are based on the assumptions that a healthy animal’'s [total protein]
and [ibrinogen] are WRI, and then one of two things happens: the animal
becomes dehydrated or develops an inflammatory disease.
(1) Dehydration will increase concentrations of all proteins to the same degree,
and thus the PP:F and (TP:Fib), ratios do not change.
(2)Infammation will increase concentrations of fibrinogen and some proteins
but also decrease concentrations of other proteins.Thus, the PP:F and
(TP:Fib),ratios will decrease because the denominator will increase relatively
more than the numerator.
d.Additional factors to be considered
(1)Concurrent dehydration and infammation will make interpretation of the
ratios more dificult.Increased fibrinogen consumption in the pathologic
state will also cloud the issue.
(2)Dehydration by itself will cause only minor increases in[fibrinogen].
(3）The aforementionedratio guidelines arenot appropriate for calves and foals
because the ratio reference intervals are for mature animal values. They also
are not appropriate for cattle and horses that have a concurrent pathologic
state that causes hypoproteinemia.
396
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 7.8.Diseases and conditions that cause hypofbrinogenemia
Increased fibrinogen consumption
*Intravascular coagulation (localized or disseminated)
Increased fibrinogenolysis
Decreased synthesis of fibrinogen
Hepatic insufficiency
Afibrinogenemia (congenital or inherited)
*A relatively common disease or condition
(4)The accuracy of refractometric values is at best ± 0.1 g/dL.Thus, the
accuracy of the calculated ratio is probably beter with a higher [ibrinogen].
Even then,however, they should be considered estimates.
D.Hypofibrinogenemia (plasma)(Table 7.8)
1.Hear-precipitation techniques lack sufficient analytical sensitivity and precision to be
used for detection or confirmation of hypofibrinogenemia.Quantitative assays are
needed for documentation of hypofibrinogenemia. The common assay for detecting
hypofibrinogenemia is the von Clauss modification of the thrombin time (see
Chapter 5).
2. Causes of hypofibrinogenemia (more information in Chapter 5)
a.Increased consumption of fibrinogen
(1)Intravascular coagulation: local or disseminated
(2)
）)Increasedfibrinogenolysis:uncommon bur may occur withfibrinolytic
therapy,DIC,or certain envenomations
b.Decreased synthesis of fibrinogen
(1)Hepatic insufficiency:reduction in hepatic function must be marked before
hypofibrinogenemia occurs
Inherited or congenital disorders: afbrinogenemiahypofbrinogenemiaand
(2）
dysfibrinogenemia
(a)Afibrinogenemia was found in a bichon frise that developed antibodies
to fibrinogen afer transfusions.Afbrinogenemia also has been
described in goats and people.
(b) Congenital hypofibrinogenemia was reported in a Bernese mountain
dog (Berner sennenhund) (note: sometimes translated as Saint
Bernard).4
(c)Hypofibrinogenemia or dysfibrinogenemia has also been mentioned as
occurring in Lhasa apsos, vizslas, collies, and borzois (W.J. Dodds,
unpublished), but the laboratory data to characterize these states have
not been published
III.
Other acute-phase proteins
A.Analytical concepts
1.Like most plasma proteins, the positive APPs are relatively stable analytes when
stored frozen. Except for fbrinogen, serum is the preferred sample for most APPs.
Anticoagulants (EDTA,heparin,and citrate）have beenreported to cause a variety of
effectsnPPrulthffctsfHgbbilrubinrlmanthassayar
with the analyte and the assays used.Aswould be expected for a haptoglobin assay
based on Hgb binding, the use of hemolyzed samples must be avoided
7/PROTEINS
397
2.A variety of analytical methods are used to measure increased concentrations of
specific positive APPs. Some of the immunologic methods are species specific. In
health, the concentrations of some positive APPs are near the detection limits of the
assays, so detecting decreased concentrations is difficult or impossible.
a.Serum C-reactive protein is usually measured by immunologic methods:immu-
noturbidimetry, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), or latex
agglutination.
b.Haptoglobin assays typically are based on haptoglobin’s binding to Hgb.
The binding is detected either via spectral differences of bound versus
unbound Hgb or by diminished peroxidase activity.Because of the species
differences in haptoglobin's amino acid compositions,mmunoassays designed
for human haptoglobin may ormay not detect a domestic mammal’s
haptoglobin
c.Serum amyloid A is measured with immunologic assays: immunoturbidimetric
assays or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. Assays using anti-(canine SAA)
or anti-(feline SAA) antibodies have been developed,but there is sufficient
homology in the canine and feline proteins to cross-react with some anti-
(human SAA) antibodies.
d.o,-Acid glycoprotein is measured with species-specific immunoassays: single
radial immunodiffusion assays and immunoturbidimetric assays.
e.Ceruloplasmin assays are typically spectrophotometric assays based on the
oxidation of specific substrates.
fFertin: Generally， species-specific immunoassays are needed to measure serum or
plasma [ferritin]. Assays have been developed for canine, feline, and equine67
ferritin specifically. Occasionally, the cross-reactivity is sufficient to measure
ferritin concentrations of species other than the one for which the assay was
developed; for example,the equine ferritin assay can be used to measure concen-
trations of rhinoceros, tapir, and lemur ferritin.When possible, the ferritin used
in calibrating(standard) solutions should be isolated from the species of interest;
for example,the use of lemur ferritin to calibrate an assay for lemur ferritin thar
uses an anti-(equine ferritin) antibody.
B.Increased concentrations of positive APPs other than fibrinogen
1.Examples of potential increases are provided in Table 7.9. It should be noted that
the increase in [haptoglobin] may be sufficient to produce a recognizable increase in
the serum [total protein] by itselfwhereas increased concentrations of the other
APPs typically are not.
2.Conditions other than inflammation can cause increased positive APP
concentrations.
a.Pregnancy in birches will increase [C-reactive protein].6
b.In dogs,glucocorticoid therapy can cause increased haptoglobin] similar to
haptoglobin concentrations seen during inflammation.5s9 Also, certain anthel-
mintic compounds (potassium melarsonyl, levamisole hydrochloride, and
milbemycin oxime) can increase [haptoglobin].7o
C.Phenobarbital therapy in dogs can increase [O-acid glycoprotein].7
d.[C-reactive protein] increases in cattle during lactation. The highest values were
during the first 4 mo of lactation.72
e.If an animal does not have an inflammatory disease, a plasma ferritin] tends
to refect iron storage in the animal. Thus,if iron storage is increased (e.g
398
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 7.9. Examples of changes in acute-phase protein concentrations
Concentration in
Magnitude of
Time to peak
healthy dog
response
First detection
concentration
Acute-phase Protein
(mg/dL)
(xbaseline)
of increase (h)
(d)
Fibrinogen
300
C-reactive protein
<1
95x
4
1
Serum amyloid A
<0.4
800x
2
Haptoglobin
<300
24
3-4
Q-Acid glycoprotein
<60
3x
Ceruloplasmin
<5
3x
24
4
Note: More information (except for fibrinogen) is available in a review article that was the source of the
data. Note that units were converted from "/L" to "/dL" so they could be more easily compared to other
protein concentrations (reported as g/dL) in this chapter.
Source. Ceron et al.
hemochromatosis,hemosiderosis,or chronic hemolysis),then the plasma
[ferritin] might be increased.
fSerum [ferritin] may increase after exercise in horses, so samples for feritin
analysis should be collected at least 2 d after strenuous exercise.7The exact
mechanism for the increase is not established but appears to berelease from
tissues other than liver.
IMMUNOGLOBULINS
The most common reason for measuring IgG] is to determine whether there has been successful
passive transfer of IgG from a mother (mare or cow) to her foal or calf via colostrum. Accord-
ingly,passive transfer is the focus of this section.Immunoglobulin concentrations may also be
measured when evaluating congenital and acquired immunodeficiency states or when assessing
potential monoclonal gammopathies.
I.
Failure of passive transfer (FPT)
A.Physiologic concepts
1.Placentation in horses and cattle prevents in utero transfer of immunoglobulins to
the fetus, so neonatal horses and ruminants must ingest colostrum soon after birth
(before“gut closure”) to obtain maternal immunoglobulins, especially IgG.After
ingestion and absorption,thehalf-lifeofmaternalIgGis about20-30d in foals74
and 20 d in calves.7 Inadequate immunoglobulin transfer for a particular environ-
ment increases the risk of infectious diseases and decreases the rate of weight gain.
2.Neonatal foals,prior to ingestion of colostrum,have essentiallyno IgG in their
plasma, and calves have very low concentrations. Once exposed to antigens, neonatal
foals are stimulared to produce IgG and protective immunity in about 10-14 d.74
Synthesis of IgG by calves can be detected by 8-16d.76
3.Fetal foals and calves have limited ability to produceIgM,so neonatal foals and
calves should have low concentrations of IgM.
4.Intestinal absorption of colostrum rapidly increases plasma [total protein]. Most of
the increase is due to increased [lgG], but colostrum also contains positive acute
7/PROTEINS
399
phase proteins such as amyloid A that is produced by mammary gland epithelial
cells.77
5.Immunoglobulin uptake is mediated by the neonatal Fc receptor on epithelial cells.
B.Causes of FPT
1.Lack of colostrum ingestion (the neonate is too weak or because of other factors)
2.Inadequate IgG in the colostrum (a decreased concentration or inadequate volume
of colostrum)
3.Failure to absorb enough ingested IgG could occur if the colostrum is ingested after
“gut closure”and has been associated with certain haplotypes of theneonatal Fc
receptor in calves.78
C.Establishing the presence or absence of passive transfer
1.Appropriate decision thresholds to define FPT vary with the assay because of assay
biases (inaccuracies).Despite these biases, general recommendations have been
made.Laboratory-specific decision thresholds should be used when available.
2.Foal guidelines:Blood samples are collectedbetween 18and 48h afterbirth,when
antibody absorption should be essentially complete.
a.For several years, [IgG] > 400 mg/dL was considered evidence of passive transfer.
However,gG]> 800mg/dL may be a better criterion for adequate passive
transfer and is currently recommended74.79 although adequacy may vary with
different management and environmental factors.
b.[IgG] < 200 mg/dL is considered evidence of complete FPT.
c.
[IgG]between 200mg/dL and 800 mg/dL is considered evidence of partial FPT
foals with higher risk factors.
3.Calf guidelines are not firmly established; two published guidelines follow. For each,
blood samples are collected between 1 and 8d after birth.
a.One recommendation52.80
(1)[IgG]>10o0 mg/dL is considered evidence of passive transfer
(2)[IgG]<500 mg/dL is considered evidence of complete FPT.
b.Another recommendationsi,82
(1)[IgG]>1600 mg/dL is considered evidence of passive transfer
(2)[IgG]=800-1600 mg/dL is considered partial passive transfer.
(3)[IgG]<800mg/dL is considered FPT.
C.When refractometry was used to estimate serum [total protein], decision thresh-
olds of 5.0g/dL and 5.5 g/dLcorrectly classified the passive transfer status in
83% and 82% of the calves,respectively.52
4.Results for blood samples collected from older foals or calves, especially if ill, will be
more difficult to interpret because the half-life of maternal IgG and a neonate's
response to antigens after birth must be considered.
Because of the lack of standardization of assaymethods and reference standard sera,there
may be marked variations in [IgG] measured by different IgG assays. The evaluation of
various analytical methods is frequently compared to [IgG] determined by RID.
However, a RID assay might be inaccurate. Thus, the interpretive guidelines will ary.
1.RID test for foal or calf serum
a.Principle: IgG diffuses in a gel containing anti-(equine IgG) antibodies or anti-
(bovine IgG)antibodies for 18-24 h.The diameter of a precipitant ring is
proportional to the [lgG] in serum.
400
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
b.Results: RID is considered to be a quantitative assay for measuring IgG]. Assays
for measuring bovine[IgG] are also available.
c.Comments
(1)Usually RID is considered too time consuming (24h diffusion time)and
expensive for routine clinical use.
(2)RID has been considered the gold standard method in veterinary laborato-
ries. However, some commercial RID assays overestimate [IgG], especially at
[gG]>2000 mg/dL. In one study, a commercial RID assay for bovine
IgGhada positiveproportionalbiasthusindicating theprovided standard
solutions had lower IgG concentrations than labeled.83
2.Glutaraldehyde coagulation test for foal or calf serum
a.Principle: Glutaraldehyde(10 %)promotes the formation of molecular cross-
linkages to coagulate basic proteins such as immunoglobulins and fibrinogen.
Because fibrinogen is absent in serum and very little IgM is present in neonatal
foal serum, the amount of coagulated protein is primarily dependent on [IgG].
b.Results
(a)Reported semiquantitative values (gelling times may vary with newer
assays)
[lgG]≥ 800 mg/dL if serum forms gel ≤ 10 min
[IgG] > 400 mg/dL if serum forms gel ≤ 60 min.
▪[IgG]≤400 mg/dL if serum did not gel by 60min
(2)For estimation of bovine [lgG]
(a)Semiquantitative values2
[lgG] > 600 mg/dL if the serum forms a firm opaque clot by 60 min.
60min.
[IgG]< 400 mg/dL if the serum did not gel by 60 min.
(b)Comments
To determine the[gG]at the decision thresholds for FPT (either
>1000 mg/dL or > 1600 mg/dL),the serum would need to be
diluted prior to analysis.
The results of the glutaraldehyde coagulation test (Gamma-Check-B)
were unreliable when whole blood was used.87
c.The test is very inexpensive and simple because it just requires glutaraldehyde
reaction tubes,and pipettes.It does require that serum be harvested from blood
3.Latex agglutination (Foalcheck) for foal serum
a.Principle: Latex beads coated with anti-(equine IgG) antibodies will agglutinate
in the presence of equine IgG.
b.Results: It is a semiquantitative assay that generally agrees with the RID assay
results but is not as good as the glutaraldehyde coagulation test.s
c. Comments: The test is moderately expensive but takes only about 10 min to
complete after the serum is collected.
4.ZnSOturbidity test for foal or calf serum
a.Principle: Sulfates selectively precipitate cationic proteins such as immunoglobu
lins;other proteins are neutral or negatively charged.At a constant[ZnSO],a
7/PROTEINS
401
greater turbidity corresponds to a higher [immunoglobulin]. Since there is very
little IgA or IgM in foal or calf sera,the amount of turbidity reflects the[IgG] in
a sample.
b.The results can be assessed visually or turbidimetrically.Turbidimetric assessment
requires a spectrophotometer and standard solutions to establish a standard
curve.
(1)In foals,visual turbidity occurs when the [IgG] is near 400-500mg/dL,
which does not match with the current decision thresholds for FPT.
(2)In calves:
(a)With a ZnSO solution of 208mg/L,sufficient turbidity to obscure
turbidity test provided a good estimate of the [lgG] but was not
considered to be as useful as the NaSOs-precipitant test.
(b)In another study, the results with a ZnSO solution(208mg/L) were
compared with RID assay results.52 Inadequate rurbidity was found in
samples with [IgG] values that ranged from 0 to 2825 mg/dL (mean,
samples with [gG.] values that ranged from 1085 to 4305 mg/dL
（mean,2219mg/dL）.Themarked variations in the results suggest that
the assays were too inaccurate to enable confident decisions regarding
passive transfer in calves.
(c)With higher concentrations of ZnSO(250-400mg/L),lower [IgG]
ZnSOisused.9
c.Comments
(1)ZnSO reagents may be made from scratch or purchased in kits. Stock
solutions need to be sealed to prevent carbon dioxide absorption.
(2)For foals, turbidity tests have essentially been replaced by more aocurate and
convenient assays. The ZnSO turbidity test tends to underestimate IgG]
(3)The presence of Hgb from hemolysis will falsely increase the measured
[lgG] if turbidity is assessed by spectrophotometry (at 660 nm):Hgb
induced increments are about 200mg/dL at 1 % hemolysis and
1300 mg/dL at 5 % hemolysis.4
5.NagSO, precipitant test for calf serum
a.Principle: Sulfites selectively precipitate cationic proteins such as immunoglobu
lins;other proteins areneutral ornegatively charged.Higher concentrations of
sulfiteshave greater capability of precipitating IgGat lower concentrations.Since
there is very lirtle IgA or IgMin calf sera,the amount of turbidity refects the
quantity of IgG in the sample.
b.Guidelines for the interpretation of results with 14 %,16%,and 18% NaSO
solutions. (Note: Estimated concentrations do not match some recommended
decision thresholds and thus would be difficult to interpret.81)
(1)If [IgG]> 1500mg/dL,precipitates are seen in 14 %,16%, and 18 %
solutions.
(2)If [IgG]=500-1500 mg/dL,precipitates are seen in 16 % and 18 %
solutions.
(3)If [IgG]<500 mg/dL,precipitate is seen in the 18 % solution.
402
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
c.In another study,results were compared with the [IgG] from a RID assay.52
(Note:The marked variation in these results highlights the potentially poor
accuracy or lack of precision of such assays.)
(1)[IgG] ranged from 0 to 2400 mg/dL with no precipitate.
(2)[IgG]ranged from 645 to2450mg/dL with precipitate in the18%
solution.
(3)[IgG]ranged from 1025 to 4305 mg/dLwith precipitate in 16% and 18 %
solutions.
(4)[IgG] ranged from 2380 to 3625 mg/dL with precipitate in 14 %, 16 %,
and18% solutions.
d.Comments
(1)The NaSO-precipitant test is relatively inexpensive and quick.The major
advantage over ZnSO is the capability of estimating the[IgG] in a broad
range.
(2)Compared to the RID assay results, the precipitant test is at best a semi
quantitative assay.
(3)The assay does not work well for foal serum.
6.Changes in globulin concentration that are determined by protein electrophoresis:
The difference between -globulin concentration in precolostral serum and postco
lostral serum (1 d after colostrum ingestion) should refect the increase in [lgG].
However, this method of measuring [IgG] is not applicable to clinical decisions
because of the associated time and expense.
7. Changes in serum [total protein] determined by refractometry
a.Calves
(1)When measured by refractometry,the changes in total protein concentra
tions in precolostral and postcolostral samples (1 d after ingestion) reflected
the changes in -globulin concentrations in calves.3
(2）Because a precolostral sample is typicallynot available,guidelines for
classifying the passive transfer status in calves have been proposed.If the
decision threshold for serum[total protein] is5.0g/dL,there is a 83 %
chance of correctly classifying the calf's status.52
b.Foals
(1)When a decision threshold of 6.0 g/dLwas used to detect FPT,therefracto-
metric serum [total protein] had a diagnostic sensitivity of 95 % and
diagnostic specificiry of 21 %.91
(2)The study used two radial immunodiffusion tests as the reference methods.
There was not good agreement between the results of the two methods.
E.Each of the methods of measuring or estimating IgG] in foal or calf sera has its
advantages and disadvantages.Factors that should be considered when selecting a
procedure include associated expenses (reagents, equpment, and personnel), time
required to obtain results, convenience, and the potential reasons for incorrect results.
The most accurate test may not be clinically applicable, whereas the most convenient
test may be prone to unreliable results.
I1
Immunoglobulin deficiencies
A.Other than directly or indirectly assessing [lgG] for the purpose of detecting FPT (see
Immunoglobulins, sect.I),an immunoglobulin concentrations are measured to detect
or confirm the presence of congenital immunodeficiencies
7/PROTEINS
403
1.Horses92.93
a.Severe combined immunodeficiency in Arabian and Appaloosa foals: Affected
foals do not produce functional T- or B-lymphocytes, and thus they succumb to
infections shortly after maternal antibodies obtained by the colostrum are
degraded (=6 d for IgM,and=2-3 wk for IgG）.Other than the absence of IgM
in presuckle serum, other diagnostic features include persistent lymphopenia and
marked lymphoid hypoplasia in lymphoid organs.
b. Primary agammaglobulinemia in thoroughbreds, standardbreds, and quarter
horses: Affected foals do not produce IgG or IgM because they lack B-lympho-
cytes,but they do have T-lymphocytes. Presuckle serum lacks IgM, and maternal
IgG andIgMobtained from colostrum disappear over time toyield the
agammaglobulinemia.
c.Selective IgM deficiency: Affected foals (Arabian and quarter horses) have a
marked decrease in serum[IgM] but do produce other immunoglobulins. B-
lymphocyte concentrations are not decreased.
d.Selective IgG deficiency:Affected foals have a marked decrease in serum [gG]
but do produce other immunoglobulins.
e.Combined variable deficiency: An affected adult horse had very low serum [IgG],
[gM],[IgA],and[IgG（T)]. Blood,marrow,and spleen lacked B-lymphocytes,
but lymph nodes contained occasional B-lymphocytes.
f.Fell pony syndrome appears to be genetic disorder in which there is defective
production of B-lymphocytes that causes a hypogammaglobulinemia because of
decreased [IgG] and [IgM]. If IgG is detected in serum, it is maternal IgG. The
disorder, which affects foals of the Fell pony breed, was first recognized in Europe
and has been found in the United States.9s
2.Cattle92
a.Severe combined immunodeficiency in an Angus calf: IgM and IgA were not
detected in the serum of the affected 6-wk-old calf; a very low[IgG] was
considered to be of maternal origin.The calf lacked lymphocytes in its thymus,
lymph nodes were not detected, and its spleen was small.
b.Selective IgG deficiency: About 1-2 % of red Danish cattle lack detectable IgG2
but they do have other immunoglobulins. An IgG deficiency has also been
reported in a Holstein heifer.96
C.Transient hypogammaglobulinemia: A Simmental heifer was reported to have a
delayedproduction of immunoglobulins.
3.Dogs92.93
a.Severe combined immunodeficiency in Jack Russell terriers (autosomal
recessive): Affected dogs lack B- and T-lymphocytes and thus cannot produce
immunoglobulins. They have lymphopenia and generalized lymphoid
hypoplasia.
b.Severe combined immunodeficiency in basset hounds and Cardigan Welsh corgis
dogs have a marked reduction in CD8 lymphocytes and are lymphopenic. The
defective mutations are different in the rwo breeds.
C.Selective IgM deficiency in Doberman pinschers:Affected dogs had increased
serum [IgA], decreased [IgG],and very low[IgM].
d.Selective IgA deficiency in German shepherds: Affected dogs have decreased
serum [IgA], but[IgG] and [IgM] were WRI.
404
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
e.Selective IgA deficiency in shar-peis: Affected dogs have decreased serum [IgA]
f.Selective IgA deficiency in beagles: Affected dogs had decreased serum [IgA], but
[IgG] and [IgM]were each WRI.
g
Selective IgG and IgA deficiency in Weimaraners: Affected pups have decreased
serum[lgG]andIgA] associated with chronic infections.97
B.Analytical concepts
1. Documenting a marked decrease in an immunoglobulin concentration requires
species-specific assays that have an appropriate analytical range; that is, the capability
of accurately measuring concentrations below reference intervals.Typically, these
assays are radial immunodiffusion assays,but other immunologic assays can be used.
Because immunoglobulins in healthy animals represent about a third of the total
[globulin], a complete absence of immunoglobulins might create a hypoglobu-
linemia. However, there are many other more common reasons for hypoglobu
linemia (see Hypoglobulinemia above).
2.Because most of the Y-globulin fraction of SPE is composed of IgG, an IgG defi
ciency can be suspected when there is hypogammaglobulinemia However,the
suspicion should be confirmed with a species-specific quantitative assay forIgG or
IgG subclasses.Because IgA and IgM represent only a small amount of the β- or
-globulins in healtha deficiency in those immunoglobulins cannot be detected by
routine SPE.
III.
Immunoglobulin excess
A.Most hyperglobulinemias are caused by a chronic infection or dehydration, but a few
are due to excessive production of an immunoglobulin by neoplastic B-lymphocytes. If
not caused by dehydration (hemoconcentration),SPE determination of which immuno
globulin orimmunoglobulins are contributingto thehyperglobulinemiawillprovide
diagnostic evidence for either a chronic infammatory state or B-lymphocyte neoplasia.
In such casesit typicallyismore important tocharacterize the type of immunoglobuln
present than to measure immunoglobulin concentrations.
B.An earlier section (Hyperproteinemia, sect.II.B) of this chapter described diagnostic
methods that can be used to attempt to differentiate an inflammatory oligoclonal
gammopathy from a B-lymphocyte neoplastic gammopathy.Most of those diagnostic
assays target the heavy chain of the immunoglobulin class or subclass and do not prove
clonality.Documenting that a gammopathy is caused by only one IgG subclassor
IgM,or IgA would be better evidence of a monoclonal state because it would be
unlikely that the concentration of only one would be increased in an inflammatory
state. Establishing that a neoplastic clone is producing a single antigen-specific immu-
noglobulin is nearly impossible.
C.Mostmonoclonal gammopathies are diagnosed by association;that is,finding a
probable monoclonal gammopathy by SPE and concurent lymphoid neoplasia (e.g,
lymphoma, lymphoid leukemia,plasmacytoma,or myeloma).Most polyclonal gam-
mopathies are diagnosed by finding a probable polyclonal gammopathy by SPE and a
concurrent chronic infammatory state, typically caused by a chronic infection.These
conclusions become more diffcult and uncertain when these typical associations are not
found; for example,possible monoclonal gammopathy in an animal with a chronic
infection. Then, more definitive characterization of the immunoglobulins may establish
the pathogenesis for the gammopathy.
7/PROTEINS
405
COLLOIDALOSMOTICPRESSURE(COP)(ONCOTICPRESSURE)
I.
Physiologic processes and concepts
A. COP is also called oncotic pressure; the prefix onco- comes from the Greek for
“bulk” or“swelling,” which, in this context, refers to spaces containing colloidal
particles that swell with fuid.A more common context refers to neoplasms, that is,
oncology.
B.Hydraulic pressure gradients and COP gradients force the movement of protein-poor
fluids out of and into capillaries as described in Starling's law (Fig. 7.3 and Eq. 7.2). In
health,these gradients are important for the maintenance of blood volume.In edema
tous, transudative,and exudative disorders,alterations in the gradients cause plasma
HO to move into interstitial spaces (see Chapter 19)
Pressure gradient = hydraulic pressure - oncotic pressure
(7.2.)
=（Pcap-Pi）-（cp-E）
C.COP is caused by concentrations of colloidal solutes or particles. Collidal particles in
blood are macromolecules that are too small to settle out due to gravity but too large to
permeate intact vascular membranes. They are generally 1 nm to 1 μm in diameter,
with M, > 30,000, though colloidal properties are affected by factors other than size
(e.g, surface area). In normoproteinemic plasma, albumin contributes about 75-80 %
of total COP.
1.COP develops whenever two fuids with different concentrations of colloid particles
are separated by a semipermeable membrane.
2.Of a total capillary COPof 25 mmHg in human plasma, about 17mmHg is
directly related to plasma proteins and about 8mmHg is due to the Gibbs-Donnan
equilibrium.98
a.The major concepts of the Gibbs-Donnan equilibrium are illustrated in
Fig. 7.4. The proteins “trapped” in the intravascular space have a negative
charge. For electroneutrality, there must be more diffusible cations (e.g., Nat)
in the plasma to balance the negative charges of the proteins. In the Gibbs-
Donnan equilibrium,theproduct of themajor diffusible cation charge
concentration and major diffusible anion charge concentration of the plasma
equals the product of the major diffusible cation charge concentration and
major diffusible anion charge concentration of the interstitial fluid (Eq. 7.3
and Fig. 7.4).
[Na]ghasa × [CH ]ma = [NaJiatersia uid X [Cl- Jiatestital uid
(7.3.)
[major cations*]plam ×[major anions Jplama=[major cationsJintesica BidX
[major anions Jintenstil fud
b. This protein-induced imbalance of ions causes a greater osmolality in blood and
augments the direct colloidal osmotic pressure. In health, plasma proteins
contribute about 0.9 mmol/kg, and the Gibbs-Donnan effect contributes about
0.4mmol/kg.9
D.[Total protein] and [albumin] may suggest altered COP, but COP is infuenced by pH
Arterial
A.Peripheral capillary,arterial tovenousblood
Blood
Pcap
Tcap
P
cap
（30mmHg)
（28mmHg）A
(10mmHg)
Tif
Pif
AP
△n
(8mmHg)
△P-△π
Pif
13mmHg
(-3mmHg）
-7mmHg
(-3mmHg)
△P=33mmHg
△π=20mmHg
△P=13mmHg
B.Averagepressuresforperipheral capillarybed
Blood
Pcap
Tcap,
300mmol/kg
(17.3 mmHg)
本(28mmHg)
Pif
元if
△P-△π
(-3mmHg)
(8mmHg)
0.3mmHg
△P=20.3mmHg
299mmol/kg
△π=20mmHg
P=hydraulic pressure
π=oncoticpressure
Lymph
= gradient
No transudate if (△P-△π)-lymphatic pull =O mmHg
cap = capillary
if = interstitial fluid
Fig. 7.3. lustration of fluid movements because of Starling's law in a typical capillary bed.
A.Peripheral capillary, arterial to venous blood.
*Hydraulic pressures in health
The plasma hydraulic pressure in the arterial side of the capilary bed is much higher than the
hydraulic pressure in the interstitial fuid. The difference in the hydraulic pressure is called the
hydraulic pressure gradient (Eq. 7.2). A typical hydraulic pressure gradient (△P) on the arterial side
of the capillary is about 33mmHg.
+The plasma hydraulic pressure in the venous side of the capillary bed is higher than the hydraulic
pressure in the interstitial fuid. A typical P on the venous side of the capillary is about 13 mmHg.
The hydraulic pressure in the interstitial fuid is about3 mmHg. The negative pressure is created
by the actions of valves in the lymphatic vessels and pressure changes in vena cava vessels.
Oncotic (colloidal osmotic) pressures in health.
+The plasma oncotic pressure is greater than the interstitial oncotic pressure because the plasma [total
protein] is greater than the interstitial fuid [total protein].The[total protein] essentially does not
change in the capillary beds, and thus the oncotic pressure gradient (t) remains the same from the
arterial side to the venous side of the capillary bed.For most capillaries, the πt is near 20 mmHg.
Most of the oncotic pressure (both in plasma and in interstitial fuid)is due to albumin,but
globulins do contribute. See the text for more information about plasma oncotic pressure (colloidal
osmotic pressure).
▪The difference between the AP and △π (i.e., △P -△n) is a major factor that determines the rate of
fow of fuid out of and into capillaries.On the arterial side,the difference is about 13 mmHg,and
thus fuid leaves the capillary and enters the interstitial space. On the venous side, the difference is
about -7 mmHg, and thus fuid leaves the interstitial space and enters the capillary.
B.Average pressures for peripheral capilarybed.
Even though the P on the arterial side is much greater than the P on the venous side, the net
difference in tissues is only about 0.3 mmHg. Most fuid returns to the capillaries because of rwo
factors: (1) there are more venous capillries (entering venules) than arterial capillaries (leaving
406
7/PROTEINS
407
Plasma
Interstitial fluid
12 Na+
9Na+
6CF
8CF
6 proteir
1protein
Capillary wall
(nearly impermeable to plasma proteins)
Plasmaosmolality>Interstitial fluidosmolality
Fig. 7.4. Conceptual representation of the Gibbs-Donnan equilibrium.
The protein concentration in plasma is greater than in interstitial fuid, and most plasma proteins have a
negative charge (at pH 7.4). The typical capillary wall is nearly impermeable to the proteins but is perme-
able to Na and Cl.Movement of cations and anions is controlled by concentration and charge gradients.
At equilibrium, electroneutrality occurs on each side of the capillary wall; for example, 12 cation charges
and 12 anion charges in the plasma, and 9 cation charges and 9 anion charges in interstitial fluid. Because
of the negatively charged protein molecules, there are more cations and fewer diffusible anions in plasma (12
of solute molecules or ions) is greater in the plasma (24 particles) than in interstitial fuid (18 particles). The
than interstitial fuid (Gibbs-Donnan effect）).The Gibbs-Donnan effect increases with the square of the
proportionately greater at greater protein concentrations.
II.
Analytical Concepts
A.The osmoticeffect ofproteins is used to measure COPwith a colloid osmometer as
illustrated in Fig.7.5.
B.The COP of blood, plasma, and serum will essentially be the same. Blood cells are not
colloidal particles and thus do not contribute to COP.In theory,blood and plasma
COPvalues will be slightly greater than serum COPvalues because serum lacks
fibrinogen. Serum or plasma is typicall the preferred sample because free Hgb can be
more easily detected; also, whole blood may contain unseen small clots that can plug
tubing.
C.Units:1 mmHg=1 torr,1 mmHg×133.322=1pascal
D.Interferences
1.Hgb in the sample increases the COP because Hgb is a colloidal particle. In a small
study,Hgb increased the COP at a rate of nearly 4 mmHg per every
1 g/dL of Hgb.9 This will falsely increase the COP if the Hgb is from in vitro
hemolysis.Hemoglobinemia from in vivo hemolysis would also increase the COP.
Fig.7.3.continued
As long as the lymphatic system renmoves the interstitial fuid, a transudate does not accumulate.
Even though the oncotic (colloidal osmoticpressureis greater in plasma thanininterstitial fuid,there
is very little difference in the osmolalities of the fuids because proteins contribute very litte to total
osmolality, and the concentrations of major solutes (i.e.,electrolytes,glucose, and urea) are nearly the
same in the two fuids (see Chapter 9). The Gibbs-Donnan effect (see Fig. 7.4) creates differences in
the osmolality.
408
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
A
B
C
Difference due to
solute in
colloidal
negatve
osmoticpressure
solvent
anssed
solvent  solute in
solvent
solvent
directionof
semipermeable membrane
solvent moves through
semipermeable membrane
(permeable to solvent)
membrane because of
(permeable to solvent)
(impermeable to colloidal particles)
colloidal osmotic pressure
(impermeable to colloidal particles)
Fig. 7.5. Schematic representation of the principles of colloid osmometry.
A.Two fuids are present in an open-tube system: a solvent (such as isotonic saline) and a similar fluid that
also contains large solute colloidal particles (e.g, proteins). The fluids are initially separated by a
semipermeable membrane-
-a membrane that is permeable to the solvent and its small solute particles
but not permeable to the large colloidal particles. The presence of large colloidal particles on one side
results in a higher osmolality (see the Gibbs-Donnan effect in Fig. 7.4) and thus an osmotic gradient.
Thisgradientcreatesosmotic pressurethus the termcolloidalsmotipressre.Thecolloidalosmotic
pressure initiates the movement of solvent towards the colloidal particles (movement from A to B).
B.When the systems pressures equilibrate, solvent has moved to the fuid that contained the colloidal
particles. The difference in the fluid levels is primarily due to the colloidal osmotic pressure that was
created by the colloidal particles. Other factors (such as bulging of the membrane in this open system
and gravity) also affect the difference.
C. In the closed system of a colloid osmometer, the effects of membrane bulging and graviry are reduced.
However, the same general principles apply and the colloidal particles attract the fuid.The colloidal
osmotic pressure is measured by a pressure transducer.
2. Plasma expanders (e.g., hetastarch and dextran) increase COP. In samples containing
plasma expanders,the COP does notrepresent the concentration of colloidal
proteins.
E.Comments: Because the COPof plasma is typically due to plasma proteins,various
formulas have been proposed for estimating or calculating COP by using measured
concentrations of plasma proteins.Because of the differences in concentrations of each
plasma protein among individuals of a species and among different species,these
formulasmaynotprovideareliableestimatefplasmaCOpoAlso,theformulas
will not beuseful after treatment with syntheticcolloids.
III.
Increased COP
A.By itself,an increased COP is not a common diagnostic problem for two reasons: (1) it
typically will be due to hyperproteinemia, and this condition is more easily detected by
other means, and (2) COP is rarely measured in samples that might have an increased
COP.
B.Increased COP can occur with increases in plasma colloidal particles.
1.Increased plasma or serum Hgb concentration
a.In plasma, free Hgb from in vivo or in vitro hemolysis can increase plasma COP.
7/PROTEINS
409
b.Infusion of Hgb-based oxygen carriers (e.g.,Oxyglobin and Biopure)quickly
increases plasma COP.In one study, the Hgb-based oxygen carrier had a COP
about twice that of canine plasma (43 mmHg vs 20 mmHg). Infusion increased
the plasma COP quickly to about 36 mmHg,but the COP returned to baseline
values after 3 h.103
2.Infusion of plasma expanders such as hetastarch can increase COp.However,
plasma expanders are rypically administered to animals that have a decreased COP
because of marked hypoproteinemia, and it is unlikely that enough hetastarch would
be given to increase the plasma COP value to the reference interval. When given to
increased 2-4mmHg but returned to baseline values by 12 h.99
IV.Decreased COP
A.Decreased COPvalues result from hypoproteinemia.
B.The primary value of measuring COP is for the clinical management of severely
hypoproteinemic animals. Because marked hypoproteinemia (especially if an acute
onset) can result in the movement of water from blood to cause hypovolemia and
edematous states, plasma or plasma expanders (such as hetastarch) may be administered
to increase blood COP and thus reduce the pathologic consequences of
hypoproteinemia.
1.Hetastarch administration increases COP, but the duration of its effects depends on
two major factors:
a.The rate at which the hetastarch is degraded by the animal.
b.The permeabiliry of capillaries to hetastarch.During infammatory states,
increased vascular permeability will enable both plasma proteins and hetastarch
to move from plasma to interstitial fuid.
2.The degree that hetastarch increases the COP is somewhat less than one might
expect.When hetastarch is fist given,it quickly increases the plasma COP and thus
alters the COP gradient in capillary beds. As a result, more water is pulled back into
the plasma to expand blood volume, but this concurrently reduces [total protein].
Thus, the protein contribution to the measured COP is reduced.
3.When there is a marked decrease in COP,administration of plasma has two major
adlvantages over administration of hetastarch: (1) the circulating half-life of most
plasma proteins (especially albumin) is much greater than that of hetastarch; and (2)
the increase in COP is due to plasma proteins,and thus effects can be monitored by
either COP or plasma protein concentrations.
C.When an animal's blood has a decreased COP, the animal will be prone to develop
edema or a transudate.However,other factors also influence the extravasation of
fuid.
1.Extravasation of a small amount of fuid to the interstitial space increases the
hydraulic pressure in the interstitial space, thus limiting additional extravasation.
2.Extravasation of protein to the interstitial space is less than the extravasation of HO
（unless permeabilityisaltered by inflammation),so the protein concentration in the
interstitial fuid decreases and there is an increased colloidal osmotic gradient that
limits additional extravasation.
3.The lymphatic systemic can greatly increase its drainage of interstitial fuid in some
tissues.Thus,even though fuid may be leaving the plasma faster,it may not
accumulate in the interstitial space.
410
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
cirrhosis,PLN,and heart failure) (see Chapter 19)
References
1. Dixon FJ, Maurer PH. 1953. Halflives of homologous serum albumins in several species. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med
83:287-288.
2. Cornelius CE, Baker NF, Kaneko J, Douglas JR. 1962. Distribution and turnover of iodine-131tagged bovine
albumin in normal and parasitized cattle. Am J Vet Res 23:837842
3. Mattheeuws DR, Kaneko JJ, Loy RG, Cornelius CE, Wheat JD. 1966. Compartmentalization and turnover of 131-
Ilabeled albumin and gamma globulin in horses. Am J Vet Res 27:699705.
4. Lavoie J-P, Spensley MS, Smith BP, Mihalyi J. 1989. Absorption of bovine colostral immunoglobulins G and M in
newborn foals. Am J Vet Res 50:1598-1603.
5. Pollock PJ, Prendengast M, Schumacher J, Bellenger CR. 2005. Effects of surgery on the acute phase response in
clinically normal and diseased horses.Vet Rec 156:538-542
6. Ceron J, Eckersall PD, Martynez-Subiela S. 2005. Acute phase proteins in dogs and cats: Current knowdedge and
future perspectives.Vet Clin Pathol 34:85-99.
7.Petersen HH, Nielsen J,Heegaard PM. 2004.Application of acute phase protein measurements in veterinary
clinical chemistry.Vet Res 35:163-187.
8. Andrews GA, Smith JE. 2000. Iron metabolism. In: Feldman BF, Zinll JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm Veterinary
Hematelogy, 5th edition, 129-134. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &c Wilkins.
9. Thomas JS. 2000. Overview of plasma proteins. In: Feldman BF, Zinkd JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm Veteriary
Hematelogy, 5th edition, 891-898. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &c Wilkins.
10. Silverman LM, Christenson RH. 1994. Amino acids and proteins. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, eds. Tietz Texrbook
ofClinicalChmisay,2nd edition,625-734.Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
11.Sutton RH. 1976. The refractometric determination of the total protein concentration in some animal plasmas. NZ
Vet J 24:141-148.
12. Lundberg GD, Iverson C,Radulescu G. 1986. Now read this: The SI units are here. J Am Med Assoc
255:2329-2339
13. Cannon DC, Olitzky I, Inkpen JA. 1974. Proteins. In: Henry RJ, Cannon DC,Winkelman JW, eds. Chinical
Chemistry Primciples and Technics, 2nd edition, 405-502. Hagerstown, MD: Harper &c Row.
14. Johnson AM, Rohlfs EM, Silverman LM. 1999. Proteins. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, eds. Tietz Texrbook of
Clnica/Cheistry,3rdedition,477-540.Philadelphia:WB Saunders
15.Trivedi VD, Saxena I, Siddiqui MU, Qasim MA. 1997. Interaction of bromocresol green with different serum
albumins studied by fuorescence quenching. Biochem Mol Biol Int 43:1-8.
green method in heparinized plasma samples. Vet Clin Pathol 30:170-176.
17. Sinton E, Taylor T. 1972. The use of 2-(4-hydroxyazobenzene)-benzoic acid (HABA) in determining canine
albumin. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 8:130-132.
18.Abate O,Zanatta R,Malisano T,Dotta U. 2000. Canine serum protein patterns using high-resolution clectrophore-
sis (HRE).Vet J 159:154160.
19. Rizmann SE, Wolf RE, Lawrence MC, Hart JS, Levin WC. 1969. The Sia euglobulin test A re-evaluation. J Lab
Clin Med 73:698-705.
20. Gabay C,Kushner I. 1999.Acute-phase proteins and other systemic responses to infammation N Engl J Med
340:448453.
21. MacEwen EG, Hurvitz Al. 1977. Diagnosis and management of monoclonal gammopathies. Vet Clin North Am
7:119-132
22. Font A, Closa JM, Mascort J. 1994. Monoclonal gammopathy in a dog with visceral leishmaniasis. J Vet Intern
Med8:233-235.
23.Burlkhard MJ, Meyer DJ, Rosychul RA, O'Neil SP,Schultheiss PC. 1995.Monoclonal gammopathy in a dog with
chronic pyoderma. J Vet Intern Med 9:357-360.
24.Diehl KJ, Lappin MR, Jones RL, Cayatte S. 1992. Monodonal gammopathy in a dog with plasmacytic gastroen
terocolitis.J Am VetMed Assoc 201:1233-1236.
25.Giraudel JM,Pages JP,Guelf JF.2002.Monoclonal gammopathies in the dog:A retrospective study of 18 cases
(19861999) and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:135-147
7/PROTEINS
411
26. Kent JE, Roberts CA. 1990. Serum protein changes in four horses with monoclonal gammopathy. Equine Vet J
22:373-376.
27. Kyle RA, Greipp PR. 1978. The laboratory investigation of rmonodonal gammopathies. Mayo Clin Proc
53:719-739.
28. Attaelmannan M, Levinson SS. 2000. Understanding and identifying monoclonal gammopathies. Clin Chem
46:1230-1238.
29. Stone MJ. 1982. Monoclonal gammopathies: Clinical aspects. In: Ritzmann SE, ed. Pretein Abmormalitie, volume 2:
Pathology ef Immunoglobufins: Diagnostic and Clinical Asprcts, 161236. New York: Alan R Liss.
30. Edwards DF, Parker JW, Wilkinson JE, Helman RG. 1993. Plasma cell myeloma in the horse: A case report and
literature review. J VetIntern Med 7:169-176.
31.Kato H,Momoi Y, Omori K, Youn HY, Yamada T, Goto N, Ono K, Watari T, Tsujimoto H, Hasegawa A. 1995.
Gammopathy with two M-components in a dog with IgA-type multiple myeloma Vet Immunol Immunopathol
49:161-168
32.Bienzle D, Silverstein DC, Chaffin K. 2000. Multiple myeloma in cats: Variable presentation with different
immunoglobulin isotypes in two cats. Vet Pathol 37:364369.
33. Ramaiah SK, Seguin MA, Carwile HF, Raskin RE. 2002. Biclonal gammopathy associated with immunoglobulin A
in a dog with multiple myeloma. Vet Clin Pathol 31:8389.
34.Rothschild MA, Orat M, Schreiber SS. 1988. Serum albumin. Hepatology 8:385-401.
35. Rogers KS,Forrester SD. 2000. Monoclonal gammopathy. In: Feldman BF,Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schal
Veterinary Hemarolog, 5th edition, 932-936. Philadelphia Lippincott Williams &c Wilkins.
36. Werner LL, Turnwald GH, Willard MD. 2004. Immunologic and plasma protein disorders. In: Willard MD,
Tvedten HW, eds. SmallAamal ClnicalDiagnesis by Laberatery Metbods,4th edition, 290305. St Louis: WB
Saunders.
37.Evans EW, Duncan JR. 2003. Proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates. In: Latimer KS, Mahaffey EA, Prasse KW, eds.
Duncan Prase'sVeterinary Laboratory Medicine: ClinicalPatbology4th edition,162-192.Ames:Iowa State Press.
38. Ritzmann SE. 1982. Immunoglobulin abnormalities. In: Ritzmann SE, Daniels JC, eds. Seram Proteim Abnormafi-
ties:Diagnostic and Clinical Aspects, 351486. NewYork: Alan R Liss.
39. Michels GM, Boon GD, Jones BD, Puget B. 1995. Hypergammaglobulinemia in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
207:567-570
40.Varela F, Font X, Valladares JE,Alberola J. 1997. Thrombocytopathia and light-chain proteinuria in a dog naturally
infected with Ehrlicbiacanis. JVet Intern Med 11:309311.
41. Platz SJ, Breuer W, Pfeghaar S, Minkus G, Hermanns W. 1999. Prognostic value of histopathological grading in
canine extramedullary plasmacytomas. Vet Pathol 36:23-27.
42.Majzoub M, Breuer W, Platz SJ, Linke RP, Linke W, Hermanns W. 2003. Histopathologic and immunophenotypic
characterization of extramedullary plasmacytomas in nine cats. Vet Pathol 40:249253.
43. Arun SS, Breuer W, Hermanns W. 1996. Immunohistochemical examination of light-chain expression (lambda
kappa ratio) in canine, feline, equine, bovine and porcine plasma cells. Zentralbl Veterinarmed [A] 43:573-576
44.Kim DY,Taylor HW,Eades SC, Cho DY.2005. Systemic AL amyloidosis associated with multiple myeloma in a
horse. Vet Pathol 42:81-84.
45. Carothers MA, Johnson GC, DiBartola SP, Liepnicks J, Benson MD. 1989. Extramedullary plasmacytoma and
immunoglobulin-associated amyloidosis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1593-1597.
46.Werner JA,Woo JC,Vernau W,Graham PS,Grahn RA,Lyons LA,Moore PF.2005. Characterization of feline
immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region genes for the molecular diagnosis of B-cellncoplasia. Vet Pathol
42:596-607
47. Iijima T, Inadome Y, Noguchi M. 2000. Clonal proliferation of B lymphocytes in the germinal centers of human
reactive lymph nodes: Possibility of overdiagnosis of B cell clonal proliferation. Diagn Mol Pathol 9:132136
48. Zhou XG, Sandvej K, Gregersen N, Hamilton-Dutoit SJ. 1999. Detection of donal B cells in microdissected
d
rearrangement. Mol Pathol 52:104-110.
49. Litman MP, Dambach DM, Vaden SL, Giger U. 2000. Familial protein-losing enteropathy and protein-losing
nephropathy in soft coated Wheaten terriers: 222 cases (1983-1997). J Vet Intern Med 14:68-80.
50.Kern MR,Stockham SL,Coates JR.1992.Analysis of serum rotein concentrations after severe thermal injury ina
dog.Vet Clin Pathol 21:19-22.
51. Hoover EA, Mullins JI, Quackenbush SL, Gasper PW. 1987. Experimental transmission and pathogenesis of
immunodeficiency syndrome in cats. Blood 70:18s0-1892.
52. Tyler JW, Hancock DD, Parish SM, Rea DE, Besser TE, Sanders SG, Wilson LK. 1996. Evaluation of 3 assays fo
failure of passive transfer in calves. J Vet Intern Med 10:304307.
412
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
53. Harvey JW, West CL. 1987. Prednisone-induced increases in serum alpha-2-globulin and haptoglobin concentra
tions in dogs. Vet Pathol 24:90-92.
54. Moore GE, Mahaffey EA, Hoenig M. 1992. Hematologic and serum biochemical effects of long-term administra
tion of anti-infammatory doses of prednisone in dogs. Am J Vet Res 53:10331037.
55. Rothschild MA, Oratz M, Schreiber SS. 1980. Albumin synthesis. Int Rev Physiol 21:249274.
induced by glucocorticoid treatment in dogs. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 46:421429.
57. Keay G, Doxey DL. 1984.A study of the interaction between bromocresol green dye and bovine, ovine and equine
serum globulins. Vet Res Commun 8:25-32.
58. Gustafsson JE. 1976. Improved specificity of serum albumin determination and estimation of “acute phasc
reactants^ by use of the bromcresol green reaction. Clin Chem 22:616622.
59. Schalm OW, Smith R, Kaneko JJ. 1970. Plasma protein:fibrinogen ratios in dogs, catle and horses. Part I. Infuence
of age on normal values and explanation of use in disease. Calif Vet 24:911.
60. Duncan JR, Prasse KW. 1977. Veterinary Laboratory Medicine, Ist edition. Ames Iowa State University Press.
61. Schalm OW. 1970. Plasma protein:fibrinogen ratios in routine clinical material from cats, dogs, horses, and catle.
Part III. CalifVet 24:6-10.
62. Schalm OW, Jain NC, Carroll EJ. 1975. Veterinary Hematolegy, 3rd edition. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
63.Wilkerson MJ, Johnson GS, Stockham S, Riley L. 2005. Afbrinogencmia and a circulating antibody against
fibrinogen in a bichon frise dog. Vet Clin Pathol 34:148-155.
64. Kammermann B, Gmir J, Stinzi H. 1971. Afbrinogenemia in dogs. Zentralbl Veterinarmed [A] 18:192-205.
65.Andrews GA, Smith JE,Gray M, Chavey PS, Weeks BR. 1992.An improved ferritin assay for canine seraVet Clin
Pathol 21:57-60.
66. Andrews GA, Chavey PS, Smith JE. 1994. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent aay to measure serum ferritin and the
relationship between serum ferritin and nonheme iron stores in cats. Vet Pathol 31:674678.
67. Smith JE, Moore K, Cipriano JE, Morris PG. 1984. Serum ferritin as a measure of stored iron in horses. J Nutr
114:677-681
68.Kuribayashi T, Shimada T, Matsurmoto M, Kawato K, Honjyo T, Fukuyama M, Yamamoto Y, Yamamoto S. 2003.
Determination of scrum C-reactive protein (CRP) in healthy beagle dogs of various ages and pregnant beagle dogs.
Exp Anim 52:387-390.
69. Martinez-Subiela S, Ginel PJ, Ceron J. 2004. Effects of different glucocorticoid treatments on serum acute phase
proteins in dogs.Vet Rec 154:814817.
70. Tosa N, Morimatsu M, Nakagawa M, Miyoshi F, Uchida E, Niiyama M, Syuto B, Saito M. 1993. Purifcation and
identification of a serum protein increased by anthelmintic drugs for Diroflaria immitis in dogs. J Vet Med Sci
55:27-31
71.Hojo T, Ohno R,Shimoda M, Kokue E. 2002.Enzyme and plasma protein induction by multiple oral administra-
tions of phenobarbital at a therapeutic dosage regimen in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 25:121-127.
72.Lee WC,Hsiao HC,WuYL,Lin JH,Lee YP,Fung HP, Chen HH,Chen YH,Chu RM.2003.Serum C-reactive
protein in dairy herds. Can J Vet Res 67:102-107.
73.Hyyppa S, Hoyhtya M, Nevalainen M, Poso AR. 2002. Effect of exercise on plasma ferritin concentrations:
Implications for the measurement of iron status. Equine Vet J Suppl 34:186-190.
74. Sellon DC. 2000. Secondary immunodeficiency of horses.Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 16:117-130.
absorptionby theneonatalcalf.Immunology 23:225-238
76.Husband AJ,Brandon MR, Lascells AK. 1972.Absorption and endogenous production of immunoglobulins in
calves. Aust J Exp Biol Med Sci 50:491498.
77.Larson MA, Weber A, Weber AT, McDonald TL. 2005.Differential expression and secretion of bovine serum
amyloid A3 (SAA3) by mammary epithelial cells stimulated with prolactin or lipopolysaccharide. Vet Immunol
Immunopathol107:255-264
78. Clawson ML, Heaton MP, Chitko-McKown CG, Fox JM, Smith TP, Snelling WM, Keele JW, Laegreid WW. 2004.
Beta-2-microglobulin haplotypes in U.S. beef cattle and association with failure of passive transfer in newborn
calves. Mamm Genome 15:227-236.
79. Bertone JJ. Jones RL, Curtis CR. 1988. Evaluation of a test kit for determination of serum immunoglobulin G
concentration in foals. J Vet Intern Med 2:18 1-183.
80. Parish SM, Tyler JW, Besser TE, Gay CC, Krytenberg D. 1997. Prediction of serum IgG1 concentration in Holsteir
calves using serum gamma glutamyltransferase activity. J Vet Intern Med 11:344347.
81. MeGuire TC, Adams DS. 1982. Failure of colostral immunoglobulin transfer to calves: Prevalence and diagnosis
Compend Contin EducPract Vet 4:S35-S40.
7/PROTEINS
413
82. Hopkins FM, Dean DF, Greene W. 1984. Failure of passive transfer in calves: Comparison of field diagnostic
methods.Mod Vet Pract 65:625-628.
S3. Di Terlizzi R, Stockham SL, Kempegowda R, Wilkerson MJ. 2005. Comparison of protein concentrations in
precolostral and postcolostral bovine scra using spectrophotometric, refractometric, clectrophoretic, and radial
immunodifusion methods. Vet Clin Pathol 34:283 (abstract).
84. Pfeiffer NE, MeGuire TC, Bendel RB, Weikel JM. 1977. Quantitation of bovine immunoglobulins: Comparison of
single radial immunodifusion, zinc sulfate turbidity, serum electrophoresis, and refractometer methods. Am J Vet
Res 38:693-698.
85.Clabough DL, Conboy HS, Roberts MC. 1989.Comparison of four screening techniques for the diagnosis of
cquine neonatal hypogammaglobulinemia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:17 17-1720.
86. Beetson SA,Hilbert Bj, Mills JN. 1985. The use of the glutaraldehyde coagulation test for detection of hypogam-
maglobulinaemia in nconatal foals. Aust Vet J 62:279-281.
87. Tyler JW, Besser TE, Wilson L, Hancock DD, Sanders S, Rea DE. 1996. Evaluation of a whole blood glutaralde
hyde coagulation test for the detection of failure of passive transfer in calves. J Vet Intern Med 10:8284.
88. Rumbaugh GE, Ardans AA, Ginno D, Trommershausen-Smith A. 1979. Identification and treatment of colostrum
dehicient foals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 174:273-276.
89. Hudgens KAR, Tyler JW, Besser TE, Krytenberg DS. 1996. Optimizing performance of a qualitative zinc sulfate
turbidity test for passive transfer of immunoglobulin G in calves. Am J Vet Res 57:1711-1713.
90. Morris DD, Meirs DA, Merryman GS. 1985. Passive transfer failure in horses Incidence and causative factors on a
breeding farm. Am J Vet Res 46:22942299.
91. Davis R, Giguere S. 2005. Evaluation of five commercially available assays and measurement of serum total protein
concentration via refractormetry for the diagnosis of failure of passve transfer of immunity in foals. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 227:1640-1645
92.Tizard IR. 2000. Primary immunodeficiencies. Veterinary Immunolegy: An Intreduction, 7th edition, 413427.
Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
93. Zoran D. 2000. Immunodeficiency disorders. In: Feldman BF, Zinll JG, Jain NC, eds. Sohabm’s Veterinary
Henatolog. 5th edition, 941-946. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &c Wilkins.
94.Flaminio MJ, LaCombe V, Kohn CW, Antezak DF. 2002. Common variable imraunodefciency in a horse. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 221:1296-1302, 1267
95.Gardner RB, Hart KA, Stokol T, Divers TJ,Flaminio MJ. 2006. Fell Pony syndrome in a pony in North America
J Vet Intern Med 20:198203.
deficiency with transient hypogammaglobulinemia and chronic respiratory disease in a 6-month-old Holstein heifer.
J Vet Diagn Invest 16:432-435.
97.Day MJ, Power C,Oleshko J,Rose M. 1997.Low serum immunoglobulin concentrations in related Weimaraner
dogs. J Small Anim Pracr 38:311-315
98.Rose BD,PostTW.2001.ClnicalPhilogyofAcid-Baseand ElectroleDiserders,5thedition.NewYork
MeGraw-Hill
99. Szladovits B, Stockham SL, Moore LE. 2004. The effect of multiple doses of hetastarch and in vitro hemolysis on
100. Brown SA, Dusza K, Boehmer J. 1994. Comparison of measured and calculated values for colloid osmotic pressure
in hospitalized animals.Am J Vet Res 55:910-915
101. Thomas LA, Brown SA. 1992. Relationship between colloid osmotic pressure and plasma protein concentration in
cattle, horses, dogs, and cats. Am J Vet Res 53:2241-2244.
102. Runk DT, Madigan JE, Rahal CJ, Allison DN, Fredrickson K. 2000. Measurement of plasma colloid osmotic
pressure in normal thoroughbred neonatal foals. J Vet Intern Med 14:475478.
103. Driessen B, Jahr JS, Lurie F, Golkaryeh MS, Gunther RA. 2003. Arterial oxygenation and oxygen delivery after
hemoglobin-based oxygen carrier infusion in canine hypovolemic shoclc A dose-response study. Crit Care Med
31:1771-1779.
104. Moore LE, Garvey MS. 1996. The effect of hetastarch on serum colloid oncotic pressure in hypoalbuminemic dogs.
J VetIntern Med 10:300-303.
105. Guyton AC, Hall JE. 2000. Textbok of Medieal Pbysilogy, 10th edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders
106.Ritzmann SE,Daniels JC,eds.1982. Serum Prote Abnonmalities:Diagstic and Clenical Aspects. New York Alan R
Liss.
Thispageintentionallyleffblank
Chapter8
URINARYSYSTEM
PhysiologicProcesses.
416
ChronicRenal Insufficiency or Failure
425
Acute Renal Failure
427
Azotemia and Uremia
429
Urea Nitrogen (UN) Concentration in Serum or Plasma.......
433
Creatinine(Crt) Concentration in Serum orPlasma
436
Urea Nitrogen (UN) Concentration versus Creatinine (Crt) Concentration in
Serum orPlasma
437
Creatinine (Crt) Clearance Rate.
438
Abnormal Routine Serum Chemistry Results inAzotemicAnimals....
439
Major Urinalysis (UA) Concepts.
440
Physical Examination of Urine
441
Chemical Examination of Urine (Qualitative or Semiquantitative).
452
Urine Sediment Examination.
469
Quantitative Urinalysis.
475
Basic Concepts
475
.
24h Excretion Studies
476
l.
Analyte Urine to Plasma Ratios
476
IV.
Quantitative Urine Total Protein Assays
477
V.
UrinaryProtein to Creatinine (Prot:Crt)Ratio
478
VI.
Microalbuminuria
480
Vll.Fractional Excretion(FE) Ratios orPercentages
483
Vlll.Urine Bile Acid to Creatinine Ratio.
485
HO Deprivation and Antidiuretic Hormone (ADH) Response Tests in Animals
withPolyuria and Polydipsia (PU/PD).
485
Urolith Analysis.
487
415
416
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 8.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
(Prot:Crt)
Urinary protein to creatinine
[x]
x concentration (x= analyte)
1,25-DHCC
1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol
ADH
Antidiuretic hormone (arginine vasopressin)
AMP
Adenosine monophosphate
AMS
Amylase
ATPase
Adenosine triphosphatase
Bc
Conjugated bilirubin
Bu
Unconjugated bilirubin
Ca2+
Calcium
Crt
Creatinine
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
FE
Fractional excretion
fCa2+
Free ionized calcium (not bound or complexed)
fMg2+
Free ionizedmagnesium (not bound or complexed)
GFR
Glomerular filtration rate
GGT
-Glutamyltransferase
HCO,
Bicarbonate
hpf
High-power field (400xmagnification)
lpf
Low-power field (100xmagnification)
LPS
Lipase
M,
Relative molecular mass
NH,
Ammonia
NH*
Ammonium
PD
Polydipsia
PO4
Phosphate includingPO,HPO²,or HPO4
PTH
Parathyroid hormone
PU
Polyuria
RPF
Renal plasma flow
sd
Standard deviation
SDS-PAGE
Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
SI
Systeme International d'Unites
SSA
Sulfosalicylic acid
tCa²+
Total calcium
UA
Urinalysis (urine analysis)
UN
Urea nitrogen
UN:Crt
Urea nitrogen to creatinine
USG
Urine specific gravity
USGe
Refractometric urine specific gravity
PHYSIOLOGICPROCESSES
1.
Three major processes control renal excretion of HO and solutes: glomerular filtration
(passive), tubular resorption (active or passive), and tubular secretion (active or passive).
The netresults of the renal functions on plasma in healthy animals are summarized in
Table 8.2.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
417
Table 8.2.Net result ofnormal renal function on plasma analytes
Conserved
Excreted
HO
Urea
Glucose
Creatinine
Amino acids
PO4
Proteins
K+
EN
H+a
CI
NH4
HCO,
Lactate
Ca2+b
Acetoacetate
Mg2+
β-Hydroxybutyrate
Bilirubin
Hemoglobin dimers
Myoglobin
Renal excretion ofHmayresult in either acidic or alkalineurinedepending on the amount of H
in urine.Most H+ excreted by kidneys is bound to PO (HPO2+ H+→ HPO) or in NH+
(NH+H+→NH).
Except in horses in which kidneys excrete Ca²+ if consuming a Ca²-rich diet
II.
Glomerular filtration
A.A major route for solute and H,O excretion from an animal is through renal glomeruli
The glomerular filtration barrier is composedof capillary endothelium,basement
membrane, and glomerular epithelial cells (podocytes) with foot processes (Fig. 8.1).
The filtering function of glomeruli is typically assessed by evaluating therenal excretion
of substances that pass freely through the glomerular filtration barrier.
1.The potential for a substance to pass through the healthy glomerular filtration
barrier (from plasma to filtrate) depends on two major factors:
a.Molecular size: Nearly 100 % of molecules with radius < 2.5 nm pass through
Almost no molecules with radius >3.4 nm pass through.
b.F
Electrical charge:Positively charged and electrically neutral substances pass
through better than negatively charged substances because the glomerular
basement membrane contains negatively charged molecules.
2.In many species,albumin (M, =69,000;3.5nm radius) is near the threshold size of
the filtration barrier,its negative charge also impedes transit.Albumin is not
expected in theurine of catshorses,or cattle.A small amountmay be found nthe
urine of apparently healthy dogs. This albuminuria may represent a subclinical
disease or a species variation.
B.GFR
1.GFR is the rate fluid moves from plasma to glomerular filtrate and is measured by
determining the rate a substance is cleared from plasma.
RPF depends on blood volume, cardiac output, number of functional glomeruli,
and constriction or dilation of afferent and efferent glomerular arterioles. Other
factors that affect GFR include intracapsular hydrostatic pressure in Bowman’s space
(if pressure is increased, GFR is decreased) and plasma colloidal osmotic (oncotic)
pressure (if pressure is decreased, GFR is increased).
418
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Glomerulus
GlomerularFiltrationBarrier
plasma
Bowman's
capillary
epithelial cell with
space
capillary
endothelial cell
foot processes
small solutes
lumen
iltrafltrate
(podocytes)
H20
large sclutes
fenestrated
slitpores
capillary
ofpodocytes
wall
basementmembrane
endothelial
with negative charge
cellpore
mesangial cell
glomerularbasement membrane
mesangial matrix
Fig. 8.1. Glomerular filtration barrier. The glomerular filtration barrier consists of the capillary endothelial
cell, the glomerular basement membrane, and the epithelial cells (podocytes).HO and most solutes pass
throughfenestrationsin theendothelial cellthroughasemipermeablebasementmembrane,throughh
slit pores between the foot processes of the podocytes, into Bowman’s space, and then into the proximal
renal tubule.
3.Theideal solute formeasuring GFRwouldnot be protein bound,would passfreely
through thefiltration barrier,and would beneither secreted nor resorbed by renal
tubules.Inulin,iohexol,and mannitol nearly meet these criteria. Crt is often used
because very little is secreted by renal tubules in most animals,and it meets the
other criteria. GFR can also be assessed by imaging methods: excretion of radioac
tive compounds (renal scintigraphy) or contrast media (contrast nephrography).
III.
Functions of renal tubules are reflected by the rate of urinary excretion of a plasma
substance compared to the rate of inulin excretion.
A.Ifexcretion ofa solute is greater than excretion ofinulin,hereisanet solute secretion
by tubules.Renal tubular secretion involves processes by which solutes from plasma
interstitial fuid,or tubular cells are transferred to tubular fuid.
B.If excretion of a solute is less than excretion of inulin,there is a net solute resorption by
tubules or the substance does not freely pass through the filtration barrier.
IV.
Functions of tubules pertaining to major solutes (Fig.8.2)
A.Na
1.About 75 % of fltrate Na* is resorbed in the proximal tubules down a concentration
gradient established by the Na*-K+-ATPase pump (basolateral membrane) and a Na*-H+
antiporter. Na resorption is enhanced by an electrical gradient established by conserva-
tion of HCO,; Na is cotransported with glucose, amino acids, and phosphates.
Angiotensin II stimulates the proximal tubular resorption of Na, Cl, and HO.
2.Na is passively resorbed into the descending limb of theloop of Henle to maintain
Na in the countercurrent system.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
419
3.Na accompanies K+ and Cl that are resorbed in the thick ascending limb of the
loop of Henle via a Na*-K-2Cl cotransporter in the luminal membrane. The rate-
limiting factor is Cl delivery to the loop. Furosemide diuretics block this process
4. ADH stimulates Na and Cl resorption in the medullary thick limb of the loop of
Henle through the Na+-K*-2Cl cotransporter (a minor role for ADH).
5.Aldosterone stimulates the active resorption of Na in collecting tubules by
opening Na channels, enhancing Na-K-ATPase activity in the basolateral
membrane, and opening luminal K+ channels. Its actions are probably mediated
through aldosterone-induced proteins (Na-K*-ATPase may be one of the proteins)
(seeFig.9.3)
6. Na and Cl resorption in the distal nephron (distal tubule and collcting duct) also
involves an aldosterone-independent Na-Cl cotransporter.This process varies
directly with Na delivery to the distal nephron. Thiazide diuretics block this
cotransporter.
7. Na resorption in the distal nephron is reduced during volume expansion through
the action of atrial natriuretic peptide,which reduces thenumber of open Na
channels by a guanylate cyclase pathway.
B.CF
1.About 75% of filtered Cl is resorbed in the proximal tubules down a
concentration gradient created by Na and H,O resorption and through a
formate-Cl exchanger.
2.Cl is resorbed via a Na-K+-2Cl cotransporter in the thick ascending limb of the
loop of Henle.
3.Cl is passively resorbed in the distal nephron by an electrochemical gradient
established by Na movement (through aldosterone and aldosterone-independent
processes) (see Fig. 9.3).
4.Cl is also secreted by the type A intercalated cells when they are stimulated to
secrete H. Concurrent with the secretion of Cl,HCO,is produced by the cells
and enters the plasma (see Fig, 9.4).
C.HCO,
1.About 90 % of filtered HCO;is conserved indirectly in the proximal rubules
during H+ secretion.H secretion is mediated by the Na-H antiporter and depends
on Naresorption. As Na is resorbed, the secreted H combines with HCOin the
fltrate to formHCO,which then forms COand HO.The COandHO enter
the proximal tubular cells in which they are converted to H+ (which is again
available for secretion) and HCO.TheHCO,is transported to the peritubular
fluid via a Na*-3HCOscotransporter (see Fig. 9.7).
2.In the collecting ducts,HCOproduced by the type A intercalated cells enters the
peritubular fuid through a Cl-HCO;exchanger (see Fig. 9.4).A reverse process
in type B intercalated cells leads to HCO,secretion when there is excess HCO
(see Fig. 9.8).
D.K+
1.In health, most of the K+ that enters the proximal tubule through the glomerular
filtration barrier is resorbed prior to the distal tubule. K is secreted primarily by the
principal cells of the collecting tubulesand secretion is promoted by aldosterone
（see Fig. 9.3).K+ movement from cell to tubular lumen occurs through K+channels
opened by aldosterone. The movement is enhanced when the urinary fow rate
through the tubule is high.With high fow rates, the K is washed away quickly,and
Glomerulus
Osmolality
Sample
(mmol/kg)
USGret
protein
Plasma
280-310
1.028-1.034
Ultrafiltrate
280-310
1.007-1.013
nonproteins
300
Proximal tubule
280-310
1.007-1.013
Enddescendinglimb
>1200
>1.040
Endascendinglimb
near100
1.001-1.003
Distal nephron
50 to>1200
Proximal
300
1.001 to>1.040
tubule
75%
+EN
HO
75%
75%
CI-
fMg2+
≤50%
80-85%
-fCa2+
K+
85-90%
PTH
-PO4
HCO
90%
Na+
60-65%
urea
CF
100%
glucose
100%
amino acids
Distal
CI-
Collecting
3Na*
tubule
tubule
NH3
2K+
H+
3Na+
see
creatir
ine
fCa2t
(+)PTH
(+)aldosterone
Flg.
HO
2K
9.3
NH4+
Cl-
(+)ADH
HO
300
100
H+
300
(+}aldosteron
HO
(+）acldemla
Loopof
FIg
(+)PTH
H+
Henle
fCa2+
(+)hypokalemla
9.4
(+)PTH
fMg2+
K+
H,O
K+
HCO
+EN
2Cl-
Cl
+EN
(+)ADH
k
HO
Cl-
(+)ADH
600
urea
600
urea
urea
urea
creatinine
HO
K+
H+
900
HO
+HN
PO4
HO
(+)ADH
HO
>1500
>1500
>1500
Note:Numbers (e.g.,300,600) within tubules
Fig. 8.2. Major physiologic processes of renal tubules that pertain to solutes and H,O. The solute concen-
trations are provided to illustrate changes that occur as the fuid moves through the nephron (see Fig. 8.3).
Actual solute concentrations would vary,depending on many physiologic and pathologic factors.
420
8/URINARYSYSTEM
421
thus a concentration gradient ismaintained.The movement is reduced when the
urinary fow rate through the tubule is low because K+ stays longer in the tubular
fluid, and thus the concentration gradient is diminished.
2.ADH promotes K+ secretion in the cortical collecting tubule, perhaps by opening K+
channels in the luminal membrane. This process compensates for the reduced K
secretion that occurswith decreasedurinary flow.
3.Type A intercalated cells conserve K+when hypokalemia is present (see Fig.9.4)
E.H
1.H is secreted from type A intercalated cells of the distal nephron through a H*
ATPase pump that can work against a large concentration gradient (see Fig. 9.4).
Aldosterone and acidemia promote this proces.His also secreted,andK is
resorbed through H+-K+-ATPase pumps that appear to be most active when
hypokalemia is present.
2.A limited amount of H+ is secreted by the proximal tubular cells (see Fig. 9.7),after
which it may be buffered by HCO,NH,or PO.Most of the renal excretion of
H+ is within NH4* (see Fig.9.6) and either HPOor H,PO.Very little is present
as free H+(=10--10-mol/L)
Fig.8.2.continued
·The osmolality of the plasma and the ultrafltrate are equal (near 300 mmol/kg) as HO and nonprotein
solutes pass through the glomerular filtration barrier.
Inthe proximal tubules,amajority of the HO and solutes that enter the tubules areresorbed through
active, facilitated, and passive processes. The osmolality of the tubular fuid leaving the proximal tubule is
still near 300 mmol/kg, but the fuid volume is greatly diminished.
· In the descending limb of the loop of Henle, tubular fuid is concentrated and volume reduced by the
passive movement of H,O. Urea may diffuse from the interstitial fuid to the tubular fuid. Ar the bottom
of the loop of Henle, the concentration of the tubular fuid will vary among species. The 1500 mmol/kg
value is probably appropriate forhorses and cattle, whereas the solute concentration in cats maybe
>2400mmol/kg.
·In the ascending limb of the loop of Henle, solutes (mostly Na, Cl, and K+) passively leave the tubular
Huid via a Na-K+-2CI carrier (energy provided the by Na-K+-ATPase pump in the basolateral mem-
brane), but HO remains.Thus, the tubular fuid becomes dilute, and the fuid leaving the diluting
segment has an osmolality near 100 mmol/kg. Passive fCa² and fMg resorption depends on an electrical
gradient promoted by the NaK-2Cl cotransporterand the recycling of K,whereas active fCa²and
fMgtresorption is promoted by PTH.
·In the distal and collecting tubules there are multiple processes involved in electrolyte balance,acid-base
balance, and conservation of H,O (see the text for specifics). The major actions of ADH are to promote
resorption of HO and urea. The major actions of aldosterone are the resorption of Na and CI and the
secretion of K+ and H*. The osmolality of the urine typically is > 600 mmol/kg and may be
>2000mmol/kg.
In most healthy domesticmammals, the net function of a nephron is to excrete urea,Crt,K,H,NH
and POand to conserve Na, Cr,HCO, fCa², fMg,glucose, amino acids, and HO. The equine
nephron excretes fCa'+ instead of conserving it.
The table in the top of the figure shows a comparison of the approximate solute concentrations (in terms
of osmolality and USG.d) in different segments of a functional nephron. Note that the USGu for plasma
(1.028-1.034) were determined by using a refractometer's urine specific gravity scale. The true specific
gravity of the plasma would be nearer 1.0181.022,and such a range has lirte to no clinical relevance.
, ATPase pump; and O, transporter or shuttle.
422
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
F.Ca²+
1.About 80-85 % of filtrate Ca²+ is resorbed in the proximal tubules and loops of
Henle through a passive process that depends on Na and H,O resorption. Ca²+ is
passively resorbed in the ascending limb of the loop of Henle down an electroche-
mical gradient established by a Na*-K+-2Cl cotransporter and a recycling of K*.
2.PTH promotes Ca² resorption by activating an adenylare cyclase pathway in the
cortical thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle,the distal tubule,and the
connecting segment between the distal tubule and the collecting ducts.
3.Vitamin D promotes Ca²+ resorption in the distal nephron by inducing production
of a calcium-binding protein. Calcitriol (1,25-DHCC) formation in the proximal
renal tubules is stimulated by increasedPTH activity and hypophosphatemia.
4.Thiazide diuretics increase the resorption of Ca²+ in the distal nephron.
G.PO4
1.About 85-90 % of filtrate PO is resorbed in the proximal tubule via the actions of
a Nat-PO4cotransporter.
2.The cotransporter's activity is enhanced by hypophosphatemia and insulin,whereas
it is diminished by hyperphosphatemia and increased PTH activity.
H.Mg2+
1.At physiologic concentrations, nearly all filtrate Mg+ is resorbed (most in the
cortical thick ascending limbs of loops of Henle, but also in the proximal tubules)
Passive Mgresorption is mostly down an electrochemical gradient established by
the Na-K-2Cl cotransporter and a recycling of K.There also may be specific
transporters or channels whose activities depend on blood [Mg²].
2.ADH,PTH,glucagon,calcitonin,and β-adrenergic agonists stimulate Mg
resorption in the cortical thick ascending limb.
I.Glucose
1.Typically,glucose passes freely through the glomerular filtration barrier, and all
filtrate glucose is resorbed in the proximal tubules as Na is resorbed by a Na-
glucose cotransport system involving glucose transporter proteins. The glucose
resorption process is called secondary active tnnsport because itoccurs secondary to
Naresorption and it is active because it ismoving up a concentration gradient
（with a higher concentration in cells than in tubularfuid in the healthy state)
2.The transport process involves carrier proteins that can be saturated by excessive
glucose from plasma, thus producing hyperglycemic glucosuria.
J.Proteins and amino acids
1.Nearly all fltrate proteins and amino acids are resorbed in the proximal tubules.
2.Amino acids are resorbed through carriers specific for seven amino acid groups.
Small peptides are hydrolyzed at the brush border, and the amino acids are
resorbed.
3.Larger proteins (including albumin) enter the tubular cells through endocytosis and
then are degraded to amino acids. In some apparently healthy dogs, some of the
albumin is not resorbed and thus is present in urine in low concentrations.The
urinary albumin may represent subclinical disease or a species variation.
4.Megalin, aminionless, and cubilin,receptor proteins expressed in the apical part f
proximal tubular epithelial cells, are important in mediating endocytosis of a wide
variety of proteins.These include vitamin D-binding protein, which is required for
renal formation of 1,25-DHCC. These proteins also mediate intrinsic factor-
cobalamin uptake in the small intestine.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
423
K.Urea
1.About 60-65% offiltrate urea isresorbed in theproximal tubules down a concen-
tration gradient created by the movement of HO into the cells (which initially
lowers cellular [urea] and raises tubular [urea]).This process is enhanced in hypovo-
lemic states when there is greater proximal tubular resorption of Naand HO,
decreased urine fow rate, and thus more time for passive urea absorption.
2.Urea is recycled in the remaining nephron by moving from interstitial fuid to fuid
in the loop of Henle and then from medullary collecting duct fuid to medullary
interstitial fuid
3.Urea resorption in the distal nephron is enhanced (nearly four times the
baseline) by ADH activity and a concentration gradient established by HO
resorption secondary to Naand Clresorption. ADH increases tubular
permeability to urea.
4.Urea contributes nearly 50 % of interstitial solute for the establishment of a
hypertonic medulla that is necessary for renal concentrating ability.
L.Crt
1.In some dogs,small amounts of Crt are secreted by the proximal tubules. Crt
2.In people, Crt secretion may occur through a pathway shared with organic cations.
Serum [Crt] increases when other organic cations (such as cimetidine, trimethoprim,
and quinidine) interfere with Crt secretion.
M.Resorption of HO by tubules
1.About 30 %of RPF becomesultrafiltrate.About 75%of the ultrafiltrate H,O is
passively resorbed in the proximal tubules.
2.HO is passively resorbed in the descending limb of the loop of Henle as the loop
enters the hypertonic medulla.
3.The ascending limb of the loop of Henle and connecting segments are impermeable
to HO
4. The collecting tubules are permeable to HO in the presence of ADH. ADH binds
to receptors on the basolateral membranes ofprincipal epithelial cells of the collect
ing tubules, resulting in activation of a protein kinase that phosphorylates aquaporin
2 and enables it tobe transported from vesicles to the apical membrane.Lack of
ADH triggers endocytosis of aquaporin and its return to cytoplasmic vesicles. Water
moves into cells through the pore at the center of the proteins.Water escapes to the
interstitium through pores formed by aquaporin3inthe basolateral membranes of
the principal cells.
V.
Renal concentrating ability and renal diluting ability
A.Definitions
1.Concenrrating ability: the ability of kidneys to resorb fltrate HO in excess of filtrate
solutes; ability to concentrate solutes
2.Diluting ability. the ability of kidneys to resorb filtrate solute in excess of filtrate
HO; ability to dilute solutes
B.Terms used to describe the concentration of urine
1.Many authors describe the solute concentration of urine with the termshyposthenu
ria, isosthenuria, and hypersthenuria (-sthen- means“strength").However, there is
little agreement on the definitions for these terms.Isosthenuria should mean same
(iso-)strength (-sthen-)urine(-uria).
424
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.Our definitions (see Fig.8.8 for relationship of USGf and urine osmolality)
a.Isosthenuria (working definition) is the state in which urine osmolality is the same
as plasma osmolality,whether plasma osmolality is low,normal,or high.We
define “the same” as being within 100 mmol/kg of plasma osmolality, that is,
osmolality=osmolality,±100 mmol/kg.In most domesticmammals, such
urine typically will have a USGr from 1.007-1.013, inclusively (unpublished
authors'data)
b.Hyposthenuria is the state in which excreted urine has an osmolality that is less
than the isosthenuric values; that is, osmolality< (osmolality,-100 mmol/kg)
In most hyposthenuric animals,the USG will be less than 1.oo7. Such urine is
dilute (the filtrate has been diluted by renal processes).
c.To be consistent with terms,eusthenuria is the excretion ofurine with
the osmolality expected for an animal that has adequate renal function
andnormal hydration status,and hypersthenuria is the excretion of highly
concentrated urine. However, the terms eusthenuria and hypersthenuria are
rarelyused.
C.Physiologic processes for concentrating or diluting glomerular fltrate
1.Functions of renal interstitium
a.Provides a bridge berween tubules and blood vessels to facilitate the movement of
H,O and solutes
b.Helps maintain medullary hypertonicity to enable the concentration of tubular
fluid
2.Functions of tubules
a.Proximal tubule（proximal convoluted tubule)
(1)Approximately 30 % of the plasma that enters glomeruli becomes glomeru
lar filtrate(USG=1.010;osmolality =300mmol/kg).
(2)About 75 % of the HO in the ultrafiltrate is passively resorbed by the
proximal tubules (independent of body needs). The remainder passes into
the loop of Henle. The solute concentration does not change much in the
proximal tubule, but fuid volume decreases markedly.
b.Descending limb of the loop of Henle
(1)The osmolality of tubular fuid increases because of the passive resorption of
HO and the secretion of Na, Cl,and urea into the filtrate.
(2)Fluid entering the loop of Henle has a USGr= 1.010 and an osmolality
= 300 mmol/kg. Tubular fuid at the disral end of the descending limb has a
C.Ascending limb of the loop of Henle (the diluting segment of the nephron)
Cland Na（also K+,fCa²,and fMg²+) from the rubular fuid to the
interstitial fuid.Thus,tubular fuid loses solute and the interstitial Auid
becomes more hypertonic.Fluid leaving the ascending limb for the distal
tubule is dilute (USG<1.007;osmolality<200mmol/kg).
fuid in the medullary region so that HOmay be passively resorbed in the
descending limb of the loop of Henle and in collecting tubules.
(3)The ascending limb and the closely associated vasa recta are the major
structures of the countercurrent system that maintain a hyperosmolar
medullary interstitial fuid.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
425
d.Distal tubule（distal convoluted tubule)
(1)The distal tubule has minimal HO permeability,and thus very little HO is
resorbed in this segment.
(2)The resorption of Na and Cl in this segment lowers the tubular fuid
osmolality.
e.Collecting tubules
(1)The collecting tubules of the distal nephron contain the concentrating
processes of the nephron.
(2)ADH controls permeability of the epithelium to HO.HO is resorbed in
the presence of ADH if there is an osmolar gradient between the rubular
Auid and medullary interstitial fuid. An osmolar gradient is created by high
concentrations of urea, Na, and Cl in the interstitial fuid that are pro-
duced and maintained by segmental functions of the nephron.
(3)TheHO channels through the epithelial cells are created bymembrane-
associated proteins called aquaporins.WhenADHbinds to the renal
epithelial cell basolateral membranes, it activates a cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate (cAMP)-dependent secondary messenger system by which
aquaporins are transported to the apical membranes,and thus membranes
aquaporins.6
3.For kidneys to concentrate the ultrafiltrate, the following are necessary:
a.ADH must be present.Stimuli for ADH secretion include hyperosmolality,
decreased cardiovascular pressures as seen with hypovolemia, and, to a lesser
degree, increased [angiotensin].
b.Epithelial cells of the distal nephron must be responsive to ADH
c.There must be a concentration gradient； that is, the osmolality of the interstitial
fuid of therenal medulla must be greater than the osmolality of the fuid in the
tubules.
4.For kidneys to dilute the ultrafltrate, the following are necessary:
a.Na and Cl must be actively transported from the tubular fuid to the interstitial
fuid by epithelial cells of the ascending limb of the loop of Henle.This process
requires delivery of Na and Cl to the loop of Henle.
b.Very little to no HO is removed from the tubular fluid by the distal nephron.
D.The osmolaliry changes that occur in a nephron during the formarion of urine are
illustrated in Fig.8.3.
CHRONICRENALINSUFFICIENCYORFAILURE
What is chronicrenal insufficiency or failure?
A.Many chronic diseases may damage kidneys sufficiently so that functional renal tissue is
inadequate to maintain health. Then,the animal enters the pathophysiologic state of
chronic renal insufficiency or failure.
B.Therearenouniversallyaccepteddfnitionsorriteriaforstagingimpairedrenal
function. One system seems to correlare with clinical findings seen in many domestic
mammals.78
1.Diminished renal reserve: The GFR is about 50 % of normal, and the animal is
clinically healthy.Azotemia is not present, but the kidneys are less able to tolerate
additional insult (e.g.,disease,dehydration,or poor perfusion).
426
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Horses
Cats
&
Dogs
Cattle
maximal
>2400+
1800
1500
concentration
(hlgh ADH actvity)
1200
006
009
300-
000
300
isosthenuria
hyposthenuria
100
100
100
noADH actity
Plasma
PCT
LoH
DT
CollectingTubules
Glomerulus
Fig. 8.3. Osmolality changes in a healthy mammal's nephron. (Details of the movement of solute and HO
in nephrons are described in Fig. 8.2.)
The ultrafiltrate formed by glomerular filtration of plasma has an osmolality near 300 mmol/kg. As fuid
moves through the proximal convoluted tubule (PCT), most of the H,O and solutes are resorbed. Because
resorption is isoosmotic, the tubular fuid’s osmolality does not change. However, there are marked changes
in osmolality during fuid transit through the loop of Henle (LoH). When fuid leaves the LoH, the tubular
fuid’sosmolality is near100mmol/kg.Minimal change in osmolality oocurs inthe distal tubuleDT)s
electrolytes are resorbed. In the absence of ADH activity, HO remains in the collecting tubules, and thus
the nephron produces hyposthenuric urine (typically USGrer < 1.o07).With minimal ADH activity in
healthy mammals, the nephron produces isosthenuric urine (typically USG,g of 1.0071.013). With marked
ADH activity in the collecting tubules, a large portion of theHO is resorbed to form maximal concentra
tion.The maximal concentrating ability varies among domestic manmals. The right yaxis is probably
appropriate for horses and cattle (ie, maximum USGe = 1.050), whereas other y-axes are needed for dogs
(=1800 mmol/kg or USG = 1.060) and cats (> 2400 mmol/kg or USGr> 1.080).
2.Chronicrenal insuffciency:The GFRis approximately 2050 %ofnormal.Azotemia
and anemia appear.Polyuria occurs because of decreased concentrating ability.
3.Chronic renal failure:The GFR is <20-25 % of normal.Azotemia and impaired
concentrating ability （thus polyuria) are present.The kidneys cannot regulate
extracellular fuidvolume or electrolyte balance,and thus edema,hypocalcemia
(generallynot in horses）,and metabolic acidosis will develop.Overt uremia with its
neurologic,gastrointestinal and cardiovascular complications may develop.
4.End-stage renal disease:I he GFK is <5 % of normal. 1 he terminal stages of uremia
are present with either oliguria or anuria.
C.As a general concept,many authors write that more than two-thirds of functional renal
massmust belost before kidneys lose theability to concentrate urine,andmore than
three-fourths must be lost before an animal becomes azotemic. Such fractions help
8/URINARYSYSTEM
427
develop major concepts but do not represent firmly established facts for all species. In
one study in which renal function was reduced by nephrectomy and selective arterial
ligation, cats became azotemic with only a 50 % reduction in functional mass, and
most maintained renal concentrating ability (USGf>1.040) with an estimated 83 %
loss in renal function.
IL.
Why do animals lose renal concentrating ability in chronic renal failure?
A.More solute than usual is presented to the remaining functional nephrons,and the high
solute content within the tubules contributes to solute diuresis.
B.Medullary hypertonicity is not maintained because of three factors:
1.Medullary tissue is damaged or medullary blood fow is abnormal.
2.Naand Cl transport is decreased from the ascending limb of the loop of Henle to
the interstitial fuid.
3.Damaged cells in the distal nephron are less responsive to ADH.
II.
Polyuria in mammals with chronic renal insufficiency or failure
A.The degree of polyuria in renal failure will not be as severe as with other diuretic states,
such as diabetes insipidus, because the diminished GFR results in a decreased volume of
fltered plasma H,O. The urine volume produced in healthy people is about 12 L/d,
about 34 L/d with polyuric renal failure, and about 68 L/d with other polyuric states
(e.g., central and renal diabetes insipidus).
B.Mammals with chronic renal disease typically lose concentrating ability (and thus have
polyuria)before azotemia develops.Cats can concentrate glomerular filtrate to a greater
degree than other domestic species and may,when azotemic,retain more concentrating
ability than other species.
C.Progression of renal disease and loss of additional nephrons will eventually cause either
oliguric or anuric renal failure.
IV.
Figure 8.4 illustrates the development of azotemia and abnormal urine volume caused by a
progressive loss of nephrons.
V.
Evidence of chronicrenal insufficiency or failure
A.Evidence of insufficiency or failure
1. There is azotemia (increased [UN] and/or [Crt] in serum or plasma) because of
inadequate renal ability toremove metabolicwastesfrom plasma.
2.There is an inappropriately low USGr (often 1.007-1.013)because of a marked
reduction in renal concentrating ability.
B.Evidence of chronicity
1. Clinical findings, including duration of signs
2. Laboratory findings, including anemia and hypocalcemia (although hypocalcemia
may also occur in acute renal failure and chronic renal failure may be associated
with hypercalcemia, especially in horses)
ACUTERENALFAILURE
I.
Acute renal failure is reversible or irreversible renal dysfunction resulting abruptly (within
hours to days) from a renal disease or insult that markedly decreases GFR and leads to
azotemia. Usual causes are toxicants, renal ischemia, or infections.
428
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Stage1
Stages2&3
Stage 4
decreasedrenal reserve
renal insufficiencyl
end-stage
renal failure
renal disease
theoretical maximum urine volume for animal
polyuria
'azotemia
polyuria
patient's urine volume
azotemia,
oliguria
patient's serum[UN] or[Crt]
-anuria
100%
50%
5%
Percentage of remaining renal functional capacity
Fig. 8.4. Graphical representation of the effects of chronic renal disease and progressive dysfunction on an
animal's urine volume and serum concentrations of UN or Crt. Shaded grey areas represent the reference
intervals for urine volume (top bar) and for the [UN] or the [Crt] (bottom bar).The patient‘s urine volume
and[UN] or [Crt] are represented by labeled dasbed line.A theoretical macimalurine volume line is shown
to illustrate that animals with polyuric renal failure do not produce maximal urine volume.
In stageI (diminished renal reerve),progresiverenal disease is destroying ephrons and thus GFR
decreases. However, there is still sufficient function to clear urea and Crt adequately, and thus the animal
is not azotemic. Also, there is sufficient ability to concentrate urine, and thus polyuria is absent or not
detected.As therenal dysfunction approaches stage 2,amild polyuriamay developbecause of impaired
concentrating ability.
·In stage 2 (renal insuffciency),there is sufficient loss of nephrons so that the renal concentrating ability is
decreased (isosthenuria and polyuria develop) and the excretion of urea and Crt by the kidneys is
insufficient (azotemia is present).
In stage 3 (renal filure), there is continued isosthenuria, polyuria, and azotemia but also inadequate
control of HO balance or electrolyte concentrations.The animal has clinical signs of uremia and
abnormal serum concentrations of Na, K', CI, Ca²+, PO,H+,or HCO;
·In stage 4 (end-stage renal disease, oliguric or anuric renal failure), only a few nephrons are filtering
plasma, and thus a marked azotemia develops. The animal also becomes oliguric or anuric because very
little plasma HO enters the kidney. The remaining tubules cannot concentrate or dilute the filtrate, and
thus USGer will reflect isosthenuria.
II.
Azotemia
A.The magnitude of the azotemia does not differentiate acute from chronic renal failure.
Both can have mild to severe azotemias.
B.The rates of increase of the[urea] and [Crt] are greater in acute renal failure than
chronic renal failure; that is, a moderate to marked azotemia may develop within days
in acute failure but take weeks to months with chronic failure.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
429
Urine volume and USG
III.
A.Because of the abrupt and severe decrease in GFR,with no time for compensatory
hypertrophy of healthy nephrons, the kidneys may filter litle blood andproduce little
or no urine (oliguria or anuria).
B.The USGr can vary considerably.
1.The urine may be unexpectedly concentrated if it was formed prior to the severe
insulr.
2.The urine may be isosthenuric because of the same mechanisms that impair
concentrating ability in chronic renal disease.
3.The urine is not expected to be hyposthenuric because such a state would indicate
loss of concentrating ability but retained diluting ability
IV.
Acid-base status and electrolyte concentrations can become acutely abnormal (e.g.,hyperka
lemia or acidemia).
AZOTEMIAANDUREMIA
Definitions
A.Azotemia is increased nonprotein nitrogenous compounds in the blood that are
routinely detected as increased serum[UN] and/or serum[Crt]
B.Uremia is classically considered to mean “urinary constituents in blood” but now
typicallyrfers to the clinical signsreflecting renal failure (e.g.,vomiting,diarrhea,
coma,convulsions,and an ammoniacal odor of breath)
II.
Azotemia classifications and disorders
A.Decreased urinary excretion of urea or Crt
1.Prerenal azotemia: The initiating cause of abnormal urea or Crt excretion involves
reduced renal blood fow.
a.Disorders (Table 8.3)
b.Pathogeneses
(1)Any process that diminishes RPF will directly decrease GFR and thus
decrease clearance of urea and Crt.Thevolume (stretch)receptors in the
flow and trigger the angiotensin-renin system.Angiotensin II constricts the
afferent and efferent glomerular arterioles, which further reduces glomerular
perfusion and thus GFR.
(2）
Hypovolemia enhances resorption of Na and HO in proximal tubules,
which in turn promotes passive proximal tubularresorption ofurea (but not
Crt) because the lower flow rate provides more time for resorption.
③）
Hypovolemia also triggers release of ADH, which enhances resorption of
urea (but not Crt) by medullary collecting tubules. (Aquaporin 2 transports
urea, as well as H,O.)
(4)Azotemia occurring with a protein-losing nephropathy and marked hypoal-
buminemia may be prerenal and related to decreased GFR caused by
hypovolemia secondary to decreased colloidal osmotic pressure.
(5)Azotemia is common in clinical hypoadrenocorticism.Aldosterone def-
ciency impairs renal excretion ofK+;the resulting hyperkalemia can cause
bradycardia and thus decreased cardiac output. Concurrently, increased renal
430
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 8.3.Diseases and conditions that cause azotemia
Decreased urinary excretion of urea or Crtb
Prerenal diseases or condition
*Hypovolemia: dehydration (including hypoadrenocorticism), shock, blood loss
Decreased cardiac output: cardiac insufficiency, shock,hypoadrenocorticism
*Shock (hypovolemic,cardiogenic,anaphylactic, septic,neurogenic)
Renal diseases or conditions
*Infammatory:glomerulonephritis,pyelonephritis,tubular-interstitial nephritis
*Amyloidosis
*Toxicnephroses:hypercalcemia,ethylene glycol,myoglobin,gentamicin,
phenylbutazone
*Renal ischemiaorhypoxia:poorrenal perfusion,infarction
Congenital hypoplasia or aplasia
Hydronephrosis
Neoplasia (renal or metastatic)
Postrenal diseases or conditions
*Urinary tract obstruction:urolithiasis,urethral plugs in cats,neoplasia,prostatic disease
*Leakage of urine from urinary tract: trauma,neoplasia
Increased urea or Crt production: intestinal hemorrhage, increased dietary urea or Crt,
increased protein catabolism
*A relatively common disease or condition
Greyhounds may have mildly increased Crt concentrations apparently related to high muscle mass.
Decreased urinary excretion involves a decreased glomerular fltration of urea or Crt except when
there is leakage of urine from urinary tract into the body.
loss of Nareduces renal conservation of HO and sometimes results in
hypovolemia. In some animals, there may be increased inrestinal loss of HO
(ie., diarrhea) along with decreased HO intake to accentuate hypovolemia.
Thus,a combination of factors can decrease renal blood flow and produce
prerenal azotemia.
(6)The prerenal azotemia developing in association with severe intestinal
hemorrhage is partially due to hypovolemia, which leads to decreased renal
excretion of Crt and urea (see Azotemia and Uremia sect.II.B4).
C.Decreased RPF that is severe and persistent may lead to renal hypoxia, acute
renal damage, and thus acute renal failure. In such animals, the azotemia may be
renal and prerenal.
2.Renal azotemia:The initiating cause is any renal disease that causes a major decrease
in GFR.Any of the following may contribute：loss of nephrons, decreased vascular
patency within the kidney, decreased glomerular permeability, increased renal
interstitial pressure, or increased intrarubular pressure.
a.Diseases or disorders (Table 8.3)
b.Pathogeneses
(1)Renal disease (acute or chronic) causing the loss of at least 65-75 % of
nephron functional capacity reduces the GFR sufficiently to produce
azotemia.Reduced GFR causes inadequate renal excretion of urea and Crt
8/URINARYSYSTEM
431
from plasma (without sufficient compensation by intestinal processes),and
thus serum [UN] and [Crt] increase.
(2)Processes that contribute to a prerenal azotemia may also be present.
3.Postrenal azotemia: The initiating cause of defective urea or Crt excretion is distal to
the nephron.
a.Diseases or disorders (Table 8.3)
b.Pathogenesis of obstructive azotemia
(1)Urinary tract obstruction causes the release of vasoactive substances (prosta-
glandins and angiotensin) that constrict the glomerular arterioles, thus
reducing RPF and diminishing the GFR;reduced GFR impairs clearance of
urea and Crto
(2)Impaired outfow causes a transient increase in intracapsular hydrostatic
pressure that decreases the GFR The pressure diminishes with time as
tubularfuid diffuses into tubular cells and less ultrafiltrateis formed.
c.Pathogenesis of azotemia caused by leakage of urine within the body
(1)If there is leakage into the peritoneal cavity,urea and Crt enter the plasma
after passive absorption through the peritoneal epithelium. The peritoneal
[UN]equilibrates faster with the plasma [UN] than the peritoneal [Crt]
does with the plasma [Crt] (see Chapter 19).
(2)If there is leakage into tissue surrounding the urinary tract, urea and Crt
diffuse from theextravascular to intravascularfuid and cause azotemia.
(3）In either case,if intestinal excretionofurea and Crt doesnot compensate
for the diminished urinary excretion,then azotemia will occur.Glomerular
filtration is not reduced initially,but a calculated GFR will be reduced if not
all the urine produced during the test period is collected.
d.Processes that contribute to prerenal or renal azotemia may also be present.
B.Azotemia due to increased urea production,a form of prerenal azotemia
1.Disorders or conditions (Table 8.3)
2.Pathogenesis
a.Increased proteolysis generates more NH4,which in turn increases the synthesis
of urea by hepatocytes
b.If therate ofurea synthesis exceeds the rate of urea excretion,then the serum
[UN] will increase.
3.There is usually an adequate functional renal reserve, so increased urea production
usually causes either mild or no azotemia in these disorders or conditions.
4.Experimental evidence indicates that intestinal hemorrhage will cause azotemia when
there is a large amount of hemorrhage; concurrent hypovolemia also contributes to
the azotemia(see Azotemia and Uremia, sect.II.A.1).The azotemia due to intestinal
hemorrhage results from rwo processes: (l) increased urea production because the
marked hemoglobin degradation increases NH delivery to hepatocytes, and (2)
decreased GFR associatedwith the hypovolemia.
a.Feeding whole blood at a rate nearly equal to 10 % of a dog's blood volume
increased the [UN] by about 10 mg/dL, whereas feeding whole blood at a rate
nearly equal to 25%of a dog's blood volume increased the[UN] by about
20-30 mg/dL.The peak azotemia occurred by 12 h, and nearly all UN concen-
trations returned to baseline values by 24h.
b.Withholding H,O for 24 h and feeding wholeblood to six dogs at a rate
near one-third of a dog's blood volume increased UN concentrations from
432
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
7-37mg/dL in individual dogs.Peak concentrations occurred 47 h after feeding
and returned to baseline values by 24-36h.Removing from 52% to 76% of
the blood volumes of seven dogs while restricting access to H,O decreased blood
pressures and caused concurrent azotemias. Concentrations ofUN were increased
2-25mg/dLin individual dogs from 12-24hafterbleeding.The combination of
bleeding (near 50 % blood volume) during several hours and feeding blood (near
30 % blood volume) caused greater increases in [UN] (20-67 mg/dL increases in
ten dogs). The authors concluded that hemorrhage causing decreased blood
pressure,feding a largeamount ofblood,oracombination of theseprocesses
can create azotemia.
c. In a retrospective study in which 52 dogs with upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage
were compared to 52 dogs without upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage, the
median [UN] was 14 mg/dL greater in the hemorrhage group. Also, the serum
UN:Crt ratio was greater in the hemorrhage group.As the authors reported
however,they didnot determine whether thehydration status of the hemorrhage
group was similar to that of the control group.Thus,this study did not establish
whether the azotemias associated with gastrointestinal hemorrhage were caused
by increased urea production, decreased urea excretion, or both. In the data
provided, some dogs with hemorrhage were not azotemic.13
III.
Guidelines for azotemia differentiation (Table 8.4)
A.The cause of azotemia may be multifactorial. Both prerenal disorders (e.g. hypovole-
mia) and postrenal disorders(e.g,obstruction) can cause acute renal disease and thus
Table 8.4.Major criteria used to differentiate the three types of azotemia caused by
decreased GFR
Historical,physical exam,or
Type of azotemia
Expected USGf
Urine volume
other information
Prerenal
>1.030
↓a
Decreased GFR due to
dehydration,acute
hemorrhage, shock,or
decreased cardiac output
Renal
1.007-1.013b
↑Usually
Other UA findings,electrolyte
Maybe↓
changes, or anemia that are
suggestive of renal disease
(acute or chronic)
Postrenal
?
个
Dysuria, enlarged or ruptured
urinary bladder, urine in
abdomen
* This criterion is for dogs and is assuming there are not extrarenal disorders that are affecting the renal
concentrating ability and urine volume. USGue guidelines for cats that have concentrating ability are > 1.040
instead of>1.030;for horses and cattle >1.025
Assuming there are not substances (such as protein and glucose） that interfere withUSG assessment of
theurine solute concentration
* USGre depends on the animal's hydration status and presence or absence of concurrent renal disease.
During postobstructive diuresis, the USG,g will be low and urine volume will be increased.
Note: Prerenal, renal, and postrenal disorders may occur independently or may occur in combinations.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
433
acute renal failure.Animals with renal failure may also be hypovolemic.Accordingly,at
the time of presentation,an animal’s azotemia may be the product of both renal and
extrarenal factors.
B.Themajor laboratory criterion for diffrentiating azotemias involves theUSG
However,the diagnostician must consider the renal and extrarenal factors thatmay
infuence an animal’s ability to concentrate and dilute urine.
1.If azotemia is exclusively prerenal and relared to decreased GFR, the USGf is
expected to be > 1.030 (in dogs), > 1.040 (in cats), or > 1.025 (in cattle and horses)
because the kidneys are being stimulated to conserve HO.
2.If the USGfis below these values in azotemic animals and there is no evidence of
increased urea production (e.g., gastrointestinal hemorrhage), there is impaired renal
concentrating ability,but it may be due either to primary renal disease (renal
ability unrelated to primary renal disease,sometimes called secondary renaldisease)
a.Renal disease
(1)The USGer is often 1.007-1.013 because of impaired tubulointerstitial
function associated with nephron damage.
(2)The USGer may be > 1.013 but stil inappropriately low if:
(a)The renal disease impairs glomerular function more than tubulointersti-
tial function (especially in cats or in any animal with acute renal
failure).
(b)High urine concentrations of protein or glucose affect theUSGf such
that theUSGroverestimates urine osmolality (seePhysical Examination
of Urine, sect.IHIB.4.d.).
(c)Plasma osmolality is increased, so urine osmolality is greater than
expected despite failure to dilute or concentrate the fltrate.
b.Extrarenal causes
(1)Azotemia develops from hypovolemia.
(2)Inappropriate renal concentrating ability is caused by one or more of the
following:
(nephrogenic diabetes insipidus). This may occur, for example, because
of hypercalcemia.
(b）Solute overload (too much solute entering the loop of Henle as occurs
with osmotic diuresis) causes a high fow rate and decreases resorption
of tubular fuid.
(c)Decreased medullary hypertonicity because of the following:
(i)Prolonged hyponatremia or hypochloremia.
(i)Blocked Na and Cl transport (e.g, loop diuretics）.
(ii) Decreased urea production because of liver disease.
(iv) Solute overload or prolonged diuresis.
UREANITROGEN(UN)CONCENTRATIONINSERUMORPLASMA
I.
Physiologic processes or concepts regarding urea (Fig. 8.5)
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms and units
434
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Intestine
bacteria.
urea
Crt
Kidney
urea-
NH
protein
creatinine
Blood
Tissues
urea
proteins>NH4
creatinine
urea&
creatinine
+HN
in urine
Muscle
creatine-PO4
creatinine
NH4+
urea
Alimentary:
creatine
tract
Liver
urea
urea
cycle
creatinine
Fig. 8.5.Physiologic processes or concepts concerning urea and Crt.
Urea synthesis occurs in hepatocytes via the urea cycle, which is one method of incorporating NH into
molecules for excretion of excess NHthat is formed in tissues or intestine. After urea passively enters
plasma from hepatocytes, it has rwo possible fates.
tubules: 50-65 % of urea present in glomerular filtrate is resorbed in proximal and collecting rubules.
Urea resorption in proximal tubules is enhancedbyHOresorption in proximal tubules and by increased
ADH activity in the medullary collecting ducts.
Urea enters the intestinal tract ofmonogastric mammals (via the blood or the biliary system),where it is
cartle, rea enters the rumen(via salivaand blood),where it is degraded toNH3
for muscle contractions (creatine + ATP  creatine PO + ADP). Crt enters the plasma after the
degradation of creatine or creatine PO in muscle fibers (the animal’s muscle or dietary meat). Crt is
excreted from the body via the kidneys and intestine.
·Crt passs freely across the glomerular ltration barrier; it is nt resorbedby tubules.Small quantitiesmay
be secreted by proximal tubules when there is increased plasma [Crt].
is suspected to occur in dogs, cats, and horses, as Crt is diffusible across most cell membranes.
1.Current clinical assays measure [urea] in serum, plasma, or whole blood, and some
laboratories report [urea] directly. In many, though,the clinical custom is to express
[urea] in terms of nitrogen content in the urea (ie., urea nitrogen).
a.Urea has a M,of 60, so it weighs 60g/mol.It is composed ofone carbon,one
Oxygen, two nitrogen, and four hydrogen atoms. Therefore, 1 mol of urea
contains 28g of nitrogen.Accordingly,a [urea] of 1 mmol/dL =a [urea] of
60mg/dL= a [UN] of 28mg/dL
b.The [urea], reported as the concentration of UN, is commonly referred to as the
BUN (blood urea nitrogen) concenrration, although usually serum,not whole
8/URINARYSYSTEM
435
blood,is assayed.Because urea is a freely diffusible molecule for most cell
membranes, the extracellular [UN] and intracellular[UN] in blood will usually
be the same.Therefore, the [UN] in serum =[UN] in blood =[UN] in plasma
(SUN=BUN=PUN)
2.Unit conversion
a.mg/dL ofUNx 0.3570=mmol/L of urea (SI unit,nearest 0.5mmol/L)4
b.mg/dLofurea x0.1665=mmol/Lurea
B.Sample
1.Serum or plasma may be used in most spectrophotometric assays.
2.Urea is stable for 1 d at room temperature,several days at 46°C,and ar least
2-3mo when frozen.s
C.Principles of urea assays
1.Vitros dry reagent slide on the Vitros instrument
a.In a reaction catalyzed by urease,urea is hydrolyzed to form NH,and CO.The
NH reacts with an indicator to generate a colored dye, which is detected by
reflectance spectrophotometry.
b.Positive interference
(1)NH*: Free NH+ in the sample will react with the dye. Because the[NH+]
in most plasma and serum samples is < 1 % of the [urea], the degree of
interference should be clinically insignificant as long as the sample is not
contaminated with NH* (e.g, with quaternary ammonium compounds).
(2)Hemolysis:Hemoglobin at 50mg/dL will increase the [UN] by about
1mg/dL
c.Negative interference: Fluoride inhibits urease activity,so NaF tubes should not
be used to collect blood samples for a urease assay.
2. Roche Diagnostics wet reagents on the Hitachi instrument: In a reaction catalyzed
by urease,urea is hydrolyzed to form NHand COThe NHreacts in a coupled
reaction that consumes reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) and
thus decreases absorbance that is measured by kinetic spectrophotometry.
D.Increased [UN] in serum or plasma (azotemia) (Table 8.3)
E.Decreased [UN] in serum or plasma (Table 8.5)
1.Disorders that decrease urea synthesis
a.Hepatic insufficiency (see Chapter 13)
(1)Extensive hepatocellular disease that markedly reduces functional hepatic
mass (> 80 % loss) and thus sufficiently decreases urea synthesis to decrease
[UN] and correspondingly increase[NH4+]
Table 8.5.Diseases and conditions that cause decreased serum or plasma [UN]
Disorders that cause decreased urea synthesis
*Hepatic insufficiency: hepatocellular disease, portosystemic shunts
Urea cycle enzyme deficiencies
Disorders that cause increased renal excretion of urea
*Disorders that cause impaired proximal tubular resorption of urea: glucosuria
Central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
*A relatively common disease or condition
436
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(2)Portosystemic shunt (congenital or acquired)
(a)Less NH4 is delivered to the hepatocytes from the intestines.
(b)There is less uptake of NH by hepatocytes because of decreased
functional hepatic mass due to atrophy,necrosis, or fbrosis.
b.Urea cycle enzyme deficiencies (congenital, extremely rare)
2.Disorders that increase renal excretion of urea
a.When less HO is resorbed in the proximal tubules (e.g., because of glucosuria or
expanded extracellular volume),less of the filtered urea is resorbed in the
proximal tubules because theresorption of HO creates the concentration
gradient for urea resorption.
b. In central and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, reduced ADH activity or response
in the medullary collecting tubules decreases resorption of both urea and HO.
3.Consequence: The amount of urea in the renal interstitial fuid may diminish.
Because about 50 % of the medullary hypertonicity is normally due to urea, the
urea deficit may contribute to a reduced concentration gradient, impaired renal
concentrating ability,and thus polyuria.
CREATININE(Crt)CONCENTRATIONINSERUMORPLASMA
L.
Physiologic processes or concepts regarding Crt (Fig. 8.5)
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms andunits
1.Crt has a M,of 113,about twice that ofurea
2.Unit conversion:mg/dL×88.4=μmol/L（SI unit,nearest 10μmol/L）
B.Sample
1.Serum or plasma may be used in most spectrophotometric assays.
2.Crt in serum is stable for up to 4 d at room temperature and longer (for 1-3 mo)
when stored at-20°C.16
C.Principles of Crt assays
1.Dry reagent slide on the Vitros instrument: Crt is enzymatically hydrolyzed to
creatine,which then enters a series of reactions that result in HOreacting with an
indicator to generate a colored dye that is detected by reflectance spectrophotometry.
Enzymatic methods may yield lower values than methods using Jaffe's reaction.6
2. Roche Diagnostics wet reagents on the Hitachi instrument: Crt reacts with picric
acid to form a colored complex (Jaffe's reaction). The rate of formation of the
colored complex is measured by a spectrophotometer.
3.In some assays using Jaffe's reaction, non-Crt chromogens interfere with the assay.
However,modern modifcations have reduced the interference,and interfering
substances have less effect in kinetic than in end-point Crt assays. The non-Crt
chromogensnlude proteinsglucose,acetoacetate,β-hydroxybutyrate,ascorbic
acid,pyruvate, and cephalosporins.7
4.In a study using domestic animal sera in a kinetic Jaffe assay, acetone, cephalosporins,
and glucose caused a positive bias, whereas acetoacetic acid, bilirubin, and lipid pro
duced a negative bias.8A [bilirubin] of 10 mg/dL reduces the [Crt] about 1 mg/dL.19
Deproteinization of sera prior to the Jaffe reaction reduces the interference.
subtracted from the assay result to remove the positive interference of serum
8/URINARYSYSTEM
437
proteins.However,this correction factor is based on an assumption of a normopro
teinemiaIf there is a hyperproteinemia,the correction factor would beinadequate;
if there is a hypoproteinemia, the correction factor would be excessive.
III.
Increased [Crt]in serum or plasma (azotemia)(Table 8.3)
A.[Crt] is typically increased by pathologic processes that cause decreased GFR;the
initiating processmaybe prerenal,renal,or postrenal.
B.Increased Crt production and release from damaged myocytes could contribute to
increased serum [Crt] when renal function is impaired (e.g.,myoglobinuric nephrosis
secondary torhabdomyolysis in horses),but Crt is quickly cleared from plasma if renal
function is adequate. Baseline serum [Crt] may vary among individuals because of
variations in total body muscle mass or meat intake, but these factors are not expected
to cause more than a mild azotemia. Greyhounds have a greater mean serum [Crt] than
the mean value for dogs in the general population, and some greyhounds have values
mildly above the Crt upper reference limit.20
C. Neonatal foals can have an increased serum [Crt] if born to dams with dysfunctional
placentas that prevented normal clearance of fetal Crt by placental blood. In contrast to
congenitalrenal failure,this azotemia should diminish quickly after birth and resolve
over several days because Crt will be excreted via the urine.21
IV.Decreased[Crt] in serum or plasma
A.A decreased[Crt] in serum or plasma is not clinically recognized or clinically signif-
cant.Animals with a decreased muscle mass would tend to have a lower[Crt],and the
presence of a hypoproteinemia could yield a slightly lower[Crt](see Creatinine
Concentration in Serum or Plasma, sect.II.C.5)
B.In most species, the lower reference limit for serum [Crt] is near the detection limit of
Crt assays, so documenting a true decrease would be difficult.
UREA NITROGEN(UN) CONCENTRATIONVERSUS CREATININE(Crt)
CONCENTRATIONINSERUMORPLASMA
I.
Concepts
A.In most mammals, increases in [Crt] and [UN] generally parallel each other, and thus
the same information can usually be gained from either value alone. In horses, [Crt]
tends to be more sensitive than[UN] to decreases in GFR,probably because of urea
excretion into the alimentary tract. Similarly,in ruminants with renal failure, urea
excretion into the alimentary tract may cause disproportionate increases in [Crt].
B.In theory, [Crt] is a better indicator than [UN] of decreased GFR because the quantity
of Crt presented to the kidneys is more constant and is not resorbed by the tubules
whereas urea is resorbed. Other factors that may affect[Crt] and [UN] include the
following:
1. Hypovolemia increases urea resorption in the tubules because of decreased flow rate
in the tubules,which allows more time for urea diffusion,and ADH promotes urea
resorption in the distal nephron.
2.Increased protein in intestinal contents (high protein diet or massive intestinal
hemorrhage) leads to increased generation of NH and subsequently increased urea
synthesis if digestive and absorptive processes are functioning.
3.Intestinal excretion of urea and Crt may infuence serum[UN]and[Crt]
438
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 8.6.UNCrt ratios in azotemic dogs and cats
Prerenal
Renal
Postrenal
Number of cases
78
17
Average
Range
Average
Range
Average
Range
(TP/au)[Nn]
89
21-183
140
38-470
194
85-340
[Crt] (mg/dL)
2.4
0.4-6.4
4.9
1.2-11.1
9.1
1.3-20
UN:Crt ratio
55.3
10-260
29.8
7-102
30.5
12-128
Source (adapted from): Finco and Duncan2
II.
Serum UN:Crt ratio
A. Clinical observations have suggested that a serum UN:Crt ratio can help differentiate
prerenal and renal azotemias,and the following statements have been made:
1.An increased serum [UN]and concurrent normal serum Crt] is most likely a
prerenal azotemia.
2.If serum [Crt] is increased proportionately more than serum[UN], then the
azotemia is probably renal or postrenal.
B.Published serum UN:Crt ratios for azotemic dogsare listed in Table 8.6.The authors
concluded the following
1.The most severe azotemias occur with renal or postrenal azotemias,whereas the
greatest serumUN:Crt ratios are found in prerenal azotemias.However,renal
azotemia cannot be consistently differentiated from extrarenal azotemias by means of
the serum UN:Crt ratio because of the overlapping ranges.
2.Concentrations of UN and Crt in serum should be regarded as crude indices of
renal function because both lack diagnostic sensitivity and specificity for renal
dysfunction caused by renal disease.
CREATININE(Crt) CLEARANCERATE
I
Crt clearance rate,which is the rate Crt is cleared from plasma by the kidneys, is a good
estimate of GFR in domestic animals but is not equivalent to GFR. A decreased Crt
clearance rate (if a valid result) indicates the animal has a decreased GFR However, the
cause of the decreased GFR can be prerenal,renal, or postrenal.
II.
Crt clearance rate formula (Eq. 8.1)
[Crt],
Creatinine clearance rate =
Xvolume,+time+bw
(8.1.)
]
[Crt]= Crt concentration in collected urine during a timed collection period
[Crt], = Crt concentration in serum from a blood sample collcted during the timed
urine collection period
volume = urine volume (in mL) collected during a timed collection period
time = length of time (in min) during the urine collection period
bw= body weight (in kg) of animal
units =mL/min/kg =mL of plasma thar were cleared of creatinine/min/kg
8/URINARYSYSTEM
439
III.
Endogenous Crt clearance rate
A.Indications
1.To assess GFR in nonazotemic, non-dehydrated animals that are suspected of having
renal disease,usually because they are polyuric
2.To obtain a more objective assessment of the degree of impaired GFR in azotemic
animals,which may behelpful in predicring prognosis ormonitoring response to
therapy
B.Basics of the procedure: Adequate hydration must be established or confirmed. The
urinary bladder must be emptied completely.Allurine produced during a specified
period (20 min to 24h） is collctedviaa metabolism cage or catheterization, and the
volume is recorded. A blood sample for serum [Crt] is collected during the urine
collection period. The urine is mixed well, and the urine [Crt] is measured. It is critical
that allurine produced is collected (with no spillage and minimal evaporation),
especially when shorter collection periods are used.
C.Potential echnical problemsincludefailureto empty thebladdercompletelybeforethe
procedure,failure to collect alltheurine formed during the collection period,decreased
GFR due to undetected patient dehydration, and assay interferents (effects of non-Crt
chromogens).
D.Reference intervals: Dogs: 3.7 ± 0.77 mL/min/kg (mean ± sd),24 3.64 ± 0.10 mL/min/kg
(mean ± standard error of the mean）.2Cats:2.94±0.32mL/min/kg (mean ± sd）,9
2.56 ± 0.61 mL/min/kg (mean ± sd).25 Horses: 1.48 ± 0.043 mL/min/kg (mean ±
standard error of the mean）,2 1.92 ± 0.51 mL/min/kg (mean ± sd).27
E.Endogenous Crt clearance rate is generally more sensitive than serum [Crt] for detect-
ing decreased GFR because it is a direct assessment of renal excretion of Crt. Serum
[Crt] depends on Crt production, renal excretion of Crt,and intestinal Crt excretion.
IV.
Exogenous Crt clearance rate²
A.Basics of the procedure:It is the same as the endogenous procedure except that Crt is
injected into the patient and the urine collection period is routinely short.
B.Advantages: There is increased plasma [Crt] and therefore increased challenge to the
kidneyssoit isabetterassessmentofGFRTheproceduremnmizesffctsofassay
interferents.
C.Disadvantages: It may increase the percentage of excreted Crt from tubular secretion.
There is a lack of standardization of methods.
ABNORMALROUTINESERUMCHEMISTRYRESULTSINAZOTEMICANIMALS
I.
Serum [inorganic phosphorus]
A.In dogs, cats, and horses,hyperphosphatemia occurs when renal clearance of plasma
PO is substantially reduced due to decreased GFR caused by renal disease (acute or
chronic) or other pathologic states (e.g,prerenal or postrenal azotemic states).
B.Some azotemic horses have a low-normal [inorganic phosphorus] or hypophosphatemia
due to decreased renal conservation of POor to extrarenal excretion ofPO
C. Cartle may or may not have hyperphosphatemia. Renal excretion of PO is minor
compared to excretion via saliva and therumen.2930
II.
Serum[tCa²+]
A.The [tCa²+] may be below,above, or within reference intervals in all species
440
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.Dogs, cats, and cattle usually have a low-normal [tCa²+] or mild hypocalcemia in
chronicrenal failure because of decreased renal functionalmass and therefore decreased
renalformation of 1,25-DHCC.Hypercalcemia occurs in a minority of cases.In cattle
PO4 excreted in saliva may bind with Ca²+ in the alimentary tract and make it less
available for absorption.30
C.In dogs with chronic renal failure, the [tCa²] may not reflect the regulation of the
[fCa²] because the amount of Ca+ bound to nonprotein anions is increased (see
Chapter 11).3
D.If their diet isrelativelyCarich,horses areoften hypercalcemic in acute or chronic
renal disease because of decreased renal clearance of plasma Ca²; a major renal
function of horses is to excrete excess dietary Ca²+. Depending on the cause of the
renal disease and the dietary intake of Ca²,horses can also be hypocalcemic during
renal failure.
III.
Serum[K+] and blood pH(or[H+])
A.Dogs,cats,and horses
1.Acute decreases in renal function may cause hyperkalemia and acidemia because of
impairedrenal excretionofbothcations.Alsoinorganicacidemia accentuates
hyperkalemia through theredistribution of ions berween intracellular and extracel-
lular compartments.
2.Hyperkalemia and acidemia are seen primarily with oliguric or anuric renal failure
and can be seen with either acute or terminal chronicrenalfailure
not occur.
B.Cattle3233
1.Cattle tend to have hypokalemia due to alkalosis,decreased dietary potassium
intake,or increased potassium excretion via saliva.o
2.The animal’s metabolic alkalosis and concurrent hypochloremia are often considered
the result of H and Cl sequestration in the abomasum due to abomasal atony.
3.Cattle tend to have concurrent hyponatremia, suggesting loss of Na and Cl.
IV.Serum AMS and LPS activities
A.Dogs: Canine kidneys provide a major route of AMS and LPS excretion or inactivation.
If renal perfusion or functional renal mass is decreased, there is less renal inactivation of
AMS and LPS,and thus their longhalf-lives are increased.With time,mildly to
moderately increased serum AMS and LPS activities may develop (see Chapter 12).
B.Cats: The involvement of feline kidneys in the clearance or inactivation of AMS and
LPS is not well documented. Of 32cases of feline renal failure,hyperamylasemia (slight
to threefold increase) was present in 10.34
MAJORURINALYSIS(UA)CONCEPTS
1.
Components of a routine UA may vary from one laboratory to another; however, all
procedures should be done on fresh urine (<1 h old). Besides the potential for deteriora-
tion of cells and casts, delay of 6-24 h in completing the urinalysis may allow in vitro
crystal formation, especially if the sample is stored at 4 °C.3s
II.Procedures for a routine urinalysis have been described.36-39
8/URINARYSYSTEM
441
III.
Common components ofmost routine urinalyses
A.Physical examination:color, clarity,and USG
B.Chemical examination by reagent strip methods
1.Common assays:pH,protein,glucose,ketone,heme (occult blood),bilirubin,and
urobilinogen
2.Other assays: nitrite,USG,and leukocyte esterase
C. Sediment examination: microscopic examination to identify erythrocytes, leukocytes,
bacteria, casts, crystals, epithelial cells,and other nondissolved material (may be done
with nonstained or with stained urine sediment preparations)
IV.
Urine compositionisdetermined bythree major factors.Becauseof thesefactors,the urine
composition is affected by the entire urinary system and by other body systems.
A.Quantity and composition of the plasma presented to kidneys
B.Renal functions,including filtration,tubular secretion,and absorption
C.Material (chemicals and cells) added to the glomerular filtrate as it fows through
kidneys, ureters,urinary bladder, urethra, and prepuce or vagina/vulva
V.
It is important to know the method of urine collection (i.e.,voided,cystocentesis,
catheterization, or “off-surface) when the UA results are being interpreted.Voided
samples may have more bacteria,epithelial cells,and leukocytes from the distalurethra
and genital tract. Cystocentesis samples may be affected by iatrogenic hemorrhage, but
they localize abnormalities from the kidneys to the proximal urethra. Catheterized
samples may have more epithelial cells, blood from iatrogenic hemorrhage, lubricant,
and bacteria.And “off-surface” samples may be contaminated with a variety of
microscopic particulates.Results expected in healthy dogs,cats,horses,and cattle are
listed in Table 8.7.
PHYSICALEXAMINATIONOFURINE
I.
Urine color (pigments)
A.Physiologic processes
1.The normal yellow to amber is due to urochromes,a group of poorly defined urine
pigments of which one is riboflavin.
2.Pale yellow urine is usually less concentrated than dark yellow urine, but not always
(Plate 1lA [for all plates, see the color section of this book]).
B.Analytical concepts: Gross assessment of urine color is typically done on fresh, well-
mixed urine.
C.Abnormal urine color(pigmenturia)
1.An abnormal color indicates the presence of abnormal pigments in the urine. Other
parts of the urinalysis or other assays are needed to determine which pigment or
pigments are present.
2.Although concurrent pigmenturias may alter expected colors,the following are
common abnormal colors and the substances that create them:
a.Red: erythrocytes,hemoglobin, and myoglobin
b.Red-brown: erythrocytes,hemoglobin,myoglobin, or methemoglobin
c.Brown to black: methemoglobin from hemoglobin or myoglobin
d.Yellow-orange:bilirubin
e.Yellow-green or yellow-brown: bilirubin and biliverdin
442
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 8.7.Expected UA results in healthy dogs,cats,horses,and cattle
Dog
Cat
Horse
Cattle
Physical
Color
Yellowa
Yellow"
Yellowa
Yellowa
Clarity
Clear
Clear
Hazy-turbid
Clear
USGf
1.015-1.045b
1.035-1.060b
1.020-1.050b
1.025-1.045b
Chemical
pH
5.5-7.5
5.5-7.5
7.5-8.5
7.5-8.5
Protein
Neg-1+*
Neg
Neg
Neg
Glucose
Neg
Neg
Neg
Neg
Ketone
Neg
Neg
Neg
Neg
Heme
Neg
Neg
Neg
Neg
Bilirubin
Neg-1+
Neg
Urobilinogen (EU)
0.2-1.0
0.2-1.0
0.2-1.0
0.2-1.0
Sediment (from centrifugation of 5 mL of fresh urine)
Leukocytes/hpf
<5d
<5d
<5d
<5d
Erythrocytes/hpf
<5
<5
<5
<5
Bacteria/hpf
None
None
None
None
Casts/lpf
None"
None
None"
None"
Epithelial cells/lpf
None to fewf
None to fewf
None to fewf
None to fewf
Crystals/lpf
None"
None"
None
None"
Other
Mucus
The intensity of yellowwill typically vary proportionately with theUSG
Trace and 1+ reactions should be found in the more concentrated samples.
The number of cells seen permicroscopicfeld will differ whenthediameterof the viewed field differs
because of differences between microscope ocular lenses.
A few hyaline casts usually are not associated with a pathologic state. Occasional granular casts can be
found in healthy animals.
fThis varies with the method of collection. Large round epithelial cells and squamous cells are expected in
voided and some catheterized samples.
Phosphate crystals in dogs and cats and carbonate crystals in horses and cattle are common, and their
presence may not indicate a pathologic state (see Table 8.12).
3.Horse urine may turn red or brown during storage or when exposed to snow. The
pigmenturia is reported to be caused by pyrocatechin (pyrocatechol),which is the
aromatic portion of catecholamines. A pathologic state is not associated with this
pigmenturia.
II.
Urine clarity
A.Physiologic processes
1.Clear urine is expected, but it may have mild rurbidity due to suspended paricles
(e.g,epithelial cells and crystals)
2.Equine urine is frequently turbid or cloudy because of the presence of mucoprotein
(produced by kidneys) or calcium carbonate crystals.
B.Analytical concepts: Gross assessment of urine carity is typically done on fresh,well
mixed urine.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
443
C.Cloudiness or turbidity indicates the presence of formed elements, such as cells
crystals,bacteria, casts, and lipid droplets in the urine
III.
Solute concentration
A.Physiologic processes
1.The solutes in urine are the dissolved ions and molecules.Most of them, including
electrolytes (Na, K+, Cl,Ca²,PO4,and NH） and metabolic products (urea and
Crt), are being excreted by the kidneys.
2.The concentrations of filtrate solutes are modified by the tubular resorption or
secretion of solutes and by the resorption of filtrate HO.
3.Urine solute concentrations are expected to increase when the kidneys are conserving
HO and decrease when the kidneys are not conserving HO.
B.Analytical concepts
1.Specific gravity (also called relative density),a physical property of a solution, is the
ratio of a solution’s weight to the weight of an equal volume of HO (ie., the ratio
of their densities）. Measurement of the true urine SG is an obsolete procedure.
Specific gravity is a unitless ratio.
2.Refractive index as an estimate of USG (USG)
a.The refractive index of urine is measured with a refractometer and used as a
routine clinical estimation of USG USG）.The refractive index of a solution is
the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to the speed of light in the solution.
When light waves enter a solution, they slow down and bend (refract).As solute
is added to H,O,the degree to which the light slows and is refracted increases
proportionately to the increase in solute concentrarion (ie.,the refractive index
increases).Specific gravity also increases proportionately to the solute concentra-
tion, so specific gravity correlates with refractive index if the types and propor-
tions of the solutes remain similar. If urine has relatively normal solute
composition,USGfrom a good-quality refractometer correlates very well with
osmolality.
b.The refractive index is highly dependent on three factors: solute concentration,
chemical composition of the solute, and temperature. Refractometers measure the
refractive index of the soluble solids in the fuid (ie., solutes in the solvent);
suspended particles (e.g.,cellscasts,and most crystals)dont rfract light and
thus do not alter the refractive index of urine.Because the suspended particles
interfere with light transmission （thereby causing cloudiness or turbidity),they
may make the demarcation line in the refractometer more difficult to read.
The following are USGvalues for ten cloudy urine samples (direct reading
supernatant reading):1.043/1.043,1.054/1.054,1.028/1.028,1.016/1.016,
1.083/1.083,1.021/1.022,1.051/1.052,1.048/1.048,1.061/1.062,and
1.051/1.052(authorsunpublished data).
c.Most temperature-compensated refractometers have USGr scales that are
calibrated for the normal composition of human urine (Fig. 8.6).
d.However, there are refractometers that are calibrated for constituents of canine,
feline, and large animal urine (Fig. 8.7).
(1)The calibration scale for dogs and large animals is slightly different from the
calibration scale for people.
(2)The calibration scale for cats is moderately different； for example, a 1.010
on the canine scale is about a 1.008 on the feline scale,a 1.025 on the
444
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
SERUM
PLASMA
PROTEIN
REFRACT.
g/100ml
INDEX,nD
12
URINE
1.357
SPECIFIC
-1.356
GRAVITY
1.355
-1.354
10
1.050
1.352
-1.351
1.045
1.350
-1.349
1.040
-1.348
.347
1.035
1.346
1.345
1.030
1.344
343
1.025
.342
341
1.020
340
339
1.015
338
1.010
337
336
1.005
335
PR/NRATIO
334
1.000
9'9
.333
Fig.8.6.Illustration of scales in a Leica TS400 hand-held refractometer. The refractometer measures the
fuid's refractive index, and the urine specific gravity and serum plasma protein scales are used to estimate
USGg or total protein concentrations,respectively.Therefractometer scales were calibrated for human
samples.Image usedwith permission fromLeicaMicrosystems,Bufalo,NY.PR/Nratio 6.54,conversion
factor-6.54g of protein contains 1 g of nitrogen.
canine scale is about a 1.022 on the feline scale, and a 1.040 on the canine
scale is about a 1.036 on the feline scale.
e.The amount of error in the feline USG ismild when a refractometer calibrated
for human urine is used. If refractive indices of human and feline urine were
1.3365, the USGwould be 1.010 and 1.008,respectively.If the refractive
indices were 1.3420, the USG would be 1.025 and 1.021, respectively.2Thus,
if arefractometer calibrated for human urine is used for cat urine,the urine
appears slightly more concentrated than it really is.
f.Non-temperature-compensated refractometers underestimate the USG value
when ambient temperature increases above 68°F (20 °C).The amount of error
increases as the temperature increases.
When the USG is greater than the upper end of the USG scale of the refrac-
g
tometer,adirectreading cannot be obtainedIfareading can bemadeon the
refractive index scale,some labs convert the refractive index value to a USG
based on tables generated experimentally. If the reading is also greater than the
refractive index scale, the sample may be diluted 1:2 with distilled water,
reevaluated, and reported after correcting for the dilution (a 1.026 result with the
diluted sample would be reported as 1.052). However, diagnostically, it is usually
8/URINARYSYSTEM
445
TEMPERATURECOMPENSATED
URINE S.G.
14
DOG
CAT
13
LARGEANIMALS
1.060
1.060
12
三
11
1.050
10
1.050
9
二
一
1.040
三
1.040
一
6
1.030
1.030
三
4
1.020
1.020
3
三
三
1.010
SERUM OR
1.010
PLASMA
三
PROTEIN
gms/100ml
三
1.000
1.000
Fig.8.7.Ilustration of scales in aLeicaVET360hand-held veterinary refractometer.The refractometer has
a specific gravity scale for dog and large animal urine and a separate scale for cat urine. Note that, for a
 rop  es e   si  r  ds    
animal urine. Image used with permission from Leica Microsystems,Bufflo, NY.
not necessary toknow how concentrated the urine is when it is too concentrated
to be read directly from the refractometer.
3.Osmolality (see Chapter 9 for interpretation of serum osmolality values)
a.Principle (freezing-point osmometry method):The freezing point of a solution is
inversely related to the solute concentration in the solution.As the solute
concentration increases,the freezing point decreases.A freezing-point osmometer
detects the freezing point of a solution and converts the value to osmolality.
b.Osmolality,which is the solute concentration of a solution, can be expressed in
osmoles of solute particles per kilogram of solvent (osmol/kg)or in moles of
solute per kilogram of solvent (mol/kg): 1 osmol is 1 mol of osmotically active
particles.Fora substance that does not dissociate in solution,1molequals
1 osmol.For a substance that completely issociates into two ions per mole,each
1 mol of the substance generates 2 osmol of particles.
c.Urine osmolality measurements are usually limited to specific cases where
accurate assessment of renal concentrating or diluting abilities is critical. The gold
standard for assessing urine solute concentration is freezing-point osmometry.
4.USGr as an estimate of osmolality
a.Figure 8.8illustrates the relationship between USGr and urine osmolality
measurements.
446
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
1.030
1.025
1.020
1.010
1.005
1.000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Urineosmolality(mmol/kg)
Fig. 8.8. Comparison of osmolality and USGer in canine urine samples with USGef≤1.025 (n = 185).
There is a high correlation (r = 0.91) between the two methods of assessing urine solute concentration:
freezing-point osmometry and refractive index. For these samples, the mean Osm,USG was 33 with a sd
of 5;the mean ± 2 sd (or 95 % interval) is represented by the area between the two diagona/line.The three
values that fell above the 95 % interval had high protein concentrations (estimated concentration
≥500mg/dL)
b.Conclusions from the comparison
(1)In most urine samples, there is a good linear relationship between USGf
and osmolality.Thus,the USG is typically an accurate refection of the
urine solute concentration.
(2)Because of this good correlation, the Osm,:USGer ratio is relatively constant
(Eq.8.2）.In 185 canineurine samples with USG≤1.025,the
Osm:USGfratio was33±5（mean ± sd).In37felineurine sampleswith
USG1.025（using non-feline scale),the OsmUSGfratiowas35±5
(mean ± sd）.3
Urine osmolaliry
Osm:USG
(8.2.)
1000(USG-1.000）
Example:If urine osmolality =600 mosm/kg and USG=1.020,then:
600
600
600
Osm:USGf=
=30
1000 (1.020-1.000)
1000 (0.020)
20
OR
Urine osmolality
Osm:USG=
；Osm：USG=
600
=30
Last 2 digits of USG
20
8/URINARYSYSTEM
447
c.Wheninterpretingeither theSGvalue orurine osmolality,itmay bemr
tant to recognize the following relationships:
(1)If urine 1 has an osmolality of 300 mmol/kg and urine 2 has an osmolality
of 600mmol/kg, the solute concentration in urine 2 is twice the solute
concentration in urine 1.
(2)If theUSGfof urine 3 is 1.010 and the USGfofurine 4 is 1.020,the
solute concentration in urine 4 is approximately rwice the solute concentra-
tion in urine 3.
d.When there is either a marked proteinuria or marked glucosuria, the USG
overestimates the concentration of urine solutes and thus renal concentrating
ability (Fig. 8.8).The Osm,:USGf ratio will be decreased (in dogs,below 20)
(1)A[protein] of1g/dL adds about 0.003-0.005 to USGrbut has almost no
effect on osmolality.
(2)A[glucose]of 1 g/dL adds about 0.004-0.005 toUSGerand only slightly
increases urine osmolality (about 5 mmol/kg)
5.Reagent strip for estimating USG (Bayer Diagnostics)
a.The reagent strip method is not recommended for estimation of urine solute
concentration or USGof domesticmammals
b.Principle: The ionic strength of urine is related to total solute concentration.The
reagent system has indicators that produce different colors when dipped in urine
samples of different ionic strengths.
c.The semiquantitative scale is 1.0001.030 at 0.005intervals,with best accuracy
when the urine pH is <6.5.Add 0.005 to the reading for a pH> 6.5.
d.Falsely low results occur in alkaline urine; for example, most urines with a
pH ≥7.0 and a USGer of 1.025-1.035 had a dipstick USG of 1.015.4
Moderate quantities ofprotein can cause falsely highvalues,and glucosuria
can cause falsely low values.s
C.Expected USGf
1. One must have knowledge of an animal’s HO balance and medications to properly
assess an animal's ability to concentrate or dilute urine.
a.An animal that is dehydrated or has restricted access to HO should excrete a
relatively smallvolume of concentrated urine; that is,with arelativelyhigh
USGef
b.After diuretic orfuid therapy,an animal should excrete a relatively high volume of
less concentratedisosthenuri,ordiluteurinehatsurinewith alower
2.Healthy animals with normal or adequate renal function can excrete urine with a
broad USG range, depending on what the kidneys are being challenged to do.
a.Maximal urine dilution in domestic mammals as assessed by USGnear 1.001
b.Maximal urine concentration as assessed by USG cats > 1.080, dogs near
1.060,and horses and cattle near 1.050
c.Usual USG values when H,O intake is adequate and hydration status is
normal: dogs (1.0151.045), cats (1.035-1.065), horses (1.020-1.050), and
carttle (1.025-1.045). However, the USGr may be lower or higher in animals
with normal renal function.
D.Interpretation of USG values
1.A USG.r is usually needed for the assessment of renal concentrating ability when
animals are azotemic, polyuric, oliguric, or anuric. Because of the many variables
that changeurine solute concentrations,it is difficult to formulate firm guidelines
for the interpretation of USGf in all cases.
448
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 8.8.Major pathogenicmechanisms of polyuria
↓Tubularresponse
↓Medullary
Solute diuresis
toADH
tonicity
ADH
Chronic renal failure
+°
+
+
-b
Acute renal failure
+°
Postobstructive diuresisd
+
+°
Diabetes mellitus
+
e
Hypercalcemia
+
Canine pyometra
一
+
-e
Hypokalemia
一
+
一
Hypoadrenocorticism
+f
一
士
Liver failure
h
+
Central diabetes insipidus
+
Hyperadrenocorticism
+
Psychogenic polydipsia
+
*A plus sign indicates that mechanism can contribute to the polyuria.
Initially,there may beoliguria.If the animal survives the acuteillness,the surviving but damaged
tubules may not be able to respond to ADH adequately.
Altered Na-regulatory hormone responses and other defective tubular functions may contribute.
*Persistent diuresis may decrease medullary tonicity because of decreased tubular resorption of solutes.
Hypoosmolality would decrease the stimulus for ADH release,but concurrent hypovolemia would
stimulate ADH release.
An increased NH concentration may interfere with tubular response to ADH.
An increased GFR may also contribute.
2.Animals with impaired renal concentrating ability will have one or more of the
following defects (mechanisms for the resulting polyuric states are listed in
Table 8.8):
a.ADH deficiency is present (central diabetes insipidus).
b.Epithelial cells of distal nephrons are not responsive to ADH (nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus).
c.Solute overload was present (too much solute entering the loop as occurs with
Osmotic diuresis,renal failure,or increased GFR),causing a high owrate and
decreased resorption of tubular HO.
d.Decreased medullary hypertonicity
(1)Prolonged hyponatremia or hypochloremia
(2）Defective Na and Cl transport in the loop of Henle (e.g, loop diuretics)
(3)Decreased urea production because of liver disease
(4)Solute overload or prolonged diuresis
3.General guidelines for USGr interpretation are in Table 8.9.
4.USG in various disorders or conditions
a.USGf > 1.030 in an oliguric dog, > 1.040 in an oliguric cat, and > 1.025 in
oliguric horses or cows
Table 8.9. Guidelines for interpretation of USGvalues in a dog
Case information
USG
Interpretation
Nothing known
1.001-1.060
Could be found in a clinically healthy or sick dog
Dehydrated
>1.030
Reflects renal attempts to conserve HO appropriately
1.0141.030
renal failure; could be seen with glucosuria,
hyponatremia/hypochloremia,partial renal diabetes
insipidus disorders,hypoadrenocorticism
1.007-1.013
Strongly indicates defective renal concentrating ability;if
azotemic, then renal insufficiency or failure until proven
otherwise
001>
Strongly indicates defective renal concentrating ability but
not due to renal failure, as kidneys have ability to dilute
ultrafiltrate; consider central or renal diabetes insipidus
disorders
Polyuria
>1.020
Reflects renal attempts to conserve HO and thus not in
renal insufficiency/failure; couldbe seen withglucosuria
hyponatremia/hypochloremia, partial central or renal
diabetes insipidus disorders
1.007-1.013
Strongly indicates defective renal concentrating ability;if
azotemic,then renal insufficiency or failure until proven
otherwise
<1.007
Strongly indicates defective renal concentrating ability but
not due to renal failure, as kidneys have ability to dilute
ultrafilrrate; consider central orrenal diabetes insipidus
disorders
Oliguria
>1.030
Reflects renal attempts to conserve HO appropriately
1.014-1.030
Uncommon; suspect acute renal failure
1.007-1.013
Typical for oliguric renal failure; acute or chronic
Glucosuria
>1.020
Reflects renal concentrating ability but may be partially
impaired by solute diuresis or decreased medullary
hypertonicity (medullary washout);USGrmay be
falsely increased 0.004-0.005 for every 1 g/dL of
glucose in urine)
1.007-1.020
May reflect impaired concentrating ability caused by solute
diuresis or medullary washout but could have
concurrent renal insufficiency/failure
Hyponatremia and
>1.020
Refects renal concentrating ability but may be impaired
hypochloremia
by loop of Henle failure as may occur with
hypoadrenocorticism
1.007-1.013
May reflect greater impairment of concentrating ability
because of the loop of Henle failure but also must
consider renal insufficiency/failure
<1.007
Refect renal diluting ability and thus not renal
insuffciency/failure; defective ADH secretion probably
present
* Assuming that the USGer values are not falsely elevated by either protein or glucose
Note: Guidelinesfor cats would refect the greater concentrating ability of the feline kidneys;guidelines
for horses and cattle would refect lesser concentrating ability when challenged or in health.
449
450
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(1)Nonrenal processes (e.g,hypovolemia and decreased cardiac output) have
led to decreased renal perfusion.Hypovolemia or plasma hyperosmolality
stimulated the release of ADH.
(2)ADH promoted the resorption of HO in the collcting tubules,thus
concentrating the tubular fuid and thus urine.
b.USG < 1.030 in an obviously dehydrated dog,< 1.040 in a dehydrated cat, and
<1.025 in a dehydrated cow or horse
(1)Such findings indicate a renal concentrating defect that could be caused by
renal or extrarenal disease.
(2)Pathogeneses of the specific causes vary with the pathologic states (see
polyuric disorders in the next section).
c.USG=1.020-1.035 in a polyuricanimal
(1) Diabetes mellitus: Glucosuria causes an osmotic diuresis by inhibiting the
passive resorption of HO in the proximal tubules.If it persiststhe high
owratemayimpairresorption ofa,Cl,andurea,and thusmedullary
tonicity decreases.
(2)Potentially seen with renal glucosuria
(3)Partial diabetes insipidus and hypoadrenocorticism: An animal may have
polyuria and a corresponding low USG on some days,but values in the
1.020-1.035 interval on other days.
(4)Renal failure: Concentrating ability may be incompletely impaired when
kidneys arefailing,buta lowerUSGismore typicalofpolyuricrenal
failure.
d.USG= 1.007-1.013 in oliguric animal
(1)This typically indicates renal failure or end-stage renal disease if the animal
is azotemic,but it could represent acuterenal disease or urinary tract
obstruction.
(2)Concentrating and diluting defects could be caused by solute diuresis,
decreased tubular response to ADH, or impaired ability to maintain
medullary solute gradient.
e.USGe=1.007-1.013 in polyuric animal
(1）If there is concurrent azotemia,such fndings areessentially diagnostic of
renal failure.
(2)Concentrating and diluting defects are caused by solute diuresis, decreased
tubular response to ADH, or impaired ability to maintain medullary solute
gradient.
(3)If there is not azotemia, the finding could represent earlier stages of
renal insuficiency or extrarenal disorders that impairrenal concentrating
ability.
f.USG= 1.001-1.015 in a polyuric animal that is not azotemic
(1) Central diabetes insipidus: Hypothalamic or pituitary disease decreases the
production of ADH, and thus collecting tubules cannot resorb H,O and
thus solutes are not concentrated in the distal nephron.
(2)Hyperadrenocorticism: The pathogenesis of impaired concentrating ability is
not firmly established.
(a)Glucocorticoid hormones inhibited ADH secretion in some studies6.47
With lower ADH activity,there is less stimulation of collecting tubule
to resorb H,O.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
451
(b)Cortisol may inhibit the responsiveness of renal tubules to ADH, and
thus less H,O is resorbed.However,some studies indicate that cortisol
(3）Hyperaldosteronism: The pathogenesis of a dog's polyuric state was not
firmly established, but the evidence supported an impaired response to
ADH and delayed ADH release after hypertonic stimulation.Plasma
cortisol concentrations were within reference intervals in the basal state and
during a low-dose dexamethasone suppression test. Measurement of other
adrenal steroid concentrations was not mentioned.
(4)Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is a group of renal and extrarenal diseases in
which ADH is present but renal tubules are not responsive to it.The group
includes hypercalcemia, canine pyometra, liver failure, and hypokalemia.
(5)Hypercalcemia
(a)Increased [fCa²] inhibits ADH activity via dysregulation of aquaporins
Aquaporin 2 translocation to apical membranes appears to be decreased.
In addition, cellular aquaporin 2 appears to be decreased because of
(b)There is also evidence that Ca²+reduces resorption of Na and Cl in
the ascending limb of the loop of Henle, which reduces the osmotic
gradient needed for H,O resorption in the distal nephron.
(c)A persistently increased [fCa²] may cause mineralization of tubular
basement membranes,which results in a calcium nephropathy and thus
renal insufficiency orfailure.
(6)Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
(a)The USGr will be this low in only a small minority of hypoadrenocor
ticism patients.
(b)The pathogenesis is not well documented, but there may be failure of
Naand Cldelivery to the loop of Henle and thus failure tomaintain
medullary hypertonicity.
(c)Decreased effective plasma osmolality (because of hyponatremia and
hypochloremia) will reduce the osmotic stimulus for ADH synthesis and
release. Thus, ADH activity might be reduced (conversely,hypovolemia
is probably stimulating ADH release).
7)Canine pyometra: The specific pathogenesis is not clear, but the kidneys are
refractory or poorly responsive toADH. One potential mechanism is that
bacterial endotoxins initiate the refractory state.
(8)Liver failure
(a)Decreased urea synthesis may lead to a decreased medullary [ureal
and thus a decreased medullary concentration gradienr (medullary
washout).
(b）Other possbilities have been suggested:psychogenic polydipsia,defects
in portal vein osmoreceptors, and impairment of renal concentrating
mechanisms because of increased NH+ excretion.
(9)Hypokalemia
(a)Hypokalemia makes collecting tubules less responsive to ADH,
perhaps because of reduced generation of cyclic adenosine mono
phosphate (cAMP)3 and down-regulated expression of aquaporin
channels.651
452
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(b)Kis needed for Na and Cl resorption in the ascending limb of the
loop of Henle,and thus hypokalemia may impair countercurrent
function.5154
(10)Hypoparathyroidism:The pathogenesis is not well understood.
(11) Feline hyperthyroidism: The pathogenesis is not well understood.
(12)Psychogenic polydipsia:Excessive HO consumption leads to expanded
extracellular fuidvolume and hypoosmolality.Polyuria results from
increased GFR and decreased ADH secretion.
(13） Others: diuretic therapy,alcohol administration, intravenous fuid adminis-
tration,or dextrose or mannitol fuid therapy
(14) Thyroiditis: Occasional dogs with thyroiditis (but not hypothyroidism)
have polyuria and polydipsia. The pathogenesis is not known, but it may
not be directly related to thyroiditis.55
gVariable USGr values (<1.007 to > 1.020) with hyponatremia and
hypochloremia
(1)Because Naand Cl are major contributors to the hypertonic interstitial
fuid in renal medullae, any disorder that diminishes medullary resorption of
Na*and Cl may diminish renal concentrating ability.The impairment of
concentrating abiliry will vary with the degree ofreducedmedullary
hypertonicity. Na and Cl resorption in the ascending limb of the loop of
Henle may be diminished through two major processes:
(a)A defective transport system（e.g,inhibition of theNa-K-2Cl
cotransporter or Na*-K-ATPase)
（b）Decreased delivery of Naor Cl to the loop of Henle（e.g，persistent
hyponatremia or hypochloremia)
(2)Hyponatremia and hypochloremia will also reduce plasma osmolality and
thus reduce the stimulus for ADH secretion.Reduced ADH activity in the
collecting tubules results in formation of more dilute urine.
CHEMICALEXAMINATIONOFURINE(QUALITATIVEORSEMIQUANTITATIVE)
/
Major concepts
A.Semiquantitative results of urinalysis procedures (chemical and microscopic) are used to
detect or characterize parhologic renal and extrarenal states or to monitor response to
therapy. The concentration of a solute in urine will depend on rwo major factors:
(1) the amount of solute excreted in the urine over time, and (2) the amount ofHO
excreted by the urinary system during the same time interval. Solutes from the repro-
ductive tract may alter urine solute concentrations, particularly in voided samples.
1.The semiquantitative results of the reagent pad systems are graded on scales
provided by the manufacturers of the reagent strips (Table 8.10).
a.A 1+result indicates enough solute was present to give a 1+reaction but not
enough to give a 2+ reaction.
b.When reactions are read by visual examination, distinguishing berween a 1+
reaction and a 2+reaction,or berween 2+ and 3+（etc.),may be difficult.Thus,
the true concentration of a solute may be considerably different from the
reported value.
c.It is important to store reagent pad sticks permanufacturer's recommendations
because atmospheric moisture, light, and temperature affect the stability of the
Table 8.lo. Semiquantitative values or terms of solute concentrations estimated by urinalysis reagent strip reactions
Glucose(mg/dL)
Bilirubin (mg/dL)
Ketone (mg/dL)
Heme²(mg/dL)
Protein (mg/dL)
Urobilinogen (mg/dL)
Multistix by Bayer
<75to125
<0.4to0.8
<5to10
<0.015to0.062
15-30
Trace
100
5
10
0.2-1.0
1+
250
Small
15
Small
30
2
2+
500
Moderate
40
Moderate
100
4
3+
1000
Large
80
Large
000
8
4+
2000
160
1000
Chemstrip by Roche
Negative
<40
<0.5
<9
<10
<6
Trace
50
6
1+
100
S'0
Small
10
2+
250-500
1.0
Moderate
50
100
4
3+
1000
2.0
Large
250
500
8
4+
12
 The heme test is commonly referred to as either the *blood” or “occult blood test (see the text for explanation).
 Ranges are the reported analytical detection limits of the reactions in contived urine. Reactions may vary in the actual samples. Bilirubin units are mgdL
The ketone detection limit was measured with acetic acid. The heme detection limit was measured with hemoglobin (mg/dL) The protein detection limit was
measured with albumin.
These values were listed as the detection limits in the package insert.
Notei See the tertforpHvalues.
453
454
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
reagents in the pads.Routine use of commercial urine control solutions is
recommended to ascertain that the reactions are valid.
2.Automated reflectance photometers are available for photometric assessment of color
changes (e.g., the Clinitek 100 Urine Chemistry Analyzer). A major advantage of
the instruments is that they remove the person-to-person variation in the color
changes on the pad.
a. In a study involving canine urine samples, the authors reported good agreement
between visual estimation and automatic measurements for most analytes. The
USGreagent pad values wereunreliable.6
b.In another comparison of 40 canine urine samples, there was very good to
excellent agreement for glucose and heme. Instrument readings for protein tended
to be slightly lower, and ketone and bilirubin detection was slightly higher (i.e.
some instrument reactions were positive whenvisualreadings were negative）.57
3.Relationship of urine solute concentration,urine volume,and dailyurinary
excretion of solutes (Eq.8.3)
Daily urinary solute excretion =[solute]。X urine volume/day
(8.3.)
For example for protein excretion:
Daily urinary protein excretion = 70 mg/dL ×1000 mL/d
= 700 mg/d
a.If the urine solute concentration remained constant (e.g.,150 mg/dL) from
one day to the next, but the urine volume doubled (e.g, from 100 mL/d to
200mL/d),then the urinary excretion of the solute doubled from one day to
the next （from 150 mg/d to300 mg/d）.
b.If the urine solute concentration doubled (from 150 mg/dL to300 mg/dL) from
one day to the next,but the urine volume remained constant (1o0 mL/d),then
the urinary excretion of the solute doubled from one day to the next (from
150 mg/d to 300 mg/d).
c.If the urine solute concentration doubled (from 150 mg/dL to 300 mg/dL) from
one day to the next, but the urine volume halved (from 100 mL/d to 50 mL/d),
then theurinary excretionof the soluteremained constant from one day to the
next (150mg/d).
4.Relationship of urine volume and USG values
a.If the animal is not in renal insufficiency or failure,urine volume is inversely
proportional to USGef
b. If the urinary excretion of solutes remains constant (e.g., 1 g/d), but the urine
volume doubles from one day to thenext, theUSG is expected tohalve” from
one day to the next (e.g,from 1.040 to 1.020)
c.If the urinary excretion of solutes remains constant (e.g.1 g/d),but the urine
volume halves from one day to the next, theUSGis expected to“double” from
one day to the next (e.g,from 1.020 to 1.040).
5.Use of concepts to interpret urinalysis results
a.Dog 1 with a urine [glucose]of 500mg/dL and a USGrof 1.015 is typically
1.0 g/dL and a USGf of 1.030.
b.Dog 3 with a urine [protein] of 50 mg/dL and a USGof 1.040 is probably
not proteinuric.Healthy dogs may have urine protein concentrations of
8/URINARYSYSTEM
455
465mg/dL,5USGr is typically 1.020-1.045.However, dog 4 with a urine
[protein] of 50 mg/dL and a USG of 1.010 is proteinuric.
C.Cat 1 with a urine [protein] of 50 mg/dL and a USGof 1.010 is typically
200mg/dL and a USGr of 1.040.Both cats are proteinuric.
6.Conclusions
a.In results from routine urinalyses, the USG helps determine the significance of
estimated solute concentrations.
b.A positive chemicalreaction should first be considered a qualitative result
（substance present), and then the significance of the positive reaction can be
weighted according to the strength of the reaction and the USGef
B.The physical and chemical properties of urine may be different after centrifugation if
enough particles were suspended in the urine prior to centrifugation.
1.These following values may be the same prior to and after centrifugation (unless the
heme pigment in erythrocytes interferes with the reading of color changes):
a.Color(if due to pigmented solute and not pigmented cells or suspended
particles)
b.USG (but the line may be more difficult to read if the urine is cloudy)
c.pH
d.Protein (unless hemoglobin is present in erythrocytes)
e.Glucose
f.Ketone
Heme （if the positivereaction isdue t frehemoglobin,freemethemoglobin,r
myoglobin rather than erythrocytes)
h.Bilirubin
2.The following values may be different prior to and after centrifugation:
a.Color (if due to pigmented cells or other suspended particles)
b.Protein (if hemoglobin in the erythrocytes is reacting with the pad)
C.Heme (if intact erythrocytes are present)
IL.
pH (negative logarithm of free [H]) of urine
A.Physiologic processes
1.The pH of urine is affected bymany renal and extrarenal factors.Carnivores usually
have acidic urine, whereas herbivores usually have alkaline urine unless they are on
milk diets.
) sses
and horses and cows (7.5-8.5)
3.Much of the H+ that is excreted by kidneys is incorporated into other molecules
(e.g,NH，HPO，andHO)
B.Analytical concepts
1.Principle: based on the double indicator system that is sensitive to change in [H+].
The indicator does not detect Hbeing excreted in NHor HPO
2.The reagent strip has a pH indicator pad with a range of 5.0-8.5.Results are
reported to the nearest 0.5 units (except 5.5 reaction with some strips). The system
is designed to provide an estimate of urine pH and does not replace the more
precise pH meter when quantitative analysis is needed.s9
3.Abnormal urine color (pigmenturia) may interfere with visual interpretation of the
color change in the reagent pad.
456
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 8.11.Major disorders or conditions which cause abnormal chemistry results in a
routine UA
Aciduria
*Expected in healthy carnivores, omnivores, and herbivores on a milk diet
*Acidoses, some metabolic and potentially with respiratory
*Associated with hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis (paradoxical aciduria)
Hypokalemia
Hproduction by bacteria
Proximal tubular acidosis (if HCO,is depleted)
Alkalinuria
*Expected in healthy herbivores and after meals in monogastric mammals (alkaline tide)
*Urea degradation:spontaneous in older samplesnitiated byurease-containing bacteria
Alkaloses, somemetabolic and potentially with respiratory
Proximal rubular acidosis (early)
Proteinuria
Prerenal (overflow): hemoglobinuria,myoglobinuria, paraproteinuria
*Glomerular: glomerulonephritis or amyloidosis
Tubular: congenital or acquired proximal rubular diseases
*Hemorrhagic or inflammatory proteinuria
False-positive reaction (see the text)
Glucosuria (glycosuria)
*Hyperglycemia
Renal: congenital or acquired proximal tubular diseases
False-positivereaction (see the text)
Ketonuria
*Ketosis
False-positive reaction (see the text)
Heme positivea
*Hematuria (pathologic,iatrogenic, estral)
*Hemoglobinuria
Myoglobinuria
Methemoglobinuria
False-positive reaction (see the text)
Bilirubinuria
*Expected in substantially concentrated urine of healthy dogs
*Hemolytic diseases
*Hepatobiliary diseases
False-positive reaction (see the text)
*A relatively common disease or condition
* In most reagent systems, the heme test is called either the *blood" test or the “occult blood” test,
although the assay is designed to detect heme.
4.Contamination with buffer from an adjacent protein reagent pad may falsely
decrease the urine pH result.
C. Aciduria suggests an increased secretion of H+ (Table 8.11)
1.It is expected in carnivores, some omnivores, and herbivores on milk. H is
produced from protein diets.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
457
2.Acidoses,respiratory and some metabolic: There is a net increase in H+ secretion
(H and NH4) by proximal and distal tubular cells; the secretion is enhanced by
decreased extracellular pH
3.Hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis (see pathogenesis in Chapter 9: Bicarbonate
Concentration and Total Carbon Dioxide Concentration, sect.IIl)
4.Hypokalemia:H+ is secreted,and type A intercalated cells resorb K+ through H-K
ATPase pumps that appear to be most active when there is a state of K depletion.
5.Furosemide therapy: The H secretion may be increased because of hypokalemia or
increased by other factors (secondary hyperaldosteronism or enhanced renal excre
tion of Na and Hbecause the Na*-K-2Cl cotransporter in the loop of Henle is
blocked by furosemide).
6.Proximal renal tubular acidosis (if HCO, depleted): A decreased conservation of
HCObyproximal tubules provides more HCOto buffermore Hin tubular
fluid, and thus the urine pH is greater than expected in an acidotic animal (which
may be alkalinuric).However, when plasma [HCO] decreases, the remaining
tubular function may be enough to conserve the filtered HCO.Then, there will
not be sufficient HCO,in the tubular fluid to buffer the H,and aciduria may be
present.
D.Alkalinuria suggests a decreased excretion of H+ (Table 8.11)
1.Urea splitting or hydrolysis: Breakdown of urea releases two -NHz groups that each
quickly accepts H ion to form NH. Removal of free H+ from urine makes the
urine more alkaline.
a.It may occur with the spontaneous degradation of urea that occurs with delayed
completion of urinalyses.
b.It may be caused by urease-containing bacteria (e.g., Staphylococcus and Proteus),
eitherinvivo orinvitro
2.Respiratory alkalosis:Probably less H is secreted by the distal nephron because of
less stimulation of the H+-ATPase pump.
3. Distal renal tubular acidosis: Decreased H secretion by the distal nephron can lead
be alkaline.
4.Proximal renal tubular acidosis (see the explanation in the preceding sect.C.6)
II1.
Protein in urine
A.Physiologic processes
1.Many small proteins (usually Mr<68,0o0) can pass through the glomerular
filtration barrier.In most healthy animalsthe proteins areresorbed in the proximal
tubules, and thus very little to no protein is detected in urine samples.
2.Urine of healthy dogs may contain a measurable [protein] without clear evidence of
urinary tract disease.
a.Most of the protein is albumin.
b.Dogs (n = 145) with concentrated urine (1.020-1.045) and without evidence of
urinary tract diseasehadnegative,traceor1reactionswith a dipstickreagent
pad:465 mg/dL with a Coomassie brilliant blue method and 495 mg/dL with
a trichloroacetic acidmethod.ss
3.Tamm-Horsfall protein is a mucoprotein that apparently is secreted by the thick
ascending limbof the loop of Henle and part of thedistal tubule and collecting
ducrs. It is soluble above pH 7 but insoluble below pH 7. Ir is a major component
of hyaline casts and thought to be part of the matrix of granular casts.
458
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.Analytical concepts
1.Reagent strip method
a.Principle: The reagent pad contains a colorimetric pH indicator (tetrabromphe-
nol blue) at acidic pH.Amino groups of negatively charged proteins bind the dye
and change the pad’s color.
b.Changes in the color of the pad correspond to estimated [protein] (Table 8.10).
C.Abnormal urine color (pigmenturia) may interfere with reagent pad color and
therefore with estimation of [protein].
d.Readings may be falsely increased in highly buffered alkaline urine (i.e., > 8.0),
inmoderately alkaline urine if highly concentrated,or inurine that contains
quaternary ammonium salts or chlorhexidine.
e.Analytical sensitivity and specificity
(1)The method detects albumin better than globulins,which are less negatively
charged.Protein in cells (e.g. epithelial cells and leukocytes) reacts very
poorly with reagents.
(2)Protein concentrations needed to give a trace to 1 +reaction:albumin
(14-21 mg/dL),α-globulin (20-30mg/dL),β-globulin (40-50 mg/dL),
 sd)
hemoglobin (5-50mg/dL)6,62
2.SSA turbidiry
a.Principle: Proteins are denatured by acids and form a precipitate that is seen as
increased solution turbidity.Urine that is hazy to cloudy should be centrifuged
prior to SSA turbidity testing.
b.Results may be expressed on a visual turbidity scale (1 + to 4 +) or visually
compared against standard solutions to interpolate concentrations. There are also
spectrophotometric SSA methods that providemore quantitative results.There is
a lack of interlaboratory standardization for reporting SSA test results.
C.SSA reacts with albumin better than globulins (reportedly 24 times as well) and
will detect Bence Jones proteins if concentrations are sufficient.
d.Falsely increased readings can be caused by X-ray contrast media, tolbutamide,
penicillin (massive dose), sulfisoxazole, tolmetin sodium, and turbidity caused by
coprecipitation of crystals because of the low pH of SSA.
C.Proteinuria (Table 8.11 and Fig.8.9)
1.Prerenal (overfow, overload, and preglomerular) proteinuria
a.A pathologic state increases the plasma concentration of a small protein that
passes through the glomerular filtration barrier.If the amount of fltered protein
exceeds the ability of proximal tubules toresorb it, the protein is excreted in the
urine. Examples: paraproteinuria (light-chain proteins including monomers with
M,=23,000 and dimers with M,=46,000),hemoglobinuria (dimer M,=
34,000),myoglobinuria (M,=17,000),and postcolostral proteinuria （includes
β-lactoglobulinuria)in food animals
b.Light-chain proteinshemoglobin,andmyoglobinmolecules are detected by
routine urine protein assays.
c.Overflow proteinurias do not produce hypoproteinemia.
2.Glomerular proteinuria
a.Glomerular disease damages the filtration barrier and decreases selective perme
ability.The glomerulus becomes increasingly permeable to larger proteins or to
8/URINARYSYSTEM
459
Kidney
Blood
Glom
Prerenal
Tubular"
Hemor.
&Inf.
Hemor.
&Inf.
Hemor.
Urinary
Hemor.
&Inf.
bladder
&Inf.
Proteinuria
Fig. 8.9.Four major types of proteinuria
·In prerenal proteinurias (Prerenal), small proteins (e.g., hemoglobin dimers, light chains, and myoglobin)
present inthe plasma atincreased concentrations are excreted in the urine because they pass through the
glomerular filtration barrier and are incompletely resorbed in tubules.
·In glomerular proteinurias (Glom.), glomerular disease damages the filtration barrier and decreases selective
These proteins pass through the defective filtration barrier and are incompletely resorbed by tubules, so
they are excreted in urine.
In tubular proteinurias (Tubular),proximal renal tubules are defective,so proteins that normally are
resorbed from ultrafiltrate (e.g., some albumin and smaller globulins) are not, and thus they are excreted
in the urine.
·In hemorrhagic and inflammatory proteinurias (Hemor & Inf.),plasma proteins or hemoglobin enter the
urine because of hemorrhage or infammation involving the renal rubules, renal pelvisureters,urinary
bladder, urethra, or genital tract tissues.
negatively charged proteins. Prolonged mild or rapid severe glomerular protein-
largest forms) (see Chapter 7). Increased amounts of albumin and larger proteins
are expected onSDS-PAGEof urine from dogs with glomerular proteinuria.6465
b.In people,a transient proteinuria that occurs after exerciseis consideredaform
of glomerular proteinuria.
3.Tubular proteinuria
a.Proximal renal tubules are defective,so proteins that normally are resorbed from
ultrafiltrate (e.g., some albumin and smaller globulins) are not and thus are
excreted in the urine.Increased numbers of protein bands representing proteins
with a molecularmass less than that ofalbumin are expected with SDS-PAGE of
b.Tubular proteinurias are usually associated with acute renal diseases (toxicoses
and hypoxia) but can be congenital. They do not produce hypoalbuminemia.
4. Hemorrhagic or infammatory proteinuria (also called secretory or postrenal
proteinuria, but hemorrhage and exudation may occur in kidneys and are not
secretory processes)
a.Hemorrhagic: hemorrhage into the genitourinary tract due to impaired hemosta
sis,including blood vessel damage byinfammation,trauma,neoplasia,or other
necrosis
460
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
b.Infammatory: exudation of plasma proteins through vessel walls into the
genitourinary tract due to inflammation
The postrenal proteinurias are the most common proteinurias. The quantity of
protein lost is usuallynot suffcient to cause hypoalbuminemia,but theremay be
mild hypoalbuminemia caused by infammation or hemorrhage.Most proteins
detected in the urine entered filtratefrom the plasma.Proteinsfrom leukocytes
and epithelial cells are poorly detected by urine protein assays.
results:infammation (pyuria)and hemorrhage (hematuria).
e.One must consider reproductive tract sources (e.g.,prostatitis and estral bleed-
ing),especially in voided urine samples.
D.Other proteinuria classifications: The aforementioned classification system is not the
only system. Some divide proteinurias into three types (prerenal,renal,and postrenal)
in which the renal type includes both glomerular and tubular proteinurias.Another
classification scheme based on prerenal, renal, and postrenal divisions includes func-
tional and pathologic subdivisions of therenal proteinuria category,with glomerular,
functional proteinurias are considered to be mild and transient proteinurias caused by
physiologically altered renal handling of normal plasma proteins in the absence of renal
lesions (e.g., seen with exercise or fever).
E.Protein-losing nephropathy and renal failure concepts (Fig. 8.10)
1.Urea and Crt are small molecules that pass freely through the glomerular filtration
barrier (sieves). Some filtrate urea is resorbed by tubules.The remaining urea and
Crt are excreted in urine and thus do not accumulate in blood. Ir has been pre-
sumed that albumin does not pass through the glomerular filtration barrier in health
and thus remains in the blood (dogs may be an exception).
2.With a protein-losing nephropathy, the glomerular “sieves" become more porous,
and larger proteins or charged proteins that usually are repelled enter the renal
filtrate via glomeruli. If the ability to resorb proteins is exceeded, then a proteinuria
will be present.The continual loss of protein will lead to hypoalbuminemia.As long
as the number of functional glomeruli is adequate, urea and Crt will be adequately
removed from blood and azotemia will not develop.
3.If the glomerular disease destroys more nephrons, then renal failure occurs.The few
remaining functional glomeruli cannot remove urea and Crt fast enough from the
blood,so azotemia develops.Proteinuria continues because the remaining functional
glomeruli are permeable to proteins.The severity of hypoalbuminemia increases
because of continued albumin loss,but defective excretion of HO (associated with
Naand HOretention) may contribute to hypoalbuminemia.
F.Bence Jones proteinuria (immunoglobulin light-chain proteinuria)
1.Analysis of urine for Bence Jones proteins is not part of a routine urinalysis. It may
be indicated to clarify the type of proteinuria or to investigate a possible lymphopro-
liferative disease.
2.Bence Jones proreins are light chains (either K or A) of immunoglobulins that have
unique thermal properties: they precipitate between 40 °C and 60 °C, return to a
soluble state at 100C,and then precipitate again when cooled.The thermal
properties ofBenceJones proteins are due to thevariableportions of the light-chain
proteins.As described by Ritzman and Daniels, these proteins were first recog
nized by William MacIntyre in 1845.Dr.MacIntyre sent theurine sample to Dr
Healthy Animal
Kidney
UC
U=Urea
A
A
C = Creatinine
A=Albumin
ADH=Antidiuretichormoi
Normal glomerulus
U"
Leaky glomerulus
Destroyed glomerulus
Protein-losing nephropathy
Kidney
A
台
Protein-losingnephropathy
and renalfailure
Kidney
ADH
AU
Fig. 8.1o. Protein-losing nephropathy and renal failure. Illustrations depict a body's extracellular fluid as a
lake,kidneys as a dam, and the urine as the river below the dam. Urea and Crt molecules are small fish in
the lake, and albumin molecules are big fish. The nephron oonsists of the sieve or filter at the lake outlet
and the tubes that run through the dam. Some HO and urea are reclaimed to maintain extracellular fluid
HOandurea content.Only oneof tennephrons is shownas a filterwith a connected tubular system.
• In healthy animals, urea and Crt pass freely through ten functional flters, into the dam’s tubes, and into
the river. Some urea (and HO) is reclaimed from the dam's tubes in a process enhanced by ADH.
Albumin is too big to pass through the filters, so it stays in the lake.
▪In the protein-losing nephropathy illustration, 40 % of theilters (and nephrons) have been destroyed.
The remaining 60 % are damaged, more porous, and allow albumin to enter the dam and river. The loss
of albumin from the lake causes hypoalbuminemia and proteinuria. The remaining filters are suffcient to
keep urea and Crt removed from the lake, and thus azotemia does not develop.
In protein-losing nephropathy and renal failure, 80 % of the filters (and nephrons) have been destroyed.
The remaining 20 % are damaged,more porous and allow albumin to enter the dam and river.The loss
of albumin from the lake causes hypoalbuminemia and proteinuria.The remaining flters are insuffcient
to keep urea and Crt removed from the lake, and thus azotemia develops. Also, the remaining nephrons
cannot adequately conserve HO, and thus polyuria develops.
461
462
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Henry Bence Jones, who confirmed the findings. These proteins are known as
"Bence Jones proteins”and not“MacIntyre proteins,” perhaps because Bence Jones
published the case data first (1847) and MacIntyre's publication was in 1850.
3.The unique thermal properties of light-chain proteins are used as thebasis of the
Bence Jones test.
a.Basics of the positive heat test: (1) Urine is acidified to a pH near 4.9.(2)
Acidifiedurine isheated to56°Cfor 15min and observed forfocculence or
precipitates. (3） If focculence or precipitates are present (the test is negative if
they are absent), the urine sample is placed in a boiling water bath for 3 min and
examined for a decreased amount of precipitate.A decrease in focculence suggests
Bence Jones proteinuria.(4)Filter thehot urine through a funnel with flter paper
into a tube containing a thermometer. If Bence Jones proteins are present, they
should precipitate at about 60 °C and redissolve at about 40 °C. Variations in the
heat test acidifying solutions,filtrations,and time intervalshave been described.
b.The concentration of Bence Jones proteins needs to be > 145 mg/dL to get a
C.Other proteins may precipitate during heating (e.g.,fbrinogen precipitates at
56-58 °C), which makes interpretation dificult without the filtering and
assessment of precipitation during cooling.
4.Other methods of detecting light-chain proteinuria
a.The Bence Jones proteins react better in the SSA protein method than they do in
pad test may fail to detect light-chain proteinuria if the proteinuria is minimal.
b.If urine proteins are concentrated prior to electrophoresis, normal light-chain
proteins can be found in the β-globulin fraction (Plate 12J.2).
c.Immunoelectrophoresis for K-or A-light-chain proteins is the preferred method
of documenting light-chain proteinuria,but species-specifc antisera are not
readily available for individual species. Results from immunohistochemical
studies suggest that antibodies against human light-chain proteins cross-react
with light-chain proteins of domestic mammals (see Chapter 7).
5.Bence Jones proteinuria may occur because the formation of K- or A-light-chain
proteins by lymphocytes or plasma cells is increased.
a.Typically, their presence is associated with B-lymphocyte or plasma cell neoplasia
One study reported that about 30 % of the dogs with myeloma had a Bence
Jones proteinuria, though the authors did not state how the presence of the
Bence Jones proteins was detected or confirmed.6
b. Bence Jones proteinuria can also be caused by B-lymphocyte hyperplasia. By
means of SDS-PAGE and immunofxation methods,light-chain proteinurias
were found in dogs withleishmaniasisehrlichiosisand babesiosis
6.Light-chain proteins (M,=23,000 monomer or 46,000 dimer)pass through the
glomerular filtration barrier, and small quantities are resorbed by the proximal
tubules. If renal resorptive capacity is exceeded or if renal disease develops, light-
chain proteins are excreted in the urine.
IV.Glucose in urine
A.Physiologic processes
1.Glucose is a relatively small molecule (M, =180) that passes freely through the
glomerular filtration barrier and enters the ultrafltrate.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
463
2.Glucose is resorbed in the proximal tubules via a Na-glucose cotransport system
that depends on a favorable gradient established by active Na transport from
tubular cells to the peritubular Huid. The gradient promotes Naresorption from the
tubular fuid,and glucose is resorbed secondarily (indirect active transport or
secondary active transport).
3. The renal tubular transport maximum for glucose varies among domestic mammals.
The approximate transport maximums are 180-220 mg/dL in dogs, about
in mature cattle.
B.Analytical concepts
1. Reagent strip method
a.Principle: Conversion of glucose to gluconic acid is catalyzed by glucose oxidase
with liberation of HOwhich reacts with an indicator to give a color change in
the reagent pad. The degree of color change is proportional to the [glucose]
(Table 8.10). Indicators vary with different products.
b.Falsely increased reactions may be caused by HO and sodium hypochlorite.
Such contamination may occur when samples are obtained from an examination
table or cage floor.
c.Falsely decreased reactionsmaybecaused by ascorbic acidketonesandvery
concentrated urine samples. Cold urine, especially when reaction times are very
brief (e.g., 10 s), and marked bilirubinuria may also inhibit reactions.
2.Copper-reduction method (Clinitest)
a.Principle: Cu²+ reacts with a reducing substance (e.g, glucose, fructose, lactose,
hydroxide and thus a color change.
b.Semiquantitative results for the standard method arenegative,=250,=500,
=750,=1000,or =2000mg/dL.The method is probably more accurate than
the reagent strip method but requires a greater concentration for detection; that
is, the detection limit is higher
c.Themethod may be used to confirm questionable positive reagent strip results
such as when urine color interferes with interpretation of the reagent pad color.
d.False-positivereactionsmaybecausedbycphalosporin,ormaldehyeand
ascorbic acid (if concentrations are high enough). Reactions with sugars other
than glucose might be considered false-positive reactions.
C.Glucosuria (glycosuria) disorders (Table 8.11)
1.Hyperglycemic glucosuria
a.Transient or persistent hyperglycemia results in more glucose in the ultrafltrate
than can be resorbed by proximal tubules.
b.Hyperglycemia is typically concurrent with the glucosuria, but a transient
hyperglycemia and delay in bladder emptying may mask concurrence.
2.Renal glucosuria (normoglycemic glucosuria)
a.Transient or persistent glucosuria results from defective resorption of glucose
caused by damaged or abnormal proximal tubules.
b.Tubular abnormalities can be acquired or congenital
(1)Acquired:proximal renal tubular toxicosis or ischemia (sometimes referred
to as acquired Fanconi syndrome)
(2) Congenital: Fanconi syndrome and pure primary renal glucosuria (basenji,
Norwegian elkhound,and Shetland sheepdog)74
464
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
3.Glucose in tubular fuid will cause osmotic diuresis (H,O is“held” by the glucose in
the tubular fuid, especially in the proximal tubules) and thus cause decreased renal
concentrating ability and increased urine volume (polyuria).
V.
Ketones in urine
A.Physiologic processes
1.Acetoacetate, β-hydroxyburyrate, and acetone are ketone bodies, but only acetoac
etate and acetone have the chemical structure of ketones. Acetoacetic acid and β
hydroxybutyric acid are ketoacids that are produced by hepatocytes but dissociate at
physiologic pH to their anionic form and H
2.Ketone bodies are not expected in the urine of healthy mammals that have an
adequate intake of nutrients.
3.Ketone bodies may enter the urine by both glomerular filtration of plasma and by
tubular secretion.The tubular secretion process probably shares a transport process
with other organic anions. After entering the tubular fuid, acetoacetate and β-
hydroxybutyrate are nonresorbable.
B.Analytical concepts
1.Reagent strip method (Bayer Diagnostics)
a.Principle: Acetoacetate (mostly) and acetone (about 10 % as reactive as acetoac-
etate) form colored complexes with nitroprusside. The amount of color change
reflects the amount of ketones present (Table 8.10).The reagent system does not
react with β-hydroxybutyrate, the ketone body that does not have a ketone
chemical structure.
b.False-positive reactions may be caused by highly pigmented urine, levodopa
metabolites, and some compounds that have sulfhydryl groups (e.g., captopril
and cystine).7 Trace reactions may occur in urine with high USG and low
pH.
c.In theory,β-hydroxybutyrate can be converted with H,O to acetoacetate so that
nitroprusside methods can be used to detect β-hydroxybutyrate. However, urine
concentrations of β-hydroxybutyrate must be>200mmol/L （using3%H,O2)
or >50 mmol/L (using 30 % HO2) to produce more than a trace reaction. At
such concentrations, the[acetoacetate] would probably be great enough to be
detected routinely.76
2.Acerest tablet method (Bayer Diagnostics)
a.Principle: It is the same as with the reagent strip method. Color change is
easier to detect, so it has a lower detection limit than some reagent pads (about
5 mg/dL in urine) and thus may be used to confirm trace or questionable
reactions on reagent pads.
b.The method may beused as a qualitative assay forblood,plasma,urine,and
milk.
C.Ketonuria (Table 8.11)
1.Ketonuria occurs when the mobilization of lipids is increased because of a shift in
energy production from carbohydrates to lipids (e.g., in diabetes mellirus, starvation,
and hypoglycemic disorders). Excessive β-oxidarion of fatty acids in hepatocytes
generatesmore acetyl-coenzymeA than can be usedfor gluconeogenesis and
thus increased formation of ketoacids, leading to increased ketone bodies in blood
(ketonemia）.Ketone bodies are easily cleared from blood and are excreted in urine.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
465
2.Decreased insulin activity and increased glucagon activity promote ketogenesis. Such
changes may result from either physiologic or pathologic processes.
D.The pathologic state caused by excessketogenesis is called ketosis or, if laboratory data
indicate a concurrent acidosis, ketoacidosis. In ketosis, primarily β-hydroxybutyrate
（which is not detected by the assay) is excreted in urine, but acetoacetate and acetone
(detected by the assay) are also excreted.
E.Renal excretion of acetoacetate and β-hydroxybutyrate (both of which are anions)
obligates excretion of cations (e.g, Na or K) by the kidneys. Prolonged ketonuria may
cause Na*or K depletion that contributes to hyponatremia and hypokalemia
VI.
Heme in urine (test frequently labeled blood or occult blood)
A.Physiologic concepts: Heme-containing compounds are not expected to be present at
detectable amounts in the urine of healthy mammals.
B.Analytical concepts
1.Reagent strip method
a.Principle:In some systems,theperoxidase activity ofheme catalyzes the oxida
tion of o-toluidine to a blue compound. In other systems, the peroxidase activity
of heme catalyzes the oxidation of a chromogen (e.g, tetramethylbenzadine) to a
colored compound.
b.Heme may be from hemoglobin, methemoglobin, or myoglobin. If intact
erythrocytes are present, thecells are lysed in the reagent pad to produce either
speckled or solid color changes in the pad.Resultsmay be described in semi-
quantitative terms or as an estimated [hemoglobin] (Table 8.10)
c.Falsely increased reactions may occur with oxidizing compounds such as
hypochlorite (bleach) and microbial or leukocyte peroxidase.
d.Falsely decreased reactions may occur with a highUSG or with urine that
contains captopril,ascorbic acid, or formaldehyde.Erythrocytes may not be
detected if they are not suspended in the test sample.
2.Hematest tablet method
a.Principle: It is the same as with the reagent pad, with modifications.
b.The method may be used as a confirmatory test and also to test forfecal occult
blood.
3.Unfortunately, there is not a widely available laboratory assay for differentiating
myoglobin from hemoglobin in domestic mammals. Differentiation is usually
accomplished by clinical deductive reasoning (see Table 3.12).
a.A simple precipitant test using ammonium sulfate is considered unreliable. In
theory,hemoglobin,but not myoglobin, precipitates in 80 % ammonium sulfate
solution, whereas myoglobin precipitates in a 100 % ammonium sulfate solution.
However,denatured myoglobinwill precipitate in the 80 % soultion and thus be
incorrectly classified as hemoglobin.77Also,a similar erroneous classification will
occur if the urine pH is not adjusted to 7.0-7.5.78
b. Immunologic methods require species-specific antibodies. Electrophoretic and
spectrophotometric procedures may be employed.
amounts of blood are in the urine, there may be marked heme positivity without the
hemoglobin causing a positive protein reaction.
C.Heme-positive reaction in urine (Tables 8.1l and 3.12)
1.Hematuria
466
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
a.Erythrocytes enter the urine via hemorrhage into the urogenital tract. Hemor-
rhagemay be caused by a pathologic process （trauma,infammation,neoplasia,
coagulation defect, etc.) or the urine collection process (e.g cystocentesis,
catheterization,or bladder palpation pressure).
b.An [erythrocyte] near 5-20/μL is needed to produce a positive heme reaction.63
Erythrocytes should be microscopically identified in the urine sediment to
confrm hematuria. Erythrocytes tend to lyse if urine is very alkaline or uncon-
centrated (e.g,USGf< 1.015), so they may not be seen on examination of the
sediment.
2.Hemoglobinuria
a.During clinical intravascular hemolysis, plasma hemoglobin dimers (M,=
32,000)may form from hemoglobin (M,= 64,000),pass through the glomerular
filtration barriers, and enter the ultrafiltrate when haptoglobin is saturated (see
Chapter 3). If not completely resorbed by the renal tubules,the hemoglobin
dimers are excreted in the urine.
b.Intravascular hemolysis of suffcient severity to cause hemoglobinemia and
hemoglobinuria can be caused by a variety of disorders that cause anemia (see
Table 3.10).Hemoglobinuria may also be created by lysis of erythrocytes after
they enter urine. In such cases,hemoglobinemia should not be present (unless
erythrocytes were lysed during blood collection or handling).
3.Myoglobinuria
a.Myocyte necrosis or damage can release myoglobin (M,=17,0oo) from the
myocyteintotheinterstitial fuidlymphandfnallybloodfromwhichh
small protein easily passes into the glomerular filtrate.If not completely resorbed
by the renal tubules, myoglobin is excreted in the urine.
b.Myoglobin is rapidly cleared from plasma,and thus pink plasma is not
expected. Myoglobinuria is associated with acute myopathies caused by
trauma, excessive exertion,or exertional or paralyticrhabdomyolysis of horses
(azoturia).
4.Methemoglobinuria
a. Methemoglobinuria may contribute to a positive urine heme reaction in the
following situations (concurrent hemoglobinuria is expected):
(1)When hemoglobin (or hemoglobin dimer) molecules are in the urine, some
of the ferrous heme will undergo spontaneous oxidation to ferric heme
(forming methemoglobin)
(2)When there is an intravascular hemolytic anemia caused by an overwhelm-
ing exposure to oxidants, some of the lysed erythrocytes will release methe
moglobin to plasma.Then,methemoglobin dimers can enter the glomerular
filtrate.
b.Both metheme and heme have peroxidase activity, so either molecule will give a
positive heme (occult blood) reaction.7
VII. Bilirubin in urine
A.Physiologic processes
1.Bilirubin is not expected in the urine of domestic mammals other than the dog.
2.Bu forms from the degradation of heme, primarily from hemoglobin degradation in
macrophages. After conjugation in hepatocytes, Bc is excreted via the biliary system
8/URINARYSYSTEM
467
Ifregurgitated to the plasma,Bc passes freely through the glomerular fltration
barrier and is excreted in urine (see Fig. 3.3 or 13.1).
3.Renal tubular cells in at least some species (eg, dogs) can convert heme (from
resorbed hemoglobin of hemoglobinuria) to Bu and then Bc, which can be excreted
in the urine.
4.Usually,Bu is thought not to be in urine because it is bound to plasma albumin,
which is not filtered by most glomeruli.However,because apparently healthy dogs
may have mild albuminuria and glomerular diseases can cause proteinuria, Bu
bound to albumin may be present in urine.Also,Bcmay hydrolyze to Bu in urine.
B.Analytical concepts
1. Reagent strip method
a.Principle: Bilirubin becomes coupled with a diazonium salt in a strongly acid
medium, and the coupling produces color changes that reflect the amount of
bilirubin present (Table 8.10).Biliverdin (an intermediate breakdown product
berween heme and bilirubin) is not detected.
b.Falsely increased reactions may be caused by indican (a product of tryptophan
degradation by intestinal bacteria) and metabolites of etodolac (a nonsteroidal
anti-infammatory drug).
c.Falsely decreased reactions may be caused by ascorbic acid if the animal is being
given ascorbic acid.39
2.Ictotest method: Although based on the same analytical principle, it has a lower
detection limit (about 0.1 that of reagent strips) and maybeused to confrm trace
reactions on reagent sticks. Reagent pad results should be reported when the Ictotest
confirms positivity.
3.Bilirubin molecules are degraded to biliverdin by exposure to ultraviolet light.
Biliverdin is not detected by the bilirubin reaction.Before analysis,urine should not
be directly exposed to ultraviolet light for more than 30 min.
C.Bilirubinuria (Table 8.11)
1.Excessive bilirubin formation (in hemolytic states) or impaired hepatobiliary
excretion of Bc increases plasma [Bc].Bc passes easily through the glomerular
filtration barrier and is excreted by thekidneys.
2.In dogs,a positive bilirubin reaction must be interpreted based on knowledge of the
USGs Concentrated urine (1.025-1.040) of healthy dogs frequently produces a
small bilirubin reaction.Moderare reactions occasionally occur with more concen
trated urine (> 1.040)
3.Because of the low renal threshold for bilirubin in most animals,especially dogs,
bilirubinuria may be detected before hyperbilirubinemia or icterus is detected in
hemolytic and hepatobiliary disorders. Hyperbilirubinemia without bilirubinuria
suggests a false-negative urine bilirubin reaction or the degradation of urine bilirubin
before sample analysis
VIII. Urobilinogen in urine
A.Physiologic processes
1.Urobilinogen, a colorless compound formed from the degradation of bilirubin in the
intestine, is passively absorbed by intestinal mucosa.
2.Urobilinogen that is not removed from portal blood by hepatocytes enters the
systemic blood, from which it is excreted in the urine.
468
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.Analytical concepts for the reagent strip method
1.Principle: Urobilinogen reacts with p-dimethylaminobenzaldehyde to form a red
pigment via a modifed Ehrlich’s aldehyde reaction.The degree of color change
reflects the [urobilinogen] (Table 8.10).
2.Units:Ehrlich units (EU) or mg/dL; 1 EU =1 mg/dL
3.The assay cannot be used to detect decreased urobilinogen concentrations because
the lowest reading is 0.2mg/dL (Multistix)or 1.0 mg/dL(Chemstrip),the concen
tration expected in urine of healthy animals. There is not a negative reaction pad on
thereagent strip,so this method cannot be used to detect decreasedurobilinogen
concentrations in urine
4.Falsely increased results may be caused by aminosalicylic acid, sulfonamides, and
aminobenzoic acid.
5.Falsely decreased reactions may be caused by formalin.In addition,urobilinogen
degrades easily when urine is exposed to ultraviolet light.
C. Increased urobilinogenuria
1.Hemolytic diseases will cause the increased formation,biliary excretion,and
degradation of bilirubin. Thus, increased urobilinogen formation and
excretion are expected.However,increased urobilinogenuria isnot consistently
found.
2. Mammals with hepatic or biliary diseases may occasionally have increased urinary
excretion of urobilinogen,perhaps from the degradation of bilirubin in theurinary
system.
3.Most veterinarians do not find the assessment of urine[urobilinogen] to be diagnos
tically fruitful.
IX Nitrite in theurine
A.Physiologic processes: Certain Gram-negative bacteria can reduce nitrate to nitrite.
B.Analytical concepts for the reagent strip method
1.Principle:Nitrite reacts with p-arsanilic acid to form a diazonium compound that
couples with N-1-naphthyl ethylenediamine to form a pink product.
2.Falsely increased reactionsmay result from analysis of stale urine containing con
taminantbacteria.
3.Falsely decreased reactions may occur if there is insufficient time (<4 h) for bacterial
reduction of nitrates. Ascorbic acid (especially when USG is high) may produce
falsely decreased reactions in dog and cat urine.37
C.Nitrite-positive reaction
1.Suggestive of a Gram-negative bacterial infection in the urinary tract
2. Detection of nitrites in urine is a screening procedure for Gram-negative bacterial
urinary infections. Signifcant bacteriuria may be present but undetected with the
nitrite assay.
D.Most veterinarians do not find the urine nitrite test to be diagnostically valuable
because it does not detect significant bacteriuria consistently.
X.
Leukocyte esterase in theurine
A.Physiologic processes:Leukocytes in the urine release an esterase.
B.Analytical concept: The assay is considered to be inadequate for the chemical detection
of pyuria in dogs because offalse-negative results, and false-positive reactions area
problem in cats.39
8/URINARYSYSTEM
469
URINESEDIMENTEXAMINATION
General concepts
A.Consistently using the same urine volume for sediment preparation will enable a more
critical assessment of the semiquantitative results.The quantity of urine used may vary
between laboratories but is usually 5-10mL.About rwice the amount of sediment
would be expected from 10 mL than from 5 mL. Expected findings in this chapter are
based on the sedimentation of 5mL of urine.
B.The contents of urine are not stable,so urine should be analyzed within a fewhours
(ideally within 1 h) of collection.During sample storage,cells and casts deteriorate,
crystals may dissolve or form, and bacteria may die or proliferate.
C.The method of urine collection should be considered when urinalysis and especially
urine sediment results are interpreted.A voided sample may contain cells and bacteria
from the genital tract.A catheterized sample may contain more epithelial cells or
erythrocytes because of urethral trauma. A cystocentesis sample may contain blood
because the needle damaged blood vessels.
D.Samples should be well mixed before the aliquots are removed for centrifugation in
standardized conical based tubes at about 450 × g for 5 min. The supernatant is poured
off or removed by piperte to leave a residual urine volume in which the sedimented
material should be thoroughly resuspended before a standardized drop is placed on a
slide with a pipette and overlaid with a glass coverslip. The sediment should be analyzed
after a few minutes (to let cells sette and lipid float) by using 10x and 40x or 45x
objectives with the microscope condenser lowered to increase refraction. Systems
designed for more standardized evaluation ofurine sediment are commercially available
(e.g., the Petstix 8）.
E.Most sediment findings are quantified by the number of structures seen per microscopic
field (ie., per lpf or hpf).The width of the viewed field can vary because of differences
in the microscope objective and ocular lens. For example, the viewed area of a 25 mm
ocular is about 50 % larger than the viewed area of a 20 mm ocular. Thus, in the same
sediment,15leukocytes/hpf would be seenwith a 25mm ocular,and 10leukocytes/hpf
would be seen with a 20 mm ocular.
F.Sediment stains may be used but could affect concentrations via dilution and may
introduce organisms or particulate debris.Evaluation of stained andunstained prepara-
tions may be helpful.
IL.
Leukocytes in urine sediment (Plate 1iB,D,and E)
A.Physiologic processes: A few leukocytes (fewer than about 5/hpf) may be found in the
urine ofhealthy mammals.
B.Analytical concepts
1.Leukocytes in urine sediment are enumerated as the range or mean of leukocytes
seen in most 400x fields (hpf)
2.Leukocytes are not routinely differentiated when found in urine. On stained slides
prepared from fresh urine, most of the leukocytes will be neutrophils and macro-
phages, though eosinophils may occasionally be prominent. Small epithelial cells
may look similar to leukocytes.
3.Leukocytes deteriorate in urine within a few hours; thus, numbers diminish with
time.
C.Pyuria: increased [leukocyte] (number/hpf) in urine sediment (Table 8.12)
Table 8.12. Major disorders or conditions that cause abnormal findings in urine
sediment examinations
Pyuria (Plate 11B)
*Urinary tract infammation, infectious and noninfectious
Genital tractinfammation
Hematuria (Plate 11C)
*Urinary tract hemorrhage：pathologic（damagedvessls rcoagulation dfct),atrogenic
Genital tract hemorrhage：pathologic,estrus
Bacteriuria (Plate 11D and E)
*Infection in urinary or genital tract
*In vitro growth or contamination
Cylindruria(Plate 11F-H)
Can be found in low numbers in healthy animals
Associated with glomerular proteinuria (especially hyaline casts)
*Active renal tubular cell degeneration inammation, or hemorrhage: nephroses, nephritis
Epithelial cells in sediment (Plate 11I and J)
*Can be found in low numbers in healthy animals
*Inflammation/hyperplasia in genitourinary tract
Neoplasia in genitourinary tract
Crystalluria (urine pH in which crystals tend to occur)
Ammonium (biurate (pH usually ≤7) (Plate 11K): seen in healthy mammals; common in
Dalmatian dogs and English bulldogs; suggest liver dysfunction and portosystemic shunts
in dogs and cars
*Bilirubin（pH<7)(Plate 11L):seen withbilirubinuria
*Calcium carbonate （pH ≥7) (Plate 13A):healthy herbivores,not seen in dogs and cats
Calcium oxalate dihydrate (pHusually≤7) (Plate 13B): seen in healthy mammals,suggest
of oxalate-rich plants such as Halogeton and Amaranthus in ruminants)
Calcium oxalate monohydrate (pH usually ≤7)(Plate 13C):suggest possible hypercalciuria or
hyperoxaluria, especially ethylene glycol toxicosis
Calcium phosphate (pH usually ≥ 7): seen in healthy dogs, dogs with calcium phosphate
uroliths, or dogs with persistent alkalinuria
Cholesterol (pH ≤7) (Plate 13D): uncommon; seen in healthy dogs; suggest
hypercholesterolemia and proteinuria as seen with protein-losing nephropathy
Cystine (pH usually≤ 7):rare; seen with cystinuria and suggest liver disease
Drug crystals (sulfa, ampicillin, contrast media, primidone) (Plate 13F): refect presence of
compound in urine
Hippuric acid (pH usually≤7): very rare, are confused with calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals
Leucine (pH <7):rare; suggest liver disease
*Magnesium ammonium phosphate (struvite) (pH usually ≥7) (Plate 13E):common in dogs
and cats with alkalinuria,may be associated with urease-producing bacteria
Urate, sodium (pH7)or ammonium (pHvariable）: seen in healthymammals; common in
dogs and cats
Uric acid (pH <7) (Plate 13G): same significance as urates
Xanthine (pH≤7）:rare;may refect treatment with allopurinol or metabolic defect
Other organisms
Fungi,yeast (Candida sp.,Blastomyces sp.,Cryprococcus sp.）and hyphal forms (Plate 13H and I)
Nematode ova (Dioctopbyma renale, Capillaria plica)(Plare 13J)
Microflaria (with hematuria)
*A relatively common disease or condition
470
8/URINARYSYSTEM
471
1.Urinary tract infammation
a.Inflammation of mucosal or submucosal tissues or renal parenchyma may cause
leukocytes (mostly neutrophils and monocytes) to migrate from blood to urine.
Infammation can be caused by infections (by bacteria, fungi, or parasites) or
noninfectious processes (neoplasia,urolithiasis,or necrosis).
b.The method of sample collection (voided, cystocentesis, or catheterization) may
help determine the site of the infammatory process; that is, leukocytes might be
from anywhere in the genitourinary tract in a voided specimen,but their
presence in a cystocentesis sample indicates the sourceis somewhere from the
kidneys to,and including, the proximal urethra. Other clinical information may
also help determine the site of the infammation;for example,pollakiuria and
stranguria would suggest lower urinary tract involvement, whereas fever, neutro
philiaorazotemiawould suggestephrits.Leukocytecastsindicateinamm
tion associated with renal tubules.
2.Genital tract infammation
a.Leukocytes may enter urine from themale or female genital tract before (e
prostate) or during (e.g, a preputial or vaginal source)micturition.The chance
of contamination during micturition is reduced if the sample is collected midway
through micturition.
b. The infammatory process may or may not be of clinical significance (e.g, mild
posthitis).
III.
Erythrocytes in urine sediment (Plate 11C)
A.Physiologic processes:A few erythrocytes (fewer than about 5/hpf) may be found in the
urine of healthy mammals.
B.Analytical concepts
1.Erythrocytes in urine sediment are enumerated as the range or mean of erythrocytes
seen in most 400xfields (hpf)
2.Erythrocytes may crenate in urine and can be confused with leukocytes in non-
stained sediment. They may swell in hypotonic urine.
3.Erythrocytesmaylyseinurineeiher before or afterurineis collcted and appear as
ghost cells.Lysis tends to occur in unconcentrated or mildly concentrated urine
(USG< 1.015) or very alkaline urine, especially if analysis is delayed.
4.If erythrocytes are seen in the urine sediment, the heme reaction should be positive.
C.Hematuria:increased [erythrocyte]（number/hpf) in urine sediment （Table 8.12）
1.Pathologichemorrhage
a.Vascular damage caused by trauma inflammation,renal infarctsor other
processes; common in animals with urinary tract infections
b.Thrombocytopenia, thrombocytopathia, or von Willebrand disease and the
resultant poor repair of small vessels
C.
Coagulopathies (acquired or congenital)
d.Abnormal erythrocyte shapes have been reported in human patients with
glomerular hemorrhage,but differentiation of glomerular and nonglomerular
hemorrhage by urine erythrocyte appearance has not been reported in veterinary
species.
2.Iatrogenic hemorrhage
a.Blood vessels may be damaged during bladder palpation,cystocentesis,or
catheterization.
472
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
b.Animals with hemostasis defects orurinary mucosal disease may be more prone
to iatrogenic hemorrhage.
3.Genital tract hemorrhage (associated with estrus) in voided samples
IV.
Bacteria in urine sediment (Plate 1iD and E)
A.Physiologic processes:Urine formed by the kidneys should be sterile.Low numbers of
bacteria may access the urine via the distal urinary tract or genital tissues.
B.Analytical concepts
1. Bacteria in urine sediment are enumerated as a relative density of bacteria seen in
most 400xfields (hpf).
2.Bacteria (especially cocci) may be difficult or impossible to differentiate from small
particulate debris by routine sediment examination.Rods and chains of cocci are
more easily identified with certainty than are single cocci.
3.If bacteria are of clinical significance,pyuria is expected but not always found.
4.Bacteria may multiply in urine after it is collcted.
5.There is no standard method of reporting the concentration of bacteria in
urine sediment. Bacterial numbers may be graded (from few.to many) or
bacteria may simply be reported as present or absent.Routine centrifugation of
do not “spin down.s This is in contrast to other suspended particulates such as
cells.
6.The use of stained air-dried urine preparations formicroscopic examination has
been suggested as a better way to detect bacteriuria than the use of routine
wet-mount preparations.2
C.Bacteriuria (Table 8.12)
1.Determining the clinical significance of bacteriuria involves consideration of the
presence or absence of pyuria,the source of the sample,the concentration of
bacteria,and other evidence of a urinary tract infection.
2.The absence of detectable bacteria in urine sediment does not exclude the possibility
of an infection. One should use quantitative urine culture methods whenever a
urinary tract infection is suspected.Asmany as 10,000 rods/mL or 100,000 cocci/mL
may be required for detection by routine urinalysis, but as few as 1ooo bacteria/mL
may be significant in a cystocentesis sample.The decision threshold (based on
quantitative culture)between significant bacteriuria and contamination depends on
the species of animal and the urine collection method used.
V.
Casts in urine sediment (Plate 11F-H)
A.Physiologic processes
1.Casts are cylindrical concretions with round, square, irregular, or tapered ends
and of varying widths that mirror the tubular segments in which they formed.
They are formed in renal tubular lumens from proteins,intact cells,or cellular
debris. Most are thought to have a matrix composed of Tamm-Horsfall mucopro-
teins secreted byepithelial cells oftheloops ofHenledistal tubulesand collcting
ducts.
2.A few casts may form during the normal sloughing of tubular epithelial cells that
occurs daily.Casts seen in healthy mammals typically are hyaline casts or fine
a shower of casts may occur after physical activity.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
473
B.Analytical concepts
1.Casts in urine sediment are enumerated as therange or mean of casts seen in most
100x fields (lpf)
2.Casts are classified by their appearance,which refects their content: fine and coarse
granular (cell debris and plasma protein）,epithelial cell （ubular epithelial cells),
erythrocyte, leukocyte, farty (lipid droplers or lipid accumulation within deteriorated
cells),waxy (perhaps deterioration of granular cast),or mixed (combinations of the
previously mentioned types).
3.Casts deteriorate in urine (especially alkaline urine) and thus are best detected in
fresh urine samples
4. Casts may be pigmented by bilirubin, hemoglobin, or myoglobin.
C.Cylindruria (casts in urine) (Table 8.12)
1.Casts may form in renal tubules but may not be fushed into urine, or they may be
discharged intermittently in showers.Therefore,the absence of cylindruria does not
exclude the possibility of active renal rubular disease.
2.Hyaline casts may be found in healthy animals and occur more commonly in
animals with glomerular proteinurias.
may be evidenceof toxicephrosis(e.g,gentamicin induced，orhemoglobinuric
and myoglobinuric nephropathies) or renal ischemia.
degeneration,necrosis,or inflammation.Theymay also form from the precipitation
of plasma proteins. They can be found in the urine of healthy mammals, possibly
related to normal cell turnover or to entrapped proteins.
5.Leukocyte casts refect infammation involving renal tubules (e.g., in tubular
nephrosis and pyelonephritis).
6.Erythrocyte casts reflect glomerular or rubular hemorrhage.
7.Waxy casts are uncommon and seen primarily with chronic renal disease.
8.Hemoglobin and myoglobin casts are red- to brown-pigmented, granular casts and
may be seen with hemoglobinuria or myoglobinuria.
D. Pathogenesis (prevailing theory)
1.Hyaline casts form from the conglutination of theTamm-Horsfall mucoprotein that
is secreted by tubular cells of the loop of Henle, distal tubules, and collecting ducts
The reason for the conglutination is not understood
2.Granular,lipid,and cellular casts form when cellular debris or cells are trapped in
the Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein. Granular casts may also be formed by the incorpo
ration of plasma proteins into the Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein matrix.Waxy casts
are formed by the deterioration and solidification of granular casts.
VI.
Epithelial cells in urine sediment (Plate 11l and J)
A.I
Physiologic processes
1.Epithelial cells are constantly sloughing from the urinary tract mucosa and are
replaced by new cells. Thus, epithelial cells are expected in the urine of healthy
animals.
2.Types of epithelial cells vary within the urinary tract.Renal tubular epithelial cells
are cuboidal in situ but may be round in suspension, transitional epithelial cells
lining themucosa from therenal pelvis through most of the urethra appear round
and squamous epithelial cells lining the distal urethra appear round or polygonal.
474
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.Analytical concepts
1.Epithelial cells in urine sediment are enumerated as the range or mean of epithelial
cells seen in most 100 x fields (lpf).
2.Somelaboratoryreports separateitelial cellpopulationsbyoriginb diffee
tiation is problematic:
a.Superficial squamous epithelial cells are difficult or impossible to differentiate
from the occasional transitional epithelial cells that have angular borders.
b.Round transitional epithelial cells are diffcult or impossible to differentiate from
the round cells that occur in the intermediate layers of squamous epithelium.
c.In nonstained sediment, individual renal rubular epithelial cells are difficult or
impossible to differentiate from macrophages or small transitional epithelial cells,
andclumpsof renal tubular epithelium maylook similar to transitional
epithelium.
3.All cells deteriorate in urine and thus are best examined in fresh urine
C.Clinical significance of epithelial cells in urine
1.Epithelial cells may be found in the urine of healthy animals, especially in catheter-
ized samples.
2.More transitional epithelial cells may slough from inflamed or hyperplastic mucosa.
3.Neoplastic epithelial cells may be detected in urine sediment.Differentiation of
malignant from nonmalignant cells is best accomplished by microscopic examination
of stained,air-dried preparations of cells collected by traumatic catheterization or
needlebiopsybutprparations of centrifugedfresh,ewly rmedurinemay al
be useful. However, differentiation may be impossible. Dysplastic and proplastic
(reactive) cells are common in urine from animals with cystitis and reactive
hyperplasia.
VII.Crystals(Plates 11Kand Land 13A-G)
A.Physiologic concepts
1. Crystals represent the precipitation of salts (cation + anion).
2.Some salts tend to form at an alkaline pH but dissolve at an acidic pH, whereas
others tend to form at an acidic pH but dissolve at an alkaline pH. A salt that is
soluble at a certain pH may form crystals if the concentration of the ions is high
enough （saturation point) and the materials are present to begin crystal formation
(nucleation).
B.Analytical concepts
1.Crystals are enumerated as the number of crystals seen in most 1o0xfields (lpf)
2.Enhanced crystal formation may ocur in stored urine because of evaporation or
because of changes in temperature (especially refrigeration）or pH.3s Conversely,n
other stored samples,some crystals may dissolve.
3.Crystals are routinely identified by their microscopic appearance. Chemical and
crystallographic techniques can be used for further characterization (see the Urolith
Analysis section).
C.Crystalluria (Table 8.12)
1.The degree of crystalluria depends on the pH, concentration of ions, and tempera
ture of the urine.
2.Most urine crystals can be found in healthy animals. However, increased numbers in
theurine sedimentmaysuggestthepresenceofcertainpathologicstatesthat are
causing changes in either urine pH or ion concentration.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
475
3.Presence or absence of crystalluria is not a reliable indicator for the presence or
absence of urolithiasis (see the Urolith Analysis section),but crystalluria is a risk
factor for urolithiasis.
VIII. Organisms other than bacteria (Plate 13H-J)
A.Yeast srucures(eg,CandidaBlastmyces）,hyhal srucures(e.g,Aspergills a
various contaminants),algae (Prototheca),and parasitic structures (e.g.,Dioctophyma
Capillaria,and Stepbdnwrus ova;and Diroflaria microfilaria)can be found in urine
(Table 8.12). Identification of fungal structures may require culturing methods.
B.Parasitic structures may be present because of sample contamination with fecal material.
Ova of Capillaria species may be confused with ova of Trichuris species.
IX.
Other sediment findings that are of little or no diagnostic significance
A.Lipid droplets (Plate 13K)
1.Probably from renal tubular epithelium
2.Most common in cats, which normally store triglycerides in renal tubular cells
3.May represent contaminating lubricants used during sample collection
B.Mucus strands represent urogenital secretions and are abundant in urine of horses
C.Spermatozoa (Plate 13L)
1.Spermatozoa are an expected finding in urine from intact male animals, especially in
voided samples
2.Occasionally, spermatozoa are found in urine of female animals afterbreeding
QUANTITATIVEURINALYSIS
Basic concepts
A.Quantitative urinalysis includes procedures in which chemical or physical properties
ofurine aremeasured withquantitative assays.Inroutineurinalyses,the assays ae
qualitative or semiquantitativeTypically,the purpose of a quantitativeUAis to
quantify the amount of a substance that is excreted by kidneys in a defined time period
(e.g.,1d).
B.Analyte concentrations can be difficult to interpret because concentrations will depend
on two major variables: the amount of analyte excreted per day and the amount of
HO excreted per day. The relationship of these variables is expressed in Eq. 8.3. Please
note that an animal would excrete the same amount of analyte per day if there were a
doubling of the analyte concentration but a halving of the urine volume. An analyte's
urine concentration can be assessed by considering the USGe because changes in
USGe typically are inversely related to changes in urine volume (except in renal
failure).More precise assessments usually are accomplishedby either timed urine
collections or by calculating clearance ratios.
C.Examples of analytes whose renal excretion is assessed viaquantitative assays.
1.Electrolytes: Na, K+, Cl, Ca², and PO
2. Protein: usually total protein; also albumin and occasionally other individual
proteins
3.All solutes combined: total solute excretion via urinary system assessed by osmolality
D.Assay methods used to quantify the analyte concentration in serum may or may
not accurately measure an analyte concentration inurine.Assaymodifications or
considerations include the following:
476
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
1.To measure urine [Crt],the urine sample needs to be diluted to get the [Crt] into
the assay's analytical range.This process can cause inaccuracies. Non-Crt chromo-
gens may give positive interference with some Crt assays.Kinetic Crt assays are
designed to minimize the interference of non-Crt chromogens.
2.To measure urine [tCa²], the urine sample must be acidified before analysis so that
Ca²+ is in a soluble form and thus able to react with reagents.
3.To measure [K+] in equine,bovine,and feline urine, a fame photometer should be
used. The urine of those species contains a substance that inhibits the reaction of K*
with ion-selective electrodes.5
E.These other factorsmay need to be considered when interpreting quantitative urinalysis
results:
1.Are there appropriate reference intervals for your patient?For some analytesbody
weight,itae-elated factorsorreatments canalterurinary excretnf
substances.
2.Is an analyte's urinary excretion decreased because the kidneys are trying to conserve
the analyte or because less analyte is being presented to the kidneys?
II.
24hExcretion studies
A.This is the most definitive method of determining urinary excretion of an analyte but is
not frequently used in veterinary medicine because of several factors. First, it requires
complete and timedurine collection thatis difficult in mostdomesticmammals
Secondrencentrvasarentalwayavailablefreachcierdiffrent assay
methods,and for different diets.
B.Procedure: Begin the urine collection period by completely emptying the urinary bladder
and discarding the urine. Collect all urine that is produced in 24 h. End the collection
period by emptying the bladder.Measure the total volume of urine collected in 24 h.
Measure the analyte's concentration in the collected urine.Finally,calculate the quantity
of substance excreted (e.g, Eq. 8.4a）.Because of the marked variation in the sizes of
domestic mammals, results are usually expressed per kilogram of body weight (Eq. 8.4b).
Amount of analyte excreted in 24 h = analyte concentration x 24 h-urine volume
(8.4a.)
Example:analyte concentration=50 mg/dL;24h-urine volume=300mL
Amount of analytes excretedin 24h=50mg/dL×300mL=150 mg
Amount of analyte excretedin24h per kgbody weight =
analyte concentration +kg ×24 h-urine volume +body wgt
(8.4b.)
Example:analyte concentration =50 mg/dL;24 h-urine volume =300mL;body wgt =5kg
Amount of analytes excreted in 24 h per kg body weight =
50mg/dL×300mL+5kg=30mg/kg
C.Because a 24 h excretion study is difficult, more convenient methods to assess urinary
excretion are usually used. These include urine to plasma ratios or analyte to Crt ratios.
Although more convenient, they may be less accurate.
111.
Analyte urine to plasma ratios
A.Theory
1.The rate of urinary excretion or clearance of a substance can be calculated by using
an excretion rate formula (Eq. 8.5a)
8/URINARYSYSTEM
477
[Analyte]
Analyte excretion rate:
Xvolume+time +bw
(8.5a.)
[Analyte]
[Analyte],
Analyte excretion rate
(8.5b.)
[Analyte],
2.If urine volume, time, and body weight are considered constants for a given animal
then the urine to plasma ratio is proportional to the rate of urinary excretion ofa
substance (Eq.8.5b). Those factors are not constants,but the ratio does tend to
reflect the urinary excretion of a substance (analyte) or solutes.
B.Analyte urine to plasma ratios for differentiation of prerenal azotemia and renal
azotemia
1.The urine osmolality to plasma osmolality ratio refects the kidneys'ability to
conserve H,O.
a.A high ratio reflects an ability to concentrate solutes. An animal with prerenal
azotemia caused by dehydration should have a high ratio.
b.A ratio near 1.o indicates isosthenuria and thus failure to concentrate or dilute
the ultrafiltrate solutes.In an animal with renal azotemia, the ratio should be
near 1.0.
c.A ratio much below 1.o is not expected in most azotemic animals because
the ratio would indicate renal diluting ability is present. Azotemic animals
usually either form hypersthenuric urine (a high ratio in prerenal azotemia)
or cannot concentrate or dilute their urine (a ratio near 1.o in renal
azotemia).
2.The urine UN to plasma UN and urine Crt to plasma Crt ratios assess the renal
ability to excrete nitrogenous wastes.
a.Higher ratios reflect thekidneys'ability to excrete nitrogenous waste via urine
and thus are evidence of adequate renal function.
b. Lower ratios reflect decreased renal excretion of urea or Crt (ie., a decreased
GFR) and would support the conclusion of renal azotemia, but they also may
Occur with prerenal and postrenal azotemias.
3.Publishedratios for horses illustrate the application of the ratios (also called urinary
indices) (Table 8.13). The ratios would vary berween species, but the general
concepts apply across species.
IV.
Quantitative urine total protein assays: These are typically not part of a routine urinalysis
but are used to determine a more accurate urine[protein] for protein to Crt ratios,for
urine electrophoresis calculations,or for 24 h excretion studies.
A.Trichloroacetic acid method
1.Principle: Proteins are denatured by acids and form a precipitate that is seen as
increased solution turbidity.
2.The trichloroacetic acid method is less affected by the albumin to globulin ratio in
the sample than is the SSA method. The trichloroacetic acid method is temperature
sensitive andneeds to be completed at 20-25C.86
B.Coomassie brilliant blue assay
1.Principle: The amount of dye binding to amine groups of amino acids is propor-
tional to the quantity ofprotein present.
478
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 8.13.Urinary indices for differentiation of prerenal and renal azotemia in horses
Healthy horses
Prerenal azotemia
Renal azotemia
Number of horses
6
6
10
Osmolality.(mmol/kg)
727-1456
458-961
226-495
Osm,:Osm,ratio
2.5-5.2
1.7-3.4
0.8-1.7
[UN],:[UN],b ratio
34-100
1544
2-14
[Crt],:[Crt],ratio
2-344
51-242
3-37
FE ofNa+
0.0-0.70
0.0-0.5
0.8-10.1
Source: (adapted from): Grossman et al.116
* Urine osmolality to plasma osmolality
bUrine concentration ofUN to plasma concentration of UN
Urine concentration of Crt to plasma concentration of Crt
2.This assay is minimally affected by albumin to globulin ratios in the urine and will
detect Bence Jones proteins.
C.Benzethonium chloride assay
1.Principle: Benzethonium chloride reacts with proteins to produce a turbidity that is
proportional to the amount of protein present.
2.
This quantitative turbidimetric assay is reported to react similarly with albumin and
-globulins. Hemoglobin will react with the reagent.
D.Quantitative urine albumin assays: Species-specific immunologic assays are used
to measure low concentrations of albumin in urine (see Quantitative Urinalysis
sect.VI)
V.
Urinary protein to creatinine (Prot:Crt)ratio
A.Theory
1.Increased protein lossvia the urinary system is best determined by a 24h protein
excretion study; that is,determining themilligrams of protein lost per day per
kilogram of bodyweight.However,such a study requiresa timed and complete
urine collection.
2. Crt clearance via the urinary system is considered to be relatively constant in health.
In addition,if urinary Crt clearance is decreased,then therate of glomerular protein
loss should be decreased because Crt passes more easily through the glomerular
filtration barrier than do protein molecules.However, if more protein enters the
cretion will be increased
3.Considering the aforementioned concepts,comparing the rate of urinary protein loss
to the Crt excretion should reflect true changes in protein loss via the urinary
system.This concept can be seen in the comparison of urinary excretion formulas
and the derivation of the (Prot:Crt)ratio (Eq. 8.6).
[Prot],
Xvolume+time+bw
Protein excretion rate
[Prot]
(8.6.)
Creatinine excretion rate
[Crt]
Xvolume+time+bw
[Crt],
8/URINARYSYSTEM
479
For a randomly collctedurine sample,some factors in the numerator and denomi
nator formulas are either the same or remain relatively constant.
The urine volume, the time over which the urine formed, and the body weight
values are the same in both formulas.
·The serum[Prot]and [Crt]probably remained constant during the time the
collected urine was formed.
Therefore,the relative rate of protein excretion compared to creatinine excretion can
be estimated as follows.
[Prot],
Protein excretion rate
Protein excretion rate
constant
Prot
（Prot:Crt)ratio
Creatinine excretion rate
"]
Creatinine excretion rate
[Crt]
constant
B.Analytical concepts
analytical range of serum protein assays. Thus, different assays (collectively called
having an appropriate analytical range, a good microprotein assay will be minimally
affected by types of proteins in the urine; that is,it should detect nearly all proteins
equally.
2. Most analytical methods designed for measuring serum [Crt] can be used for
measuring urine[Crt]. However,for most urine samples, the urine must be diluted
to produce a[Crt] that is within the analytical range of the assay, and varying the
dilutionratio can cause inaccuracies.Some benchtop analyzers have been shown to
undermeasure urine [Crt] (especially at high concentrations) and thus produce
higher Prot:Crt） ratios.4
C.Published data
1.When dogs with potential nonrenal proteinuria were excluded, there was good
correlation between the (Prot:Crt) ratio and the quantity of urinary protein
excreted per day (either mg/d ormg/kg/d）.7-Results of three studies are
compared in Table 8.14. Note that the highest ratios for healthy dogs in the three
studies were 0.54, 0.17, and 0.38 with rwo different protein assays, and the 0.54
and 0.38 values were from the same type of assay. Although differences in
reference sample groups may have contributed to differences in the ratios, method
differences also likely affected the results. Most recommended guidelines do not
acknowledge the need for specific decision thresholds for different protein and
Crt methods.
2.Interpretation guidelines for the (Prot:Crt）ratio based on these studies
a.Healthy dogs: (Prot:Crt)ratio<0.5
b.Borderline values: (Prot:Crt)ratio = 0.5-1.0
c.Dogs with glomerular proteinuria: (Prot:Crt),ratio > 1.0 (Note: Other forms of
proteinuria could give similar results but were excluded from the studies that
were cited.)
3.(Prot:Crt）,ratios were not influenced by collection period (day or night) or gender
of animal.90
D.Diagnostic significance of increased (Prot:Crt) ratio
480
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 8.14. (Prot:Crt)ratios and 24 h urinary protein excretion studies in dogs
Group
White et al.ab 87
Grauer et al.bc112
Center et al.ab 89
(Prot:Crt)ratio
Healthy
0.08-0.54 (8)
0.02-0.17 (16)
0.01-0.38 (19)
Proteinurics
1.09-8.63 (10)
0.48-15.1 (14)
0.47-46.65 (38)
24hUrinary protein
Healthy
1.9-11.7(8)
0.6-5.1 (16)
0.2-7.7 (19)
excretion (mg/kg)
Proteinuric
32.2-271.1 (10)
12.2-287.5 (14)
7.5-533.7(38)
Protein method: trichloroacetic acid protein method
 Crt method: alkaline picric acid
Protein method: Coomassie brilliant blue
dThe number in parenthesis is the number of dogs in a study group.
Dogs with or suspected of having either prerenal or postrenal proteinuria were excluded from the
studies.
fThe dog with a protein loss of 7.5 mg/kg was included in the proteinuric group because it had glomeru
lonephritis and its (Prot:Crt), ratio was increased (0.47).
1.The (Prot:Crt）ratio should beincreased in any animal with proteinuria,including
prerenal (overflow),glomerular,tubular,and infammatory/hemorrhagic proteinurias.
Other clinical information is used to differentiare the proteinurias (see Chemical
Examination of Urine, sect.Ill.C).
2.Glomerular proteinurias tend to be more severe and cause hypoalbuminemia or
hypoproteinemia.However, earlier stages of glomerular damage may cause only mild
proteinuria. In the absence of hyperproteinemia and increased cell concentrations in
the urine, large increases in the(Prot:Crt）),ratio （e.g,>5.0) suggest glomerular
proteinuria. The ratios in cases of renal amyloidosis typically are higher than the
ratios in cases of glomerulonephritis,but the observed values overlap considerably.
3.Estimated (Prot:Crt）ratio
a.A semiquantitative method of estimating a (Prot:Crt）) ratio is available (Petstix 8
reagent strips).
b.Until critical studies are available that assess the predictive values of the system
with veterinary samples, the method probably should be considered to be another
subjective assessment ofurinary protein excretion and similar to interpreting the
relationship between urine [protein] and USGef
E.Comparison ofurine[protein] to urine[Crt]reduces the variability caused by the
amount of HO excreted by kidneys. If all else is equal,renal conservation of HO will
cause a proportional increase in urine [protein] and urine[Crt].Similar information
could be obtained forless expense by dividing the urine [protein] by a factor derived
from the USGf (such as the last rwo digits or USGe-1).Diluting urine samples to a
consistent USGof 1.010 prior to analysis,as is done with immunologicmicroalbu
minuria assays (see the next section), standardizes the solute concentration so that
protein concentrations can be compared without using calculations to correct for
differences in urine concentration.
VI.
Microalbuminuria
A.General concepts
1.In the classic view of renal functions,mammalian glomeruli are not permeable to
albumin because it has a strong negative charge and the albumin molecular diameter
8/URINARYSYSTEM
481
(36A) is close to the diameter of a glomerular pore (42A）.5 However,the glomeru
lar filtration barrier does allow slightly smaller proteins to pass into the ultrafiltrate,
from which they are resorbed by the proximal tubules.If there isminor damage to
the barrier (a reduced negative charge or damaged podocytes), then albumin enters
the tubular fuid. Incomplete resorption of the albumin causes albuminuria.With
fuid.
2. In random urine samples from healthy people, renal excretion of albumin results in
a urine [albumin] < 3 mg/dL or <20 mg excreted per day. In this context,
microalbuminuria is defined as a urinary albumin loss greater than those values
concentrations might create trace protein reactions.
3.For many years,the protein reaction of a typical urinalysis was expected to be
negative in the urine of healthy cats,horses, and cattle.However, a trace or 1 +
reaction in concentrated canine urine was accepted as a species variation and not
more recently, some have considered that the mild proteinurias in clinical healthy
dogs represent evidence of subclinical glomerular disease. Consequently,assays have
been developed to measure low urine albumin concentrations; that is, to detect
microalbuminuria.
4.The current working definition of microalbuminuria in dogs and cats is urine
albumin concentrations from1 mg/dLto30mg/dLinurine adjusted to aUSGfof
1.010.9697 Concentrarions>30mg/dL arereferred to as albuminuria or overt
albuminuria.It is important to remember that a urine [albumin] of 30 mg/dL in
urine withaUSGof 1.010 would havean[albumin]of 60mg/dL if theUSGf
was 1.020, or 120 mg/dL if the USGer was 1.040.
5.Some authors state that 30 mg/dL is the decision threshold formicroalbuminuria
because common urinalysis methods do not detect protein concentrations
< 30 mg/dL. However, the Chemstrip package insert states that, in 90 % of urines
tested,protein concentrations ≥6mg/dL produced a color change.For the Multistix
system,a trace reaction corresponds withan estimated[protein]of10 mg/dL.When
turbidity standard solutions are used with the SSA test, increased turbidity can be
detected when [protein] is 5 mg/dL
B.Analytical concepts
1.Quantitative immunologic assay
a.The immunologic microalbumin assays are species specific because of the species
differences in albumin molecules.Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays
(ELISAs) and nephelomerric assays have been developed for canine and feline
urine.93
b.The standard solutions for the assays are canine or feline albumin.For one
ELISA, standard solutions were diluted to create an analytical range of 1.9
30 ng/mL (0.19-3.00 μg/dL).9 Urine samples were diluted (up to 1 : 3200) to
obtain urine albumin concentrations within the analytical range of the assay,
but suchmarked dilutions can be a source of analytical error.
2.Semiquantitativeimmunologic assays
a.Commercial assays aremarketed asImmunoDip Canine and ImmunoDipFeline
both are called E.R.D.-HealthScreen Urine Tests (E.R.D. is an abbreviation for
482
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
early renal disease).These assays are similar to an assay developed for human
urine (Immunodip,Diagnostic Chemicals).
b.After the urine solute concentration has been adjusted to a specific gravity near
1.010, the device is dipped into the urine, and then the reaction is graded
visually. A negative reaction is expected if the [albumin] is < 1 mg/dL. Higher
concentrations are gradedfrom lowpositive tovery high positive based on color
changes in the device.
3.Albumin to creatinine ratio
a.Bayer Diagnostics markets a reagent pad method of estimating an albumin to
Crt ratio (Clinitek Microalbumin）.The albumin reaction is a dye-binding
method with color changes representing 0, 1,3, 8,15, and 50 mg/dL.The Crt
reaction is a peroxidase-like assay with color changes corresponding to 30, 100,
200, and 300 mg/dL. When the color changes are read by reflectance photometry
in a Bayer instrument (Clinitek), an estimated albumin to Crt ratio is calculated
The reported units of the ratios vary: 300mg/g = 300 μg/mg = 0.3 mg/mg
(or just 0.3)
b.The albumin assay is not specific for albumin. Many other proteins will react
with the dye includinglight chains,immunoglobulins,β-microglobulin,Tamm
Horsfall protein,hemoglobin,andmyoglobin.However,otherthan hemoglobin
and myoglobin, most of these proteins are not expected to be in urine at
sufficient concentrations to produce a false-positive albumin reaction.
c.In one comparison using canine urine samples,the authors concluded that the
available dipstick method (Clinitek Microalbumin)was not reliable for detection
of microalbuminuria.The results of a dipstick method were compared to the
results of a canine albumin-capture ELISA; albumin concentrations were
normalized to a specific gravity of 1.010.93 The Bayer albumin to Crt ratio
method correctly classified 48 % of the microalbuminuric samples (ie.,those
with albumin concentrations of 1-30mg/dL).Some samples were hematuric
(erythrocytes >5/hpf, > 1+heme reaction), and hemoglobin can bind to the
reagent dye.Thussome discrepanciesmayhaebeen dueto proteinsother
than albumin binding to the reagent in the dipstick.
4.Comparison to other urine protein assays
a.[Protein] estimated by routine protein assays of urinalyses (ie, thereagent
pad method and SSA turbidity) represenrs the sum of albumin and globulin
concentrations.Both methods detect albumin better than most globulins,but
globulins do contribute to the reactions.The detection limits of these assays
vary (Table 8.10)
b.The SSA assay is also called the bumintest because it detects albumin better
than globulins. When a sample's result is compared to standard solutions,
turbidity can be detected at an [albumin] of 5 mg/dL.If a very mild proteinuria
is caused by glomerular disease,albumin will be the dominant protein in the
urine.
c.The resulrs of these routine protein assays are typically not normalized to a
specific gravity of 1.010.However,their results should be interpreted with
knowledge of the sample'sUSGe so that an estimated adjustment canbemade
In a concentrated urine sample in which microalbuminuria is detected after
normalization to 1.010,itwould not be unusual for common protein dipstick
8/URINARYSYSTEM
483
reactions to produce a trace or 1 +reaction or for theSSA assay to have 1+
turbidity.
C.Canine microalbuminuria
1.There have been several published abstracts pertaining to the use of the ImmunoDip
Canine test,but very few peer review publications. Because the abstracts did not
contain complete information about materials and methods,it is difficult to
critically review the available data.911
2. It is important to remember that microalbuminuria is not unique to glomerular
disease. Microalbuminuria may be caused by any of the diseases and conditions that
cause proteinuria (prerenal,glomerular,tubular,orhemorrhagic/infammatory)
Thus, the presence of microalbuminuria should be interpreted in the context of
other clinical information. Clinical information (history, physical examination
findings,urinalysisandotherroutinelaboratoryresults）typicallyenables one
recognize prerenal and hemorrhagic/infammatory proteinurias. It is more difficult to
differentiateglomerular from tubular proteinurias.
66
3.The effects of urinary tract infammation or hemorrhage on the urine [albumin]
were explored by using a capture ELISA for canine [albumin] that the authors
acknowledged was not fully validated. Themeasured albumin concentrations were
<1 mg/dL in about rwo-thirds of the samples that had pyuria and in about half of
the samples that had hematuria and pyuria.
4.In contrast to findings in people,exercise did not increase the urinary excretion of
albumin in 26 dogs.102
VII.Fractional excretion (FE)ratios or percentages
A.Theory
1.In a random urine sample,the FE of substance Xwill reflect the relative rate of
urinary excretion of substance X compared to Crt.If substance X passes freely
through the glomerular filtration barrier and is neither secreted nor resorbed (like
Crt),the FE would be 1.0.If some of substance Xwere resorbed after freely
entering thefiltrate,theFEwould be1.o.Therore,for solutes thatfreelyass
theglomerularfiltration barrier egelectrolytes）,FEis thefractionof the solute
entering the filtrate or tubular fuid that is ultimately excreted. Substance X can be
an electrolyte,an enzyme,or another solute.For the derivation of the FE formula
(Eq.8.7), substance X is Na.
[Na+]
Xvolume+time+bw
Urinary Na*excretion rate
Na
(8.7.)
Urinary creatinine excretion rate
[Crt]u
Xvolume+time+bw
[Crt].
For a randomly collected urine sample:
Urine volume, time the over which urine formed, and the body weight values are
the same in both formulas and thus cancel out.
·Serum [Na] and [Crt] will probably be nearly the same but can vary.
·Urine [Na] and [Crt] are expected to vary because of multiple factors.
Considering these factors, the relative rates of Na* and Crt urinary excretion can be
expressed as follows:
484
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Na+
Urinary Na*excretion
Urinary creatinine excretion
Crt
Crt
[Crt].
Na*
Crt
Therefore, fractional excretion of Na*(F.E.of Na*
[r
Na*
Crt
Or expressed as a percentage, percent excretion of Na*
x100
Na+
Crt
2.A major advantage of the FE study over a 24 h excretion study is that the assessment
can be done on a random single urine sample.However, the urine and serum (or
plasma)samples for the assessment should be collected near the same time.A FE
value typicallywill be a better assessment ofrenal functions thana simpleratioof
urine analyte concentration to plasma analyte concentration because FE considers
variations in renalexcretions caused by altered GFR
B.Interpretive concepts
1.A FE ratio provides the relative rate of excretion of an analyte compared to Crt.For
aFE ratio to reflect the 24 h urinary excretion of an analyte accurately,Crt excretion
needs to be within the reference interval and relatively constant.
2.An increased FE ratio may reflect increased urinary excretion of an analyte.
a.Plasma analyte concentrations are increased (resulting in increased filtered load)
and the kidneys are attempting to excrete the excess. This may occur with
increased dietary intake of theanalyte
C：
Decreased tubular reso
analyte
3.Decreased FE ratio ofan analyte may
result from the opposite processes.
a.Plasma analyte
ecreased (resulting in decreased filtered load),
and thekidneys
areattempting
conserve the analyte. This may occur with
intake
analvte
analyte
4.An increased FE ratio may also ocur with decreased Crt excretion.
a.An increased FEof K+would occur if the renalexcretion of Kis maintained
through secretion of K+but Crt excretion is decreased because of decreased GFR
b.FE of PO4may be increased because of decreased GFR (thus less filtration of Crt
and PO4) and decreased tubular resorption of fltered PO because of increased
PTH activity.
accurate results for urine samples.
1.Urine can contain an inhibitor that interferes with the ion-selective electrode assay
for [K+].85
2.Urine may need to be acidified to promote dissociation of ion complexes; for
example, Ca² dissociation from PO or other anions.
3.Some assay systems require the protein matrix of serum or plasma, and thenearly
protein-free fluid (urine)may not be acceptable
8/URINARYSYSTEM
485
D.Clinical uses of fractional excretion studies
1.FEof Na
aIn a hyponatremic animal, an increased FE of Na indicates that renal excretion
of Nais contributing to the hyponatremia. Such a process may refect
decreased aldosterone activity,increased atrial natriuretic eptide,or renal
tubular disease.
b. In a hyponatremic animal, a decreased FE of Na* indicates that extrarenal factors
are causing the hyponatremia and that the kidneys are attempting to conserve
Na through the actions of aldosterone, angiotensin Il, or ADH.
c.FE of Naincreases in renal failure and decreases with prerenal azotemia,whereas
GFR is decreased in both conditions.
2. FE of PO
a.In a hypocalcemic animal, an increased FE of PO suggests increased PTH
activity as may occur with nutritional or renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
b. In a hypocalcemic animal, a decreased FE of PO4 suggests that decreased PTH
activity may be contributing to the hypocalcemic state.
C.In a patient with hypercalcemia caused by primary hyperparathyroidism,the FE
ofPO is increased.
3.FEofGGT
a.GGT is part of renal tubular cell membranes, so more GGT is excreted in urine
when there isrenal tubular cell damage. GGTactivity in a random urine sample
may or may not be increased with renal tubular disease. GGT activity should
reflect the [GGT] in the urine,which is determined by relative amounts of GGT
and H,O in the urine. Thus, dilute urine would be expected to have lower GGT
activity than does concentrated urine.
b.An increased FE of GGT indicates active renal tubular damage or necrosis. It
doesnot determine whether thereisorisnotrenal insufficiency orfailureandit
does not reflect GFR.103
E.FE studies are not commonly used in veterinary medicine because information obtained
may not be required for diagnosis and case management. Also, appropriate reference
intervals are difficult to obtain for each species,especially when one considers that
separate reference intervals maybe needed for different assay systems and different
diets.
VIII.Urine bile acid to creatinine ratio
Determining the urinary excretion of bile acids relative to Crt excretion is used as a method to
detect abnormal bile acid metabolism by the liver. Details of this diagnostic method are presented
in Chapter13.
HODEPRIVATIONANDANTIDIURETICHORMONE(ADH)RESPONSETESTSIN
ANIMALS WITH POLYURIAAND POLYDIPSIA (PU/PD)
1.
Renal concentrating ability is assessed in a routine urinalysis by determining the USGf
Typically, theUSGr along with other case information historical and physical findings
and other laboratory data) enables veterinarians to identify the probable causes of a PU/PD
disorder (see Tables 8.8 and 8.9).When a more critical assessment of renal concentrating
ability sneeded，and especially if central diabetes insipidusis suspected,either HO
486
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
deprivation or ADH response tests may be considered.Because interpretation guidelines
may differ when specific aspects of the challenges vary, the following provides the major
concepts (reference articles or texts should be consulted for specific interpretation
guidelines):
II.
Abrupt HO deprivation test3
A.General concepts
1.The basic purpose is to assess the ability of the kidneys to concentrate the ultrafl.
trate by inducing an abrupt stimulus (hypovolemia or hyperosmolality) for renal
HO retention.The test may be used to evaluate undiagnosed PU/PD patients that
consistentlyhave urine with USGf<1.020.
2.The test is contraindicated in azotemic animals (or those known to have decreased
GFR) or in dehydrated patients (already challenged to concentrate). The procedure
can be dangerous in severe PU states,because the animal can quickly become
severely hypovolemic.
B.Basics of the procedure
1.Baseline information is collected and may include body weight, USGs urine and
serum osmolality,and serum [Na].
2.Access to HO is abruptly removed, the animal is monitored, and the findings are
compared with baseline information until they indicate one of the following
a.The animal has become dangerously dehydrated.
b.The kidneys can concentrate urine.
c.The animal was adequately challenged,and its kidneys did not adequately
concentrate urine.
C.Basic interpretations
1.If the animal demonstrates ability to concentrate urine (the USGor urine osmolal
ity criteria are exceeded),the PU/PD state is a primary PD disorder.
2.If the animal does not demonstrate ability to concentrate urine, several possibilities
exist.
a.The procedure had to be halted before renal concentrating mechanisms produced
concentrated urine.
b.Secondary medullary hypotonicity (medullary washout) may be present because
of persistent polyuria from a variety of disorders.
c.A disorder that causes nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is present.
d.Central diabetes insipidus is present.
III.Gradual HO deprivation test3
A.The purpose, indications, and contraindications are the same as for the abrupt HO
deprivation test.The gradual HO deprivation test is indicated if medullary washout
from prolonged PU is expected or if there is failure to concentrate urine after abrupt
HO deprivation.The gradual decrease in HO intake will enable the kidneys to
reestablish a medullary concentration gradient. It tends to be a less dangerous procedure
in severely PU animals, but animals still must be monitored thoroughly for develop
ment of dehydration.
B.The major difference between the gradual and the abrupt procedures is that HO
intake and urine output are measured and recorded over 2 or more days. Then,HO
availability is decreased by 10 % each day.Like the abrupt test, the animal must be
monitored for evidence of dangerous dehydration and ability to concentrate urine.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
487
C.Advantages of the gradual HO deprivation are that it tends to be less dangerous and
allows time for reestablishment of medullary hypertonicity.The major disadvantage is
the time requirement; it may take over a week to complete the test.
IV.
ADH (vasopressin)response test²3
A.The basic purposes are to assess the abiliry of the kidneys to respond to exogenous
ADH and to confirm a complete or partial absence of ADH (diabetes insipidus) in a
PU/PD patient. It may be more justified when HO deprivation does not lead to
concentrated urine.
B.Basics of the procedure
1.HO access is ad libitum during the study.
2.After administration of aqueous vasopressin or deamino-D-arginine vasopressin
(DDAVP), renal concentrating ability is assessed by measuring the USGf or urine
osmolality.
C.Expected findings
1.Central diabetes insipidus: The kidneys did not concentrate urine during HO
deprivation but did when stimulated by exogenous ADH.
deprivation or after stimulation by exogenous ADH. The same results may occur
with “medullary washout” caused by any primary PU or PD disorder.
V.
Modified H,O deprivation test104
A.Combination of HO deprivation test and ADH response test
B.Procedure
1.Abruptly deprive the animal of H,O and then measure urine osmolality hourly until
the increase in urine osmolality between consecutive hourly samples is<5%.
2.ADH administered and urine collected 1 h after injection
C.Expected results
1.Healthy dogs: urine osmolality after HO deprivation > 1000 mmol/kg, and a 0 %
increase in urine osmolality after ADH administration
2.Partial central diabetes insipidus and partial renal diabetes insipidus cases (including
dogs with hyperadrenocorticism):urine osmolality after HO deprivation
< 600 mmol/kg, and a 20-50 % increase in urine osmolality after ADH
administration
3.Central diabetes insipidus cases: urine osmolality after HO deprivation
<300 mmol/kg,and a>100 % increase in urine osmolality after ADH
administration
4.Primary polydipsia cases:The response should be similar to that of healthy dogsif
the kidneys have medullary hypertonicity,but there may be a poor response f
“medullary washout” is present.
UROLITHANALYSIS
A urolith （or urinary calculus) is a solid concretion (stone) that forms within the urinary
tract and typically is found in a renal pelvis, urinary bladder, urethra, or voided urine.
Learning the composition of a urolith provides evidence for the pathogenesis of its forma
tion and aids in developing therapeutic plans to remove or to reduce chances for recur-
rence. Uroliths are found most commonly in dogs and are relatively uncommon in cats,
488
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 8.15.Inorganic composition ofuroliths
Group
Chemical name
Formula
Mineralogicname
Carbonate
Calcium carbonate
CaCO,
Calcite, aragonite,
vaterite
Cystine
Cystine
SCH,CH(NH)COOH
Cystine
Oxalates
Calcium oxalatemonohydrate
CaCO.H,O
Whewellite
Calcium oxalate dihydrate
CaCO.2HO
Weddellite
Phosphates
Basic calcium phosphate
Ca;(PO）（OH)
Apatite
Hydroxyapatite
Ca(PO）（OH）
Hydroxyapatite
Carbonate-apatite
Ca(POCOOH)（OH)
Carbonate-apatite
Calcium hydrogen phosphate
CaHPO4.2HO
Brushite
dihydrate
Tricalcium phosphate
Ca,(PO4）2
Whitlockite
Octacalcium phosphate
CaH(PO）·2.5HO
Magnesium ammonium
MgNHPO-6HO
Struvite
phosphate hexahydrate
Magnesium hydrogen
MgHPO-3HO
Newberyite
phosphate trihydrate
Silica
Silicone dioxide
SiO,
Silica
Uric acids
Anhydrous uric acid
CHNO,
Uric acid dihydrate
CHNO,.2HO
Urates
Ammonium acid urate
C,H,NO,NH4
Sodium acid urate
CH,NO,Na-HO
monohydrate
*A urolith is classified as to a specifc type if at least 70 % of its composition is composed of that mineral.
If it does not meet that criterion, it is referred to as a mixed urolith.
b Also known as ammonium hydrogen urate or ammonium biurate
horses, and cattle. Most urinary tract obstructions in cats are not caused by uroliths but by
plugs consisting of phosphate crystals and mucoid material.Uroliths arenot large urine
crystals but consist of aggregated crystals and an organic matrix. Crystals form with a
unique three-dimensional structure.The chemical compositions ofuroliths are listed in
Table 8.15.
II.
Two issues of theVeterinary Clinics of North America containvaluable information regarding
the detectin,analysis,treatmentandmanagement fcaninerolithspdatd
information can be found inmedicine textbooks for individual species.
III.
Analytical concepts
A.Formanyyearsolithswere analyzedchmicallith seriesfqualitativechmical
reactions to detect the presence of certain cations and anions. These chemical methods
are nearly obsolete because (l) they did not agree well with results of quantitative
crystallographic methods,(2) they did not provide a relative amount of each constitu
ent,(3） significant amounts of some ions were missed,（4） they lacked methods for
detecting silica and cystine,(5) false-positive results occurred for some compounds,and
(6)mixeduroliths could not be classfied.107
8/URINARYSYSTEM
489
B.The chemical methods have been replaced by physical analytical methods. These
analyses are offered by a few specialized laboratories (e.g., the Minnesota Urolith
Center,theUrolithiasisLaboratory atBaylor CollegeofMedicine,theUrinary Stone
AnalysisLaboratory attheUniversityofCaliforniaDavisand the CanadianVeterinary
Urolith Centre at the University of Guelph).1os-110
1. Optical crystallography: Ground urolith material is examined with a polarizing
microscope after the material is placed in a series of oils with different refractive
indices.Each crystal is identified when its refractive index is matched with one of
the oils (i.e., it disappears). Different layers of the urolith are analyzed to determine
the composition of each layer.
2.X-ray diffraction: Ground urolith material is bombarded with X-rays. As the X-rays
hit a crystal, they are diffracted (scattered) in a unique way for each crystal. The
diffractions arerecorded to determine the chemical composition of the urolith.
3.Other less common methods:electron microprobe, scanning electron microscopy,
and infrared spectroscopy
IV.
Pathogenesis of urolith formation: Urolith formation is a complex process that involves
many factors that promote and others that inhibit formation.The major steps of urolith
formation are as follows:1
urine.
B.The cations and anions combine into a unique crystalline structure. Factors such as pH,
temperature, and fowrate infuence crystallization.This process occursmore easily
when it occurs on the surface of debris,casts,or other urine particles, a process called
heterogeneous nucleation. These crystals may be seen in urine sediment and usually do
not grow fast enough to become lodged in the urinary tract;instead,they arefushed
out via the urine.
are not passed, then they provide a surface for additional crystallization and
aggregation.
D.The formation of crystals and aggregates is naturally inhibited by a variery of sub-
stances.For example, citrate binds Ca²and thus limits its availability for crystal
formation. Tamm-Horsfall protein is produced by the renal tubular cells and is a
natural inhibitor of aggregation
E.During the formation of many uroliths, variable amounts of matrix are incorporated
into the urolith.In people,the matrix is composed mostly of hexosamine,which might
be a product of Tamm-Horsfall (uromucoid) degeneration.
V.
Predisposing or contributing factors for urolith formation: Factors that contribute to
crystalluria typically also contribute to urolith formation.In addition,increased amounts of
the noncrystalline matrix and lower amounts of inhibitors will promote aggregation.
A.Struvite uroliths are associated with urinary tract infections, especiallyby urease-
producing bacteria, which degrade urea and increase the urine's alkaliniry.
B.Calcium phosphate uroliths are associated with urinary tract infections (see struvite)
and hypercalciuria caused by hypercalcemia.
C.Calcium oxalate uroliths occur with increased urinary excretion of Ca² associated with
hypercalcemia,increased intake of Ca²+or vitaminD.They also occur with increased
urinary excretion of oxalate because of ingestion of material with high oxalate content
490
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(chocolatnuts,nach,weetotates,whaterm,andxalat-ontaninglan
such as halogeton).
D.Urate uroliths are found primarily in Dalmatians and English bulldogs because of thein
excretion ofurate via kidneys,but they are also found in dogs with portosystemic
shunts or hepatic insufficiency.
E.Cystine uroliths are found in dogs thar have defective metabolic pathways thar lead to
cystinuria,including English bulldogs,Newfoundlands,dachshunds,mastiffs,bulmas
tiffs, Australian cattle dogs, and Scottish deerhounds.
F.Xanthine uroliths are found in dogs treated with xanthine oxidase to control urate
urolithiasis and in dogs with xanthinuria (cavalier King Charles spaniels and dachshunds).
corn gluten feed or soybean hulls. Silica uroliths may form in cattle grazing silica-rich
soils.
References
1.Rose BD. 1994. Clinical Physiology afAcid-Base and Electrolyte Disorders, 4th edition. New York: McGraw-Hill
2. OConnell JMB, Romeo JA, Mudge GH. 1962. Renal tubular secretion of creatinine in the dog. Am J Physiol
203:985-990
3.Robinson T, Harbison M, Bovee KC. 1974. Infuence of reduced renal mass on tubular secretion of creatinine in the
dog.Am J Vet Res 35:487-491.
4. Finco DR, Groves C. 1985. Mechanism of renal excretion of creatinine by the pony. Am J Vet Res 46:1625-1628.
5.Finco DR, Barsanti JA. 1982.Mechanism of urinary excretion of creatinine by the cat.Am J Vet Res
43:2207-2209.
6.Frokiaer J,Marples D, KnepperMA,Nielsen S.1998.Pathophysiology of aquaporin-2 in water balance disorders.
Am J Med Sci 316:291299.
7.Cotran RS,Kumar V, Collins T. 1999. Robbins Patbofogic Basis of Disease, 6th edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders
8.Foreman JW, Tsuru N, Chan JCM. 1990. Pathophysiology and management of chronic renal failure. In: Chan
JCM, Gill JR Jr,eds. Kicdney Electrelyte Disorders, 457489. New York: Churchill Livingston.
9. Ross LA, Finco DR. 1981. Relationship of selected clinical renal function tests to glomerular filtration rate and renal
blood fow in cats.Am JVet Res 42:1704-1710.
partial unilateral ureteric obstruction. Urol Res 22:279285.
11. Yuile CL, Hawkins WB. 1941. Azotemia due to ingestion of blood proteins. Am J Med Sci 201:162-167.
12. Gregory R, Ewing PL, Levine H. 1945. Azotemia associated with gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Arch Intern Med
75:381-394.
13. Prause LC, Grauer GF. 1998. Association of gastrointestinal hemorrhage with increased blood urea nitrogen and
BUN/creatinine ratio in dogs: A literature review and retrospective study. Vet Clin Pathol 27:107111.
14. Lundberg GD, Iverson C, Radulescu G. 1986. Now read this: The SI units are here.J Am Med Assoc
255:2329-2339.
15.Tietz NW.199 5.Clawial Guide teLaboratory Tests,3rd edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders
16.Braun JP,Lefebvre HP, Watson AD.2003. Creatinine in the dog: A review.Vet Clin Pathol 32:162-179.
17. Newman DJ, Price CP. 1999. Renal function and nitrogen metabolites. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, eds. Tietz
Tearbok of Clinical Cbemistry, 3rd edition, 12041270. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
18. Jacobs RM, Lumsden JH, Taylor JA, Grift E. 1991. Effects of interferents on the kinetic Jaffx reaction and an
enzymatic colorimetric test for serum creatinine concentration determination in cats, cows, dogs, and horses. Can ]
Vet Res 55:150-154.
19. Lolelkha PH, Jaruthunyaluck S, Srisawasdi P. 2001. Deproteinization of serum: Another best approach to eliminate
all forms of bilirubin interference on serum creatinineby thekinetic Jaffe reaction. J Clin Lab Anal 15:116121.
20.Feeman WE Il, Couto CG,Gray TL. 2003. Serum creatinine concentrations in retired racing Greyhounds.Vet
Clin Pathol 32:40-42.
21. Brewer BD. 1990. The urogenital system. Section 2: Renal diseases. In: Koterba AM, Drummond WH, Kosch PC,
cds. Equine ClimicalNeonarology, 446458. Philadelphia: Lea &c Febiger
8/URINARYSYSTEM
491
22. Finco DR, Duncan JR. 1976. Evaluation of blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine concentrations as indicators
of renal dysfunetion: A study of 111 cases and a review of related literature. J Am Vet Med Assoc 168:593601.
23.Finco DR. 1995. Evaluation of renal functions. In: Osborne CA, Finco DR, eds. Canune and Feline Nepwvlogy and
Urolog, lst edition, 216229. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
24. Bovae KC, Joyce T. 1979. Clinical evaluation of glomerular function: 24-hour creatinine dlearance in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 174:488491.
25. Rogers KS, Kormkov A, Brown SA, Lees GE, Hightower D, Russo EA. 1991. Comparison of four methods of
estimating glomerular filtration rate in cats. Am J Vet Res 52:961964.
26. Gronwall R 1985. Efect of diuresis on urinary excretion and creatinine clearance in the horse. Am J Vet Res
46:1616-1618.
27. Kohn CW, Strasser SL. 1986. 24-Hour renal clearance and excretion of endogenous substances in the mare. Am J
Vet Res 47:1332-1337.
28. Finco DR, Coulter DB, Barsanti JA. 1982. Procedure for a simple method of measuring glomerular filtration rate in
the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:804806.
29. Watts C, Campbell JR 1970. Biochemical changes following bilateral nephrectomy in the bovine. Res Vet Sci
11:508-514.
30.Watt C,Campbell JR 1971.Further studies on the effct of total mephretomy in the bovine.Res Vet Sci
12:234-245.
31. Schenck PA, Chew DJ. 2003.Determination of calcium fractionation in dogs with chronic renal failure.Am J Vet
Res 64:1181-1184.
32. Brobst DF, Parish SM, Torbeck RL, Frost OL, Bracken FK. 1978. Azotemia in catte. J Am Vet Med Assoc
173:481-486.
33. Divers TJ, Crowell WA, Duncan JR, Whitlock RH. 1982. Acute renal disorders in cattle: A retrospective study of
22 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 18 1:694699.
34. Lulich JP, Osborne CA, O'Brien TD, Polzin DJ. 1992. Feline renal failure: Questions, answers, questions. Compend
Contin Educ Small Anim Pract 14:127-153
35. Albasan H, Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Lekcharoensuk C, Ulrich LK, Carpenter KA. 2003. Effects of storage time and
temperature on pH, specific gravity, and crystal formation in urine samples from dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 222:176179.
36.Graff L. 1983.A Hanabook ofRewtine Urinalsis. Philadelphia:JB Lippincott.
37.Macdougall DF, Curd GJ. 200o. Urine collection and complete analysis. In: Bainbridge J, Elliott J, eds.BSA VA
Manual ofCanine andFelineNeprology and Urelogy,Ist edition,86106.Ames: lowa State University Press.
38.McBride LJ. 1998. Textbook of Urinalsis and Body Fluids. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven.
39.Osborne CA,Stevens JB.1999.UrinalsisA Clinical Guide to Compasionate Patient Care. Shawnee Mission,KS:
Bayer.
40.Coffman JR. 1981.Equine Cinical Chemistry ndPatophsiology.Bonner Springs,KS:Veterinary Medicine.
41. Goldberg HE. 1997. Prmcples of Refractomehy. Buffalo, NY: Leica.
42.Wolf AV.1966.Aqueous Selutions and BodyFluids:Their ConcentrativeProperties andConeersion Tables,NewYork:
Hoeber.
43. Stockham SL, Scott MA. 2000. Unpublished data.
44. McCrossin T, Roy LP. 1985. Comparison of hydrometry, refractometry, osmometry, and Ames N-Multistix SG in
estimation of urinary concentration. Aust Paediatr J 2l:185-188.
45. Chu SY, Sparks D. 1984. Assessment of a solid-phase reagent for urinary specifc gravity determination.
Clin Biochem 17:34-36.
46. Raff H. 1987. Glucocorticoid inhibition of neurohypophysial vasopressin secretion. Am J Physiol 252:R635-R644.
47. Dingman JF, DesPointes RH. 1960. Adrenal steroid inhibition of vasopressin release from the neurohypophysis of
normal subjects and patients with Addison's disease. J Clin Invest 39:1851-1863.
48. Lindeman RD, Van Buren HC, Raisz LG. 1961. Effect of steroids on water diuresis and vasopresin sensitivity.
J Clin Invest 40:152-158.
49. Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS, van Vonderen IK, Mol JA, Voorhout G, van Sluijs FJ, Ijzer J, van den Ingh TS, Boer P,
Boer WH. 2001. Aldosteronoma in a dog with polyuria as the leading symptom. Domest Anim Endocrinol
20:227-240.
50.Earm JH, ChristensenBM,Frakir J,MarplesD,Han JS,KnepperMA,Nielsen S.1998.Dcreased aquapori2
expression and apical plasma membrane delivery in kidney collecting ducts of polyuric hypercalcemic rats. J Am Soc
Nephrol9:2181-2193.
51.Rose BD,PostTW.2001.ClinialPhilogyofAcid-Base andElectreyeDiserder,5thedition.NewYork
MeGraw-Hill.
492
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
52. Puliyanda DP, Ward DT, Baum MA, Hammond TG, Harris HW Jr. 2003. Calpain-mediated AQP2 proteolysis in
inner medullary collecting duct Biochem Biophys Res Commun 303:52-58.
53. Raymond KH, Lifschitz MD, MeKinney TD. 1987. Prostaglandins and the urinary concentrating defect in
potassium-depleted rabbits. Am J Physiol 253:F1113-F1119.
54. Luke RG, Wright FS, Fowler N, Kashgarian M, Giebisch GH. 1978. Effects of potassium depletion on renal tubular
chloride transport in the rat. Kidney Int 14:414427.
55. Belshaw BE. 1983. Thyroid diseases. In: Etinger SJ, ed. Textbook ef Veterinary Intermal Medicine: Diseases ef tbe Dog
and Ca, 2nd edition, 1592-1614. Philadelphia: WB Saunders
56. Paquignon A, Tran G, Provost JP. 1993. Evaluation of the Clinitek 200 urinary test-strip reader in the analysis of
dog and rat urines in pre-clinical toxicology studies. Lab Anim 27:240-246.
57.WikeronMJockhamSL2002.Asessing agremetof reults of urinercant sripasay:Visualassmnt
versus Clinitek 100 Urine Chemistry Analyzer. In: Teaching Clinical Pathology, Annual Meeting of the American
Society for Veterinary Clinical Pathology, New Orleans.
58. Barsanti JA, Finco DR. 1979. Protein concentration in urine of normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 40:15831588.
59. Heuter K], Buffington CAT, Chew DJ. 1998. Agreement between two methods for measuring urine pH in cats and
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:996-998.
60. Moore FM, Brum SL, Brown L. 1991. Urine protein determination in dogs and cats: Comparison of dipstick and
sulfasalicylic acid procedures. Vet Clin Pathol 20:95-97.
61.Hinberg IH,KatzL,Waddell L1978.Sensitivity of in vitro diagnostic dipstick tests to urinary protein
Clin Biochem 1l:62-64.
62. Jansen BS, Lumsden JH. 1985. Sensitivity of routine tests for urine protein to hemoglobin. Can Vet J 26:221-223
63. Schumann GB, Schweitzer SC. 1996. Examination of urine. In: Kaplan LA, Pesce AJ,Kazmierczak SC, eds. Clinical
Chemistry:Theory Aalyis,and Correlatin,3rd edition,11141139.St Louis: CVMosby.
64. Schultze AE, Jensen RK. 1989. Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of canine urinary proteins
for the analysis and differentiation of tubular and glomerular diseases. Vet Clin Pathol 18:93-97.
65. Zini E, Bonfanti U, Zatelli A. 2004.Diagnostic relevance of qualitative proteinuria evaluated by use of sodium
dodecyd sulftagaros gl cletrophoresisand cmparisn withrenalhistologicfnding in dog.Am J Vet Res
65:964-971.
66.Lees GE,Brown SA,Elliott J,Grauer GF,Vaden SL.2005.Assessment and management f proteinuria in dogs and
cats: 2004 ACVIM Forum Consensus Statement (small animal). J Vet Intern Med 19:377385.
67.Stone MJ. 1982. Monoclonal gammopathies: Clinical aspects. In:Ritzmann SE, ed.Pretein Abnermalitis, volume 2:
Patholgy ofImmwoglobulinsDiagaosticndClinical Aspects, 161236.NewYork:Alan R Liss.
68.Ritzmann SE, Daniels JC. 1982. Seram Protein Abnormalities Diagnostic and Clinical Aspects. New York: Alan R
Liss.
69. MacEwen EG, Hurvitz Al. 1977. Diagnosis and management of monoclonal gammopathies. Vet Clin North Am
7:119-132
70. Bonfanti U, Zini E, Minetti E, Zatelli A. 2004. Free light-chain proteinuria and normal renal histopathology and
function in 1l dogs exposed to Leismania infantum,Ehrlichia canis,and Babesia canis.J Vet Intern Med
18:618624.
71. Feldman EC, Nelson RW.1996. Diabetes mellitus. In: Camime and Feline Endocrinology anad Reproauction, 2nd
edition, 339-391. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
72. Link RP. 1940. Glucose tolerance in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 97:261-262.
73. Hostettler-Allen RL, Tappy L, Blum JW. 1994. Insulin resistance,hyperglycemia, and glucosuria in intensively
milk-fed calves. J Anim Sei 72:160-173.
74.Bovae KC, Joyce T, Blazer-Yost B, Goldschmidt MS, Segal S. 1979. Characterization of renal defects in dogs with a
syndrome similar to the Fanconi syndrome in man. J Am Vet Med Assoc 174:10941104.
75. Bayer. 2005. Package insert for Bayer reagent strips. Elkhart, IN.
76.Oster JR,Rietberg B,Taylor AL,Perez GO,Chandra R,Gardner LB.1984. Can beta-hydroxybutyrate be detected
at the bedside by in vitro oxidation with hydrogen peroxide. Diabetes Care 7:8082.
77. Adams EC. 1971. Differentiaton of myoglobin and hemoglobin in biological fuids. Ann Clin Lab Sd 1:208-221.
78.Chu SY, Curtis C,Turkington VE. 1978. Influence of pH on the simple solubility test for myoglobinuria. Clin
Biochem 1l:230-231.
79.Waugh WH. 2003. Simplified method to assay total plasma peroxidase activity and ferriheme products in sickle cell
anemia with initial results in asseing clinical severity in a tral with citrulline therapy. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol
25:831-834.
80.Vail DM, Allen TA,Weiser G. 1986.Applicability of leukocyte esterase test strip in detection of canine pyuria.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:1451-1453.
8/URINARYSYSTEM
493
81. Osborne CA,Stevens JB,Lulich JP, Ulrich LK,Bird KA,Kochler LA,Swanson LL. 1995. A clinician’s analysis of
urinalysis. In: Osborne CA, Finco DR, eds. Canine and Feline Nepbrology and Urology, 136205. Baltimore:
Williams &Willkins.
82. Swenson CL, Boisverr AM, Kruger JM, Gibbons-Burgener SN. 2004. Evaluation of modified Wright-staining
of urine sediment as a method for accurate detection of bacteriuria in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 224:1282
1289.
83. Osborne CA, Lees GE. 1995. Bacterial infections of the canine and feline urinary tract. In: Osborne CA, Finco DR,
eds. Camine amd Feline Nepbrology and Urology, 759797. Baltimore: Williams &c Willkins.
84. Trumel C, Diquelou A, Lefebvre H, Braun JP. 2004. Inaccuracy of routine creatinine measurement in canine urine.
Vet Clin Pathol 33:128-132.
85.Brooks CL, Garry F, Swartout MS. 1988.Effect of an interfering substance on determination of potassium by
ion-specifc potentiomety in animal urine. Am J Vet Res 49:710-714.
86.Schriever H, Gambino SR. 1965. Protein turbidity produced by trichloracetic acid and sulfosalicylic acid at varying
temperatures and varying ratios of albumin and globulin. Am J Clin Pathol 44:667672.
87.White JV, Olivier NB, Reimann K, Johnson C. 1984. Use of protein-to-creatinine ratio in a single urine specimen
for quantitative estimation of canine proteinuria. J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:882-885.
88. Dilena BA, Penberthy LA, Fraser CG. 1983. Sic methods for determining urinary protein compared. Clin Chem
29:553-557.
89. Center SA, Wilkinson E, Smith CA, Erb H, Lewis RM. 1985. 24-Hour urine protein/creatinine ratio in dogs with
protein-losing nephropathies. J Am Vet Med Assoc187:820-824.
90. MeCaw DL, Knapp DW, Hewett JE. 1985. Effect of collction time and exercise restriction on the prediction of
urine protein excretion, using urine protein/creatinine ratio in dogs. Am J Vet Res 46:1665-1669.
91. Cook AK, Cowgill LD. 1996. Clinical and pathological features of protein-losing glomerular disease in the dog
A review of 137 cases (1985-1992). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:313-322.
92.Pugia MJ, Lott JA, Clark LW, Parker DR, Wallace JF, Willis TW. 1997. Comparison of urine dipsticks with
quantitative methods for microalbuminuria.Eur J Clin Chem Clin Biochem 35:693-700.
93. Pressler BM, Vaden SL, Jensen WA, Simpson D. 2002. Detection of canine microalbuminuria using semiquantita-
tive test strips designed for use with human urine. Vet Clin Pathol 31:56-60.
94. Zaragoza C, Barrera R, Centeno F, Tapia JA, Duran E, Gonzalez M, Mane MC. 2003. SDS-PAGE and Western
blot of urinary proteins in dogs with leishmaniasis. Vet Res 34:137151.
95.Zaragoza C,Barrera R,Centeno F,Tapia JA,Mane MC.2004.Canine pyometra: A study of the wrinary proteins by
SDS-PAGE and Western blot.Theriogenology 61:1259-1272.
96. Grauer GF. 2005. Early detection of renal damage and disease in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 35:581-596.
97. Vaden SL, Pressler BM, Lappin MR, Jensen WA. 2004. Effects of urinary tract inflarmmation and sample blood
contamination on urine albumin and total protein concen trations in canine urine samples. Vet Clin Pathol
33:14-19.
98. Gaines Das RE 1980. Dilution as a source of error: Implications for preparation and calibration of laboratory
standards and for quality control of radioimmunoassays. Clin Chem 26:1726-1729.
99.Whittemore JC, Jensen WA, Prause L, Radecki S, Gill V, Lappin MR. 2003. Comparison of microalbuminuria,
urine protein dipstick, and urine protein creatinine ratio results in clinically ill dogs. J Vet Intern Med 17:437
(abstract).
albuminuria in dogs with heartworm disease. J Vet Intern Med 16:352 (abstract)
101. Lees GE, Jensen WA, Simpson DF, Kashtan CE. 2002. Persistent albuminuria precedes onset of overt proteinuria in
male dogs with X-linked hereditary nephropathy. J Vet Intern Med 16:353 (abstract).
102. Gary AT, Cohn LA, Kerl ME, Jensen WA. 2004. The effects of exercise on urinary albumin excretion in dogs. J Vet
InternMed18:52-55.
103. Gossett KA, Turnwald GH, Kearney MT, Greco DS, Cleghorn B. 1987. Evaluation of Y-glutamyl transpeptidase-to-
creatinine ratio from spot samples of urine supernatant, as an indicator of urinary enzyme excretion in dogs. Am J
VetRes 48:455-457.
104. Mulnix JA, Rijnberk A, Hendrilks HJ. 1976. Evaluation of a modifed water-deprivation test for diagnosis of
polyuric disorders in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 169:1327-1330.
105. Osborne CA. 1986. Canine urolithiasis I. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 16:1-207.
106. Osborne CA. 1986. Canine urolithiasis II. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 16:209415.
107.Bovee KC, MeGuire T. 1984. Qualitative and quantitative analysis of uroliths in dogs: Definitive determination of
chemical type. J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:983987.
494
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
108. Ling GV, Thurmond MC, Choi YK, Franti CE, Ruby AL, Johnson DL. 2003. Changes in proportion of canine
urinary calculi composed of calcium oxalate or struvite in specimens analyzed from 1981 through 2001. J Vet Intern
Med17:817-823.
109.Houston DM, Moore AE,Favrin MG,Hoff B.2004. Canine urolithiasis: A look at over 16,000 urolith submissions
to the Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre from February 1998 to April 2003. Can Vet J 45:225230.
110.Kyles AE,Hardie EM,Wooden BG,Adin CA,Stone EA,Gregory CR,Mathews KG,Cowgill LD,Vaden S,
Nyland TG, Ling GV. 2005. Clinical, dinicopathologic, radiographic, and ultrasonographic abnormalities in cats
with ureteral calculi: 163 cases (19842002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 226:932-936.
111. Menon M, Resnick MI. 2005. Urinary lithiasis: Etiology, diagnosis, and medical management. In: Walsh PC, Retik
AB, Vaughan ED Jr, Wein AJ, eds. Canpbell': Urlogy, 8th edition, 3229-3305. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
112. Grauer GF, Thomas CB, Eicker SW. 1985. Estimation of quantitative proteinuria in the dog, using the urine
protein-to-creatinine ratio from a random, voided sample. Am J Vet Res 46:21162119
113.American Optical. 1976. Instructiens for use anad care of the AO TS meter (a Goldberg refracte meter). Bufflo, NY:
American Optical, Scientific Instrument Division.
114.Wrong O. 1978. Nitrogen metabolism in the gut.Am J Clin Nutr 31:1587-1593.
115. Jones JD, Burnett PC. 1974. Creatinine metabolism in humans with decreased renal function: Creatinine dehicit.
ClinChem20:1204-1212.
116.Grossman BS, Brobst DF, Kramer JW, Bayly WM, Reed SM. 1982. Urinary indices for differentiation of prerenal
azotemia and renal azotemia in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:284288.
Basic Concepts for the Interpretation of Electrolyte Concentrations.
497
Sodium (Nat) Concentration.
498
1.Physiologic Processes
498
Il.Analytical Concepts
500
ll. Hypermatremia.
501
IV.Normonatremia inDehydrated orEdematousAnimals
503
V.Hyponatremia
505
Potassium (K+) Concentration
509
1.Physiologic Processes
509
Il.Analytical Concepts
510
Ill. Hyperkalemia.
511
IV.Normokalemia inAcidoticorAlkaloticAnimals..
516
V.Hypokalemia.
516
Sodium to Potassium (Na+:K+) Ratio
519
Chloride (Cl) Concentration.
520
1.Physiologic Processes
520
Il.Analytical Concepts
521
Ill. Hyperchloremia.
522
IV. Normochloremia..
523
V.Hypochloremia.
523
Bicarbonate (HCO,) Concentration and Total Carbon Dioxide (tCO2)
Concentration ..
525
1.PhysiologicProcesses
525
I.Analytical Concepts
527
Ill. Increased Bicarbonate (HCO) Concentration or Total Carbon
Dioxide(tcO) Concentration.
529
IV.Decreased Bicarbonate (HCO,-) Concentration or Total Carbon
Dioxide(tCO)Concentration.
531
Anion Gap..
534
Lactate Concentration (L-lactate and D-lactate)
538
β-Hydroxybutyrate (BHB) and Acetoacetate (AcAc) Concentrations.
543
Osmolalityand Osmo.Gap.
545
495
Table 9.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
Na':K+
Sodium topotassium
[x]
xconcentration (x=analyte)
AcAc
Acetoacetate
AcCoA
Acetyl-coenzyme A
ADH
Antidiuretic hormone
ANP
Atrial natriuretic peptide
ATP
Adenosine triphosphate
ATPase
Adenosine triphosphatase
BHB
β-Hydroxybutyrate
ECF
Extracellular fluid
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
fCa2+
Free ionized calcium
fMg2+
Free ionized magnesium
HCI
Hydrochloric acid
HCO
Bicarbonate
ICF
Intracellular fuid
IV
Intravenous
LD
L-lactate dehydrogenase
mA-
Measured anion charge
mC+
Measured cation charge
M,
Relative molecular mass
NAD+
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NADH
Reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NH
Ammonium
Osme
Calculated osmolality
Osmm
Measured osmolaliry
Osmo.Gap
Difference betweenmeasured osmolality and calculated osmolarity
PcO2
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide
pH
-log [H']
pK
-log(K） where Kis the ionization constant fora partially ionized acid
PO4
Phosphate, all forms
RAS
Renin-angiotensin system
Dursesmai
SI
Systeme International d'Unites
SID
Strong ion difference
SO4
Sulfate, all forms
tA-
Total anionic charge
tbH,O
Total body water content
tbK+
Total body potassium content
tbNat
Total body sodium content
tC+
Total cationic charge
tCO2
Total carbon dioxide content
uA-
Unmeasured anion charge
uC+
Unmeasured cation charge
WRI
Within the reference interval
496
497
Alimentary
Blood
Kidney
Tract
RBO
Extracellular
Na+
Cells
CI-
Alimentary
K+
K+
H+
H,O
carbonic
HO
Resp.Tract
anhydrase
CO2
CO2
HCO3
K+
儿
P
Third spaces
(Pleural&Perltoneal)
Fig. 9.1.Basic concepts for electrolyte and H,O movements into and out of plasma.Electrolytes and H,O
enter plasma from the alimentary tract,from cells,and by injections or infusions.In vitro lysis of blood cells
and platelet activation may add K+ to the plasma or serum. Electrolytes and HO may leave the plasma and
the body via kidneys, alimentary tract,respiratory tract, or skin, and they may enter extravascular sites
within the body in the form of third-space loss (e.g., to pleural and peritoneal cavities). In some pathologic
states involvingmuscle,HOor electrolytes shift between theICF and ECF spaces(see the text for details）).
Fluids (e.g., plasma or urine) can enter pleural or peritoneal cavities and, if not removed via centesis,
electrolytes and HO will be absorbed (see the text for details).Plt, platelet; and RBC, erythrocyte.
BASICCONCEPTSFORTHEINTERPRETATION OFELECTROLYTE
CONCENTRATIONS
I
Electrolyte concentrations in serum or plasma are thenet result ofinrake,excretion,and shifts
berween ICF and ECF. Shifts may occur in vivo or in vitro.The basic concepts for electrolyte
and HO movements in and out of plasma are shown in Fig.9.1.Electrolyte concentrations
in serum or plasma essentially represent the electrolyte concentrations in all ECF.
A.Na, K, and CF typically enter the body via oral intake of food or fuids.HCO
typically is generated by carbonic anhydrase reactions in lungs,gastric mucosa,kidneys,
and erythrocytes.
B.Outside the vascular system,metabolicprocesses govern themovement of electrolytes
intoandoutofcells.
1.In health,ECF is relatively rich in Na and Cl- but poor in K,whereas ICF is
relatively rich in K+but poor in Na and Cl (except in erythrocytes of some species
and breeds).
2.Electrolyte shifts from or to the ECF will alter plasma or serum concentrations of
those electrolytes.
C.Cells within blood may alter plasma or serum electrolyte concentrarions if they release
electrolytes.
1.In vitro lysis of K-rich erythrocytes will result in falsely elevated plasma [K+].
However, erythrocytes are K-rich in only some species and breeds (see Potassium
Concentration,sect.IIl.B.1.h).
498
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.The [K+] is slightly greater in serum than in plasma because platelets release K*
during clotting.The magnitude of the increase can be clinically significant when
there is a thrombocytosis.
D.Electrolytes and HO are excreted or lost from the ECF via kidneys, alimentary tract,
skin, and airways. ECF tends to become hypotonic with loss of hypertonic fuids or
hypertonic with loss of hypotonic fluids. Drinking HO after the loss of ECF will
dilute the remaining ECF.
E.HCO,concentrations are altered by changes in the concentrations of other electrolytes
and by changes in acid-base balance.
II
Abnormal electrolyte concentrations in plasma or serum result from one or more of these
basic processes involving electrolytes or HO:
A.Decreased or increased intake
B.
Shifts to and from ICF
C.Increased renal retention
D.Increased loss via the kidneys,almentary tract, skin,or airways (HCO,indirectly)
III.
Electrolyte concentrations and acid-base abnormalities
A.The regulation of acid-base status in an animal involves physiologic processes that may
alter plasma （serum) concentrations of Na,Cl,K,and HCO,the major topics of
this chapter.
B.Pathologic states that first alter electrolyte concentrations can create acid-base abnor-
malities,themajor topics of Chapter10.Thus,it is diffcult to completely separate
electrolyte concepts from acid-base concepts.The early sections of Chapter 10 contain
the major definitions and classifications of acid-base abnormalities. The end of Chapter
10 contains a section on SID. The SID approach uses electrolyte concentrations to
define metabolic acid-base disorders.
SODIUM(Na)CONCENTRATION
1
Physiologic processes
A.Plasma [Na] is nearly equivalent to ECF Nat],which is dependent on the ratio of
tbNato tbHO (Eq.9.la-c).Therefore,plasma or serum[Na] must be interpreted
with knowledge of the patient's tbH,O （ie.,state of hydration) and consideration of
the patient's ECF volume (ie.,normovolemic,hypovolemic, or hypervolemic).
Although not completely accurate,this basic conceptual relationship assists in the
understanding of most disorders that affect plasma or serum [Na].
tbNa*
normal
↑↓
Normonatremia=normal
(9.1a.)
tbHO
normal
tbNa*
个
normal
(9.1b.)
tbH,O
normal
tbNa*
normal
Hyponatremia=↓
(9.1c.)
tbHO
normal
[Nat]+[K]
Plasma[Na+]=
(9.1d.)
tbHO
499
B.A more accurate relationship is shown in Eq.9.ld,in which Na,and Krepresent the
exchangeable Na* and K+ in the body (ions bound in molecules are not exchangeable).
From this equation,it can be seen thar the total body exchangeable K content
infuences plasma [Na]. Thus, when hypokalemia is present because of K+ depletion,
plasma [Na] decreases. The change occurs as K+ leaves cells and Na enters to maintain
electrical neutrality (see Sodium Concentration, Sect.V.B.6).Hyperkalemia tends not
to cause a significant hypernatremia for rwo reasons: (l) a marked hyperkalemia would
be necessary to create changes in [Na], but marked hyperkalemia is life-threatening;
and (2) increasing[Na] stimulates thirst centers so that intake of HO reduces that
magnitude ofchange.
C. Movement of Na frequently is associated with movement of H,O in response to
Nat-induced changes in osmotic pressure. Na retention tends to cause HO retention
(edema or ascites), and Na wasting tends to cause loss of HO (hypovolemia or
dehydration).However,HO does not follow Naacross tubular cell membranes of the
distal nephron in the absence of ADH or across membranes of the ascending limb of
the loop of Henle.
D.Serum [Na'] is controlled through two major mechanisms: regulation of blood volume
and regulation of plasma osmolality.
1.Regulation of bloodvolume
a.Whenhypovolemia or,more specifcally,decreasedeffctivebloodvolumes
sensed by juxtaglomerular cells in kidneys, the RAS is activated, which promotes
formation of angiotensin II in the lungs and aldosterone in the adrenal cortices.
Angiotensin II stimulates the proximal tubular resorption of Na, Cl,and H,O
Aldosterone stimulates the active resorption of Na in collecting tubules by
opening Na channels, enhancing Na-K-ATPase activity, and opening luminal
Kchannels.Irs actions are probably mediated through aldosterone-induced
proteins. Na-K+-ATPase may be one of the proteins.
b.If hypovolemia is detected by carotid sinus baroreceptors,ADH is
secreted.
c.If hypervolemia is sensed by atrial baroreceptors, Naresorption in the distal
nephron is reduced through the action of ANP, which reduces the number of
open Nachannels via the guanylate cyclase pathway.
2.Regulation of plasma osmolality
a.If hyperosmolality is sensed by hypothalamic osmoreceptors, thirst centers
are stimulated to promote drinking of HO and ADH is released to promote
HO resorption by the kidney. In a relatively minor role,ADH stimulates Na
and CFresorption in the medullary thicklimb through the Na-K+-2Cl
carrier.
b. Conversely, hypoosmolaliry leads to decreased HO inrake and increased urinary
H,Oexcretion.
3.Plasma [Na'] is also somewhar self-regulated in that hyponatremia promotes
aldosterone secretion and thus Na retention, whereas hypernatremia inhibits
aldosterone secretion and thus reduces Naretention. However, plasma [K] and
alterations in effective bloodvolume are themajorfactors that control aldosterone
secretion.
E.Na and Cl resorption in the distal nephron also involves an aldosterone-independent
Na-Cl cotransporter; theresorption via this cotransporter increases with increased Na
delivery to the distal nephron.Thiazide diuretics block this cotransporter by binding to
the Cl receptor.
500
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
F.The pathologic state of dehydration is equivalent to decreased tbH,O.
1.Dehydrated animals have either a HO deficit or a H,O and Nadeficit
a.Causes of a HO deficit (without Na deficit) include decreased H,O intake and
loss of free HO (central diabetes insipidus,nephrogenic diabetes insipidus,r
insensible respiratory losses).
b.Causes of HO and Na deficits include alimentary losses (vomiting, diarrhea
sequestration,rexcessive salivarion),renal losses（most polyuric states),an
cutaneous losses (sweating)
2.Types of dehydration
a.Hypernatremic,hyperosmolar,or hypertonic dehydration is caused by net
hypoosmolar or hypotonic fuid loss, thar is, HO loss > Na loss.
b.Normonatremic, isoosmolar, or isotonic dehydration is caused by net
isoosmolar or isotonic fuid loss; that is,HO loss =Na loss
C.F
Hyponatremic,hypoosmolar,or hypotonic dehydration is caused by net
hyperosmolar or hypertonic fuid loss; that is,H,O loss <Na loss.
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms and units
1.Assays measure the electrical potential of Na by direct or indirect potentiometry,
and then the electrical potential is converted to concentration units. Nat is mostly a
free ion in the plasma or serum HO.
a.In direct potentiometry, Na ion activity (electrical potential) is measured in a
nondiluted sample by the interaction of Nawith the surface of an ion-selective
electrode. The resultant [Na]represents the [Na] in the sample's HO.If the
sample contained less HO than normal because of increased protein or lipid,
theresult would be the same because only the activity in the HOphase is
measured.
b.In indirect potentiometry,the sample is dilted (sometimesgreatly）beforeNa
ion-selective electrode. The Na ion activity measured depends on the [Na] in
the HO portion of the diluted sample. The sample [Na] is determined by
multiplying the measured [Na] by the dilution factor.If the sample contains
increased lipids or proteins and therefore a lower percentage of HO, the HO
portion will be diluted more than usual by the diluent added. The measured Na
activity will therefore be falsely decreased. When the measured value is multiplied
by the sample dilution factor (rather than the HO-phase dilution factor),the
result will also be a falsely decreased value for [Na]. Results reflect mmol/L of
sample rather than mmol/LofHO,as for direct potentiometry values.
c.Flame photometric methods have the same problem as the indirect potentiomet-
(e.g., lipidemia or hyperproteinemia) cause falsely decreased [Na].
2.Unit conversion:mEq/Lx 1 =mmol/L,and mg/dL+2.3=mmol/L (SI unit,
nearest 1 mmol/L)a
B.Sample for[Na] quantitation
1.Serum is preferred. [Na] is stable for months if the sample does not dehydrate.
2.Na,EDTA plasma should not be used because the anticoagulant's Nawill be in the
plasma. The amount of Na in Na-heparin is too small to cause clinically relevant
changes in heparinized plasma [Nat].
501
Table 9.2.Diseases and conditions that cause hypernatremia
HO-deficit group (decreased total body HO,hypertonic dehydration)
Inadequate HO intake
*HO deprivation
Defective thirst response (hypothalamic defect)
Pure HO loss(without adequate HOreplacement)
*Insensible loss: panting,hyperventilation, or fever
Diabetes insipidus (central or nephrogenic)
HO loss > Na loss
Renal: osmotic diuresis
Alimentary:osmotic diarrheaosmotic sequestration,phosphate enemas,or paintball
toxicosis
Na*-excess group (increased total body Nat)
Excess Na*with concurrent restricted H,O intake
Salt poisoning
Administration ofhypertonic saline or sodium bicarbonate
Decreased renal excretion of sodium
Hyperaldosteronism
Other orunknownmechanism
Severe exercise in greyhounds
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Sample evaporation or sublimation will cause spurious hypernatremia.
C.Assays
1.Ion-selective electrode assays are the most common.
2.Flame photometers for measuring [Na]used to be the gold standard,but the
instruments are no longer used for routine patient screening.
III.
Hypernatremia
A.This occurs when the ratio of tbNa to tbHO is increased (Eq.9.1b)or with the
shifting of HO from ECF to ICF.
B.Disorders and pathogeneses (Table 9.2)
1.HO-deficit group (decreased tbHO,hypertonic dehydration）:Dehydration may
causehypernatremia directlyvia hemoconcentration (pureHO loss)and indirectly
by activating the RAS,which stimulates renal Naretention via actions of aldoste-
rone and angiotensin II. In most nephron segments, Na resorption promotes HO
resorption.But since the distal nephron is permeable to HO only in the presence of
ADH,Naretention without sufficient ADH activity results in hypernatremia.
a.Inadequate H,O intake
(1)H,O deprivation:Access to HOmay be restricted because of accidents
(water bowl turned over on a hot day), weather (frozen water tank), or other
situations.Without HO intake,physiologicHO losses via kidneys,lungs,
skin, or intestine may produce dehydration.
(2)Defective thirst response: Hypothalamic disease may damage the osmorecep
tor that triggers a thirst response, or the thirst center itself may be damaged
holoprosencephaly.
502
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
b.Pure HO loss without HO replacement
(1）Insensible loss of H,O by panting,hyperventilation,or fever:The animal
becomes HO depleted by losing HO via the respiratory system or skin.
(2）Diabetes insipidus (central or nephrogenic)
(a)In the diabetes insipidus disorders, diminished ADH activity or response
in the collecting ducts may result in pure HO loss (ie, urine with very
low concentrations of Na and other solutes;urine specific gravity
approaches 1.000)
(b)Animals with diabetes insipidus that have unrestricted aocess to HO
may drink sufficiently to prevent the hypernatremia.
(3)Adrenocortical neoplasm secreting corticosterone and aldosterone in a dog
(a)This disorder is uncommon, and the laboratory features of the case were
hypernatremia,hyperchloremia,hypokalemia,hyposthenuria,and
abnormal results of adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation tests
(inadequate increase in serum [cortisol],exaggerated increase in[corti-
costerone],and exaggerated increase in[aldosterone])
(b)This hypernatremia probably is related to the renal loss of free HO
because of the inhibition of ADHrelease by corticosterone.
c.HO loss>Na+loss
(1) Osmotic diuretic agents (e.g., glucose and mannitol) in renal tubular fuid
inhibit passive HO resorption.
(2)In the alimentary system:
(a)Accumulation of osmotic agents (as occurs in some diarrheas) will
inhibit H,O absorption.
(b)A phosphate enema will pull H,O from ECF spaces to the colon.
Concurrent colonic absorption of Namay augment the
hypernatremia.6
(c)In ruminal acidosis (grain overload),accumulation of solutes (including
lactic acid) in the rumen causes the osmotic movement of HO into the
rumen to producehypernatremia.
(d)Dogs with paintball toxicosis (after ingestion of paintballs) may develop
hypernatremia because the paintballs contain osmoticmolecules (e.g.
glycerol and sorbitol) that pull HO from plasma to intestines
(3)The HO that moves during osmosis contains a small amount of Na*
because of solute drag, but the net result is greater loss of HO than Na*,
and thushypernatremia occurs.
(4)Unrestricted access to HO may prevent this hypernatremia. Also, other
processes in such cases e.g, ketosis)may increase renal Naloss and
counteract hypernatremic tendencies.
2. Na-excess group (increased tbNat)
a.Excess Nawith concurrent restricted H,O intake (rare)
(1)Salt poisoning:Cattle with excessive Na (and Clintake)and with concur-
rent restricted access to H,O may develop an increased bNa (and total
body Cl content) and thus hypernatremia (and hyperchloremia).Extreme
hypernatremia and hyperchloremia occurred in a dog that ingested a
(2)Administration of hypertonic saline or sodium bicarbonate can lead to increased
tbNa and thus hypernatremia (and hyperchloremia or increased HCO;).
503
b.Decreased renal excretion of Na* (hyperaldosteronism) (rare)
(1)Excessive aldosterone promotes excessive renal Na (and Cl) retention.
Hypernatremia (and hyperchloremia) may occur if there is H,O restriction
or defective ADH activity.
(2）TheNa-retaining activityof aldosterone may play arole,but,becauseof
mechanism referred to as aldosterone escape, hyperaldosteronism does not
typically cause hypernatremia. Once Na* retention begins, and there is
corresponding H,O retention, natriuresis prevents the development of
hypernatremia.The natriuresismay be promoted by ANP.
3.Other orunknown mechanisms
a.Severe exercise (racing greyhounds）:-13During and immediately after a race,the
[Na] in plasma may be 10-20 mmol/L above prerace concentrations.There is a
concurrent hypovolemia and lactic acidosis;thus, the hypernatremia may be
caused by the shifting of HO from ECF to ICF.The accumulation of L-lactate
inmuscle fibers may create the osmotic gradient.
b.Sample dehydration: Exposure of serum or plasma to air may allow evaporation
that causes hypernatremia. This is especially true of air-conditioning systems that
blow cool, dry air over the sample processing or analysis areas. Sublimation of
HO from frozen samples may cause hypernatremia if the storage container is not
adequately sealed or if it is too large for the sample size.
IV.
Normonatremia in dehydrated or edematous animals
A.Normonatremia does not necessarily indicate that the Nabalance is normal (Eq.9.la)
Recognizing the possibility of altered Naregulation in normonatremic animals is
important in themanagement and treatment of these cases. That is, do you need to
administer Na*or restrict Na+intake?)
B.Disorders and pathogeneses (Table 9.3)
1.Net loss of isotonic fuids that causes dehydration
a.Alimentary loss of isotonic fuid may occur with vomiting, diarrhea, or
sequestration.
b.Renal loss of Na and H,O may occur in several siruations.
(1)Many polyuric renal diseases cause Naand HO loss because of defective
tubular functions.
(2)Osmotic diuresis impairs resorption of HO in tubules. A high tubular fow
rate also contributes to Na loss.
Table 9.3. Diseases and conditions that cause normonatremia in dehydrated or
edematous animals
Net loss of isotonic fluids causing dehydration
*Alimentary losses: vomiting,diarrhea,sequestration
*Renal losses:renal disease,osmotic diuresis,diurets
Skin loss: sweating in horses
Netretention of isotonic fluids causing edema or transudate
*Congestive heart failure
*Hepatic cirrhosis
*Nephrotic syndrome
*A relatively common disease or condition
504
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(3)Most diuretic agents (e.g.,furosemide or thiazides) cause Na and HO loss
through interference with Cl resorption.
C.Cutaneous loss in horses: The [Nat] in sweat is about the same as the [Na] in
serum or plasma.Thus,profuse sweating without increased HO intake could
cause normonatremic dehydration.
2.Net retention ofisotonic fuids that causes edema or transudation (Note: Edematous
disorders may create either normonatremia or hyponatremia, depending on the
relative retention of Naand HO.)
a.Congestive heart failure (caused by valvular disease or cardiomyopathies)
(1)“Forward” hypothesis: Cardiac disease decreases cardiac output, which is
sensed by baroreceptors as decreased effective blood volume, and thus the
sympathetic nervous system and the RAS are stimulated. If these responses
do not reestablish the effective blood volume, continued activation of the
RAS promotesrenal resorptionof Naand Cl,which increases plasma
osmolality. Hyperosmolality stimulates release of ADH and the thirst center,
which may cause retention of HO and increased blood volume. If the
hypervolemia increases venous hydraulic pressure sufficiently, it promotes
movement of isotonic fuid to extravascular spaces and thus formation of
edema (pulmonary or dependent)or accumulation of H,O in the pleural or
peritoneal cavities (transudation).
(2)Retention of Na and H,O is a compensatory process that helps
maintain an effective blood volume. If effective blood volume is not
achieved,the hypovolemic stimulus may promote thirst and thus
increase HO intake. Mammals with a cardiac disease that decreases
cardiac output will have increased tbNa and tbH,O even without clinical
edema.
b.Hepatic cirrhosis with abdominal transudation
(1)Three theories (underfilling,overflow,and peripheral arterial vasodilation)
cirrhosis.14,15
(a)In theunderfilling theory, the initiating event is the loss of plasma HO
caused by increased hydraulic pressure in hepatic sinusoids (caused by
fibrosis or venous congestion) and loss of protein-rich plasma into the
space of Disse (sinusoids are highly permeable to albumin）. This causes
splanchnicpoolingof blood and loss ofHO across thehepaticcapsule
to the peritoneal cavity and thusunderfilling ofvascular spaces.Move-
ment of fuid from vessels decreases the effective bloodvolume,which
activates theRAS,stimulates therelease of aldosterone,promotes the
retention of Naand,subsequently,HO.The expanded blood volume
accentuates vascular hydraulic pressures and thus promotes more loss of
plasma HO and more attempts to compensate. At the time of clinical
transudation, the animal will have increased tbNaand tbHO;
increased concentrations of renin, norepinephrine, and ADH; and
reduced renal excretion of Na*.
(b)In the overfow theory,the initiating event is renal retention of Na and
H,O,but the factors involved are poorly understood.
(c)In the peripheral arterial vasodilation theory,peripheral vasodilation
decreases the effective blood volume,which activates the RAS. This
505
increases hydraulic pressure in hepatic sinusoids,which leads to
transudation.
(2)Hypoalbuminemia and hypoproteinemia play secondary roles in ascites
formation.
a)In health, plasma proteins create colloidal osmotic (oncotic) pressure
(about80%from albumin and20%fromglobulins)thathelpsretain
H,O in vessels that are impermeable to proteins. When hypoprotein
emia is present with hepatic cirrhosis, the increases in vascular hydraulic
vessels (hepatic or pulmonary) to extravascular spaces.
(b)Hypoalbuminemia alone will not cause the transudation.People with
analbuminemia may have mild dependent edema but do not have
globulins, altered capillary hydraulic pressure,or altered renal blood
fow).7Also,hepatic sinusoids are freey permeable to albumin and
HO, so plasma HO moves out of the sinusoids in either the presence
or the absence of hypoalbuminemia.
C.Nephrotic syndrome (protein-losing nephropathy that leads to abdominal
transudation),8
(1)The pathogenesis of Naand HO retention is not established but involves
several processes: increased activity of theRAS, decreased renal responsive
ness to ANP,decreased plasma protein concentration,inappropriate neural
reflexes involving the kidneys, and glomerular disease.
(2)If the renal disease also causes loss of rubular functions,the kidneys have less
ability to retain Naand HO,and thus the edematous state may not
develop in some cases of protein-losing nephropathy
V.
Hyponatremia
A.This typically occurs when the ratio of tbNa to tbHO is decreased (Eq. 9.1c) or with
the shifting of HO from ICF to ECF.
B.Disorders and pathogeneses (Table 9.4)
1.Na-deficit group: net Na loss > HO loss (hypotonic dehydration). In the follow
ing disorders, the [Na] in lost fuid is usually not greater than the plasma [Na], but
loss of Na*-containing fuid followed by drinking of HO may cause hyponatremia.
a.Alimentary loss of Na-containing HOmay occur with vomiting, diarrhea,
sequestration, excess salivation, canine whipworm infections, and bovine hemor-
rhagic bowel syndrome.9For these conditions to cause hyponatremia, there
probably is a loss of isotonic ECF followed by drinking HO and renal HO
retention (ADH response) that dilute the remaining plasma Na*.
b.Renal loss
(1)Hypoadrenocorticism:'Adrenal insufficiency decreases the [aldosterone],
which causes less resorption of Na* and subsequently Cl by the renal
principal cells.Decreased Naand Cl resorption leads to decreased plasma
decreased ability to resorb HO, so hypovolemia ensues.Hypovolemia
stimulates ADH release and thirst centers.Increased ADH activity and
increased HO intake diluteECFNaand thus cause hyponatremia (and
hypochloremia).Hypocortisolemia promotes the hypothalamic release of
506
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 9.4.Diseases and conditions that cause hyponatremia
Na-deficit group: net Na loss > HO loss (loss of Na*-containing fluid followed by
increased HO intake,hypotonic dehydration)
*Alimentary loss: vomiting, diarrhea, sequestration, canine whipworm infection, excess
salivation,bovine hemorrhagic bowel syndrome
*Renal loss: hypoadrenocorticism, prolonged diuresis, ketonuria, Na-wasting
nephropathies,hypoaldosteronism
Cutaneous loss: sweating in horses
Third-space loss: repeated drainage of chylous effusion, acute hemorrhage or exudation
HO-excess groups (with or without edema)
Edematous disorders
*Congestive heart failure
Hepatic cirrhosis
Nephrotic syndrome
Expanded ECF volume (but without edema)
Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
Excess administration of Na-poor fuids
Shiftingof HO from ICFtoECF
*Hyperglycemia
Mannitol infusion (IV)
Shifting of Nat from ECF to ICF
Acute muscle damage
Shifting of Na from intravascular to extravascular fuid
Uroperitoneum
K+depletion causing shifts in Naand HO
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note:Pseudo-hyponatremia may be caused by displacement of serum or plasmaH,O (see the text)
ADH (multiple theories),which causes defective excretion of HO
(retention of free HO in the presence ofhypoosmolality) and a dilutional
hyponatremia.t2 In people with hypoaldosteronism and lack of hypocorti-
solemia, normonatremia is maintained by enhanced tubular resorption of
Na* caused by increased angiotensin II, decreased ANP, and enhanced
passive resorption.
(2)Prolonged diuresis
(a)Prolonged osmotic diuresis with Na-poor fluid² or other forms of
diuresis (e.g. caused by furosemide administration) tend to deplete
Na and HO, cause hypovolemia, and stimulate ADH release and thirst
centers.HO drinking tends to dilute theNain the ECF and thus
cause hyponatremia.
(b)Thiazide diuretics cause Na, Cl,and K+loss in excess of H,O loss,and
thus hyponatremia, hypochloremia, and hypokalemia may develop.
Urinary Na and Cl loss is increased because thiazides inhibit a Na-Cl
cotransporter in distal nephrons.Urinary K loss is increased because of
an increased flow rate in distal nephrons and hypovolemia-induced
release of aldosterone,which opens K+ channels. The hypovolemia also
507
stimulates ADHrelease,which promotes resorption of free HO and
thus dilution of the remaining Na, CF,and K*.
(3)Ketonuria
(a）During ketonuria, the excretion of ketone bodies (AcAc and BHB) is
increased. The presence of these nonabsorbable anions in the tubular
lumen obligates the excretion of cations and thus increased renal
excretion of Na*.
(b)Concurrent osmotic diuresis (from glucosuria) may compound the Na*
loss associatedwithketonuria in patients with diabetesmellitus
(4)Na-wasting nephropathies: Some renal diseases (especially tubular diseases
or pyelonephritis) cause an excess excretion of Nabecause of decreased Na
resorption. This is seen more in horses than other domestic mammals.
(5)Hyperreninemic hypoaldosteronism (see hyperkalemia)
C.Cutaneous loss by sweating
(1) Among the domesticmammals,onlyhorses sweat sufficiently to cause
electrolyte and HO imbalances.
(2)Equine sweat is a Na-,K+, Cl -rich fuid (concentrations are greater than
Drinking of H,O or the ADH-stimulated retention of HO after sweating
may lead to dilutional hyponatremia.
d.Third-space loss (typically loss to pleural cavity or peritoneal cavity)
(1)Repeated drainage of chylous thoracic effusions
(a)Repeated removal of isotonicfuid from the thoracic cavity probably
results in a Na-and H,O-depleted state that is followed by intake of
HOand an ADH response to cause dilutional hyponatremia.2526
(b)This type of hyponatremia would probably also result from repeated
removal of other cavitary effusions,but such removal is not as common
as it is for chylous effusions.
(2)Acute internal hemorrhage or acute exudation
(a)Acute loss of ECF from the vascular space to other extracellular sites in
the body (third-space loss) causes an isotonic hypovolemia. If followed
by increased intake of HO and an ADH response, dilutional hypona
tremia may develop
(b)This type of hyponatremia is rare, since hypovolemia would also
stimulate renal Na* retention.
2.HO-excess group (H,O retention>Naretention) with or without edema
a.Edematous disorders
(1)Congestive heart failure,hepatic cirrhosis,and nephrotic syndrome
(2)Although these conditions are often associated with normonatremia (see the
preceding sect. IV.B.2), hyponatremia (typically mild) may also occur if the
ratio of tbNa to tbH,O is decreased.
b.Expanded ECF volume (but without edema)
(1)Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH)
(a)This is characterized by nonphysiologic release of ADH in the presence
of hypoosmolality and hypervolemia. Excess ADH with unrestricted
HO intake leads to free-HO resorption and dilutional hyponatremia.
Renal Naexcretion (perhaps due to ANP) is increased because of
activation of volume receptors.
508
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(b)Neurologic,pulmonary, and thyroid disorders are associated with the
syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion,as are many drugs.A few
cases have been reported in domestic mammals.27
(2)Excessive administration of Na-poor fuids: Administration of 5 % dextrose
or 0.45 % saline could lead to a dilutional hyponatremia.
abnormaliry because functional kidneys can excrete the consumed HO.28
3.Shifting of HO from ICF to ECF
a.A marked or persistent increase in effective plasma osmolality (e.g., because of
hyperglycemia or mannitol infusion) creates an osmolar gradient between ECF
and ICF.This draws HO into the blood by osmosis,thus diluting the
plasma [Na]. In people, if glucose concentrations increase by 100 mg/dL,
the serum [Na] is reported to decrease 1.6 mmol/L for glucose concentrations
<400mg/dL and 4 mmol/L for glucose concentrations >400mg/dL.29
b.Concurrent processes (osmotic diuresis and ketonuria)also contribute to the Na
loss and thus hyponatremia
4.Shifting of Na from ECF to ICF
a.Acute damage to the cell membrane of muscle fibers allows Na* to move from a
high concentration in ECF to a lower concentration in ICF3
b. In this condition, there is a concurrent infux of H,O and fCa²+ and efflux of K
and POto cause hypovolemia,hypocalcemia,hyperkalemia,and
hyperphosphatemia.
5.Shift of Na*from intravascular to extravascular space
a.When urine, typically a Na and CF poor fuid, is in the abdominal cavity
(uroperitoneum),diffusion of Na and Cl from the plasma to the peritoneal fuid
may cause hyponatremia and hypochloremia.31
b.Experimentally in dogs,hyponatremia and hypochloremia were detected within
1-2 d of the onset of uroperitoneum andwere marked after 4 d.2
6.K depletion causing shifts in Na and HO(see Eq.9.1d)
a.As described larer in this chapter (see Potassium Concentration, sect. V.B.2), K+
can be lost from the body during a variery of gastrointestinal and renal disorders.
If these losses arenot replaced byintake,the body willbecome Kdepleted
b.These K losses decrease the extracellular [K], which creates a gradient for K+
movement from cells to the ECF. Because proteins and other large anions cannot
leave the cells, the electrical neutrality is maintained by one or more of the
following-each contributes to the development of hyponatremia:
(1)Naions shift from the ECF to the intracellular fuid
(2)Cl leaves the cell with K+and thus lowers the intracellular osmolality.The
resulting osmotic gradient causes HO to move from cells to the ECF,thus
diluting the ECF [Nat].
(3）H ions enter the cell as K+leaves,but the Hions bind with intracellular
buffers and thus do not add to the intracellular osmolality.However, the K
loss from the cells lowers the intracellular osmolality,and thus H,Omoves
from cells to the ECF, thus diluting the ECF [Na].
7.Pseudo-hyponatremia
a.This may occur when the serum [Na] is determined by flame photometry or
indirect potentiometry (see Sodium Concentration, sect.IIA.1).The same
principles apply to the [Cl] and the resultant pseudo-hypochloremia
509
Excess H+produced or
Excess H+lost
ExcessK+lost
less H+removed
Plasma
Plasma
Plasma/
[H+]
+[K+]
[H]
[H]
Ik]
[H][K]
[H+]
[K]
[H] 
[K]
Cell
Cell
Cell
Inorganic acidosis
Alkalosis due to
Alkalosis due to
excess H loss
excess K+loss
Fig. 9.2. H+ and K+ shift in acid-base disorders.
In an inorganic acidosis, there is an accumulation of H+ in ECF.As H shifts into cells to equilibrate
concentrations, K+ shifts out of cells to maintain electrical neutrality and enters plasma (hyperkalemia
ocursInanorganiccidosishyekalmiisntxpctedeaseaddional factorsune ma
[K'](see the text).
·In an alkalosis,[H+] in ECF is reduced. As H+ shifts out of cells to equilibrate concentrations, K+ enters
cells (leaves the plasma; hypokalemia occurs). The illustration shows the alkalotic state beginning with H+
loss; the H+ depletion may be due to other processes.
Conversely，if Kdepletion causes hypokalemiaK shifts out of the cells and Henters and thus lowers
blood [H] (alkalemia). The illustration shows the alkalotic state beginning with K+ loss; the K+ depletion
may be due to other processes.
b.Laboratories maymeasure serum or plasma Na] by direct potentiometry by
using on-selective electrodes.Such assays do not require sampledilution, so
excess solids in the plasma do not affect them.The electrodes detect the Na*
activity in the aqueous phase only.
POTASSIUM(K)CONCENTRATION
I.
Physiologic processes
A.Serum [K] is nearly equivalent to ECF[K],which is mostly dependent on tbK+and
movement of K* into and out of K+-rich cells in response to changes in acid-base starus.
Therefore, serum[K+] should be interpreted with consideration of acid-base status and
potential variations in tbK+ status.
B.Most cells are rich in K because of a Na*-K+-ATPase pump that constantly pumps K+
into cells against a concentration gradient.
C.Acidoses and alkaloses alter the serum [K+] (Fig. 9.2).
1.An inorganic or mineral acidosis （caused by renal failure, some diarrheas,or
administration of NHCl) may cause hyperkalemia because of the shifting of Kout
of cells.
2.An organic acidosis (e.g, lactic acidosis and ketoacidosis) typically does not cause
hyperkalemiabut thereasonsmay vary3
a.If an anion (such as L-lactate or ketone body) enters a cell when H
does,electroneutralityismaintained and thus K+does not need toleave the
cell.
510
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
b.Acidemia may promote the loss of K+from cells,but the Kis excreted in urine
with the organic anions (e.g.,L-lactate or AcAc) that are also excreted during
lactic acidosis and ketoacidosis,respectively.
3.Treatment of a normokalemic acidotic statemay cause hypokalemia that reflects
tbK depletion in an animal.
4. Metabolic alkalosis may cause mild hypokalemia
5. Respiratory acidoses and alkaloses are not associated with altered serum [K+],' maybe
because other regulatory systems are still functional.
D.If the acid-base status is normal, then serum or plasma [K] tends to reflect tbK'; that
is,hyperkalemia tends to occur with increased tbK, whereas hypokalemia tends to
Occur with decreased tbK*.However, a K+-depleted state may occur before hypokalemia
develops.34
E.Plasma [K+] is regulated through two major processes: (l) distribution between ECF
and ICF, and (2) renal excretion.
1.K+distribution berween ECF and ICF
a.Epinephrine and insulin promote the uptake of Kinto cells through the action
of a Na-K-ATPase pump. This effect of insulin is independent of its actions on
glucose uptake.
b.Hyperkalemia promotes the cellular uptake of K,whereas hypokalemia promotes
the loss of K+from cells.
2.Renal excretion of K
a.Typically, K is resorbed before the renal tubular fuid reaches the distal nephron.
Therefore, the [K] in tubular fuid entering the distal nephron is near zero.
b.K is secreted primarily by the principal cells of the collecting tubules (Fig. 9.3).
Aldosterone promotes this process by stimulating Na-K'-ATPase in the basolat-
eral membrane and opening luminal K channels. Hyperkalemia and angiotensin
II are the major stimulants of aldosterone secretion.Adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) and hyponatremia also stimulate aldosterone release, but the
effect of hyponatremia is diminished if the effective blood volume is adequate.
c.A high fow rate of tubular fuid also promotes K+ secretion because secreted K+
is quickly washed away and thus does not inhibit the passive movement of K+
from cells to tubular fuid. Conversely, a low flow rate inhibits K secretion.
d.Resorption of Na without Cl (e.g., hypochloremic states) establishes an
electrochemical gradient (tubular fuid more negative than cell) that promotes the
secretion of K+
3.K+ is conserved by type A intercalated cells of the distal nephron through
H-K′-ATPase pump activity when hypokalemia is caused by decreased total body
K+(Fig.9.4).
4.ADH promotes K+ secretion thar counterbalances the reduced K+ secretion that
occurs with decreased urinary fow.The enhanced secretion prevents the hyperkale
mia that might be caused by dehydration-induced oliguria.
5.Plasma [K] is also infuenced by intestinal and cutaneous processes: absorption of
dietary K+ by the intestine, loss of K+ via feces, and loss of K+ via sweat.
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms and units
1.Assays measure the electrical potential of K+ (potentiometry) and convert it to
concentrations,or they measure [K+] (fame photometry) in plasma, serum,or whole
blood.The K+is mostly a free ion in the plasma or serum HO.
511
Peritubular
Tubular
Principal epithelial cell
fluid&plasma
lumen
Aldosterone
Receptor
Aldo-Rcptr
3Na+3Na+
3Na+
3Na+
aa
AIP
2K+
2K+
2K+
H+
+
H+
K+
(less if hypochloremic)
(ifhypokalemic)
C
Cl-
Fig. 9.3. Actions of aldosterone on principal epithelial cells in cortical collecting tubules. Aldosterone enters
the principal cells and binds to receptor proteins. The aldosterone-receptor complex (Aldo-Rcptr) stimulates
the synthesis of aldosterone-induced proteins (AIP), which may include components of the Na-K'-ATPase
pump and membrane channels for Nat and K'. Through the actions on the pump or channels, aldosterone
promotes the following
1. Na+ is pumped from the cell to the peritubular fuid, and the resulting luminal cell gradient promotes the
resorption of Nat through an opened Na channel.
2.K is pumped into the cell from the peritubular fluid and typically exits to the tubular fluid through an
opened Kchannel. When hypokalemia is present, Kmay return to the peritubular fuid via an opened
basolateral membrane channel (K* is recycled).
3. Typically, the Na-K*-ATPase pump results in a net negative charge in the tubular fluid (3 Na resorbed
and two K secreted).The negative charge promotes the resorption of Cl through a paracellular route.
When there is lessCl available (as occurs with hypochloremia),thenegative charge promotes the
retention of H* in the tubular Huid (the H+ that passively leaves and reenters the principal cells) and thus
increases renal secretion of H+.
The net result of aldosterone actions in health is the resorption of Na and C and secretion of K*. In the
preseneofhypochloremiathresinreasedseretionofHwhichcanromoteacidurarametaboli
alkalosis. , ATPase pump; and aa, amino acids.
2.Unit conversion:mEq/Lx1=mmol/L,and mg/dL+3.9=mmol/L（SIunit
nearest 0.1 mmol/L)3
B.Sample for[K+] quantitation
1.Serum is preferred.The [K+] is stable for months if the sample does not dehydrate
2.KEDTA should not be used as an anticoagulant for testing plasma [K+] because the
anticoagulant'sK+will be added to the plasma and be measured.
C.Assays
1.Ion-selective electrode assays are the most common.
2.Flame photometers for measuring [K*] were the gold standard but are no longer
used for routine patient screening.
III.
Hyperkalemia
A.This typically occurs when the renal excretion ofK+ decreases or K shifts from ICF to
ECF.Hyperkalemia may also occur with increased intake of Kor treatment with K,
especially if there is renal compromise. If the acid-base status is normal, then serum
K+] tends to reflect tbK+.
512
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Tubular
Peritubular
Type Aintercalated cell
lumen
fluid&plasma
Receptor
Aldosterone
Aldo-Rcptr
H
aa
AIP
K+
H,O
HCOg
HCO
CA
OH
H+
H+
(if hypokalemic)
CO.
C
C
Cl-
Fig. 9.4. Secretion of H+ by type A intercalated cells of the distal nephron. Aldosterone enters the type A
intercalated cells and binds to receptor proteins. The aldosterone-receptor complex (Aldo-Rcptr) stimulates
the synthesis of aldosterone-induced proteins (AIP) that may include components of H-ATPase pump.
Through the actions of the pump, which is more active during systemic acidemia, aldosterone causes the
secretionof Hand formationof HCO,through thefollowing processes:
1. H* released from the dissociation of HO is pumped into the tubular lumen.
2. OH released from the dissociation of HO combines with CO in the presence of carbonic anhydrase
(CA) to form HCO, which is exchanged for CI in the peritubular fuid.
electrical neutrality (balance the H+ secretion),
The netresult if stimulated by acidemia oraldosterone is increased Hand CI secretion and increased
HCO, in plasma.In an independent processbut in the same cell a H-K-ATPase promotes the resorp-
tion of K+ and secretion of H+; this pump is more active when hypokalemia is present. Thus, hypokalemia
promotes increased H secretion, HCOproduction, and thus alkalosis.
⑧, ATPase pump; O, cotransporter or counter transporter (antiporter); and aa, amino acids.
B.Disorders and pathogeneses (Table 9.5)
1.Shifting of K from ICF to ECF
a.Metabolic inorganic acidoses causing acidemia: shifting of K out of cells when
Hmoves in (see Fig. 9.2)
b.Rhabdomyolysis or other muscle damage (release of K+ from muscle fibers)
(1)Acquired disorders: selenium deficiency,，°malignant hyperthermia, and
seizures
(2)Congenital disorders: They can be induced by stress or anesthetic in
dog's serum [K] was never documented at > 5 mmol/L but did increase
from 3.9 mmol/L to 4.9 mmol/L after exercise）.38
c.Strenuous exercise may cause hyperkalemia. Hyperkalemia is caused by Krelease
from active myocytes.The K+release might be related to ion shifts caused by a
decrease in nondiffusible intracellular anions that occur as phosphocreatine, a
highly dissociated acid,hydrolyzes to neutral creatine.Also,myocytes may be
damaged.
513
Table 9.5.Diseases and conditions that cause hyperkalemia
Shifting of K+from ICF to ECF (no change in total body K+)
*Metabolic acidoses caused by accumulation of inorganic acids
Rhabdomyolysis or other muscle damage
Acquired: strenuous exercise, seizures, selenium deficiency
Congenital:hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in quarter horses and perhaps dogs
Massive intravascular hemolysis in animals with Krich erythrocytes
Other massive tissue necrosis
After exercise in hypothyroid dogs
Increased total body K*
Decreased renal excretion of K*
*Renal insufficiency or failure (primarily oliguric or anuric)
*Urinary tract obstruction or leakage into body
Hypoaldosteronism
*Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's)
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
Hyperreninemic hypoaldosteronism
Trimethoprim-induced K+retention
Increased intake
Administration ofK-rich fluid
Other or unknown mechanism
Repeated drainage of chylous thoracic effusions
Peritoneal effusions in cats
* A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Also consider pseudo-hyperkalemia (see the text)
d.Massive intravascular hemolysis in animals with Kt-rich erythrocytes: English
springer spaniels with phosphofructokinase deficiency have hyperkalemia
concurent with their hemolytic episodes which might involve K-rich young
erythrocytes.o
e.Massive tissue necrosis (in tissues other than muscle or blood),which is caused
by the release of K'-rich ICF from dead cells, is seen with tumor necrosis, arterial
thrombosis with tissue ischemia, and sometimes just prior to death.
fHypertonicity (e.g., caused by hyperglycemia in diabetes mellitus) leads to an
osmotic shift of HO from cells to ECF, thereby increasing the intracellular [K]
(but not total K content).K+ then shifts down a concentration gradient into
ECF.Although the K+shift decreases the intracellular[K+], the net effect on
the plasma [K+] depends on many other factors (e.g., renal loss of K+ due to
ketonuria and osmotic diuresis in diabetes mellitus),and thus hyperkalemia may
not be present.
g.Plasma [K+] increased, but only slightly exceeded the upper reference limit, when
dogs with experimentally induced hypothyroidism were exercised (running for
5min);the increase did not occur in euthyroid dogs.The hyperkalemia may
havebeen causedby anICF toECF shiftofK+related to reduced Na-K+
ATPase activity in skeleral muscle. Hyperkalemia is not expected in
nonexercised hypothyroid dogs.
514
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
h.Pseudo-hyperkalemia
(1)Invitro hemolysis or leakage ofK+because of delayed removal of serum or
plasma from erythrocytes
(a)If the K+] in erythrocytes is greater than the [K+] in plasma, then the
loss of K+ from erythrocytes may cause pseudo-hyperkalemia. The ratio
of erythrocyte[K] to plasma [K] varies among species and among
breeds of dogs.
(ie,JapaeekitasJapaneehibasandrarelythers）,andca
leakage from erythrocytes.
of dogs.
(2）
Thrombocytosis4
(a)K+is released from platelets in the clotted blood sample.Thereleased
K+ is part of the [K+] used to establish serum reference intervals.
Without a thrombocytosis, serum[K+] is about 0.30.5 mmol/L greater
than plasma [K] in samples collected from the same blood draw.5
(b)When thrombocytosis is marked (>1,000,00o/μL),moreK+ is added to
the serum during clotting than normally occurs and thus the measured
serum [K+] may be increased.
(3）Leakage of K+ from leukemic cells4
2.Increased total body K+
a.Decreased renal excretion of K+
(1)Renal insufficiency or failure (primarily oliguric or anuric, acute renal
disease or the terminal stages of chronic renal disease)
（a)In oliguric or anuric phases of acute or chronic renal failure,K
excretion is diminished because of decreased flow of tubular fuid to the
distal nephron.When the rate of tubular fluid flow is low in the
collecting tubules, secreted K accumulates in the tubular fuid and thus
the K* concentration gradient is diminished. Because the movement of
Kfrom cells isa passive processK secretion from thedistal tubular
cells is diminished.When renalK secretion is impaired,dietary Kor
K+released from cells accumulates in plasma
(b)A reduction in renal blood fow will reduce the amount of K+ presented
to the kidney for excretion and thus contribute to the hyperkalemia.
(c)The metabolic acidosis of renal failure may contribute to the hyperkale
mia (a shifting of K+ from cells to plasma). In chronic polyuric renal
failure,the number of functional nephrons decreases,but the K+
excretion per functioning nephron increases. Therefore,hyperkalemia is
not expected in polyuric chronic renal failure.
(2)Urinary tract obstruction or leakage
(a)With urinary tract leakage （ruptured bladder or leakage from ureter or
urethra),K+enters the ECF and thus is not removed from the body.
With time,hyperkalemia may develop. In experimentally produced
uroperitoneum,some dogs developedhyperkalemiawithin2d,and all
dogs were hyperkalemic after 4 d.3 Hyperkalemia is not always seen in
spontaneous canine and feline cases of uroperitoneum,probably because
515
of the variable durations and variable amounts ofurine in the peritoneal
cavities.
(b)Urinary tract obstruction may cause a similar hyperkalemia because of
the defective excretion of K+ and the development of an acidosis.
(3)Hypoaldosteronism
(a)Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
(i)Bilateral adrenocortical hypoplasia decreases the production of
aldosterone and cortisol.
(i)Hypoaldosteronemia decreases the activity of Na-K-ATPase pumps
in the basolateral membranes of the principal cells of collecting
tubules. This leads to decreased resorption of Na* and therefore
decreased movement of K+ into the tubular epithelial cells for
passive secretion to the tubular lumen.This process is further
inhibited because the number of luminal K+channels decreases with
decreased aldosterone.
(b) Inhibitors of angiotensin-converting enzyme might cause hyperkalemia
because of the development of hypoaldosteronism.However,if renal
function is adequate,K is secreted through aldosterone-independent
processes, and thus only mild hyperkalemia occurs.
（c)In primary hypoaldosteronism of people,hyperkalemia is present,but
normonatremia is maintained by the actions of increased angiotensin II
and decreased ANP.
(d)Hyperreninemichypoaldosteronism was diagnosed in a 9-yr-old dog
that had marked hyperkalemia, mild hyponatremia, mild hypochlore-
mia, normocortisolemia, hypoaldosteronemia,and increased plasma
renin activity.47 The defect that led to the hypoaldosteronemia was not
determined.
(4）Trimethoprim-inducedKretention
(a)Trimethoprim (especially when protonated in acidic urine) blocks the
luminal Nachannels ofthe collecting ducts and thus acts like a
K*-sparing diuretic.49s With reduced Na resorption, the electrical
gradient that promotes K* secretion is reduced.
(b) Effects of trimethoprim would be enhanced if the flow rate in the
rubules were decreased, because K+ secretion depends on a K+ gradient
maintained by high urine fow rates that carry secreted K+away,thus
increasing the intracellular to lumen Kgradient.
b.Increased intake of K+: administration of K-rich fuid,especially if there is
renalcompromise
3.Repeated drainage of chylous thoracic effusions:25.26 Pathogenesis of hyperkalemia is
not established but may be related to concurrent hyponatremia. In the presence of
hyponatremia and hypovolemia,much of the filtrate Na is resorbed in the proximal
tubules and ascending loop of Henle. If Na* is not delivered to the distal nephron,
less Na* is resorbed distally and thus less K+ secretion occurs.
4. Peritoneal effusions: Four cats with peritoneal effusions had hyperkalemias and
either mild or marked hyponatremias.2 The effusions were caused by abdominal
carcinomatosis (one cat) and feline infectious peritonitis (two and possibly three
cats;firm diagnosis not made in the last cat）.The hyperkalemia may be caused by
impaired renal secretion ofKbecause of decreased distal rubular fow rate and
516
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
concurrent hyponatremia.Thehyponatremia was considered a dilutionalone that
resulted fromHOretention causedby stimulation ofADHreleaseand thirst
centers by a decreased effective blood volume.
IV.
Normokalemia in acidotic or alkalotic animals
A.Normokalemia in an acidotic animal
1.Because inorganic acidemia is expected to increase serum [K'], normokalemia in the
presence of inorganic acidemia suggests an animal has a decreased tbK*. Therapeutic
correction of the inorganic acidemia may lower the serum [K+] into the hypokalemic
range.Disorders that may produce this pathophysiologic state include renal failure
and some cases of diarrhea.
2. As mentioned earlier (see Potassium Concentration, sect. I.C), animals with an
organic metabolic acidosis may not be hyperkalemic.This is because either the K+
shift into cells is accompanied byan organic anion shiftorrenal excretion ofKis
increased to maintain electroneutrality as organic anions are excreted.
B.Normokalemia in an alkalotic animal
1.Because alkalemia is expected to decrease serum [K*], normokalemia in the presence
of alkalemia suggests an animal has an increased tbK*. Therapeutic correction of the
alkalemia may raise the serum [K] into the hyperkalemic range.
2. This combination of findings is not expected because disorders that cause metabolic
alkalosis typically do not concurrently increase tbK*.
V.
Hypokalemia
A.This typically occurs when there is a shift of K+ from ECF to ICF,a decreased dietary
intake of K,or an increased Kloss via kidneysalimentary tract,or skin.If the acid
base status is normal, then the serum[K+] tends to reflect tbK+.
B.Disorders and pathogeneses (Table 9.6)
1.Shifting of K+ from ECF to ICF
a.Metabolic alkalosis causing alkalemia: A general concept for the hypokalemia of
alkalosis is that K shifts into cells when H moves out (see Potassium Concentra-
tion,sect. I.C).However, this process may play a minor role.Most metabolic
alkaloses have three other reasons for hypokalemia: (1) concurrent hypovolemia
activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and thus increases the renal
secretionofK,(2）bicarbonaturia obligates therenal excretion of cations including
K+, and (3) dietary intake of K+ decreases because of anorexia or vomiting
b.Increased insulin activity: Insulin promotes the cellular uptake of K, probably
through the activation of a Na-K-ATPase. Administration of exogenous insulin or
a sudden release of endogenous insulin afterIV glucose administration may cause
hypokalemia. A ketotic diabetic animal would more likely develop hypokalemia
because it might have decreased tbK+ (see Potassium Concentration, sect.V.B.2)
develop because endotoxin stimulates the Na*-K*-ATPase of skeletal muscle,
which causes K+to shift from the ECF to musclefibers. The endotoxin-induced
release of insulin may also contribute to the K shift.
2.Decreased total bodyK+
a.Decreased K+ intake
(1)Because most diets are Krich,anorexia or prolonged food restriction can
contribute to decreased tbK+.
517
Table 9.6.Diseases and conditions that cause hypokalemia
Shifting of K+from ECF to ICF (no change in total body K+)
Metabolic alkalosis with alkalemia
Increased insulin activity (rapid increase)
Endotoxemia
Decreased total body K+
*Decreased Kintake:anorexia or other reasons for not eating
Increased excretion of K+
Increased renal loss
*Increased fuid fow in distal nephron: osmotic,Na-losing nephropathies,
therapeutic diuresis (including loop and thiazide diuretics)
*Increased renal excretion of anions (ketonuria,lactaturia,bicarbonaturia)
*Vomiting or sequestration of H+and Cl causing hypochloremic metabolic
alkalosis
Hyperaldosteronism, primary
*Increased alimentary loss: vomiting, diarrhea, sequestration, excess salivation
Increased cutaneous loss: sweating in horses
Other or unknown mechanisms
*Hypokalemic renal failure in cats
Hypokalemicmyopathy ofBurmesekittens
*Arelativelycommon disease or condition
(2)The severity of hypokalemia will be enhanced if other processes areleading
to K* loss or shifting to ICF.
b.Increased excretion of K*
(1)Increased renal loss
(a)Increased tubular fow
(i)Increased fow of fuid through the collecting tubules allows for
increased secretion of Kfrom the tubular cells.Rapid fushing of
Kmaintains a low tubular [K], which allows the passive move-
ment of K+out of the cells.
(i)Polyuric states that promote hypokalemia include glucosuria
Na-losing nephropathies (pyelonephritis, tubular interstitial
nephritis, and possibly hypercalcemic nephropathy), and diuretic
use (loop diuretics and thiazide).
(b)Increased renal excretion of anions
Ketonuria: AcAc and BHB (ketone bodies) are anions that are not
resorbed in the tubules. Their negative charges add to the electro-
chemical gradient that promotesKexcretion,especially when there
is concurrent stimulation of Na resorption. Animals with ketoaci-
dotic diabetes mellitus tend to be hypokalemic; however, the net K+
balance is the result of multiple concurrent processes.
(i)Lactaturia: Lactate is a poorly resorbed by renal tubules.Thus,
increased renal excretion of L-lactate (in lactic acidosis) obligates
the loss of cations such as Naand K
518
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(ii) Bicarbonaturia:When plasma[HCO,] exceeds the renal capacity
to conserve HCO, (renal threshold) or if there is a tubular
acidosis, the HCO,that remains in the tubular Huid obligates the
renal excretion of cations such as Na* and K+.
（c)Vomiting or sequestration of H and Cl that causes hypochloremic
metabolic alkalosis (e.g., displaced abomasum, bovine hemorrhagic bowel
syndrome,orother disorders causing uppergastrointestinal obstruction
During the development of this metabolic alkalosis, plasma [HCO]
may increase sufficiently that the tubular maximum for HCOis
exceeded and thus HCO, is presented to the distal nephron. Because
HCO, is not resorbed in the distal nephron, its presence adds to the
electrochemical gradient that promotes tubular K secretion.
(i)Renal secretion of K+ (and concurrently H') is promoted through
the actions of aldosterone if an animal is hypovolemic.
(ii) Some K in gastric secrerions may be lost via vomiting.
(d)Hyperaldosteronism,primaryss
Dogs with hyperaldosteronism caused by adrenal neoplasms may
in cats.57-60
(i)Cats also have been reported to have a primary hyperaldosteronism
that is associatedwith adrenal hyperplasia andnotneoplasia
These cats had a high-normal to increased [aldosterone] concurrent
with hypokalemia andan increased aldosterone toplasmarenin
activity ratio. The cats were considered to have primary hyperaldo
steronism because hyperkalemia and hyperreninemia were not
present.However,hyperplasia may have been secondary to incom
plete suppression of renin secretion because of renal disease. Some
of the cats did develop renal failure.
(ii) The increased aldosterone concentrations would promote renal K+
secretion by stimulating Na-K'-ATPase and opening K+ channels
in the collecting rubules (Fig.9.3).
(2）Increased alimentary loss ofKvia vomiting,diarrhea, sequestration,or
excess salivation
(a)Vomiting may cause loss of K-rich fuid and reduced intestinal absorp-
tion of Kand thus lead to hypokalemia.Also,enhanced renal excretion
of K+ (due to response to increased aldosterone activity and decreased
availability of Cl) may add to a decreased tbK+
(b)With diarrheas, loss of electrolytes and HO may be massive. HO
intake may contribute a dilutional component to the hypokalemia. In
addition,lack of absorption of dietary Kmay augment the severity of
the tbK+ depletion and thus hypokalemia.
(c)K*-rich fuid may be sequestered in the intestines of animals with ileus,
especially in horses.
(d)Because saliva is a K*-rich fuid, loss of large volumes of saliva (because
ofchokingalacerated salivayland,dyphagia,orptyalismnre
and cattle can produce hypokalemia.Initially,the concurrent loss of
HCO, may produce a mild acidosis. If the animals also become
hyponatremic,hypochloremic, andhypovolemic, then renal
519
compensations (conservation of Naand HCO，and excretion
ofK+andH+)may leadtoahypokalemicmetabolicalkalosis.
(3)Increased cutaneous loss: sweating in horses
（a)Equine swear is relatively K+rich as compared to plasma.Thus, profuse
sweating can lead to K+loss, tbK+ depletion, and hypokalemia.23.24
(b)If the horse is drinking,HO intake would promote dilution of the
remaining K*.
C.Other or unknown mechanisms
(1)Hypokalemic renal failure in cats
(a)Cats with progressive renal disease that cause chronic renal failure are
prone to tbK depletion (kaliopenia) and thus develop hypokalemia.
(b)The exact pathogenesis of the hypokalemia of chronic renal failure is
unknown and maybe due to multiple factors:increased renal K+
excretion,increased colonicK+excretion,and decreased dietary K
intake. Because cats retain renal concentrating ability much longer in
renal disease than other domestic mammals, possibly their distal tubules
remain responsive to aldosterone during hypovolemia and thus retain
Na* and secrete K*. In experimental conditions, a NaCl-restricted diet
did result in hypokalemia and inappropriate kaliuresis when the
glomerular fltration rate was reduced.
(2)Hypokalemic myopathy in Burmese kittens64-s6
(a)The Burmese kittens had hypokalemia, muscle weakness, and high
serum creatine kinase activities. The myopathy was precipitated by stress
or exercise.
(b)The pathogenesis of the hypokalemia is not established but may be due
toa sudden shift ofK+from the ECF toICF.
SODIUMTOPOTASSIUM(Na+:K+)RATIO
I.
Because several physiologic processes involve both Na and K,it's not surprising that[Na]
and [K*] may change concurrently in the same animal. Calculating a Na:K* ratio may
enhance detection of electrolyte disorders.
A.The Na:K ratio is obtained by dividing a measured serum or plasma [Na*] by a
measured serum or plasma [K] (both expressions in mmol/L or mEq/L)
B.A lowNa:K+ratio is common and expected in hypoadrenocorticism.It has been
written that a Na:Kratio<27(or 25 or 22) is diagnostic ofhypoadrenocorticism in
dogs. The lowest ratios will be found when hyponatremia and hyperkalemia are
concurrent, but a low ratio is not unique to hypoadrenocorticism.
II.
Causes of a decreased Na:K ratio:6768 A decreased Na:K+ ratio is not required to
detect the following disorders but suggests possible abnormalities inNa orK+
concentrations:
A.Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
1.Hyponatremia is caused by increased renal excretion of Na (due to decreased
aldosterone)and retention of HO (due to increased ADH secondary to
hypocortisolemia).
2.Hyperkalemia is caused by decreased renal secretion of K+ (due to decreased
aldosterone).
coursesmar
520
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.Diarrhea (dogs, cats, and horses)
1.Hyponatremia is caused by increased intestinal loss of Na,perhaps accompanied by
increased HO intake. Horses with severe diarrhea are more prone to low Na*:K+
ratios than are dogs and cats.
2.Hyperkalemia may occur because of acidemia associated with HCO loss.
3.When seen with a whipworm (Trichuris vulpus) infection, the disorder has been
called pseudo-Addison’s disease.Neither adrenocortical hypoplasia nor hypoaldoste
ronism are present, and responsive hyperaldosteronism is expected.
C.Renal failure (dogs and cats)
1.Hyponatremia is caused by decreased ability of tubules to resorb Na.
states)
D.Urinary tract obstruction (dogs and cats) or uroperitoneum
1.Mild hyponatremia might be found during obstruction. If uroperitoneum is present,
2.Hyperkalemia caused by obstruction occurs primarily because of acute oliguria or
anuria leading to decreased tubular secretion of K.Uroperitoneum may cause
hyperkalemiaviaKdiffusion from the peritoneal cavity tobloodAcidosis may
contribute in both types of cases.
E.Diabetes mellitus with ketonuria (dogs and cats)
1.Hyponatremia is caused by increased renal Na excretion (due to osmotic diuresis
and obligated cation excretion)and plasma dilution(a shift of HO from ICFto
ECF because of marked hyperglycemia).
2.Hyperkalemia is not expected with ketoacidosis. It is more common for [K+] to be
WRl or decreased.
1.Hyponatremia may result from the dilution of ECF[Na] by the HO that is
retained through hypovolemic ADH and thirst responses. Drainage of effusionsfor
example, repeated drainage of chylous effusionswould remove ECF Na and thus
enhance the severity of the hyponatremia.
2.Hyperkalemia may result from one or more processes, including decreased renal
excretion of K+（caused by decreased distal tubular flowrate or hyponatremia)ora
shift from ICF to ECF because of an associated acidosis.
G.Others
1.Any disorder that causes hyponatremia without a corresponding decrease in serum
[K+]will lower the Na+:K+ratio.
2.Any disorder that causes hyperkalemia without a corresponding increase in serum
[Nat] will lower the Na*:K+ ratio.
CHLORIDE(CH)CONCENTRATION
Physiologic processes
A.Serum [Cl] is nearly equivalent to ECF [Cl-], which is influenced by ECF concentra-
tions of Na* and HCO,. Therefore, complete interpretation of serum [Cl] requires
knowledge of serum [Na] and at least a consideration of an animal’s acid-base status.
B.Control of serum[Cl-]
1.Renal resorption and secretion of Cl1
a.About 75% of filrered Cl is resorbed in the proximal rubules down a concentra-
tion gradient created by Na and HO resorption and through a formate-Cl
521
exchanger.Angiotensin II stimulates the proximal tubular resorption of Na, Cl,
and H,O.
b.Cl is actively resorbed in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle via a
Na-K-2Cl transporter in the luminal membrane. The rate-limiting factor is Cl
delivery to the loop.This process is blocked by loop diuretics (e.g.,furosemide)
and is stimulated by ADH.
c.Cl is passively resorbed in the distal nephron by an electrochemical gradient
established by Na* movement through Nat channels. Aldosterone promotes Nat
resorption in the distal nephron.
d.Na and Cl resorption in the distal nephron also involves an aldosterone-inde
pendent Na-Cl cotransporter. This process varies directly with Na+ delivery to
the distal nephron. Thiazide diuretics block this cotransporter.
e.Type A intercalated cells of the distal nephron secrete Cl when H is secreted.
The process is stimulated by acidemia (Fig. 9.4). Conversely, when there is an
alkalemia or HCOexcess,Cl is conserved and HCOis secreted by type B
intercalated cells (see Fig.9.8).
2.Alimentary tract functions pertaining to Cl
a.Gastric (or abomasal) mucosa secretes HCl as part of the digestive process. In
healthy animals,the secreted C is resorbed after it passes into the intestinal
tract.
b.Secretion of Cl requires the generation of HCO(see Fig.9.5)
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms and units
1.Assays measure the electrical potential of Cl (potentiometry) or [Cl] (spectropho
tometry or coulometric/amperometric titration) in plasma, serum, or whole blood.
The Cl is mostly a free ion in the plasma or serum HO.
2.Unit conversion:mEq/Lx1=mmol/L,andmg/dL+3.55=mmol/L（SIunit
nearest 1 mmol/L)3
Gastricparietal epithelial cell
plasma
lumen
Na+
Na+
Na+
K+
个
K+
CF
C
HCO
HCO
K+
k+
CO2
CO2
H+
H+
H2O
carbonic
H2O
anhydrase
Fig. 9.5. Gastric or abomasal secretion of H+ and CI. H and HCO; are formed from the combination of
OH- (from HO) and CO in a reaction catalyzed by carbonic anhydrase. H+ (from HO) is secreted into
the lumen via a H'K'-ATPase pump. The generated HCO, is transported to the ECF via a Cl-HCO,
exchanger. CI is actively pumped into the lumen with Na and K', but most Na and K+ ions are resorbed,
thus leaving H and CI in the lumen.The major results of the process are gastric secretion of H and CI, a
lesser plasma [CI], and greater plasma [HCO,]
⑧, ATPase pump; and O, cotransporter or counter transporter (antiporter).
522
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.Sample for[Cl] quantitation
1.Serum is preferred.[Cl] is stable for months if the sample does not dehydrate
2.Plasma may be used.
C.Principles of assays
1.Ion-selective electrode assays are the most common. Other halides (e.g.,bromide
and iodide) will react with the electrode to give a falsely increased [Cl-], sometimes
markedly so. Bromide may be present when potassium bromide is used as an
anticonvulsant. Other anions (e.g., lactate and BHB) may react to give mildlly
increasedvalues; that is, the Cl value is increased about 3mmol/L by lactate at
10mmol/L andBHB at 16mmol/L(i-STAT literature)
2.Coulometric/amperometric titration assays were common but have mostly been
replaced by ion-selective electrode assays.
III.
Hyperchloremia
A.This typically occurs when there is hypernatremia but occasionally is found
concurrently with a decreased [HCO] (ie.,hyperchloremic metabolic acidoses).
Conceptually, changes in [Cl] are related to attempts to maintain electrical neutrality.
As [Na] increases, so does [CI]. As [HCO,] decreases, [Cl ] increases.
B.Disorders and pathogeneses (Table 9.7)
Table 9.7.Diseases and conditions that cause hyperchloremia
H,O-deficit group (with hyperchloremia and hypernatremia)
Inadequate H,O intake
*HO deprivation
Defective thirst response (hypothalamic defect)
Pure H,O loss (without adequate HO replacement)
*Insensible loss: panting,hyperventilation,or fever
Diabetes insipidus (central or nephrogenic)
HO loss>Naand Cl- loss
Renal:osmotic diuresis
Alimentary:osmotic diarrhea,osmotic sequestration,or phosphate enemas
Cl-excess group (increased total body Cl)
Excess Cl with concurrent restricted H,O intake
Salt poisoning
Administration of hypertonic saline,KCl,or NHCl
Decreased renal excretion of Na* and Cl-
Hyperaldosteronism
oursesnan
Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis
*Alimentary loss of HCO
Renal loss of HCO,
Proximal renal tubular acidosis
Distal renal tubular acidosis
Respiratory alkalosis (chronic)
*A relatively common disease or condition
523
1.HO-deficit group (hyperchloremic and hypernatremic disorders):Because Cl is the
major anion that helps maintain electrical neutraliry in the ECF, disorders that cause
hypernatremic dehydration also tend to create hyperchloremia (see Sodium Concen-
tration, sect.III.B.1).
2. Cl-excess group (and usually concurrent Na excess)
a.Increased intake of Cl via oral or IV administration of solutions containing Cl
may also lead to hyperchloremia.
b.Decreased renal excretion of Na (hyperaldosteronism) (rare)
(1) Excessive aldosterone promotes excessive renal Cl- (and Na) retention.
(2)Hyperchloremia (and hypernatremia）may occur if H,O is restricted or
ADH activity is reduced.Aldosterone escape may prevent hyperchloremia
(see Sodium Concentration, sect. III.B.2b).
3.Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis
a.Alimentary loss of HCO;
(1)Vomiting or diarrhea that causes a loss of HCO,-rich intestinal secretions
may lead to HCOdepletion and metabolic acidosis. Cattle that do not
ingest saliva (because of an esophageal obstruction) become HCO, depleted
because their saliva is rich in HCO,.
(2)The HCO secretions are also Narich but Cl poor.Therefore, the ECF
left behind becomes Cl rich, and thus hyperchloremia develops.
b.Renal loss of HCO
(1)In proximal renal tubular acidosis,the reduced reclamation of HCOmay
allow more Cl to be resorbed with Na,and thus hyperchloremic metabolic
acidosis develops.
(2）In distal renal tubular acidosis,theimpaired ability to secreteHmight be
linked to the failure of a C-HCO, shuttle, thus impairing secretion of Cl
and reclamation of HCO
4.Respiratory alkalosis (chronic)
a.As a compensatory change to prolonged hypocapnia and alkalemia, the renal
retention of H+ is increased and thus the renal conservation of HCO, is
reduced.
b.The fall in HCOis balanced by an increase in Cl and other anions that are
not identified.9
5.Dehydration of the sample (evaporation or sublimation): Exposure of serum or
plasma to air may allow evaporation that causes hyperchloremia. This is especially
true of air-conditioning systems that blow cool dry air over the sample processing or
analysis areas.Sublimation of H,O from frozen samples may cause hyperchloremia
IV.
Normochloremia: Recognizing the presence of normochloremia may be important when
either hypernatremia or decreased serum [HCO,] is present, because it suggests the
presence of an increased anion gap (see the Anion Gap section).
V.
Hypochloremia
A.This typically occurs when there is hyponatremia (and pseudo-hypochloremia when
there is pseudo-hyponatremia) or an increased serum HCO] (as occurs with
metabolic alkaloses). It may also occur in a metabolic acidosis because Cl excretion
accompanies the enhanced renal excrerion of H+ either via NH+ excretion (Fig. 9.6)
or via type A intercalated cells (Fig. 9.4)
524
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 9.8. Diseases and conditions that cause hypochloremia
Cl-deficit group: net Cl loss >HO loss (loss of Cl -containing fuid followed by increased
H,O intake)
Concurrent loss of Na(see the Na-deficit group in Table 9.4)
Merabolic alkaloses
*Loss or sequestration of HCl: vomiting,displaced abomasum,pyloric obstruction,
bovine hemorrhagic bowel syndrome
*Bovine renal failure
Furosemide toxicosis
Thiazide diuretics
Metabolic acidoses with an increased anion gap
*Ketoacidosis
*Lactic acidosis
Ingestion of foreign substance （e.g.,ethylene glycol)that generates anions
HO-excess groups (with or without edema) (see the same group in Table 9.4)
Shifting of HO from ICF to ECF (see the same group in Table 9.4)
Shifting of Cl from intravascular to extravascular fuid (see the same group in Table 9.4)
*Arelatively common disease or condition
Note: Pseudo-hypochloremia may be caused by displacement of serum or plasma HO (see the text).
B.Disorders and pathogeneses (Table 9.8)
1.Cl-deficit group(Cl-loss>H,O loss)
a.Because Cl is the major anion that helps maintain electrical neutrality in the
ECF, disorders that cause hyponatremic dehydration (via gastrointestinal, urinary,
or cutaneous loss) tend to also create hypochloremia (seeSodium Concentration,
sect.V.B.1).
b.Hypochloremia in the absence of hyponatremia suggests the presence of meta-
bolic alkalosis (with an increased [HCO; ]) or an increased anion gap (with an
increased concentration of an anion other than Cl or HCO,) because electrical
neutrality must be maintained. Interpretation of HCO(or tCO) and anion
gapvalues should besuffcient to identify these conditionsbut calculationsfor
corrected [Cl] and SID may be used (see the section on Strong Ion Difference
and Stewart's Method of Acid-Base Analysis in Chapter 10).
(1)Metabolic alkaloses
(a)Loss or sequestration of HCl (e.g.,vomiting, displaced abomasum,
other upper gastrointestinal tractbstruction,gastricrefuxinhorsesr
bovine hemorrhagic bowel syndrome):Loss of Cl -rich secretions leads
to depletion of Cl in the ECF and thus hypochloremia.
(b)Bovine renal failure: Cattle with renal insufficiency tend to become
alkalotic. The acid-base changes may result from abomasal atony, which
creates a functional obstruction and thus sequestration of Cl (see
Bicarbonate Concentration, sect. III.B.1). Also, cartle excrete more K+
via saliva during renal failure. When swallowed, the K* may limit the
absorption of Cl-.70
(c)Furosemide: This competes for the Cl-binding site in the Na-K-2Cl
transporter of the luminal membrane of the thick ascending limb of the
loop of Henle and thus inhibits Cl resorption.Excess excretion of Cl
525
(relative to H,O) causes hypochloremia. Concurrent hypokalemic
metabolic alkalosis may occur (see Bicarbonate Concentration,
sect. III.B.1.b).
(d)Thiazide diuretics act in the distal tubule by interfering with Cl-
resorption in a Na-K+ cotransporter. Because this process occurs in the
cortical nephron, it does not diminish medullary hypertonicity and thus
the kidneys maintain concentrating abiliry. Thus, when stimulated by
ADH,HO resorption will cause hyponatremia and hypochloremia by
dilution.
(2)Metabolic acidoses with increased anion gaps
(a)In ketoacidosis and lactic acidosis, there is an increased filtration of
unresorbable anions (ketone bodies and L-lactate,respectively) from
plasma.These anions obligate the renal excretion of Nato maintain
electrical neutrality. Thus, less Na is resorbed in the proximal and
collecting tubules. Because Cl resorption in those rubules depends
on the electrochemical gradient established by Naresorption, the
diminished Nat resorption diminishes the Cl resorption.
(b) Ingestion of a foreign substance that generates anions (e.g., ethylene
glycol):Pathogenesis of thehypochloremia parallels that found with
ketoacidosis and lactic acidosis, because the filtration of unresorbable
anions obligates Na* loss. As Cl resorption depends frequently on Na*
resorption,Naloss leads to Clloss.Otherexamplesofexogenous
anionic substances are listed in the Anion Gap section.
(c)If there is adequate renal function, the renal response to an acidemia is
to increase the excretion of H+ by the following processes that increase
the excretion of H+and Cl and the production of HCO,.The net
effect is to reduce the severity of the acidemia (excretion of Hand
generation of HCO for buffering) and reduce plasma [C].
(i)Acidemia stimulates the type A intercalated cells (Fig. 9.4).
(ii) Acidemia stimulates the increased renal excretion of NH* in both
the proximal and collecting rubular epithelial cells (Fig. 9.6). This
mechanism of acid excretion in the distal nephron may be impaired
with anorexia, possibly to help maintain muscle mass.
2.HO-excess group (see Sodium Concentration, sect.V.B.2)
3.Shifting of HO from ICF to ECF (see Sodium Concentration, sect.V.B.3)
4.Shifting of Cl from intravascular to extravascular space (see Sodium Concentration,
sect.V.B.5)
5.Pseudo-hypochloremia: The same factors (e.g., lipemia and hyperproteinemia) that
cause pseudo-hyponatremia will also cause a pseudo-hypochloremia if the [Cl] is
measured by indirect potentiometry or coulometric/amperometric titration assays
(see Sodium Concentration, sect.V.B.7).
BICARBONATE (HCO,) CONCENTRATION AND TOTAL CARBON DIOXIDE
(tCO)CONCENTRATION
I.
Physiologic processes
A.HCO,in the body is a major buffer that helps maintain blood pH at physiologic
concentrations.HCOis produced fromHO and COin cells that have carbonic
526
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Peritubular
Proximal tubularepithelial cell
Glomerularplasma
fluid&plasma
glutamine-
glutamine-
glutamine"
2Cl-
O'H
Glnase
3Na+
2NH
NH
glutamate"
2H+
2K+
2Na+
HO
GMD
4H+
NH
2Na+
Na+
α-ketoglutarate
2H+
mltoc
drla?
Tubularlumen
3HCO
Peritubular
Collecting tubularepithelial cell
fluid&plasma
NH3
NH3
NH3
Cl-
C
HCOg-
H+
CO2
carbonie
HO
NH+
Tubularlumen
Fig.9.6.Excretion of Hvia NH
·Proximal renal tubular epithelial cells: Acidemia results in the increased uptake and degradation of
glutamine. Energy for electrolyte transport is provided by the 3Na-2K+-ATPase and involves the increased
activity of glutaminase (Glnase) and glutamate dehydrogenase (GMD). These processes reduce the severity
of acidemia by (1) H* combining with NH to form NHand (2) the generation of HCO,which can
buffer ECF H+.The increased renal excretion of NH+obligates the excretion of anions (primarily Cl)to
maintain electrical neutrality.
·Collecting tubular epithelial cells: In the collecting tubules, NH; diffuses into the tubular fuid and
combines with H that is secreted with CI.This renal compensation for an acidemia increases the renal
excretion of H(in NH),increases the renal excretion of CI,generates HCO，and thus produces a
compensatory hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis.
, ATPase pump; and O, cotransporter or counter transporter (antiporter).
anhydrase: erythrocytes,proximal renal tubular cells (luminal and intracellular),parietal
cells of the gastric and abomasal epithelium, intercalated cells (rype A and B) of the
collecting tubules, and exocrine pancreatic epithelial cells.
B.In gastric or abomasal mucosal cells,HCl secretion is accomplished by the utilization of
Cl from the ECFand by the generation of HCO,(Fig.9.5).
C.In the proximal nephron, 90 % of filtered HCO, is conserved (not directly resorbed)
(Fig. 9.7). This occurs during the H secretion that is mediated through the Nat-H+
antiporter and is dependent on Na resorption.
D.Distal nephron
1.HCOproduced by thetype A intercalated cells of the collecting tubules enters the
peritubular Huid through a Cl -HCO;exchanger. This process is linked to H+
secretion by H-ATPase and is promoted by aldosterone (Fig. 9.4).
527
Peritubular
Glomerularplasma
Proximal tubular epithelial cell
fluid&plasma
Na+HO HCO
--
3Na+
3Na+
Tubularlumen
2K
2K+
Na+
HCO
Na+
H+
+EN
Na+
carbonic HCO
3HCO3
3HCO
anhydrase
carbonic
HO
O²H
anhydrase
CO,
200
Fig. 9.7.Proximal tubular conservation of HCO,. H secreted by a luminal border Na-H exchanger
combines with fltrate HCO,to form HCO,Dissociation of HCO, into CO and HO is facilitated by
luminal carbonic anhydrase. After passive absorption, cellular carbonic anhydrase helps CO and OH- (from
HO) combine to form HCO, which is transported to the peritubular fuid via a Na-3HCO,cotrans-
conservation is provided by a Na-K-ATPase pump in thebasolateral membrane.The electrolyte movement
in the figure is not balanced; movement of other electrolytes (K+, Cl, and NH) are involved to maintain
electrical neutrality. The net result of the process is HCO,conservation and Naresorption, but the HCO
that enters the peritubular fuid is not the same HCOymolecule that entered the ultrafiltrate. Thus HCO;
is not directly resorbed (HCO, is a not a resorbable anion). , ATPase pump; and O, cotransporter or
counter transporter (antiporter).
2.HCOcan be secreted (when there is a metabolic alkalosis) through a Cl-HCO
exchanger in type B intercalated cells of the distal nephron (Fig. 9.8).
IL.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms andunits
1.The [HCO] is calculated during blood gas analysis of heparinized blood (see Eq.
10.1a), but estimates may be obtained from serum samples.
2.The [HCO,] in serum can be estimated indirectly by measuring the [rCO]. tCO
reflects the total amount of COgas that can be liberated from serum.At a physi
ologic pH of7.4,about 95 % of the potential COgas is in the form of HCO,
about 5 % is in dissolved CO, and < 1 % is in carbamino compounds. Therefore,
the[CO] isnearly equal to the[HCO].COis also called total carbon dioxide
content（tcCO2)
3.Unit conversion:mEq/L x 1 =mmol/L(SI unit,nearest 1 mmol/L)
B.Sample for [HCO]quantitation
1.Serum is preferred,but plasma may be used.
2. Samples should have minimal exposure to air before and after serum is harvested (a
few minutes is acceptable).Because the Pco of air is near O mmHg, COz will
diffuse from the sample to air. The lowering of the Pco, in the sample “pulls HCO,
out of solution”(shifts the equilibrium toward CO and away from HCO, thus
lowering the [HCO;] and [H+] of the sample) (Eq. 9.2). The same reaction occurs
invivo during expiration （as shown in Fig.10.1) to remove H from blood,but the
528
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Peritubular
Type B intercalated cell
Tubular
fluid&plasma
lumen
H.O
CA
HCO
HCO
CO
CF
C
C
Fig. 9.8. Secretion of HCO, by type B intercalated cells of the distal nephron. When there is metabolic
tubular lumen and concurrently generate H'. In respect to HCO,and H, type B intercalated cells
essentially have the opposite function of type A intercalated cell. The net result is increased renal excretion
of HCO; and increased H and CI in plasma. , ATPase pump; and O, cotransporter or counter
transporter (antiporter).
[HCO,] decrease is not detected in physiologic states because there is relatively
much more HCO,than H+（mmol/Lvsnmol/L,respectively)and the HCO,that
is used is replaced.
H++HCO→HCO→HO+CO→COlosttoair
(9.2.)
3.The[tCO，] in underfilled blood collection tubes (e.g.,3 mL of blood into a 10 mL
tube） is lessthan in flled tubes after contact with erythrocytes for about 20min.72
Erythrocytes may contribute to loss of COinto underfilled tubes' dead spaces
(which initially would be devoid of CO), because carbonic anhydrase in erythro-
cytes accelerates the conversion of HCO, to CO.Even greater loss of CO occurs
with exposure to air before or after centrifugation.
C.Principles of assays (three variations provided)
1.Vitrosenzymatic tCO
a.In a very alkaline environment, nearly all CO is in the form of HCO,. HCO
reacts with phosphoenolpyruvate to form oxaloacetate,which is coupled to a
reaction that consumes NADH. The disappearance of NADH is measured by
refectance spectrophotometry.
b.Positive interference:L-lactate dehydrogenase (LD)activity of 4500 U/L will
increase the[tCO] by 3mmol/L because it promotes consumption of NADH as
it catalyzes the conversion of serum L-lactate to pyruvate (Vitros method package
insert). Oxamate is incorporated into some assays to inhibit LD and reduce the
interference.
2. Beckman analyzer: In an acid environment, nearly all forms of CO, are converted to
gaseous CO.The liberated CO,diffuses into aHCO,solution with a pH
electrode.Changes in pH relate to the amount of liberated CO
3.Hitachi and Olympus analyzers
a.HCO,reacts with phosphoenolpyruvatein the presence of NADH to produce
oxaloacetate, PO4, and NAD in the presence of catalytic enzymes.The
529
Table 9.9.Diseases and conditions that cause increased serum[HCO;]or[tCO]
(metabolic alkalosis)
Loss of Hfrom body
*Gastric loss: vomiting, pyloric obstruction (functional or mechanical)
Renal loss
Loop or thiazide diuretics
Secondary to respiratory acidosis
*Hypokalemia
Secondary to endurance races or intestinal disorders in horses
Shift of H+ from ECF to ICF due to hypokalemia
Administration of sodium bicarbonate, lactate,citrate,or magnesium hydroxide
*Contraction alkalosis:vomiting
*A relatively common disease or condition
text).
consumption of NADH is proportional to[HCO] and is measured via
spectrophotometry.
b. LD activity also converts NADH to NAD*. Extreme increases in serum LD
activity caused by rhabdomyolysis can result in falsely increased [HCO;].73
II1.
Increased bicarbonate（HCO,)concentration or total carbon dioxide （tCO)concentration
A.Increased [HCO] is usually associated with a metabolic alkalosis,either primary or as
compensation for a respiratory acidosis.Metabolic alkaloses are typically produced by
the loss of H+ from the ECF (which causes alkalemia) (see Fig. 10.1).For each H that
is lost, there is an equimolar generation of HCO
B.Disorders and pathogeneses (Table 9.9)
1.Loss of H+ from the body
a.Gastric loss (vomiting, or physical or functional pyloric obstruction)
(1)Secretion of H+ by gastric mucosa generates HCO,(Fig. 9.5).If the H is
lost by vomiting, drainage of stomach contents (horses), or sequestration
proximal to the intestine, it is nor resorbed in the intestine.Therefore, the
generated HCO is not used to buffer the H (that would otherwise have
been resorbed),and thus it accumulates in plasma.
(2)Concurrent hypovolemia and hypochloremia lead to increased renal
conservation of HCO,.Hypovolemia stimulates the RAS to cause the
tubular resorption of Naand Cl.If the animal is Cl depleted,resorption
of Na+without Cl in the distal nephron increases the electrochemical
gradient,which promotes H+ secretion and thus the generation of HCO
(Fig. 9.3).
(3） Cartle in renal failure may develop a merabolic alkalosis. The prevailing
theory is that the cattle develop abomasal arony that leads to HCl sequestra-
tion, which generates the alkalosis.
b.Renal loss of H+
(1)Loop of Henle diuretics:Furosemide and other loop diuretics (bumetanide
and ethacrynic acid) block the action of a Na-K-2Cl transporter,thus,the
530
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
resorption of Na,K,and Cl by the ascending limb of the loop of Henle is
decreased.The resulting impaired HO resorption and increased fuid fow
in the distal nephron promote H+ secretion by maintaining a favorable H+
gradient. Also, hypovolemia and hypochloremia lead to increased secretion
of H and thus increased HCOgeneration. In addition, increased renal
excretion of K may lead to hypokalemia that also promotes alkalosis
(Figs. 9.2 and 9.4)
(2)Thiazide diuretics inhibit a Na-Cl cotransporter in the distal nephron by
competing for the Cl-binding site. As noted in the preceding paragraph,
hypovolemia andhypochloremia promote the formationofmetabolic
allkalosis.
(3)Secondary to respiratory acidosis: Chronic respiratory acidosis allows time
(3-5 d) for renal compensation consisting of increased H+ secretion by
(Fig.9.7).The increased H+ secretion is probably stimulared by the acidemia
(4)Hypokalemia stimulates H+-K+-ATPase in the distal nephron, thereby
promoting K retention, H+ secretion, and HCO generation (Fig. 9.4)
Hypokalemia may also promote alkalosis by shifting of H+ into cells in
exchange for K+ (Fig. 9.2).
(5)After endurance races or during intestinal disorders (e.g., colitis), horses can
develop metabolic allkalosis. Sometimes these alkaloses are explained as being
caused by contraction alkalosis (see Bicarbonate Concentration and Total
Carbon Dioxide Concentration, sect. II.B.4) or gastric sequestration of
not referenced.Because both conditions produce electrolyte changes that
could cause therenal secretionof Hand the correspondinggeneration of
HCO, other mechanisms may be involved.
(a)Extensive sweating may occur during endurance races.Equine sweat is
Krich and Cl rich compared to plasma, so sweating results in
hypertonic loss of these electrolytes in addition to the loss of body HO
that may not be replaced by drinking.
(b）Watery diarrhea depletes Cl and HO.If the horse is not eating,lack of
feed intake would reduce tbK+.
(c)As explained in the foregoing section B.1.a and in Fig. 9.4, the concur
rent states of hypovolemia, hypochloremia, and hypokalemia increase
renal secretion of H+ and thus increase production of HCO. These
processes create a metabolic alkalosis.
2.Shift of H+from ECF toICF due to hypokalemia
a.Alkalosis can lead to hypokalemia,but hypokalemia can also contribute to an
alkalosis.
b.If there is tbK+ depletion,a fall in[K] in the ECF promotes the movement of
K out of the cell and the movement of H into cells. The higher intracellular
[H] also promotes H secretion by renal tubular cells and increased generation
of HCO,, thus promoting alkalemia.
3.Administration of sodium bicarbonate, organic anions that generate HCO,or
magnesium hydroxide in ruminants or horses
a.Excess administration of sodium bicarbonate (while treating acidemia) may
increase serum [HCO,]
531
b.Metabolism of some organic anions (e.g.,L-lactate and citrate) by hepatocytes
leads to the production of HCO.Alkalosis is not expected unless large quanti-
ties of organic anions are given.
c.Magnesium hydroxide administered orally in ruminants causes a metabolic
alkalosis, probably because of the alkalinizing effects in the rumen.7 In
monogastric animals, there is less of an alkalinizing effect,because of gastric
secretion of H
d.Administration of bicarbonate solutions (*milkshakes") to horses prior to races
will increase serum[HCO,].7
4.Contraction alkalosis
aWhen Cl-rich but HCO-poor ECF is lost (as may occur with vomiting, HCI
sequestration, and loop diuretics), there is ECF volume contraction without a
ECF increases.The magnitude of increase is minimal becauseH is released from
other buffers in the body (e.g.,PO4, bone, and Hgb) and combines with the HCO
b.Volume contraction also helps maintain the alkalosis by decreasing renal HCO
excretion. In response to hypovolemia, aldosterone promotes the renal secretion
of H and CF by the intercalated cels and concurrent production of HCO
(Fig. 9.4).
C.The primary processes that result in the loss of Cl (vomiting,sequestration,
diuretics, and sweating) may also cause the loss of H+ and produce HCO, and
thus contribute to metabolic alkalosis. When there is a loss of Cl and accumula-
cells (Fig 9.5) or the Type A intercalared cells (Fig. 9.4) are probably involved in
the pathogenesis of the hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis.
IV.Decreased bicarbonate（HCO,）concentration or total carbon dioxide（tCO)
concentration
A.Decreased [HCO,] is usually associated with metabolic acidosis,either primary or as
compensation for respiratory alkalosis.The generation of excess Hor a loss of HCO,
typically producesmetabolic acidosis (see Fig10.1）.The loss of HCO(or other body
buffers) reduces the buffering capacity of the body and thus allows H to accumulate.
B.Disorders and pathogeneses (Table 9.10)
1.Generationof excess H:Ifmerabolic pathways generate suffcient acid to exceed the
buffering capacity of blood, then H accumulates to create acidemia.HCOis
depleted when it isused to buffer the generated H;therefore,these conditionsmay
be referred to as titration acidoses
a.Lactic acidosis occurs when cellular metabolism switches to anaerobic glycolysis.
The resultant increased degradation of ATP causes excessive release of H+(see
Lactate Concentration, sect. IIl.A.1b). In neonatal calf diarrhea,ruminal and
entericfermentation of lactose may be the sourceof D-lactate and H+76
b. Ketoacidosis occurs when there is excessive β-oxidation of triglycerides in
hepatocytes.
c.Ingestion of certain compounds (e-g.,ethylene glycol) creates an acidemia
because the catabolism of the compound generates acid (see Table 9.12).
2.Decreased renal excretion of H:As with excess generation of acid,[HCO]
decreases as HCO,(and other buffers) is used to buffer H+ that accumulates in
plasma.
532
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 9.10.Diseases and conditions that cause decreased serum[HCO;] or[tCO]
(metabolic acidosis)
Generation of excess H+
*Lactic acidosis
*Ketoacidosis
Ingestion of certain compounds (see Table 9.12)
Decreased renal excretion of H*
*Renal failure
*Uroperitoneum or urinary tract obstruction
Distal renal rubular acidosis (type 1)
Hypoaldosteronism
Increased HCO-loss
*Alimentary losses: diarrhea, sequestration, or vomiting of pancreatic secretions
Renal losses:proximal renal tubular acidosis (type 2)
Dilutional acidosis (rapid infusion of saline)
Arelatively common disease or condition
Note:Spurious decreasemay occur due to aerobic sample handing.
a.Renal failure creates an acidemia because of the kidneys' inability to excrete the
daily acid load produced by metabolic pathways.With progressive renal disease,
less NH+is excreted because there are fewer functional nephrons to form NH+
Abnormalities in HCO,and POexcretionmay also play a role in the
development of acidemia.
b.Urinary tract obstruction also produces an acidemia because of impaired urinary
excretion of H*.
c.With uroperitoneum, H is excreted by the kidneys but not from the body. Also,
urine is typically a HCO-poor fuid, so when the HO in urine is resorbed by
lymphatic vessels,it dilutes the plasma [HCO,].
d.Distal renal rubular acidosis (type 1) occurs when the H secretion by the distal
tubules is decreased because of tubular disease.It may also occur with urinary
tract obstruction and hyperkalemia.
e.Hypoaldosteronism （as seen with hypoadrenocorticism）) may promote acidemia
through multiple mechanisms. Hypoaldosteronism is also called rype 4 rena
tubular acidosis.
(1)Reduced H+ (and K+) secretion by principal epithelial cells (see Fig. 9.3).
(2)Reduced H+ secretion by type A intercalated cells (see Fig. 9.4).
(3）The resulting hyperkalemia inhibits NHexcretion (Fig. 9.6).Also,
hyperkalemia may cause shifts of H+ from ICF to ECF (related to concepts
in Fig.9.2).
3.Increased HCO,-loss
a.Alimentary losses
(1)Intestinal and pancreatic secretions are relatively HCO,-rich fuids. Thus,
diarrhea, vomiting (if pancreatic secretions are included), and intestinal
sequestration can cause HCO depletion and thus a loss of buffering
capacity.
(2）With time,Hproduced by metabolic pathways accumulates and promotes
acidemia.
533
b.Renal losses
conservation in the proximal tubules.The defect may be due to abnormal
Na* resorption or to the presence of a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor. The
defect may be part of either an inherited or acquired Fanconi's syndrome.
Besides proximal renal tubular acidosis, other findings in Fanconi’s syndrome
include renal glucosuria,aminoaciduria,hypokalemia,and
hypophosphatemia.
(2)Acquired proximal renal tubular acidosis has been seen with multiple
myeloma,hypocalcemia,and a variety of drugs in people.In dogs,the
hypovitaminosis D), streptozotocin and maleic acid treatments, and an
overdose of amoxicillin.7-so Acquired proximal renal tubular acidosis was
reported in a mare,but the cause was not determined.81
4.Dilutional acidosis may occur with rapid saline infusion, which may decrease
[HCO,] by diluting ECF HCO,.However, absolute change caused by dilution is
expected to be minor and thus cause a minor change in blood pH.
5.In vitro loss of HCO from the sample (see Bicarbonate Concentration Sect.II.B.2)
C.Decreased [HCO] or [tCO]with hyperchloremia:Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis
strongly suggests the presence of renal tubular acidosis, either the proximal or distal
form.
1.For proximal renal tubular acidosis, proximal tubular disease reduces tubular
secretion of H+ and decreases conservation of HCO,.As shown in Fig. 9.7,
proximal tubularHCO,conservation normally leads to the movement of HCO
and Na ions from the cells into the interstitial fuid and bloodIf HCOions are
not being formed in the proximal tubular cells because of inhibition of carbonic
anhydrase, the Na-K*-ATPase pump creates an electrical gradient that enhances Cl
resorption.The net result is decreased [HCO,], increased [Cl],and therefore
hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis.
2.For distal renal tubular acidosis, distal tubular disease impairs the secretion of H*
and thus decreases the generation of HCO, by the carbonic anhydrase reaction.
As shown in Fig.9.4,decreased generation of HCOby the type A intercalated
epithelial cells decreases the renal secretion of Cl.The net result is decreased plasma
[HCO,], increased plasma [Cl ], and therefore hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis.
3.There is confusion in the literarure regarding when it is appropriate to characterize
an acidosis as a renal tubular acidosis.
a.One view is that the classification of renal tubular acidosis should be limited to
those disorders in which a renal tubular disorder produces a hyperchloremic
metabolic acidosis without an increased anion gap and there is no evidence of
decreased glomerular filtration rate (i.e., the animal is not azotemic). Others do
not restrict this classification to nonazotemic animals and thus include renal
b.These differences may be considered relatively unimportant, but the lack of
consistency results in confusion and perhaps incorrect case management.
(1)By the more restrictive definition, the acidosis is created by a tubular
dysfunction. That is, either the proximal or distal tubules are not adequately
secreting H+and conserving or producing HCO. In these animals, plenty
of functional glomeruli are providing fltrate to the tubules.
534
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(2)In renal failure,the defective renalexcretion of H+isbecause of too few
functional nephrons. Those nephrons that are still functional may still be
able to secrete H. Because the excretion of PO and other anions is also
impaired, these animals may have an increased anion gap.
(3)Unfortunately, some animals may shift from the restrictive group to the
nonrestrictive group; that is, acute proximal tubular disease (e.g., toxicosis)
may create proximalrenalubularacidosis,butif hedamageissevere
enough, the disease may also damage enough nephrons that an animal
enters acute renal failure.
ANION GAP
I.
Definitions
A.Carior: an atom or molecule with a positive charge. Monovalent cations have one
positive charge, divalent cations have two.
B.Measured cation charge (mCt): the charge concentration of the major monovalent
cations (Na* and K+) whose serum activities or concentrations are directly measured
Because these ions are monovalent and measured as free ions, their ion concentrations
are equivalent to their charge concentrations.
C.Unmeasured cation charge (uC): the charge concentration of all other cations in blood,
includingfCa²+,fMg,and cationicglobulins,forwhich concentrations arenot
measured for the anion gap calculation. Charge concentrations for cations that are not
monovalent are greater than their ion concentrations.
D.Total cation charge(tC+): total charge concentration of all cations in the blood
（tC+=mC++uC+)
E.Anior:an atom or molecule with a negative charge.Monovalent anions have one
negative charge, divalent anions have two,and trivalent anions (e.g.,PO) have
three.
F.Measured anion charge（mA）: the charge concentration of the major monovalent anions
(Cland HCO,)whose serum activities or concentrations are measured.Because these
ions are monovalent and measured as free ions, their ion concentrations are equivalent
to their charge concentrations. [HCO,] may be estimated from [tCO2].
G.Unmeasured anion charge （uA）: the charge concentration of all other anions in serum,
including PO4, albumin, anions of organic acids, and SO4, for which concentrations are
not measured for the anion gap calculation. Charge concentrations for anions that are
not monovalent are greater than their ion concentrations.
H.Total anion charge (tA): total charge concentration of all anions in the blood
（tA=mA+uA-)
I.Anion gap: the difference (gap) in the charge concentrations (not ion concentrations)
between uA and uCt (anion gap = uA- uC'). The anion gap can be calculated because
this is also equal to the difference between mC+ and mA concentrations (Eq. 9.3).
(H]+）-（]+N-
(9.3.)
II.
Physiologic processes
A.Serum is always electrically neutral; that is, total positive charges equal total negative
charges.Themajor contributors to the electrical neutrality and their relative contribu
tions are listed inTable 9.11.In the example,150of the157mmol/L of cation charge
535
Table 9.11. Cations and anions of serum in health (approximate concentrations provided to
simplify concept)
mmol/L ion charge
mmol/L ion charge
Cations
Anions
Nat
146
Cr
110
K+
4.0
HCO,
24
fCa2+
5.0
Proteins
16°
fMg2+
2.0
Organic anions
3.5b
H+
10-7
PO4
2.5
SO4
1.0
Total
157
Total
157
* Molar concentrations of proteins are not measured because of variations in molecular weights of
proteins. (Note: Using the common anion gap formulas, proteins are the major component of the anion gap
in healthy animals.)
bInhealth,rganicanions .,lactateAc,HB,and rate）ntriutevery litleo total anni
isfrom Na andK+（themC),and 134of the 157mmol/L of anion charge is from Cl
and HCO,(mA).
B.Anion gap formula derivation (Eq. 9.4)
As serum is electrically neutral, tC+= tA.
(9.4.)
AstC+=mC++uC+andtA=mA+uA,
then mC++uC=mA-+uA.
AsmC+=（[Na]+[K+]）andmA-=[Cl-]+[HCO],
then([Na+]+[K+])+uC+=([CF]+[HCO-]）+uA.
mar
Rearranging the equation, uA--uC+=（[Na] +[K+])-（[Cl]+[HCO]).
As anion gap=uA-uC,
then anion gap= ([Na] +[K])-([Cl] +[HCO]).
C.The major purpose of calculating anion gaps is to identify increased [uA] and therefore
an increase in circulating anionic molecules (e.g.,L-lactate and ketone bodies) in states
of metabolic acidosis (Fig.9.9).
1.As shown in Table 9.1l, uA > uC+ in health; that is, the sum of charges due to
proteins,organic ions, PO4,and SO4is greater than the sum of charges due to
fCa²,fMg²,and H.Also,the“unmeasured”anion concentrations can change
more markedly than can the “unmeasured”cation concentrations.
2.Clinically significant changes in the anion gap are usually the result of changes in
uA.Majorchangesin[fCa²]and [Mg]are life-threatening.Only minor changes
in[fCa²] and [fMg] are seen clinically,and these cause only minor changes in
anion gap.
3. Most changes in anion gap are due to increased concentrations of the anions of organic
acids. These organic acids may be endogenous substances (e.g., L-lactate and ketone
bodies),or they may be generated from exogenous substances (e.g,ethylene glycol.
4.Increases and decreases in protein concentrations,epecially albumin,cause mild
increases and dcreasesrespectively,in the anion gap.Most plasma proteins arein
the uA group.
536
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
UC+
uC+
uC+
uA--Pr
K+
IA--Pr
K+
uA-Pr
K+
K+
Pr
Pr.
SLO
Pr"
HCO
centrat
HCO3
HCO
HCO3
PL:
UA--Pr
HCO
Pr
charge
Na*
+eN
+eN
Na+
Nat
HCOg
uolue
CF
CF
CI-
CI
Na+
CI-
pue
Cl-
UC
A
B
C
D
E
F
anion charge concentration.The uC+is due mostly to charges from fCa²+,fMg²+,and some globulins
whereas the uA is due mostly to charges from POSO and anions of organic acids and proteins Pr).
Proteins are separated in the diagrams to illustrate their relative contributions to total anionic charge.
CationsandanionsthatcontibutetotheanionaparewithinthereyshadedareasIn theseexanplesthe
uC+ concentrations remain constant but may not be in pathologic states.
A.In healthy animals, the anion gap is almost equivalent to the combined physiologic concentrations of
anions of organic acids and proteins, PO,and SO
B.In a normochloremic metabolic acidosis (therefore low[HCO ),the increased anion gap represents
increased concentrations of uA(organic acid anions,PO,SOor other anions of the acids）.These
C.In a hypochloremicmetabolic acidosis （therefore low[HCO]and low[Cl ]),the increased anion gap
represents increased concentrations of uA（organic acid anions,POSOor anions other than Cl or
HCO, ). These acidoses may be organic (e.g., lactic acidosis) or inorganic (e.g., renal failure).
the sum of [CI] and [HCO,] and the sum of [Na] and [K+] have not changed. These alkaloses may
occur with vomiting or gastrointestinal sequestration of H+ and Cl.
E.
With concurrent hyponatremia and hypochloremia, the anion gap has not changed because theNa]
and [CF] decreased proportionally and other concentrations did not change. These findings are more
common when there is concurrent loss of Na and Cr; for example, intestinal loss via diarrhea or renal
loss in hypoadrenocorticism.
F.
With hypoproteinemia,the anion gapis decreased because there is alower concentration of proteins an
increased sum of [CI] + [HCO; ], and no change in the sum of [Na] + [K+]. These findings occur in
hypoproteinemic disorders when there are not concurrent acid-base disorders (e.g., hepatic failure).
5.With hyperphosphatemia, each 1 mg/dL increase in [PO] is associated with about a
0.6 mmol ion charge/L increase in uA and therefore in anion gap (1 mg/dL PO4 =
0.323 mmol/L PO, at an average negative valence of about 1.8).
III.
Analytical concepts
A.Units: mmol ion charge/L (same as mmol/L of ion or mEq/L of ion for monovalent
ions, but not equivalent to ion concentration for multivalent ions like PO,fCa², and
albumin)
537
B.As with any calculated value, the anion gap will be only as accurate as the measured
values.If needed,refer to prior sections on the individual electrolytes.
C.The[HCO,] used in the formula may be either[tCO,] or a calculated [HCO；]. Even
with marked elevations in Pco, values, the CO and HCO,values do not differ by
more than 2 mmol/L (2 mEq/L) if both values are accurate. Laboratory reference
intervals should be based on the measured values used in the calculation.
D.The anion gap is sometimes calculated without inclusion of [K] because [K]
contributes relatively little to the mCand is maintained within relatively narrow
bounds.Reference values used to interpret thesevalues should also be based on
calculations that do not include[K].
IV.
Increased anion gap
A.This typically is seen with certain metabolic acidoses (especially normochloremic and
hypochloremic),but an increased anion gap is not specific for a particular cause.
Hyperchloremic metabolic acidoses will typically not have an increased anion gap.
Minor increases in the anion gap can be seen in nonacidotic disorders that cause
hyperalbuminemia or reduce the concentration of fCa² and fMg²+
B.Because the anion gap is a calculated value, the value may be erroneous if the values
used to calculate it are erroneous.
1.Pseudo-hyponatremia and pseudo-hypochloremia would lead to unreliable anion gap
values.Depending on the cause of the HO displacement,[K] and[HCO] may
also be erroneous.
2.Theanin gapwillbefalsely dereased if the[C] isfalselyincreased ecause of the
presence of bromide in the sample.
3. The anion gap will be falsely increased when [HCO, ] is falsely decreased because of
escape of CO,from serum samples excesively exposed to air.
C.Disorders: Diseases and conditions that increase the anion gap are listed in Table 9.12
Table 9.12. Diseases and conditions that cause an increased anion gap
Metabolic acidoses
*Lactic acidosis: increased lactate (either L-lactate or D-lactate)
*Ketoacidosis: increased ketone bodies (BHB or AcAc)
*Renal failure: increased PO,sulfate, or citrate
Massiverhabdomyolysis:probablyincreased lactate andPO
Ingestion of certain compounds
*Ethylene glycol (antifreeze): increased glycolate or oxalate
Methanol poisoning (antifreeze): formate
Paraldehyde (sedative or anesthetic): increased acetate and chloroacetate
Metaldehyde poisoning (snail bait)
Penicillin (very high doses)
Hyperalbuminemia (minor changes)
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: A spurious increase in anion gap may occur when decreased [HCO,] is caused by aerobic
sample handling.
538
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 9.13.Diseases and conditions that cause a decreased anion gap
Decreases in uA
*Hypoalbuminemia
Increases in uC+
Hypercalcemia (minor changes)
Hypermagnesemia (minor changes)
Multiplemyeloma that is producing cationic proteins
*Arelatively common disease or condition
Note: A spurious decrease in anion gap may occur when there is a pseudo-hyperchloremia caused by
bromide.Pseudo-hyponatremia will cause unreliable anion gap values that may be decreased (see the
text).
V.
Decreased anion gap
A.A decreased anion gaphasminimal clinical significance,since it doesnotrelate o
specific pathologic states.Decreased anion gaps often accompany hypoalbuminemia
(decreased uA). They may also accompany increased uC*, but such changes are mild.
B.Recognizing that hypoalbuminemia lowers the anion gap aids in the interpretation of
anion gap values that are WRI or increased; that is, the anion gap value would have
been greater if the animal had not had hypoalbuminemia.
C.Disorders: Diseases and conditions that decrease the anion gap are presented in
Table 9.13
VI.
Strong ion difference (SID)
A.Evaluation of SID assesses acid-base abnormalities in the context of abnormal concen-
trations of ions (strong cations and strong anions). SID concepts are similar to anion
gap concepts but also consider other factors.
B.（
Complete explanation of SID is beyond the scope of this book, but major aspects are
presented in Chapter 10.
LACTATECONCENTRATION(L-LACTATEANDD-LACTATE)
I.
Physiologicprocesses
A.The glycolytic pathway anaerobically converts glucose into energy (ATP) and generates
pyruvate, which may be converted into L-lactate (Fig. 9.10).
B.The major tissue source of L-lactate is skeletal muscle. L-lactate diffuses from the
muscle fibers to plasma and is taken up by hepatocytes as part of the Cori cycle:
glucose to L-lactate via anaerobic glycolysis in peripheral tissues, and L-lactate to
glucose via gluconeogenesis in hepatocytes.Hepatocytes can also use L-lactate for ATP
production via theKrebs cycle.
C.Becausemammalian erythrocytes lack mitochondria,glycolysisin erythrocytes produces
L-lactate. Also, L-lactate from muscle enters erythrocytes via three methods: (1)
diffusion across cell membranes, (2) transportation via a monocarboxylate transporter,
Erythrocytes may serve as a transporter of L-lactate and also a “lactate sink” that
enhances L-lactate diffusion from muscle to plasma (ie.,muscle to plasma to
erythrocytes).
9/MONOVALENTELECTROLYTESANDOSMOLALITY
539
gluCOSe+2NAD++2ADP+2PO4
2pyruvate-+2NADH+2H++2ATP+2H0
aerobic
→2H+
PDH
anaerobic
2PO
2ADP
2 acetyl CoA
2NADH+2H+
2NAD++2CoA
2H+
2PO42AMP
Krebs cycle
CO+GTP+NADH+FADH
2L-lactate-+2NAD+
+H
V
Net:+38ATP
Fig. 9.10.Products of aerobic and anaerobic glycolysis. Catabolism of each gluoose molecule results in two
pyruvate molecules,twoH ionsand a net production of twoATPmolecules.When there is adequate
oxygenation of cells and after pyruvate enters mitochondria, pyruvate enters the Krebs citric acid cycle
(tricarboxylic acid cycle) with pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) promoting the breakdown of pyruvate to form
CO, GTP, NADH, and FADH. GTP, NADH, and FADH are used to generate 36 molecules of ATP in
other reactions (therefore a net 38molecules of ATP). However, if tissue hypoxia is present, pyruvate is
instead converted to L-lactate in a reaction promoted by LD. This reaction uses H+ and thus increases the
pH in the cells (or uses the H produced by catabolism of glucose).The pK,of lactic acid is 3.l, so nearly
all of the lactate produced remains in the anionic form; very little buffers H to form lactic acid at physi-
ologic pH values. As explained in the text, the acidemia in lactic acidosis caused by anaerobic conditions
comes from the use of ATP (which produces H') for energy because ATP production (which consumes
H°; reactions not shown) is not effcient in anaerobic conditions.ADP, adenosine diphosphate; AMP,
adenosine monophosphate; CoA, coenzyme A; FADH, reduced favin adenine dinudleotide; GTP,
guanosine triphosphate; NAD,nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; and NADH, reduced nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide.
COO
COO
CH
CH
HO
H
CH3
CH
CH
H
CH
pyruvate
L-lactate
D-lactate
acetoacetate
acetone
B-hydroxybutyrate
lactate isomers
ketone bodies
Fig. 9.1l. Chemical structure of pyruvate, lactate, and ketone body molecules. Knowing the chemical
composition of molecules can facilitate an understanding of the relationships of those molecules in patho
logic states. The reduction of pyruvate by LD increases the formation of Llactate in lactic acidosis. L-lactate
and D-lactate are optical isomers (mirror images). L-lactate is the major form produced by mammalian cells,
and D-lactate is produced by bacteria. Of the three ketone bodies, only AcAc and acetone are truly ketones.
AcAc can be converted to either acetone or BHB.(Note: Solid wedges extend forward,and dashed wedges
extend backward.)
D.Bacteria produce D-lactate,and some produce L-lactate.The stereoisomer of L-lactate
(Fig. 9.11), D-lactate can also be produced in mammalian cells via the ghyoxalase
pathway,whichmetabolizes methylglyoxal produced duringglycolysisorvia conversion
from acetone. In health, plasma concentrations of D-lactate are very small compared
to those of L-lactate.
540
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
II.
Analytical concepts
A.L-lactate
1. Common clinical assays for lactate measure the L-lactate produced by animal cells.
L-lactate assays use either LD (spectrophotometric methods) or L-lactate oxidase
(e.g-,i-STATandNOVA).
2.L-lactate concentrations are measured by many blood gas analyzers, but, depending
on the analyticalmethod,either wholebloodor plasma is the preferred sample.In
the NOVA instruments, a plasma [L-lactate] is measured in a whole blood sample
by allowing only plasma to enter the reaction chamber.
B.D-lactate concentrations can be measured by high-performance liquid chromatography
or by D-lactate dehydrogenase enzymatic methods.These assays are not commonly
available in clinical laboratories.
C.Unit:mg/dLx0.112=mmol/L (SIunit) (Note:This isa conversion for the analyte
lactate. The conversion factor for lactic acid is O.111.)
D.Sample for [L-lactate]
1.Blood samples should be processed or analyzed quickly so that L-lactate produced
by erythrocytes does not increase the plasma [L-lactate]. If the sample cannot be
processed immediately，L-lactate production can be reduced by collecting blood into
a rube containing sodium fluoride and chilling the blood until the plasma is
separated from the erythrocytes; fuoride inhibits phosphopyruvate hydratase
(synonym: enolase) of the glycolytic pathway.
2.Ideally,blood should be collected from free-flowing blood(without a tourniquet） so
that blood stagnation does not result in increased L-lactate production.
3.L-lactate concentrations are also measured in bovine milk, as in indicator of
ruminal acidosis, and in body cavity effusions as evidence of bacterial infection
(see Chapter 19).
4.Special collection methods for D-lactate samples were not found.
E.Substances that interfere with the measurement of [L-lactate]will vary with the method
used.
1. Bromide falsely decreases the [L-lactate] determined by the i-STAT L-lactate oxidase
method, but similar interference is not described for the NOVA L-lactate oxidase method.
2.The presence of free hemoglobin and hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers in the
sample will result in falsely low L-lactate concentrations if measured by the L-lactate
oxidase assay, probably because the peroxidase activity of heme removes the HO
produced by the L-lactate oxidase reaction..87
II1.Increased plasma L-lactate concentrations (byperlactatemia)
A.L-lactate accumulates in plasma when its formation exceeds the removal by tissues
(primarily by hepatocytic uptake and glomerular filtration).
1.The primary reason for increased L-lactate production is hypoxia.
a.During anaerobic (hypoxic) conditions, catabolism of pyruvate switches from
entry into the Krebs cycle to L-lactate production (Fig. 9.10). It should be noted
that this process generates L-lactate and not lactic acid and that the conversion of
pyruvate to L-lactate results in the use of H* (thus increased pH).
b. Concurrently, changes in other metabolic pathways result in the acumulation of
H+in the blood (acidemia).In aerobic conditions and via the Krebs cycle,cells
consume Hwhile producing large amounts of ATP.However,in anaerobic
conditions, thenegative energy status causes a net degradation of ATPand thus
541
Table 9.14.Diseases and conditions that cause hyperlactatemia (L-lactate)
Inadequate delivery of Oto tissues
*Stagnant hypoxia: shock,bloodvessel occlusion
*Demand hypoxia: strenuous exercise, struggling during restraint
Hypoxemia:respiratory disorders
Hemoglobic hypoxia: anemia,methemoglobinemia
Increase production by metabolic pathways
Grain overload
Defective metabolic pathways for aerobic glycolysis
Hyperammonemia: urea toxicosis, ammoniated forage toxicosis
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency
Other orunknown mechanisms
Sepsis
Canine babesiosis
Liver disease
Transfusionof stored blood or packederythrocytes
*A relatively common disease or condition
production of H+(Fig. 9.10). Other metabolic changes also add to the
accumulation of H (e.g., altered lipid metabolism).
2.Increased L-lactate production may also be due to defective metabolic pathways (see
the following sect. B.2.b)
3.Potentially,decreased removal of L-lactate from plasma can contribute to
hyperlactatemia, but it is uncommon for this process to occur alone.
B.Disorders and pathogeneses (Table9.14)
1.Inadequate delivery of O, to tissues: Such disorders vary from recent muscular exercise to
those causing hypoxemiahemoglobichypoxiaor stagnation hypoxia(see Chapte）
a.Stagnant hypoxia
(1)Shock:The redistribution of blood results in poor perfusion of peripheral
tissues, which causes stagnation hypoxia and increased generation of
L-lactate.
(2)Equine colic caused by gastrointestinal disorders (e.g., torsion, strangulation,
and infarction): The excessive L-lactate production may be due to poor
perfusion of tissues, but absorbed endotoxins may also stimulate L-lactate
production,and intestinal bacteria may contribute D-lactate and L-lactate.
In one study involving 14 horses with increased anion gaps,L-lactate
concentrations were increased much more than D-lactate concentrations.89
Generally, the severity of the hyperlactatemia is inversely proportional to the
prognosis in colicky horses.90
b.Demand hypoxia
(1)Strenuous exercise: Excessive muscular activity increases anaerobic glycolysis
and thus increasesL-lactate productionandrelease frommuscle.9
(2)Struggling cats: In experimental studies of stress-induced hyperglycemia,
struggling associated with harness restraint for blood collection increased
plasma L-lactate concentrations. The hyperlactatemia was considered to be
caused by increasedmuscular activity. Similar changes in other animals
would be expected with similar conditions.
542
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
c.Hypoxemia:Poor oxygenation of blood could produce suffcient hypoxia to cause
a hyperlactatemia, but this situation is not commonly recognized.
d.Hemoglobic hypoxia: Defective transport of O, to tissues could produce
hyperlactatemia, but this situation is not commonly recognized.
2.Increased production by metabolic pathways
a.Grain overload (in ruminants, horses, and ponies): Excess intake of starch (grain
or other sources) increases the formation of L-lactate and D-lactate by rumen
(ruminants) or hindgut (equids) bacteria. Increased lumen acidity alters the
microbial environment, which intensifies lactate production and diminishes
lactate use byora.The lactate is absorbed by the mucosa,thusincreasing
plasmalactate concentrations.
b.Defective glycolytic pathways
(1)Hyperammonemia
(a)This may occur from excessive production of ammonium (e.g., urea
toxicosis or ammoniared forage toxicosis), from various causes of hepatic
insufhciency, and from urea cycle defect.
（b）High[NH4]may interfere with theKrebs cycle such that the aerobic
production of ATP is defective. Generation of ATP switches to
anaerobic glycolysis,which producesL-lactate34
(2)Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency in Sussex spaniels and Clumber spaniels
resultsnexcessformationofL-lactate.Pyruvatedehydrogenasecatalyze
the conversion of pyruvate to AcCoA,which then enters the Krebs cycle.
With pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency, the conversion of pyruvate to L
lactateby LD is increased
3.Other or unknown mechanism
a.
Sepsis:The mechanism of hyperlactatemia (L-lactate) is frequently considered to
be caused by poor tissue perfusion,but endotoxemia by itself has been reported
to causehyperlactatemiain people.Also,experiments in dogs indicatethat the
b.Canine babesiosis: Hyperlactatemia (L-lactate) occurs in some dogs with acute
babesiosis,but the pathogenesis of the hyperlactatemia is not established.It
does not appear to be related to the degree of anemia and thus is not caused by
hemoglobic hypoxia.Because of the concurrent hypoglycemia, the hyperlactate-
mia is likely caused by accelerated anaerobic glycolysis that consumes glucose and
produces L-lactate.This consumption of glucose is a feature of sepsis-induced
hypoglycemia (see Glucose Concentration, sect. I.V.C.1.f, in Chapter 14).
C.Liver disease: Severe liver disease may cause hyperlactatemia (L-lactate), but the
pathogenesis isnot established.Thehyperlactatemia might be due to excessive
lactate production (hepatichypoxia or decreased mitochondrial function) and not
due to defective utilization.
dTransfusion of stored blood or packed erythrocytes:During storage,erythrocytes
continue glycolysis to produce L-lactate, and thus L-lactaterich blood is
administered IV.
IV.
Increased plasma D-lactate concentrations
A.[D-lactate] may be increased in animals with diabetes melltus.s
1.D-lactate concentrations were greater in cats with ketotic diabetes mellitus (mean
=340 μmol/L)than in cats with nonketotic diabetes mellitus (mean =140 μmol/L)
543
pathway involving acetone or methylglyoxal.
2.Even though there was a significant difference in D-lactate concentrations among
the groups,the increase was<1 mmol/L and thus would not contribute clinically to
increased anion gap values.Also,the D-lactate concentrations are much less than
found in mammals with L-lactate acidosis (e.g.,10-20 mmol/L).
B.Absorption of D-lactate (produced by enteric bacteria)can increase[D-lactate]（not
1.D-lactate is a major contributor to total [lactate] in neonatal calves with
diarrhea.76.100,101
2.A cat with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency had metabolic acidosis and a concurrent
increase in plasma [D-lactate]. The authors concluded that the uncommon
maldigestivedisordercaused entericproduction ofD-lactateby bacteria.1
3.In milk-fed calves, failure of esophageal groove reflex allows milk to enter the
reticuloruminal cavity （called ruminal drinking) in which bacterial fermentation of
lactoseresults nthe formationofD-lacticandL-lactic acids.After theions are
absorbed (probably in intestine),a metabolic acidosis with increased plasma
concentrations of D-lactate may develop.The rapid metabolism of L-lactate
prevents it from accumulating in the plasma.103
4. In a group of 50 colicky horses with mild lactic acidosis, none had increased
D-lactateconcentrations.04
C.Ingestion of propylene glycol may result in increased[D-lactat].5
1.Cats that ingested diets of 12 % and 41 % propylene glycol on a dry weight basis
had an increased [D-lactate]. The lower percentage, which is near that found in
some commercial cat food, produced nearly a 2 mmol/L increase in [D-lactate],
whereas thehigher dose produced nearly a 7mmol/L increase by 20 d.Correspond
decreased slightly from the preexisting small concentrations during the study.
2.Propylene glycol is converted to D-lactate. This probably occurs via the actions of
alcohol dehydrogenase and through methylglyoxal.
Relationship to the anion gap
V.
A.Both L-lactate and D-lactate willcontribute to an anion gap (see the Anion Gap
section).Each mmol/L increase in the[lactate] can account for each mmol/L increase
in the anion gap.
B.If there is an increased anion gap in serum or plasma and the [L-lactate] is not
increased suffciently toaccount fortheanion gapsmagnitude,theincreasedanion gap
could be due to D-lactate or other unmeasured anions (Table 9.12)
B-HYDROXYBUTYRATE(BHB)ANDACETOACETATE(AcAc)CONCENTRATIONS
I
Physiologicprocesses
A.Ketogenesis occurs in hepatocytes through a series of reactions that convert AcCoA
into BHB,AcAc,and acetone;the two anions (BHB and AcAc) and acetone are
collectively called ketone bodies, but BHB does not have the chemical structure of a
ketone (Fig. 9.11). The amounts of AcAc and BHB in hepatocytes are in equilibrium
The equilibrium shifts toward BHB when NADH is abundant in hepatocytes (e.g
in diabetes mellitus),whereas the equilibrium shifts toward AcAc when NAD+ is
544
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
abundant.The pKof acetoacetic acid is 3.6,and the pKof β-hydroxybutyric acid is
4.7.Therefore,at physiologic pHvalues,nearly all of these molecules are in her
anionic forms.
C.Renal excretion of BHB helps with the excretion of H+ because the pKof BHB is near
that of acidic urine, and thus it binds more H at a urine pH of 5 than at a plasma pH
of 7.4.Similarly,AcAc aids in the excretion of H*.
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Units (Note: Conversion factors are for anions and not the corresponding acids.)
1.AcAc:mg/dLx99=μmol/Lor mg/dLx0.099=mmol/L(SIunit)
2.BHB:mg/dLx97=μmol/Lor mg/dLx0.097=mmol/L(SIunit)
B.Assays: There are three types of assays for ketone bodies.
1.Spectrophotometric quantitative assays use BHB dehydrogenase to measure serum
[BHB] by catalyzing the conversion of BHB to AcAc. In some assays, a high [AcAc]
may interfere with the reaction to produce a falsely low[BHB].6Hemolysis can
decrease the measured values.
2.The common nitroprusside methods Ketostix strip,Acetest tablet, and Ketocheck
powderareused forblood serum,milk,andurine for thederection ofAcAcand
acetone.BHB does not react.107
3.Relatively uncommon qualitative or semiquantitative methods are designed to detect
BHB. The KetoTest strip is used for urine or milk. The Ketolac BHB strip is used
to detect BHB in milk.107,108
C.BHB stability: BHB is reported to be stable in serum for 1 wk at 4 °C and longer if
kept at-20°C.109
D.When ketone bodies are detected in blood or serum,they should also bein urine.
However, when comparing results, the type of assay and its analytic properties should
be considered.For example,the BHBmight be increased in serum and urine,but the
urine test for ketones (AcAc) may not be positive.However, typically the urinary
excretion of both BHB and AcAc is sufficient so that the nitroprussidemethod will
provide a positive ketone reaction.
E.In theory,BHBcan be converted with HOto AcAc so that nitropruside methods
can be used to detect BHB.However, BHB concentrations must be >5O mmol/L in
urine or > 100 mmol/L in serum (using 30 % HO) to produce more than a trace
reaction.Such concentrations are not clinically relevant for serum samples,and ifurine
BHB concentrations were this great,AcAc concentrationswould probably be great
enough to be detected routinely （see Chemical Examination of Urine, sect.V,in
Chapter 8).110
III.
Increased ketone body concentration
A.An increased concentration of ketone bodies in blood is ketonemia.The clinical disorder
is called kerosis. Ketosis occurs primarily for two reasons:
1.Excessive β-oxidation of fatty acids resulrs in the production of more AcCoA than
can be used by the Krebs cycle.The excess AcCoA,especially with glucagon excess or
insulin deficiency, enters the ketogenic pathway to form AcAc, which can be con-
verted to either acetone or BHB.This occurs during diabetes mellitus and starvation
2.The AcCoA produced from oxidation of lipids typically combines with oxaloacetate
as it enters the Krebs cycle, which eventually results in ATP production. When an
545
animal isin a negative energy status,oxaloacetateisused forgluconeogenesis,o
there may be an inadequate amount of oxaloacetate to react with AcCoA. The
accumulation of AcCoA promotes ketogenesis.
B.Conditions and disorders with ketonemia
1.All mammals: starvation, prolonged anorexia, and diabetes mellitus
2.Cartle: bovine ketosis associated with freshening and the high-energy demands of
lactation, diabetes mellitus, displaced abomasum, and hepatic lipidosis
3.Dogs: diabetes mellitus, starvation,lactation, and endurance racing
4.Horses: diabetes mellitus and endurance racing
C.Three cowside tests have been evaluated for detecting bovine ketosis:Ketocheck for
AcAc in milk,Ketostix for AcAc in urine, and KetoTest for BHB inmilk.7
1.The gold standard in the study was serum [BHB]:Ketosis was considered to be
present if the serum[BHB] was >1.4 mmol/L.
2.The diagnostic properties varied with the decision thresholds,but generally the
diagnostic sensitivity and diagnostic specificity of theKetostix andKetoTest methods
were good.Thediagnostic sensitivity of theKetocheckwas considered inadequate
for use a screening test for subclinical ketosis.
OSMOLALITYANDOSMO.GAP
I.
Definitions
A.Osmolality:the concentration of a solute expressed in moles of solute per kilogram of
solvent (mol/kg).In the clinical assessment ofbody fuids,osmolality is expressed as
mmol/kg or mOsm/kg (the authors prefer the simpler SI unit of mmol/kg).
B.Osmolarity the concentration of a solute expressed in moles of solute per liter of
solution (mol/L）.In clinical assessments,it is also expressed as mOsm/L.Serum
osmolality does not equal serum osmolarity,because 1 L of normal serum will contain
about 930 mL of HO (0.93kgof HO).In the absence of postprandial lipemia,the
remaining volume (= 70 mL) is occupied mostly by proteins.
C.Osmole: 1 mole of osmotically active particles. For a substance that does not dissociate
in solution,moleequals1osmole.Fora substancethatcompletelydissociatesinto
two ions per mole, there are2osmoles of dissociated solute particles per1 mole of
undissociated substance.Most dissociable solutes do not dissociate completely
D.Mole the SI unit for the amount of substance present when there are 6.023 x 1023
(Avogadro's number) identical particles of it (based on the number of particles in
0.012 kg of carbon 12). One mole of a substance weighs its gram molecular weight
(e.g., 1 mole of glucose weighs 180 g and 1 mole of Na weighs 23 g).
E.Osmotic pressure. the force required to counterbalance the force of osmotic solvent fow
through a semipermeable membrane, such as cell membranes. It is also referred to as
total osmotic pressure to differentiate it from colloidal osmotic pressure (Fig.9.12）.
F.
Osmosis. the passage of solvent (e.g.,H,O) from a solution of lesser solute concentration
(greater [HO]) through a semipermeable membrane (one that does not permit passage
of some solure particles) toa solution ofgreater solute concentration (lesserHO])
G. Osmometry: any technique for measuring the osmolality or osmotic pressure of a
solution
H.Osmometer. a device or instrument that measures the osmolality (osmotic concentra-
tion)or osmotic pressure of a solution.A freezing-point osmometermeasures
osmolality, and a membrane osmometer measures colloidal osmotic pressure.
546
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Connecting Tubular
Capillary Wall
Epithelium
Peritubular
Interstitial
Blood
Tubular
Fluid
Lumen
Fluid
Osmolality
Osmolality
Osmolality
Osmolality
1000mmol/kgHO
400mmol/kgH2O
19,300mmHg
7720mmHg
299mmol/kg HO
300mmol/kg HO
H2O
HO
HO
HO
Aquaporin
Colloidal Osmotic
Colloidal Osmotic
ADH-
Pressure
Pressure
8mmHg
26mmHg
Osmolality
500mmo/kgH,O
Total Osmotic Pressure
Colloidal OsmoticPressure
GradientinCollectingTubules
Gradient in Muscle
Fig. 9.12. Schematic comparison of osmotic pressure and colloidal osmotic pressure.
•In the left drawing of the renal collecting tubule, under phyisiologic conditions, the peritubular fluid has
a much greater osmolality than the tubular fluid.Osmotic pressure can be calculated from osmolality
(each 1 mmol/kg of osmolality is equivalent to 19.3 mmHg of osmotic pressure). Therefore, an osmolality
of 1000 mmol/kg equates to an osmotic pressure of 19,300 mmHg, and an osmolaliry of 400 mmol/kg
creates 7720 mmHg of osmotic pressure. The large difference in osmolality creates a large osmotic
pressure gradient (almost 12,000 mmHg in this example). The peritubular fuid's hypertonicity is mostly
due to high concentrations of Na, Cl, and urea. When ADH is present, it increases the permeability of
the tubular epithelium (via aquaporin) to HO so that HO is resorbed and thus increases the solute
concentration in the tubular fluid).
·In the right drawing of a capillary wall in skeletal muscle, the colloidal osmotic pressure (synonym:
oncotic pressure) is greater in the blood than in the interstitial fuid because the protein concentration is
greater in plasma than in interstitial fuid and because of the related Gibbs-Donnan equilibrium. The
colloidal osmotic pressure gradient (18 mmHg in this example) tends to cause the movement of HO
(and small solutes) from interstitial fuid to plasma. The movement of HO out of or into the plasma is
determined by the hydraulic pressure gradient across the semipermeable membrane (see the Colloidal
Osmotic Pressure section in Chapter 7, and General Concepts and Definitions, sect. V, in Chapter 19).
Note: The osmotic pressure gradient in the distal nephron is more than 6oo times the colloidal osmotic
pressure in the capillary bed. The pressure values are provided to illustrate the magnitude of the differenoes
between the forcesofosmotic pressure gradients and colloidal osmotic pressure gradients.
Tonicity:theeffective osmolality of a solution; that is,that solute concentration that can
contribute tomovement of HOacross a semipermeablemembrane
，
司
Solute. a substance dissolved in a solvent
K.
Colloidal osmoric pressure (oncotic pressure): the osmotic pressure exerted by colloidal
particles suspended in a solvent at a capillary membrane. Colloidal particles are
macromolecules that are too small (1 nm to 1 μum)to be settled out by gravity.Most
oncotic pressure of plasma is caused by plasma proteins (about 8o % albumin and
20 % globulins).Part of the colloidal osmotic pressure is attributed to cations (e.g.
Na) that are attracted to the negatively charged proteins (Donnan equilibrium effect)
9/MONOVALENTELECTROLYTESANDOSMOLALITY
547
Table 9.15. Solutes that contribute to serum osmolarity (approximate concentrations
provided to simplify concept)
Contribution to total
Measured
Factor to convert
Contribution to
osmolarity in serum of
Solute
tommol/L
osmolarity
healthy animal
concentration
Na+
146mmol/L
×1
146mmol/L
K+
4mmol/L
X1
4mmol/L
281mmol/L
CF
107mmol/L
x1
107mmol/L
94%of total solute
HCO
24mmol/L
x1
24mmol/L
UN
20 mg/dL
+2.8
7mmol/L
12 mmol/L
Glucose
100mg/dL
+18
5.5mmol/L
4%of total solute
PO4
4mg/dL
x0.32
1.3mmol/L
5mmol/L
tCa2+
10 mg/dL
x0.25
2.5mmol/L
2%of total solute
Mg2+
1mmol/L
×1
1.0mmol/L
Protein
7g/dL
Varies with protein
<1.0mmol/L
No significant contribution
Total
299.3mmol/L
Most nonprotein solutes do not contribute to osmoticpressure in capillaries,because
the capillaries are permeable to H,O and the small solutes. Chapter 7 contains informa
tion regarding the measurement and interpretation of colloidal osmoticpressures.
Physiologic processes
A.As stated in the foregoing definitions,osmolality is the concentration of solutes per
kilogram of solvent and depends on the number of molecules or ions in the solution.
The major contributors to serum osmolality and their relative contributions are listed in
Table 9.15.
B.Major concepts of relative contributions of solutes to serum osmolality
1.Nais themajor solute in serum.About half of the solute (moles,not mass） in
serum is actually Na* ions.
2.Cl runs a close second. Because Cl- frequently follows Na, changes in [Na]are
frequently acompanied by changes in[Cl],which approximately doubles the
changes in osmolality.
3.At physiologic concentrations,urea and glucose are small contributors to total
osmolality.However,marked azotemia or hyperglycemia will cause hyperosmolality.
4.Protein contributes very little (< 1 mmol/kg) to osmolality.Protein molecules are
relatively very large but extremely rare (compared to electrolytes, urea, and glucose).
5. Hypothalamic osmoreceptors are sensitive to increases and decreases in effective
plasma osmolality(toniciry).
a.If effective osmolality is increased,ADHisreleased to stimulate the renal
collecting tubules to resorb HO.In addition, the thirst center is stimulated to
increase the intake of H,O.Both processes cause a dilutional correction of the
plasma solute concentration.
548
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
b.If the effective osmolality is decreased,ADH secretion is diminished,and thus
there is less HOresorption by the collecting tubules,increased HO loss,and
thus a correctional increase in concentration of plasma solutes.
6.Effective osmolality (tonicity)
a.When different concentrations of solute are on two sides of a membrane that is
HO permeable, the solutes establish an osmolar gradient that promotes osmosis
(movement of HO to diminish the gradient). If the membrane is impermeable
to a solute, then that solute contributes to the effective osmolality.
b.Urea is a small molecule that is freely diffusible across most cell membranes （the
major exception is the epithelial cell of collecting tubules). Wherever urea (M, =
60) is freely diffusible, it does not contribute to an osmolar gradient and thus
does not contribute to the effective osmolality.
c.Methanol (M,=32),ethanol (M,=46),and ethylene glycol (M,=62) are
ineffective osmoles for the same reason, and thus they increase osmolality without
changing HO distribution or [Na]. Mannitol (M,= 182),glycerol (M,= 92),
sorbitol (M,=182),and glucose (M=180) do contribute to effective osmolality
because they are not freely diffusible across most cell membranes.
d.If urea is contributing to an increased serum osmolality and other data do not
suggest thepreence oftherneffectivesolures (eg,ethyleneglycol），ffective
osmolaliry of serum (or plasma) may be estimated (Eq. 9.5).
[UN]
effective osmolality= measured osmolality
（ifUN in mg/dL)
(9.5.)
2.8
=measured osmolality -[urea](if urea in mmol/L)
e.Knowledgeof effective osmolality is useful in two clinical situations:
(1)Determining the presence of hyperosmolar syndrome
(a)When the effective plasma osmolality rapidly rises (>350mmol/kg or
[Na] > 170 mmol/L), HO leaves cells, including neurons. Conse-
quently,heanimal can bedpreed,stuporous,reven difromh
hyperosmolar state.
(b）However,if the hyperosmolar state develops slowly,then intracellular
production oforganicmolecules such as taurine,glycine,glutamine,
sorbitol and inositol (so-called idiogenic osmoles) diminishes the
osmotic gradient, and thus less HO leaves the cell. If hypotonic fuids
are then administered to reduce the plasma osmolality,there can be a
rapid infux of HO into neurons and development of cerebral edema.
COLFS
(2) Determining physiologic responses that are expected in azotemic animals
(i.e.,effective osmolality is not increased), there should not be a
stimulus to drink HO or release ADH (unless hypovolemia is present)
(b)If the hyperosmolality is due to effective solutes and not urea, the
hyperosmolality is expected to stimulate thirst and ADH release.
III.
Analytical concepts for osmolality (see Chapter7 for colloidal osmotic pressure)
A.Osmm
1. Osmometry is based on physiochemical properties (called colligarive properties) that
depend on the number of particles in a solution.Two colligative properties are used
in clinical osmometry:
549
a.Freezing-point depression:A 1 mol/kg solution of a solute in HO (1 molal) will
have a freezing point 1.86 °C lower than that of pure HO.
b.Vapor pressure (or dew point) depression: A 1 mol/kg solution of a solute in HO
(1 molal) willhave a vapor pressure 0.03 mmHg lower than that of pure HO.
2.Freezing-point osmometers are more common,more precise,and more accurate than
vapor pressure osmometers.Vapor pressure osmometers do not measure the contri-
bution of volatile solutes (e.g, alcohols) to total osmolality. (Note: Colloid osmom-
eters measure colloidal osmotic pressure and not osmolality, see the Colloidal
Osmotic Pressure section in Chapter 7.)
3.Osmindicates the total concentration of solutes in the serum but does not indicate
which solutes are present.
4. Serum is the required sample for measuring osmolality; the addition of anticoagulants
for plasma samples would be adding solute to the plasma. The stability of a serum
osmolalitywill depend onthe stability of the individual solutesin the sample (see
sections forNa,K+,Cl,HCO,glucose,urea,or other solutes that can be
present)
B.Osm
1.Because there is a direct correlation between molality and osmolality and there is a
relationship berween molality and molarity, knowing the millimolar concentrations
of solutes enables us to estimate the osmolality that is expected due to those solutes
However,this conversion is not exact because of three factors:
a.Osmolality and osmolarity of plasma solutes are not equal because 1 L of plasma
contains about 0.93 kg HO and about 0.07 kg solids.Most plasma solids are
proteins.
b.The concentrations of some plasma solutes are not measured,and thus their
contributions to total osmolality arenot included in calculations.
c.Some plasma solutes are not completely dissociated (e.g., small amounts of Na
and CI are present in plasma as NaCl).
2.At least 14 formulas have been used to calculate an estimate (Osm)of the true
osmolality (Osmm）of serum.Each formula includesmeasured values for some of
the major solures contributing to osmolality,and constants or factors to estimate the
effects of the other solutes.The formulasvary because of the following:
a.Different investigators attempted to estimate true osmolality by using different
solutes and conversion factors.
b. Method variations for some of the analytes produce different resulrs, which
require different mathematical manipulations to best estimate true osmolality.
c.The dissociation of ionic compounds may vary among species.
d.The conversion of serum osmolarity to serum osmolality is imperfect.
3.Ideally,each laboratory would determine a best-fit equation to predicr Osm for
that laboratory’s assays.However, most use one of four equations (Eq.9.6ad)
In all formulas, Na*and K+concentrations are in mmol/L or mEq/L
If UN and glucose concentrations are in mg/dL, then
[UN]
[glucose]
Osm=1.86([Na+]+[K+])+
(9.6a.)
2.8
18
[UN],[glucose]
Osm=2[Na]+
(9.6b.)
3
20
550
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
If UN and glucose concentrations are in mmol/L,then
Osm=1.86（[Na+]+[K+]) +[urea]+[glucose]
(9.6c.)
Osm=2 [Na+] +[urea]+[glucose]
(9.6d.)
4.What are the components of the equations?
a.1.86×（[Na] +[K+]) or 2x[Na]: an estimate of the osmolality due to the
major four electrolytesthat is,the sum ofNa,K,Cl,and HCO
concentrations
(1) Because serum must remain electrically neutral, increased concentrations of
other anionswill beassociatedwithlower[Cl]or[HCO,]ifcation
concentrations remain constant. Thus, the expression estimates the
(2）The inclusion of Ktends toyield a more accurate estimate of osmolality,
especially if there is hyponatremia and hyperkalemia.However,because
serum [K*] cannot change much (± 2 mmol/L) without serious medical
consequences, major changes in serum [K*] cause only minor changes in
total serum osmolality.
(3)Others approach the conceptual contributions of the electrolytes with the
concept that 1mmol of NaCl contributes only about 1.75mmol because
NaCl, like other plasma salts, is not completely dissociated in plasma. With
the assumption thar plasma is 93 % H,O, the osmolality due to Na salts is
about1.88xplasma[Na+];1.88=1.75+0.93.The osmolality due to other
salts (i.e.,K+, Ca²,and Mg²+ salts) is about 0.12x plasma [Na]. Thus,2 ×
plasma [Na*] estimates the osmolality due to the electrolytes if the ratios of
Na* to other electrolytes are physiologic.
(4)When considering the calculated osmolality,it is important to recognize that
the first part of the formula (that which contains Na* or Na + K') repre-
sents the contributions of all ions, not just Na or just Na and K.
b.[UN] + 2.8:conversion of [UN] from mg/dL to mmol/L of urea (M, of
UN=28,and there are 10 dL in 1 L)
c.[UN] +3:approximate conversion of[UN] from mg/dL to mmol/L of urea
d.[Glucose]+18: conversion of [glucose] from mg/dL to mmol/L(M,of glucose =
180,and there are 10 dL in 1 L)
e.[Glucose]+20:approximate conversion of[glucose] from mg/dL to mmol/L
5.An Osmis oflittle value by itself;it is simply an estimate of the osmolality due to
commonly measured solute concentrations. If a measured solute concentration (i.e.,
Na,urea, or glucose) is increased,then the Osmwill be increased proportionately
and it may or may not estimate the true serum osmolality.
C.Osmo.gap
1.There isnot a correct unit for the osmo.gap because the Osm is expressed as
mmol/kg (molality) and the Osm, is expressed as mmol/L (molarity). Since neither
osmolar gap nor osmolal gap is a correct term, the term osmo. gap is used.
2.Osmo. gap formula (Eq. 9.7)
Osmo.gap=Osmm-Osm
(9.7.)
a.Osm, represents the total solute concentration in the sample. Osm,estimates the
solute concentration by use of some combination of Na,K+,urea,and glucose
concentrations.
9/MONOVALENTELECTROLYTESANDOSMOLALITY
551
urea
mannitol
_gluc.
urea
_gluc.
Igluc.
I_gluc.
urea
on
UC
urea
yC
K+_L
LUA
K
L_UA
(OH
uA
HCO3-
HCOg-
HCO
HCO3
_uC
(mosmol/kg
K+-T
UA
HCO
CI-
CI-
CI-
C-
C-
olality
三
S
Na+
+EN
+EN
Na+
Na+
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 9.13. Bar diagrams of serum osmolality concepts. The unmeasured cations (uC) are mostly fCa² and
fMg², whereas the unmeasured anions (uA) are mostly PO, SO, and anions of organic acids. Proteins are
not included because they do not contribute significantly to osmolality. Solutes that contribute to the osmo.
gap are within the grey-shaded area.
A.In healthy animals, nearly all nonprotein solutes are monovalent electrolytes except for urea and glucose
(gluc.). The osmo. gap should be near 0 if an appropriate formula for Osm, is used.
B.In a normochloremic metabolic acidosis （therefore low HCO,, the osmo. gap is not increased,
because the 1.86 (Na+K') should aocount for the sum of all cations and anions.Because electrical
neutrality must be maintained, increases in the concentration of unmeasured anions must be acoompa-
nied by either increases in cations, decreases in other anions, or both.In any case, the 1.86 (Na+ K+)
should account for the sum of all cations and anions.
C.When hyperosmolality is caused by azotemia, the osmo. gap is not increased, because both the Osmm
and the Osm, are increased proportionately by the higher [urea. The same concept applies for hyperos-
molality caused by hyperglycemia or hypernatremia.
D.When hyperosmolality is caused by an abnormal nonionic solute (e.gmannitol), the osmo. gap is
increased, because the exogenous solute increases the Osm but is not included in the Osm formula.
E
When hypoosmolality is caused by hyponatremia and hypochloremia, the osmo.gap is not changed,
because the Osm and the Osm, are decreased by the same amount.
b.If the formula used for Osm is optimized to match Osmvalues,the osmo.gap
reference interval would be near zero.
C.One cannot reliably interpret osmo.gap values if a laboratory has not determined
the relationship between paired values for Osm. and Osm for values determined
by that laboratory, although marked increases may be readily apparent.
IV.Evaluation of serum osmolaliry and osmo. gap. The major concepts are shown in Fig. 9.13.
552
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 9.16.Disorders and conditions that cause abnormal serum osmolality or increased
osmo.gaps
Osmm
Osmo.gap
Abnormal[solute]
Disorders, conditions
*Increased
WRI
Increases in Na’,urea, or
See the Hypernatremia section
glucose concentrations
See theAzotemia section in
Chapter 8
See the Hyperglycemia section in
Chapter 14
Increased
Increased
Increased concentration of a
Mannitol infusion (IV)
nonanionic compound
Radiographic contrast media (IV)
other than urea or glucose
Ethanol,methanol,ethylene glycol
*Decreased
WRI
Indicates a true hyponatremia
See Sodium Concentration,sect.V
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: A spurious increase in osmo. gap will occur if there is a pseudo-hyponatremia (see Sodium
Concentration, sect. V.B.7).
V.
Interpretation of osmolality data (Table 9.16)
A.Serum hyperosmolality and osmo. gap WRI: An increased Osm indicates the concen-
tration of one or more solutes is increased. Since the osmo. gap is WRI, there is a
proportionate increasein Osmand Osm
Because an increased Osm,results from
increased concentrations of Na,urea,or glucose,then the increased Osmis due to
increased Na*,urea,or glucose concentrations
B.Serum hyperosmolality and increased osmo.gap: An increased Osm indicates the
concentration of one or more solutes is increased.Because the osmo. gap is increased,
the Osm.isnot increased or not increased as much as the increase in Osm.In this
situation, substantial increases in the osmo.gap are associated with poisonings by
nonelectrolytes （e.g.,ethylene glycol,methanol,or paraldehyde）orIV administrationof
mannitol or radiographic contrast media.The increased osmo. gap is due to a nonionic
solute other than urea or glucose for the following reasons:
1.Increases in [Na],[K]，,or anions (Cl,HCO,or others) would result in increased
Osm,and the same increase in the Osm.The Osm,increases because there are
more particles in solution. The Osm increases because the“1.86 ([Na]+[K])”
and “2 [Na]” expressions estimate the concentration of all ions, assuming that Eq
9.6a and b provide reliable estimates of the serum osmolality. Because the expres-
sions do not account for biologic variation in ion concentrations (within an animal,
between animals, or between species), we must remember that the expressions
provide only estimates.
2.With an increase in unmeasured anions and the requirement of electroneutrality,
there will be either a concomitant increase in cations or a concomitant decrease in
other anions.
a.If cations (Naand/or K) increase to the same degree that the unmeasured
will not be increased.
b.If other anions (Cl and/or HCO) decrease to the same degree that the
unmeasured anions increase, the Osm, and Osm, will remain unchanged.
c.Either way, and because of electroneutrality, the osmo. gap should not increase
with an increased concentration of anionic compounds in circulation.
553
3.The 1.86（[Na]+[K+]) and 2x[Nat]expressions would underestimate the total
ion concentration if there were increases in cation concentrations other than [Na]
or [K+]. However, increases in [fCa²+] or [fMg] of 2-3 mmol/L would create
pathologic states but increase the serum osmolality by no more than 46 mmol/kg
(The increase in cation charge concentration could be matched by an increase in
anion charge concentration,orby a reduction in[Na']and/or[K].) A change in
osmo.gap of46units would typically be considered clinically insignifcant because
it could represent physiologic or analytical variation.
4.Even though the osmo. gap will increase because of an increased concentration of a
nonionic solute,there can be a concurrent increase in anions to create an anion
gap. Methanol can contribute to an osmo. gap, and its metabolite (formate) can
metabolites (glycolate or oxalate) can contribute to an anion gap.In ketoacidosis,
acetone might contribute to osmo.gap, but AcAc and BHB contribute to the
aniongap
C.Serum hypoosmolality and osmo. gap WRI: A decreased Osmm indicates that the
concentration of one or more solutes is decreased.Because the osmo.gap is WRI,there
is a proportionate decrease in Osm.and Osmm and thus there must be decreased
concentrations of Na, UN,or glucose.As UN and glucose contribute about 7 and
5mmol/kg, respectively, in health, and a marked decrease in either (e.g,from 7 to 3 or
5to2) causes only a minor decrease in totalosmolality,any clinically significant
hypoosmolality will be caused by hyponatremia.
D.If there is a pseudo-hyponatremia (and pseudo-hypochloremia), the Osm, will be an
accurate value because lipids or proteins do not affect the concentration of major
osmoles in plasma H,O. However, the Osm, will be decreased because of the spuriously
lowNa]. Therefore, the osmo. gap will be artifactually increased.
References
1.RoseBD,PostTW.2001.ClnialPhlg ofAcid-BaseadElectrolyDiserders5theditinNewYork
MeGraw-Hill.
2. Scott MG, Heusel JW, LeGrys VA. 1999. Electrolytes and blood gases. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, eds. Tiets
Textbook of Clixical Chemstry, 3rd edition,10561092. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
3.Lundberg GD,Iverson C,Radulescu G. 1986. Now read this: The SI units are here. J Am Med Assoc
255:2329-2339.
4. Sullvan SA, Harmon BG, Purinton PT, Greene CE, Glerum LE. 2003. Lobar holoprosencephaly in a Miniature
Schnauzer with hypodipsic hypernatremia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 223:17831787.
5. Behrend EN, Weigand CM, Whitley EM, Refsal KR, Young DW, Kemppainen RJ. 2005. Corticosterone- and
aldosterone-secreting adrenocortical tumor in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 226:1662-1666.
6. Jorgensen LS, Center SA, Randolph JF, Brum D. 1985. Electrolyte abnormalities induced by hypertonic phosphate
enemas in two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:1367-1368
7. Patra RC, Lal SB, Swarup D. 1993. Physicochemical alterations in blood, cerebrospinal fuid and urine in
experimental lactic acidosis in sheep. Res Vet Sci 54:217-220.
8.Donaldson CW. 2003. Paintball toxicosis in dogs. Vet Med 995-997.
9. Senturk S, Huseyin C. 2004. Salt poisoning in beef catde. Vet Hum Toxicol 46:26-27.
Assoc 33:113-117.
11. Toll PW, Gaehtgens P, Neuhaus D, Pieschl RL, Fedde MR. 1995. Fluid, electrolyte, and packed cell volume shifts in
racing greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 56:227-232.
12. Pieschl RL, Toll PW, Leith DE, Peterson LJ, Fedde MR. 1992. Acid-base changes in the running greyhound:
Contributingvariables.JAppl Physiol 73:2297-2304
554
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
13. Rose RJ, Bloomberg MS. 1989. Responses to sprint exercise in the greyhound: Efects on haematology, serum
biochemistry and musde metabolites. Res Vet Sei 47:212-218.
14. Gentilini P, Laff G. 1992. Pathophysiology and treatment of ascites and the hepatorenal syndrome. Baillieres Clin
Gastroenterol 6:581-607.
15. Arroyo V, Gines P. 1993. Mechanism of sodium retention and ascites formation in cirrhosis. J Hepatol 17(Suppl 2):
S24-S28.
16. Watkins S, Madison J, Gallano M, Minchiotti L, Putnam FW. 1994. Analbuminemia Three cases resulting from
different point mutations in the albumin gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:9417-9421.
17. Cormode EJ, Lyster DM, Isracels S. 1975. Analbuminemia in a neonate. J Pediat 86:862867.
18. Orth SR, Ritz E. 1998. The nephrotic syndrome. N Engl J Med 338:1202-1211.
19.Dennison AC, VanMetre DC, Callan RJ, Dinsmore P, Mason GL, Ellis RP. 2002. Hemorrhagic bowel syndrome in
dairy cattle: 22 cases (19972000). J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:686689.
20. Schmale H, Fehr S, Richter D. 1987. Vasopressin biosynthesis: From gene to peptide hormone. Kidney Int
32(Suppl 21):S8-S13.
21. Roussel AJ, Cohen ND, Ruoff WW, Brumbaugh GW, Schmitz DG, Kuesis BS. 1993. Urinary indices of horses
after intravenous administration of crystalloid solutions. J Vet Intern Med 7:241-246.
22. Weiss DJ, Geor R, Smith CM Il, MeClay CB. 1992. Furosemide-induced electrolyte depletion associated with
echinocytosis in horses. Am J Vet Res 53:1769-1772.
23. Rose RJ,Arnold KS, Church S, Paris R 1980. Plasma and sweat electrolyte concentrations in the horse during long
distance exercise.EquineVet ] 12:19-22.
24. Kerr MG, Snow DH. 1983. Composition of sweat of the horse during prolonged epinephrine (adrenaline) infusion,
heat exposure, and exercise. Am J Vet Res 44:1571-1577.
25. Willard MD, Fossum TW, Torrance A,Lippert A. 1991. Hyponatremia and hyperkalemia associated with idiopathic
or experimentally induced chylothorax in four dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:353-358.
26. Thompson MD, Carr AP. 2002. Hyponatrermia and hyperkalemia associated with chylous pleural and peritoneal
effusion in a cat. Can Vet J 43:610613.
27.Breitschwerdt EB,Root CR 1979. Inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone in a dogJ Am Vet Med Assoc
175:181-186
28. van Vonderen IK, Kooistra HS, Timmermans-Sprang EP, Meij BP, Rijnberk A. 2004. Vasopressin response to
osmotic stimulation in 18 young dogs with polyuria and polydipsia J Vet Intern Med 18:s00806.
29.HillierTA,Abbott RD,Barrett EJ. 1999.Hyponatremia: Eraluating the correction factor for hyperglycemia
Am J Med 106:399-403.
30. Perkins G, Valberg SJ, Madigan JM, Carlson GP, Jones SL. 1998. Electrolyte disturbances in foals with severe
rhabdornyolysis. J Vet Intern Med12:173-177.
31.Richardson DW, Kohn CW. 1983. Uroperitoneum in the foal. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:267-271.
32.Burrows CF, Bovee KC. 1974. Metabolic changes due to experimentally induced rupture of the canine urinary
bladder.Am JVet Res 35:1083-1088.
33. Perez GO, Oster JR, Vaamonde CA. 1981. Serum potassium concentration in acidemic states. Nephron 27:233-243.
34. Johnson PJ, Goetz TE, Foreman JH, Vogel RS, Hoffmann WE, Baker GJ. 1991. Effect of whole-body potassium
depletion on plasma, erythrocyte, and middle gluteal muscle potassium concentration of healthy, adult horses.
Am J Vet Res 52:1676-1683.
35. Waldron-Mease E, Klein LV, Rosenberg H, Leitch M. 198 1. Malignant hyperthermia in a halothane-anesthetized
horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 179:896-898.
36. Gaschen F, Gaschen L, Seiler G, Welle M, Bornand Jaunin V, Gonin Jmaa D, Neiger-Aeschbacher G,
Adx-Damilano M. 1998. Lethal peracute rhabdomyolysis asociated with stress and general anesthesia in three
dystrophin-defcient cats. Vet Pathol 35:117-123.
37. Spier SJ, Carlson GP, Holliday TA, Cardinet GH IIl, Pickar JG.1990. Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in horses.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1009-1017.
38. Jezyk PF. 1982. Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:977-980
39.Wasserman K, Stringer WW, Casaburi R,Zhang YY. 1997.Mechanism of the exercise hyperkaleia An alternate
hypothesis. J Appl Physiol 83:631-643.
40.Giger U,Harvey JW. 1987. Hemolysis caused by phosphofructolkinase deficiency in English springer spaniels: Seven
cases (19831986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:453459.
41.Schaafsma IA, van Emst MG,Kooistra HS,Verkleij CB,Peeters ME, Boer P,Rijnberk A,Everts ME.2002.
Exercise-induced hyperkalemia in hypothyroid dogs. Domest Anim Endocrinol 22:113-125.
42. Muylle E, van den Hende C, Nuytten J, Deprez P, Vlaminck K, Oyaert W. 1984. Potassium concentration in
cquine red blood cells: Normal values and correlation with potassium levels in plasma. Equine Vet J 16:447-449.
555
43. Degen M. 1987. Pseudohyperkalemia in Akitas. J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:541-543
44. Reimann KA, Knowlen GG, Tvedten HW. 1989. Factitious hyperkalemia in dogs with thrombocytosis: The effect
of platelets on serum potassium concentration. J Vet Intern Med 3:47-52.
45.Gunn-Moore DA, Reed N, Simpson KE, Milne EM. 2006. Effect of sample type, and timing of assay, on feline
blood potassium concentration. J Feline Med Surg 8:192-196.
46.Henry CJ,Lanevschi A,Marks SL, Beyer JC, Nitschelm SH, Barnes S. 1996. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
hypercalcemia, and pseudohyperkalemia in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:237-239.
47. Lobetti RG. 1998. Hyperreninaemic hypoaldosteronism in a dog. J S Afr Vet Assoc 69:33-35.
48. Rubin SI, Toolan L, Halperin ML. 1998. Trimethoprim-induced exacerbation of hyperkalemia in a dog with
hypoadrenocorticism. J Vet Intern Med 12:186-188.
50.Muto S,Tsuruoka S,Miyata Y,Fujimura A, Kusano E.2006.Effect of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole on Naand
K* transport properties in the rabbit cortical collecting duct perfused in vitro. Nephron Physiol 102:5160.
51.Dhein CR, Wardrop KJ. 1995. Hyperkalemia associated with potasium chloride administration in a cat. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 206:1565-1566.
52.Bisset SA, Lamb M, Ward CR. 2001. Hyponatremia and hyperkalemia associated with peritoneal effusion in four
cats.J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1590-1592.
53. Bundgaard H, Kjeldsen K, Suarez KK, van HG, Simonsen L, Qvist J, Hansen CM, Moller K, Fonsmark L, Lav MP,
Klarlund PB. 2003. Endotoxemia stimulates skeletal muscle NaK'-ATPase and raises blood lactate under acrobic
conditions in humans. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 284:H1028-H1034.
54. Toribio RE, Kohn CW, Hardy J, Rosol TJ. 2005. Alterations in serum parathyroid hormone and electrolyte
concentrations and urinary excretion of electrolytes in horses with induced endotoxemia. J Vet Intern Med
19:223-231.
55. Ahn A. 1994. Hyperaldosteronism in cats. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 9:153-157.
56. Feldman EC, Nelson RW. 1996. Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushings syndrome). In: Canine and Feline Enderinology
andReproduction,2nd edition,187-265.Philadelphia:WB Saunders
57. Flood SM, Randolph JF, Gelzer ARM, Refsal K. 1999. Primary hyperaldosteronism in two cats. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 35:411-416.
58. Eger CE, Robinson WF, Huxtable CRR 1983. Primary aldosteronism (Conn’s syndrome) in a cat A case report
and review of comparative aspects. J Small Anim Pract 24:293307.
59.Ash RA,Harvey AM,Tasker S. 2005.Primary hyperaldosteronism in the cat A series of 13 cases. J Feline Med Surg
7:173-182.
60.Rijnberk A,Voorhout G,Kooistra HS,van der Waarden RJ, van Sluijs FJ, IJzer J, Boer P, Boer WH. 2001.
Hyperaldosteronism in a cat with metastasised adrenocortical turmour. Vet Q 23:3843.
61. Javadi S, Djajadiningrat-Laanen SC, Kooistra HS, van Dongen AM, Voorhout G, van Sluijs FJ, van den Ingh
TSGAM, Boer WH, Rijnberk A. 2005.Primary hyperaldosteronism, a mediator of progressive renal disease in cats.
Domest Anim Endocrinol 28:85-104.
62. Stick JA, Robinson NE, Krehbiel JD. 1981. Acid-base and electrolyte alterations associated with salivary loss in the
pony.Am JVet Res 42:733-737.
63. Buranakarl C, Mathur S, Brown SA. 2004. Effects of dietary sodium chloride intake on renal function and blood
pressure in cats with normal and reduced renal function. Am J Vet Res 65:620-627.
64. Jones BR, Gruffydd-Jones Tj. 1990. Hypokalemia in the cat Cornell Vet 80:13-16.
65.Blaxter A,Lievesley P,Gruffydd-Jones T,Wotton P. 1986.Periodic muscle weakness in Burmese kittens.Vet Rec
118:619-620.
66. Jones BR, Swinney GW, Alley MR. 1988. Hypokalaemic myopathy in Burmese kittens. N Z Vet J 36:150-151.
67. Roth L, Tyler RD. 1999. Evaluation of low sodiummpotassium ratios in dogs. J Vet Diagn Invest 1l:6064.
68. Bell R,Mellor DJ, Ramsey I, Knottenbelt C. 2005.Decreased sodium:potassium ratios in cats: 49 cases. Vet Clin
Pathol 34:110-114.
69.Gennari FJ, Goldstein MB, Schwartz WB. 1972. The nature of the renal adaptation to chronic hypocapnia. J Clin
Invest 51:1722-1730.
70. Watts C, Campbell JR. 1971. Further studies on the effect of total nephrectomy in the bovine. Res Vet Sci
12:234245
71.Halperin ML, Cheema-Dhadli S, Chen CB. 2002. Effect of fasting for two days on the excretion of ammonium in
dogs with chronic metabolic acidosis. Nephron 91:695-700.
72. James KM, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, Olson JK. 1997. Effects of sample handling on total carbon dioxide
concentrations in canine and feline serum and blood. Am J Vet Res 58:343347.
556
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
73. Collins ND, LeRoy BE, Vap L. 1998. Artifactually increased serum bicarbonate values in two horses and a calf with
severe rhabdomyolysis.Vet Clin Pathol 27:85-90.
74. Kasari TR, Woodbury AH, Morcom-Karsari E. 1990. Adverse effeet of orally administered magnesium hydroxide on
serum magnesium concentration and systemic acid-base balance in adult cattle.J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:735-742
75. Auer DE,Skelton KV, Tay S, Baldock FC. 1993.Detection of bicarbonate administration (milkshake) in standard
bred horses. Aust Vet J 70:336340
76. Ewaschuk JB, Naylor JM, Palmer R, Whiting SJ, Zello GA. 2004. D-lactate production and excretion in diarrheic
calves. J Vet Intern Med 18:744747.
thyroidism. J Vet Intern Med 8:349-354.
78. Meyer DJ. 1977. Temporary remisson of hypoglycemia in a dog with an insulinoma after treatment with
sreptozotocin.Am JVetRes 38:1201-1204.
79. Al-Bander HA, Weiss RA, Humphreys MH, Morris RC Jr. 198 2. Dysfunction of the proximal tubule underlies
maleic acidinduced type II renal tubular acidosis. Am J Physiol 243:F604F611.
80. Bark H, Perk R. 1995. Fanconi syndrome associated with amoxicillin therapy in the dog. Canine Pract 20:19-22.
81. van der Kolk JH, Kalsbeek HC. 1993. Renal tubular acidosis in a mare. Vet Rec 133:43-44.
82.Aleman MR, Kuesis B, Schott HC, Carlson GP. 2001. Renal tubular acidosis in horses (1980-1999). J Vet Intern
Med 15:136-143.
83.Hostutler RA,DiBartola SP,Eaton KA. 2004.Transient proximal renal tubular acidosis and Fanconi syndrome in a
dog.J AmVet Med Assoc 224:1611-1614.
84.Vaihkonen LK, Heinonen OJ, Hyyppa S, Nieminen M,Poso AR. 2001. Lactate-transport activity in RBCs
of trained and untrained individuals from four racing species. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 281:
R19-R24.
85. Christopher MM, Broussard JD, Fallin CW, Drost NJ, Peterson ME. 1995. Increased serum D-lactate associated
with diabetic ketoacidosis. Metabolism 44:287-290
86. Osgood SL, Jahr JS, Desai P, Tsukamoto J, Driessen B. 2005. Does methemoglobin from oxidized hemoglobin-
based ozygen carrier (Hemoglobin Glutamer-200) interfere with lactate measurement (YSI 2700 SELECT
Biochemisty Analyzer)? Anesth Analg 100:437-439.
87. Jahr JS, Osgood S, Rothenberg SJ, Li QL, Butch AW, Gunther R, Cheung A, Driessen B. 200 5. Lactate
measurement interference by hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers (Oxyglobin, Hemopure, and Hemelink). Anesth
Analg 100:431-436.
88. Dennis SC, Gevers W, Opie LH. 1991. Protons in ischemia: Where do they come from; where do they go to? J Mol
Cell Cardiol 23:1077-1086.
89.Gossett KA, Cleghorn B,Adams R,Church GE,MeCoy DJ, Carakostas MC,Flory W.1987. Contribution of
whole blood Llactate,pyruvate,D-lactate, actoacetate, and 3hydrozyutyrate concentrations to the plasma anion
gap in horses with intestinal disorders. Am J Vet Res 48:72-75.
90. Orsini JA, Eker AH, Galligan DT, Donawick WJ, Kronfeld DS. 1988. Prognostic index for acute abdominal crisis
(colic) in horses. Am J Vet Res 49:1969-1971.
91. Koho NM, Vaihkonen LK, Poso AR. 2002. Lactate transport in red blood cells by monocarboxylate transporters.
EquineVetJSuppl555-559.
92. Rand JS, Kinnaird E, Baglioni A, Blackshaw J, Priest J. 2002. Acute stress hyperglycemia in cats is associated with
struggling and increased concen trations of lactate and norepinephrine. J Vet Intern Med 16:123-132.
93. Visek WJ. 1979. Ammonia metabolism, urea cycle capacity and their biochemical assessment. Nutr Rev
37:273-282.
94.Kitamura SS, Antonelli AC, Maruta CA, Soares PC, Sucupira MC, Mori CS, Mirandola RM, Ortolani EL. 2003.
A model for ammonia poisoning in cattle. Vet Hum Toxicol 45:274277.
95. Abramson CJ, Platt SR, Shelton GD. 2004. Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency in a Sussex spaniel. J Small Anim
Pract 45:162-165.
96. Shelton GD, Van Ham L, Bhatti S, Cook-Olson S, Johnson K, Barshop B, Toone J, Applegarth D. 2006. Pyruvate
dehydrogenase deficiency in Clumber Sussex spaniels in the United States and Belgium. J Vet Intern Med 14:342
(abstract).
97.Corley KT,Donaldson LL,Furr MO.2005.Arterial lactate concentration,hospiral survival, sepsis and SIRS in
critically ill neonatal foals.Equine Vet J 37:53-59.
98.Chrusch C, Bautista E, Jacobs HK, Light RB, Bose D, Duke K,Mink SN. 2002.Blood pH level modulates organ
metabolism of lactate in septic shock in dogs. J Crit Care 17:188202.
99. Jacobson LS, Lobeti RG. 2005. Glucose, lactate, and pyruvate concentrations in dogs with babesiosis. Am J Vet Res
66:244-250.
557
100. Omole OO, Nappert G, Naylor JM, Zello GA. 2001. Both L- and D-lactate contribute to metabolic acidosis in
diarrheic calves. J Nutr 131:2128-2131.
101. Ewaschuk JB, Naylor JM, Zello GA. 2003. Anion gap correlates with serum D- and DL-lactate concentration in
diarrheicneonatal calves.JVet Inrern Med 17:940-942
CG, O'Brien DP. 2005. D-lactic acidosis secondary to exocrine pancreatic insuficiency in a cat. J Vet Intern Med
19:106-110.
103. Gentile A, Sconza S, Lorenz I, Otranto G, Rademacher G, Famigli-Bergamini P, Klee W. 2004. D-Lactic acidosis in
calves as a consequence of experimentaly induced ruminal acidosis. J Vet Med [A] 5 1:6470.
104. Nappert G, Johnson PJ. 2001.Determination of the acid-base status in 50 horses admitted with colic between
December 1998 and May 1999. Can Vet J 42:703-707.
105. Christopher MM, Eekfeldt JH, Eaton JW. 1990. Propylene glycol ingestion causes D-lactic acidosis. Lab Invest
62:114118
106. Sacks DB. 1999. Carbohydrates. In: Burtis CA,Ashwood ER,eds. Tietz Textbook of Clinical Chemistry, 3rd edition,
750-808. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
107. Carrier J, Stewart S, Godden S, Fetrow J, Rapnicki P. 2004. Evaluation and use of three cowside tests for detection
108. Geishauser T, Leslie K, Tenhag J, Bashiri A. 2000. Evaluation of eight cow-side ketone tests in milk for detection of
subdinical ketosis in dairy cows. J Dairy Sci 83:296299.
109.HsuWS,Kao T, TsaiKS.1993.Fully automatedasay of blood D-3-hydroxybutyrate for ketosis.J Formos Med
Assoc 92:336-340.
110. Oster JR, Rietberg B, Taylor AL, Perez GO, Chandra R, Gardner LB. 1984. Can beta-hydroxybutyrate be detected
11l1. Chrisman CL. 1982. Coma and altered states of consciousness. In: Chrisman CL, ed. Problem in Small Anima
Neurology,199-214.Philadelphia: Lea &Febiger
112.Weisberg HF, for the American Association of Clinical Pathologists Commission on Continuing Education. 197 1
Osmolality. Clinical Chemistry Check sample no. CC-71:1-49.
Thispageintentionallyleffblank
Chapter10
BLOODGASES.BLOODpH.ANDSTRONG
ION DIFFERENCE
Definitions.
561
Physiologic Processes..
561
Analytical Concepts
565
Acid-BaseAbnormalities.
574
1.Metabolic(Nonrespiratory)Acidosis.
574
Il.RespiratoryAcidosis..
575
Ill.Metabolic(Nonrespiratory) Alkalosis..
576
IV.RespiratoryAlkalosis..
576
V.Classification of Acid-Base Disorders.
578
Hypoxemia and Hypoxia..
581
Strong lon Difference(SiD)and Stewart's Method of Acid-BaseAnalysis.....
584
559
Table 10.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
[x]
Concentration of x (x=analyte)
2,3-DPG
2,3-Diphosphoglycerate
AaDO2
Arterial alveolar oxygen tension gradient
ATOT
Sum or total of nonvolatile weak acids
BEB
Base excess in blood
BEECF
Base excess in extracellular fluid
BEp
Base excess in plasma
CO
Carbon monoxide
CO2
Gaseous carbon dioxide
CO,²
Carbonate
COHgb
Carboxyhemoglobin
ECF
Extracellular fuid
fCa²+
Free ionized calcium
FIoz
Fractional concentration of oxygen in inspired gas
fMg24
Free ionized magnesium
FOHgb
Fraction ofoxyhemoglobin in total hemoglobin
HCO
Carbonic acid
HO
Water
H,PO4
Dihydrogen phosphate
HCO,
Bicarbonate
Hct
Hematocrit
Hgb
Hemoglobin
HHgb
Deoxyhemoglobin (reduced hemoglobin)
HPO
Hydrogen phosphate
1"0
Oxygen content
P,CO2
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood
PACO2
Partial pressure of alveolar carbon dioxide
P,02
Partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood
PAO2
Partial pressure of alveolar oxygen
PcO2
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide
pH
log[H+]
PIO2
Partial pressure of inspired oxygen
Po2
PO
Phosphate includingPO,HPO,orHPO
PO
Phosphate
P.CO2
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide in venous blood
P.O2
Partial pressure of oxygen in venous blood
S,02
Percent hemoglobin saturation with oxygen in arterial blood
SID
Strong ion difference
Strong ion difference using corrected chloride concentration
SIDerue
True strong ion difference
SIDx
Strong ion difference calculated using x strong ions
SO2
Percent hemoglobin saturation with oxygen
SpO2
Percent hemoglobin saturation with oxygen of arterial blood by pulse
oximetry ("p” is for“pulse”oximetry)
tCO,
Total carbon dioxide
uSA
Unidentified strong anion
WRI
Within reference interval
560
10/BLOODGASES,BLOODH,ANDSTRONG1ONDIFFERENCE
561
DEFINITIONS
Definitions of important terms in this chapter:
Acidemia is a decreased blood pH (increased [H+]).
Alkalemia is an increased blood pH (decreased [H*])
Acidosis is a condition in which acidemia tends to occur. An animal may not be acidemic because
of compensating mechanisms or because of the width of the reference interval.
Alkalosis is a condition in which alkalemia tends to occur. An animal may not be alkalemic
because of compensating mechanisms or because of the width of the reference interval.
Hypercapnia is excess CO in blood (increased Pco). It is also called hypercarbia.
Hypocapnia is a deficiency of CO in blood (decreased Pco). It is also called hypocarbid
Hypoxemia is a deficiency of dissolved Oin blood (decreased Po)
Hypoxia is a deficiency of Oreaching the tissues, cells,or organelles of the body
Hyperventilation is an excessive rate and/or depth of respiration leading to abnormal loss of CO
from the blood because of increased movement of new air to (and from) the gas-exchange
regions of the lung.Because hypocapnia can be the consequence of hyperventilation, some-
times hypocapnia and hyperventilation are considered synonyms.
Hypoventilation is deficient ventilation of the lungs that causesreductionin the Ocontent of the
blood,increase in theOcontent of the bloodorboth,because of decreased movement ofnew
air to(and from) the gas-exchange regions of thelung.Because hypercapnia can be the conse.
quence of hypoventilation, sometimes hypercapnia and hypoventilation are considered synonyms
Tachypnea is an increased rate of respiration.The increased rate may ormay not cause
hyperventilation.
Bradypnea is a decreased rate of respiration. The decreased rate may or may not cause hypoventilation
PHYSIOLOGICPROCESSES
Several respiratory and nonrespiratory processes help maintain [H] at a minute, but stable,
concentration (about 40 nmol/L). Metabolic processes continually produce H, and it is either
excreted （via kidneys）or bound to buffers (HCO，PO，ammonia, sulfates,Hgb,and other
proteins, such as albumin). Of the total buffering capacity in health, HCO, contributes over
20 mmol/L,whereas the nonbicarbonate buffers contribute less than 10 mmol/L.
II.
As the buffers work together, changes in one buffering system reflect changes in the others.
In clinical medicine, the bicarbonate buffering system is used to monitor control of [H]
and therefore acid-base status.
A.The relationship of [H], [HCO;], and Pco in normal blood at 37 °C can be
expressed with the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation or a nonlogarithmic version
(Eq. 10.1a). The [HCO,] is calculated from a measured Pco2 value and the solubility
coefficient of CO,in an aqueous solution(Eq.10.1b).
[HCO,]
Pco,
pH=6.1+log
or[H+]=24x
(10.1a.)
[HCO]
[HCO,]
CourseSman
Pco,x0.0307=[H,CO]
(10.1b.)
[H]innmol/L;[HCO,]&[HCO,]inmmol/L;PcoinmmHg
562
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.As seen in the nonlogarithmic equation,[H]is clearly related to the ratio of Pcoto
[HCO,]. When the ratio increases in an animal, the animal becomes acidemic.When
the ratio decreases in an animal, the animal becomes alkalemic.
III.
Pulmonary functions related to blood gases and acid-base status
A.Expiration of CO leads to the elimination of free H+(Fig.10.1A).
A.Healthy animal
Systemlc
Puimonary
CO2（g)expired
pooq snouen
arterlal blood
CA
H++HCO
HCO
40nM24mM
2nM
1nM
H+ from metabolism
B.Metabolic acidosis
Systemlc venous blood
HCO
H0+CO
2
H+from metabolism
HCO3
C.Respiratory acidosis
CO2(g explred
Pulmonary arterial blood
H++HCOH2CO3
H+ from metabolism
D.Metabolic alkalosis
Systemlc venous blood
H++HCO3
HCO
CO
HCO3
H+from metabolism
H+
CO2(g)expired
E.Respiratory alkalosis
H++HCO-
HgCO3
CO2(g）
H+frommetabolism
10/BLOODGASES,BLOODH,ANDSTRONG1ONDIFFERENCE
563
1.Because blood [H] is very low compared to [HCO;] (ratio =1 :600,000), this
process does not lower [HCO] unless there is excessive generation of H.
2.It may be helpful to consider the bicarbonate system going through HCO
(Eq.10.2a),but the actual reaction catalyzed by carbonic anhydrase involves the
dissociation of H,O,release of H,and reaction of hydroxide ion (OH)with
CO, to form HCO,without a H,CO, intermediate (Eq. 10.2b). The reaction is
reversible.
H++HCOH,COH,O+CO2
(10.2a.)
(10.2b.)
B.Hyperventilation increases expiration of COand tends to cause alkalemia.Hypoventi
lation decreases expiration of CO and tends to cause acidemia. Two types of chemore
ceptors control respiration:
1.Central chemoreceptors (in the brain stem) are stimulated by increased [H+] in
surrounding fuid.
2.Peripheral chemoreceptors (carotid and aortic bodies) are stimulated primarily by
hypoxemia but also by acidemia (increased [H])
C.Oxygenation of blood and pulmonary ventilation
1.The basic physiologic aspects of the interchange of Oand CO are described in
Fig.10.2
Fig. 1o.1. Schematic representation of the basic concepts of the bicarbonate buffering system in health and
in acid-base disorders. Respiratory disorders involve removal of CO, from pulmonary arterial (capillary)
blood. Metabolic disorders cause abnormal concentrations of H+ and HCO, in systemic venous blood.
A.In health,H from metabolism is buffered by HCO,to form HCO,which dissociates to HO and
COe The COz is expired via the respiratory system. In the presence of carbonic anhydrase (CA), the
reactions are reversible but the net fow is to the right (toward COzg expiration). The approximate molar
concentrations of H+,HCO, HCO, and dissolved CO in plasma show that a large excess of
HCO;is available to bufferH+.
B.In a metabolic acidosis,acidosis occurs because of one of two basic processes.Without compensation,
Pco remains WRI. However, ↑ [H+] will stimulate respiration and result in increased removal of CO2
from pulmonary blood and thus a↓Pcoz
1.ExcesHaccumulates becauseofincreased productionoforganicacidsincreasedHreleasefrom
ATP usage, or decreased renal excretion of H'. The excess H drives the equation to the right and
thus leads to consumption of HCO
2.Excessloss of HCO,via the alimentary or urinary system reduces the buffering capacity and allows
H+ to accumulate.
C. In a respiratory acidosis, hypoventilation causes reduced expiration of COzgs which leads to an T P,cog
and an ↑ [H+] (↓ pH). Without compensation, [HCO,] is insignificantly increased and remains WRI.
Given time, the kidneys will compensate for acidemia and conserve HCO,.
D.Ina metabolic alkalosis,alkalosis ocurs because ofone of two basic processe.Without compensation
Pcoz remains WRI.
1. Excess H+ is lost via gastric or renal secretion. The secretion of H results in a generation of HCO;
that accumulates in plasma.
2.Excess HCO,is formed, conserved, or administered and results in more removal of H+ from blood
and thus an alkalemia
E. In a respiratory alkalosis, hyperventilation causes excessive expiration of CO, which leads to a ↓P,co
and a↓[H] (↑ pH).Without compensation,[HCO；] remains WRI.
564
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Inspired Air
Tracheal Air
Alveolus
Expired Air
PlO=159mmHg
PO=149mmHg
PAO=100mmHg
Plconear0mmHg
PH0=47mmHg
PACO=50mmHg
PEcO2<50mmHg
02
VenousBlood
Arterial Blood
CO2
P02=40mmHg
PO=100mmHg
PcO=45-50mmHg
PCO=40mmHg
[H+] = 40 nmol/L
CI
O,Hgb
HHgb
O2Hgb
[HCO]=24mmol/L
Fig.10.2. Schematic drawing of the exchange of O and CO at the alveolus-capillary junction. Pressure
rued sso
1000ft elevation)
▪Atmosphere to alveolus: Inspired air has a Po, (Plo,) of 159 mmHg. With the contribution of PHo
(47mmHg) in the warm trachea, the Po drops to 149 mmHg [0.209(760 -47)]. In the alveolus, the
Pois lower, near 100 mmHg,because of the interchange of O,with the blood and because of the
increased Paco (50 mmHg) from the blood.
·Alveolus to blood: In health, O quickly diffuses from the alveolus to the capillary blood (Po near
40 mmHg) to give a Po of 100 mmHg,which represents the pressure exerted by the dissolved O in
plasma. The O also diffuses into erythrocytes and binds to Hgb (OHgb) to saturate the oxygen-binding
sites of ferrous heme (So =100 %).With a normal [Hgb],1 L of blood contains about 200 mL O2
bound to Hgb (i.e.,1.31 mL O/g Hgb) and 3 mL of dissolved O2
·Blood to alveolus: Reversal of the carbonic anhydrase reaction produces CO(not shown)which quickly
diffuses from blood to alveolus and thus lowers the P,co to P,coy near 40 mmHg. The [H+] decreases
slightly because it combines with HCO, to form CO and HO. In the healthy lung, CO diffuses from
blood to alveoli at 20 times the rate that O diffuses from alveoli to blood.
Alveolus to atmosphere: When breathing air, the PEco, will be less than the Pco,because the PEco
represents a mixture of alveolar gases and the gases in the airways. During anesthesia, measuring the
expired Pco, (capnography) prowvides information to asses CO production, pulmonary gas exchange, and
elimination of COby the anesthetic equipment.
PEco, partial pressure of expired carbon dioxide; PHzo, partial pressure of water vapor.
2.Fortheretobeadequateoxyenationofbloodeveral processsmust befunctnal
a.The inspired air must have adequate O
b.The inspired air must be delivered to alveoli.
C.The inspired O must diffuse from alveoli to the capillary blood quickly.
d.The alveoli must be perfused with blood.
3.For there to be adequate gas exchange,alveoli must be perfused with blood,CO
must diffuse from blood to alveoli quickly, and CO must be expired. Because the
solubility of COinHO is greater than that of O,the diffusion coefficient of CO
is greater,and it can diffuse from blood to alveoli much faster than Ocan diffuse
10/BLOODGASES,BLOODH,ANDSTRONG1ONDIFFERENCE
565
from alveoli toblood;thediffusion coefficient for COis 20 times the diffusion
coefficient for O2-
D.Transport of O to tissues
1.Once O has diffused into pulmonary blood, most of it enters erythrocytes and
binds to Hgb.The processes involved in the oxygenation and deoxygenation of Hgb
are illustratred in Fig. 10.3.
2.For there tobeadequate oxygenation of tissuesseveral processesmust be functional.
a.The lungs must oxygenate the blood.
b.The blood must have sufficient amounts of functional Hgb.
c.The blood must perfuse the tissues.
IV.
Renal functions related to acid-base balance
A.The kidneys have key roles in maintaining acid-base status (see Chapters 8and 9).
B.Their major functions that pertain to acid-base status in health are to excrete H,either
directly or by incorporation into ammonium (NH),dihydrogen phosphate (H,PO),
or bisulfate(HSO）),and to conserve HCO
C.Hormonal and other factors that alter Na*, Cl,and K+excretion will typically influ
ence renal excretion of Hand HCO,.
ANALYTICALCONCEPTS
Blood gasinstruments
A. Blood gas instruments measure the [H*], Po, and Pco, in blood.
1.Descriptions of measured analytes
a.{H+ is the free H+ concentration in blood.It refects the net effect of bodily
processes onblood[H+] and is reported as pH,theunitless negative log of[H+]
b.Po(mmHg) is the partial pressure of O in the blood. It refects the amount of
dissolved Obut does not measure O associated with Hgb. It is useful in
assessing pulmonary gas exchange.
c.Pco (mmHg) is the partial pressure of CO in blood. Ir reflects the amount of
dissolved CO, in blood and is useful to assess alveolar ventilation.
2. Blood gas analyzers used in veterinary patients were designed to be used for human
samples.Therefore,measurements aremade at37°Crather than at the temperatures
of typical veterinary patients, and values are not accurate refections of the in vivo
values (see the following sect. C, Temperature Correction Factors).
3.Selective membranes allow only H+,Oor COto pass from the blood to cause
reactions with specific electrodes.In the Pco system,the COreacts in a bicarbon
atebuffer to change the pH; the change in pH is detected by a pH (H-selective)
electrode.
4.The membranes also protect the electrodes from proteins and other substances in
the blood. Maintenance of blood gas instruments involves maintenance (cleaning
and replacement) of the membranes.
5.Some blood gas instruments can measure So, by reflectance photometry based on
the differences in the absorption of differenr wavelengths of light by oxyhemoglobin
and deoxyhemoglobin.
6.Point-of-care testing: Small hand-held or portable chemical analyzers that use a
disposable cartridge containing ion-selective electrodes can do the following: (1)
measure blood gas values （pH,Pco,and Po2),(2) measure common blood analyte
Arterial Blood
High SO2
Low [H+]
High PFK activity
Increasing [2.3-DPG]
CO2
CO2
CI
CO,
HCO:
CA
HCO
H2O
+H
HO
H+
OHgb
OHgb
Hgb
HHgb
Hgb
HHgb
O2
O2
PFK
lactate
PFK
glucose
glucose-
lactate
2,3-DPG
2,3-DPG
Tissue Blood
Pulmonary Blood
Highest [2,3-DPG]
Lowest[2,3-DPG]
Highest [H+]
Venous Blood
Lowest [H+]
Lowest Hgb affinity for O2
LowSO2
Highest Hgb affinity for O2
[+H] YH
Low PFK activity
Decreasing [2,3-DPG]
Fig. 10.3. Oxygenation and deoxygenation of Hgb.
Erythrocyres inperipheral tissue blood
•Because erythrocytes have their greatest [2,3-DPG] and greatest [H’] while moving through peripheral
capillaries, their Hgb molecules have the lowest affnity for O and thus release O to plasma.The O is
then able to diffuse into tissue and participate in metabolic pathways.
CO(from metabolic pathways) diffuses into plasma and then into erythrocytes.Via the carbonic
anhydrase (CA) reaction, CO and HO are converted to HCO; and H'. The HCO; moves to plasma
carried in blood in two forms:(1) as dissolved COwith a Pconear 45-50 mmHg,and (2)as HCO；
in erythrocytes after reacting with HO in the presence of carbonic anhydrase.
Erythrocytes enter in peripheral tissues with high 2,3-DPG],but the more acidic environment (increased
[H]) inhibits phosphofructokinase (PFK) in the glycolytic pathway, and thus the rate of 2,3-DPG
formation decreases.
Eryzbrocytesin pulmonary blood
·O diffuses from alveoli to pulmonary plasma and into erythrocytes. Because erythrocytes have their least
[2,3-DPG] and least [H'] in the pulmonary vessels, their Hgb molecules have the greatest affinity for O
and thus beoome saturated with O (So = 100 %) to form OHgb. With a normal [Hgb], 1 L of blood
contains about 200mL Obound toHgb (ie., 1.31 mL O/g Hgb) and 3 mL of dissolved O2
·HCO;moves into erythrocytes (in exchange for CI) and combines with H+ to form CO and HO. The
COdiffuses into plasma and then to alveoli from which it isexhaled.
Most of theH+is buffered by theHCO
•Erythrocytes enter pulmonary blood with low [2,3-DPG], but the more alkaline environment (lowest
[H']) stimulates PFK in the glycolytic pathway, and thus the rate of 2,3-DPG formation increases.
566
10/BLOODGASES,BLOODH,ANDSTRONG1ONDIFFERENCE
567
concentrations (Na,K+, Cl,urea,glucose,fCa²+,and Hgb),and (3) calculate
several concentrations or values (HCO,CO，anion gap,So，BEBE,and
hematocrit).
B.Calculated acid-base and blood gas values: The following values can be calculated from
themeasured pH,Pco，and Poby using other known factors (e.g.,body temperarure
or[Hgb]):
1.{HCO /aca (in mmol/L) is calculated via the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation by
using the measured pH and measured Pco (Eq. 10.la).
2.[tCO (in mmol/L) is calculated from the calculated [HCOlactual and measured
Pco(Eq.10.3).ThePcois multiplied by 0.0307(a solubility coefficient) to
calculate the amount of dissolved COin the blood sample.The[rCO] generated
by routine serum chemistry analysis is based on different methods.
[tCO]=[HCO]+[HCO]=[HCO]+(Pco×0.0307）
(10.3.)
3.[HCO/aa (in mmol/L) is also called standard bicarbonate concentration (SBC).
a.[HCO Jd is the [HCO] in plasma when fully oxygenated blood from a
"normal”animal is equilibrated at 37°C to a Pcoof 40mmHg.The calcu-
lated [HCO]ad is an estimate of the[HCO] in the sample if thePco
were 40 mmHg.
b.TheHCOis theoretically abetterestmateof bufferbasenablood
sample because it is independent of changes in Pco,whereas a HCO,]cl
depends on Pco, values (e.g, when Pco, increases, [HCO,] increases in
plasma).2
C.The calculation for[HCOd rquires theuseof several assumed values
that may not be accurate for particular species or individuals.
4.BEforBEp（inmmol/L)
a.BEror BEp is the amount of strong acid (mmol/L) that is needed to titrate
extracellular Huid or plasma to a pH of 7.4 if the Pco is 40 mmHg at 37 °C.
b.The calculation uses the measured pH,calculated[HCO,], an assumed normal
[HCO,] (e-g.,2425 mmol/L), and an assumed normal plasma protein
concentration.
c.Changes in BEf
(1)A positive BEe indicates an excess of plasma buffer (e.g,HCO,proteins)
and thus a metabolic alkalosis.
(2)A negative BEf indicates a deficit of plasma buffer (e.g,HCO,proteins)
and thus a metabolic acidosis.
(3）If blood pH changes because of a change in Pco but the HCO] is WRI,
then the BEe will remain WRI.
5.BEg(in mmol/L)
a.The BE value is the amount of strong acid (mmol/L) that is needed to titrate
blood to a pH of 7.4 if the Pco is 40 mmHg at 37 °C.
b.The calculation involves the same values as BE plus the contribution of Hgb
to the buffer base. Erythrocyte 2,3-DPG contributes to the buffer base but is
not specifically included in the calculation.The Hgb value may be inaccurate
because of the mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)assumptions
when calculated from measured hematocrit values or because of inaccuracies of
the blood gas analyzer's hematocrit measurement (see Chapter 3).
568
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
c.Positive and negative BE values provide essentially the same information about
the patient as does the BEThe BEvalues should approach the BEas an
animal becomes more anemic.
6.Buffer base (or total buffer base)(in mmol/L)
a.Buffer base is the sum ofbuffer ions”of blood,including HCO,Hgb,and
plasma proteins.
b.Buffer base is related to base excess as follows: buffer basetu = buffer basemomal
+ base excess. Buffer baseacual is the calculated sum of the “buffer ions” in a
patient‘s sample. Buffer basemorml is the expected sum of the “buffer ions” in a
healthy human. Base excess (if positive) is the amount of excess “buffer ions"
compared to normal.
7.So(in %)
a.So is the amount of oxyhemoglobin in blood expressed as a percentage of the
total amount of hemoglobin able to bind O (See sects. II [Pulse oximetry] and
III [CO-oximeter] for methods of measuring the percentage.)
b.The So depends primarily on the Po as described by the sigmoid O-Hgb
dissociation curve (Fig.10.4）.At a Poof 100mmHg, the Sois expected to be
about 97 %.Acidemia, increased erythrocyte [2,3-DPG],hyperthermia,and
hypercarbia shiftthe dissociation curve to the right(Sodecreases for a given
Po2).
100%
80%
Shift curve to right
60%
1.increased [H+]
2.increased [2.3-DPG]
S02
3.increased temperature
40%
4.increasedPcoz
20 %
0%
20
40
60
80
100
120
PO2(mmHg)
Fig.10.4. Oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve.With a typical P,o of 95 mmHg and at a pH of 7.4, the
So is near 96 %. Because of the high affinity of Hgb for O, So values remain at > 90 % as long as the
Po remains at > 60 mmHg (dashed arrow).When Povalues are > 100 mmHg, the So, will be near
100 %. Increased [H+], increased erythrocyte [2,3-DPG], hyperthermia, and hypercarbia will shift the curve
to the right. If Po stays constant, shifting the curve to the right will result in a lower So. The displayed
dissociation curvewas constructedfrom human data.Dissociation curves for other species are slightly
different because of differences in Hgb molecules,[2,3-DPG] differences, and other factors.Aocordingly,the
average Ps0 values (Poz when hemoglobin is 50 % saturated with oxygen at pH 7.4, 37 °C, and 40 mmHg
Pco) differ:horses =25 mmHg, cattle = 26 mmHg, people = 27 mmHg, dogs =30 mmHg, and cats
=34mmHg.43.
10/BLOODGASES,BLOODH,ANDSTRONG1ONDIFFERENCE
569
c.Some blood gas instruments calculate theSofrom measured pH,Pcoand
Povalues by using formulas that attempt to correct for temperature variations
and a complex formula that attempts to describe the O, dissociation curve.
The calculated Somay be erroneous because of assumed normal Oaffinity for
Hgb and assumed normal [2,3-DPG].
(1)If the pH is constant,but the Po decreases,then So decreases.
(2)If the Po is constant, but the pH decreases (acidemia),then So
decreases. If Po is constant,but pH increases (alkalemia), then So
increases.
8.Pao (in mmHg): alveolar O2 pressure (sometimes abbreviated as A)
a.Pao is the partial pressure of O in the alveolar air (gas).Two formulas incor-
porating Flo and P.co2 can be used to calculate the value (Eq. 10.4a).FIo
is the fractional percentage of inspired Oin a gas.TheFloof air is 0.2093
(or about 21%）,and thePloofairis about159mmHg(21%of
760 mmHg).During gas anesthesia,the FIo could be 1.0 (100 % O2)
PcO2
Simplified:PaO=Plo
(10.4a.)
R
Complete:PAo=Plo
R
where PAo is partial pressure of alveolar oxygen,Plo is the partial pressure of inspired
oxygen, Pco is the partial pressure of CO in arterial blood, R is the average metabolic
respiratory quotient, and Flo is the fractional concentration of oxygen in inspired air
(gas).
Arterial alveolar oxygen tension gradient: AaDo = PAo -Po2
(10.4b.)
P02
Arterial alveolar oxygen tension ratio: a/ A =
(10.4c.)
PAO2
PaO2
Inspired oxygen fraction ratio:P o2/FI =
(10.4d.)
Flo2
b.The respiratory quotient (R) is the ratio of the volume of CO produced to
the volume of O consumed by a body.In other words,R is the ratio of the
amount of COdiffusing from blood into alveoli to the amount of Odiffusing
in the opposite direction.The respiratory quotient varies with the type of fuels
thebody is using (eg, fats versus carbohydrates).Generally, the average ratio is
0.8; that is,0.8L of COis formed when 1 L of O is consumed by metabolic
pathways. However, the value for R can vary considerably.
c.The concentration of alveolar O for a given concentration of O in inspired air
is determined by a balance between alveolarventilation and amount of O
diffusing into capillary blood.
d.The Pao calculation assumes that P,co= Paco,an assumption that may not
be true if there is a mismatch in ventilation-perfusion.
9.AaDO (in mmHg) is the arterial alveolar O tension gradient (Eq. 10.4b). The
value is used as an index of the exchange of O in lungs.
570
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
10.a/A (unitless) is the arterial alveolar O, tension ratio (Eq. 10.4c).The value is used
as an index of the exchange of O, in lungs and remains relatively stable with
changes in Flo2.
11.Po/FI (unitless) is the inspired O, fraction ratio (Eq. 10.4d). The value is used as
an index of the delivery of O to alveoli and exchange of O in lungs.
12. Oct (mL/dL) is the O content. The Oct represents the total amount (volume) of
Oin a given blood volume (100 mL), including that dissolved in plasma and that
bound tohemoglobin.
13.Pso or Po (0.5) (in mmHg): The Pso is defined as the Pao of a sample when
hemoglobin is 50% saturated with Oar pH 7.4,37°C, and40 mmHg
P.CO2.
C.Temperature correction factors for blood pH and gas values with variations in body
temperature
1.Partial pressures of dissolved gases vary with the temperature of the solvent.For
example, if O and CO content remain constant in a sample but temperature
increases, the Po and Pco values increase (hot gas expands and thus exerts more
pressure)
2.Blood gas instruments measure pH,Po, and Pco in a 37 °C chamber.If the
patient's temperature is40°C,then theinvivo valueswill be different from those
determined by the instrument. Correction factors for increasing temperatures are in
Table10.2.For example,if the Pcowere 40mmHg at37°C,then the Pcowould
be44mmHg（40+10 %of 40mmHg)at39°Cand 48mmHg（40+20% of
40 mmHg) at 41 °C.
3.There are differences of opinion and unanswered questions regarding the need for
temperature correction of blood gas.
a.For example, lowering blood’s temperature (as in hypothermia) will lower the
Po,but the Ocontent of blood will not change.In the hypothermic state,is
thelower Povalue desired for the lower metabolicrate or should thePobe
increased by increasing the FIo?
b.If temperarure-corrected values are used tomonitor a patient,andif the patients
bodyemperature changewill changesinpHPoorPcobecausedby
changes in body temperature or other factors?
4.Ifalaboratryreportstmperaure-correctedvaesit shouldalsorportthvals
measured at 37 °C. If all in vitro values are reported at 37 °C regardless of the body
temperarure, then changes in Po and Pco values will refect changes in O and
COcontentofblood.
Table 10.2. Correction of blood gas and pH values for variations in body temperature
C
°F
pH
PcO2
Po2
41
105.8
-0.06
+20%
+33%
40
104.0
-0.04
+15%
+24%
39
102.2
-0.03
+10%
+15%
38
100.4
-0.01
+5%
+7%
37
98.6
None
None
None
Note: Correction factors calculated from established formulas
10/BLOODGASES,BLOODH,ANDSTRONG1ONDIFFERENCE
571
II.
Pulse oximetry
A.An oximeter is a device that measures arterial So, denoted here as Spo.During the
1980s, the pulse oximeter became an accepted instrument in human medicine for
monitoring Hgb oxygenation during anesthesia and is common in the monitoring of
critical care patients.
B.The pulse oximeter determines the Spo by a spectrophotometric method.
1.Light at rwo wavelengths (e.g., 660 and 940 nm) is passed through tissue that
contains arterial blood (e.g,the ear lobe orfnger in people;the tongue,lip,ear,
with S.o occurred with the lip and tongue placements.
2.At the higher wavelength (e.g., 940 nm), oxyhemoglobin absorbs more light than
does deoxyhemoglobin (reduced Hgb). At the lower wavelength (e.g., 660 nm),
oxyhemoglobin absorbs less light than does deoxyhemoglobin.From the measured
absorbance values,a ratio can be calculated that reflects the So (Eq.10.5a).
[O,Hgb]
X100
(10.5a.)
[O,Hgb]
OHgb%=
X100
(10.5b.)
[OHgb]+[HHgb]+[COHgb]+[MetHgb]
OHgb (oxyhemoglobin),HHgb (reduced hemoglobin), COHgb
(carboxyhemoglobin),MetHgb(methemoglobin)
3.The interference caused by other light-absorbing substances in the tissues is
removedbymeasuring thelight while arterial blood pulses through the tissue.
In pulse oximetry, it is assumed that the changes in absorbance values occur when
O-rich blood pulsates through the tissue.The pulse quality can be evaluated
graphically.
4.COHgb and methemoglobin also absorb light at the measurement wavelengths and
thus interfere with measurements of [OHgb] if they are present (see Hypoxemia and
Hypoxia, sect. II.D) and give falsely increased S.O2 and OHgb% values (Eq. 10.5b)
III. CO-oximeter values
A.A CO-oximeter determines the different types of Hgb by measuring the absorbance of
several wavelengths of light. Each type of Hgb has a unique absorbance spectrum, and
the concentration of each type is determined.The CO-oximeter can be used to identify
methemoglobinemia or COpoisoning.
B.Calculated values (Eq. 10.6)
[tHgb]=[OHgb]+[HHgb]+[COHgb]+[MetHgb]
(10.6.)
[O,Hgb]
OHgb%
x100
[tHgb]
[HHgb]
HHgb%=
x100
[Hgb]
572
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
[COHgb]
COHgb%
X100
[tHgb]
[MetHgb]
MetHgb%=
x100
[tHgb]
[O,Hgb]
SO2=
X100
[OHgb]+[HHgb]
[OHgb]
FOHgb
[cHgb]
1.31mLO
Oct=
×[tHgb
gHgb
OHgb (oxyhemoglobin),HHgb (reduced hemoglobin), COHgb （carboxyhemoglobin)
MetHgb (methemoglobin),FOHgb （fraction of oxyhemoglobin in total hemoglobin),
Oct (oxygen content)
1. Total Hgb (tHgb) concentration represents the sum of the hemoglobin types as
determined by absorbance photometry.
determined by absorbance photometry.
3.Oct is also calculated from the oximeter's measured values.
C.Blood substitutes may interfere with CO-oximetry values.
1.TheNOVA CO-Oximeter provided accuratevalues for O,saturation with various
concentrations of hemoglobin-based O carriers,but the i-STAT provided accurate
values with only low concentrations of the carriers.
2.Compared to results obtained from an O-selective electrode assay, the O content
measured by an Instrumentation Laboratories CO-oximeter differed more than
20 % 1 h after infusion with a hemoglobin-based O carrier.The differences were
greater with the larger dosage of theblood substitute.
IV.
Sample for blood gas and pH analysis
A.Heparinized whole blood:0.05-0.1 mLofheparin (1,000 units/mL) per mL of blood
or50-100units/mLofblood
1.Arterial blood is the preferred sample for all blood gas and pH analyses and is
required for the assessment of oxygenation of blood or pulmonary function.
2.Venous blood may give adequate results for assessment of metabolic disorders but
will have lower pH, higher Pco, and lower Po values. ThePo of venous blood is
not an accurate reflection of pulmonary function. The source of the venous blood
may affect the Pcovalue.Venous blood from a hypoxicleg will have a different
Pco,value than venous blood from a well-perfused head.
3.Mixed venous blood contains blood from all venous sources and is collected from
either the right ventricle or pulmonary artery. The Po in the mixed venous sample
reflects the O remaining in blood after the blood returns from all tissues and before
it is oxygenated in the pulmonary capillaries.
10/BLOODGASES,BLOODH,ANDSTRONG1ONDIFFERENCE
573
4.Blood may be collected in either glass or quality plastic syringes,though Pomay
decreasemore quickly in glass syringes.To prevent exposure to air, the needle must
be sealed with cork or rubber immediately after collection. Air should not be in the
syringe during or after the collection of a sample.
5.Optimally, a heparinized blood sample should be tested (point-of-care testing) or
transported to the laboratory immediately after collection. If not possible, acceptable
blood gas and pH results can be obtained if the heparinized blood is immersed in an
ice bath and analyzed within 1 h. Placement of the sample in a refrigerator will not
cool the sampleasquickly,donotpacea sampleinafreezer,becauseerythrocys
will lyse.
6.Excessive heparin in the collecting syringe can result in erroneous values; there
should only be enough heparin to coat the needle and a 3 mL syringe. This can be
accomplished by drawing 0.5 mL heparin into a 3 mL syringe to the 3 mL mark
and then forcefully expelling it by using 3 mL air in the syringe. Leaving heparin in
the hub of the syringe createsminimal alterations in blood gas valuesbutmay cause
significantly decreased[fCa²] and significantly increased[Cl].Larger amounts also
cause lower Pco,[HCO,], [K], and lactate concentrations and higher Po (if
breathing air) and [Na*].
B.Erroneous blood gas and pH values because of poor sample collection or handling
1.Exposure to air (including air bubbles) or excess heparin in the sample²2
a.The Po, and Pco, values for arterial blood and room air are different
（Table 10.3）.The Poand Pcoof heparin will be the same as room air if
heparin is exposed to air.
b.The Po and Pco of blood and air quickly equilibrate; the blood Po, increases
（unless the patient is on O, therapy) and blood Pco, decreases. The loss of CO
from blood causes decreases in theHCO] and[H+] of the sample
c.Net result:↑pH,↑Po,↓Pcoand↓[HCO]
2.Delay in sample analysis or failure to chill the sample adequately (but no air
exposure)
a.Aerobic metabolism of leukocytes and platelets causes decreased Po. Based on
stability studies for equine blood Po, arterial blood should be analyzed within
10 min (if kept at room temperature) or within 2 h (if stored in ice bath). The
b.Glycolysisin leukocyteserythrocytes,andplatelets causes increased Hprodu
tion and thus decreased pH.
c.Netresult:pHandPoz
Table 10.3.Differences in Po and PcO, values (mmHg) between air and blood (samples
from healthyanimal inspiringroom air)
Room air
Arterial blood
Venous blood
Po2
=150
=90
=40
PcO2
<1
=40
=46
Souree:Muir andHubbell.20
574
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
ACID-BASEABNORMALITIES
Metabolic (nonrespiratory) acidosis
A.Metabolic acidosis is a pathophysiologic state in which a nonrespiratory process causes
the accumulation of H+ in blood and a decrease in plasma or serum[HCO].
B.Metabolic acidoses are typically produced by the excess generation of Hor a loss of
HCO.The loss of HCO(or other body buffers) reduces the buffering capacity of
the body and thus allows H to accumulate (Fig. 10.1B).
C.Disorders and pathogeneses (see Table 9.10 and the associated text)
1.Excess generation of H: lactic acidosis (including rumen overload),ketoacidosis,
and ingestion and metabolism of certain compounds (e.g., ethylene glycol)
2.Decreased renal excretion of H*:renal failure,uroperitoneum,distal renal tubular
acidosis (type l),and hypoaldosteronism
3.Increased HCOloss: gastrointestinal losses (diarrhea or saliva loss in ruminants),
renal losses (proximal renal tubular acidosis,type 2)
D.Themetabolic acidoses are sometimes classified into one of five groups:
1.Titrarional acidosis [HCO,] decreases because it is being used to buffer H that is
either being produced excessively (e.g, lactic acidosis) or not being adequately
excreted by kidneys (e.g.,renal failure).Titrational is somewhat of a misnomer
because titrating is the chemistry laboratory process of adding a reagent to produce a
given effect (e.g., adding acid to determine the concentration of a base). The
decreased [HCO,] is caused by buffering,not by titrating.HCO,is one of several
buffers in blood and is used to assess alterations in the concentrations of buffers.
2.Secretory acidosis.[HCO] decreases because it is being lost from the body (e.g-
excess salivary loss or proximal tubular acidosis) or not being produced (distal
tubular acidosis).The hallmark of these acidoses is the concurrent hyperchloremia
Secretory is an appropriate adjective when HCO is being secreted (e.g., in saliva).
Howeverinhecontextfthetbular acidosesereory isotanappropriat
adjective because the decreased [HCO,] is not caused by the secretion of HCO；
into the tubular fuid.
3.Organic acidosis: The decrease in [HCO] is linked to the accumulation of an
organic anion (e.g.,lactate, acetoacetate, β-hydroxybutyrate, or citrate). The organic
anion may represent the increased production of an organic acid (e.g., acetoacetic
acid) by merabolic pathways, but sometimes the organic anion and the H+
are being produced by different pathways (see the L-lactate section in
Chapter9).
4.Inorganic acidosis: The decrease in[HCO,] is linked to the accumulation of an
inorganic anion (e.g.,PO or sulfate). The metabolic acidosis of renal failure is
sometimes called an inorganic acidosis (due to ↑ [PO]),but there also may be
increased concentrations of organic anions (e.g,citrate).
5.Dilutional acidosis: In the SID approach to acid-base disorders (see the Strong Ion
Difference section), a dilurional acidosis occurs when an excess of free HO in plasma
20 %).However, a 20 % decrease in[Na] (e.g,from 150 mmol/L to 120 mmol/L)
results in a greater absolute decrease than the 20 % decrease in [Cl](e.g, from
110 mmol/L to 88mmol/L),and thus the SID decreases.In the traditional
approach to acid-base disorders,the excess of free HO also dilutes the[HCO]
and thus causes a metabolic acidosis (e.g.,from 24.0 mmol/L to 19.2 mmol/L).
10/BLOODGASES,BLOODH,ANDSTRONG1ONDIFFERENCE
575
Some people also consider the hyperchloremic acidosis that is caused by the rapid
infusion ofsaline（[Na]+[Cl-]=154mmol/L,but[HCO,]=0mmol/L)tobe a
dilutional acidosis. Saline is not free H,O but does contain a higher percentage of
HO (100 %) per unit volume than does plasma (about 93 %).
E.Physiologic compensation for metabolic acidosis
1.Acidemia stimulares the central respiratory chemoreceptors to cause hyperventila
tion. Hyperventilation increases the excretion of CO (thus reducing the blood
Pco2) and thus reduces the [H*] (compensatory respiratory alkalosis).
2.In nonrenal disorders, the kidneys increase the secretion of H (see Figs. 9.3, 9.4,
and 9.6).
II
Respiratory acidosis
A.Respiratory acidosis is a pathophysiologic state in which a respiratory disorder causes the
accumulation of H+ in blood and an increase in blood Pco values (hypercapnia).
B.Respiratory acidoses occur because of alveolar hypoventilation and thus an impaired
excretion of CO.Metabolism continues to generate H,but the animal cannot remove
it adequately via the bicarbonate buffering system (Fig. 10.1C).
ing room air.
D.Disorders or conditions (Table 10.4)
E.Physiologic compensation for respiratory acidosis
1.In response to acidemia, kidneys will increase the secretion of H and, in doing so,
increase the plasma [HCO,] (compensatory metabolic alkalosis)
2.Therenal response takes about 2-5 d to raise the blood pH during chronic
hypercapnia.14.15
Table 10.4.Diseases and conditions that cause respiratory acidosis (hypoventilation)*
Inhibition or dysfunction ofmedullary respiratory center
*Drugs: anesthetics, sedatives, and narcotics
Brain stem disease (trauma, infection, neoplasia, etc.)
Alkalemia due to ametabolic alkalosis
Inhibition or dysfunction of respiratory muscles (diaphragm, chest wall): tick paralysis,
tetanus,botulism,myasthenia ravis,hypokalemia, and succinylcholine
Upper airway dysfunction: foreign body,vomitus,and mechanical hypoventilation
Impaired gas exchange at pulmonary capillaries
*Pulmonary dseasenction,allrgy,dma,rosisnplasiaand hyalnemembran
diseasein neonates
*Restrictive disease: pneumothorax, pleural effusions, and diaphragmatic hernia
Vascular disorders:right-to-left shunts (e.g,patent ducrus arteriosus)
*A relatively common disease or condition
* Disorders that cause respiratory acidosis (T P,co2) because of reduced gas exchange in the lungs will
likely also result in↓Po,but the decrease may not be sufficient for the disorder to be classified as a
hypoxemic disorder (Table 10.9).
Note: During their first few days of life, neonatal foals and calves may have greater Pco values than
adult animals.2324
576
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
III.
Metabolic (nonrespiratory) alkalosis
A.Metabolic alkalosis is a pathophysiologic state in which a nonrespiratory process causes
the depletion of H+ from blood and an increase in serum and plasma[HCO,].
B.Metabolic alkaloses are typically produced by loss of H+ (renal secretion or gastric/
abomasal secretion) and the resultant generation of HCO,（Fig.10.1D).The loss of
Hand the concurrent production of HCO; are illustrated in Fig. 9.4 (type A
intercalatedrenal tubular cells)andFig.9.5 (gastric parietal epithelial cell）.Note that
the H secreted by the gastric mucosa is produced in the epithelial cell; it is not lost
from plasma.
C.Disorders and pathogeneses (see Table 9.9 and the associated text)
1.Loss of H from body
a.Gastric loss: vomiting or pyloric obstruction (functional or mechanical)
b.Renal loss
(1)Loop or thiazide diuretics
(2) Secondary to respiratory acidosis
(3)Hypokalemia
2.Shift ofH+fromECF to intracellularfluidbecause of hypokalemia
3.Administration of sodium bicarbonate or organic anions that generate HCO
4.Contraction alkalosis: loss of HCO-poor fuid,which causes hypovolemia and
increased plasma [HCO,] (see Chapter 9)
D.Physiologic response
1.Innonrenal disorders associatedwith metabolicalkalosisthe kidneys are expected to
decrease the secretion of H+ (exception: see“paradoxical” aciduria [discussed in the
following sect. 3]) and conserve less HCO-
a.With increased plasma [HCO,], the amount of HCO,that enters the filtrate
may exceed the capacity of the proximal tubules to conserve it.
b.Excess HCOwill be secreted by intercalated cells (type B) of the distal
nephron
2. Alkalemia inhibits the central respiratory chemoreceptors and thus causes hypoventi-
lation. Hypoventilation decreases the excretion of CO (thus elevating the blood
Pco2) and increases the [H*] (compensatory respiratory acidosis).
3."Paradoxical"aciduria
a.It is called panadoxica/ because the aciduria is concurrent with an alkalosis.
b.When an animal has concurrent alkalosis, hypochloremia, and hypovolemia, the
kidneys may produce acidic urine (see Figs.9.3 and 9.4).
(1)Hypovolemia stimulates the resorption of Na and Cl in the tubules
through the actions of aldosterone and angiotensin II.
(2)Na*resorption is not always accompanied by Cl (because of Cl depletion),
and thus an electrochemical gradient is established that promotes the
secretion of H+ (thus aciduria) and K+ （thus contributing to a concurrent
hypokalemia).
(3)The secretion of H+ by tubules also increases the generation of HCO,
which adds to the severity of the metabolic alkalosis.
c.It is seen most frequently in cattle but also may be seen in other mammals.
IV.
Respiratory alkalosis
A.Respiratory alkalosis is a pathophysiologic state in which a respiratory disorder causes
depletion of Hin blood and a decrease in blood Pcovalues (hypocapnia).
10/BLOODGASES,BLOODH,ANDSTRONG1ONDIFFERENCE
577
Table 10.5.Diseases and conditions that cause respiratory alkalosis (hyperventilation)
Hypoxemia (stimulation of peripheral chemoreceptors)(see Table 10.9)
Pulmonary disease (stimulation of nociceptive receptors)
Stimulation of respiratory center
*Metabolic acidosis
Septicemia (Gram negative)
Heat stroke or fever
Drugs: salicylates and aminophylline
Central neurologic disease: trauma, neoplasia, infammation, cerebrovascular accident,
and hepatic encephalopathy
Mechanical hyperventilation
Pain or anxiety
* A relatively common disease or condition
Note: When determined by the i-STAT, the Pco can be falsely decreased by the presence of
thiopental in the blood sample.
Sowrce: de Morais and DiBartola.15
B.Respiratory alkaloses occur because of alveolar hyperventilation;respirations remove
CO and thus H+ at a rate faster than H+ is being made (Fig. 10.1E).
C.Disorders or conditions (Table 10.5)
1.Hypoxemia disorders: Peripheral chemoreceptors (carotid and aortic bodies)
stimulatedby hypoxemia initiate hyperventilation that causes theincreased loss
of COand thus loss of H*.(See Table 10.9 for diseases and conditions that
cause hypoxemia）Pulmonary disease may result in poor oxygenation of blood
(hypoxemia), which stimulates hyperventilation. Because CO diffuses more easily
than O,hyperventilationmay cause excess loss of COand thus a respiratory
alkalosis.f there is acutehypoxemialossof COmay besomewhat self-limiting
because the resultant alkalemia inhibits respiration.However,with chronic
hypoxemia and respiratory alkalosis, the resulting compensatory metabolic
acidosis reduces the degree of alkalemia, and thus hypoxemia continues to
stimulate hyperventilation.16
2.Stimulation of the respiratory center: Acidemia and other factors, including central
nervous system disease, may stimulate the central respiratory center to cause
hyperventilation and thus a loss of H.
3.Mechanical ventilation:Animals assisted by mechanical ventilators may develop
alkalemia if there is excessive loss of CO
4.Interferent:When determined by the i-STAT, the Pco, can be falsely decreased by
the presence of thiopental in the blood sample.7
D.Physiologic compensation
1.In response to alkalemia, healthy kidneys decrease the secretion of H+ and,
in doing so, reduce the conservation of HCO (compensatory metabolic acidosis).
Also,metabolic alkalosis stimulates type B intercalated cells to secrete HCO
(see Fig.9.8).16
2.The renal response takes about 2-5 d to raise the[H]
578
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 10.6.Blood gas data in simple acid-base disorders
Disorder
pH
P.CO2
[HCO,]
Respiratory acidosis
↑
WRI
Respiratory acidosis with
↓WRI
↑
↑
compensatory metabolic alkalosis
Metabolic acidosis
个
WRI
Metabolic acidosis with
↓WRI
↑
↑
compensatory respiratory alkalosis
Respiratory alkalosis
↑
↑
WRI
Respiratory alkalosis with
↑-WRI
↑
↑
compensatory metabolic acidosis
Metabolic alkalosis
↑
WRI
↑
Metabolic alkalosis with
↑-WRI
compensatory respiratory acidosis
V.
Classification of acid-base disorders
A.The major patterns for the simple acid-base disorders are listed in Table 10.6
1.Simple acid-base disorders are those in which the pathophysiologic state is limited to
a primary disturbance e.g.,lactic acidosis）and the expected compensatory process
(e.g,hyperventilation）.Figure 10.5 includes an algorithm for the classification of
simple acid-base disorders.
2.When two or more simple acid-base disorders are present (e.g, vomiting causing a
metabolic alkalosis,and renal failure causing a metabolic acidosis),there is a mixed
acid-base disorder.Physical examination and laboratory findings may contain clues
that an animal has a mixed acid-base disorder.Such clues include thefollwing
(1) an unexpected blood pH (WRI or opposite change) for a given clinical state,
and ↑ Pco would indicate both metabolic and respiratory acidoses), and
(3） lack of any expected compensation (see the next section）.Additional information
on mixed acid-base disorders is available.8
B.Expected compensatory changes in acid-base disorders
1.Compensation for respiratory acidosis or alkalosis:If there is not renal disease,
the kidneys are expected to alter their excretions of H+ and HCO, (also other
electrolytes) to compensate for the acidemia or alkalemia.
2.Compensation for metabolic acidosis or alkalosis:If there is not renal disease and
the acid-base disturbance is not of renal origin,then the kidneys are expected to
alter their excretions of Hand HCOaccordingly to compensate for the acidemia
or allkalemia.The respiratory system is also expected to alter its excretion of CO, to
compensate appropriately for acidemias or alkalemias.
3.When there is either respiratory or metabolic compensation, there is never complete
compensation. Blood pH may return to the reference interval, but it will never
return to the normal pH for that animal as long as the disorder causing the acid
base balance remains.
4.How much can these systems compensate if given time to do so? One aspect of the
interpretation of blood gas data is attempting to derermine whether the animals
10/BLOODGASES,BLOODH,ANDSTRONG1ONDIFFERENCE
579
What is the blood pH?
Acidemia
Alkalemia
ifPCO2
if[HCO]
ifPcO
if[HCO]
respiratory acidosis
metabolic acidosis
respiratory alkalosis
metabolic alkalosis
if↑[HCO]
iPCO2
LOOH!
PCO2
respiratory acidosis
metabolic acidosis
respiratory alkalosis
metabolic alkalosis
with compensatory
with compensatory
with compensatory
with compensatory
metabolic alkalosis
respiratory alkalosis
metabolic acidosis
respiratory acidosis
Fig. 10.5. Algorithmic approach to classfication of simple (not mixed) acid-base disorders.Refer to Tables
10.7 and 10.8 for expected compensatory responses.
respiratory or metabolic systems have compensated appropriately. If the data indicate
that an animal has not achieved expected compensation, they may indicate the
following:
a.The animal has not had time to compensate. This is especially true of renal
compensation for acute respiratory disorders.
b.The animal has more than one disorder that is altering the acid-base status, and
this disorder is preventing an expected compensation.
5.To attempt to determine expected compensations in dogs,experimental acid-base
disorders were created and changes were monitored. The findings from several
experimentswere summarized in a review article;9data were extracted from that
article for Table 10.7. The proposed purpose of the correction factors is to determine
whether the changes in[HCO]orP.corepresent a physiologic compensation to a
single acid-base disorder or whether other factors areaffecting theHCO or
P.cO2
6.A formula for calculating an expected P,co is provided in Eq.10.7. The expected
Pcovalue is frequently calculated using average values for healthy dogs; that is,
average Pco,average HCO,],and an average compensation factor.Because of the
those average values may or may not be appropriate for a given patient. Some people
recommend that the expected P.co,value be considered a rough estimate
± 3 mmHg.However, Table 10.8 provides examples showing that a greater amount
of variation in the expected Pco values is obtained if one considers the interindi-
vidual variation in[HCO,] and P.co,values.
580
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 10.7.Expected compensations for acid-base disorders in dogs
Expected [HCO,] change
Expected P,co change
Disorder
(mmol/L)ab
(mmHg)
For each mmHg ↑ in P.coin:
Acute respiratory acidosis (<24h)
↑0.15(0.04-0.20)
Chronic respiratory acidosis (>3-5 d)
↑0.35(0.29-0.43)
For each mmHgin Pcoin:
Acute respiratory alkalosis
↓0.25(0.14-0.36)
一
Chronic respiratory alkalosis
↓0.55 (0.43-0.76)
For each mmol/L↓ in [HCO] in:
Metabolic acidosis
↓0.7(0.5-1.1)
For each mmol/L ↑ in[HCO] in:
Metabolic alkalosis
↑0.7(0.5-1.3)
* Expected compensations were reported in a review article.9 The frst number is the recommended
guideline value.The numbers in parentheses rpresent the nterval of values reported in various expermental
conditions that produced the acid-base disorders.
b The HCO; methods (either measured or calculated from blood gas data) are not precise enough to
justifyreportingHCO； to thenearest hundredthbutmay be precise enough tojustify reporting concen-
trations to the nearest tenth. Therefore, instead of expected changes of T 0.15 (0.04-0.20), consideration of
significant figures should result in an expected change of ↑ 0.2 (0.0-0.2).
The Pcomethods arenot precise enough to justify reporting them to the nearest tenth but may be
precise enough to justify reporting concentrations to the wholenumberTherefore,instead of expected
1  go sue padxaue u sai pmos sy ueguis go uoeapisuoo (1o) o o su
(0-1).
HCO-
HCO-
Expected
PCO2
compensation
PCO]=
(10.7.)
factor
Example:
Patient results:pH=7.146;Pco=36mmHg;[HCO]=12mmol/L
Average values for healthy dog （Table 10.8):Pco = 40 mmHg; [HCO] = 21 mmol/L
Expected
0.7mmHg
=(40mmHg)+(12mmol/L-21mmol/L)x
PCO2
mmol/L
=34mmHg
7.The calculation of expected compensatory changes inblood gas data should be
considered an estimate.If the goal of the interpretation of the data is to determine
whether the animal has more than one disorder affecting the acid-base status,
sometimes there are other ways of arriving at the conclusion.
a.If a dog has ketoacidotic diabetes mellitus and isvomiting,the dog very likely
has both a metabolic acidosis (caused by ketosis) and a metabolic alkalosis (due
to vomiting).
b. If a dog has a pulmonary disorder that is causing a respiratory acidosis and also
has evidence ofrenal failure,the dogvery likelyhas botharespiratory acidosis
and a metabolic acidosis.
10/BLOODGASES,BLOODpH.ANDSTRONGIONDIEFERENCE
581
Table 10.8Examples of expected compensation calculation for metabolic acidosis in dogs;
expected P,cO,calculated using Eq. 10.7
Blood gas data for a dog:
pH=7.146 (7.310-7.420)
Pco=36mmHg（35-45)
[HCO]=12mmol/L（17-24)
Difference
berween
[HCO,]
[HCO,]
Compensation
Pcoin
Expected
measured and
in patient
inhealth
factormmHg/
health
PCO2
expected P,co2
Example
(mmol/L)
(mmol/L)
(mmol/L)
(mmHg)
(mmHg)
(mmHg)
A
12
21
0.7
40
34
2
12
21
1.1
40
30
6
C
12
24
1.1
35
22
14
Example A: Expected P,co was caloulated using average Pcoz, average [HCO ], and average compensa-
tion factor for healthy dogs (see Table 10.7). The difference between measured and expected P,co values is
2mmHg and thus within the ±3 guideline.Therefore,themeasured P,co of 36mmHg represents an
expected respiratory compensation (i.e, compensatory respiratory alkalosis) for the metabolic acidosis.
Example B:Expected Pco was calculated using averagePco,averageHCO],and higher compensa
tion factor (1.1) for healthy dogs (see Table 10.7). The difference between measured and expected P,co
values is 6 mmHg and thus greater than the ± 3 guideline. This value suggests that there has not been an
appropriate respiratory compensation for the metabolic acidosis, and thus there may be a concurrent
respiratory acidosis.However, the 6 mmHg was calculated using values found in experimental healthy dogs,
and thus the compensation might be appropriate.
Example C: Expected Pco, was calculated using the lower reference limit P.co (ie, 35 mmHg), the
upper referenoe limit HCO (e.,24mmol/L),and the higher compensation factor (1.1) forhealthy dogs
(see Table 10.7). The difference berween measured and expected P,co, values is 14 mmHg and thus much
compensation for the metabolic acidosis, and thus there may be a concurrent respiratory acidosis. However,
the 14mmHg was calculated using values found in experimental healthy dogs,and thus the compensation
might be appropriate.
8.The estimated compensatory factors in this section are for dogs and were deter-
mined during experimental conditions. Experiments for cats, horses, and cattle
would probably yield different compensatory factors.Resulrs in spontaneous diseases
with multisystem involvement would probably also be different
HYPOXEMIAANDHYPOXIA
Expected Po2
A.Arterial blood is the only acceptable sample for the assessment of oxygenation of blood
by therespiratory system.The expected Povaries with theFlo, the Ocontent of
the inhaled gas (FIoin decimal fraction,PoinmmHg):(0.2,95-100),(0.3,150),
(0.4,200),(0.5,250）,(0.8,400）, and (1.0,500）.20
B.For room air, the Flo, is near 0.2, and thus a Poof 90-100 mmHg is expected.Some
authors consider a Poof <8OmmHg to be hypoxemia,2although one could also
consider hypoxemia to be present whenever Po, falls below a valid lower reference
limit.Hypoxemic stimulus of chemoreceptors is reported to occur when Po is
<70mmHg²or<60mmHg.
582
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 10.9.Diseases and conditions that cause hypoxemiaa
Decreased inhaled Ocontent:high altitude or closedventilation area
Inhibition or dysfunction of the medullary respiratory center (see Table 10.4)
Inhibition or dysfunction of the respiratory muscles (see Table 10.4)
Upper airway dysfunction: foreign body, vomitus, or mechanical hypoventilation
*Impaired gas exchange at pulmonary capillaries (see Table 10.4)
*Arelatively common disease or condition
Disorders that cause respiratory acidosis (T Pco,) because of reduced gas exchange in the lungs
(Table 10.4) will likely also resulr in ↓ P,o, but the decrease may not be sufficient to be classified a
hypoxemia.
Notes: Compared to adult horses, neonatal foals have lower P,o, higher P,co, higher [HCO; ], and
slightly lower pH values because of underdeveloped lungs. Similar patterns occur in calves and possibly
other species.
C.With the increased use of point-of-care instruments thar have O electrodes, more Po
values are being measured. In free-flowing venous blood in an animal with a Ponear
95 mmHg, the Po will be near 40 mmHg.If the sample is collected from an occluded
vein, the Po will be lower. If collected from capillary blood, the Po should be
between the Po and P,ovalues.
D.Blood gas data in neonates are different from those of adult animals.2324
1.Compared to the adult horse, a foal at birth has lower Po (< 40 mmHg) and
higher P.co values (> 50 mmHg) during its first few hours. The Po increases
quickly to near adult values by 1 d of age, and the P,co slowly changes to adult
valuesby4-7 dof age.
2.Similar patterns are seen in neonatal calves.ThePoapproaches adult values by 1 d
of age, and the P,co approaches adult values by 2 d of age.
3.Plasma[HCO,] values are also greater initially, corresponding to the greater Pco
pressures.
IL.
Hypoxemia (decreased dissolved O in blood; decreased Po2) may cause hypoxia (decreased
Odelivery or utilization of Oby tissues), but there are other disorders in which there is
hypoxia but not hypoxemia.The different types of hypoxia can be divided into seven
groups.5Hypoxemic and hypoxic disorders or conditions and the expected laboratory data
forhypoxia disorders arelistedinTables 10.9and10.10
A.Atmospheric hypoxia: inhalation of atmosphere that has decreased O content (e.g., high
altitude,anesthetic problem,or in an airtight box)
1.The inhalation of atmosphere that has decreased O content causes a decreased Pao
and thus less O, diffuses to blood (↓ P,o2) and less O, binds to Hgb (↓ So). The
combination ofPo andSoresults in a decreased amount of Oin the blood
(↓Oct)
2.If the hypoxemia stimulates the peripheral chemoreceptors(carotid or aortic bodies）,
increased respirations result in hyperventilation and thus ↓ Pco, (respiratory
alkalosis) if the CO, is actually exhaled (see tidal hypoxia in the next section).
B.Tidal hypoxia: decreased O uptake because of impaired respiratory exchange (e.g,
respiratory obstruction,or hypoventilation caused by anesthetic agents)
1.The impaired delivery of air to the alveoli has the same effect on the oxygenation
ofblood as conditions that cause atmospherichypoxia;that is,Po,So,and
↓Oct.
10/BLOOD GASES,BLOODpH,ANDSTRONGIONDIFFERENCE
583
Table 10.10.Blood
Hypoxia
Atmospheric
Tidal
Alveolar
Hemoglobic
Stagnant
Histotoxic
Demand
P.02
↑
↑
↑
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
So2
↑
↑
WRI
WRI
WRI
SpO2
↑
↑
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
Ps0
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
0
↑
↑
↑
↑
WRI
WRI
WRI
PAO2
↓
↑
↑
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
a/A
WRI
WRI
↑
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
AaDO,
WRI
WRI
↑
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
Po/FI
WRI
WRI
↑
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
P,cO2
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
pH
WRI-↑b
WRI-↓
WRI-↓
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
If the hemoglobic hypoxia is caused by anemia, the So will be WRI. If the hemoglobic hypoxia is
oxyhemoglobinemia, the Sowill be decreased.
bIf the hypoxemiaresults in the stimulation ofrespiration,hyperventilation would result in decreased
P,co, and a respiratory alkalosis.
If there is inadequate ventilation, there would be an increased Pco and a respiratory acidosis.
2.The impaired respiratory exchange causes impaired excretion of CO.Thus, there
may be T P,co, and a respiratory acidosis.
C.Alveolar hypoxia: decreased Ouptake because of decreased alveolar function (e.g
pneumoniaemphysemaleural ffusion,ntrapulmonary exudates,right-to-left shunts,
ventilation-perfusion mismatch, pulmonary edema, or pulmonary fibrosis)
1.The impaired diffusion of Ohas the same effect on the oxygenation of blood as do
²opue“os
However, the arterial alveolar O tension gradient (AaDO) and arterial alveolar O
tension ratio (a/A) identify the defective diffusion of O,from the alveolus to blood.
2.The impaired respiratory exchange results in impaired excretion of CO.Thus, there
may be ↑ P,coand a respiratory acidosis.
3.A right-to-left shunt results inPobecause venous bloodwith a Po of
45-50 mmHg is mixed with arterial blood with a Po of 95-100 mmHg
(if breathing air).
4.A ventilation-perfusion mismatch occurs when blood is perfusing nonfunctional
alveoli;hat is,blood isavailable orgasexchangebutthe gas exchange doesnot
occur.Thus,blood from those
oxygenated (remains as “venous"blood)
and then mixeswith oxygenated arterial blo
from other pulmonary tissue.
D.Hemoglobic hypoxic: decreased Obound to Hgb (e.g., methemoglobinemia or CO
poisoning) or decreased Hgb (e.g., anemia)
1.For these disorders, there is not a defect in the delivery of O to the blood; thus, the
Po will not be decreased. Po is a measure of the tension created by dissolved O2
in the plasma and is not dependent on blood [Hgb].
2.If an animal is anemic, the Oct will be decreased because most of the O in blood
is bound to Hgb. If there is not a concurrent defective Hgb,the So will not be
decreased.If an anemicanimal’s blood contains metHgb or COHgb,the Sowill
also be decreased.
584
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
3.With methemoglobinemia,both ferrous (Fe²) and ferric (Fe)heme molecules are
present.In this state,the ferric heme cannor bind Oand the ferrous heme has
greater affinity for O.Both processesresult in hypoxia26
4.CO has a much greater affinity for Hgb than does O, and thus even small amounts
of CO interfere with delivery of O to tissues.
E.Stagnant bypoxia is decreased delivery of O,to tissue because of poor blood circulation
(e.g., shock,blood vessel occlusion,or hyperviscosity syndrome).Blood gas data will
not detect an abnormality.
F.Historoxic hypoxia is defective O use by tissues because of interference with metabolic
pathways (e.g., some drugs or alcohol).Blood gas data will not detect an abnormaliry.
G.Demand bypoxia is increased O demand by hyperfunctioning cells (e.g.,hyperthyroid
ism, pyrexia). Blood gas data will not detect an abnormality.
III.
Sp02
A.A decreasing Spo typically indicates the development of hypoxemia but only when the
Po is <90 mmHg.With greater Flo such as occurs during anesthesia,greater Po
values are expected. Because of the shape of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve (Fig
10.4),falling Sovaluesmay not be detected until thePois<60 mmHg,which
might be considerably less than expected for high Flo values.
the Sporemained ar > 90 % even when OHgb percentage decreased to 30 %, because
the oximeter does not differentiate COHgb from OHgb. Similar but less severe, false
positive interference was seen with increasing concentrations of methemoglobin. As
shown in Eq.10.5b, the OHgb percentage will decrease with increased concentrations
of COHgb or methemoglobin.
C.In horses, the Spo, underestimated the So by an average of 4.4 % when So was
≥90 % and overestinmated the So by an average of 4.1 % when Sowas ≤90 %.27
The errors might be due to different properties of equine blood compared to human
blood.
D.In dogs with S.o of ≥ 70 %, the average difference berween Spo and S.owas about
34 % (e.g., Spo of 87 % and S.oof 90 %), depending on application site (tongue or
tail) and type of probe (ear or finger). The reason for the difference is not known. As
with the equine data,pulse oximetry underestimated the Sowhen it was high and
overestimated the S.owhen it was low.
STRONGIONDIFFERENCE(SID)ANDSTEWARTSMETHODOF
ACID-BASEANALYSIS
I.
Evaluation of electrolyte relationships led to an alternate method of assessing metabolic
(nonrespiratory) acid-base disturbances (Stewart's quantitative analysis of acid-base
chemistry) and the calculation of SID. A complete description of Stewart's method and
with more traditional assessment of acid-base disorders is presented.For a complete
analysisofStewartsmethodandSID,additionalreferencesshould be studied.3
In Stewart's method:
A.Electrolyte disturbances are approached in the context of physiochemistry with
considerationofequilibriumequationsconservationofmass,andbalanceofcharge
10/BLOOD GASES,BLOODpH,ANDSTRONGIONDIFFERENCE
585
B.Nontraditional defnitions of acids and bases are used.
C.All electrolytes in biologic fuids are considered to be involved in acid-base balance, and
maintenance of electrical neutrality is expected (Eq. 10.8a).
[Na+]+[K+]+[fCa²+]+[fMg²+]+[H+]+[NH+]=
(10.8a.)
[OH-]+[CF]+[HCO,]+[CO]+[AIb]+[PO]+[uSA]
where x and y represent the variable charges on albumin and phosphates, respectively,
and uSA includes,lactate,acetoacetate,βhydroxybutyrate,ther acidic anions f
metabolism, and exogenous anions.
([Na]+[K+]+[fCa²+]+[fMg²+])-（[CI]+[uSA])=
(10.8b.)
([OH]+[HCO,]+[CO²] +[AIb²]+[PO²])-([H+] +[NH+])
strong cations - strong anions= weak anions- weak cations
If SIDurue = strong cations- strong anions
Then SIDru=weak anions-weak cations
SID=([OH] +[HCO] +[CO²] +[AIb²] +[PO])-([H+] +[NH+])
(10.8c.)
D.Analytes involved in acid-base balance are considered tobe either independent or
dependent variables.
1.The independent variables are those analytes that are regulated or changed
independently of others:Pco, SID,and Aror (see the definitions in the next
section).
2.The dependent variables are those analytes that change if and only if one of the
independent variables changes. The dependent variables include H+, OH, HCO,
andtCO2.
E.Changes in [H] are predicted from changes in concentrations of strong ions.The
actual blood [H*] (i.e., pH) is not measured.
F.Albumin is included as a contributor to acid-base balance, whereas it is not a formal
ized part of the classic traditional approach. However, albumin concentrations do affect
anion gaps and are considered inbase excess calculations.
G.Hgb isnot included as a contributor to acid-base balance, whereas it is a part of the
calculatedBEpvalue that is common in blood gas data.
II.
Differences in definitions between the rwo systems can lead to confusion.2
A.Definitions in the traditional assessment of acid-base disorders by using pH, Pco,and
HCO,
1.An acid is a substance that can give off a H (a proton) at a given pH (e.g., hydro-
chloric acid is capable of giving off H+).
2.A base is a substance that can bind a H+ (e.g, HCO is capable of binding H).
3.An acidosis is a condition in which acidemia (lower pH and higher [H*]) tends to
occur.
4.An alkalosis is a condition in which alkalemia (higher pH and lower [H+]) tends to
occur.
B.Definitions in the Stewart's method
1.Strong cations or strong anions are those ions that are completely dissociated in
physiologic fuids. (Note that the definition does not consider the ions that are
complexed with protein or nonprotein ions; for example, most serum calcium ions
586
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
are complexed with anions and are not free or completely dissociated ions. Also, Na+
and CI behave as though they are only 75 % dissociated in plasma.)16
a.Strong carions (Na,K+,fCa²,and fMg²）): Strong cations (e.g,Nat) are
considered bases because when added to ECF,and if there is not a balancing shift
of a strong ion (e.g,removal of K+ or addition of Cl),H+ shifts out of the ECF
to make it more alkaline.
b.Strong anions (Cl, sulfate, lactate, acetoacetate, β-hydroxybutyrate, and other
acidic products of metabolism): Strong anions (e.g., Cl) are considered acids
becausewhen added toECF,and if thereisnot a balancing shift of a strongion
（e.g, addition ofNaorremoval of lactate),Hshifs into theECF tomake it
more acidic.
2. An acidosis is a condition in which there is an excess of strong anions ("acids") or a
is decreased.
3.An alkalosis is a condition in which there is an excess of strong cations (bases") or a
deficit of strong anions (acids）.In the SID approach,an alkalosis is present if SID
is increased.
4.Weak electrolytes are those electrolytes that are in equilibria in physiologic fuids.
a.Weak cations:NH,H,and some -globulins
b.Weak anions:HCO,CO²,PO,HPO²,HPO,and proteins(mostly
albumin)
5.Aror is the sum of the nonvolatile weak acids (HA + A). In plasma, these occur as
various anionic forms of PO4and proteins (albumin and globulins).
6.SID is the difference between the sum of strong ion concentrations; that is,
the difference between the sum of strong cation concentrations and the sum of
strong anion concentrations. By rearranging Eq. 10.8a, it is shown that SIDu
(i.e., strong cations minus strong anions) also equals the difference between the
sum of weak anion concentrations and the sum of weak cation concentrations
(Eq. 10.8b). This is an important concept for interpreting calculated SID values.
Thus, SIDuu could be calculated if the analyte concentrations in Eq. 10.8c could
be measured.
C.Using the same concepts as Stewart,² Singer and Hastings defined buffer base, which
is identical to Stewart's SID.
III.
SID equations:Several SID equations have been proposed. Other than the SIDtu,these
SID equations yield values that are estimates based on assumptions. If the assumptions are
not correct, the estimates will not be correct. The naming of the equations in this edition
differs from the previous edition and is patterned after some of the recent SID
publications.
A.SIDue (Eq. 10.9a): This equation is consistent with the SID definition but is not
usefulbecause concentrations ofmany analytes in the formula are not measured in
clinical laboratories.
SIDue= (sum of strong cations)-(sum of strong anions)
(10.9a.)
([V]+[I]）-（+]+]+[+]+[N）=
uSA includes SO,lactate,acetoacerate,β-hydroxybutyrate,other acidic anions of
metabolism,and exogenous anions.
10/BLOODGASES,BLOODH,ANDSTRONG1ONDIFFERENCE
587
SID=（[Na+]+[K+])-[Cl-]
(10.9b.)
SID4=（[Na+]+[K+])-([Cl]+[L-lactate ])（10.9c.)
SID=（[Na+]+[K+]+[fCa²+]）-（[CH]+[L-lactate-])
(10.9d.)
SID=（[Na]+[K+]+[fCa²+]+[fMg²+]）-([CI]+[L-lactate])
(10.9e.)
ourseSmart
SIDcr ered=[Na]mam noma-[Cl ]oeed
(10.9f)
[Na+]
whereCl-.
,=Cl
[Na]asie
intervals for the patient's values.
B.SID (Eq. 10.9b): This equation estimates the SID by using three strong ion concen-
trations that are routinely measured in serum or plasma, this is probably one of the
more common clinical SID formulas. Note that ir does not include the concentrations
of fCa²+,fMg,oruSA;thus,changes in those analyteconcentrationswould cause the
estimate of SID to be inaccurate.
C.SID (Eq. 10.9c):335 This equation estimates the SID by using four strong ion concen
trations (the three for SID,plus L-lactate). Note that it does not include the concentra
tions of fCa²+,fMg²,or uSA other than L-lactate （such as D-lactate); thus, changes in
those analyte concentrations would cause the estimate of SID to be inaccurate.
D.SID, (Eq. 10.9d):3 This equation estimates the SID by using five strong ions (the four
for SIDplus fCa²+).Note that it does not include the concentrations of fMg or uSA
other than L-lactate (such as D-lactate); thus, changes in those analyte concentrations
would cause the estimate of SID to be inaccurate.
E.SID(Eq.10.9e):5This equation estimates the SID by using six strong ion concentra-
tions (those used for SID, plus fMg²). Note that it does not include the concentrations
ofuSA other than L-lactate (such as D-lactate);thuschanges in those analyte concen-
trations would cause the estimate of SID to be inaccurate.
F.SIDcrd (Eq. 10.9f32
1.The basis of the [CJertd is that changes in Na]are expected to bematched by
proportional changes in[Cl] if there is either hemoconcentration or hemodilution;
for example,a 10 % increase in [Na] should be accompanied by a 10 % increase in
[Cl]. However, the absolute change in [Na] would be greater than the absolute
change in[Cl];forexample,150-165versus110-121.By calculating a [Cl]oreed
based on relative changes in [Na], one assumes that any additional change in
SIDcrreta is due to changes in other anions (i.e.,HCO,albumin,PO,or other
strong anions").
2. The equation is based on assumptions and estimations and thus is prone to be
inaccurate. A major assumption is that all animals start with a mean [Na*] of a
normal" animal. Based on actual distribution of [Na*] in healthy animals, the
assumption is rarely true. There is also an assumption that a “mean normal
concentration for one laboratory will apply to otherlaboratoriesAgain,his
assumption is typically not true.If the formula is used, then a“mean normal
588
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
concentration appropriate for the laboratory method (the same as used for patient's
[Na+]) should beused
G.OtherSIDformulashavebeen proposed thatinclude somebut not alof the strong
ions.2936 Also, there are not standardized names for SID formulas, and thus SID
information should be interpreted carefully.For example, some formulas contain
[fCa²+],[fMg²],or [L-lactate],but not [acetoacetate] or[B-hydroxybutyrate].Reference
intervals for estimated SID values and possible causes for abnormal estimated SID
values vary depending on the analytes that are or are not used in the formulas and the
methods used to measure analyte concentrations.
IV.
Comparison ofSID formulas
A.The relationship between SIDuue and SID, is shown in Eq.10.10. SID is a good
approximation of SIDu if concentrations of fCa,fMg²,and uSA are small.
However, when there is a high [uSA] such as occurs in lactic acidosis or ketoacidosis,
the SID,value will be greater than the SIDu thar is, the SID, overestimates the
SIDtrue*
Given Eq.10.9a and 10.9b,
(10.10.)
SIDue=SID+([fCa²+]+[fMg²])-[uSA]
or SID=SIDru-[fCa²+] -[fMg²] +[uSA]
B.The relationship berween SIDuand the other formulas used to estimate SID
(Eq. 10.9b-e) varies with the analytes that are or are not included in the formulas.
It ismore dificult to compare SIDcreneedwith the other SID formulas.However,
the SIDcrorered would also overestimate the SIDu if there were an increased
[uSA].
C.The changes in SID values that are caused by changes in weak ion concentrations can
be seen by examining Eq.10.1la-f (Eq.10.1la is the same as Eq.10.8c).As shown in
Eq. 10.1le, changes in SID, occur when the sum of [HCO,],[Alb*], [PO], and
[uSA] changes.
1.If[Alb²],[PO], and [uSA] stay constant, changes in SID, refect changes in
[HCO,]; that is,↑ SID reflects ↑[HCO] and thus a metabolic alkalosis, or
↓SIDrefects↓[HCO,] and thus a metabolic acidosis. However, the relationship
between SIDand[HCO] is less predictable,or is not present,when there are
changes in [AIb"], [PO], and [uSA].
2.Equation 10.11c also shows that SIDu depends on two major factors: [HCO,]
and [Aror]. Thus, if PO and protein concentrations do not change, changes in
[HCO,] change the SIDrueThis is where the traditional approach and SID
approach to acid-base balances have commonality.
a.Metabolic alkalosis=↑[HCO] =↑ SIDe
b.Metabolic acidosis=↓[HCO]=↓ SID
3.Another way to examine Eq. 10.1la and b is in terms of the buffering capacity of
plasma. The electrolytes in those equations that can buffer H+ are HCO, PO,
and Albr-. Thus, in terms of the weak electrolytes, an increase in SIDuu indicates an
increase in the plasma buffer concentration (i.e., traditional metabolic alkalosis)
Conversely, a decrease in SID indicates a decrease in the plasma buffer concentra
tion (i.e., traditional metabolic acidosis).
10/BLOOD GASES,BLOODpH,ANDSTRONGION DIFFERENCE
589
Given Eq.10.8b.and 10.9a.,
(10.11a.)
SID=([OH]+[HCO]+[CO,²]+[AIb²-]+[PO])-（[H+]+[NH+])
Because typical plasma concentrations of OH,CO,H,and NHarerelatively small,
SID=[HCO]+[AIb²-] +[PO]
(10.11b.)
Given[Alb²] +[PO]=[A],
(10.11c)
SID=[HCO,] +[A]
Given Eq. 10.10 and that typical plasma [fCa²]and [fMg] are relatively small,
SID=SID,-[uSA]
(10.11d.)
Given Eq. 10.11c and 10.11d,
(10.11e.)
SID-[uSA] =[HCO]+[A]
orSID=[HCO] +[A] +[uSA]
Considering Eq.10.9b,Eq.10.11e,and that
(10.11f.)
anion gap =([Na+] +[K+])-([CH]+[HCO]),
anion gap=SID-[HCO]=[A] +[uSA]
D.For those who are accustomed to interpretation of anion gaps (see Chapter 9),
Eq. 10.11f shows the relationship between anion gap and SID. As described in
Chapter9,the anion gap ismostly due to the ionic charge of proteins if there are not
increased concentrations of organic anions.
E.The anion gap calculation can also be used to calculate a SID value (Eq. 10.12c).
Because an increased anion gap typically indicates an increased concentration
of anions other than HCOor Cl,the increase in anion gap can be used to
estimate the [uSA]. This formula would provide a more accurate estimate of
SID than does the SIDformula when there is a metabolic acidosis.However,
the need to calculate a SID is minimal if a decreased[HCO,] has already been
recognized.
Given that SIDu = (sum of strong cations) -(sum of strong anions)
(10.12a.)
SIDue=（[Na]+[K+]+[fCa²+]+[fMg²+])-([Cl-]+[uSA])
where uSA includes SO, lactate, acetoacetate,β-hydroxybutyrate, other
acidic anions of metabolism, and exogenous anions.
And that an increased anion gap(AG) =[uSA]
(10.12b.)
(+）（+
(10.12c)
V.
Interpretation of abnormal SID,values
A.According to Stewart's method and definitions, changes in SIDuu create either an
alkalosis or an acidosis.Based on the definitions and the calculation of SID，the major
types of acid-base disorders are listed inTable10.11.Note that the expected changes in
the dependent variables (ie., [HCO,] and pH) are those expected in the traditional
approach to acid-base disorders;↑[HCO] inmetabolic alkaloses, and↓[HCO] in
metabolic acidoses.
590
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 10.11.Classification of acid-base disorders from P,CO,Aror,and SID
Expected
dependent
Change in
Change in
variable change
independent variable
measured analyte
Classification
[HCO,]
pH
P.CO2
↓PcO2
Respiratory alkalosis
WRI
↑
↑P,CO
Respiratory acidosis
WRI
ATOT
↑
↑Albumina
Hyperalbuminemic acidosis
↑
↑
↑
↑PO
Hyperphosphatemic acidosis
↑
↑
↓Albuminb
Hypoalbuminemic alkalosis
SID/SID,
↑/个
↑Na
Hypernatremic or contraction
alkalosisd
↑/↑
↓CF
Hypochloremic allkalosis
↑/↑
+N↑
Hyponatremic or dilutional
acidosis"
Hyperchloremic acidosis
↑
↓
↓/WRI
Nonef
Metabolic acidosis and ↑ [uSA]
↓/↑
Variablek
Metabolic acidosis and T[uSA]
/
If hyperproteinemia, then hyperproteinemic acidosis
bIf hypoproteinemia, then hypoproteinemic alkalosis
SID=SIDrue
an absolute basis.Therefore,SID increases (but mildly).
*Opposite explanation of hypernatremic alkalosis
Concentrations of Na, K,and CI are all WRI.
Because the SID, is WRI, the acidosis would be recognized if it is known that either a ↓[HCO] or an
Couldbe found in hyponatremianormonatremic,orhypernatremic animals.The SIDis increased
because the difference between [Na +K+] and [Cl] is increased.
The acidosis would be recognized if it is known that either a[HCO] oran↑ anion gap (which
indicates ↑ [uSA]) is present.
B.Based on the definitions, changes in concentrations of rwo ions may cause a mixed
acid-base disorder;for example,loss of plasma HO could result in concurrent hyperna-
tremic alkalosis and hyperalbuminemic acidosis.The concurrent alkalosis and acidosis
in the Stewart method raises the question of whether there is noSIDosis.
VI.
Asrecommended by some authors,SID values should beinterpretedwith routine blood
gas values (pH,Pco, and [HCO]) to determine whether the animal has an acid-base
problem is a nonrespiratory acid-base disturbance,then the contributions ofnonbicarbon-
ate electrolytes can be explored with Stewart's method.
VII.
Prior to the proposed use of the strong ion theory, an understanding of an animals
acid-base and electrolyte disorderwas obtained through theinterpretation of pH,Pco
[HCO,],BEs,[Na], [K], [Cl], anion gap, and albumin concentration (see the preceding
10/BLOODGASES,BLOODH,ANDSTRONG1ONDIFFERENCE
591
Acid-Base Abnormalities section and Chapter 9).Evaluation of such information has
VIII. Those who study SID theory and its application state that the SID approach requires
species-specific values for Aori that is,the sum of the concentrations of nonvolatile buffers,
serum or plasma proteins, and PO4. As stated earlier (in the preceding sect. II.B.5) and in
Eq. 10.1lc, plasma Aror consists primarily of the various anionic forms of PO4 and
proteins (albumin and globulins).
A.There havebeen attempts to calculate plasma Arorvalues for healthy cattle dogs
cats,and birds. The calculated values (mean ± sd) were obtained by using results
from only 10 dogs, 10 cats, 12 pigeons, and 9 calves (or pooled bovine and ovine
plasma).For most of the data, the variations in the calculated plasma Aror values
represent the expected variations in plasma protein andPOconcentrations in such
samples from healthy animals.
B.Using those calculated mean plasma ATor values and measured[HCO；],an SID value
can be calculated (Eq.10.1lc). However because there are biologic variations in the
serum concentrations of PO and proteins, a mean Aror value may not be appropriate
forall healthyanimals andwill defnitelynotbeappropriatefor animalsthathave
abnormal protein and PO4 concentrations.Also because of the lack of agreement in
many clinical assays, plasma Aror values calculated for one set of assays may not be
appropriate for another set of assays.
References
1. Heusel JW, Scott MG. 1999. Physiology and disorders of water, electrolytes, and acid-base metabolism. In: Burtis
CA, Ashwood ER,eds.Tietz Tetbek of Clinicl Cheristry, 3d edition, 10951120.Philadelphia:WB Saunders
2. Siggaard-Andersen O, Fogh-Andersen N. 1995. Base excess or buffer base (strong ion difference) as measure of a
non-respiratory acid-base disturbance. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 39(Suppl 107):123-128.
3. Jones NL. 1987. Blood Gase and Acid-Base Physiology. New Yorle Thieme Medical.
4.Salyer JW, Chatburn RL,Dolcini DM. 1989. Measured vs calculated oxygen saturation in a population of pediatric
intensive care patients. Respir Care 34:342-348.
and Applications,249-263.StLouis:CV Mosby
6. Jacobson JD, Miller MW, Matthews NS, Hartsfield SM, Knauer KW. 1992. Evaluation of aocuracy of pulse oximetry
in dogs.Am J Vet Res 53:537-540.
7. Whitehair KJ, Watney GCG, Leith DE, DeBowes RM. 1990. Pulse oximetry in horses. Vet Surg 19:243248.
8.Huss BT, Anderson MA, Branson KR, Wagner-Mann CC,Mann FA. 1995. Evaluation of pulse oximeter probes and
probe placement in healthy dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 3l:9-14
9. Jahr JS, Lurie F, Driessen B, Tang Z,Louie RF, Kullar R, Kost G. 2000.Validation of oxygen saturation measure
ments in a canine model of hemoglobin based oxygen carrier (HBOC) infusion. Clin Lab Sci 13:173-179.
10.Lurie F, Driessen B, Jahr JS, Reynoso R, Gunther RA. 2003. Validity of arterial and mixed venous oxygen saturation
measuements in a canine hemorrhage mode afer resuscitation with varying concentations ofhemoglobin-based
oxygen carrier. Anesth Analg 96:46-50.
11. Hopper K, Rezende ML, Haskins SC. 2005. Assessment of the effect of dilution of blood samples with sodium
heparin on blood gas, electrolyte, and lactate measurerments in dogs. Am J Vet Res 66:656660.
12. Scon MG, Heusel JW, LeGrys VA. 1999. Electrolytes and blood gases. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, eds. Tiet
Textbook of Cliniea/ Chemistry, 3rd edition, 1056-1092. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
13. Deane JC, Dagleish MP, Benamou AE, Wolf BT, Marlin D. 2004. Effects of syringe material and temperature and
duration of storage on the stability of equine arterial blood gas variables. Vet Anaesth Analg 31:250257.
14. DiBartola SP, de Morais HSA. 1992. Respiratory acid-base disorders. In: DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid Therapy in Sma
Aximal Practice, 1st edition, 258275. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
15. de Morais HA, DiBartola SP. 2000. Respiratory acid-base disorders. In: DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid Thrrapy in Srmal
Awma/ Prachice, 2nd edition, 241250. Philadelphia: WB Saunders
592
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
16.Rose BD,Post TW. 2001. Cinical Physiology ofArid-Base and ElectrolyteDisordes, 5th edition. New York
MeGraw-Hill
17.i-STAT Corporation.2000. Decreased PCO results associated with thiopental sodium. East Windsor,NJ: i-STAT
edition, 251261. Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
19. de Morais HSA, DiBartola SP. 1991. Ventilatory and metabolic compensation in dogs with various diseases and signs
of disease. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 1:39-49.
20. Muir WW IIl, Hubbell JAE. 1989. Acid-base balance and blood gases. In: Handbook of Veterimry Anesthrsia, 19 1
201. St Louis: CV Mosby.
21.Lumb WV, Johns EW. 1984. Veterinary Anethesia, 2nd edition. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
22. Nunn JF. 1987. Applied Respiratory Phyiolgy, 3rd edition. Boston: Butterworth.
23.Vaala WE, House JK. 2002. Manifestations of disease in the neonate. In: Smith BP, ed. Large Animal Intemal
Medicie,3rdedition,319-381.St Louis: CV Mosby.
24.Stewat JHRoseRJBarkAM94.Repiratory studies infoals from birth to seven days oldEquineVet J
16:323-328.
25. Saklad M. 1953. Classifcation of hypoxia. In: Sakad M, ed. Inhalation Therapy and Reuscitation, 2934. Springfield,
IL: Charles C Thomas.
26. Ranney HM, Sharma V. 2001. Structure and function of hemoglobin. In: Beutler E, Lichtman MA, Collr BS, Kipps
TJ, Seligsohn U, eds. Wlliams Hematology, 6th edition, 345-353. New York: MeGraw-HilL
27. Gootjes P, Moens Y, Lagerweij E. 1994. Pulse oximetry in horses A study with the aid of an in vitro blood circuit.
Anesthesiologists,Guelph, Canada, 135.
28. Stewart PA. 1983. Modern quantitative acid-base chermistry. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 61:14441461.
29.Fencl V,Leith DE. 1993. Stewarts quantitative acid-base chemistry: Applications in biology and medicine. Respir
Physiol 91:1-16.
30. Eicker SW. 1990. An introduction to strong ion difference. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 6:4549.
31. de Morais HSA. 1992. A nontaditional approach to acid-base disorders. In: DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid Therapy in Small
AimaPractice, 1st edition, 297-316. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
32.Russell KE,Hansen BD,Stevens JB. 1996. Strong ion difference approach to acid-base imbalances with dinical
applications to dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26:1185-1201.
33. Constable PD. 1999. Clinical assessment of acid-base status: Strong ion difference theory.Vet Clin North Am Food
Anim Pract 15:44747 1.
34. Singer RB, Hastings AB. 1948. An improved clinical method for the estimation of disturbances of the acid-base
balance ofhuman blood. Medicine (Baltimore) 27:223-242
35.MeCullough SM, Constable PD. 2003.Calculation of the total plasma concentration of nonvolatile weak acids and
the ffective disociation constant of nonvolatile buffers in plasma for use in the strong ion approach to acid-basc
balance in cats. Am J Vet Res 64:1047-1051.
36. Constable PD. 1997. A simplifed strong ion model for acid-base equilibria: Application to horse plasma. J Appl
Physiol 83:297-311.
37. Constable PD, Stimpfi HR, Navetat H, Berchtold J, Schelcher F. 2005. Use of a quantitative strong ion approach to
determine the mechanism for acid-base abnormalities in sick calves with or without diarrhea. J Vet Intern Med
19:581-589.
38. Constable PD. 2002. Calculation of variables describing plasma nonvolatile weak acids for use in the strong ion
approach to acid-base balance in catde. Am J Vet Res 63:482-490.
39. Constable PD, Staimpfi HR. 2005. Experimental determination of net protein charge and A(rot) and K(a) of
nonvolatile buffers in canine plasma. J Vet Intern Med 19:507-514.
40. MeCullough SM, Constable PD. 2003. Calculation of the total plasma concentration of nonvolatile weak adids and
the effective dissociation constant of nonvolatile buffers in plasma for use in the strong ion approach to acid-base
balance in cats. Am J Vet Res 64:1047-1051.
41.Stampfi H,Taylor M,MNicoll C,Gancz AY, Constable PD.2006.Experimental deternination of net protein
charge, [A]tot, and Ka of nonvolatile buffers in bird plasma J Appl Physiol 100:1831-1836.
42.Ashwood ER,Kost G,Kenny M. 1983.Temperature corection of blood-gas and pH measurements.Clin Chem
29:1877-1885
oxygen afinity and regulating factors of the blood oxygen transport in canine and feline blood. Res Vet Sci 77:8388.
healthy Standardbred horses. Vet J 169:251-256.
Chapter 11
REGULATORYHORMONES
Total Calcium(tCa²+) Concentration.
594
PhysiologicProcesses
594
Il.Analytical Concepts of [tCa²]....
596
Ill. Hypercalcemia..
598
IV. Hypocalcemia.
602
Free Calcium (fCa²+) Concentration .
610
1.
PhysiologicProcesses
610
ll.Analytical Concepts of [fCa²+].....
610
Ill.Abnormal Concentrations.
613
IV.Conceptual relationshipsof[tCa²+] and[fCa²+]....
614
Inorganic Phosphorus (Pi) Concentration...
615
1.PhysiologicProcesses.
615
Il.Analytical Concepts of [Pi].
617
Il. Hyperphosphatemia.
618
IV. Hypophosphatemia.
619
Total Magnesium (tMg²) Concentration..
621
1.F
Physiologic Processes
621
Il.Analytical Concepts of [tMg²].
622
Ill.Hypermagnesemia
622
IV.Hypomagnesemia
623
Free Magnesium (fMg²+)Concentration.
625
ImmunoreactiveParathyroid Hormone (iPTH) Concentration
626
Parathyroid Hormone-Related Protein(PTHrp) Concentration
628
Vitamin D Concentration.
628
Calcitonin Concentration.
630
Major Patterns for Calcium (Ca²+) and Inorganic Phosphorus (Pi) Disorders ...
631
593
594
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 11.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
[x]
xconcentration（x=analyte)
1,25-DHCC
1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol(calcitriol)
24,25-DHCC
24,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol
25-HCC
25-Hydroxycholecalciferol (calcidiol)
Calcium
ECF
Extracellular fuid
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
fCa2+
Free ionized calcium
fMg2+
Free ionized magnesium
GFR
Glomerular fltration rate
GH
Growth hormone
HHM
Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy
ICF
Intracellular fuid
iPTH
Immunoreactive parathyroid hormone
Mg2+
Magnesium
Pi
Inorganic phosphorus
PO4
Phosphate including PO,HPO²,or HPO
PTH
Parathyroid hormone
PTHrp
Parathyroid hormone-related protein
RLA
Radioimmunoassay
SI
Systeme International d'Unites
tCa2+
Total calcium
tMg2+
Total magnesium
WRI
Within reference interval
TOTALCALCIUM(tCa)CONCENTRATION
I
Physiologic processes
A.S
Serum or plasma Ca²+is distributed into three major fractions.All Cain body fluids is
ionized,but some is free and some is bound to anionicmolecules.
1.General concepts
a.fCa²+(often referred to as ionized calcium):About 50 % of [tCa²+] is fCa²+,which
is present as free ions in plasma HO. The [fCa²] is the portion of [Ca²] that is
hormonally regulated and contributes to pathologic states.
b.Anion-bound Ca2+
(1)Bound to anionic proteins:About 4045 % of tCa² is bound to negatively
binding is charge dependent, changes in blood pH slightly alter Ca2+
binding and thus slightly alter distribution of Ca²+ berween bound and free
fractions.
(2)Bound to nonprotein anions: About 5-10 % of tCa²+ is bound to citrates,
PO, lactate, and other small, diffusible anions.
2.Using a filtration system to separate protein-bound Ca²from other Ca²fractions
and measuring [fCa²+], the distribution of Ca²+ fractions in 13 dogs averaged 56 %
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
595
Parathyroid glands
Bones
Blood
amino
[++
+↑[PTH]
PTH
Intestine
acids
+↓[1,25-DHCC]
+↑[1.25-DHCC]
[tCa2+]
Kidneys
[fCa2+]
+↑[PTH]
[Ca²+/Pr]
+↑[1.25-DHCC]
+↓[fCa2+]
[Ca2+/A-]
Kidneys
+↑[PTH]
25-HCC
1,25-DHCC
-↑[PTH]
-↑[PO4]
-↑[1,25-DHCC]
+↑[fCa2+]
Mammary
glands
Ca2+
Ca2
Fig.11.1.Relationships of calcium kinetics and the production of PTH and 1,25-DHCC.(Note: Horse
kidneys lack 1o-hydroxylase and thus do not form 1,25-DHCC.)
•PTH production in parathyroid glands is stimulated by ↓ [fCa²] and ↓ [1,25-DHCC] and inhibited by
↑[fCa²]and↑[1,25-DHCC].
·Conversion of 25-HCC to 1,25-DHCC in kidneys is catalyzed by 1a-hydroxylase. The activity of 1o
hydroxylase is promoted by↓[fCa] and ↑ PTH and inhibiredby↑[fCa²] and ↑[PO].
Ca²mobilization from bone and Ca²+ absorption in intestine are promoted by ↑[1,25-DHCC] and 
PTH.Less Ca²+mobilization and absorption occur if there is↓[1,25-DHCC]or↓PTH.
Urinary excretion of Ca²+is enhanced by ↑[fCa²],and excretion is reduced by↓[fCa²],↑PTH, and ↑
1,25-DHCC. Increased excretion of anions may obligate Ca²+ excretion and thus decreases in [fCa²].
·During lactation, a large amount of Ca²t is excreted via milk
Ca² is present in plasma in three forms: fCa², Ca²+ bound to proteins, and Ca² bound to small anions
such as citrate and PO
+, positive effector or stimulates the process , negative effector or inhibits the process; Ca/Pr, calcium
bound to protein; and Ca²/A, calcium bound to nonprotein anions.
fCa²,34 %protein bound,and 10 %bound to other anions.²In a group of 20
horses, the [fCa²+] averaged 51 % of the [tCa²+].3
B.Major factors that determine serum [tCa²+] (Fig.11.1)
1.Age: Young dogs (6-24 wk old) have serum [tCa²] about 1-2 mg/dL greater than
mature dogs.5Young foals (1-60 d) have serum [tCa²+] similar to adult values.
Kittens (4-6wk to 20-24 wk) have serum [tCa²+] similar to adult values.Age-
related data were not found for calves.
2.Because serum Ca²+ concentrations in common chemistry profles represent the
[tCa²], a decrease in serum protein concentration (especially hypoalbuminemia)
causes a decrease in the bound Ca²+ and thus may cause hypocalcemia.
3.Absorption of Ca²+ in intestine (mostly in ileum, but from duodenum to colon)
a.In dogs, cats, and cattle, intestinal Ca² absorption requires vitamin D to induce
mucosal epithelial cell synthesis of Ca²-binding proteins.PTH activity augments
596
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
vitamin D actions to increase Ca²+absorption,mostly by stimulating 1,25
DHCC production.
b.Based on renal failure studies in horses, Ca² absorption in the equine intestine
depends less on vitamin D and more on the amount of dietary Ca².8Equine
kidneys lack 1o-hydroxylase (and thus do not convert 25-HCC to 1,25-DHCC)
but can produce small quantities of 24,25-DHCC.
4.Resorption from or deposition of Ca²+ in boneo
a.PTH stimulates Ca²+ pumps in the osteocyte membrane system that promote
Ca²movement from bone to bone fuid to ECF.Secondarily,PTH induces
release substances that stimulate osteoclasts to degrade bone by enzymatic
digestion and acidification.
b.Vitamin D enhances Ca²+resorption from bone by promoting osteoclastic
activity and by enhancing response to PTH.12
c.Calcitonin blocks osteoclastic osteolysis through direct changes in osteoclasts
and by reducing activation of osteoprogenitor cells.However,with continuous
PTH stimulation, osteoclasts escape from the suppressive effects of calcitonin.
5.Resorption of fCa²+from tubular fuid inkidney tubules3
a.Ca²+ (free and bound to small anions) passes freely through the glomerular
filtration barrier, but protein-bound Ca²+ should not pass through. About
66 % of filtered Ca²+ is resorbed passively in proximal tubules with a Na+-Ca²+
cotransport system,25%in the ascending limb of the loopof Henle,and the
remainder is resorbed in the distal tubules.PTH regulates the Caresorption
in the ascending limb of the loop of Henle and in the distal tubuleby activating
role by promoting Ca²+ resorption through the formation of calbindin, a Ca
binding protein in the distal nephron.
b.Angiotensin II stimulates the resorption of Nain the proximal tubules via a
Na-Ca² cotransport system. Ca² is concurrently resorbed.
C.Ca²and PO interaction.
1.The [fCa²] and [PO4] in plasma are great enough in healthy animals that Cas(PO)2
complexes would form if inhibitors were not present.4
2.Ca²+×PO:When the product of the [tCa²+] and the[Pi] (both in mg/dL)
exceeds 70, metastatic mineralization of tissues (kidneys and lungs) tends to
occur. However, precipitation may not occur,because it may depend on other
factors such as variations in inhibitors of precipitation and relative amounts of
Ca²+ and PO
Il.
Analytical concepts of [tCa²+]
A.Sample
1.Serum is the preferred sample for[tCa²+].Heparinized plasmamay be used in some
assays.
2.Blood anticoagulants that bind Ca²+ (EDTA, citrate, and oxalate) should not be
used in samples for Ca²+ assays.
3.In people,prolonged venous occlusion during blood collection may increase the
[tCa²+] by 0.5-1.0 mg/dL.
B.Common clinical assays are photometric assays that measure [tCa²] (free + bound)
11/CALCIUM.PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
597
2.ArsenazoIll dye colorimetric assay:Bound Ca²+is liberated from anions and then
Ca²reacts with Arsenazo IlI dye to produce a colored complex.In some systems,
aerobic sample handling may increase measured [tCa²+] by 0.4 mg/dL when the
sample's pH increases because of the loss of CO (see Chapter 10).
C.Unit conversion:mg/dLx0.2495=mmol/L,andmEq/L x0.5=mmol/L (SIunit,
nearest 0.02mmol/L)s
D.Because a large portion of tCa²+ is protein bound but the body regulates the [fCa²],
the [tCa²+] may be decreased because of hypoproteinemia or hypoalbuminemia when
the animal does not have a defect in regulating the [fCa²+]. To estimate the effect of
lower protein and albumin concentrations, correction or adjusting formulas have been
proposed.
1.Canine adjusted [tCa²] considering albumin concentration (Eq. 11.la)4
Canine adjusted[tCa²+]=measured[tCa²+]-measured[albumin]+3.5 （±1.3）
(11.1a.)
Example: If [tCa²+] = 8.0 mg/dL & [albumin] =1.0 g/dL;
Canine adjusted [tCa²+]=8.0-1.0 +3.5(1.3)=10.5±1.3
=9.2 to 11.8mg/dL
Interpretation: If the dog was not hypoalbuminemic, its serum [tCa²] would be
from 9.2 to 11.8 mg/dL in 95 % of canine samples.
Canine adjusted [tCa²+]=measured [tCa²+]-(0.4×measured [TP]) +3.3 (± 1.6)
(11.1b.)
Example: If [tCa²+] =8.0 mg/dL &[TP] = 4.0 g/dL;
Canine adjusted[tCa²+]=8.0-(0.4x4.0)+3.3(±1.6)=9.7±1.6
=8.1 to 11.3 mg/dL
Interpretation: If the dog was not hypoproteinemic, its serum [Ca²] would be from
8.1 to 11.3 mg/dL in 95 % of canine samples.
a.Some authors do not include the“±1.3,”which is an estimate of the 95 %
confidence interval of the published data.
b.The formula should be used cautiously for three reasons: (l) the adjusted [tCa²+]
is at best an estimate; (2) the formula was generated using canine tCa²+ and
albumin concentrations determined by one set of assays, and an identical formula
would probably not be obtained if other assays were used; and (3) the formula
does not consider the variations in Ca²+binding to globulins. Ca²+is bound to
albumin and some globulins. The relative amount of Ca²+ bound to albumin and
globulins varies with different albumin to globulin ratios; for example, samples
with panhypoproteinemia versus those with hypoalbuminemia and
hyperglobulinemia.
2.Canine adjusted [tCa²+] considering total protein concentration (Eq.11.1b)
a.Some authors do not include the“±1.6,”which is an estimate of the 95 %
confidence interval of thepublished data.
b. Even though the formula does include total protein concentration, it should be
used cautiously for the aforementioned reasons.
3.Other investigators have found statistically significant correlations between
[albumin] and [tCa²] in dogs, cats, horses, and cattle, but the correlations were
with [albumin] is true, the weakness and variation in the relationship among
598
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
individualssuggestthatrigidcorrectionformulasmaynotbe appropriateespecially
in cattle.
4.In a retrospective analysis of 1633 canine samples, it was concluded that these
adjusted [rCa²] equations do not reliably predict whether a dog has either an
increased or decreased serum[fCa²].1This report did not indicate whether there
was analytical agreement berween the methods used for these samples and the
methods used in the original 1982 study on which the equations were based. Also,
the basis for the reference intervals used to classify results as increased or decreased
was not provided, and the magnitude of the discrepancies between measured and
calculatedvalues was not evaluated
5.It is recommended that the potentialeffects of dysproteinemia be considered when
interpreting [tCa*]. If the formulas for adjusting the measured concentrations in
canine sera are used,the calculated values should be considered only rough
approximations.
III.
Hypercalcemia (Table 11.2)
A.Increased Ca²mobilization from bone or absorption in intestine
1.Increased PTH or PTHrp activity
a.Primaryhyperparathyroidism19-21
(1)Parathyroid adenomas or carcinomas secrete PTH that stimulates Ca²+
resorption from bone and increases Ca²+ absorption in the intestine. Renal
excretion of Ca²may be increased because hypercalcemia causes an
increased filrered load (more fltered than can be resorbed even with
increased PTH activity) but not enough to prevent hypercalcemia.
(2)Hypophosphatemia is expected because PTH is a potent phosphaturic agent.
If GFRis decreased,theremay be normophosphatemia or hyperphosphate-
mia because PTH cannot promote phospharuria if PO4 does not enter the
tubular fuid.
with primary hyperparathyroidism, 73 % had an [iPTH] WRI and 27 %
had an increased [iPTH].In the presence of hypercalcemia an appropriare
physiologic response would be a decreased [iPTH]. Thus, a [iPTH] that is
WRIparticularly in the upper range of the reference interval concurrent
with hypercalcemia, indicates an inappropriate release of PTH.
b. Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (HHM) (pseudo-hyperparathyroidism)
(1)In some paraendocrine neoplasms, a hypercalcemic agent is produced by
cells that normally do not produce the agent. Nearly all neoplasms and
especially carcinomas have the potential to be paraendocrine.
(2)Some paraendocrine neoplasms produce PTHrp. PTHrp is a polypeptide;
its first 13 N-terminal amino acids are very similar to those of the N
terminal of PTH. It has bone osteoclastic and renal resorptive effects
similar to PTH. Many normal cells produce PTHrp, but very little of the
PTHrp produced by healthy cells enters blood." PTHrp plays important
roles in fetal development, but PTH governs systemic Ca²+ homeostasis
afterbirth
(3)Neoplasms known to produce PTHrp (Note: Only some neoplasms of each
type are associated with hypercalcemia,and hypercalcemia without inreased
PTHrp does not exclude lymphoma or other neoplasms.)
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
599
Table 11.2.Diseases and conditions that cause hypercalcemia
Increased Ca²+mobilization from bone or absorption in intestine
Increased PTH or PTHrp activity
Primary hyperparathyroidism (parathyroid neoplasia)
*Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (HHM): lymphoma, several carcinomas
Humoral hypercalcemia of benign disorders (canine schistosomiasis)
Increased vitamin D activity (hypervitaminosis D)
Exogenous vitamin D
Rodenticides containing cholecalciferol
Compounds containing tacalcitol or calcipotriol
Plants containing ergocalciferol (vitamin D)
Excessdietary supplementation
Endogenous vitamin D
Granulomatous infammation:blastomycosis,histoplasmosis,cryptococcosis,
pulmonary angiostrongylosis
Neoplasm-associated hypervitaminosis D
Neoplasia in bone: myeloma, lymphoma, metastatic neoplasm
Decreased urinary excretion of Ca²
Renal failure
*Horses (common in both acute and chronic)
Dogs and cats (uncommon in acute and chronic)
Hypoadrenocorticism in dogs and cats (other theories: increased Ca²+bound to protein or
citrate)
Thiazide diuretics
Increased protein-bound Ca²+: hyperglobulinemia in multiple myeloma
Other or unknown mechanisms
Excess intravenous infusion of Ca²+
Hemoconcentration
Hypothyroidism (juvenile onset)
Retained fetus and endometritis in a dog
Idiopathichypercalcemia in cats
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: The [tCa²+] in healthy young dogs (< 1 yr old, especially in large breeds) may be up to
2 mg/dL higher than the [tCa²] reference intervals for mature dogs.
(a)In dogs, these neoplasms include lymphoma (usually T cell）,224
mammary, squamous cell, thyroid,and thymic),and malignant
melanoma.5 Lymphoma is the most common neoplasm associated with
hypercalcemia in dogs, followed by apocrine gland carcinoma.
(b) In cats, these neoplasms include pulmonary carcinoma, undifferentiated
carcinoma, thyroid carcinoma, and lymphoma.26
(4)Documentation of PTHrp involvement was limited by availability ofvalid
assays for many years. Other hypercalcemia-inducing neoplasms that have
been reported without documented increases in [PTHrp] include the
following:
600
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(a)In dogs,these neoplasms include epidermoid carcinoma²and metastatic
adenocarcinoma.29
(b)In cats, these neoplasms include feline myeloproliferative disease* and
squamous cell carcinoma.31
（c)In horses,these neoplasms include gastric carcinoma, lymphoma335
and adrenocortical carcinoma.36
(5)Other expected findings
(a)Hypophosphatemia may be present. Its presence depends on the
phosphaturic action of the agent relative to GFR.Decreased GFR
reducesthe amount ofPOthatenters the tubular fuid and thus
reduces the amount of PO that is influenced by PTH activity.
(b) Serum [iPTH] determined by an N-terminal assay is often WRI for
reasons that are not understood. Increased [fCa²+] should decrease PTH
production. In people, intact PTH assays are used to detect suppressed
PTHproduction associated withHHM
c.Humoral hypercalcemia of benign disorders
(1)In people, increased PTHrp production by benign neoplasms has been
recognized andhas been called bumoralbypercalcemia of benignancy.37
(2)Two dogs with schistosomiasis caused by Heterobilharzia americana had
hypercalcemia, normophosphatemia, increased [PTHrp], and decreased
[iPTH].3 It was concluded that the increased [PTHrp] was caused by the
associated granulomatous infammation. Necropsy failed to detect evidence
of neoplasia.
2.Increased vitamin D activity (hypervitaminosis D)
a.Excessive vitamin D activity causes hypercalcemia through multiple processes.
Hyperphosphatemia may be a concurrent finding because vitamin D promotes
intestinal absorption ofPO4
(1)It stimulates formation of Ca²-binding proteins (calbindins) in intestinal
mucosa so that more dietary Ca²+ is absorbed.
(2）It enhances bone resorption by making osteolytic cellsmore responsive o
PTH.
(3)It decreases renal excretion of Ca²+ (perhaps through increased calbindin
synthesis).
b. Sources of exogenous vitamin D
(1)Ingestion of a rodenticide containing cholecalciferol (Quintox,Rampage,or
Rat-Be-Gone),which is converted to 25-HCC.4a
(2)Ingestion of tacalcitol or calcipotriolby dogs,414 the latter (also known as
calcipotriene) being present in a topical ointment (Dovonex) that is used for
human psoriasis
Cestrum diurnum (day-blooming jessamine) in Florida6or Solanum in
Hawaii, Brazil, and Argentinao
(4)Excessive dietary intake of vitamin D,s47-9 including ingestion of misfor-
mulated commercial feeds
C.Sources of endogenous vitamin D
(1) Granulomatous infammation
(a)Hypercalcemia is reported in cases ofblastomycosishistoplasmosis5
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
601
(b)The hypercalcemia is produced when stimulated histiocytes or macro-
phages produce vitamin D (1,25-DHCC).
concentrations have been repored with canine apocrine gland adenocarci-
noma and lymphoma. The neoplastic cells may be producing vitamin D or
stimulating vitamin D synthesis in other cells.
3. Neoplasia (hemic or nonhemic) in bone
a.Hypercalcemic agents other than PTH,PTHrp, or vitamin D have been
associated with malignancies in bone. Some dogs with lymphoma and myeloma
cemic agents may be working locally or systemically and may include interleukin
1, interleukin 6, tumor growth factor, tumor necrosis factor, and
prostaglandins.10,24
b.The [Pi] may be within reference intervals or increased.
B.Decreased urinary excretion of Ca²
1.Renal insufficiency or failure
a.Horses with some acute or chronic renal diseases
(1)In health, equine kidneys excrete excess dietary Ca².Renal diseases that
decrease GFR impair renal excretion of Ca²+ and thus cause or contribute to
hypercalcemia. Lowering dietary Ca²+ intake by switching from alfalfa hay
to grass hay can reduce or eliminate the hypercalcemia, but the impaired
GFR persists.Alfalfa hay can contain 2-10 times the Ca²+content of grass
ormixed hay.s6
(2)Hypophosphatemia may be present.
(3)Horses with hypercalcemic renal failure have a decreased [iPTH].57
b.Dogs and cats with acute or chronic renal disease
(1)Occasional dogs and cats with acute renal failure are hypercalcemic. Hyper-
calcemia may be due to an increased concentration of Ca² bound to citrate
or PO.Raisin and grape toxicoses frequently result in hypercalcemic acute
renal failure.58
(2)Of dogs with chronic renal failure,10-15 % are reported to be
hypercalcemic, which appears to be primarily due to binding of Ca²+ to
retained anions.However,most dogs with chronic renal failure have a
low-normal to mildly decreased [tCa²]. Binding of Ca²+ to retained anions
may also yield normocalcemia ([tCa²+] WRI) that masks a decrease in
[fCa²+].
2.Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison’s disease) in dogs and cats
a.About 30 % of dogs with hypoadrenocorticism are hypercalcemic 1o.6 Hypercal-
cemia has alsobeen describedin carswith hypoadrenocorticism.61.6Thereason
for the hypercalcemia is not established but probably is at least partially caused
by decreased renal excretion and might be caused by increased Ca²+ binding to
protein or citrate.
b.Renal Ca²+ excretion in adrenalectomized dogs is decreased by excessive tubular
resorption of Ca²+.6 The reason for enhanced tubular resorption is not estab-
lished butmay involve angiotensinIl or cortisol deficiency.
(1)When dogs with hypoadrenocorticism become hypovolemic because of
vomiting, diarrhea, or impaired renal concentrating ability, angiotensin II
activity increases.Angiotensin II promotes Naresorption in proximal renal
tubules via a Na-Ca² cotransport system. Thus, enhanced resorption of
602
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Namay alsopromote the proximal tubularresorption of Ca²+ and cause
hypercalcemia. Concurrent hemoconcentration itself may slightly increase
the serum [tCa²+].
(2)Administration of glucocorticoids does increase renal excretion of Ca²+
Thus, a deficiency in cortisol may allow more Ca²+ to be resorbed.
3.Ruptured urinary bladder in foals: These foals may develop hypercalcemia (authors
unpublished data), but most do not. When present, the hypercalcemia is probably
caused by the resorption of urinary Ca²+ from the peritoneal cavity.
4.Thiazide diuretics:These act in the distal nephron to promote hypernatruria and,
secondarily,volume depletion.Hypovolemia promotes enhanced proximal rubular
resorptionofNaandsecondarilyproximalubularresorptionfCa+3hai
also promote the resorption of Ca²+ in the distal tubules.'3 This form of hypercalce
C.Increased protein-bound Ca+: In some cases of marked hyperproteinemia associated
with multiple myeloma, there is an increase in negatively charged globulins that bind
cations including Ca²+.When fCa² associates with proteins, the [fCa²] transiently
decreases and there is compensatory release of PTH to increase [fCa²+]. The net result is
increased[tCa²+]and [fCa²+] WRI.
D. Other or unknown mechanisms
1.Intravenous infusion of Ca²+: This can be a mechanism if the rate of administration
exceeds the rate of renal excretion.
2.Hemoconcentration:If hypercalcemia occurs,expect it to be mild and associated
with increasedprotein-bound or small anion-bound Ca²+.It may alsobe related to
angiotensin II-stimulated transport of Na*and Ca²in proximal tubules.
3.Juvenile-onset hypothyroidism:This may be caused by increased intestinal absorp
tion and decreased renal excretion of Ca²+
4.A retained fetus and endometritis in a dog
5.Idiopathic hypercalcemia This was found in a group of cats that did not have
recognized hypercalcemic disorders. Some of the cats had calcium oxalate
urolithiasis.6
IV.
Hypocalcemia (Table 11.3)
A.Hypoalbuminemic hypocalcemia (hypoproteinemic hypocalcemia)4
and therefore of protein-bound Ca²+. The regulation of the [fCa²+] would be adequate
in these animals unless there is a concurrent defect in the regulation of the[fCa²+]
2.It has been called pseudo-bypocalcemia because the [fCa²] does not decrease and
clinical signs of hypocalcemia do not occur.However, the animal truly has hypocal-
B.Decreased PTH activity
1.Primary hypoparathyroidism
a.Parathyroid glands are damaged (by trauma, surgery,neoplasia,or inflammation)
and do not respond to hypocalcemia or do not release adequate quantities of
PTH to prevent hypocalcemia.
b.Hypocalcemia is caused by decreased resorption of Ca²+ from bone and/or
decreased Ca²+ absorption in the intestine. Renal excretion of Ca²+ should be
increased initially becauseofdecreasedPTH-stimulatedresorption,but itmay
decrease due to the low filtered Ca²+ load when hypocalcemia is present.
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
603
Table 1l.3.Diseases and conditions that cause hypocalcemia
*Hypoalbuminemia (hypoproteinermia)
Decreased PTH activitry
Primary hypoparathyroidism (damaged parathyroid gland)
Pseudo-hypoparathyroidism (decreased PTH receptor responsiveness)
Hypomagnesemia (bovine grass tetany)
Inadequate Camobilization from bone or absorption in intestine
Hypovitaminosis D
*Chronic renal disease or failure in dogs, cats,and cattle
Protein-losing enteropathy in dogs
Dietary vitamin D deficiency (rare)
Vitamin D-receptor defect rickets (vitamin D-dependent rickets,type II)
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (dogs)
*Pregnancy, parturient, or lactational hypocalcemia (milk fever,puerperal tetany)
Hypercalcitonism: thyroid C-cell neoplasia, iatrogenic （calcitonin therapy)
Nutritional hypocalcemia (rare)
Oxalate toxicity
Excess urinary excretion of Ca²+
Ethylene glycol toxicosis (dogs and cats)
Intravenous HCOinfusions
Furosemide treatment
Ca²+ binding with diffusible anions
Ca²binding anticoagulants:EDTA,citrate,oxalate (in vivo or in vitro)
Tetracycline administration
Ca²+ deposition during fracture healing
Other or unknown mechanisms
*Acute pancreatitis in dogs and cats
Urinary tract obstruction
Acute renal failure
Phosphate enemas
Blister beetle poisoning (cantharidiasis) in horses
Myopathies:transport tetany,exertional rhabdomyolysis,malignant hypothermia
endurance-type exercise
Acute tumor lysis syndrome
Rumen overload (acute carbohydrate ruminal engorgement)
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: The[Ca² may be falsely decreased if the sample contains EDTA (wrong tube or contamina-
tion of clot tube). A concurrent false hyperkalemia would be expected with the potasium salt of
EDTA.
C.The serum [iPTH] will be decreased or low-normal. In the presence of hypocal
cemia and functional parathyroid glands, the [iPTH] should be increased as a
physiologic response.
d.Hyperphosphatemia is expected because of increased resorption of PO byrenal
tubules (because of less PTH to promote phosphaturia),and thus renal excretion
of PO is decreased. However, renal excretion of PO may increase later because
hyperphosphatemia causes an increased filtered PO load.
604
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
e.Hyperphosphatemia enhances hypocalcemia by inhibiting renal formation of
1,25-DHCC (except in horses).
2.Pseudo-hypoparathyroidism
a.In this rare disorder,PTH receptors or post-PTH receptor pathways are unre-
sponsive.Therefore, the [fCa²] decreases because of diminished PTH effects on
intestine,bone, and kidneys.
b.The [Pi] may be increased because of inadequate renal excretion of PO
C.The [iPTH] should be increased because of the hypocalcemia
3.Hypomagnesemia
a.Hypomagnesemia caused by Mg depletion may produce a functional hypopara
thyroid state and hypocalcemia.The dysfunction may be due to two processes:
(1)Mg-depleted cells may be resistant to PTH. PTH cellular responses are
mediated by adenylate cyclase, which requires Mg
(2)Parathyroid cells secrete less PTH either because of diminished cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) formation (impaired adenylate cyclase)
roid cells.In the presence ofhypomagnesemia,there may bemore available
binding sites for Ca²+ on the parathyroid cells and thus a lesser [fCa²+] is
able toinhibit PTH secretion.68
b. These mechanisms may explain the hypocalcemia of bovine grass tetany. Also a
dog with a protein-losing enteropathy had a marked hypomagnesemia, hypocal
cemia, decreased [fCa²], and a [iPTH] WRI. The [iPTH] was considered to be
inappropriare in the presence of a decreased [fCa²] and thus reflected a func-
tional hypoparathyroid stare.
C.Inadequate Camobilization from bone or absorption in intestine
1.Hypovitaminosis D
a.Chronic renal disease and failure in dogs,cats, and cattle.
(1)Dogs, cats, and cattle with chronic renal disease may have a low-normal
[tCa²]or mild hypocalcemia because of abnormalvitamin D metabolism.
To compensate for hypocalcemia or low vitamin D concentration, dogs,
cats, and cattle develop secondary hyperparathyroidism.Similar changes are
not expected in horses because equine kidneys lack 1o-hydroxylase activity
and decreased GFR in horses tends to cause hypercalcemia,not
hypocalcemia.
(2)The pathogenesis of secondary renal hyperparathyroidism is illustrated in
Fig. 11.2. Sequential steps of the progressive state are shown in Fig.11.3.
(3）Tissue mineralization occurring secondary to hyperphosphatemia may
contribute to hypocalcemia in renal failure.
b.Protein-losing enteropathy in dogs7d
(1)Dogs with lymphangiectasia and lymphocytic or plasmacytic enteritis had
concurrent findings of hypocalcemia,decreased[fCa²+],decreased[25-
HCC],and decreased [1,25-DHCC].
(2)The vitamin D deficiency may be due to decreased absorption of vitamin D
because of extensive intestinal mucosal disease.
2.Vitamin D-receptor defect rickets (vitamin D-dependent rickets, type I)
a.The clinical manifestations of vitamin D-receptor defect rickets are produced by
defective target-organ receptors and response to vitamin D (1,25-DHCC). The
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
605
Healthy state
[tCa2+]
WRI
renal
[P] 
WRI
disease
[1,25-DHCC]WRI
[iPTH]
WRI
1ot-hydroxylase
↓[1,25-DHCC]
promotes
phosphaturia
[PTH]
fCa²+ absorption
Secondaryrenal
from intestine&
hyperparathyroidism
fCa²+absorption
resorption from bone
[tCa2+]
WRI
[Pi]
WRI
from intestine&
[1,25-DHCC]
WRI
resorption frombone
[PTH]
[fCa²+]
1,25-DHCCproduction
la-hydroxylase
Fig. 1l.2. Sequential events during the development of secondary renal hyperparathyroidism caused by
chronic renal disease in dogs, cats, and cattle. Eventually, tCa², Pi, and 1,25-DHCC concentrations may be
abnormal (see Fig. 11.3).
• Renal disease causes a loss of nephrons and a decrease in GFR, which causes less PO to be filtered from
plasma and a mild hyperphosphatemia develops.
· Damaged tubular epithelial cells may result in less endocytic resorption of 25-HCC and vitamin D
binding protein.
·Either because of the damaged tubular cells or inhibition of lo-hydroxylase by increased [PO], there is
less conversion of 25-HCCto 1,25-DHCC,and thus less vitaminD is available for Ca²+metabolism.
and↓Ca²+resorption from bone.
·Decreased [1,25-DHCC] also reduces the 1,25-DHCC inhibition of PTH synthesis,and thus PTH
synthesis increases.
Decreased [fCa²] causes PTH production,↓ calcitonin release,and↑1o-hydroxylase activity.
· Increased PTH promotes vitamin D-dependent Ca²+ absorption in intestine, stimulates Ca²+ and PO
resorption from bone, stimulates la-hydroxylase activity in kidneys,and inhibits renal POresorption
(promotes phosphaturia).
Actions of increased PTH due to parathyroid hyperplasia tend to correct the hypocalcemia, hyperphos-
phatemia, and decreased [1,25-DHCC]. At this point, secondary renal hyperparathyroidism is present.
defective intestinal absorption of Ca²+ and defective responses in bone and
kidneys cause hypocalcemia, a compensatory increase in [1,5-DHCC], and
secondary hyperparathyroidism (with increased [iPTH]).
b.A young cat that had this disorder had hypocalcemia (3.9mg/dL),increased
[iPTH], and increased [1,25-DHCC].7Ir was presented because of vomiting,
diarrhea, muscle tremors, and mydriasis.
3.Exocrine pancreatic insufhciency (dogs)
a.Idiopathic pancreatic acinar atrophy,chronic pancreatitis,pancreatic neoplasia,or
pancreatic surgery may lead to exocrine pancreaticinsuffciency and thus cause
incomplete digestion of dietary lipids and other ingesta.
606
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Initial renal
100%
damage
75%
Additional renal
Progressed to
GFR50%
damage
25%
renal failure
0%
[Pi] 
[1,25-DHCC]
[tCa2+]
[PTH]
1
Fig. 11.3. Schematic pathogenesis of secondary renal hyperparathyroidism in dogs, cats, and cattle. Shaded
areas represent reference intervals for GFR or each analyte concentration.
Initialrenal damage：The sequence of events described inFig.11.2initially compensates for thedecreased
clearance of POand inadequate activation of vitamin D.A new homeostasis in Ca²+and PO balance is
maintained by ↑ PTH secretion.
•Additional renal damage: As renal disease progresses and more nephrons are lost, pathophysiologic
of fCa²,POand1,25-DHCC.
·Progressed to renal failure: Eventually,renal disease reduces GFR sufficiently for serum Pil to remain
increased, and insufficient 1,25-DHCC and PTH are made to maintain [fCa²+]. The animal is presented
with clinical signs of renal insufciency or failure, azotemia, impaired ability to concentrate or dilute
urine,mild hypocalcemia,andhyperphosphatemiaThe [Ca²]may not reflect theabnormal regulation
of the [fCa²+] because of the Ca²+ that is bound to anions that are not excreted in renal failure.
b.Dietary Ca²+may be less available for intestinal absorption because of its binding
to partially digested lipids. Also, maldigestion of lipids may reduce absorption of
fat-soluble vitamins, including vitamin D.
c.Dogs with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency frequently develop hypoalbuminemia
that also would contribute to thehypocalcemia.
4.Pregnancy, parturient,or lactational hypocalcemia
a.Parturient hypocalcemia (milk fever) in catte
(1)Hypocalcemia results from excess Ca²+ loss (via milk or fetal bone develop-
ment) relative to intestinal absorption and bone resorption. Because most
paretic cattle have an increased [iPTH] and an increased [1,25-DHCC],the
disorder involves an inadequate response of target cells (e.g, decreased
receptors or defective biochemical pathways).747sDietary factors that
promote metabolic alkalosis may decrease the target cell response to PTH.76
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
607
(2)A decreased [fCa²+] leads to clinical signs of hypocalcemia (hyperesthesia and
tetany early, and paresis to flaccid paralysis later) because of defective neural
transmissions and muscle contractions.
(3）Hypophosphatemiamay occur because oflactation,poor bone resorption,
and the phosphaturic action of PTH.
b.Puerperal tetany or eclampsia (bitches, mares, and ewes)7
(1)It is associated with peak lactation and corresponding peak loss of Ca²t in milk
(2)An animal may have concurrent hypomagnesemia and hypophosphatemia or
hyperphosphatemia.
c.Preparturient hypocalcemia in queens8
（1)Clinical signs（anorexia,depression,and lethargy）occurred 317dprior to
parturition.
(2)Three queens had a decreased [tCa²+]. The [fCa²] was decreased in the one
cat in which it was measured.
5.Hypercalcironism
a.This is usually caused by thyroid C-cell neoplasms (medullary thyroid carcino-
mas),which arerelatively uncommon neoplasms reported most often in older
bulls.79When associatedwith C-cell neoplasmshypercalcitonism usually causes
only mild hypocalcemia because of the following
(1)Neoplasms are seen in older animals, and their bones are relatively refractory
to calcitonin (calcitonin does not inhibit PTH-stimulated osteoclastic
activity).
(2)Lowering of the [fCa] causes a compensatory increase in PTH production
b.Marked hypocalcemia may occur if a C-cell neoplasm destroys parathyroid
glandswhichcauses hypercalcitonism and concurrent primary
hypoparathyroidism.
c.Excess administration of salmon calcitonin (used to lower the [tCa²+] in hypervi
taminosis D or HHM) may cause hypocalcemia.
6. Nutritional hypocalcemia (nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism)
a.Occurs with vitamin D-deficient diets and when diets are not balanced for Ca2+
and PO;that is, the dietary Ca²:PO4ratio is lower than the desired ratio for
the species. The diet causes the hypocalcemia, which stimulates parathyroid gland
hyperplasia. Imbalanced diets may include excessive PO4 (carnivores meat diet)
and/or a relative or absolute deficiency of Ca²+. The net effect is too much PO4
in the body and too little Ca²+.
b.A decrease in the[fCa²] stimulates parathyroid glands to cause secondary
hyperparathyroidism.The increased PTH release tends to keep the [fCa] near
normal at the expense of the Ca²+content ofbones,and thus osteomalacia may
be present,specially nyounganimals thebones oflderanimalsarerelatively
refractory to PTH-stimulated osteoclastic activity)
c.The degree of hypocalcemia depends on the severity of dietary imbalance and the
availability of Ca²+ from bones (with Ca²+ being more available in young animals
initially)
d.Renal PO excretion is increased because of the phosphaturic actions of PTH
and,in some cases,the high dietary intake of PO.If the renal POexcretion is
measured, one should expect increased 24 h PO clearance and increased
fractional excretion of PO4
608
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
7.Oxalate toxicityso
a.Horses that eat plants that have high oxalate content but low Ca²+content
absorb less dietary Ca, and develop hypocalcemia. Such plants include fuffel,
pangolaariakikuyurubarb,haogeton,easewood,nd sursobxali
pes-caprae).
b.In ruminants,Halogeton and curly dock (Rumex crispus)may cause
hypocalcemia.81
C.Alfalfa has high oxalate content, but ingestion does not cause hypocalcemia
because alfalfa also has high Ca²+ content.
D.Excess urinary excretion of Ca2+
1.Ethylene glycol toxicosis
a.Products of ethylene glycol metabolism (including oxalates) bind Ca² in renal
tubular fuid and thus cause hypercalciuria.Also,a high plasma oxalate concen
tration may cause intravascular formation of calcium oxalate crystals.2
b.Acute nephrosis of the disorder may decrease tubular resorption of Ca+4
2.Metabolic alkalosis
a.If an animal has a persistent metabolic alkalosis resulting in a plasma [HCO,]
above therenal threshold for HCO,theresultant bicarbonaturiawould obligate
the renal loss of cations such as Ca²+.
b.Intravenous HCO, infusions in catss
(1) Both the [tCa²+] and the [fCa²+] are reported to be decreased in some cats
receiving intravenous HCO,
(2）The pathogenesis of the hypocalcemia was not explained,but possible
mechanisms include decreased Ca² resorption in proximal tubules because
of Ca²+ complexing with excess HCO,, alkalemia resulting in decreased
[fCa²],or increased renal Na excretion causing concurrent hypercalciuria.
c.Metabolic alkalosis contributes to the hypocalcemia of parturient hypocalcemia
in catte by reducing target cellresponse to PTH.76
3.Furosemide treatment:Furosemide directly inhibits Na and Clresorption in the
ascending limb of the loop of Henle and thus secondarily inhibits Ca²+ resorption in
the ascending limb because the passive resorption of Ca² depends on gradients
establishdbyNarsortinaThuswhenuroemidsusedtopromt
diuresis, hypocalcemia can develop. This calciuric effect of furosemide is used
cases because they actually promote Ca²+ resorption in the distal tubules.
E.Ca²+binding with diffusible anions
1.Ca²+binds with EDTA, oxalate, or citrates given systemically or present in blood
collection systems.
2.Tetracycline is a Ca²-binding agent, and its rapid intravenous infusion may lower
the[fCa²+],but the[tCa²+] remains WRI.
F.Ca²+ deposition during fracture healing:Serum calcium concentrations decreased
slightly (about 0.6 mg/dL) during the early stages of fracture healing in dogs7 The
decrease may not be enough to cause hypocalcemia by itself, but the Ca²+ deposition
during fracture healing could contribute to hypocalcemia.
G. Other or unknown mechanisms
1.Acute pancreatitis (dogs and cats)
a.Hypocalcemia may be present in acute edematous or hemorrhagic pancreatitis in
dogs. Hypocalcemia is common in cats with acute pancreatitis, with a decreased
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
609
[fCa²+] being more common than a decreased [tCa²+]; a low[fCa²+] was associ
ated with a poorer prognosis.88
b.The pathogeneses of the hypocalcemia and decreased [fCa²] are not clearly
identified andmay involvemultiple mechanisms.
(1)Historically, the hypocalcemia was attributed to the binding of Ca² to fatty
acids in the peritoneal cavity (forming Ca²+ soaps); fatty acids were liberated
from necrotic peritoneal fat because of actions of pancreatic lipase. However,
there is little evidence to support the soap theory,and there is evidence to
refute it.89
(2) Other theories with variable support include abnormal hormonal regulation
of the [fCa²+] (involving glucagon, calcitonin, or PTH), entry of Ca²+ into
cells because of damagedmembranes,binding offCa²+ to plasma fatty acids,
and extravasation of protein-bound Ca² because of increased vascular
permeability.89-91
2.Urinary tract obstruction92
a.Mild to moderate hypocalcemia may be present; the [fCa²+] is decreased more
than the [tCa²+].
b.The pathogenesis of this hypocalcemia is not clearly understood but may be
related to increased [Pi] and the resultant binding of fCa²+.Also, the renal
tubular damage that occurred during obstruction may increase the renal excretion
of Ca²+after the obstruction has been cleared.
3.Acute renal failure
a.Hypocalcemia may occurin animals with acute renal failure,but thecause of the
hypocalcemiamaybe either therenal failure or the concurrent pathologic states.
b.If the acute renal failure is primarily due to ischemia, then perhaps a rapid-onset
hyperphosphatemia leads to Ca²+ binding and hypocalcemia, or the acute
nephrosis reduces the tubular resorption of Ca²+
c.Other concurrent pathologic states that may be contributing to the hypocalcemia
include acute pancreatitis,ethylene glycol poisoning,andhypoalbuminemia.
4.Phosphate enemas
a.In reported feline cases,authors proposed that the hypocalcemia developed
because ofhyperphosphatemia.94
b.Hyperphosphatemia may produce hypocalcemia through three processes:
(1)Acutely, the high PO load drives the following equation to the right in
plasma, thus lowering the [fCa²+]: Ca²++ PO4→ Ca²+-PO4 compounds.
There also may be more Ca²+-PO complexes in tissues.13
(2)Increased renal excretion of anionic POmay obligate increased excretion of
cations, including Ca²+.
(3)POinhibits the renal formation of 1,25-DHCC.3However,the 1,25-
DHCC deficiency would develop slowly and thus notcontribute to the
acute-onset hypocalcemia of this disorder.
5.Gastrointestinal disorders in colicky horses
a.Colicky horses with a variety of gastrointestinal disorders frequently are
hypocalcemic; the [fCa²] is decreased more frequently than the [tCa²+].9ss6 A
pathogenesis that is common to all disorders has not been established
b.Horses with blister beetle poisoning (cantharidiasis） are typically hypocalcemic.
Blister beetles produce cantharidin, a toxicant that interferes with mitochondrial
respiration and protein phosphorylation. The pathogenesis of hypocalcemia is not
610
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
understood,but loss of protein-bound Ca²+into the intestinal tractmay
contribute.97.98
6.Myopathies
tetany,exertionalrhabomyolysis,ndurance-typeexercise,monensin toxicosis
postanesthetic myositis, exhausted horse syndrome, atypical myoglobinuria,
b.The pathogenesis of the hypocalcemia may be multifactorial (e.g., decreased
intake,increasedrenal loss,increased movement of Ca²into damaged cellsand
profuse sweating)
C. Sweating in horses can create an alkalemia (hypochloremic alkalosis) that may
increase Ca²+ binding to albumin and thus lower the [fCa²+]. Also, there may be
direct loss of Ca²+ in sweat.103
7.Acute tumor lysis syndrome
a.POreleased from lysed cells may bind Ca²,and the Ca²+-PO4 complexes
deposit in tissues.
b.PO and lactate (produced by hypoxic neoplastic cells) may bind Ca²+ in renal
tubular fuid and thus inhibit tubular resorption ofCa104
8.Rumen overload (acute carbohydrate ruminal engorgement)
a.Ruminants thar ingest large amounts of fermentable carbohydrate may develop
acutelactic acidosishypovolemia,azotemia,hyperphosphatemiaand
hypocalcemia.105
b.The pathogenesis of the hypocalcemia is not established but may relate to
increased renal excretion,because Ca²+may be bound to POor lactate in the
tubular fuid. It may also relate to deposition of Ca²-PO complexes in tissues
9.Hyperadrenocorticism in dogs.
a.Hypocalcemia is present in a small percentage of dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism.106
b.Alterations in Ca² concentrations are probably related to increased glucocorti-
coid activity,but the exact mechanisms have not been established.
FREECALCIUM(fCa+)CONCENTRATION
1.
Physiologic processes (see Total Calcium Concentration, sect.I)
II.
Analytical concepts of [fCa²+]
A.Terms
1.In clinical jargon and in many veterinary publications, fCa²+ is often called ionized
calcium and is abbreviated as iCa,iCa²,or just Ca²However,all calcium in body
fuids is present in an ionized state either as a free ion (i.e., fCa²+) or as anion-bound
ionized Ca².Anions that bind Ca²+ include proteins, citrate, and PO4
2.In this book, these abbreviations are used: calcium ion (Ca²+), free calcium ion
(fCa²+), and total calcium ion (tCa²t). Referring to the unbound Ca²+ as fCa²+ is also
preferred by other clinical chemists and is analogous to using tT and fT for total
and free thyroxine,respectively.
B.Sample
1.Because of the potential changes in[fCa²] caused by preanalytical variations,it is
essential that patient samples and samplesfor determination ofreference intervalsbe
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
611
collected and processed by using uniform and stringent criteria. Because changes in
[fCa²] may be related to dietary intake and postprandial alkalosis, samples should
be collected from dogs after the dogs havebeen fasted overnight.7Similar changes
would be expected in cats and horses.
2.Acceptable samples include serum,heparinized whole blood,and heparinized
plasmaHoweverspecial conditionsapplytoall samplesForaccurateresulsblood
samples should be collected and processed anaerobically to reduce changes in pH
caused by loss of CO to air. Serum and plasma should be harvested within 1 h of
blood collection to reduce potential errors created by lactate and H+ generation by
blood cells. An excess amount of heparin should be avoided.
3.Sample storage
a.[fCa²] is more stable in serum than in plasma or whole blood.o However
silicone-separator tubes shouldnotbeused because thegel contains Ca+109
b.The [fCa²+] did not change significantly in equine sera or heparinized plasma
that was stored anaerobically for 4 d at room temperarure.Serum and plasma
[fCa²+] is reported to be stable in glass tubes for 1 wk at 4°℃and for 6 wk at
-20°C.11
c.[fCa²+] in heparinized whole blood is reported to be stable for 9 h at 4 °C.
4.Samples should be processed anaerobically and quickly to avoid the effect of pH
changes on [fCa²+]: raising the pH decreases [fCa²+], whereas lowering the pH
increases [fCa²]. The [fCa²+] changes by about 5 % for each 0.1 change in pH.
Exposing sera to air by simply inverting tubes containing sera and air lowered the
[fCa²+] (average 0.1 mmol/L lower) and raised the pH values (average, 0.35
higher).111
a.Albumin and other protein molecules have negatively charged surfaces that
enable them to bind cations,including Ca²and H.Even though an albumin
molecule has a surplus of binding sites, changes in plasma or serum pH alter the
binding of Ca² to plasma or serum proteins. This relationship is illustrated in
Fig. 11.4.
(1)A higher pH increases the available negative-charge sites on albumin and
other proteins because fewer H ions are present to bind them. This leads to
increased protein-bound Ca² and thus decreased [fCa²+]. Aerobic sample
handlingleadstesapefCOoairanncreaseinHand thusafalely
low[fCa²+].
(2)A lower pH induces the opposite changes and thus increases [fCa²+]
Delayed sample analysis will allow blood cell metabolic pathways to produce
H', causing a falsely increased [fCa²].
b.Some assays assume a blood pH of 7.4. Others normalize the fCa²+ to pH 7.4 if
the pH is abnormal.If so,results should bereported as normalized or adjusted
[fCa²]. If a patient is either acidemic or alkalemic, a normalized or adjusted
[fCa²] may be misleading because it does not represent the true [fCa²+] in the
sample.
5.Anticoagulants for whole blood and plasma samples
a.Heparin is the only acceptable anticoagulant for measuring [fCa²+] in blood or
plasma samples,but heparin （a polyanion) does bind Ca.To minimize preana
lytical error, the use of special calcium-titrated heparin tubes is recommended. If
the special tubes are unavailable, then the heparin concentration should not
exceed 15U/mLofblood.11o
612
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
pH=7.3
pH=7.4
pH=7.5
H+
Ca2+
H+
Ca2
H+
Ca2+
Ca2
Cac
H+
Ca2+
Cae
H+
H
not excreted
buffered or
or buffered
excreted
Protein bound:2 Ca2+
Proteinbound:4 Ca2+
Protein bound: 6 Ca2+
Free: 6 Ca2+
Free:4 Ca2+
Free:2 Ca2+
Fig.1l.4.Conceptual illustration of the effects of plasma or serum pHon the [fCa²].The drawing
illustrates the effect of the [H+] in plasma on the binding of Ca²+ to negatively charged proteins. A similar
effect occurs with Mg².
·At a pH of 7.4, there are Ca²+ and H+ ions bound to plasma or serum proteins and Ca²+ and H+ ions that
are free in the plasma or serum water.The free ions create the[fCa²t] and pH of the fluid. In this
illustration, there are four protein-bound and four free Ca²+ ions.
If samplehandingrespiratory disrdersrmeabolicdisorderscause anH,thenmore Handess
Ca²+ bind to the proteins. The release of Ca²+ from the proteins increases the [fCa²+]. In this illustration
with a pH of 7.3, the sample contains six free Ca²t ions.
If either samehanding,respiratory disordrsrmetabolidiorderscauseaH],thenessHand
more Ca+ bind to the proteins. The binding of Ca²+ to the proteins decreases the [fCa²]. In this
illustration with a pH of 7.5,the sample contains tvo free Ca² ions.
(1)The [fCa²+] may decrease from 5 %to 50 % by varying the amount of
experiment,canine blood was collected into syringes （to the1 mLmark)
that contained varying amounts of
eparin.The[fCa²+] in samples collected
after heparin was forcibly exp
swas considered themost
accurate value.The[fCa
0.2mmol/Lwithabout0.1mLof
excess heparin （the amount in the
dead space and needle),decreased
0.5mmol/Lwithabout 0.2mL
xcess heparin (heparin in the dead space
plus 0.1mL in the syringe),and decreased 0.7mmol/Lwith about 0.35mL
of excess heparin (heparin in the dead
(2)
eparin approximates the expected
midpoint concentration of fCa²+
inhuman plasma and shouldreduce the
binding of patient fCa²+ to heparin. H
However, the measured [fCa²]repre-
sents Ca²+ from the calcium-titrated heparin and Ca²+in the patient's
plasma, and thus appropriate reference intervals must be available.
(3)The use of zinc heparinate was attempted as an anticoagulant,but the zinc
interfered with the fCa² assay.
114
b.Other anticoagulants that bind Ca²+ (EDTA, citrate, and oxalate) cannot be used
in samples for fCa²+or tCa²+ assays.
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
613
6.It is recommended that the[fCa²+] bereported with special information:type of
sample, site of collection,measured [fCa²],measured pH, and [fCa²] converted to
a samplepHof7.4.110
C. Common clinical assays.
1.Special instruments measure [fCa²] by using Ca²-selective electrodes via potentiom-
etry.If the instrument also contains a pH electrode,it may measure pH and adjust
the measured [fCa²+] to a calculated [fCa²+] that would be expected if the pH of the
sample was 7.4.
2.Different sources of standard solutions may result in different measured [fCa²].
D.Unit conversion:mg/dL×0.2495=mmol/L,and mEq/Lx0.5=mmol/L (SIunit,
nearest0.01mmol/L).5
III.
Abnormal concentrations.
A.[fCa²]is tightly controlled byhormones.Abnormalities in[fCa²+]indicate abnormal
Ca²+regulation and may cause clinical signs or pathologic events.Although [rCa²+]
often parallels [fCa²] and is a good screening test for disorders of Ca²+homeostasis,
[tCa²] does not necessarily reflect the more relevant [fCa²+] as illustrated by the
following conditions:
1.Hypocalcemia caused by hypoproteinemia or hypoalbuminemia: The [tCa²] is
decreased because of less protein-bound Ca²+. The [fCa²+] may be WRI.
2.Hypercalcemia in renal failure or multiple myeloma: The[tCa²] is increased because
ofmore bound Ca²(Ca²+ bound to citrate,PO4,or abnormal globulins). The
[fCa²+] may be WRI.
3.In urinary tract obstruction in cats, decreases in [fCa²+] may be greater and more
common than decreases in [tCa²+]. Ca²+ may be bound to PO or other anions not
excreted by the urinary system.92
4.In a study involving 1633 samples from dogs with chronic renal failure or a variety
of other disorders,the same percentageof samples had both increased[Ca]and
[fCa²] (19 %) and nearly the same percentages of decreased [tCa²] and [fCa²]
(27 % and 31 %,respectively). However,when only the dogs with chronic renal
failure (n = 490) were considered, a higher percentage of dogs had increased [rCa²+]
[tCa²] (19 %) than decreased [fCa²](36%).The data from the renal failure
group suggest that a higher percentage of [Ca] was the bound-Ca²+fraction
(probably not protein bound) and the [tCa²+] does not refect changes in the [fCa²+]
in canine chronic renal failure.
5.Hyperthyroid cats may have a decreased [fCa²] but [Ca²] WRI.The pathogenesis
of the decreased [fCa²] is not understood.The cats dohave secondary
hyperparathyroidism.115
6.Horses after a cross-country race had decreased[fCa²] but[tCa²] WRI.6 In
another study involving endurance rides (80 km), the average decrease in plasma
[fCa²] was near 0.8 mg/dL; concurrently, the concentrations of lactate, Pi, and
albumin increased; data for [rCa] were not reported.7 The lower [fCa²] may have
been due to several factors, including increased binding to albumin, increased
binding to lactate, movement of Ca²+ from ECF to ICF, or loss of Ca²+ in sweat.
7.Amassive transfusion of blood or plasma containing citrate as the anticoagulant can
cause a decreased [fCa²].In one study in which dogs were transfused with either a
volume of blood product equal to their estimated blood volume over 24 h or a
614
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
volume>50 % of their estimated bloodvolume in3 h,the average decrease in
[fCa²+] was near 0.3mmol/L (1.2 mg/dL）.118
8.In hypocalcemic, 5- to 10-d-old calves that were acidotic because of diarrhea, the
[fCa²] was not decreased as much as the [rCa²+] prior to treatments.Both [Ca²+]
and [fCa²] decreased after fuid therapy that reduced the severity of acidosis.9 The
relationships berween blood pH and [fCa²] should be considered when acidemic
animals are administered NaHCO,intravenously,because such therapy can rapidly
decrease the[fCa2t].9
B.The acid-base status of an animal can affect the[fCa²] by three processes:
1.As explained in the analytical section (Free Calcium Concentration,sect.II)
changing the blood pH affects the binding of Ca²+ to proteins and other anions.
Acidemia increases the [fCa²+] and alkalemia decreases the[fCa²+]
2.When there is an organic acidosis (e.g.,lactic acidosis or ketoacidosis), the organic
ion (e.g., lactate or acetoacetate) in the plasma may bind Ca²+ to lower the [fCa²+],
whereas concurrent acidemia would raise the [fCa²+]. Also, the presence of the
organic anion in renal tubular fuid would decrease the rubular resorption of Ca²
With these multiple factors, the actual alteration in [fCa²+] may depend on the
severity and duration of the organic acidosis.
3.The blood pH also affects plasma concentrations of PTH independently of [fCa²+].
The [iPTH] increased during experimentally induced metabolic and respiratory
experimentally induced metabolic and respiratory alkaloses if [fCa²] was kept
constant.21 Thus, in clinical acid-base disorders, changes in [fCa²+] could also be
related to changes in PTH. The altered [iPTH] in acid-base disorders may reflect its
roles in maintaining acid-base status. The PO released from bone acts as a buffer in
blood,and the POparticipates in therenal excretion of HAlso,persistently
increased PTH activiry reduces therenal excretion of HCO-122
IV.
Conceptual relationships of[tCa²] and [fCa²].
A.Three major concepts must be remembered when interpreting Ca concentrations:
1.The routine assays of a serum chemistry profle measure [tCa²], which includes
three Ca²+fractions:free,protein bound,and bound to anions otherthan
proteins.
2. The body regulates the [fCa²] through the actions of several hormones.
3.Serum [fCa²+] values may be inaccurate when blood is not handled anaerobically
when serum separation from blood clot is delayed, and when serum-separator tubes
are used.
B.With these concepts inmind,Fig.11.5 illustrates potential relationships of the three
Ca²+ fractions. Major points that should be understood include the following:
1.An animal may have hypocalcemia because of hypoproteinemia or hypoalbumin
emia, but the systems that regulate [fCa²+] are not defective (Fig. 11.5B).
2.If serum protein concentrations are WRI, then hypocalcemia typically indicates that
the[fCa²+] is decreased (Fig.11.5C).
3.Most hypercalcemic samples have an increased [fCa²] (Fig. 11.5D)
4.Normocalcemia in the presence of hypoproteinemia suggests an increased [fCa²]
(Fig 11.5E)
5.The severity of decreased[fCa²+] may not be evident from the [tCa²+] if the concen-
trations of the bound-Ca²+fractions are increased (Fig.11.5F)
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
615
14-
P
13-
12
11
[tCa2+]
u
10
Ref. Int.
9
B
6
[fCa2+]
Ref. Int.
E
G
fCa2+
Ca²+/Pr
Ca2+/A-
Fig.1l.5. Conceprual relationships of total,free,and bound Ca²fractions in serum or plasma
A.Healthy animal: The [Ca²+] and [fCa²+] are within respective reference intervals.
B.Hypoproteinemia (hypoalbuminemia): The hypocalcemia is caused by a decreased concentration of
protein-bound Ca². The [fCa²] (the regulated concentration) is within its reference interval.
C.Primary hypoparathyroidism, hypovitaminosis D: The hypocalcemia is primarily caused by a decreased
[fCa²] because of either inadequate PTH or vitamin D activity. In this schematic example, the bound
Ca²+concentration isunchanged.
D. Primary hyperparathyroidism, hypervitaminosis D, humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy, humoral
hypercalcemia of benign disorders: The hypercalcemia is primarily caused by increased [fCa²] because of
increased activity of PTH,PTHrp,or vitamin D activity. In this schematic example, the bound-Ca²+
concentration is unchanged.
E.HHM and concurent hypoproteinemia: The [fCa²] is increased because of the increased PTHrp
activity, but the protein-bound Ca²+ concentration is decreased because of concurrent hypoproteinemia.
The net result is a [tCa²]within its reference interval.
F.Chronic renal failure: The [fCa²+] is mildly decreased because of the inadequate formation of 1,25-
DHCC. Concurrently, the concentration of Ca²+ bound to nonprotein anions (e.g., Ca² bound to
citrate or PO is increased.In this schematic example,the protein-bound Ca+ concentration is
unchanged and the net result is a mild hypocalcemia.The protein-bound Ca+ concentration would be
decreased with hypoalbuminemia caused by a protein-losing nephropathy.
G.Lactic acidosis:The acidemia promotes Ca²detaching from proteins （thus,a decreased protein-bound
[Ca²]). Some of the released Ca²+ binds to lactate to increase the Ca²+ bound to nonprotein anions. In
this schematic example, the [tCa²] is within its reference interval.
H.Excessheparin in plasma Collection of blood with an inappropriate amount of heparin (an anion)
results in some of the fCa²+ binding to heparin and thus a decreased [fCa²+]. The [tCa²+] does not
change.
6.The [fCa²+] is affected by altered plasma pH and the presence of nonprotein anions
in theplasma (Fig.11.5G)
7. Excess heparin in a blood sample can cause a falsely decreased [fCa²+] (Fig. 11.5H)
INORGANICPHOSPHORUS(Pi) CONCENTRATION
I
Physiologic processes
A.Pi exists in different forms, depending on pH:H,PO4→H++H,PO→2 H++
HPO²3H+PO.ArapHof7.4,predominanrformsareHPOandHPO
616
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Parathyroid glands
Bones
PO
Blood
+↓[fCa2+]
amino
Intestine
PTH
+↑[PTH]
acids
+↓[1,25-DHCC]
+↑[1,25-DHCC]
Total
Kidneys
+↑dietaryPO
[Pil
PO
+↑[1,25-DHCC]
+↓[fCa²+]
Cells
+↑[PTH]
nsulin
25-HCC
1,25-DHCC
PO
-↑[PO]
Kidneys
Erythrocvte
GFR
↑[PTH]
↑[GH]
Mammary
[PTH]
PO
glands
Fig.11.6. Relationships of PO kinetics and the production of PTH and 1,25-DHCC. (Note: Horse
kidneys lack 1o-hydroxylase and thus do not form 1,25-DHCC.)
·PTH production in parathyroid glands is stinulated by ↓ [FCa²+] and ↓ [1,25-DHCC] and inhibited by
↑[fCa²+] and↑[1,25-DHCC].
·Conversion of 25-HCC to 1,25-DHCC in kidneys is catalyzed by 1a-hydroxylase. The activity of 1ot-
hydroxylase is promoted by↓[fCa²+] and ↑PTH and inhibited by T[fCa²] and ↑[PO].
·POmobilization from bone is promoted by ↑ [1,25-DHCC] and ↑ PTH. Less POmobilization occurs
with↓[1,25-DHCC]andPTH
PO absorption in intestine is promoted by ↑[1,25-DHCC] and ↑ dietary POLess POabsorption
occurswith↓[1,25-DHCC]and↓dietaryPO
·Urinary excretion of PO is enhanced by ↑ PTH,and excretion is reduced by↓GFR,PTH,and ↑ GH
activity.
· Insulin promotes the uptake of PO, by cells. However, cell damage will allow POg to escape from the cells
and enter plasma.
·PO present in plasma is mostly in two forms (HPO² and HPO), but the measured phosphorus is
reported in terms of inorganic phosphorus (Pi).
·In vitro hemolysis or delayed removal of serum or plasma allows PO in erythrocytes to enter serum or
plasma and thus cause an erroneous [PO].
+, positive effector (stimulates the process); and -, negative effector (inhibits the process).
in a 1:4 ratio. Unless stated otherwise, all forms in this chapter are designated as PO
About 10 % ofPi is bound to cationic proteins,35 % is bound to nonprotein cations,
and 55% is free.
B.Major factors that determine serum[Pi] (Fig.11.6)
1.Renal clearance of PO4
a.A major route of PO4excretion is via kidneys in most mammals, so disorders
that cause decreased GFR tend to increase the serum[Pi]
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
617
b.PTH is a potent phosphaturic agent. In the presence of PTH,less of filtered PO
is resorbed in the distal tubules.PTH acts through a cyclic adenosinemonophos-
phate messenger system to inhibit the cotransport of Na and PO
2.Absorption of POin intestines
a.If animals are eating,then they will typically consume large quantities of PO4
that are absorbed in intestines.
b.Absorption is enhanced by 1,25-DHCC,either directly or through Ca²+complexes
3.Resorption from bone: PTH stimulates osteocytes (rapid effect) and osteoclasts
(delayed effect) to release PO from bone.Because of the potent phosphaturic action
of PTH,the release of PO4 does not increase the[Pi] as long as renal function is
adequate.
4. Shifting of PO between ICF and ECF compartments
a.Intracellular biochemical processes that involve phosphorylation need POfrom
ECF.
b.Insulin promotes POentry into cells by enhancing the movement of glucose
into cell.Oncein cellsglucose is phosphorylated to enter glycolyticor glycogen
synthesis pathways.The binding of free POto glucose or other organic
molecules reduces the ICF concentration of free PO and allows more PO4 to
enter cells from the ECF.
5.Animal age
a.GH is reported to be largely responsible for theincreased[Pi] in young,growing
animals.GH increases the renal tubular resorption of PO123
animals used to establishmost reference intervals.In pups（<12wk)，, serum
[Pi] reference intervals were about 5.710.8 mg/dL, whereas adult dog intervals
were about 2.5-5.5 mg/dL.In kittens (46wk to 2024 wk), serum[Pi]
reference intervals were about 5.0-10.0 mg/dL,whereas adult cat intervals were
about 1.86.4 mg/dL. A corresponding age-related difference is that these young
animals have greater serum alkaline phosphatase activity than mature animals
(usually < 3 × the upper reference limit for adults).
c.Metastatic mineralization of tissues tends to occur when the product of [tCa²]
and [Pi] (both in mg/dL) exceeds 70 in adult animals. The same does not seem
to occur in young animals.
11.
Analytical concepts of[Pi]
A.Sample.
1.Serum is the preferred sample, but plasma may be used
2.In vitro hemolysis or delayed removal of serum from a blood clot may increase
serum [Pi] because PO is liberated into serum from erythrocytes (cytoplasmic PO4
and membrane PO,released from phospholipids).
B.Assays
1. In most common assays, PO reacts with ammonium molybdate to form a colored
complex that ismeasuredby photometry.
2.In some systems, conjugated bilirubin may interfere with the assay to produce falsely
bilirubin has no effect or may produce falsely increased values.
3.In spectrophotometric assays that use the strongly acidic ammonium molybdate
reagent, the reagent can precipitate immunoglobulins to produce a turbidity that
618
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
results in a falsely increased [Pi] by 1-2 mmol/L (=3-6 mg/dL).12s This positive
modifications such as the addition of detergent to prevent protein precipitation
C.Methods of expressing concentrations
1.[Pi] is often referred to as the phosphorus concentration. More accurately,[Pi] is the
serum PO4 reported as phosphorus in mg/dL. It is not reported as a PO4 concentra-
tion in mg/dL because the amount of each form of PO changes with pH, and each
form has a different relative molecular mass (M). This problem is overcome by
reporting phosphate in SI units of mmol/L.
2.Relationship berween[PO4] and [Pi]
a.1 mmol of H,POweighs 97mg. In 1 mmol of HPOthere are 31 mg of P
Therefore, a solution of 97 mg/dL of HPOcontains 31 mg/dL of P.
b.1 mmol of HPO²weighs 96mg. In 1 mmol of HPO² there are 31 mg of P.
Therefore,a solution of 96mg/dL of HPO²contains 31 mg/dL of P.
C.F
Because of the equilibrium among the different POmolecules at a pH of 7.4,
1 mmol of PO4 averages about 96.2mg/dL
D.Unit conversion for [Pi]:mg/dL× 0.3229 = mmol/L (SI unit, nearest 0.05 mmol/L)s
III.
Hyperphosphatemia (Table 11.4)
A.Decreased urinary POexcretion.
1.Disorders that decrease GFR (see prerenal, renal, and postrenal azotemias in Chapter
8): Hyperphosphatemia occurs because PO is not filtered adequately from plasma.
Table 11.4. Diseases and conditions that cause hyperphosphatemia
Decreased urinary PO4 excretion
*Decreased GFR (see prerenal, renal, and postrenal azotemias in Chapter 8)
Urinary bladderrupture orurineleakageinto tissues
Decreased [PTH] or activity (hypoparathyroidism)
Acromegaly
Increased PO absorption from intestine
Phosphate enema or ingestion of phosphate urinary acidifier
Increased vitamin D (see Table 11.2)
Ischemicintestinal lesions (maybe also shift from ICF to ECF)
Diet with a low Ca²+:PO4ratio (rare)
Shift of PO4from ICF to ECF
Myopathies: endurance rides in horses, exertional rhabdomyolysis, malignant
hyperthermia
Acute tumor lysis syndrome
Other or unknown mechanisms
Hyperthyroidism in cats
Lactic acidosis
Hyperadrenocorticism in dogs
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: The [Pi] in growing mammals may be up to 3 mg/dL higher than Pi reference intervals for
adults of the species. In vitro hemolysis or delayed removal of serum or plasma from blood samples will
allow PO, from erythrocytes to increase the [Pi] in the serum or plasma.Also, a falsely increased [Pi]
can be found in samples with hyperbilirubinemia or monoclonal gammopathies.
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
619
The magnitude tends to parallel the severity of azotemia in dogs,cats,and cattl,
but it may not in horses.
2.Urinary bladder rupture or leakage of urine into tissues: Hyperphosphatemia results
from decreased urinary excretion of PO from the body.
3.Decreased [iPTH] or activity (primary hypoparathyroidism or pseudo-
hypoparathyroidism)(see Total Calcium Concentration, sect.IV.B).
4.Acromegaly:GH increases tubular PO resorprion.123
B.Increased PO4absorption from intestine
2.Increased vitamin D
a.Hypervitaminosis D in ruminants:perhaps increased intestinal absorption of PO
or increased bone resorption
b.Cholecalciferol intoxication in dogs (see Total Calcium Concentration, sect.
III.A.2).
3. Intestinal lesions requiring intestinal resection: Devitalized intestinal mucosa allows
POto enter plasma （and peritoneal fuid).Also, shifting of PO from ICF to ECF
may be involved.129
4.Diets with low Ca²+:PO4ratio
C.Shiftof POfrom ICF toECF
1.Myopathies (endurance rides in horses, exertional rhabdomyolysis, and malignant
hyperthemia):releaseofPOfromdamagedmuslefibeso102,130
2.Acute tumor lysis syndrome:release of POfrom necroticneoplastic cells04
D.Other or unknown mechanisms
1.Hyperthyroidism in cats: Thyroxine may promote osteoclastic activity to cause
release of Ca²+ and PO from bone. Hyperthyroid cats may have hyperphosphate
mia, a decreased [fCa], and an increased [iPTH].15 The reason for the decreased
[fCa]hasnotbeen established but has been considered the stimulus for the
increased [iPTH].
2.Lactic acidosis:3i This causes hyperphosphatemia more frequently than other
metabolic acidoses, but the mechanisms have not been completely explained. The
hyperphosphatemia might be linked to the acidemia mechanism; that is, anaerobic
glycolysis causes a net degradation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and thus
cism was significantly greater than in 20 hospitalized dogs without clinical signs of
hyperadrenocorticism. The dogs with hyperadrenocorticism also had significantly
greater plasma [iPTH],but no signifcant differences for[tCa²]or[fCa²] were
found between the groups.106
E.Pseudo-hyperphosphatemia:As noted in the analytical section (Inorganic Phosphorus
Concentration, sect.Il) the presence of hyperbilirubinemia, a monoclonal gammopathy,
or in vitro hemolysis can result in a falsely increased [Pi].
IV.Hypophosphatemia (Table 11.5)
A.Increased urinary POexcretion
1.Prolonged diuresis: Less filtered PO is resorbed.
2.Increased [iPTH] or [PTHrp] (Table 11.2).
3.Fanconi syndrome:Animals with Fanconi syndrome have a proximal tubular defect
that decreases tubularresorption of glucose,amino acids,and PO.Some people
620
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 11.5.Diseases and conditions that cause hypophosphatemia
Increased urinary POexcretion
Prolonged diuresis
Increased PTH or PTHrp activity (see Table 11.2)
Fanconi syndrome (dogs)
Decreased intestinal PO4 absorption
*Prolonged anorexiaorPO-deficient diet
coursesman
PO-binding agents
Hypovitaminosis D
Intestinal malabsorption
Shiftof PO4from ECF to ICF
Hyperinsulinism (endogenous or exogenous)
Glucose infusion
Respiratory alkalosis
Defective mobilization of POfrom bone
Postparturient paresis (milk fever) and eclampsia in bitches
Other or unknown mechanisms
*Equine renal disease (failure)
Halothane anesthesia in horses
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Conjugated bilirubin may interfere with some Pi assays to produce falsely increased or
decreased results.
restrict the term Fanconi syndrome to inherited or congenital forms, whereas others
include acquired disorders. The decreased resorption of PO in dogs with Fanconi
q respuos u dsoud e usdoqu s
not others.135
B.Decreased intestinal PO absorption
1.Prolonged anorexia or a PO-deficient diet: less dietary PO4available for
absorption
2.PO-binding agents: interference with PO4 absorption
3.Hypovitaminosis D: absence of a promoter of PO absorption
4.Intestinal malabsorption:decreased POabsorption
C.Shiftof POfrom ECF to ICF
1.Hyperinsulinism (endogenous or exogenous)
a.Insulin promotes entry ofPOinto cels to phosphorylate the glucose that enters
the cells.
b.High insulin activity could result from insulin injections, an insulin-secreting
neoplasm, or in response to glucose infusion.
2.Glucose infusion (in horses) led to a hypophosphatemia.13 Thehypophosphatemia
may be due to increased renal excretion of POq secondary to solute diuresis and also
due to insulin-induced movement of PO from ECF to ICF secondary to glucose
uptake.
3.Respiratory alkalosis:Experimentally induced respiratory alkalosis caused hypophos
phatemia and increasedmuscle glycolysisPhosphofructokinase istherate-limiting
enzyme in glycolysis, and alkalemia stimulates its activity. Thus, alkalemia promotes
POmovement into erythrocytes because of the increased phosphorylation during
accelerated glycolysis.
11/CALCIUM.PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
621
D.Defectivemobilization of POfrom bone
1.Postparturient paresis(milk fever): Cows cannot mobilize sufficient Ca²+ and PO
from bones to replace the Ca²+ and PO that are lost in milk.
2.Eclampsia in bitches: the same mechanism as milk fever
E.Other or unknown mechanisms
1.Equine renal disease (failure): Hypophosphatemia may be seen in equine renal
finding and the pathogenesis is not known.
2.Halothane anesthesia in horses:3After prolonged halothane anesthesia (12 h）,six
horses hadmild hyperphosphatemia for the first hour,but then hypophosphatemia
developed and persisted for3-4d.The pathogenesis of the hypophosphatemia was
not determined.
F.Pseudo-hypophosphatemia:As noted in the analytical section (Inorganic Phosphorus
Concentration, sectII) the presence of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia can result in a
falsely decreased [Pi].
TOTAL MAGNESIUM (tMg²) CONCENTRATION
Physiologic processes
A.Serum or plasma magnesium is distributed into three major fractions.All Mg in body
fluids is ionized, but some is free and some is bound to anionic molecules.
1.Free magnesium (fMg）:About 55%of tMg2+is fMg+present as free ions in
plasma H,O. fMg²+ is the portion of tMg+ that is hormonally regulated and
contributes to pathologic states.
2.Bound magnesium
a.About 30 % of tMg² is bound to negatively charged sites on proteins (albumin
and globulins).
b.About 15% of tMgis bound to anions such as citrate and PO
B.Mg+ is located in bones (about 60 %), in soft tissues (about 38 %), and in the
extracellular fuid, including blood (1-2 %). Except in cattle, the[tMg] in erythro-
cytes is greater than in plasma (or serum).
C.Major factors that determine the serum [tMg]
1.Hypoproteinemia decreases the amount of bound Mg and thus may cause hypo-
2. Absorption of Mg+ in the gastrointestinal tract
a.In ruminants, Mg²+ is absorbed by the rumen (and maybe intestine) in a process
linked toNa-K-adenosine triphosphatase.
b. In monogastric animals, Mg+ absorption occurs in the distal small intestine and
colon and is enhanced by vitamin D and inhibited by high dierary Ca²+ or PO4.
3.Excretion
a.Mg²+ in feces may represent unabsorbed dietary Mg² but also loss of endogenous
Mg2+.
b.Kidneys
(1) Mg²+not bound to proteins passes freely through the glomerular filtration
barrier.Thus,a decreased GFR can reduce renal excretion of Mg²+and cause
hypermagnesemia.
(2)If the amount of Mg²+entering the proximal tubules exceeds the tubular
resorptive capacity,excess Mgisexcreted.Osmotic diuresis and loop
diuretics increase renal excretion of Mg2+.
622
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(3)If Mg²+ is present in bovine urine, then the cow is not expected to be
hypomagnesemic because the presence of Mg²+ typically indicates that the
transport maximum has been exceeded. Thus, finding Mg²+ in urine
indicates that a cow does not have hypomagnesemic tetany (grass tetany)
unless there is a defect in the resorption of Mg.
c.Mammary gland during lactation: The ratio of milk [tMg] to serum [tMg²] is
about 5.
D. Hormonal regulation
1.Antidiuretichormone (argininevasopressin),PTH,glucagon,calcitonin,andβ
adrenergic agonists can stimulare Mgabsorption in the cortical thick ascending
limb of the loop of Henle.3
2. PTH can increase serum [tMg] by increasing intestinal Mg+ absorption and
increasing Mg+resorption in renal tubules andbone.14
3.Administration of 1,25-DHCCreduces the plasma [tMg²],perhaps secondarily to
decreased PTH activity.140
4.Thyroxine tends to decrease the plasma [tMg²+] by increasing Mg²+excretion in
urine and feces.141
5.Aldosterone promotes increased fecal and urinary Mg²excretion.Experimentally,
aldosterone infusions decreased ruminal Mgabsorption.Decreased aldosterone
activity increases the serum [tMg²].
II.
Analytical concepts of[tMg²+]
A.Sample.
1.Serum is the preferred sample, but heparinized plasma may be used in some assays.
2.Blood anticoagulants that bind Mg² (e.g.,EDTA, citrate,and oxalate) should not
be used in samples for [tMg²] assays.
3.Except in cattle,invitro hemolysis or delayed removal of serum from a blood clot
will increase serum [tMg+] because Mg²+is liberated into the serum from the
erythrocytes. In cattle, plasma and erythrocyte concentrations of Mg²+ are similar.
4.Postmortem aqueous humor and vitreous humor samples can be used to reflect the
antemortem [tMg]. The [tMg] was more stable in vitreous humor (up to 48 h)
B.Clinical assays
1. Common assays are photomerric and measure [tMg²]. In these assays, metallochromic
indicarors or dyes change colors when they selectively bind Mg². Atomic absorption
spectrometry is the reference method but is not used in most clinical laboratories.
2.The [fMg²] can be measured by ion-selective electrodes or it can be calculated from
tMg+measurements beforeand after dialysis of serum toremovebound Mg
However, there is currently very little clinical use of the results of [fMg²]
measurements.
C.Unit conversion:mg/dLx 0.4114= mmol/L;and mEq/L x 0.500 =mmol/L (SI unit,
nearest 0.02mmol/L).5
III.
Hypermagnesemia (Table 11.6)
A.Decreased urinary excretion:renal failure and other causes of decreased GFR
B.Shift ofMgfrom ICF toECF:Except in cattle,invitro hemolysisactive invivo
hemolysisor the delayedremoval of serum from a blood clotwill allow erythrocyte
Mgto be added to the serum concentration.
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
623
Table 11.6. Diseases or conditions that cause hypermagnesemia
Decreased urinary excretion
*Renal failure and other causes of decreased GFR
Shift of fMg²+fromICFtoECF
Active in vivo hemolysis
Increased [PTH]
Milk fever
Increased intestinal absorption of Mgwithout increased PTH or PTHrp
MgO, Mg(OH) or similar antacids or cathartics (cattle)
MgSO (horses)
Other mechanisms
Excess intravenous infusion of Mg2+
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Pseudo-hypermagnesemia may occur from in vitro hemolysis or delayed removal of serum
from blood clot (not in cattle).
C.Increased intestinal absorption of Mg²+ without increased PTH
1.Excess oral administration of MgO(magnesium oxide)and Mg（OH)(magnesium
hydroxide) to cattle144
2.Excessoral administration ofMgSO（magnesium sulfate） to horsess
D.Other orunknown mechanisms
1. Milk fever: Increased PTH may induce increased renal resorption of Mgt, leading
to hypermagnesemia.146
2.A transient increase in [tMg] and [fMg²] occurs in cattle postpartum. The increase
may be related to increased PTH activity causing increased renal resorption of Mg2
3.Excess intravenous infusion of Mg
4. In people, Addison's disease and hypothyroidism may cause hypermagnesemia.
Similar findings have not been reported in domestic mammals.
IV.
Hypomagnesemia (Table 11.7)
A.Hypoproteinemia: decreased Mg²+bound to proteins (decreased [tMg²+])
B.Inadequate ruminal or intestinal absorption of Mg
1.Prolonged anorexia or poor feed intake (especially in lactating cattle): In one study
that involved the death of 55 dairy cows, marked hypomagnesemia was present with
mia, concurrent hypocalcemia may be required.
2. Calves on a whole milk diet can develop hypomagnesemia because the dietary Mg²
requirement of growing calves is about 50 % greater than the amount of Mg²+ in
milk.10
a.The hypomagnesemia is considered to result from decreased ruminal absorption
Of Mg²+, but there are multiple theories for the absorption defect.
b.Alush grass diet is high in PO and K content and low in Mg+ and Na. In
some studies, the combination of high K and low Mg+was the key factor that
led to hypomagnesemia. Other contributing factors in some cows include high
nitrogen forage, increased dietary organic anions, and high aluminum forage.
624
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 11.7. Diseases or conditions that cause hypomagnesemia
*Hypoproteinemia
Inadequate ruminal or intestinal absorption of Mg²+
*Prolonged anorexia or poor feed intake
Calves on whole milk diet
*Grass tetany in cattle
Enteric diseases
Excess urinary excretion of Mg
*Osmotic diuresis
*Ketonuria
Other or unknown mechanisms
Blister beetlepoisoning in horses
Lactation tetany in Shetland mares
* A relatively common disease or condition
c.The roles of aldosterone in the process are not established,but aldosterone might
be the link between K+ and Mg.Mgabsorption may be reduced by factors
independent of aldosterone, such as the low Na:Kratio of rumen contents.
d.Grass tetany is difficult to diagnose postmortem because of the lack of gross or
microscopic lesions.Also, the postmortem plasma samples cannot be used for
detecting hypomagnesemia because the release of Mg2+ from cells (other than
erythrocytes) will falsely elevate the postmortem concentration.However, the
[tMg] in aqueous and vitreous humor also decreases in animals with Mg2+
depletion,and the postmortem[Mg] in those fuids is more stable than in
plasma.
(1)If the aqueous or vitreous fuids are to be analyzed,they should be centi-
fuged soon after collection to remove contaminant cells and then stored at
4°C.The viscosity of vitreous humor can interfere with accurate pipetting.
eyes, and,with one assay, a[tMg²+] <0.55mmol/L (1.3 mg/dL) was
associated with antemortem hypomagnesemic tetany. If a concurrent [K*] in
the vitreous humor is > 10 mmol/L,then there has been too much post.
mortem change to consider the [tMg²+] a reliable indicator of antemortem
concentrations.143
(3)The [tMg²+] in aqueous humor was stable up to 24 h postmortem in bovine
eyes, and, with one assay, a [tMg2+] <0.25 mmol/L (0.6 mg/dL) was
associated with antemortem hypomagnesemic tetany.143
4.Enteric diseases
a.Dogs with enteric diseases may develop hypomagnesemia because of increased
b.Horses with enterocolitissand colicky horsess frequentlyhave hypomagnese-
mia,which could be caused by decreased intake or increased intestinal loss.
1.Osmotic diuresis: decreased tubular resorption due to solvent drag
2.Ketonuria: decreased tubular resorption because of complexing with ketone bodies
(B-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate).
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
625
D.Other or unknown mechanisms
1.Blister beetle poisoning in horses:8153 The pathogenesis has not been documented
but possibly a loss of protein-bound Mg²+ may contribute.
2.Lactation tetany in Shetland mares77
3.Endotoxemia in horses causes hypomagnesemia. The decrease is caused by the
FREEMAGNESIUM(fMg+)CONCENTRATION
1.
Physiologic processes (see Total Magnesium Concentration, sect. I)
II.
Analytical concepts of [fMg+]
A.Terms: Most of the statements in the fCa²+ section also apply to terms used for Mg²+
concentrations.For consistency, these abbreviations are used: magnesium ion (Mg),
free magnesium ion (fMg), and total magnesium ion (tMg²). In clinical jargon and in
many veterinary publications, fMg+ is often called ionized magnesium and is abbrevi-
ated as iMg,iMg,or just Mg,and thus there is a potential for miscommunication
B.Sample: Most statements for [fCa²+] also apply to [fMg²+] because fCa²+ and fMg²+ are
both divalent cations that bind to anions.Heparin is a polyanion and may complex
fMg,especially with excessive amounts of heparin. However, there are few published
data about factors that alter [fMg²].
C.Clinical assays for [fMg²] are not common. Special instruments measure [Mg] by
using Mg²-selective electrodes via potentiometry.If the instrument also contains a pH
electrode, it may measure pH and adjust the measured [fMg²] to a calculated [fMg²+]
that would be expected if the pH of the sample was 7.4.
D.Unit conversion:mg/dL× 0.4114=mmol/L,andmEq/Lx 0.5=mmol/L (SIunit,
nearest0.01mmol/L)'5
III.
Abnormal concentrations.
A.Disorders of tMg+homeostasis may be disorders of fMghomeostasis or disorders
affecting anions that bind fMg.More studies are needed to establish the pathologic
B.Afewpublished studieshave explored the potential valueofmeasuringMgsss6At
this time, the many factors infuencing [fMg] limit the useful interpretation of altered
concentrations.
1.In horses,both increased [fMg²] and decreased[fMg²+]were common prior to and
after colicsurgerybutthreasonsforthevaiatonswerenotetmined.uring
experimental endotoxemia, both [tMg²] and [fMg2+] were decreased. The changes
occurred quickly and were thought to be due to movement of Mg from plasma to
cells.154
2.Serum [fMg²]remained unchanged when horses were fed a reduced-Mg²+diet even
though there was decreased renal Mg²+excretion and decreased Mg²+content in
muscles.157
3.Both [Mg] and [fMg] in sera decreased in cats fed Mgdeficient diets.58
4.In cats with nonketotic diabetes mellitus or ketotic diabetes mellirus, the [fMg²+]
was decreased more frequently than the [tMg²+].15²However, dogs with diabetic
ketoacidosis tended to have a greater [fMg2] than did dogs with uncomplicated
diabetes mellirus or healthy dogs; the reason for the greater [fMg] was not
626
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
determined.15As a group,the[fMg2] in the dogs with uncomplicated diabetes
mellitus was much more variable (some low and some high) than the [fMg²] in the
healthy dogs.
IMMUNOREACTIVEPARATHYROIDHORMONE(PTH)CONCENTRATION
I.
Physiologicprocesses
A.PTH is a polypeptide hormone (84 amino acids) produced by parathyroid glands and
inactivated or degraded by kidneys and liver. PTH is secreted by parathyroid glands in
response to a decreased[fCa²] in blood,whereas vitamin D and an increased [fCa²]
inhibit synthesis of PTH.
1.PTH secretion is primarily mediated by fCa²+ binding to the parathyroid gland chief
cell calcium-sensing receptor(CaSR）.Thisreceptor is linked to a series of intra-
cellular signaling pathways that inhibit PTH secretion.1516Mutations in the CaSR
gene can cause increased or decreased receptor activity and hypocalcemia or hyper
calcemia,respectively.
2.Mg²may infuence PTH responses by interfering with fCa² binding. Therefore,
3.The acid-base starus of an animal also affects the secretion of PTH. Acidoses
(metabolic and respiratory) stimulate PTH secretion, although, in metabolic
acidosis, the increase in[fCa] due to pH-induced shifts can be sufhcient to
inhibit increases in PTH.Alkaloses (metabolic and respiratory) inhibit PTH
secretion.120,121
B.Primary target organs:bone,intestine, and kidny
1.PTH promotes increased Ca²+ absorption by intestine (in the presence of vitamin
D) and increased resorption in renal tubules.
2.PTH promotes mobilization of Ca² and PO from bone.
3.PTH promotes renal PO excretion by inhibiting resorption of PO by tubules (a
potent phosphaturic action).
C.The net effect of PTH activity is to increase plasma [fCa²+] by Ca²+mobilization and
decrease plasma [Pi] by promoting phosphaturia.
II.
Analytical concepts for iPTH assays
A.RIAs developed for human PTH have sufficient species cross-reactivity to be valid for
domestic mammals.23
1.iPTH values generated by RIAs for intact PTH or N-terminal fragments correlate
well with expected biologic PTH activity.Because some immunoassays may react
with preproparathyroid hormone, proparathyroid hormone, intact PTH,or a PTH
fragment, the analyte of these assays can collectively be called immunoreacrive PTH
(iPTH).Only if the assay was 100 % specificfor intact PTH would[PTH]equal
[iPTH].
2. iPTH assays tend to be limited to endocrinology and larger reference laboratories.
3.iPTH assays do not detect PTHrp.
B.A human immunoradiometric assay for active whole PTH has been validated for equine
iPTH16 and canine iPTH.162
C.Samples for [iPTH] should be collected from dogs after an overnight fast.Postprandial
alkalosis and variations in the [fCa²] after meals can alter the [iPTH] in dogs.107
Similar changes might occur in cats and horses.
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
627
D.Because PTH is susceptible to proteolysis,the preferred sample for PTH is EDTA
plasma that contains a protease inhibitor (aprotinin). If the sample is not analyzed on
the day of collection, some investigators write that plasma or serum without aprotinin
is acceptableifthesampleremainsfrozenduringstorage ortransit.Inastability
study at 21°C and 37°C, the serum [iPTH]remained stable for 2 d with two protease
inhibitors (Pefabloc SC and 4-[2-aminoethyl]-benzenesulfonyl fuoride),but the serum
[PTH] decreased with other protease inhibitors. Equine [iPTH] in EDTA plasma
E.The serum [tCa²+] and ideally [fCa²+] of the same sample should be known when
interpreting the[iPTH].For example, a high-normal or increased [iPTH] in the
presence of hypercalcemia would represent a pathologic state, whereas, in the presence
of hypocalcemia, it may represent a physiologic response.
III.
Increased serum or plasma[iPTH](Table 1l.8)
A. Most disorders thar cause increased serum or plasma [iPTH] are due to excessive
production of PTH by neoplastic parathyroid cells or by hyperplastic parathyroid cells
(secondary to decreased [fCa²])
B.However,many dogs with hypercalcemia due to primary hyperparathyroidism do not
relation to an increased [fCa²+], thus reflecting a defective negative feedback on PTH
secretion
C.In one study,many dogs with hyperadrenocorticism had unexplained increases in
plasma [iPTH] and concurrent normocalcemia.106
IV.Decreased serum or plasma [iPTH] (Table 11.9)
Table 11.8. Diseases or conditions that cause increased [iPTH]
Increased PTH production by neoplastic cells
Neoplasticparathyroid gland (primary hyperparathyroidism)
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (type 1 or 2A)
Increased PTH production by hyperplastic parathyroid glands (idiopathic or secondary
hyperparathyroidism)
*Chronic renal disease
Diet with a low Ca²+:PO4 ratio
Hypocalcemic disorders (with a decreased [fCa²+]), other than hypoparathyroidism
Pseudo-hypoparathyroidism (decreased PTH receptor responsiveness)
Hyperadrenocorticism in dogs
*A relatively common disease or condition
Table 11.9.Diseases or conditions that cause decreased [iPTH]
Decreased PTH production due to damaged or removed parathyroid glands
(hypoparathyroidism)
Decreased PTH production due to inhibition
Hypervitaminosis D
Hypercalcemic disorders (with an increased [fCa²+]) except primary hyperparathyroidism
Hypomagnesemia due to Mg² depletion
628
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
PARATHYROIDHORMONE-RELATEDPROTEIN(PTHrP)CONCENTRATION
I.
Physiologicprocesses
A.PTHrp promotes Ca² balance in the ferus and modulates cartilage and bone develop-
ment.After birth,the control of Ca²+ balance switches from PTHrp to PTH.23
B.PTHrp is produced by many cells in feruses and adults, but plasma [PTHrp] is very
lowinhealthy adults.
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Sample
1.Because of rapid proteolysis of PTHrp,it has been recommended thar blood be
collected into EDTA tubes with an added protease inhibitor (aprotinin or leu-
peptin）.Separated plasma is analyzed fresh or shipped frozen toreference
laboratories.165
2. Some laboratories, however, request serum samples be shipped on ice.
B. Assays designed to measure human [PTHrp] (N terminal) are used for measuring
canine[PTHrp];however, the same assay is not valid for equine [PTHrp]. One
human PTHrp assay also can be used for measuring feline [PTHrp].26
I11.
Increased [PTHrp] in serum
A.Some neoplasms (especially lymphomas and carcinomas) can produce enough PTHrp
to cause an increase in serum[PTHrpl; the increased PTHrp activity can result in a
hypercalcemia. There also are rare reports of increased [PTHrp] in dogs with granulo
matous diseases.
B.More information about these hypercalcemic disorders is presented in the Total
Calcium Concentration section of this chapter.
VITAMIND CONCENTRATION
I.
Physiologicprocesses
A.Formation of vitamin D
1.Cholesterol is converted to 7-dehydrocholesterol,which is converted by ultraviolet
light to cholecalciferol (vitamin D).Vitamin D can also be of dietary origin.
Vitamin D (ergocalciferol) can be ingested in plants.
2.25-Hydroxylase in hepatocytes catalyzes the formation of 25-HCC from cholecalcif
erol.25-HCC circulates bound to vitamin D-binding protein.
3.Megalin,amnionlessand cubilin receptors on proximal renal tubular epithelial cells
mediate endocytic uptake of 25-HCC andvitamin D-binding protein that pass
through the glomerular fltration barrier. This receptor-mediated uprake prevents
loss of 25-HCC in the urine and delivers it to renal tubular epithelial cells. Uptake
of cobalamin/intrinsic factor complexes by the intestine is also mediated by cubilin,
4.1o-Hydroxylase in renal rubular cells catalyzes the formation of 1,25-DHCC from
25-HCC in most mammals. Srudies have shown that horses lack renal 1o-
hydroxylase and have low concentrations of 25-HCC,24,25-DHCC,and1,5
DHCC in plasma.?
5.1,25-DHCC (also called calcitriol) has 25 times the biologic activity of 25-HCC
which has 3-5 times the activity of cholecalciferol.
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
629
6.PTH activity and [Ca²] affect the formation of 1,25-DHCC, but [Ca²] appears to
be themajor factor controlling 1,25-DHCC concentrations.One study indicated
that when there is increased PTH activity, low [tCa²+] leads to an increased 1,25-
DHCC concentration, whereas high [tCa²+] leads to a decreased 1,25-DHCC
concentration.167 In that study, the [tCa²+] was measured, but the altered [tCa²+]
probably reflected a change in the [fCa²+].
B.Actions of vitamin D in dogs, cats,and cattle. (Roles of vitamin D in horses in
regulation of [fCa²] appear to be minor).
1.Vitamin D promotes intestinal uptake of Ca² by stimulating the formation of a
Ca²-binding protein (calbindin) in the mucosal epithelial cells. It also stimulates
absorption of PO4.
2.Vitamin D promotes Ca²+ and PO liberation from bone by stimulating osteoclastic
activity.
3.Vitamin D promotes resorption of fCa+by proximal renal tubules by stimulating
the formation of calbindin.
4.Vitamin D inhibits PTH synthesis in parathyroid glands by inhibiting transcription
of the PTH mRNA.
5. Net effect of vitamin D: promotes hypercalcemia
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Sample
able.Concentrations of 1,25-DHCC and 25-HCCare stable for3 d at 24°C.168
Samples should be frozen if analysis is delayed
2.Prior to most assays, the sample is deproteinized or extracted to free vitamin D
metabolites from vitamin D-binding proteins (specific α-globulins and albumin).
Nearly all vitamin D molecules are protein bound in serum.
B.Assays
1.The[1,25-DHCC] can bemeasured bya radioreceptor assay.The assay uses a
vitamin D receptor from calf thymus.The[1,25-DHCC] can bemeasured also by a
RIA.170,171
2.[25-HCC] can be measured by RIAs, though the antibody might cross-react with
III.
Because of the limited availability of 1,25-DHCC assays,there are few reports of abnormal
[1,25-DHCC] in domestic mammals.The following lists are based on reported or expected
concentrations in various disorders.Possible related defects in 1,25-DHCC pathways are
within parentheses
A.Increased[1,25-DHCC]expected or reported
1. Granulomatous disease: Macrophages may produce 1,25-DHCC.
2.Primary hyperparathyroidism:PTH promotes 1o-hydroxylase activity, which
results in increased 1,25-DHCC production.
3.Lymphoma and other HHM disorders:24.17 Either PTHrp promotes 1o-hydroxylase
activity or neoplastic cells produce 1,25-DHCC
4.Vitamin D intoxication:49i72 increased intake.
5.Vitamin D-receptor defect rickets: vitamin D-dependent rickets, type II
6.Bovine parturient paresis (milk fever):7Decreased [fCa²] and increased PTH
activiry promote 1o-hydroxylase activity,which increases 1,25-DHCCproduction
630
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
7.Chronic renal failure in hypercalcemic dogs:This was reported in 2 of 10 hypercal
cemic dogs diagnosedwith chronicrenal failure,whereas 4of 10 had decreased
[1,25-DHCC]. Reasons for the increased [1,25-DHCC] were not determined or
proposed.170
B.Decreased [1,25-DHCC]expected or reported.
1.Renal failure, including protein-losing nephropathy: This may be caused by
decreased functional renal tissue and therefore decreased production of 1,25-DHCC,
2. Hyperphosphatemia not caused by increased vitamin D: Increased [PO] inhibits
lo-hydroxylase activity, which decreases 1,25-DHCC production.
3. Hypomagnesemia: This may create a pseudo-hypoparathyroidism, which decreases
1,25-DHCC production, or hypomagnesemia may impair PTH secretion
4.Hypoparathyroidism: Less PTH activity causes less 1a-hydroxylase activity, which
decreases 1,25-DHCCproduction.
5. Pseudo-hypoparathyroidism: Less response to PTH causes less 1o-hydroxylase
activity,which decreases 1,25-DHCC production.
6.HHM24.17 (This is perhaps caused by hypercalcemia, reduced [iPTH], hyperkalemic
nephropathy, or the presence of an inhibitor of 1o-hydroxylase.)
7.Protein-losing enteroparhies in dogs(probably decreased intestinal absorption).
8.Vitamin D-deficient diet” (decreased intake)
9.Dogs with cubilin, amnionless, or megalin dysfunction and diminished renal tubular
resorption of 25-HCC and vitamin D-binding protein had decreased plasma
concentrations of 25-HCC and 1,25-DHCC.166
CALCITONINCONCENTRATION
I.
Physiologicprocesses
A.Calcitonin is a polypeptide hormone synthesized by thyroid C cells that are part of the
APUD family of cells.(APUD is the acronym for endocrine cells that have a role in
amine precursor uptake, and decarboxylation.)
B.The regulation of secretion is not thoroughly understood
1.Calcitonin secretion is stimulated by increased concentrations of fCa²+(major),
fMg+, α- and β-adrenergic hormones, gastrin, and cholecystokinin.
2.Calcitonin secretion is inhibited by decreased [fCa²+]and increased somatostatin
concentration.
II.
Actions
A.Calcitonin inhibits osteoclastic activity in bone.
B.Calcitonin inhibits renal tubular resorption of Ca²and PO4.
C.The net effect of calcitonin activity is to decrease serum [tCa²], [fCa²], and [Pi]
III.Analytical concepts
A.Marked differences in amino acid sequences between species may limit the cross-species
immunoreactivity in RIAs.
B.RIAs for canine calcitonin have been developed.173.174
IV.
Increased immunoreactive calcitonin concentrations
A.Medullary thyroid carcinoma175
B.Nonthyroid cancer,especially from neural crest tissue
11/CALCIUM,PHOSPHORUS,MAGNESIUMANDREGULATORYHORMONES
631
Table 11.10. Expected hormone and mineral patterns for major diseases or conditions
(without complications)
[tCa2+]
[Pi]
[iPTH]
[PTHrp]
[vitamin D]
Primary
↑a
↓b-WRI
WRI-↑c
WRI
WRI
hyperparathyroidism
Humoral hypercalcemia of
↑
↓-WRI
↑
WRI
malignaneyd
Excess vitamin D
↑
WRI-T
↓-WRI
WRI
↑
Caninehypoadrenocorticism
↑
WRI-↑
↓-WRI
WRI
WRI
Renal failure, hypercalcemic
WRI-↓
WRI
?E
Renal failure, chronic
WRI-↓
↑
↑
WRI
√-WRI
Hypoalbuminemia
个
WRI
WRI
WRI
WRI
Primary hypoparathyroidism
WRI-T
↓-WRI
WRI
WRI
Vitamin D-receptor defect
↑
↑
WRI
↑
rickets
Milk fever
WRI-T
WRI
WRI-↑
Prolonged anorexia
WRI
↑
WRI
WRI
WRI
↑,above the reference interval
b↓,below the reference interval
The value may not be increased but is inappropriately high for the hypercalcemic status.
Due to increased PHTrp production by neplastic cells(different patterns with other hypercalcemic
agents)
More common in horses than other species; can be either acute or chronic renal failure.
[iPTH] is decreased in hypercalcemic renal failure inhorses; similar data were not found forother
animals.
 A question mark () indicates that the expected result is not known in most mammals. Healthy horses
have very litte vitamin D, and one would expect less in the presence of hypercalcemia.
The expected result is not known in most mammals, but decreases are expected in the human condition.
Note:econdary pathologi statesmay alter patternsForexample,prolonged or severe hypercalcemia
may cause renal failure that might change the serum Pil from hypophosphatemia to hyperphospharemia.
MAJORPATTERNSFORCALCIUM(Ca+)ANDINORGANICPHOSPHORUS
(Pi)DISORDERS
Because of thephysiologicrelationships amongCa²,POPTH,PTHrp,and vitamin D,some
diseases are expected to cause certain patterns of abnormal analyte concentrations suggestive of
those diseases.Patterns for major diseases or conditions are listed in Table 11.10. Because of
compensation, some analyte concentrations may remain WRI but be inappropriately located near
either the upper or lower limits of the reference interval.Findings in clinical cases may represent
a combination of factors;for example,an animal with primary hyperparathyroidism may have
hypercalcemia because of excess PTH activity, and hyperphosphatemia because of hypercalcemic
nephrosis that produced renal failure.
References
1.Endres DB, Rude RK. 1999. Mineral and bone metabolism. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, eds. Tietz Terbeok of
Clinica/ Chemistry, 3rd edition,13951457. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
632
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2. Schenck PA, Chew Dj, Brooks CL. 1996. Fractionation of canine serum calcium, using a micropartition system
Am J Vet Res 57:268-271.
3. van der Kollk JH, Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR, Brouillet D, Wensing T. 2002. Heparinised blood ionised calcium
4.Meuten DJ, Chew Dj, Capen CC, Kociba G]. 1982. Relationship of serum total calcium to albumin and total
protein in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:6367.
5. Harper EJ, Hackett RM, Wilkinson J, Heaton PR. 2003. Age-related variations in hematologic and plasma
biochemical test results in beagles and Labrador retrievers. J Am Vet Med Assoc 223:1436-1442.
6.Fenger CK. 1998. Neonatal and perinatal diseases. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, eds. Equine Intemal Medicine, 938-
970. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
7.Meyer DJ, Coles EH, Rich LJ. 1992.Veterinary Laboratory Medicine: Dnterprwtarion and Diagnosis. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders.
8.Schott HC II. 1998. Chronic renal failure. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, eds. Eqaine Ineraf Medicne, 856875
Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
9.Breidenbach A,Schlumbohm C, Harmeyer J. 1998. Peculiarities of vitamin D and of the calcium and phosphate
homeostatic system in horses.Vet Res 29:173-186
10. Rosol TJ, Capen CC. 1997. Calcium-regulating hormones and diseases of abnormal mineral (calcium, phosphorus
magnesium) metabolism. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML, eds. Clinical Brecbemiay of Domeshic Animals, 5th
edition, 619-702. San Diego: Academic.
11.Guyton AC, Hall JE. 2000. Texrbook ofMedica Pbysiology, 10th edition. Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
12. Nap RC, Hazewinkel HA. 1994. Growth and skeletal development in the dog in nelation to nutrition: A review. Vet
Q16:50-59.
13.Rose BD. 1994. Climical Physiolegy ofAcid-Base and Electrolyte Disorders, 4th edition. New York: McGraw-Hill
14.Guyton AC, Hall JE. 1996. Textboek ofMedicaf Physiofogy,9th edition. Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
15.Lundberg GD, Iverson C,Radulescu G. 1986. Now read this: The SI units are here.J Am Med Assoc
255:2329-2339
16. Bienzle D, Jacobs RM, Lumsden JH. 1993. Relationship of serum total calcium to serum albumin in dogs, cats
horses and cattle.CanVetJ34:360-364.
17.Flanders JA,Scarlett JM,Blue JT,NethS.1989.Adjustment of total serum calum concentration forbinding 
albumin and protein in cats: 291 cases (19861987). J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:16091611.
18. Schenck PA, Chew Dj. 2005. Prediction of serum ionized calcium concentration by use of serum total calcium
concentration in dogs. Am J Vet Res 66:1330-1336.
19. Berger B, Feldrman EC. 1987. Primary hyperparathyroidism in dogs: 21 cases (19761986). J Am Vet Med Assoc
191:350-356
20. Kallt A], Richter KP, Feldman EC, Brum DE. 1991. Primary hyperparathyroidism in cats: Seven cases (1984
1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:1767-1771.
21.Frank N,Hawkins JF,Coueil LLRaymond JT.1998.Primaryhyperparathyroidism with osteodystrophiabrosaf
the facial bones in a pony. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:8486.
22. Feldman EC, Hoar B, Pollard R, Nelson RW. 2005. Pretreatment clinical and laboratory findings in dogs with
primary hyperparathyroidism: 210 cases (1987-2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:756-761.
23. Rosol Tj, Capen CC. 1996. Pathophysiology of calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium metabolism in animals. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26:1155-1184.
24. Rosol Tj, Nagode LA, Couto CG, Hammer AS, Chew DJ, Peterson JL, Ayl RD, Steinmeyer CL, Capen CC. 1992.
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)related protein, PTH, and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D in dogs with cancer-associated
hypercalcemia.Endocrinology 131:1157-1164.
25. Pressler BM, Rotstein DS, Law JM, Rosol TJ, LeRoy B, Keene BW, Jackson MW. 2002. Hypercalcemia and high
parathyroid hormone-related protein concentration associated with malignant melanoma in a dog. J Am Vet Med
Assoc221:263-265.
26. Bolliger AP, Graham PA, Richard V, Rosol TJ, Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR. 2002. Detection of parathyroid
hormone-related protein in cats with humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy. Vet Clin Pathol 31:38.
27. Barton MH, Sharma P, LeRoy BE,Howerth EW. 2004.Hypercalcemia and high serum parathyroid
hormone-related protein concentration in a horse with multiple myeloma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 225:409
413.
28.Nafe LA,Patnaik AK, Lyman R. 1980. Hypercalcemia associated with epidermoid carcinoma in a dog. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 176:1253-1254.
29.Zenoble RD, Crowell WA, Rowland GN. 1979. Adenocarcinoma and hypercalcemia in a dog. Vet Pathol
16:122-123.
30. Engelman RW, Tyler RD, Good RA, Day NK. 1985. Hypercalcemia in cats with feline-leukemia virus-associated
leukemia-lymphoma. Cancer 56:777-781.
31. Klausner JS, Bell FW, Hayden DW, Hegstad RL, Johnston SD. 1990. Hypercalcemia in rwo cats with squamous
cell carcinomas. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:103-105.
32. Meuten DJ, Price SM, Seiler RM, Krook L. 1978. Gastric carcinoma with pseudohyperparathyroidism in a horse
CornellVet 68:179-195.
33. Marr CM, Love S, Pirie HM. 1989. Clinical, ultrasonographic and pathological findings in a horse with splenic
lymphosarcoma and pseudohyperparathyroidism. Equine Vet J 21:221-226.
34. Esplin DG, Taylor JL. 1977. Hypercalcemia in a horse with lymphosarcoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 170:180-182.
35. Mair TS, Yeo SP, Lucke VM. 1990. Hypercalcaemia and soft tissue mineralisation associated with lymphosarcoma in
two horses. Vet Rec 126:99-101.
36. Fix AS, Miller LD. 1987. Equine adrenocortical carcinoma with hypercalcemia Vet Pathol 24:190-192.
37. Knecht TP, Behling CA, Burton DW, Glass CK, Deftos LJ. 1996. The humoral hypercalcemia of benignancy: A
newly appreciated syndrome. Am J Clin Pathol 105:487492.
38.Fradkin JM,Braniedi AM, Craig TM,Ramiro-Ibanez F, Rogers KS, Zoran DL.2001.Elevated parathyroid
hormone-related protein and hypercalcemia in two dogs with schistosomiasis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:349355.
39.Christakos S, Gabrielides C, Rhoten WB. 1989. Vitamin D-dependent calcium binding proteins: Chemistry,
distribution, functional considerations, and molecular biology.Endocr Rev 10:3-26.
40. Carothers MA, Chew DJ, Nagode LA 1994. 25(OH)-cholecalciferol intoxication in dogs. In: Proceedings of the
12th ACVIM Forum, San Francisco, 822-825.
41.Hilbe M, Sydler T, Fischer L, Naegeli H. 2000.Metastatic calkifcation in a dog attributable to ingestion of a
tacalcitol ointment.Vet Pathol37:490492.
42.Campbell A. 1997. Calcipotriol poisoning in dogs. Vet Rec 141:27-28.
43. Fan TM, Simpson KW, Trasti S, Birnbaum N, Center SA, Yeager A. 1998. Calcipotriol toxicity in a dog. J Small
Anim Pract 39:581-586.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:867-873.
comparative toxicity of vitamins D and D,. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:13581369.
46. Wasserman RH, Carradino RA, Krook LP. 1975. Cestrum diwrwm A domestic plant with 1,25-
dihydroxycholecalciferol-like activity. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 62:8591
47. Muylle E, Oyaert W, De Roose P, van den Hende C. 1974. Hypercalcaemia and mineralisation of non-osseous
tissues in horses due to vitamin-D toxicity. Zentralbl Veterinarrmed [A] 21:638643.
48. Spangler WL, Gribble DH, Lee TC. 1979. Vitamin D intoxication and the pathogenesis of vitamin D nephropathy
in the dog. Am J Vet Res 40:73-83.
supplementation of vitamin D. J Small Anim Pract 46:334-338.
50.Dow SW, Legende AM, StiffM, Greene C. 1986.Hypercalcemia associated with blastomycosis in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 188:706709.
51.Hodges RD, Legendre AM, Adams LG, Willard MD, Pitts RP, Monce K, Needels CC,Ward H. 1994. Itraconazole
for the treatment of histoplasmosis in cats. J Vet Intern Med 8:409-413.
52.Savary KCM, Price GS,Vaden SL. 2000. Hypercalcemia in cats: A retrospective study of 71 cases (1991-1997).
J Vet Intern Med 14:184-189.
53.Boag AK,Murphy KF, Connolly DJ.2005.Hypercalcaemia associated with Angiostrongyus wasorum in thrce dogs
J Small Anim Pract 46:7984.
54.Elfers RS,Bayly WM, Brobst DF, Reed SM,Liggitt HD,Hawker CD,Baylink DJ. 1986.Alterations in calcium,
phosphorus and C-terminal parathyroid hormone levels in equine acute renal disease. Cornell Vet 76:317-329.
55. Bertone JJ, Traub-Dargatz JL, Fettman MJ, Wilke L, Wrigley RH, Jaenke R, Paulsen ME. 1987. Monitoring the
progresson of renal failure in a horse with polycystic kidney disease: Use of the reciprocal of serum creatinine
concentration and sodium sulfanilate clearance half-time. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:565-568.
56. National Research Council. 1989. Nutrient Requirements of Horse, 5th edition. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.
57. Brobst DF, Bayly WM, Reed SM, Howard GA, Torbeck RL. 1982. Parathyroid hormone evaluation in normal
horses and horses with renal failure. Equine Vet Sei 2:150157.
58. Eubig PA, Brady MS, Gwaltney-Brant SM, Khan SA, Mazzaferro EM, Morrow CM. 2005. Acute renal failure in
dogs after the ingestion of grapes or raisins: A retrospective evaluation of 43 dogs (1992-2002). J Vet Intern Med
19:663-674.
634
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
59. Schenck PA, Chew Dj. 2003. Determination of calcium fractionation in dogs with chronic renal failure. Am J Vet
Res 64:1181-1184.
60. Pererson MA, Feinman JM. 1982. Hypercalcemia associated with hypoadrenocorticism in 16 dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 181:802-804.
cism and diabetes mellitus in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:4144.
62. Peterson ME, Greco DS, Orth DN. 1989. Primary hypoadrenocorticism in ten cats. J Vet Interm Med 3:5558.
63. Walser M, Robinson BHB, Duckett JW Jr. 1963. The hypercalcemia of adrenal insufhciency. J Clin Invest
42:456-465.
64. Osborne CA, Poffenbarger EM, Klausner JS, Johnston SD, Griffth DP. 1986. Etiopathogenesis, clinical manifesta-
tions, and management of canine calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 16:133170.
65. Greco DS, Peterson ME, Cho DY, Markovits JE. 1985. Juvenile-onset hypothyroidism in a dog. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 187:948950.
66. Hirt RA, Kneiss S, Teinfalt M. 2000. Severe hypercalcemia in a dog with a retained fetus and endometritis. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 216:1423-1425.
67. Midkiff AM, Chew DJ, Randolph JF, Center SA, DiBartola SP. 2000. Idiopathic hypercalcemia in cats. J Vet Intern
Med 14:619-626
68. Oldham SB, Rude RK, Molloy CT, Lipson LG. 1984. The effects of magnesium on calcium inhibition of
parathyroid adenylate cyclase. Endocrinology 115:1883-1890.
69.Bush WW, Kimmel SE, Wosar MA, Jackson MW. 2001.Secondary hypoparathyroidism attributed to hypomagnese
mia in a dog with protein-losing enteropathy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1732-1734.
70. Mellanby RJ, Mellor PJ, Roulois A, Baines EA, Mee AP, Berry JL, Hertage ME. 2005. Hypocalcaemia associated
with low serum vitamin D metabolite concentrations in two dogs with protein-losing enteropathies. J Small Anim
Pract 46:345-351.
71. Hendy GN, Stotland MA, Grunbaum D, Fraher LJ, Loveridge N, Goltzman D. 1989. Characteristics of secondary
hyperparathyroidism in vitamin D-dehicient dogs. Am J Physiol 256:E765-E772.
72.Wong KM, Klein L, Hollis B. 1985. Effcts of parathyroid hormone on puppies during development of Ca and
vitamin D deficiency. Am J Physiol 249:E568E576.
73. Schreiner CA, Nagode LA. 2003. Vitamin Ddependent rickets type 2 in a four-month-old cat. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 222:337-336.
74. Horst RL, Jorgensen NA, DeLuca HF. 1978. Plasma 1,25-dinhydroxyvitamin D and parathyroid hormone levels in
paretic dairy cows. Am J Physiol 235:E634E637.
75. Mayer GP, Ramberg CF Jr, Kronfeld DS, Buckle RM, Sherwood LM,Aurbach GD, Potts JT Jr. 1969. Plasma
parathyroid hormone concen tration in hypocalcemic parturient cows. Am J Vet Res 30:1587-1597
76.Goff JP,Horst RL.2003.Role of acid-base physiology on the pathogenesis of parturient hypocalcaemia (millk fever):
The DCAD theory in principal and practice. Acta Vet Scand Suppl 97:51-56.
77. Baird JD. 1971. Lactation tetany (eclarmpsia) in a Shetland pony mare. Aust Vet J 47:402-404.
78. Fascetti AJ, Hickman MA. 1999. Preparturient hypocalcemia in four cats. J Am Vet Med Asoc 215:1127-1129.
79.Young DM, Capen CC, Black HE. 1971. Calcitonin activity in ultimobranchial neoplasms from bull.Vet Pathol
8:19-27.
80.Fenger CK.1998.Disorders of calcium metabolism.In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, eds.Equine Intemal Medicine, 1st
edition, 925-934.Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
81.James LF. 1999. Halogeton poisoning in livestock. J Nat Toxins 8:395-403.
82.Crowell WA, Whitlock RH, Stout RC, Tyler DE. 1979.Ethylene glycol toxicosis in cattle. Cornell Vet
69:272-279.
83. Grauer GF, Thrall MA. 1982. Ethylene glycol (antifreeze) poisoning in the dog and cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
18:492-497
84. Grauer GF, Thrall MA, Henre BA, Grauer RM, Hamar DW. 1984. Early dlinicopathologic findings in dogs
ingesting ethylene glycol. Am J Vet Res 45:2299-2303.
85. Chew DJ, Leonard M, Muir W IL. 1989. Effect of sodium bicarbonate infusions on ionized calcium and total
calcium concentrations in serum of dlinically normal cats. Am J Vet Res 50:145-150.
86.FreestoneJF,Carlson GP,Harrold DR,Church G.1988.Infuence offurosermide reatment onfuidand electrolyte
balance in horses. Am J Vet Res 49:1899-1902
87. Kormnenou A, Karayannopoulou M, Polizopoulou ZS, Constantinidis TC, Dessiris A. 2005. Correlation of serum
allaline phosphatase activity with the healing process of long bone fractures in dogs Vet Clin Pathol 34:3538.
88. Kimmel SE, Washabau RJ, Drobatz KJ. 2001. Incidence and prognostic value of low plasma ionized calcium
concentration in cats with acute pancreatitis: 46 cases (19961998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1105-1109.
635
89. Agarwal N, Pitchumoni CS. 1993. Acute pancreatitis: A multisystem disease. Gastroenterologist l:115128
90.Warshaw AL, Lee KH, Napier TW, Fournier PO, Duchainey D,Axelrod L. 1985. Depresson of serum calcium by
increased plasma free fatty acids in the rat A mechanism for hypocalcemia in acute pancreatitis. Gastroenterology
89:814820.
91. Bhattacharya SK, Crawford AJ, Pate JW, Clemens MG, Chaudry IH. 1988. Mechanism of calcium and magnesium
translocation in acute pancreatitis: A temporal correlation betveen hypocalcemia and membrane-mediated excessive
intracellular calcium accumulation in soft tssues. Magnesium 7:91102.
92. Drobatz KJ, Hughes D. 1997. Concentration of ionized calcium in plasma from cats with urethral obstruction.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:1392-1395.
93. Vaden SL, Levine J, Breitschwerdt EB. 1997. A retrospective case-control of acute renal failure in 99 dogs. J Vet
Intern Med 11:5864
94. Schaer M, Cavanagh P, Hause W, Wilkins R. 1977. Iatrogenic hyperphosphatermia, hypocalcemia and hypernatremia
in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:3941.
95. Garcia-Lopez JM, Provost PJ, Rush JE, Zicker SC, Burmaster H, Freeman LM. 2001. Prevalence and
prognostic importance of hypomagnesemia and hypocalcemia in horses that have colic surgery. Am J Vet Res
62:7-12.
96. Delesalle C, Dewulf J, Lefebvre RA, Schuurkes JA, Van VB, Deprez P. 2005. Use of plasma ionized calcium levels
and Ca substirution response patens as prognostic parameters forilus and survival in colic horses.Vet Q
27:157-172.
97.Ray AC,Kyle ALG,Murphy MJ, Reagor JC. 1989.Etiologic agents, incidence, and improved diagnostic methods
of cantharidin toxicosis in horses. Am J Vet Res 50:187-191.
98. Helman RG, Edwards WC. 1997. Clinical features of blister beetle poisoning in equids: 70 cases (19831996).
JAmVet Med Assoc 211:1018-1021
99. Harris PA. 1998. Musculoskeletal disease. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, eds. Equine Intemal Medicime, 1st edition,
371-426.Philadelphia:WB Saunders
100. Waldron-Mease E, Klein LV, Rosenberg H, Leitch M. 198 1. Malignant hyperthermia in a halothane-anesthetized
horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 179:896898.
101. Gaschen F, Gaschen L, Seiler G, Welle M, Bornand Jaunin V, Gonin Jmaa D, Neiger-Aeschbacher G, Ad&-
Damilano M. 1998. Lethal peracute rhabdomyolysis associated with stress and general anesthesia in three
dystrophin-defcient cats. Vet Pathol 35:117-123
102.Perkins G, Valberg SJ, Madigan JM, Carlson GP, Jones SL. 1998. Electrolyte disturbances in foals with severe
rhabdomyolysis. J Vet Intern Med 12:173-177.
103. Kerr MG, Snow DH. 1983. Composition of sweat of the horse during prolonged epinephrine (adrenaline) infusion,
heat exposure, and exercise. Am J Vet Res 44:1571-1577.
105.Blood DC,Radostits OM.1983.Diseases of the alimentary tract: II. In:Blood DC,Radostits OM,eds.Veterinay
Medicne,203-259.London:BailliereTindall.
106.Ramsey IK, Tebb A, Harris E, Evans H, Herrtage ME. 2005. Hyperparathyroidism in dogs with hyperadrenocort
cism. J Small Anim Pract 46:531536.
107. Lopez I, Aguilera-Tejero E, Estepa JC, Bas S, Mayer-Valor R, Jimenez A, Rodriguez M. 2005. Diurnal variations in
the plasma concentration of parathyroid hormone in dogs. Vet Rec 157:344-347.
108. Rosol TJ, Chew DJ, Nagode LA, Schenck P. 2000. Disorders of calcium.In:DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid Tberapy in
Small AnimalPractice,2nd edition,108-162.Philadelphia:WB Saunders
109.Larsson L,Ohman S. 1985.Efect of silicone-scparator tubes and storage time on ionized caleium in serum.Clin
Chem 31:169-170.
110.Boink ABTJ,Bucldey BM, Christansen TF, Covington AK,Maas AHJ,Maller-Plathe O, Sachs C, Siggaard
Andersen O. 1991. International Federation of Clinical Chemistry (IFCC) Scientifc Division. IFCC recommenda
tion: Recommendation on sampling, transport and storage for the determination of concentration of ionized
calcium in whole blood, plasma and serum. Clin Chim Acta 202:S13-S21.
111. Schenck PA, Chew DJ, Brooks CL. 1995. Effects of storage on normal canine serum ionized calcium and pH. Am J
Vet Res 56:304-307.
112. Sachs C, Rabouine P, Chaneac M, Kindermans C, Dechaux M, Falch-Christiansen T. 1991. Preanalytical errors in
ionized calcium measurements induced by the use of liquid heparin. Ann Clin Biochem 28:167-173.
113. Hopper K, Rezende ML, Haskins SC. 2005. Assessment of the effect of dilution of blood samples with sodium
heparin on blood gas, electrolyte, and lactate measurements in dogs. Am J Vet Res 66:656660.
114. Lyon ME, Guajardo M, Laha T, Malik S, Henderson PJ, Kenny MA. 1995. Zinc heparin introduces a preanalytical
crror in the measurement of ionized calcium concentra tion. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 55:6165.
636
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
115. Barber PJ, Elliott J. 1996. Study of calcium homeostasis in feline hyperthyroidism. J Small Anim Pract 37:575582.
116. Geiser DR, Andrews FM, Rohrbach BW, White SL, Maykuth PL, Green EM, Provenza MK. 1995. Blood ionized
calcium concentrations in horses before and after the cross-county phase of three-day event competition. Am J Vet
Res 56:1502-1505.
117. Aguilera-Tejero E, Estepa JC, Lopez I, Bas S, Garfia B, Rodriguez M. 2001. Plasma ionized calcium and parathyroid
hormone concentrations in horses after endurance rides. J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:488490.
118. Jutkowitz LA, Rozanski EA, Moreau JA, Rush JE. 2002. Massive transfusion in dogs 15 cases (1997-2001). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 220:16641669.
119. Grove-White DH, Michell AR. 2001. Iatrogenic hypocalcaermia during parenteral fuid therapy of diarrhoeic calves.
Vet Rec 149:203-207.
120.Lopez I,Aguilera-Tejero E,Estepa JC,Rodriguez M, Felsenfld AJ. 2004.Role of acidosis-induced increases in
calcium on PTH secretion in acute metabolic and respiratory acidosis in the dog. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab
286:E780-E785
metabolic and respiratory allkalosis on parathyroid hormone secretion in the dog. J Bone Miner Res 18:14781485.
122. Hulter HN. 1985. Effects and interrelationships of PTH, Ca*, vitamin D, and Pi in acid-base homeostasis. Am J
Physiol 248:F739-F752.
123. Corvilain J, Abramow M. 1964. Effct of growth hormone on tubular transport of phosphate in normal and
parathyroidectomized dogs. J Clin Invest 43:1608-1612.
124. Harkin KR, Braselton WE, Tvedren H. 1998. Pseudohypophosphatemia in two dogs with immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia. J Vet Intern Med 12:178-181.
125. Bakker AJ, Bosma H, Christen PJ. 1990. Influence of monodonal immunoglobulins in three different methods for
inorganic phosphorus. Ann Clin Biochem 27(Pt 3):227-231
126. Jorgensen LS, Center SA, Randolph JF, Brum D. 1985. Electrolyte abnormalities induced by hypertonic phosphate
enemas in two cats.J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:1367-1368.
127. Atkins CE, Tyler R, Greenlee P. 1985. Clinical, biochemical, acid-base, and electrolyte abnormalities in cats after
hypertonic sodium phosphate enema administration.Am J Vet Res 46:980-988.
in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:883-885.
129. Arden WA, Stick JA. 1988. Serum and peritoneal fuid phosphate concentrations as predictors of major intestinal
injury associated with equine colic. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:927-931.
130. Carlson GP, Mansmann RA. 1974. Serum electrolyte and plasma protein alterations in horses used in endurance
rides. J Am Vet Med Assoc 165:262-264.
131.Oster JR,Alpert HC,Vaamonde CA.1984. Effect of acid-base status on plasma phosphorus response to lactate
Can J Physiol Pharmacol 62:939-942.
132.Dennis SC, Gevers W, Opie LH. 1991. Protons in ischemia: Where do they come from; where do they go to? J Mol
Cell Cardiol 23:1077-1086.
133. Darrigrand-Haag RA, Center SA, Randolph JF, Lewis RM, Wood PA. 1996. Congenital Fanconi syndrome
associated with renal dysplasia in two border terriers. J Vet Intern Med 10:412419.
Vet Med Assoc 168:938-943
135. Bovée KC, Joyce T, Blazer-Yost B, Goldschmidt MS, Segal S. 1979. Characterization of renal defects in dogs with a
syndrome similar to the Fanconi syndrome in man. J Am Vet Med Assoc 174:10941104.
136. Roussel AJ, Cohen ND, Ruoff WW, Brumbaugh GW, Schmitz DG, Kuesis BS. 1993. Urinary indices of horses
after intravenous administration of crystalloid solutions. J Vet Intern Med 7:241-246.
137. Brautbar N, Leibovici H, Massry SG. 1983. On the mechanism of hypophosphatemia during acute hyperventila.
tion: Evidence for increased muscle glycolysis. Miner Electrolyte Metab 9:4550.
138. Bayly WM, Brobst DF, Elfers RS, Reed SM. 1986. Serum and urinary biochemistry and enzyme changes in ponies
with acute renal failure. Cornell Vet 76:306-316.
139. Steffey EP, Giri SN, Dunlop CI, Cullen LK, Hodgson DS, Willits N. 1993. Biochemical and haematological
changes following prolonged halothane anaesthesia in horses. Res Vet Sei 55:338-345.
140.Fontenot JP,Allen VG,Bunce GE, Goff JP.1989.Factors infuencing magnesium absorption and metabolism in
ruminants.JAnimSci 67:3445-3455.
141. Simesen MG. 1980. Calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium metabolism. In: Kaneko J, ed. Cliwka! Biochemistry of
Domestic Anima, 3rd edition, 575648. New Yorkc Academic.
142. Martens H, Hammer U. 1981. Resorption von Natrium und Magnesium aus dem foribergehend isolierten Pansen
von Schafen wahrend intravenoser Infusion von Aldosteron. Dtsch Tieraerzlt Wochenschr 88:404407.
143. MeCoy MA. 2004. Hypomagnesacmia and new data on vitreous humour magnesium concentration as a post-
mortem marker in ruminants. Magnes Res 17:137-145.
144. Kasari TR, Woodbury AH, Morcom-Karsari E. 1990. Adverse effect of orally administered magnesium hydroxide
on serum magnesium concentration and systemic acid-base balance in adult cattle. J Am Vet Med Assoc
196:735-742
145. Henninger RW, Horst J. 1997. Magnesium toxicosis in two horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:8285.
146. Riond JL, Kocabagli N, Spichiger UE, Wanner M. 1995. The concentration of ionized magnesium in serum during
the periparturient period of non-paretic dairy cows. Vet Res Commun 19:195203.
housed dairy herd. J Am Vet Med Assoc 224:9699.
148.Kmmel SE,Waddell LS, Michel KE. 200.Hypomagnemia and hypocalcemia asciated with protein-losing
enteropathy in Yorkshire terriers: Five cases (19921998). J Am Vet Med Assoe 217:703-706.
149. Martin LG, Matteson VL, Wingfield WE, Van Pelt DR, Hackett TB. 1994. Abnormalities of serum magnesium in
critically ill dogs: Incidence and implications. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 4:1520.
150. Toribio RE, Kohn CW, Chew DJ, Sams RA, Rosol TJ. 2001. Comparison of serum parathyroid hormone and
ionized calcium and magnesium concentrations and fractional urinary clearance of calcium and phosphorus in
healthy horses and horses with enterocolitis. Am J Vet Res 62:938-947
horses.J Vet Intern Med 17:860-867.
152. Norris CR, Nelson RW, Christopher MM. 1999. Serum total and ionized magnesium concentrations and urinary
fractional excretion of magnesium in cats with diabetes melltus and diabetic ketoacidosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
215:1455-1459
153.Shawley RV, Rolf LL Jr. 1984.Experimental cantharidiasis in the horse. Am J Vet Res 45:2261-2266.
154.Toribio RE,Kohn CW,Hardy J,Rosol Tj. 2005.Alterations in serum parathyroid hormone and electrolyte
concentrations and urinary excretion of electrolytes in horses with induced endotoxemia. J Vet Intern Med
19:223-231
155. Fincham SC, Drobatz KJ, Gillespie TN, Hess RS. 2004. Evaluation of plasma-ionized magnesium concentration in
122 dogs with diabetes mellirus: A retrospective study. J Vet Intern Med 18:612-617.
156. Mann FA, Boon GD, Wagner-Mann CC, Ruben DS. 1998. Ionized and total magnesiurm concentrations in blood
from dogs with naturally acquired parvoviral enteritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:13981401.
157.Stewart AJ,Hardy J,Kohn CW,Toribio RE,Hinchcliff KW,Silver B.2004.Validation of diagnostic tests for
determination of magnesium status in horses with reduced magnesium intake. Am J Vet Res 65:4224.30.
158. Norris CR, Christopher MM, Howard KA, Nelson RW. 1999. Effect ofa magnesium-deficient diet on serum and
urine magnesium concentrations in healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 60:1159-1163.
159.Chen RA,Goodman WG. 2004. Role of the calcium-sensing receptor in parathyroid gland physiology.Am J
Physiol Renal Physiol 286:F1005-F1011.
160. Ramasamy I. 2006. Recent advances in physiological calcium homeostasis. Clin Chem Lab Med 44:237-273.
161. Estepa JC, Garfia B, Gao PR, Cantor T, Rodriguez M, Aguilera-Tejero E. 2003. Validation and clinical utility of a
novel immunoradiometric assay exclusively for biologically active whole parathyroid hormone in the horse. Equine
VetJ35:291-295.
162. Estepa JC, Lopez I, Felsenfld AJ, Gao P, Cantor T, Rodriguez M, Aguilera-Tejero E. 2003. Dynamics of secretion
and metabolism of PTH during hypo- and hypercalcaemia in the dog as determined by the “intact” and “whole"
PTH assays. Nephrol Dial Transplant 18:1101-1107.
163. Sislak M, Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR, Graham P, Provencher A. 2001. Comparison of protease inhibitors for
stabilizing parathyroid hormone and free T4 by dialysis in serum samples. In: Proceedings of the 19th ACVIM
Forum,Seattle,Washington,875
164. Estepa JC, Aguilera-Tejero E, Mayer-Valor R, Alamaden Y, Felsenfeld AJ, Rodriguez M. 1998. Measurement of
parathyroid hormone in horses. Equine Vet J 30:476481.
165. Pandian MR, Morgan CH, Carlton E, Segre GV. 1992. Modifed immunoradiometric assay of parathyroid
hormone-related protein: Clinical application in the differential diagnosis of hypercalcemia Clin Chem
38:282-288.
166.Nykjaer A,Fyfe JC, Kozyraki R, Leheste JR,Jacobsen C, Nielsen MS,Verroust PJ,AminofM,de la CA,Moestrup
SK,Ray R, Gliemann J,Willnow TE, Christensen El. 2001. Cubilin dysfunction causes abnormal metabolism of
the steroid hormone 25(OH) vitamin D(3). Proc Natl Acad Sei USA 98:1389513900.
167. Hulter HN, Halloran BP, Toto RD, Peterson JC. 1985. Long-term control of plasma calcitriol concentration in dogs
and humans: Dominant role of plasma calcium concentration in experimental hyperparathyroidism. J Clin Invest
76:695-702.
638
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
168. Lissner D, Mason RS, Posen S. 1981. Stability of vitamin D metabolites in human blood serum and plasma. Clin
Chem27:773-774.
169. Hollis BW. 1986. Asay of circulating 1,25-dibydroxyvitamin D involving a novel single-cartridge cxtration and
purification procedure. Clin Chem 32:2060-2063.
170. Gerber B, Hauser B, Reusch CE. 2004. Serum levels of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol and 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol
in dogs with hypercalcaemia. Vet Res Commun 28:669680.
171. Gerber B, Hassig M, Reusch CE. 2003. Serum concentrations of 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol and 25-
hydroxycholecalciferol in clinically normal dogs and dogs with acute and chronic renal failure. Am J Vet Res
64:1161-1166.
172. Rumbeiha WK, Kruger JM, Fitzgerald SF, Nachreiner RF, Kaneene JB, Braselton WE, Chiapuzio CL. 1999. Use of
pamidronate to reverse vitamin D,induced toxicosis in dogs. Am J Vet Res 60:1092-1097.
173. Mol JA, Kwant MM, Arnold ICJ, Hazewinkel HAW. 1991. Elucidation of the sequence of canine (pro)-calcitonin:
A molecular biological and protein chemical approach.Regul Pept 35:189-195.
174. Hazewinkel HAW, Hackeng WHL, Bosch R, Goedegebuure SA, Voorhout G, van den Brom WE, Bevers MM.
1987. Infuences of different calcium intakes on calciotropic hormones and skeletal development in young growing
dogs Front Horm Res 17:221-232.
175. Peterson ME, Randolph JF, Zaki FA, Heath H IIl. 1982. Multiple endocrine neoplasia in a dog. J Am Vet Med
Assoc180:1476-1478.
Chapter12
ENZYMES
BasicPrinciples in Clinical Enzymology...
640
Alanine Transaminase (ALT) (Synonym Abbreviation:GPT)
650
Aspartate Transaminase (AST) (Synonym Abbreviation: GOT)
652
Lactate Dehydrogenase (LD)(Also Abbreviated LDH)
653
Iditol Dehydrogenase(ID) (Synonym Abbreviation: SDH).
654
Glutamate Dehydrogenase(GMD)(Also Abbreviated GDH,GLD,and GLDH)
654
AlkalinePhosphatase(ALP)..
655
-Glutamyltransferase (GGT)(SynonymAbbreviation: GGTP)
659
CreatineKinase (CK).
661
Amylase(AMS).....
663
Lipase (LPS)
665
Other Serum Enzymes.
669
639
640
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 12.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
(GGT:Crt）
Urine -glutamyltransferase activity to creatinine concentration
[x]
x concentration （x=analyte)
ALP
Alkaline phosphatase
ALT
Alanine transaminase
AMS
α-Amylase
AST
Aspartate transaminasea
ATP
Adenosine triphosphate
B-ALP
Bone allkaline phosphatase
C-ALP
Corticosteroid-induced alkaline phosphatase
CK
Creatine kinase
cPLI
Canine pancreaticlipaseimmunoreactivity
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
fPLI
Feline pancreaticlipase immunoreactivity
GFR
Glomerular fltration rate
GGT
-Glutamyltransferase
GMD
Glutamate dehydrogenase
GOT
Glutamate oxaloacetate transaminase
GPT
Glutamate pyruvate transaminase
I-ALP
Intestinal alkaline phosphatase
ID
Iditol dehydrogenase (sorbitol dehydrogenase)
L-ALP
Liver alkaline phosphatase
LD
Lactate dehydrogenase
LPS
Lipase
NAD
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NADH
Reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NADPH
Reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
P-5-P
Pyridoxal-5'-phosphate
PLI
Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
SI
Systeme International d'Unites
TG
Triglyceride
TLI
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity
U
International unit
URL
Upper reference limit
WRI
Within reference interval
The NC-IUBMB recommended transaminase but considered aminotransferase acceptable.
bThe NC-IUBMB recommended-glutamyltransferase but considered-glutamyluranspeptidase
(GGTP) aoceptable.
NC-IUBMB,Nomenclature Committee of the International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology
BASICPRINCIPLESIN CLINICALENZYMOLOGY
Enzymes are proteins that catalyzechemical reactions.Proteins that have different polypeptide
structure but catalyze the same chemical reaction are isoenzymes (or isozymes). If the different
enzyme structure is created by a postranslational modification of an original gene product, then
the proteins are isoforms. Many enzymes require nonprotein cofactors to assist catalysis, convert-
ing them from apoenzymes (without cofactor) to holoenzymes (with cofactor).These are often from
12/ENZYMES
641
Table12.2.Cellular or tissue sources and half-lives of common serum enzymes
Cellular sources of
Major mechanisms that lead
increased serum enzyme
Enzyme
to increased serum activity
activity
Half-lives*
ALP
Induction
*Hepatocytes (L-ALP)
=3 d (canine L-ALP)126
(Ingestion)
(C-ALP in dogs)
=6min (canine I-ALP）126
*Biliary epithelium
<8h (feline L-ALP)127
(L-ALP)
=2min (feline I-ALP)127
Osteoblasts (B-ALP)
Mammary epithelium
ALT
Cell damage
*Hepatocytes
2-3d（canine）20
Skeletal myocytes
AMS
Cell damage
*Pancreatic acinar cells
=5 h (canine）04
Decreased renal clearance
AST
Cell damage
*Hepatocytes
7-8 d (equine)12,129
*Skeletal myocytes
<1 d（canine）21,130
Cardiac myocytes
Erythrocytes
CK
Cell damage
*Skeletal myocytes
=2 h (equine)28.129
Cardiac myocytes
<2h （canine)31
Smooth muscle
myocytes (minor)
GGT
Induction
*Biliary epithelial cells
=3 d （equine）32
Cell proliferation
*Hepatocytes
(Ingestion)
Mammary epithelium
GMD
Cell damage
Hepatocytes
=14 h (bovine）133
ID
Cell damage
*Hepatocytes
=4 h (canine）34
LD
Cell damage
*Hepatocytes
<6h(canine)13s
*Skeletal myocytes
Cardiac myocytes
Erythrocytes
LPS
Cell damage
*Pancreatic acinar cells
=2h （canine）104
Decreased renal clearance
Liver neoplasms
Cell proliferation
Gastricmucosa
*Major cellular sources of plasma enzyme activity
Data from available but limited sources
a vitamin source (e.g.,P-5-P from vitamin B and NAD from niacin) but also may be ions
(e.g,Ca²+,and Mg²+).
Sources of serum enzymes (Table 12.2 and Fig. 12.1)
A.Serum enzymes described in this chapter originate from cells (exogenous to serum） and
do not have recognized functions in blood.Before their release from the cells,the
serum enzymes may be in a cell’s cytoplasm,mitochondria,or membrane. Serum
enzyme activity in healthy animals is typically assumed to result from physiologic
processes.
642
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Liver
Processesof degradation
ALTIDASTLD
arenotknown formost
GMD，ALP GGT
plasma enzymes.
Macrophages probably
Blood
are involved.
ALP
BiiaryGGT
Liver
epithelium
ALTID
Muscle
Hepatic ALP&
AST
LD
GGTexcreted
CK
AST
LD
ALT
ALP
GGT
Biliary
Bone
CK
GMD
epithelium
ALP
AMSLPS
Kidney
AMS&LPS
inactivated
Renal
4S
or excreted
GGT
Pancreas
LD
excreted
AMS
LPS
Erythrocyte
Fig. 12.1. Sources and routes of removal of common serum enzymes. Major sources of serum enzymes that
contribute to increased serum activities are hepatocytes (ALT,AST, GGT, GMD,ID,LD, and ALP),biliary
epithelial cells (ALP and GGT), skeletal and cardiac muscle fibers (CK,AST, LD, and ALT),osteoblasts
(ALP), and pancreatic acinar cells (AMS and LPS). In vitro release of AST and LD from erythrocytes can
increase serum activities. Kidneys either inactivate or excrete AMS and LPS. The biliary system is a route of
excretion of hepatic ALP and GGT. GGT released from damaged renal tubular cells is excreted in urine.
Macrophages probably are involved in removal of damaged or degraded enzymes and enzyme-antiprotease
complexes.
B.Tissue-specific enzymes come from only one cell type. Enzymes with poor tissue
specificity may originate from many tissues and thus different cell types.
C.
The presence of an enzyme in a particular tissue does not necessarily mean that damage
to that tissue will increase the serum activities of the enzyme.
IL.
Serum enzyme activity increases when the rate an enzyme enters plasma exceeds therate of
enzyme inactivation or removal from plasma.In general, there are five mechanisms by
which serum enzyme activity may increase: (l) increased release from damaged cells,
(2) induction of enzyme synthesis, (3） cell proliferation (hyperplastic or neoplastic),
(4) decreased enzyme clearance, and (5) ingestion and absorption.
A.Increased release of enzymes from damaged cells (major mechanism for cytoplasmic
enzymes)（Fig.12.2)
1. Enzymes may escape from a cell because of damage caused by minor cell injury
(reversible damage) or when enzymes are released with cell death (necrosis）. If
intracellular enzyme concentrations (cytosolic or mitochondrial) are greater than
12/ENZYMES
643
ATP depletion due to hypoxia
ormitochondrial toxins
membranedamagedue
to oxidants or other agents
Enzymes released to
membrane
sinusoidal blood or
blebosome
blebbing
tolymph
Fig. 12.2. Release of cytosolic enzymes by blebbing or necrosis. Blebbing and necrosis may increase serum
activity of ALT,AST,LD,ID, GMD,CK,AMS,LPS,and, to a mild degree,ALP and GGT.A variety of
insults to cells may cause direct necrosis or membrane blebbing (irreversible or reversible damage). If
irreversible cell damage occurs,cellular enzymes are released with orwithout bleb formarion.If reversible
damage occurs,blebosomes form and later lyse, thus releasing their enzymes. E, enzyme.
extracellular concentrations,and if the enzymes are active in plasma,then enzymes
from cells increase enzyme activity in extracellular fuid and thus plasma (or serum).
2.Enzymes may be released from cells by the formation of membrane blebs that form
after celinjury.Blebs form because of cytoskeletal disruption caused by ATP
depletion (because of hypoxia,mitochondrial damage,or substrate depletion),
toxicantsbinding tocytoskelral roteins,ora varietyof agents proteases,lipases,
etc.) that cause membrane damage.Once membrane blebs form, the cell may:
they evenrually lyse and cause increased plasma enzyme activiry (reversible
injury).
b.Rupture at the site of bleb formation,releasing cytoplasmic enzymes to plasma
(irreversible injury).
c.Repair itself without blebosome release or bleb rupture.
3.Factors thar affect the rate of enzyme loss from cells include severity oftissue
cytoplasm,mitochondria,or cell membrane).
.The route of access toplasma also
influences the magnitude and rate of increase
a.Damage to blood cells and hepatocytes rapidly increases plasma enzyme
activity.
b.Enzymes released from muscle fibers enter plasma via lymph and thus the rate of
entry into blood is slower.
c.Enzymes released from intestinal mucosal cells or renal epithelial cells may not
enter plasma but enter the intestinal lumen or urine, respectively.
644
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
induce
mRNA
mRNA
ALP
ALP
=ALP
Fig.12.3.Increased production of ALP by induction.In healthy animals (the leff half of the drawing),ALP
is attached to hepatocyte membranes; more is located on the canalicular than the sinusoidal membrane. In
sick animals (the righr half of the drawing), drugs or metabolites (e.g., bile acid) induce the synthesis of
more ALP that accumulates both on the canalicular and sinusoidal hepatocyte membranes. When more ALP
is released from the sinusoidal membrane, serum ALP activity increases. aa, amino acid.
d.Enzymesreleased from neurons may not cross theblood-brain barrier and thus
may not increase plasma enzyme activity.
because of altered cell membrane permeability.When damage is sufficient to allow
an enzyme,a large protein,to leak througha porousmembrane,thenmany other
intracellular solutes (e.g.,K+ and Ca²+) will leak out and the cell will die.When
there is reversible cell damage that increases serum enzyme activity,this “leakage
through holesconcept is not applicable unless the cells are capable of quick repair
to limit the loss of contents.
B.Increased enzyme production by individual cells because of induced synthesis
1.This is the primary mechanism for membrane enzymes and may be a mechanism
for mitochondrial and cytoplasmicenzymes.
2.Inductionrefers to a stimulated increase in production of the enzyme protein via
modified transcription, translation, or other processes. Endogenous substances
(e.g,bile acids） or drugs such as phenobarbital,prednisolone,or prednisone may
trigger induction.Increases in serum ALP activity result mostly from induction
(Fig.12.3).
C.More enzyme produced bya tissuebecauseof cell proliferation,particularly for
membrane-associatedenzymes
1.Neoplasia of the enzyme’s cellof origin (e.g., increased ALP and B-ALP with
osteosarcoma,or increased LPS with pancreatic or extrapancreatic neoplasia)
2.Hyperplasia of the enzyme's cell of origin (e.g, increased GGT with bile duct
hyperplasia, or increased B-ALP with bone growth or repair)
3.Conversely,decreased tissue mass may be associated with decreased serum enzyme
activity or concentration (e.g., TLI with pancreatic atrophy).
D. Enzyme removal from plasma is decreased (enzyme has an increased half-life).
1. Some enzymes (e.g., AMS and LPS) are inactivated or excreted by kidneys.
Decreased renal blood fowleads to decreased inactivation of AMS and LPS
12/ENZYMES
645
2.Some enzymes form complexes with immunoglobulins or other proteins,and these
so-called macroenzymes (e.g., AMS) may have increased survival in the circulation.
3.Other processes of enzyme inactivation include binding to circulating plasma
removal of enzymes from plasma would be decreased.
E.Colostral enzymes (GGT and ALP) are ingested and absorbed in some species concur-
rently with passive transfer of immunoglobulins.
II1.
Decreased activity of most enzymes assessed in routine serum chemistry profiles does not
have diagnosticimportance.Measured enzyme activity may bereduced because of poor
sample handling (enzyme degraded), the presence of an inhibitor (e.g., anticoagulants), a
reference interval that is not appropriate for the patient, or a decreased mass of origin
tissue.
IV.
Measurement of serum enzymes
A.Activity per unit volume
1.Enzymes are proteins that catalyze chemical reactions.Routine assays measure
enzyme acrivity by detecting how fast a substrate is consumed orhow fast a product
forms.
a.Enzyme assay theory:In the presence of excess substrate (S）, the reaction rate
depends on the quantity of enzyme (E）.More specifically,thereaction rate
depends on the rate ofreaction from the enzyme-substrate complex to the
product (P)+enzyme:E+S→E-S→P+E.
b. Nearly all serum enzyme assays are spectrophotometric. They may be either end
point assays or kinetic assays.
(1)End-point asays The reaction is stopped at a specified time, and enzyme
activity is determined from the quantity of product formed or the quantity
of substrate used.
enzyme activity is determined by the rate of the reaction (or rate at which
product is being formed). Most current enzyme assays are kinetic assays.
2.Enzyme reactions for common clinical serum enzyme assays
a.Figure 12.4 contains the initial chemical reactions catalyzed by the common
serum enzymes. The initial reactions are usually coupled to other reactions that
cause the formation or disappearance of a colored indicator that can be detected
by photometry.
b.Knowledge of the enzyme reactions promotes an understanding of enzyme
nomenclature and physiologic roles of enzymes.
3.Units used to express enzyme activity
a.U = international unit = amount of enzyme that catalyzes conversion of
1 micromole of substrate per minute under defined conditions (1 U =
1 μmol/min). In this context, substrate includes substances such as NADH
or NADPH that are also called coenzymes or cosubstrates. Units are usually
expressed as U/L but occasionally as mU/mL.
b.Unit conversion
(1)SI unit=1 katal=1mol/s
(2)1 U=16.67nanokatal (SIunit rarely used in medical laboratories)
646
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
ALP
compound-PO4
compound+PO4
alkalne pH, TMg2+
ALT
alanine
pyruvate
αx-ketoglutarate
P-5-P
glutamate
AMS
starch fragments +
starch+HO
fCa2+,cr
unhydrolyzed starch
AST
aspartate
oxaloacetate
d-9-d
o-ketoglutarate
glutamate
CK
creatine phosphate
creatine
ADP
Mg2+
ATP
GGT
-glutamyl-p-nitroanilide
p-nitroaniline
glycylglycine
-glutamyl-glycylglycine
GMD
glutamate
2-oxoglutarate
NAD
NADH+NH4+
ID
fructose
sorbitol
NAD
LD
lactate
pyruvate
NAD
NADH
LPS
diglycerides+monoglycerides
triglyceride
collpase,Cg2+
rate-limiting factor is the catalytic activity of a serum enzyme. Methods of monitoring the chemical reactions
that are catalyzed by the enzymes vary but typically involve absorption orreflectance photometry.D
messenger ribonucleic acid; and NH,, ammonium.
c.Arbitrary units: Some enzyme units are named after people who developed the
assays. Examples include Somogyi units (AMS), Sigma-Frankel and Karman units
(ALT and AST assays), Rose-Byler units (LPS), and King-Armstrong and
Bodansky units (ALP). Values expressed in arbitrary units may be much different
from values expressed in international units,because arbitrary units may be
defined by markedly different assay conditions. It is difficult to impossible to
convert the arbitrary units to international units accurately.Fortunately, most
current methods have been defined in international units (U).
4.The international unit does not normalize methods.Different assays may measure
different amounts of enzyme activity in the same sample.
a.Because of variations in some assay methods,enzyme activities measured by two
t.Figure 1.5 illustrates the marked
differences that can be found when one samp
le is analyzed by different methods
Thus, accurateinterpretation of serum enzyme activity requires that patient
12/ENZYMES
647
Table 12.3. Approximate changes in enzyme activities if the same sample is analyzed at
different assay temperatures
Relative enzyme activity at
25°C
30°C
32°℃
37C
Common enzymes*
60-80%
100 %
110-125%
130-210%
Including ALP,CK,LD,ID,ALT,and AST
Note: Changes are based on reported conversion factors.3In 2002, the International Federation of
Clinical Chemistry published serum enzyme reference methods by using a 37 °C reaction temperature.
Previous reference methods were designed for 30 °C.13 Most clinical enzyme activities are measured at
37°C.
values be compared with reference intervals established for the assay used to
measure the patient's enzyme activity.
b.Differences in assay methods that cause different measured values include
differences in the following
(1)Reactions (forward and reverse) and reagent concentrations
(2)Substrates (especially AMS, LPS,and ALP assays)
(3)pH of assay reactions (especially ALP assays)
(4)Incubation orreaction temperatures,althoughmost current automated
analyzers assay enzymes at 37 °℃
(5)Use of cofactors (e.g., P-5-P)
(6)Use of activators (e.g, N-acetylcysteine for CK)
(7)Use of inhibitors (e.g., AMP and diadenosine pentaphosphate to inhibit
adenylate kinase for CK assays)
(8) Measurement times and calculations
c.Most serum enzymes used diagnostically have near maximal activity at normal
body temperatures (37-39°C), but some deteriorate rapidly at 37°C in sera.
Table 12.3 shows the relative enzyme activity at different assay temperarures.For
some enzymes, enzyme activity measured at 37 °C may be three times as great as
the activity measured at 25 °C.
B.Mass per unit volume
1. Enzymes are proteins, and immunologic assays have been developed to measure their
concentration in terms of mass per unit volume.
2.The concentrations of PLI (this chapter) and TLI (Chapter 15) are reported as μg/L
These protein concentrations arerelatively small when compared to other common
serum protein analytes such as albumin at 3 g/dL or fibrinogen at 0.3 g/dL
3.Proteins detected by immunologic assays for enzymes may include active forms and
inactive forms or precursor forms.
V
Enzyme nomenclature
A.The recommendations of the Nomenclarure Commitree of the International Union of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology are used for naming enzymes.Most enzymes were
named by the reaction substrate first (e.g, alanine and creatine) followed by one of six
types of reaction the enzyme catalyzes (e.g, transfer amino group = transaminase,
transfer phosphate group = kinase, and oxidize or reduce = oxidoreductases, including
dehydrogenase).Each enzyme is also identified by a unique Enzyme Commission
648
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
number that describes the specific reaction the enzyme catalyzes (e.g.,EC 1.1.1.14 for
iditol dehydrogenase).
B.In the conventional system, there was not a systematic method of naming enzymes.
Conventional names are still used by some laboratories and authors.
C.Enzyme abbreviations
1. An international system for abbreviations has not been adopted. Abbreviations in
this texrbook were recommended by a group of chemists in 1975.5
2.For the conventional system, most abbreviations are “hand-me-downs” from one
VI.
Sample processing, handling, and storage for common clinical serum enzymes
A.Sample type
1.A clot tube from a fasted animal is preferred (ruminants are not fasted). Harvest
serum within 1 h of blood collection but allow time for clot formation and retrac
tion.Prolonged contact with the clotwill allow some enzymes to escape from
erythrocytes (e.g., AST and LD).
2.Plasma can be used for some enzymes but not others.
a.Most anticoagulants tie up divalent cations (Ca²+,Mg²+, Cu²,and Zn²+)and
activity (Mg²+for ALP and CK, Ca²+for LPS, and Zn²+for ID).
GGT activity than did serum samples.To confrm positive inteference,similar
work needs to be done in domestic animal samples with other GGT assays.
B.Samplehandling
1.Enzyme activity depends on a protein’s conformation. Changes in conformation may
alter cofactor or catalytic sites and thus change activity.
2.There is considerable variation in published dataregarding enzyme stability in serum
and 4°C.The degree of deterioration that occurs after 24 h (at 24°℃,4°℃,
—20 °C, or -70 °C) varies among enzymes and in some cases among species.Rate
of deterioration might be different in certain pathologic states （e.g.,infammation)
compared to health.
a.ALT in serum is very susceptible to deterioration during freezing and thawing; it
may lose 60 % of original activity.7 In a study involving bovine samples, ALT at
-20°Cwas stable in heparinizedplasma for 6wkbutwas not stable in frozen
serum overnight; ALT at 20 °C was stable for 2 and 4 d in sera and plasma,
respectively.8
b. ID is stable (>90 % activity remains) in equine serum for up to 5 h at 21 °C,
24 h at 4 °C, and 48 h at -30 °C; 73 % of ID activiry was lost by 24 h at 21 °C
and 28 % was lost by 72h at 4 °C.
c.IsoenzymeLD-5 is heat labile,whereas LD-1 is cold labile.It is best to leave a
sample for LD analysis at room temperature and analyze it within 24 h.
d.Some ALP isoforms are heat labile (B-ALP), whereas others are heat stable
(I-ALP and C-ALP). Thawed sera may have greater ALP activities than fresh sera.
e.GGT activity in heparinized equine plasma was stable for 1 mo at-20 °C.1
C.Sample quality
1.Sera or plasma with hemolysis may yield erroneous results for three reasons.
a.Enzymes of erythrocytes may be added to sera or plasma to increase activities; for
example, increased AST, LD, and possibly ALT activity.
12/ENZYMES
649
b.Chemical constituents of erythrocytes may participate in the enzyme assay for
example,glucose-6-phosphate,ATP,or adenylate cyclase for CK activity
C.Hemoglobin may interfere with light transmission in spectrophotometric assays
and yield false increases or decreases, depending on assay design.
2.Sera with elevated bilirubin (icteric sera):Bilirubin may interfere with light
transmission
3. Sera with increased visible lipoproteins (lipemic sera)
a.Lipid molecules may interfere with light transmission.
b. Lipid molecules cause unpredictable results because light transmission is hindered
VIl. Interpretation of increased serum enzyme activity
A.Because of the variations in enzyme activity measured by different assays, patients
enzyme activities need to be compared to appropriate reference intervals.Ifincreased
the degree of increase is usually determined by dividing the patient's enzyme value by
the URL (the highest value of the reference interval);for example,if a patient's ALT
activity=500 U/L with a reference interval of 10-50 U/L,then the ALT value is
10 times the URL (10xURL).The absolute values for enzyme activities may vary
considerably berween assay methods, but the degree of increase above the URL should
be nearly the same.
B.The magnitude of increased enzyme activity may limit the possible explanations. For
example,an ALT activity of15×URLis probably caused by hepatocyte damage,not
severe muscle damage. Similarly, an ALP activity of 10 x URL is typically considered
too great for B-ALP activity in adult dogs, but the ALP activity could be due to either
L-ALPor C-ALP
C.Consider the half-life of the serum enzymes.For example,CKhas a shorter half-life
than AST. Thus, after a single insult to muscle, CK activity may return to the reference
interval sooner than AST activity.
D.Integrate potential pathologic processes with other patient information to form ideas or
explanations for an animal's illness.
VIII.Significance of increased serum enzyme activities
A.Serum enzyme activities are markers or indicators of pathologic processes (e.g.,hepato
cyte injury or cholestasis) and not specific diseases.Many types of diseasesmay cause
common pathologic processes.
B.For the cytoplasmic enzymes (ALT,AMS,AST,CK,ID,LD,and LPS),the magnitude
of increase may relate to the severity of damage; that is, slight damage may cause values
<2×URL,whereas severe damage might cause values >50 ×URL.However,magni-
tude ofincrease does not differentiate reversible damage from irreversible damage,or
local damage from diffuse damage.
C.A mild increase (e.g,2x URL) might not be very important in one animal because
other findings clearly indicate a definite diagnosis. However, in some cases, the same
serum enzyme activity might provide the only clue of active disease.
D.Because of the method of characterizing a patient's enzyme activity (ie., comparing it
to the URL), the magnitude of increase is not accurately described for most animals
For example, if a dog's ALT activity prior to disease was 20 U/L, and it rose to 200 U/L
after the onset of disease,then it rose to ten times the baseline value. However,if the
ALT reference interval was 20-70 U/L, then the patient's 200U/Lvalue would
represent an increase of only about 3 x URL and might be considered a mild increase.
650
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
/Animal C
activity
Enzyme
Animal B
AnimalA
Time (days)
Fig.12.5. Interpretation of a single enzyme activity. On the day of sampling, allthree patients' enzyme
activities （）were about 3xURL （shaded area）.For animal A (---), the 3x value occurred during the
disappearance phase after an acute increase. For animal B ( ), the 3 x value reflects a persistent
pathologic process.For animal C(), the 3xvalue occured during a progressive pathologic process.
Thus, the clinical signifcance of the single measurement of enzyme activity may vary from animal to
animal.
Because predisease values are usually not available for individual animals, we must
consider variations among animals when interpreting serum enzyme activity.
E.
Enzyme activity from a single sampling may not reflect the dynamic changes thatmay
be occurring in a patient (Fig. 12.5). Sampling again in 2-3 d may provide a truer
imageof thepathologicprocesses.
ALANINETRANSAMINASE(ALT)(SYNONYMABBREVLATION:GPT)
Physiologic processes, concepts, and facts: ALTis a cytoplasmic enzyme that catalyzes a
reversible reaction that is involved in the deamination of alanine to form pyruvate, which
can enter the gluconeogenesis pathway or the Krebs cycle.
II.
Tissue sources of increased serum ALT activity and ALT half-life arelisted in Table 12.2
II.Analytical concepts: Other than variations in assay temperatures, the major factor affecting
serum ALT activity among assay systems is the presence or absence of the cofactor P-5.P.
A.Conversion of apoenzymes to holoenzymes with cofactor addition is recommended,
although the effect is variable and often not of diagnostic concern.
B.In dogs and cats, the use of P-5-P was associated with a median increased ALT activity
of about 10 % (27 to 114 %),but, in rare cases,markedly increased activity (336 %
and >14,000 %) was noted with the addition of P-5-p.1112
C.Depending on the degree of hemolysis and the assay, in vitro hemolysis might cause
falsely increased ALT activity. In one assay in which marked hemolysis increased the
12/ENZYMES
651
Table 12.4.Disorders or conditions that cause increased ALTactivity
Hepatocyte damage (dogs and cats)
*Degenerative: hypoxia caused by anemia or congestion
Anomalous: portosystemic shunt (typically mild)
*Metabolic: lipidosis, diabetes mellius, felinehyperthyroidism
*Neoplastic:lymphoma,metastaticneoplasia,hepatocellular carcinoma
Nutritional:copper toxicosis,hemochromatosis
Infammatory
*Infectious: leptospirosis,histoplasmosis, feline infectious peritonitis, bacterial
cholangiohepatitis
*Noninfectious: chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis
Inherited:copper storage disease,lysosomal storage diseases
*Traumatic:hit by car
Skeletal muscle damage (mild relative to CK changes)
Inherited: canine musculodystrophy
Traumatic: hit by car
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specific disorders or conditions are not complete but are provided to give examples.
ALT from =30 U/L to = 60 U/L in equine sera, the interference was considered to be
caused by both spectral interference and the addition of ALT from the erythrocytes.3
In another study using canine sera, marked hemolysis had no effect in some assays and
a moderate effect in others.14
IV.
Increased serum ALT activity (Table 12.4)
A.Hepatocyte damage (reversible or irreversible) may occur because of a variety of insults
(infammation, hypoxia, toxicants, trauma, etc.）.ALT may be released from hepatocytes
also during repararive stages of liver disease.
B.Increases incanine serumALTactivity that are associatedwith glucocorticoid therapy
may be caused by glucocorticoid-induced hepatopathy instead of true enzyme induc.
tion. Glucocorticoids did not increase ALT synthesis in culrured hepatocytes.'5
C.Canine serum ALT activity may be increased in dogs treated with phenobarbital. In a
study involving 12 phenobarbital-treated dogs, data from the histopathologic examina-
tion of liver and chemical analysis of liver homogenates indicated that induction did
not cause the increased ALT activity.16
D.Spontaneous muscle damage typically is not associated with increased serum ALT
activity,but increased ALT activity does occur with some muscle diseases in dogs and
cats.
1.Young dogs with muscular dystrophy may have markedly increased serum CK
activiry (> 500 x URL) and have mild to moderate increases in serum ALT
activiry (< 7 × URL).z.1# Some dystrophic dogs occasionally have extreme ALT
colony)
2.Dystrophin-deficient cats with acute rhabdomyolysis had markedly increased CK
activiry (89-2000x URL) and increased ALT activity (6-19×URL）.19
652
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
V.
Species differences
A.In dogs and cats,ALTis a majormarker ofhepatocyte damage,but its serum activityis
also increased by severe muscle disease.
B.Hepatocytes of horses and cartle have so littleALT that it isnot a useful marker of
hepatocyte damage in these species.
ASPARTATETRANSAMINASE(AST)(SYNONYMABBREVIATION:GOT)
Physiologic processes,concepts,and facts:ASTis a cytoplasmic andmitochondrial enzyme
thatcatalyzesareversiblereaction involvedin thedeamination ofaspartate to form
oxaloacetate, which can enter the Krebs cycle.
II.
Tissue sources of increased serumAST activity and AST half-life are listed inTable 12.2.
III.
Analytical concepts: Other than variations in assay temperatures, variations in serum AST
activity are minimal among assay systems if results are reported in U/L. However, as for
ALT, assay methods including the cofactor P-5-P may generate different results from those
lacking P-5-P.
IV.
Increased serum AST activity (Table 12.5)
A.Hepatocyte damage (reversible or irreversible) may occur because of a variety of insults
(inflammation,hypoxia,toxicants, trauma,etc.).AST also may be released from
hepatocytes during reparative stages of liver disease.
B.Muscle damage (reversible or irreversible) may be caused by a variety of insults.
C.Hemolysis (in vitro) or delayed removal of serum from clot may cause mild to moder-
ate increases
Table 12.5.Disorders or conditions that cause increased AST and LD activity
Hepatocyte damage
*Dogs and cats (see hepatocyte damage conditions listed for increased ALT in Table 12.4)
Horses and cattle
*Degenerative:hypoxia caused by anemiacongestion,cholelithiasis
*Metabolic: lipidosis or fat cow syndrome, diabetes mellitus, equine hyperlipidemia
Neoplastic: lymphoma,metastatic neoplasia,hepatocellular carcinoma
Inflammatory
*Infectious: bacterial hepatitis (Tyzzer's disease),bacterial cholangiohepatitis
infectious necrotic hepatitis, hepatic abscess
Noninfectious: Theiler's disease,chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis
Toxic:iron toxicity,pyrrolizidinealkaloidcontaining plants,aatoxinsalsike cover
toxicity
*Skeletal orcardiac muscle damage (see muscle damage conditions listed forincreased CK in
Table 12.8)
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specific diseases are not complete but are provided to give examples.Hemolysis (in
vitro) or prolonged serum contact with erythrocytes will allow AST and LD from erythrocytes to
increase serum AST and LD activities.
12/ENZYMES
653
V.
Species differences
A.In horses and cattle,AST is a common marker of hepatocyte damage, but muscle
damage, hemolysis, and other processes also increase serum AST activity.
B.AST can also be used as an indicator of hepatocyte damage in dogs and cats.
However, it is not as tissue specific as ALT and thus is not as valuable diagnostically.
Because canine AST is reported to have a shorter half-life than canine ALT (< 1 d
damage.
LACTATEDEHYDROGENASE(LD)(ALSOABBREVIATEDLDH)
I.
Physiologic processes, concepts, and facts
A.LD is a cytoplasmic enzyme that catalyzes a reversible reaction that converts pyruvate to
lactate at the end of anaerobic glycolysis.
B.LD isoenzymes are tetramers of either heart subunits (H) or muscle subunits (M): LD-1
=HHHH,LD-2=HHHM,LD-3=HHMM,LD-4=HMMM,andLD-5=
MMMM. Identification of isoenzymes that are causing the increase in total serum LD
activity could increase the diagnostic value of LD activity.However,isoenzyme analysis
requires special assays that are not widely available, and species variations in tissue
distributions make interpretations difficult.
II.
Tissue sources of increased serum LD activity and LD half-life arelisted in
Table 12.2.
III.
Analytical concepts
A.Variations in assay temperatures can alter LD activity.
B.Some assays measure LD activity n a pyruvate to lactate reaction,whereas others
measure LD activity in a lactate to pyruvate reaction.The LD activity in the two
types of reactions can vary considerably,perhaps because LD-1 is inhibited by
high pyruvate concentrations and LD-5 maintains activity at high pyruvate
concentrations.3
IV.
Increased serum LD activity (Table 12.5)
A.In all species, LD is a marker of hepatocyte damage, but serum LD activity is also
increased by muscle damage and hemolysis (even mild).
B.Increased LD activity may be caused by reversible or irreversible, focal or diffuse cell
damage.
C. By itself, serum LD activity is a screening test for hepatocyte or muscle damage. In a
group of tests,LD activity provides additional information that may help explain
activities of more tissue-specific enzymes (ie.,ALT, ID, and CK).
of LD isoenzymes were determined in four groups of dogs with lymphoma:
Group A hadno treatment,group B was treated with steroids,group Cwas in
remission,and groupD had recurrent disease.The dogs in groups A,B,and D had
greater percentages of LD-2and LD-3 and lower percentages of LD-5 than healthy
dogs and dogs in group C. Also, dogs with lower total LD activity at the time of
diagnosis survived longer.LD isoenzyme percentages were determined by agar gel
electrophoresis.
654
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
IDITOLDEHYDROGENASE(ID)(SYNONYMABBREVIATION:SDH)
I.
Physiologic processes, concepts, and facts
A.IDisacytoplasmicenzymethat catalyzesareversiblereactioninvolving conversionof
fructose to sorbitol (or glucitol).
B.The established name for the enzyme is iditol dehydrogenase, but iditol is not a
substrate or product in clinical assays.The enzyme is frequently referred to as sorbitol
debydrogenase (SDH). In the clinical assay, fructose is the substrate.
II.Tissue sources of increased serum ID activiry and ID half-life are listed in Table 12.2.
III.Analytical concepts
A.Otherthanvariations caused by diffrences inassay tmperatures,variations
in serum ID activity are minimal among assay systems if results are reported
in U/L.
B.ID assays are not consistently included in serum chemical profiles,in part because the
enzyme's stability is a concern for routine handling of mail-in samples.
IV. Increased serum ID activity
A.This indicates hepatocyte damage and may be reversible or irreversible, focal or diffuse.
It is unusual to find ID activity > 10× URL.
B.ID activity is used primarily in horses and cattlebecause other common hepatic
cytosolic enzymes (AST and LD) are not liver specific, and ALT is not a useful marker
of hepatocyte damage in horses and carttle.
C.ID activity is sometimes used as a marker of hepatocyte damage in dogs and cats, but
ALT assays are more commonly available and ALT is more stable.
GLD,and GLDH)
I.
Physiologic processes,concepts,and facts
A.GMD is a mitochondrial enzyme that catalyzes a reversiblereaction involving conver-
sion of glutamate to2-oxoglutarate.In people,centrilobularhepatocyteshaverelatively
more GMD activity than do the periportal hepatocytes.
B.GMD is not a common abbreviation for this enzyme, but it is a recommended
abbreviation. Two more common abbreviations are GDH and GLDH. GDH
is also used as an abbreviation for glycerate dehydrogenase and glucose
dehydrogenase.
II.
Tissue sources of increased serum GMD activity and GMD half-life (Table 12.2.): Serum
GMD activity is mostly from hepatocytes, but GMD is also found in many other tissues
(e-g., kidney, intestine, and muscle). However, damage to those tissues does not increase
serum GMD activity, because the enzyme does not enter plasma (e.g., kidney and intestine)
or there is too litle in the tissues (e.g., muscle and salivary glands).
III.
Analytical concepts: GMD assays have not been available in the United States but have
been widely applied in other parts of the world.
12/ENZYMES
655
IV.Increased GMD activity
A.This typicall indicates hepatocyte damage that maybereversible orirreversibleocal
or diffuse. Disorders or conditions (listed in Tables 12.4 and 12.5) that cause hepato-
cyte damage may increase serum GMD activity.
B.Based on results of liver biopsies,the diagnostic sensitivity of increased GMD activity
for differentiating the presence of liver disease from the absence of liver disease in
horses was not as good as that of GGT activity, but GMD had a berter positive
predictive value. However, this may vary with the types of hepatic diseases encoun-
tered. The diagnostic value of GMD for specific liver diseases was not reported.
C.GMD activity appears to be very sensitive indicator of hepatic disease in dogs;
that is,more sensitive than ALT,AST,ALP,and GGT activiry.GMD activity
was increased in about 15 % of dogs that received anticonvulsant phenobarbitone
therapy;it is not known whether the increase was caused by hepatocyte damage or
induction.7
ALKALINEPHOSPHATASE(ALP)
Physiologic processes, concepts, and facts
A.ALP includes a family of phosphatases that have phosphatase activity in an alkaline
environment. Another family has phosphatase activity in an acid environment (the acid
phosphatases).
B.Many cell membranes have ALP activity,but only a few produce enough ALP to
increase serum ALP activity. Physiologic roles of ALP are not clearly established and
might vary from tissue to tissue. L-ALP may be involved in the degradation of endotox-
ins, and B-ALP is involved in the mineralization of bone.
C.Serum ALP activity may be up to 30xURL in postsuckling pups; the increased ALP
activity might be due to colostral ALP orincreased ALP production induced by
ingestion of colostrum.Serum ALPactivity returned to presuckling values within
10 d Increased ALP activity in older pups (compared to adult values) is due to
B-ALP.31
D.Serum ALP activity in presuckling foals can be 20x URL for healthy adult horses but
decreases to about 5 x URL by 3 wk of age.²The increase in total ALP activity is due
to B-ALP.Total serumALPactivity does not increase after colostrum ingestion by
foals.32
E.Serum ALP activiry in calves increases up to three times above presuckling values 1-2 d
after nursing. At least part of this increase is caused by the ingestion of colostrum. The
ALP activity nearly returned to presuckling values by the day 3.33
II.
Tissue sources of increased serum ALP activity and ALP half-life (Table 12.2)
A.In domestic mammals, there appear to be two genes for the production of two isoen-
zymes: (1) I-ALP and (2) tissue-nonspecific ALP. Posttranslational modification of the
nonspecific ALP creates different isoforms of ALP: L-ALP of hepatocytes and biliary
epithelium, and B-ALP of osteoblasts. I-ALP has not been shown to increase serum
ALPactivity.?
corticosteroids. Chemically, its amino acid sequence is the same as I-ALP, but it is more
highly glycosylated.
656
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
I.Analytical concepts:Besides variations in assay temperatures,variations in substrates and
pH may cause marked differences in serum ALP activity among assay systems.
A.In routine assays, measured ALP activity represents total ALP activity and typically
includes activity from L-ALP and B-ALP (also C-ALP in dogs). The relative contribu-
tions to total ALP activity vary with age.
B.In healthy dogs, C-ALP contributes about 10-30 % of total ALP activity; it contributes
separately, it is helpful to consider the different isoforms of ALP when interpreting ALP
activity.
C.The relative contributions of the different ALP isoforms to total ALP activity can be
determined by enzyme electrophoresis, selective inhibition,thermal stability,or selective
precipitation.313s-37
1.Affinity electrophoresis is the conventional or standard method but requires special
equipment and is time and labor intensive.L-ALP,C-ALP,and B-ALP can be
identified in canine serum.
2.Levamisole selectively inhibits L-ALP and B-ALP activity, but C-ALP is relatively
resistant. Measurement of serum ALP activity with and without the addition of
levamisole can help determine whethermuch of the serum ALP activity is due to
C-ALP.
3.C-ALP is relatively heat stable at 56°C and 65 °C,whereas L-ALP and B-ALP are
heat labile.Measurement of serum ALP activity prior to and after incubating serum
ina heatedwater bath can help determine whether much of the serum ALP activity
isdue to C-ALP
4.B-ALP and C-ALP are selectively precipitated by wheat germ lectin,whereas L-ALP
is not.ALP activity before and after the precipitation can be used to estimate B-ALP
activitywhen combinedwithdeterminationof C-ALPactivitybylevamisole
inhibition.
IV.
Increased serum ALP activity (Table 12.6)
A.Cholestasis (intrahepatic or posthepatic)
1. Increased ALP activity appears to be primarily caused by increased production
of L-ALP by hepatocytes and biliary epithelium during obstructive cholestasis. It is
not known whether ALP production is increased in functional cholestasis (see
Chapter 13)
2.Many diseases lead to impaired bile fow,which leads to an accumulation of bile
acids in hepatocytes.Increased bile acid concentrations stimulate L-ALP production,
promote accumulation of L-ALP on sinusoidal hepatocyte membranes, and are
linked to increased serum ALP activity (Fig. 12.3）3739 Bile acids may promote L-
ALP release from the hepatocyte membranes by promoting activity of glycosylphos-
phatidylinositol phospholipaseD.40.41
3.In cholestatic disorders, other substances or factors might also induce L-ALP
production, or there might be decreased biliary excretion of ALP. In the absence of
cholestasis, there appears to be roo litle ALP associated with hepatocytes and biliary
B.Induction by drugs or hormones
1.Many drugs have the potential to increase L-ALP activity. Corticosteroids (predni
sone and prednisolone), phenobarbital, and primidone are commonly reported to
induce L-ALP production.The degree of induction typically depends on dose and
12/ENZYMES
657
Table 12.6.Disorders or conditions that cause increased ALP activity (the isoform
produced is in parentheses)
Cholestasis,either intrahepatic or posthepatic (L-ALP)
*Degenerative: necrosis or hepatocyte swelling that leads to impaired bile flow
*Metaboliclipidosisdiabtesmltushyperadrenocorticismcholelithiasi
*Neoplastic:bile duct carcinoma,pancreatic carcinoma,lymphoma
*Inflammatory:eriportal hepatitis cholangitis cholangiohepatitis,pancreatits
Toxic:pyrrolizidine alkaloid-containing plantsalsike clover toxicity,sporodesmin
toxicosis
Induction by drugs or hormones
*Phenobarbital, dilantin, primidone (L-ALP)
*Corticosteroids (L-ALP and canine C-ALP): endogenous or exogenous
*Thyroxine (B-ALP): feline hyperthyroidism
Increased osteoblastic activity (B-ALP): osteosarcoma, fracture repair, rickers
Canine mammary neoplasms, benign and malignant
Benign familial hyperphosphatasemia in Siberian huskies
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specific diseases are not complete but are provided to give examples. Young growing
animals have serum ALP activities up to three times the activities expected in mature animals. Ingestion
and absorptionof colostrum by neonatal foals and pupsmayincrease serumALPactivity
duration of administration of the compound. It takes hours for hepatocytes to
increase L-ALP production (it may take days for clinical evidence of increased
production), and increased serum ALP activity may persist for 24 wk after removal
a.In a study involving 12 phenobarbital-treated dogs,data from the histopathologic
examination of liver and chemical analysis of liver homogenates indicated that
the increased ALP activity was not caused by induction.
L0
b.Data from hepatic tissue homogenates analyzed after 32d of prednisone
injections indicate that the steroid treatment increased L-ALP production by
increasing gene transcription in hepatocytes.
2.C-ALP
a.In canids, corticosteroids (e.g-, endogenous cortisol or exogenous prednisone or
prednisolone) induce the production of a unique ALP isoform of I-ALP called
C-ALP(also called CI-ALPfor corticosteroid-induced ALP,SI-ALPfor steroid-
induced ALP, and CAP for corticosteroid alkaline phosphatase). The increase in
serum C-ALP activity begins about a week after initiation of steroid therapy.
Most experimental evidence supports that corticosteroids up-regulate a specific
b.Measuring C-ALP activity can be a screening test for canine hyperadrenocorti-
have increased serum C-ALP activity.However,increased C-ALP activity is
not specifc for hyperadrenocorticism, because there are physiologic and thera
peuticreasons for increasedglucocorticoid hormones and thus increased C-ALP
activity.
658
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
C.Increased osteoblastic activity
1.Bone lesions that cause increased osteoblastic activity may cause increased serum
activity of B-ALP and thus increased total ALP activity. Generally, the magnitude of
increase in total ALP is mild (<4x URL) but has been reported to be as much as
12 times the average ALP activity in sera of two healthy dogs.36
2. Increased total ALP and B-ALP activities in frozen sera from dogs with osteosarcoma
have been associated with reduced patient survival. The degrees of increases in ALP
and B-ALPwere not reported.47
3.Total ALP activity increased (about 2-3 times the baseline by day 10) during
fracture healing in dogs. The rerurn to baseline activity corresponded with cessa-
tion of callus formation.In contrast,dogs with nonunion fractures did not have
increased ALP activity during a 2mo evaluation
4.Cats with hyperthyroidism have increased B-ALP (and L-ALP) activity that contrib
utes to increased total ALP activity.9
D.Dogs with malignant and benign mammary neoplasms may have increased serum ALP
activity (typically<8xURL) in the absence of detectable hepatic or bone metasta-
sis5osiThe source of theALPwasnotfirmly establishedbutmyoepithelial cellsn
mammary neoplasms do have ALP activity.52 Serum ALP activity in dogs with other
neoplasms wasnot assessed.
E.Benign familial hyperphosphatasemia in Siberian huskies'3
1.Of 42 pups in eight related litters of Siberian huskies, 17 pups had serum ALP
activities about six times the activities found in other age-matched Siberian huskies
B-ALPwas the isoform causing increased total ALP activity in all five of the puppies
for which isoforms were assessed.
2.The cause of the increased ALP was not determined. Serum concentrations of total
calcium, inorganic phosphorus, and parathyroid hormone were not different from
those of matched pups.
F.Pregnant women may have an increased serum ALP activity because of increased
placental ALP.ALP activity did not increase in pregnant mares.The increase in serum
ALP during pregnancy in bitches is too small to affect ALP interpretation.Placental
V.
Species and breed differences
A.Dogs
1.ALP has high diagnostic sensitivity for detecting cholestasis. ALP activity may be
increased before icterus appears. ALP values may range from < 2 × URL to >20 ×
URL.
2.Increased ALP activity induced by corticosteroids results from induced synthesis of
3.Phenobarbital, primidone, and phenytoin are described in clinical studies as either
inducing the synthesis of L-ALP or causing hepatic damage that increases serum L-
ALP in dogs.7
4.Increased ALP activity caused by increased osteoblastic activity in growing dogs
(production of B-ALP) is typically mild (< 4 x URL).5
5.At least some Scottish terriers have reater serum ALP activities than other dogsand
the difference was greater in dogs more than 6 yr old. Part of the increase may be
caused by a higher incidence in the breed of diseases that cause increased ALP
However,Scottish terriers without these diseases had a mean ALP activity near
12/ENZYMES
659
1350 U/L,whereas age-matched dogs without the diseases had a mean ALP near
230U/L.59
B.Cats
1.ALP has poor diagnostic sensitivity for detecting cholestasis. Cats typically are icteric
before ALP activity increases.ALPvalues may range from < 2×URL to>10×URL
2.In 12 (80 %) of 15 of cats with lipidosis, the ALP:GGT ratio was increased (i.e,
ALP activity increased more than GGT activity). Only 4 (10 %) of 39 of the cats
with liver diseases other than lipidosis (i.e.,bile duct obstruction,cholangitis,
cholangiohepatitis, neoplasia, hepatic necrosis, and cirrhosis) had increased
ALP:GGT ratios (magnitudes of change not reported).
3.It has been reported that from 43 % to 75 % of hyperthyroid cats have increased
serum ALP activities.ALP activities typically are <4 x URL.In such cats, the
increased ALP activity is caused by L-ALP and B-ALP,whereas ALP activity in
healthy mature cats is due to L-ALP. Some hyperthyroid cats have increased B-ALP
activiry in serum without a concurrent increase in total ALP activity.61
C.Horses
1.ALP has poor diagnostic sensitivity for detecting cholestasis. Horses typically are
icteric before ALP activity increases.ALPvalues may range from <2× URL to
>10XURL
2.There is no evidence that glucocorticoid treatments increase serum L-ALP activity in
3.In horses with colic or intestinal lesions,ALP activity may increase in the peritoneal
fuid predominantly because of increased granulocytic ALP activity, but other data
suggest that intestinal ALP may contribute (see Chapter 19）.66
D.Cattle:ALP has moderate diagnostic sensitivity for detecting cholestasis,but cholestasis
disorders are uncommon in cattle.
GLUTAMYLTRANSFERASE(GGT)(SYNONYMABBREVIATION:GGTP)
Physiologic processes, concepts, and facts
A.GGT is associated with cell membranes.It catalyzes the transfer of glutamyl groups
between peptides and is involved in glutathione reactions. Many cells have GGT
activity,butbiliary pithelial ellspancreatic acinar cell,andrenal ubular pithlial
cells are classically considered to have the greatest activity. In some species,mammary
glands also have high GGT activity. In these species,GGT is associated withmammary
glandular epithelial membranes andmilk membranes in milk.67.68
B.Colostrum of cows has high GGT activity, and the GGT molecules may be absorbed
from the calf intestine after colostral intake. Postsuckling calves may have GGT
activities as high as 20x URL （using adult reference intervals) and up to 16 times the
and thus as an indication of successful passive transfer.
C. Mare colostrum contains relatively little GGT activity, and GGT activity in neonatal
foals does not increase after suckling. However, serum GGT activity in foals less than
1 mo old is about 1.5-3.0 times as great as the GGT activity in adult horses.72
D.Because of high colostral GGT, serum GGT activity in 1-to3-d-old pups is up to
100xURL (using adult reference intervals) but returns to presuckle values within 10 d
after suckling.3
660
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 12.7.Disorders or conditions that cause increased GGT activity
*Cholestasis (see cholestasis conditions listed for increased ALP in Table 12.6)
Biliary hyperplasia:pyrrolizidine alkaloid-containing plants, sporodesmin toxicity,alsike
clover toxicity
Drugs or hormones
Phenobarbital, dilantin, primidone
Corticosteroids:endogenous or exogenous
*A relatively common disease or condition.
Note: Ingestion and absorption of colostrum by neonatal calves and pups may increase serum GGT
activity.
II.Tissue sources of increased serum GGT activity and GGT half-life are listed inTable 12.2.
III.Analytical concepts
A.Serum GGT activity varies minimally among assay systems if results are reported in U/L
and assay temperatures are the same.
B.In a study involving rat samples,heparin was shown to nearly double the GGT activity
in an assay that used -glutamyl-p-nitroanilide as a substrate.7 Heparin also can cause
turbidity in the reaction fuid, which would interfere with transmission photometry.
There were no differences in GGT activities between canine serum and heparinized
plasma samples when using the dry-slide method (Vitros) that uses the same substrate
(authors'unpublished data).
IV.Increased serum GGT activity (Table 12.7)
A.Cholestasis or biliary hyperplasia
1.Increased hepatic and plasma bile acid concentrations are expected with cholestasis.
Increased bile acids or other constituents of bile may stimulate the synthesis and
releaseof GGT similarly to ALP,but mechanisms of increase arenot completely
established.Disorders that cause cholestasismay also inducebiliary hyperplasia and
a resultant increase in GGT activity.
2.Experimental data from rat studies indicate that increased serum GGT activity
primarily depends on the degree of hyperplasia of biliary epithelial cells and not on
induction of GGT synthesishpatocyte damage,orcholestasis
B.Associated with drugs or hormones
1.Serum GGT activities transiently increased to 2-3 times the baseline values from
exceed reference intervals.75
2.Induction may not increase serum GGT activity in dogs being treated with gluco
corticoid hormones, since glucocorticoids did not induce GGT synthesis in cultured
hepatocytesHowever,in prednisone-treated dogs,both hepatic and serum GGT
activities increased,which suggested induction or the effects of steroid
hepatopathy.43
C.Hepatocyte damage in horses: Experimental data indicate that acute hepatocellular
necrosis may cause mild increases (<4 × baseline) in GGT activity.7 It is not known
whether the increased GGT represented hepatocyte necrosis or release of GGT from
cells because of secondary cholestasis.
12/ENZYMES
661
V.
Species differences
A.Horses
1.Increased GGT activity has better diagnostic sensitivity than doesALP for detecting
cholestasis or other biliary disorders in horses. In experimental cholestasisboth
GGT and ALP activities increased,but the GGT increase (=7x)was greater than
2.Neonatal foals have greater serum GGT activity than do their mares,bur not
because of GGT uptake in colostrum as occurs in other speces.72
B.Cattle
1.Increased GGT activity is generally considered to have better diagnostic sensitivity
than does ALP for detecting cholestasis or other biliary disorders in cattle. Experi-
mentally, GGT activity is increased in acute hepatic ecrosis,but the increase may
reflect secondary cholestasis.77
2.Disorders associatedwith increased GGT activity include bile duct obstruction,
cholangitisholecystitisopperxicosishpaticmycotoxicosisandfasciolisi
GGTactivitymaybeincreasedwithhepaticlipidosisbutthemagnitudeisfre
quently mild.8283
C.In dogs, increased GGT activity tends to parallel increases in ALP activity caused by
cholestatic disorders, but ALP probably has more diagnostic sensitivity. GGT values can
be increased in dogs with steroid hepatopathy.
D.In 54 cats with liver diseases, disorders associated with increased GGT activity
includedbildutbstrutonlangiishlanghpatitsldosslasa,
hepatic necrosis,and cirrhosis.GGT activity in nine (17 %)of the cats was
WRI.60
VI.
GGT activity in urine
A.Damage to renal epithelial cells increased the urinary excretion of renal GGT without
increasing the serum GGT activity.
B.Because the urinary GGT activity depends on the amount of HOexcreted by the
kidneys,the measured urine GGT activity is difficult to interpret.The (GGT:Crt)
ratio reduces the variations caused by variable degrees of renal rubular resorption of
HO(see Chapter 8).
1.An increased (GGT:Crt)。ratio should indicate that the rate of GGTexcretion is
increased relative to the rate of creatinine excretion.Such an increased (GGT:Crt）
ratio has occurred with renal diseases in dogs and ponies.4
2.Because Crt clearance depends almost entirely on GFR,but GGT excretion does
not,an increased (GGT:Crt)ratio might be caused by decreased GFR and not
increasedrelease of GGTby tubules.
3.The units for reported (GGT:Crt)ratios have been mixed volume units; that is,
calculated from GGT in U/L and Crt inmg/dL
CREATINEKINASE(CK)
Physiologic processes, concepts, and facts
A.CK is a cytoplasmic enzyme that catalyzes a reversible reaction involved in
the transfer of phosphate (PO) from creatine-PO to adenosine diphosphate
(ADP) to form ATP. Creatine phosphokinase (CPK) is not an acceptable name for
the enzyme.
662
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
B.CK is a dimer. There are four isoenzymes that have variable cell distributions: CK-1
dominates in brain,CK-2 and CK-3 in cardiac and skeletalmuscle,and CK-Mt in
mitochondria of many tissues.
C.Puppies and young dogs have greater serum CK activity than adult dogs. Compared to
adult dogs (>1 yr old), the mean CK activity was about 60 % greater in the 6-to 12-
mo-old dogs,280 % greater in the 1- to 6-mo-old puppies, and 410 % greater in
puppies less than 1 mo old. Also, the mean CK activity in small-breed dogs (<10 kg)
was about 70 % greater than activity in large-breed dogs (> 25 kg). Physiologic
explanations for the age and body size differences were not found.
Il.Tissue sources of increased serum CK activity and CK half-life are listed in Table 12.2.
IIl. Analytical concepts
A.Other than variations caused by differences in assay temperatures, serum CK activity
has minimal variation among assay systems if results are reported in U/L.The analytical
ranges of some commercial assays are too narrow for some domestic mammals, and
thus sera frequently may need to be diluted to obtain numericresults when CKactivity
is increased.
B.In samples from healthy dogs,the CK activity in serum samples is about 2.5 times that
of plasma samples. The difference may be caused by the release of CK from platelets
difference may not be clinically relevant when the increase in CK activity is moderate
to marked. Incomplete removal of platelets from plasma could lead to mildly increased
CKactivity.
C.Canine CK activity in plasma was stable for 1 wk at -4 °C and for 1 mo at -20 C.5
IV.
Increased serum CK activity (Table 12.8)
A.A variety of insults (pathologic and iatrogenic)may damage muscle fbers and cause the
release of CK from muscle fibers. CK may be released because of necrosis or reversible
cell damage.
Table 12.8.Disorders or conditions that cause increased CK activity
Muscle damage (mostly skeletal, occasionally cardiac, rarely smooth)
*Degenerative:hypoxia caused by exertion or seizures,exertional rhabdomyolysis,saddle
thrombus
Neoplastic: metastatic neoplasia
Nutritional:vitaminE or selenium deficiency
Inherited: musculodystrophy,hyperkalemic myopathy
Inflammatory:myositis causedby Neospora,Toxoplasma,bacteria orother agents;bovine
endometritis
Toxic:nnsincastorbeanosy
*Traumati:nramuscularinjctions,hitbycar,recumbenynhorses and catteeiures
exertion
*Arelatively common disease or condition
vitro hemolysis may cause a falsely increased CK activity in some CK assays. Young dogs and dogs of
small breeds may have greater values than those on which reference intervals are based.
12/ENZYMES
663
1.Themagnitude of increase can bemild to extreme (<2x URL to > 100xURL)
and is somewhat proportional to the degree of muscle damage.
2.From a single insult (e.g., recumbency or other trauma), there can be very rapid
increase (hours) and a rapid decline (hours to days) because of the short CK half-life
B.Mild to marked increases in serum CK activity were reported in anorectic cats with
nasoesophageal tubes.7 The exact pathogenesis of the increased activity is not known
but probably involves muscle damage. The method of placing the tubes was not
described.
C.Hypothyroidism in dogs isreported to cause increased CK activity, sometimesmarked,
but a pathophysiologic explanation of the increased activity is not established.ss
Whereas some hypothyroid dogs have increased serum CK activity, other hypothyroid
dogs have decreased serum CK activity.
D.In vitro hemolysis may cause falsely increased CK activity. Erythrocytes do not contain
CK but do contain glucose-6-phosphate, adenylate kinase, and ATP,which may
interfere with the coupled reactions of CK assays.
E.Injury to organs and tissues containing smooth musclemay cause increased serum CK
activity but to a lesser extent than with striated muscle damage. There is sufficient CK
in the bovine uterus that endometritis can cause increased serum CK activity. Four
cows with moderate or severe endometritis had greater CK values (= 7or 15 times as
high, respectively) than values in found in five healthy cows. There was a concurrent,
but relatively minimal, increase in AST activity.
V
CK activity in animals with neurologic disease
or demyelination of neural tissues may cause increased CK activity in cerebrospinal
fuid samples, but neither is known to cause increases in serum CK activity.
B.Increased serum CK activity in domesticmammals with neurologic disease appears to
result from therelease of muscle CK secondary to convulsions orrecumbency.
AMYLASE(AMS)
I
Physiologicprocessesconceptsand fts
A.AMS is a cytoplasmic enzyme that requires Ca²+ and Cl as cofactors and catalyzes the
hydrolysis of complex starches
B.Via electrophoresis, four AMS isoenzymes (I-IV) are classified in dogs; isoenzyme IV
includes macroamylases. Macroamylases are protein complexes that contain AMS
bound to other proteins (immunoglobulins or other proteins).
C.People and pigs have salivary α-amylase, whereas dogs, cats, horses, and cattle donot.
D.AMS activity in sera of healthy dogs includes pancreatic AMS, intestinal AMS, and
macroamylase activities. The liver may also contribute.
1.Compared to presurgical measurements, serum AMS activity in rwo of five dogs did
not decrease by 7 d after pancreatectomy.In three of five dogs, serum AMS activity
decreased by about50%.Therefore,in healthy dogs,serum AMS activitymay be
from pancreatic and nonpancreatic tissues.
2.Up to70%of the plasma AMS inhealthy dogs was of intestinal origin;however,
intestine is not considered to be a source of increased serum AMS activity. In
another group of healthy dogs, about 14 % of total amylase was bound to immuno-
globulins(macroamylase).92
664
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
E.Some investigators have found AMS activity andmRNA forAMS in canine liver,9193-96
so theliver might contribute to baseline serum AMS activity without storing appre-
ciable amounts of the enzyme. Further observations support this idea: (1) serum AMS
activity is sometimes less than thereference interval in dogs with portosystemic shunts
(authorsobservation）,and (2） serum AMS activity decreased in rats after liver damage
or inhibition of hepatic AMS synthesis.However, there is not good evidence that
hepatic disease increases serum AMS activity.
F.The kidneys are a route of plasma AMS excretion or inactivation (see Amylase, sect. IV.B).
II.
Tissue sources of increased serum AMS activity and AMS half-life are listed in Table 12.2.
III.
Analytical concepts
A.Besides variations in assay temperatures, variations in substrates may cause marked
differences in serum AMS activity among assay systems.
B.There are three major types of assays that measure AMS activity.
dseresseos
catalyzes the degradation of starch to produce glucose and maltose. These assays are
typically coupled with other reactions to measure the glucose produced by the
AMS reaction. Canine serum contains glucoamylase and maltase (synonym: a
glucosidase). Both may produce falsely increased AMS activity by reacting
with the maltose produced by the AMSreaction.97
2.In amyloclastic assays (amylo- means “starch” and -clast means “broke”), a dye binds
to the available starch. If there is less bound dye at the end of the assay, then there
was more AMS activity. These assays were the preferred canine AMS assays because
glucoamylase did not interfere,but they are not easily automated.
3.In chromogenic assays,AMS catalyzes the cleavage of a dye bound to a synthetic
substrate. Some of these assays are acceptable for measuring canine AMS activity,
whereas others are not.98
C.Specific AMS isoenzymes can be measured, but their clinical value is limited.
IV.
Increased serum AMS activity (Table 12.9)
A.Pancreatic acinar cell damage
1.Acute pancreatitis is the most common cause of damage to pancreatic acinar cells,
and it may result in the release of AMS, especially in dogs. The damage may lead to
Table 12.9.Disorders or conditions that cause increased AMS and LPS activities
*Pancreatic acinar cell damage: infammation,neoplasia (AMS and LPS)
Decreasedrenal clearance
Prerenal disorders: dehydration, shock (AMS and LPS)
*Renal disorders: acute or chronic renal diseases (AMS and LPS)
Postrenal disorders: urinary tract obstruction (AMS and LPS)
Macroamylasemia (AMS)
Other or unknown mechanism
Dexamethasone treatment (LPS)
Pancreatic or hepatic neoplasia (LPS)
*A relatively common disease or condition
12/ENZYMES
665
acinar cell necrosis. The AMS may gain access to blood via veins draining the
pancreas and via lymphatic vessels. In experimental canine pancreatitis, serum
AMS activity peaks within 1248 h and persists for 8-14 d.100
2.Species variations
extremely increased(>10xURL)
b.In cats with spontaneous pancreatitis, serum AMS activities range from WRI to
c.Measurement of serum AMS activity has not been useful for diagnosing pancre-
atitis or other diseases in horses or cartle
3.Pancreatic neoplasia can also lead to increased serum AMS activity
B.Decreased renal inactivation or excretion
1.In dogs, dinical and experimental data indicate that the half-life of plasma AMS
tally, the increased half-life may lead to hyperamylasemia (mean increase,2.54.0 times
the baseline values). Clinically, the increased AMS activity is expected to be <3x URL
in conditions that cause decreased GFR without pancreatic acinar cell damage.
2.Exactly how renal functions infuence serum AMS activity has not been established.
a.Very little to no AMS activiry is found in the urine of healthy dogs, perhaps
because AMS does not pass through the glomerular filtration barrier or because it
is inactivated or resorbed by tubular cells after it passes through the barrier.
b.There is a correlation between amylasuria and proteinuria,especially glomerular
proteinuria. Thus, it appears in health that the glomerular filtration barrier limits
the amount ofAMS that reaches the tubular lumen,or perhaps a large amount
of luminal proteinresultingfrom glomerular diseaseinterferes withAMS
inactivationby thetubular epithelial cells92.1.107
C.Experimental damage to proximal renal tubular cells increased urinary loss of
AMS, but relatively not as much as urinary loss of LPS or lysozyme. Proximal
tubular epithelial cells have some capability of inactivaring or resorbing AMS if
AMS does pass through the glomerular fltration barrier.s
d.Formation of macroamylase molecules in blood also infuences serum AMS
activity. Macroamylase, a complex between AMS and an immunoglobulin or
and thus may have a longer half-life than noncomplexed AMs.Macroamylasemia
contributes to the hyperamylasemia in some proteinuric and azotemic dogs;
however, hyperamylasemia was still present in some sera after the macroamylase
molecules were removed.92
3.The importance of renal inactivation or excretion of AMS by feline kidneys has not
been established. Of 32 cats with renal failure,10 had hyperamylasemia (slight to
3XURL).109
C.Intestinal AMS has not been shown to increase total serum AMS activity.
LIPASE (LPS)
I.
Physiologic processes,concepts,and facts
A.Pancreatic LPS is a cytoplasmic enzyme that requires Ca², colipase,and bile salts as
cofacrors. It catalyzes the hydrolysis of triglycerides. The pancreatic LPS molecule
666
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(M, =48,0o0) and colipase are small enough to pass through the glomerular filtration
barrier to be inactivated or excreted.
B.Several lipases are in the body, and each has specific roles in lipid metabolism. More
information about lipid metabolism is in Chapter 16.
1.Gastric LPS is produced by gastric mucosal cellsand degrades ingested triglyceride
(TG).
2.Pancreatic LPS (triacylglycerol LPS) is produced by pancreatic acinar cellsl and
catalyzes the hydrolysis of dietary TG in the intestine.
3.Many extrahepatic cells, including adipocytes and myocytes, produce lipoprotein
LPS,which migrates to the luminal surface of endothelial cells,where it catalyzes the
hydrolysis of TG in plasma lipoproteins.
4.Hepatic LPS is produced by hepatocytes, is present on endothelial cells of hepatic
sinusoids, and hydrolyzes TG in low-density lipoprotein molecules.
5.Hormone-sensitive LPS in adipocytes catalyzes the hydrolysis of stored TG and the
liberation of fatty acids; it is stimulated by epinephrine and glucagon.
6.Lysosomal acidLPS is an intracellular LPS that catalyzes the hydrolysis of cholesterol
esters.
C.Compared to presurgicalmeasurements,serumLPS activity in four of five dogs
decreased by 50-75 % by day 7 after pancreatectomy. However,LPS activity increased
by 40 % for one dog in the same study. Data indicated that the pancreas was a
contributor to serum LPS activity, but there were other tissue sources in some dogs.
The nonpancreatic LPS in serum might be gastric LPS or hepatic LPS.
II.Tissue sources of increased serumLPS activity and LPS half-life are listed in Table 12.2.
III. Analytical concepts
A.Clinical LPS assay methods have varied greatly,yielding disparate results caused partly
by variations in analytical specificity for pancreatic LPS.
1.Besides variations in assay temperatures, variations in substrates may cause marked
2.Exogenous colipase is required for an assay to measure total pancreatic LPS activity,
and colipase is not always included in LPS assays.
3.Exogenous Ca²+ enhances LPS activity.
4.In some assays, heparin may enhance serum lipoprotein LPS activity sufficiently to
increase serum LPS activity, and other lipases may be detected. This is especially
true for assays that use I,2-diglyceride as a substrate.
specificity for pancreatic LPS and better diagnostic sensitivity for pancreatitis
than a 1,2-diglyoeride assay,but the evidence for greater analytical specificity was
indirect."
LPS protein, not the activity of the enzyme.An assay for canine gastric LPS has also
been developed, but its clinical value has not been established.
IV.
Increased serum LPS activity (Table 12.9)
A.Interpretation of published data regarding serum LPS is complicated by the wide
variation in assay methods used. The following are general conclusions:
12/ENZYMES
667
B.Pancreatic acinar cell damage
1.Acute pancreatitis is the most common cause of damage to pancreatic acinar cells
and will result in therelease ofLPSespecially in ogsThe damagemay or may ot
cause acinar cell necrosis.TheLPSmay gain access to blood via veins draining the
pancreas and via lymphatic vessels.99
2.Species variations
a.Serum LPS activity in dogs with acute pancreatitis ranges from WRI to extremely
increased (>10x URL)
b.In spontaneous feline pancreatitis, serum LPS activity ranges fromWRI to
serum LPS activity was increased up to six times the baseline values for the first
day and then reduced to about two times the baseline values for 1 wk.103
c.Measurement of serum LPS activity has not been useful for diagnosing pancreati-
tis or other diseases in horses or cattle.
3.The reported diagnostic sensitivity of LPS for canine pancreatitis has varied
from 39 % to 100 %, and the reported diagnostic specificity of LPS for canine
pancreatitis has varied from 50 % to 93 %. These values vary for many reasons,
includinguse of different assaysdifferent diagnosticcriteria,and different popula
tions of dogs.
C.Proliferation of cells containing LPS activity:Pancreatic neoplasia and extrapancreatic
neoplasia (e.g.,cholangiocarcinoma) can also lead to increased serum LPS activity.7
Some of the serum activity may stem from enzyme release from damaged cells.
D.Decreased renal inactivation or excretion
1.Serum LPS activity tends to parallel serum AMS activity when renal blood fow or
functionalrenaltissueisdecreased5Expermentally，thedecreasedclearancemay
lead to hyperlipasemia (mean increase, 2.5-4.0 times the baseline values). Clinically,
the increased LPS activity is expected to be<4x URL in conditions that cause a
decreased GFRwithout pancreatic acinar cell damage.However,greaterLPSactivity
(68x URL) has been reported with some renal cases that did not have evidence of
neous primary renal failure.10s
2.Hyperlipasemia associated with renal disease may be caused by decreased renal
inactivation of LPS.
E.Associated with pancreatic or hepatic neoplasia in dogs: In five of six cases, histochemi
cal and immunohistochemical findings indicated that pancreatic and hepatic neoplasms
were potential sources of mild to marked increased serum LPS activity.l19 The same
dogs did not have significant increases in serum AMS activity.
F.Associatedwith dexamethasone treatments in dogs120
1.Hyperlipasemia (< 2x URL) was found in 24 healthy dogs by day 8 of treatment
with dexamethasone either at 2mg/kg or 0.2 mg/kg. In dogs with neurologic
disease,hyperlipasemia of increasing severity (mean value,4.6xURL) occured by
day 10 of treatment (initial dose at 2 mg/kg and then reduced doses). The number
of dogs sampled varied from rwo to eight on different days.
2.Microscopic evidence of pancreatic damage was not found, and concurrent hyper-
amylasemia was not found.
G. Marked hyperlipasemia may be associated with widespread steatitis caused by LPS
effects on adipose tissue.Panniculitis may be detected as firm subcutaneous masses
consisting of fat with a mild infammatory component.121
668
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 12.10.Other serum enzymes
Serum enzyme
Disorder causes
Diagnostic value
5'-Nucleotidase
↑
Hepatobiliary disease
Aldolase
↑
Muscle fiber damage
Arginase
牛
Hepatocyte damage
Cholinesterasea
Organophosphate toxicosis, infections,
chronic liver disease
Isocitrate dehydrogenase
↑
Hepatocyte damage
Leucyl aminopeptidaseb
牛
Hepatobiliary disease
Maltase
↑
Intestinalmucosa damage
Muramidase (lysozyme)
Neoplasia (histiocytic)
Malate dehydrogenase
Hepatocyte damage
Ornithine carbamoyltransferase
个
Hepatocyte damage
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI)
个
Pancreatitis or decreased GFR
(see Chapter 15)
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in
山
dogs and cats
Plasma pseudocholinesterase or butyrylcholinesterase; not acetylcholinesterase of the myoneural junction
bAlso called leucine aminopeptidase
V
Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity(PLI)
A.To improve the analytical specificity of LPS assays, immunoassays were developed by
using an antibody specific for canine pancreatic LPS (M, =51,ooo). A similar feline
assay has also been developed.
B.Dogs
1.A cPLI radioimmunoassayland a cPLI ELISAl4 have been used,and the lower
andupper reference limits for the ELISA were about half of those values for the
radioimmunoassay. The ELISA detected only about 55 % of LPS activiry added to
test samples, indicating a problem with analytical accuracy.
2.PLI was usually decreased in dogs with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
3.PLI had greater diagnostic sensitivity for pancreatitis than did LPSorTLI.122
4. When the ELISA was used, the [PLI] values were mildly increased in dogs with
chronic renal failure, but not enough to suggest acute pancreatitis.23 In a study in
which renal failure was created via 15/16th nephrectomy, 16 dogs became azotemic
([creatinine]4.3± 1.5mg/dL;mean ± sd）,but both serum LPS activity and serum
[PLI] remained within reference intervals. The lack of increased serum LPS activity
suggests that the model may not have been appropriate for assessing the effects of
renal failure on [PLI].124
C.Cats
1.In experimental pancreatitis, PLI increased more (50 × baseline versus 35 × baseline)
and was more persistently increased (10 d vs 3 d) than was TLI.
2.In spontaneous pancreatitis, when a fPLI assay and a decision threshold of 10 μg/L
(reference interval, 2.06.8μg/L) were used, the diagnostic sensitivity of the [PLI]
was 100 % for cats with moderate to severe pancreatitis (six cats) and 54 % for cars
withmild pancreatitis (eight cats）.25 PLI measurements had more diagnostic
sensitivity than did TLI measurements or abdominal ultrasound.
12/ENZYMES
669
OTHERSERUMENZYMES
Many serum enzymes have been assessed in an attempt to find better indicators of pathologic
states involving hepatocytes or other cells (Table 12.10). For a variety of reasons, most have failed
to be as clinically valuable as those described earlier in this chapter.
Decreased TLI has been shown to be valuable in diagnosing exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Increased TLI has been found in active pancreatitis (see Chapter 15)
References
1. Boyd JW. 1983. The mechanisms relating to increases in plasma enzymes and isoenzymes in diseases of animals. Vet
ClinPathol 12:9-24.
2. Gores GJ, Herman B, Lemasters JJ. 1990. Plasma membrane bleb formation and rupture: A common feature of
hepatocellular injury.Hepatology 1l:690-698.
patterns of lealcage of cytosolic and mitochondrial enzymes. Clin Chim Acta 185:265-270.
4.Webb EC, ed, for the International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. Nomenclature Committee.
1992.Enzyme Nomenclature 1992: Recommenedations of the Nomenclature Committe of the IntemationalUnio of
Biocbemistry and Molecwlar Biology on the Nomerclatwre and Classification ofEnzymes. San Diego,Academic
5.Baron DN, Moss DW, Walker PG,Wilkinson JH. 1975. Revised list of abbreviations for names of enzymes of
diagnostic importance. J Clin Pathol 28:592-593.
6.Castro-e-Silva O Jr, Franco CFF, Picinato MANC, Souza MEJ, Mazzetto SA, Ceneviva R. 1989.
Heparin-induced increase in plasma and serum Y-glutamyl transpeptidase activity.Braz J Med Biol Res
22:1333-1335.
7.Kramer JW, Hoffmann WE. 1997. Clinical enzymology. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML, eds. Cliwical
Biochemistry ofDomestic Anima, 5th edition, 303-325. San Diego: Academic.
8. Jones DG. 1985. Stability and storage characteristics of enzymes in cattle blood. Res Vet Sci 38:301306.
9.Horney BS, Honor DJ, MacKenzie A,Burton S. 1993. Stability of sorbitol dehydrogenase activity in bovine and
equine sera. Vet Clin Pathol 22:5-9.
10.West HJ. 1989. Observations on Y-glutamyl transferase, 5'-nucleotidase and leucine aminopeptidase activities in the
plasma of the horse. Res Vet Sci 46:301-306.
11.Mesher CI, Rej R, Stokol T. 1998.Alanine aminotransferase apoenzyme in dogs. Vet Clin Pathol 27:2630.
12.Stokol T,ErbH.1998.The apo-enzyme content of aminotransferases in healthy and diseased domestic animals.Vet
Clin Pathol 27:71-78.
13. Allen HS, Steiner J, Broussard J, Mansfield C,Williams DA, Jones B. 2006. Serum and urine concentrations of
trypsinogen-activation peptide as markers for acute pancreatitis in cats. Can J Vet Res 70:313316.
14.O'Neill SL,Feldman BF. 1989.Hemolysis as a factor in clinical chemistry and hematology of the dog.Vet Clin
Pathol 18:58-68.
15. Hadley SP, Hoffmann WE, Kuhlenschmidt MS, Sanecki RK, Dorner JL.1990. Effect of glucocorticoids on alkaline
43:89-98.
16.Gaskill CL, Miller M,Mattoon JS,Hoffmann WE, Burton SA,GeensHC, Ihle SL,Miller JB, ShawDH, Cribb
AE. 2005. Liver histopathology and liver and serum alanine aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase activities in
cpileptic dogs receiving phenobarbital Vet Pathol 42:147-160.
17.Koregay JN,Tuler SM,Miller DM,Levesque DC.1988.Muscular dystrophy in a litter of golden retriever ogs
MuscleNerve1l:1056-1064.
18. Valentine BA, Blue JT, Shelly SM, Cooper BJ. 1990. Increased serum alanine aminotransferase activity associated
with muscle necrosis in the dog. J Vet Intern Med 4:140-143.
19. Gaschen F, Gaschen L, Seiler G, Welle M, Bornand Jaunin V, Gonin Jmaa D, Neiger-Aeschbacher G, Ada-
Damilano M. 1998. Lethal peracute rhabdomyolysis associated with stress and general anesthesia in three
dystrophin-deficient cats.VetPathol35:117-123
20. Fleisher GA, Wakim KG. 1963. The fate of enzymes in body fuids: An experimental study. IL. Disappearance rates
of glutamic-pyruvic transaminase under various conditions. J Lab Clin Med 61:7685.
21. Fleisher GA, Walkim KG. 1963. The fate of enzymes in body fluids: An experimental study. III. Disappearance rates
of glutamie-oxalacetic transaminase II under various conditions. J Lab Clin Med 61:98106.
670
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
22.Moss DW, Henderson AR. 1999. Clinical enzymology.In: Burtis CA,Ashwood ER, eds. Tiez Textbook ofClinicaf
Chemistry, 3rd edition, 617-721. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
23. Cardinet GH Ill. 1989. Skeletal muscle function. In: Kaneko JJ ed. Clinical Biohenistry of Dometic Auimab, 4th
edition, 462495. San Diego: Academic.
24.Zanatta R, Abate O,D'Angelo A, Miniscalco B, Mannell A. 2003. Diagnostic and prognostic value of serum
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and LDH isoenzymes in canine lymphoma. Vet Res Commun 27(Suppl 1):
449-452
25. Durham AE, Smith KC, Newton JR. 2003. An evaluation of diagnostic data in comparison to the results of liver
biopsies in mature horses. Equine Vet J 35:554-559.
26. Muihlberger N, Kraft W. 1994. Diagnostic value of glutamate dehydrogenase determination in the dog [in German].
Tierarztl Prax 22:567-573.
being treated with phenobarbitone. Vet Rec 153:13-16.
28.Poelstra K, Bakker WW, Klok PA, Hardonk MJ, Meijer DK. 1997. A physiologic function for alkaline phosphatase:
Endotoxin detoxification.Lab Invest 76:319-327.
29. Balcerzak M, Hamade E, Zhang L, Pikula S, Azzar G, Radisson J, Bandorowicz-Pilkula J, Buchet R 2003. The roles
of annexins and alkaline phosphatase in mineralization process. Acta Biochim Pol 50:1019-1038.
30. Center SA,Randolph JF, ManWarren T, Slater M. 1991. Effeet of colostrum ingestion on gamma-glutamyltransfer-
ase and alkaline phosphatase activities in neonatal pups. Am J Vet Res 52:499-504.
31. Sanecki RK,Hoffmann WE, Hansen R, Schaeffer DJ. 1993.Quantifcation of bone alkaline phosphatase in canine
serum. Vet Clin Pathol 22:17-23.
32. Hank AM, Hoffmann WE, Sanecki RK, Schaeffer DJ, Dorner JL. 1993. Quantitative determination of equine
alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes in foal and adult serum.J Vet Intern Med 7:20-24.
33. Zanker IA, Hammon HM, Blum JW. 2001. Activities of gamma-glutamyltransferase, alkaline phosphatase and
aspartate-aminotransferase in colostrum, milk and blood plasma of calves fed frst colostrum at 02, 67, 12-13 and
2425 h after birth. J Vet Med [A] 48:179-185.
34. Syakalima M, Takiguchi M, Yasuda J, Hashimoto A. 1997. The age dependent levels of serum ALP isoenzymes and
the diagnostic significance of corticosteroid-induced ALP during long-term glucocorticoid teatment. J Vet Med Sci
59:905-909.
35. Mahaffey EA, Lago MP. 1991. Comparison of techniques for quantifying alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes in canine
serum.Vet ClinPathol 20:51-55.
bone and liver alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes in canine serum. J Vet Med [A] 44:603610.
37. Syakalima M, Takiguchi M, Yasuda J, Hashimoto A. 1998. The canine alkaline phosphatases: A review of the
isoenzymes in serum, analytical methods and their diagnostic application. Jpn J Vet Res 46:3-11.
38.Kidney BA, Jackson ML. 1988. Diagnostic value of alkaline phosphatase isoenzyme separation by affnity
electrophoresis in the dog. Can J Vet Res 52:106-110.
39. Putzki H, Reichert B, Heymann H. 1989. The serum activities of AP, gamma-GT, GLDH, GPT and CHE after
complete biliary obstruction and choledochocaval fistula in the rat. Clin Chim Acta 18l:81-86.
40. Solter PF, Hoffnann WE. 1995. Canine corticosteroid-induced alkaline phosphatase in serum was solubilized by
phospholipase activity in vivo. Am J Physiol 269:G278-G286.
41.Solter PF,HoffmannWE.1999.Solubilization of liver alkaline phosphatase isoenzyme during cholestasis in dogs.
AmJVetRes60:1010-1015.
42. Meyer D], Noonan NE. 1981. Liver tests in dogs receiving anticonvulsant drugs (diphenylhydantoin and
primidone). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:261264.
43. Solter PF, Hoffnann WE, Chambers MD, Schaeffer DJ, Kuhlenschmidt MS. 1994. Hepatic total 30-hydroxy bile
acids concentration and enzyme activities in prednisone-treated dogs. Am J Vet Res 55: 1086-1092.
44. Wiedmeyer CE, Solter PF, Hoffmann WE. 2002. Allaline phosphatase expression in tissues from glucocorticoid-
treated dogs. Am J Vet Res 63:1083-1088.
45.Wiedmeyer CE, Solter PF, Hoffmann WE. 2002.Kinetics of mRNA expression of alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes
in hepatic tissues from glucocorticoid-treated dogs. Am J Vet Res 63:1089-1095.
46. Solter PF, Hoffmann WE, Hungerford LL, Peterson ME, Dorner JL. 1993. Assessment of corticosteroid-induced
allaline phosphatase isoenzyme as a screening test forhyperadrenocorticism in dogs.JAmVet MedAssoc
203:534-538.
47. Ehrhart N, Dernell WS, Hoffmann WE, Weigel RM, Powers BE, Withrow SJ. 1998. Prognostic importance of
allaline phosphatase activity in serum from dogs with appendicular osteosarcoma: 75 cases (19901996). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 213:1002-1006.
12/ENZYMES
671
48. Komnenou A, Karayannopoulou M, Polizopoulou ZS, Constantinidis TC, Dessiris A. 2005. Correlation of serum
alkaline phosphatase activity with the healing process of long bone fractures in dogs.Vet Clin Pathol 34:3538.
49.Archer FJ, Taylor SM. 1996. Alkaline phosphatase bone isoenzyme and osteocalcin in the serum of hyperthyroid
cats.CanVetJ37:735-739
E. 2003. Total serum alkaline phosphatase activity in dogs with mammary neoplasms A prospective study on 79
natural cases. J Vet Med [A] 50:501-505.
51. Hamilton JM, Wright J, Kight D. 1973. Alkaline phosphatase levels in canine marmmary neoplasia. Vet Rec
93:121-123
52. Tateyama S, Cotchin E. 1977. Alkaline phosphatase reaction of canine mammary mixed turnours: A light and
clectron microscopic study. Res Vet Sai 23:356-364.
53.LawlerDF,Kelmer DG,HoffmannWE,Nachreiner RF,Hegstad RL,Herndon PA,Fischer BJ. 1996.Benign
familial hyperphosphatasemia in Siberian huskies. Am J Vet Res 57:612617.
54. Meuten DJ, Kociba G, Threlfall WR, Nagode LA. 1980. Serum alkaline phosphatase in pregnant mares. Vet Clin
Pathol9:27-30.
55. Bebiak DM, Lawler DF, Reutzel LF. 1987. Nutrition and management of the dog. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 17:505-533.
56.Leveille-Webster CR. 2000. Laboratory diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease. In: Ettinger SJ,Feldman EC, cds.
TexbookfVeteriry IntralMedicine：DiseassftheDogandCat5thedition12771293.Philadelphi:WB
Saunders.
Anim Pract 23:659670.
58.Harper EJ,Hackett RM, Wilkinson J, Heaton PR. 2003. Age-related variations in hematologic and plasma
biochemical test results in beagles and Labrador retrievers. J Am Vet Med Assoc 223:1436-1442
59.Nestor DD,Holan KM, Johnson CA,Schall W,Kaneene JB.2006. Serum alkaline phosphatase activity in Scottish
Terriers versus dogs of other breeds. J Am Vet Med Assoc 228:222-224.
60. Center SA, Baldwin BH, Dillingham S, Erb HN, Tennant BC. 1986. Diagnostic value of serum -glutamyl
transferase and alkaline phosphatase activities in hepatobiliary disease in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:507-510.
61. Foster DJ, Thoday KL. 2000. Tissue sources of serum allaline phosphatase in 34 hyperthyroid cats: A qualitative
and quantitative study. Res Vet Sci 68:89-94.
62. van der Kolk JH, Klein WR, van der Putten SW, Mol JA. 1991. A horse with Cushing’s disease [in Dutch]. Tijdschr
Diergeneeskd 116:670-675.
63. Cohen ND, Carter GK. 1992. Steroid hepatopathy in a horse with glucocorticoid-induced hyperadrenocorticism
J AmVet Med Assoc 200:1682-1684.
64.Ryu SH,Kim BS, Lee CW, Yoon J, Lee YL.2004. Glucocorticoid-induced laminitis with hepatopathy in a
thoroughbred flly. J Vet Sei 5:271-274
Aluids of horses with colic. Am J Vet Res 42:888891.
66.Davies JV, Gerring EL,Goodburn R,Manderville P.1984.Experimental ischaemia of the ileum and concentrations
of the intestinal isoenzyme of allkaline phosphatase in plasma and peritoneal fuid. Equine Vet J 16:215217.
67. Baumrucker CR 1980. Purification and identifcation of -glutamyl transpeptidase of milk membranes. J Dairy Sci
63:49-54.
68. Baumrucker CR, Pocius PA. 1978. -Glutamyl transpeptidase in lactating mammary secretory tissue of cow and rat.
J Dairy Sei 61:309-314.
69.Perino LJ, Sutherland RL, Woolln NE. 1993. Serum Yglutamyltransferase activity and protein concentration at
birth and afe suking incalveswithaequat andnadequate passve transfer fmmunlobulinG.m JVet Res
54:56-59.
70. Thompson JC, Pauli JV. 1981. Colostral transfer of gamma glutamyl transpeptidase in calves. NZ Vet J
29:223-226.
71. Bouda J, Dvorik V, Minksovi E, Dvorik R 1980. The activities of GOT, gamma-GT, allaline phosphatase in
blood plasma of cows and their calves fed from buckets. Acta Vet Brno 49:193-198.
72.Patrerson WH, Brown CM. 1986. Increase of serum Yglutamyltransferase in neonatal standardbred foals.Am J Vet
Res 47:2461-2463.
73. Szasz G. 1969. A kinetic photometric method for serum -glutamyl transpeptidase. Clin Chem 15:124136.
74. Bulle F, Mavier P, Zafrani ES, Preaux AM, Leses MC, Siegrist S, Dhumeaux D, Guellaen G. 1990. Mechanism of Y
glutamyl transpeptidase release in serum during intrahepatic and extrahepatic cholestasis in the rat: A histochemical,
biochemical and molecular approach. Hepatology 1l:545-550.
672
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
75. Muiller PB, Taboada J, Hosgood G, Partington BP, VanSteenhouse JL, Taylor HW, Wolfshcimer KJ. 2000. Effects of
long-term phenobarbital treatment on the liver in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 14:165-171.
76. Hoffmann WE, Baker G, Rieser S, Dorner JL. 1987. Alterations in selecred serum biochemical constituents in
cquids after induced hepatic disease. Am J Vet Res 48:1343-1347.
77. Yonezawa LA, Kitamura SS, Mirandola RM, Antonelli AC, Ortolani EL. 2005. Preventive treatment with vitamin E
alleviates the poisoning effects of carbon tetrachloride in cattle. J Vet Med [A] 52:292—297.
78.Cable CS,Rebhun WC, Fortier LA. 1997. Cholelithiasis and cholecystitis in a dairy cow. J Am Vet Med Assoc
211:899-900
79. Auza NJ, Olson WG, Murphy MJ, Linn JG. 1999. Diagnosis and treatment of copper toxicosis in ruminants. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 214:1624-1628.
80.Putam MRQuall CWRice LEDawson LJEdwards WC.1986.Hepatic nzyme changes in bovine hepatg
enous photosensitivity caused by water-damaged alfalfa hay. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:77 82
81. Molina EC, Lozano SP, Barraca AP. 2006. The relationship between haematological indices, serum gamma-glutamyl
transferase and glutamate dehydrogenase, visual hepatic damage and worm burden in cattle infected with Fasciola
gigantica. J Helminthol 80:277-279.
82. Cebra CK, Garry FB, Getzy DM, Fettman MJ. 1997. Hepatic lipidosis in anorectic, lactating Holstein cattle: A
retrospective study of serum biochemical abnormalities. J Vet Intern Med 1l:231-237.
83. Kormatsu Y, Itoh N, Taniyama H, Kitazawa T, Yokota H, Koiwa M, Ohtsuka H, Terasaki N, Maeno K, Mizoguchi
M, Takeuchi Y, Tanigawa M, Nakamura T, Watanabe H, Matsuguchi Y, Kukino T, Honma A. 2002. Classifcation
of abomasal displacement in cows according to histopathology of the liver and linical chemistry. J Vet Med [A]
49:482-486
84. Gossett KA, Turnwald GH, Kearney MT, Greco DS, Cleghorn B. 1987. Evaluation of Y-glutamyl transpeptidase-to
creatinine ratio from spot samples of urine supernatant, as an indicator of urinary enzyme excretion in dogs. Am J
Vet Res 48:455-457.
85.Aktas M,Auguste D, Concordet D, Vinclair P, Lefebvre H, Toutain PL,Braun JP. 1994. Creatine kinase in
dog plasma: Preanalytical factors of variation, reference values and diagnostic significance. Res Vet Si
56:30-36.
86.Lindena J, Sommerfeld U, Hopfel C, Wolkersdorfer R, Trautschold I. 1983. Enzyme activities in blood clls of man
and dogs after separation on a discontinuous Percoll gradient. Enzyme 29:100-108.
87. Fasceti AJ, Mauldin GE, Mauldin GN. 1997. Correlation between serum creatine kinase activities and anorexia in
cats. J Vet Intern Med 11:9-13.
88.Dixon RM, Reid SW, Mooney CT. 1999. Epidemiological, clinical, haematological and biochemical characteristics
of canine hypothyroidism. Vet Rec 145:481-487.
89. Sattler T, Furll M. 2004. Creatine kinase and aspartate aminotransferase in cows as indicators for endometritis. J Vet
Med[A]51:132-137
amylase, isoamylase, lipase and trypsin-like immunoreactivity in dogs. Res Vet Sci 51:7882.
91. Stickle JE, Carlton WW, Boon GD. 1980. Isoamylases in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 41:506-509.
92.Corazza M, Tognetti R, Guidi G, Buonaccorsi A. 1994. Urinary O-amylase and serum macroamylase activities in
dogs with proteinuria. J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:438-440.
93. Moore WE, Cunningham BA. 1976. Comparative properties of canine hepatic and pancreatic amylase. Bull Am Soc
Vet ClinPathol5:1l-12(abstract)
94. Nothman MM, Callow AD. 1971. Investigations on the origin of anylase in serum and urine. Gastroenterology
60:82-89.
95. Kellr P. 1981. Enzyme activities in the dog: Tissue analyses, plasma values, and intracellular distribution. Am J Vet
Res 42:575-582.
96. Mocharla H, Mocharla R, Hodes ME. 1990. Alpha-amylase gene transcription in tissues of normal dog. Nucleic
Acids Res 18:1031-1036
97. O'Donnell MD, MeGeeney KF. 1975. 0-Amylase and glucoamylase activities of canine serum. Comp Biochem
Physiol 50:269-274.
98. Braun JP, Ouedraogo G, Thorel B, Mxdaille C, Rico AG. 1990. Determination of plasma 0-amylase in the dog: A
test of the specifciry of new methods.J Clin Chem Clin Biochem 28:493495
99. Mayer AD, Airey M, Hodgson J, MeMahon MJ. 1985. Enzyme transfer from pancneas to plasma during acute
pancreatitis: The contribution of ascitic fuid and lymphatic drainage of the pancreas. Gut 26:876-88 1.
100. Brobst D, Ferguson AB, Carter JM. 1970. Evaluation of serum amylase and lipase activity in experimentally
induced pancreatitis in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 157:1697-1702
101. Schaer M, Holloway S. 1991. Diagnosing acute pancreatitis in the cat. Vet Med 86:782795.
12/ENZYMES
673
102. Hill RC, Van Winkle TJ. 1993. Acute necrotizing pancreatitis and acute suppurative pancreatitis in the cat A
retrospective study of40 cases(1976-1989). JVet Intern Med 7:25-33.
103. Kirchell BE, Strombeck DR, Cullen J, Harrold D. 1986. Clinical and pathologic changes in experimentally induced
acute pancreatitis in cats. Am J Vet Res 47:1170-1173.
104. Hudson EB, Strombeck DR 1978. Effects of functional nephrectomy on the disappearance rates of canine serum
amylase and lipase. Am J Vet Res 39:13161321.
105. Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, Stevens JB, Hayden DW. 1983. Serum amylase and lipase activities in dogs with chronic
primary renal failure. Am J Vet Res 44:404410.
106. Jacobs RM. 1989. Relationship of urinary amylase activity and proteinuria in the dog.Vet Pathol 26:349-350.
107. de Schepper J, Capiau E, van Bre H, de Cock I. 1989. The diagnostic significance of increased urinary and serum
amylase activity in bitches with pyomera. J Vet Med [A] 36:431437.
108. Jacobs RM. 1988. Renal disposition of anylase, lipase, and lysozyme in the dog. Vet Pathol 25:443449.
109. Lulich JP, Osborne CA, OBrien TD, Polzin DJ. 1992.Feline renal failure: Questions, answers,questions.Compend
Contin Educ Small Anim Pract 14:127-153.
110. Steiner JM, Berridge BR, Wojcieszyn J, Williams DA. 2002. Cellular immunolocalization of gastric and pancreatic
lipase in various tissues obtained from dogs. Am J Vet Res 63:722-727.
111. Graca R, Messick J, MeCullough S, Barger A, Hoffman W. 2005. Validation and diagnostic efficacy of a lipase
assay using the substrate 1,2-o-dilauryl-rac-glycero glutaric acid-(6’ methyl resorufin)-ester for the diagnosis of acute
pancreatitis in dogs.Vet Clin Pathol 34:39-43.
112. Greten H, Levy Rl, Fredrickson DS. 1968. A further characterization of lipoprotein lipase. Biochim Biophys Aeta
164:185-194.
113. Steiner JM, Williams DA. 2003. Development and validation of a radioimmunoassay for the measurement of canine
pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity in serum of dogs. Am J Vet Res 64:1237-1241.
114. Steiner JM, Teague SR, Williams DA. 2003. Development and analytic validation of an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay for the measurement of canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity in serum. Can J Vet Res
67:175-182
115. Steiner JM, Wilson BG, Williams DA. 2004. Development and analytical validation of a radioimmunoassay for the
measurement of feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity in serum. Can J Vet Res 68:309-314.
116. Steiner JM, Williams DA. 2004.Development and analytical validation of an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
for the measurement of canine gastric lipase immunoreactivity in serum. Can J Vet Res 68:161168.
neoplasia: A case series.Vet Pathol 37:527 (abstract)
118. Strombeck DR, Farver T, Kaneko J. 1981. Serum amylase and lipase activities in the diagnosis of pancreatitis in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 42:1966-1970.
119.Quigley KA,Jackson ML,Haines DM. 2001.Hyperlipasemia in six dog with pancreatic or hepatic neoplasia:
Evidence for umorlipase production.Vet Clin Pathol 30:114120.
120. Parent J. 1982.Effcts of dexamethasone on pancreatic tissue and on serum amylase and lipase activities in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:743-746.
121.Mellanby RJ,StellA,Baines E,Chantrey JC,Hertage ME2003.Panniculitis assocated with pancreatitis ina
cocker spanieL J Small Anim Pract 44:2428.
122.Steiner JM, Broussard J, Mansfield CS, Gumminger SR,Williams DA. 2001. Serum canine pancreatic lipase
immunoreactivity (cPLI) concentrations in dogs with spontaneous pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med 15:274 (abstract).
123.Willams DA. 2003. Diagnosis of canine and feline pancreatitis. In: 38th Annual Meeting of the American Society
ofVeterinary Clinical Pathologists,Banff, Canada, 6-12.
124. Steiner JM, Finco DR, Gumminger SR, Williams DA. 2001. Serum canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
(cPLI) in dogs with experimentally induced chronic renal failure. J Vet Intern Med 15:311 (abstract).
125. Forman MA, Marks SL, De Cock HE, Hergesell EJ, Wisner ER, Baker TW, Kass PH, Steiner JM, Williams DA.
2004. Evaluation of serum feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity and helical computed tomography versus
conventional testing for the diagnosis of feline pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med 18:807-815.
126. Hoffimann WE, Dorner JL. 1977. Disappearance rates of intravenously injected canine alkaline phosphatase
isoenzymes.AmJ Vet Res 38:1553-1556.
127. Hoffmann WE, Renegar WE, Dorner JL. 1977. Serum half-life of intravenously injected intestinal and hepatic
allkaline phosphatase isoenzymes in the cat.Am J Vet Res 38:1637-1639.
128. Harris P. 1997. Equine rhabdomyolysis syndrome. In: Robinson NE, ed. Current Therapy in Equine Medicime 4,
115-121. Philadelphia:WB Saunders
129.Cardinet GH, Litrell JF,Freedland RA. 1967.Comparative investigations of serum creatine phosphokinase and
glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase activities in cquine paralytic myoglobinuria. Res Vet Sci 8:219226.
674
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
130. Walkim KG, Fleisher GA. 1963. The fate of enzymes in body fluids: An experimental study. Il. Disappearance rates
of glutamic-oxalacetic transaminase I under various conditions. J Lab Clin Med 61:8697.
131.Rapaport E. 1975.The fractional disappearance rate of the separate isoenzymes of creatine phosphokinase in the
dog. Cardiovasc Res 9:473477.
132.Barton MH,Morris DD. 1998.Disease of the liver. In: Reed SM,Bayly WM,eds. Equine Internal Medicine,707
738. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
133. Colis KA, Symonds HW, Sansom BF. 1979. The halflife of glutamate dehydrogenase in plasma of dry and
lactating dairy cows. Res Vet Sci 27:267-268.
134. Freedland RA, Kramer JW. 1970. Use of serum enzymes as aids to diagnosis. Adv Vet Sei Comp Med 14:61-103.
135.Bar U, Friedel R, Heine H, Mayer D, Ohlendorf S,Schidt FW, Trautschold I. 1972. Studies on enzyme
dlimination IL Distribution, transport, and elimination of cell enzymes in the extracellular space. Enzyme
14:133-156.
136.Kaneko JJ, Harvey W,Bruss ML1997. Clinical Biochemistry ofDostic Aimab,5th edition.San Diego:
Academic.
137. Siekmann L, Bonora R, Burtis CA, Ceriotti F, Clerc-Renaud P, Farard G, Ferrero CA, Forest JC, Franck PF, Gella
FJ, Hoelzel W, Jorgensen PJ, Kanno T, Kessner A, Klauke R, Kristiansen N, Lessinger JM, Linsinger TP, Misaki H,
Mueller MM, Panteghini M, Pauwels J, Schiele F, Schimmel HG, Vialle A, Weidemann G, Schumann G. 2002.
IFCC primary referencc procedures for the measurement of catalytic activity concentrations of enzymes at 37 *C.
ClinChemLabMed40:631-634
Lsesman
Chapter13
LIVERFUNCTION
Physiologic Functions of the Liver.
Abnormal Results of Routine LaboratoryTests Because of Hepatic Insufficiency
or Disease.
677
Bilirubin Concentration
681
I.PhysiologicProcesses
681
Il.Analytical Concepts
683
Ill.Hyperbilirubinemia
684
IV. Bilirubinuria
689
V.lcterus Index
689
Bile Acid (BA) Concentration.
690
I.PhysiologicProcesses
690
l.Analytical Concepts
691
l.Increased BileAcid (BA) Concentration in Serum orPlasma.
691
IV. Bile Acid Challenge Test forDogs and Cats
693
V.Urine Bile Acid to Creatinine (BA:Crt) Ratios
696
Ammonium (NH,+) Concentration inPlasma.
697
Physiologic Processes
697
Il.Analytical Concepts
697
Ill.Hyperammonemia
699
IV.NH+Tolerance Test
702
V.Postprandial VenousNH+ToleranceTestforDogs
702
Dye-Excretion Tests.
703
CourseSmart
675
676
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 13.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
[x]
Concentration of x (x= analyte)
ALP
Alkaline phosphatase
ALT
Alanine transaminase
AST
Aspartate transaminase
8-Bilirubin
BA
Bile acid
BA:Crt
Bile acid to creatinine
Bc
Conjugated bilirubin
P8
Direct bilirubin
18
Indirect bilirubin
Bt
Total bilirubin
Bu
Unconjugated bilirubin
Bu/Alb
Unconjugated bilirubin bound to albumin (noncovalent)
Crt
Creatinine
GGT
-Glutamyltransferase
GMD
Glutamate dehydrogenase
HCO
Bicarbonate
Hgb
Hemoglobin
ID
Iditol dehydrogenase
LD
Lactate dehydrogenase
NH,
Ammonia
NH*
Ammonium
SI
Systeme International d'Unites
TNFo
Tumor necrosis factor C
UNSBA
Urine nonsulfated bile acid
URL
Upper reference limit
USBA
Urine sulfated bile acid
USGef
Refractometricurine specific gravity
WRI
Within reference interval
PHYSIOLOGICFUNCTIONSOFTHELIVER
The liver has many vital physiologic functions involving synthesis, excretion,and storage.When a
disease process damages cells within a liver, changes in hepatic function may alter the composi-
tion of bodyfuidsand the resulting abnormalities may be detected by laboratory assays.
1.
Functions involving body fuels
A.Protein metabolism:Hepatocytes synthesize most plasma proteins (over 1000 proteins),
including albumin and most globulins (except immunoglobulins). Most synthesis is de
novo (from new"), either from essential (dietary) amino acids or from nonessential
amino acidsmadeby hepatocytes.
B.
Carbohydrate metabolism: Hepatocytes remove most dietary glucose from portal blood
and store glucose as glycogen for emergency needs. Glucose from hepatic gluconeogen-
esis is the major source of glucose in the blood of fasting animals.
13/LIVERFUNCTION
677
C.Lipid metabolism:Hpatocytesmake fatty acids,triglycerides,cholesterol,andapolio
proteinsforlipoproteins,and esterify cholesterol for phospholipids.Hepatocytes
degrade chylomicrons from portal and systemic blood and remove lipoprotein remnants
from systemicblood
II.
Storagefunctions:Hpatocytes store lycogen,trglyceride,andavariery ofelments
including iron and copper.
III.
Detoxification: Hepatocytes modify or degrade endogenous compounds (e.g., uric acid,
steroidal hormones, polypeptide hormones, and hemoglobin) and exogenous compounds
(e-g., steroidal hormones) via a wide range of chemical reactions, including conjugations,
oxidations, reductions, and hydrolysis. Hepatocytes are a major site of NH4+ fixation (i.e.
IV.
Actions of mononuclear phagocytic system: The liver filters blood (systemic and portal;
capability second only to spleen) through the actions of Kupffer cells.The macrophages
remove damaged cells(erythrocytes,leukocytes,andplatelets),infammatorymediatrs,
organisms, and endotoxins from the blood (and thus also detoxifies).
Excretory function: Hepatocytes change compounds to HO-soluble forms for excretion via
thebiliaryystemrinarysystem,orntstinesHpatoytesderadecholestrol tobil
acids for excretion inbile.
A.Bile is formed by three processes. In a BA-dependent pathway, the active secretion of
BA produces an osmotic gradient thar increases HO excretion.In a BA-independent
pathway,active transport ofNa,glutathioneandHCOpromotes bileformationvia
Na-Kadenosine 5'triphosphatase.Third,secretin promotes bile formation by
stimulating HCO,and Cl secretion into bile.
B.Components of hepatic bileinclude HO,BA（at least 50%ofbile solids）,Bc,lecithin,
cholesterol, fatty acids, electrolytes (Na,K, Ca²+, Cl, and HCO）,and a variety of
HO-soluble wastes.In the biliary ducts and gallbladder,BA-richbile is formed by
resorption of HO and some electrolytes.
ABNORMALRESULTSOFROUTINELABORATORYTESTSBECAUSEOFHEPATIC
INSUFFICIENCYORDISEASE
1.
Routine laboratory test results may suggest the presence of liver disease or decreased hepatic
function (Tables 13.2 and 13.3). However, individual results are not specific for hepatic
insufficiency or disease, that is, other disorders may cause the abnormalities.
II.
It is important to recognize the difference between abnormalities that indicate hepatocellu
lar disease,biliary disease,or hepatobiliary disease,because some pathologic processes affect
mostly hepatocytes, whereas others affect mostly biliary cells.Also, it is important to
recognize data thart indicate hepatic insufficiency.
A.Hepatocelular disease may result from a wide variety of pathologic states (ie., degen-
erative,autoimmune,anomalous,metabolic,nutritionalneoplasti,inammatory,
infectious, inherited,toxic, or traumatic).
B.Biliary diseasemay alsoresult from a variety of insults.Itismost often the result of
infammatory,neoplastic,or toxic disorders
Table 13.2. Complete blood count (CBC)and chemistry test results (pathologic findings)
that suggestorindicatehepaticdisease or dysfunction
Pathologic finding
Hepatic lesion suggested
Pathogenesis of findinga
CBCresults
Acanthocytosis
Hemangiosarcoma
Possibly vascular trauma
Lipid metabolism defect
Altered lipid composition of
erythrocyte membrane
Anemia
Hepatitis (chronic)
Anemia of infammatory disease
↓Functional mass
Possiblyerythropoietin or
abnormal protein or amino
acid metabolism
Codocytosis
↓Functional mass
Altered lipid composition of
erythrocyte membrane
Microcytosis
↓Functional mass
Possiblytransferrin production
Portosystemic shunt
and thus↓delivery of iron to
erythrocyte precursors
Chemistry assay results
Decreased UN
↓Functional mass
↓Urea production
Hyperammonemia
↓Functional mass
Inadequate fixing of NH into
Portosystemic shunt
urea
Hyperbilirubinemia
Cholestasis
Inadequate biliary excretion of
↓Bc transport
bilirubin
Hypercholesterolemia
Cholestasis
↑Production of cholesterol
↓Clearance of lipoproteins
Hyperglycemia
Cirrhosis
Hyperglucagonemia or increased
Hepatopathy
gluconeogenesis of
hepatocutaneous syndrome
Hyperuricemia
↓Functional mass
↓Conversion of uric acid to
allantoin by hepatocytes
Hypoalbuminemia
↓Functional mass
↓Albumin production
Hypocholesterolemia
↓Functional mass
↓Cholesterol synthesis
Hypofibrinogenemia
↓Functional mass
Fibrinogen production
Hypoglycemia
Functional mass
↓Gluconeogenesis
Hypoproteinemia
↓Functional mass
↓Production of albumin and
globulins other than-globulins
IncreasedALT,AST,ID,
Damaged hepatocytes
Release of cytoplasmic enzymes
LD,or GMD
due to blebbing or necrosis
Increased ALP
Cholestasis
↑Production of L-ALP
Increased GGT
Biliary hyperplasia
↑Production of GGT
Cholestasis
Releaseof GGTfromdamaged
Possibly hepatocyte
cells
damage
Lipemia (gross)
↓Functional mass
↓Clearance of lipoproteins
Decreased functional mass reults from diffuse hepatocyte damagedestruction,atrophy,or hypoplasia.
L-ALP, liver isoform of alkaline phosphatase; and UN, urea nitrogen
678
13/LIVERFUNCTION
679
Table 13.3.Urinalysis,coagulation,fecal,and peritoneal fuid test results (pathologic
findings) that suggest or indicate hepatic disease or dysfunction
Pathologic finding
Hepatic lesion suggested
Pathogenesis of findinga
Urinalysis results
Ammonium (bi)urate
↓Functional mass
Inadequare fixing of NH into
crystalluriab
Urea cycle defect
urea and↓ conversion of uric
acid to allantoin
Bilirubinuriab
Cholestasis
Inadequate biliary excretion of
↓Bctransport
bilirubin
Hyposthenuria or
↓Functional mass
↓Renal medullary tonicity due
isosthenuriab
to decreasedurea
↑NHexcretion may inhibit
concentrating mechanism
Urate crystalluriab
↓Functional mass
↓Conversion of uric acid to
allantoin
Coagulation assay results
Prolonged partial
Cholestasis
↓VitaminK-dependent
thromboplastin time
coagulation factors due to
or prothrombin time
impaired intestinal absorption
of vitamin K
↓Functional mass
↓Clearance of inhibitors of
coagulation factors such as
fibrin or fibrinogen
degradation products (fibrin
fragments + fibrinogen
fragments)
↓Production of most
coagulation factors
Fecal exam results
Steatorrhea
Cholestasis
Defective lipid digestion because
bile acids are not delivered to
intestine
Peritoneal fluid analysis
Transudate
↓Functional mass
↑Naand HO retention,
Cirrhosis
plasma oncotic pressure,
portal hypertension,↓ lymph
drainage
* See more complete explanations in the chapters for each particular analyte.
Findingmayoccur in clinicallyhealthy animals; forexamle, ammoniumbiurate) crystallurian
Dalmatians, urate crystalluria in English bulldogs, bilirubinuria in dogs, and hyposthenuria or isosthenuria
as a physiologic response to excess water intake.
C.Hepatic insufficiency is a pathophysiologic state in which the number of functioning
hepatocytes is markedly reduced. Hepatic insufficiency and hepatic failure are usually
considered synonyms. Disorders that cause hepatic insufficiency fall into two groups:
1.Disorders that destroy hepatocytes (hepatocellular disease) may progress slowly,recur
episodically, or involve rapid,extensive necrosis.
089
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.Portosystemic shunts (congenital or acquired) cause either hypoplasia or atrophy of
the liver because of decreased nutrients reaching hepatocytes from portal blood.
D.All animals with hepatic insufficiency have too few functioning hepatocytes, but many
animals with hepatocellular disease do not have hepatic insufficiency. Most animals
with primary biliary disease will develop secondary hepatocellular disease. Many
animals with primary hepatocellular disease develop secondary biliary disorders. Either
hepatocellular or biliary diseases may cause hepatic insuficiency.
E.Laboratory test results that indicate hepatic insufficiency do not tell us which hepatocel-
lular or hepatobiliary disease the animal has or whether the disease process is reversible
or irreversible
I.
In clinical jargon, some people refer to hepatic enzyme assays (ALT, AST, ALP, GGT, and
ID) as liver function tests.However, these enzymes are not solely hepatic in origin,
increased activities of these enzymes do not directly indicate loss of any liver function, and
liver function can be greatly reduced without increased serum enzyme activities. To
emphasize the last concept,would the serum activity of a hepatic enzyme increase if one
removed an animal’s liver?
IV.
Decreased functional hepatic mass
A.Hepatic insufficiency occurs when hepatic functional mass has decreased enough to cause
a pathophysiologic state.The decreased functional mass typically results from too few
hepatocytes (and thus a small liver). Evidence of hepatic dysfunction is expected with
loss of 70-80 % of liver mass.However,hepatic insufficiency also may result from
dysfunction of existing hepatocytes and occur with hepatomegaly or a normal-sized liver.
B.Many diseases and conditions may decrease an animal's functional hepatic mass.
Examples are listed in Table 13.4.
V.
Cholestasis
A.Cholestasis is defined in different ways. In a dictionary definition, cholestasis is the
"stoppage or suppression of bile flow.2
Table 13.4.Examples of diseases and conditions that cause decreased functional hepatic
mass (using the DAMNIT acronym)
Degenerative: hypoxia caused by anemia or congestion
*Anomalous:portosystemic shunt
Metabolic: lipidosis, diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism
Neoplastic: lymphoma, metastatic neoplasia
Inflammatory
Infectious: leptospirosis,histoplasmosis,feline infectious peritonitis
*Noninfectious:chronic active hepatitis
Inherited: copper or lysosomal storage diseases
*oxi:stroidatpathy,omeanstheticaentstraylinecarprofenc
toxicosis,hemochromatosis,pyrrolizidine alkaloid-containing plants
Traumatic:hit by car
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specific disorders or conditions are not complete but are provided to give examples.
13/LIVERFUNCTION
681
1.The stoppage component of the definition is consistent with the observations of
distended bile ducts (grossly）and bile plugslakes,or pigments (microscopic）that
are caused by extrahepatic or intrahepatic lesions that obstruct bile fow and thus
reduce the volume of bile leaving the biliary system.
2.The suppression component of the definition is consistent with pathophysiologic
states involving impaired BA secretion into bile. As the osmotic effects of secreted
BA largely control bile volume, decreased BA secretion may reduce the volume of
bile produced by the biliary system and thus reduce bile fow (less bile volume per
(Kep
3.Cholestasis is commonly used in the context of the icterus that occurs because of
obstructive biliary lesions. However, Bc is a very small component of bile and
contributes little to formation ofbile orbilevolume.When there is obstructive
biliary disease,there probably is decreased bile fow,decreased Bc excretion,and
decreased BA excretion.
4. From one perspective, understanding obstructive cholestasis is necessary to explain
structural consequences of biliary disease.However, from another perspective,
understandingfunctional cholestasis isnecessary to explain the pathophysiologic
consequences of defective bile acid secretion.
B.The different uses of the term cholestasis are mentioned to help clarify statements that
may appear to be conflicting.For example,a pathophysiologic state associatedwith
endotoxemia is called either functionalcholestasis or sepsis-associatedcholestasis.In this
context,thereisdectiveBAsecretion fromhepatocytestobil,but hereisotan
obstructive lesion that impairs bile flow (see additional information on functional
cholestasis in Bilirubin Concentration, sect.III.E.2).
C.Bile acid and bilirubin pathways have similarities but also marked differences. These
pathways will be covered in more detail in separate sections.
1.Bu is a product of heme degradation,whereas BA is a product of cholesterol
degradation.Heme and cholesterol do not share physiologic pathways.
2. Bilirubin (Bc and Bu) and BA enter hepatocytes through sinusoidal membranes but
by different membrane transport systems.
3.Bc and BA are secreted from hepatocytes through canalicular membranes but by
different membrane transport systems.
4. Pathologic states that damage hepatocyte mermbranes can impair both bilirubin and
BA excretion. These defects may be further linked because accumulation of BA in
hepatocytes may cause hepatocyte damage that interferes with bilirubin metabolism.
However,pathologic states that selectively interfere with transport systems may
impair secretion of one analyte but not the other.
BILIRUBIN CONCENTRATION
Physiologic processes (Fig.13.1)
A.In plasma, there are three fractions of total bilirubin (Bu/Alb, Bc, and B8). Bu/Alb is
dominant in the absence of disease. Bu is constantly produced from the degradation of
heme from senescent erythrocytes and heme-containing proteins. In health, Bu and Bc
are rapidly removed from plasma by either liver (Bu and Bc) or kidneys (Bc).The
spontaneous and covalent binding of bilirubin glucuronide isomers (Bc) to albumin
forms B8(Bc-Alb),which,once formed,has the circulating half-life of albumin
(=8-20 d）.Bc and B8 concentrations are negligible in health
682
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Peripheral
BuiAIb
Bu/AIb
blood
BC
UD
BC
Othertlssues
Hepatocyte
epatocy
Kidney
UDP-G
Ub
BWAb
业
北
Hepatic arteries
UD
Bile
Portalveins
duc
Ub
Urine
Spleen
Intestine
Feces
Fig.13.1.Physiologic processes involving bilirubin.
•In health, erythrocyte destruction within macrophages of the spleen, liver, or bone marrow is followed by
the degradation of heme and its conversion to Bu. Small and usually clinically insignificant amounts of Bu
heme-containing molecules (catalase, peroxidase, and cytochromes). As Bu leaves a macrophage, it forms a
noncovalent association with albumin (Alb) and remains associated with Alb until uptake by hepatocytes.
Bu is relatively water insoluble prior to binding to Alb.
·When Bu enters the liver and its protein-permeable sinusoids, it enters hepatocytes without albumin and
binds to Y-protein (ligandin, glutathione S-transferase B) or Z-protein (fatty acid-binding protein）.Bu
probably enters hepatocytes by a passive but facilitrated process; binding proteins enhance the process by
reducing the efflux of Bu back to the sinusoidal plasma.
·Within hepatocytes, Bu is conjugated with glucuronide (also glucose in horses) to form bilirubin
monoglucoronide or bilirubin diglucuronide, collectively called Bc.
·Bc is transported from hepatocytes into canaliculi (the rate-limiting step in bilirubin excretion) by an
energy-dependent transport system for organic anions other than BAs.
·Bc in bile enters the intestine and is degraded to urobilinogen (colorless).Urobilinogen can be passively
absorbed in the intestine and then enter hepatocytes for excretion in bile, or bypass the liver and be
excreted in urine. Urobilinogen can also be degraded to stercobilinogen (dark brown) and excreted in
feces.
·If Bc escapes hepatocytes and enters the blood, it can pass through the glomerular filtration barrier and be
excreted in the urine. Because Alb does not pass through the glomerular filtration barrier of most
mammals,Bu/Alb does not enter the urine in those animals
Bu/Alb, Bu associated with albumin; MΦ, macrophage; Sb, stercobilinogen; Ub, urobilinogen; and
UDP-G, uridine diphosphoglucuronide.
B.Small amounts of bilirubin are commonly found in the urine of healthy dogs.It has
not been established whether the bilirubin is Bc or Bu/Alb. It is frequently assumed to
be Bcbecause Bc is HO soluble and passes freely through the glomerular filtration
barrier. However, small amounts of albumin are also commonly present in the urine of
healthy dogs, so some bilirubin may be in the form of Bu/Alb.
13/LIVERFUNCTION
683
C.Healthy horses have greater serum [Bt] than other domestic animals: about
0.7-2.0 mg/dL in horses versus < 0.5 mg/dL in other animals.
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Unit conversion:mg/dLx 17.10=μmol/L (SIunit,nearest 2 μmol/L)
B.Conventional spectrophotometric methods (wet chemical assays)
1. Several bilirubin assays are used to measure all bilirubin fractions (Bt) or only the
non-Bu fractions (Bd). The classic bilirubin assay was the van den Bergh method.
but it has been replaced by other assays (e.g.,Malloy-Evelyn and Jendrassik-Grof
methods) for several decades.
a.Bu reacts slower than Bc in most bilirubin reactions, so substances are
added to accelerate its participation in Bt assays. When the accelerant factors
are not present,only the non-Bu fractions are measured (called direct bilirubin
reaction).
b.From the measured [Bt] and [Bd],[Bi] is calculated by subtraction:
[Bt]-[Bd]=[Bi].
2.If these assays areused,laboratoriesmay report the following concentrations that
should represent the bilirubin fractions listed below.[B8] is not specificallymeasured
and cannot be calculated by these methods.
a.[Bt]（measured)=[Bc]+[B8]+[Bu]
b.[Bd] （measured）=[Bc]+[B8]
c.[Bi] （calculated）=[Bt]-[Bd]=[Bu]
C.Dry-chemical methods using thin-layerreagent slides (Kodak or Vitros instruments)
1.The assays use modified bilirubin diazo reactions in thin-layer reagent films and are
designed to measure the following
a.[Bt]=[Bc]+[B8]+[Bu]
b.[Bu]
c.[Bc]
2.From those measured concentrations, the following are calculated:
a.[Bo]=[Bt]-[Bc]-[Bu]
b.[Bd]=[Bc]+[B8]
D.Procedural notes
1.Hgb interferes with azo reactions and produces falsely low [Bt] with the Malloy-
Evelyn and Jendrassik-Grof methods.However,in the thin-layer reagent slides,Hgb
falsely increases the[Bt] and [Bc] and falsely decreases [Bu].
2.Ultraviolet light degrades bilirubin.In direct sunlight,[Bt] may decrease up to 50 %
inlh.
3.Immunoglobulinsmay precipitate after theaddition of acidicbilirubinreagents,
and this precipitant interferes with light transmission and causes a falsely increased
[Bt].The interference occurs primarily when there is an increased -globulin
concentration (e.g,paraproteinemia）.A clearly increased [Bt](e.g,>5mg/dL) can
be easily recognized as a false value when the serum is visually not icteric. In one
case, the [Bt] was “measured” to be > 20 mg/dL, but the sample was not icteric
(observation by S.L.S.). Minor interferences,however,may not be detected via this
comparison.
4.Using thin-layer slide assays, the sum of [Bc] and [Bu] may exceed the measured
[Bt](especially in horses). It has not been established whether the [Bt] is falsely
decreased orwhether the sum of[Bc]and[Bu]is falselyincreased.
684
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 13.5.Diseases and conditions that cause hyperbilirubinemia
Increased Bu production
*Hemolytic disorders,especially extravascular hemolysis (see Table 3.10)
Decreased Bu uptake by hepatocytes
*Fasting or anorexia (especially in horses)
Decreased functional mass (diffuse hepatocellular disease; see the text for examples）
Decreased Bu conjugation
Decreased functional mass (diffuse hepatocellular disease; see the text for examples)
Decreased Bc excretion in bile
Obstructive cholestasis
*Hepatic cholestasis:lipidosis,diabetes mellitus, steroid hepatopathy,lymphoma
histoplamosiscytauxzoonosis,cirrhosis,cholangitischolangiohepatitisperiportal
hepatitis,pyrrolizidine alkaloid toxicosis, sporodesmin toxicosis, and alsike clover
(Trifolium bybridum)toxicosis
*Posthepaticcholestasischolangitis,bileduct carcinoma,liverukes,holelithiasis,
cholecystitis,pancreatitis,and pancreatic carcinoma
Functional cholestasis (sepsis-associated cholestasis)
Persistence ofBo inplasma
*A relatively common disease or condition
Notes: Lists of specific disorders or conditions are not complete but are provided to give examples.
Depending on the assay method, hemolysis may cause either positive or negative interference with
bilirubin assays.
III.
Hyperbilirubinemia (Table 13.5)
A.Hyperbilirubinemia occurs when the rate of Bu production exceeds the rate of Bu
uptakeby hepatocytes,or therate of Bcformation in hepatocytes exceeds therate of Bc
excretion in bile. Hyperbilirubinemia may persist after removal of the cause (e.g,
obstruction)because of the longhalf-life ofB8.
B.Increased Bu production
1.Hemolytic (prehepatic) icterus (Fig.3.10)
a.Disorders
(1)Hemolytic disorders that may cause icterus are listed in Table 3.10. Animals
with acute intravascular hemolytic disorders are less likely to be icteric
initially but will typically develop icterus within 2-3 d.
(2）If therate of extravascular hemolysis is low,the hepatobiliary system may be
able to eliminate Bu so it does not accumulate in plasma.
b.Pathogenesis
(1)An animal that has a hemolytic anemia may develop icterus if the rate of Bu
formation exceeds the hepatobiliary system's capacity for Bu uptake or Bc
excretion (Fig. 3.10).
(2) Pathogeneses of hemolytic diseases are described in Chapter 3.
c.Results of serum bilirubin profile (Table 13.6)
(1)[Bt] may be mildly to markedly increased.
Secondary (e.g, hypoxic hepatocellular degeneration) or concurrent hepato
biliary disease may complicate the pattern.
13/LIVERFUNCTION
685
Table 13.6.Bilirubin profles in common pathophysiologic states that cause icterus
[Bt]a
[Bd]
[Bi]
[Bc]
[Bu]
[B8]
Pathophysiologic state
个
WRI-↑k
↑个
WRI-↑
↑个
WRI-T
Hemolytic disorders
WRI-↑
↑个
WRI-T
WRI-T
Fasting hyperbilirubinemia (horse)
个
↑-↑↑
↑-↑↑
↑-↑↑
↑-↑↑
Hepatocellular dysfunction and
concurrent cholestasis
WRI-↑↑↑
WRI-↑
WRI-1↑
Obstructive cholestasisd
个
WRI-T
WRI-T
WRI-TT
Functional cholestasis
*The[Bt] may be mildly to markedly increased.
The number of arrows for the bilirubin fractions in the table indicates the relative concentrations to
illustrate the fractions that typically contribute most to the hyperbilirubinemia.
Excretion of Bc from hepatocytes is considered the rate-limiting step. Thus, when there is increased Bu
and Bc formation in hemolytic disorders,Bc may accumulate in hepatocytes and then be regurgitated to
blood.
In horses, the [Bu] may be greater than the [Bc].
Note:Depending on the assay method,hemolysis may cause either positive or negative interference with
bilirubin assays.
(3）It hasbeen written that bilirubin fractions do not help differentiate hemo-
lytic and hepatobiliary icterus because[Bc] is always greater than[Bu].This
had concurrent hemolytic anemia and liver disease,but it is inconsistent
with the authors'experiences.
(4)[Bu] is often greater than [Be] in animals with hemolytic anemias,but it
will not always be greater.When [Bu] > [Bc],it supports the concept that
the icterus is directly related to extravascular hemolysis.When clinical data
indicate a hemolytic anemia and[Bu]<[Bc],concurrent hepatobiliary
disease should be considered.
d.Other expected laboratory findings with hemolytic icterus
(1)Anemia, regenerative if of suffcient duration,moderate to marked severity
(2)Hemoglobinuria and hemoglobinemia if there is sufficient intravascular
hemolysis
（3）Bilirubinuriaif suffcient Bc escapes from hepatocytes or,with intravascular
hemolysis,if there is sufficient renal rubular heme degradation and bilirubin
excretion into urine
(4）If plasma hepatic enzyme activities are increased,hepatocyte damage or
cholestasis could be due to anemic hypoxia.
2.Increased Bu production not associated with hemolysis
a.Besides Bu from erythrocyte destruction,heme degradation also occurs with
destruction of erythrocyte precursors (ineffective erythropoiesis) and degradation
ofother heme proteins (myoglobin, cytochromes, and peroxidases).
b.By themselves,these processes are not considered to cause increased [Bt].
However,they could contribute to an increased Bu] if there are other reasons for
increased [Bt].
C.Decreased Bu uptake by hepatocytes
1. Fasting hyperbilirubinemia
a.Disorders
989
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(1)Horses that are off feed (either feed withheld or anorexia)typically develop
hyperbilirubinemia (increased [Bu]). The hyperbilirubinemia can be
detected as early as 12-15 h after feed is withheld and usually reaches a
steady concentration in 2-3 d.
(increased[Bu]not associated with hemolytic or hepatic disease).Fasting
healthy cartle also develop mild hyperbilirubinemia ([Bt]< 1.4 mg/dL）.
(3)Lack of colostrum intake was considered a contributing factor to icterus in
veal calves.12
b.Pathogenesis: The fasting state leads to increased mobilization of fat (lipolysis in
adipocytes)and thus increased[farry acids] in the blood.The fatry acidsinterfere
with Bu uptake by hepatocytes, and thus plasma [Bu] increases.
(1)The interference may be competitive because fatty acids and Bu bind to the
same cytoplasmic receptor proteins; that is,Z-protein (fatty acid-binding
protein) and Y-protein (ligandin, also known as glutathione S-transferase B）.13
(2）
Experimental data clearly indicate that fasting reduces the hepatic clearance
rate of bilirubin and that the reduction is greater than the reduction in the
hepatic clearance of bile acids.
c.Comments on species differences
(1)Horses might be more prone to this form of icterus because they use
glucose available in hepatocytes for Bu conjugation.Administration of
glucose to horses with fasting hyperbilirubinemia lowered plasma concentra-
tions of bilirubin and fatry acids.5 It was not established whether the lower
[Bt]was due to availability of glucose or reduced [fatty acids]
(2）Similar interferences in bilirubin excretion likely occur in other animals,but
changes in [Bt] are minimal. Anorectic cats occasionally have slight hyper-
bilirubinemias(increased[Bu]),and thus it is easy to speculate that fatty
acids are contributing to defective Bu clearance.
(3) Increased [Bu] may also occur in horses that are not anorectic or anemic and
are not diagnosed with hepatic disease. The pathogenesis of hyperbilirubine-
mia in these instances is not understood
d.Results of serum bilirubin profile (Table 13.6)
(1)In horses, the [Bt] is typically < 8 mg/dL and nearly all is [Bu] or [Bi].
(2)Minor increases in [Bc] or[Bd] may occur because Bu and Bc compere for
uptake by hepatocytes.
e.Other expected laboratory findings
(1)In horses, fasting or anorexia does not produce abnormalities in other
routine laboratory tests. Thus, plasma or serum hepatic enzyme activities are
expected to be WRI if hepatobiliary disease is not present. Hematocrit is
expected to be WRIunless anemia is produced by the disorder that is
causing the anorexia.
(2)In cattle and horses with hepatic lipidosis, the accumulation of lipid leads to
hepatocyte swelling and damage. Thus, serum activities of hepatic enzymes
may be increased.
2.Decreased functional hepatic mass
a.A marked reduction in functional hepatocytes can result in decreased Bu uptake
by hepatocytes, decreased Bu conjugation,and decreased Bc excretion.However,
13/LIVERFUNCTION
687
ifa disease is causing only decreased functional mass andnot obstructive
cholestasis,then clinical icterus is not expected.
b. Disorders that may cause decreased functional mass are listed in Table 13.4.
3.Hereditary deficiencies in the hepatic uptake of Bu may cause hyperbilirubinemia
and have been recognized in Southdown sheepand Corriedale sheep.17
D.Decreased Bu conjugation
1.As mentioned in the preceding section 2.a, a marked reduction in functional mass
would reduce Bu conjugation. When cytoplasmic receptor proteins are saturated, the
uptake of Bu by hepatocytes decreases.
2.Hereditary deficiencies of enzymes that catalyze conjugation reactions occur in
people and laboratory animals but have not been confirmed in our common
domestic mammals. A persistent hyperbilirubinemia in an otherwise healthy
Thoroughbred was probably causedby a defective conjugation pathway,but the
exact defect was not established.8The [Bt] ranged from 9.4 to 12.7mg/dL during a
2 yr evaluation, and about 90 % of the bilirubin was Bu.
E.Decreased Bc excretion
1.Obstructive cholestasis is caused by a pathologic state that obstructs bile fow through
bile canaliculi or bile ducts (hepatic or posthepatic).Lesions that impair bile fow
include hepatocellular swelling that compresses canaliculiperiportal lesions that
compress bile ducts, infections and other processes that damage bile ducts, and
blockage of bile ducts by stones,parasites,or neoplams.
a.Pathogenesis (Fig.13.2)
(1)Increased [Bc] in systemic and thus sinusoidal blood sarurates bilirubin
receptors on hepatocytes, and thus Bu uptake is impaired.
(2)With time, increased [Bc] leads to increased [Bu], but the [Bc] is expected
to remain greater than the [Bu].
b.Results of a serum bilirubin profle (Table 13.6)
(1)The [Bt] may be mildly to extremely increased.
(2)Typically, [Bc] > [Bu] ([Bd] > [Bil) except in horses and cattle.
(a) Concurrent hepatocellular disease may complicate parterns by decreasing
functional mass and therefore decreasing uptake and conjugation of Bu.
(b)In horses with cholestasis, the [Bd] is typically <30 % of [Bt]. The
increased [Bd] in horses strongly suggests cholestasis.
(c)In cartle with cholestasis, the [Bd] may be greater than or less than the
[Bi].
c.Other expected laboratory findings
(1）Anemia may ormay not be present.If present,it typically is
nonregenerative.
(2)Increased serum activities of enzymes associated with cholestasis (ALP and
GGT)
(a)ALP and GGT activities may be increased in dogs before icterus
develops.
(b)ALP and GGT activities typically are not increased in cats until there is
marked obstructive icterus.
(c)Biliary obstruction is uncommon in horses and cattle. When present,
ALPand GGT activitiesmay be substantially increased
(3)Serum activities of hepatocellular enzymes (ALT,AST, LD,ID, and GMD)
may be increased because of hepatocyte damage.
688
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Peripheral
BwAIb
Bc
BwAIL
B8
blood
Bc
UD
Alb
UD
Other tlssues
Hepatocyte
Kidney
Bc
UD
Bc
BC
BWAID
Bc
Hepatic arteries
UD
ortalveins
Urine
Spleen
Intestine
Feces
Fig.13.2. Obstructive cholestatic icterus:Lesions of bile canaliculi or bile ducts (hepatic or posthepatic
inhibit bile flow, and thus less or no Bc is excreted to the intestine. Bc enters systemic blood because of
(1) increased permeability of canalicular tight junctions and leakage to the space of Disse and the central
vein, (2) hepatocyte necrosis allowing Bc entry to hepatic sinusoids, or (3) concurrent increased BA content
that inhibits excretion of Bc to canaliculi and thus Bc is “regurgitated” to hepatic sinusoids. A persistently
increased plasma [Bc]results in increased formation of B8 and increased urinary excretion of Bc (bilirubi
nuria).Bu/Alb,Bu associated withalbumin;B,Bc covalently bound to albumin;M,macrophage;Sb,
stercobilinogen; Ub, urobilinogen; and UDP-G, uridine diphosphoglucuronide.
(4)Hypercholesterolemia occurs in some cholestatic conditions and can be
marked, but is not a consistent finding (see Chapter 16).
2.Functional cholestasis(sepsis-associated cholestasis)is impaired excretion of Bc from
hepatocytes to canaliculi in the absence of biliary obstruction.A functional cholesta
sis was reported in dogs with Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus intermediusinfec-
tions causing pneumonia,peritonitisurinary ract infection,endocarditis,and soft
tissue infection.9This type of icterus ismore commonly recognized in people and
may be more common in domestic mammals than hasbeen recognized.
a.Pathogenesis
(1)Increased [tumor necrosis factor alpha](directly or with endotoxins) results
in decreased BA transport proteins in hepatocyte canalicular membranes.221
Interleukin 6 also interferes with bile salt transport.22
(2)
It is not clear whether the impaired Bc excretion is a direct defect or whether
it occurs secondary to canalicularmembrane damage caused byretainedBA.
b.Results of a serum bilirubin profle (Table 13.6)
c.Other expected laboratory findings
(1)Inflammatory changes in blood leukocytes (e.g,neutrophilia,neutropenia,
left shift,oxic change,or lymphopeni
(2)Other changes would depend on the duration and the location of the
bacterial infection.
13/LIVERFUNCTION
689
3.Hereditary deficiencies in the hepatocellular excretion of Bc may cause a hyperbiliru
binemia and have been recognized in Corriedale sheep.The sheep also have a defect
F.Persistence of B8 in plasma
1.Since B8has the plasma half-life of albumin (8-20 d),an increased [Bt] may persist
formore than 1-2 wk after correction of the pathologic defect in bilirubin excretion
(e.g, surgical removal of a biliary tract obstruction).
2.The persistent increase in [B8] and thus persistent increase in [Bt] is not commonly
recognized.In most animals with cholestatic icterus, the halflife ofB8may actually
be shorter than the time required for the[Bc] to decrease if there is slow recovery
from an obstructive cholestatic disease.Also, there is limited use of the dry-chemical
method that enables calculation of the[B8].
IV.Bilirubinuria
A.Excessive bilirubin formation (in hemolytic states) or impaired hepatobiliary excretion
of Bcmay increase plasma [Bc].Bc easily passes through the glomerular fltration
barrier and is then excreted in the urine.
B.Because of the low renal threshold for Bc, bilirubinuria may be detected before
hyperbilirubinemia is detected.If hyperbilirubinemia (from Bc)is present,then
bilirubinuria is expected.
C.As explained in Chapter 8, a positive bilirubin reaction in a urinalysis should be
interpreted with knowledge of USG.s especially in dogs.Moderately concentrated
urine (USGf =1.025-1.040) of healthy dogs frequently gives a 1+bilirubin reaction;
2+reactions occasionally occur with more concentrated urine (USGr>1.040).
V.
Icterus index
A.Definition:a value that represents an estimation of the yellow discoloration of plasma
caused by hyperbilirubinemia
B.Methods
1.Potassium dichromatemethod3
a.Icterus index is determined by comparing the color of a patient's plasma to a set
of standard solutions containing potassum dichromate.The degree of icterus is
recorded in units from 0 to 100.The plasma of healthy herbivores is expected to
be more yelow because carotenoid pigments from plants may impart a yellow
discoloration.
b.Hemolyzed or lipemic plasma can falsely elevate the icterus index.
2.Icterus index determination by chemistry analyzers
a.The Hitachi chemistry analyzers estimate the bilirubin concentration by spectro-
photometric assessment of absorbance changes caused by the presence of biliru-
bin.The method involves consideration of absorbance changes caused by
hemoglobin or lipids,if present. This icterus index is reported as a numerical
value (e.g, 10) that corresponds to absorbance changes expected by a [Bt] of the
same numeric value (e.g,10 mg/dL).
b. Olympus chemistry analyzers have a similar spectrophotometric system in which
absorbancereadings atdifferent wavelengthsareused toassess degrees of icterus,
lipemia, and hemolysis.
c.Plant carotenoids (e.g., β-carotene and lycopene) may interfere with these
methods.
690
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
C.Clinical laboratories may subjectively grade the severity of icterus (mild,moderate,or
marked) by assessing the degree of yellow to orange discoloration of plasma or serum.
Serum [Bt] typically exceeds 1.5 mg/dL before visible icterus (in sera or mucous
membranes) is detected. This depends somewhat on the species and the observer's
experience.
BILEACID(BA)CONCENTRATION
Physiologicprocesses (Fig.13.3)
A.In health,the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids is highly efficient, and nearly all
bile salts excrered in bile are returned to theliver via intestinal absorption and portal
blood fow.
Peripheral
BA
BA
blood
Dthertissues
Hepatocyte
Cansllculus
Hepatocyt
Kidney
cholestero
1'BA
TBAC
BA
2BA
2B
2BA
Hepatic arteries
BA
Portalveins
uct
Urine
Spleen
BA
Intestin
-eces
graded in hepatocytes to a 1°BA,either cholic
or chenodeoxycholic acid. A 1°BA becomes conjugated (usually with taurine or glycine, but sometimes
and transported via the bile ducts to the intestine. In the intestine, a 1°BAc has three possible fates:
(1) absorption by the intestinal mucosa and entrance into the portal blood, (2) deconjugation by enteric
bacteria to a 1°BA and then absorption by the intestinal mucosa and entrance into the portal blood, or
(3) degradation to a 2°BA (either deoxycholic acid or lithocholic acid),which may have two fatesexcretion
in the feces or absorption by the intestinal
1 and entrance into the portal blood. If conjugated with
sulfate, BAs are poorly absorbed by the intestinal mucosa.When returned to the liver via the portal blood,
conjugated BAs, deconjugated BAs, and 2°BAs are efficiently removed from the blood by the hepatocytes.
complete the enterohepatic circulation.In health,nearly all BA molecules are within the enterohepatic
circulation; very few are in the systemic blood. BA molecules that escape the enterohepatic circulation can
be cleared from the plasma via glomerular filtration and excreted in the urine. 1°BA, primary bile acid;
1 °BAc, conjugated primary bile acid; and 2°BA, secondary bile acid.
13/LIVERFUNCTION
691
B.Bile salts are themajor solids in bile that enter the intestine after gallbladder contrac
tion.After intestinal absorption of BAs, the resulting higher [BA] in portal blood may
exceed the liver's ability to extract BAs, and thus there is a postprandial increase in [BA]
in systemic blood.Typically,gallbladder contraction results from actions of cholecysto-
kinin that isreleased afteringestion of ameal.However,gallbladder contractionmay
occur at other times.
C.BA secretion from hepatocytes to canaliculi occurs through two processes; one is Na*
dependent and one isnot.
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms and units
1.In common use,the term bile acids refers to a group of cholesterol-derived
anionic acids and their dissociated anions.The bile acids include cholic acid,
chenodeoxycholic acid,deoxycholic acid,and lithocholic acid,all ofwhich are
3o-hydroxylated bile acids.At a pH of 7.4, the dissociated anionic forms of the
molecules dominate (e.g.cholate and lithocholate）.Collectively,the anionic forms
are called bile salts.
2.Unit conversion?
a.Total bile acid: mg/L x 2.547 =μmol/L (SI unit,nearest 0.2μmol/L)
b.Cholic acid:mg/L x 2.448 =μmol/L (SI unit, nearest 0.2 μmol/L)
c.Chenodeoxycholic acid:mg/L× 2.547 = μmol/L (SI unit,nearest 0.2 μmol/L)
d.Deoxycholic acid:mg/L× 2.547=μmol/L (SI unit,nearest 0.2 μmol/L)
e.Lithocholic acid:mg/Lx 2.656=μmol/L (SI unit,nearest 0.2 μmol/L)
fOccasionally, other units are used (ie.,mg/mL and mmol/L).See Table 1.6 for
the conversion factors.
B.Assays
1.The [BA] is measured in clinical laboratories by a spectrophotometric assay that uses
3o-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in reactions with primary and secondary bile acids
or their anions (either conjugated or deconjugated）.Free Hgb in a hemolyzed
sample will cause a negative interference in the assay. Lipids in a lipemic sample
create unacceptable errors according to the assay's manufacrurer.
2.The concentration of conjugated bile acids can be measured by either radioimmuno
assays or enzyme immunoassays. These assays may be more economical in reference
laboratories.
3.Clinically, abnormalities in total bile acid concentration and conjugated bile acid
concentration tend to parallel each other, and thus either type of assay can be used.
4.A IDEXX SNAP bile acid test is available to screen animals for increased [BA]
III.Increased bile acid (BA) concentration in serum or plasma (Table 13.7)
A.An increased [BA] can be called bypercholemia,but the term is not commonly used. It
should not be confused with hyperchloremia or hypercholesterolemia.
B.There are two major pathologic processes that increase serum [BA] in fasting dogs and
cats: (1) decreased BA clearance from portal blood and (2) decreased biliary excretion of
BA (Fig. 13.4). Accordingly, increased serum [BA] supports the conclusion that an
animal has decreased hepatobiliary function. Increased serum[BA] has high diagnostic
sensitivity for hepatobiliary dysfunction. However, many primary and secondary liver
diseases can cause the dysfunction, and the dysfunctional state may or may not be
reversible.
Table 13.7.Diseases and conditions that cause an increased fasting[BA]
Decreased BA clearance from portal blood
*Decreased functional hepatic mass: diffuse hepatocellular disease
*Decreased portal blood flow to liver: congenital and acquired portosystemic shunts
Decreased BA excretion in bile
Obstructive cholestasis
*Hepaticcholestasis:lipidosis,diabetesmellitus, steroid hepatopathy,lymphoma,
histoplasmosis,cytauxzoonosis,cirrhosis,cholangitis,cholangiohepatitisperiportal
hepatitis,pyrrolizidinealkaloid toxicosisporodesmin toxicosisalsikeclov
(Trifolium bybridum)toxicosis
*Posthepatic cholestasis: cholangitisbile duct carcinoma,liver fukes,cholelithiasis,
cholecystitisanreatitpnreaticcarinm
Functional cholestasis (sepsis-associated cholestasis)
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specific disorders or conditions are not complete but are provided to give examples.
Serum bile acid concentrations are increased postprandially.
Peripheral
BA
BA
BA
blood
BA
BA
BA
BA
BA
Hepatocyte
Canallcull
Kidney
cholesterol
BA
"RA
BA
BA
BA
oglycin
BA
品
Bile
Portal veins
duct
Portosystemic shunt
BA
Urine
B
2BA
BAC
Intestine
Feces
Fig.13.4.Pathologic processes that increase serum [BA] (hypercholemia).Two major pathologic processs
cause hypercholemia:
·Decreased clearance from the portal blood: The defect may occur because of (1) decreased uptake of BA
from the sinusoidal blood because of a decreased functional hepatic mass or because (2) there is a
portosystemic shunt.
Decreased biliary BA excretion:When there is obstructive cholestasis (3) or functional cholestasis (4),the
BAs are regurgitated to the sinusoidal blood instead of passing through the biliary ducts to the intestine.
692
13/LIVERFUNCTION
693
1.Decreased BA clearance from portal blood
a.Many pathologic states (e.g,infammatory,metabolic,and degenerative)
enough to impair BA clearance.25-29
b. Congenital and acquired portosystemic shunts enable bile salts absorbed in the
intestine to bypass the liver, escape the enterohepatic circulation, and enter the
systemic blood.30
C.Mild increases in [BA] may occur when feed is withheld from horses. The
increase is probably caused by a decreased hepatic clearance rate of bile acids.
2.Decreased biliary BA excretion
a.A variety of hepatic and posthepatic disorders can impair bile fow and thus
impair excretion of bile acids. Concurrent impairment of Bc excretion is
expected, but it may not be enough to cause hyperbilirubinemia. Similarly,when
hepatic or posthepatic hyperbilirubinemia is present, increased serum [BA] is
expected.
b.During obstructive cholestasisthere is a down-regulation of canalicular BA
transport proteins,and hepatocytesmay pump BA into sinusoidal blood instead
of into canaliculi.This process may explain the “regurgitation” concept of BA
leaving hepatocytes.32
C.BAs are toxic to cells. Thus, accumulation of BAs in the liver may lead to
cell damage and release of BAs and other substances from canaliculi and
hepatocytes.
d.Cytokines (notably tumor necrosis factor alpha) have been shown to decrease BA
transport proteins in hepatocyte canalicular membranes and thus impair BA
secretion.2z The resultant impairment in BA excretion is called functional
cholestasis (see Bilirubin Concentation, sect.III.E.2).
C.Mild increases in serum [BA] occur in healthy animals after meals.Postprandial
increases are also exaggerated in some hepatobiliary disorders.These findings are the
basis of the bile acid challenge test (see sect. IV).
D. In horses, increased serum [BA] was found in nearly all horses (36 of 38) with hepatic
necrosis,lipidosis,neoplasia,or cirrhosis.In contrast,only 2of78sick horses without
liver disease had increased serum [BA] (reference interval not stated but upper limit
estimated from a graph to be 18 μmol/L）.27
E.In cartle, the diagnostic sensitivity of serum [BA] varied among liver disorders:
fascioliasis (100 %,n =11),biliary calculi (100 %,n=2),hepatic abscesses (53 %，
n=15）,leptospirosis(71 %,n=7）,and hepatic lipidosis (86%,n=36)（reference
interval not statedbut upper limit estimated from a graph to be40 μmol/L）.2 In
another report,values for serum BA] were increased in cattle with hepatic lipidosis,
hepatic abscesses,leptospirosisand fascioliasis with mean concentrationsof
90-225μmol/L at initialevaluation.33
IV.
Bile acid challenge test for dogs and cats
A.Principle: A 12 h fasting [BA] provides a baseline assessment of the amount of BA that
escapes the enterohepatic circulation and enters the systemic blood. After ingestion of a
standardized meal,gallbladder contraction releases bile salts to the intestine, from which
they are absorbed and then enter the portal blood. This infux of endogenous bile acids
challenges the ability of the hepatocytes to keep bile acids within the enterohepatic
circulation.
694
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 13.8.Results of the bile acid challenge test in dogs
Percentage with fasting
Percentagewith 2-h postprandial
Group
n
[BA] >5 μmol/L
[BA]>15.5μmol/L
Healthy
66
2.5a
2.5
Severe liver diseaseb
62
86.9
78.7
All liver disease
101
82.5
77.7
Portosystemic shuntd
29
100
100
Ill,liver disease not detected
40
17.5f
12.5
* Because the upper limit of the reference interval (5.0 μmol/L fasting and 15.5 μmol/L postprandially)
was determined as the value 2 standard deviations above the mean, the 2.5 % assumes that reference values
had a Gaussian distribution.
Disorders (followed by median fasting/postprandial concentrations) included cirrhosis (62/149 μmol/L),
chronic hepatitis (12/74 μmol/L),hepatic necrosis (40/78 μumol/L), and cholestasis (111/111 μmol/L).
Disorders (followed by median fasting/postprandial concentrations) included those for the severe liver
disease groups and hepatic neoplasia (10/29 μmol/L), glucocorticoid hepatopathy (12/19 μmol/L), and
passive congestion (5/5 μmol/L).
Themedian fasting/postprandialbile acid concentrations in the portosystemic shunt dogs were
114/221 μmol/L
hepatic involvement, disseminated intravascular coagulation, brain neoplasia, hypoadrenocorticism,
glomerulonephritis, perironitis meningoencephalitis, endocarditis, congestive heart faiure, and ystitis.ach
dog lacked histologic evidence of hepatobiliary disease. The median [BA] in fasting and postprandial samples
were 3 and 6μmol/L,respectively.
fNone exceeded 17.1 μmol/L
None exceeded 21.9 μmol/L.
Source: Center et al.28
B.Procedure
1.A fasting sample is collected from the dog or cat after a 12 h fast. Then, the animal
isobservedwhileitingestsfoodcontainingprorein andfareg,2teaspoonsofa
canned food for those<10 Ib,and 2 tablespoons for large dogs).A 2 h postprandial
sample is collected.
2.Sample hemolysis should be avoided during blood collection and processing because
Hgb interferes with the spectrophotometric BA assay.Postprandial lipemia should be
avoided by first collecting a fasting sample and then limiting the amount of ingested
poo
C. Published data
1. Dogs² (Table 13.8)
a.Fasting and postprandial samples had high diagnostic sensitivity forliver disease
and portosystemic shunts,but the samples did not consistently differentiate the
type or severity of the disease. Some dogs with nonhepatic diseases may have an
increased fasting and postprandial [BA], but increases are typically minor.
b.When decision thresholds of 20 μmol/L for fasting samples and 25 μmol/L for
postprandial sampleswereused,hediagnosticpecificityofthebileacid
concentration approached 100 % and the diagnostic sensitivity values were about
60 % and 75 %, respectively (dara from a total BA enzymatic assay; different
decision thresholds may be needed for different assays).
13/LIVERFUNCTION
695
Table 13.9.Results of the bile acid challenge test in cats
Percentage with fasting
Percentage with 2-h postprandial
Group
n
[BA]>5μmol/L
[BA]>10.0μmol/L
Healthy
？
2.5a
2.5
All liver disease
82
73
98
Portosystemic shuntb
24
79
100
Liver disease but not shunt
58
71
97
Ill, liver disease not detectedd
26
11.5°
30.8f
The method festablishing rference interval wasnotreportedFor thepurpose of comparison,th
2.5 % assumes that reference values had a Gaussian distribution. Upper reference limits were 5.0 μmol/L for
fasting samples and 10.0 μmol/L for postprandial samples.
The median fasting/postprandial bile acid concentrationsin the portosystemic shunt cats were
32/140μmol/L.
Diagnoses (number of cats [n] followed by the median fasting/postprandial [BAl) included hepatic
lipidosis (n=20;28/142 μmol/L),hepatic necrosis (n=13;15/29μmol/L),hepaticneoplasia (n=8;
8/26 μmol/L), and cholestasis disorders (n = 17; 40/140 μmol/L).
Diagnoses included a variery of nonhepatic disorders. Each cat lacked histologic evidence of hepatobili.
ary disease.
“None exceeded 16.0 μmol/L.
Maximal value was not reported.
Source: Center et al.29
2.Cats² (Table 13.9)
a.Fasting and postprandial [BA] values had high diagnostic sensitivity for hepatobi-
liary disease when the respective URLs were used,but the[BA] did not differen-
tiate the type or severity of the diseases.
b.The diagnostic specificity for the absence of liver disease approached 100 %
whenvalues>4xURL and 2xURLwere considered abnormal for fasting or
disease was only 49 %(fasting)and 81% (postprandial) when these decision
thresholds were used (data from a total BA enzymatic assay)
D.Factors other than hepatobiliary and portal systems that influence results
1.Fasting [BA]
a.Spontaneous contraction of the gallbladder may increase fasting [BA]
unexpectedly.
b.Fasting serum [BA] depends on the enterohepatic cycle,for example,intestinal
diseases may impair intestinal absorption of BA and thus lower a serum [BA].
2.2 h postprandial [BA]
a.The peak [BA] may not occur 2 h postprandially because of variations in gastric
emptying, intestinal transit time, intestinal absorption, or other actors.
b.The animal may not have eaten the food provided,or it may have a poor
cholecystokinin response.
The gallbladder may have contracted prior to feeding.
c.
3.The aforementioned factors may contribute to the relatively common finding that
postprandial sample is not of diagnostic value.
696
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
E.Conclusions
1.The diagnostic value of a serum [BA] is primarily for detecting hepatobiliary disease
or portosystemic shunts.
2.The highest serum [BA] occurs when there is a disease process that enables BA
molecules to escape enterohepatic circulation.However,many diseases or pathologic
states can cause the dysfunction.
3.The popularity of the bile acid test (compared to other liver function tests, such as
plasma [NH4] or dye-excretion tests) is probably due to its simplicity, that is, it
V.
Urine Bile Acid to Creatinine (BA:Crt)Ratios
A.Principle
1.As shown in Fig.13.3 and 13.4,BA molecules that escape the enterohepatic circulation
are excreted in the urine.Whenever there is defective clearance of BA from the portal
blood or decreased biliary excretion of BA that leads to BA entering the peripheral
blood,there will be increased BA excretion via the kidneys.TheBA conjugated with
sulfate (sulfated bile acids) are more water soluble than nonsulfated BA.
2.The amount of BA excreted via urine should reflect plasma [BA] during the time
the collected urine was formed.In the published studiesdogs and cats were not
fasted prior to collction of the analyzed urine samples43s
B.Procedure
1.The [BA] and the[Crt] are measured in a randomly collected urine sample. The
urine concentrations of sulfated BA, nonsulfated BA, or sulfated plus nonsulfated
BA are measured using enzymatic colorimetric assays.
2.A ratio of their concentrations is calculated. The reported ratios represent a mixture
of units; that is, μmol of BA/mg of Crt.34-6Unitlessratios could be calculated by
converting the [Crt] of mg/L to μumol/L before dividing the BA concentration (also
in μmol/L) by the [Crt].
3.The relative ease of a one-time collection of urine compared to fasting and postpran-
dial blood collections makes this assay attractive for assessing bile acids.
C.UNSBA:Crt and (USBA +UNSBA):Crt have been shown to have diagnostic proper-
ties similar to serum [BA] in dogs and cats when ratios were compared to the greatest
serum [BA] found in fasting or postprandial samples (Tables 13.10 and 13.11)
1.With use of the selected decision thresholds in the population studied, the ratios for
canine urine had excellent diagnostic specificity and positive predictive values for
Table 13.10.Results of BA:Crt ratios in dogs and cats
USBA:Crt
UNSBA:Crt
(USBA+UNSBA):Crt
Group
n
μmol/mg
μmol/mg
μmol/mg
Dogs
Healthy
15
0.0-0.9
0.0-6.0
0.4-6.6
Hepatic disorders
120
0.0-42.6
0.3-2377.0
0.0-2377.0
Cats
Healthy
8
0.0-1.9
0.7-1.2
0.2-3.9
Hepatic disorders
54
0.0-14.4
2.0-12.9
0.4-35.7
Note: Reported ratios included a multiplication factor of 100.
Soure: Trainor et al. and Balkman et al.336
13/LIVERFUNCTION
697
Table 13.11.Diagnostic properties ofBA:Crt ratios in dogs and cats
Diagnostic
Diagnostic
Positive
Negative
sensitivity
specificity
predictive value
predictive value
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Dogs
BA (serum)
78
67
96
23
USBA:Crt
17
100
100
10
UNSBA:Crt
63
100
100
18
(USBA+UNSBA):Crt
61
100
100
18
Cats
BA (serum)
87
88
96
68
USBA:Crt
78
94
98
57
UNSBA:Crt
87
88
96
68
(USBA+UNSBA):Crt
85
88
96
65
Note:The reportedratios included amultiplication factorof100.The decision threshold forSBA was the
URL.Thedecision thresholds for theratio valueswere calculated (mean + 2 standard deviations15 dogs
and 8 cats). The predictive values may differ considerably with different prevalences of hepatic disease.
Source: Trainor et al.3 and Balkman et al.36
liver disease because there were no false positives.However,the decision thresholds
yielded only fair diagnostic sensitivity values and poor negative predictive values
because of frequent false negatives.
2.With use of the selected decision thresholds in the population studied, the ratios for
feline urine had very good diagnostic specificity and positive predictive values
because there were few false positives.The decision thresholds yielded good diagnos-
tic sensitivity values and fair negative predictive values.
3.Predictive values may vary considerably with variations in the prevalence of hepatic
diseases in populations of interest.
D.Establishing the diagnostic value of the urine BA:Crt ratios will depend on the use of
appropriate decision thresholds and comparing theresults with othermethods of
detecting liver disease.
AMMONIUM(NH)CONCENTRATIONINPLASMA
I.
Physiologic processes (Fig. 13.5)
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Units and terms
1.The analyte is commonly called blood ammonia (NH),but the dominant form in
plasma is ammonium (NH4). At a pH of 7.4 and a pK,of 9.25, the NH:NH,
ratio is about70,and thus there is relatively littleNH,in plasma.At body tempera-
ture and pressures,NH is a gas.Routine clinical assays use plasma and not whole
blood as a sample.
2.Unit conversion
a.NH:μg/dLx0.5871=μmol/L （SIunit,nearest 5μmol/L)
b.NH4:μg/dLx0.5543=μmol/L (SIunit,nearest 5μmol/L)
698
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Peripheral
Urea
Urea
blood
NH4+
Other tlssues
Hepatocyte
Canallculus
epatocv
Kidney
Urea
aa
Urea
AMP
NH4+
Gln
NH4+
NH4
NH4+
Urea
proteins
Hepaticarteries
NH4+
Bie
Portal veins
uct
Urea NH4+
NHA
Spleen
Urea
Intestine
Bacteria
Amino acids
Fig. 13.5. Physiologic processes of ammonium.
·Most NH,* is produced in intestines by digestion of dietary proteins or by the metabolism of bacteria.
Some NH is produced by the deamination of amino acids (in many cells) and adenosine monophos-
phate (especially in muscle fibers).
·After NH enters the liver (via the portal vein or the hepatic artery), it enters hepatocytes and is used for
the synthesis of urea (in urea cycle),amino acids,and proteins.Urea diffuses from hepatocytes to the
sinusoidal blood or the bile canaliculi, from which it may be excreted via the kidneys or the intestine,
respectively.Urea that enters the intestine (from diet,bile,or blood)may be reabsorbed as part of an
enterohepatic circulation (also see Fig. 8.5).
·Renal excretion of NH,* may oocur by NH passing through the glomerular fltration barrier and being
excreted in the urine. NH,* is also fixed into urea in the hepatocytes or into glutamine (Gln) in the renal
tubular cells. In response to acidemia, deamination of Gln to glutamate (Glu) in the renal tubules results
in NH,*excretion (see Fig. 9.6).
NHis the molecular formthat is present in most aqueous bodyfuids at a pH of 7.4,but it does not
diffuse through cell membranes. NHy is relatively lipid soluble and rapidly diffuses across cell membranes,
but very little is present in body fuids.
B.Assays for NHconcentration
1.Methods
a.Enzymatic method:NH++α-ketoglutarate+NADPH→glutamate+NADP
by a dye-binding method.
c.Other assays measure NHvia colorimetric or ion-selective electrodemethods.
2.When [NH] values from two commercial analyzers were compared with values
generated by the generally accepted enzymatic assay, there was good agreement
between the Blood Ammonia Checker and the enzymatic assays bur poor agreement
between theVerTest and enzymatic assays.37
13/LIVERFUNCTION
699
C. Samples
1.In healthy fasting dogs, the[NH] in arterial and venous plasma samples were not
significantly different. However, in dogs with liver disease, the arterial samples had
greater [NH] (see Ammonium Concentration, sect.III.A.5).3
2. The [NH] in serum samples is greater than in paired plasma samples.
3.Hemolysis causes false increases of [NH] in some assays because the heme pigment
interferes with light transmittance or because erythrocytes contain NH9
4.Sample handling
a.Ideal:EDTA-or heparin-anticoagulated blood is delivered to a laboratory
immediately after collection.The plasma isharvested immediately after arriva
and cooled to 4°C（in an ice bath),and chemical analysis is completed within
1 h.All steps should be completed with minimal exposure to air.
b.The plasma[NH4] is usually considered tobe stable for up to4 h at 4°Cand
adequately stable for 1-2 d at-20°C.
c.Suboptimal handling and instability problems can lead to highly variable
results.40
(1)Within hours of storage at room temperature, the [NH4] will be up to 2-3
times the starting value because of the generation of NH from the
degradation of labile proteins and amino acids (e.g.,glutamine).
(2)Delayed collection of plasma from the blood enables NH to be produced
by erythrocytes and leukocytes, thus increasing the measured [NH*].
(3)Delayed analysis of plasma enables NH to escape from plasma particularly
if the sample is not stoppered or if an evacuated tube is incompletely filled.
Loss of NH will cause a decrease in the plasma [NH4].
I1.
Hyperammonemia (Table 13.12)
A.Decreased clearance of NHfrom portal blood
1.Diseases or conditions that reduce the removal of NHfrom portal blood may
cause hyperammonemia because intestinal bacteria produce large quantities of NH4.
Two major types of diseases have this pathologic defect:
aDiffuse hepatocellular diseases thar reduce functional mass (e.g, cirrhosis,
necrosis,and lipidosis)2s
2.Decreased NH4 clearance can potentially be caused by congenital deficiencies that
directly or indirectly involve the urea cycle (Fig. 13.6). These disorders are rare.
a.Argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency has been reported in dogs.
b.A probable case of ornithine carbamoyltransferase (ornithine transcarbamylase)
deficiency caused hyperammonemia in a cat.43
c.Defective mitochondrial transport of ornithine, a substance thar is transported
from cytosol to mitochondria in the urea cycle, probably caused hyperammone
d. Congenital cystinuria is caused by defective renal tubular resorption of cystine;
concurrently, there is defective resorption of arginine and ornithine. A cystinuric
car had multiple episodes of hyperammonemic encephalopathy during its life.s
The authors concluded that if dietary sources did not maintain sufficient
amounts of arginine and ornithine for a functional urea cycle (Fig. 13.6), then
argininuria and ornithinuria caused a depletion of those amino acids,and the cat
wasthenprone tohyperammonemia
Table 13.12.Diseases and conditions that cause hyperammonemia
*Decreased NHclearance from portal blood
*Decreased functional mass: diffuse hepatocellular disease
*Decreased portal blood fow to liver:congenitaland acquiredportosystemic shunts
Urea cycle enzyme deficiencies (congenital)
Cystinuria with concurrent arginuria and ornithinuria (cat)
Cobalamin deficiency
Increased NH4* production
Postprandial
Urea toxicosis in cattle
Strenuous exercise (racehorses and dogs)
Urinary infection with urease-containing bacteria and concurrent urethral obstruction
Intestinal disease in horses
Increased NH4+intake
NHCl administration per osor perrectum
Ammoniated forage toxicosis in cattle
Exposure to NH from anhydrous NH
*Arelatively common diseaseor condition
Note:Lists of specificdisorders or conditions are not complete but are provided to give examples
A falsely increased NH may occur if delayed analysis of the sample results in proteolysis or NH
production by the blood cells.
Hepatocyte cytoplasm
CPS
Carbamoyl
NH4++HCO
Ornithine
Urea
phosphate
Arginase
100
Mitochondrion
HO
Urea
Cytosol
Citrulline
Arginine
Cycle
Aspartate
ASS
Fumarate
ASL
Arginosuccinate
Fig.13.6.The urea cycle (Krebs-Henseleit cycle) in hepatocytes:The dashed structure represents a mito
chondrion; the other reactions occur in a hepatocyte's cytoplasm. The roles of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
and phosphate are not shown.
Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase (CPS) catalyzes the reaction in which NHand HCO;are used to
produce carbamoyl phosphate.Ornithine carbamoyltransferase (OCT) catalyzes the combination of
carbamoyl phosphate and ornithine to produce citrulline. Argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) catalyzes the
combination of citrulline with aspartate to form argininosuccinate (a link between the urea cycle and the
citric acid cycle). Argininosuocinate lyase (ASL) catalyzes the generation of arginine and fumarate from
argininosuccinate. Arginase catalyzes the combination of arginine and H,O to urea and ornithine;
ornithine is then available to begin the urea cyde again.
Congenital deficiencies in ASS or OCT cause a defective urea cycle and hyperammonemia because NH*
is not incorporated into urea.
700
13/LIVERFUNCTION
701
3.Decreased NH4+clearance can also occur with acquired disorders that cause a
defective urea cycle (Fig.13.6).A cobalamin deficiency (see Chapter 15) may cause
methylmalonic acid to accumulate, which decreases the concentrations of N-acetyl
glutamate. A decreased N-acetyl glutamate concentration causes decreased activity of
carbamoyl phosphate synthetase and thus less fixation of NH into urea.6
4. The ammonium concentrations of Irish wolfhound puppies that were 7-8 wk old
were 47-115μmol/L compared to 6-27 μmol/L for adults.The pathogenesis of the
hyperammonemia in these pups was not determined, but Irish wolfhounds do have
a high incidence of portosystemic shunts.
5.In 69 dogs with hepatic encephalopathy caused by several liver diseases (including
14 congenital and 29 acquired shunts), the [NH] in arterial plasma averaged 1.5
times the[NH] of venous plasma.The venous concentrations may be lower
because of enhancedNH4clearance from arterial blood bykidneys,muscle,or
other tissues.Because of the difference, some investigators recommend that arterial
samples should be collected for measurement of plasma[NH*].3 However, collect-
ing an arterial sample is not as easy as collecting a venous sample.Also, based on the
graphed data provided by the investigators, nearly all dogs that werehyperammone-
mic based on fasting arterial samples were also hyperammonemic based on fasting
venoussamples.
B.Increased NH4production
1.Postprandial: Increased NH4+ production during the digestion of a meal may cause
temporary hyperammonemia.This condition should not be considered if the animal
was appropriately fasted prior to sample collection.
2.Urea toxicosis in cartle: Hydrolysis of urea in the rumen liberates NH, that com-
bines with H+to form NH,+. This makes ruminal Auid more alkaline.When the
rumen pH is>8.O,theNH:NH+ratio shifts towardNH,which diffuses from the
3.Strenuous exercise: During exercise, two adenosine diphosphate (ADP) molecules
combine to form adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and adenosine triphosphate
(ATP)via the myokinase reaction of myocytes.The deamination of adenosine
monophosphate produces inosine monophosphate and NH, The NH, diffuses to
blood and increases the plasma[NH] and pH.9
a.In greyhounds,the plasma[NH] increased from a mean of 82 μmol/L before
the race to a mean of 256μumol/L immediately after the run.
b.In quarter horses, the plasma [NH+] increased from a mean of 67 μmol/L before
exercise（treadmill) to a mean of 137μmol/L immediately after exercise. In
another study,the mean NHconcentrations before and after exercise were 37
and113μmol/L,respectively.49
4.Urinary infection with urease-containing bacteria and concurrent urethral obstruc-
tion:An azotemic dog with staphylococcal urinary tract infection andurethral
calculi had a fasting [NH] of 258μg/dL.The hyperammonemia may have been
caused by increased NH* production in the urinary tract, decreased renal excretion
due to obstruction,and perhaps decreased urea cycle activiry due to acidosis.2
5.Intestinal disease in horses: Horses with certain intestinal disorders may have a
markedly increased plasma NH] and clinical signs of colic and encephalopathy
without evidence of hepatic disease. An increased plasma [NH,*] is thought to be
caused by increasedgeneration ofNH+by abnormal proliferations of colonic
bacteria and/or by increased intestinal absorption of NH4.No single type of
702
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
bacteria has been cultured consistently in these cases.Diagnosis requires measure-
ment of blood [NH4+].53-56
C.Increased NH4 intake or absorption
1.NHCl administration per os or via the colon (see the next sect. IV,NHTolerance
Test)
2. Ammoniated forage toxicosis in calves: A 30-d-old calf had a plasma [NH] that
was considered increased while nursing a cow that had ingested hay treated with
anhydrous NH57
3.Cattle dying after exposure to anhydrous NH presumably would have increased
plasma NH4].Cattle exposure occurs with themalicious release of anhydrous NH
from storage tanks.s8
IV.NH4 tolerance test
A.Principle: By administration of NHCl either orally or rectally,a challenge dose of
NH* is presented to the liver via the portal veins. Either decreased hepatic functional
mass or a portosystemic shunt will enableNH4to escape the enterohepatic circulation
and cause an excessive increase in the plasma [NH4].
B.The NH+ tolerance test may be used when decreased hepatic function is suspected but
other laboratoryresults donot strongly supporthepaticinsufficiency ora portosystemic
shunt.Typically,an NHtolerance test is not indicated if there is a fasting hyperammone
mia.Also,an excessively high plasma [NH] might contribute to hepatic encephalopathy
C.Basics of procedures in dogs
1.Oral NHtolerance test:After a 12 h fast and collection of a fasting sample, NHCl
is administered orally (0.1 g/kg but not more than 3g) in 20-50mL HO.A
30 min post-NHCl blood sample is collected.
2.RectalNHtolerance testAfter a 12 h fast and collection of a fasting sample,
NHCl is administered (5 % solution; 2 mL/kg)via a catheter inserted 20-35 cm
into the colon. Blood samples are collected 20 and 40 min later.Both 20 min and
40 min samples have been recommended because peak [NH4] occurred before
30 min in some dogs and after 30 min in others.9
D. Interpretation of results
1.Fasting [NH4+]
a.WRI: There is no evidence of hepatic insuficiency or a portosystemic shunt.
These conditions could be present, but the production of NH* is not enough to
overwhelm the weakened system. There is no evidence of a rare congenital urea
cycle enzyme deficiency.
b.Hyperammonemia: See Table 13.12 for potential pathogeneses.
2.Postchallenge [NH+]
a.WRI: There isno evidence ofhepatic insufficiency,portosystemic shunt,or a rare
congenital urea cycle enzyme deficiency.
b.Increased above reference interval:The functional hepatic mass,portosystemic
shunt, or both are decreased.Rarely, a congenital or acquired urea cycle enzyme
deficiency is present.
E.Example results for dogs with portosystemic shunts are listed in Table 13.13.
V
Postprandial venous NH4 tolerance test for dogs
A.This procedure is similar to the NH+tolerance test (see the preceding sect.IV) except
digested food provides the NH+ for the tolerance testing.The major advantage over
13/LIVERFUNCTION
703
Table 13.13.Ammonia tolerance test results for six dogs with portosystemic shunts
Results for assay 1
10Healthy dogs
Dog 1a
Dog 2b
Dog 3b
Fasting [NH+] (μg/dL)
88±36°
100
370
260
30 min [NH] (μg/dL)
155±71
1000
1400
850
Results for assay 2
10 healthy dogs
Dog 4d
Dog5b
Dog 6b
Fasting [NH] (μg/dL)
56±14
100
250
125
30 min[NH+] (μg/dL)
76±30
550
900
650
The fasting NH] was WRI, and thus hepatic function was suffcient to handle the NH load during
the fasting state. The marked hyperammonemia in the 30 min sample is consistent with a portosystemic
shunt or hepatic insufhciency.
The fasting hyperammonemia revealed the defective NH,* clearance. The marked hyperammonemia in
the 30 min sample would be expected because of influx of NH,* into the system.
All data for healthy dogs are expressed as mean ±standard deviation. The datamay not have had normal
distributions.
The fasting [NH] was slightly increased and thus not strong evidence of hepatic insufficiency or a
portosystemic shunt. However, the [NH] in the 30 min sample was definitely increased and thus
supportive of hepatic insufficiency or a portosystemic shunt.
Note: Two sets of data are reported because of the lack of analytical agreement of the two NH* assays
(note the different values in the healthy dog groups).
Source: Meyer et al.61
the NHtolerance test is that the administration of NHCl solution is considered
stressful, and some dogs may vomit the solution if it is administered orally.
B.Basics of the procedure
1.Withhold food for 24 h and then feed a commercial diet containing about 30 %
protein to provide 33 kcal/kg (= 25 % of the estimated daily metabolizable energy
requirement).This estimate is adjusted for growing dogs.
2.Heparinized blood is collected prior to feding and at 2h intervals (2,4,6,and 8 h)
after feeding. Blood is chilled during processing, and the plasma [NH] is measured
immediately after plasma is harvested.
C.In the published study, the postprandial [NH] did not exceed 16 μmol/L in samples
from healthy dogs. Dogs with hepatocellular disease frequently had a preprandial
[NH4] and a postprandial [NH4] above 16μmol/L without significant change
between preprandial and postprandial values; the maximum concentrations occurred
6 h postprandially. Dogs with portosystemic shunts had preprandial ammonium
concentrations up to250μmol/L(90th percentilenear150μmol/L)andpostprandial
ammonium concentrations up to400μmol/L(9oth percentile near 250μumol/L)in the
2,4,or 6h samples
D.The data support the use of this tolerance test to detect portosystemic shunts and that a
6h sampling may be beneficial. This tolerance test had poor diagnostic sensitivity for
hepatocellular disease.Appropriate laboratory-specific decision thresholds should be
used for diagnostic investigations.
DYE-EXCRETIONTESTS
Prior to availability of spectrophotometric assays for bile acids, hepatic function was clinically
assessed by excretion tests involving two organic anions or dyes: BSP (bromosulfophthalein or
sulfobromophthalein) andICG(indocyanine green).
704
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Excretion of these dyes depends on hepatic blood fow, hepatocyte uptake, conjugation (BSP
but not ICG), excretion to the biliary system, and enterohepatic circulation (BSP but not ICG).
Impaired excretion (caused by a defect in any step of the pathway) was detected as either an
increased percent retention of the dye or an increased plasma half-life of the dye
The use of dye-excretion tests is limited in clinical diagnostic testing because BSP is no longer
commercially available, ICG is expensive, and assessment of [BA] and [Bt] provides essentially the
same information about hepatic function.
References
1.Tolman KG, Rej R. 1999. Liver function. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, eds. Tietz Textbook of Climical Chemisay, 3rd
edition, 11251177. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
2.1988. Dorland's Ilustrated Medical Dictienary, 27th edition.Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
3. Berk PD, Noyer C. 1994. Bilirubin metabolism and the hereditary hyperbilirubinemias. 2. Hepatic uptake, binding
conjugation, and excretion of bilirubin. Semin Liver Dis 14:331-343.
4. MeDonagh AF, Palma LA, Lauff J, Wu TW. 1984. Origin of mammalian biliprotein and rearrangement of bilirubin
glucuronides invivo in the rat.J Clin Invest 74:763-770.
5. Lundberg GD, Iverson C, Radulescu G. 1986. Now read this: The SI units are here. J Am Med Assoc
255:2329-2339.
6. Pantanowitz L, Horowitz GL, Upalakalin JN, Beckwrith BA. 2003. Artifactual hyperbilirubinemia due to paraprotein
interference. Arch Pathol Lab Med 127:55-59.
7.Rothuizen J. 2000. Jaundice. In: Etinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook ofVeterinary Intermaf Medicine:Diseases of
Dog and Cat,5th edition,210-212. Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
8. Rothuizen J, van den Brom WE. 1987. Bilirubin metabolism in canine hepatobiliary and hacmolytic disease. Vet Q
9:235-240.
9.Engelking LR. 1993.Equine fasting hyperbilirubinemia. AdvVet Sei Comp Med 37:115-125.
10.MeSherry BJ,Lumsden JH,ValliVE,Baird JD. 1984. Hyperbilirubinemia in sick catteCan J Comp Med
48:237-240.
11. Reid IM, Harrison RD, Collins RA. 1977. Fasting and refeeding in the lactating dairy cow. 2. The recovery of liver
cell structure and function following a six-day fast. J Comp Pathol 87:253265.
12. Gray ML, Bounous DI, Kelley LC, Almazan P, Brown J. 1995. Icterus in bob veal calves and its association with lack
of colostrum intake and high serum creatine kinase activity. Am J Vet Res 56:1506-1512.
triglycerides in the horse. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 165:8690.
14.Cornelius CE, Kelley KC, Himes JA 1975.Heterogeneity of bilrubin conjugates n several animal speces Coell
Vet 65:90-99.
15.Gronwall R, Engellking LR. 1982. Efect of glucose administration on equine fasting hyperbilirubinemia Am J Vet
Res 43:801803.
16. Mia AS, Gronwall RR, Cornelius CE. 1970. Bilirubin-C turnover studies in normal and mutant Southdown sheep
with congenital hyperbilirubinemia. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 133:955-959.
17. Mia AS, Gronwall RR, Cornelius CE. 1970. Unconjugated bilirubin transport in normal and mutant Corriedale
sheep with Dubin-Johnson syndrome. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 135:33-37.
18.DiversTj,chappelKA,weeney RW,TennantC.993.Persistent hypebilrubinemia in ahealthy thoroughbd
horse.CornellVet 83:237-242
19. Taboada J, Meyer DJ. 1989. Cholestasis associated with extrahepatic bacterial infection in five dogs. J Vet Intern Med
3:216-221.
20. Moseley RH, Wang W, Takeda H, Lown K, Shick L, Ananthanarayanan M, Suchy FJ. 1996. Effect of endotoxin on
bile acid transport in rat liver: A potential model for sepsis-associated cholestasis. Am J Physiol 271:G137-G146.
21.Whiting JF, Green RM, Rosenbluth AB, Gollan JL. 1995. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha decreases hepatocyte bile salt
uptake and mediates endotoxin-induced cholestasis.Hepatology 22:1273-1278.
22.Green RM, Whiting JF, Rosenbluth AB, Beier D, Gollan JL1994. Interleukin-6 inhibits hepatocyte taurocholat
uptake and sodium-potassium-adenosinetriphoshatase activity. Am J Physiol 267:G 1094G1100.
23.Jain NC.1986. Scbam Veterinary Hematelogy,4th edition. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
24.Center SA. 1993. Serum bile acids in companion animal medicine.Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
23:625-657.
13/LIVERFUNCTION
coursesmai
705
25. West HJ. 1996. Clinical and pathological studies in horses with hepatic disease. Equine Vet J 28:146156.
26. West HJ. 1991. Evaluation of total serum bile acid concentrations for the diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease in cattle.
Res Vet Sei 51:133-140.
27.West Hj. 1989.Evaluation of total plasma bile acid concentrations for the diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease in
horses. Res Vet Sci 46:264270.
28. Center SA, ManWarren T, Slater MR, Wilentz E. 1991. Evaluation of twelve-hour preprandial and two-hour
postprandial serum bile acids concentrations for diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
199:217-226.
disease in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1048-1054.
30. Buonanno AM, Carlson GP, Kantrowitz B. 1988. Clinical and diagnostic features of portosystemic shunt in a foal.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:387-389.
31. Hoffmann WE, Baker G, Rieser S, Dorner JL. 1987. Alterations in selected serum biochemical constituents in equids
after induced hepatic disease. Am J Vet Res 48:13431347.
32. Fricker G, Landmann L, Meier PJ. 1989. Extrahepatic obstructive cholestasis reverses the bile salt secretory polarity of
rat hepatocytes. J Clin Invest 84:876-885.
33. West Hj. 1997. Clinical and pathological studies in cattle with hepatic disease. Vet Res Commun 21:169-185.
34.Ballkman CE, Center SA, Randolph JF, Trainor D,Warner KL, Crawford MA,Adachi K, Erb HN. 2003.Evaluation
of urine sulfated and nonsulfated bile acids as a diagnostic test for liver disease in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
222:1368-1375.
35. Trainor D, Center SA, Randolph F, Balkman CE, Warner KL, Crawford MA, Adachi K, Erb HN. 2003. Urine
sulfated and nonsulfated bile acids as a diagnostic test for liver disease in cats. J Vet Intern Med 17:145-153.
36.Balkman CE,Center SA, Randolph JF, Trainor D, Warner KL, Crawford MA, Adachi K, Erb HN.2003. Evaluation
of urine sulfated and nonsulfated bile acids as a diagnostic test for liver disease in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 223:339
(erratum).
37. Sterczer A, Meyer HP, Boswijk HC, Rothuizen J. 1999. Evaluation of ammonia measurements in dogs with two
analysers for use in veterinary practice. Vet Rec 144:523-526
38. Rothuizen J, van den Ingh TSGAM. 1982.Arterial and venous ammonia concentrations in the diagnosis of canine
hepato-encephalopathy.Res Vet Sci 33:17-21.
39. Seligson D, Hirahara K. 1957. The measurement of ammonia in whole blood, erythrocytes, and plasma. J Lab Clin
Med 49:962-974.
40. Hit ME, Jones BD. 1986.Effects of storage temperature and time on canine plasma ammonia concentrations. Am J
Vet Res 47:363-364.
41.Beech J, Dubielzig R,Bester R. 1977. Portal vein anomaly and hepatic encephalopathy in a horse. J Am Vet Med
Assoc170:164-166.
42.Strombeck DR, Meyer DJ, Freedland RA.1975. Hyperammonemia due to a urea cyce enzyme deficiency in two
dogs.J Am Vet Med Assoc 166:1109-1111
43. Washizu T, Washizu M, Zhang C, Matsumoto I, Sawamura M, Suzuki T. 2004. A suspected case of ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency in a cat. J Vet Med Sei 66:701-703.
44. MeConnico RS, Duckett WM, Wood PA 1997. Persistent hyperammonermia in two relatedMorgan weanlings. J Vet
Intern Med 11:264266.
45. Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Lehkcharoensuk C, Ross SJ, Rogers QR, Koehler LA, Ulrich LK, Carpenter KA, Swanson
LL, Pedersen LA. 2006. Hyperammonemic encephalopathy in cystinuric cats. In: Procedings of the 19th ACVIM
Forum, Denver, 794-795.
46. Battersby IA, Giger U, Hall EJ. 2005. Hyperammonaemic encephalopathy secondary to selective cobalamin
dehciency in a juvenile Border collie. J Small Anim Pract 46:339344.
47. Meyer HP, Rothuizen J, Tiemessen I, van den Brom WE, van den Ingh TSGAM. 1996. Transient metabolic
hyperammonaemia in young Irish wolfhounds. Vet Rec 138:105-107.
48. Haliburton JC, Morgan SE. 1989. Nonprotcin nitrogen-induced ammonia toxicosis and ammoniated feed toxicity
syndrome. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 5:237-249.
49. Miller PA, Lawrence LM. 1987. The effect of submaximal treadmill training on heart rate, lactate and ammonia
in quarter horses. In: Gillespie JR, Robinson NE, eds. Equine Exercise Physiology 2, 476484. Davis, CA:
ICEEP.
50.Snow DH,Harris RC,Stuttard E.1988.Changes in haematology and plasma biochemistry during maximal exercise
in greyhounds. Vet Rec 123:487489.
51.Miller PA, Lawrence LM. 1986. Changes in equine metabolic characteristies due to exercise fatigue. Am J Vet Res
47:2184-2186.
706
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
52.Hall JA, Allen TA,Fettman MJ. 1987. Hyperammonemia associated with urethral obstruction in a dog J Am Vet
Med Assoc 191:1116-1118.
53. Hasel KM, Surmmers BA, de Lahunta A. 1999. Encephalopathy with idiopathic hyperammonaemia and Alzheimer
type Il astrocytes in equidae. Equine Vet J 31:478-482.
54. Peek SF, Divers TJ, Jackson CJ. 1997. Hyperammonaemia associated with encephalopathy and abdominal pain
without evidence of liver disease in four mature horses. Equine Vet J 29:70-74.
55. Stickle JE, McKnight CA, Williams KJ, Carr EA. 2006. Diarrhea and hyperammonemia in a horse with progressive
neurologic signs. Vet Clin Pathol 35:250-253.
56. Sharkey LC, DeWitt S, Stockman C. 2006. Neurologic signs and hyperammonemia in a horse with colic. Vet Clin
Pathol 35:254258.
57. Kerr LA, Groce AW, Kersting KW. 1987. Ammoniated forage toxicosis in calves. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:55 1552.
58.Fitzgerald SD, Grooms DL, Scott MA, Clarke KR,Rumbeiha WK. 2006. Acute anhydrous ammonia intoxication in
cattle. J Vet Diagn Invest 18:485489.
59.Rothuizen J, van den Ingh TSGAM. 1982. Rectal ammonia tolerance test in the evaluation of portal circulation in
dogs with liver disease. Res Vet Sci 33:22-25.
60. Walker MC, Hill RC, Guilford WG, Scott KC, Jones GL, Buergelt CD. 2001. Postprandial venous ammonia
concentrations in the diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 15:463466.
61. Meyer DJ, Strombeck DR, Stone EA, Zenoble RD, Buss DD. 1978. Ammonia tolerance test in clinically normal
dogs and in dogs with portosystemic shunts. J Am Vet Med Assoc 173:377-379.
Chapter14
GLUCOSE.KETOAMINES.ANDRELATED
REGULATORYHORMONES
Glucose Concentration inSerum,Plasma,orWhole Blood
708
1.Physiologic Processes..
708
ll.Analytical Concepts
709
Ill.Hyperglycemia
713
IV.Hypoglycemia.
719
V.[Glucose] During InsulinTherapy.
722
Ketoamines:Fructosamine and Glycated Hemoglobin ..
723
1.PhysiologicProcesses
723
Il.Analytical Concepts
724
Il.Increased[Fructosamine]and Increased Glycated Hemoglobin
Percentage or Concentration.
724
IV.Decreased [Fructosamine]and Decreased Glycated Hemoglobin
Percentage or Concentration..
725
V.Correction of the[Fructosamine] for Abnormal Protein Concentrations
726
Immunoreactive Insulin (IRl) Concentration in Serum or Plasma.
726
1.PhysiologicProcesses
726
ll.Analytical Concepts
727
Il.Hyperinsulinemia
728
IV. Hypoinsulinemia.
728
V.Immunoreactive Insulin to Glucose (IRl:G)Ratio
729
Immunoreactive Glucagon (IRG) Concentration in Plasma
730
1.PhysiologicProcesses
730
Il.Analytical Concepts
730
Ill.Hyperglucagonemia Associatedwith Glucagonomas
731
707
708
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 14.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
[x]
x concentration (x=analyte)
ACTH
Adrenocorticotropichormone (corticotropin)
DM
Diabetes mellitus
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
GH
Growth hormone
GLP
Glucagon-like peptide
GLUT
Facilitative hexose transporter
H
Hematocrit
Hgb
Hemoglobin
IRG
Immunoreactive glucagon
IRI
Immunoreactive insulin
IRI:G
Immunoreactive insulin to glucose
NaF
Sodium fuoride
SI
Systeme International d'Unites
GLUCOSECONCENTRATIONINSERUM,PLASMA,ORWHOLEBLOOD
1
Physiologic processes (Fig.14.1)
A. Blood [glucose] is regulated and infuenced by several hormones. For the hormones to
infuence metabolism,theremust be appropriatereceptors and transport systems in the
target cells.
1.Insulin activity lowers blood [glucose]by promoting the uptake,utilization,or
storageof glucoseby hepatocytesmyocytes,and adipocytesInsulin isnoteeded
forglucose tansortntronslkocysryhroytes,ltletsrhpatoy.
Insulin does infuence hepatocyte glucose uptake by altering activities of hepatic
enzymes that promote glycolysis or glycogen synthesis,orby reducing
gluconeogenesis.
2. Glucose entry into most cells is modulated by a family of proteins called facilitative
hexose transporters (GLUT-1 to GLUT-7）.Insulin promotes glucose entry into
myocytes and adipocytes via GLUT-4; insulin is not needed for the other carriers
(e.g.,GLUT-2 in hepatocytes).
glycogenolysis.
a.An O-adrenergic stimulus of pancreatic β-cells decreases insulin release and thus
reduces glucose utilization by hepatocytes,myocytes,and adipocytes.
b.A β-adrenergic stimulus of pancreatic β-cells increases insulin release.However,
O-adrenergic receptors predominate on pancreatic β-cells, so catecholamines
primarily inhibit insulin secretion.
C.A β-adrenergic stimulus of hepatocytes increases glycogenolysis.
d.An O-adrenergic stimulus of the pituitary gland increases the release of GH-
releasing hormone,which then causes GH release.
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
709
5.GH (somatotropin) activity increases blood [glucose] by reducing glucose uptake by
6. Cortisol activity increases blood [glucose] by stimulating gluconeogenesis and
creating a state of insulin resistance (see Glucose Concetration in Serum, sect. IIl.B)
B.In monogastric animals, fasting blood [glucose] is maintained by gluconeogenesis by
using products of protein and lipid catabolism. In ruminants, propionate from rumen
fermentation is used for hepatic gluconeogenesis. In horses, colonic propionate contrib
utes to gluconeogenesis.
C.Fasting normoglycemia represents a balance between the actions of insulin (promoting
storage and utilization of fuels) and glucagon (promoting mobilization of fuels）.When
there is an imbalance and fuel mobilization dominates then the animal will be hyper
glycemic and potentially glucosuric; glucosuria reduces the magnitude of the hypergly-
cemia.If fuel storage and utilization are dominant, then the animal will be
hypoglycemic.Even though the balance of insulin and glucagon actions is assessed by a
blood[glucose],these hormones also infuence lipid and protein metabolism.
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms and units
1.As explained in the following section C,the[glucose] in whole blood may not be
equal to its concentration in plasma or serum harvested from the same blood.
Assuming similar contact times with blood cells,glucose] in serum and plasma will
be nearly equal to each other.
2.Unit conversion:mg/dLx0.05551=mmol/L(SIunit,nearest 0.1mmol/L)
B.Sample for[glucose]
1.For most clinical laboratory methods, serum is recommended and plasma (especially
heparinized) can be used. Serum and plasma should be removed from cells within
1 hof blood collection because glycolysis continues inbloodcells invitro,thus
lowering [glucose].
a.If plasma or serum has contact with cells at room temperature prior to centrifu
leukocytosis and erythrocytosis will accelerate the process.The rate of glucose
consumption can be decreased by placing the blood sample in a cool environ
ment, but clot formation and contraction are also reduced.
b. Serum separator tubes (rubes with gold or red/black stoppers) contain an
activator (silica) that enhances clot formation and gel that enables easier separa-
tion of a blood clot and serum.After centrifugation,the serum[glucose]remains
stable in a refrigerator for at least 48 h if the gel barrier is intact.&9 The gel
barrier may break down in transit.
2.Special collction tubes containing NaF (rubes with grey stoppers) can be used to
block glycolysis. However, they are not routinely used in clinical medicine.
a.F complexes with Mg²,which is a cofactor for phosphopyruvate hydratase
(synonym: enolase) in the glycolytic pathway. The NaF tubes may also contain
anticoagulants (oxalate or EDTA). F  will also inhibit glucose oxidase activity
(and other enzymes),and thus NaF plasma should not be used in glucose assays
that use glucose oxidase.
b.Plasma [glucose] decreased by 5-10 % during the first hour after blood collection
intoNaF tubes.The decrease may result from the osmoticmovement of HO
from erythrocytes to plasma when the bloodis mixedwiththehyperosmotic salts
Pyruvate
↑glucagon
+oorlsol
Insulln
Glucose
Liver
+finsun
+↑glucagon
+↑cortisol
+↑epinephrine
Glvc
Intestine
Dietary CHO
+↑Insulln
Glucose
Muscle
Glucose
-GH
-↑cortisol
Blood
MS
+↑GH
[glucose]
Adipose
+↑glucose
tissue
+glucagon
+insuln
+amino aclds
Insulin
Glucagon
GH
+↓glucose
Glucose
rvtirocy
+amino acids
soonB+
+cortisol
+epinephrne
GHRH
Pituitary
Kidney
Growth
Epinephrine
Cortisol
hormone
Adrenalglands
Glucosuria
Fig.14.1.Physiologic factors that influence blood[glucose].
·Intestine: Dietary carbohydrates (CHO) are broken down to monosaccharides (including glucose) that are
absorbed in the small intestine, from which they enter portal blood and then systemic blood if not
removed by hepatocytes.
•Pancreas: Insulin and glucagon are released from pancreatic islet β-cells and α-cells, respectively. Insulin
secretion is stimulated by increased blood concentrations of glucose, GH, glucagon, or amino acids.
Glucagon secretion is stimulated by increased blood concentrations of amino acids and cortisol, or by
decreased blood [glucose].Amylase (AMS) is released from the pancreas and catalyzes the breakdown of
ingestedstarches to formglucose.
Liver: Hepatocytes are the primary source of blood glucose during fasting. Glucose can be obtained from
glycogenolysis (stimulated by epinephrine and glucagon but inhibited by insulin) or gluconeogenesis
(stimulated by glucagon and cortisol but inhibited by insulin). Insulin also promotes glycolysis. Increased
glucose release from hepatocytes is promoted by increased glucagon, cortisol, or epinephrine. Insulin
promotes the hepatic uptake of glucose by promoting glucokinase activity, but this glucose uptake does
not require insulin.
710
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
711
(NaF and potassium oxalate). Other data indicate that it takes about 1 h for the
Fto inhibit glycolysis completely,but then [glucose]remains stable for at least
3 d.The antiglycolytic effect of F depends on its concentration in the blood
sample.12
c.Erythrocytes are prone to lysis when exposed to NaF and potassum oxalate,
especially if there is not an optimal amount of blood drawn into the evacuated
blood tube.Therelease of erythrocyte contents (e.g,Hgb,inorganic phosphate,
and K+) may lead to erroneous results in some clinical chemistry assays.
3. Many point-of-care instruments are available that can be used for measuring blood
[glucose]. Several are designed for use by people who are monitoring the control of
their diabetic states.The instruments typically will provide useful results if the unit
directions are followedprecisely.
4.[Glucose] in arterial or capillary blood is greater than in venous blood because
peripheral tissues consume glucose.The difference in normoglycemic and normoin-
sulinemic states isprobably<10 mg/dL
C.What is measured: whole blood or plasma [glucose]?
1.When an assay uses whole blood for a sample,it is important to know whether the
result represents a whole blood [glucose], a plasma [glucose],or a calculated plasma
[glucose]. Some instruments measure and report whole blood [glucose]. Other
instruments measure a whole blood [glucose] and calculate a plasma [glucose]. Of
these, some assume a normal Hct value,and thus the calculatedvalue will not be
correct in anemic or erythrocytotic samples. Some whole blood assaysmeasure
molality and not molarity,and thus variations in the HO content of blood (e.g
due to displacement of H,O by proteins or lipids) will influence measured
[glucose].14.15There have been several reports of comparisons of [glucose]measured
by different blood glucose instruments or assays. Some of these studies are dificult
to interpret because the types of [glucose] (ie,blood,plasma,or serum）werenot
specified and differences due to different Hct values were not considered.
2.Whole blood versus plasma or serum[glucose]
aGlucose is uniformly distributed in HO components of whole blood (glucose
freely diffuses between plasma and erythrocytes),but there are about 71 mL of
Fig.14.1.continued
·Muscle: Glucose uptake by myocytes is promoted by insulin through specific insulin receptors and glucose
transporters; GH and cortisol inhibit the uptake of glucose. Insulin promotes glycogen synthesis in
glycolysis.
·Adipose tissue: Insulin promotes the uptake of glucose by adipocytes; GH reduces glucose uptake.
Kidney: If the renal threshold for tubular resorption of glucose is exceded, then hyperglycemic gucosuria
will develop.
·Piruitary: GH release from the pituitary is stimulated by growth hormone-releasing hormone, which is
released from the hypothalamus during hypoglycemia or after epinephrine stimulation.
• Blood cells: Glucose enters erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets through insulin-independent processes
and is used in glycolysis and the hexose monophosphate shunt.
Note:The solid arrous indicate the movement of glucose, and the dashed arrous represent the movement of
hormones or amylase.
712
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
HOper 100mL oferythrocytes and about 93mLof HOper 100mL of
plasma.Thus, the HO content of whole blood varies with its Hct.Because there
is less HO in erythrocytes than in plasma, the [glucose] in erythrocytes is about
76 % of that in plasma,and therefore whole blood [glucose] measured by some
methods are lower than those of serum or plasma.Whole blood [glucose] can be
converted to plasma [glucose] (Eq.14.1).13
Whole blood[glucose]
Plasma [glucose]=
(14.1.)
（1.0-(0.0024xHct in %)
b.The differences that may occur between whole blood [glucose] and plasma or
serum [glucose]are listed in Table 14.2.When severe anemia is present,whole
blood [glucose] and plasma [glucose]will be nearly equal.
D.Methods of measuring[glucose]
1.Photometric assays:Most current methods use glucose oxidase (specific enzyme for
glucose), glucose dehydrogenase, or hexokinase (enzyme for all hexoses） for the
initial reaction.In other assays,glucose (and other monosaccharides) reacts with
o-toluidine or glucose reduces reagents such as copper or ferricyanide. Color changes
can be detected by spectrophotometry or reflectance photometry.Lipemia,hemoly
sis,and icterus can interfere with the light transmission, but the degree of interfer-
ence varies among assays. Isopropyl alcohol can produce a positive interference with
reagent pad methods (e.g., Dextrostix) when blood is contaminated with isopropyl
alcohol during blood collection; the resulting[glucose] can be greatly increased
(change from 100 mg/dL to nearly 300 mg/dL）.16
2.Nonphotometric assays:These modifications of the glucose oxidase methods have an
advantage over photometric assays in that there are fewer chemical and photometric
interferences.In the glucose oxidasereaction,Ois consumed and hydrogen
peroxide is produced. Some instruments measure the rate of Oconsumption with
oxygen electrodes, and others measure the rate of hydrogen peroxide generation with
hydrogen peroxide electrodes. Some of the glucose oxidase methods are inhibited by
Table 14.2. Calculated plasma [glucose] in a blood sample with given whole blood
concentration and Hct value
If whole blood [glucose] (mg/dL) is:
Increase above
50
100
400
800
wholeblood
Calculated plasma [glucose](mg/dL) is:
[glucose](%)
IfHct is:10%
51
102
410
820
2
45%
56
112
448
897
12
60%
58
117
467
935
17
Note: Concentrations of plasma glucose were calculated by using Eq. 14.1 and assuming variables in
sample handling, and in vitro glycolysis were not present. Agreement between calculated and measured
plasma concentrations depends on the analytical properties (accuracy, precision, specifcity, and sensitivity) of
the assays. Conversion using Eq. 14.1 is applicable when the glucose assay result is a whole blood [glucose]
in mg/dL or mmol/L. Other conversion factors are needed if the glucose assay measures molal concentration
(mmol/kg) instead of molar concentration (mmol/L).
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
713
F-or bromide;false decreases in[glucose] can be marked in samples from patients
receiving potassum bromide for neurologic disease.
E.Artifactual hypoglycemia from cellular consumption
1.Extreme leukocytosis: Some leukemias and inflammatory states (see Chapter 2)
have been reported to cause hypoglycemia because of increased glycolysis.
Depending on sample handling,the hypoglycemia could be partially caused by
in vitro glycolysis. Increased glucose consumption may occur because of increased
numbers of leukocytes or because of increased metabolic activity in leukocytes
(e.g.,malignant blast cells or after stimulation by granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor)."7
2. Erythrocytosis (same concepts as with extreme leukocytosis): A leukocyte needs more
glucose than an erythrocyte,but typically there are about 1000 times as many
erythrocytes as leukocytes.Marked rubricytosis would alsoprobably cause increased
glucoseconsumption.i8
III.
Hyperglycemia
A.As in summarized in the preceding Physiologic Processes section,plasma [glucose] is
infuenced by many factors,so it should not be surprising that there are many causes
of hyperglycemia.
1.Thedenitionsdiagnosticcriteriaand classificationsofDMusedin thischapt
were described in a report from a committee organized by the American Diabetes
Association.9
a.Definition of DM: Diabetes mellitus is a group of metabolic diseases character-
izedbyhyperglycemia resulting from defects n insulin secretion,insulin action,
or both."
b.Diagnostic criteria for human DM (Table 14.3)19
(1)To adapt these criteria to domesticmammals,veterinarians will need to
establishappropriate decision values for[glucose] in each animal species (see
Table 14.3 for suggested decision thresholds for dogs, cats, horses, and
cattle).
(2)The expert committee recommended that the classifications of “insulin
dependent” and “non-insulin-dependent” DM be dropped because of the
confusion generated by their use.
2.A proposed classification system for canine DM² is similar to the classifications
of pathologic hyperglycemia in Table 14.4. It consists of two major groups: (1)
insulin-deficiency diabetes (IDD) includes those disorders that cause a progressive
loss ofβ-cells (e.g, type 1 DM, and pancreatitis),and (2） insulin-resistance diabetes
(IRD) includes those disorders in which there is insulin antagonism by hormones
(e.g.,type 2 DM and endocrine DM).
3.For the pathologic hyperglycemic disorders, several other abnormal laboratory
findings may be present and can be used to help characterize the diabetic states.
a.Glucosuria and associated polyuria (Chapter 8)
b.Ketonemia and ketonuria (Chapters 9 and 8,respectively)
c.Metabolic acidosis (Chapters 9 and 10)
d.Lipemia (Chapter 16)
e. Increased [ketoamine] or ketoamine percentage (see the Ketoamines:
Fructosamine and Glycated Hemoglobin section)
714
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 14.3. Criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus in people
1.Symptoms of diabetesplus casualplasma[glucose]≥200 mg/dL （11.1mmol/L).Casua
is defined as any time of day without regard to time since last meal. The classic symptoms
of diabetes include polyuria, polydipsia, and unexplained weight loss.
10
2.Fasting plasma [glucose] ≥ 126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L). Fasting is defined as no caloric
intake for at least 8h.
10
3.2-h plasma[glucose]≥200 mg/dL(11.1 mmol/L) during an oral glucose tolerance test.
Thetestshouldbe performed as described bytheWorld Health Organization,usinga
glucose load containing an equivalent of 75 g anhydrous glucose dissolved in water.
In the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia with acute metabolic decompensation, these
criteria should be confirmed byrepeat testingonadifferent day.Theoral glucose tolerance
test isnotrecommended for routine clinicaluse.
The > 200 mg/dL criterion should work for dogs and horses; > 250 mg/dL is proposed for cats and
>150 mg/dL is proposed for cattle.
 The decision limit of 126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L) was based on several factors, including correlation
or arterial disease). Until similar studies are done in domestic species, similar decision limits cannot be
established for them.
It is unlikely that veterinarians will need such a criterion in clinical medicine.
Sources.WHO Study Groupand Gavin9
B.Disorders and conditions (Table 14.4)
1.Physiologic hyperglycemia
a.Postprandial hyperglycemia: Glucose absorbed after carbohydrate (starch)
digestionincreasesglucoseentryinto blood.Also,amino acidsabsorbedafter
protein digestion stimulate the release of glucagon which then promotes hyper-
glycemia via gluconeogenesis.[Glucose] in a monogastric animal should rerurn to
fasting values within 4 h.
b.Excitement or fright: Catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine) stimulate
glycogenolysis (β-adrenergicresponse) and promote GH release(a-adrenergic
response). GH then interferes with glucose uptake by myocytes and adipocytes.
An Og-adrenergic stimulus of pancreatic β-cells decreases insulin release and thus
reduces glucose utilization by hepatocytes, myocytes, and adipocytes.Also,
epinephrine may stimulate ACTH secretion, which would promote hypercorti
solemia and associated hyperglycemic effects.2 Themagnitude of the hyperglyce-
300 mg/dL).22
c.Steroid-associated hyperglycemia: Glucocorticoids produced by“stressed” patients
stimulate gluconeogenesis and create a state of insulin resistance by decreasing the
number or efficiency of glucose membrane transporters (GLUT-4) and indirectly
by increasing glucagon and fatty-acid concentrations.232 However, the number of
insulin receptors in target cell membranes may actually be increased because
glucocorticoids stimulate their formation.25
d.Diestrus: Progesterone released from the corpus luteum promotes release of GH,
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
715
Table 14.4.Diseases and conditions that cause hyperglycemia
*Physiologichyperglycemia:postprandial,excitement,fright,steroid-associated,diestru
Pathologic hyperglycemia
Type 1 DM: targeted β-cell destruction, usually leading to absolute insulin deficiency
(major form in dogs)
*IdiopathicDM
Immune-mediated DM
Type 2 DM: insulin resistance with inadequate compensatory insulin secretory
response
*Pancreatic insular amyloidosis (major form in cats)
Obesity
Other specific types of DM
*Pancreatic DM: pancreatitis, pancreatic carcinoma
*Endocrine(nonpancreatic)DM:acromegaly,glucagonoma,hyperadrenocorticism,
hyperpituitarism,hyperthyroidism,hypothyroidism,pheochromocytoma,bovine
milk fever,canine hepatocutaneous syndrome
Drug-induced DM: steroids (glucocorticoids), thyroid hormone, megestrol acetate
Infectious DM: sepsis, bovine virus diarrhea
Hyperammonemia:horses and cattle
Genetic DM:keshonds,possibly Samoyed dogs
Anti-insulin antibodies
Pharmacologic or toxicologic hyperglycemia (transient)
*Oral orintravenous glucose, steroids(glucocorticoids),megestrolacetateketamine,
glucagon,thyroxinehylenglycol,xylazine,etomidine,propranolol,inulin
(Somogyi effect),morphine,progestins
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note:A whole blood[glucose] is lower than serum or plasma [glucose],and thus appropriate
reference intervals should be used to determine whether hyperglycemia exists (see the text). The
classification system of an Expert Committee of the American Diabetes Association (2000) served as
similar to the above.
GH is produced by ductal epithelial cells of mammary glands and not by the
pituitary gland.27
2.Pathologic hyperglycemia
a.Type 1 DM (β-cell destruction, usually leading to absolute insulin deficiency);
previously called insulin-dependentDM,type IDM,or juvenile-onset DM
(1)This form of DM is caused by specific destruction of pancreatic β-cells. The
destruction is typically considered immune mediated.
(2)This may be themost common form of canine DM,but documentation of
an immune-mediated pathogenesis is uncommon.Investigators have shown
that some diabetic dogshaveanti-β-cell antibodies9
b.Type 2 DM (insulin resistance with inadequate compensatory insulin secretory
response); previously called non-insulin-dependent DM, type II DM,or adult
onsetDM
(1) This form of DM is most common in cats and is caused by defects in
insulin secretion and postinsulin receptor defects in target cells,the two
major criteria for type 2 DM.28
716
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(2)In cats,evidence indicates that amylin (amyloid polypeptide) that normally
is produced by pancreatic β-cells is often involved in the disorder.3 when
amylin is overproduced, it accumulates in pancreatic islets (pancreatic
amyloidosis) and damages β-cells.Also,amylin may mediate the insulin
resistance in target cells.31
(3)Persistent hyperglycemia may lead to glucose toxicosis, a state in which there
is down-regulation of glucose transporters on the β-cells.If there are fewer
transporters, hyperglycemia is not recognized by β-cells, and thus there is
several types of DM.
(4)Obesity is associated with an increased incidence of DM in cats (and
people). As cats changed from a lean state to an obese state, they developed
glucose intolerance and a lower GLUT4 expression.The results suggest
that decreased GLUT4 expression occurs in obese cats before they develop
clinical DM.Alterations in blood nonesterifed farry-acid,leptin, and
glucagon concentrations may also be contributing factors to the feline
diabetic state.Even though there are alterations in glucose tolerance and
insulin secretioninobese dogs,obesity doesnot appear to cause linicalDM
in dogs.28
C.Other specific types of DM
(1)Pancreatic DM: Any pancreatic disease (e.g,pancreatitis) may damage
enough β-cells to cause DM.In one study,13 % of the canine diabetic cases
were diagnosed as having pancreatitis.
(2)Endocrine (nonpancreatic) DM
(a)Acromegaly in dogs and cats: Excess GH creates insulin resistance by
(b)Glucagonoma: Excess glucagon antagonizes insulin activity by stimulat-
ing gluconeogenesis and inhibiting glucose utilization and storage.
(c）
Hyperadrenocorticism: Excess cortisol antagonizes insulin activity by
stimulating gluconeogenesis and creating insulin resistance (see Glucose
Concentration in Serum, sect. II.B.1.b). In one study, 23 % of the
diabetic dogs were diagnosed as having hyperadrenocorticism.4
(d)Hyperpituitarism: A diabetic state can be created through excess
secretion of GH or ACTH (which stimulates cortisol production)
A pituitary adenoma that was producing ACTH created an insulin
resistant diabetic state in a cat. The adenoma also produced
d-melanocyte-stimulating hormone.37
(i)Pituitary adenomas (one producing ACTH and one producing
GH) were found in a cat that had clinical signs and laboratory data
indicative of hyperadrenocorticism andDM.38
(ii)Horses with pituitary adenomas may be hyperglycemic because of
secretion of ACTH and the resultant excess production of gluco-
corticoid hormones.39.40
(e)Hyperthyroidism: Studies in cats suggest that hyperthyroidism creates a
state of insulin resistance.The mechanism is not known.41.42
Hypothyroidism: Some dogs with untreated hypothyroidism are
hyperglycemic, but some euthyroid dogs suspected of having hypothy.
roidism are also hyperglycemic. In another srudy of hypothyroid dogs
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
717
that had increased [fructosamine],the hypothyroid dogs were not
hyperglycemic. The concurrent finding of hypothyroidism and
hyperglycemia may,in some casesbebecause ofagenetic predisposition
to both thyroid disease andDM.45.46
(g）Pheochromocytoma:In one study,about 15%of dogswith pheochro-
(epinephrine and norepinephrine) secreted in excess by a pheochromo-
cytoma stimulate glycogenolysis and promote GH release (see Glucose
Concentration in Serum, sect.III.B.1.b).Available glycogen stores may
limit the severity of hyperglycemia.
(h)Bovine milk fever The hyperglycemia may be partially caused by Ca²
deficiency;Ca+is involved in the cleavage of proinsulin to insulin.450
Other physiologic responses in stressed cows may contribute to the
hyperglycemia via catecholamines and/or cortisol.
Canine hepatocutaneous syndrome: Hyperglycemia is a common finding
in the hepatocutaneous syndrome of dogs. Most of the affected dogs
has been calleddiabeticdermatopathy,necrolyticmigratory erythema,
and superficial necrolytic dermatitis.The pathogenesis of the hyperglyce
mia is not established but may involve insulin resistance, glucagon, GH
oralteratinsnmino aidattyaidrimtabolism.Itaas
that the diabetic state develops after the onset of hepatic disease,but it
has not yet been established if the liver disease causes the diabetic state.
(3)Drug-induced DM: persistent hyperglycemia (2or more days) associared
with use of a drug
(a)Steroids (glucocorticoids) (see Glucose Concentration in Serum,sect.
III.B.1.c)
(b)Thyroid hormones: Studies in cats suggest that hyperthyroidism creates
ism in dogs,data indicared that the glucose-induced hyperglycemia was
prolonged because of defective insulin secretion.54
（）Megestrol acetate:As a steroid,it promotes gluconeogenesisasa
progestin, it stimulates release of GH.Bothmechanisms probably occur
in dogs,but perhaps only the latter occurs in cats.s
(4)InfectiousDM
(a)Cattle infected with BVD virus can develop DM that appears to result
from damage toβ-cellss657
(b) Sepsis: An early response to endotoxemia is insulin resistance and
resultant hyperglycemia. Hypoglycemia may develop later. There are
several hormonal and cellular responses in sepsis that alter glucose
metabolism. Because animals with DM are considered more suscep-
tible to infections (especially urinary), sepsis could be the cause or result
ofDM.
(5)Hyperammonemia (horses and cattle):Hyperammonemia occurs in horses
and cattle for a variety of reasons (Chapter 13), and hyperglycemia may be a
concurrent finding.59-sThe hyperglycemia may develop because NH
（ammonium) stimulates the release of glucagon,which then promotes
718
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
gluconeogenesis andreduces glucose utilization by tissues.If that is the
mechanism,hyperglycemia would depend on glucose production by
hepatocytes, and thus hyperglycemia would be more likely when the
(e.g,excesNHproduction in intestine,urea toxicosisand ammonia
forage toxicosis).
(6)GeneticDM
(a)An inherited form of DM occurred in keeshonds. The onset of the
disorderwas frequently before 6mo of age and was caused by β-cell
hypoplasia.64
(b)A probable familial insulin-dependent DMwas reported in a group of
adult Samoyed dogs. The pathogenesis of the diabetic state was not
established.6s
(c)Certain breeds of dogs (e.g.,Alaskan malamute,Finish spitz,miniature
schnauzer, miniarure poodle, and English springer spaniel) have a higher
incidence ofDM,but a genetic pathogenesis isnot established in those
breeds.28
(7)Anti-insulin antibodies:Dogs with anti-insulin antibodies prior to insulin
treatments have been reported，but without case detail.2 (Note:Diabetic
dogs treated with bovine insulin may develop anti-insulin antibodies.)
3.Pharmacologic or toxicologichyperglycemia: hyperglycemia associated with occa-
sional or sporadic administration oringestion of a drug or toxicant (persistent use of
some agents may produce a disorder that fulflls diagnostic criteria for DM; see
Table 14.3)
a. Oral or intravenous glucose (dextrose) enters plasma faster than it is utilized,
stored, or excreted
b.Steroids (glucocorticoids) (see Glucose Concentration in Serum, sect. II.B.1.c)
C.Megestrol acetate:As a steroid,it promotes gluconeogenesis as a progestin,it
stimulates release of GH.Both mechanisms probably occur in dogs, but perhaps
only the latter in cats.5s
d.Ketamine stimulates release of epinephrine, which promotes glycogenolysis,
e.Glucagon antagonizes insulin activity by stimulating gluconeogenesis and
inhibiting glucose utilization and storage.
f.Thyroxine: In a study in which thyroxine was given to create experimental
hyperthyroidism in dogs, data indicated that the duration of the hyperglycemia
after intravenous glucose infusion was prolonged because of defective insulin
secretion.54
g
Ethylene glycolmay inhibit glycolysis and theKrebs cycle, and thus may
indirectly stimulate gluconeogenesis in“starved" cells.
h.Xylazine and detomidine bind to a-adrenergic receptors onβ-cells,resulting in
the inhibition of insulin release and thus reduction in glucose utilization by
hepatocytes,myocytes,and adipocytes.
iPropranolol and otherβ-adrenergic blockers inhibit insulin release from β-cells.9
Additionally,propranolol may create a state of insulin resistance.
j.Insulin (Somogyi effect）:In response to excess injected insulin,an animal
develops hypoglycemia that stimulates the release of glucagon, epinephrine,
cortisol, and GH. Together, these hormones promote hyperglycemia. In a normal
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
719
animal, the hyperglycemia is minimized by insulin release. In a diabetic, insulin
release does not compensate, and thus the animal develops hyperglycemia that
might be misinterpreted as evidence that not enough insulin was given.
k.In humans,thiazides,diazoxide,phenytoin,phenothiazine,andnicotinic acid are
reported to produce hyperglycemia by inhibiting insulin release.
1.Progestins stimulate GH release from mammary glands in dogs. GH is also
m. Morphine may stimulate the release of GH and ACTH, which could lead to
hyperglycemia through multiple processes.1
IV.
Hypoglycemia
A.Hypoglycemic disordersare causedby increased glucoseutilization by tissues,decreased
glucose production,or both.
B.A diagnostician should always be alert to thepossibilityof a mild to extreme spurious
hypoglycemia created by the following:(1) in vitro glycolysis in leukocytes,erythro-
cytes,plateletsand possibly bacteria（see GlucoseConcentration inSerum,sectII.)
or (2) the bromide interference in glucose oxidase assays.
C.Disorders and pathogeneses (Table 14.5)
1.Pathologic hypoglycemia
a. Increased insulin secretion
(1)Functional pancreatic β-cell neoplasia (insulinoma)
(a)Hyperinsulinism will cause both increased glucose utilization by
hepatocytes, myocytes, and adipocytes and decreased glucose production
by hepatocytes. Insulinomas may cause persistent or sporadic hypoglyce
mia of suffcient severity to cause weakness and seizures.With sporadic
hypoglycemia,a prolonged fast （up to72 h) may beneeded to
documenthypoglycemia.
(b)Insulinomas have been recognized in dogs for many years. More
recently, an insulinoma was reported in a cat. They also oocur in
ferrets. An insulin-secreting neoplasm can be part of multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1.73
(c)Documentation ofhyperinsulinism requires a measured IRl]and
increased IRI:Gratio (seeImmunoreactiveInsulin Concentration in
Serum, sect.V).
(2)Xylitol toxicosis
substitute (alone or with aspartame) in candy, chewing gum, and some
toothpaste.nogsitsaotent stimulant forleasefinsulinwhich
then promotes increased glucose uptake and utilization and thus
of insulin than when glucose is given per os.Xylitol stimulates insulin
release in cattle and goats, but not in people and horses.
(b)A dog that ingested xylitol-containing gum (Atkins sugar-free gum) quickly
developed hypoglycemia secondary to the stimulated release of insulin.76.7
b.Decreased insulin antagonists
(1)Hypoadrenocorticism:When hypoglycemia is present in this disorder,it is
probably because of the hypocortisolemia (thus, decreased gluconeogenesis
and increased insulin sensitivity in target cells).78
720
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 14.5.Diseases and conditions that cause hypoglycemia
Pathologichypoglycemia
Increased insulin secretion
*Pancreatic β-cell neoplasia (insulinoma)
Xylitol toxicosis (dogs)
Decreased insulin antagonists
*Hypoadrenocorticism (decreased cortisol)
Growth hormone deficiency
Hypopituitarism (decreased cortisol and GH)
Decreased gluconeogenesis
*Hepatic insufficiency/failure: acquired, congenital
*Hypoadrenocorticism (decreased cortisol)
Neonatal or juvenile hypoglycemia
Starvation and severemalnutrition
Decreased glycogenolysis
Glycogen storage diseases (rare)
Increased glucose utilization
*Lactational hypoglycemia (spontaneous bovine ketosis)
Exertional hypoglycemia (hunting dogs, endurance horses)
Other pathologic hypoglycemias with uncertain or unknown pathogeneses
Non-β-cell neoplasms: epithelial and nonepithelial
*Sepsis,especially with endotoxemia
Pregnancy hypoglycemia
Malonic aciduria in Maltese dogs
Pharmacologic or toxicologic hypoglycemia
Insulin
Sulfonylurea compounds (glipizide,glyburide)
Ethanol
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Delayed analysis of blood samples or failure to remove serum or plasma from blood cells
appropriatelywillresultinfalselylowglucose]becauseofcellutilization.Bromide ionswill causea
falsely low[glucose]when using the i-STAT instrument, and marked leukocytosis and erythrocytosis
may accelerate glucose consumption in vitro as cells utilize glucose.Whole blood[glucose] is lower
than serum or plasma [glucose], and thus appropriate reference intervals should be used to determine if
hypoglycemia exists (see the text).
(2)GH deficiency:Reduced GH activity promotes increased insulin sensitivity
and thus has the potential to cause hypoglycemia,but reports of hypoglyce
mia in animals with a GH deficiency were not found.
（③）
Hypopituitarism: Hypoglycemia could be caused by decreased secretion of
GH or ACTH (and thus less cortisol production), but hypoglycemia is not
a common problem in animals with hypopiruitarism.
c.Decreased gluconeogenesis
(1)Hepatic insufficiency:With marked reduction in functional hepaticmass
because of congenital or acquired diseases, there are too few hepatocytes to
maintain fasting normoglycemia. Other evidence of hepatic disease or
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
721
insufficiency is expected (e.g.,ncreased hepatic enzyme activitieshypoalbu-
minemia, decreased [urea nitrogen], and increased [bile acid]).
(2）
Hypoadrenocorticism (see the preceding section on hypoadrenocorticism)
③
Neonatal or juvenile hypoglycemia: This neonatal canine disorder occurs in
toy and miniarure breeds and may be caused by hepatic immaturity and
insufficient gluconeogenesis relative to metabolic rate and glucose
consumption.79
(4)Starvation: With chronic depletion of body fuels (including proteins and
fats), gluconeogenesis may not be able to maintain normoglycemia. A
starved state may be caused by lackof foodintake,maldigestion,or
intestinalmalabsorption.Generally,physiologic pathwayswill attempt to
maintain blood glucose at the expense ofother body fuels,and thus animals
with this form of hypoglycemia are expected to bemarkedlyunderweight or
emaciated.
d.Decreased glycogenolysis: Congenital deficiencies of enzymes needed for glycoge
nolysis may contribute to hypoglycemia and accumulation of glycogen in cells
(glycogen storage diseases).8o
e.Increased glucose utilization
(1)Lactational hypoglycemia (spontaneous bovine ketosis): During marked milk
production (especially in very productive cows), there is a huge need for
glucose in mammary glands. The cows will become hypoglycemic if
gluconeogenesis cannot meet demand.Ketosis develops secondarily because
of enhanced fatty-acid catabolism.s
(2)Exertional hypoglycemia:Hunting dogs and endurance horses may become
hypoglycemic because glycolysis consumes glucose faster than it is replaced
by either glycogenolysis or gluconeogenesis.In contrast, catecholamine and
catecholamine-independent factors tend to cause hyperglycemia in exercised
animals
fOther Pathologic states causinghypoglycemia through unknown mechanisms
(1)Non-β-cell neoplasms (epithelial and nonepithelial): Several non-β-cell
neoplasms have been associatedwith hypoglycemia.Most were leiomyomas,
leiomyosarcomashpatocellularcarcnomasrrenalcarcinomas.
hypoglycemiamight result from secretion of an insulin-like substance,
excessive glucose utilization by neoplastic cells, liver dysfunction, or a
combination offactors.
2
）Sepsis (especially endotoxemia)
(a)Hypoglycemia is probably due to both increased utilization by tissue
and decreased glucose production. Glucose consumption by organisms
is an unlikely explanation in most infections.Endotoxins have been
shown to produce hypoglycemia, possibly by increasing glucose utiliza
tion. The complex interactions of endotoxins and cytokines result in a
decreased perfusion of tissues. Consequently, the target cells switch to
anaerobic glycolysis,which requires more glucose to generate energy for
the cells;also, leukocytes of the inflammatory response consume more
glucose. Concurrently,hepatic production of glucose is reduced because
of acidosis and decreased delivery of precursors for gluconeogenesis
(b)If there are numerous organisms, they might contribute to the
hypoglycemia.9o
722
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(3)Pregnancy hypoglycemia:A ketotic hypoglycemia occurs in late pregnancy
in dogs. The pathogenesis of the disorder is not established.9
(4）Malonic aciduria in Maltese dogs: Dogs with this metabolic disorder had
marked hypoglycemiabut the specific enzymatic defect wasnot established.
The dogs did not have malonyl-coenzyme A (CoA) decarboxylase def
mia, because increased [malonyl-CoA] inhibits pyruvate carboxylase, an
enzyme of a gluconeogenesis pathway.
2.Pharmacologic or toxicologic hypoglycemia
a.Insulin
(1) An overdose of insulin in a diabetic animal may cause hypoglycemia because
of the excess utilization of glucose and decreased gluconeogenesis.The
amount of insulin that a diabetic needs will depend on food intake,physical
activity,and other factors.
(2)Surreptitious insulin injections: Malicious administration of insulin to a
b.Sulfonylurea compounds (glipizide and glyburide):These drugs, sometimes
referred to asoral hypoglycemic agentsdirecly stimulateinsulin secretion and
may also improve cellular responses to insulin.94
C. Ethanol: Ethanol oxidation generates reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH). When there is an acute excess of ethanol, an increased ratio of reduced
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide to nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
[Glucose] during insulin therapy
V.
A.Serial blood[glucose]curve
1.Data from this procedure may beuseful for initial regulation of a diabetic state,for
suspectedhypoglycemia during therapy,or for poorly controlledDM.
2.In dogs, the serial blood [glucose] curve is created by measuring blood [glucose] in
thefollowing samples from hospitalizedpatients that arefed and exercised as
similarly as possible to their normal routine
a.An 8 am. sample, just before morning insulin injection
b.Samples collected at 2 h intervals for 8-12h(insulin administeredq12h) and at
16 h and 24 h if receiving insulin q24h
C.An 8 p.m. sample,just before evening insulin injection (insulin q12h)
3.One set of recommendations for altering insulin dose (porcine lente insulin,
subcutaneous, q12h) in diabetic dogs is as follows:96
a.Increase the insulin dose if the nadir [glucose] is > 145 mg/dL and the 8 a.m.
and 8 p.m. samples had [glucose] >180 mg/dL
b. Do not change the insulin dose if the nadir [glucose] is between 90 and
145 mg/dL and the 8 a.m.and 8 p.m. samples had [glucose] > 180 mg/dL
c.Decrease the insulin dose if nadir [glucose] is < 90 mg/dL or if either the 8 a.m.
or the 8 p.m. sample had [glucose] < 180 mg/dL.
4.Guidelines for cats are similar but with greater decision thresholds (e.g., nadir values
between 100 and 150mg/dL).7
5.Because there can be marked variation in the serial blood[glucose] curves from one
day to the next,especially during hospitalization, a decision to alter an insulin dose
should consider other clinical information.96
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
723
6.Problems that may be revealed by serial blood [glucose]curves include the
following:
a.Insufficient insulin dose: If so, increase the dose
b. Too short an insulin effect: If so, use longer-acting insulin or give q12h.
c.Overlap of insulin effect between insulin doses:If so,use shorter-acting insulin.
d.The Somogyi effect (see Glucose Concentration in Serum, sect. II.B.3.j）: If so,
reduce the insulin dose and repeat the curve in 1 wk.
B.Unexpected hyperglycemia:There are several possible reasons for inadequate response to
insulin treatments.
1.There may be an insufficient insulin dosage, the insulin may have deteriorated,or
the owner may be having problems injecting the insulin.
2.The caloric intake in the diet may have increased.
3.A state of insulin resistance may have developed because of stress,hyperadrenocorti
cism,infections,hypothyroidism,pancreatitis,or acromegaly.
C.Unexpected hypoglycemia
1.As previously indicated (Glucose Concentration in Serum, sect.IV.C.2.a),an insulin
overdose may cause hypoglycemia.
2.Other reasons for hypoglycemia in treated diabetic animals include decreased caloric
intake（g,anorexiavomiingxocrinepancreaticinsufcency,andinammatry
intestinal disease) and excess glucose utilization by tissues (e.g., excess physical
activity and increased metabolic state). The diabetic state might also be due to a
transient disorder that decreased in severity or resolved itself.
KETOAMINES:FRUCTOSAMINEAND GLYCATEDHEMOGLOBIN(Hgb)
Physiologic processes
A.When glucose reacts nonenzymatically with a protein's amino groups,mostly at lysine
sites,a Schiff base is formed that then converts to a more stable ketoamine adduct.
1.Generally speaking,fructosamines are glycated proteins In clinical chemistry,
fructosamine refers to ketoamines that are formed by the posttranslational irreversible
nonenzymatic linking of glucose to albumin or other plasma proteins (mostly IgG);
glycated albumin acounts for about 80%of human serum ketoamines.9 The
carbon backbone of these ketoamines is identical to fructose (hence the name
"fructosamine).The half-life of fructosamine molecules is generally stated to be
near 2-3 wk, but the half-life varies among species and can be altered during
pathologic states.
2.Glycated (glycosylated) Hgb is a ketoamine formed by the nonenzymatic addition of
glucose toHgb.The half-life of glycated Hgb is generally stated to be 2-3mo but
varies with the circulating life span of erythrocytes (e.g., dogs = 100 d, cats = 70 d,
and cattle =150 d).Hemoglobin A is the major subset of human glycated Hgb,
representing glycation of the amino terminus of the β-globin chain.
B.The formation of ketoamines in blood is positively correlated with the magnitude and
duration of hyperglycemia, whereas the removal of ketoamines depends on the degrada
tion or loss of the parent molecules (e.g., albumin or Hgb).Transient hyperglycemia, as
not significantly affect the concentrations of the ketoamines in dogs (nitroblue tetrazo
lium assay)9 or cattle (nitroblue tetrazolium assay)ioo and should not affect ketoamine
concentrations in any species.
724
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
II.
Analytical concepts
A.[Fructosamine]
1.In the nitroblue tetrazolium assay,fructosamine acts as a reducing agent in an
alkaline medium to generate formazane, which is detected spectrophotometrically.
Nonspecific reduction occurs within the first 10 min, so measurements are taken
after thattime.However,otherreducingagentsin serum could causefalse-positive
results.In contrast, the fructosyl lysine oxidase assay is considered to be specific for
fructosyl lysine, a specific glycated amino acid.
mined by the nitroblue tetrazolium assay were about 34 times those determined
by the enzymatic assay (about 100 μmol/L）. This study raises a concern about
the validity of the [fructosamine] reported from the nitroblue tetrazolium assay.
b.Modifications of thenitroblue tetrazolium assay to remove actions of reducing
substances other than fructosamine reportedlly resulted in[fructosamine] of about
10 % that of the original nitroblue tetrazolium assays.12
2.Whenmeasured by spectrophotometricassays,hemolyzed and icteric samples can
cause erroneous results.
B.Glycated Hgb concentrations or percentages
1.Glycated Hgb has been measured by chromatographic,immunorurbidimetric, and
chemical assays, each with its own limitations. Some assays were designed to
specifically detect human hemoglobin A whereas others (e.g,chemical methods)
detect multiple forms of glycated Hgb.
2.Results are usually reported as the percentage of rotal Hgb that is glycated.
3.If lipemia is present, the assay should be completed after washing the erythrocytes;
4.There was good agreement between a colorimetric assay and a chromatographic
method with canine blood.104
5.An immunoturbidimetric assay, manufactured for measuring human [glycated Hgb].
III.
Increased [fructosamine] and increased glycated hemoglobin percentage or concentration
(Table 14.6)
A.Diabetes mellitus: Increased concentrations of fructosamine or glycated hemoglobin
occur in animals with DM. Concentrations of these glycated proteins can be used to
monitor the effectiveness of controlling the diabetic state. [Keroamine] has been
measured indiabeticdog02.106-10and cats.-113
B.Hypothyroidism
1.Mildly increased [fructosamine] (asay type not reported) was found in hypothyroid
dogs thar were not considered to have DM. In another study of normoglycemic
Table 14.6.Diseases and conditions that increase [ketoamine]
Fructosamine
Glycated hemoglobin
*Hyperglycemia (persistent)a
*Hyperglycemia (persistent)
Hypothyroidism
*A relatively common disease or condition
 See Table 14.4 for causes of hyperglycemia
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
725
Table 14.7. Diseases and conditions that decrease[ketoamine]
Fructosamine
Glycated hemoglobin
*Hypoglycemia (persistenr)a
*Hypoglycemia (persistent)
Hypoproteinemia
Anemia (see the text for variables)
Hyperthyroidism
*A relatively common disease or condition
See Table 14.5 for causes of hypoglycemia.
normoproteinemic hypothyroid dogs,9 of 11 had an increased [fructosamine]
（nitroblue tetrazolium assay),and the concentrations decreased afterinitiation of
thyroid hormone supplementation.44
2.Based on studies in people, the increased [fructosamine] is the result of an increased
albumin half-life (reduced protein turnover）.4
C.Hyperproteinemia
1.In theory,hyperproteinemia could cause increased [fructosamine]. However,
variations in the duration of the hyperproteinemia and variations in albumin to
globulinratiosresult in variablefructosamine concentrationsin hyperproteinemic
samples.11s.116
2. In one study, corrected [fructosamine] in hyperproteinemic animals did not improve
the diagnosticvalue of[fructosamine].5
IV.
Decreased[fructosamine] and decreased glycated hemoglobin percentage or concentration
(Table 14.7)
A.Decreased [fructosamine]
1.Insulinoma in dogs: Persistent hypoglycemia caused by an inappropriate release of
2.Hypoproteinemia and hypoalbuminemia
a.Normoglycemic dogs with hypoalbuminemia had decreased fructosamine
concentrations.116.119
b. About 67 % of normoglycemic cats with hypoproteinemia had decreased serum
[fructosamine].6The[fructosamine]was better correlatedwith[total protein]
than with [albumin].
3. Decreased [fructosamine] has been associated with azotemia and hyperlipidemia in
normoglycemic dogs.l16 However, the report did not describe whether the azotemic
or hyperlipidemic dogs had dysproteinemias.
4.Cats with hyperthyroidism have significantly lower serum fructosamine concentra
tions than healthy cats.120.1z Similar findings are found in people with
thyrotoxicosis.122
B.Decreased glycated Hgb percentage or concentration
1.Insulinoma:Persistent hypoglycemia caused by an inappropriate release of insulin
2.Anemia: If [erythrocyte] is stable, then the degree of glycated Hgb formation will
primarily depend on blood [glucose] during the life span of the erythrocytes.
a.If there is an acute anemia (e.g., because of hemorrhage or hemolysis) and a
subsequent regenerative response, then the glycated Hgb concentration and
percentagewill be reducedbecause young erythrocytes have less glycatedHgb
and blood [Hgb] is decreased.
726
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
b.If there is anemia of any origin and the animal has not been hyperglycemic
then the[glycated Hgb] will be decreased because the blood [Hgb] is
decreased.108
C.The glycated Hgb percentages in dogs with acute and chronic anemias were
similar to those in dogs with hypoglycemias caused by β-cell neoplasia1o8
V.
Correction of the [fructosamine] for abnormal protein concentrations
A.Because dysproteinemias affect [fructosamine] independently of blood [glucose], some
authorshave recommended correction formulas to adjust for the dysproteinemia(Eq
14.2). The formulas suggest the relationships are complerely linear and depend only on
albumin or total protein concentrations,but the degree of glycation permole of
albumin depends also on the half-lives of the proteins. At a lower [albumin], the
catabolism of albumin is decreased,so its half-life is increased.This results in greater
glycation permoleof albumin,thus somewhat counteracting the decrease in fructos-
amine caused by hypoalbuminemia23 Consequently, the correlation between albumin
and fructosamine concentrations is poor to moderate.
median[albumin]for healthy dogs
Corrected canine[fructosamine]= observed [fructosamine]x
observed [albumin]
TSBma
(14.2a.)
3.3g/dL
Example:corrected canine[fructosamine]= 180 μmol/L x
=297μmol/L
2.0 g/dL
observedtotal protein]
(14.2b.)
B.A canine correction formula using serum [albumin]was recommended because of a
greater correlation coefficient (r) for serum [albumin] (r =0.79) than for [total
use of the corrected concentrations did not substantially increase the diagnostic
sensitivity or diagnostic specificity of the [fructosamine] (nitroblue tetrazolium assay)
forDM.115
C.A feline correction formula using serum [total protein] was recommended because of a
greater correlation coefficient for serum [toral protein] (r= 0.68) than for [albumin].6
Because there was very poor correlation with serum [albumin], the authors suggested
that a greater proportion of the glycated proteins were globulins.
IMMUNOREACTIVEINSULIN(IRI)CONCENTRATIONINSERUMORPLASMA
I.
Physiologic processes
A.Insulin is a polypeptide hormone (M, = 6000) with 51 amino acids in rwo chains
(A and B) linked by disulfide bridges. The amino acid sequences of insulin molecules
of dogs and pigs are identical and have one amino acid difference from human insulin.
Equine insulin has one amino acid difference from porcine insulin.Feline and bovine
insulinmolecules are similar but haveminor differences from the molecules of canine,
porcine, and human insulin.94124
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
727
B.Physiologic stimuli for insulin secretion include increased concentrations of glucose,
xylitolmino acidandsveraormonesgucaon,gatrincretin,anreozymin
gastrointestinal polypeptide, and β-adrenergic hormones).
C.Inhibitors of insulin secretion nclude somatostatin,adrenergic agonists,andβ
adrenergic antagonists.70
proinsulin that is stored in secretory granules of the Golgi complex. Insulin is formed
after cleavage enzymes (some Ca² regulated) break peptide bonds to form insulin
C-peptide, and split peptides. [Glucose] regulates synthesis of proinsulin and one
cleavage enzyme.Insulin and C-peptide secretions are equimolar; small amounts of
proinsulin and split peptides are also released.9
E.The major actions of insulin are illustrated in Fig. 14.1.
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms andunits
1.IRI is the preferred term for immunoassay measurements of serum or plasma
insulin for two reasons: (1) measurements may include proinsulin, and (2)
measurements of insulin arein mmunoreactive units,not biologic activity units
of injectable insulin.
2.Units: μU/mL= mU/L;μU/mLx7.175=pmol/L;and μg/L×172.2= pmol/L
(SI unit,nearest 5pmol/L)
B.Assays
1.Most measurements of IRI are made using commercial radioimmunoassay kits and
therefore anti-insulin antibody reagents. Chemiluminescent assays and enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) are also available.
2.The antibody in commercial assays may have been developed to react with porcine
or human insulin.There is sufficient cross-immunoreactivity that commercial assays
have been validated for canine insulin. Commercial assays may not be valid for
feline insulin.125
3.Wide ranges of [IRl] have been reported for canine, feline, and human samples
differences in standard or calibrator solutions,but unacceptable variation persisted
after laboratories used a common calibrator. Because of this variation:
a.A patient's[IRl] should be compared against reference intervals established for
the assay used to measure the patient's[IRI],and the assay should have been
validated for the species being tested Diagnostic decision limits for IRl] or
IRI:G ratios need to be established for each validated insulin assay.
b.Laboratories offering quantitation of [IRI] should thoroughly evaluate their
insulin assays for performance characteristics with varying lots of reagents.
4.Samples
a.An [IRI] may be determined in serum or heparinized plasma.EDTA-plasma can
b.IRIis stablein whole blood at room temperature for at least 5h.In serum,it s
stable for 7 d at 4 °C and for several months at -20 °C. Thawing and refreezing
should be avoided.t9
c.Because glucose,amino acids,and several gastric, intestinal,and pancreatic
hormones infuence insulin secretion, it is very important that samples be
collected from fasted animals to reduce the effects of these physiologic factors
728
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 14.8. Diseases and conditions that cause hyperinsulinemia
Increased insulin production and release
*Functional pancreatic β-cell neoplasia (insulinoma)
Xylitol toxicosis
Hyperglycemic disorders not caused by decreased insulin production (see the text)
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Anti-insulin antibodies may produce a positive interference in some assays.
II1.
Hyperinsulinemia
A.The major reason for measuring [IRl] is to document the inappropriate release of
insulin from neoplastic β-cells; that is, too much insulin released for the animals
plasma or serum [glucose].
B.Disorders and pathogeneses (Table 14.8)
1.Increased insulin production and release
a.Functional pancreatic β-cell neoplasia (insulinoma): Neoplastic β-cells may
consistentlyor sporadicallyproduceinsulinwhichcauseshypoglycemia because
ofenhanced glycolysis,reduced gluconeogenesis,and increased glucose uptake by
myocytes and adipocytes.
b. Hyperglycemia not caused by decreased insulin production
(1)Hyperinsulinemia is expected with physiologic hyperglycemia because
hyperglycemia stimulates the production and release of insulin.
cemias if insulin release from β-cells is not defective.Also,a state of insulin
resistance may initiate or augment a hyperglycemic state and concurrent
hyperinsulinemia.
2. Anti-insulin antibodies: The presence of anti-insulin antibodies may result in a
falsely increased [IRI] in some assays (see Fig. 17.2 for the concept).Anti-insulin
antibodies may arise from spontaneous pathologic processes or insulin therapy.
IV.
Hypoinsulinemia
A.Documenting hypoinsulinemia could help in classifying or characterizing DM states;
for examleconrmingMstagingt2DMorssessingnsulinstatun
other diabetic states
1. Measuring [IRI] in hyperglycemic animals is not common. The infrequent measure-
ment of [IRI] in DM cases is probably due to many factors, such as cost,lack of
standardized assays, and lack of diagnostic or prognostic criteria associated with
variations in [IRI] in different types of DM.
2.A deficiency in insulin can be defined in rwo ways: (1) an absolute deficiency in
which [IRl] is below an appropriate reference interval, and (2) a relative defciency
in which the amount of insulin is insufficient to maintain a normal carbohydrate
metabolism. Fasting plasma [IRI] has been used as a method of detecting insulin
resistance in cats fitting the second definition.127
B.Disorders or conditions where [IRl] is expected to decrease
1.Pathologic hypoinsulinemia
a.Type I DM: Insulin production is decreased because of the destruction of β-cells
b.Type 2 DM: Advanced stages of pancreatic amyloidosis involve β-cell damage and
thus decreased insulin production.
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
729
2.Physiologic hypoinsulinemia: Animals with a variety of hypoglycemic states (see
Table 14.5) would be expected to have hypoinsulinemia if the hypoglycemic state
was not caused by increased insulin secretion.
3.In some assays, the presence of anti-insulin antibodies can cause falsely decreased
values.
V.
Immunoreactive insulin to glucose (IRI: G) ratio
A.Because insulin production and release from β-cells depend on plasma [glucose], an
IRI:G ratio should indicate whether the measured [IRl] is appropriate for the degree of
glucose stimulation. When used, the ratio is typically calculated by using conventional
units for both IRI and glucose concentrations (Eq. 14.3).
[IRI]x100
IRI:G:
(14.3.)
[glucose]
with [IRI] in μU/mL and glucose in mg/dL;thusIRI:Gratio unit is μU/mg glucose
B.The lack of analytical agreement among insulin assays requires that reference intervals
forIRI:G ratios be established for each assay,which is a task that is not commonly
accomplished.
C.Interpretation of the fasting IRI:G ratio (assuming valid concentrations of IRI and
glucose and comparison to an appropriate reference interval for IRI:G ratio)
1.Increased
a.If associated with hypoglycemia, then insulin is contributing to the
hypoglycemia.
b.If associated with normoglycemia or hyperglycemia, then an increased IRI:G
ratio may indicate insulin resistance.When this ratio was calculated from values
measured in samples from fasted cats, it was shown to be a relatively reliable
method for assessing insulin sensitivity compared to several othermethods27
2.Within the reference interval
a.If associated with hypoglycemia, then a pathologic state other than hyperinsu-
linemia is causing thehypoglycemia.
b.If associated with hyperglycemia,then a factor other than insulin deficiency is
causing the hyperglycemia.
3.Decreased: If associated with hyperglycemia, then an absolute insulin deficiency is
present that could be due to β-cell damage or glucose toxicosis3
D.The IRI: G ratio may be difficult to interpret for reasons other than the variations
Created by different assays.
1.Substances other than glucose influence insulin release from β-cells.
2.Much of the released insulin is removed from portal blood by hepatocytes and thus
E.Amended insulin to glucose ratio and the “< 30 mg/dL theory”
1.In 1971,Turner and associates reported an“observation that the plasma insulin
levels of normal subjects[humans] are near zero if theplasma glucose is 30 mg/dL
or less2andreferenced an article by Turner,Oakley,andNabarro that was n
press. Based on the observation, they proposed that [glucose] above 30 mg/dL would
result in insulin entry into peripheral blood.To evaluate[IRI] in hypoglycemic
people,theymodified the IRI:G ratio by subtracting 30mg/dL from the measured
730
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
[glucose]. If the modification was valid, there would be a direct relationship between
insulin andglucose concentrationsover30mg/dL;that isxμU of insulin for every
ymgofglucose>30.
2.In1973,Turner,Oakley,and Nabarro reported changes in plasma [insulin] during
a.They did not mention their“<30 mg/dL” theory or proposed amended IRI: G
ratio of 1971, and their published data were not consistent with the theory.
Insulin was not detected in several samples with a [glucose] of 40-65 mg/dL
There were only three samples with a [glucose]<30 mg/dL; insulin values in
those samples ranged from 0-2.0 μU/mL.
b.They did write, “The fall in plasma insulin was a function of the fall, rather than
of the absolute values of the plasma glucose."
c.Another variable not considered was the difference between insulin concentra-
tions in portal and peripheral blood.Because much of the secreted insulin is
removed from portal blood by hepatocytes, assessment of insulin secretion
stimulated by glucose is better evaluated by measuringportal blood concentra
tions, which is a technique generally limited to experimental investigations.
3.Many veterinary publications have included the use of the amended IRI: G ratio to
evaluate [IRI] and [glucose] in domestic and nondomestic animals.There have also
been several attempts to squelch the use of the amended IRI: G ratio, but it seems
to have a life of its own.-13 The amended IRI: G ratio should not be used.
IMMUNOREACTIVEGLUCAGON(IRG) CONCENTRATIONINPLASMA
I.
Physiologic processes
A.Pancreatic glucagon (M, = 3485) is a 29-amino-acid polypeptide hormone that is
secreted by the α-cells of the pancreas. Glucagon is a member of a superfamily of
peptide hormones (collectively called GLPs) that influence or regulate several digestive
and metabolic processes. Other than glucagon, the major GLP involved in glucose
metabolism is GLP-1.135
1.The major role of glucagon is to maintain blood [glucose] during fasting.
Stimuli for pancreatic glucagon secretion include hypoglycemia (which may be
induced by exercise),increased amino acids,hypercortisolemia,and probably
hypoinsulinemia.
2. GLP-I, which is released from L cells (large granule cell) of the intestinal mucosa
after feeding,stimulates the release ofinsulin and reduces postprandial hyperglyce
mia Prior to the identification of GLP-1,thehormone was referred to as gut
glucagon, which cross-reacted with glucagon in some immunoassays.
B.Proglucagon is producedbypancreatic -cellsintestinal Lcellsand the parasympa
theticnucleusofthevagusnerveAvarietyoffactorscontrolthecleavageofprogu
cagon into glucagon (primarily in the pancreas), GLP-1 (primarily in intestine), and
other GLPs
C.The major actions of glucagon are illustrated in Fig. 14.1.
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms and units
1.The term IRG should be reserved for the glucagon that is measured by
immunoassays that are specific for pancreatic glucagon.Unfortunately,some
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
731
radioimmunoassay antibodies also detect other GLPs,especially GLP-1 or gut
glucagon.Some authors refer toIRG as glucagon-like immunoreactivity.
2.Unit conversion: pg/mL=ng/L (SI unit, nearest 10 ng/L)
B.Assays
1. For many years, the gold standard assay for canine IRG was a radioimmunoassay
with Unger's 30K antibody, an antibody thar was considered specific for the C
terminus of glucagon.36Other investigators have shown varying degrees of antibody
2. One group of investigators described validation studies using an anti-(bovine
glucagon) antibody to assess [glucagon] in dogs, cats, sheep, cows, and horses. In the
fasting state,about 30% of the glucagon-likeimmunoreactiviry was pancreatic
glucagon. Their antibody did cross-react with larger molecular forms that had
glucagon-likeimmunoreactivity.13
glucagon assays differed considerably (> 10-fold in some plasma samples) in a
screening evaluation.140
C. Samples
1.Most investigators considerIRG to be very unstable inblood,and thus special
handling is recommended.49 Immediately after collection, EDTA-blood is immersed
in an ice bath and a protease inhibitor (aprotinin) is added. Plasma is separated from
erythrocytes in a 4 °C centrifuge and then frozen at-20°C.Samples should be
protectedfrom light.
2.Serum has been used in some studies.41 There is evidence that the stability of
radiolabeled glucagon isnot the samein all species.In some assay systems,
degradation of radiolabeled glucagon will cause falsely increased measuredvalues.143
3.The presence of arginine can lead to an overestimation of measured [IRG].144 This
finding must be considered when interpreting results of the arginine stimulation
tests that have been used to validate IRG assays; that is, an increased [IRG] after
arginine stimulation was used as evidence that the assay was measuring glucagon
released from the a-cells.
III.
Hyperglucagonemia associated with glucagonomas
A.Because glucagon is a hormone involved in carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, there
are many reports of immunoreactive glucagon concentrations in various physiologic and
pathologic states.However,[IRG]has very limited use in veterinary diagnostic efforts.
B.Some dogs with pancreatic glucagonomas have a characteristic superficial necrolytic
dermatitis,but not all dogs with the dermatologic disorder have glucagonomas.
1.ncreasedplasmaRG]hasbeenrportedinsomedogswiththdisrder46
2.In a study involving 22 dogs with superficial necrolytic dermatitis, pancreatic
neoplasms were not found (19 of 22 had histologic pancreatic examinations), and
immunoreactive glucagon concentrations were within thereference intervalin the
five dogs that were evaluated.147
References
1.Adams HR. 1995. Adrenergic agonists and antagonists. In: Adams HR, ed. Veterinary Pharmacolegy and Therapeu
tics, 7th edition, 91-116. Ames: Iowa State University Press.
2.Rizza RA, Cryer PE, Haymond MW, Gerich JE. 1980. Adrenergic mechanisms of catecholamine action on glucose
homeostasis in man. Metabolism 29:11551163
732
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
3. Thurmon JC, Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ. 1996. Preanestheties and anesthetic adjuncts. In: Thurmon JC,
Williams &Willkins.
4. Adams HR. 2001. Introduction to neurohormonal transmission and the autonomic nervous system. In:
Adams HR, ed Veterinry Pharmacolgy and Therapentis, Sth edition, 6990. Ames Iowa State University
P'ress.
5. McMahon CD, Radcliff RP, Lookingland KJ, Tucker HA. 2001. Neuroregulation of growth hormone secretion in
domestic animals. Domest Anim Endocrinol 20:65-87.
6. Simmons HA, Ford EJH. 1991. Gluconeogenesis from propionate produced in the colon of the horse. Br Vet J
147:340-345.
7. Lundberg GD, Iverson C, Radulescu G. 1986. Now read this: The SI units are here. J Am Med Assoc
255:2329-2339.
8. Laessig RH, Hassemer DJ, Westgard JO, Carey RN, Feldbruegge DH, Schwartz TH. 1976. Assessment of the
serum separator tube as an intermediate storage device within the laboratory. Am J Clin Pathol 66:653657.
9. Bush VJ, Janu MR, Bathur F, Wells A, Dasgupta A. 2001. Comparison of BD Vacutainer SST Plus Tubes with BD
SST II Plus Tubes for common analytes. Clin Chim Acta 306:139-143.
10. Christopher MM, O'Neill S. 2000. Effect of specimen collection and storage on blood glucose and lactate
concentrations in healthy, hyperthyroid and diabetic cats. Vet Clin Pathol 29:22-28.
11.Chan AY, Swaminathan R, Cockram CS. 1989. Efectiveness of sodium fuoride as a preservative of glucos in
blood.Clin Chem 35:315-317.
12.Chan AY, Ho CS, Cockram CS, Swaminathan R. 1990. Handling of blood specimens for glucose analysis. J Clin
Chem Clin Biochem 28:185-186.
are accurate and specific. Clin Biochem 29:27-31.
14. Fogh-Andersen N, D'Orazio P. 1998. Proposal for standardizing direct-reading biosensors for blood glucose. Clin
Chem 44:655-659.
15. Fogh-Andersen N, Wimberley PD, Thode J, Siggaard-Andersen O. 1990. Direct reading glucose electrodes detect
the molality of glucose in plasma and whole blood. Clin Chim Acta 189:3338.
16. Grazaitis DM, Sexson WR. 1980. Erroneously high Dextrostix values caused by isopropyl alcohol Pediatrics
66:221-223.
17. Astles JR, Petros WP, Peters WP, Sedor FA. 1995. Artifactual hypoglycemia associated with hematopoietic cytokines.
Arch Pathol Lab Med 119:713-716.
18. Macaron CI, Kadri A, Macaron Z. 1981. Nucleated red blood cells and artifactual hypoglycemia. Diabetes Care
4:113-115
19. Gavin JR IIl. 2000. Report of the Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus.
Diabetes Care 23(Suppl 1):S4-S19.
20.Catchpole B,Ristic JM,Fleeman LM,Davison LJ. 2005.Canine diabetes melltus: Can old dogs teach us new
tricks?Diabetologia 48:1948-1956.
21. Labrie F, Giguere V, Proulx L, Lefevre G. 1984. Interactions between CRF, epinephrine, vasopressin and glucocorti-
coids in the control ofACTH secretion.J Steroid Biochem 20:153-160.
22. Rand JS, Kinnaird E, Baglioni A, Blackshaw J, Priest J. 2002. Acute stress hyperglycemia in cats is associated with
struggling and increased concen trations of lactate and norepinephrine. J Vet Intern Med 16:123-132.
23. Munck A, Naray-Fejes-T6th A. 2001. Glucocorticoid action: Physiology. In: DeGroot LJ, Jameson JL, cds.
Endocrinology,4th edition,1632-1646.Philadelphia:WB Saunders
24.Drucker Dj. 2001.Glucagon secetion, a cell meabolism, and glucagon action In:DeGroot LJ, Jameson JL, d.
Endocrinology, 4th edition, 728736. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
25.MolDE,FlierS.1991.nsn sistacMehanisssyromes, andmliationsNEng JM
325:938-948.
26. Eigenmann JE, Eigenmann RY, Rijnberk A, van der Gaag I, Zapf J, Froesch ER. 1983. Progesterone-controlled
growth hormone overproduction and naturally occurring canine diabetes and acromegaly. Acta Endocrinol
104:167-176.
27. Rijnberk A, Mol JA. 1997. Progestin-induced hypersecretion of growth hormone: An introductory review. J Reprod
FertilSuppl 51:335-338.
28. Hoenig M. 2002. Comparative aspects of diabetes mellinus in dogs and cats. Mol Cell Endocrinol 197:221229.
29. Hoenig M, Dawe DL. 1992. A qualitative assay for beta cell antibodies: Preliminary results in dogs with diabetes
mellitus. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 32:195-203.
30. O'Brien TD. 2002. Pathogenesis of feline diabetes mellitus. Mol Cell Endocrinol 197:213219
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
733
31. Lutz TA, Rand JS. 1995. Pathogenesis of feline diabetes mellitus. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
25:527-552
32. Hostettler-Allen RL, Tappy L, Blu JW. 1994. Insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, and glucosuria in intensively milk
fed calves. J Anim Sai 72:160-173
33. Brennan CL, Hoenig M, Ferguson DC. 2004. GLUT4 but not GLUT1 expresson decreases early in the develop-
ment of feline obesity. Domest Anim Endocrinol 26:291-301.
34. Hess RS, Saunders M, Van Winkle TJ, Ward CR. 2000. Concurrent disorders in dogs with diabetes mellitus: 221
cases (1993-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:1166-1173.
35. Peterson ME, Taylor RS, Greco DS, Nelson RW, Randolph JF, Foodman MS, Moroff SD, Morrison SA, Lothrop
CD. 1990. Acromegaly in 14 cats. J Vet Intern Med 4:192201.
36. Hurry CA, Flatland B. 2005. Feline acromegaly: A review of the syndrome. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 41:292-297.
37.Meij BP, van der VlugtMeijer RH, van denIngh TSGAM, Flik G, Rijnberk A 2005.Melanooph pituitary
adenoma in a cat with diabetes mellitus. Vet Pathol 42:9297.
38. Meij BP, van der Vlugt-Meijer RH, van den Ingh TSGAM, Rijnberk A. 2004. Somatotroph and corticotroph
pituitary adenoma (double adenoma) in a cat with diabetes mellitus and hyperadrenocorticism. J Comp Pathol
130:209-215.
39.Reed SM. 1998. Pituitary adenomas: Equine Cushing's disease. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, eds. Equine Internal
Medicine, 912-916. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
40.Keen JA,MeLaren M, Chandler KJ, MeGorum BC. 2004.Biochemical indices of vascular funetion, glucose
metabolism and oxidative stress in horses with equine Cushing's disease. Equine Ver J 36:226-229.
41. Hoenig M, Peterson ME, Ferguson DC. 1992. Glucose tolerance and insulin secretion in spontaneously hyperthy-
roid cats. Res Vet Sci 53:338-341.
42. Hoenig M, Ferguson DC. 1989. Impairment of glucose tolerance in hyperthyroid cats. J Endocrinol 121:249-251
43. Dixon RM, Reid SW, Mooney CT. 1999. Epidemiological, clinical, haematological and biochemical characteristics
of canine hypothyroidism.Vet Rec145:481-487.
44.Reusch CE,Gerber B,Boretti FS. 2002.Serum fruetsamine concentrations in dogs with hypothyroidism.Vet Res
Commun26:531-536
45.Hargis AM, Stephens LC, Benjamin SA, Brewster RD,Brooks RK 1981. Relationship of hypothyroidism to
diabetes mellitus, renal amyloidosis, and thrombosis in purebred beagles.Am JVet Res 42:1077-1081.
46.Feldman EC, Nelson RW. 1996. Hypothyroidism. In: Caine aned Feline Endecrinolegy nd Reproduction, 2nd
edition,68-117.Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
47. Barthez PY, Marks SL, Woo J, Feldman EC, Matteucci M. 1997. Pheochromocytoma in dogs: 61 cases (1984-
1995). J Vet Intern Med 11:272-278.
48.Witzel DA, Littedike ET.1973. Suppresson of insulin secretion during induced hypocalcemia.Endocrinology
93:761-766.
49.Sacks DB.1999. Carbohydrates. In:Burtis CA,Ashwood ER,cds.Tietz Textbook of Clinical Cbemistry,3rd edition
7 50-808.Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
50.Steiner DF,Bell GI, Rubenstein AH, Chan S]. 2001. Chemistry and biosynthesis of the islet hormones: Insulin,
islet amyloid peptide (amylin), glucagon, somatostatin, and pancreatic polypeptide. In: DeGroot LJ, Jameson JL,
eds.Endocriwology, 4th edition, 667-696.Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
51. MeNeil PE. 1992. The underlying pathology of the hepatocutaneous syndrome: A report of 18 cases. In: Ihrke PJ,
Mason IS, White SD, eds. Aduances in Veterinary Dermatology, 113-129. Oxford: Pergamon.
52. Miller WH Jr, Scott DW, Buerger RG, Shanley KJ, Paradis M, MeMurdy MA, Angarano DW. 1990. Necrolytic
migratory crythema in dogs: A hepatocutaneous syndrome. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:573-581.
53.Turnwald GH, Foil CS, Wolfsheimer KJ, WIlliams MD, Rougeau BL. 1989. Failure to document hyperglucagone
mia in a dog with diabetic dermatopathy resembling necrolytic migratory erythema. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
25:363-369.
54.Renauld A, Sverdlik RC. 1989. Influence of exogenous ATP on blood sugar, serum insulin and serum free
fatty acids in short-term experimental hyperthyroid dogs and in euthyroid controls. Acta Diabetol Lat 26:
301-307.
55.Peterson ME. 1987. Effects of megestrol actate on glucose tolerance and growth hormone secretion in the cat. Res
Vet Sci 42:354-357.
56. Taniyama H, Ushiki T, Tajima M, Kurosawa T, Kitamura N, Takahashi K, Matsukawa K, Irakura C. 1995
Spontaneous diabetes mellitus associated with persistent bovine viral diarrhea (BVD) virus infection in young catte.
VetPathol32:221-229.
57. Murondoti A, van der Kolk JH, van der Linde-Sipman JS. 1999. Type 1 diabetes mellitus in a pregnant heifer
persistently infected with bovine viral diarrhoea virus. Vet Rec 144:268269.
734
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
58. Michie HR. 1996. Metabolism of sepsis and multiple organ failure. World J Surg 20:460-464.
59.Hintz HF,Lowe JE, Cliford AJ, Visek WJ. 1970.Ammonia intoxication resulting from urea ingestion by ponies.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 157:963-966.
60. Kitamura SS, Antonelli AC, Maruta CA, Soares PC, Sucupira MC, Mori CS, Mirandola RM, Ortolani EL. 2003.
A model for ammonia poisoning in cattle. Vet Hum Toxicol 45:274277
61. Sticdkle JE, McKnight CA, Williams KJ, Carr EA. 2006. Diarrhea and hyperammonemia in a horse with progressive
neurologic signs. Vet Clin Pathol 35:250-253.
62. Peek SF, Divers TJ, Jackson CJ. 1997. Hyperammonaemia associated with encephalopathy and abdominal pain
without evidence of liver disease in four mature horses. Equine Vet J 29:70-74
63. Roller MH, Riedemann GS, Romkema GE, Swanson RN. 1982. Ovine blood chemistry values measured during
ammonia toxicosis. Am J Vet Res 43:10681071.
64. Kramer JW, Klassen JK, Baskin DG, Prieur DJ, Rantanen NW, Robinette JD, Graber WR, Rashti L. 1988.
Inheritance of diabetes mellitus in Keeshond dogs. Am J Vet Res 49:428431.
65. Kimmel SE, Ward CR, Henthorn PS, Hess RS. 2002. Familial insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in Samoyed
dogs J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:235-238.
66. Hoenig M. 1995. Pathophysiology of canine diabetes. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 25:553-561.
67.Davison LJ, Ristic JM,Herrtage ME,Ramsey IK, Catchpole B. 2003.Anti-insulin antibodies in dogs with naturally
occurring diabetes mellitus. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 91:53-60.
68.Lin HC. 1996.Disciative anestheics. In:Thurmon JC,Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ, eds. Lnb and JonerVeerinary
Anestwsia, 3rd edition, 241296. Balimore: Williams & Wilkins.
69. Thrall MA, Grauer GF, Mero KN. 1984. Clinicopathologic findings in dogs and cats with ethylene glycol
intoxication. J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:37-41.
70.Dornhorst A,Powell SH,Pensky J. 1985.Aggravation by propranolol of hyperglycaemic effect of hydrochlorothia
zide in type II diabetics without alteration of insulin secretion. Lancet 1:123-126.
71. Branson KR, Gross ME, Booth NH. 1995. Opioid agonists and antagonists. In: Adams HR, ed. Veterinary
Pharmacology andTherapeutis,7th edition,274310.Ames: lowa State University Press.
72. Kraje AC. 2003. Hypoglycemia and irreversible neurologic complications in a cat with insulinoma. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 223:812-814.
73.Remer SB,Peosi A,Frank JD,Stfcek BA,Kiupel M,Hauptman JG.2005.Multiple endocrine neoplasia ty 
in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:101-104.
74.Hirata Y,Fujisawa M,Sato H,Asano T, Katsuki S.1966.Blood glucose and plasma insulin responses to xylitl
administrated intravenously in dogs. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 24:471475.
75. Kuzuya T, Kanazawa Y, Kosaka K. 1969. Stimulation of insulin secretion by xylitol in dogs. Endocrinology
84:200-207
76. Dunayer EK. 2004. Hypoglycemia following canine ingestion of xylitol-containing gum. Vet Hum Toxicol
46:87-88.
77. Dunayer EK, Gwaltney-Brant SM. 2006. Acute hepatic failure and coagulopathy associated with xylitol ingestion in
eight dogs. J AmVet Med Assoc 229:1113-1117.
78. Syme HM, Scott-Moncrieff JC. 1998. Chronic hypoglycaemia in a hunting dog due to secondary hypoadrenocorti-
cism. J Small Anim Pract 39:348351.
79. Vroom MW, Slappendel RJ. 1987. Transient juvenile hypoglycaermia in a Yorkshire terrier and in a Chihuahua. Vet
Q9:172-176.
80.Johnson SE.2000. Chronic hepatic disorders. In: Ettinger SJ,Feldman EC,eds.Tetbook ofVeterinary Inema
Medicime: Diseases ofthe Dog and Cat, 5th edition, 1298-1325. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
81.Brus ML. 1997. Lipids and ketones. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML, eds. Clnical Biochemstry ofDorestic
Anmals, 5th edition, 83-115. San Diego: Academic.
82.Leifer CE, Peterson ME, Matus RE,Patnaik AK. 1985. Hypoglycemia associated with nonislet cell tumor in 13
dogsJAmVet Med Assoc186:53-55.
83. Bagley RS, Levy JK, Malarkey DE. 1996. Hypoglycemia associated with intra-abdominal leiomyoma and leiomyo-
sarcoma in six dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:69-71.
84.Roby KAW, Beech J, Bloom JC,Black M. 1990. Hepatocellular carcinoma associated with crythrocytosis and
hypoglycemia in a yearling flly. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:465-467.
85. Bellah IR, Ginn PE. 1996. Gastric leiomyosarcoma asciated with hypoglycemia in a dog J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
32:283-286.
86.Thompson JC, Hickson PC,Johnstone AC, Jones BR. 1995. Observations on hypoglycaemia associated with a
hepatoma in a cat. NZ Vet J 43:186-189.
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
735
hypoglycemia associated with renal cell carcinoma in a horse. J Vet Intern Med 19:613-616.
S8.Bieniek K, Szuster-Ciesielska A, Kaminska T, Kondracki M, Witek M, Kandefer-Szerszen M. 1998. Tumor necrosis
factor and interferon activity in the circulation of calves after repeated injection of low doses of lipopolysaccharide.
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 62:297307.
S9. Gerich JE. 2001. Hypoglycemia. In: DeGroot LJ, Jameson JL, eds. Endecerinofogy, 4th edition, 921940. Philadel-
phia: WB Saunders.
90. Smith JE, Cipriano JE, Hall SM. 1990. In vitro and in vivo glucose consumption in swine eperythrozoonosis.
Zentralbl Veterinarmed [B]37:587-592.
91. Jackson RF, Bruss ML, Growney PJ, Seymour WG. 1980. Hypoglycemia-ketonemia in a pregnant bitch. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 177:1123-1127.
92. O'Brien DP, Barshop BA, Faunt KK, Johnson GC, Gibson KM, Shelton GD. 1999. Malonic aciduria in Maltesc
dogs: Normal methylmalonic acid concentrations and malonyl-CoA decarboxylase activity in fibroblasts. J Inherit
Metab Dis 22:883-890.
93.Given BD, Mostrom MS, Tull R, Ditkowsky N, Rubenstein AH. 1988. Severe hypoglycemia atributable to
surreptitious injection of insulin in a mare. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:224226.
94.Feldman EC, Nelson RW. 1996. Diabetes mellitus. In: Camine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 2nd
edition,339-391.Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
95.Madison LL,Lochner A,Wulff J. 1967. Ethanol-induced hypoglycemia Il. Mechanism of suppression of hepatic
gluconeogenesis.Diabetes 16:252-258.
96.Fleeman LM, Rand JS. 2003.Evaluation of day-to-day variability of serial blod glucose concentration curves in
diabetic dogs.J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:317-321.
97. Stein JE, Greco DS. 2002. Portable blood glucose meters as a means of monitoring blood glucose concentrations in
dogs and cats with diabetes mellitus. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 17:70-72.
98. Armbruster DA. 1987. Fructosamine: Structure, analysis, and dinical usefulness. Clin Chem 33:21532163.
99. Marca MC, Loste A, Ramos J. 2000. Effeet of acute hyperglycaemia on the serum fructosamine and blood glycated
haemoglobin concentrations in canine samples. Vet Res Commun 24:11-16
100. Jensen AL, Petersen MB, Houe H. 1993.Determination of the fructosamine concentration in bovine serum
samples. Zentralbl Veterinarmed [A] 40:111-117.
101. Watanabe D, Nakara H, Akagi K, Ishii T, Mizuguchi H, Nagashima Y, Okaniwa A. 2004. Oral glucose tolerance
test and determination of serum fructosamine level in beagle dogs. J Toxicol Sdi 29:3336.
102. Jensen AL. 1995. Glycated blood proteins in canine diabetes mellitus. Vet Rec 137:401-405.
103. Mahaffey EA, Cornelius LM. 1981. Evaluation of a commercial kit for measurement of glyoosylated hemoglobin in
canine blood. Vet Clin Pathol 10:21-24.
104.Smith JE,Wood PA, Moore K. 1982.Evaluation of a colorimctric method for canine glycosylated hemoglobin.Am
J Vet Res 43:700-701.
105.Marca MC,Loste A. 2000.Glycosylated haemoglobin assay of canine blood samples. J Small Anim Pract
41:189-192
106. Loste A, Marca MC. 2001.Fructosamine and glycated hermoglobin in the assessment of glycaemic control in dogs.
Vet Res 32:55-62.
107.Marca MC,Loste A,Unzueta A,Perez M.2000.Blood glycated hemoglobin evaluation in sick dogs. Can JVet Res
64:141-144
108. Elliot DA, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Neal LA. 1997. Glycosylated hemoglobin concentrations in the blood of
healthy dogs and dogs withnaturally developing diabetes mellitus, pancreatc B-cll neoplasia,hyperadrenocorticim,
and anemia.J Am VetMed Assoc211:723-727
109. Elliott DA, Nelson RW, Reusch CE, Feldman EC, Neal LA. 1999. Comparison of serum fructosamine and blood
glycosylated hemoglobin concentrations for assessment of glycemic control in cats with diabetes mellitus. J Am Vet
Med Assoc214:17941798.
110. Hoenig M, Ferguson DC. 1999.Diagnostic utility of glycosylated hernoglobin concentrations in the cat. Domest
Anim Endocrinol 16:11-17.
111.Kaneko JJ. Kawamoto M, Heusner AA,Feldman EC, Koizumi L. 1992.Evaluation of serum fructosamine
concentration as an index of blood glucose control in cats with diabetes mellitus. Am J Ver Res 53:1797-1801
112.Crenshaw KL,Peterson ME, Heeb LA,Moroff SD,Nichols R 1996. Serum fructosamine concentration as an index
of glycemia in cats with diabetes mellitus and stress hyperglycemia. J Vet Intern Med 10:360364.
113. Elliot DA, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Neal LA. 1997. Glycosylated hemoglobin concentration for assessment of
glycemic control in diabetic cats. J Vet Intern Med 1l:161-165.
736
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
114. Waterson MJ, Mills RJ. 1988. Serum fructosamine in patients with overt and treated thyroid disease. Ann Clin
Biochem 25(Pt 5):587-588.
115. Jensen AL. 1993. Various protein and albumin corrections of the scrum fructosamine concentration in the diagnosis
of canine diabetes mellitus. Vet Res Commun 17:13-23.
116. Reusch CE, Haberer B. 2001. Evaluation of fructosamine in dogs and cats with hypo- or hyperproteinaemia,
azotaemia, hyperlipidaemia and hyperbilirubinaemia. Vet Rec 148:370-376.
117. Thoresen Sl, Aleksandersen M, Lonaas L, Bredal WP, Grondalen J, Berthelsen K. 1995. Pancreatic insulin-
secreting carcinoma in a dog: Fructosamine for determining persistent hypoglycaemia. J Small Anim Pract
36:282-286.
118. Mellanby RJ, Herrtage ME. 2002. Insulinoma in a normoglycaemic dog with low serum fructosarnine. J Small
Anim Pract 43:506-508.
119. Loste A, Marca MC. 1999. Study of the cffect of total serum protein and albumin concentrations on canine
fructo samine concentration. Can J Vet Res 63: 138-141.
120. Graham PA, Mooney CT, Murray M. 1999. Serum fructosamine concentrations in hyperthyroid cats. Res Vet Sci
67:171-175.
121. Reusch CE, Tomsa K. 1999. Serum fructosamine concentration in cats with overt hyperthyroidism. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 215:1297-1300
122. Lloyd D, Marples J. 1986. Serum fructo samine and thyroid function. Clin Chem 32:1985
123.Schleicher ED,Olgemollr B,Wiedenmann E, GerbitzKD.1993.Specic glycation of albumin depends on its
half-life.Clin Chem 39:625-628.
124. Kaneko JJ. 1997. Carbohydrate metabolism and its diseases. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML, eds. Clinica/
Biechemistry ofDomestic Anima,5th edition,45-81. SanDiego: Academic
125. Lutz TA, Rand JS. 1993. Comparison of five commercial radioimmunoassay kits for the measurement of feline
insulin.Res Vet Sci 55:64-69.
cial radioimmunoassay kits. Am J Vet Res 44:21792183.
127. Appleton DJ, Rand JS, Sunvold GD. 2005. Basal plasma insulin and homeostasis model assessment (HOMA) are
indicators ofinsulin sensitivity in cats.J Feline Med Surg 7:183193.
128.TurnerRC,OaleyNW,NabarroJDN.1971.Control of basal insulin secretion, with special reference to the
diagnosis of insulinomas. Br Med J 2:132135.
129.Turner RC, Oalley NW, Nabarro JDN. 1973. Changes in plasma insulin during ethanol-induced hypoglycemia
Metabolism 22:111-121.
130. Edwards DF. 1986. It's time to unamend the insulin-glucose ratio. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:951953.
131.Knowlen GG, Schall WD. 1984. The amended insulin-glucose ratio: Is it really better?J Am Vet Med Assoc
185:397-399.
132.MeCaw D.1979. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma.J AmVet Med Assoc 175:247-248 (letter)
133.Brown SA,Edwards DF.1986.Final comments on amended insulin-glucose ratio. JAm Vet Med Assoc
189:408409.
134. Schaer M. 1986. Winding down on the amended insulin:glucose ratio. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:259.
135. Kieffer TJ, Habener JF. 1999. The glucagon-like peptides. Endocr Rev 20:876-913.
136.Conlon M,pp E,Unger RH1978.Themolcular forms of immunoreactive glucaon secreted by the isolated,
perfused dog pancreas. Life Sci 23:1655-1658.
137. Heding LG, Frandsen EK, Jacobsen H. 1976. Structure-function relationship: Immunologic. Metabolism 25(Suppl
11):1327-1329
138. McCann JP, Bergman EN, Aalseth DL. 1989. Validation of radioimmunoassay (RIA) for glucagon in domestic
animals. J Anim Sci 67:220 (abstract).
139. Bond R, MeNeil PE, Evans H, Srebernik N. 1995. Metabolic epidermal necrosis in two dogs with different
underlying diseases. Vet Rec 136:466471.
A comparison and evaluation of commercial assays. Vet Clin Pathol 9:4I (abstract).
141. O'Brien TD, Hayden DW, Johnson KH, Stevens JB. 1985. High dose intravenous glucose tolerance test and serum
insulin and glucagon levels in diabetic and non-diabetic cats: Relationships toinsular amyloidosis. Vet Pathol
22:250-261.
142.Mirsky IA,Perisutti G,Davis NC.1959.The destruction of glucagon by the blood plasma from various species
Endocrinology 64:992-1001.
143. Eisentraut AM, Whissen N, Unger RH. 1968. Incubation damage in the radioimmunoassay for human plasma
glucagon and its prevention with *Trasylol" Am J Med Sei 235:137-142
14/GLUCOSE,KETOAMINES,ANDRELATEDREGULATORYHORMONES
737
144. Lacey RJ, Scarpello JHB, Morgan NG. 1992. Evidence that the presence of arginine can lead to overestimation of
glucagon levels measured by radioimmunoassay. Clin Chim Aeta 210:211-219.
145. Torres S, Johnson K, MeKeever P, Hardy R. 1997. Superficial necrolytic dermatitis and a pancreatic endocrine
tumour in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 38:246250.
146. Millr WH Jr,Anderson WI, McCann JP. 1991. Necrolytic migratory erythema in a dog with a glucagon-secreting
endocrine tumor.VetDermatol 2:179-182.
147. Gross TL, Song MD, Havel PJ, Ihrke PJ. 1993. Superficial necrolytic dermatitis (necrolytic migratory erythema) in
dogs.Vet Pathol 30:75-81.
148. WHO Study Group. 1985. Diabetes melitus. WHO Tech Rep Ser 727:1-113.
Thispageintentionallyleffblank
Chapter15
EXOCRINEPANCREASANDINTESTINE
Exocrine Pancreatic and Intestinal Absorptive Malfunctions
740
Trypsin-like Immunoreactivity(TLl) Concentration in Dogs,Cats,and Horses.
741
Pancreatic Lipase Immunoreactivity (PLl) Concentration in Dogs and Cats
745
Trypsinogen Activation Peptide (TAP) inDogs.
746
Cobalamin (Vitamin B) Concentration in Dogs, Cats,and Cattle
747
Folate Concentration in Dogs and Cats.
750
Fecal a,-Protease Inhibitor (a-Pl) Concentration in Dogs and Cats.
753
D-Xylose Absorption Test in Dogs, Cats, and Horses.
754
Glucose Absorption Test in Horses ..
755
Lactose Tolerance Test in Horses.
756
Urine Sucrose Concentration in Horses..
757
Other Methodsof EvaluatingDigestive or Absorptive Functions..
758
739
740
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 15.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
[x]
Concentration of x (x= analyte)
AMS
Amylase
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
EPI
Exocrine pancreatic insuffciency
GFR
Glomerular fltration rate
HCO,
Bicarbonate
LPS
Lipase
PLI
Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
RLA
Radioimmunoassay
SI
Systeme International d'Unites
TAP
Trypsinogen activation peptide
TAP:Crt
Trypsinogen activation peptide to creatinine
TLI
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity
URL
Upper reference limit
C-PI
O-Protease inhibitor
EXOCRINEPANCREATICANDINTESTINALABSORPTIVEMALFUNCTIONS
T.
Exocrine pancreaticinsufficiency (maldigestion)
A.Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI) is a pathophysiologic state in which inadequate
pancreatic secretions (enzyme rich or HCOrich) cause incomplete digestion of food
(maldigestion) and, secondarily,inadequate absorption of nutrients.
1.Dogs and cats with EPI typically have lost weight and produce malformed feces.
Pancreaticmaldigestionmay result from inaequate secretion fPAMS,
trypsinogen,chymotrypsinogen, carboxypeptidases,or combinations of these
zymogens and enzymes.
2. Three pancreatic conditions are recognized as causes of EPI in dogs and cats. EPI is
not recognized in cattle or horses.There must be extensive loss of acinar cells before
there is clinical evidence ofmaldigestion caused byEPI
evidence indicares this condition is caused by a hereditary immune-mediated
lymphocytic pancreatitis (atrophic lymphocytic pancreatitis) in German shep-
herds andrough-coated collies.2When presented forweight lossthereisnearly
a complete absence of pancreatic acinar cells. Using a decreased serum [TLI]
value as amarker of affected dogs,a study involving134 German shepherds
indicated an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.3
b. Chronic pancreatitis in dogsand cats:This disorder is typically an idiopathic,
recurring pancreatitis that causes extensive destruction of acinar cellsIf there is
concurrent destruction of islet cells, the dog or cat can develop diabetes mellitus.
c.Pancreatic duct obstruction in dogs and cats: Impaired secretion of pancreatic
enzymes into the intestine could cause maldigestion.However, the obstructive
lesion wouldprobablylead to acuteinflammation,and thus the animalwould be
presented for an acute illness and may not develop a maldigestive state that
causes chronic weight loss or chronic diarrhea.
15/EXOCRINEPANCREASANDINTESTINE
741
B.Dogs and cats with EPI may develop secondary intestinal abnormalities, such as increased
mucosal maltase and sucrase activities,increased microvillar membrane proteins,or
bacterial overgrowth. The latter could lead to mucosal changes that cause malabsorption.
II.
Pancreatitis
A.Even though the initiating factors for pancreatic infammation are not thoroughly
understood,it is known that pancreatic acinar cell damage is a major consequence of
the inflammation.
B.In acute pancreatitis (from mild edematous to severe necrotizing or hemorrhagic), the
release of cytoplasmic enzymes from the damaged acinar cells can result in increased
serum activities of AMS and LPS (see Chapter 12),increased serum [TLI]and [PLI]
(see Chapter 12),and increased urine and plasma[TAP]（see Trypsinogen Activation
Peptide (TAP) in Dogs, sect. II.A). Among domestic mammals, acute pancreatitis is
most common in dogs. Affected dogs frequently have an acure onset of clinical signs
such as vomiting and anterior abdominal pain.
progressive destruction of pancreatic acinar cells. When severe, the pancreas may not
be able to secrete sufficient enzymes to digest food, and the animal may develop EPI.
Chronic pancreatitis occurs in cats and less commonly in dogs,and may result in
EPI with clinical signs such as progresive weight loss and soft or malformed feces.
Endocrine pancreatic dysfunction may also arise.
I1l.
Intestinal malabsorption
A.Several small intestinal diseases cause inadequate absorption of nutrients and thus
intestinal malabsorption.The malabsorptive state could be localized (e.g., proximal
small intestine orileumor diffuseit couldinvolve malabsorption ofmanynutrients
malabsorption is not caused by a specific absorption defect,the animal ispresented
because of weight loss or malformed feces. Acute enteric diseases thar cause diarrhea for
a few days probably cause a temporary malabsorptive state,but such disorders are not
typically considered in discussions of malabsorptive disorders because there isnot a
concurrent malnourished state.
B.Intestinal diseases that lead to malabsorption occur in most animal species,but
laboratory tests are used mostly to evaluate the disorders of dogs and occasionally of
cats and horses.Specific diagnosis of suspected primary intestinal disease usually
requires histologic examination of intestinal tissue.Examples of intestinal diseases that
cause malabsorption include the following:
1.Inflammatory: histoplasmosis, lymphocytic enteritis, lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis,
eosinphilicnritranlmtousnrithigrdasindrotts
2.Neoplastic: lymphoma
3.Lymphangiectasia
TRYPSIN-LIKEIMMUNOREACTIVITY(TLI)CONCENTRATIONINDOGS,CATS,
AND HORSES
Physiologic processes (Fig. 15.1)
CourseSmar
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms and units
742
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Blood
PLI
TLT
Pancreas
Trypsin
Trypsin
Antproteases
TAP
Lipase
Trypsinogen
TAP
Proximal
Kidney
small
intestine
Trypsinogen
TAP
Lipase
Trypsin
Urine
Fig. 15.1. Physiologic processes that influence plasma or serum concentrations of TLI, PLI, or TAP
converted totrypsin,a potent igestive proteaseInhealth,asmall amount ftrypsinogen scapesh
pancreas and enters the blood, in which it can be measured as TLI. Also, small amounts of trypsin may be
formed in the pancreas (see TAP); this trypsin may enter the blood, bind to antiproteases, and contribute
to [TLI]. Plasma trypsinogen and trypsin are degraded in the kidneys and by the mononuclear phagocyte
system.
TAP:In health, smallamounts of trypsinogen are cleaved to form trypsin and TAP within the pancreas;
this TAP enters the plasma (probably via lymph), and some of it is cleared via the kidneys and is excreted
in the urine. Activation of trypsinogen to trypsin by enterokinase in the intestine also results in the
formation of TAP,but this TAP is not absorbed and thus does not enter the plasma.
PLI:Most pancreaticLPS is secreted in enzyme-rich pancreatic secretions into the intestine, where it
catalyzes the lipolysis of dietary triglycerides. In health, a small amount of pancreatic LPS escapes the
pancreas and enters the bloodin whichit can be measured as PLIThe kidneys are involved in the
removal of LPS from the plasma.
1.Immunologic assays detect cationic trypsinogen,trypsin,and trypsin bound to
protease inhibitors (probably O-antitrypsin); thus the name TLI. In healthy animals,
nearly all TLI is trypsinogen.
2.TLI is reportedly pancreas specific,and values were markedly ecreased after
pancreas removal; however, TLI was still measurable.Trypsin is present in the
human small intestine (Paneth cells), in bile epithelium, and in ovarian and hepato
biliary neoplasms.
3.Units:μg/L (SI units not found)
15/EXOCRINEPANCREASANDINTESTINE
743
Table 15.2.Diseases and conditions that cause increased [TLI],[PLI], or[TAP] in dogs
andcats
Increased release of trypsinogen (or trypsin), LPS, or TAP from pancreatic acinar cells
*Acinar cell damage caused by pancreatitis or other disorders
Stimulated by food intake or cholecystokinin and secretin administration
Decreased GFR (see prerenal, renal, and postrenal azotemia in Chap. 8)
Cobalamin deficiency in cats ([TLI])
*A relatively common disease or condition
text).
bThe [TLl] has been shown to increase after food intake. The same change has not been docu
mented for [PLI] or [TAP] yet.
B.Assays
1.Canine,feline,andequine[TLl] aremeasured by species-specifcimmunoassay.
Trypsin's enzymatic activity is not measured because of the presence of trypsin
inhibitorsin serum.
2. In cats, reference intervals for [TLl] measured by a RIA (17-49 μg/L) were different
from those measured by an ELISA (12-82 μg/L).
C.Sample: Serum is the preferred sample, but EDTA plasma or heparinized plasma can be
ised.Samples shouldbe storedat 4°Cor-20°C.
III.
Increased [trypsin-like immunoreactivity][TLl] (Table 15.2)
A. Increased release from pancreatic acinar cells
1.Acinar cell damage caused by pancreatitis10
via lymph and peritoneal fluid.
b.Dogs
(1)In an experimental canine pancreatitis study, serum [TLI] tended to parallel
serum AMS and LPS activities; that is,all started to increase within 1 d,
remained increased through day 5, and had returned to near baseline values
at 2wk.However,thepeak in [TLI]occurred 1-2 d prior to the peak
activities of AMS and LPs. Using decision thresholds based on receiver
operating characteristic (ROC)analysis (nor URLs), diagnostic specificity
for severe pancreatitis was about 90 %,but diagnostic sensitivities for
pancreatitis have been reported to be about 3350 % (less than those for
serum LPS activity).
(2)Dexamethasone (0.25 mg/kg per os daily) was associated with increased
[TLI] by day 7 of treatment and was within the reference interval again 7 d
after withdrawal. The mean increase was three times baseline mean, but only
2 of 12 dogs had[TLI] > the URL. The authors suggested that the [TLI]
was increased because of toxic effects of dexamethasone on the pancreas.13
c.Cats
pancreatitis, there were not significant differences in serum [TLI] found in
cats without pancreatic lesions (10), cats with pancreatitis and fibrosis (9),
catswith pancreaticfibrosisbut without active inflammation (4),and cats
744
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
with acute necrotizing pancreatitis (5）. These conclusions were questioned
by other investigators who wrote that increased [TLI] is specific for feline
pancreatitis.
(2)Other studies described that [TLI] has an 80-86 % diagnostic sensitivity for
moderate to severe pancreatitis in cats when empirical decision thresholds
d.Horses
(1)Horses that have strangulating intestinal obstruction and endotoxic shock
can have increased plasma [trypsin] (as measured by an activity assay）. The
trypsin is probably released from pancreatic acinar cells because of poor
perfusion of splanchnic tissues.
(2)In a study involving ten horses, some with strangulating intestinal obstruc-
tions had increased plasma [TLI], but those with nonstrangulating intestinal
obstructions didnot.It is notknownwhether the increasedplasma[TLI]
was due to increased release of pancreaticTLI molecules,whether more TLI
molecules were bound to proteins (e.g,acute-phase proteins),or whether
trypsin gained access to plasma via damaged intestines.
2.Stimulated by food intake or cholecystokinin and secretin administration9
B.Decreased renal clearance in disorders that cause decreased GFR
1. Trypsinogen is cleared from plasma by kidneys. Disorders that cause a decreased
GFRcause an increased[TLI].20
2.Prerenal,renalor postrenal disorders （seeChapter ） can decrease GFR,and thus
concurrent azotemia is expected.
C.Cobalamin deficiency in cats
1.Of 19 cats with severe cobalamin deficiencies associated with gastrointestinal disease,
15had increased serum[TLI] at the time of diagnosis;10 had a[TLI] > 100μg/L
(reference interval =12-82 μg/L). The reasons for the increased [TLI] in these cats
were not determined. Serum [TLI] decreased in 9 of 19 cats when they were given
parenteral cobalamin therapy.2
2.Of nine cats with various types of infammatory bowel disease, five had mild to
moderate decreases in[cobalamin]. One of those five had a greatly increased [TLI]
of undetermined origin.2
D.Associated with higher protein diets in dogs: Serum [TLI] was greater in dogs on a
high-protein dier when compared to dogs on a low-protein diet, but the mean concen-
trations for all groups were within common canine reference intervals.23
IV.Decreased[trypsin-like immunoreactivity][TLI] (Table 15.3)
A.Decreased release from pancreatic acinar cells
1.Chronic pancreatitis that leads to destruction of most acinar cells
2.Pancreatic acinar atrophy in dogs
B.In dogs with clinical signs of maldigestion (due to EPl) or malabsorption (due to small
intestinal disease), the diagnostic sensitivity, specicity,and accuracy of a fasting serum
[TLI] for EPI are very high (approaching 100 %).24 The presence of active pancreatitis
or a disorder that is causing decreased GFR may increase [TLl] enough to mask a
deficient state.
C.A decrease in serum [TLI] was found in 20 German shepherds and rough-coated collies
in the absence of clinical disease.s Of these dogs,seven later developed clinical EPI
（within 646 mo) and were treated with enzyme supplementation.The results indicated
15/EXOCRINEPANCREASANDINTESTINE
745
Table 15.3.Diseases and conditions that cause decreased[TLI] or[PLI] in dogs
and cats
Decreased release of trypsinogen (or trypsin) or pancreatic LPS from pancreas
Chronic pancreatitis
*Pancreatic acinar atrophy
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: The [TLl] has been shown to decrease in these disorders in both dogs and cats. A decreased
[PLI] has not been documented yet in cats.
that decreased [TLl] may represent subclinical immune-mediated lymphocytic pancre-
atitis (atrophic lymphocytic pancreatitis).
D.In a group of 20 cats with clinical signs suggestive of EPI (e.g,weight loss,soft r
voluminous stool, and polyphagia), 17 had decreased serum [TLI] values.Additional
diagnostic evaluations and/or response to enzyme replacement treatments supported the
conclusion that the cats did have EPI.
PANCREATICLIPASEIMMUNOREACTIVITY(PLI)CONCENTRATIONINDOGS
AND CATS
I.Physiologic processes (Fig.15.1)
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms and units
1. Because the immunoassays are designed to measure the pancreatic LPS protein
(M,=51,0o0 in dogs)and not its activity, the analyte is called pancreaticlipase
immunoreactivity (PLI).
2.Units:μg/L
B.Assays
1.Species-specific immunoassays for pancreatic LPS have been developed for dogs
(RIA and ELISA)26.2and cats (RIA）.2These assays measure the actual concentra-
tion of the lipase protein, not the activity of the enzyme. The polyclonal antibodies
localized only topancreatic acinar cells in immunohistochemical studies of canine
tissues.
2.The sources of the standard solutions for the assays were not specified but assumed
to beLPS isolated from canine and feline pancreatic tissue,respectively, by the
investigators.
3. Reference intervals vary with the methods used and among laboratories.
C. Sample: Serum is the preferred sample.
I1l.
Increased [pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity][PLI] (Table 15.2)
A. Increased release from damaged pancreatic acinar cells
1.During experimental and spontaneous pancreatitis,LPSisreleased from damaged
pancreatic acinar cells and enters the blood (probably via lymphatic vessels).
2.PLI testing has the advantage over most routine serum LPS assays of being specifc
for pancreatic lipase, and testing is offered by some large veterinary referral laborato
ries.However,results may be too delayed tobeuseful for diagnosing andmanaging
patients with acute pancreatitis.
746
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
3.Dogs:When decision thresholds of the URL or of an empirical value greater than
the URL were used, the PLI] had a diagnostic sensitivity for acute pancreatitis
of100 % and 82 %,respectively.9Diagnostic sensitivities of LPS andTLI were
less.
4.Cats:The [PLI] (with decision threshold of 10 μg/L) is reported to have better
tal initiation of pancreatitis in cats,the[PLl] had greater increases (50x baseline vs
35x baseline) and more persistent increases (10 d vs 3 d) than did the [TLI].3
B.Decreased renal clearance in disorders that cause decreased GFR
1.Thekidneys are involved in the removal of pancreatic LPS from plasma (see
Chapter 12). When there are disorders that result in decreased blood fow through
the kidneys (ie.,prerenal,renal,or postrenal disorders), then PS has a longer
circulatinghalf-life and thus can accumulate in plasma.
2.Using the canine PLI ELISA, the PLI] was mildly increased in dogs with experi
mentally induced chronic renal failure, but not above the suggested diagnostic
threshold for pancreatitis.3i.3Lack of increased serum LPS activity in this study
[PLI] caused by renal failure.
IV.
Decreased [pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity] [PLl] (Table 15.3)
A.Release of LPs from pancreatic acinar cells may be decreased in disorders associated
with reduced functional pancreatic acinar tissue,and therefore serum pancreaticlipase
immunoreactivity concentrations may be decreased. The primary disorders in dogs and
cats are chronic pancreatitis (which leads to destruction of most acinar cells) and, in
dogs, pancreatic acinar atrophy (an immune-mediated disorder of German shepherds
andrough-coated collies)
B.In a study using an ELISA, all 25 dogs with EPI (as defined by having a decreased
[TLI]) had decreased [PLI]. However, TLI is preferred over PLI for diagnosis of EPI
because TLI appears to differentiate affected dogs from healthy dogs more clearly,and
it may have greater diagnostic sensitivity for EPI.
TRYPSINOGENACTIVATIONPEPTIDE(TAP)INDOGS
I.
Physiologic processes: After ingestion of a meal, trypsinogen from pancreatic acinar cells
enters the intestinal lumen and is cleaved by the action of enterokinase to produce trypsin
and TAP,an eight-amino-acid N-terminal cleavage peptide.In theory, the TAP is not
absorbed and thus does not enter plasma.A minute TAP] can be found in plasma and
urine ofhealthy dogs,presumably from activation within the pancreas.34
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Units
1.Plasma: nmol/L
2.Urine: nmol/L; also reported as a TAP: Crt ratio
conserved amino acids allow for cross-species testing with a single assay. The analytical
detection limit of the enzyme immunoassay is near the lower plasma concentrations
found in healthy dogs and thus cannot beused to detect decreased plasma[TAP]
Assays are not widely available.
15/EXOCRINEPANCREASANDINTESTINE
747
C. Sample
1.EDTA blood is collected and centrifuged at 4 °C,and plasma is separated within
1 h. EDTA plasma is frozen (at -20 °C) until just prior to analysis
2. Urine is collected into EDTA-containing vacuum tubes and frozen (at -20 °C) until
just prior to analysis.
III.Increased plasma [TAP] or increased urinary TAP:Crt ratio3435 (Table 15.2)
A.Acinar cell damage caused by pancreatitis: During pancreatitis, trypsinogen is cleaved to
form trypsin and TAP within the pancreas through actions of cathepsin B or through
autoactivation.TAP probably enters plasma via lymph, and some of it is cleared via
kidneys.
1.In dogs with increased plasma [TAP] because of pancreatitis, most had an increased
s
with a histopathologic diagnosis of pancreatitis and using receiver operating charac
teristic curve analysis (see Chapter 1) to determine decision thresholds,the urinary
TAP:Crt ratio had the best capability of differentiating mild pancreatitis from severe
pancreatitis (compared to TLI, plasma TAP],serum LPS activity,and serum AMS
activity) based on the stated classification for severity.Diagnostic sensitivity and
specificiry for severe pancreatitis were 86 % and 100 %, respectively. In comparison
serum LPS activity had diagnostic sensitivity and specificity for severe pancreatitis of
pnss%pe%9
2.Ina study of ten cats with spontaneous pancreatitis,plasma TAPwas increased in al
cats,but the urinary TAP:Crt ratios were not significantly increased when compared
to those of healthy cats.36
3.In experimentally induced pancreatitis in cats, there was increased urinary
excretion of TAP during the 24 h of the study.Serum LPS activity also
increased.37
B.Decreased renal clearance in disorders that cause decreased GFR:Dogs with renal
disease may have increased plasma [TAP]. In four dogs with plasma [TAP] increased by
renal disease, the urine [TAP] was decreased. In two of these dogs, the urinary TAP:Crt
was within thereference interval.
COBALAMIN (VITAMIN B) CONCENTRATIONIN DOGS,CATS,AND CATTLE
I.
Physiologic processes (Fig.15.1)
A.Cobalamin is a required cofactor in the metabolic pathways involving folate
(Fig.15.2).38
B.Cobalamin is also a required cofactor for the conversion of methylmalonyl coenzyme A
to succinyl coenzyme A.Without this conversion, plasma [methylmalonic acid]
accumulates (methylmalonic acidemia and aciduria), and a neurologic disease develops
because of defective formation of neuronal lipids
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms and units
1.Cobalamins are a group of compounds that have a corrin (porphyrin-like) ring and
side chains bound to cobalt. One cobalamin is cyanocobalamin (vitamin B) that has
a cyanide side chain; other side chains include methyl and hydroxyl groups. In
common clinicaluse,cyanocobalamin is simply called cobalamin
Diet
Cbl
Folate
Stomach
Cbl
R-protein
H+
(6op)
CbVR
Dietary folate
(cat)
Pancreas
IF
IE
HCO
Proximal
L
small
CbVR
intestine
IF
HCOg
Erythrocyte
Dietary folate
R
hydrolysls
CbI/IF
Folate
Folate
LiverCbl
T
Cbl
1
Bacteria
L
Bile
Cb/Trans
-Jejunum
CbI/IF
Mucosalreceptor
-lleum
Methionine
Cell
Cobalamin
N5-methyltetrahydrofolate
methionine synthase
N5,10-methylene tetrahydrofolate
Homocysteine
Methylcobalamin
Tetrahydrofolate
Usedforsynthesis
ofDNA
Fig. 15.2. Physiologic processes that infuence plasma or serum concentrations of cobalamin or folate and
the cellular relationship of cobalamin and folate.
Cobalamin: Cobalamin (Cbl) enters the stomach via ingested foods.In the acidic environment,it binds
the gastric mucosa. Cobalamin enters the intestine bound to R protein (R), but when it enters the alkaline
environment, it detaches from R protein and binds to intrinsic factor (IF) that is secreted by the pancre-
atic cells (dogs and cats) and the gastric mucosa (dogs). Enteric bacteria use some of the cobalamin as it
moves through the small intestine.When it reaches the ileum,the cobalamin/intrinsic factor complex
binds to specific mucosal receptors involving cubam (cubilin and amnionless) and megalin, and enters
enterocytes.When cobalamin enters the portal blood, it binds to transcobalamin 2 (Trans), a transport
protein.From the blood, cobalamin may be used in tissues, stored in the liver, or excreted in bile.
748
15/EXOCRINEPANCREASANDINTESTINE
749
2.Unit conversion for cyanocobalamin:pg/mLx0.7378=pmol/L;andng/dLx
7.378=pmol/L (SI unit,nearest 10 pmol/L)39
B.Assays
1.The assays are designed to measure [cyanocobalamin]. Competitive protein-binding
assays are more common than bioassays that are technically difficult.
2.Assays designed for human sera may not be reliable for other species because of
cobalamin-binding proteins in canine and feline sera.Some commercial assays
designed for analysis of human samples use porcine gastric intrinsic factor as the
binding agent.If the binding reagent contains contaminant R proteins,they can
bind to inactive cobalamin metabolites and give falsely increased values.4o
C.Samples
1.Serum is the preferred sample. The use of heparinized or hemolyzed plasma should
be avoided.
2.Samples are stable ar 8 °C overnight and up to 8 wk at -20 °C.
3.Falsely low concentrations may occur when cobalamin is degraded by excess
exposure to light.
11.
Increased serum [cobalamin]
A.Increased serum [cobalamin] is uncommon.However, disorders or conditions that
could increase [cobalamin] should be considered when interpreting concentrations that
are decreased or within the reference inrerval.
B.Diseases or conditions that cause increased serum [cobalamin]
1.Cobalamin supplementation:parenteral or oral
2.Release from damaged hepatocytes: Because hepatocytes are a storage site for
cobalamin, hepatic necrosis could increase serum [cobalamin]. The magnitude or
duration of the increase isnotknown.
IV.
Decreased serum [cobalamin] (Table15.4)
A. Serum [cobalamin] will not be decreased until the body reserve is depleted.
Depletion typically occurs because of decreased ileal absorption of cobalamin,
but the primary defect may be preabsorptive (i.e.,before cobalamin absorption by
theileum)
Fig.15.2.continued
Folate：Folate ispresent infod (.g,green leafy plants)ina polyglutamate form.Afer digestion eleases
proximal small intestine. After cellular uptake, it is converted to N'-methyltetrahydrofolate (commonly
called folate), which enters the blood and is transported to tissues for biochemical reactions.Enteric
bacteria can also produce folate. Folate from erythrocytes lysed during sample collection can increase
measured serum [folate].
Relationshipof cobalamin and folateCobalamin isarequired cofactor formethionine synthase,which
catalyzes the conversion of N'-methyltetrahydrofolate (the primary molecule in plasma) to tetrahydrofo
late, which is then available for DNA synthesis in cells. If there is a cobalamin deficiency, the methyl
group of N-methyltetrahydrofolate is not transferred to cobalamin (methyl trapped), and thus a cellular
deficiency in tetrahydrofolate occurs.
750
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 15.4.Diseases and conditions that cause decreased serum[cobalamin]
Cobalt deficiency in cattle
Preabsorptive defect in dogs and cats
EPI: pancreatic atrophy, chronic pancreatitis
Intestinal bacterial overgrowth:EPImpairedgastric acid secretion,entericdisordes
(see the text)
Defective absorption of cobalamin in ileum of dogs and cats
*Ileal disease:inflammation,resection,villous atrophy (viral,hypersensitivity,cytotoxic
(sanp)
Congenital deficiency of receptor in giant schnauzers and Border collies
Severe cobalamin deficiency in a cat (probable congenital malabsorption defect)
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specific disorders or conditions are not complete but are provided to give examples.
Falsely low concentrations may occur when cobalamin is degraded by excess exposure to light.
B.Diseases or conditions that reduce cobalamin absorption in the intestine
1. Cobalt deficiency: A dietary cobalt deficiency in cattle can cause a decreased serum
[cobalamin]; cobalt isneeded for synthesis of cobalamin by ruminal bacteria. The
cobalamin deficiency leads to an increased plasma homocysteine] because methylco-
balamin is needed for the methylation of homocysteine to form methionine (Fig
15.2).
2.Preabsorptive defect
a.EPI
(1)Failure to secrete HCO,-rich fuid into the duodenum results in cobalamin
not being released from R proteins (a pH-dependent event).
(2)The production of intrinsic factor may be decreased (especially in cats
because they apparently lack gastric intrinsic factor). Thus, there is less
cobalamin/intrinsic factor complex formation for absorption.
b. Intestinal bacterial overgrowth (> 10 colony-forming units/mL of duodenal
juice)²especially involving obligate anaerobes,can lower serum [cobalamin] by
increasing the amount of cobalamin bound to intestinal bacteria and thereby
decreasing the amount of cobalamin that is free for absorption.
3.Defective absorption of cobalamin in the ileum of dogs and cats
a.Diseases that damage the ilealmucosa infammation,villous atrophy, cytotoxic
drugs, and resection
b.Congenital deficiency of the cobalamin/intrinsic factor complex receptor has
complex of cubilin and amnionless) and megalin. A similar disorder occurs in
Border colliesAustralian shepherds,beaglesand komondors.
4.Severe cobalamin deficiency in a cat with methylmalonic acidemia7 The cause of
the cobalamin deficiency was not established, but clinical evidence supported a
congenital defect in cobalamin absorption.
FOLATECONCENTRATIONINDOGSAND CATS
I.
Physiologicprocesses
A.See Figs. 15.1 and 15.2 for basic processes.
B.Cobalamin and folatemetabolism are linked in a reaction in which a methylgroupis
transferred from N-methyltetrahydrofolate to cobalamin in one-carbon pathways.In
15/EXOCRINEPANCREASANDINTESTINE
751
the absence of cobalamin, the methyl group is trapped in N'-methyltetrahydrofolate,
and the result is a functional folate deficiency.Because N'-methyltetrahydrofolate
contributes to the total measured [folate], serum [folate] may not be decreased even
though there is a functional folate deficiency (i.e., the manifestations of a folate
deficiency are present).
II.
Analytical concepts4o
A.Terms and units
1.Specifically, folate is the anionic form of folic acid, which is composed of pteroic
acid and glutamic acid.Several derivatives offolic acid are formed by the addition
of substiution groups (e.g.,methyl,formyl, glutamyl, and pteridine) to three
positions in the molecule.The clinical serum assay detects primarily N-
methyltetrahydrofolate,but the assayis commonly considered a test forfolate
2.Unit conversion:ng/mL× 2.266=nmol/L;andμg/dL×22.66=nmol/L(SIunit,
nearest2nmol/L）9
B.Assays
1. Competitive-binding assays (sometimes combined with cobalamin assay) are most
common. The competitive-binding agent in folate assays is β-lactoglobulin (milk
folate binder), which binds principally with N-methyltetrahydrofolate.Assays may
involve denaturation of endogenous binding proteins (by boiling or high pH) to
release folate.
2.Bioassays have been used but have been replaced by more convenient assays.
Immunometric assays using ferromagnetic particles or charcoal are also used to
measure [folare].
C. Samples
1.Serum is the preferred sample. An erythrocyte has high [folate], and thus
hemolysis will give falsely increased values. EDTA-plasma may be used in some
assays.
2. Serum [folate] are stable at 4 °C for 1 d and at -20 °C for 68 wk. Repeated
thawing and freezing should be avoided.
III.
Increased serum [folate](Table 15.5)
A.Increased absorption of folate in the small intestine
1.Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth: Excessive folate produced by enteric bacteria is
absorbed in the small intestine.The overgrowth could be secondary to EPI or caused
Table 15.5.Diseases and conditions that cause increased serum[folate]
Increased absorption of folate in small intestine
Intestinal bacterial overgrowth:EPI,mpairedgastricacid secretion,enteric disorders
(see text)
Low intestinal pH:EPI, excessive gastric acid production
High dietary intake
Parenteral supplementation
courseSimar
Cobalamin deficiency in cats
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Lists of specifc disorders or conditions are not complete but are provided to give examples
Hemolysis may give falsely increased values.
752
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 15.6.Diseases and conditions that cause decreased serum[folate]
Decreased absorption of folate in small intestine
*Small intestinal mucosal disease (proximal or diffuse)
Dietary deficiency
*A relatively common disease or condition
by impaired gastric acid secretion, decreased intestinal peristalsis, a defective mucus
barrier, or decreased production of immunoglobulin by intestinal lymphoid cells.A
relative IgA deficiency has been associated with intestinal bacterial overgrowth in
German shepherds.50
2.Low intestinal pH:Maximal folate absorption occurs in an acidic environment
Decreased intestinal pH (increased absorption) may occur with EPI (impaired
HCO, secretion) or excessive gastric acid production.
3.High dietary intake: Folate absorption usually occurs by a facilitated transport
system,but,at high intestinal concentrations,absorption occurs by passive
diffusion.s1
B.Parenteral supplementation: The magnitude and duration of increased serum [folate]
would depend on dosage. A complete history should indicate whether this process is a
potential cause of the abnormality.
C.Cobalamin deficiency in cats: Five of 19 cats with severe cobalamin deficiencies had
increased serum [folate]. When given parenteral cobalamin therapy, the [folate]
decreased significantly in the 19 cats. The authors suggested that the cobalamin
deficiency decreased the utilization of folate (see Fig. 15.2), which resulted in the
accumulation of folate inplasma.21
D.As indicated in the preceding section II.C.1, in vitro hemolysis can cause falsely
increased serum [folate]because erythrocytes contain folate.
IV.
Decreased serum [folate](Table 15.6)
A.Decreased absorption of folate in the small intestine
1.Diseases of the proximal small intestinal mucosa can cause impaired absorption of
folate.
2.Dietary deficiency: Commercial diets should have more than minimum folare
requirements, and thus folate-deficient diets are uncommon.Feeding an all-cheese
diet to dogs created a folate deficiency52
B.Other concepts
1.Prolonged phenytoin (Dilantin) treatment is known to lower serum [folate] in
people. [Folate] was not significantly different in phenytoin-treated and nontreated
dogs that were fed a folate-deficient diet.52 The effects of phenytoin on [folate] is
not known for dogs fed a folate-adequate diet.
2.Sulfasalazine also is reported to lower [folate] in people, but similar findings have
not been reported for dogs or cats.3
3.In theory, sterilization of the intestine with antibiotics may lower serum [folate]
because amajor source offolate（ntestinallora）would beremoved.Also,folateis
involved in DNA synthesis so extensive neoplastic cell growth could potentially
deplete folate levels.
coursesman
15/EXOCRINEPANCREASANDINTESTINE
753
FECALα-PROTEASEINHIBITOR(α-PI)CONCENTRATIONINDOGSANDCATS
I.
Physiologic processes
A.-PI is a protein that inhibits the activity of proteases (e.g., trypsin) in feces. It is
reported to have nearly the same molecular mass as albumin. a,-PI is normally present
in plasmainterstitial fuid,and lymphbutnotin theintestinal lumen.
B.The exact identity of this protein has not been found. Because it is considered to be of
blood (plasma) origin, the antiprotease activity may be due to Q-antitrypsin (human
M,=54,000) or Q-antichymotrypsin (human M, = 68,000).The reported molecular
mass of domestic mammal a-PI molecules varies slightly with the species: canine M,=
59,000,felineM,=57,000,and equine M,=58,000.55
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Units:μg/g of feces
B.Sample
1.Because of the variations in [o-Pl] fecal samples, three separate voided fecal
samples are collected. Collection of feces by digital or mechanical removal of
fecesmay introduce blood into the sample,whichwillresult in falsely increased
[α-PI].56
2.After collection,the fecal samples should beimmediately frozen and shippedwith
dry ice to the reference laboratory.When kept at 37 °C for 72 h, the [o-PI]
decreased by about 30 %; when kept at 4 °C for 72 h, the concentration decreased
about5%.57
C.Currently, there is one ELISA for measuring immunoreactivity for [α-Pl] at Texas
A&M's Gastrointestinal Laboratory (College Station, TX).57
D.An assay for feline[o-Pl] in serum has been developed,but documented evidence of
clinical application was not found.55
III.
Increased fecal [o,-PI]
A.Increased plasma protein loss into intestines
1.Protein-losing enteroparhies caused by extensive intestinal disease such as
lymphangiectasia,idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease (including
lymphocytic,plasmacytic,oreosinophilicdisorders),ntestinal lymphoma
intestinal carcinoma, histoplasmosis, intestinal parasitism, and parvoviral
enteritis.54.58
2.Blood loss into the alimentary tract:Blood loss may be associated with protein
losing enteropathies (e.g.,ulceration or carcinoma),but it may also be due to
hemorrhage from nonentericdisease （ie.,thrombocytopenia,coagulopathy,or
gastric ulceration).
B.Contamination of feces with blood or plasma during collection of the fecal
sample.
C.Increased fecal [α-Pl] may be more sensitive to early protein-losing enteropathy
than are serum albumin, globulin, and total protein concentrations.
IV.
In a study involving seven dogs that were being treated with the nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory agents meloxicam or carprofen, fecal [o-Pl] did not
increase.59
754
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
D-XYLOSEABSORPTIONTESTINDOGS,CATS,ANDHORSES
I.
Physiologic processes
A.D-Xyloseis a simple pentose that isnot commonly ingested,and very litle is presentin
blood or liver.If ingested，it is passively absorbed in the duodenum and proximal
jejunum, from which it enters portal blood. After bypassing the liver, it passes through
the glomerular fltration barrier and is excreted in urine.
B.In people, xylose enters the glucuronic acid-xylulose pathway in hepatocytes. It is
usually assumed that very little of the absorbed xylose is degraded by hepatocytes of
domestic mammals.
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Unit conversion: mg/dL × 0.06661 = mmol/L (SI unit,nearest 0.1 mmol/L）9
B.Assays
1.Multiple xylose assays are available, but clinical laboratories do not commonly offer
them.
2.A colorimetric assay using phyloroglucinol has been used for equine and feline
seraTherealsoareassays thatinvolvedeproteinationofwholeblood,gaschroma
tography,or enzymaticmethods.An o-toluidine assay can measure[xylose] based
glucose)and pentoses(e.g,xylose).62
3.The capability of the intestine to absorb sugars other than just xylose （e.g.,methyl
glucose,rhamnose,and lactulose) can bedetermined by quantitation using high
C. Sample
1.The preferred sample varies with the assay system. Serum is generally preferred.
2.Information on xylose stability was not found.
III.
Xylose absorption tests
A.Basics ofprocedure
1.The D-xylose absorprion test consists of administering D-xylose orally and then
collecting multiple timed blood samples to assess the intestinal ability to absorb D-
xylose.Most of the absorbed xylose passes through the liver and enters systemic blood.
The peak blood [xylose] should reflect the amount of xylose absorbed by the intestine.
2.Xylose is cleared from plasma by passing through the glomerular fltration barrier.
The amount of xylose in urine is related to the amount of xylose absorbed in the
intestine.
B.In dogs and cats
1.Xylose absorption tests have been used to evaluate the small intestinal function of
dogs and cats65-9 In some animals with small intestinal disease, xylose was poorly
absorbed and thus the absorption curves were flat.
2.In most of the current textbooks, small animal internists no longer recommend
xylose absorption tests, perhaps because of the limited availability of xylose assays or
because other methods of characterizing intestinal disease are more fruitful.
C.In horses:Xylose absorption tests have been used to evaluate the function of the small
intestine.70-74
IV.Diseases and conditions thar alter xylose absorption curves (Table 15.7)
15/EXOCRINEPANCREASANDINTESTINE
755
Table 15.7.Diseases and conditions that alter xylose absorption curves
Flat xylose absorption curve (decreased absorption)
*Reduced absorption because of small intestinal mucosal disease
Incomplete delivery of xylose to intestine: vomiting, delayed gastric emptying
Rapid transit time: diarrhea
Persistent [xylose] (decreased elimination)
Decreased GFR
*A relatively common disease or condition
GLUCOSEABSORPTIONTESTINHORSES
I.
Physiologic processes and introductory concepts
A.The glucose absorption test is used primarily in horses that are presented because of
chronic weight loss.The horses may be passing malformed feces (e.g,cow-pie). If the
mucosal disease is limited to the small intestine,feces may have normal consistency.
B.Glucose is a simple hexose that is absorbed in the duodenum and proximal jejunum
from which it enters portal blood.A large portion of the absorbed glucose is removed
from the portal blood by hepatocytes, and the remainder enters the peripheral blood.
From the peripheral blood, glucose may enter metabolic pathways of cells (e.g
glycolysis or glycogen synthesis) or be excreted by kidneys if the renal resorptive
maximum for glucose is exceeded.
C.In horses,microbes of the large intestine digest carbohydrates and produce volatile fatty
acids that are absorbed by the mucosa. Therefore, disorders of the large intestine in
horses can cause clinical states in which ingested carbohydrates are malassimilated.
D.Whereas the results of the xylose absorption test depend primarily on the intestinal
absorption of xylose, the results of the glucose absorption test depend on intestinal
absorption and glucose utilization byhepatocytes andperipheral tissues （primarily
muscleandadposetissue）Therearethreemajoradvantagesof thelucoseabsrptin
test compared to the xylose absorption test:(l) glucose is more readily available,
(2）glucose is less expensive,and (3）assays aremorereadilyavailable formeasuring
serum [glucose].
E.The glucose absorption test can be used to assess the intestinal absorption of monosac-
charides in monogastric mammals, but cannot be used to assess intestinal absorption in
ruminants. It is rarely used in the evaluation of dogs and cats, probably for two reasons:
(1)other diagnosticmethods are availablee.g,those using folate and cobalamin),and
(2) disorders thar cause glucose intolerance are more common.When used to assess
carbohydrate tolerance, the procedure is called the oral glucose tolerance test.
II.
Analytical concepts (see the Glucose Concentration, sect. II in Chapter 14)
III.
Oral glucose absorption test
A.Basics of procedure: Glucose is administered via a stomach tube, and then multiple
blood samples are collected to assess the intestinal ability to absorb it. Assuming normal
glucose metabolism, the peak blood [glucose] should reflect the amount of glucose
absorbed by the intestine.
756
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 15.8.Diseases and conditions that alter oral glucose absorption curves
Failure to meet criteria of adequate absorption
*Malabsorption caused by small intestinal mucosal disease (inflammation,neoplasia
villous atrophy)
Incomplete delivery of glucose to intestine(delayed gastricemptying,prolonged
intestinal transit time)
Rapid transit time associated with diarrhea
Increased utilization of glucose by hepatocyte or peripheral tissues
Peak concentrations unexpectedly high or prolonged
*Diabetes mellitus
*Arelatively common disease or condition
B.Procedure7s
1.Feed is withheld overnighr prior to the procedure.
2.A blood sample is collected for a baseline (or O time) [glucose].
3.Glucose (1 g/kg body weight as a 20 % solution, weight/volume) is administered via
stomach tube.
4.Blood samples are collected at 30,60,90,120,and 180min after glucose is
administered.
5.Blood samples are processed appropriately,and glucose concentrations are measured
in the serum or plasma samples.
C.Expected values in healthy horses
1.Two criteria are used as evidence of adequate intestinal absorption of glucose:
[glucose] at 120 min is greater than either 85%7or 100 % above the baseline
[glucose]
2.The guidelines are based on data from 11 healthy horses. The peak [glucose] at
120 min was approximately twice the concentration in the baseline sample; that is,
178± 29 mg/dL at 120min and 83± 11 mg/dL at 0 min (mean ± sd）.7
IV.Diseases and conditions thar alter oral glucose absorption curves (Table 15.8)
LACTOSETOLERANCETESTINHORSES
I.
Physiologic processes and introductory concepts
A.The lactose tolerance test is used primarily in foals to detect a lactase deficiency that
B.Lactose is a disaccharide composed of glucose and galactose.Lactase is typically present
in the brush border of the small intestine in foals and young adult horses (<3 yr old).
Older horses lack the enzyme.78
C.Lactase catalyzes the splitting of monosaccharides from lactose. The fate of the glucose
is described in the Glucose Absorption Test in Horses section.
II.Analytical concepts (see the Glucose Concentration, sect. II in Chapter 14)
III. Lactose tolerance test
A.Basics of procedure: Lactose is administered via a stomach rube, and then multiple
blood samples are collected to assess the intestinal mucosa's abiliry to digest lactose to
15/EXOCRINEPANCREASANDINTESTINE
757
glucose and galactose.Assuming normal glucose absorption andmetabolism,the peak
blood[glucose] should reflect the amount of lactase activity in the intestine.
B.Procedure79
1.Feed is withheld for 4 h prior to the procedure.
2.A blood sample is collcted for a baseline (or O time) [glucose].
3.Lactose monohydrate (1 g/kg body weight as a 20 % solurion, weight/volume) is
administered via stomach rube.
4.Blood samples are collected at 30, 60, and 90 min after lactose is administered
5.Blood samples are processed appropriately,and glucose concentrations are measured
in the serum or plasma samples.
C.Criteria for adequate lactase activity
1.[Glucose] is 150-250 %of baseline concentrations at 60 or 90 min.77
2.A peak[glucose]is at least 35mg/dL above the baseline concentration.79
IV.Diseases and conditions thar alter the resulrs of the oral lactose tolerance test
A.Maldigestion caused by lactase deficiency
1.Viral enteritis (e.g, rotavirus)
2.Clostridium diffcile enterocolitis
B.Malabsorption of glucose because of disease of the small intestine.
C.Excessive cellular utilization of absorbed glucose
URINESUCROSECONCENTRATIONINHORSES"1
I.
Physiologic processes
A. Sucrose is a disaccharide that is split into glucose and fructose by sucrase in the
proximal small intestine.
B.Sucrose is typically not absorbed by either gastric mucosa (impermeable) or enteric
mucosa (degraded before absorption can occur).
I1.
Analytical concepts
A.Assays
1.For the equine study cited,high-performance liquid chromatography was used to
separate sucrose from other sugars, and pulsed amperometric detection was used to
quantify the separated sugars
2. A spectrophotometric sucrose assay is available, but reports of its use in domestic
mammals were not found.
B.Sample: Urine samples were collected, immediately mixed with sodium azide, and then
frozen (at-80oC)untilanalysis.
C.Urine osmolality was also measured so that sucrose to osmolality ratios could be
calculated.
III.
Sucrose absorption tests
A.Basics of procedure: The urinary bladder was emptied,and then horses were fed 1 kg of
Omolene and then given 454g of sucrose (10 % solution inHO) via a nasogastric
tube.Urine samples were collected 2 and 4 h later.
B.Horses with gastric ulcers had increased urine [sucrose] and increased sucrose to
osmolality ratios.Those horses with more severe gastric ulcers excreted more sucrose in
urine.
758
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 15.9.Other laboratory methods used to evaluate for exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Laboratory method
Abnormal result
Suggested pathologic state
Azocasein digestion test
Feces failed to digest
Decreased fecal proteolytic
azocasein
activity
Fecal fat excretion
Increased fecal fat excreted in
Maldigestion of ingested lipids
24 h sample
Fecal fat,microscopic exam
↑Sudanophilic droplets in
Maldigestion of ingested lipids
feces
Fecal starch,microscopic
↑Starch granules stained by
Maldigestion of ingested starch
exam
Lugol's iodine
Gelatin tube digestion
Feces failed to liquefy gelatin
Decreased fecal protease activity
adequately
Muscle fbers,microscopic
Undigested muscle fibers
Maldigestion of dietary muscle
exam
present
(protein)
PABA
Decreased plasma PABA] or
Decreased chymotrypsin
decreased urinary PABA
released from pancreas
excretion
Plasma turbidity test
Absence ofplasma turbidity
Decreased pancreaticLPS
after ingesting lipid meal.
activity in intestine
but turbidity present after
ingesting predigested lipids
Radiographic film
Feces failed to clear gelatin
Decreased fecal proteolytic
digestion
from flm
activity
Starch digestion test
Flat glucose absorption curve
Maldigestion of starch or
malabsorption of glucose
* PABA: N-benzoyl-L-tyrosyl-para-aminobenzoic acid (bentiromide)
Note: Increases in serum AMS and LPS activities can be indicators of active or recent pancreatic acinar
cell damage. Serum AMS and LPS activities should not be used to detect EPI, because there are
extrapancreatic sources of AMS and LPS that can keep serum activity within the reference interval in
EPI cases.Serum AMS and LPS activity can be decreased when an animal does not have EPI
OTHERMETHODSOFEVALUATINGDIGESTIVEORABSORPTIVEFUNCTIONS
I
Many other laboratory assays or methods are used to evaluate animals with potential
exocrine pancreatic or intestinal diseases (Tables 15.9 and 15.10).Most of the assays listed
in the tablesarenolongeroronlyrarelyused,oftenbecauseofunacceptablyhighratesf
false-negative and false-positive results.
A.The measurement of [TLl] has generally replaced other tests that were used to evaluate
potential maldigestive disorders.
B.Most of the absorption tests have not been found to be clinically valuable. If malab-
sorption is suspected,histologic examination of biopsy samples is frequently used to
establish a diagnosis so that appropriate therapy can be recommended or initiated.
II.
Fecal assays used to detect intestinal parasitism are common in veterinarymedicine,but
discussion of the procedures is beyond the scope of this textbook.The reader is referred to
diagnostic parasitology resources.
15/EXOCRINEPANCREASANDINTESTINE
759
Table 15.10. Other laboratorymethods used to evaluate intestinal diseases
Laboratory method
Abnormal result
Suggested pathologic state
Bacterial culrure (isolation)
Specific isolate (e.g,
Bacterial enteritis
Salmonella sp.)
Bacterial culture (quantitative)
>10²colony-forming
Small intestinal bacterial
units/mL of duodenal
overgrowth
juice
Biopsy procedures (incision or
Abnormal cell populations
Varies with the histologiclesion;
excision)
or abnormal tissue
typically inflammation or
structure
neoplasia
Direct fecal exam
Motile parasites
Giardiasis or amebiasis
Fecal flotation test
Parasiticova,oocytesr
Parasitism
larvae
Fecal occult blood
Positive reaction for heme
Blood in alimentary tract
Fecal sedimentation test
Fluke ova
Parasitism
Hydrogen breath test
Increased hydrogen
Bacterial overgrowth or
production
carbohydrate malabsorption
Plasma turbidity test with
Absence of plasma
Malabsorption of digested lipids
predigested fat
turbidity
Stained feces,microscopic
Acid-fast organisms
Cryptosporidia oocysts or
exam
Mycobacterium bacilli
Giardia trophozoites
Giardiasis
Histoplasma organisms
Histoplasmosis
Increased leukocytes
Enteritis
Neoplastic cells
Neoplasia
Uniform bacilli
Bacterial overgrowth
Starch digestion test
Flat glucose absorption
Malabsorption of glucose
curve
Unconjugated bile acids
Increased serum
Increased deconjugation of bile
concentrations
acids by an overgrowth of
intestinal bacteria
Urine indican test
Positive for indican
Increased degradation of
tryptophan by enteric
bacteria
Urine nitrosonaphtholtest
Positive nitrosonaphthol
Increased bacterial degradation
of tyrosine by enteric bacteria
Note: This is not a complete list. Other special assays are used for specific organisms or pathologic states.
References
1. Wiberg ME, Saari SA, Westermarck E. 1999. Exocrine pancreatic atrophy in German shepherd dogs and rough
coated collies: An end result of lymphocytic pancreatitis. Vet Pathol 36:530-54 1.
2.Wiberg ME. 2004. Pancreatic acinar atrophy in German shepherd dogs and rough-coated collies: Etiopathogenes,
diagnosis and treatment—A review. Vet Q 26:6175.
3.Moeller EM,Steiner JM, Clark LA,Murphy KE,Famula TR,Williams DA,Stanlovics ME,Vose AS.2002.
Inheritance of pancreatic acinar atrophy in German shepherd dogs. Am J Vet Res 63:1429-1434.
4. Watson PJ. 2003. Exocrine pancreatic insuffciency as an end stage of pancreatitis in four dogs. J Small Anim Pract
44:306-312.
760
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
5. Steiner JM, Williams DA. 2000. Serum feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity in cats with exocrine pancreatic
insuficiency. J Vet Intern Med 14:627-629.
6.WillimsDA 2000.Exorinc pareatic diseae. In: Einger S),Feldan EC,eds.Tebook fVerinryInt
Medicine: Disease ofthe Deg and Cat, Sth edition, 1345-1367. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
7. Steiner JM, Williams DA. 2000. Disagrees with criteria for diagnsing pancreatitis in cats. J Am Vet Med AssoC
217:816-817.
8.Tietz NW. 1995. Clinical Guide to Laboratory Tests, 3rd edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
9. Keller ET. 1990. High serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity secondary to pancreatitis in a dog with exocrine
pancreatic insuffciency. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:623626.
10. Steiner JM. 2003. Diagnosis of pancreatitis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 33:1181-1195.
11.Hayakawa T, Kondo T, Shibata T, Naruse S. 1992. Peritoneal absorption of pancreatic enzymes in dogs. Gastroenterol
Jpn 27:230-233.
12. Simpson KW, Batt RM, MeLean L, Morton DB. 1989. Circulating concentrations of trypsin-like immunoreactivity
and activities of lipase and aylase after pancneatic duct ligation in dogs. Am J Vet Res 50:629632.
13. Lucena R, Ginel PJ, Novales M, Molleda JM. 1999. Effects of dexamethasone administration on serum trypsin-like
immunoreactivity in healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 1357-1359.
the diagnosis of pancreatitis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:37-42.
15.Forman MA, Marks SL, De Cock HE, Hergesell EJ, Wisner ER, Baker TW, Kass PH, Steiner JM, Williams DA.
2004. Evaluation of scrum feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity and helical computed tomography versus
conventional testing for the diagnosis of feline pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med 18:807-815.
16.Gerhardt A, Steiner JM,Williams DA,Kramer S, Fuchs C, Janthur M, Hewicker-Trautwein M, Nolte I. 2001
Comparison of the sensitivity of different diagnostic tests for pancreatitis in cats. J Vet Intern Med 15:329333.
17. Grulke S, Gangl M, Deby-Dupont G, Caudron I, Deby C, Serteyn D. 2002. Plasma trypsin level in horses suffering
from acute intestinal obstruction.VetJ163:283-291
development of a radio-immunoassay.Vet Res 34:317-330
19. Reidelberger RD, O'Rourke M, Durie PR, Geokas MC, Largman C. 1984. Effects of food intake and cholecystoki-
nin on plasma trypsinogen levels in dogs. Am J Physiol 246:G543-G549.
20. Geokas MC, Reidelberger R, O'Rourke M, Passaro E Jr, Largman C. 1982. Plasma pancreatic trypsinogens in
chronic renal failure and after nephrectomy. Am J Physiol 242:G177-G182.
21. Ruaux CG, Steiner JM, Williams DA. 2005. Early biochemical and clinical responses to cobalamin supplementation
in cats with signs of gastrointestinal disease and severe hypocobalaminemia. J Vet Intern Med 19:155160.
22. Meneses F, Ehinger B, Gerhardt A, Meyer-Lindenberg A, Hewicker-Trautwein M, Amtsberg G, Nolte I. 2003.
Chronic-idiopathic enteropathy in cats: A case control study. Berl Munch Tierarztl Wochenschr 116:340345.
23. Carro T, Williams DA. 1989.Relationship between dietary protein concentration and serum rypsin-like immunore-
activity in dogs. Am J Vet Res 50:2105-2107.
24. Williams DA, Batt RM. 1988. Sensitivity and specificity of radioimmunoassay of serum trypsin-like immunoreactiv.
ity for the diagnosis of canine exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:195201.
25.Wiberg ME, Westermarck E. 2002. Subdlinical exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
220:1183-1187.
26. Steiner JM, Williams DA. 2003. Development and validation of a radioimmunoassay for the measurement of canine
27. Steiner JM, Teague SR, Williams DA. 2003. Development and analytic validation of an cnzyme-linked immuno-
sorbent assay for the measurement of canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity in serum. Can J Vet Res 67:175
182.
28. Steiner JM, Wilson BG, Williams DA. 2004. Development and analytical validation of a radioimmunoassay for the
measurement of feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity in serum. Can J Vet Res 68:309-314.
29. Steiner JM, Broussard J, Mansfield CS, Gumminger SR, Williams DA. 2001. Serum canine pancreatic lipase
immunoreactivity (cPLl) concentrations in dogs with spontaneous pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med 15:274 (abstract).
30. Williams DA, Steiner JM, Ruaux CG, Zavros N. 2003. Increases in serum pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (PLI)
are greater and of longer duration than those of trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI) in cats with experimental
pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med 17:445446 (abstract)
31.WilliamsDA2003Diagnsisofcanineandfline panceatitisIn：38thAnnulMeeting f theAmericanSocietyf
Veterinary Clinical Pathologists, Banff, Alberta, 612.
32. Steiner JM, Finco DR, Gumminger SR, Williams DA. 2001. Serum canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (cPLI)
in dogs with experimentally induced chronic renal failure. J Vet Intern Med 15:311 (abstract)
15/EXOCRINEPANCREASANDINTESTINE
761
33. Steiner JM, Rutz GM, Williams DA. 2006. Serum lipase activities and pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity concentra
tions in dogs with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Am J Vet Res 67:8487.
34. Mansfeld CS, Jones BR. 2000. Plasma and urinary trypsinogen activation peptide in healthy dogs, dogs with
pancreatitis and dogs with other systemic diseases.Aust Vet J 78:416422.
35. Mansheld CS, Jones BR, Spillman T. 2003. Assessing the severity of canine pancreatitis. Res Vet Sci 74:137144.
36. Allen HS, Steiner J, Broussard J, Mansfeld C, Williams DA, Jones B. 2006. Serum and urine concentrations of
tryp sinogen-activation peptide as markers for acute pancreatitis in cats. Can J Vet Res 70:313316.
37. Karanjia ND, Widdison AL, Jehanli A, Hermon-Taylor J, Reber HA. 1993. Assay of trypsinogen activation in the cat
experimental model of acute pancreatitis. Pancreas 8:189-195.
38.Rucker RB,Morris JG.1997.The vitamins. In:Kancko JHarvey JW,Bruss ML,eds.Clinical Bichemistry of
Dostic Animas,5th edition,703-739. San Diego: Academic.
39. Lundberg GD, Iverson C, Radulescu G. 1986. Now read this: The SI units are here. J Am Med Assoc
255:2329-2339.
40. Fairbanks VF, Klee GG. 1999. Biochemical aspects of hematology. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, eds. Tietz Texbeek of
Clixiaf Cbemistry,.3rd editon,1642-1710.Philadelphia:WB Saunders
41. Simpson KW, Morton DB, Batt RM. 1989. Efect of exocrine pancreatic insuffciency on cobalamin absorption in
dogs.Am J Vet Res 50:1233-1236.
42.Williams DA, Batt RM, MeLean L. 1987. Bacterial overgrowth in the duodenum of dogs with exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency.J Am VetMedAssoc 191:201-206.
43.Stangl GI, Schwarz FJ, Jahn B, Kirchgessner M. 2000. Cobalt-deficiency-induced hyperhomocysteinaemia and
oxidative status of cattle.Br J Nutr 83:36
44. Fyfe JC, Giger U, Hall CA, Jezyk PF, Klumpp SA, Levine JS, Patterson DF. 1991. Inherited selective intestinal
cobalamin malabsorption and cobalamin defciency in dogs. Pediatr Res 29:2431.
45. Fyfe JC, Jezyk PF, Giger U, Patterson DF. 1989. Inherited selective malabsorption of vitamin B in giant schnauzers.
J AmAnim Hosp Assoc25:533-539
46. Outerbridge CA, Myers SL, Giger U. 1996.Hereditary cobalamin defciency in Border collic dogs. J Vet Intern Med
10:169 (abstract).
47.Vaden SL,Wood PA, Ledley FD, Cornwell PE, Miller RT, Page R. 1992. Cobalamin deficiency associated with
methylmalonic acidemia in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1101-1103.
48. Batt RM, Morgan JO. 1982. Role of serum folate and vitamin B concentrations in the differentiation of small
intestinal abnormalities in the dog. Res Vet Sci 32:1722.
49. Rutgers HC, Batt RM, Elwood CM, Lamport A. 1995. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in dogs with chronic
intestinal disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:187-193.
50. Batt RM, Barnes A, Rutgers HC, Carter SD. 1991. Relative IgA deficiency and smallintestinal bacterial overgrowth
in German shepherd dogs.Res Vet Sci 50:106-111.
51.HallEJ,SimpsonKW.2000.Diseasesof thesmall intestine.n:EtingerSj,Feldman EC,eds.exbookofVety
IntemalMedicne：Diseases oftbeDogandCat,5th edition,11821238.Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
52.Bunch SE,Easley JR,Cullen JM1990.Hematologic values and plasma and tissue folate concentrations in dogs
given phenytoin on a long-term basis. Am J Vet Res 51:1865-1868.
53. Williarms DA. 1999. Defining small intestinal disease. In: Proceedings of the 17th ACVIM Forum, Chicago.
466-468.
54.Murphy KF, German AJ, Ruaux CG, Steiner JM, Williams DA, Hall EJ. 2003.Fecal C-proteinase inhibitor
concentration in dogs with chronic gastrointestinal disease. Vet Clin Pathol 32:67-72
55. Fetz K, Ruaux CG, Steiner JM, Suchodolski JS, Williams DA. 2004. Purification and partial characterization of feline
C-proteinase inhibitor (foα,-Pl) and the developrment and validation of a radioimmunoassay for the measurement of
foL,-PI in serum. Biochimie 86:67-75
56.Koenig A, Slater M, Ruaux CG, Steiner JM, Williams D. 2002. Comparison of fecal -proteinase inhibitor
concentrations in fecal samples obtained via spontaneous defecation and rectal palpation. J Vet Intern Med 16:329
(abstract).
57. Melgarejo T, Willams DA, Asem EK. 1998. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for canine O-protease inhibitor.
Am J Vet Res 59:127-130.
58. Mohr AJ, Leisewitz AL, Jacobson LS, Steiner JM, Ruaux CG, Williams DA. 2003. Effect of early enteral nutrition on
intestinal permeabilty,intestinal proteinloss,and outcome in dogs with severe parvoviral enteritis.JVet Inter Med
17:791-798.
59. Murphy KF, German AJ, Ruaux CG, Steiner JM, Williams DA, Hall EJ. 2003. Fecal C-proteinase inhibitor
concentration in dogs receiving long-term nonsteroidal anti-in fammatory drug therapy. Vet Clin Pathol
32:136-139.
762
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
60. Eberts TJ, Sample RH, Glick MR, Ellis GH. 1979. A simplifed, colorimetric micromethod for xylose in serum or
urine, with phloroglucinol. Clin Chem 25:1440-1443.
61. Henderson AR, Rinker AD. 1999. Gastric, pancreatic, and intestinal funetion. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, eds.
Tietz Textbook of Clinical Chemistry, 3rd edition, 1271-1327. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
62.Bauer JD, Ackermann PG, Toro G. 1974. Clinical Labwrwtery Metheds, Sth edition. St Louis: CV Mosby.
63.Serensen SH,Proud FJ,Rutgers HC,Markwell P,Adam A,Batt RM.1997.A blood test for intestinal permeability
and function: A new tool for the diagnosis of chronic intestinal disease in dogs. Clin Chim Acta 264:103-115.
64. Rutgers HC, Batt RM, Proud FJ, Sorensen SH, Elwood CM, Petrie G, Matthewman LA, Forster-van Hijfte MA,
Boswood A, EntwistleM, Fensome RH. 1996. Intestinal permeability and function in dogs with small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth. J Small Anim Pract 37:428-434.
65.Hil FWG, Kidder DE,Frew J. 1970. A xylose absorption test for the dog.Vet Rec 87:250255.
66. Hill FWG. 1972. Malabsorption syndrome in the dog: A study of thirry-eight cases. J Small Anim Pract 13:575594.
67. Burrows CF, Merritt AM, Chiapella AM. 1979. Determination of fecal fat and trypsin output in the evaluation of
chronic canine diarhea. J Am Vet Med Assoc 174:6266.
68.Sherding RG, Stradley RP,Rogers WA,Johnson SE.1982. Bentiromide:xylose test in healthy cats.Am J Vet Res
43:2272-2273.
69. Hawkins EC, Meric SM, Washabau RJ, Feldman EC, Turrel JM. 1986. Digestion of bentiromide and absorption of
xylose in healthy cats and absorption of xylose in cats with infltrative intestinal disease. Am J Vet Res 47:567-569.
70. Jacobs KA, Norman P, Hodgson DRG, Cymbaluk N. 1982. Effect of diet on the oral D-xylose absorption test in the
horse.Am J Vet Res 43:1856-1858.
71.Bolton JR,Merritt AM, Cimprich RE,Ramberg CF, Streett W. 1976.Normal and abnormal xylose absorption in the
horse.Cornell Vet 66:183-197.
72. Tate LP Jr, Ralston SL, Koch CM, Everitt JI. 1983. Effects of extensive resection of the small intestine in the pony.
Am J Vet Res 44:1187-1191.
73.Roberts MC. 1974. The D (+) xylose absorption test in the horse. Equine Vet J 6:28-30.
74. Roberts MC, Norman P. 1979. A re-evaluation of the D (+) xylose absorption test in the horse. Equine Vet ]
11:239-243
75.Roberts MC, Hill FWG. 1973. The oral glucose tolerance test in the horse.Equine Vet J 5:171-173.
76.MairTS,Hillyer MH, TaylorFG,Pearson GR 1991. Small intestinal malabsorption in the horse: An assessment of
the specificity of the oral glucose tolerance test.Equine Vet J 23:344-346.
77. Sweeney RW. 1987. Laboratory evaluation of malassimilation in horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 3:507514.
78. Roberts MC. 1975. Carbohydrate digestion and absorption in the equine smallintestine. J S Af Vet Assoc 46:1927.
79. Martens RJ, Malone PS, Brust DM. 1985. Oral lactose tolerance test in foals: Technique and normal values. Am J
VetRes46:2163-2165.
80.Weee JS,ParsonsDA,Staempfi HR.1999.Association of Clridim diffcilewith cnterocolitis and lactose
intolerance in a foal. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:229-232
81. O'Conner MS, Steiner JM, Roussel AJ, Williams DA, Meddings JB, Pipers F, Cohen ND. 2004. Evaluation of urine
sucrose concentration for detection of gastric ulcers in horses. Am J Vet Res 65:31-39.
82. Hessels J, Snoeyink EJ, Platenkamp AJ, Voortman G, Steggink J, Eidhof HH. 2003. Assessment of intestinal
permeability: Enzymatic determination of urinary mannitol, raffinose, sucrose and lactose on Hitachi analyzer. Clin
Chem LabMed 41:33-38.
Chapter16
LIPIDS
Lipids.
764
Overview of Lipoproteins
764
I.Lipoprotein Classification,Content,and Properties
764
Il.Lipoprotein Metabolism..
766
Ill. Lipases.
767
Cholesterol Concentration of Serum
767
I.PhysiologicProcesses
767
Il.Analytical Concepts
769
Ill.Hypercholesterolemia.
770
IV.Hypocholesterolemia
770
Triglyceride (TG) (Triacylglycerol) Concentration of Serum.
771
1.Physiologic Processes
771
Il.Analytical Concepts
771
Ill. Hypertriglyceridemia
772
IV.Hypotriglyceridemia.
772
Hyperlipemia,Hyperlipidemia,and Hyperlipoproteinemia Disorders.
773
I.Terms.
773
.
Classification of Hyperlipoproteinemia Conditions and Disorders .
773
I.Physiologic(Postprandial)Hyperlipidemia.
.773
IV.Primary or PossiblePrimary Hyperlipidemia Disorders inDomestic
Mammals..
773
V.Secondary Hyperlipidemia Disorders.
775
Other Assessments of Lipids
778
Lipoprotein Electrophoresis
778
Il.Nonesterified Fatty Acids(NEFA,Free Fatty Acids,and Fatty Acids)
778
Ill.Standing Plasma Test for Chylomicrons.
780
763
764
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 16.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
[x]
Concentration of x (x= analyte)
CoA
Coenzyme A
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
HDL
High-density lipoprotein
IDL
Intermediate-density lipoprotein
LCAT
Lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase
LDL
Low-density lipoprotein
LPL
Lipoprotein lipase
LPS
Lipase
NEFA
Nonesterified fatty acid, free fatty acid, fatry acid
SI
Systeme International d'Unites
TG
Triglyceride (also called triacylglycerol)
TNF
Tumor necrosis factor
VLDL
Very low-density lipoprotein
LIPIDS
I.
A lipid is a compound that is soluble in organic solvents and relatively insoluble in HO.
Of the lipid compounds in blood or other body fuids, serum [cholesterol] and[TG] are
the most frequently measured and thus are the focus of this chapter.
IL.
Lipids found inmammals
A.Sterols: cholesterol,cholesterol esters,bile acids, steroid hormones,and vitamin D
B.Glycerol esters:phosphoglycerides (phospholipids),monoglycerides,diglycerides,and
triglycerides
C.Fatty acids: short-, medium-, and long-chain fatty acids, and prostaglandins (fatty-acid
derivatives)
D.Sphingosines:sphingomyelin (phospholipids),and glycosphingolipids
E.Terpenes: vitamins A, E,and K
III.
Lipids have many functions in the body but are particularly important as an energy
source (triglycerides and fatty acids), as structural components of all cell membranes
(phospholipids and cholesterol),and as substrates forhormones and second messengers.
OVERVIEWOFLIPOPROTEINS
Lipoprotein Classification, Content, and Properties
A.A basic understanding of lipoprotein composition and properties is needed to under-
stand serum [TG] and[cholesterol] because all TG andmost cholesterol molecules are
transported in serum within lipoproteins. Formation of lipoproteins enables lipids to
form small particles that can circulate through the vasculature without coalescing into
large lipid masses that would obstruct blood flow.
B.Lipoproteinsare classfiedeither by their electrophoreticmobility orby their density
relative to HO. Their properties depend on composition (Table 16.2)
Table 16.2.Lipoprotein classification,content,and properties of human lipoproteins
Lipoproteins
Property
Chylomicron
VLDL
IDL
LDL
HDL
Density (g/mL)
S6'0 >
<1.006
1.006-1.019
1.019-1.063
1.063-1.210
Major lipid
Dietary TG
Heparic TG, phospholipid,
HepaticTG&
Phospholipid &
Phospholipid &
&cholesterolster
cholesterol ester
cholesterol ester
cholesterol ester
Lipid to protein ratio
40:1 to 70:1
10:1to15:1
5:1to10:1
3:1 to 4:1
1:1
Apolipoproteins
A,B,C,E
B,C,E
B,C,E
B
A,C,D,E
Electrophoretic migration
Origin
Pre-β
g-od o g
β
Diameter (nm)
> 70 (oftm 500-1000)
25-70
22-24
19-23
4-10
Contibute to senum
Yes, foats with time
Yes
Maybe
No
No
lactescence
Major site of formation
Small intestine
Hepatocyte
Plasma (from
Plasma (from
Hepatocytes,
enterocytes
VLDLs)
IDLs and
enterocytes
VLDLs)
Major sites of
Plasma and
Plasma
Plasma
Nonhepatic cells,
Hepatocytes
degradation or
hepatocytes
hcpatocytes,
transformation
macrophages
Sewree(modifedj:Rifaiet al.
iCourseSmar
766
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
1.The general composition of lipoproteins in domestic mammals is similar to the
composition of human lipoproteins.23
a.The outside surface of lipoprotein particles contains phospholipids,nonesterifed
cholesterol molecules, and apolipoproteins.The hydrophilic aspects of the
molecules are on the plasma surface; the hydrophobic aspects are adjacent to a
core of mostly TG and cholesterol ester molecules. Farty acids may be present in
the core but also circulate outside of lipoproteins bound to albumin.
b.Apolipoproteins (apoproteins） are the specific protein and polypeptide components
of lipoproteins. They are separated into five major classes (A, B, C, D, and E),
some with subclasses (e.g., C-1, C-Il, and C-II).
c. Lipoprotein density increases with increased percentage of protein content
(chylomicrons<VLDL<IDL<LDL<HDL),whereas theratios of lipid to
protein and triglyceride to cholesterol decrease with increasing lipoprotein density.
2.There are also significant variations in the relative amounts, content, and electropho-
reticmigration of lipoprotein fractions and subfractions among species.
a.Dogs,cats,and horses have predominantly HDL cholesterol rather than LDL
cholesterol. LDL cholesterol predominates in people.
b. Predominance of HDL cholesterol is associated with decreased or absent choles-
terol ester transfer activity (transferring cholesterol from HDL to LDL) and
decreased susceptibility to atherogenesis. Most domestic mammals have little or
no cholesterol ester transfer activity.
C.In veterinary medicine,TG and cholesterolare the routine screening tests to assess
lipoproteins,whereas in human medicine, a routine lipoprotein profle also includes
measurement of HDL cholesterol(good cholesterol),a calculation of LDL cholesterol
("bad cholesterol"),and sometimes a calculation ofVLDL cholesterol.
D.More completelipoprotein analysis includes qualitative and quantitative lipoprotein
subfraction analysis by various electrophoretic and density separations,and assessment
of apolipoproteins by immunoassays or genetic tests. Such assays are used to assess
lipoprotein metabolism in people but are rarely used in clinical veterinary medicine.
Lipoprotein metabolism (Fig.16.1)
A.In the context of serum [cholesterol] and [TG], disorders involving lipoprotein
metabolism involve excess synthesis,defective lipolysis, or defective clearance or cellular
uptake of lipoproteins.
1.Nascent (newly made) lipoproteins are produced in small intestinal enterocytes
(chylomicrons) and in hepatocytes (VLDL and discoid HDL).
2.Lipolysis of lipoproteins (chylomicrons,VLDL,and IDL） occurs on the luminal
surface of capillary endothelial cells and is catalyzed by LPL. LPL production and
activity depend on insulin.Insulin enables LPL to “foat” from the inner surface of
the cell membrane to the outer surface,where it can contact plasma lipoproteins and
thus facilitate the removal of TG from lipoproteins.4
3.Intravenous heparin promotes the release of LPL from endothelial cells and thus an
increased plasma LPL activity. Heparin also promotes release of hepatic lipase from
the sinusoidal endothelial cels to plasmaBecause of its actionsheparin is
sometimes calledlipemia clearingfactor.
4.Lipoprotein remnants are cleared from plasma by hepatocytes.LDLmolecules are
ingLDLbinding to cellreceptors.
16/LIPIDS
767
B.Apolipoproteins are critical for normal lipoprotein metabolism,influencing lipoprotein
structure,actingascofactorsor enzymes nvolved inlipidmetabolism,and actingas
ligands for receptor-mediated cellular interactions.
1.TheA class,from intestineand liver,is associatedmostly withHDLApolipoprotn
A-I is an activator of lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) and is a structural
protein.
2.The B class, from intestine and liver,is involved in synthesis and secretion of
chylomicrons and VLDL and in the endocytosis of lipoprotein particles from
VLDL,IDL,LDL,and chylomicron remnants.
3.The Cclass,fromliver,ismostly inVLDL,HDL,and chylomicrons.Apolipopro
tein C-II is a cofactor for LPL
4.Apolipoprotein D is associated with LCAT in HDL
5.The E class, from liver andmacrophages, is in all lipoproteins and may be involved
in ligand binding and conversion of VLDL to IDL.
C.There are many other aspects of lipoprotein metabolism (e.g., mobilization and
oxidation oflipidsand apolipoproteinreceptorregulation）thatwillnot be considered
here.For more detailed information about control and processes of lipoproteins, the
reader isreferred to textbooks orreviewarticles.2sA detailed understanding of
lipoprotein metabolism is needed to understand coronary heart disease and some
primary lipoprotein disorders. Because such disorders are uncommon in domestic
mammals,lipoprotein informationwill be limited.
III.
Of the several lipases in the body, the major ones that pertain to lipid disorders are LPL
and hepatic lipase. More information about lipases is in Chapter 12.
A.Hepatic lipase is produced by hepatocytes, is present on endothelial cells of hepatic
sinusoids, and hydrolyzes TG in LDL
B.Many extrahepatic cells, including adipocytes and myocytes,produce LPL. It migrates
from these cells to the luminal surface of endothelial cells,where it catalyzes the
hydrolysis of TG in chylomicrons, VLDL, and IDL. Its activity is enhanced by insulin,
thyroxine,and heparin.
CHOLESTEROLCONCENTRATIONOFSERUM
I.
Physiologicprocesses
A. Nearly all cholesterol in a fasting serum sample is within lipoproteins, and most was
produced in hepatocytes. However, essentially all cells can synthesize cholesterol.
Particularly significant nonhepatic sources are intestinal mucosal cells, which
synthesize cholesterol that is packaged into chylomicrons,and gonads and adrenal
glands.
B.In the healthy state, cholesterol synthesis begins with acetyl-CoA and is a regulated
process that depends on cellular [cholesterol]. The major rate-limiting enzyme is
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase.
C.The potential toxic effects of free cholesterol are prevented by cholesterol esterification
involving two enzymes: plasma LCAT and cellular acylcholesterol acyltransferase.
Esterification also increases the lipid-carrying capacity of lipoproteins.
D.In general,LDL delivers cholesterol produced in theliver to other cells in the body,
and HDL scavenges excess cholesterol from cells throughout the body and delivers it to
the liver.
ExogenousLipidPathways
EndogenousLipidPathways
VLDL
Liver
Small
Chol
Intestine
TG
Apoproteln
LAMG
AcCoA
synthesls
FA
TG
PL
MG
synthesls
CE
Discoid HDL
TG
FA
Glycerol
Lymphatc
Other
HDL
cells
Macrophage
Hepatic
clearance
Blood
vessel
VLDL
Blood
'Chylomicron
chylomicron
remnar
P
IDI
Muscle
ATP
AOC
-ipolysis
FA
TG
Adipose tissue
Adipose
Muscle
ATF
AcCo
OTriglyceride molecules in lipoproteins
tissue
Cholesterolester moleculesin lipoproteins
AB C D EApolipoproteins A,B,C,D,andE in lipoproteins
Fig.16.1.Basic physiologic processes in lipoprotein metabolism.The threemajor processes that affect
[lipoprotein] and thus TG] and [cholesterol are (l) synthesis of chylomicrons in enterocytes and VLDL in
hepatocytes, (2) LPL-catalyzed lipolysis on endothelial cell membranes, and (3) hepatocyte clearance of
exogenous lipids.
MG and FA.After absorption by enterocytes, MG and FA are reassembled into TG.Enterocytes also
produce CE,phospholipids,and apolipoproteins A and B and then assemble the molecules into TG-rich
lipoproteins called chylomicrons.The chylomicrons are secreted into lymphatic vessels and then enter blood
via the thoracic duct. In blood, chylomicrons obtain C and Eapolipoproteins from circulating HDL. In
the presence of insulin, apolipoprotein C-ll activates LPL (on endothelial cell membranes) that catalyzes
the lipolysis of TG to generate FA. The FA enters adipocytes to be stored in TG or enters muscle fbers
(or other cells) to undergo oxidation to generate energy.After removal of most TG molecules,the
chylomicron remnants are cleared from plasma by hepatocytes in a process involving B apolipoproteins.
768
16/LIPIDS
769
E.Cholesterol esters enter cells by receptor-mediated endocytosis of lipoprotein fragments.
They are delivered to lysosomes,where acid lipase promotes their hydrolysis.Choles
terol can then be released for use by the cell
F.When cholesterol reaches hepatocytes via lipoprotein remnants, it may be reused for
lipoprotein synthesis,excreted unchanged in bile, or degraded to bile acids.
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms and units
1.Serum [cholesterol]represents the total [cholesterol], including cholesterol and
cholesterol esters that are hydrolyzed during analysis.The reacting cholesterol
molecules are within lipoproteins, typically in cholesterol-rich LDL and HDL
molecules.
2.Units: mg/dL × 0.02586= mmol/L (SI unit,nearest 0.05 mmol/L)
B.Sample
1.Serum is the preferred sample.Total [cholesterol] is stable at 4 °Cfor 5-7 d, at
-20°C for 3mo, and at -70°C for years.Repeated thawing and refreezing should
be avoided.9
2.Dogs and cats should be fasted overnight or for about 12 h to avoid postprandial
hyperlipidemia, which may affect [cholesterol].
C. Methods
1.Most automated assays are enzymatic methods that hydrolyze cholesterol esters and
then use cholesterol oxidase to oxidize cholesterol and generate hydrogen peroxide,
which then reacts with an indicator dye.Some assaysuse an O-sensing electrode to
measure O consumption.
Fig.16.1.continmed
and CE that may form from dietary cholesterol or de novo synthesis.
TG-rich VLDL is assembled in hepatocytes and secreted into sinusoidal blood. In the presence of
insulin, apolipoproteins C-II on the VLDL activate LPL on endothelial cells to initiate lipolysis and
liberation ofFA from TG.As VLDL loses TG,it becomes denser to form IDL,which may also
undergo additional lipolysis to form LDL. LDL delivers cholesterol to many cells for maintenance of
cellmembranes or steroid hormone synthesis.Hepatocyte clearance of LDL involves the action of
hepatic lipase and thebinding of a cholesterol-richremnant to a B-apolipoprotein receptor on
hepatocytes. LDL is also removed by macrophages in either receptor or non-receptor-mediated
processes.
hepatocytes and have rwo major functions: (1) they serve as a source of C and E apolipoproteins for
transport it for reutilization (in hepatocytes) or degradation (in hepatocytes or macrophages). Choles-
terol is captured by theLCAT-catalyzed formation of cholesterol ester andlysolecithin from lecithin and
cholesterol.This is supported by apolipoprotein A.As HDL accumulates cholesterol in circulation,they
become larger and acquire their spherical form.
·The outer surfaces of lipoproteins contain phospholipids, nonesterified cholesterol, and apolipoproteins
Shaded letters A,B, C,and E are A, B,C, and E apolipoproteins;AcCoA,aoetyl-ooenzyme A;ATP,
adenosine 5′-triphosphate; CE, cholesterol ester; Chol, cholesterol; FA,fatty acid;LPL, lipoprotein lipase;
LPS,pancreatic lipase;MG,monoglyceride;PL,phospholipid; and TG, triglyceride.
770
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 16.3.Diseases and conditions that cause hypercholesterolemia
Increased cholesterol production
By hepatocytes
*Nephrotic syndrome or protein-losing nephropathy
By enterocytes
*Postprandial hyperlipidemia
Decreased lipolysis or intravascular processing of lipoproteins
*Hypothyroidism
*Nephrotic syndrome or protein-losing nephropathy
Lipoprotein lipase deficiency (very rare in dogs)
Other, unknown, or multiple mechanisms
Acute pancreatitis
*Cholestasis (obstructive)
*Diabetes mellitus
Hyperadrenocorticism or excess glucocorticoids
Hypercholesterolemia in briards
Idiopathic hyperlipidemia of miniarure schnauzers or other breeds
*A relatively common disease or condition
enzymatic assays. Ascorbic oxidase may be included in an assay's reagents to
remove the effect of ascorbic acid.
III.
Hypercholesterolemia
A.Increased serum[cholesterol] indicates there are increased concentrations of lipoproteins
that contain cholesterol.
B.Disorders or conditions (Table 16.3)
C.The pathologic processes that cause hypercholesterolemia are described in a later section
on lipoprotein disorders (Hyperlipemia, Hyperlipidemia, and Hyperlipoproteinemia
Disorders).
IV.
Hypocholesterolemia
A.Hypocholesterolemia is an uncommon finding in clinical cases.
B.Disorders or conditions that cause hypocholesterolemia (Table 16.4)
1.Portosystemic shunts:It is reported that about 60-70 % of dogs and cats with
portosystemic shunts have hypocholesterolemia. Two pathogeneses are proposed for
the hypocholesterolemia:(1) decreased cholesterol production because of decreased
functional hepatic mass, and (2) inhibition of cholesterol synthesis by bile acids.
2.Protein-losing enteropathy (especiallybecause of intestinal lymphangiectasia4
The pathogenesis of the hypocholesterolemia may include decreased lipoprotein
production because of the carabolic state or, in the case of lymphangiectasia, loss of
lipids that are normally produced by enterocytes.
3.Hypoadrenocorticism
a.In one study involving 17 dogs with hypoadrenocorticism, 13 had hypocholester
olemia. In another study involving 201 dogs, 14 were hypocholesterolemic, but
29 had hypercholesterolemia.16
16/LIPIDS
771
Table 16.4.Diseases and conditions that cause hypocholesterolemia
Decreased cholesterolproduction
Portosystemic shunts in dogs and cats
Protein-losing enteropathy
Other, unknown, or multiple mechanisms
Hypoadrenocorticism
b.As explained in the section on hyperadrenocorticism in dogs (Hyperlipemia,
Hyperlipidemia,and HyperlipoproteinemiaDisorders sectV.E),corisol oes
infuence lipoprotein metabolism,but howhypocortisolemia is associated with
hypocholesterolemia is not established.
TRIGLYCERIDE (TG) (TRIACYLGLYCEROL) CONCENTRATION OF SERUM
Physiologic processes
A. In general, lipoproteins transport TG from intestines and liver to muscle for energy or
to adipose tissue for storage.
B.Nearly all TG in a fasting serum sample is within lipoproteins that were produced in
hepatocytes. Much of the TG in a postprandial sample is in chylomicrons that were
assembled in enterocytes from dietary lipids.
C.TG synthesis begins with fatry acids (short,medium, or long chain) and glycerol from
carbohydrate metabolism. TG synthesis for lipoproteins occurs in hepatocytes and
enterocytes.
D.When lipoproteins containing apolipoprotein C-lI bind to LPL on endothelial cells,
fatty acids are cleaved from TG molecules and enter cells (e.g., adipocytes and myo-
cytes).With repeated processing, the lipoproteins become TG depleted and thus serum
[TG]decreases.
II.
Analytical concepts
A.Terms and units
1.Triglyceride is the more common term for a group of lipids that contain three fatty
acids artached to a glycerol backbone. The more correct term for the molecules is
triacylgtycerof, but it is not used as frequently in medical communication.
2.Serum [TG] represents the total [TG]; the reacting TG molecules were mostly
within TG-rich lipoprotein (ie., chylomicrons,VLDL,and IDL). TG molecules are
a highly variable population ofmolecules because of the varied fatty acids that are
artached to the glycerol backbone.
3.Units:mg/dL×0.01129=mmol/L（SI unit,nearest 0.05 mmol/L)
B.Sample
1.Serum is the preferred sample.Total [TG] is stable at 4°C for 5-7 d,at -20°C for
3mo,and at 70 °C for years.Repeated thawing and refreezing should be avoided.
2.Vacuum tubes with silicone-coated stoppers have not been recommended for TG
analysis because glycerin from glycerin-coated stoppers may be detected in assays
that measure glycerol released from TG. However, in a pilot study with the Vitros
TG assay,exposure of serum to glycerin-coated stoppers didnot increase the
measured [TG] (authors’unpublished data).
772
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
3.Increased concentrations of chylomicrons,VLDL,and possibly IDL may cause
lactescence or turbid serum and may interfere with spectrophotometric assays.Thus,
laboratory personnelmay clear the serum (by centrifugation or addition of clearing
agents)prior to chemical analysis.When the serum is cleared of the TG-rich
lipoproteins, the [TG] in the sample will be decreased.
4.Harvesting serum below a superficial “cream layer after routine centrifugation may
also falsely decrease serum [TG]
5.Dogs and cats should be fasted overnight or for about 12 h to avoid physiologic
postprandial hyperlipidemia.Prolonged postprandial hyperlipidemia indicates the
presence of a pathologic state.
C.Methods
1.In most automated assays, the initial reaction involves a lipase that liberates glycerol
from TG. The liberated glycerol is then measured in coupled reactions that result in
products that can be detected by spectrophotometry.
2.High [free glycerol] in serum would produce falsely elevated [TG], but such
conditions are rarely recognized.
3.[TG] in a grossly lipemic sample may exceed an assay's analytical range, and thus the
sample may need to be diluted prior to analysis.
III.
Hypertriglyceridemia
A.Increased serum [TG] indicates there are increased concentrations of lipoproteins that
contain TG.
B.Disorders or conditions (Table 16.5)
C.The pathologic processes that cause hypertriglyceridemia are described in the next
section: Hyperlipemia, Hyperlipidemia, and Hyperlipoproteinemia Disorders.
IV.Hypotriglyceridemia:no significant pathologic states
Table 16.5.Diseases and conditions that cause hypertriglyceridemia
Increased triglyceride （triacylglycerol) production
By hepatocytes
*Equine hyperlipemia or hyperlipidemia
By enterocytes
*Postprandial hyperlipidemia
Decreased lipolysis or intravascular processing of lipoproteins
Hypothyroidism
Nephrotic syndrome
Lipoprotein lipase deficiency (rare in cats, very rare in dogs)
Other,unknown, or multiple mechanisms
*Acute pancreatitis
*Diabetes mellitus (see different types in Chapter 14)
High-lipid diet
Hyperadrenocorticism or excess glucocorticoids
Hyperlipidemia in a Brittany dog
Idiopathic hyperlipidemia of miniature sch nauzers or other breeds
*A relatively common disease or condition
16/LIPIDS
773
HYPERLIPEMIA,HYPERLIPIDEMIA,ANDHYPERLIPOPROTEINEMIADISORDERS
Terms
A.Hyperlipemia,hyperlipidemia, and hyperlipoproteinemia are nearly synonyms.
1.Hyperlipemia and byperlipidemiarefer to an increased [lipid] in blood,whether it is
from hyperlpoproteinemia,hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, or even
increased [fatty acids].
2.Hyperlipoproteinemia is an increased concentration of one or more lipoproteins in
blood.It is the preferred term when a measured concentration of a lipoprotein (e.g.
LDL or HDL)is increased
3.The terms are sometimes used to identify clinical disorders (e.g., equine hyper
lipidemia or equine hyperlipoproteinemia)
B.Lipemia (also lipidemia),by most dictionary definitions,is a synonym for both hyper-
lipidemia and hyperlipoproteinemia.In routine clinical use,lipemia is usually defined
astheturbid oropaque appearance of serum or plasma as seen by thenaked eye.he
lactescence is primarily caused by increased concentrations of the large lipoprotein
particles (i.e., chylomicrons and VLDLs)
IL.
Classification of hyperlipoproteinemia conditions and disorders
A.Physiologic (postprandial) byperlipidemia is thehyperlipidemia that occurs after ingestion
of a meal containing TG.
B.Primary (or familial）byperlipoproteinemia disorders,which are caused by congenital
defects in lipoprotein metabolism, are relatively uncommon in domestic mammals. The
defects involve three major processes:
1.Increased production of lipoproteins by hepatocytes
2.Defective intravascular processng of lipoproteins,including defective lipolysis
3.Defective cellular uptake of lipoproteins or lipoprotein remnants
C.Secondarybyperlipoproteinemia disorders areacquired disordersinvolving damagedcells
or abnormal hormonal activity. They are relatively common in domestic mammals (see
Tables16.3 and 16.5)
III.
Physiologic (postprandial) hyperlipidemia
A.The hyperlipidemia occurs in monogastric mammals and is caused by a hyperchylomi-
cronemia that occurs after intestinal absorption of monoglycerides and fatty acids that
have formed from digestion of ingested triglycerides (Fig. 16.1). Hypertriglyceridemia
will be present; hypercholesterolemia may not be present.
B.In dogs and cats, the hyperchylomicronemia peaks by 2-6 h after a meal,and the
chylomicrons areusually cleared by 8-16h.Delayed clearing of chylomicrons indicates
defective lipoprotein metabolism, either a primary or secondary hyperlipidemia.
C.The presence of postprandial hyperlipidemia with and without addition of pancreatic
extracts to food has been used to assess for exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (plasma
turbidity test; see Table 15.9).However, variations in gastrointestinal function cause
variations in the development and clearing of the postprandial hyperlipidemia,thus
complicating interpretation of the test, which has been largely replaced by measurement
of serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity (see Chapter 15).
IV.
Primary and possible primary hyperlipidemia disorders in domestic mammals
A.Idiopathic hyperlipidemia of miniature schnauzers23
774
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
1.The pathogenesis of the hyperlipoproteinemia is not established. It may be caused
2.There is hypertriglyceridemia with or without hypercholesterolemia.There may be
concurrent glucose intolerance due to insulin resistance.
B.Hyperlipidemia in a Brittany dog7
1.A 9-yr-old male Brittany dog was suspected to have “hyperlipemia due to a progres-
sive inactivation of lipoprotein lipase with aging." Hypertriglyceridemia was found
at 5, 7, and 9 yr of age, and hypercholesterolemia was not present. Serum [TG] did
not decrease after heparin administration.
2.The hyperlipidemia was considered a primary disorder because a secondary cause
was not found and the dog's son (3 years younger) also had a fasting hypertriglyceri
demia. However, response to heparin in the son was similar to a control dog's
response.
C.Idiopathic hyperlipidemia occurring in dogs of other breeds (e.g.,Shetland sheepdogs)
may have a similar or different pathogeneses from hyperlipidemias in Brittany and
miniature schnauzer breeds.
D. Congenital LPL deficiency in a mixed-breed pup
1. A 1-mo-old mixed-breed dog had marked hypertriglyceridemia (830 mg/dL),
hypercholesterolemia (312mg/dL),and normoglycemiain a serum sample that
looked like cream-of-tomato soup. The pup was the smallest dog of the litter and
died a few days after initial presentation.
2.LPL deficiency was diagnosed by the failure of intravenous heparin (3000 units） to
produce fatty-acid changes consistent with lipolytic activity.
1.Affected cats have a mutated LPL gene resulting in lack of plasma LPL activity
(prior to and after heparin) but increased concentrations of the LPL protein （type
II LPL defect). This autosomal recessive hereditary defect causes defective lipolysis
of plasma lipoproteins.
2.Cats with this disorder have marked hypertriglyceridemia. Concentrations
of cholesterol were not statistically significantly different from those in
lipemia retinalis and subcutaneous xanthomas that sometimes appeared to
compress nerves.
F.Hypercholesterolemia in briards
1.The mean[cholesterol] in sera from 15 clinically healthy briards was 309 mg/dI
compared to an age-matched and gender-matched group of nonbriards that had a
mean [cholesterol] of 159 mg/dL.The briards had increased a-lipoprotein concen-
trations that suggested increased concentrations of HDL in the samples. The
hyperlipoproteinemia appears tobefamilial,but until the defect isknownclassfa
tion as a primary disorder is premature.Note that the mean [cholesterol] was only
slightly above common cholesterolreference intervals,so many affected briards were
not hypercholesterolemic if compared to most dogs. TG concentrations were not
abnormal.
2.The healthy briards were evaluated to explore the cause of lipid droplet accumula-
tion associated with retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy in the breed.The results of
the study suggested a possible relationship. The genetic defect in the retinal lesion
has been established,but the relationship to hypercholesterolemia (if any)is still not
understood.
16/LIPIDS
775
V.
Secondary hyperlipidemia disorders
A.Acute pancreatitis324
1.Dogs with acute pancreatitis frequently have hypertriglyceridemia with or without
hypercholesterolemia.Thehypertriglyceridemia may be either an initiating factor or
a consequence of the pancreatitis.
2.The pathogenesis of the hyperlipoproteinemia is not firmly established but
appears tobea defect in the intravascular processing of chylomicrons and
VLDL.
a.One theory is that decreased [insulin] causes defective LPL activity because
movement of LPL to the luminal surface ofendothelial cells is dependent on
insulin.However,in the early stages of experimental canine pancreatitis,there
were parallel increases in[insulin] and[glucose].2s
b.TNF and other cytokines have been shown to alter lipoprotein metabolism and
result in increased[VLDL].26.27 Thus,the lipemia of pancreatitis could be
associated with release of cytokines during infammation.
c.Because pancreatitis may cause obstructive cholestasis,part of the hyperlipidemia
may relate to defects in lipid metabolism caused by cholestasis.
B.Cholestasis in dogs and cats
1.Dogs and cats with obstructive cholestatic disorders frequently but inconsistently
have hypercholesterolemia without concurrent hypertriglyceridemia.
2.The hypercholesterolemia of cholestasis is associated with increased cholesterol
content of hepatocytes, and it appears to result from multiple processes
a.Cholestasis reduces biliary excretion of cholesterol from hepatocytes.
b.Experimental bile duct obstruction in rats causes increased 3-hydroxy-3-
methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase activity, which results in increased
cholesterol synthesis.Because bile acid synthesis is concurrently increased,it
has been speculated that a common positive effector induces synthesis of
cholesterol and bile acids.
C. In experimental cholestasis in dogs, increased [LDL] suggests a defective uptake
of LDL by hepatocytes.29
3. Cholestasis has been associated with the appearance of unique lipoproteins called
lipoprotein X1, X2, and X3 that have cathodal electrophoretic migrations.
a.These lipoproteins have a similar density to LDL but have a characteristic lipid
content predominated by phospholipids and nonesterified cholesterol, and a
protein content dominated by albumin within the core and apolipoprotein C on
the surface.
b.Lipoprotein Xmay form from a physicochemical,nonmetabolic interaction of
plasma lipidswith bile acids.Another theory is thatreduced LCAT activity from
hepatic disease may play a role, this is consistent with the presence of lipoprotein
X in human familial LCAT deficiency.
C.Some investigators havereported the presence of lipoprotein X in cholestatic
dogs,but in other studies of experimental cholestasis in dogs,none of the
increased lipoprotein fractions had a composition characteristic of human
lipoprotein X.29.30
C.Diabetes mellitus
1.Diabetic dogs and cats frequently have hypertriglyceridemia, typically with hyper
cholesterolemia.The pathogenesis and severity of the hyperlipoproteinemiamay vary
with the type of diaberes mellitus (see Chapter 14).
776
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.The hyperlipoproteinemia may be caused by multiple mechanisms:
a.Defective intravascular processing of chylomicrons and VLDL may occur because
of low[insulin] and thus defective LPL activity.
b. Increased VLDL synthesis by hepatocytes may occur due to mobilization of body
lipids that is caused by increased hormone-sensitive lipase activity in adipocytes.
The influx of fatty acids into hepatocytes and their oxidation causes excess
formation of acetyl-CoA that promotes TG, cholesterol, and ketone production.
C.There is increased synthesis of HDL cholesterol by intestinal mucosa cells in
experimental canine diabetes melltus.31
D.Hypothyroidism in dogs
1.About 75 % of dogs with hypothyroidism have a fasting hypercholesterolemia;
hypertriglyceridemia may or may not be present.23Because some forms of hypo
thyroidism are familial, the associated hyperlipoproteinemia is familial.3 However,
the lipid metabolism defect isa secondaryhyperlipoproteinemia becauseit is caused
by decreased thyroid hormone activity. One of the first reports of hyperlipoprotein-
emia in beagles is sometimes cited as a form of primary hyperlipoproteinemia,but
the investigators did not exclude hypothyroidism as a cause.
2.In human hypothyroidism,the hyperlipidemia appears to be related primarily to
decreased expression of hepaticLDLreceptors and decreased activities ofhepatic
lipase and LPL.36.37
a.Decreased clearance of LDL causes hypercholesterolemia.3Data in people have
shown a correlation between serum[triodothyronine] andhepaticlipase activity.
b.Low [thyroxine]is associated with low LPL activity.Thus,reduced intravascular
processing of chylomicrons and VLDL may cause hypertriglyceridemia.
E.Hyperadrenocorticism in dogs
1.About 90 % of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have a fasting hypercholesterolemia;
hypertriglyceridemia may or may not be present.Because increased glucocorticoid
activity may lead to diabetes mellitus or a steroid hepatopathy,it may be difficult to
determine which pathologic state is causing the hyperlipidemia.
2.Glucocorticoid hormones (endogenous and exogenous）may promote hyperlipopro
teinemia through multiple mechanisms:
b.They stimulate hormone-sensitive lipase and thus increased liberation of fatty
acids from adipose tissue. The influx of fatty acids into hepatocytes will stimulate
TG and cholesterol synthesis and thus increased production of VLDL
c.They antagonize the actions of insulin, which thus may cause decreased LPL
activity."
F.Nephrotic syndrome and protein-losing nephropathy in dogs and cats
1.The cause of the hypercholesterolemia (sometimes accompanied by hypertriglyceri-
demia) is typically considered to be increased hepatic production of VLDL,defective
lipolysisof lipoproteins due to deficiencies of lipases and some lipoproteinreceptors,
and defective conversion of cholesterol tobile acids.2
a.There is good evidence that there is defective lipolysis of lipoproteins that
contain apolipoprotein B；that is,chylomicrons,VLDL,IDL,andLDL.It is
possible that a protein needed forLPL binding to endothelial cells or the action
of LPL is lost with other proteins in the urine. There also are several reported
alterations in lipoprotein-receptor proteins and enzymes involved in lipid
metabolism.2
16/LIPIDS
777
b.The possible increased production of cholesterol has been questioned in people
because cholesterol synthesis did not appear to be increased in nephrotic
patients.44
C.
Experimental dara in rats indicate that there is not a down-regulation of the LDL
receptor-related protein.42
2.Dogs and cats with protein-losing nephropathy may have hypoalbuminemia and
hypercholesterolemia but not enough sodium and HO retention to cause the ascites
and edema of the nephrotic syndrome.
G.Equine hyperlipemia of horses, ponies, and donkeys
1.These secondary equine hyperlipidemic disorders or syndromes have been given the
name byperlipemia, which occurs secondarily in several metabolic disorders that alter
lipoprotein metabolism.
2.Some authors divide the condition into two forms:5.46
a.Hyperlipidemia: Plasma lipids are increased but with little clinical significance.
Serum [TG] is usually<500 mg/dL.
b.Hyperlipidemic syndrome: Increased plasma lipids are associated with hepatic
lipidosis and marked clinical changes. Serum [TG] is usually > 500 mg/dL
3.The disorders that produce changes in lipoprotein metabolism are varied,but the
changes are similar.
a.Physiologic or pathologic processes result in mobilization of fatty acids from the
TGmoleculesof adiposetissue.
b.Hepatocytes increase the synthesis of TG-rich VLDL molecules that enter blood
to cause hypertriglyceridemia.These VLDL molecules have altered apolipopro
tein content.
c.If the condition is severe enough,then TG accumulation in hepatocytes causes
hepatic lipidosis and subsequent damage to hepatocytes.
4.Conditions that are associated with equine hyperlipidemia include anorexia,obesity,
pregnanylatatinrenal filrenotxmiaandth statehatreat
negative energy balance. Hormones or other substances can contribute to the
defective metabolic pathways.47
a. Catecholamines and glucagon stimulate hormone-sensitive lipase in adipocytes to
increase release of fatty acids. Insulin typically inhibits this enzyme, and thus
decreased insulin activity may remove a negative effector and promote fatty-acid
release
b.Glucocorticoid hormones also stimulate hormone-sensitive lipase
c.Insulin stimulates LPL for hydrolysis of TG in most lipoproteins, especially the
TG-rich chylomicrons and VLDL.Decreased insulin activity reduces the activity
of LPL, and thus the intravascular processing of lipoproteins is reduced.
d.Progesterone (when increased in pregnancy or lactation） stimulates growth
hormone, which creates insulin resistance by causing insulin receptor and
postreceptor defects.48
e.Hypoglycemia,when present, stmulates glucagon release. Glucagon stimulates
hormone-sensitive lipasein adipocytes and thuspromotes theliberation of fatty
acids.
fEither directly or through cytokine release,endotoxins stimulate TG and VLDL
synthesisbyhepatocytes,and they also can inhibit lipoprotein catabolism..4
g.Rats in renal failure （created by partial nephrectomy)had defective lipolysis of
VLDL molecules and thus hypertriglyceridemia.The agent or agents that
778
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
produce the defective lipolysis were not identified.5It is not known whether a
similar defect occurs inhorseswithrenalfailure
5.Congenital hyperlipemia in a Shetland pony foals
a.A Shetland pony neonate had visually lipemic sera, increased total [lipid], and
hypercholesterolemia. By definition, the foal had a congenital hyperlipidemia,but
it may not have been heredirary.
b.The mare was hyperlipidemic (perhaps associated with pregnancy), so the foal’s
lipemia may have been caused by the placental transfer of fatty acids from the
mare.The influx of fatty acids may have stimulated VLDL synthesis sufficiently
to cause hyperlipemia in the foal.
H.High dietary fat intake in dogs
1.Excesive dietary lipid would result in storage of lipids and potentially obesity. Such
dogs may have prolonged postprandial hyperlipidemia because of insulin resistance
or other factors.
2.Extremely elevated fat intake and concurent inadequate protein intake can lead to
defective lipoprotein metabolism and hepatic lipidosis.
OTHERASSESSMENTSOFLIPIDS
Lipoprotein electrophoresis
A.Lipoprotein electrophoresis has been used as an adjunct qualitative assessment of
lipoprotein abnormalities in clinical veterinary samples. However, methods vary,and
test availability and interpretive expertise are limited.The following is a brief summary
of the procedure:
1.EDTA plasma (or serum) is applied to a gel (usually agarose).
2.An electric current causes lipoproteins to migrate through the gel based on their
charge, size, shape,and interaction with the gel
3.Aftrseparation,lipid stainsare applied tovisualize thlipoproteinbands,
which are named according to serum O and β-protein bands of corresponding
mobility.
a.Chylomirons,if present,remain at the application origin.
b.HDL molecules migrate furthest toward the anode (o-bands)
c. LDL and VLDL molecules migrate intermediately (β- or pre-B-bands).
4.The gel should be examined qualitatively for dyslipoproteinemic partterns. In dogs
increased O-migrating lipoproteins are associatedwith hypercholesterolemia,and
increased pre-β-bands,β-bands, or application site bands are associated with
hypertriglyceridemia.52
B.Although gel banding patterns can provide useful information about lipoprotein
subfractions,bands are not consistently associated with certain classes of lipoproteins as
defined by their densities.Therefore,lipoprotein electrophoresis is most useful when
combinedwith density fractionation studies or to monitorresponseto therapy.
Nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA, free fatty acids, and farty acids)
A.Physiologic processes
1.NEFAs and glycerol form from hydrolysis of triacylglycerol in adipose tissue, liver,
and mammary gland.
2.Hydrolysis in adipocytes is mediated by hormone-sensitive lipase, which is
stimulated by epinephrine and glucagon.Insulin is inhibitory
16/LIPIDS
779
3.After hydrolysis,NEFAs arereleased to blood,where they bind to albumin and are
transported to other tissues. Major target organs are muscle and liver.
4.After passive uptake, NEFAs are activated and then undergo β-oxidation in mito-
chondria to form aceryl-CoA.
5.Aceryl-CoA enters the tricarboxylic acid cycle for generation of energy or conversion
to amino acids. In liver, acetyl-CoA may be used for ketogenesis.
6.Glycerol enters hepatocytes and is converted to glyceraldehyde3-phosphate,an
intermediate in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis.
7. NEFAs may be incorporated into TG and VLDL in hepatocytes.
B.Analytical methods
1.Terms and units
a.NEFAs are commonly called free fatty acids because they are outside of lipopro
tein particles, but most circulate bound to albumin and are not free.The
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) recommended
term is fatty acids.
b.Units:mEq/L×1=mmol/L
2.Sample
a.Serum or plasma from EDTA-anticoagulated blood (not heparin or collection
from heparinized patients) should be used.$3
b. Serum or plasma should be separated from cells as soon as possible and be frozen
or maintained at 4 C before testing. Frozen samples should yield valid results for
at least 1 mo,andrefrigerated samples are best tested within 24 h.Values may be
falselyincreasedif serum separatorubesareused,f samples arnot keptcool,r
if testing of samples kept at 4°C is delayed beyond 24 h.53
C.Significant false increases also occur withmoderate to severe hemolysis.5
d.Formonitoring prepartum cattle,samples should be collected shortly before
feeding time and 2-14 d before calving.They can be processed and stored frozen
until calving occurs, at which time it will be known whether the samples were
collected in the desired 2-14 d precalving window.
3.Methods
a.NEFAs may be measured in automated systems with an enzymatic colorimetric
assay in which they are enzymatically acylated and then oxidized to hydrogen
peroxide linked to a reaction that generates a colored product.
(1)This assay detects medium- to long-chain (626 carbon) farty acids
(2)Volatile fatty acids (e.g, propionic acid and butyric acid） are not
measured.
b.Enzymatic methods replace more time-consuming nonenzymatic methods that
rely on extraction ofNEFAs by organic solvents after converting them to copper
salts.
4.Increased [NEFA]
a.Increases occurwithincreased fat mobilization inresponse to a negative energy
balance from any cause.
b. NEFAs are usually assessed in ruminants, particularly to monitor transition cows
in the last 12 wk prepartum, when there are high energy demands for the fetus
and milk production (see Herd-based Testing for Cattle in Chapter 1).
(1)When a certain proportion of prepartum cows in a dairy herd have values
above a decision threshold,it is evidence that too many cows are in a
negative energy balance, and management changes are needed.
780
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(2)Increased prepartum [NEFA] is associated with more postparturient ketosis,
fattyliver,and displaced abomasums.
C.[NEFA] may also be increased with diabetes mellitus, hepatic lipidosis, overfeed-
ing and obesity, food deprivarion, and after exercise.
II.Standing plasma test for chylomicrons (also called a refrigeration test)
A.Because of their high TG content and thus low density,chylomicrons will foat to the
surface of a serum or plasma sample if the sample is undisturbed.
B.A 16 h-standing test has been used to detect chylomicrons.In the procedure, 2 mL of
plasma is placed in a small glass tube and then examined after 16 h of refrigeration at
4°C.
1.The presence of a creamy layer on the plasma sample indicates the presence of
chylomicrons. Chylomicrons indicate postprandial hyperlipidemia (which could be
pathologic if it represents delayed clearing).
2.Turbidity below or without a surface creamy layer suggests that other causes of
hyperlipidemia may need to be considered.
C.However, the 16 h-standing test has a relatively poor capability of detecting chylomi-
crons when compared to lipoprotein electrophoresis and ultracentrifugation. In one
study,only about 20 % of the chylomicron-positive samples (as detected by electropho-
resis) had a positive 16 h-standing test. Similar results were found when the standing
test was compared to ultracentrifugation.5 The presence of a creamy layer in the
standing test is specific for chylomicrons,but many samples that contain chylomicrons
donot have a derectable lipid layer.
References
1. Rifai N, Bachorik PS, Albers JJ. 1999. Lipids, lipoproteins, and apolipoproteins. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, eds.
TietTextbook ofClinial Chemistry,3rd edition,809-861.Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
2.Bauer JE.200o.Hyperlipidemias.In:Ettinger SJ,Feldrman EC,eds.Textbook ofVeterinary Intermal MedicineDie
eftheDog 4nd Cat, 5th edition, 283292.Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
3.Bruss ML. 1997. Lipids and ketones. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML, eds. Clnical Biocemisty of Domestic
Arimal, 5th edition, 83-115. San Diego:Academic
4.Gross KL,Wedekind KJ,Cowell CS,Schoenherr WD,Jewell DE,Zicker SC,Debraekeleer J,Frey RA.2000.
Nutrients. In: Hand MS, Thatcher CD, Remillard RL, Roudebush P, eds. Srmall Anmaf Clinical Nutrition, 4th
edition, 21-107.Topeka,KS: Mark Morris Institute.
5.Watson TDG, Barrie J. 1993. Lipoprotein metabolism and hyperlipidaemia in the dog and cat: A neview. J Small
Anim Pract 34:479487.
6. Baginsly ML. 1981. Measurement of lipoprotein lipase and hepatic triglyceride lipase in human postheparin plasma
Methods Enzymol 72:325-338.
7.WilliamsKJ,FlessGM,Petrie KA,SnyderML,BrociaRW,SwensonTL1992.Mechanisms by which lipoprotein
lipase alters cellular metabolism of lipoprotein(a), low density lipoprotein, and nascent lipoproteins: Roles for low
density lipoprotein receptors and heparan sulfate proteoglycans. J Biol Chem 267:1328413292.
8. Lundberg GD, Iverson C, Radulescu G. 1986. Now read this: The SI units are here. J Am Med Assoc
255:2329-2339.
9. Tietz NW, with Druden EL, MePherson RA, Fuhrman SA, eds. 1995. Clinical Guide to Laboratory Tests, 3rd edition.
Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
10. Young DS, Pestaner LC, Gibberman V. 1975. Effects of drugs on clinical laboratory tests. Clin Chem 2l:1D432D
(special issue).
11.CenterSA,Magne ML1990.Historical,physical examination,and linicopathologic features of portosystemic
rascular anomalies in the dog and cat. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 5:8393.
12. Fossum TW. 1989. Protein-losing enteropathy. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 4:219225.
16/LIPIDS
781
13.Littman MP, Dambach DM, Vaden SL, Giger U. 2000.Familial protein-losing enteropathy and protein-losing
nephropathy in soft coated Wheaten terriers: 222 cases (1983-1997). J Vet Intern Med 14:6880.
14.Willard MD, Helman G, Fradkin JM, Becker T, Brown RM, Lewis BC, Weeks BR. 2000. Intestinal crypt lesions
associated with protein-losing enteropathy in the dog.JVet Intern Med 14:298-307.
15. Lifton SJ, King LG, Zerbe CA 1996. Glucocorticoid defcient hypoadrenocorticism in dogs: 18 cases (19861995).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:20762081.
16. Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Kass PH. 1996. Pretreatment clinical and laboratory findings in dogs with hypoadrenocor-
ticism: 225 cases (1979-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:8591.
17. Hubert B, de La Farge F, Braun JP, Magnol JP. 1987.Hypertriglyeridemia in two related dogs. Companion Anim
Pract 1:33-35.
the young puppy.Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 131:183-185.
19. Perit LN, Brunzell JD, Harvey-Clarke C, Pritchard PH, Jones BR, Hayden MR. 1990. Characterization of a
lipoprotein lipase class II type defect in hypertriglyceridemic cats. Clin Invest Med 13:259263.
20. Jones BR, Johnstone AC, Hancock WS, Wallace A. 1986. Inherited hyperchylomicronemia in the cat. Feline Pract
16:7-12.
21. Ginzinger DG, Lewis ME, Ma Y, Jones BR, Liu G, Jones SD. 1996. A mutation in the lipoprotein lipase gene is the
molecular basis of chylomicronemia in a colony of domestic cats. J Clin Invest 97:1257-1266
22. Watson P, Simpson KW, Bedford PGC. 1993. Hypercholesterolaemia in briards in the United Kingdom. Res Vet Sei
23. Whitney MS. 1992. Evaluation of hyperlipidemias in dogs and cats. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 7:292-300.
24. Whitney MS, Boon GD, Rebar AH, Ford RB. 1987. Effects of acute pancreatitis on circulating lipids in dogs Am J
Vet Res 48:1492-1497.
25.Satake K,Carballo J, Appert HE,Howard JM. 1973. Insulin levels in acute experimental pancreatitis in dogs Surg
Gynecol Obstet 137:467-471
26. Krauss RM, Grunfeld C, Doerrler WT, Feingold KR. 1990. Tumor necrosis factor acutely increases plasma levels of
very low density lipoproteins of normal size and composition. Endocrinology 127:1016-1021.
27. Feingold KR, Grunfeld C. 1992. Role of cytokines in inducing hyperlipidemia. Diabetes 41(Suppl 2):97-101.
28.Dueland S, Reichen J, Everson GT, Davis RA.1991.Regulation of cholesterol and bile acid homoeostasis in bile-
obstructed rats.BiochemJ 280:373377.
29.Danielsson B, Ekman R, Johansson BG, Petersson BG. 1977. Plasma lipoprotein changes in experimental cholestasis
in the dog. Clin Chim Acta 80:157-170.
30. Ridand S, Bergan A. 1975. Plasma concentration of lipoprotein-X (LP-X) in experimental bile duct obstruction.
Scand J Gastrocnterol 10:17-24.
31. Kwong LK, Feingold KR, Peric-Golia L, Le T, Karkas JD, Alberts AW, Wilson DE. 1991. Intestinal and hepatic
cholesterogenesis in hypercholesterolemic dyslipidemia of experimental diabetes in dogs. Diabetes 40:1630-1639
32.Feldman EC,Nelson RW.1996.Hypothyroidism.Canine and Fene Endocrinology and Reprouctim,2nd edition,
68-117.Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
33. Scot-Moncrieff JCR, Guptill-Yoran L. 2000.Hypothyroidism. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Texbook of
Veterinary Intermal MedicineDisease ofthe Dog and Cat,5th edition, 14191429.Philadelphia: WB Saunders
34. Manning PJ. 1979. Thyroid gland and arterial lesions of beagles with familial hypothyroidism and hyperlipoprotein-
emia. Am J Vet Res 40:820-828.
35. Wada M, Minamisono T, Ehrhart LA, Naito HK, Mise J. 1977. Familial hyperlipoproteinemia in beagles. Life Sc
20:999-1008
36. Valdemarsson S, Hansson P, Hedner P, Nilsson-Ehle P. 1983. Relations between thyroid function, hepatic and
lipoprotein lipase activities, and plasma lipoprotein concentrations. Acta Endocrinol 104:50-56.
37.Valdemarsson S. 1983. Plasma lipoprotein alterations in thyroid dysfunction: Roles of lipoprotein lipase, hepatic
lipase and LCAT. Acta Endocrinol 103(Suppl 255):1-52.
38. Duntas LH. 2002. Thyroid disease and lipids. Thyroid 12:287-293.
39.Feldman EC. 2000. Hyperadrenocorticism. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Textbook ofVeterimary Intermal
Medicine: Disease oftiv Deg and Cat, 5th edition, 1460-1488. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
40.Gibons GF.1990.Assembly and secretion of hepatic very-low-density lipoprotein. Biochem J 268:1-13.
41. Bagdade JD, Yee E, Albers J, Pykalisto Oj. 1976. Glucocorticoids and triglyceride transport: Effects on triglyceride
secretion rates, lipoprotein lipase, and plasma lipoproteins in the rat. Metabolism 25:533-542
42. Kim S, Kim CH, Vaziri ND. 2005. Upregulation of hepatic LDL receptor-related protein in nephrotic syndrome:
Response to statin therapy.Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 288:E813-E817
43. Orth SR, Ritz E. 1998.The nephrotic syndrome. N Engl J Med 338:1202-1211.
782
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
44.Dullaart RPF, Gansevoort RT, Sluiter WJ, de Zeeuw D, de Jong PE. 1996. The serum lathosterol to cholesterol ratio,
an index of cholesterol synthesis, is not elevated in patients with glomerular proteinuria and is not associated with
improvement of hyperlipidemia in response to antiproteinuric treatment. Metabolism 45:723730.
45. Naylor JM. 1982. Hyperlipemia and hyperlipidemia in horses, ponies, and donkeys. Compend Contin Edue Pract
Vet4:S321-S326.
46. Jeffcott LB,Field JR1985. Current concepts of hyperlipaemia in horses and ponies.Vet Rec 116:461466.
47. Barton MH, Morris DD. 1998. Disease of the liver. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM, eds. Eqaine Ixtemal Medicin, 707-
738.Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
48. Peterson ME, Taylor RS, Greco DS, Nelson RW, Randolph JF, Foodman MS, Moroff SD, Morrison SA, Lothrop
CD. 1990. Acromegaly in 14 cats. J Vet Intern Med 4:192-201.
49. Feingold KR, Staprans I, Memon RA, Moser AH, Shigenaga JK, Doerrler W, Dinarello CA, Grunfeld C. 1992.
Endotoxin rapidly induces changes in lipid metabolism that produce hypertriglyceridemia: Low doses stimulate
hepatic triglyceride production while high doses inhibit dearance. J Lipid Res 33:1765-1776.
50. Gregg RC, Diamond A, Mondon CE, Reaven GM. 1977. The effects of chronic uremia and dexamethasone on
triglyceride kinetics in the rat. Metabolism 26:875-882.
51. Gilbert RO. 1986. Congenital hyperlipaemia in a Shetland pony foal. Equine Vet J 18:498-500.
52. Rogers WA, Donovan EF, Kociba GJ. 1975. Lipids and lipoproteins in normal dogs and in dogs with secondary
hyperlipoproteinemia.J AmVet Med Assoc 166:1092-1100.
53. Stokol T, Nydam DV. 2005. Effct of anticoagulant and storage conditions on bovine nonesterified fatty acid and
beta-hydroxybutyrate concentrations in blood. J Dairy Sci 88:3139-3144.
54. Stokol T, Nydam D. 2005. Effect of hemolysis on bovine non-esterified fatty acid and beta-hydroxybutyrate
concentrations. Vet Clin Pathol 34:288-289 (abstract).
55. MeNeely S, Seatter K, Yuhaniak J, Kashyap ML. 1981. The 16-hour-standing test and lipoprotein electrophoresis
compared for detection of chylomicrons in plasma Clin Chem 27:731-732.
56. Luley C, Prellwitz W. 1988. Qualitative detection of chylomicrons with a high-speed laboratory centrifuge compared
with 16-h-standing test, lipoprotein electrophoresis, and preparative ultracentrifugation. Clin Chem 34:1362-1363.
Chapter17
THYROIDFUNCTION
Physiologic Processes
784
Analytical Concepts
785
Thyroxine (T) Concentration
789
1.[Total Thyroxine] (tT).
789
A.Hyperthyroxemia
789
B.Hypothyroxemia.
790
Il.[Free Thyroxineled(IfTaled)
793
A.Increased[fT4la(Free Thyroxine Concentration by
Equilibrium Dialysis)...
793
B.Decreased [fTaled(Free Thyroxine Concentration by
Equilibrium Dialysis)....
793
Total Triiodothyronine(tT,)and Free Triiodothyronine(fT) Concentrations.
793
Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone (TSH) Concentration.
794
Autoantibodies..
794
1.ThyroglobulinAutoantibodies(TgAA)
794
Il.ThyroxineAutoantibodies(TAA)and Triiodothyronine
Autoantibodies (T,AA)
795
Ill.Thyroid Peroxidase Autoantibodies (TpAA).
795
Response and Suppression Tests...
795
1.Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone (TSH)Response Test
795
Il.Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone (TRH) Response Test.
796
Ill. Triiodothyronine (Ts) Suppression Test..
796
Total Thyroxine to Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone(tT,:TSH) and Free
Thyroxine to Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone(fT:TSH)Ratios inDogs
798
Interpretation of Thyroid Hormone Concentrations and Profiles.
799
783
784
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 17.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
[fT4]ed
Free thyroxine concentration by equilibrium dialysis
[x]
Concentration ofx(x=analyte)
fTs
Free triiodothyronine
fT4
Free thyroxine
RIA
Radioimmunoassay
SI
Systeme International d'Unites
T3
Triodothyronine
TAA
Triodothyronine autoantibodies
T4
Thyroxine
TAA
Thyroxine autoantibodies
TgAA
Thyroglobulin autoantibodies
TpAA
Thyroid peroxidase autoantibodies
TRH
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
TSH
Thyroid-stimulating hormone(thyrotropin)
tT3
Total triodothyronine
rT
Total thyroxine
WRI
Within reference interval
PHYSIOLOGICPROCESSES
I.
Hormonal control of thyroid glands (Fig. 17.1)
A.TRH from the hypothalamus stimulates the production and release of pituitaryTSH
Factors that infuence the secretion of TRH are poorly understood.
B.TSH binds to thyroid TSH receptors and stimulates the production and release of T
and T,from the thyroid glands.All circulating T4is produced by the thyroid glands,
but a minority (1040 %) of circulating T is produced by the thyroid glands.The
rest of Tisgenerated from T4 in cells throughout the body; in this context,Tis a
prohormone.In the piuitary gland,Tproduced by the deiodination of Tinhibits
secretion of TSH.
1.Synthesis of Tand T; is also infuenced by intrathyroidal factors,including
availability of iodide,sensitivity to TSH,and the ratio ofTtoT
2.Thyroglobulin is produced by luminal thyroid cells and is stored in follicular
lumina. Thyroglobulin acts as an acceptor protein and is involved in the synthesis
and laterrelease of Tand T
3.Daily variations in [tT] have been reported.
a.In horses, the highest concentrations are in the late afternoon, and the lowest
concentrations are in the early morning.
b.In dogs, some authors report that there is not a predictable diurnal variation,and
there can be confusing fuctuations in random baseline [tT].² However,based on
a study of a small group of dogs, [tT] was significantly lower at 8 a.m. (mean,
1.75μg/dL) than at 11 a.m., 2 p.m.,5 p.m., and 10 p.m.The highest mean
[tT4] was at 2 p.m. (3.54 μg/dL). A similar pattern (but with less change) was
found in 8 a.m., 2 p.m., and 8 p.m. samples. Thus, the time of sampling may
infuence the interpretation of[tT4]. Similar patterns were seen in[fT4]ed
17/THYROIDFUNCTION
785
Ta
Hypothalamus
Blood
T/protein
()
TSH
T/protein
TRH
14
Pituitary gland
Peripheral
Thyroglobulin
cells
TSH
Thyroglobulln
Thyroid glands
Fig.17.l.Hormonal control of thyroid glands. TRH released from the hypothalamus stimulates the release
of TSH from the pituitary. TSH stimulates the production and release of T and T, in pathways involving
thyroglobulin in the thyroid glands. In blood,most T and T; molecules are protein bound.fT and fT;
may enter peripheral cell in which some of the T is converted to T,T, has more activity than T In the
negative-feedback system (dashed lines),fT and fT; (produced locally) inhibit the secretion of TSH and
possibly TRH.
C.In blood, most tT and tT, molecules are protein bound.
1.NearlyallTreleased from thethyroid glandsbecomes bound to plasma proteins.7
Factors that influence protein binding are not clearly established. In dogs, about
99 % of T4 is bound to thyroid hormone-binding globulin, transthyretin, albumin,
and apolipoproteins. The binding proteins in cats are not established. In horses, T4
is bound to thyroid hormone-binding globulin (61 %), T-binding prealbumin
(22%),and albumin (17 %).
2.T4not bound to plasma proteins is called fTand is the biologically active form of
T4.fTenters most cells of the body and is converted to either Tg or reverse-T by
the actions of deiodinase enzymes.Reverse-T is biologically insignificant.
3.Like T4,most T (99 %) is protein bound (specific globulins and albumin）.fT is
about 3-5 times as potent as fT4.7
D.T andT dissociate from plasma proteins and enter cel, where they bind to receptors,
tocause r promoteincreased metabolicrate,ncreased Oconsumption,increased
heart rate,enhanced response to catecholamines,bone formation and resorption,
increased catabolism of muscle and adipose tissue,protein synthesis,erythropoiesis,and
alterations in lipoprotein metabolism.
E.T; and T are excreted in bile and urine
ANALYTICALCONCEPTS
Terms and units
A.Thyroxine and triodothyronine are commonly referred to as T and T,respectively.It
is important to differentiate tT from fT
B.Unit conversion*
1.tT:μg/dL×10=ng/mL;μg/dLx12.87=nmol/L;andng/mLx1.287=nmol/L
(SIunit,nearest 1 nmol/L)
2.fT:ng/dLx 12.87 =pmol/L (SI unit,nearest 1 pmol/L)
786
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
3.T:ng/dLx10=Pg/mL;ng/dLx0.01536=nmol/L;andpg/dLx15.4=nmol/L
(SIunit,nearest O.1 nmol/L)
4.TSH:μg/dL x 10= ng/mL;also reported as mU/L (or μU/mL)
II.
Sample
A.Canine [tT4] is stable in EDTA-plasma and serum when stored in plastic tubes for 5 d
at 25 °C, 8 d at 22 °C, and months at-20 °C;[tT4] increased in serum samples stored
at 37°C for 5 d but remained stable in EDTA-plasma samples.°Stability of canine
[T4](serum or plasma) is similar in glass tubes at22°C and-20°Cfor5 d;[tT4]
increased when stored in glass tubes at37 °C for reasons that are not established.
Similar stability is expected in sera from other species.
B.Stability of [fT] is similar to that described for[tT4]. As for [tT4],[fT4] increased in
both EDTA-plasma and serum samples stored in glass at 37 °C for 5 d.
C.TSH and TgAA are stable at 4 °C for a few days, or longer if frozen.
D.To reach reliable conclusions about the endogenous thyroid status of an animal
receiving thyroid medication, a 4 wk medication withdrawal period is recommended
prior to testing.
E.Increased plasma [fatry acid] can result in falsely increased [fT] in people; the fatty
acids displace T on binding proteins. The increased [farty acid] and falsely increased
[fT] have been shown to occur when people were given either intravenous or sub-
cutaneous heparin.1,12
III.Assay principles and procedures
A.[tT]
1.[tT] is the concentration of free and bound T
2. [tT4] is usually measured by RIA, but enzyme immunoassays (enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay and chemiluminescent enzyme immunoassay) are also used.
good agreement for [tT] for one species but not another. Comparisons of results
have detected suffcienr biases so thatreference intervals for different assays would be
different.
3.[tT4] in healthy dogs is much lower than [tT4] in healthy cats, horses, and people.
Thus, assays for canine [tT] must have lower detection limits to measure normal
and decreased[tT4] correctly.Assays that have an analytical range appropriate for
human [tT4] should not be used to evaluate canine [tT4].
4.In the common solid-phaseRIA systems,TAA in serum will cause falsely elevated
measured [tT4] (Fig.17.2）.In less common assays, a falsely low [tT4] will be
measured if the assay detects all antibody-bound radiolabeled T(bound to either
reagent antibody or autoantibody).TgAA do not interfere with these assaysbut sera
that have TgAA may haveTAA17.18
B.[fT]
1.Equilibrium dialysis
a.[fT] is best measured by an assay that involves equilibrium dialysis.In equilib
rium dialysis procedures, fT is allowed to diffuse through a membrane that does
not allow diffusion of protein-bound T.After sufficient timehas passed,[T]
is measured in the protein-poor dialysate, or ratios between predialysis and
postdialysis values are used to determine a sample's [fT].19
17/THYROIDFUNCTION
787
12T
12T
Dog1
RIA
12T
Dog2
noT4AA
dose-response
withT4AA
curve
6T4
pun
6T4
T
wash
T
1>
T
CT4
T
<T4
T4
<1
CT4
<T4
CT4
T4>
Dog Dog
T
T4
T
T
1
2
T4
log [tT4]
?
?
Fig.17.2. Effects of TAA on measured [tT in a solid-phase RIA. RLAs are oompetitive-binding assays in
which the patient's T competes with a known amount of radioactive T, (*T) for a limited number of
antibody-binding sites(e.g,ina tube coatedwith antT4antibodies）.Thusa greater concentration f
patient Tresults in less bound *T
In the analysis of dog 1’s serum, its serum (containing T) and a *Treagent are added to an antibody
coated tube (step a). During incubation (step b), some of the patient T and *T bind competitively to
anti-Tantibodies on the tubes;other Tmolecules remain unbound.After incubation, the unbound Tis
rinsed from the tube,and the bound T stays in the tube (step c).The tube's radioactivity is then
measured, and the percentage of added *T, that remained bound is determined (in this simplifed version,
6of 12 added *Twere bound,or 50 % bound）.Using a standard dose-response curve,dog 1's[tT] is
determined (see the graph).
·In the analysis of dog 2's serum, its serum (containing T and TAA) and *T4 reagent are added to an
antibody-coated tube (step d). During incubation, *T binds to the anti-T, antibodies coating the tube
and to the TAA,and thus less *Tis bound to the tube (step e).After rinsing out Tnot bound to the
tube (step f),the tubes radioactivity is measured, and the percentage of added T that remained bound
to the tube is determined (in this simplifed version, 4 of 12 added *T were bound, or 33 % bound).
Using a standard dose-response curve, dog 2’s [T] is determined (see the graph）. The lower % *T
bound translates to a greater [tT] on the standard dose-response curve.
In this schematic assay, the[T] in the sera of dogs 1 and 2 were the same (each had 12). However, the
TAA in dog 2's serum interfered with binding of *T to the tube and resulted in a falsely increased
measured [tT].
b.Anti-T antibodies do not interfere with the equilibrium dialysis assay because
the antibodies do not diffuse through the semipermeable membrane.
c.The major disadvantage of determining [fT] by equilibrium dialysis is the
expense.
2.Nondialysis fT RIAs
a.NondialysisRIAs designed for quantitation of human [fT] are not reliable for
canine serum fT,because they tend to underestimate the canine [fT.]. In a
comparison of an equilibrium dialysis fTassay and five nondialysis fTassays,all
fivenondialysis assays producedfalsely low[fT] in sera ofhealthy dogs and sick
dogs with nonthyroidal illness.19
788
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
b.In a comparison study of the Nichols equilibrium dialysis assay and nine
nondialysis assays using sera from euthyroid people, the concordance percentages
varied from 59 % to 96 % when serum T-binding capacity was within the
increased,but from only 31% to 69% when serum T-binding capacity
decreased.As shown in bias plots,poor agreements were found when the
serum T4-binding capaciry was in the lower part of the reference interval or
poorest agreements were found when the serum T-binding capacity was
decreased.
3.Chemiluminescence assay: Results from a chemiluminescence assay for [fT4]were
lower than results from the equilibrium dialysis assay. They were about 50 % lower
for cat sera.² The degree of difference was not reported for dog sera.2
C.[tT]and[fT]
1.Generally, the same basic principles for T assays (tT and fT) apply to T (tT and
fT) assays. Unlike tT assays, assays designed for measuring [tT] in human sera
have adequate analytical ranges to measure [tT] in dogs and cats.
2.RIAs have the analytical specificity to differentiate Tand T, molecules.Because of
lower concentrations, assays that measure [tT] tend to be less reproducible than
assays that measure [tT].
D.TSH
1.CanineTSH
a.There are commercial assays (immunoradiometric and chemiluminescent
immunometric) for canine [TSH],but it is not known whether they detect all
glycosylated forms of TSH. The canine TSH assays lack sufficient analytical
range to enable documentation of decreased [TSH].² There was good agreement
between two immunoassays when the measured[TSH]was ≥0.5ng/mL and fair
b.The reference intervals for canine[TsH] and the methods used to generate
reference intervals have differed among investigators. Thus, a [TSH] considered
WRI by one investigator might be considered an increased [TSH] by another
investigator. Such differences make comparison of reports diffcult.
c.There is sufficient antigenic variation between human and canine TSH molecules
that the human TSH assay does not measure canine[TSH] accurately.
d.The presence of TAA or TAA does not interfere with TSH measurement
2.Feline TSH
a.Hypothyroidism is an uncommon disorder in cats, and thus there is little need to
measure feline [TSH].
b.However,it appears that felineTSH] can be assessed with assays designed for
other species. There is evidence that the canine TSH assay can be used to
measure feline[TSH]. Also,results from a human TSHassay indicated that
[TSH] in a group of hypothyroid kittens were, as expected with primary
hypothyroidismat least wice theconcentrationfoundinhealthycas
3.Equine TSH: A RIA for equine TSH has been developed by using a noncommercial
source of anti-TSH antibody as the ligand and purified equine TSH as the
standard.27
E.TgAA
1.A commercial enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for TgAA was developed during the
1990s (produced by Oxford Biomedical Research). Prior to its availability, there was
17/THYROIDFUNCTION
789
a lack of assay standardization.Thus,results from different laboratories were difficult
to interpret. Another EIA for TgAA was developed, and its results were in good
2.For the commercial assay,TgAA results are reported as a percentage of the result
obtained for a known positive sample, with percentages above a certain decision
threshold considered positive for TgAA. Prior to 2005, a positive result was an
optical densiry value greater than 2 standard deviarions above the optical densiy
value in a negative control serum.
3.As with any diagnostic assay,establishing the decision threshold that separates
positive andnegativeresultsaffects the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of the
assay. A lower decision threshold for a TgAA result led to frequent false positives. A
higher decision threshold would cause more false-negative results.
4.Because nonspecific binding of immunoglobulins to assay plates can falsely increase
TgAA values, testing with and without assessing and subtracting the nonspecific
binding yields different results that must be interpreted with different decision
thresholds. Some laboratories have labeled the assay sTgAA (specific TgAA） to
differentiate from NSB TgAA (nonspecific binding TgAA) when nonspecific binding
is assessed and excluded from the result
F.TAA and TAA: Assays for TAA and T,AA have been used in special laboratories for
many years. The diagnostic sensitivity of the TgAA values for canine lymphocytic
thyroiditisisgreater than diagnostic sensitivity valuesofTAAandTAA72but these
assays help identify false T and Tresults caused by interference from TAA and T,AA
G.TpAA: Canine TpAA have been detected in sera by using an immunoblot assay.s
THYROXINE(T)CONCENTRATION
I
[Total thyroxine]([tT4])
A.Hyperthyroxemia (Table 17.2)
1.Increased production of Tby thyroid neoplasia
a.Thyroid adenoma (or“adenomatous thyroid hyperplasia") in cats
(1)When presented with the clinical signs of hyperthyroidism,about 90 %of
hyperthyroid catswill have increased [tT].2Themost common presenting
problems include weight loss and polyphagia. Others include alopecia,
polyuria, polydipsia, and nonspecific gastrointestinal or nervous system
findings.Laboratory dara may include the following: erythrocytosis;
Table 17.2.Diseases and conditions that cause hyperthyroxemia (increased [tT4])
Increased production by thyroid neoplasia
*Thyroid adenoma (common in cats, uncommon in dogs,rare in horses)
Thyroid adenocarcinoma (dogs, cats, horses)
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (type II)
Administration of T,TSH,or TRH
Administration of compounds containing iodide
* Relatively common disease or condition
Note:During diestrus and pregnancy,dogs have greater [T].Pregnant horses have greater [tT]
than nonpregnant horses. TsAA may cause positive interference in some tT assays.
790
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
increased alanine transaminase (ALT),alkaline phosphatase (ALP), or
creatine kinase (CK) activity; azotemia; hyperglycemia; and decreased
[fructosamine].
(2)[tT4] may fuctuate sufficiently in hyperthyroid cats so that the [tT] may be
WRI on a random sample.3 Also,nonthyroidal illness may lower the [tT]
in hyperthyroid cats so that the [T] isWRI. A T suppresson test may
confirm the presence of hyperfunctional thyroid tissue, and a subsequent
[tT4] may be increased.
(3）Mutations in theTSH receptor causing constitutive activation and thyroid
hormone production may cause hyperthyroidism in cats.
(4)Thyroid carcinomas have been reported to occur in about 2 % of hyperthy.
roid cats.3
b.Thyroid adenoma or adenocarcinoma in dogs: About 25 % of canine thyroid
hyperthyroidism.
c.Thyroid adenoma or adenocarcinoma in horses:Hyperthyroxemia is rarely
reported in horses with thyroid neoplasia. In one horse, the [tT4] was about
double the upper reference limit.34
d.Multiple endocrine neoplasia (type II) in dogs: This rare disorder involves
neoplasia of APUD (amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation) cells and is
characterized by thyroid medullary carcinoma,pheochromocytoma,and parathy
roid hyperplasia or neoplasia.3s
2.Administration ofTTSH,or TRH
3.Administration of compounds containing iodide:Horsesmay have temporarily
increased [tT] because of increased production of T after exposure to iodide in
expectorantscounteriritants,contrastmediagaintr shampoos.
4.T4AA may cause positive interference in some tT assays (Fig. 17.2).
B.Hypothyroxemia (Table 17.3)
1.Decreased production of T
a.Primary hypothyroidism (caused by thyroid gland disease)
(1)Primary hypothyroidism is a common disorder in dogs.
(2)The most common presenting problems include weight gain,lethargy, and
symmetric alopecia. The more common abnormal laboratory data include
mild anemia (nonregenerative), codocytosis, hypercholesterolemia, and
hypertriglyceridemia.
(3)A basal [tT4] is the standard screening test for hypothyroidism in dogs
Decreased values support hypothyroidism,but there are several reasons for
hypothyroxemia other thanhypothyroidism.Conversely,it isveryunlikely
that a dog with a [tT4] that is WRI has primary hypothyroidism (if the
[tT] is valid; see Fig. 17.2).
(4)Lymphocytic thyroiditis, considered an inheritable autoimmune disorder in
many dog breeds, is a common cause of thyroid gland destruction and
primary hypothyroidism in dogs (at least 50 % of cases).3 The damaged
thyroid gland exposes antigens from immunologically privileged sites so that
the immune system produces autoantibodies such as TgAA,TAA,TAA,
and TpAA.Idiopathic thyroid gland atrophy is another common finding in
thyroiditis.
17/THYROIDFUNCTION
791
Table 17.3.Diseases and conditions that cause hypothyroxemia (decreased [tT])
Decreased production of T
*Primary hypothyroidism: lymphocytic thyroiditis, idiopathic thyroid atrophy,congenital
thyroid gland dysgenesis destruction of thyroid gland (neoplasia, surgery,radioactive
iodide treatments,or other means)
Secondary hypothyroidism: TSH deficiency caused by pituitary malformation or destruction
by neoplasia,radiation,or other means
Defective thyroxine production
Iodine organification defect
Congenital thyroid peroxidase deficiency in toy fox terriers
Iodine deficiency
Multifactorial (may include decreased Tproduction) or unknown mechanisms
*Nonthyroidal diseases: hyperadrenocorticism, infammatory diseases
*Drugs:glucocorticoids,trimethoprim-sulfadiazine,trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,
phenobarbital, phenylbutazone, clomipramine
Dietshighinnergy,roten,copper,zinc,ndophte-infected fscue rass (hrss)
Food deprivation for 4 d (horses)
Diet high in Leucaena leucocephala (cattle)
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Healthy large-breed and medium-breed dogs tend to have lower [tT4] than small-breed dogs.
Healthy greyhounds (and posibly other sighthound breeds) have lower [tT] than other dogs of other
breeds.2
(5)Thyroid neoplasia may destroy enough functional follicular cells to create a
hypothyroid state.Conversely,old,untreated,hypothyroid beagles hada
relatively high incidence of developing thyroid neoplasia,possibly because of
chronicTSH stimulation.37
(6)Thyroid glands can also be damaged during surgery, during radioactive
iodide treatments, and by other physical means.
(7)Congenital thyroid gland dysgenesis with hypothyroidism has been reported
in dogs.38
(8)Nongoitrous hypothyroidism was found in two Scottish deerhound puppies.
The congenital disorder was caused either by primary thyroid hypoplasia or
by thyroid-unresponsiveness to TSH.39
(9)Congenital hypothyroidism has been reported in kittens of Abyssinian cats,
Japanese catsandadomestic shorthair cat6Becausehealthy5o
6-wk-old kittens have [tT4] that are 2-3 times greater than adult cat
concentrations,a hypothyroid kirten may have [tT] within the adult
reference interval.42
b.Secondary hypothyroidism (caused by TSH deficiency) is one form of central
hypothyroidism.
(1) Rare cases caused by pituitary neoplasia or malformation are reported in
by surgery,radiation,or trauma3
(2)Thyroid neoplasms may produce abnormal hormones that do not stimulate
physiologic responses (therefore hyperthyroidism does not develop)but do
suppress TSH release (therefore hypothyroidism develops).4
792
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(3)Lack of TSH secretion causes atrophy of thyroidal follicular cells and thus
decreased T and T, production.
C.Tertiary hypothyroidism (caused by TRH deficiency)(one form of central
hypothyroidism): The authors are not aware of documented cases in domestic
mammals.
d.Defective T4 production
(1)In dogs,iodine organification efetor congenital thyroid peroxidase
deficiency in toy fox terriers6
(2）In foalsiodine deciency from decreased dietary intake foal and dam）
(3)Defective thyroglobulin synthesis in Merino sheep,Dutch goats, and mice
produced hypothyroidism.However, defective thyroglobulin synthesis in
Afrikaner (Afrikander) cattle and Bongo antelope produced euthyroid
congenital goiters.4s
2.Multifactorial (may include decreased T production) or unknown mechanisms
a.Nonthyroidal diseases
(1）Many infammatory,neoplastic,metabolic (e.g.,renal failure),and endocrine
disorders (especially hyperadrenocorticism) are known to decrease [tT4]
Sick euthyroidism (en from Greek, meaning “well") is the condition in
which a disease outside of the thyroid hormonal system creates
hypothyroxemia.
(2）Nonthyroidal diseasesmay lower [tT] by one or more of the following
processes:
(a)Decreased protein-bound Tbecause of decreased concentration or
affinityofbindingproteins
(b)Inhibition of TSH secretion
(c)Inhibition ofTproduction
(2)Assessment of TSH and [fT]amay help differentiate nonthyroidal illness
from hypothyroidism when [tT4] is decreased in dogs with clinical signs of
hypothyroidism.
b. Many drugs (especially glucocorticoids) are known to lower [tT].
(1)Dogs with hyperadrenocorticism frequently have decreased[tT4], but
[tT] did not change in one study,whereas the[tT] decreased in another
factors, including reduced TsH secretion, and that the thyroid glands are
less responsive to TSH.There is also evidence that glucocorticoids reduce
the conversion of Tto T in peripheral tissues.9 Increased[TSH] is not
expected.
(2)In dogs, prednisolone,trimethoprim-sulfadiazine, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole,² and phenobarbital5354 treatments have been shown to
cause hypothyroxemia. Sulfonamides interfere with the iodination of thyroid
hormones by inhibiting thyroid peroxidase activity,5s56 so [TSH] may be
increased.
(3)In horses, phenylbutazone and glucocorticoid treatments have been shown
to cause hypothyroxemia.57
(4)Clomipramine (ClomiCalm）administered to dogs for nearly 4mo decreased
[tT] and[fT].The decrease in[tT] was detectable after 1 mo of treat-
ment, persisted for the duration of the experiment, but did not drop below
17/THYROIDFUNCTION
793
the lower reference limit.5Clomipramine is used for a variety of behavioral
disorders.
C.The following have been shown to produce lower [tT] in horses:
(1）Diets high in energy,rotein,copper,or zinc
(2)Ingestion of endophyte-infected fescue grass7
(3)Food deprivation for 4 d (mean [tT4] decreased from 19.9 nmol/L to
7.6nmol/L)59
d. Cattle fed foliage from Leucaena leucocephala (common names: miracle tree,
ipil-ipil,uazin,yaje,and kubabule) developed hypothyroxemia and
hypothyroidism.co
3.Certain dog breeds tend to have lower [tT] than other breeds.In one study,the
mean [tT4] in large-breed and medium-breed dogs was about 0.5 μg/dL lower than
the[tT4] in the small-breed dogs.6 Greyhounds, and possibly dogs in other sight-
hound breeds,have lower reference values for[tT4] and [fT4] than most other
dogs.The diagnosis of hypothyroidism in sighthound dogs may require data other
than [tT4] (e.g, increased [TSH]). Unpublished data for dogs in the sighthound
breeds indicate that different reference intervals are needed for[tT] and[fT4],but
not for[tT]or[TSH].
II.
[Free thyroxine]ea ([fT4]a)
A.Increased [fT4la (free thyroxine concentration by equilibrium dialysis)
1.The same disorders that cause a truly increased [tT] (Table 17.2) are expected to
cause a concurrently increased[fTld.About98%ofhyperthyroid cats have
increased [fT4] when tested.29
2.[fT4]a does not always mirror [tT]
a.A horse with clinical hyperthyroidism had a normal [tT] but an increased
[fT4]d.63
b.Concurrently finding decreased [tT] and increased[fT4] in cats suggests the
presence of a sick euthyroid state. For unknown reasons, sick cats occasionally
have an increased [fT4]a but a [tT4] that is WRI.
3.T4AA may cause positive interference in some fT assays, but values for [fT] are
not affected.
B.Decreased [fT4]d (free thyroxine concentration by equilibrium dialysis)
1.Thyroidal disorders that cause decreased [tT] by decreasing production of T are
expected to have concurrently decreased [fT4]ed.
2.Other disorders or conditions that may cause decreased [fT4] include hyperadreno
corticism,nfammation（interleukin1,interleukin,interferonand tumor
necrosis factor may cause decreased[fT4led),and treatments with prednisolone,
sulfonamides, or phenobarbital.
3.Decreased [fT4le was found in horses with experimentally induced hypothyroidism
and in horses with a variety ofillnesses (especially with severe disorders）.
(fT3)CONCENTRATIONS
Basal[tT,]and [fT，]assess conversion of Tto T,but have less diagnostic sensitivity for
hypothyroidism and provide little useful additional information over[tT] and[fT].In
dogs, diurnal variations in [tT§] were less than the variations found in [tT].
794
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
I1.
[tT] is measured to monitor therapeutic concentrations and to assess owner compliance in
the T, suppression test.
III.If a solid-phase RIA is used to measure[tT], then TAA can cause erroneously increased
values just like TAA in tT4 assays (Fig. 17.2). In some assays, TAA falsely decrease [tT,]
and falsely increase [fT]
THYROID-STIMULATING HORMONE (TSH) CONCENTRATION
CourseSmar
1.Dogs
A.Increased canine [TSH]
1.Primary hypothyroidism: Lack of negative feedback because of decreased [fT4] and
decreased [fT] should increase pituitary synthesis and release of TSH and thus cause
an increased [TSH].Studies indicate that about 60-75 % of hypothyroid dogs have
increased [TSH].67.68
2.Compensated hypothyroidism: It appears that some dogs with thyroiditis can
maintain [tT] or [tT,] WRI but only with greater stimulation of remaining thyroid
cells by TSH.
3.[TSH] is expected to increase during the TRH response test (see Response and
Suppression Tests, sect. II).
B.Because [TSH] in euthyroid dogs can be at the detection limit of the canine
TSH assay, a decreased [TSH] cannot be reliably differentiated from a[TSH] that
is WRI. Therefore, [TSH] will be WRI in dogs with secondary hypothyroidism.
The hypothyroid dogs without increased [TSH]may have secondary hypothyroidism
or primary hypothyroidism.Dogs with sick euthyroidism or drug-induced changes
in thyroidal hormone concentrations also may have[TsH] values that are
WRI.67.69
II.
Cats
A.By using the canine TSH assay to attempt to measure feline TSH, the feline [TSH] in
50 healthy cats was 0.00-0.32 ng/mL (note: canine TSH used as standards). Increased
concentrations of feline[TSH] were found in cats after thyroidectomies or after chronic
methimazole therapy. Because the lower reference limit is 0.oo ng/mL, this assay cannot
document decreased feline [TSH]
B.If there is not 100 % cross-reactivity between canine and feline TSH, then the use of
purifed feline TSH in the assay would produce different results. However, the analyti-
cal inaccuracywould bereflectedinthereference interval,so interpretationsmayot e
affected.
III.
Horses:Equine [TSH] was increased in horses after experimental production of hypothy
roidism and as a response to TRH administration.7Additional studies are needed to assess
the diagnostic value of [TSH] in horses.
AUTOANTIBODIES
Thyroglobulin autoantibodies (TgAA)
A.The reported prevalence of TgAA in dogs with hypothyroidism varies, but the percent
ages are relatively large; that is,36 %of 42dogsand55 %of 31 dogs.28Withmarked
17/THYROIDFUNCTION
795
thyroid atrophy or end-stage lymphocytic thyroiditis, the amount of circulating TgAA
maydiminish.71
B.In one study,all eight dogs with a positiveTgAA result had lymphocytic thyroiditis2
disease and not evidence of thyroid dysfunction.
C.Predictive values of TgAA results for thyroidal disease have varied among investigators,
at least partially because of different methods of establishing a decision threshold
with hypercalcemia,hypocalcemia,hypoadrenocorticism,hyperadrenocorticism, or
diabetes mellitus.It was not determined whether the positive reactions were true or
false-positive results in these cases.72
II.
Thyroxine autoantibodies(TAA)and triiodothyronine autoantibodies(TAA)
A.Many dogs with lymphocytic thyroiditis also have autoantibodies against T4 (T4AA)
and T, (TAA). In a study of nearly 300,000 dogs with clinical signs of hypothyroid
ism, thyroid hormone autoantibodies were found in about 6 % of the dogs' sera.7
B.When autoantibodies are detected, TgAA are more common than either TAA or
result.'7
III.
Thyroid peroxidase autoantibodies (TpAA)
A.Thyroid peroxidase catalyzes the iodination of tyrosine molecules that are attached to
thyroglobulin in thyroidal colloid.The iodination leads to the formation of Tand T
bound to thyroglobulin.The hormones are cleaved from the thyroglobulin in thyroid
epithelial cells and are released to blood.
B.The diagnostic value of the canine TpAA assay has not been established. In canine sera
that contained TgAA, TAA,or TAA, 17 % contained TpAA.TpAA may be involved
in the pathogenesis of lymphocytic thyroiditisbut there are also other proposed
theories for the mmune-mediateddestruction of thyrocytes.74
RESPONSEANDSUPPRESSIONTESTS
I.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) response test
A.Poor or inadequate response to TSH stimulation was the gold standard for establishing
thyroid hypoplasia (hypothyroidism) for many years. Because an approved pharmaco-
logic form of bovine TSH is no longer available, the TSH response test is rarely used
for clinical investigations. Recombinant human TSH is available but is expensive.75
Basic aspects of the TSH response test are provided to assist in the understanding of
published reports on canine hypothyroidism.
B.A TSH response test assesses the ability of the thyroid gland to produce Tafterbeing
stimulated by TSH. Several protocols have been recommended. The amount of
administered TSH and the sample collection times vary among feline, canine, and
equineprotocols.
C.Example of a canine TSH response test
1.Procedure: A blood sample for a basal [tT] is collected, bovine TSH is administered
intravenously (0.1 units/kg body weight with a maximum of 5 units), and a blood
sample is collected 6 h after TSH administration.
796
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.Interpretation guidelines (expected values may vary among assays)65
(1)Basal [tT4] in healthy dogs is expected to be 1.0-4.0 μg/dL. In nonthyroidal
illness, it may be  1.0 μg/dL.
(2)Post-TSH[tT↓]>3.0μg/dL
b.Borderline results: post-TSH [tT] = 1.5-3.0 μg/dL
c.Hypothyroid dogs:basal and post-TSH[tT4]<1.5 μg/dL
II.
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) response test
A.The TRH response test indirectly assesses thyroid function by causing the release of
TSH that stimulates release of T
B.In dogs, the TRH response test is not as good as the TSH response test in
detecting hypothyroidism.7677 Some euthyroid dogs (as classified by the TSH
response test and clinical signs) appear to be hypothyroid by the TRH response
test (positive predictive value of 50 %).7 The TRH response test does not reliably
differentiate primary from secondary hypothyroidism, because TRH-induced TSH
release is diminished in secondary hypothyroidism and in most primary hypothyroid
sg'saop
C.TRH is not approved for use in horses.
D.The TRH response test is not needed to diagnose hyperthyroidism in cats but has been
used.79
1.In hyperthyroid cats,TRH is expected to have little or no effect on TSH and [tT]
because of feedback inhibition on thepituitary gland.Serum[tT] in a healthy
euthyroid cat is expected to double in thepost-TRH sample.
2.Advantages of the TRH response test over the T suppression test are that it is
shorter (4 h versus 3 d) and does not require owners to administer pills to their cats.
Disadvantages are the side effects of TRH administration (salivation,vomiting,
tachypnea, and defecation)
II.
Triiodothyronine (T) suppression test
A.Cats
1.Most cats with clinical hyperthyroidism have hyperthyroxemia,and thus additional
diagnostic testing is not needed. However, some cats with hyperthyroidism have a
basal [tT] that is WRI or only slightly increased, perhaps because of variable
secretion of T4 from hyperfunctional thyroid glands, a nonthyroidal disease that is
lowering [tT], or other reasons. For these animals, a T suppression test should
differentiate the hyperthyroid cats (those with defective hypothalamus-pituitary
thyroid regulation) from euthyroid cats.m.81
2.Basics of the procedure
a.Collect serum for basal [tT] and basal[tT,]and freeze it for submission with
later serum samples
b. Owners administer T, (liothyronine) per os starting the next morning at 25 μg
q8h for 2 d.
c.Within 24 h of the final and seventh dosage of T，the cat is returned to the
clinic, and serum is collected for post-T,[tT] and [tT].
dBasal and post-T sera are submitted to a laboratory for determination of [tT4]
and [tT,].
17/THYROIDFUNCTION
797
Basal [tT4]
Post-T3[tT4]
100
100-
90
2
90-
1/owu)
08
(owu)
80-
70
70-
1
60
60
E
50
50
un
40
wn
40
30
30
20
20
10
10
Hyper-
Other
Hyper-
Other
thyraidism
disorders
thyroidism
disorders
hyperthyroidism,therewas a failure to suppress[Tbelow20nmol/L.In cats with other disorders,the
[tT4] in post-T; samples was < 20 nmol/L. Hyperthyroidism was diagnosed in 77 cats, based on clinical
signs,palpable thyroid noduleshigh-normal to increased[T], andresponse to treatment forhypethyrid
ism. Cats (n = 22) with other disorders had clinical signs suggestive of hyperthyroidism. Their disorders
incuded gasroitstinal diseaseschronicrenal disease,cardiomyopathyandhavioral disordrThg
shaded area represents the [tT4] found in 44 clinically healthy cats. The graph was constructed from
published data.o
3.Expected results
aThe post-T[T] should be greater than the basal [T].If it isnot,then failure
of suppression may be due to failure to administer T; to the cat.
b.Interpretation guidelines of post-T [T4] (Fig. 17.3):Values may vary with the
assay and laboratory.Using an absolute decision threshold is considered a better
method of interpreting results than using a percent decrease,29 but at least a
50 % decrease in [tT4] typically excludes hyperthyroidism.
(1)Post-T,[tT] >20 nmol/L (> 1.6 μg/dL) indicates a lack of suppression of
T4 secretion and thus supports the presence of a thyroid adenoma.
of T4 secretion and thus indicates that the cat does not have a thyroid
adenoma.
B.Horses
1.Hyperthyroidism is uncommon in horses,and thus the need for a T, suppression
test is limited. Interpretive guidelines and optimal sampling times are not firmly
established.
2.Basics of the procedure34
a.EDTA-plasma is collected for basal[tT4] and basal [tT] for 2 consecutive days
prior to administration of T.Samples are frozen for submission with later
samples.
798
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
b.T, (2.5 mg diluted in 5 mL saline) is administered at 8:30 a.m. and 6 p.m. for
3 d and at 8:30 a.m.on day 4.
c.EDTA-plasma is collected at 6 p.m. on day 4 and at 8:30 a.m. on days 6, 7,
and 9.
d.Basal and post-T plasma are submitted to a laboratory for determination of
[tT4] and [rT]
3.Expected results3
a.In three clinically healthy horses, plasma [tT4] values were suppressed
（<4ng/mL)for at least 5 d after the last doseof T
b.In a horse with a thyroid adenoma,plasma[tT] remained increased
(> 24 ng/mL) during and after administration of T
C.[tT] should be increased in samples collected on days 4 and 6.
TOTALTHYROXINETOTHYROID-STIMULATINGHORMONE(tT:TSH)
(fT:TSH)RATIOSINDOGS
Because of the physiologic relationships among T,T and TSH secretion, T:TSH
1
and fT:TSH ratios have the potential to differentiate hypothyroid from euthyroid
states. Lower ratios suggest that the thyroid glands are not responding to endogenous
TSH (primary hypothyroidism). However, the tT: TSH ratio may also decrease in
secondary hypothyroidism because the[tT] decreasesmore than the detectable decrease
in [TSH].
II.
Reported results
A.Reported ratios have been calculated directly from the numerical value of reported
concentrations; for example,[tT4] of 10 nmol/L, [fT4] of 5 pmol/L,and a [TSH] of
0.5 ng/mL would result in a ratio of 20 nmol tT4:μg TSH (20 mmol tT4:g TSH) and
10 pmol fT:μg TSH (10 μmol fT4:g TSH).It would be better if analyte concentra-
tionswere converted to similar units before a ratio is calculated so that the ratios were
unitless.
B.tT4:TSH ratios (as nmol:μg) in one study showed that hypothyroid dogs usually had
lower ratios (values of 1-66;10 of 11 ratios<30) than healthy euthyroid dogs (values
of 36-173) and sick euthyroid dogs (values of 45-2114;a ratio > 4000 was an obvious
outlier).82
C.tT4:TSH and fT4:TSH ratios in a 1999 study3
1. tT: TSH ratio: Using a decision threshold of 17.3 nmol tT:μg TSH, the tT4:TSH
ratio had a diagnostic sensitivity for hypothyroidism of 86.7 % anda diagnostic
specificiry of 92.2 %.
2.fT4:TSH ratio: Using a decision threshold of 7.5 pmol fT:μg TSH, the fT4:TSH
ratio had a diagnostic sensitivity for hypothyroidism of 8o.o % and a diagnostic
specificity of 97.4 %.
3.Ratios and diagnostic performancewill vary with specific assays,laboratoriesand
decision threshold values.
D.The ratios have not been widely used,and their diagnostic value compared to other
assessments is not firmly established. Inaccurate [TSH] at very low concentrations (the
assay's detection limit is near concentrations found in euthyroid dogs) could result in
inaccurate and perhaps misleading ratios.
17/THYROIDFUNCTION
799
Table 17.4.Interpretation of thyroid profleresults in dogs
[tT4]
[fT4]ad
[TSH]
TgAA
Interpretation
WRI
Rules out hypothyroidism unless [tT4] is falsely
increased byTAA
↑
↑
个
Positive
Primary hypothyroidism caused by lymphocytic
thyroiditis
↑
↑
↑
Negative
Primary hypothyroidism caused by thyroid atrophy
or possibly end-stage immune thyroiditis
个
WRI
Negative
Secondary hypothyroidism caused by pituitary
gland dysfunction
Sick euthyroidism,nonthyroidal illnes
Hypothyroxemia caused by effects of drugs
WRI-↑c
WRI-↑
Negative
Nonthyroidal illness (sick euthyroidism)
WRI-T
Positive
Primary hypothyroidism (lymphocytic thyroiditis)
with T4AA increasing the [tT4] (see Fig. 17.2)
WRI
WRI
WRI
Positive
Thyroiditis without thyroid dysfunction or false
positive (e.g., nonspecific binding)
WRI
WRI
↑
Positive
Thyroiditis with compensatory increase in TSH
production
WRI
WRI
↑
Negative
Potentially responding after withdrawal of
suppressive drugs or after a nonthyroidal illness3
Therefore, the lower limit of a TSH reference interval cannot be reliably established.
bSulfamethoxazole-trmethoprim, prednisolone, or phenobarbital
[fTaled will vary. Results depend on where the illnesses or drugs interfere with thyroid hormone
production (see the text).
Note: [tT4] and [fT4]a near respective reference limits (borderline results) should be interpreted
cautiously.
I.
Dogs
A.Major patterns of thyroid profleresults in dogs（Table17.4)49.52.6769.72.827
B.[tT] can be used to help monitor thyroxine therapy.For dogs receiving appropriate
thyroxine supplementation,[tT] is expected to be high-normal to increased 4-6 h after
thyroxine administration and[TSH] should beWRI
C.To reassess a diagnosis of hypothyroidism via hormone assays in a dog receiving
thyroxine supplementation,thyroxine should be discontinued for at least 4wk
prior to testing,in order to remove the infuence of treatments on thyroid profle
results.2
IL.
Major parternsof[tT4] and[fT4]in cats(Table 17.5)
800
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 17.5.Interpretation of [tT.] and [fT] in cats
Clinicalhistory &signs suggest
[T4]
[fT4]d
Interpretation
Hyperthyroidism
↑
Strong evidence of hyperthyroidism (a
concurrent ↑[fT] provides additional
evidence but is typically not needed)
↓-WRI
WRI-T
May be hyperthyroidism and/or
nonthyroidal illness;T suppression
testrecommended
Euthyroidism
WRI
WRI
No evidence of thyroid dysfunction
个
Could be early hyperthyroidism,normal
random variation,or inappropriate
reference interval; a confirmatory↑
[T4] ora positiveTsuppression test
is needed before diagnosing
hyperthyroidism
Probably nonthyroidal illness altering
[tT4] or[fT4]
↓-WRI
WRI
Hypothyroidism
WRI-T
Nonthyroidal illness causing sick
euthyroidism
Probable primary hypothyroidism;could
be secondary hypothyroidism or
changes due to nonthyroidal illness or
drug therapy
Note:[tT] and [fT] near respective reference limits (borderline results) should be interpreted
cautiously.
References
1.Chastain CB, Ganjam VK 1986. Clnical Enderinolegy of Cemparin Ammab, Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
2.Feldman EC,Nelson RW.1996.Hypothyroidism. Canine andFelineEndocrinlogy ndReprouction,2nd edition,
68-117.Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
3.Bianco AC,Salvatore D,Gereben B,Berry MJ,Larsen PR2002.Biochemistry, ceular and molecular biology,and
physiological roles of the iodothyronine selenodeiodinases. Endocr Rev 23:3889.
4.Duckett WM. 1998. Thyroid gland. In:Reed SM, Bayly WM,eds.Equine Intemal Medicine, 916-925.Philadelphia:
WB Saunders.
5.Hoh WP, Oh TH.2006. Circadian variations of serum thyroxine, free thyroxine and 3,5,3'triiodothyronine
concentrations in healthy dogs. J Vet Sei 7:25-29.
6.Torres SMF, McKeever PJ, Johnston SD. 1991.Effect of oral administration of prednisolone on thyroid function in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 52:416-421.
7.Larsson M,PettersonT,CarlstomA.1985.Thyroid horrmone bindingin serum of15 vertebrate species:Isolation
of thyroxine-binding globulin and prealbumin analogs. Gen Comp Endocrinol 58:360-375.
8. Bassetr JH, Harvey CB, Williams GR. 2003. Mechanisms of thyroid hormone receptor-specifc nuclear and exra
nudear actions. Mol Cell Endocrinol 213:1-11.
9.Lundberg GD, Iverson C, Radulescu G. 1986. Now read this: The SI units are here.J Am Med Assoc
255:2329-2339.
10. Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ, Young DW. 1998. Effect of storage conditions on cortisol, total thyroxine, and free
thyroxine concentrations in serum and plasma of dogs J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:15641568.
17/THYROID FUNCTION
801
11. Stevenson HP, Archbold GP, Johnston P, Young IS, Sheridan B. 1998. Misleading serum free thyroxine results during
low molecular weight heparin treatment. Clin Chem 44:1002-1007.
12.Vermaak W], Kalk WJ, Kuyl JM, Smit AM. 1986. Faty acid induced changes in cireulating total and free thyroid
hormones: In vivo effects and methodological artefacts. J Endocrinol Invest 9:121-126.
13. Kemppainen RJ, Birchfield JR. 2006. Measurement of total thyroxine concentration in serum from dogs and cats by
use of various methods. Am J Vet Res 67:259265.
e o ue o ung oo  y  p  
quantitative measurement of serum total thyroxine concentration in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
221:243-249
15. Peterson ME, DeMarce CL, Sheldon KM. 2003. Total thyroxine testing: Comparison of an in-house test kit with
radioimmuno- and chemiluminescent assays. J Vet Intern Med 17:396 (abstract).
16. Singh AK, Jiang Y, White T, Spassova D. 1997. Validation of nonradioactive chemiluminescent immunoassay
methods for the analysis of thyroxine and cortisol in blood sarmples obtained from dogs, cats, and horses. J Vet Diagn
Invest 9:261268.
17. Thacker EL, Refsal KR, Bull RW. 1992. Prevalence of autoantibodies to thyroglobulin, thyroxine, or triodo-
thyronine and relationship of autoantibodies and serum concentrations of iodothyronines in dogs. Aun J Vet Res
53:449-453
18. Skopek E, Patzl M, Nachrciner RF. 2006. Detection of autoantibodies against thyroid peroxidase in serum samples of
hypothyroid dogs. Am J Vet Res 67:809-814.
19. Schachter S, Nelson RW, Scot-MoncriefF C, Ferguson DC, Montgormery T, Felman EC, Neal L, Kass PH. 2004.
Comparison of serum-free thyroxine concentrations determined by standard equilibrium dialysis, modified equilib.
rium dialysis, and 5 radioimmunoassays in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 18:259-264.
20. Sapin R, dHerbomez M. 2003. Free thyroxine measured by equilibrium dialysis and nine immunoassays in sera with
various serum thyroxine-binding capacities. Clin Chem 49:1531-1535.
21. Paradis M, Page N. 1996. Serum free thyroxine concentrations measured by chemiluminescence in hyperthyroid and
euthyroid cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:489-494.
22.Paradis M, Page N, Lariviere N, Fontaine M. 1996. Serum-free thyroxine concentrations, measured by chemilumines-
cence asay before and after thyrotropin administration in healthy dogs, hypothyroid dogs, and euthyroid dogs with
dermatopathies. Can Vet  37:289-294
23. Mooney CT. 1999. Canine TSH: A help or a hindrance? In: Proceedings of the 17th ACVIM Forum, Chicago,
456457.
24. Marca MC, Loste A,Orden I, Gonzalez JM, Marsella JA. 2001. Evaluation of canine serum thyrotropin (TSH)
concentration: Comparison of three analytical procedures. J Vet Diagn Invest 13:106-110.
25.Graham PA, Refsal KR, Nachreiner RF, Provencher-Bolliger AL.2000. The measurement of feline thyrotropin (TSH)
using a commercial canine immunoradiometric assay. J Vet Intern Med 14:342 (abstract).
26.Tanase H,Kudo K, Horikoshi H, Mizushima H, Okazaki T, Ogata E. 1991. Inherited primary hypothyroidism with
thyrotrophin resistance in Japanese cats. J Endocrinol 129:245-251.
27.Breuhaus BA. 2002. Thyroid-stimulating hormone in adult euthyroid and hypothyroid horses. J Vet Intern Med
16:109-115.
28.Patzl M, Mostl E. 2003. Determination of autoantibodies to thyroglobulin, thyroxine and triodothyronine in canine
serum. J Vet Med [A] 50:72-78.
29. Peterson ME. 2006. Diagnostic tests for hyperthyroidism in cats. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 21:2-9.
30.Peterson ME, Graves TK, Cavanagh I. 1987. Serum thyroid hormone concentrations Huctuate in cats with
hyperthyroidism. J Vet Intern Med 1:142-146.
31. Peterson ME, Gamble DA. 1990. Effect of nonthyroidal illness on serum thyroxine concentrations in cats 494 cases
(1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1203-1208.
32.Peeters ME, Timmermans-Sprang EP, Mol JA. 2002. Feline thyroid adenomas are in part associated with
mutations in the G gene and not with polymorphisms found in the thyrotropin receptor. Thyroid 12:571-
575.
33.Turrel JM,Feldman EC,Nelson RW, Cain GR. 1988. Thyroid carcinoma causing hyperthyroidism in cats:14 caser
(1981-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:359-364.
34.Alberts MK, McCann JP, Woods PR. 2000. Hemithyroidectomy in a horse with confirmed hyperthyroidism.J Am
Vet Med Assoc 217:1051-1054.
35.Peterson ME,Randolph JF,Zaki FA,Heath H II. 1982.Multiple endocrine neoplasia in a dog J Am Vet Med
Assoc 180:1476-1478.
36. Graham PA, Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR,Provencher-Bolliger AL. 2001. Lymphocytic thyroiditis.Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 31:915933.
802
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
37.Benjamin SA, Stephens LC, Hamilton BF,Saunders WJ, Lee AC, Angleton GM, Mallinckrodt CH. 1996.
Associations between lymphocytic thyroiditis,hypothyroidism, and thyroid neoplasia in beagles.Vet Pathol
33:486494.
38. Greco DS, Peterson ME, Cho DY, Markovits JE. 1985. Juvenile-onset hypothyroidism in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
187:948-950.
39. Robinson WF, Shaw SE, Stanley B, Wyburn RS. 1988. Congenital hypothyroidism in Scottish Derhound puppies.
Aust Vet J 65:386-389.
40. Jones BR, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Sparkes AH, Lucke VM. 1992. Preliminary studies on congenital hypothyroidism in a
family of Abyssinian cats. Vet Rec 131:145-148.
41. Crowe A. 2004. Congenital hypothyroidism in a cat. Can Vet J 45:168, 170.
42. Greco DS. 2006. Diagnosis of congenital and adult-onset hypothyroidism in cats. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
21:4044.
43. Mellanby RJ, Jeffery ND, Gopal MS, Hertage ME. 2005. Secondary hypothyroidism following head trauma in a
cat. J Feline Med Surg 7:135-139.
44. Branam JE, Leighton RL, Hornof WJ. 1982. Radioisotope imaging for the evaluation of thyroid neoplasia and
hypothyroidism in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:1077-1079.
45. Chastain CB, MeNeel SV, Graham CL, Pezzanite SC. 1983. Congenital hypothyroidism in a dog due to an iodide
organification defect. Am J Vet Res 44:1257-1265.
46.Fyfe JC,Kampschmidt K,Dang V,Poteet BA,He Q,Lowrie C,Graham PA,FetroVM.2003. Congenital
hypothyroidism with goiter in toy fox terriers. J Vet Intern Med 17:50-57.
47. Osame S, Ichijo S. 1994. Clinicopathological observations on thoroughbred foals with enlarged thyroid gland. J Vet
Med Sei 56:771-772.
48. Medeiros-Neto G, Targovnik HM, Vassart G. 1993. Defective thyroglobulin synthesis and secretion causing goiter
and hypothyroidism. Endocr Rev 14:165-183.
49. Ferguson DC, Peterson ME. 1992. Serum free and total iodothyronine concentrations in dogs with hyperadrenocorti-
cism.AmJ Vet Res 53:1636-1640.
50. Moore GE, Ferguson DC, Hoenig M. 1993. Effects of oral administration of anti-inflammatory doses of prednisone
on thyroid hormone response to thyrotropin-releasing hormone and thyrotropin in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet
Res 54:130-135.
51. Gookin JL, Trepanier LA, Bunch SE. 1999. Clinical hypothyroidism associated with trimethoprim-sulfadiazine
administration in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:10281031.
52. Hall LA, Campbell KL, Chambers MD, Davis CN. 1993. Effect of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole on thyroid
function in dogs with pyoderma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:1959-1962.
53.Gaskill CL,Burton SA, Gelens HCJ, Ihle SL, Miller JB, ShawDH, Brimacombe MB, Cribb AE. 1999. Effects of
phenobarbital treatment on serum thyroxine and thyroid-stirmulating hormone concentrations in epileptic dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 215:489-496.
54.Mller PB,Wolfsheimer KJ, Taboada J, Hosgood G, Partington BP,Gaschen FP. 2000. Effects of long-term
phenobarbital treatment on the thyroid and adrenal axis and adrenal function tests in dogs. J Vet Intern Med
14:157-164
55. Doerge DR, Decker CJ. 1994. Inhibition of peroxidase-catalyzed reactions by arylamines: Mechanism for the anti
thyroid action of sulfamethazine. Chem Res Toxicol 7:164-169.
56. Gupta A, Eggo MC, Uetrecht JP, Cribb AE, Daneman D, Rieder MJ, Shear NH, Cannon M, Spielberg SP. 1992.
Drug-induced hypothyroidism: The thyroid as a target organ in hypersensitivity reactions to anticonvulsants and
sulfonamides. Clin Pharmacol Ther 51:56-67.
57.Messer NT, IV. 1997. Thyroid disease (dysfunction). In: Robinson NE, ed. Current Therapy in Equine Medicine 4,
502-503. Philadelphia: WB Saunders
58. Gulikers KP, Panciera DL. 2003.Evaluation of the effects of domipramine on canine thyroid function tests. J Vet
Intern Med 17:4449.
59. Messer NT, Johnson PJ, Refal KR, Nachreiner RF, Ganjam VK, Krause GF. 1995. Efct of food deprivation on
baseline iodothyronine and cortisol concentrations in healthy, adult horses. Am J Vet Res 56:116-121.
60. Jones RJ, Blunt CG, Nurnberg BI. 1978. Toxicity of Leucaena fencocepbal The cffect of iodine and mineral
supplements on penned steers fed a sole diet of Leueea. Aust Vet J 54:387392.
61. Reimers TJ, Lawler DF, Sutaria PM, Correa MT, Erb HN. 1990. Effects of age, sex, and body size on serum
concentrations of thyroid and adrenocortical hormones in dogs Am J Vet Res 51:454457.
62. Gaughan KR, Bruyette DS. 2001. Thyroid function testing in greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 62:1130-1133.
63. Ramirez S, MeClure JJ. Moore RM, Wolfsheimer KJ, Gaunt SD, Mirza MH, Taylor W. 1998. Hyperthyroidism
associated with a thyroid adenocarcinoma in a 21-year-old gelding. J Vet Intern Med 12:475477.
17/THYROIDFUNCTION
803
64.Peterson ME. 2000. Hyperthyroidism. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Tearbook ofVeterinary Intermal Medicine
Diseases efthe Dog and Cat, 5th edition, 1400-1419. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
65. Scot-MoncriefF JCR, Guptill-Yoran L. 2000. Hypothyroidism. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds. Texrbook of
Veterinary IntalMedicine:Disense oftbe Dog and Cat,5th edition,14191429.PhiladelphiaWB Saunders
66. Breuhaus BA, Refsal KR, Beyerlein SL. 2006. Measurement of free thyroxine concentration in horses by equilibrium
dialysis. J Vet Intern Med 20:371-376
67.Peterson ME, Melin C, Nichols R. 1997.Measurement of serum total thyroxine, triodothyronine, fee thyroxine,
and thyrotropin concentrations for diagnosis of hypothyroidism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:13961402.
68.Boreti FS, Reusch CE. 2004. Endogenous TSH in the diagnosis of hypothyroidism in dogs. Schweiz Arch Tierheilld
146:183-188.
69. Scou-Moncrieff JCR, Nelson RW, Bruner JM, Willams DA. 1998. Comparison of serum concentrations of thyroid-
stimulating hormone in healhy dogs, hypothyroid dogs, and euthyroid dogs with concurrent disease. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 212:387-391
70. Dixon RM, Mooney CT. 1999. Canine serum thyroglobulin autoantibodies in health, hypothyroidism and non
thyroidal illness.Res Vet Sdi 66:243-246.
71. Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR, Graham PA, Bowman MM. 2002. Prevalence of serum thyroid hormone autoantibodies
in dogs with clinical signs of hypothyroidism J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:466-471.
72. Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR, Graham PA, Hauptman J,. Watson GL. 1998. Prevalence of autoantibodies to thyroglobu-
lin in dogs with nonthyroidal illness. Am J Vet Res 59:951-955.
73. Haines DM, Lording PM, Penhale WJ. 1984. Survey of thyroglobulin autoantibodies in dogs. Am J Vet Res
45:14931497.
74. Stassi G, De Maria R. 2002. Autoimmune thyroid disease: New models of cell death in autoimmunity. Nat Rev
Immunol 2:195-204.
75. Stegeman JR, Graham PA, Hauptman JG. 2003. Use of recombinant human thyroid-stimulating hormone for
thyrotropin-stimulation testing of euthyroid cats. Am J Vet Res 64:149-152.
76. Ramsey I, Herrtage M. 1997. Distinguishing normal, sick, and hypothyroid dogs using total thyroxine and
thyrotropin concentrations.CaninePract 22:43-44
77. Scot-Moncrieff JC. 1997. Serum canine thyrotropin concentrations in experimental and spontaneous canine
hypothyroidism. Canine Pract 22:4142.
78. Frank LA. 1996. Comparison of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) to thyrotropin (TSH) stimulation for
evaluating thyroid function in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:481487.
79.Peterson MEBroussard JD,Gamble DA.1994.Use of the thyrotropin releasing hormone stimulation test to
diagnose mild hyperthyroidism in cats. J Vet Intern Med 8:279-286
80. Peterson ME, Graves TK, Gamble DA. 1990. Triiodothyronine (T3) suppression test: An aid in the diagnosis of mild
hyperthyroidism in cats. J Vet Intern Med 4:233-238.
81. Refsal KR, Nachreiner RF, Stein BE, Currigan CE, Zendel AN, Thacker EL. 1991. Use of the triiodothyronine
suppreson test for diagnosis of hyperthyroidism in ill cats that have serum concentration of iodothyronines within
normal rangeJAm Vet Med Assoc199:1594-1601
82.Dixon RM, Graham PA, Mooney CT. 1996. Serum thyrotropin concentrations: A mew diagnostic test for canine
hypothyroidism.Vet Rec 138:594-595.
83.Dixon RM,Mooney CT.1999.Evaluation of serum free thyroxine and thyrotropin concentrations in the diagnosis of
canine hypothyroidism J Small Anim Pract 40:7278.
84. Panciera DL. 1999. Is it possible to diagnose canine hypothyroidism? J Small Anim Pract 40:152-157.
85. Kantrowitz LB, Peterson ME, Trepanier LA, Melian C, Nichols R. 1999. Serum total thyroxine, total trilodothyro-
Assoc 214:1804-1808.
86. Beale KM, Hallivwell RE, Chen CL. 1990. Prevalence of antithyroglobulin antibodies detected by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay of canine serum. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:745-748.
87.Dixon RM, Mooney CT. 1999.New diagnostic methods in the evaluaton of canine thyroid disease. Comp
Haematol Ind 9:232-233 (abstract)
Thispageintentionallyleffblank
Chapter18
ADRENOCORTICALFUNCTION
PhysiologicProcesses
806
Analytical Concepts
807
Cortisol Concentration.
808
.
Diseases and ConditionsThat Cause Hypercortisolemia
808
Il.Diseases and Conditions That Cause Hypocortisolemia
810
Urine Cortisol to Creatinine (Cort:Crt), Ratio
812
Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (ACTH)Concentration
813
Plasma Cortisol to ACTH Ratio
814
Suppression and Stimulation Tests
815
815
A. Low-dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test (LDDST).
815
B.High-dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test (HDDsT)..
817
C.Interpretation of Dexamethasone Suppression Tests...
818
D.Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (ACTH) Stimulation (Response) Test.
818
821
A.Low-dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test (LDDST).
821
B.High-dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test (HDDST).
821
C.Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (ACTH) Stimulation (Response)Test.
821
l.Horses............
822
A.Dexamethasone Suppression Test
822
B.Adrenocorticotropic Hormone(ACTH) Stimulation (Response)Test.
.822
Combined Dexamethasone Suppression-Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (ACTH)
Stimulation (Response) Test.
823
Aldosterone Concentration..
824
Other Assessments of Adrenocortical Function
826
Thorn Test and Modified Thorn Test
826
I1.Concentrations of Other Steroid Hormones
827
805
806
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 18.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
(Cort:Crt)
Urine cortisol to creatinine
[x]
Concentration of x (x= analyte)
ACTH
Adrenocorticotropichormone （corticotropin)
CRH
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
FAN
Functional adrenal neoplasia
HDDST
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test
LDDST
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
op'DDD
1,1-Dichloro-2-(o-chlorophenyl)-2-(p-chlorophenyl)ethane
PDH
Piruitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
PPID
Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction
RIA
Radioimmunoassay
SI
SystemeInternational d'Unites
WRI
Within reference interval
PHYSIOLOGICPROCESSES
I
Regulation of cortisol and aldosterone secretion (Fig.18.1)
A.CRH from the hypothalamus stimulates the production and release of pituitary ACTH
and other hormones.Low[cortisol] promotes secretion of CRH and ACTH.High
[cortisol]inhibits secretion of CRH and ACTH.
B.ACTH stimulates the production and release of cortisol, aldosterone, and other steroid
compounds from the adrenal glands.The adrenal gland cortices produce most circulat-
ingcortisol.
C.Aldosterone secretion is also stimulated by angiotensin Il,hyperkalemia,and hyponatre-
mia but is inhibited by atrial natriuretic peptide. The secreted aldosterone stimulates
the renal retention of Na*and Cland excretion of Kand H+
D.Peak secretion of cortisol occurs in the morning in dogs and horses but in the evening
in cats. The degree of daily variation is minimal in domestic mammals' but may need
to be considered when interpreting diagnostic tests in horses (average about 3.0 μg/dL
at midnight; averages 4.5-5.0 μg/dL from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m.).2
E.Nearly all cortisol released from the adrenal glands becomes bound to plasma proteins.
In dogs,about 40 % of cortisol is bound to transcortin, 50 % to albumin, and the
remainder (5-10 %) is free. The half-life of cortisol is about 1.5 h in dogs and less in
cats.
F.Cortisol binds to receptor proteins in cells.The corisol-receptor complex initiates
synthesis of hormone and cytokine receptors and other proteins involved in gluconeo
genesis, protein catabolism, lipolysis, immune responses, and H,O balance.
G.Most cortisol is removed from plasma by hepatocytes,but there is also urinary excretion
ofcortisoland cortisol metabolites.
18/ADRENOCORTICALFUNCTION
807
Systemic
effects
Cortisol
Atrial natriuretic peptide
Hypothalamus
Na+&Cl-retention
Aldosterone
K+&H+excretion
CRH
Kidneys
AngiotensinIl
Hyperkalemia
Pituitary gland
ACTH
Adrenal glands
Hyponatremia
Fig.18.1.Regulation of cortisol and aldosterone secretion.
CRH released from the hypothalamus stimulates the production and release of ACTH from the pituitary
gland. ACTH stimulates the production and release of cortisol and aldosterone from the adrenal gland
cortices. In the negative-feedback system (dashed lines), increasing the [cortisol] inhibits the secretion of
CRH and ACTH.
Increased [angiotensin I],hyperkalemia,hyponatremia, and increased [ACTH] promote the release of
aldosterone from adrenal gland cortices. Atrial natriuretic peptide inhibits aldosterone release. The secreted
aldosterone stimulates the renal retention of Na* and CF and excretion of K+ and H+.
ANALYTICALCONCEPTS
I.
Unit conversion?
A.Cortisol:μg/dL x10 =ng/mL andμg/dLx 27.6=nmol/L (SI unit,nearest
10 nmol/L)
B.Aldosterone:ng/dL x 10=pg/mL and ng/dL × 27.74=pmol/L (SI unit,nearest
10 pmol/L)
C.ACTH:ng/L=Pg/mL andpg/mLx 0.2202=pmol/L(SI unit,nearest 1 pmol/L)
II.
Sample
A.Cortisol
1.Serum or EDTA-plasma may be used
2.Stability of [cortisol] inEDTA-plasma is better than in sera and better in cold
samples (20 °C best and 4°Cacceptable) than in warm ones (25°Cor 37°C)
3.It is occasionally written that serum or plasma should be collected from blood
quickly because of the uptake of cortisol by erythrocytes.Erythrocytes do bind
cortisol that is added to blood,but cortisol should already be distributed to plasma
and erythrocytes in patient blood samples.There was no difference between
measured [cortisol] in plasma samples removed from cels either 10min or 40h
after blood collection.
B.Aldosterone
1. Serum or heparinized plasma may be used.
2.[Aldosterone] is stable for a week at 2-8°C and for at least 2 mo at -20 °C.7
C.ACTH
1.EDTA-plasma is preferred (addition of a protease inhibitor such as aprotinin has
been recommended to reduce degradation).Plasma should be removed from the
erythrocytes immediately, placed in a plastic rube,and chilled. The sample should
not have prolonged contact with glass because ACTH adheres to glass.
808
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.ACTH is very labile, so the plasma requires special handling.If not analyzed the
day of collection, then the sample should be frozen and shipped to the reference
(without aprotinin) for 3 h at 19 °C.
I1.
Principles and assay procedures
A.Cortisol
1. Several commercial cortisol assays are available. RIAs are the most common and are
considered the gold standard, but enzyme immunoassays (e.g., enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay and chemiluminescent enzyme immunoassay)are also used.
2.Anticortisol antibodies in the immunoassays may cross-react with other glucocorti-
coids. Unless you know the cross-reactivity of an assay, interpret a[cortisol] with
caution if an animal has received corticosteroid therapy.The following cross-
reactivity percentages are for a common cortisol RIA(manufacturer's data):cortisol
(100 %), prednisolone (69 %), 11-deoxycortisol (7.5 %), prednisone (6.4 %),
cortisone (4.2%),corticosterone (3.5 %), spironolactone （<0.2 %）,and dexametha
sone (< 0.1 %). Poor cross-reactivity with dexamethasone is an important fact for
dexamethasone suppression tests.
3.Assays designed to measure plasma cortisol are also used to measure urine cortisol
for(Cort:Crt）,ratio.
B.ACTH
1.Antibodies in RIA reagents designed for measuring human ACTH tend to cross-
react with canine and feline ACTH.
2.Instabiliry of ACTH is the major concern with ACTH measurement. Samples must
be processed appropriately to obtain valid results.
C.Aldosterone
1.Aldosterone RIAs are not as common as cortisol assays.A relatively minute [aldoste-
rone]requires assays with high analytical sensitivity andvery low detection limits
(pg/mL).
2. Physiologic and dietary factors that infuence aldosterone production need to be
considered when establishing reference intervals for [aldosterone].
CORTISOLCONCENTRATION
I
Diseases and conditions that cause hypercortisolemia (Table 18.2)
A.Spontaneous conditions: Basal plasma [cortisol] by itself is of limited value because
many patients with hyperadrenocorticism do not have increased basal[cortisol].
However,there is sufficient cortisolproduction to cause clinical disorders either because
of episodic exaggerated secretions or because of a mild but continuously increased
production of cortisol. A[cortisol] is best interpreted in either dexamethasone suppres
sion tests or ACTH stimulation tests (see later sections).Historical,physical,and
preliminary laboratory data may clearly indicate that an animal has hyperadrenocorti-
cism but may not clearly differentiate the causes of the pathologic state. Adrenal
suppression and stimulation tests (covered later in this chapter) can be helpful for this,
and diagnostic imaging methods (i.e., radiography,ultrasonography, computed axial
tomography, or magnetic resonance imaging) can locate the pituitary or adrenal
neoplasms but cannot determine whether the abnormal tissue is producing excessive
amounts of hormones.
18/ADRENOCORTICALFUNCTION
809
Table 18.2.Diseases and conditions that cause hypercortisolemia
Increased production of cortisol
Spontaneous conditions
*Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
*Functional adrenocorticalneoplasia:adenoma,adenocarcinoma
*Stress-induced hypercortisolemia
Ectopic production of ACTH by a neoplasm
Ovarian steroid cell tumor
Iatrogenic conditions
Exogenous ACTH administration
*A relatively common disease or condition
Note: Pharmacological doses of some steroid compounds may result in a cross-reaction and give a
falsely elevated [cortisol].
1.Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH):(Hyperadrenocorticism is
commonly referred to as Cushing's disease, the name originally given to the human
pituitary disorder described by Dr. Harvey Cushing.)
a.In PDH, the neoplastic pituitary cells release excess ACTH, which causes
bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia. The ACTH release may or may not be
inhibited by exogenous glucocorticoids.Also, individual neoplasms can be
inhibited by some steroids but not others.
b.In dogs, about 80-85 % of clinical hyperadrenocorticism cases are caused by
increasedrelease of ACTHfrom pituitary adenomas.A small percentage are
c.In cats, about 7585 % of clinical hyperadrenocorticism cases are caused by
increased release of ACTH from pituitary adenomas.A small percentage are
caused by pituitary adenocarcinomas. One cat had clinical hyperadrenocorti-
cism and diabetes mellitus because of the secretion of ACTH and growth
d.In horses, nearly all cases of clinical hyperadrenocorticism are caused by a
horses and referred to as pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID）.There is
evidence thatPPID is secondary tohypothalamic degeneration that decreases
dopamine production.Normally,dopamine inhibits the melanotropes of the pars
intermedia.Without this inhibition, the melanotropes produce excess pro-
opiomelanocortin,which is cleaved into β-melanocyte-stimulating hormone
(β-MSH),corticotropin-like ntermediatelobe peptide,β-endorphinrelated
peptide (βEND peptide), and ACTH. The combination of increased β-MSH,
βEND peptide, and ACTH causes excess steroidogenesis and clinical
hyperadrenocorticism.4
2.Functional adrenocortical neoplasia (FAN)
a.In FAN,cells of the adrenocortical adenoma or adrenocortical carcinoma
produce excess cortisol. The neoplastic cells may or may not be responsive to
exogenous ACTH.A high [cortisol] is expected to inhibit ACTH release, and the
nonneoplastic adrenal gland will atrophy.
810
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
b.In dogs,about 10-20 % of clinical hyperadrenocorticism cases are due to adrenal
adenomas or adenocarcinomas.o
C.In cats, about 1525 % of clinical hyperadrenocorticism cases are due to adrenal
adenomas or adenocarcinomas. Clinical hyperadrenocorticism may also be seen
when adrenocortical neoplasms produce steroid hormones other than cortisol
3.Stress-induced hypercortisolemia
a.Stress caused by an illness or environmental changes may stimulate the release of
CRH,then ACTH,and thus stimulate the adrenal glands to produce more
cortisol.
b.If persistent,the stressresponsemay lead o bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia,
but it should not cause the clinical manifestations of pathologic
hyperadrenocorticism.
4.Ectopic production of ACTH:Neoplastic tissue other than pituitary neoplasms can
produce ACTH that causes bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia and clinical hyper-
adrenocorticism.16 These disorders are rarely recognized in domestic mammals bur
have been found in people for many years.
5.Ovarian steroid cell tumor in a dog:7 Ovarian neoplasms can produce cortisol-like
compounds that cause clinical hyperadrenocorticism.
B.Iatrogenic conditions
1.Exogenous ACTH administration is expected to cause hypercortisolemia (see
Suppression and Stimulation Tests,sect. I.D).
2.Because the anticortisol antibody in immunoassays may cross-react with other
steroids,recent administration of steroids could result in a falsely increased measured
concentration.For example, assays that list significant cross-reactivity with predniso
lone may have false values if the animal was recently treated with prednisolone
(e.g,Prednis-Tab),prednisone (e.g.,Meticorten),or prednisolone sodium succinate
(e.g., Solu-Delta-Cortef).
C.Other common routine laboratory findings with hypercortisolemia
1.Leukogram: steroid leukogram (see Chapter 2)
2.Chemistry profle: increased serum activity of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) in dogs,
hyperglycemia,hypercholesterolemia, and lipemia
3.Urinalysis: relatively unconcentrated,isosthenuric, or hyposthenuric urine, and
glucosuria in horses
Diseases and conditions that cause hypocortisolemia (Table 18.3)
A.Spontaneous conditions
1.Primary hypoadrenocorticism (Hypoadrenocorticism is commonly referred to as
Addison's disease, the name originally given to the human adrenal disorder described
by Dr. Thomas Addison.)
a.Causes of spontaneous bilateral atrophy or destruction of adrenal glands are
usually not known, but they may include immune-mediated disease, adrenalitis,
or adrenal hemorrhage.
b. The disorder is recognized primarily in dogs but also oocurs in cats and
occasionally in foals.19
2.Secondary hypoadrenocorticism (ACTH deficiency): ACTH deficiency could result
from destruction of the pituitary gland by disease processes or surgery,but this is
much less common than primary hypoadrenocorticism.
coursesiman
18/ADRENOCORTICALFUNCTION
811
Table 18.3.Diseases and conditions that cause hypocortisolemia
Decreased production ofcortisol
Spontaneous conditions
*Primary hypoadrenocorticism
Secondary hypoadrenocorticism (ACTH deficiency)
Atypical primary hypoadrenocorticism (selective cortisol deficiency)
Iatrogenic conditions
*Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism*
Iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticismb
Ketoconazole or trilostane treatment
The animal has clinical manifestations (e.g, polyuria or alopecia) of excess glucocorticoid hormonal
activity because of prolonged treatment with glucocorticoid compounds.
b The animal has clinical manifestations of deficiencies in glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid
hormonal activity (e.g.,weakness, azotemia,hyponatremia,hypochloremia,or hyperkalemia) caused by
adrenocortical hypoplasia induced by op'DDD, trilostane, or sudden withdrawal of prolonged
treatment with glucocorticoid compounds (e·g, prednisolone, prednisone, or megestrol acetate).
3.Atypical primary hypoadrenocorticism (selective cortisol deficiency):Rare spontane
ous cases of hypocortisolemia without concurrent hypoaldosteronemia,hyponatre
mia, or hyperkalemia have been reported.2° In some of these cases, [aldosterone] was
not reported bur was only presumed to be WRI because of the absence of electrolyte
changes. In another case, the concurrent cortisol and thyroxine defciencies were
considered apolyglandular deficiency syndrome.22
B.Iatrogenic conditions
1.Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism
a.Chronic administration of glucocorticoid drugs (e.g., prednisone or prednisolone)
may produce clinical signs consistent with hyperadrenocorticism.
b.The exogenous glucocorticoids will cause a negative feedback on the release of
CRH and ACTH, and thus adrenal glands will atrophy and produce less cortisol.
Baseline [cortisol] typically will be decreased (<1.0 μg/dL), and there will be a
diminished response in the ACTH stimulation test.Slow withdrawal of the
steroid treatments enables the adrenal glands to recover.
2.Iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism
a.Treatment of dogs with op'DDD (mitotane[Lysodren]) for hyperadrenocorticism
because of PDH or FAN causes progressive necrosis of the adrenal cortex (zona
fasciculata and zona reticularis).Excesive necrosis can decrease adrenal function
and clinical hypoadrenocorticism with cortisol deficiency and sometimes miner
alocorticoid deficiency.
b. Sudden withdrawal of glucocorticoid treatments (including megestrol acetate in
cats) may cause clinical hypoadrenocorticism because of adrenal gland atrophy
that developed while the animal was receiving glucocorticoids.
3.Treatment of dogs or cats with ketoconazole can cause decreased [cortisol] because
ketoconazole inhibits steroid biosynthesis.3iTreatment with trilostane reduces
[cortisol] by inhibiting 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase,an enzyme that catalyzes
anintermediatereactionin steroid synthesis.5
812
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
C.Other common routine laboratory findings with hypocortisolemia (except with
iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism caused by glucocorticoid administration)
1.Leukogram: absence of steroid leukogram in stressed, ill patients (particularly a lack
of lymphopenia; and possible lymphocytosis or eosinophilia)
2.Chemistry profle:hyponatremia,hypochloremia,hyperkalemia,hypercalcemia,
hypoglycemia, and azotemia
3.Urinalysis:inappropriately lowurine specifc gravity with azotemia
URINECORTISOLTO CREATININE(Cort:Crt),RATIO
I.
As described in Chapter 8,comparison of a urine analyte's concentration to urine [creati
nine] will provide a relative rate of urinary excretion of the analyte (such as cortisol)
compared to creatinine.In theory, the (Cort:Crt),ratio should detect a hyperadrenal state
better than a basal [cortisol] because the cortisol that accumulates in urine was produced
over a longer period and thus is not as susceptible to variations caused by episodic cortisol
secretions.Episodic secretions can cause fuctuations in a random serum [cortisol]
However,the increased urinary cortisol excretion could be either a physiologic or patho
logic state.
The (Cort:Crt),ratio should be calculated by using molar concentrations of urine cortisol
nine]were expressed as μg/dL and mg/dL, respectively. Instead of stating the true ratio
value (e.g., 20 x 10-°), sometimes it is shortened to “20" in clinical jargon.
urine cortisol concentration
(Cort:Crt),ratio=
(18.1.)
urine creatinine concentration
with cortisol innmol/L&creatininein mmol/L
Example:urine cortisol concentration=200 nmol/L
urine creatinine concentration=10 mmol/L
200nmol/L
200nmol/L
(Cort:Crt)ratio
=20×10-6
10mmol/L
10×10°nmol/L
III.
Conclusions from published reports (Fig.18.2)
A.Dog26.27
1.A (Cort:Crt） ratio that is WRI is strong evidence that a dog does not have
hyperadrenocorticism,but increased (Cort:Crt）ratios are frequently found in dogs
without hyperadrenocorticism. In other words, the (Cort:Crt) ratio has a high
diagnostic sensitivity for canine hyperadrenocorticism (relatively few false negatives)
but has a poor positive predictivevalue and poor diagnostic specifcity (relatively
frequent false positives) (Fig. 18.2).
2.Basal (Cort:Crt)ratios cannot reliably differentiate PDH from FAN,but the
greatest ratios areusually associated with PDH,as is suppression of (CortCt）
ratio in conjunction with a HDDST.2s
B.Cats:9The(Cort:Crt),ratios in 15 of 32 cats with hyperthyroidism were greater
than the upper reference limit of the feline reference interval (8.0 x 10 to 42.0 x 106;
n = 45).For the hyperthyroid cats, the median ratio value was 37.5x 10-6,with two
values above 100 x 10-. The greater (Cort:Crt) ratios may be reflective of the stress
18/ADRENOCORTICALFUNCTION
813
600
2500
Mean
StudyA
Mean
338
StudyB
550
2000
83
1500
Meani
450
103
1000+
+
400
(CortCrt）u
(Cort:Crt)u
300
50
200
Mean
Mean
Et
40
100
16
30
30
20
20
10-
10-
Hyperadreno-
Nonadrenal
Nonadrenal
Hyperadreno-
Nonadrenal
corticism
disorders;
dlsorders,
cortlclsm
PU/PD dIsorders
(n=25）
hiyperadreno-
hyperadreno-
(n=40)
(ez=u)
corticsm
corticism
pepedsns
not suspected
(n=21)
(z=u)
Fig.18.2.(Cort:Crt),ratios in two studies.
·In study A, the (Cort:Crt), ratios from three groups of dogs were compared to a group of healthy dogs
(background grey region; mean = 13 x 10°, n = 31). Of 25 dogs with hyperadrenocorticism (21 PDH
and 4 FAN), 23 had increased (Cort: Crt) ratios. Of 21 dogs with nonadrenal disorders (renal insuff-
ciency, liver disease, pyelonephritis, hypothyroidism, bronchitis, and diabetes insipidus) but in which
hyperadrenocorticism was suspected, only one had an increased (Cort: Crt), ratio. However in 28 dogs
with moderate to severe nonadrenal disorders (gastrointestinal,renal,lower urinary tract, liver,neurologic,
immunemedatd,cardiac,raumati,ndinctiousdiseases),22had inreasd Cort:rtrat
· In study B, the (Cort:Crt)。 ratios from dogs with hyperadrenocorticism (36 with PDH and 4 with FAN)
and other polyuria/polydipsia disorders (diabetes insipidus,hypercalcemic disorders, liver disease,
pyometra, and diabetes mellius) were compared to the (Cort:Crt), ratios found in healthy dogs (back-
ground grey region；mean = 6 × 10°, n = 20).All 40 dogs with hyperadrenocorticism had an increased
(Cort:Crt) ratio but so did 18 of the 23 polyuria/polydipsia (PU/PD) dogs that did not have
hyperadrenocorticism.27
associatedwith thehyperthyroid state and should not be consideredreflectiveof
pathologic hyperadrenocorticism.
ADRENOCORTICOTROPICHORMONE(ACTH)CONCENTRATION
I
Dogs and cats: Measuring [ACTH] can be very helpful in differentiating PDH from FAN,
and primary hypoadrenocorticism from secondary hypoadrenocorticism (Fig. 18.3).
A.An [ACTH] is expected to be WRI or increased in animals with PDH, primary
hypoadrenocorticism,perhaps with ectopic productionof ACTH,and perhaps after
stressful stimuliDogs with primary hypoadrenocorticism may also have an exaggerated
increase in [ACTH] after an injection of corticotropin-releasing hormone.3
B.An [ACTH] is expected to be decreased in animals with FAN, secondary hypoadreno-
corticism,after dexamethasone injectionsand while they are being given therapeutic
doses of glucocorticoid steroids (e.g.,prednisone or prednisolone).Dogs with secondary
hypoadrenocorticism have an inadequate increase in[ACTH] after an injection of
CRH.30
814
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Dogs
Cats
32140
32140
28
120
28
24
120
100
20
100
08
16
16
08
60
12
60
8
40
8
40
4
20-
20
pmol/Lpg/mL
pmolLpg/m
Pituitary-
Functional
Primary
Secondary
Pituitary-
Functional
Primary
dependent adrenocortical hypoadreno- hypoadreno-
dependent adrenocortical hypoadreno-
hyperadreno-neoplasia
corticism
corticism
hyperadreno-
neoplasia
corticism
m
corticism
Fig.18.3.ACTH concentrations in adrenocortical disorders of dogs and cats.
·Dogs with PDH and primary hypoadrenocorticism have ACTH concentrations WRI or increased,
whereas dogswith FAN and secondary hypoadrenocorticism have ACTH concentrations below reference
intervals. The background grey region represents the canine reference interval. Data for the graph were
extracted from published concentrations.3a66
· Cats with PDH and primary hypoadrenocorticism have increased ACTH concentrations, whereas cats
with FAN have decreased ACTH concentrations.The background grey region represents the feline
reference interval. Data for the graph were extracted from published concentrations6
Note: The arrows above the solid bars indicate that concentrations may be much greater than the values
shown in the y-axes.
II.
Horses
A.Plasma [ACTH] > 50 pg/mL strongly support the presence of pituitary gland adenoma
or hyperplasiaFor ponies, an[ACTH] >27pg/mL is supportive.Values and diagnos-
tic decision thresholds may vary among assays and laboratories. In another study using
chemiluminescent enzyme immunoassay,ACTH concentrations in five healthy horses
were 13.4 ± 2.2 pg/mL, whereas a PPID horse with clinical hyperadrenocorticism had
an[ACTH] of155pg/mL.3
B.Theforegoing data must be interpreted with caution because of the seasonal variation
in [ACTH] in horses (and ponies). Plasma ACTH concentrations were significantly
greater in September than in January or May in horses and ponies. The seasonal
variation was also found in the dexamethasone suppression test results (see Suppression
and Stimulation Tests sect.III.A). The reason for the seasonal differences is unknown.
Also,it is unknown whether differences exist during other months.
III.
Clinical use of [ACTH] is hampered by instability of ACTH and expensive dry-ice
shipments.
PLASMACORTISOLTOACTHRATIO
Because of the negative feedback in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal hormonal system
decreased production of cortisol by adrenal glandsis expected toresult in a highplasma
18/ADRENOCORTICALFUNCTION
815
[ACTH] （thus low cortisol to ACTH ratio). Conversely,increased production of cortisol by
an adrenal neoplasm is expected to result in a low plasma[ACTH](thus a high cortisol to
ACTH ratio). These relationships may be used to interpret individual hormone concentra
tions (ie., expect a high [cortisol] with a high [ACTH] in PDH),but published attempts
to use the ratios in diagnostic decisions have been limited.
II.
Onepublishedstudyof 22dogswithprimaryhypoadrenocorticismreportedthat
cortisol to ACTH ratios in those dogs (range,0.003-0.17 nmol/pmol) (or 3-170
as unitlessratios) were consistently lower than the ratios in 60healthy dogs
(0.79-175 nmol/pmol) (or 790175,000 as unitless ratios).3 The authors reported
the ratios in truncated form (e.g., 0.003-0.17). Examples of the calculations are presented
in Eq. 18.2.
Using molar concentrations:
(18.2a.)
48nmol cortisol/L7.4 nmol cortisol
_7,400pmol cortisol
Cortisol:ACTH Ratio=
7.4x10²
6.5pmolACTH/L
pmol ACTH
pmol ACTH
Ratio reported in the article for these data would have been 7.4.
Using weight/volume concentrations:
(18.2b.)
17μg/Lcortisol/L_0.57μg cortisol_570,000pg cortisol
Cortisol:ACTH Ratio=
=570×103
30pgACTH/L
Pg ACTH
PgACTH
Ratio was not reported in the article for these units.
III.Because of the lack of agreement among some hormone assays, interpretative guidelines
may need to be developed for each set of cortisol and ACTH assays.The cortisol to ACTH
in differentiating different forms of hyperadrenocorticism. The special sample handling
required for ACTH samples and the associated expenses will limit the use of cortisol to
ACTHratios.
SUPPRESSIONANDSTIMULATIONTESTS
I.
Dogs34
A. Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test (LDDST): a screening test for PDH
and FAN
1.Procedure
a.A predexamethasone blood sample is collected and processed.
b.Dexamethasone is given at 0.01 mg/kg IV (some use IM)
c. Postdexamethasone samples are processed after collections at 4 h and 8 h (some
use 3 h and 8 h,46 h and 8 h, or just 8 h)
d.Predexamethasone and postdexamethasone plasma or serum samples are submit-
ted for measurement of [cortisol].
2.Expected results (Fig.18.4)
a.In healthy animals, dexamethasone is expected to reduce the secretion of CRH
and ACTH for several hours and thus decrease release of cortisol from the
adrenal glands.Because thehalf-life of cortisol is< 2 h,plasma[cortisol] is
LDDST
B
C
D
4h
44 %
100 %
samples
72%
8h
samples
100%
98%
HDDST
G
H
4h
30%
samples
100%
8h
31%
samples
Healthy
Pituitary-dependent
Functional
Nonadrenal
hyperadrenocorticism
Iadrenocorticali
disorders
Not suppressed
(n= 181)
neoplasia
(n=59)
Suppressed
(n=35)
Fig. 18.4. Responses for canine dexamethasone suppression tests.
Data for A and F are results expected for healthy dogs, based on common decision limits. Suppression was
defined as a postdexamethasone [cortisol]< 1.4 μg/dL and<50 % of predexamethasone concentration.
Data for D,G, and H were extracted from published results. In B and D, suppression was defined as
a postdexamethasone [corisol] <1.4 μg/dL. In C, suppression was defined as a postdexamethasone
[cortisol]50 % of the predexamethasone concentration.In G and H,suppression was defined as a
postdexamethasone[corisol]<1.4 μg/dL or<50 % of the predexamethasone[corisol].
Data for E were extracted from published results; comparative data for HDDST (I) were not found. In
the LDDST, suppression was defined as a postdexamethasone [oortisol] < 30 nmol/L (1.1 μg/dL), a
decision limit estimated from graphical data. Nonadrenal disorders included hepatic, pancreatic, urinary,
gastrointestinal, respiratory, and cardiac diseases and endocrine diorders other than hyperadrenocorticism
(e.g., diabetes mellitus, hyperparathyroidism, and insulinoma). Dogs selected for this group were not
suspected of having hyperadrenocorticism.
dogs with PDH had adequate cortisol suppression than when judged by the < 1.4 μg/dL criterion (B).
esp >
suppression by 8h.Using the50% criterion,58of102(57%)PDH dogs that had suppression at4h
had escaped suppression by 8h.
Using HDDST, nearly all dogs with FAN (H),but a minority of dogs with PDH (G),failed to have
adequate suppression at the 4 h and 8 h samplings.
If results from LDDST and HDDST are examined together, there was inadequate suppression of cortisol
 oe  e  Ne su s
PDH (B, C, and G; 24 %). A few dogs with PDH (14 %) and two dogs with FAN (6 %) had inadequate
H   uosns en q T   uddns ae p ( 1)
HD,high dose;and LD, low dose
816
18/ADRENOCORTICALFUNCTION
817
expected to be decreased dramatically at 4 h and 8 h (Fig.18.4A).Values are
usually inadequately suppressed at 8 h with both PDH and FAN.
(1)Most veterinarians interpret a postdexamethasone [cortisol]<1.4μg/dL
(<40 nmol/L) to indicate there was adequate suppression of cortisol
secretion.This decision threshold appears to have been calculated from
data collected from 22 healthy dogs: it represented the mean concentration
(0.5μg/dL) plus3 standard deviations (3x 0.3=0.9μg/dL) at
8 h.35.36
(2) Some authors propose that suppression is present if the postdexamethasone
[cortisol] in the 4h and 8h samples is<50 %of the predexamethasone
concentration. Such an interpretative guideline is consistent with the half
life of plasma cortisol.
b.If hyperadrenocorticism is caused by PDH or ectopic production of ACTH, then
a low dose of dexamethasone may ormaynot lead to suppressed release of
ACTH by neoplastic pituitary cellsand thus cortisol production from hyper-
plastic adrenal glands may or may not decrease (Fig. 18.4B and C).
(1)In some cases, the 4 h postdexamethasone [cortisol] is below the decision
threshold,but the 8h postdexamethasone [cortisol] is above the decision
threshold.In such cases,the ecaped suppression ishighlyindicativeof
PDH if the clinical signs support a hyperadrenocorticism diagnosis.
Nonadrenal disorders may also be associated with this pattern (Fig. 18.4E).
(2)Suppression is demonstrated in more PDH cases if the “<50 %”criterion
(Fig.18.4C) is used compared to the“<1.4 μg/dL”（<40 nmol/L) criterion
(Fig.18.4B).
c. If hyperadrenocorticism is caused by FAN, then low-dose dexamethasone is not
expected to decrease the secretion of cortisol (Fig.18.4D).Even though suppres
testing, because of variations in cortisol secretion by neoplastic cells,binding to
proteins, or plasma clearance. The LDDST has high diagnostic sensitivity for
FAN.
d.Suppression may not be adequate in dogs with nonadrenal illness (Fig. 18.4E).
e.In two dogs receiving phenobarbital therapy, cortisol concentrations were not
suppressed adequately,possibly because phenobarbital's effects on clearance of
synthetic steroids enhance dexamethasone's clearance rate. However, phenobarbi-
tal therapy did not affect results of the LDDST in five other dogs.37
fToo few cases of ectopic ACTH production have been reported to establish a
pattern,but there should be a lack of suppression of cortisol in these animals.
B.High-dose dexamethasone suppression test (HDDST) (Fig. 18.4): a test that may
differentiate PDH from FAN after hyperadrenocorticism is diagnosed
1.Procedure: the same as for the LDDST except that dexamethasone is given at
0.1 mg/kgIV (some useIM)
2.Expectedresults
a.In healthy animals, dexamethasone is expected to dramatically reduce plasma
[cortisol] at 4 h, and concentrations should remain decreased in the 8h samples
(Fig. 18.4F).
b. If hyperadrenocorticism is caused by PDH, then high-dose dexamethasone
usually causes suppression of ACTH release by neoplastic pituitary cells and thus
reduces cortisol production from hyperplastic adrenal glands(Fig.18.4G).
818
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
c.If hyperadrenocorticism is caused by FAN,then high-dose dexamethasone is not
expected to decrease the secretion of cortisol (Fig.18.4H).Even though suppres
sion criteria are not fulfilled,cortisol concentrations may fuctuate during the
testing,becauseofvariationsncortisol secretionbyeoplasticcellbinding
proteins, or plasma clearance.
d.If a HDDST is done in a dog with nonadrenal illness,then cortisol production is
expected to be decreased sufficiently to indicate a suppresson of ACTH
secretion.
e.Too few cases of ectopic ACTH production have been reported to establish a
partern,but there should be a lack of suppression of cortisol in these animals.
C.Interpretation of dexamethasone suppression tests
1.Expected patterns of LDDST and HDDST results for individual dogs
a.In healthy dogs,[cortisol] will be suppressed to < 1.4 μg/dL (<40 nmol/L) with
both tests (both 4 h and 8h samples).
b.If hyperadrenocorticism is caused by PDH, then[cortisol] is usually suppressed
to<1.4 μg/dL (<40 nmol/L) with the HDDST and often with the LDDST
also.
C.If hyperadrenocorticism is caused by FAN, then [cortisol] is expected to be
≥ 1.4 μg/dL (> 40 nmol/L) in nearly all postdexamethasone samples.
d.If hyperadrenocorticism is caused by ectopic production of ACTH, then [corti-
sol]is expected to be ≥ 1.4 μg/dL (>40 nmol/L) in nearly all postdexamethasone
samples.
.In dogs with nonadrenal illnesses,theremay ormay not be corisol suppression
with the LDDST. The[Cortisol] is expected to be< 1.4 μg/dL (<40 nmol/L)
with theHDDST.
2.Table 18.4 lists examples of cortisol concentrations from dexamethasone suppression
tests.
3.Interpretations for Table 18.4 were made by using Fig.18.4 as a guide. Best
interpretations are made when results are interpreted in context of historical or
physical findings.
D.Adrenocorticotropic hormone(ACTH) stimulation (response)test
1.DiffrentACTHproductsroutefadministration,nddoseshavebeenusedand
results of some have been directly compared.Results and interpretation are generally
similarbu smedifferneaecoiz
2.Procedure (may begin at any time of day)42
a.A sample for pre-ACTH [cortisol] is collected.
b.ACTH is administered to stimulate cortisol production.
(1)Synthetic ACTH （cosyntropin [Cortrosyn]) is usually given IV at 5 μg/kg or
IM at 0.25mg/dog
(2)Porcine ACTH gel (Cortigel-40) or bovine ACTH gel (Acthar) is usually
given at 2.2 U/kg IM.
(3)Other ACTH products (e.g., Synacthen) and dosing regimens are also used.
Laboratories should be consulted for information about local protocols and
preferences.
c.A post-ACTH sample is collected 1 h later if cosyntropin is given (2 h if porcine
or bovine ACTH is used) to assess for a cortisol response.
3.Expected results (Fig.18.5) (Specific patient results should be interpreted by using
reference intervals and interpretation guidelines provided with results.)
Table 18.4.Example results of dexamethasone suppression tests in dogs
LDDST
HDDST
Cortisol(μg/dL)
Cortisol(μg/dL)
Predex.b
4 h postdex.b
8h postdex.
Predex.
4 h postdex.
8h postdex.
Healthy dogs
0.5-6.0
<1.4
<1.4
0.5-6.0
<1.4
<1.4
Dog 1°
4.5
3.0
3.5
3.5
3.3
2.9
Dog 2d
7.0
1.0
3.8
6.2
0.8
0.6
Dog 3e
5.0
0.9
0.6
5.5
0.5
0.3
Dog 4f
6.5
3.2
2.8
4.5
0.8
0.4
Dog 52
0.2
0.1
0.1
Conversion to SI units: μg/dL × 27.6 = nmol/L (round to nearest 10)
Predex,predexamethasone[ortisol]and postdex,postdexamethasone[cortisol]
Dog 1 had either PDH or FAN. In the LDDST,inadequate suppression indicates PDH,FAN, or
nonadrenal disorders. In the HDDST, inadequate suppression is more likely in FAN but can be found with
PDH. Adequate suppression is expected in nonadrenal disorders.
dDog 2had adrenal hyperplasia caused by PDH or a hyperresponsive adrenal gland because of a
disorders. In the HDDST, suppression can be found with PDH and is expected with nonadrenal disorders
but is not consistent with FAN.
Dog 3was healthy or hadPDHora nonadrenal disorder.In the LDDST,suppresson can be found
with health, PDH, and nonadrenal disorders. In the HDDST, suppression can be found with health, PDH,
and nonadrenal disorders. Suppression is not expected with FAN.
Dog 4 had adrenal hyperplasia caused by PDH or a nonadrenal disorder. In the LDDST, failure to
HDDST, suppression can be found with PDH and is expected with nonadrenal disorders. Suppression is
not consistent with FAN.
Dog 5 had a hypoadrenal state. In the LDDST, the predexamethasone hypocortisolemia indicates a
hypoadrenal state that could be primary, secondary,or iatrogenic.The HDDST is not needed in such cases.
100%
100%
51%
Healthy
Hypoadreno-
latrogenic
Pituitary-dependent
Functional
Nonadrenal
corticism
hyperadreno-
hyperadreno-
adrenocortical
disorders
(n=225)
corticism
corticism
neoplasia
(6S=u)
Exaggerated response
(n=28)
(n=62)
(n=41)
Inadequate response
Respanse of healthy dogs
Fig.18.5.Responses from canine ACTH stimulation tests.
·Criteria used to determine appropriate, inadequate, or exaggerated responses to ACTH stimulation varied
among publications.For each set of extracted data, the authors’ criteria were used.
In all hypoadrenocorticism cases, there were inadequate responses to ACTH stimulation.The 225 cases
included 220 cases of primaryidiopathic hypoadrenocorticism and five cases of secondary
hypoadrenocorticism.69
In all casesofiatrogenichyperadrenocorticismadrenocortical atrophyresulted ininadequateresponses to
ACTH stimulation.
·In 84 % of PDH cases and in 51 % of FAN cases, there were exaggerated responses to ACTH
stimulation.35.60.671-74
·In 14%of dogs with nonadrenal illnesses,there were exaggerated responses toACTH stimulation.
819
820
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
a.Healthy dogs
(1)ACTH should stimulate the production and release of cortisol from the
adrenal cortices.
(2)Expected pre-ACTH and post-ACTH concentrations of cortisol are different
in published reports and reference laboratories.Usually, the post-ACTH
[cortisol] is<17μg/dL(470 nmol/L)
b.Hypoadrenocorticism
(1)Dogs with primary, secondary,or iatrogenic adrenocortical hypoplasia or
atrophy are expected to have fewer or no responsive cells, and thus the post
ACTH [cortisol] increases inadequarely or not at all.
(2)Pre-ACTH and post-ACTH cortisol concentrations<1.0μg/dL
(<30 nmol/L) indicate adrenocortical atrophy, destruction, or hypoplasia
c.Hyperadrenocorticism
(1)From 60% to 80%of dogs with PDH and about 50 %ofdogs withFAN
have exaggerated responses to ACTH that reflect either bilateral adrenocorti-
cal hyperplasia or responsive neoplastic cells.It isnot clear why exaggerated
responses do not occur in all dogs with hyperplastic glands. Some of the
adrenocortical neoplasms may not respond because the neoplastic cells have
defective receptors or other signaling pathways.Dogs with ectopic produc
tion of ACTH would be expected to have an exaggerated cortisol increase
because of the presence of bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia. Dogs with
iatrogenichyperadrenocorticism from chronic glucocorticoid administration
have little orno response.
(2)The decision threshold that represents an exaggerated response varies among
studies and usually is near 18-22μg/dL (500-610 nmol/L).
d.Nonadrenal illnesses
(1)Some dogs with disorders other than PDH or FAN may have exaggerated
responses to ACTH.
(2）
Typically, these animals are thought to have stress-induced
hypercortisolemia.
e.After op'DDD (mitotane [Lysodren]) treatment
(1)op'DDD is an adrenocorticolytic compound that is used to treat PDH
and FAN. The compound damages the zona fasciculata and the zona
reticularis.
(2)ACTH stimulation tests can be used to monitor destruction of adrenocorti
cal tissue. Typically, the goal of op'DDD treatment is to get the post-ACTH
[cortisol] to be<5μg/dL (<140 nmol/L) but not cause sufficient destruc
tion to create a hypoadrenocortical state.
f.After trilostane (Vetoryl or Modrenal) treatment
(1)Trilostane,which is an alternative to op'DDD for treatment of PDH,
reduces steroid synthesis by inhibiting 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and
thus reduces the synthesis of cortisol, aldosterone, and other steroid hor-
mones. Trilostane reduces [cortisol] in dogs with PDH and also reduces
[aldosterone],but to a lesser degree.s
(2)ACTH stimulation tests can be used to monitor the effectiveness of trilo
18/ADRENOCORTICALFUNCTION
821
increased. If the dog has continuing clinical signs suggestive of hypoadreno
corticism and the post-ACTH[cortisol] is<0.8μg/dL （< 20 nmol/L), then
treatment is discontinued.43
II.
Cats
A. Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test (LDDST): not recommended
1.Procedure: Basically the same procedure as for the canine LDDST except dexameth
asone is given at either 0.01 or 0.015 mg/kg IV.Some people refer to use of a
0.1mg/kgIV dose asa LDDST in cats,but it is considered aHDDST in this text.
2.Expected resulrs” (Specific patient results should be interpreted by using reference
intervals and interpretation guidelines provided with results.)
a.In healthy cats, the 4 h and 8 h cortisol concentrations are usually < 1.0 μg/dL
(<30nmol/L),but they are not suppressed this low in about 15-20% of healthy
cats. Cortisol suppression may also fail to occur in cats with nonadrenal illness.
Therefore, the LDDST has poorer diagnostic specificity than the HDDST (for
recommended.A postdexamethasone [cortisol]of 1.0-1.4 μg/dL (3040 nmol/L)
is considered a borderline result.
b.In cats with hyperadrenocorticism,the 4 h and 8 h cortisol concentrations are
expected to be > 1.5 μg/dL (>40 nmol/L).
B.High-dose dexamethasone suppression test (HDDST)
1.Procedure
a.The initial protocol is the same as with the canine HDDST, but 1 mg/kg
dexamethasone is also used. Some people refer to a 0.l mg/kg dose as a low dose
in cats and consider 1 mg/kg a high dose. Others consider the 1 mg/kg an ultra
high dose.
b.Cats may escape the suppressive effects of dexamethasone faster than dogs, so
suppressionmaybe seenonlyif samples arecollectedat2h4h,and6haft
dexamethasone.
2.Expected results for 0.1mg/kg dosage(Specifc patient results should be interpreted
by using reference intervals and interpretation guidelines provided with results.)
a.In almost all healthy cats, the 4 h and 8h cortisol concentrations are
<1.0 μg/dL(<30 nmol/L).A postdexamethasone [cortisol] of 1.0-1.4 μg/dL
（30-40nmol/L) is considered a borderline result
b. In abour 90 % of cats with hyperadrenocorticism, the 4 h and 8 h cortisol
concentrations were>1.5μg/dL(>40 nmol/L).
C.Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)stimulation(response) test
1.Procedure (may begin at any time of day)
a.A sample for pre-ACTH [cortisol] is collected
b.Synthetic ACTH (Cortrosyn）is given IV at 5μg/kg or 0.125 mg/cat.Porcine
ACTH gel (Cortigel-40)may be used at 2.2 U/kg IM.
c.Post-ACTH samples are collected at 30 min and 60 min or just at 1 h.
2.Expectedresults42
a.Specific patient results should be interpreted by using reference intervals and
interpretation guidelines provided with results.
b.A healthy cat should have a pre-ACTH [cortisol] of 1.0-6.0 μg/dL
(30-170nmol/L) and a post-ACTH[cortisol]<13.0μg/dL（<360nmol/L)
822
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
c.Cats with hyperadrenocorticism may have a pre-ACTH [cortisol] WRI or
increased, and a 30 min or 60 min post-ACTH [cortisol] > 16 μg/dL
(>440 nmol/L).However, only about 40-50 % of cats with hyperadrenocorti-
III. Horses
A.Dexamethasone suppression test
1.Overnight method214
a.A sample for predexamethasone [cortisol] is collected between 4 p.m. and
6 p.m.
b.Dexamethasone is given at 40 μg/kg (about 2 mg/100 Ib) IM.
c.Postdexamethasone samples are collected at noon the next day (about 19 h after
dexamethasone),or two samples are collected at 15 h and 19 h.
d.Expected results4
(1)Specific patient results should be interpreted by using reference intervals and
interpretation guidelines provided with results.
(2）
Healthy horses:adequate suppression resulting in a postdexamethasone
[cortisol]<1.0μg/dL（<30nmol/L)
(3)Hyperadrenocorticism caused by PPID: inadequate suppression resulting in
apostdexamethasone[cortisol]>1.0μg/dL(>30 nmol/L)
2.Cortisol concentrations during a 24 h period after dexamethasone (40 μg/kg)
a.In34 healthy horses,cortisol concentrations were decreased 8-24h after
dexamethasone.All had concentrations < 1.0 μg/dL at 20-24 h after
dexamethasone.
b. In 52 horses with PPID, the maximal suppression was seen 812 h after dexa
methasone.All had cortisol concentrations> 1.0 μg/dL at 20-24 h after
dexamethasone.
3.Seasonal variation: Concurrent with the seasonal variation in [ACTH], results of the
those in September.²In a study of 10 healthy horses and 29 ponies,there wasno
seasonal difference in the predexamethasone [cortisol] (all < 1.0 μg/dL), but the
postdexamethasone cortisol concentrations were >1.0 μg/dL in 26%of the
September samples (some > 2.0 μg/dL). The increased ACTH concentrations and
the results of the dexamethasone suppression tests in September samples suggest that
a seasonal hyperadrenocortical state is present, but the reason for this variation is
unknown.
B.Adrenocorticotropichormone (ACTH) stimulation(response) test
1.Multiple ACTH compounds have been used for stimulation tests,but nearly all
studies included a presample and a 2 h post-ACTH sample.
2.Results expected for healthy and PDH horses if ACTH gel is given (1 U/kg
IM)
a.In healthy horses, the post-ACTH [cortisol] is expected to be 2-3 times the
presample's concentration.²However, four healthy horses had post-ACTH
cortisol concentrations that ranged from 3.7 to 4.7 times the pre-ACTH
concentrations.
b.In most,but not all,PDH horses, the post-ACTH [cortisol] is more than three
times the pre-ACTH sample concentration.9.4s
18/ADRENOCORTICALFUNCTION
823
c.Because of overlapping findings for healthy horses and horses with PDH, the
ACTH gel stimulation test is not recommended as a diagnostic test for equine
PDH."
3.Results expected for healthy and PDH horses if ACTH (cosyntropin) is given
(1mg IV)
a.In healthy horses, the post-ACTH [cortisol] is expected to be<1.8 times the
presample's [cortisol].46
b.In PDH horses, the post-ACTH [cortisol] is expected to be > 1.8 times the
presample's [cortisol].
COMBINEDDEXAMETHASONESUPPRESSION-ADRENOCORTICOTROPIC
HORMONE (ACTH)STIMULATION (RESPONSE)TEST
The major advantage of the combined test is that it combines adrenal assessment into one
diagnostic procedure, and thus only one set of samples is submirtted to a reference laboratory. The
major disadvantage in dogs is that it does not have the same diagnostic power as the combination
ofLDDST and HDDST done individually.
I.
Canine method36
A.A samplefor a basal[cortisol]is collected,and then dexamethasone is administered
(0.1mg/kg IV).A 2-4 h postdexamethasone sample is collected,and then the ACTH
stimulation test is done as described in Suppression andStimulationTests, sect.I.D.All
samples are submitted for measurement of [cortisol].
B.The dexamethasone dose is the same as that used in the HDDST, but the postdexa
methasone sample occurs only at 2 h and thus does not assess the possible escape in the
8 h sample of the HDDST.
C.An exaggerated ACTH response would support hyperadrenocorticism but does not
reliably differentiate PDH and FAN.
II.
Feline method7
A.A sample for a basal [cortisol] is collected, and then dexamethasone is administered
(0.1 mg/kg IV). A 2-4 h postdexamethasone sample is collected, and then the ACTH
All samples are submirtted for measurement of[cortisol].
B.In two cases of feline PDH,there was inadequate suppression after dexamethasone and
exaggeratedresponses toACTH.4748
C.In one study involving cats with nonadrenal illnesses (17 diabetic cats and 18
nondiabetic cats）and19healthy cats,results werevery similar among groups9
III. Equine method5o
A. A sample for a basal [cortisol] is collected, and then dexamethasone is administered
(10 mg IM at 9 a.m.). A 3 h postdexamethasone sample is collected, and then cosyntro-
pin is administered IV (1 mg = 100 IU). Then, a 2 h post-ACTH sample is collected.
All samples are submitted for measurement of[cortisol].
B.There has been limited use of the procedure in horses. In one study, the
combined test did not reliably differentiate six healthyhorsesfrom sixhorseswith
PDH.
CourseSmar
824
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
ALDOSTERONECONCENTRATION
I.
An [aldosterone] in clinical hypoadrenocorticism should be decreased except in rare atypical
cases. In primary and secondary hyperaldosteronism, aldosterone concentrations are
increased. Because ACTH stimulates the release of cortisol and aldosterone,aldosterone
concentrations before and after ACTH administration may reflect adrenal function.
However,relatively few published dara support these concepts.
II.
Primary hyperaldosteronism
A.Dogs
1.Three cases of primary hyperaldosteronism caused by adrenal neoplasms were
described. All three dogs were presented because of episodic weakness, and each
hadhypokalemia and an[aldosterone]>3000 pmol/L（reference interval not
provided with case information; see pre-ACTH aldosterone concentrations in
healthy dogs in Table 18.5).
2.Another case was described in which the presenting problem was polyuria. Other
findings were mild hypokalemia, marked hypophosphatemia, alkalemia, decreased
plasma renin activity, and increased plasma [aldosterone] (740 and 840 pmol/L in
[wo samples)compared to30-210 pmol/L in 12 healthy dogs).Plasma cortisol
concentrations during a LDDST were within reference intervals, measurement of
other precursor steroid concentrations was not mentioned.
B.Cats
1. Cases of primary hyperaldosteronism caused by adrenal neoplasms have been
described.52-54 Problems in each cat included weakness and hypokalemia.Each cat
had increased plasma [aldosterone]: > 5000 pmol/L with a reference interval of 540
1080pmol/L,2.53or 877-14,653pmol/Lwith a reference interval of
150-430pmol/L.
2.Other cases of primary hyperaldosteronism were diagnosed based on high-normal to
increased [aldosterone] concurrent with hypokalemia and increased aldosterone to
plasma renin activity ratios. The cats were not hypernatremic, and some developed
renal lesions consistent with persistent hypertension.
3.Another cat had an adrenocortical carcinoma that produced excessive amounts of
aldosterone and progesterone. The resulting clinical signs were due to the effects of
progesterone (i.e., diabetes mellitus) more than to aldosterone effects.6
III.
Aldosterone concentrations in other canine disorders
A.There is not a clear separation of pre-ACTH aldosterone concentrations between
healthy dogs and dogs with hypoadrenocorticism. However, aldosterone concentrations
in the post-ACTH sampleswere lower in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism than in
clinically healthy dogs (Table 18.5).
B.Dogs with PDH had aldosterone concentrations similar to those of healthy dogs in
both pre-ACTH and post-ACTH samples (Table 18.5).
C.Some dogs with nonadrenal disorders had a very high [aldosterone]. The high concen-
trations are probably related to hypovolemia or decreased effective blood volume
(Table18.5)
D. Results of a study of 31 dogs with PDH, 5 dogs with FAN, and 12 healthy dogs:7
healthy dogs.The authors suggested that under chronic ACTH stimulation, some of
Table I8.5.Aldosterone concentrationsfrom ACTH stimulation testsin dogs
Aldosterone concentrations
Healthy dogs and dogs with adrenal
Healthy dogs and dogs with nonadrenal disorders
disorders (mean ± 2 sd) (pg/mL)
(rangc of obsarved values) (pg/mL)
Clinical state
n
Before ACTH
1 h afterACTH
BeforeACTH
1 hafter ACTH
2 h after ACTH
7
203±142
397±188
21
5-345
91-634
71-758
Hypoadr mocorticism
5
167±30
162±56
6
95-0
0-36
PDH
28
124±120
331±216
Iatrognic
9
126±118
213 ± 132
hyperadrenocortiism
Various nonadrenal disordersd
5
>1200
>1200
Diabetes mellitus and mitral
1
10
20
insufficiency
0.5U/kgIV
2.2U/kg IM
° A diagnosis of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism was based on finding educed cortisol concentrations in pre-ACTH and post-ACTH samples in dogs with
 Diagnoes included chylothotax (I), lymphocytic gastritis (1) glomerulonephritis and mitral insuficiency (I), acute renal filure (1), and acute renal filure
and diabetes mellitus (l). In the chylothorax and gastritis cases, the aldosterone oonoentrations in 2 h post-ACTH samples were also > 1200 pg/mL.
825
826
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
the aldosterone-secreting cells converted to cortisol-secreting cells as has been
described in experimental sheep and rat studies.
2.Aldosterone concentrations were significantly greater in the FAN dogs than in the
nase) concentrations via changes in blood volume and electrolyte concentrations.
E.Aldosterone to renin ratio
1. Plasma aldosterone concentrations are related to renin concentrations via changes in
blood volume or electrolyte concentrations.
a.Aldosterone production is stimulated by angiotensin Il, which is produced by the
renal release of renin in response to renal hypotension or decreased delivery of
sodium to the distal tubules.
b. Renal responses to aldosterone result in retention of Na* and Cl, which
promotes plasma volume expansion and thus decreased stimulation of the
renin-angiotensin system.
C.Aldosterone concentrations are expected to be greater in people on a sodium-
restricted diet (i.e., aldosterone is needed to retain Nat) than in people who are
not on a sodium-restricted diet. Similar responses would be expected in domestic
mammals.
d.Interpretation of an increased plasma [aldosterone] should include a consider-
ation of whether the increase is appropriate （e.g.,stimulated release because of
decreased effectiveblood volume) orinappropriate(ie.,uncontrolled release from
adrenal neoplasia)
2. In a study of 22 dogs with primary hypoadrenocorticism, aldosterone to renin ratios
were consistently lower (0.002-0.08 pmol/fmol/s[or 2-80/s]) than the ratios in 60
healthy dogs (0.091.6 pmol/fmol/s [or 90-1600/s])33 (note: the authors reported
the ratios without units). Units of the ratios are complex because the authors
measured renin activity (rather than concentration) via the generation of angiotensin
I;the ratio represents the amount ofaldosterone （pmol)related to renin activity
(fmol of angiotensin I produced per second).
3.Conceptually, the aldosterone to renin ratio should improve the interpretation of a
plasma [aldosterone].However, ir probably will have limited use in clinical medicine
many other hormone assays,differences in assay methods may also limit the
usefulness of the ratio because interpretation guidelines may not apply from one set
of assays to another.
OTHERASSESSMENTSOFADRENOCORTICALFUNCTION
Thorn test and modified Thorn test5s.59
A.Instead of directly measuring [cortisol] after an ACTH injection, changes in [cortisol]
can be indirectly and roughly assessed via changes in blood [eosinophil] (Thorn test) or
changes in neutrophil to lymphocyte ratios (modified Thorn test). An [eosinophil] is
measured directly, whereas the neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio is calculated from
leukocyte differential counts determined on blood films.
1.In a healthy dog,blood [eosinophil] is expected to decrease and the neutrophil to
lymphocyte ratio is expected to increase if blood [cortisol] increases.
2.Failure to see a decrease in [eosinophil] or failure to see an increased neutrophil to
lymphocyteratioafter administration ofACTHsuggests thepresenceofhypoplastic
or atrophied adrenal glands.
18/ADRENOCORTICALFUNCTION
827
B.Increased ease of obtaining serum or plasma cortisol concentrations and their superior
diagnostic value have made the Thorn test and modified Thorn test nearly obsolete.
However, the relationship between blood [cortisol] and blood leukocyte concentrations
should be remembered when interpreting routine complete blood count results.
II.
Concentrations ofother steroid hormones
A.Adrenal glands produce other steroid hormones, including intermediates in the
synthetic pathways.
1.Increased progesterone concentrations have been reported in dogs and a cat with
FAN. 15.60
2. In a study of 53 dogs with confirmed hyperadrenocorticism (including PDH and
ACTH stimulation test,and79%had an exaggerated increase in[cortisol].61
3.Another study included 127 dogs with suspected hyperadrenocorticism.After
ACTH stimulation, 59 (46 %) had an exaggerated increase in [cortisol]. Of those
59, 42 (71 %) had an exaggerated increase in [17-hydroxyprogesterone]. Also, an
exaggerated increase in [17-hydroxyprogesterone] was found in 31 % of dogs that
had neoplasms not related to pituitary or adrenal glands.These findings emphasize
that adrenocortical hyperplasia may occur secondarily to nonadrenal diseases.
B.Measurement of other steroid hormone concentrations may help detect adrenal
disorders,especiallyif the synthetic pathwaysare defective.Some laboratories measure
concentrations of the following steroid hormones in pre-ACTH and post-ACTH
samples: cortisol, dihydroepiandrostenedione, estradiol, androstenedione, 17
hydroxyprogesterone, progesterone, and testosterone.In some cases, steroid hormones
other than cortisol are increased.63
References
1.Chastain CB, Ganjam VK. 1986. Clinical Endecrinolegy of Companion Anima.Philadelphia: Lea &c Febiger.
pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 204:627 -632.
3.Lundberg GD, Iverson C, Radulescu G. 1986. Now read this: The SI units are here. J Am Med Assoc
255:2329-2339.
4. Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ, Young DW. 1998. Effect of storage conditions on cortisol, total thyroxine, and free
thyroxine concentrations in serum and plasma of dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:15641568.
5.Philip ELI, Marotta SF.1971. Cellular variation in the uptake and metabolism of cortisol by canine erythrocytes.
Acta Endocrinol 68:771-778.
6. Olson PN, Bowen RA, Husted PW, Nett TM. 1981. Effects of storage on concentation of hydrocortisone (cortisol)
in canine serum and plasma. Am J Vet Res 42:1618-1620.
7.Feldman EC, Nelson RW.1996. Canine and Feline Endecrinology and Reproduction, 2nd edition. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders.
measured in canine plasma, using a commercially available radioimmunoassay kit. Am J Vet Res 51:19411947.
9. Couetil L, Paradis MR, Knoll J. 1996. Plasma adrenocorticotropin concentration in healthy horses and in horses with
clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism. J Vet Intern Med 10:16.
10. Feldman EC, Nelson RW. 1994. Comparative aspects of Cushing’s syndrome in dogs and cats. Endocrinol Metabol
Clin North Am 23:671-691.
11. Duesberg C, Peterson ME. 1997. Adrenal disorders in cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27:321-347.
12. Meij BP, van der Vlugt-Meijer RH, van den Ingh TSGAM, Rijnberk A. 2004. Somatotroph and corticotroph
pituitary adenoma (double adenoma) in a cat with diabetes mellitus and hyperadrenocorticism. J Comp Pathol
130:209-215
18:237-270.
828
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
14. Messer NT, IV. 1999. How to diagnose equine pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction. In: Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Convention of the American Association of Equine Practitioners, Albuquerque, NM, 145147.
15. Boord M, Griffn C. 1999. Progesterone secreting adrenal mass in a cat with clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 214:666-669.
16. Galac S, Kooistra HS, Voorhout G, van den Ingh TSGAM, Mol JA, van den Berg G, Meij BP. 2005. Hyperadreno
corticism in a dog due to ectopic secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone. Domest Anim Endocrinol 28:338348.
17. Yamini B, VanDenBrink PL, Refsal KR 1997. Ovarian steroid cell tumor resembling luteoma asociated with
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease) in a dog. Vet Pathol 34:57-60.
18.Peterson ME, Greco DS, Orth DN. 1989. Primary hypoadrenocorticism in ten cats. J Vet Intern Med 3:55-58.
19. Couetil LL, Hoffman AM. 1998. Adrenal insuffciency in a neonatal foal. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:15941596.
20. Dunn KJ, Herrtage ME. 1998. Hypocortisolaemia in a Labrador retriever. J Small Anim Praet 39:9093.
21. Lifton SJ, King LG, Zerbe CA. 1996. Glucocorticoid defcient hypoadrenocorticism in dogs: 18 cases (1986-1995).
JAm Vet Med Assoc 209:20762081.
22. Kooistra HS, Rijnberk A, van den Ingh TSGAM. 1995. Polyglandular defidiency syndrome in a boxer dog Thyroid
hormone and glucocorticoid deficiency.Vet Q 17:59-63.
23. Feldman EC, Bruyette DS, Nelson RW, Farver TB. 1990. Plasma cortisol response to ketoconazole administration in
dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Asoc 157:71-78.
24.Willard MD, Nachreiner R, MeDonald R, Roudebush P. 1986. Ketoconazole-induced changes in selected canine
hormone concentrations.Am J Vet Res 47:25042509.
25.Wenger M, Sieber-Ruckstuhl NS, Maller C, Reusch CE. 2004. Effeet of trilostane on serum concentrations of
aldosterone, cortisol, and potassium in dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Am J Vet Res
65:1245-1250.
26. Smiley LE, Peterson ME. 1993. Evaluation of a urine cortisol:creatinine ratio as a screening test for hyperadrenocor
ticism in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 7:163-168.
27.Feldman EC, Mack RE. 1992. Urine cortisol:creatinine ratio as a screening test for hyperadrenocorticism in dogs.
JAm Vet Med Assoc200:1637-1641.
28.Galac S, Kooistra HS,Teske E, Rijnberk A. 1997. Urinary corticoid/creatinine ratios in the differentiation between
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and hyperadrenocorticism due to adrenocortical tumour in the dog. Vet Q
19:17-20
29. de Lange MS, Galac S, Trip MR, Kooistra HS. 2004. High urinary corticoid/creatinine ratios in cats with hyperthy
roidism.JVetIntern Med 18:152-155
30.Peterson MEKintzer PP,Kass PH. 1996. Pretreatment clinical and laboratory findings in dogs with hypoadrenocor
ticism: 225 cases (1979-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:85-91.
31. Sgorbini M, Panzani D, Maccheroni M, Corazza M. 2004. Equine Cushing-like syndrome: Diagnosis and therapy in
two cases. Vet Res Commun 28(Suppl 1):377-380.
32. Donaldson MT, MeDonnell SM, Schanbacher BJ, Lamb SV, MeFarlane D, Beech J. 2005. Variation in plasma
adrenocorticotropic hormone concentration and dexamethasone suppression test results with season, age, and sex in
healthy ponies and horses. J Vet Intern Med 19:217222.
33.Javadi S, Galac S,Boer P,Robben JH,Teske E,Kooistra HS.2006.Aldosterone-to-renin and cortisol-to-
adrenocorticotropic hormone ratios in healthy dogs and dogs with primary hypoadrenocorticism. J Vet Intern Med
20:556-561.
Medicine: Diseases of tbe Dog and Cat, 5th edition, 14601488. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
35.Feldman EC. 1983. Comparison of ACTH response and dexamethasone suppression as screening tests in canine
hyperadrenocorticism.J AmVet Med Assoc 182:506-510
36.Fldman EC.1985.Evaluation ofacombined deamethasone suppresion/ACTH stimulation test in dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:4953.
37. Chauvet AE, Feldman EC, Kass PH. 1995. Efects of phenobarbital administration on results of serum biochemical
analyses and adrenocortical function tests in epileptic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1305-1307.
38. Kerl ME, Peterson ME, Wallace MS, Melian C, Kemppainen RJ. 1999. Evaluation of a low-dose synthetic
adrenocorticotropic hormone stirmulation test in clinically normal dogs and dogs with naturally developing
hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1497-1501.
39. Watson ADJ, Church DB, Emslie DR, Foster SF. 1998. Plasma cortisol responses to three corticotrophic preparations
in normal dogs. Aust Vet J 76:255-257.
40. Frank LA, Oliver JW. 1998. Comparison of serum cortisol concentrations in dinically normal dogs after administra
tion of freshly reconstituted versus reconstituted and stored frozen cosyntropin. J Aum Vet Med Assoc
212:1569-1571.
18/ADRENOCORTICALFUNCTION
829
41. Kemppainen RJ, Behrend EN, Busch KA. 2005. Use of compounded adrenocorticotropic horrmone (ACTH) for
adrenal function testing in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 4l:368-372
42. Feldman EC, Nelson RW. 1996. Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome). In: Canine and Feline Endorimolog
and Reproduetion, 2nd edition, 187265. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
43.Neiger R,Ramsey I, OConnor J, Hurley KJ,Mooney CT. 2002.Trilostane treatment of 78 dogs with pituitary-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Rec 150:799-804.
44. Myers NC II, Bruyette DS. 1994. Feline adrenocortical diseases: Part I. Hyperadrenocorticism. Semin Vet Med Surg
(Small Anim) 9:137-143.
45. Hillyer MH, Taylor FGR, Mair TS, Murphy D, Watson TDG, Love S. 1992. Diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in
the horse.Equine Vet Educ 4:131-134.
46.Eiler H, Goble D, Oliver J. 1979. Adrenal gland function in the horse Effcts of cosyntropin (synthetic) and
corticotropin (narural) stimulation. Am J Vet Res 40:724726.
47. Zerbe CA, Nachreiner RF,Dunstan RW,Dalley JB. 1987. Hyperadrenocorticism in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
190:559-563.
48. Peterson ME, Steele P. 1986. Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:680-683.
49. Zerbe CA, Refsal KR, Peterson ME, Armstrong PJ, Nachreiner RF, Schall WD. 1987. Effect of nonadrenal illness on
adrenal function in the cat.Am J Vet Res 48:451-454.
test in the horse: A new approach to testing of adrenal gland function. Am J Vet Res 41:430434.
51.Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS, van Vonderen IK,Mol JA, Voorhout G, van Sluijs FJ, Ijzer J, van den Ingh TS, Boer P,
Boer WH. 2001. Aldosteronoma in a dog with polyuria as the leading symptom. Domest Anim Endocrinol
20:227-240.
52. Flood SM, Randolph JF, Gelzer ARM, Refsal K 1999. Primary hyperaldosteronism in two cats. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 35:411-416.
53. Eger CE, Robinson WF, Huxtable CRR. 1983. Primary aldosteronism (Conn’s syndrome) in a cat A case report and
review of comparative aspects. J Small Anim Pract 24:293307.
54. Ash RA, Harvey AM, Tasker S. 2005. Primary hyperaldosteronism in the cat: A series of 13 cases. J Feline Med Surg
7:173-182
55.Javadi S,DjajadiningratLaanen SC,KooistaHS,vanDongen AM,Voorhout G,van SluijsFJvan den Inh
TSGAM, Boer WH, Rijnberk A 2005. Primary hyperaldosteronism, a mediator of progressive renal disease in cats.
Domest Anim Endocrinol 28:85104.
56.DeClue AE, Breshears LA, Pardo ID, Kerl ME, Perlis J, Cohn LA. 2005. Hyperaldosteronism and hyperprogesteron
ism in a cat with an adrenal cortical carcinoma. J Vet Intern Med 19:355358
57. Javadi S, Kooistra HS, Mol JA, Boer P, Boer WH, Rijnberk A. 2003. Plasma aldosterone concentrations and plasma
renin activity in healthy dogs and dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Rec 153:521-525.
58. Osbaldiston GW, Greve T. 1978. Estimating adrenal cortical function in dogs with ACTH. Cornell Vet 68:308-316.
59. Chastain CB, Madsen RW, Franlin RT. 1989. A screening evaluation for endogenous glucocorticoid deficiency in
dogs: A modified Thorn test. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:1822.
60.Norman E], Thompson H, Mooney CT. 1999. Dynamic adrenal function testing in eight dogs with hyperadrenocor-
ticism associated with adrenocortical neoplasia. Vet Rec 144:551-554.
61. Benitah N, Feldman EC, Kass PH, Nelson RW. 2005. Evaluation of serum 17-hydroxyprogesterone concentration
after administration of ACTH in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1095-1101.
62. Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ, Boozer AL,Whitley EM, Smmith AN, Busch KA. 2005. Serum 17-0l-
hydroxyprogesterone and corticosterone concentrations in dogs with nonadrenal neoplasia and dogs with suspected
hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1762-1767.
ACVIMForum,Seatte,452454
64.GolnDL,LthropCD j1988.Aretrospetivetudyofaosteroneseetioninormalandadenpathicgs
JVet Intern Med 2:121-125.
65. Willard MD, Refsal K, Thacker E. 1987. Evaluation of plasma aldosterone concentrations before and after ACTH
administration in clinically normal dogs and in dogs with various diseases. Am J Vet Res 48:1713-17 18.
66.Nelson RW,Feldman EC. 1992. Indications and interpretation of endocrine tests used in the dog and cat. Semin Vet
Med Surg(Small Anim) 7:285-291.
67. Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Feldman MS. 1996. Use of low- and high-dose dexamethasone tests for distinguishing
pituitary-dependent from adrenal tumor hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:772775.
68. Kaplan AJ, Peterson ME, Kemppainen RJ. 1995. Effects of disease on the results of diagnostic tests for use in
detecting hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:445451.
830
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
69. Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Kass PH. 1996. Pretreatment clinical and laboratory findings in dogs with hypoadrenocor
ticism: 225 cases (1979-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:8591.
70. Huang HP, Yang HL, Liang SL, Lien YH, Chen KY. 1999. Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism in 28 dogs. J Am Anim
HospAssoc35:200-207.
71. Peterson ME, Gilbertson SR, Drucker WD. 1982. Plasma cortisol response to exogenous ACTH in 22 dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism caused by adrenocortical neoplasia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:542544.
72.Duesberg CA,Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Bertoy EH, Dublin AB, Reid MH. 1995. Magnetic resonance imaging for
diagnosis of pituitary macroturmors in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:657-662.
73. Bertoy EH, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Duesberg CA, Kass PH, Reid MH, Dublin AB. 1995. Magnetic resonance
imaging of the brain in dogs with recently diagnosed but untreated pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Am
VetMedAssoc206:651-656.
74. Lester SJ, Bellamy JEC, MacWilliams PS, Feldman EC. 1981. A rapid radioimmunoassay method for the evaluation
of plasma cortisol levels and adrenal function in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:121128
Chapter19
CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
General Concepts and Definitions
832
Pathogeneses of Cavitary Effusions.
837
1.
Transudates.
841
1.
Exudates
843
!.
Hemorrhagic Effusions.
844
IV.
Lymphorrhagic(Lymphorrheal) Effusions
845
V.
Effusions Caused by the Rupture of a Hollow Organ or Other Tissue.
846
VI.
Effusions Caused by Multiple Processes.
847
Routine AnalysisofPleural andPeritoneal Fluid
847
1.
Sample Collection and Processing.
848
1l.
Physical Analysis.
849
!.
Chemical Analysis
850
IV.
[Erythrocyte]or Hematocrit (Hct)
851
V.
[Total Nucleated Cell Concentration](TNCC)
851
VI.
Microscopic Examination.
851
Selected Analyses forPleural and Peritoneal Effusions
856
[Cholesterol] and[TG]
856
1.
[Urea] and[Crt]
857
II.
[Na],[CIl,and [K]+
858
IV.
[L-lactate]
858
V.
[Glucose]
859
VI.
[Bilirubin]
860
Vill.
[Ammonium]
861
Vlll. Protein Concentrations.
861
IX.
Enzyme Activity
862
X.
Gram Staining.
862
Xl.
Culturing forMicroorganisms.
862
Comments About Specific Effusions
863
1.
Septic and Nonseptic Exudates
863
11.
Differentiation of aBacterial Exudate and Intestinal Contents
863
Il.
Effusions Associated with Neoplasms.
864
IV.
Lymphocyte-Rich Effusions.
864
V.
Pericardial Effusions.
865
VI.
Amniotic Fluid.
865
831
832
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 19.1.Abbreviations and symbols in this chapter
[x]
Concentration ofx (x=analyte)
ALP
Alkaline phosphatase
Chol:TG
Cholesterol to triglyceride
Crt
Creatinine
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
FIP
Feline infectious peritonitis
DH
Hematocrit
SG
Specific gravity
TG
Triglyceride
TNCC
Total nucleated cell concentration
TP
Total protein
TPref
Total protein determinationbyrefractometry
GENERALCONCEPTSANDDEFINITIONS
I.
Effusions accumulate in body cavities because of physiologic or pathologic processes.
Results from the analysis of the effusion and other clinical information are used to deter-
introduction to the results of cavitary fluid analyses and how the results relate to pathologic
processes.Most of the chapter is directed toward pleural and peritoneal effusions; the last
section contains information about pericardial fuid.Any of several excellent textbooks can
be consulted for more information about analytical methods and the microscopic features
of cells and other structures in effusions.-7
II.
The pleural and peritoneal cavities are lined by a layer of mesothelial cells (mesothelium)
with two surfaces: the visceral surface that covers viscera (lungs, intestine, etc.）and the
parietal surface that covers mediastinum and the pleural and peritoneal walls. In most
species,a small amount of clear serous fuid in the cavities provides a lubricant and
medium for transport of electrolytes and other substances. The cavities are called serous
because they contain a clear watery fuid in health.Pleural and peritoneal fluids are formed
by similar processes that involve the forces of Starling's law and anatomic structures.
Generally, a plasma fltrate leaves the capillaries enters interstitial space, and diffuses no
the serous cavities,from which it is removed by the lymphatic system and returned to
plasma.Pleural fluidis formed in health by diffusion of fuid through the parietal mesothe
lium to the pleural cavity (Fig. 19.1）.8The fuid has a low [protein] and low cellularity.
Peritonealfuid is formed similarly,with most of the fuid removed by diaphragmatic
lymphatic vessels.9
III.
Composition of pleural fluid and peritoneal fuid in health.
A.The chemical composition of a body cavity fuid is primarily determined by permeabil-
ity of capillaries to HO and solutes and, to a lesser extent, permeability of pleural and
peritoneal mesothelium.
1.Capillaries are ermeable toHO,lectrolytes eg,Na,K,C,Ca²,bicarbonat
and phosphates) and small nonprotein solutes (e.g-, glucose, urea, and Crt). Other
than [protein],the interstitial fuid adjacent to most capillaries has electrolyte,urea
glucose, and Crt concentrations similar to plasma.
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
833
Parietal Tissue
P
Pulmonary Tissue
Interstitium
e
Interstitium
Capillary
Capillary
Lymphaticvessel
Lymphatic vessel
口
Stomata-
d
Fig. 19.1. Pleural fuid formation and removal. Forces of Starling's lawmove protein-poor fuid from
capillaries to the parietal and pulmonary interstitial spaces. The parietal capillary beds and parietal pleura are
relatively impermeable to proteins, so the fuid that diffuses from the interstitium to the pleural space has a
ess d q md o  
entering the pulmonary lymphatic vessels via stomata The drainage is powered by the lymphatic pump that
creates a negative pressure to pullfuid from the interstitium. Evidence indicates the visceral pleural barrier is
impermeable to HO and solutes in most mammals.
2.Interstitial Huid is the source ofmost pleural and peritoneal Auid proteins.Varia
tions in capillary permeability to plasma proteins causes variations in interstitial
[TP].For example,in people, the interstitial fuid [TP] is near 1.5 g/dL in skeletal
muscle,near 2.0g/dLin subcutaneous t
tissue,near 4g/dLin intestine,and near
B.Pleural and peritoneal fuids in healthy animals should not contain erythrocytes and
should havelow concentrations ofucleated cells (eg.,mesothelial celllymphocyte,
macrophages,and neutrophils).However, thoracocentesis or abdominocentesis typically
damages small blood vessels,and thus a few erythrocytes and rare blood leukocytes are
not unusual in collected fuids.
C. Canine pleural and peritoneal fuids.
1.The amount of pleural and peritoneal fuids in healthy dogs is very small, so it is
difcultto collectsuffcientfuidforanalysis.Onesource states thathealthy dogs
have0-15mL of peritoneal fluid and about 3mL of pleural fuid.12
2.There is very little information about the expected features of these fuids in health,
but data frommultiple sources suggest they should have these features colorless to
slightly yellow,clear,a[TP<2.5g/dL,a TNCC<3.0x10²/uL,and a mixture
ofmesthelial ellutrphils,lyteandmacopageypicall,cavitary
fuid is collected when there is an effusion,and the task is determining the cause of
the effusion and not whether the fuid is abnormal.
fluids in healthy cats are very small, so it is difficult to collect sufficient fluid for
analysis. If fuid can be collected, the fluid probably represents an effusion.
E.Equine pleural and peritoneal fluids: Healthy horses do have enough cavitary fuid for
collection and analysis, but the reported findings vary considerably (Table 19.2). For
834
Table 19.2.Reported features of pleural and peritoneal fuids of healthy horses"
Pleural fuid
Peritoneal fuid
Peritoneal fuidd
Peritoneal fluid
Numba of horses
18
25
20
20
Volumecollected(mL)
2-8
10-100
10-100
Color
Yellow or red-yellow
Light yellow
Light yellow
Clarity
Clear to hazy
Clear to slightly turbid
Clear to slightly turbid
TPr (g/dL)
<3.4 (usually < 2.5)
0.1-3.4
0.1-2.5f
0.2-1.5
TNCC (x10²/μL)
0.8-12.1
2.0-9.0
0.04.6
0.5-10.1
Nautrophils
0.4-10.3x10/μL
%89
%86-08
2282 %
Lymphocytes
0.0-0.7×10/L
0-29%
1-11 %
1-19%
Monocytes/macrophages
0.0-2.6×10²/μL
3-50%
1-17%
1968 %
Mesothelial cells
Occasional
Eosinophils
0.0-0.2×10²μL
% E-0
0-7 %
0-5%
Mast cell
Occasional
Red blood cells (x10/μuL)
22-540
0.2-5.4
 Even though dinicaily heahrhy, the [TPa] > 20 g/&L and frequent neurroplnils suggest tnar tne'norses'nave a sdodiricd exuhstne disorber.
Sowve Bach and Rickett
Sr MeGrath
Thee data were colleted before efective antihelminthic programs were common, so the higher TP may indicate subclinical parasitc disease.
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
835
Table 19.3.Reported features of peritoneal fuids of healthy cattle
Peritoneal fuidb
Peritoneal fluid
Peritoneal fuidd
Number of cattle
19
8
？
(TP/)
0.1-4.6
2.2-4.0
<3.0
Fibrinogenef (g/dL)
0.1-0.4
TNCC (x10²/μL)
5.0-30.0
0.4-3.0
<10.0
Neutrophils
12-58%
<2.2×10²/μL
Lymphocytes
1-28%
<0.2×10²/μL
Monocytes/macrophages
1-28%
<1.0x10/μL
E
Eosinophils
25-72 %
<0.6×10/μL
Even though clinically healthy, the [TPe] >2.0 g/dL and frequent neutrophils suggest that the cattle
have a subclinical exudative disorder.
 a(eps 
Source. Anderson et al.
dSource Kopcha and Schultze3
Reported as [total solids](g/dL)
fDescribed as usually a 1 : 1 ratio of neutrophils and mononuclear cells, but also up to 60 % eosinophils
both thepleuraland peritoneal fuidsneutrophilpercentagesneed tobeinterpreted
with knowledge of the fluid’s TNCC and the quantity of fuid that is in the cavity.
F.Healthy cattle may have enough peritoneal fuid for collection and analysis.However,
pathologic effusions are uncommon, and analysis of effusions is even less common.
Reported features of peritoneal fuid in healthy cattle are listed in Table 19.3, but some
of the values are much greater than what is expected in healthy animals of most species.
Thus, the findings may not truly represent data from healthy cattle. TNCC may be
increased during the first 2 wk postpartum.3
IV.
Definitions
A.
Effusion is the accumulation of fuid in a body space or cavity,and an effusion is the
fuid that has accumulated.
B.Ascires is the fuid accumulated in a serous cavity (typically peritoneal cavity). It can be
a transudate, exudate, or other type of effusion (e.g, hemorrhagic ascites).
C.
Transudation is the passage of fuid or solute through a membrane because of changes
in hydraulic or oncotic pressure gradients.
D.A transudate is an efusion produced by changes in mechanical factors such as oncotic
or hydraulic pressure within capillary beds. Such changes influence the loss or
resorption offuid
E.
Hydrostatic presure is the energy (pressure) of a fuid at rest.
F.Hyedraulic presure is the energy (pressure) of a fluid in motion.
G.Exudation is an exuding or oozing out through pores.
H.An exudate is an effusion produced by increased vascular permeability to plasma
proteins because of infammation.
Hemorrhage is the escape or loss of blood from blood vessels or heart.
T.
Lymphorrhage is the escape or loss of lymph from lymph vessels.
K.A modifed ransudate is a transudate that has been modified by the addition of protein
and/or cells.This classification is not recommended by the authors.
836
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
1.Pathologic processes that produce these effusions are varied and not consistently
described. The origin of modified transudare is unknown.It is rarely described in the
human literature and was not present in a 1967veterinary clinical pathology
textbook.4Benjamin wrote in1961 that “a typical transudate can usually bereadily
distinguished from a typical exudate; but many extravascular fuids are modifed
transudates ormodifed exudates with some characteristics of both, so thatrecogni-
tion of the etiologic process may be difficult without a more complete examination
of the fuid.5 Modified transudate was listed as one type of effusion in a 1977
veterinary clinical pathology textbook. It is now a common label or classification
even though it may not accurately refect the pathologic process responsible for the
effusion.
2.The modified transudate classification is usually based on laboratory data rather than
the pathologic process or processes that produced the effusion.Basically，this
classification has been used foreffusions that had a [TPeand/orTNCCina grey
zone between protein-poor transudates and typical exudates.
3.A variety of effusions have been considered to be modified transudates,including
hemorrhagic, chylous, congestive,neoplastic, and low-grade inflammatory effusions.
Increased hydraulic pressures contribute to transudation in congestive heart failure,
but transudation is not the primary mechanism responsible for the fuid that
accumulates in hemorrhagic, most chylous, and most neoplastic effusions. In this
chapter, effusions are not classified as modified transudates, because the classification
does not clearly communicate the pathologic processes that led to the effusions, and
many of the so-called modified rransudates do not accumulate because of transuda-
tion and subsequent modification.
V.
Basic concepts of Starling's law (Eq.19.1) are needed to understand the pathogeneses of
body cavitary effusions. In the context of most capillary beds, the major variables are
illustrated in Fig. 7.3.
Net filtration=LpS[△ hydraulic pressure-△ oncotic pressure]
(19.1.)
=LpS[（Pap-Pi）-s（map-π）]
Net filtration = net flux of fuid from capillary to interstitium
Lp = unit permeability (porosity) of the capillary
S = surface area available for fuid movement
s=reflection coefficient of proteins across the capillary wall
Pap=hydraulic pressure of plasma
P=hydraulic pressure of interstitial fuid
= oncotic pressure of plasma in capillary
π=oncotic pressure of interstitial fuid
A.A majority of the fuid that enters the interstitium from plasma returns to theplasma
via the permeable venous capillaries (capillaries that open into venules). The remainder
enters the lymphatic vessels and returns to the blood via the thoracic duct (most of the
body) or the right lymphatic duct (parts of head, neck, and thorax).
B.Most capillary walls haveminimal permeability to plasma proteins,but some proteins
do enter the interstitium and the resultant lymph. The proteins in the interstitial fuid
create an extravascular oncotic pressure (colloidal osmotic pressure)(see Chapter 7)
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
837
1.Oncotic pressure in interstitium of skeletal muscle is about 30 % of the plasma
oncotic pressure in health.17
2. Oncotic pressure in the hepatic interstitium is nearly equal to plasma oncotic pressure
3.Oncotic pressure in the pulmonary interstitium is about 70 % of plasma oncotic
pressure.Alveolar capillaries are less permeable to proteins than are the hepatic
sinusoids butmore than are the skeleral muscle capillaries.7
C.The permeability of capillaries is expressed as a reflection coefficient (Eq. 19.1), which
ranges from O (completely permeable to proteins) to 1 (impermeable to proteins). The
reflection coefficient approaches 1 inmost capillary beds but is smaller in hepatic and
pulmonary capillary beds
PATHOGENESESOFCAVTTARYEFFUSIONS
Effusions accumulate in pleural and peritoneal cavities when one or more pathologicprocesses
(Table 19.4) cause increased entry of fuid into the cavity and/or decreased removal of fuid from
the cavity. These processes are illustrated in Fig. 19.2. The composition of the effusion will
provide evidence for the type of pathologic process that led to the effusion (Table 19.5).
However,frequently the evidence is not diagnostic of a disorder, and thus other information
3000
Blood
5
Urinary
organ
Blood
bladdej
contents
Pleural
Blood
Plasma
5
fluid
Peritoneal
fluid
Fig. 19.2. Schematic drawing of the five major pathogeneses of pleural and peritoneal effusions.
1. Transudates form when there is increased vascular hydraulic pressure with or without decreased plasma
oncotic pressure. The transudate forrmed from increased hydraulic pressures in hepatic sinuses and
alveolar capillaries (lungs not shown) have relatively higher protein concentrations because the vessels are
more permeable to plasma proteins.
2.Exudates form when increased vascular and mesothelial permeability enables protein-rich fuid to escape
from the capillaries to the interstitium and then to the cavity.
4.Efusions develop when there is decreased drainage of the fuids by the lymphatic vessels either because of
increased pressure within the lymphatic vessel or because cells (e.g., neoplastic) are blocking pathways.
Damage to lymphatic vessels enables lymph to escape to create a lymphocyte-rich effusion. If the lymph
contains chylomicrons, then a chylous effusion forms.
5. Damage to viscera enables contents of those structures to enter the body cavity (e.g., a uroperitoneum).
The contentsreleased fromdamaged alimentary,bilaryorurinary tissueswillinitiateaninfammatory
reaction and thus exudation.
Table 19.4. Cavitary effusions Pathologic processes, mechanisms, and conditions or disorders that produce effusions
Pathologic process
Pathologic mechanisms
Effusion
Conditions or disorders
Altered hydraulic and
Transudate, protein poor
*Cirrhosis (dogs)
oncotic pressures
*Protein-losing nephropathies (including nephrotic syndrome)
Protein-losing enteropathy
Lymphatic obstruction (e.g, lymphangiectasis, lymph node
Noncirthotic portal hypertemnsion (presinusoidal and sinusoidal)
Transudate, protein rich
*Congestive heart failure
Portal hypertension (postsinusoidal)
Exudation
Increased vascular
Exudate, infectious
Bacteria （cocci and bacilli), fungi (e.g,Blastmye,Hisoplasm,
permeability to
Caudida), vinuses (FIP coronavirus), protozoa (e.g
plasma proteins
Leishmania,Taxoplasa),，and parasites (Mecesoidei)
Exudate,noninfectious
*Neoplasia, foreign body, bile peritonitis, pancrearitis, steatitis
uroperitonem, ischemic necrosis of spleen,lung, ortr
tisues due to torsion or vascular lesions
Hemorthage
Leakage of blood from
Hemorrhagic effusion, acute
*Trauma to blood vessels, neoplasia, hemostasis defects
vessels
Hemorrhagic effusion,
*Neoplasia, hemostasis defects (vascular damage or factor
deficiencies), trauma
Lymphorrhage
Leakage of lymph from
Chylous effusion
Cardiac disease, trauma, diaphragmatic lesions or hernia,
(lymphorrhea)
lymphatic vessels
Nonchylous lymphatic
neoplasms, and mediastinal lesions (see the text)
effusion
Lymphatic obstruction (eg lymphangiectasis, lymph node
disease)
Rupture of
Leakage of urine from
Uroperitoneum, secondary
*Trauma
hollow organ
exudate
Urolithiasis
or tisue
urethra,or urete
Neoplasia of urinary tract
Leakage of bile from
Secondary exudate,
Cholelithiasis, cholangitis, bile duct carcinoma, cholecystitis
biliary tract
noninfectious
Leakage of gastric or
Secondary exudate,
Gastric: perforated ulcer, gastric carcinoma, trauma
intestinal contents
infectious or
Intestinal: perforated intestine, intestinal neoplasia, intestinal
noninfectious
obstruction,intestinal ischemia
* A relativedy common disease or condition
During the development of an effusion, more than one pathologic proces may contribute, for example, a persistent chylous effusion elicits an infammatory
T uopewwegu repuooos sq nq uopsry ue sneo jou fou ypas pq osne aq oi snquoo uopepr seq os ssoond
Table 19.5.Common features ofeffusions
TNCC
Predominant nucleated
Physical fearures
(g/dL)
(x10/μL)
cells
Otha findings
Transudate,
Clear,colorless
<2.0
<1.5
Variable
Reactive mesothelial cells may be
protein poor
prsent
Transudate,
2 2.0
Mostly neutrophils and
Reactive mesothelial cells are
protcin rich
Yellow, orange, red
macrophages
common
Exudate, bacterial
Hazy to cloudy
≥2.0
>5.0
Neutrophils or neutrophils
Bacteria may not be found via
Yellow, tan, cream, orange
microscopy
Exudate,fungal
Hazy to cloudy
≥2.0
>5.0
Neutrophils or neutrophils
Fungus may not be found via
Yellow, tan, cream, orange
sdo pue
microscopy
Exudate, parasitic
Hazy to coudy
≥ 2.0
>5.0
Neutrophils or neutrophils
Eosinophil percentages vary, parasite
Yellow, tan, cream, orange
and macrophages
may not be found via microscopy
Exudare, FIP-
Clear to hazy
≥2.0
<5.0
Neutrophils or neutrophils
Finely granular pink background,
Yellow
protein crescent, perhaps fibrin
pueds
Exudate,
Hazy to cloudy
≥2.0
Neutrophils or neutrophils
See the text
noninfectious
Yellow, tan, cream, orange.
and macrophages
green
perhaps lymphocytes
Continues
839
840
Hemorrhagic
snbedo
≥2.0
Neutrophils and
Platelets if very recenthemorrhage
effusion, acute
Red
lymphocytes (most
directly from blood)
Hemorrhagic
Hazy to opaque
≥2.0
>2.0
Neutrophils and
Erythrophages
effusion,
Red
macrophages
Siderophages
chronie"
Chylous effusion
Hazy to white
≥2.0
<10.0
Small lymphocyte (brief
Sudanophilic droplets in fluid and
duration)
macrophages
Mixed leukocytes
(long duration)
Lymphatic
Hazy to cloudy
？
10.0
Small lymphocytes
effusion"
Yellow to pink
Uroperitoneum
Yellow
<2.0
1.5
Variable
(initially)
found, and urine odor
Uroperitoneum
Variable
Variable
>1.5
Neutrophils and
Urine crystals occasionally found
(persistent)s
macrophages
The table contis mn fetues fthe ffusisHoeer, e paholg p hat at fusi, tte lfid lis,dee.
type of effusion.
the animal's pathologie condition or oould be due to blood contamination during sample collction.
Each of these effusions have been classifed as modijfedtrawswdates.
The TPa value will be falsly increased if the fuid is grosdy dloudy to opaque because of the lipid The [TP} after removal f chylomicrons or by a method
/ 0<aq o rde s s q pae 4e
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
841
(history,physical examinationmagingfndings,orother laboratory data）isneded tointeprt
the significance of analysis results or establish the pathogenesis of an effusion.
I.
Transudates
A.Pathogenesis
1.Transudates typically accumulate in pleural and/or peritoneal cavities when there is
an excess diffusion of plasma HO from the vascular space because of alterations in
hydraulic and/or oncotic pressures. They may also accumulate when lymphatic
drainage from a cavity is impaired (see Fig. 7.3).
2.Formost tissues, a transudate is protein poor ([TPe <2.0 g/dL), but transudation
from a liver can create a protein-rich peritoneal transudate if normoproteinemia is
present. If a marked hypoproteinemia is present, then the transudate associated with
hepatic transudation will contain a lower[TP] than if formedwhen theplasma[TP]
was not decreased.
3.A transudative pleural effusion is caused primarily by increased hydraulic pressure
in the alveolar capillaries. Most of the pulmonary transudate remains in the lung
(ie.,pulmonary edema),but it may fow into the pleural cavity because of damaged
visceral pleura. Concurrently, venous congestion and the resultant increased
hydraulic pressure in the posterior vena cava reduce lympharic drainage from the
pleural cavity.
4.Portal hypertension is a frequent contributor to the formation of peritoneal transu-
dates and occasionallypleural transudates.Portal hypertension is a pathologic state in
which the hydraulic pressure in portal blood vessels is increased by either increased
portal blood fow or, more likely, increased resistance to portal blood fow.
a.l
Blood enters the abdominal portal venous system from capillary beds in viscera
(intestines, seen,pancreas, stomach, and distal sophagus）,ravels to the livr
via the portal vein and its branches in the portal triad, flows through the hepatic
sinusoids （capillaries) of the hepatic lobule to the central vein,exits theliver via
the hepatic vein, and enters the vena cava. Lesions within or adjacent to these
vessels or the heartmay impair portal blood flow and increase hydraulic pressure
within the portal system.
b.Portalhypertensive disorders can be classifed by overlapping systems..9The
anatomic system is primarily based on gross anatomy (i.e.,prehepatic,intra-
hepatic, or posthepatic)andrelates to the ow of blood to,through,and from
the liver.The vascular system identifies the location of the lesion relative to the
hepatic sinusoids (i.e., presinusoidal, sinusoidal, or postsinusoidal). The disorders
that restrict portal blood flow can be classified as luminal (e.g., thrombosis) and
extraluminal (e.g., hepatic fibrosis).
(1)Portal hypertension caused by right heart failure is posthepatic and postsinu-
soidal. Because there is increased hydraulic pressure in the hepatic sinusoids,
the resulting effusion is protein rich.
(2)Portal hypertension caused by hepatic cirrhosis is intrahepatic but may be
either presinusoidal or sinusoidal. When the increased hydraulic pressure is
presinusoidal, the resulting effusion is protein poor. Sinusoidal hypertension
B.Protein-poor transudates (Tables 19.4 and 19.5)
1.These tend to form in body cavities when hypoproteinemia (including hypoalbu-
minemia)ismarked.Most mammals with protein-poor transudates have a serum
842
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
[albumin]< 1.5 g/dL.However in most disorders,hypoalbuminemia by itself will
not cause transudation.
a.Analbuminemia occurs in people and is characterized by serum [albumin]
<0.1 g/dL; these people typically do not have transudative effusions but may
have mild edema. Compensatory processes that prevent transudative effusions
include increased synthesis of globulins,reduced intravascular hydraulic pressure,
reduced interstitial oncotic pressure, and increased lymphatic drainage.The
plasma oncotic pressure in analbuminemic people is about half of that found in
healthy people.20
b.The lack of significant transudative effusion in the absence of albumin empha-
sizes three concepts: (1) globulins contribute to oncotic pressures,(2) increased
lymphatic drainage of a cavity may compensate for increased transudation, and
(3) factors other than hypoalbuminemia typically contribute to transudative
effusions.
C.An acute onset of marked hypoproteinemia (e.g.,marked blood loss followed by
intravenous fuid therapy)maylead to transudation because therehas been
insufficient time for adjustments in the oncotic pressure gradient and lymphatic
drainage.
2.The most common disorders that produce protein-poor transudates in dogs are
hepatic cirrhosis and protein-losing nephropathy (Table 19.4).Pathologic protein-
poor transudates are uncommon in cats,horses,and cattle.In both cirrhosis and
protein-losing nephropathies,transudates form because of these rwomajor factors:7
a.Decreased plasma oncotic pressure
(1)As the plasma [TP] falls, proteins (including albumin) in the interstitial
fluid are redistributed to the vascular space. If the plasma [TP] and the
interstitial fuid [TP] decrease by the same amount, then the oncotic
pressure gradient does not change. Thus, there will not be additional H,O
movement from the vessels. When there is marked hypoproteinemia,less
interstitial fuid protein is available for redistribution to thevascular space.
fuid, the oncotic pressure gradient is reduced, and thus more fuid will
enter the interstitial space.However, a transudatewill not accumulate if
increased lymphatic drainage removes the fuid. In people, lymph fow can
increase by at least a factor of 10 to compensate for increased rate of fuid
leaving plasma.17
b.Increased hydraulic pressure gradient
(1)In cirrhosis and protein-losing nephropathies, abnormal regulation of blood
volume leads to retention of Na and HO. The retention of HO causes an
increased plasma hydraulic pressure and thus a greater rate of fuid leaving
plasma and entering interstitium. Portal hypertension also contributes to
transudation in cirrhosis.
(2)The processes that lead to the retention of Na and H,O involve hormones
and renal functions (see Chapters 8 and 9).
3.Occasionally, lymph node iseases,protein-losing enteropathies, and idiopathic
noncirrhotic portal hypertension cause the formation of protein-poor effusions
a.If a protein-poor effusion is associated with intrathoracic or intra-abdominal
lymph node disease, at least part of the reason for the effusion is decreased
lymphatic drainage of fuids that normally enter the cavities
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
843
b.If a protein-poor effusion is associated with a protein-losing enteropathy, at least
two mechanisms may be contributing to the effusion.If the enteropathy has led
toa marked hypoproteinemiathen part of pathogenesis includes a decreased
oncotic pressure gradient.Also, some protein-losing enteropathies impair
drainage of intestinal lymph (e.g,lymphangiectasia).
c.Idiopathic noncirrhotic portal hypertension in dogs is an uncommonly recog-
nized disorder that may be caused by portal vein hypoplasia. Dogs with this
disorder have protein-poor peritoneal transudates and many other laboratory data
suggestive of a portosystemic shunt orhepaticinsufficiency.
C.Protein-rich transudates (Tables 19.4 and 19.5)
1.Protein-rich transudates typically occur when there is increased plasma hydraulic
pressure in the liver or lungs because of venous congestion.
2.The most common disorders that produce protein-rich transudates are congestive
heart failure and portal venous hypertension (Table 19.4).In both, transudation
occurs because of increased plasma hydraulic pressure.
a.In congestive heart failure,a complex set of events decreases cardiac output,
increases hydraulic pressure in veins, and increases Na and HO retention (see
Chapter 9).
b.In portal venous hypertension (either posthepatic or postsinusoidal),the rate of
plasma entering the space of Disse increases because of the increased hydraulic
pressure in hepatic sinusoids.If there is not a corresponding increase in lymphatic
drainage,the protein-rich fuid may move from the liver to the peritoneal cavity.
c.In people with these disorders, a serum albumin-ascites gradient (serum
[albumin]-effusion [albumin]) is used to help differentiate effusions caused by
portal hypertension (e.g., cirrhosis and congestive heart failure) from other
effusions.This gradient is greater in these congestive disorders than in exudative
disorders.2324Very little information about this gradient is available for domestic
mammals.
3.The [TP] of a transudate may increase when an animal is given a diuretic agent to
reduce edema or the quantity of an effusion.
Exudates （Tables 19.4 and 19.5)
A.An exudate forms when inflammation causes increased vascular permeability that allows
plasma (and its proteins) to ooze out of the blood.The exudation of protein-rich fuid
is usually accompanied by the migration of leukocytes (mostly neutrophils) into the
effusion because of chemotactic substances in the fuid
1.The vascular permeability is typically increased by the effects of inflammatory
mediators (e.g.,histamine,bradykinin,leukotrienes,and substance P) that were
released from inflamed tissue.Theinflammatory mediatorsmay also cause selective
vasodilation, so that more blood enters the infamed tissues and thus increases the
hydraulic pressure in the capillaries.when associated with sepsis,secondary
vascular damage increases the vascular permeability.
2.The inflammation can directly involve blood vessel (vasculitis and phlebitis), and
then the vessels become very permeable to plasma proteins.
B.Neutrophils are the most common nucleated cell in most exudates,but nucleated cells
in exudates will frequently be predominantly neutrophils and macrophages or a mixture
ofneutrophils,macrophages,and lymphocytes.Occasionally,nucleated cells of exudates
willbe predominantly eosinophils or possiblylymphocytes.
844
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
C.The leakage of proteins into the interstitium reduces the oncotic pressure gradient
between plasma and interstitial fuid, and thus plasma has less ability to retain HO.
The plasma hydraulic pressure pushes a protein-richfuid into the interstitium,and less
fuid returns in the venous end of the capillary bed. A pleuritis or peritonitis may
damage mesothelium so that the protein-rich interstitial fuid easily moves into the
cavities.
D.Exudates are caused by infectious and noninfectious agents.The type of exudate (i.e
infectious or noninfectious) cannot be reliably determined until the causative agent or
event has been established.
1.Exudates are frequently caused by an infection with bacteria or other organisms.
Some peopleconsiderseptic andbacterialtobe synonymsbut sepsisrferstoany
microbial infection (e.g,bacterial,fungal,viral,or protozoal）.To reduce the
possibility of confusion,it may be better torefer to the infectious exudates by
the appropriate infectious agent (e.g.,bacterial exudate or fungal exudate),when
known.
2.Exudates are also commonly formed during noninfectious inflammatory responses.
For example,the inflammatory response may be due to necrotic tissue (e.g,
surgical sponge or barium), or the presence of an irritating fuid (e.g., bile or urine).
E.When an effusion is protein rich and has a high [neutrophil], it is not difficult to
recognize the effusion as an exudate. However, it may be difficult to determine the
causeof theexudation.
1.In bacterial and fungal exudares, a microscopic examination of a fuid may detect
bacteria (cocci or bacilli) or fungal structures (yeasts or hyphae) in phagocytes
(neutrophils or macrophages) or extracellularly. However, if very few organisms
are in the fuid,they may not be detected during themicroscopic examination,
and the fuid should be placed in appropriate culture media to attempt to grow
organisms.
2.With the exception of the exudate of FIP,viral exudates are uncommon.The types
ofproteinsin theFIPexudate are very similar to the plasma proteins because the
FIP vasculitis enables plasma proteins to ooze through the infamed vessel walls.
Compared to most exudates, the FIP exudate tends to have a low nucleated cellular-
itybecause theinflammatory process isin thebloodvessels andnotin thebody
cavity. Microscopic examination of a stained preparation may reveal a pink granular
background reflective of a high [TP].
3.Protozoal exudates (e.g.,Leishmania sp.) are uncommon in the United States.
Amastigotes can be found in macrophages.
II1.
Hemorrhagiceffusions （Tables 19.4 and 19.5)
A.When the primary reason for an effusion ishemorrhage,the fuid is a bemorrhagic
effusion. Relatively minor hemorrhage is a component of many exudates because of the
vascular damage associated with infammation. Also, minor hemorrhage commonly
occurs during the collection of an effusion;this is commonly called raumatic tap or
iatrogenic hemorrhage.When recent hemorrhage causes an effusion, the collected fuid
will have many features of the animal’s peripheral blood.Lymphaticvessels attempt to
resorb the effusion's HO, solutes, and erythrocytes. Thus, the effusion volume and its
composition change with time. About 65 % of erythrocytes are resorbed (autotrans-
fused)within 2 d and 80%within 1-2wk.26
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
845
B.When the effusion forms because of frequent but small amounts ofhemorrhage,the
effusion canhave avariety of features.
1.If collected soon after hemorrhage, it might have features of dilute blood.
2.With persistent hemorrhage,the extravasation of plasma proteins disrupts the
oncotic pressure gradientand thusHO tends to diffuseinto the cavity and dilute
its contents.Concurrently,HO and proteins are returning to plasma via lymphatic
vessels.
3.Some erythrocytes are engulfed by macrophages to form erythrophages, and some
degrade hemoglobin to form hematoidin or hemosiderin.
C.It is difficult to set a decision threshold for the classification of hemorrhagic effusior
because many factors can alter the effusion’s Hct (or hemoglobin or erythrocyte
concentrations), and sometimes an effusion develops because of hemorrhage and other
processes. If the effusion’s Hct is > 3 %, then hemorrhage is contributing to the
effusion；for example,an effusion Hct of 5 % and a blood Hct of 25 % suggests that
20 % of the effusion'svolume isblood
D.Occasionally, an abdominal sample is collected from an enlarged spleen.The bloody
sample will have a Hct > 3 %, but it does not represent a hemorrhagic effusion.A
splenic origin (aspirate or rupture) should be considered when hematopoietic cells are
in the collected sample but not the blood.
IV.
Lymphorrhagic (lymphorrheal) effusions (Tables 19.4 and 19.5)
A.There isnot a common term for the loss of lymph into abody cavity.Two terms that
occasionally are used are lymphorrhage and lymphorrhea. For this chapter, bymphorrhage
will be used similarly to hemorhage, that is, lymphorrhage is a process that results in
lymph escaping fromlymphatic vesselsjust as hemorrbage is a process that results in
blood escaping from blood vessels.
1.Lymphorrhage is sometimes used synonymously with lymphorrhea but is also used to
refer to a focal accumulation of lymphocytes in tissues.
2.Lymphorrhea more commonly refers to the external loss of lymph from damaged
lymphatic vessels. Occasionally, authors also use the term to refer to the process thar
causes lymphedema or formation of a lymph-rich effusion.
B.Several pathologic statesmay cause lymphorrhagic effusions.The pathogeneses of these
1.In the traumatic group, physical damage to lymphatic vessels allows lymph to enter
the body cavity.
2.In the nontraumatic group,lymphorrhagic effusions occur when one ormore of
these mechanisms are present: (1） lymph stasis,(2） lymphatic hypertension, (3)
defective lymphatic valve function because of dilated lymphatic vessels, and (4)
increased permeability of lymphatic vessels. Also, the persistence of a nontraumatic
process might weaken a lymphatic vessel and cause lymphorrhage when it ruptures.
Clinical findings suggest thatmany chylous pleural effusions are caused by obstruc
tion of the thoracic duct or cranial vena cava; contrast lymphangiography reveals
extensive lymphangiectasia of mediastinal and pleural lymphaticvessels.2s
3.Blockage of lymphatic vessels by neoplastic cells can be a major reason for effusions
associated with malignancies.However,enhanced vessel proliferation and increased
vascular permeability may also contribute to these effusions.29
C.Lymphorrhagic efusions can be classified into these two major groups based on the
presence or absence of chylomicrons in the effusion:
846
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
1.Chylous effusions
a.A chylous effusion is produced when chylomicron-rich lymph leaks from lym-
phatic vessels and enters the pleural cavity to form a chylothorax or the perito-
neal cavity to form a chyloabdomen (chyloperitoneum). Chylomicrons are
formed in intestinal mucosal cells,enter intestinal lymphaticvessels,and enter
peripheral blood via the thoracic duct. When a chylous effusion is present, it
indicates that lymphatic vessels somewhere berween the small intestine and the
thoracic vena cava are damaged.
b.Among the domestic mammals, chylothorax is most common in cats. It can be
caused by several disorders in cats,dogs,and horses (e.g,neoplasms,cardiomy-
opathy,earfilureramaunglbersion,andinfeinbutrequnys
idiopathic.so-3s The leakage of chylomicron-containing lymph may be directly
related to damaged lymphatic vessels but also may be secondary to increased
hydraulic pressure in the cranial or caudal vena cava. Chyloabdomen occurs
rarely.36.37
c.Chylomicrons may be abundant and thus create a creamy white fuid. However,
[TG] and [cholesterol] to recognize their presence (see Selected Analyses for
Pleural and Peritoneal Effusions,sect.I).
2.Nonchylous lymphaticeffusions
a.A nonchylous lymphatic effusion is produced when lymph without
chylomicrons leaks from lymphatic vessels and enters the pleural cavity or
peritoneal cavity. The lesion may involve lymphatic vessels that are not in
the drainage path from intestine to thoracic duct and thus do not contain
chyle or chylomicrons. However, the absence of chylomicrons might indicate
a lack of dietary intake of lipids （thus,theintestinal lymph did not contain
chylomicrons) or that the chylomicrons (or TG) did not persist in the
effusion.
b.These effusions do not have the unique features created by chylomicrons,
including the chylous pattern of the [TG] and [cholesterol]. Small lymphocytes
may be the predominant nucleated cell if the lymph originated from an efferent
lymphatic vessel.
3.Pseudochylous effusions
a.Pseudochylous effusions are fuids that grossly have a similar appearance to
chylous efusions e.g, whiteto cream colored,and cloudy orturbidbut donot
contain chylomicrons and do not have a high [TG]. They have been recognized
in people (rarely) but are not described in domestic mammals. Effusions
effusions.
b.Pseudochylous effusions typically have a high [cholesterol] that might result from
the degradation of cellmembranes or the trapping of cholesterol-rich lipoproteins
(e.g., low-density lipoproteins) in the body cavity.
V.
Effusions caused by the rupture of a hollow organ or other tissue (Tables 19.4 and 19.5)
A.Leakage ofurine from theurinary bladder,ureterurethraorkidy
1.Uroperitoneum occurs when urine enters the peritoneal cavity subsequent to trauma
urolithiasis, or neoplasia. Attempts to expel urine forcefully from a distended urinary
bladder can rupture it.
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
847
2.Initially,the peritoneal fuid has features of urine (see Selected Analyses for Pleural
and Peritoneal Effusions,sects.II and III),but when the presence of urine in the
peritoneal cavity initiates an infammatory response, the effusion may have features
of an exudate. Bacteria may be present when associated with a bacterial infection of
the urinary tract,but the TNCCmay be quite low because of the relatively large
amount ofurine entering the cavity
B.Leakage of bile from the biliary tract
1.Several pathologic statesmay damage the biliary tract suffciently for bile to enter
the peritoneal cavity. The [bilirubin] in the effusion is typically greater than the
animal’s serum [bilirubin] (see Selected Analyses forPleural and Peritoneal Effusions
sect.VI).
2.The bile volume probably is not suffcient to create an excessive amount of perito.
neal fuid,but the bile will initiate infammation (often low to moderate grade),
which then creates an exudative effusion.
C.Leakage of gastric or intestinal contents
1.Several pathologic statesmay damage the gastrointestinal tract suficiently for
luminal fuid to enter the peritoneal cavity.
2.The luminal fluid volume may or may not be sufficient to create an excessive
amount of peritoneal fuid.However,the fuid’s content (e.g.,bacteria and ingesta)
will initiate inflammation that then creates an exudative effusion.
VI.
Effusions caused by multiple processes
A.Many cavitary effusions accumulate because of multiple concurrent processes. For
example,an abdominal neoplasm may have necrotic areas that result in an infamma-
tory reaction that causes an exudate. Concurrently, a few blood vessels are damaged
sufficiently to cause hemorrhage into the cavity.Also,neoplastic cells may enter
lymphatic vessels and impair lymphatic drainage. Therefore, the animal may be
presentedwithanefusionthatformsbecauseofexudationhemrrhageandmpaied
lymphatic drainage.
B.Other examples of multiple pathogeneses include the following:
1.A persistent protein-rich transudation in heart failure caused by a low-grade
inflammatoryreaction and exudation
2.Urine leakage in uroperitoneum and subsequent exudation caused by
peritonitis
3.Gallbladder rupture and subsequent exudation caused by peritonitis
ROUTINEANALYSISOFPLEURALANDPERITONEALFLUID
Analysis of pleural and peritoneal fuid may yield a cause for the effusion, but,more often,
analysis provides information about the fuid’s composition so that one or more possible explana
tions for its excess formation can be considered.The results of the fluid analyses have been used
to create effusion classifications. Effusion classifications are not diagnoses, just as classification of
an anemia as regenerative is not a diagnosis. Classification schemes provide us with a method to
communicare.
If appropriate historical and physical examination findings are known, results of most fuid
analyses can be appropriately interpreted with the following three results: (1) [TP,d, (2) TNCC,
and (3) types and percentages of nucleated cells. Other features of an effusion may help clarify
the cause of the effusion.
848
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
I.
Sample collection and processing
A.Sterile collection methods should be used to ensure that bacteria or other organisms are
not introduced into the cavity.The centesis site and method vary among species: dogs
and cars,horses,6.3 and cartle.1339
B.Collected fuid should be placed into rwo tubes: one tube that contains EDTA,which
inhibits fibrin clot formation, and one sterile rube for possible submission for micro-
biologic testing (e.g., culturing) or chemical analysis.Tubes that are not immediately
submitted to alaboratory should bekept cooland delivered to the laboratory within
36h. Concurrent submission of stained and unstained direct or concentrated prepara
tions made from an aliquot of the fresh fuid can be very helpful. Some EDTA tubes
may contain an additive that falsely increases the[TP Heparin may also be used as
an anticoagulant, but it alters the staining properties of cells and thus may interfere
with microscopic analysis.
C.Methods of preparing specimens formicroscopic examination depend somewhat on the
celularity of the fuid. When possible, the cytopreparations should be made soon after
the sample is collected,so that in vitro changes are less likely (e.g,cell deterioration,
organism proliferation,or in vitro phagocytosis).Thefuid is air-dried prior to staining
with routine stains.For all of thefilm methods, the feathered edge,which frequently
contains important cells or structures, should be in the stainable area of the slide.
1.Direct smear: Using the common technique for making a blood flm, a small drop of
fluid is spread on a glass slide. This method is usually adequate for effusions that
have a TNCC> 5.0 x1o²/pL,but an additional concentration method is desirable
forfuidswith a TNCCofup to at least20.0 x10/pL
2.Line preparation: This method is similar to the direct smear, bur the push slide is
abruptly stopped and lifted so that cells are concentrated in a terminal line. This
method tends to concentrate cells in a line and can be used forfuids with a TNCC
<10.0 x 10²/uL. However, a high [TP] tends to make this area too thick for a
step:when the spreader slideisliftedto form the terminal line,the slideis tipped
up to allowthe terminal line to flowback and spread out enoughfor betercell
visibility.
3.Sediment smears are used for effusions with a low TNCC.The concentration method
is not needed for effusions that have a TNCC>20.0x 10°/μL
a.Fluid is centrifuged in a clinical centrifuge by methods similar to preparing urine
sediment. After removal of most supernatant, the sediment is resuspended in a
small amount of fuid,and then a direct smear method isused to distribute cells
on a glass slide.
b.Another method involves using special devices to allow gravity to form a
sediment slowly.This procedure may or may not create a monolayer of cells for
microscopic examinations.
4.Cytocentrifuge prepanation:Commercial cytocentrifuges are designed to concentrate
cells in a fuid on a glass slide and are especially valuable for fuids that have a
TNCC < 1.0 × 10²/μL.However, their cost limits their use to larger laboratories
that analyze such fuids daily.
predicted based on the transparency of the fluid. If the fuid is clear or hazy, the
TNCC is probably low,and thus a concentrating method is needed.If thefuid is
cloudy or opaque, then a concentrating method is probably not needed.When in
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
849
doubt,bothtpesofytopreparationsaremadeandthemicroscopistcanselecth
best slide for examination.
II.
Physical analysis
A.Color and transparency of the fuid (noted before centrifugation and,if the effusion is
not clear and colorless, also after centrifugation)
1.A supernatant's color refects the pigmented solutes in the fuid, such as bilirubin
(yellow to orange), hemoglobin (pink to red to brown), stercobilinogen (brown),
and chlorophyll （green）.A nontransparent white,creamy,or cloudy supernatant
typically indicates the presence of lipoproteins (e.g., chylomicrons) in the fuid.
2.A sediment's color is an indication of the pigments in the suspended cells or
nucleated cell,and brown for fecal contents.The amount of sediment typically
reflects the number of erythrocytes andnucleated cellsin the effusion.
B.Refractometricestimates of[total protein] ([TP)
1.Clinical refractometers measure the refractive index of a fuid,which is then
displayed on a TP, SG, or total solids scale; some current refractometers have “TS”
in their names but have TP and not total solids scales. Most clinical refractometers
are calibrated for the normal constituents of human plasma (TP scale) and human
urine (SG scale) A refractometer with a SG scale for domestic mammals is also
available (see Chapter 8）.To reduce the effects of ambient temperature, temperature
compensatedrefractometers arerecommended
2.The [TP] scale is calibrated for plasma [TP] and will approximate the true [TP] in
protein-rich fuids because the altered refractive index is mostly due to proteins.
Even though the [TPd may not be accurate, the estimated [TP] is a differential
feature of effusions.
3.Some clinical refractometers have a total solids (TS) scale. On a g/dL basis,most
dissolvdolidsarrotnthrlidsnuectrolyteaosn
other chemical analytes.
4.High concentrations of lipids (as seen in chylous effusions) will increase the fuid’s
refractive index and produce falsely increased values for [TP and SG.High
concentrations of solutes other than proteins (e.g,ureain uroperitoneum） willalso
falsely increase the TPr value.
5.Suspended cells typically do not interfere withrefractometric values,because the
cells do not alter refractive index significantly (see the Physical Examination of Urine
10%/μL) may. Whenever in doubt, the values of fluid with suspended cells can be
compared to the fluid's supernatant.
6.A variety of decision thresholds for[TP] have been proposed for differentiating
effusions.However, several factors determine an effusion's[TP, so such decision
thresholds should be considered as suggested guidelines.
a.A lower[TP (usually < 2.0 g/dL and frequently near 1.0 g/dL) is found
primarily in protein-poor transudates and early in uroperitoneal effusions.
b.A [TP > 2.0 g/dL is found in most other effusions. Typically, the greater the
[TP] is, the greater is the protein permeability of blood vessels.
7.One study described a falsely increased [TP(e.g.,= 1.5 g/dL increase) when
peritoneal fuid was added to an EDTA tube that also contained additives to prevent
crystallization of the EDTA.Not all commercial EDTA tubes contain the additive,
850
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 19.6.Conversion of refractive indices to[TP,,[total solids],or specific gravity
(SG) valuesa
Refractive index
Plasma [TP (g/dL)
Plasma [TS] (g/dL)
Urine SG
Plasma SGb
1.3368
1.0
2.1
1.011
1.010
1.3376
1.5
2.5
1.013
1.011
1.3386
2.0
3.1
1.017
1.012
1.3396
2.5
3.7
1.019
1.014
1.3406
3.0
4.2
1.021
1.015
1.3416
3.5
4.8
1.024
1.016
1.3426
4.0
5.3
1.027
1.018
1.3436
4.5
5.9
1.029
1.019
1.3444
5.0
6.3
1.031
1.020
1.3454
5.5
6.9
1.033
1.021
1.3464
6.0
7.5
1.035
1.023
The table includes data for TP, from 1.0 to 6.0 g/dL at 0.5 g/dL intervals.The table provided by
American Optical has TP data for each 0.1 g/dL. Because the relationships are nearly linear, other values can
be estimatedby interpolation.
bValues arerounded to the nearest thousandth so they canmore easily be comparedwith the urine SG
values.
and,by itself, the EDTA （at the recommended concentration) had minimal effect
on the fuid’s refractive index if the EDTA tube was at least one-third full.Refrac
[TPd values (i.e., by assessing the fuid refractometrically prior to and after adding
different volumes of it to EDTA tubes).
C.Refractometric estimates of specific gravity (SG)
1.The SG scale is calibrated for urine and will approximate the true SG of a protein-
poor and glucose-poor fuid because most of the fuid’s refractive index is due to
electrolytes (therefore, similar to urine refractive properties).
2. Clinical refractometers do not have a scale for plasma SG, but Leica, American
Optical, and other refractometer manufacturers provide tables to convert plasma
refractive index to plasma SG. In Table 19.6,note that the difference in the SG
values (urine versus plasma) becomes greater as the [TPe increases. Also note that
the total solids (TS) concentration is not equivalent to theTP
3.If a laboratory reports a SG for a body fuid, the value might be a “urine SG" (if
taken from refractometer scale) or a “plasma SG"(if taken from a conversion table)
Some published methods of classifying effusions use[TP and SG values.If a SG
of 1.017 or 1.019 is a decision threshold, the SG value was from the urine SG scale.
A refractive index of 1.3386 converts to a urine SG of 1.017 and a plasma SG of
1.012 (Table 19.6)
4.Using the refractometer to estimate urine SG is very useful because the SG values
typically reflect changes inurine osmolality (see Chapter 8）However,plasma SG or
osmolality values typically do not help with the interpretation of effusions.
III.
Chemical analysis
A.As described in the previous section, an effusion’s[TP] is routinely estimated by
measuring its refractive index. A chemical assay to measure [TP] may be used, but
additional expense may not be warranted.
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
851
B.The concentrations ofurea,Crt,cholesterolG,electrolytes,and thersubstances r
occasionally measured to characterize some effusions (see the Selected Analyses for
Pleural and Peritoneal Effusions section).
IV.
[Erythrocyte] or hematocrit (Hct)
A.Either an [erythrocyte] or a Hct should be determined when the effusion is pink to red,
so that those values can be compared with peripheral blood [erythrocyte] or Hct.The
analytic methods used for measuring [erythrocyte] or Hct in peripheral blood (see
Chapter 3) typically can be used for effusions,but the values may be lower than the
assay's detection limit.
B.Efusions other than transudates typically contain a few erythrocytes either because the
pathologic disorder is causingminor bloodvessel damage or because the collected fuid
was contaminated with peripheral blood during collction.However,the [erythrocyte]
in most pink effusions is typically very low (Het<3 %，[erythrocyte]<0.5×10%/μL);
such values do not represent a hemorrhagic effusion.
C.When hemorrhage is a major contributor to the formation of the effusion,the [erythro-
cyte] (or Hct value) can approach the values found in an animal's peripheral blood.
Soon after hemorrhage into a cavity,the[erythrocyte] decreases because of theresorp-
tion of erythrocytes via the lymphatic vessels and the altered oncotic pressure gradients
that promote fuid movement from interstitium to the body cavity.
V.
[Total nucleated cell concentration](TNCC)
A.Because pleural and peritoneal fuids contain leukocytes, mesothelial cells, and poten
tially other nucleared cells, it is appropriate to refer to their concentration as a TNCC
instead of a[leukocyte].However,the electronic and manual methods of determining
leukocyte concentrations (see Chapter 2)will provide adequate TNCCvalues formost
fuids.If the nucleated cells are present in clumps or tissue fragments, the measured
TNCCwill beless than the trueconcentration.
the Huid is grossly abnormalbecause the fuid may contain clumps of cells debris,
orothermaterial that could plug the small ubing or orifices of electronic cell
counters.
C.By itself, an effusion's TNCC has limited value for determining the cause of an
effusion.The lowest TNCCvalues (frequently<1.0x10/μL) are found in protein
poor transudares.The greatest TNCC values (occasionally > 100.0 x 10°/μL) are found
in exudates and neoplastic lymphoid effusions.
VI.
Microscopic examination
A.When cavitary effusions are clear and colorless (i.e.,look like HO and therefore are
protein-poor and cell-poor transudates),a microscopic examination of thefuid
typically yields very little useful information.For all other effusions, the microscopic
fluid analysis. Part of the microscopic examination is the examination of cells, but
1.Stains designed for blood films are frequently used for the routine staining of
cytopreparations.Onemajor advantage ofusing the blood stainsis that people are
familiar with the staining of blood cells and similar features are found in the
nucleated cells of effusions.
852
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
2.The microscopic examination should include all parts of one or more cytoprepara
tions because of the potential uneven distribution of cells and other microscopic
structures.
B.Major aspects of the examination are as follows:
1.Nucleated cell differential count is done to determine percentages of each nucleated
cell; the count is completed by either a subjective estimate or an objective enumera-
tion.With a measuredTNCC and anucleated celldifferential count,approximate
concentrations of each cell type can be calculated and interpreted. For example,
60 % neutrophils in a fuid with a TNCC of 1.0 x 10°/μL is interpreted differently
than 60 %neutrophils in a fuid with a TNCCof 100.0x10²/μL.If cell concentra-
tionsare calculated from the percentages,they probably shouldbe considered crude
estimates because of the inaccuracies of TNCCvalues and the nucleated cell
differentialcounts.
2.Some people include mesothelial cells in the differential cell count, and others do
not.If they are not included,it ismore difficult to interpret the TNCC,and
concentrations of other nucleated cells cannot be calculated or consistently esti-
mated.Mesothelial cells are often in clusters, so their inclusion may lead to increased
variability of the differential count, depending on whether clusters of cells were
present in the counting region.Variabiliry is also a problem for other celltypes
when they are clumped.
3.During the examination, diagnostic features of cells are identified;for example, size
shape,nuclear featuresand cytoplasmic features,including nclusons r
microorganisms.
4.If present, extracellular structures such as microorganisms,debris, and other material
are identified.
C.Cells that are routinely identified in pleural and peritoneal fuids
1. Neutrophils
a.Generally,an increased [neutrophil] in an effusion indicates that exudation is a
component of the effusion formation.However,exudationmay be the primary
reason for the effusion, or exudation may have occurred after another process
created the effusion.
b.The neutrophils in effusions may have microscopic features that are similar to
those seen in blood films; if so,they are called nondegenerate neutrophils (Plate
14A and B) [for all plares, see the color section of this book]. The presence of
nondegenerate neutrophils in body fuids suggests a nonbacterial cause of the
effusion,but such neutrophils can be found in bacterial exudates.For example
neutrophils adjacent to colonies ofActinomyces orNocardiamay have degenerate
features,but other neutrophils in the exudate may not (Plate 14C).
c.Degenerate neutrophils are cells thar have aoquired certain structural defects after
they have left the blood.Microscopic features of the classic degenerate neutrophil
include a swollen and pale-staining nucleus, lack of nuclear chromatin patterns,
and variable degrees of cytoplasmic vacuolization (Plate 14C and D).
(1)There are many variations berween the severely degenerate and nondegener-
ate cells, so it may be difficult to classify the cells consistently.
(2)A degenerate neutrophil is not a toxic neutrophil.Toxic neutrophils develop
their structural features in bone marrow and typically are seen in blood or
marrow samples. Microscopic features of degenerate neutrophils reflect
events that occur after neutrophils leave the vascular system.
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
853
(3)Nondegenerate neutrophils can deteriorate within hours of sample collec
tion, and thus they may acquire features resembling degenerate neutrophils
Therefore,itmay be difficult to differentiate degenerative change fromin
vitro deteriorationif cytopreparationswere notmade soon after sample
collection.
d. Differentiating nondegenerare from degenerate or deteriorated neutrophils is
less important than searching for direct evidence of the cause of the infamma.
nondegenerate neutrophils may occur with sepsis. However, the presence of
intense.
2.Lymphocytes
a.The lymphocytes in most effusions resemble the small lymphocytes that are
typically seen in peripheral blood films. These cells have small nuclei (with
diameters <10 μm in areas where cells are well spread), clumped chromatin
patterns, and small amounts of blue cytoplasm (Plates 14E and 15L)
b.When they have been stimulated, the lymphocytes may have features of reactive
lymphocytes, plasmacytoid lymphocytes, or plasma cells (Plate 14F).
c.Neoplastic lymphocytes (Plate 14H and I) frequently have nuclei with diameters
≥ 10 μm and finely granular to homogeneous chromatin patterns.Frequently, the
cells have moderate amounts of deeply basophilic cytoplasm.The cells may have
prominent or largenucleoli
d.In some effusions, differentiating neoplastic from reactive (proplastic) lympho
cytes can be very difficult or impossible based on their microscopic features.
Then,other diagnostic methods （e.g.,assessment of associated abnormal solid
tissue mass) may be needed to determine whether the lymphocytes are neoplastic.
3.Mesothelial cells
a.Mesothelial cells are of mesodermal origin and occur as individual cells or sheets
of squamous-like epithelial cells in health. They have round to oval nuclei and
usually moderate amounts of pale blue cytoplasm. Individual cells usually are
round to oval; cells in sheets can be polyhedral (Plate 14l and J).
b.Reactive mesotbelial cells,which are round to oval,have varying degrees of
increased cytoplasmic basophilia and/or hyperchromatic nuclei (Plate 14K and
L).These proplastic cells may be multinucleated or have mitotic nuclei. The cells
may have small cytoplasmic vacuoles.
c.Besides their structural functions,mesothelial cells are involved in infammatory
responses of pleural and peritoneal cavities, including antigen presentation,
cytokine production, release of oxidants and proteases, and promotion of the
migration of neutrophils.2-44
4.Macrophages
a.Outside of the vascular system,monocytes transform into macrophages or
histiocytes. Cells with the appearance of monocytes,macrophages, or transition
phases occur infuidsbuttheymay allbe lumpedintoamacrophage category
once the cells have left the vasculature.
b.The cytoplasms of macrophages frequently contain vacuoleslipid,or cellular
debris, and might contain engulfed cells (e.g., erythrocytes and leukocytes),
organisms,or foreignmaterial Plate 14MO）.Cellsorganisms,or foreign
material may undergo phagocytosis within 30 min in vitro (Plate 14O).
854
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
(1)Erythrophages are relatively common in effusions when blood contaminates
a fluid that contains activated macrophages and when cytopreparations are
not made soon after sample collection.
(2）Leukophages are relatively common in some fuids,especially in the
peritoneal fuid of horses.Frequently,the leukophages contain neutrophils at
various stages of degradation (Plate 14B).
5.Mononuclear cells
a.The term is often used collectively for cells that are not granulocytes or mast cells
（though they also have only one nucleus).Most so-called mononuclear cells in
effusions are lymphocytes,macrophages,or mesothelial cells, and they can be
categorized as such in most cases.
b. In well-prepared, well-stained cytopreparations, most small lymphocytes and
macrophages that have vacuolated cytoplasms or contain engulfedmaterial are
easily recognized.However, some reactive lymphocytes and smaller monocytoid
or histiocytic cells are not easily differentiated. Typically, those cells are part of an
infammatory response, and accurate differentiation is probably not needed.
c.Very degenerate neutrophils may be mistaken for macrophages and therefore so-
called mononuclear cells.This is most common with bacterial exudates.
d. Some histiocytic cells and reactive mesothelial cells have similar nuclear and
cytoplasmic fearures. If the microscopist is not confident of the cell's lineages,
they can be called large mononuclear cells. Such a classification probably will not
alter the interpretation of the fuid analysis results because these cells typically are
relatively minor contributors to the TNCC.
6.Erythrocytes are found in nearly all samples.Abnormal microscopic features often
represent artifacts (e.g., membrane spicules, hypochromia, and refractile membranes)
but may reflect pathologic states (e.g., acanthocytes,polychromasia,and associated
organisms).Findings suspected to represent a pathologic state should be confirmed
byfnding the same abnormality in a stained film of fresh blood.
a.If the hemorrhagic effusion has been present for at least a few hours,erythro-
hematoidin crystals may be found in macrophages.
b.Erythrophages,siderophages,and othermacrophagesbecome amore prominent
feature of effusions the longer the blood has been in a cavity.
c.When the hemorrhage is caused by a nontraumatic event (e.g., hemorrhagic
neoplasm), frequently there is either recurring hemorrhage or persistent low-grade
hemorrhage. Thus, the effusion may have properties of both an acute hemor-
rhagic effusion (ie.,high Hct value) and a chronic hemorrhagic effusion (ie.,
siderophages)
d.If the making of a cytopreparation was delayed for a few hours or less in
some cases, then the presence of erythrophages may represent in vitro
phagocytosis.
D.Platelets can be found in collected samples.The presence of platelets suggests ongoing
(or very recent) hemorrhage or contamination of fuid with peripheral blood during
collection. Clots indicate fibrinogen was in the sample, but the fibrinogen could be
present because of exudation,hemorrhage,orblood contamination.
E.Nucleated cells that are less commonly found in pleural and peritoneal fuids
1.Eosinophils usually have features similar to those seen in peripheral blood
(Plate 15A)
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
855
2.The presence of relatively few mast cells are not unusual in exudates and are also
found in other effusions (e.g,heart failure effusions). Unless the cells have promi-
nent microscopic features ofmalignancy,neoplastic andnonneoplastic mast cells
cannot be reliably differentiated viamicroscopy.
3.Neoplastic cells are not common in effusions (Plate 15B-D). More information on
neoplastic cells is found in Comments About Specific Effusions, sect. III.
4.Occasionally, cells from tissues are found in effusions. Hepatocytes are occasionally
found as contaminants in pleural and peritoneal fuids. Squamous epithelial cells
from skin may enter the fuid during the collection process, but they may also be
present in equine peritoneal effusions because of gastric rupture (Plate 14D）or
squamous cell carcinoma (Plate 15D).
F.Noncellular findings.
1.Organisms (primarily bacteria and fungi) can be found in exudates.
a.Most bacteria stain dark purple, dark grey,or dark blue with a Romanowsky
stain (see Chapter 2) and usually can be identified as cocci or bacilli (Plate 15E
and F).
b.Mycobacterium spp.do not stain withaRomanowsky stain and therefore appear
as white or clear bacilli.
C.Actinonryces and Nocardia may not be uniformly distributed in an exudate.
Squash preparation of yellow particulates (sulfur granules) in an exudate may
reveal a colony of filamentous, beaded, branching bacilli consistent with such
bacteria (Plate 14C).Fusobacterium bacteria may also be beaded and filamentous
but do not branch.
d.Dead or damaged bacteria may stain a variety of colors from red to light grey or
light purple.The shapes of the dead organisms may be different from those that
were live when the sample was prepared for examination.
e.Fungi may appear as yeasts (e.g., Blastomyces or Histoplasma),hyphae (e.g
Aspergillus or Mucor),or yeasts and pseudohyphae (Candida)(Plate 15G). Most
yeasts will have a positive staining reaction with a Wright stain (ie.,blues or
purples), but hyphae may have negative reactions. Nonstaining hyphae can be
derected as delineated linear structures that are displacing cells and other stained
material.
g.Large ciliated protozoa (e.g.,Balantidium sp.,Polmorphella sp., and Cyclo-
posthium sp.) may be found in equine peritoneal exudates or in intestinal taps
(Plate 15H) The protozoa typically are commensal inhabitants of equine
intestines but may be secondary invaders of diseased intestinal mucosa.
2.Other material that can be found in exudates and lipid effusions includes urine
crystals (Plate 151）, sperm (Plate 15J),bilirubin crystals,bile(Plate 15K),mucus,
plant material, barium crystals (Plate 14N),and lipid droplets (Plate 15L). Sudano
philic droplets can be identified in the fuid and in macrophages by using a Sudan
stain (Plate 15L). To look for Sudanophilic droplets, Sudan stain is placed on top of
an air-dried cytopreparation of the effusion, and then a coverslip is placed on top of
the liquid.Via microscopy,heSudanophilic droplets appear asround,orange tored
structures that tend to float (just under the coverslip) or are within macrophages.
3.The staining intensity of the space between cells tends to be greater when the fuid
has a high [TP]. A drying artifact may create protein crescents when the [TP] is
increased (Plate 15N).
856
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
Table 19.7.The [TG],[cholesterol],and Chol:TG ratios in chylous and nonchylous
effusions of dogs and cats
Canine effusions
Feline effusions
Chylous
Nonchylous
Chylous
Nonchylous
Fossum studya
Number in group
6
3
4
5
Cholesterol (mg/dL)
37-127
48-139
38-232
65-111
Triglyceride (mg/dL)
45-2,687
8-33
91-4,670
0-59
Chol:TGratio
0.04-0.15
3.88-6.00
0.05-0.70
1.88-110.00
s pe
Number in group
6
17
13
12
Cholesterol (mg/dL)
23-70
3-119
18-148
16-107
Triglyceride (mg/dL)
110-610
3-83
130-3490
23-93
Chol:TG ratio
0.04-0.64
0.33-27.33
0.01-0.64
0.23-7.64
Source. Fossum et al.49
Source: Waddle and Gigera
SELECTEDANALYSESFORPLEURALANDPERITONEALEFFUSIONS
L.
[Cholesterol]and[TG]
A.If a diagnostician suspects an effusion is chylous,but the routine analysis does not
provide enough evidence for a firm conclusion,measuring the [cholesterol] and [TG] of
the effusion and the animal's serum may provide data to differentiate chylous and
nonchylous effusions.
B.In a study involving dogs and cats,effusions were considered to be chylous if there
wasmicroscopic appearance of chylomicrons (ie,Sudanophilic droplets）,the sample
couldnotbecleared with centrifugation,or thefuid did clear afterthe addition of
ether.Effusions were classfiedasnonchylous if they didnotmeet the chylous effusion
criteria. The results of the study are in Table 19.7.
1.As would be expected with the presence of Sudanophilic droplets in the chylous
effusions but not in the nonchylous effusions, the triglyceride concentrations were
greater in the chylous than in the nonchylous.Also the Chol:TG ratios were much
smaller in the chylous effusions because of the greater triglyceride concentrations.
2.The diagnoses for dogs with chylous effusions included thoracic lymphangiectasia,
intestinal lymphangiectasia, and aortic body tumor.
3.The diagnoses for cats with chylous effusions included thoracic lymphangiectasia,
diaphragmatic hernia,cardiomyopathy,andmetastatic pulmonary adenocarcinoma.
C.In another study involving dogs and cats,5 effusions were considered to be chylous
effusions if lipoprotein electrophoresis revealed a distinct chylomicron band at the
origin of the electrophoretic pattern.
1.The major findings in this study’s laboratory data were as follows (Table 19.7):
a.Each chylous effusion had a [TG] >100 mg/dL,and each nonchylous effusions
hada [TG]<100mg/dL
b.Each chylous effusions had a Chol:TG ratio < 1,whereas most nonchylous
effusionshad Chol:TGratios>1.
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
857
c.Grossly,nearly all chylous effusions had white,milky appearances after centrifu
gation, whereas none of the nonchylous effusions had that appearance.
2.The diagnoses for dogs with chylous effusion included lymphoma, venous thrombo-
sis,cardiomyopathy,and idiopathic chylothorax.
3.The diagnoses for cats with chylous effusion included cardiomyopathy,diaphrag-
matic hernia, pericardial effusion, and idiopathic chylothorax.
D.Cholesterol and TG assays that are designed for serum samples (see Chapter 16)
typically can be used to analyze the supernatant of suspected chylous effusions.When
the sample looks like milk, the sample may need to be diluted before the [TG] is
measured.
II.
[Urea]and [Crt]
A.When a diagnosis of uroperitoneum is being considered, the measurement of the [urea]
and[Crt] in the peritoneal fuid and a time-matched serum sample may help establish a
diagnosis. It is important that the effusion concentrations be compared with recent
serum concentrations because of the rapid diffusion of urea and Crt from the cavitary
fluid to lymph and blood
B.Urea and Crt are small molecules that diffuse through capillary walls; urea
diffuses quicker than Crt. In health and most pathologic states that create effusions,
the serum and peritoneal fuid concentrations of urea and Crt are nearly the
same.
C.When there is a recent addition of urine to peritoneal fuid, the resulting fuid
will have a greater [urea] and [Crt] than plasma concentrations because the [urea] and
[Crt] in urine are typically much greater than plasma or serum concentrations. With
time and with diffusion of molecules due to concentration gradients, the [urea] and
[Crt] in the extravascular and intravascular fuids willbecome similar again, and both
will be increased
1.After 45 h of experimentally induced uroperitoneum, the [Crt] in the peritoneal
fluid was about twice the serum [Crt]: The mean peritoneal fluid [Crt] was
11.6 mg/dL (range, 5.5-15.6 mg/dL), whereas the mean serum [Crt] was 5.2 mg/dL
(range, 1.2-6.7mg/dL）. However, the [urea] in the effusion and serum at 45 h were
nearly the same.These data support the fact that urea enters the blood faster than
does Crt.Azotemia (either an increased [urea] or [Crt]) was detectable in a few dogs
within 5 h but in all 11 dogs by 21 h afterrupture.” The serum[urea] and [Crt]
continued to increase over the3 d study.51
2.In a retrospective study of 13 dogs with uroperitoneum, the creatinine concentra-
tions in peritoneal fuid were at least twice theblood”concentrations in 11 dogs.
The durations of the spontaneous conditions were not known. (Note: The authors
did not specify whether the “blood” creatinine concentrations were serum or plasma
concentrations.) The ratios for eight dogs with other peritoneal effusions were from
0.7 to 1.2
3.Ratios of peritoneal fluid [Crt] to serum [Crt] have been reported for other animals
with uroperitoneum: foals (mean, 3.5; and range, 2.74.6),3 horses (>2.0),and
interpretationofdatabutotheraspectsofthecaseshould becarefullyconsideed.
For example,a cat with a urinary tract obstruction may have been severely azotemic
before the uroperitoneum occurred.Thus, the ratio may not be > 2 when the cat is
first examined.
858
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
D.Urea (or urea nitrogen)and Crt assays that are designed for serum samples (see Chapter
8) typically can be used to analyze the supernatant of suspected uroperitoneal effusions.
For some assays, the sample may need to be diluted before analysis to obtain analyte
concentrations within the assay's analytical range.
I1I.
[Na],[Cl],and[K+]
A.Na, Cl, and K are freely diffusible through most capillary walls, and thus their
concentrations in plasma,interstitial fuids,and most pleural and peritoneal effusions
are nearly the same.The major exception to this concept occurs in uroperitoneum.
Compared to plasma and most extracellular fluids, the urine [Na’] and [Cl] are less
and the urine [K] are greater.Thus,in the early stages of uroperitoneum, the perito
neal fuid [Na] and [Cl]will be less than plasma concentrations,and the peritoneal
fuid[K]will be greater than plasma concentrations.With time,diffusion of electro
lytes and HO willreduce the differences.
B.In a retrospective study of 26 cases of feline uroperitoneum,the[K] was measured in
five cats. The ratios of the peritoneal fluid [K+] to serum [K+] ranged from O.9 to 2.4,
with a mean of 1.2.55
C. In a retrospective study of 13 dogs with uroperitoneum, ratios of the peritoneal fuid
[K+] to the “blood” [K+] were ≥ 1.4 in all dogs (median, 2.7; and range, 1.44.9).
(Note: The authors did not specify whether the “blood” [K+] was a serum or plasma
concentration.)52 The ratios for eight dogs with other peritoneal effusions ranged from
0.7 to 1.2.
D.In an experimental production of uroperitoneum in dogs, hyponatremia and hypochlo
remia were apparent between 1 and 2 d and pronounced by 4 d. Hyperkalemia was
apparent in some dogs by 2d and in nearly all dogs by 4 d.51
E.Assays designed for serum [Na], [K+], and [Cl] (see Chapter 9) may not provide
accurate electrolyte concentrations in the supernatant of cavitary effusions. Some ion
selective electrodemethodsrequire a proteinaceous fuid,so urine or a uroperitoneal
effusion may not be acceptable.Anions other than Cl may react with the electrodes of
the Cl assay.For cellular samples,measured K+] might include Kreleased from cells
either in vivo or in vitro.
IV.
[L-lactate]
A.L-lactate is the product of anaerobic glycolysis, and one reason for hyperlactatemia is
tissue hypoxia (see Chapter 9). The L-lactate produced by cells may enter venous blood
to cause hyperlactatemia but also may enter interstitial fuids and diffuse into pleural or
peritoneal fuids.An increased [L-lactate] in pleural and peritoneal fuids may be a
marker of increased anaerobic glycolysis in thebody cavities.
B.An increased [L-lactate] in peritoneal fuids has been found in animals with strangulated
and nonstrangulated intestinal obstructions, abdominal neoplasms, and bacterial exudates
1.The [L-lactate] in peritoneal fluids was greater in colicky horses with intestinal
ischemia secondary to strangulating obstruction (8.5 ± 5.5 mmol/L, mean ±
standard deviation) compared to colicky horses with nonstrangulating obstruction
(2.1 ± 2.1 mmol/L) and healthy horses (0.6 ± 0.2 mmol/L).5 The[L-lactate] in
equine peritoneal fuid is used as an indicator of the severity of intestinalischemia in
colicky horses
2. The [L-lactate] in peritoneal effusions was greater in dogs with intra-abdominal
neoplasms (hemangiosarcoma,carcinomatosis,neuroendocrine tumor,metastatic
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
859
adenocarcinoma,and pancreatic carcinoma)(3.8± 1.7mmol/L,mean ±
standard deviation) than in dogs that did not have abdominal neoplasms (1.7±
0.5 mmol/L）.7 The greater [L-lactate] in the neoplastic group could be due to
increased anaerobic glycolysis by neoplastic cells or to the neoplasmsinterfering
with blood supply to nonneoplastic tissue.
3.The [L-lactate] in peritoneal effusions was greater in dogs and cats with bacterial
exudates than in dogs and cats that had nonbacterial peritoneal effusions caused by a
variety of disorders.58.59
a.In the dogs of one study, the [L-lactate] was 4.2 (3.8-8.4) mmol/L (median
and range) in the bacterial exudates (n =3) and 1.9 (1.1-5.7) mmol/L
(median and range) in the nonbacterial effusions (n = 4).58 Similar data were
found in another 8 dogs with bacterial exudates and1l dogs withnonbacterial
effusions.59
b.In cats of one study,the [L-lactate] was 6.2 (1.3-10.6) mmol/L (median and
range) in the bacterial exudates (n = 5) and 1.4 (1.2-1.6) mmol/L (median and
range) in the nonbacterial effusions (n = 2).5 Similar data were found in another
nine cats with bacterial exudates, but a wider range of values was found in nine
other cats with nonbacterial effusions.59
c.The differences between peritoneal fuid [L-lactate] and plasma [L-lactate] were
usually greater in the bacterial exudate group than in the nonbacterial group. A
difference greater than 2mmol/Lwas suggested as an indicator of septic peritoni-
tis; the same criterion would have incorrectly classified three of eight dogs and
five of nine cats in the second study.9 The pathogenesis of the increased [L-
lactate] in the bacterial exudates was not explained,but at least two explanations
are possible:
(1)Bacteria can produce bothL-lactate and D-lactate,and thus bacteria could
be a source of the L-lactate in the bacterial exudates.
(2)L-lactate could also be produced by leukocytes and erythrocytes in the
exudate. Cell concentrations in the bacterial effusions tended to be greater
than thosein thenonbacterial effusions.
4. The [L-lactate] in peritoneal fuid was increased within 2 h of experimental intesti-
nal strangulation in dogs and continued to increase during the 24 h experiment. The
plasmaL-lactate]changedvery littlein thesurvivor group,butincreasedrapidly
after 8h in the nonsurvivor group.6
C.Assays designed for serum or plasma [L-lactate] (see Chapter 9) typically can be used to
analyze the supernatant of effusions. Interpretation of effusion [L-lactate] should also
consider that erythrocytes and leukocytes are a potential source of L-lactate.Also,L-
lactate could be produced by cells in the effusion after sample collection, and thus
samples need to be processed and analyzed quickly. If samples cannot be analyzed
quickly, the fuid could be placed in sodium fuoride tubes (see Chapter 9) or the cells
removed from theeffusion.
V.
[Glucose]
the [glucose] in effusions with knowledge of the plasma or serum [glucose]
B.The glucose concentrations in peritoneal effusions were less in dogs and cats with
bacterial exudates than in dogs and cats that had nonbacterial peritoneal effusions
caused by a variety of disorders.8
860
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
1.In dogs,the glucose concentrations were 57 mmol/L (median) in the bacterial
exudates (n =7) and 137(51-322)mmol/L (median and range) in the nonbacterial
effusions (n =11).
2.In cats,the glucose concentrations were 100 (39-234) mmol/L (median and range)
in the bacterial exudates (n=7)and 141(107-224)mmol/L (median and range) in
the nonbacterial effusions(n =5）.
3.The glucose concentrations in bacterial exudates were less than the corresponding
blood glucose concentrations in all dogs and nearly all cats. The authors suggested
that a difference of 20 mg/dL or more indicates a bacterial exudate. However, the
TNCCs in all nonbacterial effusions were < 13.0 × 10²/μL, and nearly all bacterial
exudates had greater TNCCvalues.Thus, the differences in [glucose]may have been
due to differences in nucleated cell concentrations and not due to the presence of
bacteria.
C.Glucose assays that are designed for serum or plasma samples (see Chapter 14) typically
can be used to analyze the supernatant of effusions. Glucose will be consumed by cells
in theeffusionand thus samples should beanalyzed soon after collection.If samples
cannot be analyzed quickly, the fuid could be placed in sodium fluoride tubes (see
Chapter 14)or the cells removed from the effusion.
VI.[Bilirubin]
A.Because conjugated bilirubin is diffusible and plasma proteins are present in most
nontransudative effusions, the [bilirubin] in most effusions should be similar to the
serum [bilirubin]. The major exception to this concept is seen with bile peritonitis and
the formation of a bilious exudate. When damage to bile ducts or gallbladder results in
the leakage of bile into the peritoneal cavity, peritonitis will develop and the resultant
exudate will have an increased[bilirubin]
B.There are several potential causes of bile entering the peritoneal cavity,including blunt
or penetrating trauma,bile ductrupture secondary tomanual expression of the
gallbladder,necrotizing cholecystitis or cholangitis, cholelithiasis, and neoplasia of the
biliary tissues.
C.When the effusion develops secondary to bile leakage,results of fuid analysis reveal the
presence of an exudate that typically has a [TP >2.5 g/dL, a TNCC>5.0 × 10²/μL,
and>80 % neutrophils.61
1.Microscopic examination may detect a small to large amount of intracellular or
extracellular amorphous yellow to brown bile pigment,orbilirubin crystals,extra
cellularly or in macrophages.
2.If thebileleakageis secondary to a bacterial infection,the exudate may contain
intracellular or extracellular bacteria.
3.Typically, the [bilirubin] in the bile-containing effusions will be at least twice an
animal’s serum [bilirubin] .61.62
4.When a gallbladder lesion enables its mucoid secretion (called white bile) to enter
the peritoneal cavity, the resultant effusion may contain light basophilic mucinous
material when stained with a Romanowsky stain.62
D.Results of blood and urine analysis will depend on the cause and duration of the biliary
tract leakage;for example,if the animal had obstructive cholestasis prior to bile leakage
hyperbilirubinemia may have preceded the bile peritonitis. However, with trauma.
induced bile leakage,the hyperbilirubinemia occurs after the onset of the bile peritoni
tis.Likewise,an inflammatory leukocytosis may be the result of a bacterial cholangitis
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
861
that causes bile leakage, or an infammatory leukocytosis may occur after the onset of
acute bile peritonitis.
E.Bilirubin assays that are designed for serum or plasma samples (see Chapter 13)
typically can be used to analyze the supernatant of effusions. Bilirubin is degraded by
ultravioletlight,and thus effusions should be handled and storedto limit the sample's
exposure tolight.
VIl.[Ammonium]
A.The [ammonium] in peritoneal fuid was increased 24h after experimental intestinal
strangulation in dogs. The increase in the [ammonium] in the effusion may be caused
by ammonium passing through devitalized intestinal tissue.The plasma [ammonium]
changed very little in the study.o
B.Ammonium assays that are designed for plasma samples (see Chapter 13) typically can
be used to analyze the supernatant of effusions. In vitro factors can alter the [ammo-
nium] in the collected sample (see Chapter 13).
VIll.Protein concentrations
A.With the possible exception of immunoglobulins, the proteins detected in effusions
represent those that leaked through capillary walls.The greater amount of protein and
the larger proteins can pass through the more protein-permeable capillaries.
B.Protein electrophoresis
1.Protein electrophoresis of pleural and peritoneal fuid (especially if paired with
serum protein electrophoresis) will provide information about the permeability of
capillary beds. If the [TP] of the fuid is < 2.0 g/dL, the fuid may need be concen-
trated before electrophoresis.
2.In FIP exudates, the electrophoretic patterns of the cat‘s exudative effusion and its
serum are very similar because the disorder's vasculitis enables plasma proteins to
ooze into the pleural or peritoneal fluid.
C.In people, a pleural effusion [TP] to serum [TP] ratio > 0.5 is indicative of exudation if
the effusion does not contain blood.3
D.In people, a serum albumin-ascites gradient (serum [albumin] - effusion [albumin]) has
been used to help differentiate peritoneal efusions caused by portal hypertension (e.g
cirrhosis and congestive heart failure) from effusions caused by malignancies or inflam
matory states; the gradient is greater in the portal hypertension disorders than in the
other disorders.Most dogs with transudates caused byhepatic cirrhosis had a serum
albumin-ascites gradient > 1.1 g/dL, but so did about half of the dogs that had
effusonscausedbyplasiapanreatitiscongestiveheartfilure,rotein-losng
enteropathy, and other disorders.6
E.Concentrations of specific proteins can be measured in effusions, but the data available
are insufficient to establish the diagnostic value of such concentrations; for example,
phase protein (see Chapter 7), similar findings would be expected in cats with exudative
effusions not caused by FIP, but such documentation is not available.
F.TP and albumin assays that are designed for serum or plasma samples (see Chapter 7)
typically can be used to analyze the supernatant of effusions. The [TP] or [albumin]
might be below the assays' analytical ranges in some effusions. The bromcresol green
assay for [albumin] may not provide an accurate concentration if the dye binds to
globulins. Assays for some proteins may need to be species specific.
862
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
IX
Enzyme activity
A.Lipase activity: Peritoneal fuids from dogs with acute pancreatitis had much greater
lipase activity than other peritoneal effusions and were at least double the animal's
serumlipase activity.68
B.Alkaline phosphatase: In horses with colic or intestinal lesions,ALP activity may
increase in the peritoneal fuid predominantly because of increased granulocytic ALP
activity, but other data suggest that intestinal ALPmay contribute.The magnitude
of increased total ALP activity in peritoneal fuid was greater in horses with peritonitis
and intestinal rupture than in horses with strangulated and nonstrangulated intestinal
disorders; the study's analytical methods did not enable the identification of the ALP
increase total ALP activity in serum.9.70
C.Most enzyme assays that are designed for serum or plasma samples (see Chapter 12)
typically can be used to analyze the supernatant of effusions.
X.
Gram staining
A.Gram stain is used to different bacteria into two large groups: Gram-positive
bacteria and Gram-negative bacteria. The Gram stain involves two major steps:
(1) staining a bacterium's cell wall with a dye (either methyl violet or crystal violet)
and iodine, and (2) attempting to decolorize the cell wall by using ethanol or acetone
solution. In theory, the dye-iodine complex becomes fixed in the Gram-positive
organisms and thus they retain the dark purple stain,whereas the dye-iodine complex
is dissolved out of the cell walls of the Gram-negative organisms to produce pink
organisms.
B.The Gram stain is designed for staining of bacteria selected from colonies grown in a
variety of culture media, and it is difficult to apply the stain to cellular samples or
proteinaceous effusions uniformly and consistently.When the stain is applied to air
dried smears or films of effusions, several factors should be considered:
1.Dead Gram-positive organisms frequently have a Gram-negative reaction, that is, the
stain does not remain in the cell walls of dead Gram-positive bacteria during
decolorization.
2.Using too little ethanol or acetonemay produce a false Gram-positive reaction,
whereas using too much ethanol or acetone may produce a false Gram-negative
reaction.
3.Cell debris, especially from nuclei, has a Gram-negative reaction, and thus
Gram-negative bacteria can be dificult to locate among Gram-negative cellular
debris.
4.If used diagnostically, a set of known Gram-positive and Gram-negative slides
prepared from cellular efusions should be stained concurrently to serve as positive
and negative control slides.
5.The use of Gram stains is not necessary to detect the presence of bacteria.
Routine Romanowsky stains are excellent for this and offer much more, as
well.
XI.
Culturingformicroorganisms
A.Whenever an infection is suspected, fuid should be submitted for possible culturing of
organisms.
B.Usually,culturing can better detect organisms than can a microscopic examination of
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
863
COMMENTSABOUTSPECIFICEFFUSIONS
I
Septic and nonseptic exudates
A.The results of fuid analyses are sometimes classified as either septic exudates or
nonseptic exudates.
1.The term septic in this context frequently is used synonymously with bacterial and is
used when bacteria were found during the microscopic examination of an exudate.
However, others use the term septic whenever any microbe is found that is consid
ered the cause of the infectious exudate.
2.The term nonsepric in this context frequently is used synonymously with nonbacterial
and is used when bacteria were not found during the microscopicexamination of a
stained slide. However, the effusion might be a septic exudate.
a.Bacteria may have been present but not found via microscopy.This is not
uncommon when very few organisms are in a sample.
b.Bacteria may have been present but not culrured because of inappropriate culture
media (e.g-,aerobic versus anaerobic organisms) or the animal had been treated
with antibiotics prior to collection of an effusion.
c.The exudation is caused by a microbe other than bacteria but was not found by
microscopy or culruring
3.Occasionally, bacteria are found in an exudate but are contaminants. In these cases,
the exudate with bacteria might be a nonsepticexudate.
B.A classification of septic exudate is best applied to an effusion when it is known that the
exudation iscaused by an infctious agent.Conversely,aclassification ofnomsepti
exudate is best applied to an effusion when it isknown that the exudation is not caused
by an infectious agent; this is typically not known at the time a fuid sample is evalu
ated,so the term nonseptic exudate is not recommended for the interpretation of fuid
analyses.When bacteria are not found during the examination of an effusion, it may be
better to classify it asanexudate ofunknowncause than to classify it asanonseptic
exudate.
L.
Differentiation of a bacterial exudate and intestinal contents
A.Occasionally,a collected sample will contain numerous and pleomorphic bacteria that
are consistent with intestinal fora. The microscopist should consider that the sample
might be either a bacterial exudate secondary to intestinal leakage or that the sample
inadvertently was collected from an intestine (called an intestinal tap).
B.Both types of samples may contain numerous bacteria and evidence of ingesta (e.g
fragments of plantormusclefbers,or granular debris）andhave odors and a gross
appearance of intestinal contents.
1.The bacterial exudate may have few to numerous leukocytes, often degenerate, and a
[TP > 2.0 g/dL, whereas the intestinal fuid will not have many leukocytes, and
neutrophils, if present,will tend to be nondegenerate if the sample is processed
promptly. Rarely, the peritoneal Huid is collected within minutes of an intestinal
rupture,and thenitwillnot be possible to differentiate theperitoneal fuid sample
from intestinal fuid. However, the resultant inflammatory response will be evident
in samples collected a few hours later.
2.Even though the intestinal bacteria are not pathogens within the intestine, they are
recognized as foreign structures in the peritoneal fuid.Accordingly, they will be
engulfed by neutrophils and macrophages. Bacteria from an intestinal tap may
864
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
undergo phagocytosis invitro within15-30min after collection,further complicat
ing the differentiation of a mixed peritoneal fluid-intestinal tap from a ruptured
intestine.
II1.
Effusions associated with neoplasms
Most intrathoracic and intra-abdominal neoplasms that cause effusions do not slough
cells into the fuid; they typically cause an effusion by other processes (exudation,
transudationhmorrhageordamagedlymphatic sytem）hefaturesof th
effusions canbe extremely variable,with only rare neoplastic cells among many
inflammatory cells or with an extremely high concentration of neoplastic cells.
B.A critical examination of the nucleated cells is needed to suggest or confirm the
presence of neoplastic cells in an effusion.
nuclei > 10 μm in diamerer and has nuclear and cytoplasmic features of high cellular
activity. Smaller neoplastic lymphocytes are more diffcult to recognize via
microscopy.
2.Primary carcinomas or adenocarcinomas of abdominal or thoracic organs may
exfoliate cells into the effusion (Plate 15B）.Metastatic sarcomas typically do not
exfoliate cells nor do they cause effusions.
3.Metastatic mast cell neoplasia may slough cells into the effusion
4.Hemangioma or hemangiosarcoma (malignant hemangioendothelioma） of spleen,
liver, lung, or heart might rupture and cause a hemorrhagic effusion, but rarely will
neoplastic endothelial cells be found in the effusion.
5. Metastatic melanomas may damage tissues, damage lymphatic vessels, and exfoliate
neoplastic cells.
6.Pleural and peritoneal mesotheliomas can produce effusions with numerous anaplas
tic cells (Plate 15C). However diagnostically, it may be difficult to differentiate
neoplastic mesothelial cells from carcinomatous cells or proplastic mesothelial cells
found in nonneoplastic effusions.
7.Squamous epithelial cells in effusion samples are typically contaminants. However,
occasionally they represent neoplastic cells exfoliated from an abdominal neoplasm;
for example,gastric quamous cell carcinoma in horses.Poorly differentiated
squamous cellsmay be difficult to differentiate from reactive mesothelial cells. In
pregnant animals, squamous cells may be from amniotic fuid (Plate 15O).
IV.
Lymphocyte-rich effusions
A.Lymphocyte-richeffusions are those pleural and peritoneal efusions in which the
dominant nucleated cell is a lymphocyte (Plates 14E, G, and H and 15L). The
two most common causes of a lymphocyte-rich effusion are lymphoidneoplasia
(lymphoma)and an accumulation of lymph (Table19.5). Occasionally,a low-grade
B.Microscopic examination of the lymphocytes may enable a neoplastic lymphoid
effusion to be differentiated from a nonneoplastic effusion. The distinguishing features
include the following:
1.Nuclear diameters:If most lymphocyte nuclei are > 10 μm in diameter, then the
effusion is probably neoplastic.If most lymphocyte nuclei are<10 μm,lymphoid
neoplasia may or may not be present.
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
865
2.Chromatin patterns:Dispersed or finely granular chromatin (especially in larger
cells) is typical of lymphoid neoplasia.
3.Nucleoli:If many lymphocytes have nucleoli,then they probably are neoplasti;
proplastic cells may have similar nucleoli.
C.The[lymphocyte]in nonneoplastic effusions rarely exceeds 10.0x 10²/μL;
neoplastic lymphoid effusions occasionally have a TNCC < 10.0 x 10°/μL. The
higher the [lymphocyte] is, the more likely the analyzed fuid is a neoplastic lymphoid
effusion.
D.The routine analysis of the lymphocyte-rich effusion may not be able to definitively
differentiate a neoplastic from a nonneoplastic effusion.Additional diagnosticmethods
might include clonality studies of the collected lymphocytes or histopathologic exami
nation of excised tissue.
coursesmar
V.
Pericardial effusions
A. These are uncommon and mostly detected in radiographs and ultrasonograms (echocar-
diograms). Disorders associated with pericardial effusions include neoplasia and
infections,but they frequently are idiopathic.7476
B.Frequently, the collected pericardial fuid has features of a hemorrhagic effusion. In such
samples, erythrophages, siderophages, and hematoidin crystals are frequently found. A
chylous pericardial effusion may be secondary to chylothorax or occur alone.
including intense cytoplasmic basophilianuclei with distinctnucleoli,and variable
nuclear to cytoplasmic ratios. These cells should not be considered neoplastic cells even
though their microscopic features are consistent with neoplastic cells.Rarely,mesothe
lial cells contain hemosiderin granules.
D.Studies have provided data that suggest the pH of pericardial fluid may help differenti
ate pericardial effusion due toneoplasia from othercauses.However,individual cases
could not bereliably differentiated by the pHvalues.779Like the measurement of
blood pH (see Chapter 10), sample handling and processing are critical to obtain
accurate pH values.
VI.Amniotic fuid
A.Occasionally,amniotic fuid s inadvertently collected during paracentesis.
B.Unless there is a pathologic state involving a fetus or the amniotic sac, the amniotic
Auid is clear and watery, and a microscopic examination reveals numerous nucleated or
anucleate cornified squamous epithelial cells (Plate 15O)
References
1.Raskin RE,Meyer DJ. 200l.Adas ofCanine and Fefinr Cytofogy. Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
2.Cowell RL, Tyler RD. 1992. Cyology and Hematolegy ofthe Horse. Goleta, CA:American Veterinary.
3.CowllRL,TylerRD,Meinkoth JH.1999.DiasticCytolgy nd Hemalgy oftheDogand Cat2ndedition.St
Louis: CV Mosby
4.Baker R,Lumsden JH. 2000.The lymphatic system. In:Coler Atas of Cytology of theDog andCat,71-94.St Louis:
CV Mosby.
5.Perman V,Alsaker RD,Ris RC.1979. Cytology of theDog and Cat. South Bend,IN:American Animal Hospital
Association.
6.Cowell RL, Tyler RD.2002.Diagnostic Cytelogy and Hematelogy oftbe Hore, 2nd edition.Sr Louis: CV Mosby
866
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
7.Villiers E, Blackwood L,eds. 2005. BSA VA Mamual of Canine and Feline Clinical Patbology.2nd edition. Gloucester
British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
8. Miserocchi G. 1997. Physiology and pathophysiology of pleural fuid turnover. Eur Respir J 10:219-225.
9. Hosgood G, Salisbury SK, Cantwll HD, DeNicola DB. 1989. Intraperitoneal circulation and drainage in the dog.
Vet Surg18:261-268
10. Guyton AC, Hall JE. 2000. Texrbook of Medica Physielogy, 10th edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
11. Wang NS. 1985. Anatomy and physiology of the pleural space. Clin Chest Med 6:3-16.
12. O'Brien PJ, Lumsden JH. 1988. The cytologic examination of body cavity fuids. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim)
3:140-156
13. Kopcha M, Schultze AE. 1991. Peritoneal fuid. Part II. Abdominocentesis in cattle and interpretation of nonneoplas-
tic samples. Compend Contin Educ Pracr Vet 13:703-709.
14.Coles EH.1967.Veterinary Clinical Pathology,Ist edition.Philadelphia:WB Saunders.
15.Benjamin MM. 1961. Outfne efVekerimary Clirical Pathology, 2nd edition. Ames: Iowa State University Press
16.Duncan JR, Prasse KW. 1977.Veterinary Laboratory Medicme, 1st edition. Ames: Iowa State University Press.
17.Rose BD,Post TW.2001. Cliical Physiology ofArid-Base and Electrolyte Disorders,5th edition.New York
MeGraw-Hill
18. Lazaridis KN, Abraham SC, Kamath PS. 2005. Hematological malignaney manifesting as ascites. Nat Clin Pract
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2:112-116.
19. Molina E,Reddy KR. 2001. Noncirrhotic portal hypertension. Clin Liver Dis 5:769-787.
20. Koot BG, Houwen R, Pot Dj, Nauta J. 2004. Congenital analbuminaemia Biochemical and clinical implicationsA
case report and literature review. Eur J Pediatr 163:664670.
tions for cardiac failure and cirrhosis.Mt Sinai J Med 68:350361.
22. Bunch SE, Johnson SE, Cullen JM. 2001. Idiopathic noncirrhotic portal hypertension in dogs: 33 cases (1982-
1998). J Am Vet MedAssoc 218:392-399.
23. Rector WG Jr, Reynolds TB. 1984. Superiority of the serum-ascites albumin diference over the ascites total protein
concentration in separation of *transudative” and “exudative” ascites. Am J Med 77:83-85.
24. Runyon BA, Montano AA, Akriviadis EA, Antillon MR, Irving MA, McHutchison JG. 1992. The serum-ascites
albumin gradient is superior to the exudate-transudate concept in the differential diagnosis of ascites. Ann Intern
Med 117:215220.
25.Hosgood GL, Salisbury SK. 1989.Pathophysiology and pathogenesis of generalized peritonitis. Probl Vet Med
1:159-167.
26. Clark CH, Woodley CH. 1959. The absorption of red blood cells after parenteral injection at various sites. Am J Vet
Res20:1062-1066.
27.Gorecki R, Zajgner J, Wawrzenczyk B. 1972. Mechanisms of lymphorrhage into the serous cavities with description
of a case. Pol Med J 1l:1242-1251.
28. Birchard SJ, McLoughlin MA, Smeak DD. 1995. Chylothorax in the dog and cat: A review. Lymphology 28:6472.
29.Aslam N, Marino CR 2001. Malignant ascites New concepts in pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management. Arch
Intern Med 161:27332737.
30. Birchard SJ, Ware WA, Fossum TW, Fingland RB. 1986. Chylothorax asociated with congestive cardiomyopathy in a
cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:1462-1464.
31. Fossum TW, Forrester SD, Swenson CL, Miller MW, Cohen ND, Boothe HW, Birchard SJ. 1991. Chylothorax in
cats: 37 cases (1969-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:672678.
32. Fossum TW, Miller MW, Rogers KS, Bonagura JD, Meurs KM. 1994. Chylothorax associated with right-sided heart
failure in five cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 204:8489
33.Fossum TW, Birchard SJ, Jacobs RM. 1986. Chylothorax in 34 dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:1315-1318
34. Schumacher J, Brusie R, Spano J. 1989. Chylothorax in an Arabian flly. Equine Vet J 21:132-134.
35.Willard MD, Conroy JD. 1985. Chylothorax associated with blastomycosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
186:72-73.
36.Gores BR, Berg J, Carpenter JL,Ullman SL. 1994. Chylous ascites in cats: Nine cases (19781993). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 205:1161-1164.
37. Mair TS, Lucke VM. 1992. Chyloperitoneum associated with torsion of the large colon in a horse. Vet Rec 13l:421.
38. Nelson AW. 1979. Analysis of equine peritoneal Huid. Vet Clin North Am Large Anim Pract 1:267-274
39.Wilson AD, Hirsch WM, Osborne AD. 1985.Abdominocentesis in cattle: Technique and criteria for diagnosis of
peritonitis. Can Vet J 26:7480.
40.Estepa JC, Lopez I, Mayer-Valor R, Rodriguez M, Aguilera-Tejero E. 2006. The influence of anticoagulants on the
measurement of total protein concentration in equine peritoneal fuid. Res Vet Sci 80:510.
19/CAVITARYEFFUSIONS
867
41.American Optical. 1976. Instructions for use and care ofthe AO TS meter (a Goldberg refraetemeter). Buffalo,NY:
American Optical, Scientife Instrument Division.
42. Mutsaers SE. 2004. The mesothelial cell Int J Biochem Cell Biol 36:916.
43.Antony VB, Mohammed KA.1999.Pathophysiology of pleural space infections. Semin Respir Infect 14:9-17
44. Yung S, Li FK, Chan TM. 2006. Peritoneal mesothelial cell culture and biology. Perit Dial Int 26:162-173
45.Kjeldsberg CR,Knight JA.1986.Bocy Flids:Laberatry Exanatin efAmnieticCerebrespinaSeminalSerous 
Sywovial Fluid-A Textbeok Atlas, 2nd edition. Chicago: American Society of Clinical Pathologists.
46.Ringsrud KM, Linne JJ. 1995. Urinalsis and Body Fluids: A Colortext and Atlas. St Louis: CV Mosby.
47. Caruso KJ, James MP, Fisher D, Paulson RL, Christopher MM. 2003. Cytologic diagnosis of peritoneal cestodiasis in
dogs caused by Meocestoides sp. Vet Clin Pathol 32:50-60.
48. French RA, Meier WA, Zachary JF. 1996. Eosinophilic colitis and hepatitis in a horse with colonic intramucosal
ciliated protozoa.Vet Pathol 33:235-238.
49. Fossum TW, Jacobs RM, Birchard SJ. 1986. Evaluation of cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations in differentiat-
ing chylous and nonchylous pleural effusions in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:4951.
50.Waddle JR,Giger U. 1990. Lipoprotein electrophoresis differentiation of chylous and nonchylous pleural effusions in
dogs and cats and its correlation with pleural effusion triglyceride concentration. Vet Clin Pathol 19:80-85.
51. Burrows CF, Bovee KC. 1974. Metabolic changes due to experimentally induced rupture of the canine urinary
bladder. Am J Vet Res 35:1083-1088
52. Schmiedt C, Tobias KM, Otto CM. 2001. Evaluation of abdominal fuid: Peripheral blood creatinine and potassium
ratios for diagnosis of uroperitoneum in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 1l:275-280.
53.Richardson DW,Kohn CW.1983.Uroperitoneum in the foal J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:267-271.
54.Nyrop KA, DeBowes RM, Cox JH, Coffman JR. 1984. Rupture of the urinary bladder in two postparturient mares
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 6:S510-S513.
55. Aumann M, Worth LT, Drobatz K]. 1998. Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases (1986-1995). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
34:315-324.
56. Latson KM, Nieto JE, Beldomenico RM, Snyder JR. 2005. Evaluation of peritoneal fluid lactate as a marker of
intestinal ischaemia in equine colic. Equine Vet J 37:342-346.
57. Nestor DD, MeCullough SM, Schacffer DJ. 2004. Biochemical analysis of neoplastic versus nonneoplastic abdominal
effusions in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 40:372375.
58. Bonczynsli JJ, Ludwig LL, Barton LJ, Loar A, Peterson ME. 2003. Comparison of peritoneal fuid and peripheral
blood pH,bicarbonate, glucose, and lactate concentration as a diagnostic tool for septic peritonitis in dogs and cats.
Vet Surg 32:161-166.
59. Levin GM, Bonczynski J, Ludwig LL, Barton LJ, Loar AS. 2004. Lactate as a diagnostic test for septic peritoneal
effusions in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 40:364-371.
60.DeLaurier GA, Cannon RM, Johnson RH Jr, Sisley JF,Baisden CR, Mansberger AR Jr. 1989. Increased peritoneal
Huid lactic acid values and progresive bowel strangulation in dogs. Am J Surg 158:32-35.
61.Ludwig LL, MeLoughlin MA, Graves TK, Crisp MS.1997.Surgical treatment of bile peritonitis in 24 dogs and 2
cats: A retrospective study (1987-1994). Vet Surg 26:90-98.
with mucinous material in abdominal fuid as the prominent cytologic finding. Vet Clin Pathol 32:114120.
63. Eid AA, Keddissi JI, Samaha M, Tawk MM, Kimmell K, Kinasewit GT. 2002. Exudative effusions in congestive
heart failure.Chest 122:1518-1523.
64.Han SH, Reynolds TB, Fong TL. 1998. Nephrogenic ascites Analysis of 16 cases and review of the literature.
Medicine (Baltimore)77:233-245.
dogs with transudative abdominal effusion. J Vet Intern Med 14:613618.
66. Duthie S, Eckersall PD, Addie DD, Lawrence CE, Jarrett O. 1997. Value of alpha 1-acid glycoprotein in the
diagnosis of feline infectious peritonitis. Vet Rec 141:299-303.
67. Bence LM, Addie DD, Eckersall PD. 2005. An immunoturbidimetric assay for rapid quantitative measurement of
feline alpha-1-acid glycoprotein in serum and peritoneal fuid. Vet Clin Pathol 34:335-341.
68. Guija de Arespacochaga A, Hitmair KM, Schwendenwein I. 2006. Comparison of lipase activity in peritoneal fuid
53:119-122
69.Froscher BG,Nagode LA.19s1. Origin and importance of increased alkaline phosphatase activity in peritoneal fuids
of horses with colic. Am J Vet Res 42:888891.
70. Davies JV, Gerring EL, Goodburn R, Manderville P. 1984. Experimental ischaemia of the ileum and concentrations
of the intestinal isocnzyme of alkaline phosphatase in plasma and peritoneal Auid. Equine Vet J 16:215217.
868
FUNDAMENTALSOFVETERINARYCLINICALPATHOLOGY
serum and peritoneal fuid from horses with acute colic. J Vet Intern Med 18:564567.
72. Horney B. 2005. The diagnostics and prognostic value of allaline phosphatase activity in serum and peritoneal Huid
from horses with acute colic. J Vet Intern Med 19:783-784.
73. Tamsma JT, Keizer HJ, Meinders AE. 2001. Pathogenesis of malignant ascites: Starling's law of capillary hemodynam
ics revisited. Ann Oncol 12:1353-1357.
74. Perkins SL, Magdesian KG, Thomas WP, Spier SJ. 2004. Pericarditis and pleuritis caused by Cormebacteriww
pseudotuberculesis in a horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 224:1133-1138.
75. Sims CS, Tobias AH, Hayden DW, Fine DM, Borjesson DL, Aird B. 2003. Pericardial effusion due to primary
cardiac lymphosarcoma in a dog. J Vet Intern Med 17:923927.
76.MacGregor JM,Faria ML,Moore AS, Tobias AH, Brown DJ,de Morais HSA. 2005.Cardiac lymphoma and
pericardial effusion in dogs: 12 cases (19942004). J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:14491453.
77. Boston SE, Moens NM, Martin DM. 2006. Idiopathic primary chylopericardium in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
229:1930-1933.
78. de Laforcade AM, Freeman LM, Rozanski EA, Rush JE. 2005.Biochemical analysis of pericardial fuid and whole
blood in dogs with pericardial effusion. J Vet Intern Med 19:833-836.
effusions.JVetIntern Med 17:525-529
80. Wagner AE, Bennett DG. 1988. Analysis of equine thoracic fluid. Vet Clin Pathol 1l:13-17.
81.Bach LG, Rickets SW. 1974. Paracentesis as an aid to the diagnosis of abdominal disease in the horse. Equine Vet ]
6:116-121.
82. MeGrath JP. 1975. Exfoliative cytology of equine peritoneal fuid: An adjunct to hematology examination. In
KitchenH,KrehbielJD,edsProceedings oftheFirst IntenatinalSymposium ofEquineHematelogy,408416.
Golden, CO: American Association of Equine Practitioners.
83. Morley PS, DesNoyers M. 1992. Diagnosis of ruptured urinary bladder in a foal by the identification of calcium
carbonate crystals in the peritoneal fuid. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1515-1517.
84.Anderson DE, Cornwell D,Anderson LS, St-Jean G, Desrochers A 1995. Comparative analyses of peritoneal fuid
from calves and adult cattle. Am J Vet Res 56:973-976.
INDEX
AaDOSee Arterial alveolar oxygen tension
ACT. See Activated coagulation time
gradient
ACTH.See Adrenocorticotropic hormone
AB system, 119
Activated ooagulation time (ACT), 279-80
AcAc. See Acetoacetate concentration
Acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AML)
Acanthocyte, 143-47,144t
differentiation, 347
Accuracy, 37
dysplasiamulilineage and,34748
Acetaminophen, Heinz body formation and, 186
genetic abnormalities and,347
Acetoacetate (AcAc) concentration, 54345
MDS and development of,350
analytical concepts in, 544
thrombocytosis and,245
physiologic process,543-44
Acute phase protein (APP)
Acid-base balance
analytical concepts, 396-97
abnormalities, 574-81
infammation and, 380
Ca+,free concentration and,614
negative,372
caloulated,567-70
positive,372,39298
renal functions related to,565
fbrinogen as, 393-96
Stewart’smethod of anlaysis of,58491
general concepts of,392-93
Acid-based disorders,562-65,562f
increased concentrations of,397-98,398t
blood gas data in,578,578t
Addison's disease,83,515
classification,578,579f
in cats,601-2
compensatory changes in, expected, 57881
in dogs,601-2
differences in definitions of, 585-86
Na:Kratio, decreased and,519
mixed,578
USG,refractometric and,451
simple,578
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP),188-90
Acidemia,561
ADH. See Antidiuretic hormone
acidosis and,512
Adrenocortical function,805-27
Acidosis,585
ACTH and,813-14,814f
acidemia and, 512
aldosterone concentration and, 824-26
compensatory changesin,578,581t
analytical concepts,8078
dilutional,574-75
assessments, 826-27
HCOy- and, 532
cortisol concentration and,808-12
inorganic, 574
cortisol,urine to Crt ratio and, 812-13,813f
K，serum and,509-10,509f
physiologic proceses, 806
lactic, hyperphosphatemia and, 619
stimulation tests, 81523
metabolic
suppression tests,815-23
groups of,57475
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
hyperchloremic,523
concentration,813-14,814f
hypochloremia and,525,526f
cortisol, plasma ratio to, 81415
physiologic compensation for,575
stimulation test
normokalemia and,516
canine,81821,819f
organic,509-10,574
dexamethasone suppresson test combined
renal tubular, 532
with,823
respiratory,575,575t
equine,82223
secretory,574
feline,821-22
tCO²and,532
ADVIA,122
titrational,574
erythrocyte,125,127
Aciduria,456-57,456t
MCHC and evaluation with, 158
paradoxical,576
Afbrinogenemia,310
869
870
INDEX
Afbrinogenemia (continued)
respiratory,523,576-77
BMBT and,264
diseases/conditions causing,577,577t
TT,prolonged and,285
physiologic compensation and, 577
Agglutination
POand,620
erythrocyte,130,136
Alkalosis, 561
latex, for foal serum,400
Alopecia, in Hereford calves, 167
AID. See Anemia of inflammatory disease
ALP.See Alkaline phosphatase
AIHA. See Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
ALT. See Alanine transaminase
Alanine transaminase (ALT), 650-52
Altman-Bland bias plot,32,32
activity, increased serum, 651,651t
American College of Veterinary Pathologists, 5
analytical concepts, 65051
Amino acids, renal tubule function and, 422
psychologic processes, 650
AML. See Acute megakaryocytic leukemia
serum,651,651t
Ammonium
tissue sources,650
clearance, decreased, 699701,700
Albendazole,thrombocytopenia and,236
concentration, plasma, 697703
Albumin
analytical concepts, 697-99
analytical principles for total,372-79
physiologic processes,697,698f
Ca²+and,597-98
samples,699
concentration,measuring,374
effusion analysis with, 861
Crt to,ratio,482
intake/absorption,increased,702
general concepts for total,370-72
production, increased,701
physiologic processes, 37071
tolerance test, 702
renal excretion, 481
in dogs,702-3,703t
synthesis,decreased,383
Amniotic fuid, 866
urine assays, quantitative, 478
AMS. See Amylase
Aldosterone
Amylase (AMS)
concentration,824-26
physiologic processes,663-64
canine,824-26,825t
renal excretion/inactivation and,665
secretion,806,807f
serum, increased activity of,66465,664t
Alkalemia,561
Amyloidosis,385
hyperventilation and,563
systemic,prolonged TT and,285
Allkaline phosphatase (ALP), 655-59
Amyloid,serum,372
analytical conoepts of, 656
Analyte,5
in cats, 659
analytical aocuracy and,24
in cattle,659
detection limit, 25
in dogs, 658-59
herd-based testing and measuring, 49-50
in horses, 659
urine, to plasma ratios,47677
osteoblastic activiry, increased, 658
Analytical accuracy,22f, 2425
physiologic processes,655
Analytical errors, 21
serum,increased activity of,655-58,657t
reproducibility of random,22
drug/hormone induction of,656-57
sources of,37
species/breed differences in,658-59
Westgardrules and detecting,2627
Alkalinuria,456t,457
Analytical precision,21-24
Alkaloses,585
CV and, 22-24
compensatory changes in, 578
variation and need for,22
contraction,531
Analytical sensitivity,25
hypochloremic metabolic,518
Anaphylaxis, thrombocytopenia and, 243
K,serum and,509-10,509f
Anaplasma,leukocyte,95
metabolic, 510, 576
Anaplasma platys,233
Ca²+urinary excretion and,608
thrombocytopenia and,242
hypochloremia and,52425
Anaplasa sppnfioushmolytianmia18
normokalemia and, 516
Anapltsmataceae,leukocyte,95,96t
INDEX
871
Anemia of infammatory disease (AID),160-61
pathogeneses, 181
Anemias,151-59.See also Refractory anemia;
Theileria spp.,185
Refractory anemia with excess blasts 1;
Trypansma spp.,185-86
Refractory anemia with excess blasts 2;
hyperchromic
Refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts
macrocytic,157
aplastic, 338
normocytic, 157
blood loss,167-70
hypochromic
acute,167-68,168f
macrocytic, 155
chronic,168-70,169f
microcytic,156
blood-loss,158
normocytic, 157
BMBT and,264
of infammatory disease,339
CHCM,increasedand,15758
MCHC,increasedand,15758
classification
megaloblastic, 201-2
erythrocyte indices, 15358, 154t
myelophthisic,163
marrowresponsiveness,151-53
nonregenerative,151-53,159-67
pathophysiologic,158-59,159f
aplasia, pure red cell causing, 16364
reticulocytosis and,151
disorders causing,160-67,160t
cobalamin deficiency and, 165
endocrine disorders causing, 166
copper deficiency and, 165
erythrocyte production and, 159
erythrocyte production, decreased causing,
erythropoiesis, ineffective causing,16367
158
general concepts of, 159-60
Fe defciency and, 16465,16870,169f
hypoplasia,erythroid causing,16367
folate deficiency and, 165
immune-mediated, 164
general information, 151
infammatory disease causing,160-61, 160t
hemolytic,158,170-93
marrow hypoplasia/aplasia causing, 162-63
ATP generation defects and, 188-90
nutrient deficiencies causing, 164-65
concepts an classifications of17076
renal disease causing,16162
eccentrocytic,187-88
normochromic
erythrocyte examination and, 171
macrocytic,155-56
Heinz body,186
microcytic,156-57
idiopathic,192
normocytic,154-55
IMHA as, 177-79
PFK defciency, 189
regenerative,151,152
PK defciency,188-89
hyperplasia, erythroid and,152
porphyria producing, 190
sideroblastic,143
spherocytic,192
in dogs,202
hemolytic,erythrocyticmetabolic defect,18691
Anion,534
oxidative damage and,1868
Ca+binding with diffusible,608
hemolytic,immune,17681
charge, 534
disorders of, 177-81
serum,535,535t
drug-induced,17980
strong,586
pathogenesis of, 178f
Anion gap,534-38
vaccine-induced, 180
analytical concepts, 53637
hemolytic,infectious,18186
calculating,535,536f
Araplasma spp.,182
changes,535
Babesia spp,184
decreased,538,538t
Clostridium spp.,18283
definitions,534-35
ELAV,183-84
increased,537,537t
FeLV,184
physiologic processes,535-36
hemotropicmycoplasma species,18182
serum,535
Leptospira spp.,182
SID and,589
Myeoplasma spp.,181
Anisocytosis, 142
872
INDEX
Antibodies
AT. See Antithrombin
FDPs and specificity of, 296-97
ATP.See Adenosine triphosphate
fibrin fragment D-dimer and specificity of,
Autoantibodies,794-95. See also Thyroglobulin
299-300
autoantibodies
thrombocytopenia and,239
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia(AIHA),179
Anticoagulants
Azotemia,427,428f,429-33
endogenous
in cats,440
ATas,288-91
in cattle,440
anti-(phospholipid-protein) antibodies as,
cause,multifactorial,432-33
292-93
classifications, 429-32
protein C as,291
Crt in serum/plasma and, 437
protein Z as,291-92
differentiation, guidelines for, 43233, 432t
lupus,292
disorders,429-32
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH),485-87.See aso
in dogs
Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
serum chemistry results in, abnormal routine,
Anti-(phospholipid-protein) antibodies,292-93
440
Antithrombin (AT),288-91.SeeasoThrombin-
UN:Crt ratio and,438,438t
antithrombin complexes
in horses, 477,478t
activity
serum chemistry results in, abnormal routine,
decreased,289-90,289t
440
increased, 290
postrenal,430t,431
coagulation enzymes inhibited by,273-74,275f
prerenal,429-30
consumption,290
disorders and,429,430t
heparin therapy and consumption of, 290
renal u, 477,478t
interpretive considerations,289
renal, 430-31
loss, 290
prerenal .,477,478t
plasma,288
renal disease and, 433
stability,289
renal failure, acute and, 428
units,289
serum chemisty results in, abnormal routine,
Aplasia
439-40
bone marrow, anemia caused by, 16263
UN in serum/plasma and, 435
lymphoid, protein synthesis/catabolism and,389
urea/Crt urinary excretion and,42931
lymphopenia of lymphoid,84f,85
urea production, increased and,430t,43132
pure red cell, anemia caused by,16364
red cell, 339
Babesa spp.,infectious hemolytic anemia,
pure,163-64
184
Apoenzymes,640
Bacteriuria,472
Apolipoproteins,766
Base excess in blood (BEs), 567-68
APP. See Acute phase protein
Base excess in ECF（BEgcr)，567
Arterial alveolar oxygen tension gradient (AaDO),
Base excess in plasma (BEp),567
569-70
Basopenia, 88
Ascites
Basophil
defnition,835
concentrations, abnormal,88
hypoalbuminemia and formation of, 505
kinetics, 59-60
hypoproteinemia and formation of, 505
pools,59-60
Aspartate transaminase (AST), 652-53
Basophilia,88
activity,increased serum,652,652t
diffuse cytoplasmic,92
Aspiration
Basophilic stippling,erythrocyte,13841,140t
bone marrow,328
Bayer Technicon,122
processing samples for, 32829
B8.See delta-Bilirubin
lymph node,362
BE,. See Base excess in blood
AST. See Aspartate transaminase
Beckman analyzer, 528
Asynchronous nuclear maturation,92
BEecr.See Base excess in ECF
INDEX
873
BenceJones proteinuria,385,46062
effusion analysis with,861
Benzethonium chloride assay, 478
hemolysis and,684-85,685t
Benzocaine, Heinz body formation and, 186
hepatocyte uptake of, 685-87, 685t
BEp. See Base excess in plasma
hyperbilirubinemia,684-89,684t
BHB.Seeβ-Hydroxybutyrate
icterus,hemolytic and,684-85,685t
Bicarbonate (HCO,)
metabolism, Hgb degradation and, 114, 114f
alimentary losses of,532
productionofncreased,645
analytical conoepts, 52729
in urine,466-67
assays,528-29
delta-Bilirubin (B8),689
concentration,525-34
Bilirubinuria,171-73,467,689
decreased,531-34
Biuret reaction, total proteins measured with, 374
increased,52931
Blast cell, 346
physiologic processes,52527
Bleeding disorders, major
standard, 567
bleeding pattern and,301
decreased
breed, age and, 301
disorders/pathogeneses and, 53133,532t
diagnosis,300-304
hyperchloremia and, 533-34
clinical fndings and,301
increased,529-31,529t
findings and pathogenesis of,300310
loss,increased,53233
gender and,301
nephron
hemostasis tests and,3024,302t
distal, 526-27
patterns in,302-4,303t
proximal,526,527f
pathogenesis,304-10
quantitation,sample for,52728
afbrinogenemia in,310
renal losses of,532
consumptive coagulopathy and, 3089
renal tubule function and, 419
dilutional coagulopathy in, 30910
secretion,527,528
dysfibrinogenemia in, 310
Bicarbonaturia,518
hepatic disease in,304-5
Bile acid
vitamin K antagonism or deficiency and,305-
analytical concepts, 691
8,307t
biliary excretionof691,692
types of, 301
challenge test,for dogs and cats,69396
Blisterbeetle poisoninghypomagnesemia nd,
factors infuencing results of,695
625
procedure in,694
Blister cell, 147
published data on, 694-95,694t,695t
Blood.See also Base excess in blood; Complete
cholestasis and, 681
blood count, Nucleated red blood cells
clearance,decreased，692f,693
cells,6
concentration,690-97
staining,61-62
increased,691-93,692f,692t
crossmarching, 210
physiologic processes,69091,690f
disorders, 301
enterohepatic circulation of, 690
erythrocytes,111,111t
excretion
data differences and, 129-30
biliary, 691, 692f
fragmentation in, 191
decreased,693
gases,559-91
secretion,691
acid-base disorders and,578,578t
urine, to Crt ratio,485,69697,697t
analytical concepts in,56573
Bile salts, 691
calculated,567-70
Biliary disease, 677
compensatory changes in, expected,580
Bilirubin
erroneous values for,573,573t
cholestasis and,681
exchange,564-65
concentration,681-90
hypoxia and,582,583t
analytical concepts of,683
instruments for analyzing, 56571
physiologic processes of, 68183,682f
physiologic processes of,56165
conjugated,decreased excretion of,68789
pulmonary functions related to,562-65
874
INDEX
Blood (continued)
Blood loss
sample for,57273
anemias
temperature and,570, 570t
acute,167-68,168f
groups,208-9
chronic,168-70,169f
cat,119
causes,167
cattle,120
hypoproteinemia and, 385
dog,119
platelet survival, decreased and, 240
erythrocytes and,117-20,20810
Blood transfusions
horse,119
autologous,131
Hgb,128-29
blood groups and,089
impedance cell counter,6364
blood species variations and,210
laboratory assays,78
Ca²,freeconcentration and,61314
leukocytes, 55
incompatible, IMHA secondary to, 18081
abnormal concentration of, 70-90
posttransfusion purpura, 240
evaluation and, 60-61
Blood vessels (endothelial cells), 300
lymphocytes,58
disorders,301
processes influencing, 59
B-lymphocytes,55
neutrophils,57
neoplasia
abnormal concentration of,70-81
hyperproteinemia and, 38185
left shift and,7071
laboratory/clinical problems with,385
processes infuencing measured, 57
pathogenesis,381-82
right shift and,71-72
BMBT.See Buccal mucosal bleeding time
oxygenation,56365,564f58
Body fluids
pH,559-91
laboratory assays for,78
analytical concepts in, 56573
samples,7
erroneous values for,573,573t
Bone
physiologic processes of, 561-65
Cat,596
samples for, 572-73
neoplasia in,601
temperature and,570,570t
Bonemarrow，5455,3235
plasma, 6-7
analysis,methods for,328-34
samples,5-6
anemias
anticoagulants for, 6
aplastic,338
leukocyte evaluation with, 6061
classfication and responsiveness of, 15153
serum,7
aplasia,anemia caused by,16263
speciesvariations in,21011
aspiration,328,334
typing,208-10
processing samples for, 32829
cat,119
biopsy,328
cartle,120
processing samples of core, 329
dog,119
CBC,358,360f
erythrocytes and,117-20,20810
cell concentrations of, 327
horse,119
classifications,334-37
methods for, 209-10
collection/processing of,328-29
volume, Na and regulation of, 499
composition,324
whole
core samples
clotting times for,279-80
cytologic examination of,333-34
glucose concentration in,708-23,712t
histologic examination of333
Blood ammonia, 697
dyscrasia of poodles,100
Blood films
erythropoiesis and, 334-36
examination of stained,61
examination, 329-34
platelet evaluationon,227,229-30
cytologic,333-34
volume and, 247
gross,329
Blood hemocrit values, 49
histologic,333-34
INDEX
875
indications for,327-28
platelet function test,26364
interpreting results of,357-58
prolonged,263
microscopic,329-33
vascular disease and,264
Fe,332-33
vWD and,263
flow cytometry, 334
Buffer base,568
granulopoiesis and, 33637
Burmese kittens, hypokalemic myopathy in,
hematopoieticcells,32427,32930
519
hematopoietic populations,33032,331f
Burr cell,147
hemic neoplasia,342-57
classification of,342-46,343t
Ca²+.See Calcium
general concepts/terms, 34246,344f
Cachectic states, protein synthesis/catabolism and,
hyperplasia,33438,335t
389
basophilic granulocytic, 337
Calcitonin concentration,630-31
eosinophilic granulocytic,337
Calcium (Ca²),593-631
generalized,33738
anions, diffusible binding of, 608
granulocytic, 336-37
anticoagulants binding, 611-12
megakaryocytic, 337
bone,596
monocytic,337
chloride,clotting and,281
hypoplasia,338-40,338t
oncentration,free,61015
anemia caused by，16263
abnormal,613-14
erythroid,339
acid-base status affecting, 614
generalized,33839
analytical concepts of, 610-13
infections and,236-37
hormone control of,613-14
megakaryocytic, selective,340
physiologic processes of,610
selective ranulocytic,338t,3390
samples, 61011,612f
lymphocytes, 332
true and,614-15,615f
lymphocytosis,340
concentration, interpreting, 614
major concepts and terms,32434
concentration,total,594610
mastocytosis,34041
albumin and, 59798
maturation progression, 332
analytic concepts of, 59698
myelitis,341
free and,614-15,615f
myelofbrosis,341
physiologic processes of, 59496
myelophthisis,341
plasma,594-95
necrosis,341-42
regulationof,597-98
neoplasia
serum,594-95
hemic cell,342-57
disordermajrpansor,
histiocytic,351-52
effusion analysis with,858-59
lymphoid,351
fracrure healing and deposition of, 608
myeloid,346-51
hypercalcmiaand,598602,599t
neutropenia and,337
increased protein-bound, 602
neutrophils,57
mobilization of598-601
nucleated cell differential count in health and,
inadequate,604-8
327
PO,interaction with,596
nutritional defciencies,336
regulatory hormones,593-631
postmortem samples of334
renal failure/insuffciency and, 601
replacement, thrombocytopenia and, 237
renal tubule,596
samples,357-58
renal tubule function and, 422
Bradypnea,561
serum,594-95
Bromide, L-lactate measurement and,540
factors determining, 595-96, 595f
Buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT)
urinary excretion of
analytical conoepts,263
decreased, 601
anemia and,264
excess, 608
876
INDEX
Canine distemper inclusions
UA,442t,445
erythrocytes and,202
USG,refractometric in,450
leukocyte,95
D-xylose absorption tests in,754
Carbohydrates metabolism,liver function and,
Cattle.See also Herd-based testing for cattle
676
alopecia in Hereford calves, 167
Casts, urine sediment, 47273
ALPin,659
Cation,534
azotemia in,abnormal routine serum chemistry
results and,440
measured,534
bile acid increase in,693
total,534
blood-group system of 120
unmeasured, 534
dyserythropoiesis,congenital in Hereford calves,
serum,535,535t
167
strong,586
GGT in,661
Cats
glucocorticoids in, caused by hypoferremia,
-PI, fecal in, 753
204
ACTHin,813,814f
glutaraldehyde testing of calf serum in, 400
adrenocortical function tests in,821-22
hemoglobinuria,postparturient in,189
ALP in,659
hereditary band 3 deficiency in Japanese black,
azotemia in, abnormal routine serum chemistry
200
results and, 440
hypocalcemia, parturient in, 6067
bile acid challenge test for, 693-96, 695t
Ig
blood-groups system,119
calf serum and changes of,402
cobalamin in,747-50
defciencies in,403
cortisol,urine to Crt ratio in,812-13,813f
FPTof,398-99
EPI in,740
measuring/estimating, 399_402
FeLV in,164
leukogram patterns in,90
infectious hemolytic anemia and,184
NaSOfor calf serum in,4012
folate in,750-52
neutropenia in,77-79
GGT in,661
porphyria, congenital erythropoietic in, 19091
Heinz bodies in,187
renal failure,524
formation of,186
reticulocytosis,117
hemolytic anemia,idiopathic in,192
RID testing of calf serum in,399400
hyperaldosteronism in,824
Theileria spp.in,185
hyperbilirubinemia, fasting in, 686
UA,442t
hyperlipidemia disorderssecondary n,77578
USG,refractometric in,450
hyperparathyroidism in,452
ZnSOrurbidity testing for calf serum in,
hyperthyroidism in,619
400-401
hypoadrenocorticism in,6012
Cavalier King Charles spaniel, thrombocytopenia
infectious hemolytic anemia,181
in,235
leukogram patterns in, 90
idiopathic, 241-42
megaloblastic anemia in, 201
Cavitary effusions,831-66
myopathy,hypokalemic in,519
defnitions,832-37
PLI and,668,745-46
general concepts, 83237
porphyria, congenital erythropoietic in,191
hemorrhagic,845-46
renal disease in,601
lymphocyte-rich, 865
renal failure, hypokalemic in, 519
lymphorrhagic, 846-47
reticulocytes, 117
neoplasms associated with,864-65
reticulocytosis,117
pathogenesis of,837-48,837t,840t
TLIin,741-45,743t,745t
pericardial, 866
triodothyronine suppresion test in,79698,
rupture-caused,847-48
797f
specific, comments about,86366
TSH in,794
Starling’s law and,836-37
INDEX
877
Cb,R deficiency. See Cytochrome-b;reductase
Citrate, 6
deficiency
CK. See Creatine kinase
CBC. See Complete blood count
Clinical pathology, 4-5
Cell counting, 63-64,64f
Clinitest. See Copper-reduction method
Cell(corpuscular) hemoglobin concentration mean
Clomipramine, hypothyroxemia and, 792-93
(CHCM)
Closridmspp,infctious hemolytic anemia,
anemia and increased,157-58
182-83
increased,157-58
Clotting
Centrifugation,urine,455
assays,coagulation factor,287
Cephalosporins, immune hemolytic anemia
calcium chloride and, 281
induced by,179-80
thrombopathia and,264-65
Ceruloplasmin,372
whole blood,times,279
CHCM. See Cell (corpuscular) hemoglobin
CNP. See Circulating neutrophil pool
concentration mean
Coagulation, 268-93. See also Glutaraldehyde
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, 99
coagulation tests
Chemistry assays, 8
ACT,279-80
Chloramphenicol,erythroid hypoplasia and,339
analytical concepts, 274-79
Chloride(CI)
general approach to,278
alimentary tract functions pertaining to,521,
instruments, 278
521f
samples,274-78
Ca²+,281
assays,274
concentration,520-25
cascade web, 268-69, 270f
analytical concepts,521-22
endogenous anticoagulants, 288-92
assays,522
AT as, 288-91
physiologic processes of, 52021
anti-(phospholipid-protein) antibodies as,
terms/units for, 521
292-93
hyperchloremia,522-23
protein C as,291
hypochloremia,523-25
protein Z as, 291-92
renal tubule function and,419
enzymes,inhibitors of,273-74,275f
resorbed, actively/passively,521
factors,269-71,272t,273f
serum,520
activities of,286-87
control of,520-21
antibodies,292
Cholestasis,656,68081
clotting assays for specific,287
functional,681,688
deficiencies in,286-87,286t
obstructive,681,687-88
inhibition of,310
laboratory findings for, 687-88
inhibitors, 292
pathogenesis of,687,688f
nonenzymatic, 269-71
stoppage and, 681
fibrinogen and, 28586
suppression and,681
hypothermia, hemorrhage and, 27879
Cholesterol
OSPT,282-84
effusion analysis with,856-57,857t
pathways,269
hypercholesterolemia and,770,770t
physiologic inhibitors of, 271-74
hypocholesterolemia and,77071,771t
physiologic processes,268-74
serum concentration of,767-71
PIVKA and, 28788
Chromogenic assays,287
PTT,280-84
Chronic myeloid leukemia,76
RVVT,288
Chylomicons,standinglasma testfor0
samples
Chylous thoracic effusions, repeated drainage of,
citrated,276-77
515
collecting/handling,274-76
CI. See Chloride
processing/stabiliry of,277-78
Circulating neutrophil pool (CNP), 57
TF,282-83
Cirrhosistransudation and,5045
whole blood clotting times and,279-80
878
INDEX
Coagulopathy
Creatinine (Crt）. See also Urinary protein to
consumptive
creatinine ratio
hemostatic test results, abnormal in,309
albumin to,ratio,482
recognizing,308-9
assays,436-37
dilutional,309-10
clearance rate,438-39
Cobalamin (vitamin B)
cortisol,urine ratio to,812-13,813f
concentration,747-50,748f
effusion analysis with,857-58
decreased,749-50,750t
physiologic processes/concepts regarding,434f
defciency,anemia and,165
renal tubule function and, 423
increased,749
serum/plasma concentration of, 434f, 43637
Codocyte,147
decreased,437
Coefficient of variation (CV)
increased,437
analytical precision and, 2224
UN concentration u,437-38,438t
between-assay,23
urinary excretion of, 42931
determining,23
urine bile acid to, ratio,485, 696-97,697t
laboratory assay,2224
Crossmatching, blood, 210
relevance of,2324
CRP.See Corrected reticulocyte percentage
within-assay, 23
Crt. See Creatinine
Colloidal osmotic pressure (COP),405-10,
Crystallography, optical, 489
546-47
Crystalluria,474-75
analytical concepts, 4078, 408f
Crystals, urine sediment, 47475
decreased,409-10
Cubic meter,10
Gibs-Donnan equilibrium,405,407f
CV.See Coefhcient of variation
increased,408-9
Cyclichematopoiesis,8081
interferences with, 407-8
Cylindruria,473
osmotic pressure v,546f
Cytochemical stains, hemic neoplasia classification
psychologic processes/concepts and, 405
with,353,353t
Starling's law, 405, 406f
Cytochrome-breductase(Cb,R) deficiency,199
Combs'test,211,212
Cytology,8
Complete blood count (CBC),60-62
bone marrow,333-34
bonemarrow,358,360f
Cytometry,fow, 334
components of,60
Cytoplasm, foamy,92
erythrocyte,120
platelet,227
Dacryocyte, 147
Coomassie brilliant blue assay,47778
DEA. See Dog erythrocyte antigen
COP. See Colloidal osmotic pressure
Decision limits,20
Copper deficiency,anemia and165
Decision thresholds,39-40,40f
Copper-reduction method (Clinitest),463
factors infuencing establishing, 48
Corrected reticulocyte percentage（CRP),123,
reference limits ,20
134
ROC curve establishment of, 45-46,47f
Cortisol
Dehydration
ACTHratio toplasma,814-15
causes,net loss of isotonic fuids and,5034
concentration,808-12
disorders and pathogenesis of, 5034
Crt ratio to urine,812-13,813f
erythrocytosis caused by，193-96
hypercortisolemia and,808-10,809t
hypernatremic,500
hypocortisolemia and,81012,811t
hyperproteinemia of, 371
secretion,806,807f
hyponatremic, 500
Creatine kinase (CK)
normonatremic,500,503-5
analytical concepts and, 662
pathologic state of, 500
neurological disease and activiry of, 663
types,500
physiologic processes,661-62
USG, refractometric and,450
serum,increased activity of,66263,662
Deming method comparison,33-34,33f
INDEX
879
Dendritic cells,327
Dogs
Detection limit, 25
O-PI,fecal in,753
Detomidine, hyperglyemia and,78
acidosis in,581t
Dexamethasone. See aiso High-dose dexamethasone
ACTHin,813,814f
suppression test;Low-dose dexamethasone
adrenocorticalfunction tests in,815-21,816f
suppression test
aldosterone concentration in,824-26,825t
glucocorticoid,204
ALPin,658-59
LPS and, 667
ALT,serum,651
suppression tests
ammonium tolerance test in,702-3,703t
ACTH stimulation tests combined with,
azotemia in
823
abnormal routine serum chemistry results in,
canine,815-18,816f,819t
440
equine,822
UN:Crt ratio and,438,438t
feline,821-22
bile acid challenge test for, 693-96, 694t
TLI and,743
bone marrow dyscrasia of poodles,100
Dextran,biuret reactions for measuring total
CK in,662
protein and,364
cobalamin in,747-50
Diabetes insipidus,nephrogenic,451
cortisol,urine to Crt ratio in,812-13,813f
Diabetes mellitus
dexamethasone and,667
diagnostic criteria for,713,714t
distemper inclusions in,202
drug-induced,717
dyserythropoiesis in English springer spaniels,
endocrine,716-17
167
genetic,718
elliptocytosis in,200-201
hyperglycemia and, 713
hereditary, 200
infectious, 717
enteropathy, protein-losing in, 604
D-lactate and, 542-43
EPI in, 740
Na:Kratio, decreased and,520
exocrine pancreatic insuffciency in, 6056
pancreatic,716
folate in,750-52
types,715-18
GGT in,661
Diagnostic accuracy,39
Heinz body formation in,186
Diagnostic procedures, 5
hyperadrenocorticism in, 610
ROC curve comparison of, 45-46
hyperaldosteronism in,824
Diagnostic properties
hyperlipidemia disorders, secondary in,77578
deficiency in theories of,44
hypoadrenocorticism in,601-2
laboratory assay,3845
hypothyroidism andWD in, 266
Diagnostic sensitivity,3839
Ig deficiencies in,403-4
Diagnostic spcifcity，39
IMT,drug-induced in,23839
Diarrhea
leukemia, 356
Kloss through,518-19
leukogram parterns in,90
Na: K+ ratio, decreased and, 520
LPS and, 667
Diazoxide,hyperglycemia and, 719
microalbuminuria in, 483
DIC. SeeDisseminated intravascular coagulation
neoplasia in,LPS and, 667
Diestrus,714-15
nonstaining eosinophil granules of, 1012
PFK deficiency in English springer spaniels,
249
189
Disoocytes,136
PLI and, 668, 745-46
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
portosystemic shunts in,204
envenomation and,241
pyometra in,451
thrombocytopenia and, 241
renal disease in, 601
Diuresis, prolonged, 5067
reticulocytosis,117
Dog erythrocyte antigen (DEA), 119
sideroblastic anemia in,202
infectious hemolytic anemia, 181
SLE in,240
880
INDEX
Dogs (continued)
Electrolytes
spectrin deficiency in Dutch golden retrievers
concentrations
and,201
abnormal, 498
TAPin,746-47
interpretation of,basic concepts for,497-98
thrombocytopenia in Cavalier King Charles
K,509-19
spaniels,235,24142
Na, 498-509
thyroid hormone concentrations in,799,799t,
plasma, 497_98
800t
serum,497-98
thyroxine and TSH in,798
monovalent,495-553
TLIin,741-45,743t,745t
weak,586
TSH in,788,794
Elliprocyte, 148
UA,442t,445-55
Elliptocytosis, 148
uroliths, 488
in dogs,200-201
USG,refractometric in,449t,450
hereditary,in dogs,200
D-xylose absorption tests in,754
Endocarditis, thrombocytopenia and, 241
Dohle's inclusion bodies, cytoplasmic, 92
Endocrine disorders
Dutch golden retrievers, specrin deficiency in,
anemia caused by, 166
201
hypoplasia, erythroid caused by, 339
Dye-excretion tests, 7034
Endomitriosis,325
Dyscrasia
Endothelial cells.SeeBlood vessels
bone marrow, of poodles, 100
Endotoxemia
protein,371
hypomagnesemia and, 625
Dyserythropoiesis, 348
neutropenia caused by,78f, 79
congenital,in Hereford calves,167
thrombocytopenia and, 242
in English springer spaniels, 167
Endotoxic shock,erythrocytosis causedby，196
Dysfibrinogenemia,310
English springer spaniels
TT,prolonged and,285
dyserythropoiesis in, 167
Dyshematopoiesis,acquired secondary,350
PFK deficiency in,189
Dysmegakaryopoiesis,349
Enteric diseases,hypomagnesemia and, 624
Dysmyelopoiesis,348
Enteropathy,protein-losing, 604
Dysplasia,multilineage,347-48.See also Refractory
Envenomation,192
cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia;
thrombocytopenia and,241
Refractory cytopenia withmultilineage
Enzymes, 639-69
dysplasia and ringed sideroblasts
activity,645
Dysproteinemia,371
effusion analysis with, 862
hyperproteinemia and pattern of, 38283
increased serum,649-50,650f
patterns,expected,38081
units to express, 64547, 647t
assays
Eecentrocyte,147
hepatic,680
ECF. See Extracellular fuid
serum,645-47,646f, 647t
Echinocyte, 147-48
defnition,640
Eclampsia,607
nomenclature,647-48
Edema,isotonic fuid net retention and,504-5
production
Edematous animals
cellular, 644
hyponatremia and, 507
tissue, 644
normonatremia in,503-4,503t
release ofincreased,643f
EDTA. See Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
cell escape and, 64243
Effusions
cellular,643
definition,835
rate, factors affecting, 643-44
peritoneal,515-16
removal of, plasma,64445
Ehrlichia,leukocyte,95
serum,668t
ELAV. See Equine infectious anemia virus
activity, 642-45
INDEX
881
activity, increased,64950,650f
elliptocytosis in dogs and, 200-201
assays of,645-47,646f647t
fragmentation of,in blood,191
measurement of, 645-47
general features, 13637
samples of, 648-49
ghost cell, 137
sources of,641-42,641t,642f
Heinz bodies, 141
Enzymology, basic principles in clinical, 64050
hemolytic anemia and examination of, 171
Eosinophilia,86-88
hereditary band 3 deficiency in Japanese black
causes,86-87,87t
cattle and,200
disease states suggested by,8687,87t
hypochromic,137-38
neoplasms linked to,88
inclusions,138-42,140t
paraneoplastic,87-88
basophilic stippling,13841,140t
Eosinophilic leukemia,88
Hgb crystals as, 141
Eosinophils
Howell-Jolly bodies as,141
concentrations, abnormal, 8688
refractile artifacts as, 141-42
kinetics,59
siderotic granules as, 142
nonstaining, granules of dogs,1012
indices,anemia dassification with, 153-58,
pools,59
154t
Pseudo-Pelger-Huet,101
kinetics, 112
EPI. See Exocrine pancreatic insuffciency
megaloblastic anemia and, 2012
Epithelial cells, urinary, 47374
metabolic defect in, hemolytic anemia and,
Epo,110-11
186-91
Equine infectious anemia virus (EIAV), 18384
metabolism ofmature,115,118f
Erythrocytes, 107-212.See alsoDog erythrocyte
methemoglobinemia and, 198-99
antigen; Wintrobe's erythrocyte indices
morphologic evaluation, 120
abnormalities,nonregenerative anemia and, 152
morphologic features of, 13551
ADVIA,125,127
organisms,138,139t
agglutination,130,136
osmolality,130-31
heparin and,136
oxidant exposure of,19899
analysisrapingdata from12526
pathogenesis, 13551
analytical methods
physiologic processes,11020
impedance cell counter,124-25
polychromatophilic,138
microhematocrit,124-35
precursors,110
RC, 131
production, anemia and, 15860
RP,132-34
QBCanalysis of,127
anemia,151-59
rouleau,136
assessment,135
rubricytosis,136-37
blood,111,111t
shape,abnormal14351,144t
crossmatching and, 210
sideroblastic anemia in dogs and, 202
groups/types and, 11720, 20810
small, 130
speciesvariations and,21011
spectrin deficiency in Dutch golden retrievers
CbR deiciency and, 199
and,201
CBC,120
spiculated,147
central pallor,137
splenic,111-12
clinical signifcance13551
stomatocytosis,hereditary and,199200
color,137-38
surface antibodies,methods for detecting,
complement,methods for detecting,21112
211-12
crenated, 147-48
urine sediment, 471-72
data,differences in,12931
volume, abnormal, 14243
discocytes,136
Erythrocyte surface-associated immunoglobulin
distemper inclusions in dogs and, 202
(ESAIg)
in dogs,200-202
disorders with,212
effusions and,851-52
fow cytometric detection of, 212
882
INDEX
Erythrocytosis,193-98
Failure of passive transfer (FPT), 389
absolute,193
immunoglobin, 398-402
hypoxic, 196-97
causes of, 399
idiopathic,198
physiologic concepts of, 39899
pathogenesis,195f
False negative (FN)results,38
physiologic,196
False positive (FP) results, 38
primary,198,351
ROC curve and rate of,45
relative,193
Fanconi syndrome, 620
secondary appropriate,196-97
FDPs.SeeFibrinor fbrinogen degradation producs
pathogenesis of, 197
Fe. See Iron
physiologic processes of 197
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
secondary inappropriate, 197-98
erythroid hypoplasia induced by, 164
Erythrocytotic disorders/conditions,193-98,194f,
infectious hemolytic anemia and, 184
194t
FeLV. See Feline leukemia virus
hemoconcentration as, 193-96
FEratios/percentages.SeeFractional excretion
splenic contraction,196
ratios/percentages
Erythrogram,60,12023
Ferritin,207-8,372
Erythron,110-12
hyperferritinemia, 207-8, 207t
Erythrophage, 94
hypoferrtinemia, 208
Erythropoiesis
Fibrin fragment D-dimer,299-300
effective, bone marrow and, 334
analytical concepts,299-300
ineffective
increased,300
anemia caused by,163-67
sample, 299
bone marrow and, 336
theory,299
ESAIg. See Erythrocyte surface-associated
Fibrinogen,271,28586372,39396.eea
immunoglobulin
Hyperfibrinogenemia; Plasma protein to
Ethanol, hypoglycemia and,722
fbrinogen ratio
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 6
activity,285-86
Ethylene glycol
analytical concepts, 39394
hyperglycemia and, 718
antigen, detecting, 286
toxicosis,608
heat-precipitantmethod39394
Euglobulin,377. See aso Sia euglobulin test
heparin and,285
Evan's syndrome, 240
hyperfbrinogenemia, 394-96
Exocrine intestine,739-59
hypofbrinogenemia,396,396t
absorptive malfunctions of, 74041
interpretive considerations,286
diseases,methods for evaluating,758,759t
physiologic process,393
Exocrine pancreas,73959
TT,394
absorptive malfunctions of, 740-41
Fibrinogenolysis, inreased, 298
Exocrine pancreatic insuffciency (EPI), 605-6,
Fibrinolysis,293-300
740-41
assays,300
in cats,740
FDPS and,293-98
in dogs,740
fbrin fragment D-dimer and, 299-300
evaluating,methods for,758,758t
increased,297-98
Extracellular fluid (ECF). See also Base excess inECF
physiologic processes,293
electrolyte concentrations in,497
Fibrinolytic system,293,296t
hyperalbuminemia and, 390
Fibrin or fibrinogen degradation products (FDPs),
hyponatremia,507-8
293-98
hypoproteinemia and, 389-90
analytical concepts, 296-97
Exudates, 844-45
s 
bacterial, 864
clearance, decreased,298
increased,297-98,298t
Exudation,835
interpretive considerations, 297
INDEX
883
96‘oy sfessoumm uogeunse xe
Glomerular fltration rate (GFR),417-18
measuring,293
PO4 and disorders decreasing, 618-19
sample,293-96
Glucagon
unit,297
hyperglycemia and,718
Fight-or-fight,90
immunoreactive,concentration of730-31
FN results. See False negative results
Glucocorticoid therapy
Foamy cytoplasm,92
APP, positive concentration increase and,397
Folate
hyperalbuminemia, 390
concentration,750-52
hypothyroxemia and, 792
decreased,752,752t
Glucose
deficiency, anemia and,165
absorption test, in horses,755-56,756t
increased,751-52,751t
concentration,708-23,712t
FP results. See False positive results
analytical concepts for,709-13
FPT. See Failure of passive transfer
physiologic processes for,7089,710f
Fractional excretion (FE) ratios/percentages,
effusion analysis with, 860-61
483-85
hyperglycemia and, 713-19
24h excretion study ,484
hypoglycemia and,719-23
decreased, 484
insulin and, 72223
increased, 484
immunoreactive ratio to,729-30
interpretive concepts,484
renal tubule function and,422
studies,linicaluses of485
in urine, 462-64
theory,483-84
analytical concepts of, 463
Fructosamine,723-26
physiologic processes of, 46263
decreased, 725
Glucose infusion, 620
increased,724-25,724t
Glucosuria
protein concentrations, abnormal and,726
disorders, 463-64
Fucosidosis,100
hyperglycemic,463
Functional hepatic mass, decreased, 680, 680t
renal,463
bilirubin uptake in hepatocytes and,68687
Glutamate dehydrogenase (GMD),65455
Furosemide
activity, increased, 655
Ca urinary excretion and,608
serum,654
hypochloremia and, 524-25
-Glutamyltransferase (GGT), 659-61
in cats,661
Gammopathy,monoclonal,382
in cattle, 661
in domesticmammals,383-84
in dogs, 661
Gastrointestinal disorders in colicky horses,
in horses, 661
hypocalcemia and,609-10
physiologic processes,659
Gaussian distribution,18,19f
serum, increased activity of, 659,659t
Genital tract
species differences,661
hemorrhage, 472
urine activity of, 661
infammation,471
Glutaraldehydecoagulation tests,400
GFR.See Glomerular fltration rate
Glycated hemoglobin,723-26
GGT.SeeGlutamyltransferase
decreased, 725-26
Ghost cell, 137
increased,724-25,724t
Gibbs-Donnan equilibrium, 405,407f
Glycogenolysis,72021
Globulin
Glycosuria,disorders,46364
analytical principles for total, 372-79
GM gangliosidosis, 99
general concepts fortotal,37072
GM gangliosidosis, 99
physiologic processes, 370-71
GMD. See Glutamate dehydrogenase
total,measuring,375
Gold salts,IMT induced by,238
Glomerular fltration,417-18
Gram staining,effusion analysis with,863
concentration/dilution of, 42425
Granules, toxic, 92
884
INDEX
Granulocytes,56
dendritic cells and,327
Granulopoiesis,bone marrow and,33637
erythrocyte lineage,325,325t
Griseofulvinmyelosuppressveffectsf
lymphocyte lineage,326
Group testing, 48-50
megakaryocyte lineage,325
nonlymphoid leukocyte lineages, 326
HO
populations,bone marrow,33032,331
dehydration and,500
Hematopoietic cellularity, bone marrow,32930
electrolyte concentrations and,498
Hematuria,176t,465-66,471-72
hypernatremia and intake of, 501
Heme
hypochloremia and excess, 525
synthesis, porphyria caused by defects in,
hyponatremia and excess group of5078
190-91
intake, Naexcess and, 502
in urine, 465-66
loss
Hemic neoplasia, 90-92
Na loss and, 502
bone marrow, 34257
pure,502
classification of,342-46,343t
Na and, 499, 502
general concepts/terms, 34246,344f
replacement,502
cells,methods for characterizing,92
shifting of, 508
classifying, methods of, 35257
H,O deprivation
cytochemical stain,353,353t
in PU/PD,485-87
immunophenotyping,353-56,354t
tests for
microscopic,352-53
abrupt,486
molecular and cytogenetic studies for,357
gradual,486-87
Wright stain,35253
modifed,487
thrombocytosis and, 244-45
Halothane anesthesia,621
Hemoconcentration,193-96
Haptoglobin, 372
hyperalbuminemia and,390
HCO.See Bicarbonate
hyperfbrinogemia caused by, 394, 394t
Hct.See Hematocrit
hyperproteinemia and,379
HDDST. See High-dose dexamethasone
Hermocytometermethod,62-63,63f
suppression test
platelet analysis with,231
Heat-precipitant method,fbrinogen,393-94
Hemodilution
Heinz bodies
hypoproteinemia and, 389-90
erythrocyte,141
thrombocytopenia and, 241
feline,187
Hemoglobin (Hgb),112-14. See aso Percent
formation of,186
hemoglobin saturation with oxygen of
hemolytic anemia, 186
arterial blood by pulse oximetry
Hematest tablet,465
blood,128-29
Hematocrit (Het), 120
conductivity determination of, 128
conductivity,131
crystals,141
determination of, 128
degradation,113f
effusions and,851-52
bilirubin metabolism and,114,114f
erythrocyte data differences and calculating,
erythrocyte,120
129-30,129t
function,112
Hematology analyzers, light-scatter pattns
glycated,723-26
produced by, 92
MCHC relationship with,121-22
Hematology assays,78
myoglobin differentiation from,465
Hematopoiesis
reticulocyte, content/volume of, 208
cyclic,80-81,86
structure,112
extramedullary,351
synthesis,11213,113f
Hematopoieticcell3227
type of113
bonemarrownucleated cell differential count in
Hemoglobinemia,hemolytic,174,175f
health and,327
Hemoglobinuria,176t,466
INDEX
885
hemolytic,174,175f
Ca² sample anticoagulation with,61112
postparturient,in cattle,189
AT consumption and, 290
Hemolysis,170
erythrocyte agglutination and,136
alloimmune,180-81
fibrinogen and, 285
bilirubin and,684-85,685t
hemolysis induced by,191-92
envenomation and, 192
IMT induced by, 239
extravascular v.intravascular,170-71,173t
PTT monitoring therapy with, 282
heparin-induced, 19192
Hepatic disease
hypoosmolar,191
bleeding disorder pathogenesis and, 3045
intravascular, massive, 513
protein catabolism, increased and, 388
pathologic,170
protein synthesis, decreased and,388
Hemolytic disorders/conditions, 171, 172t,176
Hepatic enzyme assays, 680
93.See also specific disordersconditions
Hepatocellular disease, 677
idiopathic nonspherocytic,192
Hepatocytes, bilirubin uptake by, 68587, 685t
immune hemolytic anemias as,176-81
Hepatocytes, functioning, 680
of unknown pathogenesis, 19193
Hepatozoonamericanum,leukocyte,95-97
Hemolytichemoglobinemia,174,175f
Hepatozoon canis, leukocyte,97
Hemolytic hemoglobinuria,174,175f
Herd-based testingforcattle,4850
Hemolytic icterus,171,174f
abnormalities in,50
Hemolytic syndrome,in horses,193
analyte measurement in,4950
Hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma,192
data evaluation, 50
Hemophilenderan0
metabolic/nutritional status,4950
Hemorrhage
Hereditary band 3 deficiency in Japanese black
blood loss caused by，167
cattle,200
defnition,835
Hetastarch, increased COP and, 409
effusions and, 845-46
Heterobilharzia americana,600
genital tract,472
Heterogeneous nucleation, 489
hypothermia and,278-79
Hgb. See Hemoglobin
iatrogenic,471-72
HHM. See Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy
proteinuria and,459-60
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test
vitamin K and, 306
(HDDST)
Hemostasis,259-311
canine,817-18
abnormal,261
feline, 818
bleeding disorders,major,300310
Histiocytic neoplasia, 192
patterns in tests for,3024,303t
Histology,bonemarrow,33334
tests for,302-5,302t
Histopathology, surgical, 8
blood vessels and,300
Histoplasma capsulatwm,leukocyte,97
coagulation and,26893
Hitachi analyzers,52829
consumptive coagulopathy tests for, 309
Holoenzymes, 640
defnition, 261
Hormones.See also specific hormones
fibrinolysis,293300
Ca,freeconentrtionand6114
in health,261,261f
Mgregulated by,622
platelets and,26265
Horses
concentration of,262-63
ACTH in,814
thrombosis and, 310-11
adrenocortical function tests in, 822-23
abnormalities in,311
ALP in,659
vitamin K and tests for, abnormal results in,
azotemia in
305-8
renal/prerenal, 477, 478t
vWF and, 265-68
serum chemistry results in,abnormal routine,
Hemotropic mycoplasma species,infectious
440
hemolytic anemia,181-82
bile acid increase in, 693
Heparin, 6
blood-group system of119
886
INDEX
Horses(continued)
β-Hydroxybutyrate (BHB)
cobalamin in,747-50
concentration,49,543-45
EIAV,183-84
analytical concepts in, 544
erythrocyte agglutination in,136
physiologic processes,543-44
gastrointestinaldisrersincolicky,
renal excretion, 544
hypocalcemia and, 609-10
Hyperadrenocorticism
GGT in,661
hyperphosphatemia and, 619
glucose absorption test in,755-56
USG,refractometric,450-51
glutaraldehyde testing of foal serum in, 400
Hyperadrenocorticism,in dogs,610
halothane anesthesia in, 621
Hyperalbuminemia,39091
Heinz body formation in,186
diseases/conditions causing,390,390t
hemolytic syndrome in,193
Hyperaldosteronism
hyperbilirubinemia, fasting in, 686
primary,824
hyperlipemia in,777-78
USG,refractometric and,451
hypomagnesemia and, 625
Hyperammonemia, 699_702, 700t, 71718
idiopathic hypersegmented neutrophils of, 101
Hyperbilirubinemia,684-89,684t
Ig
fasting, 685-86
defciencies in,403
Hypercalcemia,385,598-602,599t.Seea
foal serum and changes of, 402
Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy
FPT of,398-99
of benignancy, 600
measuring/estimating,399-402
Ca²,free concentrationand13
lactose tolerance test in,756-57
diseases/conditions causing,599t
latex agglutination for foal serum in, 400
USG,refractometric and,451
leukogram paterns in, 90
Hypercalcitonism, 607
methemoglobinemia, familial in, 199
Hypercapnia, 561
peritoneal fuid in,833-35,834t
Hypercarbia,561
pleural fuid in,833-35,834t
Hyperchloremia,522-23
renal disease in,621
disorders/pathogeneses and,522,522t
renal failure in, 601
HCO,decreased and,533-34
reticulocytosis, 117
metabolic acidosis and, 523
RID testing of foal serum in, 399-400
tCO²,decreased and,53334
sweat,507
Hypercholesterolemia,770,770t,774
Kloss through,519
Hypercortisolemia,808-10, 809t
Theileria spp.in,185
Hyperestrogenism, anemia and, 166
TLI in,741-45
Hyperferremia,203,203t
triodothyronine suppresson test in79798
Hyperferritinemia,207-8,207t
TSH in,794
Hyperfbrinogenemia, 394-96
UA,442t
diseases/conditions causing,394,394t
urinary bladder, ruprured in, 602
PP:F ratio,395-96
urine sucrose concentration in, 757
TT, prolonged and, 285
USG,refractometric in,450
Hyperglobulinemia, 392, 404
ZnSO turbidity testing for foal serum in,
hyperproteinemia and, 392
400-401
Hyperglucagonemia,731
Howell-Jolly bodies,141
Hyperglycemia, 713-19
H,renal tubule function and,421
classifcation,713,715t
Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (HHM),
diabetes mellitus and, 713, 714t
598-600
disorders/conditions,714-19,715t
Hydraulic pressure, 835
pathologic,715-18
Hydrogen peroxide, Heinz body formation and,
pharmacologic/toxicologic718-19
186
physiologic,714-15
Hydrostatic pressure, 835
postprandial,714
INDEX
887
steroid-associated,714
neoplasia,B-lymphocyte,381-85
unexpected,723
protein synthesis, increased and,38085
Hyperinsulinemia,728,728t
Hyperthyroidism
Hyperinsulinism, 620
Ca,free concentration and,613
Hyperkalemia. See asa Pseudo-hyperkalemia
hyperphosphatemia and, 619
K+and,511-16
Hyperthyroxemia,789-90,789t
strenuous exercise causing, 512
Hypertonicity,513
Hyperlactatemia, disorders/pathogeneses causing,
Hypertriglyceridemia,772,772t
541-42
Hyperventilation,561
Hyperlipasemia, LPS and, 667
alkalemia and,563
Hyperlipemia,77378
Hyperviscosity syndrome385
equine,777-78
Hypoadrenocorticism, 515
Hyperlipidemia, 773-78
anemia and, 166
conditions/disorders,773-74
in cats, 601-2
disorders,secondary,77578
in dogs, 601-2
Hyperlipoproteinemia,773-78
hyponatremia and, 5056
conditions/disorders,773
lymphocytosis of,83
Hypermagnesemia,622-23,623t
Na:Kratio,decreased and,519
Hypernatremia, 5013
Hypoadrenocroticism, refractometric USG and, 451
disorders/pathogenesisof5013,501t
Hypoalbuminemia,391-92
HO intake and, 501
albumin synthesis, decrease and, 383
Hyperosmolality,smo.gapand serum,553
ascites formation and,505
Hyperparathyroidism
diseasesconditonscausing39191t
feline, refractometric USG and,452
hypocalcemia,602
primary,Caand,598
infammatory, 391
Hyperphosphatasemia,658
pathogenesis,391
Hyperphosphatemia,618-19, 618t
Hypoaldosteronism,515
pseudo-,619
hyperreninemic,hyponatremia and507
Hyperplasia
primary,518
basophilic granulocytic, bone marrow and,337
Hypocalcemia,602-10,603t
bone marrow,334-38,335t
Ca+,free concentration and,613
eneralized,337-38
diseases/conditions causing,603t
eosinophilic granulocytic, bone marrow and,
gastrointestinaldisorders incolickyhorses and,
337
609-10
erythroid
hypoalbuminemic, 602
anemia, regenerative and, 152
lactational,606-7
bone marrow,334-36
myopathies,610
granulocytic
nutritional, 607
basophilic,337
pancreatis,acute and,6089
bone marrow and, 336-37
parturient,606-7
eosinophilic,337
phosphate enemas and, 609
lymph node, 362
pregnancy,606-7
megakaryocytic, bone marrow and, 337
preparturient,607
monocytic,bone marrow and,337
renal failure, acute and,609
reactive,362
tumor lysis syndrome,acute and,610
Hyperproteinemia,371,37985
urinary tract obstruction and, 609
diseases/conditions causing,379,379t
Hypocapnia,561
dysproteinemia pattern and,382-83
Hypocarbia, 561
hemoconcentration and, 379
Hypochloremia,523-25
hyperglobulinemia and,392
acidosis,metabolicand,525,526f
infammation and, 380-81
alkaloses, metabolic and, 52425
888
INDEX
Hypochloremia (continued)
anemia caused by,16263
diseases/pathogeneses and,524-25,524t
generalized,33839
HO excess group of525
infections and,23637
hyponatremia and,52425
erythroid
Hypocholesterolemia,770-71,771t
anemia caused by,163-67
Hypochromasia,138
bone marrow and selective, 339
Hypocortisolemia81012,11t
drugs and, 339
Hypoferremia,203-5,204t
endocrine disorders causing, 339
young animal,204-5
FeLV-induced,164
Hypoferritinemia, 208
granulocytic
Hypofbrinogenemia,396,396t
bone marrow and selective, 338t, 339-40
TT,prolonged and,85
selective,338t,339-40
Hypoglobinemia, 392
lymphoid
Hypoglycemia,719-22
lymphopenia of, 84f, 85
disorders/pathogeneses,719,720t
protein synthesis/catabolism and,389
pathologic,719-22
megakaryocytic, selective,340
pharmacologic/toxicologic,722
Hypoproteinemia,371
unexpected,723
ascites formation and, 505
Hypoinsulinemia, 72829
COP, decreased and, 409
Hypokalemia,451-52,516-19
diseases/conditions causing,385,386t
alkaloses, metabolic and, 510
FPT and,389
disorders/pathogeneses and,51216,513t,516,
hemodilution and, 389-90
517t
hypomagnesemia and, 623
K+
plasma loss and,38788
decreased total body and, 516-19
PLE,387
increased excretion and,517-19
PLN,385-87
myopathy and, in cats, 519
proteincatabolism,increased and,38889
renal failure andin cats,519
protein synthesis,decreased and,38889
Hypomagnesemi,604,2325,24
in serum/plasma,385-90
hypoproteinemia and,623
vascular space protein loss and,8
Hyponatremia, 505-9
Hyposthenuria,424
dilutional,508
Hypothermiahemorrhage and,27879
disorders/pathogeneses and,05,06t
Hypothyroidism
diuresis, prolonged and, 5067
anemia and,166
ECF,507-8
secondary,791-92
HO excessgroup,5078
vWD and,266
hypoaldosteronism, hyperreninemic and,507
Hypothyroxemia,790-93,791t
hypochloremia and,52425
drugs and, 79293
ketonuria and,507
Hypotriglyceridemia,772
Na deficit group of, 505
Hypoventilation, 561
nephropathies, Na-wasting and,507
Hypovitaminosis D,604
pseudo-,508-9
Hypoxemia,561,581-84
renal loss and, 5057
alkalosisrepraoryand7,7
Hypoparathyroidism
atmospheric,582
pseudo-,604
diseases/conditions causing,582,582t
PTH activity,decreased and,6024
Hypoxia,561,581-84
USG,refractometric and, 452
alveolar,583
Hypophosphatemia, 619-21, 620t
blood gases and,582,583t
pseudo-,621
demand,584
thrombocytopenia and,243
hyperlactatemia and, 54142
Hypoplasia
hemoglobic,583-84
bone marrow, 33840, 338t
histotoxic, 584
INDEX
889
L-lactate production and, 54041
Immunoreactive PTH (iPTH)
stagnant,584
assays,analytical concepts for,62627
hyperlactatemia and, 541
concentration,626-27
tidal,582-83
plasma,increased/decreased,627,627t
serum, increased/decreased,627,627t
Icterus
Impedance cell counters, 6364
hemolytic,684-85,685t
basic principles,63, 64f
index,689-90
erythrocyte,124-25
Ictotest, bilirubin in urine and, 467
platelet analysis with,230
ID.See Iditol dehydrogenase
IMT.See Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
IDEXX QBC VetAutoread hematology system,
Inchusions. See also Dohle's inclusion bodies,
66-67
cytoplasmic
Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome, 87
erythrocyte,138-42, 140t
Iditol dehydrogenase (ID), 654
leukocyte
Ig. See Immunoglobins
hereditary disorders thathave,99-100
IMHA. See Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
miscellaneous contained in,94-95
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA),
platelet,232-33
177-79
Individual testing,4850
blood transfusions, incompatible and secondary,
Induction,644
180
Infections
laboratory features of, 179
IMT associated with,239
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT),
megakaryopoiesis decreased by,236
237-38
thrombocytopenia and,236-37, 242
drug-induced, 238-39
thrombopoiesis decreased by,236
idiopathic,237
Infammation
infections associated with,239
APPs and,380
primary,237
genital tract,471
secondary,238
hyperfibrinogemia caused by, 394, 394t
tests for,249
hyperproteinemia and, 38081
Immunodeficiencies, Ig concentrations and
monocyte changes and, 94
congenital,402
neutrophilia and, 74
Immunoelectrophoresis
proteinuria and,459-60
gammopathy,monoclonal,38384
urinary tract, 471
immunofixation sensitivity .,384
Infammatory disease,anemias and,339
protein,377
nonregenerative caused by,16061,160t
Immunofixation,immunoelectrophoresis sensitivity
In-house laboratories,35-36
v.,384
INR. See International normalized ratio
Immunoglobins (Ig),372,398-404
Insulin
in cattle,398-402
glucose and,72223
deficiencies,4024
hyperglycemia and,71819
analytical concepts in,404
hyperinsulinemia, 728,728t
in cattle, 403
hypoglyoemia and,722
in dogs,403-4
hypoinsulinemia,72829
in horses, 403
immunoreactive
excess, 404
concentration of,726-30
FPT,398-402
glucose ratio to,729-30
causes of 399
International normalized ratio (INR),283-84
physiologic concepts of, 398-99
Intestine. See also Exocrine intestine;
in horses, 398-402
Gastrointestinal disorders in colicky
Immunophenotyping
horses, hypocalcemia and
hemicneoplasia,353-56,354t
malabsorption,741
lymphoma,364-65
PO absorption in, 617
890
INDEX
Intestine (continued)
LPS and, 667
decreased, 620
PO4clearance by,616-17
increased,619
urea excretion, disorders increasing, 436
Ion difference,559-91
analytical conoepts in,56573
Laboratories in human hospitals, 3637
Iron （Fe),115,116f
Laboratory assays,7-9.See alo specifc asays
bone marrow,332-33
agreement
deficiency, anemia and, 16465, 16870, 169f
acceptable degree of, 35
percent transferrin saturation and,206
assessing,32-34
profile results, comparative, 208,209t
bias plots and,32,3
serum,202-5
Deming method comparison for, 3334,33f
analytical concepts of, 2023, 2078
kappa,34,34f
hyperferremia and, 203, 203t
Passing and Bablok method comparison for,
hyperferritinemia and, 207-8
33f,34
hypoferremia,2035,204t
amount  concentration in,12-16
stainable, in macrophages, 107
analytical aocuracy, 2425
stauslbratorymthodsorassessing0
analytical precision in,21-24
TIBC,205-6
analytical properties of, 2125, 22f
UIBC,205-6
analytical sensitivity, 25
Irradiation, thrombocytopenia and,237
analytical specificity, 24
Isoenzymes, 640
analytical variation for, 23-24
Isoforms, 640
basic principles/methods, 89
Isosthenuria,424
body fuid,7-8
Isotonic fuids
chemistry,8
dehydration and loss of,503-4
chromogenic,287
edema and net retention of,504-5
CI,522
transudation and retention of, 504-5
clotting coagulation factor,287
coagulation,274
K.See Potassium
comparison of,3135
Kappaament,
control solutions and assessing performance of,
Keratocyte,148-49
22
Ketamine,hyprglyemia and718
Crt,436-37
Ketoacidosis,465
CV,22-24
Ketoamines,723-26
relevance of,23-24
Ketogenesis, 544
detection limit, 25
Ketonemia,544-45
diagnostic accuracy, 39
Ketones
diagnostic properties, 3845,40,41f
bodies,543
diagnostic sensitivity,839
concentration of,increased,544-45
diagnostic specifciry,39
in urine, 464-65
direct megakaryocyte immunofluorescence assays,
Ketonuria,464-65,517
IMT,249
hyponatremia and, 507
enzyme
Ketosis,465,544-45
hepatic, 680
Kidneys
serum, 645-47,646f, 647t
albumin excretion by,481
fbrinolysis,300
AMS and, 665
HCO,528-29
BHB excretion through, 544
hematology,7-8
glomerular filtrate concentration/dilution and,
hepatic enzyme, 680
425
immunologic, microalbuminuria,481-82
HCO,losses through,532
iPTH,analytical concepts for,62627
K+excretion and, 514-15
K,511
increased, 517-18
microscopy, 8
INDEX
891
Nat,500-501
D-lactate, 538-43
Pi,617-18
absorption,543
platelet,IMT,249
predictive value of 38-45
concentration,increased plasma,54243
quality assurance,2529
diabetes mellitus and, 542-43
quantitative urine total protein, 477-78
propylene glycol and,543
random error, 37
L-lactate,538-43
reference intervals,1620
analytical concepts,540
significant figures in,910
concentration,increased plasma,54042
examples of, 10t
effusion analysis with,859-60
reporting, 9
hyperlactatemia and,541-42,541t
rules of,9-10
measuring,540
substances interfering with,2425
plasma, 540-41
systemic error, 37
Lactate dehydrogenase (LD), 653
tCO²,528-29
activity, increased serum, 652t,653
thyroid function,786-89,787f
Lactation tetany, hypomagnesemia and, 625
UA,quantitative,475-76
Lactose tolerance test in horses,756-57
urea,435
Lactosuria,517
vitamin D,629
LAD. See Leukocyte adhesion deficiency
WF,267
Laser fow cell cytometer, 6465,64f
Westgard rules for, 2629
erythrocyte,125-27
Laboratory methods
platelet analysis with, 230-31
comparing,44-45
Latex agglutination immunoassays,FDP, 296
differences in,29-31
LD.See Lactate dehydrogenase
evaluating,44-45
LDDST. See Low-dose dexamethasone suppression
reasons for, 3637
implementing,37
LE. See Lupus erythermatosus (LE)
validating,36-37
Lee-White method,279
Laboratory tests, 5
Left shift
hepatic insufficiency/disease and, 677-81, 678t,
blood neutrophil concentrations and, 70-71
1649
classifcation,blood neutrophil concentrations
multiples test results, 1920
and,70-71
results
degenerative, 71
analytical errors in,21,22
neutrophilia and, 72,73f
classifcations of,38
regenerative,71
comparing, 31
Leishmania,leukocyte,97-98
differences in, 2931,30f
Leptocyte,149
FN,38
Leprospira spp.,infectious hemolytic anemia,182
FP,38
Leukemia. See also Acute megakaryocytic leukemia;
major determinants in, 2021
Feline leukemia virus
postanalytical errors in,21
acute,346
preanalytical errors in,21
ambiguous lineage,348
quality of, 20-29
canine,356
samples and errors in,21
chronic,346
terms used for,1617
chronic myeloid, 76
TN,38
definition,346
TP,38
electron microscopy,356
Lactate
eosinophilic, 88
chemical structure, 539f
myelogenous, 326
concentration,538-43
myelomonocytic, chronic, 350
analytical concepts of, 540
Leukemoid response,74
physiologic processes, 538,539f
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD), 100
892
INDEX
Leukocytes,53-102
Levamisole, immune hemolytic anemia induced by,
abnormal morphologic features of,92-100
180
agglutination/aggregation, 9899
Levey-Jennings control chart, 27, 28f
analytical principles and methods,6069
Light chain identifcaton,neoplasiaand384
blood,55
Light chain proteinuria,462
abnormal concentration of,70-90
Lipase (LPS).See aiso Pancreatic lipase
sample for evaluating,60-61
immunoreactivity
canine distemper inclusions in,95
analytical concepts of, 666
concentrations, principles of determining.
pancreatic,665-66
62-69
physiologic process, 665-66
hemocytometer method for, 6263, 63f
renal excretion/inactivation and,667
impedance cell counters for,6364,64f
serum,increased activity of,664t,66667
optical/laser flow cell cytometer, 6465
Lipids,763-80
QBC for,65-67,66f
assessments of, 77880
differential, count,6
cholesterol,767-71
microscopy,67,68t
definition,764
differentiation,55
hyperlipemia, 77378
disorders,nonneoplastic,100-102
hyperlipidemia, 77378
esterase, in urine,468
hyperlipoproteinemia, 773-78
Hepatozoon americanwm in,95-97
metabolism,liver function and, 677
Hepatozoon canis in,97
TG,771-72
Histoplasma capsulatum in,97
Lipoproteins, 764-67
inclusions
classifcation,764-66,765t
hereditary disorders that have, 99-100
content,764-66,765t
miscellaneous contained in, 9495
electrophoresis,778
Leishmania in,9798
metabolism,766-67,768f
leukogram, 60,62
properties,764-66,765t
Mycobacterium in,98
Liter,10
organisms in,95-98
Liver disease/insuffciency
physiologic processes involving,54-60
anemia and,16667
production,55
laboratory test results and,67781,678t,
Sarcocystis in,98
tissue, 56
Liver failure,refractometric USG and,451
Tocoplasma gondi in,98
Liver function,675-704
Trypanosoma cruzi in,98
bilirubin concentration and,681-90
urine sediment, 469-71
body fuels and,676-77
Leukocytosis
carbohydrate metabolism and, 676
infammatory, 74
detoxifcation, 677
paraneoplastic neutrophilic,76
dye-excretion tests,703-4
Leukogram, 60, 62
excretory,677
acute infammatory, 84
lipid metabolism and,677
morphologic evaluation, 62
physiologic,676-77
patterns,9092,91t
protein metabolism and,676
cat,90
storage, 677
cartle,90
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
dog,90
(LDDST)
horse,90
canine,815-17,816f
results,relative/absolute changes in,69,0t
feline,818
steroid,75,75t
LPS. See Lipase
WBC,62
L-sorbose intoxication,190
Leukon,54-56
Lukes-Collins classification,364
Leukopoiesis,55,55f
Lupus anticoagulants, 292
INDEX
893
Lupus erythematosus (LE),9495.See also
Lymphoproliferative disorders,8283,82f,346
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Lymphorrhage, 835
Lymphadenitis,363
effusions and, 846-47
Lymphadenopathy,358
Lymphnodes58,32365
Macrocyte,142
analysis,methods for,358-63
Macrocytosis, 142
aspiration,362
Magnesium (Mg²),593-631
biopsy,358
concentration,free,62526
major features of, 35962
abnormal,625-26
cells in, ofhealthy mammals,36263
analytical concepts in, 625
classification,363-65
measuring,625
hyperplasia, 362
physiologic processes in, 625
lymphocytes in,59
concentration,total,621-25
major concepts/terms,35863
abnormal,625
neoplasia,351,36365
analytical concepts of, 622
reactive,363
hormonal regulation of,622
samples,cytologic,35962
physiologic processes and,621-22
Lymphoblasts,363
excretion,621-22
Lymphocytes,56
hypomagnesemia and,62324,624t
blood,58
plasma,621
processes influencing, 59
regulatory hormones,593-631
bone marrow, 332
renal tubule function and, 422
concentrations,abnormal, 81-85
serum, 621
effusions and, 865
factors determining, 621-22
hematopoietic cells and,326
urinary excretion of,624
kinetics,5859,58f
Marginated neutrophil pool (MNP), 57
life span, 59
Mast cells
in lymph nodes, 59
concentrations,abnormal,8890
nonlymphoid,326
disease,351
pools,58-59,58f
kinetics, 60
reactive,93-94
precursors,56
in tissues,59
Mastocytemia, 8890
Lymphocytosis, 81-83
disorders causing,88-89,89t
bone marrow, 340
Mastocytosis,bone marrow,340-41
causes, 81, 81t
MCHC.See Mean cell hemoglobin concentration
of hypoadrenocorticism,83
MCV. See Mean cell volume
physiologic,81-82,82f
MDSs.See Myelodysplastic syndromes
of young animals, 83
MDS-U.See Myelodysplastic syndrome,
Lymphomas, 351
unclassified
classification systems for, 364
Mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
diagnosis,364
anemia and increased,157-58
evaluation of,364-65
Hgb relationship with,121-22
immunophenotyping, 364-65
increased,157-58
microscopy,364
Mean cell volume (MCV),131
polymerase chain reaction analysis of, 465
Mean platelet component concentration (MPC),
Lymphopenia
228
acute inflammatory,8385,84f
Mean platelet volume (MPV), 228, 246
causes,83-85,83t
decreased,247
depletion, 85
increased,246-47
of lymphoid aplasia, 84f,85
platelet analysis with,231-32
of lymphoid hypoplasia 84f, 85
Meclofenamic acid, myelosuppressive ffctsof, 23
steroid,84f, 85
Megakaryoblasts, 325
894
INDEX
Megakaryocytes,325.See also Direct megakaryocyte
MPC.SeeMean platelet component concentration
immunofuorescence assays;
Mproteins,382
Promegakaryocytes
MPS. See Mucopolysaccharidosis
bone marrow, 330
MPV. See Mean platelet volume
Megakaryopoiesis,225
Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS),99-100
infections decreasing, 236
Mycobacterium,leukocyte,98
Megaloblastic anemia,2012
Mycoplasma spp.,infectioushmolyticanemia81
Megestrol acetate
Myelitis,326
diabetes mellitus induced by,717
bone marrow,341
hyperglycemia and, 718
Myelocytes,326
Metaboli/uritionl stushrdaedtsn
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs), 34851
and,49-50
AML development and,350
Methemoglobinemia,198-99
classifications, 349
acquired,198-99
dyshematopoiesis, acquired secondary and, 350
diagnosis,199
dysplastic changes in, 348-49
familial, in horses,199
thrombocytosis and,245
Methemoglobinuria,466
Myelodysplastic syndrome,unclassified (MDS-U),
Methimazole,IMT induced by,239
349
Methionine,Heinz body formation and,186
Myelofibrosis
Methylene blue,Heinz body formation and,186
bone marrow,341
Mg+.See Magnesium
chronicidiopathic,351
Microalbuminuria,480-83
Myelogenous leukemia,326
analytical concepts,481-83
chronic,350
canine,483
Myeloid cells,326
general concepts,48081
Myeloma, plasma cell, 351
immunologic assays, 481-82
Myelonecrosis,thrombocytopeniaand,237
Microcyte,143
Myelophthisis, bone marrow, 341
Microcytosis,143
Myeloproliferative diseases,346
causes of, 15657
chronic,346,35051
Microhematocrit, erythrocyte,124
thrombocytosis and, 245
Microorganisms,culturing for,863
Myelosismegakaryocyt5
Microscopy,8
Myoglobin,Hgb differentiation from,465
electron,leukemia,356
Myoglobinuria,176t,466
hemic neoplasia classification with,352-53
Myopathy
leukocyte count, differential, 67
hypocalcemia, 610
accuracy of,67,68t
hypokalemic, in cats,519
lymphoma,364
pleural/peritoneal fuid, 852-56
Na. See Sodium
MNP. See Marginated neutrophil pool
NaSO.See Sodium sulfite
Molality, osmolality and, 549
Na:Kratio,519-20
Mole,545
Naphthalene,Heinz body formation and,186
Monoclonal gammopathy,382
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Monocytes,56
(NIST),11
concentrations,abnormal,85-86
unit conventions,11,12t
infammation and changes in,94
Necrosis
kinetics, 59
bone marrow, 341-42
pools,59
tissue,massive,513
Monocytopenia, 86
NEFA concentration.See Nonesterified farty acid
Monocytosis,85,86t
concentrations
neoplastic,85-96
Neoplasia
steroid,85
B-lymphocyte
Morphinehyrlymiand719
hyperproteinemia and,38185
INDEX
895
laboratory/clinical problems with,385
giant,92,93
pathogenesis, 381-82
granulation,hereditary anomaly of,99
bone,601
hypersegmented,93
histiocytic,192,35152
idiopathichypersegmented,of horses101
LPS and, 667
kinetics,56-58,56f
lymphoid,351,36365
marrow, 57
lymphoproliferative,346
pools,56-58,56f
myeloid,346-51
blood,57
nonlymphoid,365
Pseudo-Pelger-Huet,101
thrombocytopenia and,239-40
structural changes in, 92
Neoplasms
tissue,58
effusions associatedwith,86465
toxic, 92-93
thrombocytopenia and, 242-43
Nicotinic acid, hyperglycemia and, 719
Nephrons
NIST.See National Institute of Standards and
distal, Na reabsorption in, 499
Technology
distal,HCOin,52627
Nitrate poisoningmethemoglobinemia and198
HCO,in,526-27
Nitrite,in urine,468
loss of,427,428f
Nonesterifed fatty acid (NEFA) concentrations,49,
Na reabsorption in distal, 499
778-80
proximal,HCOin,526,527f
Nonseptic exudates, 86364
urine changes and, 425, 426f
Normochloremia,523
Normocytes,136
Na-wasting, hyponatremia and, 507
Normokalemia,516
protein-losing,460,461f
Normonatremia,5035
Nephrotic syndrome,505
disorders and pathogenesis of, 5034
Neurological disease, CK activity and, 663
nRBCs.See Nucleated red blood cells
Neutropenia,76-81,77t
Nucleated red blood cells (nRBCs), 122-23
bone marrow and, 337
enumeration of,123
causes, 76-77, 77t
WBC correction for,68-69
cyclic,80-81
Nucleus, asynchronous nuclear maturation,92
endotoxemia-causing.78f,79
Null-lymphocytes, 55
granulocytic hypoplasia, 79-80
Nutritional deficiencies,bone marrow,336
ineffective production, 80
infammatory,76-79,78f
Observed value,16
peripheral destruction,79
Olympus analyzers, 52829
secondary to immune, 86
One-stage prothrombin time (OSPT),282-84
Neutrophilia
Optical cell cytometer,6465,64f
diseases and condirions causing,72,72
erythrocyte,125-27
infammatory,72-74
platelet analysis with, 23031
acute,72-74,73f
Osmo.gap,545,55051
chronic,73f,74-75
evaluationof,551,551f
kinetics,73f
hyperosmolality, serum and,55253
physiologic,75,76
Osmolality,545-53
steroid,75
analytical concepts,54851
stress,75
calculated,549-50
Neutrophils. See also Circulating neutrophil pool;
data,inrpretationof5,
Marginated neutrophil pool
definition,545
blood,57
effective,548
abnormal concentration of,70-81
clinical applications of,548
left shiftand,7071
erythrocyte,13031
processes infuencing measured, 57
molality and,549
right shift and,7172
physiologic processes,547
896
INDEX
Osmolality (continued)
prolonged, 281t, 282
plasma, Na and regulation of, 499
shortened,282
serum,547-48,547t
Passing and Bablok method comparison, 33f, 34
evaluation of,551,551f
PCDW.See Platelet component concentration
USG,445-47,446f
distribution width
Osmolarity,545
PDW. SeePlatelet distribution width
Osmole,545
Pelger-Huet anomaly,101
Osmometer,545
Penicillin
freezing-point, 549
immune hemolytic anemia induced by, 179
Osmometry,545,548-49
IMT induced by,239
Osmosis,545
Percent hemoglobin saturation with oxygen (SO）,
Osmotic pressure,545
568-69,568f
COPu,546f
Percent hemoglobin saturation with oxygen of
OSPT.See One-stage prothrombin time
arterial blood by pulse oximetry (Spo),584
Ovalocyte, 149
Percent transferrin saturation,206
Ovalocytosis,148
Pericardial effusions, 866
Oxalates,6
Peritoneal effusions,515-16,836-39,839f
toxicity,608
analyses for, selected,85663
Oxidants, erythrocyte exposure to,19899
Peritoneal fuid
Oxidative damagehemolytic anemias and
composition,832-35
186-88
equine,833-35,834t
Oximeter,571
microscopic examination of,852-56
C-,571-72
routine analysis of, 84856, 851t
blood substitutes interfering with,572
Peritonitis,hypoproteinemia plasma lossthrough,
Oxygen,58182.See alsoArerial alveolar oxygen
387-88
tension gradient, Percent hemoglobin
PFK deficiency.See Phosphofructokinase deficiency
saturation with oxygen; Pulse oximetry
pH
Oxygenation
blood,559-91
blood,56365,564f,5812
analytical concepts in, 56573
tissue,565,566f
erroneous values or,573,573t
physiologic processes of, 56165
Pancreas. See Exocrine pancreas
samples for, 572-73
Pancreatic insufficiency, exocrine and, 6056
temperature and,570,570t
Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (PLI),668
urine,455-57
cats and,668,745-46
Phagocytic system,mononuclear, 677
concentration,745-46
Phenazopyridine,Heinz body formation and,186
dogs and, 668, 745-46
Phenobarbital therapy
Pancreatis, acute, 6089
APP, positive concentration increase and, 397
Pancreatitis,741
hypothyroxemia and, 792
Panhypoproteinemia, 385
Phenothiazine,hyperglycemia and,719
Paraneoplastic neutrophilic leukocytosis,76
Phenylbutazone
Paraproteinemiaprolonged TTand,285
hypothyroxemia and,792
Parasitism,blood loss caused by,167
myelosuppressive effects of, 236
Parasitology,8
Phenylhydrazine,Heinz body formation and,186
Parathyroid hormone (PTH). See aso
Phenytoin, hyperglycemia and,719
Immunoreactive PTH; PTH-related protein
Phosphate (PO)
activity, decreased,602-4
absorption of,intestinal,617
Partial thromboplastin time (PTT)
decreased, 620
activated,280-81
increased, 619
coagulation,280-84
Ca+ interaction with,596
heparin therapy monitored by, 282
enemas, hypocalcemia and, 609
interpretive considerations,281-82
renal clearance of, 616-17
INDEX
897
renal tubule function and,422
Platelet component concentration distribution
shift,617,619,620
width (PCDW),228
urinary excretion,618-19
Platelet distribution width (PDW), 228
increased, 61920
increased, 247
Phosphofructokinase (PFK) deficiency,189
Platelets, 223-49.See also Mean platelet
Phosphorus (Pi,593-631
component concentration; Mean platelet
volume;Platelet component concentration
assays,617-18
distribution width
concentration,inorganic,61521
analytical principles/methods,227-32
animal age and, 617
analyzer, 22829
physiologic processes of,61517
blood flm evaluation,227,229-30
concentrations,methods of expressing, 618
CBC,227
forms,615-16
hemocytometer, 231
inorganic, major patterns for disorders of, 631,
impedance cell counter, 230
631t
MPV,231-32
regulatory hormones, 593-631
optical or laser fow cell cytometer,23031
sample,617
QBC,231
serum, factors determining,61617,616f
thrombogram,227-29
Physical examination,5
Anaplasma platys in,233
Pi.See Phosphorus
assays,IMT,249
Q-Pl. See o-Protease inhibitor, fecal
clumps, 229, 232
Pincered cell, 149
concentration,228,230-31
Pirimicarb,immune hemolytic anemia induced by,
hemostasis and,262-63
180
consumption, 227
PIVKA. See Proteins induced by vitamin K
distribution,229
antagonism, absence, or deficieny
abnormal,235
PK deficiency. See Pyruvate kinase deficiency
functions, 227
Plasma, 67.See also Base excess in plasma; Renal
hemostatic, 262
plasma flow
thrombopathia and,263,264t
ammonium concentration in,697-703
function tests,263-65
B8,689
BMBT,26364
bile acid concentration, increased in, 691-93
hemostasis and, 262-65
1769
hemostatic functions of,262
Ca²+concentration in,594-95
inclusions,232-33
components,7
kinetics,225-27,226f
electrolyte concentrations in,497
life spans, 227
abnormal,498
microscopic features of, 23233
enzyme removal from, 64445
general,232
glucagon,immunoreactive concentration in,
production,224-25
730-31
adequate, 235
glucose concentrationin,70823,712t
decreased,235-37
insulin,immunoreactive,726-30
factors affecting,227
iPTH,627,627t
increased,reactive thrombocytosis and,
K，eulatinof101f1
245-46
D-lactate, 54243
psychologic processes, 22427
L-lactate, 540-41
redistribution,reactive thrombocytosis and,245
Mg²+,621
reticulated,225,247-49
osmolality, Na and regulation of, 499
assessment method for,247-48
UN,477
interpretation of, 248-49
urine analyte to, ratios,476-77
values of, 24849
Plasmacytoma, extramedullary,351
shape,232
Plasma protein to fibrinogen (PP : F) ratio, 395-96
size,232
898
INDEX
Platelets (continued)
Posttransfusion purpura, 240
splenic,227
Potassium (K). See aiso NaKratio
survival,decreased
alimentary loss of,518-19
blood loss and,240
assays,510-11,511
DIC and,241
concentration, 509-19
drugs causing, 241
analytical concepts of, 51011
endocarditis and,241
physiologic processes, 509-10
envenomation and,241
terms/units for,510-11
foreign materials causing,241
decreased
immunologic causes of,23740
hypokalemia and, 51619
nonimmunologic causes of, 24041
total body,516-19
platelet activation with aocelerated
depletion,508
consumption and,240-41
effusion analysis with, 85859
thrombocytopenia and, 237-41
excretion
vasculitis and, 241
hypokalemia and increased,51719
thrombocytopenia, 233-43
increased,517-19
thrombocytosis,244-46
hyperkalemia and,51116
volume, 246-47
hypokalemia and,51619
blood flm evaluation of,247
increased,513
PLE.See Protein-losing enteropathy
total body,514-15
Pleuraleffusions,836-39,839f
urinary tract obstruction/leakage and, 514-15
analyses or,selected,85663
intake
Pleural fluid
decreased,516-17
composition,832-35,833f
increased, 515
equine,833-35,834t
Na and, 499
microscopic examination of,852-56
plasmaregulation of10,1f
routine analysis of, 84856, 851t
quantitation, sample for,511
Pleuritis, hypoproteinemia plasma loss through,
renal excretion of,514-15
387-88
decreased,514-15
PLI. See Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
increased,517-18
PLN.See Protein-losing nephropathy
renal tubule function and, 419-21
POSee Phosphate
retention,trimethoprim-induced,515
Poikilocyte,143,144t
serum,509-10,509f
Polychromasia,138
shifting of,512-14
Polychromatophil,138
PP:F ratio.See Plasma protein to fbrinogen ratio
Polycythemia,193-98
Preanalytical errors,21
Polycythemia vera,198,351
Predictive value (PV), 41f
Polydipsia,452.Seealso Polyuria and polydipsia
applying concepts of, 4044
Polymerase chain reaction analysis,lymphoma465
basic concepts of,3940
Polyuria,427
deficiency in theories of, 44
Polyuria and polydipsia (PU/PD)
diagnostic value comparison and, 4244, 43f
ADH response tests in,48587
interpreting concepts of,40-44
H,O deprivation in,485-87
laboratory assay, 3845
Porphyria,113
negative, 39
congenital erythropoietic
positive, 39
bovine, 190-91
Prednisolone,hypothyroxemia and,792
feline, 191
Prekeratocyte,148
heme synthesis defects causing, 19091
Prevalence, 39, 40f
hereditary erythropoietic,191
Proficiency testing, 29
Porphyrins,113,190
Progestins, hyperglycemia and, 719
Portosystemic shunts in dogs,204
Promegakaryocytes,325
Postanalytical errors, 21
Propofol, Heinz body formation and, 186
INDEX
899
Propranolol, hyperglycemia and,718
M,382
Propylene glycol
metabolism,liver function and,676
Heinz body formation and, 186
nephropathy and loss of,460,461f
D-lactate and,543
physiologic processes,370-71
Propylthiouracil
plasma,371
immune hemolytic anemia induced by, 179
loss of, 387-88
IMT induced by,239
renal failure and loss of,460,461f
Prot: Crt, ratio. See Urinary protein to creatinine
renal tubule function and, 422
ratio
Sia euglobulin test,377-79
O-Protease inhibitor (α-PI),fecal,753
synthesis
Protein C
decreased,38889
activity, decreased, 291
hyperproteinemia and, 38085
coagulation inhibited by,274
increased, 380-85
as endogenous anticoagulant, 291
total,372-74
Protein-losing dermatopathy, 387
biuret reaction for measuring, 374
Protein-losing enteropathy (PLE),387
quantitative wrine, assays,477-78
Protein-losing nephropathy (PLN),38587
refractometry formeasuring,372-74
diseases and,386
transudates and, 842-44
laboratory findings, major of 38687
in urine, 457-62
Proteins,369-410.See also Acute phase protein;
analytical concepts of, 458
Hyperproteinemia; Hypoproteinemia;
assays,477-78
Plasma protein to fbrinogen ratio; Urinary
microalbuminuria and,48283
protein to creatinine ratio
proteinuria and,458-60,459f
analytical principles for total,372-79
Proteins induced by vitamin K antagonism,
catabolism, increased,38889
absence,or deficiency (PIVKA）,287-88
complement,372
Proteinuria,458-60,459f
concentrations,effusion analysis with,862
Bence Jones,385,46062
COP,405-10
classifications,460
C-reactive,372
glomerular, 45859
delayed response,372
hemorrhagic, 459-60
infammation and, 380
infammatory,459-60
disorders,371-72
light-chain,462
dyscrasia,371
prerenal,458
electrophoretic region contribution of serum,
tubular,459
377,378t
Protein Z,as endogenous anticoagulant, 29192
enteropathy and losing,604
Protein Z-dependent protease inhibitor (PZI),
fractions
291-92
calculating concentrations of, 375, 376f
Prothrombin time (PT),282-84.See also
SPE determination of,375-77
Thrombotest PT
fructosamines and abnormal concentrations of,
INR and,284
726
prolonged,283,283t
general concepts for total,37072
shortened,283
hyperalbuminemia and, 39091
warfarin therapy monitored by,283
hyperglobulinemia and, 392
Pseudo-hyperkalemia,514
hypoalbuminemia and, 39192
Pseudo-hyperphosphatemia,hyperphosphatemia
hypoglobinemia and,392
and,619
immunoelectrophoresis, 377
Pseudo-hypoparathyroidism, 604
immunoglobins, 398404
Pseudo- hypophosphatemia, 621
loss of
Pseudo-Pelger-Huet eosinophils,101
PLE and,387
Pseudo-Pelger-Huet neutrophils, 101
PLN and,385-87
Pseudo-thrombocytopenia,233
from vascular space, 38588
PT.See Prothrombin time
900
INDEX
PTH.SeeParathyroid hormone
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves,
PTH-related protein (PTHrp), 628
45-46
PTHrp. See PTH-related protein
assay comparison,45,46f
PTT.See Partial thromboplastin time
decision threshold established with,45-46,
Puerperal tetany, 607
47f
Pulmonary ventilation,56365,564f
diagnostic procedure comparison by, 4546
Pulse oximetry,571.Seeao Percent hemoglobin
FP rate in,45
saturation with oxygen of arterial blood by
TP rate in, 45
pulse oximetry
Red blood cell (RBC),120
PU/PD.SeePolyuria and polydipsia
aplasia,339
PV. See Predictive value
hemocytometer method,128
Pyknocyte, 149
Red cell distribution width (RDW),122
Pyometra, canine, 451
Reference distribution, 16
Pyridoxine deficiency, anemia and,165
determining,18
Pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency,188-89
Gaussian,18,19f
Pyuria,469,470t
skewed,18,19f
PZI. See Protein Z-dependent protease inhibitor
Reference individual, 16
selecting criteria for, 17
QBC analysis. See Quantitative buffy coat analysis
Reference intervals,1620
Quality assurance,25-29
defnition of,16
concepts,25-26
determining, 18
error,acceptable random,26
establishment of,17-18
Westgardrules,2629
expected fndings and, 20
Quantitative buffy coat (QBC) analysis,65-67
Gaussian distributions and,18,19f
66f.See also IDEXX QBCVetAutoread
healthy,19
hematology system
herd-based testing,50
erythrocyte,127
laboratory results and,31
platelet analysis with,231
measured values outside of, 19
multiple test result, 19-20
RA. See Refractory anemia
skewed distributions and, 18, 19f
Radial immunodiffusion(RID),399-400
synonymous terms,16
RAEB-1. See Refractory anemia with excess blasts 1
use of, 19-20
RAEB-2. See Refractory anemia with excess blasts 2
Reference limits,16
Rappaport classification,364
decision thresholds v,20
RARS. See Refractory anemia with ringed
determining,18
sideroblasts
Reference population,16
RBC.Ser Red blood cell
Reference range,term,1617
RC. See Reticulocyte concentration
Reference sample group, 16
RCDM. See Refractory cytopenia with multilineage
establishing,17-18
dysplasia
Reference value, 16
RCMD-RS. See Refractory cytopenia with
information on, 20
multilineage dysplasia and ringed
measuring/determining, 18
sideroblasts
Refractile artifactserythrocyte,14142
RDW. SeeRed cell distribution width
Refractometry
Reagent strip
proteins, total measured with,372-74
bilirubin in urine and,467
USG,443-45,444f,445f
glucose in urine and,463
Refractory anemia (RA), 349
heme in urine and, 465
Refractory anemia with excess blasts 1 (RAEB-1),
nitrite in urine and, 468
349
protein in urine,458
Refractory anemia with excess blasts 2 (RAEB-2),
USG estimation and,447
349
REAL system. See Revised European/American
Refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts (RARS),
Lymphoma system
349
INDEX
901
Refractory cytopenia with mulilineage dysplasia
HCO,and, 419
(RCMD),349
Kand,419-21
Refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia
major solutes and,41823,420f
and ringed sideroblasts (RCMD-RS),349
Mg²+ and, 422
Regressionquatin,4
Na and, 418-19
Renal concentrating ability,423-25,485-86
POand,422
renal failure and loss of, 427
proteins and,422
Renal diluting ability,42325
urea and, 423
Renal disease
glucosuria and,463
anemia caused by, 161-62
Reticulocyte concentration (RC),123
azotemia and,433
erythrocyte analysis with, 131
in cats,601
Reticulocyte percentage (RP).See also Corrected
in dogs, 601
reticulocyte percentage
equine,621
automated techniques for, 132
Renal failure
erythrocyte analysis with, 132-34
acute,427-29
procedure,basics of,132
azotemia and,428
reticulocytosis and increased,132,133t
hypocalcemia and,609
RNA fuorescence and,127
urine volume and, 429
Reticulocyte production index (RPI),134-35
bovine,524
Reticulocytes,11517,123
Ca²+ and, 601
aggregate,117
chronic, 42527
cat,117
Ca²,free concentration and,613
circulating,life spans of,115
evidence of, 427
e adde aa
polyuria in, 427
punctate,117
renal concentrating ability and,427
shift,134
in horses, 601
types,115-17
hypokalemic, in cats, 519
Reticulocytosis,117,138
Na:K ratio, decreased and,520
anemia classification and,151
protein-losing, 460, 461f
production of, species variation in, 152
Renal function
RP,inreased and,132,133t
failure/insuffciency, chronic of,425-27
Revised European/American Lymphoma (REAL)
impaired,425-26
system,364
plasma analyte,416,417t
Rhabdomyolysis, K+ and, 512
Renal insufficiency
Ribonucleic acid (RNA)
Ca²+and,601
dye staining,126-27
chronic,425-27
RP and fuorescence of,127
evidence of, 427
Rickets,604-5
polyuria in,427
RID.See Radial immunodiffusion
Renal interstitium, 424
RNA. See Ribonucleic acid
Renal loss,hyponatremia and,5057
ROC curves.SeeReceiver operating characteristic
Renal plasma flow (RPF),423
curves
Renal tubules
Romanowsky stains, 61
Ca²+and,596
Rouleau/rouleaux,136
functions of,418
RP.See Reticulocyte percentage
amino acids and, 422
RPF. Se Renal plasma fow
Ca²+ and,422
RPI. See Reticulocyte production index
CI and, 419
Rubricytosis
Crt and, 423
appropriate,137
glomerular fltrate concentration/dilution and,
erythrocyte,136-37
424-25
inappropriate,137
glucose and,422
Rumen overload, 610
Hand,421
Ruminants,Heinz body formation in,186
902
INDEX
Russell's viper venom time (RVVT), 288
Ca²+
RVVT. See Russell's viper venom time
factors determining,595-96, 595f
total concentration,594-95
Salivation, excess,518-19
cation,535,535t
Samples,5-7
cholesterol concentration in,767-71
ammonium concentration in plasma, 699
CK,increased activity of,662-63,662t
blood,5-6
electrolyte concentrations in,497
anticoagulants for, 6
abnormal, 498
leukocyte evaluation with, 60-61
enzymes,668t
blood gas,572-73
activity,642-45
bloodpH,572-73
activity,ncreased,64950,650f
blood plasma, 6-7
assays of, 645-47, 646f, 647t
body fuid, 7
measurement of, 645-47
bone marrow,357-58
samples of, 64849
Ca²,free concentration,61011,612f
sources of,64142,641t,642f
citrated, coagulation, 27677
Fe,202-5
coagulation,276-77
GGT,increased activityof,659,659t
collecting/handling,274-76
glucose concentration in,708-23,712t
processing/stability of, 277-78
GMD,654
collecting,21
hyperosmolality, 55253
enzyme, serum,648-49
ID, increased activity of, 654
FDPs,293-96
insulin,immunoreactive,72630
fbrin fragment D-dimer,299
iPTH,627,627t
handling,21
K+,509-10,509f
laboratory examination of5
LD,increased activity of,652t,653
laboratory results and, 31
low,50
errors in,21
LPS, increased activity of,664t,66667
Levy-Jennings control chart for monitoring, 27,
Mg²,621
28f
factors determining,621-22
lymph node cytologic,359-62
osmolality,547-48,547t
Pi, 617
evaluation of, 551,551f
reference intervals and, 18
Pi,factors determining,61617,616
urine,7
TG concentration of, 771-72
vitamin D,629
Serum protein electrophoresis (SPE)
vWF,266
gammopathy, monoclonal,383
Sarcocystis,leukocyte,98
protein fractions determined with,375-77
Sarcoma,histiocytic,352
SIADH. See Syndrome of inappropriate ADH
Schizocyte, 149-50
secretion
Secondary hemostatic plug,268
Sia euglobulin test,377-79
Septic exudates, 863-64
SID.See Strong ion difference
Sequestration,235
Sideroblastic anemias,143
Kloss through,518-19
Siderocyte,142
Serum
Sideroleukocyte,94
ALP,increasedactivity of,655-58,657t
Siderotic ranules,erythrocyte,14
drug/hormone induction of,656-57
Sigma, 27
ALT, increased activity of, 651,651t
classification,27
muscle damage and, 651
theoretical, 28
AMS,increased activity of,664-65,664t
Significant figures
anion gap, 535
laboratory assay,9-10,10t
AST,increased activity of,652,652t
unit calculations and resultant, 11
bile acid concentration, increased in,69193,
SI units,10-12,11t
692f, 692t
non-SI unit conversion to,11-12,13t
INDEX
903
non-SI units,10-12,11t
Steroids, hyperglyemia and, 714,718
SI unit conversion of,11-12,13t
Stewart'smethod of acid-base analysis,58491
Six Sigma Quality Management, 27
definitions,585-86
Skewed distribution,18,19f
Stomatocyte,150
SLE.See Systemic lupus erythematosus
Stomatocytosishereditary,199200
SO.See Percent hemoglobin saturation with
Strong ion difference (SID),538
oxygen
anion gap and, 589
Sodium (Na+). See aso Na+K+ratio
equations,586-88
assaymeasurement of,500-501
formulas, comparison,58889
blood volume regulation and, 499
Stewart'smethod of acid-base analysis,584-91
concentrations,498509
theory,591
analytical concepts of, 500-501
values, interpretation of abnormal, 58990, 590t
hyponatremia and, 505-9
Sulfaquinoxaline, vitamin K antagonism and, 306
K and, 499
Sulfonamides,IMT induced by,238
physiologic processes,498-500
Sulfosalicylic acid (SSA), 458
terms/ units for,500
Sweating
dehydration and,499
equine,507
effusion analysis with,858-59
horse,K loss through,519
excess group,5023
K+loss through,519
H,O and, 499
Na cutaneous loss through,507
hypernatremia and, 501-3
SynBiotics SCA2000Veterinary Coagulation
ion activity, 500
Analyzer,280
loss
Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
HO loss and,502
(SIADH),507-8
sweating and cutaneous,507
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 240
third-space, 507
nephron reabsorption of, 499
Tachypnea,561
plasma osmolality regulation and, 499
Tamm-Horsfall protein,457
quantitation, sample for,500
TAP. See Trypsinogen activation peptide
renal tubule function and,418-19
TAT.SeeThrombin-antithrombin complexes
shifting, 508
tCO².See Total carbon dioxide
sweating an cutaneous loss of,507
TCT. See Thrombin clotting time
Sodium sulfite(NaSO）,401-2
TF. SeeTissue factor
Solute,546
TFPI.See Tissue factor pathway coagulation
Spectrin deficiency in Dutch golden retrievers, 201
inhibitor
Spherocytes,143,150
TG. See Triglyceride
Spleen
TgAA. Se Thyroglobulin autoantibodies
contraction, erythrocytosis caused by,196
Theilera spp,infctioushmolyic anemia185
erythrocytes,111-12
Theoretical assays, sigma,28
platelets in,227
Thiazides
Spo.See Percent hemoglobin saturation with
diuretics,525
oxygen of arterial blood by pulse oximetry
hyperglycemia and, 719
SSA See Sulfosalicylic acid
Thrombi
Staining
clinical signscaused by,311
azurophilic,62
formationof,310-11
basophilic, 62
Thrombin-antithrombin complexes （TAT),290-91
blood,61-62
Thrombin clotting time (TCT), 284-85
eosinophilic, 62
Thrombin time (TT),284-85
neutrophilic,62
fibrinogen, 394
Starling’slaw，405,406f
prolonged,285
cavitary effusions and, 83637
shortened,285
Stem cells,55
Thrombocrit,228
904
INDEX
Thrombocytes,262-65
clinical signs, 311
Thrombocythemia
definition,310
essential, 351
hemostatic abnormalities,311
primary,244-45
Thrombotest PT,288
Thrombocytopenia, 233-43.See abo Immune-
Thyroglobulin autoantibodies （TgAA),78889,
mediated thrombocytopenia
794-95
amegakaryocytic, acquired, 235
Thyroid function,783-800
anaphylaxis and,243
analytical concepts, 78589
Anaplasma plarys and,242
assays,78689,787f
antibodies and, 239
hormonal control of thyroid glands and, 784
in Cavalier King Charles spaniels,235,24142
85,785f
diseases and conditions,233-43,234t
physiologic processes,784-85,785f
drugs associated with, 243
response tests,795-98
endotoxemia and,242
suppression tests,79598
envenomation and,241
TgAA and,794-95
general concepts,233
thyroxine and,789-93,798
hemodilution and,241
triodothyronine concentrations and,793-94
hypophosphatemia and, 243
TSH concentration and,794,798
idiopathic,241-43
Thyroid hormone concentrations,799,799t,800t
infections and, 23637,242
Thyroiditis,refractometricUSG and,452
irradiation and, 237
Thyroid peroxidase autoantibodies, 795
marrow replacement and, 237
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH),788
mechanisms,243
in cats, 794
MPV and,246
concentration,794
multifactorial, 241-43
in dogs,794
myelonecrosis and,237
in horses, 794
neonatal allimmune,239
response test,795-96
neoplasia and, 239-40
thyroxine and,798
neoplasms and, 24243
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH),796
platelet production, decreased and,23537
Thyroxine
drugs causing,235-36
autoantibodies,795
platelets and
concentration,789-93
distribution,abnormal of,235
diabetes mellitus induced by,717
survival, decreased of,237-41
free,793
postransfusion,240
hyperglycemia and, 718
pseudo-,233
hyperthyroxemia,789-90,789t
Thrombocytosis
hypothyroxemia,79093,791t
diseases/conditions,244-46,244
TSH and,798
general concepts,244
TIBC.See Total iron-binding capacity
MPV and,246
Tissue factor (TF)
neoplasia, hemic and, 244-45
coagulation test,282-83
reactive,245
PT and,282-83
platelets and, 245-46
Tissue factor pathway coagulation inhibitor (TFPI),
Thrombogram,60
274
platelet,227-29
Tissues
Thrombopathia,263,264t
lymphocytes in, 59
clotting and, 264-65
lymphoid,58
Thrombopoiesis,225
neutrophils,58
infections decreasing,236
TLI. SeeTrypsin-like immunoreactivity
Thrombopoietin （Tpo),225
T-lymphocytes,55
Thrombosis
TNCC.See Total nucleated cell concentration
acquiredconditions associatedwith,311
TN results. See True negative results
INDEX
905
Tonicity,546
Kretention induced by,515
Torocyte,150-51
myelosuppressive effects of, 236
Total carbon dioxide (tCO²)
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
analytical conoepts, 527-29
hypothyroxemia and,792
assays,528-29
immune hemolytic anemia induced by,180
blood collection tube,528
Trimethoprim-sulfonamide,myelosuppressive
concentration,525-34
effects of, 236
decreased,531-34
True negative (TN) results, 38
increased, 529-31
True positive (TP) results,38
physiologic processes,52527
ROC curve and rate of, 45
decreased,531-34
True values,24
disorders/pathogenesesand,5313353
Trypanosoma cruzi,leukocyte,98
hyperchloremia and, 533-34
Trypanoma spp, infectious hemolytic anemia,
increased,529-31
185-86
disorders/athogeneses and,52931,529t
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI)
vitros enzymatic, 528
analytic concepts, 74143
Total iron-binding capacity (TIBC)
concentration,741-45
analytical concepts, 205
decreased,744-45,745t
decreased serum, 206, 206t
increased,743-44,743t
increased serum,205-6,206t
physiologic processes,741,742f
Total nucleated cell concentration (TNCC), 852
Trypsinogen activation peptide(TAP),746-47
Toxic granules, 92
TSH. See Thyroid-stimulating hormone
Toxic neutrophils,92-93,93
TT.See Thrombin time
Toxoplasma gondileukocyte,98
Tumor lysis syndrome, acute,610
Tpo.See Thrombopoietin
TPresults.SeeTrue positive results
UA. See Urinanalysis
Transferrin,372
UIBC. See Unbound iron-binding capacity
Transudate
UN.See Urea nitrogen
defnition,835
Unbound iron-binding capacity (UIBC), 2056
modifed,835-36
Units,10-16
pathogenesis,839-42
abbreviations for major,12t
protein-poor,842-43
amount  concentration, 1216
protein-rich, 843-44
basic,ofmeasurement,10,11t
Transudation
calculations and resultant significant fgures,
defnition,835
11
hepatic cirrhosis with abdominal,504
measured values, 11
theories of,504-5
metric system of, 10
isotonic fuid retention and, 5045
NIST,conventions,11,12t
TRH.See Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
non-SI unit conversion to SI unit, 11-12,13t
Trichloroacetic acid method, 477
SIv.non-SI,10-12
Triglyceride (TG)
Urea
effusion analysis with, 856-57,857t
assays,435
hypertriglyceridemia772,772
azotemia and production of,430t,431-32
hypotriglyceridemia, 772
effusion analysis with,857-58
serum concentration of,771-72
physiologic processes/concepts regarding,434f
Triodothyronine
renal excretion, disorders increasing, 436
autoantibodies,795
renal tubule function and, 423
concentrations,793-94
urinary excretion of, 42931
suppression test,796-98,797f
Urea nitrogen (UN)
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine
plasma, 477
hypothyroxemia and,792
serum/plasma concentration of, 43336,434f
IMT induced by，239
Crt concentration v,437-38,438t
906
INDEX
Urea nitrogen (UN) (continued)
urine in, physical examination of, 44152
decreased,435-36,435t
urine sediment examination and,469-75,470t
increased,435
urolith analysis, 487-90
urine, 477
Urinary tract
Uremia, 429-33
epithelial cells in,473-74
Urinanalysis (UA)
infammation, urinary sediment examination
in cats,442t,455
and,471
in cattle,442t
K*, increased and obstruction/leakage from,
components of,440-41
514-15
in dogs,442t,454-55
obstruction
in horses, 442t
Ca,free concentrationand13
major concepts in,440-41
hypocalcemia and, 609
procedure,440
Na:Kratio, decreased and,520
quantitative,475-85
Urine
24 h excretion study, 476
24h excretion study of, 476
analyte urine to plasma ratios and,476-77
FE study v.,484
assay methods for,475-76
analyte, to plasma ratios,47677
basic concepts of,475-76
assays, quantitative
FE ratios/percentages and, 48485
albumin, 478
interpreting,476
total protein,477-78
microalbuminuria and, 480-83
bilirubin in, 466-67
Prot:Crt, ratio and, 47880
Ca²+excretion in,601
urine total protein assays and, 47778
decreased,601
results
excess, 608
disorders/conditions causing,456t
centrifugation,455
interpreting,454-55
chemical examination,452-68
Urinary bladder, ruptured,602
major conoepts of, 452-55
Urinary protein to creatinine (Prot:Crt）ratio,
semiquantitative,452-54,453t
478-80
clarity,442-43
analytical conoepts, 479
collection,441
increased,dianosti signifcance of4790
color,441-42
published data on,479,480t
composition,441
theory,478-79
concentration of,423-24
Urinary system,415-90
cortisol,Crt ratio to,812-13,813f
azotemia and, 429-33
GGT activity in,661
serum chemistry results in, abnormal routine,
glucose in,462-64
439-40
analytical concepts of, 463
Crt serum/plasma concentration and, 434f,
physiologic processes of, 46263
436-37
heme in,465-66
glomerular fltration,417-18
ketones in,464-65
physiologic processes, 41625
leukocyte esterase in,468
renal concentrating ability, 423-25
Mg² excretion in, 624
renal diluting ability，423-25
nephron and changes in, 425,426f
renal failure
nitrite in,468
acute, 42729
pH,455-57
chronic,425-27
physical examination of, 441-52
renal insuffciency, chronic, 42527
POexcretion in,618-20,618t
renal tubule functions in,418-23,420f
protein assays
UA and,440-41
microalbuminuria and,482-83
quantitative,475-84
quantitative,477-78
UN serum/plasma concentration and,433-36,
protein in,457-62
434f
analytical concepts of, 458
uremia and, 429-33
proteinuriaand,458-60,459f
INDEX
907
samples,7
calcium oxalate,489
soluteconcentration,443-52
calcium phosphate, 489
analytical concepts in,443-47
canine, 488
physiologic processes for,443
cystine, 490
UN,477
formation
urobilinogen in, 467-68
factors for,489-90
USG and,443-45
pathogenesis of,489
volume
inorganic composition of,488,488t
abnormal,427,428f
silica,490
renal failure, acute and, 429
struvite,489
USG,refractometric and,454
urate, 490
Urine sediment
xanthine, 490
analysis,8
Uroperitoneum, 847
bacteria in,472
USG. See Urine specific gravity
casts in, 472-73
crystals in,474-75
Vascular disease,BMBTand,264
epithelil cells in,47374
Vasculitis
erythrocytes in,471-72
hypoproteinemia plasma loss through, 38788
examination,469-75,470t
thrombocytopenia and, 241
general concepts, 469
Veterinary laboratories,31
leukocytes in, 469-71
in-house,35-36
organisms in,475
options,35-36
Urine specifc gravity (USG)
Veterinary Laboratory Association (VLA),29,30f
osmolality, 445-47,446f
Veterinaryreference laboratories,6
reagent strip for estimating, 447
Vitamin Bu.See Cobalamin
refractometric, 445-47, 446f
Vitamin D
in cats,450
actions of,629
in catle, 450
activity,increased of600601
in dogs,449t,450
assays, 629
expected,447
concentration,628-30
in horses,450
analytical concepts in,629
hyperadrenocorticism and,45051
physiologic processes in, 62829
hyperaldosteronism and,451
endogenous,sources of,600601
hypercalcemia and,451
exogenous, sources of600
hyperparathyroidism and, 452
formation,628-29
hypoadrenocroticism and,451
hypervitaminosis,neoplasm-associated,601
hypokalemia and,45152
hypovitaminosis,604
hypoparathyroidism and,452
rickets and, 6045
interpreting values of, 447-52,449t
sample, 629
liver failure and, 451
Vitamin K
polydipsia,psychogenic and,452
antagonists,305-6
pyometra, canine and,451
bleeding disorders and antagonism or deficiency
thyroiditis,452
of,305-8,307t
urine volume and,454
deficiency, 306
in various disorders/conditions,448-52
hemorrhage and, 306
refractometry,443-45,444f,445f
hemostasis tests and,abnormal results in,
Urine sucrose concentration in horses,757
305-8
Urobilinogen, in urine, 467-68
Vomiting,K+loss through,518-19
Urobilinogenuria, 173-74
Von Willebrand disease (vWD), 265-66
increased,468
acquired,265
Uroliths,487-88
BMBT and,263
analysis,487-90
clinical/laboratory signs of, 266
concepts in,488-89
hypothyroidism and,266
908
INDEX
Von Willebrand disease (vWD) (continued)
White cell impedance count (WIC),65
physiologic processes,265
White cell optical count(WOC),65
types,266
Whole blood count (WBC),62
Von Willebrand factor (vWF),265-68
nRBCcorrection of, 68-69
analytical concepts,26667
WIC. SeeWhite cell impedance count
assays and,267
Wintrobe's erythrocyte indices, 12023
sample and,266
WOC. SeeWhite cell optical count
units and,266-67
WorkingFormulation system,364
antigen ratio to,267-68
Wright stains,61
decreased,267-68,267t
hemic neoplasia classification with, 35253
interpretive considerations fo,268
genetic tests for detecting, 268
X-ray diffraction,489
vWD. SeeVon Willebrand disease
Xylazine, hyperglycemia and, 718
vWF. SeeVon Willebrand factor
Xylitol toxicosis,719
D-Xylose absorption tests,754,755t
Warfarin therapy, PT monitoring of, 283
WBC.SeeWhole blood count
Zinc sulfate （ZnSO),400-401
Westgard rules, 2629
ZnSO. See Zinc sulfate
Plate 1. Photomicrographs of leukocyte abnormalities (all blood
D. Hypersegrmented neutrophil, horse. E. Reactive lymphocyte,
films stained with Wright stain) (5 μm bar in L applies to cach
dog.F. Reactive lymphocyte, dog. G. Reactive lymphocyte,
frame).
horse. H. Reactive plasmacytoid lymphocyte, cat. I. Activated
A.Toxic band neutrophil with foamy cytoplasm that contains
monocyte or macrophage,cat. J. Sideroleukocyte, dog.K.Eryth
Dshle bodies. horse. B. Toxic neutrophil dog. C. Toxic giant
rophage. foal with neonatal isoerythrolysis. L. Neutrophil con-
neutrophil with double nucleus and toxic band neutrophil, cat.
taining bacterial bacilli, cat.
D
Plate 2.Photomicrographs ofleukocyte abnormalities （all
1993).E. Gametocyte of Hepatozoon americawam in a monocyte,
Wright-stained blood films unless otherwise stated) (5 μm bar in
dog (from ASVCP slide contributed by C.J. LeBlanc et al.
L applies to each frame).
2002). F. Yeast stages of Hisoplama caplaram in a neutrophil,
A. Morula of Ehrlichia wingi in a neutrophil dog. B.
cat. G. Negative-staining Myobweferiu sp. in a neutrophil, dog
Monulae of Anaplasma phagocyophilux in a neutrophil horse
(from ASVCP slide contributed by H.W. Tvedten, 1988).
(from ASVCP slide contributed by J.W. Harvey, 1983）. C.
H. Negative-staining Myrobacterium sp. in a monocyte, dog
Monula of Ebrlicbia canis in a granular lymphocyte, Pan6tico
(from same slide as G). I. Tachyzoites of Texoplana gondi ina
Rapido dip stain, Brazilian dog, (blood film courtesy of Camilo
neutrophil, dog. J. Pelger-Huet neutrophil, dog. K. Spectacle
Bulla, Michigan State University). D. Distemper inchusions in a
form of Pelger-Huet neutrophil, dog. L. Pelger-Huet eosinophil,
neutrophil, dog (from ASVCP slide contributed by J.C. Tobey,
dog-
K
Plate 3. Photomicrographs of erythrocyte abnormalities (all
rocytes of Fe deficiency, dog. F. Aggregate reticulocytes, new
Wright-stained blood fmsunlessotherwise stated) (5 μm bar in
methyleneblue vital stain, dog, G. Reticulocytes (coase and fne
L applies to each frame).
punctate), new methylene blue vital stain, cat. H. Anaplam
A.Rouleaux, horse. B.Agglutination, dog. C. Rubricytosis
marginale,cow.IAnaplasma cenralecow.J.Baesia canis dog.
(metarubricyte and rubricyte) and polychromatophilic erythro-
K. Babesia gibsani, dog (from ASVCP slide contributed by A.R.
cyte, dog. D. Ghost erythrocytes, dog. E. Hypochromic eryth-
Irizarry-Rovira et al, 1999). L. Cyamzoe n fefis, cat.
B
口
C
K
Plate 4. Photomicrographs of erythrocyte abnormalitis (all
cytes, cow (from ASVCP slide contributed by E.G. Welles et al.,
Wright-stained blood flms unlessotherwise stated) (5 μm bar in
1993）.D.Myoplama haemocanis, dog.E. Mycpsa heo
L applies to each frame).
flis, cat.F. Theileria uffeli, cow. G. Basophilic stippling of
A. Distemper indusions, dog (from ASVCP slide contributed
plumbism, dog. H. Heinz bodies, cat. I. Heinz bodies, new
by D.C. Bernreuter, 198 1). B. Distermper inclusions, Diff-Quik
methylene blue vital stain, cat. J. Hermoglobin crystal, dog.
stain, dog (from ASVCP slide contribured by J.R. Duncan,
K. Howell-Jolly bodies, dog. L. Howell-Jolly body, ring variant,
1981). C. Myopfasma wewyeni, most detached from erythro-
horse.
00
Plate 5. Photomicrographs of erythrocyte abnormalities (all
chromatophilic microcytes ofa portosystemic shunt, dog
Wright-stained blood flms unlessotherwise stated) (5 μm bar in
F. Poikilcytes including an longated form (werener) and a
L applies to each frame).
cell with a broad appendage (upper cener), cat. G. Acanthocytes,
A. Refractile artifact, Diff-Quik stain with water in fixative,
splenic hemangiosarcoma, dog. H. Codocytes, dog. I. Dacryo-
dog. B. Siderocytes with siderotic granules, dog. C. Macrocyte
cyte, dog J. Artifactual dacryocytes, dog. K. Eecentrocytes,
and resulting anisocytosis, horse. D. Leptocytic hypochromic
horse. L. Echinocytes, dog.
microcytes of Fe deficiency, dog. E. Normochromic and poly-
Plate 6. Photomicrographs of erythrocyte abnormalities (all
horse. F. Pyknocytes,new methylene blue vital stain,hore
Wright-stained blood flms unlessotherwise stated) (5 μm bar in
G.Schizocytes,dog.H. Selenocytes (artifacts),DiffQuik stain
L applies to each frame).
dog. I. Spherocytes, immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, dog.
A. Prekeratocytes (lf) and keratocyte (rigt),dog. B. Folded
J.Acanthocytes and fragmentation-derived spherocytesdog.
hypochromic, microcytic leptocyte of Fe deficiency， dog.C.
K. Sromatocytes, dog (from ASVCP slide contribured by D.E
Ovalocytes, dog. D. Pincered cells, dog. E. Pyknocyte (4 o'dock),
Brown et al., 1992). L. Torocytes (artifact), dog.
10m
H
Plate 7. Photomicrographs of crythrocytes in a saline dispersion
fresh citrared blood, dog. G. Platelet density soen with a normal
test, and platelet abnormalities in Wright-stained blood flms
platelet concentration, dog. H. Plat elet density seen with throm-
(scale bar in each frame).
bocytopenia, dog. I. Platelet density seen with marked thrombo-
A. Marked rouleaux, 1 part blood to 1 part saline, nonstained
cytosis due to essential thrombocythemia, dog (from ASVCP
wet preparation, dog. B. Rouleaux, 1 part blood in A to 3 parts
slide contributed by C.P. Mandell et al, 1987). J. Large plarelet
saline, nonstained wet preparation. C. Absence of rouleaux, 1
clump in feathered edge of blood film, cow. K. Smaller platelet
part blood in A to 9 parts aline, nonstained wet preparation. D.
clump surrounded by leukocytes and erythrocytes in feathered
Megakaryocyte in feathered edge of blood film, dog. E. Elon-
edge of blood film, cow. L Small platelet dump in body of blood
gated platelet (proplatelet),cow. F. Oval and elongated platelets
flrn,dog.
Plate 9. Photomicrographs of cells and other microscopic find-
immune-mediated nonregenerative anemias, dogs. H. Myelof
ings in marrow samples major reason for image is provided (all
brosis with bundles of fibrocytes and collagen marow core,
Wright-stained flms of marrow aspirates unles otherwise stated)
hematoylin and cosin stain, dog. I. Macrophage laden with
(scale bar in O applies to all frames except inserts and frames
amastigotes of Leishrwawia sp., insert with high magnification
with separate scale bars).
of amastiotes and their rod-shaped kinetoplasts, dog. J. Undif
A. Promegakaryocyte, dog. B. Mature megalkaryocyte and
ferentiated blast cells of acute leukemia. dog, K Dysplastic
smaller immature megakaryocyte, dog. C. Erythroid 'island’ of
myelomonocytic cells cat. L Dysplastic crythroid cells (lf
nucleated erythroid series, dog. D. Granulocytic series from late
and rigbt), cat. M. Dysplastic megakaryocyte with hyposeg-
myeloblasts to segmented neutrophil, dog. E. Hypereellular
mented nucleus and mature cytoplasm (micromegakaryocyte),
cat. N. Pleomorphic neoplastic plasma cells, multiple myeloma,
magnifcation insert with nonstained golden hemosiderin, dog.
dog. O. Neoplastic histiocytic cells with phagocytized neutrophil
F. Marrow fragment with decreased hematopoietic cellularity,
(top lff）, phagocytized rubricyte （bortom lf）.and large cell
dog. G. Macrophages with engulfed rubriblast and degraded cell
with atypical nucleoli (righr), histiocytic sarcoma, dog.
(lf) and polychromatophilic nubricyte (night) associated with
口
Plate 10. Photomicrographs of cells and other microscopic find-
G.Budding yeast of Blasye demaiidiand many eutro
 o i) s ro sse  q  s
phils in diferent focal plane, fungal lymphadenitis,dog.
reason for image is provided (all Wright-stained flms of aspirates
H. Leishmmmia sp. amastigotes in neutrophils and macrophages,
or imprints unless otherwise stated) (scale bar in N applies to all
high magnification insert shows intracellular amastigotes with
framescxceptO).
rod-shaped kinetoplasts, protozoal lymphadenitis, dog. I. Inter-
A.Predominantly smalland intermediate lymphocytes,
epected findings in health, dog. B. Plasma cells, large lympho-
J. Cell death of neoplastic lymphocytes 1 d after glucocorticoid
cyte, and small lymphocytes, reactive lymph node, dog. C.
therapy, lymphoma, dog. K Small to intermediate neoplastic
Plasma cells, neutrophils eosinophil, and small lymphocytes
lymphocytes, lymphoma, dog, L Smallraft of pleomorphic epi-
reactive lymphadenitis, dog. D. Neutrophils, reactive intermedi-
thelial ells, metastatic carcinoma, dog. M. Metastatic mast cells,
ate lymphocyte, small lymphocytes, neutrophilic lymphadenitis.
cosinophils, and lymphocytes, dog. N. Neoplastic myeloid cells,
dog. E Macrophages and neutrophils laden with nonstaining
Myobacterum sp., rmycobacterial lymphadenitis, cat.F. Histo-
O. Secretory epithelial cells of mandibular salivary gland and
 nxa pe aeo eu us d
windrowing of erythrocytes in the mucoid salivary fuid, salivary
magnification insert of Hisroplasma yeasts, fungal lymphadenitis.
gland aspirate (attempted lymph node aspirate), dog.
福
50um
Plate 11.Photograph ofurine （4)）and photomicrographs of
yellow,USG=1.023,osmolality=551mmol/kg.B.Leuko-
urine sediment findings (B-L). Sediment was unstained except
cytes and erythrocytes. C. Erythrocytes. D. Erythrocytes, three
when air-dried (D). All wet sediment photomicrographs were
leukocytes, and dusters of bacterial cocci, no stain (/ef); eryth-
taken using a high-dry objective (use scale bar in frame Z) except
rocytes and neutrophils with intracellular and extracellular clus-
for G, which was taken using a 10x objective (grey scale bar).
ters of bacterial oocci, air-dried cytooentrifuge preparation of
A. USG and osolality of urine samples with different gos
sediment, Wright-stain (nigh), dog. E Large bacterial rods and
appearances and colors demonstrating that appearance does not
several leukocytes (courtesy of Don Schmidt, University of Mis-
necesarily predict USG,r or solute concentration: (/) colorless,
souri). F. Granular cast. G. Hyaline cast. H. Epithelial cell cast.
USG=1.014,osmolality=410mmol/kg;(2) light yellow,
I.Epithelial cell cluster (probably transitional epithelial cells).
USG=1.014.osmolality=531mmol/kg（3)yellow,
J. Squamous epithelial cells. K. Ammonium biurate crystals.
USG= 1.013,osmolality=292mmol/kg;and（4）dark
L. Bilirubin crystals.
Dog.selective
Ref.Int
hypoproteinemia
57-85
TP
68gL5779
1062
3.7g'dL
23
4.0
AD
AD
15g/ol
3.7gdL
3.0
Gob
21gcl
2647
Gioh
19g/0
AIb
02
BB
at
Dog.inflammatory
Dog.glomenular
hyperprotenemia
proteinuria
9.4g'dL
TP
128guL
TB
525mgdt
4.4gdL
20gL
1018
Clob
5.0.9dL
Glob10.8gL
AbaBB
[AbaO2BB
1.2
Cat.inflammatory
百
Dog.β2mono
oclona
Dog
dysproleinemia
gammopathy
panhypoprote nemia
7.4g/dl
TP
10.10/0L
IP
3.5gidL
23
PPD
Alb
14o/
1.7gdL
Glol
7P/028
Glob
18gdL
Ab
[02/B./B2
Dog.
Dog.Bence Jones
hyperproteinemia
pant
ypoproteinemia
prote nuria
TP10.7g²dL
TP
580mgdl
Ab
2.0g/dL
106B
1p/6289010
Alb
J.2
Plate 12. Serum protein electrophoresis densitometer tracings.
panhypoproteinemia include acute blood loss maldigestive
cellulose acetate strips, and serum protein concentrations fom
and malabsorptive disorders, starvation, cachexia, and occa-
dogs and cats. Reference intevals for total protein, albumin, and
sionally hepatic failure This dog had intestinal lymphoma
globulin concentrations for cats and dogs are in sections A and
L.Dog, selective hypoproteinemia and glomerular proteinuria
E, respectively.
1. Serum: The densitometer tracing shows a selective
patternrclatively les albumin compared to the globulin
A. Cat, healthy: The densitometer tracing is within expected
regions. In a hypoproteinemic sample, this selective
resultsforhalthy cats and is providdasreferenc paen;
pattern indicates that albumin concentration is decreased
minor variations in the distribution of protein fractions
more than some globulin concentrations Even though
would be found in other healthy cats.
the total globulins concentration is decreased, the relative
B.Cat,panhyperproteinemia:The densitometer tracing is
excess of o-globulin region indicates that concentrations
within expected results for a healdhy cat but is found in a
of other globulin fractions decreased more than the Og
hyperproteinemic sample Thus, protein concentrations are
globulin concentration. This pattern is indicative of
increased proportionately (panhyperproteinemia) and are
protein-losing nephropathy in which the glomerular fl-
consistent with hemoconcentration due to dehydration.
tration barrier has become more permeable to plasma
C. Cat, inflammatory dysproteinemia: The densitometer tracing
proteins because of glomerulonephritis or glomenlar
shows a sclective patternrelatively less albumin comparod
amyloidosis. In such cases, there is a relative excess of the
to the globulin regions. Even though total globulin concen-
Cl-globulin region because Q-macroglobulin is too large
tration is WRI, there are relatively more of alg globulin and
sud ieus q rq uoeng aq qanonq sed oa
Y-globulin fractions compared to the other globulin fractions.
can. Note that even though there is hypoproteinemia,
The increased Q-globulin region is probably due to increased
hypoalbuminemia, and hypoglobulinemia, there was not
concentrations of haptoglobin or Og-macroglobulin (positive
truly a panhypoproteinemia berause the concentration of
acute-phase proteins). The increased Y-globulin region is
Cta-globulins was not decreased.
broad-based and is thus due to a polyclonal gammopathy
2. Urine: The densitormeter tracing shows that most urine
(probably mostly IgG). Overall, the dysproteinemia is a
proteins are in the albumin region, consistent with a
delayed-response pattern caused by an infammatory process
d e e pi Aedoudsu Suis-ud
of more than 7 d duration.
uria. Note that the proteinuria is a selective proteinuria as
D. Cat, infammatory hyperproteinemia: The densitometer
the urine protein patern is not the same as the dogs
tracing shows a sclective pattern-relativdy less albumin
serum protein pattern.
compared to the globulin regions. The hyperglobulinemia is
J.Dog non-sclective bypoproteinemia and Bence Jones
due to increased Y-globulin concentration. The increased -
proteinuria
globulin region is narrow and thus could be a monoclonal
1. Serum: The densitometer tracing is within expected
gammopathy or a polyclonal gammopathy with restricted
results for a healthy dog but is found in a hypoprotein-
migration. In this casc, a post mortem diagnosis of fdline
emic sampleThus, protein concentrations are decreased
infectious peritonitis and the absence of B-lymphocyte
neoplasia indicated that the hyperproteinemia hypoal-
poproteinemiancude acutebloodloss,maldigestiv and
buminemia, and hyperglobulinemia were due to chronic
malabsorptive disorders, starvation, cachexia, and occa-
infammation.
sionally hepatic failure. This dog had multicentric lym-
EDog.healthy. The densitometer tracing is within expected
phoma with Mott cells and its hypoproteinemia was
results for healhy dogs and is provided as a rference patten;
probably due to multiple processes.
minor variations in the distribution of protein fractions would
2. Urine: Most urine proteins are in the β-globulin region,
be found in other healthy dogs.
consistent with migration of immunoglobulin light
F. Dog. infammatory hyperproteinemia: The densitometer
chains.The Bence Jonesurine test was positive thar is,
tracing shows a selective pattern—relativdy less albumin
urine supernatant was initially clear, frmed precipitatt
compared te the globulin regions. The hyperglobulinemia is
40-60C,deared at 100°C,and then appearances
due to increased β- and globulin concentrations. This
reversed as the sample retumed to room temperature.
broad-based region represents a pronounced polyconal gam-
Note that the proteinuria is a selective proteinuria as the
mopathy. In this case, clinical signs and an extremely high
urine protein partern is not the same as the dog's serum
titer to Ebrichiacs indicated that thehyperproteinemia
was due to a chronic ricketsial (bacterial) infection
proteinura (see Chapter 8).
G. Dog, β-monoclonal gammopathy The densitometertracing
shows a selective patternrelatively les albumin compared
Note: The serum total protein and albumin concentrations were
to the globulin regions. The hyperglobulinemia is due to
measured by biuret and BCG methds, respctively.Th serum
increased βglobulin concentration. The Px-globulin region
globulin concentrations were calculated by subtraction from the
is contains a narrow peak and an anodal shoulder. The com-
measured values. When the clectrophoresis stips were scanned,
bination of narow β-globulin region and an apparent
the densitometer was set so that the darkest protein band in the
decrease in the globulin concentration is indicative of a
sample caused the maximum deflection of the tracing pen.
monoclonal gammopathy of a non-IgG immunoglobulin.
Hyperproteinemic samples were diluted (either 1 part serum t
This dog's hyperproteinemia was due to a myeloma and the
 d do
serum IgA concentration was markedly increased.
there was amore linearrelationship between quantiry of protin
H. Dog. panhypoproteinemia: The densitometer tracing is
in the darkest band and the amount oflight that passes through
within expected results for a healthy dog but is found in a
the strip. The urine total protein concentrations were measured
hypoproteinemic sample. Thus, protein concentrations are
by the Coomassie brilliant blue assay. The urine samples were
decreased proportionately (panhypoprotcinemia). Causes of
concentrated 10-fold prior to electrophoresis.
一
G
Plate 13. Photomicrographs of direct urine sediment findings.
D. Cholesterol crystals (courtesy of Don Schmidt）. E. Struvite
Sediment was unstained except where noted (/). All photomicro-
crystals. F. Sulfa crystals and erythrocytes (courtesy of Don
graphs were taken using a high-dry objective (use scale bar in
Schmidt）.G. Uric acid crystals. H. Yeast. I. Blasromye sp.
frame L) except for E, which was taken using a 10x objective
and several neurrophils, new methylene blue stain. J. Capillaria
(grey scale bar).
sp.ovum （courtesy of Don Schmidt）. K. Lipid droplets.
A. Calcium carbonate crystals. B. Calcium oxalate dihydrate
L.Sperm.
crystals and bacteria. C. Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals.
Q
Plate 14. Photomicrographs of cells and other microscopic find-
vacuolated macrophages,pleural cffusion, dog.G. Neoplastic
ings in direct smears (C, G, J, and ) or ytocentrifuge prepara-
granular lymphocytes (ft and righ, neoplastic lymphoid per-
 toneal effusion, cat. H. Intermediate and large neoplastic lym-
of major significance (all Wright-stained unless otherwise stated)
phocytes, neoplastic lymphoid pleural effusion, dog. I. Small
(scale bar in O applies to all frames unless a frame has a separate
sheet of non-reactive mesothelial cells, neutrophils, and macro-
scale bar).
phages peritoneal fuid, horse. J. Sheet of mesothelial clls, ox.
A. Nondegenerate neutrophils and macrophages, peritoneal
KReactive mesothdial cell, nondegenerate neutrophils, and
fuid, horse B. Nondegenerate neutrophils and macrophages
macrophage pleural fuid, dogLReactive mesothelial cells and
including two leukophages, peritoneal fuid, horse. C. Filamen-
nondegenerate neutrophils, pleural fuid, dog. M.Erythrophages
tous, beaded, branching (apper ara) bacilli and small bacilli.
and many erythrocytes, hemorthagic peritoneal effusion, dog.
consistent with Aetinrycs sp. or Noardia sp. (ef), mildly
N. Neutrophils and macrophage containing barium, foreign
degenerateneutrophil wihphagocytized bacteria(rgt), pleral
body peritoneal exudate cat(slide courtesy of Jenny Thomas,
bacterial exudate, dog. D. Degenerate neutrophils (some con-
Michigan State University). O. Nondegenerate neutrophils and
taining short chains of cooci) and mature squamous cell, perito-
macrophages with intracellular and extracellular particulate clot
neal bacterial exudate, ruptured stomach, foal. E. Small
activator from collecting fuid into an activator-containing clot
tube (in vitro phagocytosis), peritoneal fluid, cat.
(siderophage),lymphoid pleural effusion, dog, F. Plasma cll and
一
20
Plate 15. Photomierographs of cells and other findings in direct
D.Wood et al, 2001). G. Pseudohyphae of Candida sp. and
or cytocentrifuge (A H KM and O) preparations of cavitary
damaged adherent cells, pericardial mycotic exudate,dog.
effusions; erythrocytes are not described (Wright-stained unless
H. Intestinal protozoa (/ff and rigr), bacterial peritoneal exudate
otherwise stated) (scale bar in O applies to all frames unless a
due to intestinal rupture, horse. I. Calcium carbonate crystals and
frame has a separate scale bar).
nudeated cels (out of focus), quine uroperitonium (ASVCP slide
A. Mortly sorinophile and blu fbrinoue materidlconrictent
contributed by L Vap et al., 1094). J. Spem heade in nutrophil
with doting, osinophilceudat, atB.Plemorhic largecls
exudate of seminoperitoneum, mare (ASVCP slide contribured by
neoplastic efusion, metastatic mammary carcinoma, dog. C. Pleo-
P. McWilliams, 1992). K. Bile pigment, neutrophils, and macro-
morphic large mesothelial clls, nooplastic effusion, mesothelioma,
phages, bile peritonitis, dog. L Smallymphocytes, nondegenerate
horse. D. Squamous epithelial cells and neutrophils, neoplastic
neutrophils, and macrophages, insert with Sudanophilic lipid in
effusion with exudation, gastric squamous cell carcinoma, horse
and adjacent to macrophage,chylous effusion,cat.M.Vacuolated
(ASVCP slide contributed by M.J.Burlkhard et al.,1995).E.
macrophages and nondegenerate neutrophils, exudate, pan-
Mostly degenerate neutrophils (one containing bacilli), bacterial
creatitis, dog. N. Macrophages, granular protein and protein
exudate, dog. F. Mostly neutrophils (one containing morulae
crescents, proteinaceous exudate, feline infectious peritonitis cat.
another morula magnified in inserted image). exudate with
O. Nuceared and anucleared squamous epithelial cells, amnionic
Aplasma pbhgocytophilam, horse (ASVCP slide contributed by
Hluid collected during attempted abdominocentesis, alpaca.