Self-Assessment
ColourReview
LEARN·REVISE·REINFORCE
Wildlife
Medicine &
Rehabilitation
AnnaLMeredith
EmmaJKeeble
Clinicalcases
Problembased
Fullyillustrated
MANSON
PUBLISHING
Self-Assessment Colour Review
Wildlife
Medicine
Rehabilitation
Anna L Meredith
MA, VetMB, CertLAS, DZooMed(Mammalian), MRCVS
and
Emma J Keeble
BVSc, DZooMed(Mammalian), MRCVS
RCVS Recognised Specialists in Zoo and Wildlife Medicine
Exotic Animal and Wildlife Service
Hospital for Small Animals
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies
University of Edinburgh
Easter Bush, Roslin, Scotland, UK
MANSON PUBLISHING/THE VETERINARY PRESS
Copyright @ 2011 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN: 978-1-84076-146-7
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
holder or in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright Act 1956 {as amended), or under
the terrms of any licence perrmitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency,
33-34 Alfred Place, London WC1E 7DP, UK.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication may be liable to
crirminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
For full details of all Manson Publishing Ltd titles please write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringharn Road, London NW11 7DL, UK.
Tel: +44(0)20 8905 5150
Fax: +44(0)20 8201 9233
Email: manson@mansonpublishing.com
Website: www.rmansonpublishing.com
Commissioning editor: Jill Northcott
Project manager: Paul Bennett
Copy editor: Peter Beynon
Design and layout: Cathy Martin
Colour reproduction: Tenon & Polert Colour Scanning Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed by: Butler Tanner & Dennis, Frome, England
Preface
Encounters with wildlife casualties are increa singly commonplace in veterinary practice.
Whether these are due to natural disasters or man-made problems, there is a duty of
care for the welfare of that animal. Initial assessment and triage are essential in the
wildlife casualty case to enable decisions on treatment and rehabilitation methods to
be made. These processes often involve a chain of veterinary personnel working closely
with local or more specialized rehabilitators to facilitate the recuperation and eventual
release back to the wild of the patient. Knowledge of the animal's unique biology,
physiology and natural history is essential so that educated decisions can be made as
to the best course of action. Difficult decisions may have to be made and these
circumstances are covered in the text, with examples of cases where euthanasia may be
indicated on welfare grounds.
The contributing authors have an enormous range of practical experience in their
subject and this has resulted in a comprehensive and easy-to-use reference text.
Common conditions seen in wildlife species in a range of different countries are covered,
with cases from Europe, North America, the Middle East and Australia. It is obviously
not possible to cover all species or conditions encountered, but we hope that the
selection of cases presented covers sufficient common scenarios to have direct or indirect
relevance to most readers. The book will appeal to veterinary professionals in general
practice worldwide as a general reference text, and also for those working more directly
a   y e as on  o a 
There are few textbooks available to the veterinary surgeon covering wildlife
rehabilitation medicine in any detail. This book is designed to address that lack of
information by providing the reader with an up-to-date text covering commonly presented
conditions and species as well as providing more complex and unusual wildlife case
material. It is not intended to be a comprehensive text and references are not provided.
We hope that readers will find this book both informative and enjoyable to read and
that it will provide an easy revision text for testing existing knowledge and be of help
to those revising for postgraduate examinations.
Anna Meredith
Emma Keeble
Acknowledgements
The editors are very grateful for the expertise, hard work and punctuality of all the
authors. We would also like to thank Jill Northcott, Michael Manson and the team at
Manson Publishing for all their encouragement, patience and technical assistance. In
particular we would like to thank our partners and families for all their support and
encouragement over the past year.
3
Picture acknow
gements
 8 courtesy of British Divers Marine Life
81b courtesy of Joerg Kinne
Rescue
91b courtesy of Lorraine Fleming
18, 30, 174, 186, 192a, 194a, 198 and
101b courtesy of Christudas Silvanose
202 courtesy of Secret World Wildlife
115b courtesy of Central Veterinary
Rescue
Research Laboratory, Dubai
21 courtesy of Mary-Anne Barnett
142 reprinted with permission from
33a courtesy of Declan O'Donovan
Samour JH (2000) (ed) Avian
43,68, 133, 177a and 177b courtesy of
Medicine. Mosby, London,
Kevin Eatwell
pp.181-186
62 courtesy of Institute of Zoology
148b reprinted with permission from
67a, 67b, 67c, 95a and 95b courtesy of
Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine
Scott Fitzgerald
{1997)28:325-330
75c courtesy of Sherry Morgan
155a and 15sb courtesy of Frank
76 courtesy of Jim Sikarskie
Slansky
78a, 78b and 78c courtesy of Michael
183 courtesy of Roger Musgrove
Pyne
Contributors
Tom A Bailey BVSc, BSc, PhD, MSc,
Suzetta Billington BSc, BVSc, MSc,
CertZooMed, MRCVS
MRCVS
 Dubai Falcon Hospital, Dubai, United
Birch Heath Veterinary Clinic,
Arab Emirates
Tarporley, Cheshire, UK
James E F Barnett BVSc, BSc, MRCVS
Debra C Bourne MA, VetMB, PhD,
British Divers Marine Life Rescue,
MRCVS
Uckfield, East Sussex, UK
Beckenham, Kent, UK
J R Best BVMS, MRCVS
Michelle L Campbell-Ward BVSc, BSc,
Ashford, Kent, UK
DZooMed (Mammalian), MRCVS
Taronga Conservation Society Australia,
Steve Bexton BVMS, CertZooMed,
Dubbo, New South Wales, Australia
MRCVS
RSPCA Norfolk Wildlife Hospital, East
John R Chitty BVetMed, CertZooMed
Winch, Kings Lynn Norfolk, UK
MRCVS
JC Exotic Pet Consultancy, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, UK
Glen O Cousquer BVM&S, BSc(Hons),
Richard A Saunders BVSc,BSc,
CertZooMed, PGDOE, MSc, MRCVS
DZooMed (Mammalian), MRCVS
Moray House School of Education,
Veterinary Department, Bristol Zoo
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Gardens, Bristol, UK
Simon R Hollamby BVSc, DiplACZM,
Colin Seddon
MRCVS
SSPCA, Middlebank Wildlife Centre,
Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Dunfermline, Fife, UK
Emma J Keeble BVSc,
Victor R Simpson BVSc, DTVM, CBiol,
DZooMed(Mammalian), MRCVS
FIBiol, FRCVS
Easter Bush Veterinary Centre,
Truro, Cornwall, UK
University of Edinburgh, Roslin, UK
Jonathan M Sleeman MA, VetMB,
Becki Lawson BA, VetMB, MRCVS
DipACZM, MRCVS
Brixton, London, UK
USGS National Wildlife Health Center,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Lesa A Longley BVM&S,
DZooMed(Mammalian), MRCVS
Alexandra J Tomlinson MA,VetMB,
Penicuik, Midlothian, UK
MRCVS
Wildlife and Emerging Diseases
Erica Miller DVM
Programme, FERA, Stonehouse,
Tri-State Bird Rescue and Research, Inc.,
Gloucestershire, UK
Newark, Delaware, USA
Katherine E Whitwell BVSc, DipECVP,
Elizabeth MullineauxBVM&S,
FRCVS
CertSHP, MRCVS
Equine Pathology Consultancy,
Quantock Veterinary Hospital,
Newmarket, Suffolk, UK
Bridgewater, Somerset, UK
Maria L Parga DVM, MSc
SUBMON, Barcelona, Spa in
Ian Robinson BVSc, CertSHP,
CertZooMed, FRCVS
 International Fund for Animal Welfare,
Yarmouth Port, Massachusetts, USA
Andrew D Routh BVSc, CertZooMed,
MRCVS
Zoological Society of London, Regent's
Park, London, UK
5
Classification of cases
Flamingos
Foxes, otters, badgers, raccoons, mink
1, 65
11,14, 17, 30,38,45, 49,54, 60, 69,
Swans, ducks, geese
85,103,106,107,119,131,138,146
4,7,25,29, 51, 80, 90, 117, 118, 133,
163, 172, 176,180,191, 193, 194, 198
140,145,151,157,166,175,179,182
Hedgehogs
192
12,13, 32,57,64, 86, 87,125,136,
Buzzards, kestrels, sparrowhawks,
158,165,185,196,205
falcons, vultures, eagles
Seals
5,23,37,42,59,81,88,109,116,121,
3,16,19,61,70,72,73,91,94,128
137, 147, 156,160,162, 188
129,143,178
Owls
 Dolphins, whales
10,41, 53,79,96, 123,153, 168, 199,
8,9,21,28,62, 104
201, 204
Manatees
 Blackbirds, green finches, chaffinches
15
24, 31, 48,63, 169, 177, 184
Hippopotami, oryx, deer
Ospreys
20,33,34,43,59,67,71,93,95,99,
26,77
108, 124,150,164,174,202
Guillemots, curlews, gulls
Gorillas
27,46, 134, 181
50, 130
Pheasants
Elephants
35
76
Lorikeets
Bats
78
89,112,141, 182
Herons
Shrew
98
97
Bustards, coots, moorhens
Echidna
101,102,115,127,135,142,148,152
120
Cuckoos
Wallabies, possums, kangaroos, koalas
170
44, 92, 171, 195, 206
Doves
Reptiles
190, 197
40, 52, 74,83,105,144, 149
Squirrels
Miscellaneous
2,36,75, 126,155,159
47,56,66,82,84,111,113,114, 139,
Hares, rabbits
154,167,173,186,187,200,203
6,18,22, 39,55,68,100,110,122,
132, 161,189
6
1, 2: Questions
1 A four-month-old greater flamingo
presented with a lesion involving the
dorsal eyelid (1). The bird was housed
outside in a park with a group of 20
 other chicks of similar age. A further
four chicks had similar lesions on the
non-feathered skin of their hock joints
or on the feathered part of their necks.
i. List the differential diagnoses for these
lesions.
ii. What are the diagnostic test(s) to
determine a provisional diagnosis and to confirm the diagnosis?
ili. What therapeutic and surgical considerations are there, and what is the
prognosis in this case?
iv. What preventive measures can be taken to avoid this condition?
2a
2b
 2 An orphaned juvenile red squirrel develops pale yellow diarrhoea while being
hand-reared (2a). Direct microscopy (x100) of a faecal smear reveals a few small
oval structures (2b).
i. What is the organism shown?
ii. Is this likely to be causing the diarrhoea?
ili. What factors could be contributing to the diarrhoea and how could these be
reduced?
7
1,2:Answers
1 i. Mosquito bites, mite infestations, haematomas, early abscesses, avipox infection,
mycobacteriosis, neoplasia. This was a case of cutaneous avipox.
i. A provisional diagnosis can be made based of clinical signs. A definitive diagnosis
of typical intracytoplasmic inclusions or Bollinger bodies. Virus isolation using
biopsy samples is possible using the chorioallantoic membrane of embryonated
 chicken eggs. Electron microscopy is important because it is not always possible to
isolate virus from dry scabs.
iii. There is no specific treatment. Secondary infection with bacteria or fungi may
be treated with broad-spectrum antibacterial or antifungal therapy. Supple-
mentation with vitamin A to promote epithelial regeneration and topical anti-
bacterial/antifungal creams or mercurochrome may be helpful. Hydrocolloid or
hydroactive dressings will aid skin healing. Electrocautery and chemical cautery
using silver nitrate pencils can be used to treat cutaneous lesions. Large proliferative
 o si siod e ss p  sx is a oi   si
pox lesions involving the eyelids or diphtheritic oropharyngeal lesions interfere with
vision and feeding and leave permanent scars. Scabs around a digit can lead to
constriction injuries and loss of digits. Scabs on eyelids can cause keratitis and
corneal ulceration.
iv. There are no commercially available flamingo pox vaccines. Mosquito control
should include netting around the area where the birds are housed. Clinical cases
should be isolated.
2 i. A coccidial oocyst (Eimeria spp.)
ii. Coccidia are commonly found in the intestine of red squirrels and are usually
non-pathogenic; however, they can cause disease in stressed or immunosuppressed
animals.
ii. Poor husbandry and management in captivity could be contributing to the
diarrhoea. Red squirrels are nervous animals prone to stress in captivity, especially
if being regularly handled. Stress should be reduced by keeping human contact to
a minimum and keeping the squirrel in a warm quiet secluded environment. A nest
box should be provided to make it feel more secure. Ideally, only one person should
be responsible for feeding the squirrel and it should be handled confidently and
gently. If kept with or near other squirrels, then competition, dominance or
aggression might be causing stress. Strict hygiene is essential, especially in the areas
where food is available. The milk replacer and any supplementary food should be
fresh and suitable for red squirrels, and any changes to the diet gradually
introduced.
8
3, 4: Questions
3 A harbour seal was admitted into
3a
rehabilitation as an abandoned depen-
dent pup. Rehabilitation proceeded
uneventfully for about three weeks,
during which time the seal was fed on a
liquid diet by gavage tube. The seal then
started the weaning process, involving
the introduction of assist-fed whole fish.
Immediately on the introduction of
whole fish, the seal showed intermittent
distress on assisted feeding. Some fish were regurgitated immediately after feeding.
others vomited within 30 minutes. Occasionally, feeding would progress without
incident or vomiting.
Clinical examination revealed no abnormality and the animal was within normal
normal. Plain radiographs of the chest and abdomen were unremarkable. 150 ml
of barium contrast medium was delivered into the caudal oesophagus via gavage
tube and a radiograph (3a) taken within five minutes.
i. What can you see on the radiograph?
ii. What is your diagnosis?
ii. When considering possible treatment options, what must be taken into
consideration?
iv. Why are plain radiographs in seals often unrevealing?
4 You are presented with a young adult
mute swan found this morning by the
side of a road. The weather is wet and
windy. On examination the swan has a
slightly wide-based gait, is moderately
underweight and has scuffed plantar feet
and hocks, a wound on the skin over the
keel bone and some bruising to the
upper bill.‘
wound, several days after debriding, is
shown (4).
i. What are the possible differential diagnoses for this individual?
i. What diagnostic tests might you perform?
ii. How would you treat such a wound in this species?
9
3,4:Answers
3i.A diaphragmatic hernia of the
3b
cardiac area of the stomach.A dilated
caudal oesophagus, lightly outlined by
barium and filled with air, is also visible.
i. Diaphragmatic hernia and megal-
oesophagus (confirmed on necropsy, 3b).
iii. The diaphragmatic hernia might be
operable and the megaloesophagus may
respond
to conservative treatment,
although the prognosis for recovery would be guarded. However, in an animal
intended for return to the wild, there are three major considerations:
 Possible interference with the diaphragmatic sphincter, which controls the flow
of deoxygenated blood from the hepatic vein back to the heart during
prolonged breath holding (part of the ‘dive reflex') by surgical correction of
the hernia could have severe repercussions for the seal;
+
 Significant risk of breakdown of a surgical repair during deep diving due to
increased pressure on organs;
This is a congenital and possibly hereditary condition. Should the seal survive
and breed, it could propagate the condition in the wild population.
iv. Because of the lack of intra-abdominal fat. Although the percentage of fat to
body mass in seals is similar to land mammals, the fat is concentrated in the blubber
layer for insulation.
4 i. This has been caused either by a single traumatic event or because of a period
s n   s   n pa n nd  jo
o uai eisu 'spon iam to p A sms) enn ioedui o asaas
water) given the typical foot lesions.
i. Swans suffering from lead poisoning are more likely to fly into power cables and
other objects. It would therefore be advisable to screen for lead poisoning by gizzard
radiography and blood lead analysis. Survey radiographs, especially of the pelvis,
would be advised given the gait abnormality.
iii. The wound appears relatively superficial and to be healing well after debride-
 ment. Protective dressings, adherent to the skin or sutured into place, encourage
granulation and offer physical protection while helping to keep the wound clean.
More chronic or deeper wounds are challenging to treat. They may require repeated
debridement, possibly even including bone. Avian skin is thin and inelastic; this
area continues to be traumatized by contact with substrate, and the keel bone itself
applies further localized pressure to the healing area. Thick bedding, protective
dressings, systemic antibiosis and analgesia are all helpful. Swans rarely self-
mutilate. The prognosis is guarded.
10
5, 6: Questions
5 This buzzard (5a) was brought in to
5a
the veterinary clinic by a member of the
public. It was lethargic and anorexic and
died shortly after examination.
i. Describe the lesions shown.
ii. What is the cause of this problem, and
what treatment should be instituted?
6a
6b
6 A dead wild hare was submitted by a gamekeeper (6a). It was in an emaciated,
dehydrated state with no evidence of diarrhoea. Fur around the mouth was
darkened and matted and green food protruded, but there was no lip ulceration
(6b). Palpation of the abdomen revealed very firm abdominal contents that
subsequently proved to be due to the dehydration of the large bowel contents,
which moulded to the folds in the wall. In addition, the stomach was distended and
there were minimal internal body fat reserves. The lower lobes of the lungs were
congested and firm due to inhalation pneumonia.
i. What condition is suggested by these external features?
ii. How would you investigate it further?
ii. Is this a common condition?
iv. Has it been seen in rabbits?
v. What is the cause of the condition?
11
5,6:Answers
5 i. There is severe localized soft tissue swelling
5b
associated  with  oedema and  subcutaneous
haemorrhage surrounding the right eye.
i. A large engorged Ixodid tick. There is an
association between tissue oedema/haemorr-
hage and the presence of engorged adult female
ticks.Ixodes frontalis is a specific avian
parasite that has been reported in France and
the UK, although concurrent infection with
Borrelia burgdorferi has also been implicated.
Its preferred habitat is bushes, brambles and
hedges, and bird species frequenting these habitats may be more likely to develop
tick-related syndrome (TRS). Raptors, Turdidae and Columbiformes (e.g. the
collared dove shown in 5b) appear to be more commonly affected. TRS is poorly
understood. Acute death, lethargy, depression, focal swelling and/or haemorrhage
are all typically seen. It has been suggested that free-living species may be more
resistant to TRS, either innately or due to previous exposure. TRS may also render
individuals more vulnerable to other problems that mask signs of TRS.
The use of broad-spectrum antibiotics, together with anti-inflammatories, is
of the treatment plan. /
Any engorgedt
ticks should be removed and an
ectoparasiticide, such as fipronil, used for the treatment and prevention of tick
infestations.
6 i. Leporine dysautonomia. Perioral matting of fur occurs in 58% of cases due to
defective swallowing, gastric distension in 65% and large bowel impaction in 97%
of cases. At the time of death, 87% show atrophy of body fat reserves and 52%
have developed inhalation pneumonia.
ii. Histological examination of ganglionic neurons (left cranial mesenteric and the
stellate ganglia are the easiest to locate). In positive cases, some chromatolytic
degenerate neurons are present within the ganglia.
ii. Dysautonomia was the second commonest cause of death in one survey, causing
24% of the hare deaths
iv. Yes. Dysautonomia has been confirmed in two young wild rabbits and in some
cases of constipative mucoid enteropathy in domestic rabbits.
v. Unknown. The condition shares features with equine grass sickness. The current
belief is that equine dysautonomia may be associated with a form of botulism.
12
7, 8: Questions
7A juvenile mute swan of abnormal
appearance has been noticed with an
apparent deformity of the wings (7).
i. What is this condition commonly
called?
ii. What has caused this abnormality?
ili. How will this affect the swan in the
wild?
iv. What can be done to treat this
condition?
8  A cetacean (the Atlantic white-sided
dolphin shown in 8) strands on a beach
and you are the veterinary surgeon
called to the scene. What are the poss-
ible reasons for this animal stranding?
13
7,8:Answers
7 i. Angel wing; also slipped wing, flip wing and straw wing.
ii. An angular limb deformity, which occurs during the period of rapid flight feather
o im s a oa s no ae s a jo sq a  o
the developing feathers causes carpal valgus and lateral rotation, resulting in the
primary feathers being inverted and laterally protruding when the wing is folded.
Although genetic factors may be involved, the primary mechanism is excessive
dietary protein during the period of primary feather growth, leading to increasing
feather weight before the appendicular skeleton is sufficiently ossified to support it.
ili. Affected birds are permanently flightless and, therefore, less able to escape from
territorial attack by other swans and at increased risk from predation. The primary
feathers often become traumatized and frayed at the ends due to the angle at which
they stick out. Despite this, birds in suitable environments can thrive well.
iv. If noticed early enough, while the bones are still growing, some mild deformities
will respond to corrective bandaging and splints. Once the bones are ossified, the
changes are irreversible without surgical osteotomy and intramedullary pinning of
the metacarpal bone. This usually restores the cosmetic appearance of the wing.
but will not necessarily restore full flight status.
 8 Pelagic and coastal species of cetacean may live strand due to disease, leaving
them weak and disorientated. Infectious disease conditions commonly reported
includelungworm
1 and/or bacterial pneumonia, b
bacterial  septicaemia  and
meningoencephalitis. Non-infectious conditions encountered include starvation/
hypothermia and trauma. A certain number of primarily pelagic dolphins and
whales also appear to strand in relatively healthy condition with no evidence of
significant pathology (coastal species such as harbour porpoises rarely do so).
Theories for this are focussed on navigational error. Distortion of echolocation
signals, the system of sonar used by beaked whales and dolphins to catch prey and
navigate, may occur in shallow water particularly on gently shelving beaches.
Pelagic dolphins also may be stranded by the receding tide when chasing prey
inshore. Some scientists believe cetaceans use geomagnetic contours to navigate,
     a    
perpendicularly. Links also have been made between the mass stranding of beaked
whales and the use of military active sonar. Mass strandings are thought to occur
d pa-ol aa) sads snona un s pos ons jo aonaso e se
whales and Atlantic white-sided dolphins), leading to the stranding of entire social
groups after one individual strands for any of the reasons outlined above.
14
9, I0: Questions
9 What are the options available for management of the stranded cetacean shown
in 8?
10a
10b
10  An immature great horned owl is
10c
found in late August by the side of the
road. Physical examination reveals no
external injuries, thin body condition
(weight 760 g), several hippoboscid flies
(10a), moderate dehydration, inter-
mittent torticollis and mild ataxia when
placed in a cage. Radiographs and a
fundic examination are within normal
limits. Stabilization care consists of
intravenous lactated Ringer's solution, systemic NSAIDs and oral rehydrating
solution. The bird becomes profoundly neurological over the next several hours
(sternal recumbency, rolling and eventually seizuring) (1ob), produces watery, foul
diarrhoea and dies. Necropsy reveals a thin bird with little to no fat reserves, no
food in the upper GI tract and otherwise grossly normal tissues with the exception
of the brain (10c).
i. What conditions would be on the initial list of differentials?
i. What is the significance of the gross lesions in the brain?
ii. Is there a zoonotic concern with this case or any concern for other birds in-
house?
1.5
9,I0:Answers
9 Refloatation, rehabilitation and euthanasia. With prompt action and careful
assessment, refloatation is appropriate for some pelagic animals that live strand,
specifically those that strand in relatively healthy condition. Refloatation is used
widely in New Zealand, which has a large number of live strandings annually and
where the majority strand in a healthy state. In a number of other countries,
cetacean experts argue against the use of refloatation as an option for the
management of particularly single stranded cetaceans, as clinical assessment on the
beach is not ideal and response may not always be immediate. Onset of shock,
organ failure and muscle damage following stranding are insidious and these life-
threatening sequelae occur regardless of condition at the time of stranding and
worsen the longer the animal remains out of the water.
Rehabilitation requires facilities that include: an oval or round pool over 2 m
deep and 9 m in diameter (to allow free swimming during recovery), with an
adequately filtered/treated and temperature-controlled salt water supply; isolation
from other marine mammals; facilities available for handling, feeding and
treatment. In Europe, facilities are found in the Netherlands and Spain, and there
are several in the USA. Survival rates vary considerably between facilities. There are
limits on the size of animal that can be taken into rehabilitation.
10 i. Head trauma (hit by vehicle), cholinesterase inhibition (organophosphate or
carbamate toxicity), heavy metal toxicity, West Nile virus (WNV) infection,
bacterial or fungal meningitis, cerebral nematodiasis and toxoplasmosis, among
others. The chronicity (thin bird), lack of external injuries, diarrhoea and presence
of hippoboscid flies are strongly suggestive of WNV infection.
i. Gross haemorrhage in the brain is commonly, though not consistently, seen with
WNV encephalitis in birds. It is often misinterpreted as gross evidence of head
traima.
ili. WNV in birds can be transmitted to humans, though the incidence is quite low
(transmission has occurred through scalpel injuries during necropsies and possibly
through exposure of body fluids to human mucous membranes). Transmission to
other birds, via fecal ingestion or via vectors (mosquitoes and hippoboscid flies), is
a greater concern. Precautions, including parasite control, isolation of suspected
cases and good personal hygiene, should be taken to minimize this possible
transmission.
16
II, I2: Questions
11 You are presented with an unconscious fox (11) that has recently been involved
in a road traffic accident (RTA).
i. What would be your immediate care of this case?
ii. The following day the fox is conscious. How would you continue your assess-
ment of it?
12a
12 A hedgehog is discovered by a client it in his garden during the daytime. It is
mild weather in late October in central England. The hedgehog (12a) weighs
approximately 350 g, and has a rasping cough.
i.What is the most likely aetiology for this condition?
i. How would you diagnose and treat it?
17
I1,I2:Answers
11 i. As the fox is unconscious, it is may be possible to make a full clinical
examination, but this should not compromise human safety. Using a Baskerville-
type dog muzzle will prevent unexpected bites. The species (red fox), age (adult) and
sex (male) of the fox should be noted. An assessment of the body condition (good)
should be made and the fox examined for evidence of chronic disease. Further
diagnostic tests may be indicated. Immediate basic first aid treatment might include
fluid therapy, analgesia, broad-spectrum antibiotics, provision of warmth and
oxygen. The fox should be hospitalized and monitored in a quiet environment away
 from the sounds of people and other animals.
ii. When the fox is conscious it will be more difficult to handle, but easier to assess.
Because of the previous loss of consciousness, a full assessment of locomotion and
mental status are necessary. Remote cameras are a useful aid. If clinical problems
are evident, examination under sedation or anaesthesia may be necessary once the
animal is clinically stable. A suitable rehabilitation facility is likely to be required
for several days. Once considered fit for release, RTA casualties should be returned
to the site at which they were found.
12 i. Lungworm infestation (with the species Crenosoma striatum and/or Capillaria
aerophila). The typical bipolar Capillaria egg in a faeces sample is shown (12b).
Crenosoma are typically seen as first-stage larvae and may be seen live or dead in
the faeces after being coughed up and swallowed. Intestinal capillariasis is also
possible.
ii. Examine a faeces sample microscopically as a fresh wet preparation. A negative
sample does not disprove the possibility of infestation, due to the intermittent
shedding of eggs and larvae. A sputum sample may be obtained, under general
anaesthesia, via swab or endotracheal tube from the trachea. A number of
commonly used anthelminthics are effective against these species. The most effective
regime appears to be levamisole (27 mg/kg s/c on alternate days for 3 doses).
Concurrent bacterial bronchopneumonia is common, and inflammation and the
presence of exudate and dead or dying worms can worsen the animal's respiratory
condition. Broad-spectrum antibiotics and bromhexine, clenbuterol, etamiphylline
and dembrexin can be used both systemically and by nebulization; however,
titration of drugs designed for large animals is potentially very inaccurate.
Glucocorticoids or NSAIDs may be of benefit to reduce the hypersensitivity
reactions associated with lungworm die-off and reduce inflammation.
12b
18
13, I4: Questions
13 What ancillary treatment might you provide for the hedgehog in 12, and how
would you advise caring for this animal and releasing it?
14 A small fox cub is discovered above ground at dusk with no vixen in sight. It
is taken into captivity (14).
i. What is the likelihood of it having been abandoned?
Aedde jo aoureadde an uiendxa pinos suonns jeu omn ie '!
abandoned fox cubs above ground?
ii. What are the main long-term behavioural problems that may be caused by hand-
rearing fox cubs?
iv. What is the most common congenital abnormality of fox cubs, which often
results in maternal rejection?
v. What should be done with this fox cub?
19
I3,I4:Answers
 aq o pe n ns an un ndo  r aro oi ads ar so 1
 on a mixture of dried and tinned dog and cat foods, although proprietary hedgehog
foods exist. The addition to, or replacement of, such a diet with live invertebrate
 naturalistic diet. Younger hedgehogs may benefit from the addition of pancreatic
enzyme preparations to increase the digestibility of proprietary diets. Release should
be delayed until the animal weighs at least 500 g, during a spell of warm weather
or the end of the winter. If necessary, the hedgehog should be overwintered until the
spring. Release should ideally be associated with provision of some supplementary
food for a few days, in a suitable environment, lacking predators, far from roads
and with nesting areas.
14 i. Fox cubs are very rarely abandoned and will usually have their mother nearby.
Genuinely orphaned cubs are usually thin, weak and vocal.
i. Weaned cubs are often seen above ground playing and learning survival skills
without the obvious presence of the vixen. Litters of younger cubs less than four
weeks old are sometimes translocated by the vixen to safer sites, and one or two
may be left behind while she moves the others. The vixen will usually return later.
ii. It is difficult to rear fox cubs in captivity and ensure that they acquire the
necessary hunting and social skills to survive back in the wild afterwards. The
species is prone to becoming tame and imprinted on humans, so it is imperative to
keep all human contact to a minimum, keep cubs in small groups of similar ages,
and feed natural food (e.g carrion from road kill) to develop natural dietary tastes.
At about six weeks old, cubs should be kept in a large enclosure with environmental
enrichment to encourage the development of natural behaviour.
iv. Hydrocephalus.
v. The cub should be handled as little as possible and, if healthy, returned to where
it was found, if safe from people and dogs. The area should be checked the
following day to ensure that it has been retrieved by the vixen.
20
15, I6: Questions
15a
15 The dorsal surface of a Florida manatee demonstrating propeller wounds is
shown (15a). Briefly describe the common reasons for presentation of manatees in
their habitat off the coastal waters of Florida, USA, to specialist manatee
rehabilitation centres.
16a
16b
16 A group of juvenile common seals in a rehabilitation centre suddenly develop
greenish-brown watery diarrhoea (16a) and become dull, lethargic and inappetent.
Examination of faeces by direct microscopy reveals large numbers of organisms
(16b), approximately 45 x 25 μm.
i. What are these organisms?
i. How significant are they?
ii. What management factors could have contributed to their presence?
iv. What are the other principal differential diagnoses for diarrhoea in these seals?
21
15,I6:Answers
15 Boat collision injuries are one of the
15b
most common reasons for presentation
torehabilitation facilities.
Propeller
blade injuries can penetrate the pleural
cavity, with secondary bacterial infec-
tions and sepsis often proving fatal.
Internally, the manatee's body cavity is
divided longitudinally, with each dorsally
located
Alung
further separated
by
hemidiaphragms. Fistulous tracts and
chronic vertebral osteomyelitis are com-
thorax, pyothorax, pulmonary haemorrhage and secondary buoyancy problems.
Traumatic injuries are also caused by entanglement with fishing lines, crab pots and
other discarded debris and waste. When severe, these injuries may cause, or require,
pectoral flipper amputation (1sb). Orphaned or abandoned neonatal manatees
usually present cachexic, dehydrated and hypoglycaemic, with major metabolic
abnormalities. Sepsis and secondary skin infections are common. Juvenile manatees
(<300 kg) and adults are prone to cold stress in cooler waters (<20°C) and present
similarly to orphaned neonates. Outbreaks of Karenia brevis, commonly known as
red tide, have caused mass mortality events in manatees. This dinoflagellate produces
a potent neurotoxin termed brevetoxin. Clinical signs noted include dyspnoea,
flaccid paralysis, muscle fasciculations, hyperflexion, disorientation and seizures.
Chronic abscessation of the dermis and deeper muscle planes is a common problem
in rehabilitating manatees.
16 i.Eimeria phocae oocysts.
ii. Occasionally, small numbers of oocysts are found in seal faeces with little
significance; however, the large numbers found in these seals are likely to be causing
enterocolitis, resulting in diarrhoea and occasionally dysentery.
ili. A build-up of sporulated oocysts in the environment is more likely in conditions
of overcrowding and poor hygiene. Increased temperature and humidity also favour
the survival of oocysts.
iv. Sudden diet change, especially a change to poorer quality fish; stress (e.g. recent
changes to their captive environment); bacterial enteritis (e.g. Clostridium
perfringens, salmonellosis, coliform enteritis); severe gastrointestinal helminthiasis;
viral enteritis.
22
17, 18: Questions
7a
17 You carry out a post-mortem examination on an otter killed in a road traffic
accident and observe that there are numerous whitish lesions about 1l mm in
diameter scattered throughout the lungs (17a).
i. What would be your provisional diagnosis?
i. How would you try to confirm this?
i. What is the clinical significance of the disease?
18 You are presented with a litter of orphaned wild rabbits approximately 10 days
old (18).
i. How would you initially feed these animals?
i. At what age would you introduce weaning food, and what would you consider
to be suitable food items?
ii. What problems may be associated with hand-rearing rabbits, and how might
these be overcome?
23
I7,I8:Answers
17 i. Adiaspiromycosis, a condition
caused
1bythe
dimorphic fungus
Emmonsia crescens. In its free-living or
saprophytic state the fungus grows on
decaying
 plant  material,
where it
produces
 numerous
small
spores,
2-4 μm diameter, called conidiospores.
 If these are inhaled, they develop in the
lung parenchyma and form thick-walled
spores known as adiaspores. Adiaspores
can grow up to 500 μm in diameter, but do not divide or develop further in the
dies or is eaten by a predator. The adiaspores become surrounded by inflammatory
cells and it is these that form the characteristic lesion. A major differential diagnosis
is tuberculosis.
i. Histopathological examination. Adiaspores surrounded by granulomatous
reaction in an otter's lung are shown in this H&E-stained section (17b).
ii. Adiaspiromycosis is a common condition of animals that hunt or nest
underground. It is rarely of clinical significance, but the lesions can closely resemble
those of tuberculosis. Although humans can become infected, this is only by
inhalation of spores from the environment. Adiaspiromycosis is not a zoonosis.
18 i. In the wild, suckling lagomorphs take large feeds, usually just once a day.
Hand-reared rabbits should be fed 3-6 times a day on a suitable replacement milk
feed, such as commercial dog and cat milk replacers or goats milk. Volumes of feed
will depend on age and frequency of feeding.
i. Wild rabbits begin to wean at 2-3 weeks old. An assortment of grass, fresh leaves
and leafy vegetables should be provided together with ad-libitum hay. A commercial
"junior' pelleted food can also be used.
ii. Problems include aspiration pneumonia, digestive disturbances and diarrhoea
during the milk feeding phase. These can be prevented by good hygiene, as well as
a careful feeding technique. Coccidiosis may be a problem in groups of young
rabbits. At weaning, fatal digestive disturbances and diarrhoea are common and
these are attributed to a lack of access to adult caecotrophs, which establish normal
gut flora. Feeding of fresh caecotrophs from healthy adults and the use of probiotics
have been advocated
24
19, 20: Questions
19a
19  This juvenile grey seal pup is brought to a wildlife hospital for veterinary
assessment. On examination it is found to be emaciated (based on visibly distinct
neck, pelvis and ribs and evidence of loose skin) and dehydrated (19a).
i. How may dehydration be assessed on clinical examination in this species?
i. What is the recommended route for fluid therapy in this animal, and what site
is most commonly used?
20
20 In 2004/2005 an outbreak of anthrax (Bacillus antbracis) killed 306 hippo
      a     nd
 mortality represented 11.63% of the total park hippo population.
i. Give a list of possible differential diagnoses for sudden death in this group of
hippos.
i. Describe possible modes of transmission that would sustain this anthrax
outbreak.
ii. What management actions would you recommend to respond to this outbreak,
and how would you dispose of affected carcasses?
2.5
19,20:Answers
19i. Dehydrated seal pups have sunken eyes
19b
and dry mucous membranes and lack normal
tear staining around the eyes. The 'skin pinch
test' is unreliable due to the tight application
of the skin to the blubber layer. Normal
hydrated pups have wetness around the eyes
due to tear staining, since nasolacrimal ducts
are absent.
i. The extradural intravertebral vein is located
with the seal pup
0restrained in sternal
recumbency. Access to this vein is best achieved
19c
midline via the L3/L4 intervertebral space at a
distance halfway between the caudal most ribs
and the iliac crests (19b). In pups weighing <25
kg the anatomical landmarks can be palpated
to aid location of the site. A 21 gauge 2.5-5 cm
needle is inserted perpendicular to the skin and
advanced until blood appears in the hub.
Correct  placement  can  be confirmed  by
drawing blood back first. The needle is left in situ and an intravenous fluid giving
set is attached (19c). Once the animal is hydrated it will start to move around more
and alternative fluid therapy routes will need to be employed.
20 i. Botulism, toxicities (both natural and anthropogenic), anthrax, peracute
babesiosis and theileriosis (East Coast fever).
i. (1) Contamination of hippo grazing tracks with blood from infected animals.
Hippos tend to use well worn tracks for their nocturnal terrestrial grazing habits.
(2) Ingestion of spore-contaminated stagnant water in small pools. (3) Spore
contamination of open
1 wounds. Hippos are very aggressive and aquatically
territorial with fight wounds being common. (4) Ingestion of infected carcasses.
Cannibalism has been reported to occur in hippos. (5) Mechanical transmission
through biting haematophagous flies
iii. Anthrax may be seen as part of the natural ecology of endemic areas. However,
intervention may be required due to its zoonotic implications (at least 4-7 people are
reported to have died in this outbreak after eating contaminated hippo meat), its
effects on domestic livestock (many livestock graze on the periphery or within national
parks in East Africa) and its effects on endangered species of wildlife. Management
actions used in this outbreak were carcass disposal by cremation or burying under a
layer of quicklime, vaccination of at-risk local livestock and education of local
communities. Anthrax is a notifiable disease in some parts of the world.
26
21, 22: Questions
21  You are called to a stranded cetacean on a beach and start your clinical
examination, which is limited to the equipment available in the back of your car.
What are the essential components of your examination?
22a
22b
22c
condition, had external signs of myxomatosis and an unusual swelling on the right
side. A post-mortem examination was carried out to assess the swelling (22a, b).
The site was dissected and the contents removed and identified (22c).
i. What is the structure within the swelling in the musculature of the right back
muscles?
i. Was it likely to have contributed to the rabbit's death?
ili. Is this a common problem?
27
21,22:Answers
21
 Blood sampling sites in cetaceans
● Determining the species and size of
the animal.
Lateral surface of dorsal fin
● Determining if it is weaned (check its
length against known species lengths,
presence/absence of vibrissae on the
beak/rostrum, presence/absence of
lingual papillae and umbilicus).
Ventral surface of tail flukes
Nutritional
state/body
condition
(N.B. central cail veins also 
(concavity/convexity of the lumbar
 accessible from dorsal
surface of flukes)
muscles adjacent to the dorsal fin).
Assessing the severity of any trauma.
Checking for skin peeling/cracking (worsens with time out of water).
 Checking for signs of dehydration (loss of skin/muscle tone).
*Assessing reflexes and jaw/tongue tone.
Checking for discharges from orifices (including blood).
Lung auscultation and assessing the character and
d rate of respirations
(porpoises/dolphins normally 2-5 breaths/minute; less in larger cetaceans).
 Assessing for signs of shock (including increasing expiratory-inspiratory gap and
capillary refill time).
 Checking temperature (taken with thermistor probe inserted 20-30 cm into
[104°F] critical; >42°C [107.6°F] terminal}
Where nearby laboratory services are available, analyses of blood samples drawn
from the central tail vessels (arteriovenous complexes) in smaller animals and
the dorsal fin vessels in larger animals (21). Useful parameters include
haematocrit, leucogram, muscle enzymes, urea and creatinine. Reference ranges
for some species are available.
22 i. Coenurus serialis, the larval stage of the adult tapeworm Taenia serialis, in
which the scolices are typically arranged in serial lines. Distinct rows of white
structures can be seen radiating along the surface in 22b.
i. The intermediate stages of this tapeworm locate in connective tissue sites. In this
rabbit the cyst has developed in the muscles, forming a smooth-walled space,
without evidence of sepsis, and causing no compromise to the rabbit's health. Death
was due to myxomatosis. In certain locations (e.g. the orbit) the cysts can
compromise the rabbit's health.
ii. The adult tapeworms are parasites of dogs and foxes. The pasture where this
rabbit was found is dog free and foxes are seen rarely. The parasite cyst can affect
 rabbits and hares, but it is non-lethal and an uncommon finding.
28
23, 24: Questions
23 A common buzzard is found dead.It is in
23a
an emaciated condition. On post-mortem
examination you observe numerous whitish
focal lesions in the liver and spleen and
nodular swellings on the wall of the gizzard
and along the intestines. There is a gross
excess of pericardial fluid and a mass of urates
in the cloaca (23a).
i. What is your provisional diagnosis?
ii. Which of the lesions are characteristic of
the disease, and which are unusual?
ii. What tests would you carry out to
investigate this case further?
iv. What other organisms might cause similar
lesions?
24 A fledgling common blackbird, 'rescued'
24
from an attack by a domesticated cat, is
presented with multiple wounds to the body
(24). Examination reveals a bird in good body
condition with fresh wounds, some of which
appear to be skin lacerations, exposing the
underlying damaged musculature, but one
wound on the lateral body wall has clearly
punctured the body cavity.
i. What are the main factors to be considered
in the assessment of this common situation,
and what course of action is appropriate?
i. Would attempts to treat this bird be of any significant conservation value?
29
23,24:Answers
23
i.Avian tuberculosiscausedby
23b
Mycobacterium avium subsp.avium.
ii. Focal lesions in both the spleen and
liver are commonly seen in avian
tuberculosis. However lesions can occur
 in any organ. Typically, the lesions con-
sist of caseous pus and are often partly
mineralized, which makes them feel
gritty when cut. The nodular lesions in
the wall of the gizzard and along the
Excess fluid in the
pericardium and cloaca is commonly seen in birds suffering from chronic debility.
ili. Make impression smears from the cut surface of lesions onto at least three
microscope slides. Stain one with Gram and one with Ziehl-Neelsen and examine
them with a high-power objective (at least 60x). If you see clumps of acid-fast
Organisms (23b), there is litle justification in most cases for further tests. If no acid-
fast organisms are seen, check the Gram smear for other organisms and consider
submitting tissues for cultural examination. Sections of affected organs could also
be examined histopathologically using Gram, ZN and H&E stains.
iv.Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, Salmonella spp., Listeria spp. and Erysipelothrix spp.
can cause similar focal liver lesions.
24 i. Cat bite wounds are commonly associated with a variety of bacterial
infections, frequently leading to fatal septicaemia/toxaemia. The chance of
successful treatment (supportive/medical/surgical) in such a severe case is very low
and euthanasia might be the most humane approach. The success rate with less
severely injured fledglings is also poor, usually due to failure to control infection.
Uninjured fledglings are best returned to the site where found and placed in a safe
position for their parents to relocate. If this is not possible, they can, with patience,
be easily reared by hand
i. As with most species of passerine birds, the dynamics of the wild population
to independence an average of two or three offspring, of which 60% will fail to
survive the first year. Casualties of displaced fledglings might represent part of this
natural loss and attempts to rehabilitate these birds in a species that is under no
serious threat is unlikely to be of any real conservation value.
30
25, 26: Questions
25a
25b
25 Following an oilspill in Northern Europe, several hundred oiled seabirds are
long-tailed ducks and common goldeneye. For several days they are held in small
groups in cardboard boxes, on newspaper and towels as bedding (25a). As facilities
introduced to water. They seem to be waterproof and are bright and responsive.
However, the next morning several of the birds are found to be waterlogged and
hypothermic, and two are dead in the water. Lesions typical of those found on
examination of both dead and live birds are shown (25b).
i. What is the cause of the lesions over the keel bone?
i. What is the probable cause of the failure of waterproofing?
ii. Can the live birds be treated, and what is the prognosis?
iv. What advice would you give to the rehabilitators?
26a
26b
26 An osprey is shown (26a). It had been found on the ground near a trout lake
in southern England and was unable to fly. A ventrodorsal radiograph of the bird's
pectoral region was taken (26b).
i.What lesions can be seen?
ii. What would be your approach to managing this case?
31
25,26:Answers
25 i. Pressure necrosis. Even with soft
25c
bedding, seabirds are very prone to keel
lesions. They can only stand on land for
short periods, so spend their time resting
on their keel, which rapidly ulcerates.
i. Leaking of serous fluid from the
wound onto surrounding feathers. This
clogs the feathers and causes them to
clump together making a hole in the
waterproof outer layer of feathers.
Water then soaks through to the down
feathers and the bird becomes waterlogged, loses buoyancy and becomes
hypothermic due to lack of insulation and increased heat loss.
li. Treatments attempted, with limited success, include suturing the lesion with
subcuticular sutures and providing a warm water pool to prevent hypothermia. The
prognosis is guarded, and is hopeless unless birds can be maintained on water to
reduce keel pressure.
iv. Prior to washing, oiled seabirds should be kept in net bottomed cages (25c). This
minimizes the pressure on the keel bone and feather damage from faeces, which drops
 through the netting. Birds should be triaged and those showing evidence of keel lesions
washing, birds should be maintained on water. A small ledge should be provided for
birds to leave the water and avoid drowning if they start to become waterlogged.
26 i. A fractured coracoid bone and a round metallic density suggestive of a piece
of lead shot are visible
ii. The coracoid fracture is minimally displaced. This type of fracture often does
well with rest. Lead shot does not normally need to be removed from soft tissue
unless infection is present. Lead is not significantly absorbed from this particular
site, thus preventing heavy metal toxicity. This bird was rested for two weeks in a
treatment bay. It then spent a further rwo months in rehabilitation aviaries, the
space allowed being gradually increased as flight improved. It was fed on fresh trout
while in captivity. As these birds migrate, release had to be timed to coincide with
migration times. It was deemed *ready' in early autumn to coincide with the osprey's
southern migration. A satellite tracking device was fitted and the bird released.
After a few days spent on the south coast of England the bird's signal was picked
up in northern Spain less than 10 days post release
Post-release monitoring is of vital importance in assessing treatment and
rehabilitation success. In this case it could be seen that conservative management
gave a favourable outcome and that the bird had, in fact, been fit for release.
32
27, 28: Questions
27  You are called to a facility where approximately 40 guillemots have been
admitted following an oil spill. Pending washing they are housed in a concrete
floored barn in pens divided up by bales of hay. Approximately half have already
been washed and are on an outdoor covered pool consisting of a concrete-edged,
shallow, static fresh water pool with no filtration. They are fed freshly defrosted
sprats in the water. Six birds have died within 24 hours of the washing process.
i. What are your differential diagnoses for the cause of death, and how would you
proceed to diagnose the problem?
i. What changes would you make to the facility to improve their success rates?
28a
28b
28
A  long-finned pilot whale is
28c
observed in a harbour on the north.
eastern seaboard of the USA. The
animal is remaining at the surface,
circling in an anticlockwise pattern, with
breaths every 1-2 minutes. It is actively
avoiding boats and shallow water, and
evades attempts by the local strandings
network staff to herd it out into deep
water. A few days later, attempts to herd
it into deep water are successful, but the following morning the animal is found
stranded on a nearby beach. As it is impossible to refloat the animal, it is euthanased
and taken to a marine laboratory for necropsy (28a). These lesions are seen on
superficial inspection (28b, c).
i. How would you describe the body condition of this animal?
i. What do you consider to be the cause and time-scale of these lesions, and what
impact do you think they may have had on the eventual fate of this animal?
33
27,28:Answers
27 i. Fungal infection, maladaption due to either
27
 inadequate body condition or incomplete washing.
Dead birds should be subjected to post-mortem
examination and samples taken for histopathology
and bacterial and/or fungal culture. The cause of
death in these birds was aspergillosis (27). Remain-
ing live birds are likely to be infected and should be
investigated
 by  radiographic  and
endoscopic
examination. Any with grossly evident aspergillo-
sis should be euthanased, and the rest, plus new
additions, treated prophylactically with antifungals
(e.g. itraconazole)
ii. Even in clean environments, fungal spore levels
can be sufficient to cause clinical disease. Vegetation, hay or straw results in a very
high environmental fungal spore load. Better ventilated, uncontaminated environ-
ments should be used and all organic material removed. Unless the birds spend all
their time on the water the concrete floor should be covered with soft matting to
avoid foot lesions. The birds should be fed fish in shallow water-filled bowls or trays,
separate to the water they swim in, to avoid recontamination of plumage with fish oil.
The water should be filtered, or at least be continuously overflowing, and skimmed
to avoid recontamination with faeces. Fresh water is commonly used, but salt water
is the natural environment of such birds and is preferred.
28 i. This animal is emaciated. The body shape over the lumbar muscles between
the midline and the transverse processes of the vertebral column is markedly
concave. There is a visible ‘neck' behind the blowhole
ii. There are abrasions on the fluke stock dorsally and laterally and cross-hatched
impressions on the peduncle, typical of rope abrasions from entanglement. Cetaceans
can often free themselves of entanglements over time and many show typical scars.
On the eastern seaboard of the USA there is a significant problem with entanglement
of large whales (and seals and marine turtles) in the vertical lines of lobster pots.
However, this is not the only cause, and entanglement in set nets (drift nets or bottom
  i   s  i   o  a
There is evidence of healing, which suggests that the wounds are more than a few
days old; however, the depth of the lesions does not necessarily suggest that the
entanglement was prolonged over weeks or months. It is difficult to attribute the
emaciated condition of this animal solely to the effects of entanglement, although
it may have been a contributory factor. Other potential causes for the emaciated
condition of this animal should be investigated by a full necropsy.
34
29, 30: Questions
29A Canada goose weighing 2.4 kg is
29a
presented to your clinic. The goose has
been living in a park by the same pond
for three years and local residents feed it
bread, crackers or popcorn on a daily
basis. About a week and a half ago they
noticed that the goose's voice was
changing. A few days ago they noticed
that it had green diarrhoea, and today
thegoose
did
notstand
when
approached. It was generally depressed
and weak; respiration was normal; there
was a ruffled appearance to the neck
 and head feathers and lice were present;
the eyes were dull; the mouth and nares
were normal; and the goose could use its
legs but was in a sternal position. PCV
was 0.29 1/l (29%), buffy coat was 1%
and total solids were 1.8 g/dl. A dorso-
ventral radiograph was taken (29a).
i. What additional diagnostic test(s) would you run?
ii. What conditions are on your differential list, and which is/are highest?
ii. Provide a stabilization and treatment plan for this bird.
30 i. What does this image show (30), and how is the injury likely to have been
sustained?
ii. What would be your approach and considerations when treating such injuries?
3.5
29,30:Answers
29 i. Submit a blood sample for heavy
29b
metals (minimum lead and zinc).
ii. Crop impaction: possible lead or
other heavy metal poisoning; possible
foreign body blockage; possible soybean
toxicity, possible trauma. Density in
ventriculus: foreign body ingestion,
most likely lead or zinc. An elevated zinc
blood level (80 ppm [>40 ppm is toxic])
confirmed a diagnosis of heavy metal toxicity. Pennies minted in the USA after 1981
contain up to 98% zinc, coated with copper (29b).
ii. 2.5% dextrose in lactated Ringer's solution (D2.5LRS) should be given i/v and
repeated q12h for 24 hours. D2.5LRS or another oral rehydrating solution should
be given. There should be access to water but no other food (especially avoid any
solids like corn or pelleted feeds that might further grind the metallic objects).
Pyrethrin powder is applied to treat the lice. Once stable, the treatment for lead
 s i  e jo n  as an si o  s
calcium EDTA or Succimer and removal of any metal still visible in the GI tract).
 In this goose the penny can be removed through endoscopy, gastric lavage or by
surgical ventriculotomy.
30 i. A deep cutaneous circumferential linear wound around the ventral caudal
abdomen of a badger. This was caused by a wire snare.
ii. The badger should be sedated and fully examined. Concurrent injuries to the
limbs and jaw are common, associated with the animal's attempts to escape from
the snare. Where wounds extend into deeper structures or there are concurrent
injuries, the chance of successful release is poor and euthanasia is recommended.
Where the wounds are limited to the cutaneous and subcutaneous structures, they
management includes daily flushing with saline or dilute chlorhexidine solution
and the application of topical hydrogel products to encourage granulation and
epithelialization. Wounds suitable for suturing are those that are gaping, but have
clean viable subcutaneous tissue, and skin edges that can be closed without tension.
 If there is any uncertainty regarding tissue viability, open wound management
should continue for a few days and the wound be reassessed. Ischaemic damage
from the snare may result in a delay in tissue necrosis of several days. Animals that
have been snared should be kept under observation for at least one week, even
where initially wound healing appears to be progressing well. Broad-spectrum
 antibiotics, fluid therapy and analgesics should be implemented as appropriate.
36
31, 32: Questions
3la
31 You are presented with a blackbird that has been found in a client's garden and
brought indoors by her cat. It has a puncture wound near the shoulder (31a) and
is unable to fly.
i. Is this wound likely to be a cat bite wound? If not, what is the most likely
aetiology, and why?
ii. What would be the most useful diagnostic procedure?
ili. What is the likely prognosis, and what action might you take?
32
32 You are presented with this hedgehog (32) in late summer. What considerations
would you make in your triage and decision making regarding this case?
37
31,32:Answers
31b
31 i. Although cat bites are an extremely common source of morbidity and
mortality in wild passerines, this wound has the classical appearance of a ballistic
entry wound. The feathers entering the hole are drawn in by the pressure wave
preceding a shotgun or airgun pellet.
i. Radiographic evaluation is vital in any case of ballistic injury or suspected
predator trauma. This radiograph (31b), showing a fracture of the humerus and an
associated airgun pellet, was obtained at post-mortem examination from a similar
case involving a wood pigeon.
ili. The injury noted in the radiograph, if the result of blunt impact trauma, would
have a very poor prognosis for full return to flight and subsequent release. Because
 the injury is associated with an area of soft tissue damage extending from the entry
point to a depth unknown, and because of the presence of not only the pellet, but
also indrawn skin and feather material, the likelihood of infection and fibrosis is
even greater and the prognosis grim. Euthanasia is the preferred outcome.
32  Hedgehogs hibernate over winter and this affects the release of underweight
(<550 g) juveniles in the winter months. The hedgehog illustrated is a juvenile and
underweight for its size. There is evidence of chronic skin disease: generalized hair
o d p (e  d a  Aa si s
spines. There are no acute clinical signs requiring first aid treatment. The hedgehog
should be fully examined and a diagnosis of the skin condition made using suitable
diagnostic tests (e.g. skin scrape for parasites, fungal culture).
The main considerations are the chronicity of the skin problem and the likely
time for it to resolve with correct treatment. This, together with the age of the
hedgehog and the time of year, means that a protracted time in captivity may be
required. There are costs attached to both the diagnostic procedures and the drugs.
Ultimately, the hedgehog will need a suitable release site away from main roads. The
likely causes of the skin problem (mites or ringworm) are common in the hedgehog
population.
38
33, 34: Questions
33a
Entry/exit gates
Chainlink
covered with
Feeding stations
canvas sheet
after initial
Entrance to
capture
raceway
Baffle to remove angle
inthecorner
Remote controlled guillotine gate
33 The equipment illustrated (33a, b) is used
33b
to physically restrain animals from a herd of
semi-free-ranging scimitar-horned oryx in-
habiting a large desert reserve area for annual
vaccinations, hoof trimming and health checks,
including blood sampling. Describe briefly the
 main elements of the system, including how the
animals might be moved into the capture
system?
34 i. What are the advantages of using physical restraint compared with chemical
restraint when dealing with groups of ungulates?
ii. What problems can occur during the physical restraint of large ungulates?
39
33,34:Answers
33 Animals are first habituated to being fed in an enclosed feeding area out of which
a raceway leads to where the restraint equipment is set up. The feeding area should
is closed manually or automatically (remote controlled guillotine gate) after the
animals have entered the feeding area. Utilizing feeding stations and installing the
raceway in advance of the catch conditions animals to changes in their surround-
ings. After the gate is closed, a coloured canvas sheet is suspended on the outside
encourage the animals into the raceway, where animals are quickly split into small
groups (2-3) using sliding doors to avoid injury or aggression. From these groups,
individuals are moved up a ramp and restrained using a V-shaped drop floor Junior
Tamer or larger Tamer 2 unit. The raceway system is modular and, along with the
Tamer unit, can be transported readily between sites.
anaesthesia/sedation of individual animals, but is not practical for handling large
numbers. Mobile raceway and restraint equipment (see 33) gives the flexibility to
move many animals safely, with repeat treatment and manipulation of animals as
necessary. The raceway system enables an animal to be restrained every 5-10
minutes, thus processing up to 50 medium-sized ungulates a day. The equipment
can be mobilized and moved between sites easily.
i. Physical restraint can affect blood parameters and often results in muscle and
liver enzymes being acutely elevated, possibly due to capture stress. Medical
problems that can occur include:
Capture myopathy.
 Asphyxiation. If an animal is dropped in the unit after being left with access to
food for too long in the feeding pen before being moved into the raceway, its
weight on a fully engorged stomach can cause regurgitation of rumen contents
and asphyxiation). Food should only be used in small amounts as an incentive
to get the animals into the pen.
 Trauma. Minor abrasions, scuffing and horn injuries can occur to animals within
the Tamer and raceway system. These are usually superficial and easily treated.
● Late-term abortion. Heavily pregnant animals should not be dropped in the unit.
40
35, 36: Questions
35
35 This free-ranging golden pheasant was submitted with an ocular discharge, a
persistent cough and a swollen head (35). Other pheasants in the flock were
similarly affected.
i. List the diseases that can cause these clinical signs in gamebirds
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis, and how would you confirm it?
ii. What age group is most susceptible to infection?
iv. What are the features of the disease that lead to mortality?
v. What treatment should be given to the flock?
vi. What control measures are important?
36
36  Many requests for veterinary advice and assistance concern abandoned or
orphaned young birds and mammals, such as the animal seen in this picture (36).
i. What is this species?
i. In the UK, what legal and ethical issues should be considered when presented
with such a patient?
41
35,36:Answers
35 i. Syngamiasis, mycoplasmosis, chlamydophilosis, cryptosporidiosis, Newcastle
disease, infectious laryngotracheitis, infectious bronchitis.
i. Sinusitis caused by Mycoplasma galisepticum. Diagnosis is based on culture of
swabs taken from the trachea, conjunctiva, choanal cleft or sinus (using special
culture media). Mycoplasmosis can be confirmed indirectly using serology. A
positive serological test result plus a suspicious history and clinical signs allow a
DNA probes or PCR are also useful.
ii. Chicks 2-8 weeks of age.
iv. Mortality depends on secondary factors such as concurrent infection (e.g.
Chlamydophila or Pasteurella spp.). The eyes are affected first, resulting in
photophobia, swelling of the eyelids, watery discharge, blepharoconjunctivitis and
keratitis. Death results from starvation.
v. Antimycoplasma drugs, including tiamulin, tylosin, spiramycin and enrofloxacin,
in the drinking water.
vi. Mycoplasmosis can be transmitted vertically via the egg and horizontally
times of stress. M. gallisepticum can exist for short periods of time on dust, litter,
feathers and rubber boots. Contaminated litter (e.g. from poultry farms) may pose
a risk to free-living birds. Strategic in-feed medication of adults during times of
stress (e.g. when birds are moved) may help reduce spread. Contact with wild birds,
which can be reservoirs for Mycoplasma infection, should be avoided.
36 i. A juvenile grey squirrel.
ii. An immature wild animal is often assumed to be orphaned or abandoned, but
this is rarely the case and animals are often taken into care unnecessarily. Unless the
parents are known to have been killed or injured, in most cases the patient has
matured to the point where it can leave the safety of its nest and start exploring its
environment. These immature individuals are often unable to fly or fend for
themselves and rely on staying hidden in order to avoid predators. Their parents will
op o wau rog aes si ii ssaun ueoidde iou mm inq uno an paan oi an
so; therefore, they are mistakenly thought to have been abandoned or orphaned.
In the UK, non-indigenous birds and mammals cannot legally be released into the
wild under the Wildlife and Countryside Act (1981), which contains measures for
preventing the establishment of non-native species that may be detrimental to native
wildlife. The release of animals and planting of plants listed in Schedule 9 of the Act
is prohibited. The grey squirrel is listed in Schedule 9 and so it is illgal for grey
squirrels to be released into the wild. This should be borne in mind when a grey
squirrel is presented for rehabilitation.
42
37,38: Questions
37a
37 i. What type of fracture fixation system has been used to stabilize the tibial
fracture in this kestrel (37a)?
ii. What are the advantages and disadvantages of this method?
38
38 This photomicrograph (38) is of a blood smear stained with a Romanowsky.
type stain (Speedy-DiffTM). The blood sample was taken under general anaesthesia
from a two-year-old male badger in May as part of a badger capture-mark-
recapture study in the UK. The badger was in good body condition.
i. What is the microparasite in the centre of the photograph.
ii. What are the possible consequences of infection?
43
37,38:Answers
37i.A bilateral uniplanar external
37b
skeletal fixator system using hypodermic
needles as full pins and a thermosetting
plastic material (methylmethacrylate) to
form the lateral and medial bars.
ii. This method of fixation produces
good fracture site stability, does not
immobilize the proximal and distal
joints and allows rapid return to normal
use of the limb. There is minimal soft
tissue damage. Pins run medial to
damage to the distal tendons of insertion
of the cranial tibial and long digital
extensor muscles. Rotation a
at
the
fracture site is limited. The medullary cavity is not broached, making the technique
especially suitable for compound fractures. Fixators are light, inexpensive and easily
removed, and usually well tolerated. The main disadvantage is the risk to nerves and
blood vessels crossing the craniolateral aspect of the tibia. Great care must be taken
placing the pins. Intramedullary pinning of the tibia using a medial approach to
the limb is the preferred technique. It is not always possible to obtain perfect
alignment using an external fixator (37b). Pin fracture or loosening is not a
significant issue in birds because they are lighter and fracture healing is more rapid.
The acrylic resin used in this example has a very strong odour, may burn the skin
and takes a long time to set. More user-friendly acrylic products are available (e.g.
bone cement, dental acrylic).
'pe aosodanl e si aseid an 'anureadde peonodou an uo pasr '1 8
from previous reports, it is likely to be Trypanosoma (Megatrypanum) pestanai.
ii. Low and intermittent levels of parasitaemia associated with trypanosome
infections mean diagnosis by this method is likely to underestimate the prevalence
of infection. Megatrypanosomes are not generally associated with clinical signs,
but the occurrence of pathogenic effects and/or the degree to which badgers may be
trypanotolerant are currently unknown. Pathogenic effects might include anaemia,
generalized lymphadenomegaly, pyrexia associated with a parasitaemia and
progressive condition loss. The vector for T. pestanai is also currently unknown, but
 possible candidates include the badger flea Paraceras melis and tabanid biting flies.
44
39, 40: Questions
39a
39b
39 An immature male hare was found lying down dying at pasture and was
euthanased by neck dislocation and submitted for post-mortem examination shortly
afterwards. Severe crusting and dermatitis were evident on the face around the
mouth and nostrils and several pustules were present inside the lips (39a). Similar
dermatitis was noted in the perineal region around the anus and sheath (39b). There
was absence of internal fat reserves and only 17 g of food in the stomach: the
alimentary tract was unremarkable. No diarrhoea or internal coccidial lesions were
 present. The spleen was massively enlarged: adrenals and kidneys were also swollen.
A swab from heart blood was sterile.
i. What is the most likely cause of the skin lesions?
ii. What is the most likely cause of the weight loss and prostration?
40
40 What are the husbandry requirements for loggerhead sea turtle hatchlings (40)
maintained as a constant?
4.5
39, 40:Answers
39c
39 i. Hare syphilis. Bosma-Steiner silver staining of a facial skin histology section
mitted and is quite common; however, it is not usually so severe and is not usually
associated with death. Rabbits also are susceptible.
i. The swollen spleen and histological appearance of the spleen, adrenal glands and
kidneys confirmed severe secondary amyloidosis. This was presumably in response
to the chronically infected skin lesions. The kidneys were particularly badly affected
in this case, so the severe illness may have reflected renal failure.
40 Loggerhead hatchlings are especially sensitive to water salinity (they require sea
 amq ai aadn e ba) aai ram nq pe (a
and 28°C in the first stages). These parameters need to be maintained constantly
throughout the captivity period. The use of ultraviolet light is also important to ensure
adequate vitamin D synthesis and, therefore, correct calcium metabolism. There is a
lack of knowledge concerning what these animals eat in the wild during their juvenile
stages. Therefore, as wide as possible a range of different foods should be given.
Recipes for home-made, gel-based diets have been published, and a mixture of
different fish, crustaceans and molluscs, dusted with a commercially available calcium
s i a t aasa d si s ss ps q oe  ao
before the animals are released, so that they get used to their natural food in the wild.
Commercially available gels for carnivorous marine animals can also be used to
balancethisdiet.
46
41, 42:Questions
4la
41  A tawny owl chick close to fledging is presented after being found on the ground
in a local wood (41a). The bird appears to be in good condition with no obvious
it by hand.
i. What are the main problems associated with hand-rearing a young bird such as
this, and what advice should be given?
ii. Very often, in cases like this, the bird has been in captivity for several days, or
longer, and the site where the bird was first located is not known. What are the
options for handling and releasing young tawny owls in these circumstances?
42
42  A thin debilitated northern sparrowhawk is presented with this lesion in the
mouth (42).
i. What are the likely differential diagnoses?
ii. How should these be distinguished?
ili. How would you treat/manage this condition?
47
41,42:Answers
41 i. Inappropriate diet and social and sexual
4lb
imprinting on human handlers. Osteodystrophy is a
common problem in hand-reared owls (41b).
Imprinting on handlers can result in birds that have
 no fear of humans and could, during the breeding
season, recognize humans entering their territory as
being conspecific invaders and attack. To prevent
imprinting, the amount of visual and auditory
contact with humans must be kept to a minimum
and
contact
with
conspecific individuals
encouraged. Due to these problems, the best advice
is to attempt to return the bird to where it was
found, where it is very likely to be reunited with its
parents.
ii. With help from a local naturalist, the chick might
be fostered by placing it in a tawny owl nest with young of a similar age. Failing
this, the bird should be passed to a rehabilitation unit with the facilities and
experience in handling and releasing young tawny owls. The timing of release of
 juveniles of any species requires knowledge of their natural history. If none of these
options are available, euthanasia could be considered.
42 i. Trichomonosis (frounce'), candidiasis, bacterial infection (especially secondary
to trauma), capillariasis.
ii. Wet preparations and Gram-stained and trichrome (e.g. Diff Quik)-stained
preparations of crust and underlying mucous membranes should be examined. In
this case there were many motile protozoans present, and stains of the crust showed
a heavy mixed bacterial load with associated inflammatory cells. A diagnosis of
trichomonosis with secondary bacterial infection was made.
iii. The bird was given metronidazole (50 mg/kg p/o q24h) and clavulanate-
amoxicillin (150 mg/kg p/o q12h) for five days. The oral lesion was cleaned twice
a day with dilute povidone-iodine before the bird was tube fed with Critical Care
Formula (Vetark). Trichomonosis is generally contracted from eating infected
pigeons. Most accipiters show good immunity to the disease unless there is prior
trauma or they are immunocompromised. In this case the bird was relatively young
and had a heavy intestinal endoparasite load. This illustrates the need always to
assess for any underlying disease as well as the obvious clinical lesions.
48
43, 44: Questions
43
 43 This deer (43) was hit by a car and fractured its mandible. It was repaired using
an external fixator.
i. What species of deer is this?
i. Are there any welfare issues to be considered in this case?
ili. What are the risks associated with general anaesthesia in deer?
44a
44b
44 Two out of a group of eight Bennett's wallabies have died in three days, another
is showing neurological signs, falling over repeatedly, and a fourth has laboured
breathing. Gross post-mortem examination of the dead wallabies shows congested
lungs and enlarged, mottled mesenteric lymph nodes. Romanowsky-stained
impression smears from the heart of one of the animals are shown (44a, b).
i. What is the likely cause of these animals' illness?
ii. What further tests could be carried out to confirm this diagnosis?
ii. How can this condition be treated?
iv. How can it be prevented in the future?
v. What other species are highly susceptible to this disease?
49
43,44:Answers
43 i. Roe deer.
ii. Generally, wild deer do not cope well with confinement. They have to be kept
yery quiet, away from people and other disturbances. If hospitalized, they should
be in a purposely adapted building, such as a shed with no windows, but good
ventilation. Care must be taken with opening any doors, as deer may try to jump
towards the light. If treatment is likely to last more than two weeks, careful
consideration should given as to whether euthanasia is the most humane option.
The deer illustrated here was kept in a purpose-built mammal shed at a wildlife
hospital and successfully released six weeks later.
ii. Deer can suffer from capture myopathy, so should be manually restrained or
chased as little as possible. They are ruminants, so great care must be taken to
ensure that rumen contents are not aspirated under general anaesthesia. The head
should be elevated and ideally the deer should be kept in sternal recumbancy. If
lateral recumbancy is necessary, it is preferable to lie the animal on its right side.
Profuse salivation is common, as the swallowing reflex disappears early, therefore
intubation is generally recommended.
44 i. Toxoplasmosis. Two Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites (44a) and a tissue cyst
(44b) are demonstrated.
i. Immunohistochemical staining of tissue sections.
ii. Pyrimethamine (0.5 mg/kg p/o q24h) plus sulphadiazine (60 mg/kg p/o q24h
in 3-4 divided doses) plus folic acid supplementation (1 mg/kg q24h); or
clindamycin (11 mg/kg p/o or i/m q12h for at least 30 days); or spiramycin (3 g
per 70 kg daily p/o in divided doses); or atovaquone (100 mg/kg p/o q2h4). The
rest of the group may be treated with trimethoprim/sulphonamide in the food.
The food trough should be thoroughly cleaned and any hay removed and replaced
with a fresh batch
iv. The definitive hosts are cats, and the usual source of infection for herbivores
is oocysts in cat faeces. Cats should be kept out of feed stores and, if possible, out
of hay barns. If cats are kept for rodent control, adult, neutered cats that are
already seropositive for T. gondii should be kept, since shedding of oocysts is
greatest on first infection. Once wallabies are infected, the protozoa remain in
the tissues lifelong and infection may be reactivated by stress. Wallabies should
be treated prophylactically with oral sulphadiazine if they are moved to another
enclosure.
v. Australian marsupials, lemurs, marmosets and tamarins and the European brown
hare, as well as Pallas cats.
50
45, 46: Questions
45
45 What criteria need to be considered when releasing an adult badger back into
the wild following treatment for territorial fight wound injuries (45)?
46 A 21-day-old stone curlew chick in
46
amixed
1 species avicultural
unit
presented with severe dyspnoea and a
mucoid ocular and nasal discharge (46).
A blacksmith plover at the same unit
had died suddenly the previous night
and had been submitted for post-
mortem examination, but no results
were available. A number of other
white-bellied bustard chicks were also
observed with mild respiratory signs,
decreased food consumption and
general lethargy. The building was situ-
ated adjacent to lakes, which accommo-
dated large numbers of both pinioned
and free-flying waterfowl. Older chicks
 from the rearing unit, including the dead
blacksmith plover, had been housed outdoors in pens near the lakes in the day and
brought into the rearing unit at night. Over the course of one week a further three
birds died in the rearing unit after presenting with respiratory signs.
i. What diagnostic tests are available to investigate respiratory tract disease in these
birds?
ii. List the differential diagnoses for respiratory tract signs in birds
51
45,46:Answers
45 Is it fit and in good body condition? A casualty badger with territorial wounds
is sometimes an elderly animal that is no longer a viable clan member and is simply
cast out by the other badgers. This type of casualty should not be released and
should be euthanased. A fit badger should be returned to the area it was found in.
Territorial wounding is caused during clan member disputes over food, sett choices
and right to mate. A badger with a territorial fight wound will know where it stands
within the pecking order of its clan. If released into another badger clan area, it
will not be familiar with sett locations, feeding areas or have any status within the
group. It will probably be treated as an alien and chased away.
The time of year is important. There are peak times of territorial activity
amongst badgers, notably February to May and October to December (in the
northern hemisphere). If a badger has to be released into an alien area, this should
be done outside of these periods.
46 i.
● Aerobic bacterial and fungal culture on conjunctival and nasal-choanal swabs.
·Chlamydophila testing.
●
 Cytology on samples of nasal and ocular discharges.
●
Virus isolation on swabs of the ocular and nasal discharge and pooled cloacal-
choanal swabs. For avian influenza virus the standard is to use 9-14-day-old
ermbryonating chicken eggs.
 Mycoplasma culture on swabs collected from the ocular and nasal discharge and
the trachea.
 Rapid antigen testing on faecal samples for avian influenza, Newcastle disease
and Chlamydophila.
● Collection and storage of sera to allow for the demonstration of seroconversion
using acute and convalescent serum samples against any isolated agent.
ii. Differential diagnoses include:
 Bacterial infections, in particular Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus mirabilis,
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., Staphylococcus aureus and Mycoplasma spp.
· Chlamydophilosis
●Viral infections including paramyxovirus, avipox and avian influenza virus.
● Parasitic infections such as trichomonosis and gapeworm.
 Fungal infections with Aspergillus spp. and Candida albicans.
 Non-infectious diseases including nasal plugs, irritation of the respiratory tract
with dust, toxins or foreign bodies, subcutaneous emphysema or haemorrhage,
trauma, neoplasia and space-occupying masses or fluid in the coelomic cavity.
Influenza virus subtype H9N2 was isolated from clinical specimens collected from
the live birds and from the tissues of the dead blacksmith plover.
52
47, 48: Questions
47 An outbreak of avian influenza H9N2 has been diagnosed in an aviculture unit
(see 46).
i. What are the implications for the staff of the aviculture unit?
ii. What treatment or preventive measures can be recommended?
12345678910
48
PATHOLOGYLABORATORY
XT1700-1702
48 A client is concerned after finding three dead greenfinches (48) in the garden
over the course of a week and has recently seen listless, fluffed-up birds at the
 garden bird feeding station.
i. What are the most likely causes of the problem?
ii. What advice would you offer?
53
47,48:Answers
47 i. Humans can be infected with both low pathogenic (LP) and high pathogenic
(HP) avian influenza infections (AIVs). Human illness due to LP AIVs can range
from mild symptoms (e.g. conjunctivitis) to generalized influenza-like illness.
Human infections have been linked to exposure to infected commercial poultry,
and to date (2008) there has not been a documented case of direct transmission of
AIVs from a wild bird to a human.
i. Wild waterfowl are reservoirs for all known HA and NA subtypes of influenza
A viruses. The wild waterfowl were suspected to be the source of the outbreak in
this example. The transmission of AIV from wild birds to captive birds may be
prevented through implementation of good biosecurity measures and the prevention
of direct or indirect contact with infected wild birds. Captive birds can also be
protected through vaccination using commercially available AIV yaccines.
Treatment of individual avian cases of LP AIV using osetamivir phosphate
(Tamiflu?) (10 mg/kg p/o q12h) has been reported.
48 i. Infectious disease is the most likely cause. Salmonellosis typically affects
gregarious seed-eating species (e.g. greenfinches, house sparrows). Mortality usually
occurs during the winter months; transmission is via the faeco-oral route.
Salmonella typhimurium DT40 and DT56 are the typical causative agents and wild
bird populations are believed to act as reservoirs of infection. Lesion predilection
sites include the upper alimentary tract, liver and spleen. Salmonellosis is an
emerging infectious disease of British finches. Epidemic mortality has occurred
yearly since 2005, peaking in the early autumn months, although cases have been
recorded throughout the calendar year. Necrotic ingluvitis is associated with this
infection. Transmission is direct between birds during the breeding season, or where
fresh saliva contaminates shared food or drinking water.
i. Best practice for garden bird feeding should be followed (e.g. regular cleaning of
feeders and tables, provision of fresh food from accredited aflatoxin-free sources,
rotation of feeding sites). In the event of a disease outbreak, disinfection measures
should be practised and temporary reduction or cessation of feeding considered to
discourage congregation of mixed garden bird species at high densities. The client
should be advised to follow sensible hygiene precautions because of potential public
health implications. There is a risk of cats becoming ill following predation on
garden birds affected by salmonellosis.
54
49, 50: Questions
49a
49 This red fox (49a) is presented for treatment.
i. What zoonotic diseases may foxes carry?
ii. What preventive measures can be taken to reduce the risks to staff dealing with
foxes?
50
 50 Ecotourism is viewed by many as an important conservation tool and a number
of free-ranging great ape populations have been habituated to humans for this
purpose. However why is the close contact between humans and mountain gorillas
illustrated (50) a concern for the conservation of great apes?
5.5
49,50:Answers
49
i. Sarcoptic mange, ringworm.
49b
Where rabies is endemic, foxes are often
a reservoir host. Several bacterial infec-
tions, particularly those causing enteric
disease, are zoonotic (e.g. Campylo-
bacter jejuni, Salmonella spp., coliform
infections). Other organisms that may
be
transmitted in
faeces
include
Cryptosporidium parvum,Giardia spp.,
Toxoplasma,Echinococcus granulosus
and E. multilocularis. Foxes may also be
a source of tuberculosis and leptospirosis. Bite wounds from foxes commonly
become infected (e.g. with Streptococcus spp.). This fox had ticks attached to its
skin (49b). Ticks may transmit several diseases (e.g. Lyme disease, Q fever,
rickettsial disease). Less common zoonotic infections include capillariasis. Where
the intermediate agent (sandfly) is present, Leishmania infantum may be transmitted
from foxes to humans.
i. Contact with skin, urine, faeces and secretions may spread zoonotic disease.
Good hygiene is therefore paramount when examining and treating foxes, including
disinfection of holding facilities (to reduce transmission to humans as well as other
animals). Latex or nitrile gloves should always be worn when treating wild foxes.
Protective equipment such as facemasks, eye goggles and aprons is also useful. In
areas where rabies is endemic, staff should be vaccinated and animals handled
appropriately to avoid being bitten.
50 Great apes are especially vulnerable to human diseases due to a close taxonomic
relationship, and there are increasing reports of human-associated diseases in great
ape populations. These include gastrointestinal parasites and sarcoptic mange in
mountain gorillas and human paramyxoviruses causing respiratory disease and
death in chimpanzees. Consequently,
, human diseases are considered one of the
most serious threats to the survival of great ape populations.
Ecotourism is an important conservation tool, and the habituation of great apes
for the purposes of viewing by tourists provides economic incentives to conserve
such populations and is a viable strategy for sustainable development. However,
due to the potential detrimental impact on great ape populations from the
introduction of human diseases, most tourist sites have strict disease prevention
regulations. These include stipulating the distance that must be maintained between
tourists and great apes, limiting the number of visitors, limiting the length of visits
 and denying sick tourists access to the great apes, among other measures.
56
51, 52: Questions
51 A mute swan cygnet with a history
5la
of progressive weakness before it died is
submitted by a wildlife rehabilitation
centre for post-mortem examination.
The bird is in an emaciated condition
and there are unusual lesions in the
thoracic cavity (51a).
i. What are the white structures?
ii. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ili. How would you confirm this?
iv. What are the predisposing factors?
52
52 This eastern box turtle (52) presented to a wildlife rehabilitation facility.
i. Describe the clinical signs noted.
ii. What is a potential infectious aetiology?
ii. How may this be diagnosed?
57
51,52:Answers
51 i. Thoracic air sacs. They are greatly
51b
thickened and are lined by a thick white
deposit.
ii. Aspergillosis caused by infection with
the fungus Aspergillus fumigatus.
ii. As a rapid test, take a smallscraping
of the white material and place it in a
drop of water on a microscope slide.
Add a coverslip and examine with a
compound microscope with the con-
denser lowered. Fungal hyphae and/or sporangia confirm a mycotic infection. For
definitive diagnosis a sample of air sac lining should be collected aseptically and
submitted for cultural examination. Histopathological examination is helpful in
s  no o 1ds a 1q ad q m s  a 's 
(51b).
iv. Aspergillosis is often seen in debilitated birds or birds that have been housed on
damp hay or straw bedding. It is also a common secondary infection in swans
affected by chronic lead poisoning or avian tuberculosis.
52 i. There is a mucopurulent discharge from the nares and eyes, palpebral oedema
and depression. This is likely to be a clinical case of mycoplasmosis, but other
potential infectious causes include chelonian herpesvirus or iridovirus infection,
other bacterial infection including mycobacterioisis, and fungal infection. Other
clinical signs typically associated with mycoplasmosis include conjunctivitis, eyes
recessed in the sockets and dullness to the scales and scutes.
western USA and California and has been associated with dramatic population-
level declines of this species. The aetiological agent in desert tortoises is
Mycoplasma agassizi, which has also been isolated from gopher tortoises from
Florida displaying similar clinical signs. Recently, a novel but related Mycoplasma
species was identified using a PCR assay in box turtles displaying clinical signs
consistent with mycoplasmosis. Infection is usually chronic and can often be
subclinical. Expression of clinical signs is often intermittent or cyclical and may be
associated with stress. A carrier status exists, therefore infected individuals should
not be released into the wild.
ii. By culture, although these are fastidious organisms and require special
techniques to isolate successfully. PCR assay has proven to be a useful technique to
detect the presence of the organism in infected animals.
58
53, 54: Questions
 53 A great horned owl presents to a US wildlife rehabilitation facility displaying
dehydration, emaciation, depression, inability to fly, ataxia, a head tremor and head
incoordination. A venous blood sample is collected for routine haematology and the
results below were obtained. Describe the clinical pathology, and suggest a likely
viral diagnosis.
Results
Reference intervals (ISIS)
PCV
0.28 1/1 (28%)
0.3-0.53 (30-53)
WBCs
69.8 x 109/1 (69.8 x 103/μl)
2.89-61.5
Heterophils
46.7 x 10%/l (46.7 x 10²/μl
0.86-44.3
Lymphocytes
6.2 × 10%/l(6.2 × 103/μl)
0.07-16.6
Monocytes
6.6 x 10%/1 (6.6 x 103/μl)
0.07-5.0
Eosinophils
8.6 x 10%/l (8.6 x 103/μl)
0.06-9.84
Basophils
0.5 × 10%/1(0.5 × 103/μl)
Not available
 Band cells
2.3 × 10%/1(2.3 × 103/μl)
Not available
54
54 This photomicropraph (54) shows material recovered from a badger faecal
sample, following flotation in saturated salt solution. The sample was collected
 from a male badger cub in mid August as part of a badger capture-mark-recapture
study in the UK. The cub was approximately six months old and in good body
condition.
i. Describe the findings from the faecal flotation.
i. Briefly discuss implications for the individual cub.
59
53,54:Answers
53 Haematology reveals anaemia and a leucocytosis with a heterophilia,
eosinophilia, monocytosis and probable left shift. This bird is probably infected
with West Nile virus, a flavivirus that was introduced into New York in 1999 and
has subsequently spread throughout North America with the exception of Alaska.
It is transmitted by mosquitoes, primarily Culex species. In addition, direct
 transmission between birds has been documented under experimental conditions.
Most, if not all, North American species of birds are susceptible to infection;
however susceptibility to disease and mortality rates vary depending on the species.
American corvid species, including American crows and blue jays, appear to be
very susceptible, with high mortality rates, as well as some species of raptors
including great horned owls and red-tailed hawks. Sage grouse also appear to have
close to a 100% mortality rate.
Infections have been reported in a number of mammalian species of wildlife
including fox squirrels, grey squirrels, eastern chipmunks, deer and several species
of bats. Additionally, infection has also been reported in American alligators.
54 i. Two species of coccidian oocyst are shown. Based on morphological
appearance and previous reports, the smaller oocyst is likely to be Eimeria melis,
and the larger one a sporulated oocyst of Isospora melis.
i. The implications for the individual cub depend on the intensity of infection, the
pathogenicity of the parasite in question and the host's general health and immune
status. It is possible to make a quantitative assessment of the parasite burden using
a modified McMaster technique, but the practical limitations of this approach,
together with circadian variations in oocyst output and the possible occurrence of
pathogenicity of these species has not been fully elucidated, but there is some
evidence to support mortality and/or impaired growth in cubs associated with
Eimeria melis infection. In this case the cub was in good body condition, with no
evidence of diarrhoea. In addition, it was subsequently recaptured twice in the
same year and found to be in good body condition.
60
55, 56: Questions
55
After some wet weather in the
55a
autumn, gamekeepers noted increased
numbers of dead hares. One was
obtained for post-mortem examination.
It had no discharges from orifies and no
diarrhoeic staining. Internally there was a
notable absence of body fat (i.e. none
around the kidneys or in the mesenteries.
which were glass-clear). Parenchymal
no abnormality was evident in the
thoracic organs. Pale foci were seen
throughout much of the small intestine,
55b
visible through the outer mesenteric
surface (55a), and distinct pale patches
were evident in the mucosa when the
small bowel was opened (55b).
i. What are these pale foci in the small
bowel?
ii. How commonly are they seen, and
are they a cause of mortality?
ili. What test can be done to validate the
diagnosis?
56 In a large-scale bird oiling
56
incident (56), triage is necessary to
ensure that as many birds with a
high chance of recovery as possible
are treated.
i. What is the first priority in treat-
ment?
ii. When should birds be washed?
ii. What is the best way to clean
oiled birds?
iv. What parameters need to be
checked before release?
61
55,56:Answers
55 i. Massive clusters of mucosal coccidial oocysts (Eimeria spp.).
i. Some degree of intestinal coccidiosis is present in most wild hares and they
develop an immunity with time. Massive infestations are the commonest cause of
death in young hares in their first autumn, particularly when environmental
conditions are damp. The majority of the lesions are in the small intestine, with
fewer in the large bowel, which is probably why diarrhoea is often not a feature.
ii. The laboratory examination of faeces will confirm high numbers of oocysts.
56 i. Stabilization (removal of excess oil, stabilization of body temperature, oral
 administration of an enteric coating agent, rehydration, nutritional support).
i. Not until they have been stabilized (normal body temperature; weight within
10% of normal; normal hydration level, PCV, total proteins, blood glucose; absence
of apparent infectious disease). If the oil will cause chemical burns (e.g. diesel, jet
fuel) or birds are severely coated, a quick (maximum five minutes) wash should be
given soon after admission.
ii. With detergent and hot water. The water should be at about 42°C in order to
clean the bird quickly without scalding or cooling. The water must be fresh, not salt
water, and not too hard. Washing should continue until the wash water remains
clean. Once all the oil has been removed, the feathers must be rinsed until all the
detergent is removed and water is beading on the feathers. The bird is then patted
dry with towels and left in a dimly lit, quiet drying cage or drying room.
iv. Normal weight and body condition for the species, age, sex and time of year; an
adequate PCV; a normal level of waterproofing. The release site must be checked
(appropriate habitat for the species; free of oil; any necessary permissions in place
to release the birds).
62
57, 58: Questions
57 A hedgehog presented because
57a
it was dragging both hindlimbs
(57a). Although the forelimbs
were unaffected, it was unable to
curl up when threatened and was
only able to bristle and erect the
spines of the cranial half of the
body. The caudal body spines
remained flat against the skin.
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. How do the findings help to
localize the lesion?
ili. How would you confirm the diagnosis?
58a
58b
58 A three-month-old, captive bred, female saker falcon, kept in a falcon breeding
facility, was presented with anorexia, respiratory difficulties and a bilateral ocular
discharge (58a). The bird showed mild inspiratory and expiratory stridor and
bilateral conjunctivitis. The bird was anaesthetized and the trachea was examined
with an endoscope. A mild inflammation with mucus accumulation was observed
in the trachea. Swabs were taken from the trachea and smears stained with a Diff-
Quik? stain for cytology examination (58b).
i. What is your preliminary diagnosis in this bird based on the clinical signs and
cytological findings?
i. What diagnostic tests would be needed to confirm the aetiology?
ii. What are the route of infection and life cycle of the organism?
63
57,58:Answers
57 i. This hedgehog has spinal cord
57b
damage, most likely resulting from
trauma, although other causes of spinal
lesion, including inflammation, infec-
tion, neoplasia and intervertebral disc
prolapse, are possible.
i. The hindlimb paralysis with normal
forelimb function is suggestive of a
lesion caudal to the brachial outflow (or
less likely a bilateral peripheral nerve
problerm). The location of the cut-off
line between normal bristling spines and non-functional flattened spines indicates
 the level of the spinal cord damage, the underlying lesion being just cranial to this.
This is equivalent to the panniculus reflex used to localize cord lesions in other
species.
ili. Plain radiographs will usually reveal a spinal fracture or vertebral dislocation
with cord transaction. In this case the radiograph shows fracture of the vertebral
body T8, with associated compression on the vertebral canal causing denervation
caudal to the lesion (57b).
 58 i. Cryptosporidiosis caused by the cocidian parasite Cryptosporidium spp..
C. baileyi, C. meleagridis and C. parvum affect different avian species.
i. The very small oocysts (4 x 8 μm) with sporozoites (arrows in 58b) can be found
in cytology preparations of samples collected from air sacs, trachea or conjunctiva.
Additional diagnostic methods include acid-fast staining, direct immunofluo-
rescence staining, PCR or ELISA.
ii. The life cycle is direct and monoxenous (requires only one host). Oocysts
containing four sporozoites are inhaled or ingested. Following release of the
sporozoites, trophozoites are formed, as the epithelial cell encapsulates each
sporozoite within its membrane. The trophozoite evolves to a meront type I, which
releases 4-8 merozoites. At this point the merozoites can form new trophozoites,
continuing the asexual cycle, or form a meront type II, which initiates the sexual
phase of the cycle. The meront type II releases more merozoites and these become
either microgamonts or macrogamonts. The microgamonts fertilize the macro-
gamonts, forming oocysts that may be excreted or reinfect the host. The endogenous
phase occurs in the luminal border of epithelial cells of the respiratory, urinary and
gastrointestinal tracts. Their location has been described as intracellular but
extracytoplasmic. In the respiratory tract the parasite affects the mucociliary
function, causing rhinitis, conjunctivitis, tracheitis, sneezing and dyspnoea.
64
59,60: Questions
59
59 The feet of a scimitar-horned oryx are shown (59).
i. Describe the condition seen and the main causes of this problem.
ii. Name the types of common hoof problems that occur in captive wild ungulates.
i. How would you deal with the problem in the individual animal and in the herd?
60
S     s ss      
animal interactions, including the host species' natural history, lead to major rabies
species reservoirs in various geographic regions. Briefly describe the major rabies
reservoir species for Southern Africa, Europe, Asia, North America and Latin and
South America.
65
59,60:Answers
59 i. Overgrown hooves. The causes are multifactorial and include genetics,
enclosure size and substrate and nutrition. A combination of reduced exercise on
poorly abrasive surfaces, wet autumn conditions and excess dietary protein are
their natural arid environment, free-living oryx range over large distances and
enclosures. Even semi-free-living oryx in large reserves may not travel the same
distances as wild animals, especially if they are provided with supplemental feeding.
i. Overgrown hoofs, hoof cracks, cuticle overgrowth, solar abscess, contusions,
penetrating wounds, laminitis, candidiasis and infectious pododermatitis.
lii. The individual animal needs appropriate repeated hoof rimming. Preventive
measures within a herd include controlled breeding, enclosure design and adequate
dietary management. In temperate climates the provision of larger, dry yard areas
to overwinter stock may reduce the incidence of hoof pathology. Fine sand should
be added to hard areas to act as an abrasive. Feeding stations could be moved
around and enrichment techniques used to help stimulate movement.
60 Southern Africa. Since 1940 rabies virus has infected wildlife species via
spillover from domestic dogs. Previously, viverrid species were the main reservoir.
In some areas the jackal is the main reservoir, whereas in others it is the bat-eared
fox and yellow mongoose. Endemic viverrid rabies viruses are also evolving over
long periods amongst stable non-migratory populations.
Europe. Rabies is compartmentalized, with bats, red foxes and arctic foxes being
the major reservoirs (the raccoon dog is also important). The red fox is the ideal
rabies host, as flexible social structures and population dynamics promote high
conspecific contact during relatively short periods of intensive intraspecific
transmission. The serotine bat comprises more than 85% of bat rabies cases in
Europe.
major reservoir in the Middle East.
North America. Ninety per cent of cases occur in wildlife. Major North
American/Canadian reservoirs are raccoons (the Atlantic and southeast), red fox
(New England), arctic and red fox (Alaska), skunk, mainly striped (North Central,
South Central and California, which are all distinct rabies variants), coyotes (Texas)
and grey foxes (southwest).
The major reservoir in Latin and South America is the domestic dog, with the
notable role of haematophagous bats (e.g. the vampire bat).
66
61,62: Questions
61  A post-weaning orphaned common
6la
or harbour seal is presented to your
 practice by members of a marine animal
welfare association (61a). It is tachyp-
 noeic, with harsh lung sounds. There is
a mucoid nasal discharge and live
worms approximately 5 cm long are
noted in the faeces.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How would you proceed in managing
this case?
ili. What further diagnostic procedures
might you carry out?
62
62 You are asked to carry out a gross post-mortem examination of a stranded
cetacean and collect relevant samples. Closer examination of the carcase reveals a
number of lesions that lead you to be suspicious of bycatch (i.e. entanglement in
fishing nets) as the likely cause of death (62). Although most bycaught cetaceans do
 not strand alive, occasionally this may occur. What gross lesions may lead to you
to such a conclusion?
67
61,62:Answers
61 i. The seal is hydrated, as evidenced
61b
by the tear marked circles around the
eyes and, while underweight, it is not
emaciated. It is in ventral recumbency,
which at rest can be associated with
some respiratory effort. The mucoid
nasal discharge and faecal worms are
strongly indicative of clinical lungworm
infestation. Parafilaroides gymnurus
and Otostrongylus circumlitis are seen
in this species, with adult worms and
larvae coughed up and swallowed, often
found regurgitated or passed in faeces.
Secondary bacterial bronchopneumonia is likely and the presence of the worms will
cause tissue destruction, haemorrhage, inflammation, mucus production and
oedema (61b, O. circumlitis in the bronchial tree).
i. Do not to give anthelmintic drugs prior to stabilization. Rapid lungworm die off
can cause local inflammation, anaphylaxis and simple blockage of the airways in
heavily infested individuals. Any fluid deficits should be addressed and
administration of NSAIDs or glucocorticoids, mucolytics, bronchodilators and
appropriate broad-spectrum antibiotics commenced before giving moxidectin or
ivermectin at standard doses.
ii. Chest radiography is of limited use due to the subcutaneous fat layer in older
juveniles and the difficulty of achieving inspiratory views and good positioning
without general anaesthesia. Microscopic analysis of faeces or sputum is useful in
diagnosing less overt infestations or establishing whether animals have been
successfully treated
62 Lesions associated with bycatch tend to be skin wounds and deeper trauma
 associated with capture in multifilament and particularly monofilament netting.
These include encircling skin abrasions on the beak/rostrum (see 62), flippers and
flukes, multiple evenly spaced parallel incisions in the skin and, possibly, cleanly cut-
off fins or tail flukes. Other signs that are suspicious, but not specific, for bycatch
include evidence of a recent meal, mandibular fractures (usually seen post mortem)
and bruising in submandibular and periscapular subcutaneous tissues. Other signs
that are more likely to be seen in dead strandings due to bycatch are lesions
consistent with death by immersion, including epicardial petechial haemorrhages,
froth in the bronchi and bullae in the lung parenchyma. Some of these lesions also
 may be seen as a consequence of live stranding.
68
63,64: Questions
63 A wildlife hospital reports that the blackbird fledglings they are hand rearing
are making an abnormal gurgling or clicking respiratory noise. What is the most
likely cause of the problem, and how would you investigate this further?
64a
64b
64 A hedgehog rehabilitator has over
64c
40 hedgehogs, all admitted as “out
during the day and too small to hiber-
nate: under 500g bodyweight’ during
the autumn. On admission they were
pue Addnd arois iad Kreienudoid e uaaia
kitten dewormer at the package dose
recommended for puppies and kittens,
fed a mixture of dog and cat food, and
were putting on weight satisfactorily,
but in the last five days, eight hedgehogs have been found dead. Some animals are
coughing or sneezing and some had shown a brief reduction in appetite before
 death. Three are presented for necropsy, but all are suffering from some degree of
decomposition. On necropsy the abdominal contents are autolysed. However, it
can be seen that there are areas of atelectasis and emphysema in the lungs. Smears
made from the cut surface of the lungs are examined microscopically under low
power (64a-c).
i. What can you see in these photos?
i. What is your diagnosis, what treatment would you give, and what advice would
you offer the rehabilitator?
69
63,64:Answers
63  Syngamiasis is a common parasitic
63
infection
of birds, particularly in
juveniles of the Corvidae and Turdidae
families. The condition is colloquially
cm
known as 'gapeworm' infection and is
2
3
4
5
 an important concern for game bird and
intensive poultry management systems.
The blood-red coloured adult stage of the parasite, Syngamus trachea, is found in
   )  r     
asymptomatic or it can lead to clinical disease. Clinical signs include open mouth
breathing, head shaking, abnormal respiratory noise and serious respiratory
compromise in cases with heavy infection. Weight loss and anaemia may also occur.
The parasite life cycle is indirect, with an invertebrate paratenic host (e.g.
earthworm, snail or slug).
 Standard parasitological faecal examination, using individual or pooled samples
for group-housed birds, should be performed. Infection is diagnosed based on the
characteristic bioperculate appearance of the ova (90 x 50 μm). General clinical
examination, history taking, and other diagnostic screening procedures may be
required to evaluate differential diagnoses for avian respiratory disease.
64 i. Adults and larvae of two species of lungworm. Crenosoma striatum is a live
bearing worm and adults are found in the trachea, bronchi, bronchioles and
alveolar ducts. The caudal part of an adult worm, containing embryonated eggs
surrounded by newly hatched live larvae, can be seen in 64c. Capillaria aerophila
is a smaller, thinner worm bearing bipolar eggs. Adults are often found in the
epithelium of the bronchi, bronchioles and trachea. Both live larvae and bipolar
eggs can be seen throughout the slides (64a, b).
i. A heavy infestation of lungworms, which is the likely cause of death. Because of
their low bodyweight, the recommended puppy and kitten dose of dewormer per
unit of bodyweight will be low and ineffective. Using allometric scaling, several
anthelmintics have been used successfully to treat lungworm in hedgehogs,
including oral fenbendazole (100 mg/kg for 5 days), levamisole (27 mg/kg s/c
3 times at 48-hour intervals) and ivermectin (up to 3 mg/kg s/c). All these doses are
considerably higher than those for domestic species.
The effectiveness of worming can be checked rapidly by examination of a faecal
smear post treatment. Because shedding of eggs and larvae can be intermittent, it
is better to examine several smears over a period of time.
70
65,66:Questions
 a ua  o e re ooz e ie p isnt  so ng 5
let out of the burlap bags they have been transported in, they cannot stand up.
i. What is the likely problem?
ii. What is the treatment?
ili. What is the prognosis?
iv. How can this problem be prevented in the future?
66a
66b
66 Fledgling birds are often found alone and apparently abandoned by their
parents. Most should be left alone or moved into the safety of cover nearby and the
parent will usually return. Many are mistakenly ‘rescued’ and taken into care for
hand rearing. If presented with juvenile birds that cannot be returned to the wild
birds can broadly be divided into altricial (66a) and precocial types as shown (66b).
i. What do these terms mean?
i. How do these affect the way they are hand reared?
iii. Why must human contact be kept to a minimum, especially in precocial species?
71
65,66:Answers
65 i. “Leg cramp', probably a form of
65
capture myopathy. It is seen in long-legged
birds of all sizes, including waders (shore-
birds), which have had their legs kept in a
flexed position for a prolonged period. This
JVE
DO NOT
position reduces circulation; at the same time
DISTURA
the bird may repeatedly try to straighten its
legs, putting considerable stress on the
muscles.
i. Treatment is supportive, including physio-
 therapy, maintenance in slings if unable to
stand and nutritional support.
ii. Variable, but generally poor; in flamingos
this has usually been fatal, while some
waders have been successfully treated over a period of two weeks.
iv. Long-legged birds should always be transported with their legs extended,
preferably standing in individual crates of an appropriate size (65). If restrained for
treatment, they should be held with their legs extended, keeping a finger between
a raoe ao ise agqni sha ai wo aep dons oi sho ai ie shal a
legs can be flexed for a short period if necessary, but should never be forced into a
flexed position, and should be returned to an extended posture as soon as possible.
66 i. Altricial birds are hatched naked and blind and are totally dependent on the
parents for food and warmth. Precocial birds are more developed when they hatch
 and are able to feed themselves soon afterwards, although they still rely on parents
for warmth and protection.
i. Altricial nestlings will usually gape (open their mouth) for food and must be
hand fed regularly throughout the day with a high quality food placed directly into
the beak. Precocial birds are able to feed themselves if suitable food is offered.
although some initial encouragement may be required. Additionally, precocial birds
are fully feathered and mobile, whereas altricial birds are featherless when they
hatch and require more warmth and care. In general, the hand rearing of precocial
birds is less labour intensive.
i. Precocial juveniles follow their parents soon after hatching and have a relatively
therefore prone to imprinting when artificially reared and can mistake the foster
human for the parent bird, especially if newly hatched. This learned association,
 once formed, is irreversible and can lead to long-term behavioural problems.
72
67,68: Questions
67a
67b
67 These images (67a, retropharyngeal
lymph nodes; 67b, thoracic cavity) are
from a 3.5-year-old female white-tailed
deer shot in Michigan, USA.
i. Describe the lesions seen.
ii. Name the most likely causative organism. What is the aetiology of the disease in
this species?
68
68 This wild rabbit (68) has been brought in to your veterinary surgery by a
member of the public who is keen to try and treat it.
i. What is the most likely cause of this rabbit's condition?
i. When was this disease first introduced into Europe, and why?
ili. How is it spread between rabbits?
iv. Would you advise treating this rabbit?
73
67,68:Answers
67 i. The retropharyngeal lymph nodes
67c
demonstrate discrete, multiple nodular
lesions on their surfaces, infiltrating into
the
parenchyma and also affecting
adjacent structures There are multiple,
diffuse, discrete, focal, nodular lesions
on the lung surface and thoracic cavity
surfaces. A central, walled-off area of
mineralization and caseous necrosis
surrounded by a thick mononuclear
inflammatory infiltrate interspersed with areas of fibrosis is shown in the
histological section 67c.
i. Mycobacterial infection, which in white-tailed deer can be subacute to chronic.
Lesions may be confined to the superficial lymph nodes of the head, such as the
suggesting both oral and respiratory transmission pathways. M. bovis persists in
tonsillar crypts and can be shed via nasal and oral secretions. In contrast to cattle,
many infections in white-tailed deer have a tendency to abscess formation with
purulent discharge, although granuloma formation is also seen. Infections increase
with age and can range from no gross lesions visible to systemic involvement of
multiple organs and tissues. The most common sites for lesions are the lymph nodes 
 and associated structures of the head and the lung and thoracic wall.
68 i. Myxomatosis, caused by the myxoma pox virus.
i. It was introduced to control wild rabbits in France in 1952, with subsequent
spread to the British Isles. The virus's natural host is the South American forest
rabbit.
ili. By arthropod vectors, mainly the rabbit flea (Spilopsyllus cuniculi) in the UK,
but can also be mosquito borne. The flea's life cycle is linked to the reproductive
status of the female rabbit. This leads to heavy flea infestation of the young and so
they are particularly susceptible to infection with the virus. The virus does not
 replicate in the vector, but in the infection site, spreading to regional lymph nodes.
iv. The majority of rabbits die within two weeks due to secondary bacterial
septicaemia. There are anecdotal reports of successful treatment with supportive
care consisting of systemic antibiotics, fluid therapy and provision of warmth.
However, captivity is highly stressful for a wild rabbit. Given that the prognosis is
so poor, euthanasia is generally recommended.
74
69, 70: Questions
69a
69b
69 You are called to a wildlife rehabilitation
centre that rehabilitates  and  rears  several
hundred raccoon kits each year. As soon as the
kits are weaned (approximately 7-8 weeks of
age), they are moved into large outdoor pens
where they are group housed
1 (69a). On the
morning you are called, the rehabilitator discovered two dead raccoons in the cage
and one that has oculonasal discharge and diarrhoea (69b).
i. What are your two main differential diagnoses?
ii. What in-house test(s) can be done to differentiate the two, and what clinical signs
are seen with each?
ili. What definitive diagnostic tests can be done?
70 This seal pup was found on a
70
beach off the east coast of Scotland
with an obvious neck injury (70).
i. What species of seal is it?
i. What may have caused the injury?
ili. How would you treat the lesion?
75
69,70:Answers
69 i. Canine distemper virus (CDV) and raccoon
69c
parvovirus (RPV). (Raccoons can also get feline parvo-
virus [FPV] and mink enterititis virus [MEV]), so these
could be included in the differential list).
ii. An in-house faecal ELISA test for canine parvovirus
will often show a positive result for RPV, FPV or MEV,
so a positive result can be used to rule out CDV. A
negative result does not necessarily mean that a
parvovirus is not present. Clinically, both CDV and the
parvoviruses may exhibit oculonasal discharges and
unkempt fur. Raccoons with CDV often exhibit central
(69c) and ataxia, with varying degrees of other
neurological signs including circling, “chewing gum
seizures’ and full tonic-clonic seizures. Parvoviral
infections usually manifest with gastrointestinal signs,
including diarrhoea and distended, gas-filled bowel loops. Evidence of hypermotility
(plications) in the small intestines is commonly seen on post-mortem examination.
ii. Virus isolation or histopathology on post-mortem tissues (urinary bladder
preferred for CDV; small intestines preferred for parvovirus).
70 i. A common or harbour seal. The muzzle is short and the nostrils form a *V"
shape. This species is smallr and has a paler coat than grey seals, the other species
seen frequently in the region.
i. The injury encircles the neck and is most likely due to entanglement (e.g. in
netting or fishing line).
ili. Perform a complete physical examination to assess for other pathology. Remove
any material from around the neck and investigate the extent of the lesion. Wounds
commonly become infected and may result in septicaemia. Deep wounds require
surgical investigation and debridement. Systemic antibiotics are necessary if deep
injuries or obvious infection are present (e.g. amoxicillin, 10 mg/kg p/o q12h
[7 mg/kg i/m q24h]; amoxicillin-clavulanate, 12.5 mg/kg p/o q12h [8.75 mg/kg i/m
q24h]). If a discharge is present or healing does not progress satisfactorily, take
swabs for culture and sensitivity. Cleaning with saline and/or dilute antiseptic (e.g.
chlorhexidine, povidone-iodine) on a daily basis will facilitate healing. If the
rehabilitation centre has facilities, addition of salt to water in a shallow pool may
supportive care (e.g. assist feeding with liquidized fish) if necessary. This lesion did
not require surgical debridement. Systemic antibiotics and topical antiseptics
resulted in healing within five weeks.
76
71, 72: Questions
71 You are called to the scene of a road
accident involving an adult deer. What
do you need to consider when preparing
to capture and handle this animal (71)?
72a
72h
72 Two harbour seal pups are found on
129
the beach on the same day (72a). They
are considered to be weaned, indepen-
dent pups of the current year by their
size, and are in moderate to good body
condition. Both are brought into care at
a local wildlife centre. Both have respir-
atory distress and mucopurulent nasal
and ocular discharge, and are dull and
unresponsive. One has a dry crepitus
detectable on palpation of the neck and thorax. The animal with crepitus suffers
convulsions and dies shortly after admission. You perform a necropsy, which reveals
subcutaneous emphysema and the lesions shown (72b, c).
i. What lesions can you see on the gross necropsy?
i. What is the likely diagnosis, and what would be your differential list?
ii. How would you confirm your diagnosis?
iv. What tissues other than those showing lesions would be useful for diagnosis?
77
71,72:Answers
71 Deer are potentially dangerous when handled and consideration must be made
for the safety of those involved in handling casualties. Handling and capture must
be well planned and involve suitable handling equipment, including sedative or
anaesthetic drugs and darting equipment. Provision for euthanasia should be
available, including the services of a marksman.
Equipment should include: thick blankets or rugs for covering the head of all
species and restraint of smaller species; cargo or freight netting for restraint of larger
species; ropes for hobbling larger species; crates or boxes for housing smaller
species. Drugs may include: medetomidine or xylazine; etorphine; atipamazole;
ketamine; diazepam; intravenous fluids (lactated Ringer's solution, glucose saline
[for capture myopathy]); pentobarbitone or secobarbital plus cinchocaine (for
euthanasia).
Consideration of the necessity of handling and the extent to which the deer is
handled must be made. Most deer, unless trapped in some way or severely injured,
will have vacated the site of an accident long before a veterinarian arrives. Injured
deer must be carefully triaged, ideally from a distance or following sedation. Deer
are poor patients in captivity, being less easy to handle and more susceptible to
rehabilitation.
72 i. Severe consolidation combined with emphysema.
i. Phocine distemper (PD). The combination of clinical signs of subcutaneous
emphysema and convulsions, and the gross necropsy findings are typical of PD.
Canine distemper (CD) can affect seals, and epizootics of Baikal and Caspian seals
have been attributed to CD, with similar clinical and pathological findings. Phocine
herpesvirus has been responsible for outbreaks of disease in seals in rehabilitation
 s  s n  po   p s 
dissimilar to PD and similar lesions on gross necropsy. Verminous pneumonia and
associated secondary bacterial infections can produce severe respiratory distress
and subcutaneous emphysema, and variable oculonasal discharge.
ii. Virus isolation and PCR can confirm the diagnosis. In the acute stages of the
disease, animals may not have seroconverted. Morbilliviruses induce immuno-
suppression and parasite loads can be high in affected animals, so care must be
taken to identify the primary cause of disease. Histology should reveal typical
morbillivirus inclusions.
iv. Like CDV, the bladder wall is a target tissue for virus replication and is often rich
in inclusion bodies, so is a useful sample to take for histology.
78
73, 74: Questions
 73 Phocine distemper caused by phocine distemper virus (PDV) is diagnosed in two
harbour seal pups brought into a wildlife rescue centre in the UK.
i. What are the implications for wild seals, other seals in the wildlife centre and
other animals?
i. Is this disease potentially zoonotic?
74a
74b
74 A loggerhead sea turtle strands with a fishing line evident on clinical examin-
ation protruding from the cloaca (74a). On radiographic examination a hook is
seen in the distal part of the oesophagus (74b).
i. What is the prognosis in this case?
ii. What treatment is indicated?
79
73,74:Answers
73 i. Phocine distemper has occurred as an epizootic outbreak twice in the eastern
Atlantic, the Baltic and North Sea regions, in 1988 and again in 2002. In 1988
there was a mortality of up to 50% of populations of harbour seals in the Wash and
the coast of Holland (North Sea). In the 2002 outbreak mortality was lower, at
around 18%. Grey seals were little affected and appear to have a high degree of
innate resistance to infection with PDV. On the eastern seaboard of the USA (the
western Atlantic) an unusual mortality event (UME) in seals was declared in
2006/2007, believed to be associated with morbillivirus infection. The mortality
associated with this event was not in the proportions seen in the eastern Atlantic,
although interestingly, a number of grey seals have been affected.
i. PDV is spread by aerosol and is highly infectious. CDV can infect seals and a
range of other carnivores, but there is no evidence of field infection of other
carnivores with PDV. However, precautions should be put in place, particularly to
exclude dogs from contact with potentially affected seals, both within rehabilitation
centres and on the shoreline where affected wild seals may strand. PDV has shown
no potential as a zoonosis.
74 i. Extremely poor, especially because the hook is embedded in the oesophagus
and the attached fishing line has already been ingested through the intestinal tract.
The peristaltic movements of the intestines pull the line gradually, tensing up the
animal's gastrointestinal tract as a concertina effect. The line causes haemorrhage
and necrosis of the stomach and intestines, and eventually results in perforations,
peritonitis and subsequent death.
ii. Immediate emergency treatment involves cutting the line from the hook and
performing a coeliotomy, surgically accessing different parts of the gastrointestinal
tract in order to cut the line at different levels and so prevent it cutting through the
walls of the intestine. If the turtle is not strong enough to survive such a surgical
procedure, the coeliotomy should not be carried out. In this case the line is left to
fransit through the intestines, causing further necrosis and haemorrhage. The
animal may eventually recover from these lesions in the intestines and stomach;
however, until it does it will show symptoms of severe malabsorptive protein-losing
80
75,76:Questions
75a
75b
75 This female, juvenile fox squirrel is
found with raised lesions over a large
portion of the body (75a, b). Many of
the lesions are open, and while the
animal does occasionally scratch at an
open lesion, it does not appear overly
pruritic. The animal is eating normally
and has no gross evidence of ecto-
parasites.
i. What is the cause of the dermal lesions on this fox squirrel?
ii. How is this condition transmitted, and what species may be affected?
ili. What is the recommended treatment?
76
76 A wild elephant is anaesthetised prior to translocation (76). An international
study found that that 25% of translocated wildlife species were not given a physical
examination by a veterinarian or biologist before moving. How would you draw up
a translocation plan for a group of animals?
81
75,76:Answers
75 i. Fibromatosis, also known as
75c
squirrel pox, which is caused by the
squirrel fibroma virus, a poxvirus
closely related to the myxoma and
Shope's fibroma  viruses that infect
rabbits. A skin biopsy from an affected
squirrel demonstrates the intracyto-
plasmic inclusion body typical of most
pox viruses (75c).
i. Mosquitoes are known to transmit
this disease between squirrels. As with other pox viruses, additional routes of
 n ni ssd ne   n ss
with open lesions) and/or ectoparasites such as fleas, lice and mites. Fox squirrels,
eastern and western grey squirrels and woodchucks are naturally infected; domestic
rabbits have been experimentally infected.
 p   s d arn s o r si  
anecdotal evidence suggests that the application of topical iodine will help prevent
secondary infections, dry the lesions and reduce the healing time.
76 (1) Prepare a detailed description of the wild animal translocation to be
assessed. This should include objective signalment of animals shipped, timing of
the translocation, source and destination ecosystems and differences between the
ai jo Kreuns e pue paoidua aq oi sjooiond jesipausupueuandes comi
health, economic and ecological risks involved. (2) Identify the potential health
hazards associated with the proposed animal translocation. This should include
analyses of all diseases the animals are exposed and susceptible to at the point of
 origin and destination and their effects on other species. Also include disease risks
in transit and any vaccinations and other biological preparations the animals have
been exposed to. Include non-infectious hazards (nutritional, toxicological,
conflict with human activities) at the destination. (3) Make an assessment of each
health hazard identified. (4) Make an overall statement of the risk involved in the
translocation. (5) Make a statement about any additional risks involved not
specifically covered when identifying potential health hazards (e.g. damage to the
environment, change in the nature or type of biomass available for cover from
predators due to increased grazing pressure). (6) Make recommendations to
reduce the risks
82
77, 78: Questions
77 A bald eagle nestling being sampled
77
by biologists in the USA as part of an
ecotoxicological study examining per-
sistent organic pollutants in tertiary
avian predators is shown (77).
i. What effects are caused by poly-
chlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in avian
species, and what is the mechanism of
action?
ii. What might be some of the issues
associated
with
proving
negative
impacts on reproduction in these species?
78a
78b
78 A wild rainbow lorikeet was brought
78c
to a wildlife rehabilitation hospital in
Queensland, Australia.
i. Describe the clinical signs (78a-c), and
provide a likely aetiology.
i. What is the significance of the disease
in this particular species?
83
77,78:Answers
77 i. PCBs are mixtures of 209 commercial congeners released from chemical and
combustion processes. They have been related to decreased reproductive success in
wild mammals, birds and fish. The mechanism of action is incompletely understood.
Coplanar PCBs operate through the aryl hydrocarbon receptor as antioestrogens.
The antioestrogenic effects may be related to decreased oestrogen receptor number
rather than to direct binding of PCBs to the oestrogen receptor. PCBs may also act
by altering gene expression of the oestrogen receptor. Another mode of action may
be to alter enzyme induction. PCBs also disrupt thyroid and adrenal gland
homeostasis, which may play a role in reproductive toxicity. Some PCB congeners
Therefore, multiple mechanisms of action are occurring.
i. The evidence for PCB reproductive toxicity in avian species relies on correlation
of field observations of reproductive success with residue analysis of tissues and
eggs of exposed birds. PCBs have been associated with abnormal breeding
behaviour of gulls. Isolating a cause and effect with wildlife is difficult, as many
mixtures of chemicals can cause similar effects. Another difficulty is the lack of
uniformity with the way study data is presented and the time frame over which
long-term effects can be assessed.
78 i. There is loss of tail and distal primary flight feathers and abnormal feather
calamus/rachis and necrosis. Feather colour has changed in areas from green to
pale yellow, especially on the tail. These signs are consistent with psittacine beak
and feather disease (PBFD) caused by a circovirus
i. Rainbow lorikeets and scaly-breasted lorikeets are by far the most common wild
birds in southeast Queensland that are presented with PBFD. Affected birds are
typically young (determined by a dark beak colour). Research suggests that lories
carry a variant form of the virus (named psittacine circovirus 2, Ps-CV 2). Nucleic
acid sequence analysis confirmed that the virus in lories has sufficient nucleic acid
differences that it is not detected using proprietary nucleic acid primers to the
original documented virus (now known as psittacine circovirus 1, Ps-CV 1). As
there are reports of lorikeets surviving documented disease, it is thought that this
variant may be less pathogenic than disease caused by Ps-CV 1.
84
79,80: Questions
79i.What are the two most common
79a
ectoparasites found in juvenile tawny
owls (in the UK).
ii. What is the significance of such
parasites?
i. What is unusual about the parasitism
shown (79a), and how should such cases
be treated?
80a
80b
80 A group of eight-week-old shelducks
on a freshwater pool during a hot sum-
mer became increasingly dull, lethargic
and inappetent. A pooled faecal sample
examined by direct microscopy revealed
 Oval thick-walled helminth eggs measur-
ing approximately 50 x 30 μm (80a). All the ducklings were treated with a broad-
spectrum anthelmintic, but failed to improve. Post-mortem examination revealed
(ssi pr a p snd an tmq  an e a
with excess mucus production (80b). Worms were present in these lesions in some
of the birds.
i. What are these nematodes?
ii. What was the significance of the hot weather?
ili. Why was anthelmintic treatment ineffective in these birds?
iv. What management factors could be used to reduce disease in subsequent years?
8.5
79,80:Answers
79 i. Lice and hippoboscids. The para-
79b
site load increases during the breeding
season when an increase in stressors
coincides with a build-up of parasites in
the nest.
i. Avian lice (order Mallophaga) feed
mostly on feather debris. A build-up of
feather lice is commonly seen in
debilitated birds; healthy birds can
reduce lice burdens by regular preening.
Irritation and restlessness may be seen,
progressing to loss of condition and feather damage in more severe cases.
Hippoboscids (flat flies) are dorsoventrally flattened to facilitate movement through
the bird's plumage. They cause pruritis, suck blood and transmit Haemoproteus
 and trypanosomes, as well as some parasitic mites. Heavy parasite loads can result
in anaemia.
ili. The young tawny owl is suffering from fly strike (myiasis), which is relatively
uncommon in birds, but may be seen in association with open wounds or soiled
plumage and skin. Dirty nests may attract flies and chicks may present with myiasis.
Affected birds are often severely debilitated and in shock. Where this is the case (as
in 79b, where second- and third-stage larvae are seen in an ulcerated abdominal
wound with extensive tissue damage), euthanasia is recommended. Early cases will
usually only have eggs or first-stage larvae present, and should undergo thorough
wound debridement under general anaesthesia, removing all maggots. Use of
permethrin products may also be indicated.
80 i. Echinuria (Acuaria) uncinata, which commonly affects juvenile waterfowl.
ii. The intermediate host for this parasite is primarily the water flea (Dapbnia spp.),
to waterfowl.
ili. The nematodes cause fibrous nodular thickening of the isthmus, which is often
irreversible and permanently impairs digestion. Therefore, treatment with an
anthelmintic when this scarring is already present will have litle beneficial effect.
iv. Management factors are primarily aimed at reducing the number of intermediate
hosts. Reproduction of the water fleas can be reduced by increasing the flow rate
of the water or completely draining and refilling the pools with freshwater. Regular
routine anthelmintic reatment of waterfowl, especially during the summer months,
may help reduce any damage caused by the worms.
86
81, 82: Questions
81a
81b
81  A female peregrine falcon (81a) from
a rehabilitation centre was presented.
Clinical examination revealed weight
loss, inappetence, a change in faecal con-
sistency, poor pectoral muscle condition
and the presence of palpable subcu-
taneous nodules in the neck/crop region.
Candidiasis was confirmed from a saline
crop swab examined microscopically. A
biopsy from a subcutaneous nodule in 
the neck was put in formalin and
submitted for histology (Ziehl-Neelsen
stain; 81b). Haematology results showed a moderate leucocytosis with marked
heterophilia and moderate monocytosis.
i. What lesion can be seen in the falcon?
ii. What is your provisional diagnosis, and what other test(s) would you recommend
to confirm the diagnosis in this bird?
ii. What are the causative agent (s) of this condition?
iv. What is the route of infection?
v. What are the differential diagnoses for progressive weight loss in a raptor?
vi. What are the implications for the rehabilitation centre?
82 You are the owner of a veterinary practice dealing with wildlife casualties on a
regular basis. What would your considerations be in devising a health and safety
 policy for your staff for when dealing with wildlife casualties?
87
81,82:Answers
81 i. Carpal bursitis.
i. Mycobacteriosis. The presence of small, acid-fast, rod-shaped bacteria in the
histology section supports the diagnosis. Endoscopy and biopsy of internal
granulomas is helpful. Cultures should be incubated at 37°C for 6-8 weeks. PCR
has been used to identify M. avium complex mycobacteria in formalin-fixed and
unfixed tissues.
ii. Several mycobacterial species can cause this disease in birds, principally M.
avium, M. intracellulare and M genavense.As M. avium and M. intracellulare share
some common antigens, these species are often grouped and termed as M. avium-
intracellulare complex. Other mycobacterial species belonging to the M.
tuberculosis complex, including M. tuberculosis and M. bovis, may also cause
lesions in birds. M. avrum is the most commonly isolated mycobacterial species in
raptors. M. avium paratuberculosis has been isolated from falcons in the Middle
East following feeding with contaminated mutton.
iv. The usual route of infection is oral, via direct contact or contact with food or
water contaminated with faeces of infected birds.
v. Includes aspergillosis and chlamydophilosis. These two diseases and candidiasis
are often diagnosed concurrently.
vi. In view of the zoonotic potential, affected birds should be euthanased. In-contact
birds should be investigated and quarantined. The bacteria remain infectious in the
environment for many months, so thorough decontamination should be carried out.
82  Within the practice it will be necessary for certain groups of staff to carry out
differing tasks involving wildlife casualties. These tasks should be specified and
limited to each group. Staff performing a certain task should be trained and certified
 n  rog rs y s p  e  s ar ' r 
group of tasks, including the procedure(s) to be carried out, the perceived risks (e.g.
bites, scratches, kicks, infections) and the methods in place to prevent these risks.
 Protection against risks will undoubtedly include the provision of suitable protective
clothing (e.g. gloves, aprons, masks, leather gauntlets) and handling equipment (e.g.
crush cages, cat catchers). There should be consideration of the wildlife species that
are both commonly and rarely seen and specific assessments relating to these should
be drawn up. Diseases carried by the species treated, especially zoonotic infections,
protective equipment and the disinfectants used. The need for prophylactic
protection against serious infections (e.g. rabies vaccinations) should also be
reviewed on a regular basis and made a requirement of handling certain species if
such a risk is perceived.
88
83, 84: Questions
83
3An unconscious loggerhead sea turtle is brought to a marine animal
rehabilitation centre by a trawl fisherman. On clinical examination you find that the
animal is not moving, is reported to have not taken a breath for one hour and has 
 no corneal, palpebral or cloacal reflexes and no pain response.
i. What is the prognosis in this case?
i. Describe any appropriate emergency treatment and first aid procedures.
84
 84 i. What are the similarities and differences between the gaseous agents in the
vaporizer on the left of the picture (sevoflurane) and that on the right (isoflurane)
(84)?
 ii. What properties make these agents beneficial in the treatment of wildlife
casualties?
89
83,84:Answers
83 i. Collapsed turtles can withstand long
83
periods without breathing, and their heart
rate can reduce to 1-2 beats/minute. A
Doppler ultrasonic probe can be used to
detect arterial blood flow on either side of
the neck, but this may prove difficult.
 Unless the animal is showing signs of rigor
mortis, it can be assumed it is still alive.
The prognosis is guarded and depends on
 the response to emergency treatment.
ii. Oxygen via an endotracheal tube and intravenous fluids and shock doses of
steroids via the dorsal cervical sinus (83). The turtle should be warmed gradually
at all times. With the turtle on its plastron, the caudal body is elevated to facilitate
drainage of water from the lungs. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation is achieved by
a snd p a sin po ais r o snd  sn a n
humerus-radius-ulnar joint into the body with the thumbs quickly and firmly, then
letting go. This is repeated 4-5 times in quick succession to massage the heart. The
fore-flippers are then extended cranially and then laterally on either side of the
animal's body to encourage movement of air through the respiratory system. The
whole cycle is then repeated. A drowned turtle may take several hours before it
starts breathing voluntarily.
84 i. Both are fluorinated ethers. Both agents have low solubility, resulting in rapid
anaesthetic induction, changes in depth of anaesthesia and recovery time.
Sevoflurane, being the more soluble, has the most rapid effects. Isoflurane is a very
potent anaesthetic (minimal alveolar concentration [MAC] 1.28% in the dog),
allowing anaesthesia to be induced and maintained at relatively low concentrations.
Sevoflurane is slightly less potent (MAC 2.1-2.4% in the dog), meaning that higher
concentrations are needed. Both agents can be used for mask or chamber induction
of anaesthesia. Isoflurane has a fairly strong, pungent odour that can result in
breath holding and anxiety. Sevoflurane has a non-pungent and non-irritating
odour making it better tolerated. Anaesthesia with both isoflurane and sevoflurane
results in less myocardial suppression than other agents (methoxyflurane,
halothane). Both anaesthetic agents are primarily exhaled, with only 0.2% of
isoflurane and 3% of sevoflurane being metabolized, making both agents an
excellent choice for patients with renal or hepatic dysfunction.
ii. Their low solubility and rapid anaesthetic effects. Both agents have high safety
profiles, making them useful in situations where the health status of the casualty is
unknown. Sevoflurane is the most suitable agent for mask or chamber induction.
90
85, 86: Questions
85 A red fox is found in a debilitated
85a
condition and dies shortly after being taken
into care.
You  start a post-mortem
examination and observe that areas of the
lungs appear congested and consolidated,
but there is also unusual yellowish brown
discolouration (85a).
i. What is the likely cause of the observed
changes?
ii. What would be the next stage in your
post-mortem procedure?
ii. How would you investigate the lung
lesions?
iv What is the significance of this diagnosis
in relation to the health of domestic
animals?
86  A hedgehog is presented with severe
86
loss of spines (86). It is not pruritic. The
skin is inflamed around the skirt, with a
small amount of dried exudate and some
crusts at the base of spines that can be
plucked out easily. A light dusting of
ectoparasites, just visible to the naked eye,
is noted on the face.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis for this
condition?
i. How would you advise confirming this
diagnosis and treating it?
91
85,86:Answers
85 i.Infection with the heartworm
85b
Angiostrongylus vasorum.
ii. Open the right ventricle and the
pulmonary artery and look for adult
nematodes (85a).
ili. Adult nematodes are not found on
gross examination in every case, but
evidence of infection can normally be
proved by histopathological examina-
tion of lung.
This will show the
nematode eggs and first-stage larvae
developing in the parenchyma. Another
simple test is to make a scrape from the
tracheal mucosa, place it on a micro-
scope slide and examine with a low-
power objective. This will often show first-stage larvae with their characteristic
notched tail wriggling in the mucus (85b).
iv. A. vasorum is carried by foxes, often subclinically, and they are a reservoir of
infection for domestic dogs. Slugs act as the principal intermediate host for the
parasite and become infected by feeding on dog or fox faeces.
86 i. The ectoparasites are probably Caparinia tripilis mites, which can be vectors
for the transmission of dermatophytosis. The clinical appearance (crusting skin and
spine apex lesions, with spines being easily epilated on gentle traction) is typical of
ringworm
i. Samples should be taken for microscopy and fungal culture. Multiple spines, or
a brushing or scraping of the crusting lesions, or both, should be submitted for
dermatophyte culture or performed in-house using standard dermatophyte test kits.
Antibiosis may be required if, as in this case, there is significant secondary or
coincidental bacterial dermatitis. Topical applications of natamycin or enilconazole,
after pre-washing with povidone-iodine or chlorhexidine and miconazole shampoo,
appear to be effective, but are highly labour intensive, requiring regular repeat
washings. There is a moderate risk of human infection during this process. Oral
administration of systemic antifungal agents (e.g. itraconazole or terbinafine)
appears to be effective as long as reinfection from fomites and other infected
animals can be prevented. An initial topical treatment and regular disinfection of
the environment is advised. The Caparinia mites may be treated with fipronil or
diluted ivermectin applied topically.
92
87, 88: Questions
87
87 A client has a moderately severe dermatitis on one hand (87), which has
developed since she started caring for the hedgehog in 86 one month ago. The
lesions have worsened despite treatment with topical steroid cream. What advice
would you give regarding this condition?
88  Several oriental white-backed vul-
88
tures, found weak and collapsed in a
roost adjacent to a cattle carcase dump
in India, are rescued by a wildlife charity
(88). All except one respond, over three
days, to intravenous and subcutaneous
fluids (0.9% saline) given at 2% body-
weight per day. A post-mortem examin-
ation performed on the dead bird found
it to be in good condition with food in
its gastrointestinal tract. Uric acid tophi
were identified in several organs, giving
an interim diagnosis of visceral gout and
renal failure.
i. What may have caused the illness and
death of the vultures?
i. How could this be confirmed?
ii. What is the prognosis for the survivors?
iv. What would your recommendation be to the charity for subsequent management
of the survivors?
93
87,88:Answers
87 Dermatophytosis from hedgehogs is zoonotic and relatively easily transmitted
if handling infected hedgehogs. Infection is introduced via spine microtrauma to
the human skin. Latex gloves are not protective against this, and hedgehogs should
be handled using thick gloves or a combination of latex gloves and impervious
materials. The pattern of human infection is typically a small area of skin on the
palms of the hands, spreading if untreated. Spread is increasingly rapid if a
  n      i
Involvement of nail beds is possible, and the infection may be spread to other parts
of the body via the infected skin of the hands. Typical ring-shaped lesions are not
usually seen in this form, although they may be seen via contact with fomites. The
client should be advised to see her GP as soon as possible, and given copies of any
fungal testing results from infected animals
88 i. They have probably eaten from an animal carcase treated with the NSAID
diclofenac. Until recently this was freely available as a licensed veterinary product
for use in ruminants. Its toxicity to scavenging vultures has led to a >99% decline
in numbers of the Gyps species in the Indian subcontinent in the last decade.
ii. By analysis of tissue samples from the dead bird, in particular the liver, for
diclofenac
ili. Good. Birds that survive the initial effects on the renal system, which in part is
dose-related, tend to show no permanent effects.
iv. Veterinary diclofenac products have been banned in a number of countries within
the range of Asiatic Gyps species. Meloxicam is an alternative, having been
 demonstrated as safe for vultures and used therapeutically in several Gyps species.
However, despite legal restrictions and extensive public information programmes,
veterinary diclofenac use still persists (old or illegally imported stock and use of the
human injectable form). Vultures are legally protected in India. One option would
be to gain State Government permission to relocate survivors to a captive-breeding
centre. These now hold over 200 birds, representing the three Gyps species native
to India, with the aim of building up a captive population for release once
diclofenac has been eliminated from the environment.
94
89. 90: Questions
89
89 A client woke up to find this animal (89) in his bedroom.
i. What is this animal?
ii. What initial advice would you give to your client?
90a
90b
90 Seven mute swans (90a) are admitted to a local wildlife rehabilitation facility
from the same body of water a docks marina. They are preferring to spend time out
 of the water. On examination they are found to be a little underweight, with plantar
thickening, and they have varying amounts of adherent dark oily material (90b).
i. What could this material be?
ii. Would you consider any diagnostic procedures in these cases?
ii. How would you manage these cases, both in initial treatment and before and
after release?
9.5
89,90:Answers
89 i. A red bat.
ii. The bat should be captured safely and rabies testing of the bat arranged. One
technique for capture involves closing all windows and doors, turning on the lights,
and waiting for the bat to land. Wearing gloves (heavy, preferably thick leather), the
bat should be covered with a coffee can or similar lidded container. A piece of
cardboard is then slid underneath and the can turned right side up and sealed. If the
bat is dead, it should be placed in double-layered plastic bags for submission to a
diagnostic laboratory.
Anyone who has been in a room with a bat and is unsure whether an exposure
took place should be considered exposed to rabies and should submit the bat for
rabies testing. If the bat is not available, post-exposure rabies prophylaxis should
be given. Most of the recent human rabies cases in the USA and Europe have been
caused by bat variants of rabies virus (bat lyssaviruses), probably due to
transmission via minor or unrecognized bat bites. Molecular epidemiological studies
have linked most of these cases to lyssaviruses associated with insectivorous bats.
 In particular virus variants associated with two relatively reclusive species, the
silver-haired bat and the eastern pipistrelle, are the unexpected culprits of most
cryptic cases of human rabies.
90 i. Mute swans permanently resident on inland watercourses or docks are often
presented with plumage contamination from vegetable oil (discarded by food
vendors), diesel or heavier engine oils. This appears to be engine oil.
i. In general, mute swans seem to tolerate oiling better than seabirds, but diesel
Haematological and biochemical analysis may be worthwhile, especially in birds
that do not recover well from the washing process.
ii. The swans should be housed indoors without access to water as their
waterproofing and thermal insulation are adversely affected by the oil. They should
be given nutritional support and washed as soon as their general condition is
satisfactory for release. Any significant foot lesions should be treated, and in cases
where one foot is notably more affected than the other weight bearing and function
of the contralateral limb should be evaluated by examination and radiography.
Thickened areas of the plantar hindlimb are common in swans on artificial
substrates. Release of the birds to an alternative location is not likely to be helpful,
as most will return to their original site. Ringing of the birds by appropriately
trained personnel is advised to monitor their long-term health.
96
91, 92: Questions
91a
91You are called to see a six-month-old common seal at a local wildlife
rehabilitation centre. It is housed with one other seal in a semi-water-filled cubicle.
Its left eye is almost completely closed and it is reluctant to eat. On examination
under local anaesthesia in a darkened environment, you discover a central
fluorescein-positive lesion, approximately 8 mm diameter, which has not extended
 as deep as Descemet's membrane, and a periphery of corneal oedema covering all
the visible cornea (91a).
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. What factors do you think could have played a part in its development?
ii. How would you treat this case, and what would have been the likely progression
without treatment?
iv. What is the prognosis for release and post-release survival in this case?
92 Bait containing cyanide poison is placed in bait stations and bait bags in New
Zealand. Warning notices are put up informing people when the bait stations and
bags have been filled with bait and warning people not to handle the bait, to keep
children under supervision at all times, not to allow dogs in to areas where bait has
been placed and not to take any animals for eating. Which species is being targeted
with the poisoned bait, and why?
97
91,92:Answers
91 i. Corneal oedema, which is common and
91b
marked in seals with corneal ulceration or
damage.
ii. Trauma (infighting with conspecifics,
foreign material, handling of uncooperative
individuals), primary or secondary bacterial
infection.
ii. Rapid aggressive treatment with systemic
NSAIDs and topical antibiosis is necessary to
avoid permanent damage. Severe cases may
benefit from fortified solutions of cephalosporins and/or gentamycin, made using
ocular lubricant solutions. Systemic antibiotics may be required. Topical serum
from the individual can assist healing. The animal should be kept in saline to keep
the eyes moist. Repeated removal from water, for long enough for drops to stay in
an adequate length of time, is stressful and impractical. Regular spraying of the
eyes with saline via a plant mister may help. Conjunctival pedicle grafts may be
s n  s s ae s p p 'e ae nrd i 
 and more robust in a semi-aquatic environment postoperatively. Corneal rupture is
a common sequela if the condition is left untreated.
iv. Corneal rupture and panophthalmitis in a grey seal is shown (91b). If this occurs,
the prognosis for continued sight in that eye is grim. Although enucleation may be
 performed, the survival rates of visually challenged seals post release is unknown.
92 The brush-tailed possum, which was introduced into NZ in 1837 from Australia
in order to establish fur farms. Some animals escaped from the farms and the species
native ground-nesting birds. Additionally, possums have become NZ's most
significant wildlife reservoir for Mycobacterium bovis infection in cattle and deer.
They are highly susceptible to M. bovis and although mostly solitary animals, they
do share dens and have some social contact, allowing for spread of infection.
Organisms are excreted via various routes, with respiratory spread and pseudo-
vertical transmission from mother to offspring being considered the most important
methods of transfer.
There has been large-scale possum eradication mostly through the use of
poisoned bait. In some areas, culling has resulted in dispersal of infected possums
and the creation of edge habitats with high levels of tuberculosis. Additional
strategies, such as oral vaccination of possums, improved testing of livestock and
consideration of other vector and reservoir species, have therefore been adopted.
98
93-95: Questions
93 Surveillance surveys in some areas of the USA have found the prevalence of
Mycobacterium bovis in the wild white-tailed deer herd to be around 4-5%
i. In what other wildlife species has this infection been diagnosed in this area, and
what is the significance of this?
worldwide.
 94 List the criteria that should be met prior to the release of rehabilitated seal pups
in order to ensure a successful outcome.
95a
95b
95 This parasite (95a, b, arrow) is commonly found in the nasopharynx of white.
tailed deer in many locations throughout the USA. Name the genus, describe its life
cycle, and comment on any pathogenic effects it may have on the host.
99
93-95:Answers
93 i. Infections have been diagnosed in various scavenging carnivore species
(coyotes, red fox, raccoon, black bear) in the same area, but these are thought to
be dead-end hosts not involved in persistence of the disease. M. bovis infections in
cattle and other species often persist due to the presence of a wildlife reservoir. M.
bovis infection in white-tailed deer in Michigan is an exception, but is strongly
associated with long-term cultural attitudes to deer hunting and management in
the region. These include management activities such as baiting, feeding and
maintenance of focal high deer densities on large tracts of private land.
ii. M. bovis infections have been found in an enormous number of wild species
worldwide, and include elk and white-tailed deer in Canada, bison in Canada.
African buffalo in Kruger National Park, South Africa, feral Australian brushtail
possums in New Zealand, feral ferrets in New Zealand, European badgers in the
UK and Ireland, wild hoofstock in Spain and wild ungulates in Tanzania.
94
· Pups should be in good body condition and clinically well.
● Pups should be self-feeding on whole fish.
 Release should take place at the average expected weight at weaning. For grey
seal pups this is 40-45 kg and for common seal pups it is 30-35 kg.
(probably C. phobifera). Adult male flies gather at species-specific aggregation areas
(e.g. hilltops that may be associated with man-made structures such as fire
    d    i 
White-tailed deer recognize the flies as irritants and display a range of specific
avoidance behaviours. Female flies are attracted to increased concentrations of CO2
and they lay larvae in the nasal cavity of the deer. First-stage instars are mainly
found around the ethmoid bones, while second- and third-stage instars are found
exclusively in the retropharyngeal area, which enlarges to form a pouch. Levels of
infection per deer of 1-55 larvae, with an infection rate of 62%, have been
recorded. Few clinical signs are associated with infection and infestation is not
thought to have an effect at the population level. Occasional deaths associated with
larval penetration of the cranial cavity have been reported, as well as neurological
signs associated with aberrant migration to the auditory regions. The significance
of deer avoidance behaviour as a stressor is not known. As infections are isolated
to the head, cephenymiasis has no effect on the meat quality of hunter killed deer.
100
96, 97:Questions
96a
 96 A barn owl is presented weak and thin and with extensive bruising around its
right eye (96a).
i. What is the likely cause?
ii. What treatment should be given?
97
i. What abnormalities do you see, and how might they have occured?
ii. Why is this presentation more common in birds?
iv. What treatment is indicated?
101
96, 97:Answers
96 i. This is typical of a tick reaction to
96b
the bird tick Ixodes frontalis. There is
intensive localized swelling around the
head, with subcutaneous haemorrhage
and tissue necrosis. The exact nature of
the reaction is not known. Studies have
not identified an infectious cause. Ticks
attaching on the bird's body rather than
the head rarely cause a reaction. Simi-
larly, not all ticks stimulate a response
(96b shows a tick on a common buzzard
without reaction). It is possible that this is a toxin-related response or even a host-
parasite incompatibility or anaphylactic response.
i. The bird will die without intervention. It should be given supportive care with
fluid therapy (both systemic and oral) along with systemic antibiosis (e.g.
amoxicillin or oxytetracycline). Corticosteroids (e.g. short-acting preparations of
dexamethasone) are indicated, although these should be given with great care as
therapy is given early and the bird is supported through treatment.
97 i. A shrew.
ii. The most obvious abnormality is a generalized subcutaneous emphysema. The
skin is distended away from the body wall and there is a defect of the rib cage
evident on the left thorax.
ili. Such injuries are most commonly produced following a cat attack, where the
chest wall has been penetrated and air is able to leak from the lungs into the
overlying tissues. Emphysema is more commonly seen in birds that have been
caught by cats. The avian air sac system is extensive and particularly vulnerable to
trauma. Both blunt trauma and penetrating injuries can cause air to leak from the
air sacs into the subcutaneous tissues.
iV.
Aggressive antibiotic cover is indicated where wounds are present, or indeed
a pog sm aioaip ou pue o e Aq iqane uaq su ruad a arm
inoculation of bacteria into a small mammal or bird following a cat bite or scratch
will frequently lead to septicaemia and death. Broad-spectrum antibiotic cover is
indicated as a mixed aerobic/anaerobic population has been recovered from the
majority of cat bite wounds. A combination of clavulanate-amoxicillin and a
fluoroquinolone is favoured, as fluoroquinolones on their own provide inadequate
protection against anaerobic organisms and incomplete protection against
Streptococcus spp.
102
98, 99: Questions
98a
98b
98  You are presented with a juvenile
great
blue
heron that was found
entangled in fishing line near the edge of
a pond. You remove the line and the
98c
bird appears to be uninjured as a result.
The bird is thin and has pale oral
mucosae, but is otherwise bright and
alert. The bird dies unexpectedly only a
few hours later, so you conduct a post-
mortem examination (98a-c).
i. What are the characteristic
gross
lesions that can be seen in 98a and 98b?
ii. What is the life cycle of the nematodes
shown in 98c?
ii. Can these parasites be removed from
a live bird?
99 This deer (99) was diagnosed with
99
chronic wasting disease (CWD) after
being shot in southern Wisconsin, USA.
i. How is a diagnosis of CWD reached?
ii. What species are affected?
ii. Describe the clinical course of this
disease.
103
98,99:Answers
98 i. Parasitic tracts caused by the migration of the nematode Eustrongyloides
ignotus.
ii. The larvae of E. ignotus are carried by fish ingested by herons. As the larvae
develop into adult worms, they embed in the wall of the proventriculus and
eventually migrate through the stomach wall into the coelomic cavity, causing a
fibrinous reaction and coelomitis, as well as anaemia, emaciation and dehydration.
The combination of the worms in the abdomen and the fibrinous reaction result in
a 'ropey' feeling on palpation. The adults lay eggs within the migration tracts, which
are carried back to the gastrointestinal (GI) lumen and expelled in the faeces, enter
the water and are ingested by fish.
ii. If the worms have not caused too much damage, the bird can be treated
systemically with ivermectin and long-term supportive care. If the damage is
extensive, the GI tract will become non-functional and the bird will eventually die
from direct damage to the GI tract or from secondary emaciation and anaemia.
99 i. Location should always be considered when assessing wildlife disease and
CWD has been present in southern Wisconsin since late 2001. Diagnosis is by
confirmation of infection by immunohistochemical staining of the obex and the
retropharyngeal lymph nodes for accumulation of CWD-associated prion protein.
i. Wild and captive white-tailed and mule deer, rocky mountain elk, moose.
ii. In captive animals, subtle behavioural changes can precede more overt clinical
signs. In wild animals, early signs may be difficult to recognize, but they may lead
to an increased susceptibility to trauma, predation and hunting or exacerbate the
effects of harsh winter environmental conditions. The clinical course in some deer
has been characterized by acute death, with no noted clinical signs for over a year.
The minimum incubation period in wild deer is thought to be 1.5 years. In the
terminal stages, animals become emaciated (99), display abnormal behaviour, lose
bodily functions and die. Signs in captive deer include excessive salivation, loss of
appetite, progressive weight loss, hyperexcitability, tremors, excessive thirst and
urination, listlessness, teeth grinding, holding the head in a lowered position and
drooping ears. There are no distinctive gross pathological changes associated with
CWD; however aspiration pneumonia has been noted in some affected animals,
presumably due to dysphagia and swallowing difficulties.
104
100, I0l: Questions
100 A young rabbit is found dead near
100a
a warren by a gamekeeper. It is in poor
physical condition and on post-mortem
examination you observe that there are
several whitish, tortuous tracts beneath
the liver capsule (100a). The game-
keeper has noticed similar lesions pre-
viously in cases he has examined and
suspects tuberculosis.
i. What would be your provisional diagnosis?
i. What diseases would you include in your differential diagnosis?
ili. What tests would you carry out to establish a diagnosis?
10la
10lb
101 A male kori bustard from a flock
that ranged freely in a large park was
submitted for examination after it had
been noted to be salivating excessively
and inappetent. Physical examination
findings included caseous lesions in the
oropharynx, emission of foul odour
from the mouth, emaciation, oral
discharges and  inflammation  of  the
tongue (101a). A wet normal saline
swab was examined directly using phase-contrast microscopy (400x magnification)
(101b).
i. What is the diagnosis, and what are the differential diagnoses for oral lesions in
birds?
ii. What is the route of infection?
ii. How would you treat this individual and prevent this disease causing problems
in the flock?
iv. Why is this condition seasonal in some environments?
105
100,10l:Answers
100 i. Hepatic coccidiosis caused by
100b
Eimeria stiedae.
ii. The gross lesions may be confused
with those of pseudotuberculosis caused
by Yersinia pseudotuberculosis and of
fascioliasis due to Fasciola bepatica.
However in yersiniosis the lesions are
usually discrete caseous foci and in
fascioliasis there is more severe and
extensive fibrosis of the bile ducts.
Neither condition is as common as hepatic coccidiosis in wild rabbits. Farmers,
gamekeepers and hunters sometimes submit cases for laboratory examination
believing the lesions are those of bovine tuberculosis.
ii. As a rapid test, place a bile sample on a glass slide and examine using a
compound microscope. In most cases this will show large numbers of oocysts.
Histopathological examination of liver will reveal remarkable hyperplasia of bile
ducts, with the formation of large cystic spaces and massive numbers of coccidia
developing in the epithelium (100b)
101
(Trichomonas gallinae) consistent with a diagnosis of trichomonosis. Differential
diagnoses include diphtheritic pox, candidiasis, bacterial stomatitis and hypo-
vitaminosis A.
ii. Transmission is by ingestion of contaminated food and water. Most species of
pigeons are infected with T. gallinae and this bustard probably developed
trichomonosis following indirect contact with food or water contaminated by
infected birds.
ii. Bustards presented with early clinical signs respond well to metronidazole
(50 mg/kg p/o q24h for 5-7 days). Cases with advanced lesions may need to be
hospitalized. At-risk birds in “closed’ aviaries can be given preventive medication
every 3-6 months. Birds in 'open' aviaries, where wild birds have access, should be
given preventive medication every other month, alternating between dimetridazole
and ronidazole. Dimetridazole has also been added to bustard pellets at a dose rate
of 180 ppm as part of a preventive medicine programme.
iv. In the Middle East, a seasonal distribution of cases is observed. The highest
summer months when the ambient temperature reaches its peak. This is because
Trichomonas organisms are killed instantly on drying.
106
102, 103:Questions
102a
102b
102c
102 A coot was found by a member of the public and brought to a wildlife
veterinary clinic. On clinical examination the bird was severely dyspnoeic and there
was coelomic distension (102a)
i. What are the differential diagnoses in this case?
i. Radiographs (ventrodorsal and lateral whole body views) were taken (102b, c).
What do these show?
ii. What other tests would you perform as part of an initial diagnostic workup?
iv. What is the prognosis in this case?
103 You are presented with an orphaned but otherwise healthy badger cub of a few
days old. What are the major considerations in the rearing and release of this
animal?
107
102,103:Answers
102d
102e
102 i. Egg binding peritonitis, organo-
megaly (hepatomegaly, renal enlarge-
ment, splenomegaly, etc), neoplasia,
abscess, ascites, coelomitis.
i. A metallic foreign body consistent with an air gun pellet is lodged within the
caudal coelomic cavity. There is a general loss of coelomic visceral detail as well as
a femoral fracture.
ii. Full blood count and serum biochemistry.
iv. Poor. The bird was euthanased and post-mortem examination revealed ascites
(102d). The air gun pellet had tracked through the coelomic cavity, involving the
left ovary and kidney (102e) and causing a severe coelomitis resulting from
secondary bacterial infection from contaminants drawn in with the pellet.
103 Badger cubs require specialized facilities for successful rearing and release
Warmth should be provided via an incubator or alternative heat source. Canine
milk substitutes may be used, fed at rates and volumes similar to those used in
reasonably large cubs coming into captivity may still require bottle feeding. From
eight weeks old, weaning foods such as breakfast cereals, scrambled eggs and
minced meats can be introduced. Badger cubs require perineal stimulation to pass
urine and faeces, usually after feeding. Badgers are social animals and orphaned
cubs should be mixed with others of a similar age as soon as possible. Cubs reared
as individuals have a tendency to develop abnormal behaviours and are not good
candidates for release. As badgers are territorial, cubs cannot be released back into
the area where they were found and must instead be released as new social groups
in relatively badger-free areas with the landowner's full consent. Short-term artificial
setts are constructed for this purpose. Cubs are released at 6-8 months old in groups
consisting of more females than males and including at least two male animals.
108
104-106: Questions
104 What are the potential methods of euthanasia in stranded cetaceans?
105
105 Around 95% of the red blood cells in a fresh blood smear from a green turtle
contained these basophilic cytoplasmic inclusions (105).
i. What are these inclusions?
ii. Is this a normal finding?
106
SCOTT
106 i. What is this species (106)?
i. At what age can this orphaned, hand-reared animal be released into the wild?
109
104-I06:Answers
104 Drug-induced euthanasia is the method of choice.
104
Euthanasia using an intracardiac injection of pento-
barbitone in a neonatal pilot whale is shown (104).
Intravenous administration of pentobarbitone (60-200
mg/kg) is most frequently carried out using the central tail
vessels in smaller species. Prior administration of a
sedative (e.g. a benzodiazepine or alpha-2 agonist) is
advisable. If intravenous administration proves difficult,
pentobarbitone can be given via the intraperitoneal or
intracardiac routes, using appropriate length needles.
Etorphine hydrochloride (Large Animal Immobilon)
has also been used for cetacean euthanasia. Advantages
include intramuscular administration and the relatively
low volumes required (0.5 ml/1.5 metres in dolphins and
porpoises and 4.0 m/1.5 metres in whales). The major
disadvantage is the serious risk to the operator and public safety. It is important to
ensure appropriate disposal of the body to reduce risks to wildlife, domestic animals
and the public.
If drugs are unavailable, stranded cetaceans up to 4 m in length can be shot,
either through the blowhole at a 45° angle ventrocaudally to an imaginary line
running through the pectoral fins, or via a shot aimed slightly up from just above
the centre of the ear-eye line.
105 i. Cytoplasmic inclusion bodies
ii. Although commonly confused with haemoparasites, cytoplasmic inclusion bodies
in the red blood cells of green turtles are normal. They are also seen in other species
of chelonia, such as the loggerhead sea turtle and the desert tortoise. They are
degenerating organelles, appearing on electron microscopy as electron dense
structures without any internal structure.
106 i. A Eurasian otter.
i. Orphaned otter cubs that are hand reared should not be released until they are at
least 12 months old. Wild otter cubs stay with and are dependent on their mother
for a minimum of 12 months. During this time she shows them how to hunt, where
the best feeding areas are and gets them fit enough to survive on their own. An otter
cub reared in captivity must not be released if it is tame; it will not be able to fend
for itself and will look for handouts from people. The best way to rear an otter cub
is to have a *hands off approach and rear it with another otter of a similar age.
110
107, 108: Questions
107a
107b
107 A local resident finds a badger hiding in the back of his garage. He is alerted
to its presence by the attempts of his two dogs to attack it. He sees fresh blood on
its nose and suspects that it might have involved in a road traffic accident (RTA) and
then taken refuge. He is also concerned that his dogs have wounded the badger.
There is no known badger sett in the vicinity. A local animal rescue group captures
the animal and brings it in for examination. It is bright and aggressive and requires
sedation for examination (107a, b).
i. What can you see, and what can you deduce about this badger?
i. What advice can you give the local rescue group about the possibility of
rehabilitation and release for this badger?
ii. What other factors would you take into consideration?
108 A mature female impala that had
08
given birth the previous day was found
with an everted swollen mass hanging
through the vulval lips (108).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What are the possible causes of this
condition?
ii. What would be the treatiment of
choice if the organ was not necrotic?
iv. What are the potential complications
associated with this condition and its treatment?
v. How would you treat this individual?
111
107,I08:Answers
107 i. There appears to be some dried blood around the rhinarium, which may be
consistent with a RTA, but the main observation is that there is marked attrition of
the teeth, with severely worn or broken canines. The wound on the rump is of some
long standing and is not due to an attack by dogs. This is a typical wound resulting
from territorial fighting in badgers.
i. This badger is almost certainly old and has been rejected from its sett. This will
be the major reason it is hiding in human habitation. If rehabilitation and release
is attempted, it is most likely that this badger will be attacked and driven out again,
resulting in further injury and suffering. Therefore, the correct decision is
euthanasia.
ii. Badgers are extremely territorial and should only be released back into the
 d   i  r s      
tuberculosis in badgers and also a link between tuberculosis in badgers and cattle.
Therefore, badgers should not be translocated without careful health screening and
a thorough risk assessment. Tuberculosis is a zoonosis.
108 i. Post-parturient uterine prolapse. The exposed tissues are severely swollen
and necrotic and in the early stages of putrification.
ii. The causes of this condition in wildlife are poorly documented. It is more
prevalent in animals with a history of malnutrition and chronic disease.
iii. The uterus should be supported in an elevated position and kept clean. Calcium
borogluconate should be administered and, if the animal is not anaesthetized,
caudal epidural analgesia should be induced to eliminate straining. The exposed
tissue should be cleaned, inspected for trauma (and for the presence of a distended
bladder) and replaced according to techniques described for cattle. After reduction,
oxytocin should be given. Vulval sutures may be required for 2-3 days to prevent
recurrence
iv. Haemorrhage, metritis, toxaemia, septicaemia, paresis, uterine rupture with
bladder or intestinal eventration.
v. Amputation of the everted uterus. The procedure is performed under anaesthesia
and comprises the application of an encircling ligature immediately behind the
region of the cervix and subsequent excision of the prolapsed uterus about 8 cm
posterior to the ligature. Amputation can be carried out with a scalpel blade or
using cautery. Once the organ has been removed, the vagina and stump are replaced
through the vulval lips into the pelvic canal. The prognosis is grave, since the risk
of complications is high.
112
109-l1l:Questions
109 A common buzzard is admitted
601
after being found on a road verge unable
to fly and trailing one wing. Clinical
examination reveals
6anemaciated
juvenile with an open fracture of the
right humerus. The wound appears to be
fresh, with a sharp fragment of bone
protruding through the skin. No other
clinical abnormalities can be detected.
Palpation and radiography reveal a comminuted fracture with multiple fragments
in the mid-third of the humerus (109). What is the prognosis, and what would you
judge to be the best course of action?
110 A freshly dead, adult female wild hare was
found at an equestrian property in February. It
weighed 2.8 kg, was very lean and a post-
mortem examination showed absence of internal
body fat. The teeth and alimentary tract
appeared normal and there was 65 g of food in
the stomach. The spleen, adrenals and kidneys
were all swollen. There was no pregnancy in the
uterus, but the distal half of the left uterine horn
was notably swollen. An adhesion extended
from the left ovary to the site on the left uterine
horn where the swelling started. The swollen
horn (only) contained a mass of inspissated pus
from which a profuse growth of Staphylococcus
aureus was isolated (110). What are the two
most likely contributions to the hare's chronic
weight loss and eventual death?
111 What factors affect the post-release survival rates of oiled birds?
113
109-I1l:Answers
109 Repair of a fractured avian humerus, especially to preserve accurately the
anatomy and full function of the wing, is extremely difficult. This is due to the
sigmoid shape of the humerus. Because the humerus is pneumatized, it possesses a
thin cortex that easily shatters, forming sharp shards that frequently lacerate soft
tissue structures and penetrate the skin, resulting in an open and potentially infected
fracture site. For a rehabilitated avian casualty to survive in the wild it must have
a near perfect ability to fly. The chance of success in this case is highly unlikely.
Euthanasia would be the most humane course of action with, whenever possible, a
full explanation of the rationale behind this decision being given to the finder of the
casualty.
  szq   i   s i e si s
difficulty finding food, lose body condition, become weak and, being carrion
feeders, are attracted to road kills and hence fall victim to road traffic accidents.
 Such casualties, although directly associated with human activity, might well reflect
the inability of the individual to survive in the wild and so, in reality, be a casualty
of natural selection.
110 (1) Well established uterine sepsis, possibly the result of uterine trauma in the
last pregnancy. The adhesion around the injured site may have prevented adequate
drainage of infected material away from the distal half of the horn. (2) Secondary
amyloidosis of spleen, adrenal and kidney, as in this case. The liver is also a site that
often shows amyloid deposition.
Amyloidosis is a common observation in wild hares that have a chronically
infected site. Even without treatment, if the site is small and the infection not life
threatening, the hare survives the infection, but death results from the effects of
secondary amyloidosis and not from the primary infection
111 Survival rates vary depending on many different factors. These include the
species of bird affected, the oil type spilt, weather conditions on release, facilities
available for rehabilitation and length of time in captivity. Survival to release can
be as high as 60%; however, post-release survival rates in auks are reportedly low.
Other bird species, such as mute swans and jackass penguins, have higher post-
release survival rates. The reason for this is unknown. It may be that inadequate
food sources and immunosuppression are factors involved in lower post-release
survival rates.
114
112, 113:Questions
1l2a
112b
112 Wing injuries in bats are usually traumatic and may involve the wing
membrane, the skeleton, or both of these structures. A small membrane tear as a
result of a fishing hook injury, which did not impair the animal's flight, and a
compound metacarpal fracture are shown (112a, b). What should be considered
when assessing such injuries?
.3
113 i. Which of the following are risk factors for the development of capture
low ambient temperatures; noisy surroundings during capture and handling; high
humidity; pre-existing vitamin E deficiency; all of the above.
i. Which of the following animals are considered to be at particularly high risk of
development of capture myopathy: ungulates; primates; elephants; long-legged
birds; big cats; birds of prey.
ation is shown; 113) develop?
iv. What treatment should be given, and is it effective?
v. How can capture myopathy be prevented?
11.5
112, 113:Answers
112c
12d
112 A thorough assessment of the full
extent of any injury should be made. Use
of magnifying lenses and good lighting
(112c) is mandatory and many of these patients will benefit from a radiographic
evaluation.
 More extensive damage to wing membranes may significantly impair a bat's
flying ability and this should be carefully evaluated prior to release. The majority
of fractures of the wing are compound (humerus, 112d) and these bats should be
euthanased in view of the poor prognosis for such patients.
113 i. All of the above.
ii. Ungulates, long-legged birds.
ii. At any time from minutes after capture to days or weeks after the event.
iv. Fluid therapy with balanced electrolyte solution to counteract dehydration,
hyperkalaemia, metabolic acidosis and myoglobinuria; sodium bicarbonate to
resolve metabolic acidosis and to increase urinary pH; hyperbaric oxygen, if
available (as used in human medicine); multivitamins (effectiveness unclear); benzo-
diazepines to relax muscles and reduce stress; analgesia. Treatment is often
ineffective, particularly in individuals with severe clinical signs.
v. Avoid catching in very high or low ambient temperatures or in high humidity.
 Minimize chasing. Ensure effective restraint by experienced personnel and minimize
restraint times. Avoid prolonged restraint in unnatural positions (do not keep long-
legged birds with their legs folded up). Minimize external stressor stimuli such as
noise and sight of humans (use blindfolds); use capture drugs, which minimize
induction and recovery times and promote physiological stability. Consider giving
vitamin E supplementation in the period prior to capture and transport of known
susceptible species.
116
114, I15:Questions
114 Wildlife casualties are often found by members of the general public, who
subsequently seek telephone advice from local veterinary practices regarding
appropriate capture and handling of these animals. What specific advice on
handling would you give to someone finding: (1) a raptor; (2) a hedgehog: (3) a
fox?
115a
115b
115 A free-ranging white-bellied bustard from a multispecies wildlife park in Dubai
was caught up for examination after the keepers observed an ocular discharge
(115a). Clinical examination revealed a severely inflamed conjunctiva with a
villiform-like appearance of the surface of the conjunctival sac. A microscopic view
of one of many parasites found on examination of a swab taken from the
conjunctival sac is shown (115b).
i. Identify this parasite.
ii. What is the recommended treatment for this condition?
ili. What is the life cycle of this parasite?
iv. How do birds become infected with this parasite?
117
I14,115:Answers
114 (1) Danger to handlers is possible from talons and beak. The handler should
wear stout leather gloves. The whole bird should be covered with a thick blanket,
cloth or coat, allowing the talons to grip the material and restrain the legs. Once
captured, the bird should be picked up so the wings cannot be forced open. The bird
may be carried this way for a short journey or placed in a darkened secure box
with ventilation holes.
(2) Danger to handlers arises from scratches from the quills. This includes the
possibility of ringworm infection. Hedgehogs should be picked up wearing thick
gloves, a thick blanket or a coat through which quills cannot penetrate. A small,
darkened, secure box with ventilation holes and bedding should be used for
transportation.
(3) Foxes are dangerous animals and can cause severe bite injuries to handlers, so the
general advice would be not to attempt handling. They should be handled only by
experienced staff with appropriate equipment. Restraint of the head with a cat
catcher or careful manual restraint of the scruff will allow transfer into a secure
container (e.g. a wire crush cage darkened by covering with a blanket). In an
 emergency, a stout dustbin with a secure lid may be an alternative for transportation.
115 i. The eye fluke Philophthalmus distomatosa.
ii. Little has been published on the treatment of this condition. P. gralli have been
physically removed from anaesthetized ostriches, with concurrent topical
application of carbamate. Creoline has been used, applied directly into the eye of
infested chicks following prior application of topical anaesthesia. Repeated doses
of parenteral and topical doramectin and praziquantel have been attempted in
bustards, but appear ineffective. The parasites can be removed manually under
general anaesthesia using microforceps. Topical antibiotic eye drops should be
administered because secondary bacterial infections are common.
ii. The life cycle of Philophthalmus spp. consists of birds as the final host and water
snails as intermediate hosts. Larval stages have been found in the viviparous aquatic
snail, Melanoides tuberculata, in the Middle East. Infected snails produce cercariae
that form floating metacercarial cysts at the water surface.
iv. Following ingestion of metacercarial cysts when drinking.
118
116, I17: Questions
1l6a
116 In early winter, an immature sparrowhawk is submited for post-mortem
examination. The muscular condition is very poor and the blood appears anaemic.
The liver is shrunken and the gall bladder is distended with bile. The proventriculus
is empty and there is only blackish mucoid material in the gizzard. The intestines
are full of large nematodes (116a).
i. What is the likely primary problem?
ii. What lesions may have been missed on examination?
i. What is the identity and significance of the nematodes?
117 An adult mute swan is admitted to
117
the practice in dry weather during the
unable to stand without support or fly
(117). It is in reasonable body condition,
has dirty ventral plumage and is
attempting to ‘walk’ using its wings by
flapping them into the ground, to the
extent that it has superficially trau-
matized both carpi. At rest it is posi-
tioned with its head and neck laying on its body.
i. What are the most likely differential diagnoses for this case?
ii. What history taking, clinical examination and diagnostic procedures would you
carry out?
ili. What action might it be useful to carry out in the environment from which the
bird came?
119
1l6,117:Answers
116 i. Starvation. Sparrowhawks are predators of birds and
116b
 do not feed on carrion, invertebrates or small mammals.
Inexperienced sparrowhawks often find it difficult to kill
sufficient prey.
ii. It is not uncommon in these cases to find that a wing
joint, particularly a carpus, has been damaged and is
swollen and/or inflamed. This is probably caused by a
collision and although it may not be obvious on post-
mortem examination, it is likely to have impaired the bird's
hunting ability.
ii. Porrocaecum depressum, an ascarid-type worm com-
monly seen in the intestine of debilitated sparrowhawks.
The head of a worm, with ascarid-type mouth parts, is
shown (116b). Although they almost certainly develop as a consequence of
malnutrition, heavy infections can occlude the gut and are therefore significant.
117 i. Botulism (Clostridium botulinum type C toxicity), lead poisoning or (less
likely) any generalized systemic illness or trauma to the spine, pelvis or hindlimbs.
Botulism is most likely, as this has a relatively rapid onset, although recent ingestion
of a large amount of particulate lead is possible.
ii. It is important to know the site where the swan was found, what it was doing
when found, how long it was there, and whether its condition has deteriorated since
then. A full clinical and neurological examination should be carried out. Both lead
poisoning and botulism produce generalized weakness and incoordination and
"limber neck', where the head and neck lie back across the body. Both conditions
anaerobic silt. Botulism is often associated with diarrhoea, and lead poisoning with
bright green faeces. Radiographic examination of the spine, pelvis, hindlimbs and
ventriculus and blood lead analysis should be performed.
ii. Animals dying from botulism constitute a source of ingested toxin for other
birds, particularly scavenging species such as gulls. Carcases should be removed,
birds deterred from feeding from the area and, if possible, water flow and depth
increased to remove and reduce access to the toxin.
120
118, 119: Questions
118
118 You are called to investigate a die-off of a group of mallards. You arrive at the
wetland area and notice that several carcases have the clinical sign shown (118). In
addition, several carcases have bloody fluid draining from the nares.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What gross pathological signs would you expect to see, and how would you
confirm your diagnosis?
ii. What is the significance of this disease to free-ranging waterfowl populations?
119 Active holes at a badger sett are shown (119). Badgers are social mammals and
in the UK usually live in groups of 3-10 individuals, often occupying a well-defined
territory. Badgers are implicated in the transmission of bovine tuberculosis to cattle.
How might the social behaviour of badgers influence attempts to control the disease
by means of vaccination or culling?
121
118,119:Answers
118 i. Duck viral enteritis (DVE) (also known as duck plague), which is caused by
a herpesvirus. Clinical signs include loss of fear of humans, photophobia, reluctance
to fly, convulsions and death. Birds may also have a blood-stained vent and a bloody
discharge from the nares or mouth. Male birds will often have a prolapsed phallus
(as illustrated).
ii. Petechial and ecchymotic haemorrhages on the heart, pinpoint necrotic foci in
the liver, dark bands of haemorrhage and necrosis in the intestines of ducks (in
 geese these necrotic areas are circular), and necrotic plaques and pseudomembranes
 no s  s a po on q s  'so  
waterfowl. DVE infection may also be detected by PCR assay.
ili. There have been at least two extensive outbreaks of DVE in North America
involving several thousands of birds. Wild waterfowl may or may not represent a
significant natural reservoir for the virus. However, DVE has the potential to be
 detrimental to wild waterfowl populations and its periodic occurrence in captive or
feral waterfowl should be contained or eliminated to avoid spillover into wild
populations. Captive populations can be vaccinated against the virus. Minimizing
other mechanisms by which DVE virus might be transferred into wild populations
of waterfowlis also appropriate.
119 Some or all of the following important relationships should be considered. In
much of the UK the organisation of badger populations into discrete social groups,
occupying conspicuous setts, provides convenient units for targeting management
efforts. Consequently, accurate information on the spatial distribution of badger
setts is likely to be an important prerequisite for any such intervention. Vaccine
delivery in the form of an oral bait would be facilitated by group aggregation, but
deployment methods to ensure a sufficiently large proportion of the population
took the bait would need to be developed. A further consideration would be
frequency of bait deployment, which would partially depend on the rate of
recruitment of susceptible animals to the population.
 Intensive long-term studies suggest that a stable social structure may limit the
spread of bovine tuberculosis in badger populations by reducing the extent of
movement between social groups. This social stability, however, has been shown to
break down in response to culling, resulting in increased levels of movement
amongst badgers and potentially increasing the opportunities for contact with
cattle. Culling may, therefore, may be associated with both positive and negative
impacts on the incidence of tuberculosis in local cattle. It remains to be seen whether
such effects are short lived or persistent.
122
120, I21:Questions
120 A short-beaked echidna (120) has
120
been hit by a car. The driver of the
vehicle reported that the animal walked
away from the incident apparently
unharmed except for some bleeding
from the head. The animal has since dug
itself into the surface soil at the side of
the road.
i. Describe how you would handle and
restrain this animal to evaluate it further.
ii. Which bones, if any, are most likely to have been damaged by the trauma?
121
121 This endoscopic image (121) shows a large mass of roundworms in the lower
respiratory tract of a wild saker falcon that had been confiscated from trappers and
submitted for examination before release at a rehabilitation centre.
i. Identify the parasite.
ii. Is this infection significant in wild falcons, and should the bird be treated before
release?
ii. If so, what is the treatment protocol?
iv. Are other birds at the rehabilitation centre at risk from infection? If so, how
might the centre control this parasite?
123
120,I21:Answers
120 i. It is virtually impossible to lift an echidna that has dug itself into the surface
soil by sheer force. It is usually necessary to dig down beside the animal and push
it up from below. Once freed from the soil, echidnas will roll themselves into a tight
ball, but they can be handled with thick leather gloves. If the animal relaxes and a
hindlimb is seen protruding, this limb can be grabbed and the animal held up in the
air to permit at least a superficial examination of the body. To conduct a thorough
examination, anaesthesia is usually necessary. The anaesthetic agent of choice is
isoflurane. Induction in a chamber and maintenance via a mask is appropriate in
most cases.
ii. The thick spines and significant subcutaneous fat layer of echidnas often protects
the bulk of their body from trauma. However, the delicate maxilla and mandible
within the beak are relatively unprotected and often damaged when these animals
suffer vehicle-induced trauma. Fractures of these bones are often comminuted. The
mouth and nasal cavity should, therefore, be carefully evaluated in any echidna
trauma case.
121 i. Serratospiculum spp. Nine species are described in falcons. S. seurati, the
most common species, is a large filarial worm found within the air sac mem-
branes, visceral membranous serosa and connective tissue of the coelomic cavity
of raptors.
ii. Field studies have shown that 10-15% of the wild saker falcon population in
central Asia are infected with this parasite. It is also commonly found in wild
peregrine and gyr falcons in central Asia and the former Soviet Union. Wild
prairie falcons are commonly affected in the USA. Wild falcons are probably well
adapted to this parasite, but opinions as to its pathogenicity in captive falcons
vary. Some authors believe that Serratospiculum spp. infections can contribute to
morbidity in wild-caught falcons that are used in falconry as part of stress-induced
lower respiratory disease syndromes (e.g. aspergillosis or bacterial airsacculitis).
ili. Current treatment protocols include ivermectin or doramectin (0.2 mg/kg i/m
weekly for 3 weeks). Many clinicians consider that heavy infestations of dead
parasites should be removed endoscopically from the coelomic cavity.
iv. The life cycle of the parasite is indirect, with an arthropod as an intermediate
host. Eradication of invertebrates (e.g. beetles) within the environment of raptor
facilities is an important control measure.
124
122, I23:Questions
122a
122b
122 i. What disease should be suspected in wild weanling rabbits presenting with
diarrhoea (122a) and hepatomegaly (122b)?
i. What post-mortem findings and ancillary tests confirm this suspicion?
ili. What treatment options may be considered?
123
123 An adult male barn owl has been found in mid-summer caught in a 'pole' trap
(a spring-trap placed on the top of an upright pole used illegally to control raptors).
The bird is in good body condition and has fresh, open fractures to both
tarsometatarsi (123). There appear to be no pedal reflexes.
i. What courses of action could be considered?
i. The barn owl population in many places is in serious decline. This adult bird is
likely to be feeding young. Does this affect any decisions?
ili. The use of such traps is illegal in some countries. What action should be taken
in such circumstances?
12.5
122,I23:Answers
122 i. Hepatic coccidiosis, caused by
122c
the rabbit-specific protozoan parasite
Eimeria stiedae.Clinical symptoms may
vary as a function of the severity of
infection and the immune status of the
individual.S
Signs include weight loss,
ascites, jaundice, diarrhoea and hepato-
megaly.
11.
Post-mortem signs reflect  this
parasite's predilection for the bile ducts.
The gallbladder and bile ducts are likely to be thickened and distended (122c). The
swollen gallbladder may be sampled and wet bile smears made to reveal large
numbers of coccidial oocysts. Raised serum bilirubin levels in young rabbits are
virtually pathognomic for hepatic coccidiosis. Elevated AST, ALKP, GGT and ALT
readings may also be seen.
ii. A number of anticoccidial drugs, including sulphaquinoxaline, toltrazuril and
robenidine, have been used to treat E. stiedae. Treatment failure is to be expected
where oral medication is supplied to inappetent or anorectic rabbits. Such rabbits
may be best euthanased. Response to treatment can be good when sulpha drugs
 are administered to rabbits that are active and eating well. Newly weaned animals
that recover from hepatic coccidiosis possess lifelong immunity from the disease.
Diclazuril (4 mg/kg single s/c injection) has been shown to be effective in controlling
clinical coccidiosis in rabbits
123 i. In the absence of complications (infection/soft tissue damage), such fractures
respond well to immobilization using external fixation. However, this case appears
to involve soft tissue damage and, as both legs are fractured, the bird would need
support in the form of a sling, which might prove to be very stressful or, indeed,
impracticable. Euthanasia would be the more humane approach.
i. The welfare of the bird must be the first consideration. Although the male is the
primary provider of food for the brood, the female is still likely to be capable of
providing for some of the young, at least. If the nest site is known, then supple-
mentary food can be given. Even if treatment was successful, the young would have
fledged by the time the injured bird could be released and, depending on the local
barn owl population, it is likely that another male would rapidly fill his place.
ili. Cases of illegal use of traps should be reported to the appropriate authorities.
126
124-126:Questions
124
124 i. What abnormalities are present in this white-tailed deer (124).
ii. Provide a list of differential diagnoses.
25
125 This European hedgehog was found by a member of the public out during the
day time with extensive lesions (125).
i. Describe your approach to this patient.
ii. What is the prognosis in this case?
 126 A long-term captive grey squirrel is presented with weight loss, polydipsia and
lethargy. The squirrel is in good condition, weighs 750 g and is eating well.
 Urinalysis shows a high urine glucose concentration, ketonuria and a SG of 1.010.
i. What condition would you consider likely, and what may have predisposed the
animal to this?
i. How might this condition be treated?
127
124-I26:Answers
     r e  s n    t 
emaciated as assessed by prominence of the ribs and pelvic bones. White-tailed deer
are generally crepuscular/nocturnal, suggesting behavioural change, as does the
close proximity to human structures.
i. Trauma (animals survive with fractures that heal by secondary intention after
encounters with hunters); chronic wasting disease; systemic spread of localized
abscesses (gunshot, arrow or fight wounds; ‘cranial abscess syndrome');
Mycobacterium bovis infection; rabies; Mycobacterium paratuberculosis subsp.
avium; Baylisascaris procyonis infection; malnutrition (more likely to manifest
under harsh winter conditions); chronic bronchopneumonia; dental disease; tooth
125 i. As with all wildlife, an initial brief physical examination is performed to
permit triage of the patient. In general, hedgehogs should not be active during the
day and if the lesions observed have just occurred, it is likely disease other than the
recent trauma is present. Once the extent of the pathology has been determined,
the prognosis will be known and a decision can be made on whether to treat or
euthanase the animal.
i. Hedgehogs commonly survive quite severe infections, and limb fractures may be
 treated using fixation or amputation. Supportive care should be administered. This
animal had extensive lesions, including avulsion of the right eye (likely due to head
trauma), and it was unresponsive to stimuli. It was euthanased on welfare grounds
without further investigation or treatment.
126 i. The urine test results are highly suggestive of diabetes mellitus. Despite the
recent weight loss, this animal is overweight (normal average 500-600 g). Grey
squirrels in captivity often gain weight through inappropriate feeding and sedentary
life styles. In other mammalian species this is known to predispose to diabetes
mellitus (in particular type II diabetes).
ii. Diabetes may be treated by administration of regular insulin injections and
monitoring of blood glucose. This was considered both impractical and stressful
in this case. An alternative treatment is diet modification and oral hypoglycaemic
drugs (sulphonylurea drugs, alpha-glucosidase inhibitors or biguanides). This
squirrel was treated with the sulphonylurea drug glipizide (0.5-1 mg/kg p/o q12h),
together with a controlled low-sugar diet. Urine glucose and ketone levels were
monitored on a weekly basis and doses of glipizide adjusted until the urine was free
of ketones and glucose levels had reduced.
There are no known reports of diabetes in squirrels, but the author has successfully
treated three captive squirrels in this way. The presence of concurrent endocrino-
pathies, such as hyperadrenocorticism or thyroid disorders, should also be considered.
128
127, 128: Questions
127
127 A moorhen is presented to your practice as shown (127).
i. What would your course of action be?
ii. What short-term environmental requirements would you have to provide for this
animal?
ii. What wider action might you take after seeing this case?
128
128 You are called to see a four-month-old grey seal at a newly set up marine
wildlife rehabilitation facility (128). It has a number of inflamed lesions on the
ventral thorax and abdomen, the palmar surfaces of the foreflippers and around the
mouth. It is one of eight similarly aged grey seals at the facility, either in individual
or shared cubicles. The plan is to transport them to a larger facility once they
require greater pool space.
i. What is this condition, and why has it affected the seal in this manner?
i. What is the prognosis for this animal?
129
127,128:Answers
127 i. After initial stabilizing treatment, the bird should be anaesthetized, all visible
line removed and the bird examined for further line. Monofilament nylon can be
drawn tightly around the extremities and cut into the skin without being
immediately visible. Any circular wounds should be probed with a hypodermic
needle or number 11 scalpel blade to locate and cut line in one place only, then the
free ends grasped with fine forceps and unravelled. Fishing line may be associated
with fishing hooks embedded in the skin or with line, hooks and weights in the
gastrointestinal tract, although the latter is not common in this species. Survey
radiography is recommended. It is advisable to monitor the animal for 48-72 hours
following line removal to ensure vascular viability of the distal limb.
i. Moorhens are easily stressed and should be kept out of sight and hearing of
predatory species and humans. A quiet room, a partial cage covering and a “hide'
(e.g. cardboard box) are advised. Moorhens are predominantly piscivorous, but
also eat snails,worms, seeds and berries. Finely chopped fish, worms, snails and
insectivorous bird food may be provided, but they may not eat in captivity. Gavage
with a diluted canine convalescent diet may be required, although this is stressful
in itself.
ili. Encourage fishermen to retrieve fishing waste.
128 i. Seal pox, which predominantly affects grey seals rather than common or
harbour seals, and mainly affects naive juveniles. It is extremely infectious between
seals and via fomites, mainly affecting the flippers, ventrum and mouth, all areas
that come into contact with the floor and feeding utensils and are subject to small
breaks in the skin. The widespread and moderately severe nature of the clinical
appearance may be a result of immune suppression due to other diseases, malnutri-
tion or secondary bacterial infection. The ventral thoracic spread is less typical and
may, alternatively, reflect poor environmental hygiene.
i. Good. Cases such as this may have some difficulty feeding due to the lesions
around the mouth, and they may be in some discomfort due to the inflamed and
ulcerating nature of the lesions. Uncomplicated cases with limited lesions, no
secondary infection and minimal ulceration and bleeding hardly affect the animal
and have an excellent prognosis. Very widespread lesions may reflect a poor
underlying health status. Generally, affected individuals can be expected to improve
over 4-8 weeks, with lesions healing and shrinking. Some lesions, especially on the
lips and between the digits, may become infected with opportunistic environmental
bacteria and generate a purulent discharge.
130
129-13l:Questions
129 What would be your advice to the manager of the rehabilitation facility where
the grey seal in 128 was kept?
130
 An anaesthetized free-ranging
130
mountain gorilla is shown (130). What
is the most common reason for veter-
inary intervention in free-ranging moun-
tain gorillas?
131 A dorsal view of the rump of an
131
adult male badger, taken under general
anaesthesia in January as part of a
badger capture-mark-recapture study in
the UK, is shown (131).
i. Describe the lesion seen.
ii. What is the likely aetiology?
ili. Discuss its behavioural and epi-
demiological significance.
131
129-131:Answers
129The seal should be treated with NSAIDs to reduce inflammation and
discomfort and with long-acting broad-spectrum antibiotics (ideally in feed, but by
parenteral injection if the animal is reluctant to eat). Cefovecin has been used in a
small number of seals where antibiosis is essential, but repeated injection or oral
medication has not been practical. The seal should be isolated and barrier nursed
to avoid spread to other seals. It may be acceptable to allow other seals to be
systemically ill or debilitated, or otherwise immune suppressed. Environmental
hygiene should be improved to avoid high environmental bacterial loads. A salt
water environment may be beneficial in this respect. Infected lesions may be bathed
in antiseptic solutions. Lesions that proliferate and bleed readily at the slightest
 s xod pa  ro n p    
occasionally been reported to affect humans, so the use of latex gloves and
meticulous hygiene is advised. Immunosuppressed humans and those with breaks
in the skin on their hands and forearms should not handle affected animals.
130 Mountain gorillas will occasionally become ensnared in rope or wire snares
that are set by poachers to capture forest ungulates. These snares will tighten
around a wrist or ankle, act like a tourniquet and result in the loss of a hand or a
foot, which could subsequently jeopardize the survival of this individual. Prompt
particular gorilla was immobilized to remove a snare from the left wrist. She had
already lost her left foot as a result of a previous snare injury.
131 i. There is an extensive area of hair loss over the rump, associated with a large
purulent wound, matted with hair and tissue exudate.
ii. A bite wound from another badger.
ili. Bite wounds are not uncommon in badgers and tend to be more frequent and
more severe in males than in females. Aggressive encounters between individuals
may occur both within and between social groups, and in males they are probably
associated with territorial disputes and reproductive competition. This study
population is known to be infected with Mycobacterium bovis, the causal agent for
bovine tuberculosis. Isolation of M. bovis bacilli from bite wounds is well
documented, and has also been associated with rapid and progressive infection,
leading to the hypothesis that bite wounds represent a potential route of disease
transmission between badgers.
132
132, 133:Questions
132
132 A large mature male hare (2.7 kg) was found dead. It had no signs of external
trauma, discharges or diarrhoea and had no palpable abdominal impaction. At
post-mortem examination there were plentiful internal fat deposits and 65 g of food
in the stomach. The liver had a very prominent lobular pattern, the distended
bladder contained dicoloured urine and the tracheal mucosa was intensely
congested. Histological examination of the liver revealed a severe diffuse
hepatopathy with necrosis of hepatocytes, some containing a basophilic stippling
(132).
i. What is the diagnosis?
i. Is this condition likely to affect rabbits?
ili. How frequently does it cause hare mortality?
133
133 i. What are the three species of swan seen in the UK?
ii. Which species is a resident?
ili. What are common options for anaesthetic induction agents in large swans?
iv. What are the main indications for endoscopy (133) in swans?
v. What is the preferred site of entry for coelomic cavity examination?
133
132,133:Answers
132 i. European brown hare syndrome (EBHS), which is caused by a calicivirus. It
was confirmed by electronmicroscopy in this case. The nature of the pathology and
the fact that hares are usually in good bodily condition, but with a full stomach,
when found dead, indicate that it is of sudden onset.
ii. EBHS does not cause disease in rabbits. (Rabbits can suffer from rabbit
haemorrhagic disease, which is a lethal calicivirus infection.)
iii. In both hare and rabbit populations these caliciviruses can cause high mortality
in a susceptible population. EBHS outbreaks have been reported every few years,
but sometimes only a single case is found at a location.
133 i. Mute swan, Bewick's swan, Whooper swan.
ii.Mute swan.
ii. Mask induction is not generally practical in swans due to their size, so
intravenous induction agents are generally used (e.g. 9 mg/kg ketamine plus 10
μg/kg medetomidine or 0.2 mg/kg xylazine i/v).
of diseases such as aspergillosis. Overt respiratory signs are usually not evident.
Endoscopy to visualize the air sacs and internal organs can be part of a general
diagnostic workup for a bird that is not responsive to medical therapy. Some hooks
in the oesophagus and proventriculus can be removed using a flexible endoscope
with an instrument channel, avoiding the requirement for a proventriculotomy.
v. The swan is placed in right lateral recumbancy and the left leg pulled back to
expose the caudal ribcage. The incision site is identified between the last two ribs,
ventral to the spine and cranial to the femur. A small skin incision is made and the
muscles between the ribs dissected bluntly using artery forceps. Entry into the air
sacs is confirmed by an audible 'pop'. A rigid endoscope can then be placed into the
coelomic cavity via this incision. There is no need to suture the wound
postoperatively.
134
134, 135:Questions
134 A black-headed gull is presented
134a
with a damaged wing. Examination
reveals a bird in good body condition.
Palpation and radiography indicate a
closed fracture of the distal third of the
radius (134a). No other obvious clinical
abnormalities are found. What is the
prognosis, and what would you judge to
be the best course of action?
135 The Houbara bustard is listed in
135
Appendix 1 of the Convention on
International Trade  in  Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
(CITES). These wild-caught birds are
often smuggled from Pakistan into
Middle Eastern countries, where they
are used by falconers to train their
falcons (135).
i. If these birds are discovered by
customs officials at a port of entry, what
is the appropriate action for the authorities to take?
ii. What disease considerations are there for birds that have been trafficked through
markets, and why should falconers not consider these to be suitable birds to train
their falcons?
ili. What problems should be considered if these birds are sent to a rehabilitation
programme for release back into the wild or for incorporation into a captive
breeding project?
iv. What issues might be of concern even if the birds are medically screened and
determined to be healthy for potential release back into the wild?
13.5
134,135:Answers
134 Closed fractures of the ulna or
134b
radius usually have a good prognosis.
The intact bone splints the fractured
bone and, as long as the fragments are
in at least partial apposition, stabil-
ization of the fracture can occur within
ten days and healing be complete within
34 weeks. Initially, the damaged wing
will droop and, to prevent damage to
the flight feathers, the wing can be
supported with adhesive tape (ideally
masking or autoclavable tape, as the adhesive used is unlikely to damage feathers,
134b). The tape is applied around the primaries and secondaries of the closed wing.
Such support should not be left in place for periods of >5-7 days without being
removed and the wing manipulated to prevent contraction of the tendons, which
will lead to permanent restriction of joint mobility. Gulls with disabilities do not
disability is short term, requiring minimal interference. The casualty is quickly
restored to normality and, where practicable, can be returned to the locality where
it was found. In such a case there are few concerns regarding welfare.
135 i. If the country is a signatory to CITES, the government has to confiscate the
birds.
i. Smuggled birds have potentially been exposed to infectious agents, such as avian
influenza, Newcastle disease and avian pox, during their shipment. There is a
potential risk to falcons if trafficked birds are used as “bagged' quarry to train them.
ii. These birds represent a potential disease risk to captive breeding programmes
and free-living Houbara bustard populations if health monitoring and medical
treatment are not instigated There is also a potential economic threat should these
birds come into contact with local poultry flocks.
iv. There are IUCN Guidelines for the Placement of Confiscated Animals.
Confiscated birds have often been moved a great distance from the site of capture;
therefore, because the site of original capture of smuggled birds is unknown, it is
difficult to establish an appropriate site for release that takes into account the
biological and ecological needs of the individuals, the animal's genetic make-up and
other aspects that are important to minimize risks (e.g. territorial competition) to
free-living populations.
136
136, 137:Questions
136a
136 An adult male hedgehog, found by the side of a road, appears to be grossly
inflated (136a). Although very large and round, it feels lighter than expected and
the skin is spongy when pressed. It has some blood around the nose and one eye,
 and laboured breathing.
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How would you confirm the diagnosis?
ii. Why is this condition so dramatic in the hedgehog?
iv. What is the treatment and prognosis for such hedgehogs?
137
hand reared was presented for examination because it had drooping wings and was
unable to stand. The bird was anaesthetized and radiographed (137).
i. What observations can you make from this radiograph?
i. What is the condition affecting this bird?
ili. What are the causes of this condition?
iv. What free-living species has this condition been reported in?
137
136,137:Answers
i.Generalized subcutaneous
136b
136
emphysema (*balloon syndrome').
ii. Needle aspiration will confirm the
presence
of
air
under t
the
：skin.
Radiography can be used to support the
diagnosis (136b).
ii. As a defence mechanism, hedgehogs
have developed the ability to curl up
tightly by contracting the strong purse
string-like orbicularis muscle. In order
to achieve curling, the dorsal skin is
quite loose fitting, with a large potential
subcutaneous space. Injury to the respiratory system can result in a large volume of
air leaking under the skin and inflating the hedgehog. Such injuries are usually
sustained in road traffic collisions and include rib fracture, airway penetration or
tearing of the cranial mediastinum at the thoracic inlet. Rarely, the subcutaneous
emphysema is caused by a gas-producing bacterial infection of a deep wound.
iv. Broad-spectrum antibacterial therapy and alleviation of the respiratory distress
with oxygen therapy if required. Repeated deflation with stab incisions or needle
aspiration may also be beneficial. The prognosis depends on the severity of the
initial trauma and extent of other injuries (including pulmonary emphysema and
haemorrhage). Many affected individuals do make a full recovery.
137 i. A generalized lack of density in the cortex of all the long bones. Folding
fractures can be seen in the tibiotarsal, humerus, femur, radius and ulna bones.
ii. Severe metabolic bone disease.
ii. Metabolic bone disease encompasses a number of conditions that develop as a
result of prolonged deficiencies of calcium or vitamin D, or of an improper dietary
Ca:P ratio (normal ratio 1:1 to 2:1). Vitamin D deficiency can occur secondary to
insufficient exposure to UVB light. Calcium deficiency leads to nutritional
secondary hyperparathyroidism in raptor chicks. Adequate levels of both calcium
and phosphorus are present in the natural diet of wild raptors because the bones
and tissues of prey animals contain the correct Ca:P ratio. Metabolic bone disease
bird was being fed a meat-only diet.
iv. Wild collared doves, grey herons and young crows. In Africa, vulture chicks have
been reported with metabolic bone disease, which has been attributed to a lack of
calcium intake.
138
138-140:Questions
138
138 Injured European badgers found on the roadside may demonstrate blue-green
colouration of their faeces (138). What should be suspected in such cases, and how
can this be investigated further?
139 What documentation is available to guide those undertaking translocation of
wildlife species?
140
140 An invertebrate removed from the feather of a mute swan is shown (140).
i. What is this?
ii. What is its significance?
139
138-140:Answers
138 It must not be assumed that a badger found by the roadside has been hit by a
  r s  s   q    
debilitated. Displaced individuals with territorial fight wounds are often hit by cars.
There are a number of blue-coloured materials that badgers may ingest. Many
products are coloured to aid identification (e.g. various food dyes are added to
rodenticides and pesticides by manufacturers); however there is no universal
colouring code. Slug bait, containing methiocarb or metaldehyde, is also often
coloured blue. Badgers are often subject to bait marking studies where coloured
plastic can be mixed with peanuts and treacle. Badgers like peanuts and treacle and
this combination appears to be commonly used as a vehicle for poisons for badgers.
The presence of blue peanuts is therefore strongly suggestive of a deliberate attempt
to poison.
History, clinical examination and other observations will help to ascertain a
confirmation of the poison involved. In cases of suspected poisoning, stabilizing the
patient and delivering symptomatic reatment is paramount. Further absorption of
the toxicants must be prevented and efforts made to promote their speedy
elimination.
139 Translocation planning is essentially an exercise in risk assessment. Three
documents are available that guide those undertaking translocations:
● IUCN (1998) Guidelines for Re-Introductions. Prepared by the IUCN/SSC Re-
Introduction Specialist Group, Gland, Switzerland and Cambridge, UK. 10 pp.
●
IUCN Position Statement. Translocation of Living Organisms (1987).
· Woodford, MH (2000) (Ed) Quarantine and Health Screening Protocols for
Wildlife Prior to Translocation and Release into the Wild. Published jointly by
the IUCN Species Survival Commission's Veterinary Specialist Group, Gland,
Switzerland, the Office International des Epizooties (OIE), Paris, France, Care for
the Wild, UK, and the European Association of Zoo and Wildlife Veterinarians,
Switzerland.
140 i.A feather louse, Trinoton anserinum.
ii. Small numbers are not usually associated with clinical signs, but large numbers
with a high burden, feather quality may be affected. This louse also serves as an
intermediate host in the life cycle of the filarial heartworm (Sarconema eurycerca),
causing disease in swans and geese.
140
141, 142: Questions
14la
141 A UK fisherman caught this bat accidentally while fly fishing (141a). It bit
him as he was unhooking it, but then died. There were no obvious external lesions
and the bat was in good condition.
i. How should you proceed?
i. Can you identify the species of bat, and what is the significance of this?
142
142 A wild adult male Houbara bustard was caught in a noose snare in order to
fit satellite telemetry as part of a migration study for a conservation project. The
bird was unable to stand or fly off when it was released and was retained in
captivity for further veterinary investigation (142).
i. What condition is this wild bird suffering from based on the clinical signs
observed and the history?
ii. What diagnostic samples might be useful to support the provisional diagnosis
made?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses of this paresia in captive adult bustards?
141
141,142:Answers
141b
141 i. The fisherman should be advised to seek
medical attention immediately. If he has not
already done so, the bite wound should be
thoroughly washed with soap and water. In the
UK, the relevant government agency should be
 advised of the incident and arrangements made
 to submit the bat for rabies testing.
i. The bat is a Daubenton's and all recorded
cases of bat rabies (European bat lyssavirus) in
the UK so far have been in this species. Daubenton's bats often feed by flying low
 Over water and are occasionally caught by fly fishermen. They have unusually large
feet with long hairy toes (141b), which are used to take food items from the surface
ofwater.
142 i. Capture myopathy or capture paresia.
i. In addition to haematology, heparinized blood samples should be collected for
biochemical analysis. Diagnosis is based on consideration of the history, clinical
signs and detection of elevated plasma levels of creatine kinase (CK), aspartate
aminotransferase and lactate dehydrogenase. Elevation of serum CK concentration
appears to be the most sensitive and specific index of muscle damage in both
mammals and birds.
ili.
Traumatic causes: vertebral fractures or luxations, multiple fractures, pelvic
fractures, dislocations, sprains.
● Infectious causes: neuritis (peripheral nerve), encephalitis or encephalomyelitis,
intervertebral abscess, septicaemia with spinal infection, nephritis, viral
 infections (PMV group, reovirus), bacterial infections (e.g. Chlarydophila spp.,
Listeria spp., Yersinia spp., Salmonella spp., Streptococcus spp.), fungal infec-
tions (aspergillosis involving the central nervous system).
●Metabolic/nutritional causes: vitamin E/selenium deficiency.
 Reproductive causes: obturator paralysis following difficult egg delivery, egg
1
binding, broken leg from calcium deficiency, ectopic eggs.
 Neoplastic causes: renal adenocarcinoma, fibrosarcoma, other neoplasia or
space-occupying lesion (e.g. haematoma).
Poisons: botulism, lead toxicosis, ionophore toxicity.
· Miscellaneous causes: cloacal lithiaisis.
142
143-145:Questions
143 List the post-release monitoring options for rehabilitated seal pups.
144 i. Describe the condition this adult
144
 male eastern bearded dragon is suffering
from (144).
ii. What are the possible causes of this
condition?
ii. How would you treat it?
145 This swan was rescued from the
145
wild by a member of the public and
brought to the veterinary surgery for
further assessment and treatment. On
clinical  examination  you  notice  the
lesions shown (145).
i. What species is this?
ii. What sex is this swan, and how can
this be determined?
ii. What is this likely cause of the
injuries seen, and what is the prognosis in this case?
143
143-I45:Answers
143 Hind flipper rototags (143), head
143
tags and satellite relay data loggers.
144 i. Bilateral hemipene prolapse.
ii. Blunt trauma to the lumbosacral
region or trauma to the hemipene itself
during mating can cause swelling and an
inability to retract the organ/s into the
associated pocket. The condition may
also be seen secondary to infection of
the reproductive structures or general-
ized weakness.
ii. The prolapsed tissue should be
properly identified and tissue viability
 assessed prior to any attempt at repair. If viable, the exposed tissue can be soaked
in hypertonic saline (to reduce oedema), then flushed with sterile saline, lubricated
and gently replaced. Surgical debridement may be necessary if the tissue is damaged
or necrotic. Holding sutures can be placed temporarily at the opening to the
hemipene pocket to prevent immediate re-prolapse. The animal should be
 individual is suboptimal, suggesting that there may be other contributing health
concerns.
145 i.A mute swan.
i. A male (cob). Males are larger and weigh more on average than females (called
pens). During the breeding season the fleshy area above the nares enlarges and
becomes engorged in the male. This area is often termed the knob'. Outwith the
breeding season it is more difficult to tell the sexes apart.
ili. Injuries to the head are often caused by territorial fighting between rival swans
during the breeding season. Fierce territorial combats in which the dominant male
uses his wings to beat against the opponent are common. This bird has severe ocular
traumatic injuries involving both eyes and therefore its prognosis for return to the
wild is poor. The loss of one eye may be well tolerated and is often seen in wild
swans apparently coping well with this disability; however, complete loss of sight
has an extremely poor prognosis.
144
146, 147:Questions
   a   q     
from injuries caused by a road traffic accident (RTA).
i. What are the potential zoonotic disease risks from this animal?
i. What safety precautions should be taken to minimize risks to staff?
ili. Outline your approach to this case.
147a
147b
147 The legs of a sub-adult common buzzard that was hit by the author's car are
shown (147a). It died almost immediately after. A ventrodorsal radiograph of the
bird was taken (147b).
i. What do you notice about the legs?
ii. What does the radiograph demonstrate, and does it confirm your suspicions from
examination of the bird?
14.5
146,147:Answers
146
6i. If thoracic penetration has
46
occurred, badgers with tuberculous
pulmonic lesions are a significant source
of
infection
for
human
carers
Leptospira spp. and Salmonella spp.
have been isolated from 
badgers.
 Badgers are also susceptible to anthrax.
Sarcoptic mange has been reported in
Europe.
i. Badgers are dangerous animals; care
should be taken to avoid being bitten
(e.g. use basket or nylon fabric muzzles
designed for dogs). Gloves should be
worn during examination of the animal, and hygiene measures undertaken.
Facemasks are advisable, particularly if draining abscesses are present. Unless the
animal is comatose, examination is usually performed under general anaesthesia
(e.g. medetomidine 20 μg/kg with ketamine 4 mg/kg and butorphanol 0.4 mg/kg
administered i/m). The muzzled badger shown (146) is receiving 0xygen by
inhalation mask.
ii. Animals that survive the initial trauma following a RTA will be suffering from
shock. Initial first aid (e.g. subcutaneous fluids, analgesia) should be provided to
stabilize the patient before sedation or anaesthesia. Common injuries include
fractures, thoracic trauma and abdominal trauma. A thorough assessment includes
a clinical examination and thoracic and abdominal radiographs. Further diagnostics
(e.g. ultrasonography, haematology, biochemistry) may be appropriate. Badgers do
not adapt well to hospitalization and this often limits feasible treatments. If severe
injuries are detected or tuberculosis is suspected, the animal should be euthanased.
147 i. There is bowing, especially of the tibiotarsal bones.
thyroidism ('rickets'). This has almost certainly occurred secondary to the
abundance of road kill carrion found along that road that year. This will result in
overfeeding of the young by the parent birds and hence selective feeding of muscle
rather than bone. While the bone changes were unlikely to have been responsible
for the bird's behaviour in flying near the road, they would certainly have been
factors that would have made this bird less likely to survive a harsh winter. This case
illustrates the need to examine the whole bird and not just concentrate on acute
injuries and their healing before making the decision to release a bird back to the
wild.
146
148, 149: Questions
148a
148b
148 An adult Houbara bustard that arrived at a private zoological collection the
previous week is presented with a history of inappetence, laboured breathing and
a nasal discharge (148a). The bird died overnight and the owner submitted the
carcase along with a second live bird from the group, which was showing
neurological signs (148b). A further two birds from the original group of eight were
head shaking and ataxic. The birds had not been vaccinated.
i. What samples would you collect from the live and the dead bird for laboratory
investigation, and how is the diagnosis confirmed?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses for conditions causing upper respiratory signs
in bustards?
ii. What recommendations would you make to the manager of this collection to
prevent this disease in the future, and are there any risks in maintaining surviving
birds in the collection?
149 Rosenberg's goanna (149) is a
149
species native to open forest and wood-
land in the temperate zones of Australia.
Predation by cats and dogs and injuries
sustained by motor vehicles are major
threats to the species.
i. If an injured specimen is found, can it
be legally removed from the wild?
ii. Is this species subject to CITES
regulations?
iil. Which item of national legislation
 governs the import and export of CITES species in Australia?
147
I48,149:Answers
148 i. Swabs of the nasal discharge, and choanal and tracheal swabs from live
birds, should be screened for Mycoplasma, Chlamydophila and bacterial diseases.
Rapid screening tests on faecal samples to rule out avian influenza should be
performed. Rapid screening tests on faecal samples to check for paramyxovirus
type 1 (PMV-1) should be performed if available. Samples from post-mortem cases
include brain, lung, liver intestine and spleen. Definitive diagnosis of PMV-1
requires virus isolation, demonstration of the viral antigen by immuno-
histochemistry or rising specific antibody titres. In unvaccinated birds, positive titres
coupled with clinical signs are regarded as strong diagnostic evidence of PMV-1
infection.
ii. Bacterial infections, particularly gram-negative organisms (e.g. Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Proteus mirabilis, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp.); viral infections (e.g.
PMV-1, avian influenza); fungal infection (e.g. Aspergillus spp.); infection with
Chlamydophila spp. and Mycoplasma spp.; non-infectious diseases (e.g. nasal plugs,
irritation of the upper respiratory tract with dust, toxins or foreign bodies).
ili. Strict quarantine protocols for incoming stock, exclusion of free-living birds and
subcutaneous vaccination using commercially available inactivated PMV-1 vaccines
for poultry or gamebirds. Live PMV-1 vaccines can be given to bustards by the
intranasal and intraocular routes. In other avian species, birds that have survived
infection with PMV-1 can become carriers and intermittently shed virus, but this has
not been demonstrated in bustards.
149 i. Yes, if removing the animal from the wild will prevent or relieve suffering.
the animal may be taken and as a general rule should be transferred to an
authorized carer associated with a wildlife rescue organization and licensed by the
relevant state government. However, it should be noted that the degree to which
various reptile species are protected in the wild varies from state to state.
i. Yes, all members of the genus Varanus are CITES listed.
ili. Part 13A of the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(EPBC Act). The EPBC Act is the Australian Government's principal piece of
environmental legislation and, in addition to regulating the import and export of
wildlife and wildlife products, it aims to protect matters of national environmental
significance by conserving Australian biodiversity, enhancing the protection and
management of important natural and cultural places and by promoting
ecologically sustainable development.
148
150-152:Questions
150 i. What are the lesions seen on this
150
white-tailed deer (150)?
ii. How is the disease transmitted, and
what are the implications for consump-
tion of venison from this animal?
151 i. What species is this (151)?
151
i. What is its diet, and how should it be
managed in captivity?
152 An image of the carpal joint of an
152
adult Houbara bustard is shown (152).
i. What does this injury tell you about
the possible origins of this bird?
i. What problems in the birds's environ-
ment can lead to this injury?
ii. How can the frequency of such
injuries be reduced in centres where
birds are being rehabilitated for release
into the wild?
149
150-152:Answers
150 i. Cutaneous fibroma. These are hairless tumours, caused by a papillomavirus,
found on the skin of white-tailed deer. Clinical problems rarely arise from these
masses, but occasionally an animal will develop large growths that will interfere
with vision, respiration, feeding and ambulation.
i. Deer-to-deer transmission is thought to occur through biting insects and possibly
also through direct contact with various contaminated materials that may abrade
the skin. This is not a zoonotic disease, and only large fibromas with secondary
bacterial infection would cause the deer carcase to be unfit for consumption.
151 i. A great northern diver, also known as the common loon in North America.
i. Small fish. In captivity it should be kept on artificial pools with landing areas.
These are heavy birds, so concrete landing areas are not recommended in order to
avoid foot lesions. The pools should be large enough that the bird can spend most
of its time on the water. Small marine fish can be fed. If frozen fish are used, vitamin
supplements (e.g. Fisheater Tablets [Mazuri Zoo Foods]) are essential. Salt tablets
should not be needed, as these birds are often found on freshwater lakes as well as
 in coastal waters. The beak is heavy and sharp and care is needed when handling.
Gloves are recommended and the head should always be restrained.
152 i. Injuries like this (and also to the keel) occur when bustards are frightened
and fly into the side or roof of enclosures, particularly easily stressed and/or wild-
derived individuals.
ii. The size of the enclosure, the availability of hiding areas in the enclosure or the
abrasiveness of the material used to form the sides of the enclosure.
ili.
● Using plastic coated foam padding to surround the sides of cages or pens (e.g. in
areas where birds are regularly caught such as in hospital or quarantine pens).
● Using shade-cloth or tension netting on the roof and sides of aviaries to cushion
the impact resulting from birds flying within a pen.
● Modifying behaviour by taming nervous individuals that are not destined to be
released, or housing such birds in naturalistic pens with cover.
● Preventing stress by reducing the number of non-essential people who visit the
birds.
● It is thought that Houbara bustards derived from migratory populations may be
more restless during the migratory season and more vulnerable to trauma-related
deaths.
1.50
153, 154:Questions
153
153 An adult tawny owl has been freed from fruit neting after becoming entangled
   s o  og   i   
found other than a severely damaged right eye (153). A clinical examination reveals
that the damage to the eye has been present for some time, the globe having partially
collapsed.
i. What are the possible courses of action for this bird?
i. If the bird is kept in captivity as a permanently disabled casualty, what are the
welfare implications?
154 The overriding aim of wildlife rehabilitation is the successful release of the
casualty back into the wild.
i. Following initial assessment of a wildlife casualty, what are your main options for
dealing with it?
ii. What factors would you consider in making your decision?
1.51
153,154:Answers
153 i. The damage to the eye is beyond repair. Enucleation of the entire eyeball in
birds, although possible, is difficult due to the size of the globe within the orbit, the
reduced orbital musculature and the danger of damage to the contralateral optic
and monitoring of the condition, surgical 'debulking' of the eyeball, or euthanasia.
The bird will inevitably lose the use of one eye and, although many anecdotal
reports exist of one-eyed birds surviving in the wild, the ethical position of releasing
such a permanently disabled raptor is questionable.
i. If, after treatment, the injury itself is not causing any concerns regarding welfare,
then the possibility is raised of keeping the casualty permanently in captivity. For
this the bird should be kept in conditions that are as close to the wild as possible
and there should be sound justifications such as: captive breeding programmes for
endangered species (not in this case); breeding for legitimate uses (falconry/
aviculture); education through licensed use of
casualties in conservation
presentations; and use in rehabilitation units as imprint models for hand-reared
conspecific juveniles).
154 i. The flow chart below shows the main treatment options available:
Capture
Euthanasia
First aid
Y
Euthanasia
Treatment
Release
Euthanasia
Permanent captivity
Release
i. Factors to consider should include: species of casualty and knowledge of its
natural history; approximate age of the casualty and, especially, confirmation of
whether it is a dependant juvenile or an adult; sex of the casualty; body condition
in comparison with what is normal for that species; evidence of acute or chronic
problems; heath status, evidence of primary injury or disease; evidence of secondary
injuries or disease; psychological status; facilities, knowledge and funding for
veterinary treatment and care; facilities, knowledge and funding for rehabilitation
and release; likelihood of successful treatment and release in order for the casualty
 to lead a normal life in the wild, including normal movement, feeding, defence of
individuals of the same or another species; availability of suitable release sites.
152
155, 156: Questions
155a.
155b
155 This male, juvenile eastern grey
squirrel is found with several raised skin
lesions (155a, b). Each lesion has a
circular opening at the apex, and the
animal scratches at these intermittently.
He is in otherwise good body condition and is demonstrating normal behaviour.
i. What is the cause of the dermal lesions on this squirrel?
ii. How is this condition transmitted, and what species may be affected?
ili. What is the recommended treatment?
156 A juvenile Eurasian sparrowhawk
156
has been found in a garden, close to the
house, conscious but unable to fly. On
initial examination the bird appears to
be in good body condition with no
obvious injuries (156).
i. If the bird appears to be a suitable
candidate for release, what factors
should be considered?
ii. If, on initial examination, this bird
appeared to be emaciated, how would
this affect the approach to the case?
1.53
155,156:Answers
155 i. “Warbles', a bot larva infestation
155c
caused by migrating larvae of Cuterebra
emasculator. Close examination of the
lesions reveals  a larva within  each
 papule. The opening at the apex of the
nodule allows the larva to respire.
ii. The adult flies lay eggs at burrow
entrances, and the larvae gain entrance
tothe host through the mouth and
nostrils. The larvae migrate through the host, eventually entering the subcutis,
where they create a hole in the host's skin through which they breathe and excrete
waste materials. After approximately three weeks, the full-sized larva drops from
the pore and burrows into the soil, where it pupates. Fox squirrels, grey squirrels,
woodchucks, cottontail rabbits, mice (155c) and other burrowing or ground-
foraging animals (including some birds) have been identified with the larval
infestation.
ii. Treatment consists of killing the larvae, careful surgical extraction of the dead
larvae and subsequent wound treatment. Larvae may be killed in the skin via topical
 or oral application of nitenpyram and then removed surgically once dead. Removal
of live larvae often leads to an anaphylactic response and death of the affected
animal.
156 i. Sparrowhawks frequently collide with windows. It is assumed that, while
hunting, they see the movement of their reflection in the glass and, as a reflex, turn
towards it as they would towards potential prey. The birds are temporarily stunned
and usually recover fully within a short period of time. If presented at a clinic, a
short period of detention for observation and stabilization is all that is required. If
recovery is not rapid, the possibility of concussion and possible brain damage must
be
considered, as well as other traumatic injuries (fracture of the coracoid is
frequently seen in sparrowhawks, although this presents as obvious wing damage).
All raptors and larger avian casualties (over 500 g) involved in collisions with the
risk of head trauma should have, before release, an ophthalmoscopic examination
to exclude intraocular haemorrhage caused by impact damage to the pecten.
ii. This may be due to a shortage of food resources or an inability to feed secondary
to disease, injury or poor development of feeding skills. Casualties that do not start
to feed in captivity or regain body mass are likely to have an inherited or acquired
condition that inhibits their survival.
154
157, 158: Questions
157 A female mallard has some
157
wounds on her dorsal neck and
has been anaesthetized using
mask induction with isoflurane
sothat the wounds may
be
cleaned and dressed (157).
i. What is the likely cause of these
wounds?
ii. Does this impact on the release
of this bird?
ili. What are the pros and cons associated with this method of anaesthesia in ducks?
158a
158b
158
This hedgehog presented with
158c
severe haemorrhagic vomiting. It was
euthanased and post-mortem examina-
tion identified large splenic and hepatic
abscesses with severe gastritis (158a-c).
Enlargement and caseous necrosis of the
mesenteric lymph nodes and caseous
necrotizing
lesions in the Peyer's
 patches, liver and spleen, typical of this
condition, were also found on gross
examination.
i. What is the cause of this condition?
i. How is it acquired?
ili. What are the clinical signs?
iv. What is the significance of this condition for wildlife rehabilitators?
15.5
157,158:Answers
157 i. This bird was seen during the mating season and it is most likely that the
wounds have been caused by overvigorous mating by one or more male ducks.
i. The wounds should heal rapidly. However, if the duck is released during the
mating season, it is likely that she will be injured again, therefore she should be
retained in captivity until after the mating season.
iii. Mask induction of anaesthesia is often rapid and effective in birds. However,
ducks may exhibit a “dive response’ with resultant apnoea, meaning that they are
very hard to induce and maintain at a surgical plane of anaesthesia. Some veterinary
surgeons prefer to induce anaesthesia in waterfowl using injectable agents (e.g.
intravenous propofol). The rubber attachment to the mask makes this a semi-open
system (rather than fully open). In theory this may be helpful in induction; however,
in practice it is unlikely to have any significant effect. The bird can be maintained
using an open mask, as this is likely to be a short procedure. Intubation and
maintenance on isoflurane given via a T-piece/mechanical ventilation will give better
control of the anaesthetic and enable scavenging of waste gases.
158 i. The bacillus Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, which is found ubiquitously in the
environment.
ii. By ingestion of contaminated food and water, but direct contamination via dust
and soil is also possible. The organism can cross the intestinal barrier to reach the
underlying Peyer's patches. From there it disseminates to mesenteric lymph nodes,
where the bacteria replicate and cause a mesenteric lymphadenitis.
ii. The resulting relatively chronic clinical condition is characterized by weight loss,
loss of condition, poor appetite and lethargy. Palpation of the abdomen may identify
a number of enlarged lymph nodes. Subacute clinical signs include diarrhoea and
weight loss. Affected individuals may die within two weeks to three months.
Y. pseudotuberculosis can also enter the bloodstream and cause septicaemia, and
affected individuals may die within 48 hours. Most cases occur in the winter
months. This may be due to the enhanced growth characteristics of the organism
q nd sn iss r  o si ar 'sdn po 
rodents and migratory birds.
iv. Zoonotic infection may occur in situations where an occupational exposure is
likely to arise. Veterinary surgeons and wildlife hospital staff, as well as farmers,
hunters and abattoir workers, may be exposed to infected individuals and should
therefore take appropriate precautions. Euthanasia of affected wildlife patients is
usually recommended due to the zoonotic risk.
1.56
159, 160: Questions
159a
159 You are asked to carry out a post-mortem examination on a red squirrel that
was found dead. There is no history. There are no obvious lesions externally or
internally, but you submit a range of tissues for histopathological processing. On
examination of sections of lung, you observe numerous ovoid multinucleate bodies
in the alveolar walls (159a).
i. What are these bodies?
i. How can you differentiate them from similar structures that might be present in
a squirrel's lung?
ili. Are they of clinical significance?
160a
160b
160 A wild peregrine falcon was presented for examination. The bird was under-
weight and had small yellow plaques present on the oral mucosa (160a). Parasite
eggs (160b) were visible when a crop swab was examined.
i. Identify the parasite.
ii. Is infection with this parasite clinically significant?
ili. What is the life cycle of this parasite?
iv. What treatment is recommended?
1.57
159,160:Answers
159i.Schizonts ofthe protozoan
159b
parasite Hepatozoon spp.
ii. They are most likely to be confused
with schizonts of Toxoplasma gondii,
but are typically larger, oval and have
up to 16 dense nuclei. Toxoplasma
schizonts are less prominent and more
variable in form (159b). They are also
normally found in other tissues, such as
liver and spleen, whereas Hepatozoon
schizonts are confined to lung.
ili. The significance of Hepatozoon
infection in red squirrels is currently uncertain, but heavy infections do seem to be
associated with alveolar thickening. The species in red squirrels is as yet unnamed,
but there is a similar, but genetically distinct, species Hepatozoon griseisciuri in
grey squirrels.
160 i. Capillaria spp. It is easily identified by microscopic examination of faecal
samples or mucosal scrapings from lesions in the oropharynx. Capillaria eggs are
 oval and have characteristic bipolar plugs.
i. Three forms of the disease are recognized in raptors based on the location of the
infection: oropharyngeal, oesophageal and intestinal forms. Lesions in the mouth
 can lead to localized abscesses, oesophageal lesions can rupture through the skin
and the intestinal form can result in inflammatory changes causing diarrhoea and
weakness.
ii. Earthworms can play a role as transport hosts in the transmission of Capillaria
to birds of prey. Raptors are also infected with Capillaria following ingestion of
infected prey.
iv. Treatment can be challenging as the parasite frequently shows multiple drug
resistance. Fenbendazole, mebendazole, ivermectin and doramectin have been used.
Follow-up faecal samples should be tested to ensure that the parasite has been
eliminated.
1.58
161, 162:Questions
161 An emaciated adult hare was found dead. There was no evidence of diarrhoeic
staining and no palpable impaction in the abdomen. There was staining and matting
of the fur around the mouth and on the chin.
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
i. If this had been a live hare, what particular evaluations should be done prior to
consideration for rehabilitation?
162a
162b
162 A saker falcon was presented for
162c
examination with a history of anorexia,
biliverdinuria (162a)and a markedly
swollen periophthalmic  region  and
infraorbital sinus region (162b). The
bird  was anaesthetized and radio-
graphed. The lateral radiograph is
shown (162c). A blood sample was
collected and the significant haemat-
ology results included a raised packed
cell volume, heterophilia and mono-
cytosis. A rapid antigen capture test (Speed CHLAM) performed on a swab of the
faecal sample for chlamydophilosis was negative.
i. List the conditions that commonly cause these clinical signs in birds?
the faecal sample?
ii. How would you interpret the clinical and laboratory findings, and what further
investigative action is indicated?
iv. How would you conclusively confirm your provisional diagnosis?
1.59
161, 162:Answers
161 i. Differentials include three condi-
161
tions causing perioral staining and
which have the potential to cause death:
(1) leporine dysautonomia, in which
impaction is also a major feature; (2)
severe dental disease +/- inability to
chew and +/- sinus infection; and (3)
hare syphilis perioral lesions. In this case
there was very severely abnormal cheek
tooth  development (161). A long-
eap on pei pe anui aui yno i on e jo uiad piu supuis
from emaciation. Only 2% of hare deaths in one survey were primarily caused by
dental disease. In both (2) and (3), death may result from the development of an
associated secondary amyloidosis of internal organs (e.g. kidney, liver, spleen or
adrenal gland}.
i. A detailed check of the oral cavity, including radiography of the skull.
162 i. Bacterial infection, particularly gram-negative organisms (e.g. Pseudomonas
αeruginosa), fungal infection (e.g.
Aspergillus spp.) and infection with
Chlamydophila spp. Viral infections (e.g. PMV-1, avian influenza) are less common,
but should be considered.
i. Pooled choanal and oropharyngeal swabs are more consistent for isolation of
the agent than faecal swabs, especially in the early stages of infection. This bird
 may have been in the early stages of infection and conducting a rapid antigen test
on a faecal sample was not sensitive enough.
ili. The clinical (splenomegaly) and laboratory findings (heterophilia, monocytosis)
are suggestive of an infectious disease process, possibly chlamydophilosis. Cytology
should be conducted on impression smears of the discharge and samples collcted for
bacteriology. Examination of paired serum samples to demonstrate rising titres of
Chlamydophila spp. antibodies should be conducted. Plasma chemistry should be
carried out on samples collected before any treatment (including intramuscular injec-
tions) is given. This may provide information on hepatic function and hydration status.
iv. Diagnostic methods to confirm Chlamydophila spp. infection include:
 Direct visualization in clinical specimens by staining impression smears.
 Isolation of the agent and identification.
 Detection of seroconversion and a fourfold rise in antibody titres, along with
clinical signs or pathological findings typical of the disease.
● Detection of antigen (ELISA or PCR).
160
163, 164:Questions
163a
163 You are presented with an adult otter in very weak condition and showing
respiratory distress. It has recently lost a lower premolar tooth and the adjacent lip
is torn (163a).
i. What is the likely cause of these lesions?
ii. What further examinations would you carry out?
ili. Would you attempt treatment, and what is the prognosis?
164
164 i. What is the most likely cause of the growth interruption/crack on the hooves
of this white-tailed deer (164)?
ii. Describe the other clinical and gross pathological signs seen in deer with this
disease.
161
163,164:Answers
163 i. A fight with another otter. It is very
163b
likely that there will be further bite wounds
around the face, on the feet and lower limbs
and around the perineum.
i. Although desirable, further examination
would be unwise unless the animal can be
sedated or anaesthetized, as even sick otters
can inflict severe bite wounds. The fact that
this otter is showing respiratory distress is a
complication, as it is likely to be suffering
from pleurisy and/or heart lesions. Purulent
pleurisy and pericarditis in an otter resulting
from an infected tooth is shown (163b). These
are common sequelae in otters with infected
bite wounds or fractured teeth. As a result
they carry a high anaesthetic risk.
ii. A broad-spectrum antibiotic can be given
by injection initially, restraining the otter with
a grasper. If its condition improves, further
examinations while sedated may be justified.
However, the prognosis is grave.
164 i. Chronic haemorrhagic disease caused by epizootic haemorrhagic disease
virus or bluetongue virus, which are related, but genetically distinct, Orbivirus
species. Transmission occurs through biting Culicoides midges.
i. Clinical signs are highly variable. Many deer show no, or only mild, clinical signs,
or it can present as a peracute, acute or chronic disease. Initially, animals may exhibit
depression, fever respiratory distress, oedema of the head, neck, conjunctiva or
 tongue, and cyanosis of the oral mucosa. Deer will typically be found close to a water
source. Some animals will die shortly after the onset of clinical signs, but some will
live longer and display lameness, inappetence and reduced activity. Gross
pathological lesions will also vary depending on the virulence of the virus and
duration of infection. Peracute cases will have severe oedema of the head, neck,
conjunctiva and lungs. In the acute form the animal will also have petechial
haemorrhages in the heart, pulmonary artery, lungs, rumen and intestines. There may
also be areas of necrosis or ulcerations on the dental pad, tongue, hard palate, rumen
and omasum. The chronic form is typified by hoof growth interruptions as well as
sloughing of the hoof walls, and scarring, with loss of papillae, on the rumen mucosa.
162
165, 166: Questions
165 An emaciated juvenile hedgehog
165a
dies within a few hours of being found
out during the daytime. On necropsy,
the
mesenterycontains
multiple
haemorrhages
and
there
are
 approximately 50 small cream-coloured,
seed-like structures approximately 5 mm
in length throughout (165a).
i. What are these structures?
ii. How could their identification be
confirmed?
li. Could they be responsible for the
death of this hedgehog?
166
166 A mute swan (166) from a local lake is presented to your practice by members
of a local wildlife charity.
i. What type of fishing gear is pictured here, and what special problems can this
cause?
i. How would you remove this item and treat the swan?
iii. Would you carry out any diagnostic procedures in this case?
163
165,166:Answers
165 i. Thorny-headed worms (Acanthocephala}.
165b
i. Direct microscopy of the cranial portion of the
worm will show the characteristic hooks (165b).
li. Yes. Although usually found in small numbers
and of little significance in hedgehogs, occasion-
ally, extreme cases with large numbers of worms
are encountered  with  widespread intestinal
ulceration, haemorrhage and anaemia, which can
prove fatal. There may, however, be an under-
lying disorder  causing  immunosuppression
predisposing to such a large Acanthocephala
burden. The most commonly found species are
Moniliformis erinacei and Prosthorbyncus spp.
166 i. A triple-barbed pike hook. This can cause
severe damage to the tongue and bill. One hook penetrates the tongue, one
penetrates or damages the bill and the other remains pointing out, which can make
it difficult and dangerous to the person removing it. The associated line is usually
reinforced and may cause substantial trauma if it wraps around the bill.
ii. It is easier, safer and less stressful to remove the hook under anaesthesia or
sedation. Free points should be cut off using wirecutters, wearing eye protection and
holding the tips in forceps to avoid injury. Any points entering tissue should be cut
at the base and drawn out in the direction of the barbs to avoid further tissue
damage. Simple penetrative damage is usually minor, but ligation of the tongue by
line or repeated excoriation by a free hook point can cause distal tongue necrosis
Local cleaning and debridement are advised, together with parenteral antibiosis
and analgesia. Fluid therapy and nutritional support are advisable. The tongue
usually heals rapidly, but any distal tissue necrosis results in a poor prognosis if the
bird cannot feed for itself.
iii. Survey radiographs are advised to check for internal hooks, line and weights
and any other hooks that may be embedded in wing webs or feet.
164
167-169:Questions
167 What is the significance of psittacine beak and feather disease (PBFD) to wild
psittacine populations in Australia?
168
168 The ear of a tawny owl is shown (168).
i. What lesion can be seen?
ii. What is the significance of this?
169a
169b
169 i. What is the likely cause of the
lesions visibleon thepost-mortem
examinations in this chaffinch (169a)
and buzzard (169b)?
ii. How does the epidemiology of this
condition differ between birds of prey,
finches and pigeons?
16.5
167-169:Answers
167 PBFD is endemic at high prevalence in wild lorikeet flocks, so eradicating the
disease from wild populations is not feasible. PBFD was listed in April 2001 as a
key threatening process to endangered Australian psittacines (Australian Environ-
ment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999). Artificial congregation
of large numbers of birds at feeders probably aids in the transmission of the virus.
Evidence suggests that recovered lorikeets remain latently infected, with the virus
persisting in their livers. Releasing rehabilitated recovered birds can be problematic,
as it increases the general viral load in wild populations and could affect sympatric
 populations of endangered psittacine species.
168 i. There is bruising evident overlying the bone enclosing the globe.
               
certainly haemorrhage from the pecten of the eye into the posterior chamber (even
if no haemorrhage can be seen in the anterior chamber). It is essential that this bird
receives a full ocular examination. It can be difficult to achieve mydriasis in order
to examine the posterior chamber. The easiest way is to anaesthetize the bird. If
there is haemorrhage present, then topical anti-inflammatories (e.g. corticosteroids)
should be used. Resolution of the haemorrhage should be monitored and if retinal
detachment results, then the bird is not a candidate for release.
169 i. Infection with the protozoal parasite Trichomonas gallinae.
i. T. gallinae is a cosmopolitan parasite of pigeons and doves and is readily
transmitted to squabs through the feeding of crop milk. The organism thus cycles
transmission from parent birds to young seen in pigeons, two additional modes of
transmission may occur.
Birds of prey, such as buzzards, prey on wood pigeons and may become infected
with the parasite when feeding on infected material. The incidence of trichomonosis
in other birds of prey known to feed on pigeons (e.g. Eurasian sparrowhawks and
buzzard. Garden bird trichomonosis is now recognized as an emerging disease of
wild greenfinches, chaffinches and goldfinches.
The epidemiology underpinning the emergence of this new form of the disease
has not been elucidated. It is, however, likely that it involves the contamination of
feeding and drinking stations. The trichomonad organism does not survive for long
outside of the host, but water-borne transmission is likely where large numbers of
birds are encouraged to congregate and heavy contamination of a water bath or
bird table is allowed.
166
170-172:Questions
170
170 In late summer a juvenile common cuckoo (170) is presented having been
found in a rural garden. The bird is in fair body condition and on examination the
only injury that can be found is a fracture of the right tarsometatarsus. The bird
responds well to hand feeding. What considerations are important in the assessment
of this case?
171
171 A carer hand rearing an orphan joey red kangaroo is shown (171). Diarrhoea
is one of the most common presenting complaints in such animals. List the causes
of diarrhoea in hand-raised macropods.
172 A group of badger cubs has been hand reared. A suitable release site has been
found and landowner consent for the release has been gained. The farmer is
concerned about the risk of M. bovis infection to his cattle on the adjacent land.
i. How would you go about testing this group of animals for tuberculosis?
ii. What are the disadvantages associated with testing?
167
170-172:Answers
 o  s       s   
individual undergoing rehabilitation. Hand rearing an insectivorous juvenile should
present few problems and in passerine birds, fractures to a tarsometatarsal bone
usually heal without complications when immobilized externally by splinting.
However cuckoos are migrants and this fracture will take several weeks to heal. By
late summer most juvenile cuckoos are independent of their foster parents and
about to start their southward migration. This bird will not be fit for release for at
least 3-4 weeks, which means that it will have to start its migration immediately
and, although the autumn migration is usually taken in short stages, this bird will
not be in a fit state to perform long periods of exertion. A decision will have to be
 ra on qoa n aq oi k q e sr jo s n to 
migration, of retaining the bird in captivity over the winter or on humane grounds,
of performing euthanasia.
171 Causes of diarrhoea are usually multifactorial in hand-reared joeys, but are
often related to suboptimal husbandry. In general, the more consistent and
standardized the husbandry routine the better. Possible causes of diarrhoea in hand-
reared joeys include: oral and intestinal candidiasis (secondary to stress, immuno-
suppression, poor husbandry); lactose intolerance (incorrect rearing formula);
malabsorption (excessive volume or secondary to bacterial overgrowth); bacterial
diarrhoea (secondary to inadequate hygiene or inappropriate administration of
antibiotics); coccidiosis (only seen in recently pouch emerged grazing joeys,
diarrhoea (secondary to stress associated with poor management).
172 i. The methods of testing individual badgers for tuberculosis all have their
limitations. None of the current methods of testing have a high enough sensitivity
to ensure individual animals are free from infection. The badger Tb ELISA test was
developed for use in groups of animals and would be an appropriate test to detect
infection on a group basis, but not to indicate infection in individual animals, as its
sensitivity is too low (40.7%). In individual animals the sensitivity of the Tb ELISA
can be increased to acceptable levels (over 80%) by using three applications of the
test. The time badger cubs spend in captivity allows for the use of multiple testing.
usually at admission, weaning and before release.
ii. Multiple testing increases the sensitivity of the badger Tb ELISA, but at some cost
to its specificity (reduced from 94.3% to 83.1%). Badgers may therefore test ELISA
positive, but be negative on standard post-mortem examination and culture tests
following euthanasia. Other disadvantages include the necessity to sedate or
anaesthetize all but the very smallest cubs in order to collect blood safely. The cost
of testing three times may also be prohibitive in some situations.
168
173, I74: Questions
173a
173b
173 Complete ophthalmological exami-
nation (173a) is a crucial part of any
clinical examination in injured birds and
should not be overlooked.
i. Why is this?
 ii. Why might it be of particular importance in birds of prey such as this tawny owl
(173b)?
174
174 A roe deer (174) has been captured and held overnight in captivity. How would
you anaesthetize this animal in order to suture a wound on its flank?
169
173,174:Answers
173 i. Ophthalmological examination is
173c
vital in the assessment of casualty wild
birds undergoing rehabilitation back to
the wild, as a visual deficit may prevent a
bird from finding and killing sufficient
 sis    n d
 particularly reliant on their vision to avoid
predators.
i. Visual impairment in an owl may affect
its ability to avoid obstacles and may even prevent it from flying. Many lesions affect
the posterior segment and would be missed if a c
 complete ophthalmological
examination is not performed. In raptors the eyes constitute a major portion of the
cranial mass and they are particularly vulnerable to trauma. This tawny owl presented
with a head tilt and central blindness. The large size of the owl's orbit and the absence
within the retrobulbar tissues can be seen adjacent to the optic nerve (173c).
Significant ophthalmological lesions were found in 75% of 128 wild tawny owls
 presented to a UK wildlife hospital. This study also found that the Schirmer tear test
was consistently lower than found in some other families of birds. This may increase
pathology of the cornea in tawny owls and should be considered when deciding on
treatment protocols.
174 Deer are both difficult to handle and easily stressed by handling procedures.
Intramuscular injections may be used as the sole anaesthetic agents for short
procedures. A combination of ketamine (2-3 mg/kg) plus an alpha-2 adrenergic
agonist, such as xylazine (2 mg/kg) or medetomidine (50-100 μg/kg), is most
appropriate. Medetomidine has the advantage that it can be reversed using
atipamazole (200 μg/kg). Both sedative combinations, together with local
anaesthesia (procaine or lidocaine), are suitable for suturing of small wounds
Intravenous lines placed to prevent 'shock' and capture myopathy allow for
intravenous induction of anaesthesia with minimal handling. Premedication with
diazepam (0.5 mg/kg i/v) reduces the amount of induction agent required and aids
intubation. Ketamine (3 mg/kg i/v) can be used for induction following premedication
with xylazine (2 mg/kg i/v). Alternatively, propofol (2-4 mg/kg i/v slowly to effect)
may be used. It can also be used to maintain field anaesthesia as a bolus (0.6-
1.5 mg/kg) or continuous infusion. Isoflurane or sevoflurane in oxygen can be used
to maintain anaesthesia following sedation or induction. Deer are relatively easily
intubated using suitably sized (8-12 mm for adult roe deer) cuffed endotracheal tubes.
 Recovery following general anaesthesia should be in a quiet, darkened and,
ideally, padded recovery box.
170
175, 176: Questions
175a
175b
175 Some unusual ocular lesions are noted during a routine examination of a
Canada goose captured in an oil spill (175a). Similar lesions have also been found
in a chuck-will's-widow, a mallard (175b) and several species of gull.
i. What is the aetiology of this condition?
ii. How should this condition be treated?
176
176 i. What does this image show (176)?
i. What makes both this individual and the method of fixation used advantageous
to a successful outcome?
171
175,176:Answers
175
i. These birds have flukes
175c
(Philophthalmus gral) embedded in the
conjunctiva deep to the nictitating mem-
brane. The birds ingest encysted cercariae
on an intermediate aquatic host, such as
a snail or crayfish. The flukes migrate
through the avian gastrointestinal tract to
the ocular mucosa.
ii. The affected bird can be anaesthetized
and the flukes manually removed using
OMETRIC
eye dressing forceps (175c, d). The
application of ophthalmic tetracaine
drops (0.5%) five minutes prior to the
175d
procedure results in easier removal of
the flukes and less inflammation after-
wards. Topical ophthalmic lubricants
alone or combined with a topical oph-
thalmic anti-inflammatory for 1-2 days
afterwards may also help to alleviate
discomfort and decrease healing time.
176 i. A badger cub (approximately
eight weeks old) with an external skeletal fixator system applied to a femoral
fracture of its left hindlimb. The system is made up of an intramedullary pin “tied-
in’ to a unilateral, uniplantar half frame (lateral supporting bar with angulated
positive profile pins), which maintains alignment and stability at the fracture site
and prevents rotation.
i. Because this injury has occurred in a cub, the fracture should heal quickly (4-6
weeks maximum). A badger cub would normally be kept in captivity for several
months before release, so fracture healing is unlikely to delay its release. In adult
of the casualty being successfully released because of complications associated with
long-term captivity.
The metal implants (pin and external system) are removed once the fracture is
healed, allowing the casualty to be released without possible future complications
of implants being left in place. If plates, screws and cerclage wires are used to
stabilize fractures, they should also be removed if possible, though this is often
 much more difficult. Screws, pins and wires may work loose over a period of time,
causing local reaction and leading to osteomyelitis. Retained implants should be
avoided wherever possible in wildlife casualties.
172
177-179: Questions
177 i. What species of bird is this
177a
(177a)?
ii. What are the lesions on the legs likely
to be caused by?
ii. What pathogens are also reported to
be associated with these lesions?
iv. What treatment options, if any, are
available in this case?
178a
178b
178 This seal (178a, b) was found alive on the beach in eastern England in mid-
May. The animal was in respiratory distress and died while being transported to a
rehabilitation centre.
i. What species is this seal, and what can you say from its external appearance?
i. Suggest a probable cause for the respiratory distress and death?
ili. How could this be confirmed?
179 What criteria should be considered when selecting the best time and place to
release orphan cygnets?
173
177-179:Answers
177 i. A chaffinch
177b
i. Mites ( Cnemidocoptes spp.) (177b).
ili. Viral papillomas have been shown to
occur in clusters in finches, especially
chaffinches. Studies show a prevalence
of 1.3%. On histopathology a hyper-
keratotic epidermis with intranuclear
inclusion bodies may be seen.
iv. Topical application of ivermectin or
fipronil. There is no treatment for
papillomas and often these birds require
euthanasia.
178 i. A harbour seal. It has a 'step' in its forehead and a triangular rhinarium
typical of the species. In the UK, the harbour seal pupping season is June and July.
Harbour seals have a white lanugo coat, like other true seals (the grey seal and ice
breeding seals such as harp and ringed seals), but unlike other species they lose this
lanugo coat before birth. Harbour seals resemble adults phenotypically at birth and
the shed lanugo coat can be found in the birth fluids. Seals have permanent teeth
erupted at birth and do not have a temporary dentition.
i. This seal has a lanugo coat and a fresh, bloody umbilical stump. The teeth have
not yet erupted. This is a case of premature birth. Respiratory distress and death
 may well be connected with incomplete lung inflation due to prematurity.
ii. This could be confirmed by evidence of poorly inflated lungs on necropsy. The
timing of this stranding (mid-May, before the start of the breeding season in this
region) is consistent with this conclusion. Pacific harbour seals are frequently seen
at birth in lanugo coat, which they lose within a few days. This is a normal variation
in this subspecies.
179 Ideally, they should be reared with other orphan cygnets and released when
they have attained their full plumage (i.e. their flight feathers), which in the case of
 mute swans is September to the end of November in the northern hemisphere. They
should be released where there is a group of wintering swans that are support fed.
This can be a river estuary or other water body. The support feeding will help them
through their first winter before they decide to disperse.
174
180-182:Questions
180 You are presented with an American
180a
mink, which was killed by a gamekeeper in
Somerset, UK. It is in good condition and the
liver appears normal, but the gallbladder is
thick walled and pink and there are numerous
blackish bodies, less than 1 mm long, on the
mucosal surface (180a).
i. What is your provisional diagnosis?
ii. How would you confirm it?
ili. What other species may be infected?
181 i. What species is this (181)?
181
i. What is its natural diet?
li. What factors should be considered
prior to its release back into the wild
following a period of rehabilitation?
182 This pipistrelle bat (182) was found
182
alive on someone's garden path. It was
submitted to a bat hospital and ate well
for two days and appeared to be
 recovering. On the third day it stopped
eating and died.
i. What is likely to have caused the
damage to the wing membrane?
ii. What is the probable cause of death?
175
180-I82:Answers
180 i. Cholecystitis, caused by the bile
180b
flukePseudamphistomum truncatum.
ii. By transferring several of the small
bodies to a microscope slide, adding a
small amount of water and examining
them with a compound microscope using a
low-power objective and a lowered con-
denser. P. truncatum from the gallbladder
of a mink are shown (180b).
ili.P truncatum is commonly found in UK
otters in Somerset and Dorset and in East
Anglia. In Europe the parasite has also been
recorded in a wide range of carnivores,
including foxes, polecats and domestic cats
and dogs. There are rare reports
of
infection in humans. The life cycle involves
freshwater crustaceans and certain species
of fish. Infection can only be acquired by
eating uncooked fish.
181 i. A stone curlew, also known as the Eurasian thick-knee.
ii. Leafy plants and invertebrates, which are easily provided in captivity.
ii. It is a shy bird and is largely crepuscular or nocturnal. Therefore, in captivity,
brightly lit areas should be avoided and the bird should be given as much seclusion
as possible. In some areas of the UK this species is the subject of conservation work
and monitoring. Areas of pasture are often managed as 'stone curlew plots'. If
planning to release such a bird, it is important to liaise with local groups to ensure
release into the correct area and, of course, enable post-release monitoring.
182 i. Bites from a domestic cat.
ii. In such cases there are often other internal injuries not readily detected on clinical
examination. These include torn pectoral muscles, ruptured abdominal wall and
ruptured liver. However, if the bat initially improves and then dies after approxi-
mately 48-72 hours, it is usually due to Pasteurella septicaemia. P. multocida is a
commensal in cats' mouths and is introduced via bite wounds. In rehabilitation
centres it is a common cause of death in birds as well as in bats and other small
mammals.
176
183-185:Questions
183
3An immature mute swan is
183
presented (183). The bird has been
present on a local river for several
days, with a very obviously damaged
wing. It has been the cause of much
public concern and has eventually
been captured in a widely publicized
rescue. On examination the bird
appears to be in poor body condition.
No other injuries are found other
than an open, comminuted fracture
of the distal third of the right humerus, with a section of exposed, devitalized bone
and infection of the associated soft tissue. The public interest in this case has
resulted in many offers of financial assistance and sites for relocating the bird. What
are the options for dealing with this injury?
184
A young passerine bird is
184
 presented with weakness and masses
over the head (184).
i. What is the likely cause?
ii. How would you manage this case?
185 i. What are the likely causes of
185
the injury in this hedgehog (185)?
i. What would be your medical con-
siderations in treating this case?
177
183-185:Answers
183 Such injuries are commonly the result of mid-air collisions with power cables
 qeqond aq asn sn u se isnn an pards st p an ai an q p
beyond surgical repair. Amputation or euthanasia are the only options. The release
of a wing amputee into the wild is clearly unethical. However, the possibility does
exist to release such a casualty onto a small, privately owned stretch of water that
is not the territory of an existing pair of breeding swans, but this situation would
need constant supervision to ensure the welfare of the casualty. Such cases are often
the public in the realities of dealing with wildlife casualties.
184 i. Avipox infection. There is heavy crusting with secondary infection on the
eyelids and this is likely to cause scarring. If scarring is severe, there may be
permanent damage to the eyelids and cornea.
ii. There is no specific therapy; however if secondary bacterial infections can be
controlled and the bird is provided with appropriate supportive care and can self-
feed, it is likely to resolve in a few weeks. Avipoxvirus is spread both by insect
vectors and by direct contact, gaining entry to the skin via open wounds.
Therefore, good barrier nursing and fly control are essential if this bird is to be
admitted and nursed in a wildlife hospital.
185 i. The hedgehog is showing generalized blackening and shortening of the
cranial dorsal spines consistent with burn injuries. Hedgehogs frequently nest in
piles of leaves and wood prepared as bonfires and become injured in this way when
the fires are lit.
i. A full clinical examination should be performed to assess the severity of burning
as well as to look for any concurrent disease or injury. The spines may become fused
when burnt and this may compromise the ability of the animal to roll. Skin damage
 below the spines may not become evident for several days, after which the skin begins
to slough. Burnt hedgehogs should be kept in captivity and closely observed for at
least one week to ensure there are no such delayed problems. Topical treatment of
damaged skin is often difficult, but cleaning of affected areas with sterile saline or a
dilute solution of chlorhexidine, followed by the application of a cream containing
silver sulfadiazine or cleansing agents, may be beneficial. Broad-spectrum anti-
bacterials (e.g. potentiated amoxicillin) given orally are indicated where skin damage
is marked. Lung damage through smoke inhalation is an additional complication
requiring oxygen therapy in the early stages of treatment, together with the use of
anti-inflammatory drugs, bronchodilators and broad-spectrum antibacterials.
178
186, 187:Questions
186
186 Land mammals are frequently involved in road traffic accidents (RTAs) (186).
i. What are the common injuries sustained?
i. How would you deal with RTAs, and what prognosis would you attach to the
various types of injury?
187 i. How can dehydration be assessed in wild birds?
ii. By what routes can fluids be administered?
179
186,187:Answers
186 i. Fractures of long bones and/or pelvis; lung contusions, pneumothorax,
haemothorax; diaphragm rupture; liver or spleen contusions and/or rupture;
bladder rupture; damage to the central nervous system; brain injuries, spinal
injuries, peripheral nerve damage.
i. As with all wildlife casualties, the normal 'triage' considerations must be made.
These include the general condition of the casualty and presence of concurrent disease
or injury, species-specific considerations related to its ability to return to full normal
function and consideration of rehabilitation facilities and release sites. All cases are
likely to require immediate first aid treatment, usually including fluid therapy (colloids
 or crystalloids) and analgesia (NSAID and opioid drugs), and the provision of a warm
environment to prevent further heat loss and slowly return body temperature to
normal. Diagnostic tests include radiography, ultrasonography of the thorax and
abdomen, diagnostic abdominocentesis and thoracocentesis, exploratory laparotomy
and blood tests to assess the haematological and biochemical status.
Some injuries may resolve with supportive treatment (e.g. contusions to lung.
liver or spleen, inflammatory CNS damage, mild pneumothorax or haemothorax).
Surgical treatment of some injuries carries a good prognosis (e.g. splenectomy,
diaphragm repair) and others a reasonable prognosis (e.g. liver lobectomy, fracture
repair). The surgical skills of the veterinary surgeon, facilities and funding available
must be considered.
187 i. The high metabolic rate of birds results in rapid fluid deficits after a short
period of anorexia. Avian skin is much thinner and less pliable than mammalian
skin, making assessment of skin tenting more difficult. Dehydration status can be
assessed as follows: <5%, imperceptible signs; 5-6%, loss of skin elasticity, skin
slides less readily over breast muscles; 7-10%, skin dry and adherent, buccal
mucosa dry with presence of false membranes in the mouth, cornea dull; 10-12%,
generalized weakness/collapse, changes in scale colour on legs and feet (dull beige
instead of bright yellow), cold extremities, cornea dry; >12%, extreme
weakness/collapse.
i. All wild avian casualties should be considered at least 5% dehydrated and receive
oral fluids (2.5% body weight) as part of initial first aid. If too sick or stressed to
receive oral fluids, an intraosseous or intravenous catheter can be placed, which
 n   s s s ss  
pneumatized bones, such as the proximal tibiotarsus and the distal and proximal
ulna, and they can be capped and protected with a suitably shaped finger splint,
applied over a figure of eight bandage. Boluses of fluid can be administered at
regular intervals, or via a giving set to large birds. Suitable vessels for intravenous
catheter placement include the ulnar, basilic, medial metatarsal and saphenous
veins.
180
188, 189:Questions
188a
188b
188 i. What species is shown (188a)?
188c
Can you give an idea of its sex or age?
ii. What lesions can be seen (188b, c)?
ili. How can this be managed?
189
189 i. What is this species (189)?
ii. What clinical signs can you see from the photo?
ii. What are your differential diagnoses?
iv. How would you treat this case?
181
188,189:Answers
188 i. A common kestrel. The brown
188d
head, wing tips and tail show that this is
either an immature bird or an adult
female. The adult male has a slate grey
head, tail and wing tips.
i. The distal left wing is drooping,
indicating injury to (or just distal to) the
carpus. A wound is visible in the meta-
carpal region. The radiograph shows a
fracture of the metacarpal bones.
ili. There is little bone displacement; however, the fracture is complicated by being
open. Systemic antibiosis and NSAIDs are indicated. This type of fracture will not
heal without support. In this case a piece of thermoplastic was shaped and moulded
to the ventral distal wing (188d) so that it bent upwards over the edge of the wing.
This was held in place with tape for five days. If the dressing is in place for longer
than five days, there is likely to be muscle and joint contracture. If the fracture is
not healed at this time, the dressing should be left off for two days before being
reapplied for five more days. If still not healed, the fracture should be reinvestigated
 to determine the cause of the non-union.
189 i. Blue hare (syn. mountain hare, Arctic hare, Irish hare, varying hare). It is
distinguishable from the brown hare by its smaller size, shorter ears and greyer
coat, which in winter becomes white with dark ear tips. This picture was taken in
early December with the coat in transitional pelage. It is found in Ireland and the
Scottish Highlands, especially on managed heather grouse moors.
i. Crusting lesions around the nose, lips and eyelids.
ili. Myxomatosis, pasteurellosis, treponematosis
primary viral cause. Pasteurellosis may be treated with antibacterials, but per-
 manent respiratory tract damage may result and recurrence of clinical disease is
not uncommon. Treponematosis can be treated with parenteral penicillin (40 mg/kg
q24h for 5 days)
182
190, 191:Questions
190a
190b
190 Dyspnoea and open mouth breathing, associated with weight loss, may be
seen in pigeons and doves.
i. What is the likely cause of these clinical signs and the post-mortem lesions shown
in these doves (190a, b)?
i. How can the diagnosis be confirmed?
191 i. What does this radiograph show (191)?
191
ii. How would you treat this fracture in this
wild animal, and what would affect your
decision making in this case?
183
190,I91:Answers
190 i. The flagellated protozoal parasite
190c
Trichomonas gallinae is responsible for
the oropharyngeal lesions shown here in
a collared dove (190a) and a stock dove
(190b). As many as 80% of pigeons are
silent carriers of this organism. Patho-
genic strains of the organism are able to
take advantage of small lesions in the
oropharyngeal mucosa. Rapid multipli
cation leads to extensive ulceration and
the formation of caseous material that
can cause obstruction of the respiratory and digestive tracts. Build up of caseous
material around the choanae and glottis can give rise to considerable respiratory
difficulty. Trichomonosis is becoming increasingly recognized as a cause of disease
and increased mortality in wild pigeons and doves.
ii. By identification of motile protozoa in oropharyngeal swab material. Samples
should be taken from live birds or ‘still warm' cadavers in order to maximize the
likelihood of detecting motility. This is done by collecting a sample using a saline
moistened cotton swab (190c) and expressing a drop of fluid onto a microscope
slide. Culture of the organism from swabs placed in an appropriate transport
medium is also possible.
191 i. A mid-shaft, compound comminuted fracture of the radius and ulna of a
large mammal, in this case a badger (the five full digits suggest it is not a canid).
There is abnormal bone proliferation around the elbow joint, most notably on the
is associated with chronic disease. It is likely that the bone had become weakened
at the fracture site as a result of the changes proximal to it. The new bone formation
might be due to osteomyelitis resulting from a bite wound or other penetrating
infection. Neoplasia is a possible but less likely cause.
i. Fracture fixation, amputation of the limb or euthanasia. Fracture fixation is likely
to carry a poor prognosis, as the fracture site includes diseased bone. Fracture
healing is likely to be poor and the elbow joint will remain compromised. As this
is an adult animal (all growth plates appear closed on the radiograph), the time in
captivity would be protracted. The need to remove any orthopaedic metal implants
prior to release also limits the methods of possible fixation. As this is a large
 mammal requiring forelimbs for both normal locomotion and digging, amputation
is not an ethical course of action. Euthanasia would be the author's preferred option
in this case.
184
192, I93: Questions
192a
192 A mute swan was reported by a member of the general public 48 hours ago
as appearing distressed. The swan has now been captured and is presented to you.
How would you deal with this casualty based on the photo shown (192a)?
193
193 A small otter cub was found in weak condition, apparently abandoned. It was
taken into care and improved for a few days, but then developed blackish diarrhoea
and died. On post-mortem examination the stomach was empty apart from blackish
deposits over the mucosa in the pyloric region, and the mucosa itself was ulcerated
(193). The intestines contained blackish mucoid material. Bacterial cultures of
 stomach and intestines failed to demonstrate any pathogens.
i. What is the blackish material over the pyloric mucosa?
ii. What is the likely cause of the lesions?
18.5
192, I93:Answers
192 The image shows fishing line at the
192b
swan's bill. Fishing line and hook injuries
are common in swans. Fluid therapy should
be administered to stabilize the casualty
prior to anaesthesia, especially where there
has been a known “delay in capture.
Anaesthesia is required for full assessment
and removal of most hooks and lines.
Gaseous agents (isoflurane or sevoflurane)
may be used for induction via a mask, or
intravenous agents (propofol or alfaxalone)
can be used. Where hooks and line are
limited to the bill, these may be easily
removed. Barbed hooks sometimes need to
be advanced and cut to allow removal.
Where the hook is not visible and line
extends down the oesophagus, radiography
or endoscopy is essential for assessing the
hook position (192b). Line must never just
be pulld, as this can cause severe oesophageal damage. Hooks in the oesophagus
 and proventriculus require removal, while those in the gizzard are rapidly broken
down by normal gizzard action and can be left in situ. Palpation of the oesophagus
may indicate areas of obstruction. Hooks in the oesophagus with line attached can
be dislodged using a plastic tube passed over the line to move the hook caudally.
Alternatively, hooks can be removed endoscopically or via a surgical incision.
e a m raan s san a  adssa s r po a t 
mucus, forms the bulk of the material in the intestines.
i. The condition is not due to an infectious agent, but is believed to be a result of
stress. Cubs in these situations typically have enlarged adrenal glands. Ulceration
of the pyloric mucosa is commonly seen in cubs that are being hand reared,
especially by inexperienced people.
186
194, 195:Questions
194
 Badgers (194a) may become
194a
infected  with  Mycobacterium bovis
(bovine tuberculosis).
i. What are the clinical signs associated
with this disease in badgers?
ii. What are the options for testing
badgers for M. bovis infection?
195
195 i. List four drug combinations that would be suitable for inducing general
anaesthesia in this free-ranging western grey kangaroo (195).
i. How should these drugs be administered?
administration in this species?
187
194, 195:Answers
194b
ve
-ve
3806
-20
3-
-ve
ve
2106
4106
2006
2206
2406
194 i. Some animals may show no or few clinical signs, with infection becoming
latent or even resolving. Clinically infected animals show weight loss. There may be
an increased likelihood of intraspecies aggression due to the debilitation leading to
wounding, which may be a source of M. bovis infection. Peripheral lympha-
 denopathy may be associated with respiratory lesions and wounding. Clinical signs
associated with the site of infection may also be evident, lung lesions being most
common followed by those in the kidney and GI tract.
i. Clinical sampling (culture of sputum, faeces, urine and bite wound swabs). The
sensitivity of such tests is relatively poor and the time taken for culture is limiting
in clinical situations. Blood testing using the badger Tb ELISA test or the MAPIA
"Brock rapid test' (194b) has g0od specificity (94.3% and 95%, respectively), but
poor sensitivity (40.7% and 53%, respectively). A badger gamma interferon test has
improved sensitivity and specificity, but is not yet commercially available. The
xa uo-isod si srq u siso q rg reis po, pnda
and serial lymph node culture.
195
i. Tiletamine and zolazepam; ketamine and xylazine; ketamine and
medetomidine; etorphine and acepromazine.
i. Intramuscularly via a projectile syringe (to prevent a prolonged chase).
ii. Capture myopathy.
188
196, 197:Questions
196a
196 i. What are the likely causes of the
injury in this hedgehog (196a)?
i. How would you anaesthetize this animal
in order to treat the wound?
1976
197 These mourning doves were presented to a wildlife rehabilitation clinic within
a 48 hour period (197a). All 19 doves were thin to emaciated and all exhibited
varying degrees of central nervous system signs on presentation, ranging from a
mild ataxia to profound torticollis with rolling seizures. All received supportive
nutritional care, diazepam and systemic anti-inflammatories, but died within 24
hours of presentation.
Gross necropsies revealed emaciation with little muscle mass and no fat stores.
The kaolin linings of the ventriculi were all bright green, but no ingesta was present
in the upper gastrointestinal (GI) tracts. No parasites were found in intestinal
content or in scrapings of the GI mucosa. All other organs appear normal.
Histopathology of the brain was performed on several of the birds (i97b).
i. What is the significance of the histopathological lesion?
i. How did these doves acquire this infection?
ili. Is this condition treatable?
189
196, 197:Answers
196b
196 i. The linear wound is likely to have been caused by garden equipment, in
particular a garden strimmer.
i. General anaesthesia using a gaseous anaesthetic chamber. Isoflurane
or
sevoflurane are the gaseous agents of choice, the latter having the benefit of being
less irritant to the mucous membranes. Once anaesthesia is induced, a close-fitting
are available, but alternatives can be adapted from existing anaesthetic equipment
(196b). For longer procedures, hedgehogs should be intubated using a small
laryngoscope to visualize the larynx before placing an uncuffed endotracheal tube
(typically size 2.0 or 2.5).
 Monitoring equipment can be used in small mammals (such as the pulse oximeter
in 196b) and some commercial ventilators will work safely in animals of very low
body weight. Temperature should be monitored and maintained.
197 i. There is a cross section of a nematode larva in the brain. Additional sections
confirmed the identification of Baylisascaris procyonis larvae.
i. By ingesting seeds found in raccoon faeces. Omnivorous raccoons eat mulberries
and other fruits, the seeds of which pass through the GI tract undigested. Mourning
doves and other ground-feeding seed-eaters subsequently ingest the seeds, which
are contaminated with the first-stage larvated ova of B. procyonis, the raccoon
roundworm.
ii. In an aberrant host, such as mourning doves, the B. procyonis larvae migrate out
of the GI tract with an affinity for the brain and eye. The roundworms can be
eliminated from the raccoon with most common anthelmintics (e.g. pyrantel
pamoate or fenbendazole), but once an aberrant host has shown clinical signs, the
damage done by the migrating larvae is irreversible.
190
198, 199: Questions
198
198 i. What condition is this red fox suffering from (198)?
ii. How would you confirm your diagnosis?
ii. What are your options for treating this condition in the fox, and what might
influence your choice of treatment?
661
199 i. What species is this (199)?
i. What considerations are important when considering post-treatment release of
this species in the UK?
191
198,199:Answers
198 i. Chronic mange, caused by the parasite Sarcoptes scabiei. The animal shows
generalized skin lesions, weight loss and debilitation. Mange is relatively common
in foxes and appears to be especially prevalent in the urban fox population.
ii. By demonstration of S. scabiei mites on microscopic examination of deep skin
scrapes taken when the fox is sedated or anaesthetized.
ili. This type of mange affects other canids, including domestic dogs. Several dog
licensed commercial spot-on preparations containing the active ingredients
selamectin, moxidectin or amitraz are available for the treatment of mange in foxes.
Other products, such as injected or oral ivermectin and topical amitraz baths, have
also been used successfully in foxes. All these products have the disadvantage of
requiring multiple (two plus) treatments for them to be fully effective, requiring the
fox to remain in captivity or be re-trapped. Foxes with mange are often severely
debilitated when presented for treatment, with possible underlying systemic disease.
Euthanasia is the preferred course of action in the majority of cases. The effect of
the treatment of individual chronic cases on the prevalence of the disease in the fox
population as a whole is unknown.
199 i. A short-eared owl.
i. The status of this species varies according to region. It is partially migratory,
 moving south in the winter from the northern parts of its range. For example, in the
UK it is found all year round as a breeding species in the Midlands and further
north. In the south it has tended to be a winter non-breeding migrant. However, this
 may be changing and can even vary from year to year. It is becoming clear in
      rs n    
autumn, there are more recent instances of this species being observed during the
summer. Therefore, it is important that before releasing a short-eared owl its
migratory status must be considered. If not fit to migrate, it should be retained in
captivity until the next resident season. It is also important to liaise with local
ornithologists to obtain information on the local status and movements of the
species that year.
192
200, 20l: Questions
200 Fishing hook and/or line injuries are commonly seen in wild avian casualties
 and are particularly common in waterfowl. Ducks and swans may be seen with
fishing line hanging from their bills. Bats may also fall victim to discarded or
abandoned fishing tackle and are more likely to be found hanging from a branch
after becoming snagged on fishing line. What advice should be given to members
of the public who report such incidents?
20 1 a
20 1 b
201 i. What species is this (201a, b)?
i. What age and sex is this bird, and how can this be determined?
193
200,201:Answers
200
200 Care must be taken not to provide the member of public with advice that is
likely to compromise their own safety. Great care is required when catching
waterfowl on water and when handling large, potentially aggressive birds, such as
swans, or when climbing trees and handling bats.
Where a bird is seen swallowing a fishing line, it should be caught in order to
remove the fishing line and assess and treat any associated health problems.
Members of the public should not attempt to do this and specialist wildlife rescue
agencies should be contacted. Once captured, the line should be secured to the bird’'s
bill to prevent further ingestion (200). Where a bat has been found snagged on
discarded fishing tackle, it should be supported in a net while the fishing line is cut,
if safe to do so. All bats are potential vectors of bat lyssavirus and should be handled
as little as possible and with gloves. Scooping the bat into a small box or container
 minimizes the need for handling.
201 i. A barn owl.
ii. The lack of speckling on the breast feathers and the “heart-shaped’ facial disc
indicate this is probably a male. Females tend to have much rounder facial discs and
black speckling over the white breast feathers. 201b shows the talon on the third
digit. On this talon is a flange, indentations of which give an idea of the age. In this
case the indentations are quite deep, showing this to be a bird older than two years.
The width of the flange may also assist in sexing, although these differences are
very subtle.
194
202, 203:Questions
202
202 You are presented with a healthy roe deer kid (fawn) (202). How would you
deal with this animal?
203
203 Air sac disease is not uncommonly identified at post-mortem examination in
wild birds. What can be seen in the air sacs of this bird (203), and what is their
significance?
19.5
202,203:Answers
202 Deer fawns are mistakenly found as ^orphans' when they have simply been left
in cover and the doe is still nearby. It is unlikely that the fawn could be successfully
returned to where found and accepted by its mother at this stage, but this should
not be completely ruled out.
Deer fawns are difficult to rear, hard to release and may easily become
reared animals in particular can be aggressive and dangerous when adult.
Hydration status should be assessed and fluid therapy administered as necessary.
Bottle or syringe feeding is the ideal, but may be resented and stressful initially.
Fawns may be persuaded to lap from a bucket or bowl. Milk should be fed every
3-4 hours until the fawn is 8-10 weeks old. Ewe or goat milk is best, with vitamin
and probiotic supplementation. Defecation and urination should be stimulated
by using warm damp cotton wool around the perineum. Fawns should be weaned
at about ten weeks old. Suitable weaning foods include leafy browse (e.g.
hawthorn, bramble, wild rose) and fruits, although commercial lamb food may
also be fed. Hay and water should be provided.
203 Pentastomids, also known as tongue worms, a taxon of about 130 species
of parasites living exclusively in the respiratory tracts of vertebrates. Pentastomids
are vermiform, obligate parasites that are largely devoid of morphological
features. They are generally white in colour, although the black intestine can be
seen through the cuticle, and possess a mouth flanked by two paired hooks.
Approximately 90% of pentastomid species infect the lungs of reptiles. Only two
species have been identified as parasites of birds (Reighardia sternae in gulls and
terns, and Reighardia lomviae [pictured here] in guillemots). Both species live in
the host's air sacs and have a direct life cycle. A third avian pentastomid species
was identified in the air sacs of a black vulture (Aegypius monachus). While the
presence of pentastomid parasites in the air sacs may cause a low-grade irritation
and airsacculitis, they are not regarded as a primary cause of death in marine
birds. Secondary bacterial infections may worsen the clinical and pathological
picture and this may become significant where birds are debilitated for other
reasons such as oiling.
196
204, 205: Questions
204
204 The eye of a tawny owl is shown (204).
i. What can be seen?
ii. What are this bird's prospects for release?
205
affects those in the wild. Dental problerms have been shown to be a significant cause
of debilitation and death in hedgehogs that have been rehabilitated and released.
i. What factors might predispose to dental disease in this species?
ii. How might dental disease be prevented and treated in hedgehogs?
197
204,205:Answers
204 i. The anterior chamber is full of blood (hyphaema), probably as a result of
tralma.
ii. It is unlikely that this bird will regain much, if any, vision in this eye. While tawny
owls do use their sense of hearing for hunting, their sight, in particular binocular
vision, is extremely important. This requires full vision in both eyes. Therefore, this
bird has little prospect for release and euthanasia should be advised as soon as
possible unless the bird can be kept in captivity in such accommodation that its
welfare is not compromised.
205 i. The natural diet of hedgehogs is predominantly earthworms, molluscs and
insects. The chitinous exoskeletons of insects probably protect the teeth to some
extent against the build up of tartar and development of periodontal disease.
"Unnatural diets', such as those fed in captivity or found when hedgehogs are in
proximity to humans, might be expected to predispose to the development of
dental disease.
'saiug oi speal qaai aul uaamiaq pue punone reirei jo dn pimq aul '
bacterial infection, gum regression, periodontal disease and, eventually, tooth
loss. Treatment involves standard small animal dentistry techniques under general
anaesthesia. Antibacterials, such as metronidazole (10-20 mg/kg q12h), should be
used for 5-7 days, ideally starting courses of such drugs 24-48 hours before
dental surgery. In captive hedgehogs the diet should be adapted to try and prevent
recurrence of dental problems. Commercial insectivorous diets containing chitin
are available. Hard foods, such as crushed cat biscuits, may be fed as a readily
available alternative. Seaweed-based products added to food ('Plaque off') and
chlorhexidine solutions added to water may help to prevent periodontal disease.
Where possible, advice should be given to members of the public feeding
hedgehogs in their gardens as to the most appropriate feeds to use.
198
206: Question
206 A male adult koala is presented to
206
a wildlife clinic. The animal was found
on the ground at the edge of a reserve
with increased respiratory effort and
ataxia. There was little resistance to
restraint. On physical examination the
koala was found to be in good body
condition, weighing 5.7 kg. No abnor-
malities were detected on thoracic
auscultation (206) or abdominal palpa-
tion. The left superficial axillary lymph
node and both rostral mandibular lymph
nodes were enlarged. However, the koala
resented abdominal palpation. A blood sample was collected from the cephalic vein
and haematology/biochemistry revealed the following results:
Parameter
Result
Reference range
Haemoglobin
70 g/l (7 g/dl)
88-140 (8.8-14.0)
PCV
0.21 1/1 (21%)
0.29-0.44 (29-44)
MCHC
301 g/l (30.1 g/dl)
298-330 (29.8-33.0)
MCV
108 fl (108 mm²)
94-117 (94-117)
RBCs
1.6 × 1012/1 (1.6 × 10%/μl)
2.7-4.2 (2.7-4.2)
WBCs
74 x 10*/l (74 x 103/μl)
2.8-11.2 (2.8-11.2)
Neutrophils
12.5 × 10/1 (12.5 × 10²/ul)
0.5-6.3 (0.5-6.3)
Lymphocytes
61 × 10%/ (61 x 10²/μl)
0.2-5.8 (0.2-5.8)
Monocytes
0.5 × 109/1(0.5 x 103/μl)
0.0-0.6 (0.0-0.6)
Eosinophils
0 x 10*/l (0 × 102/μl)
0.0-1.1 (0.0-1.1)
Urea
7.1 mmol/ (19.9 mg/dl)
0.2-6.6 (0.56-18.48)
Creatinine
0.11 mmol/l (0.0012 mg/dl)
0.08-0.15 (0.0009-0.0017)
AST
151 u/l
0-134
ALT
144 u/l
(0-236)
ALP
38 u/l
(25-219)
GGT
25 u/l
(0-16)
LDH
401 u/l
(79-412)
Total protein
60 g/l (6.0 g/dl)
58-83 (5.8-8.3)
Albumin
29 g/l (2.9 g/dl)
34-50 3.4-5.0)
Globulins
31 g/l (3.1 g/dl)
18-39 (1.8-3.9)
Calcium
2.76 mmol/l (11.04 mg/dl)
2.28-2.97 (9.12-11.88)
I. phosphate
1.23 mmol/l (3.81 mg/dl)
0.79-1.96 (2.45-6.08)
i. What is the likely diagnosis?
ii. How would you confirm the diagnosis?
ili. What treatment options are available?
iv. Which virus is this disease associated with?
199
206:Answer
206 i. Lymphoid neoplasia. The marked lymphocytosis is highly suggestive of this
common disease of koalas. Supporting clinical features include peripheral
lymphadenopathy, moderate anaemia and mild hypoalbuminaemia.
i. Excisional biopsy of one of the enlarged superficial lymph nodes may reveal
neoplastic lymphocytes. Alternatively, a bone marrow aspirate can be collected from
the ileal crest under general anaesthesia. Squash preparations of the aspirate are
evaluated microscopically for myeloid:erythroid ratio, which in a healthy koala
should be 1.7 (0.8-2.7). If the koala is euthanased or dies, a post-mortem examin-
ation will permit definitive diagnosis via histopathology of multiple organs.
ii. No successful treatment options have been reported. Chemotherapy has been
attempted in selected cases, but as yet the results have been disappointing.
iv. Koala retrovirus (KoRV), an endogenous retrovirus closely related to gibbon ape
leukaemia virus, is associated with a number of common diseases of the koala,
including lymphoid neoplasia. Koalas with confirmed lymphoid neoplasia
frequently have high circulating levels of KoRV RNA.
200
ommona
and Latin names
African buffalo
Syncerus caffer
Desert tortoise
Gopherus agassizii
American alligator
Alligator
Eastern bearded
Pogona barbata
mississippiensis
dragon
American crow
Corus
Eastern box turtle
Terrapene carolina
bracbyrcbynchos
carolina
American mink
Neovison vison
Eastern chipmunk
Tamias striatus
Arabian oryx
Oryx leucoryx
Eastern grey squirrel
Sciurus carolinensis
Arctic fox
Alopex lagopus
Eastern pipistrelle
Pipistrellus
Atlantic white-sided
Lagenorhynchus
subflavus
dolphin
acutus
Elephant
Loxodonta spp.
Badger (European)
Meles metes
Elk
Cervuselaphus
Bald eagle
Haliaceetus
Flamingo
Phoenicopterus spp.
leucocephatus
Florida manatee
Trichecus manatus
Barn ow]
Tyto alba
latirostris
 Bat-eared fox
Otocyon megalotis
Fox
Vulpes vulpes
Bennett's wallaby
Macropus
Fox squirrel
Sciurus niger
rufogriseus
Golden pheasant
Chrysotophus pictus
rufogriseus
Goldfinch
Carduelis carduelis
Bewick's swan
Cygnus columbianus
Grey squirrel
Sciurus carolinensis
Bison
Bison bison
Great blue heron
Ardea berodias
Blackbird
Turdus merula
Great horned owl
Bubo virginianus
Black-headed gull
Larus ribundus
Great northern diver
Gavia immer
Blacksmith plover
Anitibyx armatus
Great horned owl
Bubo virginianus
Black vulture
Aegypius monachus
Greater flamingo
Phoenicopterus
Blue hare
Lepus timidus
roseus
Blue jay
Cyanocitta cristata
Greenfinch
Carduelis chtoris
 Bonelli's eagle
Hieraaetus fasciatus
Green turtle
Chetonia mydas
Brown hare
Lepus europaeus
Grey fox
Urocyon
Brush-tailed possum
Trichosurus
cinereoargenteus
vulpecuta
Grey seal
Halichoerus grypus
Canada goose
Branta canadensis
Guillemot
Uria aalge
Chaffinch
Fringilla coetebs
Harbour porpoise
Phocoena phocoena
Chimpanzee
Pan troglodytes
Hare
Lepus spp.
Chuck-will's-widow
Caprimuigus
Hedgehog (European) Erinaceus europaeus
carolinensis
Hippopotamus
Hippopotamus
Collared dove
Streptopelia
amphibius
Houbara bustard
Chlamydotis
Common blackbird
Turdus merula
undulata
Common buzzard
Buteobuteo
House sparrow
Passer domesticus
Common cuckoo
Cucuius canorus
Impala
Aepyceros
Common dolphin
Detpbinus deipbis
malampus
Common goldeneye
Bucephala clangula
Jackass penguin
Spheniscus demersus
Common kestrel
Falco tinnuncuius
Koala
Phascolarctos
Coot
Fulica spp.
cinereus
Cottontail rabbit
Silvilagusfloridanus
Kori bustard
Ardeotiskori
Daubenton's bat
Myotis daubentonii
Loggerhead sea turtle Caretta caretta
201
Appendix: Common and Latin names
Long-finned pilot
Globicephala melas
Scaly-breasted
Trichoglossus
whale
lorikeet
chlorolepidotus
Long-tailed duck
Clanguta byemalis
Scimitar-horned oryx (
Oryx dammah
Mallard
Anas platyrbynchos
Seal (Common/
Phoca vitulina
Moorhen
Gallinuta chioropus
Harbour)
 Mountain gorilla
Gorilla berengei
Serotine bat
Eptesicus serotinus
berengei
Shelduck
Tadorna tadorna
Mourming dove
Zenaida macroura
Short-beaked
Tachyglossus
Mute swan
Cygnus olor
echidna
acuteatus
Osprey
Pandion baliaetus
Short-eared owl
Asio flammeus
Otter (Eurasian)
Lutra lutra
Shrew (Common/
Sorexaraneus
Pacific harbour seal
Phoca vitulina
Eurasian)
richardsi
Silver-haired bat
Lasionycteris
Pallas cat
Felis manut
noctivagans
 Peregrine falcon
Falco peregrinus
South American
Sytvilagus
 Pipistrelle bat
Pipistrellus
forest rabbit
brasitiensis
pipistrellus
Sparrowhawk
Accipiter nisus
Prairie falcon
Falco mexicanus
(Northern/Eurasian)
Rabbit
Oryctolagus cuniculi
Stock dove
Columba oenas
Raccoon
Procyon lotor
Stone curlew
Burhinus
Raccoon dog
Nyctereutes
oedicnemius
Striped skunk
Mephitis mephitis
Rainbow lorikeet
Trichogtossus
Tawny owl
Strix aluco
haematodus
Vampire bat
Desmodus rotundus
Red bat
Lasiurus borealis
Western grey
Dacelo
Red fox
Vutpes vulpes
kangaroo
novaeguineae
Red kangaroo
Macropus rufus
Western grey squirrel
Sciurus griseus
Red squirrel
Sciurus vutgaris
White-backed vulture
Gyps bengatensis
Red-tailed hawk
Buteo jamaicensis
White-bellied bustard
Eupodotis
Reindeer
Rangifer tarandus
senegalensis
Roe deer
Capreotus capreolus
White-tailed deer
Odocoileus
Rosenberg's goanna
Varanus rosenbergi
virginianus
Sage grouse
Centrocercus
Whooper swan
Cygnus cygnus
urophasianus
Woodchuck
Marmotamonax
Saker falcon
Falco cherrug
Yellow mongoose
Cynictis penicillata
202
Note: References are to case
badgers (continued)
blackbirds (continued)
numbers
road traffic accidents 146,
cat attacks 24
186
syngamiasis 63
‘abandoned’' young
suspected poisoning 138
blood sampling
fedgling birds 66
territorial fighting/wounds
cetaceans 21
fox cubs 14
107,131
see also haematology
squirrels 36
trypanosome infection 38
blood smear
Acanthocephala parasites 165
wire snare wounds 30
green turtle 105
adiaspiromycosis 17
baits 92, 138
trypanosome infection
air sac disease 203
ballistic injuries, birds 31, 102
(badger) 38
airgun injuries 31,102
“balloon syndrome' 136
bluetongue virus 164
amyloidosis, hares 110
bats
boat collision injuries 15
anaesthesia (general)
capure and handling 89,
bone disease, metabolic 137
deer 43, 174
141
bonfires, and hedgehogs 185
ducks 157
cat bites 182
bots
echidna 120
Daubenton's 141
grey squirrel 155
gaseous agents 84
fishing line/hook injuries
nasopharyngeal in deer 95
hedgehogs 196
200
botulism 117
intramuscular agents 174
pipistrelle 182
bovine tuberculosis 119, 131,
kangaroo 195
rabies risk 141
194
swans 192
68 pa1
deer 67
angel wing 7
wing injuries 112
testing of badgers 172, 194
Angiostrongyius vasorum 85
Baylisascaris procyonis 197
breeding success, and
anthelmintics 12,64
bearded dragon, eastern 144
polychlorinated biphenyls
anthrax20
birds
77
anti-oestrogens 77
avipox infections 1, 184
burn injuries, hedgehogs 185
anticoccidial drugs 122
cat bite wounds 24
bustards
aspergillosis 27,51
conservation of wild
eye fluke 115
Aspergillosis fumigatus 51
populations 24
Houbara 135,142,148,
auks 111
dehydration 187
152
Australia
diet 137,181
kori 101
import/export wildlife
eye fluke 115,175
trade 135
species 149
eye injuries/impairment
trichomonosis 101
psittacine beak and feather
153,173,204
white-bellied 115
disease 167
fedglings 24, 63, 66
buzzards
avian influenza virus 46, 47
head trauma 156, 168
common 23, 109, 147
avipox infections 1, 184
limb fracture fixation 37
tick-related syndrome 5
wing injuries 109, 134,
trichomonosis 169
badgers
183, 188
tuberculosis 23
bovine tuberculosis 107,
see also named species and
wing injuries 109
118,131,172,194
groups of birds
bycatch 62
coccidiosis 54
bite wounds
fractures 176, 191
badgers 107,131
calcium deficiency 137
handling 146
cats 24, 97, 182
caliciviruses 132
rearing and release of cubs
otters 163
canine distemper virus 69, 72
103
blackbirds
Caparinia tripilismites 86
release of adults 45, 107
ballistic injury 31
Capillaria spp. 160
203
xapul
Capillaria aerophila 12, 64
coccidiosis (continued)
diarrhoea (continued)
captive animal husbandry
rabbits 100, 122
hand-reared kangaroo
great northern diver 151
red squirrel 2
171
grey squirrels 126
Coenurus serialis 22
red squirrel, juvenile 2
hedgehogs 13
collision injuries
diclofenac 88
65 sads x.
sparrowhawk 156
die-off, mallard 118
red squirrel juveniles 2
swans 4, 183
jaP
seals 129
see also road traffic
great northern diver 151
turtle hatchlings 40
accidents
hedgehog 13, 205
capture
confiscated animals 135
loggerhead turtles 40
bats 89, 141
coot, air gun injury 102
stone curlew 181
deer 71
corneal oedema/ulceration 91
wild raptors 137
large herbivores 33, 34
Crenosoma striatum 12,64
dimetridazole 101
capture myopathy 142
crop impaction 29
diver, great northern 151
diagnosis 142
cryptosporidiosis 58
dolphins
Houbara bustard 142
cuckoo 170
euthanasia methods 104
long-legged birds 65
culling
stranding 8,104
prevention 113
badgers 119
dove
risk factors 113
bush-tailed possum 92
mourning 197
treatment 113
curlew, stone 46, 181
stock 190
cardiopulmonary
cygnets, release of orphan
duck viral enteritis (duck
resuscitation, sea turtle 83
179
plague)118
cat bite wounds
ducks, mating injuries 157
fledglings 24
deer
dysautonomia, leporine 6
pipistrelle bat 182
capture and handling 71
shrew 97
chronic wasting disease 99
eagle
cats, toxoplasmosis
epizootic haemorrhagic
bald 77
transmission 44
disease (bluetongue)
Bonelli's 137
cefovecin 129
virus 164
εchidna 120
Cephenymia spp.95
general anaesthesia 43,
Echinuria(Acuaria} uncinata
cetaceans
174
08
blood samplings 21
handling 43
ecotourism, risks to wildlife
bycatch 62
mule99
50
euthanasia methods 104
mycobacterial infection 67,
Eimeria spp. 55
strandings 8, 9,21, 62,
93
Eimeria melis 54
104
nasopharymgeal bots 95
Eimeria phocae 16
see also named cetacean
‘orphaned’ young 202
Eimeria stiedae 122
species
roe 43, 202
elephants, translocation 76
chaffinch 169, 177
road traffic accident 43, 71
elk, mountain 99
chelating agents 29
white-tailed 67, 93, 95, 99,
emaciation
chemical restraint 34, 71
124,150,164
hare 161
Chlarmrydophila spp. infection
dehydration
hedgehog 165
162
seals 19
sparrowhawk 116,156
cholecystitis, American mink
wild birds 187
whale 28
180
dental disease
white-tailed deer 124
chronic wasting disease 99
hares 161
emerging diseases
CITES 135, 149
hedgehogs 205
salmonellosis in garden
Cnemidocoptes spp.177
dermatophytosis 87
birds 48
coccidiosis
diabetes mellitus 126
trichomonosis 169
badger 54
 diaphragmatic hernia 3
Emmonsia crescens 17
harbour seal 16
diarrhoea
emphysema, subcutaneous
hares 55
coccidiosis 2,16
97, 136
204
Index
enclosures, causing injuries
fledgling birds (ontinued)
haematology (continued)
152
cat bite wounds 24
West Nile virus 53
environmental hygiene 2, 27,
precocial 66
hand rearing
129
syngamiasis 63
badger cubs 103
etorphine hydrochloride 104
fluid therapy
deer fawms 202
 European brown hare
bird casualties 187
Eurasian otter 106
syndrome 132
seals 19
rabbits 18
Eustrongyloides ignotus 98
flukes
red kangaroo 171
euthanasia methods, stranded
bile 180
red squirrel 2
cetaceans 104
eye 115, 175
tawny owl chicks 41
fly strike (myiasis) 79
handling
external skeletal fixator 37,
folic acid supplementation 44
deer 71
176
foreign bodies
echidna 120
eye disease
air gun pellet 102
foxes 114
fuke 115, 175
lead shot 26
hedgehogs 114
mycoplasmosis (pheasant)
foxes
raptors 114
35
cubs 14
hares
seals 91
grey60
amyloidosis 110
eye examination, birds 173
handling 49, 114
blue (mountain/
eye injuries
heartworm 85
Arctic/Irish) 189
mute swan 145
mange 198
coccidiosis 55
tawmy owl 153, 204
maternal behaviour 14
dental disease 161
rabies 60
dysautonomia 6
faecal samples, coccidiosis 2,
red 49, 85,198
European brown hare
54
road traffic accident 11
symdrome132
faeces, blue colouration 138
zoonotic disease risks 49,
myxomatosis 189
falcons
60
pasturellosis 189
Chlamrydophila spp.
fracture fixation, external 37,
syphilis/treponemiasis 39,
infection 162
176
189
peregrine 81,160
fractures
uterine sepsis 110
saker (caprive bred) 58
badger 191
head trauma
aker (wild) 121, 162
birds 26,37, 109, 123,
sparrowhawk 156
feather louse 140
134,188
tawmy owl168
fenbendazole 64
echidna 120
health and safety
fbroma, cutaneous 150
spinal (hedgehog) 57
avian influenza infections
fibromatosis (squirrel pox)
47
75
gapeworm’infection
handling of badgers 146
fishing hook/line injuries
(syngamiasis) 63
health and safety policy 82
advice to public 200
garden birds, feeding 48
heartworm 85
bats 200
geese, Canada 29, 175
heavy metal toxicity 4, 29,
moorhen 127
 goanna, Rosenberg's 149
117
swans 166, 192
gorillas
hedgehogs
fishing net/line entanglement
human disease risks 50
burn injuries 185
loggerhead turtle 74
mountain 50, 130
care in captivity 13
seals 70
greenfinches 48
causing human
whales 28
guillemot 27
dermatophytosis 87
flamingo
gull, black-headed 134
dental disease 205
cutaneous avipox 1
Gyps spp. 88
general anaesthesia 196
"eg cramp′65
handling advice 114
fleas, rabbit 68
H9N2 virus 46, 47
lungworm infestation 12,
fledgling birds
haematology
64
altricial 66
lymphoid neoplasia 206
skin lesions 32
20.5
xapul
hedgehogs (ontinued)
lanugo coat (seal pup) 178
Mycoplasma agassizii 52
spinal cord injury 57
lead poisoning 4, 29, 117
Mycoplasma gallisepticum35
subcutaneous emphysema
lead shot 26
mycoplasmosis 35, 52
(balloon syndrome')
levamisole 12, 64
myiasis 79
136
lice, avian 79
myxomatosis 68, 189
trauma 125,196
limb deformity, mute swan 7
treatment/euthanasia
Jimb fractures
navigation, cetaceans 8
decisions 125
badger 191
neoplasia, lymphoid 206
triage 32, 125
birds 37
New Zealand, possum
Yersinia
liver, avian tuberculosis 23
eradication 92
pseudotuberculosis
Joon, common (great
nonsteroidal anti-
infection 158
northern diver) 151
inflammatory drugs
hemipene prolapse 144
lorikeets
toxicity 88
Hepatozoon spp. 159
rainbow 78
nutrition, see diet
herons, great blue 98
scaly-breasted 78
hippoboscids (flat flies) 79
Jungworm
oiled birds 25
hippopotamus 20
hedgehog 12, 64
causes of death 27
 hooves, management in
seals 61
cleaning 56
captive animals 59
lymphoid neoplasia 206
mute swan 90
human diseases
lyssaviruses 89
release 56
dermatophytosis 87
survival rates 111
risks to wildlife 50
mallard
triage 56
see also zoonotic diseases
die-off 118
0ocysts, coccidial 2, 54
hygiene
mating injuries 157
ophthalmological
captive seals 129
manatee, trauma 15
examination,birds 173
oiled seabirds 27
mange, fox 198
Orbivirus spp. 164
hyphaema 204
MAPIA *Brock rapid test'
orphaned young
194
cygnets 179
impala 108
marsupials 44, 171, 195
deer 202
imprinting 41
maternal behaviour, fox 14
squirrels 2, 36
influenza viruses, avian 46,
medetomidine 174
oryx, scimitar-horned 33, 59
47
megaloesophagus 3
osprey 26
isoflurane 84
metronidazole 101
osteodystrophy
Isospora melis 54
mice, bot larva infestation
buzzard 147
jvermectin 64
155
hand-reared owls 41
Ixodes spp. ticks 5, 96
migration, birds 26, 170, 199
Otostrongylus circumlitis 61
mink, American 180
otters
kangaroos
mites
adjaspiromycosis 17
anaesthesia induction 195
Caparinia tripilis 86
fight wounds 163
diarrhoea in hand-reared
Cnemidocoptes spp. 177
pleurisy 163
171
Sarcoptes scabiei 198
rearing and release 106
red 171
Moniliformis 165
stress ulcers 193
western grey 195
monitoring, post-release 26,
owls
Karenia brevis 15
143
barn 96,123,201
keel lesions, oiled seabirds 25
moose 99
sexing and ageing 201
kestre]
morbilliviruses 72
ectoparasites 79
common188
mycobacteriosis, avian 23, 81
eye injuries 204
fracture fixation 37
Mycobacteriumbovis 119,
fractures 123
ketamine 174
131,172,194
great horned 10, 53
koala, lymphoid neoplasia
deer 67, 93
hand-rearing 41
206
tests 172,194
head trauma 168
in USA 93
pole traps 123
206
Index
owls (oontinued)
psittacine beak and feather
road traffic accidents
short-eared 199
disease 78,167
badgers 146, 186
tawny 41, 79,153, 168,
birds 109
203
rabbits
deer 43, 71
tck reaction 96
hand feeding 18
foxes 11
West Nile virus 10
hepatic coccidiosis 100,
122
Saimonella typhimurium
papillomas, viral 177
leporine dysautonomia 6
DT40 and DT56 48
Parafilaroides gymnurus 61
myxomatosis 68
salmonellosis 48
paramyxovirus type 1 148
tapeworm 22
Sarcoptes scabiei 198
parasites
rabies 49,60, 89, 141
shizonts 159
falcons 121, 162
reservoir species 60
seal pox 128, 129
foxes 85
raccoons
seals
hedgehogs 12, 86, 165
canine distemper virus 69
dehydration 19
herons 98
parvovirus 69
Eimeria phocae coccidiosis
mourning dove 197
raceway, mobile 33
16
pentastomids 203
raptors
fishing line/net
rabbits 22
Capillaria spp. infection
entanglement 70
shelduck 80
160
grey 19,73,94,128,129
sparrowhawk 116
collision injuries 156
harbour (common) 3,61,
swans 140
handling 114
70,72,91,178
tawny owl 79
ophthalmological
lungworm infestation 61
typanosomes 38
examination173
phocine distemper 72, 73
parvovirus 69
trichomonosis 169
 post-release monitoring
Pasturella septicaemia 182
visual impairment 173
143
pasturellosis 189
see also named raptor
premature births 178
 pentastomids (tongue worms)
species
release (priorities for) 94
203
red blood cells, cytoplasmic
septicaemia,Pasturella 182
pentobarbitone 104
inclusion bodies 105
Serratospicuium spp. 121
peregrine falcon 81, 160
red tide 15
sevoflurane 84
periodontal disease 205
Reighardia spp.203
shelduck 80
pheasant, golden 35
release of wildlife
shrew, cat attack 97
Philophthaimus distomatosa
adult badgers 45, 107
sinusitis, pheasant 35
115
badger cubs 103
sare injuries
Phitopbthaimus gral 175
birds with eye
badgers 30
phocine distemper 72, 73
injuries/visual impairment
mountain gorilla 130
pike hook 166
153,173,204
sparrowhawk 116
pleurisy, otters 163
factors for consideration
Eurasian 156
poisoning
154
trichomonosis 42
lead 4, 117
migratory birds 170, 199
Spilopsyllus cuniculi 68
suspected in badgers 138
non-native species 36
spinal cord injury, hedgehog
‘pole’trap 123
oiled seabirds 56
57
Polychtorinated bipheryls77
otter cubs 106
squirrel pox 75
Porrocaecum depressum 116
seals 94, 143
squirrels
possum, bush-tailed 92
swans (post injury) 183
bot larva infestation
power cables, collisions 183
respiratory tract disease
(warbles’) 155
poxviruses 75
birds 46,148,190
coccidiosis 2
premature young, seals 178
otters 163
fox 75
pressure necrosis 25
restraint
grey 36,126,155
Prosthorbyncus spp. 165
chemical 34, 71
Hepatozoon infection 159
Pseudamphistomum
physical 33, 34
orphaned/abandoned
truncatum180
risk assessments 82
young 2, 36
207
xapul
squirrels (continued)
t+puo8 musmdoxoi
wallaby, Bennet's 44
red 2, 159
schizonts 159
warbles'155
 staff health and safety
toxoplasmosis 44, 159
waterfowl
avian influenza infections
susceptible species 44
air gun injury 102
47
trade, in wildlife 135
fishing line entanglement
risk assessments 82
translocation 139
127,166,192,200
starvation, sparrowhawk 116
elephant 76
parasites 80
stone curlew 46,181
guidelines 139
weaning, wild rabbits 18
strandings
 transportation, long-legged
West Nile virus 10, 53
cetaceans 8,9, 21,104
birds 65
whales
cinical examination 21
traps, barn owl 123
euthanasia 104
euthanasia 104
Treponema cuniculi 39
long-finned pilot 28
loggerhead turtle 74
treponematosis 39,189
pilot 104
mass 8
triage
wounds 28
rehabilitation and
hedgehog 32, 125
Wildlife and Countryside Act
reflotation 9
oiled seabirds 56
(1981) 36
stress 2
road traffic accidents 186
wing amputation, swans 183
stress ulcers, otters 193
Trichomonas gallinae 101,
wing injuries
swans
169, 190
bats 112
anaesthesia induction 133
trichomonosis 169
black-headed gull 134
angular limb deformity 7
buzzard 169
buzzard 109
aspergillosis 51
chaffinch 169
kestrel 188
botulism 117
kori bustard 101
collision/impact injuries 4,
sparrowhawk 42
Yersinia pseudotubercutosis
183
stock dove 190
infection 158
feather louse 140
Trinotonanserinum 140
fishing hook/line injuries
Trypanosoma
zoonotic diseases
166, 192
(Megatrypanum) pestanai
anthrax 20
lead poisoning 4, 117
38
dermatophytosis 87
mute 4,7,51,90,117,
tuberculosis
rabies 49, 60, 89, 141
133,145,166,183,192
avian23
risk from badgers 146
oiled 25,90, 111
bovine 67,119,131,172,
seal pox 129
release of orphan cygnets
194
transmitted by foxes 49
179
turtles
Yersinia
sexing 145
collapse/drowning 83
pseudotuberculosis 158
syngamiasis 63
eastern box 52
syphilis, hares/rabbits 39, 189
fishing line entanglement
74
Taenia serialis 22
green, blood smear 105
Tamer unit 33
hatchling husbandry 40
tapeworm 22
loggerhead 40, 74, 83
territorial behaviour
badgers 45,107,131
uterine prolapse, impala 108
mute swans 145
uterine sepsis,hare 110
thick-knee, Eurasian (stone
curlew) 46, 181
visual impairment, birds 153,
thorny-headed worms 165
173,204
tick-related symdrome 5
vitamin D deficiency 137
ticks, birds 5, 96
vulture
tongue worms (pentastomids)
black 203
203
white-backed 88
tortoise, mycoplasmosis 52
208