FOX
SISSON
MOISE
SECOND EDITION
TEXTBOOK OF
CANINE AND FELINE
Cardiology
Principles and Clinical Practice
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
TEXTBOOK OF
CANINE AND FELINE
Cardiology
Principles and Clinical Practice
SECOND EDITION
Philip R. Fox, D.V.M., M.Sc.
Diplomate, American and European College of Veterinary Internal Medicine (Cardiology)
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
Astor Chair of Comparative Medicine
 Director, Caspary Research Institute of The Animal Medical Center
Cardiologist, Department of Medicine
Bobst Hospital of The Animal Medicine Center
New York, New York
David Sisson, D.V.M.
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine (Cardiology)
 Associate Professor of Cardiology
Director, Cardiology Service
L'niversity of lilinois
College of Veterinary Medicine
Urbana, Illinois
N. Sydney Moise, D.V.M., M.S.
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine (Cardiology
and Inteinal Medicine)
Cardiologist, Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital
 Professor of Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences
Cornel University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Ithaca, New York
W.B. SAUNDERS COMPANY
A Division of Harcourt Brace &i Company
W.B, SAUNDERS COMPANY
A Divusion of Harcouri Brace Conpany
The Curtis Center
Independence Square West.
Philadelphia, Perinsylvania 19106
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publlcation Data
Textbook of canine and feline cardiology: principles and clinical practice—2nd ed. /
[edited by] Philip R. Fox, David Sisson, N. Sydney Moise.
p.
cm.
Rev. ed. of: Canine and feline cardiology. 1988 
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-7216-4044-3
1. Dogs—Diseases.
2. Cats—Diseases.
 3. Veterinary cardiology.
I. Fox, Philip R.
Il. Sisson, David.
+ Ill. Moise, N. Sydney.
IV.Canine and feline cardioiogy.
[DNLM: 1. Dog Diseases. 2. Cat Diseases.
3. Cardiovascular Diseases
veterinary.
SF 992.C37 T355 19991
SF992.C37C36 1999
636.7'089612—dc20
DNLM/DLC
96-22328
TEXTBOOK OF CANINE AND FELINE CARDIOLOGY: Principles and Clinical Practice
ISBN 0-7216-4044-3
Copyright @ 1999, 1988 by W.B. Saunders Company.
All rights rescrved, No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any imears, clctronic or mechanical,
inclucding photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval systen, without permission in writing from the publishcr.
Printed in the Lnited States of America.
l ast dligit is ihe print number:
6
8
7
6
5
3
2
Contributors
Clarke E. Atkins, D.V.M.
Clay A. Calvert, D.V.M.
Diplomatc, American College of Veterinary Internal Medi-
Professor, Department of Small Animal Medicinc and Sur-
cine (Cardiology and Internal Medicine); Professor of Medi
gery, Univcrsity of Georgia Collcgc of Vetcrinary Medicinc,
cine and Cardiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, North
Athcns, Gcorgia
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina
Myocardial Diseases of Dogs; Canine Heartworm Disease
Cardiac Manifestations of Systemic and Metabolic Disease
Dennis T. Crowe, Jr., D.V.M.
 Diplomate, Amcrican Collegc of Vetcrinary Surgcons, Ameri-
Sanford P. Bishop, D.V.M., Ph.D.
can Collcgc of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care;
Diplomate, Amcrican College of Veterinary Internal Medi-
Georgia Veterinary Specialists Emergency and Critical Carc,
cinc (Cardiology), American College of Veterinary Pathol-
Alpharetta, Georgia
ogy, Professor of Pathology, Departnent of Pathology. Uni-
Cardiopulmonary and Cerebral Resuscitation
versity of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alahama
EmbryonicDevelopment;Cardiovascular Anatony:Necropsy
Kenneth H. Dangman, M.D., Ph.D.
Techniques for theHeart and Great Vessels
Clinical Fellow, Baystate Medical Center, Tufts Universily,
School of Medicine, Springfieldl, Massachusetts 
 John D. Bonagura, D.V.M., M.S.
Electrophysiologic Mechanisms for Arrhythmias
Diplomatc, American College of Veterinary Intcrnal Medi-
Gregory B. Daniel, D.V.M., M.S.
cine (Cardiology and Internal Medicine); Gilbrcath-McLorn
Diplomatc, Amcrican College of Veterinary Radiology: Asso-
Professor of Veterinary Cardiology, Departmcnt of Veterinary
Medicinc and Surgery, University of Missouri College Of
ciate Professor and Head, Radiology, Department of Smail
Veterinary Mecicine, Columbia; Cardiologist,
,Veterinary
Animal Clinical Science, Cniversity of Tenncssce College of
Medical Teaching Hospital, Columbia, Missouri
Veterinary Medicinc, Knoxvillc, Ienncssec
Nuclear Imaging, Copnted Tomography, and Magnetic Reso-
Putmonary Edema; Congenital Heart Disease
nance Imaging of the Heart
 Janice M. Bright, D.V.M., M.S.
Peter G. G. Darke, B.V.Sc., Ph.D., D.V.R., D.V.C.,
 Diplomate, American College of Vetcrinary Internal Medi-
M.R.C.V.S.
cine (Carcliology and Internal Medicine); Associate Profes-
Diplomatc, European College of Veterinary Internal Medi-
sor, Department of Clinical Sciences, Colorado State Univer-
cine (Cardiology); Department of Vetcrinary Clinical Stud-
sity Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Fort Collins, Colorado
ies, Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studics, Lniversity of
Nuclear Imaging,(ompnted Tomography.and Magnetic Reso-
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Unitcd Kingdom 
nance Imaging of the Heart
Acquired Vatvular Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats
 Jernifer J. Devey, D.V.M.
John D. Broussard, D.V.M.
 Diplomate, Amcrican College of Veterinary Einergency and
Diplomate, American Collcgc of Veterinary Internal Medi
Critical Carc; South Paws Veterinary Referral Cenier, Spring-
cinc; Internist, Department of Medicine, Bobst Ilospital of
feld, Virginia
Thc Arnimal Medical Center, New York, New York
Cardiopnulnonary and Cerebral Resuscitation.
Hyperthyroidism und Other High Output States
Ray Dillon, D.V.M., M.S.
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary lnternal Medi-
James W. Buchanan, D.V.M.
cine; Jack O. Rash Professor of Medicinc, Department of
Professor of Cardiology, University of Pennsylvania School of
Small Animal Surgery and Medicinc, Auburn U'niversity, Col.
Vetcrinary Medicine, Philadclphia, Pcnnsylvania
lege of Vetcrinary Mcdicinc, Auburn, Alahama
Prevalence of Cardiovascular Disorders
Feline HeartuormDisease
vii
vii CONTRIBUTORS
Stephen J. Ettinger, D.V.M.
Affairs, The Ohio State University Collcge of Veterinary Med-
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Internal Medi-
icine, Columbus, Ohio
cine (Internal Medicine and Cardiology); California Animal
Anesthesia and the Heart
Hospital, Los Angeles, California
The PhysicatExamination
Bruce W. Keene, D.V.M., M.Sc.
 Diplomatc, Amcrican College of Veterinary Internal Medi
Howard E. Evans, D.V.M., Ph.D.
cinie (Cardiology); Associate Professor of Cardiology, North
 Professor Fmeritus, Deparunenl of Biomecdical Sciences, Cor-
Carolina State University Collcgc of Veterinary Medicinc,
nell University College of Veterinary Medicine, Ithaca, New
Ralcigh, North Carolina
York
Nutrition and Management of Cardiovascular Disease
Cardiovascular Anatony
Mark D. Kittleson, D.V.M., Ph.D.
George E. Eyster, V.M.D., M.S.
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Internal Medi-
Diplomate, Amcrican College of Veterinary Surgeons; Profes-
cine (Cardiology); Professor, Department of Mcdicine and
sor, Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, Michigan
Epidemiology, University of California School of Veterinary
State University College of Veterinary Meclicinc, East Lan-
Medicinc, Davis, California
sing; MSU Veterinary Clinic, East Lansing, Michigan
Maragemet ofHeartFaitre Principlef Treatent,Therap
Basic Cardiovascutar Surgery and Procedures
tic Strategies, and Pharmacology
Philip R. Fox, D.V.M., M.Sc.
Diplomate, American and European College of Veterinary
Clarence Kvart, D.V.M., Ph.D.
Diplomate, European Colege of Veterinary Internal Medi-
 Internal Medicinc (Cardiology); American Collegc of Vetcri-
nary Emergency and Critical Care; Astor Chair of Compara-
 cine (Cardiology); Associate Profcssor, Department of Ani-
tive Medicine; Director, Caspary Rescarch lnstitute of The
mal Physiology, Veterinary Faculty, Swedish University of Ag
Animal Medical Center; Cardiologist, Department of Medi-
ricultural Scicnccs, lppsala, Sweden
cinc, Bobst Ilospital of The Animal Medical Ccnter, New
Acquired Vatvular Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats
York, New York
Cardiowascular Anatomy;TheHistory:Electrocardiography:
Linda B. Lehmkuhl, D.V.M., M.S.
aaounwpun ssouo utuu ndio pn iniopivou
 Diplomatc, American College of Veterinary Internal Medi
ment ofFeline Arrhythmias; Cardiopulmonary and Cerebral Re
suscitation,Feline Cardionyopathies;NutritionandManagement
cine (Cardiology); Assistant Professor, The Ohio State Uni-
ofCardiowascular Disease; Hyperthyroidisn and OtherHigh Out-
Thc Ohio State University Veterinary Teaching Hospital, (Co-
pnit States;Systenic Hypertension:Recognition and Treatnent;
lumbus, Ohio
Congenital Heart Disease
Robert L. Hamlin, D.V.M., Ph.D.
Diplomate, American Collcgc of Veterinary Internal Mcdi-
Meryl P. Littman, V.M.D.
Diplomate, Anerican Collcgc of Veterinary Intcrnal Medi-
herg Professor of Veterinary Bioscienccs, Department of Vet-
cine; Associate Professor of Medicine, Chief, Section of Medi-
erinary Biosciences, The Ohio State University College of
cine, Univcrsity of Pennsylvania School of Velerinary Medi-
Veterinary Medicinc, Columbus, Ohio
cinc, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Normal Cardiooascular Physiology; Pathophysiology of the Fail
Systemic Hypertension: Recognition and Treatment
ing Heart
Si-Kwang Liu, D.V.M., Ph.D.
Neil K. Harpster, V.M.D.
Associatc Director, Caspary Research Institute; Senior Pathol-
Diplomate, Amcrican College of Veterinary Internal Medicinc
Ogist, Department of Pathology, Thc Animal Medical Center,
(Cardiology); Adjunct Professor, Tufts University School of Vet-
New York, Xew York
crinary Medicine, Boston; Director of Cardiology, Angell Me-
Cardiovascular Pathology
morial Animal Hospital, Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts
Diagnosis and Managemen ofFeline Arrhythnias
Peter F. Lord, B.V.Sc., F.R.C.V.S.
Steven C. Haskins, D.V.M., M.S.
Diplomate, Amcrican College of Vetcrinary Radiology; Pro-
Diplomatc, American College of Anesthcsiology, American
fessor, Department. of Clinical Radiology, Vcterinary Faculty,.
Collcgc of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care; Depart-
Swedish U'niversity of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Swcden
Radiology
ment of Veterinary Surgery and Radiology, University of
California School of Veterinary Medicine, Davis; Veterinary
Medical Teaching Hospital, Davis, California
Diane E. Mason, D.V.M., M.S.
Treatment of Shock
Diplomate, American Collcge of Veterinary Anesthesiolo-
 gists; Clinical Instructor, Departunennt of Aatomy and Physi-
John A. E. Hubbell, D.V.M., M.S.
 ology, Kansas State University, College of Veterinary Medi-
Diplomate, Amcrican Collcgc of Veterinary Anesthesiolo-
cine, Manhattan, Kansas
gists; Associate Professor and Assistant Dean for Academic
Anesthesia and the Heart.
CONTRIBUTORS
 ix
John W. McCall, B.Sc., M.Sc., Ph.D.
Clarence A. Rawlings, D.v.M., Ph.D.
Professor of Parasitology, Department of Parasitology, L'ni-
Diplomatc, American College of Veterinary Surgeons; Profcs-
versity of Georgia College of Veterinary Medicine, Athens,
sor and Head, Departunent of Small Animal Medicine, Uni-
Georgia
versity of Georgia College of Veterinary Medicinc, Athens,
Canine Heartworm Disease
Georgia
Canine Heartworn Disease
Matthew Miller, D.V.M., M.S.
Diplomatc, American Collcge of Vetcrinary Medicine (Cardli-
 John E. Rush, D.V.M., M.S.
ology); Associatc Professor, Departmcnt of Small Animal
Diplomate, Armcrican Collcge of Veterinary Internal Medi-
Medicine and Surgery, Texas A&M University Colge of
cinc (Cardiology); American College of Veterinary Emer-
Veterinary Medicinc; Staff Cardiologist,
,Texas Veterinary
gency and Critical Care; Associate Professor, Clinical Cardiol.
Mecical Center and Veterinary Teaching Hospital, College
ogisl, Co-Director of ICU/Emergency Services, Tufts
Station; Adjunct Assistant Professor of Pediatric Cardiology,
University School of Veterinary Medicinc, North Grafton,
Baylor College of Mcdicinc, Houston, Fcxas
Massachusetts
Infectiue Endocarditis;NutritionandManagement of Cardiovas-
Syncope and Episodic Weahness
cular Disease
Richard A. Sams, Ph.D.
Michael S. Miler, V.M.D., M.S.
 Professor, Dcpartmcnt of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, The
Diplomate, American Board of Veterinary Practitioners (Ca-
Ohio State L'niversity College of Veterinary Medicine, Co-
nine and Feline); Director, Cardiology-Lltrasound Refcrral
lumbus, Ohio
Service, Thornton, Pennsylvania
Pharnacology and Pharmacokinetics of Antiarrhythmic Drugs
Electrocardiography
William C. Shoemaker, M.D.
N. Sydney Moise, D.V.M., M.S.
Professor of Anesthesia and Surgcry, Universily of Southern
Diplomate, American Collcgc of Vetcrinary Internal Mcdi-
cine (Cardiology and Internal Medicine); Cardiologist, Vctcr-
California, Los Angeles, California
inary Medical Teaching Ilospital; Professor of Medicine, De-
Pathophysiology and Monitoring of Shoch
partiment of Clinical Sciences, Cornell University College of
Vetcrinary Medicine, lIthaca, New York
 David Sisson, D.V.M.
(Cardiovascutar Anatomy; Echocardiography and Doppler Int-
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Medicine (Cardi-
aging;Phurmacology and Pharmacokinetis ofAntiarrhythmic
ology); Associate Professor of Cardiology, Dircctor, Cardiol.
Drugs: Diagnosis and Management of Canine Arrhythnias; Pace-
ogy Servicc, University of Illinois College of Veterinary Medi-
cine, Urhana, Illinois
ThePhysical Examination: Cardiac Catheterization and Angio
William W. Muir, II, D.V.M., M.S., Ph.D.
Cardiography; Management of Heart Failure: Principles of Treat-
Diplomate, American Collcgc of Veterinary Ancsthesiolo-
ment,Therapeutic Strategies,and Pharmacology:AcquiredValuu
gists; American College of Veterinary Encrgency and Critical
lar Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats; Infective Endocarditis;
Care; Professor, Department of Veterinary Clinical Scienices,
Myocardial Diseases of Dogs; Pericardial Disease and Cardiac Tu-
The Ohio State Univcrsity College of Veterinary Medicine,
Columhus, Ohio
Pharmacology and Pharmacokinetics of Antiarrhythmic Drugs
Francis W. K. Smith, Jr., D.V.M.
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Internal Medi-
Michael R. O'Grady
cine (lnternal Medicine and Cardiology); Clinical Assistant
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Internal Medi-
Professor, Department of Medicine, Tufts University School
cinc (Cardiology and lnternal Medicine); Associate Profes-
 Of Veterinary Medicinc, North Grafton, Massachusetts; Chief
sor, Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary Col-
 of Medicine, Cardiopet Inc., Little Falls, New Jersey
lege, University of Guclph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada
Electrocardiography
Myocardial Disease of Dogs
David Spreng, D.V.M.
Mark E. Peterson, D.V.M.
Associatc Professor of Surgery, University of Bern Faculty of
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary lnternal Medi-
Vetcrinary Medicinc, Bern, Switzerland
cine; Associate Dircctor, Caspary Rescarch Institute; Head,
Cardioputmonary and Cerebral Resuscitation.
Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Bobst.
H lospital of Thc Animal Medical Center, New York, New York
Hyperthyroidisn and OtherHigh Output States
Peter F. Suter, D.V.M.
Former Professor of Veterinary Racdiology and Intcrnal Mccli-
cine, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Professor Emcri-
Paul D. Pion, D.V.M.
tus, Faculty of Veterinary Medicinc, Lniversity of Zurichr;
Diplomatc, Amcrican Collcge of Veterinary Internal Medi-
Former Director, Small Animal Vetcrinary Mcdical Clinic
cine (Cardiology); President, Vetcrinary Information Net-
and Division of Radiology, Kant. Tierspital, University of
work; private practice, Davis, California
 Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Nutrition and Managenenl of Cardiovascular Disease
Radiology
CONTRIBLTORS
William P. Thomas, D.V.M.
tario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, On-
Diplomate, Amcrican College of Veterinary Internal Medi-
tario, Canada; President, Vet Med Fax Consultation Services,
cine (Cardiology); Professor, Department of Medicine and
 Santa Fe, New Mexico
Epidemiology, University of California School of Vcterinary
Electrocardiography
Medicine,Davis Chif, Cadioloy Service,Vrinary M
cal Teaching Hospital, University of California, Davis, Califor-
Wendy A. Ware, D.V.M., M.S.
nia
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Internal Medi-
(ardiac CatheterizationandAngiocardiography;Pericardial Dis-
cinc (Cardiology); Associate Professor, Departments of Veter-
ease and Cardiac Tumors
inary Clinical Scicnccs and Veterinary Physiology and Phar-
macology, Iowa State Lniversity College of Veterinary
Larry P. Tilley, D.V.M.
Mcdicine, Ames; Staff Cardiologist, Veterinary Teaching Hos-
Diplomate, Amcrican Collcgc of Veterinary Internal Mecdi-
 pital, Ames, lowa
cine; Adjunct Professor, Department of Clinical Studies, On-
Pulmonary Edema
Preface
And I said of medicine,that this is an art which considers
ing abreast of new and complex technologies, and a
the constitution of the patient,and has principles of aclion
bewildering mountain of information. Accordingly, we
and reasons in each case.
intended Textbook of Canine and Feline Cardiotogy: Prin-
ciples and Clinical Practice, 2nd edition, to be a com-
PLATO, 4TH CENTURY B.C.
pletc, cutting-edge, and authoritative treatisc of clinical
cardiology. Toward this end, we enlisted some of thc
Hewho has an absolutely clear insight into the immediate
cause ofan illness,must be considered preeminently capable
most notable leaders in the field, and focused their
expertise into a comprehensive and usable source of
of combating it.
definitive information.
HERMANNI BOERHAAVE, 1703
 Physicians havc stated through antiquity that in or-
der to provide optimal care, one must first understand
The young physician starts life wuith twenty drugs for each
the fundamental bases which underlie structure and
disease,and the old physician ends life with one drug for
function. Conscquently, we have included the essential
tuwenty diseases.
 aspects of cardiac anatomy, phyisology, pathology, and
pharmacology and synthesized these elements with dis-
SIR WILLIAM OSLER, LATE 19TH CEN1URY
cussions of diagnostic techniqucs and principles of
therapy. In this fashion, we have attempted to bring
The past 25 years have witnesscd rcmarkable ad-
together the "statc of the art"’ into one practical
vances in the science and practicc of cardiology. Barely
source designed to bridge the gap bctwcen clinical
a generation ago, clinical assessment was largcly con-
cardiology and the empiric foundation on which such
fned to auscultation, elcctrocardiography, phonocar-
 practice should be based.
 diography, and radiography; angiography was thc gold
 To accomplish these goals we have organized this
P a sem an sio e  ps
textbook as a multipurpose resource incorporating the
 provincc of referral institutions. Therapy often cen-
best features of an atlas, a reference, and a clinical
tered on furoscmide, digitalis glycosides, propranolol,
 guide. In order to allow recent medical advances to be
and a few other agents, and correction of congenital
readily grasped, the text employs a practical and easy-
anomalies was thc purvicw of surgeons. In contrast,
to-usc format, combined with detailed figures and ex-
today's clinical cnvironment offers an impressive array
tensive bibliographies. By this construct, the 2nd cdi-
of technologic advances. High resolution, noninvasive
tion covers ali clinical, diagnostic, and treatment facets
imaging has rcplaced invasive angiocardiography as
of canine and feline cardiology. It begins with the
the gold standard for morphologic diagnosis. A broad
anatornic and physiologic basis of cardiovascular struc-
range of therapeutic options havc become available,
ture and function; integrates these concepts with pa-
including a plethora of new cardiovascuiar drugs and
tient assessment, diagnostic methods, and examina-
rclated agents. Furthermore, nonsurgical interven-
tion:
reviews
 abnormal
 cardiovascular  function;
 discusses principles of therapy; details congenital and
correct certain congenital anomalies.
acquired cardiovascular diseases, and reviews salient
The exponential expansion of knowledge associated
cardiovascular surgery and ancsthesia. Thus, it is our
with these rapid changes presents unique chailenges
 hope that this texthook will assist a broad range of
t0 the student, practitionel, and specialist. Since the
students, practitioners, and specialists who are respon-
first edition of Canine and Feline Cardiology was pub-
 sible for evaluating and treating the cardiac paticnt to
lishcd in 1988, clinicians must increasingly divide their
do the right thing for thc night reasons, and to do
time between the burgeoning mcdical literature, keep-
them dependably, consistently, and effectively.
xi
xii
PREFACE
A uniquc and notable aspect of this work emanates
and acknowledge their support for the International
from the fact that it represents the comprehensive
Cardiac Health Council. We have enjoyed working with
cxpertise of 50 cardiologists and allied specialists. As
 our students, interns and residents, technicians, and
such, it represents thc largest multi-authored cardiol-
 colleagues, who will continue to be our partners in
 ogy textbook in the world. Thesc contributors are not
learning. And to the many pets whom I have treated
 only international authorities in their respective fields
 and from whom I have learned, I remain grateful.
but are also precmincnt and thoughtful clinicians. We
 I am especialy apprcciativc of David Sisson and
have made every effort to synthesize and integrate
Sydney Moise who have remained my dear friends
their extensive experience into a focused, systematic
through the trials and tribulations of editing this text-
 approach to provide the most advanced resource avail-
book. Together, we ardently sought to capture the
able on canine and feline cardiology.
current knowledge, collctive cxcitcment, and magic
that is the hallmark of this rapidly moving field. It is
contributors who have gencrously shared their knowl-
our wish that you will use this texthook with expertisc
edge, innovation, creativity, and time. It has been a
 and confidence to improve care for your paticnts, to
rewarding expcricnce and a pleasure to collaborate
stimulate future diagnostic and therapeutic advance-
with each of them. We sincerely thiank Frank Pipers
 ments, and to cducate trainces who wish to lcarn cardi-
and Merial Limited for a grant which made possible
ology.
the reproduction of color plates for this tcxtbook,
PHILIP R. FoX, D.V.M.
The Animal Medical Center
Ncw York, Ncw York
1999
PhilipFox
SydneyMoise
David Sisson
NOTICE
 Companion animal practice is an ever-changing field. Standard safety precau-
tions must be followed, but as new research and clinical experience grow,
changes in treatment and drug therapy become necessary or appropriate.
The authors and editors of this work have carefully checked the generic and
 trade drug names and verified drug dosages to assure that dosage informa-
tion is precise and in accord with standards accepted at the time of publica-
tion. Readers are advised, however, to check the product information cur-
rently provided by the manufacturer of each drug to be administered to be
  as p a  o q r  s  
the contraindications for administration. This is of particular importance in
regard to new or infrequently used drugs. Recommended dosages for ani-
mals are sometimes based on adjustments in the dosage that would be
 suitable for humans. Some of the drugs mentioned here have been given
cxperimentally by the authors. Others have been used in dosages greater
than those recommended by the manufacturer. In these kinds of cases, the
responsibility of those administering a drug, relying on their professional 
skill and expericence, to determine the dosages, the best treatment for the
 patient, and whether the benefits of giving a drug justify the attendant risk.
The ediors cannol be responsible for misuse or misapplication of the
material in this work.
THE PUBLISHER
rlls
1
8. Echocardiography and Doppler
Imaging
The Normal Heart: Cardiovascular
130
N. SYDNEY MOi SF and PHILIP R. FOX
Structure, Function, and
Physiology
9. Cardiac Catheterization and
1
Angiocardiography
173
 1.  Embryologic Development: The Heart and
WILLlAM P. THOMAS and DAVID SISSON
Great Vessels
10. Nuclear Imaging, Computed Tomography.
SANFORD P. BISHOP
 and Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the
2. Cardiovascular Anatomy
Heart
13
193
PHllIP R. FOX, N. SyDNeY MOi SE.
GREGORYB. DANIEL and
HOWARD E. EVANS,
JANICE M. BRIGHT
and SANFORD P, BISHOP
3.
 Normal Cardiovascular Physiology
25
IV
ROBERT L.HAMLIN
Abnormal Cardiovascular Function
and Principles of Therapy
203
11. Pathophysiology of the Failing Heart
II
205
Examination of the Patient with
ROBERT L. HAMLIN
12.
 Management of Heart Failure: Principles of
Cardiovascular Disease
39
 Treatment, Therapeutic Strategies, and
4.
 The History
41
Pharmacology
216
PHILIP R. FOX
DAVID SISSON and MARK D. KITTLESON
 The Physical Examination
46
13.
 Pulmonary Edema
251
5.
DAVID SISSON and
WENDYA. WARE and JOlIN D. BONAGURA
STEPHENJ.ETTINGER
14.
 Pathophysiology and Monitoring of
Shock
265
WILLIAM C.SHOEMAKER
TII
15.
Treatment of Shock
272
Diagnostic Methods
65
STEVEN C. HASKINS
6. Electrocardiography
16.
 Electrophysiologic Mechanisms for
67
MICHAEL S. MIlL.ER, lARRY P. TILLEY,
Arrhythmias
291
FRANCIS W. K. SmiTH, JR.,
KENNETII H. DANGMAN
and PHILIP R. FOX
17.
 Pharmacology and Pharmacokinetics of
7.
Radiology
107
Antiarrhythmic Drugs
307
PETER F. LORD and
WIlIIaM W. MUIR, Iil, RICHARD A. SAMS
PETERF.SUTER
and N. SYDNEY MOISE
XV
xvi CONTENTS
18.
 Diagnosis and Management of Canine
31.
 Feline Heartworm Disease
727
Arrhythmias
331
RAY DILLON
N. SYDNEY MOI SE
19.
 Diagnosis and Management of Feline
VI
Arrhythmias
386
Effects of Systemic and Metabolic
PIlILIP R. FOX and
NEIL K. IIARPSTER
Disorders on the Heart
737
20.
 Pacemaker Therapy
400
32.
 Nutrition and Management of
N. SyDnEY mOiSE
Cardiovascular Disease
739
21.
Cardiopulmonary and Cerebral
PAUl. D. PION, BRUCE W. KEENE.
Resuscitation
MATTHEW MILLER, and PHILIP R. FOX
427
DENNIS T. CROWE,Jr.,PHILIP R.FOX,
33.
 Cardiac Manifestations of Systemic and
JENNIFERJ. DEVEY, and DAVID SPRENG
Metabolic Disease
757
22.
 Syncope and Episodic Weakness
446
CLARKE E. ATKINS
JOHN E. RUSH
34.
 Hyperthyroidism and Other High Output
States
781
V
PIlILIP R. FOX, JOHN D. BROUSSARD,
and MARK F, PETERSON
Diseases of the Heart and
35.
 Systemic Hypertension: Recognition and
Circulation
455
Treatment
795
23.1
 Prevalence of Cardiovascular
MERYL P. 1.ITTMAN and PlIILIP R. FOX
Disorders
457
JAMES W. BUCHANAN
VII
24.
Congenital Heart Disease
471
Cardiovascular Pathology
815
JOHN D. BONAGURA and
LINDA B. LEHmKuHl.
36.
 Cardiovascular Pathology
817
25.
 Acquired Valvular Heart Disease in Dogs
SI-KWANG LIU and PHILIP R. FOX
and Cats
536
37. Necropsy Techniques for the Heart and
DAVID SISSON, CLARENCE KVART,
Great Vessels
845
and PETER G. G. DARKE
SANFORD P. BISHOP
26.
 Infectious Endocarditis
567
MATTHEW W. MILLER and DAVID SISSON
VIII
27.
Myocardial Diseases of Dogs
581
Cardiovascular Surgery and
DAVID S1SSON, M1CHAEI. R. O'GRADY,
and CIAY A, CALVERT
Procedure
851
28.
 Feline Cardiomyopathies
621
 38. Anesthesia and the Heart.
853
PHILIP R. FOX
DIANE F. MASON and
29.
 Pericardial Disease and Cardiac
JOHN A. E. HUBBEII.
Tumors
679
39.
 Basic Cardiovascular Surgery and
DAVID SISSON and WILLIAM P. THOMAS
Procedures
866
 Canine Heartworm Disease
GEORGE F. EYSTER
30.
702
CLAY A. CALVERT,
Appendix
883
ClARENCE A. RAWLINGS,
and JOHN w. McCALL
Index
919
PLATE1
Eight-month-old,polycythemic cat with cyanoticcongenital heart disease(tetralogy of Fallot).Mucous
membranesreveal cyanosis(courtesy of Dr.PhilipFox).
PLATE2
Retinal photographfrom a dogwith systemic hypertension.Lesionsinclude preretinaland intraretinal
hemorrhage,mildvascular tortuosity,and intraretinal edema(courtesy of Dr.SandraVan derWoerdt).
PLATE3
Color-flowDoppler echocardiogram (short-axis view)
recorded at theheartbasefrom adogwithsevere
pulmonic stenosis.Disturbedsystolicflowisrecorded
ascolor variance(yellow/red/green)beginningat
AO
the pulmonic valve.AO,aorta;PA,pulmonaryartery
(courtesy of Dr.Philip Fox).
PA
PLATE4
ColorM-mode can be useful tohelp
time flow events.In this dog with
subaortic stenosishighly disturbed,
turbulentflowwasrecorded ascolor
AO
variance(yellow/green) during systolic
ejection through the aortic valves.
Arrows indicate onset of systole.
Pandiastolic aorticregurgitation is
LA
coded asred.AO,aorticroot;A,lft
atrium (courtesy of Dr.Philip Fox).
ReDl
PLATE5
Top:Color-flowDoppler echo
cardiogram（right parasternal
long-axis view)from a cat with
ventricular septal defect (VSD).
Blood shunting toward the trans-
ducer—from theleft ventricle(LV)
across theVSD,to the right ven-
tricle (RV)--is coded red.Color
variance(yellow/green)results
from increased flowvelocity.
Bottom:Transseptal interrogation
of the defect by continuous-wave
Dopplerrecords ahigh systolic
velocity (5.5m/sec),suggesting a
small(“restrictive”)VSD.Amax-
imal gradient of 121 mmHg (i.e.
6I8NAOGN
pressure drop across the defect)
was estimated using theBernoulli
ECG
equation.The spectral trace above
Replau
thebaseline indicatessystolicflow
toward the transducer(courtesy of
Dr.Philip Fox).
RA
PLATE6
Color-flowDopplerechocardiogram
(right parasternal short-axis view)
recorded attheheartbasefrom a
dog witharestrictiveVSD.Systolic
flowcrosses the defect below the
aorticroot(AO),moves anteriorly
and toward theRVoutflowtract
and pulmonary artery (PA).The
verybrightmosaic ofcolorsignals
(aliasing)isassociated withturbu-
lent flow.Compare the normal,
laminarflowthroughthePA here
(coded blue—away from the trans-
ducer)，with the disturbed flowin
ECG
Plate3.A,left atrium;RA,rgh
atrium (courtesy of Dr.Philip Fox).
Replau
RA
PLATE7
Color-flowDoppler echocardiogram(right parasternal
long-axisview)ofa dogwitha sinusvenosus atrial septal
defect.Blood shunts through the defect from theleft
atrium (LA) into the right atrium (RA) and is coded red,
signifyingflowtoward thetransducer.Thecolor signal
changesfromred toblue indicating the aliasing point
(ie.,thepoint where thebloodvelocity exceeds the
system’s abilitytoaccuratelyrecord it.)LV,leftventricle
(courtesy of Dr.Philip Fox).
Not
PLATE8
Color-flowDoppler echocardiogram (left
apical four-chamber view) ofa dogwith a
large ostium primum atrial septal defect,
which comprised part of an endocardial
cushion defect.Flowtoward the transducer
(coded red) crosses the defect in thelower
atrialseptum,and alsomovesthrough the
mitral and tricuspidvalvestofill eachrespec-
tivevenricleduringdiastoleVftvn-
240K3
tricle;RV,right ventricle(courtesy of Dr.
ECG
Steven Rosenthal).
Pause
Replau
PLATE9
Color-flowDopplerechocardiogram(left
apicalfive-chamberview)recordedfrom the
same doginPlate8aftersurgicalrepairof
the defect.Flow isno longerrecorded across
RA
thebasal atrial septum,but instead travels
normally from theLA to theLV during dia-
stolic filling（courtesy of Dr.Steven
Rosenthal).
ECG
Pause
Replau
RV
PLATE10
Color-flowDoppler echocardiogram(right
parasternal long-axis view)from a dogwith
atrioventricularvalveendocardiosisand
regurgitation.Themitral and tricuspid
regurgitant jets are displayed asmosaiccol-
ored signalscaused by turbulentflow(vari-
anceis indicated by yellow/green),origi-
natingfrom themitral and tricuspidvalves
respectively (courtesy of Dr.Philip Fox).
8NCOK3
ECG
Peuse
Replau
PLATE11
Photomicrograph (Masson
trichrome stain) of a section of
ventricularseptumfrom acat with
idiopathic hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy.Two abnormal intra-
muralcoronary arterioles display
severe wall thickening (arterio-
sclerosis, or“small vessel” dis-
ease),and are surroundedby blue
staining fibrous connective tissue.
Myofberdisarraysresent
ticularly in the right-hand region
(courtesy of Dr. Si-Kwang Liu).
PLATE12
Photomicrograph (Masson
trichrome stain)of a left ventric-
ularmyocardial sectionfrom acat
with idiopathicmyocardial failure.
Severe myocardial necrosis is pre-
sent.Diffuse and massivereplace-
mentfibrosis with mid-mural
accentuationisindicated bythe
dark blue staining tissue （courtesy
of Dr. Si-Kwang Liu).
The Normal
Heart:
Cardiovascular
Structure,
Function, and
Physiology
elopment
The Heart and Great
SANFORD P. BISHOP
A thorough knowledge of developmental anatorny is essential to assist
Detailed reviews of embryologic development'- and an excellent description
of cardiac morphogenesis have been reported.
 Developmental abnormalities result in a variety of cardiac defecis (chap-
ters 23, 24), the most severe of which cause early embryo death. Only a
portion of animals with abnormalities survive to birth with congenital heart
disease; many of these resull in clinical signs early in life, whereas milder
forms may be asymptomatic or not cause signs until adulthood.
EMBRYOLOGY
EARLY FORMATION OF THE HEART
The heart originates as paired structures in the splanchnic mcsoderm,
first appearing at about the three- to four-somite stage. This mesodermal
tissue eventually becomes the myocardium. Shortly afterward, endocardial
tissue, also from the mesoderm, combines bilaterally with the myocardial
progenitor tissue to form paired endocardial tubes. These paired endocar-
dial tubes migratc centrally and fuse to forim a single straight cardiac tube
consisting of myocardium, endocardium, and associated extracellular mate
rial. At this stage, interference with fusion of the two paired structures can
result in formation of two independent beating hearts, one on cach side of
the embryonic midline.
Conotruncal cardiac malformations result frorn abnorrmalities in develop
ment of neural crest-derived tissue.-s They include tetralogy of Fallot,
transposition of the great vessels, subaortic ventricular septal defects, double
outlet right ventricle, and other outflow tract abnormalities.
CARDIAC LOOP
The straight cardiac tube is contained in the primitive pericardial cavity
and has the ventral aorta on its anterior end and the omphalomesenteric
A
THE NORMAL HEART: CARDIOVASCULAR STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND PHYSIOLOGY
veins at the posterior end. The tube undergoes a series
During formation of the cardiac loop, the endocar-
of bends and folds to form the cardiac loop with the
dium invaginates through the cardiac jelly and into
various clearly defined structures, the sinus venosus,
the myocardium, forming trabeculae that persist into
atrium, ventricle, and bulbus cordis (Fig. 1-1). The
adult life and form the papillary muscles. 'The cardiac
caudally located sinus venosus receives blood from thie
jelly disappears from the ventricular portion with the
entire embryo and is separated frorn the atrium by the
development of trabeculation but persists longer in
sinoatrial sulcus, the site of the future sinoatrial node
the atrioventricular canal and bulbus cordis regions.
 or pacemaker of the heart. During final stages of car-
The cardiac jelly is invaded by endocardial cells and in
diac loop development, the atrium forms two lateral
these latter regions forms the endocardial cushions
lobes but is still a single chamber. Caudal to the atrium,
that participate in cardiac septation.
the ventriclc takes on a saccular shape and is separated
from the atrium by a distinct atrioventricular canal.
The bulbus cordis is separated frorn the ventricle by
SEPTATION
the bulboventricular sulcus. The region adjacent to
the ventricle will become the infundibular region of
After the development of the cardiac loop stage, the
the adult heart, and the most cranial portions will
 heart undergoes a series of septations that divide the
form the aorta and pulmonary artery (Fig. 1-2).
left and right sides of the structure. However, openings
remain between all charnbers, resulting in two parallel
communicating circulations. The bulbus cordis elon-
VENTRICLE FORMATION
gates and separates into two channels, forrning the
aorta and pulmonary arlery. Muscle tissue disappears
Cardiac contractile activity begins during the early
distal to the tricuspid valve primordia. The proximal
cardiac loop stage when myocytes have discernible ac-
portions of the bulbus cordis forrn the infundibular
tin and myosin contractile proteins.o, 1 Although
muscular regions of the ventricles. The sinus vennosus
valves are not yet formed, forward flow of blood is
 becomes separated from the left atriun by deepening
maintained by constriction of the tube at the atrioven-
of the atrioventricular sulcus and opens only into the
tricular canal. The endocardium is separated from the
right atrium. The caval veins obtain independent
myocardium by an extensive extracellular matrix of
openings into the right atrium, and part of the sinus
glycosaminoglycans and glycoproteins, the cardiac jelly.
venosus becormes the coronary sinus (Fig. l-3A). At
The cardiac jelly aids in forming a valvelike action of
thte same time, the pulrnonary veins connect with tht
the primitive heart, and once pulsatile forward flow of
left atrium. In the adult heart, the smooth portions of 
blood is established during cardiac loop formation,
the left and right atrium are derived from the sinus
blood pressure of about l mmHg may be recorded in
venosus region of the cardiac loop. Irregular pectinate
the chick embryo.12. u By completion of septation at 6
portions are derived from embr yonic atria.
days in the chick embryo, left ventricular systolic pres-
 In the ventricle, septation begins from the apex by
sure is 3.5 mmHg'4 and by the tine of hatching, blood
extension of the trabeculation process and growth of
 pressure is reported to reach 30 mmHg.1s
tissue toward the atrioventricular canal, forrning the
rent.ao
FIGURE 1-1
Ventral vicws of thc devcloping heart, illustrating
forrmation of the cardiac loop from the straight.
cardiac tube. ao. arch, aoric arches, AV const.,
atrioventricular constriction; bulh. cord., bulbus
cordis: BV sulc., bulboventricular sulcus; Cuv. d.,
Cuvicr's duct: omph. v., omphalomesenteric veins;
bulb. cord
SA sulcus, sinoatrial sulcus: sin. ven., sinus
trium
venosus; ven1. c., vehnac cavac; velil., venuicle; vent.
ao.,ventral aortic roots.
AVconst
EMBRYOLOGICDEVELOPMENT5
FIGURE1-2
Scanning electronmicrographs
of chick embryo hearts, showing
modifications of the external
formof the heart atpostlooping
stages (ventral views). (A) Third
day of incubation.At this stage,
the bulbus cordis (T + C) cannot
be separated into its two
components.Arrowsindicate the
interatrial (top）and
interventricular (bottom) sulci.(B)
Fourth day of incubation.The
bulbus isgrowinglongitudinally
andbendsaroundatransverse
axis.This is the point at which its
two components,truncus and
conus, can be distinguished.
Compare the size of the two
atria.(C) Fifth day of incubation.
Note therapid growth of the
right atrium.(D) Sixth day of
incubation.The proximal
segments of the aorta and
pulmonary artery are already
formed.However,there is no
external separation.Note the
location of theinterventricular
sulcus (arrowhead).The apex of
the heart is alreadyformedby
theleftventricle.
A,atrium; Ao, aorta; A-Vc,
atrioventricular canal;C,conus;
LA,left atrium;P,pulmonary
artery; RA,right atrium; T,
truncus;V,ventricle.
(Reproduced by permission from
Icardo JM:The growing heart:
An anatomical perspective.In
Zak R(ed):Growth of theHeart
inHealth and Disease.NewYork,
Raven Press, 1984,p 41.)
primaryinterventricular foramen(Fig.1-3B).The pri-
superiorportionof theseptumprimum andeventually
maryinterventricularforamenpartiallyclosesbyform-
coalesce,forming the ostium secundum.Another
inga connective tissue masswhen theventral septal
septum—-the septum secundum—arises from the dor-
tissue fuses with the septal portion of the atrioventricu-
sal atrial wall,descends down over therightside of the
lar(AV)cushion.However, theventralportion of the
septum primum, and joins the atrioventricular canal
primary interventricular foramen remains open,be-
cushion. An opening called the fossa ovalis persists in
comingtheconnectionof the aorta with theleft ventri-
theseptum secundum.Thisfossa ovalis isnormally
cle. Ventricular septal defects result when this ventricu-
covered by the septum primum, forming the valve of
lar septalpartitionfails toclose;theymaybelocated
the fossa ovalis (Fig. 1-3D). Defects in this region
anywherefromthepulmonicinfundibularregionto
include(1）patient foramen ovale(due tofailure of
the aortic outflowregion.
normal postnatal anatomic closure of this opening),
In the atrium, the septum primum extends from
(2）ostium primum defects(due to incomplete fusion
the dorsal atrialwall toward the atrioventricularcanal,
of the septum primum with the atrioventricular cush-
formingthe ostiumprimum.This openingisnormally
ions),and(3)ostium secundum defects(the septum
completely occluded when the septum primum fuses
with the dorsal andventral endocardial cushions(Fig.
primum does notcover thefossa ovalis).
1-3C). At the same time, perforations appear in the
Atrioventricularvalveformationoccurslatein the
6
THE NORMAL HEART: CARDIOVASCULAR STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND PHYSIOLOGY
first trimester in mammals, long after the cardiac septa
Jumens, consisting of cardiac jelly seeded with mesen-
tion is completed.l6 The atrioventricular canal forms
 chymal cells and covered with endothelium. Abnormal
the dorsal and ventral endocardial cushions,  which
blood flow during development results in thickcned
fuse with the atrial and ventricular septa, giving rise to
leaflets and commissural fusion.18. 19 A range of pul-
the mitral and tricuspid valves (Figs. 1-3C,D). The
monic valve abnormalities have been described in thc
valves form from tissue  folds derived in  ventricular
beagle dog related to a recessive gcne with incomplete
walls and cndocardial cushions, through a process of
 penetrance.2o Additional conotruncai lcsions, includ-
 Mesenchymal cell deathi and mesenchyinal transforrma-
 ing tetralogy of Fallot, have been described in the dog
tion of endocardial cells. Perforations in the cusp ap-
pear and coalesce to form the chordae tendineae and
 other defects involving the semilunar valves and subval-
 papillary muscles.'7 Dcvelopmental anomalics in the 
vular outlow tract region may be due to a genetic
atrioventricular cushions result in persistent openings
predisposition  in  combination  with  abnormal  flow
belween the chambers, usually accompanied by clefts
characteristics during valve formation.
in the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve, and some-
times in the tricuspid valve as well. These endocardial
cushion defects are especially common in the cat.
AORTIC ARCHES
Semilunar valves also develop relatively late in car-
diac morphogenesis. Following conotruncal septation,
 Six pairs of aortic arches develop with the ermbryonic
three cushions form within the aortic and pulmonary
heart. ln mammals, the first, second, and fifth pairs
FIGURE 1-3
Septal development of the lheart.
(A-D) Drawings illustrating
developmen of ventricular and
atrial septa and formation of
A
alrioventricular valves by the AV
endocardial cushions (from thc
postlexop stage to late fetal
devclopment). AVC, anterior
ovalis, fossa ovalis: F. ovale,
foramen ovale: LA, left atrinm; 
LV Post. Pap.. left ventricle
ccundum; O. prirm.,
ostium primum; Pul. v., P.V
vena cava; RA, right. atrium: S.
sct., septun secunrdun; S. prim.,
sepl um primum; S. spuriurm, S.
spur., septum spuriurm.
D
EMBRYOLOGIC DEVELOPMENT
External
Holidanlerles
Rt. subcla
artery
Aorllca
Dorsal aortae
R1.7th
A
B
C
FIGURE 1-4
(A-C) Development of the aortic arrh systen in the dog and car. Ouly the third, fourth, and sixth
arches are retained, and the seventh interscgmental arteries form the subclavian arteries.(Modilicd
5th ed. New York, MeGraw-l Iill, 1982, p 7.)
rcgress complctely at an early stagc, and the third pair
tial capillary bed. Prior to this lime, myocardial mutri-
forms the internal carotid arteries. The left fourth arch
tion is supplied by the rabecular myocardial sinusoidal
forms a portion of the aortic root, joining with the
 system. Coronary arteries arise as buds from the aortic
persistent left dorsal aorta. The right fourth arch forms
root that connects to the capillaries, Although mecha-
the root of the subclavian artery, and the distal right
 nisms of coronary vascular developmcnt are unknown,
dorsal aorla disappcars. The sixth arches form the
a variely of physical and chemical factors have been
pulmonary arteries, and the distal portion of the lcft
experimentally shown to influence vascular growth.23
retains its connection with the dorsal aorta as the
These signals include mechanical factors, cndothelial
ductus arteriosus (Fig. 1-4; see also Fig. 24-39).
migration, chemical signals from perivascular cells,
A variety of vascular ring anornalies are possible due
and autonomic nerve fibers, which extend into the
lo malformations in the development of the aortic
myocardium at the samc time as the coronary vessels
archcs. The most common in dogs is persistence of
develop.
the right fourth aortic arch. This results in entrapment
of the csophagus berween the pulmonary artery, tra-
SPECIALIZED CONDUCTION TISSUE
chea, and the ligamentum, or patent ductus arteriosus.
Functional specialized conduction tissue may first be
when the hcart has already been beating for some
PULMONARY VEINS
time. The specialized conducting tissue, including the
sinus and atrioventricular nodes, and the Purkinje fi-
The lungs develop from primitive foregut indepen-
 bers appear to develop from myocardial cells, forming
dernt of the heart. They drain during tarly embryo-
rings that fuse at the crux of the hcart.s Cells in the
gencsis to the cardinal and umbilicovitelline veins.
sinus venosus beat al a faster rate than those of the
Pulmonary veins develop from the left atrium to com-
ventricle, even in the cardiac loop stage. Although
municate with pulmonary venous drainage. Failure of
liutle is known about the ontogeny of the conducting
this system to develop normally can result in anoma-
system, thesc more rapidly beating cclls in the sinus
 lous pulmonary venous drainage.
venosus presumably become the sinus node."9
TRANSITION FROM FETAL TO
CORONARY VASCULATURE
NEONATAL BLOOD FLOW
 The coronary circulation appears relatively late in
 development, showing up initially as remnants of the
 During circulatory development from thc embry
 trabecular channels remaining patent to forrm the ini-
onic to fetal to neonatal stage, transformation occurs
8
THENORMALHEART:CARDIOVASCULARSTRUCTURE,FUNCTION,ANDPHYSIOLOGY
inbloodflow,fromasinglecircularsystemtoadouble
content.Only5to10percentofrightventricularand
parallel circuit and finally, to a double circulation in
pulmonary artery blood traverses the lungs.
series (Fig.1-5).In the early embryo, all blood enters
Highly oxygenated blood returning from the pla-
the heart through a single venous sinus,traverses
centa andumbilicalvein crosses theductusvenosus
straight through theheart,andis distributed to the
and enters the right atrium through the postcava.The
bodyandplacentabywayoftheconotruncalbulb and
anatomicrelationshipofthepostcava and thefossa
the aortic arches.As partitioning develops,a double
ovalis allowsmostof thisbloodtobe shunted directly
circuit is formed with parallel flow and cross-over prox-
through thefossa ovalis to theleft atrium andventri-
imalanddistaltotheventricles.Virtuallyallblood
cle.This highly oxygenated blood then enters the root
entering theright atriumfrom the head andforepart
oftheaortawheremostisdistributedtotheheadand
ofthebodyisshuntedbyamuscularfoldontheatrial
heart.Theremaindertraversestheaorticisthmusto
septumadjacenttothefossaovalisdirectlyintothe
bemixedwithpoorlyoxygenatedbloodentering the
right ventricular cavity.This poorly oxygenated blood
aorta through the ductus arteriosus.The oxygen-poor
is pumped by the right ventricle to the pulmonary
bloodfromthedistalpostcavaispreferentiallyshunted
artery,across the ductus arteriosus,to the descending
tothe tricuspidvalve andenters therightventricle.30
thoracic aorta en route tothe placenta andlower body.
Thus, two parallel circuits are present in the fetal
Thepulmonaryvasculaturehasveryhighresistance
period, which deliver highly oxygenated blood to the
owing tofluid surroundingthevessels andowingto
brain andheart andlesswelloxygenatedbloodtothe
vasoconstrictioninresponsetothelowbloodoxygen
placenta.
Abnormalitiesofcardiacdevelopmentdonotcause
functional abnormality in the fetus as long as there is
communicationbetweentherightand left sides of the
d&
circulatory system.However,stenoses and abnormal
circulatory patterns may result in reduced flow, caus-
ing underdevelopment or hypoplasia of the affected
chamber or vessel. Semilunar valve stenoses (e.g., pul-
monic stenosis) may cause chamber enlargement prox-
lghO2
imal tothestenosisduetoincreasedrightventricular
workload.Experimentally,leftventricularenlargement
in the fetus,or left ventricular hypoplasia may be
causedbyinflowobstruction totheleftventricle.31
Right ventricular enlargement has been produced in
fetal lambs by pulmonary artery constriction.32
BLOODFLOWCHANGESATBIRTH
At the time ofbirth and during the subsequent
←
AorticIsthmus
earlyneonatalperiod,circulatorychangesresult inthe
da
formationoftwoseparatecircuitsinseries.When air
is introduced into the lungs,the fluid media sur-
rounding the vasculature is replaced,thus reducing
vascular resistance.With exposure to oxygen,pulmo-
naryvasculature dilates.Atthe same time,theplacen-
tal circulationisremoved.Thisincreasessystemicresis-
tanceandpreventsright-to-leftbloodflowthrough
the ductus arteriosus.The musculature of the ductus
arteriosus is highly sensitive to oxygen and contracts
FIGURE1-5
whenexposedtothenowincreasedoxygencontent of
Diagrammatic representation of blood circulation during the late
blood coming from the lungs.33.34 In addition, the
fetalperiod.Notethat themosthighly oxygenatedbloodreturning
ductus arteriosus musculature is responsive to prosta-
to theheartfrom theplacentavia theposteriorvena cava is
shuntedmainly across theinteratrial septum to theleftventricle,
glandins that are present at birth,and its closure may
and thatvesselstotheheart and headreceive thishighly
be induced by prostaglandin inhibition.35.36
oxygenated blood.Oxygen-depleted blood comingfrom the head
In the fetus, approximately two thirds of the re-
isreturned to theright ventricle,traverses the ductus arteriosus,
turning blood enters the right ventricle,causing the
andenterstheaortadistaltothevesselstotheheartandhead
(white arrow). da,ductus arteriosus.
right side of the heart tobe as large as or larger than
EMBRYOLOGICDEVELOPMENT
9
the left side. With closure of the ductus arleriosus and
Cardiac Growth in Neonatal Puppies
reduction in pulmonary resistance, a larger volume of
Ventricular wt./Body wt.
blood now cnters the left atrium, This increases leff.
6.0
 atrial pressure and forces the septum primum flap
5.0
against the scptum secundum. Effective functional clo-
sure of the fossa ovalis occurs, completing the forma-
tion of two circulatory systems in series.
 After the completion of septation, the fcetus cnters a
3.0
Ratio
rapid growth phase, and there is a progressive rise in
2.0
arterial blood pressurc. In the shecp, peak systolic
(sirp ct1 Jo) uonesa8 jo siep 0sI 0n oz1 in aunssod
1.0
中
is reported to be 45 to 50 mmHg.32 37 in chick em-
 bryos, arterial pressure has been reported to be up to
0.0
0
20
40
60
30 mmHg at hatching,* In the newborn rat we have
Age (days)
 = RV/BW
: LV + S/BW
measured femoral artery blood pressure using a servo-
FIGURE 1-6
Hull micropressure system; at birth, mean femoral ar-
Graph displaying ratios (g/kg of lefil ventricle plus septum to body
tery pressure was 18 mmlIg, incrcasing to 30 mmHg
  ( on  ar a   l 
by 3 days of age, 50 mmHg by 12 days, and 75 mmHg
by 21 days of age.*s In the newborn dog we have
dogs (3 to 17 dogs per samplcd time period). LV, Ieft ventricle; S.
scptum; RV, right ventricle.
measured ventricular pressure by transthoracic punc-
turc of the left and right ventricles with a 2l-gauge
needle. In newborn puppies, systolic pressure was 35
and by 2 wceks of age, the adult ratio of right-to-left
to 50 rmmlIg in the left ventricle and 23 to 40 mmIIg
ventricular weight is obtained. Thereafter, growth is
in the right ventricle, Left ventricular pressures rapidly
 proportionate betwecn left and right ventricles.
pe ‘a8e jo sAep 2 01 g ie 5Hu 06 01 92 01 paseaio
to
120 mrmHg by 3 to 4 weeks of age, while right
CONVERSION FROM HYPERPLASTIC TO
HYPERTROPHIC MYOCYTE GROWTH
FETAL AND NEONATAL
MYOCARDIAL
During the enbryonic and fetal growth periods, in-
crcase in heart mass is predominantly a rcsult of cell
CELL GROWTH
number multiplication (ie., hyperplasia). Cellular hy
 perplasia continues into the early neonatal pcriod,
when the cells enter a transitional stage of mixed
 In fetal life, right ventricular blood flow is approxi-
hyperplastic and hypertrophic growth. Finally, the myo-
matcly twice that of the left venntricle. As a result, right
cytes undergo a final nuclear mitosis, often without a
ventricular muscle mass equals or exceeds that of the
subsequent cellular division, resulting in many binucle-
left ventricle until the time of birth. Although very few
atcd cells." In the dog, this transition period starts at
data are available, pressures in both ventriclcs in utero
about 2 weeks of age,*" and by 6 wecks of age, 80 t0)
 are presumably ncarly equal, since there is large open
 85 percent of canine myocytes are binucleated.4t. 41
communication between the two parallel circulatory
Thereafter, virtually all increase in cardiac rnass is due
systems. Following birth, however, left ventricular pres-
to increase in myocyte size (i.e., hypertrophy), with addi-
sure rapidly increases, while right ventricular pressurc
tion of other cellular components such as coronary
remains stable.
vasculature and connective tissue.
NEONATAL VENTRICULAR GROWTH
EFFECT OF WORK OVERLOAD
ON THE.FETAL AND NEONATAL
 In the normally growing neonatal dog, right ventric.
ular free wall wcight remains stable for approximately
HEART
10 days after birth. Icft ventricular weight incrcases
continuously in a linear fashion from the time of birth
(Fig. l-6). Right ventricular free wall weight is only
 The type of myocardial cell growth resulting from a
slightly less than combined left ventricle plus septum
pressure or volume overload will determine the cellu-
(including the right ventricular portion of the septum)
lar response. For example, severe pulmonic stenosis
 at the time of birth. The relationship rapidly changes,
will produce a load on both ventricles during the fetal
10THENORMAL HEART:CARDIOVASCULAR STRUCTURE,FUNCTION,AND PHYSIOLOGY
period,causing biventricular enlargement due to an
oped,and thereis animmatureinterstitial collagenous
increased number of myocytes (hyperplasia). Both ven-
connective tissue.Following completion of the last cel-
tricles areinvolved since thereisfree communication
lulardivisionandtheinitiationofhypertrophic
between cardiac chambers in the fetus.The massive
growth, the cellular ultrastructure rapidly assumes the
cardiac enlargement atbirthwill be due to increased
adult ultrastructural appearance, and all further
numbers of normal-sized cells. On the other hand,
growth is due to uniform addition of all cellular com-
canine congenital subaortic stenosis does not typically
ponents.
result in severe outflow tract obstruction until the ani-
In the early neonatal period,myocytes have a ta-
mal is several months of age. The mechanism of cell
pered shape, and there is an absence of T tubules in
caninemyocardium.Myocytes havea cross-sectional
myocardial thickeningwill be theresult ofincreased
area of about 30μm²,and the myofibrils are located
cell size with noincrease in cell number.Although the
at the cell periphery.4Both myofibrils and mitochon-
clinical significance of these two responses to increased
dria are relatively sparse compared with adult myocar-
work overloadhas receivedlittle study,thedifferent
dium. Glycogen and ribosomes are abundant. Intercel-
mechanisms of cellular response could result in differ-
lular junctions are present but do not have the
ent outcomestosurgical or therapeutictreatment.
transversesteplikestructurepresentinmaturemyocar-
dium.Componentsoftheintercalated disc,including
desmosomes,filament attachment areas (fascia ad-
MYOCARDIAL
herens),and nexus regions, are present around the
cell periphery.Mitoses are frequently evident in neona-
ULTRASTRUCTURE
tal cardiac myocytes.During mitosis, there is dissolu-
tion of myofibrillar organization with complete loss of
Z-band material.
During embryonic and early fetal development, car-
By6weeks of age in the dog,virtually all mitotic
diacmyocytes arepoorlydifferentiated,withrandomly
activityhas ceased,and both thefewremaining single
arrangedmyofilaments.Cellshave a spherical or ovoid
nucleatedcells anddoublenucleatedcells areincreas-
shape,and intercellular connections are not devel
ing in size. Intercalated discs are well formed, and
oped. By the time of birth, myocytes have become
individual myocytes have the characteristicfeatures of
elongated and there is a definite longitudinal orienta-
adult heart muscle cells (Fig. 1-7). T tubules are pres-
tion of myofilaments and organization into myofibrils.
ent,providing an extension of thesarcolemmal surface
Presumably, this is at least partially a consequence of
area that penetrates to the deepest part of each cell.
remodeling effects caused by intraluminal pressure.
Thesarcolemmamakesintimatecontactwiththesar-
During the continued postnatalhyperplastic growth
coplasmicreticulum,bothalongtheoutersurfaceand
phase, intercellular connections are very poorly devel-
along the T tubules (Fig. 1-8). These junctional areas
cap
FIGURE1-7
Electron micrograph of the left
ventricularmyocardiumof a
normally growing 8-week-old dog.
Although myocyte size has not
attained that of the adult,
internalcell structureis
indistinguishable from that of the
SIL
adult.Note uniform transverse
ICD
sarcomere alignment of
myofibrils (my),central location
my
ofnuclei (N),intercalated discs
(ICD, arrow),mitochondria (m,
arrow),and distinct sarcolemmal
membranes（sm,arrow),withvery
little interstitial space.Cap,
capillary.Bar = 2 μm.
2um
EMBRYOLOGICDEVELOPMENT
nex
FIGURE1-8
Electronmicrograph of normal
adult canineleft ventricle at
higher magnification than in
Figure 1-7.Intercalated discs
(ICD)have nexuses or gap
junctions (nex),desmosomes (d),
andfilament attachment areas
(fa).The sarcolemma (sm)
invaginates at the Z-lines (Z) to
form the T-tubule system (four
arrous).The sarcoplasmic
reticulum (sr)isintimately
associatedwith the sarcolemma
and Ttubules and surrounds the
myofibrils.The sarcomere is
composed ofmyosin-containing
A bands (A), central M lines (M),
and light I bands(I)flanking the
Z lines.Bar = 1 μm.
are thesiteof calcium andotherion transportinto
tive.InZakR(ed):GrowthoftheHeartinHealth and
the sarcoplasmic reticulum, an important component
Disease.New York,Raven Press,1984, p 41
6.de la Cruz MV, Gomez CS,Artega NM, Arguello C.
of excitation contraction coupling.Well-organized
Experimental studyof the development of the truncus
myofibrilsfill the entire cytoplasm,andmitochondria
and the conus in the chick embryo.JAnat 123:661,1977
arediffuselydistributedbetweenmyofibrils.Nuclei are
7.Kirby ML, Gale TF, Stewart DE.Neural crest cells con-
centrallylocated,with clusters of mitochondria at
tribute tonormal aorticopulmonary septation.Science
their poles.
220:1059,1983
Thecontractile apparatus of cardiacmuscle consists
8.Kirby ML,Turenage KL,Hays BM. Characterization of
conotruncalmalformations following ablation of“car-
of anoverlapping arrangementof thin actin and thick
diac”neural crest.Anat Rec 213:87,1985
myosinfilaments,togetherwithavarietyofother con-
9.Clark EB.Mechanisms in the pathogenesis of congenital
tractile proteins separated into sarcomeres by dense Z-
cardiac malformations.In Pierpont MEM,Moller JH
bands (Fig. 1-8). Sarcomeres are aligned in series to
(eds):Genetics of Cardiovascular Disease.Boston,Mar-
form myofibrils,which have branching interconnec-
tin Nijhoff Publishing,1986,p3
tions and extend the entire length of the cell.Myofi-
10.Manasek FJ.Embryonic development of theheart.1.
brils are surrounded by an intimate network of sarco-
A light andelectron microscopicstudy ofmyocardial
developmentin theearlychick embryo.JMorphol
plasmic reticulum,which serves both as a calcium
125:329,1968
source and a sink during myocyte contraction(chap-
11.LindnerE.Myofibrils in the early development of chick
ter 3).
embryohearts as observed with theelectron microscope.
Anat Rec136:234,1960
12.VanMieropLHS,Bertuch JJr.Development of arterial
bloodpressure in the chick embryo.Am JPhysiol
REFERENCES
212:43,1967
13.Clark EB,Hu N,Dummett JL,et al.Ventricular function
and morphology in chick embryo from stages 18 to 29.
Am JPhysiol 250:H407,1986
1.VanMieropLHS,Kutsche LM.Embryology of the heart.
14.
Hu N,Clark EB.Hemodynamics of the stage 12 to stage
In Hurst JW (ed):The Heart.New York,McGraw-Hill,
29 chick embryo.Circ Res 65:1665,1989
1982,p7
15.Girard H.Arterial pressure in the chick embryo.Am J
2.Los JA.Embryology.InWatson H (ed):Paediatric Cardi-
Physiol 224:454,1973
ology.St.Louis,CV Mosby,1968,p1
16.PexiederT.Prenatal development of the endocardium:
3.Boyd JD.Development of the heart.In Handbook of
a review.Scan Electron Microsc2:223,1981
Physiology.Vol 3.Washington,DC,AmericanPhysiologi-
17.Arrechedera H, Strauss M,Arguello C,et al.Ultrastruc-
cal Society,1965,p2511
tural study of themyocardialwallof the atrioventricular
4.MoormanAFM,LamersWH.Molecularanatomyofthe
canal duringthedevelopmentofthe embryonicchick
developingheart.TrendsCardiovascMed 4:257,1994
heart.J Mol Cell Cardiol10:885,1984
5. Icardo JM. The growing heart: an anatomical perspec-
18.Colvee E,Hurle JM. Malformations of the semilunar
12 THE NORMAL HEART: CARDIOVASCULAR STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND PHYSIOLOGY
valves produced in chick embryos by mcchanical intcr-
31. Fishman NH, Hof RB, Rudolph AM, Heyinann MA. Mod-
ference of cardiogenesis. Anat Embryol 168:59, 1983
cls of congcnital heart disease in fetal lambs. Circulation
19. Atkins DL, Clark EB, Marvin WJ. Foramen ovale/atrial
58:354,1978
scptum ratio; a markcr of transatrial blood flow. Circula-
32. Pinson CW, Morton Mj, Thornburg KI., Mild pressure 
tion 66:28. 1982
loading alters right ventricular function in fetal shccp.
20. Patterson DF, Haskins ME. Hercditary dysplasia of thic
Circulation 68:947, 1991
pulrmonary valve in beagle dogs. Am J Cardiol 47:631,
33. Born GVR, Dawes GS, Mott JD, Rennick BR. lhe con-
1981
striction of the ductus artcriosus caused by oxygen and
21. Patterson DF, Pylc RL., VanMierop L, cl al. Hereditary
by asphyxia in ncwborn lambs. J Physiol 132:304, 1956
defects of the conotruncal septum in kccshond dogs:
 34. Knight DH, Patterson DF, Mclbin J. Constriction of the
pathologic and genetic studics. Am J Cardiol 34:187,
fetal ductus arteriosus induced by oxygen, acetylcholine,
1974
22. Pyle RI., Patterson DF, Chacko S. Thc gcnetics and pa-
thology of discrcte subaortic stenosis in the Newfound-
47:127, 1973
land dog. A1n Heart J 92:324, 1976
35. Coceani F, Olley PM, Bodach E. Lanb durtus arteriosus:
 23. Ryan Tj, Barnhill R1. Physical factors and angiogcnesis.
effect of prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors on the nuscle
In Nugent J, O'Connor M (eds): Development of thc
tonc and the response to prostaglandin E. Prostaglain
Vascular Systcm. London, Pituman Ciba Foundation,
dins 9:299, 1975
1983, p 80
 24. Paff GH, Boucck RJ, Klopfenstein HS. Expcrincntal
closure of patent ductus arteriosus in the prematurc
heart-block in the chick cmbryo. Anat Rcc 149:217, 1964
infant. N Engl J Med 295:526, 1976
25. Forsgren S, Thornell LE, Eriksson A. The development.
37. Hawkins J, Van IIare GF, Schinidt KG, Rudolph AM.
of thc Purkinje fibrc systcm in the bovine feial heart.
Effects of incrcasing afterload on left ventricular output
Anat Embryol 159:125, 1980
in fetal lambs. Circ Res 65:127, 1989
26. Lieberman M, Pas de Carvalho A, Thc clectrophysiologi-
cal organization of the embryonic chick heart. J Gen
 cell growth and blood prcssure development in neonatal
Physiol 49:351, 1965
spontaneously hypertensive rats. Lab Invcst 56:189, 1987
27. 1lieberman M. Initiation of cardiac contraclions. In Fer-
38a. Bishop SP. Lnpublished data, 1995
rans VJ, Rosenquist GC, Weinstcin C (cds): Cardiac Mor-
 39. Clubb FJ ,Jr, Bishop SP. Formation of binuclcated myocar-
phogenesis. Sew York, Elsevier, 1985, p 141
dial clls in the neonatal rat: an index for growth hyper-
28.
Marino TA, Severdoa J. The carly development of the
trophy. 1ab Invcst 50:571, 1984
AV node and bundle in thc fcrrct hcart. Am J Anal
40. Bishop SP, Hine P. Cardiac muscle cytoplasmic and nu-
167:299,1983
clear development during canine nconatal growth. In
   s    
Roy P (cd): Reccnt Advances in Studies on Cardiac.
trical properties of the hcart. In Spcrelakis N (ed): Physi-
Structurc and Mctabolism. Vol 8. The Cardiac
Sar-
ology and Pathophysiology of thc Heart. Boston, Martin
coplasm. Baltimore, U'niversity Park Press, 1975, p 77
Nijhoff Publishing, 1984, p 343
41. Vahouny GV, Wei Rw, Tainboli A, Albcrt EN. Adult.
30. Rudolph AM. Distribution and regulation of blood flow
canine myocytes: isolation, morphology and biochemical
in thc felal and neonatal lamb. Circ Res 57:811, 1985
characteristics. J Mol Cell Cardiol 11:339, 1979
liovascular
Anatomy
PHILIP R. FOX
N. SYDNEY MOiSE
HOWARD E. EVANS
SANFORD P. BISHOP
CLINICAL UTILITY OF CARDIOVASCULAR
ANATOMY
 Diagnosis and management of congenital and acquired heart disease are
founded upon a sound working knowledge of basic cardiovascular anat-
 omy.I-4 Clinical abnormalities identified from the history, physical ecxamina-
tion, and diagnostic tess rmust ulimately bc cquatcd to derangemcnis in
cardiac structurc and function to ensure diagnostic accuracy, direct suitable
 treatment, and assess responsc to therapy Accordingly, carcful necropsy
  r o  s  a rr) 
(chapter 7), echocardiography (chapter 8), computed tomography (CT) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (chaptcr 10), and surgery (chapter 39).
The appcarance, and conscquently interpretation, of the heart and sur-
rounding structures in the living animal are influenced by a number of
factors: (1) imaging techniques, (2) cffecrs of inspiration and expiration,
(3) cardiothoracic motion, (4) body position, such as right or left lateral,
ventrodorsal or dorsoventral rccumbency, and (5) effects of extracardiac
factors (e.g., obesity, effusions, masses, trauma). Thus, multiple tomographic
planes (i.e., sagittal [medial], transverse, and frontal [dorsal]) should be
incorporated to arrive at a composite anatomic asscssment.
THE THORACIC CAVITY
Thc shape of thc thoracic cavity varies greauly in dogs but is rclativcly
morc uniforin in cats. It is cnclosed by the thoracic walls laterally and thc
diaphragm caudally, and it opens cranially to thc cxtcrior through the
thoracic inlet. The thoracic iniet is bounded laterally by the first pair of ribs
and their costal cartilages, dorsally by the longus colli muscles, and ventrally
by the manubrium and sternum; it contains the forward portion of the
cranial mediastinum which encloses the trachea and csophagus (situated left.
lateral to the trachea); recurrent laryngeal, phrenic, and frst thoracic
ncrves; common carotid and subclavian arteries; apices of plcural cavitics;
pleural cupulae; and projcction of the thymus (Figs. 2-1, 2-2).
13
14
THENORMALHEART: CARDIOVASCULARSTRUCTURE,FUNCTION,AND PHYSIOLOGY
Spinat br,
intercostola
Dorsofsco
Dorsol br
Thoracic
vertebro!
L.bronchoesophaqeotb
Costocervicoltrun
Caudal
vena cova
FIGURE 2-1
Anatomy of the thorax as seen from the
left lateral projection. The lungs are not
shown. Coinpare with Figure 22 to
Superf
understand ihe orientation of stnictires
and how they differ between the left
and righit lateral projections. (Reprinted
with perinission. Copyright. 1993 by
1 loward E. Evans.)
Extthor
Pericardiocophre
Brachiocepho
.intthoracicc
Putmonorya.
Perforating br
Heart
Mediastinol br
Phrenic
Diaphragn
THE MEDIASTINUM
The pericardium is coinposed of an outer fibrous and
inner serous component (the latter is divided into
 parictal and visceral layers). At the cardiac base, the
The mediastinun is part of the cxtrapleuural space
fibrous pericardium blends with adventitia of the great
within the thorax and divides the right and left hemi-
thorax. It is covered and closcd off from both pleural
artcrics and veins that enter and leave the heart. The
caviies by the mediastinal pleura and is open cranially
epicardium is the visceral layer of the serous pericar-
to the deep fascial planes of neck musculature. The
dium, which is firinly aftachcd to the heart muscle.
mediastinum is connected caudally to the retroperito-
The pericardium is elastic and capable of chronic dis-
ncal space through the aortic hiatus.*6 It cncloscs the
tention to accomnodate large volumes. More detailcd
information about its anafomy, vascular supply, in-
aorra, heart, trachca, esophagus, thymus, vagal and
 other nerves, and vessels entering into and cxiting
nervation, and function is contained in chapter 29.
from the heart. The cranial mediastinal cavity lics in
front of the hcart and contains fat in obesc animals;
the middle ncdiastinal cavity conrains the heart; and
the caudal mcdiastinal cavity is behind the hcart. The
THE PLEURAE
lattcr contains the descending aorta, the cranial vena
cava, and the distal csophagus. In most dogs and cats
 the mediastinum is incomplete and permits air or fluid
Serous meimbranes line the walls of the thoracic
f0 pass between each hcmithorax.
cavity and cover the lungs and mediastinum. The pleu-
rae form leff and right pleural sacs that constitute the
 pleural cavities, in hcalth, thesc are only potential spaces
THE PERICARDIUM
and contain a scant quantity of fluid that scrvcs to
lubricate thc visccral and parietal plcural surfaces dur-
This thin, strong fbrous sac lined by a serous mem-
ing respiration. When air or clfusion collects between
 brane completely encloses the heart and a small quan-
visceral and parietal pleurae in discase stafes, thc plcu
tity (0.2 to 5 ml) of fluid within the pericardial cavitly.
ral space and cavity cnlarge.
CARDIOVASCULAR ANATOMY
15
Rt bronchoesophogeoi br
Soinat br.
Dorsal scopuiora.
Thoracic vertebro!a.
Deep cervicol a.
,Castocervical trunk
Vertebra! o.
Azygous
oncorotic
Aorta
FIGURE 2-2
Anatoiny of the thorax as seen from the
right lateral prnjection, The lungs are
mot shown. Coinpare with Figure 21 t0
understand the orientation of structures
and how they differ between the left.
and right lateral projections. (Reprinted
with permission.Copyright 1993 by
rdiocophrenico
Howard E. Evans.)
Extfhorocic
Brachiocephaiic trunk
Perforoting br
'Int. thorocic Q
Coud. veno cava
phrenico.
Diaphragm
epigostric a
THE LUNGS
between the third and sixth ribs, and is largely covered
by the lungs. On the right side, an upside-down, V
  p  .,' s, a 'ua pe
Thc left lung is composed of a cranial lobe that is
lungs, which allow a sinall region of the pericardium
to contact the lareral chest wall. In the dog, this occurs
dividcd into cranial and caudal portions, and a caudal
between the right 4th to 5th intercostal spaccs; its
lobe. The left cranial lobc cxtends beyond thc first
 dorsal apex is opposite the beginning of the distal 4th
pair of ribs into the pleural cupola and somewhat to
the right of the medial plane. The right lung is com-
of the 4th rib, approximatcly betwecn the sternum
 poscd of cranial, middle, caudal, and acccssory lobes.
and costochondral junction. In situ, the cardiac base is
Lung lobes overlap each other significantly.
oriented dorsocranially and the cardiac apex is directed
The pulmonary trunk carries nonoxygenated venous
ventrocaudally, slightly to the left of a transverse plane
 blood from the right ventricle to the lungs. It arises
through the diaphragn (Figs. 2-1, 2-2). The cranio
from the fibrous pulmonary ring at the distal right
ventral right ventriclc and caudodorsal left vcntricle
ventricular ouiflow tracl and bifurcates at the rcspec-
are separared by the longitudinally siruated and some-
tive lungs into the left and right pulmonary arteries.
what curved interventricular septum, which forms the
Putmonary veins return oxygcnaled blood from thc
division between ventricles, the blood-pumping cham-
lungs into the dorsum of the left atrium. Pulmonary
 bers. Each is transverscly divided into blood-receiving
vcins generall lic ventral to the pulmonary arteries.
chambcrs—ihe left atrium that reccives blood from
the lungs, and the right atrium that reccives blood
from the rest of the body.
THE HEART
The hcart is composcd of thrce layers. The myocar-
dium comprises the cardiac nuscle, The endocardiun
lincs the atrial and ventricular cavities. The epicardium
Ioy oiu ppa dnd ienonu e si ieou a
is the most external layer and covers the myocar-
chambers by cardiac valves and septa. It is situated
dium.
16THENORMALHEART:CARDIOVASCULARSTRUCTURE,FUNCTION,ANDPHYSIOLOGY
INSITUORIENTATION
flowtract andmainpulmonary artery aremostpromi-
nent from thisview,whereas the aortic root lies deep
Viewing theheartinsituhelpsoneunderstandrela-
tothepulmonarytrunk.Therightventricularfreewall
tionships between various structures (Figs. 2-1,2-2).
normally extends two thirds to three quarters of the
Radiographic and echocardiographic anatomy and in-
distance from the coronary groove to the apex of the
terpretationisgreatly enhancedby anappreciation of
heart.The cardiac apex is formed by the left ventricle.
theserelationships.
Theleft anterior descending coronary artery courses
from its origin at the aortic root, between the pulmo-
nally crosses the heart toward the apex.Several diago-
EXTERNALCARDIACANATOMY
nalbranches course over thefree wallof theleft
ventricleand,toalesserextent,theanteriorportions
Cardiacorientation isfacilitatedby observing the
of theright ventricular free wall.
locations of theleft andright auricles and coronary
From thedorsocaudalview,the circumflexbranch
of the left coronary artery courses caudally in the
exceptfor thecranioventralaspect associatedwiththe
left coronary groove between the left atrium and left
dorsal part of the right ventricle (pulmonary conus),
ventricle andisvisibleon thecaudalleftventricular
and it separates the atria and ventricles. From the
wall(Figs.2-4,2-5).The right coronary artery extends
ventrocranial view,theleft and right atrial appendages
are seen on either side of the pulmonary artery trunk
caudallyintherightcoronarygrooveunder theright
auricle, sending marginal branches to the free wall of
and aortic root (Fig. 2-3).The right ventricular out-
the rightventricle.The arteries and coronary arteries
are shown in Figures 2-3, 2-4, and 2-5. The prominent
sinus node artery(Fig.2-4)courses from the caudal
portion oftherightventricularfreewall anddorsally
over theright atrialfree wall to the junction of the
cranialvena cava and the right atrium.It extends
through this junction,within or adjacent to the sinus
node,and is a useful landmark for identification of
PA
the canine sinus node.
The veins entering the heart can serve as landmarks
RVOT
forinternalstructures.Thecaudalvenacavaenters
theright atrium at its caudalmargin and isuseful in
identifying the opening of the coronary sinus and the
RVFW
fossa ovalis (Figs. 2-1, 2-2, 2-4). The cranial vena cava
enters thedorsal aspectof theright atriumnear the
sinus node (Fig. 2-4).Pulmonary veins enter on the
dorsal surfaceoftheleftatrium.
LV
THEATRIA
Both atria arerelatively thin-walled structures.They
act as reservoirs to receive blood from systemic (right
atrium) or pulmonary (left atrium) circulations and
then pump it into their respective ventricles. Each
atrium hasanassociated auricular appendage(Fig.
2-4).
RIGHTATRIUM
FIGURE2-3
Theright atrium (RA) lies dorsocranial to the right
Ventrocranialviewof thenormal external anatomy of thecanine
ventricle andreceivesbloodfromsystemicveinsand
heart.The cranial cardiac“waist”is represented by themain
most of the heart (Figs. 2-4, 2-5C,D). An appendage,
pulmonary artery (PA),right auricle (RAu),and ascending aorta
(Ao).Theleft coronary artery gives off a paraconal interventricular
the right auricle,projects forward and downward,adja-
branch that accompanies the great coronary veinin the paraconal
cent to the distal aspect of theRV outflow tract at the
groove（arrowhead).This marks the division between the right
level of the pulmonary valves (Fig.2-3,2-5A,B).Its
ventricularfreewall(RvFw)and theleftventricularfreewall (LV).
LAu,left auricle;RVOT,right ventricular outflow tract.
internal surface is composed of pectinate muscles.
CARDIOVASCULARANATOMY
ings of the cranial and caudalvena cava(Fig.2-5C).8
Itrepresents thefetalforamenoualis,whichpermitsRA
toleft atrium(LA)flowduringfetaldevelopmentand
maybeprobepatent atnecropsyin some animals.
LEFTATRIUM
SN
The LA forms theleft dorsocaudal aspectof the
RA
cardiacbase (Fig.2-5A,B).The left auricle(lined with
CdVC
SNA
pectinatemuscles)liescaudal tothepulmonaryconus
and trunk,which separates it from the craniallyposi-
tioned rightauricle(Fig.2-3).Generally,two or three
pulmonaryveinsfromtheleftlungenterintothecaudo-
dorsal LA,and three from the right lung enter into
LCX
PDCA
thecraniodorsalLA(veinsfrom diaphragmaticlobes
RVFW
are largest and most caudal)(Fig.2-5).The left atrio-
ventricularorificejoinstheLAandtheleftventricle
(LV)through theleft atrioventricular(mitral)valve
LV
(Fig. 2-6).
INTERATRIALSEPTUM
Separating both atria, this septum is marked with
thefossa ovalison itsmedialright atrial aspect.At its
correspondinglocation on themedial sideof theleft
atrial septum, a thin tissue flap representing the valve
METRIC2
of theforamenovaleislocated.
FIGURE2-4
Dorsocaudalviewof thenormal external anatomy of thecanine
THEVENTRICLES
heart.The cranial vena cava (CVC) and sinus node artery (SNA)
serve as landmarks for the sinus node (SN)(see text for details).
The caudal vena cava (CdvC) enters the body of the right atrium;
Bothventriclescombinetoconferaconicalstruc-
theright auricle (RAu)is seen at the cranial aspect of the right
ture to the heart (Fig.2-5).The right ventricle is
atrium(Fig.2-3).The circumflex branch of theleft coronary
artery(LCX)and its subsinuosal interventricular branch (PDCA）are
cranioventral to theleftventricle.Itreceives systemic
seenintheirrespectivelocationsrelativetotheleftventricularfree
blood from the RA and pumps it through the pulmo-
wall (LV)andrightventricularfreewall (RVFW).In the normal
heart,theleftventricleforms thecardiac apex,whichisobserved
nary arteries into thelungs.The leftventriclenormally
in the ventrocranial (Fig.2-3),dorsocaudal, and left lateral (Fig.
constitutes the majority of cardiacmass.It receives
2-5A,B)views.
oxygenated blood from the lungs by way of the pulmo-
nary veins into the left atrium,and pumps this out of
the aorta into the systemic circulation.Myocardial f-
There are four openings into the RA (Figs.2-5,2-6):
bers form superficial,middle,and deep layers.The
(1)thecranialvena cava enterstheRAfrom thefront
middle layer is the largest and conforms to a spiral or
and from above,draining the head,neck,thoracic
circular arrangement that interdigitates between both
limbs,ventral thorax,and adjacent abdominal wall;
ventricles.
the azygosveinusuallyentersthe cranialvena cava
(although occasionally it enters theRA directly),drain-
RIGHTVENTRICLE
ing part of the lumbar region and caudal thoracic wall;
(2）the caudal vena cava enters theRA from behind
The RV lies cranioventral to the left ventricle (Figs.
andreturns bloodfrom the pelvic limbs,abdominal
2-3 to 2-5). It appears crescent-shaped in cross-sec-
viscera,and part of the abdominal wal; (3) the coronary
tion,anditsfreewallisrelativelythincomparedwith
sinusenterstheRAfromtheleftandliesbelowthe
thatoftheleftventricle.BloodthatfillstheRV
cranialvenacava;(4)therightatrioventricular orificeis
through the right ventricular inflow tract(the right
surrounded by the right atrioventricular (tricuspid)
atrioventricularorificedelineatedbyleafletsofthe
valve andis situatedbetweentheRAand theright
tricuspid,or right atrioventricular valve)is pumped
ventricle(RV).The fossa ovalis is a small depression on
outtheRVoutflow tract(conus arteriosus),across the
themedialRAwalllocated just caudaltotheinterve-
pulmonary valves,andinto thepulmonary arteries
nous tubercle,a ridge of tissue situated between open-
(Fig.2-5C,D).A ridge of muscle,the supraventricular
18
8THENORMALHEART:CARDIOVASCULARSTRUCTURE,FUNCTION,ANDPHYSIOLOGY
BT
RAU
RAu
RV
RV
E
B
Pv
CVC
CdvC
FO
RA
RO
RVOT
RV
FIGURE2-5
Composite ofnormal canine internal cardiovascular anatomy.FramesA and Bare left lateral
coronary arteries,but their supportingstructureshavebeencut awayinframesBandD to showthe
internalcardiacstructures.
(A)The close proximity of the aorta(A)and pulmonary artery (P)is seen at the base of the heart.
The main pulmonary artery (P) arises from the right ventricular outflow tract (see alsoFigs.2-3,
2-5D),which is located dorsocranial to thebody of the right ventricle(RV).The position of the
pulmonaryvalve semilunarcusps at thebaseof thepulmonaryarteryisindicatedbyarrowheads.The
left coronary artery exitsfromthe left coronary sinus.Itbranchesinto a paraconal interventricular
branch (p),whichmarks the division between theRVandleft ventricle(LV),and a circumflex
branch(c),whichwinds dorsocaudally and to theright across thecaudodorsal heart surface in the
coronary groove.At the subsinuosal(dorsal) interventricular groove,the circumflex branch courses
toward the cardiac apex as the subsinuosal interventricular branch (see Fig.2-5C).RAu,right
auricle;T,trachea;E,esophagus;V,vagal (X)nerve.
(B）The left heart isopened,exposing theLVinflow tract (ie.,theleft atrioventricular orifice
between theLA andLV delineatedby leaflets of themitral[or left atrioventricular]valve).The
interventricular septum (S) separates theRVand LV.Just ventrocranial to the ascending aorta (A)
lies therightauricle(RAu）.At thebase of the aorta,one of the aorticvalve semilunar cuspsis
indicated(arrowhead).Theparietal cusp of thetricuspidvalve(arrow)delineates oneborder of the
RVinflow tract.TheLVinflow tractisdelineated by themitralvalve.LA,left atrium;RAuright
auricle;RPA,right pulmonary artery;LS,left subclavian artery;BT,brachiocephalic trunk.
CARDIOVASCULARANATOMY1
19
Semilunarvalvulesof theaorticvalve
1.Caudal (septal)
2.Right
3.Left
Semilunarvalvulesofpulmonarytrunkvalve
1.Cranial(intermediate,ventral)
Aorticvalve
2.Right
3.Left
Ostiumof rightcoronary
artery
Pulmonarytrunkvalve
Ostiumof leftcoronary
artery
Rightatrioventricularvalve
Cusps of right A-Vvalve
LeftA-Vvalve
1.Septal
2.Parietal
Cusps of leftA-Vvalve
3.Cranial(angular)
1.Septal
2.Parietal
FIGURE2-6
Thebase of theheartfrom the craniodorsalview.Thegreatvessels andatria havebeenremoved to
show the cardiacvalves.Valve leaflets and theirrelative positions areillustrated.(FromAnderson
WD,Anderson BG.Atlas of Canine Anatomy.Philadelphia,Lea&Febiger,1994.)
crest,is situatedobliquelybetweentheatrioventricular
third of theseptalwall.Althoughoften there arethree
opening and the origin of the conus arteriosus.Papil
majorpapillarymuscles,thenumber andmorphology
lary muscles are conical, slender muscular projections
(i.e., some may be fused or bifid) may vary, especially
fromtheRVwall thatattachtochordae tendineae.
in cats.Chordaetendineae arefibromuscular strandsusu-
Typically,papillarymuscles originatefrom the apical
allyarisingfromthe apexofpapillarymuscles and
FIGURE2-5Continued
(C)The right coronary artery (RC) delineates theright atrium (RA)and RV.The caudal vena cava
(CdvC),cranial vena cava (CVC),and azygos vein(Az)are seen entering theRA.The opening of the
coronary sinus is indicated by alarge,curved arrow.Belowit the circumflexbranch of theleft
coronary arterygives off the subsinuosal interventricular branch(S)at the subsinuosal
interventriculargroove,and courses toward the cardiac apex.Thefossa ovalis(FO)is a small
depression on themedialRAwall located just caudal totheintervenous tubercle,aridgeof tissue
(small straight arrows) situatedbetweenopenings of thecranial vena cava and caudalvena cava.The
RV contains trabeculae carneae(straight arrows)incontrast to the LV chamber whose endocardial
surface is much smoother and generally lacks thesemuscularbands (compareRV and LV inFig.
2-5D).Pulmonary veins (Pu)are seen entering the left atrium;V, vagus (X)nerve;E,esophagus; T,
trachea;B,right mainstem bronchus;A,descending aorta.
(D)TheRV and majority of theinterventricular septum (S)has beenremoved to show theleft
ventricle(LV)and LVoutflow tract.Papillarymuscles (p)serveas attachmentsforchordae tendineae
which are thenfixed to mitral valve leaflets(small white arrows).Ostia of pulmonary veins(u)are seen
in the roof of the left atrium (LA).Blood from the LA then passes into the LV inflow tract (through
theleft atrioventricular valve[small white arrows])totheLV,where it ispumped out across the left
ventricular outflow tract (LvOT) and into the aorta.The aorticroot (A)is observed between the left
atrium (LA)andmain pulmonary artery (P),the location of an aortic valve semilunar cusp is
indicated by twosmallblackarrous.Pulmonary semilunarvalvecusps(smallwhitearrows）areevident
the conus arteriosus.(Modifiedwith permissionfromDoneSH,GoodyPC,EvansSA,Strickland NC.
Color Atlas ofVeterinary Anatomy.TheDog&Cat.Vol 3.London,Mosby-Wolfe,1996.)
20  THE NORMAL HEART: CARDIOVASCULAR STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND PHYSIOLOGY
less commonly from small, muscular ventricular septal
aortic (aortic fibrous ring) and pulrnonary (pulmomary
protuberanccs (particularly chordae ataching lo the
fibrous ring) orifices, respectivcly (Fig. 2-6).
septal tricuspid valve cusp). They generally arborizc
distally into smaller branches to blend into free mar-
gins of atrioventricular valve cusps. Their morphology
CARDIAC VALVES
is variable, particularly in cats. Trabecutae carneae are
muscular ridges that arc a distinguishing characteristic
 The four cardiac valves attach to their respectivc
of the RV cavity. They are particularly common on the
fibrous rings (see preceding paragraph) in a specific
cndocardial RV free wall surfacc, arc generally ori-
anatomic arrangement relative to each other (Fig. 2-
cnted parallel to the cardiac axis, and coalesce apically
6). During diastole, the aortic and pulmonic valves
in the vicinity of the interventricular groove. Con-
close first to prevent rcgurgitation back into the ventri-
ductile tissue containing Purkinje's fibers and bundled
clcs. Then, the atriovcntricular valvcs open as blood
into onc or more delicate, branching strands, or trabec-
travels from the atria to Gill the ventricles. During
ulae septonarginalis (moderalor bands), may bridgc to
ventricular systole, aortic and pulmonic valves are
the septal wall, to papillary muscles, or to the RV
opcned by ventricular cjection of blood into the great
free wa!l.
vesscls, while the atriovcntricular valves are closed, re-
strained fron billowing into the atria by the chordae
LEFT VENTRICLE
tendineae.
The LV is a conical chamber characterized by a
ATRIOVENTRICULARVALVES
relatively thick wall, the apex of which comprises the
apex of the hcart, and a relative lack of trabeculae
Thcsc valves linc thc atrioventricular ostia of the
carneae (Fig. 2-5). The anterior mitral valve leaflet
right and left ventricular inflow tracts and prevent
separates the LV inflow and outflow tracts. Blood that
blood from regurgitating into the atria during ventric-
filis the LV through the lelft ventricular inflow tract
ular systole. They are attached at. thcir external perime-
(the leff atriovcntricular orifice delincafed by lcaflets
ter to collagenous atrioventricular fibrous rings sur-
of the mitral, or left atrioventricular, valve) is pumped
rounding each atrioventricular orificc, and at the
out through the LV outflow tract, across the aortic
ventricular surfaccs of the valvulae by chordae tendi-
valve cusps, and into the ascending aorra (Fig. 2-5D).
neae (Figs. 2-5, 2-6). The tricuspid valve (right atrioven-
tricular vatve) consists of a dorsal septal cusp attaching
(caudally situated) and one ventral (more cranially
 to the ventricular septurm and a ventral parictal cusp
 situated)--originating near the LV apex. Chordac ten-
attaching to the right ventricular ventral (free) wall.
dineae attach to atrioventricular valve leaflets and ar-
Occasionally, small secondary cusps are prcsenf at the
borize as describcd for the righr ventricle. One 
or
morc trabeculae septomarginalis (moderator bands)
valve) is similar but more robust than the tricuspid
may be prescnt, and in cats, a wide variation in nuin-
valve. Division into distinct cusps is less obvious than
bers and morphology may occur.
for the tricuspid valve, but septal and parieral divisions
can be recognized.
INTERVENTRICULARSEPTUM
Scparating the RV and LV, this septurn is mostly
AORTIC AND PULMONARY VALVES
composed of a thick, muscular part and a very small,
 Sometimes referred to as semilunar valves, the aortic
thin, basal mermbranous region. In general the muscu-
lar portion is of similar thickness to the LV free (cau-
fibrous rings. Each seinilunar valve consists of right, leff
dal) wall.
and septal semilunar cusps, or valvulae composed of a
fibrous tissue stroma covered by endothelium (Figs.
2-5, 2-6). The aortic vatve lies caudal to the pulmonary
FIBROUS CARDIAC SKELETON
valve, The free margin of cach valvulac consists of
crescent-shaped lunulae, and at. thc ccntcr of cach
At the cardiac base, a "skeleton' of fibrous tissue
valvule is a nodule that functionally occludes the space
composed of collagen and some carilage separates
formed by the thrce contiguous sermilunar cusps when
atrial and ventricular myocardium. The specialized
these valves are closed in diastole. Thc aortic wall is
 conduction fibers in the atrioventricular bundle ex-
dilated just peripheral to each cusp to form three
tend through it from the atria to the ventricles.? This
αorlic sinuses (the right, left, and septal sinuses). This
skclcton forms two Gbrous rings. The atriouentricular
widening of the base of the ascending aorta is the
fibrous rngs surround each atrioventricular orifice; the
aorlic bulb. The right and left coromary arteries originate
others in the form of two scalloped rings surround the
from thesc right and leff coronary sinuses through
CARDIOVASCULAR ANATOMY 
21
ostia, which in the dog may be single or multiple.o
 pulnonary trunk, Along its nedial surface the pulmo-
Thc pulmonary trunk valve lies cranial to thc aortic
nary trunk contacts the aorta, and both vessels
valve and is morphologically similar, albeit less robustly
 ohliquely cross each other, forming a slight spiral. At.
devclopcd and without a distinct bulb.
its distal fourth, it is atftached to the fibrous pericar-
dium.
CARDIAC BLOOD VESSELS
AORTA
CORONARYARTERIES
 The aorta is the thickest vessel and transports blood
 cjccted from the left ventricle to systemic arteries that
 Coronary arteries supply blood to the nyocardium.
arise dircctly from it (Figs. 2-1, 2-2, 2-5A,B). The
Thc left coronary artery exits from the left coronary
ascending aorta originates from its Gibrous ring, turns
sinus and branches (Figs. 2-3, 2-5A) into a cranial
abruptly dorsocaudally and to the lcff as the aortic arch,
paraconal interventricular branch (formerly called left an-
then courses caudally to its distal trifurcation as the
terior descending coronary artery, cranial descending
 descending aorra. At the aortic arch, blood is shunted 
coronary artcry, or dorsal interventricular branch of
to the head, neck, and thoracic limhs through two
the left coronary artery); it courses obliquely and cra-
Imain arteries. The brachiocephalic trunk is the first large
nially on the left face of thc hcart, thcn rightward
artery from thc aortic arch and passcs obliquely
across the sternocostal surfacc in the paraconal inter-
rightward and cranially across the ventral trachea. It
ventricular groove.1 It gives off left ventricular, right
gives off the left common carotid artery, the first branch to
ventricular, and interventricular branches. A circumflex
leave the brachioccphalic trunk, then the right common
 branch of the left coronary artery winds dorsocaudally
carotid artery and thc right subclavian artery. Uncom-
and to the right across the caudodorsal heart surface
 monly, both common carotid arteries can arise from a
in the coronary groove and has ventricular and atrial
common trunk off the brachiocephalic trumk.'6 The
branches.2, * At the subsinusal (dorsal) interventricu-
 left subclavian artery branches off the aorta just distal
lar groove, it courses foward the cardiac apex as the
to the brachiocephalic trunk.
subsinusal interventricular branch (forinerly called dorsal
 interventricular branch of left coronary artery or pos-
terior descending coronary artery) (Figs. 2-4, 2-5C).
CARDIAC VEINS
The lef marginal untricular branch courses down the left
The coronary sinus represents the large, dilated ter-
border of the left ventricle parallel to the subsinusal
minal end of thc great coronary vein, and it returns
intcrventricular branch. In the dog, the left circumflex
 most of the blood that is supplied to heart. It emptics
coronary artery and its branches supply the caudal left
into the right atrium ventral to the caudal vena caval
ventricle and a portion of the caudal right ventricular
opening (Fig. 2-5C) and may contain a sinall semilunar
frce wall. The right coronary artery is smallcr than the
valve. The great coromary vein originates in the cardiac.
lcft, originates from the righr aortic sinus, and may
apex, ascends toward the base in the paraconal intcr-
givc off many smaller ventricular branches that arho-
ventricular groove, follows the dorsal part of the coro
rize in the RV wall (Fig. 2-5C). It curves cranioventrally
nary groove, and circles the diaphragmatic surface of
and to thc right in thc coronary groove, covered dor-
the heart from the left. It collects a number of veins,
sally by thc right auricle. Rarely it extends to thc
including the dorsal left ventricular veins that ascend
borders of the right ventricle and supplies two thirds
from the cardiac apex. The middie cardiac vein ascends
of the blood to the right ventricular free wall.14 A sinall
the subsinuosal interventricular groove, collccis veins
frorn both ventricles, and erpties into the coronary
 of dogs. ' An atrial branch of the right coronary arrtery
sinus. A number of other cardiac vcins are variably
 supplies the sinoatrial node in dogs.12 15
present, and some ventral cardiac vcins and small the-
besian vesscls opcn direculy into the heart.'7
PULMONARY TRUNK
The pulmonary trunk and its branches trausport un-
LYMPH NODES AND VESSELS
oxygenated (venous) blood to the lung. The trunk
arises from the pulmonary Gbrous ring at the conus
arteriosus (Fig. 2-5D), where it is flanked by the lcfft
The lymphatic systcm is an adjunct to the venous
and right auricles, and thcn divides into the right and
 sess (r d,)   s
left pulnonary arteries. Just proximal to this bifurca-
  srs ss  sssa  n s
tion is the ligamentum arteriosum, rcpresenting the fetal
ductus arteriosus. It cxtcnds from the aorta to the left
nodcs, which then act as filtcrs and serve as lympho-
pulmonary artery .just as it branchcs from the main
cyte gerrminal centers. Eferent lymph vessels exit from
22 THE NORMAL HEART: CARDIOVASCULAR STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND PHYSIOLOGY
lymph nodes carrying filtcred lymph enriched with
toward the caudal vena cava. The SA node is composed
lymphocytes ("secondary lymph") and enter larger
of histologically discrete, specialized cells that are re-
draining lymph vesscls.
sponsible for initiating cardiac impulses. As with thc
Lymphatic drainage of the chest has been classified
atrioventricular node, the SA node has an abundanf
into parietal (lyinph nodes of the dorsal and veniral
supply of adrenergic and cholinergic nerve fibers. 21, 23
thoracic lympl centers) and visceral (nodes of medias-
tinal and bronchial lymph centers) groupings.1 The
ventral thoracic lymph centcer is represented by the
ATRIOVENTRICULAR (AV)
cranial sternal lymph nodes. The dorsal thoracic
IUNCTIONAL AREA
lymph cenfer consists of intercostal lymph nodes. The
 mediastinal lymph center comprises the cranial medi-
astinal lymph nodes (usually associated with large prc.
cardial vesscls). Pulmonary lymph nodes, when pres-
This terrm describes the area of specialized conduc-
ent, lic in the dorsal surfaces of primary bronchi
tion tissucs fhat connects the atrial and ventricular
between right and left tracheobronchial nodes and
myocardiun. It can be subdivided into scvcral ana-
the lung parenchyma. Right and left tracheobronchial
tomic zones, although thc cxact. cxtent of thcse subdi-
lyinph nodes are present lateral to their respective
visions requircs more complcte clinicoanatomic stud-
bronchus and, less commonly, on the trachea. The
ies.21, 23-25
right node is ventral to the azygos vein while the leff
The AV node originates as a mass of Purkinje cells
node has a similar relation to the beginning of the
in the lower interatrial septal wall in the right atrial
thoracic aorta. The middle tracheobronchial lymph
endocardium, situated at the apex of the triangle of
node is the largest in the group and lics in the angle
Koch. The triangle base is formed by the coronary
formcd by the origin of the primary bronchi from the
sinus; the triangle apex is formed by the fibrous com-
 trachea and below the csophagus. It is Vshaped, its
missure of the flap (the tendon of Todaro) protecting
the openings of the caudal vena cava and the coronary
[ o q p   o  x
bifurcation.
sinus, and the attachmcnt of the tricuspid valve septal
The thoracic duct is the primary channcl for lym-
leafct. Thus, the AV nodc is just craniovcntral to the
 phatic rcturn. It begins in the sublumbar region or
coronary sinus opening and craniodorsal to the tricus-
between the diaphragmatic crura as a cranial continua-
pid valve septal cusp.21. 4-36
tion of the cisterna chyli and continues through thc
 I courses forward, penctrating the fibrous cardiac
diaphragm as the thoracic duct. The location of its
basc, and continues down into the ventricular myocar-
termination varics but it usually empties into an ante-
dium. Here, the branching bundlc is locatcd on thc
rior venous site.tx-20
crest of the muscular interventricular septum, immedi-
ately subjacent to the interventricular component of
the ncinbranous scpfur. It divides into the right and
CARDIAC CONDUCTION
 left bundle branches. The left ventricular specializcd con-
duction tissues are immediately subendocardial on the
SYSTEM
ventricular septal surface in the left ventricular outflow
tracr; they cascade down the septun below the septal
(caudal) semilunar aortic cusp in a fanlike fashion,
 The heart has a specialized conducting system com-
 into three broad divisions (anterior, posterior, and sep-
posed of the sinoatrial node, the atrioventricular nodc,
tal). The fibers arborize, spread to the ventricular free
and thc atriovcntricular bundle of His. In addition,
wall, and ramify into the myocardial tissue, The righ1
pathways for  internodal conduction have bccn de-
bundle branch dips down into the ventricular septum
scribed.21-23. 26
subendocardially and continues as a thin, cordlike
structure intramyocardially, ramifying distally.2
SINOATRIAL (SA) NODE
CARDIAC NERVES
The SA node forms a wedge-shaped group of cells
set into the junction of the cranial vena cava, right
auricular orifice, and body of the right atriun in thc
Cardiovascular physiologic rcsponses to pharmaco
region of the sulcus terminalis, a poorly defined exter-
logic and physiologic perturbations are related to se-
nal groove thar lies opposite the intcrnal right atrial
lcctive distribution of autonomic fibers,26-ss These
strucure, the crista terninalis (a thick ridge of muscle
 actions are associated with parasympathetic and sympa-
bctwcen thc cranial vena cava and atrioventricular
thetic nerves.
opcning) (Fig. 2-4). It is of variable length, tapering
Parasympathetic nerues supplying the cardiovascular
CARDIOVASCULAR ANATOMY
23
system originate from cranial and sacral locations. Cho-
nerves innervating the intraventricular regions primar-
linergic outflow arises from vagal nuclei in the medulla
ily follow the coronary arteries. Moreover, sympathetic.
oblongata, which decreases the rate of SA nodal dis-
 afferent and efferent nerves travel within the first milli-
charge and slows AV nodal conduction. Preganglionic
meter of the subepicardium, except in the right ven-
Gibers pass to the heart in the cardiac branches of the
tricular outflow tract where the fibers are subendocar-
vagal nerves and synapse in the heart with ganglionic
dlial.37
neurons. Postganglionic neurons are also distributed
to the atria and, to a much lesser degree, to ventricular
myocardium (the ventricular conducting system is well
REFERENCES
supplied by cholinergic innervation). Cholinergic f-
 bers to resistance vessels of the heart and lungs origi-
nate in the cranial parasympathetic fibers descending
1. Evans HE. Miller's Anatomy of the Dog. 3rd cd. Philadel-
from the vagal nucleus.
phia, WB Saunders, 1993
2.
Anderson WD, Anderson BG. Atlas of Canine Anatory.
Although overlap exists, some degree of sidedness is
Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1994, p 117
present in parasympathetic cardiac input,* Moreover,
3. Done SH, Goody PC, Evans SA, Strickland NCC. Color
selective innervation exists to the SA and AV nodes
Atlas of Veterinary Anatomy. The Dog & Cat. Vol 3.
from intracardiac ganglia27-33 Parasympathetic inner
London, Mosby-Wolfe, 1996
vation to the sinus node is primarily supplied from
4. Field HE, Taylor MF., Butterworth BB. Atlas of Cat Anal-
fibers coming from the ganglia situated in the pulmo-
omy. Chicago, University of Chicago Prcss, 1969
 5. Koch T, Sajorski H. A contribution to the comparative-
nary vein fat pad. This fat pad is located between the
topographical anatormy of the mediastinun and the se-
cranial and caudal vena cava and adjacent to the right
rous membrane covering the esophagus in rman and dog
pulmonary veins. The SA nodal artery is apically posi-
(Geriman). Zentralbl Vet Med 1:469, 1954
tioned to this fat pad.27 Primary parasynpathetic in-
6. Preuss F, Henschel F. Praktikum der angewandten Veter-
nervation of the AV node is from the ganglia in an-
inaranatomie. Berlin, Preuss and Henschel, 1967
7. Suter PF. Text Atlas. Thoracic Radiology. Thoracic Dis
other fat pad that overlies the entry of the coronary .
eases of the Dog and Cat. Wettswil, Switzerland, Peter F.
sinus into the caudal interatrial septum at the junction
Suter, 1984
of the caudal vena cava and caudal left atrium.27. 24
8. Dias SM, Orsi AM, Oliveria MC, et al. Sur la morphologie
Wihin both of these fat pads the ganglia are immersed
dc la fosse ovale du coeur chez le chien adulie (Canis
in faty tissue and close to the epicardial surface.34. 353
familiaris). Anat Hist Embryol 8:168, 1979
9. Baird JA. Robb JS. Study, reconstruction, and gross dis-
 In addition to parasympathetic fibers within these fat
section of the atrioventricular conducting systerm of the
 pads, nonadrenergic noncholinergic fibers have also
dog heart. Anat Rec 146:313, 1950
been identified in the dog.* The right vagal nerve
10. Boucek RJ, Takashita R, Fojaco R. Functional anatomy
(Fig. 2-5) affects the sinus node more than the AV
of the ascending aorta and the coronary ostia (dog). Ain
node, and the left vagal nerve affects the AV node
J Anat 114:273,1964
11. Christenson GC. The blood supply to the interventricu-
more than the sinus node.26 The ventricles do have
la1 septum of the heart—a cormparative study. Am J Vet
 parasympathetic innervation with fibers traveling intra-
Res 23:869, 1962
murally or subendocardially, which then rise to the
12. Kazzaz D, Shanklin WM. The coronary vessels of the dog
epicardium at the AV groove.*7
demonstrated by colored plastic (vinyl acctate) injection
Sympathetic nerves to the heart and vessels originate
and corrosion. Anat Rec 107: 43, 1950
13. Pianetto MB. The coronary arteries of the dog. Am
in the lateral reticular formation in the vasomotor
Heart J 18:403, 1939
center Postganglionic sympathetic nerves impinge on
14. Donald DE, Essex HE. Pressure studies after inactivation
the SA and AV nodes and innervate atrial and ventricu-
of the major portion of the canine right ventricle. Am J
lar myocardium. Activation increases heart rate and
Physiol 176:155, 1954
15. Moore RA. The coronary arteries of the dog. Am Heart
contractility. Resistance blood vessels, splanchnic blood
J5:743,1930
vessels, and cutaneous veins are especially densely in-
16. Jarvis JF, Xell AMH. The brachiocephalic artery in the
 nervated and when stimulated, effect strong vasocon-
dog with special reference to the arterial supply of the
striction.
esophagus. Anat Rec 145:1, 1963
Cardiac sympathetic innervation is regional and
17. Esperanca-Pina JA, Correia M, O'Neill JG, et al. Mor-
based on input from extrinsic and intrinsic cardiac
phology of the vein draining the coronary sinus of the
dog. Acta Anat 109:122, 1981
neurons,** Efferent sympathetic impulses reach the ca-
18. Kagan KG, Breznock EM. Variations in the carine tho-
nine ventricle from the ansae subclaviae via branches
racic ducl systein and the effecis of surgical occlusion
of cervicothoratic ganglia (previously called the stelate
dermonstrated by rapid aqueous lynphography, using an
ganglia) and middle cervical ganglia. Several sympathetic
intestinal lymphatic trunk. Am J Vet Res 40:948, 1979
nerves from these ganglia then innervate relatively
19. Huber F. Der ductus thoracicus. Inaugural dissertation.
Dresder, 1909. p 1
localized regions of the heart, with the recurrent cardiac
20. de Freitas Von V, Piffer CR, et al. On the topography of
nerve supplying the right. ventricle and the ventrolateral
the ductus thoracicus in the dog, Anat Anz 149:451, 1981
cardiac nerve supplying the left ventricle. Sympathetic
 21. Nonidez JF The structure and innervation of the con-
24
 THE NORMAL HEART: CARDIOVASCULAR STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND PHYSIOLOGY
ducile system of the heart of the dog and rhesus rmonkey
automatic and conducile tissues of the canine heart.
as seen with a silver impregnalion technique. Am Heart
Am J Physiol 248:H61, 1985
[26:577.1943
 30. Butler CK, Srmith FM. Nicholson J, et al. Cardiac effects
22. Lin SK Histopathologic study of the conduction systein.
 jnduced by chemically activated neurons in canine iritra-
In Tilley LP. Essentiais of Canine and Feline Cardiology.
thoracic ganglia. Am J Physiol 259:H1108, 1990
3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1992, p 267
 31. Takahashi X, Barber MJ, Zipes DP. Eferent vagal in-
23. Yanaguchi A. Lltrastruclure of the innervation of the
nervation of the canine left ventricle. Am J Physiol
  s      
248:H89, 1985
structure of the Mammalian Hcart. Ncw York, Acadcmic
32. Randall DC, Randall WC, Brown DR, et al. Hcart rate
Press, 1973, p 27.
control in awake dogs after selective SA-nodal parasyin-
24. McGuire MA, de Bakker JMT, Vermeulen JT, et al. Atrio-
pathectomy. Am J Physiol 262:H1128,1992
ventricular junctional tissue discrepancy between histo-
33. Plecha DM, Randall WC, Geis GS, et al. Localization of
logical and electrophysiological characteristics. Circula-
vagal prcganglionic somata controling the sinoatrial arnd
tion 94:571, 1996
atrioventricular nodes. Am J Physiol 255:R703, 1988
 25. Ho SY, Kilpatrick L, Kamai T, et al. The architecture of 
34. Randall wC, Ardell JL, Calderwood D, et al. Parasyinpa-
the atrioventricular corduction axis in dog compared to
thetic ganglia innervating the canine atrioventricular
tman: Its signilicance to ablation of the atrioventricular
nodal region. J Auton Nerv Syst 16:311, 1986
 nodal approaches. Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 6:26, 1995
35. Randall WC, Ardell JI., Wurster RD, et al. Vagal postgan-
26. Zipes DP. Genesis of cardiac arrhythmias: Flectrophysio
glionic innervation of the canine sinoatrial rode. J Au-
logical considerations. In Braunwald F (ed): Heart Dis-
ton Nerv Syst 20:13, 1987
case: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 5th Ed.
 36. Ursell PC, Ren CL, Albala A, et al. Nonadrenergic non-
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997, p 548
cholinergic innervation; anatomic distribution of' calcito-
 27. Randall WC, Wursteer RD. Peripheral innervation of the
nin gene-related peptide-immuuoreactive tissue in the
heart. In Levy MN, Schwartz PJ (eds): Vagal Control of 
dog heart. Circ Res 68:131, 1991
the Heart: Experimental Basis and Clinical Implications.
 37. Ito M, Zipes DP Efferent synpathetic and vagal innerva-
Arimonk, NY, Futura Publishing Co, 1994, p 21
tion in the canine right ventricle. Circulation 90:1459,
28. Ardell JL, Randall WC. Selective vagal innervation of
1994.
 sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes in the canine heart.
 38. Yuan B, Ardell JI., Hopkins DA, et al. Gross and imicro-
Am J Physiol 251:H764, 1986
scopic anatony of the canine intrinsic cardiac rervous
29. Randall wC, Ardell JI. Selective parasynpathectomy of
system. Anat Rec 239:75, 1994
Nor
2
Cardiovascular
ROBERT L. HAMLIN
OVERVIEW OF THE CARDIOVASCULAR
SYSTEM
 The cardiovascular system circulates blood in order to supply oxygen and
remove carbon dioxide from metabolizing tissues'- (Fig. 3-l). The heart is
actually composed of two pumps called the right and the left ventricles. The
right ventricle pumps blood through the lungs and sucks blood from the
systemic veins. The left ventricle pumps blood through the systemic circula
tion and sucks blood frorm the lungs. Valves within the veins and the heart
keep blood flowing in one direction. The mitral and tricuspid valves prevent
regurgitation frorn the ventricles into the atria, and the aortic and pulmonic
valves keep blood moving from capillaries toward the heart.
Most of the blood volume resides in systemic veins, whereas most of the
interference to blood flow resides in systemic arterioles. Very little blood
resides in the lungs or systermic capillaries. The capacity of the veins to store
blood, and the interference to blood low through arterioles, are determined
by the degree of contraction or relaxation of the vascular smooth muscle
surrounding the vessels. When vascular smooth muscle is constricted, venous
capacity decreases and arteriolar resistance increases.
The blood volume and blood pressure in the pulinonary circulation,
especially within the pulmonary capillaries and veins, depend upon the
volune of blood within the systemic veins. If the blood volume is constant,
then more blood resides within the systeinic veins and less blood is available
to reside within the pulmonary vesseis. Venous and capillary blood pressures
are correspondingly reduced. In contrast, the less blood within the systemic
veins, the more blood resides within the lungs, and the greater are the
pulmonary vascular pressures.
BLOOD VOLUME AND CIRCULATION OF
BLOOD
and carbon dioxide) between the atmosphere and tissues. Distribution of
blood to the systemic vascular beds depends on a number of faciors, includ-
ing blood volume, venous return, and cardiac Gilling.
25
26
 THE NORMAL HEART: CARDIOVASCULAR STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND PHYSIOLOGY
MICROCIRCULATION
HYDROSTATIC
OSMOTIC
PRESSURE
PRESSURE
CAPILLARY
RVI
1+
-28
The normal capillary microcirculation? is illustrated
ZALVEOLAR-CAPILLARY
 in Figure 3-2. At the capillary-alveolar level, serum
MEMBRANE
moves across the capillary-alveolar membrane into the
interstitium and back into the vascular system via
INTERSTITIUM
lymph channels (chapter 13; see Figure 13-1). A hy-
drostatic force of 12 mmHg pushes serum through the
 alveolar-capillary membrane from capillary to intersti-
tium. This results from (1) a positive pressure of 7
mrmHIg in the pulmonary capillary due to the right
FIGURE 3-2
ventricle pumping blood into that capillary; (2) effects
Schematic diagram of the alvedar-capillary membrane, with thc
capillary (CAPILARY) situated above the memhrane and the
       
pups blood through this capillary and generates a hydrostatic
pressure of +7mmHg.The osmoue plasma pressure (atributed to
proteins) creates a force of - 28 mmHg. Representative interstitial
hydrostatic and osrmotic (oncotic) forccs are thus -- 5 and - 17,
respectively. By summing all the forces that. either push scrum out
UNGS
(12 mmHg) or pull serum in (i I mmHg) acros the capillary
pores, a net force of 1 rmmHg is driving serum out of the capillary
and into tlie interstitium. Once the serurm reaches the interstiliun.
however, it is drained by the lymphatics back inteo the vascular
system. Although no excess fluid builds up within the interstitium.
the interstitium is continually bathed with serum.
 of the left veintricle sucking blood out of the capillary;
and (3) a force of -5 mmHg within the interstitium
PULMONARY
 associated with the elastic lung recoil and tendency of
ARTERY
VEIN
the thoracic. wall to expand.
Also, osmotic forces (actually oncotic forces because
they are due to protein molecules) tend to retain fluid
in both the capillary and the interstitium. Because
 proteins are in greater concentration in the capillary,
the osmotic pressure is
-28 mmHg; and, because
there is less protein in the interstitial fluid, the osmotic.
force is; only a - 17 mmIIg. Thus, a net osrmotic force
of 11 mmllg tends to force uid from the interstitium
YSTEM
VEINS
AORTA
to the capillary.
The total net. effect. resulting from 12 mmHg hyclro-
static force driving fluid from capillary to interstitium,
 qsnd o sun ary oouso suu II - pue
mmHg. This drives fluid from the capillary to the
interstitium, causing loss of serum to the pulmonary
interstitium at a rate approximating 1000 ml per day.
varves
 Pulmonary lymphatics remove this fluid and return
TISSUES
it. to the vascular system. Therefore, there is neither
 gain nor loss of vascular volume. Figure 1l-3 demon-
FIGURE 3-1
strates what happens to the microcirculation when pul-
Diagram of the cardiowascular system. Vascnlar smooth musclc
"'wraps' around the systermic veins, aorta, and arterioles. The
monary capillary hydrostatic pressure becomes ele-
rclative degree of vascular srmooth muscle tone helps determine
vated owing to inadequate pulmonary circulation
the volumc of systemic venous blood, the effort required by the
 emptying in left-sided heart failure,
lefl ventriclc to ejec. hlood into the aorta, and the resistanee t
blood flow through systemic arterioles. 1f blood volume is constant,
then the greater the systemic venous volume, the lesser the volune
PRELOAD
 sddm
vcins deterrmine to what volune (ie, thc preload) the leff
ventricle fils. IA, left atrium; RA, righr atrium; LV, left ventricle:
The volume of blood within the pulmonary veins
RV, riglit ventricle.
and capillaries is an important factor in the return of
NORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR PHYSIOLOGY
blood to the left ventricle (IV).bα This quantity of
PRINCIPLES OF NORMAL
blood returning to the IV is termed the preload. It
CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION
ultimately determines the resting length of sarcormeres
and, thus, ventricular end-diastolic wall stress. There-
fore, the state of systemic venous dilatation or constric-
tion determines the left ventricular preload. All else
 To discuss the pathophysiology of heart failure
being constant, if the systemic veins are dilated, lefft
(chapter 11), certain basic principles of normal cardio-
ventricular preload is reduced; if systemic veins 
vascular function must be understood.9 These include
are
constricted, left ventricular preload is increased. A ven-
(1) heart rate, (2) force of ventricular contraction, (3)
odilator is a drug that relaxes the smooth muscle of
interference to blood flow, (4) myocardial stiffness or
systemic veins. Venodilators will therefore reduce left.
its reciprocal (i.e., compliance), (5) myocardial oxygen
ventricular preload and are termed "preload reduc-
consumption (MVOz), (6) microcirculation and trans-
ers" (chapter 12).
capillary luid moveinent into and out of the intersti-
There is an inverse relationship between the volume
tial compartment, and (7) the cardiac cycle.
of blood within the systemic veins anid the preload.
The ventricular end-diastolic volurme (preload) and
thus, encd-diastolic pressure, depends upon the ratio of
HEART RATE
blood volurme to the capacity of veins to store it (the
end-diastolic pressure also depends upon the forcc
IIeart rate (IIR) is determined by the rate of sponta-
with which the atrium "kicks' blood into the ventricle
neous sinoatrial (SA) nodal discharge. This in turn
during atrial contraction). The smaller the venous
 depends on existing autonomic efferent traffic to that
compartment, the more blood returns to the ventricles
structure (Fig. 3-3). Thus, SA discharge fluctuates ac-
and the larger the preload.
cording to the prevailing balance between parasympa-
'The size of the venous compartment depends upon
thetic nervous impulses (which slow SA nodal dis-
whether the smooth muscle in the walls of those veins
charge) and sympathetic efferent impulses (which
is stimulated or is relaxed. If the systemic venous blood
speed SA nodal discharge). In the normal dog, the SA
volume is great (i.e., blood "pools" in the systemic
 rd s on e ss ao
veins), then the volume of blood returning to the
but this will vary between approximately 45 beats/min
thorax and to the left ventricle is relatively small. If
at rest to 259 beats/min during peak exercise.
the volume returning to the ventricle is small, then
ventricular preload is correspondingly small. A drug
such as nitroglycerine that. dilates veins (i.e., a venodila-
PARASYMPATHETIC STIMULATIONAND
tor) acts as a preload reducer; drugs that constrict
BLOCKADE
systemic. veins enhance preload.
When vagal centers in the medulla oblongata are
stimulated, acelylcholine (ACh) binds to its SA nodal
AFTERLOAD
receptor sites, decreasing the rate of SA nodal dis-
charge. These receptor sites will be blocked from ACh
The degree of systemic arterial and arteriolar vascu-
by administration of a parasympatholytic drug such as
lar smooth muscle constriction or dilatation is an im-
atropine, Thus, while vagal stimulation decrcases heart
portant factor determining the afterload.-s Aflerload
rate, vagal blockade by atropine increases it (usually to
 may he described as the tension, force, or stress acting
 approximately 150 heats/min in dogs).
 O11 ventricular wall myocytes after onset of shortening.
I1 indicates the degree of interference to blood flow
SYMPATHETIC STIMULATION AND BLOCKADE
from the IV to and through the systemic arterial tree,
 to the capillaries and through the veins. In general, if
When sympathetic centers in the medulla are stimu-
the vascular smooth muscle is relaxed (i.e., the arteries
lated, norepinephrine binds to its β,receptor site on
become less stiff and the arterioles dilate),
the
the SA node, which increases the rate of SA nodal
aflerload will be recluced. In contrast, if the vascular
discharge. Cerrain adrenergic-blocking drugs such as
simooth imuscle is contracted (i.e., the arteries are stif-
atenolol, pindolol, and metoprolol are relatively car-
fer and the arterioles are constricted), the afterload
 dioselective and block the β-receptor site. Other adre
(and, thus, impedance to lef ventricular emptying)
nergic-blocking agents, including propranolol, timolol,
will be increased.
 and esmolol, are nonselective and block both β- and
A more complete discussion of preload and after-
βradrenergic receptors. Thus, while β-adrenergic stim-
load follows (see dependency on preload, and depen-
ulation may speed the HR from a resting value of 60
dency on interference of blood flow from ventricle to
to a stimulated level of 250 beats/min, B-adrenergic
capillaries).
blockade may decrease the HR to 150 beats/min. Or
28
THE NORMAL HEART: CARDIOVASCULAR STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND PHYSIOLOGY
 maximal
240
exercise
augmentor n.
150
HR
ACH
 pentolinium
vagus n.
[(-)
(-)
NE
45
propranolol
atenolol (-)
60
200
Pa (mmHg)
atropine
FIGURE 3-4
(-)
Illustralion of the rclationship between heart rate (IiR) and arterial
SAN
blood pressurc (Pa). Hcart rate [or imost mammals varies betwecn
45 and 240 beals/min, and mean systcmic arlcrial blood pressure
varies betwcen 60 and 200 mmHIg. During maximal exertion, hcart
ratc is approximately 240 and mcan systemic arterial pressure is
approximately I50 mmHg. Under nonexercising conditions, heart.
rate slows as blood pressurc clevates. This is known as the Marey
 reffex, mediated prcdominantly via the parasympathetic nervos 
FIGURE 3-3
systerm,
Efferent impulses arising fron thc medulla oblongata (M) and
modulated by the hypothalamus (H) ravel to the hearl. over the
vagal (parasympathetic) and augmentor (sympathetic) nerves.
multiplied by stroke volume. The basic relationship
Parasympatheic: traffit: slows the SA nodal discharge, slows AV
 between arterial blood pressure (ABP), cardliac output
nodal conduction, and decreases myoxardial contractilty.
Sympathetic traffic causes opposite respouses. Synapses for
(CO), and total peripheral resistance (TPR) is APB =
sympatheic traflic occur in the paravertehral ganglia. Its
CO X TPR (chapter 35).
neurotransrmiter is acetylcholine (ACh), which is bloxcked by
ganglionic bloxcking agents such as pentolinium. The
postganglionic mediaior for sypathetie efferent trafic is
FORCE OF VENTRICULAR
hlocking agents sucht as propranolol (a mixed β-blocker) or
alcnoloi (a β-selective adrenergic blocker). The ncurotransmitter
CONTRACTION
for parasympathetic efferent traffic is acerylcholine, which may be
blocked by atropine. SAN, sinoaurial node.
'The force generated by the contracting myocardiun
 depends on (l) the inotropic state (rnyocardial con-
if the pet becomes slightly excited, HR may not. in-
tractility, va): (2) the volume of blood within the ventri-
crease as much with β-adrenergic blockade.
MEAN SYSTEMIC ARTERIAL BLOOD PRESSURE
(MAP)
MAP is an important modifier of heart. rate (Fig.
glossopharyngeal n.
34). Both IIR and MAP are related by a reflex that
vagus n.
depends on pressure sensors within the aortic arch
and carotid sinuses, which detect the level of blood
pressure. These sensors send afferent volleys over the
vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves to the brain. The
carotid
 brain then sends efferent. volleys, predominantly over
aortic sinus
sinus
the vagus nerve, either to increase or slow the IIR
(Fig. 3-5). In general, when systemic arterial pressure
FIGURE 3-5
is elevated, IIR slows. Alternatively, when that pressure
Tension (pressure) reccptors at the aortic arch and carotid artery
is reduced, HR increases.
bifurcation send afferent. impulses along the vagus and
This protective reflex tends to adjust blood pressure
glossepharyngeal nerves to the medulla oblongata (M). The
intensity of these impulses is direcly related to the pressure within
toward normal by changing HR, and thus, cardiac
the arterial tree. Input fron the hypothalamus (H) modulates the
output, since cardiac output. equals the product of HR
 afferent impulses from tlie baroreceptors.
NORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR PHYSIOLOGY
29
cle just before it contracts (end-diastolic volume, EDV,
EXCITATION-CONTRACTION COUPLING
also known as preload, PL); and (3) the interference
Cycling of the heavy meromyosin heads" is initiated
to ejection of blood from the ventricle into the aorta,
by the following sequence: (l) the myocardial cell is
which is associated with afterload (AL) (discussed
stimulated by any perturbation that increases conduc-
later).6
pisino ayn uoy qsu suoi +en (z) (suo! .en oi aou
to the inside of the cell, changing (depolarizing) the
inside from a minus to a positive electrical charge:
DEPENDENCY ON MYOCARDIAL
(3) depolarization increases conductance of the cell
CONTRACTILITY
membrane to Ca+-, which enters the cell from the
outside; Ca+- is also released from the sarcoplasmic
The fundamental microscopic unit of cardiac muscle
reticulum where it has been concentrated; (4) Ca+-
is the sarcomere (Fig. 3-6), millions of which are ar-
 binds to troponin-c, which is attached to tropomyosin,
ranged both in series and in parallel to comprise the
ald pulls the tropomyosin molecule from a position
myocardium. Hlowever, true contraction results from
bctween actin and myosin that prevents the cross-
cycling of heavy meromyosin heads (cross-bridges).
 bridges from cycling; (5) cross-bridges cycle, and the
These extend from the stationary myosin molecule to
sarcomere either shortens or—if shortening is pre-
sites on the thin actin flaments that extend from the
vented-—generates tension; (6) cycling is terminated
 Z bands. When the heavy meromyosin heads cycle,
when Ca+- is driven both back into the sarcoplasmic
they pull the opposing untethered ends of the actin
reticulum and outside of the cell, thus permitting the
filaments toward one another, which pull the Z bands
tropomyosin molecule to again inhibit the cross-
 on either side of the sarcomere.9.10
bridges.
 Energy required for cycling and for driving Ca--
 against a concentration gradient into the sarcoplasmic
SARCOMERE
reticulum comes from the hydrolysis of adenosine tri-
phosphate (ATP) by ATPase, resulting in energy plus
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phospho-
rlus,
LEFT
 Once cycling of cross-bridges begins, the Z bands on
VENTRICLE
 opposite ends of each sarcomere are pulled toward
one another. If motion is prohibited, the sarcomere
will generate only tension. The maximal velocity with
which each heavy meromyosin head cycles is termed
myocardial contractility, or the inotropic stale, and is repre-
sented by the symbol vu. The inotropic state depends
upon the rale of energy liberation when ATP is hy-
 drolyzed by ATPase to ADP, releasing energy and inor-
ganic phosphorus. The inotropic state is increased
when norepinephrine, epinephrine, or sympathomi-
metic amines (e.g., isoproterenol, dopamine, dobu-
Z
tamine) bind to myocyte β,-adrenergic receptors.
ACTIN
Norepinephrie  originates from  sympathetic  nerve
 endings, but epinephrine released from the adrenal
medulla, which circulates to the receptors, has an iden-
MYOSIN
tical inotropic effect. In contrast, the inotropic state is
 decreased by removing norepinephrine from the β-
receptor or binding ACh to cholinergic receptors.
Myocardial relaxation is morc sensitive to ATP deple-
tion than is the process of myocardial contraction.
Thus, O, debt resulting in ATP depletion causes nega-
tive lusitrope earlier, and to a greater degree, than it
causes nlegative inotrope.
ATP
DEPENDENCY ON PRELOAD
FIGURE 3-6
Diagram of the left ventricle with a single sarcomere (top) which is
FRANK-STARLING LAW OF THE HEART
magnificd (botton) to ilustrate its componcnts. Millions of these
If all other factors are equal, the greater the volume
sarcomeres comprise the myocardium and are responsihle for
contraction. See texi for details.
of blood in the ventricle just before it contracts (i.e.,
30THE NORMAL HEART: CARDIOVASCULAR STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND PHYSIOLOGY
the grcater the preload), the more vigorous is the
force of contraction.16 This Frank-Starling lau of the
heurt occurs because more cross-bridges are cycling.
EDP - Ppl
aeniui on  -e jo Aqean raea v si ai pue
EDV
EDV =
this cycling. This relationship is illustrated by the clas
r
Em
sic Frank-Starling cuurve (Fig. 3-7; see also Fig. 11-1C),
EDP
cm
in which a parameter of systolic (contractile) function
(e.g, pressure-generated, stroke volume, or cardiac.
output) is plotted on the yaxis, versus preload (e.g-.
 = stiffness
3
end-diastolic volume) plotted on the x-axis. Actuaily, x-
axis units could be represented as nurmbers of cross-
个
bridges cycling, or Ca+ -
available for cycle initiation;
Ppl
both relate to end-cdiastolic volume, end-diastolic fiber
length, or ratio of the force distending the ventricle to
FIGURE 3-8
the stiffness of the ventricle (chapter 11).
Schematic showing the relationship betwcen vcntricular hlood
volume at the cnd of diastole (EDV), pleural pressures (Pp), and
myocardial stiffness (En). Ventricular hloxod volaume just beforc
contraction is determined by the pressure within the ventricle (i.c.,
end-diastolic pressure. or EDl) minus the pressure outside the
ventricle (ic., plenral pressure, (or Pp), all divided by the
myocardial stiffiess. The EDP is delermined by blood volume and
force of atrial contraction (i.c., atrial kick): pleural pressure is
determined by lung function; myocardial stiffness is deternined by
discase, drugs, O, debt. fibrosis, and other factors.
MYOCARDIAL STIFFNESS
The myocardium may become stiff in a number of
ways.7. 9 If the intramyocardial vessels become full of
blood, they may become rigid. Thus, elevation of right.
atial pressure will cause the coronary circulation to
become engorged, and both ventricles may appear
stiff. Myocardiurn will also appear stiff if it contains or
is surrounded by excessive fbrous connective tissue.
PL
since this tissue is normally stiffer than myocardium.
EDV
The ventricular stiffness (the reciprocal of which is
compliance, or ventricular fusitrope) depends upon a
[%optimal
numberof
number of factors. Most important is the rate and
Ot
70
06
Q0
[meromysinheads
coinpleteness with which Ca++ ions are driven off
working
 of troponin-c and are either resequestered into the
sarcoplasmic reticulum or transporled out of the myo-
cyte. This activity is energy dependent and, thus, may
 eu e si d  ei q
FIGURE 3-7
release are reduced, as occurs with hypoxia.
Drawing contrasting the relationship between preload and force of
The ventricular distending force (Fig. 38) is repre-
comtraction. The Y axis (ordinate) plots the force (F) of 
contraction, the X axis (abscissa) depicts the volumc of blood
sented by the difference in ventricular pressure (end-
within the ventricle (ie., prcload [Pl.J or cnd-diastolic volume
diastolic pressure, EDP) minus the pressure ouside
fEDVD just before the ventricle contracts. The thick-walled circles
the ventricle (intrapleural pressure, Ppl). Compliance
bclow the abscissa depict the relative volume of blood within thc
ventricle as cnd-diastolic yohume increases.Below each circle is rhe
also depends upon ventricular volume (preload). The
percent of total possible heavy meromyoxin heads that. can cycle al
larger the ventricular volume, the stiffer (i.e., the less
each coyresponding ventricular volume. At the bottom are Iwo
sarcomeres. Left. sarcormere shows that only one heavy 1merormyosin
compliant) the ventricle, and the greater the transmu-
licad per actin filamenl can cycle; right sarcomere shows thal. two
ral pressure required to stretch the venticle further.
heavy meromyosin heads can cycle. Thus, the sarcomere to the
 Compliance is measured during diastole in a num-
right gencrates more force hut does nol cycle more rapidly. The
ber of ways (Fig. 3-9): (1) as the ratio of end-diastolic
bottom curve represents the heart failure palient. Notice that al a
give11 preload, the failing heart gencrates substantially less force of
ventricular volume to end-diastolic ventricular pres-
contraction compared with the normal heart, In heart failure,
sure; (2) as the maximal rate of fall of intraventricular
compensatory mcchanisms increase prelxad in an efforl to
pressure (dP/dran), which usually occurs during the
maintain force of contraction. This drives the Starling curve to the
right and may ultimately result in pulmonary congestion.
isovolumetric relaxation period; (3) as Tau (T)—the
NORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR PHYSIOLOGY:
31
A
B
EDP
EDI
EDV
dp/dt
C
D
LVP
100-
{6H
Fmitrolvolveopens
E
①
△P
A
AV
②
Y=minima!
50
Tout
ventricular
ESV
pressure
Yolume (ml)
FIGURE 3-9
Methods of expressing myocardlial or ventricular compliance (C).
by echocardiograply, scintigraphy, or angioxardiography. Pressure can be measured by a high-
frequency micromanometer inserted into the left ventricle via aoric or miral orifices. Acrually, this
value ocurs after the ventricle is completely flled. It is sensitive to loth the rate and completeness
properties of the ventricular wall.
(B) Cormpare recorded left ventricular pressure (LVP) and its time-derivative (dP/dt, or change in
pressure per change in time),using a high-fidelity nicronanomcter inserted into the lefl vcntricle.
Calculate the dP/dt by on-line anaiogue computer. The minimal point of dP/dt can be used to
csinate compliance. Actuall. this value always occurs before the venrricle begins to fill; therefore, it
is most sensitive to the rate and compleleness of sequestration of Ca+ ' ions from troponin-c: t
sarcoplasmic rcticulum and may bc rclatively insensitive to flling of the ventricle. ILAP, left atrial
pressurc.
(C) Tau (1/compliancc) is the timc required for ventricular pressure to fall 63% of the value
(line 1 to line 3) from the presure at which the nitral valve opens (X,line 1), to the lowest
pressure it achieves in dastole (Y,line 2).This calatin, or a logarithmic funetin of this is the
most accurate method of expressing compliancc.
(D） The slope of the rclationship between change in vcntricular yolume (4V) and change in
ventricular pressurc (AP) which ocurs during diastole estimates compliance Cat many instants
during diastole. The pressure-volume loop is obtained by plotting ventricular pressure (ordinatc)
against ventilar volunc (abscissa).Points for this loop are A =enddiastole; B =he instant the
aortic valve opens; C = end-systole; I) = the instant. the mitral valve opens. △P is thc pressure
gradient required to fill the ventricle for the strokc volume; AV is the stroke volume. Because the
slope of the line D-A is not constant, the “hest'" linc is usually drawn.
32  THE NORMAL HEART: CARDIOVASCULAR STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND PHYSIOLOGY
duration in milliseconds required for intraventricular
SYSTOLE
pressure to fall approximately 63 percent of its value
from the instant the mitral valve opens, to when the
most negative intraventricular pressure exists; and (4)
as the slope of the curve when ventricular volume is
 plotted against ventricular pressure during ventricular
filling.
Clinical exarmples of increased or apparent in-
creased stiffness leading to reduced ventricular Glling
include feline hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy, ventricu-
lar dilatation for any reason, myocardial fibrosis, peri-
cardial tamponade, myocardial ischemia, and elevated
DIASTOLE
in trapleural pressure.
Svr
VENTRICULARINTERDEPENDENCE
α2+B2
V+PG
 Because both ventricles occupy space within the con-
FIGURE 3-10
fines of the rather rigid pericardial sac, enlargement
Diagram illustrating Cactors relating to systemic vascular resistance
of one ventricle impinges upon the filling of the other
ventricle and makes it appear stiff. This ventricular
initial porion of thc aorta. The aorta expands to acoammodate
interdependence is important in understanding how,
the blood but also inpedes the flow of blood from the ventricle.
Furthier resistance to blexod flow occurs distally at the arterioles
when one chamber becormes diseased (e.g., the left
(stippled). Then, while the ventricle rests, the distended aorta
yentricle with mitral regurgitation resulting in left
recoils and propels the blood through the arterioles. The stifness
of the initial portion of tie aorla generates impedance, and the
heart volume overload), the other ventricle may mani-
aperture of the arterioles generates systemic vascular resisance.
fest altered diastolic function. In contrast, if a ventricle
Both irnpedance and resistance are increased by α, slimulation and
fills less completely than normal, then its force of
PGF:; they are decreased by αy, βz, or vagal (V) stinulation, or by
contraction will fall according to the Frank-Starling
prostacy:lin (PG).
relationship.
tension. Since the ventricle may be considered as a
DEPENDENCY ON INTERFERENCE TO
thick-walled sphere, tension (T) can be estimated by
BLOOD FLOW FROM VENTRICLE TO
I aplace's formula:
CAPILLARIES
T = P X r/WT.
The interference to blood flow9 1 from the ventri-
where P is pressure within the ventricle; r is the radius
cles to either aorta or pulmonary trunk is termed the
of the chamber lumen; and WT is the IV freewall
afterload (AL). It. must be appreciatcd that the left
thickness. Clinically, afterload is often expressed as
ventricle does not pump blood through the arterioles
 preload (PL.) or end-diastolic volume (EDV), since PL
but only into the proximal portion of the aorta (Fig.
or EDV is related to radius (Pl. = 4/3 pi r') and is
3-10). Then, while the ventricle is relaxed, the aorta,
multiplied by ventricular pressure (P) divided by IV
which has become distended by the left ventricular
free-wall thickness (WT). Thus,
strokc volume, rccoils and pumps the blood through
 the arterioles and capillaries to the veins. Thus, energy
Afterload = PI. X P/w1.
from the contracting ventricle aind the blood it ejects
is stored within the elastic elements of the aorta, to be
The maximal value occurs at the instant the aortic
dissipated by ejecting blood through the arterioles. At
valve opens; when the ventricle is at its largest end-
 a given level of contractility, myocardial fiber shorten-
dliastolic volume; when the wall thickness is the least
ing varies directly with Pl. and inversely with AL.
end-diastolic wall thickness;, and when the ventricular
 The Al. depends upon the degree of contraction or
 pressure is great, although not maximal. That is, pres-
relaxation of the vascular smooth muscle within the
sure still increases from the time the aortic valve opens
systemic arterial tree. When the smooth muscle is con-
until peak systole occuurs. Ilowever, after the valve
tracted, the arterial tree is stiff, and the ventricle per-
opens and the ventricle ejects, ventricular volume be-
ceives increased interference to ejection.
comes smaller and the free-wall becomes thicker. Con-
sequently, even though P increases, the ratio of Pl. X
P/WT—and, thus, afterload—decreases.
 Factors Determining Vascular Smooth
Interference to blood fow from lefl ventricle to
Muscle Constriction
systemic capillaries is an important factor in afterload.
Afterloado is measured in units of peak ventricular
It arises from two sources: (1) impedance (Z), and (2)
wall tension. Laplace's law approximates ventricular wall
systemic vascualar resistance (svr).
NORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR PHYSIOLOGY
33
Inpedance is the sum of extcrnal factors opposing IV
DELIVERY
CONSUMPTION (MvO 2)
cjcction and is closely rclated to afterload. It represents 
thc ratio of aortic pressure to flow and is determined
31
by physical propertics of the vascular wall and blood
LUNG
HR
(e.g., blood density and viscosity; aortic diamcter and
V
 aortic wall viscoelasticity; reflected flow; and pressures
3
 gencratcd in the distal arterial system). Impedance is
Hb
 estimated by dividing the pulsatile prcssure in the
m
 aorta by the pulsatile flow.
EDV x Pa
Systemic vascular resistance is that interference im-
 poscd by having to force blood through the systemic
+
WT
alterioles. At rest, impcdancc contributes 15 percent
of the interference to flow, while systcmic vascular
FIGURE 3-11
resistance contributes 85 percent. During maximal ex-
sdp npe ouusad  a gour au
upon the balance between oxygen delivery and oxygcn
crtion, impedance may increase to 30 percent and svr
consumplion (MVO). Oxygen is delivered if the lung functions
decrease to 70 percent of the interfercnce. Systemic
well, if the blood contains adequate amounts of normal
vascular resistance is estimated by dividing the pressure
hemoglobin (lib), and if the coronary blood flow (Qw) is sufficicnt.
difference bctwcen the aorta and right atrium by the
Oxygen consumption dcpcnds mainly on thrcc factors: hcart rate
(IIR), myocardial conractility (Vm), and pcak myocardial tension
cardiac output.
(7) generated during conuraction. The former two factors arc
Blood viscosiy2. 5 also influences svr, since for any
determined by a balancc beiween β-adrenergic (β:) activity, which
givcn arteriolar apcrture, the more viscous the blood,
increases Og demand, and vagal (V) activily, which dccreascs O
dcmand.Peak tcnsion (7)is determined by end-diastolic yolume
the greater the pressure gradient requircd to drive
(EDV) and diastolic systemic arterial blood pressure (Pa). Peak
blood across the aperture. Most of the blood viscosity
tension is inversely related to thc wall thickncss (Wl) of thc
 depends upon the packed cell volume and is less de-
chamber.
pendcnt upon cither the serum protein concentration
 or the crythrocyte foldability (erythrocytes, with a di-
ameter of 8 μM, must fold to traverse a capillary with
cardiac O, delivery minus cardiac O extraction (Fig-
3-11).'o The amount of Oz cxtracted is termed myocar-
 a diameter of only 5 μM).
 os  p s   
dial oxygen consumplion (MVOs). Oxygen delivered to
The contractile state of smooth muscle cells responds
the heart depcnds on pulmonary function (an cxam-
to many vasoactive agents. These agcnts alter both
 ple of the interdependence betwcen the hcart and the
impedance and systemic vascular resistancc, as well as
 lungs), thc amount and quality of hemoglobin that
venous capacity The net cffect depends upon the drug
carries Oz, and the coronary blood flow, which is de-
and dosc, the relative intcnsity of autonomic nervous
pendlent on forces driving blood through that circula-
stimulation, and the specific vascular bed affectcd (Ta-
tion.
ble 3-1).
CORONARY BLOODFLOW
MYOCARDLAL OXYGEN CONTENT
Because of the importance of coronary blood flow,
 Thc amount of oxygcn present within the myocar-
its major detcrminants must bc summarized.o.u1 As
 dium at any one time results from a balance between
with any tubc, the volumc of blood flowing through
thc coronary circulation is a function of the pressure
TABLE 3-1
gradient betwecn the two ends (i.e., the aortic pressurc
 Responses of Vascular Smooth Muscle to
minus the right atrial pressure) (Fig. 3-12). However,
Various Stimuli
bccause the coronary circulation flows through collaps-
ible tubes that traversc thc myocardium, ventricular
Vasodilate/
contraction causes thcir comprcssion and actually
Vasodilate
Vasoconstrict
Vasoconstrict
interferes with coronary blood flow. Thus, during
β-Adrenergic
α-Adrencrgic
α,-Adrencrgic
ventricular systole, intramyocardial tension is great
stimulation
stimulation
 stimulation
Vagal stimulationl
Dopamine
Scrotonin:
 cnough to terminatc coronary blood flow, cven though
Bradykinin
Prostaglandin
Angiotensin II
thc pressure gradient between aorta and right atrium
Adcnosinc
Endothelin
 m aid e s s  rs 
Atrial natriuretic:
Vasopressin/ADH
 left ventricular myocardium, which has greatly elevated
peptide
Histaminc
intramyocardial pressure. During diastole, when thc
Nitric oxidc (EDRF)
aortic valve is closcd, aortic diastolic pressure is trans-
Acetylcholine
mittcd without impcdiment through the sinuses of
EIBRF, endothelin-derived relaxing factor; ADH, antidiuretic horrmone.
Valsalva to the coronary ostia. Intramyocardial tension
34
1THE NORMAL HEART: CARDIOVASCULAR STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND PHYSIOLOGY
relationship, peak myocardial tcnsion is directly re-
lated to EDV and aortic diastolic blood prcssure (Pa)
α 1
(i.e., tension equals the product of intraventricular
aorta
 pressure and intcrnal radius divided by the wall thick-
Ra
ness). Thus, events that increasc cither EDV or Pa or
that decrcasc myocardial wall thickness increasc peak
tension (and MVOz). This emphasizes the importance
 of compensatory responses that decrease ventricular
volumc and aortic pressure and keep the ventricular
Two factors influencing myocardial oxygen con-
sumption—heart rate and O, delivery (the duration of
to right atrium
diastole)—can be synthesizcd in a paramctcr calied 
percentage diastote (Fig. 3-13). The higher the hcart
P
rate, the greater the O, consumption and the less time
there is for O, delivery. When heart rate speeds, systole
shortens, but the number of systolcs incrcases. Therc-
fore, the time spcnt in systole incrcases. However, dias-
tole shortens disproportionatcly more, so that the per-
 centage of time spent in diastole falls prccipitously.
FIGURE 3-12
Drawing illustrating thie factors cffecting coronary blood fow.
Coronary blood fow Q equals the driving force,that is, aortic
pressure (Pa), munus night atrial pressure (PRA), divided by hc
THE CARDIAC CYCLE
resistance to flow by the coromnary arterioles (Ra) plus compression
of the coronary vessels by Lthe contracting wall (Rc). Coronary
arteriolar resistanee (Ra) is inercased by α-adrencrgic traffie (Q);
Bxadrcnergic efferent traffe (βe) dcereases that resistancc. Nofe
that the coinpressive forces on the coronary vessel become greatcr
 The sequcncc of cvents that occurs during contrac-
near the cndocardium (larger aurows) than ncar the epicardium
tion and relaxation of the hcart is termed the cardiac
(smaller arrows). This is hecausc intramyocardial tcnsion is grcatcr
ini the deeper regions of the ventricular wallthan at the more
supcrficial regious. Also, when heart rate becomes more rapid,
average ventricular pressure is grcater than when heart ratc is
slower
Diastol
falls precipilously, offering little resistancc to intramyo-
SYSTOLE
cardial coronary flow. Most coronary blood flow occurs
DIASTOLE
during this period and is greatcst whenever the hcart
and
spends morc time in diastole.
Systole
Coronary vascular resistance is influenccd by a number
of factors. Neural influences are very important. For
cxample, α;- andl αz-adrcnergic reccptors release nor-
cpinephrine and cause coronary vasoconstriction. In
contrast, β- and βy-adrenergic receptors mediate vaso-
12
 dilation. Metabolic, myogenic, and pharmacologic fac-
Duratior
Duration Spent Contracting=O2 Demand
tors are inportanl, as are substances relcased from the
endothelium causing vasodilation or vasoconstriction.
 It follows that when the myocardium requires more
Os, cfforts to slow the hcart should improve coronary
Slow
Fast
HEART RATE
blood flow by increasing diastole. Oxygen debt could
rcsult by increasing hcart rate and the timc spent
FIGURE 3-13
in systole.
Ilustration of the relationship bctwcen heart rate and duration of
Myocardial oxygen consumption is determined primar-
systole and diastole. Duration of systolc and diastole (ordinate) arc
sp i uoa (essisse) oen nreo nsuee pnd
ily by (1) hcart rate, (2) myocardial contractility, and
represenis the time that coronary blood flows and oxygen is
(3) myocardial tension. Heart rate and contractility
delivered to the myocardiuin; the duration inl systolc represcnts thc
are dctcrmined by the balance between β-adrenergic
timc that intranyocardial tension obstructs coronary flow and
determines the demand of the myocardium for oxygen. Note the
and vagal cfferenl. activities. According to the Laplace
distinct advantagc for myocardial oxygenation at slowcr hcart ratcs.
NORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR PHYSIOLOGY
35
cycle.-1 Since it occurs repctitively, we shall examine
contracts, atrial and ventricular pressurcs and ventricu-
only a single cardiac cycle (Fig. 3--144,B).
lar volume incrcase slightly, the leaflets of the mitral
Thc cardiac cycle is initiatcd by the P wave of the
valve open to accommodate flow from atrium into
elcctrocardiogram (ECG) (occurring before time in-
ventricle, and myocardial tension (T) increases slightly.
terval I), which represcnts the wave of stimulation that
After blood cnters the ventricle during atrial con-
drives the atria to contract. Between I and II the atrium
traction, the ventricle rcaches an elastic limit, suddenly
IVV
VV
$
V1
80
100
AF
Cm/sec
AP
LVP
LAP
PCG
ECHO
A
WT
PCG
ECG
ECG
A
B
FIGURE 3-14
Graphs showing cvents of the cardiac cycle illustrated by cchocardiography, pressure recordings,
heart sound recording,and electrocardiography,as would ocur in alarge brccd dog. Cardiovaselar
cvents may be tined with respect to the clectrocardiograms (ECG) at the botoms. Curves are
show aortic flow(Af)and aorticvelocitry () aortic pressurc(AP)pressureswithin the Iett venticle
(LVP) and Icft atrium (LAPy heart sounds (PCG): S, = first hcart sound; S = second heart souncl;
Ss = third hcart sound; S - fourth heart sound (normally, only S: and S, are present); lefft
ventricular wall thickncss (WT); Ieft ventricular frcc-wall (LV-FW); intrainyocardial tension (T) [T
(LVP × V) / WT]; ainterior and posterior leallets of the aortic valve (AV; AV,) and mitral valves
(MV;MVJ.
Cardiac cyle time interoats are labeled with Roman numcrals (1-VI). They idenify verical time lines
relative to each set of curvcs and physiologic activities to mark cvents as they rclate to cach other
(scc text for dctails).
+ Interval I to II represcuts thc period when the Ieft atrium cjccts blood into the Ieft ventriclc.
+ Interval lI to Iul is thc period of isovolumctric contraction when the left venriclc is gencrating
grecal force,but it is ot ejeting blood because the pressure has not yct cxcceded that in the
aorta.
Interval IlI to IV is the period of Icft ventricular ejction, which has initially a period of rapid
ejection and then terminally, a period of reduccd ejcction.
Interval IV to V is the period of ventrieular filing. separated into the initial period of rapid filling
and the terminal period of reduccd filing.
Following interval VI and until interval I of the ncxt cardiac cycle, the heart is quiet. Nonethcless.
the arterial tree is recoiling and moving blood through the arteriolcs and capillarics to the veins.
36
 THE NORMAL HEART: CARDIOVASCULAR STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND PHYSIOLOGY
decelerates, and throws cardiohcmic structures into
cardiohcmic structures are thrown into oscillations,
 oscillations, giving rise to the soft, low-pitched fourth
giving risc to the third hcart sound (Ss). It is note-
heart sound (S).
worthy that both the fourth and the third heart sounds
Next, just beforc I, the QRS coinplex of the ECG
arc caused by the ventricle converting to a chamber
signals the wave of stimulation of the venntricles, and at
that fills first rapidly, thcn at a reduced rate--the
I, the ventricle bcgins to contract. Initially, ventricular
fourth sound in the wake of atrial contraction and the
contraction forcibly closes the mitral  valve lcaflets
third sound in the wake of more passive filling.
when ventricular pressure cxcceds the rclatively low
 Notice that at interval V, myocardial tension is actu-
atrial prcssure. As these leaflets close and suddenly
ally a negative value. This is because the volumc within
the chamber is small, the wall is thick, and thc pressurc
re-enter the atriun, cardiohemic structurcs are again
is low. Thus, according to Laplace's law, tension is at
thrown into oscillations, giving rise to the first heart
 its lowest. This ncgative tension permits the ventricle
-op pnos heoq isy ou o ais  '('s) puos
to
 generate subatrospheric pressure and to suck
pends upon how vigorously the leaflets are closed and
blood through and from the atrium. The ventricle also
dlecelerate the blood. Ventricular pressure quickly rises
sucks blood during contraction. When the ventriclc
to a level just less than that of aortic pressure. Ventricu-
cjccts blood into the aorta, the ventricle becomcs
lar volumc dloes not change since the ventricle is
small. In order to become small, all sides of the ventri-
closcd at one end by the mitral vaive and at the other
cle and the floor and the ceiling, or chamber, move
end by the aortic valve. This period is termed the
together. Since the cciling of the ventricle is the floo1
 period of isovolumetric contraction bccause the ventri-
of the atrium, the atrium is cnlarged when its floo1
cle is contracting but is not changing volume.
desccnds. This cnlargcmcnt causes atrial prcssure to
Next, as ventricular pressurc continues to clevate (II
become subatmospheric. Therefore, during ventricula1
to IM) to levels grcater than that within the aorta, the
contraction, blood is actually sucked back into the
aortic valve is thrown openn (usually in silence); blood 
atrium from the pulmonary vcins and capillaries. This
is ejected frst at a rapid rate and then at a reduced
movement of blood from pulmonary veins to left
rate from left ventricle into aorta (II to IV). At the
atrium can be identified using Dopplcr echocardiogra
instant (II1) the aortic valve opcns-when the product
phy.
 Finally, after the ventricle is as full as it will gct
by ventricular wall thickness is always the great-
bcfore the next atrial contraction, the heart is in a
cst—myocardial tension reaches its maximum, termed
 period of quicscence. During that period, the gradicnt
the afterload (AI.). Notice on thc aortic cchocardio-
of prcssure bctwcen the aorta and the right atrium
gram that the aortic leaflets open as blood is cjected
forccs blood through the coronary circulation to dc-
into the aorta. Notice also that aortic flow peaks during
liver O, to the myocardium.
the carly portion of ejection and then decrcases sud-
 Although this sequence of events is described for
 denly until it approaches zero at IV. Occasionally, when
thc left atrium, left ventricle, and aorta, an identical
blood flow into the aorta suddenly reaches its peak and
sequence is occurring for the right atrium, right ventri-
thenn decelerates, thcre arc oscillations of cardiohemic
 cle, and pulmonary trunk, but slightly skcwed in time.
structures just after the first heart sound; normally,
An interesting and clinically important asynchr0-
however, ejection occurs silently.
 nism betwcen left and right ventricular cjection occurs
When ventricular relaxation bcgins (IV) and ventric-
 during ventilation. During inspiration, the duration
ular pressure pluinmets toward 0, the aortic valve slams
 of right ventricular cjcction lengthens, while during
closed because aortic pressurc cxcceds ventricular
expiration, it shortens. Sincc this duration determines
pressurc. Aortic pressure is partially sustained duc to
when the pulmonic valve closcs, during inspiration the
the clastic recoil of the arterial tree, which squcezes
 pulmonic valve closes tardily. Thus, the scconcd heart
thc arterial blood and forces it through the systeric
sound (S,) becomcs split. Splitting of S. during inspira-
yascular resistancc. Ventricular pressure falls first to a
tion is termed “physiological splirting." Bccausc in
Ievel below aortic pressure (IV), then to a levcl bclow
 dogs the heart rate accelerates during inspiration and
atrial pressure (V). This period of ventricular rclax-
 durationn of left ventricular cjection shortens, the aortic
ation, when pressure within is falling but the volume
valve closes early, thus adding to the physiological split-
 is not changing, is termcd the period of isovolumetric
ting.
relaxationl.
When this period of isovolumetric relaxation cnds,
thc lcaflcts of the mitral valve open (V), and blood 
REFERENCES
flows quickly from atrium to ventricle. The ventricular
filling is first rapidl and then occurs at a reduced ratc.
When the ventriclc converts from a chamber that fills
1. Guyton AC (ed). Textbook of Medical Physiology. 9th
first rapidly and then suddenly at a reduccd ratc,
cd. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995
NORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR PHYSIOLOGY
37
2. Bernc RM, Levy MN. Cardiovascular · Physiology. St.
7. Cohn PF. Clinical Cardiovascular Physiology. Philadcl-
Iouis, CV Mosby, 1981
phia, WB Saunders, 1985
 3. Litle RC. Physiology of the Heart and Circulation. Chi-
8.
 Sinith J, Kanpine JP. Circulatory Physiology: The Essen-
cago, Ycar Book Medical Publishcrs, 1985
tials. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1980
4. Rusher RF. Cardiovascular Dynamics. Philadelphia, WB
9. Katz AM. Physiology of the Hcart. Ncw York, Ravcn
Saundcrs, 1976
Press, 1992
3. Burton AC. Physiology and Biophysics of the Circulation.
10. Shcpherd JT, Vanhouttc PM. The Hurnan Cardiovascular
Chicago, Year Book Medical Publishers, 1972
System. Ncw York, Raven Prcss, 1979
6. Braunwald E, Ross J Jr, Sonnenblick EH. Mechanisms of
11. Opic LH. The Heart; Physiology and Metabolism. Ncw
Contraction of the Sorimal and Failing Heart. Boston,
York, Raven Press, 1991
Little, Brown, 1976
I1
Examination of
the Patient with
Cardiovascular
Disease
The History
PHILIP R. FOX
PURPOSE AND IMPORTANCE OF THE MEDICAL
HISTORY
 Eliciting a good medical history is a technique that must be learned. It
requircs cffort, tact, and patience. Historical information must be analyzed
History taking is an important art that rmay be likened to the "glue" binding
together subjective aspects of the physical examination and diagnostic
tests.3. 6
ma pue a aun ssdaq o pun qespun pue uoid e si au
rcquired for an insightful history and thorough examination, It is often
simpler to substitute expensive technologic procedurcs when diagnosis O1
management could have been readily made with a detailed history and
completc examination.2. 6, 7 An accurate and attentive history is the richcst
sourcc of information and assists the clinician in evaluating subjcctive aspccts
of diagnostic tests.8. 6-1t
The history and physical examination form the cornerstone of diagnosis.3
6. 8 Thcy are crucial for decisions involving clinical evaluation and therapy
(Fig. 4-1). A good history should help reveal the system or disease(s) causing
clinical signs described by the client's chicf complaint. Accordingly, the
history collects mcdical information to (l) hclp distinguish bctwcen cardiac
and pulmonary disease, (2) establish a specific diagnosis of hcart discasc,
(3) detcrmine the frequency and cxtent of associated clinical impairment,
(4) asscss the response (or lack of response) to therapy, (5) detcrminc thc
 prcsence of other medical conditions, and (6) establish a doctor-client
rclationship. Thc history also provides a sense of pet owner willingness
and commitment to trcat. chronic heart failure, which is usually incxorably
progressive.
ELICITING THE HSTORY
 i  o  e  n    so n
cormplcte and comprchensive set of wcll-planned qucstions is requircd to
obtain neccssary information (Table 4-l). During the initial proccss the
 Owner is asked to rclate observations and concerns in his or her own manner.
While this may result in many irrelevant facts and is timc consurning, it
providcs a glimpsc of the client's intelligcncc, emotional state, and health
care experience. It usually providcs important information about the pet's
clinical condition, and gives the client the satisfaction of bcing hcard.
The pet owncr will not usually voluntcer all rclcvant infornation without
prompting. This is due to incomplete obscrvation of clinical signs, incorrect
description of signs through misinterprctation, cmotional concern, and a
sense of denial that serious illness is prescnt.
The clinician must then direct the client, using a well-planned set of
questions designed to evaluate relevant clinical observations. These observa-
41
42
EXAMINATION OF THE PATIENT WITH CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
CLINICAL SIGNS
PAST HISTORY
IS HEART
Important clucs may be obtained from the pet's past
DISEASE
NO
history. For cxample, congenital heart disorders may
PRESENT?
CONGENITAL
YES)
ACQUIRED
be inferred if siblings, dam, or sire have been affectcd
IS HEART
ARE CLINICAL
with known cardiovascular disease,'1 Questions con-
FAILURE
YES
SIGNSDUETO:
cerning the heaith of related pets should bc askcd.
PRESENT?
Also, results from diagnostic procedures, including
ARE HEART FAILURE SIGNS DUE TO:
VRESPIRATORY
 ladiographs, electrocardiograms (ECGs), echocardio-
DISEASE?
PROGRESSIVE HEART DISEASE?
grams, and clinical pathology tests performed at other
VNEWLY ACqUIRED CONDITIONS?
VNONCARDIAC
vetcrinary clinics, arc important to evaluate. Frc-
VNUTRITIONAL FACTORS?
DISEASE?
V Cardiac DrUg Therapy?
qucntly, drugs will have been prescribed for known or
- INADEQUATE DOSING?
. TREATMENT COMPLIANCE?
suspectcd hcart discasc. Knowledge of doses, owncr
·DRUG TOXICITIES?
compliancc, and therapcutic response (or lack of re-
: INCORrect DRuGS?
FQXPR,1996
sponsc) can offer valuable insights. In addition, drug
FIGURE 4-1
toxicitics can cxcrt a variety of systemic or metabolic
Iistory algoritu. This highlights basic arcas to investigatc in
cffects and may contribute to clinical signs.
ordcr to discern the relationship between clinical signs and cardiac
versus oncardiat diseasc.
GENERAL HHSTORY
tions includc (l) determining onset. of signs, their
A detailed gcncral mcdical history is important (see
rclated chronology, and severity: (2) uncovcring prc-
Table 4-1).2-o Systemic and mctabolic disorders may
cipitating factors; and (3) assessing response (or lack
precipitate or causc cardiovascular abnormalities such
of response) to therapy. The clinician must elicit a
as hyperthyroidisin (chapter 34), chronic renal disease.
description of all clinical signs, cven if the pet owner
(chapter 35), and a variety of other conditions (chap-
does not believe them to bc rclcvant. Gcnerally, only
ter :
33). Whcthcr the pet's environment is primarily
those problems deemed most bothcrsome to the clicnt
indoor or outdoor may influence its susccptibility to
(the chicf complaint) are volunteered.
heartworm infection. Prcvious dict and current diet
are important, as certain nutritional deficiencies (e.g..
      
SIGNALMENT
dial dysfunction (chapter 32). Significaint past illnesses
(e.g, parvovirus infction) or injuries (e.g, traumatic
This part of thc objective data basc includes the
age, breed, and gender. Many discascs havc particular
 arteriovenous fistula) should be discerned.
breed and gender predilections (chapters 23-25). Ac-
quired cardiorcspiratory diseases also have species and
breed variation rclative to certain diseases.11-13
SPECIFIC CARDIOVASCULAR HISTORY
TABLE 4-1
SIGNS OF HEART DISEASE
 Important Information for the Complete History
 Dyspnea, exercise intolerance, syncope, coughing,
Signalment (age, breed, gender)
and cyanosis are thc most coinmon signs of heart
Gcographic origin (pound, brceder, found as stray)
Environmcnt (indoor vs. outdoor)
disease. Thus, the clinician should be familiar with
distinguishing fcatures of respiratory, systemic, and
Diet.
Previous mcdical or surgical problems (include diagnostic
metabolic discascs that cause similar signs (Table 4-
 procedures and associated results, therapies, outcome)
 2).2 8 no Cats in heart failure are also usually lethargic
Prevcntivc health care status (vaccinations, parasites, heartworm
and anorectic and tend to hide. They do not cough
prophylaxis)
Chief medical complaint.
with pulmonary edema but may with hcartworm dis-
Date of onisel
Acutc or gradul
case.
Deseription of signs (static, regressive, or progressive)
Heart failure is a syndromc with variable clinical
Association of sigus with activily
 signs and may be present along with respiratory dlis-
Diagnostic tcst results if cxamincd clscwhere
Therapics
ease. Therefore, one must distinguish anong hcart
Doses, duation
dlisease, heart failurc, and noncardiac diseases relative
Kcsponisc
to clinical signs (sec Fig. 4-1) and determine the po-
General status (weigh loss or gain, acivity level, appetite,
 tential rclationship of these disorders to the clinical
urination and defceaion characteristics)
complaint.
THE HISTORY
43
TABLE 4-2
Historical Features Differentiating Cardiac from Respiratory Disease
Clinical Signs or Paticnt
Characteristics
Hcart Discasc
Rcspiratory Disease
Snall dogs (<20 kg, cspecil toy and
Clhronic acquired valve disease
COPD; large airway disease:
miniature breeds)
Large/giant. breed dogs
Dilated cardiotnyopathy
I aryngeal paralysis
Brccd-specifit: predispositions
Congenital heart disorders (chapters 23. 24)
Trachcal stcnosis (English lbulldogs)
Acq uired hearl dliscascs
Stenotic nares; clongatcd soft palate; cverted
DCM (Doberman pinschers; Cocker
laryngeal saccules (brachycephalie breeds)
spaniels)
Chronic respiratory infecuions (Chinese Shar
Sick sinus syndrome (miniature schnauzers)
Pei)
Righit atrial hemangiosarcoma (German
Ciliary dysfunction (Chinese Shar Pei)
shepherds: Irish scuers; Labrador
Laryngcal paralysis (Bouvier des Flandres)
reuricvcrs)
Body condition
Stunted (scverc congenital heart diseases)
Obese or normal
Cachexia (CAVD; DCM; SBE)
Weight loss (hypcrthyroidism)
('ongh1
With pulmonary edema: mild, grunting, soft
With large airway discasc: loud, tacking, brassy.
dry. *'goose honking,* precipituted by
excitcmcnt
Excrcisc capacity severely decreased
Excrcise capacity nornal between episodes
 between coughing episodes
Duration: acute to days
Duration: months to ycars
Respiratory stridor
No
Exercise capacity
Markedly reduccd with left-sided CHF
Large airway disease: generally normal
Bronchopneumonia: generally reduced but
variablc
Syncope
CAVD: HOCM; SAS; DCM; right-to-left
L'ncommon; may occur in small breed dogs with
cardiac shumting, anemia; pulmonary
large airway disease and severe mirral
hypertension: brady or tachyarrhythmias
regurgitation
Abdominal cistcntion
Right-sided CHF
No
Peripheral edema
Right-sidcd CHF
No
Dict
Specific deficiencies (e.g., carnitine;
No
taurine)
CHF, congestive heart. failure: COPD, chronic. obstruelive pulmonary disease; DCM, dilat:d cardiomyopathy; CAVD, clronic acquirel valvular discase; MR,
mitral regurgitation; TR, tricuspid regurgitation; iIOCM, hyperiroplhic obstructive cardiomyopathy; SAS. subaortic stenosis; SBE, bacterial endivcarditis.
Dyspnea
ness or syncopc. In cats, dyspnea is a common signn of
severe thyrotoxicosis.!7
Dyspnca is associatcd with a large and varied sct of
A history indicating that dyspnca diminished or rc-
conditions:15, 16 heart failure, respiratory disease, chest
solved with diuretics, angiotcnsin-converting cnzymc
wall abnormalities, plcural and pericardial effusions,
inhibitors, or digitalis therapy suggests heart. failurc as
circulatory disorders, anemia, acidosis, cxcitcment,
all etiology. Response to bronchodilators, antibiotics,
 and pain.
 or corticosteroids suggests bronchial discasc.
d  ss     
voke dyspnea or its relative onset of action may be
helpful. Acutc dyspnea suggests pulmonary cdema.
Cough
severe pncumonia, airway obstruction, pncumothorax,
Coughing is associated witli a variety of cardiorespi
or pulmonary thrombocmbolism. Chronic, progressive
ratory conditions, and many coughs sound alike.6 15. 1s
dyspnca may occur with right-sidcd heart failure, peri-
More than one etiology may cocxist. (ardiogenic pul-
cardial disease, bronchial discase, emphysema, pleural 
monary cdema in dogs most frequcntly results from
cffusions, progressive anemia, or pulmonary neoplasia.
left-sided heart volumc overload (rmitral regurgitation
Inspiratory dyspnea suggests upper airway obstruction,
caused by cndocardiosis) or dilated cardiomyopathy.
whereas cxpiratory dyspnca is typical of lowcr airway
 Duration of coughing from acute pulmonary edcma is
 obstruction. Exertional dyspnca implics organic dis-
usually less than a wcck and rapidly progrcsscs in
case (e.g., myocardial failure with dilated cardiomyopa-
scverity. The related cough is gencrally relativcly soft
thy) or chronic obstructive lung disease. Dyspnca at
and mild and accompanics cxertional dyspnca (in con-
rest can indicate pncumothorax, pulmonary thrombo-
trast to largc airway discasc). Chronic pulmonary con-
embolisni, or severe congestive hcart failurc (CHF).
gestion may cause mild intermittent coughing and noc-
 Paroxysmal dyspnca may suggcst brady- or tachyar-
rhythmias, cspecially if accormpanied by cpisodic weak-
nocturnal coughing has not been established, however.
 44EXAMINATION OF THE PATIENT WITH CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
When cdema is fulminant, the cough may yield small
OTIHER SIGNS OF HEART DISEASE
quantities of frothy, pink-tinged foam from the mouth
or nares. Acute pulmonary edema may occur without
PARESIs. Acute posterior paresis in cats associated
with cardiomyopathy is a characteristic sign of aortic
 In dogs, impingement of the left main stem bron-
thrombocmbolism caused by a saddlc cmbolism (chap-
chus by a left atrium enlarged by chronic mitral regur-
ter 28). Clinical signsls. 22 include peracute, lateralizing
gitation contributes to chronic coughing.20 Cats appear
posterior parcsis with the distal paw slightly swollen;
- esp p ra a ps d 
not to cough, howcvcr, cven when severc left atrial
enlargement is prescnt.
lated to congestive hcart failure, which offten occurs
Large airway discasc in small brecd dogs causcs
concomitantly with thrombosis. Occasionally, thrombo-
chronic paroxysmal coughing characterized as harsh,
embolism affects a front leg rather than the distal
resonant, dry. and “goose honking" in nature.19. 20
aortic trifurcation. In these cases the right front leg is
Coughing may pcrsist for years, is paroxysmal, and is
usually affected.
usually elicited by excitement. Less commonly, affected
dogs with collars who pull during leash walks will ex-
as a complication of bacterial endocarditis.2 Aortic
hibit this coughing. Dogs with coliapsed trachea usu-
thromboembolism occurs but is rare.?1
ally have normal exercise capacity between coughing
cpisodes unless congestivc hcart failure is present,
WEIGHT Loss. Wcighr loss is a cominon finding in
which causes lethargy and wcakness.
dogs with chronic, severe heart failure causcd by ac-
 In cats, pulronary edema usually results from hyper-
quired degencrative valve diseasc or dilated cardiomy-
trophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy Affected cats do
opathy (DCM). Cardiac cachexia is associated with
not cough but instead exlibit acute dyspnea, lethargy.
gradual but progressive loss of weight despite a rela-
 and occasionally vomiting.1s
tively normal appetite (chapter 32) and drug therapy.
 In dogs with DCM, marked weight loss rmay occur over
a short period of 1 to 2 weeks and is sometimes the
SYNCOPE
chief client complaint,
 In cats, weight loss is most commonly associated with
 Transicnt loss of consciousncss from inadequate ce-
 '( ) oos s ao o 
cstablished (chaptcr 34). Cats with primary cardiomy-
occurs most commonly in coughing, cxcited, small
opathy do not usually lose wcight unless chronic right-
breed dogs with chronic, severe mitral regurgitation,
sided hcart failure is prcsent.
whose paroxysmal coughing is immcdiatcly followcd
by transient collapse (cough syncope). Syncope or epi-
sodic weakincss also occurs with othcr cardiovascular
SWOLLEN ABDOMEN OR PERIPHERAL EDEMA. Thc clicnt
diseases, most notably subaortic stcnnosis, pulmonary
may bccome aware of weight gain manifested by ab-
valve stenosis, hypertrophic obstructive cardiornyopa-
dominal swelling when ascites is present. Occasionally,
scverc gencral rctention of cxtraccilular fluid will
thy, pulmonary hypertension, and right-to-left cardiac
shunts (tetralogy of Fallot, patent ductus arteriosus).
cause pcripheral edema, which is most notable in the
Poor forward cardiac output, as occurs with dilated
extremities. Periphcral cdcma may also result from
hypoproteinemia and obstruction of lymphatics, When
lator drugs, may causc syncope. Tachy- or bradyar-
edema affects only one leg, local factors such as neo-
plasia, phlebitis, or neoplasia must be considered.22
rhythmias may also bc causative. Complete (third-de-
grcc) AV block usually prccipitates acute lcthargy or
collapse.15
 MUCoUS MEMBRANE COLOR. Clients will occasionally
describe abnormal changes in mucous membrane col-
oration. Cyanosis may be observed in the tongue,
WEAKNESS AND) EXERCISE INTOLERANCE
gums, or cars of pets with congenital heart diseases
causing right-to-left shunting (chapter 24), with con-
Although not specific for hcart discasc, decompel-
 gestive heart failure, or with severe respiratory discase.
sated heart failurc is characterizcd by lack of cxcrcisc
Bcforc cyanosis associatcd with hypoxcmia can bc de-
ability, lethargy, or fatigue. This results from the heart's
tectcd, circulation of at least 5 gm/dl of deoxygenated
inability to provide oxygen to satisfy tissuc mctabolic
hemoglobin must be prescnt. Pale, gray mucous mcm-
needs because of myocardial dysfunction, obstruction
 brancs may result from cyanosis combincd with periph
to ventricular outlow, or arrhythmias.6. 15 Anemia, sys-
cral vasoconstriction. Pink or rcddish mucous mem-
temic and metabolic diseases (e.g., hypoadrenocorti-
brane may be observed during initial stages of septic
cism), drug toxicities (hypotension), and severe respi-
shock. Injectcd, dark red mucous membranes may re-
ratory discasc may also causc these signs.
sult from cyanosis combined with hypoxemia and re-
THE HHISTORY
45
duced blood fow.24 Yellowish discoloration is associ-
7. Thibault GE. The appropriate degrce of diagnostic cer-
ated with icterus.
tainty. N Engl J Med 331:1216, 1994
8.1
Hurst JW. Morris DC, Crawled IS, et al. The history.
Symptoms and past cvents related to cardiovascular dis-
OCULAR AND NEUROLOGIC SIGNS. Systemic hypcrten-
case. In Hurst J[W, Schlant RC, Rackley CR, et al (eds):
sion may be heralded by acute blindness with fundo-
The: Heart: Arlerics and Veins. 7th cd. New York,
scopic lesions including retinal degeneration, hy-
McGraw-IHill, 1990., p 122
9. Jones D. History and physical examination. In Birchard
phema, and hemorrhage (chapter 35). Occasionally,
SJ, Sherding RG (eds): Saunders Manual of Small Ani-
central nervous system signs, including stupor and
mal Practice. Philadelphia. WB Saunders. 1994, p I
coma, may be present.
10.
Schaer M. The medical history, physical cxanination,
and physical restraint. In Sherding RG (ed): The Cat.
Discases and Clinical Management. New York, Churchill
INTERPRETING THE HISTORY
Livingstone. 1994, p 7
11, Dhein CR, Prieur DJ, Riggs MW, ct al. Suspected ciliary
When cliciting a history, the owncr's pcrsonality and
dysfunetion in Chinese Shar Pei pups with pneumonia.
Am J Vet Res 51:439, 1990
emotional statc must bc takcn into considcration, It
12. Greenficld CL. Canine laryngeal paralysis. Comp Cont
should bc apprcciatcd that many owners with scvcrely
Ed 9:1011, 1987
sick animals may exhibit marked denial of their pets?
13. Fox PR. Feline myocardial diseascs. hn Fox PR (cd):
illncss. This is due in part to the incrcasing importance
Canine and Feline Cardiology. New York, Churchill Liv-
 of the human-animal bond and apprchcnsions of costs
ingstone, 1988, p 435
14, Pattcrson DF. Epidemiologic and gcnetic studies of con-
related to vcterinary care. Significant historical details
genital heart discase in the dog. Circ Res 23:171, 1968
should be verified by repeated questions constructed
15.Ware WA. The cardiovascular examinauon. /n Nelson
slightly differently. A friend or family member who
RW, Couto CG (eds): Fsscntials of Sinall Animal Internal
brings the pet in for examination may not have actually
Medicine. St Louis, Mosby-Year Book, 1992, p 3
 observcd thc pet's clinical signs, and this must be
16. Turnwald GH. Dyspnca and tachypnea. In Fllinger SJ.
Feldman EC (eds): Texthook of Veterinary Internal Med-
asccrtained.
icine. 41h ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 64
17. Broussard LD, Peterson MF, Fox PR. Changes in the
o  r n s  e 
1982-1992. J Am Vet Med Ass0c 302:302, 1995
REFERENCES
18. Ettinger S, Barret KA. Coughing. n Ettinger SJ, Feld-
man EC (eds): Texibook of Veterinary Internal Medi-
cinc. 4th cd. Philadelphia, WR Saunders, 1995, p 57
19. Hamlin RL. Is a cough due to heart disease or lung
1. 1Dimsdale JE. Delays and slips in medical diagnosis. Per-
disease? Vet Forum, May, 1994, p 59
spect Biol Med 27:213. 1984
20. Hamlin Rl. Identifying the cardiovascular and pulno-
 2. Abrams J. Esscntials of Cardiac Physical Diagnosis. Phila-
nary diseases that affect older dogs. Vet Med, May, 1990,
delphia, Lea and Febiger, 1987
p 483
 3. Sapira JD. The history. In The Art and Science of Bed-
21. Kapoor WN. Hypotension and syncopc. In Braunwald E
side Diagnosis: Baltimore, Urban Schrwartzenherg, 1990,
(ed): Heart Diseasc. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
p 9
1992, p 875
4. Osborne CA. Diagnosis by rule-out: Judgment in the
22. Suter PR, Fox PR. Peripheral vascular diseases. In Et-
absence of certainty. In Bonagura JD (edl): Kirk's Current.
tinger SJ, Feldman FC (eds): Texthook of Veterinary
Veterinary Therapy Vol X11. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
Internal Medicine. 4th cd. Philadelphia, WR Saunders,
1995, p 7
1994. p 1068
5. Lund EM, Klausner JS. Clinical epidlkemiology for thc
23. Calvert CA. Fndocarditis and bactereinia. In Fox PR
veterinary practitioner: Thc diagnostic process. In Bona-
(cd): Canine and Feline Cardiology. New York, Churchill
gura ID (cd): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy. Vol
Livingstone, 1988, p 419
XI1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 7
24. Schertel ER, Muir Ww. Shock: Pathophysiology, nonitor
6. Braumwald D. The history. In Braunwald F (ed): Heart 
ing and therapy. In Kirk Rw (ed): Currcnt Veterinary
Disease. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992, p 12
Therapy. Vol X. Philadelphia, WB Saumders, 1989, p 316
Examination
D. DAVID SISSON
STEPHEN J. ETTINGER
Information from the physical examination, combined with that obtained
from a complete history, comprises the foundation for diagnosis, initial
treatment, and evaluating response to therapy. Despite major technologic
 most important components of thc cardiac cvaluation. The tools employed
arc the five scnscs, supplemented at times by instruments designed to
augment their sensitivity, such as the stcthoscope or ophthalmoscope. Al-
though a complete physical examination should bc pcrformcd on each
 paticnt, practical considcrations often dictate the amount of time and effort.
devoted to a particular organ system. Tablc 5-1 identifies depcndable signs
of cardiovascular dliscasc in the dog and cat. Note that 8 of the 12 signatures
of cardiovascular discase are based on the physical examination.
A thorough writtcn record of thc cntire cardiac examination is esscntial
 to follow medical progrcss. Preprintcd forms requiring simple check-marks
 or symbols provide the essential information for subscqucnt follow-up and
review.
INSPECTION
BREATHING
 Initially, the clinician should observe each patient from a distancc, noting
the brced, general body condition, attitude, tempcramcnt, conformation,
and ability to ambulate. The rate and charactcr of rcspiration arc obscrved,
by cough, incrcased cffort, or altered pattern of respiration is a frequent
 manifestation of hcart failurc or respiratory discasc. Rapid, shallow breathing
is often observcd in anxious pcts at the time of the examinatior. Animals
with true dyspnea oftcn stand with their clbows abducted in an attempt to
improvc ventilation. Morc scvere respiratory distress is evidenced by exten-
sion of thc hcad and ncck and by opcn-mouth breathing (Fig. 5-1). Orthop
nea is dcmonstratcd when a scvcrcly compromised patient sits on its
haunches and refuses to assume a recumbent position. This finding is
common in animals with respiratory distress causcd by scvere pulmonary
cdcma, plcural cffusion, bronchopncumonia, pneumothorax, or acute dia-
 phragmatic hernia. Pet owners oftcn report that their animal has bcen
restless at night, with difficulty slecping.
EXERCISE INTOLERANCE
Animals with hcart discase are oftcn rcluctant to exercise or unable to
perform to cxpecied standards. With severe diseasc, they may bc to0
46
THEPHYSICALEXAMINATION
47
TABLE5-1
ure.Common causes of right-sided heart failure in
DependableSigns of CardiovascularDisease in the
dogs include heartworms,dilated cardiomyopathy,
Dog and Cat
congenital or acquired tricuspid valve insufficiency,
1.GradeIV/VI or louder systolicmurmurs
and pulmonic stenosis. In cats with congestive heart
2.
GradeIIl/VI systolicmurmurs in the absenceof anemia
failure,ascites occurslesscommonly and isusually less
3.Diastolic murmurs of any intensity
pronounced.Totheuntrainedobserver,patientswith
4.Gallop heart sounds (an accentuated third,fourth,or
summation sound)
5.Palpable precordial thrills
tion.Thedistinctionisusuallyeasilymadebycareful
6.Peripheral cutaneous thrills
7.Generalizedvenous engorgement
palpation and ballottement,butabdominocentesis is
8.Localized absence of arterial pulsations
sometimes required to confirm ascites in obese pa-
9.Radiographic or echocardiographic evidence of cardiac
tients.
enlargement
10.Left bundle branch block (ECG)
11.
Right ventricular enlargement criteria(ECG)
DISTENDEDJUGULARVEINS
12.Certain cardiac arrhythmias (atrial fibrillation or flutter;
persistent orfrequent premature atrial or ventricular
contractions;paroxysmal tachycardia;high-grade
Animalswithright-sidedheartfailure orpericardial
atrioventricularblock)
disease typically manifest jugular venous distention
(Fig.5-3).Jugular pulses are abnormal.
ModifdfromDetweilDKPatersnDFuginbhilHaliseasef
the cardiovascular system.In Catcott EJ(ed):CanineMedicine.Santa Barbara,
California,American Veterinary Publishers,Inc.1968.
PERIPHERALEDEMA
Swollenextremitiesandventraledemaareuncom-
weaktoambulatemorethanafewyards.Subtlede-
mon withcongestiveheart failure.When present,the
grees ofexerciseintolerance aredifficult torecognize
edemaisusually symmetricindistributionandvirtually
or to quantify,particularly in cats and nonworking
alwaysindicatessevereright-sidedheartfailure.
dogs.In this regard,the owners’observations,as elic-
ited in the history, must be relied upon. Classes of
heart failure,analogous tothose developed bytheNew
EXAMINATIONOFTHEHEAD
York Heart Association for humans and based largely
ANDNECK
on abilitytoexercise,havebeenadoptedforcategoriz-
ingheart disease severity in dogs (see Appendix).Such
classifications are relatively useless for categorizing cats
EVALUATIONOFTHESKINAND
with heart disease. Often, the only observed change in
MUCOUSMEMBRANES
catswith developingheartfailureis atendency toward
morereclusivebehavior.
Themucousmembranesarenormallymoistand
pink.Avarietyof disordersalter theappearanceof the
WEIGHTLOSS
Chronicheartfailure may cause severeweight loss,
referred to as cardiac cachexia.It is distinguished from
otherformsofweightlossinthataffectedanimals
sufferasubstantiallossofleanbodymass.²Muscle
wasting is oftenparticularlynoticeablein the temporal
regionoftheheadand alongthedorsal lumbararea
(Fig.5-2).Such findings are particularly common in
dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy, severe heartworm
infestation, or chronic degenerative valvular disease.
Pathophysiology of cardiac cachexia is complex,but
causesncludedecreased appetit,malabsorpion,gas
trointestinalproteinloss,andincreasedproduction of
tumor necrosis factor andvarious cytokines (chapter
FIGURE5-1
32).
Severely dyspneicdogwithfulminant pulmonary edema causedby
mitral insufficiencyfromchronic acquiredvalvular disease.
Cardinalfeaturesincludea straighthead andneck,which
ASCITES
minimize resistance to breathing;maximal uilization ofmuscles of
respiration,evidenced by abducted elbows;and open-mouth
Abdominaldistentionduetoascitesis commonin
breathing.Notice the commissures of themouth,which are drawn
back,andagaringstare,associatedwith anxietyanddysnea.
dogswithpericardial disease orright-sidedheartfail-
（Courtesy of Dr.PhilipFox,The Animal Medical Center.)
48
EXAMINATIONOFTHEPATIENTWITHCARDIOVASCULARDISEASE
FIGURE5-2
Cardiaccachexia,evidenced bygeneralizedmuscle
wasting,is apparent in thisDoberman pinscherwith
chronic congestive heartfailure caused bydilated
cardiomyopathy.
mucous membranes;some reflect primary cardiac or
circulatory disorders whereas othersindicateresponses
patients.Animals suffering from shock orhypothermia
of the circulatory system to systemic disease or environ-
often have pale,ashen mucous membranes.In these
mental challenges.Thus,while anemia and polycythe-
circumstances,capillary refill time,normally1 or 2
mia arecharacterizedbypale or injectedmucous
seconds long,is also often noticeablyprolonged as a
membranes,respectively,such findings are a very in-
result of reduced cardiac output. In the majority of
sensitive andunreliablewayto estimatethecirculating
dogs and cats presented inheart failure,mucous mem-
mass of red blood cells.The mucous membranes often
brane color and capillary refill times are normal, em-
appear pale in nervous animals,especially cats,and
phasizing thefact that such assessments serve only to
distinguish animalswithparticularly severe disease.
Cyanosis is defined asbluish discoloration of the
mucousmembranes or the skin(ColorPlate1).The
magnitudeofcyanosisisdeterminedbytheconcentra-
tion of reduced hemoglobinin the blood perfusing
the regional capillaries.Cyanosis is usually observed
only when the concentration of deoxygenated hemo-
globin exceeds 5g/dl.3It is important todistinguish
patients with central cyanosis from those with peripheral
cyanosis.
Centralcyanosis indicates that cyanosis isgeneral-
ized,involving all bodytissues,including skinmucous
membranes.It results from arterial hypoxemia or in-
creased concentrations of abnormal hemoglobin pig-
ments such asmethemoglobin.Mechanisms ofarterial
hypoxemia include (1）inspiring air with an abnor-
mally low oxygen concentration, (2) hypoventillation,
(3）diffusion impairment,(4)ventilation-perfusion
mismatch, or (5) shunting unoxygenated blood from
the right side of the circulation to theleft.Pulmonary
edemaduetoleft-sidedheartfailureresultsinarterial
hypoxemia andcentralcyanosis,mainly as a result
of ventilation-perfusionmismatching.Anatomic shunts
resulting in central cyanosis are usually caused by con-
genital cardiovascularmalformations such as tetralogy
of Fallot, Eisenmenger's syndrome, and right-to-left-
FIGURE5-3
shunting patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).The latter is
characterized by“differential cyanosis,”in which the
Jugular venous distentionis apparent in this cat with severeright-
caudal half of thebody is cyanotic while the head
sided congestive heart failure.(Courtesy of Dr.PhilipFox,The
Animal Medical Center.)
and front legs receive blood with near-normal oxygen
THE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION 4
49
saturation. The carcful cxaminer compares and con-
prcssure, and (2) the type of venous wave pattcrn. The
 trasts the appearancc of oral and conjunctival mucous
jugular veins are not normaly distended and should
membranes with those of the vulva or penis and pre-
cmpty quickly following manual compression at thc
 pucc. Artcrial blood gas analysis confirms the presence
thoracic inlet. Normal venous pulsations do not usually
and clucidates the cause of artcrial hypoxemia.
cxtend higher than onc third of the way up thc neck
Peripheral cyanosis is usually obscrvcd in the distal
 in hcalthy, erect-standing animals. During inspiration,
extremitics, such as the digits and car tips. By defini-
jugular venous pressure normally decclincs, causing thc
tion, arterial oxygen saturation is normal in patients
vein to collapse, but the amplitude of the pulse waves
with peripheral cyanosis, but a larger proportion of
increases slightly owing to increased venous return.
thc oxygcn is cxtracted from the capillary and venous
 T'he jugular venous pulse pattern reflects evcnts of
blood perfusing the affccted region. Peripheral cyano
thc cardiac cycle (Fig. 5-4). This pattern is often
sis results from dccreascd artcrial blood flow or venous
disccrnible in largc-brccd dlogs with slow heart ratcs.
 pooling and, thus, may devclop sccondary to reduccd
m sieo o shop teus ut pasegnou uanjo si ii mg
cardiac output, regional vasoconstriction, or vascular
rapid hcart rates. Thc wavc that results from atrial
obstruction. Shock and hypothcrmia are common
causes of pcriphcral cyanosis. Regional cyanosis of the
atcly follows the "'a' wave and results from atrial relax-
digits, nailbeds, and footpads is a wcll-known physical
ation. A small "e" wave is often present and occurs
finding in cats with aortic thromboembolism.
simultancously with thie carotid arterial pulse but rc-
Other abnormalities of the skin and mucous mem-
sults primarily from tricuspid valve closure. The *'x'-
branes arc less likely to indicate or be associated with
descent" that follows results from downward move-
cardiovascular diseasc. Icterus, manifested as a yellow
ment of the tricuspid annulus as thie ventriclcs start to
or orange cast to the mucous membranes and sclera,
contract at the onset of systolc. Filling of thc right
signifies elevated total serum bilirubin. Causcs include
atrium dluring late vcntricular systole results in the *v"*
obstruction to bile flow, a variety of hcpatopathies, or
wave; this is followcd by the "y-desccnt' as right atrial
increased rate of red blood cell destruction. Jaundice
 pressure falls whcn the tricuspid valve opens.
 is a most unusual fnding with heart diseasc, occurring
 Distention of the jugular veins reflccts clevatcd sys-
most commonly in heartworm-infectcd dogs with vena
tcmic venous pressure and orcurs with right-sided
caval syndrome. Ecchymotic hemorrhages in the skin
heart failurc (systolic or diastolic), pcricardial discasc,
or mucous membrancs occur with severe polycythemia
hypervolemia, or obstruction of the supcrior vena cava
but arc morc typical of a systemic vasculitis or coagu-
(Fig. 5-3). Common acquired heart discases resulting
lopathy. Pctechiac arc obscrved most commonly with
in systemic venous hypertension include pericardial
thrombocytopenia but are occasionally noted with in-
cffusion with cardiac tamponade, heartworm discase,
fective endocarditis.
cardiomyopathy, and tricuspid valve insufficiency due
to valvular degeneration or pulmonary hypcrtension.
Somc of the congenital hcart defects causing increased
THE OCULAR EXAMINATION
 jugular venous pressure include pulmonic stcnosis, tri-
 cuspid valve dysplasia, cor triatriatum, and pericardial
Certain cardiovascular discascs causc marked ocular
changes. Careful cvahuation of the eycs, including a
cysts. Abnormally distended jugular veins should alert
thc cxaminer that right-sided hcart failure or any of
carcful fundic examination, is therefore important. In
cats with systemic hypertension, diminished or absent
 pupillary responses arc common due to retinal detach-
ledema, swclling of the optic disc, is also common
in this circumstancc. Retinal hemorrhages are also
obscrved with polycythemia or bacterial endocarditis
Central rctinal dcgcneration is reportcd in about one
third of cats with dilated cardliomyopathy causcd by
taurine deficicncy.? It is charactcrized by horizontally
linear, hyperreflective areas that can cxpand to incor-
porate most of the fundic rcgion.
FIGURE5-4
EXAMINATION OF THE JUGULAR AND
Thc normal pattern of jugular venous pulses resulting fron
OTHER SUPERFICIAL VEINS
hemodyuanic cvcnts in the right hcart. The *'a' wave results from
atrial systole, the "x descent* from atrial relaxation, the *c'’ wave
from tricuspid valve closure, andl the "'v' wave from atrial filling.
Two principal observations can be imade from exam-
The "y descent' is inscribcd whcn the tricuspid valve opens and
ination of the jugular vcins: (1) thc level of venous
the right atrium crmplies.
thie aforementioned cardiovascular disordlcrs may bc
dium, and obstructive lesions of the posterior vena
present.
 In addition, the pattern of venous pulsations may
hcart failure, it is not usually a striking finding. The
 provide clues to the etiology of the disorder. Abnor-
term hepatojugular reflux refers to distention of the
mally prominent "a’" waves are obscrvcd whcn thc
 jugular veins clicited by compression of the abdomen
right atrium contracts against a hypcrtrophicd, non-
for 10 to 30 scconds.7 This abnormal finding is associ-
compliant, or resrictcd right ventriclc, Intcrmittent,
atcd with elevated central venous pressure and inability
bounding jugular venous pulsations occur when distur-
of the right side of the heart. to accommodatc any
banccs of thc cardiac rhythm cause thie right atrium to
additional venous return. Careful abdominal palpation
contract against a closed atriovenntricular valve, forcing
may also reveal masses associatcd with hcmorrhage
the blood to move retrograde into the jugular veins.
 n s   e 
These giant, or cannon, "a' waves are most commonly
compatiblc with rcnal failurc and arterial hyperten-
observed in dogs with complete heart block. Promi-
sion.
nent "v" or "cv” waves (fusion of "c" and “y” waves in
the absence of an "'x-dlescent"') are seen with tricuspid
 insufficiency. Thc acccntuated jugular pulscs obscrved
EXAMINATION OF THE
THORAX
mal "x and *y” descents. A jugular pulse should bc
 differcntiated fron pounding of the carotid artery in
ncrvous animals.
Examination of the thorax commenccs with inspcc-
tion and palpation for obvious deformitics of the ribs
(flail chest), sternum (pcctus cxcavatum, pectus cari-
PALPATION OF THE NECK
natum), and the thoracic spine (kyphoscoliosis). Rcspi-
rations and their frequency, regularity, and depth, as
 Careful neck palpation can icdentify enlarged thyroid
well as thc cffort required during inspiration and expi-
glands, particularly in cats with hyperthyroidism. Thc
ration, should be notcd. The chest should be palpated,
-ned st pueo pion pasrequa te ds., on ae
and the location and intcnsity of the cardiac impulse,
larly hclpful in aged cats with a hcart murmur or
commonly refered to as the apex beat, should bc
gallop hcart sounds. Palpation of a mass and the pres-
noted. This region is also the point of maximal intensity
cncc of a thrill or bruit near the larynx of an aged
xde oql 'jeuue euiou ati u spunos nreaq n jo
dog is highly suggcstive of a thyroid carcinoma and
bcat may be displaced by any condition that altcrs
associated arteriovcnous fistula. Thyroid function is
the position of the heart within thc chest cavity, c.g..
usually normal or depressed in affected dogs, but high-
intrathoracic neoplasms, diaphragmatic hcrnia, plcu-
output hcart failure may develop from the many arte-
ral effusions, or cardiomegaly. In thcse circumstanccs.
riovcnous communications developing in association
or with obese patients, thc apex bcat may bc reduced
withi this tumor. Dilation of the esophagus in young
 in intensity or abscnt. The prcscnce and location of
dogs with a history of rcgurgitation suggests congenital
a palpablc thrill (vibrations) should be noted, which
megaesophagus or a vascular ring anomaly. Thc cxter-
idcntifics the point of maximal intensity of a loud
nal jugular vcins arc distcndcd and noncompressible
hcart murmur.
whcn obstructcd by thromboemboli. Suchi obstructions
 Percussion, although of some valuc in largc animals
may devclop as a sequela to intravenous catheteriza-
for the assessinent of heart size, is much lcss rcliablc
tion or compression of the cranial vena cava by a
in thic dog and cat. The use of percussion is of greater
mediastinal mass. Cranial vena caval obstructions also
value in the detection of pneumothorax in which thc
cause head and neck edema and pleural effusion.
lungs sound hyperresonant, or plcural cffusion, in
Lymphi nodes, laryngeal masses, and tracheal malfor-
which the lungs are hyporesonant.
mations or collapse can also be palpated.
PRINCIPLES OF THORACIC
EXAMINATION OF THE
AUSCULTATION
ABDOMEN
Auscultation is thie most valuable part of thc cardio-
Abdominal ballottemcnt and palpation are per-
vascular examination, providing csscntial information
formed to determine the presence of ascites and hcpa-
about the hcart and grcat vcsscls and allowing evalua
tomegaly. These findings are expected with advanced
tion of thc airways and pulmonary parenchyma. The
disorders of the right-side of the hcart, the pericar-
importance of auscultation cannot be overemphasizcd.
THEPHYSICALEXAMINATION51
Too oftenthe clinician advancesto sophisticated diag-
bell.When the diaphragm of the chestpiece is placed
nostic procedures,bypassing the basic steps of the
firmly on the thorax,it transmits a wider band of
physical examination, thereby missing significant clini
frequencies than the bell. The diaphragm tends to
cal information relevant to the diagnosis and treat-
attenuatelow-frequencysoundsandtoaccentuate
ment.
higher-frequency sounds (such as S and Ss).Dia-
phragmsvaryfrom small pediatric tolarge adult sizes.
《
A large diaphragm is more sensitive,as it gathers
sounds from awide area,but a small diaphragm has
THEMODERNSTETHOSCOPE
the advantageofpermittingbettersoundlocalization
in a small dog or cat.
Auscultationisaccomplishedwiththebinaural
stethoscopefirstintroducedbyGeorgeCammannin
1855.8Stethoscopesvaryinqualityofdesign andof
sound transmission.Imperfections in thetubing or
PSYCHOACOUSTICS
chest piece,or wax lodged in the ear tips,may inter-
ferewithnormal soundconduction.
Figure5-5indicates therange offrequencieswithin
The best instrument is theone that fits the ear
whichheartsounds andmurmurs occurin contrast to
canalscomfortablyandtransmitsbothnormaland
normalhumanspeech.9Thehumaneardoesnothear
abnormalheartandlungsoundsclearly.Agood
allsounds of equal intensitywith equal ease,and the
stethoscope should have comfortable ear pieces angled
threshold of audibility differs from person to person
slightlyforwardtofit snuglyinto theear canals.Most
depending upon individual hearing ability.8. 9 Higher
comewithboth soft and firm earpieces to assure a
volume is requiredfor low-frequency sound tobe
comfortablefit.In theory,doubletubingis superiorto
heard.For example,a sound at 32cyclesper second
single tubing in transmitting sounds accurately, espe-
(Hz)requires 100 times the intensity to make it as
cially at higher frequencies. In practice, both single
audibletothenormalhumanear asasoundtransmit-
tubing(Littmann-type）and double tubing(Rappa-
tedwith afrequency of 256Hz.
port-Sprague-type)models seem to work well.
The
Aquietenvironmentisrequiredfor successful aus-
best tubing is about 1/8inch (3mm）in internal
cultation.The smallestinterval thatcanbediscrimi-
diameterand should be as short aspractical, typically
nated by the human ear is 20 milliseconds.1oWhen a
14 to18 inches,for easy use.The chest piece should
louder soundprecedes a softer sound,thelattermay
permitaccentuationofeitherhigh-orlow-frequency
not be detected,a phenomenon known as fatigue.
vibrations.Inmostmodelsthis isaccomplishedbya
Evenlow-intensitybackgroundnoisecanobscure
bell and diaphragm, a design we favor.When the bell
much of the sound,a phenomenon known as mask-
is placed gently on the thorax,it accentuates lower-
ing.11
frequencyheartsounds(such asSsand S4)and attenu-
Purring sounds and harsh respiratory noises also
ateshigher-frequency sounds.If thebell is held too
disrupt normal heart sound recognition and may
firmly on the chest, the underlying skin acts as a dia-
mimicmurmurs.Holdingthe animal'snares closed or
phragm, negating the low-frequency attributes of the
gentlybrushingasmallcottonpledgetwithalcohol
100
10
SPEECH
AREA
FIGURE5-5
Only a small segment of thetotal vibratory energy of
ES
acardiacmurmurisaudiblebecauseoftheintrinsic
limitations of thehuman ear.Low-frequency heart
sounds are particularly difficult to hear.(From
.01
ButterworthJS,et al.CardiacAuscultation.NewYork,
HEART SOUNDS
Grune&Stratton,1960.)
AND MURMURS
.001
.0001
8
16
32
64
512
102420484096
FREQUENCYINCYCLESPERSECOND
52 EXAMINATION OF THE PATIENT WTTH CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
against the nasal rcgion may limit such sounds. Purring
often can bc discouraged by turning on a faucet near
the cat, prcssing on thc larynx, or by other physical
maneuvers.
ELECTRONIC STETHOSCOPES
ECC
 Most of the currently available electrical amplifying
stethoscopes amplify both the lieart sounds and exter-
nal background noise. Except for the hearing im-
paired, thicy offer no substantial advantage over the
traditional stcthoscopc. However, technology now ex-
PHONO.
cies.? Frequency shifting is also possible, permitting
split S
S2
S3
S
splitS2
the detcction of diagnosticaly important audible
ystole-
diastoke
 sounds. With thesc techniques it is possible to compen-
PHONO.
sate for selectivc hcaring loss. It is also possible
to
eliminate distractive sounds by using an appropriate
bandpass filter. As these and other mcthods of sound
processing and display are developed, clectronic
click
FIGURE 5--6
stethoscopcs may hecome more practical in the futurc.
llustrations of relationships belween the elecirocardiogran (lCC)
and tinming of hcart souuis. Electrical acivity depicied on the ECG
precedes cardiac mcchanical acivity shown by the
PHONOCARDIOGRAPHY
plonocardiogram (phono), The QRS complex represcnts
ventricular acivation. The atrioventricular valves close as the
ventricles cject blood through the semilunar valves, and the list
A pcrmancnt, writtcn recording of the heart sounds
heart soumd (S,) occurs at the R-wave dowustroke. The sccond
heart soud (S) occurs at the endl of ventricular contraction (i.e..
gram (ECG) is usually rccorded simultaneously with
ventricular systole), when the semilunar valves closc. The third
heart sound (Ss) occurs during the first half of diasole dlnring
the heart sounds for timing (Fig. 5-6). Modern phono-
passive ventricular filling (e.g., between the T wave and ensuing P
cardiographs accomplish clcctronic filtering of the
wave).The fouruh heart soundl (Soccurs late in liastole following
atrial activation (P wave) and contraction. (Fron Gompf RE. The
narrow band of sounds can be recorded. Voltage limi-
clinical approach to heart disease: History and physical
cxamination. In Fox PR (edl): Ganine and Feline Cardiology. Ist.
tation is provided to enable simultancous display of
ed. New York, Churchill Livings1onc, 1988, p 29.)
soft diastolic murinurs and loud systolic murmurs. Ar-
terial pressures, respiration, M-modc ultrasound, or
 other physiologic parameters may be concurcntly rc-
intensity of the hcart sounds in the normal animal. By
corded if available.
advancing the stethoscope cranially along the left ster-
nal border to thc 3rd to 4th intercostal spaces, the
region of the pulmonic valve arca is auscultatcd. Thc
CARDLAC AUSCULTATION
aortic valve area lies dorsal and slightly caudal to thc
pulmonic valve arca in thc middle third of thic left
thiorax at the 4th intcrcostal spacc. In thc smaller dog
Thoracic auscultation should bc performed in a sys
and in most cats, the pulmonic and aortic rcgions
tematic fashion.1s + Failure to use this approach invari-
overlap, making their separation diffcult. Sounds
ably results in misdiagnosis, as somc murmurs and
transmitted from the tricuspid valve arca arc best
abnormal transients will be missed or misintcrprcted.
hcard from the 3rd to 5th intercostal spaces at the
Rcgardlcss of the method used to defne the location
 junction of the lower and middle thirds of the right
of hcart sounds and murmurs, it is important to listcn 
thorax.
carefully over the cntire thorax when heart discasc is
suspcctcd. Traditional areas of auscultation include the
mitral, tricuspid, aortic, and pulmonic valve areas (Fig.
REVISED AREAS OF AUSCULTATION
5-7) .12-14
Auscultation usually begins by placing the stetho-
Instruction in the technique of cardiac auscultation
scope over the mitral valvc arca, which is located at
 can be greatly facilitatcd by redefinition of thc tradi-
the cardiac apcx, at the left 5th intercostal space near
tional arcas of cardiac auscultation, cmphasizing thc
the costochondral junction. This is the point of maximal
origin and transmission of both normal and abnormal
THEPHYSICALEXAMINATION
53
A
B
FIGURE5-7
Areas of cardiac auscultation.Traditional areas include the tricuspid (T) valve area on the right
hemithorax (A),and the mitral (M),aortic (A),and pulmonic (P)valve areas on the left hemithorax
(B).The shaded regions represent newly revised areas for auscultation.(A) On the right
hemithorax,the PA (pulmonic area）andAo(aortic area）are also represented,together with the
right atrial(RA)and rightventricular(RV)areas.(B) On theleft hemithorax,four landmark areas
are identified:LA,left atrial area;LV,left ventricular area;AO(aortic)and PA (pulmonic) areas.
heart sounds (Fig. 5-7).15 In this revised scheme, the
ventriculararea,iswherethemurmuroftricuspid
aorticarea consists of the traditional aorticvalve area
regurgitation is best heard.
on theleftsideof thethoraxbut alsoincludes another
Using a simpler approach, the location of all mur-
area on the right cranial thorax,reflecting the fact
mursmaybedescribed asoccurring attheleftheart
thatmurmurs arisingfrom aorticvalve abnormalities
base (including the aortic andpulmonicregions),the
are often heard in both locations.For example,the
left apex (mitral region), or the right apex (tricuspid
murmur of aortic stenosis is often louder on the right
region). Although simpler, this approach places less
hemithoraxthan at theleftsideoftheheartbase.14
emphasisonthegenesisofmurmursandtransient
The murmur of aorticinsufficiency is usually best
heart sounds than do other methods,and it is less
heard in the traditional aortic area on theleft,as is
valuablefor teaching auscultation.
the aortic component of the second heart sound. The
leftventricular area is centeredjustventral tothe
traditionalmitralareaatthecardiacapex.Gallop
NORMALANDABNORMAL
soundsgenerated in theleft side of theheart arebest
TRANSIENTHEARTSOUNDS
heard in this location.15 This is also a good location to
hear the murmurs of mitral stenosis,mitral regurgita-
tion, and aortic regurgitation.The left atrial area lies
dorsal to the left ventricular area,and here the mur-
CLASSIFICATIONOFHEARTSOUNDS
mur of mitral regurgitation is often heard best.The
revised pulmonic area consists of the traditional pul-
Cardiovascular sounds ofrelativelyshortduration
monicvalveareaontheleftsideofthethoraxbutalso
arereferred to as transientheart sounds.13.15,16 These
includes a corresponding area on the right cranial
includethetwonormalheartsounds,SandS,systolic
thorax.The murmurs of pulmonic stenosis and pul-
ejection sounds,mid to late systolic clicks,early dia-
monic insufficiency are usually best heard in the pul-
stolic sounds (pericardial knocks,tumor plops,and
monic area on the left,asisthepulmonic component
opening snaps),and accentuated Ssand S4 heart
of thesecondheartsound.Therightventricular area
occupies theareatraditionallyidentified as thetricus-
soundvibrationsoflongerdurationarisingfrom the
pid valve area.The murmurs of tricuspid stenosis and
heart or great vessels and possess a variety of distin-
ventricular septaldefects are usuallyheard bestin
guishing characteristics: intensity, timing, radiation,
the right ventricular area, as are gallop heart sounds
frequency, character,and location.
generated in the right side of the heart.The right
A review of normal physiologic events reveals the
atrial area,defined as the region dorsal to the right
genesis of heart sounds and guides their identification.
54 EXAMINATION OF THE PATIENT WITH CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
 Othcr hcart sounds are recognized by reference to thc
hcart sound must bc distinguished from a presystolic
gallop, cjcction sounds, and systolic clicks.
pedied ap oi dysuonelan uy qep-qy se porenne
pcriphicral pulse. Most hcart sounds may be adequately
characterizcd by a dcscription of their frequency or
EJECTION SOUNDS
pitch, the timc of their occurrcnce in the cardiac cycle,
and the location on thic chcst wall wherc they are
Ejection sounds arc high-frcquency sounds OC-
best heard.
curring early in systole in association with hyperten-
sion, dilatation of thc grcat vcsscls, or the opcning of
abnormal yet mobile semilunar valvcs. Thcse sounds
THE FIRST HEART SOUND (S1)
are best appreciated at the left heart base in the aortic
or pulmonic areas. Fjection sounds are occasionally
Soccurs at the onsct of ventricular systole (Fig.
reported in animals with congenital hcart discascs such
 5-6) and is associated with a palpablc apex bcat just.
as tctralogy of Fallot, aortic stenosis, and pulmonic
oni s s iansssd ee un as sr on od
stcnosis, and acquired diseases such as heartworm dis-
longer, and lower pitched than the sccond hcart
casc. More often, ejection sounds are recognized on
peose st 's go uoniod aapne iofeu su. t punos
thc phonocardiogram only and not by auscultation.
with closure of the mitral and tricuspid valves, and it
is hcard bcst at thc mitral and tricuspid valve areas.
The sound is not gencrated by the valve cusps slapping
SYSTOLIC CLICKS
shut but rather by the sudden accclcration and decel-
cration of blood and tensing of thc valve cusps,
Systolic clicks arc short, mid- to high-frcqucncy
chordae tendineac, and rclated structures. '7 Othcr cle-
sounds that typically orcur in mid or latc systole (Fig.
mcnrs that contribute to S, are vibrations duc to carly
 5-6). They are best heard ovcr the mitral or tricuspid
ventricular muscle contraction, opening of the semilu-
valvcs; may vary in occurrence, timing, and intensity;
nar valves at the end of isovolumic contraction, and
occur most commonly in dogs with early degenerative
vibrations relatcd 1o rapid early acceleration of blood
valvular disease; and are often accompanied by a sys-
in thc ventriclcs.
In the dog, S, is approximatcly 80 mscc in duration
systolic clicks are most often due to systolic A-V valvc
and begins approximatcly 20 mscc aftcr the onset of
ventricular depolarization, ncar the bcginning of the
but they are likcly caused by tcnsing of redundant
QRS complex.12. 1: Time rclationships in the cat are
valve leaflets or clongated chordac tendincac. They
similar but slightly shiortcr in duration.
may be misintcrprctcd as gallop sounds, which also
The first heart sound is loudest in young, thin ani-
producc a triple cadence on auscultation. Systolic
mals and in those with high sympathetic tonc, tachycar-
clicks can be easily distinguishcd from gallop sounds
dia, systemic: hypertension, or anemia. Dogs with ac-
by noting that they are high-frequency sounds best
quircd valvular discasc causing mitral insufficiency also
hcard between S, and S. using the stethoscope dia-
have S, with incrcased intcnsity.
phiragm.
A first heart sound of diminishicd intensity may be
auscultated in obese dogs or cats; S, is also dccreased
in animals with plcural or pcricardial cffusion, dia-
THE SECOND HEART SOUND (S)
phragmatic hernia, cmphyscma, shock, dccrcased myo-
cardial contractility (dilated cardiomyopathy), or pro
T'his sound is of higher frequency and shorter dura-
longed P-R intervals.
tion (60 msec in clogs) than the first sound, and it is
hcard best at. thc aortic and pulmonic valve areas (Fig.
SPLIT s. Occasioually, thc first sound is split into two
 5-7).1z. 14 Vibrations contributing to Sg arc produced
components due to asynchronous closurc of the A-V
by early muscular rclaxation, blood vibration in thc
valves or accentuation of the later cjection components
great vesscls, and opcning of the A-V valves;6 S2 occurs
of the first heart sound (Fig. 5-6). Splitting can occa-
at the end of ventricular systole, ncar the cnd of the T
sionally bc appreciated at the cardiac apex and mitral
wave on the ECG (Fig. 5-6) and corresponds to closure
 Aeu l t 'shop pooq-ose Kprey un uonlau sapea
of the semilunar (aortic and pulmonic) valves. In dogs
attributed to electrical disturbanccs (bundlle branch
and cats, aortic valve closure (Ag) prcccdcs pulmonic
block, cctopic beais. or cardiac pacing) or to mcchani-
valvc closure (Ps) by a very short interval, which is
usually not dletcctable by ear, causing S, to be heard as
conditions delay either mitral or tricuspid valve closurc
a singlc sound.12. t In dogs, the increase in heart rate
and producc asynchronous valve closure. A split first
accompanying a normal sinus arrhyrhmia also tcnds to)
THE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
55
nullify thc incrcase in diastolic filling that occurs dur-
TABLE 5-2
ing inspiration.18
 Mechanisms That May Producc Abnorrmal Splitting of
the Sccond Hcart Sound
SPLIT sy. Auclible splitting cluring inspiration is occa-
A. Pulmonic valve closure follows aortic valve closure (P, follows
sionally detected in hcalthy, large-brccd dogs. The pul-
A2)
monic cornponent occurs slightly later in the cardiac
1. Delayed P,
Lcft-to-right intracardiac shunt (atrial septal defect) *
cycle than the aortic component. It is bcst recognized
Pulmonary hypertcnsion (heartwor dlisease)*
by listening over the pulnonic valve arca. Inspiration
Pulmonic stenosis*
 Right bundle branch block*
increascs negativc inirathoracic pressures, drawing an
Certain ventricular cctopic beais+
increased ainount of blood into the right ventricle; this
Dilatation of the pulmonary artery
rcquires a longcr pcriod for right ventricular ejection,
2. Premature A:
Mitral insufhciency
which rmomentarily dclays closure of the pulnonic
Mitral stenosis
valvc. During expiration, the two components of S.
1.efl atrial tumors
 approximate each other, and therc is no splitting,12. 16
B. Aortic valve closure follows pulmonic valve closure (paradoxic
splitting)
Pathologic splitting of S, is causcd by asynchronous
1. Delayed A:
closure of the aortic or pulmonic valve, either froin
Aortic stenosis*
heinodynamic abnorrmalitics or clcctrical disturbances
I.eft bundle branch block*
Certain ccvopic ventricular beatst
such as bundle branch block, extrasystolcs, or ventricu-
Systemic. hyperiension
lar pacing,1s-rs The most cominon cause is delayed
closure of the pulnonic valve due to pulmonary hyper-
Mechanisms that have leen recgnized in the clog.
tension (Fig. 5-8) in dogs with hcartworrn disease and
Modifierd fro Dretweiler DK Palleison DF. Abuto
lhcartsomdsau
murmurs of the dog. J Small Anirm Pract 8: 193, 1967.
certain congenital hcart defects. Here, the interval
between Ay and P varics with rcspiration, as described
carlier In dogs with an atrial scptal defect, this interval
diastolic sounds of sirmilar quality best describedl in
docs not vary with respiration, and splitting of S, is
humans with constrictive pericarditis.
valvc results in "paradoxic splitting"” of Sz, which is
acccntuated during expiration. Aortic stenosis,
Iefi.
THE THIRD HEART SOUND (S:)
bundle branch block, and certain ectopic ventricular
beats may dlelay A, in dogs. Other potcntial causcs of
 The third heart sound is of low frequency and is
a split Sg are listcd in Tablc 5-2.
gencrated by rapid ventricular flling. It is not ausculta-
table in most healthy dogs and cats, but it can some-
times be identified on phonocardliographic recordings
EARLY DIASTOLIC SOUNDS
as a low-pitched sound occurring 10 to 15 msec after
thc second heart sound in the dog (Figs. 5-6, 5-9).12.14
Opening snaps, rarely detectcd in dornestic aninals,
Thc intensity is determined by the rapidity of early
occur shortly aftcr Sz, at thc timc of maximal opening
diastolic filing, the pressure in the atrium, and the
of the A-V valves in early diastole. Thcy are a promi-
distensibility of the ventriclc during early diastole.13.
nent finding in hurmans with rheumatic mitral valvc
stenosis but arc rarely heard in aniimals. Mobilc atrial
 the sound. Auscultatablc, loudl, third heart sounds are
tumors can causc similar sounds, which arc usually
abnormal in the dog and cat and often imply heart
referred to as tumor plops. Pericardial knocks are carly
failurc, especially systolic (myocardial) dysfunction.
FIGURE 5-8
Phonocardiogram recorded from the pulmonic area
of a dog with pumonary hypertension and a right to
lefl-shunting patent ductus arteriosus. The second
heart sound is distinctly split, as is cvidenced by its
audible componenis, A (aortic valve closure) and P,
(pulmonic valve closure). Iog scale recording. A
sinultancous ECG is displayed abovc.
 56 EXAMINATION OF THE PATIENT WITH CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
continuous
pansystolic
holosystolic
holodiastolic
systolic
pre
early, mid ,late
early
mid
S1S2
r
mC5u
tele
S1S2
S4
S
S
S3
S4
'S
Systole
Diastole
FIGURE 5-9
Phonocardiograu recorded from a Doberman pinscher with
FIGURE 5-10
dilated cardiomyopathv. Xotice the third (S,; heart sound
The Liming and duration of systolic and diastolic heart nurmurs.
(protodiastolic gallop). which immediately follows the second (S)
heart sound.In dogsscultation of anS,sound srongly suggesis
The terms "'pansystolic'’ and "holosystolic' arc commonly used
interchangeably. S, frst heart sound: S, second heart sound; Ss,
the presence of myocardial failure. S), first hcart sound.
third heart. sound: S,、 fourth heart sound. (Modified from
Detweiler DK, Patterson DF. Abnormal heart sounds and murmurs
of the dog. J Small Anim Pract 8:193, 1967.)
Other causes of an audible S, inciude mitral regurgita-
tion, hypcrthyroidism, and ancmia. When Ss is audiblc,
thc hcart sounds may bec verbally characterized as lub-
GALLOP RHYTHMS
dub-thud. Suchi soundls are usually bcst hcard with the
stcthoscopc bcll positioncd ncar thc cardiac apcx,
A gallop rhythin is a sequence of three sounds con-
 along the left sternal border in the left ventricular
sisting of the first and second heart sounds and an
area.
extra sound, which is an intensified third or fourth
heart sound, or both (Figs. 5-6; 5-9, 5-10, 5-11).
Gallop rhythrns are classified as protodiastolic (Ss),
THE FOURTH HEART SOUND (S4)
presystolic (Ss), or as surmmation gallops (fusion of Ss
and Sa). Gallop heart sounds may originate frorm either
The fourth hcart sound is procluccd by atrial systole.
the left or right ventricle and often indicate adlvanced
 It is always inauclible in normal cats and dogs but may
Imyocardial discasc or hcart failure. 4.17
occasionally be dlernonstratcd on a phonocardiograrn.'4
 The most common gallop rhythm auscultated in cdogs
Vibrations initiated by forccful ejection of the atrial
is a protodliastolic gallop, causcd by an acccntuated
third heart sound. An audible S; is most often heard
ant ventriclc produce this low-pitchcdl, low-frcquency
with diastolic vcntricular ovcrloading, as in rmitral in-
hcart sound (Fig. 5-6). Whcn S, is aucliblc, thc hcart
sufficiency, dilated cardliornyopathy, scptal dlefects, or
sounds may bc verbally characterizcd as bub-lub-dub; S
 patcnt ductus artcriosus. In dogs with mitral insuffi-
is most easily detected using the stethoscope bell posi-
ciency, an accentuated S; may be mistaken for the
tioned near the leli cardiac apex.
second hearl sound if a loud pansystolic murmur ex-
Holosystolic
Holosystolic
Earty
Mid-diastolic
Pre-systolic
ejection
diastolic
regurgitant
murmur
Jnuwnw
mummur
mumur
murmur
plateau-shaped
diamond-shaped
decrescendo
S2
S.
S
S
S
S,
mitral regurgitation.
mltral valve stenosis
aortlc stenosis
aorlc Insuffciency
trlcuspld regurgitation
pulmonlc stenosis
pulmonic insufficlency
ventricular sepfal defect
ventlcular septal defect 
FIGURE 5-11
Contrasting the shape (intensity profile) of a heart murimur, which is often helpful in icdenilying its
origin, The most common murmurs heard in dogs and cats are the plateau-shaped systolie murmur
of mitral regurgitation, the diamond-shaped murmur of aortic and pulmonic: stenosis, and the
continuous murmur of a palent ductus arteriosus. (Modifed from Detweiler DK. Patterson DF.
Abnormal heart sounds and murmurs of the dog. J Small Anim Pract 8:193, 1967.)
THE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION  57
tends through thc second heart sound. Protodliastolic
location of the atrioventricular valvcs at the onset of
 gallop sounds in the cat are most coimmonly associatcd
systole and by variable diastolic Gilling of the venuricles,
with congcstive (dilated) cardiomyopathy, hyperthy-
roidlisn, or severe anemia. A rapid hcart ratc, particu-
with succcssive contractions. The most common cause
larly in cats, often makes it inpossible to determinc
of heart rate variability in dogs is respiratory sinus
whether a diastolic fling sound is an Ss, or a summa-
arrhythmia. Inspiration causcs hcart ratc to specd up
tion of the two sounds.
 because vagal tone dccreases as lefl atrial filling pres-
 Presystolic gallop sounds heard just before S, repre-
sures increase and ncgative thoracic prcssure incrcases
sent accentuation of S4. 'T'hey occur with atrial contrac-
(the Bainbridgc reflex). Expiration causcs hcart rate
tion and follow the P wave on phonocardiographic
to slow as vagal tone increases. This waxing and waning
recordings'2; Sa is most likely to be audible in those
 of the heart rate, which can be climinated by pain,
cardiac conditions associated with rmarkcd left ventric-
cxcitement, or parasympatholytic drugs. produccs a
ular hypertrophy. They arc audible only as long as
rhyth mic variation of the hcart sounds.
sinus rhythm is preserved and disappear with the onsct
of atrial fibrillation. In cats, S, is commonly associated
with diastolic restrictive diseases such as hypertrophic
PREMATURE BEATS AND
cardiomyopathy (HCM) and left ventricular hypertro-
TACHYARRHYTHMIAS
phy causcd by systcimic hypertension or hyperthyroidl-
ism, A fourth hcart sound is occasionally auscultatable
in clogs with profound hcart failurc clue to advanced
Single supravcntricular and ventricular premarure
 mitral valvular insufficiency, particularly after rupture
beats are auscultatcd as early heart sounds of low inten-
sity followed by a pause of variable duration. The pausc
of a major chordae tendineae.11
When S and S, merge, particularly with rapid heart
following atrial and junctional ectopic beats is usually
shorter than that following a ventricular prernaturc
rates, the resulting single accentuated sound is re-
ferred to as a summation gallop. The summation gallop
contraction, but this distinction requircs considerable
is caused by the sane conditions that produce individ-
 practice to make. It is wiscr to identily the nature of
an irregular heart rhythrm on an ECG. Ventricular
ual protodiastolic or presystolic so unds.
ectopic beats may also cause splitting of the first and
second heart sounds. The most dlramatic cxamplcs of
heart rate and heart sound variability occur in dogs
VARIATIONS IN INTENSITY AND
and cats with atrial fibrillation, an arrhythmia charac-
RHYTHM OF HEART SOUNDS
terized by a rapid, irregular heart rate. 'Ihe intensity of
the first heart sound varies continuously; the second
heart sound is absent if the force of contraction is of a
DIMINISHED INTENSITY
magnitudle inadequate to open the seinilunar valves. If
 a valvular murmur was prcsent prior to tlie onset of
Hcart sounds are dininished with obesity, cmphy
atial fibrillation, it may bc of variable intensity, espe
seia, pleural or pericardial cffusions, thoracic masses,
cially if thc ventricular rate is rapid. The irrcgularly
diaphragmatic hernias, and when left ventricular con-
irregular rhythm of atrial fibrilation has bccn aptly
Uractility and cardiac output are lowered.
referred to as delirium cordis. Paroxysnal supravcntricular
or ventricular tachycardias are characterized by bursts of
rapid, regular beats that usually cease abruptly.
INCREASED INTENSITY
Heart sounds are loudcst in young, thin animals
BRADYARRHYTHMIAS
whicn the hearl rate is rapid. Hyperdynarnic states,
such as hyperthyroidism, anermia, or fever, may also
With first-degrec atrioventricular heart block, thc
increase intcnsity of S, and Sz.
first heart sound rmay be of diminished intensity be-
cause thc prolonged P-R interval perrmits thc rnitral
and tricuspid valve lcaflets to return passivcly to a
VARIATIONS WITH ARRHYTHMIAS
 coapted state beforc venuricular contraction begins.
 Intermittent pauses in the rhythm are hcard in dogs
The intensity of S, and S may vary with arrhythimias,
with sccond-degrce hcart block, but similar pauscs may
inclucling sinus arrhythmia of healthy dogs, supraven-
be caused by pronounced sinus arrhythmia and sinus
ticular and ventricular premature contractions, atrial
arrest. In dlogs with hcart block, a low-pitchcd atrial
fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia, and heart block.
sound is sometimes audible during the pause." With
These alterations arc produced by variations in the
completc heart block, two independent rhythrms exist.
 58 EXAMINATION OF THE PATIENT WITH CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
In addition to the slow but loud and forceful first
auscultation by an cxpcricenced cxarniner. A grade
and sccond hcart sounds produced by the ventricular
3/6 murmur is moderately loud and easily heard. A
cscape focus, the carcful cxaminer can usually detect
gradc 4/6 murmur is a loud murrmur that docs not
the softcr aud morc rapid, low-pitchcd aurial (S,)
produce a palpable thrill. A gradlc 5/6 rmurmur is a
heart sounds.
vibration) but is inaudible when thc stethoscope is
rernoved fron the chest wall. A grade 6/6 murmur is
CARDIAC MURMURS
a very loud murrnur that produces a thrill (palpable
vibration) still audible after the stethoscope is removed
frorm thc chest. Adherence to the same grading systern
Murmurs reprcsent sounds of longer duration than
permits different clinicians to communicate clearly
thc transicnt hecart sounds already described. Heart
and conciscly.
murmurs arisc from turbulent blood flow (vibrations)
crcatcd whicn the normal, quiet, larninar flow is dis-
SHAPE. Murinurs are oftcn clescribed in tcrms of thcir
rupted. This is caused by blood flowing through abnor-
profile during the cardiac cycle (Figs. 5-10, 5-11).
mal communications bctwcen the cardiac charnbers or
This corresponds to thcir shapc on a phonocardio-
through stc notic or insufficient valves, or by alterations
, o sn ao e r sn o
in blood viscosity or vessel diamctcr. Thc relationship
or "bamdl-shaped" for those murmurs of nearly equal
of cardiac murmurs to vessel size, flow vclocity, and
intensity throughout their duration, "decrescendo"
bloodl viscosity is dcscribed by Reynold's number:
for those murmurs that gradually taper off from an
initial peak, and "dianond-shaped" or "crescendo-
Radius × velocity × densiy
Rcynold's number =
decrescendo' for thosc murinurs that build to a pcak
Viscosily
and thien gradlually diminish.
DESCRIPTIVE CHARAGTERISTICS OF
PITCH OR FREQUENCY. Murmurs rnay also dlcscribcd as
high-, medium-, or low-pitched or of mixed frequency.
MURMURS
High-pitched rnurinurs are heard best with thc stetho-
scope diaphragm, whereas low-frequency murmurs are
A number of features nay hclp characterizc cardliac
heard best with thc bell. The quality or timbrc of a
murmurs,12-17. t9. 21
murmur refcrs to thc arrangement of murmur fre-
quency components (purity of the pitch) producing a
TIMING. Murimurs can be dlividcd bascd upon thcir
subjective impression, dlcscribed in such tcrms as
tirning during the cardiac cycle into systolic, diastolic, or
harsh, blowing, or musical.
continuous types. Systolic murmurs begin with or after
the frst heart souud and end with or before the scc-
RADLATIoN. Murinurs radiate in the direction of
ond heart sound. Diastolic murinurs bcgin with or
 blood flow responsible for the murmur. The pattern
aftcr the first component of the second heart sound
of radliation is importamt in some lesions, For example,
and end prior to the frst heart sound. The duration
thc rmurmur of congenital subaortic stenosis radiates
of thc rmurmur within the cardiac cycle rmay be further
widclycraniodorsaly, apically, and cvcn to the head;
modified by terms such as holo- and pansystolic; proto-
thus, it may be hcard loudly at thc right cardiac basc.
(early), meso-(mid), or telc-(late) systolic; proto-,
With pulmonic stenosis, thc murmur racliatcs cranio-
meso, and holodiastolic; and prcsystolic (Figs. 5-10,
 dorsally into the main pulmonary artcry and thus may
5-11), 12-17, 19, 21
be heard loudly at thie left cardiac basc.
LocATioN. The location of a murmur relatcs to the
cardiac valve area where it is hcard loudest (point of
SYSTOLIC HEART MURMURS
rmaximal intcnsity) (Figs. 5-7, 5-11). It may also be
heard in other areas where it radiates. Location hclps
idcntifly the spccifir valvular lesion, as described undlcr
Cardiac Auscultation.
INNOCENT AND PHYSIOLOGIC
MURMURS
INTENSITY (LoUDNFss). Ihe intensity of a rmurInur is
best com municated using the six grades described by
Nonpathologic murmurs include innocent murinurs,
Freciman and Levine.12. 16. 21 A grade 1/6 murmur is
most cormmonly detectced in young animals with no
the faintcst rmurrmur that can be detectcd and is heard
eviclcnce of structural hcart discase, and physiologic
only with particular cffort. A grade 2/6 murmur is
(functional) murmurs, usually causcd by increased car-
a faint murmur clcarly heard after a fcw seconds'
diac output or dccrcascd blood viscosity. It is often
THE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
59
difficult to distinguish innocent or physiologic mur-
causc. These murmurs are ofrcn soft (grade 2/6 to
murs frorn thiosc dluc to organic discasc.
3/6) and best heardl on either sidce of the stcrnum
 Innocent and physiologic (functional) murimurs are
ovcr thc 5th or 6th intercostal spacc. Dynamic right
usually sofl (grade 1/6 to 3/6), early to midsystolic,
ventricular outflow tract obstruction has recently been
high-frequency murmurs. They arc loudlcst at the aor-
identified as a common causc of some murmurs in
tic or pulmonic valve regions and dlo not racliate cxtcn-
cats in these circumstances.22 Such obstructions are
sivcly. Such rnurmurs are of uncertain origin bur may
usually mild, arc casily idlcntified by color-flow Doppler
be due to increased blood flow velocity and turbulcncc
cchocardiography, and appcar to be of litle clinical
in the right or left ventricular outflow tracts. The char-
conscqucncc. Systcmic conditions that commonly pro
actcr of thc rmurrnur often changes with body position
duce imurmurs (c.g., anemia, hypcrthyroidism) arc
and hcart ratc, and these murmurs typically disappear
identificd by laboratory testing.
in carly adult life.
 Physiologic (functional) murmus are common with
anemia, hypertension, fever, prcgnancy, and hyperthy-
MITRAL INSUFFICIENGY
roidisn. It is often impossible to differentiate an inno-
cent from a functional murmur without additional
Although this murmur is usually loudest over the
testing. The most common physiologic murmur is
rnitral valvc arca and left atrium, it commonly radiates
caused by decrcascdl blood viscosity from moderate or
dorsally and to the right thorax, confounding reliable
severe aneimia. When thc blood hemoglobin level falls
identification of tricuspid rcgurgitation. Intensity
bclow 6 mg/dl, decrecascd viscosity and increased
ranges froim grade 1/6 to grade 3/6 but docs not
blood flow velocity produce turbulcncc. This tends to
reliably indicate severity. Loud murmurs often rcso-
occur in dogs with a hematocrit of lcss than 22 to 25
nate from small orifices when the volume of rcgurgita-
pcrcent and in cats with a hcmatocrit of lcss than 18
tion is small. With severe dliscasc, inurmur intcnsity
to 20 pcrcent. Anemic murmurs are usually best heard
ofien declines as the atrial-ventricular prcssure differ
ovcr the pulmonic or aortic areas during carly to midl-
cncc narrows. Loud murinurs of mitral insufficicncy
systolc and are typically low-intcnsity and high-frc
are holosystolic and plateau shaped, wliercas soft mur-
 murs commonly occupy only the eauly portion of sys-
is rclicved. Diastolic murmurs have occasionally bcen
tolc (Fig. 5-12). Regurgitant murnurs associated with
associated with ancmia.
mitral valvc prolapsc may nor dlevelop until mid to late
Systolic murmurs of uncertain origin are often
systolc. Thc rnurmur of mitral insufficiency is typically
 heard in cats with hyperthyroidisrn and in a variety
aq aem h imq dupunos qsey pue Aunbsy poxiu jo
of other systeinic clisorders. Many of these cats have
highi-pitched or musical (whooping) in quality. The
identifiable left venticular hypertrophy of uncertain
pitch of the murnur often varics frorm examination
ecg
ecg
pcg
left
xode
sm
lett
apex
sm
S1
$2
FIGURE 5-12
Phonocardiograms (pog) recorded from two dogs with tmitral regurgitation. ilustraring the highly
variable nature of this murmur. The phonocardiogram on the left, reeorded at the left cardiac apcx
of a dog with mild mitral regurgitation, shows a sofi systolic murmur that decreases in intensity in
the latter part of systole. The phonocardiogram on the right, recorded atl the left. cardiac apex of a
dog with severe mitral regurgitation and pulmonary hypertension, shows a loud holosystolic murmur
and acccntuated scond hearl sound (S). sm,systolic murmur; eg, electrocardiogram. Log scale
recording.
60 EXAMINATION OF THE PATTENT WITH CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
to cxainination. In dlogs with mitral insufficiency, the
to vary more with respiration than do rmitral murrmurs.
intcnsity of the S, is often increased. In many affected
 Isolatcdl tricuspid insufficiency secondary to myxoma-
dogs, S, is obscurcd by the murmur, but in some cases,
tous degencration of the valve occurs, particularly in
the pulnonic componenr of S, is accentuated due to
cocker spanicls and Dachshunds, but this is an uncom-
coexisting pulmonary hypcrtension (Fig. 512). Dogs
with sevcre mitral rcgurgitation often manifest protodi-
causc of congenital malformation of thc tricuspid
astolic or presystolic gallop hcart sounds.
valve. Dilatation of the righit venricle, as occurs with
 Mitral insufficiency results from many diseases. The
 pulmonary hypertension and cardiomyopathy, can also
cause tricuspid valve insufficiency.
valvular disease (myxomatous degcncration).14 It can
also devclop whcn the left venuicle and mitral annulus
dilatc and thc papillary nuscles are pulled out of
AORTIC STENOSIS
 alignrmcnt, as in adult dogs with cilated cardliornyopa-
thy and puppics with certain congenital heart defects
 In dogs, acquired or congenital aortic valve stenosis
such as PDA. Congenital malformation of the mitral
is rarc; however, subvalvular aortic stenosis (SAs) is
valvc, resulting in valvular insufficiency, is one of the
one of the most common canine congenital heart de-
 Iost common congcnital heart defects of cats.2 Mitral
fects. All these dlisorders are uncommon in cats. The
regurgitation is common in dogs and cats with HCM
murrnur of valvular and subvalvular aortic stenosis is
and dymamic lefl ventricular outflow tract obstruction,
 a systolic crescendo-decrescendo, or dliamond-shaped
as the anterior leaflet moves cranially to make contact
murmur, heard best at thc lcft hcart basc or right
with the interventricular septun in carly to midsys-
cranial thorax (Fig. 5-13).15 Mild obstructions causc
tole.2+ The rcsulting midsystolic regurgitant murmur is
soft murmurs thal are difficult to distinguish from
clifficult to localize on the chest wall as it blcnds with
innocent or functional murnurs.2 The intensity of
or is obscured by the systolic ejection murmur. Trivial
such murmurs increases substantially following cxcr-
 mitral regurgitation may be detected with color-flow
cise, as a larger stroke volume is ejected into the aortic
 Dopplcr ccho in most cats with cardiomyopathies.
r0ot. Unfortunately, innocent and functional rmurmurs
 oftcn behave similarly. With moderate-to-severe SAS,
 the murmur grows louder and longcr in dluration; is
TRICUSPID INSUFFICIENCY
usually harsh and of rmixed frcqucncy, andl often radi-
ales into the thoracic inlct and up thc neck along the
The systolic murmur of tricuspid valve insufficiency
carotid artcries. If the murmur is suffciently intense.
is best heard near the righr 3rd to 5th intercostal
it is accompanied by a prccordial thrill. Aortic cjection
spaces at the costochondral junction. L'nfortunatcly,
sounds may occur with subvalvular aortic stenosis and
the murrnur of mitral insufficicncy radiates to that
 may be related to poststenotic dilatation of thc aorta,
area as well, and tliese murimurs may bc vcry dlifficult
 or opening of a thickcned aortic valve. Color-flow
or im possiblc to differentiate. The intcnsity and dura-
 Doppler echo studies indicate that SAS is usually asso-
tion of rnurmurs arising from the tricuspid valve tend
ciatcd with mild aortic insufficiency. In most cases, the
658
SM
FIGURE 5-13
SM
Phonocardiogram recorded from a
dog with congenial subaortite:
stenosis. The systolic ejection
murmur of aortic stenosis is
 diaumond-shaped. best heard and
recorded with the stethoscope (or
stcthophone) placed over the
S
aortic valve arca. cecg.
S2
elecirocardiogram:; SM, systolic
murmur: S, first heart sound; Sz
second hearl sound. Iog scalc
recording.
THE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
61
diastolic leak is minor and there is no audible evidence
mur is caused by incrcased blood flow across a norrmal
of a diastolic murrnur.
pulmonic valve, Delayed closure of thc pulmonic valve
Dynamic left venuicular outlow tract obstruction
results from a combination of hcrmodynamic and clcc-
occurs in dogs and cats with HCM as well as in certain
trical factors. Relative to thc left side of the heart, the
congcnital heart defecis causing interventricular septal
right ventricle nust expel an increased volume of
hypcrtrophy24 Such murmurs rnay be absent at rest
 blood. In addition, conduction disturbances leading to
but very loud during and following cxercisc. The
delayed right vcntricular activation are common in
 mechanism is denonstrated by echocardliography, us-
dogs with an ASD.
ing provocativc maneuvers that increase nyocardial
contractility, decrease cnd-diastolic left ventricular vol-
umc, or reduce afterload. Murmur ouset and duration
DIASTOLIC HEART MURMURS
arc coincident with systolic anterior motion of the
Imitral valve. 1Dynamic obstruction is the rmost common
 m s   o o 
MITRAL STENOSIS
PULMONIC STENOSIS
Mitral stenosis (MS) is uncomrmon in dogs and cats.
and auscultatory features are not wcll charactcr
ized,27. 28 In dogs, MS is usually a congcnital abnormal-
A high-frcquency systolic cjection murmur, best hcard
ity. Most reported cases were detccted in dogs with
al the leff-sicded hcart base ovcr thc pulmonic valve, is
characteristic. Murrnur intensity and duration vary with
concurrent subaortic stenosis. A diastolic murmur was
the severity of thc stenosis. As the pressure gradient
heard in thc left apical arca in 4 of the l5 reported
betwcen the right ventricle and pulmonary artery widl-
dogs.?* In the same rcport, a left apical holosystolic
ens, thc murrmur becomes louder and peaks latcr in
murmur  compatible  with  mitral  insufficiency  was
systole.4.1e The murrnur of pulmonic stenosis is typically
 heard in eight dogs. The murrmur of MS is low-pitched,
and it begins in mid-diastole. In human paticnts, thec
a crescendo-dccrescendo (dliamond-shaped), holosys-
tolic rnurmur with maximun intensity in rmidsystolc.
duration of thc murmur correlatcs with the scverity
of the obstruction.1s 14 Presystolic accentuation of the
oand e Aq panueduoor aq xeu snnu pnor 
murmur results whcn traiusvalvular blood flow is in-
thrill palpable over the pulmonic area on the left cranial
thorax. 'I'he murinur of pulmonic stenosis tends not to
creascd following contraction of the atriuin. ln the
small urmber of affectedl animals we examined, dia-
radliate as widely as the murmur of subaortic stenosis.
stolic murmurs were usually present, but thcy werc
Splitting of S, rmay be notedl on phonocardiographic
recordings, but this is usually not heard because of the
oftcn subtlc andl easily could be ovcrlooked (Fig. 5-
loud murmur.
14).
VENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT
AORTIC INSUFFICIENCY
The murmur causcd by a restrictive ventricular sep-
 In adult dogs, aortic insuficiency results nost often
tal defect (VSD) is loudl, harsh, and typically best heard
fron bacterial endocarditis.2? lt also occurs as an iso-
on thc right cranial thorax. The shape and quality of
lated congenital heart defect, in association with
these murmurs vary trcmendously, but they are often
subaortic stenosis, or as an unwanted complication of
rmid- to high-frcquency holosystolic murrnurs, fre-
a venticular septal defect.30 Insuffciency of the aortic
quently accompanied by a thrill at the point of maxi-
valve results in a soft, blowing, decrescendo heart mur-
mal intensity.2 Murrmur intensity and cduration may be
mur beginning imrmediately after the second heart
reduced if the VsD is largc and pulmonary hypertcn-
sound. lt is frequently accompamied by a midsystolic,
sion develops. With severe pulmonary hypcrtension,
cjection type of murmur. Such murmurs are usually
the murmur is absent and the second hcart sound
best hcard over the aortic area or at the cardiac apex.
is split. l6
 In dogs with severe aortic regurgitation, a prcsystolic
imurmur, referred to as an Austin Flint murmur, may
also be heard as the mitral valve closes premarurely,
ATRIAL SEPTAL DEFECT
causing disturbed diastolic flow through the mitral
orifice. The presencc of both systolic and diastolic
Auscultatory findings with atrial scptal dcfccr (AsD)
hcart murmurs, which in cornbination have a distinct
include a systolic cjection murmur loudcst ovcr the
pulmonic area occurring in coimbination with fixed
truly continuous rnurnur of an arteriovcnous fistula
splitting of the second hcart sound.?6 The systolic rmur-
 or patent ductus arteriosus.
62 EXAMINATION OF THE PATIENT WITH CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
FIGURE 5-14
Phonocardiogram rccorded from a
cal with miral valve stenosis. Notice
the presystolic accentuation of this
mid-diastolic murmur. Diastolite
murmurs (DM) are uncommon in
dogs and cats. Compare the timing
of this diastolie murmur to the
systolie murmurs in Figures 5-14
DM
DM
DM
and 5-15. ecg clectrocardiogram; 1,
first heart souund; 2, second heart
sound. Log scale rccording.
PULMONIC INSUFFICIENCY
5-l5).12. is It is best heard at thc left heart basc but
radiates widely in some animals. The clistinctive contin-
 Isolated pulmonic insufficiency of sufficient magni-
uous murmur occurs as blood flows from the highi-
tude to producc an audiblc murmur is uncommon.
Few dogs with isolatcd congenital pulmonic insuffi-
producing turbulencc. Pulmonic and mitral valve in-
ciency have been described.? Thc dliastolic murrmur of
sufficiency are observed in many dogs with a PDA,
isolated pulmonic insufficiency begins in early diastole.
contributing to thie acoustic events.
It is soft, is decrescendo in shape, and is usually accoin-
Alihough deicction of a continuous murmur is
panied by au cjection murmur also locared ovcr thc
highly suggestive of a PDA, it is not a pathognomonic
pulmonic valve arca. The murrmur of pulmonic. insuf-
finding. Pulmonary arteriovenous fistulas produce con-
fciency is sometimes detected in dogs with pulmonic
tinuous murrmurs, as do coronary arteriovenous fistu-
 stenosis or a patent ductus arteriosus. When pulnonic
las. A continuous murmur also results when a coronary
insufficicncy develops as a consequence of pulmonary
artery or ruptured coronary sinus aneurysm comrmuni
hypertcnsion, the murmur is usually, loudlcr, harshcr,
cates directly with the right atrium. All thcse defccts
and longer in duration."
are quite rare. The rnurmur of a PDA is not always
continuous. The development of pulmonary hypcrtcn-
sion can cause attenuation and cventual disappcarance
CONTINUOUS MURMURS
of thc cliastolic murmur.1ts
THE ARTERIAL PULSE AND THE
 The characteristic murmur of a PDA is a continuous
EXTREMITIES
is best heard over the aortic and pulnonic valve re-
and wancs during the cardiac cycle and reachcs peak
Examination of the cxtrermitics is pcrformed to (1)
intcnsity near the timc of the second hcart sound (Fig.
dctcct rcgional or generalized pcrfusion deficits, (2)
FIGURE 5-15
with patent ductus artenriosus. This distincive
continuous murmur is best heard at the left.
heart base. The peak murmur intensiy
occurs just after the T wave of thc
electrocardiogran (eg), near the tine when
scalc recording.
pcg-AO
THE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
63
cvaluate thc patency of the periphcral veins, and (3)
Putsus alternans is idlcntified when thc arterial pulse
asscss the integrity of regional lymphatics. The appar-
alternales between strong and weak pulscs while thc
cnt pulsc sizc and charactcr are dcterimined by the
patient is in sinus rhythm* In cxtremc cases, thc
stroke volumc, rate of cjection, dlistensibility of the
alternating weak pulses becone imperccptible. Pulsus
vascular bed, the periphcral resistancc, the systolic and
alternans is a sign of profound myocardial deprcssion.
diastolic pressures, and rmany other factors (Fig. §16).
In accordance, wc have derected this pulsc pattern
A simall, weak pulse is oftcn found in conditions with
 most oftcn in dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy.
a small stroke volume, incrcased peripheral resistance.
Putsus bigeminus is caused when pulsc strcngth alter-
and narrow pulsc pressure. One common cause of this
typc of pulse is left ventricular failuresz Small or wcak
tricular bigerminy. It is casily identified since the weak
pulscs with a delayed systolic pcak (parvus et tardus) are
pulsc typically follows a shorter interval than the
oftcn noted in dogs with moderate-to-severe SAS.
 stronger pulse.
When thc pulse is large and strong and the contour is 
Pulsus paradoxus is an inspiratory fall in systemic
,  q e pn  ! ru 3siqo
 arlerial pressure cxceeding 10 rnmIlg. This is al or
hamimer," pulse. Such pulscs arc comimonly encoun-
 just bclow the level detectable by physical palpation of
tered in animals with a PlA, peripheral A-V fistula, or
 a peripheral artcry. It is detected most comrmonly in
aortic insufficiency (Corrigan's pulse). Patients with
 dogs with pericardial cffusion and cardiac tamponade.
 nitral insufficiency or VsD often havc abrupt, brisk,
 In this circumstance, wcak pulscs may disappear en-
or jcrky pulses because a greater than normal percent-
tircly for several beats cluring inspiration (chapter 29).
age of the stroke volune is cjccted in carly systolc.
Partial or coinplete obstruction of the peripheral
Various specific arterial puise abnormalities have been
arteries is usually due to systemic thrombocimbolism.
described in humans. Thc normal arterial pulse con-
In dogs, primary causes include bacterial endocarditis,
tour consists of thrce parts--the ascending linb, peak,
hyperadrenocorticism, and certain protcin-losing glo-
and desccnding limb. Aracrotic and dicrotic pulses do
merulopathies (amyloidosis). The most common causc
not occur or are not appreciated in dogs or cats.
of systemic thromboembolism in cats is rnyocardial clis-
Other abnormalities such as pulsus altemans, pulsus
ease, Physical abnormalities rcsulting from vascular ob-
 bigeminus, and pulsus paradoxus can be easily ident-
struction include inability to palpate an arterial pulsc,
fcd in dogs.
coolncss of thc affectedl cxtrcmities, Iuscular nigidity
Normal Pulses
Bounding Pulses
aortic insufficiency
 patent ductus arteriosus
FIGURE 5-16
Weak Pulses
Arterial pulse variations. Palpable abnormalities of
heart failure
aortic stenosis
the arterial pulses are common in dogs and cars
with hcart discase. The top tracing shows thte
contour of the normal femoral artery pulse: tracings
varicty of cardiovascular disorders. PVC, premature
Pulsus Altemans
ventricular complex.
myocardial failure
tachyarrhythmias
Bigeminal Pulses
prematurebeats
PVC
PVC
PVC
Pulsus Paradoxus
pericardial disease
inspiration
expiration
64 EXAMINATION OF THE PATIENT WITH CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
and pain, and pallor or cyamosis of the footpads and 
17. Gompf RE. The clinical approach to heart discase: History
nailbeds. Oblitcrative changes in the femoral arteries of
and physical examination, In Fox PR (ed): Canine and
Feline Cardiology. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1988,
Cavalicr King Charles spaniels with rmitral regurgitation
p 29
have been described,*+ although the etiology is umcx-
18. Pattcrson DF, Detweiler DK. Thc diagnostic significance
 plained.
of spliting of the second hcart sound in the dog. Zenralbl
Veterinarined 10:121, 1963
19. Dctwcilcr DK, Pafterson DF Abnormal heart sounds and
REFERENCES
murmurs of the dog. J Smail Anim Pract 8:193, 1967
20. Eltinger Sl. Isoprotercnol treatmcnt. of atrioventricular
block in the dog.J Am Vet Med Assoc 154:398, 1969
21. Warc W. Abnormal hcart sounds and heart murmurs. In
1. Detweiler DK, Patterson DF, I uginhthil 11. Discascs of thc
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds): A Textbook of Veterinary
cardiovascular system. In Catcott EJ (cd): Caninc Medi-
Internal Medicine. 4th cd. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
 cinc: A Text and Referencc Work, Sania Barabara, Califor-
1995, p 86
nia, Amcrican Veterinary Publishers, Inc., 1968, p 589
22. Rishniw M, Thomas WP, Kicnle RD. Dynamic right mid-
2. Freeman LM. 'The role of cytokines in cardiac cachexia.
ventricular obstruction in 50 cats; Abstract. J Vet Intern
Proc 14th Ann Vet Med Forum, 1996, p 240
Med 10:159, 1996
3. Jacobs, G. Cyanosis. m Etinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds):
23. Bonagua JD, Darkc PGG. Congenital hcart disease. In
Textbook of Veierinary Intcrnal Medicine. 4th ed. Phila-
Etuinger SJ, Fceldman EC (cds): A Textbook of Veterinary
dclphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 192
Internal Medicine. 4th cd, Philadelphia, WB Saunders.
4. Litunan MP. Spontancous systcmic hypcrtension in 24
1995, p 892
cats. J Vct Intern Med 8:79, 1994
24. Sisson D, Thomas WP. Myocardial diseases of the dog
 5. Sisson DD, Knight Dl1, llelinski C, el al. Plasma taurine
and cat, /n Eitingcr SJ, Feldinan EC (eds): lextbook of
conccntrations and M-mode echocardiographic measures
Veterinary Intcrnal Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
in healthy cais and cats with dilatcd cardiomyopathy J Vct
Saumders, 1995, p 995
Intern Med 5:232, 1991
25. Hainlin RL, Smetzer D1., Smith, CR. Interventricular sep-
 6. Constauit J. Bedsidc Cardiology. 3rd ed. Boston, Litdle,
tal defect (Roger's discase) in the: dog. J An Vet Med
Brown & Co., 1985, p 95
Assoc 145:131, 1964
 7. Ewy GA. 1he abdominojugular test: Technique and hemo-
26. Hlamlin Rl., Smith CR, Smetzer DL. Ostium sccundum
dynaunic corrclatcs. Ann Imtcrm Med 109:456, 1988
type interatrial septal defccts in thc dog. J Am Vet Med
8. Selig MB. Stcthoscopic and phonoaudio device: HIistorical
Assoc 143:149, 1963
and fuure perspectives. Am IIcart J 126:262, 1999
27. Tashjian RJ, McCoy JR. Acquired mitral stenosis resulting
9. Butterworth JS, Chassin MR, McGrath R, ct al, Cardiac.
in left atrial dilatation with thrombosis. Cornell Vet
Auscultation. New York, Grunc and Stratton, 1960
50:485, 1960
10. Johnston FD. Synpositum of cardiovascular sound. I. Clin-
 28. Lehmkuhl LB, Warc WA, Bonagura JD. Mitral stenosis in 
ical aspects. Circulation 16:421, 1957
15 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 8:2, 1994
11. Groorn D. The effect of background noisc on cardiac
 29. Sisson D, Thomas WP. Infecive endocarditis of thc aortic.
auscultation. Ain Heart J 52:78l, 1956 
valve in the dog. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 184:570, 1984
12. Derweiler DK, Pattcrson DF. A phonograph record of
30. Sisson D, Luethy M. Thomas WP Ventricular septal defect
heart sounds and murmurs of thc dog. Ann NY Acad Sci
accompanied by aortic rcgurgitafion in 5 dogs. J Am Anim
127:322,1965
Ilosp Assoc 27:441, 1991
13. Ravin A. Auscultation of the Heart. 2nd ed. Chicago. Year
 31. Ilahn AJ. Auscultation of the canine heart. Part IV. Mur-
Book Mcdical Publishers, 1967
muurs. Small Anim Clinician 2:13, 1962
14.Etinger SJ, Suter PF. Canine Cardiology. Philadclphia, WB
32. Goocdwin JK. Pulse alterations. In Etingcr SJ, Fcldman EC
Saumders, 1970, p 12
(eds): A Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicinc. 4th
15. Tilkian AG, Conover MB. Undcrstanding lIcart Soumds
cd. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 89
and Murmurs. 21d cd. Philadclphia, WB Saumders, 1984
 33. D'Cruz I, Cohen HC, Prabhu R, ct al. Echocardiography
16. Perlofl JK H Hcart. sounds and murmus: Physiological
 in mechanical alternans. Circulation 54:97, 1976
mechanisims. hn: Braumwald E (ed): Heart Disease: A Texl-
 34. Buchanan JW. Cardiovascular pathology in Cavalier King
book of Cardiovascular Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia,
Charlcs spanicls. Proc 13th Ain Cofl Vet Intern Med
WB Saunders, 1992. p 43
Forum, 1995, p 292
III
Diagnostic
Methods
Electrocardiogi
MICHAEL S. MILLER
LARRY P. TILLEY
FRANCIS W. K. SMITH, JR.
PHILIP R. FOX
PRINCIPLES OF ELEGTROCARDIOGRAPHY
The clcctrocardiogram (ECG) is a rccord of the average electrical potcn-
tial gencrated in the hcart muscle graphed in voltage and time during the
cardiac cyclc. Intraccllular and extraccllular ionic gradients nove across
semipcrmcable mcmbranes and result in celular transmembrane action
 potentials. The summation or subtraction of these electric charges generated
during the cardiac cyclc results in a vector that acis as a dipole. It is measured
by the ECG at the body surface. Extracardiac factors may influence thc
ECG, including body tissues with different. conductive propertics and body
structurc.
 Normally, each ECG scgment is sequentially generated from a specific
cardiac region. The P wave, QRS compicx, and T wavc arc thc rccognizablc
deflcctions of the ECG trace and indicate atrial depolarization (P), ventricu-
lar depolarization (QRS), and ventricular repolarization (T) (Fig. 6-1).
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES
In 1856, Kolliker and Muller*, * demonstratcd that the bcating heart
gencrates clectric current. In thc experiment, a frog muscle rhythmically
twitched whcn in contact with a contracting ventricle. In 1887, Wallert used
a capillary elcctromcter to mcasurc current associated with cardiac clcctrical
activity from thie body surfacc. Howcver, accurate quantitative measuremcnts
 of cardiac clcctric activity awaited Einthoven's string galvanometer in 1902.5
Einthoven also devclopcd the bipolar triaxial lead system and amed the
spccific waveforms produced on the electrocardiogram "P-QRs-T com-
plexes." Although his 600-lb instrumcnt was used for research, its clinical
application devclopcd rapidly. Sir Thomas Lewis used Einthoven's technol-
 ogy and cxpanded it in clinical cardiology. ILewis wrote the first authoritative
 book on clinical elcctrocardiography in 1913. Wilson and colleagucs devcl-
oped thc conccpt of a central terminal in 1933,7 which led to the devclop
ment. of unipolar clcctrocardiography& 'Thc central terminal provides an
indifferent clectrode with small potential change throughout the cardiac cy-
cle.
Although Waller and Einthoven had rccorded canine ECGs, Norr? was thc
first to approach electrocardiography in the dog clinically. Veterinarians
cxpandcd clinical and research applications for clectrocardiography in the
1950s through 1990s.10-21
67
68  DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
R1
FIGURE 6-1
Electrocardiographic waveforns
indicating depolarization and
repolarization corrclated with
mechanical cvents of the cardiac
cycle. (Copyright 1968. Novartis.
Reprinted with permission fro
Clinical Symposia, Vol. 10/1,
illustrated by Frank Netter. MD.
All rights reserved.)
diastole
systole
diastole
RECORDING THE
and III (Fig. 63), unipolar limb lcads aVk, aVi, and
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
aV, (Fig. 6-4), and unipolar prccordial (thoracic)
lcads CVLL (V), CVLU (V), CVsRL. (rV), and Vo-
The ECG is a moving rccord of the deflcctions gcn-
Right lateral recumbency is the standard body posi
erated by thc clcctrocardiograph stylus calibratcd in
tion for ECG rccording in thic cupneic animal (Fig.
6-5). Flectrodes should be placed just above the olcc-
voltage (vertical axis) and time (horizontal axis). Elcc-
trocardiographic electrodes (leads) sample cardiac po-
ranon and over the patellar ligaments for bipolar stan-
tentials at the body surfacc. Thesc arc measured by
dard and augmented unipolar limb leads. Alcohol or
the clectrocardiograph (galvanometer) and recorded
conducting paste is applied to the skin and electrodes.
on standardized graph paper inscribed with l-mm
If tachypnea or dyspnea is evident, the ECG should bc
spaced horizontal and vertical lines21-23 (Fig. 6-2). Thc
clcctrocardiograph can combine the electrodes on thic
TABLE 6-1
 body (right and left arms, left leg, and exploring elec-
Electrocardiograph Lead Systems
trode) into the specific combinations or leads (Table
6-1). They include bipolar standard limb leads I, [l,
 Bipolar standard limh leads
Lead I: right arm (-) compared with left arm (+)
Lead II: right arin (- ) compared with left leg ( +)
(t) XoI yoI ym paegduo ( ) uue yaI i pea1
Angimented uipolar limh leads
Lcad aVg: right arm ( +) compared with left arm and lefi Ieg
（-）
Iead aVi,: left am ( +) counpared with right. arn and left leg (
Iead aV: lefl leg (+ ) compared with right and lefl arms (-)
0.5 mV
Spccial leads
I mm =0.1mV
Unipolar prccordial chest lcads
Lcad CV,RI. (rV): fth right intercostal space near edge ol
-10.02→
slernan
Lead CV,LI. (V): sixth left intercostal space near cdge of
SECOND
sternr
Lead CV.,IU (Va): sixth lef. intercostal space at costochondral
O.IO SECOND
 junction
Lead Vigi over dorsal spinous process of seventh thoracic
FIGURE 6-2
veTlehra
Electrocardiographic grid lines. At the standard paper spced of' 50
Modified orthogonal lead systems
nm/scc, the interval between two heavily drawn vertical lincs is
Lead X: lead I: right (-—) to) left ()
0.10 second andl between two fine veruical lines, 0.02 second. At.
Lead Y: lead aVe, cranial (-) to caudal ( +)
normal standardization, 10 mm (10 simall boxes) = 1.0 mV, s0
Lcad Z: lead Vios; ventral (-) to dorsal ( + )
cach srall vertical box = 0.l nV. (From Tiley LP: Fscntias of
Canine and Feline Electrocardiography. Srd ed. Philadelphia,
From Iilley LP. Essentials of Canine and Felinc Flkectrocardiography. lnter.
Lca & Febiger, 1992, with permission.)
pretation and Managcmem. 3nd ed. Philadelplia, Lea & Febiger. 1992.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
69
FIGURE6-3
Bipolar standard leadsI,II,and II1.(From Tilley
LP:Essentials of Canine andFeline
Electrocardiography.3rded.Philadelphia,Lea&
Febiger,1992,with permission.)
LEAD1
LEADⅡI
LEAD Ⅲ
FIGURE6-4
AugmentedunipolarlmbleadsaVR,aVL,and
aVF.(From Tilley LP:Essentials of Canine and
FelineElectrocardiography.3rded.Philadelphia,
Lea &Febiger,1992,with permission.)
LEADaVR
LEAD aVL
LEAD aVF
FIGURE6-5
Right lateralrecumbency positionforrecording the
ECG in the eupneic animal.Proper electrode
placement is illustrated. (From Tilley LP:Essentials of
Canine and Feline Electrocardiography.3rd ed.
Philadelphia,Lea&Febiger,1992,with permission.)
70DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
recordcd with the animal standing or in a stcrnal
nizcd on the ECG tracing as a regular sequence of
position to reduce thc stress of examination. Precor-
fne, sharp, vertical oscillations. Thc placcment of a
dial chest lcads may be helpful in confrming cardiac.
hand on the animal's thorax or blowing into the ani-
chambcr cnlargement; in cmphasizing the deflcctions
mal's facc may aid in minimizing rmuscular tremor and
 of the standard limb lcads (c.g., it. may bc important
respiratory motion. Artifact may also bc reduced by
if P waves are not clcarly visiblc); and for confirming
 positioning the clectrode clips correctly, using appro.
data rccorded on the othcr limb leads. Orthogonal
priate conductive gel, and preventing the electrodcs
lcads are oricnted perpendicular to eachi other and
or wires from moving during respiration.
vicw the heart in differen1 planes (leads X, Y, and Z).21
The X lead mcasures the frontal plan directed from
right to lcft and is approximatcd by lead 1. The Y lcad
VECTORCARDIOGRAPHY
axis indicates a midsagittal planc orientcd craniocau-
dally and is approximatcd by lcad aV. Thc Z lead
The vectorcardiogram is anothcr method of rc-
rcprcsents the transverse planc dirccted ventral to dor-
 cording electric potentials generated from the cardiac
sal and is approximated by lcad Via. The orthogonal
cyclc (Fig. 6-6). Using a cathode ray oscilloscopc, it
lcads can be used to generate a vectorcardiogram (Fig.
may bc projected in the frontal, horizontal, and sagittal
6-6). Orthogonal lead systcms (McFee, Schmidt, and
planes. In contrast to an ECG lead that records instan-
Frank lead systems) require utilization of multiple elcc-
taneous vectors (i.e., clectric potentials) in a singlc
trodes at prccise body locations.
axis, the veclorcardiogram rccords electric cvents si-
Technical or mcchanical problems that are superin-
multaneously in two pcrpendicular axes as a loop re-
 poscd on and distort the normal P-QRS-T complcxcs
cording.3 19, 24. 2 Vectorcardiography is uscful in teach-
arc known as artifact. For accurate ECG intcrprctation,
it is csscntial to rccognizc artifact and eliminatc thic
practice.
sourcc. Electric 60-cycle "noise"’ may be duc to poor
clectric grounding (of the clcctrocardiograph, the ani-
mal, or table on which thc animal is positioned), or
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIG
adjacent lights, or clectrical cquipment. It is rccog-
PRINCIPLES
llad
TRANSMEMBRANE ACTION
POTENTIALS
Fighl
A myocardial cell transmcmbrane action potential
Frontal
may be divided into four recognizable phases'. 2-27
(Fig. 6-7). A negative resting potential, termed phase.
orsal
4, is characterized by an intraccllular-to-extracellular
rig
clectrochemical gradicnt of approximately - 90 mV.
left
The rapid action potential upstroke, or phasc O, repre-
1
sents cellular depolarization due to rapid movement. of
1
extraccllular-to-intraccllular sodium ions through fast
sodium channels. Phasc 1 is termcd thic ovcrshoot and
Horizontal
ventral
is causcd by exccssive sodium ion cntry into the cells.
As sodium influx stops, the mcmbrane potential drops
craniad
toward 0 mV. The slow calcium ion channcls permit
extracellular-to-intracellular calcium flow causing thic
platcau, or phasc 2 of the action potential. During the
platcau phasc, thc cardiac ccll cannot be stimulated
(refractory period). This allows for coordination between
cellular clectrical and mechanical functions. At the
Sagittal caudad
cnd of the platcau, the slow intracellular calcium char-
FIGURE 6-6
nels closc, potassium flow out of the ccil persists, and
intraccllular ncgativity, or phase 3, is re-established
Vectorcardiogram rerorded from a dog with right ventricular
hypcrtrophy causcd by hcartworm discasc. Initial ventricuar forces
(termed "*repolarization'). The cell at. the resting po-
are prolonged and oriented toward the right (0.014 sccond).
tential can thcn be activated by an clcctrical or chemi-
Sealar tine lines-0.1 second; teardrops-0.002 second. (Froin
Etinger S]. Suter PE: Canine Cardiology. Philadlphia, WB
cal stimulus and is said to be excitable (chapter 16)
Saders, 1970. with permission.)
 Although transmembrane action potentials of atrial
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
71
Miwivolts
and surface ECG wavcforms arc describcd ncxt and
Overshoot
Plateau
Repolar-
Phase
may be rclatcd to cardiac or extracardiac disorders.
ization
The ECG waveforms arc scalar records of cardiac
Time
clectrical potentials as projected at the body surface.
-20-
23. 24 A scalar quantity has magnitude and sense (i.c.,
N
1401
 positive or negative), but no dircction. A vector quan-
Restoration
tity has magnitude, scnse, and direction. It rnay be the
Resting
of lonic
rcsult of two or more scalar forces (e.g., wo ECG
80Potentlal
lcads) or multiple vector forces. Thc surface ECG is a
-90-
rccording of the mathematical summation of elcctric
Intracelular
activity from all individual rnyocylcs. 'Ihis electric activ-
Fuid Space
ity is modificd by thc spalial relationships of cach
SarcDlor
myocyte to each other, the time sequence of activation
Extracehular
of thc cardiac cells (i.c., they do not all depolarize
Na
Ca*
Fkuid Space
SowCaCun
simultancously), and the characteristics of the body as
chanriels
Sodiurm
an clectric feld.22. 25 For cxamplc, the first and last
Potassium
Pump
ventricular myocardial cells that are stimulated depo-
FIGURE 6-7
larizc asynchronously. A difference in clectric potential
occurs during this depolarization period that results in
Phascs and ionic gralients of the cardiac cell transmeinbrane
ac.tior potential. (From Lipman BS, Dunn M.Massie E: Clinical
the QRS complex.
Flectrocardiography. 7th cd. Chicago, Year Book Medical
Publishers, 1984, with pennission.)
EQUIVALENT DIPOLE THEORY
and ventricular fibers are similar, they differ from pace
A review of the dipole hypothcsis can provide a
makcr cell transmcmbranc potentials (sec Figs. 16-1,
thcoretic basis for clinical ECG interpretation. A single
16-2). Pacemaker cclls posscss automaticity character
pair of cqual and opposite charges that are in close
izcd by a low rcsting membranc potcntial; slow activa-
proximity to each other conslitutc an elcctrical genera-
tion during phase O; short action potential duration;
tor, termcd a dipole. If the dipolec is immcrscd in a
 no overshoot; and spontancous depolarization during
conducting medium (c.g., body fluids), the dipolc will
phasc 4 until the threshold potential is reached. Auto-
gencrate an clectric field throughout the conducting
maticity is the capability of a cell to depolarizc sponta-
medium,2. 24--7 The clcctric potential mcasured at any
ncously, rcach threshold potential, and initiate an ac-
position in thc elcctric ficld depends on the position
tion potential. 2 Paccmaker cells havc a slowcr
of the recording clcctrode with respect to thc positive
upstrokc and lowcr amplitude than myocardial cells.
and ncgative charges of the dipole. If any two points
Conductivity is the ability of a cell's action potential to
(electrodes) with a differcnt potential in the electric
produce clectric current that stimulates adjacent cell
field arc connccted by a superior electric conductor
 membranes to their threshold potcntial and to depo-
(c.g, the ECG lead wires), the potential differencc
larize.
betwecn the electrodes will result. in a flow of curren1
Othcr cardiac tissues, including cclls in the atria,
through the wires. This clectromotive force, or voltage,
mitral and tricuspid valvcs, distal atriovcntricular (AV)
is the quantity mcasured by the surface ECG.
nodal and AV junctional tissues, and the His-Purkinje
Numcrous surface dipoles are formed by the individ-
systcm, arc capable of automaticity. Normally, these
ual myocardial cclls and musclc bundles, and thcy
latent paccmakcr cells rcach threshold later than do
move during the depolarization-rcpolarization process
sinus node cells and thus are dischargcd bcfore they
(Fig. 6-8). They create an clectric ficld in thc sur-
aulomatically depolarize. Propertics of automaticity,
rounding body tissues and can bc representcd by vec-
excitability conducuivity, and refractoriness are im-
tors that point toward the positive chargc.
 portant in arrhythmia gencsis and therapy.
Dipoles differ in orientation and polarity because of
thcir varied spatial relationships in thc multidimen-
 sional hcart. At any givcn instant during ventricular
depolarization or repolarization, all the dipoles can be
THE SURFACE ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
intcgrated and a resultant dipolc or vector recorded
by the electrocardiograph.
Abnormalities in cellular depolarization result in
This equivalent dipolc thcory assumes that electric
QRS complex alterations. Disturbances in repolariza-
 potentials a1 the body surfacc can be represented at
tion arc reflccicd by changes in thc ST scgment or T
any instant. by a singlc resultant dipolc vector.? Al-
wave. Thcsc relationships betwcen cellular changcs
though ovcrsimplified, this concept is applicable to the
72
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
node locatcd at the junction of the cranial vena cava
and right atrium. A depolarization (activation) wave
sprcads through specialized internodal tracts to acti-
vate first the right and then the left atrium. The car-
diac impulse then slows drarmatically while traversing
the specialized conduction tissuc of the AV node and
AV junctional tissue, This dclay facilitates more effec-
tive synchronized atrial and ventricular contractions.
When the impulsc cmcrges from the AV junctional
tissue, its vclocity incrcases through the bundle of
I His, right bundle branch, common left bundle branch,
anterior and posterior fascicles of the common left
bundle branch, and Purkinje network. The cardiac
impulsc cmerges from the Purkinje network and then
sprcads by cellto-cell conduction through ventricular
myocytes.25, 27
The P wave reflects atrial depolarization and prc-
cedes the QRS complex. The Q wave is the first nega-
tive wave in the ventricular depolarization complex.
T'he R wave is the first positive wavc, and the S wave is
the irst negative wavc following the R wave. Collec-
tivcly, thcse waves are called the QRS complex. Ventric-
FIGURE 6-8
ular recovery (rcpolarization) is represented by the
The clectric potential of the heart can be determined al an
'I' wave."1
external point. and resolved into a single clectric force or vector
thatl acts as a dipole. One half of the dipolc or electric field is
positivend ialfgvend 
attached to the skin on the legs, cardiac elecrice activity can bc
APPROACH TO
reeorded by an electrocardiograph. (From Tiley LP: Essenrials of
Canine and FelneFlectrocardography rd ed.Philadlpha,
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
L.ca & Febiger. 1992, with permission.)
CLINICAL INDICATIONS
surfacc ECG. Tlie resultant force registered in any
given bipolar lcad is in dircct proportion to the projec.
Elcctrocardiography is clinically uscful (l) to diag-
tion of the instartancous vector on the axis of the lead
nosc cardiac arrhythmias, (2) as an adjunct lo detcct
and is inverscly proportional to the cube of the dis-
cardiac enlargement (dilation or hypcrtrophy), and
tance between tlie dipole and each of the lead elec-
(3) to indicate certain clectrolyte, acid-base, systemic,
trodes. This vector concept was used by Einthoven to
or metabolic disorderg2u 21, 28 (Tablc 6-2).
determine the mean electric axis of the cxtremity lcads
(1, 1I1, II1).
The dipole theory has becn criticizcd because hcart
THE ECG AS PART OF THE CARDIAC
muscle is anisotropic (i.e., docs not conduct homogc-
DATA BASE
neously in all directions). Morc accuratc analyscs of
body surfacc potentials utilizc thc clcctric ficld pro-
duced from epicardial potcntials. Maps dcscribing po-
Effcctive management of arrhythmias (chapters 18
to 20), heart failure (chaptcr 12), and a variety off
tential distribution of thc body surfacc (isopotential
  se so   sss
lincs) can be constructed2 but are not generally used
requires accurate ECG assessment.21 29
 in clinical vcterinary scttings.
Cardiac lesions do not always cause or correlate with
ECG abnormalitics. Thc clcctrocardiograph may be
normal cven in the facc of advanced cardiovascular
TRANSCRIPTION OF THE
discasc or hcart failure.$0 Other factors may obscurc
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
ECG evidencc of cardiac chamber enlargement, such
as body conformation or the dampening effects of
Normally, atrial and ventricular contractions arc pre
pericardial or pleural effusion or obesity. Morcover,
ceded by electrir activity that initiates myocyte cxcita-
a morphologically normal heart may devclop lcthal
tion-contraction couplingl (Fig. 6-9). The cardiac im-
arrhythmias in a variety of disorders (chaptcr 33).
pulse originates in the paccmaking cclls of the sinus
The ECG may be useful in cvaluating animals with
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
73
FIGURE 6-9
Sequence of clectrical impulsc conduetion
and cardiac cham:ber activation as it rclatcs
to) the clcctrocardiogran. (From Tilley LP:
Essentials of Canine and Feline
Electrocardiography, 3rd cd. Philtadelphia.
Lea & Fcbiger. 1992, with permission.)
metabolic discases such as endocrinopathics (e.g-,
before evaluation of anECG.However,the ECG has limita-
hypoadrenocorticism, thyrotoxicosis, phcochromocy-
tions and is onty a laboratory test that must be interpreted in
toma) or systcmic disorders (c.g., shock, ncoplasia),31. 32
conjunction with the entire data base (i.c., history, physical
Severe electrolyte disorders, acid-basc disturbanccs, or
cxamination, radiographs, clinical pathology profile,
 mctabolic changes may affcct myocyte electrochemical
and echocardiogram). 3
gradicnts, altering depolarization or repolarization
with associated ECG abnormalitics. Electrocardio-
LIMITATIONS OF THE
graphic alterations in such cases may reflect. systemic
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
and not organic heart diseasc. Thus, it is csscntial to
correlate the ECG with other diagnostic tests.
The major shortcoming of the ECG is its lack of
 An ECG is an essential diagnostic step in cvaluating
scnsitivity for inferring cardiac chambcr enlargement
heart discasc and is required to help individualize
 or hypertrophy by changes in the P-QRs-1 voltagc. In
therapy. No aninal should be given cardiac medication
vcterinary medicine this problcm is complicated by
 commcrcial clectrocardiographs themselves. These in-
strumcnts are designed with inlernal clcctrical filters
TABLE 6-2
 Clinical Indications for Electrocardiography
contaminating the desired ECG signal bascd upon the
spectrum of frequcncies according to human spccif-
ArThythimias
Cardiac umonitoring (ancsthesia; critical carc)
cations. Thc feline ECG, for cxample, has substantial
Paccmaker dysfunclion
Heart chainbcr enlargement.
 to humans, in whorm most of the ECG signal occurs at.
Drug effects or toxicities
less than 100 IIz. Commercial elcctrocardiographs are
Myocardial discase
Congenital heart disease 
manufactured to attcnuate signals of less than 1o0 Hz
Acquired valvular heart disease
minimally and attenuate signals above 100 Hz maxi-
Pericardial disease
Hcart failurc
mally. Thus, they significantly attenuate P-QRS-T am-
Fndkoerine disorders (c.g., thyrotoxicosis)
plitudes of the fcline ECGs These effects havc not
Electrolye imbalance (potassiwn, calcium)
been widely investigated in other spccics.
Acid-basc abnormalitics
Shock
Dyspnea
ANALYZING THE
Syncope or seizures
Heart murmurs
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
Gallop rhythuus
Cyanosis
Geriatric or presurgical workup
 A mcthodical interpretive approach to the ECG is
Systemir. diseascs
mandatory to avoid overlooking vital information. The
74
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
initial evaluation involves asscssing hcart. ratc, rhythm,
3. Recognition of QRS complexes and cvaluating their
and mean electrical axis.2l
configuration, uniformity, and regularity should
then be performed.
4. Anabysis of the P-QRS relationship is thc final stcp.
CALCULATING HEART RATE
 Recognition of P wavcs is crucial in determining
this relationship. Doubling thc ECG scnsitivity may
Hcart rate should be determined from the lead II
 bc helpful to magnify P waves. Precordial chest or
rhythrn strip. Both atrial and ventricular rates arc cal-
 csophagcal lcads may demonstrate P waves that are
culated since they may vary in some arrhythmias.
unrccognizable in other leads. Following calcula-
Whicn the basic rhythm is irrcgular, the ventricular rate
tion of hcart ratc and analysis of rhythm, all ampli-
can be estimated by counting thc number of cycles
tudes, durations, and P-QRST intervals are deter-
o Aq suid pe sos g um (eanun a)
mincd from thc lcad I rhythm strip.
When the rhythm is regular, heart rate may be calcu-
lated as follows:
MEASURING THE P-QRS-T COMPLEX
1. At a paper specd of 50 mm/sec, the width of onc
small calibration box represents 0.02 sec (see Fig.
6-2). Therefore, the numbcr of small boxes equal.
Normal canine and feline ECG valucs arc listcd in
Table 6-3.21 Duration of the P wave is measurcd from
ing 1 minute is determincd by dividing 0.02 sec
its bcginning to the end; amplitude is measured from
into 60 seconds, or 3000. Thus, hcart ratc/minute
thc isoclectric base line to the maximum height of the
may be calculated by dividing thc numbcr of small
boxcs within one R-R interval into 3000. At a paper
P wave. Thc P-R interval is measured from the begin-
spccd of 25 mm/sec, one small calibration box
ning of the P wave to the bcginning of the QRS com-
plcx. QRS complcx duration is measured from the
cquals 0.04 sec, and heart rale is calculated by divid-
beginning of the Q wave (if present) or R wave (if no
ing thc number of small boxes within onc R-R
Q wave) to the cnd of thc S wave (if present) or to
interval into 1500.
where the R wavc deflection crosscs thc basclinc. The
2. A large calibration box comprises five small boxcs.
 QRS amplitude represents the sun of cxcursions from
At a paper specd of 50 mm/sec (see Fig. 6-2), it is
equal to 0.02 scc times 5, or 0.1 sec; at a paper
the positive R wave and negative S wavc. Amplitudes
speed of 25 mim/sec, it cquals 0.2 scc. Thus, the
of the Q. R, and S waves are measured from the base-
linc to the point of their maximal excursion. The S-T
number of large boxcs cqualing 1 minute is deter-
intcrval is the segment between the cnd of thc QRS
mined by dividing 0.1 scc into 60 scconds, or 600.
complcx and beginning of the 'I wave. The Q-T intcr-
'Therefore, the number of large boxcs within one
val represcnts thc distance between the beginning of
R-R interval divided into 600 givcs thc hcart rate
thc Q wave and end of the T wave. Normal canine and
/wu cz ny 'poads jaded sas/uu oe ne amuu jad
feline ECGs are illustrated in Figures 6-10 and 6-1l.
sec paper speed, heart rate is calculatcd by dividing
thc number of large boxes within onc R-R intcrval
into 300.
MEAN ELECTRICAL AXIS
Einthoven introduced thc equilateral trianglc con-
INTERPRETING CARDIAC RHYTHM
cept. to help analyzc the ECG (Fig. 6-12). Based on
three limbs forming thc apexcs of an cquilateral trian-
After calculating hcart rate, the heart rhythm should
then be evaluatcd. Calipcrs arc hclpful for making
gle with the heart situated in the ccnter, the sides of
the triangle are analogous to standard limb lcads (1,
interval measurcmcnts. All rccorded leads must be
[I, and 1If). During ventricular depolarization-repolar-
examined for arrhythmias. Rhythm cvaluation may
ization, many dipoles contribute to the clcctric ficld
proceed as follows:2 21. 27
 and may bc represcnted by a single dipole or vector at
1. General inspection will show whether the tracing
any given instant. The mcan electrical axis is the aver-
shows characteristics of an arrhythmia or represents
agc of all vectors that can be projected onto Eintho-
normal sinus rhythm. If an arrhythmia is observed,
ven's trianglc. By transposing the three sides of the
one must determinc whcther it is occasional, fre-
triangle so that thcir centcrs are supcrimposed on one
quent, repctitive, regular, or irregular.
another (Fig. 6-13), the triaxial reference system is
 2. identification of P wavcs plays a crucial role in
formcd. Adding thc unipolar limb lead axes to the
rhythm evaluation. It is important to determine
triaxial system forms the hexaxial lcad system.21. s3
whether the P waves are uniform, multiform, rcgu-
The mean etectrical axis (MEA) refcrs to thc avcrage
lar, irregular, associated with the QRS complex, or
direction of thc clectrical potcntial gcncratcd by the
abscnt.
heart during the entire cardiac cycle.2 It is uscful for
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
75
TABLE 6-3
 Normal Values for the Canine and Feline Electrocardiogram
Rate
Mcasurements (Contimued)
Dog
Cat
70 to 160 beats/ min for adult dogs
P wavc
60 to t40 bcats/ min for giant. breeds
Width: maximum, 0.04 sccond
Up to 180 beats/ min for toy brceds
1lcight: inaximum, 0.2 1mV
sorddnd ao urus / swaq 0zs on dn
P-R interval
Cat
Width: 0.05 to 0.09 second
Range: 120 1o 240 beats / imin
QRS complex
Mean: 197 bcats/ min
Width: maximum, 0.04 second
Height of R wave: maximum, 0.9 nV
Rhythm
S-T segment
[og
 No rmarked depression or elevation
Normal sinus rhythm
T wave
Can be positive, negative, or biphasic—rnost often positive
Sinus arrhythrnia
Maximun ampliude: 0.3 mV
Wandering SA pacermaker
Q-T interval
Cat
Width: 0.12 to 0.18 sccond al normal hrart rate (rangc, 0.07
Normal sinus rhythm
to 0.20 second); varies with hcart rate (laster rates.
Sinus tachycardia (physiologice reactiou to exciteinent)
shortcr Q-T intervals: and vice versa)
Measurements (lead I. 50 mm/ sec, I cm = 1 mV)
Mean Electrical Axis (frontal plane)
Dog
Dog
P wavc
+40 to +100 dcgrccs
Width: naxinum, 0.04 second
Cat
maxinun, 0.05 sccond in giant breeds
0 to +160 degrccs
IIeight: maximum.0.4 mV
I-R intcrval
Precordial Chest Leads (valucs of special importance)
Width: 0.06 to 0.13 second
Dog
QRS complex
CV, Rl. (rV): T wave positive, R wave nol grrater than S3 mV
Width: 1maximum, 0.05 sccontdl in small breeds
CV,LI. (Vs): S wave not greater than 0.8 mV, R wave not greater
maximun, 0.06 secontdl in large breeds
Height of R wave*: maximun. 3.0 mV in large brceds
than 3.0 nV*
CV, LU (V4): S waves not greater than 0.7 mV, R wave not
aximum, 2.5 mV in small breeds
ST' segment
greater than 3.0 mV*
Viu: negative QRS coinplex, I' wave negative cxcept in
No depression: not more than 0.2 mV
No elevation: not more than 0.15 inV
(hihuahua
'T' wavc
Cat
Can be positivc, negalive. or hiphasic 
CVLL. (V): R wave not grcater than 1.0 mV
Not greater than one fourth amplitude of R wave
(V,1.L (V.): R wave not greatcr than 1.0 mV
Q-T interval
Vo: T wave negative; R/ Q not greater than 1.0
Widthi: 0.15 to 0.25 second at normal heart rale: varies with
hcart ratc (faster rates have shorter Q-T intervals and vice
versa)
#Not vaid for thin. dleep-chestcedl dogs undler 2 years of age.
T
aVR
aVL
aVF
CV5RL
CV6LL
CV6L.U
Vo
新利
！
3
FIGURE 6-10
Normal canine electrocardliogran ilustrating the bipolar standard leads (1, 1l. III), augmcnted
unipolar Jirnb lcadls (aVR, aVL. aVF), and uipolar precordial chest leads (CV,RL, CVLI., CV,LU.
and Via). Mean electrical axis, + 60 degrces. (From Tilley I.P: Essentials of Canine and Feline
Elecurocardiography. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lca &: Febigcr, 1992, with permission.)
76
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
1
aVR
VE
::1
FIGURE 6-11
Normal feline electrocardiogram illustraing the bipolar standard leads (I, [l. I1), the augmented
unipolar linh lcads (aVR, aVT. aVF), and the unipolar prccordial chest lcais (CV,RL. CVLL,
volrages, which are normal in the cat. (From Tilley LP: Essentials of Canine and Feline
Flectrocardiography. 3rd cd. Philadclphia, Lea & Febiger, 1992. with permisson.)
suggesting chamibcr cnlargement or intraventricular
dicular lines are then drawn from these points to their
conduction defects. The MEA 1may be applied to atrial
intcrscction. A line drawn Irom the center of the axial
depolarization (P wave) or ventricular rcpolarization
reference sysiem 1o this intersection represents the
(T wave). Traditionally, it has bcen applicd to ventricu-
angle (in degrees) of the QRS axis. (2) Simplcr (and
lar depolarization (QRS complex). Using the six limb
less accurate), examine all standard and augmented
lcads and the hcxaxial reference system, the MEA in
limb leads and identify the one that is isoelcctric (i.c.,
thc frontal planc can be calculated. In the normal
thc algcbraic sum of the QRS deflections is zero). 'The
       
degrees, In the normal feline hcart, the axis lies be-
isoelectric lead toward its net (positivc or ncgative)
1ween 0 and + 160 degrees.2
vallle.
I'here are several mcthods of determining 1he MEA.
(1) The mos1 accurate (and most tinc-consuming)
involves measuriug the net amplitudes in lead I and
90°
lead Ill and plotting these vectors on the triaxial refer-
 ence system (marked off from the zero point). Perpen-
FIGURE 6-12
(A) The cquilateral triaunglc of Einthovcn. forined by leads 1, 1.
FIGURE 6-13
and II. (B) The triaxial lead referencc system is produced by
The hexaxial lead system in Figure 6-12 can be cncloscd in a
transposing the thrce sides of the triangle (leads I, II, IIl) to a
circle and used to determine direction and magnitude of the
common cen tral point of zero potential. This triaxial lcad system is
cardiac electrical axis. Thc positivc polc of cach lcad is indicatcd
used to fornulate the hexaxial lead system. (Fron Tilley LP:
by a small circle. (From Tilley LP: Essentials of Canine and Felinc
Esentials fCanine and FclineFlectrocardiographyrdd.
Electrocardiography. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Iea & Febiger, 1992.
Philadelphia, 1 ea & Febiger, 1992. with permission.)
with permission.)
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
77
THE ABNORMAL
TABLE 6-5
Classification of Cardiac Arrhythmias
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
Normal sinus impuise forination
Nomal sinus rhythm
Sinus arrhythmia
The frst and mos1 imporlan1 step in ECG iuterpreta-
Wandering sinus paccmaker
tion is diferentiating between normal and abnormal
Disturbances of sinus inpulse formation
wavcforms.21. 27. s# One 1hen assesscs the various abnor-
Sinus arrest
Sinus bradycardia
mal ECG parttcrns and corrclates theni with know
Sinus tachycardia
struclural, physiologic, and hemodynamic conditions.
Disturbances of suprave ntricular impulsc formation
When cardiomegaly is suggested by ECG abnormali-
Atrial premature conplexes
ties. thoracic radiography, echocardiography, or occa-
Atrial iachycardia
Atrial flutter
sionally angiocardiography may be uscd for confirma-
Atrial fibrillation
tion and further assessment. A simple checklist for
Atrioventricular junctional rhythun
ECG evaluation (Table 6-4) and cardiac arrhythmia
Disturbances of ventricular impulse formation
Ventricular prernature cornplexes
classification (Table 65) may be instructive.
Ventricular tachycardia
All ECGs depicied herc are rccorded from lead 
Ventricnlar asystole
opnydun unm sas/uu os fo paads radnd e e papiooa1
Ventricular Gbrillation
 Disturbances of irnpulse conduction
measured at I cm = I mV, unless otherwise noted.
Sinoatrial block
Persisicnt atrial standstill ("'silent' atrium)
Atrial standstill (hyperkalemia)
ATRIAL AND VENTRICULAR
Ventricular pre-excitation
First-degrcc AV block
ENLARGEMENT
Second-degree AV block
Completc AV hlock (third-degrec)
Bundle branch blocks
LIMITATIONS OF ELECTROCARDIOGRAPIIY
Disturbances of bouh impulsc formation and inpulse conduction
There is some brced variaion in the duration and
Sick sinus syndrone
Ventricular pre-excitation and the Wolf-Parkinson-Whitc (WPW)
voltage of P waves amd QRS complexes. Often, P waves
syndrorne
and QRS complcxcs may be wider in giant canine
Atrial premature coinplexes with aberrant ventricular conduction
 breeds than mean values published for dogs in general.
Escape rhythms
Less variation occurs in cats.
 Junetional ecxcape rhythins
Ventricular cscape rhythms (idioventricular rhythm)
The ECG voltage criteria used to infer cardiomegaly
TABLE 6-4
have inherent lirmitations. For example, linb lead and
Evaluation of the ECG for Arrhythmias-A Checklist
 especially precordial lead voltages arc influenced by
the distance between the clecirodes and thc hear1,
1. Are P waves present? If not, is there other evidence of atrial
Also, voltage criteria may not be as valid for young.
activiy (flunicr or fibrillatory waves)?
cmaciated, or narrow-chestcd animals. Lastly, condi-
counplexes?
tions such as pericardial and thoracic cffusions, pncu-
a. Whal are thc atrial and vcntricular rates?
 mothorax, obesity, and even the type of commercial
b. Is a P wave related lo cach QRS coinplex?
C. Docs a P wave precede or follow the QRs conplex?
electrocardiograph used may reduce the amplitude of
d. Is the P-R or K-R interval constant?
QRS deflections recorded at the body surface.
C. Are the P-R and R-R intervals rcgular or irrcgular?
3. Are the P wavcs and QRS coinplexes normal and of sinilar
morphology:
RIGIIT ATRIAL ENLARGEMENT
4. Are the QiRS complexes wide (grcater than 0.05 sec) or normal?
(Fig. 6-14: see also Fig. 6-16)
5. Is the ventricular rhythm regular or irregular?
6. Are durations and ainplitudes of P. P-R, QRS, and Q-T intervals
Thc P wave is increascd in both amplitude and
7. Arc there paustes or prcmalure complcxes that rcquire
duration. Causes include chronic respiratory disease
explanation?
(e.g., chronic bronchitis; collapsed trachea in the
8. What is the significance of the arrhythmias in context. with the
dog); certain congenital hcart defects (c.g., tricuspid
clinical selting?
a. Is a danger posed by the arrhythinia?
valve dysplasia or slenosis); 1ight ventricular volume
b. Should attempts be made directly to terininate the
overload (e.g., tricuspid regurgitation): and cardiomy
arrhythinia?
opathies.
c. Can an underlying disorder he corrected. thereby abolishing
the arrhythmia?
ECG Characteristics
Frot Fox PR, Kaplan P, Feline arrhythmias. Ix Bonagura JD (ed), Conem-
1. P-wave amplitude is greater than 0.4 mV in the dog
(> 0.2 mV in the cat).
78
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
ECG Characteristics
1. P waves are increased in duration (called P mitrale):
CANINE-
->0.04 second (> 0.05 scc in giant
breeds);
FELINE -—>0.04 second (somc investigators usc
a cut-olf of 0.035 sec).
2. P wavc is oficn notched (best visualized in lead II)
from supcrimposition of asynchronous right and
left atrial conduction. However, P-wave notching by
itsclf is not abnormal unless the P wave is cxccs-
sivcly widc.
BIATRIAL ENLARGEMENT
(Fig. 6-14.4)
Causes include mitral and tricuspid valvular imsuffi-
ciency, cardiomyopathics, and various congenital hear1
defects, cspecially those that occur in combinations.
Thesc changes could also occur in right atrial enlarge
ment with an intra-atrial defec1 or as an interatrial
conduction defec1 in the left atria.
ECG Characteristics
1. P wave is both taller (> 0.4 mV in dogs; > 0.2 mV
sos g0'0 < issop ul os +0'0 <) 1apm pue (seo u!
FIGURE 6-14
in giant breeds) and cats (> 0.035 to 0.04 sec).
(A) Biatrial enlargement in a small-breed dog with a collapsed
2. P-wave notching or slurring is often present.
mV tall (P pulrmonale) and 0.05 scc widc (P nitrale). (B) Icft
atrial cnlargement in a geriauic small-brced dog with chronic
acquired valvular disease (mitral insufficieney). P wavcs are wide
RGIIT VENTRICULAR ENLARGEMENT
(0.075 second), notcled, and cquivocally tall.
(Fig. 6-15; see also Fig. 246)
Bccausc the ECG does no1 usually distinguish bc-
tween ventricular hypertrophy and dilation, the ter1
2. P-wave contour is usually tall, slcnder, and peaked,
"'enlargement? is preferrcd. Furthermorc, the ECG is
cspecially in chronic pulmonary disease (called P
a relatively insensitive indicator of right ventricular
pulmonate).
enlargement. Becausc of left ventricular doninance
 3. A slight baseline depression following the P wave is
during ventricular depolarization, the right ventricle
 sometimes present; representing atrial repolariza-
must bc markcdly enlarged 1o cause ECG changes.
tion, lhis 'T. wave can also occur with very rapid
Associatcd  conditions  include  right-sided  pressure
heart rates.
Ovcrloads caused by certain congenital or acquired
discascs including pulnonic stenosis; 1etralogy of Fal-
LEFTATRIALENLARGEMENT
lot; reverse (right to left) shunting in patent ductus
(Fig. 6-14; sce also Fig. 6-37)
arteriosus or septal defect; acquired diseases, including
Causcs include left-sided voluume overloads from ac-
lism; right-sided volume overloads such as tricuspid
quired lesions (c.g., canine chronic acquired valvular
regurgitation; andl, occasionally, severe, chronic pul-
discasc causing mitral regurgitation), or congenital
monary disease (cor pulmonale) or cardiomyopathics.
hcart defccts (c.g. mitral valvular malformations, espe-
cially in cats; patent ductus arteriosus; large ventricular
ECG Characteristics
scptal defcct or commmon atrioventricular canal, espe-
cially in cats). Myocardial discases (espccially restrictive
CANINE—When any thrce of the following fcatures
and hypertrophic cardiorryopathy in cats and dilated
 are prescn1, right ventricular enlargement is generally
cardiormyopathy jt dogs) usually cause atrial enlarge.
diagnosed:
mcnt. Left atuial cnlargement may also resull from
other lesions, such as mitral valve slenosis.
1. S wave in lcad CV,LL grcater than 0.8 mV.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
79
CV6LU
aVR
aVL
aVF
V10
：
S
FIGURE 6-15
Sevcrc right ventricular enlargenent in a dog with pulmonic stenosis. There is a right axis deviation
of approximatcly -110 degrees. Note the deep S waves in lcads I, II, III, aVF, and CV,I.U. The T
Philadelphia, Lca & Febiger. 1992, with permission.)
2. Mean clcctrical axis of the QRS complex in the
mass, not ventricular wall thickness. With LV pressurc
frontal plane: + 103 degrces and clockwise.
overload, increased wall thickness occurs in the ab
3. S wave in lead CVaI.U grcater than 0.7 mV.
sence of chamber enlargement (concentric hypertro-
4. S wave in lead I greatcr than 0.05 mV.
phy). With volumc overload, both wall thickncss and
5. R/S ratio in CV,LU less than 0.87 mV.
cavity sizc increase (eccentric hypertrophy). ECG volt
6. S wave in lead II greater than 0.35 mV.
agc changes are gencrally greater in animals with vol-
7. S waves prescnt in leads I, II, II, and aV.
ume overload than with pressurc overload. Sceveral
8. Positive T wavc in lead Vio (except in the Chihua-
ECG changes are possible as a result of incrcascd
hua brccd).
muscle mass: (1) incrcased R-wave height, (2) pro-
 9. W-shapcd QRS complex in lead Vio.
longed QRS cornplex duratiou, (3) depressed S-r seg-
ment, (4) altcred Twave morphology, and (5) left
FELINE—-ECG criteria for right ventricular cnlarge-
shift of the mcan electrical axis in the frontal plane.
ment arc no1 well established. Right bundle branch.
block is difficult to differentiate from right ventricular
Prolongation of the QRS cormplcxes occurs only with
severe left ventricular enlargement. An abnormal left
cnlargement. Radiographic or echocardiographic ab-
sencc of right ventricular cnlargemcnt supporis the
axis deviation is not diagnostic by itself for left ventric-
ECG diagnosis of a conduction defcct. Sevcre right
ular enlargcment.
 Causcs of left vcntricular enlargement include vol-
vcotricular enlargement produces some of the same
ECG features described for the dog.
umc overloads (e.g., mitral or aortic valvular regurgita-
tion, left-to-righ1 shunting from patent ductus arterio-
sus or atriovcntricular fistula); high output states (e.g.
ECG Characteristics
hyperthyroidism, chronic ancmia); pressure overloads
1. S waves in leads I, II, Il, and aV (usually 0.5 mV
(e.g., aortic stenosis, systemic hypertension); and car-
diomyopathies.
or greater).
2. Mean elcctrical QRS axis in the frontal planc
greater than + 160 degrees and clockwisc, cspecially
ECG Characteristics
when comparing scrial ECGs.
 3. Large S waves in leads CV,LL and CVLU (usually
1. R wavc voltage:
> 0.7 mV).
CANINE (cxcept < 2 years old or deep chest
4. Positive T wavc in lead Vi0-
breeds):
 5. Right atial cnlargcment (tall P waves).
CV,LL.
LEFT VENTRICULAR ENLARGEMENT
ii) Large/giam1 breeds—R wave in lcads II, aVf
grcater than 3.0 mV.
(Fig. 6-16; see also Figs. 6-39, 342. and 34-3)
ili) Small brecdsR wave in leads lI, Il, aV
ECG criteria for lefi ventricular (LV) enlargement
grcater than 2.5 mV.
may represent IV dilation and/or hyperirophy. The
FELINE:
main factor determining ECG voltage is overall musclc
1) R wave im lead II grcatcr than 0.9 mV.
80
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
1
TIT
aVR
aVL
aVF
FIGURE 6-16
cardiomyopathy. P waves are tall in leads II, 1II, and aVF. The R wave zamplitude is abnormally tall
(1.6 mV im lead l). (From Tilley LP: Esscntials of Canine and Feline Electrocardiography. 3rd cd.
Philadelphia, Iea & Febiger, 1992, with pennission.)
i)R wave in leads CVLU or CV,LL grealer than
indicate left ventricular enlargement with ventricu-
1.0 mV.
lar septal hypertrophy.
2. QRS width:
4. ECG criteria for left and right atrial enlargement
CANINE:
are often present.
i) Large/giant brceds, QRS grcaicr than 0.06
 5. ECG may be normal despite scvcre generalized car
second.
diomegaly.
ii) Small/medium brceds, QRS grcatcr than
0.05 second.
FELINE:
ABNORMALITIES OF CONDUCTION
i) QRS greater than 0.04 second (>0.035 by
SINOATRIAL BLOCK AND ARREST
somc cardiologists).
3. Displaccmcnt of the ST segment in a direction
(Fig. 6-17)
opposite the main QRS deflection. Ihis causes the
With sinoatrial (SA) nodal block, an clcctrical im-
S+T segmcnt to sag into the 'T wave, called S'T
pulse generated in the SA node is prcvented (blocked)
from depolarizing the atria. This can be difficult to
4. Incrcased “T-wave amplitude Irom repolarization
differentiate frorri sinus arrcst (see Fig. 18-28D, E) on
changes.
the surface ECG, in which inmpulses are not generated
5. A left shift in mcan clectrical axis deviation in the
within the SA node. SA block may be caused by various
frontal planc (<
+ 40 degrccs in thc dog: < 0
pathologic conditions affecting the atria (e.g, dilation,
degrees in the cat).
hypertrophy, fibrosis, necrosis, cardiomyopathy), drug
1oxicities (especially β-adrenergic blockers, calcium
channel blockers, or digitalis glycosides), clcctrolyie or
BIVENTRICULAR ENLARGEMENT
altonomic imbalances, and other discascs (c.g., sick
 Simultaneous enlargement of both ventricles is dif-
sinus syndrome). SA block has been described in pug
ficult to confirm accurately by electrocardiography. Di-
dogs with His bundle stenosis4 and iu patched Dalna-
aguosis of right vcntricular cnlargement is generally
tian coach hounds that are born deaf.3
unreliable.
ECG Characteristics
ECG Characteristics
1. Variable heart rate depending on the underlying
 mechanism, with frequent or occasioual pauses. SA
1. Precordial chest lcads show changes for both righ1
 block is suggested when pauses in the rhythm are
ventricular (deep S waves in CVLL and CV,LU; tall
 precise muipies of normal R-R intervals. Junc-
R wave in CV,RL) and lcft ventricular (tall R waves
tional or ventricular escape complexes may occur
in CV,LL and CV,LU) cnlargemcn1.
but can be absent in some conditions (sick sinus
 2. ECG evidence of left ventricular cnlargement with
syndrome).
a righi shift of the MEA (in dogs).
2. P waves are usually of norrmal configuration.
3. Deep Q waves in leads I,I1, II, and aVs, along with
3. The QRS configuration is usually normal.
ECG criteria of left ventricular enlargemcnt, may
4. The P-R interval is cssentially constant.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 81
FIGURE 6-17
conplex.
PERSISTENTATRIALSTANDSTILL
4. No P waves evident after atropinc administration or
(Fig. 6-18)
following excrcise.
 5. Abscnt α wave (generated by atrial systole) on righ1
This arrhythmia is characterizcd by abscncc of P
wavcs and a regular escape rhythm with QRs com-
atrial prcssure recording.
plexes of supravcntricular configuration. It may be
temporary, pcrsisteut, or terminal. Atrial staudstill may
ATRIOVENTRICULAR BLOCK
result from digitalis toxicity or hyperkalemia. Persistent
Atrioventricular (AV) block occurs when couduction
atrial standstill has been associated with various condi-
tions in humans, including muscular dystrophy,$6 and
of a supraventricular impulse is delayed or interrupicd
s s    ar aa 
through the AV junction and bundle of His. The pre-
cise site of delay cannot be identified from the ECG
(bundle of His recordings can delineate thc precise
fibrous replacement of atiial myocytes or, occasionally,
site of dclay or block but are not performed in a
fcline dilated cardiomyopathy. Terrminal atrial stand-
still may occur with cardiac arrest.
clinical setting). The 1erm "block" should no1 be used
if conduction delay or failure occurs because a supra
ECG Characteristics
ventricular prematurc impulsc has recached the AV
(see also following secliou on hyperkalemia)
junction or bumdle of His too carly. The P-R interval
represcnts the time pcriod of impulse conduclion
1. Slow, regular hcart ratc (dogusually <60 beats/
Irom 1he atria to the ventricles.
min; cat
<160 bcats/min.
 2. No P waves in any lcad (including intracardiac ECG
recording).
First-Degree AV Block
 3. QRS cscape rhythm nearly normal im configuration
(Fig. 619; scc also Fig. 19-64)
(supraventricular type) or incrcascd duration with
A prolonged P-R interval may result from certain
bundle branch block patterm.
drugs (e.g., digitalis glycosides, β-blockcrs, calcium
FIGURE 6-18
Persistent. atrial standstil in a 4ycar-old Siamcsc catl with clinical signs of dyspnea. No P waves are
present; the QRS complexes are incrcased in voltagc and duration, indicating Ieft bundle branch
block and/or left hcarl enlargement. The heart rale is only 40 beats/min. (Fron Tiley LP:
Essentials of Canine and Feline Electrocardiography. 3rd cd. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1992.)
821
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
FIGURE 6-19
First-degree and second-degree AV block in a dog with syncopc. The P-R interwal is prolonged (0.14
second). Every other atrial impulsc is conducted (2:1 second-dcgree block).
channel blockers, occasionally quimidine and procain-
idiopathic fibrosis in older dogs, hcreditary stenosis of
amide); organic hear1 diseasc; age-related degencrative
the bundle of His in pugs, drug effects (e.g., digitalis
changes in the AV conduction system; hyperkalemia;
glycosides; intravenous atropine; xylazine: β-adrenergic
hypokalemia; vagotonia (ofien associated with respira-
blockers; calcium channel blockers), or clectrolyle im-
tory sinus arrhythmia causing a cyclic incrcasc in the
balances. In thc cat, 2° AV block can occasionally be
P-R interval); and feline dilated cardiomyopathy. Occa-
associated with myocardial diseases and hyperthyroid-
sionally, first-degrce (1°) AV block may occur in ani-
isrm.
mals thal are clinically normal and hcalthy. The P-R
interval tends to shorlen with rapid hcart rates.
ECG Characteristics
ECG Characteristics
Mobitz type I (Wenckebach phenomenon) 2°AV block (usu
1. P-R interval prolongation:
ally Type A) (Fig. 6-20):
CANINF-—greater than 0.13 second
1. 'The veniuicular ratc is slower than the atrial ratc
FELINE--greater than 0.09 sccond
because of blocked P waves. In the typical form of
 2. Heart rate, rhythm, and P wave are usually normal
umless associated with drug intoxication or severc
Wenckebach phenomenon, the rhythm is rcgularly
irregular; the R-R interval becomes progrcssivcly
underlying cardiac disease.
3.QRS morphology is usually
shorter as thc P-R interval becomcs progrcssivcly
normal. If bumdlc
longer until a P wave is ultimately "blocked" (not
branch block is present, 1° AV block may be caused
conducied to the vcntricles).
by the conduction delay in the other bundle branch
2. P wave is usually of normal configuration.
rather than in the AV junction.
3. QRS usually normal, indicating that the buudle
branches are also normal.
Second-Dcgree AV Block
1. Mobitz type I AV block rarely progresses to higher
(Figs. 6-19, 6-20; sce also Fig. 19-6B, C, and Fig.
degrces of AV block.
18-27)
Mohitz type I1 2° AV block (usually Iype B)(Fig. 6-19;
Intcrmittent failure of AV conduction characterizes
see also Fig. 19-6B):
2° AV block. One or more P waves are not followcd by
QRS-T complexes. A proposcd classification takes into
1. 'The P-R intcrval is always constant but may be ci-
consideration the width of thc QRS complexcs: (1)
ther normal or consistently prolonged. Thc rhythm
Type A 2° AV block, with a norimal QRS duration (the
is usually regular and suddenly interrupted by the
site of conduction failure is assumed to be above thc
abscncc of a QRS complcx following a P wavc.
bifurcation of the bundle of His), and (2) ‘Type B 29
Unlikc Mobitz ype I 2° AV block, no progressive P-R
AV block, with a wide QRS (the site of block is assumed
interval prolougation precedes 1he blockcd P wave.
to be below the bundle branch bifurcation).
2. There may be a fixcd relationship betwcen the atrial
Second-degree AV block may occur in some normal
and ventricular complexes—e.g., 2:1 2° AV block
dogs, cspccially in the early years of life, and in brachy.
(two blocked P waves for every one QRS complex),
cephalic brccds. lt is often associated with sinus ar-
3:1, 4:1, and so forth. When three or more P waves
rhythmia and other causes of increased vagal 1one, or
are blocked, the tcrm "high-grade 2° AV block" is
it is physiologic when associated with supraventricular
used (Fig. 19-6C). This frequently deteriorates into
tachycardia. Other associations imclude microscopic
complcie AV block.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
83
FIGURE 6-20
Mobitz type I sccond-dcgree Av block (Wenckebach phenomcnon) in a hyperthyroid cat. The P-R
interval progressively lengthens until a P wave is not conducted (arrow). (Modified from Fox PR.
Kaplan P: Feline arrhythiwias. In Bonagura JD (cd): Contemporary Issues in Small Animal Practice.
Vol 9: Cardiology. New York, Churchill Livingstonc, 1987. p 251, with permission.)
 3. ‘The ventricular rate is slowcr than the atrial rate
heart sound intensity, intermitlent “cannon a waves'
because of blocked P waves.
4. P waves are usually normal.
right atriurm contracis against a closed tricuspid valve),
5. If the QRS complexes are of abnormal configura
and  variable  prescnce of  third  and  fourth heart
tion, the conduction defcct may involve the bundle
sounds.
of His or proximal bundle branches. Mobitz type II
Associa1ed conditions include isolated congenital AV
 AV block (Type B) may progress to higher degrees
block; congenital defccts such as aortic stenosis and
of AV block.
ventricular septal defect; severe drug intoxication (e.g..
digitalis glycosides, β-adrenergic blockers, calcium
channcl blockers); myocardial diseases including infil-
Complelc AV Block
trative clisorders; bacterial cndocarditis; myocardial in-
(Fig. 6-2l; see also Fig. 19-6D)
farction; and hyperkalemia. Bundle of IIis lesions have
Complete (3°) hcart block occurs when AV conduc-
been identificd in affcctcd Doberman pinschcrs and
tion is absent. 'The ventricles are depolarized by pace-
pugs. Degeneration or fibrosis of the AV nodc and
makcrs originating below thc arca of the block that
bundle branches has been associated with endocardial
usually have a grcatly reduced rate of discharge. This
 and myocardial fibrosis in cats wih cardiomyopathy.
results in severc bradycardia and decreased cardiac
output (rccall that carrdiac output = heart rate X
ECG Characteristics
stroke volurme). Climical signs frequently accompany
weakness, sudden death, and congestive heart failure.
1. P waves bcar no constant rclationship 1o the QRS
Physical examination will imdicate variation in first
complcxcs.
FIGURE 6-21
Cormplete heart block (3 AV block) with an idioventricular escape rhythin (arrows) of 30 bcats/min.
from a dog with syncope and severe ascites. Cardiac neoplasia was found at necropsy. (From Tilley
with permission.)
84 DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
 2. Ventricular rate is slower than the atlial ratc (more
ital subaortic stenosis, certain drug toxicities (e.g.,
P waves than QRS complexes).
Adriamycin), and severe ischemia.
3. P waves arc usually of normal configuration.
4. QRS complexes are usually widc and bizarre whcn
ECG Characteristics
the rescuing pacemakcr is of ventricular origin. It
is normal when the escape pacemaker is located in
1. Prolonged QRS cornplex duration (CANINE—> 0.07
the AV junction (above the His bundle bifurcation).
sec; FELINE—> 0.06 sec)
2. Widc and positive QRS complexes in leads I, II, I1I,
INTRAVENTRICULAR CONDUCTION DEFECTS
and aVr, and in leads over the left precordium
(CV,LL and CV,LU).
The intraventricular conduction system is composed
3.
 Negative QRS complcxcs in lcads aVk and CV,RL.
  ( cd    
4. With LBBB, normal imitial ventricular scptal activa-
bundle branch, (2) the anterior fascicle of the left
tion is disturbed, altering the first part of the QRS
bundle branch, and (3) the posterior fascicle of the
complex. Thus, the Q wave is offen absent in leads
left bumdle branch. A block or dclay in conduction
that defimitely record septal activity im a right-to-left
can occur in one, trwo, or all thrce pathways at the same
axis orientation (e.g., lcads I and CV,LU).
time. Major forms of intraventricular block include
5. LBBB rmust be differentiated from left veutricular
(1) bundle brancl blocks (right or left bumdle), (2)
enlargement. Absence of left ventricular cnlargc-
fascicular blocks (left anterior or left postcrior fasci-
 ment on thoracic radiographs or echocardiogram
cles), (3) combinations of block in the three rmajor
lends support 1o a diagnosis of isolated LBBB.
conduction pathways (e.g., righ1 bundle branch block
6. Intermittent LBBB or RBBB may occur that is tachy-
with anterior or posterior fascicular block), and (4)
cardia- or bradycardia-dependent; rarely, bundle
block in all thrce conduction pathways. producing
branch block alteruans may occur.
complctc (third-degree) AV heart block. Bundle
branch or fascicular blocks cause no hemodynamic
impairment, unlcss complcte AV block occurs.
Right. Bundle Branch Block (RBBB) (Fig. 6-23)
Righ1 bundle branch block (RBBB) is a delay or
block of conduction in the right bundle branch. This
Left Bundle Branch Block (LBBB)
results in the ight ventricle depolarizing through myo-
(Figs. 6-18, 6-22: see also Figs. 6-37, 610, 18-3)
cytes by impulses tha1 pass from the left bundle branch
Lefi bundle branch block (LBBB) results fror con-
to the right side of the septum below the block, instead
duction dclay or block in the left bundle branch-
 of through the Purkinje network. This prolonged right
cither in the main branch or al the level of the anterior
ventricular activation causcs the QRS complex to be-
and posterior fascicles. 'This causes a supraventricular
come widc and bizarrc. The block can occur in the
impulsc to activate 1he righ1 ventricle first through the
proximal right bundle branch (complete block) or
right bumdle branch. The left ventricle is activaled later
more peripherally in the 1ight bundle branch (incom-
and more slowly, having to rcly on cardiac impulse
plete block). RBBB is occasionally found in normal
transmission through myocytes instead of Purkinje f-
and healthy dogs and cats. It may also be associated
bers. lhis causes the QRS complcx to becorme wide
with ventricular septal defec1, cardiac neoplasia, car-
and bizarre. LBBB usually indicates significant underly.
diormyopathy, heartworm disease, and postcardiac. ar-
 ing cardiac disease, including cardiomyopathy, congen-
rcst.? Incomplele RBBB has been found in the bea-
FIGURE6-22
Inrermittcnt left bundle branch block in a dog. The QRS complexes are wider and taller than
nornal in the fourth, ffth, and sixth complexcs.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
85
aVR
aVL
aVF
FIGURE 6-23
Right bundle branch block in a dog. The QRS duration is grearly prolonged at 0.09 second. Large
and wide S waves are prescnt in leads I, II II, and aVF. There is a right axis deviation
(approximately - 90 degrces).
gle as a genetically determined localized variation
fasciclcs cach pass through the base ol' the correspond-
with right ventricular wall thickness.
ing lcft ventricular papillary muscles. If the fascicular
path to one of these papillary rmuscles is blocked,
ECG Characteristics
ventricular activation begins at the other papillary mus-
cle. This causes the gencral direction of left ventricular
Complete RBBB:
depolarization to shift toward the blocked fascicle and
CANINE—QRS greater than 0.08 second
corresponding papillary rmusclc. In left anterior fascic-
(>0.07 sec in toy breeds)
ular block, this results in a marked left axis dcviation
FELINE—
QRS grcater thau 0.06 second. Prolonged
and only a sligh1 prolongation of left ventricular depo-
terminal QRS forces (i.c., S wave)
larization.
1. Right axis deviation is usually present.
 2. The QRS complex is positive in aVe, aV, and CV,RL
and has a wide RSR' or rsR' pattern (ofteu M
shaped) in CV;RI.
 3. QRS complexes have large, wide S waves in lcads I.
11, II, aV, CV&LL, and CVIU. An S wave or W
pattern is usually prcsent in lead Vi.
 4. Diagnosis of isolated RBBB is supported if diseases
causing severe right ventricular enlargement are
excluded. In most cases, the thoracic radiograph
or echocardiogram can cvaluate right ventricular
Ⅱ
IⅡ
enlargement.
5. lntermittcnt RBBB (i.e., tachycardia- or bradycar-
dia-dependcnt) or bundle branch block alternans
may occur.
Incomplcte RBBB:
1. Wlien fcatures 1 to 3 above are obscrvcd bu1 the
QRS duration is within normal limits or slighily
widened due to prolonged S-wave duration, incom-
pletc RBBB is suspected.
aVR
aVL
αVF
FIGURE 6-24
Fascicular Blocks (Fig. 624)
Lefl. axis dleviation suspected due to left anterior fascicular block in
The concept of left buodle branch fascicular blocks
a cal with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. There is a severe left axis
deviation ( -60 degrces) with a qR pattern in leads I and aVL and
(croncously termed *hemiblock') was promoted by
an 1S pattern in leads IH. II, and aVF. Terminal QRS forces arc
clectrocardiographers 1o clinically apply clectrocardi-
slighdywidesuggesting parial rightbundlebranchblck.From
ography to conduction system pathophysiology in hu-
Tiley LP, ct al: Prinary nyocardial disease in the cat: A uoel for
human cardiomyopathy. Am J Patho1 86:493, 1977, witt
mans. As classically taught, the anterior and posterior
permission.)
86 DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
Although the presence of conduction system blocks
is acknowledged, much doubt now exists that the ordi-
nary ECG can predict the anatomic locations of inter-
rupted conduction in the left bundle system. This is
due to markcd anatomic differences in the left conduc-
tion systeim anatomy and inaccuracies of Einthoven's
triangle to predict axis changes.*0 In animals, definitive
morphologic data are lacking. However, in cats,
marked left axis deviation (hypothesized to occur with
fascicular block) is often recorded with left ventricular
hypertrophic diseases and only rarely in other forms
FIGURE 6-25
of feline heart disease (chapters 19, 28). Occasionally,
Ventricular prc-cxcitalion ini a dog. A short P-R inteival and a
a marked left axis deviation can be recorded from
widened QRs complex with slurring or notching (arow) of thte:
apparently normal dogs.
upstroke (*"delta* wave) are present.
ECG Characteristics of Marked Left Axis Deviation
tracts), and Mahaim's fibers (nodoventricular tracts).
IIypothesized ithLeff Anterior Fascicular Block
Electrical, radionuclide, and echocardiographic tech-
niques are frequently used in hunans to localize the
1. QRS complex duration usually within normal limits.
accessory pathway insertion site when surgical or elec-
2. Marked left axis deviation in the frontal plane.
 trical ablation therapy is intended.
3. Small Q wave and tall R wave in leads I and aV..
During sinus or atrial impulse propagation, the ac-
4. Deep S waves in leads II, IlI, and aV-
cessory pathways activate a portion of the ventricles
without passing through the bundle of His, while the
ECG Characteristics of Right Bundte Branch Block
rest of the ventricle is activated via the nornal AV
and Marked Left Axis Deuiation (Hfypothesized with
pathway. Pre-excitation of the ventricles results in a
Left Anterior Fasricular Block)
shortened P-R interval because the entire irnpulse is
not. slowed by normal conduction delay through the
1. QRS complex greater than 0.07 second in the dog;
AV junction. The QRS complex has a slurred upstroke
 greater than 0.06 sccond in the cat.
2. Marked left axis deviation in the frontal plane.
ducted through ordinary myocardium without the aid
3. Wide and decp S waves in leads I, 1I, Il, aV,
of the specialized conduction system. If the atrial im-
pulse is conducted over the James bypass fibers, a short.
and CV,LU
4. Small Q wave and tal R wave in leads I and aV.
P-R interval with a QRS complex of normal duration
5. QRS complex in CV;RL with a wide rsR' or RSR'
will result (Lown-Ganong-Levine syndrome).
pattern (often M shaped).
Paroxysrmal tachycardia associated with ventricular
pre-excitation (WPw syndrome) may occur by the re-
 entry mechanism (chapter 16). An irnpulse traveling
VENTRICULAR PRE-EXCITATION AND
to the ventricles through the AV junction may turn
THE WOLFF-PARKINSON-WHITE
around and reenter the atria through the accessory
pathway.  A reciprocal  tachyrhythmia is thus  estab-
SYNDROME
lished. Drugs are selected that prolong the accessory
pathway refractory period (ie., class lA and 1C: see
Ventricular pre-excitation is a rare arrhythmia. It
chapter 17); in contrast, digitalis may shorien acces-
occurs when impulses originating in the SA node or
sory pathway refractoriness and speed the ventricular
atrium activate a portion of the ventricles prernaturely
response with reciprocating tachycardia. In nany cases,
through an accessory pathway (Fig. 6-25; see also Fig.
however, there are no detected arrhythmias or clini-
cal signs.
inpulscs to rcach the ventricles iniially without going
Ventricular pre-excitation can be congenital with no
through the AV node (i.e., bypasses all or part of the
 organic heart disease present; it has been asociated
AV node). The terin ""Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW)
with congenital and acquired cardiac defects and hy-
syndrorme'" is applied when clinical signs due to parox-
 pertrophic cardiomyopathy in cats. In some cases it is
ysnal supraventricular tachycardia are present.
idiopathic.13 14
A variety of anatomic substrates for accessory path-
ways may exist and result in a number of ECG pre-
ECG Characteristics
excitation variations. 1. 12 Three accessory conduction
pathways are postulated: bundles of Kent (accessory
1. P-R interval in ventricular pre-excitation is very
AV connections), James’ fibers (AV nodal bypass
short.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
87
2. Heart rate and rhythm are norrmal in ventricular
pre-excitation. In wPW syndrorme, the hearl rate
may be extrernely rapid, often greater than 300
beats/min (>400 beats/min in the cat), particularly
with 1:l conduction (P wave for every QRS con-
plex).
 3. Sinus P waves are normal in veniricular pre-excita-
tion but difficult to recognize in the WPw syn-
drome.
 4. QRS complex morphology in ventricular pre-excita-
FIGURE 6-27
tion is widened with slurring or notching of the R
Lead II rhythm strip recorded from a dog with acutc pancrealiis.
Sinus bradycardia and Q-T interval prolongation (0.5( sec) are
A) has predoninantly positive QRS complexes in
present. (Fron Tilley 1.P: Essentials of Cainc and Feline
CV,RL, whereas the right type (lype B) has pre-
Electrocardiography. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1992,
douninantly negative QRS complexes in CV,RI. In
withi perrmission.)
the WPW syndrome, QRS complex configuration
can be normal, wide with a delta wave, or very wide
and bizarre.
with rmyocardial infarction, pericarditis, and myocar-
dial hypoxia. In addition, ventricular hypertrophy, bun-
dle branch block, and ventricular premature com-
S-T SEGMENT, Q-T INTERVAL, AND
plexes can cause secondary S-T scgment changes
T-WAVE ABNORMALITIES
following abnormalities of the QRS complex. Pseudo-
depression of the ST segrnent due to a prominent T.
wave (atrial repolarization) can occur with tachycardia
S-T SEGMENT CIIANGES
 or pathologic atrial changes.
(Figs. 6-26, 6-39; see also Fig. 24-14)
T'he S-T' segment represents the time from the end
ECG Characteristics
of the QRS interval to the onset of the T wave. It may
lie above (elevated), at, or below (depressed) the level
1. CANINE (magnitude of abnormal S'T segment de-
of the baseline. The baseline or the isoelectric line is
viation):
on the same level as the T-P segment (betwecn the T
 Depression-0.2 mV or greater: 0.3 mV or greater
wave and the P wave).
in lead CV.LL
ST segnent changes may be attributable to many
Elevation—0.15 mV or greater in leads I
factors.2l: *s The magnitude of ST segrment deviation
through aVs, depression of 0.3 mV
ay vary cyclically with changing R-R intervals of respi-
in leads CV,IL and CV,l.U.
ratory sinus arrhythrmia. The degree of S-T deviation
FELINE: Significant SI segment deviations 0.1 mV
increascs with shorter preceding R-R intervals in the
or greater.
dog,*6 The ST segiment rmay display some normal varia-
2. The S-T segrnent normally curves gently into the
tion in healthy anirmals. Depressed S-T segnent leads
 proximal limb of the I' wave.
with doninant R waves (I1, II, aV, CV,LU) can be
associated with myocardial ischeinia, acute 1nyocardial
 previous tracings from the same anirnal.
infarction, electrolyte disturbances, digitalis toxicity,
 and cardiac trauma. Elevation of the ST' segment (Fig.
6-26) in leads with dominant R waves can be associated
Q-T INTERVAL ABNORMALITIES
(Fig. 6-27; see also Figs. 18-25, 33-7, 34-3)
The Q-T interval is rmeasured frorn the onset of the
Q wave to the end of the T wave. It. represents the
summation of ventricular depolarization. 'The Q-T in-
terval is dependent on the preceding R-R interval (i.e.,
the faster the heart rate, the shortcr the interval).
However, it does not vary with respiratory sinus ar-
rhythmia, probably because fluctuations in canine
heart rate occur too slowly to perinit reselting of spe-
cific ion channels.17 Drugs that affect the aulonomic
nervous systein can influence the QT interval through
FIGURE 6-26
direct pharmacologic action or indireculy, by changing
ST segment elevation (arrow) in a dog with pericardial effusion.
heart rate. A prolonged Q-7’ interual can occur with
88  DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
hypocalcemia (see Figs. 18-25, 33-7; 34-3), hyp0-
larger and spiked in hyperkalemia and are smaller and
kalemia, quinidine toxicity, ethylene glycol poisoning,
biphasic in hypokalemia. Nonspecific T-wave changes
strenuous exercise, hypothermia, and central nervous
are associated with metabolic diseases (e.g., anemia,
systeim disorders. A shortened Q-T interval can bc associ-
shock, uremia, hypothyroidism, and fever), drug toxic
ated with hypercalcemia (see Fig. 33-7), digitalis toxic-
ity (e.g, digitalis, quinidine, and procainamide), and
ity, and hyperkalemia.
respiratory abnormalities. Twave alternans can occur
Various formulas and tables correlate Q-T interval
from increases in circulatory catecholainines, hypocal-
t0 heart rate, age, and gender in humans. However,
 cenia, and acute increase in sympathetic discharge.
the Q-T interval alonc is not very helpful in veterinary
diagnostics.
ECG Characteristics
ECG Characteristics
1. T-wavc anplitude:
CANINE—less than 25 percent of the R-wave arn1
1. 'The normal rauge with sinus rhythin:
plitude.
 FELINE—T wave rarely greater than 0.3 mV and
CANINE--0.15 1o 0.25 second; FEIINF0.12 to
0.18 second.
may even exceed the R wave.
2. An approximatc rule of thurnb is that the Q-T inter-
2. Twave rmorphology: T waves are normally slightly
asymmetric and in dogs may be biphasic. They
val should be less than one half the preceding R-R
 Jo sieak 7 ueq 1aieaia shop ui aarsod aq pnoys 
interval for a normal sinus heart rate.
 age and positive in lead CV.RL; they should be
negative in lead Vo in all breeds except the Chihua-
T-WAVE ABNORMALITIES (Fig. 6-28)
hua. Polarity reversal or a large magnitude in ampli-
tude change on serial ECGs rmost often represents
The 'T wave is the first rmajor deflection following the
an abnorinal finding. T waves that are sharply
QRS complex and represents the ventricular recovery
 pointed or notched are usually abnorimal and may
period (repolarization). Its contour may be positive,
indicate acid-base or electrolyte abnormalities (e.g..
notched, negative, or biphasic and is most accurately
hyperkalemia).
analyzed when conipared with T waves from previous
3. Polarity of secondary Twave changes is not always
ECGs.
 T-wave abnormalities may cause abnorrmal arnpli-
equal to that exhibited by the QRS counplex.
4. Isolated Iwave alternans (i.e., rhythrmic alteration
tude, shape, or direction (polarity). They can be classi-
of the ‘T-wave configuration without concoinitant
fied as (l) primary, or changes independent of depo-
change in the QRs coimplex) can occur and is
larization, and (2) secondary, or changes directly
usually abnormal.
dependent. on depolarization.4$
Twave abnormalities can result frorn myocardial
 hypoxia, anesthetic complications, and hyperventila-
EFFECT OF SELECTED
tion during hcat strokc; with hceart failure or various
DISEASES ON THE
heart diseascs; during bradycardia (T waves larger)
and myocardial infarction (T' wave larger with a polar-
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
ity change). Intraventricular conduction defects such
as RBBB or LBBB are often associated with large T
waves secondary to the QRS change. 'T waves becoine
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
(Fig. 6-29)
Myocardial infarction is frequently detected in cats
at necropsy but is uncoinmon in the dog.* Most cases
involve the left ventricle. Microscopic intramural myo-
cardial infarctions (MIMI) and focal areas of rnyocar-
 dial fibrosis are frequent in older dogs with acquired
cardiovascular disease. Xo clinically  well-established
ECG patterns have been reported to diagnose or pre-
cisely localize spontaneous myocardial infarction in the.
dog, however.
ECG Characteristics
FIGURE 6-28
1. Serial ECCs documenting QRS- and ST-Twave
I arge, negative T waves recorded fron a dog with scvcre
heartworm discasc.
 changes provide a higher degrcc of confidence for
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
89
HYPERKALEMIA (Fig. 6-30)
The effects of severe, uncorrected hyperkalemia on
cardiac conduction and rhythrn are often lethal. In
severe hyperkalemia, no P wave is rccorded because
the atrial myocardium does not depolarize. Resultant
wide and bizarre QRS coinplexcs may simulate an
idioventricular rhythm, but the SA node continues to
fire, and its impulses are transinitted via the internodal
FIGURE 6-29
pathways to the AV junction and ventricles. This is
termed a "sinoventricular rhythin.'
"'Notched R-wave descent' (arow) recorded frorm an old dog.
This uay indicate microscopic intramural myocardial infarcion
Changes may nol appear on the ECG until serum
(MIMl) . (From Tilley LP: Essentials of Cainine and Feline
 potassiurn concentrations are greatly elevated. More-
Electrccardiography. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1992,
 over, ECG alterations are influenced and potentiated
with pemmission.)
by hyponatreinia, hypocalceinia, and acidosis (chapter
33). Therefore, the ECG is not always predictive of
serurn potassiurm concentration.
diagnosis of rmyocardial infarction. The zone of is-
Hyperkaleinia is a common clinical condition. It
cheinia that surrounds the infarctcd region ac-
occurs most frequently with feline urinary tract. ob-
 counts for the S-T segrnent and T-wavc abnormali-
struction, oliguric renal failure, hypoadrenocorticisn
(Addison's disease), and reperfusion injury postaortic.
ties.
 2. ECG changes that could indicate myocardial in-
thromboembolism.29.w.
farction:
ECG Characteristics
a. Sudden S-T segment deviation.
b. Tall, peaked T waves (first few hours).
ECG changes are not directly correlated with precise
c. Sudden developrnent of Q waves or a change in
 serurn K+ concentrations, but the following generaliza-
T-wave direction.
d, Axis shift in the frontal plane.
tions can be made:
c. Low-voltage QRS complexes.
1. Serun K+ greater
T waves larger and peaked.
f. Sudden development of bundle branch block or
than 5.5 mEq/L
AV block.
2. Serum K+ greater
 decreased R-wave ampli-
g. Sudden onset of ventricular arrhythmias due to
than 6.5 mEa/1.
tude; prolongcd QRS and
ischiemia.
P-R intervals; S-T segment
h. Ventricular arrhythmias 12 to 24 hours later due
depression.
to ischeimic effects on the subendocardial Pur
3. Serum K' greater
 decreased P-wave amplitude;
kinje system.
than 7 mEq/I.
increased P-wave dura
 3. A sloppy R-wave descent (may be associated with
tion; prolonged QRS, P-R,
MIMI).
and Q-T intervals.
1
B
FIGURE 6-30
(A) Atrial stantdstill rcorded fron a hyperkalenic dog (serum K' , 8.4 mEq/L) in hypovolenic
shock duc to addisonian crisis (hypoadrenocorticism). P waves are absent, and T waves are tall and
peaked. (B) Afier therapy (serum K*, 4.8 mEq/1.), P waves are present, and the QRS-T cormplex is
of smaller anplitude. (From Tilley LP: Esentials of Caninc and Feline Electrocarcdiography. 3rd ed.
Philadelphia. Lca & Febiger, 1992. with pernissiom.)
06
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
ECG Characteristics
1. Decreased QRS amplitude in serial ECGs recorded
at different tinc periods (in the dog, R waves < 0.5
mV in leads I, II, II, and aV, are suggestive).
2. S-T segment elevation in leads I, 1I, II, and aVr,
cardial ischemia due to comprcssion by pericardial
 3. P-R segiment depression in leads I, 11, II, and aV,
probably representing subepicardial atrial injury.
4.1
 Electrical alternans. 'This is diagnosed when the P,
FIGURE 6-31
QRS, or T complexes (or any combination) alter
Elecrical alternans in a dog with pericardial effusiom. Every other
their amplitude every other or cvery third or fouurth
R wave alternates in amplitude.
beat, and so on. The most common alternating
ratio is every other beat and usually involves the
QRS cormplex voltage (i.e., R wave). Shifting cardiac.
4. Serum K" greater
 disappearance of the P wave
p  na al r eaq a no 
than 8.5 mEq/1.
with atrial standstill and
ing every other beat causes an alternating shift
resultant sinoventricular
in the anatoinic relationship of the heart to any
rhythm.
given electrode. This produces alternating ECG
5. Serum K- greater
increased widening of the
changes.50
than 10 rmEq/I.
QRS complex; eventual re-
placeinent of QRS coin-
HYPERTHYROIDISM
plexes with a snooth bi-
(Fig. 6-32; see also Figs. 34-2 and 34-3)
phasic waveform; final
 Electrocardiographic abnormalitics are comnon in
stage is ventricular flutter,
feline thyrotoxicosis. Sinus tachycardia (greater than
ventricular fibrillation, or
ventricular asystole.
240 beais/min) and increased R-wavc amplitude: in
lead II represent. the most common ECG abnormali-
ties. Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias (e.g-, atrial pre-
mature conplexes, atrial tachycardia, ventricular pre-
PERICARDIAL EFFUSION AND
ELECTRICAL ALTERNANS (Fig. 6-31)
mature conplexes, and ventricular tachycardia) and
conduction abnormalities are also frequently
re-
corded. Sinus tachycardia, increased R-wave amplitude,
Pericardial effusion is often associated with low volt
and most arrhythrmias usually resolve following success-
age complexes, ST segrnent. deviation, and sometimes
ful therapy (chapter 34),s1.5ia
electriral alernans. The QRS cornplex amplitude is in-
fluenced by many extracardiac factors, such as the
distance of the heart from the recording clectrode
ARRHYTHMIAS
(this distanre influenced by chest sizc, thoracic wall
Anl arrhythrmia is an abnorimality in the rate, regular
thickness, obesity), presence of emphysema, pncumo-
ity, or site of cardiac inpulse origin and/or a distur
thorax, or pleural effusion.
bance of irnpulse conduction. During normal sinus
FIGURE6-32
Sints tachycardia (285 bcats/min) from a cat with hyperthyroidism. The R wave voltage is 1.1 mV,
indicating lef ventricular enlargemen.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 91
FIGURE 6-33
Sorinal sinus rhythm in a dog. The heart rate is 165 beats/min. (From Tilley LP: Essentials of
Canine and Feline Elecirocardiography. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lca & Febiger, 1992, with pernission.)
rhythrn, the cardiac inpulse originates in the SA node
mechanism to increase cardiac output (e.g., heart fail-
amd spreads in an orderly fashion throughout the atria,
ure); (4) underlying cardiac, systeinic, or metabolic
AV node and His-Purkinje systein, and ventricles. Ab-
disease (e.g., fever, anemia, sepsis, hypoxia, hypcrthy-
normalities of inpulse formation or conduction pro-
roidism); or (5) in response to pharmacologic agents.
       
Sinus tachycardia is the most common arrhythmia in
6-5) and therapy (chapters 17 to 21).
the dog and cat.
NORMAL SINUS RHYTHM (Fig. 6-33)
ECG Characteristics
The SA node has a normal inherent pacemaker
1. All criteria of norrmal sinus rhythm are inet except
rate of 70 to 160 beats/minute in thie adult dog and
that the heart rate is greater than 160 beats/rminute
approxirnately 140 to 220 in the adult cat. Sinus
in the dog (above 180 in toy breeds and above 220
rhythm is the most common cardiac. rhythm. Rates of
in puppies) and greater than 240 beats/minute in
 u oti se yu se aq eo ars ieou ys
the cat.
breeds and up to 220 in puppies. A regular sinus
2. The rhythn is regular, with less than 10 percent
rhythim below the norinal rate is sinus bradycardia,
variation in R-R intervals and constant P-R intervals.
whereas sinus tachycardia represents sinus rate above
3. Vagal mancuvers (e.g., ocular prcssurc) produce
the normal range. An irregular sinus rhythm is called
only gradual, transient slowing of the hcart rate, if
sinus arrhythmia, which is comnon in dogs but uncon
any change at all.
mon in cats.
ECG Characteristics
Sinus Bradycardia (Fig. 6-34; see also Fig. 19-6A)
 Sinus bradycardia represents a regular sinus rhythin
1. The rhythin is regular with less than 10 percent
slower than the norinal sinus heart rate. Severe sinus
variation in R-R intervals. The difference between
bradycardia may adversely affecl cardiac output and/
the largest and simallest R-R interval is less than 0.12
 or increase susceptibility to ectopic cardiac impulse
second in the dog; less than 0.10 second in the cat.
formation. Sinus bradycardia can occur from condi
2. P waves arc positive in lead II with a consistent
tions that increase vagal tone, severe systemic disease,
configuration.
and drug toxicities and certain anesthetics: with feline
3. QRS cornplexes are normal. They may be wide and
dilated cardiomyopathy; or during end-stage heart fail-
bizarre if atrial enlargement or an intraventricular
ure. Bradycardia rnay be a norimal ECG variation in
 conduction defect is present.
the dog, and many large breeds normally have hearl
4. 'The P-R interval is constant.
rates of 60 to 70 beats/minute,
ARRIIYTIIMIAS ORIGINATING IN TIIE
ECG Characteristics
SINUS NODE
1. All criteria of normal sinus rhythm are met, except
Sinus Tachycardia (Fig. 6-32)
 heart rate is less than 70 beats/rninute in the dog
Sinus tac hycardia can be associated with many condi-
(< 60/min in large breeds) and less than 120
tions: (l) increased sympathetic discharge associated
beats/minute for the cat.
with fright or excitement, (2) a physiologic mechanism
 2. The rhythm is usually regular, with a slight variation
in response to increased body metabolism resulting in
in the P-P interval.
a greater O, demand (e.g., shock); (3) a compensatory
3. The P-R interval is constant.
92
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
FIGURE6-34
Simus bradycardia in a cat (75 beats/min) recorded during surgical anesthetic complications. (From
Tilley LP: Essentials of Canine and Feline Electrocardiography. Srd ed. Philadelphia, Lea & Felbiger.
1992, with permission.)
Sinus Arrhyihmia (Fig. 6-35)
tween successive P waves, or greater than 10 percent
variability exists between R-R intervals. In the cat,
Sinus arrhythmia is an irregular sinus rhythin origi
 0.10 second or greater variability occurs between
nating in the SA node. It is represented by alternating
successive P waves.
 periods of slower and more rapid heart rates, which
 2. P waves, QRS complexes, and P-R intervals are nor-
is usually rclated to respiration. In respiraory sinus 
Imal.
arrhythimia, inspiration causes reflex inhibition of va-
 3. A wandering pacemaher is often present. This is a shift
 gal tone, resulting in cyclical P-P interval shortening
of paceinaker discharge froin within the SA node
and an incrcasing heart rate; expiration causes P-P
or fron the SA node to the AV node. Consequently,
interval lengthening and a slowing heart rate. Respira-
the direction of atrial depolarization (and P-wave
tory sinus arrhythunia is a frequent normal finding in
contour) may change. Thus, a wandering pace-
 dogs, especially brachycephalic breeds in which large
maker causes an irregular supraventricular rhythrm
airway obstructiom increases the force of inspiration.
with changing P-wave rnorphology. It is usually a
Sinus arrhythmia is accentuated by vagal maneuvers
norinal variation in the dog.
such as carotid sinus massage and ocular compression.
Atropine will usually eliminate sinus arrhythmia, indi-
Sinus Arrest (see Figs. 6-17 and 6-40)
cating vagal origin. In cats, sinus arrhythmia is uncon-
Sinus arrest represents failure of SA nodal impulse
ddn m piss an si ln lsd uua 
formation caused by depressed automaticity. Differ-
respiratory infections. Nonrespiratory sinus arrhythmia
entiating between SA block or arrest by standard sur-
is ot associated with respiration.
face ECG is difficult. Prolonged periods of sinus arrest
may cause episodic weakncss or syncope when subsid-
ECG Characteristics
iary escape pacemakers fail to discharge.
Intermittent sinus arrest can be a normal incidental
1. All criteria of normal sinus rhythm are met. In the
finding in brachycephalic breeds, in which it is associ
dog. 0.12 second or greater variability exists be-
atcd with vagotonia accompanying accentuated respi-
FIGURE 6-35
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia in a dog with an average rate of 120 beats/inin. The R-R intervals vary
more than0.12 secondasherate changeswithinspirato(INSP）and cxpiration(EXP）.From
Tiuey LP: Essentials of Canine and Feline Electrocardiography. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lea &Febiger.
1992, with pernnission.)
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
93
ration. It is rare in the cat. Ocular or carotid sinus
are variable. Soine dogs are asymptomatic. Syncope
pressure oftein produces sinus arrest or block. Other
and cpisodic weakness are the most common clinical
causes of vagotonia, including surgical manipulation
signs associated with the bradycardia-tachycardia syn-
and thoracic or cervical neoplasms, may cause sinus
drome. Very occasionally, heart rates may be so slow as
arrest or block.
t0 reduce cardiac output and exacerbate cardiac fail-
ure.
ECG Characteristics of Sinus Arrest uith Normal
Sinus Rhythm
ECG Characteristics
1. The hcart rate can be variable, depending on the
1. Severe and persistent sinus bradycardia not induced
underlying mechanism. The rhythin is regularly ir-
by drugs.
regular, or irregular with pauses demonstrating a
 2. Short or long sinus pauses (SA block/arrest) with
lack of P-QRS-T complexes. The pauses are equal
or without escape rhythrms.
to or greater than twice the normal R-R interval.
 3. Atrial fibrillation with a slow ventricular rate (in the
 2. P waves are usually of normal configuration but mnay
 absence of cardioactive drugs), usually associated
vary in shape if a wandering pacemaker is prcsent.
with accompanying disease of the AV junction.
3. QRS configuration is normal unless an intraventric-
 4. Long sinus pause following an atrial prermature
ular conduction defect exists.
complex.
 4. The P-R interval is essentially constant.
 5. AV junctional escape rhythm (with or without slow
and unstable sinus activity).
Sick Sinus Syndrome (Fig. 6-36)
6. Bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome: periods of se-
vere sinus bradycardia alternating with ectopic su-
A nunber of SA nodal abnorimalities are described
 praventricular tachycardias (atrial tachycardia, atrial
under this terminology, including severe sinus brady-
fibrillation, or atrial flutter); absence of intervening
cardia with pronounced SA block, and sinus arrest.32
ad snus jo spoad luo hup u aensa 
When paroxysms of recurrent. supraventricular tachy
'Tests for SA node dysfunction include the following:
cardia (e.g, atrial fibrillation or atrial tachycardia)
coexist with this bradyarrhythmia, the tern *bradycar-
1. Ocular or carotid sinus massage (vagal rnaneuvers)
dia-tachycardia syndrome" is applied. This has been 
may cause prolonged periods of sinus arrest (> 3
reported in rniniature Schnauzers most commonly,
sec). Increased vagal tone may partially contribute
but also pugs, dachshunds, cocker spaniels, and rnixed-
to this syndrome.
breed dogs can be affected. The condition is rare
2. Atropine (0.015 to 0.04 mg/kg IV) fails to cause a
in felines.
marked increase in heart rate (norimally at least a
Most dogs with sick sinus syndrome also have coexist-
 50 percent increase occurs), indicating that the SA
ing dysfuncion of the AV junction or bundle branches
node dysfunction is not due 1o exccssive vagal tone.
or both. Autoimaticity of lower pacemakers is often
 3. Sirmultaneous automatic monitoring with radiotel-
depressed. Thus, during long periods of SA block or
enmetry and time-lapse video recordings have beeil
arrest, latent alternate pacemakers fail to depolarize,
used to correlate syncope with arrhythimias.
causing long intervals of sinus pause (asystole). Syn-
4. After cessation of rapid right atrial pacing, the
cope may result.
atrium can fail to depolarize for as long as 15 sec-
The clinical manifestations of sick sinus syndrone
onds (norinal in the dog is 1.5 sec).
FIGURE 6-36
Prolonged ventricular asystole due to sinoatrial block or arresl after a vagal maneuver (ocular
pressurc) was perforned on a dog with sick sinus syndrome. No escape beats occur duing this
interval.
94DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
 5. Failure of sinus rhythm initiation after electric car-
P'-QRS-T complexes that disrupt the normal sinus-
dioversion of tachycardia.
initiated rhythm.
 5. If there is partial recovery of the AV node or the
intraventricular conduction system, the P' wave is
DISTURBANCES OF ATRIAL. RHYTHM
conducted with a long P'-R interval or with a
Atrial Premature Complexes
change in the norimal QRs configuration (called
(Fig. 6-37; see also Figs. 6-47, 18-1, 18-27, 18-3,
aberrant conduction).
19-2)
6. The P'-R interval is usually equal to or greater than
the sinus-initiated P-R interval.
Atrial prenature complexes (APCs) can originate
7. A noncompensatory pause may result. It is recognized
frorn any area in thc atria or AV node. Although APCs
when the R-R interval of the two norrnal sinus com-
are occasionally detected in clinically normal dogs and
plexes that enclose the APC is less than the R-R
cats, they are usually associated with structural cardiac,
intervals of three consecutive sinus complexes. Ihis
metabolic, systemic, or inflarmmatory diseascs. Isolated
is caused by retrograde conduction of the APC into
or infrequent premature atrial cornplexes cause 1o
the SA node, which discharges the SA node prema
 hemodymamic or elecurical instability and require no
turely, resetting SA nodal discharge and, thus, tim-
therapy. They may occasionally precipitate or presage
ing of the normal sinus rhythm.
the occurrence of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias
such as atrial tachycardia or flutter, Causes of APCs
include atrial enlargement from volume overloads
Atrial Flutter (Fig. 6-38; see also Figs. 18-10 and
(e.g, congenital or acquired valvular regurgitation, or
18-11)
left-to-right shunting congenital heart diseases), myo-
Atrial flutter is an uncoinmon tachyrhythmia charac-
cardial diseases (idiopathic or secondary to systemic
or metabolic diseases), sepsis, neoplasia (espccially
terized by a rapid atrial rate usually exceeding 300
 hemangiosarcoma), hyperthyroidism, and drug toxic-
bcats/iminute, and with variable ventricular conduc-
ity (e.g., digitalis glycosides, gencral anesthesia)
tion. In the classic forrn, norrmal P waves are replaced
ECG Characteristics
of AV conduction are usually present. When 1:1 atrial
to ventricular conduction occurs, the arrhythrnia nay
1. A premature, cctopic P' wave (called P' wave) oc-
be difficult to distinguish from atrial tachycardia.
Atrial flutler is associated with conditions that cause
curs and has a dlifferent configuration from normal
other atrial arrhythmias (espccially diseases producing
sinus P waves. The P' wave may be negative, positive,
biphasic, or superimposed on the previous T wave.
severe atrial enlargeinent), ventricular pre-excitation
(WPW syndrome), and, occasionally, feline restrictive
similar to thal of sinus-initiated complexes follows
or hypertrophic. cardiomyopathy.
the P' wave.
 3. If the P' wave occurs too early relative to thc preced-
ECG Characteristics
ing I' wave, the AV node may not have recovered
adequately to permit conduction of the P' wave
1. Normal P waves are replaced by sawtooth flutter
irnpulse to the ventricles. A nonconducted P' wave
waves (F waves), which represent a combination of
results (QRS is absent).
cctopic and pronounced atrial rcpolarization waves.
4. Cardiac rhythm is irregular due to the premature
2. The atrial rhythin (F waves) is regular and rapid
FIGURE6-37
A psne aime a asu m sop eu an d pue (smaun sxdu aimead ey
chronic mitral regurgitation.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
95
FIGURE 6-38
Atrial fluter with 2:1 conduction (ventricular rate, S30/min) from a dog with an atrial scptal defect.
(From Tilley LP: Essentials of Canine and Feline Electrocardiography. 3rd edPhiladelphiaea &
IFebiger, 1992, with permission.)
(usually > 300 beats/min). The ventricular rhythm
associated with severe atrial enlargenent. In dogs, it
and rate depend the state of AV conduction and
most often results from dilated cardiomyopathy, severe
atrial rate. When the rate of atrial and ventricular
chronic mitral regurgitation, or uncorrected congeni-
depolarizations is equal, 1:1 atrioventricular con-
tal heart diseascs such as patent ductus arteriosus.51
Additional  causes include  ventricular pre-excitation 
larizations occur for each QRs-T complex, conduc-
(WPW syndrome) and, rarely, severe systemic or meta
tion is said to be 2:1, and so on.
bolic. diseases (e.g., hypoadrenocorticism, gastric tor-
 3. The QRS configuration is norrmal, or wide and bi-
sion-volvulus). Occasionally, atrial fibrillation may oc-
zarre due to bundle branch block, aberrant ventric-
cur in large or giant-breed dogs without cardiac
ular conduction, or ventricular pre-excitation.
enlargement. In cats, atrial fibrillation is predomi-
 4. When conduction through the AV node is constant.
nantly associated with hypertrophic or restrictive car-
thc interval between thie QRS complex and the F
diomyopathy.54-56
wave is of constant duration. This interval rmay vary
based on changing conduction and second-degree
ECG Characteristics
AV block.
1. IDiscernible P waves are absent. In coarse atrial fi-
Atrial Fibrillation (Fig. 6-39; see also Figs. 18-2,
brillation, large oscillations (called "f" waves) of
18-12, 18-13, 19-4, and 22-1)
varying amplitude replace the normal sinus P waves.
When prominent f waves resemble atrial flutter, the
 Atrial fibrillation is common in the dog but uncom-
mon in the cat. Although it can be paroxysmal, it is
 2. Ventricular heart rate is rapid and irregularly irreg-
more usually sustained. The loss of atrial contribution
ular (rarely, a slow ventricular ralc is present).
to ventricular filling, combined with a rapid ventricular
 3. The QRS configuration is normal, or more com-
heart rate, may substantially reduce cardiac output and
monly, widened owing to bundle branch block or
exacerbate heart failure. Atrial fibrillation is usually
aberrant conduction. Normal QRs complexcs
FIGURE 6-39
Atrial fibrilation recorded from a dog with congestive heart failure. The heart rale is rapid and
irregularly irregular. P waves are absent. The tall and wide QRS complexes indicate left heart
cnlargemen. The S'T' segnent is depressed.
96
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
FIGURE 6-40
(A) Supraventricular tachycardia, probably atrial tachycardia, recorded from a dog. The ectopic
origin cannot be identified with accuracy in this strip. (B) After vagal mancuvers (ocular pressure),
lhe tachycardia has been terminated, the configuration of thesc sinus QRS complexes is ihe sane as
in strip A and represents a left bundle branch block configuration. (From 'Tiley LP: Essentials of
Canine andt Feline Electrocardiography. 3rd ed, Philaclelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1992, with permission.)
sornetimes vary in amplitude, especially during
Atrial Tachycardias (Fig. 6-40; see also Figs. 18-4,
rapid hcart ratcs.
18-9. 19-3)
 4. The ventricular rate is irrcgularly irregular because
the AV junction conducts only a limited nunber of
Atrial tachycardia is usually rapid and regular, origi-
fibrillatory waves to the ventricles in a sporaclic fash-
nating frorn an ectopic supraventricular focus. Thrce
ion.
or more consecutive APCs constitute atrial tachycardia,
which is usually associated with organic heart. dlisease.
Its P' waves are different in mnorphology from sinus P
SUPRAVENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIAS
wavcs. Unlike sinus tachycardlia, atrial tachycardia may
(Figs. 18-2, 18-4, 18-8, 18-9, 18-14 thirough 18-17)
 be terminated by vagal maneuvers. The same factors
that cause APCs are associated with atrial tachycardia
Nomenclature
 Other predlisposing conditions include ventricular pre
Tachyarrhythmias are sometimes differentiated as to
cxcitation, disscminated intravascular coagulation, and
whether the QRS complexes are narrow (i.e., normal
blunt cardiac trauma. Atrial tachycardia with AV block
width) or wide. Narrow QRS tachycardia reprcsents com-
is often due to dligitalis toxicity.
plexes Icss than 0.065 second wide in the dog and less
than 0.045 second in the cat. These complexes indicate
ECG Characteristics
that.  atriovcntricular conduction occurs via  the AV
 node. A variety of electrophysiologic mcchanisns can
1. Rapid heart rate, grcater than 160 beats/minute
account for tachycardias originating in the atria or AV
(> 180 in toy breed dogs): greater than 240/minute
junction with ECG characteristics of a supraventricular
in the cat. Rhythm is rcgular in most cases but may
QRS complex, regular R-R interval, and no evidencc
be slightly irregular. Atrial tachycardia can bc either
of ventricular pre-excitation. These tachycardias havc
intermittent (paroxysmal) or continuous. P' waves
bcen termed paroxysmal atrial tachycardia if the P wavc
arc usually positive in lead II, with regular P'-p'
occurred in front of the QRS, and paroxysmal junctionat
intervals.
(or nodatl) tachycardia if the P wave exhibited retrograde
 2. P' waves may not be easily rccognized. They may be
contour and occurred within or just following the QRS
 obscured by thc fast ventricular rate or a prolonged
complex. A broader, generalized term, "paroxysmal
P'-R' interval.
supraventricular tachycardia, is frequently applied to
3. P’ wave configuration is generally different from
n i,    s sse
that of sinus P waves. If the atrial rhythm is irregular
cardia' has been substituted when the mechanism is
and the P' waves are of varying configuration, the
thought to be re-entry. It must be remcmbered that
term "'multifocal atrial tachycardia" is uscd
some cases of supraventricular tachycardia can havc
 4. QRS configuration is usually normal; alternatively,
wide QRs complexcs because of pre-existing or func-
it is wide and bizarre duc to bundle branch block,
tional bundle branch block or conduction through an
aberrant. ventricular conduction, or ventricular pre-
accessory AV pathway $0 4s In this chapter, descriptive.
excitation.
titles are applied for the sake of clarity, although somc
5. The P'-R interval of the P-QRS is usually constant
controversy cxists in this nomenclature.
(1:1 AV conduction). At extremely high rates, vary-
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
ing degrees of AV block can occur (e.g., 2:1, 3:1,
ATRIOVENTRICLLAR JLNCTIONAL TACHYCARDIA. In AV
4: 1).
junctional tachycardia, the ectopic focus in the AV
junction acts as a primary pacemaker that discharges
faster than the inherent AV junctional rate of 40 to 60
 Arrhythmias Originating in the Atrioventricular
beats/minute (in the dog). The term "enhanced AV
Junction
junctional rhythm' is used for rates greater than 60
but less than 100 in the dog. It is usually impossible to
ATRIOVENTRICULAR JUNCTIONAL PREMATLRE COMPLEXES.
differentiate atrial tachycardia from an AV junctional
(Fig. 6-41; see also Figs. 6-46, 18-6, 18-14). Atrioven-
tachycardia, since the inverted P waves are superim
tricular junctional premature complexes are caused by
posed on the QRs-T complcxcs. The term "'supravcn-
the early firing of an cctopic AV junctional focus. The
tricular tachycardia"’ can be used for both arrhythmias.
impulse spreads backward (retrograde) to the atria as
well as forward (anterograde) to the ventricles. The
Associated conditions include those disorders associ-
ated with atrial arrhythrmias. Digitalis toxicity is often
term "junctional" is more acuratc for describing
associated with an AV junctional arrhythmia.
rhythms that arise in the region cxtending from the
 atrial fibers approaching the AV junction to the bifur-
ECG Characteristics
cation of the bundle of His. Junctional prematurc
complexes are often associated with digitalis toxicity
and similar causes described for APCs.
1. Hcart rate is greater than 60 beats/minute in the
dog. 'The rhythm is usually regular. Junctional tachy-
cardia can be cithicr paroxysmal or continuous.
ECG Characteristics
 2. P' waves are negativc in lead II and may precede,
 be superimposed on, or follow the QRS complcx.
1. The heart. rate is usually normal. The rhythrm is
 3. QRS configuration is usually normal or can be wide
irrcgular due to the premature P' waves that disrupt
and bizarre as a result of bundle branch block,
normal sinus-initiated P-wave rhythm.
 aberrant ventricular conduction, or ventricular prc-
 2. The P' wave is usually negative in lead I1.
cxcitation.
 3. Thc premature QRS complex is usually normal in
4. The P'-R interval is constant. Thc P'-R interval for
configuration but can be wide and bizarre due to
a high AV junctional focus is normal or longer
bundle branch block, aberrant ventricular conduc-
when there is conduction delay below the AV junc-
tion, or ventricular pre-excitation.
tional focus. At high hcart rates, varying degrees of
 4. The P' wave may precede, be superimposd on, or
AV block can occur.
follow the QRS, depending on the location of the
cctopic focus and on the conduction velocity above
and below the AV junctional focus. For cxample,
ARRHYTHMIAS ORIGINATINGIN THE
the negative P' wave precedes the QRS when retro-
VENTRICLE
grade impulse conduction is faster than antero-
Ventricular Premature Complexes
grade conduction.
(Fig. 6-42: see also Figs. 6-45, 6-46, 19-7)
5. A nonronpensatory pause is usually present. It is char-
acterized by an R-R interval enclosing the prerna-
Ventricular premature complexes (VPCs) represent
ture complex that is less than twice the normal R-R
impulses that arise from an ectopic ventricular focus.
interval cluration.
Thesc depolarizations spread from cell junction to cell
FIGURE 6-41
I'wo junctional premature complexes (ffith and sixth complexes) recorded from a dog with digitalis
toxicity. P mirrale is also present.
98
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
FIGURE 6-42
Frequent ventricular premature complexes (VPCs) and paroxysmal ventricutar tachycardia recorded
from a dog with septicemia-endocarditis. (Froin Tilley LP: Essentials of Canine and Feline
Elcctrocardiography. 3rd cd. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1992, with permission.)
junction rai.her than across  the  Purkinje system  as
4. The ventricular origin of the VPCs can be suggested
would normally occur. This results in conduction delay
as follows: If the major QRS deflection is ncgative
with associated widening and bizarre conlour of the
in lcad ll, the ectopic focus is in the left ventricle;
QRS complex. Premature ventricular complexes com-
the reverse is true for right-sided VPCs.
 prise thc second rmost common arrhythmia after sinus
5. A compensatory pause usually follows a VPC. The ec-
tachycardlia. Two potential mechanisms include re
topic ventricular impulsc gencrally cannot pene-
entry and increased automaticity (chapter I6). Occa-
trate the atrium retrogradely through the AV junc-
sional VPCs by thcmselves do not causc hermodynamic
tion (sce Figure 6-45). Thereforc. the SA node is
impairment or clinical signs and should not be treated.
not depolarized and resct as usually occurs with
supravcntricular prcmature depolarizations, and
sionally, they may occur in normal hearts without clini-
the sinus rhythm continues undisturbed after the
cal significance. Cardiac causes include heart failure
VPC. The R-R interval of the sinus-initiatcd QRS
due to congenital or acquired disorders; myocardial
complexes on either side of the VPC cquals twice
infarction; infection (especially viral or bacterial); in-
the normally conducted R-R interval.
∩ammation; infltrative myocardiopathies such as neo
6. VPCs of identical shapc are called unifocal; when
 plasia; pericarditis; traumatic myocarditis; and idlio.
ectopic QRS complexes are variable, they arc
pathic myocarditis, especially in boxers and Doberman
termedl multiform or multifocal VPCs.
pinschicrs. Inherited ventricular tachycardia is reported
 in Gerrman shepherds.$7 Secondary causes are numer-
 ous. Some of the more cornmon include changes in
Ventricular Tachycardia
autonomic tone; hypoxia; ancmia; uremia; sepsis; dis-
(Figs. 6-42, 6-43; sec also Figs. 18-21 through 18-24,
seminated imtravascular coagulation and other coagu-
19-8, 19-9)
lopathies; gastric dilation-volvulus; pancreatitis; nutri-
tional deficiencies; and certain endocrinopathies (cs-
pecially thyrotoxicosis). Cardioactive drug toxicities
Tachycardias that. are depicted by wide QRS corn-
plexcs (CANINE >0.65 scc; FELINE >0.4 sec) arc
and certain anesthetics may be causative.
usually associated with ventricular tachycardia. Differ-
cntial diagnoses of wide QRS tachycardia include supra-
ECG Characteristics
vcntricular tachycardia with (1) aberration, (2) pre-
existing or functional bundle branch block, or (3)
1. Premature, cctopic QRS complexcs are widened.
conduction over an accessory pathway.
bizarre, and often of large amplitude. The T wavc
A continuous series of three or more successive VPCs
is directed opposite to the QRs deflection.
is termed ventricular tachycardia. It may be interrmit-
 2. Heart rate is usually normal. The rhythm is irrcgul-
tent. (e.g., paroxysmal) or persistent and sustained.
lar due to the premature QRS complex that disrupts
Ventricular tachycardia is generally considered a seri-
the normal sinus rhythm.
ous and life-threatening tachyrhythmia that may cause
3. P waves are normal but are not associated with the
hemodynamic impairment (c.g. syncope, weakness,
premature, ectopic QRST complex. Independent
hypotension) or clectrical instability (e.g., ventricular
normal P waves may precede, be within, or follow
fibrillation). Similar condlitions that cause VPCs also
thie VPC.
 predispose to ventricular tachycardia.
ELECTROCARDI0GRAPHY
99
FIGURE 6-43
Sustaincd venuicular tachycardia from a dog with gastrie rorsion. There is no relationship beween
the QRs complexes and the P waves (called atrioventricular dissociation).
ECG Characteristics
ECG Characteristics
1. Ectopic ventricular rate:
1. In ventricular fibrillation there are no discernible
CANINE--Greater thian 100 beats/minute with a
P-QRs-T complexes. Irregular, chaotic, low-voltage
regular rhythm. Rates bctwcen 60 and
waves are present on the ECG.
100 arc termed idioventricular tachycar
2. There are two morphologic types of ventricular fi-
dia or enhanced ventricular rhythn.
brillation: coarse (Ilarge oscillations) and fine ampli-
 FELINE—Usually greater than 150 beats/min-
tude. The latter is associated with worse survival
ute.
rates.
2. Ectopic QRS complexes are wide and bizarre, with
3. Ventricular flutter displays regular, rapid, large sine
T waves dlirected opposite the QRs deflection.
wave-like oscillations.
3. P waves, if visible, are norrmal in contour, but there
is no association bctween them and the ventricular
Ventricular Asystole
Ventricular asystole denotes the absence of ventricu-
pendent normal P wave may preccde, be within, or
lar complexes and cardiac output. Associated with car-
follow the VPC.
diopulnonary arrest, it carries a grave prognosis.5a
4. Fusion complexes imply ventricular activation from
Ventricular asystole may be caused by sevcre SA block
two different foci.
or sinus arrest, third-dlegree AV block, scverc clectro-
 5. Capture beais by normal sinus-initiated rhythm or
lytc or acid-base disorder, or othcr terminal systemic
complexes may be present.
discases.
ECG Characteristics
Ventricular Flutter and Fibrillation
In cardiopulmonary arrest, there are no wave forms
(Fig. 6-44; sce also Figs. 18-22 and 19-9)
on the ECGonly a straight. line. If associated with
These arrhythmias result in loss of consciousness
and are usually fatal within rminutes unless successful
intervention is providcd. Ventricular fibrillation is a
tcrminal arrhythmia associated with cardiopulmonary
arrest.s* Ventricular contractions are weak and uncoor-
dinated and do not cjcct blood (cardliac output
ccases). The ECG shows irregular, chaotic, and dc-
formed deflections of varying amplitude, width, and
shape. Immedliate defibrillation and cardiopulmonary
resuscitation must be unclertaken (chapter 2l). Ven-
tricular flutter prcsents as a sine wave in appearance,
which is characterized by regular, large oscillations and
FIGURE 6-44
may progrcss to ventricular fibrillation. They may not
Coarsc ventricular Hibrillatiorn. Disorganized oseillations without
be casily distinguishable from rapid ventricular tachy-
recognizable QRS-T deflcions are evidenr. (Frorn Tilley L.1:
Essentials of Canine and Feline Flctrocardiography, rd ed.
cardia,
Philadclphia, Lea & Fcbiger, 1992. with permission.)
100DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
third-degree (complete) AV block, normal P waves
ABERRANT CONDUCTION
occur but no QRS complexes are present. With severe
(Fig. 6-47; see also Figs. 18-3 and 19-4)
SA block or arrest, the faster the original rate, the
longer the period of asystole.
Aberration refers to abnormalities of a supraventric-
ular impulse with abnormal or bizarre intraventricular
ADVANCED
conduction.54-6t It occurs when a premature impulse
conducts through cardiac tissue (bundlc branches,
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHIC
Purkinje fibcrs, or rmyocardium) that is in its absolute
CONCEPTS AND TECHNIOUES
or relativc refractory period. This may be related to
changes in cycle length, functional alterations in cellu-
 lar electrophysiologic propertics, clectrolyte and meta-
LADDER DIAGRAMS (Figs. 6-45 and 6-46)
bolic abnorrmalities, or toxic drug cffects. A form of
aberrancy associated with effects of changing cycle
The ladder (Lewis) diagram is a graphic illustration
lcngths on refractoriness is known as the Ashman phe
of cardiac inmpulsc formation and condluction. It is
nomenon. Duration of refractory period is related to
used to enhance understanding of arrhythmias and
the immediately preceding cyclc length--the longer
conduction disorders.21. 59
the preceding cycle, the longer the refractory period.
A
A
A-V
A
A-V
V
FIGURE 6-45
Technique describing use of the atrioventricular (AV) ladder diagram. (A) First, use a ruler to line
up the beginning of the P waves with a subsequent vertical lne drawn at the A (atrial) level Then,
linc up the beginning of the QRs (Q wave) with the ventricular (V) level, and draw a corresponding
vertical line. Finally, indicate AV conducton by connecling the bottom of the atrial line with the top
of the ventricular fine. A dot indicates the site of impulse formation. (B) Thc first two interpolated
orcus afier the third VPC. (From Tiley Ll: Essentials of Canine and Feline Electrocardiography.
3rd ed. Philadelphia, Iea & Febiger, 1992. with permnission.)
ELECTROCARIIOGRAPHY
101
SA
NODE
ATRIA(A)
A-V
NODE
VENTRICLES (V)
FIGURE 6-46
Representative examples of the atrioventricular (AV) ladder diagram: (1) Atrial premature complex
(APC) with normal conduction; (2） APC with aberrant venuricular conduction (also used to illustrate
left and right buncte branches); (3) nonconducted APC; (4) AV junctioral premature complex with
anterograde vemtricular and retrograde atrial conduclion: (5) ventricular premature complex (VPC)
with partial penetration of the AV junction; (6) Fusion coinplex between a sinus impulse and an
conduction. (Fron tilley Lit: Essentials of Canine and Feline Elcctrocardiography. 3rd ed.
Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1992, with perumission.)
 Sudden prolongation of the inmedliately preceding
2. RBBB pattern of thc aberrant QRS.
cycle length with a relatively constant hcart ratc may
 3. Nonconpensatory pause following the aberrant QRS
causc aberration. The refractory period of the right
complex.
bundle branch normally cxcccds that. of the Ieft. bun-
 4. Irregular coupling of thc aberrant QRS.
dlle branch. Therefore, aberration due to thc Ashman
phenomenon usually shows a RBBB configuration and
must be differentiated frorn VPCs. If a P' wave having
CONCEALED CONDUCTION
a slightly prolonged P'-R interval precedes the aber-
(Figs. 645 and 6-46)
rant QRs complex, intraventricular aberrant conduc-
tion of a supraventricular premature complcx (versus
 Concealed conduction explains the phcnomenon of
 a ventricular premature complex) is suggested (Fig. 6-
incomplete cardiac impulse conduction through spe-
47).
cialized conducion tissuc (c.g., AV node) and empha-
sizes the irmportance of deductive reasoning in arrhyth-
ECG Characteristics (Aberrancy Due to the
mia analysis. The effect of incompletely conductcd
AshmanPhenomenon)
impulses on subsequent. clectrocardiographic tran-
scriptions is manifestcd by changes in the ensuing
1. Relatively long cycle immediately prcceding the cy
P-QRS-T complexes, 21, 64, ba For example, retrograde
cle terninated by the aberrant QRS complex.
impulse transmission of VPCs into the AV node may
causc (l) conduction delay (i.c., prolongcd conduc
tion of normal  supraventricular
impulses down
through the AV node, resulting in P-R interval prolon-
gation [1° AV block]), (2) block of P wave transmission
(e.g., 2° AV block); (3) displacement of the normal
hancement, or (5) a combination of these. Although
the prescnce of concealed conduction rmay often be
deduced, further studies may be nceded to confirm
this possibility.
FIGURE 6-47
Aberrant. ventricular conduction recorded from a dog. Amial
PARASYSTOLE
tachycardia is iniriated by an APC (after the seconcd sinus 
complex). This first. APC contains a long P'-R interval with
aberrant ventricular conduction (arrow). This aberrancy may
This term refers to arrhythmias characterized by
represent the Ashman phenomenon, owing lo the long cardiac
(1) a varying coupling interval betwccn the ectopic
cycle that preceded the short. cyclc. Secondary ST-T changes arc
(parasystolic) complex and dominant, sinus com-
also prescnl. (From Tilley LP: Essentials of Canine and Feline
Elcctrocardiography. 3rd’cdl. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1992,
plexes, (2) a common minimal time interval between
with permission.)
interectopic intervals, with longer intercctopic inter-
102  DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
vals representing multiples of the minimal interval; the
special scanncr (Fig. 6-48) or by using computerized
techniques.
from discharge by the dominant. (sinus) rhythm, and
 Indications for long-term ECG monitoring include
(3) fusion complexes. This arrhythmia may originate
thc nccd (l) to demonstratc suspected paroxysmal
in atrial AV junctional or ventricular tissues.60-61
tachyarrhythmias, bradyarrhythmias, or conduction
dlisordcrs when the routinc ECG fails to record an
arrhythmia, (2) to associate known rhythm distur
RE-ENTRY (scc Fig. 6-46)
bances with clinical signs such as syncope, (3) to docu-
ment. arrhythmias with hemodynamic significance, (4)
Re-entry is a mcchanisn underlying many tachyar-
to dlemonstrate arrhythmias with the potential for clec-
rhythmias (chapters 16 and 18). The electrical impulse
trical instability, and (5) to assess cfficacy of antiar-
that activates a cardiac tissue returns by a different
rhythmic or pacemaker therapy (sce chapter 18).59. 0
pathway to reactivate the same tissue and thus, initiate
To highlight. the relative lack of diagnostic accuracy
reciprocating arrhythmias.60-6 Purkinje fibers, ische-
provided by bricf lcad Il rhythm strip recordings com-
mic myocardial tissue, bundle branches, His bundle,
pared with 48-hour continuous monitoring, one studly6e
AV nodal tissue, and accessory AV pathways (WPW
compared the two tcchniques: the percentage of dogs
syndrome) all may function as a re-entrant. circuit.
with no ventricular arrhythmias recorded on ECGs
performed every 6 hours, but with arrhythmia rc-
corded by 48-hour continuous monitoring, was 25 per-
CONTINUOUS ECG (HOLTER)
cent when more than 3000 VPCs/hour were present;
MONITORING (Fig. 6-48; see also Fig. 18-21)
 50 percent. with 1000 to 3000 VPCs/hour; and 100
 percent with 10 to 300 VPCs/hour.
The short, resting, lcad H rhythrm strip as generally
performed during clinical cxamination has limited
ability to intercept many arrhythmias. To enhance
TRANSTELEPHONIC
rhythm-sampling duration, continuous monitoring
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
may be applied. This techniquc employs a precordial
lcad system (two or three electrodles positioned on the
chest wall) connected to a portable, baftery-powered
Transtelephonic electrocardliography is well estab
ECG monitor. The ECG signal is rccorded on magnetic
lished in veterinary and human medicine and can
tape or solid state unit, which is then analyzed by a
accurately characterize rhythm dlisturbances and con-
duction abnormalities. It utilizes a small, portable, bat-
tery-powered, transistorized ECG prcamplifier that
converts ECG signals into tones that can be transmitted
CH12:22AM T0 2:27AM D1 PATIENT
DATE
over the telephone line to a central receiving center
staffed by specialists.67
In a clinical revicw of 2000 consecutive transtele-
phonic caninc ECGs, 18 typcs of arrhythmias were
cluded supraventricular arrhythmias (APCs, atrial
tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, and atrial Hutter); ven-
tricular arrhythrmias (VPCs, ventricular tachycardia and
fibrillation); conduction disorders (1°, 2", and 3° AV
block, SA block and/or arrest, atrial standstill, and
ventricular pre-excitation). Technical limitations of
transtelephonic electrocardiography include attenua-
tion of recorded voltages and inadequate frequcncy
response of the mcchanical system (recorder stylus),
but thesc dlo not intcrfere with arrhythmia interpreta-
tion and diagnosis.
FIGURE 6-48
Printouts of a displayed time segment from a Holter monitor
systen. Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia can be easily recognized
COMPUTED ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
and correlated with the time of occurrence by referring to digital
tirne entries clisplayed adjacent to the ECG data. By this technique.
arrhythmias can be recognized and graphically enlarged for
complete analysis. (Courlesy of Del Mar Avionics, lrvine,
Computed interpretation of the clectrocardiogram
California.)
hias developed in human medicine; its contributions
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
103
includeimprovedtechnicalECGquality;reducedneed
formedical record storage and improved routine sur-
veillance for abnormalities;enhanced data retrieval;
stimulated teaching;and reduced time needed for
analysisandinterpretation.6Manufacturersofelectro-
A
cardiographmachineshave addedcomputed assess-
mentofP-QRs-Twaveforms tomanyoftheirnewer
models. The clinician should be wary of relying on
HIs
these computed assessments, however, as they have
beencalibratedforhumanpatients.Inveterinarymed-
A
icine, computed ECG analysis is still an emerging
Electrogram
feld.5 In both human and veterinary application, it is
mandatorythat all ECGs bereviewed by anelectrocar-
Node
diographer so thatcomputer analysis not be the final
No-e
assessment.Currently available softwareprograms can-
notaccuratelyinterpretmanycomplexarrhythmias,
although they are effective in diagnosing common
Bundle
problems.
R.Bund
INTRACAVITARY
B
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY(Fig.6-49;see
LEADI
also Fig. 18-12)
A routine ECG does not provide detailed informa-
tionaboutconduction system activation andmaynot
indicate the presence of atrial activity (P waves). Intra-
cavitary recordings can generate a cardiac electrogram
using uni-, bi,tri-,quadri,or hexapolar catheters
inserted in the right atrium orventricle.21.59.60Special
C
His bundle catheters can provide a Hisbundle ECG
thatrecords atrial andventricular activity,atrium-to-
FIGURE6-49
His bundle conduction, His bundle-to-ventricle con-
(A) Canine bundle of His (His) electrogram (bottom) recorded
duction,and other information.Atrial activityin com-
simultaneously with a right atrial (RA) electrogram (middle) and a
lead II electrocardiogram (top）.(P,Pwave;R,Rwave;A,atrial
plex tachyarrhythmias may be uncovered,aberrant
deflection;H,His bundle deflection;V,ventricular deflection.)
ventricularconductiondetected,siteofAVblockdeter-
(B)His bundle electrogram (from [A] above) related to the
mined,conduction intervals between the atrium and
corresponding conduction system sitesillustrated by thein situ
cardiac diagram.(C) Same scheme as in (A).The third complex
His bundle and between theHis bundle andventricles
from left (arrow) on thelead II ECG is of supraventricular origin
defined, and arrhythmia ablation or cardiac pacing
TheP’wave is premature; the His bundle electrogram displays a
facilitated.
lengthened A'-H'interval due to prolonged conduction through
theAVnode,whichhasnotfullyrecoveredfrom theprevious
impulse.The third complex(R')represents aberrant conduction.
（From TilleyLP:Essentials of Canine and Feline
Electrocardiography.3rd ed.Philadelphia,Lea &Febiger,1992,
SIGNAL-AVERAGING
with permission.)
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
Signal-averaging electrocardiography (SAECG) is a
techniqueforevaluatingventricularlatepotentialsthat
myocardiumthatmayserveas asiteforre-entry and
occur during the terminal phase of the QRS complex
developmentofventricular arrhythmias.Studieshave
or during theS-T segment.They represent low-ampli-
shownSAECGstoidentify some human patientswho
tude(usually less than1μV)and high-frequency elec-
are atincreasedriskfordevelopingsustainedventricu-
tricalactivity.69.70Speciallyplaced surface electrodes
lartachycardia and,to alesser extent,suddendeath.
are used to evaluate three bipolar ECG leads by a
Experience in veterinarymedicineis currentlylimited
signal-averaging computer.The computer amplifies,
withSAECGs.Someboxers andDobermanpinschers
filters,digitally samples,and then signal-averages the
withcardiomyopathyhavebeenidentifiedwithventric-
complexestoremove extraneousnoisefrom the signal.
ular latepotentials onSAECGs.A few alsohadventric-
Ventricular late potentials occur in areas of injured
ular arrhythmias and experienced sudden death.71
104   DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
23. 1azzara R. Basic electrophysiology. In Helfant R (ed):
REFERENCES
Bellet's Essentials of Cardiac Arrhythunias. Philadelphia,
WB Sautlers, 1979
24.
Silver EN, Katz L.N. Elecirocardiography and vectorcardi-
1. Opie LH. The Ilcart. Physiology and Metabolism. 2nd
ography. In Hleart Disease. New York, Macimillan, 1975,
ed. New York, Raven Press, 1991
p 294
24a. Fisch C. Electrocardiography. In Braunwald E (cd):
2. Kolliker A, Muller H. Nockweis der Negativen Schiwan-
Hearl Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine,
kung tles Muskelstrom am Naturlich sich contrahireiden
Muskel. Verh Phys Med Ges 6:528, 1856
5th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1996, p 108
25. Greenspan K. Cardiac cxcitation, conducion and the
3. Lipman BS, Dunn M, Massie E. Clinical Electrocardiog-
electrocardliogram. In Selkurt EE (ed): Physiology. 4th
raphy. 7th ed. Chicago, Year Book Medical Publishers,
ed. Boston, Litule, Brown, 1976, p 311
1984
 26. Horan LG, Flowers NC. Electrocardiography and vector-
4. Waller AD, A demonstration on mau of clcctromotive:
cardiography. In Brauwald F. (ed): Heari Disease. Phila-
changes accompanying the hearl's beat. J Physiol (L.ond)
tlelphia, WB Saunders, 1980, p 198
8:229,1887
27. Castellanos A, Myerburg R. The rcsting electocardio
 5. Burch GE, DePasquale NP. A Ilistory of Electrocardiog-
grarm. In Hurst [W (ed): The Heart. 6th ed. New York.
raphy. Chicago, Ycar Book Medical Publishers, 1964
McGraw-HHill, 1986, p 206
6. Lewis T. Clinical Electrocardiography. New York, Shaw &
28. Abildskov JA. The electrocardiogran. In Sodeman WA
Sons, 1913
(ed): Pathologic Physiology; Mechanisms of Disease. 5th
7. Wilson FN, Johnston FD. Macleond AG, et al. Electrocar-
ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders. 1974, p 312
diogranis that represent tht potential variations of a
29.
 Fox PR (ed). Canine and Feline Cardiology. Xew York,
single clcctrode. Am Ileart J 9:477, 1934
Churchill Livingstone, 1988
8. Wilson FN, Johnston FD, Rosenbaum FF, et al. On Ein-
29a. Edwards NJ. Bolton's Hlandbook of Canine and Feline
thoven's triangle, the theory of unipolar electrocardio-
Electrocardiography. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saum-
graphic leads and thc interpretation of the precordial
ders, 1987
electrocardiogram. A1n Heart J 32:279, 1946
30. Zipcs DP Specifc arrhythmias: Diagnosis and treatment.
9. Norr J. Uber Ilertzstromkurvenautnahmen an Haus-
In Braunwald E (ed): Heart Disease, 5th ed. Philadcl-
tieren. Zur Finfuhrung der Elektrokardiographie in die
phia, WB Saunders, 1996, p 705
Veterinarmedizin. Arch Wiss Prakt Tierhdikd 48:85, 1922
 31. Wynne J, Braunwald E. 1he cardiomyopathies and myo-
10. Detweiler DK. Flcctrocardiographic and clinical fcatures
cardiides: Toxic, chemical, and physical damage to the
of spontaneous auricular fbrilation and flutter (tachy-
hcart. In Braunwald E (ed): Heart Disease, 5th ed. Phila-
cardia) in dogs. Zentralbl Veterinaermed 4:509, 1957
delphia, WB Saunders 1996, p 1404
11. Detweiler DK, Patterson DF The prevalence and types
32. Fox PR, Nichols CER. Cardiac involvement in systemic
of heart disease in dogs. Ann NY Acad Sci 127:481, 1965
disease. In Fox PR (ed): Cannine and Feline Cardiology.
12. Patterson DF, Detweiler DK, Hubben K, et al. Spontane-
New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1988, p 565
ous abnormal cardiac arrhythmias and conduction dis-
33. Stang JM, Ryan JM. The magic of the electrocardiogram;
turbances in the tlog (a clinical and pathologic study of
Diagnostic uuility of the sealar and vector FCG in the
3.000 dogs). Ain J Vet Res 22:355. 1961
1980s: A perspecive. In Warren JV, Lewis RP (eds):
13. Hanlin Ri, Smith CR. Anatonical and physiological
Diagnostic Proccdures in Cardiology: A (Clinician's
basis for intcrpretation of the electrocardiogram. Am J
Guide. Chicago, Year Book Medical Publishers, 1985,
Vet Res 21:701. 1960
p51
14. Ilamlin RL, Sinetzer Dl, Smith CR. The electrocardio-
33a. Schrope DP, Fox PR, Hahn AW, et al. Effects of electro-
gran, phonocardiogram and derived ventricular activa-
cardiograph frequency filters on P-ORS-T ampliudes of
tion process of donnestic cats. Am J Vet Res 24:792, 1960
the feline clectr0cardiogran. A1n J Vet Res 56:1534, 1995
15. Hamlin RI.. Electrocardiographic detection of ventricu-
34. James TN, Robertson Bl; Waldo Al., el al. De subitancis
s  aa   o   na 
nortibus, XV. HIereditary stenosis of the His bundle in
153:1461.1968
Pug dogs. Circulation 52:1152, 1975
16. HHill JD. The electrocardiogram in dogs with standard-
35. James IN. Congenital deafness and cardiac arrhythmias.
ized body and linb positions, J Electrocardiol 1:175,
Am J Cardio1 19:627, 1967
1968
36. Steven1son WG, Perloff JK, Weiss JN, et al. Facioscapulo-
17. Moore EN. Morsc IIT, Price AC. Cardiac arrhythmias
humeral muscular dystrophy: Evidencc for selective. ge-
produced by catecholamines in anesthetized dogs. Circ
netie electrophysiologic cardiac invoivemen. J Am Coll
Rcs 15:77,1964
Cardiol 15:292, 1990
18. Moore EN, Jomain SL, Stuckcy JII, et al. Sudies o11
37. Jeraj K,et al. Atrial standstill, myocarditis and destruc-
ectopice atrial rhythims in dogs. Am J Cardiol 19:676, 1967
tio1 of cardiac conduction system: Clinicopathologic cor-
19.
Ettinger SJ, Suter PF Canine Cardiology. Philadelphia,
relation in a dog. Am Heart J 99:185, 1980
WB Saunders, 1970
 38. Holland CT, Cranfield PJ, Watson AD, et al. Dyserythro-
20. Fox PR. Animal models of naturally occurring arrhyth-
poicsis, polymyopathy, and cardiac disease in three re-
nias. In Dangman KII, Mura DS (eds): Electrophysiology
alnd Pharmacology of the Heart. New York, Marcel Dek-
1991
ker, Inc, 1991, p 413
 39. Pattcrson DF. Congenital defects of the cardiovascular
21. Tilley LP. Essentials of Canine and Feline Flectrocardiog
system of dogs: Suudies in comparative cardiology. Adv
raphy Interpretation and Management. 3rd ed. Philadel-
Vet Sci Comp Med 20:1, 1976
phia, Lea & Febige1, 1992
40.
 Spodick DH. Fascicular blocks: Not interpretable from
22. Miller MS, Tilley L, Detweiler DK. Cardiac Electrophysi-
thc electrocardiogran. A1n J Cardiol 70:809, 1992
ology. In Swenson MJ, Reece WD. Duke's Physiology of
41. Leitch J, Klein Gf, Yce R, et al. New concepts on nodo-
Domestic Animals. 1lth ed. New York, Cornell University
ventricular accessory pathways. J Cardiovasc Electrophy-
Press, 1993, p 105
siol 1:220, 1990
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY105
42. Wellens Hll. Brugada PC, Penn OC, ct al. Pre-excitation
tham/OsU Symposium; Cardiology. Vernon, California,
syindromes. In Zipes DP, Jalife J (eds): Flcctrophysiology:
1994, p 119
From Cell to Bedside. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1990,
57.
 Moise NS, Meycrs-Wallen V, Flahive W], ct al. Inherited
p 691
ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death in German
43. Moore EN, Spear JF. Boincau JP. Arrhythmias and con-
shepherd dogs. J Am Coll Cardiol 24:233, 1994
duction disturbances in simulated Wolf-Parkinson-White
58. Rush JE. Wingfield WE. Rccognition and frequency of
syndromc in the dog. Am J Cardiol 6:650, 1971
dysrhythmias during cardiopulmonary arrest. J Am Vet
44.
Hill Bl., Tilley LP.Ventricular preexcitation in seven
Med Assoc 200:1932, 1992
dogs and nine cats. J Vet Med Assoc 187:1026, 1985
59. Tiley LP. Advanccd electrocardiographic tchniques. Vet
45. Rothreld El. The itinerant S1-1 segrnent. Heart lung
Clin North Am 13:365, 1983
6:857. 1977
60. Chung EK. Principles of Cardiac Arrhythmias. 3rd ed.
46. Detweiler DK. The dog electrocardiogram: A critical re-
Ballinore, Willians & Wilkins, 1983
view. In MacFarlane PW, Lawrie TDV (eds): Comprehen-
61. Zipes DP, Jacifes J (eds). Cardiac Electrophysiology.
sive Electrocardiography: Theory and Practice in Health
 Fronn Cell to Bedside. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1990,
and Disease. New York, Pergainon Press, 1988
p 807
47. Oguchi Y, Iamlin RL. Ratc of change of QT interval in
62. Fisch C. Elcctrocardiography of arrhythmias: From de-
responsc to a sudden change in the heart rate in dogs.
ductive analysis to laboratory confirmationTwenty-five
Amn J Vet Res 55:1618, 1994
years of progress. J Arn Coll Cardiol 1:306, 1983
48. Friedinan HH. Diagnostic Electrocardiography and Vec-
63. Josephonson ME. Clinical Cardiac Flecurophysiology.
torcardiography. 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1985
2nd ed. Philadelphia, Lea & Fehigcr, 1993
49. Liu SK, Fox PR. Myocardial infarction and ischermia. In
64. Fisch C. Concealed conduction. In Zipes DP (ed): Cardi-
Kirk RW, Bonagura JB (eds): Kirk's Current. Veterinary
ology Clinies. Vol 1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1983,
Therapy. Vol X1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992, p 791
p 63
 50. Bonagura JD. Electrical alternans associated with pericar
65. Miller Ms, Calvert CA、 Special methods for analyzing
tial effhusion in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 178:574,
arrhythnias. In Tiley LP: Essentials of Canine and Feline
1981
Electrocardiography. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lea & Feb-
51. Fox PR, Broussard JD, Peterson ME. Eleclrocardio-
iger, 1992, p 289
a  sin  s e pe o
66. Marino DJ, Matthiesen DT, Fox PR, et al. Ventricular
roidism: Comparison of populations evaluatcd during
arrhythumias in dogs undergoing splencctoiny: A prospee-
1979-1993; Abstract. J Vet Intern Med 7:118, 1993
tive study. Vet Surg 23:101, 1994
5la. Broussard JD, Peterson ME, Fox PR. Changes in clinical
67. T
Tilley LP. Transtelephonic analysis of cardiac arrhyth-
      
mias in the dog. Vet Clin North Am 13:63, 1983
from 1983 1o 1993. J An Vet Med Assoc 206:302-305.
68. Sridharan MR, Flowers NC. Computerizcd tleciro-
1995
cardiographic analysis. Mod Concepts Cardiovasc Dis
52. Jordan JL, Yamaguchi I, Mandel WJ. Studies on the
53(7):37,1984
mechanisms of sinus node dyslunction in the sick sinus
69. Simson MB. Use of signals in the terminal QRS complex
syndrome. Circulation 57:217, 1978
to itdentify patients with ventricular tachycardia after
53. Hamlin RI. Sinetzer DL, Breznock EM. Sinoatrial sy11-
myocardial infarction. Circulation 64:235, 1981
copc in miniaturc Schnauzers. J Arn Vet Med Assoc
70. Calverl CA. High-resolution electrocardiography (signal-
161:1023, 1972
averaged clectrocardiography)  in normal ‘ Doberman
 54. Bonagura JD, Warc WA. Atrial fibrillation in the dog and
pinschers and Doberman pinschers with occult cardio-
cat. Clinical findings in 8l cases. J Ain Anim I losp Assoc.
myopathy. ACVIM Scicntific Proceedings. New Orleans,
22:111, 1986
1991, p 693
55. Harpster NK. The cardiovascular systerm. In Holzworth J
 71. Brcithardt. G, Borggrefe M. Recent advances in the iden-
(ed): Diseases of the Cat. Medicinc and Surgery. Phila-
tification of patients at risk of ventricular tachyarrhyth-
delphia, WB Saumders, Philadelphia, 1987, p 820.
mias: Role of ventricuar late potentials. Circulation
56. Fox PR. Feline myocardial diseascs. 18th Anmal Wal-
75:1091, 1987
Radi
PETER F. LORD
PETER F. SUTER
ROLE OF RADIOLOGY IN DIAGNOSIS AND
MANAGEMENT OF THORACIC DISEASE
Thoracic radiography forms the cornerstonc for evaluation of cardiopul-
monary discase.l 2 Its value is to (l) provide direct information about
cardiovascular size and shape; (2) indicate lesions or abnormalities in lung
parcnchyma, airways, and plcural and mediastinal spaccs; (3) indirectly
asscss cardiopulmonary circulation; (4) reflect thc degrec of heart failure:
and (5) disclosc and hclp assess noncardiac conditions. A careful and system-
atic thoracic radiographic examination may facilitate, confirm, or exclude a
 particular clinical diagnosis suspccted from the history and physical cxamina-
tion. It also aids in assessing the scvcrity and significance of known hcart.
diseasc and helps cvaluate thcrapcutic efficacy.
Although many cardiorcspiratory disorders manifest. with similar clinical
signs (e.g., coughing, dyspnca, fainting, or cyanosis), hcart failurc oftcn can
be diferentiatcd from respiratory disorders on the basis of radiographic
features. This is especially truc when the history, clinical signs, and physical
cxamination are not spccifie enough to confer a dcfinitive diagnosis. Radio-
 logic information may also illustrate the nced for other diagnostic fess that
would not othcrwise be considered.
Echocardiography cannot replace radliography for cvaluation of the
coughing or dyspncic paticnt. Thc cchocardliogram often providcs useful
information about cardiac anatomy and function. Howcver, only racdiography
will indicate certain hemodynamic conscqucnccs of hcart. failurc (c.g.. pul-
monary congestion), provide information about the respiratory system, help
idcntify and differenliatc clinical abnormalities attributable to many sys-
temic, noncardliac diseascs, and assist in asscssing iherapcutic rcsponse.
Contrast studies such as angiocardiography (chapters 9, 24) and pcricardiog-
raphy (chapter 29) bave declined in importance with the growing refinc-
mcnt of echocardiography. IHowever, these techniques still maintain a placc
for definitivc diagnosis of certain conditions. Thus, knowledgc of cardiac
anatomy is cssential (Fig. 7-1).
RADIOGRAPHIC QUALITY
The natural contrast provided by air in lhc lungs ouilincs thie hcart,
mediastinum, thoracic wall, diaphragm, and pulmonary structurcs. Thc
opacity of the ribs, spine, and muscle mass is minimizcd, while the lungs
and airways are optimally cxposcd.
107
108
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
A
B
FIGURE 7--1
Schematic. diagrams of the norual canine cardiac silhouctle illustrating radiographic anatomy. (A,
B) Right lateral view: (C) dorsovenral view. a, Ieft atrium; b, left ventricle: c, right ventricle; d, right
alrium; e, ascending aorta; I. pulmonary trunk.
TECHNICAL FACTORS
of shock or other conditions in whichi cardiac output
is severcly reduced.
The clinician must master the technical factors that
 pe s see oi ny r
EXPOSURE TIMES
proves diagnostic accuracy. Poor imagc quality lcads to
frustration or misdiagnosis.
"Fogging"
 caused by scaftered radiation is not a
grcat problerm because most of the thorax contains
A tcchniquc chart that uscs high kilovoliage (kV)
air. It is morc important that short cxposure times
and low milliamp-scconds (mAs) is best for thoracic
(maximum 0.02 s) be used to offsct cffccis of motion.
radiography bccausc it (l) minimizcs cxposure time.
For this rcason, a grid should not bc used even on
(2) reduccs motion unsharpncss, and (3) produces a.
fairly large dogs, if it increases cxposure time so much
low-contrast, high-latiude image that is ideal for tho-
that a blurred image would result. Rare carth screens
racic organ intcrprctation. The cxposurc must place
can bc 400 percent fastcr than standard high-speed
the parenchyma in the middle of the grey scale. Thc
screens, with no decrcasc in resolution. Their usc,
high latitude technique will ensure that some contrast
combined with an accurate electronic timcr, usually
remains in the spine and mediastinum. To avoid un-
will ensure acceptable films from a low-powcr machine.
der- or overexposure, technique corrcctions must
 Exposurc must be sufhcient in the ventrodorsal (VD)
accommodatc variations  in proportion of tissue to
or dorsovcntral (IDV) view to differcntiatc mediastinal
air associated with brccds (c.g., bulldog vs. Afghan
structures, including aortic arch, desccnding aorta,
hound): chest. conformation (c.g., obcsc vs. cmaci-
atcd); and known discascs (c.g., plcural cffusion vs.
main pulmonary arteries, trachea, and main bronchi.
pncumothorax).
 Standard devclopment (cither by the timc-tempera-
turc mcthod using frcsh devcloper and fixcr or an
RADIOGRAPHIC POSITIONING
automatic filin proccssor) is another essential element
for reproducible diagnostic films. Old developer and
fixer mars itnage qualiiy.
Animals must be positioncd straight since even slight.
 Tranquillization (chapter 38) should be used judi-
obliquity in either lateral, ventrodorsal, or dorsoventral
ciously and a1. a low dose when necessary to achicve a
vicws distorts the cardiac silhouerte and the dia-
diagnostic inmage. In an uncooperative animal, poten-
 phragm?1 and displaces thc anatomic relationships bc-
tial risks of sedation should be weighed against thc
twecn bronchi and pulmonary vcsscls. This makes it.
loss of diagnostic information from a distortcd imagc,
difficult to distinguish normal fronn abnormal strue-
motion unsharpness, and qunderintlatcd lungs. Seda-
lures. Radiographic positioning should be standard-
tion may cause less stress than is incurred by manual
ized. Either the right or lceft lateral view, or the DV
restraint. of a struggling animal, cxccpt in somc states
or Vl) view, should bc used routinely so that slight
RADIOLOGY
109
differencesbetweenviews56arenotmisinterpreted as
DIFFERENCESBETWEEN
abnormalities.
RADIOGRAPHICVIEWS
In lateral views, sternal contact is often greater in
RESPIRATORYPHASE
theleft than therightlateral view,particularly in
round-chested dogs (Fig. 7-2).The heart rotates
slightly in thecraniocaudal axis due toitsweight,and
Ideally,radiographsshouldbeexposedatpeakinspi-
it can move to a greater extent in a wide than in a
ration to optimizecontrast and detail.7In dogs,radio
thin thorax.Becauseincreasedsternal contactis a sign
graphicchangeshave beenreported relative to phase
ofright heart enlargement in the right lateral view,
of respiration.
observationofnormalcontactasviewedintheleft
lateral view may be mistakenly interpreted as enlarge-
LATERALRADIOGRAPHEXPOSEDATFULLINSPIRATION
ment,especially if congenital heart disease orheart-
(compared to full expiration).At full inspiration there
wormsare suspected.Consistency withfollow-up exam-
is (1) increased sizeof lung lobes cranial to the cardiac
inations ismore important than whichviewischosen
silhouette,(2)slightelevation of the silhouette from
initially,5,6 so that slight differences in shape are not
the sternum,(3)increasedventral trachealangulation
mistaken for pathology.
over the heart,(4)a flatter diaphragm with greater
SpecialconditionsmayaffectthechoiceofDVor
separation of diaphragmfrom caudalcardiacborder,
VDviews.Theanimalmaybeuncomfortable
or
(5)awider lumbar-diaphragmaticangle(generally
dyspneic,for example,and may not tolerate certain
caudal to T-12),and (6)a thinner,more elongated
positions. It may be more difficult to pull the forelegs
anddistinctcaudalvenacava thatismoreparallel to
forward in theDVview.In addition,the hilar area and
the vertebral column.
thepulmonaryarteriesinthecaudal lobes aremore
sharplydelineated in theDVviewbecausethedorsal
VENTRODORSALRADIOGRAPHEXPOSEDATFULLINSPIRA
lungis better inflatedwith the animal intheprone
TION (compared tofull expiration).At full inspiration
position,1 6 making subtle signs of heartworm disease
there is(1)a smaller cardiac silhouette(more appar-
andperibronchial lesionsmorelikelytobediagnosed.
entthanrealduetodecreasedcardiothoracicratio),
Ontheotherhand,theprojectionofthelungfield is
(2) increased thoracic width (especially caudal to the
larger in the VD view. In the cat, the lungs are nor-
6th rib),(3) increased thoracic cavity length,(4) dia-
mallybetter inflated in theVDviews because the tho-
phragmatic domepositioned caudal to midT-8,(5)a
raxismore expanded.6Mildpleuraleffusionmay be
wider cardiodiaphragmatic angle with decreased cardi-
missedintheVDviewbecausethefluidgravitatesto
odiaphragmatic contact,and (6)a costodiaphragmatic
the paraspinal gutters formed by the rib curvature.
angle located caudal to T-10.
Taking advantage of thisfact,the suspicion of pleural
B
R
FIGURE7-2
Left (A)and right (B) lateral views of a normal St.Bernard,a breed with a round thoracic
view.These variations in cardiac shape and contact must not be misinterpreted as cardiac pathology.
110 DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
effusion suggests usc of a VD vicw if cardiac size and
ROUND-cCHEsTED DOGs. This other cxtrenme in confor-
shape are to be cvaluatcd, bccausc fluid is lcss likely
mation may cause the heart to appcar rounder and
to obscure thic cardiac silhoucttc in thc VD than in
larger in the lateral view, with grcater sternal contact.
thhe DV vicw.*. 
Thesc hcarts appear ovoid on thc DV or V) vicws.
 PUPpirs. Normally, puppies havc rclativcly slightly
LATERAL VIEWS
largcr hcarts than do adult dogs. This can lead to an
Ohliquity makes the heart appcar roundcr. Instcad
crroncous misdiagnosis of cardiomegaly in some cascs.
of being superimposed on each othcr, the main sterm
bronchi are tilted, giving thc imprcssion of left atrial
OBEsrTY. Fat deposited around the heart can crcatc
cnlargcmcnt. When the thorax is straight in the lateral
thc impression of cardiomcgaly, particularly in the VD
vicw, thic dorsal archics of thc ribs on each side will
or DV view, which must bc taken into considcration
linc up with cachi other.
when cvaluating the cardiac silhouettc of obcsc ani-
mals.
DV AND VD VIEWS
The tips of the spinous processes should be within
FELINE BREED CONFORMATION
the bounds of the vertebral bodics.? Ihe hcart is more
clongated in the VD than in thc DV view. Thc tech
Cats have far lcss brccd-related cardiac variation
nique must be set so that vesscls arc clearly visualized.
than dogs. Variation, whcn it occurs, is morc individual
rather than breed related,9 The anglc of cardiac long
axis oricntation is more variablc than is the heart.
EXPOSURE TIMING
shape. Age-rclated changes in thc fcline cardiac silhou-
etle have bcen reported. An cxaggerated *horizontal"
Ideally, the rarliograph should be exposcd at thc
alignmcnt of the heart. (incrcascd sternal contact) and
tortuous, rcdundant aorta arc a common variation in
are a major source of misdiagnosis. Obesc and panting
older cats.10
dogs may not brcathe deeply cnough to provide good
inspiration. Diffcrcnccs in inspiration and expiration
were discusscd carlicr under Respiratory Phase.
INFLUENCE OF THE CARDIAC CYCLE
AND CIRCULATING BLOOD VOLUME
EVALUATING CARDIAC SIZE
AND SHAPE
Thc stagc of the cardliac cycle has a slight effect. on
sizc and shape.1l External transverse diametcr changes
 only 7 percent to makc a volume change from diastole
to systoie of 50 perccnt in the normal ventricles.e This
Variations in conformation, positioning, and tech-
is because the lincar dimensions arc cubed to give
nique may crcate a false appcarance of cardiac enlarge-
volume mcasurements. Similarly, proportionately large
ment in animals suspected of having heart discasc.
 incrcascs in internal yolumc will causc a relatively small
Physiologic rather than pathologic conditions may af-
incrcase in cxternal dimensions.
fect heart size. The stage of respiration has becn mcn-
 Changes in circulating blood volume have a major
tioned as an important factor.
crcascs blood volume and cardiac size. Dehydration
(t.g, overdiuresis) may mask mild cardiac cnlarge-
CANINE BREED CONFORMATION
mcnt. Severe bypovolemia as may occur with hypoadrc.
 Normal variations in breed conformation can result
size.
in greater differences in relative heart size and shapc
than is caused by heart disease within a particular
brccd.t. * I. is csscntial to consider cardiac size and
METHODS OF CARDIAC
contour with reference to the particular conformation
of the dog.
EVALUATION
DEEP- AND NARROw-CHEsTED DOGs. Thcsc havc an elon-
gatcd, morc vertically oriented hcart. In thc DV vicw
The hcart may bc cvaluated by thrcc melhods: (1)
the hcart may appcar almost circular in shape.
the cmpiric mcthod based upon mcmory (i.e., a men
RADIOLOGY
111
tal “library” of normal appearances and associated
TABLE7-1
variations);(2)objectivemethods toevaluatecardiac
ConditionsThatMaybeAssociatedwithaRelatively
enlargement, measuring dimensions, ratios, and areas.13.14
Normal CardiacSilhouette
In the dog these efforts can be defeated by variations
Small atrial andventricular septal defects
inconformation,positioning,andradiographictech-
Mild aortic andpulmonic stenosis
nique.However,avertebral scale system tomeasure
Functional murmurs
canineradiographicheart size hasbeenreported,with
Bacterial endocarditis (early)
goodcorrelationbetweencardiacsizeandbodylength
Focalmyocarditis
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (mild)
regardless of conformation;14 and (3) a comparative
Mildmitral or aorticregurgitation
method evaluating heart enlargement using previous
Conduction disturbances
films of the same animal,orfilms from an animal of
Constrictive pericarditis
Neoplasia
the same breed. The last is generally the best method
Congestiveheartfailure overtreatedwith diuretics
of evaluation.15
(dehydration)
In contrast to the dog,the cat has little variation
in conformation.Therefore,cats are more amen-
abletomeasurementsofrelativeandabsoluteheart
RADIOGRAPHIC APPEARANCE.In the lateral vieW,the
size.9, 10, 16, 17
long cardiac axis is shorter, making the trachea appear
farther than normal awayfrom the spine.Theright-
sided heart border and apex may be separatedfrom
LIMITATIONSOFRADIOGRAPHIC
the sternum, creating a gap that may be mistaken for
ASSESSMENTFORCARDIAC
pneumothorax,particularly on radiographs with too
much contrast or that are overexposed. The apex is
ENLARGEMENT
morepointed,andthetransversecardiac dimensionis
narrower.In the DV or VD view,the cardiothoracic
Theability to evaluate chamber enlargement accu-
ratio is decreased (Fig. 7-3).
rately by radiography is probably overrated.1s A range
ofnormalvariationsincardiacsizeandshapeoverlaps
pathologic enlargement and can be influenced by
GENERALIZEDCARDIACENLARGEMENT
technical factors, positioning, and breed conforma-
tion.1.2 Thus, heart enlargement should be evaluated
CLINIcAL CAUsEs.The cardiac silhouettegenerally en-
only within the context of other clinical findings.
largesinresponsetovolume overloadormyocardial
Cardiac shape changes are usually easier to detect
failure or both.Volume overload may be caused by
than are small changesin cardiac size.Noncardiogenic
factors influencing cardiac shape include (l) breed
conformation (especially dogs),(2) obesity,(3) stage
ofrespiration andcardiac cycle,(4)dehydration or
overhydration,(5)pleural effusion,and (6)poor ra-
diographic positioning. Overdiagnosis of enlargement
is commonbecauseof thedesire toattributeclinical
signs to congestive heart failure, especially when a
heart murmur ispresent.9In contrast,withmany car-
diovascular disorders,whether ornotclinical signs are
present, the cardiac silhouette may appear radiograph-
ically within the normal range (Table 7-1).Therefore,
lackofcardiomegalydoesnotalwaysindicateabsence
of disease.
THESMALLHEART
CLINIcAL CAUsEs.A small heart mayresult from de-
creased venous return.Etiologies include dehydration,
FIGURE 7-3
overinflated lungs (physiologic, e.g., hyperpnea or up-
Right thoracicradiographofa10-year-old,hypovolemicGerman
per airway obstruction; or pathologic, e.g., emphy-
shepherd in shock.Notice the small heartwith the apex displaced
sema),shock,pneumothorax,and obstruction to ve-
awayfrom the sternum;thin,spindly pulmonaryvesselsand avery
thin caudal vena cava.These changes are associatedwith severe
nousinflow.
hypovolemia.
112
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
valvular incompctence, central or periphcral arteriove.
nous shunts (c.g., patent ductus arteriosus, arteriove-
nous fistula, unrestrictive ventricular scptal defects),
 or scverc bradycardia (e.g, completc heart block).
Myocardial failure may be primary (c.g., idiopathic
dilatcd cardiomyopathy), or it may occur secondary 10
A
the chronic bigh wall stress of scvere volume overload.
Myocardial tailure cannot. be directly assessed by radi-
 ography. It. may be determined by cchocardiography
noninvasively (chapter 8), cardiac catheterization and
 angiography (chapters 9. 24), or nuclear imaging or 
MRI (chapter 10).
Thc hcart is cncloscd in the pericardium, which
LV
under normal conditions tends to minimize focal pro-
trusion of individual chambers. In most discascs, how-
cver, more than one chamber is affccted by a volume
 or prcssure load. For example, if thc lcft vcntricle fails
FIGURE 7-5
from mitral regurgitation, the righi ventricle may then
Seliematic diagram showing cardiac changes associated with
fail secondarily, followcd by right atrial and vcntricular
clironic volurme overload due to mitral regurgitation fong roroms).
dilation. Neurocndocrine compensatory mcchanisms
The iruer broken line jndicatcs the lefl ventricular chamber (LV)
cause fuid rctcntion, which increases preload and con-
with associated resultant lilation (called ecenoic hyperrophy). The
tributes to volumc overload and cardiac dilation. Thus,
outer lbroken line represents the left vennicle as would ocur with
secondary myocardial failhue. Here, lie LV is dilated with a
all chambcrs may bc cnlarged by certain lesions affect-
thirner-than-normal I.V wall. These differences in internal
ing the left ventricle.
dinension and wall thickness are not detected on plain
racliographs.Typical radiograplic changes with clronic volume
overload: tie left vcntricular border (a) becomes convex; the lcft
RADIOGRAPHIC APPEARANCE. Cardiac enlargcmcnt is
atriun (LA) enlarges and displaces the left main sten bronclus
determincd by the size of thc heart compared with thc
(b): the IA bulges caudally (c): the right ventricular border
becomes more convex (d)in responsc to an incrcased work load
thorax, and by displaccment of adjacent structures.
or myocardial failure: the caudal vcna cava (e) is elevated (malt
Thc hcart appears wider in the craniocaudal, trans-
versc, and long axes in both projctions, and is gener-
ally rounder than normal (Figs. 7-4, 7-5, 7-6; scc also
Figs. 13-2, 13-3, 24-57A, 25-7, 27-4, 29-6, 29-16).
width of the thorax is grcaler than the normal 0.6 in
The trachea is displaced dorsally, and the caudal vena
thc dog's and 0.67 in thc cat.io 'rhese ratios are only a.
cava may slopc upward from the diaphragm to the
 guide and are affected by variations in stagc and depth
hcart.
of brcathing and plenural and pulmonary discases.
In thc VD/IV view, cardiothoracic ratios may be
Scveral studies have cvaluated methods to asscss ra-
increased with gencralizcd cardiomegaly (Fig. 7-6B;
 diographic heart sizc. In dogs. hcart mcasurements
see also Figs. 25-7, 28-9A). Thc ratio of the maximal
have not been regarded to be as sensitive as the trained
transverse width of the hcart to the maximal transversc
cye.1s Iowever, a vertebral srale systen has bcen reported
FIGURE 7-4
Schematie diagrams of the
canine cardiac silhouette.
slowing enlargement of all
chambers due to volume
ovcrload and/or myocardial
failure. (A) Right lateral view;
(B) dorsoventral view. Ihe left
ventrieular border (a) is
prominent; the left atriun (b)
bulges dorsally. caudally, and
laterally, the right ventricular
horder (e) is more convex and
tlic right atium (d) more
prorminent; tlie caudal vena cava
is ofien widened.
B
RADI0L0GY113
B
FIGURE7-6
Generalizedcardiacenlargementinasmall-breeddogwithchronic,severe,atrioventricularvalve
insufficiency(chronicmyxomatous valvular degeneration,or endocardiosis).(A)Right lateralview
showingdiffuseinterstitial edemainthedorsocaudal lungfield andcompression of theleft
mainstem bronchus (arrow).(B)Ventrodorsal view showing generalized cardiomegaly.
tomeasure canine heart size inradiographs.It uses
butmaybe obscuredbythediaphragm;withmoderate
combined lengths of long and short cardiac axes scaled
toseverepericardialeffusion,alldistinctionofpecif
against the length of vertebrae above theheart,begin
cardiacchambersislost andreplacedbygeneralized
ning with T4. The sum of long and short axes calcu-
rounding of the cardiac silhouette (Figs. 7-13, 29-6
lated from 100 clinically normal dogs averaged
and29-16).
9.7±0.5vertebrae and was found to be generally reli-
able.14Incats,theratioof thecraniocaudalwidth of
LEFTVENTRICULARENLARGEMENT
theheartto thedistancebetween thecranialborder
of thefifthriband thecaudalborder oftheseventh
CLINIcAL CAUsEs.In most cardiac disorders,left ven-
rib may be a reliable indicator of cardiomegaly.9
tricularenlargementisaccompaniedbyleftatrialen-
In states of severe hyperpnea, the heart may not
largement.Exceptions may include left ventricular
appear enlarged relative to the expanded thorax.A
pressure overload (e.g., aortic valve stenosis or systemic
flat diaphragm and an open spinal-diaphragmatic
hypertension) and some cases of myocardial disease in
angle are evidence ofoverinflation.
whichleftventricularwallthickeningoccurswithor
In the presence of pleural effusion,the heart is
withoutminimalleftventricularchamberdilation(Ta-
hidden, and the only indication of cardiomegaly may
ble 7-1). These conditions are best assessed by echo-
be the position of the trachea.In the cat, tracheal
cardiography.Isolatedleftventricularenlargement is
elevation in the presence of pleural effusion has been
uncommon and difficult to detect by radiography.
shown tobeunreliablebecausetheheartis displaced
dorsallywithmoderateandseverefluidaccumula-
RADIOGRAPHICAPPEARANCE.The entire caudalheart
tion.20 In the dog, when the trachea is dorsally dis-
border changes in shape from the normal convex to a
placed just cranial to the heart, a heart base mass
straightor bulgingleftheartwallformed by theen-
should be suspected (see Fig. 29-16); when the trachea
larged left atrium and left ventricle (Fig. 7-4; see also
iselevatedovertheleftatrium,leftventricularandleft
Figs.13-2,24-17,24-35,24-57A,24-59,25-7,27-5,
atrial enlargement is most frequently the cause(see
and 34-4).Left atrial enlargement is a reliable radio-
Figs. 7-6, 25-7).2.18
graphic indicator of left ventricular disease.2
Severerightatrialandventricularenlargementin
congenital tricuspid valve dysplasia (Fig.7-7; see also
LEFTATRIALENLARGEMENT
Fig.24-57B) may resemble severe generalized cardiac
enlargement or pericardial effusion.However, in the
CLINIcAL cAusEs.The left atrium may enlarge in re
former, the apex of the heart is usually still apparent
sponse to left-sided volume overload (e.g., chronic ac-
114
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
A
FIGURE7-7
Severeright-sidedheart enlargement in a three-month-old bull terrier with severe tricuspidvalve
dysplasia and insuficiency.(A) In theright lateral view the heart has a rounded appearance because
the apex is elevated andobscured by the diaphragm.This could be confusedwith generalized
by the cardiac apex (arrow),which is displaced toward the 4 o’clock position.
quiredatrioventricularvalvedegeneration,mitralvalve
chanical bronchial impingement by the left atrium
vegetative endocarditis, congenital left-to-right shunts
may induce coughing even in the absence of conges-
such as patent ductus arteriosus),most cardiomyopa-
tiveheartfailure.
In the VD/DV views,the left auricle may bulge
states such asfelinehyperthyroidism and,occasionally,
beyond theleftventricularborder atthe2to3o'clock
chronic,severeanemia willalsocauseleft hearten-
largement.21
RADIOGRAPHIC APPEARANCE.In thelateral vieW,the
anglebetween the trachea andthecaudalborderof
theleftatrium(dorsaltothe caudalvenacava)
changes with progressive left atrial enlargement from
LA
obtuse, to a right angle, and then to an acute angle.1.2
The caudal border of the heart changes from a normal
convexshapetoa straight,thenS-shapedorconcave
appearance (Figs.7-4 to 7-9; see also Figs.7-20;13-2
to 13-4;24-17,24-57A,24-59).A notch in the caudal
heartborder(caudal waist)may markthe atrioventricu-
B
A
lar gr0ove (Figs.7-8,7-9; see also Figs.7-20;24-57A,
24-59),accentuated by severe left atrial enlargement.
FIGURE7-8
The entire caudal trachea,left main stem bronchus
Schematic diagrams of feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.The
(especially in dogs),or both bronchi are displaced
thickened,stiff,noncompliant leftventricle(LV) increases diastolic
dorsally (Figs. 7-1, 7-5, 7-6A, 7-20; see also Figs. 24-
resistance toventricularfilling（curuedarrous）.Increased left atrial
17B, 24-35). Small dogs with severe, chronic mitral
end-diastolic pressureresults.This,when combinedwithmitral
regurgitation (which usually accompanies changes in the mitral
regurgitationmay have an especiallylargeleft atrium
valve complex),causes left atrial enlargement.(A） In theright
that compresses the left main stem bronchus (Fig.
lateralview,the large left atrium (LA)displaces the trachea
7-6A), especially with expiration or coughing. These
dorsally (a); theleft atrium bulges caudally and laterally (b)
creating a notch (open arrow) in the caudal heart border.(B) In the
dogs are also prone to tracheal collapse,especially
dorsoventral(DVorVD)view,thelargeleft auricular appendage
when obesity is present.Lateral flms may have to be
usually enlargessecondarily toleft-sidedheart pathophysiology
taken at inspiration andexpiration to confirm this
and/or tricuspid regurgitation(c).The cardiac apex may shift to
bronchial collapse if fluoroscopy is not available. Me-
the right (d) by the enlarged left atrium.
RADI0L0GY115
A
FIGURE7-9
A cat withhypertrophic cardiomyopathy.(A)In the right lateral view the left side of theheart is
elongated,causing the overlying trachea tobecome elevated toward thespine.Theheart iswider
than normal and has a notch (arrow) in the caudal heart border.This indicates left atrial
enlargement dorsal to the notch.Note the dorsal displacement of the caudal vena cava at its
junction near theheart.(B)On the ventrodorsal view,there is biatrial enlargement (outlined)
especially theleft atrium.
position (Figs. 7-6B, 7-9B; see also Figs. 13-4A; 28-9A;
compliance as it enlarges (eccentric hypertrophy).2 As
344A).With extreme left atrial enlargement,as in
theregurgitantvolumeincreases andvolumeof for-
congenital or long-standing mitral regurgitation, mi-
ward cardiac output falls,diastolic ventricular blood
tral stenosis, or feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
volumeincreases,causingpressure in thepulmonary
theleft atriummaybe outlinedas a distinctmass
venous capacitance beds to increase (chapters 3,11).
superimposed on theheart.23. 24 It may be most notable
Coupled with neuroendocrine system activation,this
in theDV/VDviewsituatedbetweenthemainstem
incites compensatorymechanisms of proximal venodi-
bronchi and is especially evident when employing rela-
lation,peripheralvasoconstriction,and increasedlym-
tively high kilovoltage (kV) to visualize the large air-
phaticdrainage toprotect thelungsfrompulmonary
ways in themediastinum.In cats with severe hypertro-
edema.The balance of these factors may be upset
phic or restrictive cardiomyopathy, the left atrium is
acutely,precipitating alveolar pulmonary edema
disproportionately larger than the left ventricle. The
(chapter 13).A contrasting situation exists in the case
caudal cardiac waist is accentuated,creating a bean-
of acute aortic26 or mitral regurgitation. The limits of
shaped heart in thelateral view (Fig.7-8A)and a
myocardialandpericardialdistentionarereachedwith
asmall increaseinvolumebecauseof inadequatetime
the VD/DV view (Fig.7-8B;see also Fig.28-9).The
to adapt to the sudden load. Rapidly progressive di-
VD/DVview is most sensitive for detecting left atrial
lated cardiomyopathy may developpulmonary edema
enlargement in cardiomyopathic cats (chapter 28).
withonlymoderatecardiacenlargement.
Thereisno consistentdirectrelationshipbetween
In feline hypertrophic and restrictive cardiomyopa-
left atrial size and the degree of left ventricular failure.
thies,thestiffleftventricularwall reduceschamber
Often theleft atrium is severely enlargedbefore con-
compliance,impedes diastolicleft atrial emptying dur-
gestive heart failure (CHF)develops (Figs.
7-9，
ing diastole,andincreasesleftventricular end-diastolic
7-20).23 24 In chronic mitral regurgitation, the large
filling pressures (chapter 28). Progressive left atrial
compliant left atrium buffers the lungs from the regur-
enlargement results, protecting the lungs from acute
gitated blood.End-diastolic(filling)pressure does not
pulmonary edema.There is usually much less dramatic
increaseinitiallybecause theventriclemaintainsits
changeintheexternalcontouroftheleftventricle.
116
SDIAGNOSTIC METHODS
The heart commonly rotates clockwise on the VD/
ment of the right atrial appendage (Figs. 7-4A, 7-7A:
DV view, so that the apex appcars on the right sidel6
scc also Fig. 31-2). The angle formed by the cranial
(Fig. 7-8B).
vena cava and the cranial heart border will be filled
in with loss of the rranial waist, and thc transvcrsc
(craniocaudal) cardiac axis will be increascd or cn
RIGHT ATRIAL ENLARGEMENT
largcd. The trachea may be elevated as it passes over
the cranial part of the heart.
CLINIcAL CALses. Most of the disorders causing right
In the DV or VD vicws, a largc right atrium causes a
ventricular enlargement (discusscd ncxt) also result in
bulge at 9 to l1 o'clock on thc cardiac silhouette (Figs.
7-4B, 7-7B; scc also Figs. 28-9; 30-7; 34-4A). This is
in rcsponsc to chronic volume and pressure overloads
causcd by cnlargement of the right atrial appendage.
in a manncr similar to that in the left atrium. In
congenital tricuspid valve dysplasia wih severe regurgi-
lation, thc right atrium may become huge before con-
RIGHT VENTRICULAR ENLARGEMENT
gestive hcart failurc ensues.2 3s Radiographic right
atrial and ventricular cnlargement in congenital tricus-
CLINIcAL CAusEs. A prominent right ventricle may rc-
pid dysplasia may be diffcult to differentiate from mild
sult from high resistance to right ventricular cjcc-
to moderate pericardial cffusion (Figs. 7-7, 7-13; scc
tion.27 s2 Incrcascd pulmonary vascular resistance may
also Fig. 24-57B). Identifying the apex of a severely
occur with chronic lung disease (cor pulmonale); pul-
cnlarged heart and cvaluating each side is the best
monary hypcrrension (heartworm disease, thrombo
way to differentiate the presence of right ventricular
cnlargement from generalized cardiomegaly (Figs. 7-
10, 7-11, 7-12; see Fig. 7-7). A large, right atrial
syndrome); and by fixcd ventricular outflow obstruc-
hcmangiosarcoma may also causc the right atrium to
tion as in pulmonic stcnosis and tetralogy of Fallot.
bulgc slightly. IIowever, the surrounding pericardium
Right  ventricular  volume  overload  or myocardial
and the prescncc of pcricardial or pleural fuid render
failure also causes right ventricular and atrial cnlarge-
thc radiographic examination insensifive for this dis-
ment.2 82 Causes include congenital or acquired tricus-
ease.*4
opathy: severe leff-sidcd hcart disease (especially
RADIOGRAPHIC APPEARANCE. On the lateral view, the
endocardiosis with scvcre mitral regurgitation); and,
cardiac silhoucttc may bulge cranially due to enlarge-
uncommonly, large ventricular septal defect with left
FIGURE 7-10
Schenatic diagrans of right.
ventricular enlaugenent caused
Dy a pressure overload (e.g..
pulronic stenosis). Becausc of
the fixed outflow olstruclion,
right ventricular ermptying is
reduccd (curued arrus, and
systolic pressure rises. Right.
ventrieular wall hypertrophy
occurs secondarily: the right
ventricle becones more rouncled
nd the border nore: convex (a).
ontact inereases (a),whic nay
(A) ln lhe lateral view, stermal
RV
push the apex dorsally off tlic
sternum (apex tipping). (B) In
RV
the VD/DV view, the main
pulnonary artery (pulnonary
trunk) (bj bulges at the 2
o'clock position. The heart is
B
rotated counterclockwise rue to
tle: large right ventricle (RV).
RADIOLOGY
117
FIGURE7-11
Right lateral view ofheartworm-infected dog.
The right ventricle is severely enlarged,
indicatedbyincreasedeartwidthncreased
sternal contact,and elevated cardiac apex
(arrow).Note that the caudal (left)heart border
isrelatively convex,indicatingnolf-sided
enlargement. Radiographic evidence of
heartworms includes (i)perihilar opacity of the
dilated main pulmonary arteries,(2) severely
widened and tortuous caudal arteries,and (3)
widened cranial arteries.
ventricular to right atrial shunting, or anomalous pul-
volume overload (e.g., tricuspid regurgitation） or
monaryvenous connections.
acute pressure overload(e.g,pulmonary thromboem-
bolism)may cause the chamber to dilate.By contrast,
RADIOGRAPHIC APPEARANCE.Theeffect of theseloads
a chronic pressure load from pulmonic stenosis, cor
ontherightventricleisdifferentfromthoseimposed
pulmonale,or leftventricular disease will cause con-
centrichypertrophy,which thickens therightventricu-
which the right ventricle normally operates permits it
lar wallandmakesthechamber resembletheleft
tohave a thin wall and a large radius of curvature.A
ventricle(Fig.7-10).Both pressure and volume over-
load will enlarge the right ventricular contour on the
radiograph.2
On thelateralview,right ventricular enlargement is
determined by accentuatedheartconvexity cranial to
the apex. This causes the characteristic findings of
(1) increased sternal contact (Figs. 7-4A,7-6A, 7-7A,
7-10A,7-11;see also Figs.24-7,24-57B;30-8;31-1,
31-2, 31-3A), and (2) “apex tipping” (i.e., the apex
ispusheddorsallyoffthe sternumif severerightven-
tricular enlargementispresentwithout an enlarged
left side of the heart) (Fig. 7-11; see also Fig. 31-3A).
The trachea is usually elevated where it passes over
the cranial heart.In thelateral view,right ventricular
enlargementmaybeunderestimatedbecause theheart
may rotate to the left as it enlarges.
OntheVD/DVview,rightventricularenlargement
createsamoreconvexbordertotherightoftheapex
(which isnormally at the5 to6o'clockposition).The
convexityextendsclockwisetoaboutthe10o'clock
position (Figs.7-7B,7-12;see also Figs.24-28A;30-
8B).If there is no left-sided heart enlargement, the
enlarged right ventricle will create a“reverse-D"con-
tour (Figs. 7-10B, 7-12; Fig. 24-28B). Rather than
bulging out toward the right thoracic wall, the heart
FIGURE7-12
often rotates counterclockwise to move the apex far-
Ventrodorsal viewof the heart of aShihTzu with congenital
ther to the left (Fig. 7-12).An enlarged main pulmo-
pulmonic stenosis.Right ventricular enlargement is indicated by
nary artery is often apparent (Fig. 7-12; see also Fig.
the reverse“D”appearance.The cardiac apex (black arrow)
24-7, 24-10, 24-51; 30-8; 31-3), except in tetralogy of
separatestherelatively straightleftventriclefrom theprominently
convexright heart border.
Fallot when the pulmonary trunk is hypoplastic.
118
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
PERICARDLALDISEASES
it may not always result in sufficient pericardial distor-
tionso that cardiomegaly is detectedby radiography.
PERICARDIALEFFUSION
CONGENITAL
CLINIcALCAUsEs.Etiologiesandpathophysiologyare
PERICARDIODIAPHRAGMATICHERNIA
discussed in chapter 29. In addition, radiographic
identification of extracardiac disease can provide im-
CLINIcAL CAUsE.As a developmental abnormality,the
portant prognosticinformation.34a
pericardiumadaptstotheadditionalvolumeimposed
by the presence of abdominal organs within the sac.
RADIOGRAPHIC APPEARANCE. The classic radiographic
Frequently, unexpected diagnosis is related to gastroin-
appearance of chronic, severe pericardial effusion is
testinal or respiratory signs.36
that of a large,round heart shadow, lacking an apex
or other structural detail2, 35 (Fig. 7-13; see also Figs.
RADIOGRAPHIC APPEARANCE.The diagnosis is suspected
29-6,29-16).As a point of differentiation from gen-
when theheart shadowis enlarged,isslightlydistorted,
eralcardiomegaly duetoheart disease,theleft atrium
and blends in with the diaphragm (silhouette sign).
is not prominent whenmoderate to severepericardial
Radiographic evidence suggesting that abdominal or-
effusion is present.
gans are contained within the pericardial sac include
Acute pericardial effusion (e.g., left atrial rupture)
(1） irregular, lucent areas caused by omental fat,(2)
may cause life-threatening cardiac tamponade,but it
gasbubbles indicating entrapped stomach orintes-
mayresultonly inmild tomoderate enlargementof
tines,and(3)cranially displaced or absent stomach
the cardiac silhouette,makingradiographic diagnosis
spleen, or other organs (see Fig.29-6).Acute gastric
uncertain.In chronic effusive states,severefluid build-
orintestinaldisplacementoccasionallycausesobstruc-
up and pericardial distention may result in severe,
tive ileuswith dilatedintestines.
generalizedroundingofthecardiacsilhouette.Echo-
Diagnosisisbestconfirmedby echocardiographyor
cardiography is indicated to characterize cardiac anat-
abdominal ultrasound. Alternative diagnostic tech-
omy and search for neoplasia and other causes of
niques include peritoneography (inject 2 ml/kg of
pericardialeffusion.
water-solublecontrastmediuminto theperitoneal cav-
Pericarditis may cause pericardial effusion. However,
ity,roll thepatient to disperse the contrast,andradio-
A
B
FIGURE 7-13
Lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B)views of a dogwith severe pericardial effusion.The cardiac
silhouetteis extremely large andround;themagnitudeof thiscardiomegaly ismuch greater than
could be expected from valvular regurgitation or myocardial disease.Notice also that thereisno
distinctive cardiac chamber enlargement(ie.,theleft atrium is not prominent),and the lungs are
hypovolemic, lending support for pericardial effusion.
RADI0L0GY119
graph the thorax) and upper gastrointestinal contrast
trachea (see also Figs. 24-8A, 24-10, 24-28B; 30-8B;
studies.
31-3A).37 In the VD/DV view, the main pulmonary
trunknormallyfillsthecardiacborderatthe1to2
o'clock position (Fig. 7-1C). A prominent bulge at this
GREATVESSELSAND
point most likely represents an enlarged pulmonary
MEDIASTINALSTRUCTURES
trunk caused by pulmonic stenosis (Figs.7-10B, 7-12;
see also Fig.30-8B) or pulmonary hypertension.This
bulge is not common with feline dirofilariasis,40 41 al-
CHANGESINGREATVESSELS
though it may occur occasionally(see Fig.31-3).
Rarely,enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes can create a
CLINICAL CAUsE.The great vessels enlarge inresponse
similar bulge.
toincreasedpressureloadorturbulence.2.22.37-39Steno-
sis of thepulmonary or aorticvalve region causes
ENLARGEDAORTICARCH.Theaorticarchisnotentirely
poststenotic enlargement of thepulmonary trunk and
constant in size.There is considerablevariation in the
aortic arch,respectively (chapter 24). However, ab-
normal curvature of the aortic arch in the dog and its
senceof thisdetectableenlargementdoesnotexclude
appearance over the left cardiac border in theVD/DV
semilunarvalvestenosiswhenother appropriateaus-
view.2. 15 It may also be displaced by neoplasia, espe-
cultatory and clinical findings are present. Echocardi-
ciallyheart-base tumors.
ography andDoppler echo studies are confirmatory.
In theVD/DVview,it mayfill the angle formed by
Whenvascularbloodflowisreducedby anintracardiac
the right atrial appendage and the cranial vena cava at
shunt, the vessel may be small or hypoplastic. This is
11o'clock,bulging into the mediastinum and filling
usually observed in thepulmonary artery with tetral-
theanglebetweenthecranialmediastinumand the
ogy of Fallot owing to right-to-left shunting across a
pulmonary trunk at the1 o'clockposition(Fig.7-14B;
large ventricular septal defect.
bump may appear on the left border of the cranial
RADIOGRAPHICAPPEARANCE.Appreciationofvascular
mediastinum onthe VD/DVprojection,which
is
changes is maximizedwhen twowell-positioned radio-
formed by the aortic archviewed end-on.An enlarged
graphic views are compared.
aortic arch can be differentiated from a bulging pul-
monarytrunkinthisviewin that thelateralborder of
ENLARGED PULMONARY TRUNK.In thelateral vieW,the
theaorticarch continues downthemediastinum just
pulmonary trunk is normallynotprojected outward
to the left of the spine,whereas thepulmonicbulge
from the heart (Fig. 7-1B)and thus is not visible on
does not.In patent ductus arteriosus,the aorta is
plain radiographs unless severely enlarged.It may then
dilated at the point of exit from the ductus.2.22,42 The
appear as an anteriorly oriented, convexly shaped cap
dilation is best seen on aperfectly straightVD or DV
bulging forward andupward,superimposed on the
viewasaslightbulgeontheleftsideoftheaortic
A
H
FIGURE7-14
(A)Right lateral and (B)ventrodorsal views of a dogwith congenital subaortic stenosis.Notice the
poststenotic dilation of the aortic arch (arrowheads).
120DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
structures thatare superimposedon eachotherand
surroundedbymediastinal connectivetissue.
PERIHILARANDHEARTBASEMASSES
Hilarlymphadenopathycanresultfrommycoticor
bacterial(including tuberculosis)infection,or neopla-
sia.This increases the soft tissue density around the
carina and leftatrium andcanbemistakenfor left
atrialenlargementin thelateralview.A significant
radiographicdifferencebetweenhilarlymphadenopa-
thy andleftatrialenlargementonthelateralview,
however,is that the former opacity usually lies dorsal
to themain stembronchi,which arenotelevated,or
maybecompresseddownwardwhenseverelyenlarged
(Fig. 7-16). In contrast, the left atrium lies ventral to
FIGURE7-15
the carina,and,when severely enlarged,it elevates
Ventrodorsalviewof a6-year-oldpapillonwith exercise
intolerance,cyanosis during exercise,andno auscultatable cardiac
the caudal trachea (Fig. 25-7),which loses its normal
murmur.Notice a prominent bulge (arrowheads) on the left side at
caudoventral sloping over the cardiac base (compare
the 2oclock position,representing the pulmonary trunk,and the
Figures 7-1A and 7-3 with 7-4A and and 7-6) and
aortic bulge above it at the 1 o'clock position.This pattern is
elevates the left main stem bronchus (Figs.7-5,7-6).
diagnosticfor patent ductus arteriosusn thiscasewith pulmonary
hypertension.Two-dimensional echocardiography showed that the
Verydilatedmainpulmonaryarteriesfrompulmo-
right ventricle and outflow tract were enlarged.
nary hypertension (especially severe dirofilariasis)
cause a hilar opacity in the lateral view (Fig. 7-11).
border,just caudal to the arch (Fig. 7-15; see also Fig.
Thetracheamaybe displaced or compressed in these
instances.
2442A).
The great vessels and trachea can also be displaced
In the lateral view,poststenotic dilation due to aortic
by heart base tumors (chemodectoma,aortic body tu-
stenosis extendsinto the cranial mediastinum.Itfills
mors),infiltrating primary bronchogenic carcinoma,
in the angleformedby the cranialvenacava andthe
and rightatrial hemangiosarcoma.Typically,these
cranial heart border (Fig.7-14A; see alsoFigs.24-17B,
masseswillelevatethetrachea over thecranialmedias-
24-22) and increases the cranial mediastinal density.
tinum orheartbasebutnot over the left atrium.They
CAUDAL vENA CAvA.In the lateral view,the position and
may also cause soft tissue density bumps or opacities
angle of the caudalvena cavaprovides a clue to the
around the heart base, often associated with pericar-
sizeof theheartsinceitiselevatedcraniallyifeither
dialeffusion,tamponade,or caval obstruction.Two-
ventricle is enlarged (Figs. 7-5, 7-9A).A persistently
dimensional
echocardiography  is  the preferred
method for evaluating cardiac masses and pericardial
fullandwide caudalvena cava,especially when com-
bined with other evidence of cardiac decompensation,
effusion. Additional imaging techniques include a vena
provides evidence of right ventricular failure,pericar-
cavagram or selective angiography to outline intracavi-
dial tamponade,constrictive pericarditis, or right atrial
raphy to reveal right atrial masses2 45; or computed
obstructionbyanintracavitaryneoplasmorthrom-
bus.2.42a However, it is a relatively insensitive sign of
tomography and magnetic resonance imaging.
venous hypertension.15. 43 A persistently thin cava (Fig.
7-3) is associated with poor venous return, hypovo-
THEESOPHAGUS
lemia,orincreased intrapleuralpressure.Thelatter is
caused by air trapping associated with overinflation,
asthma,bronchitis, and emphysema (which also cause
Commonradiographicfindingsin dyspneicanimals
radiographic signs of overinflated lungs).2
are the presence of air throughout the esophagus or
localized in the cranial thoracicregion of a slightly
dilated esophagus. An enlarged heart will compress
OTHERMEDIASTINAL
the esophagus slightly and displace it dorsally.
STRUCTURESANDDISEASES
Vascular ring anomalies cause esophageal stenosis
withsecondarydilationinthecranialmediastinum
(see Fig.24-61).Aspiration pneumonia may be pres-
Lesions in this region are usually poorly defined.
ent.A wide spectrum of vascular ring anomalies has
This resultsfrom the manymediastinal vessels and
been described (see Fig.1-4; chapter 24).Persistent
RADI0L0GY121
FIGURE 7-16
Right lateral radiograph from a
coughing dog.Notice the severe hilar
lymphadenopathy that causes acute
ventraldisplacement of the distal
trachea.The caudal cardiac border is
relatively convexandnormal.
Tuberculosis was detected inhilar
lymph nodes at necropsy.(Courtesy of
Dr. Philip Fox.)
rightaorticarch,46alsocalleddextroaortawithleft-
and inspiration will increase diagnostic accuracy to
sided ligamentum arteriosum,is the mostprevalent
confirm tracheal collapse.? On routine inspiratory ra-
type in dogs and cats. Severe tracheal compression and
diographs made of the heart,intrathoracic tracheal
malformedtrachealrings areevidenceofdouble aortic
collapse may not be manifested.
arch.47Persistentleft cranialvena cava alsomay be
Compression or collapse of theleft main stem bron-
present.2
chusoftenaccompaniescollapsedtracheaorsevere
left atrial enlargement in dogs (Fig. 7-6). Coughing
frombronchialcompressionmaybemistakenfor a
TRACHEAANDMAINBRONCHI
coughdue topulmonary congestion andrequires eval-
uation of other clinical and diagnostic findings (chap-
In thelateral view,theposition of the caudal trachea
ters 4 and 5).
relativetothespineprovidesanindicationofthe
presence and severity of cardiomegaly, especially left-
sided.A distal trachea displaced upward toward the
spine suggests a large heart (e.g., severe pericardial
THELUNGFIELDINHEART
effusion;dilatedcardiomyopathy)ormoderatetose
DISEASE
vereleft atrialandventricular enlargement.Inparticu-
lar,dorsal displacement and compression of the left
main stembronchus indicates left atrial enlargement.
The position of the trachea and main stem bronchi
The pulmonary radiograph has been likened to a
helpsdifferentiateleftatrialenlargementfromother
windowreflectingunderlying cardiopulmonary patho-
causes ofhilar disease(seeearliersection onPerihilar
and Heart Base Masses).2
physiology. Evaluation of lung fields often provides
Tracheal collapse is often present in conjunction
moreusefulinformationthandeterminationofcar-
with chronic acquiredvalvular disease (endocardiosis)
diac chamber size.It helps in assessing the severity of
in small-breed dogs(chapter 25).Radiologic examina-
thehemodynamic disturbance (i.e.,congestive heart
tionoftenhelpsclarifyorresolvethecause
failure), and the effects of therapy. Air in the small
of
coughing (Fig. 7-17). In dogs with large airway dis-
airways and alveoli actsas a contrastmedium outlining
ease,the trachea typically collapses in the cervical or
the pulmonary vessels and parenchyma. This makes
the thoracic regions,or both.The cervical(extratho-
radiography a relatively sensitive and specific method
racic) trachea collapses during inspiration. The intra-
of assessing thepulmonaryvascular circulation.Since
thoracic trachea collapses during expiration.Upper
thisnatural contrastfluctuateswith thephase of respi
airway obstructionbyanelongated or swollen soft
ration (Fig. 7-17), a false diagnosis of pulmonary
palatewillexaggeratecervicaltrachealcollapse.
edemacanbemadewhenevaluatingexpiratoryradio-
Exposing lateral radiographs during both expiration
graphs.
122
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
FIGURE7-17
Rightlateral radiographsfrom an 1l-year-old
Yorkshire terrier with a chronic cough and
chronic mitral regurgitation.At expiration (A),
theintrathoracic trachea isrelatively collapsed,
and the dorsal lungs have a diffuse opacity.The
heart overlies the diaphragm.At inspiration (B),
B
the trachea is normal in diameter,and thelung
fields are clear.On both flms,there ismild left
atrial enlargement and severe right ventricular
enlargement.Coughing was caused by the large
airway disease (collapsed trachea).
NORMALVARIATIONS
OVERINFLATED LUNGs.Overinflation of thelungs by
mechanical ventilation may eliminate pulmonary infi-
Care must be exercised when interpreting radio-
trates,such aspulmonary edema,by creating artifcial
graphs exposed under different conditions. For exam-
pulmonarylucency.Ideally,aphysiologicend-expi
ple, thick thoracic walls in an obese animal mayimpart
ratorypressure should be maintained.
a uniformgrayopacity to theradiographsbecause of
scatteredradiation,especiallyin thelateral view of
small,round-chested dogs.One must also interpret
THEVASCULATURE
films made under general anesthesia cautiously. The
dependentlungmaybeunderinflatedorbothlungs
HYPERPERFUSION(OVERCIRCULATION).HyperVascularity
maybeunderinflated,creatingfalseopacityafteronly
resultsfrom significantlyincreasedpulmonaryblood
afewminutesoflateral recumbency.Under-or overin-
flow (two or more times normal).Causes include (1)
flated lungs warrant special consideration.
left-to-right shunting (central or peripheral); (2) hy-
perdynamic states such as chronic,severe anemia or
UNDERINFLATEDLUNGs.Conditions that increasera-
thyrotoxicosis; and(3)iatrogenicvolume overload or
diographic lung opacity and decrease diagnostic qual-
congestive heart failure. Hyperdynamic states that
ityinclude(1)reduced tidal volume from obesity;(2)
are oftennotradiographically apparentcauserelatively
 conditions restricting lung inflation; and (3) cranially
mild overcirculation.Large left-to-right shunts may
displaceddiaphragmfromincreasedabdominalpres-
eventually cause a pressure overload (and enlarge-
sure compressing the lungs and preventing good infla-
ment)on therightventricleifpulmonaryvascular
tion (hepatomegaly,obesity, large masses, or ascites).
resistance rises.22.27.28. 42
RADIOLOGY
123
Xormally, only a small proportion of the pulnonary
 PROMINENT PULMONARY ARTERIEs. Prominen1 pulmo-
 so a r d i rq ei
nary arteries are a sign of pulmonary arterial hyperten-
sion. Pulnonary hypertension may he acute (c.g., pul-
fused vessels reduce contrast of lung parcnchyma
monary thromboembolism), or chronic (e.g., some
against the vessels. This crcatcs a hazy increasc in
left-to-right shunts, chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
interstitial opacity resembling interstitial pulmonary
case, and chronic hypoxia). The most common causc
edema (chapter 13). Thcse conditions are indistin-
 of pulmonary hypertension is canine heartworm dis-
 guishablc. However, thc distribution of hypervascular-
case.
ity is morc widespread in states of ovcrcirculation, and
The location of pulmonary arterics is predictable.
vascular markings cxtend to the lung periphery, as
 and radiographic changes are often dramatic so 48, w 1n
the lateral view, the cranial arteries lic dorsal to thc
central in distribution with less prominent vascular
veins and can usually be seen even when the caudal
markings.
vesscls are obscured by perivascular inflanumatory in-
Overcirculation is best apprcciated in the lateral vicw
filtration. With pulmonary hypertension, the proximal
(Fig. 7-18; sec also Fig. 24-28B; 24-36, 2442B), in
arterics become wide and the middle portions becomc
which the arteries and veins arc prominent and wid-
tortuous. Thc peripheral sections are usually thin. Ft-
ened due to incrcased flow and pressure. When cardio-
largement is indicated when the relative size of the
vascular shunts arc prescnt, thcir location rnay he sug-
right cranial pulmonary artery exceeds 1.2 timcs the
gested by cardiac radiographic changes (chapter 24).
width of the right fourth rib at a point jusi below the
spine,5 In the VD/DV view, the pulmonary arterics
HYPOPERFUSION (UNDERCIRCUIATION). CauSes Of gener-
are lateral to thc pulmonary veins.
alized bypoperfusion include (l) right-to-left shunts;
(2) low cardiac output (e.g., shock or severe myocar-
CANINE HEARTWORM DISEASE (chapter 30). Slight irregu-
dial failurc, sevcre dehydration, acute adrenocortical
laritics and tortuosity of the right main caudal artery
insufficiency, rcstrictive pericarditis, caval or right
are the most sensitive signs of mild carly dirolilariasis
atrial obstruction, cardiac tamponadc, severe fight
(Fig. 7-19),51. 52 At this stage the heart is normal, and
heart failure, cornplete hcart block); or (3) severe
therc is no visible perivascular reaction, Pulmonary
 enphyserma.' 2 Technical faults involving radiographic
arterial changes accormpanying dirofilariasis include
techniquc or processing may create irmages that resem-
(1) enlargement, (2) indentation or scalloping, (3)
ble undercirculation. Examples inclucde overcxposure,
tortuosity, (4) disappcarancc, (5) pruning, and (6)
 overdevelopment, Oor overinflation (due to struggling
scrration² s (see Figs. 30-5, 30-6, 308). To maximizc
 or upper airway obstruction). Overinflation can be
the chance of recognizing these subue changes, partic-
recognized by a flat diaphragm on the lateral view and
ularly in vesscls that ovcrlie the livcr. a DV view with
wide costodiaphragrmatic angles in the VD or DV views.
 good lung inflation is necessary.?2
 Radiographic  findings of hypoperfusion  include
 Periarterial inflammatory lesions and edcma oficn
thin pulmonary arterics and veins and a relatively ra-
make the vessels difficult to identify, particularly in the
diolucent interstitium (Fig. 7-3; see also Fig. 24-7).
lateral view. The classic signs of enlarged right ventricle
and rmain pulmonary artery may be obscured. U!nder
other clinical abnormalitics may help in formulating a
thesc conditions, severe hcartworm lesions may be con-
diagnosis. Hypoperfusion with light ventricular cn-
fused with pulmonary neoplasia bccausc the grossly
largement but without an enlarged main pulmonary
 enlarged and distortcd arteries, when vicwed cnd on.
resemble lung masses. This error is particularly likely
 hypoperfusion with a gcncralized, rounded cardiac sil-
if only a lateral view is taken on which the main caudal
arteries are superinposed. The accompanying changes
causes cardiac tramponade.*5 lsolatcd pulmonic stenosis
in the right ventricle and pulmonary trumk are less
has been reported to cause an underperfused lung
likely to be visible on the lateral than on ihe IDV view.
ficld, cven in clinically normal dogs.*7 Whether the
appcarancc reflccts true hypoperfusion, hyperlucency
FELNE HEARTWORM DISEASE (chapter 3l). In the cat.
due to othcr causes, or interpretive bias (ie., belicf
 diagnosis of heartworns requires carcful inspcction of
that pulmonic stcnosis should causc hypoperfusion) is
the main caudal pulmonary arteries, particularly the
unresolved.
left caudal pulmonary artery, scen best in the IV or
 Lobar hypoperfusion is cornpatible with pulmonary
DV oblique vicws40. 53 (sce Figs. 31-3, 31-4). The worms
thrombocmbolisrn.39 Additional radiographic signs of
may be obscured by interstitial inflarmmatory infiltrate.
thromboembolism include thin pulmonary veins, pleu-
Compared with dogs, artcritis is less cvident, and
ral cffusion, proximally dilatcd pulmonary artcry in
worms are fewer and smaller in cats. 'Typically, pulmo-
the affected lobe and clsewhere, and right. ventricular
    s   q 
enlargement.
prominent. pulmonary trunk.41 Yonsclcctive angiogra-
124DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
FIGURE7-18
Right lateral thoracic radiograph of a pair of 2-month-old golden retriever litermates.(A)
Hyperperfused,overcirculatedlungsarecausedbyaleft-toright shuntingpatent ductus artriosus.
Note the engorged distended pulmonary veins (open arrous) overlying the cardiac silhouette.
Pulmonary arteries(closedarrws）arealso abnormallywide and arebestvisualized inthe cranial lung
lobes.hrsaiffunrsitalunarynsityiallyvidentnhriiarrin
to overcirculation.The left atrium is enlarged and elevates the trachea. Compare these changes with
those in the normal littermate (B).
phy (seeFig. 31-4) and serology may be necessary for
vein, respectively). 2 Pulmonary venous hypertension
diagnosis.40.54
isusuallycausedbychronicallyelevatedleftventricular
filling pressure, as occurs in dogs with chronic ac-
PROMINENTPULMONARYVEINs.Pulmonaryveinslieme-
quired degenerative mitral valve disease(endocar-
dial to thepulmonary arteriesontheVD/DVview;in
diosis,chapter 25).It may also develop acutely in
thelateralview,theylieventral tothecranial lobar
decompensatedcaninedilated cardiomyopathyor in
bronchi(theorder of distributionfrom dorsal toven-
feline cardiomyopathy.These changes are always asso-
tral is pulmonary artery, bronchus, and pulmonary
ciatedwithmoderatetosevereleftatrialenlargement.
RADIOLOGY
125
PULMONARYPARENCHYMA
INTERSTITIALPULMONARYEDEMA
The interstitium is an extravascular tissue compart-
ment thatexpandsto accommodateexcess transu-
dated fluid, which is then drained by pulmonary lym-
phatics (chapter 13).When this process is over-
whelmed,interstitial pulmonary edema may occur as
a uniform, poorly defined increase in lung opacity that
reduces small vessel sharpness or clarity (Fig. 7-6;see
also Figs.13-4,13-5; 24-42).
Whether interstitial pulmonary edema can be diag-
nosed radiographically depends on technical factors,
including lung inflation. Films that are exposed at
FIGURE 7-19
expiration may mimicthisfinding.Ideally,comparison
Ventrodorsal view of a dogwith heartworm disease.Notice the
ofserialradiographsexposedwithsimilartechnique
wide and tortuous main caudal pulmonary arteries.
andphaseofinspiration shouldbemade.
Not all cases of left-sided heartfailurehavepulmonary
ALVEOLARPULMONARYEDEMA
venousenlargementevidentonradiographs,however.
Moreover,pulmonary edema may obscurevenous en-
Alveolarpulmonary edemarepresents a more ad-
gorgement when present in some cases.
vancedstate ofleftventricularfailurethaninterstitial
Chronicpulmonaryvenous hypertension oftenre-
edema.It is characterized by absence of pulmonary air
sults in distended and tortuous pulmonary veins (Fig.
contrast, the air being replaced by alveolar edema
7-20; see also Figs. 13-2; 24-17B, 24-28B). They may
fluid.If sufficiently severe,theedema obscuresvascular
sometimes be identified on a DV view with the lungs
markings (see Figs. 13-2 to 13-5 and 25-5). The bron-
well inflated.Dilated cranial veins may also be visible
chi are not flooded and may show up as radiolucent
in the lateral view. Distention is greatest in the perihi-
air bronchograms (see Figs.13-2 to 13-6;24-17;25-5;
lararea,wheretheveins arewidestandwall tension
28-11). In the lateral view, air bronchograms appear
(according tothelaw of Laplace)is highest at any
as tapering and branching thick, radiolucent lines sur-
givenvenouspressure.
rounded by opacity, obscuring adjacent vessels.2 In the
VD/DVview,airbronchograms are often shorter or
appear as round, lucent “holes.”This is because in
this view the bronchi are foreshortened or appear
end on.
An alternative appearance for acute pulmonary
edema isafinely stippled orfinenodularpattern.This
air alueologram pattern is caused by groups of fluid-
filled (opaque) acini mixed with air-flled (lucent)
acini or alveoli.
Many other conditions besides leftventricular fail-
ure,such as pneumonia and hemorrhage,cause an
acute alveolar pattern. The radiographic distribution
 of infltrates is helpful in formulating a diagnosis. 2.55
For cardiogenic pulmonary edema in the dog, the
mostcommondistributionisdorsal,perihilar,andsym
metric.There may also be pulmonary venous engorge-
FIGURE7-20
ment and moderate to severe left heart enlargement.
Right lateralview of adogwithheartfailurefrom chronic
By contrast, pneumonia is typically peribronchial, lo-
acquired mitralregurgitation(endocardiosis),showingpulmonary
bar,cranial,and ventral in distribution,without con-
venous congestion.Proximalpulmonaryveins(arrow)aregreatly
comitant cardiomegaly(unless unassociated cardiac
dilatedover the heart.Theleft atrium is severely enlarged
disease happens to be coincidentally present). There-
(arrowheads)from chronic mitral regurgitation.No pulmonary
edema hasyet developed.
fore, it is usually possible to differentiate these two
126DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
common causes of dyspnea by radiographs. Although
lapsc, and asynmetric luccncy because of oligemia in
acute, fulminant pulmonary cdema may extend into
the affccted lung or lobe.*
the cranioventral lung ficld, it will always have a pre
Bacterial cndocarditis may cause septic pneumonia
dominant perihilar componcnt. Pulmonary edema scc-
and thromboembolisn as well as pulmonary edema.
ondary to chronic mitral rcgurgitation is often accen-
The pulmonary lesions may be difficult to differenti-
tuated in the right caudal lobe.2
ate. Consolidated areas may be present due to emboli-
 In cats with hypertrophic or restrictivc cardiornyopa-
zation." Pulmonary metastases may also bc associated
thy, pulmonary edema is usually patchy and asymmetri.
with hemangiosarcoma?1 or heart base tumors.
cally distributed; the air alveologram pattern prcdomi-
nates. Perihilar distribution is rare. Moderate to severe
left auricular enlargement is usually clearly evident on
THE PLEURAL CAVITY
the DV/VD vicw. Bronchopncumonia in cats appears
similar to that in dogs but is much less common.
Farly pulmonary cdema as a sign of left ventricular
Discases involving the pleura and pleural space may
failure occasionally may be masked by other factors.
bc subdivided into thosc that cause (1l) increased ra-
 Overinflated lungs will reducc the radiographic density
diographic pleural and thoracic density (i.e, plcural.
of pulmonary edema. This may occur by forccd inspi-
cffusion, pleural masscs, and pleural thickening), and
ration during the stress of manual restraint associated
(2) those that result in diminished pleural and tho
with radiographic positioning, or if an animal is venti-
racic density (i.e., pneumothorax).*
lated under gencral anesthesia. Severe right ventricu-
 In heart failure, two radiographic signs of pleural
lar failure accompanying left ventricular failure may
involvement may be observed. The nost common ab-
decrease pulmonary perfusion pressure as well as ob-
normality is plcural effusion that follows right-sided
scure visualization of pulmonary parenchyma.
heart failure either (l) directly from a right-sided heart
volume overload (e.g., tricuspid regurgitation) or pres-
sure overload, (2) from severc left-sided heart disease
PULMONARY FIBROSIS
cardiomyopathy, (3) from gencralized hcart failure
 Pulmonary fibrosis causes a diffusc interstitial opac-
(e.g, dilated cardiomyopathy), or (4) conditions asso-
ity that may be indistinguishable from poor lung infla
ciated with ventricular underfilling, such as cardiac
tion or pulmonary edema.2 Since pulmonary fibrosis is
tamponade or constrictive pericarditis. In constrictive
associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary discase
pericarditis, the heart shadow is not usually enlarged.56
In dogs, pleural effusion usually follows liver conges-
causcd by chronic bronchitis and tracheal and bron-
chial collapsc, diagnosis in sinall dogs with chronic
tion and ascites in the progression of signs. In cats,
cough and concurrent mitral regurgitation may some-
 pleural cffusion may accompany all forms of decom-
times be difficult from radiographs unless clinical
fundings are carefully cvaluated.
ure. A complete data hase is often required to differen-
tiate cardiogenic and noncardiogenic pleural cffusion.
The least common pleural cavity abnormality is pleural
thickening or pleural edema. It is caused by acute,
FOCAL PULMONARY LESIONS
sevcre left ventricular failure that overwhelms the pul-
ASSOCIATED WITH HEART DISEASE
monary lymphatic drainage and always occurs with
acute alveolar edema.
Focal pulinonary lesions may occur with certain car-
The radiographic signs of pleural effusion have been
diovascular disorders. Dirofilariasis causcs severe lung
described in detail.? Differences in its appcarance be-
reactions.2 is. 19 Lesion distribution may range f1om
twcen the VD and DV views are important in heart
patchy or diffusc interstitial patterns in occult heart-
diseasc. Frce fluid moves within the pleural cavity by
worm discasc to lung consolidation causcd by throm-
gravity. In the prone position for the DV vicw, fluuid
bosis following adulticide trcatmcnt (sce Figs. 30-5,
gravitates to the ventral regions and surrounds the
 30-7、 30-10). Fosinophilic pulmonary granulomas
heart and diaphragm. In the DV vicw, cven small
may be prescnt. The pulmonary pattern in cats with
amounts of pleural effusion may obscure the cardiac
diroflariasis is usually much milder, Patchy interstitial
silhouette and diaphragm. Therefore, a VD view
and alveolar densitics have been reported (sce Figs.
should be taken if possible, since in the supine position
31-1, 31-2).40. 11. 53
fluid gravitales away from the hcart and diaphragm to
Acute pulmonary thrormboembolism in dogs as a
the dorsal regions of the plcural cavity (see Fig.
complication of systemic diseascs is manifested in a
varicty of focal pulmonary lesions (Fig. 30-11). They
thoracocentesis and drainage will relieve dyspnea and
include single or multiple alveolar opacitics, lobar col-
ensure bctter visualization of thoracic organs.
RADI0LOGY
127
THE ABDOMEN
lieart disease illustrates liow diagnoses of common spe-
cific disorders can be made from plain films (Table
7-2). Tle addition of clinical signs offen enablcs a
Thoracic radiograplis sliould include the cranial ab
specific diagnosis to be made.
 In addition to assisting diagnosis of a particular con-
 domen. Liver enlargement and ascites are general se-
genital anoaly, the radiologic examination offers a
quelae of right-sided or generalized congestive heart
failure. When congenital peritoneodiaphragmatic peri-
prognostic guide for some conditions, particularly
tliose with volume overload, by revealing the severity
cardial hernia is suspected, diagnosis is supported by
an enlarged, roumded cardiac silliouete and missing
 of cardiomegaly and its hemodynamic consequcinces.
 Plain film radiography is reasonably accurate for diag-
or cranially displaced abdominal organs (see Fig. 29
nosing some congenital anomalies such as patent duc-
 6). Moreover, radiographic evaluation of the abdomen 
tus arteriosus. This accuracy is greatly incrcascd when
may reveal noncardiac causes of abdominal effusions
assessed in conjunction with clinical findings. However,
such as neoplasia.
ecliocardiography, including color-flow and speciral
Liver enlargement is often radiograplically overdi
Doppler echocardiography, is required for definitive
agnosed. Standard criteria for normal liver size state
1liat thie caudoventral tip should lic at tlie costal arch.
diagnosis and characterization of most congenital dis-
cases. When diagnnostic ultrasound is navailable. the
However, the liver moves beyond the arch in inspira-
patient can be referred for ecliocardiography or car-
tion, particularly if the thorax is expanded and tlie
diac catheterization. Occasionally, nonselectivc angio-
diaphragm is flat, as with dyspnea or pleural effusion.
Hepatomegaly results from many noncardiac diseases
cardiography may help delincate some disorders.$7
and is not uniformly present in heart. failure.
CONCLUSIONS FROM THE
DIAGNOSIS OF CONGENITAL
RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATION
HEART DISEASE
The astute clinician will evaluate radiologic signs
Tlie liearl. and lumgs sliould always be interpreted
of cardiopulmonary disease within the context of an
together. A scheme for thcir evaluation in congenital
insigliful history and a complete clinical data base.
TABLE 7-2
Diagnostic Scheme for Congenital Heart Diseases
Lung Field
 Congenital Cardiac Anomaly
Cardiac Silhouette
Severe pulmonic sicnosis
Right side enlarged (or usually enlarged)
Tricuspid dysplasia.
Tetralogy of Fallot
Pulmonic stenosis with atrial septal defects
(R →I. shnt)
Prominent pulnonary veins
Aortic stenosis in left ventrieular failurc
Lcft side enlarged
Mitral valve malformation or stcosis
 Prominent arieries and veins
Atrial septal defccts (L > R shunt)
Gencrally enlarged
(overperfused)
Ventricular septal defects (1. → R shunt)
Patent rluctus arteriosus (L →> R shunt)
Artcriovcnous shuns (I. → R shunt)
Proninent puhmonary arteries
Eisenmenger's synerome (hypertensive, R → L
Variable cardliac cnlargemen!
shunting, VSD. PDA, ASD)
Normal
Pulnonic stenosis (mild)
Right side cnlarged
Pulmonic or tricuspid incompetence.
Small ventricular septal defect
Aortic stenosis (scvcre)
Left side enlarged
Compensated congenital mitral valve mallorimation
Maltiplc dlefec:s
Gencral cnlargement
Peritoneodiaphragmatic pericardial hernia
Edema
L.eft ventricular failure
Variable cardiac enlargenent
Biven tricular failure
VSD. venricular septal tlefec; PDA, patent ductus arleriosus: ASD, atial septal delect.
128DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
Tlie acciuracy of assessing minor degrees of cardiac
13. Suter PF, Lord PF. A critical evaluation of thc radio-
graphic findings in caninc cardiovascular diseases. I Am
Vet Mcd Assoc 158:358. 1971
and echocardiographic assessment do not always corre-
16. Lord PF, Zontine WJ. Radiologic cxamination of thc
late. Also, for evaluation of cardiac morphology, radi-
feline cardiovascular systcm. Vet Clin North An 7:281.
ograpliy is more sensitive than some diagnostic tests
1977
(e.g., for left arrial and right ventricular enlargement.
17. Hamlin RL, Smetzer D, Smith C. Radiographic anatomy
compared with tlie ECG54. s"), but i1 is less accuurate
of the norimal cat heart. I An Vet Med Assoc 143:957.
than cchocardiograply. In contrast, tliere is no substi-
1963
18. Murphy ML, Bluc LR, Thcnabada PN, et al. The rcliabil-
fute for radiography for assessing lung fields and pleu-
ity of the routinc chest rocntgenogran for determina-
ral cavity and providing an overall balanced assessment
tion of heart size based on specific ventricular chamber
for thoracic and cardiorespiratory(
diseascs. Radio-
evaluation at postinorten. lnvcst. Radiol 20:21. 1985
graphic information must be carefully asscssed, to-
19. Lord PF. Radiologic cxanination. In Fox PR (cd). Ca-
nine and Feline Cardiology. New York, Churchill Living-
stonc, 1988, p 91
for reliability, sensitivity, specificity, and prognosis. Dif-
20. Snyder PS, Sato T, Aukins CE. The utility of thoracic
ferent diagnostic tests are uscd to complement cach
radiographic measurcment for thc detcction of cardio-
other. Computer algorithms have not yet replaced the
megaly ini cats with plcural effusion. Vet Radiol 31:89,
educated and prepared mind.
1990
21. Fox PR. Feline cardionyopatliy. In Fox PR (ed). Canine
and Feline Cardiology. Ncw York, Churchill Livingstone.
1988, p 435
REFERENCES
22. Ackerman N, Burk R, Hahn AW, Hayes HM Jr. Patent
ductus arteriosus in the dog: A retrospectivc study of
radiographic, epidemiologic, and clinical findings. Am J
Vet Res 39:1805, 1978
1. Burk Rl., Ackeriman X. Simall Animal Radiology and
23. Lord PF, Wood A, Hilley LP, Liu SK. Radiographic and
Ultrasonography. Philadclphia, wB Saunders, 1996
hemodynamic cvaluation of cardiomyopathy and thron-
2. Suter PF, Lord PF. Thoracic Radiograply: Thoracic Dis-
boembolism in the cat. J Aun Vet Med Assoc 164:154,
cascs of thc Dog and Cat. Wettswil, Switzerland, PF
1974
Sutcr, 1984
24. Lord PF, Wood A, Liu SK, Tilley LP. Left ventricular
3. Holmes RA, Smith GF, Lcwis RE, Kein EM. Thc effects 
algiocardiography in congenital nitral valvc insuffi-
of rotalion on the radiographic appearance of the ca-
ciency of the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 166:1069, 1975
ninc cardiac silhoucttc ini dorsal recumbency. Vet Radiol
 25. Iord PF. Left ventricular diastolic stiffness in dlogs with
20:98,1985
congestive cardiomyopathy and volume ovcrload. Am J
4. Grandagc J. The 1adiology of thc dog's diaphragin, J
Vet Rcs 37:953. 1976
 Small Anin Pract 14:89, 1974
26. Sisson D, Thomas WP. Endocarditis of the aortic valve
 5. Rueht ww, Thrall DE. Thie effect of dorsal versus vcentral
in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:570, 1984
rccunbcncy on the radiographic appearance of the ca-
27. Weirich WE, Blevins WE, Rebar All, Late consequences
ninc thorax. Vet Radiol 22:10, 1981
of patent ductus arteriosus in the dog: A repori of six
6. Carlisle CH, Thrall DE. A comparison of normal fchine
cases. J Am1 Anim Hosp Assoc 14:40. 1978
thoracic radiographs made in dorsal versus ventral rc-
 28. Feldman EC, Nimmo-Wilki JS, Phar1 JW. Eisenmenger's
cumbcncy. Vet Radiol 23:3, 1982
syndrome in the dog: Case reports. J Am Anin Hosp
7. Silverman S, Suter PF. Influcncc of inspiration and expi-
Assoc 17:477, 1981
ration on caninc thoracic radiographs. J Am Vet Med
29. Ware WA, Bonagura JD. Multiple congenital cardliac
Assoc 166:502, 1975
anomalies and Eiscnmcngcr's syndrome in a dog. Can
8. Groves IF, Ticcr JW. Pleural fluid movement: Its efect
Vet J 10:932, 1988
 on appcarance of ventrodorsal and dlorsoventral radlio-
30. Oswald GP, Orton ECl. Patcnt dhucnus arfcriosus and pul-
graphic projections. Vet Radiol 24:99, 1983
monary hypertension i related Pembroke Welsh corgis.
9. van der Broek AHM, Darkc PGG. Cardiac measureimcnts 
J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:76, 1993
OW thoracic radiograpls of cats. J Small Anin Pracl
 31. Laks MM, Morady T, Garner D, Swan HjC. Relation of
28:125, 1987
ventricular volume, compliance and inass in the normal
10. Moon Ml., Keenc BK, Lessard P, et al. Age related
and pulmonary artery bandcd heart. Cardiovasr Res
changes in the fclinc cardiac silhoucttc. Vet Radiol Ultra-
0:187. 1982
soumd 34:315, 1998
32. Wcbe1 KT, Jarnicki JS, Slroff SG. Tlhe right ventricle:
11. Toal RL., Iosonsky JM, Coulter DB, De Novellis R. Influ-
Physiologic arrd pathophysiologic consideralions.  Cril
ence of cardiac cycle on the radiographic appearanice of
Carc Mcd 11:323, 1983
the feline heart. Vei Radiol 26:63, 1985
33. Liu S-K, Tilley LP. Dysplasia of the tricuspid valve in the 
12. Rankin JS, McHale PA, Arenizen CE, et al. The three-
dog and cat. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 169:623. 1976
dinensional dynamic geometry of the left ventricle in
34. Hoit D, Winkie T, Schelling C, et al. Correlation between
thc conscious dog. Circ Res 39:301, 1976
thoracic radiographs and post mortem finclings in dogs
13. Hanlin Rl. Analysis of the cardiac silhouette in dorso-
with hemangiosa1coma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1535,
ventral radiographs froin dogs with heart discasc. J Am
1992
Vet Med Ass0c 153:1446, 1968
34a. Durming D, Monnet E, Orton C.et al. Analysis of
14. Buchannan JW, Buchele1 J. Vertebral scale system to
prognostic indicators for dogs with pericardlial effusion:
measure canine heart size inl radiographs. J Am Vet Med
46 cascs (1985-1996). J An Vet Med Assoc 212:1276.
Assoc 206:194. 1995
1998
RADIOLOGY129
35. Gibhs C, Gaskell CJ, Darke PGG, Wotton PR. Idiopathic
47. Martin DG, Ferguson EW, Gumncls RD, ct al, Double
pericardial hemorrhage in dogs: A review of 14 cases. J
aorfic a1ch in a dog. J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 183:697, 1983
Snall Anin Pract 23:483, 1982
48. Calvert CA, Rawlings CA. Pulmonary manifestations of
36. Evans SM, Bicry DN. Congenital peritoneopericardial
hcartworm disease. Vet Clin Xortlhi Am 15:99l, 1985
diapliragimatic hernia in the dog and cat: A literature
49. Ackcrman N. Radiographic aspccts of hcartworm
clis-
revicw and 17 additional casc histories. Vet Radiol
easc. Scmin Vet Mcd Surg (Small Anim) 2:15, 1987
21:108, 1980
50. Thrall DE, Losonsky JM. A method for cvaluating caninc
37. Fingland RB, Bonagura JD, Mycr CW. Pulnonic slcnosis
pulmonary circulatory dynamics from survey radio-
in the dog: 29 cascs (1975-1984). J Am Vet Med Assoc
graphis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 12:457, 1976
189:218, 1986
 51. Losonsky JR, Thrall DE, Lewis RE. Thoracic radiographic
 38. O'Grady MR, Holmberg DL, Miller GW, Cockshutt JR.
abnormalities in 200 dogs with spontancous heartworm
Canine congenital aortic stenosis: A review of the litera-
imfestation. Vet Radiol 24:120. 1983
ture and commentary Can Vet J 30:811, 1989
32. Holmes RA, Techniques to aid in the radiograplic diag-
 39. Flukiger M, Gomez J. Radiographic findings in dogs witlh
nosis of heartwonn disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc
spontancous pulmonary thronbosis or embolism. Vet
1986:1063, 1985
Radiol 25:124, 1984
52a. Atkins CE, DeFranccsca TC, Miller MW, et al. Prcva-
40. Green BJ, Lordl PF, Gricvc RB. Occult feline diroflariasis
lence of heartworin infection in cats witlh signs of cardio-
confirmed by angiography and serology. J An Anin
respiratory abnormalities. J An Vet Med Assoc 212:517,
Hosp Assoc 19:847, 1983
1998
41. Donahue JMR, Kncller SK, Lewis RE. Hematologic and
53. Dillon R. Feline dirofilariasis. Vet Clin North Am
radiographic changes in cats aftcr inoculation with infcc-
14:1185, 1984
tivc larvac of Dirofilaria immitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
54. Wong MM, Pederson NC, Cullen J. Diroflariasis in cats.
168:113, 1976
 .J Am Aniin Hosp Assoc 19:855, 1983
42. Patterson OF, Pyle RL, Buchanan JW, et al. Hereditary
 55. Burk RL. Radiographic cxamination of thc carrliopulmo-
patent ductus arteriosus and its sequelae in the dog. Cic
nary systein. Vet Clin North Am 13:241, 1983
Res 29:1, 1971
42a. Edwards DF, Bahr RJ, Suter PF, ct al. Portal hypcrten-
56.
Thomas WP, Reed JR, Gomez JA. Diagnostic pneumo-
sion secondary to a right atrial tumor in a dog. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 173:750, 1978
effusion. Vet Radiol 25:2, 1984
 57. Sticklc RL., Anderson LK. Diagnosis of conmon congeni-
43. Tlrall DE, Calvert CA. Radiographic cvaluation of ca-
nine hearrworin discase cocxisting with right heart fail
tal heart anomalies in thc dog using survey and nonse-
lre. Vet Radiol 24:124, 1983
lective contrast radiography. Vet Radiol 28:6, 1987
44. Cantwell HD, Blevins WE, Wcirich WE. Angiographic
58. Lombard CW, Ackerman N. Right lhieart cnlargement. in
diagnosis of heartbase tumor in the dog. J Ani Anim
hicartworim-infectcd dogs: A radiographic, electrocardio-
Ilosp Assoc 18:83. 1982
graphic and echocardiographic corrclation. Vet Radiol
43. Berg RJ, Wingfield W. Pericardial eflusion in the dog: A
25:210,1984
Ieview of 42 cascs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:721, 1983
59. Loinbard CW, Spcncer CP. Correlation of radiograplhic,
46. Shires PK, Liu WI. Persistcnt right aortic arch in dogs:
cchocardiographic and elcctrocardiographic signs of lcft
A long-term follow-up after surgical correction. J Am
heart cnlargement in dogs with mitral regurgitation. Vet
Anim Hosp Assoc 17:773, 1981
Radiol 26:89, 1983
Echocardiogi
andl
0op
e
 N. SYDNEY MOiSE
PHILIP R. FOX
Ecliocardiograply plays an integral role in cardiovascular evaluation, pro-
viding accurate, noninvasive assessment of cardiac structure, funclion, and
blood flow dynamics. Most importantly, cchocardiography is a diagnostic test
that should complement but nol replace the survey thoracic radiograph. As
such, it is of greatest value when guided by and incorporated into a coinplete
clata base.l. la
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF ULTRASOUND
Echocardiography is the clinical application of diagnostic ultrasound to
examine the heart and proximal great vessels. Its diagnostic utility is cin-
hanced by understanding basic physical principles.
GENERATION OF ULTRASOUND
Utrasound is produced when a piezoelectric crystal housed in a transducer
is electrically stimulated. The crystal expands and contracts to produce a
series of sound waves. These are propagated in the form of a bean and
transmitted into tissues. The greater tlhie voltage applied to tlie crystal, tlte
greater the transmited pulse amplitude and intensity., 
When emitted sound waves encounter an acoustic interface, tliey are
reflecied back to the transducer and produce electrical cnergy (sound waves
are transmitted less than I perceint of the time). Tlie distaince to tlie acoustic
interface is calculated, since tlie speed of soud waves in soft tissues (average,
1540 m/sec)? and the time for the soumd to travel are knowm. Tlie cchocardi-
faces. Inage quality is deterimined by sophistication of the equipment, the
proper match of transducer and structure, and the technical skills of the
operator.
CHARACTERISTICS OF SOUND WAVES
Ultrasound travels through a mcdium as a propagating wave that causes
the particles in the medium to oscillate. The amplitude and frequency of
130
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY AND DOPPLER IMAGING:
131
displaced particles can be graphically'expressed as a
sue  penctration  than  lower-frcquency  transducers
sine wave. 'The height above and below tlie baseline
(e.g., 3.5 MHz).
represents the degree of particle compression and rar-
Penetration of sound waves is influenced by the
cfaction.! The wauelength of a given sound wave is
tissue. Sound penetrates casier and travels straighter
determined by the distance betwcen two sinilar points
in honogcneous tlian in heterogencous tissues. When
on tle sine wave. The frequency of a sound wave repre-
more ultrasound is rellected, less is available for trans-
senis tlie 1umber of wavelengths that. occur within a
mission through dceper tissues. Ultrasound travels in
given time and is expressed in cycles/sec (cps) or hertz
a straight line for a distance in the near field without
(Hz); 1 cps = 1 Hz. Frequency and wavelength arc
diverging: it then diverges in the far field.'
inversely related (e.g., the smaller thc wavelength, 1he
higher the frequency). The velocily of a sound wave in
a medium equals the product of the frequency and
ATTENUATION
wavclength, and it is primarily determined by density
of tlie mediu; denser structlres increase soumd wave
Attenuation describes loss of ultrasound cnergy be-
vclocity.13
causc of tissue absorption and sound wave scatter. The
When sound waves meet a boundary between two
distance that ultrasound must travel to have lialf its
different media, a portion of the acoustic energy is
 energy attenuated is referred to as its half-pooer distance
reflected, and part continues into the second medium.
(cm)*; lialf-power distances include water, 380 cm;
‘The ability to visualize structures with ultrasound is
 blood, 15 cim; soft tissue other than muscle, 1 1o 5 cm:
determined by the reflectioin of transmitted ultra-
muscle, 0.6 to 1 cm; and lung, 0.05 cm (sound waves
soumd. 'The acoustic impedance of a medium describes
do not penetrate air). Thus, air is tlie "enemy" of
how sound travels through it. When a sound wave
ultrasound because of the great refraction and attenua-
traverses the interface berween two media that have
tion it causes; structures behind air cannot be ade-
different acoustic impedance properties, it is botli re-
quately imaged. ln contrast, effusions enliancc im-
flected and refracted. Greater differences in acoustic
aging. Cleares1 images arc obtained before removing
impedance, termed acoustic mismatch, incrcase re-
 pericardial or pleural fluid, although severe effusions
flecled and refracted sound waves.
may cause undue patient stress.
Scaltered echoes originate from irregular targets that.
arc sinaller than the wavelength of the ultrasound
wave. Tlicy cause reflected ecliocs to be cast in many
directions, resulting in only a few cchoes being re
RESOLUTION
turned to the transducer.' Scattered echoes do no1
dlepend on the angle of incidence and are iportan1.
Resolution refers to the ability to distinguish between
in visualizing structures that are parallel to the ultra
two small, separale objects or points. Axial resolution
refers to the ability to resolve points lying along the
sound beam.
Specular echoes are reflected from large structures
path of tlhe beam (i.c., one object behind the otlier)
with smooth edges. They depend on the angle of the
and is rclated to the wavelength, frequcncy, and dura-
ultrasound beam to the tissue imterface.
tio11 of transmitted pulse. Resolution is approximatcly
equivalent to twice the wavclength. For exainplc, tlie
wavelength of a 5 MIIz transducer is 0.3 um. There-
fore, tlhe resolution is approximately 0.6 mm. The
TRANSDUCERS AND THE ULTRASOUND
lower the transducer frequency, the longer the wave-
BEAM
lengtli and the poorer the resolution. Lateral resolution,
the ability to differentiate points lying side by side
The ultrasound bcam is relativcly cylindric in shape
relative to the ultrasoud beam, is largely a function
as it leaves the transducer. The larger the radius and
of beam width, which depends on traiusducer sizc,
the simaller the wavelengih (i.e., higher frequency), the
shape, frequency, and focusing. Structures parallel to
farther the bean travels without divergence. Objects
tlie bean must be separated by more tlian wice the
imaged within this near field will be visualized better
ultrasonic bean width to be resolved as laterally dis-
than those outside this distance (far field). Higher-
tinct.' Azimuthal (or elevational) resolution relates to
frequency transducers produce a more diagnostic near
the thickness of the imaging plane. Poor azimutlhal
field. The amount of divergencce can be electronically
 resolution causes structural superimposition.
focused in some machines.
 Object resolution is best if targeis are situated cen-
Higl-frequency transducers (i.e., 7.5 MHz) produce
trally within a narrow ultrasound beam. Bcarm widtli
sound waves with a shorter wavelength, which allows
can1 be changed by gain controls. If the gain is in1-
reflection from smaller structures. This permits better
crcased, the beain widtli increases, resolution de-
structural definitioin aind resolution but witli less tis-
creases, and artifacts worsen.
132 DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
TISSUECHARACTERISTICS
DISADVANTAGEs. The limited inage scctor associated
with a single, “icepick,”' one-dimensional beam focuses 
When tissue does not reflect ultrasound, it is termed
only on a very small portion of the lieart (Fig. 8-1).
anechoic or sonolucent. If a tissue reflecis ultrasound
This causes lack of consistenl and accurate spatial ori-
minimally copared with surrounding tissues, it is re-
cntation unless the M-mode is guided and derived
ferred to as hypoechoic. Conversely, if a tissue is lhiglily
from the 2-1) image (i.e., the image is obtained and
reflective, it is said to he hyperechoic (it lias greater
 optimized with 2-D scanning, immediately followed by
echogenicity). Through-transmission is a phenomenon
engaging tlie M-mode inaging format).
in wlicli ultrasound passes through a tissue that is
aneclioic or hypocchoic, and lhe next rissue to be
aa seae q p r t rs
TWO-DIMENSIONAL
because of acoustic enhancement (e.g., greater echogeni-
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
city of the riglit ventricular wall is seen in animals with
 pericardial effusion). When an ulrasound beam strikes
Two-dimensional cchocardiography was devcloped
a calcified or dense objec1 that. blocks tlirougl-trans-
mission, tlhat object will be hyperechoic. However, the
 to circumvent linitations associated with single beam
expected image behind it is usually absent, wlicl is
M-mode interrogations. 1, 3
referred to as an acoustic shadou. Calcification is a
 common cause of acoustic shadowing.
ADVANTAGEs. Utilizing an ultrasonic bcam moving in
a sector, 2-D echocardiograply creates a pie- or fan-
shaped image, displaying anatomic and functional
characleristics tlhiat are more ainatomically intuitive
TYPES OF
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
tems are available. (l) Meclianical scanners move the
ultrasound beam by mechanically oscillating a single
Standard M-mode and two-dimensional (2-1D) echo
ducer. These are relatively less expensive and produce
cardiography evaluate cardiac chamber anatomy and
motion. The best inages result when strucures are
better resolutionn under certain conditions, althougl1
perpendicular to the ultrasound beam. Doppler echo-
tliey are often more bulky and are prone to lhigher
cardiography (spcctral and color-flow) evaluates car-
Imainteiance 11eeds. (2) Phased array scanners have
diovascular blood flow by assessing the relative change
multiple transducer elemenis arranged into thin crys-
tals that are clectronically fired in sequence witlout
in rcturned ultrasound frequency compared with the
use of mechanical components. This produces a qui-
transmitted frequency. Inforrmation is mosl accurate
eter, ligliter transducer capable of dynamic focusing.
when Doppler sound waves are direcled parallel to the
target red blood cells (RBCs)., 3
DISADvANTAGEs. Compared with M-mode ccliocardi-
ography, 2-1 echo image acuity is less precise, and
frame rate is slower. These factors are generally most
M-MODE ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
inportant when precise mcasurenments of smal struc-
tres are contemplated.
M(motion)-mode echocardiography was the first
widely used form of diagnostic cardiac ultrasound. Al-
though 2-1) cchocardiograply witli its more intuitive
TRANSESOPHAGEAL
image has largely replaced M-mode ccho, tlie latter
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
still has certain applications and value.*
In contrast to standard transtlioracic chocardio
ADvANTAGEs. Thc sharp axial resolution and high
graphic procedures in which the transducer is placed
sampling frcqucncy of M-mode ccho (1000 to 5000
upon the chest surface, transesophagcal ecliocardiog-
pulses/sec) compared with the slower 2-1) scanning
raphy (TEE) uses a 2-D transducer at the end of a
rate (15 to 128 frames/scc) alow small, rapidly moving
flexible endoscope placed in the esoplagus to provide
slructures to be discerned and accurately correlated
 high-quality images. This results from closer proximity
with time relative to the ECG. For cxample, M-mode
 of the transducer to ilie lieart. It is also possible to
eclio is superior when resolving small cardiac dimen-
obtain Doppler information witli this techniquc. Bi-
sions or structures such as wall thicknesses in cais, in
plane or multiplane probes are preferred.3-7
which 1 mn can make the difference between normal
Despite improved imaging, TEE lias had limited vet-
versus pathologic hypertrophy.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING133
B
A
FIGURE8-1
(A)Heart in long-axis view,depicting the three standard M-mode echo beam orientations.(B)
AssociatedM-mode echo images of a normal dog.FrameA (apical leftventricularlevelat thelevel of
the chordae tendineae):The transducer sends ultrasound waves(in sequence) through theright
chestwallrightventricularwallandchamber,interventricularsptum,leftventricularchamber,
chordae tendineae,andleftventricularfreewall.RVWED,rightventricularwall at end-diastole;
RVEDDrightnicularndiastliciamtr;icuspidaeEDinrvnricularm
at end-diastole;VESinterventricularseptumatnd-systolVEDD,leftventricularend-diastolic
diameter;VESD,leftventricular end-systolicdiameter;VWED,leftventricularwall atend-diastole;
LVWESleftventricularwall atend-systole;WA,lefventricularwall amplitude;CT,chordae
tendineae.
FrameB (mid left ventricular, or mitral valve,level): The echobeam traverses the right heart.
Depending on the transducer angle,itmayintersect the tricuspidvalve,themostbasilar portion of
theinterventricular septum,theanteriorandposteriormitralvalveleaflets,andtheleftventricular
freewallRV,rightventricle;D,nitial mitralvalve opening;E,maximum early diastolicmitralvalve
openingF,closure ofleafletsafter early diastolicfilling;the slopefromEtoFis thevelocity of
diastolic closure (and if thisisnot a straight linepoint Fisalso used);C,closure ofmitral leaflets
just before systol;EPS,E-point eptal sparation;AMV,anteriormitralvalve;PMV,osteriormitral
valve.
FrameC(aorticroot andleft atrial level):The echo beam traverses theright heart,aorticroot and
aorticvalve,and left atrium.RV,rightventricle;Ao,aorticroot；AS,aorticvalve during systole;AD,
aorticvalve during diastole;AA,aorticamplitude;LA,left atrium.A simultaneous ECGisrecorded
tofacilitatetiming of thecardiaccycle.
134DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
of thespecifictransducers,theneed toanesthetize the
CONTRASTECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
animal to perform this procedure,and increased time
required for examination.
WhenDoppler echocardiography is unavailable,mi-
crobubblesinaperipheralvenous injection reflect
ultrasound and assist inidentifying right-to-leftintra-
THREE-DIMENSIONAL
cardiac shunting.Microbubbles donot traverse the
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
pulmonaryor systemiccapillariesbut arefilteredout
by pulmonary capillaries with a diameter of 8 μ. They
Technologicenhancementsin2-Dimaginghavefos-
are easily created by agitating saline(3 to10 ml)with
teredimprovedmethodologiesforassessingheartsize
0.5 to1 ml of air,or by a1:4 mixture of the animal's
andcardiacstructureandfunctionbythree-dimen-
sional echocardiography.10. 10a Advantages include the
blood and saline.Excess air is eliminated from the
syringeand theagitatedsolutionisimmediatelyin-
abilityto assess anatomicgeometry and associatedven-
jected into a large vein during echocardiographic ex-
tricular function reliably;disadvantages include the
need for special equipment,software,and training.
amination.
Simultaneouscardiacimagingvisualizesbloodflow
by observing microbubbles entering the right atrium
SPECIALECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC
and right ventricle;if a right-to-left shunt is present,
TECHNIQUES
microbubbles appear in the left heart (Figs. 8-2,8-3;
see also Fig. 24-52B).A negative contrast effect is
Inaddition totransthoracic and transesophageal
recorded by noncontrast-containing blood shunting
echocardiographic examination, other imaging tech-
into a chamber containing microbubbles (Fig.8-3,
niques can sometimes provide useful information.la
Frame 2).
3
2
Rv
R
SD
5
Rv
Rv
ASD-
ASD
ASD
FIGURE8-2
Contrast two-dimensional echoes (long axis four-chamber viewrecorded at the right parasternal
position)of aboxer with an ostium secundum-type,predominantlyright-to-left-shunting atrial
septal defect.Frame 1:Contrast (C)frst appears in the right atrium (Ra).Frame 2:The contrast has
filled the right atrium and rightventricle(white arrows) and has crossed the atrial septal defect (ASD)
into theleftatrium.Frame3:Theleft atrium is filledwith contrast.Frame4:All chambers contain
contrast.The echogenicity of thecontrast bubblesisgreaterin therightheart.Contrast is still eing
injected and therefore continues tofill theright atrium.Frame5:Contrast hasvirtually clearedfrom
theleft heart.Frame6:Remaining contrast in therightheart continues to theatrial septal defect
(ASD）and bubbles are seen in theleftventricle.Ru,rightventricl;S,interventricular septum；u,
left ventricle; Ra,right atrium; La, left atrium.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING
135
RA
IAS
LV
117
HR118
ECG
RA
FIGURE8-3
Contrast two-dimensional echoes (long axisfour-chamberview
recordedfrom right parasternal position)of a dogwith a sinus
venosus-type,bidrectional-shuntingatrial septal defectA
nonselectiveechocontrast studyisperformed byperipheral
venous injectionof agitated saline.Frame1(A) shows a dilated
left atrium (LA),right atrium (RA),and left ventricle (LV).A high
ASDof the sinus venosus type is indicated(arrow)in the
interatrial septum (IAS）VS,interventricular septum;AMV,
anteriormitral valve leaflet.Frame2(B）is taken afterinjection of
echocontrast.During early systole,left atrial blood shunts
through the defectinto theright atrium.This shunted blood
(arrow)from theleft atrium is without contrast(and thus appears
black);itis surrounded by the echoreflective,white-appearing
microbubble,creainganegativecontrasteffect.,contrast.Frame
3(C)is duringmid to late systole;microbubble-laden blood
(arrows) shunts from theright atrium to theleft atrium.
DOPPLERECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
whereVis flowvelocityofblood cells(m/sec);Cis
speed of ultrasound in blood; f。 is transmitted fre-
Mostcardiacdisordersaffectbloodflowvelocityor
direction. Doppler echocardiography permits evalua-
quency (for any given transducer); f is shift in trans-
mitted frequency (Doppler shift); and θ is the inter-
tion of these characteristicswithin theheart andgreat
cept angle.By rearranging this equation
vessels.It utilizes theDoppler principle,which is based
on thechangeinreflected soundwavefrequency that
2f。x V × cos θ
occurswhen soundwavesstrike a movingobject.
△f=
Ultrasound waves generated from the transducer are
C
reflected from red bloodcells.Sincethe transmitted
TRANsDUCERFREQUENCY.Accordingtotheseequa-
frequencyisknown and thefrequencyofreflected
tions, the Doppler shift (f) is greatly influenced by
ultrasound is measured,thedifferencebetween trans-
transducerfrequency.Thehigher the transducerfre-
mitted andreceived signals can be determined.This
quency (e.g., 7.5 MHz versus 2.5 MHz), the lower the
shiftinfrequency,theDoppler shiftrDopplerfrequency
velocity of bloodflow that canbemeasured.
represents the differencein the transmitted and re-
ceived frequencies.11. 12
DIRECTIONOFBLOODFLOw.Soundwavesthatstrike
Doppler echocardiography assesses direction and ve-
RBCs moving toward the transducer are reflected off
locityofbloodflowbaseduponmeasurementof the
the RBCs at a higher frequency. This is displayed as a
frequency shift ofreflected ultrasound signals.Since
spectralrecording above thebaseline and denotesa
velocity =frequencyXwavelength,the magnitude of this
positive Doppler shift (Figs. 8-4, 8-5; see also Figs.
shift is proportional toRBCvelocity:
8-15,8-16B;24-9D,24-16,24-38,and24-56D).Con-
△fXC
versely, sound waves that strike RBCs moving away
V=
2fXcos θ
from the transducer arereflectedbackat a lower fre-
136
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
FIGURE8-4
Continuous-waveDoppler echo examinations.A horizontal line in each
frame indicates thebaseline.In frames1 and 2,the distance between
markers =1 meter/sec.A simultaneouslyrecordedECG accompanies each
Doppler trace.Frame 1:Dog with congenital pulmonic stenosis;right
through the pulmonary valves away from the transducer (below the
AI
baseline),and the trace depictsincreasedvelocity caused by pulmonic
stenosis (PS).Using the modified Bernoulli equation (△P=4×velocity²),
the pressure gradient(△P)across the stenotic valves is approximately 121
mmHg [i.e.,4×(5.5m/s)²].There is also diastolicflow of pulmonic
insufficiency (Pl) toward the transducer (above the baseline).
Frame 2:Dogwith congenital subaortic stenosis;left caudal (apical)
position with the Doppler courser placed in theLV outflow tract in the
five-chamberview.Blood flows duringsystole through the aorticvalves away
from the transducer,and the trace depictsincreasedvelocity belowthe
baseline from aortic stenosis (As）.The transvalvular gradient is about 110
mmHg[i.e.,4× (5.25 m/s)²].There is also diastolic flow of aortic
insufficiency (Al) toward the transducer (above the baseline)from blood
regurgitating back through the aortic valves.
Frame3:Cat withmitral stenosis;left caudal (apical)positionwith the
Doppler courser placed through themitral valvesin thefour-chamber view.
Stenoticmitralvalvesincreasepeaktransvalvularbloodflowvelocityin early
diastole,followed by an abnormally slowdiastolic descent.Themitral
pressurehalf-time is greatly prolonged(80 to100 msec;normal,less than
30msec）MSdastlicllingroflofmitral stnosisRsystolij
mitral regurgitation.ECG is at bottom.
1
MR
3
EC6
quency.This is displayed as a spectral recordingbelow
accuracy of gradients determined by Doppler echocar-
thebaseline anddenotesanegativeDoppler shift
diography.Itrepresents the anglebetween the ultra-
(Figs.8-4,8-5,8-15,8-16F; see alsoFigs.24-1,249C,
sound beam and the moving RBCs.When Doppler
24-16, and 2420).
echo beam alignment is parallel to moving RBCs,
bloodvelocityis most accuratelymeasured.In contrast,
ACCURACY OFDOPPLERVELOCITYDETERMINATION.The
2-D and M-mode echocardiography require the beam
intercept angle,theta(),isakeyfactorinfluencing the
tobeperpendiculartotissueinterfacesforidealim-
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING
137
axis),which represent the relative numbers of cells
moving at a particular velocity. This velocity spectral
analysisdepicts acomplexplot of thevariousvelocities
(Y axis）moving forward and backward in temporal
associationwith thecardiaccycle.
DEFINrTIoNs.Cardiovascularbloodflowhascertain
characteristics that can be measured with Doppler
echocardiography. Normally, blood displays laminar
flow.That is,most RBCs move with equal velocity,
accelerate anddeceleratein thesamedirection and at
thesame time,andhavesimilarDopplershifts.Normal
bloodflow throughtheheartandgreatvesselsrarely
exceeds 1.2m/sec in the cat and1.5 m/sec in the
dog.Blood flow is pulsatile,exhibiting slightly differ-
entprofileswithacceleration anddeceleration.
Disturbed flow,or turbulentflow,results when there
is disruption to the normal laminar pattern (e.g., by
obstruction toflow).This causes the orderlymovement
of RBCs tobecome disorganized,resulting in whorls
andeddiesofdifferentvelocitiesanddirections.Re-
cordedDopplershiftsdepictaprofileofspectralbroad
B
eningcausedbyheterogeneityofbloodflowdirection
and velocities.
FIGURE8-5
PATHOLOGICVERSUSNONPATHOLOGICTURBULENTFLOW.
Turbulentflowpatterns can existwithout structural
Pulsed-wave (A)and continuous (B) Doppler echo traces from a
dog with chronic acquiredmitral insufficiency imaged with a 3.25
cardiacabnormalitieswhenflowvelocitiesarein-
MHz transducer.(A)The pulsed-waveDoppler sample gatewas
creased,or with congenital or acquired conditions.
placed at themitralvalve orifice intheleft apical four-chamber
Transitionoflaminartoturbulentflowoccursover a
view.Peak diastolic transmitral filling velocities (1.5m/s)
appearing above the baseline arewithin theNyquist limit (3.0m/
widerange of flow rates.This has been estimated by
s)for this configuration and are accurately profiled.In contrast,
theReynold’snumber,a dimensionlessparameter used to
thepeakvelocityof thesystolicmitralregurgitationjetexceedsthe
characterizeflow.As it increases,so does thetendency
Nyquistlimit,anditsspectralrecordingsaliased.Thisisdepicted
toward turbulent flow.TheReynold’s number(Nr)is
as a band "wrapping around”above and below thebaseline
(arrous).(B) Continuous-wave Doppler echo differentiates both the
representedbytheequation
direction and maximal velocity (approximately 5.6 m/s) of the
systolic mitral regurgitant jet.
Nr =(2r)(v) (p/m)
whereris theradius of the cylinder,vis themean flow
aging.When theDoppler beam is parallel toblood
velocity,p is the mass density of blood, and  is the
flow,theintercept anglebetween theultrasound beam
bloodviscosity.Within pipes,the tendency for turbu-
and blood flow is zero degrees, and cos O becomes 1.
lentflow increases as theReynold'snumber approxi-
Measuredvelocitywill thenrepresenttruevelocity.If
mates a value of 2300.Thus,turbulent flow patterns
the intercept angle is wide, there will be a greater
can occur in some normal animals with rapid blood
reduction in measured blood flow velocity compared
flow in large vessels.This is most often encountered
with truevelocity.Practically speaking,if theintercept
in practice during clinical evaluation of a soft,systolic
angle is less than 20°,thepercent error in velocity
murmur,especiallyin young,large-breed dogs immedi-
determination is less than 6percent.Angles greater
ately following exercise,when rapid flow through the
than25°generally yieldunacceptable quantitative esti-
matesofvelocity.
cent”or“functional”murmurs,2-Dexamination will
reveal normal cardiac structure and function,and
Doppler echostudies discloserelativelynormalflow
CHARACTERISTICSOFBLOODFLOW
dynamics,exceptfor slightly increased transvalvularve-
Bloodflowvelocities arerepresentedasa spectral
locity.
display or analysis of Doppler shift information.In
In contrast,flow through a small (stenotic）orifice
reality, the spectral recording comprises a series of
intoalarger chamber causes turbulence at alower
“bins”(vertical axis)recorded over time(horizontal
Reynold's number (200 to 500).For example,a small,
138DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
left-to-right-shunting ventricular septal defect (VSD)
quires anesthesia, which may reduce ventricular pres-
has reduced radius (r) with increased driving pressure
d og o og aq s peoss pue sns
from the left ventricle. This causes much turbulence
compared with most Doppler ccho cxaminations.
(and a loud murmur) but an insignificant shunt vol-
ume. Alternatively, severe miral regurgitation with mi-
 tral valve dysplasia may cause minimal turbulence (and
CONTINUOUS AND PULSED-WAVE
a soft murmur) but a significant regurgilant volume.
DOPPLER ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
This results from a very large valve orifice (radius) and
huge recciving chamber, which lower the turbulent
 Prior to color-flow Doppler imaging, conventional
threshold.
 Doppler methods uilized spectral Doppler techniqucs
in the form of continuous and pulsed-wave Doppler
DERIVED INFORMATION FROM DOPPLER
cchocardiography. Each uses the same transducer to
EXAMINATION
send and receive ultrasound.
Using velocity data obtained from the Doppler cxami-
nation and dimensional information obtained from the
PULSED-WAVE DOPPLER ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
cchocardliographic image, a variety of calculations can
 Pulsed-wave (Pw) Doppler echo uscs the same trans-
be made. Thesc include intracardiac chamber pres-
duccr to alternate between sending and receiving
sures,12 presure gradints,  low olume and ou
sound wayes,
ratios,24. 23 and others. Imlerrogation of cardiac blood
How by Doppler echocardiography can provide cxtcn-
ADVANTAGEs. This system can provide Doppler shift
 data selectively along the ultrasound bcam at any given
sive information relative to the prescncc, location, and
range (known as depth discrimination or range resolu-
extent of abnormal flow, obstruclion to blood flow, and
tion) by positioning an clcctronically controlled sam-
systolic or diastolic dysfunction.
ple volume to a desircd location. Blood flow at a
specific point within the hearl or vessel can be mea-
ESTIMATION OF PRESSURE GRADIENTS. Obstruction tO
blood flow (e.g., valvular stcenosis) incrcases vclocity
sured by adjusting the time-gatc delay control to re
across the stenotic region. Resultant systolic jets may
ceive only the ultrasound waves reflected from RBCs
at that particular point and depth. Blood flow can be
attain maximal peak velocities of 5 or 6 m/sec. Thc
*'mapped'’ as to the location, extent, and vclocity of
gradient (ie., pressure drop) across an obstruction
abnormal flow by manually and systematically moving
may be calculated by the simplified Bernouli equation
the sample gate within a vessel or cardiac chamber.
This time-consuming proccss is shortened with colo1-
pi- P2 = 4v
fow Doppler echocardliography (discussed later).
whcre p - p approximates the pressure gradient
 DISADVANTAGEs. Pulsed-wave Doppler cchocardiogra-
across an obstruction (c.g., across a stenotic valve),
and v is the maximal velocity distal to the obstruction
phy has limited ability to mcasure high blood flow
(see Fig. 8-4).
velocities such as occur frequently with acquircd or
 Differences exist between pressure gradicnts calcu-
congenital valvular diseases. To mcasure blood flow
yelocity accurately, the sampling rate must be suffi-
lated by Doppler studies and cardiac catheterization
(Fig. 24l). Dopple1 studics are usually performed
ciently high relative to the flow vclocity of intercst
 (see Nyquist limit, later). Also, since bcam divergencc
in unanesthetized paticnts and reprcsent the maximal
(peak) instantaneous pressure gradient. Doppler cchocar-
occurs, the farther into the heart the sample volumc
diography may underestimale maximal blood flow ve-
is placed, the larger it becomes, and depth rcsolution
locities and calculated pressure gradicnts if parallel
bccomes compromised.
beam orientation to blood flow is not attaincd. The
Dopplc1 ccho peak instantaneous gradicnts are usually
CONTINUOUS-WAVE DOPPLER
higher than the cathcterization-derived peak-to-pcak
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
gradients.' In contrast, commonly reported catheter-
ization-derived gradienis represcnt the ventricular to
Continuous-wavc (Cw) Doppler cchocardiography
uses separatc transmitting and recciving crystals within
mcnt of the pcak instantancous catheterization gradi-
a transduccr. This cnables ultrasound waves to be con-
ent is usually highcr than thc peak-to-peak gradient,
tinuously transmitted and reccived.
but accurate measuremcnt of the formcr requires
more time and is prone to crror, especially when fuid-
ADVANTAGEs. CW Doppler cchocardiography accu-
filled catheters are used. Cardiac catheterization re-
rately measures high blood velocities. In certain con-
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY AND DOPPLER IMAGING
139
genital disorders, it is important to evaluate maximal
red, and blood flowing away from the transducer is
blood flow velocitics and quantitatively evaluate true
coded blue. Blood flow velocity is indicated by the
blood flow profilcs. This is most important whcn as.
intensity of the color. 'Thus, slowly moving blood is
sessing the severity of gradients causcd by aortic and
colored dark; faster-moving blood is colored brightly.
pulmonic. valvular stenosis.
VARIANCE
DISADvANTAGEs. CW Dopplcr cchocardiography is un-
able to selectively sample at a given location and lacks
When blood flow is laminar, mean velocity is close
 depth discrimination. The CW beam contains Doppler
to pcak vclocity. In contrast, turbulent flow causes
 broadening of the velocity spectrum, with many differ-
shift information all along the course of its ultrasound
beam. It does not allow selective placement of a given
ent velocities occurring simultaneously. Variance cx-
 Doppler sample volume, making it difficult to localize
 presses the degree that velocities within a given sample
defccis.
yolume differ from the mcan velocity. Echocardio-
graphs incorporate methods to detect this spectral
broadening variance detection by use of color-en-
hanccd variance maps. These add shades of green or
COLOR-FLOW DOPPLER
 p r m sn  s jo s a
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
bright colors to detect variance."2
Color-flow (CF) Doppler echocardiography synthe-
sizes the anatomic image of the two-dimcnsional or M-
ALIASING AND THE NYQUIST LIMIT
mode cchocardiogram with Doppler blood flow char-
When blood velocity cxcceds the ability of pulsed-
acteristics to create a spatially correct, dynamic image.
wavc Doppler to record it accurately, the phenomenon
Color-flow mapping specds thc complete Dopplcr
echocardiographic examination. 29-32
of aliasing occurs. The Nyquist limit defines the maximal
Because “CF Doppler cchoes are derived from
velocity that can be recorded by pulsed-wave Doppler
withoul aliasing:
 pulsed-wave Dopplcr cchocardiography, they are sub-
ject to similar limitations. In contras1 to pulscd-wave
Number pulses/sec
Doppler, which has a single-range gate or sample vol-
Nyquist limit =
2
ume, CF Dopplcr utilizcs multiple sampling gatcs to
This specifies that measurcmcnts of frequency shifts
by sampling every point in the scan plane (line density)
(i.c., blood vclocity) arc accurate only whcn the pulse
to determine the Doppler shift from the rcturning
repetition frequency (PRF) is at least twice thc dc-
signals and proccssing these data when the multiple
tected maximal vclocity (i.c., the Doppler shift fre-
gates are analyzed.
quency).:
Incrcased spatial information of blood flow is achieved
Aliasing is depicted on the specural display as a band
when ultrasound waves arc cmitted as bursts of pulses,
that "'wraps around' the baseline and resulis in ambig-
called a pulse train:The pulse repetition frequency (PRF)
uous depiction of the velocity profle (sce Fig. 8-5A).
is determined by the time between pulse trains. 'Thc
Because color-flow Doppler is a form of pulsed-wave
 packet size describes a burst of ultrasound pulses, which
 Dopplcr, determination of high-vclocity blood flow is
is determined by successive pulse trains along a given
subject to the samc limitations. Aliasing is manifcsted
linc at a given angle. The higher the packet size and the
by the colors *wrapping around' and results in color
 greatcr the line density, the better the color image.
reversal. For cxample, if the velocity of blood flow
However, the larger the packet size, the smaller the line
moving toward thc transducer excccds the Nyquist
density, and vice versa. Line density and packet size
limit, the normal rcd color will become very bright or
are automatically acljusted when the cchocardiographer
ligh1 orange; it will turn to very light blue or white
selects the sctor angle and depth range. Color images
when higher vclocity is detected; and ultimately, it
are maximized by the narrowest sector angle and low
turns to darker shades of blue if velocities are higher
imaging depth, but thesc settings decrcase spatial orien-
yet.
tation. Thus, trade-offs exist. between instrumentation
setings for obtaining the best image. These are manipu-
CONTROL OF ALIASING AND THE
lated by the operator to achicve the optimal desired
NYQUIST LIMIT
format for particular needs.
The mcan frequency-shift obtained from the multi-
The Nyquist limit (i.c., thc maximal recordable vc-
ple gates or sample volumes is coded with color to
locity with PW Doppler) is controlled by two factors:
indicate direction and velocity,31-33 By standard conven-
(1) depth into the tissue, and (2) transducer fre-
tion, blood flowing toward the transduccr is coded
qucncy The maximum PRF is limited by the distance
140DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
into theheartthatthesamplevolumeisplaced.The
platform(wood orPlexiglas)with cut-outholes,or a
closerthesamplevolumeislocatedtothetransducer,
table with cut-out holes or notches upon which the
thehigher the maximumPRF(and thehigher the
patient is placed (Fig. 8-6)is very helpful.With the
Nyquist limit). Conversely, the farther the sample vol-
animal restrained in lateral recumbency over the ap-
ume is placed into the heart,the lower the maximal
propriate-sized hole, the transducer is directed up
PRF becomes,and in a practical sense,the lower the
through the hole against the thorax.This allows the
maximal velocity that can be recorded without aliasing.
hearttolieclosertothedependentthoracicwalland
Transducer frequency affects the Nyquist limit (i.e.,
thus,nearer the transducer.
themaximalrecordablevelocitywithPWDoppler).
Selection of atransducerwith optimalfrequencyfor
Switchingtoalower-frequencytransducerincreases
theindividualisimportant;echocardiographicinstru-
themaximalvelocity thatcanberecordeduntil the
ments and patient size must be considered.In general,
Nyquist limit is exceeded.The disadvantage ofa
high-frequency transducers(e.g.,7.5MHz)provide the
low-frequency transducer is that it reduces the signal-
best 2-D and M-mode image detail but have less tissue
to-noise ratio and related image quality.Another tech-
penetrating ability and are unable to record high-veloc-
niquetoovercomesignalaliasingistomovethebase-
itybloodflowintheDopplermode.Thelatteris
line to the top or bottom of the trace,which expands
facilitated by lower-frequency transducers.
the frequency range.
Examinationsusually start from therightparasternal
position.Once the heart is visualized,the depth setting
is optimized,followed by the time gain compensation
THETWO-DIMENSIONAL
(TGC)controls(adjusted to compensate for loss of
ultrasonic energy as the beam traverses the thorax),
ANDM-MODE
and thedegreeofrejectandcompressionis set.With
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC
color-flow mapping, adjustments in frame rate, quality,
sectorangle,andother manipulationsaremadeto
EXAMINATION
optimizestructures of interest in eachview.
The transducer is initially positioned in the right 4th
to5thintercostal space.In directing the transducer,it
Thefoundation ofdiagnostic echocardiography is
is importanttoremember that the long-and short-axis
two-dimensionalimaging.Therefore,selection ofama-
views refer to theheart andnot tothethorax.It may
chine that provides high image quality is critical. The
be helpful to conceptualize the heart as it appears in
greatest usefulness of Doppler echocardiography is for
congenital heart disease evaluation, although assess-
ment ofcertain acquireddisorders is often assisted.
To provide maximal diagnostic information,the
echocardiographic examination should systematically
evaluate multiple tomographic planes from both sides
of the thorax, beginning with 2-D echocardiography,
and followed by M-mode, color-flow mapping, and
spectral Doppler echocardiographic techniques.34, 35
This requires that the clinician (1) understand normal
three-dimensionalcardiovascular anatomy andrelate
it to images obtained from various imaging planes, (2)
recognize andunderstand theeffects ofpathologic
changes on cardiac structure and function, and (3)
apply the basic principles of diagnostic ultrasound to
adjust the instrument,maximizing diagnostic image
quality.
Althoughmost animalsdonotrequiretranquiliza
tion, some cases require chemical restraint to facilitate
a good examination. Chemical agents variably alter
heart rate, indices of cardiac function, and Doppler
FIGURE8-6
measurements.
Patientexaminationtable thatweusefor transthoracicecho and
Doppler echo examination.Rectangular or circular holes are cut
Transthoracic imaging doesnot usually require shav-
into the platform.The patient is restrained inlateral recumbency
ing the hair. However, generous application of cou-
with the desired thoracic location(window)placed over the
pling gel is always beneficial.
appropriatelysizedhole.The transduceristhenintroducedfrom
thebottm.Whenrectangularpeningisusedmallranmas
Appropriatepatientpositioningfacilitatestranstho-
can bepositioned at an angleand larger animals along its long
racic echocardiographic examinations.An elevated
axis to obtain thebest access.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING
141
thoracic radiographs during the examination.Stan-
RIGHTPARASTERNALLOCATION
dard echocardiographic views are then obtained.35-40
Thistransducerlocationisbetweentheright3rd
and 6th (usually 4th to 5th) intercostal spaces (Fig.
8-7). The two principal imaging planes include long-
STANDARDIMAGINGPLANESFORTWO-
axis views (Fig.8-7A) and short-axisviews (Fig.8-7B).
DIMENSIONALECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
TheM-modeechocardiogramisusuallyderivedfrom
eitherthelong-axisviewshowingpartoftheleftatrium
and aorta,or the short-axis views.Whenrecording the
Standard imaging planes (also called views） have
M-mode from short-axis views,it is important to tran-
been adapted fromhuman echocardiography and
modified for animals (Fig. 8-7).35, 36 They are desig-
secttheheartdirectlyinthemiddleinthetrueminor
axis and avoid angled or obliqueviews.
nated basedupon(1) transducerlocation(also called
“"windows"),(2) spatial orientation of the imaging
LONG-AxIsvIEws.Two views are generally obtained
plane, and (3) recorded structures.For example,
(Fig.8-8A):(1) a four-chamber view with the ventricles
"right parasternal long axis” describes a view recorded
(cardiac apex) displayed to the left and atria (cardiac
with the transducer positioned on theright parasternal
base) displayed to the right, and (2) a second view
location and the imaging plane oriented parallel to
obtainedbyslightclockwisetransducerrotationshow-
the left ventricular long axis.Animals vary with respect
ingtheleftventricular(LV)outflow tract,aorticvalve,
tooptimal transducerlocations.36
and aortic root.
sHORT-AxIsvIEws.These are obtainedbyrotating the
RightParasternalWindow
transducer andbeamplane 90°fromlong-axisviews
(Fig.8-8B).By then angling the beam plane from
apex (ventral) to base (dorsal), a series of progressive
views areobtained at the levelof theLVapex,papillary
muscles,chordae tendineae,mitral valve,and aortic
valve,respectively.
LEFTCRANIALPARASTERNALLOCATION
Thisislocatedbetweentheleft3rdand4thintercos-
talspacesbetween the sternumandcostochondral
junctions (Fig.8-9A).
LONG-AxIsvIEws.A series ofviewsmaybe obtained
with the beam plane oriented approximately parallel
with the long axis of the body and heart (Fig. 8-9A).
LeftParasternalWindows
SHORT-AxIsvIEws.A series of short axis orientations is
obtainedbyrotatingthetransducerbeam90°fromthe
long-axis view (Fig. 8-9B).
LEFTCAUDAL(APICAL)LOCATION
This location is close to the sternumbetween the
5th and 7th intercostal spaces (Fig. 8-10).
LEFTAPICAL FOUR-ANDFIVE-CHAMBER VIEWS.A four-
chamberviewoftheheartorientedverticallymaybe
obtained with the left side of the heart appearing to
theright,theright side of theheart appearing to the
left,and the ventricles in the nearfield (Fig.8-10A).
FIGURE8-7
A leftventricular outflowregionmaybebroughtinto
Standard transducer locations(“windows")for transthoracic
viewby tiltingthebeamslightlycranialfrom thefour-
echocardiography.See textfor details.(From ThomasWP,Gaber
chamberview.Afive-chamberviewisdenotedwhenall
CE,JacobsJ,et al.Recommendationsfor standardsin
four cardiac chambers,both atrioventricular valves,
transthoracictwo-dimensional echocardiographyinthedog and
cat.JVet Intern Med 7:247-252,1993,with permission.)
and the aortic valve appear in one plane.
142
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
Long-Axis4-ChamberView
Short-AxisViews
C
D
Long-AxisLVOutflowView
A
B
FIGURE8-8
Two-dimensional echoviewsrecordedfrom theright parasternal transducer location.Illustrations of
theheart displayedfrom theright side contain differentecho transducer alignments.Thesefan-
images.
(A)Long-axisfour-chamberviewand long-axisview that optimizes theleftventricular outflow
region.In thelong-axisview that optimizes theLVoutflowregion,thebody of theleft atrium,left
ventricle,and aorta usually cannotbe imaged togetherin a singleplanefrom this location.This
resultsinonlyasmall portionof theleftatriumbeingimaged,comparedwith thefour-chamber
view.RV,rightventricle;V,tricusidvalve;RA,rightatrium;V,lftventricl;,ntrventricular
septum;VW,leftventricular posterior （caudal)wall;CH,chordae tendineae;PM,papillarymuscle;
MV,mitral valve;A,left atrium;AO,aorta;C,left cusp (aorticvalve);RPA,rightpulmonary artry.
(B)Two-dimensional short-axis echo views obtained from the right parasternal transducer location.
The center diagramillustratesthebeam orientationsused to obtainimages at six levelsof theleft
ventricle.Corresponding images are depicted clockwise startingfrom thebottom.SectionsA toF
showprogressive viewsfrom the levelof the apex(A),papillarymusclelevel(B),chordae tendineae
level(C),mitral valve level with themitralvalves open during diastole(D),aorticvalvelevel(diastole)
(E),and basilar level showing the pulmonary arteries (F).RV,right ventricle;LV,left ventricle; CH,
chordae tendineae;PM,papillarymuscle;VO,ftventricularoutlow tract;PMV,postrior
（parietal）mitralvalvecusp;RvO,rightventricularoulowtract;AMV,antrior(sptal）mitralalve
cusp;PPM,posteromedial (dorsal)papillary muscle;APM,anterolateral (ventral)papillarymuscle;
PV,pumonaryvalv;A,right atrium;V,ricusidvalve;A,ftatium;C,nncoronaryor stal
aorticvalvecusp;C,ightaorticvalvecusp;C,lfaorticvavecusp;CaVC,caudalvenacava;A,
main pumonaryarry,A,rightumonary artry,Aftumnaryarteryurightauril;
AO,aorta.(FromThomasWP,aber CE,JacobsJ,etal.Recommendationsfor standardsin
transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiographyin thedog and cat.JVetInternMed7:247-252,
1993,with permission.)
LEFT APICAL TWO-CHAMBER VIEws.Whenthe beam
thoughtheshort-axisviewsoften allowbetter anatomic
plane isnearlyperpendicular to thelongaxisof the
alignment. Standard recordings are made (1) through
body andparallel tothelong axis of theheart,a two-
the aorta andleft atrium,(2)leftventricle at themitral
chamber long-axis view is obtained of the left atrium,
valvelevel,and(3)leftventricleatthelevelof the
mitral valve,and left ventricle (Fig. 8-10B).
chordae tendineae (see Fig.8-1).
STANDARDIMAGINGPLANESFOR
THEDOPPLER
M-MODEECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC
EXAMINATION
M-mode echocardiograms are derivedfrom 2-Dim-
ages that guideproper spatial and anatomic orienta-
tion.MostM-mode data arederived from theright
Ifcolor-flowDopplerechocardiographyis available,
parasternallong-axis view of theleft ventricle,al-
itisusedfirsttomapabnormalflowpatternsand
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING
143
Long-AxisView1
Short-AxisView
LV
AC
RA
Long-AxisView2
B
FIGURE8-9
Two-dimensional echoviews obtainedfrom theleftcranial parasternal
transducer location.(A)Long-axisviews:View Iaccentuates theLV
outflowregion.View2is an obliqueviewshowing theleft andright
ventricle,ticuspidvalve,rightariuminflowregion,andlong-axisviw
of theright atrium and caudalvena cava.View3shows theRVoutflow
Long-AxisView3
tract,pulmonary valve,and main pulmonary artery.(B)Short-axisview
atthelevel ofthe aorticroot.Notethat therightventricularinflow
and outflow tracts are displayed.For (A)and (B):RVO,right
ventricularoulowtract;P,pulmonaryvalve;TV,tricuspidvalve;,
leftventricle;RC,rightaorticvalvecusp;C,noncoronary orseptal
aorticvalveup;farticvalvcuparta;farum
PA,pulmonary artery；RV,rightventricle;CaVC,caudal vena cava;RA,
right atrium;RAu,right auricle.(From ThomasWP,Gaber CE,Jacobs
J,et al.Recommendationsfor standards in transthoracic two-
dimensional echocardiography in the dog and cat.J VetInternMed
7:247-252,1993,with permission.)
A
thenguidethepulsed orcontinuous-waveDoppler
SUBCOSTALLOCATION
examinationinordertoattainmaximalvelocityfor
blood flow measurements.#l The Doppler examination
Withthe animal inright or leftlateralrecumbency,
isinitiatedwiththeanimalpositionedinrightlateral
thetransducerisplacedunderthexiphoid andpushed
dorsallyintothe abdomen,whileheldroughlyparallel
recumbency(seeFig.8-8).The animalis then turned
tothevertebralcolumn.An apical two-chamberview,
toleft lateral recumbency and examinedbothfrom a
cranial (Fig.8-9)and caudal (apical)(Fig.8-10)posi-
including thedescending aortaorientedparallel to
tion.For optimal Doppler studies, the ultrasound
the transducer beam,can be obtained.Some animals
beam is directed asparallel aspossible toblood flow.
object to this abdominal pressure unless sedated.
From the cranial position, the base of the heart and
the great vesselscan be thoroughly interrogated.From
SUPRASTERNALLOCATION
the caudal (apical) position,the two-chamber,four-
chamber,andfive-chamberviewsoftheheartcanbe
Although uncommonly used inveterinarymedicine,
seen.Eachcardiac transectionoffers adifferent ana-
this location may provide good alignment between
aortic blood flow and the Doppler echo beam.The
tomic perspective.
transducerisplacedinthethoracicinlet and thebeam
directed toward the ascending aorta.
STANDARDIMAGINGPLANESFOR
GENERALPRINCIPLESOF
DOPPLERECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHICMEASUREMENT
Transducer locations and imaging planes described
Cardiacdimensionshavebeenassessedfromeither
for 2-D imaging are used for Doppler echocardio-
the M-mode or the 2-D echocardiogram.37,38.42 43 Di-
graphic studies.Views thatprovide optimal parallel
mensionalmeasurementsaremoreaccuratewhencal-
beamorientationare selected.Two additionalloca
culated from 2-D echo-guided M-mode traces. A variety
tions may be useful.
ofderivedleftventricularcalculationscanbemade
144
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
4-Chamber(Ilnflow)View
Long-Axis2-ChamberView
5-Chamber(LVOutflow)View
Long-AxisLVOutflowView
LV
B
A
FIGURE8-10
Two-dimensional echo views obtained from theleft caudal(apical)parasternal transducer location.
(A)Four-chamber inflowview displays allfour cardiac chambers and provides optimal alignment for
Doppler echo studies of mitral and tricuspid inflow.Slight cranial tilting of the beam produces the
five-chamberviewshowing theLV outlow tract in additionto theleft andright ventricular inflow
tracts.(B)The long-axis two-chamber view andLV outflow view are obtained by directing the beam
plane nearly parallel to thelong axis of theheart.RV,right ventricle;V,left ventricle;A,ft
atrium;Au,left auricle;VS,ventricular sptum;AS,atrial septum;RA,right atrium;RVO,rght
venticuawatrtirtamaaustr
ThomasWP,Gaber CE,Jacobs J,et al.Recommendationsfor standards in transthoracictwo-
dimensional echocardiographyin the dog and cat.JVetInternMed7:247-252,1993,with
permission.)
frommeasurements ofcardiacdimensions,including
Dechocardiography.End-diastoleismostreliablymea-
volume, LV mass, and wall stress.
sured at the onset of the QRScomplex.End-systole is
more difficult to define. If ventricular septal motion is
normal,end-systole may be represented at the nadir
MEASURINGTECHNIQUES
of septal motion.Normally, the interventricular sep-
Differentmethodshavebeendescribedformeasur-
tumandLVfreewallmovetowardeachotherinsystole
ing M-mode and 2-D images. Although variations are
and away from each other during diastole.However,
reported, the most widely accepted standards follow
peakmotionmaynot correspond exactlybecause of
recommendationssetbytheAmericanSocietyofEcho-
theslight differences inmyocardialdepolarization.
cardiography,2 using the leading edge method for mea-
Theseptumisusuallydepolarizedafewmilliseconds
suring. The leading edge represents the part of the
before the free wall,causing it to contract sooner.
line closest to the transducer;the trailing edge is the
When septal motion is abnormal,timingof thepeak
part of the line farthest from the transducer.Dimen-
posterior wall motion can be selected.The end of the
sions andwall thicknessesaremeasuredfromleading
Twave has been described as a timingpoint,but this
edge to leading edge.
is generally inaccurate.
Measurementsaretimed tospecificreferencepoints
Measurementsofleftventricularchamber andwalls
in the cardiac cycle, according to simultaneous ECG
should bemadeat thelevelof thechordae tendineae.
recording (see Fig. 8-1). The higher M-mode sampling
Normally, the LV wall is approximately three to four
rateallowsmoreprecisetiming andresolution than2-
timesthickerthantheright.Rightventricularchamber
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY AND DOPPLER IMAGING
145
 dimensions may vary according to whether the animal
due to body weight has becn described, it does not.
is in right or left lateral recumbency. Aortic root is
appear to bc as great a problem as in the dog. How-
mcasured at cnd-diastole. Iefl atrium is measured at
evcr, because of the small size of the feline heart,
cnd-systole at the maximal dimension (the standard
suboptimal images frequently causc errors in mcasure-
 M-1node long-axis parasternal view optimizing the IV
 ment and interpretation.
outflow tract underestimates I .A size).
Additional measurements have becn Icported, in-
cluding amplitudes of motion (left septal echo or left
ventricular free wall echo), the rate of rise or fall of
ASSESSMENT OF CARDIAC CHAMBER
the left ventricular frec-wall ccho, and others. Oncc
SIZE, DIMENSIONS, AND STRUCTURES
the echocardiogram has been mcasured, it is assessed
to identify abnormalitics in chamber size, wall thick-
The primary 2-D and M-mode imaging planes assess
ncss and motion, valve morphology annd motion, and
cardiac chamber dimensions, and relatcd measure-
indices of cardiac function.' 3
ments help quantify systolic function. No single view
 provides all the information needed. Thus, multiple
THE MYOCARDIUM
views shouldl be obtained.
 Dctermination of normal from abnormal structures
Altcrations in myocardial echogenicity can some-
times be assessed with 2-D echocardiography. The ho-
Icquircs the clinician to compare size Iclationships
 of cardiac structures visually, apply published normal
mogeneous appcarance of the myocardium can be
values wlien availablc, and use personal cxperience.
disrupted by diseases that produce hypocchoic areas
(c.g., fluid-filled absccss from myocarditis or necrosis),
than in thc cat due to the wider spcctrum in canine
mixcd echoic areas (e.g., neoplasia such as a hemangi-
size and wcight. ln the dog, relationships exist bctwcen
 osarcoma), or hyperechoic regions (e.g., increased f-
certain echocardiographic mensurals, somatotype, and
brous tissue or calcification, as sometimcs occurs in
breed. Thus, charts listing "normal" values according
 papillary muscles with severc subaortic or pulmonic
to body sizc can be mislcading and should be uscd
stenosis, or Duchenne's cardiomyopathy). lnstrument.
settings must. avoid excessive gain or reject, which
weigling between 14 and 22 kg than in the very small
could mirmic or simulate myocardial lesions.
 or large breeds. Although normal values have been
recorded for some breeds (Table 8-1),32-5s data are
LEFT VENTRICLE
limited for the normal, immalure animal and for ex-
DILATlon. This is associated with (1) volume overload
 Normal  echocardliographic  alucs  have
becn re-
(especially mitral regurgitation with chronic acquired
ported for the cat (Table 8-2) .ss-66 Although variation
valvular discase in dogs; aortic insufficiency; leff-to-
TABLE 8-1
Normal Canine M-mode Echocardiography Valucs for Eight Different Brecds
English
Pembroke
Miniature
Cocker
Welsh
Afghan
Golden
Irish
Poodlesz
Spaniela
Corgis"
apunog
Relriever'"?
Greyhounds4
Deerhound5a
Mensural
(n = 20)*
(n = 12)t
*(0 = u)
(n =20)
(n = 20)*
t(91 = u)
(1=)
+(001 = )
Wcight (kg)
3 (1.4-9)
12.2 ± 2.2
15 (8-19)
23 (17-36)
32 (23-41)
20.7-32.5
41.3 ± 4.9
>50
Heart rate (bpm)
(006-001)091
120 (80-160)
120 (80-140)
100 (80-140)
125.7 ± 30
LVTWD (nm)
5 (4-6)
7.9 ±. 1.1
8 (6-10)
9 (7-11)
10 (8-12)
12.1 ± 1.7
10.0 ± 1.8
9.5 ± 2.1
LVPWS (mm)
8 (6-10)
12 (8-13)
12 (9-18)
15 (10-19)
15.2 ± 2.2
15.3 + 2.2
15.0 ± 3.3
LVD (mm)
20 (16-28)
88 5 868
32 (28-40)
(79-68) 
45 (37-51)
44.1 ± 3.0
51.2 ± 5.0
53.9 ± 5.2
I.VS (mm)
10 (816)
22.2 ·2.8
[9 (12-23)
28 (20-37)
27 (18-35)
32.5 ± 3.5
34.0 ± 5.1
35.2 ± 4.8
FS (%)
47 (35-57)
34.3 ± 4.5
44 (33-37)
33 (24-48)
39 (27-55)
25.4 ± 6.3
33.5
5.8
35.2 + 1.9
EPSS (mm)
(6-0) 0.
2 (0-5)
4 (0-10)
5 (1-10)
7.8 ± 1.6
7.4 ± 1.5
RVd(mm)
4 (2-9)
10 (6-14)
10 (5-20)
13 (7-27)
22.6 ± 5.7
26.7 ± 5.3
VSd (mm)
5 (4-6)
8.2 ± 1.3
8 (6-9)
10 (8-12)
10 (8-13)
10.6 ± 1.7
9.1
± 2.2
8.0 ± 1.9
IVSs (mm)
8 (6-10)
———
12 (10-14)
13 (8-18)
14 (10-17)
13.4 ± 2.5
14.6 1 4.1
13.7 ± 3.4
AOD (mm)
10 (8--13)
18 (15-22)
26 (20-34)
24 (1427)
29.6 ± 3.7
30.5 ± 4.0
LAS (1nm)
12 (8-18)
21 (12-24)
26 (18-35
27 (16-32)
一
28.4 ± 3.9
33.7 ± 5.9
*Median (range).
LVPWD, IV posterior wall dimension at enddiasiole: LVPws, LV posterior wall thickness al end-systole: LVD, IV chamber dinension al endtiasole; LvS. LV
inervetrilar stalhicksstliasl;IVSsintrvntricular septalthicknessatn-sytleAOD,aricrooaendliasoleLftrual
enel systole.
IMean ± standlard deviatio.
146
DAGNOSTIC METHODS
TABLE 8-2
 Normal Feline M-mode Echocardiography Values*
Sisson
Moise
Soderberg
Jacohs &
Pipers
Fox et aj66
et aj64
et al15n
Fox et al51
Allena
el al2
et al59
Mensural
(n = 37)
(6L = 14)
(n = 11)
=#
30)
(n=
30)
(n=10)
(n=
16)t
(n = 25)
LVEDD (cm)
1.46 ± 0.20
1.5 ± 0.2
1.51 ± 0.21
1.59 ± 0.19
1.40 ± 0.13
1.29 ± 0.12
1.28 ± 0.17
1.48 + 0.26
LVESD (cm)
0.82 ± 0.15
0.72 + 0.15
0.69 ± 0.22
0.80 + 0.14
0.81.
. ± 0.16
0.86 ± 0.16
0.83 ± 0.15
0.88 ± 0.24
Ao (cm)
0.95 ± 0.11
0.90 ± 0.14
0.95 ± 0.15
0.95 ± 0.11
0.94 ± 0.11
0.90 ± 0.07
0.94 ± 0.14
0.75 ± 0.18
LA (cm)
1.09 ± 0.18
1.17 ± 0.17
1.21 ± 0.18
1.23 ± 0.14
1.03 ± 0.14
1.03 ± 0.07
0.98 ± 0.17
0.74 ± 0.17
LA/Ao (cm)
1.25 ± 0.18
1.29 ± 0.23
1.30 ± 0.17
1.10 ± 0.18
1.09 + 0.27
IVSED (cm)
0.37 ± 0.07
0.42 ± 0.7
0.50 ± 0.07
0.31 ± 0.04
0.36 ± 0.05
0.43 ± 0.03
0.45 ± 0.09
IVSES (cn)
0.67 ± 0.12
0.76 ± 0.12
0.58 ± 0.06
0.4 ± 0.04
一
LVWED (cm)
0.36 ± 0.06
0.41 ± 0.07
0.46 ± 0.05
0.33 ± 0.06
0.35 ± 0.08
0.31±0.11
0.37 ± 0.08
L.VWES (cm)
0.68 ± 0.11
0.78 ± 0.10
0.68 ± 0.07
一
——
0.55 ± 0.80
EPSS (cm)
一
0.06 ± 0.08
0.04 ± 0.07
0.02 ± 0.09
——
RVED (cm)
0.46 ± 0.17
0.54 ± 0.10
0.60 ± 0.15
0.50 ± 0.21
LVWA (cm)
一
0.50 ± 0.07
0.32 ± 0.11
AA (cm)
0.36 ± 0.10
MVEFS (mm/s)
54.5 ± 13.4
87.2 ± 26.0
83.78 ± 23.8
%FS
44.2 ± 8.2
52.1 ± 7.1
55.0 ± 10.2
49.8 ± 5.8
42.7 ± 8.1
34.05 ± 2.5
34.5 ± 12.6
41.0 ± 7.3
LVWT (%)
———
———
39.5 ± 7.6
二
二
二
95.1 ± 67.1
（%）ISA]
78 - 986
———
HR (beats/min)
182 ± 22
194 ± 23
245 ± 36
175 ± 19.9
167 ± 29
Body wcight (kg)
4.8 ± 1.1
4.7 ± 1.16
4.3 ± 0.05
3.88 ± 1.17
3.6 ± 0.65
2.2 ± 6.58
Agc (years)
6.08 ± 3.6
5.1 (0.5-15)8
4.11 ± 1.05
3.36 ± 3.15
1.1±岁
*Mean ± SO:t, scxlaced with kelamite HCl: tsedatedl wth pentobarlital; Snormal range.
LVEDD, LV en-diastolic dimension; LVESD, LV end-systolic dimension, Ao, aortie root; LA.left atrim; LA/Ao, lef atriu to aorla rario; IVsED intravcnrie
lar seplum at end-liastole: IVSES, intraventrieular septum at end-systole: LVWED, IV posterior wall at end-diastole: IVWES, LV poslerior wall at end-systole:
FPSEpoint sepal sparation;Aaortie roamliude MVEFS.miral valve FF slope;%%LVractonal shorteningLVWT.L posterior wall
bhickening, IVsT, iuterventrieular septal thickening; HR, heart ratc, -, not available.
Tigh1 shunts such as patent ductus arteriosus or arterio-
rubicin cardiotoxicity, end-stage mitral insufficiency).
venous fistulas), (2) dilated cardiomyopathy, and (3)
Akinesis or dyskinesis may result from rnyocardial in-
high-ouput states such as chronic anemia or thyrotoxi-
farclion. Thesc abnormalities may be global or 1c-
cosis.
gional.
REDUcT1on. Thic LV chamber sizc may be decreased
RGHT VENTRICLE
with scvcre volumc deplction as with sevcre dehydra-
tion, hypoadrenocorticism, or hypovolemic shock; or
DILATIoN. Dilation often resulis from RV volume
inadequate blood rcturn to the LA and I V (e.g., heart-
overload (commonly, tricuspid insuficicncy; uncom-
worm discasc, tetralogy of Fallot).
monly, atrial septal defects or severe pulmonic insuff-
cicncy) and cardiomyopathy (cspecially dilated cardio-
THINNING. Thin LV posterior wall segments may show
 myopathy, but occasionaily hypertrophic or restrictive
aneurysms or infarction, as commonly observed in
cardiomyopathy).
feline cardiomyopathies. Dilated cardiomyopathy may
causc the ventricular scptum and free wall to become
REDUcTIoN. The RV chamber sizc may bc decreascd
relatively thin.
with sevcre volume deplction or cardiac tamponadc.
HYPERTROPHY. Left ventricular hypertrophy is associ
HYPERTRorHy. In dogs, RV hypertrophy usually re-
ated with (l) pressure overloads (c.g., aortic stenosis,
sults from right-sided heart pressure overloads (e.g.
arterial hypertension), (2) cardiomyopathy (especially
 pulmonic stenosis, tetralogy of Fallot, cor pulmonale,
 hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and endomyocaidial fi-
heartworm disease, pulmonary thrombocmbolism, and
brosis), (3) infiltrative myocardial diseases, and (4)
idiopathic pulmonary hypertension). In cats, hypcrtro-
hyperthyroidism.
 phic and restrictive cardiomyopathies can cause right-
sided hcart. pressures to increasc sccondarily, with suh-
WALL MOTION ABNORMALITIEs. Hyperki1csis may Occu1
scquent mild-to-moderate hypertrophy.
with mitral or aortic insufficiency, certain yolume over-
load states (e.g., severe anemia), hyperthyroidism, sym-
INTERVENTRICULARSEPTUM
pathetic stimulation, or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Hypokinesis may occur with dilated cardiomyopathy
The sepium is asscssed for continuity (e.g., ventricu-
or diseascs resulting in myocardlial failure (e.g., doxo-
lar septal defects), abnormal relationships betwcen the
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING
147
septum and other cardiac structures (e.g., overriding
aorta in tetralogy of Fallot), and patterns of hypertro-
phy, thinning, and motion.
Rv
HYPERTROPHy.Most commonly,septal hypertrophy
results from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or disorders
increasing left or right ventricular afterload (e.g., aor-
tic or pulmonic stenosis,hypertension).In feline hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy, the septum may be dif-
fusely or segmentally hypertrophied.
THINNING.A diffusely thin septum typically accompa-
nies dilated cardiomyopathy. Regional thinning may
occur with feline myocardial disorders,infarction,or
aneurysms.
2
SEPTALMOTIONABNORMALITIEs.Thesemayreflectab-
normal filling and depolarization patterns of the left
and right ventricles. In LV volume overload (e.g., se-
Rv
vere mitralinsufficiency),ventricular septal motion
may be hyperkinetic; during early diastole,marked
anterior (i.e., toward the transducer) movement may
occurfromexcessiveinflowofblood.Conversely，in
right ventricular pressure or volume overload,inter-
ventricular septal motion may be reduced,or its mo-
tion may be paradoxic relative to the left ventricular
free wall.Paradoxic septal motion is recognized when
the septum moves anteriorly(toward the transducer)
insteadof posteriorly(away from the transducer) dur-
FIGURE8-11
ing systole. In pure RV volume overload (e.g., tricuspid
Two-dimensional echoesfrom two dogs obtained in theright
insufficiency),septalflattening andparadoxicmotion
parasternal transducerlocation.These short-axisviews are at the
occurs during diastole; in systole, the LV resumes a
levelof the chordae tendineaerecordedin diastole.Frame1:
Healthy,35-kg ChesapeakeBayretriever demonstratingnormal
normal circular appearance. However, with pure RV
circularleftventriculargeometry.The twoperpendicularleft
pressure overload or in RVpressure and volume over-
ventricular minor axis dimensions(d, and d)were equal in both
load, the septum remains flattened during systole and
systoleanddiastole.Frame2:6year-old,32-kgGerman shepherd
withheartworm diseaseand associatedpressure andvolume
diastole,conferring a half-moon shape to the left ven-
overload.The two dimensions are unequal during systole and
tricle (Fig. 8-11).
diastole.Note theflattened interventricular septum (S).Ru,right
ventricle;P,pericardium.
LEFTANDRIGHTATRIA
The atria are evaluated for dilation,intracavitary
acquired mitral regurgitation and dilated cardiomyop-
masses (e.g.,thrombi or neoplasia),or abnormal septa-
athy,andlessfrequently,congenital left-to-right shunts
tion.In the four-chamber view, the normal left and
(e.g, PDA), mitral stenosis, and cor triatriatum. In
right atria are approximately the same size.
cats,LA enlargement occurs most commonly from
myocardial diseases,mitralvalve malformation,and
LEFT ATRIAL ENLARGEMENT.The long-established M-
hyperthyroidism.
mode comparison of the aortic diameter at end-dias-
tole to theLA at its maximalsystolicexcursion has
valueiftheexactlocationoftheleftatrialtransection
RIGHT ATRIAL ENLARGEMENT The RA enlarges in dogs
is known. Blinded examination may actually provide a
most commonlywith tricuspid regurgitation,dilated
scan of the left auricle or pulmonary artery rather
cardiomyopathy,orheartworm disease.Less common
than the body of the LA. The best appreciation of left
causes include tricuspid stenosis, congenital right-to-
atrial size is attained from right parasternal short-axis
left shunts, cor pulmonale, and pulmonary hyperten-
viewsby 2-Dechocardiography.MeasuringLA circum-
sion.Incats,enlargementmost commonlyresultsfrom
ference in one or more planes may provide a means
myocardial disease.Less frequent causes are tricuspid
of accurately comparing size between examinations.
regurgitation (tricuspid dysplasia), heartworm disease,
The LA enlarges in dogs most commonly with chronic,
orhyperthyroidism.
148DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
ATRIAL SEPTUM
leaflets of the aortic valve may be identified on a 2-D
short-axis view, although only two leaflets of the pul-
The airial sepium may bulge into either atrium in
 monic valve are evident from this imaging plane. Aor-
cases of severe pressure or volume overload. An intact
tic valve opening and closing may be altered in many
atrial septum can be verifed using two-dimensional
conditions, and this is well demonstrated by M-inode
and Doppler echocardiographic imaging, as well as
echocardiography (Fig. 8-13). The aortic valve may
contrast echocardiography.
exhibit fine systolic flullering on an M-mode scan froin
high blood flow in both norinal and pathologic condi-
PULMONARY ARTERY AND AORTA
tions. Normaily the leaflets should exhibit a wide sys-
tolic opening excursion, appearing paralll to the ves-
 Identification of the pulmonary artery is usually pos-
sel wall in 2-D) echo or as a "box suspended on a
sible only with 2-D imaging. Normaly, the pulnonary
slring" on M-node, Premature aortic valve closure
trunk is slightly smaller than the aortic rooi. It. is
indicates ventricular outflow obstruction and is most
dilated with congenital leff-to-right shumis, pulmonic
cormmon with the obstructive form of feline hypertro-
stenosis, heartworm disease, or cor pulnonale.
phic cardioimyopathy and with sorne cases of congeni-
The aorta may be reduced in size when forward
tal subaortic stenosis. Early aoric valve closure may
cardiac output is decreased. The ascending aorta may
also occur with low-flow states and poor cardiac output.
be enlarged with subaortic stenosis (associated with
Thickened aortic valve leaflets may occur with endocar
poststenotic dilatation), with telralogy of Fallot, and in
diosis and may be accompanied by Doppler evidence
some old, or hypertensive cats. Aortic dilation occurs
 of regurgitation. Vegetative endocarditis rmay restrict.
af and just distal to the junciure of a patent ductus
aortic valve opening and cause imasslike lesions on
arteriosus.
valve leaflets; these may prolapse into the lef. ventricle
during diastole. If leaflet dorming occurs, valvular ste-
CARDIAC VALVES
nosis may be present.
The four cardiac valves are directly evaluated for
motion, excursion, and structure. Changes in cardiac
PERICARDIUM
chambers may result from valvular problems such as
The pericardium is normally evident as the brightest
cardiac chamber cnlargement with severe valvular in-
line adherent to the pericardial surface. With pericar-
sufficiency or ventricular hypertrophy with valvular ste-
dial effusion, an echolucent, or *'echo-free," space is
nosis. Doppler echocardiographic transvalvular flow
 profiles are altered according to the specific valve le-
created between the epicardium and pericardium (see
later). Occasionally, fibrin or neoplasia will cause the
sions.
effusion to be echogenic. The presence of pleural
effusion will clearly highlight 1he pericardiun. which
ATRIOvENTRICLlAR VALVEs. The norimal sequence of
is contrasted between two bodies of effusion.
mitral valvc opening and closing is shown in Figure
8-1. A variety of lcsions may affect AV valves (Fig. 8-12;
see also Fig. 8-21). These lealets should appear as
smooth, echodense, fine lines. Irregularities, masses,
EVALUATION OF CARDIAC
or thickening may indicate myxomalous valve degener-
FUNCTION
ation (endocardiosis) or vegetative endocarditis. ln
aortic valvular insuffciency, the regurgitant jet may
strike the anterior mitral valve leafleis, causing thein
There is no universally satisfactory method to evalu-
to exhibit fine diastolic fluttering. In AV valvular
ate cardiac function. Each paraneter and technique.
prolapse, ruptured chordae tendineae, or severe endo-
has certain strengths and weaknesses. They should be
cardiosis, the AV valves rmay be seen within the corre-
interpreted in the context of their inherent limitations
sponding atria during systole. Rupture of chordae ten-
dineae can cause a Dail leaflet. In mitral valve stenosis,
and in conjunciion with clinical inforrmation fron the
valve leafleis will be thickened and display decreased
physical exainination and complete data base.'. la
E to F slope. The posterior leaflet will have abnormal
anterior 1motion during early diastole. In systolic ante-
rior motion of the anterior mitral valve, this leafle1.
CARDIAC SIZE
 makes a sharp-angled bend against the basilar ventricu-
lar septun during systole.
The size of ventricular chainbers reflects the degree
of volume overload or, frequently, the severity of some
SEMILLNAR vALvEs. The aorlic and pulmonic valves
forms of cardiomyopathy. Cardiac chamber dimen-
arc best imaged with 2-D echocardiography. Three
sions can be readily deterimined by M-mode and 2-1)
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING
149
V
LA
A
RV
RV
LVPW
B
D
RV
IVS
LVPW
E
J.P.Petrie
FIGURE8-12
Common abnormalities of the mitral valve. (A) and (B) Cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and
systolicanteriormotion of the mitral valve.(A) is a 2-D parasternal long-axis view optimizing the left
ventricular (LV) outflow tract and the left atrium (LA),and(B) is an M-mode echo at the mitral
valvelevel:during systole,the anteriormitral valve leafletmakes a sharp-angled bend (arrow)across
theLVoutlowtract,shownin（A),tocoaptagainst thebasilarventricularseptumduringsystole
(B).(C)2-Dright parasternal four-chamber view of a dog with chronic acquired valve disease.The
mitral valve leaflets (black arrous)are thickened and protrude into the left atrium during systole;
associated chordae tendineae(open arrow)are also thickened.(D)M-mode tracing at themitral valve
leaflet during diastole when themitralvalves are open,causing theleaflet toexhibit fine diastolic
flutter (arrow).(E) M-mode trace at themitral valve level of a dogwith mitral valve stenosis.Note the
thickened leaflets;decreased E toF slope [compare with (B)and(C)above];and abnormal early
diastolic cranial motion(arrow) exhibited by the posteriormitral leaflet,which probably indicates
fusionof thevalvecommissures（normally,theposteriorleafletmoves away,or downward from the
anteriorleaflet）.RV,rightventricle;Ao,aorticroot;VS,interventricular septum;VPW,left
ventricular posterior (free)wall.(Courtesy of Dr.J. P.Petrie,The Animal Medical Center.)
echocardiography andcanbeused toestimateventric-
assumptionofnormalmitralvalvemotionandthe
ularvolumes.
necessity for correct (perpendicular) ultrasound beam
alignmentthrough
the ventricular septum,mitral
E-POINTSEPTALSEPARATION(EPsS).ArOughassessment
valve,and free wall.
of LV size is to measure the distancefrom the E point
oftheanteriormitralvalveleaflettotheinterventricu-
LEFTVENTRICULARVOLUMES
larseptum.Normally,there isnone orvery minimal
separation (see Tables 8-1, 8-2).As LV ejection frac-
Ina studyof a smallgroupofdogs withchronic
tion decreases,EPsS increases.Limitationsinclude the
acquiredvalve disease,LVend-systolicvolume index
150
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
LV
PEPLVET
A
FIGURE8-13
M-mode echo traces illustrating abnormalities of the aorticvalve.(A)Normal pattern of
valveexcursion.The aorticvalvestypicallyopen abruptly,remain openduringLVsystolic
sequenceiscorrelatedwithasimultaneouslyrecordedelectrocardiogramabove,which
B
facilitates assessing systolic time intervals（consultFig.3-14).These include theLVpre-
ejection period(LVPEP),representing theinterval from theQwave to the aorticvalve
opening,and theLV ejection time(LVET).(B)Premature opening of the aorticvalve
(beforeonset ofelectrical depolarization）associatedwithseverely elevatedLVend-diastolic
pressure secondary to severe aorticregurgitation.(C)Premature leaflet closurein a dog
C
of LVejection but gradually close during systole.(D)Greatly attenuatedvalve dynamics due
toseveremyocardial failurefromdilatedcardiomyopathy.TheLVPEPisprolonged and
LVETis shortened.Aorticvalveopeningis delayed,the duration of ejection and maximal
valve excursion are diminished,and thevalves close prematurely.(E)Midsystolicclosure of
the aorticvalve.Duringmidsystole,theaorticvalvesclose secondary tothe subvalvular
obstruction associated with systolic anterior motion of themitralvalve(seeFig.8-12A,B).
(F)Vegetative endocarditis involving the aorticvalves.Increased echoes are apparent on the
D
valveleafletswithoutrestrictionofvalvemotion.Vegetationsmaybebestimagedindiastole
or systole,depending on the direction of theultrasound beam.
E
F
J.p.Petrie/P.Foy
increasedlinearlywithLVend-diastolicvolumeindex.
considerationsintroduce error in echocardiographic
Anindex is derivedby dividing the calculatedvolume
calculationof chamber volumes.A moreaccurate
by patient body surface area.The Teichholz method,
method employs Simpson's rule (also known as the
“disc summationmethod"),which calculates the sum
Volume=[7.0/2.4+D]×D3
of volumes of a series of smaller, similar figures.
whereDequalstheleftventricularinternal dimension,
calculated thelargest LVend-systolic volume(com-
pared with using D", or 1.2 × D3 for calculations).
LEFTVENTRICULARMASS
Theend-systolicvolumeindex(normal,lessthan30
ml/m²)more accurately separated out dogs withmitral
An important adaptation to LV pressure or volume
insufficiency andmyocardialfailurethandidshorten-
overload is muscular hypertrophy.This is grossly char-
ingfraction;end-diastolicvolume indexwasmore than
acterized by increased LV muscle mass or weight, and
100 ml/m² (normal, less than 100 ml/m2), indicating
itisdeterminedbyincreasedwallthicknessand/or
volume overloading.67,68
chambervolume.Anumberofechocardiographic
Manymodels andformulashavebeendescribedfor
methods have
beenreported to calculate LVmass
calculating LV volume.69 Certain geometric assump-
(LVM)but arebased on the assumption that myocar-
tionsinherentin thevariousformulasandtechnical
dialvolumeequalsthetotalvolumecontainedwithin
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY AND DOPPLER IMAGING
151
epicardial borders of the ventricle, minus the IV cham-
A X  6   () 1A N
ber volume?":
fber shortening, is a highly regarded measure of IV
systolic function in humans, in whom it. has been thor-
LVM = [V,(ep) -V(en)] × 1.05
oughly validated. In. is the ratio of the LV stroke volume
to the IV end-diastolic volume (EDV):
where Vr is the total 1V volume, or the volume con-
tained within the epicardial interface, and V. is the
FDV - ESV
EF=
× 100
chamber volume, or volume contained within the en-
EDV
docardial interface. The ventricular septum is assumed
to be part of the LV. Volume componenis of LV imass
In one study of dogs with chronic mitral regurgitation,
echo-derived EF was useful to separate dogs with nor-
formulas can be calculated by formulas for deriving
LV volumes (see previous section). Accuracy is infu-
Imal or 1mild from severe myocardial failure.$7
enced by forrnulas and measurement acuity. When
there is widely varying lV wall thickness, itl is difficult
PERCENT FRACTIONAL SHORTENING (%FS, OR %AD), De-
to establish represenlalive dimensions.
rived from M-node recordings of the LV minor axis,
the %FS can be calculated as:
IVDd -_1VDs
EJECTION PHASE INDICES OF LEFT
%FS =
IVDd
X 100
VENTRICULAR PERFORMANCE
where the LVDd is the LV chamber diarneter at end-
These indices represent the most commonly used
diastole, and LVDs is the LV chamber diameter mea-
clinical measurements of LV systolic function and are
sured a1. end-systole. This index is based upon angio
largely derived froin linear dimensions described ear-
 graphic observations that the systolic decrease in IV
lier (Tables 8-1 to 8-3). Although generally considered
ventricular volume results prinarily from minor axis
to reflect myocardial contractility, each is influenced
shortening, and it represents a simple method for
by ventricular loading conditions. Thus, if preload (1V
estimating veniricular function in the symmetrically
end-diastolic volume) or afterload (IV end-systolic vol-
contracting ventricle.
une) is reduced, or if aortic pressure (aflerload) is
The %rS has certain limitations. Major changes in
increased, ejection phase indices decline (and vice
versa).
and remain unaccounted for by %Fs. In addition,
%FS is dependent on inherent cardiac contractility,
STROKE vOLUME (sV). The SV is computed as:
 preload, and afterload. With canine chronic acquired
valve disease (mitral insufficiency), the LV experiences
SV = 1.V end-dliastolic volune (EDV)
decreased afferload as the incompetent mitral valve
- IV end-systolic volume (ESV)
permits the LV to eject blood retrogradely into the
low-pressure left atrium, rather than into the high-
Both volumes are calculated using one of the many
 pressure aorta. Thus, even though a higher %FS results
methods for chamber volume calculation (see earlier).
than if the heart did not have mitral insufficiency,
Stroke volume normally decreases during inspiration.
this does not. mean that the imherent contractility is
TABLE 8-3
 Normal Left Ventricular Systolic Tine Intervals*
Canine
Feline
Athins &
Pipers
Athins 
Pipers
Sryder?
etars9
Snyder-1
Knighto
Fox et a?l
et al1
Parameter
(sz = u)
(n = 6)
(n = 30)
(n = 27)
(n = 10)
PEP (ms)
54.± 7
69±8
46±5
44 ± 9
LVET (ms)
159 ± 15
256 ± 13
116 ± 19
140 ± 20
116 ± 11
150 ± 20
IVETI (ms)↑
227 ± 15
301 ± 10
206 ± 9
214
217
PEP/IVET
0.34 ± 0.05
0.24 ± 0.09
0.40 ± 0.05
一
0.38 ± 0.08
QAVC (ms)
214 ± 18
324 ± 7
162 ± 24
VcF (cire/sec)
2.48 ± 0.50
4.0 ± 0.9
90 46
80 + 9
2.9 ± 0.8
Heart rate (bpin)
124 ± 23
81±7
226 ± 25
194 ± 23
245 ± 36
167 ± 7
*Mean ± SI).
fCalculated for dogs: 1VET + 0.55 (heart rate): for cats, LVET + 0.40 (heart rate).
valvc closure; V:F,
velocity of cireumferentiat fiber shorlening: cire,、 cireumference; bpn, beats per minule.
152 DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
increased or even normal. Shortening fractions less
can be measured as representing the time of the first
than 50 percent and EDV indices greater than 200 ml/
anterior motion of the IV free wall to the point of its
In? may indicaic myocardial failure when severe mitral
peak excursion?; IVET can also be measured as the
insufficiency is present.7
duration of the Doppler echo signal a1 the aortic valve.
The PEP/IVET index is superior to either index alone
CIRCUMFERENTIAL FRACTIONAL SHORTENING (Ver). This
as it compensates somewhat for effects of loading con-
 index, expressed in circumferences per second, is cal-
ditions and heart rate. Normal values for Slls are
culated as:
listed in Table 83.31, 59-61. 91
IVDd -- LVDs
V.=:
LVDd x LVET
HEMODYNAMIC INFORMATION
where LVET is the LV ejection time calculated from
Echocardiography can provide quantitative data
systolic time intervals (see later). When derived from
about blood flow and intracardiac pressures.72 The
M-mode echo mcasurements, V: actually represents
mean blood flow velocity through a vessel or valve
the velocity of shortening of the minor axis and not
orifice is acquired by measuring the velocity-tine inte-
the whole circumference.
gral of the Doppler signal (i.e., the area under the
Doppler recording trace). The corresponding cross-
sectional diameter is measured by 2-l) or M-mode
LEFT VENTRICULAR WALL STRESS
echocardiography and the area is calculated. For exain-
 ple, blood flow in the ascending aorta and crosssec-
The aforementioned noninvasive measures of LV
tional area imay be used in this fashion to calculate
systolic function do nol differentiate between abnor-
cardiac output (CO):
malities of nyocardial confractility and changes in pre-
load or afterload (loading conditions). A method to
(O) = A x V x HR
overcome these limitations utilizes measurement of IV
wall stress (measured as dynes/cm?), which incorpo-
where A = area of vessel or orifice, V = integrated
rates end-systolic stress length and end-systolic pres-
flow velocity, and HR = heart rate. A number of
sure-volurne relations. A simplified index of end-sys-
technical limitations affeci accuracy, particularly in ob-
tolic rmeridional wall stress is calculated as follows:
taining an accurate orifice area. However, Doppler
techniques for neasuring cardiac outpu1. or stroke
LVID
voluune have the potential for following directional
PR_
2)
changes in a given patient.
M
M
where P is IV pressure (can be estinated by arterial
DIASTOLIG FUNCTION
blood pressure delermination), R is minor LV radius,
W is LV wall thickness, and IVID is IV dianeter.70
 Diastolic function encoinpasses several distinct and
These and other formulas have not been clinically
fundamentaly different hemodynamic phases. Al-
validated in veterinary heart failure patients.
though many paramelers have been proposed to mea-
sure its various aspecis, no single index is universally
applicable or even ideal.,7za
SYSTOLIC TIME INTERVALS
A nunber of diastolic indices have been derived
from M-rnode echo tracings. They include measure-
Systolic time intervals (STI) assess global 1V systolic
Inents that assess time periods (diastolic time intervals),
performance. Although they are affecied by heart rate,
and those that measure rates of change of different
preload, and afterload, they are readily measured by
dimensions. Some of the more coinmonly used assess-
sinultaneous recording of the ECG and M-inode echo-
menis include the isovoleinic relaxation period, relax
cardiograrn of the aortic valve (Fig. 8-13). The pre-
ation tirne index, peak or rate of change in LV dimen-
ejection period (PEP) represents the time between initial
sion, duration of rapid filling phase (i.e., the line
inflection of the QRs (Q wave) and the onset of LV
from rnininum IV dimension to the moment when
ejection, which is marked by opening of the aortic
the rate of increase in dimension has decreased to
valves. The LV ejection tine (LVET) is measured from the
20% or 50% of its maximum value), tine to peak
aortic valve opening to its closure. Total electromechanical
filling rate, and peak rate of ventricular wall thinning
systole (QAVC interval) represents the interval from
in diastole.' * In the normal dog or cat, IV relaxation
initiation of the QRS coinplex 1o aortic valve closure
causes a rapid and smooth descent from the nadir
(e-g., sum of the PEP and LVET). Alternatively, 1VET
during systole to the point of greatest chamber dimen-
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING153
sion in diastole.However,with diastolicdysfunction,
easilyidentified7asarechangesassociatedwithheart
normalwalldescentmaybeinterruptedbyabump or
failure(Fig.8-14).The presence of a dilated caudal
ridge evident on the LV posterior wall.
venacava，
dilated hepatic vessels,enlarged and
M-mode atrioventricular valve tracings parallel events
rounded liver,orascitesmay help provide evidencefor
recordedby spectral Doppler echocardiography.For ex-
right-sided congestiveheartfailure.
ample,maximumM-modeAVvalve excursionreflects
similardynamicsasrecordedbydiastolictransmitral
blood flow velocity during Doppler echo examination.
INTERPRETATIONOFTHE
Similarly, the appearance of abnormal mitral valve clo-
DOPPLERECHOCARDIOGRAM
sure (i.e.,decreased EtoF slope),as seen with mitral
valve stenosis,reflects the spectral Doppler profile re-
corded during prolonged ventricular filing.
Doppler transmitral flow profiles are affectedbyven-
Dopplerechocardiographyevaluatesbloodflowdy-
tricularcompliance andrelaxation.Accordingly,time-
namicsby directing theultrasoundbeamparallel to
velocityDopplersignalsgeneratedduringearlydia-
blood flow (Fig.8-15);ultrasound waves reflect off
stolic flow (E wave) and flow following atrial systole (A
moving RBCs and are processed into a spectral trace
wave）maybe alteredwith LVdiastolic dysfunction
(in contrast,2-D echocardiography illustrates cardiac
(Fig. 28-2).72a Normally, the peak E-wave velocity ex-
structures by directing the echobeam perpendicular
ceeds the peak A-wave velocity (E/A ratio>1).In
to tissues).Doppler echo examinations use similar
"windows” (transducer positions) as in 2-D imaging,
certain diseases,earlypeak diastolic flowis reduced
and peak flow following atrial contraction is greatly
but specific views are selected,such as the left apical
increased,decreasing the E/A ratio less than 1,and
window(Fig.8-15),to provide themost parallelbeam
representing the“delayed relaxation”pattern.Other
alignmenttobloodflow.
alterations havebeen described,including increased
peak E-wave velocity and decreased(often minuscule)
INDICATIONS FOR DOPPLER ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.The
peak A-wave velocity, representing the so-called “restric-
greatest application of Doppler echocardiography is in
tive”pattern.Avariety ofother measurements evaluat-
diagnosis and evaluation of congenital heart disease.
ing different portions have been reported,including
The answer to the question,“When is a routine Dop-
peak acceleration anddecelerationvelocities andve-
pler examinationwarrantedwithacquiredheartdis-
locity-time integrals. It is important to note that these
ase,” is not always clear. Ideally,Doppler echocardiog-
velocity alterationsarenotdisease specificbutare
raphystudiesshouldprovidenewinformation—that
present in disorders that share similar diastolicproper-
is, detect an unsuspected lesion,exclude a lesion be-
ties.Moreover,many technicalfactorsmay affecttrans-
lieved tobepresent,or detect a transvalvulargradient.
valvular dynamics,including age,phase ofrespiration,
A completeDoppler echoexaminationshouldin-
heart rate, and precise Doppler sampling site.
clude assessing all cardiac valves from right and left
parasternal positions. It is often performed in con-
junctionwithandfollowinga2-Dechocardiographic
ABDOMINALIMAGING
study.Thetendencytofocus only on areas suspected
forhigh diagnosticyield may actually result inlesions
being overlooked.
Ultrasonic examination need not stop at the dia-
Examples of Doppler echocardiograms in acquired
phragm. Normal sonographic anatomy of the liver is
and congenital heart disease areillustrated in Figures
2
FIGURE8-14
Two-dimensional abdominal
GB
sonogramsfrom dogswithright-
sided congestive heart failure.
Frame 1 shows ascites and
Liver
hepatomegalywithroundedliver
edges.Frame 2illustrates passive
Ascites
hepatic congestion.Hepatic veins
(HV)are markedly enlarged
comparedwith theportalveins
Body-
(PV),which characteristicallyhave
wall
more echogenic walls. GB,
gallbladder.
154 DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
8-4, 8-5, 8-15, 8-16, 8-18; see also Figures 24-1, 249,
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC
24-16, 2426B, 24-324, 24-38, 24-56D, 28-2, 28-4,
and 28-5. Norimal blood flow velocities across the car-
DIAGNOSIS OF CONGENITAL
diac valves are listed in Table 8-3.74 The physics and
HEART DISEASE
 practical use of quantitative Doppler echo7s, 76 and
color-flow Doppler77. 7x have bcen published. Normal
values for Doppler echocardiography parameters are
 Many congenital heart defects may be specifically
listed in Table 8-4.74. 79-81
diagnosed or strongly suspected onl the basis of two-
dimensional echocardiographic exanination. Doppler
QUANTIFICATION OF VALVULAR
diagnosis and characterization.
REGURGITATION
PATENT DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS
Many 1nethods have been proposed for estimaling
the severity of valvular regurgitation, bu1. true quanti-
The PDA communicates betwcen the descending
fication remains elusive.* Although color-flow Doppler
aorta and the main pulnonary artery (see Figs. 1-4.
 mapping provides a spatiotemporal display of the re-
1-5). It may be identified in the short-axis view (Fig.
gurgitant jet, there are significant limitations related
8-16). The aortic arch may be inaged frorm a subcostal
to cardiac geoineiry and Doppler technology. Quanti-
(see Fig. 24-44) or cranial left parasternal position.
tative color-flow analyses have utilized two approaches
10 evaluate regurgitant jets. Onc considers the rmormen-
LEFTTO-RIGHT-SHUNTING PDA. Nonspecific 2-D echo-
tum flux of the distal jet, which relates factors includ-
cardiographic changes may include (1) those associ-
ing jet length, area, and valve orifice area to scverity.
aled with a chronic, severe left hearl volume overload,
Clinically, seiniquantification of  severity
:is approxi-
including IA and LV dilation and increased mitral
matcd by the size, length, and configuration of the
regurgitant jet.1 Severity is generally graded mild, mod-
may develop secondarily; (2) mildly reduced fractional
erate, or severe. The other approach applies principles
shoriening or a value in the low-normal range; (3)
 of flow convergence, which analyze velocities upstream
exaggerated interventricular septal motion; and (4)
 enlargement of the aorta and main pulmonary artery.
Doppler echocardiography is available, semiquantifi-
Color-flow Doppler mapping is very helpful in demon-
cation is obtained by first placing the sainple volume
strating this anoimalous vascular shunt. During diastolic
 in the center of valve orific, then gradually moving it
runoff froin the descending aorta into the main pul-
 outward in an cxpanded radial sweep to define the
monary artery, it codes blood fow in the ductus as
limits of regurgitation.
red (i.e., flowing toward the transducer).8 Pulsed-wave
TABLE 8-4
 Normal Spectral Doppler Echocardiography Velocities (cm/sec)*
Feline
Canine
Canine
Canine
Canine
Feline
Santilli &
Broun
Canine
Yuill &
Kirkberger
Kirhberger
Fox et alts
Bussadorits
et atr4s
Gabery
O'Gradysoll
et alos
1y70 18
Mitral Valve
E wave
一
66 ± 11
——
75.0 ± 11.8
86.2 ± 9.5
1+16
94 = 16
A wave
52±8
53.8 ± 8.7
二
63 1 13
64 ± 15
EA wave
87 ± 9
Tricuspid Valve
E wavc
56.2 ± 16.1
一
68.9 上 8.4
86 ± 20
85 ± 20
A wave
——
——
58 + 16
58 ± 17
EA wave
88 上[4
一
一
Pulmonary Valve
102 ± 15
84.0 上 17
99.8 ± 15.3
R 98.1 ± 9.4
120 ± 20
125 + 26
L 95.5 ± 10.3
Aortic Valve
102 ± 19
106 ± 21
118.9 ± 17.8
118.1 ± 10.8
157 ± 33
149 ± 27
*Mean (cm/sec)上 SD.
+Fox PR, et al. L'npublished data, 1996.
ISantilli RA, Bussadori C. Unpubished data, 1996.
SVelocities measured by pused-wave Doppler echocardiugraphy.
R, values derived from right parasternal slor-axis view; L, values derived from left par
g-axisviet
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING155
RV
?
FIGURE8-15
(A) Cranial parasternal short-axis
view at thelevel of the aorta,with
4
E
pulsed-wave sample sites on either
side of the tricuspid (1,2）and
pulmonic (3,4) valves.The grid
2
illustratesspectralDoppler
recording:1,normal tricuspid
RA
diastolicflow;4,normalpulmonic
systolicflow.Site2woulddetect
tricuspid regurgitation,and site3,
pulmonic regurgitation.(B)Left
apicaltwo-chamberviewwith
pulsed-waveDoppler sample sites
on either sideof the mitral (1,2)
and aortic (3,4) valves.The grid
illustrates spectralDopplerecho
recordings:1,normal mitral
diastolicflow;4,normal aortic
systolicflow.Site3would detect
aortic regurgitation,and site2,
mitral regurgitation.(From Kisslo
J,Adams D,Mark DB.Basic
Doppler echocardiography.Clin
DiagnUltrasound 17:78-87,1986,
with permission.)
2
B
Doppler echocardiography canverify(1)turbulent
disturbance is localized. Complete right-to-left shunting
flow through the main pulmonary artery, (2) abnor-
through thePDA is rare,however.Even with suprasys-
mal retrograde (Fig. 8-16B) and continuous (Fig. 8-
temicpulmonary arterypressures,somediastolicflow
16D)flow in the main pulmonary artery, and (3) mild
is usually detected.Other nonspecificfindings include
increases in transmitral (usually <1.75 m/sec)and
evidence of pulmonary hypertension, including high-
aortic(usually<2.5m/sec)flows.After successful duc-
velocity tricuspid and pulmonic regurgitation; pulmonic
tal ligation or occlusion,normallaminarflowwithin
bloodflowwithadecreasedtimetopeakvelocity;
the pulmonary artery is re-established.
abruptdecreaseinflowvelocityinmidsystole;lossof a
normal negative presystolicvelocity component of pul-
RIGHT-TO-LEFT-SHUNTING("REVERSED")PDA.A dilated
monicflow correspondingto atrialsystole;and indica-
pulmonary artery and ductal communicationmay be
torsofdecreasedrightventricularcompliance（early
imagedwithassociatedchangesofincreasedpulmo-
ventricular diastolicfilling velocity that is less than that
naryvascularresistance,includingrightventricular hy-
produced with atrial systole).85
pertrophyandparadoxicinterventricularseptalmo-
Several conditions may have spectral Doppler blood
tion.Contrastechocardiography causes opacification
flow patterns that can be confused with PDA. These
of the descending aorta but not the left ventricle.The
include anomalous origin of a coronary artery,aortic
former isbestvisualized asit courses over thebladder.
pulmonarywindow,andpulmonicinsufficiency.Color-
Dopplerstudiescanidentifyturbulence at thejunction
flowDopplermappinggreatly facilitates their differen-
of the ductus and descending aorta where the flow
tiation.85-87
156
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
C
B
F
FIGURE8-16
position in a dog with lef-to-right-shunting patent ductus arteriosus.(A） 2-D shor-axis view
illustrating themain pulmonary artery (MPA),right pulmonary artery (RPA),left pulmonary artery
(LPA),descending aorta (DA),and ascending aorta (AA). (B)Pulsed-wave Doppler trace (sample
volumeplacementindicatedbythe star)showingretrogradediastolicflowintheMPA.A broad
spectralDopplerecho profile appears above the baseline,indicatingflow toward the transducer.The
spectral displaybelowthebaseline shows part of the systolic antegradeflowthroughthepulmonary
artery. (C) 2-D echo short-axis view obtained by rotating the transducer slightly counterclockwise.
The communication of the patent ductus arteriosus isevident between the MPA and DA.(D)Pulsed
waveDoppler tracerecorded with the samplevolume positioned approximately at thePDA.
arteriosus.The audio component of theDoppler signal correlateswith the sound of the auscultated
murmur.(E)Postoperative 2-D short-axis echo image showing the ligated ductus (arrowhead).(F)
Pulsed-wave Doppler trace with the samplevolume positioned in the main pulmonary artery.Note
that normal,laminar,antegrade systolic flow is detected.Diastolic flowisabsent.The distance
between the vertical markers is 20 cm/sec.
VENTRICULARSEPTALDEFECT
ofaVSD.Insmall dogsandin cats,actualvisualization
can be difficult. Doppler echocardiography, and espe-
Most ventricular septal defects (VSDs) are small,
cially color-flow imaging,87 enhances the sensitivity for
high, membranous lesions (Fig. 8-17; see also Figs.
the detection of even the smallest lesions.
1-3D,24-32A,24-33 and Color Plates 5 and 6).Opti-
Determinationofpeakbloodflowvelocitythrough
malvisualization is usually obtained from the cross-
a VSD can be hampered by eccentric jet directions
sectionalview atthelevelofthe aorta.Alternatively,
(see Fig.24-32A),which makes detecting the true
the right parasternal long-axis view may show the de-
maximaljetvelocity difficult.Also,theBernoulli equa-
fect and is the best positionfor Doppler echocardio-
tionisbestsuitedfordiscretestenosis,andthederived
graphicinterrogation,sincebloodflowingthroughthe
gradient may not actually reflect the ventricular pres-
defect is approximately parallel to the Doppler beam.
sure difference.Because of the series effect,flow dis-
Rarely,the defectoccurs in other areas of theinterven-
turbance(turbulence）from aVsD maypass into the
tricular septum (Fig.8-17B).When a VSD is of ade-
pulmonary arterybeforerelaminarization (subsidence
quate size, the lesion may be readily visualized.How-
ofturbulence)hasoccurred.Identificationof laminar
ever, because of inadequate lateral resolution, 2-D
andnonlaminar flow across the cardiacvalves is im-
echocardiography consistentlyunderestimatesthesize
portantifpulmonaryblood flow（Qp）to systemic
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING157
atriumandventriclecausesenlargementof those
chambers.Very occasionally,pulmonary edema can
result from marked shunting (e.g., >2.5:1 pulmonary-
to-systemicflow).If highpulmonaryvascularresistance
and pulmonary hypertensiondevelop,right ventricular
systolic and diastolic pressures increase to systemic lev-
elsandreversed (right-to-left)shunting may occur
(Eisenmenger's physiology).Thus,very large nonrestrictive
VSDs (e.g, tetralogy of Fallot) have only mildly ele-
vated trans-septal pressure gradients,equilibration of
bloodpressureinbothventricles,and rightventricular
hypertrophy.
RV
ATRIALSEPTALDEFECT
RA
An atrial septal defect(AsD)can be detected by
views that include both atria in the imaging plane.The
foramenovaleiscoveredonlybya thinmembrane,
andthe normal atrial septum thins as it approaches
theforamen ovale.Thus,echo“dropout”at thispoint
maybe misdiagnosed asa defect.
FIGURE8-17
Atrial septal defects areclassified according to their
Two-dimensionalechoes of twodogswithventricularseptal defects
position in the septum and their embryogenesis (see
recorded from the right parasternal transducer location.(A)Long-
axisviewoptimizedfortheleftventricular outlowtractshowsa
Fig.1-3B,C).An ostium primum defect is positioned in
large basal (membranous)ventricular septal defect (arrow)）.(B)
thelower portion of the septum,contiguouswith the
atrioventricularvalves andmembranousinterventricu-
inflow tracts.A midventricular (muscular) septal defect is evident.
lar septum (see Fig. 24-26B and Color Plate 8). It
RA,right arium;RV,right ventricle;A,left atrium;V,ft
results from incomplete fusion of the septum primum
ventricle;p,papillary muscle;Ao, aorta.
and endocardial cushions (see Fig.1-3C,D).It is con-
sideredapartialformofthecommonAVcanal,which
blood flow(Qs）ratios (Qp:Qs)are to be calculated.
includes cleft andvariably fused mitralvalveleaflets.
This canbe estimatedwithaVSDif thevolume(flow
When a high interventricular septal defect coexists, a
velocity integral andcross-sectional area of orifice）for
completecommon AVcanal issaid tobe present.A
pulmonary flow is measured in the pulmonary artery
sinus venosus defect is rare and islocatedhigh in the
ormitralvalve,andthe systemicflowis measured in
interatrial septum,close to the opening of the cranial
the aorta.24. 25
vena cava(see Fig. 8-3 and Color Plate 7).An ostium
REsTRIcTIvEvsDs.MostVSDs are small,“restrictive'
secundum defect is located in the region of the fossa
lesions permitting minimal left-to-right shunting.
ovalis (midatrial region) (see Fig. 8-2) because of in-
Doppler examinationcanindicateshunt direction(see
completedevelopmentoftheseptumsecundum.
Figs. 24-32A, 24-38 and Color Plates 5 and 6) and
Most ASDs are left-to-right shunting and cause RA
and RV dilation. The main pulmonary artery may also
quantifythepeakflowvelocity across thedefect(see
Fig. 24-38 and Color Plate 5), allowing an estimation
be dilated,but the LA is normal or slightly enlarged.
With large shunts or with common AV canals,dilation
of the instantaneouspressure difference across the
defect by the modifiedBernoulli equation.14, 85 High-
of the left side of the heart develops.Doppler echo
pressure gradients (e.g., >60 mmHg) indicate a large
examination usually detects(1)transatrial septalflow
differencebetweenleft andrightventricular pressures.
during systole and diastole that varies with respiration
This suggests a small VSD shunting a lowblood volume
(greatest flows occur during systole but smaller,
athighvelocityacross thedefect.In theserestrictive
broader peaks often occur during diastole);(2)in-
VSDs there are oftenno cardiac chamber abnormali-
creased transpulmonic valve velocity, and often (3)
ties since the shunt fraction is low. Sometimes,pro-
mitral insufficiency.Echocontrast may traverse the de-
fect with right-to-left or bidirectional shunting (see
lapse of an aortic(see Fig.24-33）or tricuspid valve
leaflet into thedefect may occur,occasionally closing
Figs.8-2,8-3;see also Fig.24-26).
When mapping blood flow in the atria, tricuspid
the defect.
regurgitation may be confused with blood flowing
NONRESTRICTIvE vsDs.In left-to-right shunting,nonre-
across an ASD in some cases. One distinguishing aid is
strictive VsDs,increased venous return to theleft
thatbloodflowvelocityacrossanASDisusuallylow
158DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
(e.g.,in children, a mean velocity of 41 cm/sec),88 a
The four-chamber apical view may provide the best
contrastto thehighervelocityusuallyfoundwith tri-
visualization. Doppler echo reveals the presence and
cuspid insufficiency.85, 89 Also,flow disturbance with
direction of regurgitant jets and, often,increased
tricuspid regurgitation is purely systolic,beginning
transvalvular fllingvelocitiesfrom thevolume over-
after theQRScomplex.
load.
TheQp:Qs (shunt)ratio canbe determined with an
ThedifferentiationbetweenEbstein'smalformation
ASD.Thisis accomplished byusingtheflowvelocity
andtricuspidvalvedysplasiarestsindeterminingthe
integral and cross-sectional area of thepulmonary ar-
degreeofapicaldisplacementofthetricuspidseptal
teryforQp,and themitral oraorticvalveforQs.24.25.85
leaflet.Normallythebasilar tricuspidvalveattach-
mentsaremoreapicalthan themitralvalveattach-
ments.Displacementwithoutthickeningof thevalve
leaflets downward into theRVisusuallydefined as
ATRIOVENTRICULARVALVEDYSPLASIA
Ebstein's anomaly;however,distinct differentiation
from tricuspidvalvedysplasiamaybe difficult.Flat-
Inmultipleechocardiographicviews,someorallof
tening of theinterventricular septum occursbecause
thefollowing2-D echochangesmay occur with dyspla-
of the overloadedRV.ConcurrentASDorpatentfora-
sia of mitral or tricuspidvalves:
men ovalemaybepresentwitheithervariation.
Color-flow and spectralDoppler echocardiography
1.Adherence of the tricuspid septal leaflet tothe in-
usually showmarkedAVvalvularregurgitation(Fig.
terventricular septum,
8-18; see also Fig.24-56). The regurgitant jet velocity
2.Focalor diffuseAVvalvularleaflet thickening or
may not be high90-93 unless valvular stenosis is present.
fusion,sometimes resulting in stenosis,
3.Direct insertion of valve leaflets onto papillary mus-
cle,
AORTICSTENOSIS
4.Atrophy or hypertrophy of papillary muscles,
5.Fusion or shortening of chordae tendineae of papil-
lary muscles,
Subaortic stenosis(SAs)is the mostcommon form
6.Redundant and elongated valve leaflets,
of aortic stenosis (As),although valvular and supraval-
7.Upward displacement ofpapillary muscles,
vular AS has been reported in the cat and dog.
8.Apicaldisplacementof thetricuspidvalveleaflet
hinge points(Ebstein’s malformation),and
TWO-DIMENSIONALECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.Anumberof
9.Atrial and ventricular dilation.
abnormalitiescanbeidentifiedfromtherightpara-
E
FIGURE8-18
Continuous-waveDoppler echorecorded across thetricuspid annulusfrom the apicalfour-chamber
viewina dogwith severetricuspid dysplasia.Duringrightventriculardiastolicfilling,flowthrough
the tricuspidvalveis depicted as a spectral trace above thebaseline (toward the transducer).
Diastolic fillingisrecorded as an early,passivefillingphase(Ewave),followed bya laterfilling
phase（A wave)resultingfrom atrial contraction.Here,theA wave ismore prominent than usual
duetoright heart volume overloadimposed by the tricuspidregurgitation(TR).During systole,
bloodregurgitatesfrom therightventricleinto theright atrium (away from the transducer),causing
reflecting late systolic increase inright atrial pressure (RV-RA pressure difference）.The distance
between the vertical markers is 1 m/sec.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING159
sternal long-(Fig.8-19; see also Fig.24-19) and short-
grade 2—a narrow,thickened subvalvular ridge par-
axis (see Fig. 24-13) views in dogs with SAS94:(1)
tially surrounding theLVoutflowtract;and grade3a
concentricleft ventricular hypertrophy（unless the
completesubvalvularfibrousbandorcollarsur-
condition is mild);(2)LVpapillary muscle hypertro-
rounding theLV outflow tract,sometimes involving
phy; (3) a fibrous subaortic band that may protrude
thecranioventralmitralvalveleaflet.
or appear muscular, with a wide,fbrous component;
(4)hyperechoic areas within the LV myocardium asso-
DOPPLERECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.DopplereXamination
ciatedwithmusclefibrosisor calcification;(5)elevated
willdemonstratethemaximalsystolicpressuregradi-
transmural pressures,resulting in coronary artery
ent (△P) from the peak transaorticvelocity41. 96-i0o ac-
bloodflowreversalwithdilationoftheleftcoronary
cording to the modified Bernoulli equation: P
artery;(5)poststenotic aortic root dilation;(6)mitral
(change in pressure) = 4 × [velocity]² (see Fig. 8-4,
valveabnormalities andthickeningoccasionallyifthe
Frame 2; see also Figs.24-16,24-20).The maximal
fibrous band incorporates portions of the anterior mi-
velocity is often best determinedfrom the supraster-
tral valve leaflets;(7)variableLA enlargement;(8)
nal,subcostal,orleft caudal (apical) locations.In mild
coarse systolicfluttering of the aorticvalve if substan-
cases the onlydetected abnormalitymaybeincreased
tial aortic regurgitation is present; mild aortic valve
aortic blood-flow velocity. Color-flow Doppler echocar-
systolicflutteringmay be normal or increasedwith
diography reveals systolic turbulence distal to the ob-
high blood flow; (9) discrete premature aortic valve
struction.Mild aortic regurgitation is usually present
closure accompanying dynamic left ventricular outflow
in dogs with subaortic stenosis.Maximal Doppler pres-
obstruction;(10)dynamicobstruction toLVoutflow
suregradients of over 125mmHg areconsidered se-
fromsystolicanteriormotionwhentheanteriormitral
vere.By cardiac catheterization,traditionalgradients
valveleafletcoaptswith theventricular septalbase to
suggesting thelevel of severity aremild stenosisgradi
encroachon theoutflowofblood.Somedogs atrest
entof less than50mmHg;moderate stenosis,50to75
may not exhibit LV outflow obstruction; disclosure may
mmHg; and severe, over 75 mmHg. General anesthesia
occur after extrasystolic beats, or provocative testing
depressespressuregradients at least50percent.
with isoproterenol orexercisemaybenecessaryforits
detection(see Fig.24-21).Systolic anterior motion is
not pathognomonic of subaortic stenosis and may be
PULMONICVALVESTENOSIS
presentinhypertrophiccardiomyopathy,leftventricu-
lar hypertrophy, and hypercontractile states.
Pulmonic stenosis(Ps)most commonlyresultsfrom
Theseverityof thesubaorticstenosiscanbejudged
pulmonicvalve dysplasia,althoughinfundibular,sub-
by the degree of myocardial thickening,presence of
valvular,andsupravalvularPshavebeenreported.Sub
hyperechoic lesions, and objectively by the pressure
valvular orvalvularPS is a component of tetralogy of
gradient across the area of stenosis.
Morphologic
Fallot.Short axis-viewsbestvisualize theselesions.
grades of SAs have been described from necropsy95:
grade 1—small,slightly raised subvalvular nodules;
TWO-DIMENSIONALECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.CharaCteristic
changes (Fig. 8-20; see also Fig. 24-9) include: (1) RV
hypertrophy and papillary muscle enlargement,(2)
paradoxicventricular septal motion,(3)muscular nar-
rowing of the RV outlow tract,(4) hyperechoic lesions
within theRVmyocardium,indicating severe fibrosis
or calcification,(5)poststenotic dilatation of the main
pulmonary artery, (6) increased echogenicity and
thickening of the pulmonary valves,(7)a narrowed
pulmonary valve orifice, and (8) variable right atrial
enlargement.Concurrent lesions may occur, such as
anomalous left main coronary artery,especially in En-
glishbulldogs andboxers,and tricuspidvalve dyspla-
sia.
FIGURE8-19
DOPPLER ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY. Common findings in-
clude turbulence in the pulmonary artery,increased
Two-dimensionalechorecordedat theright parasternal transducer
location in a dogwith congenital subaortic stenosis.The long-axis
blood velocity across the stenosis,pulmonic insuffi-
viewis optimized todisplay theleftventricular outflowtract.There
ciency,and a valvular gradient(see Fig.8-4,Frame
ishypertrophy of theinterventricularseptum(S）and left
1).Optimal ultrasound beam alignment across the
ventricular posteriorwall (LW）.A distinct subvalvularfibrous band
is present (arrow）.A hyperechoic subendocardial region is evident
pulmonaryvalvemaybedifficult,and therightventric-
in the papillary muscle (open arrow).LA, left atrium; A, aorta.
ularoutflowtractshouldbeimagedfromboththeleft
160DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
PV
RA
PA
FIGURE8-20
Two-dimensional echoesrecorded at theright
parasternal transducerlocationin twodifferentdogs
with pulmonic stenosis.(A) Short-axis view at the
levelofthe aortashowsthickenedpulmonaryvalve
ECG
(PV) leaflets (which had decreased range of motion);
60
narrowed pulmonary valve annulus;and dilated main
pulmonary artery (PA)(poststenotic dilation).RA,
right atrium;A,aorta.(B) Oblique short-axis view at
RVOT
thelevel of the aorta shows dysplastic pulmonary
valves (PV)(curved arrow) that are greatly thickened,
and subvalvular (infundibular)hypertrophy (arow).
PA,main pulmonary artery;RvOT,rightventricular
outflow tract;A, ascending aorta.
cranial andrightparasternal locations to detect the
phy and paradoxic or flattened septalmotion are
maximalvelocity.Thepressuregradientacrosstheste-
present.Pulmonaryatresia andhypoplasiaof the su-
noticpulmonicvalvemaythenbedetermined(△P
praventricularcrestmaybepresent.Echocontrast stud-
4 × [velocity]2).1o1 Dogs with a gradient of less than
ies document right-to-left shunting through theVSD.
50 mmHg are considered to have mild PS, whereas
severe PS is indicated in dogs with gradients of greater
DOPPLER ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.Doppler examination
than 125mmHg.The bestcandidates for balloonval-
reveals right-to-left shunting across the VSD into the
vuloplasty are dogs with gradients of greater than 75
aorta and severepulmonicstenosis.Pulmonaryhyper-
mmHg that do not have severe structural and func-
tension as a potential cause of right-to-left shunting
tional alteration and have purely valvular stenosis.
must be ruled out.
TETRALOGYOFFALLOT
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC
Two-dimensionalechocardiographyisusedtoiden-
EVALUATIONOFACQUIRED
tify components of this cyanotic congenital cardiac
DISEASE
anomaly.Thepulmonary trunk andpulmonicvalves
shouldbeexamined carefullyattheirsites oforigin to
differentiate tetralogy of Fallot from truncus arteriosus
orpulmonic atresia.
CHRONICACQUIRED
ATRIOVENTRICULAR(AV)VALVE
TWODIMENSIONAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.FeatureS(see
DISEASE
Fig. 24-52) include (1) a large, subaortic ventricular
septal defect, (2) a dextropositioned (overriding)
aorta,（3)rightventricularoutflowobstruction(pul-
Atrioventricularvalveinsufficiencyresultsfrom
monic stenosis),and (4) secondary right ventricular
chronic acquired valve disease (endocardiosis,myxo-
hypertrophy. The aorta may be enlarged owing to in-
matous degeneration). It is easily evaluated by 2-D and
creasedflow through theVSD.Left atrialandventricu-
Doppler echocardiography, but the cost-benefit value
lar size are generally small.Ventricular septal hypertro-
of these studies in uncomplicated cases is unproved.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING161
TWO-DIMENSIONALECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.RightparaSter-
allyuncommonwith acquired caninemitral regurgita-
nallong-and short-axisviews arewell suitedfor2-D
tion.67
evaluation.Atrioventricularvalveleafletsarethickened
TheE-pointseptalseparation(EPss)is anindicator
and nodular (Fig.8-21; see also Fig. 8-12) and may
ofinotropic state aswell aschamber diameterand is
protrudeinto the atria during systole.Regurgitation
usuallynormalunless significant andchronicmitral
severitycanbeindirectly estimated bythedegree of
regurgitation is present. This measurement highly de-
ventricular andatrialenlargement,whichmaybepro-
pends onbeam orientation.
nouncedin advanced cases.
When mitral insufficiency is present, the percent
DOPPLERECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.Dopplerechocardiogra-
fractional shortening (%FS)provides only an approxi-
phy canidentifyandsemiquantifyvalvularinsufficiency
mationofsystolicfunctionbecausepreloadand
(Color Plate 10). Spectral Doppler echocardiography
afterloadmarkedlyaffectthisindex.Sinceleftatrial
may showahighpeakregurgitantvelocityinmitral
pressures arelower than systemic arterial pressures,it
regurgitation (5 to 6 m/sec) but relatively lower veloci-
is easierfor theLVincases ofmitral insufficiency to
ties (<2 m/sec) in tricuspid regurgitation (high-veloc-
eject blood into theLA than into the aorta.Withmild
ity tricuspid regurgitation [>4 m/sec] usually suggests
mitral insufficiency andlowregurgitantfraction,the
pulmonaryhypertension).Insignificantpulmonic and
%FS will be normal.However, as the regurgitant frac-
aorticinsufficiency(<2m/sec)arecommonlypresent
tion increaseswhile myocardial functionispreserved,
in some affected dogs.Assessment of the regurgitant
the %FS also increases. That is,the LV “unloads"
jet's size (length and area)depends not only on the
blood more readily, albeit retrogradely, into the LA,
amount ofregurgitationbutalsoonthecharacteristics
suchthat the%FSiselevated,evenwhenearlymyocar-
of thereceiving chamber.Limitationsin quantifying
dial failure is present.During diastolic ventricular fill-
AVvalveinsufficiencyhavebeenreviewed.82.102
ing, ventricular septal motion is exaggerated toward
theRV.Enhancedventricular unloadingand increased
preload contribute to a supranormal %FS value (Fig.
MYOCARDIALDISEASES
8-22A). If myocardial failure develops, the %FS de-
clines,and values ultimately may be recorded in the
Echocardiographyhasgreatlyimprovedcharacter-
normal range (Fig.8-22B).Myocardial failure is gener-
ization of cardiomyopathies.Dilated,hypertrophic,
LV
FIGURE8-21
LA
RA
Two-dimensionalecho of apoodlewith
RA
chronic acquired valve disease
(endocardiosis)and severemitral
regurgitation recorded at theleftapical
(caudal) transducer location.Sequential
framesin this apical four-chamberview
demonstratemitralvalvemotion and
severelythickenedleaflets.Duringearly
(Frames 1and 2)and late (Frame 3)
diastole,the anteriormitral valveleaflet
3
(arrow)movesnormally,butthe
posteriorleaflet isrelatively immobile.
InFrame4,the thickenedleaflets
MV
protrude into the left atrium (LA).The
LA and left ventricle(LV)are dilated
from volume overload.RA,right atrium;
RV,right ventricle.
162
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
FIGURE8-22
M-mode echoes of two dogs with chronic acquired
valve disease(endocardiosis)recorded at the
ventricular level just below the mitral valve.(A)
Nine-year-oldpoodlewithasymptomatic
compensatedmitralinsufficiency.Ventricular
septal and LVfreewall motion arehyperdynamic;
fractional shortening is elevated (55%). (B)
Fifteen-year-oldLhasaApsowithdecompensated
mitral and tricuspid regurgitation.Motion of the
ventricular septumis exaggeratedrelativetothe
hypokineticLVfreewall.Whereas thefractional
shortening(35%)may be within thelow-normal
rangefor somehealthy,unaffected ogs,itis
lowfor adogwithseveremitralregurgitation and
indicatesleftventricular myocardial failure.Left
ventricular end-systolic andend-diastolic
dimensions are also increased.RV,right
ventricular chamber;S,interventricular septum;
LV,left ventricular chamber;W,left ventricular
wall.
andrestrictivecardiomyopathiescanbereadilydiffer-
stasis,(14)LA orLV thrombi in cats,and (15)pericar-
entiatd.58,626610-109
dial,pleural, or abdominal effusion.Canine dilated
cardiomyopathyis frequently associatedwithatrial fi-
brillation.105
DILATED(CONGESTIVE)CARDIOMYOPATHY
TWO-DIMENSIONALECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.ThefolloWing
DOPPLERECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.Doppler echocardio-
echocardiographicfindingsmaybedetecteds1(see
graphic studies can provide additional information
Figs. 27-6, 28-20): (1) dilated left and right ventricles,
about myocardial function.102,106 The velocity of blood
(2) dilated left and right atria, (3) hypokinetic and
flow across the cardiacvalves is reduced.Hemody-
paradoxic septalmotion,(4)severelyreduced frac-
namicdeterminations aremostfrequentlyquantified
tional shortening andvelocity ofcircumferentialfiber
from the aorticflowvelocitycurves.Diastolicfunction
shortening,(5)reduced left ventricular free wall am-
may also be abnormal.
plitude,(6) normal-to-thin myocardial wall thickness,
(7)increased E-point septal separation,(8)decreased
HYPERTROPHICCARDIOMYOPATHY
mitralvalve excursions,(9)abnormaldelayedclosure
of the mitral valve,resulting in a visible hump ("B
Echocardiography is a highly sensitive testof left
shoulder"),(10)dilated left ventricular outflow tract,
(11)decreased aorticrootamplitudeanddiameter,
cardiomyopathy(HCM)is morphologicallyhetero-
(12）abnormal systolic time intervals (decreased LV
geneous.66. 104 In feline hyperthyroidism, LV hyper-
ejection time and prolonged pre-ejection period), (13)
trophy, LA and RA enlargement, increased %FS and
spontaneous echocontrastformationsuggestingblood
indicesindicating ahypercontractilestatearecom-
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY AND DOPPIER IMAGING163
mon.tw These changes are often reversible when cu-
(2) ormal or nearly normal systolic function, (3)
thyroidism is re-estahlished and main tained.
severe LA enlargement in the absence ol signilicant
left-sided heart volurme overload, (4) moderate-to-se-
TWO-DIMENSIONAL ECHOCARDIOCRAPHY. Characleristic
vere RA cnlargement, RV enlargement, and variable
2-D echo findings" (see Figs. 28-3, 28-5, 28-7, 28-14)
RV hypertrophy, (5) LA or LV thromboemboli, and
include (l) LV hypertrophy (LV free wall or ventricu-
(6) variahle pleural or pericardial effusion. Doppler
lar septurn >6 mm at end-diastole; wall thickening is
studies may disclose mild mitral or tricuspid regurgita-
rmost cornmonly diffuse, involving the ventricular sep-
tion. Some affected cats havc a "classic" Doppler mi-
tum and free wall). Less frequently, it may be segmen-
tral filling pattern characterized by a high E wave and
tal and confined to the anterior ventricular septum;
very-low-velocity A wave, or relaxation ahnormalities
(2) moderately to severely enlarged LA and left auri-
(E:A reversal). 109, 110
cle, often accompanied by RA enlargement of lesser
severity; (3) left ventricular internal dimensions usually
normal al. end-diastole but decreased at end-systole;
DIOPATHIC ENDOMYOCARDIAL SCARRING
(4) dynamic IV outflow tract obstruction associated
with systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the anterior
This condition is characterized by endomyocardial
mitral valve, and corresponding midaortic. valve clo-
fihrosis with large endocardial plaque, Echocardio-
sure; the anterior mitral valve leaflet is usually thick-
graphic characteristics (see Fig. 28-16) include (1) IV
eled and eiidocardial plaque is present in the basilar
hypertrophy and severe LV enlargement, (2) variahle
ventricular septum, corresponding to the point of
RA and RV enlargenent and hypertrophy, (3) severe
SAM-septal contact; (5) fractional shortening usually
mid-IV endocardial scar, usually bridging the IV free
normal hut may be increased; (6) possible LA or LV
wall and venitricular septum, and occasionally obliterat-
thromhi (see Fig. 28-14); and (7) pericardial or pleu-
ing the apical chamber, (4) LA or LV thromboemboli,
ral effusion in some cats. Endomyocardial fibrosis may
and  (5)  variable pericardial and  pleural effusion.
sometimes cause increased echogenicity. Caine HCM
 Doppler studies disclose mild-to-moderate mitral or
is rare and not well descrihed.
 ticuspid regurgitation and turbulence in the region
of the endocardial scar, often with midventricular
DOPPLER ECHOCARD1OGRAPHY. Doppler studies Ieveal
gradients.110. 111
mild mitral insufficiency in most cats. When dyuamic
LV outlow tract obstruction is present, regurgitant jets
originate at 1he site of SAM-septal contact; they ca1 be
of high velocity (>4 m/sec); and they have an eccen-
BACTERAL ENDOCARDITIS
11ic orientation, often directed toward the caudal IA
Vegetative endocarditis oflen can be detcted by
border (see Figs. 28-4, 28-5). Cats with the nonoh-
structive form of ICM have mild mitral regurgitan1
echocardiography (Fig. 8-23; see also Figs. 26-1,
 26-5).t2. 1s3 Ihe mitral and aortic valves are most fre-
jets of lower velocities, originating from the mitral
valve commissures. With the obstructive form of HCM.
quently involved. Characteristic findings include (1)
forward aortic velocities are increased (typically, 2 t0
thickened, shaggy valve leaflets, often with pcduncu-
4.5 m/sec), with a characteristic late peaking contour
lated, mobile 1nasses, (2) secondary left-sided heart
and corresponding midaortic valve closure on M-mode
changes due to severe volume overload (e.g., LA and
echo. In addition, diastolic dysfunction may be associ-
 LV enlargement, hyperdynamic LV septal and poste-
aled with changes in transmitral flling patierns. Char-
rior wall motion), and (3) diastolic flutter of the ante-
acieristic LV relaxation abnormalities are reflected by
rior mitral  valve leaflet when aortic regurgitation
reversal of carly alnd late filling waves (E:A reversal).
(from aortic valve vegetations) strikes this miral leaflet
Here the Doppler echo A wave (following atrial con-
(see Fig. 8-12). Vegetative valvular lesions may calcify.
traction in late dliastole) is exaggerated relative to the
become hyperechoic, and cast aroustic shadous (i.e..
carly diastolic inflow velocity (E wave), as the atria
 s e  l jo a ps o s
contract to fill the stiff, noncompliant left 
ventricle
cated directly behind auother highly reflective object) .
(see Fig. 282). Many factors influence the interpreta-
 Even if vegetative lesions are not observed, this diagno-
 tion of Doppler echo patterns in addition to diastolic
sis cannot be excluded since small lesios may be
dysfumction.72
helow the resolving capability of 2-D echocardiography.
Diagnosis is aided by clinical findings and Doppler
ccho evidence of associated valvular insufficicncy. Pre-
RESTRICTIVE CARDIOMYOPATHY
This feline myocardial disorder is heterogencous
endocardiosis) may hamper recognition of vegetations
and poorly defined. Echo characteristics include (l)
or simulate lesions. Myocardial absccsses may occur
relatively normal LV chamber and wall dimensions,
and appear as hypoechoic areas.
164DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
DIASTOLE
SYSTOLE
3
DIASTOLE
SYSTOLE
FIGURE8-23
Two-dimensional echoesrecordedfrom theright parasternal transducer locationfrom a9-year-old
English setterwith syncope.Frames1and2:Short-axisviews at the aorticvalvelevel.During diastole
(Frame1),aortic cusps arevisible.During systole （Frame 2）a large,hyperechoic,vegetative mass is
seen to occupy the aortic orifice.Frames 3and4:Slightly obliquedlong-axisviews to accentuatethe
LV outflow tract and aorticroot.During diastole(Frame3)thehyperechoicvegetative mass is
situatedin theLV outflow tract.Notice the darkenedarea of echodropout intheLVposteriorwall
(W) directly below thevegetation.This acoustic shadow is caused by thevegetative mass blocking
ultrasound transmission.During systole (Frame 4),the mass enters the aorticroot.S,ventricular
septum;A, aortic root; u, vegetative mass.
PERICARDIALANDPLEURALEFFUSIONS
nallong-axisview,pericardial effusion collectsinitially
behind the posterior LV wall just distal to the atrioven-
Echocardiographyis sensitive for diagnosingpericar-
tricular groove. It is most abundant at the cardiac
dial and pleural effusions (Figs.8-24 to 8-27; see also
apex,decreases toward theheartbase,andisvirtually
Figs.29-15,29-17).114-116
absentbehind theleftatrium(preventedbyvenous
pericardial attachments)(Figs.8-24,Frame 3,8-25; see
PERICARDIALEFFUsION.Mostpericardialdisordersare
also Figs.28-16, 29-17).
associated with pericardial effusion or cause diffuse
pericardial involvement.Effusion is identifiedby a rela-
tively anechoic (black) or hypoechoic (dark) area (i.e.,
CARDIAC TAMPONADE.Rapidaccumulation of a small
echo-free space) between the epicardium and pericar-
amount of intrapericardial fluid,or chronic accumula-
dium;it occasionally contains fibrous bands,thrombi,
tion of a large volume,canraiseintrapericardial pres-
focal tumor implants,or loculated effusion.Careful
sureandimpairdiastolicfilling.Tamponadedescribes
and extensive examination using multiple imaging
the spectrum of cardiac abnormalities whose echocar-
planes and positions is indicated to search for etiology.
diographic features (Fig. 8-24, Frame 4) include (1)
Pericardialeffusionis indicatedin short-axisviews
pericardial effusion, usually moderate-to-severe, (2) di-
by(1）separation ofvisceral andparietalpericardial
astolicinversion(collapse)of theright atrial orventric-
surfaces by an echo-free space (Fig.8-25,Frames 2,4),
ular walls, and (3) generalized compression of the
and (2) swinging of the entire heart within the pericar-
right side of the heart at very high pressures. Doppler
dial space with severe effusions. In the right paraster-
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING165
PI
3
PE
RV
PE
rvw
RA
LV
PE
PF
PIF
FIGURE8-24
Two-dimensional echoes demonstrating pleural and pericardial effusionsrecordedfrom the right
parasternallocation.Frame1:Short-axisview of the left andrightventricles at the papillary level,
ligament (arrow) and lung (L)indicate that the effusion is pleural rather than pericardial.Frame 2:
Similar viewrecorded during systole of anothercat with pleural fluid.The dotted lineis theM-mode
cursor.S,ventricular septum.Frame3:Right parasternal long-axisfour-chamberviewfrom a Great
Dane with pericardial effusion (PE).Notice that the effusion does not traverse behind the whole left
atrium (LA) but ends slightly distal to the atrioventricular groove.RA,right atrium;Ru,right
ventriclrw,rightventricularwall;,ltventril,venticular pum;thrdaetndna
Frame4:A German shepherdwithpericardial and pleural effusion that outlines the pericardium(P)
as a circular sac around the heart.Theleft ventricular epicardium andparietal pericardium are
separated bya sonolucent(echo-free）) space caused by pericardial effusion （PE).The contour of
Notice that the right ventricle (R) collapses inward during this diastolicframe because of cardiac
tamponade.L,leftheart.
166
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
RA
P
3
LVOT
FIGURE8-25
Two-dimensionalechoes of dogswithvariousheart-base tumorsrecordedfromtheright parasternal
transducer position.Frame1:Short-axis view at the aorticlevel of a mixed-breed dog.A mass (M)
surrounds the aorta (A）and the right and left pulmonary arteries.RA,right atrium;PT,pulmonary
trunk.Frame 2:Short-axisview at the atrioventricularlevelfroma miniature poodlewith a
chemodectoma.A mass(arowheads) that protrudesinto theleft atrium is of different echogenicity
(appearing hypoechogenic,or“moth-eaten)relative to the myocardium.PE,pericardial effusion;S,
interventricular septum;Mu,mitralvalve;P,pericardium.Frame3:Oblique,long-axisviewof theV
outflow and inflowtractrecordedfrom anEnglishbulldogwith a chemodectoma.The tumor
(arrowheads）is large andencroacheson theleftatrium.LVoT,leftventricular outflow tract;MV,
mitralvalve.Frame4:Short-axisviewat thepapillarymusclelevel,recordedfrom a10-year-oldgolden
retriever.A mass (M)is apparent within the pericardial effusion (PE)adjacent to the right ventricular
wall (RV).Right atrial hemangiosarcoma was found at surgery.S,ventricular septum;LV,left
ventricle;P,pericardium.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHYANDDOPPLERIMAGING
167
TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT
2
3
FIGURE8-26
M-mode echorecordings at three standardviewsfrom a dogwith mitral and tricuspid insufficiency
andpericardial effusion.Frames1and2:Pericardialeffusion(PE)isindicated by a sonolucent,echo
free space between the epicardium and parietal pericardium (P).Pericardial effusion is
characteristicallymostprominent atthecardiacapex,leastevidentatthebase,andismostlyabsent
behind the left atrium as inFrame3（compare withFig.827).Ruw,right ventricular wall;Ruc,right
ventricularchamber;S,interventricular sptum;uc,lftventricularchamber;ow,leftventricular
freewall;V,tricuspidvalve;V,anteriormitralvalveleaflet;A,aorticrootcontaining aorticvalve
La,left atrium.
variationofcardiacbloodflow anddecreasedtransval-
nostic accuracy is enhanced when cardiac imaging in-
vular flows, especially during inspiration.
corporates multiple tomographic views.
Heartwormswithintherightsideoftheheart or
PLEURAL EFFUsION.Pleuraleffusion (Figs.8-24,Frames
pulmonary artery canbe seen asfineirregular,linear
1,2,4,827)must be carefully differentiated from peri-
echoes or as a large, irregular dense mass when the
cardial effusion (Figs. 8-24,Frames 3,4, 8-25,8-26).
worms are incorporated into a thrombus (see Figs.
Pleuraleffusionisdetectedbehindtheleftatrium
30-9; 31-5).117 Echocardiographic changes associated
(Fig. 8-27), whereas pericardial effusion is minimal
with heartworm disease include(1）RV andRA en-
or absent there (Fig. 8-26). With pleural effusion,
largement,(2) flattened or paradoxic ventricular sep-
delineation of collapsed lung lobes, the pericardiodi-
tal motion,(3)reduced LVand LA chamber dimen-
aphragmaticligament(caudal mediastinum),and cra-
sions,(4) pulmonary artery enlargement,and (5)
nial mediastinum is possible,but not that of pericar-
pleural or pericardial effusion.
dial fluid.
Intracardiac thrombi occur rarely in dogs but are com-
Pericardial and pleural fluid may be present con-
monin theleftatrium andventricleofcatswithmyo-
comitantly.In thesecases thepericardiumis clearly
cardial disease(see Fig.28-14).When myocardial fail-
outlined (Fig.8-24,Frame 4).
ureorleft atrialorventricularenlargementis severe,
blood stasis may result in spontaneous echo contrast.
This appears as swirling, tiny white or gray echoes
INTRACARDIACANDEXTRACARDIACMASSES
withintheaffectedchamberandisoftenassociated
Two-dimensional echocardiography is very useful to
with mural thrombi (seeFig.28-14).
identify intracardiac and extracardiac masses.117 Diag-
Neoplasia(e.g.,chemodectoma,hemangiosarcoma,
168
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
2
3
FIGURE8-27
Re
M-mode echo recordings at three standard
PLF
viewsfroma catwith pleural effusion.Note
that inFrames 1 and 2,there is no separation
of the LVepicardium and parietal
occurif pericardialeffusionwerepresent.
Also,pleural effusionislocatedbehind the
left atrium(Frame3), a feature that does not
occur withpericardial effusion.P,
pericardium;R,right ventricular cavity;S,
LA
interventricular septum;LV,leftventricular
chamber; W, left ventricular free wall; Cw,
chest wall;M,anteriormitral valveleaflet;
Au,aorticvalve;A,aorta,A,left atrium;l
PLF
F,pleural fluid.
ectopic thyroid adenocarcinoma,metastatic tumors)
5.SewardJB,KhandheriaBK,OhJK,et al.Bianar trans-
can be identified best with 2-D echocardiography118
esophagealechocardiography:Anatomiccorrelations,
(Fig. 8-25; see also Figs. 29-18, 29-19). The transducer
implementation,and clinical applications.Mayo Clin
Proc63:649,1988
oftenmustbepositionedina craniodorsallocationto
6.Khandheria BK,Oh J.Transesophageal echocardiogra-
image theheartbase.Multipleimaging andtransducer
phy:Technique,anatomic correlations,implementa-
locations will assure optimal diagnostic accuracy.A
tion,and clinical applications.Mayo Clin Proc 63:649,
massinvolving onlytheRA ismore likelytobea
1988
7.OmotoR,Kyo S,Matsumura M,et al.New direction of
hemangiosarcoma than a chemodectoma. Usually,
biplane transesophageal echocardiographywithspecial
hemangiosarcoma is more likely to have hypoechoic
emphasis onreal-time biplane imaging andmatrix
or anechoicareas than ischemodectoma.Mostfeline
phase-array biplane transducer.Echocardiography
intramural masses are lymphosarcoma.
7:691,1990
8.Loyer C,ThomasWP.Transesophageal echocardiogra-
phy in the dog:Technique,anatomy, and imaging
planes.VetRadiol Ultrasound36:212,1995
REFERENCES
9.KienleRD,Thomas WP,RishniwM.Biplane transesoph-
ageal echocardiography in thecat:Technique,anatomy,
andimagequality.JVetInternMed19:200,1995
10.Gopal AS,Keller AM,Shen Z,et al.Three-dimensional
1.Weyman AD (ed).Principles and Practice of Echocardi-
echocardiography:Invitroand invivovalidation of
ography.2nd ed.Philadelphia,Lea&Febiger,1994,pp
leftventricularmass andcomparisonwithconventional
3,218,302
echocardiographicmethods.JAmColl Cardiol24:504,
la.Parrish DL, Grayburn PA.Use of echocardiography
1994
in patients with congestive heart failure.Cardiol Rev
10a.YaoJ,Masani ND,Cao Q-L,et al. Clinical application
6:203,1998
oftransthoracic volume-rendered three-dimensional
2.Wells PNT. Biomedical Ultrasonics.New York,Aca-
echocardiography in the assessment of mitral regurgita-
demicPress,1977
tion.Am J Cardiol82:189,1998
3.Feigenbaum H. Echocardiography. 4th ed.Philadel-
11.Stevenson JG,Kawabori 1. Noninvasive determination
phia,Lea &Febiger,1986
of pressure gradients in children:Two methods em-
4.Picard MH.M-mode echocardiography:Principles and
ploying pulsed Doppler echocardiography. J Am Coll
examination techniques.In Weyman AD(ed):Princi-
Cardiol3:179,1984
ples and Practice of Echocardiography.Philadelphia,
12.GoldbergSJ,AllenHD,Marx GR,et al.DopplerEcho-
Lea&Febiger,1994,pp282,584
cardiography.Philadelphia,Lea&Febiger,1985
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY AND DOPPLER IMAGING
169
13. Snider AR. Predictior of intracardiac pressures and
of ccentricity of jet and mechanisn of regurgitalion. J
assessment of ventricular function with Doppler echo-
Am Coll Cardiol 21:1211, 1993
cardiograpby. Echocardiography 4:305. 1987
31. Danford DA. Basic principles and technical considcra-
14. Murphy DJ Jr, Ludomirsky A, Huhta JC. Continuous-
tions. An Kucdormirsky A, Huhta JC (eds): Color Dopplcr
wave Doppler in children with ventricular septal dcfect:
Of Congenital Hcart Discase in the Child and Adull.
Noninvasive cstimation of interventricular pressure gra-
Mount Kisco, NY, Futura Ptblishing Company, 1987,
dicnt. Am J Cardiol 57:428, 1986
p1
15. Talano IV. Doppler echocardiography in assessing intra-
32.
Kisslo J, Adams DB, Bclkin RN. Doppler Color Flow
cardiac: pressures, fuclion, and flow. Echocardiogra-
Imaging. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1988
phy 3:83, 1986
33. Gesserf JM, Moore GW. Color flow imaging display
16. Berger A, Berdoff RL., Gallerstein PE, et al. Eyaluation
 modes and data acquisition parameters. Echocardiogra-
of aortic stenosis by continuous wave Doppler tultra-
phy 4:375, 1988
souud. J Am Coll Cardiol 3:150, 1984
34. Kienle RD, Thomas WP. Echocardiography. In Nyland
17. Fyfe DA, Currie P], Seward JB. et al. Continous wave
TG, Mattoon JS (eds): Veterinary Diagnostic Echocardli-
Dopplcr determination of the pressure gradient ac ross
 ography. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995. p 198
pulmonary artery bands: Hemodymamic correlation in
35. Thomas WP, Gaber CE, Jacobs (GJ, et al. Rccommenda-
20 paticnts. Mayo Clin Proc 59:744, 1984
tions for standards in transthoracic two-dimensional
18. Currie PJ, Haglcr DJ, Seward JB, ct al. Iristantaneous 
echocardiography in the dog and cat. J Vet Intern Med
pressure gradient: A simultaneous Doppier and dual
7:247,1993
catheter correlative study. J Am Coll Cardiol 7:800, 1986
 36. Darke PGG, Bonagura JD, Miller M. Transducer orien-
19. Lima CO, Sahn DJ, Valdes-Cruz LM, ct al. Noninvasive
tation for Doppler echiocardiography in dogs. J Small
 predictioin of transvalvular pressure gradicnt in patients
Anim Pract 34:2, 1993
with pulmonary stenosis by quantitative two-dimen-
37. DeMadron F, Bonagura JD, IIerring DS. Two-dimen-
sional cchocardiographic Doppler studies. (irculation
sional echocardiography in the normal cat. Vet Radiol
67:866, 1983
26:149, 1985
20. Schuster AH, Nanda NC. Doppler echocardiographic
38. O'Grady MR, Bonagura JD, Powers JD, et al. Quantita-
meastrcment of cardiac output: Comparison with a
tive cross-sectional chocardiography in the normal
non-golden standard. Am J Cardiol 53:257, 1984
dog. Vet. Pathol 27:34, 1986
21. Meijboom EJ, Rijsterborgh H. Bot II, ct al. Linits of
39. Thomas WP. Two dinensional real time echocardiogra-
reproducibility of blood low mcasureiments by Doppler
phy in the dog. Vet Radiol 25:50, 1984
echocardiography. Am J Cardiol 59:133, 1987
40. Sahn DJ, Anderson F. An Atlas for Fchocardiographers;
22. Meijboon E, HHorowitz S, Valdes-Cruz I., et al. A Dop-
Two-Dimensional Anatomy of the Hcart. New York,
pler echocardiographic mcthod for calculating volume
John wiley and Sons, 1982
flow across the tricuspid valve: Correlative laboratory
41. Lehmkuhi LB, Bonagura JD. Comparison of transducer
and clinical studies. Circulation 71:551, 1985
place ment sites for Doppler echocardiography in dogs
23. Valdes-Cruz IM, Horowitz S, Mesel F, ct al. A. pulsed
with subaortic stenosis. Am I Vet Res 55:192. 1994
Doppier echocardiographic method for calculating pul-
42. Sahn DJ, DeMaria A. Kisslo J, et al. Recomumcndatiors 
monary and systemic blood flow in atlial level shunts:
regarding quantitation in M-nmode cchocardiography:
Valitation studies in animals and initial human experi
Results of a survey of echocardiographic mcasure-
cnce. Circulation 69:80, 1984
ments. Circulation 58:1072、1978
24. Barron JV, Sahn DJ, Valdes-Cruz L.M, et al. Clinical
43. Henry WI., DeMaria A, Gramiak R, ct al. Reporl of thc
utility of two-dimensional Doppler echocardiographic
Anerican Society of Echocardiography Conmiec on
techniques for estimating pulmonary to systemic blood
nomenclature: and standards in two-dimcnsioral echo-
flow ratios in children with left to right shunting atrial
cardiography. Circulation 62:212, 1980
septal t,ntricatal ftrat s
44. Lombard Cw. Normal values of thc caninc M-modc
arteriosus. J Am Coll Cardiol 3:169, 1984
echocardiogram. Am J Vet Rcs 45:2015, 1984
25. Valdes-Cruz LM. Horowitz S, Mesel E, et al. A pualsed
45. Boon J, Wingfield WE, Miller CW. Echocardiographic
Doppler echocardiographic method for calculation of
indices in the normal dog. Vet Radiol 24:214, 1983
pulmonary and sysiemic flow: Accuracy in a canine
46. Dennis MO, Ncaleigh RC, Pyle RL., et al. Echocardio-
model with 
ventricular  septal  defcct.  Circulation
graphitc assessment of normal and abnormal valvular
68:597, 1983
function in beagle dogs. Am J Vet Res 39:1591. 1978
26. Kosturakis D, Allen HD, Goldberg SJ, et al. Noninvasive
47. Baylen BG, Garrer DJ, Laks MM. et al. Improved echo-
quantification of stenotic senmilunar valve areas by
cardiographic evaluation of the closed-chest canine:
Doppler echocardiography. J Am Coll Cardiol 3:1256,
Methods and anatomic observations. J Clin Ultrasound
1984
8:335,1980
27. Richards KL、 Cannon SR, Miller JF, et. al. Calculation
48. Franklin TD Jr, Weyman AE. Egernes KM. Closed chest.
of aortic valve arca by Doppler echocardiography: A
carnine:  nodel  for  cross-sectional  echocardiography
direct application of the continuity equation. Circula-
study. Am J Physiol 233:H417, 1977
tion 73:964, 1986
49. Mashiro I, Nclson RR, Cohn JN. et al. Ventricular di-
28. Richards KL. Doppler echocardiographic quantifica-
ensions mcasured noninvasively by cchocardiography
tion of stenotic valvular lesions. Echocardiography
in the awake dog. J Appl Physiol 41:953, 1976
4:289,1987
50. Eaton IW, Maughan WL. Shovkas AA, et al. Accurate
29. Gura GM Jr.
. Vidco Atlas of Two-Dimensional Color
yolurme determination in the isolated ejecting canine
Flow Doppler Echocardiography. Boston, Lile,
lefl ventricle by two dimensional echocardiography. Cir-
Brown, 1989
culation 60:320, 1979
 30. Enriquez-Sarano M, Tajik AJ Bailcy KR, et al. Color
51. Pipers FS, Andrysco RM, Hamlin RL. A total noninva
flow imaging compared with quantitative Doppler as-
sive method for obtaining systolic lime imtcrvals in the
sessment of severity of rmitral regurgitation: Influence
dog. Am J Vet Res 39:1822, 1978
170DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
52. Morrison SA, Moise NS, Scarlett JM. et al. Efect off
71. Atkins CA, Snyder PS. Systolic timc intervals and their
brced and body weight o1 echocardiographic values of
dcrivatives for evaluation of cardiac function. J Vet In-
four brcds of dogs of differing wcight and somatotype.
tcrn Med 6:55, 1992
J Vet Intern Med 6:220, 1992
72. Sahn Dj. Determination of cardiac output by cchocardi-
53. Gooding JP, Robinson wF, Mcws GC. Echocardio-
ographic Doppler methods: Rclative accuracy of various
graphic assessment of left ventricuiar dimensions in
sites for measurement. J Am Coll Cardiol 6:663, 1985
clinicaily normal English cocker spanicls. Am J Vet Res
72a. Choong CY. Left ventricle: V: Diastolic fumction—its
47:296,1986
principles and cvaluation. In Weynan AE (ed): Princi-
54. Page A, Edmunds G, Atwell RB. Echocardiographic
ples and Practice of Echocardiography. Philadelphia,
values in the grcyhound. Austr Vet J 70:36l, 1993
Lea & Febiger, 1994, p 721
55. Vollrmar A. Kardiologische Untersuchungen beim Ir-
73. Carlislc CH, Wu J-X, Heath TJ. Anatomy of the portal
ischen wolfshund unter besonderer Berucksichtigung
and hepatic veins of the dog: A basis for systematic
dcs Vorhoffinmerns und der Echokardiographic.
cvaluation of the liver by ultrasonography. Vet Radiol
Kleintierpraxis 41:397, 1996
UItrasound 36:227. 1995
55a. Vollmar A. Kardiologischc Untersuchungen bcim
74. Brown DJ, Knight DH, King RR. Ust: of pulsed-wavc
Deerhound, Referenzwertc fur die Echodiagnostik.
Doppler cchocardiography to determine aortic and
Kleinticrpraxis 13:197, 1998
pulmonary velocity and flow yariables in clinically nor.
56. Sisson D, Schaeffer D. Changes in linear dimensions of
mal dogs. Am J Vet Rcs 52:540, 1991
the heart, relative to body wcight, as measured by M-
73. Talano JV (ed). Doppler cchocardiography in assessing
mode echocardiography in growing dogs. Am J Vet Res
intracardiac pressures, function and flow. Echocardiog-
52:1591, 1991
raphy 3:83, 1986
57. Bayon A, Fernandez del Palacio MJ, Montes AM, ct. al.
76. Richards KL. Doppler cchocardiographic quantitation
Mmode cchocardiography study in growing Spanish
of stenouic valvular lesions. Echocardiography 4:289.
mastiffs. J Small Anim Pract 35:473, 1994
1987
58. Moise NS, Dicuze AE, Mezza IE, et al. Echocardiogra-
77. DeMaria AN. Considerations in the quantification of
phy, elerfrocardiography, and radiography of cats with
Doppler color flow imaging. E.chocardiography 4:495.
dlilatation cardliomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiormyopa-
1987
thy, and hypcrthyroidisim. Am J Vet Res 47:1476, 1986
78. Ritter SB. Color Doppler cchocardiography-1990.
59.Pipers FS, Reet V, Hamlin RI. Echocardiography in thc
Echocardiography 7:689, 1990
domestic cat. An J Vet Res 40:882, 1979
79. Gaber CF. Normal pulsed Doppler flow vclocities in
60. Jacobs G, Knight DV. M-mode cchocardiographic mea-
achult dogs; Abstracl. Proc 5th Annu Vet Med Forum
surements in nonanesthetized healthy cats: Effects of
1987, p 923
body weight, heart rate, and other variables. Am J Vet
80. Yuill CD, O'Grady MR. Doppler-derived velocity of
Res 46:1704, 1985
blood flow across the cardiac valves in the norrmal dog.
61. Fox PR, Bonrl BR, Peterson ME. Echocardiographic
Car J Vet Res 55:185, 1991
reference values ini healthy cats sedated with ketamine
81. Kirkberger RM, Bland-van den Berg P, Grimbeek RJ.
hydrochiloride. Am J Vct Res 46:1479, 1985
62. Soderberg SF. Boon JA, Wingfield WE, et al. M-mode
Doppler cchocardiography in the norrmal dog: Il. Fac-
tors influencing blood low velocities and a comparison
echocardiography as a diagnostic aid for feline cardio-
between ieft and right heart blood flow. Vet Radiol
myopathy. Vet Radiol 24:55, 1983
63. Allen DG. Echocardiographic: study of the anesthetized
Lltrasoumd 33:380, 1992
82. Grayburn PA, Peshock RM. Noninvasive quantification
cat. Can J Conp Med 46:115, 1982
64. Sisson DiD, Knight DH, Helinski C, Fox PR,et al.
of valvular regurgitation. Getting to the core of the
Plasma conceutrations and M-mode echocardiographic
matter. Circulation 94:119, 1996
83. Recusani F, Bargigia GS. Yoganathan AP, et al. A new
measures in healthy cats and in cats with dilated cardio-
myopathy J Vet Intern Med 5:232, 1991
method for quantification of regurgitant flow rate using
65. Jacobs G, Knight DH. Changes in M-mode echocardio-
color Doppler flow imaging of uhe flow convergence
graphic values in cats given kelamine. Am J Vct Rcs
region proximal to a discrete orifice: An in vitro study.
Circulation 83:594, 1991
46:712,1985
66. Fox PR. Liu SK, Maron B. Echocardiographic assess-
84. Smallhorn JF Patent ductus arteriosus
evaluation by
ment of spontaneously occurring feline hypertrophic
echocardiography. Echocardiography 4:101, 1987
cardiomyopatly; An animal model of human discasc.
85. Stevcnson JB. The use of Doppler echocardiography
Circulation 92:2645, 1995
for detection and estination of severity of patent ductus
67. Kittleson MD, Eyster GE, Knowlen GG, et al. Myocardial
arteriosus, ventricular septal defect, and atrial septal
function in small dogs with chronic mitral regurgitation
defcct. Echocardiography 4:321, 1987
and severc congestive heart failure. J Ain Vet Med Assoc
86. Switzer DF, Nanda XC. Doppler cchocardiography. Part
184:455. 1984
[1l. Congcnital heart disease. Echocardiography 2:257,
68. Borow KM, Green LH, Mann T. et al. End-syslolic vol-
1985
tume as a predictor of postoperative left vcntricular
87. Ludomirsky A, Huhta JC (eds). Left-to-right. shunts. In
Color Doppler of Congenital Hcart Discase in the
tation. Am J Mcd 68:655, 1980
Child and Adult. Mount Kisco. NY, Futura Publishing
69.Vuille C, Weynan AE. Ieft ventricle I: General consid-
Company, NY. 1987, p 51
crations, assessment of chamber sizc and furction. In
88. Marx GR, Allen HD, Goldberg SJ, ct al. Transatrial
Weyman AD (ed): Principles and Practice of Echocardi-
septal velocity measurement by Doppler cchocardiogra-
ography. Philadelphia, 1.ca & Febiger, 1994, pp 282, 584
phy in atrial septal defect. Correlation with Qp:Qs rato.
70. Quinones MA, Makotoff DM, Nouri S, et al. Noninva-
Am J Cardiol 55:1162, 1985
sive quantification of left ventricular wall stress. Valida-
89. Suzuki Y, Kambora H, Kadora K, et al. Detection of
tion of method and application to asscssment of
intracardiac shunt (low in atrial septal defect using
chronic pressure overload. Am J Cardiol 45:782, 1980
a real-tinc: two-lirmensional colorcoded Doppler flow
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY AND DOPPLER IMAGING
171
imaging system and comparison with contrast two-di-
canine dilated cardiomyopathy. J Soiaill  Anim Pract
mensional cchocardiography Am J Cardiol 56:347,
24:59. 1984
1985
104. Peterson EN, Moise NS, Brown CA, ct al. Hleterogcneity
90. Curtius JM. Thyssen M, Breuer HW, ct al. Doppler
of hypertrophy in felinc hypertrophie: disease. J Vel.
versus contrast echocardiography for diagnosis of tri-
lntern Med 7:183, 1993
cuspid regurgitation. Am J Cardiol 56:333, 1985
105. Wingfield wF, Boon J, Miller CW'. Echocardiogenic
91. Mikomi T, Kudo T, Sakurai N, et al. Mechanisms for
assessmennt of mitral valve molion, cardiac structures,
developmenl of fmctional tricuspid regurgitation de-
and ventricular funclion in dogs with atrial fibrillation.
termined by pulsed Doppler and two-dimensional echo-
J Am Vet Med Assoc: 18l:46, 1982
cardiography. Am J Cardiol 53:160, 1984
106. Louie EK. Congestive cardiomyopathy: Doppler echo-
92. Pearlman lAs, Otio CM. Quantification of valvular re-
cardiographic assessment of strnclure and function.
gurgitation. Erhocardiography 4:271, 1987
Echocardiography 4:119, 1987
93. Pennesetli F, Loperfido F, Salvatori MP, ct al. Asscss-
107. Moise NS, Dietze AE. Echocardiographic, elcctrocardio-
 ment of tricuspid regurgitalion by pulsed Doppler ul.
graphic, and radiographic detection of cardiouegaly in
trasonography of the hepatic veins. Am J Cardiol
hyperthyroid cats. Am J Vet Res 17:1487, 1986
54:363,1981
 108. Bond BR, Fox PR, Petcrson ME, Skavaril RV. Echocardi-
94. Wingficld wE, Boo JA, Miller Cw. Echocardiographic
ographic findings in 103 cats with hyperihyroidism. J
assessment of congenital aortic stenosis in dogs. J Am
Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1546, 1988
Vet Med Assoc 183:673, 1983
109. Bonagura JB, Fox PR. Feline restrictive rardiomyopathy.
95. Pyle RL., Patterson DF, Chacko S. The genctics and
In Bonagura JB, Kirk RW (eds): Kirk's Current Veteri-
pathology of discrete subaoric stenosis in the New-
nary Therapy. Vol 12. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995.
foundland dog. An Heart J 92:324, 1976
p863
110. Fox PR. Feline myocardial discases. Proc 18th Annu
96. Krafchek J. Rohertson JlI, Radford M, et al. A reconsid-
Waltham/Osu Synp. Cardiology. Vernon, CA, Wal-
eration of Doppler assessed gradients in suspected aor-
than USA, Inc. 1994, p I17
tic stenosis. Ain Heart J 110:765, 1985
111. Liu SK, Fox PR, Bond BR. Restrictive cardlioryopathy
97. williams GA, Laboviz AJ, Nelson JG, el al. Valtue of
in the cat; AbstracL. 8th Asian-Pacific Cong Cardiol,
nnultiple cchocardiographic views in the cvalualion of
1983
aoric stenosis in adults by continuous-wave Doppler.
112. Bonagura JD, Pipers FS. Echocardiographic feauures of
Am J Cardiol 55:445, 1985
aortic valve cndocarditis in a dog, a row, and a horsc. J
98. Yeager M, Yock PG, Popp RI. Comparison of Doppler-
Am Vet. Med Ass0c 182:595, 1983
derived pressure gradient to that determined at cardiac
113. Lombard Cw, Bucrgelt CD. Vcgetative bacterial cndo-
catheterization ini adtults with aortic valve stenosis: Im-
carditis in dogs: Echocardiographic ctiagnosis and clini-
 plications for maragement. Ao J Cardiol 57:644, 1986
cal sigus. J Simall Anim Pract 24:325, 1983
99. Stamn RB, Martin RP. Quantification of pressure gradi-
114. Bonagura JD, Pipers FS. Echocardiographic featurcs
ents across stenotic waves by Doppler ultrasound. J Am
of pericardial cffusion in dogs. J An Vet. Med Assot
Coll Cardiol 2:707, 1983
179:49. 1981
100. Zoghbi WA. Fchocardiographic and Doppier ultrasonit:
115. Bonagura JD. Electrical alternans associated with peri-
evaluation of valvular aortic stenosis. Echocardiography
cardia cffusion in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assor
5:22.1988
178:574, 1981
101. Murphy DJ, Ludominsky A. Danford DA, Hluhta JC.
116. Sagar KB, Wann LS, Klopefenstcin HS. Echocardiogra-
Doppler cchocardiography in pulmonic stenosis. Echo-
phy in the diagnosis of cardiae tamponade. Echocardi-
cardiography 4:187, 1987
ography 4:29,1987
102. Vuille C, Weyman AE. l.eft ventricle I: General consid-
117. Thoimas WP, Sisson D, Bauer TG, et al. Dcteclion of
crations, assessnent of chamber size and function. In.
cardliac masses in dogs by 1wo-dimensional cchocardiog-
Weyman AE (ed): Principles and Practice of Echocardi-
raphy Vet Radiol 25:65, 1984
ography. Philadelphia, Lca & Febiger. Philadelphia,
118. Lombard CW, Buergelt CD. Echocardiographic and
1994, p 575
clinical findings in dogs with heartworm-induccd cor
103. Lombard Cw. Echocardiographitc and clinical signs of
pulmonale. Comp Cont Ednc 5:971, 1983
atheterization and
Angiocardiograpl
WILLIAM P. THOMAS
DAVID SISSON
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES
The ‘"gold standard for cardiovascular diagnosis over thc past scvcral
 decades has been invasive hemodyramic measurerment and visualization of
cardiac and vascular blood flow via catheters introduccd through peripheral
blood vessels (i.c., cardiac catheterization).' Many disorrlers that once re-
quired catheterization for confirmation can low be diagnosed noninvasively
by multimodal echocardiography. In fact, reliable diagnosis, prognosis, and
therapy can now be accomplished in most patients by noninvasive cvalua-
tions, which include physical examination, thoracic radliography, clectrocar-
diography, and echocardiography (especially if it includes Doppler imaging).
Howevcr, cardiac catheterization rcmains an importan1 clinical and research
 tool best performed and interpreted by individuals with specialty training or
experience in cardiology and radiology.
Although dogs havc been used extensively for cardiovascular research,
few refercnccs discuss the details of clinical cardiac catheterizalion,2-s The
tcchniques and applications in animals are similar to those uscd in humans:
in-depth coverage of this topic can be found in several human texts.7-11
INDICATIONS
careful consideration of potential risks vcrsus henefits. Most catheterizationn
and angiographic proccdures rcquirc general ancsthesia, whicl: may have
attendant risks. although in cxperienced hands, morhidity and mortality
with catheterization is modest if overt. heart failure is not prescnt. The cost
be considered.
 Invasive studies should he used in those instances in which an understand-
ing of the anatomic and physiologic abnormalities from noninvasive studies
are inadequate or incomplete for making clinical decisions. Such instances
may include (l) animals in which measurement. of intracardiac pressurcs,
especially diastolic pressures, may affect the diagnosis, rccommcnded ther-
apy, or prognosis; (2) animals with vascular disorders affecting the great
vessels or systemic, pulmonary, or coronary vasculature, which cannot be
adcquatcly evaluated noninvasively; and (3) animals with congenital or ac-
173
174 DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
quircd hcart discase that requires additional character
Other studies such as indlicator dilution and oximetry
ization in preparation for cardiac surgery. In addition,
require equipment described later.
cathcterization is required to perform interventional
During catheterization, clectrical grounding and
procedures. such as balloon dilation of intracardiac or
shielding from x-radiation are essential for patient and
vascular obstructions, traiiscatheter vascular intcrvei1-
operator safcty. Cardiac catheters provide dircct path-
tions, and electrodiagnostic studies, Dircct mcasure-
ways to the heart, and current lcaks from x-ray or
ment of cardiac output and intracardiac pressures by
recording equipment have the potential to cause ar-
rhythmias or even ventricular fibrillation.
 of clinical and experimental rcscarch protocols.
PATIENT PREPARATION AND
ANESTHESIA
CONTRAINDICATIONS
Although  limited catheterization may  be accom-
 plishcd in awake or lightly scdated patients, full cathe-
'There are no absolute contraindications to cardiac
terization is usually performed under general anesthe-
catheterization cxcept for scvcrc adversc reactions to
sia (chapter 38). Routine laboratory evaluation,
anesthesia. ln gcncral, if the risk of the procedure
including a complete blood count and BUN or crcati-
 outweighs the potential benefit of thie data obtained,
nine is obtaincd prior to anesthesia. Cardliac medica-
the study is not indicated. Catheterization is not indi-
tions are often withheld on the morning of the study.
cated when an adcquate diagnosis has been made
Most sedatives and alesthetics reducc cardiac output
lloninvasivcly, cxcept as a research or instructional pro-
annd blood pressure to some degrec, annd an attempt
cedure with tlte owner's informed consent. Potcntially
should be made to minimize thcse cffects. Premedica-
severe arrhythmias or congestive hcart failure should
tion with atropine or glycopyrrolate' may be given
be uncder maximum medical control prior to the study.
along with a small dose of a narcotic or other sedative.
In addition, any correctable extracardiae conditions
'lranquilizers tend to deprcss blood pressure more
thal might. affect 1he study results or increase the risk
than narcotics. Barbiturates have less effect on cardliac
of the procedurc, espccially pulmonary diseases, bleed-
output and blood pressurc, but their use involves the
ing dlisordlcrs, hypcrthyroidlisn, anemia.
 and fluid-
risks associated with longer-acting, less rcvcrsible intra-
electrolyte-acid base abnormalities, should be treated
venous drugs. Endotrachieal intubation is advocated,
prior to the study.
and equipment for positive-prcssurc ventilation and
 oxygen administration should be available. The most
common methods use inhalation anesthesia with
CARDLAC CATHETERIZATION-
methoxyflurane, halothane, or isoflurane,3.  Close
METHODOLOGIES AND
ECG monitoring is important. Thc level of anesthesia
should he as light as possiblc to minimize the drugs?
TECHNIQUES
 hemodynamic effects, and light anesthesia just suffi-
cient to prcvent movement is usually adcquate.
Cardiac catheterization is a minor surgical proce-
EQUIPMENT
dure requiring ascptie technique. All cathcters, surgi-
cal instruments, drapes, and other equiprment that will
Cardiac: catheterization is a sophisticated procedure
contact. the operator or paticnt should be prcsterilizcd.
rcquiring spccial monitoring and rccording equip-
and the surgical site is clipped, surgically prepped,
ment. Placement of catheters and angiography are
and drapedl.
carried out under fluoroscopic guidance with image
Therc are several methods to introduce catheters
intensification to mininizc radiation exposure. The
and reach the desired chamhers and vessels.2 " Older
image is displaycd on a television monitoring system
cruder techniques, such as direct transthoracic lefft
Fither tlie table top or the x-ray unit should be adjust.
ventricular ncedle puncture, arc rarely used today. Al
able to optimize animal positioning.
most all cardiac cathcierizations are performed using
Display and recording of physiologic data are accorm-
percutaneous techniqucs or surgical exposure of pe-
plished using a multichannel amplificr-rccorder that
ripheral vessels (*'cut-down') to introduce catlieters
allows continuous clectrocardiographic (ECG) moni-
dircctly, which are then guided through the circulation
toring and recording of two or rnore parameters si-
using fluoroscopic guidancc.7-10
multaneously. Anesthesia equipment is rcquired. A
dirct-current defibrillator, emergcncy drugs, and car.
PERCUTANEOUS CATHETERIZATION
diopulmonary (CPR) cquipment should be readily
available,"* A varicty of cathcters, surgical instruments,
Percutancous  catheter  insertion (sometimes  rc-
drapes, and suture material should be presterilizcd.
ferrcd to as the Seidinger technique*) without a cut-
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION AND ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY
175
 down is used extensively in humans, but it is employed
the bands. A small incision is made int the vesse!
in animals primarily for right-sided heart. cathcteriza-
through which the catheter is inserted. 'llie proximal
tion. 'The technique begins with percutancous necdlle
band is loosened to allow passage of the catheter and
puncture of a peripheral vcin or artery and introduc-
 then clamped around the catheter and vessel to pre-
tion of a flexible guidewirc through thc needle into
vent. bleeding but loose cnough to allow easy manipula-
the vcssel. The needle is removed, leaving the wirc in
tion of thc cathctcr. When a catheter is in a blood
place. In the original techniquc, after a short, tapcred
vessel, it is flushed periodically with heparinized (l to
dilator is fed over the wire to cnlarge the path and
2 IU/ml) saline.
then removed, a tapcred cnd-hold catheter is guided
ovcr the wire into the vessel and the catheterization
proceeds, Today it is much more common to introduce
CATHETERS AND GUIDEWIRES
a commercial  dilator-sheath combination  ovcr  the
guidewire to dilate the path and to position a sclf-
Many different catheter configuratious have bcen
sealing shcath in the vessel, through which cathetcrs
designed for specific purposcs. The catheter selected
may hc easily introduced and exchanged. when the
 depends on the studies that are planned and the oper-
catheters and sheath arc removed at thc end of the
ator's expcrience and personal preferencc. A varicty
of cathetcr lengths, diamcters, and tip configurations
sure are required to prevent exccss hemorrhagc, espe-
cially after arterial puncture. Since this is usually not
(Fig. 9-l) should he available. The idcal catheter is
radiopaque for easy fluoroscopic visualization, rela-
possible to achieve casily in small animals, percutane-
 ous cathetenization is usually limited to peripheral ve-
tively nonthrombogenic, smooth cnongh to slide easily
through the vessel, flexible enough to hcnd without.
nous entry forI
right-sided lheart
cathctcrization,
kinking and reduce the risk of perforation, yet suiff
whereas peripheral arterial cntry for left-sided heart
enough so that the tip can be casily controlled by
catheterization is morc often achieved by direct arte-
rial cut-down.
manipulating the proximal catheter end. The most.
common materials used are woven Dacron and poly
ethylene.7-10
Catheters used in small animals usually range from
VASCULAR CUT-DOWN
No. 4 French (1.3 mm) to No.8 Frenuch (2.7 mm)
outside diameter and 50 to 150 cm in length.2- In
general, the largest-bore catheter that can be casily
Passagc of vascular cathctcrs in the No, 4 to 10
introduced through the peripheral vessel and maneu-
vercd to all desired positions is the best. to use, allowing
vcins. The most commonly sclccted vcssels because of
easy injection annd withdrawal with tlie least resistance.
thcir size, mobility, aund proximity to the heart arc the
carotid artcry and external jugular vein in thc neck.5. 6
Thc proximal femoral artery and vein are also used,
bu1 they lie farther from the heart and are less mobile
CATHETER SELECTION
 than those in the neck. The femoral approach may be
preferrcd for transseptal left hcart catheterization, for
When a catheter is sclected, a few gencral rules
clectrode cathcters for some electrophysiologic stud-
should be applied. Pressure may be measured withi
ies, and for some interventional studlics.
 plain cathctcrs having either an end hole, onc or more
 The tcchnique of catheter insertion is the samc at
side holes, or hoth (Fig. 9-1A). To measure pulrnonary
cithcr site. Accordingly, a small 2- to 3cm incision is
capillary wcdge pressurc, a plain end-hold catheter
made thirough the skin and subcutaneous tissue. In
(c.g., Cournand's cathetcr) or a balloon-tipped end-
the neck, the external jugular vcin, which lies in the
hole catheter (Swan-Ganz type) (Fig. 9-1A,B) is usually
superficial fal ventrolateral to thc trachea, and the
used. An end hole is also required for ay catheter
carotid artery, which lies dccpcr and dorsolateral to
insertcd ovcr a guidewirc, A multipurpose, balloon-
the trachca, are isolated by blunt dissection. The artcry
tipped, end- and side-hole thermistor catlieter (Fig.
is separated from the small internal jugular vein and
9iB) is also comimonly used to measurc pulmonary
large vagosympathctic trunk. In the hind limb, the
artery and right. atrial pressurcs and thermodilution
femoral artery, vcin, and nerve lic together just cranial
cardiac ourput in thc laboratory or in an intensive
to the pectineus muscle. The nerve is carefully sepa-
care unit. For rapid angiographic contrast injcction,
rated, and the artery and vein are separately isolated.
especially when using an automated power injector, a
To insert the catheter, the vessel is either ligated
cathcter with side holes and a closecd or tightly curved
distally or occluded by mcans of a rubbcr or elastic
tip (e.g., N1H, Lehman's ventriculography, Bcrman's
band held with a hemostat. A similar band is applied
angiographic, or pigtail) is recommcnded. Multiple,
proximally, and the vessel is tcnscd slightly berwecn
      o 
176
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
FIGURE9-1
(A)The tips of some commonly used cardiovascular catheters areillustrated.1,Straight polyethylene
tubingwith an end hole and a manually cut side hole;2,Cournand’s dacron catheterwith an end
holeonly;3,NIHangiographiccatheterwithseveral sideholesjustproximal toablunt,closed tip;
4,Lehman’sventriculography catheterwith a tapered solid butflexibletip and 2sideholes just
proximal tothe taper;5,pigtail catheterwith multiple sideholes proximal to a tightly curved tip
with anendhole;6,Swan-Ganztype ofballoon-tippedcatheterwithinflatableballooncuffattheip
andan end hole（used primarily forright-sided heart catheterization and pulmonary arterial wedge
pressure measurement);7,bipolar electrode catheter forrecording Hisbundle electrograms;8,
Telcocatheterwithmicromanometer tipforhigh-fidelityrecordingofpressure and intracardiac
phonocardiography;9,thin,bipolar electrode catheter for temporary cardiac pacing.(B)Balloon-
tipped thermodilution catheter.The three ports on theright communicate with the end hole,a side
hole several centimetersfrom the tip,and the balloon at the tip(arrow),respectively.The other2
plug connectors (T) are the electrical connections to a thermistor near the catheter tip used for
cardiac outputmeasurementby thermal indicatordilution.
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION AND ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY 177
end hole allow better dlispersion of injected contrast.
cranially to reach the right ventricular outflow tract
material, stabilize the catheter tip, and allow injection
and pulmonary artcry (Fig. 9-2C), forming a loop.
without the catheter recoil that invariably accompanics
Preforming the cathcter with curvature at. the tip facili-
rapid injection through an endl-hold catheter: In adldi-
tates this maneuver. Misdirection of the cathetcr in the
tiol1, there is reduced risk of intramyocardial injection
vena cava or atrium may result in its passage dorsally
of contrast if the catheter tip is positioned against the
into the azygos vein or caudally into the caudal vena
myocardlium.
cava or coronary sinus. The pulmonary capillary or
catheter distally into the lung until its tip is wedged
into a small pulmonary artery, occluding forward fow
GUIDEWIRE SELECTION
through the vessel (Fig. 9-2D). Alternativcly, a balloon-
tipped cathcter can be positioned in a mcdlium pulmo
Guidewires are inserted into vascular catheters to
lary artcrial branch and the balloon inflated to oc-
assist their manipulation and insertion. They are simi-
clude forward flow and record the back prcssure from
lar to wound guitar strings, consisting of a solid steel
thc pulmonary capillarics and veins (the " wedge pres-
wire core wrapped in a fine wire coil. The most com-
surc). A similar course is followed if the femoral ap-
monly uscd guicdcwires rangc in length from 125 to
 proach is used.
 260 cm, and in diameter from 0.01 to 0.38 mm. Thc
 Right-sided heart cathcterization may also bc
tip, which lacks the solid inner core and is very flexi-
achieved without. fluoroscopic visualization, primarily
ble, may be straight or curved into a sharp J shape to
 in large dogs, by using a balloon-tipped catheter (Fig.
further reduce the risk of pcrforation.
9-1B). Whcn thc balloon is inflated in the right
 Flexible guidewires arc useful for (1) maneuvering
atrium, the catheter tip tends to bc swept with thc
 a cathcter into a dcsired position more easily than if a
blood flow into the right ventriclc and pulmonary
stiffer catheter were selected; (2) straightening a
 artery. Positioning in the arium, venntricle, pulmonary
curved catheter to facilitate its insertion or maneuver-
artery, or wedge position can be confirmed by connect-
ing; (3) maintaining percutaneous vcssel access during
ing the catheter to a pressure transducer (Fig. 9-3)
catheter exchanigc; and (4) preplacement to guide
and monitoring the configuration of the pressurc
large-bore, stiff catheters. They are particularly useful
 pulse, or by a snall test injection of contrast medium.
 and cven essential for guiding balloon dilation cathe-
Nornal right-sided heart pressures are shown in Figure
ters, which arc typically stiff and wide, espccially in
9-4 and Table 9-1.
thc region of the balloon. Also available are steerahle
guidcwircs that have a proximal control mechanism
that allows the operator to control the flexion of the
tip. These may be advantageous in very small paticnts
LEFT-SIDED HEART CATHETERIZATION
 in which mancuvering room in the heart is very lim-
ited.
PERIPIIERAL ARTERIAL APPROACTI
Left-sided   heart.  catheterization  is  accomplishcd
through a carotid or femoral artery Because of the
RIGHT-SIDED HEART
high arterial blood pressure, cxtra care must be takenn
CATHETERIZATION
to cnsure that the occluding bands placcd on these
Right-sided  heart  cathetcrization  is  accomplishcd
through an cxternal jugular or fcmoral vein. Whether
TABLE 9-1
the right or left side is uscd and whether thc animal
 Normal Intracardiac and Intravascular Pressures
faces left or right is a matter of personnal preference.
(mmHg) in Small Aninals
Bccausc of the low venous blood pressure, littlc physi-
Site
Systolic
Diastolic
Mcan
cal pressure is rcquired from the occluding bands
placed on the vessel to prevcnt hemorrhage.
.After
RA
(±2)
achicving vascular access and catheter introduction,
RV
25 (±5)
0-5
IA
25 (±5)
10 (±3)
15 ( ±5)
thc animal's thorax is positioned in the fluoroscopic
PA wcdgc
6(±2)
4(±2)
5(÷2)
beam field for further guidance.
V1
LV
120 (±20)
810
From the jugular venous approach (Fig. 9-2A-D).
Aorta
120 (±20)
90 (±10)
100 (±10)
the catheter is advanced down the jugular vein,
Femoral artcry
130 (±20)
(01+) 06
100 (± 10)
through tlie cranial vena cava, and into thc right
atrium (Fig. 9-2A). ln the atriunn, the tip is directed
Note: These yalues represent annas under intrayenus pentarbal ans
thesia. Somewhat lower values are common in animals given other preanes-
ventrally into the right ventricle (Fig. 9-2B) and then
thelice and anesthelie agents.
FIGURE9-2
(A-D)Right-sided heart catheterizationvia theexternal jugularveinis illustrated.Usingfluoroscopic
guidance,the catheteris advanced through the cranial vena cava into the right atrium (A),then
ventrally through the tricuspid valve into theright ventricle(B).From theRV the cathetermust turn
cranially into theRV outlow tract,then dorsally through the pulmonary valve into the proximal
pulmonary artery (C).The pulmonary wedge position is reached by advancing the catheter farther
into a smaller pulmonary artery (D).(E-H)Lef heart catheterization via the carotid artery is illustrated.
The catheter tip isguidedretrograde through the brachiocephalic trunk into the aortic arch,then
dorsally into the descending aorta (E) or ventrally into the ascending aorta (F) and through the
aortic valveinto theleft ventricle(G).Although dificult to achieve invery small patientsthe
catheter tipmaybe guided dorsally through the mitral valve into the left atrium (H).Compare these
positionswith the angiograms inFigures9-11 and9-12.
178
CARDIACCATHETERIZATIONANDANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY
179
FIGURE9-3
Examples of Statham pressure transducers.The larger
model3Db,isusefulormallandlargeanimals,
whereas the smallermodel,p37B,ismorefragile and
used mainly forvery smallanimals.Pressure is
measured by connecting the endof thefluid-filled
transducerdomehorizontallyto thefluid-filled
intravascular catheter toforma closed,gas-freefuid
connection between thecatheter tip and transducer
sensing diaphragm.
vessels aretight and stable enoughtopreventhemor-
gradepassage through the aorticvalve,including Leh
rhage during catheter manipulations.
man's ventriculography andpigtailcatheters (Fig.
From the cervical approach (Fig. 9-2E-H), the cath-
9-1).7-1o Ventricular arrhythmias are commonly in-
eterisadvancedthroughthebrachiocephalictrunk
ducedbythecathetertipintheleftventricle,andthe
and into the aortic arch. By turning the tip dorsally
ECGshouldbecontinuouslymonitoredtodetectand
or ventrally,the catheter can be directed into the
avoid serious arrhythmias.Becauseof the difficulty
descending (Fig.9-2E) or ascending (Fig.9-2F) aorta,
passing a catheterretrogradethrough themitral valve,
respectively.In the aortic root, the catheter tip tends
theleft atrium isnotroutinely catheterized.However,
to deflect off theaorticvalve cuspsinto the sinusesof
usingaflexibleandslightlycurvedcatheter turned
Valsalva.Repeatedback-and-forth movements timed to
dorsallyintheventricle,theleft atrium may be entered
advancethecatheterduringventricular systoleusually
(Fig. 9-2H).
result in passage through the valve into the leftventri-
Left-sided heart catheterization is usually more dif-
cle(Fig.9-2G).If the catheterhas an endhole,use of
ficult from the femoral approach because of the
a J-tipped guidewire may assistin this maneuver.Sev-
greater distance involved and the curvature of the
eralcatheters havebeendesignedtofacilitateretro-
aortic arch,which reduce the operator's control over
A
PA
>RV
RA
FIGURE9-4
30
(A)Normal right-sided heart pressures during withdrawal of a
BH
catheterfrom thepulmonary artery(PA)into theright ventricle
20
(RV) and right atrium (RA).As the catheter tip crosses the
pulmonary valve,the early diastolic pressure drops tonear zero in
the rightventricle.The peak systolic pressure in the PA and RVis
10
the same (22mmHg),with no pressure gradient across the normal
valve.The RV end-diastolic pressure (EDP = 4 to 5 mmHg)is
measured after atrial systole,justbefore therapidupstrokeof
D
EDF
ventricular systole（arrow).As the catheter tip crosses the tricuspid
valve,thesystolic pressure also drops toa lowlevel.In theRA,the
B
awave s due to atrial contraction,and thevwaverepresents atrial
filling during later ventricular systole.Themean RA pressure is3
PA
mmHg.(B)Pulmonary artery pressurerecorded simultaneously by
30
a fluid-filled catheter system anda high-fidelity catheter-tip
-fluid
manometer system.Note the smoother,high-fidelity tracing and
the exaggeratedpeaks and fluctuation on thefluid-filled catheter
tracing (see text for details).
180 DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
the catheter tip. Passage into tie left ventricle may be
tion is an auial or ventricular arrhythmia, usually pre-
facilitated using a pigtail cathieter and/or a J-tipped
mature beats or transient ventricular tachiycardia, in
guidewire.
duced by catheter contact of sensitive endocardium,
All especially sensitive area for catheter-induced ven-
tricular arrhythmias is the right ventricular ouflow
TRANSSEPTALAPPROACH
tract. These usually subside when the catheter is with-
Arl alternative but infrequently used method to cath-
drawn or repositioned, but lidocaine administration
eterize thic left atrium and ventricle utilizes the atrial
may be indicated if ventricular ectopy is marked and
transseptal approach.7-1o Using a femoral vein ap-
persistent. Right bundle branch block may also be
proach, a specially designcd long needle with a gently
induced when a right-sided heart cathcter (especially
curved tip is passed thirought an end-hole catheter to
a large, balloon dilation catheter) is manipulated
the junction of the caudal vena cava and righit atrium.
through the right ventricular outflow region, due to
The needle is advanced to protrude heyond the tip of
trauma to thic righit bundle branch within the thin
the catheter, aimed rmedially toward the atrial septum,
moderator band. This usually subsides within rminutes
and then fluoroscopically positioned against thie fossa
to a few hours, but permanent bundle branch block
ovalis in the caudal right atrium. The needle is thcn
occasionally results. Intimal damage and thrombosis
advanced through the interatrial septum into the left
may occur in cathieterized vessels, but this is usually of
atrium, and the positioning is confirmed by contrast
litte consequence. Post-operative complications at the
injection or by demonstrating a high oxygen content
incision site may include hemorrhage, infection, or
in a blood sample. A guidewire can then be passed
seroma formation, which rarely requires drainage.
through the necdle and used to guide other catheters
Serious. potentially life-threatening complications,
into the left atrium and ventricle after necdle removal.
although uncommon in an experienced laboratory.
Transseptal puncture may also be accomplished using
may include ventricular fibrllation, cardiac or vascular
the jugular vein approach. The transseptal approach
perforation, valve damage, intramyocardial contrast in-
is most valuable in conditions in which the left atrium
jection, and catheter breakage and embolus.4. 15-17
and ventricle cannot be reached by retrograde cathc-
Myocardial infarclion, a significant risk in humans, is
terization (e.g., mitral stenosis or severe aortic steno
cxtrermely rare in anirmals. Occasionally, a catheter-
sis).
induced ventricular arrhythmia may progress to ven-
tricular fibrillation. Emergency drugs and a defibrilla-
tor should always be nearby during any invasive cardiac
RECOVERY AND AFTERCARE
study. Overzealous catheler manipulation may result
in perforation of the myocardium or a large vessel.
 Following completion of appropriate studies, cathe
resulting in thoracic hemorrhage or acute cardiac tan-
ters are removed and the vessels are repaired or li-
ponade. A catheter should never be forced agains1.
gated, depending on the vessel size, degree of damage
an obstruction. Lse of flexible, preformed catheters,
incurred, length of the procedure, and ability of the
judicious use of guidewires, and gentle manipulation
 operator. Free bleeding should occur from hoth proxi-
can minimize this risk. Vigorous catheter manipulation
mal and distal portions of a vcssel to he repaired.
can also perforate or lacerate a cardiac valve, especially
Fortunately, because of the prescnce of collateral
 during retrograde catheterization or balloon catheter
paths, the jugular vein, carotid artery, and femoral
dilation. Particular care is required whien passing a
artery and vein may be safely ligated in dogs and cats.
catheter retrograde through the delicate aortic valve.
Wound closure and aftercare are routine. Perioperative
Complications  associated   with  angiocardiography
antibiotics are not recommended unless the procedure
are uncommon in cxperienced laboratories.u. i3. ts. 19
 is long or the sterility is comproimised.
Transient hypotension is cormmon following angiogra-
phy, and the risk of severe hypotension, bradycardia,
and acute heart failure is increased in patients with
COMPLICATIONS
severe acquired pulmonary hypertension. Intramyocar
dial injection of contrast medium can occur, usually
 In experienccd hands and with proper precautions,
when a power injector is used with an cud-hole cathe-
serious complications during or after cardiac catheter-
ter or with any catheter wedged into ventricular trahec-
ization are uncommon. iis Risk is definitely
in
ulae. Use of closed tip, sidc-hole cathcters for angiogra-
creased in the presence of hcart failure, and risks also
 phy and confirming catheter tip positioning by small
tend to increase in proportion to procedure length,
test injections of contrast by hand usually prevents this
disease severity, and aggressivencss of the procedure
complication. Cathieters that are intended for reuse
(e.g., balloon dilation).
shiould also be inspected after every use for cracks,
Complications may be minor and transient or major
kinks, or weakened areas, cspecially near thie tip, to
 and scrious.'5 The most common transient complica-
prevent breakage and embolization.
CARDLAC CATHETERIZATION AND ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY
181
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION
sures), usually standardized at the midsternal level in
 a laterally recumhcnl animal.
STUDIES
 3. The frequency response of the enuire system must
be appropriate, For intravascular pressures, a relatively
flat, linear (± 5 percent) frequency response (output
The commonest studies performed include pressure
vs. input) up to the frequcncy of the first 10 harmonics
measurements, blood sampling for oximetry, indicator
(approximately 20 Hz) of the fundamental frequency
dilution low studies, and angiocardiography3 -1 L.ess
of the pressure wave is required.
commonly, intracardiac phonocardiography, intracar-
diac elcctrogran recording and pacing studies, and
Every catheter-transducer system has iis own natural
interventional studies (e.g., balloon dilation valvulo-
frequency at which thie system resonates and overam-
plasty, transvenous coil occlusion) are performed.
plifies the signal. That frequency should be highcr
than 20 1Iz to avoid accentuation of the higher fre-
quency conponents of the pressure signal and
"overshoot'-type artifacts. Damping of higher frequen-
PRESSURE MEASUREMENTS
cies is oflen necessary to limit this type of artifact.
However, if the system is overdamped, the higher-fre-
[ntracardiac hydrostatic pressure is thie most com-
quency components of the pressure signal are dlimin-
mon hemodynamic measurencnt  made at cardiac
ished and smaller, morc rapid pressure fluctuations are
lost, altering the peak systolic and diastolic portions of
studies, including pressure measurements, should be
the tracing. Common causes of overdamping include
air bubbles in the system, clots in thc catheter tip,
anesthiesia to minimize the ncgative hiemodynamie ef-
fluid leaks, a catheter that is too narrow or too long
fects of these agents. While microimanometer-tipped
for the volume of the transducer, and other hindrances
catheters provide lag-free and nearly artifact-free pres-
1o free fluid movement (e.g., kinked catheter, paruially
sure recording (Fig. 94B), they are expensive and
closed stopcock). The commonly employed No, 4 1o 8
fragile. The most. common system used in clinical
 French cathetcr-transducer systems, although inade-
studies is the fluid-filled cathieter coupled to an cxter-
quate for recording high-frequency events (suchi as
nal strain gauge transducer-amplifier-recorder system
ventricular dp/dt [rate of chiange of pressure]), are
(Figs. 9-1, 9-3).
usually satisfactory for recording conventional clinical
There are several principles to consider when mea-
suring pressure with a fluid-filled catheter-transduccr
pressures.
Pressure is recorded from cach chamber entered
system.*-! The transdlucer consisis of a pressure-sensi-
during the procedure. Before recording the first pres-
tive membrane or diaphragm inside the fuid-filed
sure, the zero reference point and system calibration
chamber with one or two outlet connections (Fig. 9-3).
are rechecked and the catheler is flushied. The calhe-
Changing pressure at the catheter tip is transmitted by
ter tip should be free in the lumen of thie vessel or
small Huid movemenis through the catheter directly to
 chamber (except in the wedge position) 1o prevent
the trausducer chamber When this pressure change is
occlusion of the hole(s) during part of the cardiac
applied to the diaphragrn, changes in electrical resis-
Cycle, which is especially common with end-hole cathe-
lance proportional to the pressure causc voltage
changes in a circuit beneath the diaphragm. The trans-
ters. Ihe catheter tip should also be as stable as possi-
ducer thereby converis the intravascular pressure sig-
ble to avoid motion artifact ('catheter whip"), which
is especially common in tracings from the pulmonary
nal into a proportional voltage signal that can be cali-
 artery. On the venous (right) side, the pulmonary
brated, displayed on an oscilloscope, and recorded on
wedge pressure is measured as described earlier, using
paper or tapc. For the system to display the catheter
an end-hole or balloon-tipped catheter. By occluding
tip pressure accurately, the following criteria must be
forward Hlow, the end hole measures the back pressure
me:t:8-11
from the pulmonary capillaries, veins, and left atriun.
1. The transduccr rmust. accurately calibrate and zero
The tracing reseimbles left atrial pressure (a and v
 properly compared with a ncrcury rmanormeter, and its
waves may or may nol be discernible) and is slightly
response must be linear over the range of intravascular
 lower than the pulmonary artery diastolic pressure.
pressures, The zero level should he checked frequently
The cathetcr is then withidrawn successively into the
during the procedure to compensate for baseline drift,
 pulnonary artery, right ventricle, and atriurn. It is
usually caused by temperature changes in the trans-
common to cncounter ventricular extrasystoles whien
ducer dome.
the catheter tip crosses the pulmonary valve into the
2. The catheter tip and trausducer must be at the
righ1 ventricular outflow tract. On the arterial (left)
      
side, pressure is recorded during withdrawal of the
measuring low atrial and ventricular diastolic pres-
catheter tip from the left ventricle into the aorta. A
182DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
catheterwith asingleendorsideholeismostusefulif
both the magnitude and location of an abrupt pressure
A
11/11/11
change(pressure gradient) arebeing studied.
PA
RV
RA
100
CARDIOVASCULARPRESSUREVALUES
80
86mmHggradient
三
Normalcardiacpressures are listed and illustrated
09
(Table 9-1; Figs. 9-4, 9-5).11 Arterial pressure tracings
in the normal animal have a peak systolicpressure,a
dicroticnotch associatedwithsemilunarvalve closure,
and a minimum diastolicpressure.The pulmonary
artery diastolic pressure should be very close to the
leftventricularend-diastolicpressure.In theventricle,
B
the systolic pressure is the same as in the correspond-
PA
RV
>RA
ing artery,but the diastolic pressure is similar to atrial
pressure and close to zero.The end-diastolicventricu-
lar pressure is measured after atrial contraction at the
junctionbetween thea(atrialcontraction)wave and
the rapid,early systolic upstroke.The atrial pressure
tracing is onlya few millimeters of mercury and has
two consistentpositive waves,a and u(late systole),
followed by the downslopes x and y, respectively.
Relativelyfewmajor changes in the normal pressure
PA
>RV
>RA
40
profiles arecommonlyrecordedinpatientswithheart
disease.2- Examples of abnormal pressure tracings
fromanimalswithright-sidedandleft-sidedheartdis-
eases are illustrated (Figs. 9-6, 9-7; see also Figs. 241,
24-11, 24-20, 24-21; Figs. 29-1, 29-13,29-14, 29-21,
29-22).Abnormalities of systolic pressure occur pri-
marilywhenthereis anincreasedresistancetoventric-
ular outflow.Discreteflowobstructions anywherein
the circulation are characterized by the presence of a
FIGURE9-6
pressure gradient during flow across the obstruction.
Abnormal right-sided heart pressure tracings.(A) Dogwith
Discrete ventricular outflow obstructions are diag-
congenital pulmonic stenosis.The pulmonary artery pressure is
normalbut thereis anabrupt increase in the systolicpressure as
nosedby demonstrating a systolicpressure gradient
the catheter tipiswithdrawn across thevalve into theright
ventricle (compare with Fig. 9-4A).The systolic pressure gradient
is 86mmHg,indicating a moderately severe stenosis at the
pulmonary valve level.Themean right atrial pressure is normal （4
to5mmHg),but the awave is slightly increased because of the
associated right ventricle (RV) hypertrophy. (B)Dog with moderate
pulmonaryhypertension.The systolic,diastolic,andmean
LA
LV
Ao
pulmonary artery(PA)pressures are increased.The systolic
160
pressureisalso increased in theRV,and there isnogradient
across thepulmonary valve.TheRVend-diastolic pressure is
120
increased(12 to 15mmHg),and the right atrial a wave is also
prominent.(C)Dog with tricuspid valve regurgitation.ThePA
80
pressure and the RV systolic pressure are normal.TheRVend-
diastolic pressure is slightly increased (8 to 9mmHg).The mean
40
right atrium (RA)pressure is slightly increased (7 mmHg),and the
av
uwave is increased (17mmHg) and dominant.
EDP
FIGURE9-5
Normal lef-sidedheart pressures duringwithdrawal of a catheter
across the obstruction,which may be valvular, subvalvu-
from the left atrium (LA) through the left ventricle (LV)into the
lar, or supravalvular, and may be fixed or dynamic.1.7-11
aorta (Ao). The LA tracing is similar to that in the RA (Fig.9-4).
Figures9-6A and 9-7A demonstratetypical systolic
In the LV,the end-diastolic pressure (EDP= 8mmHg) is slightly
gradients from dogs with valvular pulmonic stenosis1s
higher than in the RV (Fig. 9-4).As the catheter tip crosses the
aortic valve,the diastolic pressure increases (105mmHg）.The
and subvalvular aortic stenosis,9respectively.Atrioven-
peak systolic pressure in the Ao and LV is the same (140 mmHg),
tricular valve obstructions(rare)are similarly charac-
with no pressure gradient across the normal valve.The sharp
deflection at the dicroticnotch of thefirst aorticpressure pulseis
terizedbyapressuregradientbetweenthe atrium and
an artifact caused by the aortic valve impacting on the catheter tip.
ventricleduringdiastole.2oDiseases thatdiffuselyin-
CARDIACCATHETERIZATIONANDANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY
183
creaseperipheral systemicvascularresistance orpul-
Abnormalitiesofdiastolicpressureoccurfrequently
monary vascular resistance result in increases in the
in advanced cardiac diseases.The development of con-
corresponding mean arterial pressure(systemichyper-
gestive heart failure is marked by an increase in the
tension or pulmonary hypertension,2 respectively) and
ventricularend-diastolicpressureintheaffectedventri-
identical increases in the corresponding arterial and
cle(s),8-11regardless of whether heart failure results
ventricular systolic pressure (Fig.9-6B;note that there
from myocardial contractile failure,severe volume
is no systolic pressure gradient across the semilunar
overload,or diastolicimpairmentfrom myocardial or
valve in this case).
pericardial disease. An example of increased left ven-
tricular end-diastolicpressurefroma dogwith myocar-
dialfailurecausedbyidiopathicdilatedcardiomyopa-
A
thy is shown in Figure 9-7B. The configuration of the
diastolic ventricular and/or atrial pressure tracing may
LV
200
indicate thetype of underlying abnormality.For exam-
160
ple, atrioventricular valve regurgitation causes an in-
95mmHg gradient
120
creaseinthemid-to-latesystolicvwaveinthecorres-
80
ponding atrium. Figures 9-6C and 9-7C demonstrate
40
the increased end-diastolicpressure and increasedu
wave from dogs with marked tricuspid regurgitation
and mitral regurgitation,respectively.Conditions that
increase theresistance to ventricular filling cause an
B
increased end-diastolic pressure and a predominantly
increasedatrialawave.Whenthisiscausedbyreduced
120
ventricular compliance(increasing stiffness)due to
myocardial hypertrophy,fibrosis,or infiltration,the
100
80
leftventricleisoftenmost affected,and theleftventric-
60
ular diastolic pressure is usually greater than that in
40
the right ventricle.When the filling restriction is
20
causedbyincreasedpericardialconstraint(pericardial
effusion or fibrosis),both ventricles are usually af-
D
EDP
fected equally,and there are equivalent and synchro-
C
nous increases inthe diastolicpressures of bothventri-
cles.8-11,22
LV
LA
100
80
CARDIACOUTPUT(FLOW)
MEASUREMENT
E
60
40
Theotherprimaryhemodynamicvariablemeasured
during catheterizationisblood flow,usually expressed
as cardiac output (L/min) or cardiac index (L/min/
D-
EDP
kg or L/min/m²).The twomost commonmethods
usedforflowmeasurementareoximetryandindicator
FIGURE9-7
dilution.8-11
Abnormal left-sided heart pressure tracings.(A) Dog with
congenital subaortic stenosis.The systolic pressure in the body of
the left ventricle(LV)is increased (185mmHg).As the catheter tip
OXIMETRY
iswithdrawnfrom the LV,thereis an abrupt decrease in systolic
pressure while the catheter is still in the LV (pressure gradient =
95mmHg)indicatingasubvalvularobstruction.Further catheter
Withdrawal of blood samples during cardiac cathe-
withdrawal across theaorticvalve showsno systolicgradient at the
terization is done primarily for determination of oxy-
valve level.(B)Dog with dilated cardiomyopathyand congestive
gencontent(vol%,ml/dlandml/L)or percent
heart failure.TheLV end-diastolic pressure (EDP) is elevated (19
to 20 mmHg),whereas systolic pressure remains normal.The
notch at the peak of LV pressure is a commonfluid-filled catheter
rectlyrelated tothehemoglobin content of theblood
artifact.(C)Dogwith congenital mitral valve dysplasia,atrial
by thefollowingformula:
fibrillation,and severemitral regurgitation.TheLV systolic
pressure is normal.The LV end-diastolic pressure is elevated (18 to
19mmHg).The mean left atrium (LA) pressure is increased (25
Osaturation（%）=
mmHg),and thevwave is markedly increased(41 mmHg)and
dominantNote that there isno awave on either theLVor LA
Ocontent(ml O2/dl blood)
tracings because of atrial fibrillation andloss of atrial contractions.
Hemoglobin (gmHb/dl blood) × 1.34(ml O2/gmHb)
184 DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
The numerator is the measured oxygen content of thie
right atrial and ventricular, and pulmonary arterial
blood sanple, while the denominator is the theoretical
blood is comparauively desaturated (70% to 80%). In
 oxygen-carrying capacity of the sample based on the
most animals, the Og saturation of caudal vena caval
hemoglobin content and the oxygen-carrying capacity
blood is slighuly higher than cranial vena caval blood.
of normal hemoglobin. In practice, direct measure-
and mixing begins in the right atriurn. Oxygen satura-
 ment of oxygen saturation is generally easier and faster
tion is determined in blood samples from the cranial
than the methods used to determine oxygen content
and caudal venae cavae, righit atrium, right ventricle,
directly. Percent saturation may also be deterrmined by
and pulmonary artery. Because of incomplete mixing
measuring the partial pressure of oxygen (POg) in the
and the crrors inherent in sampling and mcasurerment,
a difference of up to 3 percent cannot be considered
 oxygen dissociation curve for hemoglobin. Samples for
significant. Any increase in O, saturation 5 percent or
greater within the right heart chambers signifies a
inized syringes; air bubbles are expelled; syringes are
left-to-right shunt proximal to the sampling site. Thie:
capped and kept in an ice bath until analyzed.
location of thie shunt is determined by the position of
Cardiac output can be determined by the Fick princi-
thie step-up in saturation, and the magnitude of the
ple," which states that if a measurable suhstance is
shnunt can be estimated (expressed as thie pulmonary/
continuously added to or removed from thc hlood by
systermic flow ratio Qp/Qs) directly by the size of the
an organ, thcn the blood flow through the organ
increase, using the following formula:
cquals the amoumt of substance added or removed per
SaO, - MVOy
unit of time, divided by the arteriovenous difference
Qp/Qs =
in the concentration of the substance. For measuring
SaO, - PaO2
 cardiac output, the organ is the lung and the substance.
added is oxygen. The A-V O, clifference (ml O2/dl
where SaOz, Pas, and MVO, are thc systeinic arterial,
blood) is found by measuring Oy content of mixed
pulmonary artery, and mixed venous (righ1 atrium or
venous blood sampled from the pulmonary artery
venae cavae) oxygen contents or saturations, respec-
(after mixing of the vena caval and coronary venous
tively. In similar fashion, left ventricular, ascending.
returns in the right atrium and ventricle) and systeinic
and descending aortic blood oxygen content or satura-
arterial blood (assumed to be similar to pulmonary
tion can detect a right-to-left shunt by a fall in satura-
venous O content). Oxygen consumption (ml/min)
tion somewhere along the path of the normally highly
is measured by comparing the Og content of the in-
saturated (≥95%) arterial blood. Because of the re-
spired air to that. of a timed expircd air sainple col-
quirement for a 5 percent or greater change in O2
lected through a spirometer into a collecting bag. Pul-
content or saturation to detect a shunt, this method is
monary blood flow (which in the absence of any shunts
 only effective in detecting shunts of at least 20 percent
of the systermic (left-to-right) or pulmonary (right-to-
is cqual to systemic flow or cardiac output) is then
calculated by thie Fick forinula:
left) low. In anirmals, the method is useful only if the
paticnt is breathing room air, a drawhack to its routine:
clinical use in anesthetized patients.
Cardiac output (L/min) =
Oxygen consumption (ml/nin)
INDICATORDILUTION
Systenic arterial
Pulnonary arterial
X10
O, content (Vol%)
O, content (Vol%)
The principle of indicator (dye) dilution is an adap-
tation of the Fick principle." In this technique, an
A major drawback of the techmique in animals is the
cxternal indicator substance is injected into the flow-
neccssity for the use of general anesthiesia (which usu-
ing blood upstrean, and its concentration is continu-
 ally involves inhalation of gas, which is very high in
 ously measured downstrean. 1f the amount of indica-
O, content and completely saturates the blood and
tor injected is known and its average concentration as
invalidates the method for practical use), and the cum-
it passes the sampling site can he deterrmined, the rate
bersome requirements for determining oxygen con-
 of blood flow can be calculated. In equation form the
sumption.
relationship is
The presence and magnitude of left-to-right or right-
to-left shunts can also be determined by measuring the
Q (flow rate) =
 Oy content or saturation in a series of samples drawn
[ (quantity of indicator injected)
sequentiaily from the heart chamhers and great ves-
C (mean concentration) X t (passagc time)
sels.1 Normal pulmonary venous, left atrial and ven-
tricular, and systemic arterial blood is highly saturated
By injecuing the indicator into the systemic venous
(approximately 95%) in the absence of significant pul-
blood (usually the right atriurn) and sarnpling dowu-
monary disease. In contrast, normal systemic venous,
stream from the heart (usually the pulmonary artery
CARDIACCATHETERIZATIONANDANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY185
oraperipheral artery),cardiac output canbe ob
tained.
A number of different indicators and sampling sys-
temshave been employed,includingphotometric de-
tection ofvarious dyes,electrodedetection ofhydro-
gen or concentrated saline,and thermistor detection
n
of cold solute.Therequirements for a successful indi-
cator substance are:(1) it should be nontoxic,nonme-
tabolized,readilyinjectedand completely miscible
e
with blood;(2）it should mix completely and uni-
n
formly with the blood prior to sampling; (3) it should
not be added to or subtracted from the blood during
initial passage between the injection and sampling
n
sites; and (4)it must be easily and rapidly detected by
C
a downstream detecting device.Thisusually requires
at least one mixing chamber (ventricle)between in-
jection and sampling sites.
Prior tothe1980s themostcommonlyemployed
indicatorwasindocyaninegreendyemeasuredbya
photometricdensitometer.Today themost common
system is thermodilution,which uses cold saline or
Time
F
dextroseastheindicator and a thermistor(amaterial
FIGURE 9-8
whoseresistancevarieswithtemperature)asthedetec-
tor. Although the methodology is somewhat different,
Normal indicator dilution curverecordedfollowing injection of
indocyanine green dyeinto theright atrium andcontinuous
theprinciples are the same for each system.8-11
withdrawalofbloodfrom thefemoralartery.Thedeflection height
represents the concentration of green dye in theblood passing the
sampling site during the time followinginjection.The typical curve
INDOCYANINE GREEN DYE DILUTION.The injection site
ischaracterizedby a delayprior to theinitial appearance of the
is usually the vena cava or right atrium. The sampling
dye (A), a rapid upstroke (U) to a peak concentration (PC), and an
exponential downslope (D)interrupted by recirculation (R).To
siteisusually the aorta ora moreperipheral artery.
complete the primary curve,the downslope is extrapolated (E),
The arterial catheteris connectedtoa densitometric
assuming continued exponential disappearance.The area under
cuvette whose filter provides light in the wavelength
the primary curve isused to compute cardiac output.
Thermodilution curves appear similar except that the exponential
range of the dye's peak spectral absorption (800 mp).
downslope continues to thebaselinewithout a recirculation phase.
This is connected to a constant-ratewithdrawal pump.
The pump is started, and as blood is drawn through
the cuvette,a baseline (representing the light transmis-
significantly alter thehemodynamics thatareunder
sion through theblood) is obtained.A known amount
study.
of freshly prepared green dye is injected as a bolus
into the venous catheter. After a short delay (the ap-
THERMODILUTION.This method uses a multilumen
pearance time)a curve,representing the reduction in
catheterwiththreeportsconnectedtoadistalend
lighttransmissionthroughtheblooddueto absorption
hole (positioned in the pulmonary artery), a proximal
by the dye, is inscribed with a typical rapid upstroke to
side hole(positioned in the right atrium),and the
a peak (build-up time), exponential downslope, and
balloon tip, and an electrical connection to a sampling
recirculationwithgradualreturn toward thebaseline
thermistor near the tip (alsoin the pulmonary artery).
(Fig. 9-8). After inscription of the curve, the with-
A known volume and temperature of iced saline or
drawn blood can be re-infused.The curve is calibrated
dextrose (usually 3 to 5 ml) is injected into the right
by serially drawing dye samples of known concentra-
atrium through theproximal port and sampled by
tionthroughthedensitometercuvettetocorrelate
the thermistor in the pulmonary artery.The inscribed
deflectionheight inmillimeters to concentration in
curve is similar to that for indocyanine green dye (Fig.
mg/ml. Today the process of calibration, extrapolation
9-8), except that the temperature indicator is rapidly
of the downslope of the primary curve,and measure-
lost during peripheral vascular transit, and there is no
mentofthemeanconcentration(area under thepri-
recirculation portion of the curve. The advantages of
mary curve)are performed automaticallyby a small
thermodilutionincludeits safety,rapidreturn tobase
computer.The major drawback of this technique in
line,and lack of indicator build-up during the study,
small animals is thenecessity of withdrawing significant
allowing for rapid repetition of as many injections
volumes of blood through the densitometer cuvette,
as needed.
which is hazardous in very small patients and also may
Cardiacoutputisdeterminedfromtheinscribed
186DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
curve as follows:from theformula shownearlier, out-
Indicator dilutionmayalsobeused toidentifyintra-
put is calculated from the amount of indicator injected
cardiacandextracardiacshunts inpatients with con-
and the curve area.The denominator is,in fact,the
genital heart diseasell (Fig. 9-9). By selecting appro-
integral or area under theprimary curve,which is
priate injection and sampling sites,both left-to-right
found by extrapolating the downslope of the primary
andright-to-leftshuntsmaybedetected andlocalized.
curvetocorrecttheinscribedcurveforrecirculation
Using an aortic or peripheral arterial sampling site,
of the indicator (Fig. 9-9). This may be performed
any right heart chamber injection should appear after
manually,but todaymost studies usecompactcardiac
a delay of 3 to5 seconds.Early appearance of the
output computers that rapidly perform the extrapola-
indicator, recorded as a premature rise on the in-
tion and integration and compute the cardiac output
scribedcurveprior totheprimary curve,indicates a
within seconds.The method is useful in animals and
right-to-left shunt distal to the injection site (Fig.9-9,
can be used regardless of the type of anesthesia em-
top). The shunt can be localized by recording a series
ployed. Since blood withdrawal is not required, ther-
of curvesduringsuccessivelymore distal injectionsites
modilution may be adapted and used on very small
(right atrium,right ventricular inflow region,right
animalswith comparative safety.
ventricular outlow region, main pulmonary artery,
VSD-Right-to-left shunt
FIGURE9-9
Abnormal indicator dilution curves.Top: Curves recorded from
a sampling siteinthedescending aortaafterinjection of dyeat
the indicated sitesina dogwitharight-to-lef shunting
(smallarrous）prior tothe primary curve(P)afterright atrium
(RA)andright ventricle(RV)injection,butnot after pulmonary
artery(PA）injection,localizing the shuntto theventricular
(LV)injection.Bottom:Curvesrecorded froma dogwitha lef-to
VSD-Left-to-right shunt
right shunting ventricular septal defect.(A)After RA injection,
the dye appears afteranormal appearance time,inscribing the
A
primary curve.Theprolonged,gradual downslopewithout a
separaterecirculationphaseisdueto earlyrecirculation ofdye
passing through the shunt andreappearing sooner at the
arterial sampling site.(B-D) These curves were recorded by
samplingfrom thepulmonary artery followinginjectionof dye
at theindicated siteDyeappearsprematurelyinthePAafr
left atrium (LA)and LV injection butnot after ascending aorta
(AA), localizing the shunt to the ventricular level.
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION AND ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY
187
and distal pulmonary artery) until the dye no longer
CONTRAST AGENTs. All the available injectable radio-
 appears premaurely when the injection site is distal to
 graphic contrast agents used for angiography contain
the shunt. Detection of left-to-right shiunts is more
iodine as the x-ray absorbing element, and they are
problematic using venous injection and aortic sam-
 divided into ionic agents and non-ionic agenis, based on
pling sites, The resulting curve shows a somewhat.
their behavior in solution.8-10. 35. 36 The older ionic
lower peak delection and a prolonged, gradual disap-
agents (e.g., Renografin, Hypaque, and Angiovist) of-
pearance slope due to early recirculation of dye
len use diatrizoate as the anionic iodine carrier and
through the shunt (Fig. 9-9, bottom, A). Unfortunately,
Couple this with cationic sodiun and megluminc. The
patients with low cardiac output (e.g., heart failure) or
newer non-ionic agents (e.g., Omnipaque, Isovue, Opt-
moderate valvular insufficiency (e.g., mitral regurgita-
iray) do not ionize in solution and provide a higher
tion) may also have venous dye curves with low pcaks
concentration of iodine per volune and a lower osino-
and prolonged, gradual downslopes.
. Localization of
lality than the ionic agents, However, they are also
the shunt is also more dlifficult, requiring sampling in
significantly more costly than the ionic producis. All
a pulmonary artery branch for premature indicator
agents provide good to excellent cardiovascular con-
appearancc after successive injections into the leff
trast. in the heart and blood vessels.
atrium, left ventricle, and aortic root (Fig. 9-9, bottom).
Adverse effecis of intravascular contras1 include vaso-
 Bothi oximetry and indicator dilution are still used in
dilation (hypotension), arrhythmias, increased throm-
human cardiac cathieterization lahoratories for cardiac
 bosis, and nephrotoxicity; most appear 1o be directly
oulpul. determination, and oximetry is still used to
correlated with the contras1 agent's osmolality" The
 help quantify shunts. In small animal practice 1oday.
principal advantage of the non-ionic agents lies in
left-to-right and right-to-left shunts are 1most. often
their lower osmolality and reduced side effects. Despite
identifed and localized by Doppler echocardiogra-
this advantage, the ionic agents have a good safety
phy and contrast echocardiography, respectively (chap-
record and are still used in many patients with stable
ter 8).
heart disease, The non-ionic agents should he consid-
ered for use in highier-risk patients (myocardial failurc,
 pulmonary hypertension, unstable hemodynanics)
 and in any patient. that experiences a severe adverse
ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY
reaction to an ionic agent.
Angiography of tie heart and great vessels has hcen
uscd on literally millions of humans with cardiovascu-
CARDIAC ANGIOGRAMS
lar disease ovcr the past 30 to 40 years and is still
considered to be the gold standard for many cardiac
NONSELECTIVE ANGIOGRAPHY
diagnoses'. -to (although angiography is slowly being
repiaced by echo-Doppler imaging and other imaging
 This is performed by peripherai venous injection of
contrast, which then successively opacifies the vena
modalities for many conditions). Compared with the
paucity of clinical reports of henodynamic 1neasure-
cava, right atrium, right ventricle, pulmonary arteries
ments in dlogs and cats, there have been numerous
and veins, left atrium, left ventricle, and aorta. 'The
technique is simpler than selective injections, requir-
 reports of angiographic studies in normal experimen-
tal animals and patients with congenital and acquired
used extensively in the 1970s to differentiate the major
heart diseases."3-33 Angiocarrdiography is the most com-
types of feline myocardial diseases.2s 2. s The main
mon imaging study performed during cardiac cathe-
dlisadvantages are
terization, It involves the injection of liquid radio-
graphic contrast material into the blood strean to
(1) overlap of opacified structures often makes exami-
opacify the blood and exanine flow dynamics in the
nation of individual structures difficult, and
hearl. and great vessels. The resulting image is moni-
(2) the contrast is diluted as it progresses through the 
tored by fuoroscopy and recorded on videotape,
uo
circulation, resulting in poorer opacification of the
16-mm cine (movie) film, or on a series of small x-ray
left side of the heart in some cases, especially when
flms. Although it is possible to record a few films by
circulation time is prolonged.
manual flm changing through a homemade tunnel,*4
superior quality studies are obtained using a program-
mable rapid film changer that can record 1 to 6 films
SELECTIVE ANGIOGRAPHY
 per sccond. Contrast injections may he performed by
hand (especially in very small animals) or using an
This implies contrast injection at specific sites de-
signed to optimize the opacification of specific struc-
jection rate can be programned.
tures or to demonstrate flow abnormalities. Examples
188
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
A
1.To demonstrate valvular regurgitation,the injection
shouldbemadeinthedownstreamchamberorvessel
adjacenttotheaffectedvalve;
2.To demonstrate anobstructive/stenoticlesion,the
injection shouldbemadeintheupstreamchamber or
vessel adjacent tothe obstructed area;
PA
3.To demonstrate a shunting lesion,the injection
should be made in the upstream chamber or vessel
adjacentto thedefect;
RV
4.Contrast outlining of abnormalities may be satisfac-
toryusingnonselectiveangiography,
butoptimum
opacification generally requires injection as close to
B
the abnormality as possible.
DA
Toillustrate thesepoints,examples of selective angio-
grams of various congenital heart defects are shown in
Figure 9-12.
LA
Although（
catheterizationandangiographyhave
AA
most often been applied to the diagnosis of congenital
heart disease in animals,angiography has also been
usedtohelpdiagnoseandevaluatemanyothercondi-
LV
tions, including left ventricular volume overload;31-33
DA
PA
AA
RV
LV
FIGURE9-10
Angiocardiography in the normal dog.(A) Right ventricular
injection outlines therightventricle(RV),main pulmonary artery
(PA),and its branches.(B)Left-sided heart phase of the RV
injection shown in(A) outlines the left atrium (LA),left ventricle
DA
(LV),ascending aorta (AA), and descending aorta (DA). (C) Left
ventricular injection outlines theLV and aorta and its cranial
branches.
LA
ofnormal right-andleft-sidedheart angiograms are
AA
illustrated in Figures 9-10, 9-11; Figures 24-3, 24-4,
LV
24-8,24-10,2422,2432,2434,24-41,24-50,24-53,
and24-59.
Choice of selective injection site(s） in any patient
shouldbebasedonwhatspecificanatomicorflow
abnormality one is attempting to demonstrate, on the
patient's overall condition and estimatedrisk ofcathe-
terization and angiography, and by figuring which in-
FIGURE 9-11
jection site(s)and view(s)willprovide thegreatest
Angiocardiography in a normal cat.(A)Right ventricular injection
diagnosticinformation in theleast amount of time.
outlines the right ventricle (RV)and pulmonary artery (PA). (B)
The following principles apply to injection site selec-
Left-sided heart phase of the RV injection shown in (A)outlines
theleft atrium (LA）and associated pulmonary veins,left ventricle
tioninanimalswithcardiacdisease:
(LV), ascending aorta (AA), and descending aorta (DA).
CARDIACCATHETERIZATIONANDANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY
189
LA
AA
LV
LV
AA
PA
RV
LV
RV
PA
AA
AA
LV
RV
FIGURE9-12
Examples of angiocardiographic abnormalities (comparewith normal studies shown inFigures 9-10
descendingaortato thepulmonaryartery,allowingaleft-to-right shuntand opacificationofthe
pulmonary artery in addition to theleft-sided heart.(B)LV injection:Small ventricular septal defect
(VSD）in a dog.TheVSD(arrow),which is justbelow the aorticvalve,shunts contrast into theRV
outflowregion and causes variable distortion of theroot of the aorta.Theleftventricleismildly
dilated and there ismildmitral regurgitation,which partially opacifies theleft atrium.(C）V
injection:Congenital mitral valve dysplasia ina dog.In addition to outlining theLVand aorta,there
is dilatation andmarked opacification of the left atrium due to severe mitral regurgitation.(D)LV
injection:Congenital subaortic stenosis in a dog.The obstruction (arrow)islocated just below the
aorticvalve,and thereismildpoststenoticdilatation of theascending aorta.Mildmitral
regurgitation is partially opacifying the left atrium.(E)RVinjection:Congenital pulmonic stenosis in
a dog.Theobstruction(arrow)is located justbelow the pulmonicvalve,whoseleaflets arebarely
visibleabove the stenosis.TheRVis thickened,and thereispoststenoticdilatation ofthemain
pulmonary artery.(F)RV injection:Tetralogy of Fallot in a dog.The RV is thickened and both the
aorta andpulmonary artery aresimultaneouslyopacified,indicatingaright-to-leftshuntatthe
somewhat ventrally in thisview.Although pulmonic stenosisisnotvisible on thisframe,thereis
slight poststenotic dilatation of themainpulmonary artery.There is an incidentalfinding of avery
small patent ductus arteriosus(arrow）.AA,ascendingaorta;D,patent ductusarteriosus;DA,
descending aorta;LA,left atrium;V,left ventricle;PA,pulmonary artery;RA,right atrium;RV,
right ventricle.
190 DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
hcartworm disease?l and other types of pulmonary
thromboembolism;*7 heart base tumors:** intracardiac
is passed through this catheter and out into the lung:
tumors;* and a variety of extracardiac vascular abnor-
 the catheter is then removed, leaving the wire in place.
malities.10 42
The balloon dilation cathicter is then inserted over the
guidewire and carcfully directed through the heart
until the balloon is positioned across the obstruction.
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC TECHNIQUES
The dilating balloon is then inflated one to thrce times
with a 5:1 solution of saline or dextrose and contrast
(see Fig. 24-23). The procedure is monitored through-
Direct recording of cardiac elecurical signals is well
out by fluoroscopy and ECG. Results to date have
establishcd, but the use of multielectrode catheters to
indicated moderate success in reducing severe pul-
record intracardiac clectrograms and also attempt to
monic stenosis into the rmild to moderate range, With
abiate a region of clectrical instability is quite new. By
valvular stcnosis, sevcrc complications have been un-
mapping multiple electrograms in a heart chamber.
common. However, cxtreme caution is advised in at-
the point of origin of an arrhythinia rmay be identificd
tcmpting to dilate dogs with subvalvular pulmonic ste-
and, in some cases, ablated using clecirical, laser, or
nosis caused by an aberrant left coronary arfery
hcat energy at the catheter tip. Currently, very few
arising from the right coronary (see Fig. 24-3).
clinical electrophysiologic studies of this type have
Balloon dilation has caused fatalities due to coro-
been reportcd in animals, 13
nary artery rupture in such animals,* and in these
cases, surgical alternative treatincnts should proba-
bly be investigated.
INTERVENTIONAL TECHNIQUES
TRANSCATHETER COIL OCCLUSION
Diagnostic cardiac catheterization techniques have
been clinically used in humans since the early 1950s
Proccdures for transcatheter coil occlusion, uscd
and in animals sincc the carly 1960s.13 Starting
in
 Iost comrnonly to close patent ductus arteriosus, are
the carly 1980s, interventional techniques have been
gaining increasing popularity over standard surgical
increasingly used along with conventional mcthods in
ligation.17-9 Several techniques have bcen advocated
human and aninal catheterization laboratories to at-
for inserting spring-loaded Gianturco coils into the
tempt to treat certain disorders.x- The most common
patent ductus under fluoroscopic guidance (see Fig.
of these techniques are balloon dilation angioplasty or
24-46). Ani initial popular method dirccts a delivery
valvuloplasty, transcathictcr coil occlusion of pcrsis-
catheter (containing a coil loaded into is distal end)
tcntly patent ductus arteriosus, and cathcter ablation
through the femoral artery up the descending aorta,
 of arrhythinogenic cndomyocardial regions (deseribed
and crosses the patent ductus fron thc aoric side.
carlier). These procedures provide significant cost sav-
The coil is then extruded withi the ain of placing
ings over some surgical interventions, and advance-
the initial loop on the pulmonary arterial end, thus
nents in device technology and delivery 1methodolo-
anchoring the rcinaining loops, which are deployed
gics should make these techniques more attractive in
on the ductal ampula. A modification of this techniquc
the future.
using a preformed nitinol snare to provide controlled
coil delivery and prevent coil embolization involves
passing a snare catheter through femoral venous access
BALLOON DILATION (VALVUIOPLASTY)
into the right side of the heart and into the pulmonary
artery side of the ductus; “grabbing" the initial ex-
The techniquc of balloon dilation has bcen applied
truded loop from the delivery cathcter as prcviously
to a variety of obstructive lesions in humans, espccially
 described; and assuring optimal coil positioning prior
adults with coronary obstructions andl children with
to withdrawing the catheters. s These techniques
congenital cardiac or vascular obstructiors.x " In ani-
 mals, it has been used primarily as a treatment for
should improve as cnhanccrments in manufactured de-
caninc congenital cardliac obstructions, especially pul-
vices become available.
monic stenosis, with encouraging results.4, 45 1t has
also been cmployed to attempt to dilate congenital
subaortic stenosis in dogs, but the resuts have been
REFERENCES
discouraging.*
 Balloon valvuloplasty of congenital valvular pul-
monic stenosis is acconplished by advancing an cnd-
1. Braunwald E, Gorlin R, Mclntosh HD, ct al. Coopcrative
hole catheter fron the jugular vcin or femoral vein
study on cardiac catheterization. Summary. Circulation
through the right ventriclc and past the obstruction
37 (5 Suppl): 11193. 1968
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION AND ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY
191
2. Wallace C. Cardiac cathetcrizatioil to aid in diagnosis of
25. Buchanan JW. Seleclive angiography and angiocardiog-
cardiovascular discase. Small Anim Clin 2:232, 1902
raphy in dogs with acquired cardiovascular disease. J Aml
 3. Ettinger SJ, Suter PE. Canine Cardiology Philadclphia,
Vet Radiol Soc 6:5, 19G5
WB Saunders, 1970, p 170
26. Buchanan JW, Patierson DF. Selective angiography and
 4. Noble WH. Kay JC. Cardiac catheterization in dogs. Can
angiocardiography in dogs with congenital cardiovascu-
Anacsth Soc ↓ 2i:616, 1974
lar disease. J Am Vct Radiol Soc 6:21, 19G5
5. Knight DH. Principlcs of Cardiac Cathcterization. In
27. Knauer KW. Angiocardiography in acquired hearl dis-
Kirk Rw (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy V. Philadel-
ease. J Ain Anim Hosp Assoc 8:308, 1972
phia, wB Saunders, 1974, p 251
28. Pyle R1. Angiocardiography in congcnital cardiovascular
6. Wood Gf , Suter PF. Principles of cardiar cathcterization.
diseases of the dog.J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 8:310, 1972
In Kirk RW (ed): Currcnt Vetcrinary Thcrapy VI. Phila-
29. Stickle RL, Anderson LK Diagnosis of coinmon congeni-
tal hcart anomalies in the dog using survey and non-
dclphia, WB Saundcrs, 1977, p 323
7. Lubell DI. ‘The Cath Lab. An Introduction. Philadel.
selective contrast radiography. Vet Radiol 28:6, 1987
phia, Lea & Febiger, 1990
30. Fox PR, Bond BR. Non-selcctive and selective angiocardi-
8. Grossman W, Baim DS. Cardiac Catheterization, Angiog-
ography. Vet Clin North Ain Small Anim Pract 13:259,
raphy and Intervention. 4th cd. Philadclphia, Lea &
1983
31. Lord PF. Left ventricular volumes of discased canine
Fcbiger, 1991
9. Pcpine CJ, Hill JA, Lambert CR (eds): Diagnostic and
heart: Congestive cardiormyopathy and volume ovcrload
Therapeutic Cardiac Catheterization. 2nd cd. Baltimorc,
(palent. ductus arleniosus and primary miural valvular
Williams & wilkins, 1994
insarficiency). Am,J Vet Res 35:493, 1974
10. Davidson CJ, Fishman RF, Bonow RO). Cardiac catheter-
32. Barlte SH, Sammarco ME. Mcasurement of left ventricu-
 lar volume by biplane angiocardiography and indicator
ization. n Bralnwald E (ed): Hcart Discasc.A Texthook
of Cardiovascular Medicine. 5th cd. Philadelphia, WB
washout techniques: a comparison in the canine hcart.
Circ Res 19:295, 1906
Saundcrs, 1997, p 177
11. Yang SS, Bentivoglio IG, Maranhao V, Goldberg Il.
33. Bentivoglio LG, Cucsta AJ, Griffith LD, Geczy M. Evalua-
From Cardiac Catheterization Data to I lemodynamic Pa-
Lion of singlc plane angiography for lefi ventricular vol-
ume in the intact dog. Cardiovasc Res 10:283, 1970
rameteis. 3rd cd. Philadelphia, FA Davis, 1988
34. Patterson DF, Botts RF. A simple cassettc changer. Small
12. Lemke KA, Tranquilli WJ, Ihurmon JC, Olson WA. Ihe
Anim Clin I:1, 1961
henodynamic cffects of atropine and glycopyrrolate in
35. Frech Rs. Toxicity studies of coronary arteriographic
isoflurane-xylazine anesthetized dogs. Vet. Surg 21:82,
media in dogs. Invest Radiol 10:323, 1975
1992
36. Nakamura H, Kurata M, Haruta K. Efects of ionic and
13. Ihurnon JC, Tranquilli WI, Benson G] (eds): Lumb &
nonionic contrast. inedia on cardiohemodymamics and
Jones Veterinary Anesthcsia. 3rd ed. Baltitnore, Wil-
qualiy of radiographic image during canine angiogra-
liams & wilkins, 1996
phy. I Vet Med Sci 56:91, 1994
14. Muir Ww IHI. Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia. 2nd
37. Koblik PD, Hornof W. Harrmagel SH, Fisher PE. A coin-
cd. St. l.ouis, CV Mosby, 1995
parison of pulmonary angiography, digital subtraction,
15. Wyman RM, Safian RD, Portway V, ct al. Current compli-
and muTeDTPA/MAA ventilation-perfusion scintigraphy
cations of diagnostic and thcrapeutic cardiac catheteriza-
for detection of experimental pulrmonary enboli in the
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol 12:1400, 1988
dog. Vet Radiol 30:159, 1989
10. Buchanan IW, Pyle RI. Cardiac tamponade duing cath-
38. Cantwell HD, Blevins WE, Weirich WE. Angiographic
cterization of a dog with congenital heart disease. J Am
diagnosis of hcaribase tumor in the dog. J Anu Anirm
Vct Mcd Assoc 149:1056, 1966
Hosp Assoc 18:83, 1982
17. Robertson SA, Fowler DA. A complicalion of cardiac
39. Bright JM, Toal RL, Blackford IM. Right ventricular
cathcterization in thc dog. Vet Radiol 29:202, 1988
 outflow obstruction caused by primary cardiac ncoplasia.
18. Fingland RB, Bonagura JD, Myer CW. Pulmonic stenosis
.J Vet Intern Med 4:12. 1990
in the dog: 29 cases (1975-1984). J Ain Vet Med Assoc
40. Suter Pl. Portal vcin anomalies in the dog: their angio-
189:218, 1986
graphic diagnosis. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 10:84. 1990
19. Lchrmkuhl LB, Bonagura JD, Stepien RL. Jones DE.
41. Gomez JA, Lawson IL, Korobkin M, Moss AA. Sclective
Comparison of pressure gradients determined by Dop
abdominal angiography in the dog. J Am Vet Radiol Soc
pler echocardiography and cardiac catheterizalion in
14:72, 1978
dogs with subaortic stcnosis. (Abstract). J Vet Intern Med 
42. van Brcc IH, de Rick A, Mallhcews D. Angiographic
6:113, 1992
features in a case of extcnsive arterial throinbosis in a
20. Brown WA, Thomas WP. Balloon valvuloplasty of tricus-
dog. J Small Anim Pract 22:641, 1981
pid stenosis in a Labrador relriever. J Vet Intern Med
43. Wright KN, Atkins CE, Kanter R. Supraventrieular tachy
9:419, 1995
cardia in four young dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:75,
21. Knight DH. Evolution of pulmonary artcry disease in
1996
canine dirofilariasis: evaluation by blood pressure mca-
44. deMadron E, Bussadori C. Five cascs of valvuloplasty with
surements and angiography. Procecdings, Heartworm
a balloon cathcter for stcnotir pulmonary valves in dogs.
Symposium, [980. Veterinary Medicine Publishing Coin-
Prat Mcd Chir Anim Comp 29:383, 1994
pany, Edwardsville, KS, 198t, p 55
45. Kittlcson M, Thomas W, Loyer C, Kienle R. Lelter Lo the
22. Thomas WP, Recd JR, Bauer IG, Breznock EM. Constric-
editor IPulmonic stenosis and balloon valvuloplasty in
tive pericardial dliscasc in the dog. J Ain Vet Med Assoc
dogs1. I Vet Inicrn Med 6:250, 1992
184:546, 1984
46. deLellis IA, Ihomas WP. Pion PD. Balloon dilation of
 23. Wise M. Non-selcctive angiocardiography in the normal
congenital subaortic stenosis in the dog. J Vet Intern
dog and cat. Vet Radiol 23:141, 1982
Med 7:1532. 1993
24. (Owens JM, Twedt DC. Non-selective angiocardiography
47. Schneider M, Hagel K-J, Schncider I, Neu H. Trausvenos
in thc: cat. Vc1 Clin North Am 7:809, 1977
Coil-Embolisation zum  Verschluss des persistiercnden
192
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
Ductus arteriosus (Botal) bei einem Hund. Klcintiey-
cathctcr occlusion of patent ductus arteriosus. IProcced-
praxis 41:685. 1990
ings, 13" Annual ACVIM Forum, 1995, p 308
48. Hijazi ZM, Lloyd TR, Bcckman RH, et al. Transcathetcr
 50. Fox PR, Bond BR, Sommer Rj. Nonsurgical transcathelcr
closurc: with single or multiple Gianturco coils of patent
coil occlusion of patent ductus arteriosus in two dogs
ductus arteriosus in infants weighing ≤ 8 kg: retrograde
using a preformed nitinol snare delivery tcchnique. J
versus antcgrade approach. Am Heart J 132:827, 1996
Vet Int Med 12:182. 1998
49. Miller MW, Bonagura JD, Meurs KM, et al. Percutancous
10
Computec
Tomog
.
and
IMagnetic
Resonance Imaging
of the Heart
GREGORY B. DANIEL
JANICE M. BRIGHT
SPECIALIZED IMAGING TECHNIOUES
Nuclear scintigraphy, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) are specialized imaging techniques that rmay be usefu!
to evaluate certain cardiovascular disorders. Currently, thcy are availablc
only at large referral institutions because of thcir cxpense and required
techrical cxpertise. Familiarity with their potential application and utility
will help identify cases that would benefit from their use.
Nuclcar scintigraphy is particularly suicd to detecting and quantifying
intracardiac or vascular shunts; cvaluating ventricular function; mapping
myocardial perfusion; and evaluating obstructions to systemic and pulino-
nary blood flow. Computed tomography and MRI have scveral important.
advantages over echocardiographic imaging through supcrior imaging of
the great vessels, pericardium, and mediastinum. Thus, CT and MRI are
particularly helpful for evaluating intrathoracic and cardiac masses, discases
of the pericardium, and complex congenital heart defecis.
NUCIEAR CARDIOLOGY
Applications of nuclear cardiology have been growing in clinical practice
and research. They are relatively quick to conduct, require only intravenous
injections of a gamma ray-ermitting radiopharmaceutical, and do not rcquire
anesthesia. Most cardiac studies are performed using a ganmma camcra
interfaced with a dedicated inaging coinputer. The gamina camera consists
 of a collimator that filters the garmma rays emitted from thc patient; a large
193
194DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
sodiumiodidecrystalthatconvertsthegammarays
intolight;andanarrayofphotomultipliertubesthat
translate tiny bursts of light into voltage signals.The
computer acquires, processes, and stores the imaging
data so that they canbe subsequently mappedon a
displaymonitor.
RULU
EVALUATIONOFCARDIACSHUNTS
Thedirectionandmagnitudeofcongenitalcardiac
shuntsareeasilydeterminedusingfirst-passradionu-
clide angiocardiography (FPRA),which records the
passage of a radioactive bolus through the central cir-
culation as a series of sequential images.la. 2 Any radio-
pharmaceutical thatfreelypasses throughthepulmo-
nary capillary beds can beusedfor shunt analysis,but
pertechnetate(99mTcO-）is themost commonlyused
RULU
agent.A small volume(0.5 to 1.0 ml)is injected rapidly
toensuredeliveryofaconcentratedbolusofactivity
FIGURE10-2
andensure that the cardiacchambers aretemporally
First-passradionuclideangiocardiogram of a dogwith aventricular
resolved. The animal is positioned in lateral recum-
septal defect (VSD）.The animal's orientation and the image frame
bency over thegamma camera,and a dynamic acquisi-
rate are the same as inFigure 10-1.Pulmonary activity is
prolonged due torecirculationof blood.Note thereappearance of
tion (i.e., a series of sequential images obtained by the
the right ventricle (RV) during the levophase.LV,left ventricle.
computer),with a frame rate of 2 to 4 frames per
second for 30 to40 seconds,is initiated upon injection
of theradiopharmaceutical.
A normal FPRA is characterized by passage of the
venacava,rightatrium,rightventricle,pulmonaryar-
teries,lung,pulmonaryveins,left atrium,leftventricle,
radiopharmaceuticalsequentially through thecranial
and finally the aorta (Fig. 10-1).1a. 2
LEFT-TO-RIGHTSHUNTS
Analysis of theFPRA beginswithvisual inspection of
the sequential images displayed on the computer
screenin cinematicmotion.Left-to-right shuntsare
characterizedbyprolongedretention ofradioactivity
inthelungduetoimmediaterecirculationofblood
through thepulmonaryvasculature.The anatomiclo-
RU
cation of the shunt cannot always be determined by
FPRA.Occasionally,a ventricular septal defect isidenti
fiable as the radioactive bolus passes from the left
ventricledirectlyinto therightventricleduringthe
levophase (Fig.10-2).la The method is useful for de-
个
AO
termining shunt sizewhen surgery is contemplated.
LV
In the normal animal, activity in the lung peaks then
rapidlydecreasestoalowlevelasthepertechnetate
bolus passes through the pulmonary vasculature. Re-
sidual activity in the lung following initial passage of
bolus represents systemic arterial blood supply to the
FIGURE10-1
lung as well as superimposed thoracic wall activity.1a, 24
First-passradionuclideangiocardiograminanormal dog,recorded
In animals with aleft-to-right shunt,the pulmonary
at 2frames/sec.Dorsal is at the top of the image.The dog's head
timeactivitycurveevidencesasecondpeakanda
isto the left.Initial image （top left)shows themajority of the
substantially delayed washout phase as the pertechne-
radioactivebolusin the cranialvenacavafollowinga cephalicvein
injection.The right ventricle (RV),lung (L),left ventricle (LV)and
tatebolus continuously recirculates through the
abdominal aorta (AO)appear in normal sequence.
shunting defect(Fig.10-3).Because the area under
195
RIGHT-TO-LEFTSHUNTS
Right-to-leftshuntsarecharacterizedinFPRA stud-
ROI
pulmonary artery and aorta (Fig.10-4).Shunted ra-
N
dioactivebloodappearsearlyinthe systemiccircula-
E
tion because it bypasses the pulmonary circulation.In
patients with small shunts,the thoracic aorta may be
obscuredby therelativelyhighactivityinthelungs.
For this reason,it is important to include the abdomi
nal aorta andrightkidneyin thefieldofviewtoview
the early appearance of the radiopharmaceutical in
theselocations.
Asimpleandelegantwaytodiagnoseandquantify
macroaggregated albumin (9mTc-MAA).2 Because of its
large particle size (10 to 90 microns), 99mTc-MAA is
trapped in the capillaries. In normal animals, virtually
SEC./DIU
L:0
Q1
all the 99mTc-MAA localizes in the lung in a pattern
OR
812
reflectiveofpulmonaryblood flow.In animalswith
FIGURE 10-3
right-to-left shunts, some of the activity bypasses the
Evaluation of themagnitude of a left-to-right shunt in an animal
lung and goes directly into the systemic circulation,
with a ventricular septal defect(VsD) obtained fromafirst-pass
resultingin excessive extrapulmonary activity(Fig.10-
radionuclide angiocardiogram.First,a compositeimage of the
5).7 The percentage of shunted blood is calculated
thorax ismade by summing the image frames.Next,a region of
from the following formula:2. 8
interest (ROl)is drawn over the dorsal caudal lungfields,carefully
excluding areas over the heart and aorta.The amount of
%Shunt=ExtrapulmonaryActivity/
radioactivity (counts) in this ROI is then plotted as a function of
time to generate a time activity curve.The lung time activity curve
Extrapulmonary+PulmonaryActivity
(A,)represents a gamma variate fit to the lung peak of the time
activity curve.The second curve (A),representing the gamma
variatefitof therecirculation peak,isdisplayed to theright.
EVALUATIONOFVENTRICULAR
represents the point of maximum counts andC2represents counts
FUNCTION
at thetime of2×Tmax.TheQP/QSratiowas2.25and theC2:C1
ratio was 0.66; both indicate a left-to-right shunt.
Ventricular function can be assessed by first-pass ra-
dionuclide angiocardiography (FPRA) or gated equi-
librium radionuclide angiocardiography  (ERNA).1
thepeak of thetime activity curveisproportional to
First-pass studieshave the advantage of displayingim
blood volume,calculation of the areas under the initial
agesof therightand left sidesoftheheart indepen-
lung peak (Ai）and the recirculation peak (Az）pro-
dentlybecausetheradiopharmaceutical agentpasses
vides an assessment of the magnitude of the shunt.l1a.2.
through the cardiac chambers at different times.la, 9
5, 6 The pulmonary to systemic flow ratio, QP/QS, is
This technique isparticularlywell suitedfor right ven-
calculated by the equation:
tricularevaluation,whichisotherwisedifficulttoiso-
late. The disadvantage of FPRA is that only 4 to 6
QP/QS=A/A-A2,
cardiaccycles canbeevaluated as thebolusquickly
where A = area under the first lung peak and A2 =
passes through the ventricles.In contrast, ERNA stud-
area under the second or recirculationpeak.
iesrecorddatafromseveralhundredsofcardiaccycles,
thereby providing a more useful assessment of average
Normal animals should have a pulmonary to sys-
temicflow ratio of 1 to 1.2.A QP/QS greater than 1.2
cardiacfunction.Unfortunately,the accuracy of ERNA
indicates aleft-to-right shunt.5,6
studies is limited in dogs and cats by unavoidable
Analternativemethodof analysisrequiresmeasure-
overlapof theleft andrightventricles,so that the
functionalindicesderived arenotpurelyfroman iso-
ment of lung counts at specific timeintervals during
lated ventricle.10. 11 Nonetheless, gated ERNA is the
the peak and washout FPRA periods. First, the time
interval from initial appearance of the bolus to the
preferred method of evaluating left ventricular func-
tion in humans9 12 and dogs.10 1, 1-18
time ofpeak lung activity is recorded (Tmax).Then,
lung counts at the time of peak activity (Cl） and at
EQUILIBRIUMRADIONUCLIDE
the time of 2 × Tmax(C2) are determined.The ratio
(C2 to Cl) provides an estimate of shunt size.1. 5 The
ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY
normal C2 to C1 ratio is 0.30 to 0.50.1.5Values above
GatedERNAstudiesareobtainedfollowingintrave
this range are seen with left-to-right shunts (Fig.10-3).
196
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
P
FIGURE10-4
御
bel
First-passradionuclide angiocardiogramin an animalwith
tetralogy ofFallot.Note thesimultaneousvisualization of the
aorta andmain pulmonary artery during thedextrophase(curued
arrow),indicative of aright-to-left shunt.
labeledredblood cells(99mTc-RBC)or 99mTc-labeled
Ejection fraction(EF)is the most commonly used
human serum albumin (99mTc-HSA).7 After equilibra-
indexofsystolicfunctionobtainedfrom theradionu-
tion with the blood pool, the activity in a given quantity
of blood is directly related to its volume (Fig.10-6).
ventricular end-diastolic volume that is ejected during
The computer synchronizes image acquisition with an
cardiaccontractionandisdeterminedfromthemaxi-
electrical signal(theRwave)from theelectrocardio-
mum(end-diastolic)and minimum(end-systolic)ven-
gram sothataseriesofimagesrepresentingvarious
tricular counts.The EFis calculated using the follow-
stages of the cardiac cycle may be obtained at specific
ing formula:
time intervals.19. 20 For adequate temporal resolution,
at least 16 imaging frames per cardiac cycle are
End-diastolic counts-background activity
needed. In cats and small dogs, a pin-hole collimator
isrequired toresolve the chambers of theheart ade-
Ejectionfraction hasbeen shown to be animportant
quately.Imagesfrommultiplesequentialcardiaccycles
predictorofmortalityinhumans anddogswithcon-
are combined to form the final image set,which is
gestive heart failure.24-29 Although EF is the most widely
temporarily and spatially smoothed andfromwhich
reported index ofventricular systolic function,this
unwanted background activity is subtracted.9 21, 22 Be-
indexisinfluencedbychangesinpreloadand
cause changes in activity in the ventricle during the
afterload.3o Gated ERNA studies of dogs with early,
cardiac cyclerepresentvolume changes,anumber of
compensatedmitralvalvularinsufficiencyshowanen-
functionalindicesmaybederivedfromtheventricular
larged left atrium,increasedenddiastolicvolume,r
time activity(volume)curve,including ejection frac-
mal or small end-systolicleftventricular(LV)volume,
tion,filling times,peak filling rates, and time and rate
and an increased ejection fraction (Fig. 10-7).After
of ventricular ejection (Table 10-1).9, 10. 20
chronicvolume overload,myocardial function de-
FIGURE10-5
Dorsal and lateral images of an
animalfollowinginjectionof
99mTc-MAA.Note thepulmonary
and extrapulmonary activity
indicating the presence of a
right-to-left shunt.The brain
(open arrow）and kidneys (small
arrows)havealarge portion of
the extrapulmonary activity.The
focalaccumulationin theleft
arm represents theinjection site.
L, pulmonary circulation.
197
may also be evaluated from ERNA studies byviewing
theradionuclideventriculograminrapidsequence.
Otheruseful indices ofventricular functionob-
tained byERNA includetheratesofventricular ejec-
tion and filing (see Table 10-1).These indices are
derived byobtainingthefirstderivativewithrespectto
timeof theventricular volumecurve.Therateof
ventricular ejectionreflectsthe ability ofthemyocar-
dium to generate force.The ejection rate may be
more sensitive than the ejection fraction for detecting
ES
inotropic changes in humans.14,26
GatedERNA offers a noninvasivemeans ofmeasur-
ingventricular diastolicfunction(filling),which is al-
teredinmany cardiac diseasesspeciallythose charac
terizedbymyocardialcompliancefailuresuchas
myocardial ischemia, restrictive myocardial diseases,
and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. In many other dis-
eases, diastolic dysfunction precedes or accompanies
systolic dysfunction.32-34Fastheartrates and small car-
diacvolumeshamper the determination of ERNA dia-
ED
stolic indices in cats. Sinus arrhythmia also complicates
AS
thedeterminationofdiastolicfunctionbytraditional
E
ERNA studies, causing spuriously low counts at the
VIP>
UIP>
endof thevolume curve.This can beminimized by
FIGURE 10-6
rejecting data fromheartbeats outside apredefined
R-R interval. When the heart rate is irregular, evalua-
Multigated analysis of an equilibriumradionuclideventriculogram
tion of diastolic filling on ERNA studies is facilitated
from a normal dog.The images have been smoothed,and
background activity isremoved from the area of theheart(square
by computers that acquireandstoredatainlistmode.
box).Note the separation of theleft andright ventricles.Aregion
This method stores each scintillation count separately
ofinterestisfitted toeachventricle,and theactivitythereinis
in a serial manner as opposed to traditional frame
determinedfor eachframe.Alsonote the changein size of the
ventriclesatend-systole(ES)andend-diastole(ED).
mode acquisition.It permits reconfiguration of cardiac
images using forward and backward gating,facilitates
framealignmentatthebeginningandendofthe
clines,resulting in increased end-diastolic and end-
cardiac cycle, and removes count drop-off resulting
systolic LV volumes,and a normal or reduced EF.
from sinus arrhythmia.Accurate assessment of diastolic
Ejection of blood into the low-pressure left atrium
function isimproved.
invalidatestheejectionfractionasareliableindicator
AccurateassessmentofRVfunctionisdifficultfrom
tion.In this circumstance,end-systolic volume may be
amoreaccurateindicatorofmyocardialfunction.
TABLE 10-1
GatedERNAstudieswithdilatedcardiomyopathyand
FunctionalIndicesDerivedfromGatedEquilibrium
doxorubicin-inducedcardiactoxicityshowLVdilation,
RadionuclideStudiesinNormal Dogs
diffuse wall motion abnormalities,and a diminished
LeftVentricle
Right Ventricle
ejection fraction (Fig. 10-8). In such patients, EF pro-
Parameter
(Mean)
(SD)
(Mean)
(SD)
vides areliablemeasurement of theseverityof myocar-
dial dysfunction.
Ejectionfraction
57
18
34
11
(%)
Gated ERNA studies are more sensitive than thoracic
Emptying ratemx
3.86
1.24
2.72
0.91
radiographs for staging the progression of cardiac dis-
(EDV/sec)
Emptying rateng
ease, monitoring response to therapy, or offering a
3.04
0.99
2.02
0.67
(EDV/sec)
prognosis. Gated ERNA studies can be repeated several
Fillingratemax
4.25
1.44
2.28
0.70
hoursfollowing a singleinjectionof theradiopharma-
(EDV/sec)
ceutical, allowing evaluation of the heart in a resting
Fillingrateavg
3.41
1.21
1.96
0.58
state and after exercise.9 13 14,17 Pharmaceutical chal-
(EDV/sec)
Time topeak
122.72
12.91
123.49
19.87
lengewithdopaminehasbeenused as analternative
emptying (msec)
90.07
8.09
91.85
11.44
(msec)
to such challenges provides a particularly sensitive in-
dex of cardiac dysfunction.9, 17,1sRegional wall motion
EDV,end-diastolic volume.
198
DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
15.6MSEC/DIU
FIGURE 10-7
Multigated analysisof an equilibriumradionuclideventriculogramfrom a dogwithcompensated
mitral insufficiency.Note the large left atrium(arrow）on theimage seton theleft.Theventricular
volume curve on theright shows the hyperkineticleft ventricle.Theejection fraction was78%and
the maximum and average left ventricular ejectionrateswere6.10 end-diastolicvolume(EDv)/sec
and5.32EDV/sec,respectively.Themaximum and averageleftventricularfillingrateswere7.42
EDV/sec and6.22EDV/sec,respectively.The times topeak ejection andpeakfillingwere78.32
msec and 63.42 msec, respectively.
equilibrium blood pool studies.9. 35 The RV overlaps
FIRST-PASSRADIONUCLIDE
theLV,making it hard to isolatethesechambers.Also,
ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY
itisdifficultto isolate theRVfrom theRA.Despite
this limitation, a good correlation between right ven-
Left andrightventricular ejectionfractions canbe
tricularERNAindicesandhemodynamicmeasure-
quickly obtainedfrom FPRA studies.The volume of
ments has been demonstrated in dogs, suggesting that
theinjected dosemust be small(0.5ml)andinjected
these indices maybe auseful noninvasivemethod of
rapidly to ensure delivery of a tightbolus of activity.
predicting changes in pulmonary artery pressure.13
Theanimalispositionedinlateralrecumbencyover
M5
FIGURE 10-8
Multigatedanalysisof anequilibriumradionuclideventriculogramfromadogwithdilated
set on theleft.Theventricularvolumecurve on theright shows very poor contractility.The ejection
fractionwas17% and themaximum and average left ventricular ejectionrateswere1.34 end-
diastolicvolume (EDV)/sec and 0.84EDV/sec,respectively.Themaximum and average left
ventricularfillingrateswere 0.55EDV/secand0.44EDV/sec,respectively.Thetimes topeak
ejection and peak filing were 135.99 msec and 126.24 msec, respectively.
NUCLEARIMAGING,COMPUTEDTOMOGRAPHY,ANDMAGNETICRESONANCEIMAGINGOFTHEHEART199
thegammacamera,andadynamicacquisition,with a
themyocardium,anditspeakextractionisless than
framerateof 25to50framesper secondfor 30 sec-
thatof 20iTI.36-3999mTc-teboroximeismore efficiently
onds,is initiated uponinjection of theradiopharma-
extracted by the myocardium than the other agents,
ceutical. Regions of interest are drawn over the RV
and it has a veryrapid washout period.
and LV, and time activity curves are generated from
the dynamic acquisition.As thebolustraverses the
ventricles,severalpeaks and valleys representing the
COMPUTEDTOMOGRAPHYOF
diastolic and systolicphases of the cardiac cycle are
THEHEART
identified.Three to six cardiaccycles are combined to
createacompositevolumecurvefromwhichindices
ofventricularfunction are derived.Aswith theERNA
studies,subtraction of background activityisnecessary.
Computed tomography (CT) is an x-ray technique
Right-sidedheartfunction iscommonlyassessedby
that displays cross-section images of the body (Fig.
FPRA in humans,but this technique has not been
10-9). The usual imaging plane is perpendicular to
critically evaluated in dogs or cats.
the long axis of the body (transaxial plane)as the x-
raytuberotates around thepatientduringtheexpo-
sure.The relative intensity of the x-ray beam,as it
EVALUATIONOFMYOCARDIAL
emerges from thepatient,is recorded by an array of
PERFUSION.ISCHEMLA.AND
x-ray detectors.A computer is used to reconstruct a
cross-section image from the detector data.40.41 The
INFARCTION
CT scanner acquires one image at a time then moves
thepatient to thenextimagingplane.The thickness
of each image slice is typically 2 to10mm.Because
Myocardialperfusionimagingisrarelyperformed
the animal mustremainmotionless during the entire
in veterinary medicine owing to the low incidence
scan,general anesthesia is required.Intravenous con-
of atherosclerotic coronary artery disease.However,it
trast infusion is necessary to identifyvessels and the
mightberelevantin canine subvalvular aorticstenosis
margins of the cardiac chambers.
andfeline myocardial diseases,in which coronary ar-
Themost relevant limitation of CT scanningis the
terylesions and myocardialfibrosis are common.A
relativelylong acquisitiontimerequiredfor each im-
varietyofradiopharmaceuticalsareavailabletoevalu-
age slice. Motion results in serious image degrada-
ate myocardial perfusion. Thallium-201 has gained
tion.4oCardiacimagingisnotfeasibleinolderscanners
widespread acceptance as a myocardialperfusion im-
with long scan times (10 seconds or greater).2 Even
aging agent.The biologic properties of 2oTI are simi-
new scanners (third and fourth generation)with scan
lartothoseofpotassium.Initialmyocardialuptakeof
timesof1to5secondswillhavesomemotionartifact.
201TI is proportional to myocardial blood flow, and
approximately 85 percent of the injected 2o1TI is re-
moved by the myocardium in a single pass.Within
severalhours,2oiTIredistributesin thehearttoreflect
the distribution of the potassium pool. Myocardial de-
C
fects (cold spots) suggest the presence of a fixed ab-
normality, such as a permanent scar. Defects observed
on theinitial2oiTIscanbutwhichdemonstrateim-
proved uptake on the delayed scan generally indicate
myocardial ischemia. Cardiac perfusion images can be
made with a conventional gamma camera,but a single
photonemission computed tomography(SPECT)cam-
era is preferred.Tomographic transaxial plane images
allowcircumferentialevaluationoftheventricularwall,
improving detection and localization of perfusion de-
fects.
Two 99mTc-labeled agents, sestamibi and teboroxime,
were recently introduced as alternatives to 2o1T1.36. 37
mTc has superior physical characteristics,resulting in
improved image quality in comparison with 2o1TI.1 Like
FIGURE10-9
201T1,99mTc-sestamibi and99mTc-teboroxime are taken
Contrast-enhanced computed tomograph of a12-year-old dog.A
largemass (M)is evident overlying the cranial heart base.It was
upbythemyocardiuminproportiontobloodflow.
surgically reduced and treatedwithradiation therapy.Histologic
Unlike2oiTI,99mTc-sestamibiisnotredistributedwithin
evaluation was chemodectoma.(Courtesy of Dr.Ann Hohenhaus.)
200DIAGNOSTICMETHODS
Crude cardiac studies maybe accomplished using a
END-DIASTOLE
END-SYSTOLE
CT scanner with 1-to 2-second scan times and dynamic
scanning capability.A dynamic scan is a series of
sequential1- to 2-second scans with little or no delay
between images.Scans may be obtained without table
(patient)advancement to produce a single-level dy-
namic study. Alternatively, dynamic scanning can be
performedwith tablemovementbetweenscans to ob-
tain a multilevel dynamic scan.Experimental canine
studies showed good correlation of septalwall thick-
ness measurements obtained from dynamic CT images
with necropsy measurements.s Eliminating the prob-
lemofphysiologicheartmotionrequiresECG-gated
acquisitions or CT scanners capable of millisecond
scan times.42 Gating the acquisition to the patient's
ECG provides stop action images of the heart, but
thisoptionisnot availablewithmostcommercial CT
scanners.42 44 45 High-speed CT scanners capable of 50-
msec scan times (Cine CT) have limited availability.46. 47
C
D
MAGNETICRESONANCE
IMAGINGOF
LV
THEHEART
F
MRI is a safe and noninvasive imaging technique
thatdoesnotrequirecontrastmediainjection orioniz-
ingradiation.8Imagesarecreatedfromradiofre-
quency signals generated from the patient's hydrogen
protons.The anesthetized patient is placedwithin a
strongmagneticfieldand thehydrogenprotonsare
G
H
intermittently excited by a radio frequency signal. A
FIGURE 10-10
computer constructs an image based on the signals
Magnetic resonance images depicting long axis (A-D) and short
emitted when the hydrogenprotonsrelax.Acquisition
axis (E-H)views from a dog with experimentalmitral
time varies with the sequence of radio frequency pulses
regurgitation induced by cutting several chordae tendineae.A
and the number of the tomographicimages.
1.5-Twhole body imaging system (Philips Gyroscan,Shelton,CT)
utilizing a gradient echopulse sequence was used.Images were
MRI has excellent contrastresolution.The cardiac
obtainedfor16to20phases of thecardiac cycle and averaged
chambers andgreatvessels are easilyvisualizedbecause
over therespiratory cycle during a 15-minute period.During the
rapidly flowing blood is void of signal (appearing
preoperative stage(A,B,E,F)thecardiacchambers arenormal.
Four months postoperative（C,D,G,H),there is substantial
black) on conventional T spin-echo sequences.9 As
dilation of the left atrium (C,D) and left ventricle (C,D, G)
in CT imaging, physiologic cardiac motion must be
Notice the severe mitral regurgitation outlined by arrows (D).Ao,
compensated for by ECG gating.However, software
ascendingaort;atiumfntriclVi
ventricle.(Modifed fromDellItaliaL,MengQC,BalcelisE,tl.
forgatingMRIacquisitionis availableonmanynew
IncreasedACE and chymase-like activityin cardiac tissue of dogs
commercial scanners.50,51 Gated MRI studies define
with chronicmitral regurgitation.AmJPhysiol 269[Heart Circ
cardiac chamber morphology with the precision of
Physiol 38]:H2065-2073,1995.)
angiocardiography and echocardiography.52-54 Unlike
CTscans,MRI can create cross-sectionalimages of the
heart in any anatomic plane (Fig.10-10),facilitating
tionalassessmentof cardiacchambers andimage
study interpretation and calculation of chamber vol-
blood flow makes it excellent for evaluating congenital
ume,myocardial mass,and avarietyoffunctionalindi-
and acquired heart diseases.54-56
ces.Thepericardium,cardiac tumors,andintracardiac
New cardiacMRI applicationsincludereal-time ac-
thrombi maybemoreeasilyseenbyMRI thanby
quisitions of cardiac structure (Cine MRI) and evalua-
echocardiography.The ability ofMRI toprovidefunc-
NUCLEAR IMAGING, COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY, AND MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING OF THE HEART  201
Eitinger S (ed): Textbook of Vcterinary Internal Medi-
REFERENCES
cine. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1989, p 923
19. DePuey EG. Rozanski A. Pharmacological and other
Ionexercisc alternatives to excrcise tcsting to cvaluate
1. Zaret Bl., Wackcrs Fj. Nuclear cardiology. N Engl J Med
myocardial perfusion and Icft ventricular function with
329:775,1993
radionuclides. Semin Nucl Med 21:92, 1991
la. Berger HJ, Zaret BL. Radionuclide assessment of car
20. Movahed A, Reeves WC, Rose GCl, ct al. Dobutamine
and improvement of regional ard global left ventricular
diovascular performance. In Freeman I M (cd): Frceman
and Johnson's Clinical Radionuclidc Imaging. 3rd cd.
funetion in coronary artery disease. An J Cardiol
Orlarido, FL, Grune and Stratton, 1984, p 364
66:375,1990
21. Royal HD. Computer analysis of gated radionuclidc ven-
2. Kurug AR, Treves S. Pedialric cardiovascular nuclear
ncdicine. In Gottschalk AG, Hoffer PB, Potchen FJ
triculograms: Practical corsiderations. In Williams AG,
(eds): Diagnostic Nuclear Medicinc. 2rnd cd. Baltimore,
Eckel CG (eds): Practical Computer Applications in Ra-
Williams & Wilkins, 1988, p 114
dionuclidc Imaging. New York, Churchill Livingstone,
3. Liebow AA, Ilales MR, Bloomer WE, et al. Studics on the
1987, p 161
lung after ligation of the pulmonary artery: Il. Anatomic.
22. Fogclman I, Maisey M. An Atlas of Clinical Nuclear
changes. Am J Pathol 26:177, 1950
Medicine. St. 1.ouis, CV Mosby, 1988
4. Thrali DE, Badertscher RR, Lewis RE, et al. Collateral
23. Berger HJ, Zaret BL. Radionuelide assessment of cardio-
pulmonary circulation in dogs experimentally infected
with Dirofileria immitis: Iis angiographic evaluation. Vct
and Johnson's Clinical Radionuclide Imaging. 3rd cd.
Radiol 21:131, 1980
Orlando, Fl., Grune & Stratton, 1984, p 361
5. Allhands RV, Twardock AR, Bocro MJ. Uptake of
24.
 Robinowitz A, Wexler JP, Blaufox MD. Quantification of
'TeMDP in muscle associated with a peripheral nerve
the radionuclidc image: Theoretical concepts and the
block. Vet Radiol LlItrasound 28:181, 1987
Iole of the computer. In Frceman IM (cd): Freeman
6. Brawner WR, Daniel GB. Nuclcar imaging. Vet Clin
and Johnson's Clinical Radionuclide Imaging. 3rd ed.
North Am 23:379, 1993
Orlando, FL, Grune and Stratlton, 1984, p 261
 25. Mangschau A, Karlsen RL, Lippestad CT, et al. Systolic
 7. McAfcc JG, Subramanian G. Radioactive agents for im-
aging. In Freeman 1.M (ed): Freeman and Johnson's
time intervals and cjection fraction in assessing left vcn-
tricular performancc following acute myocardial in-
Clinical Radionuclide lmaging. 3rd ed. Orlando, Fl.,
Grune & Stratlon, 1984, p 55
farction. A comparison of systolic limc intervals and
equilibriun radionuclide ventriculography. Acta Med
8. Gates GF, Orme I IW. Dorc EK Cardiac shunt assessment
Scand 215:341, 1984
26. Philips HR. Levinc FH, Carter JE, et al. Mitral valve
99m, Radiology 112:649, 1974
9. DePuey EG. Evaluation of cardiac function with radionu-
replacemcnt for isolated mitral regurgitatior: Analysis
clides. In Gottschalk AG, Hoffer PB, Potchen FJ (eds):
Diagnostic Nuclear Medicine. 2nd cd. Baltimorc, Wil-
cjcction fraction. Am J Cardiol 48:647, 1981
liams & wilkins, 1988. p 355
27. Bonow RO, Ostrow HG. Rosing DR, cl al. Effects of
10. Daniel GB, Tuckcr RL., Bright JM, ct al. Utilizalion of
verapamil on left ventricular systolic and diastolic fiunc-
tion in patients with hypcrrophie cardiomyopathy: Pres-
instantancous ejection volume images to produce ven-
triciular yolume curves from an cquilibrium radionuclide
sure-volune analysis with a nonimaging scinillation
ventriculogram. Vet Radiol Lltrasound 34:276, 1993
probc. Circulation 68:1062, 1983
11. Sisson D, Danicl GB, Twardock AR. Comparisonn of left
28.1
Holman Bl. Nuclcar cardiology. In Braunwald E (ed):
ventricular ejection fraction determined in normal anes-
Heart Discasc: A Textbook of Cardliovascular Medicine.
thetized dogs by echocardiography and gated equilib-
3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saundcrs, 1988, p 311
rium venriculography. Am J Vet Res 50:1810, 1989
adh nu jo asn I esea f ssa  toe 6
12. Adams WE, Clausen M, Hellwig D, ct al. Radioruclide 
gated acquisition scans for prcopcrativc assessmennt of
ventriculography (equilibrium gated blood pool scan-
cardiac risk. Surg Gynccol Obstet 167:234, 1988
ning)-its present clinical position and rccent develop-
 30. Stokhof AA, Brom WE, Van-den-Brom WE. Survival time
mcnis. Eur J Nucl Mcd 13:637, 1988
in dogs with spontancous atrial fibrillation rclated to
13. Arrington KA, Bright. JM, Danicl GB. The usc of gatcd
scintigraphically mcasured cardiac: performance. Vet Q
radioriuclide ventriculography as a noninvasive method
12:161, 1990
of evaluating right ventricular furction in dogs with ex-
 31. Bough EW, Gandsman Fj, North DL., ct al. Gated radio-
perimentally induced congestive hcart failure. Sci Proc
muclidc angiography cvaluation ol valvc regurgitation.
ACVIM, 1993, p 930
Am J Cardiol 46:423, 1980
14. Daniel GB, Arrington KA, Bright IM, et al. Evaluation of
32. Rankin 1.S, Moos S. Grossman W. Atermations in preload
gatcd radionuclide ventriculography to asscss right and
and cjection phase indices of the left ventricular perfor-
left ventricular function in an cxperimental right hcart
mancc. Circulation 51:910, 1975
failure model. P'roceedings, ACVR, 1992
 33. Pierard LA, DeI andshcere CM, Berthe C, ct al. Idenitifi-
15. Sisson D. The clinical cvaluation of cardiac function. In
cation of viablc myocardiun by cchocardiography dur-
Eitingcr S (cd): Iextbook of Vcterinary Internal Medi-
ing dobutanine infusion in patients with myocardial
cine. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1989, p 923
infarction after thrombolytic therapy: Conparison with
16.Van-den-Bron WE, Stokhof AA. Radionuclide ventricu-
positron cmission  tomography.  J  Am  Coll Cardiol
lography in the normal dog. Equilibrium studies. Res
15:1021, 1990
Vet Sei 47:333, 1989
34. Bonow RO, Ostrow IIG, Rosing DR, et al. Effecis of
17. Etinger Sj. Ordering diagnostic tests in cardliovascular
verapamil on left ventricular systolic and diastolice func-
disease. n Hamlin Rl. (ed): Efficacy of Cardiac Therapy.
tion in patients with hyperurophic cardiomyopathy: Prcs-
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1991, p 1081
sure-volume analysis with a nonimaging scintillation
18. Sisson D. Thc clinical cvaluation of cardiac function. In
probe. Circulation 68:1062, 1983
202
DIAGNOSTIC METHODS
35. Bonow RO). Radionuclide angiographic cvaluation of left
49. Skioldebrand CG. 'The fumctional ard anatomic evalua-
ventricular diastolic function. Circulation 84:208, 1991
tion of thc cardiovascular system with rapid-acquisition
36. Spirit 1, Maron BJ, Bonow RO. Noninvasive assessmcnt
computed tomography. Circulation G1:960, 1980
of left ventricular diastolic furction: Comparative analy-
 50. Widmer WR, Buckwalier KA, Braunstein EM, ct al. Prin-
sis of Doppler cchocardiographic and radionuclide an-
ciples of magnetic resonance imaging and application to
giographic techniques. J Am Coll Cardiol 7:318, 1986
thc stifle joint in dogs. J An Vet Med Assoc 198:1914,
 37. Ratner SJ, Huang PJ. Friediman MI, ct al. Assessment of
1991
righl ventricular anatomy and fiunction by quantitative
 51. Bradley WG, Waluch V, Lai KS, et al. The appearancc of
radionuclide
Cventriculography.  J Am Coll Cardiol
rapidly flowing blood on magnetic rcsonarnce imaging.
13:354. 1989
Am J Radiol 143:1167, 1984
 38. Leppo JA, DePuey EG, Johrson LL. A review of cardiac
52. Peligrcw RI. Cardiovascular imaging techniques. In
imaging with sestamibi and teboroximc. J Nucl Med
Stark DD, Bradley WG (cds): Magnetic Resonance Im-
32:2012. 1991
aging. 2nd ed. St 1.ouis, Mosby Year Book, 1992, p 1G05
39. Beller GA, Watson DD. Physiological basis of myocardial
53. Erlichman M. Surface/speciaity coil devices and gating
perfusion imaging with ihe technctium 99m agents.
tcchniques in magnetic resonance imaging. I lealth Tech-
Semin Nucl Med 21:173, 1991
nol Assess Rep, 1990, p 1
40. Gibhons RJ. Technctium 99m sestamibi in the assess-
 54, Kondo C, Higgins CB. Congenital heart discase. In Stark
ment of acute myocardial infarction. Semin Nucl Med
DD, Bradley WG (eds): Magnctie Resonance Imaging.
21:213, 1991
 2nd ed. St Louis, Mosby Ycar Book, 1992, p 1531
41. Bcrman DS, Kiat H, Van-Train K, et al. Technetium 99m
 55. Mogclvang J, Stokholm KH, Saunaimaki K, ct al. Assess-
sestamibi in the assessmcnt of chronic coronary artery
ment of left ventricular volumes by magnetic resorance
disease. Semin Nucl Med 2I:190, 1991
in comparison with radionuclidc angiography, contrast
angiography and  echocardiography.  Eur  Iicart  J
tomography In Haaga JR, Aifidi RJ (cds): Computed
13:1677, 1992
Tomography of the Whole Body. 2nd cd. St. Louis, CV
 56. Allison JD, Flickinger FW, Wright JC, et al. Measurement
Mosby, 1988, p 1
 of Ieft ventricular mass in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
43. Moore SC, Judy PF. Cardliac computed tomography using
using MRI: Comparison with echocardiography. Magn
redundant-ray prospective gating.Med Phys 14:193, 1987
Reson Imaging 11:329, 1993
44. Hathcock JT, Stickle R. Principles and conccpts of com-
57.
 Akagi T, Kato Ii, Kiyomatsu Y, el al. Evaluation of atrial,
putcd tomography. Vet Clin North Am 21:399, 1993
veniricular and atriovenuricular scptal defccts by cinc
45. johrson RA, Rubin 1J. Noninvasivc cvaluation of right
magrretic rcsonance imaging. Acta Paediatr Jpn 34:295,
ventricular function. Chin Chest Med 8:65, 1987
1992
  'f 1 u q  jo 1o f  91
58. Wiles HB, Itenrich D, Haase A, et al. Imaging conigcnital
(eds): Computed Tomography of the Whole Body. 2nd
hcart disease. Pediatr Clin North Am Magn Rcson Im-
ed. St. Louis, CV Mosby, 1988, p G19
aging 8:377, 1990
47. Oyama Y, Uji I, Ilirayaima 'I, et al. Gated cardiac imaging
59. IIardy CJ, Darrow RD, Nieters EJ, ct al. Real-time acquisi-
using a continuously rotating C'I scanner: Clinical cvalu-
tion, display, and interactive graphic control of NMR
alion of 9l patients. Am J Radiol 142:865, 1984 
cardiac profles ard images. Magn Reson Mcd 29:667,
48. Lipton MJ, Higgins CB, Farmer D, et al. Cardiac imaging
1993
with high-speed Cine-CT scanner: Preliminary results.
60. Zcrhouni EA. New directions in cardiac magnelic reso-
Radiology 152:579, 1993
nance imaging. Top Magn Reson Imaging 2:67, 1990
IV
Abnormal
Cardiovascular
Function and
Principles of
Therapy
Patl
11
Faiing
Heart
ROBERT L. HAMLIN
DEFINITIONS OF HEART FAILURE
          
dliscasc. It results from a pathophysiologic interaction anong thc lhcart and
 1euroendocrine and vascular systcms. Whcn the beart cannot deliver blood
t0 meet tissuc mctabolic nccds, or does so at elevated iling pressures,
impaired organ function, rcduccd quality and duration of life, and death
may result.t.2
 Heart faiture refers to a heart that punps an inadequatc volumc of blood
 or the blood which is pumped is maldistibutcd, rcsulting in inadcquate
tissue oxygen delivery. Tacit in this definition is adcquate venous cardiac
rcturn, which differentiatcs heart failure from shock.3
Congestive heart failure (CHIF) describes inpaired cardiac function, which
rcsults in elevated venous and capillary pressures. This causcs organs to
bccomc congestcd with blood or laden with edeina fluid.
Failing heart is a third cntity dcscribcd in terms of how the myocardium
entities. A patient may have a failing hcart and may not be im heart failure.
However, CHF is alnost always associated withi a failing hcart.
Heart failure and CHF manifest clinical signs that can be observed during
physical examination or convcycd by a pct owncr. In contrast, a failing heart.
is described only in terrns of physiology, requiring laboratory measurcments
Of specific functional parameters.
THE FAILING HEART
The failing heart may be dcfincd by differcnt parameters. These include
(1) biochemical, in which the rate of energy relcasc by ATP (adcnosinc
triphosphate) hydrolysis is reduced-1 (Fig. 11-14); (2) mechanical, in which
there is a reduced naxinal velocity of myocardial fibcr shhortcning achieved
at zero loading conditions/2-17 (Fig. 11-1B); and (3) functional, in which
thierc is a lower than cxpccted force of contraction, considering thie volune
(of blood (prcload) in the chamber just before it contracistα-2s (Fig. 11-1C)
The property of the hcart to contract once stimulated is termed myocardial
contractility, or the inotropic state.? Thus, the failing hear1. has reduced myocar-
dial contractility and is in a ncgative inotropic state, ?
BIOCHEMICAL DERANGEMENTS
Muscle contraction rcsults from the shortening of sarcomeres and is seen
microscopically as reduction in thc Z-Z interval? This shortcning results
205
206
 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
A
ATP
thc hydirolysis of ATP into ADP (ade11osine diphos-
phate) (Fig. ll-14) and inorgaric phosphate (Pi).
N
ADP~P
ATPose
ADP+P
+r
Thc cncrgy for contraction and relaxation is what
holds thc Pi to the ADP molecule to form ATP: If
ATP or ATPasc is lacking, insufcient energy may be
ATP
ATPose.
availablc for both1 contraction and relaxation.22
F
ADP + P; +E
ATP
ATPase
MECHANICAL DERANGEMENTS
F2
ADPP
→ADP +P;+E
The failing hcart can bc cxpressed using the vclocity-
Velocity
tcnsion curve (Fig. 11-1 B) dcvcloped from studying a
NmN
strip of myocardium, 5s o If thc strip is stimulated and
not permitted to contract bccausc of a large mass
hanging on it, the strip will gencrate a certain tension
(maximal tension, Ts). That tcrsior will depcnd upon
both the inotropic state (i.e., the velocity with which
the heavy meroimyosin cross-bridges cycle) and how
stretched the muscle is just before it is stimulated. As
Tension
the mass suspended Irom the muscle becomes lighter
Tm
and lighter (i.c., thc musclc must lift, or try to lift, a
Systolic
lighter and lighter mass), the contracting musclc will
Function
generate less tension, and the velocity of shortcning
will become greater and greater. In fact, the relation-
NORMAL
ship betwcen shortcning vclocity (plottcd on thc ordi-
N
natc) vcrsus thc tcnsion devclopcd (plotted on thc
abscissa) forms half of a hypcrbola.
It is impossiblc to dectcriminc the vclocity of shorten-
 ing against zcro load (i.e., againrst no resistance). Even
if all mass is removed fron thc muscle strip, it must
still shortcn against its own mass. To determine the
Preload
maximal velocity of shortening that may occur only
under conditions of no load, the curve must be extrap-
FIGURE 11-1
olatcd to corditions of zero loading. The Y-axis inter-
Methods for describing thc failing hcart. (A) Equations illustrating
cept, occurring at the point where no tension is devel-
relative states of myocardial energy produetion.The ATP molecule
oped, will be the maximal velocity of fiber shoriening
is actually a molecule of ADP to which a final phosphorus atonn is
held by ahigh-nery bond.If this bond isbrokenenergy is
(v). This cannot be influenced by loading conditions
released, which serves as the fuel for both myocardial contraction
since the muscle strip is umloaded. Rather, it is detcr-
and relaxation. N depiets the normal stale. f shows reduced
mined by the vclocity with which the hicavy mcromyo-
energy production bccausc of decrcascd ATP substratc, although
ATPase concentration is normal. F shows reduced energy
sin heads cyclc, and this velocity is a mcasurc of tlhc
production assoriated with derreased anounts of ATPase, although
imotropic statc.
ATP concenuation is normal. (B) Graph contrasting the failing
and normal myocardiun at conditions of zero loacding. The failing
 In a musclc strip removed fron thc failing heart,
heart. generates a redured maximal velocity (Vs) of fiber
both maximal vclocity of fibcr slhortening (va) and
shortening at any level of tension compared with the normal hearl.
maxinmal tcrsion (T.) of thie vclocity-tcrsion curve are
The rmaximal tension (I) generated imay also bc reduced in the
rcduccd bccausc thc ratc of cycling of cach hcavy
failing heart,bur depends on the statc ofmyocardial contractilty
plus the degree of fiber slrcich (i.e., preload) just before
Ineromyosin head slows; if the muscle has not been
contraction begins. (C) A failing ventriclc can be cxprcssed by
Frank-Starling curves as illustrated here. In rhc failing heart they
 heads, there are no more heads to cycle and to gener-
show that for any given preload (end-diastolic volune)、 the force
of contraction generatcd (systolic function) is Icss than anticipaled
 ate more tension. If each head cycles more slowly, as
compared with the norinal heart.
in a negative inotropic state, but thc fbers arc
stretched to engage more heads and to add more
Ca+- t
to the excitation-contraction process, T, may
from hcavy meromyosin cross-bridges swinging (cy-
not only be normal but could be greater than normal,
cling) and tugging on the actin flaments to which the
even though v, is reduced. That is why v. rather than
 Z. bands arc attachcd (scc Fig. 36). All the energy for
'Tm is the measure of myocardial contractility, which is
this inotion—and for rclaxation as wcllariscs from
reduccd in a failing hcart.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF THE FAILING HEART
207
FUNCTIONAL DERANGEMENTS
resulting in congestion of the liver and othcr systemic.
organs.
Finally, 1he failing hcari can be expressed using
Normally the left atrial pressure (LAP) is approxi-
Frank-Starling curves (see Fig. 3-7). These relate sys-
mately 5 inmHg and is responsible for filling the left
tolic function on the ordinate to ventiicular end-dia-
ventricle (IV) to a normal cnd-diastolic volume (EDV)
stolic blood volumc (i.e., the preload) on the abscissa
(Tablc 11-1). The FDV represents the cardiac preload
(PL), which scts the number of hicavy meromyosin
sures of systolic Function-the pressure developcd,
cross-bridges for tlhnc subscquent contraction.
stroke volume, cardiac output, naximal rate of risc of
The following example ca1n illustrate rclationships
intravenitricular prcssure -will increase, not because
 between these paraincters and the failing heart. For
the ratc of cycling of heavy meromyosin heads
in-
the sake of simplicity, assume that the IV frec-wall
Creascs, but bccause there are more heavy meromyosin
thickncss (Wr) is 1 cm, A normally contracting LV
heads to cycle. In fact, the greater the preload, thc
with an EDV of 100 ml will (1) generatc a prcssure of
1nore heavy mcroimyosin hcads that cycle. In a failing
     )   
heart, the lcvcl of systolic function for a given preload
opcns; (2) cjcci a forward stroke volumc (Sv) of ap-
is Iess than cxpcctcd for a normal heart; for a given
-sis 8np ztoe sqi ou pooq jo [u 0g Aaexond
increase in end-diastolic volumc (prcload), the antici-
tolc; and (3) lcave bchind approximately 40 ml as thc
pated increment in stroke volurc or maximal ratc of
end-systolic volume (ESV).
rise of intraventicular pressure is reduced.
LAW OF LAPLACE
HYPERTROPHY, VOLUME
OVERLOAD, AND GENESIS OF
This rclationship approximates thc pcak left ventric-
ular wall tersior, a mcasurc of afterload. In its sin-
CONGESTIVE
plcst vcrsion:
HEART FAILURE
T = Pressure X r/h.
whicre the avcrage circumferential wall strcss or tcnsion
In acquircd cardiac disorders of the dog arrd cat,
(T) is dircctly rclated to the product of intraventricular
the left ventricle usually fails more frcqucntly than thc
 pressurc (Prcssurc) and internal cardiac chamber ra-
righ1. ventricle, resulting in pulinonary congestion and
dius (r), and is inversely rclated to wall thickness (h).
edema. Occasionally right vcntricular failurc occurs,
 In illustrating this Laplace relationship in the following
TABLE 11-1
Hemodynamic Profiles of Myocardial Compensation and Cardiac Disease
LAP
EDV (PL)
WT
SV
ESV
P
T
(mmHg)
(ml)
(em)
()
(ml)
(mmHg)
(Units)
A. Normal
100
1.0
60
10
100
000°01
(Dilated Cardiomyopathy)
B. Iailure
5
100
1.0
10
60
18
0008
C. Dilatcd
15
120
0.8
60
60
100
15,000
D. Eccentric hypertrophy
15
120
1.2
60
60
100
00001
E. Normal
100
1.0
60
40
100
10,000
(Aortic Stenosis)
F.Sterosis
100
1.0
40
6i0
200
000'0%
G. Comp.
15
120
0.8
09
60
008
10.000
1. Concentrie hypcrirophy
15
120
3.6
60
60
300
10,000
A, E Sormal heart: Left atrial pressure (LAP) is responsible for generating a particular left ventricular end-diastolic volume (EDV) or preload (Pl.). The end
pressure dleveloped hy e lft ventricle jusbefore the aoric valve opens P)s als equal to the diastolie systcmie artrtal blood preure.Tle peak myoralial
telsion (I) is approximated according to the law d Laplace, as the product of PL X P divided by WT.
B-D Pogressive volume owerload and nyocardial failure due to lilated eardionyopathy (scee text for details): volume load of the letl ventricle, sown as an
inerease in EDv. results from dilaled cardiomyopathy. This resulis in cecentric bypertrophy characterized hy a grosly enlarged left ventrieular lumen and only a
mordestly enlarged lelt ventricular wall thickness.
FHIefl ventrilar pressure ovrtoad fro aortic stnsis resuts in a great increase in IV wal thickness with itle change in verientar linal dimension.
rension in volume overload that initiates cecentrie hypertrophy.
208ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
exainple, rather tharn using LV radius we will use pre-
(PK), which incrcascs protein synthesis, resuling in
load or end-diastolic volurnc, which is curvilincarly
hypcrtrophy (incrcascd muscle mass). This lypcrtro-
related to radius (r) by the equation
phy is termcd “cccntric hypertrophy” because thc
ventricular lunen is dilatcd and the frec wall is either
EDV = 4/3 Pi r'.
norinal or slightly thicker than norinal (Table 1l-1 D).
In this example, assume that afterload for a ormal
Eccentric hypcrtrophy is caused by left vcntricular vol-
LV is (100 ml × 100 mmHg)/1 cm, or 10,000 units.
une overload, which is represented as an increase in
1f the IV suddenly becomcs cardiomyopathic (as from
end-diastolic volume. Thus, the IV frce wall may bc-
comc 1.2 cm thick, and the effect on afterload may be
fron taurine deficiency in a cat) and begins to fail.
predicted by the law of Iaplacc (thic aflerload will
stroke volumc decreases to 40 ml and the LV pressure
become 120 ml × 100 minHg, all divided by 1.2 cm,
(P) falls to 80 mmHg. Because of the rcduced SV, the
or will return to 10,000 units). This will re-establish a
ESV increascs to 60 ml (thc weakened IV leaves more
balance between oxygen demand and delivery and
blood bchind), and thc afterload decrcases to only
potentially prevent the consequences of sustained oxy-
8000 units (Table 11-lB). Becausc stroke volume de-
gen deht.2t-22
crcascs ard cnd-diastolic volume incrcascs, blood dams
up within the 1A, and lcft atrial pressurc imereases to
15 mmHg. This increased LA pressure slightly overfills
CONCENTRIC IYPERTROPIIY
thie left ventricle to an end-diastolic volumc of 120 ml,
Physiologic response to pressure orerload suchi as aor-
     n     
5 mmHg. Because end-diastolic volume is increased.
tic stenosis may be examined in a similar manner.
IV wall thickness dccrcascs. Despite the failing left
Assumc that the normal pressures, volumes, and tcn-
ventriclc, stroke volumc rcturns to a norinal 60 ml,
sion arc as stated earlicr (Table 1l-1/, E). After the
and I.V pressure (P) returns to a normal 1o0 mmHg
*magical instant"’ tbat aortic stenosis is produced, lcft
(Tablc 11-1C) bccausc of the Frank-Starling mecha-
atrial pressure, IV end-diastolic volume, and LV wall
thickncss rcmain corstant; stroke volumc decrcases
nisn, which1 statcs that forcc of contraction incrcascs
whcn prcload incrcascs. Thc resulting reduced myo-
duc to intcrference to left ventricular ejcction caused
cardial contractility (i.e., rcduced rate of cycling of
by thc fixed outflow obstruction (i.e., aortic stcnosis).
hcavy meromyosin leads) and incrcascd preload (i.c.,
mmHIg bccausc thc vcntricle must cjcct against that
the rumber of hcavy mcroinyosin hcads cycling) allows
the discascd left vcntriclc to eject a rormal stroke
increascd interference (inagine how much morc prcs-
yolumc and, thcreforc, sustain a normal cardiac out-
surc you could generate pushing your hand against a
 put. However, aftcrload incrcascs to 15,000 units (1120
 300-pound stccl ball comparcd withi pushing against a
ml × 100 mmHgl/0.8 cm), cnd-systolic volumc rc-
fcather!). Myocardial tension incrcascs dramatically to
-u snssad ee yi pe ' ozi on paa s
20,000 units. Blood in the IV docs not complctely
mains elevated to 15 mmHg. This conpensatory 1mccli-
cjcct, and left atrial pressurc increases to 15 mmHg
anism permits cardiac output to remain rormal,
because of this decreasc in forward stroke volumc
although at the expense of increased afterload and left
(Table 1l-1F). During the next instant, when IV end-
atrial prcssure. The conscquences of thesc changes are
diastolic pressure increases to 120 ml ard the force
 of contraction incrcascs becausc of the Frank-Starling
discussed next.
effcct, stroke volumc rcturns to normal, IV prcssure
AI read pue sh og oi st ua ssui (d)
 pressurc at the instant the aortic valvc opens incrcascs
MECHANISMS OF HYPERTROPHY
t0 40,000 (Table 11-1G). This dramatic increasc in
tcnsion initiatcs thc stcps leading to hypertrophy (Ta-
The major deterininrants of myocardial oxygen con-
ble 11-lH). Thus, LV wall thickness markedly ir-
sumptior are afftcrload, lcart ratc, aund myocardial
creases to 3.6 cm, and myocardial tension actually faills
contractility.2. 26
to the normal 10,000, cven though LV systolic prcssure
rcmains clcvated. This dramatic hypcrtropby, in which
ECCENTRIC HYPERTROPHY
thic LVFW bccomes cxtremely thickencd duc to thc
enormous I, is concenuric hypertrophy, a corscquence of
When afterload incrcascs, so does myocardial oxy-
vcntiricular pressure overload.
gen consumption. If oxygen consumption outstrips
With added myocardial mass, there may be a greater
oxyger dclivery, thc myocardium may suffer oxygen
distance for diffusion of oxygen fiom capillary to mito-
dcbt.?7 Such oxygcn debt activates adcnylatc cyclasc,
chondria, as well as a rclative decrcase in mitochon-
which augrments thc conversion of ATP to cyclic AMP
drial numbers. Therefore, oxygen deprivation, myo-
(cAMP). Incrcased cAMP activates protcin kinasc
cytc dcath, and fibrosis may result.28 s1
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF TIIE FAILING JIFART 209
PATHOPHYSIOLOGIC
ADDITIONAL MYOCARDIAL CHANGES
RESPONSE TO VOLUME
WITH HEART FAILURE
OVERLOAD
Some of the newly syntliesized proteins contain fetal
 protein forms tlhat tend to increase tlheir rate of pro-
duction,$43o There appears to be increased concentra-
tion of inhibitory G (G) protein,*7 This mediates the
Meerson and associate list tlirce stages that describe
the ventricular response to volume overload $2. s8 These
inlibition of adenylate cyclase, wlich decrcases intra-
include (l) myocardial damage, (2) hyperfunction,
cellular cyclic AMP and associafed myocytc calcium
 influx, tliereby reducing contractility In addition,
and (3) exhaustion.
human studies of long-standing lieart failure lrave re-
ported hypotlyroidism.*s This may be due to a de-
creased rate of periplieral T4 (thyroxine) to 'T, (trio-
MYOCARDIAL INJURY
dothyronine) conversion, as well as to reduced rates of
T4 production by the thyroid gland.
During this initial stage, clinical signs resull from
lheart failure that is associated with low cardiac output
VOLUME OVERLOAD WITH PATENT
(sce later) or venous and capillary distention. The
ventricle dilates; myocardial fibers swell and separate:
DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS
stores of higl-energy phosphate and glycogen become
depleted; lactate production increases; and mitoclion-
Tlhe previous discussion has explained why the right
 or left ventricle enlarges and fails with valvular stenosis
drial mass, RNA levels, and protein synthesis increase.
These responses appear to represent the consequences
 or insufficiency. However, wliy does the leff ventricle
fail with a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)?
 of oxygen debt and include a shiff toward anaerobic
Figure 1l-2 schematically compares the normal cir-
energy production and increased muscle mass.
culation with tlie circulation in PDA. Facli ventricle
normally pumps tlie same volume of blood during
each cardiac cyrle, and thus fhe pulrnonary and sys-
HYPERFUNCTION
temic circulations carry the same volumc of blood
Normally, the left ventricle pumps blood through the
During this second stage, wlhich usually lasts for a
systemic cirrulation to the riglit atrium, and the right
relatively long time, clinical signs abate. Hypertrophy
ventricle pumps blood tlirough tlie lungs to the left
results from increased myocardial fiber diameter. The
atrium. Because of cardiac septation, no blood shunts
ratio of fiber mass to myocardial mass increases. Tliere
left to right, even though pressures in tlie left cardiac
is a rerurn toward normal with respect to glycogen
chambers are ligher thar pressures in the correspond-
and higli-energy phosphate supplies, RNA levels, and
 ing right-sided heart chambers. In contrast, the circula-
protein synthesis.
tion is disrupted with PDA due fo communication
between the aorta (in whiclh the pressure varies be
xunn Aeond au pue (bhmm 08 pue 0I uam
(in wlhich pressure varies between 20 and 10 mmHg).
MYOCARDIAL EXHAUSTION
Because of this patent durtal com munication between
aorta and pulmonary artery, and because the aortic
 In this final stage, clinical signs progressively in-
e 'assad Aeuond uep anln sme si anssn
crease. Botli ventricular systolic and diastolir function
quantity of blood (i.e., 200 ml per cardiac cycle) shunts
deteriorate: the heart failure state worsens; and death
tlrougli the PDA from aorta to pulmonary trunk, 'The
becomes imminent. As the ratio of nyocardial mass to
resulting volume overload initiates eccentric liypertro-
capillary density increases, oxygen must diffuse a
phy of both lefl atrium and left ventricle, and the
greatcr distance from capillaries to myocardial cells.
 overstretching of the left ventricle initiates a cascade
Energy deprivation, myocardial degeneration, and re-
of structural clianges (e.g., fibrosis, slippage of sarco-
placement of myocardium by fibrous connective tissue
meres) and biocliemical alterafions (e.g., depletion
result. The latter decreases myocardial contractile units 
of stores of high-energy phosphate) tliat ultimately
and acts to stiffen the myocardium. It is thought that.
 precipitates lef-sided heart failure.
 increased levels of angiotensin Il may be responsible
Myocardial hypoxia or chronic stretcli or botli lead
for augmented growth, as well as for the production
to important changes in myocardial diastolic func-
of oxygen-free raricals that result in lipid peroxidation
tion,1 s4 An early effect of energy depletion is de-
of cell membranes. Protein synthesis cannot replace
creased myocardial compliance (lusitrope). ‘This re-
the loss of contractile myocardiurn.
sults in a reduced rate of ventricular relaxation, which
210
ABNORMALCARDIOVASCULARFUNCTION ANDPRINCIPLES OF THIERAPY
sure increases, then pulmonary capillary and pulmo-
nary venous pressures also become elevatede (Fig.
 11-3). Tlis causes vascular engorgement with blood
 known as congestion, wlich adds mass to the lung and
makes it stiffer. Increased lung weight and stiffness
 make inspiratory lung expansion more difficul. This
L
QQ
300
may lead to fatigue of muscles of ventilation--in partic-
U
RA
5
ular, the diaphragm-witli possible exliaustion of those
N
E
muscles and resultant asplyxia. Dilatation of pulmo-
G
S
100
300
nary veins also leads to a bronchoconstrictive reflex
tliat results in so-called "'cardiac asthima" described in
lurmans. 13. 4+ Wet, heavy lungs also result in ventilation-
 perfusion inequalities, which lead further to asphyxia.
200
 If pulmonary capillary engorgement becomes even
-sd aede Aond a neu yons 'araas a
sure reachies 18 to 22 mmIHg (normal is < 12 mmHg),
tlie rate that serum weeps from the pulmonary capil-
NORMAL
PDA
FIGURE 11-2
Diagrauns of the norrmal pulinonary and systemic circulations and
 stices, and fluid accumulates witlin tlie lung as pulmo-
of an animal with patent. ducrus arteriosus ( PDA). With PDA, a
communication bctween the aorta and pulnonary trunk persists
nary edema. Initially, this occurs around the smaller
postnataly. Vessels are labeled VC (vena cava), PV (pulruonary
airways and blood vessels and leads to partial obstruc-
vein), RA (right atrium), LA (lett atriun), RV (right ventricle), LV
(left ventricle), PA (puhnonary artery), and A (aorta). Nominal
volurues of blood traversing or being puruped by cach chanber or
HYDROSTATIC
OSMOTIC
vessel are included for illustration, Therefore, for the mormal
PRESSURE
PRESSURE
circulation. both atria, both ventricles, and both pulmonary and
CAPILLARY
RV-
+
-28
systeinic circulation carry or punp 100 units. ln contrast with the
PDA circulation, 200 units of blood shunts through the patent.
>
ZALVEOLAR-CAPILLARY
ducus from aorta to pulmuonary artery. Thus, the PA. lungs. IV,
12
MEMBRANE
I A, IV, and ascending aorta all cary three timues the normal
volurne of bleood, This results in engorgement and, in the case of
INTERSTITIUM
LA and LV. eccenuic hyperirophy. Of the 300 ml of blood which
cnters the ascending aorta. 200 snl shunt. through the POA.
Therefore, normal amounts of blood are carried in the renainder
of the aorta distal to the PDA, the systcmic circulation, vena cava,
 ody u r  e v u pe  pe 
reason the lungs can carry Lhree times the norinal anount of
blood without devcloping higher pressure (i.e.,pulruonay
hypertension) is that the pulruonary circuit can both dilate existing
HYDROSTATIC
OSMOTIC
vesscls and recruit new vessels.
PRESSURE
PRESSURE
CAPILLARY
+15
-28
ALVEOLAR-CAPILLARY
requires elevated ventricular filling pressure (i.e., left
MEMBRANE
(sainssaad Aredes pue snouaa Aeuond pue lene
INTERSTITIUM
 in order to achieve satisfactory left ventricular flling.
 In addition, inadequate myocardial energy may have a
negative inotropic effect. 'These clhanges eitlher precipi-
tate or aggravate the sequence of events leading to
congestive lheart failure. Altered diastolic furction usu
ally precedes altered systolic function.
FIGURE 11-3
Diagrams of the circulation through pulnuonary capillaries for the
norinal (top) and for the faling (bottom) left ventricle. The alveolar-
GENESIS OF PULMONARY
capillary rembrane separates the intracapillary space fron the
interstial space. Values for cither hydrwstatic or osnotic (oncotic)
EDEMA
pressures (mmlig) are labeled such that a plus sign ( + ) indicates
a force pushing fuid out of the compariment, and a negative ( )
sign indicates a force sucking fuid into the compartmenl. A
Increased left atrial pressure is a compensatory re
leardrop containing a nunber represents the direction fluid would
moveeither into or out of the capillary. With inadequate left.
sponse to tlie failing left ventricle. It initiates a cascade
ventricular function (boton), capillary hydrostatic pressure (and
of events tlial contributes to or causes clinical signs of
lyrmph flow) inereases. Iymphatic drainage is ultimately
congestive heart failure. If blood fows from pulmo-
overwhchned. and serum oozes into the interstiliur faster than the
pulmuonary lynphaties can relurn the fluid to the capillaries, This
nary capillaries to tlie left atrium when left atrial pres-
fluid builds in the pulinonary inuerstitium as pulrmonary cdema.
PATIIOPHYSIOLOGY OF THE FAILING JIEART 2
211
tion of those airways and vessels (chapter 13). This
sliglit reduction in systemic arterial pressure, fo re-
increases the load on thie right ventricle, wlicli must
duced stretching of lhigl-pressure baroreceptors in the
pump blood througla the now partially consticted pul-
aorta and carotid sinus, and to decreased numbers of
monary vessels, and leads to small airway obstructive
afferent volleys to tlie medulla, indicating to the me-
disease. As edema worsens, the fluid accurnulates
dulla thiat blood pressure is too low. The medulla then
within the interstitium and finally within the alveoli.
sends efferent volleys to increase the heart rate (i.e., it.
As lung function deteriorates and blood is oxygenated
decreases vagal restraint on tlie sinoatrial node) and
 poorly, myocardial oxygen debt leads to further cardiac
to constrict arterioles and veins (via stimulation of
deterioration. The heart may become energy-deprived
 owing to its inereased demand for oxygen at a time
in cardiac output also leads to a reduction, albeit small,
wlicn decreased oxygen enters the blood. In addition,
in renal blood flow and associated delivery of sodium
energy starvation leads to furtlier deterioration of botl1
chloride to tlie renal juxtaglomerular apparatus (JGA).
systolic and diastolic function.
This fall in sodium delivery causes the JGA to release
renin. Renin causes inactive circulating angiotensino-
gen to be converted, predominantly in the liver, to
HEART FAILURE
angiotensin I. Relatively inactive angiotensin I is con-
verted, mainly in the lung but also in many other
 organs, to angiotensin I1. Angiotensin II initiates the
following eventss6, 4* 5+ (Fig. 11-4):
'Tlhe clinical entity of heart failure is observed when
the patient. manifests clinical signs. These are com-
1. Stimulation of vascular smooth muscle, resulting
monly related to exercise intolerance'i. 46 or altered
 in constriction of arteries, arterioles, and veins, which
renal functiont or both and result when tissue perfu-
offers increased resistance fo flow from LV to capillar-
sion declines to a level incompatible witli normal or-
ies and reduced blood storage capacity of veins; 
gan function. 'Thc mechanism for reduced exercise
 2. Release of vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone)
tolerance arises from inadequate perfusion of working
from the pituitary gland, which causes reduction in
muscles, or from maldistribution of perfusion within
urine production and further stimulation of vascular
tlie working muscle. Either or both of these responses
smootli muscle (Fig. 11-5):
are mediated  over a  conplex  neuroendocrine  re-
 3. Increased thirst witli increased water consump-
sponse *designed" to protect the animal from hemor-
tion. expansion of blood volume, and further increase
rhage or dehydration over a relatively short time.20. 40. 16
 in pulmonary capillary pressure;
A cascade of events lead to congestive heart fail-
4. Decreased norepinephrine uptake from pregan-
ure.46. 4-st Because of a diseased lheart (e.g, mitral
glionic sympathetic synapses, resulting in an increase
regurgitation, dilated carcdiomyopathy), tlhere is a fall,
in circulating norepinephrine levels, which (a) con-
albeit slight, in cardiac output (Q). 'This fall leads to a
stricts and stimulates vascular smooth muscle, further
↑An
tARTERIOLAR RESISTANCE
1. CONSTRICTION OF VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE
+VENOUS CAPACITY
BLOOD
2. ↑THIRST→↑HO DRUNK
VOLUME
EDEMA
FIGURF 11-4
ARTERIOLES→→↑AFTERLOAD 
CARDIAC
Sumrnary of some of the principal elfecis of
VASOCONSTRICT
MVO
angiotensin-ll (An) that lead to cardiovascular and
renal deterioration. The sum total of thesc cffects
3.↑ADH
VEINS
PRELOAD
→↑CONGESTION
results in increased I.V afterload, worsening of
EDEMA
ederua, hypertrophy. hyperplasia of vaseunlar smooth
HORETENTION-
BLOOD
CONGESTION
muscle and the rmyocardium, cell membrane injury,
VOLUME
EDEMA
and malfunctioning of high-pressure baroreceptors.
MALDISTRIBUTION
MUSCLE
IR, heaurt rate; Vn, velocity of circumferential fiber
4.↑AL0O
>NaCI RETENTON
WEAKNESS
shortening; MVO,myocardial oxygen utilization,
FUNCTION
+MVO2
↓Vm
Qw, cardiac blood flow.
HR
ARRHYTHMIA
5. ↑NOREPINEPHRINE
VASCULAR SMOOTH MUSCLE
6. GROWTH PROMOTION↑FIBROSIS
DISORGANIZED HYPERTROPHY
7. FREE RADICALS OF Og—→LIPID PEROXIDATION OF MEMBRANES →MYOCARDiAL INJURY
212
2ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
loading of high-pressurc baroreceptors with Na--K'
100
80
ATPase (this interferes with those receptors3 s sending
(100)
(80]
NORMALQ
appropriate afferent information to the medulla and
↓=()
results in decreased vagal efferent uraffic and consequent
tachycardia, leading to increased myocardial oxygen de
20
mand and decreased myocardial oxygen delivery, with
{20)-
10
further oxygen debt and energy starvation).
(10)
90
(06)
10
RENAL CONSEQUENCES IN
{10x
HEART FAILURE
(5).
95
(56)
Althougli increased levels of aldosterone and ADH
↑ADH
may account for decreased urine produrtion (see Fig.
5
↑ALDOSTERONE
(5)
(5)
66
tor responsible for renal sodium and water retention?7
ANF
~(100}
(Fig. 1i-6). Yormally, for every 100 ml of plasma
人
1
66
(0)
(100)
AGA
EGA
PERI- TUBULAR
TUBULE
CAPILLARY
100
DE
(80)
60
NORMALQ
FIGURF 11-5
口
1 ↓Q=()
Example of how incrcased quantities of ADH and aldosterone
cause the renal tubules to retain excess quantities of saht and water.
Figures in parentheses are below-normal values representing those
GFR
20
that oceur with heart failure. Increased arnounts of secreted ADH
20
.20FF
(20)
100
10
and aldosterone during heart failure urigger salt and water
-(15L
90
reabsorption in the distal tubules. Atrial natriuretic pepuide (ANF)
20
(75)
would normally counter the effects of increased ADH and
.25FF
80
aldostcrone. I fowever. this cffect of ANF is overwhelmed by the.
10
surge of antidiuretic and antinatrinureric hormones (i.c., ADH and
(5)
aldlosterone). Furthermore, chronic left atrial distention muay
(4)-~
$6
decrease the quanrity of ANF secreted. Normally,the distal tubules
(79)
only rcabsorb 4 of the 5 units of provisional urine entering them
from the loop of Henle. However, with increased ADH and
aldosterone secrelion in leart failure、 nearly all of the provisional
urinc is reabsorbed, resling in oliguria or anuria. Q, cardiac
5
(1)
outpul.
(1)
66
(80)
increasing afterload; (b) increases heart rate,5. ss which
both increases myocardial oxygen demand and de-
1
66
creases myocardial blood flow and oxygen delivery.
(0)
(80)
thereby increasing myocardial oxygen debt and po-
PERI-TUSULAR
tentially provoking rliythm disturbances; and (c) pro-
TUBULE
CAPILLARY
(decreased  numbers)(
FIGURF 11-6
β-adrenergic receptors,6 tlius blumting the patient's
Example of how increased filration frurtion, the *third factor,"
ability to rcspond adcquately witli potentially life-say-
apnadapn ioea pue ies jo sunoue rnxo jo uordosqeai sosma
ing "figh1 or flight"' mechanisms;
tol the presence or absence of increased quantities of ADH and
3. Pronotion of vascular smootli muscle growtl,
aldosterone. Values in parentheses are below-nornal values and
represen the pathophysiologic abnorumality that constitutes “third
leading to arteriolar narrowing and myocardial lyper-
factor." In this illustration, glomerular filtration is sustained (2
trophy:
Inl) because of constriction of efferent glomerular arterioles (fCA)
and dilatation of afferent glonerular arterioles (AGA), despite a
fall in renal plasma flow (RPr) from 100 1o 80 ml. Ir glomerular
pliages and neutrophils, leading to lipid peroxidation
filtration rate (GFR) is sustained while RPF is reduced, then lhere is
of cell membranes, cell deatli, and replacement by fi-
al decrease (fromn 80 to 60 ml) in postglomerular blood cntering
brosis:
the peritubular capillary. This reduces hydrosaic pressure within
that porlion of the peritubular capillary and inereases the anount
 7. Produrtion of aldosterone by the adrenal me-
of prowisional urine (e.g., fron I0 to 15 ml) that is reabsorbed
dulla, which initiates the following events: (a) NaCl
froin the proxinmal tubule to the peritulbular capillary. Thus, less
retention by the distal convoluted tubules, decrease in
provisional urine (5 ml instcad of 10 ml) is presented to hoth the
loop of Henle and distal tubule. If these regius reabsorb norually
urine production, inerease in blood volume, and fur-
(a total of 9 rl), there will be less urine made and blood volune
ther elevation of vascular pressures and edema. and (b)
will be augmented. Q, cardiac output.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF THE FAILING JIEART 213
- si  o aade saaup ai omi o
relatively high. ‘The gradient of oncotic pressurc is
lercd fron the glomerular capillaries into the renal
 grealer in peritubular capillary blood than in provi-
fubules as provisional urine. The glomerular mem-
sional urine and favors fluid reabsorption from the
 brane is inpermeable to protein. 'Therefore, the fil-
tubule to tlhie peritubular capillary. Thc gradient of
trate is relatively low in protein, while the 80 ml of
fluid pressure (greater in the peritubular capillary
nonfiltered plasma that continues on its path in tlie
than in the renal tubule) discourages reabsorption
peritubular capillaries is protein rich. Furtliermore,
from tubule fo peritubular capillary. HHowever, oncotic
the fluid pressure within the tubules is relatively low.
forces are dominant over those of fuid pressure.
while fluid pressure within peritubular capillaries is
Tlierefore, almost 50 pcrccnt of provisional urine is
β-receptors
ADH
A
R
pulmonary veins
left ventricle
aorta
Weak
M
6ur
Sill
stior
conge
*Stiffen
B-receptors
PpC
Ventricle
·Weaken
CO1
Broncho-
Ventricle
constrict
pulmonary veins
left ventricle
aorta
•Arrhythmia
"Asthma"
stiff aorta
renin
↑ ANF:
ACE
A11←
FIGURE 11-7
(botiom), comparing changes in the left ventricle, aorta, arterioles. and pulmonary veins. Rigat side: Clinical responses to reduced cardliac
output (Q) are depicted. For the nonnal state, the pulmonary veins are semieollapsed becausc the I.V sucks blood fron then during
arlerial pressure is high, arterioles are nornally dilated, and there are numerous myocardial β;-receptors to which norepineplrine binds,
causing the ventricle to contact more forcefulfy when stinulated (β,-reccptors are represented by black semicircles). Because pulmonary
low.
Changes with heart failure include (l) LV dilation winth its free wall thinned due to incrcased filling force: (2) reduced nunbers (i.e..
“down regulation') of nyocardial β-acrenergic receptors due to clevated circulating catecholamine levels; (3) clevated pulmonary venous
and capilary pressure; and (4) arteriolar constuiction and reduced aortic. corupliance due to vascular smooth muscle stimulation resulting
from increased plasma norcpinephrine, vasopressin, and angiotensin II corccntrations. This daunrning-up of blood with the pulmenary
cireuit makes the lung congested, edematous, and heavy.
Graph of lung weight vs. pulmonary capillary pressure (Pe.): This shows lung weight increasing dramatically as pulnonary edema
appears. Dilation of the pulnonary veins elicits a bronchoconstrictive reflex. Leff atrial dilation (not shown) increases tlhe release of atrial
natriuretic pepide or factor (ANr), the substance that prevents the synthesis and ellecis of angiotensin-II. although ANF release may be
dlulled by chronic left atrial distention.
To the right of the diagran is shown the consiellation of clinical responses characterizing heart failure. At. the top right is a graph
plotting release of ADlI anc heart rate (HR) as a funcuon of systemic arterial pressure (P). As systemic arterial pressure rises, both hear
rate and ADH increase. Redueed blood flow (Q to the muscles, brain, hearl (Q), and kidneys (Qoa) results in corresponding responses (of
weaknsshairhangenreasedycardal sffesscrasedmyocardal conactiyrrhyhaand eninrdun,
respectively. Renin ulinately results in angiotensin-lI production and other pathologic responses (sce also Fig. [1-4).
214 ABNORMAL. CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
reabsorbed from the proximal convoluted tubule by
cles, wlhich causes decreased exercise capacity and mus
surrounding peritubular capillaries.
cular wcakness. Complex and still poorly undlerstood
neurocndocrine responses to reduced cardiac output
FILTRATION FRACTION AS THE
initiate a constellation of clinical signs (e.g., polydipsia,
THIRD FACTOR
oliguria, vasoconstriction, tacliycardia, muscular wcak-
ness, and exercise intolerance) (Figs. 11-4, 11-7). To-
Compensatory renovascular changes account for the
getlier, these charges coupled witli those previously
oliguria and polydipsia observed in congestive heart
described result in the clinical syndromes of heart
failure. Tliese physiologic mechanisms result in
failure or congestive hear failure. Basic cardiovascular
 changcs that also present the circulation with fuid to
principles relating neuroendocrine, hemodynamic,
be distributed, according to liydrostatic and oncotic
and clinical aspects of heart failure are illustrated in
forces, as ascites, pulmonary edema, or pitting edema.
Figure 11-7.
When renal plasma flow decreases and tlie renin-angio-
tensin-aldosterone axis is activated, efferent glomeru-
REFERENCES
lar arterioles constrict and afferent glomerular arteri-
oles cilate. ‘This causes the volume of gloinerular
filtrate to remain nearly constant despite a drop in
1. Parinley Ww, Chatterjee K. Principles in the manage-
renal plasma flow. 'Thus, the filtration fraction (the ratio
ment of congestive heart failure. In Parinley Ww, Chat-
of volume of glomerular filtration to renal plasma
terjce K (eds): Cardiology, Philadelphia. JB Lippincott,
flow), wlich is normally 0.2, elevates to as high as
1988, p 1
0.3. This means that the volume of renal plasma ow
2. Braunwald E. Pathophysiology of heart failure. In Braun-
wald E (ed): Discases of the Heart. 4th ed. Philadelphia,
destined for peritubular capillaries (i.e., renal plasma
WB Saunders. 1992, p 393
flow minus glomerular filtrate) is diminished. The re-
3. HIackel D, Ratlifr N, Mikat E. The hcart in shock. Circ
duced plasrna volune is richer in protein (i.e., pos-
Res 35:805, 1974
sesses greater oncotic pressure) and also is perfusing
4. Alpert NR, Gordon MS. Myofbrillar adlenosine tiphos-
at a lower fluid pressure (i.e., there is less of it). Thus,
phatasc activity in congestive heart failure. An [ Physiol
202:940,1962
a relatively greater amount (by percentage as well as
 5. Chandler BM, Sonncnblick EG, Spann FR, Pool PE,
absolute voluune) will be reabsorbed from renal tubule
Association of depressed myoflbrillar aclenosine triphos-
to peritubular capillary. Tlhis causes reduced urine vol-
phalcs and reduced contracility in cxperimcntal heart
ume and conservation of water and solutes when the
faihure. Circ Res 21:717, 1967
animal may be manifesting increased water intake due
6. Conway G, Hleazlitt RA, Montag J, Mattingly SR. Thc
ATPase activity of cardiac nyosin from failing and hyper-
to thirst precipitated by excessive angiotensin II.
trophied hearts. J Mol Cell Cardiol 7:817, 1975
7. Fcldman MD, Copclas L, Gwathmey JK, el al. Deficient
HEART RATE RESPONSE TO HEART FAILURE
production of' cyclic AMP: Pharrmacologic cvidence of an
important causc of contractile dysfunction in patients
Heart rate increases in response to several stimuli.
with endl-stage heart failure. Circulation 75:331, 1987
 Due to a slight fall in systemic arterial pressure. vagal
8. Furchgoui RF. Lee KS. High energy phosphates and the
restraint on heart rate is reduced, from either de
forcc of contraction of cardiac inusclc. Circulation
24:416, 1961
creased arterial baroreceptor stretching or diminished
9. Kammemeier Il, Schmidt P. Jungling E. Free cnergy
function of those barorereptors. Heart rate variability,
changc of ATP hydrolysis: A causal factor of early hy
termed respiratory sinus arrhythmia, decreases. Ele-
poxic failure of thc myocardium. J Mol Cell Cardiol
yated circulating catecholamine concentralions also in-
14:267, 1982
crease heart rate. This is injurious for two reasons:
10. Peyton RB, Joncs RN, Attarian D), ct al. Depresscd high-
(1) increased heart rate increases myocardial oxygen
energy phosphate content in hypertrophied venticles of
animal and man: The biologic basis for increased sensi-
consumption at a time wlhien blood oxygenation may
tivity to ischcmic injury. Ann Surg 196:278, 1982
be impaired due to pulmonary congestion and edcma,
11. Pooi PF. Spann JF,jr, Buccino RA, ct al, Myocardial high
and (2) increasing heart rale shortens diastole, the
energy phosphate stores in cardiac hypertrophy and
 period when coronary blood low delivers oxygen to
hcarl failure. Circ Res 21:365, 1967
12. Braunwald E, Ross J Jr, Sonncnblick EH. Mcchanisms of
the myocardium, 59 with resultant decrease in myocar-
Contraction of the Normal and Failing Ilcart. 2nd cd.
dial oxygen supply.
Boston, little, Brown, 1976
13. Covell JW, Ross J, Sonnenblick EIl, Braunwald E. Com-
NEUROENDOCRNE RESPONSES
parison of the force-vclocity relation and thc vcniricular
function curve as mcasures of thc contraclilc stale of thc
 Increased levels of cirulating catecholamines and
intact hcart. Circ Rcs 19:364, 1966
heightened sympathetic stimulation also resul. in de-
14. HIanson J, 1.owy J. Molecular basis of contractility in
creased arterial vasodilatory reserve to working mus-
muscle. Br Med Bull 2l:264, 1965
15. Huxley HE. Structural arrangenicnts and contraction
cles. This either reduces blood supply to those muscles
ncchanism in striated musclc. Proc R Soc Lond (Biol)
or produces maldistribution of blood within tlie mus-
160:442, 1964
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF THE FAILING HEART
215
16. Levine Hj, Briman MA. Force-velocity relations in intact
 38. Hamilton MA, Stevcnson Lw, Luu M. walden JA. Altered
dog heart. J Clin Invest 43:1383, 1964
17. Zelis R, Amsterdam EA, Mason DT, “lsometrie" Vma as
fect of agc and severity of illncss. Arch intern Med
an indcx of conlractility independent of series elastic
150:1249, 1990
and fibcr shortening: Inplications concerning pressure-
39. Gaasch WH, Levine HJ. Quinnes MA, et al. Lefl ventricu-
vclocity data in myocardial fibrosis, valvular rcgurgita-
lar compliancc nechanisins and clinical implications.
tion, ventricular ancurysm and ventricular scptal defect.
Ain J Cardiol 38:645, 1976
Circulation 44(suppl 2):89, 1971
40.1
Katz AM. Biochermical "defcct" in the hypertrophicd
18. Boettcher D, Vatner S, Heydrick G. Extent of utilization
and failing heart: Deleterious or compensatory? Circula-
ol the Frank-Starling 1nechanisms in conscious dogs. Aml
tion 47:1076, 1973
J Physiol 234:H338. 1978
41.
Wexler 1.F, Lorell Bll, Momomura S, et al. Enhanced
19. Grossnan W, Hlayes F, Paraskos JA, ct al. Alterations in
scnsitivity lo hypoxia-indluccd diastolic dysfunction in
preload and myocardial mcchanics in the dog and in
man, Circ Res 31:83. 1972
Role of high-encrgy phosphate depletion. Circ Res
20. Katz AM. Physiology of the Hleart. New York, Raven
62:766, 1988
Prcss. 1977
42.
Guyton A. Pulmonary alvcolar capillary interface and
21. Katz AM. Rcgulation of cardiac muscle contractility. J
interstitiun. In Fishman A, HIccht H (eds): The Pulmo-
Gen Physiol 50:Suppl:185, 1967
nary Circulation and Intcrstitial Spacc. Chicago, Univer
22.1
Katz. AM. Regulation of myocarrlial contractility, 1958-
sity of Chicago Press, 1969
1983: An odyssey. J Am Coli Cardiol 1:42, 1983
43. Moore DP, Weston A, Hughes JMB, cl al. Bronchial
23.Wikman-Coffelt J, Mason DT. Mcchanisin of decrcased
hyperresponsiveness in heart faifure; Ietter. N Engl J
contractility in chronic hemodynainic overload. In Ma-
Med 328:1424, 1993
son IDT (cd). Advances in Hleart Diseasc, I. New York.
44.
Weiss S, Robb G. Cardiac asthma (paroxysmal cardiac
Crune & Stratton, 1977, p 491
asthina) and the syndrome of left ventricular failure.
24. Sonnenblick EH. Ros J Jr, Spotnitz HM, et al. Thc
JAMA 100:1841, 1933
ultrastructure of thc heart in systole and diastole:
45.1
Mason D, Zelis R, Longhurst J, Lee G. Cardiocirculatory
Changes in sarcomerc Iength. Circ Res 21:423, 1967
rcsponses to muscular cxercise in congestivc heart taif
25. Braunwald E. Control of myocardial oxygcn consunp-
re. Prog Cardiovasc 1Dis 19:475, 1977
tion. Ain J Cardiol 27:416, 1971
46.2
 Zelis R, Sinoway LI, Musch TI, ct al. Rcgional blood flow
26. Colcman HN, Sonncnblick EH, Braunwald E. Myocar-
in congestive heart failure: Concept of compensatory
dial oxygen consumption associated with extermal work:
mechanisns with short and long time constanis. An J
The Fenn effect. Am J Physiol 217:291, 1969
Cardiol 62:2E, 1988
27. Duling B. Oxygen, metabolism, and microcirculatory
47. Barger A, Muldowncy F, Lubowilz S. Role of the kidney
regulation. In Kaley G, Altura BM (eds): Microcircula-
in the pathogencsis of congestive hcart failure. Circula-
tion. Vol 11. Baltimorc, University Park Prcss, 1977, p 40]
tion 20:273, 1959
 28. 1Ilaugaard N. IIaugaard FS. lee NII, Ilorn RS. Possible
48. Francis GS, Goldsmith SR, I.evine TB. et al. The neuro-
role of initochondria in regulation of cardiac contractil-
humoral axis in congestive heart failurc. Ann Intcrn
ity. Fed Proc 28:1657, 1969
Med 101:370, 1984
29. Zak R, Martin AF, Rcddy MK, Rabinowitz M. Control of
49. Laragh J. Hormones and thc pathogcnesis of congcstive
protein balancc in hypertrophied cardiac muscle. Circ
heart failure: Vasopressin, aldosterone, and angiotensin,
Res 38 (Suppl 10):146, 1976
Circulation 25:1015, 1962
30. Roberts JT, Wearn JT. Quantitative changes in the capil-
50.1
Mancia G. Sympathetic activation in congestive heart
lailure. Eur 1Icart J 1l(Suppl A):3, 1990
lary-muscle relationship in human hearts during nornia!
51. Packer M, Gottlieb S, Blum M. limmediate and long-tern
growth and hypcrtrophy. Am HIeart J 21:617, 1941
31. Wollegberger A. Losses in mitochondlial mass, structure,
pathophysiologic nechanisins unclerlying thc genesis of
 and inctabolic capacity in the hypertrophied heart prior
An J Med 82:504, 1987
lo failure. In Mcinorias dcl IV Congreso Mundial de
52. Daeimcn II, Lombardi DM, Bosiman FT, Schwartz SM. An-
Cardiologia. Vol 5. Mexico City, Comite Editorial de IV
giotensin ll inducces smooth muscle cell proliferation in the
Congrcso Mundial de Cardiologia, 275, 1963
normal and injured rat arlcrial wall. Cire Res 68:450, 1991
 32. Mcerson FZ. On the mechanism of compensatory hyper
 53. Thoruas JA, Marks BIl. Plasma norepinephrine in con-
fiunction and insuffcicney of thc heart. Cor Vasa 3:161,
gestive heart failure. Am J Cardiol 41:233 1978
1961
 54. Francis Gs. Ncurohuneral mcchanisms involved in con-
 33. Meerson FZ, Pshennikova MG. The cffect of myocardial
gestive heart failurc. Am J Cardiol 55:15A, 1985
hypertrophy on the contractile fiunction of the heart.
 55. Cowley A, Laird J, Guylon A. Role of baroreceptor reflex
Byul Ekspcr Biol Med 59:36, 1965
in thc daily control of arterial pressure and other vari-
34. Rabinowitz M. Protcin synthesis and urnover in norrmal
ables in the dog. Circ Res 32:564, 1973
and hypertrophicd hcar1. Am J Cardiol 31:202. 1973
56.1
Eckberg DL, Drabinsky M, Braunwald E. Defectivc car-
35. Wikman-Coffelt J, Salel AF, Mason DT. Differential re-
diac parasympathctic control in patients with heart dis-
sponscs of canine myosin ATPasc activity and fissue gases
ease. N Engl J Med 285:877, 1971
in thc pressurc-overloadled ventriclc dependent upon
37. Ilaunlin RI. Pathophysiology of heart failurc. In Fox PR
degree of obstruction: Mild versus scverc pulmonic and
(ed): Canine and Feline Cardiology. New York, Churchill
aortic stenosis, Rccent Adv Stud Cardiol Struct Mctab
Livingstonc, 1988, p 159
12:367.1978
58. Berne R. Regulation of coronary blood flow. Physiol Rev
36. Wilson J, Lancoc V, Frey M, Ferraro N. Arterial barore-
44:1, 1964
ceptor control of pcriphcral resistance in expcrirmental
59.
Gregg DE. Coronary circulation in thc anesthetizcd dog.
heart failure. Am Hleart J 119:1122, 1990
In Marchette G, Taccarde B (cds): Coronary Circulation
37. Neumann J. Schmitz W, Scholz H, ct al. Increasc in myo-
and Energetics of thc Myocardium, Bascl, S. Kargcr,
cardial Gproteins in heart failure. Lancet 2:936, 1988
1967, p 54
Management of
12
Heart Failure:
Principles of
Treatment,
Therapeutic
Strategies, and
Pharmacology
DAVID SISSON
MARK D. KITTLESON
Many different diseases can cause signs of lieart failure. Accordingly, there
are numerous approaches to thcrapy depending on the unique circurm-
stanccs of each palient. The ideal treatment is to achieve a cure, bul as this
is usually not possible, treatment goals are to improve thc quality and length
of life. Toward this end, management efforts engage in a number of strate.
gies intended to relieve congestion, control excess sodium and water reten-
tion, improve cardiac pumping funclion, or rcduce cardiac workload. Spe-
cific goals of treatment decisions are facilitated by knowledge
of
pharmacology, the hemodynamic effects of drugs, the nature and prevalence
of adverse drug reactions, short- and long-tcrm cfficacy, and the effert of
drugs on quality of life.
PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT
CLASSIFICATION OF PATIENTS WITH HEART FAILURE
 Animals with heart failure can be categorized based on the functional
disturbance(s) caused by their underlying disease. Therapy is usually di-
rected at correcting or palliating the specific fiunctional abnormalitics rc-
sponsible for the patient's clinical signs (Table 12-1).
The heart has two primary funrtions. One is fo receive blood from thc
pulmonary and systemic venous reservoirs (diastolic performance); tlie other
216
217
TABLE 12-1
ions are resequestered by thie sarcoplasmic reticulur.
Heart Failure: The Goals of Therapy
'This requires adenosine triphosphale (ATP) and phos-
1. Control Salt and Water Retention/Rclieve Edema
phor ylation of phospholamban, which normally occurs
Low sodium dlicts
rapidly and uniformly.
I xop, thiazide, potassium-sparing diuretics
Myocardial relaxation is determined by systolic loading
Venous and mixed vasodilators
conditions and inherent cardiar viscoelastic propcrties.
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors
Physical reroval of fluid
Increasing afterload improves relaxation up 1o a point.
I1. Improve Pump Fumction
but excessive afterload has an adversc effect. Hypertro-
Improve diastolic filling
phied hearts relax more slowly and less uniformly than
Control heart rale
normal lhearts. When the ventricle is diseased, the
Abxolish arrhythmia, restore AV syuchrony
Inprove ventricular relaxation
onset of relaxation is often delayed and the rate and
Imuprove contractility
extent of relaxation are reduced, either globally or to
Digitalis glycosides
Bipyriclines
varying degrees in different rcgions of the heart.
Synpathornimetic drugs
Ventricular compliance is the ability of tlie heart to fill
Reverse or modify rnyocardial and vascular reinodeling
 passively and is usually measurcd at tlie end of diastole
Angiotensin coniverting enzyine inhibitors
when thc ventricle is relaxcd. This concept is best
Beta-receptor blocking drugs
II1. Reducc Workload
explained by a graphic display of ulie ventricle's end-
Reduce afterload, ACE inhibitors, arterial or mixed vasodilators
diastolic pressurc-volume relationship, the slope of
Reduce physical acuivity
which defines compliance at any given level of preload
Avid environmental stressors
Wcight reduction in the obese
(Fig. 12-1).2 3 Given the same end-diastolic volume,
end-diastolic pressure will be higher if the ventricle is
stiffer (less compliant) tlian a norrmal venmirle. Vcn-
is to propel blood in a forward direction through the
pulmonary and systermic vasculature (systolic perfor-
mance). Systolic dysfunction predominates in most
B
A
licart failure patienis, but others suffer from diseases
that primarily impair diastolic performance. The gen-
pressu
eral approach to treatment is greaily influenced by
these distinctions, which must be clinically deter-
mined.
tolic
A number of other considerations are important in
selecting thcrapy:
end-diast
AP
(1) ‘The chronicity of clinical signs (acute versus
chronic hearl. failure);
(2) The severity of the disease (mild, moderate, or
severc heart failure); and
V
(3) The predominating clinical manifesiations (con-
gestive versus low-output heart failure, and right- versus
V
 left-sided heart failure).
 For cxample, acute, severe congestive lheart failure
LV end-diastolicvolume
(CHF) is treated mucli more aggressively and witl
FIGURE 12-1
different drug combinations tlian is chronic, less se-
vere disease.
The left ventricular end-diastolic pressure-volume relationship for
any patiert can be cxpressed as an exponential cuve. Myorardiat
stiffnessrefers to the ability of the myocardium  resis filfing
during diastole.Conversely.myorardial compliance refers to the
THERAPEUTIC APPROACH TO DIASTOLIC
ahility of the myocardiun to be suretched during diastole. The
DYSFUNCTION
slope of the curve at any point is a measure of ventricular stifness
at. that particular volume. The greater the ventricular volune. the
stiffer the chanber wall In a clinical context, nyocardial sifness
 Impaircd cardiac filling can result from excessive
increases when the ventricle dilates, when the wall hypertrophies,
pericardial restraint, obstructions 1o venous inflow, im-
paired myocardial relaxation, reduccd ventricular com-
ventricle (I.V) Glls (i.e., the IV end-liastolic volune incrcases), the
pliance, cxcessive heart rates, and weak, absent, or
slope of the curve inereases, indicating that the leit ventricle
becomes progressively stifer (less compliant). This is evident. in
poorly timed atrial contraclions. Myocardial relaxation
patient 'B'-it takes grealer pressure to achieve the same end-
is an active, energy-requiring process that initiates dia-
diastolie yolune counpared with patient 'A.' The diference in IV
cnd-diastolic pressure betwecn patients *A' and 'B' becomes even
stolir filling.' The ratc and extent of myocardial relax-
more pronounced as the I V cnd-diastolic voluame increases. AV.
ation depend on the rate at which cytosolic calcium
change in volume: AP, change in pressure.
218 ABNORMAL. CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLFS OF THIERAPY
tricular complianre is determined by the volume and
sive preload reduction resulting from inappropriately
geomctry of the clhambcr as well as the thickness and
high doses of diuretics can preripitate signs of low-
tissue characteristics (composition) of its walls.* 1 Com-
pliance failure can ocrur witli myocardial or endocar-
should be avoided in HCM, as they can precipitate
 dial fibrosis, or with yentricular hypertrophy. Felinc
systemic arterial hypotension and worsen dynamic ob-
hypertrophic. cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized
struction. Angiotensin-converting enzymc (ACE) in-
by concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle, im-
hibitors appear to be efficacious in relieving signs of
 paircd myocardial relaxation, and reduced left ventric-
CHF witlhout adversely afferting hemodynamics. Posi-
ular compliance- (sec chapter 28). As a result, left
tive inotropic drugs can also worsen dynamic obstruc-
ventricular (LV) diastolic and left atrial pressures in-
tion.
Crease, and pulmonary edema develops in some cases.
 In cats witli restrictive cardiomyopathy, the principal
functional deficit is compliance failure, although re-
MPLICATIONS FOR THERAPy. The mOst eIfective freat-
duced systolic contractile indires are sometimes pres-
ment of palients with reduced ronplianre and im-
ent as welliv (cliapter 28). Trcatment options are lim-
paired ventricular rclaxation is to resolve the underly-
ited. Diuretics and a low-salt dict are used to conirol
ing disorder. Resolution of LV liypertrophy can be
achieved in patients with systenic lypertension by cf-
fectively reducing arterial blood pressure. For all prac-
is present. Reduction of tacliycardia may improve dia-
tical purposcs it is inpossible to resolve thc extensive
stolic filling. There is some evidence tliat ACE inhibi-
nyocardial fibrosis observed in cats with restrictive
tors and aldosterone antagonists may reduce myocar-
rardiomyopathy (RCM). On rare occasions, ventricular
dial fibrosis, but their value in affectcd cats, if any, is
hypertrophy due to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy re-
unknown.l
solves with treatnenl. More often, therapy must be
Pericardial disorders such as pcricardial effusion and
directed at those compensatory responses and coexist-
 constrictive pericarditis cause signs of hcart failure by
ing conditions that further limit diastolic filling. 'These
impairing diastolic filling. Cardiac tamponade from
include exccssively fast heart rates, weak or poorly
 pericardial efusion is acutely managed by pericardio-
timcd atrial contractions, sodium and water retention,
 centesis (cliapter 29). When pericardial and epicardial
venous constrirtion, and diminishcd systolic perfor-
fibrosis restrain cardiac diastolic filling, as with con-
manre of the hear."0 Optimization of preload, control
 sirictive pericarditis, surgical removal of thc parietal
of heart rate, and maintenance of sinus rhythm are
and/or visceral pericardium is required. In alrioven-
crucial to the successful treatment of many patients
tricular valve slenosis or mass lesions that obstruc1.
with diastolic
myocardial (
dysfunction, particularly
yenous inflow, surgery or balloon dilation of the of-
when tlie prinary disorder cannot be resolved. Im-
fending lesion is usually required, when definitive
 paired ventricular filling can sometimes be augynenied
treaiment cannot be accomplished, clinical improve-
by drugs tliat improve rnyocardial relaxation (positive
 ment often can be realized using diuretics and drugs
lusitropy).
to control heart rate.
Beta-adrenergir receptor blocking drugs and cal-
cium channel blocking agents are comnonly pre-
THERAPEUTIC APPROACH TO SYSTOLIC
scribed for HCM,
bul
10』
 somcwhat different
reasons.6 9 1 Beta-blockers effectively reduce excessive
DYSFUNCTION
leart. rates, thereby improving diastolic flling: they
 Impaired systolic ejection can result from (l) pri-
can also diminish or eliminate dynamic IV outlow
mary myocardial failure (e.g., dilated cardiomyopa-
tracl obstruction and associated mitral regurgitation.7,8
thy); (2) chronic volume overload (e.g., chronic mitral
As a result, ventricular performance may improve. Dil-
valvc insufficiency or a congenital shunt [atrial septal
u uonexejai pepesoiu aotdun on paltodat s! uazen
defert, ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arterio-
cats with HCM and may also cause regression of IV
sus]); or (3) chronic pressure overload (e.g., outflow
hypertrophy in some cats. $ Diltiazem also tends 10
tract obstruction or arterial hypertension). Reduced
slow resting lieart rate, but this effect is not as reliable
 myocardial contracility is the initial and principal ab-
or as dramatic as 1hat observed with β-blockers wlien
 normality in patienis with dilated cardiomyopathy.
 sympatlieric tone is high. Diltiazem does not appear
Witli chronic pressure or volume overload, myocardial
   t     
failure eventually develops secondary to some other
blorkers.
cardiac disorder, such as valvular stenosis or insuffi-
Pulmonary edema is nost efectively treated with
ciency. In these patients, signs of congestive lheart fail-
furosermide. Cats with refractory pulmonary edema
ure can develop with no or only modest reductions in
due to HCM may benefit fron combined treatment
myocardial contractility. A thorough understanding of
with furosemide and a venous vasodilator, such as ni-
normal systolic function provides the basis for assessing
troglycerin. However, when filling is impaired, exces-
systolir dysfunction and its therapeutic implications.
HEART FAILURE: PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT, THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES, AND PHARMACOLOGY2
219
Thc rclationship between wall stress and ventricular
450 
volume inl a 11ormal dog is dcpictcd in Figurc 12-2.
During diastolc, thc ventricle fills to a certain end-
 diastolic volume, with accompanying cnd-diastolic wall
stress. During isovolumic systole, the mitral and aortic
valves are closcd and lcft vcntricular prcssure riscs,
but left vcntricular volumc and wall thickness do not
E
300
change, This results in increascd wall stress. Ejection
3/6)
begins when the aortic valve opcns. During cjcction,
ssa
pressure inercascs a small amount and thcn declincs
Stre
as chamber diamcter decreases aud the wall thickcns.
This results in dccrcasing wall suress throughout cjcc-
IIDM
tion. During isovolumic relaxation, wall stress de-
150
creases while left ventricular volume stays thie same.
The rclationship of conuractility to systolic wall stress
(afterload) and ventricular volume in a normal dog is
illustrated in Figure 12-3. If systolic intravcntricular
prcssure is incrcased, systolic wall strcss (afterload)
increascs, resulting in decrcased fiber shortening. End-
Vo
50
100
150
systolic volume increascs because thc chamber 110
Ventriculor Volume (ml/m2)
longer can cmpty as completely as it did before. Whcn
FIGURE 12-3
a line is drawn connccting the cnd-systolic wall stress-
Wall siress-volume loops lbefore and after the aclministration of an
yolumc points from each loop, its slope (Fmas) and x-
agent that constricts systemic arterioles. As cnd-systolic pressure
axis interccpt (V) defie myocardial contractility.t$
(lhence wall stress) increases, heart muscle contrartion is reduced
at end-systole. This causes an inerease in cndl-svstolic: volunie and at
leereasc in stroke volune. The slope (Emx) arid x intercept (V.)
Primary Myocardial Failure
of the line conneeting the end-systolie wall stressvolume points
Taurine deficiency cardiomyopathy in cats and idio-
define myocardial contractility. (From Kirtleson ME., Management
 pathic dilated cardiomyopathy of largc-breed dogs arc
of heart. failure: Concepts, therapeutic strategies, and drug
pliarnacology. f# Fox PR [ed]: Canine and Feline Cardiology. 1st
ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1988, p 179.)
cxamplces of discases causing reduced myocardial con-
300
(g/cm
crcascd, Faax flattcns and V, shifts to thc right.t7 For
aly givei1 end-systolic wall strcss, elid-systolic volume is
increased because the weakencd muscle fibcrs cannot
SS
shorten as far. As a rcsult, stroke volume declies.
tre
The body compensates for decrcased stroke volume by
S
150
incrcasing hcart rate and by incrcasing prcload via
D
renal salt and water rctention. Fluid retention in-
creascs end-diastolic prcssure and end-diastolic vol-
W
umc, thercby incrcasing stroke volume (Frank-Star-
ling law).
lucrcased cnd-diastolic yolumc causcs the normal
ventricular wall to strctch around a largcr than lormal
chamber, and the ventricular wall bccomes thinncr.
50
100
Thc result is incrcascd cnd-diastolic wall stress. When
Ventricular Volume (ml/m2)
cnd-diastolic volume and wall stress icrcasc, the sar-
FIGURE 12-2
comcrcs within thc myocytes replicate in series, and
Normal wall stress-volume loxp for the lefl ventricle. A, End-
wall thickness increases in proportion to the change
diastole and the point at which the mitral valve closes. A-B,
in chamher sizc.18 This type of cardiac hypertrophy is
Isovolumic systole. B, The onsel of cjeclion and pening of the
called eccentric or volume overload hypertrophy. Ecceitric
aortie valve. B-C, Fjection; the volume of B minus the volume of C
hypertrophy allows a moderately impaired heart to
is the stroke vofhume. C, End-systole and closing of the axrtic valve. C-
D, Isovolumic relaxation. D, Miral valve opening. D-A, Ventricular
ejcct a normal stroke volume despite diminishcd myo-
filling. (From Kittleson ME. Maragement of licart failure:
cardial contractility.
Concepts,therapeutic suategies,and drug pharmacology.InFox
PR Ied: Ganine and Feline Cardliology. Ist cd. New York.
A wall stress-volume loop fiom a paticnt with severe
Churchil I ivingstone, 1988, p 178.)
myocardial failure (dilatcd cardiomyopathy [DCM]) is
220 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
depictcd in Figurc 12-4. In this cxample, end-diastolic
chamber dilation. As myocardial conntractility contin-
volumc index (EDVl) is increased from the normal
ues lo declinc, thc compcnsatory process of myocar-
dial hyperirophy fails, the ratio of wall thickness to
to 250 ml/m2. End-systolic volumc indcx (ESV1) is
chamber size declines, systolic wall stress in1creases, alnd
incrcascd from a normal valuc of lcss than 30 ml/
heart failure occurs.
m" to 220 ml/m2. Thc mitral valvc annulus has been
enlarged by left vcntricular dilation, resulting in mild
 IMPLICATIONS FOR THERAPY. Scveral different surategies
mitral regurgitation. This patient's total left vcntricular
can he employcd to trcat primary myocardial failurc.
stroke volurme index (EDVI-ESVI) is 30 ml/m2. How-
The ideal trcatment would restore myocardial contrac-
ever, 20 percent of that stroke volume index (6.0 ml/
tility to normal, as occurs whcn taurine is provided to
m") is cjcctcd into the left atrium owing to the mitral
cats with taurine deficiency '6 The rationale for using
rcgurgitation. Consequently, the forward stroke vol-
 positive inotropic drugs is that functional improvc-
ume index (that amount ejected into the aorta) is only
ment should occur if thc drug is sufficicntly potcin,
24 ml/m?, comparcd with a normal stroke volume
and if the surviving myocytes can respond. Positivce
indcx of 30 to 50 ml/m?. Bccausc of the large end-
inotropes such as dobutamine and milrinone are often1
diastolic volume and thc stiffer than normal myocar-
used successfully to treat humans with acute, decom-
dium, cnd-diastolic prcssure is inercascd, causing pul.
pensated myocardial failure.19 These drugs improve
molary edema. Incrcascd cnd-diastolic prcssure and
but do not normalize myocardial conuractility (Fig.
chamber dilation1 have increased elnd-diastolic wall
12-4). Unfortunately, survival times arc diminishcd in
stress, maximally stretching the sarcomeres at enid-dias-
humans trcated chronicaly with β,-agonists or phos-
tolc, stimulating further sarcomere replication ad
phodiesterasc inhibitors, in part bccausc of an in-
creased rate of sudden death.9 2 For this rcason, thcsc
s u ndx aep oo p posn ou e snp
cial circumstanccs. Digoxin, which has no effect on
overall mortality, is oftci1 uscd chronically to improve
contractility, to conntrol supraventricular tachycardias,
450
and to modulate some of the autonomic chanigcs
/cm²)
evoked in heart failure,1s. 19
Current strategies for the long-term management of
6
chronic myocardial failure emphasize drugs that re-
Stress
300
duce afterload, decrease cardiac venous return, or
modify the systermic neurohormonal responses elicited.
by declining cardiac function (Figs. 12-4, 12-5),19 This 
Wall
approach allows cardiac output to increase without
150
incrcasing myocardial work and oxygen consumption,
while reducing diastolic intraventricular prcssurcs. Im-
proved cxcrcisce toleralice and incrcascd survival timcs
 J     t  
50
100
V。 150
200
250
failure, diuretics are required to control congcstion
Ventricular Volume (ml/m²)
and edema.
FIGURE 12-4
Wall stress volume loops from a dog with severe myocarrlial failure.
Chronic Volume Overload
The solid line represents baseline values. End-diastolic venuricular
 Mitral, aortic, and tricuspid regurgitation and leff-
volune is incrcased Ixcause of renal salt and water retention,
leading to ccrcentric hypertrophy. End-systolic volume is increased
to-right shunts, such as ventricular septal defect (VSD)
because of decreased myocardial contractility and incrcased systolic
and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), cause volume
of the line defining contractility) is llatter dhan normal, and V,
overloading of the left- or right-sided hcart, or hoth.
(the x intercept of that line) is shifted to the right (i.e., myocardial
Volurne overload results in1 ccccntric hypcrtrophy of
the involved chambers and hcart failure if scvere. Re-
the new loop forrned after administration of a positive inotrope;
F.. becones steeper, resuling in a deercase in cnd-systolic
pair of the lcsion is preferred aund is most commonly
volumc antd, therefore, incrcasc in stroke volume, The dashed line
available for PDA. When repair of the defect is not al1
shows a portion of a new loop that forms afier the administration
option, the goal of mcdical therapy is to dclay thc
of an arteriolar dilator. En and V, do not change,but systolic wall
 onset of heart failurc, slow progrcssion, and reducc:
stress decreases hecause of the resultant decrease in blood
pressure. End-systolie volume decreases dlue to the increased stroke
associated clinical sigu1s.
volume. (From Kittleson ME. Management of lhicarl failurc:
Concepts, therapeutic strategies, and drug pharmacology. In Fox
PR [ed]: Canine and Feline Cardiology. Ist ed. New York,
MITRAL REGURGITATION. Acute mitral regurgitatio11
Churchill Livingstone, 1988, p 182.)
(MR) causes a decrease in forward stroke volume by
HEART FAILURE: PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT, THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES, AND PHARMACOLOGY 2
221
permitting a certain perccntage of the ejected strokc
volumc to leak Irom the lefl vetriclc (IV) back into
thc left atrium (l.A). Decreased forward stroke volume
 and cardiac output stimulate sympathetic outflow and
(g/cm
300
catccholaminc release, thereby increasing hcart ratc
and conitractility. Dccreased renal perfusion stimulates
ress
renal compcnsatory responscs and renin releasc from
thc kidncy. Within 2 to 4 days, about 50 perccnt of
Str
150
,1
the β-reccptors become descnsitizcd to catecholamine
Wall
1
slimulation.* For a timc, fluid retention and thc
Starling mechanism help compensate for the initial
dcclinc in sirokc volume. Eventually, the I V hypertro-
phics to accommodate the volumc of blood rcgurgi-
tatcd into the LA. End-diastolic wall strcss returns to
50
100
150
200
250
normal but the IV is now cnlarged.
Ventricular Volume (ml/m?)
 In paticnts with MR, about 50 pcrcent of the total
FIGURE 12-6
left venntricular stroke volumc may be ejected into the
LA before the aortic valvc opcns. This permits the LV
Lefl ventricular wall stressvolume relations are illusrated for a
to eject a large blood volume at rclativcly low pressurc,
normal dog (dotted-line loop on the left), a dlog with adlvanced
mitral regurgitation (dashed-line lexop in the middlle), and a dog
with low wall stress and only modest increases in myo-
with cndstage mitral regurgilation and myocardial Failure due to
cardial oxygcn cousumption. These conditions allow
chronic. volume overload (solicl-line loop to the right). Uogs with
myocardial contractility to remain normal for pro-
nitral regurgitation are able to cject a very large stroke volunie
while maintzaining normal or nearly normal contracility for long
longed periods,26 A wall stress-volume loop from such
periods of time. In this circumstance. jeetion fraction is markedly
a dog is illustrated in Figure 12-6. Since contracility
increased, and end-systolic. volune and coniractility are cssentially
is norinal and systolic wall stress is relatively normal,
normal. The slope (Emx) of the line connceting Lhe end-systolic.
wall stres-volume cncl-points from cach loop and the x intercept
elld-systolic. volume is normal.
(V.) define myocardial contractility, Myocardial failure cventually
As thc mitral valvc continues to degeerate and the
develops, as indicated by the reduced (*"flartening') slope (Ema),
righiward shift of V., increased entdl-systolic volume, antl declining
ejection frartion.
LV continues to enlarge, an ever-increasing perccntagc
shop u nuod 0e 0 c4 0i dn) aoa oyons su jo
with severc MR) is ejectcd into the LA. Progrcssivc
enlargemcnt of the lef-sided hcart is accompanicd by
incrcased wall siress and myocardial oxygcn consump-
tion. Periphcral vasoconstriction and fluid retcntion,
evokcd by neurohormonal responscs to declining car-
diac output, increase afterload and preload, further
Congestion
increasing the rcgurgitant volume and heart size. Di-
MTL
page, and excessive afterload detract from thc inotro-
Low CO and Congestion
 pic support provided by ncurohormonal activation.27
Low co
In1 dogs with experimcntally creatcd MR, the cxtent of
10
20
30
myocardial dysfunction can be demoustrated by ad-
ministration of β-adrenergic blocking drugs.2s Eventu
ATRIAL PAESSURE
ally, dogs withi severe valvular insufficiency experiencc
FIGURE 12-5
a substantial decline in rnyocardial contractility, as illus-
A Frank-Starling curve of a patient in class IV hearl failure (poinl
trated inn Figure 12-6.
A). With nyocardial failure, administration ol a positive inotrope
The severity of pulmonary congcstionl and thc re-
inotrope and liuretic (or venodilator) or balanced vasodilator,
sulting clinical signs do not nccessarily reflect the vol-
improvenent oeeurs to point C. Patients with mitral rcgugitation
umc of regurgitation or thc contractile state of the
caun move from point. A 1o point C with an arteriolar dilator or a
myocardium. Pulinonary congestion tends to devclop
balanced vasoxlilator. Overzealous dliuretie aclministration or
dehydration can result in the patient's cardiovascular fuction
when left atrial prcssurc rises sufficienuy (to about 25
moving to point D Yotice that this causes lirtle change in cardiac
inclex. (from Kitdeson M. Concepts and therapeutie: strategies in
nary capillarics. I.cft atrial pressure is a functionn of left
Veterinary Therapy. Vot VII1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1983. p
atrial compliancc, thc volume of blood arriving from
279.)
the right-sided heart, thc volumc of blood that leaks
222 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
from the ventricle (regurgitant volume), and the dia-
cardial work, and oxygcll consumption are concomi-
slolic pressure of the LV.? Pulmonary cdema can dc-
tantly higher, resulting in earlier devclopinent of myo-
velop when the regurgitant volume is rclatively modcst.
cardial failure,33 In these circumstances, medical
if the atrium is small and noncompliant. An enlarged,
managcmcnt consists of afterload reduction with arte-
compliant IA can accommodate a fairly large volune
rial vasodilators or ACE inhibitors, diurctics to alleviate
of mitral regurgitation with a relatively modest rise in
signs of congestion, and positive inotropic drugs to
pressure. Thus, congestive signs may not correlate with
improve failing contractility. Surgical repair should be
the degree of regurgitation or left atrial size.
 accomplished before irreversible myocardial failurc en-
 The rcgurgitant volume is a fiunction of the pressure
sues. This is routinely accomplished in dogs with a
gradicnt hctwccn the IA and IV and the size of the
PI)A,
rcgurgitant orifice* The size of the regurgitant orificc
is a dynamic quantity that changes as the ventricle
Chronic Pressure Overload
contracts. Arterial vasodilating drugs reduce the vol-
Acute, experimentally crcated aortic stenosis rcsults
umc of mitral rcgurgitation by two mechanisms: (1)
they reducc the IV-LA pressure gradient, and (2) they
in increased intravenuricular prcssure, causing wall ten-
sion or strcss during systole (afterload) to incrcasc.
causc the ventricle (and the mitral annulus) to co11-
This increascd afterload initially rcsults in an incrcasc
tract at a fastcr vclocity, thereby reducing regurgitaint
in cnd-systolic volume and a dccrcase in stroke volume.
orificc size.* The vasodilating cffect of ACE inhibition
The myocardium responds to this prcssure overload
is more modest and dcpcindeint on the degrce of neu-
through conceintric hypcrtrophy, whcrein the sarco-
rohormonal activation. Direct-acting arterial vasodila-
 eres replicate inl parallel, causing thc muscle fbers
tors, although more potent, have the disadvatage of
t0 thickcin.'" Concentric hypertrophy returns systolic
cyoking reflex tachycardia.
wall stress and end-systolic volume back to normaf.
Diuretics and venodilators diminish plasma volume:
However, capillary density and myocardial perfusion
and increase venous capacitance, respcctively, thercby
 direculy reducing lefl atrial pressure. Diuretics cffcc-
 do not increase in proportion to the increasc in muscle
mass. 31 Chronic myocardial hypoxia results in prema-
tivcly relicve congestive signs in dogs with DCM or MR.
 For this reason, diurctics are an essential componennt
tuirc death of myocardial cells. Myocardial failurc oc-
curs in dogs with pulmonic stenosis and in some dogs
of thcrapy. Thcir use evokes marked neurohormonal
rcsponses, which may be disadvantagcous. To thc cx-
with congenital subaortic stcnosis as global myocardial
tenut they reducc left ventricular size, diuretics and
yenodilators rcduce mitral regurgitant volume. Positive
sequela of severe subvalvular aortic stenosis in dogs is
suddenl death fron venitricular arrhythinia, presumably
inotropic drugs increase the velocity of myocardial
 as a result of myocardial hypoxia.* Sevcrc conccntric
contraction, thercby reducing regurgitant orifice arca
A s nou  pa s g'aoa t p
hypertrophy and ischemia-induced rmyocardial fibrosis
important for weak positive inotropcs like digoxin.
substantially compromisc left venntricular compliance
and call cause diastolic dysfunction.
More potcnt positive inotropic drugs, such as milri-
 one and dobutaminc, are more likely to induce a
Successful trcatment of left- or right-sided hcart out-
flow obstruction is hest accomplishcd by relicving
substantial reduction in regurgitant volume.
the ohstruction, cither by surgery or balloon valvu-
loplasty36. 37 In thosc patients with sigus of heart fail-
SHCNTING DEFECTs. Vcntricular scptal defccts (VSD)
urc, trcatment with digoxin call provide modest im-
cause hemodynarnic altcrations similar to those ob-
provcment, but congestive signs are bcst treated with
scrved in mitral regurgitation. Bccause thc shunted
cxcrcise restriction1, diuretics, anid venodilators. Control
blood is ejected from the left ventricle into a low-
of hcart rate is important iu patients with suspected.
pressure reservoir (the right velitriclc), the incrcase in
cornpliancc failure (scvcre hypertrophy or exteusive
wall stress and oxygen consumption is minimal. As in
dogs with mitral regurgitatioil, myocardial function is
drugs has not bcen evaluatcd in dogs with outflow
rclatively well prescrved for a variable period of time,
tract obstructiois, but such therapy looks promising in
depending on the size of the defcct, Arterial vasodila-
expcrimcntally crcated obstructions.s* Arterial vasodi-
tors decreasc the LvRV pressure gradicit, thereby
lating drugs should hc avoided in paticnts with severe
rcducing the shunt fraction, slowing thc progression
outflow tract obstructions as they are likcly to precipi-
of cardiac enlargerment, and delaying the onsct of
tate serious systemic hypotension and reflcx tachycar-
hcart failure.*2 1n patienits with a VSD, the sizc of the
holc in the septum is fixcd. Positive iotropic drugs do
dia, thereby further diminishing myocardial perfusion.
not cffect any change in the volune of shunted blood.
 In othcr typcs of volume ovcrload, such as PDA or
RIGHT- VERSUS LEFT-SIDED HEART' FAILURE
aortic regurgitation, the LV must eject its cntire strokc
I11 animals with heart failure, congestion develops as
volume into the high-pressurc aorta. Wall stress, rnyo-
a coiisequcnce of excessive venous pressure due to thc
HEART FAILURE: PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT, THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES, AND PHARMACOLOGY  223
combined effects of increased plasma volurc (sodium
1. Relicf of life-threatening pulmonary cdema,
 and water retention) and dccreased vcuous capaci-
2. Maintenance of adequate systemic arterial blood
tallce (venoconstriction). With leff-sided heart impair-
pressure, and
ment, pulmonary venous pressures increase, resulting
 3. Adequate delivery of hlood flow to vital issues.
in pulmonary edema and sigiis of rcspiratory distress
(i.c, left-sided CHF). With right-sidcd heart impair-
Onc should select drugs with a rapid onsel of action
 and proven hemodynamic bencfits. Many drugs capa-
ment, systemic vellous pressures risc, resulting in hcpa-
tomegaly and ascites (i.c., right-sidcd CHF). Becausc
ble of irmproving cxcrcise capacity or prolonging sur-
the capacitance of the splanchuic veins and the sys-
vival in paticnts with chronic heart failurc are ncither
 appropriate nor effective when administered to acutely
temic venous reservoir is large, a rathcr substantial
increase in blood volume is required to raise systernic
decompenisated patients. Conversely, manly of the
 drugs used to optimize a patient's prospects for short-
venous pressure. As a result, right-sided congestive
tern survival are not effective for increasing exercise
signs tend to develop slowly.39
By comparison, the capacitance of the pulmonary
capacity or prolonging survival when thcy are adminis-
tered chronically. Treatment designed to realize long-
veins is small. Relatively small changes in blood volume
or its distribution can causc a rapid rise in pulinonary
term therapeutic goals should be implemented afer
the acutely ill paticnt is stabilized.
venous prcssure and pulmonary cdema. Suddcn in-
creascs i1 sympathetic tone (fcar, anxicty, cxercise)
constrict thc splanchnic veins, causing a shift of thc
OXYGEN sCPPLEMENTATION. Artcrial hypOxcImia ca11 bc
circulating blood volurne from thc systemic to thc
 best remedied by providing all oxygcn-enriched envi-
pulmonary venous rcservoir. This is olic reason for thc:
ronmenl and by rapidly reducing lefi atrial and pulmo-
often rapid oliset of pulmonary cdema in animals with
nary venous pressure. Oxygcn cagcs provide oxygen
left-sided heart failure.
concentrations (F10g) in the range of 40 to 50 percent.
Altcrnatively, oxygen can be administered via an intra-
nasal catheter, providing oxygcn conccntrations as
TREATMENT STRATEGIES
high as 90 percent, depending on the flow ratc uscd.40
INTRAVENOUS DILRETICS AND VASODILATORS. Acute re-
ACUTE CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE
duction of pulmonary venous prcssure (and pulmo-
nary cdema) is achievcd by V administration of a
Acute heart failure can develop suddenly with the
potcnt vasodilator to redistribute intravascular fluid
onset of a liew and rapidly progrcssing disease or from
volume annd IV administration of a potcnt diuretic to
exacerbation of a previously cxisting chronic disorder.
reduce total blood volume. Furosemide is a potent
Most affectcd dogs and cats suffer from a chronic,
loop diuretic that should be administered IV when
pre-cxisting cardiac disorder. Some owncrs disconitinuc
doses (2.2 to 4.4 mg/kg in dogs, 1.1 to 2.2 mg/kg in
pet begins to urinate cxcessively. A ncw arrhythmia,
cats) may be administered frequently (initially every 1
such as atrial fbrillation, can also precipitate signs of
to 2 hours) until respiratory rate and dyspnea start to
-ed pesaduoo xisnad e u aney iueay ane
decline. Dosage should then be reduced (2 to 4 mg/
tient. Dictary changes or other environimental strcsses
kg q 8 to 12 hr in dogs, 1 to 2 mg/kg q 8 to 12 hr
 Occasionally prccipitatc hcart failure. Identification of
in cats). Excessivc dosing can lead to dchydration,
thc underlying precipitating event helps guide therapy.
clectrolyte deplction, renal failurc, low cardiac output,
Dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy are often presented
and circulatory collapse. Appropriate monitoring re-
with fulminating pulnonary cdema duc to acute de-
quircs periodic dctermination of serum clectrolyles
compcnsated  left-sided hcart failure  and profoumd
and urine production.
myocardial failure. There is often no prior history of
 Sodium nitroprusside is an cxtrcmcly potent, direct-
 hcart discase and no idcntifiable precipitating cvent.
acting, mixcd vasodilator that is primarily uscd to res-
 A number of drugs and therapies can be useful for
cue:
dogs  with life-threatening pulmonary edema
caused by mitral regurgitation or dilated cardiomyopa-
treating acute CHF.
thy.41 In this circumstancc, it may bc more cffective
than furoscmide for immcdiately dccrcasing left vc1l-
TREATMENTPRIORITIES
tricular filling pressurc, left atrial pressurc, and pulmo
Pulmonary Edema Associated with Mitral
nary vcnous pressurc. Its hemodynamic cffects whc1
 Regurgitation or Dilated Cardionyopathy
uscd in animals with CHF include decreased right
atrial anid pulmollary capillary wcdge prcssures, de-
In patients with acute, decompensatcd GHF, imme-
crcascd systemic vascular resistance, alnd increased car-
 diate priorities include
diac output. 4 I dogs with mitral regurgitation, rcgur-
gitant volume can bc markcdly rcduccd as the IV-1A
hydrochloride is administcred by continuous IV imfu-
prcssurc gradicnt and arca of the regurgitant orifice
sioll at 2 to 8 μg/kg/minl.
arc diminished.*
The most commoil adversc cffects ohservcd with
Following dilution in 5 percent dextrosc, sodium
dobutamine or dopamine are tachycardia aund arrhyth-
nitroprusside is infused using a constant rate infusion
rmia. These effects are usually dose rclatcd and can hc
pump (initial ratc, 1.0 μg/kg/min). The rate of ad-
remedied by stopping or slowing the administration
ministration is titrated to effcct by monitoring blood
rate.
pressure (and ideally, pulmonary capillary wedgc prcs-
Amrinone and milrinone are cardioactive bipyridines
sure), to a maximum dose of 10 μg/kg/min. In most.
that increasc myocyte concentrations of cyclic adeno-
cases, an infusion rate of 2.0 to 5.0 μg/kg/min suffices.
Adversc side cffccts include hypotension, tachycardia,
hibition. Thcsc potent positive inotropcs also havc di
lausca, vomiting, and, with chronic adminisuration,
rect-acting arterial vasodilator propertics, Amrinonc
cyanide poisoning. Because of its short half-life,
the
and milrinone are currcntly availablc only as IV prepa
serious conscquenccs of profound hypotension
are
rations for short-term use in paticnts with decompen-
avoidable whcn paticnts arc carefully monitored. Hy-
sated heart failure. Neither has bccn uscd cxtcnsively
potcnsion is usually managed by slowing the rate of
in client-owned animals. In dogs, amrinone can be
infusion.
initially administercd as a slow IV holus (1.0 to 3.0
Alternatively, hydralazic tablcts (crushcd and
mg/kg), and thereafier by constant IV infusion (10 to
mixed with water) can be adrministered (0.5 to 2.0 mg/
100 μg/kg/min). Milrinone is 10 to 30 times more
kg PO) in combination with a nitrate (eithcr nitroglyc-
potent than amrinone, but the dose of the IV prepara-
erin ointment, 1/4 to 3/4 inch cutaneously to thc
tion is not well cstablishcd.
pinna q 8 to 12 hr, or isosorbide dinitrate, 0.5 to 2.0
Commonly observed adversc cffccts of the bipyri-
mg/kg q 8 hr PO). This latter approach seems to
dincs inchudc a dosc-rclated incrcasc in hcart rate;
work hetter in dogs with mitral regurgitation than with
gastrointestinal signs, including diarrhea and anorexia;
and at high doscs, hypotension. Amrinonc and milri-
none also cau induce or potentiate serious ventricular
 POSITIVE INOTROPEs. Inotropic support is very im-
arrhythmia.
portant with acute hcart failure due to dilated cardio-
Digoxin is a comparatively weak positivc inotrope
myopathy, and it is also used to treat sevcrcly dccom-
with a narrow margin of safety. In most cases, digitalis
pensated
mitral
regurgitatioi1.1
Dobutamille
and
glycosidces can he administered orally, starting at main-
dopamine are synthetic catecholamines that arc morc
tenancc dosage (dogs: 0.22 mg/m*, or 0.005 to 0.008
cfficacious than digoxin for acute rmanagement of pro-
mg/kg q 12 hr [subtract 10 percent if elixir is used];
found myocardial failurc. Because of their very short
cats: 2 to 3 kg, 0.0312 mg q 48 hr PO; 4 to 5 kg, 0.0312
half-livcs, thcy are best suited to short-term IV usc.
mg q 24 to 48 hr; > 6 kg, 0.0312 mg q 24 hr). Rapid.
Efficacy is limited during chronic administration by
intravcnous digitalization is rarely necessary in dogs
down regulation of β-adrenergic receptors.2 There-
with acute heart failure cxcept to control certain supra-
fore, thcsc drugs arc gencrally uscd only for 24 to
ventricular tachyarrhythrmias.
72 hours.
Dobutamine incrcascs contractility with ltle change
in heart rate or afterload. For this rcason, it is prc-
Treatment of Serious Arrhythmias
ferred over other sympathomimetic drugs for thc trcat-
ment of heart failure. Dohutaminc hydrochloride is
The most commonly encountered arrhythrmias in1
 administered by constant IV infusion (5.0 to 15.0 μg/
dogs with acute heart failure are atrial fibrillation,
kg/min). In patients with CHF, the volumc of thc
atrial tachycardia, and ventricular tachycardia.t3 is Sub-
infusion should be minimized. With thc rcccnt avail.
stantial hemodynamic and clinical inprovement can
ability of generic drug supplies, treatrnent with dobu-
often be rcalizced by successful treatment (chapter 18).
tarninc is now more affordable and practical in veteri-
Rapid oral digitalization is appropriate in dogs with
lary paticts.
Dopamine stimulatcs β-rcccptors and, at high doses.
in those with paroxysmal or sustaincd atrial tachycar-
also releascs 1lorcpincphrine from sympathetic nerve
dia. One practical method to hasten the achicevemcnt
terminals. At low doscs (< 5.0 μg/kg/min), dopamine
 of therapeutic blood concentrations is simply to give
causes selective artcriolar dilation in rcnal, mesenteric,
the calculated maintenance dosc threc times rather
coronary, aund cercbral vascular beds. For this reason,
thau twice daily, for 1 or 2 days. Thc IV routc is
it may be useful for treating paticnts with concurrent
heart and renal failure. At high doscs, dopaminc
tained atrial tachycardia, an excessively fast heart rate
causes generalized systemic arteriolar vasoconstriction,
(usually greater than 220 beats/minute), and life-
an undesirable effect with heart failurc. Dopaminc
thrcatening hemodynamic compromise. Intravenous
HEART FAILURE: PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT, THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES, AND PHARMACOLOGY
225
diltiazem may be a safer and more cffcctive trcatmcnt
CHRONIC CONGESTIVE HEART
in this situation.
FAILURE
lmmediately life-threatening ventricular tachycardia
mensuupe au Aq paseueu Aanendoidde isou s!
CLINICAL CLASSIFICATION
of IV lidocaine or procainamide (chapter I8). If hy-
poxernia precipitatcd the arrhythmia, oxygen supple-
Human hcart failure patients are often categorized
mcntation and relicf of pulmonary edema are essen-
into heart failure classes that are bascd upon exercise
tial. Acid-base and clectrolyte disturbances should also
ability and scverity of clinical signs.*6 This Ncw York
bec trcated appropriately. 1f digitalis toxicity is a likely
Heart Association scheme has bcen modified for veteri-
causc, the slow infusion of potassium salts or phenytoin1
nary usc as follows: Functional class I represeints hcart
may cffectively abort the arrhythmia.
discase without exercise intolerance or signs of hcart
failure. Cardiomegaly is mild or abscnt. Functional class
/ denotcs animals that exhibit cardiac-related exercise
intolerancc, howcver mild. Thesc animals do not gen-
Low-Output Heart Failure
erally display radiographic evidence of pulmonary
edema, but substantial cardliomcgaly is usually appar-
Clinical signs rcferable to low cardiac output and
cnt. Paticnts with diastolic dysfuiiction due 1o left ven-
hypotension may accompay acute hcart failure associ-
 tricular hypertrophy may cxhibit minimal radiographic.
ated with acute cardiac tamponade, massivc pulmo-
cvidenice of left ventricular cnlargement. Punctionat
uary thromhoemholism, or sudden myocardial depres-
class Il includes animals with signs of heart failurc
sion due to ancsthetic or circulating toxins. Congestive
during normal activity. In animals with lef-sided heart
signs and cdcma are usually absent initially bccausc
renal and neurohormonal compensatory responses
failure, radiographic changes include marked cardio-
mcgaly or at least left atrial enlargement, distended
that act to conservc sodium alid water have 1lot had a
pulmoiary veins, perihilar congestion (dogs but not
chance to opcratc. Low-output heart failure is best
cats), and interstitial or alvcolar infiltrates. In those
treated by resolving the prccipitating cvennt, by optimiz-
 paticnts with right-sided hcart failurc, thc liver may be
loddns yrdonou supiord Aq pue 'peord s!
enlarged, ascites is usually modest or ahsent, pericar-
dial and/or plcural cffusion is prescnt, and right-sidcd
or generalized cardiomegaly is evident. Functional class
Acute Hleart Failure in Feline Cardiomyopathy
/V anirnals are inl severe heart failurc and display obvi-
 Ous clinical signs at rest or with minimal activity. Radio-
Cats with acute pulmonary cdema duc to hypcrtro-
graphs dcmonstratc pulmonary cdcma with left-sided
 phic or restrictivce cardiomyopathy require prompt, ag-
heart failure, ascitcs or hydrothorax with right-sidcd
grcssivc trcatment. Because thesc animals havc heart
heart or biventricular hcart failurc, and cardiomegaly.
failure due to diastolic dysfunction, they do not bennefit
from positive inotropic drugs and may be made worse
Limitations of Heart Failure
if arterial vasodilators arc uscd. Thcrapy should bc
Classification Schemes
desigucd to relieve congestion and improve ventricular
filling. Most affected cats respond initially to IV furose-
This classification scheme has obvious limitations.
mide (2 to 4 mg/kg) combined with cutancous 2
Exercise tolerance in dogs and cats is rarely deter-
perccnt nitroglycerin ointmcnt (1/8 to 1/4 inch ap-
mined by any ohjective measure, and mild exercise
pliced to thc pinna q 8 hr) and supplcmental oxygen
limitations often go unnoticed. Thus, the distinction
thcrapy. After 24 to 48 hours, edema is usually reduccd
betwcen class I and class lI paticnts is often pragmati-
or resolvcd, and furosemide dosagc should be re-
cally based on radiographic heart size and cardiac
duccd. Additioual drugs can thcn he administered
function as judged by thoracic radiographs and/or an
t0 prcvent thromboermbolism, reduce heart rate, and
echocardiogram. Class II and class IV patients repre-
improve diastolic filling. Calcium channel blockers and
sel1t advanced disease and are morc easily identificd.
β-adrenergic receptor blockers have beci1 advocated
ln addition to thcse difficulties, thc optimal point in
to improve LV filling and cardiac pcrformance in cats
timc (Fig. 12-7) whcn one or morc cardiac drugs
with hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy. 7- Bcta-blockers
should be administcred to prevent discase progrcssion
(propranolol or atenolol) arec gencrally more cffective
is largcly unknown.
than diltiazcm in reducing heart rate. Some cats with
chronic HCM or RCM present with acute respiratory
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY AND MITRAY.
distress caused by the accumulation of a large pleural
REGURGITATION
cffusion. Successful treatment requires drainage of the
 pleural space. Thcreaftcr, trcatmcnt is bascd according
Trcatincit of class I and class II patienis with DCM
to the: dictates of the uderlying disorder.
 or mitral regurgitation is controversial. ln hurnans with
226
ABNORMALCARDIOVASCULARFUNCTIONANDPRINCIPLESOFTHERAPY
IIIVNYHeart Assoc
mg/kg/day),digoxin (dosed to achieve a serum con-
Functional Class
of Heart Failure
centration of about 1.0 to1.5 ng/dl),in combination
withACEinhibitors(enalaprilorlisinoprilat 0.5mg/
kg q 12 to 24 hr PO). This balanced pharmacologic
Atwhatpointintime
shouldtherapybeinitiated
approach is designed to improve clinical signs and to
Clinical signs:
P
toreducedisease
mitigateagainst theadverseconsequencesofneuro-
Severe
progression and
hormonal activation.It has been argued that digoxin
maximize survival?
Moderate
isunnecessaryindogswith endocardiosis thathaveno
Mild
or only mild myocardial dysfunction,and that its use
公
Pathology
enjoins an unacceptable risk of adverse drug effects.
Asymptomatic
CHF
Pilo,“98
Proponents of digitalis cite the importance of its effects
FIGURE12-7
onthe autonomicnervoussystem,aswell asitspositive
The optimal timing forinitiatingmedical therapy in dogs orcats
inotropic action.19.51 To date,there are no clinical
with progressive cardiovascular disease isuncertain andremains
trials in dogs or cats toindicate optimal therapies.
thefocus of much debate.Compensatory neurohormonal
responses are activated at different times and tovarying degrees.
Patients in functional classIII have signs of heart
This variesnot only between types of heart disease but alsowithin
failure during normal activity. Diuretics, ACE inhibi-
a particular disorder,dependingupon theseverity ofitsstructural
and functional derangements.Clinical studies wili be required to
tors,digoxin,salt-restricted diets,and curtailmentof
clarify the best sequence or combination of drugs to combat the
physical activity are often advised.Diuretics are admin-
deleterious consequences of neurohormonal activationin heart
istered more frequently and athigher doses (furose-
failure.(Courtesy of Dr.Philip Fox,The Animal Medical Center.)
mide, 1 to 2 mg/kg q 12 hr PO） than in class ⅡI
patients.ACE inhibitors(enalapril or lisinopril,0.5
mg/kgq12hrPO)areparticularlybeneficialfor
classIasymptomaticleftventricular dysfunctiondue
improving exercise capacity and delayingthe onset of
toischemiaorDCM,treatmentwithACEinhibitors
refractoryheartfailure.2Theydecreasetheconcentra-
delayed the onset of CHFbut did notprolong sur-
tionofplasma angiotensin II,a potentvasoconstrictor
vival.2 Onereport suggests that the same result might
beachievedinasymptomaticdogswithdilatedcardio-
myopathy,47 although this requires more extensive clin-
ical evaluation.
TreatmentofclassIIpatientswithsystolicdysfunc
EARLY,CLASSI&II
ACE inhibitor
+/-Furosemide
+/-
Digoxir
tion generally includes discontinuation of strenuous
HEART FAILURE
(esopMol)
activities or exercise and,potentially,anACEinhibitor
and digoxin (Fig. 12-8). Mild sodium restriction is
MODERATECLASSII
ACE inhibitor
Furosemide
+
sometimesadvocated,butthereisnoevidencethatit
HEART FAILURE
(moderate dose)
retards onset ofheart failure,improves longevity,or is
harmful.Currently,no drugs havebeen shown to alter
ACE inhibitor
+
Furosemide
the natural course of heart disease orprolong survival
SEVERE,CLASSIV
+nitrate
(high dose)
+
Digoxir
HEART FAILURE
+amlodipine
+
thiazide
in class II patients.
or hydralazine
+
spironolactone
Single-agent therapy with diuretics is usually not ad-
vocated since these drugs activate neuroendocrine re-
IntensivePharmacotherapy
sponses that mighthasten theprogression of heart
failure.8It isnotknown towhat effectthis isclinically
REFRACTORY
IVfurosemide and/ordiureticcombinations
HEART FAILURE
IVnitroprusside+dobutamine,dopamine
important. Proponents of monotherapy with an ACE
IVamrinone ormilrinone
inhibitorclaimthatitdelaystheonsetandretardsthe
progression of heart failure by virtue of its ability to
FIGURE 12-8
prevent sodium and water retention,moderate vaso-
Treatment strategiesfor heartfailure causedby systolicpump
constriction,and modify the adverse consequences of
tissue remodeling.23.49 Others have questioned the ef-
(myocardial) failure.In general, therapy escalates in proportion to
the severity of clinical signs,as do therisks of adverse drug
ficacy of this approach,particularlyin dogswithmitral
reactions and interactions.The benefits of using angiotensin-
regurgitation.Studies in CavalierKing Charles spaniels
arewell establishedindogswith dilatedcardiomyopathy.Their
with mitral regurgitation suggest that activation of the
effcacyndogswithitralregurgitationislessclearparticularly
renin-angiotensin system is not measurable,at least
in classI andclassII heart failure.Theindicationfor digoxin is
by plasma assays,until congestive signs are apparent
also controversial for treating dogs with early mitral regurgitation.
Some clinicians advocateitsuse early in the course of heart failure,
(classesIII and IV).5 More definitiverecommenda-
beginning in class I or II and continuing through class IV; others
tions require further clinical study.
recommenddigoxinonlyinthe latterstagesof heartfailure
（classesIII and IV).High doses of furosemide,combinations of
An alternativeregimen forclass IIpatients is to use
diuretics,andconcurrent administration ofvasodilators andACE
modest doses of diuretics (furosemide at 0.5 to 1.0
inhibitors are reserved for dogs in class IVheartfailure.
HEART FAILURE: PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT, THERAPELTIC STRATEGIES, AND PHARMACOLOGY  227
which rcduccs systemic vascular resistance. This lcads
forward strokc volumc and decreascs regurgitant flow,
to increased forward blood flow. In dogs with mitral
resulting in a decrcase in left atrial prcssure and reduc-
regurgitatiou, the left ventricle can thenn ejcct more
blood into the aorta, thercby reducing the volumc of
renal clearalice and inlcrcases the cffectivencss of furo-
blood regurgitatcd into thc left atrium. In addition,
semide.ss
plasma aldosteroie is reduced, which leads to de-
A1other vasodilator, amlodipinc, cau be used for thc
crcascd renal sodium and water retention. Digoxin is
same purpose as hydralazine.36 37 Amlodipine blocks
used in virtually all dogs with DCM, but there is less
the calcium channels inl vascular simooth muscle to
uamimity of opinion regarding the use of digoxin in
effect arterial vasodilation. It has reduced symptomis
 dogs with mitral regurgitation at this stage.
and improved excrcisc tolcrancc in humans with CHF
The same drugs used in class 1II paticnts are also
without increasing cardiovascular morbidity or mortal-
uscd in class IV patients, but the doses used arc usually
tenu jo paains shonod adoque 'oej un 
titratcd upward. Chronic therapy of class IV patients
 patiennts with dilated cardiomyopathy37 The cfficacy of
often requircs a varicty of drug combinations tailored
this compound in dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy
to mcct the nccds of the individual patient. Such ag-
or chronic degcnerative valve discase has not been
gressive therapy engenders the unavoidable possibility
 determined. Prcliminary clinical observations suggest
of adverse drug reactions and often unexpccted drug
that amlodipine is effcacious in dogs with heart failure
interactious. Digoxin is adviscd in class IV patients if it
complicatcd by systemic hypertcnsion and in normo-
has not alrcady been prescribed. High doscs of furosc-
tensive dogs with refractory heart failure de to rnitral
mide (2 to 4 mg/kg q 8 to 12 hr) or combinations of
rcgurgitation. Its 30-hour halflife allows once-daily
diuretics are often uscd to treat refractory edema.
dlosing. but, concomitantly, its peak effect is lot real-
Addition of a differennt class of diuretic blocks the
izcd for 4 to 7 days.* This long half-lifc of amlodipine
adaptive responses that limit singlc-agent therapy, re-
is disadvantagcous should adversc cffccts. such as hypo-
sulting in a synergistic cffect.3 We someuimes combine
lension, occur.
cither chlorothiazide or hydrochlorothiazide with furo-
The cocornitant administration of an ACE inhibitor
scmide to combat refractory edema. Daily trcatrncnt
 and arterial vasodilator must bc approached cautiously
with furoscmide and a thiazide diurctic oftenl causes
since hypotension scverc ellough to produce scverc
 dehydration and clectrolytc dcpletion, particularly in
wcakncss, rcnal failurc, and dcath call rcsult. Arterial
cats. Administration of a thiazide drug cvery 2 or 3
vasodilators, cspecially hydralazinc, can cause reflex
days (in addition to furosemide) oftcn resolves refrac-
tachycardia, necessitating usc of a ncgative chrono-
tory pulmonary congestion without causing dehydra-
tropic agent. A digitalis glycoside is generaly the first
tion. Hlypokalcmia is uncommon in dogs but fre-
choice for this purposc, a β-adrenergic receplor
qucntly occurs in anorectic cais receiving diuretics.
blocking agent, such as propranolol, is tlic second
It can be prevented or minimized by oral potassum
choice, but many of thesc agenis dccrease contractility.
supplemcntation or, thcoretically, by adding spirono-
lactonc (1.0 to 2.0 mg/kg q 12 hr PO) to the treatment
TRICUSPID REGURGITATION
regimen.
An arterial vasodilator aind/or a nitrate can he:
Tricuspid regurgitation (TR) results in a volume
added to conventional therapy inl dogs with pulmonary
 Ovcrload of the right-sided hcart in the same fashion
cdema that is refractory to treatment with furosemidc,
that miral regurgitation causes volume overload of the
an ACF inhibitor, and digoxin. A conservative ap-
left-sidcd heart. The function of the right veintricular
proach is to add a nitrate first. Other morc potcint
myocardium in TR is unknown; it may bc normal
vasodilators can be added subsequenuly, if nccessary.
or depressed. Tricuspid regurgitation resuling from
Nitroglycerin ointment can be applied cutaneously,
chronic acquircd valve discasc (cndocardiosis) occurs
but the dose and eficacy of this modality arc uncer-
mainly in dogs with concurrent mitral regurgitation,
tain. Two other nitrates, isosorbide dinitratc and its
 but it sometimes appcars as an isolatcd problem. It is
major metabolite isosorbide mononitratc, are available
for oral therapy. Safe and cffective dosages of thesce
sion is preseint, as it can grcatly augment the volume
two drugs have not becn dctermincd in dogs or cats
of regurgitant flow. Thcrapy of right-sided heart failure
by controlled clinical trials. Therefore, it is advisable
 due to TR geuerally includes diuretics, an ACF inhibi-
t start low and titrale uupward to effect (see section
tor, and digitalis. Orally administcred drugs may be
 on pharmacology of nitrates). A dosage-free interval,
 poorly absorbed, and doses may have to be adjusted
typically 10 to 12 hours long, is advised when using
accordingly. In some cases, parenteral administration
nitrates to avoid the phcnomcnon of tolerance.
of fiuroscmide is needed for initial stabilization. Rc-
 Some paticnts with systolic (myocardial) failure im-
 peated abdominocentesis is often rcquircd whcn asci
prove with more aggressive afterload reduction.
In
tes is refractory to drug therapy.
Tricuspid rcgurgitation can also devclop as a conse-
228 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
quencc of pulnonary hypcrtension and right-sided
crgic blocker or calcium channcl blocking drugs can
hcart dilatation. Successful trcatment of pulmonary
be used to abolish or reducc the obsuruction.
lowcrs right atrial prcssure. This outcomc can some-
AORTIC STENOSIS
tincs bc accomplished in dogs with heartworms but
is otherwisc difficult. High doscs of calcium channel
blockcrs arc effective in sone human paticnts with
valvular or subvalvular aortic stcllosis (SAS) unlcss
idiopathic pulmonary hypcrtension.w When congeni-
thcre is coiicurrcint mitral valve dysplasia. This combi-
nation of defects is particularly difficult to treat, and
treated medically as described earlier. When tricuspid
the(
outcome is usually uusatisfactory Occasioally,
dysplasia occurs togcther with pulmonic stenosis, treat-
dogs with isolatcd (subvalvular) aortic stenosis devclop
1neint of pulmonic stcl1osis (ballooi1 valvuloplasty or
congcstive hcart failure,* Contractile indices arc usu-
surgery) will lower right ventricular systolic prcssurc,
ally reduccd, but diastolic compliance failure may also
thercby decrcasing rcgurgitant flow. Surgical repair or
play a role. The left ventricle is usually cxtensivcly
replacement of the tricuspid valve can also be consid-
hypcrtrophied, and thcre is a substantial amount of
ered.
myocardial fibrosis. Excrcise seerns to worsen conges-
tivc signs, and sudden death is a common sequela.
Coniservative doses of furosemide are ncccssary to con-
PATENT DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS
trol ederma when present, since the hypertrophicd leff 
ventricle is dependent on moderately clevated filling
Dcfinitive trcatmcnt of dogs with a PDA can be
pressures to cnsure optimal loading and strokc vol-
umc. Digoxin provides inotropic support and rnay im-
transcatheter ductal occlusion using coils or other de-
viccs (sce Fig. 24-16) (chapters 24, 39).60. o1 Dogs with
prove diastolic filling by reducing hcart rate. The value
of ACE inhibition is unknown, Dircct-acting arterial
congcstivc hcart failurc and myocardial failure are
vasodilators can precipitate scvere hypotension and
trcated in the same way as dogs with DCM, cxcept that.
should bc avoided.
the PDA should be occluded as soon as the ainirmal is
stabilized. An IV positivc inotropc, such as dobuta-
mine, shoull be administered during surgery and in
SYSTEMICHYPERTENSION
the early postoperative period in thesc cases to ofsct
 It is uncornmon for systemic hypcrtension to pro-
the rmyocardial depressant effects of ancsthesia.
ducc signs of left-sided heart failurc. While LV hypcr-
trophy is comrnonly documenntced using echocardiograt-
AORTIC INSUFFICIENCY
 phy in hypertensivc dogs and cais, the left aurium is
n1ot gcncrally cnlarged, More often, heart failure re-
Aortic regurgitation is most commonly causcd by
sults when systcmic hypertension complicatcs somc
bacterial enndocarditis (chapter 26). Signs of hcart fail-
 pre-existing condition, such as mitral regurgitation.
ure often develop suddenly, and rapid progression is
 T'he most common disease associated with systemic
thc rule.2 Acutc therapy consists of diuretic adminis-
 hypertension in dogs is renal disease or hypcradreno-
tration in combinatiou with an ACE inhibitor or vaso
corticism; in cats, renal disease or hypcrthyroidism is
dilators. Chronic therapy consists of digoxin, diuretics,
usually causativc (chapter 35).
ACE inhibitors, and/or vasodilators (usually hydrala-
When systcmic hypertension is associated with CIF,
zinc). Prognosis is poor. Most dogs that arc severely
it is treated aggressively using diuretics, vasodilators.
affected dic within wecks of diagnosis.
ACE inhibitors, β-adrenergic blockers, and calcium
channel blocking agents. Galcium channel antagonists
PULMONIC STENOSIS
and β-blockcrs must be uscd cautiously if myocardial
failure is prcsent. We currcntly favor amlodipine for
 Right-sided heart failurc is a common scquela to
treating systemic hypertension. For cats wcighing kcss
severe pulmonic stenosis. Medical trcatincnt consists
than 5.0 kg, thc dosc is 0.625 mg sid PO6 (may he
of exercise restrictioin, sodium restriction, digoxin,
0'g 1ao sieo ioJ (Aressu J! pq hu ez on penn
and, most importantly, diuretics (the value of ACE
kg, 1.25 mg sid is used initially. The best dosc of
inhibitors is unkilown). Relief of thc ohstruction offers
thc bcst chaice of long-term survival. Balloon valvu-
 ated at 0.05 to 0.10 mg/kg sid to bid PO. The dose is
loplasty is thc preferred trcatment for those lesion1s
titrated to cffect, up to 2.0 mg/kg sid, recognizing that
the plateau concentration is not achicved until 5 to 7
is also an option (chapter 39). Sorne dogs develop a
days after commencing thcrapy. Refractory cases may
 dynamic muscular outflow tract obstruction following
respond to combined trcatmcnt with amlodipine and
rcpair of thc steniotic valvc. Treatment with a β-adrcn-
atenolol.
HEART FAILURE: PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT, THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES, AND PHARMACOLOGY 229
REFRACTORY CHRONIC HEART FAILURE
properties of the commonly used positivce inotropic
Most animals with chronic heart failure suffer from
drugs.
a degenerative or heritable disease for which there is
11o know11 cure. Ilowever, sone have an identifiable
DIGITALIS GLYCOSIDES
systernic  disorder  that  precipitates  decompensated
 Since their auspicious beginning in the treatment of
heart failure (e.g., systenic hypertension, systemic i11-
dropsy by William Withering in 1785, the digitalis
flammation, 1eoplasia, hypothyroidism, aulemia, pileu-
glycosides have beenl ernbroiled in controversy regard-
monia, hyperadrenocorticism, pulnonary thromboem-
ing their use, mechanism of action, aud efficacy They
bolism, and renal failure) (chapter 33). Cogestive
have become the most studied of all cardiac drugs,
heart failure may be alleviated when these complicat-
with reports documenting effcacyb6-sx or lack of effi-
ing disorders are identified and treated. Therefore, it
cacy-za in the treatment of heart failure. Inl a land-
is always advisable to measure blood pressure, obtai11
mark double-blind, placebo-co1trolled study of 6800
current radiographs aund an electrocardiogram (ECG).
humans with heart failure and reduced ejection frac-
and obtain a complete clinical pathology data base.
tio1l, digoxin reduced the rate of overall hospitaliza-
'The precise cause of worseniung heart failure is often
tion but had uo effect on mortality (survival). The
difficult to identify. Echocardiography is desirable i11
latter distinguished it frorn other, more potent positive
all cats and dogs with refractory heart failure. Other
 -ndod apns sul z deou aseanou ieri sadono
specialized diagnostic procedures, including ambula-
tion represented different dliseases compared with
fory ECG recordings and invasive measurement of in-
those that affect dogs and cats. Therefore, direct ex-
tracardiac or yascular pressures, are sometimes re-
trapolatiou is uncertain.
quired to guide therapy. The inhereint risks and
complications of treatmeint are always greatest in ani-
sponses to digoxil, and it has been difficult to define
mals with refractory heart failure. Referral to a special-
therapeutic end-points.9 1n one study, only 5 of 22
ist should be sought before enbarking oil all ufamil-
iar or unconventional treatunent protocol.
but those 5 lived significanuy longer than the dogs
that did not respond in this fashion.7 Ilowever, the
DRUGS USED IN TREATING
inability lo measure an inotropic response by routine
tchocardiographic measurements does not preclude a
HEART FAILURE
positive inotropic effert or an efficacious clinical re-
 is'w ssuxop on asuods
Treatmeiit with digoxin
POSITIVE INOTROPIC AGENTS
should not be abandoued on this basis, nor should it
be uuniversally embraced based ont its theoretic benefits.
 A number of agents are available to treat myocardial
Because some patients respond to its use, digoxin
failure. Table 12--2 sumrmarizes the clinically important 
should be tried in rnost dogs with myocardial failure.
TABLE 12-2
Commonly Used Positive Inotropic Drugs
Greup
Mechanism of Action
Extracardiac Effecs
Dosage Range*
0.22 mg/tn² q12h (dogs) or
I anoxiul
0.005-0.08mg/kg
1igoxin
Arorexia, nausea.
Iuereased Ca'aailabilty
voniting,
(12h(cdogs)
Autonomic effects:
Inhibiion of a-/K
0.005-0.008 mg/kg g24h
Digitalis Glycosides
↓sympathetic oufow
diarrhea
(cals)
ATPase
↑ parasympathetic tone
Nenurologic signs
Cardiar arrhytlimia
0.033 mg/kg q8-12h (dogs)
Digitoxin
Crystodigiu
Nol used in cats
Alpha and betay receptor
Tachycardia
5.0-20.0 μg/kg/min (dogs)
Jobutrex
sti thulation
( uuys oot-gg ue spre
Doluamine
Generics
Synpathomimetic
Iucreased Ca' availalsility
Increases cAMP via beti;
Selective renal vasodiation
Tac:hycardlia
2-n μg/kg/mint
Artuncs
Dopamine
Generics
receptor stimulation
at low infusion rates
Cardiac arrhythmia
Generalized vasocoustriction
Sausea, anorexia
at high infusion rates
Plhlebitis
Bipyridine
Anrinone
Inw:or
1#zng/kg slow IV, then
spunoduo
10.0-100.0 pg/kg/miu
Inereased Cat+ availalbility
Cardiac arrhythmia
Phosphodiesterasc
Inhibition of type It CAMP
Periphteral vasodilation
l'achycardia
(PDE) Inhibitors
Miltitone
phospliodieslerase
Hypoteusion
Primacor
50 μg/kg slow IV. then
0.375 0.75 μg/kg/inin
*See tcxt for dtiscussion.
230ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
If 11o benefit is realized in the face of adverse side
effects, digoxin should be discoutinued.
interpatient variability exists. Digoxin is mainly ex-
creted in the urine via glomerular filtration and renal
PHARMACODYNAMIcs. The digitalis glycOsides i11crease
secretion. About 15 percent is metabolized i1 the liver.
contractility in normal myocardium and may also do
Rellal failure reduces reual clearauce, total body clear-
so in failing myocardiun. Their positive inotropic ef-
alce, and volume of distribution, resuling in an in-
fect in normal myocardium is about one third that of
creased serum digoxin concentratioi1.* Digoxin is
the sympathomimetics (e.g., doparnine, dobutamine)
 poorly lipid soluble, whereas digitoxin is lipid soluble.
and bipyridine conpouuds (e.g., amrinone, milri-
 Drug accumulation occurs until a steady-state serumn
none). The effcct of digitalis on the Na'-K+-ATPase
concentration is reached. It takes one half-life to
pump located onl myocardial  cell membraiies
is
achieve 50 percent of the steady-stale serum co1icentra-
thought to account for its positive inotropic effect.76
tion, two half-lives to reach 75 percent, three half-lives
Digitalis competitively binds to the site at which K"
to reach 87.5 percent, and so forth. Thus, it takes
about five halflives (i.e., 5 to 7 days) for digoxin
which increases the intracellular Na+ concentration.
concentrations lo reach steady state. Therapeutic se-
The cell coumters by exchanging intracellular Na+ for
rum digoxin concentrations are between 1.0 and 2.5
extracellular Ca- +. These excess intracellular Ca+ +
 ng/ml.87 The clinical trend has been to target the low
ions, which are bound by the sarcoplasmic reticulum
end of this range.
during diastole, are subsequently released onto the
The pharmacokinetics of digoxin in thc cat are co11-
contracile proteins during systole, causing increased
troversial. The halflife is variable, ranging from 25.6
contractility. 7x
to 50.6 hours in one study (mean, 33.5 hours),* a1d
Tlie sarcoplasmic reticulun of damaged myocardial
39.4 to 78.8 hours in another (mean, 57.8 hours).rt
cells may be unable to bind as much Ca
during
 The first study reported that the half-life of digoxin
diastole or to release as much Ca+ - during systole.7 If
 increased dramatically to an average of 72.7 hours after
all or nost myocardial cells are badly
 damaged, it
 prolonged oral administration. The elixir formulation
seems unrcasonable to expect digitalis to cause a sub-
results in a serum concentration approximately 50 per-
stauntial increase in1 contractility. Poor contractility anid
cent higher than that of tablet formulation, Most cats
elevated diastolic Ca++ concentrations could result.
dislike the taste of the alcohol-based elixir, auid tablets
Cells that are overloaded with Ca + + may be clectrically
are better tolerated. Whei digoxin tablets are adminis-
unstable." If digitalis did increase intracellular Ca
tered with food, serum concentrations are reduced by
in this situation, further electrical instability and ar-
about 50 percernt compared with the concentrations
rhythmia formation could occur.
without. food.s
The digitalis glycosides exert other inportant ef-
 Digitoxin has superior pharmacokinetic properties
fects. A therapeutic digoxin plasma concentration par-
in the dog compared with digoxin.* Because its half-
lially restores baroreceplor reflexes, which are blunted
life is only 8 to 12 hours in this specices, therapeutic
in heart failure patients; digitalis glycosides increase
serurn concenitration cau be achieved more rapidly
parasympathetic nerve activity 1o the sinus node, atria,
than with digoxin, and serurn concentratio11 decreases
and AV node.s. s1 Digoxin decreases overall synpa-
more quickly if a dog becomes toxic. Ninety-five to
thetic. outflow, and the plasma norepinephrine concen-
one hundred percent of orally administered tincture
tration typically decreases following digitalization.82 As
 of digitoxin is absorbed; about 90 percent of the drug
a result, heart rate usually declines. Digitalis glycosides
is bound to serum protein, so a higher dose of digi-
also producc direct effects that help slow AV nodal
toxin is 1leeded relative to digoxin. Digitoxin is ex-
conductiou and prolong the AV nodal refractory pe-
creted by the liver, and it can be used safely in dogs
riod. They are oftenn used as antiarrhythmic agents,
with renal failure without adjusting the dose. In the
mostly for controlling supraventricular tachyarrhyth-
cat, the half-life of digitoxin exceeds l00 hours.9
rmia.
CLINICAL USEs AND EFFICACY. The digitalis glycosidles
PIIARMAcoKINETIcs. The pharmacokinetics of the two
are indicated for the treatment of myocardial failure
most comrnonly used digitalis glycosides, digoxin and
and certai supraventricular tachyarrhythmias. Myo-
digitoxin, are remarkably different despite their similar
cardial failure is present in all patients with dilated
molecular structures. Approximately 60 perceint of di-
cardiomyopathy; often it develops in dogs with
goxin in tablet form is absorbed after oral administra-
chronic, severe aortic regurgitatioin or a PDA; and it
tion, whereas about 75 perceit of that in the elixir is
h tu  s i rsd aq r  o 
absorbed. There is very litle hepatic metabolism of
secondary to mitral regurgitation. Its benefit with rmild
digoxin, so almost. all the drug that is absorbed reaches
myocardial dysfuuction is unknown. Digitalis is not
the serrum. 'Twenty-seven percent of digoxin is bound
indicated for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or pericar-
to alburnin in the serum.s In dogs, the serum half-
dial diseasc.
HEART FAILURE: PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT, THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES, AND PHARMACOLOGY :
231
The digitalis glycosides are moderately effective for
to be no correlation between the degree of azotemia
treating  supravetricular  premature depolarizations
and serum digoxin concentration in the dog.*1
and supraventricular tachycardia and for controlling
 Older dogs should be dosed very cauiously because
the ventricular rale in atrial fibrillation. Hearl rate
may have decreased muscle mass and renal insuffi-
control in dogs with atrial fibrillation often requires
ciency. The dose of digoxin (mg/kg of body weight)
the combined use of digoxin and calciurn channel
must be reduced inl patieints with ascites (10 percent
blocker or a β-adrenergic receptor blocker (chapter
with mild, 20 perceiit with moderate, and 30 perce1it
18). Digitalis should be used cautiously in the face
with severe ascites) because digoxin does not diffuse
of venitricular tachyarrhythmias, as the proarrhythmic
or bind with ascitic fluid. The need for dosage adjust-
cffects of digitalis are always a clinical coiicern.
ments in patients with thyroid dysfunction is conirover-
sial. Hypothyroidisrn may reduce digoxin clearance."
DIGOxiv. In small dogs (< 20 kg), twice daily adminis-
HIyperthyroid patieuits have  variable  sensitivity to di-
tration of digoxin at 0.005 to 0.008 mg/kg PO gener-
goxin.
ally achieves steady-state serum couicentrations of be-
Digoxin is the only recommeiided digitalis glycoside
tween 1.0 and 2.0 ng/ml. Larger dogs (> 20 kg)
for felines." Cats tolerate the elixir form of digoxin
require a lower dosage per body weight than srmnaller
 poorly. Therefore, tableis are generally administered.
dogs. The digoxin dosage can be based on body sur-
For cats wcighing less than 3 kg, digoxin is givein at
face area (0.22 mg/m? of body surface area q 12
0ne fourth of a 0.125-ng tablet cvery other day; for
hr PO).*l When maintenance doses of digoxin are
cats weighing 4 to 5 kg, 1/4 tablet is given every 24 to0
administered, a therapeutic serum concentration is
48 hr; for cats over 6 kg, 1/4 tablet is given daily.
often achieved within 2 to 4.5 days, depending on the
A umber of drug interactions can affect digoxinl
initial dose. In one study of dogs given 0.022 mg/kg
pharnacokinetics. Quinidine displaces digoxin frorn
of digoxin every 24 hours, fhe serum concentration
skeletal muscle binding sites aind reduces its rcnal
was within therapeulic range by the second day*2 Load-
clearauice, resulting in all increased serun digoxin1
i11g doses designed to achieve therapeutic drug co1l-
concentration." Although quinidine also displaces di-
centrations inl a short period of tine are occasionally
 goxin frorn rmyocardial binding sites, the net effect
used to treat serious supraveintricular arrhythmias. I1l-
is an i1icreased likelihood of intoxication," and this
travenous digitalization is generally rescrved for dogs
combination should be avoided. If both drugs must be
with severe, acute heart failure aid a sustained, life-
used together, the digoxin dosage is reduced by 50
threatening supraventricular tachycardia. It should be
percent.to A number of other drugs, including ver-
given slowly over at least 15 mminutes, to avoid periph-
apamil, also increase the serum digoxin concentra-
eral vasoconstriction and icreased afterload." For less
tion.10 Drugs that alier hepatic microsomal enzymes
urgeint situatious, a therapeutic serum digoxil concen-
may affect digoxin pharmacokinetics, since about 15
tration can be achieved quickly if the usual mainte-
percent of digoxin is metabolized in the liver.102 Drugs
 nance dose is sinply administered every 8 hr for 1 or
that induce hepatic microsomal enzymes, such as phe-
2 days. If there is acute need for positive inotropic
nylbutazone and the barhiturales, tend to increase di-
support, dobutamine or amrinone is safer and more
goxin clearance, whereas drugs that inhibit hepatic.
efficacious than loading doses of digoxin.
enzymes, such as chloramphenicol and tetracycline,
It is often necessary to nodify (reduce) the usual
should  increase the serur digoxin councentration.
mainteuance dose of digoxin. In one study, the digoxi1
However, one study indicated that chloramphenicol
dose (0.005 to 0.23 mg/kg/day) was plotted against
actually  decreases  serum digoxin  concentration  in
serum concentration in dogs with heart failure, and
dogs.108 s
 Such findings emphasize the desirability of
the corrclation coeficient (0.39) was statistically sig-
monitoring serum digoxin concentrations 3 to 7 days
nificant but weak (1.0 is a perfect correlation) .9 Thus,
after commenci1g therapy and whenever signs of toxic-
the milligram per kilograrn of body weight dose is
ily are observed.
only onle of a mumber of variables to cousider when
administering digoxin. Digoxin is poorly lipid soluble.
DKGIToxIN. The dosc of digitoxin in dogs is 0.033 mg/
so obese dogs require lower doses thann thin dogs.
kg q 8 to 12 hr PO.90 In general, small dogs should
Since most of the digitalis absorbed is bound to skele-
receive the dose every 8 hours and large dogs every 12
tal muscle. patients with reduced muscle
mass
hours. The cumulative daily dose in small dogs would
(cachexia) should be trealed with reduced doses. If
be greater than that for large dogs oll a per-weight
digitalis is required in a dog with reiral failure, the
dose of digoxin is reduced by 50 percent or more and
toxin should not be used inl cats as its half-life exceeds
subsequenily adjusted based on the serum digoxin
100 hours.1
concentration. Formulas devised for humans to calcu-
late a reduced digoxin dosage in the face of renal
 AssEssING ErFICACy. A complete data base, including
BLN, serum creatinine, and electrolytes, should be
232 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCLLAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
cvaluated before administering digoxin. Factors that
can also cause depression, disorienntatioil, and delir-
alter the dosage (obesity, cachexia) must be noted.
in1m.
Clear client communication is important to help detect
Myocardial toxicity is the most serious complication
signs of toxicity or improvement during early therapy.
of digoxin administration. Toxic doses disrupt the nor-
A reduction in heart rate, resolutioil of a supraventric-
mal cardiac electric activity (chapter 16). Digitalis di-
ular arrhythmia, and clinical improvement are identi-
rectly slows conduction and alters the refractory period
fiable therapeutic end-points. Inn most patients, how-
Of myocardial cells, rnaking it casier for re-entrant
cver, the effects of digoxin are uncertain. Many human
arrhythrnia to develop. Synpathetic lerve activity t0
patients do not recognize the benefits of digoxin until
the heart can increase whein high doses of digoxinl are
ireatment is later withdrawn and their symptoms
administered, resulting in incrcased normal automa-
worsen.7a. 71 If clinical improvement is 1ot observed,
ticity,lo Digitalis promotes abnormal automaticity in
the dosage of digoxin should rot be increased uutil its
Inyocardial cells that do not usually depolarize sponta-
serun concentration has beenl mcasured and found to
neously.1os Late afterdepolarizations (attributed io cel-
be subtherapeutic (< 0.8 ng/ml).
lular Ca * overload, especially induced in rmyocardium
 Ideally, each patieint should have serum digoxinl co1l-
that has beenl stretched and exposed to a hypokalemic
centration measured 3 to 7 days after initiating ther-
environment) may be caused by digitalis and result in
apy. The serum sample should be acquired 6 to 8
arrhythmia.
hours after the last dose. The therapeutic raige for
Myocardial toxicity can take the form of almost every
serum digoxin concentration is somewhat controver-
known rhythm disturbance. Frequeintly encountered
sial but can generally be considered to be between 0.8
bradyarrhythmias include second-degree AV block, si-
and 2.0 ng/m1. A serum concentration greater than
nus bradycardia, and sinus arrest. Digitalis can also
2.5 ng/ml is usually considered toxic, and digoxin
induce supraventricular premature depolarizations,
administration is discontinued until the serum concen-
atrial tachycardia, and junctional arrhythmias. At times
tration is less than 2.5 ng/ml. Subsequent digoxin1
it may be difficult or impossible to determine whether
doses should be reduced accordingly.
an arrhythmia is due to digitalis or to the umderlying
heart disease. The combiration of tachycardia and
DIGITALIs ToXcITy. Therapelutic end-poimis include
impaired conduction is highly suggestive of digitalis-
clinical irnprovement or attainment of a therapeutic
induced problems. A ventricular tachyarrhythmia ap-
serurn concentration. Progressive dosing until signs of
pearing in a dog taking digitalis should generally be
toxicity occur or umil the P-R innterval is prolouged is
regarded as digitalis-induced until proved otherwise.
not justified.u The incidence of digoxin toxicity in
Massive digitalis overdosc can produce hyperkalemia
hurnans is between 13 and 23 percent while 11 to 36
and possibly hyponatrenia.to This is probably caused
percent of patients have been identified as underdigi-
by digitalis inhibition of the Na+-K--ATPase pumps
talized.1os In one canine study, 25 percent of dogs
throughout the body.
recciving digoxin had a serum concentration in the
 Hypokalemia is an important predisposing cause of
toxic range, and 24 percent had a subtherapeutic con-
digitalis myocardial toxicity. Digitalis and potassium
ceitration." In the enalapril clinical studies (Freedon
compele for the sane binding site on the membrane
of Information Sumrmary #315), 15.3 percent of 222
dogs had serurn concentrations greater than 3.0 ng/
ing sites available for digitalis binding. In turn, byper-
 ml and 9.1 percent had clinical signs consistent with
kalemia displaces digitalis from the nyocardium. Hy-
digoxin toxicity.
percalcemia and hypernatremia potentiate the positive
 In our experieiice, clinically significant digitalis tox-
inotropic and toxic effects of digitalis, whereas hypocal-
icity is uncommon if the drug is used judiciously. It.
cemia and hyponatremia reduce these effects.
occurs most frequenuly because of dosage errors in
administration, particularly during initial stages of di-
TREATMENT OF DIGITALIS INTOXICATION. Gastrointesti-
 goxin administration when renal fumction deteriorates
nal signs related to overdose are treated by drug with-
ullexpectedly: and when the dose is not reduced in1
drawal and correctioi1 of fluid and clectrolyte abuor-
concerl with weight loss (cachexia). Problens fron
malities. Conduction cdisturbances usually require only
digitalis imtoxication fall into three general classes: (1)
digitalis withdrawal, although atropine administration
signs of gastrointestinal dysfunction, (2) neurologic.
is occasionally needed for severe bradyarrhythmias.
signs, and (3) myocardial toxicity. Anorexia and vom-
Venntricular tachycardia should be trcated aggressively
iting are probably due to the direct effect of the digi-
with lidocaine (see Fig. 18-26), espccially when yentric-
talis molecule on chemoreceptors located in the area
ular tachycardia is present (chapter 18).uo.  Lido-
postrena in 1he medulla.1w Although gastrointestinal
caine rmay be given as an initial bolus (2 to 4 ng/kg
sigis of toxicity usually occur before signs of myocar-
IV over 1 to 2 minutes), followed by countinuous infu-
dial toxicity, this generalization is not always the case,
sio11 of 30 to 100 μg/kg/nin for arrhythrnia control.
particularly when digoxin is administered IV. Digoxi
Cats are more sesitive to the neurotoxic effecis of
HEART FAILURE: PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT, THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES, AND PHARMACOLOGY 
233
lidocaine, so dose reduction (0.25 to 1 mg/kg IV ad-
ing agent that increases contractility and heart rate, is
ministered over 5 minutes) aud cautious administra-
arrhythmogenic, auid teinds to decrease blood pressure.
tio are recommended.
Norepinephrine increases contractility but also stimu-
Phenytoin can also be used for the treatment of
lates peripheral α-adrennergic receptors. The latter co1-
digitalis-induced arrhythmias in the dog. It has proper-
strict systemic arterioles, which increases blood pres-
ties similar to those of lidocaie. When given IV, the
sure. Epiephrine increases contractility but causes
drug vehicle canl produce hypotension and exert a
tachycardia and is arrhythmogenic. None of these
depressant effect on the myocardium.l2 The total IV
drugs are suitable for treating heart failure. Dopamine
dose is 10 mg/kg, administered in 2-mg/kg increments
and dobutarnine are more suitable because they are
over 3 to 5 minutes. Phenytoin can also be adminis-
less arrhythmogenic, and they produce snaller in-
tered orally (35 mg/kg q 8 hr).1s
creases in heart rate thai1 do other sympathonimetic
The serum potassium couicenntration should always
drugs.!1*
be deterrmined in patients intoxicated with digitalis; if
it is less than 4.0 mEq/L, potassium supplements
PHARMACoKINETIcs. Sympathomimetic drugs have
should be administered, preferably in IV fluids. Potas-
very short halflives (several minutes) and must be
sium competes with digitalis for binding sites on the
administered IV as a constant-rate infusion. They can-
Na--K+-ATPase pump and provides a more suitable
not be given orally because they are metabolized exten-
environment for the antiarrhythmic agents to work.
sively by the liver (first-pass effect).1" An infusion
 Other agents may be beneficial in certain situations.
pump is generally required to deliver these drugs at
Propranolol may be useful for digitalis-induced ventric-
all appropriale dosage because of the low flow rates
ular tachyarrhythmia, but not whcn conduclion block
needed to avoid excessive plasma yolumc expansion in
is present. Quinicdine inereases the serum concentra-
 patients with heart failure.
tion of digoxin and should not be used. Procainamide
is less cffective than other drugs in treating digitalis-
Dopamine
induced arrhythmia. Cholestyramine, a steroid-biding
resin, may be useful in cases of digitoxin and early
 Dopamine is the precursor of orepinephrine. It
digoxim intoxication.111 Cholestyramine binds digitalis
stimulates cardiac β-adrenergic receptors as well as
in the intestinal tract. Digitoxin undergoes enterohep-
atic circulatioi1 and so can be bouud by this resin.
latter appear to be located most prevalenuly in the
 In contrast, digoxin umdergoes mininal ennterohepatic
 renal and mesenteric vascular beds, where they pro-
circulation, and treatment with cholestyramine is only
duce  vasodilatioi1. Dopamine improves contractility
useful soonl after overdose. Cardiac glycoside-specific
and increases cardiac output in patients with heart
antibodies have been used to bind digitalis glycosides
failure. At low doses, it causes selective dilatation of
in the blood stream a1nd thus remove them from myo-
arterioles in the renal, mesenteric, coronary, and cere-
cardial binding sites.!!
bral vascular beds, increasing blood flow to these arcas.
At high doses, it causes generalized systemic arteriolar
SYMPATHOMIMETICAMINES
vasoconstriction. I1l patients with heart failure, the re-
sulting increase in afterload can substantially diminish
PHARMACODYNAMIcs. Sympathomirnelic amies in-
cardiac output. ln some human patients with chronic.
crease myocardial conntractility by binding to cardiac
heart failure, dopamine causes inicreased ventricular
β-adrenergic receptors.1 An1 occupied β-receptor is
filling pressures and edema formation.121
coupled with stinulatory G prolein, G, to activate
The dosage is 1 to 8 μg/kg/rmin (5-ml vials con-
adenyl cyclase within the cell. Adenyl cyclase cleaves
taining 40, 80, or 160 mg/ml), diluted in 5 percent
adenosine triphosphale (ATP) to cyclic adenosine
dextrose. Doses greater than 8 μg/kg/nin result in
monophosphate (cAMP), which acts as a second mes-
 110repinephrine release and increased peripheral vas-
senger by stimulating a cellular protein kinase system.
cular resistanice.122 Higher infusion rates are also more
 Protein kinases phosphorylate intracellular proteins,
likely to cause tachycardia and cardiac arrhythmia. An
such as the sarcoplasmic reticulum, allowing them to
initial dose of 2 μg/kg/min may be titrated upward to
bind more calcium during diastole and to release more
effect, Dopamine infusions sometimes cause nausea
calcium during systole.116
and anorexia. Phlebitis aund ischemic tissue necrosis
 Most sympathomimetic drugs increase contractility
can occur when dopamine is delivered outside the
about 100 percent above baseline, but many are unsuit-
vein.
able for treating heart failure because of other proper-
ties. Sympathomimetic agents stimulate both β- aud α-
adrenergic receplors. The degree to which each type
Dobutamine
 of receptor is stimulated depends on the specific
 Dobutamine is a sythetic catecholamine that stimu-
drug. 17 Isoproterenol is a pure β-adrenergic stimulat-
lates β,-adrenergic receptors, increasig myocardial
234 ABNORMA1. CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
contractility, and weakly stimulates peripheral βz- and
decrcases by 50 percent within 10 minutes and is dissi-
Q-adrenergic receptors. Since the vascular response t0
pated within 20 to 30 minutes, indicating the necessity
such stimulation is balanced, systemic arterial blood
for constant infusion. Infusion rates of 10 to 100 μg/
pressure is usually unchanged during dobutamine in-
kg/min increase contraciility 30 to 90 percent in anes-
fusion.' Dobutamine is less arrhythmogenic than
thetized dogs and 10 to 80 percent in unanesthetized
most other sympathomimetic drugs, and it produces
dogs. In the anesthetized dog, infusion of 10 μg/kg/
little incrcase in heart rate. Wheil administered to
min does not decrease blood pressure, whereas 30 μg/
a patient with acule or chroinic myocardial failure.
kg/min decreases it 10 percennt and 100 μg/kg/min
dobutarnine increases cardiac output and decreases
decreases it 30 percent. Hleart rate does no1 inicrease
at 10 μg/kg/min, elevates by 15 percent at 30 μg/kg/
edema formation. Dobutamine is used to treat acute,
min, and increases by 20 percennt at 100 μg/kg/min.
severe heart failure, often in combination with nitro-
In anesthetized dogs with drug-induced myocardial
prusside, until inotropic support is no longer needed
failure, amrione infusions icrease contractility 40 to
or umtil other longer-acting positive inotropic agents,
200 percent above baseliie and increase cardiac out-
such as digoxin, have takenl effect. Dobutamine can
 pu1 by 80 percent. Constant-rate infusions in dogs take
abou1 45 minutes to reach peak effect. In normal cats,
heart failurc requiring acute inotropic support. There
amrinone i1fused at 30 μg/kg/min increases contrac-
is sorne evidence that internittent adninistration of
tility 40 percent above baseline; the peak effect occurs
dobutamie to humnans with chronic myocardial fail-
90 minutes after starting an infusion.x
o  o p  hae o 
The hemodynamic effects of anrione have not
function.121. 125
been studied in dogs or cats with naturally occurring
 Dobutamine is supplied in 20-ml vials containing 250
heart failure. Treatment recommendations are based
mg of drug. Following dilution in 5 percent dextrose, it
on information obtained from normal dogs. Amrinone
is admimistercd 1V by constant-rate infusion, 5 to 20
(Inocor), 5 mg/ml, 20-ml ampules, is advocated only
μg/kg/min. The positive inotropic effect of dobuta-
for short-term administration to animals with severe,
mine is dosage dependent. Doses of 5 to 15 μg/kg/
 decompensated systolic pump failure. The initial dose
min are generally adequate. Infusion rates greater than
is 1 to 3 mg/kg as a slow IV bolus followed by constant-
20 μg/kg/min often produce tachycardia or arrhyth-
rate infusion of 10 to 100 μg/kg/min, One half the
mia in dogs. Inlusion rates of 5 to 10 μg/kg/min are
        
recommended in cats.
afler the first bolus. The same reginen may be cffec-
tive in the cat.
Amrinone has a wide margin of safety. Exacerbation
BIPYRIDINE COMPOUNDS
of venntricular arrhythmia occurs in1 about 5 perceit
of dogs treated with milrinone for heart failure, and
Amrinone and silrinoie are bipyridine compounds
anrione is presumed to cxert sinilar cffects. Ainri-
available only for IV administration, Bipyridine com-
none causes thrombocytopenia and flulike symptoms
pounds primarily act as inhibitors of phosphodiester
o a as i a 'su jo anad eus e u
ase II1,t4 iv6 an intracellular enzyme that specifically
been noled in studies of normal dogs.
breaks down cAMP in cardiac. myocytes. When phos-
phodiesterase IHI is inhibited, intracellular cAMP con-
Milrinonc
centration increases, resulting inl greatcr calciun avail-
ability to 1he contractile proteins. At high doses.
Milrinone (Primacor) is currently marketed only for
anrione and rnilrinone may increase contractility by
IV administration to human patients and has not been
direculy altering calcium ion transport.4, 2 Milrione
studied in dogs with acute myocardial failure. Clinical
is about 30 to 40 times more potent than amrimone.
evaluation of chronic oral administratioin has been
Bipyridine compoumds also produce arteriolar dila-
performed in dogs, but this forrnulation has not been
tion, ain effect tliat is probably also mediated by phos-
approved for use in humans or aimals. In normal
phodiesterase inhibition in smooth muscle.127
aliesthetized dogs, V milrinone dosed at 30 to 300
μg/kg incrcases contractility 40 to 120 percent while
decreasing diastolic blood pressure 10 to 30 percent.130
Amrinone
Peak effecl occurs within 1 to 2 mimutes. Milrinone's
 In normal anesthetized dogs, an IV bolus of amri-
effect on contractility is reduced by 50 percent in 10
none (1.0 1o 3.0 mg/kg) incrcases contractility 60 to
minutes, and the inotropic effect is essentially gone inl
100 percen1, decreases systemic arterial blood pressure
30 minutes. Constant rate IV infusions (1 to 10 μg/
O1  g e ieay ss e d o o 01
kg/min) increase co1tractility 50 to 140 percent, with
percent. The maximal increase in contractility occurs
 peak effect in 10 to 30 minutes. Ilumaus with CIIF are
5 minutes after injection. The positive inotropic effect
treated with a loading dose (50 μg/kg) administered
HEART FAILURE: PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT, 'THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES, AND PHARMACOLOGY 
235
slowly IV ovcr 10 minutes, followed by mainteiiance
CLAssFicATIoN. Diuretics are classified according to
infusion (0.375 to 0.75 μg/kg/min). Guidelines for
their site of action within the nephron (Table 12-3).
 dogs with CHF have not becn published. Dogs gener-
In general, agenits that act on the loop of Ieinle are
 ally have a greater hemodynamic response to amri-
the most potent. Three classes of diurelics are used
nole and milrimone thau do humans.
clinically in dogs to treat heart failure: thiazide diuret-
 In normal conscious dogs, milrinone administered
ics, loop diurctics, and potassium-sparing diuretics.
orally at 0.10 mg/kg increases contractility 30 percent
They differ in their ability to promote salt and watcr
above baseline; a dose of 0.30 mg/kg increases cointrac-
excretioin and in their mechanism of action. The loop
tility 50 percen1 above baseline; a1id a 1.0 mg/kg dose
diuretics are the most potennt and may be uscd in small
increases contractility more than 80 percent above
doses in fuuictional class II patieints and in higher doses
bascline. Systemic arterial blood pressure is cssentially
in patients in fuuictional classes IlI and IV heart failure.
unchanged at these doses, while hear1 rate increases
 They are administered orally for chronic therapy or
up to 30 percent at the 1.0 mg/kg dose. In the normal
parenterally for acute, severe heart failure. Thiazide
anesthetized cat, a constaint-ratc infusion of 1.0 μg/
diuretics are mildly to moderately potent agents. They
kg/mi increases contractility about 40 percent, with
are most commonly used in conjunction with a loop
peak effect occurring within 30 minutes.
diuretic in patieints with severe, refractory CIIF. Potas-
Echocardiographic pararneters of dogs with myocar-
sium-sparing diuretics are generally reserved for those
dial failure (predominantly DCM) inproved dunring a
patients that become hypokalemic with other diuretics,
4week treatment reginen with milrinone (0.5 to 1.0
or that are refraclory because of an elevated plasma
mg/kg q 12 hr PO). Ventricular arrhythmia worsened
aldosterone concentration. In the latter sithatioil, a
in a small percentage of dogs.3t In another study of
potassium-sparing diuretic is usually administered in1
canine dilated
cardiomyopathy.
cardiac
idex
i1l-
conjunction with another drug, usually a loop diuretic.
creased 54 percent, stroke volume index increased 40
percenf, and pulmonary capillary pressure decreased
MECHANisMs. Diuretics promote urine flow by imcreas-
 50 percennt. Heart rate increased 11 percen1, and left
 ing reiral plasma flow or by altering ncphron function.
ventricular end-systolic diameler, measured from the
Diuretics that increase renal plasma flow by expanding
M-mode echocardiogram, decreased 9 percent. while
plasma volume (e.g., mannitol, glucose) are contrain-
blood pressure renained constanl,
indicating in-
dicated in heart failure because they increase venous
Creased contractility,13?
 pressures and edema formation. Agents altering neph-
ron fiuction increase urine production either by i11-
terfering with ion transport in the rcnal tubules or
by opposing the action of aldosterone or antidiuretic
DIURETICS
hormone (ADH) in the kidney. Since the goal of di-
uretic therapy in heart failure is promotion of salt
 These drugs are among the most commonly pre-
alid water loss, agents that cause only water loss by
scribed cardiac medications, both for acute treatmcnt
interfering with ADH are not routinely used. Diuretics
of pulmonary edema and for chronic maintenance
interfere with ion trausport by altering (1) intracellu-
therapy When used appropriately, diuretics bave high
lar ionic entry, (2) energy generation and utilization
efficacy and relatively low and prediciable toxicity.
for ion transport, or (3) ioin transfer from the cell
TABLE 12-3
Commonly Used Diuretics
Eletrolyte and Acid-Base
Adverse Efferts.
Diuretic Class
Generie Name
Brand Nume
Mechumism ofAction
Eiffects
Drnug fnteractions
Dosage Range
Loop Diuretics
Furosemide
Lasix
Ascending loop of Henle.
↑HCO
Hypovolenia
1.1-1.1 mg/kg q8-24h
inhibits Na/K/Cl
↓ Na,Cl,K.Mg'!
(looxicity
(.5-2.2 mg/kg q12h (cas)
(dlogs)
syport.
Metabolic alkalosis
NSAIDs (efficaey)
Aninoglycosides
Thiazide Diuretics
Cllorothiazide
Diuril
Distal tubule:
↑IICO , (a-
Hyperglycenia
Diurit: 2040 mg/kg q12lt
Ilydroclhlorothiazide HydroDItRIl. Inhibits NatCI synpor.
↓ Na+.C  K,Mg'-
Urie acidenta
Metabolic alkalosis
NSAIDs (elficacy)
(dlogs)
HydroDIURIL: 2.0-4.0 mg/
kg q12lh (dogy) (given
cvcry 3sxd lay when usee
wih loop diuretics)
Potassium-Sparing Spironolactone
Aldactone
Collecting rlet:
↑K
Gynecommastia
1.0.:2.0 rmg/kg q12lh (dogx)
Diurelics
Aldosterone anttagonist
ACF: inlhibi1o1x
(byperkal:mia)
Colleeling duct
↑K,Mg''
ACE inhibitors
1.0-2.0 mg/kg q12h (dogs)
Inhibits Sa conductance
Metabolie: acidosis
(hyperkalemia)
NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflar
atory drngs; ACE. angintensim-converting enzyme.
236ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCLLAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
t0 the peritubular capillaries through the antiluminal
exacerbatioil of ventricular arrhythmias, and hypoka-
membrane.133
lemia may induce or potentiate digitalis intoxication.
Serious electrolyte disturbaces and dehydratio1 are
rare in dogs treated with furosemide, but cats are more
Loop Diuretics
sensitive. Cats rarely require more than 2 1o 4 mg/kg
These include furosemide, ethacrynic acid, and bu-
q 2 to 4 hr IV for treatment of severe pulmonary
metanide. Furosemide is the most commonly used
cdema."1
agent; ethacrynic acid is rarely given. Bumetanide is
A number of factors can limit the natriuretic effect
40 to 50 times as potent as furosemide and may offer
 Of furosemide in patients with heart failure.'s7 As a
some clinical advantages, most notably more completc
result of progressive reductions in cardiac output, re-
absorption with oral dosing.13 However, its use has 10t
nal blood flow and glomerular filtration decline,
decreasing the delivery of furosemide to its site of
inhibit active sodium, potassiurn, and chloride reab-
actionn. With chronic use of furosemide, the distal tu-
sorption in the thick porlionl of the ascending loop of
 bule hypertrophies, and the rate of sodium reabsorp-
Henle In so doing, they inhibit sodium and obliga-
tion1 increases. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
tory water reabsorption in the nephron. The loop
(NSAIDs) also reduce the efficacy of furosemide. Sev-
diuretics are capable of increasig the maximal frac-
eral strategics can be used to overcome these limita-
tional cxcretion of sodiun to 23 percent of the filtered
tions. The dose or frequenicy of administratioin can be
load, making them the most powerful natriuretic
increased, or furosemide car be administered paren-
agents available. In addition to their diuretic. effecis,
terally. 1s7 Bumetanide is better absorbed orally and can
they may act as venodilators, decreasing venous pres-
be substituted for furosemide. Alternatively, different
sures shoruly after IV administration and before diure-
classes of diuretics can be combined to block the adap-
sis takes place.136
FUROsEMIDE. Furosemide (Lasix, Disal) is supplied as
Thiazide Diuretics
a 10-mg/ml elixir, as 12.5-, 20-, 40-, and 50-mg tablets 
for oral use,41 and as a 50-mg/nL solution for IV,
These agents inhibit the Na+ /Cl- cotransporter i11
subcutaneous, or intramuscular injection. Furosernide
the distal convoluted tubule,1so The subsequent i11-
is highly protein bound and is not extensively rnetabo-
crease in delivery of Na', Cl-, anid water into the
lized in the dog and cat. Most is secreted into the
collecting duct directly enharices K· and H * secretion
proximal tubule, where it acts as a mild carbonic anhy-
in this location. Thus, thiazide diuretics can induce
drase inhibitor. Furosemide decreases reinal vascular
hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. They also act to
resistance, thercby increasing reual blood flow. When
waste magnesium and increase calcium reabsorption.
adninistered IV, its onset of action is 5 miutes, and
Only mild-to-moderate renal sodium loss is promoted
its peak effect occurs within 30 minutes. Its half-life is
by thiazide diuretics, about one third to one half that
15 rminutes, and duration of effect is 2 hours. After
achieved with the loop diuretics. Thiazide diuretics
oral adninistration, the onset of actioin occurs within1
increase renal sodium cxcretion from a lormal value
60 minutes, its peak cffect occurs within 1 to 2 hours,
and its cffect lasts 6 hours. The oral canine dose ranges
load. Thiazide diuretics are much less cffective when
from 1 mg/kg cvery other day to 4 mg/kg q 8 hr.
renal blood flow is low, which rmay explain their lack of
depending on the severity of the clinical signs associ-
 efficacy in patients with severe heart failure. Thiazide
ated with congestive heart failure and the concurrent
diuretics are not as effective in patients with renal
use of other drugs. Lower doses (e.g., 1 to 2 mg/kg q
failure, and they tend to decrease reual blood flow
12 hr) should be used in dogs receiving al1 ACE inhibi-
 alnd further compromise renal function,
 sssd se mo se pise sieae si ssop a 
A syergistic effect results when thiazide diuretics
slill controlling congestive signs. Oral furosemidle
are administered together with loop diurelics.137. 13s
doses in cats range from 1 mg/kg every 2 to 3 days, to
Addition of a thiazide diuretic every 2 or 3 days often
2 mg/kg q 12 hr. We have occasionally used higher
resolves refractory pulmonary congestion without caus-
doses (4 mg/kg q 12 hr) in refractory CIIF.
ing excessive volune depletion. Hypokalemia is more
 Severe pulmonary edema requires immediate IV fit
common in animals treatcd with furosemide aind a
Yosemide administration (dogs, 2 to 8 mg/kg q 1 to 2
thiazide diuretic. This can sometimes be prevented
hr; cats, 2 to 4 mg/kg q 1 to 2 hr). Such intensive
by oral polassium supplementation and/or by adding
dosing may result in hyponatremia, hypokalemia, and
spironolactone to the therapeutic regimen.
dehydration, which must be addressed after the life-
Chlorothiazide
c and hydrochlorothiazide
arethie
threatening pulnonary edema has been controlled.
most commonly used thiazide diuretics in dogs and
These conditions usually self-correct when the patient
cats. Both are well absorbed after oral administration.
cats aud drinks. Electrolyte disturbances may result i11
The action of chlorothiazide begins within l hour,
237
peaks at 4 hours, and lasts 6 to 12 hours. In dogs, the
advocated for several other reasons. It is theorized
dosage of chlorothiazide (Diuril), supplied in 250- and
that spirouolactoule can reduce myocardial fibrosis in
500-mg tablets, is 20 to 40 mg/kg q 12 hr PO. Hydro-
 d a  pe ' iu  s
chlorothiazide has an onset of action within 2 hours,
110rmal baroreceptor function in heart failure.'1e The
peaks at 4 hours, and lasts 12 hours. The dose of
clinical importance of these effects is not know. The
hydrochlorothiazide (HydroDiURL), supplied in 25-
dose of spiroolactone (Aldactone), supplied in 25-mg
and 50-mg tablets, is 2 to 4 mg/kg q 12 hr PO in dogs,
tablets, is 2 to 4 mg/kg/day PO in dogs.
and 1 to 2 mg/kg q 12 hr PO in cats. The newer,
Triainterene  competitively displaces
aldosterone
more lipid-soluble thiazides, trichloromethiazide and
from its binding sites auid direculy inhibits 1he distal
cyclothiazide, have not been studied in the dog or cat.
tubular trasport of potassium.143 Its aclion begins
within 2 hours, peaks at 6 to 8 hours, and lasts 12 to
16 hours. In dogs, the dose is 2 to 4 ng/kg/day PO.
Potassiun-Sparing Diurctics
It is used only rarely in dogs or cats with heart failure.
This class of diuretics includes spironolactone and
triamterene. They act by inhibiting the action of aldo
sterone on distal tubular cells. Their diuretic effect is
LOW-SODIUM DIETS
Imild in normal animals because the plasma aldoste-
rone concentration is relatively low. In normal dogs.
A diet low in sodium is one neans of reducing
these drugs increase the maximal fractional excretion
circulating blood volume. Sodium is retained in heart
of sodiurn only to 2 percent of the filtered load.!0
failure patients by a variety of rnechauisns, including
These agents are probably more cffeclive in dogs with
activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
heart failure and increased plasma aldosterone c01-
 Diuretic therapy as a modality for reducing total body
 centrations. Whenn potassium-sparing diurctics are ad-
sodium and blood volume has been discussed pre-
ministered with other diuretics, potassium loss is de-
viously. Patients with severe heart failure that are re-
 creased. They are often administered to patients that
fractory to diuretic administration have the greatest
become hypokalemic because of another diuretic
need for a low-sodium diet. Patients with carly and
 mild heart failure generally do not need marked salt 
agent.
 Spironolactone is well absorbed from the gastroin
restriclion. Chapter 32 details the dictary and sodium
testinal tract (62 percent), anid it is extensively and
requiremenits in heart failure.
rapidly rnetabolized to the active product, canren-
one,l41 Canrenone is structurally similar to aldoste-
 rone, and its effects result from competitive binding
VASODILATORS AND ACE INHIBITORS
to aldosterone's bincding sites in the distal tubule. Spi-
ronolactone has a slow onset of action, and its peak
A number of different drugs relax arteriolar or ve
effect does not occur until 2 to 3 days afier administra-
lous smooth muscle to cause vasodilation (Table 12-
tio1. The use of spironolactone for CHF has bcen
 4). Vasodilators are generally classified as arteriolar
TABLE 12-4
Commonly Used Vasodilators
Venonus
Arteriolar
Grmup
Generic: Name
Brand Name
Mechanism of Action
Dilation
Dilation
Dostge Range*
Direct Acting
l lydralazine
Apresolint:
Incertain
+++
0.5-3.0 mg/kg g12h (dogs)
Nitrates
Nitroprusside
Nipride
Nitric oxide donors
+++
+-+
2.0-5.0μg/kg/min (togs)
Nicroglycerin (2%)
Nitro-Bid, Nitrol
i++
++:
1/2/5.0kg q8h (cats, dogs)
Nitroglyeerin patch
Nitro-lur
+++
0.1-0.2 mg/lur (cats. dogs)
Isosorlide tinitrate
Isordil
++L
0.2-2.0 ng/kg q12h (dogs)
Isosorbide mononitrare
Momoket, Imdur
-++
(s0) ua1b Hy/8 06-20
Calcium Channel
Amlodipine
Xorvasc
Inhibit t-type, voltage-
+
+++
0.05-0.20 mg/kg q24h (dogs)
Blocking Drugs
seusitive, calcium
0.625 ng q24h (eats <. 5 kg)
chanels
Adrenergic
Prazuosin
Minijpress
Alpha-adlrenergic receptor
1.0 mg q8lh (dogs c 13 kg)
Receptor Blocking
alitagonists
2.0 mug 48h (dogs > 15 kg)
Drugs
ACE Iohibitors
Benazepril
L.otesin
lulhibit generarion of
+
L+
0.25 mg/kg 24h (cats, dogs)
Fnalapril
Enacard, Vasoter:
angiotensin II
·+
++
0.5 mg/kg q12-24l (dogs)
Lisinopril
Prinivil. Zestrit
Decrease bradykinin
++
L+
0.5 mg/kg q1y-24h (dogs)
metalolism
*sec tcx1 for discussion.
ACE, angintensin-converting cnzyne.
238 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
dilators, venodilators, or cornbination (balaniced) arte-
treatrent of renral hypertensive dogs using oral amlod-
riolar and venodilators. The effect of a particular agent
ipine at 0.05 mg/kg caused a substantial reduction (20
) sa il (spiq essra r ()  sa
temic, pulmonary, or both), and (2) its relative po-
once-daily administratio11 of anlodipine (0.2 mg/kg
lency in these locations. With a few exceptions, the
PO) lowered blood pressure without causing tachycar-
cffect of these drugs onl the pulmonary vasculature is
dia. Adninistration of a single 1.0 mg/kg oral dose to
erratic or insignificant relative to their actionl oin the
systemic. vascular bed.
rmmHg decline) with a peak effect 8 hours postadmin-
Arteriolar vasodilators relax the smooth muscle of
istration, This dosage caused reflex tachycardia that
systemic arterioles, decreasing peripheral vascular re-
could be abolished by simultaneous administration of
sistance or impedance. This decreases systernic arterial
a β-receptor blocking drug. In another cxperiment
blood pressure, systolic intraventricular pressure, and
involving dogs with experimental renal hypertension,
systolic myocardial wall stress (afterload). When the
systolic and diastolic blood pressure declined by 30
forcc that opposes myocardial fiber shortening is re-
mmHg following a single oral dose of 0.3 to 0.4
duced, myocardial cells can shorten further, and stroke
ng/kg.'
volune incrcases. This is the desired annd primary ef
A safe and effective dose of arnlodipine for treating
fecl. when these drugs are adninistered to patients
dogs or cats with heart failure has 1ot becin established.
with dilated cardiomyopathy. In animals with mitral
Based on our own prelininary results. it is rcasonable
regurgitation or intracardiac or vascular shunts beyoind
t0 attempt to palliate chronic, refractory heart failure
the atrial level, arteriolar vasodilators also reduce re-
in dogs using amlodipine al an initial dose of 0.05
gurgitant and shunt blood flow. In animals with severe
mg/kg PO bid, and titrating upward to 0.20 mg/kg,
mitral regurgitation, regurgitant flow is reduced be-
depending on the response. Arterial blood pressure
cause of diminution in the size of the regurgitant
should be monitored 6 to 8 hours after the initial dose
orifice and reduction of the IV-LA pressure gradient.
 and at intervals until the peak effect is observed 5 t0
Dccrcascd rcgurgitant flow results in reduced left atrial
 7 days later Amlodipine is supplied as 2.5-ng tablets.
pressure, pulmonary capillary pressure, and pulmo-
nary cdema formatioi1.
HYDRALAZINE
Venodilators relax systcmic venous smooth muscle,
decreasing systemic venous pressure and imcreasing
Hydralazine (Apresoline) is a pure arteriolar vasodi-
the capacitance of the systemic venous reservoir. The
lator that probably acts by increasing the prostacyclin
resulting redistribution of blood from the heart auid
concentration in systemic arterioles.'* Hydralazine de-
pulmonary veins reduces ventricular diastolic and pul-
creases resistance in renal, coronary, cerebral, and
monary venous prcssures, causing diminished edema
mesenteric vascular beds more than in skeletal muscle
formation. Venodilators are used in the same situations
beds.14* Increased renal blood flow can improvc: renal
as diuretics and low-sodium dieis.
fumction (if imitially depressed) and thereby enhaicc
digoxin excretion and inprove furosemide delivery
to the 1ephron.19 The effects of orally administered
AMLODIPINE
hydralazine have becn studied in dogs, 5o. 1st Hydrala-
Amlodipine (Norvasc) acts predominautly as all ar-
zine is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract but
teriolar vasodilator,!1! 1t is a member of the 1,4dihy
undergoes first-pass hepatic metabolisn by acetyla-
dropyridine family of calcium channel blocking drugs.
tion.152 Although hydralazine is not excreted by the
In hurmans, amlodipine reduces the symptoms of heart
kidney, its biotransformation is affected by renal fail-
failure, substantially improving exercise tolerance in
ure, which may increase serum concentration.
mosl patients,14 In contrast to many other calcium
 The vasodilating effec1 occurs within l hour after
channel blocking drugs, amlodipine does not incrcase
oral administration and peaks within 3 hours. The
cardiovascular morbidity or mortality, ln a recent study.
cffec1 is then stable for the next 8 to l0 hours, after
which it rapidly dissipates. The net duration of eflect.
cardiomyopathy.1 The safety and efficacy of this com-
is about 12 hours.'st Iydralazine decreases regurgitant
pound in dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy or degen-
flow, increases forward aortic flow and venous oxygen
erative valve discase have not yet been determined.
tension, and decreases radiographic evidence of pul-
Preliminary observations suggest that amlodipine may
be efficacious in dogs with either of these conditions.
Therapeutic dosage decreases mean arterial blood
Amlodipine is also efficacious for the treatment of
pressure from 100 to 110 rmmIIg to 60 to 80 mmHg.
systemic hypertension in cats (chapter 35).
These cffects inprove the quality of life and may pro-
With oral administrationl, amlodipine's peak effect
long survival time. In dogs with dilated cardiomyopa-
is observed in 4 to 7 days, reflecting its 30-hour half-
thy, hydralazine improves cardiac output bu usually
life in dogs.41 1i 1n cxperimental studies, once-daily
does not decrease pulmonary edema. In humaus, con-
239
bined use of hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate im-
may be efective in resolving this complication, In
 proves survival and the quality of life.24
other cases, persistent vomiting necessitates the use
 Clinical use of hydralazine is generally limited to
of a different vasodilator. Hydralazine's most serious
dogs that do not tolerate ACF. inhibitors or that be-
adverse effect is hypotension. Mild hypotension, indi-
 corme refractory to conventional hcart failure therapy
cated clinically by signs of weakness and depression,
(i.e., digoxin, fiurosemide, an ACE inhibitor, and low
does not require treatinent. Such signs will abate
salt diet). Hydralazine can also be used to treat dogs
within 10 to 12 hours after the last dose of hydralazine.
with acute, fulminating congestive left-sided heart fail-
The dose should then be reduced.
ure secondary to severe mitral regurgitationl when ni-
 Other direct-acting vasodilators that act indepen-
troprusside infiusion is nol possible. Its rapid onset of
denuly of the calciun channel include cndralazine,
action and short halflife make hydralazine a better
cadralazine, minoxidil, dipyridamole, and pinacidil.
choice than arnlodipine for this purpose.
None have been evaluated in dogs or cats with heart
The hemodynamic effects of hydralazine are dose
failure.
 dependent, and overdosing can result in serious hypo-
tension, particularly when adninistered to a dog al-
ALPHA-ADRENERGICBLOCKINGAGENTS
ready receiving an ACF. inhibitor. Consequently, the
dose must be litrated carefully, starting low and gradu-
Prazosin
Prazosin (Minipress) is an arteriolar aurd venodilat-
ment is noted. Systemic arterial blood pressure should
be measured either by invasive or noninvasive nethods
ing agent. It acts primarily by blocking α-adrenergic
in this circumstance. Hydralazine is supplied in 10-
terase.151 Since prazosin does not block xyadrenergic
and 25-mg tablets. A dose of 0.5 mg/kg PO should be
receptors, norepinephrine release is still controlled via
administered initially to dogs in heart failure due to
negative fedback, Reflex tachycardia is generally not.
severe miral regurgitation. An effective dose is con-
seen, The vasodilating elfects of prazosin becorne at-
Girmed by a decrease in systolic or mean systemic arte-
temuated after the frst dose in humans'5 and in rats,156
rial blood pressure of 15 to 30 mmI ig. Clinically, re-
In rats, it is thought that this efect is brought about
duccd capillary refill tine, pinker mucous membranes,
by stimulation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone sys-
and regression of pulmonary edema suiggest efficacy.
lern. Thus, concurreut use of an ACE inhibitor may
If the initial dose is not effective, it is titrated gradually
blunt. the development of resistance.
upward (incrernents of 0.5 mg/kg) until a beneficial
effect is documented or a total dose of 3.0 mg/kg q
The hemodynanic effects of prazosin have not been
documented in the dog or cat. In humans, its adininis-
12 hr is achieved.
 tration decreases right and left ventricular filing pres-
 In dogs with acute, fulminating heart failure due to
sures, edema, and congestion and increases stroke vol-
severe mitral regurgitation that are not already receiv-
ume and cardiac output.t57 Prazosin is supplied in
ing an ACE inhibitor, hydralazine titration can be
capsules containing I, 2, and 5 mg of drug. The start-
more aggressive. An initial dose of 2.0 mg/kg may be
ing dose in dogs is 1 mg q 8 hr for dogs wcighing less
administered initially along with IV furosemide. Blood
than 15 kg, and 2 mg q 8 hr for dogs weighing more
pressure monitoring is strongly encouraged, because
this dose may produce hypotension. The risks of treat-
thau 15 kg. This is then titrated upward if the initial
dose is ineffective, or reduced if hypotension occurs.
ment are well warranted in patients with life-threaten-
 Prazosin has not been used iu cats. Other α-adrenergic
ing pulmonary edema.
receptor blocking drugs used in humans (bunazosin,
Hydralazine can cause reflex tachycardia, particu-
doxazosin, indoramin, terazosin, trimazosin, and ura-
larly when blood pressure declines in patients with low
 pidil) have not been evaluated in cats or dogs.
plasma catecholamine concentrations.
3.Iydralazine-
mediated histamine release contributes to the tachycar-
dia by stimulating norepinephrine release. Patients
NITRATES
with  elevated plasma catecholamine concentrations
Nitroglycerin
      m
 administered. When dogs with congestive heart failure
Nitroglycerin and the organic nitrates act primarily
are treated with hydralazine, about one third of the
as venous and coronary artery vasodilators, with a less
 dogs experience tachycardia, one third have no change
pronounced effect on the systemic arterioles.s Nitro-
 in heart rate, and one third experience a decrease in
glycerin ointmment (Nitrol or Nitro-Bid) is available in
heart rate. Digoxin can be administered to help con-
a 2 percent forinulation to be spread on the skin
trol hydralazine's tendency to increase heart rate.
for absorption into the systemic circulation. It is also
Hydralazine causes vomiting in some dogs. Reducing
supplied in a trasdermal patch preparation. In dogs
the dose to 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg q 12 hr for 1 or 2 weeks
 and cats, a 2 percent nitroglycerin cream is offen used
and then increasing the dose to its therapeutic range
(1/2 1o 2 inches every 4 to 6 hours for dogs, 1/8 to
1/4 inch every 4 to 6 hours for cats), but the efficacy of 
Inent of chronic heart failure, and for this purpose
this treatunent has not been documented.59 In human
they are more effective than other vasodilating drugs.
patients, the absorption of cutaneously applied nitro-
ACE inhibiting drugs delay the onset of heart failure
glycerin varies with the site and area of application, as
in human patients with asymptomatic left ventricular
well as the amount of oitment used. These variables
dysfunction, and they reduce overall mortality from
 have not been studied in dogs or cats. Humans can
cardiovascular disease in those patients in overt heart
adjust the dose and method of application to obtain
failure (classes II, Ill, and IV).21-1
the desired effect, but such adjustments are not possi-
 Of the many ACE inhibitors available for use, capto-
ble in dogs and cats. If transdermal nitroglycerin
 pril, enalapril, lisinopril, benazepril, quinapril, and
cream is used, it should be applied on a hairless or
ramipril have been studied in dogs with naturally OC-
shaved area, using gloves to avoid human transdermal
curring heart falure.3,16-1 Enalapril has been stud-
absorption. To ensure Imore uniform dosing, self-adhe-
ied rmost thoroughly, and it is the only ACE inhibiting
sive transderrmal nitroglycerin patches have also been
drug that is specifically approved in the United States
used in dogs anid cats with CHF. Patches delivering 0.1
for treating heart failure in dogs. Enalapril. benazepril,
mg/hr have been recommended for treating cats aud
quinapril, and ramipril are prodrugs that are con-
small dogs, and patches deliveriug 0.2 mg/hr were
verted to their active form in the liver, whereas capto-
recommended for larger dogs.11
pril and lisinopril are active drugs.,17 This distinction
is not particularly important, since the conversion of
prodrugs to an active form does not limit drug avail-
Isosorbide Dinitrate
ability even in patients with severe liver cdisease. With
the exception of ramipril, all the ACE inhibitors listed
ferred for the foregoing reasons. Unfortunately, appro-
are clininated primarily via the kidney 170. 7 Lisinopril
priate doses of these compounds are not well estab-
is climinated entirely via glomerular filtration, whereas
the others are climinated by glonerular filtration and
lished. Isosorbide dinitrate is available in a sublingual
renal tubular secretion. The rate of clirmination of
formulation, in a standard oral formulation, and as a
these drugs declines with decreased kidney function.
controlled-release capsule and tablel. An einpiric dose
indicating the necessity for dosage adjustment when
of the standard oral forrmulation (Isordi) that has
 been used for dogs is 0.22 1o 0.44 mg/kg given every
renal function is severely impaired.
 8 hours.1 In dogs with experimentally created myocar-
It is difficult to determine the optimal dose for any
ACE inhibitor or to compare relative efficacy. The
dial infarcts, isosorbide dinitrate has been dosed as
high as 2.0 mg/kg bid,16l Isosorbide mononitrate, the
degree and duration of inhibition of plasma ACE activ
ity are commonly assayed. However, it is unknown to
primary metabolite of isosorbide dinitrate, can also be
what degree or how long plasma ACE. activity must
used in dogs with heart failure,loz. 16s From these stud-
be inhibited before a beneficial therapeutic effect is
ies, the estimated oral dose of isosorbide mononitrate
observed. Moreover, the degree to which ACE inhibi-
 in cdogs is 0.25 to 2.0 mg/kg. with a dosing interval of
6 to 12 hours. In humans, a dosage-free interval, typi-
tors inhibit plasima and tissue ACE activity varies both
in magnitude and in duration; the significance of these
cally 10 to 12 hours long, is advised to avoid the
differences relative to clinical efficacy is uncertain.
 phenomenon of tolerance. The utility of this maneuver
inl dogs or cats with CHF is unknown.
MECHANIsMs. ACF. inhibitors reduce the activity of
ACE. in the body by binding with its zinc ion--
containing active site, ACE cleaves (wo peptides off
ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME
INHIBITORS
the decapeptide angiotensin I to creale the octapep-
tide angiotensin. ln this fashion, inhibition of ACE
 The efficacy of ACE inhibiting drugs has been con-
decreases circulating concentrations of angiotensin II
vincingly demonstrated in human patients with CHF.
(Fig. 12-9). Angiotensin Il is a very potent vasocon-
These drugs have been shown to improve hemody
strictor that helps maintain systemic arterial blood
namic function and to improve clinical symptoms in
 pressure in heart failure patients. A decreased plasna
 patients with mild, moderate, and severe heart fail-
angiotensin II concentration allows the systermic arteri-
ure.2-24, s9. 164 The hemodynamic effects of ACE inhibi-
oles and veins to relax (dilate). Angiotensin If also
tors are modest in relation to the potent effects of
stimulates sodiuun and water retention indireculy via
some direct-acting vasodilators, such as hydralazine
release of aldosterone from the adrenal gland. With
and nitroprusside. Similarly, the diuretic effect of ACE
ACE inhibition, the clevated plasma concentration of
d s  on  s sn sh h
aldosterone declines, promoting renal sodium and wa
effect of furoseimide. For these reasons, ACE inhibiting
ter cxcretion. Accumulation of bradykinin in the tis
drugs are not indicated for the treatment of acute
suces may contribute to the observed hemodynamic
heart failure. Their intended application is the treat
and cardiovascular cffects of ACE iuhibiting drugs.
HEART FAILURE: PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT, THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES, AND PHARMACOLOGY :
241
 patients with heart failure. The bioavailability of capto-
pril is about 75 percent in fasted dogs, but it is reduced
heart &
liver
by 30 to 40 percent when there is food in the gastroin-
vessels
testinal traci.17s Captopril has a rapid onset of action
K
ANGIOTENSINOGEN
relative to other ACE inhibitors, and it begins to exert
hemodynanic effects within an hour after oral admin-
RENAL
TISSUE
RENIN
RENIN
hours postadministration. '74 Thereafter, the ACF. inhib-
ANGIOTENSIN I
iting activity of captopril declines rapidly as the com-
pound is rapidly excreted. In one study, a single 2.0
Lung ACE
Tissue ACE
mg/kg oral dose of captopril reduced plasma ACE
levels by less than 50 percent (peak effect) in normal
dogs, and plasma ACE levels returned to norrmal 3
hours after administration.17s Other studies suggest
ANGIOTENSIN II
much higher levels of ACE inhibition, with a markedly
Systemic Effects
diminished response afier 6 hours.176 The recom-
mended dose of captopril in dogs with heart. failure is
/asoconstriction
ar remodeling
2.0 mg/kg q 8 hr. Captopril is rarely used in dogs
Aldosterone
ardial Hypertrophy
because of its short duration of action and reports of
SNS activity
 persisteut anorexia. Carefully controlled clinical trials
in dogs or cats with hear1 failure have not been per-
FIGURE 12-9
forned.
Thc renin-angiotensin system is composcd of circulating (systenic)
and tissue componenis. Changes in blood volune and periphcral
ENALAPRL. This prodrug has very little ACE activity
vascular resistance are rmodilied prinarily by the renir-angiotensin
until it is couverted (hydrolyzed) in the liver to the
system. Redluced renal perfusion is thc primary stimulus for renin
active diacid enalaprilat, '7 Enalapril is well absorbed
releasc by the kidney and activation of ihe systemic renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone echanisn. The tissne angiotensin system
in dogs, and estimates of its bioavailability range from
may be activated even carlier than thc systemic angiotensin systen.
Yed aui aeuonnse peio ym naad oz on m
Some tissucs also contain proteascs that can act on angiotensin [ to
concentration of enalaprilat is attained 2 to 4 hours
produce angiotensin ll (the chynase pathway), Tissuc angiotcnsin
II is thought to be a stimulus of myocardial hypertrophy, libroblast
after the oral administration of enalapril. At recom-
proliferation, and renodeling of the cororary and systemic
 mended dosages of enalapril (0.5 mg/kg), plasma ACE.
vasculature. ACE inhibiting drugs can dcerease the formation of
activity is reduced by 75 percent 3 hours after the first.
angiotensin II in all thcse locations. but thcy do not block the
chynase pathway. ACF, angiotensin-converting enzyme: SNS.
 oral dose in healthy dogs.i7s Plasma ACE activity is still
syunpathetic ncrvous system,
reduced, albeit to a lesser extent, 12 hours postdosing.
Plasma ACE inhibition is minimal 24 hours after a
single oral dose. Clinical improvement has been dem-
ACE also inactivates bradykinin, which induces vasodi-
 onstrated in dogs with heart failure when enalapril is
lation directly and indirectly by increasing production
administered at 0.5 mg/kg once daily.$2 Hemodynamic
of the prostaglandins PGl, (prostacyclin) and PGE2.
studies, studies of plasna ACE inhibiting activity, and
Local renin-angiotensin systeins have been demon-
clinical trials indicate that enalapril is most. effective
srated in a number of different organs and tissues,
when it is given twice daily.r2
including the kidney, brain, blood vessels, myocar-
The Cooperative Veterinary Enalapril (COVF) study
dium, and the cardiac valves.19. 172 These local renin-
group reported that enalapril, used in combination
 angiotensin systerms are believed to regulate cellular
with digoxin and furoseinide, significantly reduces the
growth, thereby mediating the development of the
clinical signs of heart failure and inproves exercise
vascular changes and ventricular remodeling processes
tolerance in dogs with congestive heart failure from
observed in patients with heart disease. Inhibition of
vascular and ventricular remodeling might
protect
ter Prospective Veterinary Enalapril (IMPROVE) study
against the progressive deterioration of veniricular
group reported that enalapril, dosed at 0.5 mg/kg q
function in patients with heart disease, Some investiga-
12 hr, produces a significant decline in pulmonary
tors have suggested that the bencficial effects of ACE
capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) in dogs with heart
inhibiting drugs, including increased survival, are due
failure caused by DCM.'66 In this study, the decline i11
to inhibition of tissue ACF. rather than their diuretic
i  a s   ss sa a
or hemodynarnic effects.
tion, In both groups, the clinical signs of heart failure
and the radiographic severity of pulmonary edema
CAProrrn. 'This sulfhydrylcontaining ACF. inhibitor
were significantly reduced by treatment with cnalapril.
was the first compound in this class used to treat
Enalapril's cffect on survival has not been directly
242 ABNORMAL. CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
measured in dogs with naturally occurring heart fail-
ure. Controlled studies have shown that enalapril
administered orally at 0.25 to 0.50 mg/kg q 24 hr.10
significantly increases the time to development ol
refractory heart failure or death in dogs with dilated
Adverse Effects of ACE Inhibitors
ingly demonstrated in dogs with mitral regurgita-
Enalapril is the only ACF. inhibitor to be cvaluated
tion.52.178
for safety and efficacy in large numbers of dogs with
congestive heart failure. The majority of adversc reac-
tions observed in controlled clinical trials of enalapril
LISINorr. Lisinopril is somewhat more potent than
cnalapril, and its duration of action is slightly longer
were mild and similar to those observed in dogs receiv
than that of enalapril. 7s The bioavailability of lisinopril
inhibiting drugs include systeimic hypotension, hyper-
is somewhere between 25 and 50 percent, and it is not
kalemia. and azotemia. Systermic hypotension is infre-
affected by feeding.170. 1s Followinig a single oral dose
quently obscrved and can be casily managed by reduc-
of lisinopril (0.5 mg/kg), plasma ACE activity is re-
ing the ACE inhibitor dose. Serious hypotension is
duced by 75 percent 3 hours later, and ACE activity
is still reduced 12 hours postdosing.17 Plasma ACE
when other vasodilating drugs are used in combination
 co os e re s ie pn si u
with an ACE inhibitor. Hypcrkalermia is occasionally
kg oral dose. The hermodynamic effects havc bcen
studied in a small number of dogs with class IV heart
it is rarely severe enough to produce clinical signs.
failure due to dilated cardiornyopathy (Sisson, unpub-
Hyperkalemia is presumed to result frorn reduced glo-
lished). Lisinopril produced a substantial reduction in 
merular filtration and diminished plasma aldosterone
pulnonary capillary wedge pressure, mean pulmonary
concentrations. Severe hyperkalemia should prompt
artery pressure, systermic arterial pressure, and systernic
discontinuation or reduction in ACE inhibitor dose. It
vascular resistance. Heart rate decreased while stroke
is prudent to monitor serurn potassiurn concentration
volume and cardiac output increased modestly. Five of
in dogs treated with ACE inhibitors and spironolac-
the seven dogs improved by one or more classes of
tone. Potassium-sparing diuretics should be discon-
heart failure following 3 weeks of treatment with once-
daily lisinopril (0.5 mg/kg). Bloocd urea uitrogen con-
tinued in those dogs that develop hyperkalcrnia. In
 our cxperience, spironolactone is well tolerated by
centration rose transiently l wcek after the initiation
most dogs treated with an ACE inhibitor and furose-
of treatment but returned to normal after 3 weeks of
 treatment. No adverse drug effects were noted during
Inidle.
Treatiment with ACE inhibitors rnay precipitate seri-
this short-terin study. The recornmended oral dose for
ous renal dysfunction when used with high doses of
dogs is 0.5 mg/kg q 12 to 24 hr. The relative merits of
diuretics, and this complication can be fatal. Mild azo-
on1ce- versus twice-daily dosing have not beenl studied,
ternia is commonly detected in dogs with CHF. particu-
bul they arc probably similar to those of enalapril.
larly when they are aged. Azotemia is usually interpre-
ted as evidence of decreased renal perfusion (prerenal
BENAzerru. This prodrug is readily absorbed and rap-
azotcmia), combined with an age-related decline in
idly converted by the liver to the active diacid benaze-
renal functional capacity. ACE inhibitors are known to)
prilat.72 In dogs and cats, the peak benazeprilat con-
decrease glomerular fitration pressure by virtue of
centration is attained within 2 hours of
oral
their effects of the renal afferent and efferent arteri-
adiministration. In one study, a single oral dose of
oles, Treatment with an ACE inhibitor can and often
benazepril (0.5 mg/kg) reduced plasma ACE activity
does result in mild azotemia and slightly increased
in dogs 1more than 75 percent by 1.5 hours afier admin-
serum creatinine concentration. 1x* Renal function usu-
istration;' the plasma ACE concentration was still in-
ally soon normalizes or stabilizes at a new sleady state.
hibited 12 hours after dosing but not at 24 hours post-
 A small percentage of dogs treated with ACE inhibi-
treatment. In apparent contradiction, another study
tors develop life-threatening renal dysfunction.ts. 181
The occurrence of this complication is unpredictable,
ent 24 hours following a single 0.25 mg/kg oral dose
but it seerns to occur most often in dogs with severe
of benazepril.tsl At steady state, an oral dose of 0.25
heart failure and that become dehydrated (particularly
mg/kg produced more than 95 percent inhibition of
with overdiuresis) or hypotensive. In our experience,
ACE activity at peak effect (2 hours postdosing), and
serious renal dysfunction occurs most often within 1
more than 80 percent inhibition of ACE activity 24
weck of initiating reatment, but some dogs do not
hours affer dlosing. In cats, once-daily oral dosing at
cxperience the problem for several months. Several
0.25 mg/kg produced 100 percent inhibition of ACE
precautions should be observed to avoicd this problen.
at peak effect and over 90 percent inhibition after
Renal function should be assessed prior to initiating
 24 hours.isz 1n clinical trials conducted in Europe,
an ACE inhibitor. Alternative therapies should be col-
HEART FAILURE: PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT, THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES, AND PHARMACOLOGY 
243
sidered if the serim creatinine concentration exceeds
tor blocking drugs, reduced mortality inl patients with
2.5 mg/dl or the BUN concentration exceeds 50 mg/
DCM. Although these results are encouraging, many
d1. High furoseimide doses (> 4.4 mg/kg/day) should
s sn uas seaon nou pi suaned aej ne
be avoided when initiating ACE inhibitor therapy. Re-
initial drug doses administered at the onset of therapy.
nal function should always be reassessed 5 to 7 days
This subset of patients experienced rapid cardiac de-
 after initiating an ACE inhibiting drug. If serum creati-
coinpensation and worsening congestive signs, and
nine concentrations exceed 2.5 to 3.0 mg/dl and BUN
sonne died. ‘There is no reliable way of identilying
concentrations exceed 60 to 70 mg/dl, the ACE inhibi-
which patients will respond favorably.
tor should be discontinued for 1 to 2 days. Dehydrated
patients shoulel be carefiully rehydrated and the di-
MECHANisM. The mechanisn by which sone patients
uretic regimen reduced. When renal function im-
proves, the ACF. inhibitor can he reintroduced at a
theorize that β,-receptors, down regulated due to con-
lower dose or other drug treatments prescribed, typi-
cally hydralazine or armlodipine in coimbination with
late following prolonged treatment. with high cdoses of
a nitrate.
β-blocking drugs. Others theorize that long-terrm β-
blocker treatment suppresses the increase in inhibitory
G; protein activity occurring in patients with DCM.
BETA-ADRENERGIC BLOCKING DRUGS
Other possible mechanisins include improved ventricu-
lar-arterial coupling, structural ventricular remodeling.
Beta-blocking drugs are used to treat many different
reduced hcart rate, decrcased oxygen consumption,
cardiovascular conditions.1*5 Principal indications in-
more efficient oxygen utilization, as well as the antiar-
clude supraventricular tachyarrhythmias (chapters 18,
rhythmic effects of β-blockers.
19) (such as atrial Gbrillation, atrial tachycardia, and
sinus tachycardia when it causes or contributes to im-
PROPrANoioi. ‘This nonselective (first generation)
paired ventricular filling);  ventricular tachyarrhyth-
agent blocks both β- and β-receptors. lt has poor
mias, either as monotherapy in cats or in combination
oral bioavailability, '*7 is primarily eliminated by hepatic
with other agents; reduction of dynamic outflow tract.
metabolism, and has a short plasma half-life (0.5 hour
obstruction (chapter 28); and treatiment of systernic
 in cats, 0.6 to 1.5 hours in dogs), necessitating frequent
hypertension  (usually  in  combination  with other
 posn Aipensn si [oloueidoid uonensjupe (iu g b)
drugs) (chapter 35).
a dose of 0.25 to 2.0 mg/kg q 8 hr PO, starting low
Beta-adrenergic receptors are classified into β and
and titrating upward to effect.4i. 185
creases in heart rate, atrioventricular conduction veloc-
A7ENoror. This selective β,-blocking drug (second
ity, and myocardial contractility. Stimulation of cardiac
 generation) has good oral bioavailability,'9 is climi-
βz-rcceptors also increases contractility. Betaz-recep-
nated by renal excretion and hepatic metabolism, and
tors locatcd in vascular and bronchial sinooth muscle
has a much longer plasma halflife (3.6 hours in cats
mediate vasodilation and bronchodilation. Other βy
and 3.2 to 4.5 hours in dogs) than propranolol. In cats
receptors mediate renin and insulin release. The num-
her and activity of myocardial β-receptors decline in
or1min) is given initially al a dose of 6.25 to 12.5 mg/
patients with chronic heart failure, presumably in re-
cat q 12 to 24 hr PO. Higher doses nay be required
sponse to exposure to increased levels of catechola-
to achieve a desired effect. Dogs are treated with doses
mines. In addition, the contractile response to β-ago-
ranging from 12.5 to 50 mg q 12 to 24 hr PO.
nists is reduced 1s5, 186 Of the many available β-receptor
blocking drugs, propranolol and atenolol are used
OTIER β-stockERs. Carvedilol, which exhibits both α-
most. often.
and β-receptor blocking activity, has recently been
 Mounting evidence incdicates that βB-blockers night
approved for the treatment of heart failure in human
 play a substantive role in the trcatiment of paticnts with
paticnts. Carvedilol improvcs symptoms and subrnaxi-
mal exercise capacity and reduces mortality in soine
doses of β-adrenergic blocking drugs improves symp-
paticnts with heart failure caused by dilated cardiomy-
toms, exercise tolerance, hemodynamics, left ventricu-
le padoq sea lI st'ssess heay oiapst pue aedo
lar function, and perhaps even mortality in some
humans with heart failure, particularly dilated cardio-
heart failure by virtue of its vasodilating effect. How-
myopathy. Gradualed-dose protocols using metoprolol
ever, it is not tolerated in up to a third of trealed
or bisoprolol reduced the rate of hospitalization for
patients. Metoprolol (Lopressor) exhibits moxderate
heart failure and improved left ventricular ejection
fraction in some patients s, s9 In these studies, biso-
patic metabolism, and has an approximate elimination
half-life of 1.3 hours in the cat and 1.6 hours ini the
244 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
dog. In canines, it has been used at a dosage of 5 to
patic recirculation. In cats, peak concentrations of dilti-
50 mg q 8 hr PO. In an experimental canine model of
azem are reached in 45 minutes, and its half-life is
chronic heart failure, metoprolol (25 mg q 12 hr PO)
slighty less than 2 hours.197 The oral dose of the stan-
 produced beneficial effecis (decreased LV end-dia-
dard formulation of diltiazem (Gardizern) is 0.5 to I.5
stolic pressure, end-diastolic wall stress and stiffess,
Ing/kg q 8 hr in dogs and cats.t The pharmacokinet-
and improved left atrial contribution to ventricular
ics
of one cxtended release form of diltiazem
(Cardizein CD) has been studied in cats;'9 peak con-
ity. is poorly lipid soluble, and is elininated by renal
centration is realized in I40 minutes affer oral adiminis-
excretion. In the dog, it is given at a dlose of 5 to 40
tration, and halflife is about 7 hours. The recom
mg q 8 to 12 hr PO.iss
 mended oral dose of Cardizem CD in cats is 10 mg/kg
once daily 1us Dilacor is another long-acting diltiazem
preparation that has been used in felines.2w Dilacor
Adverse Effects with β-Adrenergic
capsules of varying strengths contain two to four tab-
 Receptor Blockers
lets, each of which contains 60 mg of diltiazern. Dos-
ages of 30 to 60 mg q 24 hr appear to be elffective.
Adverse effects common to all β-blockers inclucie
bradycardia, hypotension, depression, and precipita-
 In dogs, diltiazem is often administered alone, or in
tion of congestive heart failure.isa Hypoglycermia in
combination with digoxin, for the treatment of atrial
diabetics and bronchospasm in patients with pre-ex-
tachycardia and atrial Gbrillation (chaptcr 18). For
isting lung disease are less likely to develop when
rhythrmia, diltiazem can be adininistered IV (0.25 mg/
selective β-agents are used. When β-blocker treatment.
is discontinued, drug administration should be gradu-
kg) over 2 minutes and repeated as needed (maximum
ally reduced over several days to avoid withdrawal reac.
-J 1eay 4m s8op u1 ox u (sy/8ul g2'0 'ssop peio)
ure, diltiazen offers the advantage of minimally de-
tions, such as persistent tachycardia and precipitation
of myocardial  ischemia.  The  beneficial  effects of
creasing myocardial contractility. For this reason, some
chronic, high-dose β-blocker thierapy have not yet been
prefer diltiazem to β-blockers for treating dogs with
 deinonstrated in dogs or cats with naturally occurring
heart failure,20 Diltiazem's long-term clinical effects in
heart failure. Therefore, in these circumstances, its use
dogs with advanced nyocardial or valvular heart dis-
tase have not been cvaluated. Future studies compar-
should be closely monitored.
ing the antiarrhythmic effects of calciun channel
blockers with those of β-adrenergic blocking drugs or
 other antiarrhythmic agents must consider the long-
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
term effects of these drugs on exercise tolerance and
survival,
These drugs are used most comnonly in the treat-
The reported benefits of diltiazem therapy in cats
ment of supraventricular arrhythmias (chapters 18,
with hypertrophic cardiornyopathy include reduced
19). hypertension (chapter 35), and feline HCM
heart rates, a positive lusitropic effect (improved dia-
(chapter 28). The use of sone calcium channel block-
stolic myocardial relaxation). improvcd diastolic Gill-
ers such as amlodipine to augnent vasodilation in-
ing, and increased myocardial perfusion.6. 7. 2o Myocar-
 duced by ACE inhibitors is being evaluated in human
dial relaxation is impaired in humans and cats with
trials.19s This combination therapy cxerts synergistic
HCM, and the amount and distribution of intracellular
hemodynamic, antiproliferative, and antithrombotic
calciuin ions have been inplicated in the pathogenesis
properties.se True benefits await verification in veteri-
of this phenomenon. Diltiazem also dilates coronary
nary clinical trials.
arteries without producing a pronounced effect on the
systemic vasculature.8 This effect might be clinically
DIIAzeM. Diltiazem belongs to the benzothiazepine
 inportant, because cats dying from HCM often show
class of calcium channel blockers and has been used
ischemic myocardial lesions in association with abnor-
 primarily to treat cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
mal coronary arterioles. Diltiazem could help prevent
thy and dogs and cats with certain supraventricular
 or delay rnyocardial cell death and resulting myocar-
tachyarhythmias. It is available for IV injection, as
dial fibrosis. Decreases in heart rate are due to reduc-
a standard oral forrmulation, and in several different
tion of calcium-inediated depolarizing currents in the
extended-rclease forrms. The bioavailability of the stan-
sinoatrial (SA) node, but the SA node rernains respof-
dard formulation is 43 percent in dogs and 7l percent
 sive 1o increases in circulating catecholamines and sym
in cats.v7. ox This difference is due to more rapid
pathetic discharge. For this reason, reductions in heart
hepatic netabolisin in dogs (first-pass effect).
rate may not be as reliable or as dramatic as those
The pharmacology of diltiazem is complex. In the
dog. it is metabolized by the liver into several differen1
 Diltiazem has been reported to resolve myocardial
active compounds, and it also undergoes enterohe-
hypertrophy in some cats with HCM. One invesigator
reported complete resolution of myocardial hypertro-
11. Gilligan IDM, Chan Wl., Joshi J, et al. A double-blind,
phy in 66 percent of cats treatcd with long-term (≥ 18
placebo-rontrolled crossover trial of nadolol and ver
apamil in mild and moderately synptomatic hypertro-
months) diltiazem.7 Many others, including us, have
phic cardiomyopathy J Am Coll Cardiol 21:1672, 1993
not been able to achieve such rermarkable results.
12. Levine HJ, Gaasch WH. Clinical recognition and treat-
Spontaneous resolution of LV hypertrophy sometimes
ment of diastolic dysfunction and heart failure. In
Occurs in cats not treated with diltiazem.
Gaasch WH, LeWinter MM (eds): Left Ventricular Dia-
 Diltiazem has very liule negative inotropic effect.
stolic Dysfunction and Heart Failure. Philadelphia,
This otherwise desirable property may be disadvanta-
Lea & Febiger, 1994. p 445
13. Sisson DD, Thomas WP. Myocardial discascs. In Ettinger
geous in treating cats with dynamic outflow tract ob
SJ, Feldman EC (eds): Textbook of Veterinary Internal
struction. In humans with HCM, diltiazem can increase
Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995,
the severity of dynamic obstruction.20 Thus, B-blockers
p 995
14. Brilla CG, Janicki JS, Weber KT. Comparative effeets of
appear to be safer and nore efficacious in cats with
lisinopril in rats with genetic hypertension and lelt
the obstructive form of HCM,* There is no consensus
ventricular hypertrophy. Cirrulation 83:177l, 1991
of opinion for choosing between β-blockers and cal-
 cium channel blockers for those patients with the non-
tionships and their ratio in the excised, supported ca-
obstructive form of HCM, either in cats or humans.
nine lelt ventricle. Circ Res 35:117, 1974
Adverse reactions to orally administered diltiazen
16. Pion PD, Kittleson MD, Rogers QR, Morris JG. Myocar-
are uncoimrmon. Hypotension is possible with very high
dial failure in cats associated with low plasina taurine:
A reversible cardiomyopathy. Science 237:764, 1987
doses, particularly when cormbined with β-blocker or
17. Grossman W, Braunwald E, Mann I, et al. Contrartile
vasodilator drugs. Bradycardia can also occur, particu-
state of the left ventricle in man as evaluatcd from end-
larly in cats concurrently treated with a β-blocker.
systolic pressure-volume relations. Circulanion 56:845.
1977
I8. Grossman W, Jones D, McLaurin LP. Wall stress and
patterns of hypcrtrophy in the human left ventricle, J
REFERENCES
Clin Inves1 56:56. 1975
19. Smith TW, Kelly RA, Stevenson IW. ct al. Managemcnt
of heart failure. In Braunwald E (ed): Heart Discase. A
Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicinc. 5th ed. Philadel-
1. Brutsaert DI., Sys SU. Relaxation and diastole ol the
phia, WB Saunders, 1997, p 492
heart, Physiol Rev 69:1228, 1989
 2. Litle wC, Downes TR. Clinical evaluation of left ven-
 20. Packer M, Carver JR, Rodeheffer RJ. et al. Effecl of
oral milrinone on mortality in congestive heart failure.
tricular diastolic performance. Prog Cardiovasc
Dis
N Engl J Med 325:1468, 1991
32:273, 1990
21. CONSENSLS Trial Study Group. Effert of enalapril on
3. Brutsaert DL., Sys SL, Gillbert TC. Diastolic failure:
mortality in severe congestive heart failure. Results of
Pathophysiology and therapcutic implications. J Am
the Cooperative North Scandinavian Enalapril Survival
Coll Cardiol 22:318, 1993
Group (CONSENSUS). N Engl J Med 316:1429, 1987
4. Gaasch WH. Diagnosis and treatment of heart failure
 22. SOLVD Investigators: Effect of enalapril on survival in
based on left ventricular systolic or diastolic dysfunc-
patients with reduced left ventricular ejection fractions
tion. JAMA 271:1278, 1994
and congestive heart failure. N Engl J Med 325:293,
5. Bright JM, Golden L, Gompf RE, et al. Evaluation of
the calcium chammel-blocking agents diluiazen and ver-
1991
 23. SOIVD Invesligators. Effect. of enalapril on mortality
 apamil for treatment of leline hypertrophic cardiomy-
and the development of heart failure in asymptomatic
opathy. J Vet Intern Med 5:272, 1991
palienis with reduced left ventricular ejection fractions.
6. Bright JM, Golden AL. Evidence for and against the
N Engl. J Med 327:685, 1992
clficacy of calcium channel blockers for management
24. Cohn JN, Johnson G, Ziesche S, et al. A comparison of
ol hypertrophic cardiornyopathy in cats. In Hamlin RL
enalapril hydralazine-isosorbide dinitratc in the treat-
(ed): Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2l:1023,
 ment of chronic rongestive heart failure. N Engl J Med
1661
325:303,1991
25. Druninond GI, Severson DL. Cyclic nucleoides and
of esmolol on left ventricular ouflow obstruction in
cardiac function. Circ Res 44:145, 1979
 26. Kittleson MD, Eyster GE, Knowlen GG, et al. Myocardial
echocardiographic study, Absiract. J Vet Intern Med
lunction in small dogs with chronic mitral rcgurgitation
5:123, 1991
and severe congestive heart failure. J Am Vet Med Assoc
8. Fox PR. Evidence for and against the effiracy of beta
184:455, 1984
blockers and aspirin for management of feline cardio-
 27. Katz AM. Cardiomyopathy of overload. A major deter-
myopathies. In Hamlin RL (ed): Vet. Clin North Am
minant of prognosis in congestive heart failure. N Engl
 Small Anim Prart 2l:1011, 1991
J Med 322:100, 1990
9. Bonow RO, Rosing DR, Bacharach SI., et al. Eilects
28. Nagatsu M, Zile MR, Tsutsui H, et al. Native β-adrener-
of verapainil on lelt ventricular systolic function and
gic support for left ventricular dysfunction in cxperi-
diastolir filling in patienis with hypertrophic cardiomy-
mental  mitral  regurgitation normalizes  indexes of
opathy. Circulation 64:787, 1981
pump and contractile function. Circulation 89:818,
10. Chcng CP, Freeman GL, Santamore WP. Effect of load-
1994
ing conditions, contractile stale and heart rate on early
 29. Braumwald E, Welch GH, Sarnoff SJ. Hemodynamic
diastolic left ventricular filling in conscious dogs. Circ
elfects ol quamtitatively varied experimental mitral re-
Res 66:814, 1990
gurgitation. Circ Res 5:539, 1979
 246ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
30. Yoran (l, Yellin EI., Gabbay S, ct al. Mechanism of
49. Unger T, Ganten D, Lang RE. Efet of converting
reduction of mitral regurgitation with vasodilator ther-
enzyme inhibitors on tissue-ronverting enzyme and an-
giotensin ll: Therapeutic implications. Am J Cardiol
31. Yoran C, Yellin EL, Becker RM, et al. Dynamic aspecis
59:18D,1987
of acute miral regurgitation: Elffects of ventricular vol-
50. Haggstrom J, Hansson K, Karlberg BE, ct al. Effects of 
ume, prcssure and contractility on the effective regurgi-
long-term treatument. with enalapril or hydralazine on
tant area. Circulation 60:170, 1979
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone systen and fluid bal-
32. Bonagura JD, Darke GG: Congenital heart disease. In
ance in dogs with nalurally acquired mitral valve regur-
Etinger Sf, Feldman EC (eds): Texthook of Veterinary
gitation. Am J Vet Res 57:1645, 1996
lntcrnal Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
51. Knight DH. Efficacy of inotropic support of the failing
1995, p 892
heart. In Hamlin RL (ed): Vet Clinics North Am Small
 33. Wisenbaugh 'T, Spann JF, Carabello BA. Dilferences in
Anin Pract 21:879, 1991
myocardial perlormance and load between patients
52. The COVE Study Group. Controllcd clinical evaluation
with similar amounts of chronic aortic versus chronic
ol enalapril in dogs with heart failure: Resulls of the
mitral regurgitation. J Am Coll Cardiol 3:916, 1984
Cooperative Veterinary Enalapril Study Group. .I Vet
34. Schwartzkoplf B, Motz MD, Vogt MD, et al. Heart fail.
Intern Med 9:243, 1995
ure on he basis of hyperlension. Circulation 87:IV-
53. Sica DA, Gehr TW. Diuretic combinations in refractory
66, 1993
oedema states. Clin Pharmacokinet 30:229, 1996
35. Kienle RD. Thoinas WP, Pion PD. The natural history
54. Kittleson MD, Johnson LF, Olivier NB, et al. Acute
of canine congenital subaortic stenosis. J Vet Intern
henodynamic effects of hydralazine in dogs with
Med 8:423, 1994
chronic mitral regurgitation. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 36. Thonas WP. Therapy of congenital pulmonic stenosis.
187:258. 1985
In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary 'Ther-
35. Spokas EG, Wang H. Regional blood flow and cardiac
apy XII. Sinall Animal Practice. Philadelphia, WB Sau-
responses to hydralazine. J Pharim Exp Ther 212:294,
ders, 1995, p 817
1980
37. Momnet E, Orton EC, Gaynor JS, et al. Open reseclion
56. Conti CR. Usc of calcium antagonists to trcat heart
for subvalvular aortir stenosis in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Failure. Clin Cardiol 17:101, 1994
Assoc 209:1255, 1996
57. Packer M, O'Connor CM, Ghali JK. Effect of amlod-
38. Weinberg EO, Schoen FJ. George D, el al. Angiotensin-
 pine on morbidity and mortality in severe chronic heart
converting enzyme inhibition prolongs survival and
failure. N Engl J Med 335:1107, 1996
58. Yamanaka K, Suzuki M, Ishiko J. Antihypertensivc cf-
 pressure ovcrload hypertrophy due to ascending aortic
fects of amlodipine, a new calcium antagonist. Xippon
stenosis. Circulalion 90:1410, 1994
Yakurigaku Zasshi 97:115, 1991
39. Knight DH. Pathophysiology of heart failure and clini-
59. Rich S, Kaulman E, Levy Ps. Thc effect of high doscs
cal evaluation of cardiac function, In Fttinger SJ, Feld-
of calcium channel blockers on survival in primary
man EC (eds): Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medi-
pulmonary hypertension. N Engl J Med 327:76, 1992
cine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 844
60. Birchard SJ, Bonagura JD, Fingland RB, Results of liga-
40. Drobatz. KJ, IHackner S. Powell S. Oxygen supplementa-
tion of patent ductus arteriosus in dogs: 201 cases
tion. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary
(1969-1988). J Am Vet Mcd Assor 196:2011, 1990
Therapy XIl. Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia, WB
61. Miller Mw, Bonagura JD, Meurs KM. Perrutancous
Saunders. 1995, p 175
catheter occlusion of patent ductus arteriosus. Procced-
41. Keene Bw, Rush JE. Therapy of hearl failure. In Et-
tinger S], Feldman EC (eds): Textbook of Veterinary
ings of the 13th Annual Veterinary Medical Forun,
1995, p 308
Internal Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders.
62. Sisson D, Thomas WP. Endocarditis of the aortic valve.
1995. p 867
42. Lnverferth DV, Blanford M. Tolerance to dobutamine
.J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 184:570, 1984
after a 72-hour continuous infusion. Am J Med 69:262,
63. Snyder PS. Blinded trial of anlodipine in cats with
1980
hypertension; Ahstract. J Vet Intern Med 11:139. 1997
43. Hosgood G. Pharmacologic features and physiologic
64. Stopher DA, Beresford AP, Macrae PV, et al. The metab-
effects of dopamine. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1209,
olism and pharmarokinelics of amlodipime in humans
1990
and animals. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 12 Suppl 7:S55.
44. Remme Wj. Inodilator therapy for heart failure: Early,
1988
late or not at allr Cirrulation 87(Suppl IV):IV97, 1993
65. Withering W. An account of the foxglove and some of
45. Sisson D. Acquired valvular heart disease in dogs and
its medical uses, with practical remarks on dropsy, and
cats. In Bonagura IW (ed): Contemporary Issues in
other diseases. In willis FA, Keys TE (eds): Classics of
Small Animal Practire. Vol 7: Cardiology. New York
Cardiology. New York, Henry Schuman, 1941
Churchill Livingstone, 1987, p 59
 66. Dobbs SM, Kenyon WI, Dobbs RJ. Maintenance digoxin
46. Criteria Coininittee, New York Heart. Assoriation, Inc.
after an episode of heart failure: Placebo-controlled
 Diseases of the Heart and Blood Vesseis. Nomenclature
trial in outpatients. Br Med J 1:749, 1977
and Criteria for Diagnosis. 6th ed. Boston, Little,
67. Kleiman JH, Ingels NB, Daughters G. L.eft ventricular
Brown, 1964
dymamics during long-tern digoxin treatment in pa-
47. (O)'Grady MR. Does angiotensin-converting cnzyne in-
tients with stable coronary artery disease. Am J Cardiol
hibitor therapy delay the onset of congestive heart fail-
41:937, 1978
ure or sudden death im Dobermanl pinschers with oC
 68. Arnold SB, Byrd RC, Meister W, et al. I.ong-term digi-
rult dilated cardiomyopathy? Abstrart. J Vet Intern Med
talis therapy inmproves left ventricular function in heart
11:138, 1997
failure, N Engl J Med 303:1443, 1980
48. Cody RJ. Covit CB, Schaer Gl., et al. Sodium and water
69. Mulrow CD, Feussner JR, Velez R. Rcevaluation of digi-
balance in chronic congestive heart failure. J Clin Invest
talis efficacy Ann Intern Med 10l:113, 1984
77:1441, 1986
70. Uretsky BF, Young JB, Shahidi FE. Randomized study
HEART FAIL.URE: PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT, THERAPELTIC STRATEGIES, AND PHARMACOLOGY
247
asscssing the efflect of digoxim withdrawal in patients
90. Hamlin RI. Basis for selection of a cardiac glycoside for
with mild to moderate chronic congestive heart failure:
dogs. Proceedings of the First Symposium on Veterinary
Results of the PROVED trial. J Am Coll Cardiol
22:955, 1993
1978
 71. Packer M, Gheorghiade M, Young JB, et. al. Withdrawal
91. Kitteson MD. Drugs used in the imanagement of hear.
 of digoxin Irom patients with chronir heart failure
failure. In Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy.
treated with angiotensin-converting enzyne inhibitors.
Vol VI11. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1983, p 285
N Engl.J Med 329:1, 1993
92. Pedersoli WM.  Serum digoxin concentrations
in
72. Mcllaffie D, Purcell H, Mitchel-Heggs P, Guz A. The
healthy dogs treated without a loading dose. J Vet.
clinical value of digoxin in patients with heart failure
Pharm Ther 1:279, 1978
and sinus rhythin. Q.J Med 188:401, 1978
93. DeMots H, McAnulty JH, Porter GA, et al. Effects of
 73. Davidson C, Gibson D. Clinical significance of positive
rapid and slow infusion of ouabain on systcmic and
inotropic action of digoxin in patients with left ventic-
coronary vascular resistance in patients not in clinical
ular disease. Br Heart J 35:970, 1973
heart lailure. Circulation 52:77, 1975
74. 'The Digoxin Investigation Group. The effect of digoxin
94. Gierke KD, Perrier D, Mayersohn M, Marcus EI. Di-
goxin disposition kineties in dogs before and during
ure. N Engl J Med 336:525, 1997
azotemia. J Pharm Exp Ther 205:459, 1978
75. Kituleson MD, Eyster GE, Knowlen GG, et al. Eficary
93. Bonagura JD, Ware WA. Aurial fibrillation in the dog:
 of digoxin administration in dogs with idiopathic con-
Clinical findings in 8l cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
gestive tardioimyopathy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 186:162.
22:111, 1986
1985
96.
Smith TW. Digitalis. 1I1. N Engl J Med 289:1063, 1973
 76. Ilougen TJ, Smith TW. Inhibition of myocardial mono-
97. Fox PR. Feline myocardial diseases. In Kirk RW (ed):
valent cation artive transport by subtoxic doses of oua-
Current Veterinary Therapy. Vol VI11. Philadclphia, WB
bain in thc dog. Circ Res 42:856, 1978
Saunders, 1983, p 387
77. Caprio A, Farah A. 'The effect of the ionic rmilieu on
 98. Bigger JT. The quinidine-digoxin interaction. Mod Com-
thc response of rabbit cardiac muscle to ouabain. J
cepts Cardiovasc Dis 51:73, 1982
Pharm Exp Thcr 155:403, 1967
 99. Warner NJ, Barmard JT, Uhl JT, ct. al. Digoxin, quini-
78. Mason DT, Zelia R, Amsterdain EA (eds). Unified con-
dine_and monovalent cation transport. Circulation 
tept of the mechanism ol action of digitalis: Influence
66:57,1982
of ventricular fiunction and cardiar disease on hemody
100. Klcin HO, Land R, Weiss E, et al. The influence of
namic response to fundamental contractile effect. In
verapamil on serum digoxin concenlration. Circulation
Marks Bll, Weissler AM (eds): Basic and Clinical Phar-
65:998, 1982
marology of Digitalis. Springfield, 1I., CV Mosby, 1972,
101.
 Zatuchni J. Verapamil-digoxin conccntration. Am I Heart
p 283
J108:112, 1980
79. Chidsey CA. Calcium Metabolism in the Normal and
102. Breznock EM. Fffects ol phenobarbital on digitoxin
Failing Ileart. New York, HP Publishing Co, 1974
and digoxin elimination in the dog. Am J Vet Res
80. Ferrier GR, Moc GK. Effect of calciun on acctyl-
36:371, 1975
strophanthidin-induced transient. depolarization in ca-
ninc Purkinje tissuc. Circ Res 33:508, 1973
before and after concomitant treatnrent. with chloram-
 81. Moe GK, Farah AE. Digitalis and alied cardiac glyco-
phenicol. J Am Anim IIosp Assor 16:839, 1980
sidcs. In Goodman LS, Gilman A (eds): Pharimarologi-
104. Gross DR, Hamlin Rl., Pipers FS. Responsc ol P-Q
cal Basis of Therapeutics. 4th ed. New York, Macmillan,
intervals to digitalis glycosides in the dog. J Am Vet
1970, p 677.
Med Assor 162:888, 1973
82. Krum H, Bigger JT Jr, Goldsmith Rt., et al. Efct of
103. Smith TW. Digitalis toxicity: Epidemiology and clinical
 long-term digoxin therapy on autonomic function in
lse of serum concentration mcasurements. Am J Med
patients with chronic heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol
58:470, 1975
25:289, 1995
106. Borison HL, Wang SC. Physiology and pharmacology
83. Baggot JD, Davis LE. Plasma protein binding of digi-
of vomiting. Pharmacol Rev 5:193, 1953
toxin and digoxin in several mammalian species. Res
107. Gillis RA: Digitalis: A neuroexcitatory drug. Circulation 
Vet Sci 15:81, 1973
52:739, 1975
84. Breznock EM. Application of canine plasma kinetics of
108. Karagueuzian Hs, Katzung BG. Relativc inotropic and
digoxin and digitoxin to therapeutic digitalization in
arrhythmogenic effects of five cardiac steroids in ven-
the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 34:993, 1973
tricular myocardium: Oscillatory afterpotentials and the
85. Wcidler DFJ, Jazllad NS, Movahhed HS, et al. Pharima-
role of endogenous catecholanines. J Pharm Fxp Ther
cokineuirs of digoxim in the cat and comparisons with
218:348,1981
man and the dog. Res Conin Chem Pathol Pharm
109. Citrin D, Stcvenson IH, O)'Malley K. Massive digoxin
19:57, 1987
overdose: Observations on hyperkalemia and plasma
86. Doherty JF. Pharmacokinetics and their clinical impli-
digoxi1n levels. Scott Med J 17:275, 1972
cations, Ann Intern Med 79:299, 1973
110. Dreifus LS, McKnight EH, Katz M, Likoff W. Digitalis 
87. De Rick A, Balpaire FM, Bogaert MG, el al. Plasina
intolerance. Geriatrics 18:494. 1963
Concenirations of digoxin and digitoxin during digitali-
11l. Peon J, Ferrier GR, Moe GK 'The relationship of excit-
zation of healthy dogs and dogs with cardiac failure.
ability to conduction velocity in canine Purkinje tissue.
Am J Vet Res 39:811, 1978
Circ Res 43:125, 1978
88. Bolton GRP. Pharmacokinetics of digoxin in the cat.
112. Rall TW, Schleifer LS. Drugs clfective in the therapy of
Preliminary report. Personal communication.
the epilepsies. In Gilman AG, Goodnan LS, Gilman A
89. Erichscn DF, Harris SG, Upson DW. Plasma levels of
(eds): The Pharmacological Basis of Therapcutics. 6th
digoxin in the cat: Soine clinical applications. J Am
ed. New York, Macmillan, 1980. p 539
Anim Hosp Assoc 14:734, 1978
113. Sanders JE, Yeary RA. Serum concentrations of orally
   e   
of 'Iherapeutics. 9th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Book
Assor 172:153, 1978
Company, 1996
114. Caldwell JH, Bush CA, Greenberger NJ. Interrupion
134. Brater DC. Disposition and response to bumetanide
of the enterohcpatic circulation of digitoxin by choles-
and furosemide. Am J Cardiol 57:20A, 1986
tyraminc, Effect on metabolic disposition of tritium-
135. Ilas M. The Na-K-Cl cotransporters. Am J Physiol
labeled digitoxin and cardiac systolic intervals il uan.
267:C869, 1994
J Clin lnvest 50:2638, 1971
1:36.1
 Raftery EB. Hemodynarmirc efferts of diuretics in hearl
115. Smith Tw, Buler VP, Haber E, et al. Treatment of life-
failure. Br Heart J 72:44, 1994
threatening digitalis intoxication with digoxim-specific
137.
Cody RJ, Kubo SH, Pickworth KK Diuretic treatment
a11tibody fragments. N Engl J Med 307:1357, 1982
for the sodium retention of congestive hcart failure.
116. Lindemann JP, Watanahe AM. Mechanisms of adrener-
Arch Intern Med 154:1905, 1994
gic and cholinergic regulation of myocardial contractil-
138. Ellison DH. 'The physiologic basis of diuretic synergisrm:
ity. In Sperekalakis N (ed): Physiology and Pathophysi-
Its role in treating diuretic resistance. Ann Intern Med
ology of the Ileart. 3rd ed. Boston, Kluwer Academic
114:886, 1991
Publishers, 1995, p 467
139. Gamba G, Saltzberg SN, Lambardi M, et al. Primary
117. Adams HR. New perspectives in tardiopulmonary ther-
structure and fiunctional cxpression of a cDNA encod-
apeutics: Receptor-selective adrenergir drugs. J Am Vet
ing the thiazide sensitive electroneutral sodium-chlo
Med Assoc 85:966, 1984
ride cotransporter. Proc Natl Acad Sci 90:2749, 1993
118. Maekawa K, Liang I, IIood WB. Comparison of dobu-
140. Brater DC, Their SO. Renal Disorders. Ncw York, Mac-
millan, 1978
Circulation 67:750, 1983
141. Karim A, Kook C, Zitzewitz DJ, et al. Species differences
119. Murphy PJ, Williams TI., Kau DKI. Disposition of dobu-
in the metabolisim and disposition of spironolactonc.
tanine in the dog. J Pharm Exp Ther 199:423, 1976
Drug Metah Dispos 4:347, 1976
120. McNay JI., McDonald RH, Goldgern L1. Direct renal
142.
Wang W, MeClain JM, Zurker 1H1. Aldosterone reduces
baroreceptor
r discharge in the dog.
.Hypertension
Res 16:510, 1965
19:270,1992
121. Loeb HS, Bredzakis J, Gunner RM. Superiority of dobu-
143. Crosley AP, Ronquillo LM, Strickland Wll, et al.
tamine over dopamine for augmeniation of cardiac
Triamterene, a new natriuretic agent. Ann Intern Med
output in patients with chronic low output cardiac fail-
56:241, 1962
ure. Circulation 5:375, 1977
144. Burges RA, Dodd MG, Gardiner DG. Pharmacologic
122. Robie NW, Goldberg I.1. Comparative systemic and re-
profile of amlodipine. Am J Cardiol 64:101, 1989
gional hemodynamic eflects ol dopamine and dobu-
145.1
Packer M, O'Connor CM, Ghali JK. Effert of amlodi-
tamine. Am Heart. J 90:340, 1973
pine on morbidity and mortality in severe chronic heart.
123. Vatner SF, McRitchie J. Braunwald F. Effects of dobu-
failure. N Engl.J Med 335:1107, 1996
tanine on left ventricular perlormance, coronary dy-
146.
Yamanaka K, Suzuki M, Ishiko J. Antihypertensive ef-
namics, and distribution of cardiac output in conscious 
fects of amlodipine, a new calciun antagonist. Nippon
dogs. J Clin Invest. 53:1265, 1974
Yakurigaku Zasshi 97:115, 1991
124. Unverferth DV, Magorian RD, Lewis RP, et al. Long-
147. Greenwald JF., Modulation of prostaglandin biosynthe-
term benefit. of dohutamine in patients with congestive
sis: Proposed mechanism of action of hydralazine. Dis-
cardiomyopathy. Am HHeart J 100:622, 1980
sertation, (Ohio State Cniversity, Akron, O)H1, 1981
125. Sacher HL, Sacher MI., Landau SW, et al. Outpatient
148. Spokas EG, Wang H. Regional blood flow and cardiac
dobutamine therapy: The rhyme and the riddle. J Clin
responscs to hydralazine. J Pharin Exp Ther 212:294.
Pharmacol 32:111, 1992
1980
126. Mancini D, IeJemetel T, Sonnenblick E. Intravenous
149. Cogan J, Humphreys MH, Carlson CJ. Acute vasodila-
use of amrinone for the treatment of the failing heart.
Am J Cardiol 56:8B, 1985
tients with congestive heart failure. Circulation 64:973,
127. Ludmer Pl., Wright RF, Arnold JMO, et al. Separation
1981
of the direct myocardial and vasodilator actions olf mil-
150. Kittleson MD, Johmson LE, Olivier NG. Acute hemody-
rinone adininistered by an intracoronary infusion tech-
namir elfects of hydralazine in dogs with chronic mitral
nique. Circulation 73:130, 1986
regurgitation. J Am Vet Med Assor 187:258, 1985
128. A Summary ol Laboratory and Clinical Data on Inocor
151. Kittleson MD, Hamlin RL. Hydralazine pharmacody-
(brand of ammrinone). Rensselaer, NY, Sterling Win-
namics in the dog. An J Vet Res 44:1501, 1983
throp Research Institute, 1980
152. Koch-Weser. J: Hydralazine. N Engl J Med 295:320, 1976
129. Treadway G. Clinical safety ol intravenous amrinone. A
153. Kittleson MD, Eyster GE, Olivier NB, et al. Oral hydra-
review. Am J Cardiol 56:39B, 1985
lazine therapy for chronic mitral regurgitation in the
130. Alousi AA, Canter JM, Montenaro MJ, et al. Cardiotonic
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:1205, 1983
activity ol inilrinone, a new and potent cardiar bipyri-
154, Lowenstcin J, Steele JM. Prazosin. A1n Heart J 95:262,
dine, on the morinal and failing heart ol experimental
1978
animals. J Cardiovasc Pharm 5:792, 1983
155. Packer M, Meller J, Gorlin R, et al. Hemodymamic and
131. Kitleson MD, Pipers FS, Knauer KW, et al. Echocardio-
clinical tachyphylaxis to prazosin-mediated afterload re-
graphic and clinical effect of milrinone in dogs with
duction in severe chronic congestive heart failure. Cir-
1nyocardial failure. Am J Vet Res 46:1659, 1985
culation 59:531, 1979
132. Kitueson MD, Johnson LE, Pion PD. The acute heino-
156. Smith RD, Tessman DK, Kaplan HR. Acute tolerance to
dynamic effects of milrinone in dogs with severe idio-
prazosin in conscious hypertensive rats: Involvement
pathic rmyocardial failure. J Vet Intern Med 1:127, 1987
of the renin-angiotensin system. J Pharm Exp Ther
133. Jackson EK. Diuretics and other agents einployed in the
mobilization of edema fluid. In Hardman JG, Limbird L
157. Awan NA, Miller RR, DeMaria AN, cl al. Efficacy of
(eds): Goodman & Gilman's The Pharmarological Basis
ambulatory systermic vasodilator therapy with oral pra-
zosin in chronic refractory heart failure. Circulation
carboxy-3-phenylpropyl |-L-Ala-L-Pro and its ethyl ester
56:346, 1977
(MK-42l) on angiotensin-converting enzyime in vitro
158. IIarrison DG, Bates JN. The nitrovasodilators: New
and angiotensin I pressor responses in vivo. J Pharima-
ideas about old drugs. Circulation 87:1461, 1993
col Exp Ther 216:552, 1981
159. Hamlin Rl. Evidence for or against clinical eficacy of
177. Tocco DJ, deL.una FA, Duncan AE, et al. The physiologi-
preload reducers. In Hamlin Rl. (ed): Vet Clin North
cal disposition and metabolism of enalapril maleate in
Ain Small Anim Pract 21:93l, 1991
laboratory animals. Drug Metab Dispos 10:15, 1982
160. Kittleson MD. Management of heart failure. Concepts,
178. Etringer SJ. ACE inhibitors-why, when, and why not?
strategies, and drug pharmacology. In Fox PR (ed):
Proceedings of the l5th Annual Veterinary Medical
Canine and Feline Cardiology. New York, Churchill
Forum, 1997, p 194
Livingstone, 1988, p 171
179. Gomez [HI, Cirillo VJ, Moncloa F. The clinical pharma-
161. Jugdutt Bl, Khan MI. Effect of prolonged nitrate ther-
cology of lisinopril. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 9:$27, 1987
apy on left ventricular remodeling after canine acute
180. Oda M, lno Y, Suzuki K, ct al. Angiotensin-converting
myocardial infarction. Circulation 89:2297, 1994
enzyne inhibitory activity of MK-0521 in vivo and anti-
162. McDonald KM, Francis GS, Matthews J, et al. Long-
hyperlensive effect. of its oral administration on blood
term oral nitrate therapy prevents chronic ventricular
pressure and effect on the renin-angiotensin system in
remodeling in the dog- J Am Coll Cardiol 2l:514, 1993
2-kidncy Goldblatt hypertensive dogs. Nippon Yakuri-
163. Jugdutt BI, Khan MI, Jugdutl SJ, et al. Impact of left
gaku Zasshi 93:225, 1989
ventricular unloading after late reperfusion of canine
181. King JN, Mauron C, Kaiser G. Pharmacokinctics of
anterior myocardial  infarction  on  remodeling  and
the active metabolite of benazepril, benazeprilat, and
function using isosorbide-5-mononitrate. Circulation
inhibition of plasma angiotensin-converting enzyme ac-
92:926,1995
tivity after single repeated administration to dogs. Am
164. Committee on Evaluation and Management of Heart.
I Vet Res 56:1620, 1995
Failure. Guidelines for the evalualion and treatment
182. King JN, Humbert-Droz E, Maurer M. Pharmacokinet-
of heart failure. Report of the American College of
ics of benazepril and inhibition of plasma ACE. activity
Cardiology/American Ileart Association Task Force on
in cats; Abstract. J Vet lntern Med 10:163, 1996
Practice Guidelines. Circulation 92:2764, 1995
183. Longhofer SI., Ericsson GF, Cifelli S, el al. Renal func-
165. Fox PR, Sisson DD. Angiotensin-converting enzyme in-
tion in heart failure dogs receiving furosemide and
hibitors. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veteri-
cnalapril maleate; Abstract. I Vet Intern Med 7:123,
mary Thcrapy XIl, Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia,
6661
WB Saunders, 1995, p 786
184. Gottlieb SS, Weir MR. Renal effects of angiotensin-
166. The IMPROVE Study Investigalors. Clinical effects of
cnalapril maleate in dogs with naturally acquired heart.
ure. Am [ Cardiol 66:14D, 1990 
failure: Results of the invasive multicenter prospective
185. Ware WA. Current uses and hazards of beta-blockers.
veterinary evaluation of enalapril. I Vet Intern Med
In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Current Veterinary
9:234, 1995
Thcrapy Xl, Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia, WB
I67. [Hofimann S, Kersten Ui. The effectiveness and tolerance
Saunders, 1992, p 676
186. Bristow MR. Changes in myocardial and vascular recep-
in dogs. DTw Dtsch Tierarztl Wochenschr 103:159,
tors in heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 22:6lA, 1993
1996
 187. Floras JS. Clinical aspects of sympathetic artivation and
168. Morisse B, Kersten U. Ireatment of heart failure in
 parasympathetic withdrawal in heart failure. J Am Coll
Cardiol 22:72A, 1993
captopril. Tierarzul Prax 23:489, 1995
188. Waagstein F, Caidahl K, wallentin I, ct al. I.ong-term β-
169. Pouchelon JL, Benazcpril Veterinary Investigators.
 blockade in dilated cardiomyopathy. Effects of shor-
Treatinent of heart failure in dogs with benazc-
and long-term metoprolol treatmenl followed by with-
prilResulls of European double-blind placebo-con-
drawal and readministration of metoprolol. Circulation
trolled study; Abstracl. J Vet Intern Med 10:163, 1996
80:551, 1989
170. Kelly IG, O'Malley K. Clinical pharmacokinetics of the
189. CIBIS Investigators and Committees. A randomized
newer ACE inhibitors. A review. Clin Pharmacokinet
trial of β-blockade in heart failure: The cardiac insuffi-
19:177, 1990
ciency bisoprolol study (CIBIS). Circulation 90:1765,
171. Eckcrt IIG, Badian MJ, Gantz D, el al. Pharmacokinet-
1994
ics and biotransformation of ramipril in rat, dog, and
190. Eichhorn EJ. The paradox of beta-adrenergic blockade
man. Arzneimittelforschung 34:1435, 1984
 for the management of congestive heart failure. Am J
172. Unger T, Ganten D, Lang RE. Effecl of converting
Med 92:527, 1992
enzyme inhibition on tissue converting enzyme and
191. Bristow MR. Pathophysiologic and pharmacologic ratio-
angiotensin ll: Therapeutic implications. Am J Cardiol
nales for clinical managemenl of chronic heart failure
59:18D, 1987
with beta-blocking agents. Am J Cardiol 71:12C, 1993
173. Allen AA, Wilke LE, Fettman MJ. Captopril and enala-
192. Quinones M, Dyer DC, ware WA, et al. Pharmacokinet-
pril: Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. J Am
ics of alenolol in clinically normal cats. An I Vet Res
Vet Med Assoc 190:94, 1987
57:1050, 1996
174. Kittleson MD. The acute hemodynamic: cffects of capto-
193. Bristow MR, Gilbert EM, Abraham W1, et al. Carvedilol
 produces dose-related improvements in left ventricular
16:1, 1993
function and survival in subjects with chronic heart
175. Ilamlin RL, Nakayama T. Comparison of some pharima-
failure. Circulation 94:2807, 1997
cokinetic paramelers of 5 angiotensin-converting en-
194. Shimoyama II, Sabbah HN, Rosiman H, et al. Effecl of
zyme inhibitors (ACEI's) in normal beagle hounds. J
β-blockade on left atrial contribution to ventricular
Vet Intern Med (in press)
filling in dogs with moderate heart failure. Am Heart [
176. Gross IM, Sweet CS, Ulm EH, el al. Effect of N-I(s)-I-
131:772, 1996
250 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
195. O'Connor CM, Belkin RX, Carson PE, ct al. Effect of
200. Atkins CE. Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am
amlodipine on mode of death in severe chronic heart
Anim Ilosp Assoc Scientific Proceedings. 1997. p 3
failure: the PRAISE trial; Abstract. Circulation 92
201. Russel LC, Rush JE. Cardiac arrhythmias in systemitc
(Suppl 1:1-143, 1995
disease. In Bonagura ID (ed): Kirk's Current. Veterinary
196. Ruschitzka FT, Luscher TF. Is there a rationale for
Therapy Xll. Smal Animal Practice. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders, 1995, p 161
and calcium antagonists in cardiovascular disease? Am 
202. Fujiki A, Mizumaki K, Tani M. Effecis of diltiazem on
Heart I 134:S31, 1997
concealed atrioventricular nodal conduction in relation
197. Piepho Rw, Bloedow DC, Lacz JP, et al. Pharmacokinet-
to ventricular response during atrial fibrillation in anes-
ics of diltiazem in selected animal species and human
thetized dogs. Am HIeart J 125:1284, 1993
beings. Am J Cardiol 49:525, 1982
203. Salerno DM, Dias VC, Kleiger RF, Eficacy and safety
of intravenous diltiazem for treaunent of atrial fibrilla-
198. Johnson LM, Atkins CF, Keene BW, et al. Pharmacoki-
tion and atrial flulter. Am J Cardiol 63:1046, 1989
 tetic and pharmacodynamic properties of conventional
204. Bright JM. Update: Diliazeim therapy of feline hypcr-
and CD-formulated diltiazem in cats. J Vet Intern Med
trophic cardiomyopathy. In Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD
10:316, 1996
(eds): Current Veterinary Therapy XI. Small Animal
199. Pion PD. Current uses and hazards of calcium channel
Practice. Philadelphia, WB Saunders. 1992, p 766
blocking agents. In Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD (eds): Cur-
205. Betocchi S, Piscione F, l.osi MA, et al. Effects of diltia-
rent Veterinary Therapy Xl. Small Aninal Practice.
zem on left ventricular systolic and diastolic function in
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992, p 684
hypertrophic cardiormyopathy. Am J Cardiol 78:45. 1996
ulmonary
Edema
13
WENDY A. WARE
JOHN D. BONAGURA
Pulmonary edema is the abnormal accunulation of cxtravascular pulmo-
nary fluid. Pulmonary edema develops when fluid movement into thie lung
chaptcr is cardiogenic pulmonary edema, although other causcs are also
briefly discussed.
THE NORMAL PULMONARY CIRCULATION
ALVEOLAR-CAPILLARY STRUCTURE
Pulimonary alvcoli arc richly supplicd with capillaries (Fig. 13-1). The
capillary cndothelial cclls intcrdigitate extensively, and relatively wcak
("loosc') interccllular junctions are formed where cells overlap.* Conse-
quenuly, communication between pulmonary capillaries and the intcrstitial
space is facilitated. While inovemcnt of protcins across this memhrane is
somewhat restricted, the pulmonary capillarics are rnore permeablc to pro-
teins than are the systemic capillaries.1. 1
 Each capillary is surrounded by an interstitial spacc of varying thickncss.
On one side of the capillary this space is very narrow and the capillary wall
closely abuts the alveolar epithelium; this juncture is believed to bc the
 major surfacc for pulmonary gas exchange. Areas of thicker interstitial space
contain conncctive tissuc Gbrils, fbroblasts, and macrophages.* Fluid filtered
from the capillaries first accumulates in these areas, which are continuous
with the larger, more compliant spaces around tcrminal bronchioles, small
arteries, and veins. I.ynphatic drainagc occurs from the intcrstitium of thesc
latter structurcs.1 * There are no lymphatic channels in the alveolar-capillary
inltcrstitium,
Thc alveolar wall is lincd prinarily with large squamous cells (Type I) and
smallcr numbers of granular pneumocytes (Type Il). In contrast to the
capillary endothclium, alveolar epithclial cells are fused together to form
"tight" interccllular junctions. These arc thought to help protect the alveo-
lus from flooding. Surfactant, a hydrophobic lipoprotcin that lincs thc
alveoli, acts to rmaintain alvcolar stability by minimizing surfacc tension, and
 it helps impede thc onset of alveolar flooding.* 5. 6
CAPILLARY-INTERSTITIAL FLUID EXCHANGE
Classically, the Starling equation has been used to describe the net fluid
flow out of the capillary into the initerstitial space in terms of the balance
bctwcen hydrostatic and osmotic forces, modified by certain membrane
characteristics. This flow (Q) is dcternincd by thc differcnce betwccn capil-
251
252ABNORMALCARDIOVASCULARFUNCTIONANDPRINCIPLESOFTHERAPY
Pulmonary interstitialpressure alsoislower than sys-
temic pressure and is well below atmospheric pressure.
The pulmonary lymphatics play an important role
Alveolus
in removing fluid from the interstitial space.Fluid
movesfromalveolar-capillaryareastowardadjacent
perivascular andperibronchialinterstitiumwherelym-
phatics are located.1. 12 Lymph flows toward the bron-
chial and hilar lymph nodes, finally returning to the
venous circulation.Lymphaticflowresults from intrin-
Alveolus
siclymphvesselwallcontractions aswell as thepump-
ing action caused by fluctuating pleural pressure and
vascular pulsations.3. 4,13 Valves within the lymphatics
maintain unidirectional flow.
When thecapacityforlymphaticdrainageisex-
ceeded,interstitialfluid accumulates.However,there
is a tremendous capacityforlymphaticdiameter and
flow toincreaseinresponse togreaterinterstitialfluid
accumulation.Lymphaticflow in normal dogs has
beenestimated at4to20ml/hr.1.14,15Withchronic
elevationsin left atrial pressure,thelymphatic system
hypertrophies. Increases in lymphatic flow of 300 to
FIGURE13-1
2800 percent over control have been demonstrated in
A respiratory unit.The arteriole branchesinto capillary plexus
a canine model of chronic congestive heart failure.3, 14
surrounding alveoli.Starling'sforces controllingfluidmovement
into or out of the capillary areindicated.P,capillaryhydrostatic
Freeinterstitial fluidmay alsodrain into thepleural
pressure;capillary colloid osmotic pressure;Pinterstitial
space or flow along bronchovascular connective tissue
hydrostaticpressurenterstial collidsmoic pressur;
intothemediastinum toberemovedbymediastinal
arteriole;V,venule;L,lymphaticvessel;Tb,terminal bronchiole；
I.S.,interstitial space.
lymphatics.12,16
Factorstendingtoprotect againstovertpulmonary
edemaincludethefluidclearancepathways(lymphatic
vessels, pleural space,mediastinum), the normally low
lary(P)and interstitial(P;)hydrostatic pressures and
the capillary（π)and interstitial（π)colloid osmotic
rates of liquidfiltration andproteinleak,and thehigh
plasma protein concentration.416Since lymphatic walls
pressure gradient. Thus,
are also very permeable, accumulated interstitial pro-
Q=K[（P-P）-o（π-π)]
teins are removed along with fluid.Lymphatic removal
ofinterstitialproteinsand/orincreasing interstitial
whereKis thecapillaryfiltration coefficient(hydraulic
hydrostatic pressure helps retard the formation of fur-
conductivity times surface area-of the capillary wall)
ther edema.4
and ois thereflection coefficient,which defines the
permeability of the microvascular wall to proteins.1.2. 7
Thisrelationshipshowsthatfluidmovementintothe
CAUSESOFPULMONARY
interstitium results from high capillary hydrostatic
EDEMA
pressure,low capillary osmotic pressure (rarely a
cause), or increased capillary permeability. However,
experimentshaveshown thattheformationofpulmo
Pulmonary edema has traditionally been categorized
nary edema cannotbeneatlygroupedinto thesecate-
as being caused by either increased pulmonary capil-
gories.8-11
lary hydrostatic pressure orincreased alveolar-capillary
membrane permeability. It is now apparent that this
classification is somewhat inaccurate and misleading.
PULMONARYCIRCULATIONAND
Damageto thealveolar-capillarymembraneoccurs sec-
LYMPHATICS
ondary toincreased capillaryhydrostaticpressures,
and this damage increases membranepermeability to
Overall pulmonary capillary hydrostatic pressure is
plasma proteins.8-1o Furthermore, pulmonary insults
low comparedwith the systemic circulation.Within the
thatwerepreviously thoughtto causeedema only by
lung,gravitational influences result in greater hydro-
increasing alveolar-capillarymembranepermeability
staticpressureventrally.A major portion of thepulmo-
also often involve increased capillary pressures as well.
nary arterial-to-venous pressure drop occurs in the
With this inmind,an overview of certain clinical
alveolar wallcapillary rather than in the arteriole.12
causes of pulmonary edema is presented next.
PULMONARY EDEMA253
CARDIOGENIC PULMONARY EDEMA
trophils, lcading lo intercurrent incrcases of vascu-
lar pcrrmeability that further enhance edema forma-
Elevatcd puimonary capillary prcssure secondary to
tion,21. 22 There is evidence that platelet degranulation
lefl-sided  heart failure  oftcn  initiatcs  pulnonary
products also may contribute to pulmonary edcma
cdema. Comnon causes of this in dogs and cats in-
formation in congestive hcart failure.? Metabolic as
clude various cardiomyopathics (cspecially hypertro-
well as structural changes arc also thought to occur in
phic cardiornyopathy in cats and dilated cardiomyopa-
thy in dogs) and volume overloads caused by mitral
tion.9. 11
and aortic valve insufficiency and patent ductus arteri-
osus. Acute left ventricular dysfunction from othcr
causes, as well as severe arrhythmias, can also result. in
cardiogenic pulmonary edema. 17, 1s Rarely, obstructivc
PRIMARY ALVEOLAR-CAPILLARY
lesions of the left atrium (c.g, ncoplasia or thrombus),
MEMBRANE INJURY
a major pulmionary vcin, or mitral valve orifice (c.g..
Pulmonary edema resulting from primary damage
sure" pulmonary edema. Excessive pulmonary blood
to the alveolar-capillary mernbrane ("high-perineabil-
flow resulting from a congenital left-to-right. cardiac
ity' edema) is somnctimes called thc adult. respiratory
shunt (e.g, patent ductus arteriosus), anemia, or cxer-
distress syndrome (ARDS) or *shock lung" in peoplc.
cise can promote pulmonary edema. Clinical cdena is
Alveolar-capillary rmcmbrane injury can develop follow.
more likcly to occur when marked volurne overloading
ing a wide varicty of pulmonary insults, including inha-
Occurs in the presence of left vcntricular diastolic dys-
lation of toxic gascs, smoke, or gastric secretions; acute
function.2
 pulmonary infections; endotoxic, cardiogenic, or hypo-
Overzcalous intravenous fluid adiministration (greater
voleimic shock; gran-nncgative scpticemia; pancrcatitis;
than 100 rml/kg/hr in norinal dogs) can cause or
trauma; pulmonary Imicrocmboli; anaphylaxis; im-
mune complex disease; exposure to toxic substances
hydrostatic pressure and diluting serum proteins. Sys-
(including organophosphates and herbicides [c.g..
tcimic vcnous hypertension has experimentally beenl
paraquat],
 alpha-naphthylthiourca [ANTL], insect
shown to contribute to incrcased lung water and
and snake venoms); urcmia; or prolonged exposure
tension and/or impcding lymphatic drainage.3 19
experimental and clinical evidence indicating that
 The amount. of edcma formed dcpcnds in part on
polymorphonuclear leukocytcs and various chemotac-
the rate of risc of intravascular pressures and vascular
tic agents and cytokines initiatc and perpetuate injury
 permeability1. α Normal dogs subjected to acute in-
lcading to high-permeability pulmonary edema.3 293, 31
creases in left atrial pressure above 23 mmlIg dcvclop
Thc pathogcnesis of pcrmeability edema includes di-
lung edema. Convcrsely, pressure can be chronically
rect pulinonary damage and indirect injury mcdiated
elcvated to 40 to 45 1mmHg without devclopment of
by vasoactive componcnts of the clotting cascade, leu-
significant edcma becausc of gradually increasing lym-
 kotricnes, lysosomal cnzyines, cytokincs rclcased from
phatic capacity.1 Such chronic elevations can be associ-
monocytic cells (such as various interlcukins and tu-
 ated with pulmonary hypertcnsion and secondary right.
mor necrosis factor), platelet factors, and oxygen-frec
ventricular failure.
radicals,3.12,30.35-40
 Increascs in capillary pressurc causc ultrastructural
 Incrcased microvascular pressure also plays a rolc in
distortion and injury to capillary cndothelium, alvco-
lar cpithclium, or all laycrs of thc membranc.*n-2
increascs during inflamrnation. Somc inflanmatory
'Stretching' of the loose junctions bctwecn cndothe-
mcdiators have cven been shown to inducc a purely
 lial cells allows fluid and protein passage during high
hydrostatic ederma without measurable change in capil-
perfusion pressurc. Thcse junctions can rcturn to a
lary pcrmeability, whercas others increase both capil
more normal appcarance once the pressure is rclicved,
lary pressure and permeability. Capillary pressure may
which may cxplain thc rninimal cndothclial injury
risc (e.g-, with increascd postcapillary vascular resis-
found in some reports. In contrast, marked disruption
 tance) even with decrcased or unchanged pulmonary
of alvcolar cpithclial cells was scen in arcas of grcatest.
artery occlusion pressures. Thcse pressure changes
alveolar and interstitial edema.* v2 Fpithclial
"tight'"
emphasizc the dilcmma of volumc infusion in thc
junctions and fewer intercellular junctions per unit
management of permcability lung edcma. Sincc mainy
area compared with cndothelium presumably
cause
of the underlying conditions (e.g., septic shock) arc
 higher resistancc to periccllular fluid movement and
usually treated with volume expansion, thc potcntial
damage from shcer prcssures caused by alvcolar inter-
to increase flow to affectcd lung lobes and furthcr
stitial cdcina.- Sccondarily, cxposurc of bascmcnt
promotc edema formation must be appreciated. The
membrane can attract and activatc platclcts and ncu-
 protcin cxudation associated with high-permeability
254 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
edema inhibits resorption of luid frorn the intcrsti-
both elevations in edema protein content and bio-
tium. Moreovcr, alvcolar flooding inhibits the function
chemical changes similar to thosc found with reperfu-
 of lung surfactant complex and can sccondarily in-
sion injury 12. 5 574
crcasc microvascular permeability. 47
 Pulmonary edema sccondary to upper airway ob
A high-protein coating in thc alvcolus reduccs gas
struction has also been reportcd in dogss$ and is well
recognized in humans,9. o The pathogenesis is multi-
tent of cdema fluid causcd by primary alvcolar-capil-
factorial, probably involving increased intrapleural and
microvascular pressures as wcll as microvascular per-
plasma protcin concentration; protcin concentrations
mcability changes.
 of cardiogenic edema have bccn reported at 40 to 50
 On the basis of the Starling rclationship, low plasma
percent of plasma.12. 15. 18. 4s
colloid osmotic pressurc theoretically could inducc
pulmonary edema. Scvcre hypoproteineimia is rarcly
inplicatcd as the solc causc of edema, although it does
exacerbatc edema gencrated by other mechanisms. ?
OTHER CAUSES OF PULMONARY
 In thc dog with norrmal plasma protcins, edema will
EDEMA (NONCARDIOGENIG
not occur until left atrial pressure rises abovc 23
PULMONARY EDEMA)
rmmHg. But when the plasna protein level is decreased.
by 50 percent, cdcma forms at a left atrial pressure of
Pulnonary edema can be ncurogcnic in origin, rc-
only 12 mmHg.
sulting from hcad trauma, scizurcs, intoxicants (c.g.,
 Acute pulmonary hypertension could lead to pulmo-
 organophosphate  and  chlorinated  hydrocarbons),
nary edeima. Rcgional inhomogcncity of artcriolar va-
othcr central nervous system lesions, or clectrocution.
soconstriction might protecl some but not all pulmo-
A combination of hemodynamic and permeability
 nary capillary beds from high microvascular pressures.
The ahscnce of clinically significant edema in chronic
Acutc sympathetic overactivity causes decreased capaci-
 pulmonary hypertension probably relates to structural
tance of the pulmonary bed, shifts blood volume from
arteriolar changes that protect the capilary bed frorn
thc systcmic 1o the pulmonic circulation, and markedly
cxcessivc pressures.
increases pulmonary vascular pressures. However, pul-
 Rarcly, pulmonary edema of unccrtain pathogencsis
monary capillary prcssurc is only transiently raiscd. In
has been associated with other causes. It has bccnn
addition  to mcchanical  capillary-alveolar mcmbranc
rcported with hypoglycemia and with kctaminc HCl
injury, neural stimulation itsclf causes some degrcc of
administration in cats.? It occurs in some pcoplc cx-
altered permeability,24 53.34
 posed to high altitudes but has not bcen reproduced
A revicw of 26 cases of noricardiogenic pulmonary
in experimental animals.12 Lastly, near drowning can
cdema in 23 dogs and 3 cats revealed associated causcs
flood alveoli and damage capillarics, causing pulmo-
to include airway obstruction (8), cranial trauma (7),
nary edema.2a.62.63
clectric shock (7), and scizurcs (4). Nineteen of thc
 26 were less than 1 ycar of agc. Radiographic pattcerns 
compatible with pulnonary cderna were asymmetric in
PATHOPHYSIOLOGIC
 83 percent of the animals.5*a Lung injury lcading to
ALTERATIONS CAUSED BY
the respiratory distress syndrome in young Dalnatian
dogs was characterized by pulmonary cdcrma and
PULMONARY EDEMA
chronic rcspiratory failure.s3b
Obstruction to lymphatic drainage (e.g., with carci-
nomatosis') is an uncommon primary cause of pulno-
STAGES OF PULMONARY EDEMA
nary edeina. Howcvcr, in the prescncc of other predis-
DEVELOPMENT
posing factors,
，partial
lymphatic
obstructio1l
.10
dysfunction would incrcasc thc tendency for edema
The scquencc of cderma accumulation appears to be
formation. Studies in shcep have shown that normal
similar, regardlcss of cause. Initially, thcre is a compen-
satory incrcasc in lynphatic flow, which maintains nor-
significantly inhibited by anesthesia and endotoxin in-
rmal intcrstitial volume (Stagc l). When thc amount of
fusion.? Systemic venous H
hypcrtcnsion also inipedes
capillary filtrate excceds thc pumping capacity of the
the low of lyrnph into the central venous pool.
lymphatics, fluid and colloid accumulate in the intersti-
Re-expansion pulmonary cdema may occur when a
tial areas around bronchiolcs, arterioles, and vernules
 previously collapsed lung lobc is suddenly inflatcd.
Thcrc rmay be correlations bctween the vigor of rc-
 cuff around the bronchioles and pulmonary blood ves-
expansion, duration of collapsc, and dcgree of edema.
scls.
Damage to the capillary endothelium cai1 occur, with
During the carly stages of edema, gas exchange may
PLLMONARY EDEMA 255
be relatively umaffectcd if thcrc is no increase ini alvco-
lar cornpression in thc depcndent areas of thc lung
lar-capillary membranc thickncss along the thin side
and also promote redistribution of blood flow. Pulmo
nary arteriolar vasoconstriction secondary to alveolar
ucs to accumulatc, the less compliant interstitium
hypoxia is more prominent ventrally and may contrib-
around thc alvcolar-capilary septa also fills, intcrstitial
ute to redistribution.1. 3
pressure riscs, and alveolar flooding begins.1. 4. 1 Fluid
initially accumulates in the corners of the alveoli whcre
 lung can bc expanded) is an carly feature of pulmo-
thc radi of curvature are smallcst. (Stagc 3A).3 9. 10
nary edema. Compliancc becomes sevcrely impaircd
Finally, alvcolar flooding occurs (Stage 3B).
as edema progresscs. As the lung becomcs stiffcr (non-
There is controversy regarding mcchanisms of fluid
compliant), there is an incrcased tendency for lung
cntry into the alvcoli. Fluid may enter by retrograde
 collapse.1 2 With advancing Stage 2 edema, fluid cufs
flow fron bronchioles3. 12. 16, however, if the alvcolar
compress blood vessels and bronchi, isolating them
mcimbranes have been disrupted, fluid can dircctly
from the normal inspiratory retracting forces of thc
surrounding lung, Narrowing and premature expir-
viously thought to be an all-or-none phenomcnon with
atory closurc of ventral (dependent) small airways arc
 respcct to an individual alveolus appears to occur grad-
acccntuated, espccially in older animals and during
ually" If there has been minimal alvcolar-capillary
rccumhcncy. The resulting clevation in periphcral air-
mernbrane injury, clcaring of thc cderma fluid can
way and vascular resistanccs promotes ventilation-per-
progress quickly oncc the initiating cause is rclieved;
fusion mismatching at  various levcls  within 
thc
 the alvcolar cpithelium plays an active role.*
As norc alvcoli arc flooded, total pulmonary gas
flooded units shrink in size, further decreasing lung
cxchangc detcriorates. Flooded alveoli act as small
compliance. Small airway closure throughout the respi-
regions of purc shunt, since no ventilation occurs;:
ratory cycle and alveolar flooding causc a truc intrapul-
accordingly, the degrec of arterial hypoxemia is related
monary shunt.
 At highcr lung volumes, pulmonary compliance ab-
late stagcs of edema, frothy fluid spills from the alveoli
normalities and smal airway closure are minirnizcd.6
into the airways. Any nonflooded alveoli behind a
 Thus, if several deep brcaths can be stimulatcd during
froth-filled airway wili be unventilated duc to airway
 therapy ventilation should improve. Airway narrowing
 ohstruction. 2 Capillary membrane damage allows ex-
may also be cxacerbated by reflcx bronchoconstric-
travasation of red cells, which tint. the froth pink,
tion.1. s6 Chronic interstitial cdena and high pulmo-
The distribution of pulmonary edema across the
nary capillary pressures inducc reaclive tissuc changes
lung is not homogeneous. Since mean intravascular
 and lung fibrosis, which decrease pulmonary conpli-
pressures are greatcst in the most ventral areas of the
ancc as well i5
lung (Zone 3), whcre venlous pressure exceeds alveolar
A shallow, rapid breathing pattern occurs with pul.
 pressure, venous congestion or disrupted alveolar-cap-
monary edema, which minimizcs the work of ventilat-
illary mernbranes promote the most rapid and grcatest
 ing thc stiff lungs. Increased stimulation of airway and
accumulation of pulmonary cdema herc. Although
 interstitial pulmonary rcceptors occurs secondary to
more edema accurnulates in lowcr lohcs, thcrc also
pulmonary venous congestion and edema. This results
in a vagally mcdiatcd reflex incrcasc in respiratory
and alvcolar cdcma distribution at any level within thic
rate,3 67-70 Tachypnca may amcliorate the accumulation
lung: floodcd alveoli canl also border nonflooded units.
of cdema by increascd pumping of the lymph vesscls.
Although gravity contributes to the greater anount of
Arterial oxygcnation (PaO2) decrcases bccausc of
pulrnonary fluid found in more ventral regions, othier
ventilation-perfusion misinatch, Animals with reduced
factors are involved as well.91l Rcgional differences in1
cardiac output also have a dccrcascd rnixed venous
apparent protein contcnt of hydrostatic edema fluid,
PO, which lcads to decrcascd PaO, for any levcl of
as well as thc amount of edcma, imply regional differ-
ventilation-pcrfusion mismatch. Ilypoxic pulmonary
cnccs in thc reflection cocfficient for alburnin.?1t
vasoconstriction is an attcmpt to minirnizc this mis-
match by redirccting blood low away from unventi-
or variation in the distribution of pulmonary blood
latcd alvcoli and by redistributing flow toward the
flow or mcdiators of vascular tone, may also he im-
 better ventilated apices of the lung.*t The PaCO, tends
portant in determining the distribution of pulmonary
to be normal or low. Ilyperventilation of unaffccted
edcma of any causc,. l1. 65
 alvcoli occurs with tachypnea; since CO, diffuses more
The venous congestion of cardiogenic cdema causes
 rapidly than O, and dogs have good collateral venntila-
 an initial increase in pulmonary blood volumc, with
tion, hypercapnia occurs only with fulminant ederna.
redistribution of flow and beter pcrfusion dorsally 15. 61
 Both hypo- and hypercapnia can worsen ventilation-
Greater formation  and gravitation of pulmonary
perfusion mismatch. However, experimentally, artif-
cdema ventrally causc more markcd airway and vascu-
cial hypcrvcntilation to reduce PaCOg was associatcd
256
ABNORMALCARDIOVASCULARFUNCTIONANDPRINCIPLESOFTHERAPY
withreducedPaOandincreasedalveolar-arterialO2
AUSCULTATION
gradient.71
Auscultatoryfindings alsovary.Theremaybe no
abnormalitieswithearlyinterstitialedema.Inperacute
edema,onlyloudbronchial soundsmaybeheard.As
CLINICALMANIFESTATIONS
small airways become compressed, fine crackles may
HISTORYANDPHYSICALEXAMINATION
be heard on inspiration as previously closed bronchi-
oles snap open. Initially, crackles may be heard only
The historical and physical findings associated with
ventrally at end-inspiration after a deepbreath.It is
pulmonaryedemavarywiththeseverityoffluidaccu-
helpfultoholdofftheanimal'sbreathforashort
mulation.Mildedemacancause tachypneaorexer-
time to stimulate deep inspiration.As edema worsens,
tional dyspnea.In dogs there may be a dry frequent
wheezes and crackles of varying pitch and more wide-
cough of recent onset,althoughbronchial compres-
spread distribution are often heard during both inspi-
sionfromleftatrialenlargementmaycauseasimilar
ration andearlyexpiration.
cough.Cats are much less likely to cough with pulmo-
It isimportanttorememberthat abnormalrespira-
nary edema.Orthopnea may developasedema wors
torysoundsare not specificfor pulmonaryedema.
ens;affected dogs tend to stand with elbows abducted
Similarly,even severelung edema maynot lead to
and are reluctant to liedown(see Fig.5-1),whereas
obvious adventitial sounds.Other lung diseases,espe-
catstend tohunch ina sternalpositionwithelbows
ciallypulmonaryfibrosis andbronchitis,are associated
abducted.Respirationsbecomemorerapidandshal-
withloud crackles andwheezes.Thus,abnormal lung
low. Paroxysms of dyspnea and coughing often occur
sounds must be evaluated within the context of history,
afterresting orduringrecumbencyasaddedblood
physical findings, cardiac auscultation, thoracic radiog-
volumeisreturnedfromtheextremitiestothecentral
raphy, and ancillary tests.
pool.2 Hyperpnea or dyspnea worsens with hypox-
emia,especially atPaOless than60mmHg,andwith
lactic acidosis.15Withsevere edema,Cheyne-Stokesres-
DIAGNOSIS
piration,expectorationofpinkfoam,and cyanosismay
occur.Open-mouthbreathingin thecatoftensignals
Earlydetection ofpulmonaryedema is oftendiffi-
severerespiratorydistress.
cult.Despite advances in diagnosis with CT scans and
FIGURE13-2
Lateralradiographsfrom an1l-year-oldAfghanhound withdilated cardiomyopathyandmitral
insufficiency taken during congestive heart failure (CHF) (A) and after therapy (B).(A)
pulmonary opacity throughout thelungfields,airbronchograms,andalargelobarpulmonaryvein
(closed arrow).The left atrium is moderately enlarged (open arrous）.(B)Post therapy radiograph.
Noticethat thelungfields areconsiderablyreducedinopacity comparedwith the pretreatment
radiograph.The pulmonary veinis still distended(arrow),indicatingpulmonary venous congestion.
Theleft atrium is prominent,and the cardiac silhouetteismildly enlarged.
PULMONARYEDEMA257
double-indicatordilutiontechniques,5radiographyre
endocarditisorrupturedchordaetendineaewithmi-
tral insufficiency, acute myocardial failure,tachyar-
tent increase in resting respiratory rate may signal
rhythmias,or constrictivepericarditis.
earlypulmonaryedema.Measurementofpulmonary
artery occlusion (capillary wedge”) pressure may be
develops. Interstitial fluid blurs the edges of pulmo-
usedtoestimatepulmonarycapillaryandleft atrial
nary vessels and cuffs the bronchi, especially in the
pressures, but this may not reflect actual pulmonary
hilar region of dogs. Pleural thickening may be seen,
capillary pressure when pulmonary vascular resistance
but because dogs and cats have little interlobular tis-
iselevated.Inahuman study,wedgeressureunderes-
sue,Kerley'slines-afeatureofpulmonaryedema in
timated capillary pressure by a mean of 7 mmHg.3
humansdo not appear. Chronic edema stimulates
Presently,invasivehemodynamicmonitoringis still not
interstitial lungfibrosis and addsto the overall increase
readily accessibleformostveterinarypractitioners.
in radiographic opacity.72
Early alveolar edema, in which groups of flooded
alveoli intermingle with aerated units,is radiographi-
RADIOGRAPHY
callyevident asareas offluffyormottled softtissue
The characteristiclocations of lung infiltrates and
the caliber of pulmonary vessels can suggest a radio-
become more confluent.Eventually, a homogeneous
logicdiagnosisofpulmonaryedemaandmayhelpthe
opacitydevelopswithcompletelyobscuredpulmonary
clinician distinguishbetween cardiogenic andnoncar-
diogenicedema.Thetechnicalqualityof theradio-
Fig.13-2;Fig.13-3).Interlobar borders may bevisual-
graph,patient positioning, phase of respiration, and
ized, indicating subpleural edema or pleural fluid.72
any artifacts should be considered before a presump-
The limitations of thoracic radiography in detecting
tivediagnosis oflung edema ismade.Pre-existingchest
andquantifyingpulmonaryedemamustberecognized
pathology and the time lag between edema formation
(chapter 7).For example,a time lag exists between
and the appearance of radiographic abnormalities may
the onset and clearance of pulmonary fluid and its
complicate the radiographic diagnosis.15. 15a
radiographic appearance and disappearance. Thus,
The onset of left-sided congestive heart failure is
theanimalmayclinicallyseembetterorworsethan
associatedwithpulmonaryvenous congestion.Inthe
radiographs indicate. Small changes in interstitial
dog,theusualradiographicsigns aredilatedpulmo-
opacity are difficult to appreciate, and pre-existing
nary veins and increased symmetric perihilar intersti-
lungpathologymay hinder the identification of pul-
tialopacities.On thelateralview,thelocation ofcra
nialpulmonary vessels(from dorsal to ventral) are
lobarartery,bronchus,lobarvein.Normally,thewidth
of theveinandartery areequal and average70to75
percent of the diameter of the dorsal one third of the
fourthrib.Onthe dorsoventral orventrodorsalview,
thelobar arteryiscraniolateraltothevein andassoci-
ated bronchus. As pulmonary congestion increases,
thewidthandopacityofthepulmonaryveins exceed
that of the accompanying arteries (Fig. 13-2; see also
Fig. 7-20). Sometimes the cranial lobar vein appears
tosagdown,awayfrom thebronchus on lateralview.
Although pulmonary venous distention is a signifi-
cant indicator ofleft-sided congestive heart failure,it
isnot a consistentfinding.Secondaryright-sidedheart
failure or compensatoryvenoconstriction will reduce
the engorgement of pulmonary veins.
Catswithseverepulmonaryedemafrequentlyex-
hibit enlargement of both lobar vein and artery. As
with dogs, this is not a consistent finding.
FIGURE13-3
Cardiomegaly is common whenleft-sidedheartfail-
ure is caused by chronic mitral regurgitation, dilated
Lateralradiographfrom an1l-year-oldpoodlewithcongestive
heart failure duetomitralregurgitation.Moderate generalized
cardiomyopathy, or congenital left-to-right shunts.Typ-
cardiomegaly is present.Theleft atrium is prominent.Interstitial
icalradiographicchangesinthecardiacsilhouette are
and alveolarinfitrates compatiblewithpulmonaryedemaare
described elsewhere (chapter 7).72-74 However,radio-
evidentorsallycaudall,andntriilarreionhyreu
graphic signs of heart enlargement may be minimal
in air bronchograms (arrowheads).Pulmonary interlobar borders are
visualized.Diuretic therapy led to prompt radiographic clearing of
in some cases of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, acute
these pulmonary opacities.
258
3ABNORMALCARDIOVASCULARFUNCTIONANDPRINCIPLESOFTHERAPY
monaryedema.7²After diuretictherapy,theradio
tobedistributeddorsocaudallyinthelungperiph-
graphicevidenceofpulmonaryedemamaybeminimal
ery.50,75
even though somepatients still exhibit clinical signs.
Cardiogenicedemaindogs accumulatestoagreater
extent in thehilar region (seeFig.13-3).This edema
TREATMENTOFPULMONARY
is usually bilaterally symmetric, although it is not un-
EDEMA
commontoobservegreaterinvolvementoftheright
lobes.7²Hypostaticfluidaccumulationinarecumbent
animal can also cause an asymmetric radiographic ap-
pearance,thoughlateralrecumbencyisuncommonin
Therapeuticobjectivesforpulmonaryedemaof any
dyspneicanimals.
Thedistributionofpulmonary
cause include(1)restoration of arterial oxygenation,
edemaindogswithfulminantcongestiveheartfailure
(2)removal of alveolarfluid,and (3) correctionof the
may be diffuse (see Fig. 13-2A).
underlying etiology (Table 13-1).Mainstays of therapy
Cardiogenicpulmonary edema in cats can bedif
include supplemental oxygen,airway suction (if froth-
fuse,but n contrast to dogs,it often appears unevenly
ing is evident), redistribution of pulmonary blood to
distributed, patchy, or concentrated in the middle lung
the peripheral circulation, rest, and diuresis.The pa-
zones (Fig.13-4).Differentiation from other infiltra-
tient should be handled gently tominimize stress.
Whenever possible, oral medications should be
tive lung lesions,therefore,can be more difficult in
the cat.
avoided in dyspneic animals.
When lung infiltrates are present in a lobar, asym-
metric,or otherwise uncharacteristic pattern for car-
diogenicedema,other etiologies shouldalsobe
SUPPLEMENTALOXYGEN
considered (e.g. pneumonia,thromboembolism, neo-
plasia,obstructivelung disease),as well as noncardio-
Oxygen can be administered by face mask, nasal
genic edema.74a Neurogenic edema (Fig. 13-5) tends
catheter,endotracheal tube,or Ocage.An Ocage
A
FIGURE13-4
Radiographs from two cats with cardiomyopathy andleft-sided congestive heart failure.(A)
Ventrodorsal view of one cat with cardiogenic pulmonary edema.The heart ismoderately enlarged.
Left ventricular enlargement is evident by cardiac elongation;the left auricleisrounded and
enlarged and theright atrium is alsoprominent.Pulmonary edema is suggested by bilateral
interstitialand alveolarinfltrateswhicharemost prominentcaudal totheheartAnair
resulting in prominent interlobarfissures (curued arrous)and blunted costophrenic angles.(B)
Lateral viewof a different cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy illustrating interstitial and alveolar
lungopacitieshereisapredispositiontothecaudallunglobesalthoughsome patchyinltrate
are also observed cranial to theheart.Moderate cardiomegaly is present in bothviews.
PULMONARYEDEMA259
FIGURE13-5
Lateralradiographfrom an18-month-old Siberian
husky withnoncardiogenic pulmonary edema
secondary to seizure.Thecardiacsilhouetteisnormal
sized (compare with Figs.13-2and13-3).A profound
increaseinpulmonary interstitial and alveolar opacities
with airbronchograms is evident in thecaudal lung
lobes.The dorsocaudal lungfields displayparticularly
increasedopacity,typical ofneurogenicpulmonary
edema.
shouldhavetemperatureandhumiditycontrols;a
achievedwithintravenousadministrationoffurose-
maximumof65°Fhasbeenrecommendedfornormo-
mide.83 This loop-acting diuretic may also reduce pul-
thermic animals.25 Oxygen flows of 6 to 10 L/min are
monary shunt by augmenting perfusion of nonflooded
usually adequate.Initially,administered concentrations
alveoli beforediuresis occurs.84Furosemidemust be
of 50 to100percent Omaybenecessary.
delivered to thenephronby renalbloodflow,which
Severely affected animals,or those that experience
maybeimpairedinsevereheartfailure.Somepatients
respiratory arrest,may respond to endotracheal or
are unresponsive to traditional doses (1 to 2 mg/kg)
tracheotomy tubeplacement andmechanicalventila-
offurosemidebutwillrespond tohigher initialdoses
tion with positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), con-
or to cumulative doses administeredevery 30to60
tinuous positive airway pressure (CPAP),or high-fre-
minutes.Accordingly,we usually administerrelatively
quency jet ventilation. Salutary effects of PEEP
high IV or IM doses initially (2 to 5 mg/kg) to assure
ventilation include clearing of small airways,
ex-
deliveryofa sufficientconcentration ofthedrug to
panding small-volume alveoli, forcing alveolar fluid
therenal tubules.Furosemidemustbe actively secreted
backintotheinterstitium,andincreasinglungvolume
in the proximal tubules, delivered to the loop of
to augment the interstitial fluid capacity.12. 76a
Henle,and sufficiently concentrated there to induce
ChronicallyadministeredhighOconcentrations
diuresis.Once diuresishas ensued and respiratory
(>70%）can injure lung tissue.A formula has been
signs begin to abate, the dosage should be reduced
devised forhumansusinganinitial FiO(inspired O2
(0.5to2mg/kgevery8to12hours)toprevent
concentration） of less than 50 percent. Therapy is
excessivevolumecontractionorelectrolytedeple-
adjustedbyaddingincrementsof5mmHgPEEPuntil
tion.84aLowsodiumwatershouldbeofferedtothe
the PaO2 divided by the FiO is greater than 300.64
patient. In very ill, azotemic,or anorectic animals,
Alternatively,PEEPcanbeachievedwithspontaneous
conservative fluid therapy may be required. Indirect
ventilation through a respirator and by exhaling
monitoring of arterial blood pressure,serial determi
against a 4to 20-cm H0 pressure.25. 77More informa-
nationof serum creatinineandBUN,andregularmea-
tion on ventilatory support is found elsewhere.78s0
surementofserumelectrolytes arepractical andeffec-
Careful, continuous monitoring is essential for intu-
tivemethodsforavoidingoverdiuresisinmostpatients.
bated animals.Mechanical ventilation with high peak
Other diuretics,such as bumetanide,the thiazides,
inspiratory pressures has been shown to produce high-
or aldosterone antagonists (spironolactone),can be
permeability pulmonary edema.81.82
helpful either aloneorinconjunctionwithoralfurose-
mide in treating chronic pulmonary edema in dogs.
Pulmonary edema in catsis usually responsive to furo-
DRUGTHERAPIES
semide(1 to2mg/kg)orfurosemide and transdermal
nitroglycerin.
DIURETICS
BRONCHODILATORS
Rapid diuresis and pulmonaryfluidreabsorption is
Methylxanthines such as aminophylline,given intra-
aprimary concern of initialtherapyandcanbe
muscularly orby slowintravenous injection,have mild
 260 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
TABLE 13-1
TRANQUILIZERS
Hospital Therapy of Pulmonary Edema
Dogs with severe pulmonary edema may benefit
Avoid All Stress!
from morphinc sulfate administercd cvery 2 to 3
 Avoid Significant IV Fluid Administration
minutes (0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg) intravenously until thc
 Restore Oxygenation
desired clinical response is achicved," or administered
Check airway pateney
as a singlc intramuscular or subcutancous dose (0.1 to
( 8 < 1oy %og < pror) 0 pauaddus a
Prowide cage rest
a maximum of 0.5 mg/kg) .2 Bencficial effects include
Intubate/supply positive-pressure ventilaion if needed
reduced anxiety, slower, deeper breathing from respi-
If frothing is evident, suetion the airways
ratory center depression, and redistribution of blood
Rapidly Remove Alveolar Fluid
away from the lungs via splanchnic vasodilation. Mor-
Redistribute blood volume:
phine can raisc intracranial pressure and is contraindi-
Morphine (dogs only: see below)
Vasodilators:
cated in neurogenic cdema, Morphine is also contrain-
2% niroglycerin ointment (dogs: -1 inch topieally q 12 hr;
dicated in cats. Acepromazine (0.1 mg/kg SQ) mixed
cats: ↓-↓ inch q8-12 hr)
with butorphanol (0.15 mg/kg SQ) can bc used as an
Na niroprusside (0.5-5 μg/kg/min CRI)
 alternative for cats. Although peripheral redistribution
Initiate diuresis:
of blood might be promoted, these drugs may exacer-
Furosemide (dogs: 2-5 ing/kg IV, 1M q 6-8 lr; cats: 24 mg/kg
 batc prc-existing hypotherrmia.
IV, IM q 6-8 hr)
Following initial duresis, derease dose and repcat q 8-12 hr
Reduce Anxiety
Morphine (dogs: 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV: 0.1-0.5 mg/kg SC or IM)
VASODILATORS
Aceproinazine (eats: 0.1 mg/kg IM, SC q 8-12 hr) mixed with
butorphanol (0.15 mg/kg IM, SC q 8-12 hr)
Vasodilator drugs, such as 2 percert nitroglycerin
Reduce Bronchoconstriction
Aminophyiline (dogs: 610 mg/kg IV, PO, can repeat q 6 hr; cats:
prusside, a rapid-acting arteriovenous dilator (used
48 mg/kg PO, can repeat q 12 hr)
with careful paticnt and blood prcssure monitoring),
Administer Inotropie Support (for myocardial failure)
can reduce fulminan1. edcma by increasing systemic
Digoxin (dogs: 0.01-0.013 mg/kg PO + bid; cats: 0.031 mg total
a     
dose IO q 18 hr)
pressure. Niroprusside may also improve cardiac out-
Dobutamine (2-10 μg/kg/Inin CRI)
Dopanine (2-8 μg/kg/min CRI)
put by systemic arteriolar dilation.
'Treatmcnt of acutc, scvere edema resulting from
Na niuroprusside (sce earlier dosage)
mitral regurgitation may be improved when oral hydra-
1lydralazine (dogs: 1-3 mg/kg PO, q 12 hr)
 lazine, a pure arteriolar dilator, is added to diuretic
Treat High.Permeability Edema
and topical nitroglyccrin administration. Hydralazine
Consider glucocorticoids
 or nitroprusside should be chosen over angiotensin-
Institute sperifie neasures depending on etiology
 converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors for acute therapy.
Provide Ancillary Therapy
The onset of action for hydralazine begins within ap-
Correet acid-base imbalanee (e.g, sodium hicarbonate if moderate
 proximatcly 30 minutes and peaks within 3 hours.8 In
to severe Inetabolic acidosis; ventilation for respiratory acidosis)
Provide thoracocentesis if coneurrent pleural effusion and
contrast, ACE inhibitors have a longcr onsct of action
aleleetasis
and later peak activity (chapters 12, 25).
Monitor the Patient
Record hearl raue and rhythu (ECG), pulse strength, arterial
 blood pressure, respiratory rate. hydration status, urinary ouput
CARDIOTONICS
Monitor pulse oxinetry, arterial blood gases, end-idal CO. (if
intubatcd)
Positive inotropic drugs, when indicated, must. bc
Measure PCV/plasma protein. serum biochemistries. and
used carefully. Catcchiolamincs can increasc pulmo-
electrolytes
nary and systemic vascular resistance, potenuially cx-
CRI, constant rate infsion; FCG, electrocardiogram; PCV, packed rell vol
acerbating intcrstitial fluid accumulation. The acidosis
nule.
and hypoxcmia that are common in severe edema
can incrcasc myocardial sensitivity to digitalis-induced
 arrhythimias.64 Monitoring electrolytes and acid-base
diuretic and positive inotropic actions as well as a
bronchodilating effect. They also decrease fatigue of
 balance is important.
respiratory muscles and enhance diaphragmatic func-
tion.xth Rapid absorption occurs after oral adminis-
ADDITIONAL MEASURES
tration. Adverse effects include incrcased sympatho-
mimetic activity and arrhythmias, cspccially with
Other techniqucs uscd for acute cardiogenic edema
 parenteral administration. Objcctive mcasures of cff-
poa lenn jo suod gg on dn jo auqaud ap
Cacy in pulmonary cdema are lacking.
volume and rotating tourniqucts (not very effective in
PULMONARYEDEMA261
animals). A newer technique reported in humans is
doses of furosemide,an ACE inhibitor, and in most
venousultrafiltrationwithfluidsubtraction.85a
cases,digoxin (chapter12)
SPECIFICTREATMENTPLANS
FELINEHYPERTROPHIC
CARDIOMYOPATHY
CANINEMITRALREGURGITATION
Initial therapy for pulmonary edema includes furo-
semide,nitroglycerin ointment,and oxygen.Mostcats
Initial therapy of pulmonary edema is directed to
respond well to this treatment.Once diuresis has oc-
induce diuresis with furosemide,lower venous pres-
curred, echocardiography and other clinical studies
sures further with topicalnitroglycerin ointment,and
can be completed as indicated. Chronic therapy usu-
provide supplemental oxygen.Dogs with mild-to-mod-
allyincludes diltiazem oraβ-adrenergicblocker.The
eratesignsusuallyrespondwell tosuchtreatment.
doseoffurosemideistapered tothelowesteffective
More aggressive therapy is needed forlife-threaten-
maintenance dose or,insome cases,discontinued84a
ingpulmonary edema.In addition tohigh-dosefurose-
(chapter 28).Many clinicians alsoprescribe an ACE
mide,niroglycerin, and oxygen,hydralazine is admin
inhibitor(enalapril,0.25to0.5mg/kg daily),although
istered at an initial dose of 0.75 to 1 mg/kg PO,
long-termefficacyremainstobedocumented.
followed by repeated doses every 2 to 3 hours,if
needed,tolowerthesystolicbloodpressuretobetween
90 and 110 mmHg, or until obvious clinical improve-
DILATEDCARDIOMYOPATHY
ment.Hydralazine effectively reduces regurgitant frac-
tion and lowers left atrial pressure (chapter 12).85a If
Initialtherapyofpulmonaryedemarelatedtocar
blood pressure cannot be monitored,an initial dose
diogenic shock in canine dilated cardiomyopathy usu-
of 1mg/kgis given andrepeatedin2to4hours if
ally includes furosemide, oxygen, and dobutamine or
sufficientclinicalimprovement hasnotbeenobserved.
dopamineinfusion(chapter 27).Theadministration
If necessary, administration of 1 to 2 mg/kg can be
ofpotent inotropic agents (dopamine,dobutamine)
repeated every12 hours.
canincreasecardiac output andbloodpressure,
An alternative therapy to nitroglycerin/hydralazine
allowing safe administration of vasodilator drugs. For
is sodium nitroprusside infusion beginning at 1 μg/
life-threatening pulmonary edema, sodium nitroprus-
kg/min.Thedoseshouldbetitrated toyielda systolic
side (beginning at 0.5μg/kg/min in a constant rate
bloodpressure of 90 to100mmHg.The infusion is
infusion)isveryeffectivewithbloodpressuremonitor-
usually continued for 12 to 24 hours (Fig.13-6).Fol-
ing.Alternatively, topical nitroglycerin ointment and
lowing successful therapy of pulmonary
edema,
an ACE inhibitor can be used in less severe cases.
chronictreatmentcanbeinitiatedwithmaintenance
Digitalizationis indicated and is particularly important
A
B
FIGURE13-6
(A)Lateralradiographfrom a dogwith severealveolar cardiogenicpulmonaryedemaresultingfrom
ruptureof chordae tendineae.Thereis onlymild-to-moderate cardiomegaly,with amarkedincrease
in pulmonary opacity.A number of air bronchogram signs are evident(arrows）.(B)Repeat lateral
radiograph exposed 72 hours after theradiograph depicted in (A).Following aggressive diuresis with
furosemideandvasodilator therapy with sodium nitroprusside,thepulmonary edema hasresolved.
The heart has decreased in size due tovolume contraction and preload reduction.
262 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
if there is concurrent atrial fibrillation. After 24 to 48
     
 hours of intensive therapy, chronic trcatment can usu-
phology. Am Rev Respir Dis 147:989, 1993
10.
 Bachofen H, Schurch S, Michel RP, et al. Experimcntal
ally be initiated, which includes digoxin, furosemide,
an ACE inhibitor, and dictary sodium restriction. Oral
lesions. Am Rev Respir 1Dis 147:997, 1993
hydralazine can be added in refractory cases.
11. Crapo JD. New concepts in the formation of pulmonary
edema. Am Rev Respir Dis 147:790, 1993
12. Uhley IIN, Leeds SE, Sampson J, et al. Role of pulno-
THERAPY OF
nary lymphatics in chronic pulmonary edema. Circ Res
11:966, 1962
NONCARDIOGENIC EDEMA
13. Fnderson BL, Rice CL, Beaver CW, ct al. High frequcncy
ventilation and the accumulation of extravascular lung
water. J Surg Res 36:133, 1984
14. Wcaver IJ, Carrico GJ. Congestive heart failure and
Pulnonary edema associated with sevcre alvcolar
edema. In Staub NC, Taylor AE (cds): Fdema. New York,
capillary membrane damage and inlammation is dif-
Raven Press, 1984, p 543
ficult to trcat successfully 7ia. 7ia Experimentally, a vari-
15.
 Staub NC. Pathophysiology of pulmonary edema. In
Staub NC, Taylor AE (eds): Edema. New York, Ravcn
cty of substances that may protect against or counteract
Press, 1984, p 719
thc cffects of different inflammatory mediators have
15a. lakeda A, Okumura S, Miyamoto T, et al. Comparison
been administered cither bcfore or after induction of
 of extravascular lung water volune with radiographic
is
findings in dogs with experimentally increascd perme-
given as outlined earlier. A diuretic may be helpful,
ability pulmonary edema. J Vet Med Sci 37:181, 1995
16. Staub NC. New concepts about the pathophysiology of
uu a pinous uonepiu pue anssand poonq nq
pulnonary edema. J Thorac Imaging 3:8, 1988
tored. The tendency to infuse large volumes of crys
17. Lang SA, Maron MB. Hemodynamic basis for cocaine-
talloid must be tempered with an understanding that.
induced pulmonary edema in dogs. J Appl Physiol
 incrcasing pulmonary blood flow usually worsens non-
71:1166,1991
cardiogenic edema. Although use of corticosteroids is
18. Hering SF., Jurca M, Vichi FL, et al. Reversible cardiomy-
opathy in patients with severe scorpion cnvcnoming by
controversial, they have becn advocated in the carly
Tityus serrulatus: Evolution of enzymatic, elcctrocardio-
treatment. of smokc inhalation, clectric shock, snake
graphic and echocardiographic alterations. Ann Trop
bitc, septic shock, and anaphylaxis.6+ Identification of
Paediatr 13:173, 1993
the primary etiology, if possible, may sugges additonal
19. Miller WC, Simi WW. Rice Dl. Contribution of systemic
therapy. If PaO: falls to < 60 mmHg despite supple-
venous hypertension to the development of pulmonary
edema in dogs. Circ Res 43:598, 1978
mental oxygcn, if PCO, is > 50 mmHg, or if respira-
20. Butler BD, Drake RE, Sneider WD, et al. Changes in
tory fatigue is cvident, the patient should be ventilated.
microvascular permeability with acceleration of edema
Additional therapy for high-permeability edema has
in dog lungs. Am J Physiol 258:H395, 1990
been reviewed elsewhere.25.7a.39-91
21. West JB, Mathieu-Costello O. Stress failure of pulmonary
capillaries in the intensive carc setting. Schweiz Med
Wochenschr 122:751, 1992
REFERENCES
22. Tsukimoto K, Mathicu-Costello O, Prediletto R, et al.
Utrastructural appearances of pulmonary capilaries at
high transmural pressures. J Appl Physiol 71:573, 1991
23. Cohen AB, Stevens MD, Miller EJ, ct al. Neutrophil
1. West JB. Pulmonary pathophysiologyThe esscntials.
2nd ed. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1982
from congestive heart failure or ARDS. Am J Physiol
 2. Nonn JF. Applied Respiratory Physiology. 2nd ed. Lon-
264:1.490, 1998
don, Butterworths, 1977
24. Kuida H, Hinshaw I.B, Gilbert RP, et al. Effecl of gram-
3. Ingran RHI, Braunwald E. Pulmonary edema. In Braun-
negative cndotoxin on pulinonary circulaion. Am J
wald E (ed): Hcart Discase: A Textbook of Cardiovascu-
Physio1 192:335, 1958
lar Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Sauders, 1992,
25. Hawkins EC, Ettinger SJ, Sutcr PF. Diseases of the lower
p551
respiratory tract and pulmonary edema. In Euinger S]
Guyton AC. Textbook of Medical Physiology. 7th ed.
(ed): Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine: Diseases
4.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1986, p 466
of the Dog and Cat. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders.
 5. Neiman GF, Brendenberg CE. 1ligh surface tension pul-
1983, p 853
monary edema induced by detergent aerosol. J Appl
 ) a    r i g g
Physiol 58:129, 1985
rent Veterinary Therapy VII. Philadelphia, WR Saunders,
6. Seeger W, Stohr G, Wolf HRD, ct al. Alteration of surfac-
1980, p 243
tant function due lo protein leakage. J Appl Physiol
27. Toung TJ, Sendak MJ, Rosenfeld BA, ct al. Lung injury
58:326, 1985
produced by
 paiicreatic proteases in dogs. Surgery
7. Cottrell 1S, Levine OR, Senior RM, et al. Electron micro-
112:68, 1992
scopic altcrations al the alveolar level in pulmonary
 28. Isago T, Noshima S, Traber LD, et al. Analysis of pulmo-
edema. Circ Res 21:783, 1967
nary microvasc ular permeability after smoke inhalation.
 8. Cope DK Grimbert. F, Downey JM, el al. Pulmonary
J Appl Physiol 71:1403, 1991
capillary pressure: A review. Crit Care Med 20:1043, 1992
29.
Ghio AJ, Kennedy TP, Ilatch GE, et al. Reduction of
9. Bachofen H, Schurch S, Michcl RP, et al. Experimental
PULMONARY EDEMA:
263
'4e  y    
19. Vreim CE, Snashall PD, Staub NC. Protein composition
1991
of lung fluids in anesthetized dogs with acute cardio-
 30. McDonald JW, Heffner JE. Eugenol causes oxidant-medi-
genic edema. Am J Physiol 231:1466, 1976
ated cdema in isolatcd perfused rabbit lungs. Am Rcy
50.
 Newman MM, Kligerman M, Willcox M. Pulmonary hy-
Respir Dis 143:806, 1991
pertcnsion, pulmonary cdema, and decreased pulmo-
31. Iainee P, Robincau P, Guittin P, ct al. Mechanisms of
nary compliance produced by increased intracranial
pulnonary edema induced by an organophosphorus
pressurc in cats. J Neurosurg 60:1207, 1984
compound in anesthctized dogs. Fundam Appl Toxicol
51.1
Bradley Rl., Kcating MI. Neurogenic pulmonary cdema
17:177, 1991
in a cat. Fel Pract 9:26, 1979
32. Royston BD, Wcbster NR, Nunn JF. Time coursc of
 52. Kolata RJ. The clinical fcatures of electrical cord bite
changes in lung perincability and cdema in the rat ex-
injury in dogs. In Proccedings of the 4lst Annual Mcet-
posed t0 100% 0xygen. J Appl Physiol 69:1532, 1990
ing of the Amcrican Animal Hospital Association, 1974,
33. Yoshimura K, Nakagawa S, Koyana S, et al. Leukotriene
p 460
B, induces lung injury in the rabbit: Rolc of neutrophils
53.
 Simon RP Neurogcnic pulmonary edema. Neurol Clin
and effect of indomcthacin. J Appl Physiol 74:2174, 1993
11:309, 1993
34, Pafterson CE, Barnard JW, Lafuzc JE, ct al. l'he role of
 53a. Drobatz. KJ, Saunders M, Pugh CR, Hendricks JC. Non-
activation of neutrophils and microvascular pressure in
cardiogenic pulmonary edema in dogs and cats: 26 cases
acute pulinonary edema. Am Rev Respir Dis 140:1032,
(1987-1993). J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 206:1732, 1995
1989
53b. Jarvinen A-K, Saario F., Andresen F, ct al. Lung injury
35. Herdon DN, Iraber DL, Niehaus GD, et al. Thc patho.
lcading to respiratory distress syndrome in young Dalma-
physiology of smoke inhalation injury in a shcep model,
tian dogs. J Vet lntern Med 9:162, 1995
J Trauma 24:1044, 1984
54.
Maron MB. Pulmonary vasoconstriction_in a canine
36. Malik AB, Perlman MB, Cooper JA, ct al. Pulmonary
model of neurogenic pulnonary cdeina. J Appl Physiol
microvascular cffects of arachidonic acid mctabolites
68:912, 1990
and thcir rolc in lung vascular injury. Fed Proc 44:36,
 55. Wilkinson PD, Kcegan J, Davies SW, ct al. Changcs in
1985
pulnonary nicrovascular pcrmeability accompanying re-
 37. Brigham KL. Metabolites of arachidonic acid in experi-
expansion oedema: Evidence from dual isotope scintig-
mental lung vascular injury. Fed Proc 44:13, 1985
raphy Thorax 45:456, 1990
38. Horgan MJ, Palace GP, Everitt JE, et al. TNF-alpha re
 56. Jackson RM, Veal CE. Re-expansion, re oxygenation and
lcasc in cndotoxcmia contributes to neutrophil-depen-
rethinking. Am J Med Sci 298:14, 1989
dent pulmonary edema. Ain J Physiol 264:H1161, 1993
57. Koike K, Ono S, Sakuma T, et al. Collapse and recxpan-
 39. Jacobson JM, Michael JR, Meyers RA, et al. Hyperbaric
sion of lungs inerease microvascular permeability in
oxygen toxicity: Role of thromboxanc. J Appl Physiol
sheep. Tohoku J Exp Med 157:19, 1989
72:416, 1992
37a. Stampley AR, Waldron DR. Rcexpansion puinonary
40. Welbourn R, Goldman G, Kobzik L, ct al. Interleukin-
edema after surgery to repair a diaphragmatic hernia in
2 induces carly multisystcm organ cdema mcdiated by
a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1699, 1993
neutrophils. Ann Surg 214:181, 1991
 57b. Soderstrom SD, Gilson N, Gulbas T1. Fatal rcexpansion
41. Lantz. RC, Keller GF, Burrell R. Thc rolc of platclet-
pulmonary edema in a kitten following surgical correc-
tion of pecius excavatum. J Am Anin Hosp Assoc
bacterial cndotoxin, An Rey Respir Dis 144:167, 1991
42. Seeger W, Grinminger F, Barden M, et al. Omcga-oxi-
31:133, 1995
58. Kerr IY. Pulmonary edcma sccondary to upper airway
dizcd leukotriene Bt detectcd in the broncho-alveolar
obstrucuion in the dog: A review of nine cases. J Am
lavagc fluid of patients with non-cardiogenic pulmonary
Anim Hosp Assoc 25:207, 1989
edema, but not in thosc with cardiogenic edema. Inten-
59.
Cascade PN, Alexander GD, Mackie DS. Negative pres-
sive Care Med 17:1,1991
13. Ilocking DC, Phillips PG, Ferro TJ, et al. Mcchanisins of
sure pulmonary edema after endotracheal intubation.
pulmonary edcma induced by tumor nccrosis factor-
Radiology 186:671, 1993
60. Younker D, Meadors C, Covelar L. Postobstruction pul-
alpha. Circ Res 67:68, 1990
44. Goldblum SE, Yoneda K, Cohen DDA, ct. al. Provocation
monary cdema. Chest 95:687, 1989
of pulnonary vascular endothelial injury in rabbits by
61. Guyton AC, Lindsey AW. Effect of elevated left atrial
human rccombinant interlcukin-l beta. Infect Immun
 prcssurc and decreased plasrma protein concentration
on the devclopmcnt of pulmonary edema. Circ Res
56:2255, 1988
44a. Heffncr JE, Sahn SA, Repine JE. Thc rolc of plateleis
7:649, 1959
in thc adult respiratory distress syndromc. Am Rcv
62. Modell JH. Drowning. In Staub NC, Taylor AE (eds):
Respir Dis 135:482, 1987
Fdema. New York, Raven Press, 1984, p 679
14b. Frevert CW, Warner AE. Respiratory distress resulling
63. Cohen DS, Matthay MA, Cogan MG, et al. Pulmonary
from acute lung injury in thc veterinary paticnt. J Vet.
ederma associated with sal1 water near-drowning: New
Int Mcd 6:154, 1992
insights. Am Rev Respir Dis 146:794, 1992
45. Barnard JW, Palterson CE, Hull MT, et al. Rolc of micro-
61. Ayres SM: Mechanisms and consequences of pulnonary
vascular  pressure  in  reactive  oxygen-indueed
lung
cdema: Cardiac lung, shock lung, and principles of venti-
edema. J Appl Physiol 66:1486, 1989
latory therapy in adult respiratory distrcss syndrome. An
46. Paterson IS, Klausncr JM, Pugatch R, ct al. Noncardio-
Hcart J 103:97, 1982
genic pulmonary edema after abdominal aortic ancu-
63. Velazquez M, Schuster DP. Perfusion redistribution after
rysim surgcry. Ann Surg 209:231, 1989
alvcolar flooding: Vasoconstriction vs. vascular compres-
47. Wang CZ, Barrow RE, Cox CS, et al. Influence of deter-
sion. J Appl Physiol 70:600, 1991
gent aerosol on lung microvascular permeability J Appl
 66. Sasaki F. ishizaki T, Mifunc J, ct al. Bronchial hyperre-
Physiol 74:1016, 1993
sponsiveness in patients with chronic congestive heart
48. Lord PF. Ncurogenic pulmonary cdema in the dog- J
failure. Chcst 97:534, 1990
An Anim Hosp Assoc 11:778, 1975
67. Kappagoda CT, Ravi K, Teo KK. Effect of pulmonary
264
 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
venous congestion on respiratory ratc in dogs. J Physiol
 80. Court MH. Respiratory support of thc critically ill small 
Lond 408:115, 1989
animal patient. In Murtaugh RJ, Kaplan PM (eds): Veteni-
68. Oliven A, Kelsen SG. lnspiratory musclc activity during
nary Emergency and Critical Care Medicinc. St Louis.
pulmonary cdema in anesthetized dogs. Respir Physiol
Mosby-Year Book, 1992, p 573
89:287, 1992
81. Drcyfuss D, Soler P, Saumon G. Spontaneous resolution
 69. Ravi K. Kappagoda CT. Responses of pulmonary C-fibre
of pulmonary edema caused by short periods of cyclic
and rapidly adapting reccptor afferents to pulmonary
overinflation. J Appl Physiol 72:2081, 1992
congestion and cdcina in dogs. Can J Physiol Pharmacol
82. Parker JC, Ilernandez IA, Longnecker Gl., ct al. Lung
70:68, 1992
edema caused by high pcak inspiratory pressures in1
70. Hargrcavcs M. Ravi K, Kappagoda CT. Responises of 
dogs: Role of incrcased microvascular filtrationl pressure
slowly and rapidly adapting receptors in the airways of
and permeability. Arm Rev Respir Dis 142:321, 1990
rabbits to changes in thc Starling forces. J Physiol Lond
83. Wickerts CJ, Blomqvist II, Berg B, et al. Furoscmide
432:81, 1991
when used in combination with posilive cnd-expiratory
71. Domino KB, Lu Y, Eisenstein BL, et al. 1lypocapnia
 pressure facilitates thc resorplion of extravascular lung
worscns arterial blood oxygenation and increases VA/Q
water in cxperimental hydrostatic pulmonary oedema.
hctcrogeneity in canine pulmonary cdema. Anesthesiol-
Acta Anacsthesiol Scand 35:776, 1991
ogy 78:91,1993
84. Ali J, Wood LDH. Pulmonary vascular effects of furose-
72. Suter PF. Thoracic Radiography. Wetswil, Switzerland.
mide on gas exchange in pulmonary cdema. J Appl
PF Sutcr, 1984
Physiol Respir Environ Excr Physiol 57:160, 1984
 73. David LE. Management of acutc pulmonary ederma. J
84a. Fox PR. Current. uscs and hazards of diuretic therapy.
A1n Vet Med Assoc 173:97, 1979
In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Current Veterinary
71. Warc WA. Diagnostic tests for the cardiovascular systemn.
Therapy X1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992, p 668
In Nelson RW, Couto CG (eds): Essentials of Siall Ani-
 84b. Supinski G, DiMarco A, Dibner-Dunlap M. Alterations 
mal lInternal Medicinc. St I ouis, Mosby-Year Book, 1992,
in diaphragm strength and fatigability in congestive
p 27
heart failure. J Appl Physiol 76:2707, 1994
74a. Parent C, King LG, Walker LM, ct al. Clinical and
 85. Kittleson MD, Johnson LE, Oliver NB. Acute hemody
clinicopathologic findings in dogs with acute respiratory
namic effecis of hydralazine in dogs with chronic mitral
distress syndrome: 19 cascs (1985-1993). J Am Vet Med
regurgitation. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:258, 1985
Assoc 208:1419, 1996
85a. Susini G, Zucchetti M, Bortonc F, et al. Isolated ultrafl-
73. Lord PF. Neurogenic pulmonary cdema in the dog. J
tration in cardiogenic pulmonary edema. Crit Care Med
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 11:778, 1975
18:14, 1990
76. Hamlin RL. Radiographic diagnosis of hcart discase in
 86. 1Isu K, Wang D, Li MH, et al. Dimethylthiourca ainclio-
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 137:458, 1960
rates acute lung injury induccd by phorbol myristate
76a. Parcnt C, King IG, VanWinkle TJ, et al. Respiratory
acctate in dogs. Crit Care Med 20:823, 1992
function and trcatrment in dogs with acute respiratory
 87. Hocking D,Ferro TJ, Johnson A. Dextran sulfate and
distress syndrome: 19 cases (1985-1993). J An Vet Med
heparin sulfate inhibit plateict-activating factor-induced
Assoc 208:1428, 1996
pulmonary edema. J Appl Physiol 72:179, 1992
77. Wickerts CJ, Berg B, Blomqvist H. Influence of positivc
88.
Hocking DG, Ferro 'TJ. Johnson A. Dextran sulfate inhib-
end-expiratory pressurc on cxtravascular lung water dur-
its PMN-dependent hydrostatic pulmonary tdcma in-
ing the formation of experimental hydrostatic pulmo
duced by tumor necrosis factor J Appl Physiol 70:1121,
nary oedema. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 36:309, 1992
1991
78.Hawkins EC. Ancillary therapy: Oxygen supplementation
 89. Prewitt RM, McCarthy J, Wood LDI1. Treatment of acute
and vcntilation. In Nelson Rw, Couto CG (eds): Essen-
   so   d ssd mo
tials of Smal Animal Intcrnal Medicine. St Louis,
67:409, 1981
Mosby-Year Book, 1992, p 250
 90. Morgan RV. Respiratory emcrgencies. Part I, Compend 
79. Moon PF, Concannon KT. Mechanical ventilation. In
Contin Educ 5:228, 1983
Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Current Veterinary Ther-
91.
Olivier NB. Pulmonary cdema. Vet Clin North An
apy X1. Philadciphia. WB Saunders, 1992, p 98
15:1011, 1985
14
ano
Von11
Shock
WILLIAM C. SHOEMAKER
SHOCK, HYPOVOLEMIA, AND
LOW-FLOW STATES
THE TRADITIONAL APPROACH
Thc cardiovascular and pulmonary systerns are normally closcly integrated
 t0 provide tissues with an adequate oxygen supply. These systems funcuion
to support metabolism in the normal steady state, as wcll as during rapidly
changing metabolic conditions associated with severe illness. To maintain
homcostasis, they must provide oxygen and oxidative substratcs to mect.
tissue mctabolic requirements. Critically ill patients usually have compro
mised circulatory and pulmonary function, which affects oxygen demand
and delivery.'. :
Classically, most shock states have bcen described in terms of hypotension,
low blood fow, and high peripheral resistance (chapter 15). It has become
evident, however, that inadequate tissue perfusion, not low cardiac output,
 is the major problem in hemorrhagic, postoperative, traumatic, and sepuic
 shock states. In shock, critical illncss reduces tissue perfusion, resuling in
The acutely ill patient with circulatory dysfunction or shock experiences low
vasoconstriction, and capillary lcak. Circulatory disorders have been tradi-
tionally evaluated by comparing patient hemodynarmic variablcs against. pub-
lished normal values. However, for opuimal clinical cvaluation and therapy.
this approach often produces poor results.
CLINICAL ASSESSMENT
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND PATIENT MONITORING
Shock is a syndrome, not a disease. It is clinically characterized by variable
subjective and nonspecific clinical signs (e.g., cold, clanmy skin; mucous
meimbrane pallor; wcak, thrcady femoral arterial pulse; unstable vital signs;
and reduccd level of consciousness). These signs represent the secondary
effects of shock, not the principal causc or pathophysiologic mechanism.
Unfortunately, subjective signs are commonly used to diagnose shock, to
evaluate changes in the clinical status, to asscss effects of therapy, and to
formulate prognosis. The related lack of objectivity and accuracy is a major
265
266ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FLNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
deterrent to a succcssful outcoine. For cxample, hypo-
tory changes must be recognized. This begins with
tension and oliguria are carly and readily detectable
the baseline normal state, evolves to reduccd tissuc
manifestations of shock. If thcse changes alone are
Oxygenation and subscquent. conpensatory hyperdy-
used as the therapcutic cnd-points, trcatmenf. with
namic states, and cnds, finally, in a terminal stage.
crystalloids and vasopressors rmay restore blood pres-
Physiologic patterns have becn deinonstrated in survi-
Suopun nq 'leuou iesu oi ndno sun pue ans
vors compared with patients who die in the latc or
deficits in tissue perfusion may remain unmoticed until
prcterminal stagc, although there have been few stud-
multiple organ failure occurs.
ies identifying significant differences berween groups
 Similarly, noninvasive monitoring is usually applied
in early temporal patterns.
t0 superficial or isolated changes caused by shock,
The marked  variability  in  circulatory  conditions-
such as blood pressure, heart rate, and the electrocar
especially as they relate to metabolic and tissue
diogram (ECG). Conventional approaches to shock
managemcnt have frequently considered each moni-
namic and monitoring parameters to decide the type
of therapy and timing of certain interventions. An
each of them to diagnosis, cvaluation, and therapy.
important related issue involves the clinical application
Essentially, this one-at-a-time approach precludes orga-
 of published hemodynamic and oxygen transport vari
nized, systermic analysis of complcx cardiopulmonary
ables. These are gencrally compiled from data col-
interactions that determine efficiency of tissuc perfu-
lected in critical discascs and are described as mean
sion and oxygen supply.
values (± SD or ± SEM) for each individual variable.
 One must bcar in mind that these values are generally
CLINICALPATHOLOGYANDHEMODYNAMIC
 published in tables without regard to temporal rela-
MEASUREMENTS
tionship to the stage of shock; that is, data throughout.
the disease course are usually listed as though thcy
 Although blood plI, base deficit, anion gap, hemato-
occurred consistently, or were representative of a con-
dition when tested at any single point in timc. In
tive mcasurements to help evaluate shock patients than
 do clinical signs alone, they do not direcuy relect
developmcnt, progrcssion, and resolution of critical
tissuc perfusion and oxygenation, Instead, these clini-
illnesses. Thus, the use of mcan values and parametcrs
cal  pathology  values represent  secondary organ
obscures trends in the dynamic process of circulatory
 changes as part of complex interrclationships involving
failure.
anaerobic mctabolism.
Whcrn temporal patferns are takcn into account,
'Traditional henodyamic mcasurcmcnts commonly
however, low or inadequate blood flow is frequently
monitored in critical care scttings are mcan arterial
obscrved as an early event antecedent to subsequent
pressure (MAP), heart rate (IIR), central venous pres-
 hyperdynamic states, tissue hypoxia, vital organ failure,
sure (CVP), urimc output, and arterial oxygen tension
shock, and death. This is particularly true in hemor-
(PaOy). These variables reflect circulatory failurc in
 rhagic, traumatic, septic, and postoperative shock. L.ow
the late stages of shock but do not measure adequacy
flow in the intraoperative or immediate postoperative
 of circulatory function or tissue perfusion in the early
period has been identified as the underlying causc of
stagcs. For example, in studies of human high-risk
 oxygen debt and subsequcnt multiple organ failure.6-9
postoperative paticnts, these variables correlated
poorly with outcome.26 These and other common
mcasurements were restored to their normal range in
76 percent of the nonsurvivors as well as in 75 percent
HEMODYNAMIC AND OXYGEN
of the survivors, indicating thcir lack of reliability as
TRANSPORT MONITORING
outcome predictors.*-7
Severe illness incrcascs metabolic rates and tissuc
CHANGING CONCEPTS OF
requirements for circulatory function.? 'Thus, it is im-
 perative that therapeutic goals and physiologic bench-
SHOCK: CLINICAI
marks utilize supranormal rather than just normal
IMPLICATIONS
hemodynamic parameters to guide therapy and man-
agement. decisions.
A wide range of physiologic assessments, hernody-
PATHOPHYSIOLOGIC TIME
namic measurements, oxygen transport variables, and
RELATIONSHIPS IN SHOCK
man critical care settings (Table 14-1; see also Tables
Shock is a labile condition---not. static. To under-
15-6, 15-7). With incrcases in monitorimg capabilitics
stand iis pathogenesis, sequential patterns of circula-
in1 many veterinary institutions, these factors are more
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND MONITORING OF SHOCK 267
TABLE 14-1
 oxygcn carricd by each gram of saturated hemoglobin,
 Clinical Roles for Hemodynamic Monitoring
 plus a small amount of oxygcn dissolved in plasma
Diagnosc etiologies
(0.0031 × PaO,).*
Determine hemodynamie: basis of circulatory dysfunction
Oxygen delivery (ie, the amount of oxygen deliv.
Assess cardiac and pulmonary function
cred to the tissues per mimute) is the primary role of
Evaluate tissue perfiusion
Tiuate treatments
thc circulatory systen, As such, DO, reflects the overall
Achieve optimal physiologic goals
circulatory function to peripheral tissucs. Imcrcases
Assess dherapeutie effectiveness relative to lhe preceding
 above the normal range represent compensation.
paramclers
Spontaneous increases im DO, in the face of trauma,
infcction, and other forms of stress represent compen-
satory responses to incrcased tissue demands. The in-
frequently being evaluated. 1lemodynamic values have
Crease in cardiac index and DO, in rcsponse to a
been reported and average ranges for cardiovascular
standard fluid volume load is also an indircct mcasure
disorders described.1. 2. 4. 3 Thesc hemodynamic and
 of the circulation's capacity to compcnsate. Failure of
DOg to increase with colloid fuid challenge or after
more usefiul when combined with traditional monitor-
stimulation with an inotropic agent such as dobuta-
ing.1-8
It is casicr and more cffective to observe, analyzc,
The temporal patern of DO, change is more infor-
and trcat mild circulatory changes at thcir carliest
mative than a single set of measurements.' For exam-
appearance when they are more responsive to therapy.
ple, after evaluating a serics of high-risk human surgi-
Moreover, the intcractions of heart, lung, and tissue
Cal procedures, survivors generally displayed increascd
perfusion are easicst to evaluate in the early periods.
DO, VO2, and cardiac index comiparcd with nonsurvi-
vors in the postoperative period (Fig. 14-1).
'Thc ratc of oxygen consumption (VOs) measures
ASSESSMENTS OF TISSUE PERFUSION
 overall body metabolism and represents the total of all
To be cffective, the circulatory system must perfuse
oxidative mctabolic reactions. The VO, may be limited
tissues with sufficient amounts of oxygenated blood to
by a progressively decrcasing rate of oxygcn delivery
sustain body mctabolism. Tissuc pcrfusion has conven-
/Ou am uoenbo au jo .op!s Aiddns, ou (o)
tionally been infered from the subjective signs and
VOg rclationships have becn demonstrated in experi-
symptoms of shock, but not specifically mcasured. Re-
mental laboratory studics, the patterns are not always
cenly, the 1most important applicatior of imvasive mon-
as obvious in clinical conditions, when many other
itoring has been related to quantitative measurements
problems may contribute.10. 11
of tissue perfusion and tissue oxygcnation by evalua-
tion of temporal changes of oxygen delivery (DO)
and oxygen consumption (VO)
EARLY HEMODYNAMIC AND OXYGEN
TRANSPORT PATTERNS IN SHOCK
OXYGEN TRANSPORT. Evaluation of the bulk movement.
of oxygen is a useful mcasure of tissue perfusion be-
 Iligh-risk surgical patients may be used as a model 
 e   sr si sxo (e) a
s e m aeise si i! (q) oq snoua pax
for shock because time relationships can be preciscly
arteriovenous gradient, (c) it is rclated to overall tissue
determined (sec Fig. 141).1 In clinical studics, the
perfusion and clinical outcome, and (d) cellular oxy-
time-rclated patterns exhibited by nonsurvivors con-
 gen uptake is a measure of overall body mctabolism.
sisted of reduced blood flow and oxygen transport in
the intraoperative and immediate postoperative peri-
Reduccd tissue oxygcnation is the major functional
impairment of hemorrhagic, traumatic, septic, and
ods. By contrast, survivors had fewer circulatory deficits
 and had improvcd blood flow and oxygcn transpor.
postoperative shock.
 Overall measurement of peripheral circulation and
variables in the early postoperative period. Comparcd
tissue perfusion may be quantitatively evaluatcd by
with the nonsurvivors, the survivors had (a) greater
oxygen delivery (DOz), which is the product of cardiac
increascs in cardiac index and flow-related variables,
output and arterial content (see Fig. 15-1). Similarly,
with lower central venous pressures and pulmonary
  q    
capillary wedge pressures; (b) less pulmonary vasocon-
ox-
ygen consumption (VOz), which is the product of car-
striction; (c) greater increases in DOy and VOz, with
diac output and the arteriovenous O, difference
lower oxygen extraction rates and normal blood gases;
[C(a-v)Oy]. The oxygen contents of arterial and
(d) greater hematocrit, blood volume, and red cell
mixed venous blood are thc products of hemoglobin
mass, and (e) less pulmonary shunting (Qsp/Qt).4 6
concentration, the percent hemoglobin saturation,
and a constant. (1.36) that represcnts the volume of
*PaOs, arterial oxygen tension.
268
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
HOUnS pOStOperatIvE
PI1:
4
72
120
110
MEAN ARTERIAL PRESSURE
100
100
CARDIAC INDEX
FIGURE 14-1
Temporal patterns of mean
arterial pressure, cardiac index,
WEDGE PRESSURE
pulmonary artery occlusion
(wedge pressue), systemic
vascular resistance index, oxygen
delivery. and oxygen
consumption olbtained
preoperativcly (P).
intraoperatively (I), and at.
successive time periods
postopcrativcly in a scries of
M sIoalansuou pue stoaLauns
organ failure. Sotiad lines denoAe
SYSTEMIC VASCULAR RESISTANCE
survivor patterns; dotted lines
dlenote nonsurvivor patterns.
Data represent mean values -.
2800
SEM (uertical bars). Survivors had
2400
trends of significantly greater
cardiae indes, oxygen delivery.
2200
2200
and oxygen consumprion than
nonsurvivors. (Reclrawn fro
Shoemaker WC, Appel PA. Kram
1000
1800
HB. Hemodynamic and oxygen
transport responses in survivors
and nonsuvivors of high-risk
OXYGEN DELIVERY
850
surgery. Crit Care Med 2l:977-
650
990, 1993, with permission.)
550 4
$55
450
OXYGEN CONSUMPTION
160
10
120
20
SURVIVORS
NONSURVIVORS
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND MONITORING OF SHOCK 269
Preoperative patients with sepsis, severe stress, acci-
delivery (DO) and consumption (VOg) with related
 pr to siso pne pne n pe
oxygen debt, .  Inadequate VO, which is the earliest
preopcrative baseline cardiac index (Cl) values. In1
pathogenic circulatory event, appears at, or before, the.
the postoperative survivors, there were increases over
initial hypotensive crisis. It leads to oxygen debt that
thcir own baseline valucs in cardiac index, DO, and
linits body metabolism and increases mortality and
VO, but minimal changes in other hemodynamic vari-
morbidity.
ables. Nonsurvivors had little or no increases in cardiac
 Iuadequate oxygen consunption may result from
index, DOz, and VO despite higher central venous
(a) low blood flow fron cardiogenic or hemorrhagic
pressure and pulmonary artery wedge pressure.
shock, (b) maldistribution of blood flow due to uneven
Critically ill patients with congestive heart failure
microcirculatory vasoconstriction, and (c) increased
(CHF) or hypovolemic shock usually had prcoperative
tissue Inetabolisn from sepsis, trauma, stress, or other
hypotension, high pul morary artery wedge pressures,
disorders. Low flow or uneven (i.e., maldistributed)
and reduced CI, DO, and VO. However, in the carly
flow successively leads to tissue hypoxia, organ dysfunc-
 postoperative period the average CI, DOz, and VO2
tion, organ failure, and death..  In acute illness,
values of survivors were appreciably higher thaun those
oxygen debt may occur from increased tissue meta-
of the: ronsurvivors.f
bolic dernand or reduced oxygen supply. Decreascd
 Oxygen delivery occurs in cardliac insuffciency or fail-
ure, hypoxemia, respiratory failure, trauma, hemor-
OXYGEN DELIVERY AND
rhage, dehydration, cardiopulmonary arrest, and other
CONSUMPTION RELATIONSHIPS
acute circulatory catastrophes.
The patterns of DO2 and VO vary in the carly
metabolic responses (chapter 15). These include the
compcnsated states of acute circulatory failure inde-
arachidonic acid cascades to form thromboxane, pros-
pendlent of cause. Characteristically, the hemorrhagic
taglandins, and leukotrienes; production of histamine,
and cardiac shock patients have greatly reduced DO.
other arines, and serotonin; complement system acti-
with only moderately reduced VOz, because of in-
vation; tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and cytokine pro-
creased oxygen extraction, Septic, postoperative, and
duction; bacterial antigenemia; and formation of oxy
trauma patients have increased DO and VOg in thcir
gen free radicals. These mediators are thought to
carly compcnsated states. The combination of sepsis
initiate or intensify organ failure.
with accidental or surgical trauma increases metabolic
demands, as shown by the further increases in VOy.
'These data suggest that circulatory fimction increases
THERAPEUTIC GOALS
when possible to compensate for increased body me-
tabolism. When increases in DOy are limited by hypo-
volermia or reduced cardiac function, an increased oxy-
gen extraction ratio is the principal compensatory
Studies have demonstrated a direct relationship be-
response.
tween patterns of cardiac index, DO, VO2, oxygen
debt, organ failure, and death.1. -1.26. 2* These clinical
trials showed improved survival, reduced organ failure,
ESTIMATION OF OXYGEN DEBT
ues for cardiac index, DOy, and VO, were used as
The degree and duration of tissue hypoxia may be
therapcutic goals in the first 8 to 12 hours after high-
estimated as the net cumulative defcit of oxygen con-
sumption (VO2). Guyton and colleagues/2 13 measured
is delayed until after organ failure occurs, it is not
VO in dogs subjected to hemorrhage. When the net
effective.
accumulated O debt was less than 100 ml/kg, all dogs
Multicomponent monitoring provides insight into
survived. In coritrast, when the Og debt was greater
the markedly different physiologic changes occurring
thari 140 ml/kg, all died; the halfway point where 50
ovcr time in critical patients. Early abnormal changes
percent lived was 120 1nl/kg. Other methods have
("monitored events") in cardiac, pulmonary, and tis-
been developed to assess high-risk human surgical pa-
sue perfusion are utilized to guide therapy by some
tients."
clinicians. 'These have been defined in human studies
as a sudden decrease (> 20%) in cardiac index, or
OUTCOME PREDICTION
reductions of cardiac index less than 2.5 L/min/m*;
decrcased SaO* by pulse oxirnetry less than 90 per-
cent. trariscutaneous oxygen tension (P,Os) to less
The common denominator of shock and the major
determinant of outcome is inadequate tissue oxygen
*SaO. arterial oxygcn saturation.
270 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
than 50 torr, and P,Og/PaO, to less than 0.60.2 These
and further therapy should be considered. By contrast,
noninvasive monitoring systems may be uscd to evalu-
if no increase in VOg results from significantly in-
ate serial functional changes of cardiac, respiratory,
creased DOz, "supply-independent' vO may be as-
and peripheral tissue fumction.1 Cardiac index identi-
sumcd; this suggests that the oxygen debt has been
fies changes in cardiac fiumction. Blood gascs measured
corrected, or the microcirculatory defect is irreversible
by conventional blood gas analysis anid by pulse oxim-
or uncorrected with the given therapy and dose.
eter reflect pulmonary fuction. The POy and P,Oz/
Therapeutic algorithms have been successfully ap-
PaO, index indicates tissue perfusion, as do DO, and
plied for initial therapy in human critical care. Thesc
VO2.
are then modified as required for patient age, various
In one study, use of these parameters identified 636
specific diagrnostic and high-risk categories, hyperdy-
'n ist sd ns yrir t un sa
namic states (traurna, stress, sepsis, recent surgery),
during, or immediately after high-risk surgery.2 At thc
hypodynamic states (hemorrhage, hypovolemia, and
time of the bascline evaluation, about three fourths of
cardiogenic problerns), specific organ failures (respira-
the perioperative events recorded normal or incrcased
tory, renal, hepatic, cardiac, central nervous system).
cardiac, respiratory, and peripheral perfusion, but
and postoperative complications (sepsis, septic shock,
about one fourth had reduced functiorn in one or
disseminated intravascular coagulation, amd nutritional
more of these areas. At the nadir, cardiac index was
failure).4 2s The objective is to minimize the degree
decreased in about two thirds of the events and perfu-
and duration of tissue hypoxia. Guidelines for hemody.
sion was decreased in over half, but PaO, was reduced
namic and blood gas monitoring are listed (see Tables
in only one quarter. Recovery was associated with im-
15-6, 15-7).
proved blood flow in about two thirds of the events
and improved perfusion in over half, but inproveinent
FLUIDs AND TRANsFUSIONs. HemodynaInic and oxygc11
in PaOy occurred in less thar 1 in 5.
transport resporses to fluid therapy are roughly pro-
portional to their success ini expanding plasma volurme.
Colloids expand plasma volume and inprove hemody-
OPTIMIZING PHYSIOLOGIC VARIABLES
nanics and oxygen transport, whereas crystalloids
largely expand interstitial volume.10. n1 Crystalioid infu-
FOR SHOCK MANAGEMENT
sions therefore require very large volumes. For the
critically ill, high-risk, noncardiac failure patient, vigor-
Targeting supranormal  physiologic  pararneters
ous fluid loading without exceeding a pulmonary
wedge pressure of 20 mmHg is the first and most
couicept of achieving suprarorinal values has bcern sup-
important maneuver to achieve optimal volume expan-
sion. The use of colloids, dextrans, and hydroxyethyl
from human studies showed no significant differences
starch is discussedl (sce Tables 15-4, 15-5). Criticaly
between the mortality of patients managed with a CVP
ill patients may also require transfusions to maintain
catheter and those with pulmonary artery cathcters
 hematocrit levels sufficient to provide optimal oxygen
using norrmal values as therapeutic goals. By contrast,
delivery.
when pulmonary artery catheter monitoring was used
to guide therapy to achieve supranormal physiologic
INOTROPlC AGENTs. Aftcr fluid administratior has
goals (cardiac index, DO2, and VOz), morbidity and
been maximized, inotropes may be necessary in some
mortality were significantly reduced,6 ts-2 Thus, thera-
 patients to maintain or increase forward stroke volume
peutic interventions can be guided by intensive patient
(see Table 15-1). Dobutamine is gencrally the agent of
choice. It inproves cardiac conitractility by stimulating
sary (see Table 14-1; see also Tables 15-6, 15-7). Sirmi-
myocardial β-adrenergic receptors and by relaxing
larly, documcntation of relatively normal or low physio-
previously vasoconstricted metarterioles (βz-adrenergic
logic oxygen transport and hemodynamic values could
cffects), thus improving microcirculatory flow and tis-
serve as an early warning for adverse outcome.. , 4. 12
min) should be increased as required to reach optirnal
TITRATION OF THERAPY TO ACIHEVE
goals. Hypotension may occur if hypovolermia has not
been previously corrected by adequate fluid therapy.
OPTIMAL GOALS
 Increasing circulatory fumction to achieve supranor
VASODILATORs. Vasodilators such as nitroprusside, ni-
mal oxygen trarsport. values helps maximize oxygen
troglycerin, hydralazine, and labetalol are generally
delivery. For example, if therapy increases oxygen de-
livery (DOg) by 50 to 100 mi/mnin/m*, and oxygen
 s) (      
consumption (VOg) also increases by 15 to 25 ml/
15-8). Blood pressure monitoring is necessary to de-
min/m", “supply-dependent" VOy may be assumed,
tect arid prevent hypotersion.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND MONITORING OF SHOCK 271
VAsoPREssoRs. Dopamine, norepinephrine, or epi-
prognostic indices based on hemodynanic and oxygen
nephrine can be used to correct hypotension if fluid
transport variables in shock patienis with ARDs. Crit
resuscitation has not adequately restored blood flow
Care Med 15:1, 1987
15.1
Edwards JD, Brown GC, Nightingale P, et al. llse of
(see Table 15-4). IIowever, vasoconstriction may re-
survivors cardiorespiratory values as therapeutic goals
duce rmicrocirculation and worsen tissue perfusion by
in septic shock. Crii Care Med 17:1098, 1989
αj-adrenergic stimulation of smooth muscle in metar-
16.
Iuchschmidt J, Fricd J, Astiz M, cl al. Evaluation of
terioles.
cardiac output and oxygen delivery improvcs outcome
in septic shock. Chest 102:216, 1992
17.
Creamer J, Edwards JD, Nightingalc P. Ilemodynamic
REFERENCES
to treatmcnt. Ain J Cardiol 55:1297, 1990
18. Bcrlauk JF, Abrams JH, Gilmour IJ, et al. Preopcrative
Optimization of cardiovascular heinodynamics improves
outcome in peripheral vascular surgery. Ann Surg
1. Wcissnan C, Kemper M, Harding.J. Response of critically
ill patients to increased oxygen demand: Hemodynamic
214:289,1991
19. Hayes MA, Yan EHA, Timins AC, ct al. Responsc of
subsets. Crit Care Med 22:1809, 1994
critically ill patients to treatmcnt aimcd at achieving
2.
 Shoemaker WC. Monitoring and inanagement of acute
circulatory problcms. An J Crit Care 1:38, 1992
 3. Cournand A, Riley RL, Bradllcy SE, et al. Studics of the
tion to outco1ne. Chest 103:886, 1993
20. Bishop MH, Shoermaker WC, Appel Pl., ct al. Rclation-
circulation in clinical shock. Surgery 13:964, 1943
4. Shoemaker WC, Appel PL, Kran HB. Hemodyramic
ship between suprarormal circulatory values, time de-
lays, and oufcone in severcly traumatized paticnts. Crit
and oxygen transport responses in survivors and nonsur-
Care Mcd 21:56, 1993
vivors of high-risk surgery. Crit Care Med 2l:977, 1993
21. Gilbert EM, Haupt MT. Mandanas RT, et al. The cffect
 5. Bland RD, Shoemaker WC, et al. Probability of survival
of fluid loading, blood transfusion, and catecholaminc
as a prognostic and scverily of illness score in critically
infusion on oxygen delivery and consumption in patients
ill surgical patients. Crit Care Med 13:91, 1985
6. Shoemaker WC, Appel PL, Kram HB, ct al. Prospective
with sepsis. Am Rev Respir Dis 134:875, 1986
 22. Boyd O, Grounds M, Bennert D. Preoperative increase
trial of supranorimal values of survivors as therapeutic
 Of oxygen delivery reduces mortality in high-risk surgical
goals in patients. Chest 94:1176, 1988
patienis. JAMA 270:2699, 1993
7. Bland R, Shoemaker WC, Shabot MM. Physiologic moni-
23. Astiz ME, Rackow FC, Falk JL., et al. Oxygen delivery
toring goals for the critically ill paticnt. Surg Gynecol
and consumption in patients with hyperdynanic septic
Obstet 147:838, 1978
shock. Crit Carc Mcd 15:26, 1987
 8. Forrester JS. Diamond G, Chaterjee K, et al. Mcdical
24. Gattinoni I., Brazzi I., Pclosi P, et al. A trial of goal-
therapy of nyocardial infarction by application of hemo-
 oriented hernodynamic therapy in critically ill patients.
dynanic subsets. N Fngl J Med 295:1356, 1976
V Engl J Med 383:1025, 1995
9. Shoemaker WC, Appcl PL, Kram HB. Tissue Oxygen
25.Moore FA, HacmclJB, Moore EE, et al. Incommensurate
debt as a detcrminant of lethal and nonlethal postopera-
oxygen consumption in responsc to maxinal oxygen
tivc organ failure. Crit Carc Med 16:1123, 1988
10. Shoeimaker WC. Diagnosis and treatment of thc shock
33:58,1992
syndromes. In Shoemaker WC, Thompson WL, Hol-
 26. Shoemaker WC, Appel PL., Kram HB. Incidencc, physio-
brook PR (eds): Texthook of Crilical Care. 3rd ed. Phila-
logic description, compensatory mechanisms, and thera-
delphia, WB Saunders, 1995. p 85
 peutic implications of monitored cvents. Crit Carc Med
11. Shoemaker WC, Appel PL, Kram HB. Oxygcn transporl
17:1277. 1989
Ineasurements to cvaluate tissue perfusion and titrate
 27. Scalea TM, Simon HM, Duncan AO, ct al. Geriatric blunt
therapy: Dobutamine and dopamine cffecis. Crit Care
multiple trauma: Improved survival with early invasive
Med 19:572, 1991
monitoring J Trauma 30:129, 1990
12. Crowell [W, Smith EE. Oxygen defcit and irreversible
 28. Shoemaker WC, Patil R, Appcl PL, ct al. Hemodynamic
hemorrhagic shock. A1n J Physiol 106:313, 1964
and oxygen transport patterns for outcone prediction.
13. Guyton AC, Crowell JW. Dynamics of the hcart in shock.
therapeutic goals and clinical algorithms: Fcasibility of
Fed Proc 10:51, 196i
artificial intelligence to customizc algorithms. Chest
14. Ilankeln K, Scnkcr R, Schwarten JM, ct al. Evaluation of
102:617S, 1992
eatment oi
15
Shock
STEVEN C. HASKINS
"Shock' is a syndrome-not a discase. It is associated with acute reduction
in effective blood flow, resulting in failure to maintain transport and delivery
 Of vital substrates to sustain organ function.l. 2
DEFINITioN. In this chapter, shock is defined as inadequate cellular energy
production. Thus, the terrn carn be applied to any progressive discase or
process that leads to disruption of cellular and organ fumction and, ulti-
mately, death, Hypoperfusion is a key concept in the recognition and urder-
standing of shock.
    a ss as , q   e s 
the animal is “really sick." Thus, the term “shock" should always be prc-
ceded by a descriptive adjective (e.g., hypovoleinic, cardiogenic, septic, and
so on) to help characterizc the underlying pathophysiology. The word
*'shock is applied when clinical signs indicate cardiovascular collapse, men-
tal obtundation, and other signs related to reduced systemic blood flow.
CLINICAL CATEGORIES OF SHOCK
For clinical purposes, it is useful to categorize shock states based on the
mechanism or primary cause of circulatory failure (Tablc 15-1). These
groupings are oflen somewhat arbitrary, share overlapping mechanisms, and
serve only to ilustrate the multiple avenues by which organ dysfunction
may develop. An anirmal may have more than one lype of shock, and the
characteristics of circulatory disturbance may change with time or therapy
(sce Fig. 338).
CARDIOGENIC SHOCK
Cardiogeric shock is a syndrome inl which inadequate cardiac output
causes insuficient delivery of oxygen to tissues, resulting in inability of the
heart to meet resting tissue metabolic demands.? Etiologies inchude prirmary
or secondary dilated cardiomyopathy; pericardial tamporade; myocardial
 reprou ssardap er sinp pe (aixoi uoay 'sa) sxo
tion (general anesthetics, large doses of β-adrenergic blockers). Congestive.
heart failure, ischemic injury and necrosis, or metabolic derarngerment may
progress to cardiogenic shock. Without therapy, deterioration is relentless.
Synpathetic. nervous system ard renal-neurohumoral activation results in a
spiraling decline of cardiovascular function.
Hemodynamic features of cardiogenic shock include low systolic (<80
mmHg), or 1nean (<60 mmHg) blood pressurc; elevated arteriovernous
272
TREATMENT OF SHOCK 273
TABLE 15-1
blood flow—without critical decrease of intravascular
Clinical Classification of Shock: Mechanism
volume, carrdiac function, or obstruction to blood
or Primary Cause
flow. Distributive shock 1nay result from decreased
Shock
arterial resistance caused by inflainmatory vasodilat-
Classification  Prinary Mechanisn
Examples
tion, arteriovenous shunting, or increased venous ca-
Cardiogenic
Dilated cardionyopathy
pacitance as in septic shock. Arteriovenous shunts re-
Poor contractility
s8nap/sxoI.
duce net cardiac output and tissue blood flow. Severe
Myocardial infarction
trauma may cause signs similar to those of hypovolemic
Pericardial tanponade
Distributive
Vasomotaor dlysfuction
Arreriovcnous shunting
shock (even though there is no evidence of blood
llyputcnsion (expanded
loss) due to maldistribution of available blood volume.7
yenous capacitance)
Cardiac output may be increased but is inadequate
Iigh (or norinal resistance
Hypodynainic late
septie shock
to maintain nornal tissue requireincnts. Peripheral
Hypoxenic
Lack of oxygen
Alicmia
vascular resistance is reduced, and hypotension is pres-
Hypoxemia
ent.
Metabolic
Inability to utilize encrgy
Sepsis
suhstralcs
Cyanidc poisoning
lcal stroke
Hypoglycenia
Obstructive
Inadequate cardiace preload Pericardial tanponade
HYPOVOLEMIC SHOCK
Restrictivc pericarditis
Intracarrdiac masses
Hypovolemia is the most comrnon cause of reduced
Hlypovolemic
Inadequate cireulating
Dehydration (any
systemic blood flow and rmay result frorm whole blood
blord volume
cause). hypo-
proteinenia
Or plasina loss, hypoproteinemia, increased vascular
Blood loss
 permeability, or any cause of dehydration. Hypovo-
Septic
Bacteremia
Sepsis
lermia is considered to be a forim of distributive shock
Endotoxemia
by some because it is normally associated with compen-
satory peripheral vasoconstriction, which interferes
with peripheral (visceral organ) perfusion.
Oxygen difference; depressed cardiac index (cardiac.
output related to body weight); elevated central venous
d m  ud  (o o<)
OBSTRUCTIVE SHOCK
sure (>15 mmHg).5
Low-flow states resulting froin hypovolemia may have.
Obstruction to cardiac filling redluces cardiac pre-
heinodynamic profles sinilar to cardiogenic shock
load and leads to reduced cardiac output. Impedance
with an importarit exception: with cardiogenic shock,
to cardiac filling most commonly results from pericar-
there are clevated ventricular flling pressures (i.c.,
increased left-sided heart preload suggested by pulmo-
dial tanponade (chapter 29). Other disorders include
large space-occupying asses in the atria, ventricles. or
nary artery wedge pressure >15 mmHg, and elevated
right-sided hcart prcload suggested by jugular venous
cava; torsion of spleen, stomach, or intestines; masses
 distention and increased central venous pressure ger-
impinging on inajor vesscls; and severe cmbolization.
erally >10 cm H0).
Clinical features of myocardial failure include in-
HYPOXEMIC SHOCK
adequate tissue perfusion, often coupled with gallop
rhythms,
Cardiac
murmurs,
clectrocardiographic
Hypoxemic shock implies that tissues are heing per
(ECG) abnormalities (arrhythmias, cardiac chamber
fused (to differentiate it from distributive shock), but
enlargemcnt patterrs), and thoracic radiographic
tissue oxygenation is severely impaired. The two com-
changes (scvere cardioinegaly, effusions, congestion).
non examples of hypoxic shock include aneinia (low
When cardiogenic shock is suspected, an ECG should
be obtained imnediately, because cvidencc of signifi-
anssud pented mo) euxodu pue (uuoo uixo
cant abnormalities may focus attention toward the
of oxygen or low hemoglobin saturation due to pulmo-
heart. Echocardiography (chapter 8) provides a rapid,
nary pathology). Methemoglobinemia (oxidized, ferric
noninvasive, and accurate test to assess cardiac struc-
hemoglobin) and carboxyhemoglobin (carbon monox-
ture and function. Radiographs are essential for diag-
ide poisoning) decrcase the oxygen-carrying capacity
nosis and to plan treatment. Specific therapies are
of hemoglobin.
reviewed in chapters 25 through 29.
METABOLIC SHOCK
DISTRIBUTIVE SHOCK
This category cncormpasscs a potpourri of condi-
Neurohormonal or intraccllular reflexes may inter-
tions. It represcnts severe alteration in distribution of
fere with cellular energy productior cven though tis-
274ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
 sues are being adcquatcly perfused and oxygenated.
lets, and mast cells; amd (6) activation of compleinent
Metabolic responses may be altered in sepsis somewhat
(anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a), coagulation, and fi-
dlifferently from the effects of vasoactive intermediates
brinolytic. cascades.
and cell-mediated injury.
 Early in septic shock, decreascd systemic vascular
A nuunber of conditions can causc mctabolic shock.
resistarce (from mediator-induced  vasodilation) rc-
Cyanide intoxication can inter fere with mitochondrial
sults in increased stroke volunc and cardiac output,
cytochrornic oxidativc phosphorylation. Heat stroke is
 Causing a hyperdynanic state. Venous dilation results
 a forin of metabolic shock in which the rnetabolic rate
 in venous pooling and decreased cardiac return. Clini-
excceds the arninal's ability to deliver energy
sub-
cal signs include tachypnea, tachycardia, bounding
strates. Hypoglycemia causes inadequate energy sub-
femoral arterial pulses, and red mucous membranes.
strate for cerebral mctabolism.
Later stages result in a hypocdynamic state character-
ized by hypotension, decreased cardiac output, and
increased peripheral vascular resistance. With lethal
SEPTIC SHOCK
 progression, decreased right and left ventricular func-
tion and cardiac output occur.'t
This complex syndrome causes multiple and dispa-
rate clinical abnormalities that are often complicated
by signs related to the inciting illness (see Fig. 338).
SYSTEMICINFLAMMATORY RESPONSE
The Inost frequcnt cause is gram-negative bacteremia.*
SYNDROME (SIRS)
There are multiple risk factors: infectious disorders,
 Once activated, these cascadles propagate positive
debilitating corditions (e.g., traurna, neoplasia, gastro-
cnteritis, burns), immunosuppression (e.g., viruses
feedback loops to one another that "autoperpetuate"
including feline immunodeficiency virus and feline
the entire process and cause adverse systermic effects.
leukemia virus, glucocorticosteroid therapy, chemo-
The clinical  andl  laboratory manifestation  of  this
therapy), surgery, and indwelling catheters.3 Prognosis
process is referred to as the systemic inflammatory re-
is usually grave. Septic shock is a form of distributive
shock resulting from intravascular bacteria (bacter-
clescribes the condition whcn ar infectious cause is
detected.
emia) and/or enterotoxins (heat-labile bacterial toxins
primarily from graim-ncgative bacteria).
condition ( Table 15-2) may trigger enzymatic cascades
MULTIPLE ORGAN DYSFUNCTION
with systeimic consequcnces, including vasodilation,
SYNDROME (MODS)
complenent systen activation, and leukotaxis. t0
Thesc cascades include (l) turnor rccrosis factor re-
Whenn the systernic inflaminatory response syndrome
leased from macrophages; (2) platelet-activating factor
 becomes severe or prolonged, organ function deterio-
fron 1nacrophages, neutrophils, platelets, and endo-
rates. This results in the mulliple organ dysfunction syn-
thelial cells; (3) interleukin-l and -6 fron macro-
drome, or MODS (Iable 15-3). When the cause is sepsis
 phages and endothelial cells; (4) neutrophil activation
(based upon positive blood cultures or fever with leul-
kocytosis), then the term "'septic" MODS or septic
with the release of superoxide, protcascs, and catalases;
shock is appropriate.
(5) eicosanoids (thromboxane and leukotrienes) from
cell membranes of macrophages, neutrophils, plate-
One must realize that SIRS ard MODS represent
can often overlap, and there is not always a clcar
clinical distinction betwccn the two. Organ function
TABLE 15-2
declines in shock as cell function deteriorates. Myocar-
Systemic Stressors Capable of Inducing Systemic
Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS) and
dlial contractility, cardiac output, and oxygen delivery
dlecrcase. Inappropriate changes in vasomotor tone
Multiple Organ Dysfunction Syndrome (MODS)
Occur, resulting in either vasodilation (hypotension)
Sepsis (bacterial, viral, fiungal, rickeuisial, spirochetal)
0r vasoconstriction (impaired tissue perfusion). Gas-
Ilcal strokc
trointestinal ulceration and hemorrhage occur. Oli-
Trauma
Parcreatitis
guric or anuric renal failure ensues. Vascular perme.
Lreimia
ability decrcases, resulting in hypoproteinemia and
Gastrointestinal ischemic or inflammatory discaso
Disseminated cancer
hypovolemia. Diffuse, imfiltrative pulmonary edeima
I Iypovolemic: shock
 and hypoxemia devclop. Anemia, hypoproteinemia,
Autoimmune discases (AIILA, IIP, SLE*)
coagulopathies, lactic acidosis, and hypoglyccimia are
 also common features of SIRS and MODS.
*AIHA, auroimmune hermolytic anemia; ITP, inmume thrombocytopenic
purpura; SLE, systemie lupus erythematosus.
Treatment is directed toward restoring tissue perfu-
TREATMENT OF SHOCK 275
TABLE 15-3
MANAGEMENT OF SHOCK
Clinical Manifestations of Systemic Inflammatory
 Response Syndrome (SIRS) and Multiple Organ
Dysfunction Syndrome (MODS)
The acronym "VIp" is clinically useful to guide ini-
SIRS
MODS
tial management of the shock patient. V refers to
Historical Ahmormalitics
ventilation (ensure pulinonary O, and CO, cxchange);
Aunrcxia
1/++
-/÷+
I to infusion (provide adequate intravascular volume);
Lethargy
+/+ -
++/+-
and P to pumping (support cardiac function) 12 Con-
Diarhea (hemorrhagic)
+
ventional views have traditionally focused on restoring
Physical Examination
circulation to "normal" and treating problems associ-
Clnical depression
+/++
+++
ated with organ system failure. Newer vicws for sorne
Fever
Hypothermia
Y
types of shock stress attaining objectives of enhariced
Vasodilation (rcd mucous
Y
tissuc oxygen delivery and consumption in corncert
memhranes; accclerated
with restoring circulation, cardiac output, and other
capillary refll timc)
Vasoconstriction (pale
Y
hermodynamic variables to higher than “normal" val-
mucous mcmhranes;
ues (chaptcr 14).13.14
prolongcd capillary refill
tine)
Heart murmur
Y
±
Arterial pulse quality
"Bounding"
VENTILATION
Y
Normal or dccreased
Tachyeardia; arrhyth mias
Clinical observation of the thoracic cxcursionn and
T'achypnea; hyperventilation
Y
Pctechiac or blceding
breathing pattern for adequate chest movement and
+
±A
Clinical Pathology
respiratory distress is enhanced by arterial blood gas
Ilyperglyccnia
±/Y
analysis to measure acid-base status and ventilation
±/V
adequacy. Ilypoxemia in the absence of hypercapnia
Hypoglycemia
Leukocytosis (possibly
Y
and respiratory acidosis indicates the need for increas-
following transient
ing inspired oxygen concentration (e.g., oxygen ther-
leukopenia, left shift,
mild toxic changes)
 apy using nasal oxygen delivery). If increasinig inspired
Lenkopcnia or rapid
O fails to reverse hypoxemia (PaOg <60 nmHg), or
decrease in lenkocytes
with marked lcft shift.
if progressive respiratory acidosis occurs (PaCO >
toxic: neutrophils
60 mrnlIg), endotracheal intubation and ventilation
Coagulation parameters
(assisted or intermittent) with a volume-controlled res-
Normal to hyperactive
 pirator may be considered. If decrcasing pulmonary
I lypoacLive.
Increased liver enzyues
compliance or "shock lumg" (acute respiratory distress
(particularly alkaline
：
syndrome, or ARDS) develops, PEEP (positive end-
phosphatasc)
cxpiratory pressure) or CPAP (continuous positive air-
Jaundice
±/Y
±/Y
√F
way pressure) may recruit alveoli arnd decrease pulmo-
Azotcmia
nary arterial yenous shunting.15
Acidosis (lactic/
The need for ventilatory support (i.e., PEEP, CPAP)
metabolic)
Henodynanic Changes
must be balanced with the potential for deleterious
Cardiac output
effects. Mechanical ventilation increases intrathoracic
Normal to high
pressure. This impedes venous cardiac rcturn (pre-
Low
V
load) and thus cardiac output and oxygen delivery.
Arterial blood pressure;
cenral venous pressure
Normal
+/-
Low
+/++/+++
+/++
INFUSION (FLUID THERAPY)
-, mild, moderate, sc
vere.
Restoration of an effective circulatory volume is a
first priority in the management of shock and multiple
organ dysfunction. Clinical evidencc suggesting dimin-
siorn1 ard abolishing systemic infection. Management
ished circulating volume includes (l) a history of ex-
of SIRS and MODS is prinaurily directed toward the
cessive fluid or blood loss (vomiting, diarrhea, hemor-
underlying diseasc process ard secordlarily toward sys
rhage), (2) signs referable to severc dehydration
temic manifestations. Each major organ system must
(decreased skin turgor, tacky oral mucous mem-
be evaluated thoroughly and repeatedly and therapy
branes), (3) signs referable to arterial vasoconstriction
modified accordingly (Table 15-4).
(prolonged capillary refill tine, cool appendages, an-
276ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
TABLE 15-4
Treatment of SIRS and MODS
 Restore Effective Circulating Volune
Support Colloid Oncotie Pressure (maintain total protein >3.54.00
A1 S/u1 001 0 0t spoesk)
g/dl: Alb >1.5-2.0 g/dl; colloid oncotic pressnre >13
Colleids: 10 4o 30 ml/kg IV
mmlIg):
1lyperlonic salinc: 4=6 ml/kg IV or 7.5% hypertonic saline
Plasma: 10 ml/kg IV
Hetastarch: 10-30 ml/kg/day
 Support Cardiovaseular Funcion (1myocardial contractility, cardiac
Dextrans: 20 ml/kg for 1st 24 hr: 10 ml/kg for 2nd 24 hr
output, arterial hlood pressure, and oxygen delivery)
Sy/ur oz-g se 8y/m 0t-0r sso0 pq sou
Dopamine (CRl): 1-3 μg/kg/min (dopamincrgic acivity:
Maintain Urine Output (l-2 ml/kg/hr)
increase renal perfusion)
 3-5 μg/kg/min (β-adrenergie activity.
Fluids: Maintain CVP approximatcly 8-10 crm IL.O.
inotropic support)
nean arterial hlood pressure >80 mmHg, and
5-10 μg/kg/nin (α-agonist activity;
systolic arterial blood prcssure >100 mmllg
(tossadosEA
Diureties (nannitol; furosemide; dopanine)
Dobuamine (CRI): 2-15 μg/kg/min
 Gastrointestinal Support
Pressors (CR):
Dopamine: 5-10 μg/kg/min
Fluids (as above); cnteral nutrition; histaminc-blockcrs;
Xorepinephrine: 0.1-1 μg/kg/min
sueralfate; mnisoprostil; corticosteroids
Vasodilators:
Treat Coagulopathies (DIC)
Hydralazine: I-3 mg/kg PO bid; cspecially pulmonary cdema
Heparin
froin chronic mitral regurgitation
Frcsh plasma: 10 ml/kg IV (repeat until bleeding controlled)
Nitroprusside: 1-10 μg/kg/min CRI; cardiogcnic pulnonary
Cryoprecipitate: 0.5 unit/4.5 kg (repeat until bleeding
edema
controlled)
 Optinize Pulmonary Function
Antimicrobials
Oxygen: maintain PaO: >80 mmHg: SaO, >95%
Other Therapies
Positive pressure ventilation
Positive endexpiratory pressure (PEEP); 5 to I3 cm HO
Glucocorticosteroids
Maintain Blood Oxygen Content
Clucose
Sodiun bicarbonate
Red blood cell suhsritutes (Oxyglobin, se text)
Nutritional support
(20g o g< Ad ueueu) Aeq uojs
Iacked red cels: 11 mt/kg will increasc PVC approximatcly
10%
Stored whole hlood: 22 ml/kg will increase PCV approximately
%
Maintain PaO (partial pressure of oxygen) >80 mmHg; SaO
>95%
(RI, constan rate infision; PCV, parked cellvohume; SaO, oxygen percent
(oagulation
uria), and (4) poor femoral arterial pulse quality, and
cquivalent to half to one, or more, times the animal's
low central venous and arterial blood pressures. End-
estimated blood volume (i.e., 80 to 90 ml/kg for the
points of initial fluid adrministration include decrease
dog and 50 to 55 ml/kg for the cat). Animals with
 Or normalization of heart rate, restoration of accept-
coexistent pulmonary cdeima, cerebral edema, or con-
able fernoral arterial pulse quality, and a return of 
 gestive heart failure require close monitoring and at-
urine output. Restoration of the central venous pres
tenuation of fluid infusion to assure adcquate blood
sure (CVP) to a high-normal level (8 to 10 cm H,O)
yolume restoration without worsening these condi-
suggests that an adequate volume load is being pre-
tions.
sented to the hcart. Restoration of mean (>60-80
The volume restoration achieved by crystalloid fluids
mmHg) systemic blood pressure is important to cere-
 rmay be flecting, and if hypotersion or vasoconstriction
 bral and coronary perfusion.
recurs (fluid redistribution or continued bleeding may
 be the cause), further fluid administration, perhaps in
the form of colloids or whole blood, is indicated. Only
CRYSTALLOIDS
about 20 percent of a crystalloid fluid rermains in the
Lactated Ringer's or cquivalent solution, having ap-
vascular fluid compartment 30 minutes following ad-
proxirnately normal extracellular concentratioris of so-
ministration.16-18 The remainder diffuses across endo-
diun. potassiurn, chloride, and a "bicarbonate-like"
thelial incrmbranes to be redistributed into the intersti-
anion (bicarbonate, lactate, gluconate, or acetate), is
tial fluid compartment. Addition of blood or colloid
a good fluid with which to begin blood volume restora-
therapy may help sustain vascular fluid volumes.
tion therapy. Thcsc fluids can be administered rapidly,
Excessive herrodilution is a common limitation to
in large volurnes, without causing inportant changes
crystalloid fluid administration. This is defined as a
in major extracellular clectrolyte concentrations. Crys-
packed cell volurme less than 15 to 25 percent (de-
talloid fluids may nced to be adiministered in volumes
pending upon the systemic status of the patient; see
TREATMENT OF SHOCK277
later discussion under Integrated Moritoring of Car-
fects. Lse of colloids should be considered (l) when
diopulmonary Function) or a total protein less than
there is lack of responsc to crystalloid fluid infusion,
3.5 g/dl (albumin <1.5 g/dl).
(2) when edeima develops prior to adequate blood
Subcutaneous edema forimation during fluid admin
volune restoration, and (3) when it is necessary t0
istration may occur with excessive crystalloid therapy.
reduce required crystalloid fluid volume administra-
Edema may occur in the face of hypovolemia if the
tion. Both hetastarch and dextrans are similarly effec-
patient is hypoproteinemic or if there is incrcased
tive at expanding blood volurne.? They are approxi-
vascular perneability.  Vascular perincability can be
mately 3 to 4 times more effective at restoring blood
high in septic shock, allowing leakage of even very
volume connpared to isotonic crystalloids. Infusion of
high molecular colloids.
colloids increascs colloid oncotic pressure, whereas ad-
ministration of crystalloid fluids decreases it. Dextran
70 and hetastarch are probably equally efficacious in
IIYPERTONIC SALINE
raising plasma oncotic pressure and volume. A number
In1 sorne cases it is difficult to acdliminister sufficient
of colloid solutions are commercially available (Table
fluid volumes rapidlly enough for resuscitation. This is
15-5).
especially truc when time is limited by critical status
Synthetic colloids are commercialy packaged and
are generally iso-osmotic and hyperoncotic. Thcy sup-
large volunes. Hypertonic salinc may be sclected to
port plasma colloid oncotic pressure and thus heip
achieve the greatest cardiovascular benefit. with the
counteract effects of reduced plasina colloid oncotic
least volume of infused fluids. It inproves most cardio-
pressure associated with hypoproteincimia. If the total
vascular parameters and tissuc perfusion, and de-
protein is low (<3.5 g/dl or albumin <1.5 g/dl), or is
creases the required volume of subsequent fluids,1s-23
likely to be reduced below this level with crystalloid
The optimal concentration or dose of hypertonic sa-
therapy, plasina or a plasma substitute (dextran 70
line has not been clearly cstablished, but 7.5 percent
or hctastarch) nay be administered as part of the
is the most commonly studied formulation. It may also
fluid therapy.
be administered intraosscous.
 Potential limitations of high doses include increased
One-time intravenous administration of relatively
cloting times resulting from platelet dysfunction and
small doses (3 to 5 mg/kg of 2400 milliosmoles [7.5
fibrin clot. alteration, although these cffects may be
percent] slowly over 3 to 5 minutes) induces plasma
somewhat less with hetastarch than with dextrans.
volume cxpansion. Marked effects orn resuscitation in
hypovolemia or hernorrhagic shock have been re-
HETAsTARCH. Hydroxyethyl starch is a modified amy-
ported.21-23 The most comrmonly recoinnended dose is
lopectin, a highly branched glucose polymer. The mol.
4-6 ml/kg over 3 to 5 mirutes.
Mechanisms of action are probably morc compli-
 arnylases.2 1uring initial climination, small molecules
cated than can be explaincd only by fluid shifts from
(<50,000 daltons) are primarily excreted by the kid-
the intracellular to cxtracellular fluidl corrpartrments.
ney. Soine are cxtravasated from capillaries and phago-
Additional actions thought to be irnportant include
cytized by the reticuloendothelial syster.?27 Elimination
 osmoreceptor- and neurohunoral-stimulated effects. 4
kinctics are complex because of the heterogencity of
Certain factors limit cfficacy of hypertonic saline. As
hetastarch solutions. After infusion into healthy dogs
with crystalloids, fluid redistribution from the intravas-
subjected to hemorrhage, 38 percen1. was present in
cular to extravascular compartments occurs. Thus, the
the plasma and 31.5 percent had bcen excreted in
intravascular volume-expanding qualities and hemody-
a a so  su t a r
nanic. effects of hypertouic saline are short-lived. 'This
between days 7 and 28 after a single infusior1 of 25
may necessitate additional fluid therapy such as col-
ml/kg, the halflife varied between 7.5 ard 8.4 days.
loid, blood component, or crystalloid administration.
 The duration of plasma expansion is approximately
Delcterious effects of 7.5 perccnt saline include hyper-
3 to 24 hours.?% Multiple hetastarch infusions incrcase
natremia, hyperchloremia, hypcrosinolality, hypoka-
serum half-life in humans, but no data regarding simi-
lemia, hypobicarbonaternia, and acidemia. Its use,
 lar administration are available in dogs.
therefore, is linited to initial resuscitation, and it
 Two commercial hetastarch solutions are available:
should not be repeated.
hetastarch (450/0.7) and pentastarch (260/0.7). The
numerical values preceding the slash (e.g., 450) indi-
cate the average molecular weight of the colloid; the
COLLOIDS
numerical values listed afler the slash (e.g., 0.7) indi-
Colloid solutions may be more effective than hyper
cate the degree of hydroxylation of the starch mole-
lonic saline in restoring blood volurne, They are re-
cules. Half-life is depcndent upon the degree of hy
tained to a greater cxtent within the vascular fluid
droxylation and on the conplexity of the molecular
compartment and therefore exert longer-lasting ef-
structure.
278 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
TABLE 15-5
Comparison of Common Colloid Solutions
6%
10%
Plasma
6% Dextran 70
Hetastarch
10% Dextran 40
 Pentastarch
Gelatin
Potential source
In-house; ABB;
Baxter: Abbott;
DuPont
Abbott; Baxter:
McGaw; DuPont
 SmithKline
Cutter: Alpha
McGaw
McGaw; Pharmacia
Beecham
Therapcutic
Rangc of molccular
66-69 (albumin);
15-160
10-2500
10-90
10-2000
5-100
weight (1000 daHons)
200-500 (globulin)
Average molccular
611
70
450
40
264
35
wcight (1000 dallons)
Colloid oncotic pressure
20-22
t9-09
78-0%
58108
40
46-47
(m11lIg)
Water-reraining capacity
13-18
20-25
15-20
20-25
15-25
(ml/g) |sustained]
Volumc cxpansion
67
75
71
死
(% volume infused)
[immediate]
Volune expansion
32
33
14
(% volune infused)
[sustained]
ARH; Animal Blood Hank, Dixon, CA  (916) 678-7350)
Abbott, Abbotu Park, I1.  (800) 222-6883
Alpha Therapeutic. Los Angeles, CA (213) y25-221
Haxter Healthcarc. Round Lake, IL  (800) 933-0303
Cutter (Miles) Pharmaceutical, West Haven, CT(203) 937-2000
DuPont, Wilmington,DE (800) 441-7516
Metanw, Irvine. CA (714) 660-2000
Pharmacia, Piscataway, NJ (732) 4578000
SmithKline Beecham, Exton, PA
Hetastarch has extremely low toxicity and does no1
fluid expansion and initial plasma volume.? The aver-
adversely affect cell-mediated immume functions.29a In
 age plasna expansion in norinovolermic dogs who were
peoplc, it has rarely been associated with allergic reac-
administered 25 ml/kg of hetastarch was 137 percenit
tioris. In cats, the LDso of a single acute dose is greater
of infused volume.2s Afer infusing an average of 50
than 1.5 g/kg (75 nl/kg).2b Dogs have tolcrated doses
ml/kg of hetastarch in dogs with hemorrhage, postin-
of 130 to 250 ml/kg and 200 to 1000 ml/kg during a
fiusion plasma valucs cxceeded preinfusion values by
period of 2 to 5 days and 3 to 38 days, respcctively*0
more than 200 percent.37 The duration of plasma
 Doses of 200 ml/kg adiministered to hypoproteinernic.
expansion after a single dosc is between 24 and 48
dogs over a 5-hour period resulted in no adverse ef-
hours.27-30
fects.s1 IIetastarch does not interfere with red cell typ-
The recorminended initial dose of hetastarch is 10 to
ing and cross-matching procedures, although it may
 30 ml/kg/day. Aniinals may benefit from concurrent
be associated with a doubling of serum amylase con-
crystalloid fluid support represcnting about two thirds
cerntrations in the absence of pancreatitis.26
of the calculated dose.36
Experimental data suggest a number of beneficial
renal effccts of hetastarch adrministration. During se-
DEXTRANs. Dextrans are mixtures of linear polysac-
vere heinorrhagic shock, it appears to support renal
charides produced by the bacteria Leuconostoc mesenter-
furction.*" Reversal of oliguric rcnal failurc has been
oides or lactobacilli onl sucrose media. Subsequenl acid
hydrolysis produces cornmercially available molecular
kg inproved renal dysfumction in hypotensive and nor-
weight dextrans. Molecular wcights above 50,000 dal-
motensive dogs. α1
tons are widely distributed in the body and are metabo-
Hetastarch can affect some coagulation parameters;
lized by dextrinases at the rate of 70 mg/kg of body
it may decrcase all components of factor VIII-related
weight/day.38
coinplex and should therefore be used with caution
 Dextran 40 is rapidly filtercd by the glomerulus and
when von Willebrand's dlisease is known or suspected.s
may be associated with an osmotic diuresis and high
Otherwise, doses of less than 1 to 1.5 g/kg (16 to 25
urine specific gravity. In states of active tubular reab-
ml/kg) probably have few serious deleterious effects
sorption of sodium and water, such as occurs in dehy-
on coagulation. Hetastarch affects plasma volume vari-
dration, dextran molecules concentrate in the tubular
 ably, depending in part on the degree of extravascular
 lumen, increase the filtrate viscosity, and perhaps pre-
TREATMENT OF SHOCK 279
cipitate. This may plug the tubule and cause acute
the total plasma colloid oncotic pressure. ‘There is
renal failure.23 Dextran 70 and hetastarch have Dot
approximately 4 to 5 g of albumin/kg in extracellular
been implicated as a cause of acute renal failure. Com-
fluid.*1 Approximately 35 percent of the total is located
-ladaq snou s! (1) ov uenxap oz uenxap yim pand
 in the interstitial space.2 41 Albumin synthesis is regu-
 oncotic, (2) causes greater initial blood volume expan-
lated by colloid osmoreceptors in the hepatic cndo-
sion, (3) has a shorter duration of action (1.5 to 4
hours), and (4) significantly lowers blood erythrocyte
ficial coloid adrinistration or hyperglobulinemia4
aggregating capacity, viscosity, and microvascular sludg-
Albumin helps maintain intravascular colloid on-
ing. Dextrans are dosed at 20 ml/kg for the first 24
 cotic pressure and volume, It has a strong negative
hours and 10 ml/kg per 24 hours thereafter.
charge and is an inportant carrier of cerrain drugs,
Dextrans produce a dose-related defect of primary
hormones, metals, enzymes, chemicals, and toxins
hemostasis which is greater than that due to simple
(e.g., cations, anions, toxic oxygen radicals, toxic in-
dilution alone.*9 Prolongation of activated partial
flammatory substances).2 Albumin is administered in
thrormboplastin time (APTT) is attributed to a reduc-
 humans to maintain plasma proteins without affecting
tion of factor VII1:C activity. Prolonged bleeding time
clotting function.4 The piasma haiflife is 16 hours
and decreased platelet adhesiveness are attributed to
and the body half-life (in healthy people) is about
inhibition of the von Willebrand factor-anigen activ-
 20 days.41 Usage in veterinary medicine is currently
ity. Although it is not expected that even large doses
restricted by availability, lack of clinical trials, and the
would induce bleeding in normal dogs, dextrans
potential for antigenic reactions following repeated
should be used conservatively when von willebrand's
administrations. Formulation of a 3 percent albumin
disease or other bleeding tendencies are suspected.
 preparation can be made by adding 12 ml of 25 per-
This effect on coagulation and platelet function may
cent human albumin to 488 ml of lactated Ringer's
 potentially be therapeutic in thromboembolic diseases.
Additional problems  with dextran administration
have been reported. Dextrans interfere with red cell
wHOLE BLOoD. Hemoglobin is a major factor in de-
typing and cross-rnatching procedures. Therefore, this
termining blood oxygen content. Thus, when hemo-
must be taken into account if blood transfusion is
globin concentration decreases, oxygen content de-
contemplated. Naturally occurring dextran antibodies
creases and oxygen delivery may become inadequate.
 exist in the general human population, resulting from
 Depending upon other factors, including cardiac out-
exposure to dietary and gastrointestinal tract bacteria-
 put and PaOz, oxygen delivery may become deficient
produced dextrans. The incidence of reactions has
when the hemoglobin is reduced to less than 5 to 10
been rare following reformulation of these products. 26
g/dl (packed cell volume below 15 to 30 percent).
Allergic reactions have not been reported in animals.
Therapeutically, hermoglobin concentration must be
Dextran 70 is antigenic, interferes with blood typing
maintained in bigh-normal ranges when blood oxygen-
and cross-matching due to rouleaux formation, inter-
ation and cardiac output are com promised as in septic
feres with blood glucose measurement, and must be
shock or multiple organ dysfunction syndrome.
stored at stable temperatures (25° C) to avoid precipi-
In dogs, naturally occurring isoantibodies are un-
tates.
    o  
transfusions, reactions are reported to be uncommon
when cross-matching is not performed. When they do
BLOOD PRODUCTS
Occur, their severity is often minimal. However, dogs
-and skep g ueq raneas uoisnjsuen e peu aarq ie
PIAsMA. Species-matched plasma directly replaces
viously should be cross-matchied. Donor blood should
fluid and protein lost to extravascular spaces. Plasma is
be negative for dog erythrocyte antigen (DEA) 1.1.
not as efficient as other colloids for increasing plasma
The importance of DEA 1.2 and DEA 7 in transfusion
colloid oncotic pressures and plasma volume. When
reactions is controversial because they are weakly anti-
preparing blood components, plasma is separated as
genic.47
poj s oooc aaoe on paods e ne poenuao s! poo
 In cats, naturally occurring isoantibodies occur and
 30 minutes at 1 to 6° C. Plasma is then expressed into
it is advisable that cats should be cross-matched prior
(ul 0og on 0oz) eused jo san pue 8eq anans p
 to transfusion. Type A cats have low titers of naturally
should be frozen for future use. Fresh plasma is made
 Occurring anti-B antibodies, but Type B cats have high
by separating it from whole blood within 3 to 4 hours
titers of strong, naturally occurring anti-A antibodies.
of collection; it should be used within 24 hours.40
Mean red blood cell survival times in maichied transfu-
Approximate initial dose is 10 ml/kg.
B blood into Type A cats was associated with a mean
ALBUMIN. Albumin comprises ahout 50 perrent of thie
red blood cell survival time of 2 days and only minor
total plasma protein and affects about 80 percent of
transfusion reactions, whereas transfusion of Type A
280 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
blood into 'Iype B cats was associated with a mean red
CARDIAC SUPPORT
blood cell survival time of 1 hour and severe transfu-
sion reactions.49 A compatible major cross-match of
Cardiotonics may be required in some cases to main-
the blood donor with the untyped recipient identifies
tain cardiac contractile function. A constant rate infu
a safe transfusion and a blood Type A recipient. An
sion of dobutamine or dopamine is usually selected
incompatible major cross-match of Type A and un-
(see later; also, see chapter 12).
typed recipient identified an unsafe transfusion and a
blood Type B recipient.so
 Blood typing of donor cats is necessary. Cats most
INTEGRATED MONITORING
likely to be Type A are the cdomestic shorthair and
OF CARDIOPULMONARY
mon in Scottish Fold, Birman, Himalayan, Abyssinian,
FUNCTION
Somali, Persian, Devon Rex, and Britishi shorthair
breeds.31. 32
The volune of blood to be transfused depends upon
The purpose of fluid therapy in shock is to restore
(1) the degree of anemia, (2) the time over which it
occurred, and (3) the extent of ongoing hemorrhage
(chapter 14). Deterrmination of efficacy involves a
or hemolysis. When 2.2 ml/kg of whole blood is ad-
number of clinical observations and measured assess-
ministered to anemic cats, the packed cell volume
ments. These include mucous membrane color and
(PCV) increases approximately 1 percent.3 Alterna-
capillary refill time; appendage temperature; urine
tively, a gencral formula may be used to calculate thie
output; heart rate; and femoral arterial pulse quality.
required transfusion volurne of whole blood required
In animals that. respond well to fluid therapy. this 
to increase recipient PCV to a desired level:
level of monitoring is usually sufficient. A number of
patients, however, fail to respond to fluid therapy alone
Volumc (whole biood) =
and do not attain acceptable carrdiovascular improve-
body wt (kg) X (66 for cats, 88 for dogs)
ment. Therapy in these cases is modified to include
additional fluids and sympathomimetic drugs. Idealy,
Desired PCV - Rccipient PCV
X
appropriate management decisions are guided by basic
PCV of transtused blood
 cardiovascular monitoring in addition to clinical signs
and assessments.
where species blood volume is approximately equal to
66 ml/kg in cats and 88 mg/ml in dogs.31 A general
rule of thumb to guide the amount of blood to be
CENTRAL VENOUS PRESSURE
administered is: dogs receive 10 to 40 ml/kg and cats
receive 5 to 20 ml/kg for small to large transfusions,
 rcspectively. Whole blood and plasma is administered
The central venous pressure (CVP) is affected by
venous blood volume (venous return), venomotor
over about 2 to 4 hours to minimize clinical manifesta-
tions of volume overload or foreign protein histamine.
tone, ventricular compliance, and cardiac output. lt is
mediated reactions. Immunologic transfusion reac-
indirectly
 associated with right ventricular preload
(end-diastolic filing volume) when diastolic function
tions may be clinically manifested by restlessness, acute
a  r sas sana p pe p 
collapse, hypotension, dyspnea, wheezing, urticaria,
tricular filling volume. Measurements of CVP should
hemoglobimemia, hemoglobinuria, or fever. If any of
be interpreted with reference to patient history, physi-
these signs develop, the transfusion should be stopped
cal examination and other parameters of cardiovascu-
immediately.
lar function. A CVP of less than 5 cm HO suggests
that additional fluids or increased administration rates
RED BLOOD CELL. SUBSTITUTEs. The quest for Oxygen-
are necessary. Alternatively, a CVP greater than I0 cin
carrying red blood cell substitutes intensified when
HO suggests that the rate of fluid therapy administra-
human acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
 tion is sufficient or excessive. depending upon clinical
increased the risk for blood-borne transmission. One
'suais pun suopuon
blood substitute, Oxyglobin? (Biopure Corp., Cam-
bridge, MA), is a bovine-derived, ultrapure, polymer-
ized hemoglobin solution (hemoglobin concentration,
ARTERIAL BLOOD PRESSURE
13 g/dl) that has recently received veterinary FDA
approval, Recommended dosage in dogs is a one
Monitoring arterial blood pressure (ABP) may be
time dose of 30 ml/kg administered IV at a rate of up
irnportant, especially when treating conditions associ-
to 10 ml/kg/hr. The major veterinary indication for
ated with impaired myocardial contractility, bypoten-
red blood cell substitutes is acute, reversible anemia.
sion, or large fluxes in vascular volume. Arterial blood
TREATMENT OFSHOCK
281
TABLE 15-6
HemodynamicParametersUsedforPatientMonitoring
MeasuredParameters
Arterialblood pressure
Central venous pressure
Cardiac output
Arterial blood gases
Mixedvenous blood gases
Pulmonary artery occlusion pressure(wedge pressure)
Hemoglobin(packed cell volume)
CalculatedVariables
Variable
Formula
Units
Cardiacindex
CI=Cardiac output/BSA
L/min·m²
Systemicvascularresistanceindex
SVRI=79.92*(MAP-CVP)/CI
dyne·sec/cm·m²
Pulmonary vascular resistance index
PVRI-79.92*(MPAP-WP)/CI
dyne·sec/cm·m²
Mean transittime
Direct measurement
sec
Central bloodvolume
CBV=MTTXCI×16.7
ml/m²
Strokeindex
SI=CI/HR
ml/m²
Leftventricularstrokework
LVSW=SI×MAP×0.0144*
g.m/m²
Right ventricular strokework
RVSW=SIXMPAPX0.0144*
g.m/m
Left cardiacwork
LCW=CI×MAPX0.0144*
kg·m/m²
Right cardiac work
RCW=CI×MAP×0.0144*
kg·m/m²
Oxygen delivery
DO=CI×CaO×10
ml/min²·m²
Oxygen consumption
VO2=CI×C(a-v)O×10
ml/min·m²
*0.0144 and 79.92 are conversion factors.
BSA,body surface area;MAP, mean arterial pressure;MPAP, mean pulmonary arterial pre
are;WP,pul
e;MTT,
nsit time; HR,
heart rate;CaO,arterial Ocontent;C(a-v)O,arteriovenous Odiffrence.
pressure is the product of cardiac output times sys-
Theinterrelationshipsofhemodynamicandcardio-
temicvascular resistance(chapter 35).Meanpressure
vascularparameters areillustratedinFigure15-1.Pul-
shouldbemaintainedatgreater than60mmHg and
monary occlusion pressure (i.e.,pulmonary capillary
systolic pressure at greater than 80 mmHg. Normal
wedgepressure,PCWP)is ameasurement of left-sided
blood pressure does not insure the presence of accept-
heartpreload.Acuteleft-sidedheartfailureorfluid
ablecardiovascularfunction—it assuresonly thatone
overloadcancauseaPCWPofgreater than15mmHg,
component of it maybe adequate.Moreover,although
and monitoring this parameter maybe useful during
arterialbloodpressuremaybewithinthenormal
aggressivevasodilator therapy,especiallywhen sodium
range,it may not indicate appropriate cardiac output
nitroprusside is administered. Cardiac output can be
andtissueperfusion sincepersistentvasoconstriction
evaluatedbythermodilution andused as anindex of
may normalizepressuremeasurements.If arterial
blood pressure is low after fluid therapy while CVP is
high,sympathomimetics may beindicated.
Systemic
VascularResistance
Arterial
Arterial
Blood
Blood
Pressure
Volume
CARDIOVASCULAR
Heart
CATHETERIZATIONFOR
CardiacRate
Output
Stroke
HEMODYNAMICMONITORING
Volume
O2Delivery
(Do 2)
Contractility
Preload
Afterload
Placement of a balloon-tipped,thermodilution car-
diacoutput catheter allows themeasurement andcal-
O,Consumption
ArterialO,
culation of various hemodynamic parameters(Table
(Vo2)
Content
(Cao2)
15-6; see also Figure 14-1); these provide a compre-
MixedVenousO2Content
hensive overview of cardiovascular status(Table 15-
7).57 As discussed in chapter 14, such evaluations may
(CvO2)
be especially beneficial in critically ill or unstable pa-
FIGURE 15-1
tients,orwhen CVP and arterialblood pressure are
Important hemodynamicrelationships in management of shock.
normalbutclinical parameters of tissueperfusion and
Hb,hemoglobin concentration;PaO,partial pressure of oxygen in
arterial pulse quality are still suboptimal.
arterial blood.
 282 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
TABLE 15-7
Normal and Minimally Acceptable Cardiopulmonary Values to Guide Therapy in Critically Ill Patients
Minimally
Acceptable
Paramcter
Norrmal Value
Value
Optimal
Arterial bloxod pressurc (mmHg) (mcan)
061018
60-800
80-120
Central venous pressurec (cm H.O)
01-0
>6
8-10
(Cardiac output (L/m/min)
3.55.5
>4
PaO, (mmlIg)
80-110
>60
>80
SaOy (mmlIg)
66-86
>90
>95
PaCO; (1nmHg)
35-4.5
<60
35-45
PvO (mmIlg)
40-50
>30
>40
Pulmonary artery occlusion pressurc (mmHg)
8-12
>6
10-14
Systemic vascular resistance (dynes + sec · cin?)
16,000-24,000
>500;<2500
500-1500
Pulrmonary vascular resistancc (dymes + sec · cin*)
150-200
HIemoglobin (g/dl)
13-16
8-L<
>9-10
Systemic oxygen delivery (IL/in2/mnin)
1006-009
>600
008<
Oxygen corsumption (I./m/min)
150-200
>100
>150
Oxygen cxtraction (%)
0607
<35
<25
Venous admixturc (%)
<10%
As low as possiblc
As low as possible
the heart's ability to accept and eject blood adequately.
DRUG THERAPIES
A low cardiac output can be caused by reduced preload
(e.g, severe volume contraction from dehydration,
blood loss, overdiuresis, conditions of ventricular un-
derfilling such as cardiac tamponade) or poor contrac-
SYMPATHOMIMETIC AGENTS
tility.
Certain drugs (Table 15-8) may be indicated for
cardiovascular support when fluid therapy alone has
 OXYGEN DELIVERY AND CONSUMPTION. As desCribed in
failed to restore acceptable tissue perfusion, pulse
chapter 14, oxygen delivery and consumption must be 
 quality, arterial blood pressure, and cardiac output, or
optimized to efect a successful oulcoine. Common
to redluce elevated central venous or pulmonary artery
causes of decreased oxygen delivery include reduced
cardiac output or low arterial oxygen content. The
maintain or increase cardiac output. Pressor agents
latter is often due to anemia or hypoxemia. Low oxy
 may be needed to increase arterial blood pressure, but.
gen consumption may be attributed to insufficient oxy-
cxcessive vasoconstriction may impair tissue perfusion.
gen delivery, shunting of blood past metabolically ac-
Vasodilators may be useful to improve cardiar output
tive tissue beds, or intrinsically impaired metabolic
and tissue perfusion, but may cause hypotension and
function. Attention is focused on methods to assure
 a reduction in PaOy, More aggressive oxygenation and
optimal oxygen delivery, provide vascular volume sup-
ventilation support may be indlicated if significant hy-
 port and avoid cxcessive vasoconstriction or vasodila-
poxemia develops.
tion.
Untoward reactions to sympathomimetics relate to
their agonist effects. These include sinus tachycardia,
extrasystoles, and increased myocardial oxygen utiliza-
VENOUs ADMIXTURE. This expresses the lung's ability
tion with βragonists; systemic hypertension with α1
to oxygenate the blood. It is a better index of pulmo-
agonists; and hypotension occurring with βragonists,
nary function than PaO, alone or the alveolar-arterial
α,-blockers, or direct-acting vasodilators. Dopamine
PO2 gradient and may be elevated in the respiratory
and dobutamine are the most commonly used inotro-
distress syndrome or septic multiorgan dysfunction syn-
pic agents in shock therapy.
drome. Management options include oxygen adminis-
tration to optimize ventilation/perfusion or positive
 DOPAMINE. This drug exhibits bothi direct and indi-
pressure ventilation to reopen collapsed small airways
rect cardiovascular effects, half of which is attributed
and alveoli.
to norepinephrine release from synpathetic nerve
TREATMENT OF SH0CK 283
TABLE 15-8
 Cardiotonic and Vasoactive Drugs Used in Septic Shock
Receptor Activity
Agent
β
Dosage
Indicalion
Dobutaminc
+++
+
2.5-15 μg/kg/min
Low Q, high SVR
suundog
+-1
++
3-10 μg/kg/min
L.ow Q, SVR, ABP
Epinephrine
-++
+++
0.1-1 μg/kg/mint
When patient nonresponsivc lo dopamine
Norepinephrinc
--+
0.1-1 μg/kg/min
Low SVR, ABP
Phenylephrine
+++
25-100 μg/kg/nmin
Low SVR, ABP
Ephedlrine
+
0.05-0.2 mg/kg
Sainc as dopaininc
Nitroprusside
Dircct vasodilation
1-3 μg/kg/min
Iigh SVR
Dircct vasodilation
0.20.5 mg/kg
Iligh SVR
Q, cardiac output; SVR, systemic vascular resistance; ABP, arterial blod presure.
endings. Effects are dose related,6i-s The duration
kg/min. In cats, doses greater than 5 μ/kg/min may
of beneficial effects is limited due to depletion of
induce seizures.67
presynaptic dopaminergic reserves, receptor sequestrat-
tion, or down regulation." At low dosages (1 to 2 μg/
kg/min), βs-agonist and dopaininergic actions domi-
OTHER DRUGS TO SUPPORT CARDIAC
nate, which enhance blood flow to renal and splanch-
nic beds (except liver). Moderate doses (3 to 5 μg/
OUTPUT AND BLOOD PRESSURE
kg/min accentuate cardiac inotropy, and at higher
dloses (5 to 10 μg/kg/min), vasoconstriction predomi-
Epinephrine has potent βtg and αi2-agonist activities
nates.
that are dose related. Lower dosages increase cardiac
 Dopamine is preferred over dobutamine if an in-
output with minimal changes in systemic vascular resis-
crease in arterial blood pressure is the desired end-
tance. Higher dosages increase systemic vascular resis-
point. Greater pressor activity (and arrhythmogenicity)
tance and arterial blood pressure with no further im-
manifests as the dose increases. Higher doses may
cause excessive vasoconstriction, and further dose in-
cominonly used in cardiac arrest (chapter 2l) and only
 Creases provide no improvement in cardiac output or
occasionally in shock states unresponsive to dobuta-
oxygen delivery. Dopamine constricts capacitance veins
mine or dopamine. Ephedrine is an indirect-acting sym-
and may increase central venous and pulmonary occlu-
pathomimetic drug that causes norepinephrine release
sion pressures.f4 Dopamine also decreases aldosterone
from sympathetic nerve endings. Althoughi not as po-
secretion.5
tent or effective as dopamine and dobutanine, it has
a longer duration of action. Norepinephrine and pheny-
 DOBLTAMINE. A direct-acting synthetic catecholamine,
ephrine are occasionally adininistered if arterial blood
 dobutamine increases cardiac output, oxygen delivery.
 pressure cannot be stabilized with any of the other
and oxygen consumption more reliably than dopa-
agents. These potent vasopressors should be used with
mine, primarily because dobutamine does not cause
vasoconstriction. Dobutarnine has potent β,-(cardiac
may impair organ perfusion.
stimulatory) and modest βz-(vasodilatory) properties,
with lesser α-agonist activity. Its major rmetabolite, 3-
Omethyldobutamine, is an α.g-inhibitor. Dobutamine
VASODILATORS
administration is usually associated with a decrease in
systemic vascular resistance, central venous pressure,
and pulmonary occlusion pressure but can increase
Hydralazine and nitroprusside. These drugs are occa
sionally used to treat acute, severe cardiogenic pulmo-
dobutamine therapy is an animal with severely de-
 nary edema (chapters 12, 13) and are uncommonly
 pressed myocardial contractility, with clevated filling
administered for shock therapy. Hydralazine is an arte-
pressures but without hypotension  (imean arterial
 riolar vasodilator. When administered orally, it exerts
blood pressure >80 mmHg). In heart failure patients,
significant arteriolar dilation and afterload reduction
dobutamine reduces systemic vascular resistance and
 by 1 hour postadministration. Nitroprusside is a potent
increases cardiac output while arterial blood pressure
mixed arteriolar and venous vasodilator administered
remains relatively constant.6 Dosage is 2.5 to 15 μg/
by constant rate infusion. It acts immediately, and
284ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF TIIERAPY
blood pressure must be carefully monitored to avoid
tivity similar to that of aminoglycosides. HHowever,
hypotension.
resistance is not plasmid-mediated, and therefore quin-
olone antibiotics may be effective when resistance has
developed to aminoglycosides.72 Thus they should not
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS
be used indiscriminately when equally  eficacious
agents are available,
In shock, antibiotics should be administered by the
 parenteral route because of reduced gastrointestinal
 BETA-LAcrAMs. The usefulness of these popularly ad-
drug absorption. Because pathogen type and the spec-
 ministered antibiotics is related to their safety, efficacy.
trum of antibiotic sensitivity cannot. be known initially.
 and cost.
a choice  of  broad-spectrum antimicrobial  agent(s)
should be favored (Table 15-9). Selection should also
incorporate information about pharmacokinetics, anti-
PENrcnuINs. Penicillin G, ampicillin, and amoxicilin
microbial charactcristics, and patient status. Reported
 are generally effective against gran-positive (Strepiococ-
 bacteremias are gram-negative 30 to 70 percent of the
cus sp and sorne Staphylococcus spp) and all anaerobic
tirme, gram-positive in 25 to 50 percent, anaerobic in
bacteria  except beta-lactamase-producing strains
of
10 to 30 percent, and of mixed infection in approxi-
Bactrroides fragilis and Actinomyces hordeovulnaris. They
mately 10 to 50 percent.ns-7a
are not effective against gram-negative organisms. The
beta-lactamase resistant penicillins (methicillin, nafcil-
AMINOGLYCOSIDEs. Gentamicin, amikacin, netilmicin,
lin, oxacillin, cloxacillin) are generally effective against
 and tobrarnycin are effective against most gran-nega-
Staphylococcus spp but, in general, are not effective
tive organisms and Staphylococcus aureus; they are not
against anaerobes and gram-negative bacteria 375 Ihe
h u'saqoare pue ddsnodans suee ana a
extended-spectrum carboxypenicilins (ticarcillin and
carbenicillin), and the extended-spectrum ureidopeni-
FLLOROQUINOLONEs. Enrofloxacin
(Baytril),
nor-
cillins (azlocillin, piperacillin, mezlocillin) are broad-
floxacin, and ciprofloxacin exhibit a spectrum of ac-
spectrum antibiotics with expanded activity against
TABLE 15-9
Antimicrobials and Spectrums of Activity
Gran-Positive
Spectrum
Gram-Negative
Agent
Spectrun
(Staph sp; Strep sp)
Anaerobie Spectrum
Penicillins:
1I)
yes
Yes (cxcept some B.
penicillin C
fragilis andl
ampicillin1
arctinomyces)
Beta-lactaumase-resistant penicillins:
yCs
[1)
oxatcillin
mcthicillin
rafcillin
cloxacillint
Extended-spcetrum penicillins:
yes
yCs
ye.s
yes
carbenicillin
ticarcillin
Extended-spcctrum ureidopenicillins:
azlociltin
piperacillin
mezlocillin
Cephalosporins:
1sl generation
sorne
ycs
yc5
n0o
2nd generation
dasxa) saA
yes
yes
variable:
P'seudomonas)
3rd gcneratiort
yes
yes
yes
yes
Imipenern/cilastarin
yes
yes
yes
Aininoglycosides
saA
yes
[0
no
Fluoroquinolones
saA
yes
no
no
Aztreonan
yes
1]
n)
no
Metronidazole
no
(u
nn
ycs
Clindamycin
ou
yes
yes
ycs
TREATMENT OF SH0CK 285
 Slaphylococus sp and gram-negative and anacrobic bac-
dipropionate. amprolium, pyrimethamine, and clinda-
teria.71. 72. a, 76 Broad-spectrum effectiveness is en-
Inycin.7s
hanced when they are combined with beta-lactam en-
zyme inhibitors such as sulbactam or clavulinic acid.
GLUCOCORTICOSTEROIDS
(EPHArosPoRINs. First-generation cephalosporins
(cephalothin, cefazolin, cephalexin, cephapirin, ceph-
Corticosteroids have been advocated in shock for
adrine, cefadroxil) are effective against gram-positive
various reasons: organelle and cell membrane stabiliza-
bacteria. However, they have intermediate effectiveness
tion, inproved cellular rmetabolism and gluconeogene-
against gram-negative bacteria and are generally inef-
sis, improved microcirculation, decreased production
fective against anaerobes (especially B. fragilis and
of endogenous toxins (e.g., myocardial depressant fac-
otherBacterodes s)7 72  Secondgeneration cepha-
tor), decreased leukocyte activation and degranula
losporins (cefoxitin, cefamandole, cefaclor, cefurox-
tion, and minimized reticuloendothelial depression
ine, cefonicid, ceforanide, cephotetan, cefmetazole)
and histologic organ damage. Agents generally recom-
are effective against some anaerobes (including B.
mended for hypovolemic and septic shock include hy-
firagilis and other Bacteroides spp) and
drocortisone (100 to 300 mg/kg); prednisolone and
gram-negative
 organisns (except Pseudomonas spp).71.
   
methylprednisolone (10 to 30 mg/kg); and dexameth-
generation cephalosporins (cefotaxime, moxalactam,
asone (4 to 6 mg/kg).x2
cefoperazone, ceftizoxime, ceftriaxone. ceftazidime,
Studies evaluating the efficacy of large-dose cortico-
cefixime) have a gram-positive, gram-negative, and
steroids in the treatiment of septic shock have been
anaerobic spectrum; are highly
con ducted in humans6 s.* and animals.* Improved
ybeta-lactamase-
resistant:7t # and probably are suficiently effective and
survival was rcported by some investigators;*-w others
broad-spectrum to be used as the sole antibiotic.
recorded more frequent reversal of shock in steroid-
treated patients compared with controls, buit without.
improved survival rates.8s No improvement in survival
CARBA/zNzMs. Beta-lactamase is the most common
Or reversal of the shock state was observed using
cause of resistance to extended-spectrum penicillins.
 Third-generation cephalosporins and these newer-gen-
methylprednisolone, 30 mg/kg plus 5 mg/kg/hr for 9
eration agents are resistant to β-lactamase-secreting
hours" or 30 mg/kg repeated three times at 6-hour
intervals for 24 hours.85 s6 Moreover, no significant
organisms. Imipenem/cilastatin is resistant to Type I
beta-lactamase and provides goodl, broad-spectrum cov-
 diferences were found in the incidence of secondary
infections  between  steroid-treated  versus  untreated
erage.7"
groups, although steroid-treated patients had higher
MONOBACTAMs. Aztreonarn is effective against most
mortality when secondary infections were present com-
pared with the patients not given steroids.s. s7 A bene-
gram-negative bacteria (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Pro-
ficial effect on survival was achieved with modest doses
leus, Enterobacter); however, it is not reliable for gram-
of hydrocortisone in septic shock patients.89a
 positive and anaerobic bacteria.74
Glucocorticoids are generally beneficial for treat-
ment of shock associated with adrenal insufficiency
MACROLIDEs. Clindamycin has a good spectrum of
 and hypothyroidism. They are not indicated for cardio
genic shock.
many anaerobes (especially Bacteroides spp)
but not
should be infiused over a 30-minute period to avoid
ANTIPROSTAGLANDINS
hypotension,
Prostaglandins that are released into the systemic
OTHER AGENrs. Sepsis can also be caused by ricketf-
circulation during shock cause marked hemodynamic
sial, protozoan, chlamydial, and viral infections, in
changes. These include decreased cardiac output, sys-
which case the aforementioned antimicrobial agents
temic hypotension, pulmonary hypertension, and in-
may not be effective. Metronidazole (Flagyl) is effective
creased vascular permeability. Experimental treatment
against protozoa and obligate anaerobic bacteria (espe-
with antiprostaglandins ameliorates these cardiovascu-
cially Bacteroides spp). It is not effective against faculta-
lar changes and improves survival but generally does
tive anaerobes or obligate aerobes.71. s Rickettsia are
not affect the leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, acidosis,
usually susceptible to tetracycline, doxycycline, chlor-
or coagulopathies that develop during septic shock.
amphenicol, and imidocarb dipropionate. Chlamydia
Adverse effects of antiprostaglandins include gastroin-
are usually susceptible to tetracycline, doxycycline, and
testinal tract hemorrhage and ulceration, which are
chloramphenicol. Protozoa are usually susceptible to
augmented by coadministration of corticosteroids. Re
metronidazole, quinacrine hydrochloride, imidocarb
nal afferent. vasoconstriction has been reported when
286 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
ibuprofen was acdninistered during septic shock in
sion and for inducing diuresis. If restoration of an
dogs.* The clinical usefulness of antiprostaglanrlins
effective circulating volume docs not generate an ac-
awaits further investigation.
ceptable urine flow, diuretics should be adininistered.
Furosermide, 5 mg/kg, intravenously, is a potent loop
diuretic that promotes mild renal (and visceral) vasodi-
GLUCOSE
lation. If urine flow is not detected within 10 minutes,
the dose may be doubled or a different dliuretic admin-
If the blood glucose concentration is very low, a
istered. Mannitol, 0.5 g/kg, intravenously administered
bolus of glucose (0.25 g/kg IV) should be adminis-
over 10 to 20 minutes, osmotically increases blood
tered. Adequate blood glucose concentration is then
volume and renal perfusion and subsequently acts as
maintained by an infusion of a 2.5 to I0 percent glu-
an osmotic diuretic. lf urine flow is not detected within
cose solution, titrated to the desired effect.
10 minutes following the end of the mannitol infusion,
another agent should be administered. Dopamine, 1
to 3 μg/kg/min, intravenously, causes renal (and vis-
SODIUM BICARBONATE
ceral) vasodilation via dopaminergic-receptor stimula-
tion. If each drug individually fails to induce an accept-
 Sodium bicarbonate should be administered if meta-
able urine output, simultaneous administration of all
bolic acidosis becomes severe during shock. If the base
agents may be attempted.
or bicarhonate deficit is known, the dose of bicarbon-
ate can be calculated as:
THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Sodium bicarbonate dose =
Basc defcit × [0.3 × body weight. (kg)]
HEMORRHAGE AND MUCOSAL SLOUGHING. GaStrointesti-
If the magnitude of metabolic acidosis cannot be nea-
nal tract hemorrhage, mucosal ulceration, and
 sloughing are common consequences of septic shock.
sured but is estimated on the basis of clinical signs as
moderate to severe, then sodium bicarbonate, 3 to 5
minished organ perfusion, oxygen radical-induced
mEq/kg, may be administrated slowly over 20 minutes.
cell membrane lipid peroxidation, diffusion of luminal
hydrogen ions into mucosal cells, deterioration of the
EFFECTS OF SHOCK ON
effectiveness of the mucous barrier, destructive action
of bile acids and pancreatic proteases, or some combi-
SPECIFIC ORGANS
nation of these causes, 92, 99
The mainstay of gastrointestinal tract protection in-
volves (1) restoration of an effective circulating blood
THE HEART
volume, and (2) re-establishment of adequate visceral
perfusion and oxygenation. Drugs such as cimetidine
HEARr FAILuRE. Impaired myocardial contractility is
and ranitidine, which block histamine (H) receptors,
an early consequence of septic shock. The heart may
 dlecrease gastric acid secretion, as do sone anticholin-
become unable to compensate for hypotension re-
ergic agents such as glycopyrolate. Sucralfate acts to
sulting frorn arterial vasodilation or hypovolemia. Cor.
coat and protect existing epithelial erosions. Misopros-
onary perfusion may be compromised, further reduc-
tol, a prostaglandin E2 analogue, and superoxide dis-
ing cardiac function. The left ventricular ejection
 mutase and catalase, oxygen radical scavengers, have
fraction becomes depressed, resulting in further hypo-
been reported to diminish gastric injury in a septic
tension, inadequate tissue oxygen delivery, and multi-
shock. Methylprednisolone, however, was more effec-
 ple organ failure. Volurne resuscitation with sympatho-
tive in this regard than was a combination treatiment
 mimetic cardiovascular support is indicated.91
of misoprostol, superoxide dismutase, and catalase.9
Clinical eficacy awaits adlditional trials.
THE KIDNEYS
THE LUNGS
ACUTE RENAL FAILURE. Urine Output is an indirect indi-
cator of renal blood tlow. Anuria suggests inadequate
RESPIRATORY FAILURE. Adult respiratory distress sy11-
renal (and visceral) perfusion that may precipitate
drome (ARDS) is a diffuse, infiltrative pulmonary pa-
acute organ failure if excessive or prolonged. Oliguria
renchynal disease that is a common sequela to trauma,
is a cardinal manifestation of shock. A urinary catheter
shock, sepsis, and a variety of pulmonary insults. It is
should be placed to verifly and quantify urine output.
also receiving more attention in veterinary medicine
Fluid administration is the mainstay of renal perfu-
This syndrome is caused by increased pulmonary capil-
TREATMENT OF SHOCK 287
lary permeability resulting from a series of complex
 gastrostomy (PEG) tube. Some critically ill patients
systemic inflammatory interactions. This diffuse infil-
develop ileus that may limit the efficacy of feeding via
trative process decreases lung compliance, increases
the stomach. A jejunostony tube should be considered
the work of ventilation, and ultimately causes small
if the stomach is not enmptying appropriately, or if
air way and alveolar collapse, increased venous admix-
vomiting is a problem. Enteral feedling should provide
ture, and refractory hypoxemia.9
nutrition for the gut itself and potentially satisfy pa-
Oxygen therapy may be initially palliative. As the
tient nutritional requirements.
condition worsens, positive pressure ventilation be-
If the enteral feeding is not possible, intravenous
comes necessary to re-expand small airways and alve-
feeding is recommended. However, this route is rutri-
oli. Aggressive ventilatory settings are often necessary
tionally inferior to enteral feeding and should not be
 due to the severely reduced compliance of these lungs.
used as the primary source of nutrition when the gut
is working.
THE BLOOD
TOXIC OxYGEN RADICALS. Toxic oxygen radicals may
result from multiple mechanisms, including mitochon-
COAGULoPATHIEs. Activation of the coagulation and
drial electron bleed, eicosanoid metabolism, xanthine
platelet aggregation cascades is an early consequence
oxidase action on hypoxanthine, and neutrophilic acti-
 of the systemic inflammatory response syndrome and
vation. These oxyradicals may cause tissue injury
multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. Acute dissemin-
through (1) protein denaturation and fragmentation,
altering both structure, function, and susceptibility lo
 Endogenous fibrinolysis leads to a rise in plasma fibrin
proteolysis; (2) oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty
 degradation products. Smal vessel thrombosis may
acids, making them nore susceptible to hydrolysis by
cause microangiopathic red blood cell fragmentation
phospholipase Ay; (3) DNA strand breakage; and (4)
(schistocytes) and intravascular and extravascular he-
NAD' and ATP depletion.97
molysis. Hypocoagulopathy may develop secondary to
Antioxidant therapy may have a clinical role in septic
depletion of coagulation precursors or accumulation
multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. Although super-
 of fibrin degradation products and is associated with
oxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase, allo-
multifocal hemorrhage, prolonged coagulation times,
purinol, alpha-tocopherol, *lazaroids,” corticosteroids,
impaired clot formation, dlepletion of antithrombin III
and other agents are being studied, their benefit in
(AT 11), thrombocytopenia, and hypofibrinogenemia.
shiock is speculative at this time.
 Management of DIC involves several key steps: (1)
Treatment of the underlying disease process is the
single most. important objective; (2) Crystalloid fluid
REFERENCES
is administered to maximize microcirculation (i.e., in-
duce modest hemodilution); (3) The hypercoagulative
state is treated to diminish thrombogenesis (e.g., hepa-
1. Deitch EA. Overvicw of multiple orgar failure. In
rin, 100 μ/kg subcutaneously every 6 hours) with the
Prough DS, Traystman RJ (eds). Critical Care: State of
 objective of inpairing further coagulation; platelet ag-
the Art. Society of Criticai Care Medicine, Anahcim, CA,
gregation can be inhibited by oral aspirin or dextran
1993, p 131
 2. Weil MI1. Current understanding of mechanisms and
infusion; (4) Underlying prothrombotic factors
(i.e.,
treatncnt of circulatory shock causcd by bacterial infcc-
stasis, sepsis, dehydration, AT III deficiency) are modi-
tions. Ann Clin Res 9:181, 1977
fied; and (5) secondary complications are prevented.95
3. Goldberg RJ, Gore JM, Alpert JS, et al. Cardiogenic
shock after acute myocardial infarction; Incidence and
mortality from a community-wide perspective, 1975 10
1988. N Engl J Med 325:1117, 1991
METABOLIC INJURY
   h   ) e  
Churchill Livingstonc, 1988
   
support
 5. Califf RM, Bengtson JR. Cardiogenic shock. N Engl J
(within 24 to 48 hours of hospitalization) represents
Mcd 330:1724, 1994
6. Weil MH, von Planta M, Rackow EC. Acute circulatory
failure (shock). In Braunwald E (cd). Heart Diseasc: A
Enteral feeding is preferable for several reasons. It
Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 4th ed. Philadel-
phia, WB Saundcrs, 1992, p 569
mucosal immunity; it reduces infectious complications
7. Shuster DP, Lefrak SS. Shock. In Civetta JM, Taylor RW,
and release of intflanmatory cytokines associated with
Kirby RR (eds), Critical Care. Philadelphia, JB Lippin-
critical ilness; and it inproves survival compared with
cott, 1988. p 891
intravenous feeding.
8. Hardie EM, Rawlings CA. Septic shock. Part I. Pathophys-
iology. Compend Con Educ Pract Vet 5:36, 1983
 Many animals can be successfully supported by feed-
9. Goodwin J-k, Schaer M. Scptic shock. Vet Clin North
ing through a nasoesophageal or percutaneous placed
Am 19:1239, 1989
288
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
10. Tracey KJ, Lowry SF. The role of cytokine mediators in
Rcstoration of nacrophage integrity and prevention of
septic shock. Adv Surg 23:2, 1990
increased circulating interleukin-6 levels. Crit Care Med
11. Vincent JL., Weil MH, Puri V, et al. Circulatory shock
23:806, 1995
associated with purulent peritonitis. Am J Surg 142:262.
 29b. Mishler IM. Pharmacology of hydroxyethiyl starch. Use
1981
in therapy and blood banking. Oxford, Oxford U'niver.
12. Weil MII, Shubin I1. Ihe "VIP" approach to the bedside
sity Prcss, 1982
managcinent of shock. J Am Med Assoc 207:337, 1969
30. Thompson Wl., Walton RP. Blood changes, renal func-
13. Shoernaker WC, Montgorncry ES, Kaplan E, et al. Physio-
tion and lissue storage following inassive infiusion of
logic paterns in surviving and nonsurviving shock pa-
hydroxyethyl starches; abstract. Fed Proc 22:640, 1963
tients. Arch Surg 106:630, 1973
 31. Rackow EC, Weil MH, Macneil AR. Effects of crystalloid
14. Shoemaker WC, Bland RD, Appel PL. Therapy of criti-
and colloid fluids on extravascular lung water in hypo-
cally ill postoperative paticnts based on outcome predic-
proteinemic dogs. J Appl Physiol 62:2421, 1987
 tion and prospective clinical trials. Surg Clin North Am
 32. Heidenreich O, Muhlen K, Iicinlze K. Ihe effecl of thc
65:811,1985
plasma substitutes hydroxyethyl starch an1d dextran 60
15. Kunar A, Falke K], Geffin B, et al. Continuous positive-
on the kidney furction of dogs
s in acutc hemorrhagic
pressure ventilation in acute respiratory failure, N Engl
shock. Anaesthetist 24:239. 1975
J Med 283:1430, 1970
33.Rajagopalan ER, Reines HID, Puliam C, et al. Reversal of
16. Walser M, Selfin DW, Grollrman A. Measurcrment of ex-
acute renal failure using henodilution with hydroxyethyl
tracellular tluid with radiosulfatc. J Clin Invest 31:669,
starch. J Trauma 23:795, 1983
1952
 34. Murphy CP, Dermaree DE, Gagnon JA. Thie renal arid
17. Lamke 1.O, Liljedahl SO. Plasma volune changes affer
systcinic effects of hydroxyethyl starch solution infusions.
infusion of various plasma exparders. Resuscitation
JLrol 93:534, 1965
5:93,1976
35. Strauss RG, Stump DC, Henriksen RA. Hydroxyethyl
18. Hauser CJ. Shoemaker WC, Turpin 1. et al. Oxygen
starch accentuatcs von Willcbrand's diseasc. Trarsfusion
transport responses to colloid and crystalloid in critically
25:235,1985
ill surgical patients. Surg Gynecol Obstet 150:811, 1980
 36. Smiley LE. The use of hetastarch for plasma expansion.
19. Nakayarna SI, Sibley L., Gunther RA, ct al. Sinall-volume
In Hohenhaus AE (ed). Problems in Vet Med (Transfu-
resuscitation with hypertonic saline (2400 mOsm/litcr)
sion Medicine) 4:652, 1992
during hemorrhagic shock. Circ Shock 13:149, 1984
 37. Thormpson WL, Walton RP. Circulatory responses to in-
 20. Kramer GC, Perron PR, Lindsey DC, ct al. Sinall volurne
travenous infusions of hydroxyethyl starch solutions. J
resuscitation with hyperuonic saline dextran solution.
Pharinacol Exp Thcr 146:359, 1964
Surgery 100:239, 1986
38. Grubber LP. Blood Replacerment. New York, Springer-
21. Velasco II, Rocha e Silva M, Oliveira MA, et al. Hlypcr-
Verlag, 1969
tonic and hyperoncotic resuscitation froin severe hemor-
 39. Concannon KT, Iiaskins SC, Feldman BF. Hleniostatic
rhagic shock in dogs: A comparative study. Crit. Care
defects associatcd with two infusion rates of dextran 70
Med 17:261、1989
in dogs. Am J Vct Res 53:1369, 1992
22. Layon J, Duncan D. Gallagher IJ, ct al. Hypertonic
40. Mooney SA. Preparation of blood components. In Ho-
saline as a resuscitation solution in heinorrhagic shock:
hcnhaus AE (ed). Problems in Vet Med (Transfusion
Effects onn cxtravascular lung water and cardiopulrnonary
Mcdicine) 4:594,1992
function. Anesth Analg 66:154, 1987
41. Rainey IG, Read CA. Pharinacology of colloids and crys-
23. Zorar DI., Jergens AF, Riedesel DII, et al. Evaluation of
talloids. In Chcrnow B (ed). Ihe Pharmacologic Ap-
hemostatic analytes after use of hypertonic saline solu-
tion combined with colloids for resuscitation of dogs
Williams & wilkiris, 1994, pp 272-290
with hypovolemia. A1n J Vet Res 53:1791, 1992
42. Rothschild MA, Oratz M, Schrciber SS. Alburnint synthc-
 24. Maningas PA, De Guzinan LR, Tillman FJ, et al. Sinall
sis. N Engl J Mcd 286:748, 1972
volume infusion of 7.5% NaCl in 6% dextran 70 for the
43. Rothschid MA, Oratz M, Franklin EC, ct al. The effect.
treatment of severe henorrhagic shock in swire. Ann
of hypcrgainnaglobulinemia on alburnin metabolism in
Emerg Mcd 15:1131, 1986
hyperimmunized rabhits studicd with albumin-1131. J
25. Linko K. Makclainen A. Cardiorespiratory function after
Clin lnvest 41:1564, 1962
replacement of blood loss with hydroxyeihyl starch 120,
44. Einerson TE. Uniquc fearures of albumin: A brief review.
dextran 70, and Ringer's acetate in pigs. Crit Care Med
Crit Care Med 17:690, 1989
17:1031. 1989
45. Hardic EM. Sepsis vcrsus septic shock. fn Murtaugh RJ
26. Falk JL, et. al. Colloid and crystalloid fluid resuscitation.
Kaplan PM (eds). Veterinary Emergeney and Critical
n Shoemaker WC, Thompson WL, Holhrook PR (eds).
Care Medicine. St Louis. CV Mosby, 1992, p 176
Texihook of Critical Care. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB
46. Pichler ME, Iurnwaldl GII. Blood transfusion in the
Saunders, 1989, p 1060
dog and cat. Part I: Physiology, collecion, storage and
27. Mishler JM. Synthetic plasrma volurne expanders: Their
indications for whole blood therapy. Cornp Coni Educ
pharmacology, safety and clinical efficacy. Clin Haematol
Vet 7:64, 1985
13:75, 1984
47. Smith CA, Transfusion medicine: The challenge of prac-
 28. Thompson WL, Fukushina T, Rutherford RB, ct al. In-
tical use. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 198:747, 1991
travascular persistence, tissue slorage, and excretion of
48. Marion RS, Smith JE. Survival of erythrocytes afler autol-
hydroxyethyl starch. Surg Gynecol Obstet 131:965, 1970
ogous and allogenic transfusioris in cats. J An Vet Mcd
29. Yacobi A. Gibson TP, McEntegart CM, ct al. Pharinacoki-
Assoc 183:1437, 1983
 netics of high molecular weight hydroxyethyl starch irt
49. Giger L, Bucheler J. Transfusion of type-A and type-R
dogs.
. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol 36:199,
blood to cats. J An Vet Med Assoc 198:1l1, 1991
1982
50.
Giger U. Felinc transfusion rmcdicine. In Hohenhaus
29a. Schirmand JF, Ayala A, Morrison MH, ct al. Effects of
AE (cd). Problcms in Vet Med (Transfusion Medicine)
hydroxyethyl  starch  after trauma-hemorrhagic shock:
4:600, 1992
TREATMENT OF SHOCK 
289
51. Giger U, Kilran CG, Filippich LJ, et al. Frequencies of
72. Brown SA. Treatnent of gran-negative infections. Vet
feline blood groups in the U'nited States. J Am Vet Med
(Clin North Am 18:114l, 1988
Assoc 195:1230, 1989
73. Dow SW. Management of anaerobic: infections. Vet Clin
 52. Giger l', Bucheler J, Patterson DF. Frequency and inheri-
North Am 18:1i67, 1988
tance of A and B blood types in feline breeds of the
74. Donowitz CR, Mandell GL. Beta-lactaun antibiouics. Engl
L'nited Statcs. J Heredity 82:15, 1991
J Med 318:419, 1988
53. Callan MB, Giger ll. Transfusion medicine. In August JR
75.E
Papich MG. Therapy of gram-positive bacterial infec-
(ed). Consuliations in Feline Intcrnal Medicine. Phila-
tions. Vet Clin North Am 18: 1l67, 1988
delphia. WB Saunders, 1993
76.
Kilgore WR. Clavulanatc-potentiated antibiotics. In Kirk
54. Kristensen AT, Feldman BF. Blood banking and transfu-
RW (cd). Current Veterinary Iherapy X. Philadelphia,
sion medicine. Im Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC: (eds). Text-
WB Saunders, 1989. p 78
book of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 4th ed. Philadel-
77.
Rivicre JE. Cephalosporins, In Kirk Rw (cd). Currcnt
phia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 347
Veterinary Therapy X. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1989,
55.Hohenhaus AE. Canine blood transfusion. In Hohen-
P 74
haus AE (ed). Probleins in Vet Med (Transfusion Medi-
78.
Karan GH. New antibiotics in the critical care unit. Crit
cinc) 4:612, 1992
Care Rep 2:128, 1991
56. Rentko VI. Red blood cell substitutes. In Hlohenhaus
79. ILonghofer S.. Chemotherapy of ricketsial, protozoal,
AE (ed): Problems in Vet Med (Transfusion Medicine)
and chlamydial diseases. Vet Clin North Ain 18:1183,
4:647, 1992
1988
 57. Sprung Cl. The Pulmonary Artery Cathete1. Baltinore,
80.
Altura BM, Altura BT. Peripheral vascular actions of
University Park Prcss, 1983
glucocorticoids and their relationship to_ protection in
58. Shoermaker WC, Appel PL, Kram HB, et al. Comparison
circulatory shock. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 190:300,
of hemodynanic and oxygen transport effects of dobu-
1974
tamine and dopamine in critically ill surgical patients.
 81. Alura BM. Glucocorticoid-induced protection in circula-
Chest 96:120, 1989
tory shock. Role of reticulocndothclial systcm function.
 59. Iollgen HI, Drcxler HI. Use of inotropes in the critical
Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 150:202, 1975
care setting. Crit Care Med 18:S56, 1990
82. Vargish I, Turmer CS, Bond RF, et al. Dose-response
60. Zaritsky Af.. Catecholamines, inotropic medications, and
relationships in steroid therapy for hemorrhagic shock.
vasopressor agents. In Chernow B (edl). Ihe Pharmaco-
Am Surg 43:30, 1977
logic Approach to the Critically Ill Patient. 3rd ed. Balti-
83. Sprung CI., Caralis PV, Marcial EH. The effects of high-
more, williams & wilkins, 1994, p 387
dose corticosteroids in patienis with septic shork. N Engl
61. Driscol DJ. Gillete PC., Exrailson EG. Inotropic responscs
J Med 311:1137, 1984
of the neonatal canine myocardium to dopamine. Pedi-
84.
Veterans  Administration Systemic  Sepsis Clooperative
atr Res 12:42, 1978
Study Group: Effect of high-dose glucocorticoid therapy
62. Maekawa K, Liang CS, Hood WB. Conparison of dobu-
on mortality in patients with clinical signs of systemic
 r e  s  
sepsis. N Engl J Med 317:659, 1987
Circulation 67:750, 1983
85. Bone RC, Fisher CJ, Cleminer TP, et al. A controlled
68. van Kesteren RG, van Alphen MMA, Charbon CA. Ef-
clinical trial of high-dose methylprednisolone in the
fects of dopaimine on intestinal vessels in anesthetized
trcalnent of severe sepsis and septir: shock. N Engl J
dogs. Circ Shock 25:41, 1988
Med 317:653, 1987
61. Marino RJ, Romagnoli A, Keats AS. Selective venocon-
86. Luce JM, Montgomery AB, Marks JD, el al. lneffec-
slriction by dopamine in comparison with isoproterenol
tiveness of high-dose methylprednisolone in preventing
and phenylephrine. Anesthesiology 43:570, 1975
65. Whitfeld 1, Sowers JR, Tuck MIt, Golub MS. Dopaniner-
tients with septic shock. An Rev Respir Dis 138:62, 1988
gic control of plasma catecholamine and aldostcrone
87. White GI. White GS, Kosanke SD, et al. Iherapcutic
response to acute stimuli in normal man. J (Clin Endocri-
effects of prednisolone sodium succinate vs. dexanetha-
nol Metab 51:724, 1980
sone in dogs subjected to E. coli septic shock. J Am Anin
66. Ruffolo RR Jr, Sporadlin IA, Pollock GD, et al. Alpha-
Hosp Assoc 18:639, 1982
and beta-adrenergic effects of the stereoisomers of dobu-
88. Schumer W. Steroids in the treatment of clinical septic
tanine. J Pharmarol Exp Ther 219:447, 1981
shock. Ann Surg 184:333, 1976
67. Fox PR. Feline myocardial diseases. Proceedings of the
89. Hoffman SL, Punjabi NH, Kumala S, et al. Reduction of
I8th Anmual Waltham/OSU Symposium: Cardiology.
mortality in chloranphenicol-trealed severe typhoid fe-
Vernon, California, Walthan LSA, Ine, 1994, p 117
ver by high-dose dexanethasone. N Engl J Med 310:82,
 68. Hardie EM, Rawlings CA, Calvert CA. Severe sepsis in
1984
selected small animal surgical patients. J Am Anin Hosp
89a. Bollaert P-E, Charpentier C, Levy B, et al. Reversal of
Assoc 22:33, 1986
late septic shock with supraphysiologic doses of hydro-
69. Hirsh DC., Jang SS, Biberstein EL. Blood culture of the
cortisone. Crit Care Med 26:645, 1998
canine patient. J Am Vet Med Assoc: 184:173, 1984
90. Beck RR, Abel FL, Papadakis E. Influence of ibuprofen
70. Dow SW. Jones RI., Adney WS. Anaerobic bacterial in-
on renal function in acutely endotoxemic dogs. Circ.
fections and response to treatment in dogs and cats:
Shock 28:37, 1989
36 cascs (19883-1985). J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:930,
91. Parker MM, Shelhamer JH, Bacharach SL, et al. Pro-
1986
found but reversible myocardial depressior in patients
70a. Jang SS, Breher JE, Dabaco IA, et al. Organisms iso-
with septic shock. Ann 1ntern Med 100:483, 1984
lated fron dogs and cats with anaerobic infections and
92. Arvidsson S, Falt K, Haglund U. Acute gastric mucosal
susceptibility to selected antimicrobial agents. J Am Ver
ulcerauion in septic shock. Acta Chir Scand 150:541,
Med Assoc 210:1610, 1997
1984
71. Olin BR (ed). Drug Facts and Gomparisons. Philadel-
93. Arvidsson S, Falt K, Haglund U. Feline E. coli bacter-
phia, JB Lippincott, 1991, p 1530
emia—effects of misoprostol/scavengers or mcthylpred-
 290 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
nisolone on hemodynamic reactions and gastrointestinal
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 4th ed. Phila-
mucosal injury. Acta Chir Scand 156:215, 1990
delphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 1946
94. Fowler AA, Hamman RF, Good TJ. et al, Adult respira-
96.
Minard G, Kudsk KA. Is carly feeding beneficial? How
tory distrcss syndrome: Risk with common predisposi-
early is early? New Horizons 2:156, 1994
tions. Arn Intern Med 98:593, 1883
97.
Zimnerinan J. Oxygen frec radicals. In Chernow B
95. Green RA, Thonnas JS. Henostatic disorders: Coagulopa-
(ed). Ihe Pharmacologic Approach to the Critically Ill
thies and thronmbosis. In Etinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds).
Patient. Baltimorc, wilfiams & wilkins, 1994, p 901
0.3
16
hanisms
 for
KENNETH H. DANGMAN
Research on the electrophysiology of arrhythmias has cvolved through
scveral phases. The first phase slarted in the 1890s, when cxtracellular
grams and direct electrograms from the myocardium. Use of thcse tech-
niques led 1o the recognition of several typcs of arrhythmias as well as
description of two basic mechanisms for tachycardias in the atria or ventri-
cles: ectopic autonaticity and re-entrant activity. The second phase of re
search started in the la1e 1940s, with thc development of intraccllular re-
cording techniques. Thesc uscd potassium chloride-filled microclectrodcs 
coupled to high-input impedance anplifiers to detect transtnembrane action
potentials (Fig. 16-1) from single cardiac cells in tissue preparations. The
third phasc began in thc early 1980s, with the devclopment of patch clamp
techniques or cloned ion channcis for the study of transnembrane ionic
currents of cnzymatically isolated myocytes.!
Cardiac clcctrophysiology has been investigated intensively over the past
100 ycars. Many of these studies used cxperimental anirmals with normal
hcarts or with induced pathology and arrhythtnias. Thereforc, the insigh1s
and conclusions gained frotn these studies are relevant to veterinary medi-
cine.
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY OF THE NORMAL
HEART
It is nccessary to understand normal cardiac function beforc considering
the pathophysiology that can lcad to arrhythtmias. In the hcalthy individual,
the hcart remains in sinus rhythrm (in many dogs, sinus arhythmia predomi-
nates), which appears on the surfacc clectrocardiogram as a regular, rc
peating sequencc of threc deflections or waveforms (Fig. 16-2). These threc
deflections are the P, the QRS, and the T wave. The normal cardiac impulse
begins in thc sinus nodc, which is also called the sinoatrial or SA node. ln
beagle dogs thc node is up to 40 mm long and is found at the rostral
junction of the anterior vena cava and the right atriurm. The transmembrane
potential of the sinus node pacemakcr cells gradually decreascs during
pacemakcr site can vary slightly, changes in autonomic tone and hcart ratc
may shift the pacctnakcr within the node.
Diastolic depolarization in the sinus node begins from a maximum poten
tial of abou1 - 60 millivolts (tnV), and it is thought to bc produced by decay
291
292
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
+40
left atria. Normal atrial muscle fibers have rclativcly
high action potential atnplitudes (100 to 1l0 mV) and
0
maximum upstrokc vclocitics (100 to 200 V/sec). The
mV
upstroke is carried by the fast Na current (ina). The
40
impulse is conducted fairly quickly throughout the
-801A
atria. The wavcfront of atrial depolarization produces
the P wave of the electrocardiogran (sce Fig. 16-2).
Thc wavefront of the cardiac impulse is conducted
from atrial tissues to the atrioventricular (AV) nodc.
The wavcfron1 of excitation may sprcad to the AV node
+401
via specialized pathways (called the anterio, middle, and
0
posterior internodal tracts) in the right atriun. They carry
mV
the impulses preferentially to the AV node. They tnay
40
be responsible for sinoventricular conduction. That is,
 sometimes during hyperkalcmia no P wave occurs, but
80
the sinus node will continue 1o fire and rcgularly acti-
vate the ventricles.
400mSec
 The atrioventricular node is specialized to provide
FIGURE 16-1
slow conduction. The nodal cells arc small and rela-
tively poorly coupled electrically. The transmembrane
[iagrams of transmembrane action potentials. In both pancls, thc
heavy line shows output of the microelectrodc. Dashed line shows
 action potentials of the nodal cells have low amplitudes
(60 to 80 mV) and slow upstrokc velocities (5 to 10
 e irq  ano ix a an e us st (
volts/second [V/sec]), and they arise from relatively
right.
Upper panet lnitially, the volage level is zero when the tip of the
low diastolic potentials (about -60 mV). The up-
clecirode is in cxtracellular Iluid. As the cell is impaled, the
strokes of the action potentials are carried by the slono
voltage reading reflecrs intracellular potential. During diastole, thc
inoard or calcium current (ica), rather than thc fast
transinemlrane potential is alout  90 mV. When an aetion
potential oceurs, the polarization of the mcmlranc reverses: the
sodiun current. As a result of the slow conduction,
transmembrane potcntial transicntly spikes ar 35 to +40 mV.
This rapid upstroke is called phase 0 (zero). Repolarization oceurs
orccurs 1 to 5 msec. after the spike. Phase 2 is the slow
repolarization that occurs during the aclion potential platcau.
Phase3 ishenoderatclyrapidrpolarization thatoceursat e
end of thc platcau that tarries the potential to diastolic levels
(phase 4).
1.orer pamet Spontancously firing Purkinje fiber. Paccmaker
aclivity in the hearl occurs when phasc 4 depolarization slowly
carries membranc potential to the threshold voltage for inward.
current. Threslold voltage during dliastole is shown here as a
dashed linc above the transmembrane potential. This pacemaker
arctivity normally occurs in the SA node (see Fig. 16-2), and, if
overdrive fron the SA node is relieved. in subsidiary pacemaker
tissucs such as spccialized atrial concdurtion tissue and ventricular
Purkinje fihers (shown here).
Of a current "ik', which is an outward current carried
by potassiun ions, or by onsct. of an inward current
"i', which is carricd by sodium and potassiun ions.?
90mV
The upstrokc of the sinus node action potential occurs
2 m V
when diastolic depolarization carries the membrane
potential to the voltage thresholds for the onset of
200 ms
two inward calcium currents ('iea-r' and then *'ica-1.').
Sinus node depolarization, occurring as it. does in a
FIGURE 16-2
relatively small mass of tissue, is not reflcctcd on the
Diagram of rransmenbrane action potentials in atrial and
surface electrocardiogram.
ventricmlar tissues during normal sinus rhyth. Traces, fronn top to
 After the pacemaker cell fres an action potenfial,
bottom, show actiom potentials of a simus node cel, atrial
yocardial fiber, AV node cell, His bundle liler, cistal Purkinje
the impulse conducts slowly throughout. the sinus node
liber, cndocardial ventricular nustle ell, and epicardial
and then sprcads to the adjacent cells of the atrial
ventricular inuscle cell. ‘Fhe lowernost. trarce shows the surface
electrocardiograin. Note tirne antd voltage calibration bars at. the
myocardiun. Once in the tnyocardiutn, the itnpulsc
lower right. The voltage calibration bar is 2 mV for le
propagates radially through the tissues of thc right and
electrocardiograin (ECG)、 90 1nV for action potentials.
the wavcfront. of the cardiac impulse propagates slowly
tive) aftcr myocardial damage. Thc decrcascs in dia-
through the AV node. The slow conduction allows an
stolic potential that occur in these injured cells may
appropriate interval (60 to 130 tnscc in the canine
result from (l) decreased activity of the sarcolemmal
heart, 50 to 90 mscc in the feline heart) to clapsc
Na*-K* ATPase (the elecirogenic “sodium pump,"
betwcen atrial and ventricular contraction.
which provides a net outward pump current as a result
When the impulse cmerges from the distal end of
 of the asymnetric transport of cations); (2) incrcased
thc AV node, it. invades the Purkinjc fibers of thc
inward sodium conductancc (Ga); and (3) decrcased
proximal His bundle. These Purkinje fibers have high
outward potassium conductance (Gk).
diastolic potentials (abou1 - 90 mV), action potential
These changes tend to inercase nct inward current,
amplitudes of 110 to 140 mV, and maximum rates of
and thercfore 1o depolarize the cell. In addition,
depolarization (200 to 1000 V/scc).* Depolarization1 of
decreased clectrogenic sodium pump activity  will
the cells of the atrioventricular node and the Purkinjc
increase intracellular Na' concentrations, decreasc
system does not producc a waveforin on the surface
intracellular K+ concentralions, and increase K' con-
clectrocardiogram. Extracellular recording of Purkinje
 centrations in the interstitial clefts of the myocardium.
fiber activity is possible, however, using an intracardiac
These changcs in concentrations of K- and Na* can
Catheter to detcct the His bundlc clectrogram.
hclp reduce the level of diastolic transmembrane po
Once the cardiac impulse cnters the His bundle, it is
tential by decreasing the magnitude of the clectro-
rapidly propagated through the ventricular conduction
chhernical ionic gradienis across the cell membrane.
system to the distal Purkinje fibers on the cndocardial
When diastolic potential in working rnyocardial or
surfaces of both ventricles. The distal Purkinje fibers
 Purkinje fibers decreases significantly, voltage-depen-
conduc1 the inpulse to the subendocardial veniricular
dent changes will occur in cellular clectrical activity.
muscle. Propagation in the myocardium then pro-
Reduced membrane potential can induce abnormal
gresscs to the subepicardial layers. Ventricular excita-
automaticity or triggcred activity, or it call slow propa-
tion gives risc to the QRs deflection of the surface
gation of the cardiac itnpulsc and lead to conduction
electrocardiogran.
block and/or rc-entrant excitation.
After each iinpulse is conducted to the oulermost
layers of the ventricular walls, it is cxtinguished as
the wavefron1 becones surrounded with refractory or
DECREASES IN THE AMPLITUDE AND
inexcitable tissucs. The final cvcnt of the cardiac clec-
trical cycle is ventricular repolarization. lt produces
RATE OF RISE OF PHASE 0
the T wave and, rarcly, a U wave (sce Fig. 16-2).
Thc effects of decreascs in diastolic potential on
co11duction are largely explainable through effects on
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC
phase 0 of the action potcntial (Fig. 16-3). 1n myocar-
EFFECTS OF CARDLAC DAMAGE:
dial fibers (for tncinbranc potentials bctwcen - 60 mV
and - 90 to - 100 tnV), conduction velocity is directly
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
 proportional to takc-off potential. This is becausc the
amplitude and maximum ratc of depolarization of
phase 0 are important determinants of conduction
Cardiac arrhythmias rarely occur in norimal hearts
velocity. Sinnply stated, action potentials with higher
but often occur in hearts with structural degeneration
amplitudes and faster depolarization rates provide a
 or acute injury. Most myocardial lesions (including
better stimulus for induction of the rcgcncrativc rc-
ischemia, anoxia, metabolic inhibition, stretch, digi-
sponse (the upstrokc of the action potcntial) in down-
talis toxicity, myocardial infarction, congestive heart
siream areas of mctnbranc that are resting in the dia-
failure, and cardiomyopathies) will change cardiac ac-
slolic voltage ranges. Thus, tnorc distal mcmbranc
tion potentials in characteristic ways. Thcsc effects, as
areas will be brough1 to threshold level more quickly
cxplained later, can lead to ectopic impulses, tachycar-
by a robust action potential than by a depressed action
 dias, or fibrillation.
potential. Therefore, the robust impulse will be con-
ducted tnore rapidly.
The amplitude and depolarization ratc of phase 0
DECREASES IN DIASTOLIC MEMBRANE
in turn are largcly dependent on the intensity of thc
POTENTLAL
rapid inward sodiun current. The inward sodium cur-
rent is carricd through ion-selective channels in the cell
Typically, diastolic membrane potential is
- 80 t0
membrane.1 These channcls are guardcd by gates that
 - p s    a    --
inpede ion fluxes; the opcning and closing of these
to - 95 mV in Purkinje fibers. Generally, these dias1olic
gates  is both  voltage- and timc-dependent.+  It is
 potential levels will decreasc (i.c., become less nega-
though1 that as the take-off potential becomes less and
294ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
IA
B
unidirectional conduction block to a zone of bidirec-
tional block and thus disrupt a re-cntran1 circuit.
Thercfore, local anesthetic effects on depressed fast
responses may underlie important antiarrhythunic ac-
tions of these drugs.
When the take-off potential is rcduced to a value
less than - 60 mV, the fast. inward sodium channcls
40mV
are largely, if not cntirely, inactivated. Yet action poten-
200msec
tials still tnay occur in fibcrs with diastolic potentials
FIGURE 16-3
 0f  55 to -35 tnV. Thesc action potentials, which are
Eflects of a deereasc of resting menbrane potential in a Purkinjc
 peus oq l s'sosuodsu mos, se on pua
fiher by elevalion of extracellular potassium. Fach panel shows a
sufficicnt slow inoard or type L-calciun current (iea-t.) cai1
transunembrane action potenial from a canine Purkinje fiber. the
be clicited." The upsirokc velocity of phase 0 of the
zero refercnce potemtial (horizomtal line) for the action potential,
and a differentiated signal obtained during the upstroke of the
slow responsc action potentials is in the range of 1 to
action potential. The horizontal placement of the differential trace
 5 V/sec, and so they are conducted very slowly (ie..
is arbitray. The pcak of this differential recording is the naximal
0.02 to 0.05 mcters/sec). Obviously, the slow responses
upstroke velocity of the action potcntial (dv/dtas). The
differentiated trace also shows a square wave in each panel, this is
will provide less effective stimuli for regenerative re-
a 200 V/sec calibration signal. Note that the gain on the
sponses than normal or depressed fast. responses.
differential anplifier is lower in A and B than in C and D. A shows
Therefore, slow response dependent action potcntials
the control action potential in T'yrode's solution (physiologic
salinc) containing 2.7 mM of potassium chloride (KCl); maximun
are very likely to show variable conduction ratcs and
diastolic potenial (MDP) is 92 mV, and dV/dtaa is 322 V/sec.
unidircctional or bidircctional block. Partially depolar-
ln B, the KC1 level is about 10 nM; the resting ncmbrare
ized myocardial tissucs gcncrating slow responses also
potential is - 66 mV, and the dV/dlmx is 200 V/sec. ln C thc
diastolic meubrane potential is -58 mV, and the dV/dtuax shows
 provide the anatotnic substrate for re-cntrant arrhyth-
two upstrokes of 20 fo 26 V/sec. In I, the tliastolic membraie
mias.
potential is - 55 mV, and the action potential became a slow
 Not all cardiac cells with resting potentials positive
response. No dV/dlnx could be determined; at rates umder
5 V/sec. the dellection in the differenial trace is too small to be
sesoq si s!ut 'ssuodsau mos hoddns m A pg - 01
neasured. Shortly afier this final photograph was taken, the
ica-l. can be a weak current; if apprcciable outward
mcrmbrane potential deercased slightly more, and no further
(i.e., potassium) current is flowing, slow responses may
action potentials were elicited.
Hot be clicited. In these circumstances, augmenting
ica 1. may lead to slow responsc action potentials. Phos.
phorylation of an internal sitc on one of the subunit
less negative, more and more of the sodium channels 
proteins of the slow inward channel cnhances ica-i
become inactivated (i.e., totally refractory to stimula-
a cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinasc catalyzes this
tion). Thus, as the take-off potential is decreased from
 phosphorylation. Therefore, calecholaanines and phos-
-90 to about -60 tnV, the sodium current during
 phodiesterasc inhibitors (caffcine, thcophylline, and 
phase 0 becomcs less and less robust, the amplitudc
milrinone) can induce slow response action potentials.
and rate of rise of the action potential are reduced,
'Thus, it is possible that arrhythmias caused by β-adren-
and the conduction velocity is decrcased (Fig. 16-3).
ergic stimulation or increased sympathetic tone may
The term depressed fas responses describes action po-
 be associated with slow response action potentials. The
specific mechanisns involved are described later,
cells with take-oft polentials between
-75 and
1 -60
 It is likely that both slow response and deprcssed
mV. Depressed fast responses may be important in the
fast response action potentials can be found within or
gencsis of re-entrant arrhythmias. This is because the.
around the zone of pathology in most discascd hearts.
depressed fast responscs will propagate more slowly
It is not likcly that any type of cardiac damage, whether
than nornal action potcntials, and this will facilitate
focal or diffusc, will producc an abrupt and totally
the occurrence of re-cntry (see later). Also, if the
uniform decrcase in diastolic transmembrane potential
irnpulse must. traverse a zone of relatively incxcitable
throughout the affcctcd arca. Somc cells may havc
tissue, the depressed fast response, having an intrinsi-
-   c - n oo- jo s o
cally lower stinulus cfficacy than the normal
re-
vated fast sodiutn channcls, and deprcsscd fast re-
sponscs, will be imorc prone to allow conduction blocks
 sponses. Other cells nay have take-off potentials
o
to occur.
less than - 60 mV and completely inactivated sodiuum
Many of the Class I antiarrhythmic drugs (e.g., lido-
channels. Somc of these cells may support relatively
cainc, procainamide, and bepridil) decrease upstroke
robust slow rcsponse actionl polentials and very slow
and conduction velocity in cells with depressed fast
conduction, whereas other highly depolarized cells
responses in therapeutic (low) concentrations, and
may show tenuous slow responscs with decremcntal
these concentrations do not affect normal action po-
conduction and block. Finally, sonc of the highly de.
tentials.-> This selectivc action may convert a zonc of
polarizcd cells tnay have sufficicntly strong outward
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC MECHANISMS FOR ARRHYTHMIAS
295
(potassium) currents and weak inward (calcium) cuur-
12.3 4
56
AE
rents such thal they do not support any regenerative
responscs at all. Obviously, a zone of thcse highly
depolarizcd fibcrs could producc a site of cithier uni-
dircctional or bidircctional concluction block.
AN
DECREASES IN ACTION POTENTIAL
DURATION AND REFRACTORINESS
Many cardiac discascs result in changes in action
potcntial duration; cither decreases or incrcascs can
occur. Tlese changes in action potential duration can
AH
 be important for arrhythmogenic mechanisms because
4
recovery of excitability in norinal atrial and ventricular
FIGURE 16-5
myocardial cells accompanics repolarization (during
Example of time-dependent retractoriness in a record in a rabhit
phase 3 of the action potential). That is, excitability
begins to rccovcr after the cell has repolarized to about
- 60 mV; the upstroke velocitics of a premature action
preuature beats that were elicited at inereasing coupling intervals.
The upper trace shows the atrial elec trogram (AE); the middle
potential then incrcasc more and morc as the take-off
trace shows action potentials recorded from a cell in the proximal
potential increases during the terminal portion of 
region of the node (AN region). The lower trare (AH) shows the
record fron the distal region of the node. Note that the only
phase 3. Rccovery of excitability is complele in normal
premature impulsc to propagate through the node is number 6:
myocardial cells or Purkinje fibers when tnaximutn
premature impulse mumber 5 produces only a subthreshuold
diastolic potential (or full diastolic potetial)  is
response, and numbers 1 to 4 prorduce no effect at the listal node.
In the AN cell, premature inpulse mumber 6 produccs a normal
achicved. Cotnplete recovcry of cxcitability occurs
artion potential. Farlier inpulses produce less and less response in1
when the maximum ratc of depolarization and action
the AN region, even though they arrive at the node after this
potential anplitude of a premature action potential
regiom has fully repolarized. This is tine-dependent refractoriness.
Note calibration bars at lower right; vertical bar is 25 mV:
arc esscntially identical to those of the control action
horizontal bar. 50 mscc. (Diagran baserd on original recorrls firom
potentials elicited at the basic cycle length (Fig. 16-4).
Mendlez C, Moe GK. Soine characteristics of transmemlbrane
This rapid rccovery of cxcitability is referred to as
potentials of Av nodal cells during propagation ol premature
bcats. Cire Res 19:993, 1966. Copyright 1966 Aincrican Ileat
voltage-dependent refractoriness.
Association.)
ln cardiac tissues with take-off polcntials more posi-
tive  than  about.
 s poss   o -
sponscs or slow response action potentials will occur.
In these tissucs, refractoriness can be a function of
time as well as of yoltagc. Tha1 is, recovery of thc
amplitude and tnaximun ratc of depolarization of a
prcmaturc inpulse cxtends well into phasc 4 (Fig.
16-5). The different rales of recovery of excitability in
nortnal and depressed scgments of isolated canine
Purkinje fibers arc known to produce rate-dcpcndent
block* and are thought to underly re-entrant. arrhyth-
mias in canine ventricle.
FIGURE 16-4
SPECIFIC MECHANISMS FOR
Example of voltage-dependent refractoriness in a record ohtained
CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIAS
in a sheep Purkinje fiber preparation. Prernaturc action potentials
elicited at. 14 dlifferent coupling intervals after prismary beat are
shown: the primary beat is shown at. the left. Early premaure
isnpulses orcurring dluring phase 3 of the prinary action potential
Much is known about the cellular mechanisms of
produce only loeal responscs. As fiber repolarizes, premature beats
abruptly attain more ionnal auplitudes. At the beginning of phase
arrhythmic activity in the mamtnalian hcart.? Arrhyth-
4,premature ipulscs havc esscnially mormal anplitude（4th
mias can be caused by abnormalitics of impulse initia-
tion, inpulsc conduction, or both.1o.  Tablc 16-1
shows a sitnple classification system for these cellular
diastole. Note calibration bars at lower right: vertical represents 20
mV: horizomtal, 100 mser,
mechanisms.
296
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
TABLE 16-1
tion.* Pacemaker activity can result from either normal
 Electrophysiologic Mechanisms of Ventricular
automaticity or abnormal automaticity.
Arrhythmias
Nornal automaticity occurs spontaneously in non
A. Arrhythinias caused by cnhanccd impulse initiation in ectopic.
pathologic fissues, such as the sinus node, and subsid-
iary pacemaker cells of the atria (specializcd atrial
foci:
1. Automatic rhythms:
conduction fibers) and the ventricular conduction sys-
a. Normal Purkinje fiber autounaticity (MDP > -70 mV)
ten. In ventricular tissues, nornmral autotmaticity occurs
b. Catecholaninc-enhanccd automaticity in normal Purkinje
fibers
 only in Purkinje fibers, with maximum diastolic poten-
c. Abnormal autoumaticity (MDP <
- 50 mV) in Purkinje
tials of about - 70 mV or more and upstrokes carried
fibers and ventricular inuscle cells
2.Triggered rhythms:
by the fast inward sodiun current. Abnornal automatic-
a. Farly afterdepolarizations
ity occurs in Purkinje fibers and working myocardial
b. Dclayed afterdepolarizations
cells with markedly depolarizcd (approximately
-55
B. Arrhythmias caused by abnorumal inpulse concuction:
mV) maximum diastolic potentials and upstrokcs car-
1. Conduetion blorcks
ricd by ica-1.,
2. Re-entrant activalion:
a.Macro re-cniry
There are at least two typcs of normal automaticity:
(1)  Fixed pathway/analomic. barrier
(1) normal autotnaticity in sinus node paceinakcrs
(2)Variable pathway/leading circle"
b. Micro re-cntry
occurs from maximun diastolic potentials of about
(1）Functional longirudinal dissociation
 60 mV and rescimbles abnormal automaticity in that
(2)Reflection
the upstrokes are carried by a calcium current: (2) in
C. Arrhythmias caused by simltaneous derangeuents of inpulsc
initiation and impulse conduction:
contrast, normal automaticity in Purkinje fibcrs occurs
1. Parasystole
 by a different tncchanism, as described ncxt.
2. Counplex arrhythmias
 NORMAL AUTOMATICITY IN PURKINIE FIBERS. NorImal aU-
MDP, Maximun diastelie ptential
totnaticity in canine, feline, and primate Purkinje fi-
ARRHYTHMIAS CAUSED BY ENHANCED
IMPULSE INITIATION IN ECTOPIC FOCI
Ectopic arrhythmias caused by cnhanccd impulse
 initiation are generated by a speciic cell (or small
 group of cells that are well coupled electrically) out-
side of the sinus node. This cell or group of cells is
referred to as the "focus" of thc arrhythmia, and
 generally is found in the zone of earlicst activation
during the cctopic bcats. The cells in the focus have
configuration (Fig. l6-6). That is, 1hey undergo rapid
phase 4 depolarization that gradually leads to a regen-
erative response; a sharp inflection point at the foo1
of phase 0 is not seen. The prcscnce of pacemaker
fibers in a distinct ectopic focus distinguishes arrhyth-
mias caused by enhanced impulse initialion froin othcr
arrbythtnias such as those caused by conduction block
90mV
 and/or re-entrant activation.2 The two subtypes of
arrhythtnias caused by cnhanced itnpulse initiation are
2mV
automatic rhythms and triggcrcd rhyihms.8
200 ms
AUTOMATIC RHYTIHMS
FIGURE 16-6
Reprcscntation of the sequence of depolarization dnring a
Arrhythmias caused by automaticity occur when a
venitricular ectopic bcat.Format as in Figure 162.Arrhythmia
subsidiary pacemaker site in the atria or ventricles
Occurs becausc thc cctopic paceunaker in the distal Purkinje fiber
(5th acion potential from the lop）isfring rapidlyThe His
becomes activc and fires at a rate faster than that of
bundic. AV node, atrial umscle, and SA node all are activated in
the sinus node. Automaticity is defined as spontaneous 
retrograde direction; the ventricuar umscle is arlivated in an
innpulse generation occurring from a discrete pace-
aberrant scquence. This results in a premature ventricalar
depolarization;note thelonger QRSdurationwith alered ector,
maker site that, as opposed to triggering, does not de
and the retrograde P wave supcrimposed on the:'T wave in thc
pend on previous activation of that site for its initia
electrocardiogran (bottom trace).
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC MECHANISMS FOR ARRHYTHMLAS 297
bers denotes spontaneous impulse initiation from nor-
slolic depolarization, (2) incrcasing the threshold po-
mal maxitnum diastolic potentials ( - 70 to
- 95 1mV)
tential for the fast. inward currcnt, (3) increasing the
 It occurs whcn ovcrdrive frotn higher paccmakers is
maxitnum diastolic potential, or (4) a combination of
rclicved (Fig. 16-7A). The diastolic depolarization re-
these efects. Antiarrhythmic drugs also can altcr ratc
sponsible for normal automaticity is generated by a
and rhythm of the heart indirectly, by interacting with
net inward ionic current that reflects a balancc of
autonotnic nervous system reflexes or circulatory catc
inward and outward currents. Although thc dctailed
cholaines.
bchavior of thesc currents is not entircly clcar, at lcast
four factors may contribute to the voltage time course
ABNORMAL AUTOMATICITY. Abnorrnal aulomaticity  is
of diastole in the normally automatic cardiac cell: (1)
thought to be an important cause of atrial and ventric-
an inward current (i), which is carricd by Na' and K+
ular arrhythmias.5 It is a forn of rapid cctopic itnpulse
ions, and which shows voltage and time dependenice;
initiation that occurs in working myocardial cells or
(2) an outward current carried by potassium, which
 Purkinje fibers with maximum diastolic potentials in
shows voliage dependence but is now thought not
the range of - 60 to -40 mV (Fig. 16-8). It can arisc
to have time dependence; (3) an outward curren1
after cardiac tissues have been damaged by ischcmia,
generated by activity of the clectrogenic Nat-K'
stretch, or drug toxicity (e.g., digitalis). The mecha-
poar  () pue ((dnd os, ) ased
nisns of abnorrnal automaticity may be simpler than
voltagc and onset characteristics of the fast inward
thosc involved in normal auomaticity, because abnor-
(sodiun) current that generates the upstroke of the
 tnal autonaticity occurs in a diastolic voliage range in
action potential. Thus, normal automaticity in Pur-
which beat-1o-bca1 activation of the fast inward (so-
kinje fibers is a very complex phenomenon.4
dium) current is neglible during the action potential
Antiarrhythmic drugs can reduce normal autonratic
upstroke. Because 1hc sodium influx is minimal in
rhythms directly by (l) cdecrcasing the slopc of dia-
the partially depolarized cels, the clectrogenic sodium
pump will make a very small contribulion to the dia-
stolic voltage changes of abnormal automaticity. Thus,
A
 in conirast to normal Purkinje fibers, abnormal auto-
matic pacemakers do not show post-overdrive suppres-
 sion following a period of rapid stimulation (Fig. 16-
7B, C).
Diastolic depolarization in  abnormal  automaticity
30x1000
has bcen attributed to a time-dcpcndent. decreasc of
outward potassium current 16 or to the inward pace-
B
maker curren1 i.'7 As mentioned earlicr, thc action
 potentials in abnormal automaticity are slow responses
carried by an inward calciutn current (ica- ). It can be
abolishcd by Class IV antiarrhythmic drugs such as
20
une peu u sv g'udipnu pe uedena
30x500
C
drugs can slow or abolish abnortnal autonaticity di-
01
rectly by (l) decreasing the slope of diastolic depolar-
ization, (2) increasing the threshold potential for cal-
cium current, (3) increasing the maximum diastolic
potential, or (4) sotre combination of these fac1ors.
Antiarrhythmic drugs also may aller abnormal automa-
20
ticity by indirect. effecis (i.e., occurring through inter-
30x300
5s÷C
actions with the autonomic nervous system)
FIGURE 16-7
Effects of overdrive stirnuiation on norimal and abnorinal
automaticity in caninc Purkinje fibers. Panel A shorws the cffects of
TRIGGERED ACTIVITY
30 beats at a cycle length of 1000 msec (60 bpm) on a normal
preparation with maximal diasolic potcntial in the patcmaker
This second type of ectopic impulsc gencration oc-
cessation of the stimlus train. Panels B and C show cffects of
curs from a discretc pacemaker site,* Triggcred activity
overdrive on fibers with abnormal autoruaricity. Neither overdrive
may be paroxysmal or continuous, but it occurs if and
   ad sr nd  e a
occurs. Note different. time and voltage calibralions (shown below
cach panel) for panels B and C versus pancl A. (Reprinted with
an appropriate action potential or series of action
permission of the American College of Cardiology. from Danginan
potentials. That is, in contrast to anutomatic rhythms
KII, Iloffiuan BF. Studics on overdrivc stimulation of canine
(which occur de nooo), triggered rhythms occur only
cardiac: Purkinje fibers: Maximal cliastolic potential as a
determinant of the responsc. Reprinied by permission of the
after an initiating beat that produccs depolarizing
American Collcge of Cardiology. J Am Coll Cardiol 2: 1183, 1983.)
aftcrpolentials. Thesc afterpotentials are classificd into
298
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
0.25mM
30mir
Washout
1SEC
100SEC
FIGURE 16-8
Induetion of abnormal autoimaticity in a norinal canine Purkinje fiber by superfusion with Tyrode's
solution containing bariun chloride, 0.25 nM. Exposurc to barium (panel A) decreases maximal
Auone prdey snun g m g u Au ge - inoqe o Au o - noqe uoy peguaiod soisp
(abnormal autoimaticity) occurs. Abnommal autoumaticity is then sustained (panel B) until
antiarrhythuic drugs are added or barium is washed out (panel C). This model of abnorumal
autounaticity closely mimies naturally occurring forms in Purkinje fibers and 1nyocardiun danaged
by isthemia or stretch. Iraces were obtained fron a pen rerorder with linited Irequeney response
and thus have attenuated spikes. Note the 1wo different papcr spceds: fast paper speed at. the
begimming and end of panels A and C and throughout B. Tiune and voltage calibrations arc at lower
right; zero referenee potential is at left of cach panel. (Froun Dangman Ki, Miura DS.
Electrophysioloygical effects of bethanidine sulfate on canine cardiac: Purkinje libers and ventricular
muscle: cells. J Cardtiovasc Pharrmacol 7:50, 1985, with permission.)
1wo subgroups: carly afterdepolarizations and delayed
dium window curren1 is incrcascd* and repolarizing
afterdepolarizations.
(ik) current. is decrcased during phase 3,28 or if so-
dium-calcium cxchangc is incrcased ,29 The triggered
FARLY AFTERDEPOLARIZATIONS. Early afterdepolariza
irmpulscs from EADs are abolished by most agents or
tions (EADs) occur during either phase 2 or phase 3
conditions that  shorten action  potential  duration,
of the action potential. Triggered impulses occurring
Thus, increased cxtracellular potassium concentrations
from maximum diastolic potentials of - 60 to - 20 tnV
abolish EADs. Agcnis such as acetylcholine, lidocainc.
can be generated from these carly afterdepolarizations.
and tctrodotoxin are also effective.21, v2 s5. s8
These triggered impulses tmay occur as coupled single
beats or as salvoes of cxtra bcats (Fig. 16-9). In Pur-
DELAYED AFTERDEPOLARIZATIONs. The second mecha-
kinje fibers, triggered beats from carly aftcrdepolariza-
nism for triggcred activity is the delayed afterdepo
tions cain occur after exposure to high concentrations
larization (DAD), DADs are afterdepolarizations occur
of antiarrhythmic drugs (e.g., quinidine, Nacetylpro-
ring after full repolarization (Fig. 16-10). Triggcred
cainamide, and cibcnzoline), treatment with high con-
rhyihms from DADs occur in isolated ventricular tis-
centrations of catcholamines, low oxygen tension, low
sues following treatment with digitalis glycosides,30 33
pH (about 6.8), inyocardial infarction, and exposure
catccholamines,* and induction of tnyocardial infarc-
to toxic salts (i.c., bariutn chloride, cesium chloride)
tion.x 3 Triggered activity fron DADs can occur in
or organic toxins.19 27
coronary sinus tissues and mitral valve fibcrs.36 87
ln gencral, conditions that prolong action potential
 In Purkinje fiber preparations treated with catechol
duration will tend to incrcasc the amplitude of early
amines or toxic doses of a cardiac glycosidc (c.g,
afterdepolarizations and conscquently the likelihood
ouabain, 0.2 μM for 30 mimules), DA1s can be elicited
of triggering from the plateau level. Since action po-
routincly. The amplitude and coupling inlerval of
tential duration decreases when the rale of stimulation
thcse DADs is directly proportional to the rate and
is increascd, early afterdepolarizations generally are
posn si jeq speaod uonoe jo uen su jo uonninp
abolishcd by rapid drive.' Indeed, early afterdepolar-
t0 elicit thein. The atnplitude of delayed afterdepolar-
izations may be transiently suppressed if a single beat
izations and the incidence of triggered activity can bc
is imposed at a shortened cycle length.1 Likewise, if a
 decreased by a variety of agents, including acetylcho-
toxic drug or salt is present, carly afterdepolarizatio1s
line, slow inward current blocking conpounds, local
may emerge if the dominant pacctmakcr ratc 
is
anesthetic drugs, and decreased calcium levels in the
slowed.19. 21
superfusatc.
Early afterdepolarizations mray occur whcn the so-
The ionic mcchanisns for DADs have been sudied
ELECTROPHYSIOLC
NISMS FORARRHYTHMIAS
667
CONTROL
c82 2.5 mg/l, 15min
CBZ 2.5 mg/L, 30min
1
WASHOUT, I0 min
20min
35 min
100
而V
6sec
Imin
FIGURE 16-9
Farly afterdepolarizations in Purkinje iber treated with cibenzoline. Records show one impalement
(as upper and lower rares in cach pancl) fron each of two separate Purkinje fiber preparations
aud "'washout' of drug cffects is shown in the lower two panels. Times are as indieated. Note that
carly afterdepolarizations ocur in impalement in he lower trace,but not in the upper. During
washout, long salvoes of triggercd impulses (rescmbling abnormal automaticity) oceur.The duration
of these salvoes gradually shoricned as washout was contimed.The formal for time and voltage
calibration is as in Figure 16-8. (From Dangman KI1. Cardiac effecis of cibenzoline. I Cardiovasc
(harmacol 6:300, 1984; with permission.)
intensively, aud it has been found that DADs occur
 propagation occurs at a critical point in the specialized
when intracellular calcium ion activity is increased.9 13,
conduction system. Such failures in conduction result
in sinus node exit block, second- or third-degree alrio-
(i) that may result from cither (1) the opening of
ventricular block, and bumdle branch or hemibrauch
nonspecific ion channels that carry sodium and potas-
block. Small areas of block within the working atrial
sium fluxes (ivak), or (2) inward currents created by
or ventricular myocardium probably do not give rise
electrogenic sodium-calcium ion exchange (inarca).
to clinically significant changes in cardiae activation
patterns (unless the block leadis to the production of
re-entrart activity as deseribed later).
ARRHYTHMIAS CAUSED BY ABNORMAL
As mentioned earlier, conduction blocks can occur
IMPULSE CONDUCTION
in myocardial tissues damaged by ischemia, infarction,
stretch, or drug toxicity. Blork of conduction through
Two types of arrhythmias can be caused by abnor-
the atrioventricular tode can also be produced by
malities of impulse conduction: bradycardias can result.
excessive vagal tone. Autoimmune diseases can lead to
from conduction blocks, and tachycardias (or single or
complete heart. block in humans.so + For instance.
multiple premature depolarizations) can result from
congenital complete heart block can occur with ncona-
rc-cntrant activation.
tal lupus erythematosus.+o. 4 This condition is associ-
antibodies aud consequett inflammation and fibrosis
CONDUCTION BLOCKS
in the cardiac conduction system. It is interesting that
Simple conduction block can be diagnosed from
dogs can develop antinuclcar antibodies, and sys-
surface clectrocardiograms when failure of impulse
temic lupus erythematosus (SLE) occurs in dogs and
300
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
2000
600
  e e si e   
the refractory period of the ventricular tissues is usu-
ally from 200 to 500 msec. Therefore, an impulse that
is capable of causing re-entry in hearts of these species
must be sequestered in a zone of cardiac tissue for an
1000
500
 appreciable time so it can emerge and re-excite the
heart at the end of the refractory period.
 In re-eutry, the impulse does not remain stationary
while awaiting the end of the refractory period. In-
stead, the impulse must continue to conduct. slowly
800
400
through a pathway that is functionally or anatomically
isolated from the rest. of the myocardial syncytium.
This isolated conduction pathway, which generally will 
be composed of a very small percentage of the heart,
must provide a route by which the impulse can return
700
300
to the normal regions of the heart that have previously
been excited. The pathway also must be sufficicnly
long to allow cuough time for the impulse to continue
to propagate until the end of the absolute refractory
period.
FIGURE 16-10
meters per sccond) in normal atrial and ventricular
myocardial fibers. This means that if re-entry were to
Delayed afterdepolarizations induced in a goat Purkinje fiber by
treatment with isoprotcrenol, 1 uM. FEach panel shows the effects
occur in the normal myocardium, the length of the
of a stimulus train of I0 beats at cycle lengths between 2000 and
clectrically isolated pathway needed for the sequestra-
400 msc.The train show at 300 msec did not conduct 1:I and so
consists of a total of 14 beats. Xote that as the cycle length is
tion of the impulse would be very long (c.g, at lcast
dccreased, the armplitude of the delayed afterdepolarization
150 cm in the atrium and at least. 200 to 500 cm in the
inercascs, ancd the coupling interval deereases. Volage and time
ventricle. Electrically isolated pathways of this length
calibralions are shown at lower right. The maximum diastolic
potential is approximately - 94 mV throughout.
are not likely to exist in the normal heart. In diseased
hearts, however, conduction velocitics can be very slow.
Thercfore, the nccessary pathway length for the iso-
lated segment of a re-cntrant circuit could be very
cats, +# Also, it has been suggested that the pct dogs of
short,'l
patients with SLE develop antinuclear anlibodies as a
 In summary, the necessary conditions for develop-
result of cxposure to common environmctital factors
ment of re-entry are the occurrence of (l) unidiree-
or transmissible agents.4 Thus, some cases of hcart
tional conduction block, and (2) slow condluction (rel-
block or myocarditis in dogs or cats may prove to
ative to refractoriness of the surroumding carrdiac
be explained by autoimmune discase, although this
cells). In the normal heart, the tissues that are the
remains to be verified.
most likely anatomic substrates for re-entry are those
of the sinus and atrioventricular nodes. This is because,
as discussed later, the nodal tissues have relatively
RE-ENTRANT ACTIVATION
poorly coupled cells, generate slow response action
potentials, and show time-dependent refractoriness.
In normal sinus rhythm, the atria and ventricles are
This may allow parallel conduction pathways with
activated in a specific, effcient, and relatively constant
“"functional longitudinal dissociation" to occur, and
 pattern. Each normal cardiac impulse dies as the wave-
these parallel dissociated pathways may support rc-
front reaches the limits of the cardiac syncytiurn in the
entry.
veniricular subepicardium. The myocardium is then
 In contrast to nodal tissues, the working atrial and
activated again only after it. is invaded by the ncxt
ventricular myocardial tissues will support slow conduc-
normal sinus impulse (see Fig. l6-2). If re-entrant
tion and unidirectional conduction block only if sig-
activation occurs, the propagating impulse docs not
die out in the usual way; rather, it persists to re-excite
mias in the myocardium are generally considered to
the chambers of the heart after the cnd of the refrac-
be of greater clinical significance than are nodal
tory period. Thus, re-entry can produce premature
arrhythmias. That is, life-threatening re-entrant arrhyth-
beats; either the atria or the ventricles can be involved
mias are far more likely to occur in the diseased hcart
 in the re-entrant activity.
than in the normal heart. There are iwo basic typcs of
In both canine and fcline hearts, the refractory
change in cellular clectrophysiology of cardiac cells
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC MECHANISMS FOR ARRHYTHMIAS3
301
that can predispose to the developrment of slow con-
0
B
duction and unidirectiotal conduction blork: (l) de-
creased maximum diastolic potential, and (2) in-
creased dispersion of refracloriness.
RE-ENTRY DEPENDENT ON SLOW CONDUCTION AND UNIDI
TISSUE WITI DEPRESSED ACTION POTENTIAIS. This tyPc Of
re-entry can depend ol an anatomic loop of tissue,
composed of atrial, ventricular, or Purkinje fibcrs, with
 appropriate electrophysiologic characteristics. This is
M
classic re-entry, 15-4
 In the mammalian heart, the anatomy of the ventric
ular cotductiot1 system is such that after ischemic dam-
 age or stretch, pathways can occur that are functionally
FIGURE 16-12
suitable for re-eniry. The Purkinje system originates in
Re-entry in the Schmitt/Erlangcr diagram.s The impulse
the His bundle; it then divides into the left and right
propagatcs through the proximal bundle (PB) and distal bundle A
bundle branches. Each of these bumdle branches then
in the normal manner, Distal bundle B is darmaged: the antegrade
divides again and again over most of the endocardial
impulsc conducts slowly and dcerementally through B (wavy line)
and blocks in the damaged zone. The impulse conducts rhrough
surface of both ventricles. Each of the major bundles
thc ventricle and re-cnters the damaged zome from the distal
of Purkinjc fibers is invested with a covering layer
margin. The impulsc propagates back to the proximal bundlle and
 of connective tissuc. This tends to kcep each bundle
reenters the proximai bundlle, where it continues to be conducted
in the rerogradc directon.This can give rise to a premanre
 electrically isolated from the underlying ventricular
ventricular depolarization (displayed on the clectroeardiogram
muscle as well as from the other strands of Purkinje
below). If every prirmary (sinus) impulse is followcd by a premature
tissue running in parallel to it. ln the His bundle and
depolarization, this can producc a bigeninal rlhythm.
bundle branches, the strands of fibers usually anasto-
mose quite frecly. More peripherally, the terminal Pur-
kinje fibers arborize many times and contact endocar-
Therefore, junctional sites between Purkinje fibers and
dial ventricular muscle cells  (Fig.
These
 muscle can form anatomic loops. ormally, the cardiac
16-11).
ventricular muscle  cells  are connected  syucytially.
impulse quickly propagates through all branches of the
vetricular conduction system to thie subendlocardial
ventricular muscle. Normal impulses are terminatcd
in ventricular muscle when the advancing wavefronts
collide and are surrounded by refractory tissue (see
Fig. 16-11).
 Re-cntry can occur in the distal Purkinje network if
conduction velocity is decreased and unidirectional
block occurs at a critical site (Fig. 16-12). Obviously,
if a zone of damage encompasscs one or more of
these Purkinje fiber-ventricular muscle loops, diastolic
potential, action potential amplitudc, and upstroke
velocity may be reduced in the damaged fibers, Slow
VM
couduction and unidirectional block may occur. Since
the intensity of insull. in the damaged zone rarely is
uniform, some areas within the loop will be more
FIGURE 16-11
depressed  than  others,  Unidirectional  conduction
block will usually occur in one of the areas of greatest
Illustration of normal conduction of the cardiac inpuise in the.
ventrieular conduction system. The Schmitt/Erlanger diagran al
depression. If, however, depression of the action potenl-
left shows one of the bifureations of the His-Purkinje systcm: PB
tials is too great, no conduction will be supported, and
denotes proxinal bundle, A and B denote distal branches, VM
bidirectional conduction block will result. Under these
clcnotes ventrieular muscle distal to branches, Action potential
so ea, u u s e sod au pe 
circumstances, re-entry will not occur. Because the de-
of distal brarnches A and B. The impulse normally conducts down
gree of deprcssion is critical for the development. of
thronugh each branch and siuultaneously activates the endocardial
ventricular muscle in contact with the ultimate transitional fibers
unidirectional conduction block, and this can vary
of each branch. The wavefronts of activatiom then collide in the
from site to site in a zone of damage, re-entry is more
ventricular muscle zone and terminate. Action potentials at right
likely to occur in a large zone of damage than a small
are from points indieatcd in the drawing at left; action potentials
indieate the activation sequence in the ventricle, producing an
one. Once a re-entrant circuit is established, it may
electrocardiograin of normal sinus rhythm as shown below.
support either single premature impulses or multiple
302ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
premature responses (i.c., a tachycardia). Re-cntrant
toritess was described in isolated rabbit left atrium.+51
tachycardias resulting from continuous circling of the
In this "leading circle’ model, re-entry occurs in the
impulsc around the loop are called circus movement
absence of an anatomic obstacle. The initiation of re-
tachycarclias.
entrant activity is permitted when atrial fibcrs in closc
 In some cases, the zone of damage may not havc
proximity to cach other have different refractory perj-
appropriate electrophysiologic characteristics (i.c..
 ods. Re-entry can be initiated when a premature im-
 pulse fails to conduct through fibers with long refrac-
itate re-entry at ormal (sinus rhythm) cycle lengths.
tory periods and conducts through fibers with shorter
In these cases, re-entry may be provoked by premature
refractory periods, Eventually, the impulse returms to
impulses. which may originate from cither supraven-
the initial site of unidirectional block in the retrograde
tricular or ventricular foci. The prematurc impulses
direction after excitability recovers there. The impulse
are rore likely to prccipitate re-entry becausc Purkinje
may then persist in a circus 1movemeit over an auatom-
fibers in a zone of damage will usually have a much
ically variable circuit with a perimeter of as little as 6
longer refractory period than fibers in normal zones.
to 8 mm. The conduction velocity within the circuit is
If the depresscd Purkinje fibers are activated prema-
relatively slow because the impulses are propagating
turely, the premature irmpulse will be conducted more
through partially refractory tissucs. Impulscs sprcad
slowly and havc a grcater tendency to block than will
inward from the perimeter continuously, leading to a
an impulse elicited at the longer (normal)
cycle
central zone of the re-cntrant circuit that is functiot-
 length. In other words, premature impulses often can
ally inactive. The anplitudes of the action potentials,
lead to re-entrant responses becausc al short cycle
and their maximum upstroke velocities, decrease grad-
ually from the periphery to the center of the circuit.
tion in the myocarcdiun.
Cells in the center of the re-entrant circuil produce
 Sites of re-eniry over fixed anatornic pathways are
only local responses rather than full action potentials
tot cxclusivcly found in the peripheral Purkinje sys-
 dependent on regenerative responses. This is because
tem. 1t is likely that sirnilar re-entry loops could involve
thiey arc continuously kept in a partially depolarized
the IHis bundie aud bundle branches, or major proxi-
and refractory state by the circulation of the impulse
mal fascicles of the conduction system, In these cases,
about them. The length of the circuit and the circula-
re-entry might occur as a result of bundle branch
tion time of the loop are controlled by the conduction
blocks or hemiblocks. respectively. Re-entry loops can
velocity and refractory period of the fibers composing
also be formed in pathologic zones of working atrial
it.
or ventricular muscle. For example, cardiomyopathy
A second example of re-entry dependent on disper-
can produce areas of inexcitable atrial tissue, which
sion of refractoriness occurs in the atrioventricular
can create pathways for circus movemcnt. Finally, the
(AV) node preparation. As mentioned carlier, in AV
existence of arn anatomically discrete loop is not an
node cells, the tine needed for ful recovery of ex-
absolute requiremcnt for the developrnent of slow con-
citability does not begin at the end of phasc 3 but in-
duction, unidirectional conduction block, and re-
stead lasts well into phase 4. That is, these cells show
entry. Re-entry can occur in unbranched bundles of
time-dependent refractorincss rather than voltage
fibers or shcets of tissue if “functional longitudinal
dependent refractoriness,$2 Re-catry can occur in this
 n mogs aa pauduonne si pue smooo uoneioss
preparation because adjacenl zones of the node are
duction and unidirectional conduction block.
functionally different electrophysiologically. The recov-
cry period can be different in the two zones of the
RF-ENTRY DEPENDENT ON DISPERSION OF REFRACTORI
node, and if these differences are significant enough,
NEss. Recently, it has bect demoustrated that re-entry
re-ctitry can occur following a premature impulse. This
can occur not only in depressed, depolarized tissues.
is because, following a premature inpulse, the differ-
bul also in cardiac tissues in which the cells havc
ences in the refractory periods of the two populations
1ormal diastolic potentials and rapid rates of depolar.
of AV nodal cells functionally divide the node into
ization. However, the sarme two basic electrophysiologic
two pathways. If conduction of the premature impulsc
phenomena must be present to support re-entrant acti-
through the node is slow enough, it may returt to the
vation in these fully polarized tissues: that is, the prepa-
atrium as a return extrasystole. If this return extrasystole
ration must still support unicdirectional conduction
propagates through the atriurn at a time when the
block and slow coucduction. Although undamaged tis-
sues probably will mot show slow conduction and unidi-
citability, the impulse may again enter the AV node
rectional conduction block at normal sinus rates, both
and conduct around the circuit. This can become a
conduction abnormalities may occur duing propaga-
continuous process and may lead to paroxysmal supra-
tion of premature impulses through relatively refrac-
ventricular tachycardias with some degree of AV block.
tory cardiac tissues.
 Differences in refractoriness can also lead to rc-cntry
Re-entry occurring as a result of dispersion of refrac-
in the ventuicle. However, as in the examples cited in
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC MECHANISMS FOR ARRHYTHMIAS :
303
the atrium and the AV node, an appropriately timed
tial can promote (l) enhanced ectopic or abnormal
 premature impulse is needed to elicit. this re-entrant
automaticity, (2) triggered activity from delayed after-
activity. An example of re-cntrant activation of the
depolarizations, and (3) conduction blocks and/or re-
ventricles dependent on differences in refractoriness
cntrant activity. The effects of decreases in diastolic
is the R-on-T phenomenon, in which ventricular fibrilla-
potential on impulse conduction are often mediated
tion is produced by premature impulses clicited during
by decreases in the rate of rise and amplitucde of phase
the peak of the T wave. Local differences in relractori-
 0 of the action potentials. In addition, alterations in 
 ness can be accentuated by cardiac disease, producing
action potential duration and refractoriness may occur
a predisposition to R-on-T re-entry.
in stretched, ischermic, infarcted, or scarred myocar-
dium, with or without great changes in diastolic mem-
brane potential, and these changes may lead to cou-
ARRHYTHMIAS CAUSED BY
duction blocks or re-entrant activity.
SIMULTANEOUS DERANGEMENTS OF
 Direct applications of the cellular clectrophysiology
IMPULSE INITIATION AND IMPULSE
of cardliac arrhythmias to the clinical setting is still
limited. In part this is because almost all studies of
CONDUCTION
cardiac pathophysiology and the cellular mechanisins
of arrhythmias have been carried out in experimcntal
It is probable that many of the arrhythmias oc
animal models. The more common models for study
curring clinically arc not caused by a single electro-
physiologic mechanism but represent two or more
of ventricular arrhythmias include digitalis toxicity atd
coronary artery ligation.is m For atrial tachycardias,
mechanisms operating simultaneously. Perhaps the
they include "anatomir barrier" models and tricuspid
simplest cxam ple of these rmultifaclorial arrhythmias is
insufficiencya-s As reviewed earlier, ventricular ar.
 parasysole. Here, prermature depolarizations (in either
rhythmias from cdigitalis intoxication are causcd by
the atria or the ventricles) occur infrequently and are
triggered activity from delayed  afterdepolarizations,
randomly distributed during diastole. Intervals
:be-
cnhanced automaticity, or re-entry. Multifocal arrhyth
Iwee these cctopic impulses are whole number multi-
Imias in acute myocardial infarctions occurring 10 to
ples of oue basic cycle tength that is presumed to be
30 hours after onset of ischemia in the canine heart
the cycle length of an ectopic pacemaker. That is,
are largely attributed to abnormal automaticity or trig-
parasystole is thought to reflect the activity of at inde-
gered activity. Arrhythmias in hearis with older, more
pendent eciopic pacermaker that is protected from si-
 organized myocardial infarcts are caused by re-cntrant
tus node overdrive by a complele etitrance block, and
the cetopic impulses are thought to reflect the escape
excitation, as are most forms of experimental atrial
arrhythmias.
of this cctopic impulse through a zone of variable
However, experimental models may not perfectly
exit block.
mimic the intended clinical situations. and good mod
Another example of an arrhythmia caused by more
els are not available for many types of cardiac patho-
than one
mechanism  occurring  simuftaneously
is
physiology. For instance, very limited information is
foumd in the multifocal ventricular arrhythmias in thc
 digitalis-intoxicated dog or cat. These arrhythmias may
available on cellular mechanisms of arrhythmias in
heart failure, and the few studlies of the electrophysiol-
result from enhanccd normal automaticity, delayed
 ogy of cardiornyopathy have provided conflicting re-
afterdepolarization-induced triggered activity, and re.
sults.s For the most part, we can only extrapolate data
entrant activity.
from more general models of arrhythmia.
 In rccent years, research on the causes and therapy
of arrhythmias has expanded to involve two new ap-
SUMMARY AND CLINICAL
 proaches. Electrophysiologists havc shifted thcir inter-
CONSIDERATIONS
est to the molecular biology of iotl channels. The goal
of this work is to understand the fundamentals of iot
channel function. One then may be able to explain
This chapter has reviewed the elcectrophysiologic
how derangements of these channels' function can
mechanisms of cardiae arrhythmias. Bradyarrhythmias
lead to abnormalities of impulse initiation or conduc-
can be caused by excessive vagal tone (c.g., sinus brady-
tion. Simultancously, scientific interest has also been
cardia) or atrioventricular blocks.  Tachyarrhythmias
focused on the role of cherical mediators in ventricu-
 can be caused by enhanced autornaticity, triggered
lar arrhythmias.61 1t has long been known that altcr-
activity, or re-cntrant activation. These cellular arrhyih-
ations of potassium levels, clevated catccholamines, or
   a  q  s m
histainine can cause arrhythmias. Moreover, a contrib-
tropathophysiologic changes that cat result from is-
uting role has been suggested for amphophils, arachi-
chemic or toxic damage to the ventricular or atrial
donic acid metabolites (prostaglandins, leukotrienes,
myocardium. Decrcases in cliastolic membrane poten-
and tliromboxane), angiotensin ll, free radicals, and
304ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
endothelin in arrhythmias. Exactly how these chemical
19. Dangman KH, Hoffiman BF. In vivo and in vitro antiar-
rhythmic and arrhythmogenic effects of Nacetyl procain-
agents produce arrhythmias generally remains to be
anide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 217:85l, 1981
explained.
vasc Pharinacol 6:300, 1984
 21. Roden DM, Hoffiman BF. Action potential prolongation
REFERENCES
-unb mol aq Aourone qeouqe jo uononpu pin
 dine conccntrations in canine Purkinje fbers. Relation-
ship to potassiun and cycle length. Circ Res 56:857, 1985
22. Coraboeuf E, Deroubaix F, Coulombe A. Acidosis-in-
1. Toimaselli GF, Backx PH, Marban F. Molccular basis of
duced ahnorimal repolarization and repetitive activity in
perneation in voltage gated ion channels. Circ Res
isolated dog Purkinje fibcrs. J Physiol (iaris) 76:97, 1980
23.
Hoffrman BF, Cranefield PF. Electrophysiology of the
72:491, 1993
2. Camphell DI., Rasmusson RI., Strauss HC. Elcctrophysi-
Heart. New York, McfGraw-Hill, 1960
24. Brachmann J, Scherlag BJ, Rosenstraukh LV, Lazzara R.
ology of the sinus node: lonic and cellular mechanisms
underlying primary cardiac pacemaker activity. In Dang-
Bradycardia-dependent triggered activity: Relevance to)
drug-induced multiform ventricular tachycardia. Circula-
ntan KH. Miura Ds (eds): Elecirophysiology and Phar-
tion 68:846.1983
macology of the Hcart: A Clinical Guidc. Ncw York,
 25. Brown BS. Early aftcrdepolarizations induced by balra-
Marcel Dekker, 1991, p 59
chytoxin: Possible involvement of sodiuun current, Fed
3. Dangman KH. Electrophysiology of the Purkinje fiber.
Proc 42:581, 1983
In Dangman KH, Miura DS (eds): Electrophysiology and
 26. Trautwein W. Generation and conduction of impulscs in
Pharmacology of the Hcart: A Clinical Guide. New York,
the hearl as affected by drugs. Pharrmacol Rev 15:277,
Marcel Dekker, 1991, p 16l
4. Noble D. The lnitiation of thc Heartbeat. Oxford,
1963
27. Dangznan KH, Hoffman BF. Effccts of single premature
Clarendon Press, 1975
5. Allen JD, Brennan FJ. Wit AI. Actions of lidocainc on
stimuli on automatic and triggered rhythms in isolated
canine Purkinje fbers. Circulation 71:813, 1985
transnembrane potentials of subendocardial Purkinje
28. Corabocuf E. Role of ionic curents in the genesis of
fbers surviving in infarcted canine hearts. Circ Res
normal and abnormal automatisms in cardiac tissues. In
43:470. 1978
Antaloczy Z、Preda I (eds): Procccdings, 8th Interna-
6. Danginan KH. Effecis of bepridil on uransmernbrane
tional Congress on Electrocardiology, 1981. Amstcrdam,
action potentials recorded from canine cardiac Purkinje
Excerpta Medica, 1982, p 1
fhers and ventricular muscle cells; Insights into antiar-
29. Fischineister R, Vassort G. The eleclrogenic Na-Ca ex-
rhythimic  mechanisms. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch
change and cardiac electrical acivity. I, Suimulation of
Pharmacol 329:326, 1985
Purkinjc fibrc action potential. J Physiol (Paris) 77:705,
 7. Dangman KH. Effects of procainamide on automatic and
1981
 triggcred impulse initiation in isolated preparations of
 30. Rosen MR, Gelband H, Hoffman BF. Corrclation be-
caninc cardiac Purkinje fibers. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol
twccn cffccts of ouabain on the canine electrocardio
12:78, 1988
gram and transimeinbrane potcntials of isolated Purkinje
8. Craneficld PF. The conduction of the cardiac impulse:
fibers. Circulation 47:65. 1973
Thc slow responsc and cardliac arrhythmias. Mount
31. Rosen MR, Gelband H, Merker C, Hoffiman BF. Mccha-
 Kisco, NY. Futura Publications, 1975
nisms of digitalis toxicity, Effccts of ouabain on phase
9. Noble D. The surprising heart: A review of recent prog-
4 of canine Purkinje fiber transmembrane potentials.
rcss in cardiac electrophysiology. J Physiol 353:1, 1984
Circulation 47:681. 1973
1.0. Hoffman BF, Rosen MR. Cellular mechanisms for cardiac
32. Ferrier GR. Moe GK Effect of calcium on acctyl-
arrhythmias. Circ Res 49:1, 1981
sirophanthidin-induced transient depolarization in ca-
11. Wit AL, Cranefeld PF. Rccntrant excitatjon as a cause
ninc Purkinje tissue. Circ Res 33:508, 1973
of cardiac arrhythimias. Am J Physiol 235:Hl., 1978
 33. Karaguezian HS, Katzung BG. Voltage clamp studies of
12. Hoffman BF, Dangman KH. Demonstration of the mech-
transient inward current and mechanical oscillations in-
anisms for arrhythimias in experinental animals. Ann NY
duced by ouabain in ferret papillary muscle. J Physiol
Acad Sci 432:17, 1984
327:255, 1982
I8. DiFrancesco D, Noble D. A model of cardiac electrical
34. Dangman KH, Danilo P, Hordof AJ. et al. Electrophysio-
 activity incorporating ionic puinps and concentration
logic characteristics of human ventricular and Purkinje
changes. Phil Trans Soc Iond (Ser B) 307:353, 1985
fibers. Circulation 65:362, 1982
14. Vassalle M, Kotake H, lin Cl. Pacemaker current, mem-
 35. E1 Sherif N, Gough WB, Zeiler RII, Mchra R. Triggered
brane resistancc, and Kt in sheep cardiac Purkinje fibers.
ventricular rhythms in I-day-old myocardial infarction in
Cardiovasc Res 26:383, 1992
the dog. Circ Res 52:566, 1983
15. LeMarec H, Dangman KH, Danilo 1, Rosen MR, An
 36. Wit AL, Cranefield PF. Triggered and autornatic activity
evaluation of automaticity and triggered activity in the
in the canine coronary sinus. Circ Res 4l:435, 1977
C      o  
37. Wit AL, Cranefeld PF. Triggered activity in cardiac mus
farction. Circulation 71:1224, 1985
cle fibers of the simian miral valve. Circ Res 38:85, 1976
16. Hiraoka M, Ikcda K, Sano T. Thc mcchanism of Ba-
38. Kass RS, Lederer WJ. Tsicn Rw, Weingart R. Role of
 imduced automaticity in ventricular muscle fibers. J Mol
calcium ions in transient inward current and aftercon-
Cell Cardiol 10(Suppl 1);:35, 1978
tractions induced by sirophanthidin in cardiac Purkinje
17. Opie LH. The Hcart. Physiology, Metabolism, Pharma-
fbres. J Physiol 281:187, 1978
cology and Therapy. London, Grune and Stratton, 1984
 39. Brown HF, Nohle D, Noble SJ. Taupignon Al. Relation-
18. Dangman KI1, Hoffiman BF. Effects of nifedipinc on
ship between the transicnt inward current and slow in-
clectrical activity of cardiac cells. Am J Cardiol 46:1059,
ward currents in the sino-atrial node of the rabbit. J
1980
Physiol 370:299, 1986
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC MECHANISMS FOR ARRHYTHMIAS 305
40. Olah Ks, Gee H. Fetal hearl block associated with mater-
dia. I. The "leading circle" concept: A new model of
nal anti-Ro (SSA) antibody--current management: A
circus movement in cardiac tissue without the involve-
revicw. Br J Ohstet Gynaccol 98:751, 1991
ment of an anatomical obstacle. Circ Res 41:9, 1977
41. Yokoi K. Akaike M, Nishiuchi T, et al. Scar formation in
52. Mendez Cl, Moc GK. Some characteristics of transmem-
the cardiac conduction system of a patient with Takaya-
brane potentials of AV nodal cells during propagation
su's arteritis. Cardiology 81:378, 1992
of prematurc bcats. (irc Res 19:993, 1966
42. Alexander F, Buyon JP, Provost TT, Guarnieri I. Anti-
53. Ferrier GR. Digitalis toxicity. In Dangman KH, Miura DS
 Ro/SS-A antibodies in the pathophysiology of congenital
(eds): Electrophysiology and Pharinacology of thc Heart:
 heart block in neonatal lupus syndrome, an experimen-
A Clinical Guide. New York, Marcel Dekker, 1991, p 277
tal model. In vitro clectrophysiologic and immunocyto-
54. Patterson E, Scherlag BJ, Lazzara R. Arrhythimias in thc
cheinical studies. Arthritis Rheum 35:176, 1992
canine heart two to twenty-four hours aftcr myocardial
43. White SD, Posychuk RAW, Schur PH. Investigation of
infarction. In Danginan KH, Miura Ds (eds): Electro-
anlibodies to extractable nuclcar antigens in dogs. Am J
physiology and Pharimacology of the Heart: A Clinical
Vet Res 53:1019, 1992
Guide. Ncw York, Marcel Dekker, 1991, p 301
44. Jones DRE, Hopkinson ND, Powell RJ. Autoantibodies
 55. El-Sherif N, Restivo M, Gough WB. Reentrant ventricular
in pet dogs owncd by paticnts wih systcmic lupus crythe-
rhythms in the three-to-fivc-day-old canine postinfarction
matosus. Lancet 339:1378, 1992
hcart. In Dangman KH, Miura DS (eds): Electrophysiol-
45. Mayer AG. Rhythmical Pulsation in Scyphomedusae.
ogy and Pharmacology of the Hcart: A Clinical Guide.
Washington, DC, Carncgie Institutc, Puh 47, 1906, p 1
New York, Marcel Dckkcr, 1991, p 331
46. Mines GR. On dynamic equilibrium in the hcart. J Phys-
56. Franc I.H, Page RI., Hoffinan BF. Atrial rccntry around
iol 46:349, 1913
an anatomic barier with a partially excitable gap: A
47. Mincs GR. On circulating excitations in heart muscles
caninc 1nodel of flulter. Circ Res 58:495, 1986 
and their possible relation to tachycardia and fibrillation.
57. Boyden PA. Reentrant excitauon in the atrium. In Dang-
Trans R Soc Can, Ser 3, Sect IV, 8:43, 1914
man KH, Miura DS (eds): Electrophysiology and Phar-
48. Schmitt FO, Erlanger J. Directional differences in the
       
conduction of the impulsc through hcart musclc and
Marcel Dekker, 199l., p 239
their possible relation to extrasystolic and fibrillary con-
58. Boyden PA, Hoffinan BF. Thc effects on atrial clcctro-
tractions. Am J Physiol 87:326, 1928
physiology and structure of surgically induced righit
49. Allessie MA, Bonke FIM, Schopman FJG. Circus move-
atrial enlargement in dogs. Circ Res 49:1319, 1981
ment in rabhit atrial musclc as a mcchanism of tachycar-
59. Boyden PA. Activation sequence during airial flutter in
dia. Girc: Res 33:54, 1973
 dogs with surgically induced right atrial enlargement.
 50. Allcssic MA, Bonke FIM, Schopinan FJG. Circus imove-
Circ Res 62:596, 1988
cent in rabbit atrial muscle as a mechanism of tachycar-
 60. Pyc MP, Cobbe SM. Mcchanisms of ventricular arrhyth-
dia. I. Role of nonuniforin recovery of cxcitability in
mias in cardiac failure and hypertrophy. Cardiovasc Res
thc occurrence of unidirectional block, as studicd with
26:740, 1992
multiple microelcctrodes. Circ Res 39:168, 1976
61. Curtis MJ, Pugsley MK, Walker MJA. Endlogenous chemi-
 51. Allessie MA, Bonke FIM, Schopman FJG. Circus movc-
cal mediators of ventricular arrhythmias in ischaenic
ment in rabbit atrial tissue as a mechanism of tachycar-
hcart disease. Cardiovasc: Res 27:703, 1993
Pharmacology a
and
17
Pharmacokinetics
of Antiarrhythmic
Drugs
WILLIAM W. MUIR, II
RICHARD A. SAMS
N. SYDNEY MOISE
ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUG CLASSIFICATION
SCHEMES
The spectrum of drugs with potential utility for treating disturbances in
cardiae rhythm continues to grow. Clinical efficacy depends in part on the
factors causing the arrhythmia (Table 17-l). Given that all cardiac arrhyth-
mias are linked to one or more cellular electrophysiologic abnormalities,1-s
schermes to classify mechanisms of arrhythmogenesis (chapter 16) and antiar-
rhythmic drugs have been developed based upon cach drug's principal
electrophysiologic properties.9-1z The mosl popular of these scheimes was
developed by Vaughan-Williams with modifications by Harrison. It classifies
drugs according to their predominant electrophysiologic action (Table 17-
2)s-i3 based upon their ability to block trans-sarcolemmal flux of sodiur
(Class I) or calcium (Class IV) jons; antagonize the sympathetic nervous
system (Class Il); aud prolong the duration of the cardiar action potential,
thereby increasing cardiac refractoriness (Class I1).
Regardless of this classification scheme's ability to aid in categorizing
drugs, its clinical usefulness in determining which drug to seleet to treat a
spccific cardiac arrhythmia remains questionable,14. 1s This is due to the fact
thal arrhythmias are frequently caused by several mechanisms (see Table
16-1), and that the classes of antiarrhythmic drugs producc clectrophysio-
logic effects that frequently overlap. For cxample, amiodarone not only
increases refractoriness but blocks trans-sarcolemmal sodium flux and pos
sesses β-adrenergic-blocking activity (Tables 17-2 and 17-3). Ideally, a drug
classification scheme based on the mcchanisms for cardiac arrhythmias
would be more uscful. This approach is just beginning to be appreciated for
its clinical rclevance (chapter 18). It has been based on known cellular
Imechanisms for cardiac arrhythmias ("vulnerable parameter") and the use
of drugs that are rost likely to modulate the vulnerable parameter therapeu
tically (Tables 17-4, 17-5;, see also clhapter 16).t, 15
307
308
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
THEVAUGHAN-WILLIAMS
rhythmias induced by ischermia and clrugs such as thio-
CLASSIFICATION
barbiturates and halothane which “sensitize" the
heart, the clinical use of mixed α- and β-adrenoceptor-
CLASS I
blocking drugs has been proposed as more effective
than β-blocking drugs alone. Clinicaly, the poten-
Class I antiarrhythrnic drugs are referred to as mem-
tially bencficial effects of adrenoceptor-blocking drugs
 brane stabilizers and produce their principal electro-
are dependent on the prevailing autonomic tone, par-
physiologic effects by depressing transmembrane so-
ticularly sympathetic tone.7 Larger drug dosages are
dium flux and phase O of the cardiac action potential.
required when sympathetic tone is high. Quinidine-
Mauy of the drugs within this class are local ancsthe-
like or membrane-stabilizing properties are frequently
tics. Class I antiarrhythmic drugs have been subclivided
ascribed to many of the β-adrenoceptor-blocking drugs
into three subgroups (la, Ib, Ic) based upon their
but are unlikely to play a significant role in producing
ability to slow conduction velocity and alter action
clinically relevant antiarrhythmic effects bccause these
potential duration (sec Table 17-2). Class Ia drugs
effects are appreciated only at doses larger than those
(which include quinidine, procainarnide, and disopyr-
that produce β-adrenergic blockade. Similarly, β,-cardi-
 anicle) depress phase O of the action potential, depress
oselectivity, intrinsic sympathomimetic activity, and po-
conduction velocity, prolong action potential duration,
tency ratio do not appear to contribute to the cffeetive-
and delay repolarization. Lidocaine, mexiletine, tocai-
ness of this class of drugs (sce Table 17-3).18
nide, and phenytoin (Class Ib) produce little to no
effect on phase O of the action potential or conduction
velocity in normal heart tissue but depress phasc O and
CLASS III
 dlecrease conduction velocity in diseased tissues. Drugs
Class II antiarrhythmic drugs prolong action poten-
 in Class Ib also shorten action potential duration and
tial duration and refractorincss without significantly
 incrcasc ventricular fibrillation threshold. Class Ic
depressing the rate of phase 0 or conduction velocity
clrugs (e.g., propafenone) cause marked depression of
(see Table 17-2). Some Class III drugs rnay possess
phase 0 of the action potential and conduction velocity
sodium channel (Class I)-blocking cffeets but are rec-
but produce ninimal effects on repolarization and
ognized rnore for their antifibrillatory activity.1-2s Al
refractoriness (see Table 17-2).
though Class II antiarrhythmic drugs have been exten-
sively studied and advocated in human patients, their
use in veterinary medicine is just beginning and thcir
CLASS II
effectiveness has yet to be determined.
Class 1l antiarrhythmic drugs produce antisympa-
thetic or sympatholyic effects (see Table 17-2). Al-
though many autiarrhythrmic drugs are noted for their
CLASS IV
cffects on autonornic tone (see Table 17-3), Class I1
Class IV antiarrhythmic drugs inhibit the cntry of
 drugs include the β-adrenoceptor-blocking drugs and
calcium iois into cells and are collectively referred to
(drugs with botl α- and β-adrenoceptor-blocking activ-
as calcium channcl-blocking drugs (sce Table 17-2).
ity (e.g., labetalol). This class of drugs produces their
These drugs block the slow inward calcium current
principal antiarrhythmic effects by blocking β,-adreno-
(IcaL). Calcium plays a pivotal role in regulating both
ceptors. Becausc α-adrenoceptor stimulation may be
the electrical and rnechanical activity of cardiac and
 an important cause of spontaneously occurring ar-
vascular tissues.24-32 The selectivity of a calcium channel
 blocker for cardiac or vascular tissue depends on the
specific binding site to the calcium chaunel,2, s1. 32 The
TABLE 17-1
dihydropyridines (nifedipine, amlodipine) are selec-
Common Clinical Causes of Cardiac Arrhythmias
tive for the vascular smooth muscle. Thereforc, these
Central nervous system discase or trauma
drugs are used to treat systemic hypertension. In cotl-
Periphcral or reflex-inediated alterations in neural tome
Infections (viral or bacterial)
trast, the prototype calcium channel blockers diltiazem
Trauma
and verapamil, each of which binds to a different site
Degencrative or fibrotic conditions
on the calcium channel, are cardioselective. Although
Congenital or acquired heart lisease
Xeurohunoral and endocrine influences
diltiazem is used to treat systermic hypertension, its
Acid-base aned electrolyte disturbances
effects on vascular smooth muscle are less potent than
Hypoxia, hypercapnia, and teinperaturc changes
those of amlodipine, and it more readily causes sinus
Autonomic imbalancc
Ischemia
bradycardia and slowed atrioventricular (AV) nodal
Toxic substances and cdrugs
 conduction. Electrophysiologically, calcium is particu-
larly inportant in maintaining normal autormaticity
Modified Irom Muir Ww 1lI, Sams RA. Pharmacokogy and pharmacokinetics
of antiarrhythmic drugs.In Fox PR (ed): Canine and Feline Cardiotogy. New
and conduction within the sinoatrial (SA) and AV
York, Churchill Livingstone, 1988, p 309.
todes. Antiarrhythmic activity (supraventricular ar-
PHARMACOLOGY AND PHARMACOKINETICS OF ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUGS
309
TABLE 17-2
 Classification of Antiarrhythmic Drugs
Drug Class
Basis for Classification
 Predominant Electrophysiologic Effects
Class 1
Class I drugs are generally considered membrane
Ia
Quinidine
stabilizers; most are noted for thcir ability t0
Deprecss phase 0
Procainamide
block Na' chammels
Slow conduetion velocity
Disopyramide
Prolong repolarization
Acecainide*
Pirinenol*
1b
Lidoeain1c
De press phase 0 in abnormal risse
Tocainide
Shorten repolarization
Mexilctine
Moricizine
Phenytoin
Ic+
Propafcnone
Depress phase 0
Lorcainide.
Markedlly slow conduetion vclocity
Indeeainide
Cibcnzolinc
Class II
pqoudoa
Class I drugs are syinpatholytic and are noted for
Depress phase 4
Natdolol
their ability to block β- and α-adrenoceptors
Prolong rcpolarization
Atcnolol
Minimally slow conduction velocity
Metoprolol
Esinolol
Labetalol
Class III
Amiodarome
(lass Il drugs prolong the artion potential
Depress phasc 4 in the sinus and atriovcntricular'
Bretylium
duration and effective refractory period
nodes
Sotalol
Prolong conduction time through the simus and
Cleofilium*
atrioventricular nodes
Seinatilide*
Class IV
Verapamil
Class IV drugs block calciun channels, partirularly
Depress phase 4 in the sinus and aurioventricular
Diltiazem
lcx-1
nodes
 Prolong conduction time through the sinus and
atrioventricular nodes
Class Vs
Alinidinc
Class V dnugs block anionir (Cl ) channels; these 
Bclievcd to block pacermaker current
drugs produce bradycardia
*Investigational.
Flecainide and cucainile have been withdrawn from use because of increased risk of sudden death in humans.
Class II drugs are being subclassifierl to inelucle K chatmel faeilialors (pinacil)
SCHass V drugs wvill not he disenssexl.
TABLE 17-3
Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Effects of Antiarrhythmic Drugs
Drug
 Sympathetic Effects
 Parasympathetic Effects
Quinirdine
α-Adrenoceptor blocker; β: srimulation?
Vagolytic.
Procainamide
Ganglion blocking
Disopyramide
Vagolytic
Iidocaine
'Tocainide
Same as lidocaine
Mexiletine
Sane as lidocaine
Phenytoin
Synpatholytie CNS elfcct
Propafenonc
βi,-Acrcnoceptor blocker
Propranolol
B1-Adrcnoceptor blocker
Nadolol
Bt-Adrenoceptor blocker
Atenolol
β-Adrenocepior blocker
Metoprolo!
β-Adrenoceptor blockcr
Esmolol
β-Adrcnoceptor blocker (moderately cardioselective)
Labetalol
β.s-Adrenoceptor blocker, α,aclrenoccplor blocker
Amiodarone
βi,-Adrenoceptor blocker, Q,-adrenoceptor blockcr
Bretyliun
lnitial norepinephrine rclease; late syinpatholysis
Sotalol
Btg-Adrenoceptor blocker
α-Adrenoceplor blocker, noncompetitive sympatholylice
Digiialis
Sensitizes barorcceptors; stimulates (CNS; stimulates postganglionic. sympathetic
Increases vagal tone
nerves; releases norepincphrine from sympathetic nerve lerminals
 oe aae pe a  e xo  sp  jo sd e oo v s 'i am  g po
York, Churchill Livingstone, 1988, p 309,
310ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
TABLE 17-4
 Classification of Antiarrhythmic Drug Actions on Arrhythmias Based on Modification of Vulnerable Parameter
Arrhythmia
Mcchanisns
Vulnerablc Paramcter
Drugs*
Inappropriate sinus tachycardia
Automaticity
Phase 4 depolarization
β-aclrerergic-blocking agents
Sone idiopathic ventricular
(A) Enhanced norrmal
(decrease)
Na+channel-blocking agents
tachycardia
Accclerated idioventricular
Phase 4 depolarization
Ca"" or Na' channel-blocking
rhythrns
(decrease)
agerits
Torsadles de pointes
I'riggered activity
Action potential duation
β-agonists; vagolytie agcnts
(A) EAD)
(shorten) or EAD (suppress)
(increase rate)
Ca channcl-blocking agents
Mg*-: β-atrencrgic-blocking
agents
Digitalis-induced arrhythias
(B) DAD)
Calcium overloadl (unload) or
Ca channel-bloxcking agents
DAD (suppress)
Nat channel-blocking agents
Certain autonormically mediated
Calcium overload (unloal) or
β-adrencrgie-blocking agents
ventricular tachycardias
DAD (suppress)
Ca'' channel-blocking agents.
atlenosine
Sustained monomorphic
Conduclion and excitability
Xat channel-blocking agents
ventricular tachycardia
(depress)
Atrial lilrillation
Refractory period (prolong)
K channel blockers
Polymorphie and sustained
Refractory period (prolong)
Quinidine, procainamide,
mononorphic ventricular
tlisopyramide
tachycartlia
Ventricular fibrilation
Refractory period (prolong)
Bretylium
Amiodarone, solalol
AV nodal reentrant tachycardia
Recnry (Ca+ channel-dependent)Conduction and cxcitability
Ca*+ channcl-blocking agents
(depress)
*Refer to Tatsle 17-2.
FAD, early adter depolarizations; DAD, dclayed after depolarizatious.
rtassifieationt of antiarrhythmitc drugs bascd ou their actious on arrhythmuogent mwchanisms. Eur Heart J 12:1 112. 1991.
rhythrnias) is one of the more prominent therapeutic
effects of calcium-blocking drugs, although this action
 drug concentration to produce a beneficial drug effect
is not characteristic of all drugs in this group,21. 27
 after attainment of equilibrium between drug in blood
xa rassal e oi redenaa sdeqiad pue azni
 and at the receptor is obtained by the following equa-
have energcd as the most clinically useful calcium-
tion;
 blocking drugs for the treatment of supraventricular
arrhythrmias (chapter 18).
Dose rate = total body clearance X average plasina drug
concentration desired
CLINICAL PHARMACOKINETICS
If the bioavailability of a drug is known after adiminis-
tration by a specific nonintravenous route, the dose
rate should be modified by dividing the right-hand
side of the equation by the extent of bioavailability.
The pharmacologic effects of nost drugs affecting
the cardiovascular system are assuned to be a function
When the desired maximum and minimun plasna
 of the drug concentration at specific receptor sites
drug concentrations are known, the maximum time
within the body. Although drug concentrations
interval between doses (T) can be calculated:
at
these sites are rarely rneasured, it is generally assumed
T = 1.44 X tu/y ln
maximum drug concentration
that the concentration of drug al the receptor sile
 nininum drug concentration /
ultimately attains equilibrium with the concentration
of drug in the vascular system (i.e., blood or plasna).
where t/2 is the terminal elinination half-life of the
Therefore, the concentration of drug at the receptor
drug and In is the natural logarithm.
site is affected by the sane faciors as those affecting
The time required to achieve steady-state plasma
the concentration of drug in the blood (nanely, the
n s   sn 
rale and extenl of absorption, distribution processes,
nous infusion or ruliple dosing is approximately four
metabolism, excretion, and protein binding). Further-
half-lives of the drug. If it is necessary or desirable 1o
more, the developrnent of safe and effective dosage
 achieve therapeutic drug concentrations more rapidly.
regimens depends on elucidation of various pharmaco-
 a loading dose can be given when the constant infusion
kinetic parameters and knowledge of effective plasma
Or 1multiple dosing regimen is started. ‘The loading
concentrations of the drug. For example, the dose rale
dose is calculated as:
TABLE 17-5
Electrocardiographic Properties of Popular Antiarrhythmic Drugs
Ventricular
Response
During
Sinus
QRS
QT
Atrial
Ventricular
Accessory
Supraventricular
Ventricular
Drug
Rate
Duration
Duration
Fibrillation
Rate
Pathway
Arrhythmias
Antifibrillatory
Quimidinc
↑0
11
+-
-+
Procainamide
0/↑
(0/ ↑
1+
0
Lidocaine
n/↑
0
0/ ↓
0
↑ /0
0
+++
.+
Tocainide
0/1
()
0/ ↓
()
↑/0
(1)
++
Mexiletine
0/↑
0/↓
0
↑/n
0
++
+?
Phenytoin
0)
(1
0
↓/0
0
+
Propafenone
0
(1
↑/0
↑↑
+
++
Propranolol
0
0
0
Atenolol
0
0
Lsmolol
()
()
一
+
0
Amiodarone
个
+
++
+
Sotalol
↑/0
+
++
Diltiazem
Q
↑/n
+
()
Digoxin
()
0
0
↑/0
++
一
GlycopyTrolate
0
(
↑= Increase;-
- decrease: 0 - lno effect; -
benelicial effect; -
= rletrirmcntal effe:cl.
Modinied trom Muir ww l, Sams RA. Pharmacology and pharmacokinctics of antiarrhythmie drugs. Fn Fox PR (ed: Ca
dFe:lit
Yk,Chrt:hillI.iv
c. 1988. pp 309-333.
 312 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
Loading dosc = desircd plasna drug concentration X
is the total hepatic blood flow rate. Hepatic clearance
volume of distribution
is therefore approximated by the following equation:
Drug concentrations immediately after intravenous
f. X CLirir
bolus dose administration will be greater than desired
if the drug is extensively distributed. Therefore, if the
drug has a low therapeutic index, the loading dose
If hepatic blood low is much greater than the product
should be divided or given slowly. Again, if bioavailabil-
 of unbound fraction and intrinsic clearance, hepatic
ity is incomplete, the appropriate correction can be
clearance reduces to the following equation:
made by dividing the right-hand side of the equation
CLiagatie = f.、 X CLiarini
by the extent of bioavailability.
For drugs cleared in this manner, hepatic clearance
is dependent on the unbound fraction and the intrin-
CLEARANCE AND VOLUME OF
sic clearance, but it is relatively independent of liver
DISTRIBUTION
blood flow rate. Therefore, hepatic clearance of such
low-extraction drugs will be influenced or affected by
ORGAN CLEARANCE
drug interactions and disease processes that affect pro-
tein binding of drugs and their intrinsic clearances.
Clearance and volume of distribution are the most
important terms in defining the disposition of a drug.
Intrinsic clearance, in lurn, depends on the properties
Individual organ clearances added together equal the
of hepatic microsomal enzymes, which are subject to
enzyme induction and enzyme inhibition.
total body clearance:
 In other cases in which the hepatic blood low is less
CL = CL + CLive, + CIother
than the product of the unbound fraction and the
intrinsic clearance, the hepatic clearance is approxi-
where CL represents clearance and the subscripts indi-
mated by the equation:
cate the organ or process involved. "Others" may rep-
CLahtpatr = Qhrpou
resent lung, saliva, sweat, and additional sites of metah
olism. If it is known, for example, that the drug is
Therefore, hepatic clearances of such "high-extrac-
eliminated primarily by hepatic. metabolism, the total
tion" drugs will depend only on hepatic blood flow
 body clearance approximates hepatic clearance.
rates. The clearances of these drugs (e.g., propranolol
  se passadxa aq ues sueap uelro enpa
and lidocaine)  will  not be significantly  atfecled by
lows:
alterations in plasina protein binding or intrinsic clear-
ance.
CI. - organ blood flow X extraction ratio
The extent of oral bioavailability is determined 1ot
only by the fraction of the dose that is absorbed but
EXTRACTIONRATIO
also by the fraction of the absorbed dose that escapes
The exiracuion ratio is an expression of the fraction
hepatic metabolism. The latter fraction is readily esti-
mated from the expression:
of the drug molecules entering the organ that are
rernoved by the organ. The extraction ratio ranges
F = l  Etruik
from zero for a noneliminating organ to unity for an
organ that removes all drug molecules entering the
where F is the fraction of the absorbed dose escaping
 organ. The maximum clearance of an organ is there
first-pass metabolisrn and Eepate is the extraction ratio.
fore equal to the total blood flow to the organ.
First-pass metabolisn of highly extracted drugs, such
as lidocaine and propranolol, will be high, and the
fraction escaping first-pass metabolism will be low. The
EXAMPLE OF ORGAN CLEARANCE—HEPATIC
converse is true for low-extraction drugs, such as phen-
To illustrate the principles of clearance and the
ytoin and tocainide.
extraction ratio, the hepatic clearance of drug is used.
The hepatic extraction ratio (Enepaue) is approxirmated
VOLUME OF DISTRIBUTION
as follows:
The volume of distribution is a measure of the ex-
fuX （I-iutrio
Fhepaie =
tent of distribution of a drug outside the vascular
Qnepone + fs X Clsoviosi
compartment. Thus, a drug characterized by a large
volume of distribu tion, such as lidocaine or digoxin, is
where f, is the fraction of the drug unbound in blood,
extensively distributed to tissues, and a drug with a
CLanuuse is the intrinsic. metabolic clearance, and Quepauec
small volune of distribution, such as phenytoin, is not.
The volume of disiribution (Vds) depends on several
sodium flux.8 ssa The decrease in transmembrane
physiologic paraineters as follows:
sodium flux results in depressionn of conduction of
electrical inpulses and membrane responsiveness. Pro-
Vd = Vp + Ifu.p/fu.l X Vr
longation of the action polential is a cellular electro-
physiologic effect shared by quinidine and other Class
where V, is the volume of plasma water, fu, is the
 la and I1I antiarrhythmic drugs (see Table 17-2). This
fraction of drug not bound to plasma proteins, fu. is
action, combined with quinidine's ability lo depress
the fraction of drug not bound to tissue coinponents,
conduction, resulis in a mmarked prolongation of the
and V is the volume of water in the tissues. The
effective refraclory period in cardiac tissues. These
volume of distribution of a drug will therefore be
direct celular elecirophysiologic effects are believed
altered by changes in plasma and tissue volumes and
to be the primary rechanisrs responsible for the
by changes in the extent of drug binding to plasma
antiarrhythmic efficacy of quinidine bul are known
 proteins and tissue components. Several diseases cause
to be extremely dependent on serum potassium con-
alterations in binding, and drug interactions often in-
centrations,3. si. s Low serum potassium concentra-
volve competition between drugs for binding sites on
tions antagonize the depressant actions of quinidine,
plasma proteins or tissue components.
whereas high serum concentrations increase quini-
dine's depression of conduction velocity, membrane
DRUGHALF-LIFE
responsiveness, and auomaticity.
Clinically, quinidine's effects are the resull of direct
The half-life of a drug is a useful pharmacokinetic
and indlirect aclions mediated by competitive blockade
 pararneter that depends on the volume of distribution
of muscarinic cholinergic receptors (see Table 17-3).
and the total body clearance as shown:
 Changes in heart rate and rhythrn are dependent on
Halflife = 0.693 X Vd/CL
the prevailing parasyinpathetic tone and the type of
arrhythmia being treated (supraventricular versus ven-
Thus, an increase in the volume of distribution or a
tricular). Since the parasympathetic nervous systern
decrease in total body clearance will increase the half-
innervates supraventricular tissues and proximal por-
life of a drug. Since both changes may occur in various
tions of the His-Purkinje system, quinidine's anticho-
disease states, the change in half-life may be greater
linergic actions may increase SA node automaticity and
than that predicted on the basis of an evaluation of a
AV conduction (see Tables 17-3 and 17-5).
change in either the volume of distribution or the total
At therapeutic concentrations, the direct and indi-
body clearance alone.
recl electrophysiologic actions of quinidine cause some
alterations in the electrocardiogram. Minimal to mod.
erate increases in sinus rate, slighi increases in QRS
PHARMACOLOGY OF SPECIFIC
duration, and prolongation of the Qr interval can
ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUGS
develop. The PR interval usually remains unchanged.37
 Acceleration of AV nodal conduction is an important
consideration when treating patients with atrial fibril-
QUINIDINE
lation and flutter because of the potential to produce
marked increases in ventricular rate. Clinically, digitalis
has been added to slow AV conduction and prevent
CLINICAL USE
increases in ventricular rale in patients with supraven-
Quinidine can be used to treat either supraventricu
tricular arrhythmias, especially atrial fibrillation. How-
lar or ventricular arrhythmias in dogs. Although it has
ever, calcium channel blockers may be more beneficial
been administered most ofien for ventricular arrhyth-
in such circumstances,8 Toxic plasma concentrations
mias, is use and popularity have waned when com-
of quinidine generally produce prolongation of the PR
pared with more current antiarrhythmic agents. Occa-
interval and QRS duration. An increase in the QRS
sionally in the dog it may be of value in the treatiment.
duration of more than 25 percent is indicative of quini-
of acute atrial fibrillation, particularly when this ar
dine toxicity.
rhythmia is not associated with atrial enlargement
PHARMACOKINETICS
ELECTROPIIYSIOLOGY AND
Quinidine is a lipophilic weak base (pK, 4.0 and 8.6)
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPIIY
that is rapidly and widely distributed to peripheral
Quinidine is the prototypic Class Ia antiarrhythmic
tissues. It is extensively bound to plasma and tissue
drug. Like all Class I antiarrhythmic drugs (see Table
proteins and has a large volune of distribution,
17-2), quinidine produces membrane-stabilizing ef-
Quinidine is eliminated by the kidneys and is metab
fects resulting from its inhibition of transimembrane
olized by the liver; less than 40 percent of the dose is
314
4  ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
eliminated unchanged in the urine,39. 4o Since hepatic
25 percent of all dogs trealed with oral quinidine
 d  ssi sl (y i) 
develop signs suggestive of gastrointestinal discomfort
∩ow, hepatic clearance is relatively insensitive to
(Muir and Sams, unpublished data). Gastrointestinal
changes in hepatic blood Dow but is sensitive
to
side effects may be greater in cats, although quinidine
changes in binding and intrinsic clearance. For exam-
is rarely used in this species.
 ple, propranolol does not reduce quinidine clearance
 in spite of a reduction in hepatic blood flow.l The oral.
availability of quinidine is good and is not appreciably
PROCAINAMIDE
 influenced by firsi-pass metabolisin.
 Quinidine competes for tissue-binding sites of cer-
CLINICAL USE
tain drugs. most notably digoxin. Consequenily,
Procainamide has actions that affect both atrial and
plasma digoxin concentrations rise during quinidine
therapy due to displacement of digoxin from skeletal
ventricular tissues. Therefore, it can be used in the
muscle and other tissue-binding sites 12. 4# Furthermore,
treatment of supraventricular and ventricular arrhyth-
quinidine reduces the renal clearanre of digoxin by
mias. Although it is similar to quinidine, it is used
unknown nechanisms.2, +s The possibility of central
more successfully in the treatnent of ventricular ar-
nervous system-induced toxicity with arrhythrnia pro-
rhythmias, with fewer side effects (see Table 17-6).
duction due to an increased circulating plasma con-
 centration of digoxin has also been suggested a4 Thus.
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY AND
plasma digoxin concentrations should be monitored
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPIIY
during combined quinidine-digoxin therapy and the
 digoxin dosage reduced if necessary.
Procainanide is a Class la antiarrhyihmic drug with
electrophysiologic properties similar to those of quini-
dine,* Like quinidine, its electrophysiologic effects are
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
due both to direct and indirect (anticholinergic) ac-
 Negative inotropisn, vasodilation, and hypolension
    (h 71 s s) s
can be produced by quinidine when administered at
yield conflicting results with regard to the effect of
therapeutic dosages. These hemodynarnic aclions are
procainaimide on sinus heart rate.* At low drug con-
 not a problerm in patients with normal cardiac function
centrations there is a vagolytic action, and at high
but must be considered when treating patients with
drug concentrations there is a direct depressant effect.
compromised or compensated cardiac disorders. Quin-
 Studies in dogs reveal that in a dose-dependent man-
idine produces vasodilation by blocking both α, and
ner AV nodal conduction and His-Purkinje conduction
αyadrenoceptors.15
are prolonged, and the refrartory periods of the atrial
Toxic quinidine concentrations produce a variety of
and ventricular nuscles are prolonged. The direct
deleterious cardiac efferts that are extensions of its
depression of the AV node conduction velocity and
direct electrophysiologic and hemodynamic actions.
the prolongation of refracloriness are partially blunted
First-, second-, and third-degree AV block, intraventric-
by the anticholinergic effects. Clinically, anticholiner-
ular (i.e., bundle branch) block, and ventricular tachy-
gic effects may be responsible for increases in ventricu-
lar rate caused by an increase in the transmission of
mature complexes are probably produced by marked
atrial impulses through the AV node. Therapeutic
depression of conduction of electrical inpulses, or are
doses of procainamide, however, generally produce
due to quinidine's ability to induce early afterdepolar-
litue or no effect on AV nodal conduction velocity or
izations,a6. 7 Direct depression of cardiac contracuility
refractoriness in patients in normal sinus rhythm.
and vasodilation cause decreases in cardiac outpul,
Atrial automatic tissues are more sensitive than are
hypotension, and increases in left ventricular end-dia-
stolic pressure. Clinically, these changes are recognized
 presses  nornal  and  abnormal  automaticity.49 Pro-
by the development of lethargy, weakness, and pulno-
cainamide's effect on automaticity is believed to be its
nary edema. Sodium bicarbonate, 1 mg/kg IV, can be
primary antiarrhythmic effect.* It depresses the rate
used to partially reverse cardiotoxicity and hypotension
 of rise of phase 0 of the action potential, resulting in
(Table i7-6). Metabolic alkalosis can temporarily de-
 decreased conduction velocity of electrical impulses in
crease serum potassium concentrations, thereby lim-
all cardiac tissues. Procainarnide depresses membrane
iting quinidine's direct cellular effecis, and increase
 responsiveness and excitability in atrial and veniricular
quinidine's binding to serum albumin, Protein-bound
specialized fibers and muscle.* The vagolytic effecis of
 drugs do not exert pharmacologic activity.
 procainamide on supraventricular tissues (particularly
Nausea, vorniting, and diarrhea are the most fre-
the AV node) are less pronounced than those of quini-
quently encountered adverse effects associated with
dine. The electrophysiologic effects of procainamide,
 oral quinidine therapy in dogs and cats. Approxinately
like those of quinidine, depend on the extracelular
TABLE 17-6
Therapeutic Guidelines and Adverse Effecis of Antiarrhythmic Drugs*
Adverse Effects
Trade Name
Dose* and Route of Administration
Electrophysiologic
Hemodynamit
Other
Quinidline
Quinidine sulfate
5-15 mg/kg qid PO
Aggravation of arrhythia, AV bloxck;
Mild negative inotropc,
Nausea, vomiting. diarrhea,
Quinnid ime:
620 mg/kg lid-qid PO, IM
inereased verntricular response inl A
hypotension
depressiom
gluconate
fib
Quinicdline Dura-tabs
Procainamide
Proncstyl
10-20 mg/kg qid PO: 8-20 mg/kg IV, IM: 
Arrhythrmia aggravation; AV block
Hypotension with IV use
Aorexia.auscavomiting,luu
20-50 μg/kg/min CRI+
like reaction
Procan SR
20-50 ng/kg id PO: cat: 62.5 mg/ca1
bid-tid PO
Disopyramide
Norpace
10-20 mg/ kg q2h P()
Arrhythmia aggravation; AV block;
Aggravales (lll: hypotension
inerease im ventricular ratr: in A lib
Lidocaine
2-8 mg/kg IV over 10 uin
Arrhythia aggravationl
Minor
Drowsiness, ataxia, ystagmus,
40-80 μg/kg/imin IV cRI+ (cats: 0.25-1
Sinus bradycardia
tremor, vomiting: seizures
mg/kg IV over 5 nin)
AV block
'Tocainide
Tonocardl
10-20 mg/kg id PO
Sane as lidocaine
Same as lidocaine
Mexiletinie
Mexitil
2-8 mg/kg bid-id P()
Same as lidocainc
Saue as lidlocaine
Saute as lidocaine
Dilantin
30 mg/ kg tid PO)
Miuor
Minor
Depression, seizures
10 ng/kg IV slowly
Propafenone
Rhythmol
3-10 mg/kg tid PO
Bradycardia, arrhythtnia aggravation
1lypotension, negative
Depression
inotrope
Propranolol
Incleral
510 mg tid PO
Bradycardia; AV block
Negative inotrope;
Depression, aggravation of
0.01-0.3 ng/kg IV: cat: 0.2-1.0 mg/kg tid
hypotension
puhnouary bromchoconstiction
PO, 0.01-0.06 mg/kg IV slowly
Nadolo!
Corgard
540 mg tid P()
Atennolol
Tenormin
0.5-1.0 mg/kg sid or bid PO; cat: 6.25-12.5
ng sid-bid P()
Metoprolol
Lopressor
550 ng tidl P()
Esmolol
Brevibloc
Auiodarone
Cordarone
5-15 mg/kg bid P()
Bradycardia; AV block
Negativc inourope;
Hypothyroidisrn, hypertlhyroidism:
hypotension
pulnomary librosis,
 photosensitization, liver failure
Brerylium
Bretylol
6-10 mg/kg IV
Arrhythenia agyravation: tachycardia
Ilypotension (late)
Nansea, yotniting
Sotalol
Betapacc
0.5-2 mg/kg bid, tid; PO
Bradycardia, AV block, arrhythmia
Negative inotropc.
Depre'ssion
aggravation
hypotension
mdeNA
Calan; Isoptin
1-5 mg/kg tid PO; 0.05 mg/ kg q 10-30 nin
Bradycardia: AVblock hypoension
Negative: i11otrope
Deprcssion
IV (maximum cumulative dose is 0.15
g/kg)
Diltiazeml
Cardiazcru
0.5-2 mg/kg tid PO; 1-5 μg/kg/tmin IV
Bradycardia; AV block: hypotension
Negativce inotrope
Minimal depression
Aulenosie
Adenocardl
12 ng IV rapidly, repeat if cesay
AV block: bradyeardia
Hypotensiont
Positive inotrope
Depression
Digoxin
Lanoxin1
0.005-0.011 mg/kg IV
Simus bradycardia: AV block;
Vomiting, dliarrhea
0.22 ng/n2 bid PO, or 0.1 mg/kg divided
proarrhythmia
bid PO: cat: 0.031 mg q 24-48 h PO
Atropine sulfate
Atropine
0.02-0.04 1mg/kg SO, IV
Tachycardia: ventricular arrhythmias
Inercased MV().
Depression. constipation
Glycopyrrolate
Robinul-V
0.005-0.01 mg/kg SQ, IV
Tachycardia
 Increased MVO
*All sloses arue for the dog, unless otherwise inrdicate d.
fCRI, constant rate infusion; formula for CRI: Body wcigh (kg) × dose (μg/kg/min) × 0.36 - tomal lose int niligrams admiriserd IV over 6 hours.
MVOs, nyoardial oxygen consumption A filb, atial fibrillation: CHf, congestive lear failure.
316ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
potassiurn ion concentration. Increases in extracellular
depression of cardiac contractility, vasodilation, and
 potassium potentiate its depressant actions.
hypotension are produced when therapeutic dosages
Therapeutic dosages of procainamide produce ECG
of procainamide are administered intravenously. Intra
changes that are the result of the direct cellular elec-
muscular and oral adlninistration of procainamide pro
trophysiologic effects of the drug. Sinus rate remains
duce insignificant changes in hemodynanics in dogs
unchanged or is minimally decreased. The PR, QRS,
with norrnal myocardial function. Myocardial depres
sion following procainamide administration to patients
17-5, 17-6). The magnitudes of these changes are
in heart failure is minimal, a function of dosage, and
determined by the plasma concentration of procain-
dependent on the rate and route of drug adrninistra-
amide and can be used to monitor toxic drug concen-
tion.
trations. A 25 percen1 increase in the QRs interval is
'Toxic dosages of procainamide produce hypotension
 an indication of procainamide toxicity.
and marked depression of AV conduction (see Table
17-6). First, second-, or third-degree AV block can
PHARMACOKINETICS
occur. Depressed conduction in atrial and ventricular
specialized fbers may initiate intraventricular block,
Procainaride is a lipophilic weak base (pK 9.23)
that is sructurally related to procaine. Procainanide
rhythrmias. The precipitation of tachyarrhythmias by
is rapidly and extensively distributed to exiravascular
toxic dosages of procainamide or quinidine can result
tissues and, consequenty, has a volume of distribution
in syncope or lead to the sudden development of
greater than that of total body waters Procainamide
ventricular fibrillation.5# Clinicaly, prolongation of the
Xapy ar aq panaxa pue iall au a pazogeau st
QRS and QT intervals (corrected for changes in heart
Renal excretion of procainanide is proportional to
rale) can be used as a therapeutic guide in order
creatinine clearance. NAcetylprocainarnide, an active
to avoid toxicity. Hypotension can be treated by the
 metabolite of procainamide in humans, is not pro-
administration of Huids, calkcium-containing solutions,
duced in dogs or cats.51 Drugs or diseases that interfere
or catecholamines (e.g., dopamine, dobutamine).
with liver metabolism or increase serum creatinine
 Patients receiving oral procainamide occasionally de-
 concentration should be expected to prolong procain-
velop nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. These gastroin-
amide elirnination.
testinal side effects are infrequent and generally sub
 Total body clearance of procainamide in dogs is
side when therapy is discontinued or reduced. A side
97 01 8 jo sasesop 1e Sy/u/u 6 o1 2 1noqe
effect that does not appear 1o be associated with ad-
mg/kg,sl The relative contributions of renal and he-
verse consequences occurs in some black dogs treated
patic clearance to total clearance are unknown. If total
with procainamide. Black Dobermans and brindle box-
clearance is due largely to hepatic metabolism, then i1
ers have turned reddish brown when treated with pro-
would be expected that alterations in liver blood flow
cainamide (Moise NS, unpublished observations).
would have little effect on total clearance since pro-
cainamide has a low extraction ratio.
 Plasma procainamide concentrations that are effec-
DISOPYRAMIDE
talis intoxication in dogs range from about 25 to 50
CLINICAI. USE
μg/ml (lDavis LE, personal communication). These
concentrations are higher than in persons, perhaps
Disopyramide is used less cornmonly than quinidine
due to the contribution of Nacetylprocainamide to
and procainamide in the treatment of ventricular ar-
the pharmacologic effect in humans. These plasma
rhythmias,$4 Unfortunately, side effects have limited its
concentrations can be attained with loading doses of
use in dogs.5s
38.2 mg/kg, followed by constant rate infusions of
16.3 mg/kg/hr. Plasra procainamide concenirations
ELECTROPIIYSIOLOGY AND
effective for controlling arrhythmias produced by coro-
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPIIY
nary occlusion and digitalis intoxication in dogs have
also been achieved after iniravenous doses of 40 to 60
Disopyramide is a Class Ia antiarrhyihmic drug with
 mg/kg.* However, plasma procainaride concentra-
electrophysiologic and ECG properties similar to those
tions required to abolish clinical arrhythmias are much
of quinidine and procainamide (see Table 17-2).8 3
lower than 25 to 50 μg/ml.
Disopyramide has a long duration of action and pro.
duces few side effecis in humans.M Like quinidine and
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
procainamide, disopyramide produces electrophysio
logic actions that are due to dirert and indirect (i.e.,
 Procainamide produces minimal cardiovascular de-
anticholinergic) effectss, 5 (see Table 17-3). Unlike
pressant effecis when conpared with quinidine.52 Mild
quinidine and procainamide, however, the anticholin-
ergic effects of disopyramide predominate at relatively
 The toxic manifestations associated with disopyr-
low plasma concentrations. This results in increases in
amide therapy are primarily attributed to hypotension
sinus rate and acceleration of AV conduction when
and myocardial depression, although electrophysio-
 therapeutic dosages of disopyrarnide are administered.
logic and ECG abnormalities sinilar to those produced
Disopyramide should be used cautiously in patients
by quinidine and procainamide can be expected (see
with atrial flutter or fibrillation in order to prevent
Tables 175, 17-6).* Lethargy, weakness, and syncope
excessive ven tricular rales. Disopyramide produces de-
may occur. Pulmonary congestion may develop or be
creases in auomaticity and conduction velocity, and
exacerbated if dogs with compensated heart failure are
increases in refractoriness. Large doses of disopyr-
treated with excessive doses of disopyramide. Anticho-
amide produce direct depression of AV conduction.
linergic actions may result in tachycardia. The inci
These aclions are dependent on the extracellular po-
dence of severe adverse side effects during long-term
tassiun concentration. Like quinidine and procain-
 disopyramide therapy in dogs and cats is unknown.
amide, disopyramide produces dose-dependent pro-
longation of the PR, QRS, and QT inlervals (see Tables
17-5 and 17-6).
LIDOCAINE
PIIARMACOKINETICS
CLINICAL USE
Disopyramide is a lipophilic weak base (pK 8.36)
 Lidocaine is relatively ineffective in the treatment of
that is rapidly and extensively distributed to extravascu-
supraventricular arrhythrmias but is very effective for
lar tissues. The binding of disopyrarnide to plasina
the reatment of ventricular arrhythmias in dogs and
α,-acid glycoprotein is concentration dependent and
cats (chapters 18 and 19). Nonsustained and sustained 
consequently the volume of dlistribuion varies with
ventricular tachycardia, monomorphic and polymor-
concentration.7
phic ventricular tachycardia, veniricular arrhythmias
 Disopyramide is cleared by renal and hepatic mecha-
caused by cardiac sensitization to catecholamines (hal-
nisms, with approximately 20 percent of an intrave-
Othane), and digitalis toxicity respond favorably to li-
nous dose eliminated unchanged in the urine, Hepatic
 docaine therapyss Lidocaine should be considered the
metabolism is extensive and involves successive Ndeal-
 drug of choice for the acute treatment of ventricular
kylation.37, a3 Metabolites may contribute to the overall
 arrhythimias in patients with cornpensated or uncorn-
pharmacologic. effert. Hepatic clearance is intermedi-
 pensated heart failure, but it should be used cautiously
in order to avoid hypotension.7 61. 62
ate in magnitude between that of quinidine and pro-
pranolol.
Oral bioavailability is incomplete due to first-pass
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY AND
 metabolism and averages about 40 percent. The half-
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
life is somewhat larger after oral dosing (2.4 hours)
than after intravenous doses (1.1 hours).37
Lidocaine is a local anesthetic and Class Ib antiar-
Disopyramide doses of 3 to 5 mg/kg IV slow the
rhythmic drug that produces minimal depression of
sinus rate in healthy dogs.$ Maximum plasma concen-
phase O of the cardiac action potential in normal
trations after such doses are approximately 2 to 5 μg/
tissue but marked depression of phase 0 in diseased
Iml. Frequent dosing is required owing to the rapid
tissues.s8. M Unlike Class Ia antiarrhythmic drugs (i.e.,
clearance and short halflife in the dog.
quinidine, procainamide, disopyrarmide), therapeutic
concentrations of lidocaine produce litue effect on
sinus rate, AV conduction, or action potential dura-
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
tion and refractoriness. ‘Therefore, lidocaine usually
Therapeutic dosages of disopyramide produce sig-
can be effectively used in patients with SA node dys-
nificant decreases in myocardial contractility 6 This
function.6 Lidocaine does not produce anticholinergic
effect is much more pronounced than with quinidine
effects.66 Cardiac muscle membrane responsiveness, ex
and procainamide and can lead to a reduction in
cardiac output and an increase in left ventricular end-
 lesser degree by therapeutic concentrations of lido-
 diastolic pressure. Disopyramide therapy also produces
caine than by quinidine or procainamide. In contrast
vasoconstriction, resulting in an increase in peripheral
to Class Ia antiarrhythmic drugs, lidocaine shortens
vascular resistance. The mechanism for this latter ef-
 action potential duration in atrial and ventricular spe-
fect is controversial but may increase afterload,
re-
 cialized fibers, although the effective refractory period
sulting in a reduction in cardiac output. The deleteri-
may be prolonged slightly.** I idocaine does not alter
ous cardiovascular effects of dlisopyramide are dose
atrial  refractoriness  and  conduction  velocity,  which
dependent and must be given serious consideration in
may be a partial explanation for its inefectiveness in
patients with cardiac arrhythmias and heart failure. 61
the treatinent of supraventricular arrhythmias.
 318 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
The cellular electrophysiologic effects of lidocaine
of lidocaine to dogs in hearl failure produce no
depend on the extracellular potassium concentration.7
change in cardiac output, blood pressure, or heart
Hyperkalemia intensifies depressanl effects on cardiac
rate.79,71
membranes, whereas hypokalemia diminishes its effec-
Central nervous systein (CNs) excitement is the
tiveness.36
most common toxic side effect following intravenous
Lidocaine generally produces no change in PR,
lidocaine administration to dogs and cats (see Table
QRS, or QT duration. The QT interval may decrease
17-6),7 Drowsiness and depression 1may occur when
somewhat due to the ability of lidocaine to shorten
therapeutic doses of lidocaine are administered but
 action potential duration. Occasionally, lidocaine pro-
are considered inconsequential. More frequently, agita-
duces sinus tachycardia (see Table 17-5). The mecha-
tion, disorientation, muscle twitching, nystagrnus, and
nisin for this latter effect is uncertain, bul it may
 generalized tonic-clonic seizures are observed as the
involve the central nervous system.
dose of lidocaine is increased. Convulsions are self-
limiting and subside as the plasma lidocaine concentra-
tion decreases. Cats are more sensitive to the CNS side
PHARMACOKINETICS
effects of lidocaine than are dogs, emphasizing the
Lidocaine is a highly lipophilic weak base (pK, 7.85)
need for caution during intravenous bolus administra
that is rapidly and extensively distributed to extravascu-
tion (Muir and Sams, unpublished data). Diazepan,
lar tissues. Consequently, it has a very large volume of
 0.5 mg/kg, is effective in preventing lidocaine-induced
distribution. Lidocaine binds (44 to 71 percent) to
seizures. Respiratory depression and respiralory arrest.
plasma proteins, primarily α-acid glycoprotein.
may occur in unconscious dogs and cats receiving lidoy
 Lidocaine cannot be used orally despite excellent
caine to control arrhythmias due to traumatic myocar-
oral absorption, The clearance of lidocaine from
ditis (Muir and Sans, unpublished data).
plasma is very high (first-pass effect) and is attributed
to hepatic metabolism, since only abou 2 percent of
an iniravenous dose is recovered unchanged in the
TOCAINIDE
unine,67. s Major metabolites result from successive N
dealkylation and arornatic ring hydroxylation.7 The N
Tocainide is effective in the treatnent of ventricular
dealkylated metabolites are pharmacologically active,
arrhythmias. Iowever, its widespread use is limited
 possibly contributing to the antiarrhythmic and toxic
because of side effecis.76
effects of lidocaine.
 Lidocaine is rapidly metabolized by the liver. Conse-
quently, its hepatic metabolism is dependent upon
ELECTROPIIYSIOLOGY AND
liver blood flow.62 Therefore, patients in heart failure
clear lidocaine more slowly than normal patients and
require correspondingly lower dosages. Propranolol69
Tocainide, an analogue of lidocaine, is a Class Ib
antiarrhythmic drug (see Table 17-2).3 13. 4.  Tocai-
and cimetidine reduce hepatic blood Mow. If adminis-
tered concurrently with lidocaine, these drugs could
nide is a lidocaine-like drug that can be given orally.
decrease lidlocaine clearance and predispose to lido-
 Its electrophysiologic, antiarrhythmic, electrocardio-
 graphic, hemodynanic, and toxic effects are identical
centrations in persons range from 2 to 4 μg/m1, with
to those of lidocaine (see Tables 17-4 and 17-6).7"
toxicity occurring at concentrations as low as 5 to 9
Cnlike lidocaine, however, tocainide's clearance is not
μg/ml.72 Concentrations in excess of 9 μg/ml in hu-
 significantly influenced by changes in liver blood flow,
 thereby negating the potential interactions with drugs
mans are frequently associated with toxicity. Ouabain-
induced ventricular arrhythmias in dogs are abolished
like propranolol and cimetidine.
at a mean concentration of 6.2 μg/ml.,/ Plasma concen-
arrhythmias range from 0.5 to 4.0 μg/zml.
PHARMACOKINETICS
'Tocainide is a lipophilic weak base structurally re-
laled to lidocaine. Tocainide was synthesized in an
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
tffort to produce an antiarrhythrnic agent with a lower
Therapeutic doses of lidocaine produce minimal de-
clearance and greater oral availability than those of
pression of cardiac contractility. Intravenous bolus
lidocaine.
 The volurne of distribution is greater than
administrations or infusions of large dosages can pro-
duce transient and mild reductions in cardiac contrac-
lidocaine. Total body clearance of tocainide is less than
tility and vasodilation that may result in transient de-
10 percent of that of lidocaine and is attributed to
creases in cardiac output and arterial blood pressure,
both hepatic metabolism and renal excretion.77 Ap-
respertively, Slow bolus injections of therapeutic doses
proxirnately 30 percent of an intravenous dose is elini-
nated unchanged in 1he urine.77 IIepatic clearance is
lowering the dose and combining treatment with a β-
approximately 2.9 m1/min/kg in healthy dogs77 and is
blocker or cautiously adding a Class Ia antiarrbythmic.
expected to be relatively insensitive to changes in he-
administration and is not extensively metabolized on
PROPAFENONE
its first pass through the liver?s This allows the drug
to be given orally. The halflife of tocainide is approxi-
CLINICAL USE
mately 4.7 hours after intravenous dosing and ranges
 Propafenone, a Class Ib antiarrhythmic, is used in
from 8 to 12 hours after oral doses.7s
the  treatment of ventricular  and supraventricular
tachycardia. It can be effecive in preventing paroxys-
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
mal atrial fbrillation and flutter. Currently, the lim-
The high incidence of side effecis (40 percent)
iting factor in its use is the cost.
(Muir and Sams, unpublished data) mus be appreci-
ated if tocainide is used. Nausea, vomiting, and an-
ELECTROPIIYSIOLOGY AND
orexia are common; neurologic disturbances, includ-
ELECTROGARDIOGRAPIIY
ing ataxia, disorientation, and twitching, can occur.
Moreover, renal failure and ocular lesions develop with
 Propafenone possesses 1/40 the β-blocking activity
use for rnore than 6 rmonths.76
of propranolol. However, because of propafenone's
ability to decrease the maximum rate of rise of phase
 0 of the cardiac action potential, it has been catego-
MEXILETINE
rized as a Glass Ib antiarrhythrmic (see Table 17-2).s
Propafenone-induced depression of phase 0 is ob-
Currently, mexiletine is the most commonly used
served in all cardiac tissues and is rate dependent,
oral Class Ib antiarrhythmic for the treatment of ven-
 being more pronounced at higher heart rates. Concur-
 tricular arrhythmias.7 s2 Preliminary experience and
rent with depression of phase O, propafenone shortens
limited studies have shown it to be effective with a
 action potential duration and decreases the rate of
tolerable incidence of side effecis. Mexiletine can be
combined with β-adrenergic blockers (e.g., atenolol)
and Purkinje fibers. Propafenone slows the rate of
to increase its effectiveness and potentially decreast
 depolarization of action potentials within the atrioven-
side effects. Mexiletine has electrophysiologic, antiar-
tricular node, thereby slowing AV nodal conduction.
rhythmic, ECG, hemodynamic, and toxic effects similar
This electrophysiologic profile predisposes patients to
to those of lidocaine and tocainide (see Tables 17-2,
first-, second-, and third-degree atrioventricular block
17-5, 17-6).69. 83
and prolongation of the QRS duration (see Table 17-
5). Moreover, care should be used in treating patients
with sick sinus syndrome.*6 Propafenone's mild, non-
PHARMACOKINETICS
specific β-blocking acuivity is responsible for is ability
Mexiletine is rapidly absorbed frorn the gastrointesti-
10 slow sinus rate in intact animals.8, 86
s an aos p yiy ym sp siseq y ren ie
PHARMACOKINETICS
Renal excretion is dependent on urinary pH, leading
to large variations in the plasma elimination half-life.
Propafenone is absorbed slowly after oral administra-
The elimination half-life of mexiletine varies from 4.5
tion, reaching peak serum concentrations within 2 to
to 7 hours in dogs and is longer when the urine pH is
 5 hours of administration, Propafenone is extensively
alkaline.** Mexiletine is metabolized by hepatic mixed-
metabolized by the liver, and liver metabolites are
function oxidases and, as with lidocaine, metabolism
known to contain varying degres of parent compound
is influenced by liver blood flow. Cimetidline decreases
01 01 g uouj ssueu ssop u sasesop qeo sane
the rate of mexiletine elimination. The volume of dis-
mg/kg administered two or three times daily.
tibution of mexiletine is large due 1o its high lipid
solubility. Therapeutic plasma concentrations range
from 0.5 to 2 μg/ml.
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
Therapeutic concentrations of propafenone pro-
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
duce mininal decreases in arterial blood pressure and
cardiac contractility, and caution should be used when
Dogs treated with mexiletine may become anxious
administering propafenone as antiarrhythmic therapy
 or depressed. Twitching may develop. Sonme dogs be-
to patienis with congestive heart failure. Large doses
come lethargic. Most side effects can be controlled by
 may precipitate heart failure in patients with preex
isting cardiovascular disease. Side effects include neu
to 17-5) produce their beneficial effects on heart rate
rologic disorders, weakness, depression, nausea, and
  so   a  
vomiting.* The potential for atrioventricular block
the sympathetic nervous system or the effects of exoge-
must be considered, particularly in patients with preex-
nously administered adrenergic drugs (e.g, norepi-
isting atrioventricular conduction disturbances. Propa-
nephrine, epinephrine, isoproterenol, dopanine, and
fenone has the potential to produce proarrhythmic
dobutamine).s Adrenergic stimulation of the heart
 effects in patients that are hypokalemic or receiving
increases sinus rate, enhances conduction velocity
 large doses of loop diuretics (furoseimide).6. s7
through the AV node, and decreases refractoriness.
Automaticity in atrial and ventricular specialized fibers
 is enhanced, Differential decreases in ventricular mus-
PROPRANOLOL
cle refractoriness produce an inhomogeneous pattern
of repolarization that, in the selting of increased auto-
CLINICAL USE
maticity, can predispose to arrhythmias. Propranolol
and other β-adrenoceptor-blocking drugs slow sinus
Propranolol is used to treat sinus tachycardia, supra-
rate, depress conduction through the AV node, and
ventricular and ventricular arrhythmias, hypertrophic
produce a more homogeneous pattern of repolariza
cardiomyopathy, hypertension, hyperthyroidism, and
tion (see Table 17-5). Increases in automaticity pro-
duced by increases in sympathetic tone are abolished.
greatly influenced by the prevailing sympathetic tone
Dosages of propranolol that produce plasma concen-
and β-adrenoceptor numbers. Chronic stimulation of
cardiac receptors by the adrenergic nervous system or
cause direct cellular elecirophysiologic effects. These
catecholamines in heart failure can result in a decrease
direct actions are characleristic of the Class Ia antiar-
in β-adrenoceptor numbers, known as down reguiatin.
rhythmic drugs and have been referred to as quini-
The administration of propranolol or any other β-
dine-like effects.8 The inportance of quinidine-like
 adrenoceptor-blocking drug to a patient that has be-
effects during clinical therapy is controversial but un
come dependent on adrenergic tone in order to main-
likely to be significant. The electrocardiogram is mini-
tain heart rate and cardiac contractility can be lethal.
By contrast, receptor up regulation may occur during
changes induced by decreased heart rate and slowed
chronic therapy with propranolol and other β-adreno-
AV conduction (see Table 17-5).
ceptor-blocking drugs. Chronic therapy with proprano-
lol, for exarnple, causes an increase in adrenergic re-
ceptor numbers or affinity (up regulation), resulting in
PHARMACOKINETICS
severe cardiac arrhythrmias should therapy be suddenly
 Propranolol is a lipophilic weak base (pK 9.45) that.
discontinued.* Similarly, patients with chronic hyper-
is highly bound to plasma α,-acid glycoprotein (90
thyroidism demonstrate an increased number and sen-
percent bound) and tissue proteins.o Consequently,
sitivity of β-receptors.
propranolol is widely and extensively distributed to.
 Propranolol is contraindicated with sinus bradycar-
naas jo angoa e e seu pue snssn ienseaenxa
 dia, AV block, and severe congestive heart failure. Pa-
tion (greater than total body water).9t
tients with chronic obstructive airway disease, those
 Propranolol is metabolized in the liver to several 
undergoing anesthesia, or those receiving calcium en-
 oxidation products and their conjugates, which are
try-blocking drugs must be monitored closely if pro-
eliminated in the urine.92. o3 One of these oxidation
pranolol therapy is being considered.
products, 4-hydroxypropranolol, exhibits pharmaco-
 Drugs other than propranolol that possess β-adreno-
logic activity sinilar to that of propranolol and may
ceptor-blocking activity are potentially useful for the
 contribute to propranolol's pharmacologic effect.93
treatment of cardiac arrhythmias in dogs and cats.
Hepatic metabolism of propranolol is rapid and ex-
 Metoprolol, atenolol, and esmolol are cardioselective
tensive (i.e., clearance is not affected by alterations in
β-adrenoceptor-blocking drugs (Table 17-7) that offer
plasma protein binding or metabolic activity), perfu-
specific advantages in patients with bronchospastic dis-
sion rate-limited (i.e., clearance is affected by alter-
 orders or insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
ations in liver blood flow rate), and saturable, Conse-
quently. the extraction ratio is high and dose
dependent; only a small fraction of an oral dose es-
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY AND
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
ss a srai re usre s-s siin
 Propranolol and compounds that possess β-adreno-
but may increase disproportionately with increased
ceptor-blocking activity as their principal pharmaco-
doses as saturation of liver enzymes occurs.
logic effect are grouped together as Class Il antiar-
The total body clearance of propranolol is very high,
rhythmic drugs. 2 Beta-blocking drugs (see Tables 17-2
approaching or perhaps exceeding liver blood flow in
TABLE 17-7
Pharrmacologic Properties of β-Adrenoceptor-Blocking Drugs
Intrinsic
Membrane
Relative βt
Sympathornimelic
Stabilizing
Drug
Selectivity
Activity
Lipophilicity
Activity
Propranolol
0
High
Nadolol
Lw
Tinolol
0
0
Low
Pindolol
+
Moderate
Metoprolol
Moderate
0
0
Atenolol
+
Low
0
Esnolol*
+
0
Labetalolr
0
1.ow
*Short duration of aetion (10 to 20 minutes)
Posseses αadrenoceptor-blocking activiy.
-. Properry exhibiurd; 0. properly not exhibited.
Madific frm Mir wwI. Sams RA.Pharnaclogy and pharmaokin
iarrhytlit
ic drugs. Fox PR (ed): Catine anrl Felin: Cardiology. Nev
York,Churchil Livingstoue1988,pp 309-333
dogs$4 o5 Alterations in liver blood flow due to physio-
 striction, vasoconstriction, and inhibition of insulin
logic variables (e.g., feeding), disease states (e.g, car-
release.*9
diac failure), or concomitant administration of drugs
‘Toxic concentrations of propranolol produce brady-
affecting cardiac output or liver blood flow would be
cardia, cardiac failure, and hypotension (see Table
cxpected to affect the clearance of propranolol. Feed-
 17-6). Bronchospasm and hypoglycemia mnay occur
ing increases (52 percent) the clearance of intravenous
but are rare. These effects can be prevented by the
propranolol; this is mostly due to an increasc in he-
infusion of catecholamines (e.g., dopamine, dobuta-
patic blood flow, which remains clevated for 5 to 7
mine), which may precipitate cardiac rhythm distur-
hours after feeding.$ Furthermore, propranolol de-
bances. CNS depression and disorientation may occur
creases liver blood Hlow and decreases its own clear-
 during therapy with propranolol and other highly lipo-
ance as well as the clearance of other highly extracted
philic  β-adrenoceptor-blocking   drugs.  Propranolol
drugs (e.g., lidocaine). 71
markedly potentiates the depression of atrioventricular
The dose of propranolol required to suppress cate-
conduction produced by digitalis, calcium entry-block-
 cholamine-induced arrhythmias is 0.1 to 1.0 mg/kg IV
ing drugs, and Class Ia antiarrhythmics, The simultane-
(doses above 0.3 mg/kg are considered high) and 2 to
ous administration of propranolol and a calcium entry-
4 mg/kg orally. Doses may be given two or three times
blocking drug (e.g., verapamil) can produce dramatic
daily. Feeding does not affect the extent of oral absorp-
reductions in heart rate and cardiac contractility.
tion of propranolol but significantly delays the rate of
absorption, shifting the time of peak plasma concentra-
tion from about. 60 to 158 minutes after dosing.* Ther-
ATENOLOL
98 o oy  srn son seid sde
ng/ml in humans and are probably similar in dogs
CLINICAL USE
and cats.
Atenolol is a cardioselective β,-adrenoceptor-block-
ing drug that is used as an alternative to propranolol
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
in dogs and cats (see Tables 17-6, 17-7).s* lt may be:
Propranolol and other β-adrenoceptor-blocking
preferred because of fewer side effects and less fre-
drugs produce dose-dependent decreases in cardiac
quent dosing (0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg od to bid). Atenolol
contractility and metabolic rate. Decreases in cardiac
has been used successfully to reduce sinus rate, depress
AV conduction, and eliminate premature ventricular
contractility and heart rate combine to produce de-
Creases in stroke volume, cardiac output, arterial blood
depolarizations. The electrophysiologic and electrocar-
 pressure, and myocardial oxygen consumption. These
diographic ceffects of atenolol are similar to those of
effects are particularly pronounced after intravenous
propranolol.
administration and must be considered during oral
 therapy in patients with severe congestive heart failure
PHARMACOKINETICS
01 cardiomyopathy. Other important pharmacologic
effects of propranolol are dependent on its nonselec-
Atenolol has low lipophilicity and does not readily
tive β-adrenoceptor-blocking activity (see Table 17-7)
cross the blood-brain barrier, thereby decrcasing the
and include decreases in renin release, bronchocon-
 potential for CNS side effects, In contrast to proprano-
322 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
lol, clearance is primarily renal rather than hepatic.
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
Also, only approximately 10 percent of atenolol is
As with other β-blockers, esmolol must be adminis-
atenolol accounts for the difference in organ clear-
tered cautiously and under close supervision to pa-
ance. Iikewise, low lipid solubility does not result in
tients in heart failure or that are volume depleted. in
 order to avoid the acute ouset of hypotension, pulmo-
significant crossing of the blood-brain barrier, thereby
decreasing the potential for CNS side eflects (depres-
nary congestion, and heart failure. Extravasation of
sion) more commonly seen with propranolol.
esmolol from the vein can result in skin irritation
because of its acidity. Furthermore, when used to treat
life-threatening supraventricular arrhythmias, caution
should be high if prior treatment with calcium chaunel
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
 blockers has been given. When these agents are com-
Excessive doses of atenolol can cause bradycardia or
bined, the potential for excessive bradycardia is in-
AV nodal block. Although the frequency of lethargy
creased.
and depression is much less with atenolol than with
 propranolol, these effects can still occur.
AMIODARONE
ESMOLOL
CLINICAL USE
Although amiodarone is classified as a Class IHI anti-
CLINICAL USE
arrhythrmic (see Table 17-2), it actually possesses Class
I, I1, and IV activity as well.a* It is an effective treatment
Esmolol is an ultra-short-acting cardioselective β-
for both supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias
adrenoceptor-blocking drug (see Tables 17-2, 17-6,
in humans. In addition to its antiarrhythmic proper-
17-7).!5 Like that of other β-adrenoceptor-blocking
ties, it also possesses antifibrillatory activity. Today, use
agents, esmolol's antiarrhythmic activity is fully derived
 of amiodarone in veterinary patients is limited because
from β-blocking activiy.8 21 Electrophysiologic, elec-
of the cost and inadequate clinical studies to demon-
trocardiographic, and hemodynamic effects are similar
strate effectiveness over side effects.
to those of other β-adrenocepior-blocking drugs. Clini-
cally, esmolol is effective therapy for sinus tachycardia,
sllpraventricular tachycardia, and ventricular arrhyth-
PHARMACOKINETICS
 mias that are believed to be initiated or aggravated by
increases in sympathetic tone. Esmolol is particularly
Amiodarone is a lipophilic weak base that has a large
effective as therapy for ventricular arrhythmias that
volume of distribution (2.22 1./kg). 9 It is cleared from
are caused by drugs (thiobarbiturates. halothane) that
the plasma (Cl, = 21.0 ± 7.0 ml/min/kg) by liver
sensitize the myocardium to arrhythmias.
metabolism.9 A major active metabolite, Ndesmeth-
ylamiodarone, accnumulates during chronic oral dos-
ing. The concentration of amiodarone in the myocar-
PHARMACOKINETICS
diun at. steady-state plasma concentrations is almost
90 times its concentration in plasma, reflecting the
Esmolol has a relatively short half-life (minutes) in
selective uptake of the drug by heart tissues. Also, its
dogs and cats. This drug is rapidly converted to inac-
lipid solubility is responsible for amiodarone's high
tive nletabolites by blood esterase?; therefore, esmolol
concentrations in the liver and lungs. Furthermore.
is given as cither an intravenous bolus or a constant-
myocardial concentrations of the drug decrease niuch
rate infusion. Infusion rates ranging from 25 to 200
more slowly than plasma concentrations., ‘The onset of
μg/kg/min have been used to successfully treat ar-
action of orally adrninistered amiodarone is slow and
rhythimias in dogs and cats, to reduce the pressure
therefore requires loading doses.1o Amiodarone is ex-
gradient, myocardial work, and myocardial oxygen
creted by the luminal glands, skin, and biliary tract,
Serum digoxin concentrations increase during concur
duce acutely or eliminate dynamic left ventricular
rent amiodarone administration due to decreases in
outlow tract obstruction in cats with hyperurophic ob-
renal clearance of digoxin. This could predispose to
structive cardiormyopathy (Fox PR, personal communi-
signs and symptoms of digitalis toxicity. Oral bioavail-
cation).  Like  allβ-adrenoceptor-blocking
drugs,
ability is poor, probably due to exteusive first-pass me
esmolol's effects are dependent upon prevailing sym-
tabolism. The complex pharmacokinetics of amioda-
pathetic tone. Drug effects are more pronounced
rone result in difficult dosing schedules and ill-defined
when sympathetic tone is high.
therapeutic plasma considerations.
323
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY AND
clearance of bretylium is low and is attributed to renal
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
elimination." Total clearance is diminished in those
patients with renal dysfunction, and the dose should
Amiodarone was initially introduced as a coronary
be reduced accordingly. The limited volume of distri-
artery vasodilator.s3 However, it markedly prolongs the
bution and low clearance result. in a comparatively
 action potential duration and effective refractory pe-
long half-life of about 10.4 hours. Bretylium is well
riod in both atrial and ventricular tissues. Therapeutic
absorbed after intramuscular adrninistration but is not
doses of amiodarone decrease sinus rate and depress
absorbed after oral administration.
AV conduction velocity. The ECG usually demonstrates
Antifibrillatory effects are related more closely to
a slowing of sinus rate, PR and QT prolongation, and
tissue drug concentration than to plasma drug concen-
a flattening of the T wave (see Table 17-5). Cardiac.
tration. Drug concentrations in plasma decline rapidly
contractility and arterial blood pressure are minimally
after intravenous dosing; tissue concentrations rise
depressed by therapeutic doses of amiodarone.
slowly, peaking at 1.5 to 6 hours,lo2 Therefore, antifi-
brillatory effects should not be expected immediately
SIDEEFFECTSAND TOXICITY
after IV dosing but. are delayed for 3 to 6 hours after
a single dose. Intravenous doses of 2 to 6 mg/kg in
Serious side effects can occur with amiodarone (sce
dogs produce myocardial tissue concentrations that
peak at 6 to 15 μg/ml in 3 to 6 hours. These concen-
fibrosis, gray-bluish discoloration of the skin, corneal
trations increase ventricular fibrillation thresholds 5-
rmicrodeposits, and altered thyroid function can de-
velop. Moreover, although amiodarone when used
alone does not usually cause torsades de pointes, it is
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY AND
more likely when combined with some other drugs
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
(i.e., Class I antiarrhythmics). Until recently, the use
Bretylium produces antiarrhythmic effects by both
of amiodarone in humans was considered only for the
 indirect and direct actions (see Table 17-3). Bretylium
most severe arrhythmias. However, with much lower
therapy results in an initial release of catecholamines
doses and the demonstration that amiodarone effec-
from adrenergic nerve terrminals. This cffect is tran-
tivcly lowered morbidity and mortality, it has become
Sup ponad pasuooud e sq pamonoy si pue iuans 
more generally used."o The extreme effectiveness of
which norepinephrine  release from postganglionic
amiodarone as therapy for potentially lethal cardiac
lerve terminals is inhibited. The direct actions of bret-
arrhythmias that are refractory to conventional antiar-
ylium are limited to ventricular muscle and Purkinje
rhythrmic therapy warrants its continued investigation
tissues, in which it markedly prolongs action potential
in dogs with atrial and ventricular arrhythmias despite
duration and the ffective refractory period u Br-
the potential for toxicity.
ylium increases the threshold necessary to induce ven-
tricular fibrillation.1o3. 104 Clinically, administration of
bretylium in therapeutic dosages causes a transient
BRETYLIUM
increase in sinus and AV conduction velocity, presum-
ably associated with initial catecholamine release.
CLINICAL. USE
This is followed by a longer period during which heart
rate and AV conduction are depressed. The ECG is
Bretylium. a Class Ill antiarrhythmic (see Table 17-
not significantly changed by bretylium.
2), has had limited use in clinical veterinary medicine,
It was initially introduced as a chemical antifibrillatory
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
drug. IIowever, this action was not appreciated until it
Toxicity associated with bretylium therapy is rare.
was learned that adequale tissue concentrations in the:
H ypotension is infrequent and, when it does occur, is
heart did not occur until several hours after intrave
casily treated with intravenous fluids. Ataxia, nausea,
nous administration. The use of bretylium is probably
and vomiting may occur after rapid intravenous admin-
limited to situations of impending ventricular fibrilla-
istration. No significant drug interactions have been
tion in an intensive care situation.
reported in conjunction with bretylinm therapy. Brety-
lium  should not be administered to cxtremely
bradycardic or hypotensive animals.
PIIARMACOKINETICS
 Bretylium is a hydrophilic quaternary amine (i.e., it.
SOTALOL
is ionized at all plI values). The rate and extent of
tissue distribution are less, and therefore its volume of
GLINICAL USE
distribution is lower than that of other drugs discussed
Sotalol is a Class 1ll antiarrhythmic and β-blocker
in this chapter because of its greater polarity. The total
that has been available for clinical use in Europe and
 324 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
South America for over 30 years (see Table 17-2).2.24
cardiac output, and dP/dt (a load-dependent index of
It has been used to treat both ventricular and supra-
ventricular contractility).
ventricular arrhythmias.
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
PHARMACOKINETICS
Adverse effects associated with sotalol administration
 Sotalol is almost 100 percent bioavailable in dogs
include hypotension, bradyarrhythimias, depression,
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea (see Table 17-6).23
and cats, with plasma concentrations reaching their
Congestive heart failure may be precipitated in animals
maxirmum within 1.5 to 2 hours after oral administra-
tion.2 Sotalol demonstrates a relatively longer half-life
with preexisting cardiac disease. As with other Class 11I
than most antiarrhythmic drugs do and is eliminated
and Class Ia and Ic antiarrhythmics, sotalol has the
in the urine and feces. Absorption of sotalol from the
the development of torsades de pointes, particularly in
gastrointesinal tract is delayed by meals containing
calcium, and drug elimination is markedly prolonged
hypokalemic patients or patients receiving relatively
in patients with renal disease. Oral dosages of sotalol
high doses of loop diuretics (furosemide). 46. 6a In
humans, torsades de pointes is more common withi
in the dog range from 3 to 5 mg/kg administered two
or three times daily. The lowest effective dose should
sotalol than with amiodarone.
be used to decrease the incidence of side effects,
VERAPAMIL AND DILTLAZEM
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY AND
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
CLINICAL USE
Efficacy in humans for treatment of supraventricular
Verapamil and diltiazem are examples of Class IV
and ventricular arrhythmias has been established and
 antiarrhythmic agents (see Table 17-2) that can be
cxtensively studied. A major factor in its efficacy is the
effectively used to treat supraventricular arrhythmias.
combined Class IHI and Class II actions present in the
 Both result in some arteriolar dilation, although vascu-
racemic form of sotalol (d,l sotalol). When only the
lar selectivity is substantially less than in dihydropyra-
Class Ill action (d sotalol) is available, the beneficial
midines (ie, nifedipine, amlodipine). Each drug can
effect for decreasing mortality in humans is lost. Sota-
be given parenterally or orally as an antiarrhythmic
lol prolongs the ventricular action potential duration
(for specifics with regard to use, see chapter 18).
and thereby potentially produces antifibrillatory activ-
ilty'; it also inhibits the time-dependent potassinim cur-
PHARMACOKINETICS
rent (delayed rectifier. lk). Minimal depressanl effects
are observed on the background potassium current
Verapamil is a lipophilic weak base that is rapidly
(inward rectifier, I). These actions produce a marked
and extensively distributed to extravascular tissues. To
prolongation of action potential duration and refracto-
tal body clearance is very high due to cxtensive liver
riness and are most pronounced in Purkinje fibers,
 metabolism and possibly other routes of climination.16
although significant prolongation of both atrial and
Two metabolites resulting from successive demethyl
ventricular myocyle action potentials also occurs.
ation are found in plasma affer oral and intravenons
Therapeutic concentrations of sotalol do not affect
dosing and may contribute to the drug's pharmaco
the maximum rate of rise of the cardiac action poten-
 logic effect.los The oral bioavailability of verapamil is
tial (phase 0) nor do they modify the rate of phase 4
low due to cxtensive first-pass metabolism, but the
diastolic depolarization in sinoatrial, atrioventricular,
metabolite, nonverapamil, is active in humans. Vera-
or other alltomatic cells,23 Sinus rate in intact animals
 pamil is cxtensively protein bound. Diltiazem also is
is often decreased. however, due to sotalol's nonselec-
ar s s si i o od 
tive β-blocking activity (see Table 17-5). Unlike other
 metabolism than verapamil. Diltiazem is only partially
β-blockers (propranolol, atenolol) without intrinsic
excreted by the kidneys and primarily eliminated in
sympathomimetic activity (pindolol), sotalol has the
the gastrointestinal tract. Unless the slow-release for-
mulations of diltiazem are used, dosing must be fre-
longing action potential duration and increasing the
quent (three to five times daily in the dog). Because.
magnitude of the inward calcium current. The clinical
 of metabolite accumulation, this dosing interval may
significance of this activity is controversial and may be
decrease with chronic use.
overshadowed by nonselective β-blocking properties.
Verapamil decreases the renal clearance of digoxin,
This latter point is supported by the observation that.
resulting in  increased  serum  digoxin concentra-
 intravenous and oral administration of sotalol to dogs
tions.to7. lus Diluiazem does not interfere with dosing
decreases heart rate, stroke volume, cjection fraction.
requirements for digoxin.
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY AND
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGYAND
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
Class IV antiarrhythmic drugs derive their clectro-
 Digitalis glycosides produce indirect and direct anti-
physiologic and antiarrhythmic activity by producing
arrhythmic effects,1 Most. of the indirect antiarrhyth-
mic actions are due to increases in parasympathetic
dose-depencdent depression of transmembrane calcium
tone and sympathetic inhibition (see 'Table 17-3). Digi-
flux through the slow L-type calciun channel.oo This
action has led to the terms *'slow-channel inhibitory
talis glycosides dlecrease sinus rate, depress AV conduc-
drugs," "calcium antagonists," and
1 "calcium-entry
tion velocity, prolong AV refractoriness, enhance intra-
blockers" (the last of which is preferred). Although a
 atrial conduction, and depress atrial specialized-fiber
wide variety of compounds have been devcloped that
automaticity. Digitalis derives its positive inotropic cf-
inhibit calcium entry into cardiac cells, only verapamil
fecis by producing dose-dependenl inhibition of the
and diltiazem demonstrate significant antiarrhythmic
Na",1
 K-ATPase-dependent pump." Inhibition of the
activityir This action is believed to be due to their
Nat, K' pump results in the accumulation of intracell-
ability to depress the slow inward Car' current and
lar sodium that cxchanges for extracellular calcium,
minimally to inhibition of the fast Na' current. Because
thereby increasing intracellular calcium concenitration,
of dose-dependent decreases in sinus rate and atrioven-
which ultimately produces a more forceful cardiac con-
tricular conduction velocity, slowing of the sinus rate
traction.
Digitalis-induced increase in inotropy. de-
and PR interval prolongation can be documented (sce
crease in cardiac size, and increase in myocardial
Tables 17-3, 17-6).
perfusion may be partially responsible for improved
intra-atrial conduction and the abolition of ventricular
arrhythmias. Prolongation of the PR interval, although
inconsistent, is the most frequent ECG change ob-
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
served during digitalis therapy.
Verapamil and diltiazem can cause decreases in car-
diac contractility, vasodilation, and hypotension (see
SIDE EFFECTS AND TOXICITY
Table 17-6),26. t Depression, anorexia, and lethargy
Toxic doses of digitalis cause cellular depolarization
can be seen with these calcium-cntry blockers.
and marked slowing of conduction in atrial and ven-
Toxic doses of verapamil or ditiazerm can produce
tricular spccialized fibers and the AV node. These ac-
sinus bradycardia, AV block, hypotension, and heart
failure.2s These deleterious effects can be antagonized
tions can produce a wide variety of conduction dis-
turbances, including first-, second-, and potentially
by the intravenous administration of  calcium-con-
third-degree AV block; right or left bundle branch
taining solutions or catecholarnines.
block; and reentrant atrial or ventricular arrhythmias.
The excessive accumulation of intracellular calcium
can result in abnormalities in intracellular calcium
DIGITALIS GLYCOSIDES
kinetics, causing oscillation of the resting membrane
potential, delayed afterdepolarizations (DADs), and
the development of atrial and ventricular arrhythmias.
CLINICAL USE
More common toxic side effects include depression,
restlessness, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, and diarrhca
Digoxin is the most common digitalis glycoside used
to treat supraventricular arrhythmias, Atrial fibrillation
(see Table 17-6).
is the most frequent supraventricular arrhythmia
Digitalis toxicity can be managed by decreasing or
treated in dogs with digoxin (for specifics regarding
withdrawing digitalis therapy. Lidocaine and phenytoin
are particularly effective for treating digitalis-induced
treatment see chapter 18).
arrhythmias. The simultancous administration of di-
goxin with certain drugs (e.g., furosernide, quinidine,
PHARMACOKNETICS
propafenone, amiodarone, and verapamil) can de-
crease the renal clearance of digoxin, increase digoxin
 1Digoxin has a low therapeutic to toxic ratio. In years
serum concentrations, and potenually induce digitalis
 past, excessive doses of digoxin resulted in frequent
toxicity.1o Ilypokalemia decreases digoxin binding to
toxicity. Currently, more conservative and cautious dos-
skeletal muscle, increasing serum digoxin plasma con-
ing, knowledge of drug and disease interactions, and
centrations and predisposing to digitalis toxicity.
monitoring of plasma digoxin concentrations facilitate
therapy with less toxicity. Digoxin is excreted primarily
POTASSIUM AND MAGNESIUM
through the kidneys and, therefore, in renal failure,
the dose must be decreased. Renal excretion of di-
Throughout this discussion, continued refcrence has
goxin is also reduced during hypokalemia.
 been made to maintaining normal serum potassium
326ARNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
concentrations. Indeed, it can be unequivocally stated
hypokalemia 31. 46. 61 Therefore, serum potassium con-
that increases or decreases in serum potassium concen-
centrations should be monitored during initiation of
tration can be responsible for the development of
antiarrhythmic therapy if hypokalemia is suspected, or
during adrministration of large doses of loop diuretics.
duces sinus bradycardia, first-, second-, and third-de-
Magnesium deficiency is associated with chronic car-
gree atrioventricular block, sinoventricular rhythm dis-
rliovascular disease and, cither by itself or in associa-
trbances, sinoventricular rhythms, and ultimately,
tion with hypokalemia, has been demonstrated to pro-
widening of the QRs complex, poor ventricular func-
duce a variety of cardiac arrhythmias, particularly
tion, cardiac failure, and ventricular fibrillation. Hypo-
ventricular tachycardias 36. i1e, 13 Magnesium is neces-
sary for normal Na', K-ATPase pump function and
tricular tachycardia and predisposes to ventricular
exerts control over intracellular potassium homeosta-
fibrillation. Abnormalities in serum potassium concen-
sis. Magnesium is also required for protein and nucleic
tration can have dramatic effects upon antiarrhythmic
acid synthesis within cells and in the mitochondria.
therapy and thc effects of antiarrhythmic drugs. In-
Magnesium homeostasis is important for normal func-
deed, most antiarrhythmic drugs are ineffective during
tion of potassium channels in cardiac myocytes and
hypokalemia and potentially toxic during hyperka-
therefore can influence action potential, duration, and
lemia. Furthermore, many antiarrhythmic drugs with
Iesting membrane potential.
the potential to produce proarrhythmic effects are
Magnesium is recognized as a physiologic calcium
more likely to do so in hypokalemic patients. Relatively
channel blocker that may interfere with calcium cur-
minor proarrhythmic effects in normokalemic patients
rents, causing shortening of the action potential dura-
can  transform  into  severe polymorphic
: ventricular
tion. Decreases in magnesium can in fact shorten ac
tachycardia (including torsades de pointes) in states of
tion potential amplitude and duration and decrease
TABLE 17-8
Exanples of Drug-Drug Interactions Involving Antiarrhythmic Drugs
Class
Drug
Interaction with
Result
Ia
Quinidine
Digoxin
Inereased digoxin level
Other Class I antiarrhythmics
Added negative inotropic cffeet and/or
depressed concduction
β-blockers. calciunn antagonists
Enhanccd hypotension, negative
 imotropic: effect.
Amiodarone
Incrcased risk of torsacdles dle pointes
Varapamil
If hypokalemia, risk of torsadcs dc
pointcs
Diuretics
Increased quinidine level
I'rocainamide
Few interactions
[dode]
Iossible immume effects
h
Lidocaine
β-blockers, cimeridine, halothane
Reduced hepatic clearance of lidocaine;
toxicity
Phenytoin
Chloraumphenicol
Reduced hepatic clearance of
phenytoin; long half-life
Tocainide
Few interactions
Mexiletine
Few interactions
Propafenone
Drugs inhibiting SA or AV rodes (β-
SA and AV nodal depression
blockers. verapamil, diltiazeim,
(ligoxin)
Drugs with negative intropie effees
Depressed myocardium
Drugs with depressed HV conduction
Conduction delay
(quinidine. procainanide)
Digoxin
Digoxin level increased
I1
Propranolol (β-blockers)
Anesthetics
Myocardial depression
Lidocaine
Reduced clearamce
I1
Auiodarone
Class Ia drugs
Risk of torsades de pointes
Digoxin
Digoxin level incrcascd
Flecainide
Flecainide level increaserd
Sotalol
Diuretics, Class la agents, aniodarone,
Risk of torsades de pointes
phenothiazines
IV
Veraparnil
β-blockers
Myorardial depressals
Digoxin, quinidine
Incrcased digoxin concentration
Diltiazem
β-llockers
Myocardial depression
Modined from Mareus FI, Opie LI. Antiarrhythmic agents. In Opiu: ILH (ed): Drugs for the Heart. 3rd d. Philarlelphia, WB Saunders. 1991. p 189.
PHARMACOLOGY AND PHARMACOKINETICS OF ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUGS 327
8. Camm AJ. Current antiarrhythmic therapy overview.
resting mermbrane potential; this can predispose to
spontaneous automaticity, decreases in cardiac refrac-
Cardiovasc: Drugs Ther 4:531, 1990
toriness, and development of tachyarrhythmias." In-
9. Vaughan-williams EM. Classification of antiarrhythnic
drugs. In Sandoe E, Flensted-Jensen E, Olesen K (eds):
creases in magnesium produce negative chronotropic
Cardiac Arrhythimias. Astra, Sweden, Sodertalje, 1970,
and antiarrhythmic effecis. Intravenous magnesium ad
p 449
ministration produces slowing of the heart rate, mini-
10.
 Singh BN, Vaughan-Williams EM. A third class of antiar-
mal prolongation of the PR interval, and mild systemic
rhythmic action, Effects on atrial and ventricular intra-
cellular potentials, and othcr pharmacological aclions
hypofension. Ideally, serum rmagnesium concentrations
on cardiac muscle of MJ 1999 and Al1 3474. Br J
should be evaluated in dogs and cats with chronic
Pharmacol 39:075, 1970
heart disease or in animals receiving high doses of
11.
Singh BN, Vaughan-Williams EM. A fourth class of anti-
loop diuretics (e.g., furosemide), particularly since hy-
dysrhythmic action? Effect of verapamil on ouabain
 pomagnesemia can produce ventricular arrhythmias. is
toxicity, on atrial and ventricular intracellular poten-
 In states of hypomagnesemia, the administration of
tials, and other features of cardiac funclion. Cardiovasc:
Res 0:109, 1972
magnesium chloride (0.3 mEq/kg) over 10 minutes
12. Williams EMV: A classification of antiarrhythinic actions
followed by a constant-rate infusion of 0.2 mEq/kg/hr
reassessed after a decade of new drugs. J Clin Pharma-
can be used to return serum magnesium concentra-
col 24:129, 1984
13. Harrison DC. Antiarrhythmic drug classitication: new
tions to within normal limits (1.5 to 2.4 mEq/L).
science and  practical  applications.  Am  J  Cardiol
56:185, 1985
14. The Task Force of the Working Group on Arrhythmias
DRUG-DRUG AND
Gambit." Eur 1leart J 12:1112, 1991
DRUG-DISEASE INTERACTIONS
15.
 Members of the Sicilian Gambit. Antiarrhytlimic 'Ther-
apy: A pathophysiologic Approach. Arnonk, NY, Futura
Publishing Com pany, 1994
16.
Maze M, Smith GM. Identification of rcceptor mecha-
Interactions between drugs (Table 17-8) or betwee1l
nism rmediating epinephrine-induced arrhythmias dur-
 drugs and various disease states are common. When
ing balothane anesthesia in the dog. Anesthesiology
severe, they can alter drug concentrations in the blood
59:322,1983
and, therefore, at the drug-receptor site to such an
17. Penkoske PA, Sohel SE, Corr PB. Disparate elcctrophys-
cxtent that therapeutic failure may result. Although a
iological alterations accompanying dysrhythmia due to
coronary oeclusion and reperfusion in the cat. Circula-
given drug dose may result in clinical efficacy whien
tion 58:1023, 1978
administered, the same drug may produce toxicity or
18. Muir ww, Sams R. Clinical pharmacodynamics and
be ineffective if its pharmacokinetics are altered by the
pharmacokinelics of β-adrenoceptor blocking drugs in
administration of another drug or by a disease process.
vete1inary medicine, Comp Coni Ed 6:156, 1984
 Examples of pharmacokinetic parameters that may be
19. Cardinal R, Sasyniuk Bl. Electrophysiological effects of
altered Irom drug-drug interactions are illustrated in
bretylium tosylate on subendocardial Purkinje fibers
from infarcted canine hearts. J Pharmacol Expl Ther
Table 17-8
204:159, 1978
20. Luucchesi BR, Chi L, Friedrichs GS. et al. Antiarrhylhi-
mic versus antifibrillalory actions: inference from ex-
REFERENCES
perinental studies. Am J Cardiol 72:25F, 1993
21.
Singh BN. The coming age of the class llI antiarrhyth-
mic principle: retrospective and future trends. An J
Cardiol 78(4A):17. 1996
1. Allessie MA, Konings K, Kirchhof GJHI, et al. Fleciro
22.[
Lazzara R. Froin first class to third class: tecent up-
physiologic mechanisms of perpetuation of atrial (ibril-
heaval in antiarrhythmic: therapy-—lessons from clinical
lation.Am J Cardiol 77:10A, 1996
trials. Am J Cardiol 78(4A):28, 1990
2. I londeghem I.M, Katzung BG. Mechanism of action of
23. Ruffy R. Sotalol. J Cardiovasc Electrophys 4:89, 1993
antiarrhythmic drugs. In Sperelakis N (ed) : Physiology
24.
Opie LH, Frishman WI1, Thadani L. Calcium channel
and Pathiophysiology of the Heart. 3rd ed. Boston,
antagonists (calcium entry blockers). I Opie 1.1I (ed):
Kluwcr Academic Publishers, 1995, p 589
Drugs for the Heart. 4th ed. Philadelphia, wB Saun-
 3. Link M, Homoud M, Foote CB, et al. Antiarrhythmic:
dc1s, 1995
drug therapy for ventricular arhythmias: current per.
25.
Antman FM, Stone PHi, Muller JE. Braunwald E. Cal-
spectives. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 7:653, 1996
cium channel blocking agents in the treatment of car-
4. Kadish A, Morady F Mechanisim-specific therapy of ven-
diovascular disorders. Part 1. Basic and clinical electro-
tricuar tachycardia. J Cardiovasc Electrophys 1:08, 1990
physiologic effects. Ann Intern Med 93:875, 1980
5. Binah O, Rosen MR. Mechanism of ventricular arrhyth-
26.S
Stone PH, Antman EM, Muller JE, Braunwald E. Cal-
mias. Circulauion 85 (Suppl I);:125, 1992
cium channel blocking agents in the treatment of car-
 6. Singh BN. Do antiarrhythmic drugs work? Some reflec-
diovascular disorders. Part I1. Hemodynamic effects and
tions on the implications of the cardiac arrhythmia
clinical applications. Ann 1ntern Med 93:886, 1980
suppression trial. Clin Cardiol 13:725, 1990
27. Singh BN, Baky S. Nademanee K. Second-generation
7. Woosley Rl. New concepts affecting the use of antiar-
calcium antagonists: search for greater selectivity and
rhythmic agents. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 4:541, 1990
versatility. Am J Cardiol 55:214B, 1985
328ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FLNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
28. Pelliccia F, Cianfrocca C. Romeo F, Peale A. I lypertro-
48. Jaillon P, Winkle RA. Eleclrophysiologic comparativc
phic cardiomyopathy: long-term effects of propranolol
study of procainamide and Nacelylprocainamide in an-
versus verapamil in preventing sudden death in low-
esthetized dogs: concentration-respouse relationships.
risk* patients. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 4:1515, 1990
Circulafion 60:1286. 1979
29. Setaro JF. Zanet Bl., Schuman DS, et. al. L'sefulncss ol
49. Roscn MR, Merker C, Gelband I1, HIoffiman BF. Effecls
verapamil for congestive heart failure associated with
 of procainamide on the electrophysiologic properties
abnormal left ventricular diastolic filling and normal
 of the canine ventricular conducting system. I Pharma-
leff venuicular systolic performance. Am J Cardiol
col Exp Ther 195:438, 1973
66:981. 1990
50. Papich MG, Davis 1.E, Davis CA, ct al. Pharmacokinetics
30. Brighu JM, Golden AL, Gompf RE, et. al. Evaluation
of procainamide hydrochloride in dogs. An J Vet Res
of thc calciuun channel-blocking agents diliazem and
47:2351, 1986
verapanil for freatinent of feline hypertrophic cardio-
 51. Bagwell FE, Walle J, Drayer DE, et al. Correlation of
myopathy. J Vet lntern Med 5:272, 1991
 the electrophysiological and antiarrhythmic properties
31. Spedding M, Paoletti R. Classification of calcium chan-
of the Nacetyl metabolite of procainamide with plasma
nels and calcium antagonists. Progress report. Cardio-
and tissue concentrations in the dog. J Pharmacol Exp
vasc Drugs Ther 6:35, 1992
Ther 197:38, 1976
32. Frishman WH, Sonnenblick EH. Calcium channel
52. Badke FR, Walsh RA, Crawford Mli, et al. Heinody-
blockers. In Schlant RC, Alexander Rw (eds): The
namic effects of Nacetyl procainarmide coinpared with
Heart, Arteries, and Veins. New York, McGraw-Hill,
procainamide in conscious dogs. Circulatiou 6:1142.
1994, p 1291
33.NattelS, Bailey JC. Time course of the clectrophysiolog
1981
53. Bigger JT, IIofman BE. Antiaerhythmic drugs. In Gil
ical cffccts of quinidine on canine cardiac Purkinje
man AG, Goodman LS, Rall TW, Murad F (cds): Thc
fibers: concentration dependence and comparison with
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. 7th ed. New
York, Macmillan, 1985, p 748
225:176. 1983
 54. Iicel RC, Brogden RN, Speight IM, Avery GS. Disopyt-
34. Materson BJ, Caralis PV. Risk of cardiac arrhythinias in
 amide: a review of its pharmacological properties and
relation to potassium imbalance. I Cardiovasc Pharma-
therapcutic use in treating cardiac arrhythmias. Drugs
col 6:S493, 1984
15:331, 1978
35. Giardina EGV. lipka 1.J. Class la antiarrhythmic agents:
 55. Ranney RF., Dean RR, Karim A, Radzialowski FM. Diso-
quinidine, procainamide, disopyramide. In Podrid PJ,
pyramide phosphate: pharmacokinetic and pharmaco-
Kovey PR (eds) : (Cardiac: Arrhythmia: Mechanisms, Di-
logic relationships of a new antiarrhythmic agent. Arch
agnosis and Management. Baltimore, Wiliams and Wil.
Int Pharmacodyn 191:162, 1971
kins, 1995, p 369
56. Kus T, Sasyniuk B. Electrophysiological actions of diso-
36. McGowern B. Hypokalemia and cardiac arrhythmias.
pyramide phosphate on canine ventricular muscle and
Editorial views. Anesthcsiology 63:127, 1985 
Purkinje (ihers. Circ Res 37:844, 1975
37. Chassaing C, Duchene-Marullaz P, Paire M. Mechanism
 57. Karim A, Cook C, Novotney Rl, ct al. Pharmacokinetics
of action of quinidine on heart. rate in the dog. J
and steady-state myocardial uptake of disopyramide in
Pharmacol Exp Ther 222:688, 1982
the dog. Drug Metab Dispos 6:338, 1978
38. Goette A, Honeyeutt C, 1angherg.J. Electrical remodel.
58. Cook Cs, Karim A, Sollman P. Stereoselectivity in the
ing in atrial fibrillation. Circulation 94:2968, 1990
metabolism of disopyramide enantiomers in rat. and
39. Neff CA, Davis 1E, Baggot JD. A comparative study
dog. Drug Metab Dispos 10:116,1982
of the pharmacokinctics of quinidine. Am J Vet Res
 59. Yeh BK, Sung P, Scherlag BJ. Effecis of disopyramide
33:1521,1972
on electrophysiological and 1ncchanical properties of
40. 1liatt E, Quinn G. The distribution of quinine, quini-
the heart. J Pharm Sci 62:1924, 1973
dine, cinchonine, and cinchonidine in fluids and tis-
C0. Walsh RA, HIorwitz L.D. Adverse hemodynarnitc cffects
sues of dogs. J Pharinacol Exp Ther 83:101, 1985
of intravenous disopyramide compared with quinidine
41. Mayersohn M, Perrier D, Fenster P, Marcus FI. Steady-
in conscious dogs. Cireulation 60:1053, 1979
state plasna concentrations of quinidine and proprano-
G1. Bigger JT, Sahar Dl. Clinical types of proarrhythmic
lol. Clin Pharinacol Ther 97:078, 1979
response to antiarrhythmic drugs. Am J Cardiol 59:2E,
42. Leahey EB. Bigger JT, Buller VP Jr. Quinidine-digoxin
1987
inleraction. Time course and pharmacokinetics. Am J
62. Fcely .I, Wade D, McAllister CB. Effect of hypotension
Cardiol 48:1141, 1981
 on liver blood flow and lidocaine disposition. N Engl J
43. Warner NJ, Leahey EB Jr, Hougen J, et al. Tissue
Med 307:866, 1982
digoxin concentrations during the quinidine-digoxin
63. Camphell RwF. Class Ih antiarrhythmic agents. In Po-
interaction. Am I Cardiol 51:1717, 1983
drid PJ, Kowey PR (eds): Cardiac Arrhythmia: Mecha-
44. Lathers GM, Roberts J. Are the sympathetic neural
nisms, Diagnosis and Manageinent. Baltimore, Williams
effects of digoxin and quinidine involvcd in their action
and wilkins, 1995, p 391
of cardiac rhythm? J Cardiovasc Pharm 7:350, 1985
64. Hondeghem LM, Grant AO, Jensen RA. Antiarrhythimic.
45. Schmid PG, Nelson L.D. Mark AL., el al. Inhibition of
drug action: selective deprcssion of hypoxic cardiac
adrenergic vasoconstriction by quinidine. J Pharmacol
cells. Am Ileart J 87:002, 1974
Exp Thcr 188:124, 1974
65, Roos JC, Dunning AJ. Effects of lidocaine on impulse
46.
Zipes DP. Proarrhythmic effects of antiarrhythmic
formation and conduction defecis in man. Am HIeart J
drugs. Aim J Cardiol 59:26E, 1987
89:686, 1975
17.1
Roden DH, Iioffman BF. Action polential, prolonga-
66. Harrison DC, Alderman EI. The pharmacology and
tion, and induction of ahnormal automaticity by low
clinical use of lidocaine as ai1 antiarrhythmic drug.
quinidine concentrations in canine Purkinje fibers. Re-
Modern Treat 9:139, 1972
latonship Lo potassium and cycle length. Circ Res
67. Keenhagan [B. Boyes RN. The tissue distribution, me-
56:857, 1985
tabolisin, and excretion of lidocaine in rats. guiea
PHARMACOLOGY AND PHARMACOKINETICS OF ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUGS 329
pigs, dogs and man. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 180:454.
88. Muir Ww, Sams RA. Clinical pharmacodynamics and
1972
pharmacokinetics of β-adrenoceptor blocking drngs in
68. Wilcke JR, Davis LE, Neff-Davis CA, Koritz CD. Pharma-
veterinary medicine. Comp Cont Ed 156:150, 1984
cokinetics of lidocaine and its active metabolites in
89. Shiroff RA, Mathis J, Zelis R, ct al. Propranolol rc-
dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 6:49, 1983
bound: a retrospective study. Am J Cardiol 41:778, 1978
69. Branch RA, Shand DG, wilkinson CR, Nies AS. The
90. Evans GII, Nies AS, Shand DG. The disposition of
rcduction of lidocainc clearance by dl-propranolol: An
propranolol. lil. Decreased half-life and volume of dis-
cxample of hemodynamic drug interartion. J Pharma-
tribution as a result of plasma binding in nan, monkey,
col Exp Ther 184:515, 1973
dog and rat. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 186:114, 1973
70. Branch RA, Shand DC, Wilkinson GR, Nies AS. The
91. Vu VT, Abramson FP. The pathways of propranolol
reduction of lidocaine clearance by dl-propranolol. N
metabolism in dog and ra1 liver--10.000 g supernatant
Engl J Med 303:373, 1980
[ractions. Drug Metab Dispos 8:300, 1980
71. Lineberger AS, Sprague DH, Battaglini JW. Sinus arrest
92. Walle T, Oauis JE, Walle UK, Knapp DR. New ring
 associated with cimetidine. Aresth Analg 64:554, 1985
hycdroxylatcd metabolites of propranolol. Drug Metah
72. Wilcke JR, Davis 1.E, Neff-Davis CA. Deiermination of
Dispos 10:122, 1982
lidocaine concentrafions producing therapeutic and
93. Fitzgerald JD, O'Dornell SR. Pharrmacology of 4hy-
toxic cffcts in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 6:105, 1983
droxypropranolol, a metabolite of propranolol. Br J
73. Mason DT, DeMaria AN, Amsterdam EA, et al. Antiar-
Pharmacol 43:222, 1971
rhythmic agents. I: Mechanisms of acion and clinical
 94. Orme CF, Orme MI., Buranapong P, et al. Contribution
pharmacology. Drugs 5:261, 1973
of the liver to the ovcrall climination of propranolol. J
74. Mason DT, DeMaria AN, Amsterdam EA, et al. Antiar-
Pharmacokinet Biopharm 4:17, 1976
rhythmic agents. II: therapeutie considerations. Drugs
95. Kates RF, Keene BW, Hamlin RL. Pharinacokinetics of
5:292,1973
propranolol in the dog. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2:21,
 75. Ikeda M, Dohi T, Tsujimoto A. Inhibition of y-aminobu-
1979
tylic acid relcase from synaptosomes by local anesthe-
96. Bai SA, Walle UK, Walle T. lnfluence of food on the
tics. Am Soc Anesth 38:495, 1983
 intravenous and oral dose kinetics of propranolol in
76. Calvert CA, Pickus CW, Jacobs GJ. Efficacy and toxicily
the dog. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm 13:229, 1985
 of tocainide for the treatment of ventricular lachyar-
97. Opie [ii, Sonnenblick Eli. Frishman W, Thadani L.
rhythmias in Doberman pinschers with occull cardio-
Beta-blocking agents. In Opie Ll1 (ed): Drugs for the
1nyopathy.IVet Intern Mcd 10:235.1996
Heart. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 1
77. Berlin-Wahlen A, Barcus JC, Kcenhagen JB, et al. Elimi-
 98. Swan JHI, Chisholn Aw. Control of rccurrenl supraven-
nation of N(2-aminoacyl)-2,0-xylidines after intrave-
tricular tachycardia with amiodarone hydrochloride.
nous infusion i1n1 dogs. Acta Pharm Suec 14:417, 1977
Can Med Assoc J 114:43. 1976
78. Coltart D], Berndt TB, Kernoff R, I larrison DC. Antiar-
99. Latini R, Connolly SJ, Kates RE. Myocardial disposition
rhythmic and circulatory effects of Astra w36095a
of amiodarone in the dog. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
new lidocainc-like agent. Am J Cardiol 34:35, 1974
224:003,1983
79. Campbell NPS, Kelly JG, Adgey AAJ, Shanks RG. The
100. Marcus FI, Opie LH. Antiarrhythimic agcnts. In Opie
clinical pharmacology of mexiletine. Br J Clin Pharma-
1.1I (ed): Drugs for the Hearl. Philadelphia, WB Sau-
col 6:103, 1978
ders, 1995, p 207
 80. Singh S, Klein R, Eisenberg B, et al. Long-ferm cffect.
101. Naccarelli GV, Dougherty Al 1. Amiodarone: a revicw of
of mexiletine on left ventricular function and relation
its pharmacologic, antiarrbythinic, and adversc cffects.
to suppression of ventricular arrhythmia. Am J Cardiol
In Podrid PJ, Kowery PR (eds): Cardiac Arrhythinias:
66:1222, 1990
Mechanisms, Diagnosis and Manageinent. Baltimore,
 81. Podrid PJ, Kowery PR, Frishman WH, et al. Coinpara-
williams and wilkins, 1995, p 434
tive cost-effectiveness analysis of quinidine, procain-
102. Anderson JL, Patterson E, Conlon M, et al. Kinetics
amide, and mexiletine. Am J Cardiol 68:1662, 1991
of antifibrillatory effects of bretyliun: correlation with
82. Dufr HJ, Rahmberg M, Sheidon RS. Role of quinidine
Inyocardial drug concentrations. Am J Cardiol 46:583,
 in the mexiletine-quinidine interaction: electrophysio-
1980
logic correlates of enhanced antiarrhythmic efficacy J
103. Bigger JT Jr, Jaffe CC. The effect of bretyliun tosylate
Cardiovasc Pharmacol 16:685, 1990
on the electrophysiologic properties of ventricular inus-
83. Lucchesi BR, Patterson ES. Antiarrhythunic drugs. In
cle and Purkinje fibers, Am J Cardiol 27:82, 1971
Antonaccio MJ (ed): Cardiovascular Pharmacology. 2nd
104. Sanna C, Arcidiacono R. Chemical ventricular defibril-
ed. New York, Raven Press, 1984, p 329
lation of the human heart with bretyliun tosylate. Am
 84. Prescott LF, Pottage A, Clements JA. Absorption. distr-
J Cardiol 32:982, 1973
bution and elimination of mexiletine. Postgrad Med J
105. Breznock EM, Kagan K, Ilibser NK. Effects of bretylium
53:50,1977
 tosylate on the in vivo fibrillating canine ventricle. Am
 85. Beckett AH, Chidomere EC. The distribution and ex-
1 Vet Res 38:89, 1977
cretion of mexileline in man. Postgrad Med J 53:60,
106. Mcllhenny IIM. Metabolism of |*C| verapamil. J Med
1977
Chem 14:1178, 1971
 86. Pratt CM. Class Ic antiarrhythmic agenis: propafenone.
107. Klein HO, Kaplialinsky F. Verapamil and digoxin: their
flecainide, and ethrozine. In Podrid PJ, Kowery PR
respective effects on atrial fbrillation and their interac-
(eds): Cardiac Arrhythmia: Mechanisms, Diagnosis and
tion. Am J Cardiol 50:894, 1982
 Management. Baltimore, williams and Wilkins, I995.
108. Kuhlman J. Fffects of verapamil, diltiazem. and nifedi-
p 391
pine on plasma levels and renal cxcretion of digitoxin,
87. The ESVEM Investigators. The ESVTM trial: eleciro
Clin Pharmacol 1her 38:667, 1985
physiologic study versus elecirocardiographic monitor-
109. Katz AM. Basic cellular mechanisms of action in1 the
ing for selcction of antiarrhythmic therapy of ventricu-
calcium-channel blockers. Am J Cardiol 55:2B, 1985
lar tachyarrhythmias. Circulation 79:1354, 1989
110. Hoffman BF, Bigger lJ. Digitalis and allied cardiac
330 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
glycosides. In Gilnan AG, Goodman LS, Rall TW,
112. Zehcnden M, Mcinentz T, Faber T. Caspary A, et al.
Murad F (eds): The: Pharmacological Basis of Thera-
Antiarrhythunic effects of increasing the daily intakc of
peutics. 7th ed. New York, Macinillan, 1985, p 716
magnesiun and potassium in patients with frequent
111. The ESVEM lnvestigators. Deterininants of predictedl
ventricular arrhythmias. J Am Coll Carcdiol 29:1028,
efficacy of antiarrhythmic drugs in the electrophysio-
1997
113. Arsenian MA. Magncsium andl cardiovascular discase.
trial. Circulation 87:323, 1993
Progr Cardiovase Dis 35:271, 1993
Diagnosis and
18
Management of
Canine
Arrhythmias
N. SYDNEY MOiSE
OVERVIEW
The dccision to treat an arrhythmia must be made in conjunction with
thc history, clinical signs, physical examination, and completc data base.
eaui yo sieo pue pausesa aa pous uaen ue s suoe
clearly undcrstood by both the cliniciann and pet owner. Follow-up examina
tions and electrocardiographic (ECG) recordings arc crucial to assure appro-
priatc outcome.
ECG ACQUISITION AND ARRHYTHMIA
IDENTIFICATION
ROUTINE ECG RHYTHM STRIP RECORDINGS
Routine ECG rhythm strips arc frcquently inaccurate and insuffcicnt to
disclose and assess potentially dangerous arrhythmias.' * Although standard
ECG recordings rmay sometimes capturc arrhythmias, reliance on thcse short.
rccordings reduces the likelihood of arrhythmia detection, maintaining ap-
propriatc surveillancc, or reaching accurate conclusions.
24-HOUR ECG (HOLTER) MONITORING
Twenty-four-hour ambulatory ECG (Hloltcr) monitoring is an irmportant
technique to assist evaluation and monitoring, both before and aftcr treat-
mcnt. Thrce types of conntinuous ECG recordcrs arc available:?
1. The contimuous recorder (most commonly used in dogs and cats)
contains at least wo amplifers and an analog tape recorder for capturing
the ECG continuously;
 2. 'The intermittent recorder is self-activated for purposes of capturing
abnormal rhythms when a patient has symptoms. This rccords shorl seg-
ments for analysis or transmission by tclephone:
 3. 'The real-timc analyic recorder analyzes the recording as it. occurs annd
storcs only information interpreted as abnormal.
331
332ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
CLINICAL INDICATIONS
Holter recordings performcd in normal beagles have
revealed only rare ventricular extrasystoles."
A Holter recording is indicatcd whencver clinical
signs may be associated with a cardiac arrhythmia that
QRs vARIAT1oN. A great variation in QRS-T morphol-
has eluded diagnosis on the routinc ECG. In addition,
ogy is present in caninc 24hour recordings. These
animals with supraventricular tachycardia or vcntricu-
may be causcd by the change in cardiac location within
lar tachycardia that requires treatment may bennefit by
comparing a baseline and post-treatment recording to
the chcst whein the dog moves. Awareness of this fact
evaluate efficacy.* 7
preve nts rmisdiagnosis of conduction disturbances.
 NORMAL HEART RATE VARIATION. The norMal healthy
TECIINICAL PROCEDURE
 dog may have sinus rates that approach 300 beats/min
and last for a short tirme during excitement or acute
The most valuable information results when Holtcr
pain. Such heart rates can develop relatively rapidly
recordings are made in the homc environment and
combined with a pet owner diary describing the dog's
recordings printed at a maximum of 25 mm/sec. This
activity and clinical signs. Many recorders have an
pur yilooqied e jo sisoep uayeis e on peal Ae
cvcnt marker that can bc activatcd by the owner. 'This
scrious supraventricular tachyarrhythmia. Conversely,
identifes the time that a specific behavior such as
sinus rates of 25 to 35 beats/min during deep, slow-
syncope occurred. The techniques of lead placement
and Holter monitor application have bcen dcscribed*
wave, or rapid eye movemennt sleep are not unusual in
the dog.12. is Also, during these stages of sleep pro-
Technical problems include low-voltagc QRS
com-
longed sinus pauses of 2 to 4 seconds occur. Such
plexes, weak battery, motion artifact, poor elcctrode
pauses could be misdiagnosed as evidence of sick sinus
contact, tape drive malfunction, and incompletc de-
syndrome if a diary of the dog's activity is not kept.
gaussing of previously used tapes.
Some normal sleeping dogs will develop junctional or
even ventricular escape rhythms during sleep.  In
NORMAI.FINDINGSANDDATA
young, hcalthy dogs, occasional second-degree atrio-
vcntricular (AV) block can occur, evcn in the midst of
INTERPRETATION
a normal simus rhythm.
 Because commercial computerized Holter analyzers
have algorithms designed for human adult interpreta-
tions, they cannot bc automatically applied to canine
TACHYARRHYTHMIAS:
or feline tapes without causing erroneous diagnoses. A
VENTRICULAR VS.
tabulated report of the frequency of ectopic beats
should not be accepted blindly, and cxamplcs of what
SUPRAVENTRICULAR
were annotated as ectopic beats should be provided.
 Interactive reading by someone trained in the evalua-
tion of animal elcctrocardiography provides a more
The origin of tachyarrhythmias is classificd as either
accurate (and time-consuming)
imterpretation.
1n7
supraventricular or ventricular In Table 18-1, the most
some instances, full disclosure of the 24-hour re-
reliable distinguishing criteria have been listed, al-
cording may be nccessary.
though therc are exceptions. In humans, the QRS
complex morphology recorded in precordial lcads has
ACCEPTABLE ARRHYTHMIA COUNTs. During prolonged
 led to specific algorithms for differcntiation;14 t6 how.
- a jo a s r o a
portant premature  supraventricular and  ventricular
complexes imay occur, even in healthy subjects.2 * In
TABLE 18-1
humans, a Holtcr recording is considered within nor-
 Differentiation of Supraventricular and
mal limits if premature complcxes account for less
Ventricular Arrhythmias
than 100 beais/24 hr or less than 5 beats/hr, and
no repetitive forms or complex arrhythmias occur.l0
Supraventricular
Ventricukar
Currently, there are no parallcl guidelines for the dog
Narrow
Is the QRS complex narrow or wide? Wide
and cat, although some observations can be men-
YCN
Does the prennaturc couplex look
No
tioncd. Although it is very uncommon to find ventricu-
 80-90% like tlie norimally
lar arrhythmias in young dogs under 3 ycars of age, it
conrlucted sinus complex?
is not unusual to record them in dogs over 8 years of
Yes
Are P waves associated with the.
No)
prenature QRs complexes?
age. Although this frequency increases with illness"
Are fusion heats present?
Ye.s
thc clinical significance does not neccssarily change.
333
cvcr, thcsc rcmain to be studied in spontaneous caninl6
aberrant coplcx usually has the configuration of a
arrhythinias.
right bundlc branch block. Although aberration is usu-
ally considered with prcmature complexes (accelcra-
tion-dependlent or long-short aberration), it can occul
MORPHOLOGY OF THE QRS COMPLEX
with slow hcart rates (dcccleration-dcpendent aberra-
tion) (Fig. 18-3). Commonly, the T-wave configuration
Prcmature QRS complexes of supraventricular ori-
is diffcrent in size or polarity with prcmaturc supravcn-
gin usually appcar as normally conducted sinus com-
tricular complexes even though the QRs complcx is
plexcs (Fig. 18-1), which are usually narrow when
almost identical to the sinus complex (scc Fig. 18-1).
comparedl with complcxcs of ve ntricular origin. Supra-
Uncommonly,
prcmature
ventricular
complexes
ventricular tachyarrhythmias are most commonly con-
(PVCs) can appear narrow and very similar to the
fused with ventricular tachyarrhythmias when the QRS
normally conclucted sinoatrium-initiatcd complcx.
complex is wide (Fig. 18-2). A wide tachycardia of
T'his can be true if the origin of the PvC is near the
His bundle,17 or it may be noted in only a single lcad.&
supraventricular origin occurs with (l) marked ECG
evidence of left or right ventricular enlargemen, (2)
Thcrcfore, simultaneously recorded leads should be
pre-existent left or right bundlle branch block,
(3)
examined.
AV conduction over an accessory pathway, and (4)
functional left or right bundle branch block (aber-
ASSOCIATION OF P WAVES AND QRS
rancy). “Aberrancy" is a tcrm uscd to indicate that
COMPLEXES
conduction was delaycd bccause thc premature stirmu-
lus triggered a QRS coinplcx whenn somc myocardial
Whcn P waves arc (
dissociatcd from QRST com-
cells were partially refractory. Thcreforc, thc QRS com-
plexcs, the arrhythmic QRS waveform is most likely of
plcx has a differcnt configuration than thc norinal
ventricular origin. Such an identification may be diffi-
sinus complex. Because the recovery time of the right
cult with ventricular tachycardia (VT), particularly
bundle branch is longer thain that of the lefi, the
when sinus-initiatcd P waves are hidden within the
FIGLRE 18-1
Composite illustrating canine
premature supraventricular
coumplexcs. The QRS morphology
of tliese complexes is narrow and
appcars sinilar to conplexes
originating from the sinoatrial
ode. Interpretation is rmore
accurate when simultaneously
recorded leads are cxamined.
Paper speed 50 rmn/sec, 1 InV
I cm. (A) Sinus tachycardia with a
premalure: supraventricular
complcx (arrou) is present. Its
morphology is narrow
(supporring supravenricular
origin) but slightly different from
the QRS complcxes of sinus
origin. The amplitude is smaller.
anrd the initial depolarizatjon
ay
forces are altered (note the lack
of a Q wave in II, II, alid aVF
and the lack of an r-wave in aVR
and aVI.) due to aberrancy. Even
whien a premature QRS conplex
aVF
appears identical to the sinus
can he diffcrent as roted here.
(B) The couhiguration of the
prermature conplex (second
from left) is slightly altered, not
becanse of aberraney but beccause
of a superim posed P wave
frTUs).
334
ABNORMALCARDIOVASCULARFUNCTIONANDPRINCIPLES OFTHERAPY
A
B
D
E
F
FIGURE 18-2
Cormposite of canine supraventricular tachycarrlias with wide QRS conplexes that can be mistaken
th-ldcokerpanielwasndergoingaallooualopastforseverepulnistnosisinus
Lachycardia is present (A). When the heart rate slows, a sinus rhythm (urote P waves for each QRST
complex）withedencofright veiclarhperophy i apparenCandD）Thisrapidie
tachycardia breaks (D). a sinus rhyhm with left bundle branch block is evident. (E and F) ECGs
recorded from a Saint. Bernard. The QRS counplexes are negative, wide, and abnormal in polarity for
learl II (characteristic of a right hundle branch block). (E) An inregular rhythm without P waves
(fine fihrilation waves arc present) constitutes atrial fibrillation. In (F). the atrial fibrillation
convcricd to a sinus rhythm and distinct P waves (P) are evident. An atrial premalure conplex is
from the other P waves. This wider, lower-amplitude P wave resuls frorn aberrant.atrtal conrlction
QRST complcx, or if retrograde atrial dcpolarizations
pacemaker) with sinus complexes (Fig. 18-5). Annothcr
 occur. In the lattcr, complexes that originate in the
cause of P wavcs that are not associated with QRS-T
ventricle conduct rctrograde through the atrioventric-
complexes is junctional tachycardia. Although a junc-
ular nodc to depolarizc thc atrium; the resulting ncga-
tional tachycardia can depolarize thc atria, it is possible
tive P wavc is hidden in thc QRS-T complex.!s
for this supraventricular arrhythmia to have the atria
With supraventricular arrhythmias, P waves may not
controlled by the sinus notdc or othcr atrial tissue
be visiblc if they are hidden in thc preceding T wavc
(Fig. 18-6),
(Fig. 18-4). In humans, prcmature atrial P waves look
different from those of sinus origin. Howevcr, this is
REGULAR OR IRREGULAR RHYTHM
frequently unreliable in thc dog because the sinus
node is largc (40 mm),9 and innipulses emerge from
Determining whcther the rhythm is regular or ir-
 different regions, depending on autonomic tone. This 
regular, annd the lergth of thc pausc following a prema-
causes variation in P-wave configuration (wandering
ture complex, are unreliable features to considcr in
335
FIGURE 18-3
A. Tachycardia Dependent
Composite of premature supraventricular
：
counplexes with altererl condueLion caused by the
.
tirning of the stimulus.Paper speed 50 mm/scc
.....
except (D), which is 25 mm/sec, I mV' : 1 cm.
(A) EcC recorded from a dlog with atrial
...
.....
A
bigerminy cxcmplifies acccleration-clependlent
:.
wave. Xotice also the associated preunature P'
wave. Aberrant conduclion that wicdens the
B. Supernormal conduction
prenature supraventricular complcx is usualy
acccleration dependent. This occurs when the
ventricle is stinulated by premature simulus
during the relative refraetory periocl. It results in
delayed ventricular conluction that prolongs the
1:
QRS morphology of the atrial prermature
complex.
(B) ECG recorded from a 14-ycar-oid Ibizan
...f!
hound with left bundlle branch block. Athough
cxctssively prenature supravcntricular conplexes
usually result in slower ventricular conrluction.
C. Long-short (Ashman's phenomenon)
supermormal conduction can occasionally occur.
In supernornal conduction, the P-R interyal
Long (860ms)
Short (270ms)
Long (320ms) Short (200ms)
remains unchanged or shorlcned as seen herc.
This finding rules out. cqual prolongation of the
Iefi and right hundle branches. Although the.
name inplies conduction that. is faster than
人
normal, the aceual meaning is conduction that is
better than cxpected. Here, a supraventricular
preinature complex (aroary results in a QRS
complex. which is narowcr than that associated
with the sinus rhythm. The T-wave coufiguration
 D. Bradycardia Dependent
is also altered. The uther reason for such a
narrow coruplex is equalizalion of concluction
I.....
........
herween the lefl and right bunlle branches. In
such a case the right bundle is delayed with the
premature stimulation. Therefore, with the pre
·
cxisting delay in the left. bunrlle, the conrluction
tine is more synchronized arl the cancellaton of
forces results in a narrow complex.
(C) ECG from a 9year-old mixed-breed dog. Aherrant conduction depends not only on the degree of prematurity of a stimulus., but also
 on the R-R interval that immediately precedes the premature beat. This is hecause the action potential duration of a heat is determined by
the preceding R-R interval. The longer the R-R interval, the longer the action potential and the greater the possibility for aherratlion. This
lype of aberrancy has heen named Ashman's phenomenon and is associated with a long-short sequence. That is a nornally conducted
cormplex occurs after a long R-R interval, but aherration develops when the next stirmulus occurs after a short R-R interval. Although this
type of aberration most comonly affecis the right hundle, left bundle hranch block (LBBB) or prolongation also occurs, as shown in this
tracing. The lirsl beat (arroe) of the supraventricular tachycardia is widened with an LBBB pattern. After this complcx. accoinunodation
develops to the fast rate, and a narrow tachycardlia persists until another long-short sequence results in ani aherrant complex (second aerrou).
This clog hadl atrial tachycardia, although this type of aherrauicy is more often associated with atrial fbrilation because of the rmore
frerquent. variation in the R-R intervals. Nurmbcrs belween R waves indicate R-R interval duration in msec.
(D) ECG froin an 8year-old Afghan hound exhihiting deceleration-depenrlent aberration, Notice that incormplete right budle branch
block alternates with complete right bunlle brach block at slow heart. rates (R-R intervals >440 msec). Before the development of the
rleceleratiom-dependent cormpletc RBBB, the dog had incounplete RBBB for 5 years without clinical signs. The variation in R-R interval was
due to sinus arrhy hrmia.
dlifferentiating supraventricular and vcntricular rhythms.
(IV) administration of cholinergic drugs may help dis-
A regular or irregular rhythm can occur with both.
tinguish some ventricular from supravenuricular tachy-
ldentification of compe nsatory or noncompenisatory
 arrhythtmias and assist in classifying supravcntricular
 -e sus jo asneoq iasn nou ianba si sasned
tachycardia as AV nodal dependent or independent
rhythmia, interpolated prematurc complexes, and ret-
Aq ps aild si a ea (e os)
rograde atrial clepolarization with rcsctting of thc sinus
thc Valsalva mancuver (humans),2 coughing, sneez-
nodc by ventricular complcxcs.20. 21
ing, gagging, or vomiting.2 Somc physical mancuvcrs
(siting down, head-dcpcndent position, cold immcr-
sion, and dcep brcath) increasc systemic blood prcs-
USING VAGAL MANEUVERS TO ASSIST
surc arid rcflexly activatc vagal tonc.
DIFFERENTIATION
CAROTID SINUS MASSAGE
Interventions that increase vagal tone to thc hcart.
may profoundly alter supraventricular arrhythmias.
The most clinically useful maneuver to ilcrease va-
Thercfore vagal mancuvcrs (Fig. 18-7) or intravcnous
gal traffic to thc hcart is carotid sinus massagc (Fig.
336
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
D
P'PP
D
AVAA'A
AVA
Intraatrial.electrocardiogram
Blood pressure
mm'Hg
150
1
50
FIGURE 18-4
Electrophysiologic recorlings from a Genman shepherd dog who developed supraventricular
arrhythrmias during anesthesia using a fentanyl infusion. A learl l ECG recording reveals ectopic P
waves. Because of the high vagal tone induced by the fentanyl, many eetopic P' waves are not.
(A') are evident on the intra-atrial clectrogram, but some of the corresponrling P' waves are not.
distinguishable on the surface learl I ECG because the P' wave is hidrlen within a QRS cornplcx
(arrou). Notice the cffect of the arrhythmia on arterial bloorl pressurc. Paper spccd 25 mm/sec.
18-7). Elevatcd vagal tone slows thc sinus ratc bccause
thc 9th cranial nervc (the nerve of Hcring) uravels up
 of (1) hypcrpolarization (activation of chamncl Ixet),
to thc vasomotor ccntcr of the medulla.? If effcctivc
and (2) inhibition of channcls that promotc dcpolar-
l1crvc stirmulation has occurred, the accompanying in-
ization during hyperpolarization (I).*426 AV nodal con-
crcasc in cfferent parasympathetic traffic to the heart
duction is slowed (particularly the N or ccntral/com-
ard dccrcasc in sympathetic tone will slow the sinus
pact region)bccause
of
hypcrpolarization  and
hcart ratc and AV nodal conduction, cause peripheral
diminishcd action potential ampliude.
vasodilation, and reducc systeimnic blood pressurc.28
The dog should be positioncd in latcral rcciunbcncy,
Oncc thc mancuver is stopped, the sympathetic ner-
with carc takci1 to calm the pet. Thc points of maximal
vous systcm will counfcract the imposcd autonomic
carotid arterial pulsc arc palpatcd with the fingcrtips
imbalancc (Fig. 18--7),
placcd behind the angle of the jaw on the right and
Experimcntally, dircct stimulation of the canine va-
left upper ncck. Here, firm, medialy directed prcssurc
 gus ncrve causes dramatic reduction in heart rate and
is initiated ovcr the carotid arterics for 5 to 10 scconds.
AV nodal conduction, However, if sympathetic tone is
This is applied by moving the fingertips longitudinally.
clevated, carotid sinus massage may not tcrminate the
back and forth in a craniocaudal direction. Ihe im-
supraventricular tachycardia (SVT). Hcightencd sym-
poscd pressurc stimulates baroreceptors in the carotid
 pathetic tone that overridlcs increased parasympathetic
sinuscs, Emanating from the carotid sinus, a branch of
activity is onc rcason why vagal mancuvers arc frc-
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMIAS
337
A
RR interval
430
440
420
440
510
570
B
fs.....
i....
:111.-A
11 f.::1:
RR interval
1140
760
950
C
D
:!:..
..
FIGLRE 18-5
LCCs recorded from normal clogs to illustrate the effect of autonomic tone andl P-wave.
comnfiguration (R-R intervals are in msec). Paper spced 50 mm/sec, 1 mV = 1 cm, leadl Il. (A) The
changing size and shape of he P wave. kown as zoandernug pacemuaker, is caused by a shift in sius
balance of autononic tone shits during expiration to the parasynipathetic, and during inspiration.
to the synpathetic. This results in an allermating slower andl faster heart rate, respectivcly, and shifts
the site of sius origin. During the slower sinus hcart rate, the P wave is shorter, whereas during the
faster heart rates the P wave is taller. Typically. the P wave is taller during sinus tachycardia. During
prolonged R-R intervals (exaggerated sinus arrhythnias). the P wave after the long pausc is
occasiomally tall. This may he due lo elevated syrmpathetic tone i response to the prolonged drop in
blord pressure, shiffing the focus of SA nodal dlischarge to a more ventral location in Lhe sinus
node.
(B) ECG froun a dog with a pronounced sinus aurhythmia. Nonice lhe wirdle specurum of P-wavc
configuraions with a wandering pacemaker. The negative P waves (first and last beats) probably
originate ncar the coronary sinus. (C) was recorded fron a dog during sinus rhythm, whereas (D)
was recorded frorm the same animal immediatcly affer cxcrcise. The P-wave amplitude incrrased in
response to sympathetic stinulus and heart rate.
338
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
RR interval
260300300
300
260
ho
PP interval
320
320
320
320
320
FIGURE 18-6
ECG frorn an English bulldog. with supraventicular tachycardia originating from the atrioventricular
 nodal region. Sinus P waves are evident. that are not associated with the tachycardia. Occasionally.
Ihere was SA caplure (nolice the P waves farrmus associated with QRs-T complexes), resulting in a
shorter R-R interval (260 mscc). This exarmple illusturates junctional tachycarlia with occasional
caplure. Numbers indicate P-P and R-R interval rluration (msec). Paper speed 50 mm/sc, 1 mV =
I cm, learl Il.
qucntly ineffcctive, and this heightened tone may re-
that require thc AV node for cxistence are AV node
quirc adjunctive, cautious administration of drugs that
dependent. These includc AV nodal rc-cntrant tachycar-
affect thc sinoatrial or AV nodes (c.g., β-adrenergic
dia, automatic junctional tachycardia, and bypass tract
 blockcrs or calcium channel blockers). Rcpeating vagal
tachycardia. ‘Their differcntiation can be assisted by
mancuvers may thcn induce AV block or brcak the
response of incrcascs in parasympathetic tone (vagal
tachyarrhythmia (Fig. 18-8).
mancuvcrs) and drugs that affect AV nodal condlue-
tion. For cxample, if parasympathctic tonc is cffectivcly
increascd, the following may occur: (l) automatic si-
SUPRAVENTRICULAR
nus tachycardia is gradually slowed; (2) ectopic atrial
tachycardias usually persist, but the vcntricular rate is
TACHYARRHYTHMIAS
slowed and P waves (AV block) may be identificd;
(3) the F wavcs of atrial flutter and f-waves of atrial
fibrillation arc cxposcd, and ventricular response is
Supraventricular  arrhythmias originate from  thc
decrcased; and (4) the arrhythmia of AV nodal re-
atria or thc AV junction. Antiarrhythrmic drugs work
cntry can be abolishcd.
through their effccts on ion channcls, which, in turn,
affects the underlying mecharrism of the arrhythrmia.
Thus, inference of mechanism could serve as the basis
AV NODE INDEPENDENT
of morc rational drug selection. Although differentiat-
ing causal mechanism is difficult,2 some guidelines
SUPRAVENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIAS
may be offered.
SINUS NODE TACHYCARDIA
DEFINITION, ECG FEATURES, MECHANISMS. Si11US 11Odc
AV NODE INDEPENDENT VS. AV NODE
tachycardia is characterized by positivc P waves in leads
DEPENDENT SUPRAVENTRICULAR
II, IHI, and aVF. Thc tachycardia incrcases (onset) and
TACHYCARDIAS
dccrcascs (offset) gradually rather than abruptly;*" the
hcart rate is not instantly at its maximum, but accclera-
Some SVTs are characterized by thcir requirement
tion develops with progressivcly shorter P-P intcrvals
for thc AV node; SVTs that do not necd the AV node
and associated R-R intcrvals. Similarly, thc ofsct of thc
to pcrpctuatc the abnormal rhythm are AV node inde-
 arrhythmia does not occur suddcnly, but progressivc
pendent. 'These include cctopic atrial tachycardias (au-
 lenngthening of the P-P and R-R intcrvals occurs beforc
tomatic, triggcred, intra-atrial re-cntrant), sinoatrial
the arrhythmia stops. These changes in rate canl occur
l1ode tachycardias (automatic, re-entrant), atrial flut-
ter, and atrial fibrillation. Conversely, those rhythms
and slowing (cool-down) of hcart ratc is characteristic
DIAGNOSISANDMANAGEMENTOFCANINEARRHYTHMIAS
339
A.TheVagal Maneuver
FIGURE18-7
VasomotorCenter
Parasympathetic tone can be
Carotid
increased by direct carotid sinus
sinus-
Nerve of Hering
massage.(A) Digital pressure
appliedto the carotid sinus
directly stimulates associated
LeftVagus
baroreceptors.The nerve of
Hering,a branch of the9th
cranialnerve,transmits afferent
impulsestothevasomotorcenter
of themedulla.This stimulates
the vagus (10th cranial) nerve,
resulting in efferent cardiac
traffic thatreduces sinoatrial
RightVagus
node discharge(decreasing heart
rate)and slows atrioventricular
Sinoatrialnode
node conduction.Atrial and,to
theleastextent,ventricular
myocardium also are affectedby
'AVnode
the increasedvagal traffic.(B)
SimultaneousLead II ECG and
arterialbloodpressurerecording
MASmmonS
in a dog.The first arrow
B.RightVagalStimulation
indicates the time when its
cervical right vagus nervewas
directly stimulated
experimentally.Notice the
reduction in heartrate and
blood pressure.When
Blood pressure
stimulationwas stopped shortly
(mmHg)
after (second arrow),a rebound
140-
increaseinheartrate andblood
pressure occurred.This degree of
response can sometimes occur
clinicallywith successful carotid
sinus massage.Paper speed 10
4Q
mm/sec.(C) Simultaneous
experimentaldirectstimulation
C. Right and Left Vagal Stimulation
ofboth the right and leftvagal
nerves in the same dog eliciteda
L
profoundreductioninheartrate
and blood pressure.This
Blood pressure (mm Hg)
represents a far greater response
140-
than occurswhen carotid sinus
massage is clinically
100-
applied-unless underlying sinus
node disease is present.Paper
50
speed 10 mm/sec.
0-
of arrhythmias caused by enhanced automaticity.While
orshock,heartrate is usuallyreduced afterpharmaco
heartrates approaching300beats/mincandevelopin
logic control or correction of the underlying problem.
a frightened dog, such rates are not sustained.Dogs
with cardiac pathology or systemic diseases can develop
SINUSNODALRE-ENTRANTTACHYCARDIA
more sustained automatic sinus tachycardia.Aninap-
propriate sinus tachycardia has been described in hu-
DEFINITION,ECGFEATURES,MECHANISMS.Thisrhythm is
mans,29not associatedwithphysiologicorpathologic
characterized by positivePwaves in leads II,IIl,and
conditions.
aVF.Because this is a re-entrant tachyarrhythmia,the
onset and offset are usually abrupt without a warm-up
EFFECTOFVAGALMANEUVERS,DRUGINTERVENTIONS.Va-
period.31. 32Whilere-entrant SVT that involves the sinus
gal maneuvers may cause gradual slowing of the heart
region is uncommon and questionable in humans,30, 33
rate.In dogs that have sinus node tachycardia second-
its frequency in the dog is unknown. The large size of
ary to severe pulmonary edema,cardiac tamponade,
thecaninesinusnodemayprovidegreaterlikelihood
340
0ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
1
Tneva
FIGURE 18-8
AV node independent
spraventricular tachyeardia in a
7-ycar-old Saint Bernard. In cach
tracing,nunhers inclicate the P-P
RRinterwal
interval (top) and R-R interval
(boffomj. Paper specd 50 mn/ scc,
I nV = 1 cin, lead Il. (A) A
narrow QRS tachycardlia (>300
R
beats/min) is present: QRS
conplexcs alrcrnate in amplitude
due to alternating aberrancy
interval
This resulis fron the rapid
supravenriclar tachyeardia rate.
Obscured P waves (P) were
slspcrted in the ST seginent. (B)
Alter IV propranolol
aclministration, AV nodal
conduction slowed, and tne
resulting ventricular response
ratc was reduced because of
RRintervallu
1300240320
progressive AV block. Blocked P
wavcs (P) (arrou) occur.(C)
Carotid siunus massage was then
repeated afler β-aclrenergic
blockade, which further
C
decreased AV nodal concdluction.
A more advanccd AV bloxck
rcsuled (notice nonconducted P
waves). Although this derreased
Balhterva
the ventriculaur rate, the
underlying supraventicular
tachycaredia persisted unchanged
(P-P interval, 185 msec).
RRinterval!
DF34001
341
for its occurrencc, particularly since it supports decre
the P-P interval, and frequently, just bcfore termina-
mcntal conduction (increased conduction time with
tion of thc tachycardia, an increasc in the P-R interval.
incrcasing prematurity of the stimulus)31. 32 and unidi-
This rhythm nost likely is an atrial tachycardia, al-
rectional block, which favor re-entry.
though inappropriate sinus tachycardlia cannot be ex-
cluded.2"
EFFECT OF VAGAL MANEUVERS, DRUG INTERVENTIONS. The
re-entrant loop involves the sinus node. Therefore,
EFFECT OF VACAL MANELVERS, DRUC INTERVENTIONS. Va
increascs in vagal tone or drugs that affcct thcse slow
gal mancuvers or drugs that slow AV nodal conduction
calcium channcl cels (e.g., calcium channel blockers,
usually do not abolish ectopic atrial arrhythmias, but
β-blockers, digitalis glycosides, or adenosinc) would
thcy can decrcase the ventricular rcsponse rate (scc
abolish the arrhyihmia.st. 32
Fig. 18-8). Howcvcr, somc alitonatic atrial tachycar-
dias are imfucnccd by au1ononic tone aid potentially
can be terminated and prevcnted with β-adrenergic
ECTOPIC ATRIAL. TACHYCARDIA
blocking drugs. The SVTs caused by abrormal automa-
DEFINITION, ECG FEATURES, MECHANISMS. Thcse arrhyth-
ticity are frequently difficult to control, even with class
nias originate from atrial myocardium. Whcn thc
IA and class II drugs. Vagal mancuvers might abolish
cause is abnormal automaticity?4 or triggcred activ-
ity*s 4! the ECG is characterized by (1) P'-wavc config-
thetic tone. This activates the potassium channel Isxcs
uration and polarity that vary with the location of
which shortens the action potcntial in atrial myocytes,
 cctopic origin, (2) gradual onset (howevcr, an irregu-
thcreby decrcasing the probability of triggcred activity
lar P'-P' interval is common initially), and (3) gradual
or rc-entry. When triggered activity is thc mechanism
offset of tachycardia with prolongation of the P'-P'
for SVT, calcin channel blockcrs may abolish the
interval (Fig. 18-9). A coimmon SVT seen in thc dog
 is one that also is characlerizcd by a positive P wave in
frcquently responds to aggrcssive increases in vagal
leads I1, I1I, and aVF, slight warm-ip and cool-down of
tonc, β-adrenergic blockade, and calcium channel
PP interval
260 260 260 290 300 340
550
PR interval
110 120120 120
140
160
150
PP interval280 280 290 300
PR interva ..
130140140150
　1020120120120120
B
1:7.
111
I...a......-.
！.
PP interval
220 220 220240
069
PR interval
707080100120
80
C
1: 1
I.:l
M......
FIGURE 18-9
Lead II FCCs showing ectopic atrial tachycardias characterized by (l) positive P' waves, (2) gradlual
ofset of tachycardia with prolongation of the P-P' interval. and (3) prolonged P-R’ interval in the last
few complexes of the tachyeardia preceding terminauion. Paper speed 50 mm/sec, 1 mV = I cm.
342
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
A
B
C
：
.......
D
FIGURE 18-10
These ECGs recorded fron a normal, healthy, 2-year-old Rhodesian ricdgcback illustrate intermitten1.
atrial fihrillation and futter. (A), (B), and (C) were recorded within 5 ininutes of cach other,
Internittent coarse atrial fbrillarion (A) and flutter (B) were present. The dog would spontaneously
convert lo a sinus rhythun (C). Paper speed 50 mm/sec, I mV
1 cm, leadl I. (D) On a 24-hohr
mm/sec, 1 mV = 1 crn.
blockade. Drugs that incrcase the refractory period
atrial flutier can be a 1ransition to atrial fibrillatior1,
and slow conduction velocity in the atrial myocardlium,
whcrcas slow atrial futter inay convert to a sinus
such as procainamide, quinidine, propafenone, or ani-
rhythm. In dogs, atrial flutter is an unstable rhythm
odaronc, should have an antiarrhythinic effect. Ae-
and can occur intcrmittently (Fig. 18-10). Flutter
cordingly, thesc are usually chosen to treat cctopic
wavcs have a constant morphology, polarity, and cyclc
atrial tachycardias when conversion, rather than con-
length that usually ranges from 300 to 600 beats/nin.
MEcHANIsMs. A macrore-cntrant circuit usually travels
ATRAL FLUTTER
around the caudal veiia cava, crista tcrminalis, and
Cranial vcna cava.17 50 The ventricular resporise with
 DEFINrrIoN, ECG FEATUREs. Sawtooth-shaped, rapid un-
atrial flutter is usually rapid and irregular, umless 2:1
dulations (F wavcs) replace distinct P waves. Very rapid
conduction occurs. Fluttcr with 2:l condnction inay bc
FEFFFFFFL
1111 11: ::1:11
:1l.:
FIGURE 18-11
Dilerentiating atrial flutter from other supraventricular rhythms can he difficult when 2:1
conduetion exists, as in the top and midale traces (R-R interval. 200mse; F-F inteival. 100 msee). A
tUie F waves and facilitated diagnosis. Paper specd 50 mm/sec, 1 inV = I cn, lead I1l.
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMLAS 343
 difficult to distinguish from other types of SVT becausc
 The fibrillation waves scen in dogs with cardiac discase
F wavcs cannot be identified. When the T wavc is
are characterized by fine, irrcgular. baseline undlula-
cqually spaccd hctwccn two R waves, atrial flutter
tions. Distinct P waves arc not present. Although as 
should he suspecied (Bix rule) (Fig. 18-11).51
A ay ne aare uu/ssnd ene oreoo se Aueu
EFFECT OF VACAL MANELVERS, DRUG INTERVENTIONS. Va-
 lar bccause only a few inpulscs traversc 1he entire AV
gal mancivers and drugs that slow AV nodal conduc-
node to reach the ventricles (Figs. 18-12, 18-13).
tion do not abolish atrial flutter, but they can reduce
the vcntricular responsc rate. If conversion or preven-
MECHANIsMs. Atrial fibrillation is a microrc-cntrant
tion is the goal, drugs with class Ia antiarrhythmic
arrhythmia that has a rumbcr of predisposing factors.
properties have been uscd; howcvcr, drugs in class Ic
 A brief description appcars herc:
(propafenone, flecainide) or class Ill (amiodarone)
may be more effective.$2,33
CRITIcA!, MAss. Atrial fibrillation requires a myocardial arca
of adcquatc size or critical mass. Large hearts fibrilate
longcr than small hearts.6 Atrial fibrillation in dogs with
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION
cardiac discase is usually sustained bccausc thc atria are
enlargcd, although occasionally paroxysinal cpisodes occur.
DEFINITION, ECG FEATURES. Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a
Some gianl-breed dogs dcvclop AF without denonstrablc
common supraventricilar   tachyarrhythmia   SVT:*4
cardiac cnlargement or pathology.
Intraatria
1-2
Intraatrial
3-4
His
electrogram
Blood
pressure
FIGURE 18--12
Electrophysiologic recordings from a dog with atrial fihrilation. A quadripolar catheter was
positioned in the right atrium. The more distal poles of the catheter (l-2) show electrograins of the
f-waves, which are rore fragmented than those recorded between poies 3 and 4. The HIis
eleclrogram shows a deflection for the depolarization of the bundle of His (l), confirming the
supraventricular origin of the arrhyhmia. The inicrval bxctween f-waves varied berween I20 and 80
sec or 545 and 750 beats/min, yet. the ventricular responsc varied bctwcen 800 and 300 1nsec or 80
and 200beats/nin.V, venricutar depolarization;7,ventricular repolarization.Paper spca 100
HH/sCC.
344
1ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
HR 210
FIGURE 18-13
The: ventricular response rate
1.1.1.
.....:
during atrial fibrillation depends
on the integrity of the AV node,
number of wavelets, degree of
B.
HR 180
concealed conduction, and
balance between sympathetic and
::1.
parasympathetic lone. Paper
speed 50 mm/ser (excepi (L)
and (1), 25 mm/sec), 1 'mV = 1
cm. (A) Lead II from a
Doberman pinscher with dilated
carelionyopathy (DCM). In
addition to the rapid rate, notice
.A
the prominent Q waves and
widened R wave thal is not. tall.
........
.::...!
:010]
These are characteristic of
Doberman DCM. (B) Lead 11
frorn a 12-year-old mixed clog
C.I
HR 140
with severe tricuspid and mitral
regurgitation. The QRS
:
complexes are wide, relecting
left heart enlargement dne to
d.
chronic mitral regurgitation. (C)
Ieacl II from a 12-year-old
.
Dachshund with nitral
regurgitation. The rhythm is not
as distincdy irregular as that in
(B) and may cven he confused
HR 70
with a sinus arrhythmia, In cases
such as this it is important to1
examine all leadls. including
precordial leads, for P waves. (D)
Lead II from a 7-year-old, anemic
Collie. Although atrial fibrillation
is present, the slow ventricular
.i.
response rate negates treatment
to decrease AV nodal
conduction. (E and F) Lcad 1I
HR 70
fron a goldlen retriever with
subaorric stenosis, mitral
regurgitation and chronic atrial
fibrillation.During a
catheterization procedue the
dog became extremely
bradycardic, with periods of
ventricnuar asystole lasting 5
00010
scconds (E) (f -Hibrilation
waves). Epinephrine was
adninistered, and the ventrieular
F
HR 220
drastically (F), illustrating the
effect of calecholamines on AV
：
nodal concduction. When the ralc
is fast, the irregularily of the
rhythin appears less.
345
AUTONOMIC INFLUENCa. Increased sympathetic or parasympa-
AF include fihrosis, myocytolysis, cellular hypertrophy, andl
thetic tone can provoke AFe-s Both shorten the refractory
alterations in gap junctions.rs
period, which can potentiate re-entry; vagal stimulation
also causes unequal shortening of atrial refractoriness, which
AV NODAt. coNDuerIoN Thc ventricular rcsponse lu AF dc-
creates electrophysiologic: heterogcneity.s* Vagally induced
pends on the number of wavelets and the integrity of the AV
AF can occur in dogs anesthetized with narcotics without
node. Only a portion of the electrical activity of the atnia
prcmedication with vagolytic: drugs. In dogs with discases
reaches the ventricle; however, thc ventricuiar response rale
that may have sinultancous elevaions in both parasympa-
is still exccssive and can rcsult in danage to the ventricular
thetic and sympathetic tone (e.g., pain and strcss of gastric
myocardium. Impulscs cnter the AV node, but. many penc-
torsion), the vulnerability to AF is increased.
degrecs of AV nodal block. The mechanisn for thc AV
A7RIAl. sTRETCH. Volume Ovcrload strctches thc atria, and
nodal block is clectrotonie inhibition and resulting corcealed
this contributes lo the ability to initiate and sustain AF;. 6
conduction. The pattern of successful penetration is random,
the effective refractory period is incrcased morc in thin arcas
although reccnt studies indicatc some deterministic behav-
(vcrsus thicker regions such as the pcctinate musclcs) and
101."9
contributcs to dispersion of refractoriness (greater heterogene-
ity). This is inportant in re-enirant arrhythmias.
EFFECT OF VAGAL MANELVERS, DRLG INTERVENTIONS.
Holter rccordings from dogs with AF deinonstrate in-
NUMRrR OF wAvELrrs. One hypothesis for the mechanism of
Creascd ventricular rate with excrcise and excilement,
AF involves multiple re-entrant cireuits (the multiple wavelet
 and decreased rate during sleep. Also, the veinricular
theory7 71). Recently, this thcory has bcen challengcd, and
rate slows with expiration and increases with inspira-
thc hypothesis of a singlc source coupled with a changing
tion. Depending on the individual baseline sympa-
wavefront. has bcen proposed (Jose jalife, 1998, personal
thetic tonc, carotid simus massage may decrease 1hc
communication). For AF to be pcrpeluatcd, a minimum ot
6 wavelets must be propagating at any one time.71 Thc mum-
ventricular responsc ratc. Drugs that slow AV nodal
ber of wavelcts that can cxist in the atria and the propcnsity
conduction decrease the ventricular response rate, al-
for AF arc dctermined by both the size of the atria (critical
though comhination drug thcrapy may be requircd.
mass) related to the size of the conduction block and the
Treatmcnt to convert the AF in sclccted cascs inay bc
wavclength. Ihe atrial refractory periods tcnd to incrcase
with body size (c.g., rabhit: 70 msec;/* horse: 200 mscc7-78).
accoinplished with cardioversion or class la, class Ic,
As the size of the aninal inercases, so does the wavclength,
or class IHI antiarrhythimics.
and thc most inportant determinant is the refractory pe-
riod.7s The longer the wavelengih, the fewer lhe wavclets,
and vicc versa ormal gian-breed dogs are at the threshold
AV NODE DEPENDENT
for maintaining AF with the minimum nunber of 6 wavelcts.
Both inereascd vagal? and sympathetic tone shorten the
SUPRAVENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIAS
wavelength and increasc the likelihood for AF. In the dog, a
wavelength of 8 cm is ihe critical lcngth for thc induction
AV NODAL. RE-ENTRANT TACHYCARDIA
OF AF.73
The nunher of wavelets may have a corrclation to thc
DEFTNITION, ECC FEATUREs. The re-en1rant circle is con-
surlace ECG description of coarsc and fine fibrillation
fined within the AV node.* Usually the P waves are not
(coarsc AF is usually corrclated with a more organized pal-
visible dluring the tachycardia because the retrograde
tern of re-entry of the right atrium). This may relate to the
ability to covert AF to a sinus rhythm.50.80-52
dcpolarization of the atria is occurring at about the
same timc as the depolarization of the ventricles. If P
ElRCTRCAr. ReMOorLING. Atrial fibrillation bcgets AF-s ow-
waves are seen, thcy are most frcquently ncgative in
polarity in leads II, IlI, and aVFm  Becausc this is a
As a physiologic adaptation to the clevated hearl rate, the
re-cntrant tachycardia, it is paroxysinal, without a
atrial refractory period shortens by change in the composi-
warm-up or gradlual slow-down at the time of termina-
tion of ion chianncls responsiblc for rcpolarization. Oncc
tion. The R-R intervals are usually constant.
conversion of AF to sinus rhythm occurs, this clcctrical rc-
modcling does not instantly reversc, and a return of AF is
MECHANIsMs. The mcchanisin involvcs two different
pathways in the AV node to conduct an impulse to the
ventricle." The slow (alpha) pathway conducts im-
the atrial nyocardium devclop as a dircet result of AF Conse
pulses slowly but has a shorter effective refractory pe-
quently, there is a temporal inporlance to converting AF
riod than the fast (beta) pathway, which conducts more
when possible. Pathologic studics dcnonstratc degenerativc
rapidly (Fig. 18-14).30
changes may not be appreciated with routine histopathologic
With dual AV nodal physiology, AV conduction usually tra-
cxamination, However, transmission clectron micrographs of
verses the preferred fast pathway. However, if a prenmature
atrial myocardium from dogs with AF deinonstratce mitochon-
supraventricular complex occurs, conduction travels down
drial swelling and a decreased dcnsity and organization of
the slow pathway because it has the relativcly shortcr ellective
the cristae. These changes are characteristic of cyfosolic cal-
refractory period. This may be scen on the ECG as a pro-
cium overload and are cxperimentally prevented with
longed P-R interval at the beginning of the tachycardia.
verapamil.m. * Other pathologic changes wih long-standing
Bccause conduction is slow, the fast pathway has time to
346
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
A
Atrium
1
S
S
S
Short
Long
refractory
refractory
period
period
PR interval
Reentrant
Tachycardia
Ventricle
B
.l:.
1l-: 1.
NNAA
RR interval
180180180
460
1200
FIGLRE 18-I4
AV nodal rc-entrant tachycardia. (A) Diagram illustrating dual AV nocde physiology that can supporl.
AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia. A premarure atrial complex enters the AV node during the time
that the fast. pathway is sill refractory. This resuls in conduelion to the ventricles in the slow
pathway with the shorier refractory pathway, and in a prolonged P-R interval in the iniiating
complex of the tachycardia. Becausc the slow patlhway can rccover, it is able to re-excite when the
depolarization returns after travcling retrogradle up the fast. pathway. The tachycarlia most
comonly propagales retrogradely (depolarization wave roward the atria) up the fast pathway and
antegradely (depolarization toward the ventricle) down the slow pathway. Atypical AV nodal re-entry
has a depolarization pathway that ravels in the opposite direetion. (B) ECG recorded from a boxer
with typical AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia. P waves were not seen, and caretid sinus mawage
(inifiated at the erow) abruply termiated the regular tachycardia suddenly without a gradual slowing.
The resulting sinus rate is slow because of overdrivc suppression of the sinus node. Paper speed 50
mn/sec, I mV = I cm, lead II.
recover and is ro longer refractory; retrograde conduction
If thc tachycardia terminates with a P wavc, AV nodal
can vccur, which allows the impulse to re-cnter the AV node
re-entrart tachycardia can be suspcc1ed, although ter-
repcatedly and retrogradely depolarizc the atria causing
mination can occir without the AV block. It is in-
tachycardia (Fig. 18-14). If the re-entry loop is antegrade
(depolarization toward thc ventricles) down the fast pathway
 portant 1o note that typical AV nodal rc-entrant tachy-
and retrograde up the slow pathway, ncgative P wavcs with a
cardia does not have visible P wavcs cxcept for a single
one at the termination of the tachycardia without QRS
thc P-R interval in this typc of tachycardia.2
complexes.
EFFECT OF VAGAL MANELVERS, DRCC INTERVENTIONS. Va-
AUTOMATIC JUNCTIONAL TACHYCARDIA
gal maneuvcrs or drugs, such as calcium chamnel
blockers, β-blockers, or digitalis that incrcasc the re-
DEFINITION, ECG FEATCRES, MECHANISMS. AutOmatic
fractory period and decrcase conduction velocity in
junctional tachycardia, also known as ectopic junc-
the AV node, can terininate the rc-cntrant arrhythmia.
tional tachycardia, originates from tissie in the AV
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMIAS
347
nodal arca (scc Fig. 18-6). Becausc of this focis off
izations with bradycardias or delayed afterdepolariza-
origin, the P waves in leads I1, Ill, and aVF are ncgativc
tions with tachycardias 1o be manifested.52
and frcquently hiddcn in the QRST complex. Al-
In addition, modulating factors also determine
though the negativc P waves may also follow or corme
whether the arrhythmia will develop. These include
just beforc the QRS complex, it is rare for junctional
catecholamincs, ischemia, clcctrolyte changes, or alter
tachycardias to have negative P waves with a normal to
ations in autonomic tone. Tha1 is, thc substrate can
long P-R interval. The latter is more likely to represent
exist, the trigger can occur, bu thc arrhythmia may
a cororary sinus rhythm (see Fig. 18-5) and is not of
not begin or perpctuate if the modulating factors are
concern." Automatic junctional tachycardias charac-
not conducive. Thus, cvcn when a spccific antiarrhyth-
tcristically have a gradual onsct and offsct, and in the
nic drug is used, the efect can be overridden under
dog can be irregular and influenced by vagal tone.
certain conditions.
BYPASS TRACT-MEDIATED
REASONS TO CONSIDER
MACRORE-ENTRANT TACHYCARDIA
ANTIARRHYTHMIG THERAPY
A type of SVT that does not have a pathway confined
abovc the ventricular tissue is bypass tract-mcdiated
Clear standards for drug thcrapy are lacking. In
nacrorc-entrant tachycardia. This type of SVT in the
gcneral, supraventricular tachyarrhythimias arc trcatcd
dog is either uncomnon or inadequately recognized,
when the dlog displays associated clinical signs, when
although a few reports havc been made 9-9 Bypass
thc arrhythmia  causes hemodynamic  instability, or
tracis, or accessory pathways, arc embryonic muscular
when thc risk for the arrhythmia to degenerate into a
remnants that allow conduction from 1he supraventric-
fatal rhythn is high.
lar tissues to the ventricular tissues withont traversing
thc normal scquence of tissues in the AV node." Dc-
CLINICAL SIGNS
pending on the location and direction of conduction,
 prc-excitation may resul in a short P-R interval and
In humans with arrhythnias, complaints of palpita-
delta wavcs. Delta waves appcar as notches in or slurring
tions, dizziness, 1
lighthcadedncss, or pain are rc-
of the onset of the QRS complcx and may cause the
ported." In dogs, wc arc not aware of consequences
latter to prolong. The direction of the delta waves and
of an arrhythmia unlcss syncope, wcakncss, or dyspnea
the QRS complex depends on the location of the
is manifcsted. Detcction of an arrhythmia bcfore clini-
bypass tract.
cal signs develop depcnds on carcful physical cxamina-
tion and ECG docunentation. Dogs with SVT that
have structural and functional cardiac discase will havc
THERAPY
 rnore severe signs than those with a prinary arrhyth-
mia or minimal cardiac pathology.
ROLE OF TRIGGERS AND
HEMODYNAMICCOMPROMISE
MODULATORS
 Occasional premature supraventricular complexes
or short bursts of SvT are not of clinical importance,
Arrhythmias are depcndent upon a substraic, trig-
but sustained SVT can have dctrimental consequences.
ger, and modulating factors.s8. 9 The substrate (discasc)
The hemodynamic effects depend on umderlying dis-
is the structural or physiologic abnormality that pro-
case, ventricular rate, and whcther the dog is at rest or
vidcs the mcchanism for the arrhythmia. The substratc
cxercising. Sustained SVT will have more devastating
for a re-entry arrhythmia might be a region of dam-
results than nonsustained runs that last less than 8 to
agcd tissue that allows slow conduction, whereas the
I0 seconds. Rapid ventricular rates associated with SVT
substrate for a triggered arrhythmia might be an ab-
reduce cardiac output, systemic blood pressure, and
normality in a specific potassium charinel that allows
coronary aricry perfusion. Coronary blood flow is re-
the action potential duration to prolong. Although the
duccd because of the shortened diastolic interval and
substrate cxists, it may not cause an arrhythmia unless
the lower aortic perfusion prcssure.to
conditions are suitable.
Chronic, cxccssivc clevation in the ventricular rate
Thc trigger is the cvent that causes the induction of
can result in myocardial failure known as tachycardio-
the arrhythinia. Thc trigger for SVT imight be a single
myopathy 'o Myocardial failure in the dog will result if
prermature complex or an abrupt change in heart rate
thc ventricular ratc is maintained at 250 bcats/min
that scts the conditions for arrhythmia conduction.
for 3 to 4 weeks.1o, uo Such high hcart rates causc
Changes in heart rate migh1 allow early afterdepolar-
biventricular  enlargement  and   conplex  anatomic
 348  ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
changes, in addition to electrophysiologic alterations
though the specific mechanism may not be known.
(i.e., reduced resting menmbranc potential). If thc cle-
the arrhythmia can usually be grouped into a general
vated hcart rate is controlled in a relatively short tine
category that will assist treatmcnt stratcgy. Catcgoriza-
(fcw wecks), thc myocardial failurc is rcversible. Car-
tion is based on ECG characteristics and responsc of
diac output is reduced in specific SVT rhythms like AF
thc rhythm to either vagal mancuvcrs or drug irials
that do not bavc sequential atrial and ventricular sys-
(described carlier). Ventricular rates grcatcr than 250
tolc. In AF, tlie loss of atrial systole (atrial kick) reduces
beats/min should be considered critical and usually
p s n iso e o exe a o
require aggressive IV drug therapy, with the primary
ing cxcrcise,u1-o
goal of decrcasing the ventricular heart rate. Specifc
treatment for sinus tachycardia is not discussed sincc
RISK OF SUDDEN DEATH
therapy for the underlying discasc usually controls
the rate.
Supraventricular tachycardia with rapid ventricular
rates can causc hypotension, collapsc, and death. How-
cver, the death inay not be as suddcn as that which
THERAPY OF SPECIFIC ARRHYTHMIAS
rcsults from degcneration of a ventricular tachyar.
rhythmia into vcntricular fibrillation or ventricular
AVNODEINDEPENDENT (EXCLUDING
asys1ole. Rapid SVTs may increase thc liability to ven-
tricular arrhythmias becausc of the associated increascs
SINOATRIALNODERE-ENTRY TACHYCARDIA)
 in circulating catecholanines and myocardial ische-
Frcquently, AV node independcnt tachycardias are
mia. Morcover, long-standing SVT can lead to myocar-
more difficult to convert to sinus rhythm 1han those
dial failure, which then leads to death.
usually to control the ventricular responsc rate (Figs.
18-8, 18-15). Treatment with digoxin, calcium chan
GOALS AND CRITERIA FOR
ncl hlockers,10s11 or β-adrenergic blockcrs"# is usually
SUCCESSFUL THERAPY
selected.
Treatment goals include correction of underlying
discase (ideal but often not possible); rcturn of hemo-
Acuc (Intravenous) Antiarrhylhmic Drug
dynamic stability; convcrsion of the arrhythmia; or con-
Thierapy
trol of veniricular responsc rate. HIowever, biochemical
alterations (hypokalcimia. azotemia, acidosis, hypoxia)
Carotid sinus massage should always bc attcmpted
can be corrccted and will improve the potential antiar-
initially, and after each drug intervention. Thc two
rhythmic cffects of drugs. Diminution of clinical signs
1nost comunonly used calcium channel blockcrs arc
with a rcturn of hemodynamic stability can be achicved
with conversion of the SVT to a sinus rhythin, dcercas-
Diltiazcin has been used most cormmonly (0.1 to 0.3
ing the veniricular rate, or preventing recurrence.
mg/kg), administered in IV boluses of 0.05 to 0.2 mg/
The desircd (target) ventricular heart rate will vary
kg every 5 minutes to cffect (Fig. 18-15). Verapainil
with the sizc of the dog and thc underlying cardiac
has been used by some cliniciansit6 (0.05 to 0.15 mg/
disease. Thc hcart rate taken at thc veterinary hospital
kg), administered in 0.05-ng/kg boluses spaced 5
is gencrally higher than that recorded at home. As a
minutes apart. Calciun channel blockers have a use
general guidelinc, the desired targct ventricular
 depcendent action on AV nodal conduction that leads
rate
recorded in the vetcrinary office is approximately 100
to greater therapeutic cffects at faster heart rates.!7
to 140 beats/min. Thc heart rate at home will vary
Clinical differences betwecn vcrapamil and diltiazem
are minimal, although ditiazer may cxcrt a less nega-
with activity level; at rest, rates as low as 60 beats/min
tive inotropic effectlis-12 and have Icss interaction with
may he recorded.
With interinittent SVT, therapeutic goals are to de-
digoxin.121 129 It can be given as an infusion after bolus
crease the frequency of arrhythmia recurrencc and to
injcction (5 to 15 mg/kg/hr).124
control the ventricular response rate during cpisodes
Beta-adrcnergic blockers can be used initially or if
 of arrhythmias. Ascertaining treatment responsc may
there is inadcquate control of heart rate after calciun
be difficult unless clinical signs are obvious and corre-
channel blocker administration.124a Esmolol is an effec-
late with thc recorded tachyarrhythmia, or unless rc-
tive, ultrashort-acting β-adrencrgie blocker. It is dosed
 peated Holier rccordings are performed.
at 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg/min for 1 minute, followed by
a maintenance infision of 0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg/min.
SELECTION OFANTIARRIIYTHMICDRUG
Alternatively, propranolol boluscs can be administered
(0.02 to 0.05 mg/kg IV) in 2-minutc increments until
 Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias may be divided
the ventricular rate is controlled. Occasionally, healthy
 dogs with normal myocardial contractility may require
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGFMENT OF CANINE ARRIIYTHMIAS 349
Pretreatment
(9 minutes) compared with propranolol.v However,
propranolol is currently inexpensive compared with
csmolol, and studies in humans havc shown that it
11
 produces less hypotension.
AAAAAAU
When dogs with SVT do not adequately respond to
monothcrapy using upwardly titrated doscs of calcium
Il:.L.
channcl or β-adrcncrgic blockcrs, thcy may be com-
bined. Low doscs of the sccond agcnt may be carefully
Treatment Diltiazem 0.2 mg/kg IV
administcrcd (Fig. 18-16).126 As a third-linc drug for
B
refractory SVT, edrophoniun chloride, an anticholin-
180.
esterase agent, may be judiciously administered as a
slow IV bolus (0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg) (Fig. 18-17). Edro-
phonium can cause nicotinic and muscarinic side cf-
1:1.18
fects (vomiting, muscle twitching).* In addition, phen-
ylephrine, givcn at 0.005 to 0.01 mg/kg IV, can slow
AV nodal conduction of SVT. Phenylephrine is an α;-
adrencrgic agonist that causes arterial vasoconstriction
180
and resultant systemic hypcrtension. This increased
prcssure will reflexly, via barorcceptor stimulation, in-
 Crease vagal tone, slow AV nodal conduction, and re-
 duce the ventricular response rate,
Although IV digoxin has historically bccn uscd to
 treat SVT, its acute benefit is limited because the onset
 of action is slow,uo 127 and occasional S'T segment de-
P-P
11
1.1
180
1:
 pression is seen after treatment.12s Thc primary efect
of digoxin is a central and peripheral enhancement of
vagal tone;129 thus, with a high sympathetic tone in a
1.1
distressed animal, other or additional therapy (calcium
channcl or β-adrcncrgic blockadc) may be advanta-
gcous. Digoxin docs havc a parasympathominctic cf-
......
DM0
fcct when administercd orally, but IV adninistration
1,80
incrcascs central sympathetic outflow.
Adenosine is uscd in humans to diagnose and
LAA
 acutely trcat SVT, primarily becausc of its cffect on the
AV node (attenuation of the inward calcium clir-
rent). 1s Diagnostically, if the SVT continues after aden-
FIGURE 18-15
osine administration but the ventricular response rate
I eacl I ECUis fron a mixed-breed dog. Paper speed 50 mm/scc, 1
slows, AV nodal re-entry is unlikely and AV nodal inde-
mV 1 cm. (A) Initial recording reveals supraventricular
pendent SVT is probably prcsent. Triggcred atrial
tachycardia with 1:1 AV nodal conduciion and heart ratc of 330
lachycardia can bc abolished with adcnosine, perhaps
heats/inin. The P waves (P) are hidden in 1he T waves, but somc
irregularity in the ST scgiment suggests thcir presence. (B-E)
because of its abbrcviation of thc action potential
Excerpts from a continuous ECG recorded over a 10-minute
caused by activation of outward potassiun1 current in
period. (B) Approxitmately 1.5 ninutes after aciministration of 0.2
mg/kg of dilliazcm (IV bolus), the P-P interval renmains at 180
atrial tissuc. Its short half-life (less thar l0 sec-
mscc, but AV nodal conduction decrcased to 2:1. (C and D) The
onds1s, 131), limits adversc side cffcts. Although adeno-
same 2:I condncrion is present, hut there is a progressive increase
in the P-R interval. The P waves (P) are relatively obscured within
the R waves. (E) Advanced AV nodal block has developed as
need to deliver it cxtrcmcly rapidly through a large
cvidenced by numerous nonconducted P waves. This dog was later
ycin, and its high cost, have curbed its lise.
treated successfully with oral diltiazcm.
Chronic (Oral) Antiarrhythmic Drug Therapy
much higher doses to control hcart rate, particularly
Acute therapy may be followed by chronic oral drug
when β-blockers arc used as monotherapy. Accord-
adininistration in some cascs to (1) slow AV nodal
ingly, boluscs of 0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg havc bcen well
conduction when trcating AV node indcpendent SVT,
tolerated in many cases. However, care should be taken
or (2) convcrt AV nodal re-entrant SVT to sinus
 rhythm. Thesc agcnts include diltiazem (1 to 3 mg/kg
contractility or hypotension. In these cases, esmolol is
tid); verapamil (1 to 3 mg/kg tid); atenolol (0.5 to 1
advantageous because of its short elimination halflife
mg/kg sid to bid); propranolol (0.3 to 1.5 mg/kg tid);
350 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
A. Pretreatment
FIGURE 18-16
ECG from a 6-month-old
 Propranolol 0.1mg/kg IV
Labrador retriever that. was found
B. Treatment
moribund after bcing unloaded
from an airplane. Paper speed 50
mm/ser, 1I mV = I cm, lcad IL.
(A) The heart rate was initially
300 bcats/min and P waves were
not visiblc. Neitlier vagal
inmproved the ECG. (B)
Propranolol was administered
(0. 1 rmg/kg IV) with minimal
effect on heart rate. Electrical
alternans developed coinciden
with dhis therapy. (C) Verapanil
was administered (0.02 mg/kg
V),which abruptly crminatcd
thc tachycardia. Simus rhythm
was resumed and no furthcr
C. Treatment
treatmcnt was needed.
Verapamil 0.02 mg/kg IV
and digoxin (0.005 to 0.01 mg/kg bid). These drugs
goxin plus either of these two agcnts, may provide
may occasionally convert the arrhythmia to sinus
better antiarrhythmic control in some cases. The dos-
rhythm, but other agents have been used for the spe
age of each drug is usually decreased to reduce unto-
cific goal of conversion or prevention of AV node
ward effects when combination therapy is used. Long-
independent SVT. Thesc include procainamide (10 to
acting or sustained-release preparations can sometimcs
20 mg/kg tid to qid); quinidine (10 to 20 mg/kg tid
be beneficial when treatment compliance is an issue.
to qid): propafenone (3 to 4 mg/kg tid); flecainide (1
As a general rule, the same total dose (mg/kg) that
01 p!q 8y/8u1 7 01 g'0) [01e1os 4(p4 01 p!q 8y/8u g 01
would be given in a 24-hour period (e.g., 2 mg/kg tid)
tid); or amiodarone (loading dose 10 mg/kg for 7
is applied to the sustained-release formulation when
days, then 5 mg/kg q 24 to 48 hr).
administered once daily (e.g., 6 mg/kg/day).
The efficacy of chronic oral medication is sometimes
 Ectopic atrial tachycardias may occasionally bc corl-
suboptimal for several reasons. An oral formulation
verted to sinus rhythm or controlled with class Ia, class
may not have comparable eficacy to IV preparations
Ic,t39-142 or class II drugs (see chapter 17, Table 172).
and adjustmcnts may be nccded.lv7 Iack of response
The latter two classes are considered more effective.'4s
may be due to inadequate dosage, or combination
Some class Ic and class II drugs also affect AV nodal
drug therapy may be required.1ss The use of calcium
 conduction owing to their β-adrenergic blocking prop-
channel blockers and β-adrenergic blockers, or di-
erties. Currently, thie most effective drugs used for
351
A. Pretreatment
FIGURE 18-17
LCG from a dog with
supraventricular tachycardia.
Paper speed 50 mm/sec, I mV
= 1 cni. lcad I. (A) Initial ECG
B.Treatment
reveals rapid, narrow, and
Edrophonium 0.15mg/kg IV
rcgular supraventricular
lachycardia. (B) Trealment with
cdrophonjun (0.15 mg/kg IV)
.......
quickly rerminated the
cxtrasystoles persistcd. (C) Long-
term treatment with propafenone
(4 ing/kg IV) sucessfully
supprcssed the supravenuricular
tachycardia. Initially, trcatment
withi' diliazenn and atenolol were
C. Treatment
Propafenone 4mg/kg IV
tricd but werc inellectual as
 monotherapy or in combination.
.11:
........
...
ectopic atrial tachycardias in humans are propafenonc,
administcrcd IV (Fig. 18-18). If severe bradycardia
flecainide, sotalol, and amiodarone.14+ Fctopic junc-
results in hypotension, cardiovascular support may re-
tional tachycardias havc bccn somcwhat effectively
quire IV fluids: atropinc (0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg tid to
trcated with amiodarone.14s  Unfortunately,  clinical
qid, IV, IM, or SC) or glycopyrrolate (0.005 to 0.01
studics cvaluating the cffectivencss of thesc agents are
mg/kg IV, IM, or SC), or isoproterenol (0.04 to 0.08
lacking in dogs.
μg/kg/min IV or to cffect).
Cessation of chronic β-blockcr therapy should be
ADvERsE EFFEcTs. Fxccssive bradycardia may Occur
gradual. Sudden withdrawal may result in catechola-
with1 calcium channcl or β-adrcncrgic blockade bc-
mine sensitivity becausc of drug-rclated increase in β-
cause of thie effcct on thc sinus or AV node. Thcsc
adrenergic receptors and up-rcgulation associated with
drugs may also causc hypotension, particularly whcn
β-adrenergic blockade.145, I4i6 Calcium channel blockers
188111
1
Blood pressure:(mm Hg)
 Diltiazem 0.2 mg/kg IV bolus
FIGURE 18-18
Arterial blood pressurc recorded during IV bolus adninistration of diltiazen (0.2 mg/kg). The
hypotcnsive efcct of calcium channcl blockadc is evident as the blood presure drops from 130/80
mnHg to 85/45 mmHg. This effect can be more profound with verapamil. Thus, to avoid
hypotension, calcium channel blor kers should be adrinistered IV slowly.
352ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
and, particularly, β-adrcncrgic blockers may causc
CHRONIC (ORAL) TIERAPY, DIGOXIN ALONE. The first
dose-relatcd negative inotropic cffects, which should
choice to control heart rate in dogs with atrial flutter
be considered in animals with myocardial failurc.
or AF has traditionally been digoxin (Fig. 18-20). Di-
 Digoxin toxicity most cornrnonly causes depression,
goxin decrcases the ventricular response (rate) by its
anorexia, and diarrhea, although FCG evidencc of
indirect vagal cffects, 17 i# and by its actions to abbrevi-
prolonged AV nodal conduction (P-R interval prolon-
ate atrial nyocardial action potential duration and
gation) or arrhythmias car also occur. If digoxin toxic.
refractory period.>8 t The later allows more wavclcts
ity is suspccted, the drug should be stopped for at lcast
to bombard the AV node, resulting in greater cou-
48 hours; if continued trcatmcnt is nccded, the dosc is
cealed conduction with fewer transmitted impulses
cmpirically reduced by half. Dctermination of digoxin 
reaching the ventricle.58a 1a Although digoxin can ef
scrum levels (drawn 8 to 12 hours after administra-
fcctivcly control the hcart rate in many dogs, this con
tion) is required to confirm toxicity and adjust dosage.
s  o o   st n
stress, or excitement.52-156 HIcightened sympathetic
tonc during thcsc periods results in cxcessive hcart.
ATRIAL FLUTTERAND ATRIAL.FIBRLLATION
ratc (sce Fig. 18-13). Additional treatmcnnt with β-
Atrial fibrillation is usually a chronic, permanent
adrencrgic blockers or calcium channel blockcrs is
  s  e  
often nccessary.
due to dilated cardiomyopathy or volumc overload
(c.g., mitral regurgitation, uncorrectcd patent ductus
 CHRONIC (ORAL) TIIERAPY, COMBINATION DRUGS WITH D1
arteriosus). Occasionally, acute onsct of AF or paroxys-
GOxIN. Because most dogs with AF have some degree
mal (internittent) AF is detcctcd. In the formcr, onc
 of myocardial failure, treatment with digoxin serves a
looks to control the ventricular response rate, while in
 dual rolc. Although digoxin has previously bccn uscd
the latter, the goal is corversion to a sinus rhythm or
 alone, it is usually more cffcctive whcn combined with
prevention of episodic AF. Atrial (lutter usually
pro-
cithcr a β-adrencrgic blocker (c.g., atenolol, proprano-
gresses to AF, and principles of therapy are similar.
lol, metoprolol) or a calcium channel blocker (c.g.,
diltiazem), both of which increasc thie AV node refrac-
 Control of Ventricular Rcsponsc Rate
achieved when digoxin was conbined with calcium
 CLINICAI. EvALUATIoN. In most dogs with AF, coriver-
channel blockers than with β-adrenergic blockers,160-163
sion to sinus rhythm is not an obtainable goal. The
 In the maragernent of AF, scrum digoxin levels should
ventricular ratc will vary from 120 to 320 beats/min
be determined approximately 7 to 10 days after initia-
depending on the type of AF and concealed conduc-
tion of thcrapy; blood is sampled 8 to 12 hours after
tion, the integrity of the AV node, and the level of
digoxin administration.
autonomic tone. Hcart ratc reduction to a single opti-
 mal levcl carinot bc universally stated when treating
atrial fibrillation, and it varies with cach anirnal. Ide-
Convcrsion of Tachyarrhythmia and Prevention
ally. a 24-hour Holter recording will give the clcarest
of Initiation
appreciation of hcart rate and rhythm during rest ard
activity. Clients can often be traincd to monitor and
APPLIED ELECTROPHYSIOLOG1C PRINCIPLES. The 1mulliple
wavcict theory of AF has dlircct bearing on treatment to
record hcart rates at homc, and evaluation of heart
convcrt thc arrhythmia or to control the ventricular rc-
rate under specific circumstances can be helpful, in-
sponse. Drugs may either increase (digitalis) or decrease
cluding (l) in-hospital auscultated resting rate, (2) in-
(quinidire, procainamide, flecainide, propafenone, sotalol,
 hospital auscultated rate following minimal cxercise,
aniodarore)" the number of waveleis; this frequently deter-
ds u a i pe e u ai hea (o pue
mines whether the drug stabilizes or converts thc AF, respec-
tivcly. Drugs that stabilize the AF may actually decrcase thc
Adequate hcart rate control may occur ovcr a range of
ventricular response (e.g., digoxin), whcreas drugs tlat even-
ttally convcrt the AF may initially increasc the ventricular
cxcrcise for a large-breed dog. When slowcr ventricular
rcsponse (c.g., quinidine), The most reliable: detcrminant of
 hcart rates arc prcsent (<100 bcats/min), therc is no
thie cffcct of a drug on the number of wavelets is its effect.
nced to reduce the ventricular hcart rate further.
on the wavelcngul. Other factors are important in the poten-
tial of a drug lo act as an antifibrillatory agenl. For cxanmple.
sotalol markedly increases the wavclength and decreases thc
ACUTE THERAPy. The drugs and principlcs discussed
nunber of wavelets, bul its antifibrillatory action is disap
for the short-term trcatmcnt of other SVT rhythms
pointing because of rewerse usedependency This refers t0
apply to the treatmcnt of atrial flutter and AF. Digoxin
 decreased antiarrhythmic action with faster heart rates (i.e.
is usually not used IV whcn rapid control of tachycar-
when antiarrhythmic efficacy is needed thc most). Thc faster
the leart rate, the less antifbrillatory action becaluse of a
dia is requircd, Instead, calciun channel blockers, β-
reduced lengtlacning of the action potential w- This
 adrcnergic blockers, or both reprcscnt the first choice
reverse use-dependcncc is not true for all class I1I antiar-
for IV therapy (Fig. 18-19).
rhythmics. Amiodarone is cffective over a wide rangc of
353
Pretreatment
HR 280
Treatment
Diltiazem 0.1mg/kg IV + Propranolol 0.05mg/kg IV
1.
二
HR 130
FIGURE 18-19
ECG from a dog with atrial fluuer. Paper spccd 50 mm/scc, 1 mV = 1 cm. lead I1. (fop) Initial ECC
e ou p (i y/u Ioi u yim ji. (uusenq ose) sen u pen e poeaai
the heart rate. The decision was then cither to increase the dose of diltiazem and repeat the bolus
or administer a β-aclrenergic blocker. Propranolel was given. (Bofton) The ventrienular response rate
slowed shortly after adrminisiering a propranoloi bolus. Caution should always be used when
combining drugs that affcct AV nodal conduction, 'Ihe lowest effective dose should be tried first and 
the anount gradually inereased as needed. Flutler (f) waves are apparent. Slowing of the AV nodal
(arroz).
A.Pretreatment
FIGURE 18-20
Lead I ECG from a boxcr with
dlilated cardliomyopathy and atrial
librillation. Paper speed 50 mm/
sec, I mV = 1 cm. (A) Initial 
ECC; reveals atrial fibrillalion and
left ventrieular cnlargement
HR = 200
pattern. The ventricular response
Tate was rapid at 200 beats/min.
(B) Control of heart rate was
B. Treatment
Digoxin 0.25 mg am, 0.125 mg pm
achieved with digoxin alone. This
ECC reveals a heart rate of only
i......
50 beats/min, slowcr thaul
dlesired. Scrum digoxin
concentration was mormal. a 24
Jour Holrer reeording revealed
acccptablc heart ralcs, and the
clog did well clinieally.
HR = 50
354ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCLLAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
heart rates in the treatment of AFItn toia The mechanisms are
with digoxin has been shown in humans to be effec-
not clear
tive.181
Although reduction in wavelet nunhers is a major mccha-
nistn for drug action to abolish AF, drugs that can enlarge
Class IHI drugs (see chapter 17, Table 17-2) have
the exritable gap (arca of recovered and excitable myocar-
 been used to convert and prevent AF. IHowever, studies 
dium) in this re-entrant arrhythmia also havc an important
with experimentally induced AF in the dog have shown
therapeutic inmpact. Class la and class Ic antiarrhythmic
that the ability of sotalol to terminate AF is handi-
agents (sec chapter 17, Table 17-2) can be expected to
 capped because of reversc usc-depcndence.79 Nonethc-
enlarge the excitablc gap during AF by slowing conduction
velocityoThis abolishes the rentrantcircuit and a-
less, it still may be succcssful in the prevention of AF
rhythmia.
ate.7 Amiodarone has bccn cffcctive in the convcrsion
of AF, but reversion to sinus rhythm may take
THERAPY FOR CONVERTING TACHIYARRIIYTHMIA. In hul-
weeks,1s2.1e3 this agent has been proposed as the most
 mans and horscs, conversion of AF is more common
ss  si    
than in the dog. Most dogs with AF have cnlarged atria
and cardiac pathology. Occasionally, AF can develop
humans, 0.005 to 0.025 mg/kg IV) have shown this
in dogs without cardionegaly (c.g., gastric torsion) or
class IHl drug to be effective in cardioversion when
in apparently norrmal giant-brced dogs (sce previous
administered IV in acute AF, and with fewer side effects
discussion). interventions may bc required if hcmody-
than other drugs.is Ihutilide prolongs the action po-
narnic compromisc develops or it is feared that the
tential differently than the better-known sotalol and
acutc, sustaired AF may become permanent.
. Thie
amiodarone. Whcrcas the lattcr prolong repolarization
longer AF pcrsists. the less likely that conversion will
by blocking potassium charncls, ibutilide increascs the
Occurl? and the rnore likcly that myocardial failure
 plateau phase by enhancing the slow inward depolariz-
will result.
ing Na' current.187
Quinidine has bccn the initial choice when conver-
sion of AF is sought.i72 Quinidinc can cause an in-
crcascd ventricular response rate both becausc of its
TEMPORARY ATRIAL FIBRILLATION
vagolytic effects and the decrcase in conccaled conduc-
Although AF tcnds to bc chronic and sustaincd in
tion into the AV node as the rnurnber of wavelcts is
the dog, it is temporary and selflirniting in sone cases
decrcascd. As thc AF becomes more organizcd, thc
(e.g, when dogs are anesthetized with narcotics such
ventricular response rate increases, Therefore, quini-
dine may nced to be combined cautiously with drugs
as fentanyl citrate without pretreatment with an anti-
cholincrgic, they can spontaneously develop transient
that slow AV nodal conduction, such as digoxin. Cal-
AF). Enhanced vagal tone shortens the atrial refractory
cium channel blockers may bc prcfcrable to digoxin
period and increases the dispersion of refractoriness,
because of thcir salutary cffect on atrial myocardial
both of which facilitate AF.
pathology, which devclops as a result of AFxo. 87 β-
adrenergic  blockcrs  incrcascd  the  effectiveness
or
quinidine in converting AF in onc human study 173
AV NODE DEPENDENT (INCLUDING
Data from human trials suggcst thiat somc of the
SINOATRIAL RE-ENTRY) TACIIYCARDIA
class Ie antiarrhythmics may bc morc cffectivc than
quinidinc. Flccainide and propafenore have becn
Sinus nodal and AV rodal re-entrarnt tachycardias
used for conversion and prevention of AF,146,17-176 but
 car potcntially be converted to sinus rhythm with
cffectivcncss in dogs is unknowr. In cxperimcntal ca-
 drugs that affect thc slow calcium channels, such as
nine studies, llecainide (1 to 5 mg/kg PO bid to tid)
calcium charncl blockers or β-adrenergic blockers. In
was most. effective in AF potentiated by cxcessive vagal
humans with AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia, radiofre-
tone,2 9 tm I1n humans, flecainide'77 was potentially
quency ablatior of the slow pathway is the preferred
effective for trcating nonchronic AF in the absence of
treatment. 1sa 1s At this time, antiarrhythmics represent
structural hcart discase.178, 17 Whcther this application
the usual therapy in dogs.
may apply to spccific situations in dogs (ie., AF in1
 giant brceds) is not known. Very limited experience in
Control of Ventricular Rate and Conversion of
Arrhythimia
yieldcd a favorable response without side effects. Given
the vagolytic. properties of flecainide, it may be morc
The AV nodal tissue is sensitive to autonomic influ-
 henefciai when combincd with a β-adrcnergic blocker
ences. Therefore, physiologic mancuvcrs (scc Fig.
in diseased hearts.1sao
18-7) and drugs that incrcasc parasynpathetic or de-
 In coutrast to flecainidc, propafenone (3 to 4 mg/
crcasc synpathietic tone will potcritially stop re-cntrant
 kg PO, tid) is a more effective treatment in sympathctic.
conduction. Digoxin or β-adrencrgic blocking agents
potentiatcd AF:? Moreover, propafenone combined
        
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMIAS 355
Agcnts that act directly to slow conduction in the slow
to older, female miniaturc schnauzcrs and occasionally,
pathway of the AV riodc, such as calcium channcl
 othcr brceds (Wcst Highland white terricr, aged dachs-
blockers, will havc sirnilar antiarrhythmic effects. For
hunds). The causc for syricopc is frequcntly scvere
acute therapy, the sarnc principles discussed urnder the
bradycardia or abrupt sinus arrcst (sce discussior un-
trcatrncnt of atrial tachycardias are truc. Becausc the
der Bradyarrhythrnias). HIowever, somc dogs also have
fe-entrart loop can potentially be blocked in the fast
episodcs of norsinus SVT that follow a long pausc as
pathway, class Ia, class Ic, and class I11 drugs (sec Table
an cscape tachycardia (bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome)
17-2) that slow conduction in fast charinel cardiac.
or they may precede a long pause (tachycardia-bradyear-
muscle cells may also have antiarrhythmic bencfit in
dia syndrome). The mechanisn for SVT is believed to
bc abnormal atrial automaticity. Dogs with SsS are
in humans liave shown sirmilar benefits when verapamil
treated with pacemaker implantatior to control thc
(class IV) and flecainide (class Ic) were compared.17
bradycardia (chaptcr 20). It is not recommended that
In addition, propafenone, which differs from other
the SVT be treated without pacemaker inpiantation
class Ic drugs becausc of its additional class Il (approxi-
 becausc of the risk of exacerbating the bradycardia.
mately 1/40th the β-adrencrgic blocking potcncy of
propranolol o and class IV actions, is regarded as an
cffective antiarrhythmic.
VENTRICULAR
TACHYARRHYTHMLAS
SELECTED CANINE CARDIAG DISEASES
WITH ARRHYTHMIAS
EMERGING ROLE OF MECHANISMS IN
TREATMENT DECISIONS
BYPASS TRACT MACRORE-ENTRANT
TACHYCARDIAIN LABRADOR RETRIEVERS
CLASSIFICATION OF ARRHYTHMIAS BY
MECHANISM
Orthodromic (conduction through the AV node and
-diou (ioen ssediq e t unne at o yoeq apeionan
Whcr thc mechanism of ar arrhythmia is known
rocating tachycardia has becn identifed in Labrador
(chapter 16)1v or suspected, antiarrhythmic drugs may
be 1norc ratiorally selected.197 1o9 Not all antiarrhyth-
retrievers." In one study, a bypass tract was identified
mic thcrapy is cfficacious or cven safe, and certain
as an atrioventricular postcroscptal acccssory path-
way '" It conducted only in the retrograde dircction,
representing a concealed accessory pathway that did
mechainisms is limited for spontaneous canine arrhyth-
not display as a pre-cxcitation on the ECG during sinus
mias, ncw approachcs to drug classification may be-
rhythm. The rapid rate of the SVT induced episodes
cornc useful whcn clinical data arc accumulated. For
cxarnple, the Singh-Vaughan Williams antiarrhythrnic
of acute pulmorary cdena.
Labrador retricvcrs also havc a higher incidencc
of tricuspid dysplasia/Ebstcin's anomaly,.us The sceptal
of catcgorizing antiarrhythmic drugs bascd on thcir
A go s n   jo su
leaflet of the tricuspid valve is adhered to the intervenl-
Referred to as the "'Sicilian Gambit,"u. aw this scheme
- ne sin ssedaq suu un udas r
quenntly associated with Ebstein's anomaly.7 The poste-
empliasized how drugs affect ionic currents, receptors,
rior and septal leaflets of the tricuspid valve are the
and pumps ard the vulnerable parameler that would
last to develop in the fetus. Arrested tricuspid valve
devclopiment results in remnarnts of muscular or spe-
 posed classifications of antiarrhythmic drugs consider
cialized tissuc conrections (the subsequent bypass
not only the drugs' action on a particular channel but
tracts) across the AV groovc. In lhumars, the trcatmernt
also thc pharmacokinctics2os or the undcrlying hearl.
diseasc.2o9 The kinctics can havc importart implica-
of choice is radiofrequcncy ablation of the bypass tract,
 a technique that is of limited availability to vcterinary
tions with regard to thie antiarrhythmic and proar
medicine.
rhythmic effects of cach drug. These still require clini-
 cal study in dogs.
TACHYCARDIAASSOCIATEDWITH SICK SINUS
ROLE OF TRIGGERS AND MODULATORS
SYNDROME IN MINIATURE SCHNAUZERS
 The autonomic ncrvous systen plays an important
 Sick sinus syndrome (SsS) reprcsents a disorder in
role in arrhythrnogcnesis arnd the efficacy of drugs.
which cardiac conducting tissucs are diffuscly affected.
 Some of the more saliennt relatiorships are dcscribed
It is characterized by syncope—typically in middle-agcd
herc:
356
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCUIAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
A
B
C
FIGURE 18-21
Continuous Hlolter recording from a boxer with syncope associated with excitement and excrcisc.
(A) Simus arrhythmia. (B) During excitement and exercise. the sinus hcart rate accelerated. (C)
Shorly aftcr onset of the inercased sinus heart rate, ventricular arrhythmias developed, including.
paroxysms of ventricular tachycardlia (VT). Syncope occurred when runs of VT lasted more than 8
seconds. Mexiletine alone was inefective, but treatment with atenolol and mexiletine supprcsscd
more than 90% of the ventrieular arhythmias and abolished the syncope. The VF identified in
(xa pie asiaxa) aen eq pas o tm peisse ananbaui si sioxo
EFFECTS ON THE VENTRICULAR MYOCARDIUM. The auto-
nomic nervous system plays a pivotal role in the initiation,
only affects generation of vcntricular arrhytlumias but can
characteristics. and pcrpetuation of nost arrhythmias (Fig.
alsomodify the cffctiveness of antiarrlythmic drugs.1
18-21)m 2loFlevations in cardiac synpathctic activity have
For example, thc beneficial effecis of quinidinc (cass la)
been documented in sustained ventricular arrhythmias.248
can be annulled with increased sympathctic tone. Similarly.
The synpathetic nervous system can potentiate arrhythmias
exiletine (class Ib) may be less effcctive unless conbired
causcd by rc-cntry. automaticity, and triggered activity 2114
with atcnolol. The antiarrhythmic effects of action potential
Sympathetic stinmulalion of the Na/K punp hyperpolarizes
 prolongation by class 1ll drugs may be optinal only whien
the membranc, which allows more availalility ot Na' chan-
nels. This increases conduction velocity, which under certain 
trial revealed tliat dlsotalol was an cflective antiarrhythmic
circunstanccs may increase lhe propensity for rec-entrant
drug22; howcvcr, whcn d-sotalol was tested against placebo,
arrhythmias. Morcovcr, catecholanines shorten repolariza-
more deaths oecurred in the treatment group.2s. 1 Bccausc
tion and thc effcctivc rcfractory period. This can favor re-
d-sotalol is esscntially devoid of antiadrenergic actions and is
entrant arrlythmias by allowing more dispersion of refracto-
functionally a pure chass II drug. thc antiarrhythmic cffccts
may be lost (less blockade of potassium current) in sone
mias caused by aulomaticity because of an increase in the
siuations in whiclh sympathetic tone is increased, 22 and
slopc of phase 4 and enlkancenent of the slow inward cur-
concomitant β-adrenergic blockadc may be necessary.
rent. Thcy also pronotc dcvclopment of delayed afterdepo-
larizations because they stimulate calcium current, allowing
clevations of intracellular calciu. Apha-adrenergic agonists
block spccific potassium currents (Ik, Io) thal prolong the
INDICATIONS FOR THERAPY
action potcntial duration. Given an existing substrate, sucl
an action will increase early afterdepolarizations.
Treatment is based upon the assumption that thcr-
Differences cxist in the inpact between the neurogenic
and humoral adrencrgic stimulalion." The rcurogenic vec.
apy will (1) reduce the risk of death, (2) decrcasc the
tor (norcpinephrinc froin sympathetic rerve fibers) usually
frcqucncy of a dangerous arrhythmia, and (3) inprovc
occurs sudldenly, for short pcriods of timc, and with unequal
or abolish related clinical sigus. Bencficial results may
distribution lo ventricular myocardium; the humoral vector
not always occur, and adverse effects arc possiblc (sce
(circulating epinephrine fron the adrenal glands) occurs
morc gradually for a longer period, and with a more gener-
chapter 17, Tables 17-6, 17-8).
alized cffect. Thereforc, the influcnces of the synpauetic
and parasynpathetic systeins can be complex, particularly
during crtain circumstances sucl as exercise2m25 Arrhyth-
PREVENTION OF SUDDEN CARDIACDEATH
nias also may bc triggered with certain activities, including
sleep,13 9 with changes in the sympatheuc balance accompa
Sudden cardiac dcath can result from ventricular
Hlying congestive heart failure,2* or with hypcrtrophic cardio-
fibrillation (VF), ventricular asystole, or clectrical-
myopathy Not only are ventricular arrhyhmias more likely
mcchanical dissociation (also called pulscless idiovcr-
undlcr circumstanccs of clevated sympathetic tone, but also
tricular rhythrn by some investigators). It was oncc
large sympathetic surges are gencrated as a result of ventricl-
belicved that decrcasing the frequency of ventricular
lar tachycardia.u
cxtrasystoles would also decreasc the risk of suddcn
death. However, this assumption is rot always true.
EFFECTS ON ANTIARRHYTHMIC POTENTIAL. Sympathoexci-
tation may contributc to henodynamic stability during VI,
 Drugs can have antiarrhythmic cffects without antifib
altlough under some circumstanccs it may be detrinental.?s
rillatory effects and vice versa. If ventricular asystole or
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRIIYTHIMIAS 357
elcctrical-mechanical dissociation is the mcchanisrn of
(Figs. 18-22, 18-24/:G), or (2) whcn it may degenerate
dleath, then drugs that prevernt VF may rot affect that
into a more clcctrically unstable and fatal arrhythmia
outcone.
(Fig. 18-23).
Ventricular fibrillation is a common fatal canine ar-
Heart rate is the most. important determinant of
rhythrmia. As in the atria, the mccharisin is muitiplc
hernodynamic compromise  with a  tachyarrhythmia
rcentrant circuits. This is more likcly to occur when
(Fig. 18-24). Systolic and diastolic dysfunction are
thcre is morc dispersion of refractoriness (the differcnccs
morc pronounced in the left ventricle with sustained
in the refractory periods of thc myocytes in different
ventricular tachycardia.25 For example, slow (120
locations), which, when increascd, causes unidirec-
bcat/min), monomorphic VT that is hemodynamically
tional blocks and re-entry. The dispcrsion of refractori-
tolerated in a dog with normal myocardial function
ncss that is required for re-entry to devclop is within
usually does not demand antiarrhythrnic intervention.
thie physiologic range in the atria and outside the
Treatment of single PVCs is not neccssary becausc thc
physiologic range for the veutricle. Thus, AF can exist.
hemodynarnic comprornise is brief or not significant.
without pathology in giant-breed dogs, whereas it is
ECG fcatures that imply clectrical instability and
rare for a normal heart to devclop VF spontancously.
incrcasc thc belicf that the arrhythmia should be
Rapid VT usually precedes developrment of VF, and
trcated include (1) polymorphic PVCs, (2) a short
this rhythm increascs the inhomogencity of conduc-
 Coupling interval betwccn the PvC and the preceding
tion and refractorincss. The inhomogencity allows a
 normal beat (i.e., the prermature ventricular complex
fixcd re-cntrant circuit. to degcncratc into a randorn
occurs during the vulnerable period of the T wave [R
circuit that lcads to VF. Some drugs such as bretyliuum
on T phenomenoml), or (3) a short cycle length (i.c.,
may have a grcater antifibrillatory than antiarrhythmic
rapid hcart rate) for the consccutive ventricular com-
ability.212 At times, certain clectrical stimuli such as a
plcxes. Rapid, nonomorphic or polymorphic VT is
spontarncous premature ventricular complcx or dis-
more likely to dcgencrate into VF than is slow (<120
    o 
beats/ min), monomorphic VT.
during the vulncrable period can also set up condi-
tions for VF (Fig. 18-22).
ELIMINATION OF CLINICAL SIGNS
TERMINATION OFDANGEROUSARRHYTHMIAS
Weakness, exercise intolerancc, hypotension, and
A ventricular arrhythmia is judged to be dangerous
syncope are likcly when VT is rapid and sustained
(1) when it causcs hemodynamic comprornise (c.g,
(>30 sec).! Holter monitoring coupled with a diary
low cardiac output with weakness, syncope, or coniges-
of thc pet's activitics can corrclatc an arrhythmia with
tivc hcart failurc (CIIF); hypotension: or collapsc)
clinical signs wheu the association is in question.
LEAD
aVF
Mum
Blood
pressure
BP
FIGURE 18-22
Simultaneous rccordling of leads I, aVF, and arterial blood pressure in a German shepherd
undergoing inmplantation of a cardioverler defibrillator device. Testing requires inducing ventricular
fibrillation (leff. half of the tracings) followed by defibrillation (arrow). Fibrillation is induced with
rapidy repcated electrical simuli delivcred to the left ventricle through a sensing/pacing lead. The
yentricular fibrillation is sensed by the implamed device, which issues a shock to dcfibrillate the
heart successfully, Sinus rhyuhm is then rc-cstablished. Notice the abscnce of an arterial blood
358ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLFS OF THERAPY
Blood
9nssaIo
aVR
FIGURE1
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRIIYTHMIAS 359
Natural History and Risk Stratification
In humans, even with 24 hours of ECG recordcd,
the day-to-day variability of veutricular arrhythmias is
Whcn delibcrating whethcr to treat a ventricular
high.234-2ui Variability is grcater when the frequency is
arrhythimia, one must also corsider the clinical presen-
low (<200 PVC bcats/hr) than whcn the PVC counts
tation and associated discase. For exarnple, myocardial
arc high (>1000 bcats/hr). Moreover, when the inter-
dysfurction is the rmajor determinant of risk associated
with ventricular arrhythmias in humansz2-2s, the cx-
val between recordings is incrcased, the spontaneous
variability in arrhythmias varics cven more,?'7 There-
trapolatior is most likcly true for dogs as wcll. Evcn
fore, to demonstratc clcarly a positive drug effcct, (1)
before developmcnt of nyocardial failure in the cardi-
re-exarnination should be made within a short period
of time, (2) the percent reduction of arrhythmias
scher), VT and syncope appcar to be associated with
should be stringcnt, (3) long-term folow-up may in-
increased risk of suddeni death. German shepherd
clude examination off drug treatrnent, and (4) the
dogs with rapid VT are at risk of death until 18 months
lirnitations of monitoring, as they apply, must be fac-
of agc, whcrcas thosc with only PVCs, or those older
torcd in. Neverthclcss, Holter monitoring providcs 
than 18 months, arc at low risk.23-233
critical asscssment for managing ventricular arrhyth-
mias,6. 222, 241, 242
APPROACHES AND CRITERIA FOR
SUCCESSFUL MANAGEMENT
REDUCTION IN ARRHYTHMIA FREQLENCY (REDUCTION OF
THE INITIATION OF AN ARRHYTHMIA OR TERMINATION OF A
CONTINUOUS (HOLTER) ECG MONITORING
TACIYCARDIA). Based on 48 hours of Holtcr mornitoring
in humans, suppression of approximately 90 perccnt
 Standard, brief ECG recordings may be too short to
 of repetitive ventricular cctopic bcats and a 75% reduc-
detect VT and may be inaccurate duc to thc spontanc
tion in PVCs must be achieved to ascribe an antiar
ous hourly variability in arrhythnia frequency28--40
rhythmic cffect comfortably.24 This type of criterion is
  o    s 
effcctive only whcn ventricular arrhythmias are frc-
 hour ECG recordings. Iolter monitoring can also help
quent. Currently, specific recomncndations have not.
asscss antiarrhythmic drug efficacy- To verify a true
been validated for dogs.
reduction in the frequcncy of ventricular arrhythrnias
requircs a minimum of 24 hours of continuous ECG
 monitoring, rather than just the standard 1- or 2-min-
REDUCTION IN RATE OF ARRHYTHMIA. In1 sOIme CirCum-
ute ECG rhythm strip.
stances, abolishing the VT is not possible, although the
 Holter monitoring is not without its own lirnitations.
antiarrhythmic may cffectivcly decreasc the rate of thc
FIGURE 18-23
Elecurophysiologie recordings Uhat demonstrate the effect of ventrirular arrhythmias on systemic
(arterial） blood pressure.enricular complexcs donot general ablood presure as elfetive as
complexes thal originate from supraventricular tissue and traverse the normal conduction systerm.
The number of vcntricular ectopic beats/minte is a determinant of cardiac: output, as well as atrial
vcutrieular synergy (cardiac output = stroke volune X hcart rate). Blood pressure represents the
prorlucl of cardiac ouput timcs total peripheral resistaunce. Tlus, the lengthi of time that the heaurt
maintains a rapid ventricular arrhyhnia influenecs clinical signs.
(A) Simultancous ECG (leads If and aVR) and arterial blood pressure recorded from a dog wit
blood pressure were brief and thus diel not result in observable clinical signs. The postextrasystofic
potentiation of the sinus beat that followed the tachycardia is reflected in tle increased blood
pressure. Paper speed 25 mm/sec.
(B) Simultaneous ECG (lead II and aVR) and artcrial blood pressure recorded from a dog with
long sinus pauses, yentricular escape complexcs, and venirieular lachycardia. The arterial blood
pressure is reduced, iregular, and not consisten with each ventricular complex. Such a variation in
systemic pressure is also seen with atrial librillation. Paper speed 50 mm/sec.
(C) Data generated during ventricular pacing in a German shepherd dog undergoing
programmed stirmlation (anore is pacing artifact) to determine whether ventricular tachycardia (VI)
intraventricular leads (quad 3-4), monophasic actiou potential (MAP). and 1His clectrogram (1lis).
Ventricular pacing with a posmaure stimulus (f) and two prermature complexes (2 and 3)
(open arrour). Such a drop in systemic blood pressure, when sustained more Lhan 8 to 10 seconds,
resnlts in clinieal sigus. Induciion of VT in this dog is uusual un Gernan shepherds with inherined
VT. Ilaper speed 100 mm/sec.
360
FIGLRE 18-24
Compositc schemc of ventricular aurhythmias, showing whicli would be Lreated. The width of the
arow indlicates the increasing nced for ireatmenl. The judgmenl to treat or nol on cach of thesc
xamples is based ou the assumprionthar the shorCsegentisrepresentariveof what thedoy's
ECG is like over a longer period. To be sure of the frequency and severity of he ventricular
arrhythrmia, a Holter recording for 24 hours would improve the information on which a decision is
Monomorphic ventrieilar tripler at a rate that.is sinilar to the sinus rate. This rhythm would rarely
be treated. (C) Monormorphie, slow ventrieular taclyeardia (120 beats/1nin) fromni a dog that was hit
by a car. Most. dogs with traumatic arrhythmias recover with or without treatnent. Therapy should
be based onn close ECC monitoring and clinical assessment for hemodynamic compromise.
(1) Ventricular bigeuiny recorded from a boxer. Althougli only single preinature cornplexes were
rerorded, this brced is au high risk for dangerous VT associated with "boxer cardiomyopathy.
Therctore,24hour Holter recording is recomrmended to determine whether VT is presenr, an
echocardiogram would bc helpful; and close clinical monitoring is inportant. This dlog woull
probablyhetreated.
(E) Polyinorphic: VT recorded from a dog with a splenic mass. Acutc antiarrhythunic therapy
appcars warranted based upon clinical condition and polymorphic QRS complexes. This arrhythnia
resolved after splenectomy. (F) Rapid, monomorphic VT wih lefl bunlle branch block pattern from
a syurcopal boxer. Treatment is clearly indicated. (G) Rapid. monomorphic VT in a dog with
myocardial failure. AV dissociation is present, and some P waves are visible (notice the 2nd and 5tl.
required. Animals with myocardial failurc tolerate VT more poorly than those with a functionally
nornal hcart.
361
tachyarrhythmia. A slower heart rate during VT may
bc helpful in some cases, particularly when digitalis
bc adlequate to lcssen clinical signs and risk of death.
glycosides are uscd.
Plasma levcls of a spccific drug do not always ac-
coumt for active mctabolites, tissue drug lcvcls. and the
DRUG EFFECTS ON THE
fact that the antiarrhythmic cffect can span a wide
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
drug conccntration. Although plasma conccntrations
of procainamide can he of value in the dog, lidocaine
levels usually are tot cxcept in the cvaluation of toxic-
The ECG can often provide evidence of drug cffi-
ity, because of the wide variation thal. occurs with clear.
cacy 0r toxicity (see chapter 17, Table 17-5). Lido-
 ance, distribution, and bindling to α -acid glycoprotein.
caine, although it blocks sodium channels and causes
a delay in ventricular conduction, docs not prolong
Mexiletine levels are not usually of value bccause of
the QRS complex because of rapid unbinding,24s In
the overlap betwecn therapcutic and toxic plasma
levels,.29. 20 I1n humans?49 and dogs,23 the active metab-
contrast, quinidlinc, procainamide, amiodarone, and
olite of amiodaronc, descthylamiodarone, also has an-
sotalol will causc a dosc-related prolongation of the
tiarrhythmic activityi76. 25s andl may be responsible for
QRS complex. Prolongation of the QT intcrval can
toxicity; monitoring the parent drug may not provide
also be a marker of drug toxicity in some cases, particu-
adlequate warning of toxicity. Moreovcr, corrclating
 larly with drugs that prolong repolarization, such as
dosc atid plasma levels is complicated because of the
class Ic and class III drugs (see chapter 17, Tables
tissue uptake and very wide variability in bioavailabil-
17-2, 17-5).21s Toxicity from class I1I drugs can cause
ity, 202-254
the development of a U wave and large T waves, which
After steady-state cquilibrium is establishcd, one
may  precedc
the developmcnt(
of  torsades
dc
must know when to sample patients to obtain trough
(minimal) plasma drug concentrations.29 (
Only
thc
of repolarization or be generated from the M cells of
frce, nonprotein-bound drug is available for pharma-
the ventricular myocardium (Fig. 18-25) ,215. 246
cologic cffect, but most assays mcasure the total plasma
concentration. Thus, if the 
 proportion of a drug
PLASMA DRUG CONCENTRATIONS
 bound to plasma proteins is inconsistent, erroneous
interprctation can result.
Although therapcutic drug concentrations do not
guarantee effectivc treatments or arrhythmia con-
SELECTION OF
ANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUGS
able can assist with proper antiarrhythmic dosing.249
 Monitoring plasma drug levcis with the goal of identi-
fying a target drug concentration, avoiding low serum
Within a drug class (see Table 17-2). lack of efficacy
levels, or identifying levels in the toxicity range may
of one agent does not predict that anothcr drug within
A
TSATA
FIGURE 18-25
:121
Class Ill anuiarrhythmics can
canse changes in the ECG, such
B
as prolongation of the Qr
ieral, cnlargement of the T
wave, and devclopment of L:
waves. (A) ECG of a dog bcfore
treatment with a class Iii
antiarrtythrnic.(B) Toxicity
developed during treatment, and
C
thic dog devcloped large T waves.
(C) FCG of another dog before
treaument (QT interval = 210
mscc). (D) After treatment, this
dog developed prolongation of
the Q-TU interval (400 mscc),
large 'T waves, and L waves
D1..
(arrous)-
362 ABNORMAL. CARDIOVASCULAR FLNCTION AND PRINCIPIES OF THERAPY
that class will be effective or ineffective. Moreover, a
 exde io) sssqe s  n s 
trcatment response experienced when a drug is admin-
ml/kg/24 hr). The infusion dlose may be incrcascd by
istered by a particular route dloes not indicate a similar
delivering a larger volume or by incrcasing the lido-
response when the agent is given by a different route
cainc conccntration. Infusion pumps facilitate deliv-
Of adminisiration.7 Summary comparisons between
ering concentrated solutions with minimal fluid vol-
antiarrhythmic drug classes have been reported in hu-
umes.
This is desirablc when(
CHF (espccially
mans,25-25
pulmonary cdema) is prcsent. When lidocaine is no
longcr nccessary, the infusion may be stopped without.
tapcring. Lidocaine is stored in adipose tissues, and
ACUTE (IV, M) ANTIARRHYTHMIC
some continues to be released for several hours. *50
THERAPY
INTRAMLSCULAR ADMINISTRATION. In humans, lido-
caine has bccn administered by the IM route (4 mg/
CONSTANT-RATEDRUGINFUSION
kg) in crisis situations or when IV acccss is not
To prepare a constant-ratc infusion, several formulas
possiblc261. 262, t
 thcrapeutic  plasma  lcvels  occurred
are available to calculate the dlesired drug dose and
within 10 to 15 minutes, with effects lasting abou1. 90
infusion rate. Two popular methods are
minutes.22. 363 In dogs, IV administration is the pre-
ferred route because of its rapid onset of action: IM
Body weight (kg) X selected drug dose (μg/kg/min)
administration may be considered as a last resort.
14 9 1ao pasyu (8u u) asop A1 [eo - 9g0 ×
ADVERsE EFFECTs. Lidlocaine toxicity can result in CNS
or
signs characterized by twitching, tremors, anxiousncss,
and scizurcs. Thcsc are ustually avoided by careful dose
Selecied drug dose (μg/kg/min) × body weight (kg) =
calculation and gradual upward dose titration. If toxic-
mg of drug added to 250 ml of fluid administered at a drip
ity occurs, lidocaine administration is stopped; IV diaz-
rate of 15 ml/lhr
cpam is given if neurotoxicity is evident. In the pres-
ence of hypokalemia, lidocaine cfficacy is severely
LIDOCAINE
reduccd. A few human studlies report depression of
blood pressure and cardliac output with high lidocaine
Clinical Applications
dloscs,2+ with resualtant sinus tachycardia, although sc-
vere sinus bradlycardlia has bccn occasionally noted.263
INTRAVENOUS BOLUS ADMINISTRATION. Lidocainc is thc
 most effective drug for acute management and rapid
 In general, lidocainc does not alter hemodynamics
control of life-threatening or unstable  yentricular
except transicntly aftcr IV bolus whcn pre-cxisting
tachyarrhythmias. An IV bolus (2.2 mg/kg) is adminis-
tered during ECG monitoring. If nccded, additional
boluses (2.2 mg/kg IV) can be given over approxi-
 prescribed lidocaine dosages.
mately 5 minutes, up to a total of 8.8 mg/kg. The
halflife is short, and antiarrhythmic cffects abate by
Applied Electrophysiologic Actions
To
HOw LIDOcAINE wORKs. Lidocaine is effective because
maintain blood levels, a constant-rate infusion is begun
 of its broad antiarrhythmic action against arrhythmias
after these initial boluses ("loading doses'"). Because
caused by re-entry, normal and abnormal automaticity.
lidocaine will take 3 to 6 hours to rcach stcady state
and triggered activity (Fig. 1826),212 Thus, it may con-
concentration during constant-rate infusion, addi-
trol VT duc to any cause. Lidocaine slows conduction
tional IV holuses (0.25 to 1 mg/kg) may bc cautiously
in diseascd cardiac muscle,266 zrs increases refraclori-
repcated as needed.
ness while shortening the action potential duration.*
decrcases the dispersion of refractoriness, suppresses
CONSTANT RATE IV INFUSIONs. Lidocaine may he co1l-
phase 4 depolarization,270 blocks the plateau sodiun
stantly infused at 25 to 80 μg/kg/min. The foregoing
formulas may be used to set up the infusion. Alterna-
characteristics are similar lo thosc of mexiletinc (class
tively, starting with a midrange dlose of 50 μg/kg/min,
Ib).
withdraw 25 ml from a 500-ml bag of crystalloid fluids
Lidocainc does not control SVTs. This is because
(i.c., lactated Ringer's sofution with potassium chloride
its clcctrophysiologic actions (shortening the action
adldled if renal function is normal), and replacc this
potential and incrcasing refractoriness) do not affect.
with 25 ml of 2% (20 mg/ml) lidocaine. This mixturc
the atrial myocardium as they affect Purkinje fibers
provides a lidocainc concentration of 1000 μg/ml. The
and ventricular myocytes 200 28 In atrial myocytes, the
IV drip ratc may be calculated at the same rate that is
action potential duration is alreadly shorter than in the
used for administering a standard volume of mainte
ventricle, 69 The shorier atrial action potential duura-
DLAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMIAS
363
tion2ts means that the inactivated statc is bricfer.
poppe iy po bgu tI oi dn qmi uonnos pioisio
Therefore, less binding (and less antiarrhythmic cf-
if serum potassium and renal function arc normal); to
fect) can occur in atrial tissue.
this, 5 ml of injectable 10% procainamide hydrochlo-
ride (100 mg/ml) is added, resulting in a 1000 μg/ml
USE-)EPENDENCE. An importa1l pharmacokinetic feature of
concentration. whcn infused at a maintenance rate of
lidocaine is ruse-dependence, the block that develops during thte
action potential or platean.la A drug has a greater use-
/81/ 0 10 5  ^(//1 8) 11 4/8x/ 04
min will bc delivered. Altcrnatively, formulas may he
dependence wlien il cxhibits a greater antiarrhythimic effect
at higher heart rates (Fig. 18-26).215.2s Use-dependence is a
tsed to make thcse calculations (scc carlier).
desirable antiarrhythmic drug quality hecause rapid tachyar-
dris a s sp sou  e se
INTRAMUSCLLAR ADMINISTRATION, Unless the animal is
pression. The onset and offset kinetics of a drug determine
its degree of usc-dependenice, ts The association and dissocia-
unable to takc oral mcdication, using procainamide
ton lime constanis (thc time that it takes for a drug lo bind
IM does not offer benefit over the IV or oral route.
and unbind froin thie channel receptor) deteriminc these
The time ncedcd to rcach peak plasma levels with IM
kinetics and account for one of the major differences zuthin
 administration approximates that of oral therapy.279
class I auntiarrhythmics (classes la, Ib, Ic). During tachycar-
dias, electrical diastole is abbreviated. Tlhe time that the cell
spends in the inactivated state is greater relative to the rest-
Applied Electrophysiologic Actions
ing state; therefore, drugs that bind during inactivation will
have enhanced antiarrhythmic effccts. Drugs with rapid off-
HOw PROCAINAMIDE wORKs. As a class Ia antiarrhyth-
set kineties like lidocaine willbuild up on the channel recep-
mic agent, procainamide is similar to lidocaine becausc
tors during rapid VT but not at slower rates. Therefore, they
it depresscs membrane responsiveness and slows con-
cxhibit more antiarrhythmic effects during VT or on early
extrasystolic depolarizations (i.e., coinplexes with short cou-
duclion. Howcver, it differs from lidocaine because it.
pling intervals) because of nore drug bincling and less um-
prolongs thc cffectivc refractory period while it pro-
longs the action potential duration. This can result in
pressed by lidocaine, although thiesc are not coinmonly
QRS complex widening, cspecially at fast heart rates,280
probleinatic. Class la drugs exhibit use-dependence at slower
The latter explains why its antiarrhythmic. cffects take
rates than class Ih drugs, witlh slower recovery from block,
 place it atrial, ventricular, and His-Purkinje fihers. In
humans, the active mctabolite Nacctyl procainarmide
 Althiough heart rate is a najor deterninant for class Ib
drug binding, other factors are influential. Lidocaine prcfer-
(sec chapter 17) contributes to class IHI antiarrhyihmic,
and potentially proarrhythmic, effects; howcver, this
cardiac ceils because such cellular potential promotes the
inactivated state.,.276 Partially depolarized cels are usually
 metabolite is not prescnt in dogs. Procainamide de-
creases the dispcrsion of refractoriness caused by ischc-
those that are diseased and generate arrhythrmias. Such selec-
tivity of drug binding is advantagcous,' since more binding
mia (lcngthening the action potential duration in the
occurs with reduced pH and increased extracellular potas-
ischemic tissue), supprcsses normal and abnormal au-
sium, factors present in diseased myocardium.
tomaticity, decrcases delayed afterdepolarizations, and
incrcases the fibrillation threshold, In some situa-
PROCAINAMIDE
tions, VT may not he eliminated but the hcart rale is
decreased, thus improving hemodynamic stability280
Clinical Applications
Historically,277 IV procainamide has bcen selected as
USE-DEPENDENCE. Class Ia antiarrhythmics such as procain-
amide exhihit some use-dependence that is sinilar to that of
a sccond-choice drug whcn lidocaine is ineffective in
lidocaine. However, the offset/unhinding of procainamide
controlling VT. Procainamide affects normal and ab-
alid othier class la drugs is intermediate (seconds) between
normal tissucs, whcreas lidocaine has its maximal cf-
the rapid dissociation of lidocaine (inilliscconds) and the
fects in depolarizcd tissues such as thosc associatcd
slow dissociation of class Ic drugs (10 seconds) .27*
with ischemia and infarction.342. 276, 978 Procainamide is
uscd morc safcly than quinidine because it has fewcr
AMIODARONE
gastrointestinal side cffects, has less prolongation of
thc QT interval, does not interact with digoxin, and
Although amiodarone has only reccitly been used
causes less hypotension.277
intravenously in humans, its cffectiveness in treating
refractory Vr warrants considcration for sclected ca-
INTRAVENOUS ADMINISTRATION. PrOcainamide (10 to
nine tachyarrhythmias. The elcctrophysiologic effects
15 mg/kg) can hc administercd IV slowly over 1 to 2
 of IV amiodarone differ markedly from those associ-
minutes to avoid hypotension, although this is umcom-
ated with chronic oral administration,2s1, s2 Experimen-
mon if myocardial function is normal. For continued
tally, amiodarone (10 mg/kg/hr) has been effective in
parenteral administration, procainamide can be given
dogs that have VT and fibrillation induced by ische-
by constant-rate infusion (25 to 50 μg/kg/min).
To
mia.28a In a clinical seting. a bolus of 5 mg/kg can be
prepare a 50-pg/kg/min infusion, 5 ml of fluid arc
administcred and the dog then cvaluated for acute
removcd from 500 ml of lactaled Ringer's or other
effect in controlling VT.
364ABNORMALCARDIOVASCULARFUNCTIONANDPRINCIPLESOFTHERAPY
ECG
difference
velocity
No lidocaine
Lidocaine
Reduction
/
hh
h九
werco
Phase4
B
No lidocaine
Lidocaine
Reentry
ECG
Typeof
hh
Arrhythmic
less
eratioyperiods
Mechanism
Bidirectional
Stopped
ECG
Nolidocaine
Lidocaine
ECG
MWhh
Durati
Purkinjefiber
Short ERP
LongERP
itable
FIGURE18-26
Seelegendonoppositepage
SOTALOL
CHRONIC(ORAL)ANTIARRHYTHMIC
THERAPY
TheIVformulationofsotalolisavailableinEurope
butnotcurrentlyin theUnitedStates.Inhumans,the
PROCAINAMIDEVS.QUINIDINE
averageIVdoseis0.3mg/kg.Underexperimental
Clinical Applications
conditions,doses ofgreater than 2mg/kg IVhave
beenadministeredin thedog.284Clinicalsafetyre-
SELECTION AND UsE.Procainamide(10 to20 mg/kg
mainstobeestablished.
q 6 hrs PO) is usually preferred over quinidine for
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMIAS 365
chronic maintenance therapy of VT. The sustained-
VTs. Its clectrophysiologic propertics are similar 10
release preparations require less frequent dosing (P10-
those of lidocaine. Therefore, antiarrhythmic cffective-
can SR, 10 1o 20 mg/kg q 8 hr PO), but obtaining
ness and untoward cffects are comparable. While VT
consistent blood levcls may be morc variable. If ar-
trcated successfully with lidocaine is usually cffectively
rhythmia control is not obtaincd after steady-state
treated with mexiletinc, the acute cffects of lidocaine
blood levcls are achieved (c.g., approximatcly 24 hours
 do not always predict paticnt response to mexiletine.25
with procainamide, 36 hours with sustaincd-rclcasc
 Some human studies substantiate the improved anti-
 preparations), serum procainamide concentrations
 arrhythmic cffect of mexiletine over procainamide and
may be measured. Samples are drawn 4 to 5 hours
quinidine,26 although clinical animal trials are lacking.
after oral procainamide administration or 8 hours after
 Also, mexiletine may have fewer myocardial depressant
administration of sustained-release preparations. Ther-
effects on left ventricular function,2s6 and this may be
apeutic concentrations are uncertain. Procainamide
 beneficial in dogs with myocardial failure.
blood lcvcls of 5 to 12 μg/ml may be adcquate. In
Currently, mexiletine (4 to 8 mg/kg, q 8 hr PO),
 humans, procainamide, and especially quinidine, are
combined with atenolol (0.5 mg/kg, q 12 to 24 hr PO)
now used less frcquently because of their proarrhyth-
is my first choice for chronic oral therapy of dangerous
mic effects. The incidence of proarrhythmias in dogs
ventricular arrhythmias. Mexiletine costs substantially
 treated for spontancous arrhythmias is not known.
more than cither procainamide or quinidinc, but
fewer side cffects may reduce the overall cost of trcat-
MEXILETINE
ment. Untowardl cffects (trembling, scizures, depres-
Clinical Applications
sion) are similar to thosc of lidocainc at toxic doses.
SELECTION AND UsE. Some clinicians use mexilctine as
Gastrointestinal side cffects carn usually be limitcd by
a first-line drug for chronic management of canine
giving mcxiletine with food. Mcxiletine has fewer pro-
FIGURE 18-26
How lidocaine works as an antiarrhythumic. I. Sloes ronduetion. Blockade of the sodium channels is
the major mechanisn for slowing ventrieular conduction. llustrated from top to bottom is an ECG.
the corresponding action potentials, the percent (0 to 100%) cof available Na chammels with the sate:
of the channel (i.e., resting = R, inactivation = I, inactivatior with bound dnug.
I+ D).
Lidocaine binds and, therefore, blocks the Na channels during inactivation. In A, no lidocaine is
Ihe sodium channels are available for opening. The more sodium channels available, the faster the
depolarization (stecp phase 0 with rapid upstroke, Vaa). In B, lidocaine binds during the
inactivation phase to many of the sodium charnels. Morc binding occurs in cells that are partially
depolarized, diseased ccls (C). Shown here, thc resting membrane polcntial is only - 60 nV.
Alihough lidocaine blorks a large fraclion of the sodiu channels during cach plateau (inactivation)
phase, the fast diastolie recovery cnsures that most channels are unblocked by the next action
potential. lowever. with very early extrasystoles and rapid rates. binding accunulates (usc-
dependencc) (D). Notice how I + D is greatcr than in A or A. Beneath this schematic of usc-
difference beween cels at any point in time during phase O, dereasing potential driing fore and
slowing conduetion (iregular arrow. This slowed condurtion can change an area of unidirectional
block into bidirectional block; thereby, stopping re-entry.
I1. Decreases dispersion of refractominess. Discased myocytes vary in the duration of action potential and
refractoriness. This promotes re-entrant arrhythumias because some areas will have longcr refractory
periods, allowing uridirectional block. Lidocaine shortens the aclion potenuals where they may be
prolonged, yet inereases the cffective refrartory period in thcse arcas, creating Iess dispersion of
refractoriness. The result is more oniformity ofrefractoriness and less likelihood of bidircctional
bleorc:k. In sorne arcas, when a premarure depolarization wave hits a former area of unidirectional
block, conduetion procceds with lidocaine. resuling in the inpulse dying without rec-entry.
III.Shorten acton potentiat duration. Prolonged repolarization from diseasc or drugs can result in
triggered activity, Early afierdepolarizations (FADs) can propagate and result in ventricular
arrhylhmias. In this illustration, FADs that originate in Purkinje fibers (note small spikes during
phase 2 of action potential) propagate to the ventricular muscle.This resalts in ventricular
premature complexcs that have reached threshold. The EADs can be inhilited when the action
potential is shortened by hidocaine.
IV. Inerase efete refcory prid. Lidocaine can inreasc he effetiv refraory period (ERP)
arrhythmias caused by cnhanccd abnormal autoymaticity or re-entry. Automatic: stimuli do not result
in an arclion potential because the myocytes remain refractory (gray area representing the ERP
cxtends past ihe end of the aclion potenual),. The longer ERP results in bidireclionad block and ca
arrest re-cntrant arrhythmias.
V.Redurtion in the rat of phase 4 diastolir depolarization. Antomatir. arrhythmias are lessened because
spontanevus depolarizations are inhilbited.
366ABNORMAL. CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
arrhythmic effects than the commonly uscd class Ia
AMIODARONE AND SOTALOL
drugs.20 In the United Statcs, mcxiletine is currently
available for oral use only, although a sustaincd-rclcase
Clinical Applications
formulation (Perlongets) and IV preparation are avail-
SELEcTION AND UsE. Currently, clinical trials cvaluat-
able in Europe.
ing these class IHI agents are lacking in dogs for treat-
ing spontaneous VT. Anecdotal reports give mixed re-
sulis and may reflect the variation of discascs trcated,
B-ADRENERGIC BLOCKERS
dloses usced, andl incomplcte patient follow-up. Expcri-
Clinical Applications
mentally, sotalol was cffective in suppressing canine
VT induced by increased sympathetic influences.*4 In 
SELECTIoN AND LsE, The adjunctive use of β-adrcncr-
humans, sotalol aind, especially, amiodarone are be-
gic blockers to treat VT has been acclaimcd in humans
based on cvidence that they decrcase mortality. β-Ad-
coming more frcquently selected as first-line ventricu-
lar antiarrhythmic drugs based upon favorable clinical
renergic blocker monotherapy may be inadequate for
results.22 29-28 However, because cardiac disorders
controlling PvCs,2 ss although it is particularly ffec-
tive when PvCs and VT are associated with high circu-
(c.g., coronary artery disease) associated with these
 arrhythmias in humans are rare in dogs, it is unclear
lating catecholamine levels (e.g.. during ancsthesia
whether these drugs would be as effective in canines.
with halothane and with exercise),2o The frequency of
PVCs does not reliably predict long-term benefit.
It should be emphasized that amiodarone and dl-sota-
.In
lol are not pure class Il agents, but both have class II
human studies. β-adrenergic blocker monotherapy
action (amiodarone also possesses class I and class IV
only modestly affected the incidence of PvCs but de-
creased moriality t5. w The latter may be due to the
activity).
antifibrillatory effects of β-adrcncrgic blockadle.2 Ap-
AMfoDARONz. When1 administered orally, amiodarone
plicability of these studics to clinical vcterinary medi-
cine has no1 been detcrmined. Since β-adrenergic
has a delayed and highly variable onset of action29s that.
blockers are comparable in their antiarrhythmic cffect,
makes dosing and determination of clinical response
selection of a particular agent is detcrmined by other
difficult. Amiodarone is very lipophilic and protein
characteristics,2o. 2v2 including drug kinetics, half-life,
bound and has a high volume of distribution.sw Be-
and receptor selectivity. Cauion must be used if β
cause it can cause severe sidle cffects (sec chapter 17,
adrenergic blockers are given when myocardial failure
Table 17-6), the goal should always bc to usc the
is present.
lowest effective dosc. Clinical cxperience has been lim-
Minimal information is available regarding β-adre
ited. A loading dosc of 10 mg/kg/24 hr was givern to
- s'siep oi on 4 on ss ludxo  sop
dogs. Propranolol (0.5 to 1.5 mg/kg), atenolol (0.5
lowed by a maintcnancc dosc of 5 mg/kg daily or
mg/kg), or netoprolol combincd with either procain-
thrce times per weck.
amide or mexiletine can be cffective in some cases.
The dose of β-adrenergic blockers must be titrated to
SOTALoL. The commercially available prcparation is
 achicve thc desired therapeutic end points.
the racemic mixture of d and lsotalol, thc dextroi-
somer having less than 2 percenl. of thc nonsclccivc
β-adlrenergic blocking activity of the levoisomer.* The
ADVERSE EFFECTS
β-adlrenergic blocking activity of dl-sotalol is about 30
percen1. that of propranolol and occurs a1. lower doscs
than do the class III actions. Sotalol differs from
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC APPLICATIONS
aniodaronc in that sotalol does not bind to plasma
Antiarrhythmic actions of β-adrenergic blockcrs may
protcins; is climinatedl through the kidneys; is hydro-
be attributable to direct electrophysiologic mccha-
philic; lacks active mctabolitcs; and has no cffect on
nisms or to indirect systemic or metabolic effects.293
digoxin concen trations. Also, long-term administration
If the heart has diseased myocytes that are partially
of sotalol does not alter its kinetics with plasma con-
depolarized, these cells, when stimulated by catechola-
 centrations proportional to the dose,*o2 Caninc phar-
mincs, can reach threshold and result in premature
macokinetic* and dose-response studies (Bristol-My-
complexcs that in turn could initiate tachycardia. Fur-
ers Squibh,
. unpublished obscrvations) have been
thermore, β-adrenergic blockade will decrcase phasc
performed and reviewed.27 The starting dosc is 0.5 t0
1 spontaneous depolarization, decrcase membrane ex-
2 mg/kg PO sid to bid.
citability, inhibit adrenergic shortening of refractori-
CLINICAL MONrrORING.  Studics  in  humans trealed
q o poourdid se qns shp ei jo saso
with amiodarone rcvcaled no rclationship betwecn
the inward sodiun “window' current.29-s
dose and efficacy of PvC suppression.34 The value of
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMIA5 367
monitoring plasma levels is unclear,* although plasma
ADDITIONA1. PROPERTIEs. AImiodarone has othcr physiologic
drug concentrations may be of some henefit in de-
termining whether "effective" plasma levels have been
sion, such as its phospholipase inhibition, which prevents tice
build-up of arrhythnogenic substances during ischemia.21.312
attained.is Reverse T: levels have been used to moni-
Because the nolecular structaure of amiodarone is sinilar to
tor amiodarone, which blocks thc conversion of T4 to
thal of thyroid hormones, soine of its cardiac action is specu-
Ts. Elevated levels of reverse T; have becn associated
lated to be due to inhibition in the heart of T; nuclear
with adverse cffects,143 Liver and thyroid function, as
receptors, which then mimics intracellular hypothyroidism.313
well as routine biochemistry lests, should be monitored
evcry 6 months. For amiodarone and sotalol the heart
rate, QT interval, and P-R interval shouldl he moni-
IMPORTANCE OF REVERSE USE-DEPENDENCE. IDrugs with class
  s  (  
III action potentially express reumse us-dependence (i.e., de-
creascd antiarrhythinic action with faster heart rates). This
have been well described with sotalol:wos e
phenomenon occurs when action potential prolonging (class
II) drugs exert their greatest effects at relatively slow heart
rates. This is the opposite of the more desirable characteris-
ADVERsE EFFECTs. IDosc-rclated side cffects with amio-
tic, use-depen dence, defimed as increascd antiarhythmic actio1
darone include gastrointestinal upscts, pulmonary fi-
exprcssed at faster hcart. rates (i.e., with tachycardias the
brosis, hyperthyroidlism, hypothyroidism, ocular opaci-
antiarrhythmic effect is greater). Reveise use-dependence is
ties, and hepatic failure.?1 The usc of low-dlose
an undesirable characleristic because it calses the antiar-
rhythmic action of a drug to be least effective during tachy-
amiodarone has been touted as a means of achieving
cardia.2o Althought sotalol exhibits reverse use-dependence,
antiarrhythmic activity without untoward effccts. 18s Pro-
ainiodarone does not because it prolongs action potentials
arrhythmias, including torsades de pointes for sotalol,
to an cquivalent degree both at slow and fast rates.to? This
 are probably related to excessively high doses.
characteristic of amiodarone has been shown in thc dog. lt
Amiodarone andl sotalol must be used judiciously in
may explain the lower incidence of torsades de pointes seen
with amiodarone conpared with sotalol.z Most class I
thc setting of CHF. Ainiodarone has a minor but defi-
drugs block the rapid component of the delayed reclifer
nitc negative inotropic effect, which is ofset by the
polassjum current (Ik), although amiodarone also blocks the
 lengthening of the action potential duration and asso-
inward rectifier current (Ik) and the ATP-sensitive potassium
ciated prolongation of contraction.19s Consequenuly.
channel(Ikxur),220 lt is the hlockade of I that causes the
long-term trcatment with amiodarone does not worsen
 maximal prolongation of the action potential and refractori-
ness to occur at slow rates.t67 Amiodarone does block Ik.
 or induce CHF bccausc it has few or no net negative
during thc opcn state, and it is this action that probably
inotropic effects."" Howcver, concomitant use of di-
maintaius its lengthening of action potential duration at fast
goxin with amiodaronc can cause plasma digoxin lev-
hearl rales, thereby improving its efficacy. Sotalol does not
els to increasc. Sotalol does not affect serum digoxin
have this effect; thus, reverse usc-dependence and torsades
levcls. Moreover, drug interactions with sotalol are in-
de pointes may be related to this difference.
frequent bccausc of its lack of protein binding and
biotransformation. I lowever, sotalol can cause a wors-
COMBINATIONANTIARRHYTHMIC DRUG
ening of CIIF, lethargy, and bradlycarrdia, which is rc-
THERAPY
lated to its β-adrenergic blocking activity 309
Clinical Applications
SELECTIoN AND UsE. Although combining antiarrhythi-
Applied Electrophysiologic Actions
mics can be dangcrous. thc potential also cxists for
HOw AMIODARONE AND SOTALOL wORK. EleCtrOphysi0-
 combination antiarrhythmic drug therapy can be elfec-
logic heterogeneity underlies the re-entrant mecha-
tive in reducing VT and the induction of VF whcn
nism of many life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias.
monotherapy has failed. Combination thcrapy may
Amiodarone and sotalol prolong the action potential
also be beller tolcratcd than maximal dosages of
duration and refractory pcriod without slowing con-
 agents used as monotherapy *17 A comrnon antiarrhyth-
duciion. This class III drug effect makes the aclion
mic drug combination combines a class Ia drug (pro-
potential pattern more uniform throughout the myo-
cainamide or quinidine) with a class Ib drug (lidocaine
cardium (decreases QT dispersion), thereby increasing
potentially more antiarrhythmic when cither is com-
properly of cach drug also has an antiarrhythmic cf
bined with a β-blocker:17 For cxample, the cffective-
fect. Although these class Ill agents are antiarrhythmic,
ness of mexiletine can be cnhanced when given with a
they may exert. their greatest effect. as antifibrillatory
β-blocker (atcnolol, propranolol, nadolol, or metopro-
agents that prevent ventricular fibrillation or the VT
lol). Procainamide or quinidine combined with sotalol
that precedes VE2 The class I and class IV effects
has bcen cffective under cxperimental conditions for
of amiodaronc also contributc to its antiarrhythmic
trcating ventricular arrhythmias.321 Some agents that
cffects.2ru
are classified as class Ill drugs actually possess antiar-
368ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
rhythmic action characteristic of class II drugs, such as
crcased, gencrally in 25 percent increments. Concur
dl-sotalol and amiodarone, thercby actually providing
rent disease can alter drug clearance or metabolism
combination therapy.
(renal or hepatic disease) or change thc volume of
Problems do exist when using antiarrhythmic drug
distribution (CIF) such that frequent dosage adljust-
combinations. The cffective dosc of cach drug must
menis are needed,2 Drug-arrhythmia mismatch is a
be found, and this determination could potentially
difficult problem to detecl, although it can bc sus-
take more time than using monotherapy. The only
pected in some situations as when using class II agents
statement 1hat can be wisely made with regard to the
in German shephcrds with inherited VT (sce discus-
dosage is io start lower than the dosc used for cach
sion that follows),
drug alone. Adverse cffects may requirc the withdrawal
of both drugs, although only one drug is really detri-
mental. Although the rcason for drug combinations is
syncrgism, advcrsc reactions can occur directly from
EFFECTS OF IIYPOKALEMIA ON ANTIARRHYTHMIG DRUG EFTICACY.
 the drugs or because of drug elimination.
l.ow scrum potassium concentrations can result in loss of
antiarrhythmic effect of lidocaine., Lidocaine binds during
the inactivation state, whereas negligible binding occurs dur-
Applied Electrophysiologic Actions
ing the resting state. The longer thc membrane stays in the
resting state (clectrical diastole,phase 4),he more time for
lidocaine to unbind naximally fron the sodium chamel.
Specific electrophysiologic mechanisms umdcrlie the syner-
The nuunber of sodium channels available during the resting
gistic effecis when certain agents (see Table 17-2) arc com-
slate depends on the resting meimbrane potential, such that
bined. Class [a drugs such as quinidine prolong the action
small changes in the latter can profoumdly affect unbinding.
potential, whicl allows the sodium channels to remain inacti-
With 1more negative polentials and resulting longer diastolic
vated for a longer period of time, If a class Ih drug (e.g..
depolarization, there would be more time for unbinding.
and the antiarrhythmic effect would be lessened. Iuring
channel, is also given, more line for binding occurs and
hypokalermia, the driving force for the efflux of potassium
increased antiarrhythimic clfects are possible, even when the
from cardiac cells is increased. Therefore, the resting mem-
dose of each drug is reduced.a7 Catecholanines can actually
braune potential is more negative thaun during normokalemia.
reverse the antiarrhythmic effects of class I drugs. Therefore.
Ihei
thereby reducing sodiun channel blockade by lidocaine, and
procainamide, quinidinc, mexiletine, or lidocaine, this rever-
thus reducing its antiarrhythmic effeci. Also. the effect. of
sal is prevented.a Also, thc antiarrhythinic effect of pro-
hypokalermia lowering the resting nenhrane potential is to)
increase the upstroke velocity (Vmsx) of phase O, which en-
adrenergic blockade, and this may he due to the effects on
hances conduction velocity. This eflect can counteract the
potassium currents22.23 When class Ia drugs are used with
decrease in conduction velociy of drugs such as lidocaine.
class Ill drugs, the effect of reverse use-dependence is de-
Hyperkalemia can potentiate the slowed condurction, There-
creased:: Sympathetic stimulation shortens the action po-
fore, with hypokalemia, the effect of lidocaine on the imaxi-
tential durationi by increasing the magnitude of I, currents.
mal rate of depolarizalion may be lost. cntirely. Moreover,
Such electrophysiologic effects attenuate the effectiveness of
hypokalermia makes the heart more sensitive to catechola-
class II drugs.. * This may in part be why some class II
mines, and the beneficial antiarrhythunic effects arc lack-
drugs are not as effective, and are potentially dangerous
ing.ss Thc action of other drugs such as sotalol also is
during periods of sympathetic stimulation such as exercise.
uless they also possess sonie class II activily.2
(see discussion that follows) 5s. 2s
REASONS FOR THERAPEUTIC FAILURE
INEFFECTIVE ANTIARRHYTHMIC ACTION
A proarrhyhmia is a new arrhythmia or aggravation
 of pre-existing arrhythmia caused by a drug, Circum-
[rugs may be ineffective for many reasons. These in-
stances that makc proarrhythmia more likely include
clude
CIIF, concomitant drug usc such as high-dose diuret-
ics, poor systolic function, hypokalemia, or hypomag-
1. lncorrect arrhythmia diagnosis:
 2. Inadequate dosage;
nesemia. Although different drugs possess different
3. Pharmacokinctic complications thal reduce serum
degrees of proarrhythmic tendency, any drug can have
d ppi ae s se ealoa ue rns 
drug concentrations;
4. Antiarrhythmic drug action that does not override
rhythmic whcn they induce ncw tachyarrhythrmias or
bradyarrhythmias. In humans, the incidencc of proar-
or that potcntiates the mcchanism underlying the ar-
rhythmia varies from approximately 5 to 25 percent.
rhythmia; or
5. Physiologic alterations (i.c., hypokalemia) that hin-
Drugs that have becn associated with proarrhythmia
der the antiarrhythmic action.
and are most commonly used in dogs includle quini-
dine, procainamide, and sotalol, bu1 the frcquency of
If a drug is ineffective, the dose is gradually in-
this side effec1 is unknown.
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMIAS 369
A proarrhythmic effect is established on the basis of
incidence of proarrhythnia with aniodarone.?s Thc reverse
incrcascdl frcqucncy of ectopic complexes. Interprcta-
use-dependence of sotalol also increases its proarrhythmic
tion of such an incrcase must be weighed against the
tendency, and because auniodarone does not exhibit this
action but is effective at all stimulation frequencies, again
natural variability that occus in the frequency of ar-
has less of a proarrhythmic effect.2s This potentially fatal
rhythmias. In humans, such a determination is bascd
arrhythimia is not necessarily associated with high drug levels
 0n 24- to 48-hour IIolter recordings, and standards
- np eused mo pe ssesp moe doap eu nq
havc bcen cstablishcd rclativc to baseline arrhythmia
trations.
counts. When PVCs arc infrcquent. spontaneous
changes in the frcquency of the arrhythmia are grcatcr
than when PvCs are frequent. Therefore, a greater
SELECTED CANINE CARDIAC DISEASES
WITHARRHYTHMIAS
increase in the numbcr of PVCs is requircd for the
former to document a proarrhythmic effect. For exam-
ple, if at baseline 10 to 50 PvCs/hr are prescnt, then
BOXER CARDIOMYOPATHY
a tenfoid increase in PVCs/hr must devclop during
CLINIcAL ovERvIEw. Affectcd boxer dogs can prcsent
trcatment to he considered proarrhythmic. However,
with syncope or wcakrness or CHF or remain asympto-
if more than 300 PVCs/hr are prcsent at basclinc, then
a thrcefold increase is required. For nonsustaincd VT,
frequenily appear normal betwcen episodes. Although
the number of cvents per dlay must. increase tenfold to
some affected dogs have supraventricular arrhythmias,
o sseoap xeu srp auos gduonb u pioro
syncopc usually results from rapid, sustained VT: Col-
frequcncy of arrhythmias at rest; however, they may
lapse is usually associated with cxcrcisc, stress, or ex-
also increase the frcquency andi severity of an arrhyth-
citement, and this is when VT is frequently docu-
mia during exercise. Ideally, therefore, for Holter mon-
mented (Fig. 18-21). The VT and PVCs of boxcr
itoring the ECG should also bc recorded during
cardiomyopathy usually have a distinctive left bundle
exercise.3a0.331
branch morphology similar to that observed in hu-
Proarrhythmic effects arc often associatcd with
mans with right ventricular outflow tract Vr. Some
 higher drug doses, and therefore it is gencrally recom-
boxers may have only PVCs documented for years be-
mended that the lowes1 cffective dosc be used.274.327-329
fore VT is encountered. The value of trcating boxcr
Although the diastolic rate of drug dissociation is not
dogs thal have only PVCs is unknown, and the natural
dependent on drug concentration, onset kinctics is
history of this disease has not been described. Boxers
rclatedl. This means that class Ia and Ic drugs that have
with VI havc a high risk for sudldlen death, and trcat-
slow unbinding (i.c., offset) kinetics will attain rapid
ment is recommended.
binding (i.c., onsct) kinctics with higher doses. As a
result, more drug will accumulate and result in toxicity
THERAPY. Becausc the sympathelic ncrvous system
or proarrhythmic effects. IIowever. in some circun-
infuenccs initiation of VT in these dogs, drugs that
stances, low drug doses with low plasma concentrations
 block sympathetic tone may be of greater benefit than
may actually potentiate an arrhythmia (e.g., quinidine
 drugs devoid of this action. Mexiletine (4 to 8 mg/kg
and procainamide).
q 8 hr PO) combincd with atenolol (12.5 to 25 mg q
Arrhythmias that are induced by drugs can be due
12 to 24 hr PO) has decrcased the frequency of VT
fo potentiation of the underlying mechanism or gener-
and abolished syncope in somc affected boxcrs, Based
ation of a new mechanism. In drugs that slow conduc-
on morc limited experience, amiodarone or sotalol
tion, instead of creating bidirectional block and abol-
has bccn foundl to have similar favorable results. Hlow
ishing the Vr, re-entry can be potentiated. Such an
ever, cach of these treatment regimcns is currently
action can occur with class Ia and Ic agcnts. Increases
more cxpcnsive than procainamide (10 1o 20 mg/kg
in the dlispersion of refractorincss as cvidenced from
q 8 hr PO) combined with propranolol (0.5 to 1.0
increases in QT dispersion have bccn documcnted
mg/kg q 8 hr PO),29 which in some dogs results in an
with class Ia anel class Il drugs.3*2
adequate response. Treatment is for the lifc of the
dlog. Some dogs will go years with medlically controlled
TORSADEs DE pOINTEs. This specific ventricular arrhythimia
 arrhythmias but cventually develop myocardial failure
is characterized by a rapid, polymorphic VT that appears to
and congestion. Arrhythmias may be  exacerbated
twist. around the baseline. Torsades de pointes has been
associated with class la, class Ic. and class IlI drugs whe1l
when CIIF is present, requiring additional therapies
Purkinje fibers and midinyocardial cells develop early after-
(sce chapters 12 a1id 27).
depolarizations because of coexisting hypokalemia, pre.
existing QT-interval prolongalion, or bradycardia248. 2 It
Inay aiso may be caused by dispcrsion of refracloriness. Sota-
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY IN DOBERMAN
lol lhas a grcater incidence of torsades de pointes than anio
PINSCHERS
darone bccause it prolongs the Purkinje fibers disproporlio
ately more than myocardial celis.s Amiodarone docs the
CLINICAL ovERvIEw. Doberman pinschers with myo-
converse, and it is this effect that may explain the lower
cardial dysfunction can dlic suddenly3s1. 33 The cause
370ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
 of death usually is suspected of being VT that degener-
quency of the arrhythmias, cvcn to the point of ncver
ales into VF, although bradycardias may be the cause
in some cascs. VT in the Doberman does not havc a
Arrhythmias are most frequent during rest or sleep.
 distinctive morphologic characteristic. Monomorphic
Muluiplc factors determine the frcqucncy of the ar-
or polymorphic VT is common.
rhythmias during certain bchavioral states.!s Excite-
 mcnt and ambulating presumably are accompanied by
THERApy. Successful anntiarrhythmic management can
high sympathctic tone aind vagal withdrawal, which
bc difficult because of concurrent hcart failure and
would account for fewer sinus pauses during these
systolic dysfunction. Thereforc, usc of antiarrhythmic
behaviors. This is in contrast 1o the slower hearl rate
drugs (i.e., quinidine, d-sotalol) that have potential.
and frequent sinus pauses tha1 occur during sleep.
negative inotropic effecis may result in decompcnsa-
tion.  Consideration of potenuial drug interactions 
MECHANIsMs. Gcrman shcphcrd dogs with VT havc abnor-
(e.g, digoxin and quinidine) is inportant. Advice in
mal sympathetic inncrvation to the hcart and carly afterde
this circumstancc is to conirol the CHF and thcn trcat
with an antiarrhythmic as needed, with close follow-up
aidine (MIBG) has revealed abnormal distribution of
to assess response (sce chapters 12 and 17),
synpathctic innervation in affected dogs. Lack of imerva-
tion also was confirmcd by immunocytochcmical staining of
tyrosinc hydroxylasc in scctions of hcart muscle. Ilistologic.
SUDDENDEATHINGERMANSIIEPHERDS
examination has revealed markedly reduced numbers of sym-
pathctic ncrvc tcrminals in arcas of the hcart that failed to
CLINICAL OvERVTEw. Inheritcd vcntricular arrhythmias
takc up MIBG. Purkinjc fibcrs located in thc arcas of thc
and a proclivity for sudden dcath have becn identified
heart lacking innervation develop triggcred activity sccond-
ary to early afterdepolarizatiors, and this is one mechannisn
mals do not have syncope. Sudden death, which most
for the initiation of the VT,s Dclaycd aftcrdepolarizations
may be involved as well, Preliminary studics revcal that af-
 often occurs during presumed sleep or when the dog.
fected dogs have cxccssive β-adrenergic reccptors whcn com-
is al rest, is thc only observed physical indication of
pared with age-matched control dogs. Such a situation would
the disorder. s.23w Dogs usually die between 4 and 18
predisposc to arrhythmogcnic cffects of the sympathetic sys-
months of age, and thc postmortem examination does
tcm; perhaps this would bc cnhanced during concomitant
 not reveal the causc of dcath.230 Physical examination
increased parasympathctie activation.
is usually normal unless ann arrhythrnia is dctected.
 Since arrhythmias are dependeni on bchavior and
THERAPy. Most affected dogs do not require treal-
heart ratc,1* a routine ECG will revcal arrhythmias in
ment because (1) arrhythmias are not associated with
only the most severely affecied animals. Diagnosis usu-
clinical signs, (2) the incidence of arrhythmias in most
ally requires Holter monitoring,8. 1a. 233 although cven
affected dogs is low, and (3) after the aninals are 18
this may not identify all affected dogs bccausc
：thc
months old, the probability of death is low.2s3 Iowever,
arrhyihmias are also age depcndent.23 Standard ECG
dogs with frequen1 episodes of rapid VT (>10 runs/
measurerments, chest radiographs, biochemical pro-
24 hr) have a high probability of death, with more
files, and echocardiography are normal.
than half of these dogs dying suddenly, L'nfortunately.
Affccted dogs have a spectrum of yentricular ar-
a single oral medication has not bccn identificd that
rhythmias. Dogs at risk for sudden death have VT that
consistently prevents sudden death. Intravenous lido-
 is rapid, polymorphic, nonsustaincd, and prcceded by
caine is very effective in acutely abolishing the arrhyth-
a pause.230. 2s Therefore, the frequency and severity of
mias; however, long-tern trcatment with a varicty of
arrhythmias are greater during periods of pronounced
antiarrhythmics has yiclded mixcd resulis. Some antiar-
sinus arrhythmia. Slowing of the hcart rate by direcl
rhyth mics that prolong the action potential duration,
vagal stirulation or through stimulation of barorecep-
such as sotalol, may aclually provoke the arrhythmias.
tors with aj-adrenergic agonists cnhances the VT:310
Pacing to keep 1he heart rate above 130 beats/min
 Some dogs have slower (200 to 250 bcats/min), mono-
does reduce the frequency of VT bul may not cffcc-
morphic, sustained VI whereas others have only singlc
tively prevent sudden death in severely affected dogs.
PVCis.230.29%
 No consistently effctive oral drug has bcen identified
 Dogs usually do not have arrhythmias bcforc 12
wecks of age.23 Thcrcafter, arrhyihmias can be de-
mexiletine is generally recommended, combined with
tccted, and the frequency of ventricular arrhyihmias
a follow-up by continuous (Holter) ECG recordings to
incrcases such that the grcatest number occur between
document its cffectivencss. Also, once a severcly af-
 24 and 30 weeks of age. Subscquently, a portion of
fected dog rcaches the age of 2 years, then withdrawal
dogs remains fairly static in the frcqucncy and severity
of the drug is possible. If an affected dog requircs
 of their arrhythmias, whereas others devclop progres-
anesthesia, the VT is usually controlled (unless the dog
is severely affected) as long as parasympatholytic agents
 Other dogs as they age have a reduclion in the frc-
are given.
COMMON CLINICAL CONDITIONS
Cardiac tumors can cause regional conduction delay
ASSOCIATED WITH VENTRICULAR
and enhancc the substrate for rc-entry.
ARRHYTHMIAS
THERAPy. In thesc conditions, trcatment involves
managing the underlying discases. Pharmacologic
CONGESTIVE HIEART FAILURE
managcment and stabilization of the hcart failure state
(chapter 12) cau decrcasce the frequency of arrhyth-
Ventricular arrhythmias are common in dogs with
mias22s Antiarrhythmic therapy has becn associated
CHF due 1o dilated cardiomyopathy (chapter 27) and
chronic, acquired valve discase (endocardiosis) (chap-
with greater mortality in humans with CHIF,x-s and cven
tcr 25). In humans, nonsustained VT is an indepcn-
assessment of antiarrhythmic drug efficacy may be dif-
dent markcr of increascd mortality duc to suddenl
ficult owing to high day-1o-day variability in arrhythmia
dcath in states of CHF311 Arrhythmias 1may occur with
heart failure because  of  myocardial  hypertrophy.
and brain-heart syndroines may rcquirc short-term IV
fibrosis, local ischemia, elcctrolytc imbalances, cate-
antiarrhyihmic drug therapy with lidocaine when sc-
cholamines, or rnyocardial suretch.2s, sz Myocardial hy-
vere VT is encountered. With brain-hcart syndromc,
 pertrophy can result in slowed conduction and hetero-
thc use of β-adrenergic blockers has bccn advocated
by some clinicians, although clinical data are lacking.
 geneous increases in refractorincss, both of which
 contribute to re-entry. Similarly, fibrosis provides the
 Most ventricular arrhythmias associated with splenic
masses are not severe. However, if dangcrous VT is
substrate for re-entry becausc conduction velocity is
slowed by decrcasing the clectrical coupling between
preseint, pre- and intraoperative IV lidocaine adminis-
tration is advocated. Aftcr splencctomy, antiarrhythmic
cells. IIypertrophy also prolongs the action potential
duration, making triggered activity norc likely.2s With
therapy is usually not rcquircd. When cardiac tumors
arc associaled with ventricular arrhythmias, pharmaco-
hcart failure, prolonged action polential duration and
abnormal repolarization are believed due in part 10 a.
logic therapy is frequcntly unrcwarding, aud life-threat-
reduction in the inward rectifier K+ current Iki and
ening V'I can occur in advanccd cases.
127 These changes are not neccssarily uniform in the
failing heart, which leads to increased dispersion of
BRADYARRHYTHMLAS
refractorincss that predisposes to re-entrant arrhyth-
mias.
 Hypokalemia and hypomagneseinia have been impli-
cated as causcs for arrhythmias in CIIF Incrcased cate-
CLASSIFICATION OF BRADYCARDIAS
cholamines are arrhythmogenic as thcy incrcase intra-
cellular calcium, causing delayed afterdepolarizations,
The most common bradyarrhyihmias that demand
and increasc heterogeneity of recovery times, causing
treatment include 1marked sinus bradycardia, sinus
node dysfunction (sick sinus syndrome), high-grade 29
rc-entry. Strctching of myocytes incrcases abnormal
automaticity and triggered activity,34. 344
AV block, 3° (completc) AV block, and persistent atrial
standstill.
GASTRIC TORSION/VOLVULUS, HEAD
SINUS BRADYCARDIA
TRAUMA, SPLENIC MASSES, AND CARDIAC
TUMORS
DEFINITION, ECG FEATURFs. The parametcrs Of si1us
Dogs with these conditions can develop ventricular
bradycardia (SB) will vary dcpending on the brced
arrhythmias, Electrolyte inbalancc, poor coronary per-
and personality of the dog. As a general guidelinc, it
fusion, catccholamines, and circulatory shock contrib-
is present when (l) hcarl rate is less than 60 beats/
utc to thc arrhythmogencsis of gastric torsion/volvu-
min in an awakc yet calm large-brced or athletic dog.
lus. Thc rcason for ventricular arrhythmias in dogs
0r (2) hcart rale is less than 90 beais/1min in a nervous
with cranial trauma is hypothesizcd to be due 1o exces-
sinall-brecd dog. The circumstanccs under which the
sive myocardial calccholamine levels, resulting in small
heart rate is determined will influence the rate and
myocardial infarctions. Bccause of the link bctwcen
must bc factored into the delibcration. As discusscd
 the CNS and the hcart in the gencration of ventricular
under the section on HIolter monitoring. very slow
arrhythmias, the terin "brain-hcart syndrome?
has
sinus rates, exaggerated sinus arrhythmia, and long
been used, The mechanism for the arrhythmias associ-
sinus pauscs can be found during slcep in normal
ated with splenic masscs is unknown, although micro
dogs.12. ts The heart rate is likcly to be slower when
scopic metastasis of tumor to ventricular myocardium
 determined by auscultation in a quiet room than from
has bccn detccted in some dogs with splenic hemangi-
the routine ECG rccording.
 osarcoma (Fox PR, personal communication, 1998).
Exercise intolerancc, weakness, syncopc, or CHF
372 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
may rcsult if thc hcart ralc is excessively slow for a
syidrome classified as a sinus rode disorder or sick sinus
substantial period of time. The latter occurs when the
syridrome (SSS).
SB is related to thc sick sinus syndromc. Most dogs
 Sirus bradycardlia may be the rcsult of decrcascd impulsc
initiation, slowed intranodal conduction, or exit block. In
with SB have nno clinical signs, or the signs are so
physiologic SB, acetylcholine decreases the autonatic rate of
insidious that thcy go unnoiced. Alternativcly, SB may
diastolic depolarization that decreases impulsc initiation.
bc detccted in dogs that havc other, more serious
This occurs because the potassium channel Irxch is activatcd,
medical problems. While concern in thesc cascs may
hyperpolarizing the nenbranc and bringing the sinus nodc
 be focused on an apparently slow hcart ratc, diminu-
P (pacing) cclls farthcr from threshold.24-26 Moreover, inl-
crcascdl vagal lone decrcascs the slope of phasc 4 tlepolariza-
tion of blood flow to other organs and rclated clinical
tion.%o Conduction in the sinus node is slow (2 to 5 cn/
significance is often difficult to verify.
sec),5 such that disease (i.c., fibrosis) that disrupts thc
 Clinical signs should be correlated and maiched
intcrccllular conncctions could cause enough inpairment to
a r   s s a ri 
hinder corrtduction with the result of sinoatrial block.
Exit block and sinus arrcst are diagnoscd when the dis-
of 24-hour Holicr monitoring, although evcn with this
tancc bctwccn P waves is some rmultiplc of the basic sinus
diagnostic test, discovery of an association may still be
ratc. Fxit block means that. a sinus impulse was initiatedl bu1.
difcult if the signs are intermittent. An inappropriate
it was unable to exit fron thc sinus rode rcgion to clicit
sinus node responsc to cxercisc cau be examined if
depolarization of thc surrounding atrial tissuc. Diagnosis of
cxit block in the dog is very diticult bccause the underlying
the dog can be cxcrcised and an ECG recorded imme-
sinus arrhythmia prcvcnts any consistent measureinents of
diately aficr. Ideally, such a test is performed with the
intervals bctweer complexes. Similarly, the diagnosis of a
dog wearing a IIolter monitor.
It may be difficul to ascertain whcther SB is the
thc varicd P-P intervals that are characteristic of marked
result of vagotonia or pathologic causes. Some appreci-
sinus arrhythmia. Furthermore, block in the sinus rode ay
alion of the influence of the parasympathetic system
   l ad o ( I a z 
mcr, progressivc P-P interval shortening that occurs heforc
can be obtained by challenge with a vagolytic drug
thc dropped P wave is dliftieult to discecrn due to the sinus
Xojoqed kq pasnen as qonouny sudone se yons
arrhythnia. ‘Thc traditional rule that spccified requiring
will frequently respond somewhat, it will be less than
twicc thc previous P-P intcrval to establish a diagnosis of
that causcd by physiologically mcdiated SB. L'nfortu-
sinus arrest or exit block is ovcrsimplified.
nately, it is not clcar what constitutcs a full response
10 a parasympatholytic agennt in dogs. Morcover, this
wil vary with the size and breed. Recommendations
SINUS NODE DYSFUNCTION (SICK SINUS
SYNDROME)
rate (dependent on the initial heart rate), or achieving
a hcart rate abovc 150 beats/min. Airopine may be
DEFINITION, ECG FEATCREs. Disorders Of the sinus
adrministcred IV or IM (0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg). when
node are knownl as sinus node dysfunction or sick sinus
low doses of atropine are used or the drug is injected
syndrome (Sss). They result from inadequate impulsc
rapidly IV, a paradoxic increase in vagus-induced
formation or conduction that, although influenccd by
bradycardia frequcntly results.$4a Also, a differential
autonomic tonc, is pathologic. This disease primarily
vagolytic cffect imay occur between the SA node and
affects the sinus node, but abnormalities of the AV
the AV node such that thie sinus nodc discharge fre-
nodc and subsidiary pacemakers can coexist. in both
quency incrcases bcforc thc conduction through the
humans2 and dogs.34o The coexistcnce of abnormal
AV node accommodales lo the increasc. This results
subsidiary pacemakers incans that very long pauscs
in varying degrees of AV block (Fig. 18-27).
(excessivcly slow escape rate or rhythm) devclop when
the sinus node is not controlling the ventricular rate.
MECHANisMs. Sinus bradycardia may bc physiologic, phar-
When thc sinus node fails to propagate, the next sec-
macologic, or pathologic. Differentiation is important in for-
 ondary pacemaker 1o depolarizc the heart should orig-
mulating treaimcint tdecisions. Physiologic SB is a rormal
inate from the junctional tissues. Although this occus
responsc to incrcascd parasympathetic tone and decreased
sympathctic tonc as occurs dluring sleep. Howcvcr, the SB
in dogs with SSs, escape beats frequently originate
nay bc a physiologic resporse lo a pathologic conditior that
frorn Purkinje fibers or ventricular myocytes.
has resultcd in excessivc vagotonia. Such conditions include
Several ECG abnormalities can be grouped as SSS.
gastrointestinal (e.g., intestinal obstruction), central neryous
These include nonphysiologic SB, chronotropic in-
systcm (e.g., elcevated intracrarnial pressurc), genitourinary
(e.g, urethral obstruction), respiratory (e.g., lower airway
cornpetencc (inappropriate SB for the circumstances),
obstruction) or pharyngcal (c.g, brachiocephalic syndrome)
sinus pauses, or SB with periods of SVT that is of
disortders.3s Hypothermia and clcctrolytc imbalanccs such as
nonsinus origina (see previous discussion under SVT)
(Fig. 18-28). Excessively slow vcntricular response
blockers, calcium charnel blockers, narcotics, dligoxin, IV
rates havc been recognized in soine dogs with atrial
contrast agenis, or aticholinesterases can cause excessive
fibrillation (sce Fig. 1813), but whether or not this is
SB. Pathology of thc sinus node may bc thc result of infiltra-
tive reoplastic or inflammatory discasc. Altcrnativcly, SB may
also associatcd with sinus nodc discasc has not bccnl
cxist as a primary problem and, therefore, part of thc clinical
documented.
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMIAS ?
373
A
FIGURE 18-27
Lcad II recordings from a dog
with disease of tlie SA node.
50
Thiey demonsirate tha AV nodal
conduction can lag bchind tlie
incrcased sims rate: induced by
the atropinc. Because this dog
had first-degree hcarl block at a
B
rate of only 120 beats/min, i1s
AV node was abnormal in
addition to the sinms node. (A)
50 mm/scc; (B-D) 25 mm/scc: 1
rnV = I cm. (A) An escape bcat
(far right), probably originating
fro junetioal issue,brcaks a 5
secorid pause in the rhythm. (B)
T'wo ininues after alropine
administrarion (0.04 mg/kg IM)
negative P waves are evident
(inidicating that thc origin was
low in the atrium and most likely
[ear the coronay sinus)with 2:1
AV nodal block. (C) Ten minutes
after atropine administration. the
P wavcs bccame positive with 2:1
and 3:1 AV block. (D) Eightcen
minutes after atropine, AV nodal
conduction was I:l with firste
degrec block. 1Ieart rate was 120
beats/min.
CHINICAL PRESENTATION As previously discussed (see
qim Sop e l Sss Suisobeip u! [eioaid aq ueo sudis
carlier cormimcnts on SVTs), Sss is most cornmonly
syncope (Fig. 18-28). When clinical signs are infrc-
identificd in miniaturc schinauzers. West Highland
quent, morc cxtcnsivc monitoring, including 24- 10 48-
white terriers, and dachshunds.49 Sick sinus syndrome
hour H Iolter recordings, is usually required.
is almost exclusively detecled in middle-aged, female
An autonomic (extrinsic) component inay contrib-
miniature schnauzers. Although a tachycardia can be
ute to the pathophysiology of Sss in which a dog
a part of this syndrome, many dogs are presented with
exhibits an excessive response to enhanced vagal tone.
clinical signs due to SB or sinus pauses. Syncope is a
As described under SB carlier, recording an ECG aftcr
common complaint and is associated with pauses of at
atropine administration can hclp determine whicther
least 8 seconds in duration. Some dogs will not have
intrinsic sinus node disease exists. That is, physiologi
overt clinical signs, but bradycardia will be deteclcd
cally mediated SB due 10 vagotonia will be highly re-
during routine physical cxaunination. The prcvalencc
sponsive 1o the vagolylic effects of atropine, whereas
of this subclinical (scmi-) SSS is unknown. Such dogs
with sinoatrial node pathology, the responsc will usu-
should be followed for thc devclopmcnt of climical
 ally be blunted. Although the sinus pauses that occur
signs rclatcd to sevcrc SB or sinus pauscs. If the brady-
in some dogs can be eliminated with atropine, such
cardia is marked--cven if clinical signs have not becn
responses do not mean that the SSs is benign, and
observedclinical improvement. is usually noted when 
in most cascs, pacemaker implantation is still usually
 these dogs are paced. It is inportant to note that many
requircd. Vagal maneuvers cause marked SB or thc
dogs with sss also have mitral valve incompetence
induction of sinus pauscs greatcr than 3 seconds in
from cndocardiosis, which must be considered within
duration in dogs with SSS.
the ovcrall diagnostic and trcatmcnt strategy.
Another indication of truc sinus node disease is a
low intrinsic hcart rate.& To determine the intrinsic
DIAGNoss. A coimmon feature of SSS is prominent.
rate, both the sympathctic and parasympathetic sys-
sinus pauscs that may occasionally be captured on a
tems are blocked. Propranolol is administered IV (0.01
lcad 1I ECG rhythm strip. In many cases, extended
mg/kg) over 1 minutc, and atropine is administercd
Holter monitoring coupled with a diary of clinical
snouods su +e g* samuiu 7 1nao (8y/su v0'0) A1
374
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
A
Y
FIGURE 18-28
Holter ECG recordings from two dogs witli abnormal sinus ode function. (A and B) T'wo
simultaneonts leads recorded from a 1-year-old hoxer with syncope. (A, B) Sinus pauses exceeding I0
seconds arc present. Runs of supravcntricular (SvT) and ventricular tachycardia were later recorded.
(C to F) Single lead Holter recording froun a West. Highlaud white terrier witli sick sinus syndrome.
Periodsof SVTC）werc foowed bylongintralofnusaresDand F）hawereassoiatd
with syneope. In this dog the SVI P waves were negativc. Hlowever, because a P-R interval was
present and since the arrhythrmia persisted evcn wih high-grade Av block.both typical and atypical
AV nodal re-entrart taclycardia were ruled out. A low atrial originajion of the SVT would explain
tlic negaive T waves. A paceinaker controlled the bradyeardlia, but the SVI was resistant to
anfiarrhythimic therapies.
 inherent ratc of the sinus node reported in the normal
mechanism for the Sss. Hlowcver, the localior of the fibrosis
young dog is approxinately 100 beats/min.8 ln
soag wa ze'tunoe su ueu souod ol jo aq aeu
humans,34s and probably in dogs, the intrinsic heart
tibrosis develops with aging but does not always result in
rate is influenced by age.
SSs,ss Thc prcvious discussors relating the nonphysiologic
reasons for SB apply to the mecharism of SSs.
Thc sinus nodal discharge rale is normally dominant
ovcr latent pacemakcr cells. This is because the SA
OVERDRVE StPrREssrON This results from driving a pacc-
node depolarizes rmore rapidly, caused by a phenomc-
maker cell faster than is intrinsic, spontareous rate and is
non called ouerdrve suppression. In the latter, prolonged
Inediated by incrcascd activation of the Ya/K ATPase ex-
suppression of normal SA nodal pacemaker cells is 
change pump. Ihis gcneratcs a nct outward (hyperpolariz-
proportional to the rale and duration of a more rap-
ing) Na current Lhat suppresses spontancous inpulsc forma-
idly discharging pacemaker. The diseased sinus nodc
tion in subsidiary pacemakcr cels. When the dominant.
 is more susccptible to overdrive suppression than nor-
pacemakcr activity ccascs, the subsidiary pacemaker activity
is supprcsscd, crcating a period of quiescence until the intra-
mal, or to the effects of morc negative surrounding
cellular Xa current diminishes cnough to allow subsidiary
latcni pacemakcr cells that control the heart rate,*i6
cells to rcach threshold and initiate the riext impulsc. Usually
the paccmakcr that dcpolarizes the fastest is the sinus nodc,
but when it fails, subsidiary pacemakers are no longer sup-
MECHANIsMs. Fibrosis of thc sinus node is one possiblc
pressed ard they carl rcach threshold. With Sss, the sinus
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMIAS 375
node car itsclf be suppresscd, cithcr by spontaneous SVT
inetfective in depolarizing thc atria and penctrating the AV
(tachycardia/bradycardia) or with electrophysiologic test-
node. In English springcr spanicls, the airial myocardlium is
clectrograms, sone atrial muscle cxists that is capable of
depolarizing, although it is not able to propagate an impulsc
ATRIOVENTRICULARNODAL.BLOCK
to thc AV nodc.
DEFINrTIoN, ECG FEATCRFs. Atrioventricular nodal
block may be incomplctc (1° and 2°) or complete (3°)
(sce chapter 6). Clinical signs are associaled with ei-
THERAPY
ther high-grade 2° or with 3° AV blocks. First-degree
AV block or low-grade 2° AV block can occur in elderly
 Permancnt pacemakcr implantation is the irdeal
dogs (especially the cocker spaniel), young puppies,
trcatmcnt (scc chapter 20) for SSs (which includcs
or brachycephalic breeds without causing clinical signs.
pathologic SB); high-grade 2° AV block; 3° (completc)
AV block; and pcrsistent atrial standstill. Pharmaco-
logic therapy is usually of limited value. However, para-
CLINCAL PREszNTATHoN. The severity of the clinical
signs depends on (1) the severity of heart block, (2)
sympatholytic (c.g., atropinc, glycopyrrolate) or sympa-
thc rate of the interveniug escape rhythm, and (3) the
thomimctic (e.g., isoprotercnol, dobutamine) agents
state of underlying myocardial function or concomi-
are sometimes administered in hopes of increasing the
tant cardiovascular disease. Clinically affected dogs are
venitricular response ratc and reducing signs associated
most frequently older, although rarcly puppics arc
with severe bradyarrhythmias. When possiblc, specific
identified with congenital heart block. Although some
therapies dirccted to correct underlying discases asso-
 dogs with advanccd AV block may bc asymptomatic.
ciated with vagotonia are given. In dogs and hunans,36+
most havc excrcisc intolcrancc, weakuiess, syncope, 0r
trcatmcnt of Sss with thcophyllinc has occasionally
CIIF. Jugular distention or pulses may be identified.
resulted in clinical improvement. Anecdotal reports of
The loudncss of the first heart sound will fluctuate
other therapics have included terbutalinc. The bene-
with thic varied timing of ventricular and atrial systole.
ficial result of thesc therapics is usually lirmited by
As myocardial function is usually normal and the slow
tachyphylaxis.
 Although parenteral administration of parasympa-
hcart rate facilitates maximal ventricular diastolic fill-
ing, one can usually palpate very strong-to-bounding
 tholytic drugs such as atropinc may reduce the SB and
fermoral arterial pulses and demonstrate a high frac-
sinus pauses in soine dogs with Sss, long-terin control
tional shortening by echocardiography. Radiography
using oral therapics is disappointing. During pacc-
-eae nou si Sued Anoduan ! uoeuedu u
and echocardiography frequenily reveal cardiomcgaly
that reverts toward normal (unless cardiomyopathy or
 able, atropine is sometimes administered in an effort
cudocardiosis is present) after succcssful paccimaker
1o increase the heart rate. However, atropine can also
thcrapy.
exacerbate the tachycardia/bradycardia syndrome in
somc dogs. Complcte (3°) AV block is rarely responsive
MECHANISM. Fibrosis or occasionally inflammation of thte
to parasympatholytic or sympathomimctic drugs. Idcal
AV node is usually associatcd with advarccd heart block
treatment involves temporary pacing and cxpedicnt
(chapter 36). The AV node normally conducis slowly and has
decremental condauction—that. is, the depolarizalion wavefromnt
diminishes progressively as il travcls ini through thc AV
node *o This feature, conbined with its structural character-
istics of small sparsely disuributed fihers interconnected in a
REFERENCES
complcx network, makes AV nodal inpulses susceptible to
hlock when tibrosis or intlammation is preset.
1. Sheffield IT, Berson A, Bragg-Rcmschel 1), ct al. Rec-
ATRIAL. STANDSTILL
ommerdations for slardards of instrumcntatior aud
practice in the use of anhulatory clectrocardiography.
DEFINITION, ECG FEATURES. Atrial standstill Occurs
Circulation 71:626A,1983
whcn the atria fail to depolarize from a sinus-initiatcd
2. Knoebcl SB, Williams SV, Achord JI., et al. Clinical
competencc in ambulatory clectrocardiography: a state-
impulse. P waves arc nol prescnt on the ECG, and
ment for physicians fron the AHlA/ACC/ACP task
 junctional or ventricular escape beats are responsible
force on clinical privileges in cardiology. Circulation
for ventricular depolarizations. Thc English springer
88:337,1993
spanicl is a brced at risk for this arrhythmia. Thesc
3. Morganroth J. Evaluation of antiarrhythmic therapy us-
ing Ilolter monitoring. Am J Cardiol 62:181 I, 1988
dogs may concurrently have temporal muscle atrophy.
 4. ESVEM lnvestigators. The ESVEM trial. Electrophysio-
Biatrial cnlargement and congestive hcart failure may
logic study versus elcctrocardiographic monitoring for
occur.
sclection of antiarrhythmic therapy of vcntricular tachy
 MECHANISMs. Although P wavcs are consistenfly absent on
cardia. Circulation 70:1354, 1989
thc FCG, the sinus node usually cortirues lo firc but is
 5. ESVEM Investigalors-Mason JW. A comparison of elcc-
376ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
trophysiologic testing with Hlolter monitoring to predlict
 d      
antiarrhythmic drug cfficacy for vcntricular tachyar-
roeffector jurclion of the heart. Pharmacol Rev 37:1,
rhythmias. N Engl J Med 329:445, 1993
1985
6. Reiter MJ、 Mann' DF, Reiffel JE, et al. Significance and 
25. Salata II, Jalifc J. "Fade" of hypcrpolarizing responses
incidence of concordancc of the drug efficacy predilec-
to vagal stimulation at thc sinoatrial and atriovcntricu-
tions by Holter monitoring and clcctrophysiologic study
lar nodcs of the rabbit hcart. Circ Res 56:718, 1985
in the ESVEM t1ial. Circulation 91:1988, 1995
26. DiFranicesco D, Tromba C. Acetylcholine inhibits activa-
7. Reiter MJ. Karagoumis LA, Mann DE, ct al. Reproduc-
tion of the carcliac hyperpolarizing-activated current 1..
ibility of drug cfficacy prcdictionsby Holter monitoring
Pllugers Arch 410:139, 1987
in thc clectrophysiologic study versus clcctrocardio-
27. Waxman MB, Camcron DA, Wald RW. Interactions bc-
graphic monitoring (ESVEM) trial. Am J Cardiol
tween the autorionic systen and supraventricular tachy-
79:315, 1997
cardia in humans. In Zipes DP, Jalife J (eds): Cardiac
8. Moise Ns, De Franccsco T. Twenty-four hour ambula-
Electrophysiology: From Cell to Bedsidc. Philadelphia,
tory clectrocardliography. In Kirk RW (ed): Current
WB Saunders, 1995, p 699
Veterinary Therapy XIl. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
28. Kienzle MG. Section II: Pathologic charges associatcd
1995, p 792
with arrhythrmia. Autonomic nervous system: parasym-
9). Uulloa FM, Houston B], Altrogge DM. Arrhythmia precv-
pathctic influerce in cardiac electrophysiology. In Po-
alence during amhulatory clcctrocardiographic mori-
(drid PJ, Kowey PR (cds): Cardiac Arrhythmia: Mccha-
toring of beagles. An J Vet Rcs 56:274, 1995
nisns, Diagnosis, and Management.
Baltimore,
10. Kostis JB, McCronc K, Moreyra AE, et al. Premature
Willians & Wilkins, 1995, p 168
vcntricitlar complcxcs in thc abscncc of identifiable
29. Lcsh MD, Kalnan JM. To fumble flulter or tackle
heart discasc. Circulation 63:1351, 1981
"tach'"? Toward uptdated classitiers for atrial tachyar-
11. Pattcrson DF, Detweiler DK, IIuhcn K, ct al. Spontane-
rhythmias. J Cardiovasc Elecirophysiol 7:460, 1996
Ous abnormal cardiac arrhythmias aid conduction dis-
30.
 Fogoros RN. The electrophysiology stutdy ini the evalua-
turbarices in the dog. Am J Vet Rcs 22:355, 1961
tion of supravcntricular tachyarrhythmias. In Praclical
12. Kirby DA, Verrier RL. Differential effects of slecp stagc
Cardiac Diagnosis: Electrophysiologic Testing. Boston,
on coronary hemodynamic function. Am J Physiol
Blackwell Scientifc Publications, 1991, p 102
256:111378, 1989
31. Sano T, Sawarobori T, Adanlya H. 'Mechanism of
13. Moisc NS, Dugger DA, Brittain D, et al. Relationship of
rhythm deternimation among pace-maker cells of thc
vcntricular tachycardia to slccp/wakefuness in a model
mammaliar1 sinus 1ode. Am J Physiol 235:11379, 1978
of sudden cardiac dcath. Pediatr Res 40:344. 1996
32. Kirchhoff CJHJ, Bonke FIM, Allessie MA. Sinus nodc
14. Andrics E. Brugada P, Brugada J. ct al. Section VI:
reentry: facl or ficlion. In Brugada P, Wellens Hll (cds):
Spccific arrhythmias. A practical approach to thc diag-
Cardiac Arrhythmias: Where to Go from IIere? Mount
rosis of a Lachycardia with a wide QRs complex. In
Kisco, NY, Futura, 1987, p 53
Podrid PJ, Kowcy PR (eds): Cardiac Arrhythmia: Mech-
33. Wellens H!IJ. Rolc of sirus rcentry in the genesis of
anisns, Diagrosis, and Managcmcnt. Balimore, Wil-
sustaincd cardiac arrhythmias. In Bonke FIM (ed): The
liams & wilkins, 1995, p 1002
15. Stewart RB, Bardy GH, Greene HL. Widc complcx
Sinus Xodc. Structure, Function, and Clinical Rele-
tachycardia: misdiagnosis and outcomc aficr emergency
vance. The Hague, The Netherlartds, Marinus Nijhoff.
1978, p 422
therapy. Ann Intcrn Med 104:766, 1986
16. Tchou P, Young P, Mahmud R, et al. Useful clirnical
 34. Naccarclli GV, Shih HT, Jalal S. Sinus node reentry ard
criteria for the diagnosis of ventricular tachycardia. Am
atrial tachycardias. In Zipes DP, Jalife J (eds): Cardiac
J Med 84:53, 1988
Electrophysiology: From Cell to Bedside. Philadclphia,
17. Kastor JA. Horowitz LX, Harkcn AIl, ct al. Clirical
WB Saundcrs. 1995, p 607
electrophysiology of ventricular tachycardia. X Engl J
35. Wellens II, Brugada P. Mechanisns of supraventricular
Mcd 304:1004. 1981
tachycardia. Am J Cardiol 62:10D, 1988
36. Garson A, Gillette P. Electrophysiologic studies of su-
18. Waxman MB, Camcron DA, Wald RW, et al. Thc usc of
autonomic mareuvers for diagnosis and trcaimcnt of
praventricular tachycardia in children. Clirical eleciro-
cartliac arrhythmias. Ir Wagner GS, Waugh RA, Ramo
physiologic corrclations. Am IIcart J 102:233, 1981
37. Kunze K, Kuck K, Schlutcr M, ct al. Fffect of encainide
BW (eds): Cardiac Arrhythmias. Ycw York, Churchill
Livingstone, 1983, p 57
and flecainidc on chronic cctopic atrial tachycardia. J
19. Boineau JP, Schuessler RB, Cain ME, el al. Activation
Am Coll Cardiol 7:1121, 1986
inapping during normal atrial rhythms and atrial flut-
38. Crcamcr J, Xathan A, Camm A. Succcssful treatinent
ter. In Zipes DP, Jalifc J (eds): Cardiac Electrophysiol-
of atrial tachycardias with flccainidc acctate. Br HeartJ
ogy: From Cell to Bedsidc. Philadclphia, WB Saunders,
53:164,1985
1990, p 537
39. IHluchy .J, Milovsky V, Uhliarikova H. Triggered activity
20. Strauss H, Sarofr A, Biggcr JR, et al. Prenature atrial
as thc proposcd mcchanism of left atrial tachycardia
stimulation as a key to the untderstanding of sinoatrial
contduction in man. Circulation 47:86, 1973
34:342, 1992
21. Dhingra R, Wyndham C, Amat-Y-L.con F, el al. Sirus
40. Wyndham C, Arnsdorf M, Levitsky J. et al. Successful
nodal responscs to atrial extrastimuli in paticnts with-
surgical cxcision of focal paroxysmal alrial tachycardia.
out apparent sinus nodc discasc. Am J Cardiol 36:445,
Circulation 62:1365, 1980
1975
41. Lcrman BB, Bclardinelli L, Wesl A, el al. Adenosinc-
22. Arnold RW, Dycr JA, Gould AB Jr, et al. Sensitivily to
scnsitive ventricular tachycardia evidence suggesting
cyclic AMP-mediated triggered activity. Circulation
Mayo Clin Proc 66:797, 1991
74:270. 1986
23. Waxman MB, Wald RW, Sharma AD, ct al. Vagal tech-
42. January CT, Riddle JM. Early aflerdepolarizations:
niqucs for terninatior of paroxysmal supraventricular
mechanisms of induction and block. A role for L-type
tachycardia. Am J Cardiol 46:655, 1980
Ca : '-cirrent. Circ Rcs 64:977, 1989
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMIAS 377
43. Kass RS, Isicn RW, Wcirigart K. lonic basis of transicnt.
prcvention of atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol 77:3A,
 iward current induccd by strophanthidir in cardiac
1996
Purkinje fibers. J Physiol (Lond) 281:209, 1978
63. Zipes DP. Atrial fbrillatior: from cell to bedside. J
44. Goldberger. I, Kadish AH. Scction VI: Specitic arrhyth-
Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 8:927, 1997
Imias. Atrial premature depolarizations, junctional prc-
64. Coumcl P, Attucl P, Lavallec, ct al. Syndrome d'aryth-
mature depolarizations, multifocal atrial tachycardia,
mic auriculairc d'originc vagale. Arch Mal Coeur
and atrial tachycardia. In Podrid P], Kowey PR (eds):
71:645, 1978
Cardiac Arrhythia: Mechanisms, Diagnosis, ad Mar-
65. Coumcl P. Neural aspccis of paroxysinal alrial fibrilla-
agement. Baluinore, Williams & Wilkins, 1995, p 768
tion. In Falk RIl, Podrid JP (cds): Atrial fibrillation
mechanisms and managemcnt. New York, Raven Press,
sephson ME (ed): Clinical Cardiac Elrctrophysiology.
1992. p 109
Techniques and Imerprctations. Philadclphia, Lca &
66. Satoh T, Zipes DP. Uncqual atrial strctch in dogs in-
Febiger, 1993, p 181
creases dispersion of refractoriress conducive to devel-
46. Kopelman H, Horowitz I.. Efficacy ardl toxicity of ainio-
oping aurial fibrillation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol
darone for the trcatnent of supravcntricular tachyar-
7:833, 1996
rhythmias. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 31:355, 1989
67. Moc GK, Abildskov JA. Atrial fibrillation as a sclfsus-
47. Camm AJ, Obel OA. Epidermiology and 1nechanism
laining arrhythmia independent of focal dischargc. Am
of atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter. Am J Cardiol
Heart J 58:59, 1959
78:3,1996
68. Moe GK. On the multiple wavelet hypothesis of atrial
48. Yamashita T. lrouc H, Nozaki A, ct al. Rolc of anatomic.
fibrillation. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Thcr 140:183, 1962
 architccture in sustaincd atrial reentry and double po-
69. Moc GK. Evidencc for rccntry as a mcchanism for
tentials. Am Hlcarl J 124:938. 1992
cardiac arrhythnias. Rev Physiol Biochen Pharmacol
49. Feld GK, Shahandeh-Rad F Mechanisn of doublc po-
72:56,1975
tentials recorded during sustaincd atrial flutter in thc
70. Allcssic MA, Rensma PI., Brugada J. et al. Pathophysiol-
caninc right atrial crush-injury model. Circulation
ogy of atrial fihrillation. In Zipes DP, Jalife J (eds):
86:628, 1992
Cartdiac Electrophysiology: Froin Cell to Bedsitde. Phila-
 50. Shimizu A, Igarashi M, Rudy Y, el al. Insights into
delphia, WB Saunders, 1990, p 548
atial fluter from experimental models. Abstract. PACE
71.
Allessic MA, Konings K, Kirchhof CJu!l. et al. Eleciro-
14:627, 1991
physiologic mcchanisms of perpctuation of atrial fibril.
51. Marriott HJL. Pcarls and Pitfalls in Elcctrocardiogra-
lation. Am J Cardiol 77:10A, 1996
phy: Pithy, Practical Pointcrs. Philadelphia, Lea & Fcb-
72. Allessic MA, Lammers WJEP, Bonke FIM, et al. Experi-
iger, 1990, p 8
mental cvaluation of Moe's nultiple wavelet hypothesis
52. Pritchett ELC., McCarthy EA, Wilkirson WE. Propafen-
of atrial fibrillation. In Zipes DP, Jalifc J (eds): Cardiac.
Arrhythmias. Xew York, Grunc & Stratton, 1985, p 265
ular arrhythmias: a randomized, placebo-controlled.
73. Rernsina PL. Allessic MA, Lammers WJEP, ct al. The
crossover trial in patients tolerating oral therapy. Ann
length of the excitationl wave as ar index for the suscep
Intern Med 114:539, 1991
tibility of reentrant atrial arrhythmias. Cire Rcs 62:395,
53. Anderson JL. Sotalol, brctylium, and othcr class 3 anti-
1988
arrhythmics. In Podrid P], Kowcy PR (eds): Cardiac
 74. Rensma PL, Allessie MA, Lammers WJEP, et al. Length
Arrhythmia: Mecharisms, Diagnosis, and Managenel.
of excitatior wave and susccptibility to reentrant atrial
Baltimore, Wiliams & wilkins, 1995, p 450
arrhythmias in normal conscious dogs. Circ Rcs
54. Bonagura JB, Ware WA. Alrial fibrilation in thc dog.
62:395, 1990
clinical findings in 8l cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
75. Smeets JLRM, Allessic MA, Lammers WJEP, cl al. Thc
22:111, 1986
wavelength of the cardiac impulse and reentrart ar-
55. Bonagura JB. Atrial arrhythmias. In Kirk RW (ed): Cur-
rhythmias in isolated rabbit alriun. Circ Res 58:96,
rent Veterinary Therapy X. Philadclphia, WB Saunders,
1986
1989, p 271
76. Draper MHl, Mya-Tu M. A comparison of thc conduc-
 56. Bohn FK, Pattersor DF, Pyle RL. Atrial fibrillation ir1
tion velocity in cardiac tissues of various mammals. Q.J
dogs. Br Vet J 127:485, 1971
Exp Physiol 44:91, 1959
 57. Pallerson DF, Detwciler DK, Hubbcn K, ct al. Spontanc-
77. Som mer JR, Johnson EA. Comparative ultrastructure of
ous abnormal cardiac arrhythmias and conduction dis-
cardiac cell membrane spccializations. A rcview. Am J
turba1ces in the dog. An J Vet Res 22:355, 1961
Cardiol 25:184, 1970
 58. Waldo AL. Mechanisms of atrial fibrillation, alrial flul-
78. Meijler FL. Atrioventricular conduction versus hcart
ter ard cctopic atrial tachycardia-a brief review. Circu-
sizc from mousc to whalc. J Am Coll Cardiol 5:363,
lation 75(suppl I11l):37, 1987
1985
 59. Waldo AL. Clinical evaluation aitd therapy of patients
79. Wang J, Bourne Gw, Wang Z, ct al. Commparativc mech.
with atrial fbrillation ard flutter. Cardiol Clin 8:479,
anism of antiarrhythmic drug action in expcrinental
1990
atrial fibrillatior. Importance of use-dcpendent cffects
60. Waldo AL. Atrial fibrillation following open heart sur-
on refractorincss. Circulatior 88:1030, 1993
gery. In Olsson SB, Allessie MA, Carmiphcll RWF (cds):
 80. IIcwlett Aw, Wilson FN. Coarsc auricular fibrillation in
Atrial Fibrillation—Mechanisns and Thcrapeutic Strat-
man. Arch Intcrn Med 15:786, 1915
egics. Arnonk, NY, Futura Publishing, 1994, p 211
 81. Nelson RM, Jcnsor CB, Davis RW. Differential airial
61. Moore EN, Spear JF. Natural ocurrence and cxperi-
arrhyihmias in cardiac surgical paticnts. J Thorac
Inental initiation of atrial fibrillation in differenl animal
Cardiovasc Surg 58:581, 1969
specics. In Gulberlus HE, Olsson SB, Schlepper M
 82. Wells JI., Karp RB, Kouchoukos NT, et al. Characteriza-
(eds): Atial Fibrillation. Molndal, Sweden, Lindgren
tion of atrial fibrillation in man: sudics following open
and Soner. 1982, p 33
hcart surgery. PACE 1:426, 1978
62. Couunel P, Thomas O. Lccnhardt A. Drug therapy for
83. Wijffels MCEF, Kirchhof CJIIj, Bocrsman IVA, ct al.
378 ARNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
Atrial tibrillation begets atrial fibrilation. In Olsson SB,
103. Williams RE, Cass DA, Kawagoe Y, et al. Fndomyocar-
Allessic MA, Campbell RWF (eds): Atrial Fibrillation:
dial genc cxpression during the development of pacing.
Mechanisms and Therapeutic Strategics. Armonk, NY,
induccd hcart failurc in the dog. Circ Res 75:615, 1994
Futura Publishing, 1994, p 195
104. Graettinger JS, Carleton RA, Mucnster JJ. Cireulatory
84. wijffcls MCEF, Kirchhof CJI!J, Dorland R, et al. Atrial
consequences of changes in cardiac rhythm produced
fihrillation begets atrial fibrillation: a study in awake,
in patients by transthoracic direct-current shock. J Clin
chronicaly instrumented goats. Circulation 92:1954,
lnvcst 43:2290, 1964
1995
105.1
Killip T, Bacr RA. I Icmodynamic cffects after reversion
85. Elvan A,Wylie K, Zipes DP. Pacing-induced chronic
from atrial fbrillation to sinus rhythm by precordial
atrial fhrillation impairs sinus nodc function in dogs.
shock. J Clin Invest 45:658, 1966
Circulation 94:2953, 1996
106.
Sopher SM, Camm AJ. Atrial fibrillatior: mainterance
86. Goettc A, Iloncycull C, Langbcrg JJ. Electrical remodel-
of sinus rhythim versus ratc control. Am J Cardliol
ing in atrial fibrillation. Circulation 94:2968, 1996
77:24A,1996
87. Tieleman RG, Dc Langen CDJ, Van Gclder IC, el al.
107.
Whitc CW, Kcrbcr RE, Weiss HR, el al. Thc effccts of
Vcrapamil reduces tachycardia-induced electricalrc-
atrial fibrillation on atrial prcssure-volume and flow
modeling of the atria. Circulation 95:1945, 1997
relationships. Circ Rcs 51:205, 1982
88. Borders M, Ausna. J. Thone F, et al. Structural changes
108.
Wellers Hjj. Brugada P, Smccts [LRM. Antiarrhythmic
of atrial myocardiuim afier chronic atrial fbrillation in
drugs for supraventricular tachycardia. Am J Cardiol
the goat. Circulation 98(suppl 1):1593, 1996
62:691., 1988
89. Meijler FL, Jalife J, Bcaumont J, el al. AV nodal function
109.1
Haines DF, DiMarco JP. Current therapy for suprave1-
durng atrial fibrillatior: the role of clectronic modula
tricular tachycardia. Curr Probl Cardiol I I:1, 1992
tion of propagation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 7:843,
110.S
Singh BN, Nadcmanee K, Baky S. Calcium antagonists:
1996
clinical uses in trcaing arrhythmias.Drugs 25:125, 1983
90. Akhtar M. Damato AN. Ruskin JN, et al. Antcgradc and
111.F
Huycke EC, Sung RJ, Dias VC, ct al. Intravenous diltia-
relrograde conduction characteristics in three patterns
zem for termiriation of rc-cntrant supravcntricular
of   paroxysinal  atriovcntricular  junctional  rcentrant
tachycardia, a placebo-controlled, randomized, doublc-
tachycardia. Am Heart J 95:22, 1978
blind, multicenter study. J Am Coll Cardiol 13:538. 1989
91.Akhtar M. Jazayeri MR, Sra J, et al. Atrioventricular
112.1
 Betriu A, Chaitman BR, Bourassa MG, et al. Beneficial
1odal reentry: clinical, clcctrophysiological, and thcra-
effect of intravcnous diltiazem in the acute uanagc-
peutic considerations. Circulation 88:282, 1993
ment of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias. Circulation
92. Fogel RI, Prystowsky EN. Scction VI: Specifc arrhyth-
67:88,1983
mias. Atriovcntricular nodal recntry. In Podrid PJ, Ko-
113. Hung.JS, Yeh SJ, Liu FC, ct al. Usefulness of intravenous 
wey PR (eds): Cardiac Arrhythinia: Mechanisms, Diag-
diltiazcm in predicting subscquent electrophysiclogic
nosis, and Management. Balfimore, Wiltiams & Wilkins.
and clinical responses to oral dliltiazcm. Arn J Cardiol
1995, p 828
93. Churg EK. Principles of Cardiac Arrhythmias. Balli
54:1259, 1984
114. Yeh SH. Liu FC, Chan YY, ct al. Termination of paroxys-
more, willians & Wilki1s, 1989, p 495
94. Atkins CE, Kanter R, Wright K、 et al. Orthodromic
mal supraventricnlar tachycardia with a singlc oral dose
reciprocating tachycardia and heart failurc in a dog
of diltiazem and propranolol. Circulation 71:104, 1985
with a conccaled posteroseptal acccssory pathway.J Vet
115. Winniford MD, Fulton MD, Iillis DI., ct al. Iong-term
Inter1 Med 9:43, 1995
therapy of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia: a
randomized, doublc-blind comparison of digoxin, pro-
95. Hlill BL. Tilley LP. Ventricular preexcitation in scvenl
togs and ninc cats. J An Vet Med Assoc 187:1026, 1985
pranolol ard verapamil. Am J Cardiol 54:1138, 1984
96. Tiley LP Ventricular prccxcitation and the WolfPar-
116. Kitdeson M, Keene B.Pion P Verapamil administration
for acute termination of supraventricular tachycardia
kinson-Whitc syndrone. In Esscntials of Canine and
Feline Elecrocardiography 3rd ed. Philadlclphia, Lca &
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc: 193(12):1525, 1988
Fcbiger, 1993, p 179
117. Dorian P, Xaccarelli GV. Coumel P, ct al. A randomized
97. Smith WM, Gallagher J. Kerr CR, et. al. The clcctro-
comparison of flecainide versus verapanil in paroxys-
physiologic basis and rmanagement of symptomatic rc-
mal supravcntricular lachycardia. Am J  Cardiol
77:89A, 1996
ol the tricuspid valvc. Am,J Cardliol 49:1223, 1981
118. Singh BN. Controlling cartdiac arrhythmias with cal-
98. Podrid PJ, Fuchs T, Candiras R. Rolc of sympathelic
cium channcl blockers. In Podrid PJ. Kowcy PR (cds):
nervous systen in the gcncsis of ventricular arrhythmia.
Cardiac Arrhythmia: Mecharisms, Diagrusis, and Man-
Circulation 82(suppl 1):1-103, 1990
agcmcnt. Baltimore, Willians & wilkins, 1995, p 466
99. Coumel P, Lecnhardt A. Mental activity, adrcnergic
119. Rufly R. Atrial fibrillation. In Zipes DP, Jalife J (cds):
modulation, arirdl cardiac arrhythmias in patients with
Cardiac Elcctrophysiology: From Cell to Bedside. Phila-
hcart disease.Circulation 83(suppl I1):I-58,199]
delphia, WB Saiunders, 1995, p 682
100. Switzer DF, Waldo AL, Hlcnthorn RW. Heinodynamic
120. Bohm M, Schwinger RIIG, Erdmamn E. Different cardi-
cffects of tachycardia. A. Supraventricular tachycardia.
odepressant potcncy of various calcium arntagonists in
J Saksena S, GoldshlagcrN (eds): Electrical Thrapy
human myocardium. Am J Cardiol 65:1039, 1990
for Cardiac Arrhythmias. Philadclphia. WB Saunders,
121. Roth A, I larrison F, Mitani G, ct al. Efcacy of medium
1990, p 467
and high-dosc diltiazem alonc and in combiration with
101. Packer Dt., Bardly GH, Worley S, ct al. Tachycardia-
digoxin for control of heart rate at rest and during
intduced cardiormyopathy: a reversible form of left ve1l-
cxcrcisc in paticnts with chronic alrial fibrillation. Cir-
tricular dysfunction. Am J Cardiol 57:563, 1986
culation 73:316. 1986
102. Kaab S, Nuss IIB. Chiamvimonvat S, ct al. Ionic 1necha-
122. Rodin SM, Johnson BF, Wilson J. ct al. Comparativc
nism of action potential prolongation in ventricular
effects of vcrapamil and isradipine or steadly-state di-
myocytes from dogs with pacing-induced heart failurc.
goxin kinctics. Clin Pharmacol Ther 43:668, 1988
Circ Res 78:262, 1996
123. Piepho RW, Culhcrtson Vl., Rhodes RS. Drug inlerac-
DLAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMLAS
379
tions with thc calciun-entry blockers. Circulation
dive comparison of flccainide versus quinidine for the
75(suppl 5):V181, 1987
treatment of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation/flutter. Am J
124. Salcrno DM, Dias VC, Klciger RE, ct al, Ffficacy and
Cardiol 77:53A, 1996
safety of intravcnous diltiazcm for treatmcnt of atrial
143. Naccarclli GV, Doughcrty AH. Amiodarone: a rcview of
fbrillation and atrial flutter. The diltiazem-atrial fbril-
its pharmacologic, antiarrhythmic, and adversc cffects.
lation/flutter study group. Am J Cardiol 63:1046, 1989
In Podrid PJ, Kowcy PR (eds): Cardiac Arrhythinia:
124a. Esmolol Multiccntcr Study Rescarch Group. Ffficacy
Mechanisms,Diagnosis, and Maagement.Balrimorc,
and safcty of esmolol vs. propranolol in thc treatmcnt.
Williams & wilkins, 1995, p 434
of supravcntricular  tachyarrhylhmias:  a mullicentcr
144. LK Propafenone PSVT Study Group. A randomized,
double-hlind clirical trial. Am Heart J 110:913, 1985 
 placcho-controlled trial of propafcnone in 1hc prophy-
125. Frishman WH. βAdrenergic blockcrs. Med Clin Xorth
laxis of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia and
Am 72:37,1988
par0xysmal atrial fibrillation. Circulation 92:2550. 1995
126. Yec R, Gulamhuscin SS, Klein GJ. Combined verapamil
145. Aarons RD, Moliroff PB. Changes in the dersity of [β-
and propranolel for supraventricular tachycardia. Am J
adrenergic reccptors in rat lymphocyies, heart ard lung
Cardiol 53:757, 1984
after chronic trcatment wih propranolol. J Pharinacol
127. Falk RH, Knowlton AA, Bermard SA, et al. Digoxin
Exp Thcr 221:439, 1982
for converting reccnt-onset atrial fibrillation to sinus
146. Rango RE, Larglois S. Comparison of withdrawal phc-
rhythm. A randomizcd, double-blindcd trial. Ann In-
nomena afier propranolol, metoprolol and pindolol.
tern Mcd 106:503, 1987
Br J Clin Pharmacol 13:345S, 1982
128. Longhurst JC. Ross J Jr. Extracardiac and cororary
147. Smith TW. Digitalis. Mccharisms of action and clinical 
vascular effecis of digitalis. J Am Coll Cardiol 5:99A,
use. N Erigl J Med 318:358, 1988
1985
148. Gillis RA, Qucst JA. The role of the ervous system in
129. Sarter Bll, Marchlinski FE. Redefining thc role of di-
thc cardiovascular cffecis of digitalis. Pharmacol Rev
goxin in thc treatment of arterial fbrilation. Am J
31:19, 1979
Cardiol 69:71G, 1992
149. Hoffiman BF, Singer DH. Effecis of digitalis on electrical
130. Caimm AJ, Garratt CJ. Adcnosine and supravcntricular
activity of cardiac fibers. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 7:226,
tachycardia. N Engl J Med 325:1621, 1991
1964
131. Moser GlI, Schrader J, Dcusscn A. Turnover of adeno-
150. Bootsma BK Hoclcn AJ, Strackcc J, ct al. Analysis of
sine in plasma of human and dog blood. Am J Physiol
thc R-R intervals in patients with atrial fibrillation al
256:1:799, 1989
rest and during cxcrcisc. Circulation 41:783, 1970
132. Uirthaler F, James TX. Effects of adenosinc and ATP on
151. Knowlton AA, Falk RH. Paradoxical increasc ir hearl
AV conductior and on AV junctional rhythm. J Lab
 ratc before convcrsior 1o sinus rhythmi in patierts with
Clin Med 79:96, 1972
rcccnt-onset atrial fibrillation. Aim J Cardiol 65:930,
133. Mitsuoka T, Hirata 'l, Hiralu N, ct al. Comparison of
1990
cffccts of adenosinc and ATP on sinus and AV junction
132. Falk RH, Leavinu JI. Digoxin for atrial filbrillation: a drug
rhythms in the canine hear1. Jpn Circ J 53:494, 1989
whose timc has gone? Ann lntern Med 114:573, 1991
134. Bclardinelli L、Mattros EL, Bernc RM. Evidencc for
153. Goldmar S, Probst P, Selzer A, et al. Inefficacy of thera-
adcnosinc mediation of atrioventricular block in thc
pcutic serum levels of digoxir in controlling the ven-
ischemic carine myocardium. J Clin Invest 68:195, 1981
tricular ralc in atrial fbrillation. An1 J Cardiol 35:651,
135. Belardireli L, Pellcg A. Cardiac electrophysiology a1nd
1975
pharmacology of adenosine. J Cardiovasc Electro-
154. Picher DW, Papouchado M, James MA, ct al. Twcnty
physiol 1:327, 1990
four hour ambulatory electrocardiography in patients
136. Pellcg A, Belhasscn B, lia R, el al, Comparative clectro-
with chroric alrial fbrillation. Br Med ∫ 29:594. 1986
physiologic effects of adcrrosine triphosphate and aden-
155. Redfors A. Digoxin dosage and ventricutar rate at rest
 osinc in the caninc heart: influcncc of atropinc, pro
and exercisc in paticnts with atrial fibrillation. Acta
pranolol, vagotomy, dipyridamole and ainirophyllinc.
Med Scand 190:321, 1971
Am J Cardiol 55:571, 1985
156. Bcasley R, Smith DA, McHaffic DJ. Exercise hcarl rates 
137. Mauritson DR. Winniford MD, Walkcr WS, et al. Oral
 of dlifferenl serum digoxin concentrations in paticnts
verapainil for paroxysnal supraventricular tachycardia.
with alrial fibrillation. Br Med J 290:9, 1985
A long-term, double-blind randomized trial. Ain Intcrn
157. Zoble RG. Brcwington J, Olukotun AY, et al. Connpara-
Med 96:409. 1982
tivc cffects of nadolol-digoxin combination therapy and
138. Schwartz IB、 Kccfc D, Kales RE, ct al. Acutc ard
tdigoxin monotherapy for chronic atrial fibrillation. Am
 chronic pharmacodynanic intcraction of verapamil
J Cardiol 60(suppl):39D, 1987
and digoxin in atrial fibrilation, Circulation 65:1163,
158. DiBianco R, Morganroth J, Freitag JA, ct al. Effects of
1982
nadolol on the spontancous and cxercisc-provoked
139. Grant AO. Propafcrone: an efective agent for the man
heart ratc of patients with chronic atrial fhrillation
agement of supraventricular arrhythmias. J Cardiovasc
receiving stable dosages of digoxin. Am Ileart J
Electrophysiol 7:353, 1996
108:1121, 1984
140. Garcia-Civera R, Sanjuan R, Morcll S, et al. Effccts of
159. Lewis RV, McMurray J, McDevitt DG, ct al. Effects of
propafcnone on induction and maintenance of atrio-
alerrolol, verapamil. ard xamoterol on hcarl rate and
ventricular nodal rccintrart tachycardia. PACF. 7:649.
exercise tolcrance in dligitalized patients with chronic
1984
alrial fibrillation. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 13:1, 1989
141. Chinienti M, Cullen MT Jr, Casadei G. Safety of long-
160. Falk RH. Atrial fibrillation. In Podrid PJ, Kowey PR
term flecainide and propafenonc in thc managcnenl
(eds): Cardiac Arrhythmia: Mecharisms, Diagnosis, and
of paticnts with symptomatic paroxysmal atrial Hibrilla-
Management. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1995, p
tior: report from the flecainide ard propaferone Ital-
803
ian study investigators. Am J Cardiol 77:60A. 1996
161. Lurtdstrom T, Ryden L. Ventricular rate cortrol and
142. Naccarclli GV, Dorian P, Hohnloscr SII, ct al. Prospcc.
cxcrcise performance in chronic atrial fbrillation: ef-
380 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
fects of diltiazem arid verapamil. J Am Coll Cardiol
182. Passmorc JM, Rinkenbcrger RL, Gicbcl RA, ct al. Amio-
16:86,1990
darore: predictors of clinical responsc in atrial flutter
162. Lang R, Klein H, Segni E, cl al. Verapamil inmprovcs
and atrial fibrillation. Abstract. J Am Coll Cardiol
exercise capacity in chronic atrial fibrillation: double
7:83A,1986
blind crossover study. Am Heart.J 105:820, 1983
183. Kerin NZ, Arsari-Leesar M, Fitcl K, ct al. The effective-
163. Lang R, Klein HID, Weiss E, et al. Superiority of oral
ness anid safety of thc sinultancous administration of
verapamil therapy lo digoxin in trcatment of chronic
quinidine and amiodaronc in the conversion of chronic
atrial fibrillation. Chest 83:491, 1983
atrial fibrillation. Am Hleart J 125:1017. 1993
164. Wang Z, Pagc P, Lattel S. Mcchanism of llecainide's
184. Artman EM. Mainitaining sirus rhythm with antifibril-
antiarrhythmic action in experimental atrial fibrillalior.
latory drugs in atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol 78:67,
Circ Rcs 71:271, 1992
1996
165. Singh BN. Electrophysiologic basis for the antiarrhythi-
185. Middlekauff HR. Wicner 1, Steverison WG. low-dose
rnic actions of sotalol: comparison with other agenls.
amiodarone for atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol 72:75F,
Am J Cardiol 72:8A, 1993
1993
166. Singh BX. Controlling cardiac arrhythmias by lengthen-
186. Ellenbogen KA, Clemo HF, Stambler BS, et al. Efficacy
ing Icpolarization: historical overview. Am J Cardiol
of ibutilide for termination of atrial fibrillation and
72:18F, 1993
fluttel. Am J Cardiol 78:42, 1996
167. Hondcghen LM. Snyders DJ. Class Ill antiarrhythmic
187. Naccarelli GV, Lcc KS. Gibson JK, et al. Electrophysiol-
 agents have a lot of potential but a long way to go:
ogy and pharmacology of ibutilide. Am J Cardiol
reduced effectiveness and dangers of revcrse uise-
78:12, 1996
dependencc. Circulation 81:686, 1990
188. Kay GN, Epstein AE, Dailey SM, ct al. Selcctive radiofre-
I68. Anderson KP, Walker R, Dustnan T, et al. Rate-related
qucncy ablation of the slow pathway for the treatment.
clectrophysiologic cffects of long-terrm administration
 of atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia. Circula-
of amiodarone or1 canine yentricular myocardium in
tion 85:1675, 1992
vno. Circulation 79:948. 1989
189. Wu D, Weh S, Wang C, ct al. A simple tcchniquc for
169. I loncdcghcm 1.M. Molccular intcractions of antiarrhyth-
sclective radiofrequcncy ablation of the slow pathway
in atrioventricular node reenfrarnt tachycardia. J An
(eds): Cardiac Electrophysiology: From Cell to Bedsidc.
Coll Cardiol 21:1612, 1993
Philadelphia, WB Saundcrs, 1990, p 865
190. Wu D, Hlung J, Kuo C, et al. Effects of quinidine on
170. Allessie MA, Schalij MJ, Kirchhof CJHJ, et al. Fxperi-
atriovcntricular nodal reentrant paroxysmal tachycar-
mcntal clectrophysiology and arrhythmogenicity. An-
dia. Circulation 64:823, 1981
isotropy and ventricular tachycardia. Eur Heart J
191. Shenasa M, Gilbert. CJ, Schmide DH, ct al. Procain-
10(suppl):2, 1989
amide and rctrogradc atrioverntricular rodal conduc-
171. Animan EM. Atrial fibrillation and flutter: maintaining
tion in man. Circulation 65:355, 1982
stability of sinus rhythim versus ventricular rate conlrof.
192. Niazi I, Naccarelli G. Dougherty A, ct. al. Treatment of
Part I1. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 6:962, 1995
atrioventricular node recntrant. tachycardia with en-
172. Kerber RF. Transthoracic cardioversion of atrial fibril-
 cainide: reversal of drug cffcct with isoproterenol. J Am
lation and flulter: standard techniques and new ad-
Coll Cardiol 13:904, 1989
varices. Am J Cardiol 78:22. 1996
193. Harrison DC, Bottorff MB. Basic principles of pharma-
173. Fors WJ. VanderArk CR, Reynolds EW. Evaluation of
cokinetics: arntiarrhythmic drugs. In Sperclakis N (cd) :
propranolol and quinidine in thc lrcatment of quini-
Physiology and Pathophysiology of the IHcart. 3rd cd.
dire-resistant arrhythmias. Am J Cardiol 27:190, 1971
174. Stroobandt R, Sticls B, I locbrechts R, et al. Propafen-
Norwell, MA, Kluwer Acadcmic Publishers, 1995, p 565
194. dc Madron E, Kadish A, Spcar JF, ct al. Iricessant atrial
one for coniversion and prophylaxis of atrial fibrillation.
lachycardias in a dog with tricuspid dysplasia. J Vet
Am J Cardiol 79:418, 1997
175. Anderson JL., Gilbcrt EM, Alpert BL., ct al. Prevention
Initern Mcd 1:163, 1987
 of symptomatic recurrences of paroxysmal atrial fibril-
195. Kornreich BG, Moise NS. Right atrioventricular valvc
lation in patients initially tolcrating antiarrhythmic
rualformation in dogs and cats: an electrocardiographic
therapy: a multiccnter, double-blind, cross-over study of
survcy with cmphasis on splintered QRS complcxes. J
flecainide and placcbo using transtelephonic monitor-
Vct Intern Med 1l:226, 1997
ing. Circulation 80:1557, 1989
196. El-Sherif N. Recntrarit mcchanisms in ventricular ar-
176. Ticlcrman RG, Gosselink AT, Crijns IHjGM. ct al. Eff-
rhythmias. In Zipcs DP, Jalife J (eds): Cardiac Electro
cacy, safety, and dcterrminants of coriversion of atrial
physiology: From Cell to Bcdside. Philadelphia, WB
fibrillation and lutter with oral amiodarone. Am J
Saunders, 1995, p 567
Cardiol 79:53, 1997
197. Kacdish A, Morady F. Mechanism-specific therapy of ven-
177. Anderson JL. Acute treatment of atrial fibrillatior and
tricular tachycardia. [ Cardiovasc Elccirophysiol 1:688,
flutter. Ani J Cardiol 78:17, 1996
1990
178.Hellestrand KJ. Intravenous flecainide acetate for su-
198. Hondeghem LM. Class II agcnts: amiodarone, brety-
praventricular tachycardias. Am J Cardiol 62:16D, 1988
lium, and sotalol. In Zipes Dp Jalife J (eds): Cardiac
179.
Hellcstrand KJ. Efficacy and safety of long-term oral
Electrophysiology: Fron Cell to Bedside. Philadelphia,
flccainidc acetate in patienis with rcsponsivc supraven-
WB Saunders, 1995, p 1330
tricular tachycardia. Am J Cardiol 77:83A, 1996
199. Link MS, Hormoud M, Foote CB, ct al. Antiarrhythmic
180. Alboni P. Paparella N, Cappato R, et al. Direcl and
drug therapy for ventricular arrhythrmias: current per-
autonomically mediated effects of oral flecainide. Am J
spcctivcs. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 7:653, 1996
Cardiol 61:759, 1988
200. CAsT Investigators. Preliminary report: cffcct of cncai-
181. Capucci A, Villani GQ SATF Group. Propafcnone oral
rnide and flecainidc on mortality in a randomized trial
 loading dose plus digitalis in converting atrial fibrilla-
of arrhylhmia suppression affter myocardial infarction.
tion to sinus rhythm: a placcbo-controlled multiccntcr
N Engl J Med 321:406, 1989
study. Abstract. Circulation 92:1775, 1995
 201. CAST Trial II Invcstigators. Effect of the antiarrhythmic
agcnt moricizine  on survival alter myocardial  in-
220. Singh BN. Antiarrhythmic actions of amiodarone: a
farction. N Engl J Med 327:227, 1992
profle of a paradoxical agent. Am J Cardiol 78:41, 1996
202. Fcht DS, Liebson PR, Mitchell LB, ct al. Mortality and
221.
Sanguinctti MC, Jurkiewicz NK, Scott A, et al. Isoproter-
morbidity in patients rccciving eneainidc, lecainidc, or
cnoi antagonizes prolongation of refractory period by
placebo. The Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trial. N
the class fil antiarrhythmic agent E-4031 in guinca pig
Engl J Med 327:227. 1992
myocytes. Circ Res 68:77, 1991
203. Vaughan Williams EM. Classification of antiarrhythmic
222. ESVEM invcstigators-Mason JW. A comparison of seven
drugs. In Sand E, Flcnstedt-Jensen E, Olesen KH (cds):
antiarrhyth mic drugs in patients with verntricular tachy-
Symposium on Cardiac Arrhythmias. Sodcrtalje, Swc-
arrhyth mias. N Engi J Mcd 329:452, 1993
den, AB Astra, 1970. p 440
223. Waldo AL, Camm AJ, dcRuyter H, ct al. Preliminary
 204. Singh BN, Vaughan Williams EM. A fourth class of
mortality rcsults from the survival with oral dsotalol
antidysrhyth mic action. Effect of verapamil on ouabain
(SWORD) trial. Abstracl. J Am Coll Cardiol 15A, 1995
toxicity, on atrial and ventricular intracellular poten-
224. Waldo AL, Camm AJ, deRuyter H, et al. Survival with
tials, and on other fcatures of cardiac furction. Cardio-
oral dsotalol in patients with lefl ventricular dysfunc-
vasc Rcs 6:109, 1972
tion after myocardial infarclion: rationale, design, and
205. Josephson ME. Evalualion of antiarrhythmic agents. fn
mcthods (the SwORD trial). Am J Cardiol 75:1023.
Clinical Cardiac Electrophysiology Techniques and In-
1995
terpretations. Philadelphia, Lca &c Febiger, 1993. p 630
225. Kolettis TM, Sakscna S, Mathew P, c1 al. Right and left
206. Sicilian Gambit Members, Antiarrhythmic Therapy: A
ventricular  hemodynamic
pcrformance during sus-
Pathophysiologic Approach. Mount. Kisco. NY. Futura
tainled ventricular tachycardia. Am J Cardiol 79:323,
Publishing Company, 1994
1997
 207. Task Forcc Working Group on Arrhythmias of thc Euro-
226. Buxton AE. Marchlinski FE, Waxman IHl, ct al. Prog-
pear Society of Cardiology. The Sicilian Gambit: A ew
nostic factors in nonsustained ventricular tachycardia.
approach lo thc classification of drugs based on the
Am J Cardiol 53:1275, 1984
actions of antiarrhythmic mccharisms. Circulation
227. Oscran DS, Gang ES, Rosenthal MF, ct al. Flectrophar-
84:1831, 1991
macologic testing in sustained ventricular tachycardia
208. Campbell TJ. Subclassification of class I antiarrhyth mic
associatcd with cororary heart disease: value of the
drugs:_enhanced rclevance after CASr. Cardiovasc
responsc to intravcnous procainamide in predicting the
Drug Ther 6:519, 1992
response to oral procairamide and oral quinidine treat-
209. Bigger JT, Hoffman BF. Antiarrhythmic drugs. In Good-
ment. Am J Cardiol 56:883, 1985
man AG, Rall Tw, Nics AS, el al (cds): Ihe Pharrmaco-
228. Singh SN. Congcstivc heart failure and arrhythmias:
logic Basis of I'herapeutics. Ncw York, Pergamon Press,
therapcutic modalitics. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol
1990, p 840
8:89,1997
 210. Schwartz PJ, Priori SC. Sympathetic ncrvous systenm ard
229. Hlarpster NK Boxcr cardiomyopathy. In Kirk Rw (ed):
cardiac arrhythmias. In Zipes DP, Jalife J (cds): Cardiac
Flcctrophysiology: From Cell to Bedside. Philadelphia,
Saundcrs. 1980. p 329
WB Saunders, 1990, p 303
 230. Moisc NS, Meycrs-Wallen V, Flahive WJ, et al. Inherited
 211. Smith ML, Ellenbogen KA, Beightol LA, et al. Sympa-
ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death in German
thetic ncural responscs to induced ventricular tachycar-
shcpherd dogs. J An Coll Cardiol 24:233, 1994
dia. J Am Coll Cardiol 18:1015, 1991
231. Moisc NS, Gilmour RF Jr, Riccio Ml. An animal model
212. Lucchesi BR, Chi L, Friedrichs GS, et al. Antiarrhyth-
of sudden arrhythimic death. J Cardiovasc Elcctrophy-
mic versus antifibrillatory actions: intcrfercnce from
siol 8:98, 1997
experimental studies. Am J Cardiol 72:25F, 1993
 213. Meredith IT, Broughton A, Jenmings Gl., ct al. Evidence
232. Moise NS, Gilmour RF Jr, Riccio ML, ct al. Diagnosis of
inhcrited ventricular tachycardia in German shepherd
of a selective increase in cardiac sympathetic activity in
dogs. Am J Vet Med Assoc 210:403, 1997
paticnts with sustaincd vcrntricular arrhythrmias, N Ergl
233. Moisc Ns, Riccio MJ. Flahive WJ、et al. Agc-dependent.
j Med 325:618, 1991
214. Zipes DP, Miyazaki T. The autonomic nervous systcm
dlevelopment of ventricular arrhythimias in a sportane-
ous animal rnodel of sudden cardiac death. Cardiovasc
and the heart: basis for understanding interaclions and
effecis on arrhythmia development. In Zipes DP, Jalife J
Res 34:483, 1997
(eds): Cardiac Flectrophysiology: From Ccll to Bedside.
234. Morganroth J. Michelson EL, Horowitz LN, ct al. Limi-
Philadelphia, WB Saunrders, 1990, p 312
tations of routinc long-tcrm elcctrocardiographic moni-
215. Grant AO, Whalley DW, Wendt DJ. Pharmacology of
toring to assess ycntricular eclopic freqnency. Circula-
the cardiac sodiun charnncl. In Zipes DP, Jalife J (eds):
tion 58:408, 1978
Cardiac Electrophysiology: From Cell to Bedside. Phila-
235. Morganroth J. Arnbulalory Hlolter elec trocardiography:
dclphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 247
choicc of techrologies and clinical uses. Ann lntern
216. Nilius B, Tytgat J, Albitz R. Atuionatriurcuic peptidc
Mcd 2:73, 1985
trarisforms cardiac sodium chanrcls into calcium-cor-
236. Morganroth J. Indications for antiarrhythmic supprcs-
ducting channcls. Science 247:969. 1990
sion of ventricular arrhythmias: a definition of life-
217. Fcldinan I, (Carroll JD, Munkenbcck F, et al. HIcody
thrcatening
ventricular arrhythmias. Am J Cardiol
namic recovery during simulatcd ventricular tachycar-
72:3A, 1993
dia: role of adrerergic receptor activation. Am Heart. J
237. Toivonen L. Spontaneous variability in the frequency
115:576, 1988
218. Podrid PJ. Venditti FJ, Lcvine PA. ct al. Thc role of
tervals and inplications for antiarrhyth mic treatrment.
excrcisc testing in cvaluation of arrhythrmias. Am J
Am J Cardiol 60:608, 1987
Cardiol 62:2411, 1988
238. Takada H, Mikawa I, Murayama M, et al. Rarige of
219. Calkins IH, Sousa J, El-Atassi R, ct al. Reversal of antiar-
ventricular ectopic complexes in healthy subjects stud-
rhythmic drug cffects by cpinephrinc: quinidire versus
ied with repcated ambulatory clectrocardiographic re-
amiodarone. J Am Coll Cardiol 19:347. 1992
cordings. Am J Cardiol 63:184, 1989
382ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
239. Pratt CM, Delclos G, Wicrman AM, et al. The changing
sponses in  evaluation of efficacy Ain J Cardiol
base line of complex ventricular arrhythrnias: a new
72:114F,1993
considcration in assessing long-tcrm antiarrhythmic
259. Singh BN, Wellens HU, Hiraoka M (eds). Electrophar-
drug therapy. X Engl J Mcd 313:1444, 1985
nacological Control of Cardiac Arrhythmias: To Dclay
240. Raeder EA, Hlohnloscr SH, Graboys TB, et al. Spontane-
Conduction or to Prolong Refractoriness? Mt. Kisco,
ous variability and circadiar distribution of ectopic ac-
NY, Futura Publishing Company, 1994. p 1
tivity in patients with malignant verntricular arrhythmia,
260. Campbell RwF. Class 1B antiarrhythmic agents. In Po-
J Am Coll Cardiol 12:656, 1988
drid PJ, Kowcy PR (eds): Cardiac Arrhythinia: Mecha-
241. Reifel JA. Implications of the elecirophysiologic study
nisms, Diagnosis, and Managcment. Baltimorc, Wil-
vcrsus electrocardiographic monitoring trial for con-
liams & wilkins, 1995, p 391
trolling ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation. Am J
261, Roth A, Malov N, Bloch Y, et al. Usefulness of self-
(Cardiol 78:34, 1996
242. Gorgels APM, van den Dool A. Hofs A, et al. Compari-
hospital setting for ventricular tachyarrhythmias unasso-
son of procainamidc and lidocainc in terminating sus-
ciated with acute myocardial infarction; the "'Shahal"
taincd monomorphic ventricular tachycardia. Am J
experienice in Israel. An J Cardiol 79:611, 1997
Cardiol 78:43, 1996
262.1
Ryden L, waldenstroin A. Eho L, el al. Conparison
243. Roden DM. Role of the electrocardiogram in determin-
betwcen effcctivencss of intramuscular and intravenous
ing clectrophysiologic cnd points of drug therapy. Am
lidocaine on yentricular arrhythmias complicating
J Cardiol 62:3411, 1988
acute myocardial infarction. Br Heart J 35:1124, 1973"
244. Kay GN, Plumb VJ, Arcinicgas JG, ct al. Torsades dc
263. Stanton MS. Class 1 antiarrhythmic drugs: quinidine,
pointes: the long-short initiating sequence and other
procainarmide, disopyramidc, lidocainc, mexiletinc, to-
chinical features: observations in 32 paticnts. J An Coll
cainide, phenytoin, moricizine, flecairide, propafen-
Cardiol 2:806, 1983
One. In Zipes DP. Jalife J (eds): Cardiac: Electrophysiol-
245. Surawicz B, Knoebel SB. Long QT: good, bad, or indif-
Ogy: From Cell to Bedsidc. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
ferent? J Am Coll Cardiol 4:398, 1984
1995, p 1296
246.Antzelevitch C,Sicouri S, Lukas A, ct al. Regional differ-
264. Beltrame J, Aylward PE, McRitchie RJ, ct al. Compara-
enccs in clectrophysiology of ventricular cclls: physio-
tive haeinodynamic effects of lidocaine, mexiletine, and
logical and clinical implications. In Zipcs DP, Jalife J
disopyramide. J Cardiovasc Pharrnacol 6:484, 1984
(cds): Cardiac Flectrophysiology: Fron Cell to Bedside.
265. Darby S, Bennett MA, Cruickshank JC, ct al. Trial of
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 228
combined intramuscular and intraverous lignocaine in
247. Roden DM. Sew concepts in antiarrhythmic drug phar-
prophylaxis
S of  ventricular  tachyarrhythmias.  Laricet
macokinetics. In Zipes D (cd): Synposium on New
1:817, 1972
Thcrapcutic Approaches to Cardiac Arrhythimias. Phila-
266. Roos JC, Dunning AJ. Effects of lidocaine on inpulse
delphia, Lca & Fcbiger, 1987, p 19
formation ard conduction defects in mar. Am Heart J
 248. Roden DM. Risk anid berrefits of antiarrhythmic thcr-
89:686, 1975
apy N Engl J Med 331:785, 1994
267. Roscn MR, Sirauss H, Jansc MJ. Thc classification of
249. Wooslcy RL.' Role of plasma concentration monitoring
antiarrhythinic drugs. In Zipes DP, Jalife J (eds): Car-
in the cvaluation of response to antiarrhythmic drugs.
diac Electrophysiology: Froin Cell to Bedside. Philadel-
Am J Cardiol 62:9H, 1988
phia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 1277
 250. Campbcll NPS. Kelley JB, Adgey AAJ, ct al. The clinical
 268. Roden DM. Ionic mechanisms for prolongation of re-
pharrmacology of mexilctinc. Br J Clin Pharmacol
fractoriness and their proarrhythmic and antiarrhyh-
6:103, 1978
mic correlates. Am J Cardiol 78:12, 1996
251. Adams PC, Holt DW, Storey G, ct al. Amiodaronc and
269. Singh BN. The coming of age of the class II antiar-
its desethyl mctabolite: tissue distribution and morpho-
rhythmic principle: rctrospectivc and future trends. A1n
logic changes during long-term therapy. Circulation
J Cardiol 78:17, 1996
72:1064, 1985
270, Cainpbell TJ. Differing electrophysiological effects of
252. Pourbaix S, Bergcr Y Desager JP, et al. Asolutc bio-
class la, 1b, and 1c antiarrhythic drugs on guinea-pig
availability of amiodaronc in norinal subjects. Clin
siroatrial nodc. Br J Pharmacol 9l:395, 1987
Pharinacol Ther 37:118, 1985
271. Abraharnsson C, Carlson L, Duker G. Lidocaine and
253. Greenberg MI., Lerinan BB, Shipe JR. ct al. Rclation
risoldipine attenuale almokalarnt-induccd dispersion of
ship betwccn amiodarone and descthylarniodaronc
repolarization ard early aflcrdepolarizations in vriro. J
plasma concentrations and electrophysiologic cffccts,
Cardiovasc Elcctrophysiol 7:1074, 1996
efficacy, and toxicity. J Am Coll Cardiol 9:1148, 1987
 272. Arrsdorf MF, Biggcr JI: Effecl of lidocaine hydrochlo-
254. Falik R, Flores BT, Shaw L, el al. Relationship of stcady-
ride on membrane conductancc in nuamnalian cardiac
state serum concentralions of amiodaronc and descthy.
Purkinje fibers. J Clin Invcst 51:2253, 1972
lamiodarone to therapcutic efficacy and adversc cffects.
 273. Sirichartz GR. The inhibition of sodium currents in
Am J Med 82:1102, 1987
myclinated ncrvc by quatcrnary derivativcs of lido-
255. Talajic M, 1DeRoode MR, Nattel S. Comparativc electro-
cainc.J Gen Physiol 62:37, 1973
 physiologic effccts of intraveinous amiodarone and dc-
274. Anderson JL. Rcasscssmucnt of bcncfit-risk ratio and
sethyl amiodarone in dogs: evidence for clinically relc-
trcatment algorithms for antiarrhythmic therapy aftcr
vant activity of the mctabolite. Circulation 75:265, 1987
thc Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trial. J Clin Phar-
256. Zipes DP, Prystowsky EN, Heger JI. Electrophysiologic
macol 30:981, 1990
testing of antiarrhythrmic agents. Am Hcart J 103:610,
275. Allen JD, Dressman FJ, Wit AL. Actions of lidocainc on
1982
 transmembrane potentials of subendocardial Purkinje
257. Woosley RL., Roden M. Imporlarice ol rmetabolites in
fiber surviving
in infarctcd caninc hcart. Circ Res
antiarrhythinic therapy. Am J Cardiol 52:3C, 1983
43:470, 1978
258. Singh BN. Choicc and chance in drug therapy of car-
276. LcMarec H, Danginar KH, Danilo P, ct al, An cvalua-
diac arrhythmias: tcchnique versus drug-specific re-
tion of automaticity and triggered activity in thc caninc
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMLAS 383
heart one to four days aftcr myocardial infarction. Circ
8: Self poisoning with β-adrenoceptor blocking drugs:
Res 71:1224, 1985
recognition and management. Am Hleart J 98:798, 1979
277. Marcus FI, Opie IIi. Antiarrhythmic agcnts. In Opie
295. Nakaya H1, Kimura S, Nakao Y, ct al. Effects of nipradilol
[H (ed): Drugs for the Heart, Philadelphia, WB Saun-
(K-351) on the electrophysiological properties of ca-
ders, 1995. p 207
nine cardiac tissues: comparison with propranolol and
278. Schmidt C, Kadish AH, Balke WC, et al. Cycle lcngth-
solalol. Eur J Phar1nacol 104:335, 1984
dependent effects on normal and abnormal intraven-
296. CASCADE Invcstigators—Grcene HL. The CASCADE
uricular clectrocardiograms: effect of procainamide. Am
shudy: randonized antiarrhythmic drug therapy in sur-
J Cardiol 12:395, 1988
vivors of cardiac arrcst in Scatlc. Am J Cardiol 72:70F.
279. Giardina EGV, lipka LJ. Class lA antiarrhythimic
1998
agcnts: quinidinc, procairamide, disopyramide. In Po-
297. CASCADE Investigators. Randomized antiarrhythmic
drid PJ, Kowey PR (ceds): Cardiac Arrhythmia: Mccha-
drug_ therapy in survivors of cardiac arrest (the CAS
CADE study). Am J Cardiol 72:280, 1993
liams & wilkins, 1995, p 369
298.
 Nora M, Zipes D. Erpiric usc of amiodarone and sola-
280. Morady F, Di Carlo LA, de Buitleir M, et al. Effecis
lol. Am J Cardiol 72:62F, 1993
of incremental doses of procainamide on ventricular
299. Aniodaronc vs. Sotalol Study Group. Multicentric ran-
refractoriness, intraventricular conduction, and induc-
domized trial of sotalol vs. amiodarone for chronic
tion of ventricular tachycardia. Circulation 74:1355,
rmalignant vcntricular tachyarrhythmias. Eur Heart J
1986
10:685, 1989
 281. Nadcmancc K, Singh BN, Stevensou WG, et. al. Amio-
 300. Roden DM. Pharmacokinctics of amiodaronc: implica-
darone and post-M1 paticnis. Circulation 88(2):764,
tions for drug therapy. An J Cardiol 72:45F, 1993
1993
301. Kato R, Ikeda N, Yabck SM, ct al. Electrophysiologic
 282. Gloor HO, Urthaler F, James TN. Acutc: cffects of arnio-
effccts of thc levo- and dextrorotatory isomers of sotalol
darone upon the canine sinus rode and atrioventricu-
in isolated cardiac nuscle and their m vvo pharmacoki-
lar junction region. J Clin Invest 71:1457, 1983
nctics. J Am Coll Cardiol 7:116, 1986 
283. Patterson E, Eller BT, Abrarns GD, el al. Ventricular
302. Hanyok J. Clinical pharmacokinetics of sotalol. Am J
fibrillation in a conscious canine preparalion of sudden
Cardiol 72:19A, 1993
coronmary death: prcvcntion by short- and long-term
303. Gomoll AW, Lckich RF, Bartek MJ, et al. Comparability
amiodarone administration. Circulation 68:857, 1983
ol the clectrophysiologic rcsponses and plasma and
284. Patterson E, Lynch JJ, Lucchesi BR. Antiarrhythimic
myocardial tissuc conccntratiors of sotalol and its
and antifibrillatory actions of thc β-adrcnergic rcceptor
dstereoisoner in the dog. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol
antagonist, d, Isotalol. J Pharrmacol Exp Thcr 230:519,
16:204, 1990
1984
304. Mostow ND, Rakita L, Vrobel IR, et al. Amiodarone
285. HIcssion M, Blum R, Podrid PJ, ct al. Mexilctene and
corrclation of serum concentration with suppression
tocainide: does response to one predict rcsponsc to the
of complex ventricular cctopic activity. Am J Cardiol
othcr? J An Coll Cardiol 7:338, 1986
54:569, 1983
286. Singh S, Klcin R, Eisenberg B, et. al. Long-term effect
305. Rotmensch HIH, Belhasscn B, Swanson BN, ct al.
of mexiletine on lefl ventricular function and rclatior
Sleady-state serum amiodarone conccntrations: rela-
to supprcssion of ventricular arrhythmia. Am J Cardiol
tionships with antiarrhythimic efficacy and toxicity, Ann
66:1222, 1990
lntern Mcd 10l:462, 1984
287. O'Callaghan PA, Mc(Govern BA. Eyolving rolc of sotalol
 306. Charlicr R, Delaunois G, Bauthicr J. Rcchcrche dans la
in thc managcuent of ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
serie dcs benzofurannes. XL. Propriete antiarrhyth-
An J Cardiol 78:54, 1996
miqucs de Parmiodarone. Cardiologia 54:83, 1969
288. Haryok JJ, MacNcil DJ. Sotalol vcrsus class I and HI
307. Naltcl S, Talajic M, Fcrmani B, et al. Amiodaronc:
aritiarrhythnic:
agcrls.
Cardiovasc
Drugs Thcr
4(suppl):603, 1990
twcen thcin. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 3:266, 1992
 289. Frishinan WH. Clinical Pharmacology of thc β-Adreno.
 308. Woosley RL, Barbcy JT, Wanng T, ct al. Conicentration/
rcceptor Blocking Drugs. Norwalk, Applcton-Century-
rcsporse rclations for the ultiple antiarrhythimic ac-
Crofis, 1984
tions of sotalol. Am J Cardiol 65(suppl):22A. 1990
290. Stcinbeck G, Anderson D, Bach P ct al. A coinparison
309. Campbcll RWF, Furniss SS. Practical considcrations in
of clcctrophysiologically guided antiarrhythmic drug
the use of sotalol for ventricular tachycardia and vcn-
s  sd  a d  
tricular fibrillation. A1n J Cardiol 72:80A, 1993
tonatic, sustained ventricular tachyarrhythmias. X Engl
 310. Hamcr AWF, Arkles LB, Johns JA. Bcncficial cffccts ol
J Med 372:987, 1992
low dose armiodaronc in patients with congestive hcart
291. Rciffcl JA, Hahn F, Hlartz V. ct al. Sotalol for ventricular
failurc: a placebo control trial. J Am Coll Cardiol
tachyarrhythmias: β-blocking and class H contribu-
14:1768, 1989
tions, and relative cfficacy versus class l drugs after
311. Day CP, McComb JM, Matthews J. ct al. Reduction in
prior drug failure. Am J Cardiol 79:1048, 1997
QT dispcrsion by sotalol following myocardial in-
292. Anderson J, Lutz JR, Gilbert EM, et al. A rardomizcd
farclion. Eur Hcart J 67:51l, 1991
trial of low dose β-blockade therapy for idiopathic di-
 312. Corr PB, Gross RW, Sobcl BE. Amphipathic 1nctabolites
lated cardioinyopathy. Am J Cardiol 55:471、1985
and membranc dysfunctior in ischemic myocardium.
293. Frishiman WIi, Cavusoglu E. β-Adrenergic blockers and
Circ Res 55:135, 1984
their role in thc thcrapy of arrhythmias. In Podrid
 313. Nademanee K, Singh BN, Hendrickson JA, et al. Phar-
PJ. Kowey PR (eds): Cardiac Arrhythmia: Mcchanisms,
macokinetic significancc of seruin reverse T, Ievels dur-
Diagnosis, and Managcimcnt. Baltimorc, Williams &
ing aniodaronc trcatmcnt: a potential method for
Wikins, 1995, p 421
monitoring chronic drug therapy. Circulation 66:202,
294. Frishman W, Jacob H, Eiscnberg E, ct al. Clinical phar-
1982
macology of the ncw β-adrencrgic blocking drugs. Part
 314. Fostcr MT, Peter RW, Froman D, et al. Elecirophysio-
384
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
logic effects and predictors of success of coinbination
332. Hii JT, Wyse DG, Gillis AM, el al. Precordial QT interval
therapy with class la ard Ib antiarrhythmic drugs for
dispersion as a 1narker of torsades de pointes. Disparate
sustained vcntricular arrhythmias. An J Cardiol 78:47,
effects of class Ia antiarrhythmic drugs and amioda-
1996
rone. Circulation 96:1376, 1992
 315. Duff H!J. Mexiletine-quinidine combination: enhanced
1888
Dessertenne F. La tachycardia ventriculaire a deux foy-
aniarrhythmic and electrophysiologic aclivity in thc
crs opposes variables. Arch Mal Coeur 59:263. 1966
dog. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 249:617, 1989
334. Calvert CA, Jacobs GJ, Pickus CW. Bradycardia-associ-
316. Costard-Jaccklc A, Lienn LB, ct al. Frequcncy-dependent.
ated episodic weakriess, syncope, and abortcd sudden
effect. of quinidinc, mexiletinc and thcir combination
dcath in cardiomyopathic Doberman pinschers. J Vet
onl post-repolarization refractoriness in viso. J Cardio-
Intern Med 10:88, 1996
vasc Pharmacol 14:810, 1989
335. Calvert CA, Pickus CW, Jacobs GJ. Effcacy and toxicity
 317. Dull HJ. Antiarrhythnic drug combination therapy. In.
of tocainide for the trcatment of ventricular tachyar.
Podrid PJ, Kowey PR (eds): Cardiac Arrhythmia: Mech-
rhyihmias in Doberman pinschcrs with occult cardiopa-
anisins, Diagnosis, and Management. Baltimorc, Wil-
thy J Vct Intern Med 10:234, 1996
liams & wikins. 1995, p 498
 336. Brittain D, Concannon PW, Flandcrs JA, et al. tsc of
318. Duff IHJ, Cannon NJ, Sheldon RS. Mexiletine-quinidine
surgical intrautcrine inscmination to nanage infertility
in isolated hearts: an interaction involving the sodium
in a colony of rescarch German shepherd dogs. J Lab
channel. Cardiovasc: Res 23:584, 1989
Anim Sci 45:404, 1995
 319. Duff HJ. Rahinberg J, Shcldon RS. Role of quiridine in
 337. Dae M, Lrsell P, Lee R, Stilson C, ct al. HIctcrogcneolus
the mexiletine-quinidinc interaction: clectrophysiologic
sympathctic innervation in German shepherd dogs with
correlatcs of cnhanced antiarrhythmic efficacy.J
inherited vcntricular arrhythmias and sudden death.
Cardiovasc Pharmacol 16:685, 1990
Circulation 96:1337, 1997
320. Duff HJ, Roden D, Primm RK, ct al. Mcxiletinc in the
 338. Freeman LC, Pacioreity LM, Moisc NS, ct al. Dccrcascd
trcatmcnt of resistant ventricular arrhyihmias: cnhancc-
density of I in left vcntricular myocytes from Gerrman
Inent. of effcacy and reduction of dosc-related side
shcpherd dogs with inherited arrhythmias. J Cardiovasc
cffects of combination with quinidine. Circulation
Electrophysiol 8:87, 1997
67:1124, 1983
s e     a    6
321. Lec SD, Newman D, Ham M, ct al. Electrophysiologic
nism for inhcritcd ventricular arrhythimias in German
mcchanisms of aritiarrhyth mic cfficacy of a sotalol and
shepherd dogs. J An Coll Cardiol 27:1526, 1996
class Ia drug combination: climination of reverse use-
340. Moise NS, Moorn PF, Flahivc WJ. et al. Phenylephrine-
dependence. J Am Coll Cardiol 29:100, 1997
induced yentricular arrhythmias in dogs with inherited
322. Brodsky MA, Chough SP, Allcn BJ, et al. Adjuvart mcto-
sudden dcath. J Cardiovasc Flcctrophysiol 7:217, 1996 
prolol improves cfficacy of class I antiarrhythnic drugs
341. Doval HIC, Nul DR, Grancelli HO, ct al. Nonsustaincd
in paticnts with inducible sustained monomorphic vcri-
ventricilar tachycardia in severe heart failure. Circula-
tricular tachycardia. Am H Icart J 124:629, 1992
tion 94:3198, 1996
323. Bennett PB, McKinncy L, Bcgcnisich I, ct al. Adrcner-
342. Singh BN, Flctcher RD, Fisher G, et al. Thcrapy in
 gic modulation of the delayed rectifier potassium c han-
congestive heart failurc. Amiodarone in patients with
ncl in calf cardiac Purkinje fibers. Biophys J 49:839,
congestive heart failurc and asymptomatic ventricular
1986
arrhythrmia. N Engl J Med 333:77, 1995
324. Singh BX, Vaughan willians EM. Effect of alterig
343. Harisen DE, Craig CS, Hondeghem 1M. Strctch-
potassium conccntrations onn Lhe action of lidocaine
induccd arrhythmias in the isolated caninc ventricle:
and diphcnylhydantoin on rabbit atrial arrd ventricular
evidcnce for the imporlance of mechanoelcctrical feed-
musclc. Circ Rcs 29:286, 1971
back. Circulatior 8i:1094, 1990
325. Campbell TJ. Kinctics of onsct of rate-dependcnt effec ts
344. Franz MR, Cima R, Wang D, ct al. Electrophysiological
of class I antiarrhythmic drugs are inportarnt in de-
effects of nyocardial strctch and ncchanical dctermi-
termining thcir effects on refractoriness in guinea-pig
nants  of  strelch-activatcd   arrhythmias.  Circulalion
ventricle and providc a thcoretical basis for this sub
86:968, 1992
classification. Cardiovasc Res 17:344, 1983
345. Gomcs JA, Mchta D, Ip J, et al. Predictors of long-terl
326. Podrid PJ. Aggravatior of arrhythmia by antiarrhythmic
survival in paticnts with malignant ventricular arrhyth-
drugs. In Podrid PJ, Kowcy PR (cds): Cardiac Arrhyth-
rmias. Am J Cardiol 79:1054, 1997
mia: Mcchanisms, Diagnosis, and Maragcrmcnl. Balti-
 346. Ward DE, Carnm AJ. Dangerous ventricular arrbyth-
more, Williams & wilkins, 1995, p 507
miascan we prediet drug eficacy? N Engl J Med
327. Coplen SE, Antman EM, Berlin JA, el al. Eficacy and
329:498,1993
safety of quinidine therapy for maintenance of sirnus
347. Anastasiou-Nana MI, Mcnlovc RI., Nanas JN, ct al.
rhythm after cardiovcrsion: a mcta-analysis of random-
Spontanicous variability of vcntricular arrhythmias in
izcd control trials. Circulation 82:1106, 1986
patients with
chronic heart failurc. Am Heart J
328. Morganroth J., Goin JE. Quinidine-related mortality in
122:1007, 1991
the short-to-mcdium-term trcatment of vertricular ar-
348. Reiffel JA. Normal sinus rhythm arrd its variants (sinus 
rhythmias: a mcta-arralysis. Circulation 84: 1977, 1991
arrhythinia, sinus tachycardia, sinus bradycardia, sinus
329. Morganroth J, Horowitz LN. Flecainide—its proarrhyth-
node rcentry, and sinus nodc dysfunction [sick sinus
mic effect and expected changes on the surface electro-
syndromel): mechanism, rccognition, and manage-
cardiogram. Am J Cardiol 53:893, 1984
ment. In Podrid PJ, Kowey PR (eds): Cardiac Arrhyth-
330. Podrid PJ, Lainbert S, Graboys TB, ct al, Aggravation
mia: Mechanisms, Diagnosis, and Management. Balti-
Ofarrhythmia by antiarrhythmic drugs
incidence and
morc. williams & wilkins. 1995, p 752
predictors. Am J Cardiol 59:38E, 1987
349. Hilley LP. Essentials of Caninc and Feline Electrocardi-
331.
 Slatcr WB, Lampert S, Podrid PJ, et al. Clinical pre-
ography. Interprelation and Treatinent. 3rd cd. Phila-
dictors of arrhythmia worsening
delphia, WB Saunders, 1992, p 184
drugs. Am J Cardiol 61:349, 1988
350. Bonke FIM, Kirckholf CJHJ, Allessie MA, ct al. Impulsc
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF CANINE ARRHYTHMIAS 385
propagation from thc SA node to the ventricics. Expcri-
The Sinus Nodc. Structure, Function, and Clinical Rele-
mcntia 43:1044, 1987
vance. The I iague, The Netherlands, Martinus Nijhoff,
351. Bcnditt DB, Sakaguchi S, Goldstcin MA, ct al. Sinus
1978, p 212
Hode dysfunction: pathophysiology. clinical fcalures,
358. Opthof T, dc Tongc B, Jongsma HJ, et al. Functional
evaluation, anrd treatment. In Zipes DP, Jalife J (eds):
morphology of mammalian sinoatrial node. Eur Hcarl
Cardiac Flectrophysiology: From Cell to Bedside. 2nd
18:1249,1987
cd. Philadclphia, WB Saunders, 1995. p 1215
359. Davies MJ, Pomerance A. Quantitative study of aging
 352. Sutton R, Kenny RA. The natural history of sick sinus
   s    
syndrome. PACE 9:1110, 1986
tract. Br Hcarl J 34:150, 1972
353. Jordan JA, Yamaguchi 1, Mandel WJ. Studies on thc
 360. Reiffcl JA. Electrophysiologic evaluation of sinus node
mcchanism of sinus node dysfunction in thc sick sinus
function. Cardiol Clin 4:401, 1986
syndrome. Circulation 57:217, 1978
361.
Rciffel JA, Ferrick K, Zim merman J, et al. Electrophysio-
logic studies of the sinus nodc and atria. Cardiovasc
 354. Jose AD, Collison D. The normal range arid the deter-
Ininants of the intrinsic heart rate in inan. Cardiovasc
Clin 16:37, 1985
362.
Reiffel JA. Clinical clectrophysiology of the sinus node
Res 4:160, 1970
 355. Kugo K, Yainaguchi I, Sugishita Y, ct al. Asscssrment by
in man. Prog Clin Biol Res 275:239, 1988
363. Kocovic Z, Fricdman PL. Atrioventricular nodal block.
autonoruic blockadc of age-related chaniges of the sinus
In Podrid PJ, Kowcy PR (cds): Cardiac Arrhythmia:
node function and autonomic regulation in sick sinus
Mechanisms, Diagnosis, and Managenent. Batimore,
syndrome. Ain J Cardiol 61:36l, 1988
Williams & wilkins, 1995, p 1039
356. Strauss HC, Prykstowsky EN, Scheinman MM. Sinoatrial
364. Alboni P, Menozzi C, Brignole M, et al. Effccts of per-
and atrial electrogenesis. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 19:3:85,
manent. pacermaker and oral thcophylline in sick sinus 
1977
syndrome. The THEOPACF study: a randoinized con-
357. Becker AE. General comments. In Bonke FIM (ed):
trolled trial. Circulation 96:262, 1997
Diagnosis and
19
Management
.01
Feline Arrhythmias
PHILIP R. FOX
NEIL K. HARPSTER
CLINICAL OVERVIEW
Arrhythmias are often detected during evaluation and management of
feline heart disease,l-6 In some cases they may constiutc the principal
focus of therapy (c.g., slow thc ventricular rate in atrial fibrillation; reverse
symptomatic bradycardia fron compleie airioventricular block with pace-
maker therapy; suppress electrically or hemodynamically unstablc tachyar-
rhythrmias). Other conditions require only electrocardiographic monitoring
to uncover arrhytlimias that may requirc future thierapy. Arrhythrmias may
completely resolve when the inciting disorder is identified and corrected
(chapters 28, 33, 34).6-10
 Althoughi felinc arrhythmias are gencrally similar to those reported in
dogs,I. 12 their relative frequency and clinical significancc may be dissimilar.
Acquired cardiovascular discases affecting dogs and cats are narkedly differ-
ent. For example, myocardial diseascs most coimmonly affcct cats, especially
hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy (chapter 28). In contrast, dogs
acquire myxormatous valvular degeneration (chronic atrioventricular valvc
insuficiency), dilated cardiomyopathy, or heartworm disease. Accordingly.
thcsc disorders influcnce the elcctrocardiagran (ECG) and related thera
pics.
CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH
ARRHYTHMIAS
Arrhythmias may be associated with cardiac as well as extracardiac diseases.
Comparison of arrhythmia incidence between dogs and cats has not been
reported. HIowever, it is our experience that cats have a lower incidence of
clinically significant arrhythrmias compared with dogs.
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
Arrhythmias are not usually observed with congenital heart dlisease unless
Imalformations arc severe, pressure or volune overloads are significant,
986
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF FELINE ARRHYTHMIAS 387
TABLE 19-1
Frcquency of Cardiac Arrhythmias: Comparison of Feline Populations with Cardiomyopathy,
 Congestive Hcart Failure, and Thromboembolism*
Arrbythmia Type
AV Node
Supraventricular
Ventricular
Abnormalities
Sinus Node
Cardiomyopathy
Total
SVPC
PSVT
AF
VPC's
PVTachy
Abmormalities
1°/2°
3" AVB
Hypertrophic
205
↓(6+) 01
+(6g) 8
4 (2.0)t
4($6) 61
5(2.4)t
3 (1.5)t
with CHF
5 (6.8)
2 (2.7)
1 (1.4)
11 (14.9)
3 (4.1)
2 (2.7)
with TBE.
3 (9.4)
1 (3.1)
3 (9.4)
10 (31.3)
1 (3.1)
with CIIF & IBE
18
3 (16.7)
6 (33.3)
Inlermediatet
128
12 (9.4)
7 (5.5)
5 (3.9)
(8'97) 86
3 (2.3)
2 (1.6)
2 (1.6)
2 (1.6)
1 (2.1)
2 (4.3)
with CHF
47
7 (14.9)
2 (4.3)
1 (2.1)
18 (38.3)
2 (4.3)
with TBF
19
8 (15.8)
2 (10.5)
5 (26.3)
2 (10.5)
with CIIF & TBE
8
3 (37.5)
1 (12.5)
5 (62.5)
Dilatative
84
6 (7.1)
13 (15.5)
2 (2.4)
14 (16.7)
6 (7.1)
1 (1.2)
with CIIF
51
1 (7.4)
11 (20.4)
1 (1.9)
9 (16.7)
1 (1.9)
with TBE.
2 (66.7)
*(Conseentive feline cascs. Angell Memorial Atimal Hospital (1985-1991).
+Nunbers in parentheses are the percent of cais ir cach yrounp having that arrhythmia.
(chapler 28).
SVPC. supraventricular premalure complexes: PSVT paroxysmal supravenlrieular tachycardiax AF atral hrillation; VPCs, ventirular premature complexes:
PVahyparoxysmal venriuar tachyardi;1°/2frsegre/econd degre3hird derAB,arentricularblck:CIIngestiv hfaile
TBE, throtmbuctmbolism.
exccptions, such as tachyarrhythrmias, rmay acconpany
 [n1 contrast, sevcre leff. axis deviation compatible with
ventricular pre-excitation!4 16 or atrioventricular con-
left anterior fascicular block was recorded in 1ll per-
duction abnormalities associated with atrial or ventric-
cent of HIcM cats but in none of the cats with nyocar-
ular septal defects.6.13
dial failure.
Comparison of Feline Arrhythmias
ACQUIRED HEART DISEASES
Hypertrophic CM vs. Myocardial Failure
CARDIOMYOPATHIES
 HCM (n-46)² Wa MF (n-32)b
Myocardial discases represen1 the most comnon cal-
Sinus Tachycardia
egory of felinc heart. dliscase.1. s. 10. 17 The incidence of
APC'E
PSVT
associated arrhythmias recorded at 1wo large veterinary
Atrial Fibrillation
institutions is illustrated in ‘Table 19-l and Figure
VPC's
1
19-1. Fron a survey at Angell Memorial Animal Hospi-
Paroxys Ventric Tach
tal in Boston (Tablc 19-l), arrhythimias were most
Atrial Standatil
12
coimmonly recorded in the presence of congestive
10 AV Block
hcart failure or thrombocmbolism. Ventricular extra-
LBBB
RBBB
systoles werc most prcvalent, espccially with decoinpen-
LAFB
sated cardiomyopathy. Supravcntricular cxtrasystoles
Other
were the second most comnonly recorded arrhythmia.
% Cats wlth Arrhythmia
%Cats with Arrhythmia
From a survey of feline hypertrophic cardionyopathy
FIGURE 19-1
(HCM) and myocardial failure at the Aninal Medical
Graph contrasting arrhythunias recorded from two populations of
Center in New York17a (Fig. 19-1), ventricular extrasys-
tats at The Animal Medical Center with idiopathic hyperrophie:
toles were recorded in approxirmately onc third
of
cardiomyopathy and myocardial failurc. APCs = atrial premature
.Supraventricular prematurc com-
complexes; PSVT = paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia; VPCs
affected animals.
= venricular prenature complexes; LBBB = left bundle branch
plexes were recorded in 15 to 25 percent of cats from
block; RBBB = right bundle branch block; LAFB : lefl anterior
both groups. First-degree AV block was observed in
fascicular block. (-Data from Fox PR, Liu SK, Maron BJ:
Echocardiographic identification of spontaneously occurring feline
about half the cats froin one population with 1nyocar-
hypertrophie: cardiomyopathy. An animal model of humran diseasc.
dial failure, but in only one cat fron a study of HICM.
Cireulation 92:2615, 1995: "data from Fox PR, unpublished, 1995.)
388 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
HYPERTHYROIDISM
tion may affect ventricular filling, decreasc cardiac pre-
load, and ultimately reduce cardiac outpu1. Most sus-
A wide variety of ECG chianges have been reported
tained tachyarrhythmias increasc cardliac work and
with feline hyperthyroidism'. 2 6, 8. i820 (chapter 34).
associated 1nyocardial oxygcn dcmand in the face of
Arrhythmias are especially prevalent when hyperthy
redluced coronary perfusion. This results in nyocardial
roidism is chronic, associated with severe serun thy-
iscliemia, which can lcad to further rcduction in rmyo-
roid hormone elevation, cardiomegaly, and hear1 fail
urc. Classic ECG changes include sinus tacliycardia
myopathy' of tachycardia.2 Asynchrony between atrial
and ventricular filling and contraction reduces cardiac
(> 0.9 1mV, lcad I1), atrial and venntricular arrhytlrmias,
performance. ILoss of atrial contribution to filling, as
prolongcd QRS duration, shortened Q'T interval, and
caused by atrial fibrillation, may significantly rcduce
intraventricular conduction disturbances, With increas-
cardiac output.* The frequency and duration of ar-
ing clinical awareness and earlier delection of hyper-
rhythinia are additional factors affecting cardiac fumc-
thyroidism, this condition is now generally diagnosed
tion and clinical signs. For cxarmple, very brief parox-
sooner than in those patienis reported in earlier litera-
ysms of tachiycardia or bradycardia (i.e., 2 to 5 sec)
ture. Accordingly, the incidence and severity of ECG
Inay not result in clinical signs, whereas longer or
abnormalities are reduced,
sustained arrhythrnia rmay cause weakness, syncope, or
heart failure.
SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISEASES
Atrial myocardium and thc sinoatrial node are very
GOALS OF ANTIARRHYTHMIC THERAPY
sensitive to effects of elevated potassium.?l Severe hy-
perkalemia causes atrial standstill and a sino-ventricu-
Whien pharmacologic intervention is warranted, thc
lar rhythm (see Figure 33-7) that may be complicated
goals of therapy should be to (1) terminate or suppress
by acidosis and other electrolyte alterations. Hyperka-
symptomatic tachycardia or bradycardia. (2) providc
lemia is a common extracardiac cause of feline arrhyth-
prophylaxis against recurrencc, and (3) reduce ar-
mias. This is most prevalent with urethral obstruction
rhytlimia-associated morbidity and mortality (sce also
from feline lower urinary tract disease, whereas acute
chapter 18). Lnfortunately, few data cxist regarding
renal failurc and hypoadrenocorticisrn are lcss fre-
optimal antiarrhythmic treatment.
qucnt etiologies. Reperfusion following arterial throm-
bocmbolism may represent a mnore common cause of
hyperkalcinia tlian previously rcalized.20a
APPROACH TO THE CAT WITH
ARRHYTHMIAS
CONSEOUENCES OF
ARRHYTHMIAS
Arrhythrmia detcction is hampered by some of the
unique qualities of fclincs and thcir cardiovascular
diseascs. Firstly, compared with dogs, cats display fewer
Arrhythmias are clinically deleterious when they
classic recognizable signs of heart failurc and do not
cause hemodymamic impairment or degenerale in1o
cough with pulmonary edema. Secondly, thicir scclu-
electrically unstable forms.21 Many arrhythmias cause
sive nalure inhibits recognition of excrcise intolcrance.
no perceptible clinical signs. Others result in lethargy,
'Thirdly, syncope and weight loss, common with canine
episodic weakness. syucope, or shock; contribute 10
hiear1 failure, are uncommon with feline cardiac disor-
or exacerbale congestive hear1 failure; or cause sud-
ders.
den death. Coexisting conditions such as acquired or
 HIeart murmurs that accompany feline myocardial
congenital hcart disease or systemic disorders may
 diseases are usually soft and are easily missed during a
heighiten or exacerbate their adversc hemodymainic
hastily conducted physical examination. IDuring auscul-
cffect and contribute to morbidity and mortality.
tation, rapid feline hcart rates may obscure gallop
Certain physiologic variables such as cardiac preload
rhythrms, and they make dliagnosis of tachycardias and
and afterload and inotropic, and lusitropic status will
extrasystoles more difficult tlian in dogs, which have
infuence the clinical effect that an arrhythmia might
slower heart ralcs.
produce (chapters 3, 11). Since cardiac output is the
product of heart rate and stroke volunc, excessively
slow (< 100/min) or rapid (> 280/min) heart rates
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
can redlucc cardiac output, espccially when underlying
myocardial disease is present. Asynergy resulting from
'These are often overlooked and abbreviated, but
lncoordlinatcd atrioventricular activation and contrac
when conducted well, they provide important clucs
389
to the presence of cardiac diseasc (chapter 5). The
STEPS TO ASSIST ARRHYTHMIA
incidence of serious rhythm disturbances increases as
DIAGNOSIS
(e a, s) s a m  s a
Syncopc may be relatcd to advanced atrioventricular
 Diagnosis of some arrhytlimias can be enbianced
block or tachiyarrhytlimia. Intermitten1. claudication or
by certain steps, actions, and observations. Thesc are
acute paresis can result from arterial thromboenbo-
outlined next.
lism, For reasons thiat arc not clear, many cats voinit
 during congestivc heart failure. Physical examination
may disclose evidence of hcart disease, including tacliy-
VAGAL MANEUVERS
 pnca, jugular venous pulses, weak or irregular femoral
Vagal stinulation allows for dynamic modulation of
arterial pulses tha1 vary in strength, cyanotic rmucous
heart rate and AV nodal conduction. Parasympathctic
membrane color, ascitcs and hepatomegaly, and hypo-
sinclude lung
discharge releascs acetylcholine, which slows the sino-
thermia, Auscultatory abnormalities
crackles, muffled heart and lung sounds, heart mur-
atrial (SA) nodal discharge rate and prolongs AV nodal
conduction tine and refracloriness.? In soine arrhyth-
Inur, gallop rhythm, and irregular, slow, or rapid hcart
mias caused by the re-cntry meclianism, increased va-
rate. Duc to thc rapid feline hcart rate, extrasystoles
are usually heard as pauses, not “"extra' beats. In the
gal tone 1nay alter rc-enfry pathway refraclorincss and
absence of clinical signs, evidence of a heart murmur,
tcriminate
the
supravcntricular  tachycardia. Sinus
tachycardia slows gradlually during vagal stinulation
jns spaod mes hr rna ue no ' dos
and returns to thie previous rate wlien the maneuver is
ficient justification for an clectrocardiogram and addi-
discontinued. Vagus-induccd slowing of AV conduction
tional diagnostic tests.
ysum, Ay (sam d) Aanse pee asodxa Aeu
previously unidentifiable P waves from preceding ‘T
MINIMUM DATA BASE
waves by transiently slowing the heart rate. Vagal ma-
neuvers
 performed during simultaneous ECG
re-
'This is modificd by the signalmen1, history, and
cording
g include carotid sinus massage (preferred
physical examination. It generally includes an electro-
method) and eyeball prcssure (rarely efective) (see
cardiogran, thoracic radiographs, echocardiogran,
blood pressure neasurement, and serum thyroxinc
Fig. 18-7). Facial immersion in cold water (dive re∩ex)
and gagging are additional maneuvers uscd in lhu-
(T,) assay. Ancillary tests such as a biochemical profile,
Imans. Vagal mancuvcrs should be avoidcd when ad-
urinalysis, hemogram, Muid cytology, and heartworin
vanced AV block or significant bradyarrhythmias arc
test may be beneficial.
detectedl.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPIIY
PIIYSICAL EXAMINATION FINDINGS:
In1 eupneic cats, the ECG is often recorded with the
AUSCULTATION, PALPATION, AND
cat restrained in right lateral recuunbency (chapter 6).
BLOOD PRESSURE
In fractious animals. a nylon muzzle or an Elizabcthan
collar may be useful, although chemical restraint is
Elevations of jugular venous pressure can reflect
sometimes necessary. Intravcnous ketamine hydrochlo-
increascd righit atrial pressure in right-sidedl CHF. Ah-
ride (1 to 2 mg/kg) provides good short-term imnobi-
normal jugular venous pulsations and associated giant
lization but is arrhythmogenic, cspcially in the pres-
(cannon) α waves inay bc noted with AV dissociation
ence of hearl. failure or thiyrotoxicosis. In dyspneic
and complete AV block when thie right atrium (RA)
 cats, stress must be avoided, and ECG recordings can
contracts against a closed tricuspid valve. During regu-
be made withi thie cat standing or in sternal recum-
lar supraventricular tachycardia, a consistent arterial
bency.
pulse, blood prcssure, and first heart sound arc usually
Because of thc transient nalurc of many arrhyth-
detected. In contrast, tachyarrhythmias causing vari-
mias, a single rhythm strip or twelve-lead ECG re-
able AV conduction (e.g, atrial Gbrilation, atrial flut-
 cording may not disclose the abnormality. Chances for
ter) cause inconstant arterial pulses, changing arterial
deteclion are increased in proportion to the frequency
blood pressure, and differing loudness of thc first 
and duration of recordings. Soinctimes, allowing the
hear1 sound.
cat to stand up with thie ECG leads remaining attached
 n  e  
TIPS AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR ECG
stress. When not successful, lospitalizing thc cat for
frequent rhythn strip recordings may increasc diag-
EVALUATION
nostic opportunitics. Alternatively, ECG telemetry
1S
ELIMINATE ARTIFACT. One Of the greatest causcs of
generally well toleraled, or 24-hour Holtcr recordings
ECG misinterpretation is artifact in the recorded ECG.
may be bcneficial.20a
By positioning the lead wires so they do nol overlap,
 390 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
cross, or lie over the cat, moveiment of these leads and
is present, The standard P-QRS-T relationship is main-
associated mnotion artifact are eliminated. Restraint
tained.
techniques that minimize movement but do not stress
the cat should always be selected.
SINUS NODAL DISTURBANCES
USE CALIPERS, ECG RULERS, AND MAGNIFICATION FOR ECG
ANALysis. The rapid feline hcart rate and low-voltage
ECG CHARACTERisTICs. Dysfunction of thc sinoatrial
ECG complexcs may necessitate careful scrutiny of
(SA) node can reduce the paccmaker discharge rate.
P-QRS-T intervals and measureinents. Often, thcse
resulting in inild slowing to complete absence of SA
cannot bc adequately assessed by unaided visual in-
node activity. The latter causes lack of atrial activation
for one or more beats during the cxpccted sinus
spection.
rhythin and results in a pause recorded on the ECG.
This is called sinus arrest, sinoatrial arrest, or sinus pause.
METICULOUSLY EVALUATE THE ECG. The entire ECG, in-
chuding all leads, should be assessed. One should corn-
It is characterized by a P-P interval that *'straddles*"
pare morphologic fcatures recorded during the ar-
the pause in the rhythin, and which docs not cqual a
rhythmia with similar wave forms recorded during
multiple of the basic P-P interval. Sinoatrial block or
sinoatrial exit block occurs in the presence of "'norimal"
sinus rhythin in the same leads. Careful scrutiny of
,   a s a  pe sxo so
sinus node function but with periodic failure of im-
den' P waves.
pulse conduction from the SA node to the sur-
rounding atrial tissuc. Like sinus arrest, sinoatrial
block causes a pause in the rhythm owing to the ab-
STRESS ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY. Certain arrhyth1mias
sence of a nornally expccted P wave. In contrast,
may be provoked during stress or cxcrcise. Care must
 however, the duration of thc pause is all exact inultiple
be takcn, and this maneuver should be avoided, if
of the basic P-P interval. Differentiating sinmus arrest
 congestive heart failure is present.
from sinoatrial block when sinus arrhythmia is present
is difficult without direct sinus node recordings, an
USF ADDITIONAL DIAGNOSTIC ECG LEADs. In addition tO
invasive and clinically unnecessary procedure.25
a lead II rhythm strip, a 10-lead ECG that includes
precordial chest leads should bc recorded.! These
ET1OLoGIEs. Associated causes are varicd and range
imay contain rnorphologic chies to P-QRS-T complex
 fron systermic and rmetabolic disorders to organic heart
disease. Causes of vagotonia include brachycephalic
 brceds, upper respiratory infection or airway obstruc-
tion, anterior mediastinal masscs, and surgical manipu-
ARRHYTHMLAS: DIAGNOSIS
lations,
AND THERAPY
CLINICAL FEATUREs. Only rarcly are clinical signs at-
tributable to sinus node dysfunction. Occasionally,
lethargy, anorexia, or cpisodic wcakness may be pres-
SINUS RHYTHMS
ent. In most circumstances the condition may go un-
recognized until the cat is presented for a routine visit
NORMA1. SINUs RIIYTHM. In the hcalthy cat, norInal
 or for some unrelated conplaint.
sinus rhythun represents the basic underlying rhythin
(in comparison, sinus arrhythmia is the most common
THERAPY. Treatment of sinus node dysfunction
canine rhythm). ECG characteristics inchude (1) regu-
should be directed at the underlying cause. When it
larly occurring P waves with less than 10 percent varia-
results from cardioactive drugs, lower dosages, alterna-
tion between P and P intervals, (2) a fixed relationship
tive agents, or drug withdrawal should bc: initiated.
between P waves and subsequcnt QRs-T coinplexes.
When sccondary to gcneral anesthesia, reduction of
and (3) a rate of 140 to 220/minute.
alesthetic depth is warranted; if unsuccessfil, a para-
sympatholytic drug such as atropine sulfate or glyco-
SINUs TACHYCARDIA. This is characterized by heart
 pyrrolate may be administcred. Sinus bradycardia rc-
rates grcater than 220/iminute in which the identical
sulting  from  surgical manipulation of  cervical  or
 P-QRS-T rclationships are maintained (sce Figure 6-
cranial mediastinal structures can usually be counter
32).
acted by more gentle tissue handling or use of para-
sympatholytic agents. When sinus node dysfunction
SINUS BRADYCARDIA. When thie dorninant paccInaker
occurs due to organic hcart discase, the response to
originates in the SA node but discharges at less than
 drug therapy is frequently ineffective and unpredict-
140 beats/minute (sce Figure 634), sinus bradycardia
able.
391
SUPRAVENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS
250 to 270/minute. Syncope is occasionally associated
with rapid ventricular rates, especially with hypertro-
ECG CHARACTERIsTIcs. The tern "supravcntricular'
phic cardiomyopathy.
 implies that the site of abnorinal discharge originates
in the atria proximal to the bundle branches, and it is
ATRIAL EXTRASYSTOLES (Fig. 19-2)
used to describe both atrial and AV junctional cetopia.
Thesc arrhythmias generally have in cominon a QRS
These premature coinplexes occur earlicr than cx-
complex that is identical, or almost so, to the normal
 pected with QRs-T conforrmation identical to or very
sinus-generated QRS complex, unless aberrant ventric-
similar to the ormal QRS morphology. Due to carly
ular conduction is present, as occurs with atrial fibril-
 depolarization of the sinus node by thc supravcntricu-
lation.21
 lar premature discharge, the normal sinus paccrnakcr
 Nonenclature varies with respect to classification of
is reset causing a noncompensatory pause (i.c., the two
supraventricular arrhythumias (chapter 6), and some
 P-P intervals encompassing the premature coinplcx are
controversy exists rcgarding terminology. Tachycardias
shorter than the interval mcasured from two normal,
are sometimes differentiated as to whether the QRS
cxpected P-P intervals). The terrn “'supraventricular
complexes are narrow (< 0.045 scc)—i.e., narroo QRS 
 premature complex" is a broader term that includes
tachycardia, Or wide—-i.e., wide QRS tachycardia. Supra-
cxtrasystoles that occur in the atria and AV node.
ventricular is a broad terin that encompasscs arrhyth-
o  ) uisss i on se s o  a
mias originating in the atria or AV node. For the sakc
couplct), or as three or more in a scries (a run).
of clarity, a set of descriptive titles has been proposed
for supraventricular arrhythmias (see Table 6-5).
ATRIAL TACHYCARDIA (Fig. 19-3)
ETIOLoGIEs. Supravcntricular arrhythmias most com-
This tachyarrhythmia is present when four or more
 monly result from conditions causing significant atrial
 supravcntricular prematire complexcs occur in succes-
cnlargement,1. 2 Hypertrophic and restrictive cardiomy-
sion, usually associated with a ventricular rate of 270
 opathies are most cominonly responsible. Congenital
to 400/rminute. It may occur in short bursts or for
heart discases associated with severe volume overload
and cxtracardiac disorders are occasionally causativc.
Congestive hcart failure secms to cnhance the inci-
cncompass arrhythmias originating in the AV node.
dence. Isolated supraventricular extrasystoles are com-
Vagal mancuvers may abolish some tachyarrhythimias
mon in advanced heart disease, whereas tachyarrhyth-
 or unveil P waves.
mias are less frequently detected. The latter miay result
frorm or contribute to the onset of cardiac decompen-
sation,
ATRIAL FLUTTER
Atrial flutter is a rare, generally transienl tachyar-
CLINICAL FEATLREs. Rapid venitricular rates may causc
rhythinia characterized by (l) a rapid atrial rate whose
P waves may display a saw-toothed morphology (flutter
potension, hcart failurc, or collapse. This is somewhat.
waves), and (2) variable atrioventricular conduction
dependent upon underlying cardiac function but is
resulting in recognizable flutter (P) waves with an
more likcly to occur at ventricular rates greater than
irregular ventricular rhythm. Sustained supraventricu-
FIGURE 19-2
Atrial premature complexes (APCs) recorded from
two different cats with hypertrophic cardioinyopathy
(lead II). (A) Prermature P' wave morphology is
slightly different fron the preceding normal P waves.
(B) Prernarure P' wave is inscribed during the end of
the preceding T wave, causing the latter to be
cnlarged andi notched (arrow). The QRS complex is
wider than normal, suggesting LV enlargement. In
each cat, a noncompensatory pause follows the APC.
The QRS morphology of the APCs here are slighrly
different from the normal complexes, suggesting
aberrant conduction. Paper spced, 50 mm/sec;
I cm = I mV.
392ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
11
FIGURE 19-3
EE
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia recorded
from two cats (lead II) with myocardial disease and
severe left atrial enlargement. (A) A paroxyun of 5
extrasystoles follows the second coinplex firon the
left. P' waves are not readily identifiable. (B) APC's
and paroxysnal stpravenrieular tachycardia are
recorded. The premalure P' waves are identifiable
and vary in morphology (compare with the mormal P
waves), suggesting atrial tachyeardia. Paper speed.
50 mm/see: I cm -- 1 mV.
lar tachycardia 1nay be difficult to differentiate from
abscnce of P waves, bradycardia, and an escape rhythm
atrial flutter with a regular, fixed conduction pattcrn
of supraventricular or ventricular morphology.?26
(ie., I:1 or 2:1 conduction). Vagal mancuvers rmay
assist in diagnosis.
THERAPY OF SUPRAVENTRICULAR
ARRHYTHMIAS
ATRIAI. FIBRILLATION (Fig. 19-4)
Isolated supraventricular extrasystoles arc not sup-
This serious arrhythmia is usually associated with
 s   d a a  d ss
cardiomyopathy in which significant atrial enlarge.
compensated myocardial disease and occasionally her
mcnt is prcsent. It is characterized by replacement of
ald cardiac dccornpcnsation. Sustained or synptomatic
normal P waves with irrcgular and chaotic bascline
supraventricular tachycardias are usually trcated. If thie
fluctuatiors (fibrillation waves). Due to varying AV nodal
diagnosis is unccrtain with wide QRS complex tachycardia,
 and ventricular conduction, QRS complex morphology
-aridns qsnsunsp daq aru sanuru esea pen
is often nonuniform. The ventricular rate ray vary
tricular  tachyarrhythmias  with  aberran1.  ventricular
from 150 to 320/minute.
conduction from ventricular tachycardia by slowing
the heart rate and unmasking hidden P waves, or by
PERSISTENT ATRIAL STANDSTILI
terminating the tachycardia.
Vagal maneuvers may temporarily tcrminate certain
This uncommon arrhythmia is usually associated
supraventricular tachycardias. Simus tachycardia may
with severe, long-standing heart discase. There is total
be temporarily slowed but not abolished. Ventricular
FIGURE19-4
Atrial librillation recorded from two cats (lead II) with severe left atrial enlargement assoriated with
lypertrophic (A) and restrictive (B) cardiormyopathy. Both ECG recordings are characterized by an
irregularly irregular tachyeardia willi absence of P waves. (A) The QRS complexes vary due to
aberrant ventricular conducuon (average heart rate, 240/min). (B) With a rapid taclycardia (heart
rate200t/min）R-RnvairrgulariaregnrallyssntiablPaprd
50 mm/sec; I cm = 1 mV.
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF FELINE ARRHYTHMIAS 393
tachyarrhythimias arc nonresponsive to vagal maneu-
receptor blockers, or as monotherapy. Diltiazcrn has
vers.
been thc most widely used agent and is usually dosed
Digoxin is usually administered for persistent supra-
at 7.5 mg bid to tid orally. As monotherapy, however,
ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Oral digoxin, 0.031 mg
it rarely reduces the ventricular rate with atrial fibrilla-
(i.c., one fourth of a 0.125-mg tablet) daily or every
tion.
other day for an average-sized cat+ is usually combined
Chronic managemcnt for tachyarrhythmias should
with a β-adrenergic blocker or a calcium channel
be planned with cornplete knowlcdge of thc underly-
blocker, Doses are titrated to effect in order to reduce
ing heart disease and gcneral health status. Treatment
thc ventricular rate or abolish the tachyarrhythmia.
must be tailored to meet individual paticnt necds.
Due to renal elimination, kidncy faihure will rceduce
Control of the heart failure may itself be cffective in
excretion and increase serum digoxin concentra
terminating or controling tachyarrhythmias.
tion.2z7 v Steady state digoxin blood lcvcls are usually
rcached after approximately 7 to 10 days. Anorexia
and deprcssion are early signs of toxicity. ECG cvi-
dence of digoxin toxicosis generally includes first-de-
VENTRICULAR PRE-EXCITATION
gree AV block, although clinical toxicity may precede
(Fig. 19-5)
block, bradycardia, and arrhythmias.
Ventricular pre-cxcitation syndrome occurs when an
Calcium channel blockers slow AV nodal conduction
inpulsc bypasses the AV node and activates the wholc
and have becn used with digoxin. with beta-adrenergic
or some portion of the atriun or ventricle carlier than
FIGURE 19-5
Ventricular pre-excitation rccorded
from a clinically normal cat. The PR
interval is very short because the sinus
originated impulse is condueted
through an accessory pathway. bypassing
the AV noie and its associated
conduction delay.The QRS complexes
are wide andl talil. Slurring ol' the R wave
upstroke is difficult to see but is
suggested in Iead I. Paper speedi 25
tm/sec for all leads cxcept lead I1
rhythm strip (50 mm/see); 1 cm -
I imV.
RRY
nr000000000
 394ABNORMAI. CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
Aq asndu! au jo ssessed Aq panedionue sq pinom 
blockers, and calcium channel blockers prolong AV
way of the norinal conduction pathways. A number of
nodal conduction time and refractoriness. Ncither β-
abcrrant conncctions responsible for this syndroinc
blockers nor calcium channel blockers directly affect
have bcen reported.16 In the Wolff-Parkinson-White
conduction through accessory pathways, However, digi-
(WPw) syndrome, abnorimal accessory atrioventricular
talis can shorten refractoriness in accessory pathways
pathways (Kent's bundles) connect atria and ventri-
and deleteriously speed ventricular conduction; there-
fore, it should not be uscd. Drugs that prolong refrac-
wholly short-circuit the AV node, resulting in acceler-
toriness in accessory pathways (e.g., quinidine, pro-
ated AV conduction. These include atrio-His or atrio-
cainarmide) have been advocated in humans but have
fascicular tracts? and Mahain's fhers, which pass di-
not been well-studied in cats. We have occasionally
rectly from the A-V node to the ventricle. Both the
administered oral procainamide and quinidine in sc-
atrioventricular and atriofascicular varieties have heen
lected cases. Catheter or surgical ablation 1may he pur-
reported in the cat.: 14-16. 92
sued at highly specialized centers if oral drug therapy
is ineffective.l
ECG CHARACTERISTIcs. Ventricular pre-excitation may
produce different ECG changes depending on the lo-
cation and arrangement of acccssory AV pathways.
ATRIOVENTRICULAR NODE
DYSFUNCTION (Fig. 19-6)
usually less than 40 mscc; frequently, the PR seginernt
is totally missing or the P wave is transcribed at the
base of the R wave upstroke; (2) the QRS configuration
Normal atrial inpulses travel by specific internodal
can vary bascd upon position of abnorimal AV path-
tracts to the AV node, where impulse conduction is
way(s) and the relative rates of AV conduction betwecn
slowed before progressing through the bundle of His
abnorrmal and normal AV conduction pathways. The
to the bundle branches and Purkinje system. The AV
QRS interval is normal in the atriofascicular form hut.
node is subdivided into the AN (atrionodal), the X
is prolongcd in the other forms of pre-excitation.
(nodal), and the NH (nodal-His bundle) rcgions. Pro-
When the QRS interval is prolongedl, some lcads may
gressive slowing of conductions begins in the AN re-
show a slowly rising, shurred QRS upstrokc, kuown as
gion and reaches a maximun in the N region. Then,
a delta wave, (3) intermittent or sustained tachyarrhyth-
rmias, terimed AV rc-entrant, circus movement, or recip-
gion as the His bundle is approached,31 This slowed
rocating tachycardia, may be prcsent. Orthodromic AV
tachycardia is the 1nost common cause of reciprocating
ization and contraction, thereby obtaining maximal
tachycardia. It consists of a circuit initiated by norinal
 preload allowing atrial contribution to ventricular fll-
AV condhuction through the AV node, His' bundle.
 ing, and somewhat inhibits conduction of rapid, atrial
and the bundle branches, with subsequent retrograde
arrhythmias to the ventricles. Atrioventricular nodal
ventriculoatrial (VA) conduction back to the atria by
abnormalities cause conduction impediment, called
the abnormal AV pathway.
hcart block. Thcse may be characterized as incoinplete
(1° and 2") and complete (3°) AV block.
CLINICAL. FEATUREs. Most affected cats have no clinical
signs, Occasionally. paroxysimal or sustaincd tachycar-
ECG CHARACTERISTICs. Atrioventricular block causcs
 dia may occur with associated lethargy, anorexia, epi-
delay of impulse conduction through the AV node or
sodic weakness, or collapse. The ECG waveforms may
interruption of clectrical impulses from the atria to
 appear as wide-complex tachycardia and thus resemble
the ventricles. Depending on lesion severity, the block
venntricular tachycardia, making correct diagnosis chal-
may be incomplete (1° or 2°) or complete (3°).
lenging.
FRSTDECREE AV BLOCK (Fig. I9-6A). Atrioventricular
THERAPY OF VENTRICULAR PRE-EXCITATION
conduction is slowed as evidenced by PR interval pro
Unless clinical signs or significant. tachyarrhythmias
longation (>0.09 sec), but all impulses are conducted
arc present, therapy is not advocated. Cats with symp
though the AV node into the ventricles. A consistent
1:1 relationship is present between P waves and QRS-
tomatic tachyarrhythimias should reccive an initial va-
gal manenver. If ineffective, judicious intravenous ad-
I complexes.
ministration   of  diltiazem  or  veraparnil  may
he
attermpted and can be coupled with repeated vagal
SECOND-DECREE AV BLOCK (Fig. 19-6B, C; sec also Figure
maneuvcrs. If still  ineffective, thcn antiarrhythinic
6-20). There is failure of onc or more atrial irmpulses
agents that depress conduction in abnormal pathways
to conduct to the ventricles. Two forms of 2° AV
can he administered. Adcnosine, digoxin, β-adrenergic
block occur:
FIGURE 19-6
Exanples of different forms of hearl block from four cats (lead U). (A) First-degree (1°) AV block in
a cat withhyperrophirdionyopathyThePRral measure 0msec,whichs prolonged
(norrmal is ≤ 90 msec). Heart. rate is approximately 135/min, These changes were due to β-
adrenergic blocker (propranoloi) therapy. (B) Second-degree (2°) AV block (Mobitz I1) in a cat with1
right bundle branchblock.There is intermittent block ofatrioventricular conduction as cvidenced
by P waves (P) without QRS complexes. The PR intervals are constant. (C) Adivanced (high-grade) 2
AV block in a cat with syncope. (D) Complete (3°) AV block recorded from a cat. with acute
lethargy. There is no rclationship between P waves and QRs-I complexes. A ventricular cscape
rhythm (approximately 100/min) is present,
(1)Mobitz's Type I (Wenchebach's phenomenon) 2°AV
ETIOLoGIEs. A variety of prinary cardiac and cxtra-
block is characterized by progressive PR interval pro-
cardiac factors can be responsible (see Table 19-1).2. 3.
longation until a beat is "dropped'" (i.e., a P wave is
12. 3 First-degree AV block and Mobitz's Type I second-
present without an associated QRs-T complex) (see
 degree AV block may result from anesthetic agents, β-
Figure 6-20).
adrenergic receptor blockers, calcium channcl block-
(2) Mobitz's Type II 2° AV block shows a fixed P-R
crs (high doses), and digitalis glycosides. First-degree
interval in conducted impulscs with occasional faihure
AV block is the most common ECG abnorrmality rc-
of AV conduction (i.e., P wave without associated QRS-
corded in cats with idiopathic nyocardial failure, The
T complex) (Fig. 19-6B),
remaining forms of 2° and 3° AV block more frequently
result from organic heart disease, especially myocardial
In advanced 2° AV btock, two or more successive P
disorders.
wavcs are blocked (Fig. 19-6C). For exa1mplc, in 3:1
Clinically  significant.  bradyarrhythirmias  are  rare.
AV block, three P waves occur to each QRs-T complex.
When they occur, it is usually with organic heart dis-
The P-R interval of conducted beats is usually constant
ease (cardiomyopathy). Associated pathology includes 
but tends to be prolonged.
myocardial ischemia, infarction, fibrosis, or conduc-
tion tissue infiltration. These changes cause sinus node
TIRDDEGREE AV BL.OCK (Fig. 19-6D) represents total
dysfunction or disruption of the atrioventricular con-
disruption of atrioventricular conduction. The atria
duction pathways. In other cases, bradyarrhythmias re-
and the ventricle beat indepcndently of one another
sult fron severe systemic or metabolic illness.
at their own intrinsic rates. The ventricular rate is
usually substantially slower than the atrial ratc and
CLINICAL FEATUREs. Advanced 2° and 3° AV block may
usually ranges from 60 to 100/rminute. Its QRST con-
be associated with lethargy, episodic weakness, or syn-
figuration varics and is dependent upon the origin of
copc. In some cats with significant pre-cxisting cardiac
the ventricular pacemaker tissue.8-37
disease, the onset of advanced AV block may reduce
396ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
cardiac output and precipitate clinical signs or cxacer-
VENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS
bate heart failure. Advanced 2° AV block tends to
(Figs. 19-7, 19-8, 19-9)
clinical signs over time.
Ventricular extrasystoles and tachycardias are the
Inost common feline arrhythmias (Fig. 19-1; sce Table
19-1). α They originate distal to the bundle of His
THERAPY OFATRIOVENTRCULAR BLOCK
inl cither specialized condhuction tissues, ventricular
rnyocardial fibers, or both. Sustaincd or multifocal ven-
 Iatrogenic AV block caused by digoxin, β-adrencrgic
tricular tachycardia possesses a grcat potential for clcc-
blockers, or calcinum channel blockers may rcquire
trical instability, or it may deteriorate into hemodynam-
 dosage reduction or drug withdrawal. When hemody-
ically unstable ventricular flutter (Fig. 19-9A) and
namically significant AV block occurs under heavy se-
fibrillation (Fig. 19-9B).
 dation or general ancsthesia, anesthetic reduction or
Harcotic antagonist reversal is indicated. Parasympatho-
ET10LoGIEs. Both cxtracardiac and primary cardiac
lytic agents nay bc uscd in these circumstances if
disordcrs cause ventricular cxtrasystolcs. Prirnary car-
anesthetic reduction is unsuccessful. Short-term man-
diomyopathies represent the most comnon form of
agcment of symptomatic AV block can be attempted
associated hcart diseases,I 2 3 ID whereas hyperthyroid-
with intravenous constant rate infusion of a sympatho-
isin is the most frequently encountered form of see-
mimetic agent (isoproterenol, 0.02 to 0.04 μg/kg/
 ondary inyocardial disease.-* Ventricular ectopia is in-
min, or dopamine, 2-7 μg/kg/min [beware of a pres-
crcascd  with congestive heart failure.
Systemic
sor cffect at higher dosesl) or parasympatholytic drug
thrormbocmbolism, infarction, and aging are also as-
(atropine sulfate, 0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg: glycopyrrolatc,
sociated with incrcascd cctopia.
0.005 to 0.01 ng/kg). but these agents rarely enhance
AV conduction or reverse clinical signs. Temporary
ECG cHARACTERISTIcs. Ventricular extrasystoles (1) are
transvenous cardiac pacing may provide hemodynainic.
premature bcats: (2) have abnormal morphology
stabilization. Permanent paceimaker therapy is the only
whose cctopic QRS complex is wide (> 65 mscc),
 dependable trcatinent for the long-term management
 aisoo m  oiei r m des u a
of symptomatic AV block (chapter 20),3G-x When AV
rected from the najor QRs deflection; (3) are dissoci-
conduction abnormalities result frorn organic hcart.
ated from atrial activity (i.e., not conducted from a P
discasc, neither the underlying disorder nor the AV
wave); (4) may produce fusion beats (uncommonly in
block is usually reversible. Exceptions include secon-
cats compared with dogs); and (5) usually produce a
dary myocardial disorders  related  to  thyrotoxicosis
Xuis snooo Aeu Aau.1. (vL-61 3tg) asnpd (uorpsuaduom
(chapter 34), taurine deficicncy (chapters 28, 32), and
 in pairs, or triplcts (Fig. 19-7B, 19-84). Four or more
other noncardiac conditions (chapter 33). First-dcgrcc
successive complexes constitute ventricular tachycardia
AV block and uncormplicated second-degree AV block
(Fig. 19-8B, C). The QRS morphology can vary consid-
do not require specific trcatnent as they cause no
crably according to sitc of origin, pathway of ventricu-
 hemodynamic instability. Periodic ECG monitoring is
lar depolarization, and factors affecting the ventricular
advised.
conduction systein.
FIGURE 19-7
(A) Ventricular premature compiex (VPC) recorded
from a cat. with restrictive cardiomyopathy. The VPC
isan carly.ctopic conplex that is wie and bizarre
and has a large T wave oriented opposite to thc QRS
defletion. A rompensatory pause follows the VPC.
Lead I1: paper spced, 50 immn/see; I cn 1 inV. (B)
Mnltifocal VpCs recorded from a hyperthyroid cal
sedated with ketamine hydrochloride. I.ead Il; paper
speed, 25 mm/sec; 1 cm = I mV.
DLAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF FELINE ARRHYTHMIAS
397
FIGURE 19-8
Ventricular tachyeardia (VT) recorded from three
cats with nyocardial disease (lead II). (A) A shorl
paroxysm recorded in an otherwise asymptomatic cat.
址
Noticc theP waveimmediately preceding eachVPC
{armas). These sinus-initiated P waves are not
conducted to the ventricles and have no relationship
to the following QRS complexes. This atrioventricular
dissociation is a characteristic of venuricular
cxtrasystoles. Paper speed, 25 mm/sec; 1 cm = 
InV. (B) Paroxysnal VT recorded Irom a cat. with
restrictive cardiomyopathy. The basic underlying
arrhythmia is atrial fibrillation.A fusioncomplex
(urm) fallows the paroxysm of VT. Paper speed, 25
mm/sec; 1 cm =
( mV. (C) Sustained ventricnlar
tachycardia recorded fron a cat with dilated
cardiomyopathy. The rhythm is regular with a
ventricuiar heart rate of 200/min.QRS-T complexes
are wide and bizarre. Some P waves can be observed
partially *"hidden' in the T waves, which confers a
small notch or hump to the T wave (atrioventricular
dissociation). Paper speed, 50 mm/se; I cm =
I miV.
CLINICAL FEATUREs. Vcntricular extrasystoles are fre
namic cffect, particularly when advanced nyocardial
qucntly associated with underlying heart discase. Occa
failure is present. Ventricular tachycardia may exacer-
sional ventricular prcmature contractions (VPCs) arc
bate or worscn congestive heart failure and cause cpi-
commonly detected in older cats and are probably
sodic wcakcss, collapse, or sudden death. It is gener-
 prcsent in most animals with cardiomyopathy. Occa-
ally treated regardless of cause.
sional extrasystolcs cause no hemodynamic inpair-
 Inent or instability and require no treatment. However,
thcy are generally decmcd more important when
THERAPY OF VENTRICULAR ARRIIYTHMIAS
multifocal or frequent in nature, although no studics
 For nonsymptomatic arrhythinias, thorough patient.
have verified them as an increased risk factor in cats.
evaluation is advised to identify potentially reversible
When frcqucnt VPCs accompany severe functional car-
systeinic or metabolic causes, and to assess underlying
diac derangement, they contribute a negative hemody-
cardiac structure and function. Many cats with occa-
sional ventrcular extrasystoles or short-lived, paroxysmal
tachycardia require no therapy. Trcatment of asymp-
tomatic cats is discouraged.
 In contrast, suppressive pharmacologic therapy is
indicated if the arrhythmia is (l) electrically unstable
(c.g. multifocal VPCs; R on 'I phenomcnon in which
the R wave of the VPC falls in the vulnerable portion
 of the preceding T wave; or sustained ventricular tachy-
cardia); or (2) hemodymamically unstable (i.c., causes
lethargy, episodic wcakness, hypotension, syncopc,
shock, or congestive heart failure). Suppression of all
extrasystoles is usually not possible or necessary. Treat-
ment of hcart disease should be optimized according
to the cat's individual requireinents. Every attcmpt
FIGURE 19-9
should be made to identify an underlying or precipitat-
Hemodynamically and clectrically unstable ventricular arrhythmias.
ing etiology for the arrhythmia, such as hyperthyroid-
(A) Ventricular flutter (>320/min) characterized by a continnous
ism, when heart failure is not causativc. Closc commu-
wave form, with inability to differentiate P-QRs-T waves. With onset.
nication with the owner and regular paticnt follow-up
of' this arrhythmia the cat bccame moribund, hypotensive. and
tachypneic. (B) Coarse ventricular fibrilkation recorded dumring
are important.
cardiac arrest. Oscilations are rapid and bizarre and lack any
rccognizable morphology, This arrhythmia is associated with total
uu pg paas ioded tomeorp pue mdano sepie jo toess
VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA OR MULTIFOCAL VPCS. Initial
set: I ctul = I mV.
emcrgency pharmacologic therapy for life-thrcatening.
 398ABNORMA1. CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
sustained ventricular tachycardia consists of lidocaine
clinical and laboralory findings in hyperthyroid cats
HCl, 0.25 to 1 mg/kg IV over 5 mimutes, or in a I-mg
from 1982-1992. J An Vet Med Assoc 206:302, 1995
8.Fox PR, Pctcrson ME、 Broussard JD. Electrocardio-
bolus (up to a total of 4 mg for an average-sized cat).2
graphic and radiographic changes in cats with hyperthy.
/8 00% 01 0g 10 ‘sn[oq A1 8y/8d 00g 01 0g 10lous]
roidism: Comparison of populations evaluated during
kg constant rate infusion, may be added or uscd as
1979-1982 vs. 1992-1993. J Ain Anirm Hosp Assoc (in
1nonotherapy. This ultra short-acting β-blockcr may be
prcss)
tirated to cffect, A high sympathetic tonc may require.
9. Fox PR, Nichols CER. Cardiovascular involvemenl in1
larger doses. The cffcts on heart rate after singular
systemic disease. fn Fox PR (ed). Caninc and Felinc
Cardiology. Ncw York, Churchill Livingstone, 1988, p 565
 IV boluses nay be less than a minute, depending upon 
10. Fox PR. Feline myocardial discasc. In Fox PR (cd). Ca-
 dose and prevailing autonomic tone. If lidocaine or 
ninc and Fclinc Cardiology. New York, Churchill Living-
esmolol are ineffective, striking the chest over the left
stone, 1988, p 467
1]. Tillcy LP. Fssentials of Canine and Feline Echocardiogra-
precordium (thumpversion) 1nay occasionally termi-
phy. 3rd ed. Philadclphia, 1.ca & Febigcr, 1992
nate the arrhythmia, presumably by mechanically in-
12.
Edwards Nj. Bolton's Handbook of Caninc and Fclinc
ducing a premature ventricular cxtrasystole that inter-
Elcctrocardiography. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
rupts the re-entrant pathway.
ders, 1987
 Chronic oral maintenance therapy, when required,
13. Fox PR. Congcnital feline heart disease. In Fox PR (ed).
is usually limited to β-adrenergic blockers such as pro
Canine and Felinc Cardiology. Ncw York, Churchill Liv-
pranoloi (2.5 to 10 mg every 8 to 12 hours) or atenolol 
ingstone, 1988, p 391
14. Hil BL, Tiley LP. Ventricular prccxcitation in seven
(6.25 to 12.5 ng evcry 12 to 24 hours). Occasionally,
dogs and nine cats. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 187:1026, 1985
procainamidc (3 to 5 mg/kg every 8 to 12 hours) is
15. Ogburn PN. Ventricular prccxcitation (WolfParkinso11-
added when monotherapy is ineffective and arrhyth-
wiite syndrome) in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
mia suppression is decmed critical.
13:171,1977
16. Prystowsky EN, Miles WM, Heger l], Zipes DP. Prccxcita-
tion syndrome. Mcchanism and manageinent. Med Clin
North Am 68:831.1984
INTRAVENTRICULAR
17. Sisson DD, Thomas WP. Myocardial discascs. In Etinger
SJ, Feldman EC (cds). Textbook of Veterinary Internal
CONDUCTIONABNORMALITIES
Mcdicine. 4th ed, Vol 1. Philadclphia, WB Saunders,
1995. p 995
17a. Fox PR, Liu SK, Maron Bj. Echocardiographic identifi-
cation of spontancously occurring feline hypertrophic
Cats with blunt thoracic trauna wcre reported to
cardionyopathy: An animal model of human discasc.
develop intravcntricular conduction defects from 24
Circulation 92:2645, 1995
18. Liu S-K, Pcterson ME, Fox PR. Hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy and hyperthyroidism in the cat. J Am Vet Mcd
necrosis was demonstrated in a small numher of af
Ass0c 185:52,1984
fected cats."
19. Jacobs G, Hutson C, Dougherty,J, ct al. Congcstive hcart
failurc associated with hyperthyroitdism in cats., I Ain Vet
Med Assoc 188:52, 1986
20. Pctcrson ME, Keerne B. Ferguson DC, Pipers FS. Elcciro-
REFERENCES
cardiographic findings in 45 cats witlh hyperrhyroidism.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:934, 1982
20a. Fox PR, Moisc NS, Pricc RA, et al. Analysis of contin-
Ous ECG (Holter) monitoring in normal cats and cardio.
1. Harpster NK Felinc arrlytlmias: Diagnosis and manage-
myopathic cats in hcart failurc (Abstracl). J Vet Int Med
ment. In Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD (eds). Current Vetcri-
12:199, 1998
21. Zipes DP. Spccific arrhythmias: Diagnosis and trcatment.
732
2. Fox PR, Kaplan P. Feline arrhythmias. Contcmporary
In Braunwald F (cd). IIcart Discase. A Textbook of
Cardiovascular Medicine, 4th ed. Philadclphia, WB Saun-
 Issucs in Small Animal Practice. Vol 7 (Cardiology). New
ders, 1992, p 675
York, Churchill Livingstone, 1987, p 251
22. Packer DL, Bardy GH, Worlcy SJ. ct al. lachycardia-
3. Fox PR, Tillcy 1P, liu S-K. The cardiovascular system,
induced cardiomyopathy. A reversible form of left vcn-
In Pratl Pw (ed). Felinc Medicinc. Santa Barbara, CA,
tricular dysfunction. Am J Cardiol 57:363, 1986
American Vctcrinary Publications, 1983, p 249
23. Sisson DD. Brown W, Riepe R. Hemodynamic effccts of
4. Fox PR. Fclinc myocardial diseases. 18th Annual Wal.
tham/OsU Symposium. Vernon, CA, wallham U!SA, Inc.
mitral regurgitation; (Abstract). Proccedings of the 13th
1994. p 119
Annual Veterinary Mcdicinc Forum of ihe American
5. Harpstcr NK. The cardiovascular systcm. In Holzworth J
Collegc of Veterinary Internal Medicinc, 1995, p 1015
(cd). Discascs of the Cat. Vol 1. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
24. Mchta D. Wafa S, Ward DE、 Camin AJ. Relative efficacy
ders, 1987, p 909
 of various physical manocuvres in the lermination of
6. Peterson ME, Kintzcr PP, Cavanagh PG, et. al. Felinc
junctional tachycardia. 1ancet l(8596):1181, 1988
hyperthyroidism. Pretrcatmcnt clinical and laboratory
25.1
Fiscli C. Electrocardiographic manifestations of exit
cvaluation of 131 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:103,
block. In Zipes DP, Jalefe J (eds). Cardiac Electrophysiol.
1983
ogy: From Cell to Bedside. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
7. Broussard JD, Pctcrson ME, Fox PR. Changes in thc
1990, p 628
399
26. Tilley LP, liu S-K. Persistcnt atrial standstill in the dog
Functional properties of the atrioventricular conduction
and cat; (Abstract). Scientific Proceedings of the Aineri-
system. Circ Rcs 13:308, 1963
can Collcge of Vcterinary Intcrnal Medicinc. New York,
34. Pacs dc Carvalho A. Excitation of thc atriovcntricular
1983
node during normal rhythm. Effects of acetylcholine. In
27. Atkins CE, Snyder PS, Keenne BW, et al. Effects of com-
Dreifus 1., Likoff W (eds). Mechanisms and Therapy of
pcnsated hcart failure on digitalis pharmacodynamics in
Cardiac Arrhythmias. New York, Grune & Stralton. 1966.
cats. J An1 Vet Mcd Assoc 195:945, 1989
p341
28. Erichsen DF, Harris SG, Upson DW. Therapcutic and
35. Harpster NK. Cardiovascular discases of the cat. Adv Vet
toxic plasma concentrations of digoxin in thc cat. Am J
Sci Comp Mcd 21:39, 1977
Vet Res 41:2049, 1978
36. Stamoulis ME., Bond BR, Fox PR. Paceinaker therapy for 
29. Wolff L, Parkirson J, white PD. Bundle branch block
symptomatic bradycardia in thc cat. I Vet Emerg Crit.
with short P-R intcrval in hcalthy young_pcople pronc
Care 2:67, 1992
t0 paroxysual tachycardia. Am Hcart J 5:685, 1930
37. Fox PR, Moisc NS, Woodficld J, Darkc PGG. Techniqucs
30. Gallagher J, Scaly wC, Anderson RW, et al. Cryosurgical
and complications of pacemaker implantation in four
ablation of accessory atrioventricular conncctions: A
cats. J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 199:1742, 1991
method for correction of the preexcitation syndrome.
 38. Darkc PGG, McAreavey D, Beem M. Transvenous cardiac
Circulation 55:471, 1977
*16k0g 1oeig uuy eus  mes I pue ssop 61 u1 Buioed
31. Lown B, Ganong WF, lcvine SA. The syndrome of short
1989
P-R interval, normal QRS complexcs and paroxysmal
39. Colcolough Hl. A comparative study of acutc: myocardial
rapid heart action. Circulation 5:693, 1952
infarction in the rabbit, cat and miain. Comp Biochem 
 32. Fleckncll PA, Gruffydd-Honcs ELC, Brown CM, ct al. A
Physiol 49A:12l, 1974
casc of suspcctcd ventricular precxcitation in thc cat. I
40. Schmokcl HG, Krinkc M, Mcier D, ct. al. Intravcntriku-
Small Anim Pract 2:57, 1979
larc Errcgungsleitungsstorungen rach eincn Thorax-
33. Hoffman BF, Moore EN, Stuckey JH, Cranefeld PF.
trauma bei der Katzc. Klcintierpraxis 40:733, 1995
Pacemaker Therapy
20
N. SYDNEY MOiSE
INDICATIONS FOR PACING
BRADYARRHYTHMIAS
 Symptomatic bradycardia is the primary indication for pacemakcr therapy
in dogs and cats.I-# Although veterinary guidelines have not been cstablished
for animal paccmaker implantation, the indications are similar to thosc
(AV) block and sick sinus syndrome (SsS) associated with bradycardia alone,
or with the bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome (chapter 18). Less common
bradyarrhythmia indications for pacing are persistent atrial standstill and
high-grade second-degree (2°) atrioventricular block. Iligh-grade block indi-
cates that many P waves are not conducted to the ventricles (chapter 6).
Developmcnt of clinical signs depeuds upon many factors, including
whether the bradyarrhythmia is coustant or itermittent, the slowncss of the
associated ventricular hcart rate, the overall hcalth of the pct, ad severity
of underlying cardiac disease, if present. Clinical signs may include lethargy.
exercise intolerance, and syncope. In some animals, congestive heart failure
(CHF) can develop, causing dyspnca, tachypnea, coughing, ascites, and
progressive weakness. Experimental elffecis of 3° AV block in dogs provide
importait. clinical insights and implications for therapy. Ventricular dilatiol1
occurs acutely, followed by eccentric hypertrophy in chronic stages. Conges-
tive heart failure develops after 4 months of 3° AV block. Some animals
develop syncope because of poor cerebral circulation when bradycardia is
intermitteint and profound.
Some animals with bradyarrhythrmias do not cxhibit overt clinical signs at
pacemaker implantation cannot be made solely on their presence or ab-
sence. One must. also take into account the severity of the rhythm disorder.
its likelihood to degencrate, and the potential conscquences of the related
worst. case scenario. Frequently, owners remark that their pets display re
newed energy and heightened levels of activity after successful pacemaker
therapy.
WHAT DEGREE OF BRADYCARDIA REQUIRES PACINC. The degree of bradycardia
at which pacemaker therapy is required varies betweenl dogs aid cats, and
cvci1 among canine breeds (Fig. 20-1). Cats with 3° AV block frequenitly
havc juctional and ventricular escape rhythrm rates of at lcast 100 bcats/
min and sometimcs cxcceding 110 beats/min (Fig. 20-2). When1 these rates
arc sustained, mauy affected cats do not become symptomatic and may 11ot
requirc a pacermaker. However, cats with sustained hcart rates of less thal1
 90 beats/min are usually lethargic or may devclop CHF. In contrast, dogs
and 60 beats/min, and these rates may decrcase over time. This same
400
PACEMAKER THERAPY 401
FICURE 20-1
Electrocardiograns recorded
from dlogs with synptoratic
bradyarrhythmias. Paper spced,
50 nm/see. t mV = 1 cm. (A)
High-grade second-degrce (2°)
AV block. The scond P wave
frorm thc lefl ronelucts through
the AV node. resulting in a QRS
T complex. Then, five successive
I waves are blocked
(nonconclucted); the next. (sixth)
P wave again conducts and a
QRS-T complex is recorded. (B)
Third-degrec (3°)[complete] AV
block. Most dogs with 3° AV
block have a stablc escape
rhythm grcater than 30 beats/
minute, although soime have long
periods of ventricular asystole as
illustrated here. This dog
cxperienced houts of ventrieular
asystole for as long as 20 seconds,
requiring ermergeney pacing. (C)
Atrial lutter/fibrillation in this
dog was associaled with very slow
conduction through the AV
 node, resulung in bradlycardia
andl weakness. (ID) Sick sinus
syndrome was characterized by
long sinus pauses. Ventrieular
cscape beats rescue the hcart
froni ventricular asystole.
5 second pause
B
PPP
VE
VE
FIGLRE 20-2
Electrocardiograuns recorded from cats with bradyarrhythmias. (A) 3” AV block in an asyinptounatic.
cat with a stable and consistent escape rhythun (107 heats/inin). This cat did not. clinically require
pacing. Paper spced, 50 mm/scc. 1 mV
1 cm. P. P wavc. (B) Holter (24-hour ambulatory FCG)
reeording from a cat with frequent syncope and high-gracde 2" Av block. Xotice the interuirtent
periods without AV nodal conduction, P waves (P) without associated QRS complexes are scen affer
ventricular asystole. Sotice the faster sinus rate that follows the prolonged ventricuar pause. This
occurred in response to the drop in arterial blood pressure owing to loss of cardiac output during
the AV block. (C) 3° AV block in a cat with a slow ventricular escapc (VE) rhythum and oceasional
premature ventricular complexes (PVC). Syncope oecurred every 10 minutes., The cat had umderlying
hypertrophie cardioryopathy hut survived without clinical sigms for 10 months after pacermaker
implantatiom. Paper speed, 25 mm/sec. 1 mV = 1 cm.
402ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
syncopc, or CHF when venntricular rates are below 40
(Holter rmonitoring) to discover what arrhythmia is
beats/min. when ventricular escape rates fal below 25
present and determine whether the arrhythmia is com-
 bcats/min, clinical signs of low-output failure are usul-
 patible with and temporally associated with clinical
ally sevcre, and these cases become emergencies re-
signs.
quiring immcdiate pacemaker implantation or emer-
gency pacing.
 Often, a ventricular cscape heart rate will decline
SPECIFIC CANINE BRADYARRHYTHMIAS
over time, especially if it is low in the first place (c.g..
AND CONDITIONS
<40 beats/min in dogs, <l00 bcats/min in cats).
Therefore, it is the rate of thc cscape rhythm from
THIRD-DEGREE (COMPLETE)
subsidiary paccmakers that in part determines the criti-
ATRIOVENTRICULAR BLOCK
cal need for pacing. Escape rhythm rates vary de-
pending on whcther they originate from junctional
The ideal candidate for pacemaker thcrapy is the
tissue or from more distal ventricular (Purkinje) sites.
animal whose arrhythmia is clearly associated with clin-
The latter has thc slower rate of diastolic depolariza-
ical signs and without underlying myocardial or valvu-
tion and thercfore produces a slower heart. rate.
lar disease, such as in dogs with congenital 3° AV block.
However, most animals that. require pacemaker therapy
 SINUs PAusEs. The clinical significance of sinus pauses
are mature animals with acquired 3° AV block and
is determincd by the hreed of dog and the circum-
possibly underlying cardiac discasc. These adult. alni-
stances during which sinus pauses occur (sec Fig. 20-
mals may have other systemic, mctabolic, or respiratory
1). For cxample, large-breed dogs during slecp nor-
conditions that increase their anesthetic risk. A large
 /q o s m s sa ss s  
 LV stroke volume results from prolonged diastolic fil-
sinus pauses lasting 5 seconds with only occasional
ing time combined with incrcased rmyocyte strctch.
ventricular escape complexes, However, such slow rates
Consequently, the femoral artery pulses arc cxcced-
during normal activity are unacceptable. Brccds with
ingly strong. The jugular veins may be distended due
high vagal to1e (c.g., bulldog, boxer) frequently have
to right-sided heart. failure, and jugular pulses may be
pronouced sinus arrhythmias, with sinus pauses last-
seel1 when atria and ventricles contract asynchrouously
ing 1 to 3 seconds at rest. Such a finding in these dogs
(atrioventricular dissociation is prcscnt with 3° AV
is usually normal. In humans and cats, whe an R-R
block). Low-grade systolic murmurs may be auscultated
interval exceeds twice the prcvious R-R interval,
:thic
ovcr the mitral arnd tricuspid valve areas. Prerenal azo
pnojoid uaa 'ssop u adde ieu ,soire snuis, uian
temia is often present. Radiographic evidence of vari-
sinus arrhythmia may bc "normal." Thercforc,
 ablc, gencralized cardiomegaly is present, depending
，one
should probably avoid this term in canines as it implics
On the duratio1 and sevcrity of bradycardia. Distended
a pathologic rhythm. Conversely, a sinus pause longer
cranial and caudal vena cavae, hepatomegaly, or ascites
than 2 seconds in an awake, middle-aged, femalc min-
may indicatc right-sided or biventricular CHF. Occa-
iature Schnauzer may indicate Sss. Some dogs with
sionally, pulmonary cdema may occur, especialy if
SSS may go ycars without developing clinical signs,
chronic, severe mitral regurgitation has becn present.
whercas othcrs may have intermittent syncope associ-
Echocardiography  asscsscs myocardial colutractility
atcd withi pauscs lasting more than 8 seconds.
and assesses valvular intcgrity. Cardiac charmber cn-
effusious (pericardial, pleural, abdominal), and dis-
EVALUATION OF THE
tended hepatic veins are common fndings. Doppler
echo examination may reveal right and left AV valvc
CANDIDATE FOR A PACEMAKER
regurgitation. In the absence of chronic, acquired val-
vular discase (endocardiosis), this results from stretch-
ing the valve aunulus. Diastolic mitral regurgitation is
DATA BASE
a    r  sd a
regurgitation, cardiac cnlargement, CHF, and prerenal
A complcte data base should be cvaluatcd whell
 azotemia usually resolve within 1 to 2 wecks after pace-
considering pacemaker therapy. This includes a thor-
 maker implantation.
(CBC) and biochemical profle, electrocardiogran
SICK SINUS SYNDROME
(ECG), thoracic radiographs, and echocardiogram,
alld for cats, fcline leukemia virus, feline immunodefi-
Sick sinus syidrome occurs most. commonly in mid-
ciency virus, and serum T4 (>6 years of age) determi-
 dlc-agcd to older femalc miniature Schnauzers. Older
nations. The clinical complaint of syncope (chaptcr
dachshunds and West Highla1d white terriers are also
 22) may rcquire a 24-hour continuous ECG recording
overrepresented. Chronic acquircd valvular disease
PACEMAKER THERAPY 403
(cndocardiosis, chapter 25) is often present sincc af-
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC
fectcd dogs tend to be in associated age categories.
FUNDAMENTALS OF CARDIAC PACING:
Dogs with bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome, a form
CLINICAL APPLICATIONS
of Sss, may have periods of very rapid supraventricular
tachycardia followed by a prolonged pause owing to
 overdrive suppression (sce Fig. 20-1 D) (sec also chap-
The evolution of pacing systems has been rapid.
Most animals respond satisfactorily to pulse gencrator
ters 6 and 18). Aftcr the pause, the femoral pulse will
be of grcater intensity when1 the cscapc beat brcaks
implantation utilizing vetricular pacing alone (i.e..
VVI, see latcr and Fig. 20-5). However, as ncwer gener-
the protractcd period of asystolc. Thc prcsencc or
 absence of valvular disease will determine radiographic
 ation pacing technology becomes available to veteri-
and echocardiographic Gndings. Despite the presence
narians, the use of rate-responsive pacing, syuchro-
of chronic acquired valve disease in many affected
nized  atrioventricular  pacing,  and  antitachycardia
dogs, most respond favorably to pacemaker implanta-
pacing will be possible. Thus, an understanding of
tion, even if additional drug therapies are required.
the basic concepts for artificially pacing the hcart is
important in pacemaker selection, in programming.
and  for  trouble-shooting conplications. Although
PERSISTENT ATRIAL STANDSTILI.
without detailed pulse geuerator reprogramming as
The English springer spaniel is the most common
described later, some will require pulse generator read-
breed reported with this arrhythmia. Most affected
 justment for optimal eficacy. This is often facilitated
dogs have uderlying myocardial disease that affects
through technical  service represcntatives froin  thic
thc atria most severely. In addition, somc dogs may
pacemaker marnufacturer whose devices are being im-
have temporal musclc wasting. Radiographs and echo-
plauited.
cardiogram reveal biatrial enlargement. Prognosis de-
pends to a large part on the severity of underlying
myocardial discase and is oftel1 l1ot as favorable as il1
TIE ENERGYFORSTIMULATION
 othcr conditious requiring pacemaker therapy.
The clinical "life’ of the pacemaker pulsc generator
 depends upon several factors involving the pulse gen-
erator and lcad system. These include (l) the output
SPECIFIC FELINE BRADYARRHYTHMIAS
voltage, (2) lcad resistance, (3) pulse duration, (4)
AND CONDITIONS
pacing rate, (5) percent pacing time, and (6) battery
capacity. To induce a propagating wave of depolariza-
(Cats with primary cardiomyopathy can have high-
grade 2° AV block and 3° AV block and may require
must be applicd to the heart. muscle. The ability to
 pacenmaker implantation.8. 12 A mumbcr of nonreversi-
stimulatc the heart. electrically is related by Ohm's lau
ble lesions have been described in atrioventricular con-
 duction systems of cats with cardiomyopathies, includ-
V = IR,
ing fibrosis, chondroid metaplasia, fatty degeneration,
where V is the stimulus voltage, I is the current, and
nccd for pacemaker inplantation may be overshadowed
R is the total resistance to currcnt flow. The minimum
by more dominant clinical cousequences of the cardio-
cnergy required to activate the heart electrically out-
myopathic coditioll, such as CHF. In other situatiois,
side its refractory period is the stimulation threshotd.1+17
cats may not cxhibit clinical signs if an adequate escape
The energy of a pacing stimulus is determined by
rhythm is present and stable (Fig. 20-24). It is im-
thc duration of the voltage and current delivered. If
portant to note that high-grade 2° AV block usually
exccessive encrgy is used in stimulating the heart, the
progrcsses to 3° (complete) AV block. Thus, while the
life of the pulse gencrator will be shortened. There-
cat may be asymptomatic in the face of 2° AV block,
fore, optimizing for an adequate amount of energy to
the condition may changc acutelyx 8 Because thcsc
stimulate the heart, without wasting energy, is desir-
cats nsually have uniderlying cardiac discasc, anesthetic
able. The stimulus energy (E) used is related to the
risks should be thoroughly assessed by a complete data
amount. of voltagc (V), the time (t) the voltage is
base and chocardiographic examination, Despite this
applied, and the resistance (R).16
admonition, therc arc cats trcated with pacemaker
implantation that have lived for ycars.* Conduction
disturbances, including advanced AV block, may be
R
rccorded in states of scvere hypcrthyroidism. These
are commonly reversible when the cuthyroid state is
 These rclationships have importait clinical implica-
rc-establishcd and maintained.
tious in selecting the appropriate stimulus of a pace-
404 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
maker, and they can be evaluated by cxamination of
pulse duration and the voltage to cvaluate and achicve
the strength duration curve.
the optimal setings.s The rclationship between the
voltagc and the pulsc duration is exponential and is
represented by the strength duration curve (Fig. 20-3).
STRENGTH DURATION CURVE
The curve is steep, rapidly rising with pulse duration
In order for a stimulus to depolarizc the heart, a
less than 0.25 msec; in coi1trast, the curve is flat with
certain amout of voltage must be applied for a unit
pulsc duration greater than 1.0 scc. The shape of this
of time (Fig. 20-3). The analogy of speed (vollage) aid
curve determincs the choice of the voltage amplitude
timc (pulse duration) can be used to understand this
and duration of the pacing pulsc. When a pacemakcr
relationship. For example, if an object is to reach the
is programmed, if the pulse duraion is too short there
finish line (i.e., activate the heart), a greatcr speed will
is very little room for error should the threshold for
rcquire less timc, while a lesser speed will require nore
capture increase. Thresholds for pacing can change
time. Thereforc, to stimulate the heart to depolarize,
 after implantation, ad such a situatiou may result in
the voltage may be sct high with a shorter piulse width
a loss of capture. Couversely, if the pulse width is set.
(duration), or low with a longer pulse width.
too long o1 the flat portion of the curvc, the increase
A programmer is an instrument used to change the
in the time that. the stimulus is delivered has no effect
Amplitude (V)
O Test Results
* Programmed
Rheobase
.
Chronaxie
5.4
3X
2X
0.20.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Pulse Width (ms)
FIGURE 20-3
Top pamet ECC fron an 8year-old Saluki while permanent pacemaker pacing hresholds were being
tested and the strengih-duration curve was being computed. The anpliudle was automaticeally
decreased until capturc was lost. Pacing spikes fopen arou) generated froun this bipolar systein
gradually decreased in size. Although they are still present during ventrieular asystole, lhey are of
was printed fron thc programmer following lhe strength-duration curvc computation.The dog was
paccd with a Medtronic Thera DR 7940 pulse gencrator that was programmed in the bipolar rmode.
The curve formed by the edge of the shaded arca is the computed curve threshold for this dog
based on two ineasured threshold values (olock circes). Capturc will occur with any combination of
amplitude and pulse width values that are above this curve. Values helow the curve will not result in
caplure (ie., pacing). Thc two curycd lines above the shaded region indicate the combination
anipliude and pulse width values that will provicle a safety margin of two or thrce times the
anplitude threshold. 'The chronavie (pulse widlth thal corrcsponds to twice the rhcobase) and rhrobase
(lowest vollage that results in capure at an infinitely long duration) for this dog are indicated. Pulsc
widths on the steep portion of the curve (less than 0.2 msc) are not rccommended, because the
voltagc must be set so high rhat cxcessive battery drain occurs. Good sertings (*) to program the
pacemaker for this dog are 2.5 V at a pulse width of 0.3 ms. (Courlesy of Dr. Anna R. M. Gelzcr,
(Cornell University.)
PACEMAKER THERAPY
405
on capturing the hcart. Instead, the cxcessively wide
olds. Studies in dogs with nonstcroidal-eluting cork-
 pulse duration drains the battery, and pulsc generator
screws have shown that thresholds are similar regard-
life is shortened.
 less of the location of the electrode tip.1fi
RIIOBASEANDCHRONAXIE
PACING THRESIIOLDS
Two inuportant points cxist about the strength dura-
To determine whether thc position of the pacing
electrode is adequate, paring thresholds idcally are deter-
programming (Fig. 20-3),1s,ts The rheohase is the lowest.
mined at the time of implantation.9 92 However, until
voltage that resuits in caprure at. an infinitely long
recently such determinations have not been routinely
pulse duration. In rmodern pacemakers, this point is
performed in aimals. An cxternal testing device is
usually less than 1.5 msec. The chronaxie is thc pulse
used, known as a pacing system analyzer, or PSA. The
width rcquired to stimulate the heart at twice the
threshold is determined in volts at a pulse width of 0.5
rheobase voltagc and closcly approximates the point
msec. The PSA is sct at 5 V. 'The pacing rate is in-
of minimum threshold stimulation encrgy. Although
 crcased until the heart is consistently captured. Then
the minimum threshold is determined, a safety uargin
thc voltagc is gradually decreased until a loss of cap-
must be cousidered. Therefore the voltage is usually
turc occurs (usually less than I V at 0.5 msec for the
set at twice the threshold value at the chronaxic pulse
veutriclc at the time of implantation). If high voltage
width. Alternatively, thc piulsc width is sct at thrce
is nceded to capture the heart, a different lead posi-
times the chroaxic pulse width provided the pulsc
tion in the right ventricle is sought.
width thrcshold is less than 0.2 mscc. If it is greater
than 0.2 msec, then the lead should be repositioned
TIE IMPORTANCE OF IMPEDANCE
or voltage increased. Also, if high voltages are required
(c.g, > 5 V), repositioning of the lead is advised.
 Impedance is the total resistancc to current flow. s.24-26
Manufacturers usally recommend that chronic lcads
Ideal inpedance will allow for proper current flow for
should not have stimulation thresholds greater thall
myocardial stimulation yet bc high cnough to deter
2.5 V pulse ampliude at a pulse width of 0.5 ms. Such
ulnecessary current drain on the piulse generator. To-
high voltages grcatly reduce the lougevity of the pulse
tal pacing inupcdance is determined by (l) resistance
generator. Cltimately somc adjustment in both the
of the conducting lead (conductor resistaice), (2)
voltage and the pulse width is usually performed to
resistance betwecn the electrode and tissue (clcctrode
 optimize safety while preserving battery longevity, 19
resistance), and (3) resistaiicc caised by the accumula-
 Tht strength duration curve is generated initially
tiol1 of charge at the clectrode tip interface (polariza-
after paccmaker implantation and on recheck cxami-
tion resistance).15. 26 Excessivc resistance in ihe lcad
nation.t-22 The standard method is to have the heart.
 generates heat and is ineficient at gencrating current
 pacing, to decrease the voltage at a givei1 pulse width
for pacing. A small clectrode tip oflers higher resis-
until capture is lost, and thenl to decrcase the pulse
tance but concentrates the current at the point of
width at coustant voltage. The procedure is repcated
implant for more cfficient use of cnergy. Polarization
until cnough points are generated to create the curve
(Fig. 20-3). Depending on the pacemaker and the
widths aiid electrodes with small tips. Impcdaice cal1
 programmer, this can be done manually or automati-
be measured, and it changes after implantation (in
cally. Capture hysteresis (Wedeusky's effect) usually cx-
110steroidal-cluding lcads), Initially, impedance falls
ists such that the testing is done fron capture to the
during thc inflammatory phasc but thcn rises to a
stable level. Bipolar leads tend to have higher co1duc-
ture.23 Greater energy is required to gain capture, and
tor impedance than unipolar leads because two con-
thus the curves generated would he differeiit.
 ducting wires are required. Also, unipolar pacing has
The threshold for cousistent pacing can change over
   o i   s
time and is dependent on the type of lead used (e.g..
 area of the anode (pulse gencrator).26
passive, active, porous, steroid-eluting).'6 with onste-
     d  
roid-eluting leads, thresholds rise during the first week,
1000 ohms. Most lic betwcen 500 a1d 700 ohms at the
compared with implaiitation values, and thci1 stabilizc
nominal paccmaker setting of 5 V* At the time of
 6 weeks after implantation, The lead clicits a forcign
implantation aid during follow-up examination, the
body response, with cellular infiltrate, cdema, and fi-
 lcad ipedance ideally shonld be determined. More-
nally a collagenous capsule. Beyond the capsule, myo-
over, complications of lead fracture, iusulation break-
fibril disarray devclops. The precise respouse depends
age, or lead dislodgment canl be evaluated by de-
 again on the type of lcad tip. If a lead is unstable,
termining the lead impedance. Lead impedance
tuore inflarumation and fibrous tissuc can develop.
should remain constant over time or decreasc mini-
This can result in1 detcrioration of stimulation thresh-
mally. Elevations in thc lead impedance (> 1200
406 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
ohms) with elevations in the voltage threshold are
slope or rate of chiange in the voltage.t5. 21 Complexes
compatible with lcad fracture. Conversely, iusulation
with gradual increases in amplitude (low slew rate) are
breakage is associated with low or normal voltage
more dificult to selise, even though the sensitivity
thresholds and 1ow impeda1ce (< 250 ohms). A lead
amplitude is prograred correctly. However, if the
dislodgment or cxit block is associated with high volt-
amplitude is large, slew rate is of lesscr importance.19
agc threshold and 1ormal lcad irmpedance.
The amplitude and slew rate do change after implanta-
tion. Thereforc, adjustmuents to sensing may be needed
during follow-up cxaminationns.
SENSING
 Although modificationus are made in the amplitude
Although constant pacing is usually required for
alid Gltering for proper sensing, a certain blanking
aimals with 3" AV block, the ability to sense inherent
and rcfractory period after a senscd complex must be
 o     s  s
prograrrrmcd to improve signal discrimination.? This
SSS is important for safety. Avoidance of pacing during
is done to avoid oversensing the T wave of the paced
the vulncrable period in the T wave is essential in the
or sensed complex, The blanking period lasts for 25 to
prevention of ventricular fibrillation. Also, improved
100 msec after the pacing spike, and the refractory
hemodynamics and preservation of battery life occur
 period is programmed to adjust to the paticnt's QT
when an inherent. sinus rhythm is allowcd to dominatc.
interval. However, if the refractory period is too long.
The ability to seuse an inherent rhythm is dependent.
then thc pacemaker has the potential iot to sensc
upou several factors. These include (1) the type of
premature complexcs (Fig. 20-4). Alternativcly, if thc
lead (umipolar versus bipolar), (2) electrode sizc, (3)
refractory period is too short, T-wave seusing is a prob-
lcad contact. to the myocardium, (4) tissue reaction
lem. Atrial sensing requires that the refractory period
around the electrode, (5) position of the electrode,
be longer to avoid sensing the far-field ventricular
(6) physiologic factors (respiration, exercise, catechol-
electrogram.
amines, body position), and (7) drugs16 20.21
 Certain determinants of sensing are programmable.
Thcse include (l) amplitudc, (2) filtering, aid (3)
PACING EQUIPMENT
slew rate of the intracardiac clectrogram recorded ul1-
der the tip of the implanted lcad. When the seusitivity
is incrcascd, the nuerical value (mV) or amplitude
PACEMAKER MODALITIES
of the clcctrogram that is able to be sensed is
reduced—that is, the pacemaker is more scnsitive alnd
 Pacemakers are coded by a 3- to 5-lettering system
(Fig. 20-5) that denotcs the site and mode of pacing."9
plexes). When the sensitivity is decreased, the numeri-
The first letter position denotes the chember paced, and
cal value or amplitude of the clectrogram that is able
thie second position denotes the chamber sensed (V, ven-
to bc scnscd is incrcased. That is, the pacemakcr is
tricle, A, atrium). 'The third position denotes whether
less sensitive al1d detects ouly largcr (high-amplitude)
the mode of response to sensing is inhibited (1, inhib-
ECG siguals (complexes). This prevets thc oversens-
ited)—that is, paccmaker discharge is suppressed by
ing of waveforms such as the T wave or myopotentials.
a sensed signal, or triggered (T, triggered)-that is.
Idcally, the sensitivity of the pacemaker should be pro-
 pacermaker discharge is triggered by a sensed signal.
grammed to twicc as sennsitive as the value of the sens-
both (D, dual or both), or none (O, none). Thc fourth
ing threshold (the numerical number to program will
position indicates programmability (O, nonc; P, simplc
 be hal the threshold number). 1# Becausc determining
 programmable; M, multiprogrammable; C, commui-
the sensing threshold requires that. the animal have
cating; R, rate modulation). A miultiprogrammablc
 all adequate escape rhythm, determinatiol1 of sensing
S   r   
threshold may not be possible.
whether antitachyarrhythmia function is available.
Filtering of the intracardiac signal plays a critical role
Thcrefore, VVI pacing indicates that the pacemaker
is programmed to pace the ventricle and scnse ventric-
signals such as the I wave or very-high-frequcucy sig-
ular complexcs; whcn thesc complexes are sensed, the
nals such as myopotcntials must have highcr ampli-
pulsc geuerator is inhibited from firing. This type of
tudes to be seused. The ventricular signal from the
 pacing is the one most. commonly used in veterinary
intracardiac elcctrogram is large at. 6 to 15 mV or more
medicine. However, it may be better to dual-chanber-
 and is usually not difficult for the pacemaker to sense.
 pace (DDD or DDI) or atrial-pace (AAI) dogs with SSS
[n contrast, selising the atrial electrogram cain be more
(see Complications later). The more sophisticated and
difficult and requires grcater sensitivity than ventricu-
complicated pacing modalities, such as (AV) scquential
lar sensing owing to the smaller amplitude of 1.5 to
pacing, have until recently required two leads, which
2 mV.
increases the possibility of lcad dislodgment.
Aother determinant of sensing is thc slew rate, thc
Another feature that is inicorporated into some pace
PACEMAKER THERAPY
407
TY
 667. ms
667 ms
FIGURE 20-4
Flectrocardiograuns recorded from a West Highland white terrier with sick sinus syndrome. The log
had long periods of marked sinus braclycardia and intcrnitent periouds of rapid supraventrieular
tachyeardia. Paper specd, 50 mm/scc. I mV = I cn. (A) Initial ECGi shows sinus bradycardia and a
polonged QT interval (380 ns）related to the slow heart ratc.(B)This pacemaker, progranmed for
a rate of 90 bcats/min (RR inicrval, 667 mscc), failed to scnsc thc spontancous complex (arrour),
indicating an undersensing problem, (C) The refractory period (220 msec) and sensitivity (2.5 mV)
were changed, but then the pacermaker oversensed the T waves. This is bccause the programned
refractory period was too short, allowing the T wave to bc letccted. Sote that the interval of 667
msee (ms) now begins at the T wave. The refractory period was reprograrmmed to 325 rms.
Chamber Paced
V=Ventricle
A = Atrium
D = Dual Chamber
odeof Res
pejebbyl=
1 = Inhibited 
D = Double (Both)
O=None
FIGURE 20--5
V = Ventricle
A = Atium
VVIMO indicates that the charber paced is the ventricle, the
D = Dual Chamber
chambcr scnsed is thc ventricle, the modle of response is inhibited,
S =Single Chamber
the paceinaker has rmltiple paranneters that can be programmed,
O =None
and there are no antitachycardia features with this devicc.
Antitachyarrhythrmia
function(s)
O=None
P=Programmable
M=Multiprogrammable
P =Antitachyarhythmia pacing
C = Communicating
S=Shock
R = Rate Responsive
D = Dual (P + S)
=None
408
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCUIAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
too stiff that it risks inadvertent puncturing of the right.
ventricular (RV) wall.
The actual necessity of temporary pacing during
permancnt pacemaker implantation is controversial
and depends on the individual patient. Animals with
slow unstable escape rhythms (< 30 beats/min in dogs,
90 beats/min in cats) or with variable escapc
rhythms with long, intermittent periods of ventricular
 asystole may be best served with the insurance of ten-
  Ss  s  d a
B
responses to anticholinergic drugs. Occasionally the
heart rate spceds rapidly, only to be followed by more
profound periods of asystole as the overdrive suppres-
sion has excessivcly repressed subsidiary paceinakers.
Arguments against the use of tenuporary pacing in-
clude increascd surgical time, necessity for heavy seda-
tion; and lack of clear necessity for temporary pacing;
FIGURE 20-6
and if a jugular vein is used for temporary lead place-
Flecirocardiograrn recoreled from a Ilolter nonitor in a dlog with a
ment, this vessel then becomes uavailable for perma-
rate-responsive pacemaker. During slecp, the pacing rate was
nent. endocardial lcad placcmcnt should a problem
slower (A) than during activity (B). The arrow indicates the pacing
develop in the opposite jugular vein during permanent.
artifact spike. P, P waves.
pacermaker implantation procedure. HIowever. tempo-
rary pacing affords a margin of safety should problems
devclop, aiid problems may sometinues occur despite
makers is rate modulation.2z7-zs Iustcad of thc rate bcing
careful preparation. To avoid the use of the secoud
fixcd and thc only alteration to that ratc bcing the
 jugular vein and improve venious acccss with the least
sen1sing of ain inherent rhythm, the pacing rate changes
amount of sedation, we routinely use pcrcutaneous
with physiologic needs (Fig. 20-6). The pacing ratc
instrimentation with an introduccr via the femoral
can bc programmed for a lower and an upper limit.
vein (see Procedure later). Termporary pacing in cats
 Rate-modulated pacemakers chage the pacing rate
is technically difficult, auid therefore this step is fre
based on right ventricular volumes or pressures, blood
quently bypassed.
temperature, oxygen saturation or pIf, ventilation, or
numerous ways of activity sensing. Activity sensors arc
the most successful aid have bcen widely tested in1
PERMANENT PACEMAKERS
humans."7
Thc pacing putse generaior houses the battery (power
source), lead connection, and programming clcctron-
EXTERNAL TEMPORARY PACEMAKERS
ics and is generically referred to as the "pacemaker.'"
These devices are manufactured by a number of conml-
 External temporary pacenakers provide endocardial
panies. Modern pulsc generators derive cnergy from a
 pacing. They are intended for short-time use to stabi-
lithinm-iodide cell with a1 inhcreint voltage, when new,
lize the patient or during the anesthetic induction for
of 2.78 volts (this is not thc samc as output voltagc
 permanent pacemaker implantation.* They also allow
 e    sd a   (
the rate. voltage amplitude, and sensitivity to be se-
cal longevity of 7 to 14 years, depending on the en-
lected prior to permanent pacemaker implantation.
acted programming. Advaccmcnts in this field have
continued rapidly, with modern pulsc generators being
routes: trausvenously, trascutancously, or transcsopha-
quite small with multiprogrammable features.
geally. The transvenous rolite is used most commonly
 [n veterinary medicine, pacemakers are rarcly pur-
in dogs. External teinporary pacemakers are bipolar,
chased at their retail market valuc bccausc of thcir
with a positive and a negative port to connect the
high cost and the lack of third-party insurance rcin-
pacing lead. Many differennt electrophysiologic leads
burserment. Instcad, most are obtaincd from pace.
can be used for temporary pacing, including quadripo-
maker compainies as *scconds'’ that have minor super-
lar catheters (i.e., four electrodes spaced over the last
Gicial defects, that are surplus units being replaced by
couple of centimeters of the catheter). A o. 5 French
newer techmology, or occasionally that are explanted
pacing cathcter (lead) is used most commonly with
from humais or originate as demonstration models.
the temporary paccmakcr. This size of lead is adequate
s  a  pi e t od s
to stay in contact withi the cndocardiu, but it is not
Currently, pacemakers and leads can be purchased
PACEMAKER THERAPY 409
through CANPACERS, which is organized through the
a bipolar system, the pulse gcncrator docs not require
American College of Veterinary Internal Medicinc.
tissue conntact for pacing.
subspecialty of Cardiology.
The battery end-of-scrvice indicatio can be identi-
fied ini several ways.24 The clinical indicators of a dc-
clining pulsc generator include (l) a change in the
PACEMAKER LEAD SYSTEMS
pacing rate to the predetermined fixed rate or a 10
 percent drop in the programmed nonmagnet rate. (2)
The pacing lead consists of the conductor (coil of wire
( aas)  ia o jo nad o aq doip e
that conducts the current from the pulse generator
or (3) al1 incrcase in the pulse width. Alternatively,
to thc stirrulating electrode), lead insulation, and lead
 examination of a tclemetrized pulsc generator can give
connector (Fig. 20-7). Continuous development of leads
 an indication of the voltage (cnd-of-service voltage is
 Over the past two decades has resulted in the produc-
 2.6 V) or of the battery impedance (increased imped-
tion of many types by numerous manufacturers. 'The
ance exists at the end-ofservice). Programmers will
state the message of the end-ofservice.
and pacing lcads at reasonable prices often results in
having an inventory of assorted compouents that are
not compatible. Some leads of older manulacture have
UNIPOLAR VERSUS BIPOLAR PACING
sealing rings set at different. points such that they do
not. allow the use of one brand of lead into another
The mumber of electrodes inl contact with the hcart is
brand of pulse generator. Some incompatibility can be
denofed as unipolar (one electrode irl contact with the
resolved with the use of connection adapters. Reccntly,
heart) or bipolar (two electrodes in contact with the
heart) (Fig. 20-7).26 Pacemakers can bc cxclusively
shared compatibility between brands of pulsc geera-
  o       
tors and the leads., s3t
grammed to either unipolar or bipolar with a lead that
Older leads have 5- to 6-mm conncctors with bifur-
can function in either mode. That is, a modern bipolar
cated bipolar conncctious. Newer lead connectors arc
pulsc generator and lead frequently can be pro-
smaller, and bipolar concctors are now low-profile,
grammed to operate as a unipolar system. Ilowcver, a
l1ot bifurcated, and as small as unipolar coinectors.2
unipolar pulsc geerator and lead can operate only as
The industry standard for newer leads is designated as
a unipolar system. Unipolar aud bipolar pacing both
require an anode (positive) and a cathode (negative)
leads. However, when confronted with leads that. are
pole. The cathode in each is the tip of the lead. The
not of this standard, compatibility of a given lead with
allode of a unipolar system is the pulsc gcnerator case,
a given pacemaker can be determined by (l) coll-
whereas the al1ode in the bipolar system is located
sllting with the customer service department of a pace.
proximal to the cathode on the lead and positioncd
 maker manufacturer, (2) looking up the pulse genera
in the hcart.
tor and lead in references such as the Paccrmaker and
Unipolar pacing has a pacing artifact that is substan-
Connector Eucyclopedia or The Medtronic Guide to
tially larger than that of bipolar pacing (Fig. 20-7) and
L.ead Adapters and Battery Depletion Indicators, pub-
is more susceptible to oversensing and inhibitioi1 by
lished by Medtronic in 1996. Such referenices arc
skeletal muscle potentials. Skeletal muscle stinulatiol
actively updated, and, it. is hoped, they will soou be
available on-line. Thc l1ew leads ca be adaptcd to
 lar pacemakers ca stimulate local skeletal rmuscle,
 older pulse generators with the use of a adaptive
sleeve, It should be cimphasized that thc compatibility
and polarity of the lead and pulse generator should
the muscle tissne in the region of the implantation.
be double-checked before surgery.
Thumping can be notable if the voltage amplitude is
 Endocardial lcads may havc active or passive fixa-
 prograrmcd high. It is important to note that for a
tion. Active fixation leads penetrate the myocardium
unipolar pacermaker to pace. the uninsulated side of
with a scrcw whereas passive fixation leads ciitaugle
the pulsc generator must be in contact with the tissues.
the trabcculac with tined tips. Both arc equal in thc:
 Bipolar pacing has a pacing artifact that. is substa1l-
frequency
y of dislodgment (Lehmkuhl I., personal
tially smaller than that of a unipolar pacing system and
communicatio, 1998). In human mcdicinc, dislodg-
mcit is less than 1.5 percent for ventricular leads
skcletal muscle potentials. Skcletal muscle stimulation
ald lcss than 5 percent for atrial leads. In veterinary
is les likcly thaii with unipolar pacing. Newer technol-
medicinc, lcad dislodgment is approximately I0 per-
ogy has made bipolar lcads more flexible, and, there-
cent (Lchmkuhl L., personal communication, 1998).
The high incidence in veterinary medicine may be
unipolar, thus avoiding some of these problems.? with
due to the lesser experiencc of the operator and the
410
ABNORMALCARDIOVASCULARFUNCTIONANDPRINCIPLESOFTHERAPY
E
Setscrew
(hexwrenchtool)
A Unipolar
Pacingspike
DUpsizingsleeve
BBipolar
Pacingspike
Signal
Appliec
Fixation tool
Pulse width (msec)
LProgramminghead
FIGURE20-7
Some of theequipment used in theimplantation of a cardiacpacemaker.(A)A unipolar pulse
lead has a single connectingpoint to the pulsegenerator.TheECGfroma unipolar pacemaker has
distally on the pacing lead.Thelead has two points connecting to the pulse generator (notice two
setscrewsversus onein theunipolar system).TheECGfrom a bipolar pacemakerhasa small pacing
spike artifact.(C)The pulse generator produces an electrical current of a given voltage for a given
amount of time.These parameters canbe programmed.Someleads and pulse generators do not
match but canbe adapted with either anupsizing(D) or downsizing sleeve.Toconnect thelead
with or without the sleeve,a setscrew or hexwrench tool isused(E).Theleads(most commonly)
can be(F)epicardial,(G) tined endocardial, or(H) screw-in endocardial types.When the screw-in
endocardial lead is secured to the endocardium,thefixation tool (I) is turned to advance the helix.
Once the endocardial lead(tined or screw-in）is positioned,it is sutured to theveinwith an
anchoring sleeve (J）.A programmer (K) can be used to adjust and test the quality of pacing.Not
shown is the pacing system analyzer (PSA)or a temporarypacemaker.
PACEMAKER THERAPY
411
FIGURE 20-8
ECG recorded fron a dog with sick sinus syndronc whosc pacenakcr was being interrogated. The
arc spaced consistently and irrespective of the uderlying inhcrent rhythm. It is inportant to
rctncmbcr to reimove the magnci or turn il off when evaluating a newly programmed sctting.
C, captured beats,
movcment of animals, compared with that of humans,
ald printed. A simultancous surface ECG also can be
during the initial implantation period.
recorded. A keyboard or touch-scrcen prompts can
change parameters, These instructions and the old
valucs can be printed for verificatior. Also, thc pacc-
PACEMAKER PROGRAMMER
 makcr is interrogated following the reprogramming to
check the values.
 Modern pacemakers allow pacing parameters to be
 The programming head also contains a magnet. An
noninvasively programmed dluring or after implanta
option cxists to turn thc magnet on or off. If left in
tion by telemetry.'# Some pacemakers have limited
thie "on'" position, the paccmakcr will pace the heart.
ability to be programmed, such that only heart rate,
in the VOO mode such that fixcd pacing occurs with-
amplitude, anid pulse width carn be changed. Thesc
out the sensing of inherent rhythms (Figs. 20-5, 20-8).
pacemakers will have fixed refractory periods, blank-
To evaluate the cffccts of a new program setting, the
ing pcriods, and upper limit heart rates. We havc
wand must be removed from over the pulse generator
 found that the ability to program the refractory period
 or the magnet turned off, otherwise pacing continues
is important in dogs and cats. Newcr models have
in the nominal fixcd VOO mode, and evaluation of
 grcater flexibility and are multiprogrammablc (e.g.,
ncw settings cannot be made.
refractory period, rate modulation, polarity). Further-
more, ncwer models allow automatic or manual testing
of thresholds for stimulation and sensing (see Fig.
HEMODYNAMICS OF PACING
20-3). Each marufacturer that makes paccmakers also
makes programmers. Unfortunatcly, thesc are not in-
terchangeable anong different manufacturers. The
SEQUENTIAL CONTRACTIONS OF THE
software of new programmers can be updated so that.
ATRIA AND VENTRICLES
new pacemakers may be programmed. Programming
devices often can be borrowed from the pacing coinpa-
nics or local sales represcntatives. Alternatively, the
Single-chamber (ventricular, Vvl) pacing is used al-
local sales representatives will assist in programming
most cxclusively in animals bccause of its simplicity
during implantation or during follow-up exarmination.
and acceptable results in most cases, although AV se-
quential pacing is physiologically superior. Atrial con-
enhances its performance. In general, the instruction
traction may contribute 15 to 25 percent to cardiac
manuals that accompary modern programmers arc
output. With VVI pacing, the loss of the normal atrial
complcte and writtcn to be clinically understandable.
contribution to filling, followed by ventricular contrac-
tion, can reduce systemic blood pressure and cardiac
PULSE GENERATOR INTERROGATION AND REPROGRAM.
output in some individuals. However, most animals do
MINC. By placing the progranming head over the im-
not incur a significant drop in blood pressure with
planted pulse generator, the pacemaker car be cvalu-
ventricular pacing (Fig. 20-9), probably because of
atcd.? An interrogation command is triggercd, and
increased sympathetic activation that conpensates for
the programmer communicates with the paceinaker to
thc divcrgent cardiac depolarization. A resultant in-
identify the specifc model, serial number, and pro-
crcase in peripheral vascular resistance is a rormal
gramming of the pulse generator. Held over the pace-
      
maker, an electrogram recorded from the implanted
a critical evaluation of dogs after pacemaker implanta-
lead can bc viewcd on the screen of the programmer
tion has not becn conducted. Furthermore, single-
412ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
Bld Pres
95 mmHg
85 mmHg
FIGURE 20-9
Arterial blood pressure (Bld Pres)
Suunp sop v tuoj paposai
sinus rhythm and then after
ventricular pacing (arroo) at a
similar rate. The blood pressure
Lead Il
huu ot aoruxoclde sdorp
In humaus, a drop greater thai
20 mmHg is considered a risk
factor for the devclupment of
paceinaker syndrome.
10 seconds
chambcr pacing of the atria (AAI and AAIR) in dogs
closed AV valves causes a reversal of blood flow aid
with SSS and a competent AV node warrants consider-
ation.
cxacerbate or contribute to congestive heart failure.
The supcriority of AV scquential pacing to simulate
For this rcason, dogs with SSS ideally should be al
the normal contribution anid timing of atrial contrac-
lowed to have their inherent rhythms dominate when
tion has been experimentally established in the dog.
the rate is adequate (Fig. 20-10). Although these physi-
Thc percentage augmentation by atrial systole over
ologic changes argue for the superiority of atrioventric-
ventricular pacing alone incrcases with highcr pacing
ular sequential pacing, the current technical complexi-
rates,3. - although AV synchrony is of lesser irmpor-
ties in implantation make it a more difficult procedure
 e       
compared with the simpler ventricular pacing tecl-
pressures occur with ventricular pacing alonc, com-
nique.
pared with AV sequcntial pacing. This is primarily
caused by atrial contractioni agairist closed AV valves.
The atrial distention associatcd with VVI pacing stimu-
VENTRICULOATRIAL CONDUCTION
lates the releasc of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)
from the atria.$ Thie ANP, which causes vasodilation
Retrograde depolarization of the atria (ventriculo-
and diuresis., courteracts the baroreceptor stimulation
atrial [VAl conduction) is a potential complication of
that occurs with the drop in blood pressure present
    s   
A  l o  Ss  s o 
thetic activity, as evidenccd by elevations in plasima and
block.* Clinical impressions of dogs with SsS support.
coronary sinus levels of norepinephrine and epineph-
a similar pattern of VA conduction and may result inl
rine, is greater with VVI pacing comipared with AV
alntcgrade reactivation of the ventricle (Fig. 20-1l).
scqucntial pacing.*
The long-term effects of VA conduction in dogs have
Further siudies in dogs with experimental 3° AV
not becn cstablished, but hunans with consistent VA
block revcal that VVI pacing arid atrial systole against
conduction have the highcst susceptibility to adverse
PACEMAKERTHERAPY
413
B
FIGURE20-10
Right lateral radiographs of a dog in3°AV block.(A) Thecardiac silhouetteis normal in size and
opacity at the cranial sternal border is an ECG electrode affixed on the skin.(B) Over thenext9
monthogvelopdcardimgalymyocardialfilureandutmatelongestivea
failurehepacemakermalfunctionedwithlate-onsetintrmittentlossofcapturewhichbecame
progressivelyworse.Notice that theendocardial lead appears tohavebecome displaced awayfrom
theapex when compared with(A);however,fluoroscopy and impedance evaluations confirmed that
theleadwas securely attached.A diagnosis of lossof capture-due eitherto exit block orprogressive
myocardial disease-wasmade.
FIGURE20-11
Electrocardiograms recorded from twominiature Schnauzers with sick sinus syndrome.(A)
Retrograde,nonconductedPwaves (rP)are seen.This indicates ventriculoatrial (VA) conduction.
(B)TheVA conduction in this dogresults in a retrogradePwave (rP)that subsequently reactivates
theventricle (notice the QRs-T complexes that follow each rP).The arrow indicates the pacing
artifactfrom thepulsegeneratorprogrammedin the unipolarmode.Paper speed,50mm/sec.
1mV=1cm.
414
 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
 circulatory reflexes, which are initiatcdl by atrial recep-
TABLE 20-1
tors.34. 4t. i12 Distention of the atria, pulmonary vcins,
'Temporary Pacemaker Implantation*
and venoatrial junctions stimulates vagal afferents,
Equipment and Supplies
which causes a vasodepressor response with a decrease
1. Arrow Percutancous Sheath Introducer Set (18-Ga needle,
18-Ga catheter with stylet, guidewire, dilator, introducer),
in mcar arterial blood pressure and heart rate, as well
syringes with heparinized saline
as withdrawal of syinpathetic vasoconstriction.34, 12 The
2. Pacing Icadl (variablc, can bc quatlripolar clccrophysiologic
 presence of VA conduction is associated with greater
catheter, etc.); No. 5 French most common size
 elevation of right-sided heart and pulmonary filling
3. Tenporary pacemaker
Proceduret
pressures. Additionally, cannonn A waves and atrial dis-
1. With the dog in right lateral recunbency, the left groin is
surgically prepped aund drapedl.
ing pcriods of increased synpathetic tone, such as
 2. The left femoral artery is palpated as thc caulal landimark for
the femoral vein.
cxercise or stress, VA conduction is more likely.
3. A sinall incision (2-mrn) is rnate in the skin above the femoral
vcin, 1 to 3 mm from the Femoral ariery.
4. At a 30 to 45° angle to the skin, a ncedle or cathcter (with
stylet) connected to a syringe wirh heparinized saline is slowly
PACEMAKER IMPLANTATION
advanced with the bevel down. Xegative pressure is held on
thc syringc as the needie or catheter is advanced so that blood
is aspirated as the vein is entered.
5. Once blood is seen, the syringe or syringe and stylet are
ANESTHESIA
rernoved while sccurely holding the nccdle or catheicr.
6. A guidewire is threaded through the needle or catheter until it.
is located well within the vcin (e.g.. 3 to 5 cm).
There is no consensus regarding an optimal anesthe-
7. The neecdile or catheter is backcd out of the vein, slipped back
 tic protocol. Modern balanced anesthesia techniqucs
over the guidewirc, and removed.
8.The dilator and introducer are slipped over the guidewire and
provide safe, yet varied, methods (chapter 38). Thrce
with a gentle, twisting notion are advanced through the vein.
commornly uscd protocols include (1) premcdication
9. At the time that the introduccr meets the cntry point to the
with morphine and glycopyrrolate, induction with ket-
vein, a more forceful, yet still gentle, push is usually required.
10.The dilaor is rerovedi, leaving the introducer in place, and
amine ard diazcpam, and maintenance with isoflur-
the system is flushed with heparinized salinc.
ane; (2) premedication with morphine and aceproinaz-
11. A pacing lead is advanced, preferably with fluoroscopic
ine, induction with ctomidate, and maintenance with
guidlance, to the right ventricular apex.
12.
The pacing lcad is connccicd to the temporary pacemaker.
isoflurane; or (3) premedication with morphine, glyco-
pyrrolate, and oxymorphonc, induction with ketamine
will improve the cardiovascular status but not be excessively
and diazepam, and maintenance with isoflurane, HHow-
high. If the ratc is too rapid and lead dlislodgment results in a
loss of capture, overdrive stimulation can supprcss subsidiary
ever, anticholinergics are not nceded and may be detri
pacemakers. Therefore, the rate is usually ser for 60 to 80
mcntal to dogs in 3° AV block. Moreover, dogs with
beais/min. The voltage output is usually programmed for 1.5
SSS may develop supraventricular tachycardia in re-
to 2 V. The temporary paccmaker is not put in asynchronous
mode, but the scnsitivity is adjusted to sense inherent rhythms.
tion pacemaker testing. This problem can be overcome
Temporary pacing may also be done via he jugular vrin. We prefer the
by causing thc heart rate to slow (e.g, deepening
femoral vein becausr it allows for heter sterility and better manipulation of
the pacing lead (temporary leads in the jugular vein are on the dlowuside of
anesthesia) or by programming the pacemaker at a
the dog as the permanent lead is placed in the contralateral, “up" jugular
rate that will be overridden by the inherent rate. Pre-
vein; this cant he: awkward during emergency situations). Morever, should the
jugukar vein selected for permanent irnplantation be defeclive or damaged.
medication that allows the placement of a temporary
preservation of the other jugular vein is an advantage.
pacemaker before anesthesia induction may be desired
+When it is known thal a pacemaker will be inplanted, Lhe jugular veins
because it is usually not possible to perform this proce-
should not be used for blood collection so that they are available ad ndam-
aged for transvenous paremaker lcad inplantation.
dure in the awake animal. Anothcr important consider
-u mn jepi s a ronezbn aanadoisod si uon
strict cxcitement and movement of the animal during
thc first 24 hours after surgery in hopcs of lessening
20-1). Once the perimanent paccmaker is implanted,
the temporary pacemaker is turned off to avoid com-
the opportunity for lead dislodgment.
petitive rhythms (Fig. 20-12). Whether or not a tempo
rary pacemaker is used, isoprotcrenol (0.0l μg/kg/
min) should be available so that an infusion can be
PACEMAKER IMPLANTATION
started if the escape rhythm fails to rescuc the heart.
PROCEDURES
 For both temporary and permanent cndocardial pace.
 Imaker implantation, luoroscopy is required. However,
 A varicty of approaches and pacing techniques have
the location of the pacing lead for temporary pacing
been described involving endocardial or epicardial
can be guided by intracardiac clectrocardiography
lead placement,l- -# Reardcss of the type of pacing
(Fig. 20-13).
sclected, a temporary paccmaker may be placed either
Endocardial pacing involves placciment of the lcad
in all animals or only in thosc at high risk (Table
down the jugular vcin, and thc pulse generator is
PACEMAKER THERAPY 415
?
二
FIGURE 20-12
Electrocardiogram froun a dog dluring pacermaker irnplantation. The ternporary pacernaker (T)
shoulel be lurned ofl immcdiatcly afier permancnt pacing (P) begins to avoid competitive rhyuhms.
usually positioned on the lateral aspect of the ncck
dogs with sick sinus syndrome (Table 204). In the
(Table 20-2) (occasionally the generator is placed over
majority of cases, cndocardial pacing is the preferred
the crarnial lateral thorax after tunncling the lead from
method; however, in very small aniimals or whien ve-
the jugular vein access). Lead dislodgmcnt is the most
nous access is not possible, cpicardial pacing may
common complication of pacemaker implantation and
bc rcquired (Table 20-5). Epicardial pacing is most
occurs most oftcn in larger dogs. Movement of the
commonly performcd by a transdiaphragmatic tech-
neck may contribute to this particular complication.
nique,1-1 although a thoracic approach can be used
Thereforc, an alternative mcthod for lead and genera-
when nccessary.
tor placcinent can be uscd in patients prone to kcad
dislodgment (Table 20-3). This proccdure uscs the
costocervical vein for venous acccss (Fig. 20-14). The
COMPLICATIONS OF PACING
 costocervical approach does have the major disadvan-
tage that it requires a thoracotomy and fluoroscopy.
However, in those frustrating cases of lead dislodg-
Complications involving pacermakcr therapy havc
ment, this procedure works.
been described in humans and animals.I-9. 46, 47 Atten-
Atrial pacing may be the ideal mode of pacing in
tion to detail bcforc, during, and after implartation
can help reduce the probability of most coimplications.
However, owing to the technical difficulties of pacc-
maker implantation, the intricacy of pacing systeins,
and thc complexities involved in successful pacing,
certain complications are inevitable in a small percent-
age of cases.
RA
LEAD DISLODGMENT
The most common complication of transvenous
pacemaker therapy is lead dislodgmcnt or malposi-
tion.7 24 This usually occurs within the first few days
 or weeks following implantation, Dislodgment 1may be
 characterizcd by marked estrangement of thc pacing
lead from its venntricular pacing site, or it may appcar
subtle, with the lead just missing contact with the
endocardium. All types of leads can become dislodged.
Causes include (l) improper screwing of an active
FIGURE 20-13
fixation lead, (2) improper lodging of the tined lead
Intracardiovascular ECG cornplcxes that correspond to various
in the RV trabeculae, (3) cxcessive neck motion in thc
sequential placements of an elertrophysiologic catheter
(correspondingrecording posiions areindicatedbyuros tocach
represerntative P-QRs-T complex.Frorn left to right: the catheter
in the lcad, and (5) excessive movement of the pulse
was aclvanced frorm the cranial vena cava (CrvC), into the right.
 generator. Pulsc generator movement can be lessened
alriun (RA), through the lricuspid valve, and finally into the right.
ventriclc (RV).Also shown is the electrogram when the lcadi is
with the use of a Parsonsett pouch.*
passed into the caudal vena cava (CavC))
Lead dislodgment can he suspected from the history,
416ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
TABLE 20-2
Transvenous Endocardial Ventricular Pacemaker Implantation via the Jugular Vein
Equipment and Supplies
1. Fluoroscope, defibrilalor, ECG machine with oscilloscope, oxygen saturation monitor, Doppler blood pressure instrument, pacing
system analyzcr (PSA), cmergency crash cart
 2. Sierile surgical pack [curved hemostats; straight, smooth hemostat: needlc holclers; towcl clamps; scalpel handle, sealpel blades (#10,
);dsnfeba srMaa isr r cisss i; r0 si
 3. Pacermaker and lead (including curved and straight stylcets) for inplanration
4. Spare pacemaker and lead
5. Polyester Parsounet pouch if anirnal has very litlle subcutaneous tissuc
6. Aclapter slecves to couple mismatched pacing Icad and pulse generator
7. Ilex wrench rool, fixarion tool, and stylet guitle
8. Intravenous antibioties (usually cephalosporin)-oplional
Prepaccmaker Implantation Readincss
1. Read manufacturer's instructions for the pulse generator and lead.
jsdai io iory o ne ope sos euoti sui  ae ss. d u oy snea puodaid au pau pe o z
edo ry poeondan aq te sea [u 'eae si laloid e jI 'uasa peoidai uaaq aaq ie stas 
performance when necessary.
3. To hclp prevent rhe lead advancement into he caudal vena cava, a curvc is imparted to one stylet by grasping the stylet approximatly
5 cn fron the tip. and with the other hand, pressing a sinooth hard objet against the wire as the object is pulld toward the tip (as in
naking ribbon). Pulling the wire between the thumb and index finger also can imake this arch. The curve should match the arch taken
to cnter the right venriele.
4. When using an acuive fixation (e.g., screw-in, hclix clcctrode) pacemaker lead, the mechanical function should be verificd before
inplantation. Within the sterile lield, a straight stylet is inserted into the lead. Using the lixation ool (Fig. 20-7), the connector pin of
the lead is grasped with the most distal hole. The fool is rotated clockwisc until the coiled clcctrole is complctely exposed (1.5 to 2
coils). Fxcessive rotalions will damage the leadl. The maximum nun ber of rotations is stated in the instruetions for each lead. A J-
shaped stylet. (atrial lead) will require more rotations. The fixation tool is disconnecred frorn rhe connector pin, andl the lead is
released. This alows any residual torque in the lcad to be relieved. After this test, the fixalion tool is again attached, andl
counterclockwise motion retracis the coil into the protective sheath.
Pacemaker Implantation Procedure
1. Position the animal in left lateral recumbency antd place a folled towel undcr the neck. Position the head so that the jugular vein is
casily seen and the skin of the neck is mildly taut.
q pnoqs ear poddad o) ypod iorou asnd oul noj uou yanou Suoe uoo pato au adep pue dad aeans 7
generous).
3. At the base of the ncck, make a 5- to 8cm-long incision slightly dorsal to rhe distended jugular vein.*
4. Bluntly lissect te subcutaneous tissue. Expose and free up approximatcly 3 to 4 cm of the jugular vein.
5.Lsing the curved hemostats.slip two strands of moistened silk suure under the jugular vein so that the cranial and caudal loop can be
grasped to raise the vein manually from the surounding struclures. The cranial ligaure is tied, and the caudal ligaturc is hcld
somewhat taut fo allow blood to cntcr and distend the vein, while controlling temorrhagc.
6. Wirh smooth, straight hermostats, a porrion (one third to one half of the diameter) of the vein is pinched perpendieular to its long
axis. This action causes a lenting of the vein along is long axis.
7. A #l1 blade or iris scissors is used to perform a horizontal venolomy. Ihe incision must be dccp cnough to recach the lumcn but not
 deep enough to sever the vein.
8. A soff, curved stylct is insertedl into the lurnen of the leacl.
9.The leadl and stylet arc advanccd through the venolomy into the central venous circulation. This can be aided by using a vein pick.
10. L'nder fluoroscopic guidancc, the Iead is guided into thc right ventricle. Once the leadl is positioned in the rniddle: of ithe RV, the
11.The fxation tool is positioned on the connector pin (see earlier), and the lcad tip with the straight stylet is genuy pressed against the
endocardium. The lool is rotated clockwise. When the coil is completely extruded, this torque is released. Complete coil extrarction is
verified by fluoroscopy. Two radiopaquc crimp slceves are separated when the coil is fully retracted, and this appearance should be
noted dluring the initial fluoroscopie examination. With full extension of the coil, the crirnp sleeves come togcther.
12.Thewhole lad isrotatcd approximately1 revoluionlockwise to ensure thatthe hclicalclectrodeis securedto thc ndorrdiu
13. 'The stylet is then carefuly withdrawn.
14. ldcally, a pacemaker system analyzer (PSA) is used to obtain iniial thresholds. A pulsc duration of 0.5 ins is used. The maximum acutc
arnplitude should be 1.0 V with a resistancc of 300-1200 ohms. The minimum acute sensing amplitude should be 5.0 1nV. Values will
vary depending on the lead type and cardliac tissue condition. lf acceptable values are not initially fountl, wait 10 minutcs and repeat. If
thresholds are still too high, Icad reposilioning is requiredl.
15. An clectrogran is recorded from the implanted lead (through the notch of the stylet guide) to identify the current of injury (i.e., ST
scgnent clevation). Such an appearance indicates good contact.
16.Aug tesis prformed with e stlein lac.Th lead is gentlged whil brving eearwith lurosopyRsistans
retraet. the coil aund begin again.
lead, turn the hex wrench tool clockwise until resistance is felt. Do not overtighten the setscrew.
19.Ithepuse generatoris alar stenpacin wibinf thpulse genratoris auplar sten,pang wilbin whn h
uninsulated side of the pulse generator is placcd in contact with the tissue.
20. Once pacing begins, the temporary pacemaker should he turncd off to avoid complications (sc Fig. 20-12).
the pulse generator and any resiciual lead. A small amount of Jead slack is allowed, with a bit extra pushed into the vein. The residual
lead is loosely wrapped in a circle (rot in a higure 8, nol coiled, nol around the generator, and not tightly) (see Fig. 20-19). It is then
placcd under the pulse generator.
22. The pulse generator is atlached to adljacent. rissues by placing a nonabsorbable suture through the suttre hote locared in the pulsc
generator connector assermbly.
PACEMAKER THERAPY 417
TABLE 20-2
Transvenous Endocardial Ventricular Paccmaker Implantation via the Jugular Vein Comtinued
Pacemaker Implantation Proccdure Comtinued
23. The lcad is sccured in the vein with the aid of a grooved anchoring sleeve that fts over the lead (see Fig. 20-7). The slceve is pushed
caudaly down the lead umtil it entcrs the vein. At this point, sutures are ptaced around the sleeve and fascia and tightcnel securcly.
24. The pulse generator pocket is carefully sutured closcd, taking carc to climinatc dead space, which helps prevent seroma formation and
pulse gcnerator motion.
25.
The subcutaneous ussucs and skin arc closcd rouincly.
*An alternative to the jugular vcin cutdown approach (described in steps 3 to 7) is a percutancous jugular vein catheterization
techniquc. By this method, a 9 French, 15.5 crn long sheath (Peel-Away Introducer Sct, Type CPLl, Cook, Bloomington. IN) is
introdueed through the skin into the jugular vcin, through which the pacemakcr wire is inserted. The sheath is ihen peeled away,
eed d o  s  d d d u d 
to the pulsc generator.
Postpacemaker Implantation Medical Record Notations and Procedures
1. Importanl data to record in the rnedical record include:
a. The pacemaker manufacturer, moiel and serial munber, and radiopaque If code
b. The type of lead (active, passivc, steroid or nonsteroid-clucling), inanufacturer, model and serial number. This information is valuable
should the pulsc generator require replacerncnt.
c. Note whether or not an upsizing or downsizing slecve was uscd.
dl. All threshold valucs
C. All programmed values
2. Perfortn a I 2-lcad ECG for fuure comparison of P-QRST morphology.
3. Take lateral and dorsoventral (or ventrocdorsal) thoracice radiographs: inclnde the neck to visualize the pulse generator.
4. General home care instructions for the owner:
a.Monitor heart rate daily for 8 wecks: then wcckly.
b. Callif the heart rate slows more than 5 bcars from the original heart ratc.
C. Call ir any infection or serorma develops.
d. Sutures should be rcmovcd and the bandagc rechecked in 10-14 days.
t. Recheck to cvaluate pacing thrcsholds at 8 wecks post-op.
1. Recheck every 6 to 12 rnonths (or as dictated by the anirnal's cardiac status) after 8-weck follow-up.
ECG, and pacemaker interrogation. Clinical signs such
multiple leads may be rcquircd to identify the pacing
as weakness or syncope usually recur within days or a
spike. This is cspecially truc when exanining Holter
few wceks of pacemaker implantation. The ECG often
recordings that may filter out the high-frcquency
reveals complete or intcrmittcnt loss of pacing (i.e.,
spikes to such a degrec that unipolar spikes are grcatly
loss of capture). The initial bradyarrhythmia is usually
attenuatcd and bipolar spikes are not visible. If thc
 present on the ECG. Moreover, there is loss of sensing
ECG rccords a change in QRS morphology of the
as evidenccd by the prcsence of pacing artifacts but.
paced beats conpared with the morphology at thc
without associated QRS complexcs (Fig. 20-15). Con-
time of implantation, one should suspect incipient
tinuous ECG (Holter) recordings may be required to
 lcad dislodgment. Interrogation of the pacemaker will
identify interimittent loss of capture.
When evaluating an ECG froin an animal with sus-
ancc when kcad dislodgment is present. Modern ECG
pectcd pacing malfunction, carcful cxamination of
machines have internal filters that usually cause high-
TABLE 20-3
Equipment
1. Thoracic surgical pack (incluling rib retractors, tunneling device, Rumel's tourmiquet)
2. Ability fo provide patient ventilation
Procedure
1. Perform thoracotomy through the right second intercostal space.
2. Isolate the costocervical vein (CCV) (see Fig. 20-14) from thc mediastinal pleura and ligate it (2-0 silk) 3 cm distal to the vena cava.
3. Temporarily occhude the CXV, using a Rumel's tourniquct placed at the junction of the CCV and the cranial vena cava.
4. Make a venotomy incision bctween the ligaturc and the tourniquet; advancc he lcad into the ccntral venous circulation as the Rumel's
tourniquet is loosened.
5. Using fuoroscopy. position the lead in the right ventrieular apex.
6. Makc a 5-cm vertical incision over Lhe right 7ih rib. Create a srnall pocket. dleep to the exrernal abdorninal oblirque muscle caudal to the
7th rib.
7. Tunncl the lead deep to the subeulaneous tissues of the lateral thorax. The lead should cxit frorn the incision over the 7th rib.
sp   o   s  p ea    d pn i e  ssmd  s
Table 20-2.
418
ABNORMALCARDIOVASCULARFUNCTIONANDPRINCIPLESOFTHERAPY
Dorsal
3rd rib-
2nd rib
Azygos
Right
costocervical
vein
Caudal
Cranial
FIGURE20-14
Cranialvenacava
The anatomic location of the right costocervical vein.
Ventral
TABLE20-4
Transvenous Right Atrial Endocardial Pacemaker Implantation via the Jugular Vein *
Steps
Using a Straight Screw-in Endocardial Pacemaker Lead
Using anAtrial J-shaped Screw-in EndocardialPacemaker Lead
1
Insert a straight stylet into a straight screw-in endocardial
Insert a straight stylet into an atrial J-shaped screw-in lead.
lead.
Using fluoroscopic guidance,advance the lead tip into the
Using fluoroscopic guidance, advance the lead tip into the
right atrium (RA).
right atrium (RA).
2
Once the lead tip is positioned within the RA,the straight
Once the lead tip is positioned within the RA,the straight stylet
stylet is withdrawn from the lead and is then replaced by a
is partially withdrawn from the lead. This allows the lead to
J-shaped stylet.
assume its preformed J-shape.
Position the pacemaker lead tip so that the curve is directed
Position the pacemaker lead tip so that the curve is directed
cranially toward the right auricle.
cranially toward the right auricle.
Secure thelead tip into the right auricle by gently pressing
Completely withdraw the straight styletfrom the leadwhile
the tip into myocardium and rotating the fixation tool (see
maintaining gentle retraction on the lead (this retraction
Table 20-2).Noteatrial lead securement usually requires
secures the lead against the auricular endocardium).
several rotations with the fixation tool.t
Insert the J-shaped stylet into the lead.Secure thelead by
rotating the fixation tool (see Table 20-2). Noteatrial lead
securement usually requires severalrotationswith thefixation
tool.
Atrial lead thresholds at implantation are:
Atrial lead thresholds at implantation are:
Max. Stimulation amplitude,1.5 V
Max.Stimulation amplitude1.5V
Resistance, 300-1200 ohms
Resistance, 300-1200 ohms
Sensitivity,2 mV
Sensitivity,2 mV
*Only those details relating to atrial lead placement are contained here.Refer to Table 20-2 for a more complete description of transvenous endocardial
pacemaker lead implantation.
The position of the lead tip is judged to be satisfactory when the lead tip moves in a dorsoventral plane in concert with thebeating heart.
in the atrial appendage (Fig. 20-2).
PACEMAKER THERAPY
419
TABLE 20-5
t0 expose two radiographic views. Lead dislodginent is
Epicardial Ventricular Pacemaker Implantation *
usual apparent, but subtle changes in position cal1
Equipment
make the diagnosis more difficuit. If there is a question
1. Gencral surgical pack
as to the location of thie lead, fluoroscopy can be used
2. Epicardial pacing lead (usually, a serew-in lcad)
to identify lcad motion with each heartbeat. Fre-
4. Ability to perform patient ventilation
qucntly, the lead dislodgment can be identifed by
5. Epicardial pacing lead
cchocardiography, especially for atrial lead dislodg-
Procedure
1. Position the animal in dorsal recumbency, with the legs pulled
ment.
cranially.
Once lead dislodgment. is diagnosed, treatment rc-
2. Surgicaily prep and drape the ventral abdomen and the candal
quires a second procedure to rcposition the existing
ventral thorax.
lcad more optimally or to replace the original pacing
 3. Perforin a midine ccliotomy, beginning just cranial to the
xiphoid, and extend the incision just caudal to the umbilicus.
 system. Ideally, the cause of the dislodgment should
4. Use Balfour's rcuactors to exposc the diaphragm while gently
be identified to avoid repeating the mistake or to
retracring the liver caudally.
lessen the chance of it recurring. Most often the same
 5. Incise the diaphragm lefl of thc midlinc to expose the cardiac
apex.
lead can be reused and properly repositioncd, al-
6. Begin ventilating the patient.
though a clot or fibrosis on thc lead tip may hinder
7.Place stay sutures along the cdge of the dliaphragmatic
proper function. At the time of surgery a second com-
incision.
8. Ghasp the pericardiurn with DeBakey's forceps, lent it away
 plete pulse gencrator and pacing lcad should be avail-
trom the heart, and incise rhe pericardiun with small scissors.
able in case problems are cncountered with the origi-
9. Plare stay sutures in the pericarlium to lifl the heart so that
nal systein.
the apex is exposcd.
I0. Twist a corkscrew epicardial lcad into the epunyocardium
(avoid coronary vessels). using the specific plastic insrument
designed for this purposc. Lcave the pericardium open.
1l. Conmnert the lead as described in Table 20-2.
PACEMAKER NOT PACING AS
12. Remove stay sutures; close the diaphragm with the pacing leadl
cxiting Jrom the incision (leave a tension-relieving loop on the
PROGRAMMED
thoracic side of the dliaphragrn).
13. Create a pocket between the transverse rmuscle of the
abdomen and the internal abdominal oblique muscles.
Occasionally, a pacemaker will not pace the heart in
14. Close the abdominal wall routincly.
accordance with the programmed rate and paramcters
*This table describes the particular features for placement of ar epicardial
(Fig. 20-18),18. 24. 25 Careful interrogation of the pulsc
generator should then be made. Reasons for this in-
the lead via the jugular vein are described here. See Table 20-2 for more
cottplete rletails.
clude (1) battery depletion, (2) sticking reed switch
(places the pulse generator into magnet mode), (3)
defibrillation, and (4) inadvertent reprogramming. A
frequency pacing spikes to be recorded with varying
 problem encountered in cold climates is the reseting
amplitudes (Fig. 20-16). This does not indlicate pace-
of thc pulsc generator in response to cold (Fig. 20-18).
maker malfunction.
Pulsc generators shipped during the winter that do
Raliography, luoroscopy,  and echocardiography
 not pace at the rates programmed but instead pace at.
can confirm 1he diagrosis of leadl dislodgment. Radio-
a slower ratc should be suspected to have been affected
graphs takcn immcdiatcly after implartation are com-
by cold temperature. This causes battery voltage to
pared with those taken at the time of the loss of
drop. but the programmer can be used to reset the
capture. sensing, or both (Fig. 20-17). It is always best
paccmaker to normal function.25
FIGURE 20-15
(A) FCG recorded from a dog
with 3° AV block and parcmaker
malfunction.Paccinaker capture
is interinirtent. There arc pacing
arlifact spikes that precede
caplure (C), ferst errou, and
pacing arlitacr spikes (second
arrow) without ventricular caplure
(i.c.. absent QRS-I complexcs).
power source in (A) was
depleted. Ihe dog in (B) hadl
pacenaker lead dislodgment. Scc
text for complcte differential
diagnosis. Paper spced. 50 mm/
sec. I mv
I cm.
420
ABNORMALCARDIOVASCULARFUNCTIONANDPRINCIPLESOFTHERAPY
FIGURE 20-16
Electrocardiogramrecordedfrom
a dog using a digital
electrocardiograph.Such
recordingsusually showvariation
in the amplitude of the pacing
spike(arrows).This isa function
of thefrequency of therecording
and thehigh frequency of the
spike.It does not indicate a pulse
generator abnormality.
LOSSOFCAPTUREWITHNO
LOSSOFCAPTUREWITHPACING
PACINGSPIKES
SPIKES
Careful examinationofmultipleECGleadscanhelp
Thepresence ofpacing spikes,but a failure to cap
determinewhether lack of pacemaker captureis associ-
ture and pace,is most commonly caused bylead dis-
ated with loss of the pulse generator pacing stimulus.
lodgment (see Fig.20-15).Other causes include (1)
inadequate stimulus (voltage,pulse width),(2) exit
excessivefilteringinherentindigitalelectrocardio-
block,47 (3) inappropriate lead placement (e.g, in the
graphmachines can reduce the size of the pacing
vena cava),(4)lead fracture,(5）improper contact
artifact to thepoint that itis difficult tovisualize.25
(setscrew not secured,improper pin insertion),(6)
Truelossofpacemakercapturecanbecontinuousor
battery failure,(7) insulation failure,(8)circuit fail-
intermittent.Reasonsforthiscomplicationinclude(1)
ure,(9) certain drug therapy,(10) lead perforation,
battery failure,，,45(2)circuit failure,(3） lead fracture
or (11) metabolic factors (e.g., severe hyperkalemia).25
(Fig. 20-19), (4) unipolar lead wrongly placed in a
Holter monitoring may be needed to detect losses of
bipolar device,(5)incompatible connection between
capture thatmay correspond to inadequate stimulus.
lead and pulse generator, (6) oversensing (see later),
This is because thresholds do change during the day
(7)unipolar pulse generator not in contact with tissue,
and during certain activities.
(8)“cross-talk” in a dual-chamber device,(9) loose
Whenthepacingthresholdincreases overtimeuntil
connection(setscrew not secured,improper pin inser-
capture is no longer occurring, exit block should be
tion)(Fig.20-20),and(10) insulation failure.
1000ms
S1
S2
FIGURE 20-18
Electrocardiogram (top trace)recorded from a dogwith a
pacemaker that was not pacing at the programmedrate.The pulse
generatorwas shipped during thewinter andwas exposed to
temperatures lower than-10°C.The pulse generator was reset
andreprogrammed.Theblack arrowindicates the pacingartifact
spike of theunipolar pulsegenerator.Apresystolicclickwas
FIGURE20-17
auscultated.Phonocardiography(bottom trace)revealed that this was
caused by the pacemaker(open arrows point to the presystolic
Right lateral thoracicradiograph of a dogwith a dual chamber
click-compare the timingof the2ndopen arrowto the
pacemaker.Although the right atrium was pacing(white arrow),the
pacemaker spike above).This observation is described in humans
ventricle was not.The ventricular lead is dislodged (black arrow)
as well.The first (SI) and second (S2) heart sounds are indicated.
from its initial,correct,rightventricular apical positin.
Paper speed,50 mm/sec.1 mV = 1 cm.
PACEMAKERTHERAPY
421
FIGURE20-19
(A)Right lateral and(B) dorsoventral radiographs show an endocardial
pacemakerlead that has beenwrapped too tightly around thepulsegenerator.
Noticethattheircularloopsofpacemakerleadarebentataninappropriately
acute sharp angle(arrows).The inset in (A) shows howthe pacemakerlead
shouldbeproperlywrappedto avoidleadkinking orbending and should be
placed underneath the pulse generator.
excluded.Exitblock,which is uncommon,is caused by
candevelopwithprogressivemyocardialfibrosisdue
fibroustissueattheelectrode-myocardiuminterface.48
to a primary myopathic process (see Fig. 20-10).20
There is no change in the morphology of the QRS
withexitblockbecause thelead hasnot moved.In-
creasing the voltage and pulse width may temporarily
IMPROPERSENSING
relieve the problem;however,repositioning the lead
usuallyisnecessary.Treatment with systemic steroids
OVERsENsING.This occurs when an inappropriate sig-
may have some beneficial effects.This observation led
nal is sensed,5 and it is characterized by a loss of
to the use of steroid-eluding leads,which have essen-
capturewithout a pacing spike on theECG.Over-
tiallyeliminatedthisproblem.9Permanentelevations
sensingcanbedifferentiatedfromothercausesofloss
in capturethresholds that donotrespond to steroids
ofcapturebyplacing theprogrammingheadinthe
600ms
人
Y
600ms
600ms
600ms
600ms
FIGURE20-20
Anepicardial pacemakerwasfailing topace properly.Although theratewasprogrammedat100
beats/min,pacingwas not constant.A loss of capture without the pacing artifact was documented.
Oversensingwasnot the problem because theintervals did notmatchup,andwhen the pulse
generator was switched to“magnet mode,theloss of capture continued.In this case,failure to
paceproperlywas attributed to aloosesetscrewthatpermittedthepacemakerlead tofitloosely,
move,and lose contact within the pulse generator.Paper speed,50mm/sec.1 mV=1 cm.
422 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
magnet mode and positioning it over the pulse genera-
ing mode), (7) poor slew rate, and (8) intrinsic beat
tor. If pacing resumes and pauses are eliminaled, over-
falling in the device's refractory period (see Fig. 20--4).
sensing is the problem. Oversensing can occur when
With dual pacing systems, cross-talk inhibition can oc-
myopotentials are sensed primarily with unipolar sys-
cur. Cross-talk inhibition causes ventricular oversensing
tems, I the sensitivity is programmed too high (numer-
of atrial depolarizations, thus inhibiting ventricular
ical number too low), oversensing of the P waves or T
pacing. Confusing paterns of improper sensing can
waves can occur. To correct the problem, the pace-
be recorded during the transition of temporary to
 maker setting is reprogrammed to be less sensitive.
permanent pacing during the implantation procedure
 Afterpotentials can be a source of oversensing, espe-
(see Fig. 20-12).
cially if the pacing stimulus is of high amplitude and
duration. An afterpotential is the elecirical signal pro-
duced after the delivery of the stimulation pulse. After-
EXTRACARDIAC STIMULATION
 potentials are usually not sensed as they fall within the
blanking period.?
Occasionally, dlogs will have "thumping' or move-
UNDERsENsING. This occurs whe11 the pulse generalor
ment of their neck or diaphragm with each pacing
stimulus. The most common reason for this is a unipo-
serving the timing of pacing spikes relative to the
lar device programmed with a high output. If the
 paced and spontancous QRS complexes is required to
pacing threshold is determined, the voltage usually
make this determination. Fusion complexes can occur
         
when the ventricles are stimulated simultancously by a
margin for capture. Other reasons for cxtracardiac
 spontancous depolarization and a paced impulse (Fig.
stimulation include (1) close proximity of the elec
trode to the diaphragm, (2) phrenic nerve stimulation.
is superimposed on the spontaneous QRS complex
(3) lead insulation failure, (4) device placed upside
(stimulus too late to cause true fusion, and stimulation
down, or (5) lead perforating the heart.2
occurs during the refractory period of the ventricle)
(Fig. 20-21). Suffcient amplitude of the venuricular
complex must be achieved in order for the pulse gen-
DEVELOPMENT OF CONGESTIVE
erator to sense the depolarization. The surface ECG
may reach suficient voltage amplitude to be seen be-
HEART FAILURE
fore the intracardiac clectrogram has reached the sens-
 ing amplitude (recorded under the electrode). This is
 Some dogs develop CHF after pacemaker implanta-
the cause of pscudofusion complexes. Pseudofusion
tion. We have observed this phenomenon in dogs with
complexes may be confused for undersensing, but if
acquired 3° AV block and with SSs. Dogs with 3° AV
the pacing spike falls after the termination of the
block most. commonly develop CHF secondary to myo-
surface QRS complex, then undersensing does cxist.!9
cardial failure (see Fig. 20--10). Critical review of pre-
Causes for undersensing include (l) improper pro-
operative  echocardiographic indices of rnyocardial
gramming (sensitivity too high), (2) lead dislodgment,
structure and function is therefore important to detect
(3) lead malpositioning, (4) battery failure, (5) mag-
 dogs that may have marginally normal contracility.
net application (see Fig. 20-8), (6) sticking reed switch
A dog with good function should have a fractional
(places pulse generator in fixed [asynchroous] pac-
shortening that is above normal (chapter 8); other-
FIGURE 20-21
Electrocardiogram recorded from a dog with sick sinus syndrone. Thc unipolar paccmaker (errmu
indicates artifact. spike) is pacing the vcntriclc, but fusion bcats (F) are occurring (the inherent rale
and thepaing rale arc sinilar)If the pacing spike werc delayedjust slighly norein he lastfusion
bcat, a"pseudofusionwould havc occurred. (See text. for explanation.) A spontancous complex
(() follows one of the negative P waves. Paper spced, 50 mn/sec. 1 mV .. I cm.
PACEMAKER THERAPY
423
wise, careful follow-up for this complication is war-
 pacemaker syndrome would ideally be the implanta-
rallted.
tion of a dual chamber pacemaker that insured AV
The cause of myocardial failure observed in this
sequential pacing. In many situations this may not be
 small subset of dogs is unku1own. One possibility is that
 possible. Theoretically, this problem is more likely to
the disease process that caused heart block was also
occur in dogs with sick sinus syndrome (SSS). There-
associated with incipient, progressve myocardial fail.
fore, if ventricular pacing and VA conduction can be
ure (cardiomyopathy). Alternatively, long-term
1  and
minimized, improvement is expected. With Sss, pro-
marked bradycardia could lave resulted in irreversible
longed periods of asystole result in syncope. Thus, the
myocardial damage. Finally, pacemaker syndrome (see
pacing rate can be programned to a minimum to
 next) could play a primary or contributory role. Dogs
prevent prolonged asystole and to allow the normal
witls SSS may occasionally develop CHF. but this is
sinus rate to predominate. Dogs with primarily a co1l-
 due to chronic, progressive mitral and tricuspid valve
tinuous bradycardia would not be helped by this
degeneration (endocardiosis). However, the fact that
method. Also, hysteresis can be programmed to "on."
VA conduction is likely to be common in these dogs
Hysteresis allows ventricular pacing to occur only after
raises the probability thal pacemaker syndrome contri-
a longer pause than the programmed lower rate.30
butes to the failure. Additionally, it is conceivable that
 Alternatively, antiarrhythmics can be given to decrease
VA conduction, or theophylline can be used in an
tant fraction across the incompetenit valves.
altempt to increase the sinus rate.
PACEMAKER SYNDROME
ARRHYTHMIAS
Pacemaker syndrome was first described in humans
Arrhythmias have been reported as a conplication
as a complication of ventricular pacing that resulted
 in dogs requiring pacemakers.' It is possible for the
in CHF:o. 51 However, pacemaker syndrome can occur
lead to induce arrhythmias, and these can be recorded
with other modes of pacing when the proper timing
 most commonly during the immediate postoperative
between atrial contraction and ventricular contraction
 period. In other cases, arrhythmias may become more
 is absent."z Most of the hemodynamic alterations (de-
prevalent in conjunction witli progressive underlying
creased cardiac output and systemic blood pressure)
heart disease. It is our impresson that some dogs
of pacemaker syndrome result from the loss of AV
in 3° AV block may be more prone to ventricular
sequential pacing and ventriculoatrial (VA) conduc-
tachyarrhythmias (Fig. 20-22). Dogs with SSS may have
tion (see Fig. 20-9),s3,  IIowever, reflexes elicited by
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias in addition to the
increased pulmonary artery and pulmonary venous
bradycardia.
These  rhyihm  disturbances  must  be
 pressures may contribute to the syndrome.
treated with the appropriate antiarrhythmic agents
 Clinical evidence of right- or left-sided heart failure
when indicated (see chapter 18).
that has cxacerbated or developed after pacemaker
implantation should raise the suspicion of pacemaker
syndrome. However, it may be difficult to differentiate
INFECTIONS
the development of failure from progression of an
underlying disease and the pacemaker syndrome. A
Infections caused by contamination of the implant
specific diagnosis is reached if the clinical signs of
site at the time of surgery are rare. Most commonly.
failure resolve or improve with the resoration of AV
the infection is metastatic, caused by bacteria seeding
synchrony. Obviously, because of the limited use of AV
the pulse generator pocket from a remote site (e.g..
sequential pacing in veterinary paients, proof of this
cystitis, dermatitis, teeth cleaning). Thus. it is im-
complication is lacking.
Careful
cardiovascular 
cxamination  can identify
 dogs with Sss that may be susceptible to pacemaker
tunately, infection of the pulse generator pocket and/
syndrome. Dogs are suspect if after pacemaker implan-
 or lead is uncommon. However, if it occurs, the of
tation the systolic pressure during pacing drops, com-
fending lead and generator should be removed and
 pared with sinus rhythm. In humans, a greater than 20
replaced by a new system, using the contralateral jugu-
mmlIg pressure drop implies that pacemaker syn-
lar vein. If this is not possible, thein the site should be
drome exists., This determination should be made
assessed with a bacterial culture and sensitivity panel,
immediately after the pace maker is activated and again
the infected pulse generator pocket flushed and
 30 seconds after pacing. Doppler cchocardiography
 drained, and appropriate antibiotic given. Treatment 
can be used to assess the effect of atrial contraction
of infected pulse generator pockets, liowever, is often
against a closed AV valve and the effect of ventriculo-
unrewarding with the best treatment being a com-
atrial conduction.50 53. 54 Trcatiment of an animal with
pletely new pacing lead and generalor.
424
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
VT
FIGURE 20-22
P
Sinultancous 3-lead ECG
recorded fronn a boxer with 3"
AV block. The pulsc generator
was at the cnd of service and the
pacing rate was slow. with the
slow rate, the dog developed
vcntricular tacliycardia (Vf). This
resolved once the dog was paced
at. 90 beais/min. P, P wavc. Arrow
indicatcs the pacing artifact.
Paper speed, 500 mm/scc.
I11V：
SEROMA
6. Musscliman EE, Rouse GP. Parker Aj. Pcrimancnt pacc-
maker implantation with transvenous clectrode placc-
ment in a dog with complcte atrioventricular hcart.
A pulse generator pocket seroma is a fairly common
block, congestive heart faifurc, and Stokes-Adams sei-
and usually minor complication of transvenous pace-
zurcs. J Simall Anim Pract 17:149, 1976
maker therapy Several factors contribute to the devel-
7. Sisson D, Thomas WP, Woodfeld J, et al. Perimancnt.
opment of a seroma: (l) inadequate hemostasis, (2)
Intern Med 5:322, 1991
excessive tissue dissection and trauma, (3) excessively
8. Fox PR, Moise NS, woodfeld JA, et al. Techniqucs and
large pocket, facilitating movement of the pulse gener-
complications of pacemaker implantation in four cats. [
 ator, (4) inadequate closure of tissue layers (promoting
Am Vet Med Assoc 199:1742, 1991
pulse generator motion), and (5) pulse generator im-
8a. Starnoulis ME, Bond BR, Fox PR. Pacemaker therapy
properly secured to tissue. To decrease the chance of
for symptomatic bradycardia in the cat. J Vet Eimcrg Crit
Carc 2:67, 1992
seroma formation, one must assure proper hemostasis
9.Yoshioka MM, Tilley LP, Harvey HJ, et al. Perinancnt
 and create a snug fit between the pulse generator and
 pacemaker implantation in the dog. J Am Anirn Hosp
its subcutancous pockel to avoid motion of the device.
Assoc 17:746, 1981
ebns oyi toao paqdde si deum anssaid e uonippe u
10. Gregoratos G, Cheilin MD, Conill A, et al. ACC/AHIA
site before the animal is awakened from anesthesia.
guidelincs for implanlation of cardiac pacemakers and
The bandage is changed every third day for 2 weeks.
antiarrhythimia deviccs: cxccutivc summary. Circulation
 If a seroma forms, careful fuid drainage by needle
97:1325, 1998
11. Johnson L, Sisson DD. Atrioventricular block in cals.
 centesis, coupled with a snug, soff-padded neck wrap
Comp Con1 Educ Pracl Vet 15:1356, 1993
to reduce motionl and seroma reformation, is usually
12.1
Michaclsson M, Jonzon A, Riesenfeld T. Isolated congen-
successful.
ital completc atrioventricular block in adult life. Circula-
tion 92:442, 1995
13. 1iu SK, Tilley LP, Tashjian RJ. Lesions of the conduction
system in thc cat with cardiomyopathy. Recent Ady Stud
REFERENCES
Cardiovasc Struct Metab 10:68i, 1975
14. lrnich W. The fundamental law of clectrostimulation
and its application to defbrillation. PACE 13:1433, 1990
15. Kay GN. Basic concepts of pacing. In Ellenhogen KA
1. Bonagura ID, Helphrey Ml., Muir WW. Complications
(ed): Practical Cardiac Diagnosis: Cardiac Pacing. Bos-
associated with pcrmanenl pacemaker inplantation in
ton, Blackwell Scientific: Publications. I992, p 32
the dog. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 182:149, 1983
16.
Stokes K, Bornzin G. The electrode-biointcrface (simu-
2. Buchanan JW. Dcar MG, Pylc RL. Medical and pace-
lation). In Barold S (ed): Modern (Cardiae Pacing. Mt.
maker therapy of complete hcart block and congestive
Kisco, NY, Futura, 1985, p 33
heart failurc in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 152:1099,
17.
Stokes KB, Kay GN. Artificial clccuric cardiac stimulation.
1968
In Ellenbogen KA, Kay GX, Wilkoff BL (eds): Clinical
3. 1Darkc PGC. Been M, Marks A. Use of a programmablc,
Cardiac Pacing. Philadclphia, WB Saunders, 1997, p 3
"'pbysiological" cardiac paccmakcr in a dog with total
18. Schoenfeld Ml1, Padula 1.E, IIarthornc JW. Program-
atriovcnuricular block(with some comments on compli-
mers for cardiac: paccimakcrs. In Ellenbogen KA, Kay
cations associated with cardiac pacemakers). J Small
GX, Wilkoff BL (eds): Clinical Cardiac Pacing. Philadel
Anim Pract 26:295, 1985
phia, WB Saunders, 1997, p 127
4. Darke PGG, McArcavcy D, Been M. Transvenous cardiac
19.1
Barold SS, Zipes IDP. Cardiac pacemakers and antiar-
pacing in 19 dogs and 1 cat. J Small Anim Pract 30:491,
rhythinic devices. In Braunwald E (ed): Heart Diseases:
1989
A Texibook of Cardiovascular Mcdicine. Philadelphia,
5. Lombard CW, Tilley LP, Yoshioka M. Paccmakcr implan-
WB Saunders, 1997, p 705
tation in the dog: survey and literaturc revicw. J Am
 20. Szabo Z, Solti F. The significance of the tissue reaction
Anim Hosp Assoc 17:751, 1981
around the electrode on the latc myocardial threshold.
PACEMAKER THERAPY
425
In Schaldach M, Furman S (eds): Advanccs in Pacemaker
(DDD) and ventricular rate-adaptive (VVIR) pacing on
Technology. New York, Springer-Verlag, 1975, p 273
neuroendocrinc variables, cxercise performancc, and
21. Kay GN, Ellenbogcn KA. Sensing. In Elenbogen KA, Kay
symptoms in complcte hcart block. Br Heart J 65:188,
GN, wilkoff BI. (cds): Clinical Cardiac Pacing. Philadcl-
1991
phia, WB Saunders, 1997, p 38
37. Natio M, Drcifus lS, Mardelli TJ. ct al. Echocardio-
 22. Belott PH1, Reynolds DW. Pcrmanent pacemaker implan-
graphic features of atrioventricular and ventriculoatrial
tation. In Ellenbogen KA, Kay GN, wilkoff BL (eds):
concducion. Am J Cardiol 46:625, 1980
Clinical Cardiac Pacing. Philadclphia, WB Saunders,
 38. Natio M, Dreifus LS, David B, et al. Reevaluation of the
1992, p 447
rolc of atrial systolc to cardiac hcmodynamics: cvidence
23. Wedensky NE. Cber die Bezichung zwischcn Rcizung
for pulmonary venous rcgurgitation during abnorimal
und Errcgung irn Tctanus. St. Petcrsburg, Ber Akad Wiss
atrioventricular sequcncing. Am IIeart J 105:295, 1983
54:96, 1887
39. Ogawa S, Dreifus LS, Shenoy PN, ct al. IIemodynamic
24. Lcvinc P. Differential diagnosis, evaluation, and manage-
conscquences of atriovcntricular and vcntriculoatrial
mcnt of pacing systcm malfunction. Jn Ellenbogen KA
pacing. PACF 1:18, 1978
(cd): Practical Cardiac Diagnosis: Cardiac Pacing. Bos-
 40. Klementowicz P, Ausubel K, Furman S. The dynarmic:
ton, Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1992, p 309
nature of ventriculoatrial conduction. PACE 9:l050,
 25. Love CJ. Hlayes IDL. Evaluation of pacemaker malfunc
1986
tion. In Ellenbogen KA, Kay GX, wilkoff Bl. (eds): Clini-
11. Labovitz AJ, Williams GA, Redd RM, ct al. Noninvasivc
cal Cardiac Pacing. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997,
assessment of paccmaker hemodynamics of Doppler
p 656
echocardiography: importance of left alrial size. J Am
 26. Mond HG, Helland JR. Engineering and clinical aspects
Coll Cardiol 6:196, 1985
of pacing lcads. In Ellenbogen KA, Kay GX, Wilkoff BI.
12. Askenazi J, Alcxandcr Jll, Koenigsbcrg Dl, ct al. Alter-
(eds): Clinical Cardiac Pacing. Philatdclphia, WB Saun-
ders, 1997, p 69
branch block sinulatcd with atriovcnlricular scquential
27. Benedek ZM, Gross J. U.S-available rate modulated
pacing. Am J Cardiol 53:99, 1984
paccmakcrs. Cardiol Pacing Electrophys Spec Ed 11,
43. Fingeroth JM. Birchard SJ.
.Transdiaphragmatic ap-
1998
proach for permanent cardiac paccinaker implantation
28. Benditt DG, Duncan JL. Activity-scnsing, rate-adaptivc
in dogs. Vet Surg 15:329, 1986
paceinakers. In Ellenbogen KA, Kay GX, Wilkoff Bl.
44. Fingeroth JM. Paccmaker therapy for bradycardias.
(eds): Clinical Cardiac Pacing. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 9:192, 1994
ders, 1998, p 167
45. Fox PR, Matthiesen DT, Purse D, et al. Ventral abdomi-
 29. Roherts DH1, Tennant B, Brockman 1D, ct al. Successful
nal, transdiaphragmatic approach for inplantation of
use of a QT-sensing rate-adaptive pacemakcr in a dog.
cardiac pacemakcrs in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Vci Rcc 130:471、1992
189:1303, 1986
 30. Wood M, Ellenbogen KA, Haines 1D. Temporary cardiac
46. Rowland PH, Moise NS, Sevcrson 1). Myxomia at the site
pacing. n Ellenbogen KA (cd): Practical (Cardiac Diag-
of a subcuaneous paccimaker in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp
nosis: Cardiac Pacing. Boston, Blackwell Scicntific Publi-
Assoc 27:649, 1991
cations, 1992, p 162
47. Snyder PS, Atkins CE, Sato T. Syncope in three dogs with
31. Exccutive Committce of thc German Working Group on1
cardiac pacemakers. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:61i, 1991
Cardiac Pacing:
Comimunication  to  Professor
K.
48.1
Fishbein MC, Tan KS, Beaszell JW, ct al. Cardiac pathol-
Steinbach, European Working Group on Cardiac Pacing.
ogy of uansvenous paccmakcrs in dogs. Am Icart J
Junc 1985
93:73, 1977
 32. Ellenbogen KA, Thamcs M1D, Mohanty PK. New insights
49. Radovsky AS, Van Vlect JF: Effects of dcxamethasonc
into pacemaker syndrome gained from hcmodynamic,
clution on tissue rcaction around stinulating electrodes
humoral, and vascular rcsponscs during ventriculoatrial
of endocardial pacing leads in dogs. Am Heart J
pacing. Am J Cardiol 65:33, 1990
117:1288,1989
33. Mitchell JH, Gupta DN, Payne RM. Influence of atrial
50. Ellenbogen KA, Stambler BS. Pacemaker syndromc. In
syslolc on cffectivc ventricular stroke volume. Circ Res
Ellenbogen KA, Kay GN, Wilkoff BL (eds): Clinical Car-
17:11, 1965
diac Pacing. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997, p 419
 34. Roscnqvist M, Isaaz K, Botvinick EHi, et al. Relative im-
51.
Hass JM, Strait BG. Pacemaker induced cardiovascular
portance of activation sequence compared to atrioven-
failurc: hemodynamic and angiographice ohservations.
tricular synchrony in lefi ventricular function. Am J
Ain J Cardiol 33:295, 1974
Cardiol 67:148, 1991
 52. Barold Ss. Rcpetitivc recntrant and nonreenirant ventri-
35. Bishop VS, Haywood JR. Hormonal control of cardiovas-
culoatrial synchrony
cular reflexes. In Zuckcr IH1, Gilmorc JP (eds): Reflex
Cardiol 14:754, 1991
Control of the Circulation. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press,
 53. Goldrcyer B, Biggcr T. Ventriculoatrial condurlion in
1991, p 253
man. Circulation 41:935, 1970
36. Oldroyd RG, Rae AP, Carter R, ct al. Double-hlind cross-
54. Levy S, Corbelli JL, Labrunic P. Rctrogradc (vcntriculo-
over comparison of the effects of dual-chambcr pacing
atrial) conduction. PACE 6:364, 1983
lopulmonary
21
and
lerel
Resuscitation
DENNIS T. CROWE, Jr.
PHILIP R. FOX
JENNIFER J. DEVEY
DAVID SPRENG
CARDIOPULMONARY ARREST
Cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA) represents cessation of functional and
effective ventilation and circnlation. It results from any extreme disease or
cxchange, or cardiovascular stability. Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation
(CPCR) describes life-saving procedures intended to reverse CPA. It is synon-
ymous with cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) but emphasizes brain re-
suscitatio1l.
Many advances have been made in teaching and practicing CPCR. They
emphasize (1) preventionl of cardiopulmonary arrest, (2) carly recognition,
(3) aggressive intervention, (4) improved monitoring, and (5) postresuscita-
tive support. Resuscitation efforts have been temporally categorized into
B—Breathing, and CCirculation. This is immediately followed by Advanced
tion, and E—Electrocardiographic and other patient monitoring. Prolonged
or Postresuscitative Life Support includes postresuscitation monitoring and
circulatory support.'
INCIDENCE
 Incidence data are scarce. Cardiopulmonary arrest. was represented by
 0.46 percent of dogs and cats presenting to a university veterinary teacling
 hospital,2 and 1 percent presenting to the author's (IDTC) private emergency
 practice (overall hospital incidence, 3 percent).
OUTCOME
CPR is rarely effective in patients with chronic, debilitating illnesses or
acute, multisystemic failure. Although CPR was originally used for victims of
acute but reversible cardiopulmonary arrest, it has been increasingly applied
427
428ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
to animals with chronic, advanced discasc whose prog-
ible. When doubt cxists, resuscitation should be
losis is extremely poor.
performed.1t. 19 With owners of terminally ill animals.
Initial survival rates are determined by tlie nature of
it is prudent to discuss ssues regarding *"Do Not Resus-
underlying disease and the proficiency of resuscitative
techniques; carly postresuscitation survival is determined
tio11, reduce ecoomic burdens associated with CPR.
 by carly postresuscitative monitoring and support, and
reduce pet suffering, and minimize owner anxieties.12
long-term survival is determined by underlying disease.?
Survival rates of clinically ill pets are markedly lower
than those reported from otherwise healthy cxperi-
CLINICAL RECOGNITION
mental animals. A retrospective clinical study of 135
canines and felines who received CPR reported initial 
Primary CPA is characterized by loss of conscious-
resuscitative success in 28 percent of dogs and 42
ness that occurs within 10 1o 15 seconds of the event.
percent of cats, although only 4 dogs and 1 cat were
discharged alive. The discharged animals had cardiac
Pupils become fixed and dilated within 30 to 45 sec-
onds  and  correspond   to  electroencephalographic
arrests associated with drug or anesthetic reactions.4
Others report a 9 percent survival rate in dogs" and 7
to 22 percent in cats.. 3
becomes prolonged, and mucous membrane color may
appear muddy gray within 1 to 4 minutes postarrest,21
When excessive time has clapsed before resuscita-
tion is atteinpted. CPCR should not be started. When
in some cases.? Breathing ceases, although ventilatory
basic life support was started within I to 4 minutes of
arrest in humans and advanced life support was initi-
gasps may be ohserved for up to several minutes. There
ated within 8 to 10 minutes, successful initial resuscita-
 are no palpable arterial pulses. Secondary CPA usually
tion occurred in 60 percent, In contrast, if basic life
follows a period of hypoxia, anoxia, acid-base inmbal-
 support was not started until after 6 minutes and ad-
ances, or severe hypotension, 15. 2
vanced life support was not started until after 12 min-
 Premonitory signs may be noted. They may include
utes of arrest, successful resuscitation fell to less than
azotemia, oliguria, hypotension (systolic pressure
5 percent.* In a model of asphyxia-induced cardiopul.
< 90 mmlIg), reduced pulse pressure, serious brady-
monary arrest, CPCR performed within 3 minutes or
 or tachyarrhythmias, arterial oxygen saturation mea-
less was followed by complele recovery, within 5 min-
sured by puse oximeiry below 85 percent, acidemia,
utes. by variable coma and neurologic recovery, and
and lactic acidosis. In alesthetized or unconscious
within 7 minutes, by permanent brain damage.? This
 pets, decreased respiratory minute volume and re-
underscores the eed for preparedness, training, and
duced arterial blood pressure are common, often ap-
coordinated efforts.
pearing before electrocardiographic (ECG) waveforms
Core temperature influences oxygen demand and
change. Detection of reduced arterial blood flow may
metabolic rate. In experimental dogs, cerebral ische-
be assessed using Doppler flow devices6, 19. 3, 2 and
[eou u pnsat se oz ne snnu og on dn eu
other monitoring instruments.23 Prearrest morbidity in-
neurologic recovery. The metabolic rate and oxygen
 dices to predict survival have not yet been established
for animals.
10 percent. with cvery degre Celsius above or below
Hormal.'o Normothermic animals have been success-
fully resuscitated up to 12 minutes postarrest,l sug-
RESUSCITATIVE READINESS
gesting that efforts may be undertaken in sone cases
within this time interval.'2 Hypothermia increases the
 arrest interval fror which dogs may be treated.1. 13
PERSONNEL GUIDELINES
Prognosis is guardled for animals that do not recover
Lion. Ideally, ocular reflexes should be present about 5
Resuscitation requires a team approach. Veterinari-
minutes afer restoration of circuation,2. 1, 1-9 Termina-
tion of resuscitation efforts should be considered if me-
phases of resuscitation, including upkeep of cmer-
chanical ventilation is necessary for more than 24 hours.
 Full neurologic recovery should be gained after 2 weeks,
minimum of three individuals trained i resuscitation
 although some animals may require several months.
skills is usually required. Proficiency can be attained
through hands-on training facilitated by simulation
models such as the CPR DOG (Nasco Company, Fort
RESUSCITATION DECISION-
_WHICH
ANIMALS TO RESUSCITATE
Atkinson, WI), or by working with cadavers. Duties
must be delegated io members of the resuscitation
CPCR should be attempted only in patients in which
team. The tean should review their performance affer
causes of arrest. are believed to be potentially revers-
each CPR efforl, to improve proficiency.
CARDIOPULMONARY AND CEREBRAI. RESUSCITATION
429
EQUIPMENT GUIDELINES
decrease brain blood low in hypotensive patients' and
increase the chance for aspiration. Passage without a
Fvery practice should have at least one designated
laryngoscope can often be accomplished but requires
and well-equipped “ready area,’ maintained witl a
more manipulation of the cpiglottis and may lead to
readiness check list (Table 21-1), in which CPCR is
vagotonia and bradycardia.2 Once in place, the cuff is
performed. A mounted wall chart. with emergency
inflated and the lungs auscultated bilaterally to ensure
drug dosages specified according to body weight is
proper positioning. If there is any concern regarding
recommended (Table 21-2).17 Mandatory equipment.
the possibility of esophageal intubation, the ET tube
includes an oxygen delivery system capable of deliv-
should be immediately reinserted. If cend-tidal CO
ering up to 15 liters per minute, an ECG monitor with
detectors are attached to the ET (e.g, Easy-CAP, ET
alligator clip clectrodes for rapid attachment, direct
COg detector, Nellcor, Hayward, CA), exlialed CO,
current defibrillator, and airway suctioning cquip-
should be easily detectible during E'T intubation, but
ment.?t A Doppler blood-flow detector, with a pediatric.
not detectible with esophageal intubation.28-30
lat low probe (Parks Meclical Electronics, Aloha, Ore-
 gon), is highly recommended. A blood pressure cuff
AIRWAY OBsTRLcTION. The caudal pharynx is a com-
mon site of airway obstruction in the comatosc pet.
placed proximal to the low probe over the palmar
arterial arch allows  for arterial blood  pressure
'Therefore, the head and eck are cxlended and the
 determination.25. 26 Other devices are available
for
tongue drawn forward. Exiraineous oral foreign materi-
blood pressure monitoring (chapter 35). Instruments
als are removed if present. If the airway is obstructed
must be available to perform intubation, emergency
  s o  r o e 
forceful abdominal and chest compressons are given
trachcotomy, resuscitative thoracotomy, and rapid in-
travenous fluids (an IV fluid bag should be attached
to simulate a cough in an attempt to clear the airway,.'7
Forcign body removal is greatly facilitated by a laryngo-
to an administralion sel and inserted into either a
pneumatic [Vital Signs, Inc., Totowa, NJl or spring-
scope for visualization and a sponge or tenaculum
 driven [MTM Health Products, Burlington, Ontario,
forceps for extraction. Airway obstructions may require
Canada] device to provide fluids under pressure).17
a suction unit capable of generating sufficient negative
 pressure to aspirate thick mucus and blood clots when
the tubing is attached to a dental or Yankauer (tonsil)
BASIC LIFE SUPPORT
suction tip.
TRAcyroroMy: If a patent airway cannot be obtained
because of prelaryngcal or laryngeal injury, swelling,
 Initial efforts are direcied toward establishing a pa-
spasm, or nondislodgeable forcign bodies, inmediate
tracheotomy is required. A ventral cervical skin inci-
and maintaining circuation (Fig. 21-1).
sion is made without. aseptic preparation; strap muscles
are separated, and the tracliea is opened with a trains-
verse incision. The handle end of the scalpel or hemo-
AIRWAY
stat is inserted into the lumen followed by an endotra-
cheal tube (a smaller size than used for orotracheal
 A patent airway is the first priority i11 resuscitation.
intubation) to allow easy intubation via the tracheot-
Breathing is assessed over a 5-second period by observ-
omy.
ing the chest for movement, listening for breath
sounds, and feeling for air movement with the rescu-
PERCUTANEOUS TRANSTRACHEAI. OXYGEN INSUFFLATTON. This
er's car llear tlie mouth. Mouth-to-nose ventilations
technique, using intermittent jet. ventilation delivered
may be judiciously attempted when no instruments or
through a 16-gauge intravenous catheter, has been
supplies are available.
used successfully to venitilate dogs and cats with airway
obstructions.'7 The adapter of a 3mm ET tube con-
EndoiruchealIntubalion
nects to the hub of a catheter needle and then to the
Y of the anesthetic tubing and oxygen source. The
 Ideally, airway securement is accomplished with e1l-
other cnd of the Y is occluded with the thumb to
dotracheal (ET) intubation and followed with positive-
control lung insufflation.31. s2
pressure ventilation with 100 percent oxygen. For non-
 obstructed airways, orotrachcal intubation using a low-
TRANSTRACHEAI. CATHETER VENTLATION. Another pOteI1
pressure, high-volume cuffed ET tube is the preferred
tial technique cmploys transtracheal catheter ventila-
method of basic life support airway management.
tion (15 breaths per minute delivered witl anl oxygen
When possible, the ET tube should be passed without
line at 15 L/imin flow rates or higher).33 This method
lifting the head higher than the hearl as this may
has beenl effectively used in experimental dogs using
430
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
TABLE 21-1
 Readiness Check List
CRASH CART
[1
Drugs: all accounted for and expiration dates checked. Esential: Epinephrine 1:1000, (1 1ng/ml), lidocaine (20 mg/ml), Na 
bicarbonalc (1 mlq/ml), manniol (25%), dexanethasone sodiun phosphate (1 mg/ml), atropine (0.5 mg/ml), furosemide
(50 mg/inl). Recommended: Dextrose (5%), diazepam (5 mg/ml), dopamine (40 mg/ml), dobutamine (12.5 mg/ml), heparin
(1000 U/nl), Ca ghueonate (100 ng/ml), oxytocin (10 L/ml), doxapram (20 mg/ml)
Suylom sheq uosuu poesito oy hno ansaid iuasand sias uoisnn pimi Al
[］
Blood transfusion set present
[1
Endotracheal tubes in order; cuffs checked for leaks, tic gauze, lidocainc jelly present
Laryngoscope functioning; style, nouth gags present
［]
Stethoscope prcstent.
［］
[]
Foley and urinary catheters (all sizes) present.
［」
Miscellaneous supplies
[ 1 Syringes (all sizes), surgical tape, bandage inaterial present
[1 Neclles (25 to 14 gauge), spinal needles (22 and 18 gauge), untraosseous cannulas presen
[]‘Thermometcr
[   Orogastric and nasogastric: tubes present.
MONITORING EQCIPMENT
ECG mnachine/monitor working; ECG papcr/conduction gel present
」
 Ioppler blood flow deteclor (changed), flow probe, Aquasonic jelly, blood pressure cuffs presenl
[」
Noninvasivc blood pressure machine and cuffs checked
」
CVP sct-up prescnt
Lrinary catheters and collertion systems prescnt
OXYGEN-VENTILATION EQUIPMENT
[]
AMBL: bag, masks, rebreathing bag present
[]
E tanks with at. least 500 psi left side, full right side
［］
Iloses checked for leaks; large and sinall masks, large and small rebreathing bags present
[] 
Resuscitator bag and tubing (with oxygen line available) prescnt
[1]
Respiraror checked and functioning
DC DEFIBRILLATOR
Defibrillalor paddles (internal and external). cornduction gel present; defibrillator battery charged
SURGICAL EQUIPMENT AND SUCTION
」」
“Wound pack and thoracolomy instruments present and sterile, including thumb forceps, necdle holder, scalpel bladc and
handle, inedium Finochietto retractors, small and large Balfour retractors, Forestcr sponge forccps, DeBakey forceps, Mayo
scissors (curved), suture material
「」
Thoracolomy tubes present. (cats, small dogs. 1416 Fr: mnedium to large dogs, 18-36 Fr)
(xounto aspirator, Yankauer suction tips, trachcal suction tip present
『一
Pleurovac present and checked
Inspected by
Datc
Time
A.M./P.M.
CARDIOPULMONARY AND CEREBRAL RESLSCITATION
431
TABLE 21-2
Drugs Commonly Administered for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation*
ml/5h
ml/10 b
ml/20b
ml/30 tb
nl/40b
nl/50b
ml/60h
ml/80lh
ml/100h
Emergency Drugs
 Average Dosc
0r/2.3 kg
or/4.5 kg
or/9 kg
or/17 kg
orf18 hg
orf23 hg
or/27 htg
or/36 hg
or/45 hg
Epinephrine 1:1000
0.1 1ng/lh
0.5
2
5
6
8
10
1 mg/ml
(0.2 mg/kg)
Lidocaine IHCl
1 mg/lb**
0.25
0.5
1.5
2
2.5
4
5
20 1ng/Inl
2.2 1ng/kg
Na bicarh
0.5 mEq/lh
2.5
10
15
20
25
30
40
50
1mEq/nil
(1.0 mEq/kg)
Dexamethasone.
2 rng/lh
2.5
5
10
15
20
25
30
10
 1 mg/nl
(4 mg/kg)
Atropinc
0.025 mg/lb
0.25
5'0
1
1.5
2.5
3
5
0.5 1ng/ml
(0.05 ng/kg)
Calciun gluconate
5rng/Ib
0.25
0.5
1.5
2.5
3
1
5
[00 mg/ml
(10 ng/kg)
Countershock
Exterral
1-10 ws/Ib
25
50
100
150
006
250
008
100
500
Internal
0.1-1 ws/Ib
2.5
5
10
15
20
10
09
*Average IV dose: mg/lb or rmg/kg (rlouble dose if tracheal route).
*tfor cats. 0.25 mg/lb (0.5 mg/kg)
ws, wall-scconds.
simple equipment (e.g., transtracheal catheter affixed
Emergency Ventilation Using Equipnent and.
to a 10-ml syringe barrel connected to a 7.0-mm inter-
Supplemental Oxygen
nal dimensiol cuffed ET tube) aud a low-pressure O2
delivery source (50 cn HO driving pressure). 34
Effective ventilation should be optimized with 100
percent oxygen, The lungs are first expanded with
(wo full breaths, using positive end-expiratory pressure
aexa n s a e io  o (i)
BREATHING
 25 breaths are given per 1minute in closed chest CPR,
with a 1:2 to 1:3 inhalation:exhalation ratio. Large
EMERGENCY VENTILATION WHEN EQUIPMENT
dogs may require longer inspiratory time and slower
IS UNAVAILABLE
ventilation rales. Ventilations should generate a rapid,
high (but not sustained) peak airway pressure of 80
Mouth-to-mouth or mouth-to-nose ventilation can be
to I00 rmmHg. Ventilations timed simultaneously with
used if resuscitative equipment is not available, al-
external thoracic compressions provide beneficial hemo-
though extreine care must be exerised to prevent
dynamic effects. If open-chest CPR. is initialed, ventilate
rescuer injury with agonal pets. This technique has
 s   d sna   
sustained  reasonable  bood   gas  values  i
in some
direct cardiac compressions (i.e., approximately one vel-
tilation with every second or third compression).
whiel the rescuer's mouthi is placed over the animal's
 Breathing techniques should produce moderate hyper-
nose. Exhaled breaths are delivered approxinately 12
ventilation and improve blood gas values. After ventila-
times per minute (sinaller aninals 1may require 12 to
tion is iitiated, the chest should he auscultated to
20/min) with an inhalation:exhialatioi ratio of approx-
assess heart and lug sounds bilaterally. Lung sounds
imately 1:3 to l:4. The chest should rise with each
present over one hemithorax onily may indicate (1)
ventilation. IHigh airway resistance is commonly en-
hronchial intubation, (2) the presence of air, fluid,
countered, and slower breath delivery may be required
 abdominal contents, or mass in the pleural space, or 
(8 to 10 per mimute). If air does not enter the lungs,
(3)severe parenuchymal hung disease on one side
thie airway should he re-examined for pateicy and thie
(pneumonia, neoplasia). Repositioning the endotra-
togue repositioned. If resistance is stil noted, breaths
cheal tube, tracheal suctioning. and thoracentesis
.satun Auoedsun, aloi Susn panugnoo aq pmons
should he considered.
to achieve lug inflations.* Vagotonia may occur whie1
The parlial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide from
the neck is manipulated and may predispose to para-
blood gas analysis defines the ventilatory status and is
 sympathetic-mediated cardiac arrest in severely hypox-
useful to guide ventilation therapy. The partial pres-
emic patiens.89
sure of arterial oxygen is a measure of the lung's
432
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
BASIC LIFE SUPPORT
yes
Breathing?
Suction airway ff necessary
High flow oxygen
(no groater than 10 secs)
(5-15 Wmln)
Intubate wilhln 10-20 secs,
 intratracheal
catheter or tracheostomy if requirad
ECG, Doppler, Blood
Prassure monitoring
Ventilate 2 full breaths
(1.5 seconds) and auscult lungs bilaterally
AMBU bag ventilatlon every 5 seconds or
IV fluids and
catheter to tip of carina and O2 at 5-15 I/min
?
yes
Palpable pulse / heart beat or 
heart sounds or Doppler flow?
FIGURE 21-1
U
Clinical algorithm illustrating
 Continue ventlations 1 every 5 sec5
idcal components of Basic Life
ntinue ventlations 1
Support, ALS, Advanced Life
every 5 s8c5
Support. (sec Fig. 21-2).
 Chest compressions and simultaneous ventilations (ventilate
every 1-2 compressions) provide abdomlnal counterpulsations
with continuous abdominal compression
Establish ECG,Doppler
IVline
0-2 kg
2-10 kg
>10 kg
T
Manitor and treat as
120
100
60-80
required
compressions/min
compressians/min
compressions/min
with
with bilateral chest
with lateral or
cireumferential
compression
sternal chest
chest compression
compression
Start ECG, Dopplar, ETCO2. SpO2 monitoring
ETCO2-end idal CO2
SpO2 - O2 saturation
(pulse
CPR effective?
Change
(palpable pulss, good Doppler flow.
achnigue
ETCO2 >15 mm Hg. SpO2 > 85%}
capacity to oxygenate the blood (assuming adequate
serted through it with its tip near the carina auid oxy-
circulation) and is useful to guide positive end-expired
gen infused at 100 ml/kg/min.1, 17
airway pressure or percent of inhaled oxygen concen-
tration. If hypoventilation is associated with hypox-
POSITIVE PRESSURE vENTILATION. Animals exhibiting
emia, the indicated maneuver involves increasing the
 poor ventilatory patterns or low tidal volumes should
ventilatory rate or effectiveness, not oxygen therapy.
 receive positive-pressure ventilation administered by
one of several techiniques:
SUPPLEMENTAL OXYGEN. In the dyspneic bu1 couScious
1. Mouth to endotracheal tube. This is a temporary initial
-mu, e aq panaisuupr s uasaxo yuaad oot leu
measure.6, 87 Ventilation with 100 percent oxygen1
by' technique in which a steady stream of oxygen is
should be resumed as soon as possible.
directed into the lares. Animals beginning to regai
2. Resuscitator (AMBU) bag-valve attached to mask, or mask
consciousness should have a masal, nasoiracheal, 01
withoropharyngeal airway to endotracheal tube or to tracheos-
traustracheal catheter inseried and oxygen contimued
tomy tube.36 Use of a reservoir bag or tubung, or a
at a flow rate of 50 to 200 ml/kg/min.
. Those with
denad valve attached to the AMBU bag, is useful
eldotracheal uhes in place may have a catheter in-
with an oxygen flow rate of 5 to 15 liters per minute.2 7
CARDIOPULMONARY AND CEREBRAL RESUSCITATION
433
3.Anesthetic circuit system to mask; to mash with oropharyn-
is squeezed from both sides, using the thumb placed
geal airway; to endoiracheal tube; or to tracheotomy tube.
oll one hemithorax and the fingers on the other Cir
Mask ventilation is significatly infelior to thie place-
cunferential chiest compression has heen shown to
 ment and use of an ET tube and should be used only
increase aortic and coronary perfusion pressure in
 to preoxygenate and provide a few ventilations prior
humans+? but has not been clinically studied in ani-
to endotracheal intubation.
mals.
4. Periodic occlusion of ET tube receiving oxygen by trachel
 Lateral thoracic coinpressious are delivered to ani-
catheter Oxygen is delivered at 1 to 5 liters per minute.
 mals larger than 5 kg with the pet placed in lateral
A thumh or finger is placed over the end of the ET
recumbency. These may be performed by conpressing
tube; when the luugs are observed to inflate,
the
one side of the ches1.1 Alternatively, the nondominan1
1humb or finger is removed to allow exhalation.36
hand may be slid under the chest at the 4th to 6th
5.Demand valve thal runs at 50 psi attached to an
intercosial space and the dominant hand placed either
AMBU bag.'
on the chest wall directly opposite the nondominan1
6. Mechanical volume-cycled or timed ventilator. Pressure-
haud at or slightly above the costochondral junction
cycled ventilators are not recommended.'
7. High-frequency ventilation (HFV). This involves admin-
weighing 5 to 7 kg), or slightly more dorsal at the
 istration of short bursts of high-flow oxygen (0.2 to 5
greatest
chest.
wall
diameter
(the
"thoracic.
 lonrsod
most effective for allimals over 10 kg). The
Clinical utility is yet unproved.
former enables the cardiac pump mechanism to genier-
ale blood flow; the thoracic position enables the tho-
TRACHEAL SUCTION. After several effective breaths
racic pump to be as effective as possible (see later). A
have been adrninistered, or when resuscitating animals
compression:relaxation ratio of approximately 50:50 is
with pulmonary edema or hemorrhage, brief, intermit-
recom1me1ded.24. 41. 45
ten1 iracheal suction mnay be necessary. Oxygen infu-
 The force used to compress the chest should de-
 sion may be administered through another tracheal
crease the thoracic wall diameter approximately 25 t0
catheter during suctioning. Gravity can also he used to
33 percent,24, 4 45 although this is diffcult to maintain
tinpty fluid from large airways by elevating the caudal
in dogs greater than 20 to 25 kg.19 If this method is
aspect of the animal in relation to its head.
ineffective in generating forward blood Mow (e.g, lack
of femoral arterial pulses after 1 to 2 minutes of ef-
fort), open-chest cardiac massage is immediately per-
CIRCULATION
formed.
Blood flow must be artificially generated by closed-
 MECHANISMS OF BLOOD FLOW GENERATION WITH CLOSED-
 or open-chest compressions if cardiac arrest pulseless-
CHEsT COMPREssIONs. The heart itself may have less fo
ness is detected. Opeil-chies1 CPR lias been deinon-
do with circulation during external chest compressions
strated to be superior in huma trials.9a
thall previously believed, since cardiac charnbers do
1101 fill 1ormally and cardiac valves do 1o1 move.*6
Two basic mechanisms may contribute to forward
Exlernal Chest Compressions (Closed-Chest (CPR)
blood flow generation during chest compression.
Vigorous external chest compressions are initiated.
Blood flow during external chest compression results
Rates vary from approximately 60 compressions per
from the thoracic pump mechanism. Increased intratho-
lo amuu uad saun 0z1 0 dn sop asel oj an
racic pressure is immediately transmitted to all intra-
cats and small dogs. Brain and heart blood flow is
thoracic vascular structures. Infrathoracic arterial pres-
optimal when the force of compression is of relatively
sure is transmitted to extrathoracic arteries, while
long rather than short duration, Compression dura-
retrograde low from intrathoracic veins is prevented
tion representing approximately 50 percent of the ex-
to extrathoracic veins by anatomic closure of venous
ternal compression cycle promoted better brain and
valves af the thoracic inmlet. This causes a gradient
 myocardial blood flow in experimental dogs. Optinal
across the central nervous system capillary bed, facili-
cardiac output was reported at a coinpression rale of
tating cerebral perfusion. The thoracic pump mecha-
120/miute 40. 4
nism is most prevalent in larger dogs,14. 17 4*
Circunferential, ventrodorsal, or bilateral chest
Other investigators have demonstrated that cardiac
cornpressions rmay be delivered to very sinall animals
compression does occur in sinall dogs.17. 48a This is
(< 2 kg) by squeezing the chest with one hand.2. 15
referred to as the cardiat pump mechanism.
Altermatively, digital compression may be applied in a
 Both the cardiac and thoracic pump mechanisms
ventrodorsal directioin using the fingers placed on the
are thought to be involved with generation of forward
xiphoid-sternal juuction, with the animal cradled in
low in animals,12-14 19-52 although the latter plays a
the other hand.4 In slightly larger animals, thie chest
greater role in dogs over 16 kg.49
434 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
pressures in most cases, even when adjunctive tech-
CHEST COMPREsSIONs, Modificatios of basic CPR. com-
liques are added.
Because closed-chiest CPR is ineffective, even with
heart blood flow and improve outcome. Clinical appli-
advanced fife support, researchers have investigated
catious of hese techniques frequetlyhave been disap-
methods to improve diastolic perfusioil pressure (and
 pointing in humans,31 although soine efficacy has been
tlius cerebral flow) and systeimic perfusion pressure
suggesied,5 Since success following cardiopulnonary
(for rnyocardial flow). Open-chest experimental CPR
arrest is poor, these techniques are described here.
pers aan pue mon pooq jouadns ui panrsas
However, their value to increase survival in cardiac
and neurologic recovery coinpared withi closed-chest
arrest awaits further investigation,
CPR.GI-0S
Open-chest carcdiac massage holds a mumber of ad-
ABDOMINA1. COMPRESSTON. PerforIned only after a cuffed
valitages. We recoinmend thoracotoiny ad open-chiest
 endotracheal 1ube is inserted (abdominal pressure can
cardiac massage (l) when extraneous factors nake
cause gastric regurgitation), abdominal compression
exterlal chiest conpression dagerous or ineffective
can be accomplished by wrapping a towel siugly
(Table 21-3) and (2) when closed-chest conpression
around the abdomen, rear lirnbs, aud pelvic area. This
increases systemic vascular resistance, which elevates
rial pulses after 2 minutes.
diastolic and systolic blood pressure,4. sa Abdominal
EMERGENCY THORACOTOMY. Time is of the essence.
compression1 also linits diaphragm movement during
 Surgical preparation is not performed. A clipper may
external chest conpressions and enhances the thoracic
pump mechaiism. Canine and feline pneumatic anti-
The skin is incised on the left lateral chest wall, ex-
shock garrments (Jobs1 lnc., Toledo, OH) have been
tending froin the rib onigin dorsally to near the ster-
used by some investigators. Excessive ahdominal pres-
lum venitrally. Oiie must avoid incising through inter-
slre must be avoided, as it will force the liver forward
costal muscles auid into the lung. A blunt curved Mayo
and cause hepatic injury.
scissors is used to puncture into the pleural space and
the blades are then used to cut through intercosial
INTERPOSED ABDOMINAI. COUNTERPULSATIONS. ACTiVe ab-
Inuscles,17 25
dominal compression is applied to the abdomen (us-
The intercostal space can he enlarged if needed by
ing a 50:50 compression:relaxation ratio) immediately
cutting one or two ribs on the caudal aspect of the
after every ches1 or heart compression, followed by
incision at their costochondral junction and retracting
release of compression pressure immediately prior to
them with a Balfour abdominal reiractor or with a rib
the next cycle. Experinentally, this procedure aug-
 spreader, or by a surgical rih pivot procedure.d4
mented mean arterial blood pressure over conven-
 Other approaches to the chest can be used, includ.
tional CPR,5o 57 and it has heen associated with in-
ing traus-stermal bilateral thoracotomy and paraster-
creased resuscitatioll rates in huunans when compared
notomy. 'These are more suited for very small patients
with chest compressions alone.
and anirnals with thoracic trauma.17
The pericardium should be opened immediately
SIMULTANEOUS VENTHLATIONS AND CHEST COMPRESSIONS. VeII-
after the thoracotoiny is conpleted. The apex of the
tilations given during chest compressions create peak
pericardial sac is cut with Mayo scissors, alid the inci-
airway pressures as high as 100 mmHg, which, when
transmitted throughout the thorax, provides a driving
TABLE 21-3
force exceeding that of conventional CPR.s7,ss In dogs.
Factors That May Render Closed-Chest CPR
Ineffective
 juries, increased intracranial pressure, pneumothorax,
and inadequate gas exchange.43. 9
Interference with Generation of High Intrathoracic Pressure
I'neumothorax
Severe pericardial effusion
Severe obesity/very large animal
Open-Chest Cardiac Massage
Diaphragratic hernia
Flail chest.
 Maiitaining oxygenated blood flow to the brain dur-
Tracheal or tracheobronchial disrupuion
Congenital abnonnalities of the chest wall
ing CPCR is of paramount importance. Standard
closed-chest compressions often provide inadequate
Conditions Associated with Low Systemic Pressurc
brain blood flow; an average of only 20 percent of the
Exsanguinating hemorrhage/severc dehydration
Ventricular fibrillation/asystole: electronechanieal dissoc iation
minimum cardiac output and brain blood flow re
Anaphylactie shock
quired to sustain neuronal viability is generated after
Gastric dilatation-volvulus syndroine
5 to 15 mimutes of chest compressions,s4 43. 60 Closed
Anesthetic overdose and prolonged hypoxcmia
chest compressions fail to provide adequate perfusion
Drug ovcrdosagc
CARDIOPULMONARY AND CEREBRAL RESUSCITATION 435
sion is enlarged by moving the scissors dorsally after
initiated to restore spontaneous and effective circula-
visualizing and preserving the plrenic nerve. Pericar
tion (Fig. 21-2). It has three components: D—drug
diotomy facilitates detection of ventricular fibrillation
and increases effectiveness of CPCR.
dial blood flow, optimize blood pressure, and treat
When a stable, spontaneous cardiac rhythm is ob-
cardiac arrhythimias or acidosis, and defibrillation for
tained, the chest is lavaged ad systeinic auitibiotics
ventricular fibrillation; E—-electrocardiographic and other
administered. The incidence of infection following re-
systemic monitoring; and Fcontinued support as re-
suscitative thoracotomy without prepping in our expe-
quired to maintain adequate blood fou.
rienice is less than 10 percent.
DIRECT CARDIAC MASSAGE TECHNIQUE. One Or bothi
hands are used depending on patient size, Care should
RECOMMENDED ROUTES OF DRUG
be taken to avoid *kinking'’ the great cardiac vessels.
ADMINISTRATION
which may occur if the apex is rnanually tipped later-
ally upward. Very small hearts may allow the ventricles
 Several routes of drug adninstration are available.
to be compressed hetween the thumb and two fingers.
 Intravenous or intraosseous routes are preferred and
 For rmediurm-sized hearts, the ventricles are com-
necessary whe continuous rate infusions are given, or
pressed hetween the rescuer's palm and the palmar
for crystalloid, colloid, or blood administration,2a. 6
surface of the fingers. Large hearts nay be held against
the opposite chest wall and compressed by holding thie
ventricles ini the palin of one hand.
Intravenous
The rate of direct massage should he hetween 80
Rapid intravenous access should he used on any
and 120 per rminute. The adequacy of diastolic flling
identifiable vessel that can be cannulated. Circulation
should be visually determined. The heart should fill as
tines may vary according to vascuar site and type of
soon as it is released. If not, vascular occlusion or
CPR. In an experimeiital model of canie cardiopul-
"kinking" shiould be evaluated or Muid administration
monary arrest, drug circulatioi1 timcs of 62 ± 19.6
considered. The heart should also he ohserved for
myocardial color, tone, and the presence of fibrillation.
seconds were recorded after central venous injections;
Ventilation should be timed to occur with every second
86.6 ± 23.5 seconds after femoral vcnous injections;
and 93.6 ± 17.9 seconds after cephalic venous injec-
or third compression if possible.
tions.s In contrast, circulation limes with1 open-chest
DESCENDING AORTA COMPRESSION AND CROSS-CLAMPING.
cardiac massage were considerably shorter (21.3 ± 5.7
To improve cerebral perfusion and coronary circula-
seconds after central venous injections; 33.7 ± 5.1
tion, the descending aorta should be occluded. This
seconds after femoral vein injections; and 31.4 ± 6.0
may be accomplished by digitally compressing it
seconds after cephalic injections). Drug concentra-
against the vertebral column using simple pressure.
tions were best circulated by the central venous com-
Alternatively, cross-clarnpig may be perforrned just.
pared with other routes. In openl chcst resuscitation,
caudal to the heart base. In the trauma patient, aortic
drug concentrations were greatest when administered
cross-clamping will teimporarily retard severe arterial
 by central venous injection comnpared with the car-
hemorrhage in the chest, abdomen, retroperitoneun,
diac route.67
and pelvis. Occlusion rmay be facilitated by a flexible
Conrmonly selected peripheral venous sites include
9 o1 g'g se qons ,'lanbunoi, e soj pasn jenaeu njos
the external jugular, femoral, and sapheous veins;, the
French feeding tube, 0.25- to 0.50-inch unbilical tape,
maxillary vein also may be used effectively25. 6
or Penrose drain. C'se is limited to less than 10 mimutes
to avoid pelvic linb paraplegia. A curved hemostat is
used to dissect around the caudal thoracic aorta. The
Transtracheal or Endotracheal
tip of the material is grasped and pulled around the
These routes have been recommended for initial
aorta to form a loop. 'The same hemostat is then slid
delivery of relatively sinall volumes of emergency drugs
dowll on the loop to tighte it aroud the aorta.
whel  central  intravenous or intraosseous catheter
After the heart begins contracting spontaeously, the
tourniquet is slowly withdrawn (rapid removal may
given at two to three tines the intravenous dose, di-
result in hypotension). Occhusion time should be kept
to less than 10 minutes.
luted in 5 to 10 ml of saline, and injected transtrache-
ally or, more commonly, into a long catheter placed
through the ET tube, with its tip inserted to the level
ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT
 of the carina.t, a. 71 The animal should then be venti-
lated to help distribute the drug.
Following thie basic cardiac life support measures
Uptake is rapid via this route as long as pulnoary
discussed earlier, advanced life support is prompuy
edema or severe hemorrhage is not present. Lipophilic
436
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULARFUNCTIONAND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
ADVANCED LiFE SUPPORT
Epinephrine 自very 3 min 0.2 mg/kg IV,
Perform Qpen Chest CPR
rapid tharacotomy
open pericardium
no
CPR effective
yes
Continue CPR
begin massage
within 2 min ?
kentify ECG rhythm
crossclamp aorta
abdominal counterpulsations
Ventricular tachycardia or fibrilfation
 Severe bradycardia or
Electromechanical dissociation
CPA effective？
ventricular
asystole
Blectrical activity
yes
 Detibrillate up to 3 times if neaded -
2X dose on thlrd attempt
Epinephrine 0.2
mg/kg IV
( precordial thump first if delay with
0.4 mg/kg IT
Epinephrne IV
Repeat epinephrlne unti ROSC
defibrillation}
2-20 ws/kg external
Bvaluate hand
Contnue CPR
0.2-2 ws/kg internal
Atropine 0.05-0.1 mg/kg
position and
cardiac filling
Go to rhythm
and treat
identification
▼
JEpinephrine (same dosing as
Repeat epinephrine dose every
Identify and treat cause
cause of
arrest
V. asystoliej until ROSC 
savere hypoxemia
3 min until ROSC
severe acidosis
4
severe hypovolemia
tension pneumothorax
IV - intravenous
Defibrillate 2x dose twice
Consider eapinephrine CRI -
cardiac tamponade
IO - intraosseous
0.2 mg/kg in 1 1 LRS - give at
IT - intralracheal
[1 m/min (0.2 mcg/kg/min)
CRI - constant rale infusion
Bretyllum 25-50
mg/kg IV
ROSC - retum of spontaneous
Sodlum bicarbonate
CPR and rhythm should be assessed
Defibrillate 2x dose
twice
1 mEq/kg iV (if metabolic
 Calcium gluconate 10%,
between each step. If ex1ermal CPR
acldosis suspected or >10
5-10 mg/kg IV if
 is not afective consider internal
minutes CPR)
anesthestic overdose
cardiac massage.
suspected or calcium
mEq/kg IV
channel blockers being
Allow 30 secs for drug cireulation
pesn
if peripheral IV or IT route used.
▼
External transthoracic
Lidocaine IV 2 mg/kg dogs,
pacemaker if available
0.25-0.5 mg/kg cats
FIGURE 21-2
Clinical algoritm ilusrating ideal componenis of Advaneed Life Support. CRl. constant rate
infusion; LRs, lactated Ringer's solution; V, ventricular; epinephrine =I:I000 conccntration.
drugs are rapidly ahsorbed, and relatively sustained
derimic or spinal needle (preferred) can be used effec-
blood concentrations can he achieved. Epinephrine is
tively, as well as commercially available intraosseous
the drug most commonly adninistered in this fash-
needles,
ion.2  2i. 24. 70-72 Lidocaine, atropine, diazepam, brey
Iniracardiac
been similarly administered.72 Calcium, sodiun bicar-
For external chest compressions, the intracardiac
 bonate, and norepinephrine may injure airway mucosa
route is not recomnended because of the need to
and alveoli and should not be given via the endotra-
interrupt this activity and the possibility of lacerating
cheal route.23 In dogs, peripheral bronchial administra-
a coronary vessel and creating pueumothorax.1. 24 1De-
tion (i.e., via a 16-gauge catheter introduced through
spite  thiese
concerns, this route has been recom-
the ET tuhe and peripherally wedged in a brouchus)
mended when no other is available.? During open-
has demoustrated a clear pharmacologic advantage
 chest resuscitation with the heart visualized, this may
over just endotracheal adninistration.73
be a useful central route for drug administration,2l
Following a left ventricular injection, a finger should
occlude the ascending aorta during the next few car.
Iniraosseous
diac compressions to promote drug injection into the
This route bee1 foud useful in dogs;7s. 74 in kittens,
coronary circulation.
puppies, birds, pocket pets, and small exotics, it is
useful as a first-fine adninistration route. The abun-
Intralingual
 dant endosteal-nedullary blood supply facilitates rapid
Because uptake is unpredictable, intralingual admin-
-odk1 asnes-0z o) g1 uy son1p pue spiny 1o ayendn
istration has been recoimmeded as a last resort by
CARDIOPULMONARYAND CEREBRAL RESUSCITATION
437
some workers. Others have found it occasionally usc-
sumption than agents like epinephrine, which has both
ful,12 Drugs limited to moderately small volunes (1 10
0- alid β-adrenergic actions. $2 Iowever, there has been
15 ml) are injected just under the dorsal mucosal
no convincing evidence to date that pure α-adrenergic
tongue surface.
agents are superior to epinephrine in CPA to restore
spontaneous circulation and promote neurologic re
coveryss
EFFECTIVE INTERVENTIONS
The optinal dosing regimen is not clear, although
FOR CARDIOPULMONARY
the American Heart Association stadards and guide-
lines recommend epinephrine adininistration every 5
ARREST
Imiutes during CPR. Thus, it is recommended that
epinephrine be imnediately administered by intrave-
nous or intraosseous bolus (0.2 mg/kg), or by intratra-
 Prompt endotracheal intubation, basic life support,
cheal administration (0.4 to 0.8 mg/kg followed by 5
 and epinephrine administration represent the princi-
to 10 ml of saline) as a second route of choice. Because
pal steps to successful CPR. The key to optimizing
of the short half-life (3 to 4 minutes), constaint rate
cerebral recovery and overal survival when ventricular
infusion (0.1 to 2.0 pg/kg/min CRI) or IV holuses
fibrillation or pulseless ventricular tachycardia is pres-
repeated every 3 to 5 minutes are recommeided.72 A
ent is rapid defibrillation to restore spontaeous circu-
quick rule of thumb method to calculate a constant.
lation. Endotracheal intubation facilitates vetilation
rate epinephrine infusion of 2 μg/kg/min involves
and oxygenation of the poorly perfused myocardiun.
multiplying 0.2 mg/kg tines hody weight, placing this
Myocardial perfusion is necessary for effective defibril-
volume of epinephrine into 1 liter of fluids, and ad-
lation. Epinephrine causes vasoconstriction, support-
ministering it at 1 ml per mimute (if a volume of 500
ing coronary perfusion pressure. Additional agents
 ml or 250 ml is desired, multiply body weight by 0.2
such as aitiarrhyihrnics, synthetic (
catecholamines
mg/kg body weight and infuse at 0.5 1ml/ini or 0.25
 other than epinephrine, and glucocorticosteroids play
rml/min, respectively).
a role only occasionally
LIDOCAINE
DRUGS FOR
In general, the second agent to be considered in
canine CPA is lidocaine hydrochloride. It is the ventric-
CARDIOPULMONARY
ular aniarrhythmic drug of choice for unstable ven-
RESUSCITATION
tricular arrhythmias (chapters 17, 18). Lidocaine raises
the threshold for ventricular fibrillation* and results
in onily minimal hemodynamic impairment in dogs,
EPINEPHRINE AND OTHER ALPHA-
uiless severe rnyocardial failure or greatly reduced
ADRENERGIC AGENTS
clearance is present.s Lidocaine's effecis Imay be com-
 promised in the preseice of hypokalemia.%6. 87
For dogs, an initial intravenous loading holus (2.2
Considering all pharmacologic agents used for CPR,
mg/kg), followed by constant intravenous infusion (25
llone have proved as useful as epinephrine. Within
to 75 μg/kg/min) with small supplemental IV holuses
minutes of cardiopulinonary arrest, exteusive vasodila-
as needed, will rapidly aitain and maintain therapeutic
tion results froin rmetabolic byproducts associated with
plasrna coiicentrations,a6, 88
tissue anoxia.76 This causes ineffectual tissue blood
Cats must be given greatly reduced dosages of lido-
flow, particularly to the brain and heart, despite basic
caine. Experimentally, toxic manifestations were re-
life support techiques. Through its α-adrenergic re-
ported with 10 mg/kg given by rapid IV injection,
ceptor stinulation, epinephrine stinulates vasocon-
and at a mean dosage of 11.7 mg/kg.*" However, clini-
striction, especially of peripheral vasculature.
.These
cally affected cats during CPA and shock tolerate far
 pressor effects increase aortic diastolic and coronary
less lidocaine since hepatic metabolisin and blood flow
perfusion pressures and are central to its effcacy (i.e.,
may be greatly reduced. Conversion of ventricular
raising aortic diastolic pressure improves coronary
tachycardia inl cats has been successful by administer-
blood flow), Epinephrine adiniistered during CPR at
ing lidocaine by slow IV infusion (0.25 to 1.0 mg/
relatively high doses (0.2 mg/kg) has been reported
kg over 5 minutes") or using up to three 1-mg IV
10 cause increased effectiveness in human adults, chil-
boluses."
dren, swine, and dogs over previously suggested "'stal-
dard doses"* (0.01 mg/kg),77-so although recently, some
OTHER ANTIARRHYTHMICS
investigators have called this into question.81
 Other pure α-adrenergic agonists have the theoretic
Bretylium tosylate also raises the fibrillatioi thresh-
advantage of stimulating less myocardial oxygen con-
 old, but it may he more useful in preventing ventricu
438ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
lar fibrillation in dogs at risk, such as dogs who were
istration during CPR is of doubtful value and may be
just defibrillated, or with arrhythrnias likely to lead to
harmful. Postresuscitation brain injury results frorn a
ventricular fibrillation. IIowever, its clinical effects
cascade of detrimeintal events initiated by brain hy-
have not beenn well characterized in veterinary practice.
poxia and ischernia. Loss of intracellular calciun ioll
homeostasis is a key factor respousible for cell disrup
tion and death auid is associated with increased intra-
SODIUM BICARBONATE
cellular calcium,100-1oz For electromechaical dissocia-
tion, epinephrine and perhaps steroids rather than
A controversial area of cardiac arrest therapy in-
calcium should be administered. Calcium administra-
volves therapy for acid-base abnormalities. Traditional
tion is contraindicated except for severe hypokalemia,
reconmendations for its early adninistration were
hypocalceinia, or calcium channel hlockade toxicity.
based on the premise that bicarhonate helped couiter
Calcium entry blockers have been shown expcrimentally
 Imetabolic acidosis generated by anaerobic metabolism
during hypoxia. Empiric administration of bicarbonate
 and inprove resuscitation.o! However, they are not
in an experimental canine 1model of CPR showed im-
advocated at this time hecause of potential vasodilating
proved outcome,ta
effects and depression of cardiac conduclion.
However. current guidelines argue against routine
Dexamethasone sodium phosphate (2.0 to 4.0 mg/kg
bicarbouatc adininistration and stress the importance
IV) has beell advocated for treating electromechanical
 of appropriate ventilation, oxygenation, and circula-
dissociation.16. 1os Corticosteroids may be beneficial in
tory support to control acidosis. Mixed venous acide-
Imaitaining cell mermbrane integrity and in converting
mia occurs with cardiac arrest and respiratory acido-
electromechanical dissociation. Dopamine may be ad-
sis" Sodium bicarbonate adminisiration can increase
Iministered by coustant rate infusion (1 to 2 μg/kg/
 blood carbon dioxide tension (PCO2) as per the bicar-
Inin) to increase renal blood flow, or for its pressor (@-
bonate dissociation equation (H+ + HCO x <→ HCO:
adrenergic agonist) effects (5 to 10 μg/kg/min) to.
→ II,O + COg). which is cdriven to the right toward
treat hypotension unresponsive to other therapies.106
CO, formation. This worsens venous respiratory acide-
Other pressors may he alternatively employed. Crys-
Imia. In additioi, tissue CO, production contimues and
talloids, collids, or blood may he required for rapid
accumulates in the venous system. For CO, to be elimi-
volume fluid replacements if severe hypovolemia (e.g..
nated, venous blood must he retured to the heart
hemorrhage, severe vomiting and diarrhea, pleuritis,
ad pumped to the lungs, a process inpaired during
peritonitis, and noncardiogenic shock) contributed to
arrest. Carbon dioxide diffuses readily across tissue
or was associated with the arrest. Isoproterenol causes
mermbranes. Central nervous system aud intracellular
increased
1 myocardial oxygen demand through
in-
acidosis worsen. Myocardial "CO. narcosis" may re-
creased contractility and peripheral vasodilation (β-
duce cardiac function and the ability to resuscitate
adrenergic effect) and is not advocated in CPR." Man-
the heart and may predispose to electromechanical
nitol (0.5 g/kg. slow IV infusion) may be warrauted
dissociation."5 97
for cerehral ederna. Furosemide and other cardioactive
Routine bicarbonate use is liot currently advocated
 agents are required for managing heart. failure.
except whiern venous blood gas values or the patient's
history indicaies severe metabolic acicdosis after pro-
 longed CPR efforis. Alternatively, bicarbonate caii be
DEFIBRILLATION
adrninistered (0.5 to 1.0 mEq/kg IV) after at least 10
to 15 minutes during the low-flow stage of CPR, or if
a long interval transpired prior to CPR initiation. Care
must he taken to provide adequale and effective venti-
Rapid conversion to a stahle, effective rhythm is
latioll.
critical for successful resuscitation  when  ventricular
fibrillation,
pulseless idioventricular rhythrn,(
10
pulseless ventricular flutter/fbrillation is detected or
OTHER AGENTS
suspected in the absence of an ECG monitor,"* Early
direci current defibrillation causes myocardial depolar-
Anticholinergics are administered for severe sinus
ization, eusuing asystole, and (it is hoped) return of
bradycardia aid AV hlock caused by high vagal tone
ordered sinoatrial or other pacemakerinitiated depo-
when reduction of the inciting vagotonia is ineffective
larization-repolarization sequences. Factors that influ-
(e.g., atropine, 0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg intranuscularly
ence successful defibrillation include (l) patient trans-
or suhcutaleously). I
Intravenous adninistration inay
thoracic resistance and resultant current flow, (2)
exacerbate sinus bradycardia and cause temporary
elergy level, (3) paddle size. (4) body weight, (5)
atrioventricular block through a centrally mediated
metabolic abnormalities, and (6) duration of ventricu-
lar fibrillatioll prior to shock. There is all inverse corre-
CARIIOPULMONARY AND CEREBRAL RESUSCITATION
439
lation betweei1 duratioll of venitricular fibrillation and
of cardiovascular and organ performance, oxygen
successful defibrillation.t
trausport, alid tissue perfusion as possible.
Transihoracic resistance inay increase more as a
function of ches1 width than hody weight and can be
reduced with large paddles and firrn contact pressure.
PERIPHERAL PERFUSION
Transthoracic resistance and current flow are ininimal
with a second shock delivered at the same energy
Mucous membrane color anid refill tirne, urine out-
level,tio Thus, titration of shocks to higher energy lev-
put, and toe web temperature provide soine assessrnent
els may inprove chances for successful defibrillation.
of peripheral and visceral organl perfusion thiat is
Excessive energy call cause rnyocardial injury." Ap-
largely regulated by vasomofor tone. Vasocoustriction
(or reduced blood vohume) decreases peripheral per-
381 11 7 0n 01  01 0 0g axa a
fusion and may cause pale mucous membrane color,
patients, exteral: 100 to 360; internal: 25 1o 100.
prolonged capillary refill time, oliguria/anuria, and
If there is no conversion after two or three concur-
hypotherrnia. Vasodilation improves peripheral perfu-
rent titrated shocks, the patient should receive epi-
sion but, if exte nsive, may result in hypotensio1.
nephrine (0.2 mg/kg IV or 0.4 mg/kg iniratracheally),
followed by another maximun countershock relative
to patient size. I pulscless ventricular tachycardia con-
MUCOUS MEMBRANE COLOR
timues, a lidocaine bolus (2.2 rng/kg IV for dogs: 1 to)
2 mg IV for cats) is adininistered, followed by all
 Ski or rnucous membrane color is used as a crude
additional shock. Failhure to convert to a stable rhythm
at this tine is a poor prognostic indicator Therapy
assessiment of tissue oxygeation, but it is really a
rough estimate of hemoglobin oxygenation. Before
should then be refocused to correct underlying acid-
 base and metabolie derangements by improving oxy-
cyallosis associated with hypoxemia can he detected,
circulation of at leas1 5 gn/dl of deoxygenated hemo-
 genation and reducing metabolic acidosis through ef
globin must be present. Pale gray mucous meimbranes
fective ventilation, and by providing effective circula-
may result from cyauosis cornbined with peripheral
tion (e.g., consider open-chest CPR if closed-chest CPR
vasoconstriction. Pink or reddish mucous membrane
is being performed). Epinephrine can be readninis-
 Iay he observed during inilial stages of' septic shock.
tered. Sodiun bicarbonate may be einpirically given
 Injected, dark red mucous membranes may result from
under conditions of known prolonged resuscitation
cyanosis combined  with  hypoxemia and reduced
tine or failure to convert to a stable rhythrn. Hf the
blood flow.t14
patient iransiently converts to a stable rhythrn but the
arrhythmia returns, the sane countershock is reap-
plied.
HEART SOUNDS
Hf a defihrillator is not available when ventricular
fibrillation or pulseless ventricular tachycardia is en-
countered, a precordial thump can be delivered.112
Heart sounds become softer and, ultimately, unde-
The odds of effecting spontaleous conversion are low,
tectable by auscultation when cardiac blood flow he-
hut so is the associated 1isk. I astly, cheinical defibrilla-
comes severely reduced or ceases. This rmay result from
tion has been described, using a mixture of acetylcho-
shock, myocardial failure, ventricular underfilling
line (6 mg/kg)1s or pouassium chloride (1 mEq/kg);
(e.g., cardiac tamponade), or low circulatory states.
followed by 10 percent calcium chloride (0.2 1nl/kg).7
Muffled heart and lung sounds may also result from
pneurmothorax, severe pericardial or pleural effusions,
or thoracic masses.
CLINICAL MONITORING AND
EVALUATION
HEART RATE
Tachycardia results from increased syinpathetic ner-
A global approach to patient monitoring incorpo-
vous system activation frorn any cause. Since cardiac
rates medical history and physical examination supple-
output is the result of stroke volune multiplied by
mented with information gained through clinical,
heart rate, tachycardia may develop during conditions
physiologic, clinical pathology, and radiographic test-
associated with hypovolernia, heart failure, systeimic
ing. Monitoring should (1) assess physiologic derange-
and metabolic disease, and impending cardiac arrest.
ments caused by organ hypoperfusion and hypoxia,
Bradycardia is often a preterminal or lerrminal event
(2) detect end-organ dysfunction, and (3) evaluate
common to many animals with cardiopulinonary ar-
snaeed au se ssasse ii juer si l  dei
rest. It can also develop fron vagotoinia.
440 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHIG
hemodynamic status. As a general guide, it is desirable
MONITORING
to maintain systolic arterial pressure over 100 mmHg
 and mean pressure over 70 immHg. Therapy is gener-
Heart rate and rhythm are extremely labile in criti
 ally warranted with a systolic pressure of less than 80
cally ill animals, especially when cardiac arrest has
inmH Ig and a meain pressure of less than 60 mmHg.
ing may disclose importait clues indicating (1) cardio-
vascular deterioration (e.g.. progressive bradycardia,
QUALITATIVE DOPPLER BLOOD FLOW
atrioventricular dissociation, or ST-T wave changes),
MONITORING
(2) electrolyte disorders (e.g., hyperkalemia [tall,
 peaked T waves; prolonged PR interval; flattened or
A pediatric blood flow prohe (Model 811B, Parks
absent P waves; QRS prolongation]; hypokalemia [lat-
Medical Electronics, Aloha, OR) can be useful to pro-
tened T waves; lengthened QT intervals; ST segment
vide a general, qualitative indicator of arterial blood
chages]), (3) ST and T wave changes associated with
fow.2223. 9.37 tmay alsohelpevaluate the relave
hypoxia, infarction, or electrolyte changes, or (4) indi-
effectiveness of chest or cardiac compression whell
cation of clinical improvement (e.g., reversal of above.
attempting to generate forward blood flow.
mentioned ECG changes) or antiarrhythmic therapy
efficacy. l1s. 1s Although it is importat to identify and
monitor the cardiac rhythrn, it nust he remembered
OXYGEN TRANSPORT AND TISSUE
that only electrical activity is being monitored, which
PERFUSION
 does not provide information concerning myocardial
function or etfective circulation. Arrhythrnias reported
Microcirculatory maldistribution results in tissue hy
during cardiopulnonary arrest included ventricular
poxia and anoxia (chapter 14). Circulating hlood vol-
asystole (24 percent. in dogs; 18 percent in1 cats); elec-
tme is the most important factor affecting tissue perfu-
tromechanical dissociation (21 percennt vs. 34 percent);
sion and oxygen delivery. Systemic tissue oxygen
venitricular fibrillation (21 percent vs. 14 perceit); si-
transport is defined as the product of cardiac output.
1lus bradycardia (18 percent. vs. 16 percent); and ven-
and arterial oxygen content (TOg = CO X CaO2).
tricular tachycardia (4 percent vs. 4 percent).15
'The main delerrninauts of tissue oxygen transport are
arterial oxygen content (CaOg) and cardiac output
(CO). Major determinants of CaO, are hemoglobin
ARTERIAL PULSES
conceniration (Hb), which is indirectly assessed by
packed cell volune (PCV), aud degree of Hb satura-
 Arterial pulses are governed by left ventricular
tion, which can be evaluated by pulsed oximetry Thus.
stroke volume, arterial compliance, and capacity
CaOy = Hb X 1.34 X SaO. The major determinaiits
(chapter 35). Lack of palpahle arterial pulse is an
of cardiac output are heart rate and stroke volume
indicator of cardiopulmonary arrest or hypotension1.
(CO = HR × SV).114
Studies ini aulesthietized animals report variable systolic
pressures associated with loss of palpable femoral arte-
rial pulses (40 to 80 mmlIg) and palpable heart beat
HEMOGLOBIN SATURATION
(30 to 55 mmHg).2 es. 1# Variability depends on clini-
MONITORING BY PULSE OXIMETRY
cian experience, aninal size and conformation, and
vascular tone. Chest compressions should he started
Estimation (percent) of hemoglobin oxygen satura-
immediately when pulselessness is recoguized. Exag-
tion (SpO) may be rmade by pulse oximetry instru-
gerated arterial pulses may occur with aemia, fever,
ments using infrared lighit sensors applied to mucous
sympathietic hyperactivity, or severe bradycardia; weak-
membranes or skin,11s. i1 The pulse oximeter allows
ened arterial pulses may occur with severe tachycardia
and hypovolernia (i.e., weak, thready pulses associated
contimuous monitoring of hemoglobin saturation, al-
though most instruments are designed for human use
with reduced stroke volume ald vasoconstriction).
and ofien have trouble recording SpO. transcutane-
ously. Nornal SpO, recordings depend sonewhiat on
probe placement site, with the tongue and lip consid-
ARTERIAL BLOOD PRESSURE
ered the best sites.19 Normal SpOy values exceed 96
MONITORING
percent. Lower values may indicate relative oxygen
desaturation and hypoxemia, which could increase tht
 Trends in arterial blood pressure can be monitored
risk for cardiopulmonary arrest.6 The accuracy of
invasively or noninvasively (chapter 35), which pro-
vides essential information to guide therapy and asscss
low saturation.120
BLOOD GAS ANALYSIS
measurement results from interrelationships among
right ventricular function, venous return, and vascular
Arterial blood oxygen may be expressed as (l) the
volume and is useful to guide the rate (but not vol-
ume) of fluid administration. It should be interpreted
partial pressure of oxygen (PaOy), (2) the percent
hemoglobin saturation (SpO), and (3) the arterial
in relation to other cardiovascular parameters. A large,
 Oxygen content (CaOs). These measurements are in-
acute increase in CVP (> 5 to 7 cm I1yO), or a reading
terrelated but not synonymous. Arterial carbon diox-
of greater than 10 cm HHsO during flhuid administration,
ide is expressed as the partial pressure of COy
s  ee    
(PaCOs). Ventilatory status is assessed by PaCO. The
rate.
lung's ability or efficiency to oxygenate the blood is
Pulmonary artery catheterization allows measureinents
indicated by PaO7. I4 Blood pH identifies the severity
of pulmonary wedge pressure, an index of left ventric-
 of acid-base derangement.
ular filing (greater than 15 to 20 mmIg may herald
pulmonary cdema), pulmonary artery pressure, and
cardiac output. It facilitates mixed venous blood sam-
PARTIAL PRESSURE OF OXYGEN
pling to assess and derive oxygen transport variables.
Peripheralarterial catheterization facilitates arterial
Arterial PO, (PaO) is a measure of pulmonary oxy-
blood sampling and provides access for continuous
direct blood pressure monitoring.
genating efficiency. Hypoxemia is considered present
when PaO, is less than 60 mm Hg. An animal may
have norinal PaO, yet still have reduced blood oxygen
content if anemia or methemoglobinemia is present.
CLINICAL PATHOLOGY AND OTHER
Hypoventilation is correlated with hypoxemia when
ASSESSMENTS
the animal is breathing room (but not oxygen-cn-
riched) air.?
Multiorgan function or tissue injury may be evalu-
ated by appropriate clinical pathology, including bio-
chemical profiles, hemograms, and urinalysis. Blood
PARTIAL PRESSURE OF CARBON
coagulability tests and platelet counts should be as-
DIOXIDE
sessed to detect disturbances in blood clotting. Radiog-
raphy is uscful to detect and uncover underlying disor-
Arterial PCO, (PaCO) indicates a mcasure of venti-
ders or untoward effects resulting from CPR, such as
latory status (normal, 35 to 45 mmHg). It should be
pneumothorax, pulmonary contusion or edema, and
assessed in concert with PaO2, since both parameters
rib fractures.
tend to change in opposite directions relative to each
other. Hyperventilation is indicated by a PaCO, of less
than 35 mmHg, and less than 20 mmIig is associated
POSTRESUSCITATION
with severe respiratory alkalosis; hypovenuilation is in-
dicated by a PaCO: greater than 45 mmHg (> 60
BRAIN-ORIENTED THERAPY
minHg indicates severe respiratory acidosis, hypoventi-
lation, and possibly hypoxemia if breathing roorm air).7
Endl-tidal carbon dioxide monitoring may be accom-
Clinical deterioration of neurologic status resulting
plished with a capnograph through sensors affxed to
from cardiac arrest is triggered by initial ischemia and
the end of an E'T tube. End-tidal CO2 values greater
exacerbated by subsequent reperfusion. This may
than 15 mmHg indicate that CO, is reaching the alve-
cause irreversible brain damage and worsen survival.
oli and pulmonary gas cxchange is occurring, implying
Pathophysiology may be related to (1) cerebral reper-
some effectiveness of CPCR.ss. s2 Values lower than this
fusion failure;2 (2) cerebral reoxygenation injury
indicate poor blood flow and/or inadequate respira-
from cell-necrotizing cascades perhaps related to cal-
tory exchange. End-tidal CO, correlates only variably
cium shifts and free radical reactions;123. 124 and (3)
with PaCO,$0.121
blood toxemia associated with microcirculatory stasis
and tissue factors.12 Accordlingly, emphasis during CPR
is increasingly placed on preserving the integrity of
ARTERIAL AND VENOUS
neuronal brain function. The challenge for cerebral
CATHETERIZATION
these complex mechanisms and improve cerebral out-
Central venous catheterization (intrathoracic anterior
come. Certain postresuscitation life support protocols
vena cava or right atrium via the jugular vein) allows
central venous pressure (CVP) monitoring. The CVP
 prove useful for dogs and cats.
442
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
Trauna and Critical Care. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger,
REFERENCES
1984, p 507
22. Crile GW, Dolley DH. A11 experimental research into
the resuscitation of dogs killed by anesthetics and as-
phyxia. J Exp Med 8:713, 1906
1. Safar P, Bircher NG. Cardiopulmonary Cerebral Resus-
23. Paradis NA, Marin GB, Goetting MG, et al. Aortic
citation. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, wB Saunders, 1988
pressure during human cardiac arrest: Identification of
2. Wingfield WE, Hlenick RA. Cardiopulmonary arrcst and
pscudo-clcctromcchanical clissociation. Chest 10l:123,
resuscitation. In Eutinger S] (ed): Textbook of Veteri-
1992
nary lnternal Medicine. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
24. Emergency Cardiac Care Commiltec and Subcommit-
dcrs, 1989, p 171
tces, American Heart Association. Guidelines for car-
3. Haskins S. 'Cardiopulmonary resuscitation.  Fimer
diopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and cmergency car-
gency Medicine and Critical Care in Practice. Trenton,
diac care (ECC). J Am Med Assoc 268:2171, 1992
25. Crowe 1DT. Perforning life-saving cardiovascular sur-
NJ, Vet Learning Syslems Company, 1992, p 71
4. Kass PI1, 1laskirs SC. Survival following cardiopulmo-
gery. Vet Med 84:77, 1989
26.(
Grandy J, Dunlop C, Hodgson 1D. Evaluation of the
nary resuscitation in dogs and cats. Vet Emerg Clin
Doppler ulurasonic method of measwring systolic pres-
Gare 2:57, 1992
5. Gilroy BA. Survival after cardiopulmonary resuscitation
surc in cats. Ann J Vet Res 53:1166, 1992
27. DeBchnke DJ. Effects of vagal tonc on resuscitation
in canine patients. Proc Vet Emerg Crit Carc Soc 196.
1986
from cxperimcntal elecuromcchanical dissociation. Ann
6. Henick RA. Cardiopulmonary arrest and resuscitation
Emerg Med 12:1789, 1993
28. Sayah AJ, Pcacock WF, Ovcrton DT. End-tidal CO to
in cats. Proc Vet Emerg Crit Care Soc 66, 1987
7. Gilroy BA. Survival after cardiopulmonary resuscitation
detcct esophageal intubation during cardiac: arrcst.
in feline patients. Proc Vet Emerg Crit Care Soc 201,
Ann Emerg Med 19:857, 1990
29.Coates NE. End-idal carbon dioxide predicts the emer-
1986
8. Carveth Sw. Eight-year cxpericence with a stadiun-based
gency dcpartment. survival of traumatically injured, in-
n1obile coronary-care luni. Heart Lung 3:770, 1974
Lubated patients; Abstract. Crit Carc Med 22:A137, 1994
9. Safar P. Long-term animal oucome models for cardio-
 30. Falk JL., Rackow ECi, Weil M11. End-tidal carbon dioxide
pulmonary cerebral resuscitation research. Crit Carc
concentration during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. N
Med 13:936, 1985
Engl J Med 318:507, 1988
10. Tisherman SA, Safar P, Radovsky A, ct al. Thcrapeutic
 31. Spoercl WE, Narayanan PS, Sinph NP. Iranstracheal
decp hypothermic: circulatory arrest in dogs: A resusci-
ventilation. Br J Anaesth 43:932, 1971
tation modality for hemorrhagic shock with “irrepar-
32. wilson DV, Orsher Rj. Transtracheal ventilation for
able' injury. J Trauma 30:836. 1990
resuscitation after complete air way obstruction in a cat.
11. Gilroy BA, Rockoff MA, Dunlop BJ, ct al. Cardiopulmo-
J Am Anim 1losp Assoc 27:331, 1991
nary resuscitation in thc nonhuman primate. J Am Vet
33.Kumar M, Murry Mj. Prophylactic percutancous trans-
Mcd Assor 177:867, 1980
trachcal catheter ventilation in the management of the
12. Robello CD, Crowc DT. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation:
difficult airway, Abstract. Crit Care Med 22:A130, 1994
recommendations.
34. Reich DL, Mingus M. Transtrachcal oxygcnation using
Currellt.
Vet.
Clin Northi
Am1
19:1127, 1989
os uxo ansssnd-moi e pue uauba odas
13. Tishcrman S,Chabal C, Safar P, ct al. Rcsuscitation
Crif Care Med 18:664. 1990
 of dogs from cold-waler submersion. Ann Emerg Med
35. Elam JO, Green DG, Brown ES, ct al. Oxygcn and
14:389, 1985
carbon dioxide exchange and cnergy cost of cxpired
11. Gilroy BA, Dunlop BJ. Shapiro HM. Outconc from
air rcsuscitation. J Am Med Assoc 167:328, 1958
cardiopulmonary resuscitation in cats: Laboratory and
36. Crowe DT. Managing respiration in the citical paticnt.
clinical experience. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:133,
Vet Med 84:55, 1989
37. Wenzel V, Idris AH, Banner MJ, ct al. Exhaled gas
1987
15. Wingfield WE, Van Pelt DR. Respiratory and cardiopul-
composition of nouth to nouth ventilation during car-
monary arrest in dogs and cats: 265 cases (1986-1991).
diopulmonary resuscitation (CPR); Abstract. Crit Care
J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1993, 1992
Med 22:A133, 1994
16. Crowe D1. Cardiopulnonary resuscitation in the dog:
38. Ruben H, Elam JO, Ruben AM, el al. Investigation of
A review and proposcd new guidelines (part 2). Semin
Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 3:328, 1988
22:271, 1961
17. Crowe DT. Triagc and trauma management. m Mur.
39. Brown DC, Lewis AJ, Criley JM. Asystole and its treat-
taugh RJ, Kaplan PM (eds): Veterinary Emergency and
nent: The possible role of the parasympathetic nervous
Critical Carc. St. Louis. Mosby-Year Book, 1992, p 77
system in cardiac arrcst. J Am Coll Emcrg Phys 8:448,
18. Safar P. Cardiopulmonary ccrebral resuscitation: Basic
1979
and advanced life support. In Schwariz GR, Safar P,
39a. Boczar ME, Hloward MA, Rivers EP, ct al. A techinique
Stone JH. ct al (eds): Principles and Practice of Emer-
revisited: llemodynamic comparison of closed- and
gency Medicine. 2nd ed. Vol 1. Philadclphia, WB Saun-
Openn-chest cardiac massage during hunan cardiopul-
ders, 1978, p 195
1onary resuscitation. Crit Care Med 23:498, 1995
19. Crowe Dr: Cardiopulmonary resuscitation in the dog:
40. Halperin H, Tsilik J, Guerci A, et al. The determinants 
A rcview and proposcd ncw guidelines (part I). Semin
of blood flow to vital organs during cardiopulmonary
Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 3:321, 1988
resuscitation in dogs. Circulation 73:359, 1986
20. Hlossman KA. Resuscitation potentials after prolonged
11. Maier GW, lyson GS, Olsen CO, et al. The physiology
cercbral ischemia in cats. Crit Care Med 16:964, 1988
of external cardiac massage: High-impulse cardiopu-
21. Crowe Dr: Cardiopulmonary resuscitation and ad-
monary resuscitation. Circulation 70:86, 1984
vanced life support. hn Zaslow IM (ed): Vetcrinary
4la. von Planta I, Weil MH, von Planta M, et al. Cardiopul-
CARD10PULMONARY AND CEREBRAL RESUSCITATI0N 443
monary resuscitation in the rat (with reference to other
59. wilder Ry, Weir D, Rush BF, et al. Methods of coordi-
small mammmals). J Ain Physiol 65:2641, 1988
nating ventilation and closed cardiac massage in thc
42. Ialpern IIR, Tsitlik JE, Gelfand M, ct al. A prcliminary
dog. Surgery 53:186, 1963
study of cardiopulmonary resuscitation by circumferen-
60. Ditchey RB, Winkler JV, Rhodes CA. Relative lack of
tial coinpression of the chest with use of a pneumatic
coronary blood flow during closed-chest resuscitation
vest. N Engl J Med 329:762, 1993
in dogs. Circulation 66:297, 1982
43. Henik RA, Wingfield WF, Anglcton GM, el al. Effect of
61. Bartleit RL, Stcwart NJ Jr, Raymond I, et al. Compara-
body position and ventilation/compression ratios dur-
tivc study of thrcc methods of resuscitation: Closed-
ing cardiopulmonary resuscitation in cats. Ain J Vet Res
chest, open-chest manual, and direct mechanical ven-
48:1603, 1987
tricular assistancc. Ann Emcrg Med 13 (9 Pt. 2):737,
44. Niemann JT, Rosborough JP, Niskanen RA, ct al. Me-
1984
chanical *cough;" cardiopulmonary resuscitation dur-
62. Sanders AB, Kern KB, Ailas M, el al. lImproved rcsusci-
ing cardiac arrest in dogs. Am J Cardiol 55:199, 1985
45. H enik RA. Basic life-support and external cardiac: com-
Ann Emcrg Med 13:672, 1984
pression in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
63. Kern KB, “Sanders AB, Badylak SF, ct. al. Long-terll
200:1925, 1992
survival with openl-chest cardiac massage aftcr ineffec-
46. Werner JA, Greenc IIl., Janko Cl., ct al. Two-dimcn-
tivc closed-chest comprcssion in a canine preparation.
sional echiocardiography during CPR in man: Implica-
Circulation 75:498, 1987
tions regarding the mechanism of blood flow. Crit Care
64. Schulman AJ, Lippincot CL. Rib pivot thoracotomy.
Mcd 9:375. 1981
Comp Cont Educ Vet Small Anim Clin 10:927, 1988
17. weisfeldt ML, Halperin IIR. (Cardiopulnonary resusci-
 65. Redding JS, Asuncion JS, Pearson JW. Effectivc routes
tation: Beyond cardiac inassagc.
Circulation 74:443,
of drug administratior during cardiac arrest. Anesth
1986
Analg 46:253, 1967
48. Ewy GA, Bressler R. Cardiovascular Drugs and the Mail-
 66. Emerman Cl., Pinchak AC, Hancock 1D, ct al. Effecl of
agement of Heart Discasc. Xew York, Raven Press, 1982,
injeclion site on circulauion times duing cardiac arrest.
p958
Crit Care Med 16:1138, 1988
48a. Babbs C. Taker W, Paris R, et al. CPR with simultanc-
67. Barsan wG, Levy RC, weir H. Lidocaine levels during
CPR: Differenccs after peripheral venous, central ve
sure in 4 animal models. Crit Care Med 10:501, 1982
nous annd intracardiac injections. Ann Emerg Med
49. Lippert AC. Evans AT, white BC, ct al. lhe effect of
10:73, 1981
resuscitation technique and prcarrest state of oxygen-
68. Anderson J, Crowe D'T. Maxillary vein cutdown. Scicn-
alion on blood-gas yalues during cardiopulmonary re-
tific Proccedings, Second International Symposium on
suscitation in dogs. Vet Surg 17:283, 1988
Veterinary Energency and Critical Care, 1990
50. Kern KB, Sanders AB, Badylak SF, cl al. Long-term
69. Moses BL. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation. In Murtaugh
survival with open-chest cardiac massagc affer closcd.
RJ, Kaplan PM (eds): Vcterinary Energenry and Criti-
chest compression in a caninc preparation. Circulation
cal Care. St. Louis, Mosby-Year Book, 1992, p 508
75:498.1987
70. Ralston SH, Tackcr WA, Showen L, et al. Endotrachcal
51. Heller MB. Open-chest cardiac massagc. Cardiac Resusc
versus intravenous epinephrine during electromechani-
87:189, 1990
cal dissociation with CPR with dogs. Ann Enmcrg Med
52. Raessler KL, Kern KB, Sanders AB, et al. Aortic and
14:1044,1985
sni rdre np sisad e 
71. Roberts JR, Grcenberg MI, Knaub MA, et al. Blood
tion: A potential indicator of thc mechanisn of blood
levels following intravcnous and endotracheal cpincph-
flow Am 1Hcart J 115:1021, 1988
rinc administration. J Am Coll Einerg Phys 8:33, 1979
53. Sack JB, Kessclbrenner MB, Bergmnan D. Survival fron
72. Laritsky Al. Resuscitation pharimacology. n Chernow
in-hospital cardiac arrest with interposed abdoninal
B (ed): The Pharmacologic Approach to the Crilticeally
counterpulsation during cardiopulmonary resuscita-
I1l Patient. Ballimore, williams & Wilkins, 1994, p 233
tion. J Ain Med Assoc 267:379, 1992
 73. Mazkereth R, Paret G, Ezra D, et al. Epinepluinc blood 
51. Crowe D1, Downs MO. Physiological effecis of abdomi-
concentrations afler peripheral bronchial versus endo-
nal binding in normal and intraabdominally bleeding
tracheal adminisuration of epinephrine in dogs. Crit
dogs: Abstract. Vet Surg 15:24, 1986
Care Med 20:1528, 1992
 55. Crowe DT, MacDonald M, Gaston J, el al. The usc of' a
 74. Hodge D, Delgondo-Paredes C, Fleisher G. Intcrossc-
 pneumalic garment in the management of hemorrhage
ous infusion flow rales in hypovolemic "pediatric'"
and hypovolemic. shock in dogs and cats. Scientific.
dogs. Ann Emerg Med 16:305, 1987
Proceedings, Second International Veterinary Emer-
75. Davison R, Barresi V, Parker M, et al. lnuracardiac
gency and Critical Care Synposium 2:650, 1990
injections during cardiopulnonary resuscitation: A low-
56. Voorhees WD, Nicbauer M, Babs CF Improvcd oxy-
risk pr0cedure. J Am Mcd Assoc 244:1110, 1980
gen delivery duing cardiopulnonary resuscitation with
 76. Safar P. Resuscitation in henmorrhiagic shock, coma. and
interposed abdominal compressions. Aun Emerg Med
cardiac arrest. n Cowley RA, Trunp BF (eds): Patho-
12:128,1983
physiology of Shock, Anoxia, and Ischemia. Baltimore.
57. Koehler RC, Chandra N. Guerci AD, et al. Augmen-
Williams & wilkins, 1982, p 411
tation of cercbral perfusion by simultancous chest com-
77. Martin D, Werman HA, Brown CG. Four case studies:
pression and lung inflation with abdominal binding
IHigh-dosc cpinephrine in cardiac arrest. Ann Emerg
following cardiac arrest in dogs. Circulation 67:266,
Mcd 19:322, 1990
1983
78. Goetting MG, Paradis XA. High-dose epinephrine in
 58. Chandra N, Rudikoff MT, Weisfeldt. ML. Simultaneous
refraclory pediatric cardiac arrest. Crit Care Med
chest compresson and ventilation at high airway pres-
17:1258, 1989
sures during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Lancet
79. Brown CG, Werman HA, Davis EA, el al. Comparative
1:178, 1980
effecis of graded doscs of epinephrine on rcgional
444
 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
brain blood flow during CPR in a swinc model. Ann
99. Muir Ww. Effects of atropine on cardiac rate and
Emerg Med 15:1138, 1986
rhythm in dogs. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 172:917, 1978
80. Brunelte DD, Jamcson SI. Comparison of standard
100. Siesjo BK. Mechanisms of ischemic brain damagc. Crit
vcrsus high-dose epinephrine in thc resuscitation of
Carc Med 16:954, 1988
cardiac arrest. in dogs. Aun Emerg Med 19:8, 1990
101. F
Hitt ME. Oxygen-derived frec radicals: Pathophysiology
81. Stiell IG, Herbert PC, Weitzman BN, et al. High-dose
and implications. Compend Small Anim 10:939, 1988
epinephrine in adult cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med
102.
Katz A, Reuter M. Cellular calcium and cardiac cell
327:1045, 1992
dcath. Am J Cardiol 44:188, 1979
82. Ditchey RV. Hligh-dose epinephrine does not improvc
103. Stecn PA, Newbcrg LA, Milde jlI, ct al. Ximodipine
the balancc hcrwcen myocardial oxygen supply and
improves cerebral blood flow and neurologic recovery
after completc cercbral ischemia in the dog. J Cereb
I Am Coll Cardiol 3:596, 1984
Blood Flow Metab 3:38, 1983
83. Briliman JC, Sanders AB, Onlo CW, et al. Outcomc of
104. Capparclli EV, Hanyok []. Dipersio DM, ct al. Diltiazem
resuscitation fronn fibrillatory arrest using cpincphrinc
a11d phcnylephrinc in dogs. Crit Care Med 13:912, 1985
fibrillation in dogs. Crit Care Med 20:1140, 1992 
84. Kupersmih J, Antman EM, Hoffiman BF In vivo electro-
105. White BC, Peltinga lJ, Hoehner Pl, ct al. Incidence,
physiological cffects of lidocaine in canine acute myo-
ctiology and outcome of  pulscless idiovcntricular
cardial infarction. Circ Res 36:84, 1975
rhythm treated with dexamethasone during advanced
 85. Zipes DP. Managcinent. of cardiac arrhythmias: Pharma-
CPR. J Am Coll Emcrg Phys 8:188, 1979
cological, clectrical and surgical techniques. In Braun-
106. Dellinger RP, Mattox KL. Emergcncy resuscitation:
wald F (cd): 1leart Diseasc. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB
What ihe books do not tell you. Ih Civctta JM, Taylor
Saunders, 1988, p 621
RW. Kirby RR (eds): Critical Care. Philadelphia, JB
86.Bonagura J1, Muir Ww. Antiarrhythmic therapy. n
Lippincott, 1988, p 103
Tilley I.P (ed): Esscntials of Canine and Feline Cardiol-
107. Stitzel RE, Robinson RL. Adrenomimetic drugs. In
Ogy. 2nd ed. Philadclphia, 1ea & Febiger, 1985, p 281
Craig CR, Stitzcl RE (cds): Modcrn Pharmacology. 3rd
87. Singh BN, Vaughan-willians EM. Fffects of altering
ed. Boston, Litle, Brown, 1990, p 136
potassiu concentration on the action of lidocaine and
108. Kerber RE, Sarnat W. Factors influencing succcss of
diphenylhydantoin on rabbit atrial and ventricular mmus-
ventricular defibrillation in man. Circulation 60:226,
clc. Circ Res 29:286, 1971
1979
88. IIarrison DC, Alderman EL. The pharmacology and
109. Yakaitis RW, Ewy GA, Otto CW, ct al. Influencc of timc
clinical usc of lidocaine as an antiarrhythmic drug.
and therapy on ventricular fibrillation in dogs. Crit
Mod Trcat 9:139, 1972
Gare Mcd 8:157, 1980
89. Chadwick IIs. Toxicity and resuscitation in lidocaine or
I10. Kerher RE, Grayzel J, Hoyt. R, et al. Transthoracic: resis-
bupivicainc-infuscd cats. Anesthesiology 63:385, 1985
tance in human 
defibrillation:  Influence of body
90. Acheson F, Bull AB, Glces P. Electrocncephalogram of
wcight, chesl sizc, serial shocks, paddle size and paddlc
the cat after intravenous injection of lidocainc and
contact pressure. Circulation 63:676, 1981
succinylcholine. Anesthesiology 17:802, 1956
111. Doherty PW, McLaughlin PR, Billingham M, ct al. Car-
91. Fox PR, Kaplan P. Felinc arrhythimias. Contemp Issues
diac. damage produced by direct arrest countershock
 Small Anim Pract 7:251, 1987
applicd to the heart. Am J Cardiol 43:225,1979
92. Fox PR. Special methods of trcating arrhythmias: Car-
112. Befeler B. Mechanical stimulation of the heart: Its ther-
diopulnonary arrest and resuscitation, pacemaker ther-
apcutic valuc in tachyarrhythmias. Chest 73:832, 1978
113. Brcznock FM, Kagan KC. Chemical cardioversion of
apy. In Tilley L.P (ed): Essentials of Canine and Fcline
clcctrically incuccd ventricular fibrillation in dogs. An
Elcctrocardiography. 3rd ed. Philadclphia, Lca & Feb-
iger, 1992, p 365
J Vet Res 39:977, 1978
93. Kerbcr RE, Pandian NG, Jensen SR. Effect of lidocaine
114. Schertcl FR, Muir WW. Shock: Pathophysiology, moni-
and bretylium on energy rcquirernents for transtho
toring and therapy In Kirk Rw (ed): Current Veteri-
nary Thcrapy. Vol X. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1989,
racic defibrillation: Experimental studies. J Am Coll
Cardiol 7:397. 1986
p 3i6
93a. Vukmir RB, Bircher NC, Radovsky A, Safar P. Sodium
115. Rush JF, Wingficld WE. Recognition and frequcncy of
bicarbonate may improve outcome in dogs with brief or
dysrhythmias duing cardiopulmonary arrest. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 200:1932. 1992
prolonged cardiac aurrest. Crit Care Med 23:515, 1995
116. Wall RE, Rush JE. Cardiac cmergcncics. Ih Murtaugh
94.
Weil MIl, Rackow EC, Trevino R, et al. Differcncc in
RJ, Kaplan PM (eds): Veterinary Emergency and Criti-
acid-basc state betweei1 ve1lous and arterial blood dur-
cal Carc. St. Louis, Mosby-Year Book, 1992. p 213
ing cardiopulmonary resuscitation. X Engl J Med
117. Crowe ID1. Evaluation of a Doppler flow dctector and
315:153. 1986
probe on the cye for determining effectiveness of blood
95. Breslin RM. Chatterjec MB, Arieff AJ. Mctabolic and
flow generalion with cardiac massage in dogs. Proceed
hemodynamic consequences of sodium bicarbonate ad-
ings, Third International Symposiun on Veterinary
ministration in patients with hcart discase. Am J Med
Emergency and Critical Care, 1993, p 837
87:7, 1989
118. Hluss BT, Anderson MA, Branson KR, ct al, Evaluation
96. Ng MI., Levy MN, Zieske HA. Effects of changes in pH
of pulse oximeter probes and probe placement in
and carbon dioxidc tension on left ventricular perfor-
hcalthy dogs. J Am Anim IHosp Assoc 31:9, 1995
mancc. Am J Physiol 213:115, 1967
119. Jacobson JD, Miller MW, Matthews NS, et al. Evaluation
97. Weil MH, Rackow EC, Trevino R, ct al. Differencc in
of accuracy of pulse oximetry in dogs. An J Vet Res
acid-base state between venous and arterial blood dur-
53:537,1992
ing CPR. N Engl J Med 315:513, 1986
120.
 Sidi A, Rush W, Gravcnstein N, el al. Pulse oximetry
98. Schweitzcr P, March H. The effect of atropinc on car-
fails to accurately detect low levcls of arterial hemoglo-
diac arrhythmias and conduction. Am 1leart, J 100:119,
bin oxygen saturation in dogs. J Clin Monitor 3:257,
1980
1987
CARD1OPULMONARY AND CEREBRAL RESUSCITATION 445
121. Gudipati CV, Weil MII, Bisera J, et al. Expired carhon
ischemic anoxia—Hypothesis cxtcnsion. A tale of two
dioxide: A noninvasivc monitor of cardiopulmonary
ions? Ann Emcrg Med 13:862, 1984
resuscitafion. Circulation 77:234,1988
125. Kochanck PM, Dutka AJ, Hallenbeck JM. Indomctha-
122. Lind B, Snyder J, Safar P. Total brain ischemia in
cin, prostacyclin and heparin improve post-ischemic
dogs: Cerebral physiclogical and metabolic changes
ccrebral blood flow without affccting carly post-ische-
after 15 minutes of circulatory arrest. Resuscitation
mic granulocyte accumulation. Stroke 18:634, 1987
4:97,1975
126. Safar P. Cardiopulmonaryccrcbral resuscitation. In Shoe-
123. McCord JM. Oxygen-derived frcc radicals in postische-
maker WC, Ayres S, Grenvik A, et al (eds): Textbook of
mic tissue injury. N Engl J Med 312:159, 1985
Cnitical Carc. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1989,
124. Whitc BC, Aust SD, Arfors KE, et al. Brain injury by
P5
22
Weakness
pisodic
JOHN E. RUSH
Syncope is a sudlden, transient loss of consciousness with spontaneous
recovery Episodic weakness, near-syncope, and presyncope represent less
severe grades of syncope characterized by sudden generalized nuscle weak-
ness, rear linb weakness, ataxia, or collapse. Syncope should not be thought
of as a clinical ertity, but rather as a sign of an underlying disease.
CAUSES AND CLINICAL, SIGNIFICANCE
The cause of syncope should be aggressively pursued because underlying
disorders are often severe or potentially lethal. Causes range from benign
conditions to life-threatening arrhythimias and fall into one or 1more of 
four major pathophysiologic categories: (l) cardiogenic dysfunction. (2)
u () pn srsuo pooq u suone () sprosp aiso
logic causes. It is important to consider causes other than structural cardio-
vascular disease in cases of syncope. In thrce large human sturdies, cardiovascular
disease was established as the cause in only 13 percent of patients.I * Diagnosis,
however, is often elusive. Although no comparable data exist for animals, the.
cause of symcope in up to 40 percent of humans is never identified.
CARDIOGENIC SYNCOPE
Common causes of this category include bradyarrhythmias (e.g., advanced
or ventricular tachycardias; cardiac underfilling (e.g, cardiac tamponade,
large space-occupying intracardliac inasses); and reduced ventricular ejection
severe intravascular volume depletion).
HYPOTENSIVE SYNCOPE
Hypotension is often the cause of episodic weakness or presyncope, and 
performance, decreased blood volune, or diminishied vascular tone. Inade
quate cardiac pump function in dilated cardiomyopathy can result in hypo
tension and syncope. Causes of hypovolemia include external, internal, or
gastrointestinal blood loss, cxcessive dliuresis, diarrhea, hypoadrenocorticism,
and diseases that lead to fluid loss. Hypotensive weakness must be considered
in aninals receiving cardiac drug therapy, especially vasodilators and β-
adrenergic blocking drugs.
446
SYNCOPE AND EPISODIC WEAKNESS 447
SYNCOPE FROM ALTERED BLOOD
DIFFERENTIATION OF
CONSTITUENTS
SYNCOPE
AND SEIZURES
Less common causes of syncope include hypoglyce-
mia, hypoxia, severe anemia, and layperviscosity syn-
dromes. The brain has very limited storage of high-
cnergy phosphates for oxidative phosphorylation and
HISTORY
requires continuous delivery of both oxygen and glu-
cose for norinal function.
A careful history should include a complete and
detailed description of the *'event' to help differenti-
 ate scizures from syncopal episodes. Syncope, collapse,
and seizures are common clinical presentations for a
NEUROGENIC SYNCOPE
varicty of diseases (lable 22-l). HHistorical data that
favor a diagnosis of syncope over seizures are concur-
Discases that cause obstruction to cerebral blood
rent cardiac（
 disease; precipitation of syncope by
flow, such as thromboembolism and arteriosclerosis,
coughing, excitement, or exercise; history of severe
can also cause syncope. Cessation of blood flow for as
cardiac arrhythmias; syncope or sudden death in re-
little as 7 to 10 seconds can lead to loss of conscious-
lated animals; and vasodilator or β-ardrenergic blocking
ness. Prevailing systemic, metabolic, or cardiovascular
drug therapy. Lack of response to anticonvulsant thera-
diseases can worsen this condition.
pics or episodes of increasing frequency despite initia-
tion of anticonvulsant. drugs favor a diagnosis of syn-
cope.
Teaching the pet owner how to observe and record
CLINICAL APPROACH TO THE
future abnormal occurrences is often helpful. This
SYNCOPAL PATIENT
must include the observations of the pet's “event,"
associated behavior, and circumstances. Many clients
can be taught how to take an accurate pulse rate or
heart rate with an inexpensivc stethoscope.
The goals of evaluation are to (1) establish a diagno-
sis, (2) define related and contributory factors, (3)
assess the risk related to future events, (4) determine
TABLE 22-1
the need for therapy, and (5) establish a prognosis.
Differential Diagnoses for Syncope and Episodic
Because of the transient nature of syncope, most pets
Weakness
are asynptomatic at the time of clinical examination.
A cormplete physical examination must be per-
Primary cardiac causes (see Table 22-2)
formed. In my practice, over 50 percent of syncope
Arrhythnias
Obstruction to cardiac filling
cases were diagnosed following initial history, physical
Oustruction of ventricular ejection
examination, 10-lead clectrocardiogram (ECG), and
Hypotension
Inadiequate cardiac: output (c.g. dilated cardionyopathy,
tlhoracic radiographs. The ECG should include a lead
tac:hy/bradyarrhythmia)
 1I rhythm strip for at least 5 minutes.
luadequate yascular tone (e.g.: vasodilators. β-bleckers)
Additional testing may be required. Clinical pathol-
 Inadequate blood volume
Blxxt loss
 ogy may provide additional useful information, includ-
Internal (e.g-: splenic hemangiosarcoma, GI blood loss)
 ing a complete blood count, serum biochemistry pro-
Fxtcrnal (e.g, trauma)
file (including glucose and potassium levels), and
Diuresis (c.g.. furosemice)
urinalysis. Evaluation of the stool for occult blood may
1ypoadrenocorticisn
Fluid loss (e.g., enesis, diarrhea)
identify patients with hypovolemia resulting from gas-
Ilypoxemia (c.g., respiratory failure, pulmonary
trointestinal bleeding.  Echocardiography  should be
thrombocmbolisn)
Abnormalities of blood coustituents
performed when a cardiovascular cause is suspected
Hypoglycernia
Or when routine testing fails to identify a cause of
Hlypokalenia
syncope. Blood pressure measurement is useful in ani-
Anemia
Hepatoencephalopathy
mals receiving cardiovascular active drugs. If clinically
Neurologic and ncuromuscular disorders
indicated and available, serun drug concentrations
Epilepsy
should be assessed. Abdominal radiographs and diag-
Structural CNS disorders
Neoplasia
nostic ultrasound are helpful to detect abdominal
Cerebral arterial disease
masses, especially in elderly or large-breed dogs such as
Thromboembolism
German shepherds and golden retrievers with episodic
Narcolepsy
Myasthenia gravis
weakness due to bleeding tumors.
448
 ABNORMAL, CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
CLINICAL OBSERVATION
cope from a true seizure can be difficult in these
situations.
 Observable components of a classic scizure include
(1) a preictal period, (2) an ictus or seizure event.
coinposcd of tonic/clonic limb motions and, fre-
SPECIALIZED TESTING
quently, motor activity, chomping, and hypersalivation,
and (3) a postictal period of variable duration (com-
Continuous Ambulatory ECG (Holler Monitor)
monly 10 ninutes or longer). lnvoluntary urination
Recording
 and defecation can occur with either seizure or syn-
cope,
The use of intermittent, short-duration ECG rhythm
 Components of a classic syncopal episode include
 strips to intercept transient arrhythmias is highly unre
collapse and transient loss of consciousness. Infre-
liable. Holter monitor recording, or continuous ambu-
quently, affected animals may display an outward indi-
latory ECG recording, can be used to search for ar
cation of impending collapse, such as acute weakness,
rhythmic causes of syncope (see also chapter 18). The
staggering, or vocafization. Compared with animals
 optimal duration of Holter monitoring is not known.
with seizures, syncopal patients are more likely to cx-
However, it is generally accepted that 24 houurs of ECG
tend their head back into a position of opisthotonos.
monitoring increases the overall delection of arrhyth-
The animal in syncope is often motionless; skeletal
Inias when compared with 12 hours. The Holter moni-
muscles may be relaxed or the limbs may be rigidly
tor is attached to the patient and the ECG is recorded
extended. Subsequently, struggling to rise can occur
on a tape for subsequent analysis. As the duration of
during recovery from the episode. This is often frantic,
the recording is only 24 hours, syncopal events that.
is soinewhat. uncoordinated, and can be confused with
occur infrequently may not be identified. 1f the synco
tonic/clonic linb motions. Many syncopal animals
pal event occurs during the recording period sponta-
have normal mentation immediately following the syn-
neously or when precipitated by exercise or excite-
copal event, compared with the blunted mentation
ment, this diagnostic test can be highly useful (Fig.
typical of postictal seizure behavior. Most syncopal ani-
22--1).
Imals are able to walk normally within a few minutes
Holter recording may yield positive, negative, or
after the syncopal event. Facial chomping and hyper
inconclusive findings. Results are positive wlien syn-
salivation are rarely noted in syncopal pets.
cope occurs at the time of a hemodynamically signifi-
The duration of the “"event' may be useful in differ-
cant arrhythmia, in which case the arrhythmia is impli
entiating seizures from syncope. Seizures have a vari-
cated as the cause for the event. Negative results occur
able duration, but the actual ictus often lasts 1 to 2
when the recorded ECG is normal at the time of
minufes., ln small-breed dogs with endocardiosis and
the collapsing episode. In this case, causative cardiac.
arrhythmia can be excluded. Often, the animal does
thy, the syncopal episode may last for only a few sec-
not collapse or have a syncopal episode during the
onds. Many are then able to stand within 1 minute.
recording period and the Holter monitoring 
re-
 Alternatively, syncopal episodes may last much longer
cordings contain no suspicious arrhythmias.
 in large-brced dogs, pets with prolonged ventricular
In certain cases, cardiac arrhythmias known to be
arrhythmias, and  disordlers  causing obstruction  to
associated with collapse (i.e., ventricular tachycardia
blood flow. Five to 15 minutes may clapse until the
or advaniced atrioventricular block) are identified by
m sie un yosii on qsrou uons e see
Holter monitoring but were not. hemodynamically se-
hypovolemia or drug-incduced weakness, the duration
vere enough to have resulted in collapse. Despite a
of the event is quite variable, but it may last for mimutes
lack of temporal association, the arrhythmia is often
to hours.
 Identification of underlying dliseases may help differ-
mic therapy is instituted (chapters 17 to 19). When
cntiate syncope from seizures. Most. metabolic causes
structural heart disease is present, runs of ventricular
of seizures and weakness (i.c., hypoglycemia, hepatic
tachycardia during Holter monitor recording may have
failure, anemia, liypokaleinia) can be determined by
greater clinical significance than ventricular arrhyth-
routine diagnostic tests, especially when clinical signs
mias recorded in animals having normal cardiac struc-
 are manifested. If neurologic deficits are present, car-
ture and function. Ventricular arrhythmias may be
diovascular syncope is unlikely.
more significant when recorded in Doberman pin-
In some cases, the cause of the event is still unclear
schers and boxers with cardiomyopathy or nyocarditis
after soliciting a careful history, performing a clinical
(chapter 27).
examination, and initial testing. It should be recog-
 In a study cvaluating a large number of syncopal
nized that generalized clonic movements may occur
humans, Holter monitor recorting had a low diagnos-
with any condition that results in severe hypotension
tic yield.? Similar studies are not available for animals.
 and pancerebral hypoperfusion. Differentiation of syn-
 although in my experience, definitive diagnostic find
SYNCOPEANDEPISODICWEAKNESS
449
FIGURE 22-1
Holter monitor recordings from
a dog with dilated
carctiomyopathy aund episodic:
weakness. Medications included
dligoxin, furosemide, captopril,
and diltiazem. (A) Atrial
fibrillation at. 20o beats/min. (B)
Atrial fibrillation with ventricular
arrhythmias.Wcakness was nol
evident at the time of this
recording. (C) FCG recording at
the tine of weakness, 40 miutes
after diliazen administration.
shows atrial fibrillation with
profound bracdycardia,
B
resunably due to advanced AV
block. One junctional beat and
identitied. Episodic weakness
lesolved with discontinuation of
diliazem. Paper speed. 25 mm/
see; l cn = 1 mV.
C
ings should he expected in no more than 15 to 20
is identified. In many instances, none of these end-
percent of I Iolter recordings.
points are reached.
Exercise stress testing may be cspecially useful in
evaluation of dogs who manifest clinical signs with
In-Hlospital ECG Monitoring
exertior or excitement. The lack of an appropriate
increase in heart rate in response to exercise may point.
 Electrocardiographic monitoring during hospitaliza-
to sinus node dysfunction in patients with unexplained
tion may permit identification of arrhythinias responsi-
bradycardia.  Development  of  exercise-induced   AV
ble for syncope or episodlic weakness. Continuous ECG
block at low heart rate suggests disease in the distal
monitoring is useful in selected patients, either in
portions of the conduction system. Supraventricular
combination with or as a substitute for HHolter monitor
and ventricular tachyarrhythmias may also be provoked
recording. Continuous monitoring may be performed
by exercise. lt has been hypothesized that ventricular
using telemetric ECG recordings or hard-wire
re-
tachycardias precipitated by exercise may reflect a cate-
cordings in which the patient is directly connected to
cholamine sensitivity, implying that β-blockade may
the clectrocardiograph. If continuous monitoring is
be usefiul. In people, exercise testing is considered
not possible, serial ECGs recorded every 2 to 4 hours
diagnostically inferior to Holter monitoring, although
may help identify some transient arrhythmias.
in selected individuals this test may be preferred.s
Exercise ECG Testing
Vagal Maneuver or Other Provocaive Testing
 In some cases, cxercise may provoke arrhythimia or
If identifiable circumstances or provocations can
syncope, and ECG monitoring may document the
produce significant arrhythmias or collapse, these ac-
event. There are no standardized regimens for exercise
tivities should be performed during ECG monitoring.
ECG testing in small animals. Because cats rarely coop-
Coughing or exciteinent can precipitate collapse in
erate with exercise, thie technique is used alinost exclu-
some small-breed dogs, and tracheal stimulation dur-
sively in canines. Dogs are usually exercised on a tread-
 ing ECG monitoring may incite arrhythmia and syn-
Inill or in an open area. Exercise testing is terminated
cope. In others, vagal maneuvers performed during
if the patient collapses or when significant arrhythmia
450
ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
response with marked bradycardia, sinus arrest, or AV
arrhythmias resulting in syncope.12 Asystole and severe:
block.
sinus bradycardlia can result in coflapse. Arrhythmia
Carotid sinus massage is performed with the head
 management is discussed in detail in chapters 17 to 19.
extendled and turned slightly away from the side to be
massaged (chapters 18 and 19). The carotid sinus is
TACHYARRHYTHMIAs. Syncope resulting from ventricu-
located just caudal to the angle of the mandible and
lar or supraventricular tachyarrhythmia is usually asso-
dlorsal to the trachea. This region is compressed up-
ciated with significant. underlying cardiac disease or
ward against the vertebral bodies and is repeatedly
severe extracardiac disorders. Affected aninals should
 Inassaged in a cranial-to-caudal direction, If a vagal
always have a thorough cvaluation, including radio-
maneuver  produces  profound  bradycardia  in  a pet
 graphic and echocardliographic exaininations and ap-
propriate clinical pathology testing. Dilated cardiomy-
drugs may be attempted.
 opathy and chronic acquired valve disease are the most
 Another proposed provocation during ECG testing
common causes of canine tachyarrhythimias. Syncope
is partial airway obstruction. Suscepible individuals
frequently accompanies concurrent congestive heart
may increase inspiratory effort, which may result in a
failure. In cats, tachyarrhythmias are usually associated
reflex-induced bradycardia,
with hypertrophic and restrictive cardiomyopathy or
hyperthyroidlism.
Hemodynamically and electrically unstable tachyar
Signal-Averaged ECG, Upright Tilt Testing, and
rhythmias often result from severe extracardiac dis-
Electrophysiologic Testing
eases. Hemangiosarcoma involving the right atrium is
These specialized techniques are used to evaluate
a common cause of ventricular tachycardia in large-
people with syncope but have had little exposure in
breed older dogs. Other neoplasia may also invade the
clinical veterinary medicine. Signal-averaged electro-
heart, especially lymphoma in the cat. Systemic and
cardiography has identified people who are likely to
metabolic disorders, sepsis, and coagulopathies may
have ventricular tachycardia as the cause of syncope.?
cause myocardial structural or functional changes and
Upright tilt testing is used to evaluate humans for
arrhythmias (chapter 33). Therapy is directed at both
vasovagal or vasodepressor syncope. When tilted at a
arrhythmia suppression and the underlying disorder.
70° angle for up to 15 minutes, patients predisposed
The prognosis for aninals with syncope due to tachy-
to vasovagal syncope will experience syncope or presyn-
 arrhythimias is related to the type and degree of under-
cope.* Electrophysiologic testing involves cardiac cath-
lying disease. Ventricular arrhythmias are much more.
eterization to induce arrhythmias and record intracar-
likely to result in sudden death than supraventricular
diac electrograms. The diagnostic yield appcars to be
 arrhythmias, and for this reason they should be aggres-
highest in humans with underlying structural heart
sively treated. In one human study, the overall 1-year
disease or coronary artery disease.9
mortality rate for patients with cardiovascular cause for
 syncope was 30 percent. The subgroup with the highest
risk had advanced atrioventricular block or ventricular
MANAGEMENT OF SYNCOPE
tachycardia. Espccially with  ventricular tachycardia,
syncope is often an antecedent to sudden death.3
 Although the therapeutic end-point. of antiarrhythimic
therapy is a mater of debate, effective inanagenent
CARDIOGENIC SYNCOPE
should be directed to alleviate syncope and reduce the
likelihood of sudden death (chapters 17 to 19).
Arrhythmias
Arrhythmias are important causes of syncope in dogs
SICK SINUS SYNDROME. This condition causes sinus
and cats. Bradycardia associated with advanced forins
 slowing, sinus arrest, and supraventricular tachycardia
of atrioventricular block is a recognized cause of feline
(Fig. 636). A form of sick sinus syndroine—the
bradytachy syndrome---is present when extended inter-
diomyopathy, syncope or episodic weakness can accom-
vals of asystole without escape beats are punctuafed by
pany activity, which usually increases heart rate and
supravenuicular tachycardia. Most affected dogs are
dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction (Fox
symptomatic during these  intervals of prolonged
PR, personal communication) . In dogs, tachycardia-
bradycardia. Pacemaker implantation prevents fiurther
induced syncope is observed with some frequency. It
episodes of syncope. Sick sinus syndrome rarely can be
is typically associated with ventricular arrhythmias, al-
managed with oral anticholinergics (e.g, propanthe-
though atrial fbrillation and supraventricular tachycar-
line, 0.25 mg/kg tid), β-adrenergic drugs (e.g., terbu-
dia can also cause syncope or episodic weakness. High-
taline, 0.25 to 1.0 mg/kg tid) or theophyline (e.g..
grade  second-degree  and complete
atrioventricular
aminophylline, 6 to 10 mg/kg tid). When pacemaker
block and sick sinus syndrome account for most brady-
inplantation is not possible, the likelihood for recur-
SYNCOPE AND EPISODIC WEAKNESS
451
rcnt symcope is high, although sudden death is uncom-
cardiac outflow obstruction from aortic or pulmonic
mon.
valve stenosis, exercise may precipitate syncope when
forward cardiac output is impeded. Hypertrophic car-
BRADYARRHYTHMIAs.  Iligh-gradc  secondl-dcgrec AV
diomyopathy may cause dynamic obstruction to thc
block and complcte (3°) AV block commonly results
left ventricular outflow tract secondary lo ventricular
in symptomatic bradycardia and syncopc in dogs and
scptal hypertrophy and abnormal anterior mitral valve
cats. Most symptomatic pcts havc advanccd AV block
motion (i.c., hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopa-
on thcir rcsting ECG. Howcver, some may only havc
thy), although inadequate coronary circulation or ar-
 mild AV block, with or without accompanying conduc-
rhythmias may also contribute (chaptcr 28).
tion systcm abnormalitics (i.c., bundle branch block
 or fascicular block). Occasionally, long intcrvals of nor-
HEART FAILURE. Aithough not a disease per se, hcart
 mal conduction occur. The arrhythrmia may represcnt
failure results from a variety of structural or functional
a manifestalion of widespread cardiac disease such as
cardiac derangemcnts. Syncope often occurs with thc
cardiomyopathy or myocarditis. Pacemaker implanta-
onset of cardiac decompensation and thus scrves as a
tion is indicated for advanced AV block and usually
clinically uscful marker of congestivc hcart failure.
 abolishes syncope (chapter 20). The prognosis without
Dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy or chronic valvular
pacermaker implantation is guarded, and sudden death
discase can collapsc when cardiac output is dccreased
is common.
by myocardial failure, valvular regurgitation, or tachy-
cardia, cspccially when combincd with coughing (see
tussive syncope later). Overzealous diuresis or hypoten-
StructuralCardiacDiseases
sion causcd by vasodilator drugs may be contributory.
Common cardiac diseases associated with syncope
The prognosis is better for collapse associated with
hcart failure than for syncope resulting from ventricu-
include aortic stenosis, pulmonic stenosis, dilated car-
diomyopathy, advanced chronic acquired valvular dis-
lar arrhythmias.
case, hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy, cardiac neoplasia,
and pcricardial effusion (Table 22-2). Pulmonary em-
VENTRICULAR UNDERFILLING. IntracardiaC mass lcsions
 bolisrm and pulmonary hypcrtension, with or without
may reduce ventricular filing by obstructing blood
heartworn disease, can also causc syncope.
flow through atrioventricular valves, by obstructing the
right ventricular ouflow tract, or interfering with
OBSTRUCTION TO FORWARD BLOOD FLOw. With SCyCrC
blood rcturning from systemic or pulmonic vcins. Car-
TABLE 22-2
Cardiovascular Causes of Syncope and Breed Predispositions
Causes of Syncope
Breed Predispositions*
Structural Heart Discascs
Dilated carcliomyopathy
Doberman pinscher, boxer. cocker spanicl, giant-breed dogs
Chronie valvular disease
Small-breed dogs (middlle-aged to geriatric)
Puthmonic stenosis
English bulldog, Samoyed, beagle, Chihraua, cocker spaniel, others
Aortic stenosis
Newfoundland, boxer, golden retriever, German shiepherd, otiers
Right-tro-left shunting congcnital defects
English brllcdog
Hypertroplic cardiomyopathy
Cats (Maine coon, Himalayan); German shorthair pointer
Pericardial cflusion
German shepherd, golden retriever, others 
Intracardiac rmass lesions (neoplasia: thrormbus)
Cardiac Arrhythrnias
Sick sinus syndrome
Miniature schnauzer. dachshund
Advanced AV block
German shepherd, dachshund, pug, Doberman pinscher
Asystole
Sinus bratdycardia
Supraventricular tachycardia
Labrador retuievcr
Ventricular tachycardia
German shepherd. boxer, Dobermar pinscher
Cor Pulmonale
 Pumonary embolism
Pumonary hypertension
Hleartworm discasc
Tussive “Cough Drop” Syncope
Smallbreed dogs with combined carcliopulnonary disease
Vasovagal Syncope
Boxer, brachyccphalic breeds?
*Ioes not exclude other breeds from being affecled.
452ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
diac tamponade is the most. common causc of ventricu-
stress of another discasc process can incrcasc the frc-
lar umderfilling (chapter 29) and is commonly associ
quency of syncopal cvcnts. Dchydration, hypovolemia,
ated with ventricular arrhythmias in dogs. Episodic
and certain drugs are recognized to lcad to its devclop-
wcakncss from lack of forward cardiac output is a
mcnt.
common clinical complaint. The prognosis is largely
Vasodeprcssor syncope may be managed with eithe1
dependent upon ctiology.
anticholinergic drugs (c.g. propanthcline, 0.25 to 1.0
mg/kg tid) or β-blocking drugs (e.g., metoprolol, 0.2
Vasovagal and Related Reflex Causes of Syncope
to 1 mg/kg tid). Anticholinergic drugs act to prevent
the reflex cardiac slowing, but as previously described,
 This catcgory includes vasovagal syncopc and othcr
this may be inadequate treatiment to prevent syncope;
recognizcd or proposcd ctiologics resulting from inap-
β-adrcnergic blockers work carlicr in the reflex arc to
 propriale autonomic reflex responses, including ca-
 prevent the initial rcleasc of catecholamincs. In addi-
rotid sinus hypersensitivity, postural hypotension, and
tion, β-blockcrs havc a blocking cffcct on cardiac
  i   n 
mechano-reccptors. Disopyramide is rcported to bc an
ventilation.
effective trcatrmcnt in pcople with neurocardiogenic
syncope. I have Inanaged sevcral young boxcrs with a
VASOVAGAL (NEUROCARD1OGENIC) SYNCOPE. In h umans,
syndrome that rescmblcs neurocardiogcnic syncopc.
vasovagal syncope is the most common identifiable
Although a definitive diagnosis was not confirned.
years with metoprolol (0.2 to 1 mg/kg bid to tid), a
genic syncope is the result of countcrproductive re-
β-specific β-blocker. The prognosis with neurocardio-
flcxes that defeat the normal vascular responscs
genic syncope is good; although recurrent syncope is
nceded to maintain blood pressure.11 1lypotension or
possible, sudden dcath is unlikcly.
hypovolermia are precipitating events. In a normal indi-
vidual, hypotension or hypovolemia is countcracted by
CAROTID SINUS HYPERSENSITTVITY. 'This is an uncom-
increases in adrenergic sympathetic lone and dimin-
mon cause of syncopc. Stimulation of the carotid sinus
ished parasympathetic tone. In susceptible patients,
sends afferent impulses to the vasomotor center of
syncope occurs when there is a sudden withdrawal of
thc brain. Incrcascd vagal tone lcads to bradycardia,
sympathetic tonc and an increase in parasympathetic
whereas dininishcd vasomotor tonc results from inhi-
oosa ui dop snoclrdl e u snssu si noe
bition of the sympathetic ncrvous system. This syn-
tone at the samc timc as decreasing heart rate. It is
drome has been rcported in humans with ncoplasia
this paradoxic interruption of the normal responses to
 and inflainmatory processcs in the neck.
hypovolcmia that causcs syncopc. This abnormal reflex
appears to occur in responsc to cardiac mechanorccep-
ADDITIONAL CAUSES OF REFLEX SYNCOPE. In humans,
tor stimulation. The initial adrenergic stimulation in
these include postural hypotension, hyperventilation,
response to hypovolemia leads to vigorous contraction
and syncope during or following micturition or defcca-
of a relatively emply ventricle. This stimulus to myocar
tion. Postural hypotension results from inadequate in-
dial mechanoreceptors, or C fibers, results in inhibi-
crease in vascular tone when rising from rccumbcncy.
tion of sympathetic tone and increases parasympa-
Volume depletion and cardiac medications may con-
thctic cffercnt activity. The overal consequences of
tributc to this problcm. Oropharymgeal stimulation,
thicsc rcflexcs arc hypotension and bradycardia, and
gastric distention, and capsular pressure resulting from
thc resulting decrcasc in ccrebral blood flow causes
swclling of internal organs may also initiate reflexes
synicope.
that result in syncope. Hyperventilation is reported to
 In most paticnts, both components of the abnormal
lead to syncope via hypocapnia, which causes cerebral
reflex are active, although in a given individual one com-
artcrial vasoconstriction. The final types of reflex-medi-
 ponent rmay predorminate. Thercforc, in any given pa-
ated syncope arc thosc that occur at. the time of, or
tient, either the vasodepressor aspect or thc bradycardic
immediately following, micturition or defecation.
aspects may be primarily responsible for symptoms. Stud-
ies in animals and in people have documented that allcvi-
 ation of the bradycardic limb of the reflex with atropine
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM CAUSES
0r cardiar pacing fails to prcvent the occurrence of sy11-
copc.
OF SYNCOPE
Vasovagal syncope can occur in normal healthy ani-
mals or in animals with systermic discase. Boxers have
Neurologic ctiologics arc rarcly provcd as the cause
been described with a syndrome that rescmbles vasova-
 of syncope in animals. It is often difficult to differenti-
sd e  a s pn os 
ale seizures from syncope. The central ncrvous systcm
sition to develop vasovagal syncopc, and the additional
modulates both excitatory and inhibitory influcnccs
SYNCOPE AND EPISODIC WEAKNESS453
 on autonomic discharge and can directly or indirectly
bronchodilators (aminophylline, 10 mg/kg tid; thc-
influence blood pressure, arterial tonc, and cardiac
ophylline sustaincd-release, 20 mg/kg od to bid). Res-
ratc and rhythm. Thc relationship bctwccn thc brain
 piratory disease may be better defincd and specifically
 and the hcart is important to consider in animals with
treated following bronchoscopy with trachcal cytology
scvcrc or multiple scizures, thosc with brain trauma,
and culturc. Management of heart discasc will help
and those with intracranial bleeding disorders. In thesc
alleviate coughing resulting from hcart failure. Ilow-
cascs seizures, syncope, or both may occur. Scvcral
cver, coughing resulting from compression of main
studics have documented the association bctwcenl car-
 airways by an enlarged left atrium may pcrsist regard-
diac arrhythmias and neurologic disorders.16, t7 Electro-
less of therapy. The outcome is usually rclatcd to the
cardiographic changes in humans with neurologic
 prognosis for the underlying disorder, as few dogs die
discase 1nay includc prolongation of the QT interval,
as a result of tussivc syncopc. Recurrent syncopal
ST-segincnt depression, and non-specific T wavc
events are common, cspccially with cardiac dccompen-
changes.6 Bradyarrhythmias  and tachyarrhythmias
sation.
have also been recognized in these cases, and postmor-
tem examinations have demonstrated myocardial dam-
age. Seizures may occur in association with cardiac
DRUG-RELATED SYNCOPE
arrhythmias in either a cause or effect relationship. In
the latter, scizures may result from poor central ner-
Many drugs can cause or contributc to syncopc.
wous system perfusion following frcquent or prolonged
Calcium channcl blockers and β-adrenergic blockcrs,
symcopal cpisodes. Syncope causcd by diminished cere-
particularly at toxic doses or in combination therapy.
bral blood flow secondary to intracercbral vascular
 can causc a prccipitous drop in heart rate and/or
disorders is uncommon in veterinary medicinc.
cause AV block, Othcr drugs such as vasodilators, ni-
trates, β-adrenergic blockers, or calcium channcl
blockers, which affcct vascular tone, can causc hypo
 tension, weakncss and syncope. Diuretics can contrib-
TUSSIVE SYNCOPE ("COUGH DROP"
utc, owing to potential blood volume contraction and
SYNCOPE)
elcctrolyte depletion.
It is often difficult to detcrmine whether syncope
Tussivc, or “"cough drop,” syncope is onc of thc
results from drug adrministration or from cardiac dis-
most common causcs of syncopc in dogs. It typically
casc and arrhythmia. If drug toxicity is suspccted, one
 Occurs in small brccds and is associated with collapsing
must reaffirm the corrcct dosc, dctcrmine whether
trachea, chronic obstructive
pulnonary
diseasc,
client compliance is accuratc, asscss for systemic or
brachyccphalic syndromc, and chronic acquircd valvc
metabolic causcs that could alter drug elimination,
diseasc (endocardiosis) .
 and assay for serum drug conccntrations whcn possiblc
 Syncopc most. commonly occurs during or immedi-
(c.g, digitalis glycosidcs). In pets rcceiving polyphar-
atcly after coughing. In somc cascs owiers will describc
 macy, the diuretic dosc is typically reduced, assuming
a diferent prccipitating activity, such as gagging, an
 othcr steps havc bccn cvaluated. Alterations in the
attempt to vomit. or rctching, a hard or forceful swal-
 types or doses of other medications is attempted if this
low, or an acute episodc of excitement coupled with
step fails.
heightened respiratory activity. Multiple episodes of
syncope are common.
 Several mechanisms have becn proposed to explain
UNKNOWN CAUSES OF SYNCOPE
syncope associated with coughing. Cerebral blood flow
may be decreased as a result of incrcased intracranial
No definitive ctiology can be cstablished in a large
pressurc during paroxysms of coughing. Paroxysmal
numbcr of syncopal animals. In many, the rate of
coughing may increase intrathoracic pressure, which
 recurrence is low. There seems to be a low incidencc of
results in diminished cardiac venous rcturn and atten-
 sudden death in human patients who werc cxtensively
dant decrcases in cardiac output. Reflex cardiac slow-
studied and who have no identifiable causc of syn-
-n uaq aau ss eus ou ynne st s'adon
cardiogenic syncope) may be triggercd by coughing
 ported in animals.
and lead to collapse. Alternativcly, cardiac tachyar-
rhythmias may be precipitated by coughing and con-
tribute to collapsc.
REFERENCES
 Maragement includes therapies directed at the un-
derlying respiratory and cardiar diseascs, including
antitussivc medications (hydrocodonc, 0.22 mg/kg bid
1. Martin GJ, Adams SI., Martin IIG, et al. Prospcctive
to tid; butorphanol, 0.5-1 mg/kg bid to qid) and
 evaluation of syncope. Ann Einerg Med 13:499, 1984
454 ABNORMAL CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION AND PRINCIPLES OF THERAPY
2. Eaglc KA, Black HR, Cook EF, ct al. Evaluation of prog
10. Stamoulis ME, Bond BR, Fox PR. Paceinaker thcrapy for
nostic classifications for patients with syncope. Ain J Mcd
symptoinatic bradycardia in the cat. J Vet Emcrg Chit
79:455,1985
Care 2:67, 1992
3. Kapoor WM, Carpe M, Wiegand J, ct al. A prospcctivc
11. Fox PR, Moise NS, Woodfield J, Darke PGC. Techniqucs
evaluation and follow up of patients with syncope. N
and conplications of paceinaker implantation in four
Engl J Mcd 309:197, 1983
cats. J Ann Vet Med Assoc 199:1742, 1991
4. Eagle KA, Pruitt AA. Syncope. In Eagle KA, Haber E,
12. Fox PR, Matthiesen DT, Pursc D, Brown NO. Ventral
DeSanctis RW, Austen GW (eds): The Practice of Cardi-
ology. 2nd ed. Boston, Litule, Brown, 1989, p 43
tion of cardiac pacemakers in the dog. J Am Vet Med
. Gibson JC, 1leitzman MR. Diagnostic efficacy of 24-hour
Assoc 189:1303, 1986
electrocardiographic imonitoring for syncope. Am J
13. Kramcr MR, Drori Y, Lev B. Sudden death in young
Cardiol 53:1013, 1984
soldiers: High incidcncc of syncope prior to dcath. Chest
6. Brooks R, Garan I1, Ruskin JN. Evaluation of the patient
93:345, 1988
with unexplained syncope. In Zipes DP, Jalife J (eds):
Cardiac Electrophysiology: From Cell to Bedside. Phila-
14. Sra JS, Jazayeri MR, Avitall B, et al. Coinparison of car-
dclphia, WB Sauunders, 1990, p 646
diac pacing with drug therapy in the treatincnt of neuro
cardiogenic syncope with bradycardia or asystolc. N Engl
7. Winters SI, Stcward D, Gomes JA. Signal averaging of
the surface QRS complex predicts inducibility of ventric-
JMed 328:1085, 1993
ular tachycardia in paticnts with syncope of unknown
15. Fischer EW. Fainting in Boxersthe possibility of vaso-
origin: A prospcctive study. J Ain Coll Cardiol 10:775,
vagal syncope (Adams-Stokes attacks). J Sinall Anim
1987
Pract 12:347. 1971
8. Sra JS, Anderson AJ, Sheikh SH, ct al. Unexplained
16. Samules MA. Electrocardiographic nanifestations of
syncopc evaluated by elcctrophysiologic studics
and
neurologic discase. Semin Ncurol 4:153, 1984
17. Oppenheimer SM, Cechctto DF, Hachinski VC. Cerebro
head-up tilt testing. Ann Intern Med 114:1013, 1991
9. Ruskin JN, Schocnfeld MH. Mechanisins of ventricular
genic cardiac arrhythimias. Arch Neurol 47:513, 1990
arrhythimias. In Fagle KA, IHabcr E, DeSanctis RW, Aus-
18.
Eagle KA, Black 1IR. The impact of diagnostic tests in
ten Gw (cds): The Practicc of Cardiology. 2nd ed. Bos-
'I   f o os m sd 
ton, Litrle, Brown, 1989, p 207
1983
Diseases of the
Heart and
Circulation
Prevalence of
23
Cardiovascular
Disorders
JAMES W. BUCHANAN
change over time, as is cvident in trends reported in 1992' and 1968.? This
chapter adds cpidemiologic insights to congenital and acquired heart dis-
casc. Additional information is contained in chaptcrs covering specific dis
cascs.
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE PREVALENCE
CANINE
Typcs and prevalence of canine heart disease were first characterized 30
years ago in a survey of 5000 dogs presented to the Veterinary Hospital of
discasc, and another 9 percent had possible heart discasc. Since the inci-
dence of heartworm disease is low in this region, the frcqucncy of hcart
disease could actually be greater in endcmic hcartworm rcgions. A simila1
Center in New York City discloscd cardiovascular disease in 483 dogs (11%)
(Fox PR, Pipcrs F, unpublished data). In I988, heart disease was reported in
To determine whcther diseasc cpidemiology has changed in dogs in thc
 Philadclphia arca, the types and relative frequency of heart discasc werc
 ss q    s o i  0 0  p
  o s o   i   m
discascs arc chronic acquired atrioventricular valvular discasc, cardiomyopa-
thy, and pericardial effusion secondary to ncoplasia.
recorded in the relative disease frcqucncy and breed. This may be due in
 part to changes in brccd popularity, as well as increased disease incidence
 in certain breeds, and improved diagnostic methods. Differenccs also reflect
a greater proporion of rcferred patients with congenital heart disease, as
wcll as animals with acute heart failure presented to our busy cmergcnry
service. The types and relative frequency of arrhythmias in thcsc dogs are
listed in Table 23-2. It is interesting that cardiovascular disorders tabulated
from 813 dogs examined at a cardiology clinic in Milan, Italy,? are rclativcly
similar in type and frequency to those rccorded in Table 23-1.
458 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
TABLE 23-1
TABLE 23-3
Cardiac Diseases in 300 Dogs*
Frequency of Cardiopulmonary Disease in 500 Cats*
Diagnosis
Number
%
Diagnosis
Number
%
Chronic valvular discase (33 also had arrhythmias)
120
40.0
Ilypertrophic cardiomyopatly
118
22.5
Primary arrhythmia (shortening fraction > 23%)
50
16.7
Intermediatc cardiomyopathy
81
15.5
Congenital heart. disease (4 also had arrhythmias)
49
16.4
Mitral insuffciency, unknown cause
14.3
Dilated cardiomyopathy (24 also had arrhiythmias)
11.3
Dilated cardioyopathy
65
12.4
7.0
Pericarclial cffusion (12 had visible mass; 5 had
Ilyperthyroidism
9.8
arrhyAlmias)
Congenital heart disease
6.5
 Neoplasm witiout pericardial effusion (6 had
9
08
Myocardial disease, other
22
4.2
arrhythmias)
Pleural effusion, noncardiac
20
3.8
Heartworns
7
2.3
Systemic thromboembolism
18
3.4
Other (3 had arrhythnias)
10
3.8
Primary pulmonary discasc
11
2.1
TYIAI.
006
100.0
Pericardial diseasc
11
2. 1
Congestive heart failure
901
8'96
Systemic hypertension
6
1.1
No diagnosis
12
2.8
*All dogs with reliable signs of heart disease and owner's last nane begin-
TOTAI.
524
100.0
ning wit A-F From the 1990-1993 fles of The Veterinary Hospital, University
ofPennsylvania, Cadiology Seclion. Approximately Iyear case load, exclud
Congestive heart failurc
103
20.6
ing all cats, normal dogs, and dogs with signs of possible heart disease.
*Angell Memorial Animal Hlospital, 1985 to 1989.
ment.n Kirk Rw,Bonagura JD (eds): Current Veterinary Therapy XIPhila
FELINE
delphia, wB Saunders, 1992, p 732.
Thc ovcrall frcqucncy of felinc cardiovascular dis-
casc asscsscd by clinical cvaluation has not bcen sur-
York has ranged from 26 to 64 percent (Fox PR, un-
veyed as thoroughly as that of dogs. ln one prospective
published data, 1998) (chapter 28).
study of 388 cats in 1963, 15 (4%) had grade one to
 Necropsy studies often report a higher frequency of
thrcc (out. of five) systolic hcart murmurs, and 8 (2%)
feline heart disease, especially if histologic studics are
had triple hcart sounds. Morc rcccntly, hcart. discases
 perforrmed. For example, histopathologic examination
werc diagnoscd in *ncarly cqual" numbers of dogs
of the myocardium in 50 apparently healthy cats in
and cats at the Angell Memorial Animal Hospital.?
 Isracl revealed lcsions in 35 (70%).9 The largest rc-
The types and relative frequencies of cardiopulmonary
 ported scrics, 4933 cats nccropsicd at The Animal
diseases in 500 cats exaimined clinically at that institu-
Mcdical Centcr between 1962 and 1976, discloscd ac-
tion in 1987 to 1989 are shown in Table 23-8.* 11yper-
quired cardiac lesions in 421 (8.5%) cats and congeni-
trophic cardiomyopathy, either idiopathic or second-
tal anomalics in 96 (1.9%).1
ary to hyperthyroidism, was the most common cardiac
disorder. The annual percentage of cats diagnoscd
by cchocardiography with pathologic left ventricular
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
hypcrtrophy at Thc Animal Mcdical Center in New
TABLE 23-2
CANINE
Arrhythinias Recorded in 125 of 300 Dogs with Heart
Disease*
The reported prevalence of canine congenital heart
Nurnber of Times
disease (CHD) from several veterinary schools was 0.46
Arrhythmia Type
Recorded
to 0.85 percent1 The types and relative frequency of
Ventricular prematurc bcats
54
congenital cardiac anomalies in l000 dogs with CHD
Atrial fibrillation
28
are listed in Table 234. In a recent survey of 4325
Arial premature beats
24
I'aroxysmal ventricular tachycardia
dogs, CID was detected in 0.5 percent (Fox PR, Pipcrs
12
Supraventricular tachycardia
10
F, unpublished data). Additional data are prcscnted in
Sick sinus syndrorme
5
chapter 24.
2° AV block
5
3° AV block
4
Thc prcvalcnce of CHD is undoubtedly greatcr than
Rignt bundle branc h block
published percentages because some alnomalies do not
Left bunclle branch block 
2
Silent atrium
cause murmurs, and some severc cascs result in perina-
tal dcath without nccropsics. In a recent survcy of
Atrial flutter
_
IV.I.O.1.
149
1679 purebred pet store puppics, cardiac rmurmurs
were detected in 11 (0.65%).i In another report, con-
#All dogs with reliable signs of heart disease and owner's last name legin
genital cardiovascular anomalies were found in 5 of 25
rning with A. F in The Vetcerinary Hospital Lniversily of Pennsylvania, Cardiol
ogy Section files from 1990 to i993.
stillborn and neonatal puppies in a closed colony of
PREVALENCE OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISORDERS
459
TABLE 23-4
thc individual institutions or the Vetcrinary Medical
 Comparative Frequencies of Congenital Heart
Data Base at Purduc Univcrsity; brccd-spccific odds
Defects in 1000 Dogs*
ratios for each abnormality were calculated from thc
Defect
 brecd distribution of all dogs lcss than 3 years old
% of Dogs
 presented to the scven participating institutions. The
Patent ductus arteriosus
27.7
Aortic stcnosis
25.5
referencc population age was limited to dogs under 3
Pulmonic: ster1osis
20.8
years old, which represented 90 pcrcent of the 1000
Ventricular sepual defect
9.8
dogs. Results are summarized in Table 23-5, and data
Tricuspid dysplasia
5.1
Tetralogy of Fallot.
3.9
for individual abnormalitics and affected brceds (Ta-
Persistent righit aortic arch
3.1
bles 23-6 to 23-10) are discussed next.
Mitral dysplasia
1.7
Atrial sepial defect
1.3
Peritoneopericardial diaphragmalie hernia
0.5
0.6
PATENT DUCTUSARTERIOSUS
Othcr defects
TOTAI.
100.0
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) was the most com-
mon congenital anomaly (Table 23-4). Fifty-five differ-
TABLE 23-5
dence of CIID is at least I percent of all dogs born.
 Breed Predilections in 1000 Dogs with Congenital
 The frequcncy of CHD in purcbred dogs is grcater
Heart Disease*
than in mongrel dogs. This supports the vicw that
Relative
 genetic factors are important in the etiology of CHD.13
Brced
Lesion
Risk
 A singlc genc defect was reccntly determined to be
Akita
Ventricular scptal defect (VSD)
the cause of conotruncal abnorimalities in kceshond
Basset hound
VSD
8
dlogs.14
Bichon frise
Patent ducturs artcriosus (PDA)
3
 The prevalencc of congenital abnormalities diffcrs
Bloodond
Aortic stenosis (AS)
8
Boxer
Atrial septal defecl (ASD)
between breeds and countries and often within regions
3
AS
of a given country. This indicates the importance of
Chihuaa
PS
2
regional gene pools in the etiology of CHD. Thus, the
Cocker spanicl
PDA
English bulldog
reader should keep an opcn mind whcn interpreting
PS
VSD
名
data that may reflect the “"prevalence' of certain dis-
 English springer spaniel
PDA
2
VSD
case's.
3
 In a recent tabulation of the distribution of CH1) in 
German shepherd
AS
2
Tricuspid dysplasia (TD)
飞
 1320 dogs in the national Veterinary Medical Data
Persistent R aorlic arch (PRAA)
Basc, there was concern about the accuracy of some
Golden retriever
AS
Great Pyrences
TD
diagnoscs.' In many instances, diagnoses were entered.
3
Keeshond
PIA
by mcdical rccord clerks for patients that werc not.
Iabraclor retricver
TD
3
cxamined by cardiologists. Also, the brced-specific
Lakeland terrier
VSI>
Maltese
3
PDA
 prcvalence rates wcre based upon the breed distribu-
 Miniature schnauzcr
PS
2
tion of dogs of all ages. This fails to account for shifts
PDA
1
 in brccd popularities in young versus old dogs that
Newfoundland
AS
Pomeranian
PDA
2
have been noted in previous studics.15
Poodles—toy & miniature
PDA
名
Rottweiler
AS
名
Samoyed
PS
 Coinparative Frequencies of Canine Congenital
Scottishi terrier
PS
3
Heart Diseases
Shetland sheepdog
PDA
2
Shih tzu
VSD
2
West Higiland whitc
 To asscss current trends in breed and disease inci-
VSI>
3
terrier
Tetralogy of Fallot.
 dence, a recent study cxamined the types and relative
PS
frcquency of diagnoses in 1000 dogs (1986 to 1990)
Wirehaired fox terrier
PS
with congenital heart diseasc as recorded by veterinary
Yorkshire terrier
PDA
2
 cardiologists* (sec Table 23-4). Reference brccd popu-
*1044 abnormalities in 10o0 dogs with CHD at. seven vererinary schools
lation data for thc same period were obtaincd from
froun 1986 to 1990. The reference populatiom was 32.697 dogs less than 3
years old from the same schools.
Numbers 1. 2, and 3 identity predisposed breeds repesented by three tor
*Penrsytoaria: J. Buchanan, D. Knight, Michigan State: G. Eyster,
tmore affected dogs in which relative risk for the indieaed abnormality was
signifieanuly elevaled in 1his series (P < 05 to P< 0001).
C. Gabor, B. Olivicr, L. Anderson, M. Probst; Cormelt: S. Moise;
1, mild inereased risk (ods ratio 1.52.9 times other dogs).
Teunessee R. Gormpf: Iowa: W. Ware; Tufts: J. Rush; North Carolina: B.
2. moderate risk (odds ratin S-4.9 times olers).
Keene, C. Atkins.
(saye s g < ouea sp) xsta paru g
460DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
TABLE 23-6
Palent Ductus Arteriosus-Eslimated Relative Risks (Odds Ratios) by Breed (n = 289)*
Breeds ≥4 Cases
No.
Odds Ratio
95% Confidence Limits
Maltese
12
12.4
6.423.4
<.0001
Toy poodle
22
6.7
4.2-10.7
<.0001
Miniatre poodle
16
5.9
8.4-10.1
<c.0001
Keeshond
5.9
2.1-15.2
.002
Bichon frise
6
5.5
2.2-13.1
100*
Ponneranian
9
4.6
2.2-9.4
[00'>
Yorkshirc terrier
11
1.2
2.3-7.4
<.0001
English springer spanicl
61
4.0
2.4-6.6
<.0001
Shetland sheepdog
17
8.9
2.3-6.5
<.0001
Cocker spanic]
25
2.6
1.7-1.0
<.0001
(Chihuahua
2.8
0.9-7.8
.062
Dachshund
5
2.5
8'9-6'0
.0.57
Minialure schnauzer
7
2.2
0.9-4.8
.050
Australian sheepdog
4
2.0
0.6-5.6
ns
German shepherd
23
1.2
0.6-1.8
ns
Collic
5
.6
0.2-1.6
TIs
Mixed breed
38
.5
0.41.7
[000'
(Golden retriever
.2
0.1-0.6
100
Labrador retriever
5
.2
c"0-1'0
6000'
+Seven vererinary schools, 100 dogs, 1986 to 1990.
ns. not sigifhical.
ent breeds represented 289 (27.7%) affected dogs
University of Pennsylvania, but it was second in fre-
from the 1000 surveyed. Breed prcdisposition was
quency in the series of 1000 dogs (scc Tablc 23-4:
greatest. in Maltese dogs, with an estimated risk:odds
thesc data include all forms of left ventricular outflow
ratio of 12.4 (Table 23-6). Toy and rminiature poodles
tract obstruction). In confirmed cases, nearly all dogs
still show predisposition for the disorder as was noted
with left ventricular outflow tract obstruction have fi-
 30 ycars ago, but other brceds arc also now commonly
brous or fibromuscular subaortic stenosis (chapter 24).
affected. Although a substantial number of Gcrman
Newfoundland dogs arc still at highest risk, but larger
shepherds and collies had PDA, their odds ratios wcrc
numbers of affected golden rctrievers, rottweilers, and
 not greater than would be cxpected by chance becausc
German shepherd dogs are detected at veterinary clin-
of the large number of those breeds in the refercncc
ics in the United States (Table 23-7). Aortic stenosis
populations. Females outnumbered males by 3:1.
was diagnoscd in 29 of 31 Newfoundlands and 37 of
Cavalier King Charles spaniels have increased risk
39 rotriwcilers with CHD. There was no sex predilection
for PDA; two cases were diagnosed in the 1000-dog
m (%88) shop 2 J0 61 1m 11 'sx0q 11 1d5x
scrics yiclding an odds ratio (OR) of 5.9 (95% confi-
aortic stennosis were males. In Scotland, boxers repre-
dence limits [CL], 1.7 to 25.l; P = .049). 1n Edin-
sent about half of the cases of subaortic stenosis.19
burgh, Scotland, 6 of 32 dogs with PDA (19%) were
 cavaliers, whercas the breed makes up only 1.9 percent
PULMONIC STENOSIS
of the clinic population (Darkc PGG, personal coinmu-
nication).
Pulmonic stenosis (PS) is the third most frcqucnt
Right-to-left shunting PDA (16 dogs) was recognizcd.
causc of caninc congenital hcart discasc (scc Tablc
most frequently in this population of 1000 dogs in
cocker spaniels (5, all females). Othcr brccds with
TABLE 23-7
more than one right-to-left shunting PDA were English
Aorlic Stenosis-
-Estimated Relative Risks (Odds
springer spaniels (two) and Shetland sheepdogs (two),
with one malc and one female each. A recent report
Ratios) by Breed (n = 266)*
of hcreditary PDA in 13 of 62 Pembroke Welsh corgis
95%
Odds
Confidence
sired by a male with a small PDA included two with
Breeds ≥ 4 Cases
No.
Ratio
Lirmits
P
right-to-left PDA.1 PDA also was diagnoscd in six of
seven corgis with congenital hcart discasc, as well as in
Newfoundlland
29
19.9
13.4-30.4
<. .0001
Bloodhound
4
14.5
five related border collics in Australia.17. 1x
4.443.3
100' >
Boxer
23
9.3
5.814.7
1000' >
Golden retriever
79
6.8
3.2-0.0
1000' >
Rottweiler
37
5.1
3.7-7.8
<. .0001
AORTIG STENOSIS
German shephierd
43
2.6
1.9-3.7
1000'>
Mixed breed
11
0.1
0.40.7
1000 >
Aortic stenosis is the most common congenital hcart
 disorder obscrvcd at the Veterinary Teaching Hospital,
*Seven veterinary schools, 1000 dogs, 1986 to 1990.
PREVALENCE OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISORDERS 4
461
23-4; this includes all forms of right ventricular out-
TABLE 23-9
flow tract obstruction in this series of 1000 dogs). 1n
Ventricular Septal Defect-Estimated Relative Risks 
confirmcd cases, dysplasia of thc pulmonary valve is
(Odds Ratios) by Breed (n = 102)*
the most frequently obscrved defect in dogs, although
%96
obstruction to right ventricular outflow can devclop in
Odds
Confidence
the infundibulum and subvalvular region, and abovc
Brecds ≥ 3 Cases
No.
Ratio
Limits
P
the pulmonic valve (chapter 24)
Lakeland terrier
3
998.7
97.0-1635
1000' >
The estimated risk of PS was greatcst in English
West Highland white terricr
7
13.4
5.6-80.4
<.0001
 buldogs, but several other brccds also had elcvatcd
English springer spaniel
9
5.4
2.6-11.2
1000
Basset hound
1
5.3
1.6-15.0
.008
odds ratios (Table 23-8). There was no scx predilec-
English bulldog
5
5.0
1.812.9
t00
tion cxcept in English bulldogs, of which 18 of 25 dogs
Akita
4.1
1.413.4
.041
(72%) werc male. The importance of coronary artery
Shih t7u
3.3
1.0-9.13
880'
 Miniature poodle
2.9
1.0-9.7
alomalies with pulmonic stenosis has been highlighted
Ilusky
2.5
01.8-7.0)
ns
Chow
3
2.4
0.8-7.8
ns
with PS recently evaluated at my institution have had
Beagle
3
2.4
0.8-7.7
ns
Labrador retriever
4
0.5
0.2-1.4
an anomalous single coronary artery with an aberrant.
ns
Mixed brecd
11
0.4
0.2-0.8
.005
right coronary artery, and cncircling and constricting
*Seven veterinary schools, 1000 dogs, 1986 to 1990.
the basc of the pulmonic valve.20 Coronary angiogra-
Is, not significant.
 phy always should bc performed in this breed as an
adjunct to planning surgery.
11.6. However, they arc not a common brccd in this
Valvular PS was reportcd in four male Boykin span-
 area, and only one mastiff and two bullmastiffs with Ps
iels in Gcorgia, and other cases have been seen in
werc dctectcd in the 1000-dog serics. Rcccntly, six
Virginia and Alabama. Thickencd. dysplastic valvcs are
bullmastiffs with Ps were confirmed over a 3-year pc-
thc cause of thc stenosis. The Boykin spaniel is 2
riod in Australia,25 and 2 of 42 dogs with PS in thc
common hunting dog brccd in the Southcast but is not.
United Kingdom werc bullmastiffs.* Thus, mastiff
reflected significantly in national data. Southeastern
breeds have an increased risk for PS.
institutions did not contribute data for the 1000-dog
study reportcd in this chapter. A similar form of PS in
beagles was shown to be hereditary,2t but only two
VENTRICULAR SEPTALDEFECT
beaglcs had Ps in the 1000-dog study, and the breed
Ventricular septal defcct (VSD) has becn1 recognizcd
did not have clcvated risk. Auscultation of 3586 young
 in various brccds. English springer spanicls were most
and adult. bcagles rcvcaled 16 dogs with pulmonic
often scen in the 1000-dog scrics. Odds ratios werc
stenosis (Moisc NS, pcrsonal communication).
greatcr in West IHighland whitc terriers and Lakeland
Mastiffs had incrcascd risk for PS in the United
terriers (lable 23-9). Three of four Lakelands with
States during an carly survey, with an odds ratio of
congenital heart disease had VsD. No sex predilection
was observed. A report documenting the occurrence of
ventricular septal defcts in a group of closely rclated
TABLE 23-8
Pulmonic Stenosis—Estimated Relative Risks (Odds
 English springer spanicls indicated that the defect was
heritable,25 The exact mode of inheritance was uncer-
Ratios) by Breed (n = 217)*
tain, but no sex prcdilection was identified.
95%
Odds
Confidence
Breeds ≥ 4 Cascs
No.
Ratio
Limits
P
TRICUSPID VALVE DYSPLASIA
English bullcog
24
12.9
8.1-20.2
<.000]
Scottish terrier
7
12.6
5.328.5
<.0001
Wirehaired fox terrier
5
10.5
×.001
recent ycars, particularly in Labrador retricvcrs (sce
Miniature schnauzer
11
4.7
2.4-9.0
<.0001
Table 23-5).1 A serics of 14 dogs with thc abnormality
West Highland white terrier
5
4.2
1.510.8
.008
Chihuahua
1.210.4
960
 20 ycars ago did not. include any Labradors.26 This
4
3.7
Samoyed
6
2.7
9-11
.027
lesion usually occurs as an isolated abnormality, but it
Yorkshire terrier
1.9
0.7-4.8
ns
12
sometimes accompanies pulmonic stenosis or mitral
(Cocker spaniel
1.6
6'7-8'0
ns
Gcrman shepherd
15
1.1
0.6-1.8
1s
dysplasia. As an isolated abnormality, it is most com-
Coillie
6
1.1
0.4-2.5
nS
mon now in Labrador rctrievers (22 dogs: OR, 8.41;
Golden retrievcr
7
0.5
0.2-1.1
L.abraclor retrievcr
7
0.4
0.2-0.8
Mixed breed
18
0.3
0.20.5
<.0001
*Lnited Kingdom survey of congenital hieart discasc in 339 dogs:
1989 to 199s. Contributors: D. Clarke, M. Cobh, PG.G. Darke, J.D.
*seven veterinary sclools. 1000 dogs, 1986 to 1990.
MeEwan, M. Herrtage. S. Johnstone, C. Litrlc, V. Lis-Fuentes, M.
Is, not signifieant.
Oaklcy. Veterinary Cardiovascular Socicty Newsletrcr, 1994.
462DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
CL, 4.7 to 15.0; P < .0001) and Geriman shepherds
variations of conotruncal abnormalities associated with
(10 dogs: OR, 3.1; CL, 1.5 to 6.5; P = .003). Four
a single gene defect in that breed.11 The 1000-dog
Great Pyrenees also were observed (OR, 43.6; CI., 12.9
series included 41 cases of tetralogy of Fallot with
to 131.0; P < .0001). There was a male predominance,
wirehaired fox terriers (two dogs: OR, 22.0; CL, 8.1 to
with males accounting for all 10 German shepherds, 3
93.4; P = .004) and West Highland white terriers
 0f 4 Great Pyrenees, and 14 of 22 Labrador retrievers.
(three dogs: OR, 14.1; GL, 5.7 to 48.0; P = .002)
having greatest risk. Only one keeshond was identified.
tricuspid dysplasia. Three dogs with Ebstein's anomaly
(one Labrador retriever, one Old English sheepdog.
and one Irish wolfhound) were included under tricus-
PERSISTENT RIGHT AORTIC ARCH
 pid dysplasia.
Persistent right aortic arch (PRAA) and related vas-
 cular rings cause impaired swallowing in dogs. Many
cases are diagnosed by radiologists and are treated
MITRAL. VALVE DYSPLASIA
surgically without examination by cardiologists, unlcss
 Mitral dysplasia (malformation) with regurgitation
a coexistent abnormality is detected. For this reason,
was reported in 18 of 1000 dogs with congenital heart.
the 32 dogs with PRAA in 1000 dogs seen by cardiolo-
disease, including 3 Geriman shepherds (OR, 2.7; CL,
gists (see Table 23-4) do not reflect the number of
0.8 to 9.8; P = .125, all males). Other breeds reprc-
-nsu snouea ie panean pn pauasaid ane sase
sented by two animals each were golden retriever and
tions during the comparable time period. ‘Three
 the Dalmatian. Previous reports suggested a predisposi-
breeds with increased risk were German shepherd
tion for congenital mitral insufficiency in Great Danes
(eight dogs: OR, 4.5; CL, 1.9 to 10.5; P = .001),
 and German shepherds.27 2 However, reference popu-
Brittany spaniel (two dogs: OR, 9.3; CL, 2.9 to 40.1; P
 lation data were not given, preventing odds ratios from
一
.022), and bulldog (two dogs: OR, 6.5; CI., 1.9 to
27.8; P = .043). No Irish setters were reported.
being determined.
Recent studies indicate that bull terriers also are
predisposed to congenital mitral valve disease. Signif-
ATRIAL SEPTAL DEFECTS
cant breed abnormalities were not found in the l000-
dog series (see Table 23-5). However, the three dogs
Atrial septal defects are uncormmon in dogs. Three
(8 to 10 years old) with mitral stenosis at the Veterinary
 of the 14 cases represented from the 1000 dogs were
Hospital, Lniversity of Pennsylvania, prior to 1985
boxers (OR, 25; CL, 10.8 to 98.1; P < .001), and two
were bull terriers. At Ohio, 4 of 15 young dogs with
were Newfoundlands (OR, 24; CL, 8.6 to 113; P <
mitral stenosis were bull terriers, and 5 were New
.005). Other reports of a predilection for atrial septal
foundlands.? Most of them also had rritral insuffi-
 defect in the Doberrman pinscher and Samoyed breeds
ciency, and 8 of 15 had subaortic stenosis. Two other
were not confirned in the 1000-dog study (Table
reported cases of mitral stenosis were bull terriers.* In
23-10).
Australia, ll young bull terriers with mitral insuffi-
ciency were identifed over a period of 10 years, but 
FELINE
no mention was made of coexistent mitral stenosis.31
In the L'nited Kingdom, 29 of 49 dogs with mitral
dysplasia were bull terriers* (the large number of cases
Whether congenital heart disease is more or less
stemmed from specifc screening of the bred for evi-
s si sop  pan   a
dence of mitral dysplasia).
although different anomalies predominate in cats. The
frequency of congenital heart disease in cats was 0.2
per 1000 feline admissions and 28 per 1000 necropsies
TETRALOGY OF FALLOT
 at the Angell Memorial Aniral Hospital during thc
 Tetralogy of Fallot (TF) occurs in a variety of breeds,
period from 1957 to 1979.:2 In dogs, similar clinical
particularly those which also have increased risk for
 and necropsy frequencies were observed at that institu-
tion. In contrast, the clinical frequency of CHD in
either PS or VsD. In the series of 1000 dogs, any dog
with both PS and vsD was categorized as tetralogy of
 dogs at the Veterinary Hlospital, University of Pennsyl-
Fallot. Breed associations for the three lesions (PS,
vania, was much higher (5 per 1000 admissions or 10/
1000 if referred cases were included) in the specific
VSD, TF) are consistent with genetic studies in kees-
 hond dogs which showed that all three defects can be
cardiovascular epidemiologic study from 1958 to 1961.*
Combined data fron 287 cats with CIH1) indicate
that mitral and tricuspid valve malformations were the
United Kingdom survey of congenital heart disease in 339 dogs:
1989 to 1993. Contributors: D. Clarkc, M. Cobb, PG.G. Darke, JD.
most common abnormality (17%), followcd by VSl)
McEwan, M. Herrtage, S. Johnstone, C. Little, V. Luuis-Fentes, M.
(15%), endocardial fbroelastosis (11%), PDA (11%),
Oaklcy. Vcterinary Cardiovascular Society Ncwslettcr, 1994.
vascular anomalies (8%), aortic stcnosis (6%), tetral-
PREVALENCE OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISORDERS   463
TABLE 23--10
exceptionally high occurrence of this disease in cava-
 Additional Breed Predilections for Congenital Heart
lier King Charles spaniels was confirmed in screening
Disease (Confirmed or Suggested by Others)
clinics in Great Britain,*4 Sweden, and the Lnited
Breed
Suggested Predilection
 States,36 but investigators in Australia did not find evi-
dence of an increased prevalence in the breed.*7 Aus-
Airdale terrier
Pulmonic stenosis (PS)
Beagle
cultation of 394 cavaliers in the United States revealed
PS
Boykin spanicl
PS
systolic murmurs of mitral regurgitation in 56 percent
Bullmastiff
PS
of dogs over 4 years of age, and in 100 percent of
Bull terrier
Mitral dysplasia (MD)
Chihuahua
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
those 10 years old or older.*6
Cocker spanicl
 Limited necropsy studies indicate that chordal
PS
Collie
PDA
 lengthening or rupture with or without significant
Dobcrman piuscher
Atrial scptal defect (ASD)
English bullidog
valve thickening are common features. Mitral prolapse
Tetralogy of Fallot (TF)
Aortic stenosis (AS)
e t  aq q oe a e i p
Gerinan shepherd
MD, PDA
rupture as a complication of chronic acquired valvular
Cerman shorthair pointer
AS
Colden retricvcr
disease also occurs in miniature poodles, cocker spai1-
Tricuspid dysplasia (TD)
Great Daule
AS, PRAA, MD, TD
 iels, and dachshunds, with predominance in males.38
Irish settcr
Persistcnt right aortic arch
Clinically significant acquired mitral valve disease is
Keeshond
TF
Kerry blue terrier
PDA
uncommon in cats (Fox PR, personal communication).
Mastill
PS
One review of necropsies reported mitral valve disease
Samoyed
AS, ASD
in 11 of 202 cats (5%), whereas a frequcncy of 40
Weinaraner
TD. peritoneopericardial hernia
percent was observed in 500 dogs in the same labora-
Adapted from BuchananJw. Causcs and prcvalence of cardiovascular dis
reported in 75 (15%) of 500 cats,* although no details
phia, WB Saunders, 1992, p 647.
were provided as to whether diagnosis was confirmed
 by Doppler echocardiography or just based upon aus-
cultation. Flow murmurs and aortic outflow turbulence
ogy of Fallot (6%), atrial septal defect (4%), common
occur in cats and can be misdiagnosed as mitral regur-
atrioventricular canal (4%), and pulmonic stenosis
(3%). Malc predominance was reported for AV valve
gitation.
malformation (5:1), aortic stenosis (3:1), endocardial
fibroelastosis (9:5), and tricuspid dysplasia (6:1).*2
HEMATOCYSTS
Blood cysts (hematocysts) in atrioventricular valves,
ACOUIRED HEART DISEASE
particularly the tricuspid valve, are occasional necropsy
 a  a  so a  si
CHRONIC VALVULAR DISEASE
(ENDOCARDIOSIS)
TABLE 23-11
Chronic Valvular Disease (n = 120): Estimated
Chronic valvular disease is the most common canine
 Relative Risks (Odds Ratios) by Breed*
acquired disorder (see ‘Table 23-1) and results from
95%
myxomatous valvular degeneration (chapter 25). Mi-
sppo
Confidence
tral regurgitation occurs in more than one third of
Breeds > 3 Cases
No.
Ratio
Limits
P
 dogs over 10 years of age.s In a recent survey of 4325
Cavalier King Charlcs spanicl
4
20.1
5.5-67
.0001
dogs at the Animal Medical Center in New York City, 9
Chihtahua
6
5.5
2.1-13.3
.001
percent were affected (Fox PR, Pipers FS, unpublished
Miniature schnauzer
7
4.4
1.8-10.1
.002
data). It is more prevalent in srmall breeds, with a
Maltese.
4.2
1.4-14.1
.041
Pckingcse
slightly (but significantly) greater frequency and sever-
4.1
1.413.8
.043
Toy poodlle
3.1
1.1-8.1
.028
ity in males. Breed predisposition includes the toy and
Shih tzu
3.0
1.1-7.8
160
 miniature poodle, miniature schnauzer, Pomeranian,
Miniaturc poodle
2.8
1.2-6.0
.012
Yorkstire terricr
Chihuahua, cocker spaniel, Pekingese, fox terrier, and
2.6
0.9-6.8
.051
ILhasa apso
2.4
0.7-6.8
ns
Boston terrier breeds in the United States,s and in
Cocker spaniel
2.0
94-60
ns
 male miniature pinschers, whippets and cavalier King
Mixcd brecd
36
1.2
0.8-1.7
n1s
Charles spaniels in Great Britain.33 In a recent survey
Doberman pinscher
0.8
0.3-2.6
ns
at the Veterinary Hospital, University of Pennnsylvania,
*120dogwihchr valar disase outf$00dogswirelae igs
 small canine breeds still predominated, and no large-
ofheartdiscaseand owrs lastmameAFinheVrnryHospital
breed dogs had an increased risk (Table 23-11). The
sity of Peuusylvania, Cardiology Scction fles from 1990 to 1993.
ns, not significant.
464 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
significance. A survey of 255 beaglc dogs 5 to 24
certain breeds such as Doberman pinscher and boxcr
months old detected blood cysts in the septal leaflet of
dogs.
the tricuspid valve in I1 cases (3.9%).+ Serial scction
The prevalence of myocardial disease varics with
histology and immunohistochemistry showed that the
geographic factors (e.g., Chagas' diseasc in southern
blood cysts cainc from vessels in the valves and did not
border states), the nature of the study (clinical or
communicatc directly with the cardiac chainbers.
.In
pathologic), and type of diagnostic criteria sclected.
late stages, the cysts often were surrounded by fibrous
Necropsy studies consistently reveal a higher preva-
tissue, and metaplastic bone was sometimes present
lence of myocardial disease than do clinical investiga-
within the lesions.
tions. The types and pathology of most myocardial
diseases in all species of anirmals have been thoroughly
rcviewed by Van Vleet and Ferrans.#
BACTERIAL ENDOCARDITIS
CANINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES
Bacterial endocarditis is uncommon (chapter 26). It
From 1958 to 1960. the prevalence of myocardial
was diagnosed in 3 of 300 dogs (1%) with reliablc
disease (based mainly on the detection of arrhythmias)
signs of heart disease in our clinic (see Iable 23-1):
 in 5000 dogs was 0.45 percent. In a 1988 study of 7148
10 of 345 dogs (3.0%) at another institution had echo-
 dogs, dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) was diagnosed in
cardiographic signs of cndocarditis.1 A recent review
 of the Veterinary Medical Data Base from January 1984
1.1 percent.+ A tabulation of 300 dogs with arrhythmia
through May 1994 indicated that endocarditis was diag-
 Or echocardiographic left ventricular shortening frac-
tions of less than 25 pcrcent disclosed that 45 percent.
nosed in 0.04 to 0.13 percent of dogs and in 0.006 to
0.024 percent of cats presented for veterinary ser-
had probable myocardial disease (see Tables 23-1 and
23-2). A review of the Purdue Veterinary Medical Data
vices. 42 This same report also indicated that the preva-
Basc(
(January 1986 through December 1991) indi-
lence of endocarditis in dogs increases with age. In the
absence of an echogenic thrombus or aortic regurgita-
cated that DCM was diagnosed in approximately 0.5
percent of the dogs presented for veterinary services
tion, a clinical diagnosis of endocarditis is diffcult to
(1681 of 342,152 dogs)*; DCM was dctected in 0.5
confirm, and most epidemiologic data are based on
percent of 4325 dogs recently surveyed in Ncw York
necropsy studics.
City (Fox PR, Pipers F, unpublishcd data).
Thc ovcrall reported necropsy prevalence varies
 Large brecds of dogs, especially males. are predis-
frorm 0.06 to 6 percent and depends upon the dili
 posed to dilated (congestive) cardiomyopathy. A partic-
gencc and interest of the investigator. The mitral and
ular susceptibility has becn recognized in Doberman
aortic valves are most often affected, and the most.
pinscher dogs. Of 68 dogs with DCM reported from
common organisms isolated are Staphyococcus aureus,
the University of Georgia in 1986, 39 (57%) were
streptococci, and Escherichia coli1 Endocarditis is often
Dobermans.5 In the recent. sample of 300 dogs with
associated with infection elsewhere in the body. Pros-
reliable signs of heart disease in our clinic (Table
tate infections were the most frequent. coexisting infec-
 23-1), DCM was diagnosed in 34 dogs, of which 17
tion in 40 dogs with endocarditis in one study.4t Infec-
tive and noninfective arthritis were found in 12 dogs
(50%) were Dobermans (OR, 33.7; CL, 16.2 to 70.4; P
with endocarditis in another series.s All ten dogs in
< .000l). Males predominated in Dobermans as wcll
a recent report were large breeds." Five strains of
as in the other breeds represented (82%).
 According to a review of the Veterinary Medical Data
Erysipelothrix tonsillarum were isolated froim dogs with
Base (January 1986 through December 1991),1 the
endocarditis in Belgium.*7
prevalence rate of DCM in mixed-breed dogs was ap-
 proximately 0.16 percent compared with 0.65 percent
in purebred dogs. The prcvalence rate of DCM was
MYOCARDIAL DISEASES
highest in Doberman pinschers (5.8%), Irish wolf-
(CARDIOMYOPATHIES)
hounds (5.6%), Grcat Danes (3.9%), boxer dogs
(3.4%), Saint Bernards (2.6%), Afghan hounds
Cardiomyopathy denotes structural or functional de-
(1.7%), Newfoundlands (1.3%), and Old English
rangcment of the heart muscle (myocardial disease)
sheepdogs (0.9%). By comparison, the prevalence of
that is not atributable to valvular, vascular, or congeni-
DCM was 0.69 percent in English cocker spaniels and
tal disorders. A wide variety of primary and secondary
0.34 percent in American cocker spaniels. The preva-
causes havc been described (chapters 27, 28).
lence of DCM increased with age, and malcs werc
There is increased recognition of myocardial disease
affected nearly twice as often as females.
over the last 2 decades. This is due to improved diag-
 Other breed-associated cardiomyopathies include ar-
nostic capability associated with echocardiography, as
rhythmogenic cardiomyopathy in boxer dogs,1 DCM
well as an increased frequency of cardiomyopathy in
in Old English sheepdogs*? and Newfoundland dogs
PREVALENCE OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISORDERS 465
 in Sweden, familial cardiomyopathy in English cocker
"intermediate” cardiomyopathy used by some investi-
spaniels,$4 and Duchenne's X-linked rmuscular dystro-
 gators lacks definition, and associated reports are dif-
phy cardiomyopathy in male golden retriever dogs.5s
ficult to evaluate.
Ilypertrophic cardiomyopathy is quite rare in dogs.
'The prevalence
eof feline dilatcd cardiomyopathy
but a hereditary form has been reported in pointer
(DCM) has declined profoundly since taurine defi.
dogs.56. 57
ciency was recognized as a major etiologic factor and
 Cardiomyopathy 1may result from other factors. 'This
following commercial diets supplemented with tau-
has been shown to result frorm certain types of chemo-
rine. Occasional cats with DCM have normal taurine
thcrapy. particularly doxorubicin administration. Five
levels, and it is apparent that other etiologics reimain
10 15 percent of dogs treated with this drug devcloped
to be identifed.99 72 Differences in the Irequency of
congcstive heart failure, and cardiotoxicosis is the ma-
 DCM in separate colonies of inbred cats suggest that
jor dosc-limiting factor for extended chermotherapy for
quantitative gcnetic factors may influence susceptibility
neoplasia.58.5s
to the disease.71
MYOCARDrTIs. The frequency of parvovirus myocardi-
ENDOMYOCARDITIS AND ENDOMYOCARDLAL FIBROSIS.
tis has diminished greatly since the advent of vaccina-
 These entities occur more cormrnonly in cats than in
tion programs, and 1o cases have been recognized in
 dogs. In cats, they may result in restrictive cardiomyop-
 our clinic in recent years. A retrospective histopatho-
athy when the subendocardial myocardium is signifi-
logic study utilizing in situ hybridization technology
cantly involved or if large cndocardial scar formation
revealed evidence of parvovirus-spccific nucleic acid in
develops. Additional information is prcscnted later un-
the myocardium of some puppies without intranuclear
der feline cardiomyopathy (chapter 28).
inclusion hodies, but there was no evidence of infec-
tion after 1979 in Zurich, Switzerland.6
EXCESSTVE LEFT VENTRICULAR MODERATOR BANDS (FALSE
 Occasional dogs with arrhythunias are seropositive
TENDoNs). In cats, excessive numbers and confgura-
for Borrelia burgdorferi. IIowever, the significance of
tions of left ventricular moderator bands (false ten-
titers in our region is uncertain, and it is difficult
 dons) have been reported in association with feline 
to substantiate a clinical diagnosis of l.yme disease
myocardial diseases.7 Their significance remains un-
 certain and they are a frequent necropsy finding.
soma cruzi still appears to be limited to occasional dogs
in southern border states.
ENDOCARDIAL FIBROELASTOSIS
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES
Endocardial thickening with rild fbrosis and in-
Diagnosis of feline cardiomyopathies has been
creased elastic fibers may occur in response to chronic
grcatly facilitated by echocardiography. Hypertrophic
dilatation and diastolic pressure overload. The degree
cardiomyopathy (IICM) is currently the most frequent
of secondary thickening in this circumstance is not.
type of fcline myocardial disease. It may be primary64
clinically significant, and signs are related to the under-
or secondary.' Based upon echocardiography
logs,
lying valvular or myocardial disorder. More severe pri-
pathologic left ventricular hypertrophy was recordcd
mary endocardial fibroelastosis with clinical signs indis-
in 26 to 64 percent of cats evaluatcd at the Animal
tinguishable from thosc of dilated cardiomyopathy was
Medical Center from 1985 to 1998 (chapter 28; Fox
reported in four young dogs of different hreeds.74 Al
PR, personal communication).
though the etiology was unknown, the age suggests a
 In a retrospective review of 1472 feline nccropsies
 congenital abnormality. In a hereditary form of fibro
from 1986 to 1992 at the Veterinary Hospital, Univer-
elastosis in Burmese cats, the endocardiun progressed
sity of Pennsylvania, dilated cardiomyopathy was diag-
frorrn normal histology at birth to symptormatic fibro-
Xedoo udonidu :(%gg) se g u pasou
elastosis by 2 months of age.7
in 34 (2.3%): restrictive cardiomyopathy in 25 (1.7%);
and cndomyocarditis in 37 (2.5%).* All cases of di-
lated cardiomyopathy occurred prior to 1991, and hy-
BREED-ASSOCIATED
pertrophic cardiomyopathy is now the most frequently
recognized forim at necropsy.
ARRHYTHMIAS
 Some types of restrictive cardiomyopathy may repre-
sent a late stage of endomyocarditis.a. 7 Endomyocar-
ditis occurred primarily in young cats (mean age, 3.4
A variety of ventricular or atrial arrhythmias may
years): frequently followed a stressful event such as
occur in most forms of advanced heart disease. In
neutering, declawing, or vaccination; and was often
 addition, sore breeds are known to develop specific
accompanied by interstitial pneumonia.c7 The term
arrhythmias more than others.
466 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
SICK SINUs SYNDRoME. The most characteristic exam-
PERICARDIAL DISEASE AND NEOPLASLA
ple is syncope due to sick sinus syndrome, which most
commonly occurs in female miniature schnauzers.7 A
Certain changes have been noted in the prevalence
recent analysis of 318 affected dogs showed an odds
 of primary and secondary pericardial diseases. The
ratio of 6.9 in miniature schnauzers. At the Veterinary
most common disorder, pericardial effusion, has been
Hospital, University of Pennsylvania, 10 of 15 dogs
recently recorded almost exclusively in large hreeds of
were miniature schnauzers (OR, 126). Additional
n1onbrachycephalic dogs of either sex.
hreed predispositions were also noted in Pomeranians
At the Veterinary Hospital, University of Pennsylva-
(OR, 3.5), boxers (OR, 2.6) and cocker spaniels (OR,
nia, pericardial effusion was diagnosed or confirmed
1.7).' Sex differences were significant only in miniature
by echocardiography in 7 percent of the dogs with
schnauzers, in which the female-to-male ratio was 3:1.
reliable signs of heart disease (see Table 23-1). Al-
though recognition of  pericardial effusion  has in-
creased with the advent of echocardiography, the inci-
VENTRIcULAR EcToPy Ventricular extrasystoles with
dence also has increased in certain brecds, particularly
paroxysimal ventricular tachycardia, flutter, and fibril-
 golden retrievers.: In a series of 92 dogs with pericar-
lation were recognized as a familial arrhythmia causing
dial disease evaluated from 1987 to 1989, there was an
sudden death in a family of German shepherds 
in
New York. 77 Further studies identified four families of
increased risk of pericardial effusion in golden retriev-
ers (n = 
 22, OR, 7.4), German shepherds (n = 14;
affected German shepherd dogs, all of which were
related to a common ancestor.7s Additional cases have
OR, 2.3), and Labrador retrievers (n = 8; OR, 2.2).
been identifed in other states and in Great Britain,
German shorthair pointers (n = 4; OR, 9.5), and
indicating widespread distribution of the genetic pre-
Akitas (n = 3; OR, 6.5).' Brachycephalic breeds were
disposition for sudden arrhythmic death in this breed
uncommon and were represented by only three boxer
(Moise NS, personal communication). Ventricular ec-
dogs (OR, 1.5), one bulldog, and one Boston terrier.
topy is also the predominant arrhythmia seen in boxer
Golden retrievers (6) and German shepherds (4) were
the most common breeds represented in 2l dogs with
cardiomyopathy.at
 and were also recognized in reports by others,9o-v2 Most
 OTHER BREED-ASSOCIATED ARRHYTHMIAs. These include
pericardial effusions are caused by hemorrhage from
AV conduction block in pugs with hereditary stennosis
primary or metastatic hemangiosarcomas, but occa-
 of the bundle of His,7α and sudden1 death in 1oberman
sional dogs are recognized with chemodectoma, meso
pinschers.* Persistent atrial standstill characterized by
thelioma, various other sarcomas and carcinomas, idio
absence of atrial muscle and associated P waves in
pathic benigin pericardial effusion, congestive heart.
young dogs is rare but occurs predominantly in Englishi
failure, uremia, infection, foreign body, trauma, cysts,
springer spaniels. This breed represented 20 of 29
 congenital pericardioperitoneal hernia, or ruptured
dogs with atrial standstill in combined totals from five
left atrium.
 Neoplasia was identified as the cause of pericardial
scapulohumeral ruscle wasting in 30 percent of the
effusion in 24 of 42 dogs (57%) in one series" and 19
 dogs in one report. Fight of ll cats with atrial standstil!
of 50 (38%) in another report." A mass was visible in
were Siamese.&3
12 of 21 dogs with pericardial effusion at this institu-
tion, and 9 other dogs were found to have cardiac
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION. Atrial fibrillation is usually assO
tumors without effusion (see 'lable 23l). Hemangio-
ciated with significant heart disease in dogs and cats
sarcoma is the most common primary cardiac neo-
and is not a breed-specific arrhythmia. Hlowever, it is
plasm in dogs. It is usually located in the right atriurm
occasionally noted in large-breed, asymptomatic dogs.
 or right atrial appendage and was previously recog-
A particularly high frequency was observed in
1Irish
nized most often in German shepherd dogs.9496.
wolfhounds during screening surveys of 496 wolf-
More recently, it has been seen commonly in golden
hounds and 92 English mastiffs for evidence of cardio-
retrievers at the Veterinary IHospital, University of
myopathy8 Only four of the wolfhounds were symp-
Pennsylvania."2 Chemodectomas are the second most
tomatic for heart disease, but 52 (10.5%) had atrial
common cardiac neoplasm. They occur with increased
fibrillation; 22 had ventricular prermature beats and
frequency
 in brachycephalic breeds, particularly
some had other arrhythmias. None of the mastiffs had
males,7. 9s but are also recognized in nonbrachyce-
atrial fibrillation, but a few had other arrhythmias.
 phalic dogs.91. 97, 9
There was no sex difference in the frequency of atrial
Feline pericardial disease (mainly effusion) was diag-
fibrillation in this series, but the frequency showed a
nosed in 66 of 2852 feline necropsies (2.3%).10° 1n
positive correlation with body size in both sexes.86 Oth-
Inost instances, the effusion was associated with other
ers have reported greater frequency of atrial fibrilla-
illnesses, including feline infectious peritonitis, cardio
tion in 1male dogs. 87-8s
Imyopathy, renal failure, systemic infection, coagulopa-
PREVALENCE OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISORDERS 467
thies, or neoplasia (lymphosarcoma or metastatic car-
Intramural coronary arteriosclerosis without amyloid
cinoma). Hlemangiosarcoma and benign idiopathic
 also occurs in the left ventricle of dogs with congenital
pericardial cffusion were not observed. In another re-
subaortic stenosis and in the right ventricle of dogs
view of 4933 feline necropsies, no primary cardiac
with pulmonic stenosis. Spontaneous, asymptomatic
tumors were found, but I8 cases of hemangiosarcoima
  uo jo ssa ane Ao
were identifed.o Cardiac metastases were identifed
been recognized in up to 34 percent of young bea-
in 12 cats, but none were in the right atrium.
syndromne also has been reported in young beagles
from several laboratories in the United States, France,
PULMONARY VASCULAR DISEASE
and Great Britain over the past 10 years."l Immuno-
 logic studies have shown that the disorder is compara-
The most common pulnonary vascular disease in
ble to Kawasaki disease in humans, and it has been
 dogs is pulmonary arteritis and thromboembolism due
termed canine juvenile polyarteritis syndrome.112 Sys-
to Dirofilaria immitis infection (chapter 30). Although
temic arterial thrombi are uncommon in dogs. In a
dirofilariasis is widespread in the United States, the
 series of 29 dogs with arterial thrombi, 7 had primary
frequency and pattern of distribution generally corre-
 renal disease.10i Congenital or acquired peripheral ar-
spond to climatic conditions favoring maturation of
teriovenous fistulas occur, usually in limbs and secon-
larvae and survival of mosquito vectors. The disease
occurs in cats much less frequently than in dogs. In
 Portacaval shunts are the second most common ca-
enderric areas. 1l necropsy surveys showed average
 nine congenital cardiovascular rmalformation.' Analysis
heartworm infection rates of 1.9 percent in cats and
 of breed distribution in 298 dogs and respective odds
34.6% in dogs.102
ratios showed the most frcquent occurrence in York-
 Pulmonary thromboembolism complicating other
shire terriers (OR, 19.9), pugs (10.0), miniature
 diseases was suspected clinically in only 2 of 47 dogs
schnauzers (6.9), Maltese (5.4), Pekingese (3.7), stan-
dard schnauzers (3.7), Shih tzu (3.4), and Lhasa apso
ated diseases were cardiac (15), neoplasia (14), and
(2.4).
disscminated intravascular coagulopathy (1o). Another
Aortic thromboembolism in cats is the most frequent
nccropsy survey of vascular thrormbosis in 59 dogs ex-
vascular abnormality  encountered in small  aninal
cluded those conditions. 10+ Pulmonary thromboemboli
 medicine and may occur with any forin of cardiomyop-
were found in 27 of 59 dogs, and the most commonly
athy. The frequency of aortic thromboermbolism in
 associated conditions were renal disease (11 of 27) and
 2000 cats presented to the Veterinary Hospital, Univer-
hyperadrcnocorticisr or steroid therapy (ll of 27).
 sity of Pennsylvania, in 1961 to 1964 was 0.7 percent.!14
Portal vein thrombi in 11 dogs were mainly associated
Thirty years later, during 1991 to 1993 it was diagnosed
with steroid therapy (10 of 1l) and pancreatic necrosis
in 53 of 8350 cats (0.63%), which suggests that the
(4 of 11).'05
 occurrence rate may not have changed despite a rmajor
 Medial hyperplasia of pulmonary arterioles is often
reduction in the incidence of dilated cardiomyopathy.
observcd histologically in cats, but it is not usually
sm (tie'g) oe seak 0g sale u suad s
associated with recognizable clinical disease. Reported
still prcsent in 53 recent cases (2.5:1). 1lowever, the
occurrence rates vary from 3 to 68 percent because of
average age of affected cats today (8.4 years) was
nonspecifc criteria for histologic diagnosis and vari-
greater than 30 years ago (5.6 years, P = .007).
 able interest on the part of the observers. One study
focusing on cardiovascular pathology reported a fre-
quency of 68.8 percent in 122 cats and found no age
SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION
 group differences in cats older than I year39 Identical
lesions were found in specific pathogen-free cats, indi-
Systemic hypertension in small animals appears to
 cating that pulmonary artery parasitism was not a ma-
 be more common than studies indicated 30 years ago.
 jor etiologic fac.tor.106
This stems from better recognition of associations be-
tween hypertension and end-organ diseases (e.g., reti-
nal hemorrhage in cats presented for sudden blind-
SYSTEMIC VASCULAR DISEASE
ness).ns Diagnosis has been hampered by lack of
confidence in indirect blood pressure measurement
Primary systemic vascular disease is uncommon, but
techniques and increased blood pressure that occurs
atherosclerosis and aortic or coronary thrombosis are
with excitement in untrained dogs and cats.1t6 Cyclic
 Occasionally recognized, particularly in dogs with hypo-
blood pressure variations have also been demonstrated
thyroidism and elevated serum cholesterol. 'v? Intramu-
 by 24-hour recordings in a colony of dogs with heredi-
ral coronary arteriosclerosis with amyloid deposition is
tary hypertension.17 One report suggesis that criteria
conmon in old dogs with chronic valvular disease.os
 e snsd poq abau sad 
 468 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
180 mmHg systolic or greater than 100 mmIHg dia-
16. Oswald GP, Orton EC. Patent ductus arteriosus and
stolic.ns Surveys in clinically normal dogs revealed ele-
pulinonary hypertension in related Pembroke Weish
Corgis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:761, 1993
vated arterial blood pressures in 1 to 2 percent of
17. IIunt GB, Church DB, Malik R,Bellenger CR. A retro
dogs.us Caution should be exercised when extrapolat-
spcctive analysis of congenital cardiac anormalies (1977-
ing values from other brecds to grcyhounds that may
1989). Aust Vet Pract 20:70, 1990
have higher normal systolic pressurcs (norimally > 200
18. Malik R, Turnbull GR, Black AP. Patent ductus artcrio-
sus in 5 rclated Border Collies. Aust Vet Pract 21:2, 1991
mmHg).146
19. Fuentes VL., Dukes J. Systolic cardiac murmurs in box-
Animals with cnd-organ disease due to hypertension
ers. Vet Rec 129:313, 1991
cormrmonly have systolic arterial pressures of 220 to 240
 20. Buchanan JW: Pulmonic stenosis caused by single coro-
mimHg. About one third of dogs with hypertension
nary artery in dogs: Four cases (1965-1984). [ Am Vet
have chronic renal disease and one third have hyper-
Mcd Assoc 196:115, 1990
adrenocorticism. Most cats with hypertension have
21. Minami T, wakao Y, Buchanan JW, cl al. A case of
pulmonic stenosis with single coronary artery inl a dog.
chronic renal disease or hyperthyroidism.5
Jpn J Ve1. Sci 31:453, 1989
22. Kittleson MD, Thomas W, Loyer C, Kienle R. Balloon
dilatation caused death of two bulldogs with pulmonic
REFERENCES
stenosis and singlc coronary artery; Lelter. J Vet Intern
Med 6:250, 1992
23. Jacobs G, Mahaffey M, Rawlings CA. Valvular pulmonic
stenosis in four Boykin Spaniels. J Am Anin Hosp Assoc
1. Buchanan JW. Causcs and prcvalcnce of cardiovascular
26:247, 1990
24. Patterson DF, HIaskins MF. Schnarr WR. HIereditary
disease. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (cds): Current Veteri-
nary ‘Therapy Xl. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992,
dysplasia of the pulmonary valve in Beagle dogs. Am J
(ardiol 47:631, 1981
P 647
25. Malik R, Church DB, Hunt GB. Valvular pulmonic ste
 2. Patterson DF. Epidemiologic and genctic studies of con-
nosis in Bullmastiffs. J Small Anim Pract. 34:288, 1993
genital hcart diseasc in thc dog. Circ Res 23:171, 1968
25a. Brown WA. Ventricilar septal defccts in the English
3. Detweiler DK, Patterson DF. Prevalcnce and types of
Springer Spaniel. In Kirk RW. Bonagura JD (eds): Cur-
cardiovascular discase in dogs. Ann NY Acad Sci
rent Veterinary Therapy XI1. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
127:481,1965
ders, 1995, p 827
4. Fiorcuui M, Delli Carri E. Epidcmiological survey of
26. Liu SK, Tilhey t.P. Dysplasia of the tricuspid valvc in the
dilatativc cardiomyopathy in dogs. Veterinaria 2:81,
dog and cal. I Am Vet Med Assoc 169:623, 1976
8861
27. Harnlin RL, Harris SG. Miral ineompetence in Great
 5. Ferro E、 Brambilla PG, Faverzani S, Traditi F. Epidcmi-
Dane pups. J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 154:790, 1969
 ologia delle malattie cardiovascolari dcl cane: Risultati
28. Liu SK, Tiley 1.P. Malformation of the caninc mitral
dei primi quatro anni di indagini. (Epidemiology of
valve complex. J Am Vet Med Assoc 167:465, 1975
cardiovascular discases in dogs: Results of first. four
29. tchmkuhi t.B, Ware WA, Bonagura JD. Mitral stenosis
ycars of investigations). Veterinaria 4:5. 1990
in 15 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 8:2. 1994
6. Tashjian RJ, Pcnnsinger RR, Das KM. et al, Fclinc car
30. Fox PR。 Miller MW, Liu SK. Clinical, cchocardio-
diovascular studics-a prcliminary rcport. Proccedings,
graphic, and Doppler imaging characteristics of mitral
American Veterinary
Medicine  Association Annual
valve stenosis in two dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Meeting. 1965, p 112
201:1575, 1992
7. 1larpster NK. Cats don't havc heart discasc. Procecd-
 31. Malik R, Church DB. Congenital mitral insufficicncy in
ings, Acadeny of Veterinary Cardiology, 1990, p 22
bull terriers. J Small Anim Pract 29:549, 1988
8. Harpster NK. Feline arrhythinias: Diagnosis and man-
32. Zook BC. Congcnital cardiovascular defects. In Holz-
agcment. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Current Vet-
worth J (ed): Diseases of the Cat: Medicinc and Sur-
elinary Therapy X1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992.
gery. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1987, p 820
p732
33. Thrusficld MV, Aitken CGG, Darke PGG. Observations
9. Nobcl TA, Newmann F, Klopfer C. Histopathology of
on brced and sex in relation to canine heart valve
the myocardium in 50 apparently healthy cats. Lab
 incompetence. J Small Anim Pract 26:709, 1985
Anim 8:119, 1974
34. Darke PGG. Valvular incompetence in cavalier King
10. Liu SK Pathology of feline heart diseases. Vet Clin
Charles Spanicls. Vet Rec 120:365, 1987
North Am 7:323. 1977
35. Haggstrom J, Hansson K, Kvart C, Swenson L. Chronic
11. Ruble RP, Hird DW. Congenital abnormalitics in imma-
valvular disease in thc cavalier King Charles Spaniel in
lure dogs froin a pet store: 253 cascs (1987-1988). J
Sweden. Vet Rec 131:549. 1992
Am Vet Med Assoc 202:633, 1993
36. Beardow AW, Buchanan JW. Chronic mitral valvc dis-
12. Zaldivar R. Incidence of spontancous discases in a Bea-
easc in cavalier King Charles Spanicls: 95 cascs (1987-
glc colony. J Am Vct Med Assoc 151:1186, 1967
1991). J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 202:1023, 1993
13. Patterson DF. Hlereditary congenital heart defccts in
37. Malik R, Hunt GB, Allan GS. Prcvalence of mitral valve
dogs. J Small Anim Pract 30:153, 1989
insufficiency in cavalier King Charles Spaniels. Vct Rcc
14. Patterson DF, Pexieder T, Schnarr WR, et al. A single
130:302,1992
major gene defect underlying cardiac conotruncal mal-
38. Buchanan JW, Kelly AM. Endocardial splitting of the
formations interfcres with myocardial growth during
left atrium in the dog with hcmorrhage and hemoperi-
embryonic devclopment: Studies in the CTD line of
cardium. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 5:28, 1964
kceshond dogs. Am J Hum Gcnet 52:388, 1993
39. Tashjian RJ, Das KM, Palich Wr., et al. Studies on car.
15. Buchanan JW. Chronic valvular discase (cndocardiosis)
diovascular disease in the cat. Ann NY Acad Sci
in dogs. Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 21:75, 1977
127:581,1965
PREVALENCE OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISORDERS
469
40. IIubbcn K, Patterson DF, Botts RP. Tclangiectasis in
62. Kcene BW. Canine cardionyopathy In Kirk Rw (ed):
canine hcart valves. Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 10:1935,
Current Vcterinary Therapy X. Philadclphia, WB Saun-
1963
ders, 1989, p 241
41. Takcda T, Makita T, Nakamura N, Kimizuka G. Morpho-
63. Barr SC, Simpson RM, Schunidt SP, et al. Chronic dilata-
logic aspects and morphogencsis of blood cysts on ca-
tivc myocarditis caused by Trypanosoma cruzi in two
ninc cardiac valves. Vet Pathol 28:16, 1991
dogs. J Am Vel Med Assoc 195:1237, 1989
42. Lombard CW, Buergell CD. Vegetative bacterial endo-
64. Atkins CE, Gallo AM, Kurzman ID, Cowen P. Risk fac-
carditis in dogs; Echocardiographic diagnosis and clini-
tors, clinical signs and survival in cats with a clinical
cal sig1is. J Small Anim Pract 24:325, 1983
diagnosis of idiopathic hypertrophic cardionyopathy:
42a. Sisson 1. Bacterial Endocarditis. Thc 1Sth Annual
74 cases (1985-1989). J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 201:613,
Waliham/OsU Symposium for the Treatment of Small
1992
Animal 1Discascs, 1994, p 79
65. Broussard JD, Peterson ME, Fox PR. Changes in the
43. Calvert CA, Grcene CF, Ulardic EM. Cardiovascular
clinical and laboratory findings in hyperthyroid cats
infections in dogs: Epizootiology, clinical_manifesta-
from 1982-1992.J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:302,1995
tions, and prognosis. I Am Vet Med Assoc: 187:612, 1985
66. Stalis III, Bossbaly MJ, Van Winkle Ty. Felinc cndomyo-
44. Anderson CA, Dubielzig RR. Vcgetative endocarditis in
carditis and left ventricular endocardial fibrosis. Vet
dogs. J Am Anim Ilosp Assoc 20:149, 1984
Pathol 32:122, 1995
15. Bennelt D, Taylor DJ. Bactcrial endocarditis and inflam-
67.
Bossbaly MJ. Stalis 1H, Knight DIl, Van Winkle TJ.
matory joint discase in the dog. J Small Anim Pract
Feline endomyocarditis: A clinical/pathologic study of
29:347, 1988
44 cascs; abstract. J Vet Intern Med 8:144, 1994
46. Elwood CM, Cobb MA, Stcpien RI., Clinical and echo-
68. Skiles ML. Pion PD, llird DW, et al. Epidcmiologic
cardiographic findings in 10 dogs with vegctative bacte-
evaluation of taurine deficicncy and dilated cardiony-
rial cndocarditis. J Small Anim Pract 34:420, 1993
opathy in cats. J Vet Intern Med 4:117, 1990 
47.
Takahashi T, Tamura Y, Yoshimura II, ct al. Erysipelothrix
69. Sisson DD, Knight DH, Helenski C, ct al. Plasma con-
tonsillarum isolated from dogs with cndocarditis in Bel-
cenurations and M-mode cchocardiographic mcasures
gium. Rcs Vet Sci 54:264, 1993
in hcalthy cats and in cats with dilated cardioinyopathy.
48.
Van Vect JF, Ferrans VJ. Myocardial diseases of animals.
J Vet fntcrn Mcd 5:232, 1991
Am J Pathol 124:98, 1986
70. Skrodzki M, Trauivelter E, Monch F. Plasma taurine
49. Sisson DD, Thomas WP. Myocardial discases of the dog
levels in hcalthy cats and cais with cardiac disordcrs. J
and cat. In Euinger S], Feldman E. (eds): Textbook of
Nutr 121:S171, 1991
Velerinary Internal Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
71. Lawler DF, Termplcton AJ, Monti KL. Evidence for gc-
Saunders, 1994, p 995
nctic involvement in feline dilated cardiomyopathy J
50. Calvert CA. Dilaied congestive cardiomyopathy in Do-
Vet Intern Med 7:383, 1993
beriman pinschers. Compend Con1 Educ 8:417, 1986
72. Dow Sw, Fettnan MJ, Smith KR, et al. Taurine deple-
51. Harpster NK. Boxcr cardiomyopathy. A revicw of thc
tion and cardiovascular discasc in adult cats fed a potas-
long-term benefits of antiarrhythmic therapy. Vet Clin
North Am 21:989, 1991
sium-depleted acidified dict, Am J Vet Res 53:402, 1992
52. Thomas RE. Canine idiopathic congestive cardiomy
73. Liu SK: Left ventricular falsc tcndons associated with
cardiac malfunclion in 10l cats. Lab Invest 56:44A,
opathybrccd incidence from a series of 17 cases, Vet
Rec 121:423, 1987
1987
74. Lombard CW, Buergelt CID. Endocardial fibroelastosis
53. Tidholm A. Dilated cardiomyopathy in the Newfound-
land dog: A study of 118 cases. Proceedings, 12th An-
in four dogs. J Am Anim 1losp Assoc 20:271, 1984
nual Meeuing of the European Socicty of Veterinary
75.
Zook BC, Paasch LH, Chandra RS, ct al. The compara-
Cardiology, 1993, p 12
tive pathology of primary endocardial fibroelastosis in
54. Gooding J1, Robinson WF. Mcws CC. Echocardio-
Burncsc cats. Virchows Arch A 390:21l, 198l
76. HIarmlin RL、Simetzer DL, Brcsnock EM. Sinoatrial sy1-
graphic characterization of dilatation cardionyopathy
in thc English Cocker Spanicl. Am J Vet Res 47:1978,
cope in Miniature Schnauzers. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1986
161:1022, 1972
55. Moise NS, Valentine BA, Brown CA, et al. Duchenne's
77.
Moise Ns, Gilmour RF. Inherited sudden cardiac dcath
cardiomnyopathy in a canine model; Elcctrocardio-
in German Shcphcrds. In Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD (eds);:
graphic and cchocardiographic studies. J Am Coll
Churrent Veterinary Therapy XI. Philadelphia. WB Saun-
Cardiol 17:812, 1991
ders, 1992, p 749
56. Thonas WP, Myocardial diseases of the dog. In Bona-
78. Moise NS, Meyers-Wallen V, Flahive WJ, et al. Inheritcd
gura JD (ed): Cardiology. New York, Churchill Living-
ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death in German
stonc, 1987, p 117
shepherd dogs. I Am Coll Cardiol 24:233, 1994
 57. Sisson DD. Heritability of idiopathic nyocardial hypcr-
79. James TN, Robcrtson BT, Waldo AL, el al. Hereditary
trophy and dynamic subaortic stenosis in Pointer dogs.
stenosis of the llis bundle in Pug dogs. Circulation
 J Vet Intern Med 4:118, 1990
52:1152, 1975
58. Mauldin GE, Fox PR, Patnaik AK, ct al. Doxorabicin-
80. Janes TN, Drake FA. Sudden death in Dobcrnan
induced cardiotoxicosis: Glinical fealures in 32 dogs. J
pinschers. Ann Intern Med 68:821, 1968
Vet Intcrn Med 6:82, 1992
 81. Jeraj K, Ogburn PN, Edwards wD, ct al. Atrial standstill,
59. Page Rl., Kecnc BW. Doxorubicin cardiomyopathy. In
myocarditis, and destruction of cardiac conduction sys-
Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD (cds): Current Veterinary Ther-
tem. Clinicopathologic corrclation in a dog. Am Heart
apy X1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992. p 783
J99:185, 1980
60.
Waldvogel As, Hassam S, Wcilcnmann R, el al. Retro-
82.1
Bonagura JD, O'Grady M. FCG of the month. J Am Vet
spective study of myocardial canine parvovirus infection
Med Assoc 183:658, 1983
by in-situ hybridization. J Vet Med Series B 38:353, 1992
83. Tilley LP, Liu SK. Persistent atrial standstill in the dog
61. Iicncs MG. Myocardial dysfunction associated with
and cal. Proceedings, American College of Veterinary
Lyme discase. Vet Med 84:982, 1989
Internal Medicine, 1983, p 13
470 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
84. Childers IIF. Atrial Standstil in a dog. J Am Vet Mcd
104, Van Winkle TJ, MacDonald M, HIcndricks J. Thrombosis
Assoc 188:140, 1986
of thc portal vein, pulmonary artcries, and aorta in
85. Browmlie SF. An electrocardiographic survey of cardiac
the dog: Abstract. Proccedings, 40th Annual Amcrican
rhythm in Irish Wolfhounds. Ve1 Rec 129:470, 1991
College of Veterinary Pathology, 1989
86. Brownlie SE. Nott HI. An invcstigtion of sizc in Irish
105. Van Winkle TJ, Bruce E. Thrombosis of the portal vein
wolfhounds with supraventricular cardiac arrhythmias.
in 11 dogs. Vet Pathol 30:28, 1993
Vel Rec 129:493, 1991
106. Rogers WA, Bishop SP, Rohovsky MW. Pulmonary ar-
87. Bohn FK, Patterson DF, Pyle R1.. Atrial fibrillation in
tery mediai hypertrophy and hyperplasia in conven-
dogs. Br Vet J 127:485, 1971
ional and specific pathogen free cats. An J Vet Res
88. Bonagura JD, Ware WA. Atrial fibrillation in thc dog.
32:767, 1971
Clinical findings in 8l cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
107. Liu SK, Tilley LP, Tappe JP, Fox PR. Clinical and patho-
22:111, 1986
logic findings in dogs with atherosclerosis: 21 cases
 89. Bokenhans R. Fibrilacion auricular en caninos. Dist1i-
(1970-1983). J Am Vct Med Assoc 189:227, 1986
bucion segun sexo, edad y talla de 100 casos, (Auricular
108. Detweiler DK. Spontancous and induced arterial dis-
fibrillation in dogs. Distribution by sex, age and height.
casc in the dog: Pathology and pathogenesis. Toxicol
in 100 cases). Rev Mcd vet 73:66, 1992
Pathol 17:94, 1989
90. Berg Rj, Wingficld W. Pericardial cffusion in thc dog: A
109.
Hartman HA. Idiopathic extramural coronary arleritis
review of 42 cases. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:721, 1984
in Bcaglc and mongrel dogs. Vet Pathol 24:537, 1987
91. Cobb MA, Brownlie SE. Intrapericardial ncoplasia in
110.
 Spencer A, Greaves P Periarteritis in a Beagle colony. J
14 dogs. J Simall Anim Pract 33:309, 1992
Comp Pathol 97:121, 1987
92. Holt D, Van Winkle T, Schelling C, Pryimak C. Correla-
111. Scot-Moncriefr JC, Snyder PW, Glickiman LT, Felsburg
tion berwcen thoracic radiographs and postmortem
PJ. Systcmic necrotizing vasculitis (juvenile polyarteritis
findings jn dogs with hemangiosarcoma: 77 cases
syndromc) in ninc young laboratory bcagles. J Am Vet.
(1984-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1535, 1992
93. Sisson D, Thomas WP, Ruehl WW, Zinkl JG. Diagnostic
Mcd Assoc 201:1553. 1992
112. Felsburg PJ, HogcnEsch H, Somberg RL, et al. Immu-
value of pericardial fluid analysis in the dog, I Am Vet
nologic abnornalitics in caninc juvenile polyarteritis
Mcd Assoc 184:51, 1984
syndrome: A naturally occurring animal modcl of Kawa-
94. Klcine IJ, Zook BC, Munson TO. Primary cardiac hem-
saki disease. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 65:110, 1992
angiosarcomas in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 157:326,
113. Suter PF, Fox PR. Periphcral vascular disease. In Et-
1970
95. Aronsohn M. Cardiac hemangiosarcorma in the dog. J
tinger SJ, Feldman E (eds): Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine. 4th cd. Philadclphia. WB Saundcrs,
Am Vc1 Med Assoc 187:922, 1985
1995, p 1068
96. Fruchter AM, Miller CW, O'Grady MR. Echocardio-
114. Buchanan JW, Bakcr GI, Hill JD. Aortic embolism in
graphic results and clinical considerations in dogs with
cats: Prevalencc, surgical trcatmcnt and clectrocardiog-
Hight atrial/auricular masscs. Can Vet J 33:171, 1992
97. Hayes HM, Sass B. Chenmoreceptor neoplasia: A study
raphy. Vet Rec 79:496, 1966
of thc cpidcmiological featurcs of 357 canine cases. ]
115. tittman MP. Spontaneous systeimic hypertension in 24
Vet. Intern Med 35:401, 1988
cats. J Vet Intern Med 8:79, 1994
98. Guarda F, Bussadori C, Scotti C, el al. Patologia dei
116. Vinccnt IC, Michell AR, Lchy RA. Non-invasivc mca-
tumori della basc del cuorc (lIBT) nel canc. (Pathol-
suremcnt of artcrial blood pressure in dogs: A potcntial
ogy of canine heart base tumors). Veterinaria 6:31, 1992
indicator for the identification of stress. Rcs Vet Sci
99. Bossbaly MJ, Buchanan FW, Sammarco C. Aortic body
54:195, 1993
carcinona and myocardial infarction in a Doberinan
117. Bovee KC, Papanek PE, Skelton MM, et al. Lability of
pinscher. J Small Anim Pract 34:638, 1993
100. Rush JE, Kecne BW, Fox PR. Pericardial discasc in thc
24-hour monitoring. I Vet lntern Med 6:116, 1992
cat: A retrospective evaluation of 66 cases. J Am Anim
118. tittiman MP, Robertson JIl., Bovec KC. Spontancous sys-
IIosp Assoc 26:39, 1990
temic hypertension in dogs: Fivc cascs (1981-1983). J
101. Tilley t.P, Bond B, Patnaik AK, Liu SK. Cardiovascular
Am Vet Med Assoc 193:486, 1988
tumors in the cat. J Am Anim lIosp Assoc 17:1009, 1981
119. Remilliard Rl., Ross JN, Eddy JB. Variance of indirect
102. Kume S, citcd by Rawlings CA. Pulmonary arteriogra-
blood pressure measuremcnts and prevalence of hyper-
phy and hemodynanics duing feline hcartworn dis
tension in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 52:561,
easc. J Vet Intern Med 4:285, 1990
1991
103. t.aRue MJ, Murtaugh RJ. Pulmonary thromboembolism
120. Detweiler DK, Cox RH, Alonso R, ct al. Hlermodynamic
in dogs: 47 cases (1986-1987). J Am Vet. Med Assoc
characteristics of the young adult Greyhound. Fed Proc
197:1368, 1990
34:360, 1974
ongenital Heart
24
Disease
JOHN D. BONAGURA
LINDA B. LEHMKUHL
CAUSES OF CARDIAC MALFORMATIONS
Congenital heart discase (CHD) is a clinically signifcant cause of cardio
vascular morbidity and mortality in small animals.! 1 Etiologies, develop-
mental lesions, pathophysiology, and clinical findings are often similar to
those reported in humans with cardiac malforrmations.ts. 14, 14
Congenital cardiac defects imay develop as a result of genetic, environmen-
tal, chromosomal, infectious, toxicologic, nutritional, and drug-related fac-
certain malforinations, but more is known about genetically transmitted
defects in specific canine breeds (Table 24-1).2 2t, 22 There is little data
regarding nongenetic factors pertaining to spontaneous CHD in the dog
and cat.
A genetic basis has been demonstrated for some GHD in the dog. Earlier
studics suggested a polygenic model of transmission in which multiple genes
have additive effect and produce a discrete phenotypic trait once a "thresh-
old'" has been attained. Studies by Patterson et als suggest a single major
gene effect with superimposed variation possibly related to other gene loci
or the environment. Such patterns of inheritance explain the spectrum of
subclinical to severe malformations found in families of dogs with CIIn). The
 precise mechanisms by which parents with apparcntly normal phenotype
produces offspring with CHD has not been completely elucidated. Unfortu-
nately, since simple (Mendelian) genetic transmission is not causative, it is
difficult to provide genetic counscling for brecders. Morcover, it may be
hard to climinate or reduce the prevalence of cardiac defects without careful
attention to pedigree and breeding trials.
PREVALENCE
Ihe exact prevalence of CHD is uncertain as there are both national and
rcgional breed differences for certain cardiovascular malformations (chapter
23). A cormpilation of congenital heart defects in the United States has been
 pazeuns are soaap uomuoo pe z s s s'seo pue ssop ul panoda
Iables 23-4, 23-5, and Table 24-2. Because 1multiple congenital anomalies
may be identified in some animals,27-32 the chosen method of reporting
defects will alter frequency data slightly.
 In one of the largest canine surveys, 325 malformations were detected in
471
472 DISEASES OF THE HEART ANI) CIRCULATION
TABLE 24-1
Breed Predispositions to Congenital Heart Disease
Breed
Malformation
Airedate terrier
Pulmonic stenosis (PS)
Bcagle
Pulmonic stenosis. pulmonary insuffciency
Bichon frise
Patent duetus arteriosus (PDA)
Bouvier de Flandres
Subaortic steinosis
Boykin spaniel
Pulmonic stenosis
Boxer
Subaortic stenosis (SAS): pulnonic stenosis, atrial septal defect. (ASD)
Bll terrier
Mitral valve dysplasia, aortic stenosis
Chibualma
Patent ductus arteriosus. pulmonic stenosis
Cocker spaniel
Patent duelus arteriosus, pulmonic stenosis
Choillie
P'atent ductus arteriosus
Doberiman pinscher
Atrial septal defect
English bulldog
Pulmonie stenosis, tetralogy of Fallot, ventricular septal defect (VSD), subaorlic stenosis
English springer spaniel
Palent. ductus arteriosus, ventricular septal defect
German shepherd
Patent ductus arteriosus, subaortie stenosis, unitral valve dysplasia, tricuspid valve
dysplasia, tricuspid valve dysplasia, persistnt right aortic arch
German shorthair pointer
Subaortic stenosis
Golden retriever
Subaoric stenosis, mitral valve dysplasia, tricuspid valve dysplasia
(Great Dane
Mitral valve dysplasia, trieuspid valve dysplasia, aortic stenosis, persistent right aoric arch
Irish settcr
Persistent right arortic arch
Kerry blue terrier
Patent ductus arteriosus
Kteshond
Tetralogy of Fallot, ventricular septal defect. patent ductus arteriosus
Labrador retriever
Tricuspid valve dysplasia, patent ductus arteriosus
Maltesc
Patent ductus arteriosus
Mastiff
Mitral valve dysplasia, pulmonie stcnosis
Newlonllant
Subaortic stnosis,mitral dyplasiapatent ductus arteriosus
Old Lnglish shcepdog
Tricuspid valve dysplasia
Ioodle breeds
Patent duetus arteriosus
Poineranian
Patent ductus arteriosus
Rottweiler
Aortir stenosis
Samoyedl
Pulmonie slenosis, aortie stenosis, ? atrial septal defect
Schnanwer breeds
Pulmonie stenosis
Shetland shicepdog
Patent ductus arteriosus
Terrier breeds
Pulmonic stenosis
Weimarauer
West I Highland white terrier
Pulnonie stenosis, ? VSD
Yorkshire terrier
Patent duetus arteriosus
 290 dogs, and thc ovcrall prcvalencc in a university
In cats. thic estinatcd prcvalencc of congenital hcart
 gssop 0oo1 ad gg sem uogendod sumo pedsou
diseasc using poolcd data was bctwcen 2 and 10 cats
these 290 dogs, congenital disorders includcd patent.
per 1000 adinissions (0.2 to 1 percent). A total of 287
dluctus arteriosus (28 perccnt), pulmonic stcnosis (20
 anomalies was recorded,s 22 including atrioventricular
percent), aortic stenosis (14 perccnt), persistent right.
 scptal defects (comprising ventricular septal defect,
aortic arch (8 percent), ventricular scptal defcct (7
atrial septal defect, and endocardlial cushion de-
perccnt), and in lcss than 5 percent, tetralogy of Fallot,
fcctapproximatcly 24 pcrcent), atriovcntricular valvc
pcrsistent left cranial vena cava, and atrial septal dc-
dysplasia (17 pcrcent), enclocardial fibroelastosis (11
fects. In a I989 unpublished survcy of congcnital car-
percent), patent ductus arteriosus (1l percent), aortic
diac defects from the United Kingdon, 32 perccnt of
stcnosis (6 percent), andl tetralogy of Fallot. (6 per-
339 rcported cases were due 1o subaortic stcnosis; 20
cent).
perccnt, pafent ductus arteriosus; I4 percent, initral
dysplasia; 12 percent, pulmonic stenosis; and 8 pcr-
CLINICAL EVALUATION OF
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
prevalence information from a North American data
base of over 1300 cascs,* indicatcd that while patent
cluctus arteriosus is still the inost frcqucntly rcportcd
Identification of congenital heart disease is always
lesion (31.7 percent), subaortic stenosis (22.1 pcrcent)
s se u pe sid pe mu rn nd
now exceeded pulmonic stcnosis (18.3 percent) in
for breeding. Accurate asscssmcnt inay requirc Dop-
prcvalence. Based onl these studics, thc ovcrall prcva-
 pler  echocardiograply
  and  cardiac  catheterization.
lencc of canine congenital heart diseasc ranges from
Thc practitioner shoulid be familiar with common car-
0.46 percent to 0.85 percent of univcrsity hospital ad-
diac malformations, associated clinical findings, and
missions.
thc unclerlying gcnetic basis when known.
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 473
TABLE 24-2
Classification of Congenital Heart Disease
Ventricular Outlow Obstruction
Fiseninenger's physiology (reversed shunting across a
Right-sidled
septal defect or PDA)
Pulmonic stcnosis
Valvular dysplasia*
Malforrmation of the Atrioventricular Valves
Subvalvular
Mitral valve dysplasia
Supravalvular
Insuflicieney
Tetralogy of Fallot* (see below)
Stenosis
Double-chanbered right ventricle
Tricuspid valve malforrmation
L.eft-sidled
Insulhiciency
Aortic stenosis
Stenosis
Subvalvular (subaortic)*
Atresia (see above)
Discretc
Fibromuscular
Transposition Complexes
Dynamic
Anonalous pulmonary venous conncction
Valvular
Double-outlet right ventricle
Supravalvular
Transposition of' the great vessels
Coaretation of the aorta
1-transposition
Ilypoplasia of the aorta
L-transposition (congenitally corrected)
Interruption of the aorta
Miscellaneous Cardiac Defccts
Syslem to Pulmonary Shunting (Left-to-Right)
Anomalous development. of the atria
Atrial septal defect. (ASD)*
Cor triatriatum
Patent foramen ovale
Cor triatriatum dexter
Secumlun defect
Endocardial fibroelastosis
Primum defect
Cordis ectopia
Sinus venosus defect.
Atrioventricular septal defects/endocardial cushion defec1*
Muliple Cardiac Anomalies
 Incomplete or partial
Common atrioventricular canal
Anomalous pulnonary venous return
Vascular Anomalics
Ventricular septal defects (VSD) *
Persistent palcnt ductus arleriosus* (sce above)
Vascular “ring” anomalies
Perimermbranous defeets (suberistal)
Persistent right fourth aurtic arch*
Muscular defects
Left. aortic arch with riglnt liganentun arteriosum
Subpulmenic (supraeristal) defects
Double aortic arch
Pateni ductus arteriosus (PDA)*
Retroesophagcal subclavian artery
Aorticopulmonary septal defect (see Vascular anomalies)
Truncus arteriosus
Auromalies of the aorla annd related arteries (also,
Syslemice arterial to pulmonary shunis
ventrieular oulow obstruction, above)
Venous anomalics
Pulmonary to Systemic Shunting (Right-to-Lcft)
 Persistent left cranial vena cava
Pulunonary stenosis or trieuspid valve dysplasia
Pericardial Defects
with palent foramen ovale
Congenital peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia*
Tricuspid atresia
Pericardial cyst
Tetralogy of Faltot*
Incomplete (partial absence of the) pericardium
Pulmonary atresia
*One of es frequentlyrecognzedmalfrainatial ad reional diffreneear rgnize.Overall as arrs artesis,
punic stnosisvntricar seal fta arienclar alularlaia are heost fequentlrecogeinsn dogsVetrilar seral 
and mitral valve tmalformation are the most frequently recoguized cardiac malformations in catx.
Knowledge of thc brccd is particularly important
murmurs caused by a cardiac malformation. Thc typi-
o paadsns si sseq ool r sssoq (z rnde)
cal innoccnt murmur is soft (grade 1 to 3/6) and is
many of the cardiac malformations (see Table 24-I).
usually described as lourdest over or craniodorsal to thc
A diagnosis can usually bc attaincd by a complctc
 pulmonic or aortic valvc area; protomesosystolic (or
noninvasive cvaluation that includcs the history, physi-
cjcction) in timing; variablc with hcart rate and chang-
cal cxanination, thoracic radiography, clcctrocardiog-
ing body position; often musical in quality, and typi-
raphy, routinc hcmatologic tests, and echocardiogra-
cally dininishing in intensity or rcsolvcd by 16 wecks
phy  (chapters 4 through  8). Dcfinitive diagnosis
of age.
requires Doppler echocardiography or, infrequcntly.
cardiac catheterization and angiocarediography.
CONGENITAL CARDIAC MURMURS
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
 In contrast, murmurs of congcnital cardiac origin
are oftcnl modcrately intensc to loud. Thcrc are occa-
INNOCENT MURMURS
sional cxccptions; for exainplc, a hcart murmur may
 Normal puppies and kittcns can cxhibit innocent sys-
not bc aucdiblc with very largc dcfccts, cven in thc
tolic cardiac murmurs, which must be distinguishied from
preseiice of sevcrc cyanotic heart disease: puppies with
474 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
tricuspid valve dysplasia may have scvere malformation
of immunization following auscultation of a cardiac
and a relatively soft right-sided hearl murmur; and
murmur.
inildl stcnosis of a semilunar valve or ventricular out-
flow tract may gcnerate only a soft, systolic murmur
OTHER PHYSICAL EXAMINATION FINDINGS
that can be casily confused with an innoccnt flow
murmur, Murrnurs of outflow tract obstruction also
Abnormalitics of the artcrial pulsc, rmucous mcin-
      
brancs, jugular vcilous pulse, or prccordium may
 activity or hcart rate as do innoccnt murmurs.
support a clinical suspicion of congcnital clisease. Hy-
The prescnce of any typc or gradc of heart inurmur
perkinetic (“water-hammer') arterial puisations are charac-
in a young anirnal should be considcrcd as potcntially
teristic of lesions causing abnormal diastolic ruoff off
coinpatible with a diagnosis of congenital heart dlis-
aortic blood as occurs with patcnt ductus arteriosus or
ease. Usually, a precordial thrill accompanies loud mur-
aortic rcgurgitation. Hypokinetic arterial pulses are typi-
murs, aund this vibration corrcsponds to thic point of
cal of severc subaortic stenosis or tricuspid dysplasia
maximal nurimur intensity. Thc location of a prccor-
and are characterizcd by delayed vcntricular ejection
dial thrill oftcn is charactcristic of the associated lc-
Or diminished output, rcspectively. Although cyanosis
sion. Additional auscultatory abnormalitics nay bc
offcnn incicates right-to-left shunting, this sign also can
 present, such as a loud or split sccond heart sound.
dcvclop with severc congestive failure and secondary
pulinonary dysfunction. Prominent jugular venous put-
salions may suggest a right hcart abnorality, such as
AGE
pulmonic stenosis or sevcrc tricuspid rcgurgitation.
Agc is a factor when asscssing the effect of pul-
A precordial heave (promincnt apical inpulsc) oftcn
monary vascular rcsistance on thc magnitudc of sys-
indicates hypcrtrophy or enlargcincnt of the underly-
ternic-to-pulmonary shunts. Although the pulmonary
ing ventricle.
vascular resistancc and right ventricular pressures fall
imrncdiatcly at birth, they continue to decline during
the first 1 to 2 nonths of lifc,3s and lcf-to-right.
CARDIAC IMAGING
shunting may not bc fully manifestcd until a number
of weeks affer birth. Some lesions may progrcss with
Survcy thoracic radiographs are inportant to iden-
tify cardiomcgaly, cnlargement of thc great vesscls,
age. For cxamplc, congenital subaortic stenosis may
actually dcvelop during the first 2 months of life, and
pulmonary circulatory dynamics, and congestive heart
failure, Angiocarcliography charactcrizcs anatomic dc-
thie associatcd cardiac murmur increases in intensily as
the dog grows to inaturity18.sa A progression of clinical
fects and dclincatcs abnormal blood flow. Echocardi-
signs with incrcasing age is to be cxpected in animals
ography noninvasivcly dcefines anatomic lesions and
with scvcrc malformations. Innoccnt murmurs are
abnormal blood flow patterns and cstimates ventricu-
 most comrmon in puppies less than 16 weeks old.
lar function. Nuclcar mcdicinc studics, computed to-
1nography, and inagnctic resonance imaging have spe-
cific applications but are limited in availability.
GENDER
SURVEY RADIOGRAPHY
Exccptions include thc higher prevalcnce of patent
Radiography plays an intcgral rolc in evaluation for
 ductus arteriosus in female dogs, and thc possible inalc
congenital heart disease. 1 * Radiographic asscssmcnt
 prcdominance of both tricuspid dysplasia in dogs and
 of cardiomegaly ideally should bc done in conjunction
pulmonic stenosis in English bulldogs,9 $4 The Siamesc
with the electrocardiogram (ECG) and prcferably thic
 and Burmese brceds may be predisposcd to some con-
echocardiogram.
gcnital heart dcfects, and male kittens scem to be at
higher risk for cardiac malforination."2
CARDI0MEGALx. Ihe detection of cardiomcgaly is rela-
tively easy. Howcver, the distinction bctwecn right and
left ventricular enlargement. may bc clifficult without.
CLINICAI SIGNS
echocardiography, and thc frequent. occurrencc of
Affected anirmals nay fail to grow; exhibit shortmess
apex shifting nay also confuse the clinician and result
of breath, cough, abdominal distcntion, cyanosis, weak-
in crroneous diagnosis. Thcre is a tendeney to ovcrin-
ness, syncope, or scizurcs; or die suddenly. Many are
terpret the right ventricle in rnconatcs, in which somc
relatively asymptormatic until acutc decoinpensation
right ventricular dominance is norrmal. The thoracic
occurs. Whcrcas somc pcts with congenital hcart dis-
radiograph is a fairly good indicator of the severity of
case are cxarmnincd for clinical signs rclatcd to their
congenital hcart discasc when thc underlying condi-
malformation, most cascs are identificd at thc timc
tion1 is characterizcd by left-to-right shunting or valvu-
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 475
lar insufficicncy. Thus, a small vcntricular septal dlefect.
injection is also perforrned, and the movcment of
or mildlly dysplastic tricuspid valvc is likcly to be associ-
blood is followed for 8 to 10 seconds.
ated with rmild cardiomcgaly, whicrcas a sevcrc defect
is gencrally characterizcd by severc hcart enlargemcnt.
RIGHT VENTRICULOGRAM. Thc following lesions ca11
Howcvcr, in cases of ouflow obstruction, pulmonary
generally be identifiecd: tricuspid regurgitation, double-
hypcrtcnsion, or right-to-lcft. shunts, lesion1 scverity is
chambcred right vcntricle or anomalous Gbromuscular
often not accuratcly reflectcd in thc degree of radio-
bands, pulmonary stcnosis or atrcsia, right-to-lcft--
graphic cardioincgaly; ventricular hypcrtrophy is often
shunting vcntricular scptal defect, tctralogy of Fallot
concentric (compromising the lunen) and is far better
(and pseudotruncus artcriosus), cdoublc-outlet right.
appreciated by echocardiography.
ventricle, trauispositionl of the grcat vcsscls, truncus
arteriosus, aorticopulmonary communication  (with
 GREAT vessELs. Dilation of the great vcssels can pro-
pulmonary hypertension), reverscd patent ductus artc-
vide clues to underlying cardiac malformations. Aortic.
riosus, and abnormal pulmonary vascularity owing to
widening in the cranial mcdiastinum is typical of the
pulmonary hypertension or vascuar disease. Following
poststenotic dilatation of subaortic stenosis; the aortic
return of contrast to the left side of the hcart froin
anomaly is sometimcs noted with tetralogy of Fallot.
thc right. ventricular (or pulnonary artery) injection,
Aneurysinal dilation of the descending aorta is com-
the following lesions can generally be identificd: anom-
mon with patent ductus arteriosus. Enlargement of the
 alous pulmonary venous return (to thc right atriun),
atrial septal defcct (lef-to-right shunting), mitral ste-
turbulent flow from pulmonic stenosis, increased flow
nosis, anicd subaortic and aortic valve stenosis.
causcd by any lcft-to-right shunt, or pulmonary hypcr-
tension, Caudal vena cava cnlargcment nay bc notcd
LEFT vENTRICULOGRAM. Thc following lesions can usu-
in tricuspid dysplasia, pulmonic stcnosis, or cor triatria-
ally be identifed: mitral regurgitation; ventricular sep-
tum dextcr.
tal defect (lcft-to-right shunting); subaortic, aortic val
vular, and supravalvular stcnosis; truncus artcriosus
PULMONARY vASCULARITY. Although1 chaiges must bc
(and pseudotruncus arteriosus); and supravalvular le-
asscsscd with caution. pulinonary vascularity scrves as
sions listed later undcr the aortogram.
a useful guidelinc in determining pulmonary overcir-
culation, unercirculatin, and yenous congestion. 
AORTIC INJEcTION. This generally delincates aortic
Cranial and caudal lobar arteries and veins, as well as 
regurgitatioin; prolapse of anl aortic valvec lcaflet into a
 peripheral pulmonary vascular markings, should be
ventricular septal defect; abnorinal coronary arterics;
examined. Right-to-lcft shunts, likc tetralogy of Fallot,
aorticopulmonary communication (left-to-right shunt-
are characterized by diminished peripheral perfusion
ing); coarctation, hypoplasia, or interruption of the
and norrmal-to-small lobar vessels. Revcrscd or bidirec-
aorta; abnormalities of the aortic arch or branches;
tional shunts resulting from pulmonary hypcrtcnsion
patcnt ductus arteriosus (lcft-to-right shunting): and
may cause diminished periphcral perfusion, dilatcd
abnormal pulmonary collatcral circulation (broncho-
lobar arterics, and a dilatcd main pulmonary trunk. [n
csophagcal circulation).
somc cases of reverscd shunting, howevcr, the pulmo-
nary vasculaturc sccms remarkably normal. Vascularity
ADDIT1ONAL INJECTIONs. Injcctio1 of conitrast into thc
can also bc decreascd in othcr conditions. such as
 lcft jugular vein identifies persistent left cranial vena
pulmonic stenosis andl severe tricuspid dysplasia. Con-
cava. A right atrial injection is needcd to documcnt a
verscly, leff-to-right shunts, likc atrioventricular scptal
right-to-lcft shunting atrial scptal defcct or hypoplasia/
defccts and patcnt ductus arteriosus, have an incrcased 
atresia of thc tricuspid valvc and right vcntriclc. A
dimension of lobar arterics and vcins, with proinincnt.
caudal vcna caval injection will best dclincatc a parti-
peripheral vascular markings that may bc misintcr-
tioncd right atrium, as in cor triatriatum dexter. Ab-
pretcd as interstitial lung densitics. Right or lcfl vcn-
normal position of thc angiocardiographic cathictcr
tricular congestivc failure inay be heralded by widened
may also delincate a lcsion, as whcn an atrial septal
diamctcr of the caudal vena cava or pulmonary veins,
defect is crossed.
respcctivcly.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
ANGIOGRAPHY
Echocardiography permits detailed imaging of car-
Selective angiocarliography identifies most of the
diac anatomy. Whcn combinced with Doppler cchocar-
diographic sturlies, blood flow can bc detccted and
a  pe  e o wd  s e
intravascular pressurcs cstimatccl (chapter 8)21 4. 65
 gram and to rccord thc movcment of injectcd contrast
Quantifying prcssurc gradients across scmilunar valvcs
matcrial ovcr 10 to 20 scconds. A supravalvular aortic
requires continuous-wavc 1Dopplcr techniques 4s. st. ss
476 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
Contrast cchocardiography, in which intravascular
deviation in the frontal planne may indicate left vcntric-
echo targcts arc crcated by the rapid injection of agi-
tated saline or indocyaninc-grccn dye, can rcliably
detect somc intracardiae  (particularly right-to-lcft)
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION
shunts, as can color-tlow Dopplcr cchocardiography
(see Figs. 8-2, 8-3).
Carcliac cathctcrizatioin is an invasivc procedure use-
Information obtained froin a carcful echocardio-
ful for dliagnosing structural cardiovascular malforma-
graphic and Dopplcr ccho study should inclurdc (1)
tion  and ascssing physiologic associated derangc-
anatomic detail, cardiae function, and cardiac dimcn-
sions  detcrrmined by  two-dincnsional and  M-mode
for hemoglobin-oxygcn saturation). (2) cardiac output
ccho; (2) detection of abnormal blood flow by pulsed-
and strokc volume neasurements, (3) indicator dilu-
wavc or color-coded Doppler or through contrast echo-
tion studics, and (4) intravascular and intracardiac
carcliography; (3) idcntification of turbulent or high-
pressurc rccording. Selective angiocarrdiograms with
vclocity blood flow in the heart and grcat vessels, using.
pulscd-wave Doppler ccho; anrl (4) quantifying high-
which to compare other diagnostic and hcmodynamic
velocity flow by continuous-wave Doppler echo. Veloc-
assessineints. A complete dlescription of carcliac cathc-
ity data from thc continuous wave study can be used to
 terization can be found in chapter 9.
measure prcssure gradicnts by means of thc modified
Bernoulli equation, in which tlic instantaulcous prcs-
PRESSURE GRADIENTS AND VALVE STENOSIs. BloOd is 11Or-
sure cdrop across a stenosis or shiunt is estimatcd by
mally propellcd across thc hcart by thc generation of
simal, instantancous prcssurc gradicnts, although peak
Pressurc gradicent. (min Hg) = 4 × peak velocity (rm/s)
cardliac valvc. Valvc stcnosis is associated with ain in-
It is also possible to estimatc pulmonary artcry prcs-
creased velocity flow. This is caused by dcvclopincnt of
sures, shunt ratio, and rcgurgitant fraction using
 a pressure gradientan increase in pressurc bchind thc
Dopplcr techniques. Estimates of plnonary arterial
    d    
prcssurcs usually involve measuring thc peak velocity
This pressure gradicnt can bc mcasurcd as an instanta-
of any recordcd pulmonary insufficicncy or tricuspid
ncous, peak-to-pcak, or incan prcssure difference; the
regurgitation (in the abscnce of pulmonic stenosis or
llagnitude of the pressure gradient indicates the sever-
a large ventricular septal defcct) and employing the
ily of obstruction (Fig. 24-1).
 Bernoulli cquation. Thc greater the presure in the
A diastolic gradient across an atriovcntricular valve
pulmonary artery, thc higher the velocity of regurgita-
implics mitral or tricuspid stcnosis, whereas a systolic
tion. Shunts are estimatcd noninvasively by mcasuring
 gradicnt across a semilunar valve denotes pulmonic. or
systemic tlow and pulmonary flow using pulscrd Dop-
subaortic. stenosis. All gradients depend on transvalvu-
pler or color-flow convcrgence techniques.5t. 35
lar flow. They can be artificially diminished by heart
failure, anesthctic agcnts, hypovolcmia (fron diuret-
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
ics), arrhythrnias, or combinations of lesions that re-
ducc transvalvular flow across thc narrowed region
Thc ECG is often helpful in the diagnosis of congen-
(c.g., initral stenosis with aortic stcnosis; tricuspid re-
ital hcart discasc.4. 7. 3s.383 36 A normal ECG does not
gurgitation with pulmonic stenosis). Converscly, sym-
rule out a cardiac malformation, but an abnormal
pathetic stimulation can enhance a gradicnt by in-
ECG hclps indicatc the cause. Persistcnce of a right
crcascd blood low with inotropie stimulation.
ventricular
hypcrtrophy pattern after the first few
A prcssure gradient cloes not always inclicate valvular
weeks of agc in thc dog is abnormal and highly sugges-
stenosis. For example, when there is a largc lcft-to-
tive of pulinonic stcnosis, tetralogy of Fallot, tricuspid
right shunt, a systolic gradient of betwccn 5 and 20
dysplasia, atrial septal defect, large ventricular septal
ImnHg may develop aeross the pulmonary valvc. This
defect, or pulmonary hypcrtcnsion. Right vcntricular
s aa ae, on pane q re veia
hypertrophy can also lead to conduction delay, with
sis, the physiologic obstruction causcd by increascd
right axis deviation and QRS coinplcx widlening. Occa-
 blood volumc traversing a norinal valve orifice.
sionally, thc prcscncc of congenital right bundle
 branch block may suggcst an crroneous diagnosis of
 PRESSURE RESISTANCE RELATIONSHIPS AND SHUNTING. AI-
right ventricular hypcrtrophy in an animal with a left-
terial pressures rccordcd during catheterization arc.
sided heart lesion, but as a general rule, this fncing
 proportional to the product of blood flow and vascular
 indicates one of the aforcmcntioned righ-sided de-
resistance. Norinal right. and left ventricular outputs
fccts. Increased QRs voltages with a normal frontal
are virtually identical. Becausc thc pulmonary vascular
o p snoe snp ued jo peid ae si
rcsistance is only about 12 pcrccint of the systemic
defccts causing lcft ventricular enlargcmcnt. Left axis
rcsistance, the resultant mean pulmonary arterial and
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE477
FIGURE24-1
Pressure gradients: Simultaneous
pressurerecordings takenfrom
theleft ventricle (LV)and
ascending aorta(Ao)from a dog
with congenital subvalvular aortic
stenosis.The methods of
measuring systolic pressure
gradients acrossa stenoticlesion
are depicted as peak-to-peak,
instantaneous,ormean pressure
eak
difference.Simultaneous,
continuous-waveDoppler
echocardiographicvelocity
spectra are demonstrated.Thus,
outflowtractobstructioncanbe
measured directly by cardiac
catheterization or estimated
usingDoppler echocardiographic
techniques (chapter 8).ECG
trace appears above.
pulse pressures are much lower than those measured
larvasodilationinskeletalmuscleandincreasedsym-
inthe aorta.Thisisalsoreflectedintheincreased
pathetic activity,which can promote dynamicmuscular
wall thicknesses, and correspondingly, less distensible
obstruction in therightventricular outflowtract.
left atrial andventricularchambers.
The obvious consequence of these pressure/resis-
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION.Pulmonaryarterypres-
tancerelationships is observed when a communication
sure has an impact on clinical signs, prognosis, and
persists between systemic and pulmonary circulations.
management of patients with shunts. Estimation or
Inthisinstance,blood shunts from thehigher to the
calculationofvascularresistances isusefulinthese
lower pressure system (i.e., from left to right).Patent
animals.60a We emphasize that measurement of pulmo-
ductus arteriosus and large septal defects commonly
nary arterypressure alone doesnotaccuratelyreflect
lead to significant lefttoright shuntingwithpulmo-
the state ofpulmonaryvascularresistance.
nary overperfusion, unless there is concurrent tricus-
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) may result from in-
pidorpulmonarystenosisorelevatedpulmonaryvas-
creasesinflowthrough thelung,increasedpulmonary
cularresistance.When resistanceis abnormallyhigh
vascularresistance,orboth.14Pulmonaryvascularresis-
on the right side of the circulation,however,shunting
tance can beincreased as a result of (1)left-sided heart
willbe minimal,bidirectional,or predominatelyright
failure (with elevated pulmonary wedge pressure),(2)
to left.
left-sidedvalvular obstruction,or(3)anatomic nar-
Cardiaccatheterizationwilldocument thedisparity
rowing of the pulmonary arterial system. Unless pul-
inpressuresinmost cases of shunting;however,differ-
monaryandsystemicbloodflowaremeasuredbyther-
ences of peak systolicpressuresbetweenleft andright
modilution or indicator dilution techniques,the
sides of the circulation do not necessarily indicate the
clinicianmay beuncertain whether pulmonary hyper-
degreeofshunting.Resistancetoflowis anotherkey
tension represents high flow,lef-sided heart failure,
factor.For example,with a large(unrestrictive)ventric-
orirreversible arteriolar change.This distinctionmay
ular septal defect,bothventriclesbehave asa common
be critical to therapeutic decisions, as in the case of a
chamber, and systolic pressures virtually equilibrate.
ventricular septal defect in which PH due to high
Since bloodflows across the path of least resistance,if
flowisanindicationforrepair orpulmonary artery
thepulmonaryresistanceisnormal,a tremendous left
banding,whereas PH due to arteriolar damage injury
to-right shunt can develop.The opposite situation is
andincreasedresistanceisacontraindicationtosur-
observed with severe pulmonary hypertension caused
gery. Oximetry and evaluation of peripheral lung per-
by Eisenmenger's physiology.In this case, the peak
fusion on the thoracic radiograph can alsoyield im-
systolicpressuresareapproximatelyequalacrossthe
portantinformation aboutvascularresistance.
defect,butthelowersystemicvascularresistanceleads
to a predominately right-to-left shunt. This type of
VENTRICULARDIASTOLICPRESSURE.Elevatedventricular
shunt is often exacerbatedby exercise owing to arterio-
end-diastolic pressure is serious and may lead to clini-
478 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
cal signs such as tachypnea or ascites. This can result
disease 6 Arterial hypoxcrmia, hypocapnia, and meta-
from a numbcr of abnormalities: ventricular hypertro-
bolic acidosis inay bc detccied in cascs of right-to-left
phy or endocardial fibrosis with increascd diastolic
shunting.
ventricular stiffness; volume overloading as with left-10-
right shunting or incompctent cardiac valves; ventricu-
lar failure; pericardial dlisease; or a combination of
LESIONS CAUSING
thcsc problcms.
VENTRICULAR OUTFLOW
OXIMEry. Blood oxygenl contcnt (ml Os/dl blood)
OBSTRUCTION
is a product of the oxygen saturation and oxygen-
carrying capacity (proportional to hcmoglobin con-
centration). Oxygcn saturation valtucs, from left atrium
PULMONIC STENOSIS
to left ventriclc, to ascending aorta to descending
 aorta, are normally within I to 2 pcrccnt of each other.
Pulmonic stenosis (Ps) is a comnon congcnital
However, differcnccs of up to 5 perccnt saturation may
hcart defect in dogs (see Table 23-8) and is 0ccasion-
 bc detected on thc right side of thc hcart. The right.
 atrium receives blood from a variety of sources, each
tion to right vcntricular ouflow can develop in the
with a dlifferent oxygen saturation, and thcre is incom-
infunctibulurn, in thc subvalvular region, and above
plete mixing of blood in this chamber. Thc lowcst
the pulmonic valvc, dysplasia of thc pulmonary valve
 oxygcn saturation is mcasured at the coronary sinus,
 is the rmost frcqucntly obscrved defect in clogs. Subval.
and wc have found the cranial vena caval saturation to
vular or valvular pulmonic stenoscs arc also rccognized
be higlicr than that of thc azygos vein or caudal vena
 in animals with tetralogy of Fallot. Right vcntricular
cava in samples obtained from anesthetized dogs
outflow obstruction in the exreimc forn is rcprc-
 breathing 33 percent oxygen. Although differences of
sented as pulmonary artcry atrcsia.
 greater than 5 percent saturation are suspicious for
Pulmonic stenosis has a frcqucncy of approximatcly
shunting, even thcse differences can he encountered
11 to 18 percent of congenital cardiac defccts 33.94
within the right atrium of sorne dogs who do not have
 and demonstrates a genetic basis in ccrtain caninc
intracardiac shunting.
brceds (see Table 24-1). The etiology in cats is un-
Catheterization of patients with intracarctiac or ex-
k1lown. In beagle dogs, a polygenetic modle of trans-
tracardiac shunting may demonstrate oxygcn "stcp-
nission was rcsponsible for abnormal dcvelopment of
ups" or "'step-dowis.,"' For exarnple, a marked incrcase
 pulmonary valve anlagen, lcading to valve dysplasia.5s
in oxygen saturation (or content) in the right ventricu-
Thcsc rcsults arc likely to bc applicable to other af-
lar outlow tract suggcsts a lef-to-right-shunting vcn-
fected breeds.
 tricular septal defect or pulmonary insuffcicncy in a
case of patent ductus arteriosus. Right-to-lcft shunting
leads to dcsaturation of arterial blood, beginning at
LESIONS
the level of the shunt. Forinulas have been deviscd
GROss MORPHOLOGY. A spectrum of abnorImalities was
t0 estimatc the degree of carrliac shunting (Qp:Qs),
obscrved in pulmonary valve dysplasia of beagles, aind
calculated from oxygen contcnt and indicator dilution
graded thus': gracle 1-"slight thickening of pulno-
techniques (chaptcr 9). Surgical dccisions based on
nary valve lcatlcts with little or no fusion or hypoplasia,
shunt calculations should be interpretcd with other
producing minimal or no cdemonstrable pulmonary
information, including pulmonary artery pressure,
outflow obstruction,”’ andl grade 2—"moderate-to-se-
pulmonary vascular resistance, rcsults of thoracic radi-
vcrc thickcning of pulmonary valve leaflets, usually
 ography, and clinical signs.
with fusion, hypoplasia, or both, producing moderate-
to-scverc pulmonary outflow obstruction." Clinical
LABORATORY TESTS
cases of pulrnonic stcnosis (PS) usually represcnt a
 grade 2 lesion. Wc havc obscrvcd similar findings in
Hematologic tests are not an important part of thc
other breeds (Fig. 24-2). Many of these dogs also havc
diagnostic workup. Serum biochemical tests may bc
fibrous thickening at the imrnediatc base of the valvcs
abnormal when there is congestive heart failurc
：or
in addition to abnormal valve leaflets. Such thick-
intercurrent organ disease (c.g., portosystemic shunt-
ing), but thc complete blood count (CBC), biochemi-
vular'’ ps in some surveys. Pulmonic stenosis of the
cal profilc, and urinalysis are typically normal. Onc
dog more closely reseinbles atypical Ps in childrcn. 4
cxception is a higher-than-normal packed cell volumc
Alomalous coronary artery development is present
(PCV) in a nconate with right-to-left shunting. Polycy-
in somc affccied dogs, cspccially in English bulldogs
themia is oficn noted with tctralogy of Fallot, reversed
and boxcrs. It is characterizcrd by an anomalous left
patent ductus artcriosus, and complex cyanotic heart
main coronary artcry (originating from a single right
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE479
R
FIGURE24-2
dysplasiashowsome of thevariablefeatures.UpperrightDysplasticpulmonaryvalveviewedfrom
above.Themain pulmonary artery hasbeen cutawaytoillustrate the thickened,partially fused
pulmonary valveleaflets(arrow）.The right ventricle(RV)and the aorta(Ao)are indicated.Lower
centerRightventricular enlargement withhypertrophy of therightventricularwall(W)is evident in
this dogwith pulmonicvalve dysplasia (arrow).The pulmonic valve leaflets are thickened and
malformed,and the thickening extends to thebase of each valve.The main pulmonary artery(PA）is
dilated as a result of poststenotic dilation.Theventricular septum isnoted(S）.Upper left,Hypoplasia
of thepulmonaryvalve(arrow)isevidentin this specimenviewed from theventral surface.Thereis
markedhypertrophyof therightventriclepapillarymusclesinfundibulum(whitearowheads）,and
supraventricular crest between the tricuspid valve(TV)and the pulmonaryvalve（upper arrou）.The
right atrium (RA),aorta (Ao), and the main pulmonary artery (PA)are indicated.
(From Bonagura JD,DarkePGG.Congenital heart disease.In Etinger SJ,Feldman EC (eds).
TextbookofVerinaryIntrnalMedicine4thed.Philadelphia,BSaunders1995,918,with
permission.)
480DISEASESOFTHEHEARTAND CIRCULATION
coronary artery),which encircles the stenotic right
a systolicejectionmurmur andpoststenoticdilation of
ventricular outlet andvalve andprobablycontributes
the main pulmonary artery (PA).Increasing stiffness
to the embryogenesis of the obstruction (Fig. 24-3).45
oftherightventricleisresponsibleforthevigorous
Otherforms ofPShavebeen described.Supravalvu-
atrial contraction(awave)thatmaybeevidentin the
lar stenosis is quite uncommon in animals.It is perhaps
jugular venous furrow.Diminished rightventricular
most often observed in giant schnauzers.Rarely,a true
coronary blood flow has been documented in dogs
subvalvularpartitioningoftherightventricularinlet
withPs.6Critical stenosis limits cardiac output.If right
andoutletisproducedbyfibromuscularormuscular
atrialpressuresbecomemarkedlyelevated,right-sided
bands,acondition thathasbeenreferred toasdouble
congestive heart failure develops.Progressive right
chambered right ventricle (Fig. 24-4).14. 69
atrialenlargementprobably resultsfrom various fac-
Concurrenttricuspidvalvemalformationmaybe
tors, including outflow obstruction, elevated ventricu-
present,particularlyin larger breeds.The distinction
lardiastolicpressureand diastolicdysfunction,second-
betweenmild dysplasia andsecondarychangesin the
ary tricuspid regurgitation caused by high systolic
valve apparatus resulting from hypertrophy and valve
pressure and geometric changes within the ventricle,
thickeningisnot always clear.
anddecreasedcardiacoutputwithcompensatoryre-
tention of sodium andwater.
HISTOLoGIC FEATUREs.Thickening of the valve spongi-
osa and bands of fusiform cellspresent in a dense
collagen network are observed.6s These changes repre-
CLINICALFINDINGS
sentover-productionofnormalvalveelementsora
failure ofconversionofthecushion-likeembryonic
SIGNALMENT.Pulmonicstenosisiscommonincertain
valve primordia. Blood-filled spaces and endothelium-
breeds,including the beagle,Samoyed,Chihuahua,
lined spaces are also found in one or more cusps of
English bulldog, miniature schnauzer, Labrador re-
affected dogs.
triever,
mastiff,
chow-chow, Newfoundland,basset
hound,and other terrier and spaniel breeds(see Ta-
bles 23-8; 24-1).14a, 34
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Thepathophysiologyof PSis summarizedinFigure
CLINICAL sIGNs.Dogs withPS may be asymptomatic;
24-5.Obstructiontorightventricular outflow causes
develop signs related tolow cardiac output, such as
an increase in ventricular systolic pressure (RVsP),
syncope and tiring;manifest right-sided congestive
leading torightventricular hypertrophy(RVH),left-
heartfailure56;ordevelophypoxemiafromright-to-left
ward septal deviation or flattening,and a systolicpres-
shunting across an atrioventricular septal defect or
suregradient across thepulmonaryvalve.High-velocity
patent foramen ovale59 Clinical signs are more likely
and turbulentflow about thestenosisis associatedwith
in dogs older than 1year.
NORMAL
B
R1
R2A
R2B
R2C
FIGURE24-3
Pulmonic stenosis related toan anomalous coronary artery.(A)Rightventricular angiocardiogram
from a dogdemonstrates an asymmetricfillingdefect alongthe cranial aspect of theventricular
outlet.This corresponds to thelocation of the abnormal coronary vessel.(B)Comparison of normal
origin versus anomalous single origin of the coronary arteries.(From Buchanan JW.Pulmonic
stenosis caused by single coronary artery in dogs:Four cases (1965-1984).JAmVet Med Assoc
196:115-120,1990,with permission.)
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE4
481
LGCOFF
VOT
SEC
B
FIGURE24-4
Double-chambered right ventricle.(A) Angiocardiogram from a dog showing irregular narrowing
just proximal to the origin of the right ventricular outlet.The pulmonary valve is normal.(B)
Echocardiogram demonstrating a ventricular obstruction(arrow)at the originof therightventricular
outflow tract (RVOT).The atrial septum is not visualized in this image.RA,right atrium; LA,left
atrium; AO, aorta; MPA,main pulmonary artery.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.Findings mayinclude a promi-
tion of the main pulmonary artery (Figs. 7-12; 24-7),
nent jugular pulse; left basilar ejection murmur over
variable dilation of theproximal left pulmonary artery,
thepulmonicvalvethatradiates to theleft craniodorsal
and pulmonary underperfusion.36-40.56
cardiacbase;andpalpablerightventricular hypertro-
phy (right-sided heave). It is not uncommon to auscul-
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION.Findingsusuallyincludea
tate a holosystolic murmur of tricuspid regurgitation
systolic pressure gradient across the obstruction,ele-
over the right hemithorax.
vated right ventricular end-diastolic pressure,and an
elevatedright atrialawave.Generalanesthesia can
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY.Right ventricular enlarge-
markedly depress the pressure gradient compared with
ment is often evident (Fig. 24-6; see also Figure 6-15).
the unanesthetized state.
These ECG criteria are described in chapter 6.
Angiocardiographyis especiallyuseful for surgical
cases, and usually delineates the valvular obstruction
RADIOGRAPHY.Right-sidedcardiomegalyis usually
and secondary changes in theventricle and pulmonary
present (Fig. 24-7; see also Figures 7-10, 7-12). Addi-
artery.Angiocardiographic abnormalities include nar-
tionalradiographicfeatures include poststenotic dila-
rowedvalve orifice; dysplastic pulmonary valves;right
S1
S2
dilatedPA
FIGURE24-5
Pathophysiology and genesis of clinical findings in
pulmonic stenosis (see text for details）.(From Bonagura
RA
RAF
JD(ed).Cardiology,NewYork,Churchill Livingstone,
PULMONIC
1987,with permission.)
2TR
STENOSIS
S1
S2
RVSF
RVH
septalflattening
482
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
FIGURE24-6
Electrocardiogram from a female
basset houndwithpulmonic
stenosis.Right ventricular
hypertrophyis evident,withaxis
deviation to the right (strongly
positiveleadsIII andaVR) and
prominentSwaves,indicating
terminal craniodextradactivity,
inleads I,II,and aVF.
ventricularhypertrophy;secondarydynamicmuscular
cent filling defect,narrowing of the dye column with
obstruction of the right ventricular infundibulum; en-
acentralorasymmetricjetofcontrastobservedwithin
largementof therightcoronaryartery;andpostste-
a narrowedvalve orifice,or systolicvalvedoming(indi-
notic dilation of the pulmonary artery. Other coronary
cating commissure fusion)(Fig. 24-8;see also Fig.
anomaliesmaybe evident and influence the course of
9-12E).Rarely,subvalvular,infundibular, or supraval-
therapy as described later (see Figure 24-3).Angio-
vular stenoses occur.
graphic features of pulmonic valve dysplasia consist of
any combination of the following:narrowing at the
ECHOcARDIOGRAPHY.Typical features includehyper-
immediate base of thevalve sinuses,asymmetricvalve
trophy of the rightventricle,with increased promi-
sinuses, hypoplasia of the annulus or a valve sinus,
nence of the papillary muscles; secondary muscular
thickening of individual valve leaflets producing a lu-
narrowingoftherightventricularoutflowtractinmost
FIGURE24-7
(A)and (B)Radiographs from a fox terrier with pulmonic stenosis.There is rounding of the right
ventricularborder and dilation of themain pulmonary artery onbothviews(arrous).Pulmonary
vascularity isreduced in the cranial lunglobe vessels.
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 483
cases; increased echogenicity of the pulmonary valve:
balloon cathetcr dilation, and strctching of the main
 and dilation of the main pulmonary artcry (Fig, 249:
 pulmonary artery in dogs with PDA.
see also Figure 8-20 and Color Plate 3). The pulmo-
Clinical features include variable systolic (due to
u [euou to snsedlodaq sq kem snnuue aaiea A1eu
increased low or concurrent stenosis) and diastolic
size. Discrete subvalvular obstruction is uncommon.
murmurs. Enlargement of the main pulmonary artery
Doppler studies reveal incrcased blood velocity across
andl right ventricle may be cvident on thoracic radiog-
the stenosis and turbulence in the pulmonary artery
raphy. 'The ECG may show right ventricular cnlarge-
(see Figure 8-5A). Quantification of the ouuflow veloc-
ity can be used to estimate the right ventricular to
of that expected from the catheter and slow clearance
 pulmonary artery pressure gradient by the Bernoulli
of contrast from the dilated right ventricle (Fig. 24-
principle (chapter 8). A prominent tricuspid valve α
10). Echocardiography may show diastolic fluttering of
wave may also be recorded.
the tricuspid valve if the regurgitant jets strike the
atrioventricular valve. Doppler studies document PI
GRADING Or LESON SEVERITY This can be based on right
and can detect pulmonic stenosis or pulmonary hyper-
ventricular systolic pressure and the pressure gradi-
tension when present (see Figure 8-4A). The diastolic,
cnt.s Unlike the invasively measured gradient re-
(s/u g7<) Aoa yoy jo aq m ia! Id 1uensai
corded in the anesthetized patient during catheteriza-
whien there is pulmonary hypertension.
tion, gradients estimated from Doppler studies can be
obtained in awake or lighuly sedated animals. Anesthe-
NATURAL HISTORY
sia significantly depresses pressure gradients; there-
'The natural history depends on lesion scverity. Dogs
fore, gradients measured by Doppler are generally
affected by mild and even moderate PS may live nor-
 preferable. As a general rule, Doppler gradients are 40
mally. Animals with moderate-to-sevcre stcnosis may
 to 50 percent higher than the catheterization gradient
 develop complications, including exertional syncope,
mcasured in an individual dog.** The degree of steno-
cardiac arrhythmias, secondary tricuspid regurgitation,
:se idelorh aq Aene popetl aq teo sis
atrial fibrillation, congestive heart failure, and sudden
death. Although systolic pressure gradients are not
· Mild (Doppler gradient up to 49 mmHg),
 always predictive of clinical outcome, we have found
· Moderate (Doppler gradient of 50 to 100 mmHg),
o1
 survival. When an ASD, patent foramen ovale, or VSD
- Severe (Doppler gradient greater than 100 mmIIg).
coexists with PS, the potential for right-to-lef shunting.
Some cardiologists use 80 mmIIg as a delineation for
hypoxcmia, and polycythcmia exists.9
"severe'" stenosis. Other frequent findings at catheter-
ization include elevated right ventricular end-diastolic
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
pressure and a prominent atrial a wave.
Affected dogs should not be bred. If significant ra-
diographic, ECG, and echocardiographic changes are
cvident, or if the patient has clinical signs of disease.
CONCURRENT PULMONIC VALVE
the pressure gradient should be determined by Dop-
INSUFFICIENCY
pler cchocardiography. The pressure gradient for which
 Pulmonic valve insufficiency (Pl) is an umcommon
abnormality that has becn observed in basset hounds,
stated with certainty. Ilowever, the dog with a Doppler
beagles, and other breeds. 70. 71 Abnormal development.
 gradient of greater than 100 mmHg should be consid-
of valve leaflets or dilation of the pulmonary artery
 ered as a surgical or balloon valvuloplasty candidate.
annulus has becn observed in pups with congenital
 If surgery is delayed in a dog with moderate-to-
PI. The affected valve is usually mildly to moderatcly
severe stenosis, the patient should be re-evaluated in
 3 to) 6 months. Over time, progressive infundibular
stenotic as well. This defect must not be confused with
 hypertrophy can produce additional obstruction, and
PDA, in which the murmur may be similar but thie
supporting clectrocardiographic
radiographic.
tricuspid regurgitation may worsen. Moreover, hy-
and
findings are quite different.ao s8.50
 pertrophy and fibrosis can lead to diastolic dysfunction
The combination of mild stenosis and moderate-
that can induce elevated right atrial pressures and
right-sided congestive heart failure (CIIF) (Fig. 24
to-severe valve insufficiency leads to right venticular
dilation, Heart failure can develop in severe PI in-
9D).
duced experimentally in dogs; however, we have ob-
Surgery
served dogs that have lived for more than 5 years with
 A number of surgical procedures have bcen advo-
 dysplasia. Differential considerations for pulmonic in-
cated for the treatment of scvere PS.15, 36, @2.72-7 Valvu-
sufficiency include pulmonary hypertension, surgery,
lotomy, partial valvulectomy, patch-grafting over the
484DISEASESOF THEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
outflow tract, and conduits are most popular. Of criti-
cular hypertrophy,we recommend that a patch-graft
cal concern is thenatureof thesubvalvularmuscular
techniquebeemployedincasesofvalvedysplasiawith
hypertrophy (Fig.24-8).If this is severe,simplevalvu-
significantsubvalvularmuscularhypertrophy.
lotomymay not be adequate torelieve obstruction.
Moreover,valve dilation (Brock or balloon catheter
Balloon Catheter Dilation (Valvuloplasty)
dilation）can be initially successful but subsequently
fail as a result of scarring.Thus,until more data are
This technique is successfulfor some cases ofvalvu-
available concerning postoperative regression of mus-
lar stenosis,especially when the valves are thin and
PA
PA
RV
FIGURE 24-8.See legendon oppositepage
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
485
TABLE 24-3
 Medical Therapy of Congenital Heart Disease
Drug (Generic)
Proprietary Drug
Indications
Usual Dose
Dosing Interval
Digoxin
Lanoxin, Cardoxin
(Congestive heart failure (CHF):
0.005 ng/kg
q 12 h
atrial fbrillation
Furosemide
L asix
CHF of any causte
1-4 mg/kg
q 8-12 h
Hydrochlorothiazide
Allactazide
CHIF; paricularly unresponsive
2-4 mg/kg of combined
q 12-24 h; can
with spironolactone
(25 mg/25 11g)
cdema or ascites
product.
alternate with
furosennide
Enalapril*
Fnacardl, Vasolcr
(CHF due to leff-to-right shunt:
0.25-0.5 mg/kg
q 12-24 h
mitral regurgitation
HIydralazine*
Aprcsoline
CIIF due to leff-to-righ. shunt:
1-2 mg/kg
q 12 h
mitral regurgitation
Inderal
Subaortie stenosis: atrial
0.5-1 mg/kg
y8 h
fibrillatiorl
Atenolol
'Tenormin
Subaortic stenosis: atrial
0.25-1 mg/kg
q 12-24 h
fbrillation
rgsin thic:
setting of fixed lef. ventricular uutflow obstruction.
fused and thc annulus is not hypoplastic (Fig. 24
11),sxs 79st Since most cases of Ps in the dog resemble
it has becn described in the cat; and valvular aortic
 atypical Ps in children, the ultimatc bencfit of valvu-
stenosis per se is quite uncommon.
     s   
Canine subaortic stenosis is probably the most com-
right coronary artery should bc considcred a contrain-
 monly encountered congenital heart defect observed
dication to balloon valvuloplasty and may require
today in many veterinary hospitals, thoughi it usually
placement of a conduit from right ventricle to pulmo-
ranks sccond in frequency surveys. The current inci-
nary artery. Many dogs develop transicnt or pcrsistent
 dence has heen estimatcd by Buchanan to represcnt
right bundle branch block subscquent to balloon cath-
 betwcen 22.1 and 34.6 percent of reported canine
cter dilation (Fig. 241lB).
 congenital hcart disease. In cats, aortic stenosis has
heen recognized only infrequenuly28 14a.2.m.w
Medical Therapy
It is clear that SAS and perhaps valvular aortic stcno-
Whcn CHF or atrial fibrillation devclops, the prog-
sis are propagatcd in brceds and familices. The mode
 of inheritance is not that of a simple Mendelian trans-
nosis is poor. Medical stabilization with digitalis and
 mission. Brceding studics in the Newfoundland estab-
diuretics (Table 24-3), should be accomplished prior
to any surgical or catheter intervention.
The mode of transmission is most. compatible with an
 autosomal dominant trait with modifying genes or a
AORTIC STENOSIS
polygenic. mechanism.
Subvalvular aortic stcnosis (subaortic stenosis, or
LESIONS
 SAS) is one of the most important congcnital malfor-
        
 Data derived from colony studies in the Newfound-
 continucs to frustrate breeders of many largcr breeds.9
land dog*
3 1. 34, 86 s7 are identical to the clinical features
FIGURE 24-8
with pulrnonary valve dysplasia. Righ, Following injection of contrast into the right ventricle. dye is
funneled into a relatively small area in the region of the pulmonary valves (flower arroro) before it fills
the main pulmonary artery (PA). Slight distorion of the pulmonary valve sinuses is evident fupper
αrow), and there is marked thickening at the base of the valve sinuses. Lef, thickening of the
pulmonary valve cusp (oroas) is seen. Following the right ventricular injecuon, contrast funneled in
a rclatively narrow area of the pulmonary valve, surrounded the valve by flling the sinuses, and
opacified the posrstenotic: dilation in the main pulinonary artery (PA). RV. right ventricle.
(B) Pulnonic stenosis in the dog: secondary ruscular obstruction clue to pulmonic valve dysplasia
Lef, Following injection of contrast into the right ventricle, narrowing is cvident just below the
pulmonary valves due to hypertrophy of the ventricular infuncdibulum (white arroar) and tht
supraventricular crest (black arrou). The pulmonary valve is dysplastic and the valve sinuses unequal
in size (amuwheads). Xote that in the later systolic: frame fright), there has becn rarked attenuation of
the subvalvular region as a result of dynaunic muscular obstruction (arrros).
(From Bonagura JD, Darke PGG. Congenital heart discase. In Euinger SJ. Feldman EC (eds).
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 921, with
permission.)
486
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
HIO
HOSP
D:
16W
2.82
R
PS
EN:
FIGURE24-9
Echocardiograms obtained from dogs with pulmonic stenosis.(A) Image obtained from the short-
axisview of the aorta demonstratesa thick(hyperechoic)pulmonary valve (PV).Thevalve was
partiallyfusedand didnotopenfully duringsystole.V,ricuspidvalve;Aright atium;RVright
ventricle;AO,aorta;MPAmain pumonaryarery.(B）Short-axismagerecorded n systole,which
demonstratesmarked right ventricular hypertrophy(RVH is encompassed by the double arrows) and
flattening of theventricularseptum.Thesefindings suggest systemicpressuresin theright
ventricularlumen.RV,right ventricle;LV,left ventricle.
(C) Continuous-waveDoppler echo recording demonstratinghigh-velocity tricuspid regurgitation
from abulldogwith pulmonic stenosistricuspidincompetency,andcongestiveheart failure.The
maximumregurgitantvelocityof5m/seciscompatiblewitharightventricularsystolicpressure of at
least 100mmHg.Right ventricular to right atrial gradient =4×5²,as estimated by themodified
Bernoulliequation [pressure gradient(mmHg）=4Xpeak velocity (m/s)²].(D） Severe diastolic
velocityatrial contribution(Awave,upper arrow)isevident.Thiswaveformwould correspondtoa
giant awave in the jugular pulse orin the atrial pressure tracing.SimultaneousECGisrecorded
above.
observedinother breedswithfixedanatomicSAS.
as followsl8:grade1—themildestform,consisting of
The subvalvular obstructionmay notnecessarilybe
small,whitish,slightlyraisednodulesonthe endocar-
present at birth,but instead develops during the first
dial surface of the ventricular septum immediately be-
3 to 8 weeks of life. This progression has significance
low the aortic valve';grade 2—a“narrow ridge of
relativetotheidentificationofcardiacmurmurs in
whitish,thickened endocardium”extending partially
pups of breeds known to be at risk for SAs. The
about the left ventricular outflow tract; grade 3the
condition is known torecur in children following“suc-
most severe form,“a fibrous band,ridge,or collar
cessful’ operation and the lesion may be progressive in
completelyencirclingtheleftventricularoutflowtract
somedogs.35aIt is notuncommon toidentifyincreased
just below the aortic valve” (Fig. 24-12). This ring is
gradients in rapidly growing giant breed dogs affected
raised abovetheendocardium andextendstoandmay
withSAS.
involvethecranioventralleafletofthemitralvalveand
the base of the aortic valves.Auscultation and cardiac
GROssMORPHOLOGY.Subaortic stenosisinNewfound-
catheterization of dogs with grade 1 lesions failed to
landdogs hasbeen gradedinpostmortem studies
detectthepostmortemlesionreliably,whereasgrade2
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE487
PA
RV
B
FIGURE24-10
Pulmonic insufficiency in a basset hound with congenital pulmonary valve dysplasia (A) and (B).
The contrast injectionin the dilatedmainpulmonary arteryresults inmarked opacification of the
right ventricle.(FromBonagura JD,DarkePGG.Congenital heart disease.InEtingerSJ,Feldman
EC(eds).extbookofVetinary IntrnalMedicine4thedPhiladelphiaWBSaunders1995,
923,with permission.)
lesions oftenwere associatedwith soft cardiacmur-
leftventricular hypertrophy and myocardial fibrosis,
murs and only minimal systolic pressure gradients.The
left atrial hypertrophy, and aortic arch abnormalities.
clinical implication of these findings is clear:although
Itisnotuncommontoobserveconcurrentmitralvalve
genetic coding for SAS may be carried by a dog, clini-
malformations in dogs with SAs.91 Dynamic obstruc-
caldetectionmaybedifficult toimpossibleinmild
tionalsomaybe encountered.92
cases, and genetic counseling may be fraught with
Focalareasofmyocardialinfarctionandfibrosis
error. Associated necropsy findings include concentric
havebeenobserved in conjunction with intramural
100mmHg
100mmHg
50mmHg
50mmHg
30mmHg-
30mmHg
15mmHg
15mmHg
0mmHg
0mmHgB
A
FIGURE24-11
Right ventricular pressure before (A)and after (B)balloon catheter dilation of a stenotic pulmonary
valve.(A)The right ventricular (RV) systolic pressure approaches systemic arterial pressure (A),
indicating severe stenosis.Thereisalsoelevated end-diastolicrightventricular pressure indicating
increased diastolic stiffness orincipient ventricularfailure.(B)Followingballoon catheter dilation,
theright ventricular(RV)systolic pressure markedly decreases relative to the systemic pressure(A).
Right bundle branch block has developed (B)as a consequence of the sudden increase in
intraluminalrightventricular pressure that occurs duringballoon inflation.Alsonote the depressant
effects of anesthesia on the systemic pressures in both tracings.This effect must be considered in
comparing pressure gradients obtained under anesthesia relative to those recorded in awake animals.
488DISEASESOFTHEHEARTAND CIRCULATION
m
B
FIGURE24-12
Pathology of subvalvular aortic stenosis in the dog.(A) Severe congenital subaortic stenosis in a bull
terrier that died of congestive heartfailure.Theopened leftventricleismarkedlyhypertrophied.A
fibroussubaorticringthroughwhichtheleftventricular strokevolumemust passisevidentinthis
dissection.(B）Specimen from a dogwith subaortic stenosis.An extensive subaortic valvular fibrous
ring(arrowheads)extendsfrom the cranioventral mitral leaflet to thebase of theaorticvalve cusps.
There is poststenotic dilation of the ascending aorta (Ao).The left auricle (LA) is indicated.There is
marked left ventricular hypertrophy.(From BonaguraJD,DarkePGG.Congenital heart disease.In
EttingerSJ,Feldman EC(eds).Textbook ofVeterinary Internal Medicine.4thed.PhiladelphiaWB
Saunders1995,p924,with permisson.)
coronary arterialchanges.Two-dimensionalechocardi-
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
ography may sometimes show bright,hyperechoic re-
gions corresponding to severe,focal replacement fi-
Theclinicalpathophysiology of SASin thedog is
brosis(Fig.24-13).Abnormal coronaryflowhas been
summarized inFigure24-15.Owingtoventricular out-
measured,withdiminishedbaselinediastolicflowand
flow obstruction, left ventricular systolic pressure in-
creases, and a pressure gradient is detected across the
These changes havebeen suggested as the cause of the
outflow tract (see Fig.24-1).Obstruction to ejection
exercise-relatedST-segmentdeviationandventricular
causes a laterising arterial pulse.Highvelocity and
extrasystolessooftenobservedinseverelyaffected
turbulentflow acrosstheobstruction are associated
dogs with SAS (Fig. 24-14).
with a systolic cardiac murmur and poststenotic dila-
tion of the ascending aorta, aortic arch, and brachyce-
phalictrunk.Leftatrialhypertrophydevelopsasa
HISTOLOGIC FEATUREs. The stenotic ring consists of
consequenceoftheelevatedleftatrialpressureneeded
loosely arranged reticular fibers, mucopolysaccharide
tofill the stiff, hypertrophied left ventricle.In some
ground substance,and elastic fibers.Discrete bundles
cases,a to-and-fro murmur of aortic stenosis/aortic
of collagen and even cartilage are found in advanced
regurgitation is evident (Fig. 24-16). Aortic regurgita-
lesions.18Coronarycirculationin dogs with SAS is
tioncanberelatedtoinvolvementofthevalveleaflets
abnormal.82 s7 Extensive intramural coronary artery
with the fibrous ring, jet lesions leading to thickening
pathology occurs,including intimal proliferation of
of the valveleaflets,dilation of the ascending aorta,or
connective tissue and smooth muscle, and medial de-
bacterialendocarditis.Leftventricular hypertrophy
generation.These changes presumably result second-
and myocardial ischemia areresponsible for changes
ary tohighventricularwall tension.
in the QRS complex and ST-T segment (Fig.24-14).
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE489
CLINICAL sIGNs.Inpups with mild SAS,clinical signs
areminimal.Affected dogs are asymptomatic and
have a soft-to-moderatelyintense ejectionmurmur that
can easilybe confused with a functionalmurmur,
thoughitismostintensecaudoventraltothelocation
of most functional murmurs. Murmurs in dogs with
mild cases of SAS,or in dogs with dynamic outflow
tract obstruction,arebestdetected afterabriefperiod
ofexercise.9Moreseverelyaffecteddogsmayhave
with exertional tiring,rear limb weakness,syncope,
or left-sided congestive heart failure. Sudden death,
without premonitory signs, is common.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.Recognition of severe SAS is
not difficult. The ventricular outflow obstruction gen-
FIGURE24-13
eratesanejectionmurmurofvariableintensity,andin
Myocardial fibrosis in congenital subvalvular aortic stenosis.Short-
some cases there is a soft,diastolicmurmur secondary
axis,two-dimensionalechocardiogram at thelevel of thepapillary
to incompetency of the aortic valve. The murmur is
muscles,demonstrating a focal hyperechoic zone of tissue（arrow)
at the tip of the cranioventral papillary muscle.This change is
most intense in the subaorticregion(about the 4th
usuallycausedby extensiveloss of myocardiumwithreplacement
intercostal space) and tends to radiate down the apex,
by fibrosis.RV,right ventricle;LV, left ventricle.
up the carotid arteries,and even to the calvarium.
Frequently, the systolic murmur is equally loud at the
right cardiac base,presumably from radiation into the
CriticalSAScanlead toleft-sidedcongestiveheart
ascending aorta orfrom truevalvularAs.As previously
failure from myocardial failure,increasedventricular
mentioned,SASprobably develops in the postnatal
stiffness,mitral regurgitation,atrial fibrillation,or a
period; thus, the murmur may become increasingly
combinationofthesefactors.Moreoften,exertional
prominent during the first months of life. We have
syncope or sudden death is reported.Although the
noted anincreasingnumber ofdogswithbothSAS
cause of these is undetermined,likely mechanisms
and mitral regurgitation, but these murmurs can be
includethedevelopmentofmyocardialischemiaand
somewhatsimilarintiming andpointofmaximal in-
malignant ventricular arrhythmias.In addition,severe
tensity and therefore can be difficult to distinguish.
hypotension might result from exercise-induced in-
Other abnormalities can include an arterial pulse that
creases in left ventricular pressure, activation of ven-
is hypokinetic and tardy and a left ventricular apical
tricular mechanoreceptors, and inappropriate brady-
impulsethatisprominentfromventricularhypertro-
cardia or vasodilation.14
phy.
CLINICALFINDINGS
RADIoGRAPHy.Theheartmaybenormal or indicate
left ventricular and left atrial enlargement (Fig. 24-
SIGNALMENT. Congenital SAS is most common in
17).Poststenotic dilation of the aorta may result in
North America among larger breeds,including the
widening of the mediastinum on the ventrodorsal view
Newfoundland,boxer,German shepherd,golden re-
orlossofthecranialwaistofthecardiacsilhouetteon
triever, and bull terrier (see Tables 23-7; 24-1). Other
the lateral view (see Fig.7-14).Pulmonary circulation
large breeds, such as the Rottweiler, Samoyed, and
is normal unless pulmonary edema and venous conges-
Great Dane,also may be overrepresented.
tionarepresent.Whenmoderate-to-severeleft atrial
FIGURE24-14
Ambulatory electrocardiogram
recorded from a dog with
congenital subaortic stenosis
demonstratingST-segment
depression (especially evident in
the upper trace) and ventricular
extrasystoles(characterized by
wide,bizarre QRS-T complexes)
in a dog with aortic stenosis
(simultaneous thoracicleads)
490
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
FIGURE24-15
Pathophysiology and genesis of clinical signs in
congenital subaortic stenosis.See text for details.（From
Bonagura JD (ed).Cardiology.NewYork,Churchill
Livingstone,1987,with permission.)
AS
AR
SUBAORTIC
VH
STENOSIS
enlargement is present,intercurrent mitral regurgita-
24-1).54 In mild cases of SAS,subtle changes in the
tion should be suspected.
velocity spectra are detected.Theseinclude resting
maximal velocities of between1.7 and 2.2 m/sec,asso-
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHy.Echocardiographicimagingdem-
ciated with spectral dispersion, and mild aortic regurgi-
onstratesleftventricularhypertrophy,a subvalvular f-
tation. In advanced cases of SAS, changes in velocity
brous ring that can involve the mitral valve,and post-
spectra are dramatic, and maximal Doppler gradients
stenotic dilation of the aorta (see Figs.8-19;24-12,
of greater than 100 to125 mmHg are considered
24-18, 24-19).53.54.9-96 Doppler studies from the subxi-
severe.Mitral regurgitation may also be detected when
phoid(subcostal)position aregenerallymost accurate
thereisconcurrentmitralvalve dysplasia,involvement
forquantifyingincreasedvelocityflowwithturbulence
of theseptalmitralvalveleafletin thesubaorticridge,
beyond the stenosis (Fig.24-20; see also Figs. 8-4;
or geometric changes in the hypertrophied left ventri-
24-16).53 Doppler studies from the suprasternal notch and
cle.Themitral inflowEwave toAwaveratiomay be
left apexcan alsobeusedtorecord thehigh-velocity
reversed,indicating ventricular diastolic dysfunction,
systolicjet,andthey may detect aorticregurgitation
mostlikelycausedbyleftventricularhypertrophyor
that is often inaudible during clinical examination (see
myocardialischemia.54
also ColorPlate3).Theleftventricular-to-aortic
Csys-
Fixed obstructionintheleftventricularoutflowtract
tolicgradient can be estimated(in mmHg)from the
maybecomplicatedbydynamicobstructionrelatedto
peakleftventricular outflowvelocity(m/s)usingthe
anabnormalmitralvalveandoutflowtractmorphol-
modifiedBernoulliequation,△P=4V²,where△P
ogy (Fig. 24-21). Systolic anterior motion of the mitral
pressure gradient and V = peak velocity (see Figs. 8-4;
valvemayberecognized onM-mode studiesincases of
dynamic outflow tract obstruction. Some dogs, notably
golden retrievers,exhibit isolated,dynamic outflow
tract obstruction.88.92Cardiacmurmurs oroutflowtract
pressure gradientsmay not be evident in affected dogs,
unless provoked by exercise,infusions of catechol-
amines, or prior extrasystoles.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY.TheECGis often normal or
mayindicateleftventricularhypertrophyinadvanced
cases.4,88.97 Either left axis deviation or increased R-
waveamplitude inleadIIwithanormalfrontalaxis
can be observed.Widening of the QRSis not uncom-
TFLOV
mon. ST-T segment depression (Fig. 24-14) is com-
1056
patiblewithmyocardialischemia orleftventricular
hypertrophy. Ischemia should be strongly suspected
FIGURE24-16
when exerciseprecipitates even greater ST-Tchange
Continuous-waveDoppler echorecordingfrom a dogwith severe
or ventricular arrhythmias.Holter (24hour ECG)
congenital subvalvular aortic stenosis and aortic regurgitation.
monitor studiesoftendemonstrateexercise-induced
Because a subcostal positionwasused,the systolicsignalisnegative
ischemia or ventricular extrasystoles (Fig. 24-14).
and the diastolic,regurgitant signal ispositive (AR).Calibration
dots are5m/sec;1 second.Estimated peak pressure gradient
These changes are often,but not always,related to the
exceeds 160 mmHg.
severityofdisease.
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE
491
FIGURE24-17
Radiographs obtained from two dogs with clinically significant congenital aortic stenosis.(A)
and left atrial enlargement, as well as dilation of the ascending aorta and aortic arch, are evident.
secondarymitralregurgitation,andlef-sidedcongestiveheartfailure.Wideningof thecranioventral
usuallystmsfromentriculardiastolicrsystolicfailuremitralregurgitationmitralstnosis,
development of congestive heart failure.
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION.Findings include a systolic
representative because it can be recorded in the un-
pressure gradient across the obstruction and, gener-
anesthetized state.This is the method we use to assess
ally,anelevationofventriculardiastolicpressure(Fig.
severityofafixedobstruction.MaximalDopplergradi-
24-21;see alsoFigs.24-1,24-20).The pressure gradi-
ents of greater than 100 to125mmHg are consid-
ent in an individual dog is depressed by general anes-
ered severe.
Theleftventriculogram outlines arelativelysmall
sured in the unanesthetized state.Whereas Doppler
ventricularcavityand illustratesthesubvalvularob-
andcatheterizationgradientsare similar whenre-
struction,poststenotic dilation,andotherintercurrent
corded in the anesthetized dog (Fig.24-20),the Dop-
problems likemitral regurgitation(Fig.24-22;see also
pler measured gradient will be greatest and most
Fig. 9-12D). The obstructive lesion is most evident in
FIGURE24-18
M-modeechorecording at theventricularlevel ofa
dogwith congenital subaortic stenosis.Hypertrophy
ΛI
of theventricularseptum (IVS)and left ventricular
wall(LVW),with systolic anteriormotion of the mitral
valve (arrow)are evident.The latter finding is
compatible with a dynamic component of obstruction
(see text for details).
492
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
Echocardiography (with Doppler) or cardiac cathe-
terizationisusuallyrequiredtoconfirmtheseverityof
the condition.An ECG,Holter monitor,and chest
radiograph should be obtained from dogs with severe
SAS. Dogs with minimal ventricular hypertrophy, mild
ventricular outflow obstruction,and a maximal Dop-
plerpressuregradientoflessthan75mmHgarelikely
tobe relatively normal pets.Dogs with Doppler gradi-
ents exceeding100 to125mmHg areproneto develop
complications or sudden death.Bacterialendocardi-
tis is a risk to dogs with even mild-to-moderate gradi-
ents.
FIGURE24-19
AORTICREGURGITATION
Two-dimensional echocardiogram of adogwith congenital
subaortic stenosis demonstrates a discrete subvalvular ridge(arrow)
Aortic regurgitation (AR) is being recognized with
and poststenotic dilation of the aorta (AO). LA, left atrium; LV, left
increasingfrequency asacomplication orconcurrent
ventricle.
problemofsubvalvularorvalvularaorticstenosis,as
well as other defectssuch asventricular septal defects
theventralaspectoftheoutflowtractviewedonthe
(discussed later).43.9 Isolated congenital AR is rare.
lateralprojection.A supravalvular aorticinjection will
Aorticregurgitationmayalsodevelop asa complica-
rule out aortic insufficiency.The left coronary artery
tionofballooncatheter dilationorbacterialendocar-
anditsmajor extramuralbranches are oftennoted to
ditis,and with tetralogy of Fallot.
be prominent, likely in response to increased oxygen
A diastolic murmur,heard best over thelefthemi-
demand.
thorax, is typical of moderate-to-severe AR. The diag-
nosisis supported bypalpation of ahyperkinetic arte-
rial pulse. More often,AR is inaudible but can be
NATURALHISTORY
documented by angiocardiography or Doppler echo-
Severe SASis a discouraging condition,sincemost
cardiography (Fig. 24-16). Fine diastolic flutter of the
dogseither die suddenly or develop congestiveheart
mitralvalve maybeevident on M-modeechore-
failure.Clinical examination in an asymptomatic dog
cordings astheregurgitant jetofaorticinsufficiency
cannotreliablypredicttheseverityofthestenosis,
strikes the cranioventral mitral valve leaflet (see Fig.
though a long, loud, late-peaking ejection murmur
8-12D).
and attenuated pulses suggest significant SAs. Mitral
regurgitation, mitral stenosis, aortic regurgitation, aor-
CLINICALMANAGEMENT
ticvalveendocarditis,and atrialfibrillation cause addi-
Dogswithmild-to-moderate SAS,as determined by
mortality. Medical therapy of CHF,endocarditis,or
detailedinvestigation,aretreatednormallybut should
atrial fibrillation may be beneficial in some dogs. Con-
not beused for breeding.Prophylaxis for bacterial
gestive heart failure is particularly likely in dogs with
endocarditis is prudent in appropriate circumstances.
intercurrentmitralvalvemalformationorsevereaortic
Dogs with moderate-to-severe SAS should have re-
regurgitation.
stricted exercise.
ECG
FIGURE24-20
Catheterization andDoppler demonstration of
pressure gradients in subvalvular aortic stenosis (also
seeFigure 24-1).Simultaneous pressure and
continuous-waveDoppler studies obtained from a dog
before and after catheter balloon dilation of the
subvalvular ridge.Note the reduction in the pressure
gradient and intercurrent decrease inpeak aortic
flow velocityfollowing theintervention.
Pre-balloon
Post-balloon
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE
493
FIGURE24-21
合
寻
Simultaneous left ventricular (LV) and aortic (Ao)
200
pressure tracings from two dogs with dynamic(A)
LV
andfixed(B)LVoutflow tractobstructions.With
dynamic obstruction (A),the LV and Ao pressure
traces diverge later in systole, and the maximal
gradient occurs during thedescent of the aortic
pressure tracing.In contrast,with fixed obstruction
(B), theLV and Ao pressure tracings diverge early,
and themaximal gradient occurs during theblunted
100
upstroke of the aortic pressure tracing.In both dogs,
the pressure gradient increases (solid arrows) following
a premature contraction (open arrous).However,this
phenomenon is more pronounced in the dogwith
dynamic obstruction.(Courtesy of Dr.David Sisson,
University of Illinois.)
0mmHg
A
B
B
FIGURE24-22
Followinginjectionof contrast into theleftventricle,a subvalvular obstruction(white arrow）isevident
beneath the aortic valve.A large ductus arteriosus (black arrow) is evident and results in shunting of
dyefrom the descending aorta into the main pulmonary artery.An esophageal stethoscope is noted
in the dorsal thorax.(B)The canine study reveals ahypertrophied left ventricle with indentation of
the papilarymuscles into thelumen,a triangularsubvalvularobstruction,and poststenoticdilatation
of the ascending aorta andbrachiocephalic trunk.Thereis also mitralregurgitation that outlines a
dilated left atrium.(From Bonagura JD,Darke PGG.Congenital heart disease.In Ettinger SJ,
Feldman EC(eds).Textbookof Veterinary Internal Medicine.4th ed.Philadelphia,WBSaunders,
1995, p 904,with permission.)
494DISEASESOF THEHEARTAND CIRCULATION
Surgery
noted onapostexercise orHolterECG.Beta-adrener
gicblockadecandecreasemaximalexerciseheartrate,
Surgeryhas been employed to dilate,resect,or by
reduce STsegment deviation,and decrease the overall
pass the obstruction.However,such surgery has thus
far benormed nfrequntly131b
frequency ofventricular extrasystoles,aswell as de-
crease myocardial oxygen demand.However, the over-
all value of beta-blockade or calcium channel antago-
BalloonCatheterDilation(Valvuloplasty)
nists on clinical signs orlongevityisunproved.
Should CHF develop,medical therapy with digoxin,
Balloon catheter dilationof thesubaorticarea has
furosemide,dietary sodium restriction, and nitrates is
been used to reduce the severity of obstruction (Fig.
initiated.Lowdosesof angiotensinconvertingenzyme
24-23).1o4 In our experience in using this technique,
inhibitorsmaybeprescribed,butany arterialvasodila-
an approximate50percent decrease in the gradient at
tor drug must be used with great caution in the setting
the time of the procedure is typical (Figs.24-20B,
offixedoutflowtractobstruction(chapter12).
24-24);however,in some dogs,this benefit attenuates
over time.Nevertheless,this procedure merits consid
eration andfurtherstudybecauseitcanbedonewith
COARCTATIONOFTHEAORTA
verylowmortality andmorbidity.
Anomaliesoftheaortathatresultinleftventricular
Medical Therapy
outflow obstruction,in contrast to the situation in
children,are rare in dogs and cats.Coarctation of the
Empiricmedical therapyhasbeen usedin dogswith
aortaischaracterizedbynarrowingofthe aortadistal
SAS (see Table 24-3).We prescribe beta-adrenergic
to the subclavian artery,usually adjacent to the ductus
blocking drugs, such as propranolol or atenolol, to
arteriosus.105 One reported casel06 showed systolic and
dogs with ahistory of syncope (without CHF);with
diastolicmurmursandleftventricularfailure.Clinical
gradients of greater than 125mmHg; or with signifi-
featuresofcoarctationinchildrenarewelldescribed
cant ST-T changes orfrequent ventricular extrasystoles
and in many ways are similar to this case.14
A
B
FIGURE24-23
Catheter balloon dilation of a congenital subvalvular stenosis in a dog.A balloon-dilation catheter
has been placed overa guidewire and centeredwithin the left ventricular outflow tract.(The other
catheteris positioned in the right side of theheart and proximal pulmonary artery.)(A)Partial
inflation of theballoon demonstrates the“waist’of the stenotic ring.(B)Full inflation is evident.
This interventionmaypartially relieve the obstructionby tearingportions of the subvalvular ridge.
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE
495
Maximalinstantaneouspressuregradients
PREVALENcE.Defects in atrial septaI and II or malde-
PreandpostBD
velopment of the endocardial cushions causes paten-
200
cies of the atrial4 30, 33 59, 109-116or atrioventricular48 117
septum.In the cat this is relatively common,compris-
160
ing about9%of congenitalheartdefects.In thedog
it is encountered sporadically, 3 3, 34a with a frequency
120
of 0.7 percent in a national data base.A precise genetic
basisofdiseasehasnotbeendeterminedforeither
80
species.
40-
LESIONS
[n=18]
GROsS MORPHOLoGY.An atrial septal defect (ASD)
0
can beclassified accordingtolocationof themalfor-
PreBD
2Weeks
6Weeks
6Months
mation.14 Defects of the septum located within the
Time
fossaovaliscaudaltotheintervenoustubercleare
FIGURE24-24
called an ostiurn (or septum) secundum defect (see Figure
8-2).1o9 Patency of the lower atrial septum represents
Resultsof balloon catheter dilation of subaortic stenosis on the
maximal,instantaneous pressuregradientsmeasured by Doppler
an ostium primum defect(Fig.24-25;see also ColorPlate
echocardiography in18consecutive canine cases over a 6-month
6).The rare sinus venosus defect is found dorsocranial
follow-up.Average pressure gradient (+/-SD) for the group is
to the fossa ovalel12 (Figs. 24-25, 24-26; see also Figs.
shown.
1-3;8-3and ColorPlate 5).Patent foramen ovale is
nota trueAsDinasmuch as thesepta areanatomically
Tubularhypoplasiaoftheascendingaortalo7andaortic
formed;however,if the septa do not seal,the foramen
interruptionlos alsohave been described in dogs.These
lesions represent more extreme examples of obstruc-
Thus,the principal significance of patent foramen
tivemalformationof the aorta withventricularoutflow
ovalepertains toright-to-left shunting thatmayde-
obstruction.Definitive diagnosis usuallyrequires angi-
velop in animals with elevated right atrial pressures.
ography, though magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
The ostium primum ASD is often very large, and
thisdefectcancontribute toa morecomplex and
and CT scanning are effective methods for evaluating
variableatrioventricularseptaldefectorendocardialcushion
lesions of the aortic arch.Surgical correction has been
successful in affected dogs.
defect,sonamedbecausetheendocardial cushionsnor-
mally partition the fetal atrioventricular canal(Color
LESIONSCAUSINGSYSTEMIC
TO-PULMONARYSHUNTING
ATRIALSEPTALDEFECTS
DEVELOPMENTALANATOMY
Duringcardiacdevelopment,the atria andventricles
arejoinedasa commonchamber.Thecommon atrio-
ventricular canal is partitioned by growth of cardiac
septa,resulting in the four-chambered heart (chapter
1).The atria are partitioned by septum I (primum)
andseptumII(secundum);thelatterdevelops to the
right of septum I (see Fig.1-3). The foramen ovale,
the slitlike passageway for blood that persists between
these septa, permits right-to-left atrial shunting in the
fetus,but closesfunctionally and anatomicallyinthe
FIGURE24-25
neonate onceleft atrial pressure increases.Eventually,
the lower atrial septum is connected to the upper
Gross pathologic specimen containing two atrial septal defects in a
cat.The right atrial freewall has been removed to demonstrate a
ventricular septum by growth and differentiation of
secundum (upper) defect caudal to the intervenous tubercle and a
the endocardial cushions.
larger ostium primum defectwithin theventral atrial septum.
496DISEASESOFTHEHEARTAND CIRCULATION
FIGURE24-26
Atrial septal defects:echocardiographic anatomy.(A)Patent
foramen ovale(arrowheads) ina dogwith tricuspidvalve
malformation.The component portions of the atrial septum
are present but have notfused because of the elevated right
atrial pressures.Shunting in this case was fromright atrium
(RA)to left atrium (LA).The right ventricle (RV)and the left
ventricle (LV)are indicated.(B) Ostium primum atrial septal
defect(right panel) and tricuspid valve (TV)malformationin a
Doberman pinscher.The atrial septal defect is located in the
lower portion of the atrial septum andispointed out by a
horizontal arrow.Bidirectional shuntingwas present in this
case.V,eftventricle;RA,rightventricle;RV,rightventricle
（arrowintheRVpoints tothemalformed tricuspidvalve).
The left panel is a black and white reproduction of a color
Doppler echocardiogram that demonstrates a broad tricuspid
regurgitation jet from the same image as the right panel.
TRICUS
SPLASIA
Plate 6).Complete endocardial cushion defects in-
alignmentof theatrial andventricularseptamayoccur
clude (1) a primum ASD,(2) a ventricular septal de-
suchthattheannulusofoneatrioventricularvalve
fect component,and (3)anomalous atrioventricular
straddles both ventricles.118
valves.18The latter often include a common septal
leaflet that serves both ventricles.13 These severe mal-
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
formations are alsocalled atrioventricular septal defects,
commonatrioventricularcanal,andcanaldefects,sincethe
The pathophysiology of isolated secundum ASD is
primitive atrioventricular canalneverpartitions and
summarized inFigure24-27.Shunting depends on
thereiscommunicationbetweenallfourcardiaccham-
(1）the caliber of the orifice(defects small enough
bers (Fig. 24-26).117 The common atrioventricular
tomaintainadifferentialpressurebetweenthetwo
valve may contain clefts or notches,which predispose
connected chambers are termed restrictive),and (2)
to valvular insufficiency.In some cases,lateral mal-
therelativeresistancesin thesystemicandpulmonary
Pulm.V.
ASD
L→Rshunt
onaryflow
FIGURE24-27
vC
Pathophysiology andgenesis of clinical findings in
+O2 sat.
RA
ATRIALSEPTAL
atrial septal defect (see text for details).(From
DEFECT
Bonagura JD (ed).Cardiology.NewYork, Churchill
+RA,RV
Livingstone,1987,with permission.)
O2sat
S2
S1
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE497
circulations.14Typically,bloodshuntsfromleft-to-right.
earlyclosure of the aorticvalve)causes splittingof the
However, conditions that increase right atrial or ven-
secondheart sound.Sincetherightsideof theheart
tricular pressures will retardleft-to-right shunting and
is volume overloaded, right ventricular failure may
may lead to reversed (right-to-left) shunting. This can
developin advancedcases.Complete endocardial
developwithseverepulmonicstenosis,9tricuspidatre
cushiondefectswithmitralregurgitationmayleadto
sia,tricuspid valve dysplasia (Fig.24-26),orpulmonary
left-sided orbilateral congestiveheart failure.The
hypertension.
patientwithalargeatrialseptaldefect andleft-to-
Theheartwith a largeASDshould beconsidered to
right shunt may develop high pulmonary vascular resis-
have a single common atrium from which blood flows
tance leading topulmonary hypertension,a condi-
preferentiallyacrosstheatrioventricularpathofleast
tion termed Eisenmenger's physiology (discussed later).
diastolicresistance.Since therightventricular walls
Whether animals withAsD require therelatively long
are thinner and more distensible,more bloodenters
time for development ofpulmonaryhypertension
the right than the left ventricle (Fig. 24-27).The
noted in humans with secundum ASDis unknown.14
resultant volume overload of the right atrium (RA),
right ventricle (RV),pulmonary artery (PA),and pul-
CLINICALFINDINGS
monary veins leads to enlargement of these structures
(Fig. 24-28). The left atrium receives more blood,
SIGNALMENT.The conditionmaybemore common in
but this chamber usually enlarges only slightly as the
cats than in dogs. Breed predispositions for atrial sep-
increasedreturnisshuntedimmediatelyintothe
tal defects indogs34 are indicated inTable24-1.The
lower-pressureright atrium.When significant left atrial
boxerisnotedforprevalenceofsecundumdefects.
enlargement does occur, thepossibility of an endocar-
dial cushion defect with concurrent mitralregurgita-
CLINICAL sIGNs.Animals with small,uncomplicated,
tion should be entertained.
restrictivelesionsare asymptomatic.In advancedcases
Left-to-right shuntingincreases thehemoglobin oxy-
with severelesions,congestiveheartfailuremaybeevi-
gen saturation in the RA, RV, and PA.Although the
dent.
low-velocity shunting of blood across the AsD does not
cause a cardiac murmur, excessive transvalvular flow
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.The typical left-to-right atrial
across the right-sided cardiac valvesmay generatemur-
septaldefectmaybecharacterizedbyasoft-to-moder-
murs ofrelativepulmonicand tricuspid stenosis(Fig.
ate-intensitysystolicmurmur.Thesystolicmurmur of
24-29).Delayed closure of the pulmonic valve (and
relative pulmonic stenosis is easiest to identify. It is
FIGURE24-28
Ventrodorsal and lateral radiographsobtained from adogwith an
endocardialcushionct,mitralregurgitationandsignifcantlft-trig
shunting at the atriallevel.Therightventricleissomewhatrounded,and
thereismarked dilation of themain pulmonary artery(arrow) compatible
with increasedrightventricular andpulmonaryflow.Thelateral radiograph
shows increased pulmonary vascularitywith marked increases in thecaliber
of lobar pulmonary vessels.A dilated pulmonary vein(arrowheads）is
indicated.This dog developed congestive heart failure.(FromBonagura JD,
DarkePGG.Congenital heart disease. In Ettinger SJ,Feldman EC (eds).
TextbookofVeterinaryInternalMedicine.4thed.Philadelphia,WB
Saunders,1995,p 913,with permission.)
498DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
S
FIGURE24-29
Phonocardiogramfrom a dogwith atrial septal
defect,demonstratingasystolicejectionmurmur
(m)and splitting of thesecond heart sound into
aortic and pulmonic components.(Recording
LAL
courtesy of Drs.David Smetzer and Robert L.
Hamlin.)
heard best over thepulmonaryvalve andradiates dor-
identify(l)abnormalblood flow through the defect,
sallyinto thepulmonary artery over theleft,cranial
(2）increased transpulmonic or transtricuspid velocity
cardiac base. When a systolic murmur of mitral regur-
secondary to increased blood flow,or(3)mitralinsuf-
gitationis identifedover theleft apex,an endocardial
ficiency. QuantitativeDoppler studies can be used to
cushiondefectwithcleftmitralleafletshouldbecon-
estimate theshunt ratio(Qp:Qs),although thespectral
sidered.Rarely,adiastolicrumbleofrelative tricuspid
dispersion and turbulencerecordedin themainpul-
stenosismaybeaudibleover therighthemithorax.
monary artery are limitations of this technique.54
Cyanosis isunexpectedunlessthere is stenosis ofa
right-sided heart valve59 or pulmonary hypertension,
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHy.The ECGcan be normal,or
inwhich case the second heart sound should be tym-
it candemonstrateright atrial orrightventricularen-
panic.Differential diagnosisincludesanomalouspulmo-
largement (Fig. 24-30).Arrhythmias or intraventricu-
nary venous return to the right atrium,which leads to
lar conductiondisturbancescan occur.1liRightbundle
functionalcirculatorydisturbancessimilartoan
branch block or a left cranial axis deviation has also
ASD.119
beenobservedwithostiumprimumASDandmore
complexatrioventricularseptaldefects.
RADIoGRAPHy. In the typical ASD,the right atrial and
ventricularvolumeoverloadingandsecondaryright
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION.Thiscan be used to diag-
ventricular hypertrophy should be evident by reviewing
nose the condition,recognize concurrent lesions, and
thethoracicradiograph andechocardiograph(Figs.
estimate the magnitude of shunting. The cardiac cath-
24-26,24-28).The main pulmonary artery may be
eter oftenis advanced across septal defects sincemany
dilated from increased flow or pulmonary hyperten-
are quite large.By measuring oxygen content in the
sion,and the pulmonary vascularity is increased (un-
venae cavae,cardiac chambers,and great vessels,
less thereis elevatedpulmonaryvascularresistance).
shunting can be detected and themagnitude of sys-
The left atrium is normal to slightly enlarged.Promi-
temic-to-pulmonary shunting estimated. Note,how-
nent left atrial enlargement suggests mitral insuf-
ever,thatthe shuntestimationwill be affected by the
ciencyfrom a cleft mitral valve.
variabilityofvenousoxygen saturationfoundinthe
dog (see section on Cardiac Catheterization in this
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.In addition to defining and con-
chapter).If CHF has developed,central venous,right
firming the radiographic changes just described, the
atrial, andright ventricular diastolicpressures are in-
septaldefectmaybeimaged as an areaof abnormal
creased.Right ventricular systolicpressure is either
sonolucency (see Figs.8-2,8-3).However, care must
normal orelevatedwhenthereispulmonaryhyperten-
be takennot to overdiagnose atrial septal defects based
sion or a large left-to-right shunt. High flow across the
onthis finding alone,since normally,“echo dropout”
pulmonic valve causes “relative”pulmonic stenosis,
occurs in the areaof thefossa ovale.M-mode studies
identified inmostcasesbyapressuregradient of be-
demonstrateparadoxicventricular septal motion ow-
tween5and20mmHg.
ing toright-sidedvolume overload.Saline contrast
Angiocardiography is inferior to echocardiography
echocardiographymay traverse thedefectwhen there
for diagnosis.An injection of contrast material in the
isbidirectional shunting.Doppler studies areuseful to
right ventricle or pulmonary artery will outline left-to-
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE
499
11I
LOC
FIGURE24-30
Electrocardiogram from a dog with atrial septal defect.ThePwaves are enlarged and widened,
compatiblewith atrial dilatation with a prominent Ta wave （see chapter 6）.An axisdeviation in the
frontalplaneisevident,withdepolarizationoriented craniallyand slightlyto theright(notelead
aVR);also,terminal forces(Swave）areprolonged,compatiblewithrightventricular conduction
delayfrom rightventricular dilatation.SecondaryT-wave changes are also evident.
rightshuntingdefectsduringtheleft-sidedphaseof
congestive heart failure.If CHF occurs,life can be
the study.Following pulmonary venous return, the
prolonged with medical therapy using overall manage-
atrialseptumusuallycanbeseenbetween theleft
ment strategies similar tothosefor animalswithven-
atrium and aorta on the lateral projection.Viewing
tricularseptaldefects.
this area for a jet of contrast or, more commonly, a
spilling-over’of dye across thiswall into theright
atrium,auricle,andvenaecavae,permits shuntidenti
fication.With endocardial cushion defects,a left ven-
VENTRICULARSEPTALDEFECTS
triculogram may outline a VSD, mitral regurgitation,
and possibly left ventricular-to-right atrial shunting.
DEVELOPMENTALANATOMY
NATURALHISTORY
Theventricular septum is formed byfusionof a
number of primordial components (see Fig. 1-3). The
The secundum type ofASDoften iswell tolerated.
fully developed ventricular septum consists of two gen-
Primumdefects or endocardial cushion defects,in our
eral parts. One is a small, dorsal, membranous portion
experience, are more likely to lead to right-sided or
that forms part of thefibrous skeleton of the heart
biventricular congestive heart failure or pulmonary
andislocatedbetweentherightventricularinflow
hypertension.Shouldseverepulmonaryvasculardis-
and outflow tracts;the other is an extensivemuscular
easedevelop,Eisenmenger'sphysiologymay occur(see
septum thatforms the inlet andoutlet tracts of the
later).Atrialfibrillationor otherarrhythmiascancom-
ventricles, consisting of (l) the atrioventricular sep-
plicate these conditions.The overall prognosisfor cats
tum,(2)inlet septum,(3)apicaland cranial (outflow)
with endocardial cushion defects is guarded to poor,
"trabecular” septal segments, and (4) infundibular
asmostcatsdevelop severecardiomegalyanddieof
(outlet) septum (Fig. 24-31).118 Anomalous develop-
500
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
PA
FIGURE24-31
Postmortem examples of ventricular septal defects in cats.Most
ventricularseptal defects connect the subaortic septumwith theright
ventricle adjacent to or just ventral to the tricuspid valve.(A)Theright
ventricle（left）and leftventricle（right）from a catwithaventricular septal
defect.The septal defect (arrow)hasbeen partially covered by the
tricuspidvalve(TV)septal leaflet.The leftventricular aspect of the septal
defect is evident as alarge depression(arrowheads) that has beenmarkedly
diminished in size by the overlying tricuspid valveleaflet.Only a small
holeisleftfor shuntingof blood.This cat lived for anumber ofyears
with this defect.Prominence of theleft ventricular moderator bands is
also noted (lower arrow).Ao,aorta;PA,pulmonary artery;LA,left atrium.
(From Bonagura JD,Darke PGG.Congenital heart disease.In Ettinger SJ,
Feldman EC (eds).Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine.4th ed.
Philadelphia,WBSaunders,1995,p911,with permission.）(B）Large
subaortic,subpulmonicventricularseptaldefectinacatwith
Eisenmenger's physiology.Themain pulmonary artery is dilated from
pulmonary hypertension.Therightventricleismarkedlyhypertrophied to
meet thehigh pulmonary and systemic vascularresistances(see text for
details of this condition).
CONGENITALHEART DISEASE501
neither uniform nor simple.14.18A helpful system of
ular septal defect (VSD).
ten used in echocardiography involves recognizing sep-
taldefectsof therightventricularinfloworoutflow
PREVALENcE. The frequency of isolated VSDs in dogs
tracts. This is based on a short-axis tomogram and a
withcongenital heart diseaseis estimated tobe about
rightparasternallong-axisviewthatincludesthe aorta
7%.5. 33 34 In cats,22 the lesion has been observed in
and the right ventricular inlet. The typical defect in
approximately 15 percent of those with congenital car-
small animals is perimembranous (or paramembra-
diac anomalies.The cause of most VSDs is unknown.
nous)(see Figs.8-17A;24-32).Thus,most VSDs will
Asidefrom its genetic basis in keeshonden withmalfor-
be found adjacent to the septal leaflet of the tricuspid
mations of the infundibular, conotruncal septum9.24. 26
valve orjustbelowthevalve on theinletseptum.The
and the frequent occurrence of VsD in some breeds
defectmaybepartiallyoccluded bythisvalveorby
of dogs (Tables 23-9;24-1),there are no consistent
fibrous connective tissue that develops along the right
data aboutetiopathogenesis ofspontaneousdefectsin
ventricular surface.
dogs or cats.
Defects are of varying size, but are often very large,
and they may involve the infundibular (outlet) septum.
LESIONS
Such defects are also termed “supracristal” (cranio-
dorsal to the supraventricular crest)，“subpulmonic
MostVsDsarelocated dorsally or“high"on the
ventricular septum and usually include a portion of
(below the pulmonic valve), or “subarterial.” A VSD
the membranous septum (Figs. 24-31 to 24-34).9.24-26.
also may involve malalignment of components of the
43. 120-129 In contrast,ventrally or apically positioned
ventricularseptum,a developmental aspect described
defects of the muscular ventricular septum are uncom-
previously(seeAtrial SeptalDefect)and later under
mon in small animals.Defects of the atrioventricular
Tetralogy ofFallot. Infundibular (subarterial) defects
septumwere describedpreviouslywithASD.
and large,perimembranous defects can predispose to
prolapse of theright coronary cusp or the entire aortic
GROssMORPHOLoGy.Ventricular septal defects may
root into the defect (Fig. 24-33).Because such pro-
be classified according to location. The left ventricular
lapse can partially occlude the septal defect,aortic
location ofthetypicalvsDis below the aorticvalve.
Therightventricular location of aVSDvaries andis used
Rarely,defectsmayliein themuscular ventricular
toclassifythe defect,although thenomenclature is
septum (see Fig.8-17B).
IVS
VSD JET
LVOT
64K3
Replay
B
FIGURE24-32
Perimembranous ventricular septal defects (VSD).(A)A left-to-right shunt (arrous) can be seen in
thisblack andwhite reproduction of a colorDoppler echocardiogram.Thejet originates just ventral
tothe aorticroot andis directed eccentrically toward therightventricular apex.LvoT,left
ventricularoutlowtractorta;Afarium;Vintrventricular sum；rightventic；
syst,systole.(B)Left ventricular angiocardiogramfrom another dog demonstrates a small,left-to-
right shunting ventricular septal defect.Note the origin of the jet at the base of the aorta.
502DISEASESOF THEHEARTAND CIRCULATION
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Left-to-right shunting develops as the pulmonary vas-
cular resistance drops following birth.It has been dem-
much of the shunt flow is pumped across the defect
and immediately into the pulmonary artery,with
variablevolumesejectedintotherightventricular
chamber.30.131Thus,the left ventriclnot the right ven-
tricle-doesmostoftheadditionalvolumework.Addi-
tionally,as pulmonary flow increases,there is increased
venousreturn totheleft atrium andleftventricle,and
theleftventricular diastolicpressure canincrease.Left
ventricularfailureislikelywhen theleft-to-right shunt
is great (e.g., greater than 2.5:1, pulmonary to systemic
flow). Even in small defects (e.g., Qp:Qs <1.5:1), the
leftheartwill be enlarged since it carriesupto50
percent more blood than normal (Fig. 24-35).
FIGURE24-34
Thedegreeofrightventricularhypertrophy and the
Leftventricular angiogramfrom another dogwith prolapse of an
magnitudeofleft-to-rightshuntingdependonavariety
aortic valve into a ventricular septal defect (arrow).A portion of
of factors:size and location of the septal defect,pulmo-
the right ventricle is opacified from left-to-right shunting.
naryvascularresistance,and pulmonicvalvefunction.
Verylarge,unrestrictive defects cause the twoventri-
clestobehave asacommonchamber,so thatventricu-
occur,andleft-sidedvolumeoverloadandCHFare
larpressures equilibrate and substantialrightventricu-
expected consequences. Should pulmonary vascular
lar hypertrophy will be evident.Blood then follows
resistance increase, then left-to-right shunting will be
thepath of least resistance.If thepulmonaryvalve,
diminished and bidirectional shunting may be ob-
pulmonary vascularresistance,andleft-sided heart
served.Intheanimalwith tetralogy ofFallot,theste-
valves are all normal, tremendous shunting is likely to
noticpulmonicvalveoroutflowtract offerssuchgreat
resistance that right-to-left shunting predominates. In-
fundibular right ventricular hypertrophy leading to
subpulmonic stenosis can develop as a complication of
VSDinchildren,andasimilarcomplicationhasbeen
VSD
LGC OFF
suspected in some small animals.
CLINICALFINDINGS
SIGNALMENT.Anumber ofcaninebreeds arepredis-
posed to VSD(see Tables 23-9;24-1).Ventricular
septaldefects areamongthemostcommon cardiac
malformations in the cat.
CLINICAL SIGNs.Animals with small,uncomplicated,
restrictive VSDs are generally asymptomatic. More ad-
vanced or complexlesions may cause signs associated
sar
withtheirpathophysiology.
S5
PHYSICALEXAMINATION.Clinical features ofVSDare
variableandrelatedtothedegreeanddirectionof
shunting.The cardinalsign of the left-to-right
FIGURE 24-33
shunting, perimembranous (subcristal) lesion is a
harsh,holosystolicmurmurheard best along the cra-
Paramembranous ventricular septal defects (VsD)with prolapse of
nial right sternal border.9s.120 A systolic ejection mur-
an aortic valve cusp.Two-dimensional echocardiogramfrom a
springer spaniel demonstrates alargeVsDwith prolapse of an
mur of relative pulmonic stenosis and,infrequently,
aortic cusp(arrow)into the defect.In this case,the aorticroot was
splittingof thesecondheart soundmaybeevident at
alsomalaligned,withtheventricularoutlet septum producing
some“overriding”of the aorta.AO,aorta;PA,pulmonary artery；
the left base.The murmur will be loudest over the left
LV,left ventricle; LA, left atrium.
craniodorsal heartbase when the communication is
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE
503
+Pulmonary
flow
O2sat.
venousreturn
FIGURE24-35
Pathophysiology and genesis of clinical findings in
-Rshunt
ventricular septal defect(see textfor details).(From
Bonagura JD (ed).Cardiology.NewYork,Churchill
Livingstone,1987,with permission.)
VENTRICULAR
SEPTALDEFECT
VSD
S1
S2
subpulmonic(supracristal).When a diastolicmurmur
frontalplaneleadsoftendemonstrate abnormalearly
of aorticregurgitationis present,prolapse of an aortic
ventricularseptal activation,characterizedbyaQwave
cusp should be suspected (Figs.24-33,24-34).Fea-
thatiswide or containshigh-frequencynotching;this
tures of the atrioventricular septal defect were pre-
can be a subtle but helpful abnormality (Fig.24-37).
viously discussed(see Atrial Septal Defect)
Thepresence of a right axis deviation withVsDoften
indicates alargedefectwith equilibration ofventricu-
RADIOGRAPHy. Thoracic radiographs are variable with
larpressures,concurrent pulmonic stenosis,or pulmo-
VSD,buttheyusuallydemonstratepulmonaryovercir-
naryhypertension.
culation,left atrial and ventricular dilation,and vari-
able degrees of right ventricular enlargement (Fig.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHy.In most cases echocardiography
successfully delineates the defect (see Figs.8-17;24
ies often are dilated.If the shunt isleft toright,then
32A).Both standardized and angled views should be
peripheralpulmonaryvascularityisincreased.With
evaluatedtorecordtheseptaldefectdiametermaxi-
cases ofVSD and high-resistancepulmonaryhyperten-
mally and identify the rightventricular entrylocation.
sion, the main and proximal lobar vessels are often
Dimensional increases typical of volume overloading of
distended,but the peripheral vascular markings are
the left atrium and left ventricle are common findings.
scant.
Occasionally,the RV wall is hypertrophied,even in
the setting of a relatively restrictiveVSDwith normal
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY.Findings arealsovariablebut
pulmonary artery pressures.Doppler echo studies can
mayindicate left atrialenlargement,leftventricular
identify the high-velocity jet of a restrictive VSD (Fig.
dilation,and/orrightventricular hypertrophy.The
24-38). Color-coded Doppler or saline contrast studies
FIGURE 24-36
Lateral radiographfrom anIrish setter with a left-to-
right shunting ventricular septal defect (VSD).There
is left ventricular and left atrial enlargement and
prominent pulmonary vascularity.Theradiographic
features ofVsDare quitevariable,influenced by size
and locationof the defect and thepulmonary artery
pressure.Accordingly，different degrees of left-sided,
right ventricular,and pulmonary artery enlargement
can be observed.
504DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
FIGURE24-37
Electrocardiogramfrom a dogwitha ventricular septal defect.Anintraventricularconduction
disturbance,characterizedbyabnormallywide,deep,andnotchedQwavesintheleftandcaudal
leads, is not uncommon in this condition.
(see Figs.8-2,8-3,and Color Plates 8 and 9) can be
systolic pressure less than 45 mmHg;(4) significant
utilized to demonstrate shunting. The pressure drop
aorticregurgitation not evident.
acrossthedefectcanbeestimatedfrom thepeakshunt
velocity using theBernoulli formula,P=4V².Pro-
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION.Cardiaccatheterization
vided there is no aortic stenosis,the right ventricular
and angiocardiographyincasesofVsDdocument the
systolicpressurecanbeestimatednoninvasively asfol-
anatomiclesions andestimatethedegreeofshunting.
lows:measure the systolic arterialpressure using an
An oxygen step-up is recorded in the right ventricle.
oscillometricorDopplerflowdevice;calculatethe
Leftventricular diastolicpressures are elevatedwith
pressure drop across theVSD;and subtract thepres-
ventricularfailure or severediastolicoverload.A sys-
sure dropfrom the systolic arterial pressure.54Echocar-
tolicpressure gradient acrossthepulmonicvalve of 5
diographic data are useful in formulating a prognosis
to20mmHg,indicating relative pulmonic stenosis,
for theisolated defect.Thefollowingfindings are gen-
is typical with left-to-right shunting VSD.Pulmonary
erallyfavorablefor longevity:(1) maximal defect diam-
hypertensionandelevatedrightventricular systolic
eterfromorthogonalplanesusinghigh-quality2-D
pressure aredetectedin some cases.Sincepulmonary
echocardiography less than 40 percent that of the
hypertension can be caused by pulmonary vascular
aorta;(2)maximalvelocity of the left-to-right shunt
disease (Eisenmenger'sreaction),14 high Qp:Qs,left-
greater than 4.5 m/s; (3) estimated right ventricular
sidedCHF,oracombination of thesefactors,attention
mm
579
FIGURE24-38
Continuous-wave Doppler echocardiographic
recording obtainedfrom a dogwitha left-to-right
shuntingventricular septal defect.The shuntflowis
toward the transducer,producing a positive,high-
velocity signal.Slightlydenservelocityspectralocated
closerto thebaseline are causedbyredbloodcells
flowing toward the defect.The highest velocities
developwithin and immediately distal to the defect.
In thiscase,thepeakvelocity approximates5m/sec
(estimated gradient,approximately 100mmHg),
133
indicatingmaintenance of theleft-to-rightventricular
pressure gradient and a"restrictive”lesion.
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE  505
must he directed to shun1 estimation by oximetry,
have survived through the vaccination serics without
calculation of pulmonary  vascular--to-systemic resis-
clinical signs usually tolerate the defect and do not
tance ratio, and measurement of pulmoary capillary
require therapy.
wedge pressure (see carlier; also chapter 9).
‘The angiocardiogram (Figs. 24-32B, 2434: sec also
Fig. 9-12B) may outline the defect as well as anatomic
Surgery
lesions or cnlargements of the veintricles and great
Definitive treatment of synptomatic or severe lesions
vessels. Aortic regurgitation may be observed following
requires surgery using cardiopulmonary bypass.122. 134
a supravalvular aortic injection. w Associated defects
Pulmonary artery banding can he used 1o create supra-
suchh as subaortic stenosis, rmitral valve dysplasia, pul-
    s d n
monic stenosis, and patent ductus arteriosus may occa-
tude of leff-to-right shunting.12s. 13s This procedure is
sionally he ohserved.
recommended only (1) when signs of leftsided conges-
Catheterization and angiographic findings favoring
tive heart failure occur, or (2) with documented mod-
a good prognosis for life include: (1) Qp:Qs ratio less
thai1 1:5; (2) normal pulmonary capillary wedge a11d
flow and with a calculated pulmonary-to-systemic resis-
lefft ventricular end-diastolic pressures; (3) normal or
tance ratio of 0:6 or less. Anemia should be avoided,
minimally clevated pulmonary artery pressures; (4)
since a low hematocrit leads to decreased pulmonary
normal-to-minirnally elevated pulmonary vascular resis-
vascular resistance and increased shunting.136
tallce ratio; (5) absence of substantial aortic regurgita-
tjon; and (6) absence of concirrent. malformations.
Medical Therapy
NATURAL HISTORY
When left-sided CHF occurs. digoxin and furose-
 Potential outcomes of a ventricular septal defect in-
mide are indicated (see Table 24-3). Arterial vasodila-
clude
tors such as enalapril and hydralazine may be benefi-
• 'Tolerance of the lesion by the patient;
cial since they dccrcase systeimic resistaiice and also
· Development of CIIF:
decrease lef-to-right shunting.ts7 The prognosis for
· Partial or comiplete closure of a VsDu3 by
Eisenmenger's syndrome is very poor as discussed
adherence of the septal tricuspid leaflet, right
later.
ventricular hypertrophy, aortic valve prolapse, or
txuberant fibrous connective tissue that forms al
ventricular septal aneurysm;
PATENT DUGTUS ARTERIOSUS
· Progressive aortic regurgitation due to valve
prolapse;
- Development of progressive subpulmonic and
DEVELOPMENTAL ANATOMY
imfuudibular outlow obstructio11;
The ductus arteriosus is derived from the left sixth
· Devclopmient of pulmonary vascular discase a11d
aortic arch. It shunts blood from the pulmonary artery
pulmonary hypertension1s; and
to the descending aorta, an action that. diverts flow
· Reversal of the shunt with development of arterial
from the collapscd fetal lung. Following parurition,
hypoxemia and cyaosis. *0. 77
the increase in oxygen tension leads to inhibition
If heart failure is to occur, it is most likely to develop
of local prostaglandins, causing functional closure of
al the time resistance falls; therefore, most pups will
the ductus, followed by anatomic obliteration during
develop CHF hefore 8 weeks of age. The reality is that
the cnsuing weeks of life. Initial closure, probably ac-
such pups usually die before they are cxamined by a
complished by confraction of smooth muscle within
veterinarian, and those animals that survive to 4
the ductus,1s decreases ductal flow dramatically within
morths are probably a biased population from which
the first 12 to 14 hours of lifc. Although the ductus
to judge the true prognosis of these lesions. It is more
may be probe-patent in pups less than 4 days of age, it
difficult. to predict the survival of an older animal
generally closes by 7 or 8 days postwhelping, with his-
without additioal studies. Detailed Doppler cchocar-
tologic studices suggesting even earlier closure,28 30.14
diographic studies and/or catheterization data, as de
scribed earlier, permit. more acurate prognostication.
PREVALENCE. This disorder has been extensively de-
The grcat majority of dogs that live to 6 months of age
withonl clinical sigus will survive for many years.
of the ductus is the most comimon defect in most
surveys of canine congenital cardiovascular disease,*
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
3. 34 ranging in prevalence from about 25 to 32 percent.
Numerous methods are available to manage atrial
of reported 1malformations (sce also Table 23-6). Pa-
and ventricular septal defccts. Most. smal aiimals that
tent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is far less common in
506
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
cats,with a reportedfrequency of about11percent of
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
cases with congenital heart disease.
Thepathophysiology ofPDA is summarized inFig-
ure 24-40,115 and modes of shunting are illustrated in
Figure24-41.Owingto thehigher aortic thanpulmo-
LESIONS
nary blood pressure, blood shunts continuously into
the main pulmonary artery. This results in a continu-
GROss MORPHOLOGY.Failure of ductal closure(Fig.
ous cardiacmurmur,increasedpulmonary flow,and
24-39) probably results from histologic differences
increasedvenousreturntotheleftatriumandleft
within thewall of theductus.Whereas theductalwall
ventricle.Volumeoverloadingoftheleftsideofthe
contains a loose branching pattern of circumferential
heart causes atrial dilatation,ventricular dilatation,
smooth muscle in normal pups,with PDA the wall
and hypertrophy, and increases left ventricular dia-
morecloselyresembles thatoftheelasticaorta.The
stolicpressure.If theluminal defect is large and the
increasing genetic liability to PDA represents “exten-
pulmonaryvascular resistancerelativelynormal,left
sionofthenoncontractilewallstructureoftheaorta
ventricularfailurewithpulmonaryedemadevelops
to an increasing segment of the ductus arteriosus, pro-
fromvolume overload.Theleftventricularstrokevol-
gressively impairing its capacity to undergophysiologic
ume increases as a result of increased filling contribut-
closure.i59The simplestform of thismalformation is
ing to an increased aortic systolic pressure.Aortic dia-
the ductus diverticulum,a blind,funnel-shaped out-
stolic pressure is low owing torunoff of blood through
pouching of theventral aspect of the descending aorta.
the ductus.This causes a hyperkinetic,or water-ham-
Although this lesion can be recognized only by angiog-
mer, arterial pulse.Increased volume flowin the aorta
raphy or at necropsy,it represents the forme fruste of
and pulmonary artery,combined with turbulence
PDA and indicates that the dog possesses genes for
abouttheductus,causesdilationoftheaorta andmain
this defect.23 Increasing genetic liability results in PDA
pulmonary artery.The right ventricleis spared unless
with left-to-right shunting, or the less common,but
there is pulmonary hypertension, in which case ven-
more severe,reversed PDA in which pulmonary hyper-
tricular hypertrophy develops.
tension develops,causing bidirectional or right-to-left
In a small percentage of cases, the lumen of the
flow through the ductus.Patent ductus arteriosus may
PDA is solarge thatpulmonaryvascular pressure and
alsobeidentifiedinanimalswithcomplexformsof
resistance markedly increase.InPatterson’s colony,this
congenital heart disease and in some butnot all cases
type of ductus was the most severe,and reversal of the
of pulmonary atresia,in which,pulmonary flow may
shunt developed within the first months of life.23. 159
be supplied by the ductus or bronchial arteries.30. 31.
This appears to fit the clinical picture in the dog, in
107. 160 The mode of transmission of PDA is polygenic,1.
whichdocumentationofshuntreversalafter6months
23. 159 and the condition is observed in many breeds
of age is lacking.154, 157.161 Dogs and cats with reversed
(see Table 24-1).
PDAexhibithigh pulmonary vascular resistance,high
FIGURE24-39
Persistent patent ductus arteriosus delineated by umbilical tape
sutures.The ductus connects the descendingaorta above with the
pulmonary artery below.
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE507
dilation
pulmonary
flow
FIGURE24-40
PDA
Pathophysiology and genesis of clinical findings in
dilation
patent ductus arteriosus.See text for details.(From
LVDP
Bonagura JD(ed).Cardiology.NewYork,Churchill
S1
S2S1
Livingstone,1987,with permission.)
PATENT DUCTUS
-Rshunt
ARTERIOSUS
(systemic)pressures in therightventricle and pulmo-
apicalimpulseisoftendisplacedcaudoventrallydueto
nary artery, decreased pulmonary flow, a small left
ventricular dilatatior.Mucousmembranesare pink
ventricle, and hypertrophy of the right ventricle. This
unlessthereisseverepulmonaryedemafromleftven-
reversalrepresents a formofEisenmenger'sphysiol-
tricular failure.Noninvasive studies are diagnostic
ogy, which is discussed later.
(Figs.24-42 through 24-44; see also Fig.8-16).
CLINICALFINDINGS
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY.TheECGusuallyindicates
left atrial enlargement, with widening of the P waves
SIGNALMENT.Breeds atgreatestriskfordevelopment
andleftventriculardilatationcharacterizedbyanor-
ofPDAinclude thehuahuacollie,Maltese,dl,
malfrontalaxis andincreasedvoltageQandRwaves
Pomeranian,English springer spaniel,keeshond,bi-
in craniocaudal leads II,III,and aVF and in thelower
chon frise, Cavalier King Charles, and Shetland sheep-
left chest leads such asV and Vs(Fig.24-43).
dog (see Tables 23-6; 24-1).34 Many other breeds,
includinglarger dogs such as the German shepherd,
Newfoundland,and Labrador retriever, are prone to
RADIoGRAPHy.Chestradiographs documentpulmo-
PDA in some regions.Females developed PDA at a
naryovercirculationandleftatrial andleftventricular
rate of 2.49 per 1000 versus 1.45 per 1000 for males.5
enlargement, and they may show dilation of the main
pulmonary artery and descending aorta("ductus
Left-to-Right-Shunting Patent
cat for the left apex to be displaced into the right
DuctusArteriosus
hemithorax.
CLINIcAL SIGNs.Pupsmay beclinically healthy or thin
and may demonstrate signs of lef-sided congestive
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.Theechocardiogram substanti-
heart failure. Clinical signs are unlikely to occur until
atesleft-sidedcardiacenlargementanddilationofthe
thepulmonaryvascular resistance declines.The clini-
aorta and pulmonary artery.Theventricular shorten-
cal features of PDA have been well-described (Fig.
ing fraction is decreased in some dogs, probably due
24-40).
to the severe volume overload imposed on the left
ventricle.The ductus can be imaged (see Figs.8-16;
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.In the usual case,the arterial
24-44) in many but not all cases. Doppler echo studies
pulses are hyperkinetic, a continuous thrill may be
are less ambiguous. Spectral and color-flow Doppler
palpated at the craniodorsal cardiacbase,and a contin-
echocardiography show continuous and abnormal ret-
uousmurmuris audible.The point of maximal inten-
rogradeflow in the pulmonary artery (seeFig.8-16)
sity is over the main pulmonary artery,high on the
and mild increases in aortic velocity (generally <2.5
leftbase,and it radiates cranial to themanubrium
m/s),and they may demonstrate pulmonary and mi-
and to the right base.23, 143,145 146 Frequently, a systolic
tral valve insufficiency.Differential diagnosis includes
murmurisevident over themitral area,andmitral
aortopulmonary windowl62-164 and anomalous systemic-to-
incompetencydoesdevelopwith severeleftventricular
pulmonary artery shunt.165 These are rare conditions,
dilatation.In the cat,the murmur may be heard best
and the aortopulmonarywindow,a communication
morecaudoventrally thanin thedog andthe diastolic
between the ascending aorta and pulmonary artery,
component may be less noticeable,particularly if pul-
usuallyleads to Eisenmenger's physiology.Careful
monaryhypertension ispresent.Theleftventricular
Dopplerimagingcanusuallydistinguisha shunt that
508
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
enters thePAfrom theductusversusonethatenters
noninvasive data support the diagnosisofuncompli-
fromthe ascending aorta.
catedPDA.Catheterization datamayshowelevated
pulmonarycapillarywedge,pulmonaryartery,andleft
CARDIACCATHETERIZATIONANDANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY.
ventricular diastolicpressures.152Pulmonary and right
These tests (Figs. 9-12A, 22-41, 24-22) are not indi-
ventricularpressures arenormaltomildlyelevated in
cated unlessintercurrentmalformationsarestrongly
casesuncomplicatedbyheartfailureorpulmonary
suspected and the Doppler echocardiographic study is
vascular disease. An oxygen step-up is recorded in the
ambiguous.Associated cardiac defects in dogs with
pulmonary artery.When contrast material is injected
PDA are not common, especially in the smaller canine
into the left ventricle,or preferably the descending
breeds,150 and catheterization cannot be justified if
aorta,the ductusis evident,andboth aorta andpulmo-
PA
RV
FIGURE 24-41. Seelegend on opposite page
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE
509
FIGURE24-42
Thoracic radiography in patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).(A) Ventrodorsal and
(B）lateral radiographs from a dog withPDA,demonstrating left ventricular
and leftatrial dilatation andincreased pulmonary density compatiblewith
early left-sided congestive heart failure.Prominent pulmonary vascularity is
evident on the lateral projection.
nary artery are opacified. Mitral regurgitation may be
CLINICAL SIGNs. The symptomatic patient may exhibit
presentif thereis enoughleftventricular dilatation,
shortness of breath,pelvic limb weakness or collapse,
andpulmonicinsufficiencymaybenotedowing to
seizures, and differential cyanosis(cyanosis of the cau-
dilation of the pulmonary annulus.
dalmucousmembraneswithpinkcranialmem-
branes).61Differentialcyanosis isreadilyexplainedby
thelocationof theright-to-left shuntfrom thepulmo-
PatentDuctusArteriosuswithPulmonary
nary artery into the descending aorta (Fig. 2441).
Hypertension ("Reversed PDA")
Perfusion of the kidneys with hypoxemic blood leads
When right-to-left shunting develops as a result of
tosecondarypolycythemia andhyperviscosity,with the
increased pulmonary vascular resistance,a condition
packed cell volume (PCV) often exceeding 65percent.
called “reversed PDA” is observed.23. 154
Metabolic acidosis can develop.
FIGURE24-41
Angiograms demonstrating patent ductus arteriosus (also see Figure 24-22A).(A) Left
defect and patent ductus arteriosus.A pigtail catheterispresent within theleftventricle,and
another catheteris evidentwithin the right atrium.Following injection of contrast into theleft
ventricle,a stream of dye crosses theventricular septal defect(arrowheads),opacifies the
hypertrophied right ventricular outflow tract and main pulmonary artery (P),andfills the distal
pulmonary circulation. Contrast that exits into the aorta (Ao) outlines this vessel aswell as the ductus
arteriosus(white arowhead),which connects the descending aorta with the dilatedmain pulmonary
artery.(B)Right and left ventricular angiograms obtained from a dog with patent ductus arteriosus,
pulmonary hypertension,and bidirectional shunting.The ventriculogram on the left opacifies the
right ventricle (RV),the main pulmonary artery (PA),and the large ductus (arrowhead),which
subsequentlyfills the descending aorta and opacifies thekidney.Note that the right ventricular wall
ismarkedlyhypertrophied,thatthereissecondarymuscularhypertrophyof theinfundibulum,which
narrows the rightventricular outlow tract,and that themain pulmonary artery is dilated.The
genesis ofpolycythemia isobvious.Desaturated bloodperfuses the caudal portion of thebody,
including thekidneys,which results in an increase inplasma erythropoietin.Theventriculogram on
theright shows a smallleftventricle thathasbeen displaced dorsocaudally,prominence of theright
coronary circulation,and some degree ofleft-to-right shunting（arrowhead)into the ductus.Note that
the contrast in the descending and distal aorta hasbeen diluted by the right-to-left shunt.(From
Bonagura JD,DarkePGG.Congenital heart disease.In Ettinger SJ,FeldmanEC(eds).Textbook of
VeterinaryIntrnalMedicine.4thed.Philadelphia,WBSaunders,1995,pp908909,with
permission.)
510
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
FIGURE24-43
Electrocardiogram from a dog with patent ductus arteriosus,recorded at 1/2 standard (5mm = 1
mV;50mm/sec).The frontal axis is normal,but Q-waves are prominent (0.5mV).In lead I, the R
wave amplitudeisincreased（over5mV),indicatingleftventricular enlargement.Pwaves are slightly
widened，compatiblewith left atrial dilatation.Thereis alsofirst-degree atrioventricular block.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.The continuous cardiacmur-
Fig.7-15)andproximal lobar arteries,peripheral hy
mur is no longer present.An ejection sound, a proto-
poperfusion, and a “ductus bump’” of the descending
systolic murmur, and a loud or split second heart
aorta. Radiographic signs are sometimes subtle, and
soundmaybeevidentoverthepulmonaryarteryor
the heart may be more misshapen than enlarged
leftcardiacbase.Rightventricular hypertrophyis al-
(Fig. 24-42).
ways expected and can be palpated over the precor-
dium andconfirmedbyelectrocardiography,radiogra
phy, and echocardiography.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.Theechocardiogramdemon-
strates right ventricular hypertrophy, a dilated pulmo-
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY.The ECG usually shoWs evi-
nary artery, and the ductal communication (see Fig.
dence of right ventricular hypertrophy (chapter 6)
8-16).Contrast echocardiography,with saline injected
in the cephalic vein,will opacify the descending aorta
RAD1oGRAPHY. Thoracic radiographs usually demon-
(best observed by imaging the aorta as it courses dorsal
strate dilatation of the main pulmonary artery(see
to the bladder),but not the left ventricle.
FIGURE24-44
Subcostal two-dimensional echocardiogramfrom a
dogwith patent dugtus arteriosus shows theleft
ventricle (LV),aorta and arch (Ao),descending aorta
(DAO),and termination of the ductus into the
Helio A.DeMorais,DVM.)
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 511
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION. Sevcre pulmo1ary hyper-
nosed in dogs less than 2 years of agc. When this
tension with a corresponding elevation of the right.
condition is diagnosed in older pets, a cardiologist
ventricular systolic pressure is recorded at cardiac cath-
should be consulted and the risks and benefits care-
eterization, though this test is rarely needed to confirm
fully considered. Doppler cchocardiography can be
the diagnosis. Bidirectional shunting is commonly ob-
used to verify the diagnosis or to rule out concurrent
scrved during angiography; however, the importance
defecis and is recomnended, cspecialy in larger
of the right-to-left shunt is einphasized by the thick-
breeds, because intercurrent defects such as subaortic
ening of the right ventricular walls, relatively small size
stenosis seem to be more common, ‘The optimal tine
of the lef atrium and lefl ventricle, and the oxygen
step-down in the descending aorta. The right ventricil-
tion should be done carly, usually hetween 8 and 16
logram usually outlines a very large ductus that ap-
weeks of agc, or sooner if cardiac failure is imminent
pears to continue distall as the descending aorta.
 Or myocardial function is obviously reduced o1l echo-
Some contrast media may flow cranial to the ductus,
cardiographic cxamiation. Surgical techniques and
but 1nost flows caudally. An crrou1cous diaginosis of
results have heen described in detail.11I44 148. 153 166-168
pulmonic stenosis cau be made froin the right ventric-
When congestive heart failure has developed, the pa-
ular angiogram unless the examiner appreciates that
tient is stabilized medically with digoxin and furose-
mide (see Table 243) prior to surgery. Treaunent with
pulmonary hypertension. This can cause the right ve11-
prostaglandin inhibitors,9 often used in prernature in-
tricular outflow tract to demonstratc a dynamic. sys-
fants to cnncourage closure of the PDA, is highly unlikely
tolic muscular obstruction that abates during diastole.
to be successful due to the histologic nature of the
Dilated lobar arteries showing increased distal tortuos-
lesion (which is characterized by an absence of sm1ooth
ity are commonly visualized, and bronchoesophageal
muscle in the ducial wall) and is not advocated.
collateral vessels may be prominent.
Prognosis with surgery is excellent,It3, 4 I6 I is inad-
visable to use the dog for breeding. A surgical nortality
NATURAL. HISTORY
 of greater than 5 to 8 percent should be considered
With left-to-right shunting PDA, approximately 64
excessive in nncomplicated cases. Ductal recanalizatio11
has been reported to be umcommon, occurring in 2
without surgical treatment.l1 Complications of lef-1o-
 percent or less of the cases! 17; however, recent experi-
right PDA include puimonary edema from left ventric-
ular failure, atrial fibrillation from leff. atrial enlarge-
persistennt ductal flow is very common for weeks after
ment, pulmonary hypertension secondary to left ven-
surgery, and perhaps longer. When no PDA murmur
is andible postoperatively, it is doubtful that identifying
tricular failure (
(hut not vascular disease),
anid
development of mitral regurgitation, presumably from
residual flow by Doppler is of clinical significance.
However, when an audible murmur is identified, religa-
left ventricular dilatation.15z Some dogs with PDA sur-
vive to 1mnaturity, aud an occasional dog with PDA sur-
tion or coil embolization should be coisidered. Recan-
vives to more thain 10 years of age. I1 is popular to
alization is particularly likely to develop when there is
extrapolate from humans and predict that pulmonary
infection at the surgical site. Postoperative fever and
hypertension anid shunt reversal may develop in ma-
diffuse pulmonary infiltrates, generally devcloping
ture dogs with PDA. However, we are unaware of a
within 2 wecks of surgery, usually indicate infection at
documented case of shunt reversal that has occurred
the surgical site and hermatogellous pneumonia (Fig.
after a dog has attained 6 months of age. Our clinical
24-45).
TRANSCATHETER OCCLUSION. An altcrnative to surgical
When pulmonary hypertension in the neolnate leads 
correction of the ductus is coil embolization via trans-
to reversed shunting, congestive heart failure is un-
catheler delivery of a Gianturco coil or another special-
ized device or 0ccluder,169 100a. 169t This technique has
likcly to devclop. However, hypoxermia, polycythemia,
been accomplished successfully in a number of dogs
a1d hyperviscosity can incapacitate thie dog, and car-
diac arrhyuhmias, seizures, and sudden death may re-
(Fig. 24-46). Potential complications include pulmo-
sult. Dogs with reversed PDA often live for 2 to 5 years
nary cmbolisrn due to placemient of a coil of insufff-
if they are not stressed and if the PCV is controlled
ciennt dianeler or poor coil placement.
below a value of 65 to 68 percent.
 PROGNosis. The long-tern1 prognosis for dogs and
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
cats treated surgically appears to be good. Detailed
follow-up studies have not been reported, but most
L cft-to-Right Shunting Patent Ductus Arteriosus
 pets are clinicall normal following surgery, and overall
SURGERy. Surgical ligation of the PDA is recom-
cardiac size becomes normal, though the heart a11d
mended in all cases of leff-to-right shunting PDA diag
great vessels continue to be misshapen in outline.150
512
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
avoidanceofstress,andmaintenanceofthePCVbelow
65 percent.Excessive bleeding is discouraged since the
oxygen content of arterial blood may be diminished,
leading totissuehypoxia.Fluidvolumeshould be
maintained during phlebotomy by infusing crystalloid
solutions.
LESIONSCAUSING
PULMONARY-TO-SYSTEMIC
SHUNTING(CYANOTICHEART
DISEASE)
FIGURE24-45
Postoperative pulmonary complications can be caused by infection
of the suture/ligation sitein dogs with patent ductus arteriosus.In
A number of congenital heart diseases characterized
addition to pulmonary complications and therisk of sepsis,
infection at thesurgical sitemay promoterecanalizationofa
bypulmonary-to-systemic(right-to-left)shuntinglead
ductal or periductal channel.Lungfrom a dog demonstrates
to the clinical sign of cyanosis(see Table 24-2).Each
multifocal pulmonary abscesses.
has the potential to cause substantial systemic arterial
desaturation and clinical signsrelated totissuehypoxia
Soft left-or right-sided systolicmurmurs arecommonly
and polycythemia.Whereas tetralogy of Fallot (see
detectedimmediatelyfollowingductusligationbutare
Figs. 24-47 through 24-50) is the most common right-
generally absent at the time of suture removal.145Per-
sistent systolicmurmurs arelikely toindicatemitral
of cyanotic congenital heart disease occur. These con-
regurgitation or an undetected lesion such as mitral
ditionshavein common anumber ofpathophysiologic
valve dylasiavntricular sptal ct,rsubari
abnormalities.115
stenosis.Myocardialfunction,as assessed by echocardi-
ography,may be decreased following surgery,and this
PATHOPHYSIOLOGYOFRIGHT-TO-LEFT
likely represents a cardiomyopathy of volume overload.
The progression or regression of this has not been
SHUNTING
investigated. When atrial fibrillation or advanced con-
In orderfordesaturatedvenousbloodtoshunt into
gestive heart failure is present in PDA, the prognosis
the systemic arteries,theremust be mixing of blood
is guarded to poor, and these patients are poor anes-
between thepulmonary and systemiccirculations.This
theticrisks.152
generally involves a septal defect or aorticopulmonary
communication and some lesion that raises pressures
“Reversed"PatentDuctus Arteriosus
on the right side of the circulation; alternatively (and
Treatment of reversed PDA with secondary polycythe-
rarely),there can be transposition of the great vessels
mia consists of enforced rest,limitation of exercise,
relative tothevenousreturn,ora singlefunctional
FIGURE24-46
ThrombogenicGianturco coil occludinga patent
ductus arteriosus in a Gordon setter puppy.The
ductus had been partiallyligated atsurgery and coil
related thrombosisresulted in complete clinical
closure of the shunt.
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE
513
MPA
AO
FIGURE24-49
Gross dissection of afelineheart withtetralogy ofFallot and
pulmonary artery atresia (pseudotruncus arteriosus).The left
FIGURE24-47
ventriclehas been opened to expose the largeventricular septal
defect (white arrow),the hypoplastic pulmonary artery (black arrow),
Heart froma 5-month-old maledomestic short-hair cat with
and dilated aorta(Ao).Pulmonary flowwas through the ductus
tetralogy ofFallot.Therightventricular outflow tract and
arteriosus,the origin and termination of which are shown by
pulmonicvalve are exposed.Hypertrophy of the infundibular
arrowheads.Thelobarpulmonary arterieswere patent,butalmost
portion of therightventricular outlet isevident alongwith
noblood was found in the main pulmonary artery.(From
pulmonary valve stenosis(dysplasia)is indicated by three black
Bonagura JD,Darke PGG.Congenital heart disease.InEttinger SJ,
arrows.Therightventricular outflow tract isverynarrowed(lower
FeldmanEC(eds).Textbook ofVeterinary Internal Medicine.4th
arrow).The right ventricularwall(W)is severely hypertrophied.
ed.Philadelphia,WB Saunders,1995,p935,with permission.)
MPA,main pulmonary artery.(Courtesy of Dr.Philip Fox.)
stenosis(or atresia)andpulmonic stenosis(or atresia)
ventriclethat servesboth circulations.A defectbe-
are examples ofobstructiveright-sidedcardiaclesions.
tween the atrial,ventricular,oraorticopulmonary septa
Pulmonary vascular disease is another cause of high
or a PDA provides the potential conduit for right-to-
right-sided pressures that canleadtoright-to-left
left shunting in most cases. However, this condition
shunting.This concept was introduced previously (see
will notdevelopunlessthereis anobstructiontoblood
ReversedPatentDuctus Arteriosus)and is discussed
flow on the right side of thecirculation.Tricuspid
later (Eisenmenger'sPhysiology).
AO
FIGURE24-48
Left ventricle and aorticroot of thecat inFigure
24-47.A large ventricular septal defect (curved arrow） is
RW
present.The aortic root (Ao)and aortic semilunar
valves(smallarrows)areillustrated.Thereis severe
hypertrophy of the right ventricular wall (RW).Mitral
valvemalformationandendocardialfibrosisarealso
present.P,papillary muscle.(From Liu SK.
Cardiovascular pathology.In Fox PR (ed).Canine and
Feline Cardiology.NewYork,ChurchillLivingstone,
1988, pp 637-660,with permission.)
514DISEASES OFTHE HEARTAND CIRCULATION
Ao
PA
PA
RV
B
Ao
AO
LV
FIGURE24-50
Angiocardiograms from animalswith tetralogy of Fallot.(A)A right ventricular (RV)injection
documents simultaneous opacification of both the pulmonary artery (PA) and the aorta(Ao) in this
dog.The right ventricular wallis hypertrophied.(B)A right ventriculogram from a dog documents
a subvalvularpulmonicstenosis(arrow)andnormallyformed,butrelatively smallpulmonaryvalve
sinuses above the arrow.Thereismild poststenotic dilation of the main pulmonary artery and slight
opacificatonof teascendingaortacranialtothepulmonaryartery.Adilatedrightcoronaryartey
is shown (arrowheads）.(C)Left ventricular injection showing overriding of the aorta (arrow）.(D)
Aortic injection ina catwith tetralogy ofFallot.The aortais slightlywidened,and there ismarked
increase in collateral circulation via the bronchoesophageal system (arrow).The tortuous nature of
thesevessels is typical of collateral flow in right-to-left cardiac shunting.(FromBonaguraJD,Darke
PGG.Congenital heart disease.InEttinger SJ,Feldman EC(eds).Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine.4th ed.Philadelphia,WBSaunders,1995,p.938,with permission.)
The degree of right-to-left shunting varies with the
diminish,andright-to-left shuntingworsen.Thisisone
systemic vascular resistance or the ratio of pulmonary
of the suggested reasons for using B-adrenergic block-
(or right-sided)-to-systemic resistance.Exercise may
ers like propranolol in some forms of cyanotic heart
promote systemicvasodilation,increasethepulmo-
disease.180.1si Anemia or even relative anemia (normal
nary-systemic resistance ratio,and increase the right-
hematocrit in a hypoxemic patient)can result in a
to-leftshunt.Tachycardia orelevatedsympathetictone
declineintheratioofsystemic-to-pulmonaryresistance
may cause difficulties in cases of right ventricular hy-
when thepulmonaryresistanceisafixedlesionsuch
pertrophy,because any dynamic component of ventric-
as pulmonic valve stenosis.1s2 Therefore,phlebotomy
ular outflowobstruction may increase,pulmonary flow
in cyanotic patients not only decreases oxygen content
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
515
 per deciliter blood but also decrcases systemic vascular
coinpletely, thcre is often a VsD with malalignmcnt
resistancc, incrcasing the arterial hypoxcinia. The
berween the ventral and most dorsal coinponents of
quantitative  inpact  on  systermic-to-pulnonary resis-
the veintricular scptum, leading to a dextropositionncd
od m s  i  j 
and overriding aorta.!s
nary hyperteusion has not becnl reported.
Right-to-left shunting lcads to compenisatory il1-
LESIONS
creases in blood flow to thc lung via the bronchial
arterics. These tortuous systermic collateral vesscls are
Components of thc tctralogy are (l) right ventricu-
casily recogized with angiography (sce Fig. 24-50D)
lar outflow obstructionl (pulimonic stennosis), (2) sec-
ventral to the descending aorta. Blood froin these
 ondary right ventricular hypertrophy, (3) a subaortic
vessels may return via pulmonary veins and incrcase
ventricular septal defect, and (4) dextropositioned or
venous admixture. Although uncommon, it is possible
overriding aorta (Figs. 24-47 through 2453). When
for these vessels to rupture, leading to hemoptysis.
 Systcmic hypoxemia can be detected by mcasuring
 partitioning of the truncus, the term *'pseudotruncus
an arterial blood gas obtaincd while the animal
artcriosus" has becn used (Fig. 2449).
breathes room air. lnicreasing the inspired oxygen con-
GROss MORPHOLOGY. Pattcrson and colleagucs graded
hypoxemia nor the cyanosis in most cases of right-to-
 the conotruncal defects pathologically as follows: grade
lkeft shunting. Clinical signs of cyanotic heart disease
1—-persistence of the coinus septum fusion line, aneu
are a result of tissuc hypoxia and include stunting.
rysm of thc ventricular septum, and absence of tht
 papillary muscle of the conus (representing subclinical
1s2. te3 Since systemic hypoxemia increases plasma eryth-
malformations); grade 2—pulmonic stenosis or infun-
ropoictin concentrations, secondary polycythemia de-
dlibular ventricular scptal defcct plus thc grade 1 lc-
velops in cyanotic hcart disease. When the PCV cx-
sions; and grade 3tetralogy of Fallot: pulmonic stc-
ceeds the 65 to 68 percent rangc. hyperviscosity canl
 predispose to thrombosis and microvascular complica-
and dextropositioncd aorta (with secondary right ven-
tions. Metabolic acidosis is anothcr potential complica-
tricular hypertrophy), plus grade 1 lesions. Other lc-
tion of protracted hypoxemia. 4
 sions found in somc dogs included dilated and tortu-
Paradoxic embolizationl or a systeinic venous-1o-
ous asccnding aorta, pulmonary atresia, hypoplasia of
systemic arterial einbolus is another potenntial concern
the supraventricular crest, and anomalies of the aortic
in right-to-left shunting. Norinally, the pulmonary vas-
 arch systcin. More detailed descriptions can be found
culature filtcrs systeinic venous cmboli before they can
 in related literature,21-26
reach the Ieft side of the circulation. With reversed
shunting, the possibility of coronary, ccrebral, or other
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
systemic einboli must always be considercd, particularly
when venipuncture or intravenous cathcters are used.
As with other right-to-left shunts, the essential con-
Air, thrombi, or bacteria may gain access to vital organs
ponents are the increased right-sided resistance and
by this mechanism.
 pressure and the commuication betwecn pulmonary
 and systermic circulations (Fig. 2450). Owing to the
high resistance RV outlet and elevated right ventricular
TETRALOGY OF FALLOT
pressure, desaturated blood shunts through the scptal
defect to mix with blood coming from the left ventri-
Tetralogy of Fallot is a gcnetically transmitted disor-
cle,115. 170. 171 Due to the decreased pulmonary arterial
der in soine breeds, propagatcd as a single major
flow, the left atriuun and left venitricular cavity arc
gene defect interfering with myocardial growth.* This
small. The significant contribution of right ventricular
malformation has becn widely studicd i1n thc keeshond
blood to systeimic blood flow causes hypoxcmia, de-
brccd in which a spcctrum of lesions is describcd,
Creased hemoglobin oxygen saturation (O, saturation),
ranging from subclinical to clinically complicated.°, 24-26
cyanosis, and secondary polycythemia. A cardiac mur-
mur is generated from high-vclocity flow across thc
 pulmonic stcnosis or, less often, from shunting across
DEVELOPMENTAL ANATOMY
the VsD. Systemic collateral circulation increascs via
It is hypothesized that tetralogy of Fallot results froin
the bronchial arterial system, incrcasing venous admix-
conotruncal system malforination, the swellings 
re-
ture and hypoxemia. Right ventricular hypcrtrophy
sponsible for partitioning of the fetal truncus arterio-
develops in response to pulmonic stcnosis, Other as-
sus into the aorta and pulmonary artery and the fetal
 pects of clinical pathophysiology have been previously
comus arteriosus into right and left ventricular outflow
described (see Pathophysiology of Right-to-Left Shunt-
tracts. When thc conotruncal scptum fails to devclop
ing). In cases of pulmonary atresia, pulmonary blood
516
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
FIGURE24-51
(A)Ventrodorsal (VD) and (B)right lateral thoracic radiographs from a cat
with tetralogy ofFallot and pulmonary atresia(pseudotruncus arteriosus).
Theright sideof theheartisenlarged,resulting in apex displacement tothe
left on the VDview (A).The ascending aorta is dilated because of unequal
partitioningof the truncus arteriosus,and it ismalpositioned,resultingna
bulge in the cranial border of the heart on thelateral view(B).Theleft
auricle is small,and pulmonary vascularity isreduced owing to decreased
pulmonary blood flow.
flowmustbederivedfromeither apersistentlypatent
CLINICAL SIGNs.Presenting signs include failure to
ductus arteriosus orfrom bronchial arteries.14,160
grow, cyanosis,shortness of breath,exercise intoler-
ance,weakness,syncope,and seizures.
CLINICALFINDINGS
PHYSICALEXAMINATION.The ejectionmurmur ofpul-
monic stenosis is themost common auscultatory ab-
SIGNALMENT. Tetralogy of Fallot is common in the
normality.Detection of a murmur over the right hemi-
keeshond, English bulldog, and some families of other
thoraxisnotuncommonandmayindicateradiation
breeds.34It is also recognized in the cat.172-178
of thepulmonic stenosis(Ps) or,less likely,flow across
16:26:17
16:18:17
MALTESE 12-942
23 AUG 9S
FIGURE24-52
TETRALOGY OF FALLOT
SALINE CONTRAST
Two-dimensional
echocardiograms from a dogwith
R>L SHUNT
tetralogy of Fallot. Left panel A
short-axisimage across the base
of theheart shows infundibular
obstruction(arrow) of the right
ventricle and a large septal defect
RV>
communicatingbetween the
22
right ventricle (RV)and the root
29
of the aorta (AO).RA,right
atrium; MPA,main pulmonary
artery;PV,pulmonary valve.Right
panel:Contrast two-dimensional
echocardiogram following
injection of agitated saline into a
cephalic vein.Both the right side
of theheart and the aorticroot
(arrow)areopacified,thereby
demonstrating theright-to-left
shunt.RV,right ventricle.
CONGENITALHEART DISEASE517
rightventricularoutflowobstruction.Echocontrast
(or Doppler echo）studies (Fig.24-52）document
right-to-left shunting at the ventricular outflowlevel.184
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY. The ECGusually exhibits a
right axis deviation.However,a left orcranialaxis may
Ao
PA
befound in some cats.172
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION.Catheterization demon-
stratesvirtualequilibrationofleft andrightventricular
systolic pressures in most cases,compatible with an
unrestrictive VSD.6o An oxygen step-down is recorded
at theleftventricular outflow level,and the aortic
blood is relatively desaturated. Angiocardiography re-
veals right ventricular hypertrophy,PS with minimal
poststenotic dilatation, a large subaortic VsD, a small,
dorsally displaced left ventricle, a widened ascending
aorta,and prominent bronchial circulation (Figs.9-
12F 24-50).Eithervalvular or subvalvularPS,orboth,
FIGURE24-53
maybefound.Bidirectional shunting acrosstheVSDis
common in the anesthetized animal.Anticoagulation
Successful systemic-to-pulmonary shunt used topalliate the
tetralogy ofFallot.Following injection of contrast into the aorta,
therapy (e.g., heparin) should be considered to pre-
the pulmonary artery is also opacified.A flling defect (above the A
ventcerebralthromboembolismduringandimmedi-
in PA)is aresult of surgical scarring.Ao,aorta.(FromBonagura
atelyafter cardiaccatheterization.Caremust betaken
JD,DarkePGG.Congenital heart disease.IEttingerSJ,Feldman
EC(eds).Textbookof Veterinary Internal Medicine.4th ed
to avoid air emboli.
PhiladelphiaWBSaunders1995,939,withpemission.)
NATURALHISTORY
the septaldefectand in theascending aorta.Some
Generally,petstolerate thedefectforyearsprovided
dogshavenoobvious murmurrelatedtopulmonary
pulmonarybloodflowismaintained and hyperviscosity
atresia and/orpolycythemia withhyperviscosity(which
is controlled.60. 176 Sudden death is common, related
decreases turbulence) and ejection across a large, non-
to complications of hypoxia,hyperviscosity,or cardiac
restrictiveVSD.Cyanosis is typical,but acyanotic cases
arrhythmia.Unlike the caseinpulmonicstenosiswith
are not uncommon.Exercise or excitement may in-
intact ventricular septum,CHF is extremelyuncom-
duce cyanosis by accentuating right-to-left shunting.
mon.
Affected animals often gasp when stressed, and pulmo-
narycrackles are commonlyheard thoughthey donot
CLINICALMANAGEMENT
represent edema and their genesisisnotunderstood.
ArterialpOandpCOaredecreased.Theseanimals
Both medical and surgical therapies can be em-
may develop adversereactions(particularlybradycar-
ployed in the management of tetralogy of Fallot.
 a a pe si e sns on (
improveappreciablyfollowingadministrationofsup-
Surgery
plemental oxygen. Most cases are polycythemic,but
the hemoglobin concentrationmust becompared with
Definitive correction of the defect (closing the VSD
age-matchednormalanimals.60
andremovingorbypassingthePS)canbe doneunder
cardiopulmonary bypass,but such surgery is rarely
RADIoGRAPHy.Thoracicradiographs usually show a
performed in animals.179 The right ventricular outlow
normal-sized heart with rounding of the right ventricu-
tract obstruction should not be relieved surgicallyif
lar border (Fig.24-51).The main pulmonary artery is
the VSD cannot be closed,because marked left-to-
not enlarged in contrast to the usual case of PSwith
rightshuntingwithsubsequentleftventricularfailure
intactventricular septum.Pulmonary circulationis di-
may develop.6o Surgical palliation by creation of a sys-
minished,and the left auricle may be inconspicuous
temic-to-pulmonary shunt can be rewarding (Fig.24
due to decreased venous return.
53).60.178 Subclavian to pulmonary artery (Blalock-Taus-
sig),ascending aorta topulmonary artery(Potts),and
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.Thetwo-dimensionalechocardi-
aorta to right pulmonary artery(Waterston-Cooley)
ogramrevealsrightventricularhypertrophy,smallleft
connections have been made in dogs and cats.By
chamber dimensions, the large subaortic VsD,and
increasing pulmonaryvenous return to theleft heart,
518DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
there is a greater contribution of oxygenated blood to
tionl, markedly increase right ventricular afterload, de
thc systcimic circulation. The size of the shunt imust be
crcase cardiac output, aund usually lead to shock and
conntrolled to prcvcnt overloading of the dliminutive
dcath. For these reasons, a reversed PDA should not
left ventricle and subsequent pulinonary cdema. The
be ligatedl.
extent to which these shunts reinain patent postopera-
tively has not bcen reported, but the authors have
LESIONS
observed patency in some cases for up to 4 years.
GROss MORPHOLOGy. An atrial scptal defcct,u, 14 12
Medical Therapy
Adjunctivc therapy includes phlebotoiny to control
thesc defects is present. Aside frorn thc presencc of
the PCV bclow 65 to 68 percent (in the normally
the large-caliber shunt, thc most important anatoinic
hydrated patient), which appears satisfactory for most
changes are microscopic lesions of thc muscular and
cases. Excessive bleeding should not take place, and
small pulmonary artcrics,
thc blood volume should be maintained with crys-
talloid fluids to preserve cardiac output and tissuc
HISTOLOGIc FEATLREs. Pulm ollary vascular lesio11s ob
oxygen delivery.1sz Some children with tetralogy of Fal-
served in dogs and cats with Eisenmenger's physiology
lot benefit from β-blockade with propranolol; howevcr,
are sinilar to those of humans.4 133 18 Intimal thick-
controlled studies of the clinical efficacy of this treat-
the salient abnormalities inl most cases. The plexiform
hypoxic spells should be treated with cage rest, oxygen,
lesionl is considered irrcversible; conscquently, neither
and sodium bicarbonate (if metabolic acidosis is evi-
medical therapy nor closure of the shunt will effectivcly
 dent). Drugs with dominant systemic vasodilating
improve the condition once thesc lesions havc devcl
 properties and vigorous exercise should be avoided.
oped. Thc right ventricle becomes hypertrophicd be.
vascular resistancc.
EISENMENGER'S PHYSIOLOGY
CLINICAI. FINDINGS
tion," describes right-to-left shunting consequent to
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION. Clinical fcaturcs Of pul1no-
pulmonary vascular discase. This condition usually de
ary-to-systeimic shunting in Eiscnmenger's physiology
Asaid e jo pesiai on sprol pue olu Aeo sloa
tend to be similar to those of the tetralogy of Fallot,
left-to-right shunt.t4. te6, 13s 1s5
regardless of the underlying lesions, with a fcw notablc
differenccs. An important auscultatory finding of Eisen-
menger's syndrome is the prcsencec of a loud pulmonic.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
component of the sccond heart sound related to pul-
High flow rates or direct transrnission of systemic
1noary hypcrtension. I11 soine dogs, the sccond sound
pressures into the pulmonary arterial systerm is im-
is audibly split. These may be the only auscultablc
portant for development of this syndrome,Lw. ist al-
abnorinalitics and are lacking in tetralogy of Fallot. A11
though many details of ctiopathogencsis are incom-
ejection sound with a soft, short, systolic murmur also
 pletely understood. There is an association between
may be evident at thc base of the lefl side of the
large borc defects and thc developrnent of pulnonary
heart inl dogs with Eiseninenger's physiology. Diastolic
vascular discase, Rcversed shunting has been observed
murmurs of pulmonic insufficiency are rare.
with PDA, aorticopulmonary communication, ventricu-
lar septal defect, and atrial septal defect,28, 80 11 126.
NONINvASIVE TEsTING. Eisenmenger's physiology is
12. t3s t5+ Moreover, Eiscnmenger's physiology almost
characterized by right vcntricular hypcrtrophy. This is
always develops before 6 months of age in sinall ani-
usually evidcnt on echocardiograms, ECG, and thte
Imals.
thoracic radiograph.
od, aes e se se u s 
valve for ihe pulmonary hypertension in this condi
RADIOGRAPHY Marked cardiomegaly is arypical of most
tion, but this leads to the right-to-left shunt and resul-
cyanotic cardiac conditions, and the heart often does
tant clinical signs. The left atrium and left ventricle
110t appcar enlarged on survey films. As a general
are sinall owing to decrcased pulmonary venous re
rule, the lungs appear underperfused, and tht main
turn, and brochial collateral vesscls are incrcased in
pulmonary artery and proximal lobar arteries are di-
size. Thesc lesions explain why surgical shunt closurc
lated when Eisenincnger's syndroine is the basis for
cannot be undertaken. Shunt closure would prcclude
revcrsed shunting. In contrast, thc 1nain pulrnonary
access of right veuntricular blood to the systemic circula-
artcry is not proininennt in cases of cyanosis due to
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 519
tctralogy of Fallot, pulmonary atresia, or tricuspid atre-
 It involves controlling the PCV and prcventing signs of
sial.
hyperviscosity.
ECHOCARDrOGRAPHy The echocardiogram is usually di-
agnostic in cases of Eisenrmenger's physiology. Most
OTHER CAUSES OF CYANOTIC
large defects can be casily visualized, the right vcntricu-
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
lar inflow and outflow tracis can be evaluated, aind the
sitc of right-to-left shunting identified through ccho-
TRICUSPID VALVE DYSPLASIA
conntrast or Doppler studlics. Of note is the markedly
 dilated right ventricular outflow tract and pulmnonary
Tricuspid valve dysplasia can cause cyanosis when
allery evident with Eiscnmengcr's physiology.
associatcd with sevcre valve stenosis (Fig. 24-54), atrc-
.An
atretic, hypoplastic, or stenotic right ventricular out-
sia, or rcgurgitation, since elcvated right atrial pressure
flow tract is generally incoinpatible with the dliaguiosis
 may generate right-to-left shunting through an ASD or
patent foramcn ovale.iec The right ventricle is hypo-
of Eisenmenger's physiology. With reversed PDA,
,in
which inaging of the ductus rmay be lirnited by sur-
plastic or atretic in tricuspid stenosis unless there is a11
-le po uono snoua eiauduad e gun supuni
associated VsD, in which case therc may be a func-
tated saline will cvcntually opacify thc descending
tional remnant of the ventricular outflow tract.
aorta, which is casily visualizcd dorsal to the bladder.
Detailed ultrasound studics often render cardiac cathe-
DOUBLE-OUTLET RIGIIT VENTRICLE
terization unnecessary, unless surgery is contemplated
ond oi pasoddo se) uosualaday Areuound pue
 Doublc-ouutlet right ventricle, in which both great
stcnosis) cannot be otherwise ruled out. If pulmonic
vesscls exit from the right ventriclc, has bccn reported
valve insufficiency is observed by Doppler echocardiog-
in dlogs and cats.is7. 1ss A malaligriment type of VSD
raphy, a regurgitant jet peak velocity of less than
12.5
provides the left vcntricle an avenuc for outflow into
m/s argues against a diagnosis of pulmonary hyperten-
thc grcat vesscls. Pulmonary overcirculation is presennt
sion.
unlcss thcre is pulmonic stenosis or pulinonary hypcr-
tension develops. Cyanosis is likely based on the origin
CARDLAC CATHETERIZATION. This can demonstraIc pul-
of the aorta and is most sevcre if there is PS or pulrno-
Imonary hyperteusion, outline anatomic dlefccts, and
nary hypertension.
 assess pulmonary artery sizc and degrcc of shunting.
Angiocardiograns in cyauotic heart diseasc cann bc
D-TRANSPOSITION OF THE GREAT ARTERES
and possibly, a right atrial injection of contrast material
 In dextrotransposition of the great arteries, the aorta
in the angiographic series. The opcrator nust also
originates from thc right ventricle and the pulmonary
watch for abnormal caiheter positions as a clue to
trunk froin the left ventricle,is Sincc two completely
largc scptal defects and vessel transpositious. Aortic
independent circulations cxist and the systemic arter-
injcctions demonstrate prominent collateral broncho-
ies nevcr reccive oxygenated blood, thc purc form
csophagcal vesscls (Fig. 2450D).
of this lesion is lethal. Survival of ain animal with D-
transposition depcnds on the presence (or produc-
tion) of shunts bctwecn the two circulations to allow
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
for 1mixing of blood to prcveint fatal hypoxemia. If the
Managcmcnt of the cyanotic patient requires that
shunts are large, then pulmonary-to-systcmic flow may
the clinician know thc cause, the pulmonary artery
bc great. These defecis arc conplex, generally lethal,
pressure aind rcsistancc, and thc reason for right-to-
and probably underdiagnosed in the nconatal period.
left shunting. It is essential to determine whethcr or
not pulmonary hypertcnnsion is prcscnt prior to any
TRUNCUS ARTERIOSUS
cardiac or vascular surgery in a patient with cyainotic
heart discase. Whcn pulmonary vascular rcsistaincc is
 Persistent truncus arteriosus represents a failure of
n1ormal, as with tetralogy of Fallot or pulnonary atrc-
partitioning of the fetal truncus, such that a large VsD
sia, then pulmonary flow can be augmented and sys-
allows blood flow between the ventricles and a single
temic hypoxemia improved by creation of a shut
large vessel originates above the VSp. Classification
betweein a systemic and a pulmonary artcry. Co1l-
depends on the location and numbcr of pulmonary
artenies that arise directly fron the truncus.11 Ventricu-
irrcversible pulmonary vascular disease. The high vas-
lar blood mixcs within the coinmon artery prior to
cular resistance of this condition negates the benefit
distribution to the body and pulmonary vesscls. The
of sugery Otherwise, the genitral managemennt is simi.
clinical sigus will depcnd in part on thc ratio of pulmo-
lar to that described prcviously for tetralogy of Fallot.
nary-to-systemic blood flow.
520
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
RA
FIGURE24-54
Tricuspid valve malformation.(A)Postmortem
specimenfrom a dogwith tricuspidvalve
dysplasia.The right atrium (RA) is markedly
dilated as a result of tricuspid regurgitation.The
tricuspidvalveitself isgrossymalformed,with
short chordae tendineae(arrow).malformation of
the valve leaflets and cusps,and abnormalities of
the papillary muscles (Pm), characterized by a
single large papillarymuscle instead of the usual
three to four smaller muscles.(B)Postmortem
examination of a congenitally stenotic tricuspid
valve from a cat withright-sided congestive heart
failure.Thenarrowed orifice is obvious when
viewed from the ventricular perspective.(From
Bonagura JD,DarkePGG.Congenital heart
disease. In Ettinger SJ,Feldman EC(eds).
TextbookofVeterinaryInternal Medicine.4thed.
Philadelphia,WBSaunder,1995,p930,with
permission.)
Pulmonary atresia withventricular septal defect,es-
DYSPLASIAOFTHE
sentiallytheexaggeratedformoftetralogyofFallot
ATRIOVENTRICULARVALVES
thepulmonarycirculation is derived fromeither a
patent ductus arteriosus or the bronchial arterial circu-
lation.This lesion is sometimes termed “pseudotrun-
Dysplasiaof themitral and tricuspidvalveshasbeen
cus arteriosus”(Fig. 24-49).Angiocardiography may
reported in both cats and dogs (Figs. 24-54, 24-55).2
berequired to distinguish these two conditions.
8, 41, 186,191-198 Many have involvement of both valves.
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE521
PA
PM
FIGURE24-55
Mitral valvedysplasia.Three specimens are shown.Lef,Dysplasticmitral valvefroma cat.Thevalve
cusp is thickened and the leaflet isCshaped (arrow).Both cranioventral and caudodorsal cusps were
similarandresultedinan oval opening ofmitral incompetency in thiscat.Theleftauricleis
markedly dilated.The right ventricle(RV)and pulmonary artery (PA)are marked.Ventricular
moderatorbands adjacent to thepapillary muscles of theleftventricle seem prominent.Lower panel
Heart of a mature catwith diabetes and congestive heart failure.The openleft ventricle shows a
singular papillary muscle (PM) with relatively short chordae tendineae attaching to an abnormal
mitral valve.Jet lesions (arrous）are evidentin the opened left atrium (LA).Right panelAring-type
mitral valve dysplasia in a dog (arrow).This dog also had a patent ductus arteriosus (not shown).
(From Bonagura JD,Darke PGG.Congenital heart disease. InEtinger SJ,Feldman EC (eds)
TextbookofVerinaryIntrnalMdicine.4thd.PhiladephiaWBSaunders1995,929wit
permission.)
522DISEASES OF THE HEARTAND CIRCULATION
Malformationsof the atrioventricularvalvescomprise
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
up to 17 percent of cardiac malformations reported
in cats22 and are also common in large-breed dogs
Principalfindingsinmostcasesofmitral ortricuspid
(see Table 24-1). Diagnosis can be inferred from
valve dysplasia are (1) valve regurgitation with volume
physical examination, radiography (see Fig. 7-4),
overloading of theipsilateral cardiac chambers and
and ECG.Definitive diagnosis requires echocardi-
limited cardiac output; (2) ipsilateral atrial dilation
ography.A malformed atrioventricular valve,as a
with eccentric ventricular hypertrophy;(3) predisposi-
general rule,is incompetent.In some cases,careful
tion to cardiac arrhythmias, particularly atrial fibrilla-
echocardiographic and catheterization studies may
tion;(4) obstructed ventricular filling in cases when
demonstratevalvular stenosis aswell.In manyways,
valves are also stenotic; and (5)potential for right-to-
the pathophysiology and clinical course of congeni-
leftshunting through theforamen ovale or anASD
tal atrioventricularvalvedysplasiaissimilar tothat
withtricuspiddysplasia.Examplesofgrossfindingsare
of acquired degenerative valvular disease in the dog
illustrated in Figures 24-48, 24-54, and 24-55.
(chapter25).
Atrioventricular valveinsufficiency isfar more com-
FIGURE24-56
Echocardiograms from animals with atrioventricular valve dysplasia.(A)Long-axis,two-dimensional
imagefrom theright hemithorax of a German shepherdwith tricuspidmalformation.Note the
dilatedright atrium andventricle(RA,RV)and the elongated tricuspidvalve apparatus,whichis
connected to an abnormal, apical papillary muscle.LV, left ventricle.(B) Long-axis two-dimensional
image from the righthemithorax of a catwith mitralvalve malformation.A single,abnormal
papillarymuscle（arrow）attaches almost directlytomitral valve leaflets.Theleftventricular outlet was
also obstructd.rightentril;Vinrventricular sptum;Vftventriclorta;At
atrium;W,left ventricular posteriorwall.(C)Two-dimensional echocardiograms demonstrating
mitralvalve stenosis in two dogs.Themaximaldiastolicmitralvalve orificeis demonstratedin each
panel.The anteriorleafletsinbothcases areabnormally tethered but otherwisemobileproducinga
characteristicbowing toward the leftventricle(LV)as pressure builds behind the stenotic valve.LA,
left atrium;AS,interatrial septum.(D) Continuous wave Doppler echo recording from a dogwith
tricuspid stenosis.The early diastolicfillingpattern is prolonged (x.x),and the atrial contribution to
ventricularfilling ismarkedly exaggerated,with a peakvelocity approximately five times normal.
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE523
mon than valve stenosis;however,both can bepresent
particularly subvalvular aortic stenosismay be recog-
in a malformed valve (Fig.24-56).When valve dyspla-
nized in affected dogs.
sia causes stenosis,a diastolicpressure gradient canbe
recorded by Doppler echo across the affectedvalve;
transvalvular flowvelocity will be increased and pres-
CLINICALFINDINGS
sure decayprolonged above normalvalues(Fig.24-
CLINICAL SIGNs.Many animals are asymptomatic, with
56D)54. 91 Valvular regurgitation leads to prominent
mild lesions.Presenting signs,if any,are referable to
cuwaves in theatrialpressure curve,andventricular
exerciseintolerance orcongestiveheartfailure.
diastolicpressuresincrease duetovolume overload
andventriculardilatation.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.Thehallmark finding is a ho
losystolicmurmurheardbestover theleftapexor
along theleft apical sternal border in cats.Rarely,a
MITRALVALVEDYSPLASIA
softdiastolicrumbleis auscultated over theinflowtract
of theventricle,suggesting concurrentvalvular stenosis
Mitralvalvedysplasiamaybethemostcommonly
or severe regurgitation. A loud gallop may be detected.
recognized congenital heart lesion of cats.2. 8, 19s The
Murmursof othermalformationsmaybe evident.
cause is unknown but a genetic basis undoubtedly
existsincertain caninebreedssuch as thebull terrier,
RADIoGRAPHy.Thoracicradiographsdemonstrateleft
Great Dane,German shepherd,and a number of
sided cardiomegaly (Fig.24-57A; see also Figs.7-4,
larger breeds (see Table 24-1);however,breeding tri-
7-5). Left-sided congestive heart failure can occur in
alshavenotbeen reported.
severecases and maybe diagnosedfrom physical exam-
ination and thoracic radiography.
LESIONS
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY.Atrial arrhythmiasareacon-
GROssMORPHOLOGy.A spectrum of lesionshasbeen
sequenceoftheleftatrialdilatationthatdevelopswith
identifed (chapter 36), including shortening, rolling,
this lesion (Fig. 24-58A).91, 195, 199 Ventricular pre-excita-
notching,and thickening of the valve leaflets,fusion
tion due to anomalous atrioventricular pathways also
and thickening or elongation of the chordae tendi-
hasbeenrecognizedwithmitralvalvemalformationin
neae, direct insertion of the valve cusp into a papillary
both cats and dogs.An ECG may also indicate atrial
muscle, atrophy or hypertrophy of the papillary mus-
andventricular enlargement(substantiatedbythoracic
cles, and upward malpositioning of the papillary mus-
radiography and echocardiography).
cles leading to a horizontal alignment of the cords
(Figs. 24-48, 24-55, 24-56).191, 195 Valve stenosis is less
ECHOcARDIOGRAPHY.Leftatrial andleftventricular
common (Fig.24-56C),but when present, it coexists
enlargement,aswell as abnormallocation,shape,mo
withvalveregurgitation.9 Concurrentmalformations,
tion, or attachment of the valve apparatus, may be
B
FIGURE24-57
Radiographs from dogs with atrioventricular valve malformations.(A) Lateral radiograph from a dog
withmitralvalvemalformation andincipientlef-sidedheartfailure.Note theconsiderableleft atrial
dilatation andpulmonaryinterstitial densities.(B)Lateral radiographfrom a dogwith tricuspidvalve
sternal contact.Thecaudal vena cavaisdisplaceddorsally,supporting the assessmentofright-sided
enlargement.
524
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
FIGURE24-58
Electrocardiogramsfrom two
dogswith atrioventricularvalve
malformation.(A)ECGrhythm
stripfrom a dogwith mitral
dysplasia.The initial portion of
the ECG shows a nonsustained,
re-entrant,supraventricular
tachycardia(subsequently shown
toberelated to an accessory
atrioventricular pathway).The
last twocomplexes demonstrate
enlarged Pwaves (P), tallR waves
(R),and retrogradePwaves
(arrow) in the ST segment.Lead
II at 25mm/sec;5mm = 1mV.
(B）Intraventricular conduction
disturbance in a dog with
tricuspid dysplasia.Note the
jagged Rwaves in leads II (arrow)
and aVF. Small Swaves(S) in
leadI arenot normal and
suggest right ventricular
hypertrophy.The left lower
thoracicleadsareoftenhelpful
inrecognizingright ventricular
enlargement (as shown here,
leadV3ischaracterized by deep
S waves typical of right
ventricular hypertrophy).
imaged (Fig.24-56).Left ventricular function is vari-
stenosis,atrial septal defect,andventricularpre-excita-
able andmaydeterioratewithtime.Doppler echo
tion.196 Valve stenosis can occur (Fig. 24-56A, D) and
studies can document a regurgitant jet, valvular steno-
may be severe in some cases (tricuspid atresia hasbeen
sis, or both (Fig. 24-56D).
discussedpreviously).Additionally,dogswithtricuspid
dysplasia canhavefusionofpapillarymuscles,patency
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION.Angiocardiograms demon-
of the foramen ovale, and fibrinous epicarditis over
stratea dilatedventricle,regurgitantvalve orifice,and
the dilatedright atrium.Tricuspid abnormalities also
dilated atrium (Fig.24-59).Clearance of contrast is
have been recognized in keeshonden with tetralogy
markedly delayedwhen thereis cardiacfailure or se-
ofFallot.24
vere regurgitation. Potential catheterization abnormal-
Whether or not some cases of tricuspiddysplasia
ities have been discussed.
represent Ebstein’s anomaly is unresolved.197,200 In the
latter condition,the anomalous tricuspidvalve is dis-
placed down into theventricle and thereisan“atri-
TRICUSPIDVALVEDYSPLASLA
alizedportionoftheventricularchamber.Definitive
diagnosis requires simultaneous intracardiac pressure
and electrodestudiestodocumentaventricularelec-
Certain breeds are prone to congenital tricuspid
trogram but an atrial pressure curve in the ventral
valve malformation,especially theLabrador retriever
portionof theright atriumnear thedisplacedvalve.
(see Table 24-1). A spectrum of lesions similar to
thosedescribedearlierformitralvalvemalformation
has been observed (Figs.24-54,24-56A,D).
CLINICALFINDINGS
LESIONS
CLINIcAL sIGNs.Most affected animals are clinically
GROssMORPHOLOGY.Affecteddogs have a tendency
normal as puppies and kittens. Occasionally, severely
for multiple congenital defects, including pulmonic
affectedkittenspresentwith CHF.
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE525
B
FIGURE24-59
Angiocardiogramsfrom two cases of congenital mitral valve malformation.(A) Transseptal
catheterization of theleftatrium demonstratingsevereleft atrial dilatation andanarrowed,funnel-
shapedmitral orifice in a dogwithmitral stenosis.(B)Left ventricular study in a cat demonstrates
severemitralregurgitationwith dilatation of the leftventricle,left atrium,andleft auricle(which
projects cranially from the atrium).
PHYSICALEXAMINATION.Typically,a holosystolicmur-
or attachment of the valve apparatus is observed by
2-Decho.A typical finding is thepresence of a large,
radiates dorsally over the right hemithorax.Rarely, a
fusedpapillarymuscleinsteadof thenormally small,
soft diastolicrumbleis auscultated,suggestingconcur-
discrete muscles.The right atrium is often cavernous,
rent valvular stenosis or severe regurgitation.The in-
and therightventricleisalsodilatedunlessthevalve
tensityof themurmurdoesnotcorrelatewellwith
is significantly stenotic (Fig. 24-56A). Other congenital
lesion severity, and some dogs (especially puppies)
lesionsmaybeidentified.M-modeechodemonstrates
withseveremalformationhaverelativelysoftsystolic
right ventricular dilation and paradoxic ventricular
murmurs.In other dogs,a palpable precordial thrill
septal motion. Doppler echo demonstrates a regur-
accompanies a loud,harsh holosystolic murmur.Mur-
gitant jet,valvular stenosis, or both (see Figs. 8-18;
murs related to other malformations may be evident.
24-56D).
Jugular venous pressure isnormal unless right-sided
CHF has developed,in which case ascites (but uncom-
CARDIACCATHETERIZATION.Catheterizationis comple-
monly pleural effusion)is present.
mentarybutrarely necessary if ahigh-quality echocar-
diogram has been obtained.Angiography demon-
RADIoGRAPHy.Thoracic radiographs demonstrate
strates a dilatedventricle,regurgitantvalve orifice,and
right-sided cardiomegaly, particularly right atrial en-
dilated atrium.Clearance of contrast ismarkedly de-
largement,often with marked apex shifting to the
layed with cardiac failure or severe regurgitation.Po-
left (see Figs. 77; 24-57B).194. 16,197 The radiographic
tential pressure abnormalitieshavebeen discussedpre
interpretation can be confusing without concurrent
viously.
echocardiography.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY.TheECG is generally abnor
NATURALHISTORYOFMITRALAND
mal,withintraventricularconductiondisturbancesand
right ventricular hypertrophy evident in the left pre-
TRICUSPIDVALVEDYSPLASIA
cordial leads (Fig. 24-58B).The P waves are typically
very wide and maybe increased involtage as well.
Generally,thelesions aretoleratedformanyyears;
Atrial arrhythmiasduetoatrial dilation arecommon.
however,in other cases signs of progressive valve dys-
Ventricular pre-excitation due to anomalous atrioven-
function,cardiomegaly,atrial arrhythmias and heart
tricular pathways also has been recognized in dogs
failure and death ensue.91, 191, 192, 194-1s Only the most
with tricuspid dysplasia,and it seems most prevalent
severely affected animals areusuallydescribedin clini-
with concurrent atrial septal defect (as in children）in
cal reports, and these papers emphasized that heart
Labradorretrievers.
failure and atrial arrhythmias can develop within the
first year of life.Wehave observed the onset of heart
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.Definitive diagnosis requires
failurefrom atrioventricularvalve dysplasiaindogs less
echocardiography.Abnormal location, shape,motion,
than 6months of ageand asold as8years of age.Cats
526 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
with initral dysplasia may devclop CHF carly in life,
tion, or there is inability to auscultatc the hcart sounds
live norrnally for many years bcforc devcloping hearl
in the usual location. A sofi systolic murmur may he
failure, or they may never develop clinical signs at all
evident, but the gencsis of this is unknown. Louder
 Significant cardiomegaly suggests a guarded-to-poor
murmurs are detectable in pets with concurrcnt con-
proguosis.
genital heart defects. Borborygrnus may bc cvidcnt
 Over the heart when there is bowcl in thc pcricardial
space. A palpable defect at the caudoventral midlinc
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT OF MITRAL
or a malformation of the xiphoid or ventral abdoninal
AND TRICUSPID VALVE DYSPLASIA
wall is prcsent in some cases.
Treanment is supportive and similar to that descrihcd
RAD1oGRAPHr. Thoracic radliographs demonstrate car-
for chronic valvular discasc (chapter 25). Surgical valvc
diac silhouctte cnlargcimcnt and alicred contour, lack
rcplacement has bccn done only under expcrimcntal
of norimal scparaiion betwccn the pcricardial shadow
conditions.197 It is conccivable that a stenotic valvc
and the diaphragrn, and inhomogcncity of the appar-
could be surgically opcncd or dilated with a balloon
ent cardiac density. Gas may be found within the peri-
valvuloplasty catheter. Trcatincnt of congestive hcart.
cardiuin, but in cats, gas-fillcd intcstinal loops are un-
failure and managemcnt of atrial Gbrillation are offen
cormmon and the clinician may misdiagnose the
required in advanced cases (scc Table 24-3).
enlarged outline as cardiorncgaly froin anothcr causc.
The dorsal extent of the hernia is representcd by a
 sofi tissue density, a persistent rnesothelial remnant.
MISCELLANEOUS CARDIAC
vcntral to the caudal vena cava on the larcral vicw
DEFECTS
Anomalous devclopmcnt of the siernum may occur.
Bariun shows the position of the stomach anid intes-
tincs, whcrcas a nonsclecive angiocardiogram may
 Many rare anatormic lesions of the hcari are beyond
demonstratc cardiac displaccmcnt and oiher struc-
tures and/or fluid within thic pericardial sac.
the scopc of this chapter. The following section sum-
marizes clinically relevant aspccts of cardiac and peri-
cardial defects not yet discussed.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHy. Echocardiographic examination
is very useful for substantiating the diagnosis, particu-
larly when hepatic lobes are identified within the her-
nia sac.
PERITONEOPERICARDIAL
DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIA
THERAPY
This is a relatively common developmental anomaly
 Surgical reduction of the hernia and replacerncnt
of abdominal contcnis in the periloneal space may be
 anomaly, it can he confused with othcr congenital and
indicated.o. ws. o Such surgcry may decrease clinical
 acquired conditions. It probably rcprcscnts abnormal
signs and prevent herniation of an abdominal organ.
 developmicni of the septum transvcrsurn or pleuroperi-
 One must ensure that current clinical signs are relatcd
loneal folds in the fenus.2 Typically, abdominal visccra
10 the hernia and not a concurrent diseasc. We prcfcr
arc found within thc pericardial sac. Defccts range
not 1o operare on older affectcd cats since thcy sccin
from mild cascs, with only omentun and a lobc of
10 tolerate the condition well.
livcr within the hcrnia sac, to the presencc of muliiplc
organs and intestinal loops adjacent to the heari. In-
trapcricardiac cysts havc also heen observed in dogs,
COR TRIATRIATUM
cither in isolation or in conjunction with a hernia.2oy
Malformations of atrial septation other than an AsD
CLINICAI.FINDINGS
have becn rccognized in small animals. Cor iriatriatum
has been reported in a car?io; cor triairiatum dexter
CLINICAL sIGNs. The clinical signs arc variable, includ-
and saccular anonalics of the caudal righi atrium have
ing respiratory distrcss, wheezing, colic, and vomiting.
 been described in dogs and cats.?u-zis Cor triatrianum
Cats frequently rcach maturity without apparcnt symp
is characterized by an additional, acccssory airial cham-
toms. A high incidence has bccn rcportcd in male
ber, which is separated from thc iruc atrium by a
Persian cats.2o
membrane, and collects the venous drainagc (Fig. 24-
60). When the membrane is obstructive, dilation of
PHYsICAL EXAMINATION. Thc physical examination in-
thc venous chamber and the entering veins is cvidcnt,
dicatcs that. the cardiac apcx is in an abnormal posi-
 and congcstion develops in the lungs or, in the case of
CONGENITALHEART DISEASE527
CdRA
B
FIGURE24-60
Cor triatriatum dexter (CTD) in two dogs.(A)A two-
dimensional echocardiogram demonstrating an obstructing
membrane in the right atrium(arrow).This membrane
CdRA
partitions theright atriuminto twochambers,producing cor
triatriatum dexter.RV,right ventricle;RA,right atium;V,
left ventricle;LA,left atrium.(B) Outline of the
echocardiographicanatomy.A,left atrium;V,leftventricl;
CdRA,caudalightatrial chamer;CrRA,cranialightatrial
chamber;RV,right ventricle.(Courtesy of Amy Grooters,
DVM.)(C) Caudal vena cava angiogram from another dog
with CTD,demonstratingfilling of a dilated caudalrightatrial
chamber (CdRA) located caudal to an obstructing intra-atrial
membrane.A small communicating orifice permits blood and
contrast medium(arrow)topassfrom the caudal atrium into
the cranial right atrial chamber.
C
a right atrial membrane,in the liver. Animals with
HISTOLOGICFEATUREs.In the cat,these includediffuse
cor triatriatumareexaminedfor signs attributable to
hypocellular, fibroelastic thickening of the endocar-
pulmonaryedemaor ascites.Wehave alsoexamined
dium,withlayering of thin,randomly organized colla-
cats with saccular dilations of the caudalright atrium
gen and elastic fibers. Edema of the endocardium with
thatprotrudedintothelefthemithoraxbutdidnot
dilation of lymphatics is prominent,and there is no
cause clinical signs.Treatment generally requires surgi-
evidenceofmyocardialinflammation ornecrosis.
cal resection or bypass of the obstruction.213, 218
CLINICALFEATURES
ENDOCARDIALFIBROELASTOSIS
Early development of left or biventricular failure,
generally before 6months of age,is common.Affected
Endocardial fibroelastosis has beenreported in dogs
animalsfail tothrive.Amurmurofmitralregurgitation
andcatsand isprobablyfamilialinsomelinesof
maybe auscultated.Leftventricular and atrial dilation
Burmese and Siamese cats (see also chapter 28).8 219-221
are evident onradiographs and on theECG.Limited
echocardiographic studies suggest reduction of left
ventricularmyocardialfunction.Leftventricular dia-
LESIONS
stolicpressures areelevated,compatiblewithventricu-
GROssMORPHOLoGy.Findingsincludeleftventricular
lar stiffness,ventricular failure,orvolume overload
andleftatrialdilatationwithsevereendocardialthick-
from mitral regurgitation.221
ening,characterized grossly by diffuse,white,opaque
Thediagnosisofprimaryendocardialfibroelastosis
thickening of the luminal lining. Dogs with endocar-
is,attimes,tenuous,inasmuch as chronicleftventricu-
dial fibroelastosis often have thickening of the mitral
lardilatation mayleadto similarchanges,particularly
valve leaflets and mitral regurgitation.
in thesettingofmitral dysplasia,aorticstenosisdilated
528DISEASES OFTHEHEARTAND CIRCULATION
cardiomyopathy,or myocarditis.Similar difficultiesin
diagnosis exist in children with this disorder.14
Medical treatment of congestive heart failure may
be effective in prolonging life.However, recovery is
unlikelyinactualcasesofendocardialfibroelastosis.
VASCULARANOMALIES
These may be classified based on their location
within the vascular system.Patent ductus arteriosus
represents the mostimportantvascular malformation;
aortic coarctation,hypoplasia,and interruption have
been rarely reported.Unilateral atresia of a pulmonary
FIGURE24-61
arteryhas beendescribedina cat withrespiratory
Persistent right fourth aortic archin acat.The specimenisviewed
diffculty.22 Coronary arteries can develop anoma-
from theright lateral perspective.The aorta arches to theright,
entrappingtheesophagusbetween the tracheabaseof theheart,
louslybutrarelycausedocumentedclinicaldisease
and the ligamentum arteriosum(not shown).The dilated proximal
except as previously described under pulmonic steno-
esophagus is evident at the right side of the figure.
sis.Other major vascular defects centering on the aorta
and systemic venous drainage are addressed next.
tic arch may be observed by esophageal endoscopy.
Occasionally, the diagnosis is less straightforward, as
VASCULARRINGANOMALIES
withleftarchandright-sidedligamentumarterio-
sum,229-31 234 and requirs angiographyDifferential d
Vascular ring anomalies are characterized by malfor-
agnosis includes esophageal stenosis or hypoplasia.
mation of the aortic fetal arch systems,with entrap-
Thecondition is essentially that of esophageal ob-
ment of the esophagus between the abnormal vessel(s)
struction,and significant clinical improvement can be
and the heart base. These vascular defects,especially
obtained in many animals following surgery. Surgery
persistence of the right fourth aortic arch,have been re-
shouldnotbedelayedandusuallyinvolvesdivision of
ported frequently in dogs and cats.141.13. 223235 Other
theligamentum and blunt dissection and freeing of
vascularringanomaliesincludethoseformedbyretro-
the esophagus. Residual esophageal dilation or motor
esophageal subclavian arteries,double-aortic arch,orleft
dysfunction may be observed following surgery in
aortic archwithright-sidedligamentumarteriosum.Persis-
somepatients.235.235a
tentrightfourth aortic arch surrounds the esophagus
with the following structures: pulmonary artery to the
left;ligamentum arteriosum to the left and dorsally;
right aortic arch to the right;heart base and trachea
AORTICOPULMONARYSEPTALDEFECT
ventrally (Fig.24-61).The cardinal feature of these
defects is regurgitation of solid food because of ob-
struction of the esophagus,rather than circulatory
Persistent aorticopulmonary septal defect, as op-
dysfunction.The condition is common in German
posed to the PDA,is caused by failure of the truncus
shepherd dogs and is recognized in many other canine
breeds,including Irish setters and Great Danes (see
shunting developsbetweenthe ascending aorta and
Table 24-1). In the cat, the condition is uncommon.
pulmonary artery.Although a clinical condition simi-
Occasionally,other cardiac defects arepresent,includ
lar to that ofPDA can develop,in most casespulmo-
ingPDA.
naryhypertension occurs during thefirstyear oflife,
Diagnosis is made from the history of regurgitation
and clinical signs are similar to those in dogs that
at thetime of weaning,evaluation of thoracicradio-
developEisenmenger's syndrome owing to other de-
graphs, and a barium swallow. Care must be taken not
fects.
to induce aspirationpneumonia,which many of these
Management is similar to that for a reversed PDA.
animals develop due torecurrent regurgitation and
Surgery should not be attempted if pulmonary vascu-
aspiration.Depression or fever should be taken as
lar resistance is markedly elevated;it is difficult in
signs to initiate broad spectrum antibiotic therapy
left-to-right shunting defectsunless cardiopulmonary
promptly ortoperform trachealwashand theninitiate
bypass is available. This defect is not synonymous with
treatment.Thecharacteristicindentationsoftheob
ashort,widePDA that sometimesisreferredtoasa
structing components of a persistent right fourth aor-
"window."
CONGENITALHEARTDISEASE
529
FIGURE24-62
Persistent left cranialvena cava in a dog.Contrast was injected simultaneously into
both theright and left jugularveins.Thenormal right cranialvena cava is evident
(R)aswell as a persistent left vena cava (L).Notice that the leftvena cava empties
in the caudal portion of theright atrium into the coronary sinus.(From Bonagura
TextbookofVeterinaryInternalMedicine.4thed.Philadelphia,WBSaunders,
1995, p 942,with permission.)
VENOUSANOMALIES
REFERENCES
Thoracic venous anomalies rarelycause cardiac
1.PattersonDF. Congenital heart disease in the dog.Ann
problems in small animals.Total or partial anomalous
NYAcad Sci 127:541,1965
pulmonary venous return has been reported in a dog
2.Bolton GR,Liu SK. Congenital heart diseases of the
and behavesfunctionally as a left-to-right shunt at the
cat.VetClinNorth Am(SmAnimPract)7:341,1977
atriallevel.19Abnormalitiesofabdominalvenous
3.Severin GA.Congenital and acquired heart disease.J
drainage, such as patent ductus venosus, can induce
Am Vet Med Assoc 151:1733,1967
4.Bonagura JD.Congenital heart disease.In Ettinger SJ
hepatic encephalopathy.A relatively commonvenous
(ed).Textbook ofVeterinary InternalMedicine:Dis-
abnormalityofclinicalsignificanceduringthoracic
eases of theDog and the Cat.3rded.Philadelphia,WB
surgery is the persistent left cranial vena cava.2 This
Saunders,1989,p976
5.Detweiler DK,Patterson DF.The prevalence and types
vessel,normally present in the fetus as part of the left
of cardiovascular disease in dogs.Ann NY Acad Sci
cardinal venous system,may persist and draininto the
127:481,1965
embryologicallyrelated coronary sinus in the caudal
6.Ettinger SJ, Suter PF. Congenital heart disease.In Et-
aspect of the right atrium (Fig. 24-62). Persistent left
tinger SJ(ed).Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medi-
cranial vena cava mayinterferewith surgicalexposure,
cine.Philadelphia,WBSaunders,1975
7.Ettinger SJ,Suter PF. Canine Cardiology.Philadelphia,
particularly during surgical treatment of persistent
WB Saunders,1970
rightfourth aortic arch,but otherwiseit isof noknown
8.Liu SK. Pathology of feline heart disease.Vet Clin
functional significance. As with right fourth aortic
North Am (Sm AnimPract) 7:323,1977
arch,thisvascularanomalyis commoninGerman
9.Patterson DF.Hereditary congenital heart defects in
shepherds and has been reported in other canine
dogs.J SmallAnimPract30:153,1989
10.Patterson DF. Canine congenital heart disease:Epide-
breeds,aswell as incats.42175237Divisionof thisvessl
miology andetiologicalhypotheses.JSmallAnimPract
generally poses no clinical problem provided the nor-
12:263, 1971
malright cranial vena cava is also present.Absence
11.PattersonDF.Epidemiologicand genetic studiesof con-
of the caudal vena cava,238 venous aneurysms,239 and
genital heart disease in the dog.CircRes 23:171,1968
12.Patterson DF,Medway W.Hereditary diseases of the
aberrant caudal venous return via a left azygos240 have
dog.JAmVet MedAssoc149:1741,1966
beenreportedbutarerare
13.VanMieropLSH.Pathology andpathogenesis of the
 530 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
common cardiac malformations. Cardiol Clin 2:28,
34. Buchanan JW. Causcs and prevalence of cardiovascular
1970
(disease. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds). Current Veteri-
14. Friedman WF. Congenital heart disease in infancy and
fary Therapy XI. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992.
childhood. In Braunwald F (ed). Hear1 Disease: A'Text-
p 647
book of Cardiovascular Medicinc. 4th edl. Philadelphia,
34a. Monnet F, Orton EC, Gaynor J, el al. Diagmosis aurd
WB Saunders, 1992, p 887
14a. Tidholm A. Retrospective sturly of congenital heart
in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:569, 1997
defects in 15l dogs. J Small Anim Pract 38:94, 1997
35.
Trautvetter E. Evolution of the clectrocardiogram in
15. Detwciler DK Genetic aspects of cardiovascular diseascs
young dogs with congenital heart disease lcading to
in1 animals. Circulation 30:114, 1964
right ventricular hypertrophy, J Electrocardiol 14:273.
16. Shive RJ, Hare WCD, Palterson DF. Chromosome stud-
1981
ics in dogs with congenital cardiac defects. Cytogenetics
35a. Nakayama T, Wakao Y, Ishikawa R, Takahashi M. Pro
4:340, 1965
gression of subaorlic stenosis detected by continuous
17. Patterson Dr, Hare WCD, Shive Rf, Luginbuhl H. Con-
wave Dopplcr cchocardiography in a dog. J Vet Interm
genital nmalformations of the cardiovascular systerm asso-
Med 10:97, 1996
ciated with chromosomal abnormalitics. Zentralbl Vet
 36. Suter PF, Lord PF. Cardiac diseases. In Suter PF (ed).
Med 13:669, 1966
Thoracic Radiography of the Dog and Cat. Wettswil,
18. Pyle Rl., Patterson DF, Chacko S. The genetics and
Switzerland, Peter F. Suter. 1984. p 3:1
pathology of discrete subaortic stenosis in the New-
37. Sickie Rl., Anderson IK. Diagnosis of common con-
foundland dog. Am Heart J 92:324. 1976
genital hearl anoinalics in the dog using survey and
19. Stur I. Roth A, Muller S. Investigation into a farnilial
nonselective conurast radiography. Vet Radiol 28:6, 1987
accumulated occurrence of congenital cardiac anoma-
38. Goodwin JK. Lonbard CW. The clectrocardiographic
lies in Siamcsc and Oriental short-haired cats, Klcintier-
and radiographic features of conmon congenital hearl
praxis 36:85, 1991
defects. Vet Med 85:48, 1990
20.Rublc RP, Hird DW. Congenital abnormalities in imma-
39. Buchanan JW, Patterson DF. Seleclive auigiocardiogra-
lure dogs Irom a pct store: 253 cases (1987-1988). J
phy in dogs with congenital cardiovascular dlisease. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 202:633, 1993
Am Vet Radiol Soc 6:21, 1965
21. Bright JM, Holinberg DL. The cardiovascular system.
40. Bonagura JD, Myer CW, Pensingcr RR. Angiocardliogra-
In Hoskins J (cd). Veterinary Pediatrics: Dogs and Cats
phy. Vet Clin North Am (Small Anim Pract) 12:239,
from Birtht to Six Months of Age. Philadelphia, WB
1982
Saunders, 1990, p 43
41. Lord PF, Wood A, Liu SK, Tilley lP. Left ventricular
22. IIarpster N, Zook B. ‘The cardiovascular systein. In
algiocardiography in congenital mitral valve insuffi-
HIolzworth J (cd). Diseases of the Cat: Medicinc and
ciency of the dog J Ain Vet Med Assoc 166:1069, 1975
Surgery. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1987, p 820
42. Buchanan JW. Persistcnt left cranial vena cava in dogs:
23. Patterson DF, Pyle RL, Buchanan JW, et al. Hereditary
angiocardiography, significance, aud coexisting anoma-
patent ductus arleriosus and its sequclae in the dog.
lics. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 4:1, 1963
Circ Res 29:1,1971
43. Sisson DD, Lucthy M, Thornas WP. Ventricular septal
24. Patterson DF, Pyle RL., Van Mierop L, Melbin J, Elson
defect accompanied by aortic regurgitation in tive dogs.
M. IIereditary defects of the conotruncal sepum in
J An Anin Hosp Assoc 27:441, 1991
Keeshond dogs: Pathologic and genetic studies. Am J
44. Goodwin JK, Lombard C. Angio- anrd echocardiogra-
phy: Viewing hcart defects in more detail. Vet Med
Cardiol 34:187, 1974
25. Patterson DF, Pexicder T, Schnarr WR. ct al. A single
85:64, 1990
45. Buchanan JW. Pulmonic stenosis caused by single coro-
 major-genc defect underlying cardiac conotruncal 1nal-
forinations interferes with myocardial growth during
nary artery in dogs: Four cascs (1965-1984). J An Vet
enbryonic development: Studies in the CTD line of
Med Assoc 196:115, 1990
46. Bonagura JD, Herring DS, Echocardiography II: Con-
keeshond dogs. Am J Hum Genct 52:388, 1993
26. Van Mierop IS, Patterson DF, Schnarr WR Hereditary
genital heart disease.
e. Vel. Clin North Arn (Small Anim
conotruncal septal defects in Keeshond dogs: Embryo-
Pract) 15:1195, 1985
logic sludics. Am J Cardiol 40:936, 1977
47. Darke PGG. Congenital heart disease in dogs and cats.
27. Perkins Rl. Multiple congenital cardiovascular anoma-
J Small Anim Pract 30:599, 1989
48. Gaber CE. Doppler cchocardiography. Probl Vet Med
lies in a kitren. J Am Vet Med Assoc 160:1430, 1972
28. Pyle RL, Patterson DF. Multiple cardiovascular malfor-
3:479, 1991
49. Kaplan PM. Congenital heart discase. Probl Vet Med
ossy par la uy I ssop taxoq Jo Auey e ui soneu
160:965, 1972
3:500, 1991
 50. Matic SE. Congenital hcart disease in the dlog. J Small
29. Ogburn PN, Pcterson M. Jeraj K, et al. Multiple cardiac
Anin Pract 29:743, 1988
anomalies in a family of Saluki dogs. J Am Vet Med
51.
 Moise NS. Doppler cchocardiographic evaluation of
Assoc 179:57, 1981
30. Ware WA, Bonagura JD. Muluiple congenital cardiac
congenital cardiac disease. J Vet Iitern Med 3:195, 1989
52. Wingfield WF, Boon JA, Echocardiography for the diag-
anomalies and Fiscnmenger's syndrome in a dog, Com-
 nosis of congenital heart defects in the dog. Vet Clin
pend Con1 Educ Pract Vet 10:932, 1988
North Am (Small Anim Pract) 17:735, 1987
31.
Philips R, Hoover JP, Henry GA. Muliple congenital
53. Lchmkuhl LB, Bonagura JD. Comparison of Doppler
defects in a Blue Merle Sheltie. Canine Pract 15:4, 1990
transducer placement sites for eslimating the scverity
32. Rochat MC, lattimcr JC, Miller MA, ct al. Multiple
of subaortic stenosis in dogs. Ain J Ve1 Res 55:192, 1994
cardiac anomalies in a cat. J An Vet Med Assoc
54. Goldberg SJ, Allen HD, Marx GR, ct al. Doppler Echo
201:1049, 1992
cardiography. 2nd cd. Philadclphia, Ica '& Febiger,
33. Hunt GB, Church DB, Malik R, et al. A retrospective
1988
analysis of congenital cardiac an1omalics (1977-1989).
 55. Weyman AE. Principlcs and Practice of Echocardiogra-
Aust Vet. Pract 20:70, 1990
phy. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1994
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE  531
56. Fingland RB, Bonagura JD, Mycr CW. Pulmonic steno-
Double outlet right ventricle for relief of pulmonic
sis ini the dog: 29 cases (1975-1984). J Am Vet Med
stenosis in dogs. An experinental study. Vet Surg
Assoc 189:218, 1986
13:64, 1984
57. Buchanan JW, Pyle RL. Cardiac lamponade during
79. Bright JM, White Rl Jr, Mitchell SE, Gardner 'IJ. Percu-
catheterizalion of a dog with congenital heart discase.
tancous balloon valvuloplasty for trcatment of pul-
J An Vet Med Assoc 149:1056, 1966
monic stenosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:995,
58. Martin Mws, Godman M, Fucntes Vl., et al. Asscssnient
1987
of balloon pulmonary valvuloplasty in six dogs. J Small
80. Sisson DD, MacCoy DM. Treatment of congenital pul-
Anim Pract 33:443, 1992
 q  s o i ss 
59. Lonbard CW, Ackerman X, Berry CR, et al. Pulmonic
Vet Intern Med 2:92, 1988
stenosis and right-to-lefi atrial shun1 in three dogs. J
81.
Brownlie SE, Cobh MA, Chambers J, et al. Percutancous
Am Vet Med Assoc 194:71, 1989
balloon valvuloplasty in four dogs with pulmonic steno-
60. Ringwald RJ, Bonagura JD. Tetralogy of Fallot in the
sis. J Small Anim Pract 32:165, 1991
dog: Clinical findings in 13 cases. J Am Anim Hosp
82. Flickinger GL, Patterson DF. Coronary lesions associ-
Assoc 24:33, 1988
atcd with congenital subaortic stenosis in the dog. J
6Oa. Baim DS, Grossman W. Cardiac cathcterization, angi-
Pathol Bacteriol 93:133, 1967
Ography, and intervention. 5th Ed. Balimorc, Wil-
83. Kvart Cl. Congenital heart defecis in the dog. Svensk
lians & wilkins, 1996
Veterinartidning 38:15, 1986
61. Legcndre AM, Appleford MD, Eyster GE, Dade AW.
84. O'Grady MR, Holmberg DL, Miller CW, ct al. Canine
congenital aortic stenosis: A review of the literaturc and
left shuming patent duclus arleriosus in a dog. J An
commentary. Can Vet J 30:811, 1989
Vet Mcd Assoc 164:1198, 1974
85. Patterson DF, Flickinger GL. Subaortic stenosis in a
62. Custer MA, Kantor AF, Gilman RA. DeRiemer RH. Cor-
boxcr. Clinico-Pathologic Confereuce. J An Vet Med
rcction of pulmonic stenosis. J An Vet Mcd Assoc
Assoc 145:363, 1964
139:565, 1961
86. Patterson DF, Detweiler DK. Predominance of Germman
63. IIainlin RI., Marsland WP, Rudy Rl., Drenan DM. Atypi-
shepherd and boxer brceds among dogs with congeni-
cal clinical findings in a dog with pulmonic stenosis. J
tal subaortic sten1osis. Aim Heart J 65:429, 1963
Am Vet Mcd Ass0c 142:520, 1963
87. Pyle RI., Iowensohn HS, Khouri EM, et al. Left circum-
64. Weirich WE, Bisgard GE, Will JA, Rowe GG. Myocardial
flex coronary artery hemodynamics in conscious dogs
infarction and pulmonic slenosis in a dlog. J An Vet
with congenital subaortic stenosis. Circ Res 33:34, 1973
Med Assoc 159:315, 1971
88. Sisson D. Fixed and dynanic subvalvular aortic stcnosis
65. Lowensohn IIS, Khouri EM, Grcgg DE, ct al. Phasic
in dogs. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds). Current Veteri-
right coronary artery blood flow in conscious dogs with
nary 'Therapy Xl. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992,
normal and clevated right veniricular pressure. Circ
p 760
89. Liu S. Supravalvular aorlic stenosis with defornity of
Res 39:760, 1976
66. Hawe RS. Pulmonic stenosis in a cat. J An Anin Hosp
the aortic valve in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 152:55,
1968
Assoc 17:777. 1981
90. Stepien RL, Bonagura JD. Aortic stenosis Clinical find-
67. Jacobs G, Mahaffey M, Rawlings CA. Valvular pulmonic
stenosis in four Boykin spanicls. J Am Animal Hosp
ings in six cats. J Small Anin Pract 32:341, 1991
91. Lehmkuhl L.B, Ware WA, Bonagura JD. Mitral stcnosis
Assoc 26:247, 1990
68. Parterson DF, Haskins ME. Schnarr WR. Hercditary
in 15 dogs. J Vet Hntern Med 8:2, 1994
92. Buoscio DA, Sisson D, Zachary JF. ct al. (linical and
 y op a  aa aed an jo is
Cardiol 47:631, 1981
pathological characterization of an unusual form of
69. Willard MD, Eyster GE. Double-chambcred right ventri-
pies. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:100. 1994
cle in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 178:486, 1981
70. Polzin Dj, Ogburn P Isolated pulmonary valvular insuf-
defects using clues from the physical exan. Vet Med
ficiency in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:301, 1981
71. Eyster GE, Keller WF. Congenital pulmonic valve insuf-
85:40.46,1990
94a. Valdes-Cruz I.M, Jones M, Scagnelli S, et al. Prediction 
ficicncy in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 164:599. 1974
 of gradients in fibrous subaortic stenosis by continuous
72. Breznock EM. Surgical relief of pulmonic stenosis. In
wave two-limensional Doppler echocardiography: Ani-
Bojrab, M (ed). Current Techniques in Simall Animal
mal studies. J An Coll Cardiol 5:1363. 1985
Surgery. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1990, p 513
73. Breznock EM, Wood GL. A patch-grafl technique for
94b. Lehmkuhl LB, Bonagura JD, Jones DA, Stepien RL.
Comparison  of  cathctcrization  and Doppler-derivcd
corrcction of pulnonic stenosis in dogs. J Am Vet Med
gradients in a canine model of subaortic stenosis. J Arm
Assoc 169:1090, 1976
Soc Echocardiogr 8:611, 1995
74. Ford RB, Spaulding GL, Eyster GE. Usc of an extracar-
95. Wingfield WE, Boon JA, Miller CW. Echocardiographic
diac concduit in the repair of supravalvular pulmonic
assessment of congenital aortic stenosis in dogs. J Am
stenosis in a dlog. J Am Vel Med Assoc 172:922, 1978
Vet Med Ass0c 183:673,1983
73. Orton EC, Bruecker KA, McCracken TO. An opci1
96. O'Grady MR. The incidencc of aortic valve iusufficiency
patch-graft echniquc for correction of pulnonic steno
in congenital canine aortic stenosis: A Doppler echocar-
sis in the dog. Vet Surg 19:148, 1990
diographic study, Abstract. J Vet Inicrn Med 4:129, 1990
76. Shores A, Weinrich W. A modified pericardial patch graft
97. Aronison F, McCaw D. Congenital cardiac discasc in
technique for correctiof of pulmonic stcnosis in the
dogs [aortic stenosis]. Mod Vet Pract 65:687, 1984
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:812. 1985
98. Mur1a WFr, Ferrans VJ, Picrce JE, Roberts wC. Discrete
 77. Washizu M, Kawainura M, Kobayashi K, ct al. Improved 
subaortic stenosis in Newfoundland dogs: Association
heavy exercise toleranice after correction of mild pul-
of infective endocarditis. Am J Cardiol 41:746, 1978
monic stenosis. Jap J Vet Sci 51:441, 1989
99. Eyster GE, Anderson LK, Cords GB. Aortic regurgita-
78. Whiting PG. Breznock GI., Pendray DI., Strack DR.
tion in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 168:138, 1976
5321
DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
100. Breznock EM, whiting P, Pendray D, ct al. Valved apico-
122. Breznock EM. Vasko JS, IHilwig RW, et al. Surgical cor-
aortic conduit for relief of left ventricular hypertension
rection, using hypothermia, of an interventricular sep-
caused by discrete subaortic stenosis in dogs. J Am Vet.
tal defect in thc dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 158:1391,
Med Assoc 182:51, 1983
1971
101. linn KA, Orton EC. Closcd transventricular dilation of
123. Brcznock EM. Spontaneous closure of ventricular scptal
discrctc subvalvular aortic stcnosis in dogs. Vet Surg
defccts in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 162:399, 1973
20:340. 1991
124. Gelatt KN, McCill LD. Clinical characteristics in mi-
102. Muir GD, Pancicra DL, Fowler JD, et al. Medical and
crophthalmia with colobomas of the Australian shep-
surgical manageiment of aortic stenosis in a dog. Can
herd dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 162:393, 1973
Vet J 30:894. 1989
125. Eyster GE, Whipple RD, Anderson 1.K, ct al. Pulmonary
103. Komtebedde J, Ilkiw J. Reseclion of subvalvular aortic.
artery banding for ventricular scptal defert in dogs and
stenosis. Vet Surg 22:419, 1993
cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 170:434, 1977
103a. Monnct E, Orton EC, Gaynor JS, et al. Open rescction
126. Fcldman EC, Nimmo-Wilkie JS, Pharr JW. Eiscnmen-
for subvalvular aortic stenosis in dogs. J Am Vet Med
ger's syndromc in the dog: Case reports. J Am Anim
Assoc 209:1255, 1996
[losp Assoc 17:477, 1981
103b. Dhokarikar P, Caywood DD, Ogburn PN, et al. Closcd
127. 
MeCaw D, Aronson E. Congenital cardiac discase in
aortic valvotomy: A retrospectivc study in 15 dogs. J Am
dogs. [VII. Ventricular septal defect.] Mod Vet Prac
Anim Hosp Assoc 31:402, 1995
65:767, 1984
104. DcL.ellis LA, Thoimas WP, Pion PD. Balloon dilation of
128.
Nishida K, Wakao Y, Watanabe T, ct al. A case of thc
congenital subaortic stenosis in the dog. I Vet Intern
Mcd 7:153, 1993
41:263, 1988
105. Herrtagc ME, Gorman NT, Jefferies AR. Coarctation of
129. Bellah JR, Spencer CP, Brown D)J, ct al. Congenital
thc aorta in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 33:25, 1992
cranioventral abdorninal wall, caudal sternal, diaphrag-
106. Fyster GF, Carrig CB, Bakcr B, et al. Coarctation of the
matic, pericardial, and intracardiac defects in Cocker
aorta in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 169:426, 1976
Spanicl litterimates. J Am Vet. Med Assoc 194:1741, 1989
107. Sandusky GE, Breischwerdt ER. Tubular hypoplasia of
130. Nakai M, Tomino T, Goto V, ct al. Quantitative cvalua-
the ascending aorta and patent ductus arteriosus in a
tion of the pattern of shunt flow in the right ventricle
dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 176:536, 1980
and pulmonary artery of dogs with cxperimcntal ven-
108. Nichols JB, Eyster GE, Dulisch ML, et al. Aortic inter-
tricular septal defct. J Clin Invest 72:779, 1983
ruption in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 174:1091, 1979
131.(
Okubo S, Nakai M, Tomino T. Relevance of kocation of
109. IHamlin RI., Smith CR, Simctzer Dl., Ostium secundum
dcfect and pulmonary vascular resistance to the intra-
type interatrial septal defects in the dog. I Am Vet Med
Assoc 143:149, 1963
cxperimcntal
 vcentricular  scptal  defec.  Circulation
110. Eyster GF, Anderson LK, Krehbeil JD, et al. Surgical
73:775, 1986
repair of atrial septal defecl in dog. J Am Vet Med
132. Suter PF. The radiographic diagnosis of canine and
Assoc 169:1081, 1976
feline heart disease. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 3:441,
111. Troy GC, Turnwald GIL. Atrial fibrillation and abnor-
1861
mal ventricular conduction presented as right. bundle
133. Nimmo-Wilkie JS, Feldman EC. Pulmonary vascuar le-
branch block in a dog with an atrial septum primun
sions associated with congenital hcart defccts in thrce
defect. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:417, 1979
dogs. J Am Anim Ilusp Assoc 17:485, 1981
112. Jeraj K, Ogburn PN. Johnston GR, ct al. Atrial septal
134. Braden TD, Appleford MD, Hartsfield SM. Correction
delect (sinus venosus type) in a dog. J Am Vet Med
of a ventricular septal defect in a dog J Am Vet Med
Assoc 177:342, 1980
Assoc 161:507, 1994
113. Farrow CS. Atrial septal defect in a kiuen. Mod Vel
135. Sheridan JP, Mann PIl, Stock TE. Pulmonary artery
Pract 65:281, 1984
banding in the cat: A casc report. J Small Anim Pract
114. Church DB, Allan GS. Atrial septal defect and Eisen-
12:45, 1971
menger's syndroine in a 1mature cal. Aust Vet J 67:380,
136. Lister G, Iellenbrand WE, Kleinman CS, ct al. Physio-
1990
logic efects of incrcasing hemoglobin concentration in
115. Goodwin JK, Cooper RC Jr. Lnderstanding the patho-
left-to-ight shunting in infants with ventricular septal
physiology
of  congenital  heart  defects.
Vet Medl
defects. N Engl J Med 306:502, 1982
87:650, 1992
137. Symhorst DP, Laver RM, Doty DB, Brady MJ. Hemordy-
116. Kirkberger RM, Berry WL. Atrial septal defect in a dog:
namic effects of vasodilator agents in dogs with experi-
The value or Doppler echocardiography. I S Afr Vet
mental venuricular septal defects. Circulation 54:472,
Assoc 63:43, 1992
1976
117. Liu SK, Einger S]. Persistent common atrioventricular
138. Knight DH, Patterson DF, Melbin J. Constriction of fetal
canal in two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 153:556, 1968
dlutctus arteriosus induced by oxygen, acctylcholine, and
118. Hagler DJ, Edwards wD, Seward JB, ct al. Standardizcd
nomenclature of the ventricular seplum and ven tricular
predisposed to persistent patcncy. Circulation 47:127,
septal defects, with applications for two-dimensional
1973
echocardiography. Mayo Clin Proc 60:741, 1985
139. Gittenberger-de-Groot J. Strengers JI, Menlink M, ct
119. Hilwig Rw, Bishop SP. Anomalous pulmonary venous
al. Histologic studies on normal and persistent duchs
return in a Grcat Dane. Am J Vet Rcs 36:229, 1975
arteriosus in the dog. J Am Coll Cardiol G:394. 1985
120. Hamlin RL, Smevzcr DL, Smith CR. Intcrventricular
140. House EW, Fderstrom HE. Anatomical changcs with
septal defect (Roger's disease) in the dog. J Am Vet.
age in the heart and ductus arteriosus in the dog after
Med Assoc 145:331, 1964
birth. Anat Rec 160:289, 1968
121. Clark DR, Anderson JG, Paterson Ca. lmperforalc car-
141. Recd JH, Bonasch H. The surgical treatimcnt of a persis-
diac septal defect. in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
tent right aortic arch and patent ductus arteriosus in a
156:1020, 1970
dog. Can Vet J 5:240, 1964
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 533
142. Buchanan JW, Soma LR, Patterson DF. Patent ductus
164. Nelson Aw. Aorticopulmonary window in a dog. J Am
arteriosus surgery in small dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Vet Mcd Ass0c 188:1055, 1986
151:701, 1967
165.1
Malik R, Bellengcr CR, IHunt GB, et al. Aberrant branch
143. Buchanan JW. Symposium: Thoracic surgery in the dog
of the bronchoesophageal artery mimicking patent
and cal. IIl. Patent ductus arteriosus and pcrsistent
ductus arteriosus in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
right aortic arch surgery in dogs. J Small Anim Pract
30:162, 1994
9:409, 1968
166. Birchard SJ, Bonagura JD, Fingland RB. Rcsults of liga-
144. Breznock EM, Wisloh A, Hilwig RW, Ilamlin RL. A
tion of patent ductus arlcriosus in dogs: 201 cases
surgical method for corrccionof patent ductus arterio
(1969-1988) . J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:2011, 1990
sus in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 158:753, 1971
167. Henderson RA, Jackson WF. Modificd double ligation
145. Smctzer DL, Breznock EM. Auscultatory diagnosis of
and division of patent ductus arteriosus. In Bojrab M
patent ductus arteriosus in the dog. J Am Vet Med
(ed). Current Techniques in Small Animal Surgery.
Assoc 160:80, 1972
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1990, p 501
146. Cohen JS, Tilley LP, Liu SK, Dehoff WD. Patent ductus
168. weirich WE. Conventional surgical correction of patent
arieriosus in five cats. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc ll:95,
ductus artcriosus. In Bojrab M (ed). Current. Tech-
1975
niques in Small Animal Surgcry. Philadelphia, WB
147. Eyster GE, Whipplc RD, Evans AT, ct al. Recanalized
Saunders, 1990, p 507
patent ductus arteriosus in the dog. J Small Anim Pract
169. 1loyd TR, Fedderly R, Mendelsohn AM, ct al. Trans-
16:743, 1975
catheter occlusion of patent ductus arteriosus with Gi-
148. Eyster GF, Eupler JT, Cords GB, Johnston J. Patent 
anturco coils. Circulation 88:1412, 1993
ductus arleriosus in the dog: Characteristics of occur-
169a. Grifka RG, Miller MW, Frischmcyer KJ, ct al. Trans-
rencc and results of surgery in one hundred consccu-
catheter occlusion of a patent ductus arteriosus in a
tive cases. J Am Vct Med Assoc 168:435, 1976
Newloundland puppy using the Gianturco-Grifka yascu-
149. Atwell RB. Patent ductus arteriosus in a dog—at-
lar occlusion device. J Vet Intern Med 10:42, 1996
169b. Fox PR, Bond B, Sommer R. Nonsurgical transcathc-
tempted medical closurc. Vet Rec 101:425, 1977
150. Ackerman N, Burk R, Hahn AW, Hayes IIM Jr. Patcnt
tcr coil occlusion of patent ductus arteriosus in two
ductus arteriosus in the dog: A retrospcctive study ol
dogs using a preformed nitinol snare delivery tech-
radiographic, epidemiologic, and clinical findings. Am
nique. J Vet 1nt Med 12:182, 1998
J Vet Rcs 39:1805, 1978
170. Hamlin RL, Simith CR, Rudy RL, Nash PA. Antemortem
151. Jeraj K, Ogborn P, Lord PE, Wilson JW. Patent ductus
diagnosis of tetralogy of Fallot in a dog. J Am Vet Med
arteriosus with pulmonary hypertension in a cat. J Am
Assoc 140:948, 1962
Vet Med Assoc 172:1432, 1978
171.
Clark DR, Ross IN, Hamlin RL, Smith CR. Teuralogy of
152. Weirich WE, Blevins WE. Rebar AIH. Latc consequences
Fallot in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 152:462, 1968
of paten ductus arteriosus in the dog: A report of six
172. Bolton CR, Ettinger SJ, liu SK. Tetralogy of Fallot in
cases. J Am Anim IIosp Assoc 14:40, 1978
threc cats. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 160:1622, 1972
153. Jones CI., Buchanan JW. Patent ductus arteriosus: Anat-
173. Kirby D, Gillick A. Polyeythemia and tetralogy of Fallot
omy and surgery in a cat. J Arm Vet Med Assoc
jn a cat. Can Vet. J 15:114, 1974
179:364, 1981
174.
Eyster GE, Weber W, McQuillan W. Tetralogy of Fallot
154. Pyle RL., Park RD, Alexander AF, Iill BL. Patent ductus
in a cat. J Am Vet. Med Assoc 171:280, 1977
175. L ombard Cw, Twitchell MJ. Tetralogy of Fallot, persis-
tent lef cranial vena cava and retinal detachment in a
Am Vet Med Assoc 178:5G5, 1981
155. Aronson E, McCaw D. Patent ductus arteriosus. A com-
cat. J Am Anim Ilosp Assoc 14:624, 1978
176. Hawe RS, Witler WR, Wilson JB. Tetralogy of Fallot in
mon congenital defect. [of dogs] that must be correcled
a 5-year old cat. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:329, 1979
surgically. Vet Med Rey USA 4:2, 1983
177. VanHecrden J, Lourens DC. Tetralogy of Fallot in a two
156. Deussen A, Heusch G, Schipkc J, et al. Persistent ductus
and one half ycar old cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
arteriosus in thrce German Shepherd dogs. Zentralbl
Veterinarmed, A31:140, 1984
17:129, 1981
178. Miller CW, Holnberg DL, Bowen V, et al. Microsurgical
157. O'Brien SE, Riedesel EA, Myers RK, ct al. Right-to-lcft
management of tetralogy ol Fallot in a cat. J Am Vet
patent ductus arteriosus with dysplastic left ventricle in
Med Assoc 186:708, 1985
a dog.I Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1435, 1988
179. Herrtage ME, Hall LW, English TA. Surgical correction
158. Malik R, Turnbull GR, Black AP. Patent ductus artcrio-
of the tetralogy of Fallot in a dog. J Small Anim Pract
sus in five related female border collies, Aust Vet Pract
24:51, 1983
21:2, 1991
180.
Garson A, Gillette PC, McNamara DG. Propranolol:
159. Pattcrson DF. Congenital deferts of the cardiovascular
The prcferred palliation for teuralogy of Fallot. Am J
systeim of dogs: Studies in comparative cardiology. Ady
Cardiol 47:1098, 1981
Vet Sci Comp Med 20:1, 1976
181. Fyster GE, Anderson 1.K, Sawyer DC, ct al. Beta-adren-
crgic blockades for management of tetralogy of Fallot
ventricular septun and agenesis of the ductus arterio-
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 169:637, 1976
sus in a pup. I Am Vet Med Assoc 195:229, 1989
182. Beekman RH, Tuuri DT. Acute hemodynamic cffects of
161. Turk JR, Miller LM, Miller JB, Sande RD. Necroizing
increasing hemoglobin concentration in children with
pulmonary arteritis in a dog with patent ductus arterio-
a Hight to lelt ventricuuar shunt and relativc anemia. J
sus. J Small Anim Pract 22:603, 1981
Am Coll Cardiol 5:357, 1985
1G2. Will Jw. Subvalvular pulmonary stenosis and aorticopul-
183.
Voncolditz JH, Coon RL., Clifford PS, et al. Effects of
monary septal delect in thc cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
chronic right to lefl cardiac shunt on hypoxic sensitivity
154:913,1969
ol mongrel dogs. J Appl Physiol 58:1767, 1985
1G3. Eyster GE, Dallcy JB, Chaffce A, et al. Aorticopulmo-
I84. Bonagura JD, Pipers FS. Diagnosis of cardiac lesions by
nary septal defect in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
contrast  echocardiography.  J  Am  Vet.  Med  Assoc
167:1094, 1975
182:396, 1983
 534 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
185. Roberts WC. A simple histologic classification of pulmo-
210. Gordon B, Trautvetter E, Patterson DF: Pulmonary con-
nary arterial hypcrtension. Am J Cardiol 58:385, 1986
gestion associated with cor triatriatum in a cat. J Am
186. 1.ord PF, Liut Sk, Carmichacl JA. Congenital tricuspid
Vct Med Assoc 180:75, 1982
stenosis with right ventricular hypoplasia in a cat. J Am
211.
1. Linde-Sipman JS, Stokhof AA. Triple auria in a pup. J
Vet Med Assoc 153:300, 1968
Am Vet Med Assoc 165:539, 1974
187. Jeraj K. Ogburn PN, Jessen CA, el al. Double outlct
212.
 Stern A, McClure RC, Holmbcrg D. Cor triatriafum
right ventricle in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 173:1356,
dexter in a dog. Conmp Cont Educ Pract Vet 8:401, 1986
1978
213. Miller MW, Bonagura JD, Dilbariola SP, et al. Budd-
188. Turk JR, Miller 1.M, Ilegreberg GA. Doubic outlet right
Chiari-likc syndromc in two dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
ventricle in a dog. J Am Anim HIosp Assoc 17:789, 1981
Assoc 25:277, 1989
189. Suaw RC, Aronson EF McCaw DL. Transposition ol the
 214. Malik R, Ilunt GB, Chard RB, et al. Congenital obstruc-
grcat arteries in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:634,
tion of the caudal vena cava in a dog. I Am Vet Med
1985
Assoc 197:880. 1990
190. Bucrgelt CD, Suter PPF, Kay WJ. Persistent. truncus
215. Otto CM, Mahaffey M, Jacobs C, et al. Cor triatriatun
artcriosus in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 153:548, 1968
dexter with Budd-Chiara syndrome and a review of
191. Iamlin: RL., Sinetzer DI., Smith CR. Congenital mitral
ascites in young dogs. JI Small Anim Pract 31:385, 1990
insulficiency in thc dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 146:
216.
 Jevens DJ, Johnston SA, Jones CA, et al. Cor triatriatum
1088. 1965
dexter in two dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:289, 1993
192. HIamlin RL, Harris SG. Mitral incompetence in Grcat.
217.
 Alboliras ET. Edwards wD, Driscoll DJ, et al. Cor triatri-
Danc pups. I Am Vet Med Assoc 154:790, 1969
atum dexter: Two-dimensional echocardiographic diag-
193. Dear MG. Mitral incompetence in dogs of 0-5 ycars of
nosis. J Arn Coll Cardiol 9:334, 1994
agc. J Small Anim Pract 12:1, 1971
218. Kaufiman AC, Swalec KM, Mahaffey MB. Surgical cor-
194. Weirich WE, et al. Congenital tricuspid insulficiency in
rection of cor triatriatum dexter in a puppy. J Am Anim
a dog. J Aim Vet Med Assoc 162:1025, 1974
HIosp Assoc 30:157, 1994
195. Lin SK. Tilley 1.P. Malformation of the canine miual
219. Paasch L.I1, Zook BCl. The pathogenesis of endocardial
valvc complex. J An Vet Med Assoc 167:465, 1975
196. 1iu SK, Tilley 1.P. Dysplasia of the tricuspid valve in the
fibroelastosis in Burmesc cats. Lab Invcst 42: 197, 1980
 220, Krahwinkel DJ, Coogan PS. Endocardial fibroclastosis 
dog and cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 169:625, 1976
in a Great Dane pup. J Am Vet Med Assoc 159:327, 1971
197. Eystcr GE, Anderson L, Evans AT. Ebstcin's anomaly: A
221.
1.ombard CW, Buergelt CD. Endocardial fibroclastosis 
rcport of 3 cases in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
in four dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:271. 1984
170:709, 1977
222. Hawe RS, Tyer DF, Latimer KS. Congenital unilateral
198. Liu S, Brown B. Mallorimation of mitral valvc complex
abscncc of a pulmonary artery in a cat. J Am Anim
associatcd with cardiac dysfunction in 120 cats. Lab
1losp Assoc 21:111, 1985
Invest 58:1, 1988
223.
Kealy JK. Persistent right. aorlic arch in the Greyhound.
199. DeMadron E, Kadish A、Spcar JF, ct al. Incessant atrial
tachycardias in a dog with tricuspid dysplasia. J Vet.
Irish Vct J 15:197, 1961
224.
Imhoff Rk, Foster Wj. Persistent right aortic arch in a
Intern Med 1:163, 1987
200. Tilley I.P, liu SK. Letter to thc cditor. J Am Vet Med
te11 ycar-old dog. J Am1 Vet Mcd Assoc 143:599, 1963
225.
Coward TG. Persistcent right aortic arch in two Great
Assoc 17:798, 1977
201. Detwciler DK, Brodey RS, Clickinger GL.. Diagnosis and
Dane litterimates. J Small Anim Pract 5:245, 1964
226. Lawson DD, Pirie IIM. Conditions of thc canine
matic hernia. J An Vet Med Assoc 137:177, 1960
ocsophagusII. Vascular rings, achalasia, tumours and
202. Baker GJ. Wiliams CSF. Diaphragmatic pericardial hcr.
peri-oesophagcal lesions. J Small Anim Pract 7:1 17.
nia in the dog. Ve1 Rec 78:578, 1966
1966
203. Atkins CE. Suspcct congenital peritoncopericardial dia-
227. Van der Ingh TSG. Van der linc-Sipman JS. Vascular
phragmatic hernia in an adult cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
rings in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 164:939, 1974
228.B
Helphrey ML. Vascular ring anomalics in thc dog. Vet
165:175, 1974
204. Evans SM, Biery DW. Congcnital peritoneopericardial
Clini North An (Small Anim Pract) 9:207, 1979
diaphragmatic hernia in the dog and cat: A literature
229. Aultman SH, Chambers JN, Vestre WA. Doublc aortic
revicw and 17 additional case histories. Vet Radiol
arch and persistent right aortic arch in two littermates:
21:108, 1980
Surgical treaimenl. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:533,
205. Willard MD. Aronson E. Peritoneopericardial diaphrag-
0861
230.
Maruin DG, Ferguson Ew. Double aortic arch in a dog.
matic hernia in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 178:48i, 1981
206. Eyster GA. Evans AT, Blanchard GL, ct al. Congenital
J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:697, 1983
pericardial diaphragmatic hernia and muliple cardiac
 231. McCandlish IA, Nash AS, Peggran A. Lnusual vascular
defects in a litter of collies. J Am Vet Med Assoc
ring in a cat: Left aoric arch with right liganenum
170:516. 1977
arteriosum. Vet Rec 114:338, 1984
207. Van der Gaag I, VanDerLuer RJT. Eight cases of pericar-
232. Berry AP, Brouwer GJ, Tennant BJ. Persistent right
dial defects in the dog. Vet Pathol 14:14, 1977
aortic arch in a kitten. Vet Rec 114:336, 1984
208. Bellah JR, Whitton DL, Elison GW, ct al. Surgical cor-
233. Wheaton LG, Blevins WE, Weirich WE. Persistent right
rection of concomitant cranioventral abdominal wall,
aortic arch associated with other vascular anomalies in
caudal siernal, diaphragmatic, and pericardial defecis 
two cats. J An1 Vct Mcd Assoc 184:848, 1984
in young dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1722, 1989
234. Hurley K, Miller MW, Willard MD, et al. Left aortic arch
208a. Skrodski M, Allgocwer I, Grevel V. Dic kongenitale
and right liganentum arleriosum causing csophagcal
obstruction in a dog. J Am Vel Med Assoc 203:410,
teraturubersicht und Kasuistik. Kleinticrpraxis 42:973.
1993
1998
235. Shires PK, Liu W. Persistent right aortic arch in dogs:
209. Sisson DD, Thomas WP, Recd J, ct al. Intrapericardial
A long-term follow-up affer surgical correction. J Am
cysts in the dog. J Vet Intern Med 7:364, 1993
Anim 11osp Assoc 17:773, 1994
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
535
235a. Muldoon MM, Birchard SJ, Ellison GW. Long-term
238. Wallace CR. Absence of posterior vcna cava in a dog. J
results of surgical correction of pcrsistent right. aortic
Am Vct Med Assoc 136:27, 1960
arch in dogs: 25 cases (1980-1995). J Am Vet Med
239. Salmeri KR, Bellah JR, Ackeriman N,ct al. Unilateral
Assoc 210:1761, 1997
congenital aneurysm of thc jugular, linguofacial, and
236. Lombard CW, Knight DI, Buchanan JW, Rifle RA.
maxillary veins in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:651,
Clinico-pathologic conferencc. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1991
172:75, 1978
240. Sammarco CD, Regan J, Ward CR、 Buchanan JD. Cau-
237. Scotti C, Galloni M. Ieft anterior vena cava in a dog.
dal venous return through a left azygos vcin in a dog.
Veterinari Cremona 3:11, 1989
Vet Radiol Lltrasound 36:517, 1995
Valvular
auired
25
Heart Disease in
and Cats
DAVID SISSON
CLARENCE KVART
PETER G. G. DARKE
CHRONIC DEGENERATIVE VALVULAR
DISEASE
MITRAL REGURGITATION
Chronic degenerative valvular discase (CIVD) is thc most common causc
 of cardiac disability in dogs. As many as three fourths of all dogs with
signs of congestive heart failure suffer frorn mitral rcgurgitation caused by
Inyxomatous degeneration of the valve leaflets or chordae tendineae.'-s The
mitral valve is affccted either alone or together with the tricuspid valve in
 is doap ose t aaa eu ai o aoun sop so
myocardial diseasc and other cardiac disorders, causing volume ovcrload of
the left side of the heart. In thesc circumstanccs, valvular insufficiency results
from thc combined effects of chamber dilatation, enlargemenl. of the mitral
 annulus, and ventricular or papillary muscle dysfunction, Accordingly, dogs
with a patent ductus arteriosus or dilated cardiomyopathy oftcn develop
Imild to moderate mitral regurgitation.
Lcss is known aboul the prevalence annd causes of valvular diseascs in cats,
 inl which mitral regurgitation usually occurs in association with sorme form
of myocardial discasc. Tashjian and associates reported just 7 cascs of mitral
valvular fibrosis and 2 cases of tricuspid valvular fibrosis in 202 consecutivcly
performed necropsies.6 Necropsy studies of 112 cats with hcart failure from
acquired causes revealed mitral valvular fibrosis in 39 cats, papillary 1nuscle
fibrosis in 50, and fused chordae tendineae in 17.' In this and subsequcnt
publications, the inportance of the accompanying myocardial lesions was
ernphasized, obscuring the significance of the valvular changcs.7-"l More
 cn s c o    p pda isd 
cent), but he did not specify the nature of the diseasc process or the
tcchnique used to make this determination.!?
Inasmuch as many cats are presented in end-stage heart failure, the precise
relationship between mitral regurgitation and coexisting myocardial disease
is uncertain. In cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, mitral regurgitation
and fibrosis of thc anterior mitral valvc lcaflet occur as unavoidable consc
quences of dynamic left ventricular outflow tract (LvOT) obstruclion. Mitral
regurgitalion also occurs in many cats with endomyocarditis and restrictive
536
ACQUIRED VALVULAR HEART DISEASE IN DOGS ANI CATS I
537
myocardial diseasc, in which thc 1nitral valvc leaflcts,
surroundcd by a loosc mesh of collagen, elastic fibers,
chordac tendineae, and papillary muscles are oftcn
and ground substance, which in turn is enveloped by
 found to be distorted by adhesions and fibrotic plaques
an encircling layer of endothelial cells.
(chapter 28). Congenial mitral valve malformations
can cause valvular stenosis, insufficiency, or dynarnic
NORMALFUNGTION OF THE MITRALVALVE
LVOT obstruction.
COMPLEX
Thc exact mechanism of mitral valve closure is un-
ANATOMY OF THE MITRAL. VALVE COMPLEX
certain and probably varies in differing circumstances.
 Each component of thc mitral yalve apparatus contri-
GROss ANAroMy. Propcr closure of the mitral valve
requircs the integrated action of the six anatomic com-
 important rolc during the initial phases of mitral valve
poncnts that define the mitral valve apparatus: (1) the
closure. As a consequence of lcft atrial systole, blood
imitral lcaflets, (2) thc chordae tendineae, (3) the mi-
accelcralcs through the mitral orifice, creating an area
tral arnulus, (4) the iefl atrial wall, (5) the papillary
of negativc pressurc within the inflow tracl, drawing
musles, and (6) the lefl ventricular wall,1. 1# The anat
thc mitral valve lcaflets togcther. Eddy currcnts propa-
 omy of thc mitral valve is similar in humans, dogs, and
gated in the left ventriclc aid early valvc closure by
cats (see Figs. 2-5. 2-6).15,16 Two main cusps of the
pushing the lcaflets togcther. Atrial relaxation initiates
mitral valve can usually be identificd: a large anterior
revcrsal of the atrioventricular pressure gradient, con-
-d) roansod nnes t pue dsn (onnn no jedss)
tributing to early valve closurc. Interruption of thc
elal or mural) cusp.15.17 The antcrior cusp divides thc
coordinated sequential activation of the atrium and
 base of the left ventricle into an inflow rcgion that
ventricle, as occurs with atrioventricular dissociation,
rcceives blood froin the left atium and an outflow
can produce mild mitral rcgurgitation.
region through which blood is expelled. The hases of
Activation of the papillary muscles at thc onset of
 inde  sdsn nu p o 
vcntricular systole draws the mitral lcaflets downward
half the circumference of the atrioventricular ring,
 and together. Mitral regurgitation is often observcd
with commissural cusp tissue completing thc cncircle-
when the sequence of activation of the papillary mus-
mcnt of the mitral orifice.17
cles and the left ventricular wall is altered, as occurs
The tips and midventricular surface of the valve
with vertricular cctopic beats or vcntricular asynergy
cusps are anchored to two main papillary muscles by
from any cause. As systole procceds, rising pressure
first- and second-order chiordac tendincac, rcspcc-
within the vcntriclc rcsults in firm coaptation of the
tively.4 15 Third-order chordae tendineae can he identi-
valve leaflets. Thc tendency of the valve leaflets to evcrt
fed cxtending from the posterior and cormmissural
into thc atrium during ventricular systole is opposed
cusps dirctly to the ventricular wall. Third-order
 by the chordae tendincae, the papillary musclcs, and
chordae tendineae are not normally found on the
the buttressing action of thc coapted valve leaflcts.?4 As
 antcrior cusp of the mitral valve.'
thie ventricle contracts, constriction of the mitral anmulus
 reduces the area the mitral leaflets must. bridge.
HISTOLOGIC ANATOMY. Histologic exainination of a
Thc funclional interdependencc of the various com-
normal mitral  valve lcaflet reveals four distinctive
ponents of the initral valve coinplex is bcst illustrated
layers.1 13 The atratis consists of a thin laycr of cndo-
by the observation that valvular insufficicncy caused by
thelial cells supported by a framework of conncctivc
failure of any one of these structures results in progres-
tissue and a thin layer of smooth musclc. Bcneath thc
sivec valvular incompetence from the induccd malfunc-
alrialis is the spongiosa, a loose collection of collagcn,
tion of the remaining elements. Damage to the valvular
fibroblasts, Anitschkow cells, and clastic fibcrs crnbed-
tissue or the supporting chordae tcndincac, resulting
 ded in a mucopolysaccharidc-rich ground suhstancc.
in valvular insuffciency, induces left atrial and left
The fibrosa consists of a dense laycr of compact colla-
yentricular enlargement and mitral annulus dilatation.
gcin that is cortinuous with similar tissue in the mitral
Thcse changcs causc malalignmcnt of thc papillary
anulus and thc ccntral core of the chordae tendi-
muscles, causing a further increase in the regurgitannt
neae.13 The vcnntricular surface of the valvc is lincd by
volume. By these mcchanisms, progrcssive cnlargc-
the ventricularis, which is structurally sinilar to thie
Iment of the left side of the heart and dilation of
atrialis except that it lacks a distinct layer of smooth
the mitral annulus establish a never-cnding cycle of
muscle. Vascular structures and myocardial tissue are
worsening disease ("'mitral regurgitation begets mitral
present only in thc basilar one third of thc rnitral
regurgitation").25
valve. Thcse tissues exiend frorn the left atrial wall to
a location just beneath the atrialis.13. 18-21
PATHIOLOGY OF CHIRONIC VALVULAR
The chordae tendineae are cormposed of a central
DISEASF IN DOGS
 core of collagen that is arranged parallel to thc long
Myxomatous degeneration best describcs thc histologic
axis of the chordae." Thc dense, collagenous corc is
valve changes in dogs with chronic degenerativc valvu-
538 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
lar disease, or CDvD+ (also termed endocardiosis)
trophic valvc. The spongiosa hecomes tremendously
(chapter 37). Sinilar changes are reported in humans
thickened as a rcsull of cdema and accumulations
with the rmitral valvc prolapse syndrome and in patients
 Of the acid mucopolysaccharides, hyaluronic acid and
experiencing spontaneous rupturc of a chorda.26-30
chondroitin sulfate.2 47 As thc lesions progress, the
The progression of CDvD in dogs, once referred to as
 distinction betweenn thc spongiosa and fibrosa becomcs
warty valve disease, has been most thoroughly
de-
difficult to make.
scribed by Whitney,* Buchanan,* and Kogurc.32
 Other morphologic changes reported in dogs with
The carliest changcs, designaled as typc I lesions,
mitral regurgitation include left atrial dilatation, dilata-
consist of a few small, discrete arcas of opacity or
tion of the mitral anmulus, and eccentric hypcrtrophy
nodules in thc area of valvular apposition opposite the
of the left. venntricle. Jet impact lesions, Zahm-Schmin-
site of origin of the chordae tendincae. In type II
ckc patches, and endomyocardial tears are observed
lesions, the nodules have bccomc larger and morc
in the left atrium of some affcted dogs. 1 3 Suhstantial
numerous and have started to coalcsce. The chordac
lipid* and ainyloid accuunulations are present in thc
tcndincac are usually unaffcctcd al this stage, and
valves of some dogs.*s. +s Intramural coronary arterio-
clinical evidencc of valvular rcgurgitation is gcnerally
sclcrosis and focal 1nyocardial fibrosis are common in
3 aq p ae ssl 1l a 
dogs with chronic valvular disease,3 so These lcsions
nodules or plaquclike deforinitics resuling frorn thc
 may be dlue to vascular remodeling induced by angio-
furthcr coalcscence of lcsions. The chordae tcndineac
tensin II.
are thickened where they attach to the valve leaflet. At
this stage, the valve has become noticeably thickened
ETIOLOGY OF CHRONIC DEGENERATIVE
and is less flexible than normal.1 The basal portion of
VALVULAR DISEASE (MYXOMATOUS VALVULAR
the valve is now affecied, and areas of calcificationn and
DEGENERATION)
hcmorrhage may be observcd within the valve stroma.
Valvular insufficiency is often present at this stagc. In
 The etiology of chronic degenerativc valvular diseasc
dogs with type IV lesions, thc valvc cusps are con-
(C1)VD) has not beenn ascertained. Some investigators
tracted and grossy distorted. The free valve edges may
believe that collagen dissolution is the basic pathologic
bc rolled upward; chordae tendineac are thickened
 process responsible for myxomatous degencration
proximally, are ofien clongated, and are occasionally
ruptured. A1 this stagc of the disease the valve may
dcscribc
this proposcd pathologic process." Bul-
be dcscribcd as "ballooning." "'parachute-likc," or as
chanan suggested that a genetically influenced degen-
"hillowing sails, and valvular insuffcicncy is usually
cration of collagen 1might bc responsible for MXD
prcsent (Fig. 25-1).
in1 dogs. This attractive theory is supported by thc
 It is important to recognize that these pathologic
observations that chondrodystrophic brceds arc prcdis-
changes arc not confined to the 1nitral valve. Buchaan
 posed to CDVD, and these same breeds are also prcdis-
reported the incidencc of valvc involvcrnent in dlogs
posed to other conncctive tissue-related disorders
with chronic valvular disease as follows: mitral valve
such as intervertcbral disc diseasc, ruptured cruciate
alone, 62 percent; mitral and tricuspid valves, 32.5
ligaments, collapsing airways, and pcriodontal disease.
perccnt; mitral and aortic valves, 2.5 percent:; tricuspid
Collagen melabolism is a balancc hctwccn synthesis
valve alone, 1.3 percent; and aortic valvc alone,
,1.3
- e a penau sre sssod qon pue 'sisi pu
percent.1 Similar findings have heen rcported by
bcr of modifying influcnces. It is not known whethcr
Others.1-3, 32-37
collagcn dissolution in degencrative valve disease rc-
The prevalcnce and severity of myxomalous dcgcn-
sults from a primary disorder of collagen synthesis,
 collagcn content, organization of collagen (arrange-
Early valvc lesions, consisting mainly of proliferations
mcnt of fibcrs), or abnormal collagenase activities.
of the endothclium and of thc underlying fibroelastic
 Over 275 differcnt mutations in the genes for types I.
tissue in areas of valvular contact, cannot bc distin-
I1, I1l, IX, X, and XI collagens have been identified in
 guished from normal aging changes. Type I and type
hunans.*2 Most of thc mutations involve a single basc,
II lesiorns are compatible with normal aging cxcept
thereby changing thc codon of a criical amino acid.
Jo pouad krea Aiudoddeun ue re ioo Aoqn e
Most of thc amino acid substitutions are those of a
bulkicr amino acid for the obligatory glycine of the
 promincnt histologic featurcs include degeneration of
repeating Gly-X-Y sequence of the collagcn triple helix.
the fibrosa and thickening of the spongiosa. Collagen
The valves of the heart are composed mainly of type 1
bundles in the fibrosa lose their cross-striations,
. be-
and type IHI collagcn.53 Defects of type 1 or lype II1
comc hyalinized and disorganized, and may disinte-
grate and disappear: Acid mucopolysaccharidles accu-
 chondrodysplasia, mitral valve prolapsc, and Ehlers-
mulate within the fibrosa, displacing fragments
of
Danlos syndrome.54s Accumulations of procollagen
disrupted collagen into the central portion of thc dys-
have been neasured in human palicnts with MXD
ACQUIREDVALVULARHEARTDISEASEINDOGSAND CATS539
B
FIGURE25-1
Pathology of chronic degenerative valvular disease
(myxomatous degeneration)in three dogs.(A)
Mitralvalveleaflets aremarkedly thickened and
distorted，whichhas been likened tobillowing
sails.”(B)A flail anterior mitral valve leaflet caused
by rupture of three chordae tendineae(arrows)is
shown from the aspect of the left atrium.The
leaflet edge is thickened and rounded.(C)
Followingremoval ofbothatria,the atrioventricular
valves can beviewed from above.Notice themarked
degeneration of themitral valve (left)and of the
septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve (right）.Closer
inspection atnecropsyrevealedrupture of several
mitral and tricuspidvalve chordae tendineae.
associatedwith mitralvalveprolapse,but this finding
viralorbacterialinfection,andavarietyofendocrine
may simply indicate the production of new collagen as
part of an attempted rpair process.7.5s As yet, no one
hypotheses that prior bacterial infection or immune-
has identified a specific collagen abnormality in dogs
mediatedphenomenaplaya substantialroleinthe
withvalvularMXD
disease process. Several investigators have suggested
Increasedenzymaticlysis of collagen and elastinhas
a link between hyperadrenocorticism and MXD.4. 65
been proposed as a cause of myxomatous degeneration
Experimental studies in dogs suggest that stress
of theheartvalvesand as a causeof rupturedchordae
(ACTH,cortisol） can induce lesions morphologically
tendineae in humans.59.60 Recent studies of other con-
similar tothose of MXD.66Inculturedhumanfibro-
nective tissue diseases suggest a possible pathogenic
blasts,dexamethasonetreatmentdecreasessynthesisof
rolefor one or several differentmatrixmetalloprotei-
procollagen and causes down regulation of TIMP-1
nases (MMP).61 Collagen lysis can be induced by exces-
synthesis,tilting the balance of collagen metabolism
sive tissue activity of MMP 1 (collagenase).62 This en-
away from accumulation.67 Tissue growth factor-beta
zyme is regulated,in part,by the naturally occurring
has the opposite effect as it stimulates the synthesis of
tissue inhibitor ofMMP1,referred to asTIMP-1.Oth-
procollagen and TIMP-1. Angiotensin II and aldoste-
ers have suggested that excessive production of proteo-
rone also stimulate collagen synthesis,while angioten-
glycans is the primary biochemical defect in dogs with
sin II additionally inhibits MMP-1 activity, thekey en-
CDVD.6 According to this hypothesis, large accumula-
zyme for degradation of fibrillar collagen in the
tions of proteoglycans interferewith the normal assem-
cardiacinterstitium.68Theincreasedincidenceand se
bly of collagen and elastin fibers.Mitral valve prolapse
verity of MXD in male dogs supports a role for other
also occurs in Marfan’s syndrome patients. Etiology
hormonal influences onCDVDas well.Thesignifi-
involves mutations in the fibrillin-1 gene, a constituent
cance of the amyloid deposits in thevalves of a small
of themicrofibrillarscaffoldingrequiredfortheassem-
percentage (5 percent) of dogs with CDVD is un-
bly of elasticfibers.64
known.4.48,49 The pathology and pathogenic mecha-
Other proposed causes of chronic valvular disease
nisms of acquired valvular disease in cats have not
in dogs include stress, hypertension, hypoxia, prior
been characterized.5-7.69
540 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
FPIDEMIOLOGY OF CHRONIC DEGENERATIVE
lencc of mitral regurgitation in different age groups
VALVULAR DISEASE
of cavaliers, based on survcys conducted in thc United
 Kingdom, Sweden, Australia, and the United States, is
 In the 1960s, the prevalcnce of CDVD, dctermined
shown in Figure 25-3. Clearly, the prevalencc off
clinically in a diverse population of dogs presented to
chronic valvular discasc inl a given1 population depcnds
a teaching hospital in the United States, was reported
on brced popularity and thc agc distribution of the
to be 8.3 pcrcent.1. 2 The prevalcnce of CDVD
was
 dogs in that population.
shown to increase with advancing age, so that approxi-
97 01 07 'P1o suesA g 01 g s8op 1o 1uo21>d 01 4loreu
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF MITRAL
jusod gg 0n 0s pue plo seoa z1 01 6 saop jo juauod
REGURGITATION
of dogs over 13 years old cxhibited murmurs.? Small
breed dogs, such as toy and miniaturc poodles, minia-
 During the carly stages of myxomatous degenera-
ture schnauzcrs, Pomeraians, Chihuahuas, cocker
tion, the mitral valve reinains compctcnt, no murmur
spaniels, Pekingese, fox terricrs, and Boston terriers,
is present, and no hemodynanic alterations occur.
were found to hc prcdisposed to CDVD; and rnale
Eventually, the mitral valve bcgins to leak, a systolic
dogs were affectcd morc frequcntly than femalc dogs
(1.5 to 1.0 malc to female ratio).t 2 4 Other invcstiga-
ventricular output is cjccted into the left atrium. Thc
tors reportcd prcvalence data for CDVD ranging from
tendency for forward output to decline is compensated
for by the Starling, renal, and ncurohormonal mccha-
 reported thc prevalence of degenerative valve changcs
nisms, and by eccentric hypertrophy of thc Icft veniri-
 at necropsy rather than the clinical prevalence of valvu-
cle (chaptcrs 3, 11). These coinpensatory proccsses
lar insufficiency.
are able to maintain normal cardiac output for a long
 Reccnt epidemiologic studies of CDvD, conducted
 period of timc, often months or ycars, evcn when the
mainly in the Lnited Kingdom and Sweden, have fo-
 regurgitant volumc is large., 2. 4 Decomprcssion of the
cused on thc cavalicr King Charlcs spaniel brced. A
left ventricle into the low-pressurc lefl atrium results
 high prevalencc of nitral rcgurgitation in this brcedl
in rapidly dcclining lcft ventricular wall tension and
   q t  a s s
 an incrcase in the velocity and extent of myocardial
lcagucs.71 Soon thercaficr, Darke72 reported that car-
fihcr shortening.76 7 Myocardial oxygen consumption
diac 1murmurs wcre present in 59 percen1. of cavalicrs 4
rises only modestly as it. is dctermined mainly by heart
ycars of agc and oldcr, bascd on physical examinations
 ratc, contractility, and myocardial wall tension and is
 performed at dog shows. In Sweden, which has a popu-
litle affecicd by thc incrcased work accomplished by
lation of cavalier King Charles spaniels almost entirely
fiber shortening.74-81
cmanating from the United Kingdom, cardiac mur
murs were dctecied in 42 pcrcent of dogs 4 ycars of
DETERMINANTS OF REGURGITANT VOLUME. As describcd
by Gorlin's hydraulic equation, the volume of 1nitral
cavaliers with hcart murmurs confirmcd that chronic
regurgitant flow depcnds on the regurgitant orifice
valvular discase is the dominant cause of murmurs in
 arca (ROA), thc prcssure gradient between the left
the hreed (Kvart C, Haggstrorm J. Unpublished data).
alrium (LA) and the left ventricle (LV), and the dura-
Thc percentagc of cavalier King Charles spaniels
tionn of systole,8z-84 Of these factors, ROA is quantita-
with a heart murmur was shown to depend on the age
tively most important. The size of the regurgitanl ori-
distribution of the dogs examined,73 If a group of
fice depends on the scverity of valve damagc, thc
very young cavaliers is examined, a low prevalence of
intcgrity of the chordac tendincae, and the combined
murmurs will be found, whereas a group of older dogs
effccts of left atrial dilatation, annular dilatation, and
will have a vcry high prevalence of murinurs.
. The
ventricular dilatation on valvular function. The IV-LA
cumulative frcquency of heart rmurrmurs in relation to
 prcssure gradient and ROA arc dynamic quantitics
age groups is shown in Figure 25-2. From these data,
that change as systole proceeds* T'hc ROA tends to
approximately 50 percent of 7.5-ycarold cavalicrs
decreasc as LV diameter gets smaller Increascd prc-
would be expected to have a heart murimur. In a
load or afterload and decreased myocardial contractil-
 group of 10-year-old cavaliers, 85 percent would have
 ity increase regurgitant volume as they increase IV sizc
murimurs. One study of 6l randomly selecied cavalie1s
 and ROA over the systolic time intcrval.32,4. &3 Diurctics
(mean age of 6.4±2.8 [sD] years) revealed that 52
 and venodilators decreasc IV size and thc regurgitant
percent had heart murmurs. In a 1993 study per-
orifice at the oriscl of systole. Artcrial vasodilators and
forrmed in the Unitcd Statcs, Beardow and Buchanan71
 positive inotropic drugs increasc the rate of myocardial
reported that 56 percent of cavaliers over 4 years of
fiber shortening, causing the 1V dimensions and ROA
age and 100 percerit of those 10 ycars old or older had
to decrease al a faster ratc, Thesc cffects have been
murinurs. A lower prevalence was reported froin a
convincingly and clegantly demonstrated in dogs with
smaller survey in Australia.7 The age-adjusted preva-
experimentally induced mitral rcgurgitation.F2 63. 8-s7
ACQUIRED VALVLLAR HEART DISEASE IN DOGS AND CATS !
541
100
80
nwnw
FIGURE 25-2
Estirarion of the age at which 50% of cavalier King
heart
60
Charles spaniels have developed heart inurmurs.
Solid fine shows the estimated cumulative function of
heart murmurs by age. Points show the perceniage
with
of dogs with detected heart. rmurrs in different.
age groups from 494 cxamined Swedish cavalier
sbop
40
King Charles spanicls. (lrom Hlaggstrom J. Hansson
K, Kvart Cl, et al. Chronic valvular disease in the
cavalier King Charles spaniel in Sweden. Vet Rec
131:549. 1992.)
20
Age (Yrs)
9
12
15
Since the mitral regurgitant orifice and root of the
regurgitant orifice.ss Thus, there are two mechanisms
aorta are in parallel, the ratio of forward blood flow
of actior for the vasodilating drugs: (l) reduction in1
to regurgitant flow depends on the ratio of aortic
 ROA as a consequence of reduced ventricular size, and
impedance to regurgitant impedance.*s Increased sys-
(2) reduction of the systolic LV-LA pressure gradient
tcmic arteriolar resistance resulis in diminution of for-
as a consequence of reduced aortic impedance. The
ward flow and causes regurgitant flow into the left
first mechanism predominates in experinental mod-
atrium to increase. Conversely, the administration of
els32. 97 s# of acute mitral regurgitation, but the relative
artcriolar vasodilators decrcases the volume of rcgurgi-
 importancc of these mechanisms could differ in dogs
tant flow indcpcndent of any change in thie nitral
with more chronic discase.
LEFT ATRLAL COMPLIANCE. Whein left atrial pressure
100
 rises suffciently, pulnorary congcstion devclops, ac-
cormpanicd by thc usual signs of left-sidled conngestivc
heart failure (CHF). Mean left atrial prcssure is dcpen-
80
(%)
dent on (1) thc volume of regurgitant flow, (2) the
 output of the right side of the heart, (3) left ventricular
urs
60
diastolic pressure, and (4) the compliance of the left
weder
to dcvelop when left atrial compliancc is low and thc
Australia
regurgitant orifice is large.76.89 These conditions arc
40
leart
prescnt when a previously compensatcd paticnt suffers
sudden rupturc of a chordae tcndincac. When severc
工
20
mitral rcgurgitation devclops ovcr a long period of
time, the dilaicd left atrial chamber becorncs morc
compliant, buffering the pressure rise in the atrium as
 it compensates to provide an adcquate ventricular fill-
0
5
10
15
 ing volume. As a result, left atrial pressure may be only
slightly clevated cvcn in the face of 1nassive regurgitant
Age (yrs)
volunes. Left atrial pressure is also dependenl on myo-
FICURE 25-3
cardial contractility and left vcntricular compliance.
Estimation of the age at which 50% of cavalier King Charles
When contractility declincs in paticnts with CDVD.
spaniels have developed heart murrmturs. Sotid lines show the
signs of pulmonary congestion are usually already cvi-
estimated cumnlative functions of hcartmurmurs by age from
slucdies in the Lhnited Kingdom (UK), Ausralia, Sweden, and LSA.
dent.
The investigation in the CK, Sweden, and USA is based on
suffcient. nubers of observations, whereas more cases need to be
ATRI0vENTRICULAR COUPLING. Cardiac Pcrformance
recorled in the older age group in Australia. (From Haggstrom J,
Hansson K, Kvart C, ct al. Chronic valvular discase in the cavalicr
in dogs with mitral rcgurgitation is cxtrcmcly depcn-
King Charles spaniel in Sweden. Vet Rcc 131:549. 1992.)
 dent on the optimizcd preload provided hy an appro-
 542  DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
atrial natriuretic peptide (NT-proANP) are clevated in
gurgitation, the left atrium enlarges in sizc and mass
dogs with mitral regurgitation prior to the develop-
ssoT og uonoe ioisoog inyramod siou e sdopaop 1! se
mcnt of overt congestive heart failure.9. w Further
of this augmented booster pump action can be cata-
rescarch is nceded to deterimine the nature, cxtent,
strophic in dogs with severe mitral regurgitation. Atrial
and clinical relevamce of neuroliormonal activation in
fibrillation in dogs with severe mitral regurgitation is
dogs with early, compensated mitral insufficiency.
usually heralded by sudden cardiac decompensation
and the dcvelopment of pulmonary congestion and
signs of low cardiac output. The consequcnces of atrial
MYOCARDIAL CONTRACTILITY. In lhumans with mitral
fibrillation in dogs with experimentally induced mitral
Tegurgitation, myocardial contractility is assessed pri-
rcgurgitation include a 15 to 39 pcrccnt declinc in
marily to determine the advisability of mitral valve
cardiac output, a 22 to 65 percent fall in stroke volume,
and a 2.5 to 9.5 mmH g increase in pulmonary capillary
tility has bcen shown to be an importamt dleterminanl.
wedge pressure." Maintenance of sinus rhythm should
of left-sicdcd heart function postoperatively, and it is of
be a high priority in the management of dlogs with
substantial value in predicting the surgical outcome.
 mitral regurgitation.
The assessment of myocardial contractility in dogs with
mitral regurgitation has also received considerable at-
tention, despite the fact that reparative surgery is
NELROHORMONAL RESPONSES. Modcrate
toscvere
rarely performed.5. vs Such data have been mainly used
hcart failurc in dogs with experimentally crcated or
sidooui 2anisod jo ostn o nsuelr no 1og onae o
naturally occurring mitral regurgitation is accompa-
drugs (digoxin) in dogs with mitral regurgitation.
nied by increased sympathetic nervous system activity
The medlical treatment. of dogs with mitral regurgita-
and activation of thie renin-angiotcnsin-alctosterone (R-
tion is not. based on or determined by cchocardlio-
A-A) system,92 93 1Diuretic treatment further intensifies
graphic mcasures of myocardial contractiliy for several
the activity of the R-A-A system.z Activation of plasma
reasons. First, the ability of inotropic drugs to reduce
and lissue R-A-A systems stimulates expansion of the
regurgitant volurme is not predlicated on the slatus of
plasma volumc, increases preload and afterload, and
myocardial contracility. Regurgitant volume decreases
induces remodeling of vascular and myocardial tissues.
with positive inotropic trcatment, even when myocar-
A positive feedlback loop is cstablished in which mitral
dial contractility is normal.82 Second, intrinsic myocar-
regurgitation results in progressive ventricular enlarge-
dial contractility is very difficult to measure in dogs
ment and declining cardiac performance; this, in turn.
with mitral regurgitation. In dogs with chronic mitral
lcads to increasingly severe mitral regurgitation.
regurgitation, myocardial contractility decrcascs slowly,
The precise sequence and extent of ncurohormonal
but progressivcly and inexorably,s 1o-1 This decline in
activation in the early stages of degenerativc valvular
contractility has been termed the cardionyopathy of vot-
dlisease has not yet becn clearly clucidated. In part, this
ume overload (sce Fig. 33-1).! As a final consideration,
is due to technical ciffculties in obtaining accurate
the only positive inotropic agent currently available for
measurements of the resting plasma concentrations of
chronic oral therapy is dligoxin, which is a relatively
thesc cpisodlically released hormones.4-9s Pedersen
weak positive inotrope. ‘Treatmcnt responses to dli-
and colleagues found increased plasma renin activity
 goxin are often attributed to its pronounced modulat-
and elevated concentrations of aldosterone in asymp-
ing influencec on the autonomic nervous system or to
tomatic ancl mildly symptomatic
Ccavaliers
with
other extracardiac effects (chapter 12).
CDVI),95,9 In apparent contradiction, Swedish investi-
Sevcral factors unique to the condition of mitral
gators reported the findings of low plasma concentra-
regurgitation tend to obscure any decline in myocar-
tions of angiotensin II and aldosterone in cavalier dogs
dial contractility. Traditional mcasurements used to
with CDVT) 1 year beforc, I to 6 months beforc, and
describe ventricular function in other cardiac disor-
at the onsct of interstitial pulmonary edema (mild
ders, such as dilated cardiomyopathy, are not valid in
CIIF, Fig. 25-4)." Based on these stucdies, thcy con-
 patients with mitral regurgitation,76 The ejection phase
cluded that fluid retention in the carly stages of devel-
indices (ejection fraction, shortening fraction, mcan
oping heart failure may not be caused by activation of
velocity of circumferential fiber shortening) are in-
tlie plasma R-A-A system ancl that other mcchanisms
creased relative to the true level of myocardial contrac-
may be responsible for carly sodium and water reten-
tility, in part because of the unique loading conditions
tion in dogs with mitral regurgitation.97 9x They further
present in mitral insufficiency. Fiber shortening im
hypothesized that increased circulating concentrations
dogs with mitral regurgitation is greatly augmented by
of the atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) effectively sup-
incrcased preload (the Frank-Starling mechanism) and
press thc plasma R-A-A systerm in dogs with early, com-
by reduced afterload (ventricular cjection into a low-
pensated CDVD. Several studies have confirmed that
pressure rescrvoir, the atria).
 plasma concentrations of ANP and N-erminal pro-
Myocardial contractility can be accurately asscssed
ACQUIRED VALVULAR HEART DISEASE IN DOGS AND CATS
543
P<0.001
P<0.01
P<0.01
P<0.01
P<0.01
1
2000
1000
0001
100
.L2
Ptasma
+
·
100-
n=10
nz11
n=11
104
n=10
n=1l
n=1l
0
1
2
0
1
2
Situation
Situation
P<0.05
100
门
FIGURE 25-4
Plasma X-teiminal proatrial natriuretic peptide (NT-proANP,
fop lef), angiotensin I1 (botom), and aldosterone (fop. right)
concentrauons in cavalier King Charles spaniels 1 year bcforc
IL
dlecormpensatio1 (situation 0): at 6 months before
decompensation (situation 1); and at carly decompeisated
10
CIIF (situation 2). Data are presented as values for cach dog
ploted at each siluation and as a gcometric mean, withi error
bais representing SD. Notice the logarithmic scale. the
incrcase in plasma NT-proANP concentration with
progressiou of valvular regurgitation, and the decrease in
plasma angiotensin II and aldosterone concentrations in carly
：
dccompensated CHF (sifuation 2). (From Ilaggstrom J,
n=10
n=11
n=11
I lansson K, Kvart C, et al. Effects of naturally acquircd
decompensated mitral valve regurgitatiou oni the renin-
0
1
2
conccntration in dogs. Ain J Ve Res 58:77, 1997.)
Situation
in patients withi mitral regurgitation only by methods
slope of the end-ejection strcssvolume relation
that take into account cardiac loading conditions. This
(EESVR). This unmasks the intrinsic depression of
can be accomplished by determination of the mass-
myocardial contractility not readily apparent prior to
corrected end-ejection wall stress-volume relationship
β-adrenergic blockade.'s3 Thus, the severity of intrinsic
(EESVR), but this procedure is very cumbersome.e, 1s
myocarclial impairment in dogs with naturally oc-
Thie cnd-systolic wall stress/end-systolic volume ratio
and cncd-systolic volume index are less accurate csti-
underestimated.s.105*
mates of left ven tricular function than EESVR, but they
 The severity of clinical signs in dlogs with CDVD and
appcar to be more useful indicators of contractility
mitral regurgitation is not necessarily a reflection of
than the isovolumetric or ejection phase indices.100-104
myocardial function. Although progrcssive myocardial
It is important to recognize that increased sympathetic
failure clearly contributes to the evcntual clinical dete
nervous system activity can obscure the intrinsic de-
rioration, severe pulmonary congcstion rmay develop
cline in rmyocardial contractility occurring in dogs with
 as a consequence of mechanical regurgitation of blood
mitral  regurgitation,  Acute β-adrenergic
 receptor
into the left atrium in thie absence of myocardial fail-
blockade in dogs with chronic mitral regurgitation
ure (e.g., with traumatic rupture of a papillary muscle
reveals a substantial reduction of the mass-corrected
or sudden rupture of a chordae tendineae).1i. 5
544 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCUIATION
HISTORY AND CLINICAI. SIGNS
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
 Most clinical signs of mitral regurgitation result from 
Cardiac auscultation by a skilled cxaminer is the
pulmonary congestion (chapters 4, 5). Therefore,
most practical and economic dliagnostic mcthod for
most dogs are prescnted for respiratory distress.
(detecting mitral regurgitation (chapter 5). The classic
Coughing is a common but nonspecifc sign of devel-
murmur of mitral regurgitation is holosystolic, con-
oping heart failure in dogs, but not cats. Many older,
stant in intensity, of mixed frequency, and loudest at
small breed dogs cough because of chronic bronchitis
the left apex (see Figs. 5-10, 5-11, 5-12).15. 11 12. 12 A
 or from a collapsing trachea. When coughing results
soft, grade 1 of 6, systolic murmur over the mitral area
from heart failure, there is usually an clevated respira-
(see Fig. 5-7) is the first clinical fnding for CDVD. In
some mildly affected dogs, the murmur occurs only
tory rate (tachypnea) and increased respiratory cffort
(dyspnea). Hlowever, cough without dyspnea oftcn oc-
interrmittently at thie cnd of inspiration, A mid or late
curs with severe mitral regurgitation and is thought to
systolic click or a click-murmur can somctimes be aus-
result from compression of the left main stem bron-
cultated prior to the developmeni. of a holosystolic
chus by an cnlarged left atrium. Some dogs with CHF
mur mur. Presumably, the rmechanism of the click-mur-
become restless at night, are unable to sleep, and
 mur in dogs is similar to what occurs in human patients
cxperience orthopnea (ie., have more difficulty breath-
with mitral valve prolapse.27,2s 16. 12s
 In cavalier King Charles spanicels, there is a strong
ing lying down than sitting or standing). Paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea refers to severe attacks of orthop-
relationship between murmu intensity, heart size, sc-
nea that occur several hours after the onset of sleep.
verity of regurgitation, and NYIIA class of heart failure
3/6 or less amd a clearly audible second heart. sound
sodes have been referred to as cardiac asthma.
Righit-sided heart failure occurs in some dogs with
are likcly to have mild discase (NYIIA class I or II,
Fig. 25-6),123 With diseasc progression, the murmur
 CDVT) due to myxomatous degeneration of the tricus-
 becomes louder, the second heart sound becomcs
pid valve (and resultant volume overload), as a conse-
softer or inaudible, and a gallop heart sound may be
quence of pulmonary hypertension, or a combination
 of these disorders. Severe pulmonary hypertension oc-
curs in a small mimority of paticnts with chronic mitral
regurgitation. Most of these dogs have serious underly-
ing pulmonary disease. Rarely, signs of right-sided
100
LVEDD La/Ao-d
heart failure result from cardliac tamponade caused by
-09
a left atrial tear3. u6 The devclopment of ascites is
2
usually accompanied by signs of low-output heart fail-
ure and a dccline in the severity of pulmonary conges-
me
tion, regardless of ctiology.
40-
Gencralized muscle weakness and progressive cxcr-
 cise intolerance become evident when forward output.
30_
tio
is impaired. This may result from severe valvular regur-
 20-
 gitation, pulmonary hypertension, and/or declining 
品
myocardial contractility. Syncope tends to occur pri-
-eff
10-
marily when cardiac output declines precipitously. It is
Ansn s! pue (ao qim slop i uais uouoon ue
U
0.5
associated with a serious cardiac arrhythmia or parox-
Left
Normal
Low
 Medium
High
ysms of coughing. Other causes are described in chap-
(1&l)
(ll&V)
(V&Vl)
ter 22.
FIGURE 25-5
Various schemes have bcen proposcd to classify dogs
Mean left ventricular cndl-diastolice diamcter (LVED) and left
with CDVD into disease stages. Thiese are largely bascd
atrial ratio (La/Ao-d) echo measuremenuts in 79 cavalier King
on the attendamt severity of clinical signs and/or radio-
Charies spanicls divided in 4 groups according to auscultated
intensity of the heart murrmur (gracles 06) over the mitral area
Dogs with moderate-inteusity (giades 3 and 4) and high-intensity
humans with heart failure was cdevcloped by the New
(grades 5 and 6) murmurs differed significantly from both normal
York Heart Association (NYHA classes I-IV). A modifi-
dogs and dogs with low-inteusity murrmurs (p<.001). The La/Aod
cation of this scheme is often used to classify dogs with
and LVEDD were significantly (p<0.001) greater in dogs with high
intensity muimus (grades 5 and 6) than in dogs with moderatc
 heart dlisease (chapter 12). Unfortunately, its clinical 
intcnsity murrnurs (grades 3 and 4). Error bars represent.  SEM.
utility is limited by the paroxysmal nature of clinical
(From ilaggstrom J, Kvart C, Hansson K Ileart sounds and
signs in dogs, and the diffculties in detcting and
imurmus: changes relate to scverity of chronic valvular disease
(CVD) in the cavalier King Charles spaniel. J Vet Ilntern Med 9:75.
quantifying subtle cxercise limitations.
1995.)
ACQUIRED VALVULAR HEART DISEASE IN DOGS AND CATS 545
0%
high-pitched, musical murmur, best described as a
A
40-
No S3
S3 Present
dog with mild to moderate valvular insufficiency. In
such cases, systolic high-frequency vibralions of one of
sbop:
30-
the mitral valve leaflets can often be documcnted by
91%
echocardiography. 4 Murmur intensity ofien varies
withi changes in contractility or loading conditions.
20-
 Mitral rcgurgitation murimurs tend to become louder
31%
with cxercisc or excitcmcni, and they may become soft
 or disappcar when sevcre heart failure develops.16
10_
The murmur of mitral regurgitation is usually best
heard at the left 5th intercostal space (see Fig. 5-7),
but dorsal, cranial, caudal, or rightward radiation of
the murmur is common, lt is particularly diffcult to
determine whether murmurs heard over the tricuspid
0&l
I1&/V
valve area originate from that valve or whether they
Heart Failure Class
are referred from an incompetent mitral valve.:t . n6, 131
Clinical evidence of tricuspid regurgitation, such as
B
3.0
S3 present
jugular pulsations, or radiographic or cchocardio
 graphic evidence of tricuspid insuffciency is often rc-
quired to establish the diagnosis. Cardiac arrhytlhmias
usually interrupt the predominating cadence of thie
2.5
heart, crcate abnormal pauses in the rhythm, and alter
the intensity of both murmurs and transient hcart
011
souncis.
2.0
atrial
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPIIY
Left
1.5
Elecirocardiograms are frequently normal in dogs
with mitral regurgitation, even when cardiomegaly can
be demmonstrated on radiographs or an echocardio-
1.0
No S3 present
tial recordings are performed."6 At other times, P-
wave prolongation (p-mitralc, >0.04 scc in dogs, >0.03
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
- p i on sn nsd sq  (s ui s
Left ventricular end diastolic diameter
(LVEDD)(mm)
a    1   
 ment is suggested by prolongation of the QRS complex
FIGURE 25-6
(A) Distribution of cavalicr King Charles spanicls with S3 detccted
R-wave amplitude in leads 11, 11l, and AVF (wave >0.9
by phonocardiography in each heart. failure class. (B) An Ss was
mV in cats, >3.0 mV in dogs) (see Figs. 6-16, 6-39).
fotund anong dogs with echocardiographic evidence of
cardiomcgaly (incrcascd LVEDD and La/Ao-l). Small points
The mean electrical axis is usually normal. Nonspccific
represent dogs with no Ss, and large points represent dogs with S,
ST segment. and T-wave changes, reflccting thc pres-
prescnt. The ellipsoids represent. where confidencc curves within
cnce of hyperrophy, hypoxia, drug, and electrolyte
cach 90% of the data for each group (dogs cxhibiting Ss and dogs
alterations, may be observed.
C, Hansson K Heart sounds and murmurs: chages relate t1
Sinus rhythm (cats), sinus arrhythmia (dogs), or
severity of chronic valvular disease (CVD) in the cavalier King
Charles spaniel. J Vet Intern Med 9:75, 1995.)
sinus tachycardia predominates im animals with mitral
rcgurgitalion. Heart rate and hcart rate variability are
not. alteree in cdogs with slight to moderate left atrial
ausculated (sce Fig. 5-10),z. 123 An S; heart soumd is
and ventricular dilatation. Ilowever, heart. rate is in-
often mistaken for the sccond heart soumd whien Sz
crcased and heart rate variability is reduced once clini-
is obscured by the holosystolic murmur.l16. 123 With
 cal signs of congestive heart failure are observed.128
cxperience, gallop sounds can be readily identified as
Premature ventricular and supraventricular beats are
thiey are lower pitched thian Sq sounds and lhcard loudt-
the most common rhythm disturbances recorded in
 est at the cardiac apex.
dogs with miral regurgitation.1 12s Atrial fbrillation
Murmur intensity is a less reliable indicator of dis-
develops in a small but. substantial number of dogs
ease scverity when a varicty of breeds with differing
with severe ClVD and is observed most often in male
conformations are cxamined. Occasionally, a loud,
 dogs with scverc regurgitation and marked left atrial
546
DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCUIATION
enlargement.4 5. 16, 129 The onset of atuial fibrillation
centrally andl in the periphcral lung ficlds. The dilated
is usually accompanied by markedl clinical deteriora-
veins bccome denser and larger than the pulmonary
arterics that accompany thcm (see Fig. 7-18). At this
tachycardia, ventricular tachycardia, ancl other arrhyth-
stagc, thcre is an incrcased rate of transfer of fluidl
mias occur less frequently.
from the pulmonary capillaries to the interstitium (see
Fig. 13-1). This is initially unapparent radiographically
RADIOGRAPIIY
because the incrcased rate of interstitial fluid produc-
tion is balanced by an increased rate of removal by
 L.eft. atrial enlargemcnt. is the earliest and most con-
pulmonary lymphatics (chapter 13). Further clevations
sistent radiographic feature of mitral regurgitation
of venous pressure result in radiographically detectable
(chapter 7).jie-ais. =s In the dorsoventral projection,
 imterstitial edema, Fluid accumulation in perivascular
thc enlarged left auricle is initially recognized as a
lymphatics and the interstitium causes the margins of
slight bulge protrucding from the left cranial border of
pulmonary vessels to lose their crisp definition. Fluid
the hcart, from the 2 to 3 o'clock position, using the
accumulates in a similar fashion in thc walls of the
clock face analogy (see Figs. 7-1C, 7-4B; and 25-7).
bronchi and bronchioles, causing pcribronchiolar
Additional left atrial enlargement is usually accompa-
cuffing. The overall increase in pulmonary fluid con-
nied by radiographic evidence of left ventricular cn-
tent results in decrcased radiolucency of the lung and
largement. The entire left border of the heart becomes
a loss of conirast between thie parenchyma and bron-
more convex, and the left atrial bulge may be obscured
 chovascular structures, These changes are often most
from view as the left ventricle cnlarges. Thc enlarged
apparent in hilar lung regions or in the right caudal
cardiac sillouette cventually occupies a greater pro-
lumg lobes. In dogs, alveolar pulmonary ederma, char-
portion of the thorax. The posterior border of the
actcrized by the appcarance of indistinct fluffy densi-
heart becomes rounded and may be displaced to either
ties, air alveolograms, and air bronchograms, develops
the left or right of the midline. It is not possiblc
initially in the hilar region or in the right caudal lung
to distinguish pure left ventricular cnlargement from
lobe (see Fig. 13-3). The location of such changes is
biveniricular enlargement on routine thoracic radio-
more variable in cats.
graphs. As the left atrium dilates further, the main
stem bronchi assume a more obtuse angle, and the
CARDIACCATHETERIZATION
body of thie atrium may become visible as a dense mass
supcrimposed on the caudal portion of the cardiac.
 Cardiac catheterization and angiocardiography are
silhouette (sec Figs. 7-4; 25-7).
used mainly in a research setting to provide qualitative
 Im the lateral projcction, left atrial enlargement
and semiquantitative cstinmates of the sevcrity of regur-
causes the trachca to be displaced dorsally, diminishing
thie angle betwcen the trachea and thoracic spine. The
tion can also be scored + l to +4, based on the extent
ventral deflection of the terminal trachea disappears.
and duration of left atrial and pulmonary venous opac-
The left main stem bronchus is clevated by the enlarg-
ificalion following the injection of contrast material
into the lefl ventricle.t Miral regurgitant volume is
ing left atrium and becomes visible dorsal to its coun-
terpart on the right. Enlargement of the left atrium
more accurately estimated by measuring the dlifference
and ventricle causes the caudal border of the hcart to
berwcen the angiocardiographically determined stroke
flaten and then become more convex than normal.
volume and forward stroke volune as dctermined by
The dlorsoventral and craniocaudal dimensions of the
Fick's method or by thermodilution.*39, t32 Measurement
 heart increasc. Again, it is not possible to distinguish
how rmuch the left and righit ventricles contribute to
via a balloon-tipped end-hole catheter (Swan-Ganz), is
thc obviously enlarged cardiac silhouctte. Increased
sometimes needed to clarify the nature of atypical
sternal contact may be cvident in dogs with enlarge-
ment of cither or both ventricles. Further dilatation of
tion. Pulmonary cdema typically devclops when mean
the left atrium, combined with dilatation of the proxi-
PCWP approaches or cxceeds 25 mmHg. A largc v
mal portions of the pulmonary veins, results in thc
wave and cxaggerated y descent arc obscrved in thc
formation of a wedge-shaped density thal cxtends into
 left atrial pressure tracing when marked mitral regurgi-
the diaphragmatic lung fields (see Figs. 7-l, 7-4.
tation is present (see Figs. 54; 9-7).
7-20; 25-7).
 Thoracic radiographs are the most sensitive clinical
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
sided CHF devclops, good-quality radliographs permit
visualization of carly changes in the pulmonary vcins-
DETECTION OF REGURGITANT FLOw. Mitral regurgitation
lumg intcrstitium. As pulmonary venous pressures rise.
produces a high-velocity, turbulent jet of disturbed
the pulmonary vcins distend and become more evident.
blood flow in the lefl. atrium that can usually be de-
547
B
C
D
FIGURE 25-7
(mitral and tricuspid regurgitation） in an aged dog with chronic degenerative valvular disease.(A,B)
At initial presentation,thedogwas asymptomatic,but left atrial enlargement ispronounced.Three
months later,the dog presentedwith signs of congestive heart failure due to pulmonary edema.
(C,D） Six months afterinitial presentation,the doghad developed pulmonary hypertension and
tricuspidregurgitation.Radiographs showmarked enlargement of the left and right hearts relative
to initial films (A,B).
tected by pulsed,continuous wave,or color flowDopp
mitralregurgitantflowappearsasamosaicofyellow
ler echocardiography (see Figs. 8-5, 8-18; 25-8).134 In
and blue pixels or as a bright green spray of color.
most cases, severe mitral regurgitant flow continues
Color flow Doppler imaging allows a more thorough
throughout systole at a velocity of 5 to 6 meters per
and much quicker means of inspecting the atria to
second.Flowvelocity is a function of thepressure
find a regurgitant jet than does spectral Doppler echo
differencebetween theleftventricle andleft atrium.
(Fig.25-8).134The sensitivity and specificity of Doppler
In some cases, e.g., those with mitral valve prolapse,
techniques for the detection of mitral regurgitation
regurgitantflowmaynotbe observed until mid tolate
are over 90percent.135 Small regurgitant jets in the
systole.Regurgitantflowisvirtuallyalways turbulent
immediatevicinityofthemitralvalveshouldnotbe
flow, and it produces a broad spectrum of frequencies
overinterpreted,however.Trivial mitral regurgitation
in the jet's Doppler velocity profile. Depending on
can often be detected in normal dogs.136. 137 Identifica-
the color flow display format of the echocardiograph,
tion of concurrenttricuspidand/or aorticinsuffi-
548DISEASES OF THEHEARTAND CIRCULATION
wallareexcludedfrom theanalysis.134,138Inhuman
patients, jet areas less than 20 percent of left atrial
areacorrespondtomildmitralregurgitation;jetareas
between 20 and 40 percent correspond tomoderate
regurgitation;andjet areas greater than 40percent
usually indicate severe mitral regurgitation.39The se-
verity of regurgitation will be underestimated if gain is
not optimized andwhenever the jet is constrained by
theleft atrial wall.By comparison,jet lengthcorrelates
rather poorly withregurgitant volume.In dogs,jet size
shows a significant correlation with clinical scores of
heartfailureseverity.14oOtherqualitative,semiquantita
NGOD
tive,and quantitative methodshave been developed
933
for assessing the volume of mitral regurgitant flow.
FIGURE25-8
FLOWVOLUMEMEASUREMENTS.Mitral
regurgitant
Gray scalereproductionof colorflowDopplerechocardiogram
strokevolume andregurgitant fraction can be esti-
from a dogwith advancedmitral insufficiency.In theright
mated by echocardiographic methods that estimate
parasternal long axisview,colorflowjetsappear asmottledpale
areas within the atria during systole.The diameter of the
forward bloodflow through the mitralandaortic
regurgitant jet is quitelarge as it emerges from themitral
valves.Mitralregurgitant strokevolumeis calculated
regurgitantorifcendicatingalareregurgitantvolumeh
length and area of thejetarelessreliableindicators ofregurgitant
asthedifferencebetweenforwardflowthroughthe
volumein this dog because the jet impinges on (and is constrained
mitralvalveduring diastole andsystolicflow out the
by)the posterior left atrial wall.There is left atrial (LA)and left
aorta.141-143 Forward flow is measured by integrating
ventricular(LV)dilationassociatedwiththevolumeoverload
theDopplervelocityovertheperiodofantegradeflow
imposed by mitralregurgitation.
andmultiplying that quantityby theannular cross-
sectional area of eachvalve.Alternatively,mitral regur
gitant flow can be calculated by subtracting aortic
ciencycan alsobequickly andreadily accomplished
during thecolorflowexamination.
strokevolume,calculated as above,from the total LV
stroke volume,which is calculatedfrom M-mode or
two-dimensional echocardiographic estimates of total
COLORFLowJET sIzE.Jetsizeisproportionaltomo-
leftventricular strokevolume.
mentum flux rather than to volume flow, and mitral
regurgitantvolume cannotbe accurately determined
PROXIMAL FLOW CONVERGENCE. Mitral regurgitant
from either length or area measurements of the regur-
strokevolumecanalsobe quantifiedusingtheproxi-
gitant jet as displayed on thecolorflowDoppler echo-
cardiogram.134 Momentum flux is a function of the
proaches a pointlike orifice in a flat plate, a series of
regurgitant orifice area and the driving pressure,
concentric hemisphericisovelocity shells canbe identi-
whicharerelatedtovolumeflowbytheGorlinequa-
fiedwithdecreasingsurface area andincreasingveloc-
tion. Other problems confound the use of jet size
ity.Instantaneousflowratecanbecalculatedasthe
toestimateregurgitantvolume.Any truemeasureof
productofthevelocityatanyofthesehemispheric
regurgitant volume must integrate regurgitant flow
shells times the area of the shell.Assuming simple
rates over all of systole, and a color flow jet is an
hemisphericsymmetryofthe convergingflowfield,
instantaneousmeasurementthatreflectsflow ata sin-
theproximalisovelocity surface area is calculated as
gle time point.The direction,conformation,and size
2πr,where ris theradius measured from the first
of a regurgitant jet often change during the systolic
color alias to the regurgitant orifice.The peak instanta-
interval.Jetsizeisalsoinfluencedbyanumberof
neous flow rate(ml/sec）is given by Qπ=2πr²ua
poorly controlled variables, including imaging plane,
where va is the aliasing velocity of the system.Mitral
transducerlocation,theeffectiveturbulentvelocityof
regurgitant strokevolume (V)is calculated by multi-
blood,left atrial size,proximity of the jet to the wall
plying the peak instantaneous regurgitant flowrate by
of the atrium, and many instrument settings such as
the regurgitant time-velocity integral (Ju(t)dt) normal-
gain settings,the pulserepetitionfrequency,and trans
ized by the peak regurgitant velocity (u,). Regurgitant
ducer frequency.In addition,jets that areconstrained
flow,Qis calculated by multiplying regurgitant stroke
by the wallsofthe atrium are usuallymuch smaller
volumebyheartrate:
than free jets.
Despite theselimitations,maximal jet area,indexed
Q=V,×HR=2πr²vaJ[v(t)/v,]dt×HR)
to left atrial size,correlates reasonable well with angio-
cardiographicmeasuresofmitralregurgitantseverity,
PROXIMALJET DIMENSIONs.The diameter and cross-sec-
particularlywhen eccentric jetsimpinging on the atrial
tionalareaoftheregurgitantjetasitemergesfrom
ACQUIREDVALVULARHEARTDISEASEINDOGSANDCATS549
theregurgitant orificehavebeen shown to correlate
Mitralvalveprolapse canprecedebutis often accom-
well with angiographic grades and angiographic esti-
panied by varying degrees of mitral regurgitation.
mates of regurgitant volume in human patients, and to
Mitralvalveprolapsecanbestbe identifiedbytwo-
regurgitant flow measures obtained using the proximal
dimensional echocardiography (Fig. 25-9). Four char-
acteristics of the valve have proved useful in identifying
methodiswellsuitedtotheroutineevaluationof
human patientswith clinically importantmitralvalve
clinicalpatients as thejet dimensions canbe obtained
prolapse:(1)thelocation of leaflet displacement,(2)
quicklyandreliablyfromeithertransesophagealor
the degree of leaflet displacement,(3) the presence of
transthoracic locations.This method has not yet been
leaflet thickening,and (4) the symmetry of displace-
critically evaluated in dogs.
ment.134 In humans,mitral valve prolapse usually in-
volves both leaflets, sometimes involves only the poste-
M-MODEANDTWO-DIMENSIONALECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.
riorleaflet,andonlyrarelyinvolves onlytheanterior
Most abnormalities detected byM-mode and two-di-
leaflet.However,the same may not be true in dogs.
mensional echocardiography reflect changes caused by
The views typically used to identify mitral valve pro-
volumeoverloadoftheleft-sidedheartandarenot
lapseinclude therightparasternal long axisview and
specific for mitral regurgitation (see Figs. 8-22; 25-8,
theleftcaudalparasternalfour-chamberview.Mitral
25-9). These changes include an enlarged left atrial
valveprolapseisobservedmostoftenwhentheleaflets
dimension,increased left atrial to aortic ratio,in-
arethickened andredundantorwhen thereisaloss
creased ventricular diastolic dimension,exaggerated
of chordal support (stretching or rupture).
septalmotionandleftventricularwallmotion,exces-
Using the right parasternal long axis view, Pedersen
sive mitral valve amplitudes of motion, and a steep E
and associatesreportedthat 84percentof cavaliers
withmurmursand87percentwithoutmurmurshad
mitral valve prolapse,compared with a prevalence rate
mitralregurgitationbyfinding a separationbetween
the mitral leaflets during systole is unreliable. Struc-
of 3percent in age-matchedcontrol dogs.153In a study
turalabnormalitiesofthedegenerativemitralvalve
of 30 dachshunds with mitral regurgitation,severe mi-
identifiable by two-dimensional echocardiography in-
tral valve prolapse was identified in 40 percent, and
clude thickened valve leaflets, mitral valve prolapse
mild prolapse was identified in33 percent.154 In young
(inclusive oftipprotrusion into theleft atrium),and
dachshundswithoutmurmurs,nonehad severemitral
flailleaacd
valve prolapse, but 7 of 15 (47 percent) had mild
mitralvalveprolapse.Further studies areneeded to
determinewhether young dogs withmitral valve pro-
MITRALVALVE PROLAPSE.Mitralvalve prolapse is de-
lapse are at increased risk for mitral regurgitation com-
fined asdorsal displacement ofthemitralleafletsrela-
pared with those dogs lacking this echo finding.
tive tothemitral annulus,as this structure defines the
boundarybetween theleftventricle and left atrium.
FLAIL LEAFLETs.Rupture of a major chordae tendi-
neae (see Fig. 25-1) should be suspected when systolic
fluttering of a prolapsed mitral valve leaflet is observed
together with chaotic diastolicmotion of a mitralvalve
leaflet.65, 155-158 Ruptured chordae tendineae can be
visualizedonlyrarely.Moreoften,ruptureofachordae
tendineaemustbeinferredfromthe abnormal motion
of thevalveleaflets.15oTheflailmotionof thevalve
cusps is usuallybest observed by two-dimensional echo
imaging in the right parasternal long axis or by left
apical four-chamber views.65.155-15sIt may not be possi-
ble to distinguish stretching from rupture of a chordae
tendineae, especially when a minor chordae is affected;
bothlesionscausevaryingmitralvalveprolapse and
regurgitation.
~ECG
VENTRICULARPERFORMANCE.Echocardiographicesti-
FIGURE25-9
matesof leftventricular contractility should beinter-
Two-dimensional echocardiogram（right parasternal four-chamber
preted cautiously in dogs with mitral regurgitation,
view)from a dog with severemitral regurgitation due to chronic
particularly the ejection phase indices (e.g,left ventricu
degenerativevalvular disease.Theanterior mitral valveleafletis
lar fractional shortening, ejection fraction, and mean
thickened and prolapses into the left atrium (arrow) during systole.
As a consequence ofchronic,severevolume overload,theleft
velocity of circumferential shortening),which are inac-
ventricle (LV)and especialy, the left atrium (LA),are dilated.
curateinthis setting.7710-10,59160Thevalusbtaind
550 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
from dogs with mitral regurgitation are oftcn normal
 or greater than normal owing to the ability of the left
complement the cardiac cvaluation with a complete
ventricle to decompress rapidly into the low-pressure
blood count, chemistry profilc, and urinalysis. Blood 
left atrium. Therefore, in the setting of moderate to
 pressure should bc routinely determined in older dogs
severe mitral regurgitation, a normal ejection fraction
a r s  r  
represents  a  significant  reduction of
myocardlial
tension substantially worsens the scverity of mitral re-
 gurgitation. Chronic anemia, concurrent infections,
accurately estimatc myocardial contractility in dogs
heartworm dliseasc, and other serious dlisorders must.
with mitral rcgurgitation.59-1 However, when heart
also be identified to cnsure optimal management.
failure is present and the sympathctic nervous systcm
is activated, cven these measurements overestimate in-
THERAPY
trinsic myocardial contractility,107. 108
Most of the schemes devcloped to stage dogs with
DIFFERENTIAL. DIAGNOSIS
mitral regurgitation arc based on clinical signs and
radiographic findings.-u Echocardiography, while
The dliagnosis of mitral regurgitation duc to chronic
 not gencrally esential for diagnosis and management,
degenerative valvular disease is usually made from the
docs provides more accurate assessmcnt of hcart size
clinical history, tie physical examination, and good
and allows visualization of valvc morphology. Color
quality thoracic radiographs. Coexisting abnormalities,
flow Doppler echocardiography provides further esti-
such as chronic bronchitis, a collapsing trachea, or
mation of regurgitant volume. This information, in
pneumonia, can be easily overlooked unless current
combination with the history, physical cxamimation,
thoracic radiographs are evaluated in conjumction with
ECG, and chest radiographs, permits the most accurate
thc physical cxamination. Therefore, a dog with
assessment of disease severity and requircment for
 heart murmur that is presented for coughing or dys-
treatment.
 pnea should be carefully evaluated for upper and lower
 Specifc treatment goals are to reduce the severity of
respiratory discase. Collapsc of the left main sleml
mitral regurgitation, to prevent or alleviate pulmonary
o e si ue i paae e aq sna
congestion, to maintain cardiac output, to preserve
causc of chronic coughing that is unrelatcd to the
remaining cardiovascular reservcs, and to prevcnt or
development of pulmonary congestion. When pulmo-
 manage aggravating conditions or complications. The
nary infltrates of uncertain origin are identifed, sev-
 priority attached to any onc of these goals varies with
eral diagnostic options are available. If the infiltrates
the specific requirements of the individual patient.
rcsolve following administration of diuretics, the likely
Overall treatment objectives are to increase survival
ctiology was pulmonary congestion due to leff-sided
 and improve quality of life.
hcart failure. Should they fail to resolve, additional
diagnostic procedures should be pursued, such as
SURGICA1. ALTERNATIvEs. The definitive remedy for mi-
transtracheal or bronchoalveolar lavage, or fine needlle
tral regurgitation in human patients is surgical repair
aspiration.
Echocardiography should be performed whcn the
mcthods imclude ring and plication annuloplasty, re-
location, cause, or importance of a murmur is unccr-
scction of prolapsing valve segmcnts, and shortening.
tain ancl whcnever other clinical tests yield apparently
reattachment, or replacement of ruptured chordae
contradictory information. Loud murmurs of cithci
tendimeae. Surgical repair of the mitral valve is more
atrioventricular valve may radiate widely, and it is often
difficult to accomplishi than valve replacement, but
dliffcult to tell whether the rmitral, the tricuspicd, or
this approach has definite mechanical advantages and
both valves are incompetent. Color flow Doppler echo-
avoids the need for long-term anticoagulation.8 Prior
cardiograpby resolves such issues quickly and reliably
to the recent refinements in reparative surgical tech-
and is also well suited to differentiate other etiologies
niques, surgery was recommended only for severely
of mitral valve discase and mitral regurgitation. Ecl10-
impaired patients (NYHA class IH or IV). Currently.
cardiography cannot, however, always reliably distin-
surgery is often acdvised for patients with more modlest
guish clronic degencrative valvular discase from bacte-
physical impairment (NYHA class II).w For optimal
rial endocarditis of the mitral valve. Recognition of
results, surgery must be accomplished prior to the
the systemic manifestations of endocarditis and the
development of irreversiblc myocardial damage. Mitral
 performance of properly obtained blood cultures may
valve surgery has been performed in only a few dogs
be rcquired to establish a diagnosis in such cases
with naturally occurring discase, due largely lo the
(chapter 26).
Carcful asscssment. of othicr systemic disorders is
often neglected in dogs with heart failure from CDVD.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT. Thc ideal medical trcatmcnt
Given the high prevalence of rcnal dliseasc and hyper
would prevcnt or reverse valvular degcncration by tar-
geting the precise molecular and biochemical de-
should also be used cautiously whien signs of low-out-
fect(s) responsible for the myxomatous degencrative
put failure are present (e-g., weakness, prolonged mu
lesions. By manipulation of thc enzymes regulating
cous membrane perfusion and poor color, hypokinetic
collagcn metabolism, it may be possible in the future
femoral arterial pulses, and tachycardia), or in states
to modify the cascade of cvents causing distortion and
of ventricular underfilling (c.g., cardiac tamponade).
disruption of the valve leaflets and chordae tendineae,
Current therapy is designed to prevcnt congestion,
ACE INmBrroRs. The cfficacy of ACE inhibitor therapy
to reduce the severity of mitral regurgitation, and to
is well established in dogs with experimental71. 172 and
moderate the adverse consequences of' chronic neuro-
hormonal activation (chapter 12).
dogs with class III or class IV hcart failure due to
Diuretics, vasodilators, angiotensin-converting en-
CDVD, chronic treatment with an ACE inhibitor in
 zyme imhibitors, and positive inotropic drugs have the
combination with furosemide and digoxin alleviates
demonstrated capacity to lessen the scverity of mitral
thc signs of heart failure and irmproves exercise loler-
regurgitation under cerlain conditions,*2 s9 The rcla-
ance better than trcatment with furosemide and di-
tive merits of specific agents vary with the climical
goxin alone. There are no published studics docu-
circumstances of each patient. In gencral, patients with
mcnting the benefits of ACE inhibition in the early
acute congestive heart failurc respond best to diuretics
stages of hcart failure (class I or II) in dogs with
and rapidly actimg vasodilators. Thc current slamdard
clironic degcncrative valvular disease. Sodium and wa-
ter retention in the carly siages of hcart failure may
ure due to mitral rcgurgitation is the "FAD"’ protocol:
not be mediated by the R-A-A system, suggesting that
combination therapy using (f)urosemide, an (A)CE
 drugs other than ACE inhibitors are required to nor-
inhibitor, and (d)igoxin.16a 1 Dogs requiring medical
r p  s  a se 
therapy should avoid strenuous cxercisc, amd incrcas-
failure.
ingly severe cxcrcise restriction should be enforced as
Advcrse effects of ACE inhibitors include rcnal
the discase progresses.
failure, hypotension, and hyperkalemia.ss 10. 13
 Renal dysfunction is the most common and most seri-
DHURETICS AND SALT RESTRICTION. Dictary salt restriction,
ous complication of ACE inbibitor therapy. Dchydra-
diuretic therapy, or both are instituted at the first sign
tion, hypotension, profound heart failure, pre-existing
of CHIF to eliminate excess body fluicds and relieve
 pulmonary congestion. Improved myocardial oxygen-
diuretics increase the risk of serious renal dysfunction.
ation improves cardiac performance, and the severity
Renal function should be carefuly assessed prior to
 of regurgitation may lesscn as a result of the decrcased
trcatmcnl with an ACF inhibitor, and BUN or serum
 preload and afterload that accompanies a reduction in
creatinine levels should be periodically monitored dur-
heart sizc. Neurohormonal activation is an unavoid-
ing treatment. Other vasodilators can be used when
ablc consequence of diuretic treatment, but these rc-
ACE inhibitors are not tolerated (chaptcr 12).
sponses can be minimized when diuretics are used in
lowcr doses and/or in combimation with ACE-inhib-
DIGITALIS CLYcOSIDEs. The usc of digitalis glycosides
iting drugs,17 Feeding a sodium-restricted dict may
in dogs with mitral regurgitation remains somewhat
reduce the need for diuretics and may lessen the scver-
controversial.6. 1o5.168  While persuasive evidcencc cx-
ity of neurohormonal activation.
ists that myocardial contractility eventually declines in
Furosemide is the drug chosen most often for treat-
dogs with mitral rcgurgitation, it is very dlifficult to
ing mitral reguurgitation because it is effective and well
asscss accurately the level of myocarrdial contractility
tolerated by both dogs andl cats. The lowest dose that.
and to identify the onset of myocardial failure. Many
controls clinical signs should be used. As heart failure
cardiologists initiate digoxin therapy together with di-
o si ssop sunba do pe iy 'sassao
uretics and ACE inhibitors whicn the signs of CHF first
 appcar. This stratcgy supposes that digoxin can reduce
ent, higher doses (2 to 4 mg/kg) should be given
the severity of regurgitation prior to the onset of myo-
cardial failure, retard the development of myocardial
 hr as nceded in cmergency sctings). In refractory
failure, and/or cause long-term symptomatic improvc
heart failure, furosemidlc can be combined with an-
mcnt.oo Othiers institute digoxin only in the laler
 other diuretic with a different mechanism of action to
stages of hcart failure whcn diuretics, ACF inhibitors,
 or vasodilators are no longer able to control the clini.
Certain cautions should be observed with diuretic
cal signs and wlien there is more dramatic myocardial
aciministration. Overzcalous diuresis can dccrease pre-
impairment.168 16a There is no proven advantage to
load to the cxtent that cardiac output falls substantially.
 either strategy. Digoxin is always indicated when heart
Overdiuresis in concert with ACE inhibitor administra-
failure is complicated by atrial fibrilation and a fast.
tion can cause functional renal insuffciency. Diuretics
hcart rate. The negative chronotropic effect of digoxin
552 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
allows for improvcd ventricular filling and a larger
erin cream should be applied on a hairless or shaved
strokc yolumc. Optimal control of heart rate may re-
area, using gloves to avoid absorption by the person
quire the addition of a calcium channcl (diltiazem) or
administering the medication. Self-adhesive transder-
β-adrenergic (atcrolol, propranolol) blocking drug.
mal nitroglycerin paiches have been used in dogs and
cats to ensure more uniform drug delivery. Patches
VASoDHA7ORs. Othcr vasodilators arc uscd whcn ACE-
delivering 0.l mg/hr (in humans) have been recon-
inhibiting drugs are not tolerated or when the signs of
mcnded for trcating cats and small dogs, and patchcs
heart failure cannot otherwise be controlled (refrac-
dclivering 0.2 mg/hr were rccommended for larger
tory heart failure). 'The short-term hemodynamic ben-
dlogs.168
cfits of vasodilator therapy have been convincingly
Isosorbide dinitrate is availablc in a sublingual for-
 dcmonstrated in dogs with cxperimentally inducedx7. as
mulation, a standard oral formulation, and as a con-
and  naturally occurringis1 183  mitral
regurgitation.
trolled-rclease capsule and tablct. An cimpiric dosc of
Qucstions that rcmain umanswered concern the length
the standard oral formulation (Isordil) uscd in dogs
of timc hemodynamic bencfits are maintained.
the
with heart failure is 0.22 to 0.44 mg/kg q 8 hr. co
prcvalencc of advcrsc reactions, and the relative merits
Isosorbide dinitrate has been dosed as high as 2.0
of particular artcriolar, venous, and mixcd vasodilat-
mg/kg q 12 hr in dogs with experimentally creatcd
ing agcnts.
Hydralazine is a dircct-acting arteriolar vasodilator
mary metabolite of isosorbide dinitrate, inay also be
 that has been shown effective in thc short-term man-
useful in dogs with heart failure,1o. v2 From these
sludics, thc cstimatcd oral dosc of isosorbide mononi-
Problems cncountered with its use include a variahle
tratc in dogs is 0.25 to 2.0 mg/kg q 6 to 12 hr. In
 dosc rcquiremcnt, tolcrancc with long-term adminis-
human paticnts, a dosagc-frcc interval, typically 10 to
tration, and advcrsc side effects such as hypotension,
12 hours long, is adviscd to avoid thc phcnomcnon of
tachycardia,:
 anorexia, and other gastrointestinal
tolerancc. Thc utility of this mancuvcr in dogs or cats
with hcart failure is unknown.
hr PO) is neccssary to dctcrmine the appropriate dose
 Prazosin is an x-adrenergic blocking agent causing
(0.5 to 2 mg/kg (q 12 hr). 1lydralazine is generally
used in combination with an oral or culancously ap-
tienis, the dosage is less variable than that of hydralaz-
 plied nitrate 1o achieve balanced vasodilation. 5
 inc, and adverse reactions are uncommon, s The main
Amlodipine, a calcium channel blocking drug, has
criticism of this agent concerns its effectiveness for
 been proved to reduce symptoms and improve cxcrcisc
long-term therapy tα Tachyphylaxis may develop within
tolerance in humans with congestive hearr failure.56
48 to 72 hours in some human patients. Prazosin has
Thc cffcacy of this compound in dogs with CDVD has
not becn critically cvaluated in dogs with hcart failurc
not bccn determined, but preliminary observations
and has fallen into disfavor.
suggcst it is efficacious in dogs with heart failure com-
plicated by systemic hypertension and in normotensivc
ANCILLARY THERAPIEs. Oxygen therapy is always bene-
dogs with othcrwise rcfractory heart failure. A safe and
cffective dosce has not bccn cstablished. when dogs
ficial in hypoxemic patients with pulmonary edema.
 Morphine sulfate can be used to relieve anxiety and to
with expcrimcntally induccd systemic hypertension are
lcsscn pulmonary congestion, particularly in ncrvous
treated with anlodipine (0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg), blood
dogs. Some dogs, typically thosc with concurrcnt rcspi-
pressure declines slowly, rcaching a nadir in 6 to 8
hours after thc first dose.187 Tachycardia can occur
ratory discasc, appcar to hcncfit from thcophylinc or
aminophylline administration. Cough supprcssants are
when higher doses are used. The half-life in dogs is
avoided unless they arc nccded to control thc signs
about 30 hours; thus, steady-state concenntrations arc
 of coexisting conditions, such as collapsing trachca.
not reached for 4 to 7 days.18x
Antiarrhythmic drugs may be necdcd to climinate life
Nitroglycerin ointment, isosorbide dinitratc, and iso-
sorbide mononitratc arc direct-acting venous vasodila-
threatening or hemodynamically unstable arrhythmias.
tors. By incrcasing systcmic venous capacitance, these
drugs cffcctivcly lowcr pulmonary venous pressure,
TREATMENT OF SEVERE OR REFRACTORY HEART FAILLRE.
thercby rclieving signs of pulmonary congestion. He-
Intravenous agcnts arc gencrally rcscrved for dogs with
-ad u is u ps re s 
severe acute heart failure or chronic hcart failurc that
ticnts rccciving nitrate thcrapy, and side effects are
is nonrcsponsivc to maximally toleratcd oral doscs of 
relativcly uncommon.1s ILower I.V filling pressures and
 digoxin, diurctics, and ACE inhibitors. High-dosc in-
travenous furoscmide (c.g., 2 to 6 mg/kg) often re-
volume. Although commonly uscd in dogs with CI1F,
topical nitroglyccrin ointmcnt has not bcen critically
heart failure. Dobutamine can also be used in combi-
nation with an intravenous vasodilator, such as nitro-
ACQUIREDVALVULARHEARTDISEASEINDOGSANDCATS553
prusside,tostabilizepatientswithotherwiseintractable
years earlier had died from heart failure.The average
heartfailure.Bothdrugsare administered byconstant
age at death or euthanasia was 10.6 years.All the dogs
intravenous infusion and are primarily used to treat
freefrommurmursatthefirstexaminationwerealive,
chronic,refractoryheart failure or acute,life-threaten-
but 48 percent had developed murmurs.19s The mean
ingpulmonaryedema duetomitral regurgitation asso-
time span between onset of murmur and euthanasia
ciatedwith ruptured chordae tendineae.Hypotension
due to CDVD was approximately 3 to 4 years (Fig.
isthemosthazardoussideeffectofnitroprussidebut
25-11).Despite thefact that heart murmurs are re-
can bereversed within10minutes by simply discontin-
ported equally among male andfemale cavaliers,eu-
uing the drug.Most patients are weaned fromIV onto
thanasiaduetoheartfailureismorecommonin
oral therapywithin24to48hours.
males.72. 193 This can be explained by an earlier onset
of thediseaseinmales and,perhaps,afasterprogres
sion of the disease.194
PROGNOSIS
It is difficult topredicttheclinicalcourse of CDVD
SYNDROMESASSOCIATEDWITHCHRONIC
in an individual patient.Many dogswith chronicvalvu-
DEGENERATIVEVALVULARDISEASE
lar diseaseremaincompensated throughoutlife and
eventuallydieorareeuthanizedforreasonsother
RUPTURE OF THE CHORDAE TENDINEAE.Rupture of the
than the development of heart failure.115 Once signs
chordaetendineaeoccursinthreedifferentcircum-
of severe heart failure develop,the prognosisforlong-
stances:(1)as an incidental finding at necropsy,(2)
term survivalis oftenpoor.In a long-term trial evaluat-
in dogs with a prior history of chronic mitral regurgita-
ing the efficacy of enalapril,the average survival time
tion,and(3)asa distinct clinical syndrome character-
for dogs in NYHA class III orIV heart failure was less
izedby thesuddendevelopmentofsevere,fulminating
than 1year for both treatment groups(Freedom of
pulmonary
edemain
previously
asymptomatic
Information Summary #315).Many dogs with CDVD
dogs.11,195-197Of 28 affected dogs studied by Ettinger
sufferrepeated acuteexacerbations ofcongestiveheart
and Buergelt, 17 were males, the age range was 7 to
failure that sporadically interrupt long or short periods
17 years, and most dogs were poodles (10/28),cocker
of apparent remission. The rate of progression and
spaniels (4/28), beagles (4/28), and dachshunds
eventualoutcomeofCDVDvaryindifferentbreeds.
(2/28)196These sex,age,and breed predilections are
Rapid progression seems to be the rule in certain
similar tothose reported in dogs with chronic myxo-
breeds, such as cavalier King Charles spaniels (Fig.
matous valvular degeneration.4 1i6 Myxomatous degen-
25-10).
eration ofthe atrioventricular valvesisfound inmost
The progression of CDVD has been prospectively
dogswithruptured chordaetendineae at necropsy,but
studiedinagroupof6lanimalsselected asrepresenta-
thereislittlecorrelationbetweentheseverityofvalvu-
tive of the cavalier King Charles spaniel population in
lar lesions and rupture of the chordae tendineae.126
Sweden.193 Murmurs were initially found in 52 percent
This fact has prompted some investigators to consider
of all dogs.When this group of dogs was examined 3
alternativeor additionaletiologicfactors.
years later,28percent of those dogs with murmurs 3
Theconsequences ofchordaetendineaerupture are
CavalierKing Charles spaniel
1000
Dachshund
FIGURE 25-10
sbop
Mean for all other breeds
Mean annual number of claims
per 10,000 insured dogs in
Swedenfordeath/euthanasia
caused by cardiac disease during
100
1982 to 1990 (1983excluded).
Data are presented in age groups
000
on a logarithmic vertical axis.
/10
The overallfrequency of claims
per10.00insured dogs wasfive
10
times higherin the cavalier than
clai
in the Dachshund,and eight
times higher than the mean for
all other breeds.Error bars show
calculated 95%confidence limits.
(From Haggstrom J, Hansson K,
nu
Kvart C,et al. Chronic valvular
disease in the cavalierKing
CharlesspanielinSweden.Vet
0-2
3-4
Rec 131:549-553, 1992.)
5-6
7-10
Age (yrs)
554
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
10-
Mean=7.5 Mean=10.5
10
9
9
8-
8
(%)
FIGURE25-11
7
7
Proposed epidemiologicmodel of chronic
degenerativevalvular diseasein the cavalierKing
9
Charles spaniel.The average time spanfrom the
nuu
6
onset of theheartmurmur to death/euthanasia
due to congestiveheart failureis estimated tobe3
5-
5
years.Thisgraph illustrates the percentage of new
cases of heart murmurs in each age group; the
4-
4
percentage of deathsdue to congestiveheartfailure
in each agegroupbased on insurancestatistics
3
(AgriaLtd,Stockholm,Sweden);and the predicted
percentage of deaths due to congestive heart
2-
failure,assuming the total percentage of deaths due
to heart failure to be 40%of the population.
（Courtesy of J.Haggstrom,DVM,College of
VeterinaryMedicine,Uppsala,Sweden.
0-
0
7891011121314
Age(Yrs)
determinedmainlybythelocationofthechordaetorn
LEFTATRIALENDOCARDIALTEARSANDLEFTATRIALRUP
(see Fig. 25-1).198. 199 Clinical signs are most severe
TURE.Left atrial rupture due to endocardial splitting
when one or more first-order chordae tendineae of
of the left atrial wall is a well-characterized but uncom-
the anterior (septal) leaflet of themitral valve are torn.
mon complication ofchronic,severemitralvalvular
Lessseveresignsresultfromrupture ofthefirst-order
chordae tendineae of the posterior(mural)leaflet.
older male dogs,and dachshunds andcocker spaniels
Rupture of second-or third-order chordaemayresult
arereported tobemostcommonlyaffected.Inaseries
in minimal or no clinical signs.Sudden deterioration
of 30 dogs203 with left atrial tears, about half (17 of 30)
in a dog with pre-existing mitral regurgitation suggests
were nonperforating,and about one third (9 of 30)
thepossibilityof chordaerupture.Rupture of tricuspid
hadhemopericardiumresultingfromperforationof
valvechordae tendineae can alsooccur and usually
theleft atrialepicardial surface;acquired atrialseptal
involves those of the septal leaflet.4. 196
defect was demonstrated in four dogs following rup-
Ruptureofafirst-order chordaetendineaeoften
ture of the interatrial septum. Endocardial splitting
results in acute (often less than 12 hours),rapidly
occurredmostofteninthecaudalleftatrialwallin
progressivesigns;
severe，
intractable
pulmonary
associationwithpre-existingjetlesions.Severe,chronic
edema;l16andprofoundrespiratory distress andcyano-
mitral valvular lesions and massive left atrial enlarge-
sis.A gallop rhythm and precordial thrill are accompa-
niedby a loud,gradeVtoVI/VI,holosystolic,left
ruptured first-order chordae tendineae were observed
apical murmur.The femoral artery pulse is typically
inmany.Buchananhashypothesized thata genetically
abrupt or jerky,and a jugular venous pulse is often
influenceddegeneration ofconnectivetissuepredis-
evident.Avarietyof rhythm disturbances maybe ob-
posescertainbreedstothedevelopment ofleftatrial
served,includingventricular arrhythmias and atrioven-
tears,andthatruptureofthechordaetendineaeoften
tricular dissociation.The radiographic signs are similar
precipitated this lesion by causing a sudden rise in
tothose seenin chronicmitralregurgitationwith se-
interatrial pressure.203
vere pulmonary edema.Atrial enlargement is variable
Hemopericardiumfrom left atrialrupture often re-
and a function of the presence and severity of pre-
sultsin suddendeathfrom acute cardiac tamponade
existingmitral regurgitation.
(Fig. 25-12). In other dogs with pre-existing mitral
regurgitation, the sudden development of ascites, he-
THERAPy.Aggressive therapy isindicated indogswith
patomegaly, and jugular distention signals the occur-
ruptured chordae tendoneae and fulminating pulmo-
rence of pericardial hemorrhage.Mufling of heart
nary edema.Oxygen administration isusually re-
sounds may be detected,but more typically,this find-
quired,coupledwith apotent afterloadreducer such
ing is obscured owing to the presence of a loud, holo-
as nitroprusside,and high-dose,frequent IV furose-
systolicmurmur.Femoralarterypulsesareusually
mide administration.Phlebotomy can be considered
weak,andpulsusparadoxus maybeevident.TheECG
when these measures fail. The prognosis is often grave,
may be normal or reflect left-sided heart enlargement.
and death commonly results.116.196
The dampened,low-amplitude QRS complexes often
ACQUIREDVALVULARHEARTDISEASEINDOGSANDCATS555
FIGURE25-12
chronic degenerative valvular disease(myxomatous degeneration).(A)Theheart of a dogwith
chronicmitral regurgitation is surrounded by a large,intrapericardial blood clotwithin the opened
pericardial sac.(B) Inspection of theleft atrial endocardial surface reveals a recent tear (solid arrow);
an older tear (open arrow) is also present with an attached thrombus(T).Grossy thickened and
distortedmitralvalve leaflets arevisiblelining the atrioventricular orifice,just left of the thrombus.
Ruptured chordae tendineaewere present.(From Sisson D.Acquired valvular heart disease.In
Bonagura JD (ed):Contemporary Issues in SmallAnimal Practice.Cardiology.NewYork,Churchill
Livingstone,1987,p 59.)
observedwith other causesofpericardialeffusion are
exceptwhen an attachedintra-atrialthrombusisim-
not usually evident unless a previously recorded ECG
aged by echocardiography or angiocardiography.
is available for comparison.Electrical alternans and
avarietyofrhythmdisturbancesmayberecorded,
THERAPy.Treatment of anydogwith acutepericardial
particularly supraventricular extrasystoles,atrial and
tamponadeinvolvesimmediatepericardiocentesis.The
junctional tachycardias,and atrial fibrillation.
possibility of continued hemorrhage exists, and this
The diagnosis is often suggested by thoracic radio-
may necessitate blood transfusion or an emergency
graphs.In the dorsoventral projection, the silhouette
thoracotomy.Thoracotomymayberequired toremove
is globular in appearance and is not dissimilar in any
large clots in the pericardial sac that restrict cardiac
wayfrom other causes ofpericardialeffusion.In the
filling,although surgical repair of theleft atrium can
lateral projection,the cardiac silhouette may also ap
occasionally be accomplished.205 The prognosis is
pear rounded, but the enlarged left atrium is usually
grave.
clearlyevidentasatriangularextensionofthedorso
caudal heart border. Echocardiography is the most
sensitive modality to detectpericardialeffusion.Left
TRICUSPIDREGURGITATION
atrialruptureissuggestedwhenpericardialeffusion is
observed together with the typical echocardiographic
Tricuspidvalveinsufficiency is conveniently classi-
features of chronic mitral regurgitation, particularly
fied into organic and functional types.Organic (pri-
whenbloodclotsareimagedwithin thepericardial
mary)tricuspidregurgitation indicates that thevalve
Sac.5.201-208
leakis duetostructural damagetothe tricuspidvalve
An extremelyuncommonsequela to chronicmitral
apparatus, whereas functional tricuspid valve insuff-
regurgitationoccurswhen theatrialseptumisrup-
ciency develops secondary to enlargement (dilation)
tured, creating an acquired atrial septal defect.201. 203
of theright side of theheart.Myxomatous degenera-
Severeright-sidedheartfailure andrefractoryascites
tionofthevalveleafletsorchordaetendineaeisthe
then develop in dogs that previously exhibited evi-
onlycommoncause oforganictricuspidregurgitation
dence of mitral regurgitation.Antemortem diagnosis
in dogs.1-5 Kersten,206 Bretschneider, and Buchanan4
canbe accomplishedwithcolorflowDopplerechocar-
reported involvement of both the mitral and tricuspid
diography.The diagnosis of nonperforming endomyo-
valves in44.3percent,22.6percent,and32.5percent
cardial splits cannot usuallybemadepriortonecropsy
of dogs with CDVD,respectively.Only 1.3 percent to
556 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
7.5 percent of the dogs with CDvD had isolated
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
involvemcnt of the tricuspid valve.3 4 vo Thcsc findings
have been corroboratcd.1. 2 31-37 Other causcs of or-
 In accordance with Gorlin's hydraulic cquation, the
volumc of tricuspid rcgurgitation varics with thc cxtent
ganic tricuspid regurgitation, such as bacterial cndo-
of tnicuspid valve damagc, the dcgrcc of right ventricu-
carditis, are rare in dogs and cats.
lar cnlargcment, and the magnitudc of pulnonary
Functional tricuspid regurgitation is often ohscrycd
artery prcssure.s" Right atrial prcssure tends to in-
in dogs with dilatcd cardiomyopathy, and it is a com-
Aq pesnes rone reoy papisirl on eonbss u
crease with increasing regurgitant volume, and signs
 of congestive heart failurc tend to develop when mean
pulmonary hypertcnsion from a variety of etiologies.5.
Is w In cats, tricuspid regurgitation is ohserved most
right atrial pressure excecds 10 to 12 mmf Ig. Gradually
 dcvcloping tricuspid regurgitation is oficn well toler-
often in association with idiopathic myocardial discasc
 sso r ae sssd ee r ue pe
and lcss frequcnuy secondary to chronic hyperthy-
roidism.2w7. 2os The overall prcvalence of functional tri-
nornal because of the increased compliance of an
enlargcd right atrium.
cuspid regurgitation in dogs or cats with these disor
 Severe tricuspid regurgitation and heart failure are
ders is unknown and undouhtedly varies with the sever-
most likely to develop when organic tricuspid valvular
ity of the undcrlying disease, the severity of pulnonary
hypcrtcnsion, and the degrce of right-sided heart cn
Consequently, right-sided heart failure is seen most
largement.
often in dogs with CDVD affecting both atrioventricu-
lar valvcs.210. 2u Thc modest clcvations of pulmonary
 artery pressure rccorded in most dogs with advanced
mitral rcgurgitation (40 to 45 mmf Ig) arc umlikcly to
The adjective "tricuspid' is somcwhat of a misno
mcr when applied to the dog's right atrioventricular
valve. which consists mainly of two cusps.17 A large
tricuspid valvc is anatomically normal. Howcvcr, cycn
mural (ventral or parietal) cusp and a smaller scptal
modcst clcvations of pulmonary artery prcssurc can
(or dorsal) cusp can be idcntified, together with sev.
cause dramatic increascs in tricuspid regurgitant vol-
ume in dogs with a pre-cxisting tricuspid valve leak.
eral umnamed secondary cusps. The parietal cusp is
Dilation of the right vcntricle induccd by pulmonary
esscntial for effcctivc valve closure, whereas excision of
thc septal leaflet does not cause tricuspid regurgitation
hypcrtension from any causc contributes to progressivc
stretching of the tricuspid annulus, enlargenent of the
in othcrwise hcalthy dogs in sinus rhythin.2o9 The arca
 of thc tricuspid orifice (annulus) is slightly larger than
regurgitant orifice, and progressive tricuspid regurgita-
tion. Substantial tricuspid regurgitation flow may dc-
that of the mitral orifice, and the tricuspid valve
vclop in the absence of tricuspid valve pathology when
leaflets arc thinncr and morc transparcnt than the
the mean pulmonary artery pressure exceeds 60
mitral valve lcaflcts." The chordae tendineae of thc
mmHg,*I 1t is interesting that tricuspid regurgitation
mural lcaflct attach to a single, constant, small papil-
is slight in most dogs with heartworm disease, even
lary muscle of thc conus and to a variablc number of
papillary muscles (usually threc) arising from thc api-
cal one third of the interventricular scptum.
this is hccausc the iricuspid valve is structurally intact
The
and the regurgitant orificc is small. Sevcre tricuspid
chordae tendineae of thc septal leaflet attach dircctly
 to small ridges on the interventricular septum.
regurgitation is more consistently prescnt in dogs with
heartworm caval syndrome,21s3 This may be due to the
combincd effecis of scvere pulmonary hypertcnsion,
PATHOLOGY
 Imorc pronounccd right-sided hcart dilatation, and/or
mechanical  interfercncc with valvc closure by the
The histologic lcsions of chronic degenerative tricus-
 pid valve diseasc are qualitatively similar to the myxo.
worins in this location. Tricuspid rcgurgitation is also
modest in the majority of dogs and cats with dilated
matous changcs already described in the mitral valve.
cardiomyopathy. It tcnds to worscn with thc onsc1 of
Thc tricuspid valve is less frequently affccted, and the
lesions tend to be less severe and progrcss less rapidly
atrial fibrillation duc to the loss of alrioventricular
than those of the mitral valve,31 Thc septal cusp of the
synchrony.
tricuspid valve is almost always more severely affccicd
than the mural cusp and, when ruptured chordac
HHSTORY AND CLINICAL SIGNS
tendineae are observed in the right sidc of thc hcart.
 Isolated, organic tricuspid regurgitation is oftcn wcll
those of thc septal lcaflct are usually affcctcd (scc Fig.
25-1),4 st. 12o The absence of jet lesions and thc diff-
culty in subjcctively assessing right ventricular size
fected dogs with long-standing tricuspid valve rcgurgi-
make the clinical significance of valvular lesions ob-
tation. Such signs arc oftcn accompanied by muscle
scrvcd at necropsy hard to interpret in some cases.
wasting, weight loss, anorexia, and, in some cascs,
chronic diarrhca. Signs of right-sided hcart failure de-
(froin 9 to 12 o'clock) (sce Figs. 7-1, 7-4, 7-6, 7-7;
velop rore rapidly and arc morc pronounced in dogs
25-1). As the right ventricle enlarges, the entire bor-
and cats with concurrent left-sided heart failure and/
der of the hcart becomes more roumdcd, and the
or pulmonary hypertcnsion. Whien dogs with com-
transverse and craniocaudal dimensions of thc cardiac
bincd mitral and tricuspid valvc discase develop right-
silhouette are increased. The distancc separating the
sided heart failure, any prior signs of left-sided heart
heart from thc right thoracic wall may be diminished.
failure usually resolvc,?u Instead, these dogs oftcn suf-
but the valuc of this sign depcnds on thc position of
fcr markcd ascitcs, profound cxcrcisc intolerancc,
thc cardiac apex (chaptcr 7). With more pronounced
wcakness, collapsc, or syncope. Dogs with hcart failure
right-sided heart cnlargcment, the cardiac silhouctte
due to heartworms usually dcvclop exercise intoler-
may assume a rcversed "D" shapc. On thc lateral
 ance and ascites, but plcural cffusion is uncommon.212
radiograph, the dorsoventral dimension of the heart
Cats with severe nyocardial disease often develop pul-
enlarges and the anterior border of thc hcart becomes
monary hypertension, tricuspid regurgitation, and
more couvcx (scc Figs. 7-1, 7-4, 7-6, 7-7; 25-1). As a
pleural eflusion.
rcsult, thcre is increascd contact betwccn the heart
and stcrnum. An cnlarged posterior ycna cava, hepato.
PHYSICAL. EXAMINATION
megaly, and ascitcs support the radiographic diagnosis
 of right-sided hcart enlargemcnt in affectcd dogs.211
Thc most reliable physical evidcncc of tricuspid re
gurgitation is the combined presencc of a typical mur-
CARDIACCATHETERIZATION
mur, jugular ycin distention, and a promincnt jugular
ycnous pulsc. Thcse findings arc often overlooked by
'Tnicuspid regurgitation is charactcrizcd by *'ventric-
examincrs who neglect to listen on both sides of the
ularization' of thc right atrial pressure tracing.*" Ini-
thorax and who fail to examine the jugular vcins rou-
tially, the norinal x dcsccnt in the right atrial prcssure
tinely. The murmur is usually holosystolic, of mixed
tracing is interruptcd by a rcgurgitant cv wavc that
frcqucncy, and loudest at thc right 4th inrercosial
commences with the onset of ventricular systole. With
spacc. just above the costochondral junction.t Cocx-
Imore severe tricuspid regurgitation. the right atrial
prcssure tracing bcgins to rcsemble the right ventricu-
murmur of tricuspid regurgitation. A hcarr murmur
lar pressure tracing. Signs of right-sidcd hcart failure
may bc absent in some animals with substantial tricus-
are usually cvidcnt when mcan right atrial pressurc
excccds l0 to 12 mmHg. Whcn thc right atrium is
is present. Obvious jugular distcntion, hepatomegaly,
markcdly cnlarged and very compliant, the arial prcs-
and ascites can usually be detecied in dogs with overt
surc tracing may be ncarly normal even with moderate
right-sided heart failure. With less severe discase, dis-
to scvcrc rcgurgitation. Effcctive (forward) cardiac out-
tended jugular veins with systolic pulsations may be
put declincs only whcn pulmonary vascular resistance
evident only following exercise or whcn the abdomen
is incrcascd or when tricuspid rcgurgitation is particu-
is compressed (positive hepatojugular reflex).
larly severe.
 Right ycntricular and pulmonary artery pressurc
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
measuremcnts help delermine thc cause of tricuspid
valvular insufficiency. Right vcntricular and pulmonary
Righ1. atrial and right ventricular cnlargcment arc
artcry systolic pressurcs are normal or only slightly
most likcly to be recorded on the ECG whcn tricuspid
clcvated
with i
isolatcd  structural  tricuspid   valve
regurgitation occurs secondary to chronic pulmonary
surday aod jo suuy au e ss'ses
hypcricnsion. The mean clcctrical axis is often shifted
indicates that tricuspid regurgitation is, to somc dc-
to 1hc right (> 100° in the dog), and S waves arc
 gree, of a functional nature. The amount of ticuspid
rccorded in lcads I, I1, 1If, aVF, and the left-sided chcst
rcgurgitation can bc roughly quantified by angiocar-
leads.126. 127 P-wavc amplitudc may be increased, but
diographic or indicator dilution tcchniques.s. a17 Both
this finding is neither scnsitivc nor specific. These
methods arc plagued by the occurrence of spurious
changcs are gcnerally less dramatic or absent in dogs
 regurgitation induced by arrhythmia or the physical
or cats with isolated tricuspid rcgurgitation because
 presence of the catheter. Thesc artifacts can be mini-
right ventricular hypertrophy is oftcn milder. Cocxist-
mizcd by the use of specially designcd cathciers, or
ing left vcntricular enlargcmcnt usually obscures thc
avoided altogether by performing  Doppler ccho
ECG manifestations of right vcntricular cnlargemcnt.
Cardiography,217. 218
RADIOGRAPHY
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
On thc dorsoventral projection, modcratc to scvcrc
Doppler echocardiography is the most scnsitive and
right atrial cnlargcment appears as a bulge on the
reliable nonimvasive clinical techniquc for identifying
right craniolatcral border of the cardiac silhouetle
tricuspid rcgurgitation (scc Fig. 8-18).2x A substanial
558 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
pcrccntage of healthy dogs havc a mild degree of
ished at the onsct of isovolumetric systole when thc
tricuspid regurgitation when the heart is carefully in-
terrogated by pulsed wave or color Hlow Doppler echo-
This motion is paradoxic in the scnsc that the interven-
tricular septum normally movcs away from the trans
have smal tricuspid valve leaks, and their prevalence
ducer toward the contracting left ventricular frcc wall.
increascs with age.21s Thesc small lcaks in the valve
Two-dimcnsional ccho also allows assessmnent of tricus
are inconscquential given the normally low systolic
pid valve morphology and motion (prolapse), right
pressurcs in the right side of the heart. Whcn tricuspid
ventricular and righi atrial size, and cvaluation of thc
regurgitation is scvcrc, Doppler studies show systolic
pulmonary arterics and caudal vena cava. In dogs with
blood flow revcrsal in thc caudal vena cava and hcpatic
organic tricuspid rcgurgitation, the septal leaflet is
veins.  Doppler tcchniqucs havc replaced the
usc
often thickened and may prolapsc dorsally into thc
of contrast echocardiography (scc discussion follow-
right atrium during systole.
of a tricuspid jet will hc less than that of a mitral
THERAPY
 jct-umless RV systolic pressures arc increased to sys-
Treatment of dogs with combined mitral and tricus-
temic levels, For this reason, thc clinical significance
pid valve disease is csscntially the same as that outlined
of tricuspid regurgitation on a color flow Dopplcr
for the management of mitral rcgurgitation.27n Tricus-
cchocardiogram is sometimcs diffcult to assess, and
pid rcgurgitation may lessen or disappear whcn leff-
such studies must. be interpreted cautiously.
sided heart function improvcs. In dogs and cats with
Estimation of the transvalvular prcssurc gradicnt us-
rcfractory right-sidcd heart failure, it is often neccssary
ing spcctral Doppler should be performcd whencver a
t0 perform periodic abdominoccntesis. Other treat-
substantial dcgrcc of tricuspid regurgitation is oh-
ment altcrnatives include combining diuretics with dif-
served. Jet vclocitics in patients with organic tricuspid
fering mechanisms of action (furoscmide. a thiazide.
and/or spironolactone), or administering a vcnous va-
usually lcss than 2.67 m/sec.21s Higher vclocitics indi-
sodilator (nitroglyccrin or isosorbide dinitrate). Thc
 cate pulmonic stenosis or pulmonary hypertension.
The systolic prcssurc gradient is calculated from the
animals mandates that diuretic and vasodilator therapy
 pcak velocities in thc rcgurgirant jet using the simpli
bc carefully monitored. Surgical rcpair of thc tricuspid
fied Bernoulli equation (AP = 4V). Right ventricular
valve should not hc attempted prior to repair of the
(and pulmonary artery) systolic prcssure can
be
mitral valve when both valves arc insufficicnt, Scvcrc
quickly calculated if right atrial pressure is krown or
pulmonary cdema can rcsult if the tricuspid valve is
 can be reasonably cstimatcd (ccntral venous pressurc
repaired and the mitral valvc is grossly incompetent.80
mcasurement). Right ventricular and pulmonary ar-
 Dogs with isolaicd tricuspid regurgitation may bc
Icry systolic pressures cstimatcd in this fashion corre-
asymptomatic for ycars. Should hcart failure develop,
late very well with cathictcr-dcrived pressure esimates.28
it can bxc effectively managed in most cascs using di-
 Contrast echocardiography is a valuable and sensi-
goxin, diuretics, and/or a low sodium diet. If the right
tivc mcthod for assessing tricuspid rcgurgitation when
sidc of the heart is very dilated, it may bc helpful to
Doppler  chocardiography  is  unavailablc
(chapter
reduce regurgitant volumc by pcrforming plication or
8),2-z2 With this technique, air-agitatcd salinc, dex-
cffcctive in sone dogs with functional tricuspid regur-
trose, or indocyanine grccn dye is injected into a cc-
phalic vein, and the rcsulting microcavitations, or
gitation. Valvc rcplacement is an effcctive but costly
"bubbles,"' arc followcd through the circulation. Thcse
remedy available at somc institutional practices.s. 17.26
bubbles may bc obscrved to travel back and forth
Long-term improvement in dogs with right-sidcd hcart.
failure and tricuspid rcgurgitaion due to chronic
across the incompctcnt tricuspid valve and may reflux
into the posterior vcna cava or hepatic vcins during
hcartworm infection is depcndent on succcssful adulti-
cide thcrapy and subsequent remodeling of the pulmo-
ventricular systolc. Falsc-positive studies can rcsult
nary yasculature (chapter 30). Rcst, diuretics, and ab-
from arrhythmia, pericardial disordcrs, and right-sided
dominocentesis are uscd to alleviate congestion in
hcart failurc,218
thc interim.
M-modc and two-dimensional ccho findings reflect
right vcntricular volume overload and are not specific
for tricuspid rcgurgitation. The right ventriclc is di-
PULMONIG AND AORTIC VALVE
lated, and thc interventricular septum moves paradoxi-
INSUFFICIENCY
cally toward the transducer and thc right ventricle at
the onsct of systole 2s. 2es During diastolc, thc interven-
tricular septurn is displaced toward the left ventricular
PULMONIC REGURGITATION
cavity as a rcsult of increased filling of the right ventri-
Dilation of the main pulmonary artcry and the pul-
cle. This deformation of the septum is rapidlly abol-
monic valve ring sccondary to chronic pulmonary hy
ACQUIRED VALVULAR HEART DISEASE IN DOGS AND CATS 559
perfcnsion is the most important cause of pulmonic
with other valvc lesions, the scvcrity of regurgitation
valvc  insuffciency.s. s9  Iairogenic pulmonic  insuffi-
can bc estimated by qualitativc or quantitative mca-
cicncy often dcvelops when surgery or balloon valvu-
surementsMore mortantly, spctral Dopple in
loplasty is pcrforned in patients with pulmonic steno-
rogation of the regurgitant jet during diastole can
sis, but it is usually mild and clinical sequela are rare.
 providc an accurate estimation of diastolic pulmonary
Pulmonic valvc insufficiency can also occur whcn the
 artery pressure, allowing recognition and quantifica-
pulmonary  artery  is  dilated from  a  left-to-right
tion of pulmonary hypertension (using the nodificd
shunting patent ductus arteriosus. Idiopathic pulmo-
Bernoulli equation, chapter 8). In patienis without
 jo s   si  ae a
pulmonary hypertension, the peak velocity of the rc-
monic valve insufficiency in dogs. 27 Acquired struc-
gurgitating blood is Icss than 1.9 m/scc (highcr yeloci-
tural disease of thc pulmonic valve lcaflets is rarc in
tics gcnerally indicatc pulmonary hypcrtcnsion). The
dogs and cats.
pcak vclocity of hlood flow through the pulmonic valve
orificc during systolc may be modcstly clevaled (2.0 to
2.5 m/sec) duc to ejcction of an incrcascd strokc
PHYSICAL. EXAMINATION
volume. Two-dimcnsional and M-inode cchocardiogra-
Isolatcd  pulmonic  rcgurgitation  characteristically
 phy rcvcal changcs consistent with volumc overload of
produces a low-pitched, early to mid-diastolic decre-
the right sidc of the hcart and, occasionally, diastolic
fluttering of the tricuspid valve.* 228
sccndo or crcscendo-decrescendo murmur that  is
 heard best ovcr the pulmonic valve arca on the left
Trcatmcnt  of  isolatcd  pulmonic  imsufficicncy  is
 3rd or 4th intcrspacc. A systolic murmur is sometimes
rarcly nccessary. In dogs and cats with pulmonary hy-
heard at this samc location due cithcr to thc cjcction
pertension, treatment is directed at the primary disor-
of a larger than normal stroke volume or to turbulencc
der (sec chapters 30, 31, and 33).
generatcd by cddy currcnts in thc dilated pulmonary
arlery. On occasion, pulmonic regurgitation
is
silentno murmur is deteciablc. Whcn pulmonic rc-
AORTIC REGURGITATION
gurgitation devclops sccondary to pulmonary hypcr-
tension, the murmur is usually louder and highcr
When infectious etiologies arc cxcluded (chapter
26), acquired diseases of the aortic valve are very un-
pitched and tends to occur earlier in diastolc.s This
murmur is referrcd to as a Graham Sleel's murmur in
common in dogs and cats. Small jets of aortic insuffi-
cicncy arc often discovered by color flow Doppler
human patients. Gallop hcart sounds, excrcise intolcr-
ancc, and right-sidcd CHF are coinmon findings in
cchocardiography in older dogs with chronic degener.
dogs or cals with pulmonary hypertcnsion, but they
ativc valvular diseasc, prcsumably as a result of mild
arc umcommon in dogs with isolared pulmonic insuffi-
myxomatous changcs in thc aortic valve leaflcts.l-
Such lesions rarely, if ever, cause an audible murmur
cicncy.
or clinical disability. Idiopathic dilation of the aorta is
another uncommon cause of aortic insufficicncy. It is
FLECTROCARDIOGRAPHY AND RADIOGRAPHY
honei ses pue shop pose u uno iso poarsqo
 The ECG manifestations of right vcntricular cnlarge-
aortic rcgurgitation has also becn reported as a rarc
sequela to cardiac puncture and cardiac catheter-
ization.*, 131 Aorric regurgitation occurs most often in
lar insufficiency Thcy are morc rcliably prcscnt when
 dogs with bactcrial cndocarditis or in association with
chronic pulmonary hypcrtcnsion is the 
proximatc
 congcnital hcart defects such as ventricular septal dc-
cause of the valve lcak. Aul cnlargcd right ventricle and
fect, tetralogy of Fallot, or discretc fibrous subaortic
pulmonary artcry segincnt arc usually obscrved on
stenosis (chapter 24),29. s0 The clinical fcatures and
thoracic radiographs. In many cascs, the proxinal por-
thcrapy of aortic rcgurgitation are discussed in chap-
tions of the right and left pulmonary artcrics arc also
ter 26.
enlarged.
References
ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY AND
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
Although cardiac cathererization and angiocardiog-
1. Detweiler DK, Patterson DF. 'The prcvalence and types
raphy can help measurc right-sided heart and pulmo-
of cardiovascular disease in dogs. Ann NY Acad Sci
nary artcry prcssures and demonstrate regurgitation
127:481, 1965
of contrast material into thc right ventricle,$ the diag-
 2. Detweiler DK, Luginbuhl H, Buchanan JW, ct al. Thc
natural history of acquired cardiac disability in the dog.
nosis of pulmonic rcgurgitation is most easily con-
Ann NY Acad Sci 147:318, 1968
firmed by color flow Dopplcr echocardiography 28 As
3. Bretschneider J. Zur Pathologic und Pathogeliese der
 560 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
Sogcnanntcn Endocarditis Valvularis Chronica Fibrosa
28. Malcolm AD. Mitral valvc prolapsc associatcd with other
des Hundes. Disscrtation, Lniversity of Giessen, Ger-
disorders. Causal coincidencc, common limk, or Iunda-
many, 1962
1ncntal genctic disturbance? Br Hcart J 53:353, 1985
4. Buchaa Jw. Valvular discase (endocardiosis in dogs).
29. Mamn JM, Davies MJ. Ihe pathology of the mitral valve.
Adv Vet Sci Comip Med 21:75, 1979
In Wcils FC, Shapiro IM (eds): Mitral Valve Disease.
5. Sisson D. Acquired valvular heart disease. In Bonagura
2nd cd. 1.ondon, Buutterworths, 1996. p 16
JD (ed): Contemporary Issues in Sinall Aninal Praclice.
30.Hickey AJ、Wilcken DEI., Wright JS, et al. Primary
Cardiology. New York, Churchill 1Livingstone, 1987, p 59
(spontancous) chordal rupture: rclationship to myxo-
6. Iashjian RJ, Das KM, Palich KM, ct al. Studies on car-
matous valve disease and nitral valve prolapsc. J Ain
diovascular disease in the cat. Ann NY Acad Sci
Coll Cardiol 5:1341, 1985
127:581,1965
31. Whitncy JC. Observations of the cffect of agc on the
7. Liu S-K, Tashjian R], Palnaik AK. Congesive hcart fail-
severity of heart valve lesions in the dog. J Small Anim
ure in the cat. J Ani Vet Med Assoc 156:1319, 1970
Pract 15:511, 1974
8. Liu S-K, Tilley 1.1, L.ord PF. Feline cardiomyopathy. In
 32. Kogure K. Pathology of chronic mitral valvular disease
Roy PE, Rona G (eds): Rccent. Advances in Studies 011
in the dog. Jpn J Vet Sci 42:323, 1980
Cardiac Structure ard Metabolism. Vol 110. Baltimore,
33. Luginbuli H, Detweiler DK. Cardiovascular lesions in
Lniversity Park Press, 1975, p 627
dogs. Amn NY Acad Sci 127:5, 1965
9. Liu SK, Tilley LP.Animal modes of primary myocardial
 31. Das KM, Tashjian RJ. Chronic imitral valve disease in
disease. Yale J Biol Mcd 53:191, 1980
the dog. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 60:1209. 1965
10.
‘Tilley LP, Lini' S-K, Gilbertson SR, et al. Primary myocar-
35. Pensinger RR. Comparativc aspects of mitral valvc dis-
dial disease in 1he cat. Am J Pathol 87:493, 1977
ease in dogs. Ann NY Acad Sci 118:525, 1965
11.
Liu SK. Pathology of feline heart. discase. Vet Clin
36. Pirie HM. The pathology of heart disease in the dog. J
North Am 7:323, 1977
Small Anim Pract 8:175, 1967
12. Harpster NK Felinc arrhythmias: diagnosis and iman-
37. Jones IC, Zook BC. 
Aging changes in the vascular
agement. In Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD (eds): Current Vet-
systeim of aninals. A1n NY Acad Sci 127:671, 1965
erinary Therapy XI. Philadelphia, WB Saunders. 1992,
 38. Pomerance A. Pathogenesis of senile odular sclerosis
p 732
 of thc anteroventricular valves. Br IHeart J 28:815, 1966
13. Fenoglio ll, Tuan DP, Wit AI.et al. Canine mitral
39. Pomerance A. Aging changes in human heart valves.
complex. Circ Res 31:117, 1972
Br Hcart J 29:222, 1969
14.
Perlofr JD, Roberts Wc. The mnitral apparatus. Func-
 40. Pomerancc A, Whimcy JC. Hleart valve changes con-
tional anatony of mitral regurgitation. Circulation
 mon to iman and dog: a comparative study. Cardiovasc
46:227, 1972
Res 1:61, 1970
15. Frater RWM, Ellis FH. Thc anatomy of the canine mi-
41. Angrist A. Aging heart valves and a unitary pathological
tral valve. I Surg Res 1:171, 1961
hypothesis for sclerosis. J Gerontol 19:135, 1961
16. Anderson RH, Wilcox BR. The anatomy ol the mitral
42. Sokkar SM, Irautwcin G. Die Endokardiosc der Atrio-
valve, I wells FC, Shapiro LM (eds): Mitral Valve Dis-
ventrickularklappcn des Hundes. 1. Morphologische
case. 2nd ed. London, Buttcrworths, 1996, p 4
und histochemische Untersuchungcn. 261  Vet Med
17. Evans HE. The hcart and arterics. M Evans HF (ed):
Millcr's Anatomy of the Dog. 3rd ed. Philadclphia, WB
17A:757, 1970
43. Sokkar SM, I'rautwcin G. Die Endokardiosc der Atrio-
Saunders, 1993, p 586
18. Sonnenblick EH, Napolitano LM, Daggett WM, ct al.
ventrickularklappen des Hundes. ll. Papier und im-
An intrinsic ncuromuscular basis for mitral valvc no-
muclektrohoretische Lntersuchungen. 26l Vet Med
lion in the dog. Circulation 21:9, 1967
18A:1, 1971
19. Priola DY, Fellow C, Moosehouse J. et al. Mechanical
44. Ernst E. Schncider P, Trautwein G. Die Endokcardiose
activity of canine mitral valve in sitnu. Am J Physiol
 der Atriovenntrickularklappen des Hundes. IV. Electron-
mikroskopischc
Lntersuchungen.
219:1647, 1970
261VctMed
20. Wit AL, Fenoglio J, Wagncr BM, ct al. Electrophysio-
21A:400, 1974
logical properties of cardiac muscle in the anterior
45. Schneider PE, Ernst E, Trautwcin G. Dic Endokardiosc
mitral valve leaflel and the ardjacent myocardium in the
der Alriovernirickularklappen des Hundes. Ill. Enzym-
dog. Circ Res 32:731, 1973
histochemische
Untersuchmgcn.
261
Vet Med
21. voni Racknitz W. Inaugural dissertation. Veterinar-Patho-
19A:809,1972
logischen Institut der Lniversitat, Munich, Germany.
 46. Schole J. Untersuchungen zur atiologic and pathogcn-
1964
ese der Endokardiose and Endokarditis des Hundes.
22. Silverman M, Hurst WJ. Thc mitral complex, Am Heart
IV. Biochemische Untersuchungen. Dtsch Tiergerztl
176:399, 1968
Wochensch 80:472, 1973
23. Crawley IS, Morris DC, Silverman BD.Valvular hearl
47. Fenoglio JJ, Wagner BM. Conncctive tissue and control
discase, n IIurst IW, Lorjue RB. Schlant RC, et al (cds):
 of cardiac function. Pathobiol Ann 4:199, 1974
'Ihe Heart. 4th ed, New York, McGraw-Hill. 1978, p 992
48. Schneider P, Ernst E, 'Irautwein G. Ainyloidosc der
24. Anderson Rll, wilson BR. Ihe anatoiny of thc mitral
IIerzklappen beim Hund. Vet. Pathol 8:130, 1971
valves. In Wells FC, Shapiro LM (eds): Mitral Valve
49. Ernst E, Schneider P, Irautwein G. Elecktronen mik-
Discasc. 2nd ed. London, Buttcrworths, 1996, p 4
roskopische U ntersuchungen uber die Amyloidose der
 25. Edwards JE, Burchell HB. Pathologic anatomy of mitral
Atriovcntrickularklappen des Hundes. Beitr Pathol Bd
regurgitation. Mayo Clin Proc 33:497, 1958
152:361, 1974
26. Das KM, Pamaik AK, Liu SK, el al. Cardiovascular
50. Jonsson L. Coronary arterial lesions and myocardial
pathology of the dog and cat: a case study of 1000
infarcts in the dog. Acta Vet Scand Suppl 38:5, 1972
consecutivc nccropsies. J Am Vet Med Assoc 147:1648,
 51. King BD, Clark MA, Mobushis B, el al. *Myxomatous"
1965
27. Oison EGJ, A-Rufare HK. The floppy miral valve. Br
Circulation 66:288, 1982
Hcart J 44:674, 1980
52. Kuivaniemi H, Tromp G, Prockop DJ. Mutations in1
ACQLIRED VAIVULAR HEART DISEASE IN DOGS AND CATS
561
fhrillar collagens (types I, II, Il, and XI), fbril-associ-
72. Darke PGG. Valvuar incompetence in Cavalicr King
ated collagcn (iype IX), and network-forming collagen
Charles spanicls. Vet Rec 120:365, 1987
(type X) cause a spectrum of discascs of bone, carti-
73. Haggstrom J, Hansson K, Karlberg BE, et al. Chronic
lage, and blood vessels. Hum Mutat 9:300, 1997
valvular diseasc in thc cavalier King Charles spanicl in
53.1
 Bashey RI, Bashey HM, Jimenez SA. Characterization
Sweden. Vet Rcc 131:549, 1992
of pcpsin-solubilized bovine hcart-valve collagen. Bio-
74. Beardow AW, Buchanan JW. Chroic tmitral valve dis-
chem J 73:885, 1978
case in Cavalicr King Charles spaniels: 95 cases (1987-
54. Jaffe As, Geluman EM, Rodey GE. Mitral valve prolapse:
1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1023. 1993
a consistent manifestation of type IV Ehlcrs-Danlos syn-
 75. Malik R, Humt GB, Allan GS. Prevalence of nitral valve
dromc. (Circulation 61;121, 1981
insufficicncy in cavalicr King Charles spaniels. Vet Rcc
55. Ilammer D, Leier CV, Baba N. Altered collagen compo
130:302, 1992
sition in a prolapsing_ mitral valve with ruplured
76. Braunwald E, welch GH, Sarroff Sj. Heinodynamic
chordae tendineac. Am J Med 67:863, 1979
cffects of quantitaively varied cxperinental mitral re-
 56. Byera PH. Disorders of collagen biosynthesis and struc-
gurgitation. Circ Res 5:539, 1957
turc. In Seriver CR, Beaudet AI. Sly WA, et al (eds):
77. Braunwald E. Mitral regurgitation. Physiologic, clinical
The Metabolic and Molccular Bases of Inherited Dis-
and surgical considerations. N Engl J Med 28l:425,
ease. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1995. p 4029
1969
 57. Davis MJ, Moore BP, Braimbridge MV. The floppy mi-
78. Urschel CW, Covell JW, Grahain 'TP, et al. Efects of
tral valve. Study of incidence, pathology and complica-
acute yalvular regurgitalion on the oxygen cousump
tions in surgical, necropsy and forensic matcrial. Br
tion of the caninc hcart. Circ Res 23:33, 1968
Heart J 40:468, 1978
79. Urschel CW, Covell JW, Soiinenblick EH, et al. Myocar-
58. Cole WG, Chan D, Hickey AJ, et al. Collagen composi-
dial mechanics in aorlic and mitral valvular regurgita-
tion of normal and nyxomatous human mitral heart
tion: the concepl of instantaneous jmpedance as a dc-
valves. Biochem J 219:451, 1984
terminant of the performance of the intact heart. J
59. Caulficld JB, Page Dl., Kastor JA, et al. Conmective
Clin I1ivest 17:867, 1968
tissue abnormalities in spontaneous rupture of chordae
 80. Graham 'TP, Covell JW, Sonncnblick KI1, ct al. Control
tendineae. Arch Pathol 91:537, 1971
of nyocardial oxygen consumption: relative influence
60. Jeresaty RM, Edwardis JE, Surendra KC. Mitral valve
of contractile state and tension developnent. J Clin
prolapsc and ruptured chordae tendincac. Ain J
Invest 17:375, 1968
Cardiol 55:138, 1985
81. Taylor RR, Cingolani HF, Graham TP. Myocardial oxy-
6l. Birkdal-Hansen H, Moore WGI, Bodden MK, et al. Ma-
gen consumption, left ventricular fiber shortening and
trix melalloprotcinases: a review. Crit Rev QOral Biol
wall tension. Cardiovasc Res 1:219, 1967
Mcd 4:197, 1993
 82. Yoran C, Yellin EL, Beckcr RM, et al. Iynamic aspects
62. Shingleton WD, Hodges DJ, Brick P, el al. Collagenase:
of acute mitral regurgitation: effects of ventricular vol-
a key ennzyme in collagen turnover. Biochem Cell Biol
ume, pressure and contractility on thc effective regugi
74:759, 1996
tan1 area. Circulation 60: 170, 1979
63. Tamura K, Fukuda Y, Ishizaki M, et al. Abnormaliies 
83. Yoran C, Yellin EL, Hori M, ct al. Effects of heart ratc
inl elastic fibers and other connective-tissue components
onl experimentally produccd imitral regurgitation in
of floppy mitral valvc. Am Heart J 129:1149. 1995
dogs. An J Cardiol 152:134, 1983
64. Pyeritz RE. Disorders of fibrillin and microfibrillogen-
84. Picrpont GL, Tulley RC. Pathophysiology of valvular
csis: Marfan syndrome, MAsS phenotype, contractural
heart disease. The dyramic nalure of mitral valve regur-
arachnodactyly and related conditions. In Rimoin DL,
gitation. Arch Imtern Med 142:998, 1982
Connor JM, Pyeritz RE (eds): Principles and Practice
85. Sasayama S, Takahashi M, Osakada G, ct al. Dynamic
 of Medical Genetics. 3rd ed. New York, Churchill Liv-
geometry of the left atrium and left ventricle in acute
ingslone. 1996, p 183
mitral regurgitation. Circulation 60:177, 1979
65. Jacobs GJ, Calvert CA. Mahaffcy MB, et al. Echocardio-
 86. Yellin EI., Yoran C, Sonncnblick EH, et al. Dynamic
graphic detection of flail leftatrioventricular valve cusp
changes in thc canine mitral regurgitant orifice area
from ruptured chordae tendineac in 4 dogs, J Vet In-
during ventricular cjcction. Circ Res 45:677. 1979
tern Med 9:341, 1995
87. Yoran C, Yellin FI., Gabbay S, ct al. Mechanisin of
66. Schneider P Frnst E, Traurwcin G, et al. Experimcn-
reduction of mitral regurgitation with vasodilator ther-
telle durch ACTH und DOC induzierte hcrzkiappencn-
apy, Am.J (Cardiol 43:773, 1979
dokardiose. Endokrinologie 62:215, 1973
 88. Grecnberg BH, Massie BM, Brundagc BH, et al. Bcne-
67. Slavin J, Lnemori E, Hunt TK, et al. Iransforiming
ficial effccts of hydralazine in severe mitural regurgita-
growth factor-beta (TGF-bcta) and dexamcthasone
lion. Circulation 58:273, 1978
have direct opposing cffects on collagen metabolism in
89. Braunwald E, Valvular heart. diseasc. / Braunwald E
low passage hunan dermal fbroblasts in vitro. Growih
(ed): Heart Disease, A Texthook of Cardiovascular Med-
Factors 11:205, 1994
icie. 5th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1997, p 1007
68. Brilla CG, Rupp H, Fmck R, et al. The renin-angioten-
90. Kilhara Y, Sasayaina S, Miyazaki S, et al. Role of the lelf
sin-aldosterone system ai1d myocardial collagcn matrix
atriurn in adaptation of the hcart to chronic imitral
renodeling in_ congestive heart failure. Eur Heart
regurgitation in conscious dogs. Circ Res 62:543, 1988
16(Suppl 0):107, 1995
91. Sisson D, Brown W. Henmodynamic clfects of atrial fi-
69. 1larpster NK. Cardiovascular discases of the domestic
cat. Ady Vet Sci Comp Med 2l:39, 1977
rcgurgitation. Abstract. J Vet Intern Med 9:200, 1995
 70. Stunzi H. Aur Pathogeniese der Endocarditis valvularis.
92. Ware WA, Lumd DD, Subieta AR, el al. Sympathetic
Schweiz Arch Tierheilk 104:135, 1962
activation in dogs with congestive heart failure caused
71. Thrusfeld MV, Aitkcn CCG, Darkc PGG. Observations
by chronic mitral valve discase anci dilated cardiomyop
on breed and sex in1 relation to canine hcart valvc
athy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1475, 1990
incompetencc. J Srmall Anim Pract 26:709, 1985
93. Haggstrom J, Hansson K, Karlherg BE, el al. Eflects of
562
DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
long-term treatment with enalapril or hydralazine on
111. Katz AM. 1he cardiomyopathy of overload. A major
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and fluid bal-
determinant of prognosis in congestive heart failure. V
ance in dogs with naturally acquired nitral valve regur-
Engl J Med 322:100, 1990
gitation. Am J Vet Res 57:1645, 1996
1 12. Sagawa K, Suga HI, Shoukas A, et al. End-systolic pres-
94. Haggstrom J. IHansson K, Karlberg BE, et al, Plasma
sure/volume ratio: a new index of ventricular contrac-
concentration of atrial natriurelic peptide in relation to
tility. Am J Cardiol 40:748, 1977
severity of mitral regurgitation in Cavalier King Charles
113. Nagatsu M, Zile MR, Tsutsui H, et al. Native beta-
Spaniels. Amn J Vet. Res 55:698, 1994
adrenergic support for left ventricular dysfunction in
95. Pedersen HD. Flifects of mild mitral valve insufficiency,
experimental mitral regurgitation normalizes indexes
sodium intake, and place of blood sampling on thit
of pump and contractie function, Circulation 89:818,
renin-angiotensin system in dogs. Acta Vet Scand
1994
37:109. 1996
114. Kaplan PM, Fox PR, Garvey MS, et al. Acute mitral
96. Pederscn HD, Koch J, Poulsen K, et al. Activation of
regurgitation with papillary muscle rupture in a dog. J
the renin-angiotensin system in dogs with asymptomatic
Am Vet Med Assoc 191:1436, 1987
and mildlly symptomatic mitral valvular insufficiency. J
115. Buchanan JW. Chronic valve disease and left atrial split-
Vet. Intern Med 9:328, 1995
ting in the dog. Master's Thesis, University of Pennsylva-
97. HHaggstron J. Chronic valvular dlisease in Cavalier King
nia Graduate School of Medicine, Philadelphia, 1966
1 16. Ettinger SJ, Suter PF. Acquired valvular and endocardial
physiology. Thesis. Uppsala University, Uppsala, Swe-
heart disease. In Euinger SJ, Suter PF: Canine Cardiol-
den, 1996
ogy. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1970, p 321
98. Hagstrom J, Hansson K, Kvart C, el al. Elecis of
117. Tamlin RL. Prognostic value of changes in the carliac
naturally acquired deconpensated mitral valve regurgi-
silhouette in dogs with mitral insufficiency. J An Vet
tation on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and
Med Ass0c 153:1436. 1968
atrial natriuretic peptide concentration in dogs. Ain J
118. Suter PF. Cardiac diseases. In Suter PF: Thoracic Radi
Vet Res 58:77, 1997
ography An Atlas of Thoracic Diseases in the Dog and
99. Takeimura N, Koyama Il, Sako T, et al. Atrial natriuretic
Cat. wetlswil, Switzerland, Peter F. Suter, 1984, p 351
peptide in the dog with mitral regurgitation. Res Vet
119.E
Ettinger SJ. Valvular heart disease. In Ettinger SJ (ed):
Sci 50:86, 1991
Textbook of Veterinary Medicine; Discases of the Dog
100. Zile MR, Gaasch WH, Carroll JD, el al. Chronic mitral
and Cat. 2nd ed. Vol 2. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
regurgitation: predictive value of preoperative echocar-
1983, p 956
diographic indexes of left ventricular function anid wall
120. Criteria Committee, New York IHeart Association, Inc.
stress. J Am Coll Cardiol 3:235, 1984
101. Borow KM. Green LH, Mann T, et al. End-systolic vol-
Diseases of the Ileart and Blood Vesseis, Nomenclature
and Criteria for Diagnosis. 6th ed. Boston, Linle,
ume as a predictor of postoperative left venricular
Brown, 1964
perforimance in volune overload fron valvular regurgi-
121.
 Detweiler DK, Patterson DF. A phonographic record of
tation. An J Med 68:655, 1980
heart sounds and murmurs of the dog. An NY Acad
102. Kotler MN, Mintz GS, Parry WR, et al. M-mode and
Sci 127:322, 1965
 2-dimensional echocardiography in mitral and aortic
122. Hahn A. Auscultation of the canine patient: Part Vl.
regurgitationr: pre- and postoperative evaluation of vol-
ume overload of the ‘left ventricle. Am J Cardiol
Murmurs. Small Anim Clin 2:13, 1962
123. Haggstroin J, Kvarl C, Harsson K HHeart sounds and
46:144,1980
nurmurs: changes relate to scverity of chronic valvular
103. Schuler G, Peterson Kl., Johnson A, et al. Teinporal
disease (CVD) in the cavalier King Charles spaniel. J
response of left ventricular performance to mitral valve
surgery. Circulation 59:1218,1979
Vet Intern Med 9:75, 1995
104. Grossman W. Aortic and mitral regurgitation. How to
124. Darke P, Bonagura JD, Kelly DF. Mitral valve disease. In
evaluate the condition and what to consider surgical
intervention. J Am Med Assoc 252:2447, 1984
White, 1996. p 57
105. Kittleson MD, Eyster GE, Knowlen GG. Myocardial
125. Lombard CW, Spencer CP. Correlation of radliographic,
function in small dogs with chronic mitral regurgitation
echocardiographic, and electrocardiographic signs of
and severe congestive heart failure. J Am Vet Med Assoc
184:455, 1984
tion. Vet Rad 26:89, 1985
106. Prasad K. O'Neil Cl., Bharadwa MB. Effects of chronic
126. Chen K-Y. Reevaluation1 andl revision of electrocardio-
digoxin treatment on cardiac function, electrolytes, and
graphic criteria for the diagnosis of left ventricular
sarcolemmal ATPase in the canine failing heart due to
hypertrophy in dogs. J Chin Soc Vet Sci 14:359. 1988
chronic mitral
regurgitation.  J   An  Med  Assoc
127. 
Tilley I.P. Analysis of canine P-QRS-T deflections. In
108:1487, 1984
Essentials of Canint and Feline Electrocardiography.
107. Carabello BA, Nakano K, Corin W, et al. Left ventricu-
3rd ed. Philadelphia, I.ea and Febiger, 1992, p 59
lar function in experimental volume overload hypertro-
128. Haggstrom J, Hamlin RL., Hansson K, et al. HHeart rate
phy. Am J Physiol 256:11974, 1989
variability in relation to severity of mitral regurgitation
108.
 Kleaveland JP, Kussmaul WG, Vinciguerra T, et al. Vol-
in Cavalier King Charles spaniels. J Small Anim Pract
ume overload hypertrophy in a closed-chest model of
37:69, 1996
mitral regurgitation. An J Physiol 254:H1034, 1988
129. Buchaan IW. Spontaneous arrhythmias and conduc-
109. Carabello BA, Nakano K, Ishihara K, et al. Coronary
tion disturbances in domestic animals. Ann NY Acad
blood flow in dogs with contractile dysfunction due to
Sci 127:224, 1965
experimental volume overload. Circulation 83:1063,
130. Sellers RD, I.evy Mf. Amplatz K, et al. Lefl retrograde
1991
cardioangiography in acquired heart. disease: tech-
110. Urabe Y, Mann DI., Kent RL., et al. Cellular aned ventric-
nique, indications, and interpretations in 700 cases. Am
ular contractile dysfunction in experimental canine ni-
J Cardiol 14:437, 1964
tral regurgitation. Circ Res 70:131, 1992
131. Buchanan JIW. Sclective angiography and angiocardiog-
ACQUIRED VALVULAR HEART DISEASE IN DOGS AND CATS !
563
raphy in dogs with acquired cardiovascular disease. Am1
regurgitation flow rate and regurgitation orifce area
J Vet Rad 6:5, 1965
with angiography. Z Kardiol 86:346, 1997
132. Lord PF. Ieft ventricular volumes of the dliseased ca-
150, Feigenbaum I1. Echocardiography 5th ed. Malvern, PA,
nine heart: congestive cardionyopathy and volune
Lea and Febiger, 1994, p 456
151.
Pipers FS, Bonagura JD, Hamlin RIL., et al. Echocardiop-
insuffhciency). Am J Vet Res 35:493, 1974
graphic abnormalities of the mitral valve associated with
I33. Lord PF. Quantitative lefl ventricular cineangiocardiog-
left-side heart dliseases in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
raphy inn the dog: mcasurement and usefulness of left.
179:580, 1981
ventricular volume. J Am Vet Rad Soc 18:51, 1977
152. Kienie RD, 'Thonas WP. Echocardiography. In Nyland
134. Weyman1 AE. left ventricular inflow trac1 1. In Weyiman
TG, Mattoon JS (eds): Velerinary Diagnostic Cltra-
AE: Principles and Practice of Echocardiography. Phila-
sound. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 198
delphia, Lea and Febiger, 1994, p 391
153. Pedersen HID, Kristensen BO, Lorentzen KA, et al, Mi-
135. Perry GJ, Nanda NC. Recent advances in color Doppler
tral valve prolapse in 3-year-old healthy Cavalier King
evaluation of valvuar regurgitation, Echocardliography
Charles Spaniels. An1 echocardiographic study. Can J
4:503, 1987
Vet Res 59:294, 1995
136. Nakayama T, wakao Y, Takiguchi S, et al. Prevalence of
154. Pedersen HD, Kristensen BO, Norby B, et al. Echocardi-
yalvular regurgitation in normal beagle dogs detected
ographic study of mitral yalve prolapse in Dachshunds.
by color Doppler echocardiography. J Vet Med Sci
J Vet Med Assoc 43:103. 1996
56:973, 1994
155. Nakayama T, Wakao Y, Neinoto HI, et al. Mitral valve
137. Yuill CD, O'Grady MR. Doppler-derived velocity of
protrusion assessed by use of B-mode echocardiography
blooxd flow across the cardiac valves of normal dogs.
in dogs with mitral regurgitation. An J Ve1 Res 57:791,
Can J Vet Res 55:185, 1991
1996
138. Chen CG, Thonas JD, Anconina J. Impact of impinging
156. Mintz GS, Kotler MN, Segal Bl., el al. Two-dimensional
wall jet on color Doppler quantification of mitral regur-
echocardliographic recognition of rupturcd chordlae
gitation. Circulation 84:712, 1991
tendineae. Circulation 57:244, 1978
139. Hemcke F, et al. Color Doppler assessment of mitral
157. Humphries WC, Hamner WJ, McDonough MT, et al.
regurgitation
1  with orthogonal planes.  Circulation
Echocardiographic equivalents of a flail imitral leaflet.
75:175, 1987
Am J Cardiol 40:902, 1977
140. Uehara Y, Takahashi M. Quantitative evaluation1 of the
158.
Child JS, Skorton DJ, Taylor RD, et al. M-mode and
severity of mitral insufficiency in dogs by the color
cross-sectional echocardiographic features of flail poste-
Doppler methoxd. J Vet Med Sci 58:249, 1996
rior mitral leafets. Am J Cardiol 44:1383, 1979
141. Fishe1 DC, Sahn DJ, Friedman MJ, et al. The mitral
159. Vuille C, Weyman AE. Left ventricle I; General consid-
valve orifice method for noninvasive two-dimensional
erations, assessment ol chamber size and function. In
echo Doppler determination of cardiac output. Circula-
Weyman AF (ed): Principles and Practice of Echocardi-
tion 67:712,1983
ography. Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger, 1994, p 575
142. Ascah KJ, Stewart W], Jiang L, el al. A Doppler two-
160.
 Zile MR, Gaasch WFI, Carrol JD, et al. Chronic mitral
dimensional echocardiographic method for quantita-
regurgitation: predictive value of preoperalive echocar-
tion of mitral regurgitation. Circulation 72:377, 1985
diographic indices of left ventricular function and wall
143. Tribouilloy C, Shen WF, Slama MA, et. al. Non-invasive
stress. J Am Coll Cardiol 3:325, 1984
measuremient of the regurgitant fraction by pulsed
161.
 Zile MR, Gaasch WTI, Levine HJ. Left ventricular stress-
dimension-shortening relations beforc and after correc-
gurgitation, Br Heart J 66:290, 1991
tion of chronic aortic and mitral regurgitation. Am J
144.
Rivera JM, Vandervoort PM, Thoreau DI1, et al. Quanti-
Cardiol 56:99, 1985
fication of mitral regurgitation with the proximal flow
162. Cohn IH, Couper GS, Aranki SF, et al. Long-term
convergence method: a clinical study. Am Heart J
results of mitral valve reconstruction for the regurgitat-
124:1289,1992
ing myxomatous mitral valve. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
145. Chen C, Koschyk D, Brockhoff C. et al. Noninvasive
107:143, 1994
estimation of regurgitant flow rale and volume in pa-
163. Colon R, Frazier OH. Mitral valve replacement tech-
niques. In Wells FC, Shapiro LM (eds): Mitral Valve
ping of accelerating flow feld. J Am Coll Cardiol
Disease. 2nd ed. I.ondon, Butterworths, 1996, p 135
21:374.1993
164. Wels FC. Conservation and repair of the nitral valve.
146. Shiota T, Jones M, Tiena DE, el al. Evalualion of mitral
In Wells FC, Shapiro LM (eds): Mitral Valve Disease.
regurgitation using a digitally determined color flow
 2nd ed. London, Butterworths, 1996, p 114
convergence “centerline”acceleration method. Circu-
165. Boggs LS, Dewan SJ, Ballard SE. Miural valve reconstruc-
lation 89:2879, 1994
tion in a toy-breed dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1872,
147. Schwammenhal E, Chen C, Benning F, et al. Dynamics
1996
 of mitral regurgitant flow and orifce area. Physiologic
166. Kanemoto I, Shibata S, Noguchi H, et al, Successful
application of the proximal flow convergence method:
clinical data and experimental  testing. Circulation
Nippon Juigaku Zasshi 52:411, 1990
90:307, 1994
167. Breznock EM. Tricuspid and mitral valvular disease:
148. Mele D, Vandervoort P, Palacios I, et al. Proximal jet
valve replacenent. Seimin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim)
size by Doppler color flow mapping predic s severity of
9:234, 1994
mitral   regurgitation.(
Clinical  studies.
Circulation
168. Keene BW, Rush JF. Thcrapy of heart failure. In Et-
1:746, 1995
tinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds): Textbook of Veterinary
149. Frieske R, Engelhard B, Franke A, et al. Transesopha
Internal Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
geal Doppler echocarliography assessment of mitral
1995, p 867
valve insuffciency: conparison of jet area, pulmonary
169. Fox PR, Sisson DD. Angiotensin-converting enzyme in-
venous flow profile, proximal jet diameter, inaximal
hibitors. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veteri-
564  DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
ary Therapy XI1. Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia,
apy on left ventricular remodeling after canine acue
WB Saunders. 1995, p 786
myocardial infarction. Circulation 89:2297, 1994
170. Cody RJ, Covit AB, Schaer GI., et al. Sodium and water
191. McDonald KM, Francis GS, Matthews J, et al. Long-
balancc in chronic congestive heart failure. J Clin Invest.
term oral nitrate therapy prevents chronic ventricular
77:1441,1986
remodeling in the dog. J Am Coll Cardiol 21:514. 1993
171. Shimoyama H, Sabbah HN, Roman H, et al. Elfects of
192. Jugdou Bl, Khan MI, Jugdott SJ, et al. Inpacl of left 
long-tern thcrapy with enalapril on severity of func-
ventricular unloading after late reperfusion of canine
tional miural regurgitation in dogs with moderate heart
anterior myocardial infarction on remodeling and finc-
failure. ↓ Am Col1 Cardiol 25:768, 1995
tionusing
isosorbide-5-mo11onitrate.
Circulation
172. Hanlin RL, Benitz AM, Ericsson GF, et al. Effects of
92:926, 1995
enalapril on exercise tolerance and longevity in1 dogs
193. Haggstrom J, Hansson K, Kvart C, et al. Chronic valvu-
with heart failure produced by jatrogenic mitral regur-
gitation. I Vet Intern Medl 10:85, 1996
Sweden. Vet Rec 131:549, 1992
173. The COVT. Study Group. Controlled clinical evaluation
194. Swensen L, Haggstrom J, Kvart C, et al. Relationship
 of enalapril in dogs with heart failure: results of the
betweenl parental status in Cavalier King Charles Span-
Cooperative Velerinary Enalapril Study Group. J Vet
iels and severity of chronic valvular dlisease in offspring
Intern Med 9:243, 1995
(CVD). J Vet Med Assoc 208:2009, 1996
174. The IMPROVF Study Investigators. Clinical effects of
195. Ettinger S, Buergelt CD. Atrioventricular dissociation
enalapril maleate in dogs with naturally acquired heart
(incomplete) in the dog with ruptured chordlae tendi-
failure: results of the invasive multicenter prospective
neae. Am J Vet Res 29:1499, 1968
veterinary evaluation of enalapril. J Vet Intern Med
196. Ettinger S, Buergelt CD. Rupiured chordae tendineae
9:234, 1995
in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 155:544, 1969
175. Ettinger SJ: ACE inhibitorswhy, when, and why not?
197. Iiu S-K, Suter PF, Ettinger S. Pulmonary alveolar micro.
Proceedings, 15th Annual Vet Med Forum, 1997, p 194
lithiasis with ruptured chordae tendineae in mitral and
176. Hofmann S, Kersten l℃. The effectiveness and tolerance
thicuspid yalves in a dog. J Ain Ver Med Assoc
of ramipril in comparison to captopril for hcart failure
155:1692. 1969
in dogs. Dtsch Tierarztl Wochenschr 103:159, 1996
198. Haller J, Morrow A. Experimental mitral insuffciency.
177. Morisse B, Kersten Ul. Treatment. of heart failure in1
An operative method of chronic survival. Ann Surg
142:37, 1955
captopril. Tierarzt Prax 23:489, 1995
199. I aller J, Morrow A. Experimental mitral insufficiency.
178. Pouchelon JL、 Benazepril Veterinary Investigators.
Surgery 38:518, 1955
Treatment
ofheart
lailure in  dogs   with
200. Buchanan JW. Atrioventricular insufficiency and se-
benazepril-restlts of European dlouble-blind placcbo
quela. In Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy
controlled study. Abstracl. J Vel. Intern Med 10:163,
1II. Philadelphia, WB Saumders, 1978, p 205
1996
 201. Buchanan JW, Kelly AM. Endocardial spliting of the
179. Kittleson MD. The acute hemocdynamic effects of capto-
Ieft atrium in the dog with hemorrhage and hemoperi-
pril in dogs with hcart failure. J Vet Pharmacol 'Ther
cardium. J Am Vet Rad Soc 5:28, 1964
16:1,1993
202.
Stunzi H, Mann M, Rupturr of the atrium. Zeutra 161
180. Bright JM. Controversics in veterinary medicine: is the
Veterinaermed 17A:757. 1970
 long-term use of dligitalis for treatmcnt of low output
203. Buchanan JW. Spontaneous left atrial rupture in dogs.
failure unwarranted? J Am Anim Iiosp Assoc 19:233.
In Bloor CM (ed): Comparative Pathophysiology of Cir-
1983
culatory Disturhances. Vol 22. New York, Plenum Press,
181. Kittleson MD, IIamlin Rl. Hydralazine therapy for se-
1976, p 315
vere mitral regurgitation inl a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
204. Komitor DA. ILeft atrial rupture. Vet Med Small Anim
179:903, 1981
Clin 71:620, 1976
182. Kitfleson MD, Johnson LE, Oliver ND. Acute hemody-
 205. Sadanaga KK, MacDonaldl MJ Buchanan [W. Echocar-
namic benefts of hydralazint in dogs with chronic
diography and surgery inl a dog with left atrial rupture
mitral regurgitation. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:258, 1985
and hemopericardlium. J Vet Intern Med 4:216. 1990
183. Kittleson MB, Eyster GE, Oliver NB, et al. Oral hydra-
206.F
Kersten UI. Klinische Litersuchungen an Herzkranken
lazine for chronic mitral regurgitation in the dog. J Am
Hlund. Thesis, IHannover, Germany, 1968
Vet Med Assoc 182:1205, 1983
207. Darke P, Bonagura jD, Kelly DF. Dilated cardliomyopa-
184. Kittleson MD, HHamlin RL. Ilydralazine pharmacotly-
thy. In Color Atlas of Veterinary Carliology. Lonclon,
namics in the tlog, Am J Vet Res 44:150l, 1983
Mosby-White, 1996, p 98
185. Rutishauser W. A review of the long-term effects of
 208. Jacobs G, IIutson Cl, Dougherty J, et al. Congestive
prazosin and hydralazine in chronic congestive hear1
heart failure associated with hyperthyroidism in cats. J
failure. Eur Heart J 4:149A, 1983
Am Vet Med Assoc 188:52, 1986
186. Packer M. O'Connor CM, Ghali JK Effect of aulodi-
209. Higashidate M, Tamiya K, Kurosawa HI, et al., Role of
pine on morbidity and mortality in severe chronic heart.
the septal leaflet in tricuspid valve closure. Consider-
failure. N Eng! J Medl 335:1107. 1996
ation for treatment of coniplete atrioventricular canal.
187. Burges RA, Dodd MG, Gardiner DG. Pharmacologic
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 104:1212, 1992
 profile of amlodipine. Am J Cardiol 64:101, 1989
210. Takeuura N, Koyaina II, Motoyoshi S. Congestive hearl
188. Yamanaka K, Suzuki M, Ishiko J. Antihypertensive ef-
failure due to bilateral atrioventricular valve insuff-
fects of anlodipine, a iew calcium antagonist. Nippon
ciency in tw0 dogs. J Ve1 Med Sci 58:38, 1996
Yakurigaku Zasshi 97:115, 1991
 211. Wallace CR, Hamilton WF. Study of spontaneous con-
189. Packer M. Vasodilator and inotropic therapy for severe
gestive heart failure in the dog. Circ Res 11:301, 1962
chronic heart tailure; passion and skepticisn. Am Coll
212.
Knight DH. Hearrworm hearl disease. Ardv Vet Sci
Gardiol 2:841, 1983
Comp Med 21:107, 1977
190. Jugdutt Bl, Khan M1. Effect of prolonged nitrate ther-
213. Kuwahara Y, Kitagawa II, Sasaki Y, et al. Cardliopulmo-
ACQUIRED VAIVULAR HEART DISEASE IN DOGS AND CATS 565
-s par jo papo jeoyne im shop u sana Aie
contrast echocardiography for diagnosis of tuicuspid
d1ome in heartworm disease. J Vet Med Sci 53:59, 1991
regurgitauion. An J Cardiol 56:333, 1985
214. Lehmkuhl 1.B, Bonagura JD, Biler DS, et al. Radio-
222. Lieppe W, Behar Vs, Sallion R, et al. Detection of
graphic evaluation of caudal vena cava size in dogs. Vet.
 tricuspid regurgitation with 2-dimensional echocardiog-
Radiol Lltrasound 38:94, 1997
raphy and   peripheral  vein injections.  Circulation
215. Sepulvedla G, Lukas DS. The diagnosis of tricuspid in-
57:128, 1978
sufficiency. Circulation 11:552, 1955
223. deMadron F, Bonagura JD, O'Grady MR. Normal and
216. Hansing CE, Rowe GG. Tricuspid insuffciency. A study
paradoxical ventricular septal motion in the dlog. Am j
of hemodynamics and pathogenesis. Circulation
Vet Res 46:1832, 1985
45:793, 1972
224.
Kirklin JW, Barratt-Boyes BG. Tricuspidl valve dliseasc.
217. Ubago JL, Figueroa A, Colman T, et al. Right ventricu-
In Cardiac Surgery. 2nd ed. New York, Churchill Living-
lography as a valid method for the diagnosis of tricus-
stone, 1993, p 589
225. Duran CM. Tricuspid valve disease revisited. J Cardio-
pid  insufficiency.
   a
vasc Surg 9(suppl):242, 1994
1981
226. Orton EC. Congenital heart disease in dogs. Proceed-
218.
Weyman AE. Right ventricular inflow tract. In Weyman
AE: Principles and Practice of Echocardiography Phila-
ings. North American Velerinary Conference 1998, p 85
delphia, Lea and Febiger, 1994, p 824
227.
 sJnsu! rerlea Around paeosp d unqlo fn urod
219. Yuill CDM, OGrady MR. Doppler-derived velocity of
ficiency in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:301, 1981
blood flow across the cardiac valves in the normal dog.
228.
Weyman AE. Right ventnicular outflow tract. In Weynan
AE:Principles and Practice of Echocardiography.Phila
Can J Ve1 Res 5::185, 1991
tlelphia, Lea and Febiger, 1994, p 824
220. Curtis JM, Thyssen M, Breuer HWM. ct al. Doppler
229.Eyster GE, Anderson LK, Cords GB. Aortic regurgita-
tchocardiography versus contrast echocardiography for
tion in1 the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 168:138, 1976
diagnosis of tricuspid regurgitation. Abstract. Eur Heart
230.
Sisson D, 1uethy M, Thomas WP. Venuricular septal
J 5(Suppl 1):213, 1984
defect accompanied by aortic regurgitation in five dogs.
221. Curtis JM. Thyssen M, Breur IIM, et al. Doppler versus
 J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:441, 1991
ctous
26
Endocarditis
MATTHEW W. MILLER
DAVID SISSON
Infectious cndocarditis (IE) is an often fatal systemic disease caused by
bactcrial or, more rarcly, fungal infcction of the valvular or mural endocar-
dium. Infcctious cndocarditis occurs infrequently in dogs and rarely in cats.
As a result, it is often neglected as a differential diagnosis, with oftcn dirc
familiarity with the population at risk, and knowledge of thc usual paticnt
circumstances in which it occurs. The clinical importance of infectious
endocarditis resides in the diagnostic challenge it prcsents to the clinician,
the formidable consequences it imposes on its victims, and the obstaclcs
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The incidence of infcctious endocarditis in dogs and cats is not precisely
known. Published estimates of its prevalence in dogs rangc from 0.11 to 0.58
percent.' Much less is known about the incidence of IE in cats; the bulk of
the literature consists of isolated case repors.$-7 In 1994, Sisson* rcvicwed
si 0i jo nonas aun uo paseq sie pue sop ui Ti no xsonopido a
of clinical data submitted to the Veterinary Medical Data Base at Purdue;
presented for clinical evaluation. This incidence increases with advancing
age (Fig. 26-1), and male dogs are at slightly grcater risk for infection than
female dogs.*# Brecd-related risk factors were slight and probably related to
the occurrence of certain predisposing congenital hcart defects. In this same
report, the incidence of IE in cats was somewhere between 0.006 and 0.018
percent of cats prescinted for cvaluation.*
 In humans, many pre-cxisting heart diseases increase the risk of dcvel
oping bacterial cndocarditis, including patent ductus arteriosus, aortic regur-
gitation, aortic. stenosis, mitral rcgurgitation, rnitral stenosis, and ventricular
septal defcct."-t Several studies have shown that dogs with subvalvular aortic
stenosis arc predisposed to endocarditis.2 8 12 Endocarditis has also been de-
scribcd in dogs with patent ductus arteriosus and ventricular septal defccts, but
published evidence that degenerative valvular disease prelisposes dogs to IE.
PATHOLOGY
The characteristic lesion of infcctive cndocarditis is a vegetation. In dogs
and cats, as in humans, nost vegetative lesions develop on the mitral or
567
568
DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
0.6
 Endocarditis due to unknown
0.5
Bacterial endocarditis
0.4-
FIGURE 26-1
The prevalence of bacterial enrlocardiis in dogs
0.3-
increases with atlvancing agc. This graph was
Ho
construcicd from data chtained from the
Veterinary Medicat Data Base at Purdue University
0.2
for visits recorded fro January, 1984, through 
May, 1994. The figure shows those cases coded as
bacterial endlocarditis and those cotled as
endocarditis due lo unknown.
10
0-1
1-2
2-4
4-7
7-10
10-15
15+
Age Group (years)
aortic valves or both (Fig. 26-2).1 . 4, va in The tricuspid
endocarditis even when thc duration of bacteremia is
valve is occasionally infected, but pulmonic valve endo-
prolongcd.? The likclihood and severity of bacteremia
carditis is exccedingly rare. Fresh vegctations consist
sccin inore relaterl to the degree of periodontal diseasc
of thrce layers: (1) a large inner layer of platclcts,
than to the specific dental procedure.?2 Rocking of
fibrin, red and white blood cells, and some bacteria;
teeth, chewing hard candy, and even simple tooth
(2) a middke layer of bactcria; andl (3) an outer layer
brushing have been shown to cause transient bacter-
composed primarily of fibrin.' Most of the leukocytes
emia in people.28 Other medical procedures causing
within a vegetation are lyinphocytes and histiocytes,
transient bacteremia include bronchoscopy, the dila-
and there are comparatively few polyinorphonuclear
tion of esophageal strictures, oral intubation, lasal
cells. More mature vegetative lesions show evidence of
operations, and transesophagcal cchocardiography,24$
capilary prolifcration and fibroplasia. Mature vegera-
tions are composed of dense, fibrous tissue and are
 covcred by cndothelium. Older vegetations are less 
friable than freshly formed ones and are often
ESTABLISHMENT OF A GARDIAC
calcified.
INFECTION
Thc pathogenesis of infective endocarditis is complex,
PATHOGENESIS
involving a number of factors relating to cndothclial
integrity, disturbed blood low. bacterial virulcncc, and
host immunity29-81 Healthy, intact endothelium is only
BACTEREMIA
Or denuded vascular cndothclium readily promotes
Transient or persistent bacteremia is an absolute
the development of platelet fbrin aggregates, and such
requiremcnt for thc establishment of a cardiac infec-
lesions providc a susceptible nidus for bacterial inva-
 tion. The initiating episode of bacteremia is not identi-
sion and colonization.* The tcrm nonbacterial throm-
fied in most spontancously occurring cases of IE.18
botic endocarditis (NBTE) was coined by Zeiger in
When a predisposing evcnt is identifcd, the conditions
1888 to describc the formation of sterile clumps of
platelets, fibrin, and red cells on normal or superf-
cedures involving the oropharynx, gastrointestinal,
cially damaged cardiac valves.? An important predis
and genitourinary tracts; dental manipulation; intrave-
 posing cause of NBTE lesions is endothelial damage
resulting from high-velocity, lurbulent blood flow as
nosuppressive drug
 therapy; and prior 
valvilar
 occurs with pre-existing valvular insufficicncy or steno-
infections.8. 19 21
sis. In-dwelling vascular catheters also inducc local flow
Endocarditis occurring in association with dental
disturbances and directly damage vascular cndothc-
procedures has received much attention. The inci-
lium, promoting thc formation of NBTE.s Hyper-
dence of bacterernia associated with dental procedures
coagulable states, such as disseminated intravascular
 or tooth cxtraction has becn reported to be as high
coagulation (DIC), also predisposc patients to the for-
as 85 perccnt, but few of these individuals develop
mation of NBTE.34
INFECTIOUSENDOCARDITIS
569
B
3
4
FCIMEN171666
DATE
2-70
cm
C
FIGURE26-2
Bacterial endocarditis develops most often on the mitral (A)and aortic (B)valves of dogs and cats
(A)In this dog,proliferatingvegetative lesionswereidentified on the anteriorand posteriormitral
valveleaflets.Theanteriormitralvalveleafletisdiffusely thickenedanditssurfaceisulceratedand
hemorrhagic.(B)Destruction of the right coronary cusp and avulsion of the noncoronary cusp of
the aorticvalve is shown in a dogwith bacterial endocarditis.A contact lesionwhere theflail aortic
leaflet impacted theventricular septum is seen justbelow thevalve.
In (C) and (D),two predisposing causes of infectious endocarditis are apparent.(C) Sagittal
section throughtheleft ventricular outflow tract and leftventricleof adogwith subaortic stenosis
and infectious endocarditis of the aorticvalve.Notice theproliferative endocarditis lesioninvolving
allvalve leaflets.The heterogeneous appearance of the aorticvalverepresents areas of fibrosis and
dystrophic calcification.Destruction of thevalveleafletsresulted in aorticinsufficiency.Just below
the aorticvalve,a subtle whitering can be detected(arrowhead).This is the pathologiclesion of mild
subvalvular aortic stenosis.(D）In this specimen,avegetation is seen on the tricuspid valve of a dog
with a transvenous pacing lead positioned in the right ventricle.The animal wasreceiving
immunosuppressivedrugsforlymphosarcoma andhadanindwellingvenouscatheterwhenit
developed endocarditis.
A bacterium'sability to adhere to damaged endothe-
species.35,37 Valvular endothelium rich in fibronectin
lial surfaces plays a major role in determining its capac-
facilitates the binding of certain organisms, such as
ity to colonize a valve.36When the endothelium is
Staphylococcus aureus,that possess fibronectin recep-
damaged,organisms with well-developed mechanisms
tors.31 To sustain a cardiac infection, the invading
of adherencecanovercomehostdefensesevenatlow
pathogen must evade the host's defensive mechanisms.
levels of inoculation.Damage to endothelial surfaces
Very few granulocytes are observed in established vege-
exposes the extracellular polysaccharide dextran,
tations,and theclustersofmicroorganismsthereinare
whichfacilitatestheattachmentofsomebacterial
protected bylayers of fibrin,platelets,and a fewred
570 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
cells. The valves and the attachcd vcgetation arc also
and other large organs may be affected (Fig. 26-3).2 8
relatively avascular, limiting the access of antibodies,
Death due to the combined cffccts of renal infarction,
phagocytic cells, and antibiotics,37-39
renal infection, and glomcrulonephritis occurs in a
substantial percentage of dogs with IE.4s. 4 On occa-
sion, death results from myocardial infarction causcd
DISTRIBUTION OF LESIONS
by embolic occlusion of a coronary artery," Since in-
fections in remote arcas may be prinary or secondary
When high pressure drives an infected stream into
(metastatic), the pathogenesis of septic arthritis, uri-
a low pressure sink, a reproducible pattern of bacterial
nary tract infectiors, or discospondylitis in animals
deposition occurs, as demonstrated in Rodbard's clas-
with IE is often unccrtain.2. 8
sic experiment.o This study explains the typical loca-
tions of IE lesious on the ventricular surface of thc
aortic valve and the atrial surface of the mitral valvc.
IMMUNE-MEDIATED DISORDERS
The location of cndocarditis lesions in the pulmonary
artery of patients with a patent ductus arteriosus, in
Stimulation of humoral and ccllular immune systeins
the vein of an arteriovenous fistula, and distal to thc
diac manifestations of IE 30. 46 Rheumatoid factor, anti-
narrow isthmus of a coarcted aorta is also consistent
with the results of Rodbard's studlies. I4, 40 The distribu-
11uclcar antibodies, and circulating immune complexes
tion of IE lesions within the heart can also be ex-
contribute to the development of polyarthritis, renal
disease, and myocarditis in dogs with IE.7-4s Glomeru-
plaincd as a function of the pressure exerted on the
valve.41
lonephritis is a well-known complication of IE, and its
prevalence and scverity seem to vary in relation to the
CARDIAC SEQUELAE
may cause protcinuria, loss of antithrombin II, and a
hypercoagulable state, thercby promoting the develop-
ment of nonbacterial thrombocimbolism and 1cw IE
Valvular insufficicncy is the most common cardiac
lesions."2 A high correlation cxists between thie concen-
 tration of circulating immune complexes, the presenice
scquela to bacterial endocarditis, developing as a con-
and severity of glomerulonephritis, and rhcumatoid
sequencc of valvular necrosis, perforation, or rupture
 Of thc chordac tendineae.-3. s The severity of valvular
factor,*9
 destruction varies with the virulence of the infecting
Polyarthritis is particularly common and wcll docu-
mented in dogs with IE.47 #Bacterial cultures of the
organisin and the duration of the infection. Destruc-
joint Nuid are often positive, but many affected dogs
tion of thc valvc stroma procecds particularly rapidly
have negative cultures. Examination of the synovial
in acute, ulcerativc cndocarditis caused by S. aures.
tissues may be positive for IgG, IgM, and conplement,
L.eft-sided heart failure devclops in most dogs devel.
indicating an immune-mediatcd basis for the arthropa-
oping aortic valve cndocarditis and occurs commonly
in dogs witlh mitral valve endocarditis.23 s. 18. 15 Obstruc-
thy. Lameness in some dogs with IE has been attributed
to thc phenomenon of hypertrophic. osteopathy," 3
tion of a valve orifice by large vegetations is uncom-
Such lcsions are thought to be analogous to clubbing
mon. Extension of infection into the valve annulus,
sinus of Valsalva. pericardium, or myocardium may
 of the digits observed in some human patients with IE.
A recent hypothesis suggests that platelet clumps shed
result in abscess formation, aortoatrial shunting, puru-
from vegetative lesions are trapped in the microcircula.
lent pericarditis, myocarditis, or destruction of the con-
tion whcrc they releasc platelet-derived growth factor,
duction system1.2. 2
which acts as the stimulus for the hypertrophic oste-
opathy lesions.34
SYSTEMIC SEQUELAE
SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK
SYSTEMIC EMBOLIZATION AND
Animals with bacterial endocarditis are septic by
METASTATIC INFEGTION
definition—their disease is the result of pathogenic
microorganisms and/or their toxins in the blood or
 Septic embolization and sterile artcrial emboliza-
tissues. Some animals with endocarditis will die of sep-
 tion, resulting in infarction and metastatic infection,
tic shock and multiple organ dysfunction, and it is
are common in animals with bacterial endocarditis.
helpful to be familiar with some of the terminology
The kidney and spleen are the most common sites of
infarction at nccropsy, but the heart, brain, intestinc,
INFECTIOUSENDOCARDITIS571
FIGURE26-3
Systemicarterial embolization,nfarction,andmetastaticinfection are
common complications of infective endocarditis.Thekidney is one of
the most common organs of septic embolization (A),but the mesenteric
vessels of the small intestine (B) and the brain (C) may also be affected.
This explainsnpart,thevariedclinicalmanifestationsofaffectd
patients.(From Sisson D,Thomas WP.Endocarditis of the aorticvalve
in the dog.J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:570, 1984.)
there are obvious indications of altered organperfu-
sion,such as altered entation,oliguria,acidosis,and/
variety of physiologic effects that together constitute
orhypoxemia.Whenhypotension complicates sepsis
thephenomenon of sepsis.The intensityof the in-
syndrome,the patient is experiencing septic shock.Mul
flammatory response is controlled by regulatory mech-
tiple organ dysfunctionsyndrome(MODS)describes situa-
anisms that include the acute-phase proteins,antipro-
tions in which septic shock has progressed to cause
teases,anti-inflammatory cytokines,and by specific
any combination of DIC,acute respiratory distress,
anticytokine substances, including IL-1, various recep-
acute renal failure,hepatobiliary compromise,orcen-
tor antagonists, and the activity of soluble cytokine
tral nervous system dysfunction. The progression to
receptors.56.61
septic shock and MODS is thought to be prevented by
Inseveral animalmodels of endotoxemia orbacter-
appropriate therapy.
emia, survival has improved when the actions of IL-1
In animal models,theinflammatory cascadeleading
are blocked by infusion of the naturally occurring IL-
to sepsis and septic shock follows a predictable
1 receptor antagonist (ILRA).62 Preliminary reports
course.Theproinflammatorycytokinestumornecro-
evaluatingILRAinhumanpatientswithsepsishave
sis factor alpha (TNF-α)and interleukin-1(IL-1)are
mixedresults.63Studiesexaminingtheinhibition of IL-
released from macrophages and other inflammatory
1 and TNF-α release and other mediators are ongoing.
cellsasaresultofcontactwithbacterialendotoxinor
other microbial components or products.56-59 These
compounds activate endothelialcells and otheref-
DIAGNOSIS
fector cells,such as T and B lymphocytes,monocytes,
macrophages, and neutrophils,and they induce the
release ofotherinflammatory cytokines,such asIL-8
It is often difficult toestablish a diagnosis of IEwith
andIL-6,transforming growth factor beta(TGF-β),
certainty.Several studieshaveattemptedtoremedy
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), colony-stimulating factor,
this problem by defining reliable clinical criteria for
platelet-activating factor, eicosanoids,and other in-
establishing a diagnosis of IE.64, 65 The most recently
572 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
formulated criteria emphasize the results of blood cul-
TABLE 26-2
ture, visualization of vegctative lesions by cchocardiog-
 Definitions of Major and Minor Criteria
raphy, clinical documentation of a new rcgurgitant
Major Criteria
murmur, and substantive clinical or laboratory indica-
Positive bloxcl culture for infective endocarditis
tions of systemic embolization.6s Applying this schcme
Typical microorganism for infective cndocardis from two
retrospectively to paticnts with documented disease
separate blood cultures: Corynebacterium spp, Ersipelothrix
rhusiopi（ypicallysrovar），Stretococcusspp.Staphrs
spp, Pseudomonas teruginosa, Pasteurella spp in the absence of a
used diagnostic criteria without compromising specific-
prirmary focus, or
ity 94. 6s Slight modification of this scheme allows it to be
Persistently posiive blood culture, defined as recovery of a
applied to vcterinary patients (Tables 26-1, 26-2).
nicroorganism consistent with infective endocarditis form:
(1)Blood cultures drawn morc than 12 hours apart, or
(2) All of thre or a majority of four or more scparate blood
cultures, with first and last drawn at least. 1 hour apart
Evidence of endocardial involvcmcnl
HISTORY
Positive echoeardiogran for infective cntlocarditis
Oscillang ntracardimass nvalve orsupporng strur.
or in the path of rcgurgitant jets, or on implanted material, in
The constellation of clinical signs manifested by pa-
he ahsence of an altermative anatomic cxplanation, or abscess
tients with IE is diverse and mislcading due to the
New valvular regurgilation* (incrcase or change in prccxisting
 high prevalencc of etnbolic phenomena, metastatic
rcgurgitation not sufhicicnt)
 infections, and irmune-mediaied sequelae. Thus, the
Minor Criteria
Predisposition: predisposing heart condition (subaortic stenosis),
problcms identified by the owners of animals with
chronice indwclling catheter
Fevert
66.67 On occasion, an owmer indicates the recent occur-
Vascular phenomena, major arterial crmboli septic pulnonary
infarcts, intacranial hemorrhage, conjunctival hemorrhages
rence of some predisposing event, such as a dental
Inmunologic phenomena: glomcrulonephritis, vasculitis.
 proccdure, upper respiratory or genitourinary surgery,
polyarthropathy (+ /  rheumatoid faclor)
Microbiologie evidence: positive blood culture but not meeting
intravenous catheterization, pacemaker implantation,
major criteria as noted previously or serologic evidence of aclive
immunosuppressive drug therapy, or prior infection.
infection with organism consistent with infective cndocarditis
More often, the owners relate a vague history of gener-
Echocardiogram: consistcnt with infectivc cndocarditis but not
 alized malaise, anorexia, and depression.
mccting major eriteria as noted previously
Many animals with IE evcntually develop signs of
*Requires recent prior auscultation.
 congestive heart failure, such as cough, shortness of
fAt presentation or historically dowcunentedl.
breath, weaknes or collapse.2 4s6 Some patients pres-
Moxlified fron Durack DT, Lukes AS, Bright DK. New criteria for diagnosis
fendoarditisuilizatnof speciticechocardiographicfinings.AmM
cnt with a clinical history suggestive of systemic throm-
96:200209. 1994.
boembolism. Such signs include hematuia, lameness,
scizures, or altered mentation, depending on the par.
ticular organ system (s) involved. Intermittent or persis-
endocarditis, causing confusion with a variety of orthor
diversity of clinical signs in paticnts with cndocarditis
TABLE 26-1
a  a o a on s aos pnd sy
Criteria for Diagnosis of Infective Endocarditis
great initator
Definite Infective Endocarditis
Pathologic Criteria
· Microorganuisns demoustrated by cilture or histology in a
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
vegctation. or
·Microorganismns in a vegetation that has embolized,or
 Vegetation confirmed by histology showing active endocarditis
FEVER
Clinical Criteria (Table 262)
·Two major criteria, or
Most dogs with IE have pyrexia at presentation, or a
· One major critcria and thrce minor criteria, or
·Five minor criteria
 ble exceptions include those animals receiving antibiot-
Possible Infective Endocarditis
Findlings consistent with infecrive endlocardilis hut that fall short of
ics, aspirin, or corticostcroids, and those with chronic
"definite”’' though they are not in the "rcjected”” category
infections, renal failurc, or heart failure.2. 13. 42. 6 The
Rejected
presence of a fever is very helpful in establishing a
· Firin alternative diagnosis or
diagnosis of IE when it is detected in association with
·Resolution of clinical manifestations with antibiotic therapy for
othcr clinical findings.
<.4 days, or
·No pathologic vidence of infective endoeardiis at surgery or
autopsy afiter antibiotic therapy ≤4 days
HEART MURMURS
Modified fronm Durack DT. Lukes AS, Hright DK. Sew criteria for diagnosis
Thc development of a new or changing cardiac mu-
of endccardis: ilization of specifie cchoardiographic ndings. Am J Med
96:200-209,1994,
mur is another hallmark of valvular endocarditis. Doc-
INFECTIOUS ENDOCARDITIS573
unentation of a ncw murmur is often dliffcult as one
large vegetative lesion or1 the aortic valvc. L'nequal or
nust verify that it was rnot prescnnt orn a recently con-
absent femoral artery pulses suggest arterial thromho-
clucted prior cxainination.se The predictive value of a
crnholisin. Irregular pulses and pulse delicits are usu-
recenuy cliscovcred hcart murrnur is most dependent
ally associated with conduction or rhythm distur-
on its character and location, as these paramcters sug-
bances, indicating the need to obtain an clectro-
gest which valve is affected and the severity of the
cardliograin.
abnormality. Detection of a diastolic murmur al the
left heart base in a febrile dog or cat indicates a high
 probability of aortic valve endlocarditis sinply because
SYSTEMIC ABNORMALITIES
Other causes of aortic insufficiency are rare.2 * By com-
 The physical 1manifestations of peripheral emboliza-
parison, a systolic murmur in a febrile. smal-breed
tion1, metastatic infection, and immune-merliated phe-
dog has littie predictivc value bccause degenerative
n1omena are diverse. Vasculitis, arthralgia, and joint
Imitral valve discase is very prevalent ini this population
effusions resulting frorn inrnunc-mediatcd or scptic.
(chapter 25). In most animals with mitral regurgita-
arthritis are comnon in aninals with IE. Abdoninal
tion, the murmur is holosystolic in cduration, with a
harsh, rmixed-frcquency quality. Loud systolic murmurs
shaped kicneys or abdominal rnasses (splcnomegaly)
of aortic stenosis or mitral regurgitation oftcn mask
may be palpable. A variety of ncurologic dleficits may
the softer, lower-frequcncy murrmur of aortic regurgita--
develop, most of which are of sudden onset. suggesting
tiori.
 an ermholic event. Retinal hemorrhages, hyphema, cpi-
 The importance of a rapidly changing rmurmur as an
staxis, and petechiation of the skin or mucous rnem-
intlicalor of 1E: has been overemphasized.* Physiologic
brancs are occasionally noted. Myalgia and long-bone
murmurs and mitral regurgitant murmurs are often
 pain causcd by cmboli or hyperrophic osteopathy are
variable in duration and intensity due to changes in
infrequently detectedl. Most of the peripheral suigmata
stroke volume, preload, and afterload. Nonetheless,
 of IE obscrved in human patients (subungual splinter
serial examinations documenting alterations in the
hemorrhages, Osler's nodes, Janeway's lesions, Roth's
character of the murmur can provicle imporant prog-
spots) arc absent or go undetected in dogs and cats
nostic information, For example, the murmur of mild
with IE.α
aortic insufficiency is typically holocliastolic, and its
intensity dlirminishes only slightly over the cntire dlia-
stolic interval. When aortic insuffciency becomes
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
morc severc, the intensity of the diastolic murinur
dlirminishes throughout diastolc, and it may not hc
VISUALIZATION OF DEVELOPING VEGETATIONS
audiblc in thc latter part of diastole. This finding
indlicates equilibration of aortic andl left ventricular
Echocardliography plays a pivotal role in the diagno-
dliastolic pressures caused by the volune overload irn-
posed by aortic regurgitation, and it suggests im-
dlimcnsional cchocardiography is used to visualize the
pending hcart failure.
prinary lesion of infectious cnclocarditis (i.e., the de-
veloping vegetation), and to assess the consequences
of that infection (e.g., dissolution or avulsion of a
MYOCARDITIS AND HEART FAILURE
valve leaflet, chainber dilation and myocardial failure,
A variety of rhythm disorders may be detected in
abscess forrnation, and other coimplications). Bccause
dogs with lE as a consequence of myocarditis, heart.
the aortic and mitral valves are the most commonly
failure, myocardial infarction, or destruction of the
infected valves in dogs and cats, hoth valves should be
conduction system.2 13, 11 Ventricular arrhythmias are
evaluated with particular care. The early echocardio-
 particularly common in animals with IE. Damage to
graphic features of endocarditis often include oniy
the atrioventricular node or the bundle of His may
slight thickening or increased echogenicity of the af.
result in hcart block and symptomatic bradycardia. A
fectedl valve. At this stagc, hernodynainic changes are
third hcart sound (Ss gallop) is often detectecl in dlogs
 ahsent or minimal. As the diseasc progresses, the devel-
or cats with severe aortic or mitral regurgitation.
 oping vegetation appears as an irregular arca of highly
Cough, tachypnca, labored respiratior1, and abnormal
reflective lcaflet thickening or as a pedunculated rnass,
lung sounds rmay also be detected whcn heart failure
usually arising from the tip of the leaffet (Figs. 26-4,
dlevelops. With devcloping aortic regurgitation, the
26-5). In the majority of cases, the infectcd valve he-
femoral  pulscs bccome cxaggerated or  bounding.
cones insufficient when the valve stroma is destroyedl,
 Small amplitude, weak arterial pulses are palpated in
or when the vegetation prevents normal coaptation
anirnals with pre-existing subvalvular aortic stenosis,
following the onset of hearl failure, and in the rare
proliferating vegetative mass will obstruct a valve ori-
circumstance of acquired aortic stenosis caused by a
fice, causing functional stennosis.
574
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
mural endocardial echogenicity are more likely to be
appreciated. Such changes may be the initial clinical
finding supporting a diagnosis of IE.Transesophageal
echocardiography (TEE) is more sensitive than trans-
thoracic echocardiography for recognizing small vege-
tative lesions.69-73 However, it is uncommonly used to
image dogs and cats suspected of having endocarditis,
particularly when they are seriously ill,because of the
requirementforgeneralanesthesia.
M-MODEECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
Certainsubtlealterationsinvalvularmotionarebest
appreciated using M-mode echocardiography, but this
modalityplays a relativelyminor rolein the echocardi-
ographic evaluation of patients with or suspected of
having endocarditis.High-frequency diastolic flut-
FIGURE26-4
tering of the mitral valve,which is highly suggestive
A largevegetativelesion(arrous)on theanteriormitral valve leaflet
of aortic insufficiency, may not be apparent on two-
of adogisshowninthisrightparasternalfour-chamber,long-axis
dimensional studiesbutis easily seen on anM-mode
echocardiogram.This dog subsequently suffered an infarction of
the small intestine.RA,right atrium;LA,left atrium;V,lft
echocardiogram (Fig. 26-5).2. 74 The explanation for
ventricle.
this phenomenon is quite simple.During diastole,the
mitral valve is open and the anterior leaflet is situated
immediatelybelowthe aorticvalveintheleftventricu-
Certainlimitations of transthoracic echocardiogra-
lar outflowtract.When a jet of aorticregurgitation is
phymustberecognized.Smallvegetationsarevery
directed at the anterior mitralleaflet,it strikes the
difficulttovisualizearticularlyinverysmallorobese
leaflet, causing high-frequency vibrations that are
patients.Tachypnea, dyspnea, or tachycardia may also
readily displayed on an M-mode echocardiogram.2. 74
preclude an optimal echocardiographic evaluation. In
Other M-mode echo changes, such as premature clo-
these circumstances, a diagnosis of infective endocardi-
sureofthemitralvalve,maybeobservedwhenevaluat-
tis shouldnotberuled outbasedon a negative echo-
ing dogs with severe aortic insufficiency. When aortic
cardiographic evaluation.However, the negative pre-
regurgitation is severe,left ventricular pressure rises
dictivevalue of ahigh-qualitynormal echocardiogram
rapidly during diastole as bloodflows retrogradefrom
most likely exceeds 90percent in patients with no
the aorta.If leftventricularpressure exceedsleft atrial
detectable cardiac murmur. Serial echocardiographic
pressure,themitral valvewill close prematurelyprior
evaluations ofpatients suspectforIE canbeparticu-
to the onset of systole, at the peak of the R wave.2.74
larlyhelpfulbecausesubtlealterationsinvalvular or
FLOWDISTURBANCESAND
50-
FUNCTIONALCHANGES
60-
Thehemodynamicconsequences of endocarditis are
70-
most dramatically illustrated by color flowDoppler
imaging.75 With this technique,blood flow distur-
bances can be quickly located and assessed.Precise
quantificationofvalvularregurgitationisdifficult.
Techniquessuch asmeasuring decayrate,proximal jet
ECG
area,andproximal jetheight allowreasonable estima-
PauseReplau
tion of volumetric regurgitation.7 The severity of volu-
FIGURE26-5
metric regurgitation also may be reasonably inferred
M-mode echocardiogram of themitral valvefroma dogwith
by the degree of left ventricular and left atrial dilation.
infectiousendocarditisoftheaorticvalveandresultantaortic
Echocardiography often yields other important in-
insufficiency.Notice the high-frequencyvibrations of the anterior
mitral valve during diastole (arrow).Thisis caused by the jet of
aortic regurgitation striking this valve when it opens in diastole.
tients with a vegetation diameter of greater than 10
INFECTI0US ENDOCARDITIS  
575
mn are at significantly higher risk for embolic phe-
culture. The relative merits of these two approaches in
nonena than those with smaller vegetations.1. 7 Evi-
velerinary patients is uncertain.
dencc of left ventricular dysfunction, such as reduced
 Bacterernia is known to precede the development of
fractional shortening percent, cjection fraction, and
 s  s   n i q   
aortic flow acceleration, also suggests a poor long-
limited clinical utility because it is virtually impossible
to predict when a fever spike will occur in patients
cspccially whcn coupled with venllicular arrhythmia, can
with intermittent bacteremia. In these circumstances,
JI z szae Ar e jo ro sss 
the infecting organism is most likely to be culured
the rcgion of LV dysfunction is sinall, parameters of
and identifed whcn multiple sets of blood cultures
global wall function may remain within norimal lirmits,
are collected at wide intervals. The timing of blood
giving an crroneous portrayal of norimal LV function.8u
culturing is irrelcvant in thosc clinical situations in
which continuous bacteremia is suspected, such as pa-
tients with cndocarditis and septic thrombophlebitis.
In patients receiving antibiotics, blood culture collec-
BLOOD CULTURE
tion should be accomplished during the trough levcls
of antibiotics.9o-92 The belief that blood cultures should
Multiple scts of hlood cultures should be obtained
not be obtained from an indwelling catheter has re-
whencver bacterial endocarditis is suspected. The sen-
 cently hecn challenged.8 when the blood culture re-
sitivity of blood culturcs in human patients with cndo
sults of samples drawn through indwelling intravenous
carditis varies frorn 80 percent whcn a single culture is
and arterial cannulas were comparcd with samples
drawn sinultaneously by percutaneous venipuncture,
tures are procured.2 6, 81-si Positive blood cultures have
92 percent of 174 comparisons were identical.s This
bcen reported in about 75 percent of dogs with hacte-
study, performed in humans, has not yet bcen dupli-
lial endocarditis.8 12 Increased sample volume substan-
cated in dogs and cats.
tially improves the sensitivity of blood culturing.* In
one study, yields from cultures of 20 and 30 ml of
blood were shown to be 38 percent and 62 percent
higher, respectively, than fron 10 ml of blood.* vol-
umes of blood larger than this do not increase yield
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY AND
but increasc the likelihood of iatrogenic anernia. It is
THORACIC RADIOGRAPHY
important not to place larger volumes of blood into
 media hotles designcd for 10-ml blood samples. The
Electrocardiography detects arrhythmia and conduc-
blood in blood culturc vials is diluted at 1:5 to 1:10 to
 tion disturhances in as rnany as 50 to 75 percent of the
reduce the concentration of circulating antibacterial
factors (cornpleimcnt, immunoglobulins, phagocytes).
 dogs with IE.2 4o,6 Reported rhythim disorders include
 saxd seodp aeid raa e ne
The possibility of accidental contaimination is less likely
when the sarne organisim is cultured from scveral dif
mal and sustained  tachyarrhythmia, bundle branch
fcrent blood samplcs. In this regard, cach culturc
 block, and first-, sccond-, and third-degrce atriovcnuicu-
lar block.2. 13. 49 Arrhythmias develop as a consequencc of
should be obtained from a different venipuncturc site.
Regardless of the volume of hlood ohtained or number
 bacterial invasion into the myocardium, from rmyocardial
of bottles inoculated, blood obtained from a single
hypoxia, from embolism of portions of vegetations into
venipuncture constitutes one culture.
the coronary circulation, and as a rcsult of imrnune-
Other recomnendations for blood culture tech-
mediatcd vasculitis, Serious arrhythmias, such as sus-
niques are changing as some widely held beliefs re-
taincd ventricular tachycardia and atrial fibrillation,
negativcly affect prognosis.2
Over the last few decades, the nurnber of anaerobic
Thoracic radiography is most uscful for evaluation
isolates from blood culturcs obtained froin human
 of thc pleural spacc and pulmonary parenchyma and
patients with IE has diminished greatly,t 83 Such studies
specifically for the detecion of lcf-sided congestivc
have prornpted soine to recornmend only acrohic
heart failure. Radiographically detectable left atrial
blood culturing,*7 with these considerations in mind,
and ventricular enlargements are observed only when
two alternative culuring tcchniqucs can be consid-
moderate-lo-sevcre  valvular  insuficiency  has  devc]-
cred: (1) Each 20-ml sample of blood can bc dividcd
 opcd. Serial radiographic cvaluation is particularly
and inoculated into aerobic and anaerobic mcdia, or
helpful for assessing thosc patients with rapidly prog-
e o on    o jo   ()
 ressing valvular insufficiency As a general rule, ccho-
species only. The latter method emphasizes the impor-
cardiography is more sensitive and more specific than
tance of blood volume on culture yiclds and assumes
 radiography or electrocardiography for detecting car-
that there is a low likclihood of a positive anaerobe
diac chamber cnlargemcnt.
THERAPY
isms are cultured in a dlog or cat. Thc toxicity of the
arninoglycosicdes usually limits their use to the initial 5
to 7 days of treatment. Thereafter, antimicrobials suit-
 Antimicrobial therapy is the mainstay of trcatment
able for prolonged administration must be sclected.
There is increasing interest in the fluoroquinolones
for patients with IE, but such therapy nust oftcn be
combinedl with other medicaments or interventions.
and third-generation cephalosporins for treating dliff-
cult infecions.w 97 The efficacy of the fluoroquino
Thc goals of therapy are (l) to sterilize the vegetative
lcsion(s), (2) to attend to any atlverse cardliac sequelae,
loncs for trcating bacterial cndocarditis is uncertain,
-osse saneouqe ouisis Are sseuu on (g) pue
and the cmcrgence of resistant organisins is of growing
concern with this group of antimicrobials.9 The third-
 ated with the infection.
 generation cephalosporins (cefotaxime, moxalactam,
cefoperazone, ceftizoxime) have gram-positive, gram-
ANTIBIOTIC REGIMENS
negative, and anaerobic spectra and are highly β-lacta-
mase resistant. Imipenem, a carbapenem antibacterial
 Bactericidal antibiotics capable of pcnctrating the
agent, has the widest spectrum of any β-lactam antibi-
fibrin-rich matrix of vegctations should be adminis-
otic. lt is resistant to type I β-lactamase and is an
atractive choice as ernpiric therapy for patients with
tered for at least 2 wecks and for as long as 6 wecks
to ensure complete kill of the offending organism.
sepsis." In patients with compromised renal function,
Intravcnnous atlministration of bactericidal antibiotics is
a first-generation cephalosporin (cephalothin, cefa-
advisable initially to ensure that ninimum bactericidal
zolin, cephalexin, cefadroxil) is likely to be efficacious
for gram-positive infections but has only intermediate
biotic reginens ideally arc sclected based on culturc
cfficacy against gram-negative infections or anacrobcs.
Whcn gram-negative or anaerobic infection is sus-
and sensitivity testing, therapy is usually instituted be-
forc culture results are known. Considering the wide
pectedl, a sccond-gencration cephalosporin (ccfoxitin,
range of microorganisms isolated from dogs and cats
cefamandole, cefotetan, cefaclor, cefonicid) would be
with endocarditis, initial trcatinent with gentamicin or
more advisable.
 amikacin in combination with penicillin, ampicillin,
plete anaerohic coverage can be realized by the addi-
HEART FAILURE AND ARRHYTHMIA
tion of clindamycin or meironidazole. This trcatmcnt
regimen is also appropriate in IE cascs with nnegative
Heart failure is the most common cause of death
blood culture rcsults.
 Knowledlge of those organisms commonly isolated
in dogs with infectious endocardlitis.* * Becausc valve
from animals with IE and sepsis, and the typical suscep-
replacement surgery is unavailable to most vcterinary
tibility patterns of those organisms, helps guide ther-
patients, the development of serious valvular insuff-
apy (Tables 26-3, 26-4). Specific regimens for treating
      
nosis, particularly in dogs with aortic cndocardiis.?
IF in humans havc hcen developed and should be
consulted whcn uncommon or highly resistant organ-
Signs of hcart failure may be palliatcd by administra-
tion of cardiac glycosides, diuretics, and a vasodilator
or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. Compared
TABLE 26-3
Organisms Commonly Recovered from Dogs and Cats
sio11 of myocardial hypcrtrophy and lessen the severity
with Infective Endocarditis and Sepsis
of nyocardial dysfunction,9 o Blood pressure should
bc carefully rnonitored in patients with aortic regurgi-
Infectious Endocarditis
tation as they frequently have low diastolic pressure
(2 eaoios ienrdk) dds upguto)
Streptororrus spp
and are at increased risk for hypotension. Placement of 
Staphytococcus spp
a synthetic valvular prosthesis or allograft is a possible
Pseuiononas teruginos
treatment option, bu1. this reimerdy has not beenn re-
Escherichia roli
Frysipetothrixrhtusioptthiae
ported in clogs or cats with endlocarditis.m-m2
Sepsis/Bacterermia
Life-threatening arrhythmia or those rhythm disor-
Profens
Bacteroides
clers with serious hemodlynamic conscquences should
Satmomeltr*
Enterotocctus
be treatedl  with
 appropriate antiarrhythmic clrugs
Corynebacteriem spp
Fryipetothrixrhusiopathiae
Streptarorrus spp
Staphrylocorcus spp
(chapters 17, 18). High-gradle second-degree or com-
Pseuadononas teruginost
Escherichia colit
plete atrioventricular block may necessitate pacemakcr
Kiebsiella pneumomito
umapuisoy.)
Fusoberterium
implantation. This causcs a forrnidable dilcimma in
that infection of the implantedl clevicc is likcly, posing
*Comumm isolates from bacteremic cats.
anothcr potentially devastating complication.10s
INFECTIOUS ENDOCARDITIS
577
TABLE 26-4
 Antibiolics Commonly Used in the Therapy of Infectious Endocarditis and Sepsis
 Representative Drugs/
Classification
Dosc/Route
 Spectruml
Comments
Auninoglycosides
Gentamicein. 21 rmg/kg q8h FV
Grarn
、Sfrnph aureus
Ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity,
Amikacin, 7-1t0 mg/kg q8h IV
 therapentic serum levels:
(Gentanicin: trough (should
drop below) 2 μg/ml, peak
(should not exceerl) 8-12 μg/
ml. Amikacin: rough 2.5 μg/
ml, pcak 25 μg/ml
Chaurbapeen*
Imipenem, 2-5 mg/kg q8h V
Gram l，gram
，anaerobes
Resistant to type I B-lartamasc;
decrease dose with renal
dystunetion; may cause GI
upset aund hypersensitivity
lsl-generation
Celazolin. 15-33 1ng/kg q8h IV,
Gram I , intermediate agaist.
ccphalosporins
IM
gram -
especially Bacteroides fragilis and
Cephalexin, 20-60 ung/kg q8h
Bcteroides spp
PO
Znd-generation
Cefoxitin 25-40 mg/kg q8h IV,
Gram I , anaerobes, gram
Ce phalosporins may cross-react
cephalosporins
IM
(not Pseudomonus spp)
in1 peniceilln-sensitive people
Cefac:lor 6-13 1ng/kg q8h PO
and are ineffective against
Clostridium spp
3rd-generation
Cefotaxine, 20-80 mg/kg q8h IV
Gran +，gran
.",alraerobes
Highly B-lactamase resistant; nay
te phalosporirs*
Moxalactain, 50 mg/kg IV. IM
inpair coagulation and platelet
q6-8h
lunnctio, cross-reacl. i11
 penicilin-sensituive people
Lincosamide
Clindamycin, 5-15 rmg/kg q1h
Stre spp, Staph spp, anacrobes
Good leukocyie and tissne
IV: 22 mg/kg q24h P0
(cspecially Burterwides spp)
penetration: IV fusion tuay
cause hypotcnsion; do not use
with chloramphenicol
Nitroinidazole
Metronicdazole, 10-15 mg/kg q811
Protozoa, obligate anaerobes, nol
Good tissue penetration: may
IV. PO
facutative anaerobes (r
cause CI (mausea. voyniting)
obligate aerobes
ald CNs (ataxia, nystagmus,
seizures) signs
 Penicillins
Ampicillin. 20-50 mg/kg q8h IV,
Gram I (Strep spp, some Staph
Have been assoriated with
IM. PO
sPp), anaerobes (not B-
hyperseusitivity in some people
Anoxieilln, 20-30 ng/kg q8h
laclamase producers)
IV, IM. 1O
Nafcillin. 25-50 mg/kg q6h IV
Graun - (nost Staph spp), not
-resista11t
May cross-react ini penieillin-
penicillins
amoxicillin/clavulanate, 11-22
anacrobes or gram
sensitive pcople
mg/kg 18h PO
Gram I (most Staph spp). gran
orgalnisms
Carhoxypennicillins
Ticarcillin, 10-75 mg/kg 16-8h
May prolong bleeding rine and
IV, IM
antdl anaerobes
reduce platclet function
Carbenicillin. 20-40 mg/kg
q4-8h IV. IM
Quinolones
Enronoxacin, 5 mg/kg q12h, PO,
Gram - and Staph mus, not
May be effective if bacterial
IM, IV
dels paes
resistance ta aninoglycosides
Norfoxacin, 22 1ng/kg q12h PO
has developed
SYSTEMIC INFECTIONS AND SEPSIS
PREVENTION
Patients with scptic shock are particularly dlifficult to
treal, and the best approach to such patients is unccr-
The prophylactic usc of antibioties for this condition
tain. Although high doses of glucocorticoids given
is
prior to or within the first 2 hours of the onset of
qucnces of infcctivc cndocarditis, most authoritative
scpsis improve survival in cxperimcntal models of sep-
tic shock, their use has an adverse effect on the survival
disposing cardiac condlitions when they are subjccted
to procedures causing bacteremia.18, io The authors
lation of the individual mcdiators of scpsis, although
replete with potcntial benefit, has been met with ain-
careliovascular lesions (subaortic stcnosis, ventricular
 biguous clinical results.1o7, to The treatment for sepsis
septal dlefect, patent dluctus arteriosus, cyanotic con-
 includes antibiotic therapy and supportive care (chap-
 genital hcart diseasc) undergoing dlental scaling, tooth
ters 14, 15).
extraction, andl surgery of the upper respiratory. gas
578 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
trointestinal, or infcctedl genitourinary tracts. The anti-
16. Anderson CA, Dubiclzig RR. Vegctativc: cndlocarditis in
hiotic selected depends upon the nature of the proce-
dogs. J Am Anim 1losp Assoc 20:149, 1984
17. Buchbinder NA, Roberts WC. L.ef-sided valvular infec-
dure and the organism most likely to cause hacteremia.
tivc: cndocarditisa study of 43 necropsy patients. Am
Accordlingly, amoxicillin, administered orally, or anpi-
J Med 53:20, 1972
cillin IM or IV 1 hour beforc and 6 hours after the
18. Durack DT. Prevention of infective cndocarditis. X Engl
initial dlosc, is recommended for use with dental, oral,
J Med 332:38. 1995
19. Bender IB, Barkan MJ, Einstein A. Dental bacteremia
and upper respiratory tract procerlures. Ampicillin and
gentamicin, aclministered IV 30 minutes before the pro-
and its relationship to bacterial endocarditis: prcventive
Incasures. Conpend Contin Educ Dent. 10:472, 1994
cedure and 8 hours after the initial dosc, is recom-
 20. Everett ED, 1lirschmann JV. 'Transient bactereinia and 
mended for usc with genitourinary or gastrointestinal
endocarditis prophylaxis; a review. Medicine 56:61,
procedures.
1977
 A growing number of investigators have challenged
 21. Weiss H. Relation of portals of cntry to subacute bacte-
rial endocarditis. Arch Intern Med 54:710, 1934
the ardministration of antibiotics to prevent endocardi-
 22. Black AP, Crichlow AM, Saunders JR. Bacterermia dur-
tis. It has been argued that only 6 percent of all human
ing ultrasonic tceth cleaning and extraction in the dog.
cascs of IE could be prevented with prophylaxis.3 1s
J Ain Anim 11osp Assoc 16:611, 1980
Given the expensc and possible adverse eflects of antibi-
 23. wahl MJ. Myihs of dental-induced endocarditis. Arch
otics, the risk-to-benefit ratio and economic rationale of
Intern Med 134:137, 1994
 24. Terpenning MS, Buggy BP Kauffinan CA. Hospital-ac-
prophylactic antibiotic trcatmcnt have also been qucs-
quiredl   infective
enducarditis. Arch Intcrn Med
tioned. Despite thesc concerns, prophylaxis against IE is
148:1601, 1988
practiced in most developed countries.
25. Friedland G, Von Reyn CF, Levy B, ct al. Xosocomial
endocarditis. Infect Control 5:284, 1984
26. Sipes JN, Thompson RL, Hook EW. Prophylaxis of in-
fective endocarditis: a reevaluation. Annu Rcv Med
REFERENCES
28:371,1977
27. I.cFrock jl., Elis CA, Turchik JB, el al. Transient bacter-
emia associated with sigmoidoscopy. N Engl J Med
1. Shouse CI., Meier H. Acute vegetative endocarditis in
289:467,1973
thc dog and cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 129:278, 1956
 28. Pongratz G, Hennekc K, von der Grun M, et al. Risk of
2. Sisson D. Thoinas WP. Fndocarditis of the aortic valvc
cndocarditis in transesophageal echocardiography. Am
in the dog. J An Vet Med Assoc 184:370, 1984
Heart J 125:190, 1993
3. Lombard CW. Buergelt CD. Vegetative bacterial endo-
29. Blahd M, Frank 1, Saphir O. Experincntal cndocarditis 
carditis in dogs; echocardiographic diagnosis and clini-
in dogs. Arch Pathol 27:424, 1939
cal signs. J Small Anim Pract 24:325, 1993
 30. Freerlman LR. The pathogenesis of infectivc cndocardi-
4. Buchanan Jw. Causes and prevalence of cardiovascular
tis. J Annimicrob Chemother 20:1. 1987
disease. In Kirk RW. Bonagura JD (cds). Curren1 Veteri-
31.
Livornese LL, Korzeniowski OM. Infective Endocarditis.
nary Therapy Il: Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia,
2nd ed. Yew York, Raven Prcss, 1992, p 19
WB Sauders, 1992, p 647
 32. Durack DT, Beeson PB, Petersdorf RG. Experimcntal
5. Malik R, Church DB, Allan GS, et al. What is your
bacterial endocarditis. II1. Production and progrcss of
diagnosis? J Anm1 Vet Med Assoc 200: 1391, 1992
the disease in rabbits. Br J Exp Pathol 54:142, 1973
6. Noakes ME. What is your diagnosis? J Am Vet Med
33. Ferguson DJ, McColm AA, Ryan DM, et al. A morpho-
Assoc 193:719, 1988
logical study of experinental staphylococcal cndocardi-
7. Yamaguchi RA, Pipers FS, Gamble DA. Echocardio-
tis and aortitis. I. Inter-relationship of bacteria, vegcta-
graphic evaluation of a cat with bacterial vegetative
tion and cardiovasculature in cstablished infections. Br
cndocarditis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:118, 1983
J Exp Pathol 67:679. 1986
 8. Sisson DD. Bacterial Endocardiis. Proceedings, 18th
34. Lopez JA, Ross Rs, Fishbein MC, ct al. Nonbacterial
thrombouic  endocarditis:
a review.
Am Heart J
Annual Kal Kan/OSL Symposium, 1994, p 79
9.Fowler VG, Durack DT. Infectivc cndocarditis. Curr
113:773,1987
Opinion Cardiol 9:389, 1994
35. Baddour LM, Christensen GD, Lowrnace JHH, ct al.
10. Steckelberg JM, Wilson WR. Risk factors for infective
Pathogenesis of cxperimental cndocarditis. Rev Infect
cndocarditis. Infeci Dis Clin North Am 7(1):9, 1993
Dis 11:452, 1989
11. Durack D'T. Infective and noninfective endocarditis. In
 36. Scheld WM, Valone JA, Sande MA, Bacterial adherence
Hurst Jw (ed): The Heart: Artcries and Veins. Vol 7.
in the pathogenesis of cndocarlitis. J Clin Inivest
New York, McGraw-Hill. 1990. p 1230
61:1394, 1978
12. Muna WF, Ferrans VJ, Pierce JE, et al. Discrete subaor-
 37. Johnson CM. Adhcrence cvents in the pathogenesis of
tic stenosis in Newfoundland dogs: association of infec-
infective endocarditis. In Wilson WR, Steckelberg JM
tive cndocarditis. Am J Cardiol 41:740, 1978
(eds): Infect Dis Clin North Am, 1993, p 21
13. Calvert CA, Grcene CE, IIardie EM. Cardiovascular
 38. Durack DT. Experimental bacterial cndocardlitis. IV.
infections in dogs: epizootiology, clinical manifesta-
Struclure and cvolution of very carly lesions. I Pathol
tions, and prognosis. J Am Vet Med Assuc 187:612, 1985
115:81,1975
14. Goodwin JK, Lombard CW. Patent ductus arteriosus in
 39. Bayer AS, Theofilopoulos AN. Immunopathogcnctic as-
adult. dogs: clinical feafures of 14 cases. J Am Anim
pects of infcclive endocardlitis. Chest 97:204, 1990
Hosp Assoc 28:349, 1992
40.B
Rodbard S. Blood velocity and endocarditis. Circulation
15. Lundh T. Fibrinous endocarditis in dogs. Acta Vet
27:18, 1963
Scand 5:17. 1964
41. Lepeschkin E. On the rclation bctwccn the site of
INFECTIOUS ENDOCARDITIS 579
valvular involvemcnt in cndocarditis and the blood
63. Knaus WA, Harrcll FF, Fisher CJ, et al. Thc clinical
prcssure resting on the valve. Am J Med Sci 224:318,
cvaluation of new drugs for sepsis: a prospective sludy
1952
design based onn survival analysis. J An Med Assoc
42. Woodfield JA, Sisson D. Infective cndocarditis. In Et-
270:1233,1993
tinger SI (cd): Textbook of Simall Animal Internal Med-
64. Von Rcyn CF. Levy BS, Arbcit RD, el al. Infective endo-
icine. 3rd cd. Philadelphia, WB Saundlers, 1989, p 1151
carditis: an analysis bascd on strict case definitions. Anl
43. ‘Taboada J, Paliner GH. Renal failure associated with
Intern Med 94:505, 1981
bacterial endocardis in the dog. J Ain Anim Hosp
65. Durack DT, Lukes AS, Bright DK. New criteria for diag-
Assoc 25:243, 1989
nosis of infective endocarditis: utilization of specific.
44. Cook 1IT, Macdougall DF, Steward AP, ct al. Prospective
cchocardliographic findings. Am J Med 96:200. 1994
survey of canine chronic renal discase and prevalence
66. Calvert CA. Valvular bacterial endocarditis in the dog.
 and types of canine glomeruloncphritis. Abstract. J Pa-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:1080, 1982
thol 146:276A,1985
67. Fecly J, Wilkinson GR, McAllistcer CB. ct al. Increased
45. Swanwick RA, Williams OJ. Fatal myocardial infarct i
toxicity and reduced clearance of lidocaine by cimeti-
a Greyhound. J Small Anim Pract 23:45l, 1982
dine. Ann Intern Med 96:592, 1982
46. Phair IP, Clarke J Immunology of infcctive cndocardi-
68. Drazner FH1. Bacterial cndocarditis in the dog. Conl-
tis. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 22:137, 1979
pend Contin Educ 1:918, 1979
47. Bennett D, Gilbertson EM, Grennan D. Bacterial cndo-
69. Erbel R, Rohmann S, Drexler M, ct al. lnproved diag-
carditis with polyarthritis in two dogs associated with
nostic value of echocardiography in patients with infcc-
circulating autoamtibodies. J Small Anim Pract. 19:185,
tive endocarditis by transesophageal approach. A pro-
1978
spcctive study. Eur Hlcart J 9:43, 1988
48. Bennctt D. Taylor D]. Bacterial endocarditis and inflain-
70. Steckelberg JM, Murphy JG, Ballard D, ct al. Einbeli in
inatory joint disease in thc dog. J Small Anim Pracl
infec live endocarditis: the prognostic valute of echocar-
29:347, 1988
diography Ann lntern Med 114:635, 1991
49. Elwood CM, Cobh MA, Stepien RL.. Clinical and ccho-
71. Kim JI1, Wiscman A, Kisslo J, et al. Echocardiographic
carliographic findings in 10 dogs with vegetative bacte-
detection and clinical significance of leff atrial vegcta-
rial endocarditis. J Sinall Anim Pract 34:420, 1993
tions in active infective endocarditis. An J Cardiol
 50. Xeugarten J, Gallo GR, Baldwin DS. Glomerulonephri-
64:950, 1989
tis in bacterial endlocarditis. Am J Kidney Dis 3:371,
72. Shively BK, Gurule FT, Roldan CA. ct al. Diagnostic
1984
value of transesophageal compared with transthoracic
51. Perez GO, Rothfield N, Williams RC. Ininunc-complex
echocardiography in infective endlocarditis. [ Am Coll
nephritis in bacterial enndocarditis. Arch Intern Med
Cardiol 18:391, 1991
136:334, 1976
73. Steckelberg JM, Murphy JG, Ballard D. Value of ccho-
52. Grccn RA, Russo EA, Greene RT, ct al. Hypoalbumi-
cardiography in infective endocarditis. ACP Journal
Club, 1991, p 27
ncphrotic syu1d1ome. J Am Vet Med Assuc 186:485, 1985
74. Aragam JR, Weyman AE., Echocardiographic findings in
53. Vulganott jC. Clark RG. Arterial hypertension and hy-
infective endocarditis. In Weyman AE. (ed): Principles
pertrophic pulnonary osteopathy associated with aortic
and Practice of Echocardiography. 2nd cd. Philadlel.
valvular cndocarditis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
phia, Lea & Febigcr, 1994, p 1178
177:243, 1980
75. Weyman AE, Grifin BP. l.eft ventricular outflow tract:
34. Dickinson Cj. The actiology of clubbing and hypertro-
thc aortic valve, aorta, and subvalvular outflow tracl. In
phic osteoarthropathy. Eur J Clin lnvest 23:330. 1993
Weyman AF (ed): Principles and Practice of Fchocardi-
ography. 2nd edl. Philadelphia, Lca & Fcbiger 1994,
cations for therapy Clin Pharm 12:829, 1993
p 498
56. Glauser MP. Heumann D, Baumgartner JD, ct al. Patho-
gencsis and potential strategies for prevention and
in infective enclocarlitis: reasscssment of prognostic
treatment of septic shock: ani update. Clin Infect Dis
implications of vegctation size deterrmined by the trans-
18(Suppl 2):S205, 1994
thoracic and the transesophagcal approach. J Am Coll
37. Henry WL., DeMaria A, Graniak R, et al. Report of the
Cardiol 14:631, 1989
Anerican Society of Echocardiography Committee on
77. Pictro DA. The role of cchocardiography in infective
Nomcnclature and Standards "in Two-dimensional
cndocarditis. Echocardiography 2:423. 1985
Echocardiography. Circ ulalion 62:212, 1980
78. Fregin GF, Luginbuhl H, Guarda F. Myocardial in1-
 58. Mammen EF. Perspectives for the future (pathophysiol-
farction in1 a dog. J Am Ve1 Med Assoc 160:956, 1972
ogy oft sepsis). Intensive Care Med 19:S29, 1993
79. Nielsen Sw, Nielsen L.B. Coronary cmbolisin in valvular
59. Calandra T Baumgartner JD, Grau GE, ct al. Prognostic
bacterial endocarditis in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
values of tumor necrosis/cachectin, interleukin-1, inter-
125:376, 1954
feron-alpha, and jnterfceron-gamma in the serum of
 80. Murphy JG, Foster-Smith K. Managenent of complica-
patients with septic shock. J Infect Dis 161:982, 1990
tions of infective cndocarditis with cmphasis on echo-
60. Fisher CJ, Opal SM, Dhainaut JF, ct al. Influencc of
an anti-tumor necrosis factor monoclonal antibody on1
(eds): Infect Dis Clin North Am 1993, p 153
       a 
81. Washington JA. Blood cullures: principles and tcech-
21:318, 1993
niqucs. Mayo Clin Proc 50:91, 1975
 61. Suffredini AF, Fic hacker PQ, Danner Rl., ct al. Selccted 
82. Wilson WR, Van Scoy RE, Washington JA. Incidencc of
 treatment stratcgies for scptic shock basedl on proposed
bacteremia in adults without infection. J Clin Microbiol
mechanisms  of
pathogenesis.
Ann Intcrn Med
2:94. 1975
120:771. 1994
83. Weinstein MP, Murphy JR, Reller LB, ct al. The clinical
62. Suffredini AF. Current prospects for the treatment of
significance of positive blood cultures: a comprchensive
clinical scpsis. Cit Care Med 22:S12, 1994
analysis of 500 episodles of bacteremia and fungemia in
580 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
acdlults. II. Clinical obscrvations, with special reference
100. Widleman FE, Blackstone EH, Kirklin JW, et al. HHospital
to factors influencing prognosis. Rey Infect Dis 5:54,
mortality of re-replacement of the aortic valve. J Yhorac
1983
Cardiovasc Surg 82:692, 1981
84. Roberts FJ. ‘The valuc of thc second blood culture
101. Bortolotti U、 Milano A, Mazzucco A. ct al. Results of
(correspondence). J Infect Dis 168:795, 1993
reoperation for prinary tissue failure of porcine bio-
85. Isrup DM, Washington JA. The importance of volume
prostheses. J Thorac Cardliovasc Surg 90:564, 1985
of blood cultured in the detection of bacteremia and
102. Cale AR, Sang Cr, Campanella C, ct al. Hlufnagel revis-
fungemia. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1:107, 1983
ited: a descending thoracic aortic valve to treat pros-
86. Washington JA, llstrup DM. Blood culuurcs: issues and
thetic valve insufficiency. Ann Thorac Surg 5s:1218.
controversies. Rev Infect Dis 8:792, 1986
1993
87. Chandrasekar PII, Brown WJ. Clinical issucs of blood
103. Niederhauser U. von Segesser LK, Carrel TP, ct al.
culturcs. Arch Intern Med 154:841, 1994
Infected endocardial paccmaker clectrodes: successful
'88
Tonnesen A, Peuler M, Lockwood WR. Culures of
open intracardiac reinoval. PACE 16:303, 1993
blood drawn by catheters vs venipuncture. J Am Med
104. White GL, White GS, Kosanke SD, et al. Therapeutic
Assoc 235:1877, 1976
effects of prednisolone sodiun succinate vs dexainetha-
89. Bcnnctt IL, Beeson RB. Bacteremia: a consideration of
sone in dogs suhjected to E. coli septic shock. J Am
somc cxperimcntal and clinical aspects. Yale J Biol Med
Anim Hosp Assoc 18:1, 1982
262:1, 1954
105. Hinshaw L. Peduzzi P, Young E, et al. Efect of high-
90. Anderson FT, Young LS, Hewitt WL. Simultaneous anti-
dose glucocorticoid therapy on nortality in paticnts
biotic levels in "brcakthrough" gram-negative rod bac-
with clinical sigus of systemic sepsis. N Engl J Med
teremia. An J Med 61:493, 1976
91. Crepin O, Roussell-Delvallez M, Martin GR, et al. Effec-
317:659,1987
106. Bonc RC, Fishcr CJ, Clemmer TP, el al. A controlled
tivencss of resins in rcmoving antibiotics from blood
clinical trial of high-dose methylprednisolone in the
cultures. J Clin Microbiol 31:734, 1993
92. IHaskins SC. Management of septic shock. I Am Vet
treament of severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J
Med Assoc 200:1915, 1992
Med 317:653. 1987
93. Dow SW, Curis CR, Jones RL, et al. Bacterial culture
107. Greeniman RJ., Schcin RMH, Martin MA, et al. A con-
of blood from critically ill dogs and cats: 100 cases
trolled clinical trial of E5 murine monoclonal IgM anti-
body to endotoxin in the treatment of gran-negative
(1985-1987). J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 195:11, 1989
 94. Iirsh DC, Jang SS, Biberstein El. Blood culture of the
sepsis. J A1n Med Assoc 266:1097, 1991
108. Pennington [E. Therapy with antibodly to tumor necro-
canine paticnt. J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:175, 1984
95. Calvert CA, Greene CE. Bacteremia in dogs: diagnosis,
sis factor in sepsis. Clin Infect Dis 17(Suppl 2):S515,
treatment, and prognosis. Compend Contin Ed 8:179,
1993
1986
109. Durack DT. Currenl issues in prevention of infective
 96. Hendershot EF. Fluoroquinolones. Infect Dis North Am
cndocarditis. Am J Med 78:149, 1985
110. Dajani AS, Bisno'Al., Chung KJ, et al. Prevention of
9:715, 1995
97. Balfour JA, Bryson HM, Brogden RN. Imipenem/cilas-
bacterial cndocarditis: rccommendations by the Ameri-
tatin: an update of its antibacterial pharmacokinetics
cann Heart Associaion. J Am Med Assoc 264:2919, 1990
and therapeutic efficacy in the trcatmcnt of serious
1ll1. Hupp JR. Changing methods of preventing infective
infections. Drugs 51:99, 1996
 cndocarditis following dental procedures: 1943-1993. J
98. Bonow RO. Management of chronic aortic regurgita-
Oral Maxillofac Surg 5:616, 1993
tion. N Engl J Med 331:736, 1994
112. Wehimacher EH1. Myth: cndocarditis. Arch Intern Med
99. Scognamiglio R. Rahimtoola SH1, Fasoli G, ct al. Nifedi-
154:129, 1994
pine in asymptomatic patients with severe aortic regur-
113. van der Mecr JTM, van Wijk W, Thompson J. et al:
gitation and normal 1eft ventricular function. X Engl J
Efficacy of antibiotic prophylaxis for prevention of na-
Mcd 331:689, 1994
tive-valve endocarditis. Lancet 339:135, 1992
[yocardial
27
Diseases of Dogs
DAVID SISSON
MICHAEL R. O'GRADY
CLAY A. CALVERT
CLINICAL IMPORTANCE
 The cardiomyopathies arc a group of dliscases that primarily and predomi-
nantly affect the heart muscle. The prinary cardliomyopathics, by clcfinition,
are itliopathic diseases that are not the result of an identifiable systemic
 disorder or any other type of congenital or acquiredl heart disease.' Patients
with idiopathic myocardial diseasc are additionally classified into dilated,
hypcrtrophic, and restrictive groupings based on the predloiminating func-
tional and pathologic abnormalities detecled clinically or at necropsy ( Table
 27-1).l- Dilated cardiomyopathy is far and away the most prevalent form of
cardiomyopathy in dogs.2 4. 7 Hypertrophic cardiormyopathy is, by compari-
son, an uncommon dlisorrler, and restrictive cardiomyopathy is so rare that
q   s  s p  e  r n si 
fashionable in recent ycars to refer to the canine cardiomyopathics as
breed-specific syndromcs, c.g., Doberman, boxer dog, and cocker spaniel
cardiomyopathy, This practice was prompted by brecdl-associated differences
in prescnting clinical signs, clinical course, and eventual outcorne, and
by the suspicion that the underlying cause of cardiomyopathy varies in
different breeds.
 Myocardial diseases resulting from well-defined disease processes are ap
propriately referred to as sccondary myocardial diseases or as specific heart
muscle diseases. The World Hcalth Organization (WIIO) classification
scheme specifes that the term "cardiornyopathy’ be uscd cxclusively t0
designate only those myocardial diseases of unknown or uncertain cliology.?
If the terrn is to be applied to a disorder with a defined ctiology, it should
al least be dlescribed by an appropriate modificr, such as hyperthyroid
cardiornyopathy, ischemic cardiomyopathy, hypcrtensive cardiomyopathy, or
taurine dleficiency cardiomyopathy. Thosc sccondary myocardlial discases
that have been reported in dogs and cats are listed in Table 27-1. Although
thc tcrminology and classification scheimes describced herein suffer from
certain ambiguities and deficiencies, thcy provide an adequate framework
for communicating the essential features of this constantly evoling group
of dliseases,
581
582DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
TABLE 27-1
dlers was recognized. It was not until the introduction
Classification of Canine Myocardial Diseases
of echocardiography into clinical veterinary practicc
Primary Myocardial Diseases (Cardiomyopathics)
that a diagnosis of myocardial disease could hc con-
Dilated cardiomyopathy
firmed inexpensively and with a high degrce of cer-
Breed-specific subcategorics
tainty on a routine basis. These studics established that
Dobxcrmau pinschers
Boxer tlogs
large and giant breed dogs are particularly at risk for
Cocker spanicls
DCM, but that smaller brced dlogs, such as cocker
Poruguese water spaniels
 spanicls, may also he affected.
Hypertrophie cardiomyopathy
Obstructive forin
Surprisingly little information has been publishcd
Nonobsiructive form
docurnenting the prcvalenice of DCM. In 1988. a11
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (endonyocardial fibrosis)
Unclassified (indeterminaie) cardiomyopathy
Ialian study of 7148 dogs estimated the prevalence of
Atrioventricular myopathy
DCM at 1.1 percent.'1 A more recent survey of 342,152
Right venricular cardionyopathy
Cases rcgistered in the Veterinary Medical 1Data Base
Secondary Myocardial Diseases
(VMDB) at Purcdue from 1986 through 1991 indicated
Drugs and toxinis
that the prevalence of canine ICM was 0.5 percent.?
Anthracyclinesdoxorubicin
Catecholanines
Depcnding on the precise criteria used, myocardlial
lonophorcs
diseasc cornprises 10 to 40 percent of the cardiology
Genetic
 caseload in a teaching hospital environmcnt (see chap-
(anine X-linkedl muscular dystrophy (Duchenne's)
Infiltrative
ter 23). The prevalence of canine dilated cardiomyopa-
Clycogen storage diseases
thy may he increasing owing to the rising popularity
Mucopolysaccharidosis
of certain predlisposed brceds or, perhaps, becausc of
Neoplasia
Ischenic.
the increaserd awareness of the practicing veterinarian.9
Metabolic
It is interesting that the incidence of cardiormyopathy
Acromegaly
Diaheies mellitus
Hyperthyroidism
In North America, caninc DCM is diagnosed most
Systemit: hypertension
 oflen in the Doberrnan pinscher breed, and somewhat
ldliopathic:
lcss oftcn in other large and giant breed purebred
Renal discasc
Hyperadrenocorticism
dogs. This is reflected in the breed enrollment patern
Nutritioual
Tauine deficiency
of a recent therapeutic trial involving dlogs with conges-
Vitarni F/selenium deficiency
tive heart failure clue to DCM (Table 27-2).'4 1Iowever,
1-Carnitine deficiency
in a recent Swedish study, Newfoundllands were diag-
Intlammatorymyocardlitis
nosed with DCM twice as often as any other breed
Infectiousviral, protozoal, bacterial, fungal
Parvovirus, distemper virus
(44/189 cases), followed by cocker spaniels (23/189
Chagas disease, espsis, Lme disasc
cases), Doberman pinschers (17/189), and Labrador
Noninfeetious
retricvers (14/189).15 Since the breed distribution of
1DCM cases varies by region in accordance with the
 popularity of the various predisposed breeds, it is use-
PRIMARY MYOCARDIAL
DISEASES OF DOGS
TABLE 27-2
Breed Distribution of Dogs with Dilated
Cardiomyopathy Enroled in the
CANINE DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY
Enalapril Treatnent Trial14
Frequeney:
Brecd
No.of Dogs
PREVALENCE AND DEMOGRAPHICS
 Dilated cardiomyopathy (1DCM) is one of the most
Cocker spaniel
3 (4.1%)
Doherman pinscher
42 (56.8%)
common acquiredl carrliovascular dliseases of dogs,2 4.
German shiepherd
4 (5.4%)
7. # Only degenerative valvular disease and, in some
Great Dane
5 (6.8%)
 geographic regions, heartworm disease are more im-
Irish wolflound
3 (4.1%)
Labraclor retriever
4 (5.4%)
portant causes of cardiac morbidlity and mortality in
Old English sheepdlog
3 (1.1%)
 dogs. The syndrome of canine dilated cardiomyopathy
Terrier
1 (1.4%)
went unrecognized through the 1950s and much of
Oher
9 (12.2%)
the 1960s."o During thc 1970s and carly 1980s, the
[eo.1.
（%001)
 pathologic features of the most cormrnon types of mnyo-
From Etinger S. Lusk R, Brayley K, et al. for The Cooperative Veterinary
cardial disease in dogs and cats were cleseribed and
Enalapril (COVE) Studly Croup. Evaluation of enalapril therapy in dogs with
heart failure ia lare multinter tudyProcedingsIOthAnmual Velria
categorizedl, and the clinical importance of these disor-
ans Medlical Forum, ACVIM 1992, p 584. Copyright 1992 Stephen ]. Ettinger.
MYOCARDIALDISEASESOFDOGS583
ful toknowtheprevalenceof DCMwithin thosebreeds
atic dogs with occult disease.24-27 In a study of 193
at greatest risk. In the 1986-1991 VMDB survey de-
asymptomaticDoberman pinschers,O'Gradyand
scribed earlier,the prevalence of DCMwas5.8percent
Hornefound nosexpredilection eitherforsubclinical
in Doberman pinschers, 5.6 percent in Irish wolf-
myocardial dysfunction orfor ventricular ectopia.24 In
hounds,3.9percent in Great Danes,3.4percent in
arecentstudyofNewfoundlandswithsignsofheart
boxer dogs,2.6 percent in Saint Bernards,1.7 percent
failure due toDCM,23 of 37affectedwere females.27
inAfghanhounds,1.3percentinNewfoundlands,and
Nor is there an apparent sex predilection in the small
0.9 percent in Old English sheepdogs (Fig. 27-1).7 In
numbers of cocker spaniels identifiedwithDCM and
a small population of Scottish deerhounds examined,
a lowplasma taurine concentration.2A recent study29
the prevalence of DCMwas 6.0percent.By compari-
of related boxer dogs suggests that cardiomyopathy in
son,the prevalence of DCMwas 0.69percent inEn-
thisbreedisinherited asanautosomal dominanttrait,
glish cocker spaniels and 0.34 percent in American
reinforcing prior
observations indicating no sex
cockerspaniels.Theprevalencerate ofDCMin mixed
predilection.25.26
with 0.65 percent in purebred dogs.Dilated cardiomy-
PATHOLOGY
opathywasreportedonlyrarelyindogsweighingless
than 12 kg.
In most dogs dying of heart failure due to DCM,
Dilated cardiomyopathy occurs in dogs of all ages,
theheart ismarkedly enlarged and themyocardium
but theriskof DCMincreases substantiallywith advanc-
appears pale, soft, and flabby. In Doberman pinschers
ing age (VMDB, Fig. 27-2).7 Owing to the smaller
and boxer dogs, dilation of the left atrium and left
number of aged dogs examined, themajority of dogs
ventricle predominates (Fig. 27-3A),but in other
presentedfor evaluationandtreatment ofheartfailure
breeds,suchasNewfoundlands,Irishwolfhounds,and
due toDCM arebetween 4 and10 years old.In contra-
cocker spaniels, all chambers of the heart are grossly
diction to this general pattern, a new form of cardio-
dilated.3.23, 25-27 30-37 The ratio of left ventricular wall
myopathyhasrecentlybeendescribedthataffects
thickness to chamber diameter is decreased,and the
young (2- to 32-week-old)Portuguese water dogs.16
circumferences of the annuluses of themitraland
Affectedpups usually die within days following the
tricuspid valves are increased in proportion to the
onsetof symptoms,and,asyet,there arenoreported
magnitudeof chamberdilation.Thepapillarymuscles
cases in adult dogs. Gender also appears to influence
often appear flattened and atrophic. Depending on
therisk of developingheart failure caused byDCM, at
the age of the dog,the mitral and tricuspid valve
least in some breeds.This fact is evidenced by the 2:1
leafletsmaybemidllytomoderatelythickenedand
male/femaleratioobservedoverallinthe1986-1991
thechordaetendineaemaybeslightlythickened and
VMDB survey, as well as in other studies.7 15, 17-23 In
elongated. These valvular changes are modest when
mostpublishedstudiesofDobermanpinscherswith
compared with those observed in dogs dying from
DCM,70 percent to 80percent of the dogs with signs
chronicvalvularinsufficiency causedbymyxomatous
degeneration (see chapter 25).The endocardium of
report describing DCM in Dalmatians, all the affected
theleftatrium andventricleis oftenmildly thickened.
dogsweremales.24This pattern of male predominance
Thepresence and severityofmyocardialhypertrophy
is not observed in all affected breeds nor in asymptom-
isnotalwaysimmediatelyevidentduetotheextremely
///llll//Scotishdeerhound(7/117)
/////////////Dobermanpinscher(603/10435)
FIGURE27-1
7//////////////Irishwolfhound(38/696)
The prevalence of dilated
V///////ZGreat Dane(122/3157)
cardiomyopathy (DCM),
W////////Boxerdog（131/3800)
displayed as a percent of new
St.Bemard(29/1124)
hospital admissionsishighest n
//ZZAfghan hound.(15/897)
large and giant purebred dogs.
Male predominanceis observed
ZZNewfoundlandretriever(22/1751)
B
English sheepdog(18/1894)
=male
in mostbutnot all affected
breeds.Source:Veterinary
Eng.cocker spaniel(5/729)
Zz=female
Medical Data Base(VMDB),
Springerspaniel (25/4865)
Purdue University. (From Sisson
Am.cocker spaniel (53/15373)
Ju xes=
DD,ThomasWP.Myocardial
Labradorretriever(73/21501)
diseases.InEttinger SJ,Feldman
EC(eds):Textbook of Veterinary
Golden retriever(42/16405)
Internal Medicine.4th ed.
Mixed breed (131/83417)
Philadelphia,WBSaunders1995,
p 995.)
2
3
4
6
% Affected
584
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
PREVALENCEOFCANINEDCMBYAGE
（Boxer,Doberman,GreatDane-VMDB,Purdue1986-1991)
1268
/2702
134/1
11
=Boxer
10-
/342
FIGURE27-2
9-
=Doberman
Prevalence of dilated cardiomyop
=GreatDane
112
8-
commonly affected breeds of dogs.
ted
Most breeds show increasing
7-
46/
prevalence with advancing age.
Affec
Source:VeterinaryMedical Data
6
Base(VMDB),PurdueUniversity.
(From Sisson DD,Thomas WP.
5
33/
Myocardial diseases.In Ettinger SJ
%
Feldman EC(eds):Textbookof
VeterinaryInternalMedicine.4th
ed.Philadelphia,WB Saunders,
3
1995, p 995.)
2
1-2
2-4
4-7
<1
7-10
>10
Age (yrs)
dilated chambers. Myocardial hypertrophy is best dem-
necrosis,hemorrhage,orfibrosismaybe observed,but
onstrated andquantifiedbymeasurement of total
such lesions are usually not extensive.
heart weight and calculation of heart weight/body
Histologic changes observedin themyocardium of
weightorheartweight/body surfacearearatios.For
dogsdyingfromDCMaremodestinrelation tothe
example,in Newfoundlands dying of DCM,heart
severe degree of functional impairment observed clini-
weight/bodyweightratiosvariedfrom193to292gm/
cally. Scattered foci of myocardial degeneration, with
m²,with amean of 257gm/m²(normalvalue
myocytolysis andvacuolization of myocytes,overtmyo-
120 gm/m²).27 Small, scattered areas of myocardial
cardialnecrosis,andmyocyteatrophy,areidentifiedn
FIGURE27-3
(A)Dilated cardiomyopathy heart from aDoberman pinscher.Theleftventricleismarkedly dilated,
but the myocardium grossly appears normal.(B)This photomicrograph of the interventricular
septumofaDoberman pinscher that diedsuddenly shows atrophiedmusclefibersreplaced by
fibrous connective tissue.Trichrome stain;bar =52μm.From Calvert CA,Hall G,Jacobs G,et al.
Clinical and pathologicfindings inDoberman pinschers with occult cardiomyopathy that died or
developed congestive heart failure:54 cases (1984-1991).J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:505,1997.)
MYOCARDIAL DISEASES OF DOGS585
most dogs dying of DCM.28. 27. 30-37 IDamaged myocytes
 dogs is by no means incontrovertible. The increascd
are replaced by varying amounts of fibrous or fatty
prevalence  of  myocardial  disesase  in  Doberiman
tissue. Attenuated, wavy myofibcrs are a consistent and
pinschcrs, boxer dogs, Newfoundlands, cocker span-
relatively specific histologic finding.* Myocardial lc-
icls, Irish wolfhounds, and Great Danes certainly sug-
sions are most pronounced in the base of the papillary
 gests a genetic basis for DCM in these breeds. Recent
muscles, in 1he interventricular septum, and in the
subendocardial regions of the left ventricular frce wall
 cate that cardiomyopathy in this breed is inherited as
(Fig. 27-3B). There are no substantial differenccs in
an autosomal dominant trait.? Involvement of more
the histologic changes observed in dogs dying sud-
than 50 percent of family members in some groups of
denly and those dying of congestive hear failure. In
Doberman pinschers (O'Grady, personal observation)
boxer dogs, ihe right ventricular wall is the earliest
argues strongly for a heritablc predisposition or ge-
and most severely affected region of the heart.2 1n
netic abnormality in this brced as well. Most of the
advanced cascs, widcspread areas of myocardial fibrosis
 Doberman pinschers in the United States can be
and fatty infiltration are observed. Remodeling of the
traced to one of seven closely related dogs, three of
intrainural coronary arterioles is evidenced by intimal
which died suddenly,.s. s Dilated cardiomyopathy in
Portuguese water dogs appears to be inherited as an
cle cells in the media. Of particular note, inflammatory
autosomal recessive trait.1o The occurrence of idio-
lesions are minimal or absent in most affected dogs
 pathic cardiomyopathy has also been tracked through
dying of DCM. Small colections of cellular infiltrates.
three generations of English cocker spaniels and
usualy lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages,
shown to be associated with a particular C4 pheno-
are generally confined to focal arcas of active myofiber
type,10
necrosis.
Twenty to thirty percent of human DCM cases are
Ultrastructural abnorrmalities described in dogs with
-ne ur aensuouap isou pue 'eey aq oi sno
DCM include scattered foci of degenerated myocardial
tosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.41. 42 Familial
 cells exhibiting varying degrees of myocytolysis, mild
 dilated cardiomnyopathy in peoplc appears to be a ge-
to marked sarcoplasinic vacuofization, and increased
netically heterogeneous disorder. Five different loci
intracytoplasmic collections of large, dense lipofuscin
 that cosegregate with the DCM have been mapped so
granules3a In more severely affected myocardial
far:*2 Currently, there is particular interest in genetic
cells, the myofibrils are disrupted, disoriented, and
defects in the cytoskeletal protcins, including dys-
trophin and the dystrophin-related proteins, s-is 1De-
scattered deposits of glycogen. Mitochondria are often
fects in the dystrophin gene are responsible for X-
increased in number and may be large and irregularly
 linked dilated cardiomyopathy in humans, and they
shaped, with abnormal or disrupted internal cristae.30
are also responsible for Duchenne's and Becker's mus-
These ultrastructural changes are generally regarded
cular dystrophies, Mutations in other cytoskeletal pro-
as nonspecific markers of cell damage. Pathologic stud-
teins, such as metavinculin, alpha-dystroglycan, alpha-
ies to date have failed to identify the prinary nccha-
and gamina-sarcoglycan, and muscle LIM protein, also
nism(s) responsible for reduced nyocardial function
result in dilated cardiomyopathy, suggesting that cy-
in dogs with DCM.
toskeletal proteins play an inportant role in cardiac
function.46
ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS OF DILATED
CARDIOMYOPATHY
Nutritional Abnormalities
TAURINE. It appears certain that taurine deficiency
Proposed causes of canine DCM include viral infec-
causes or contributes to the development of myocar-
tion, autoinmunity, myocardial toxins, microvascular
dial failure in a small proportion of the dogs with
hyperreactivity, nutritional deficiency, persistent or re-
DCM, although this relationship is not as well estab-
current tachycardia, and a large number of genetic.
lished as in cats (see chapter 32).28. 47 4s The m1echa-
abnormalities.l-7 It is likely that there are many differ-
nisin by which taurine deficiency induccs myocardial
 s r e m o n soa 
failure is unknown. Taurinc is the most abundant free
than one primary disease process can induce the same
au m ono si e nu a  pe o
functional and morphologic abnormalities.37. 3
intracellular calciun kinetics in soine yet to be defined
fashion. Taurine 1nay also help eliminate oxygen free
Familial and Genetic Basis of DCM
radicals in myocardial cells, thereby protecting the
integrity of vital organelles and cell membranes.
The current consensus of opinion is that the major-
 Kramer and associates found low plasma taurine con-
ity of canine DCM cases have a familial or genetic
centrations (less than 25 nmol/ml) in 13/76 dogs with
basis, but the evidence for a genetic cause of DCM in
DCM, including 3/3 cocker spaniels and 4/6 golden
586DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCUIATION
retrievers.t7 It is important to note that most dogs
 addition, carnitine functions as a detoxifying agent
with DCM in this study, including 32/33 1oberman
within the mitochondria, where it binds acyl groups
pinschers, had no evidence of taurine deficiency. A
 and other toxic metabolites accumulating as a result
subsequent study showed that myocardial function im-
of normal mitochondrial activity and transports them
proves in most cocker spaniels wih DCM following
out of the mitochondria as esters of carnitine.
suppleinentation with taurine and l-carnitine to the
 Myocardial carnitine levels are reduced in the major-
extent that traditional medical therapy for heart failure
 ity of cardiac disorders of people, suggesting that myo-
could be withdrawn1 without aclverse effect.?8 Although
cardial carnitine concentrations often decline simply
the primacy of taurine deficiency in these cocker span-
as a consequence of heart failure.s The same is proba-
iels was confounded by the simultaneous supplementa
bly true in dogs, and there is little accumulated evi-
tion of L-carnitine, we have achieved similar results
dence to suggest that a deficiency of carnitine causes
using taurine alone. A recently published casc study
DCM. There is evidence that carnitine supplementa-
also indicates that I-carnitine is not needed to achieve
tion can exert a modest beneficial effect in heart fail-
a beneficial response.9
ure; presumably by replenishing depleted nyocardial
We havc measured low plasma taurine concentra-
stores.?7 There is little evidence to suggest that carni-
tions in other breeds of dogs with DCM, including
tine supplementation reverses the primary 1nyocardial
several mixed-breed dogs fed a vegetarian (lentil-
dysfunction responsible for heart failure in the great
 based) diet. Myocardial function improved slowly but
majority of dogs with DCM. Pre-existing cardiac ar-
 markedly over a 6-imonth period following taurine sup-
rhythmias are not abolished and sudden death is not.
plementation and a change to a more traditional diet.
prevented by I-carnitine supplementation. In one re
It is interesting that somie dogs with DCM and a low
port, carnitine supplementation in two boxer dogs did
plasma taurine concentration do not improve follow-
not produce any measurable clinical benefit.5
ing taurine supplementation. The relationship be-
tween  taurine-associated DCM in  American  cocker
OTHER NUTRITIONAL DISORDERs. There have becn n0
 s ss     pe ss 
published studies assessing the potential role of other
know. Myocardial function improves substantially in
micronutrients in  the etiology  of  cardiomyopathy.
some American and English cocker spaniels with low
Thus, the role of thiamine, selenium, cobalt, phospho-
plasna taurine concentrations after treatment using
rus, calcium, and iron remains unknown. It has been
only conventional medications (digoxin, diuretics, and
suggested that a deficiency of coenzyme Ql0 (CoQ10.
ACE inhibitors without supplemental taurine).
 or ubiquinone) might be responsible for DCM in peo-
some of these patients, plasma taurine concentrations
ple (and/or dogs) and that it might be effective in
rise into the normal range without the benefit of tau-
palliating these patients. Although there is no defini-
rine supplementation (personal communication,
I)r.
tive evidence for an etiologic role for coenzyme Q10,
Matt Miller, Texas A&M). Nonetheless, it scems pru-
some experimental evidence indicates that it exerts a
 modest beneficial effect in heart failure. perhaps as a
andl a confirined low plasma or blood taurine concen-
result. of its antioxidant properties.60
tration.
LCARNITINE. Tlie notion that carnitine deficiency
Viral Causation
might cause DCM in dogs was first advanced by
Kecne." 1le subsequently demonstrated reduced 1myo-
With the exception of parvovirus, serious investiga-
 cardial concentrations of free carnitine in 50 percent
tion into the potential role of viruses in canine DCM
to 90 percent of dogs with DCM, including somie boxer
has not taken place, In humans, viral infection is sus.
dogs, Doberman pinschers, Samoyeds, and American
pected as one of the most common causes of
cocker spaniels,1-a5s Since plasma carnitine levels do
DCM.: oi-1 The enteroviruses, particularly the coxsack-
not accurately reflect myocardial carnitine content,
ieviruses, are most frequently identified in people in
endomyocardial biopsies were required to demonstrate
this seting,64 The role of viral infections in DCM has
this deficiency. The hypothesis that carnitine defi-
been difficult to establish in human patients because
ciency might be a cause of canine DCM was attractive
evidence of the putative viral infection is usually absent
for several reasons. First, a heritable form of DCM in
by the time frank congestive heart failure manifesis.
humans liad already bcen show to result from an
With the advent of improved virus identification meth-
inborn error of carnitine metabolism, and second,
odologies, evidence of viral nucleic acid in patienis
carnitine is known to play an essential role in cardiac
with DCM has provided stronger evidence for a prior
 metabolism, acting to shuttle long chain free fatty acids
viral infection, The absence of widespread inflamma
into the mitochondria in the form of esters of acylcar-
tion or extensive myocardial damage in most dogs and
nitine. ILong chain free fatty acids represent the most
humans dying from DCM certainly argues against a
important. substrate for nyocardial energy needs.
.In
viral etiology and supports the hypothesis that one or
MYOCARDIAL DISEASES OF DOGS
587
more subcellular metabolic abnormalities is responsi-
tion depending on the type of tachycardia, the heart
 ble for the development of myocardial failure.6, 67
rate, and the duration of the tachycardia.x. s Labrador
retrievers are predisposed to persistent or recurrent
supraventricular tachycardia, and some affected dogs
Immune-Mcdiatcd Disorders
develop profound myocardial failure in association
An emerging body of evidence suggests that DCM
with the arrhythmia.8 In some but not all cases, myo.
might be the consequence of immunologic processes.
carrdial failure resolves with abolition of the tachycar-
Circulating heart-specific autoantibody, antibody di-
dia. Some giant breed dogs, including Irish wolf-
hounds and Great Danes, often present with atrial
body directed against the ADP-ATP mitochondrial
fibrillation and no or only modest ventricular dysfunc-
pue -eqde suese Apoqnue pue ,uord soesorsuen
tion. Myocardial failure eventually develops in these
beta-cardiac 1nyosin heavy chain protein'2 have been
implicated in the pathogenesis of DCM cither in hu-
conscquence of chronic atrial fibrillation or simply
 mans or in experimental animals. Immune-mediated
represents progression of an underlying myopathic
phenomena seein to play a particularly important role
process.
in dogs with chronic myocarditis, e.g., Chagas' dis-
ease. Cardioinyopathy in English cocker spaniels is
PATHOPIYSIOLOGY
associated with circulating antimitochondrial antibody
 and other immunologic abnormalities.4o Antibodies
 The predominant physiologic abnorrnality in DCM
against the alpha-helical structures of bacterial and
 patients is impaired systolic ventricular function caused
viral antigens can also cause immune-mediated heart
by declining myocardial contractility. Inpaired systolic
disease.7 Thus, molecular mimicry may be an im-
function is reflected by the decreased rate of ventricu-
portant mode of immunologic cardiac attack. Drug-
lar pressure development (dp/dt), reduced ejection-
induced cardiotoxicity may also alter the antigenicity
 phase indices (ejection fraction, fractional shortening,
of myocytes sufficiently to induce immune reactivity
rate of ejection), and increased end-systolic volume.
  n si l tisda  mu o
 Diastolic ventricular function, as reflected in measures
autoantibodies directed against cardiac antigens are
 of left ventricular compliancc, is also abnormal in dogs
important in the genesis of myocardial failure or
with DCM. Together, these functional disturbances re-
whether they are simply produced as a consequence
 sult in elevated ventricular end-diastolic, alrial, and
of cellular damage. Specific HIA antigens are associ-
 yenous pressures, and ultimately in congesive heart
 ated with DCM in people.7 Other immunologic abnor-
failure. Marked reductions in ventricular stroke vol-
malities identified in people with DCM include re-
ume result in systemic arterial hypotension and signs
duced suppressor Tcell function and excess Thelper
of low output failure, manifested as weakness, exercise
cell activity 76.77
intolerance, syncope, or cardiogenic shock. Valvular
insufficiency, cardiac arrhythmia, and neurohormonal
compensatory responses contribute to ventricular dys-
Tachycardia-Induced Myocardial Failure
function and signs of carrdliac failure in dogs with DCM
 Sustained tachycardia, induced by rapid artificial
(see chapters 11, 12). Mitral and tricuspid insufficiency
pacing, is a commonly used method for creating exper-
develop in most dogs with DCM, as demonstrated by
-s doiaaap sho se sae shop ul aine leay reua
 Doppler echocardiography. In most cases, the magni-
tive heart failure when thcir hearts are artificially and
tude of regurgitation is usually mild, but moderate to
continuously paced a1 210 beats per minute for 3 to 4
severe mitral regurgitation can occur, particularly in
those dogs with concurre nt valvular degeneration.
at 4 to 6 weeks. Tachycardia increases myocardial oxy-
gen demand yet reduces the time available for ventric-
BIOCHEMICAL ALTERATIONs. The precise mechanisms
ular filling and coronary perfusion. Neurohumoral re-
 of cardiac dysfunctior at the cellular level remain un-
sponses, similar to those observed in spontaneously
identified in dogs with DCM. It is particularly difficult
Occurring heart failure, are evoked, resulting in re-
to establish whether ani observed biochemical abnor-
modeling of the coronary vasculature, a reduced vol-
Imality is the principal cause of myocardial dysfunction
une fraction of capillaries, and severely impaired 1nyo-
or a more general consequence of cellular damagc or
cardial function,st s Rapid cardiac pacing eventually
adaptive change to the heart failure state. Alterations
causes a substantial percentage of myocardial cells to
in myocyte energetics are believed by many investiga
die while inducing a deficit in contractity in the re-
tors to be responsible for reduced contractility in pa-
maining cels, 8 Long-standing atfial fibrillation, ven-
tients with DGM. Reduccd energy reserves, as indi-
tricular tachycardia (VT), or supraventricular tachycar-
cated by a reduced creatine phosphate-to-ATP ratio.
dia (SVT) can also produce reversible myocardial
 have been demonstrated in people with DCM.sa Disor-
dysfunction, with the severity of myocardial dysfunc-
ders of energy supply and reduced availability of ATP
588DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
would have a profound effect on systolic and diastolic
channels,o,1o2 or the sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium
function. Morphologic changes in nyocardial mito-
release channelos could cause a reduction of cytosolic
chondria have been observed in dogs with DCM and
activator calcium. Calcium release channel (CRC) ac-
in patients with heart failure from many causes.30 31. 89
tivity is reduced in dogs with DCM owing to decreased
Although most of these changes are regarded as sec-
activity of Ca?+-ATPase, decreased CRC content, and
 ondary alterations, primary mitochondrial defects are.
inhibition.'o Decreased production of cAMP in the
suspected as the cause of heart failure in at least one
seting of DCM could occur from inhibition of the
fanilial form of DCM in humans.*-92
stimulatory G proteinlo or an increase in the inhibi-
 O'Brien and colleagues have suggested that the pri-
tory G protein,1o6, 107 Other investigators 1naintain that
 Imary metabolic defect in Doberman pinscher DCM
the level of activator calcium is normal in failing
hearts, o Other studies suggest that the loss of contrac-
documented impaired oxidative production of ATP
tility in DCM patients results from a decrease in the
 in Doberinan pinschers with DCM and showed that
sensitivity of the myofilaments to activator calcium, and
myocardiun from Dobermans with DCM has a 50
that this effect is due to increased cytosolic concenira-
 percent reduction in mitochondrial electron transport
tions of inorganic phosphorus and hydrogen ions.los. 10.
aclivity and a 90 percent reduction in myocardial myo-
Other biochemical abnormalities found in the myo-
globin concentration,?4. 9s They further showed that.
cardium of dogs with DCM include reduccd myocar-
these changes were associated with decreased nyocar-
dial carnitine concentrations,a ss decreased beta-re-
dial ATP concentration and iniracellular acidosis.95
ceptor-mediated adenylate  cyclase  activity, and
The same investigators have demonstrated modest re-
clevated nyocardial concentrations of promatrix met-
ductions in myofibrillar and mitochondrial creatine
alloproteinase-9  and  neutrophil 
1 elastase.  This
kinase activity in the myocardium of Doberman pinsch-
change could play a fundamental role in the develop-
ers with DCM, and even more profound reductions in
ment of DCM, inasmuch as myocardial function is
cytosolic creatine kinase activity."
profoundly influenced by the structural integrity of
 Since relaxation is an energy-dependent process, re-
the extracellular matrix.
duced myocyte energy stores might also be responsible
INFLUENCE OF ARRHYTHMA. Cardiac arrhythmia, such
for the diastolic functional abnormalities observed in
as atrial fibrillation and ventricular tachycardia, is fre-
DCM patients. Myocardial relaxation occurs when the
quently detected in dogs with DCM. The development
activator calcium pool is removed from the cytosol.
 of atrial fibrilation has important immediate and
Calcium transport from the cytosol to the sarcoplasmic
chronic consequences for dogs with underlying heart.
reticulum is an energy-dependent process. The rapid
disease. Cardiac output declines by as 1nuch as 25
reduction in cytosolic calcium causes dissociation of
percent in healthy dogs with induced atrial fibrillation
calcium from troponin, causing tropomyosin to revert
 as a result of decreased and irregular diastolic filling
back to its resting inhibitory conformation. ATP then
times and the loss of atrial and ventricular
binds myosin, causing dissociation of the actin-myosin
synchronization.11. 1s IDarkell4 has shown that stroke
cros-bridges and relaxation. Renoval of calcium from
pue o m saop ul ponau Aiorass si a
the cyiosol is initially accomplished by the sarcoplasmic
atrial fibrillation when the R-R interval is less than 0.30
reticulum Ca"+-ATPase pump.? The activity of this
second. With the development of atrial fibrillation,
enzyme is controlled by the regulatory protein phos-
right and left atrial pressures increase, and, as a result.
rapid decompensation 1may occur when dogs with
DCM develop atrial fibrilation, particularly if the heart
 ban. The sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca?+-ATPase pump is
rate is greater than 200 beats per minute. Chronic
further modulated by an allosteric effect of ATP6, 97
 atrial fibrillation may also be an important contribut-
High concentrations of ATP induce the uptake of cal-
ing cause of progressively deteriorating myocardial
cium by the sarcoplasmic reticulum, while low ATP
contractility. Based on studies of hunans with DCM,
concentrations retard calcium removal from the cyto-
atrial fibrillation may also be an important contribut-
sol. Cytosolic calcium levels are also regulated by the
ing cause of sudden death.ts Sustaincd ventricular
sarcolemmal sodium-calcium exchanger.* This mecha-
 arrhythinia can cause profound circulatory embar-
nism is dependent on the ATP-dependent sodium-po-
rassment, collapse, and sudden death. The frequency
tassium pump. Thus, ATP is important to the function
and severity of ventricular arrhythmia observed in
 of both the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca*+-ATPase pump
 boxer dogs and Doberinan pinschers with DCM may
and the sarcolemmal sodiun-calciun exchanger via
also be indicative of the likelihood of suddcn
the sodium-potassium pump.
death.19-26. 116
 Some investigators believe that alterations in peak
activator calcium levels mediate myocardial systolic dys-
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
function in DCM patients,s*8.  Abnormalities of cyclic
The spectrum of clinical signs exhibited by dogs
AMP (cAMP) production,"o the sarcolemmal I-type
with DCM is similar in all breeds, but the observed
MYOCARDIAL DISEASES OF DOGS
589
frequency of these signs is conspicuously different in
 man pinschers and boxer dogs. Both breeds occasion-
many of the commonly affected breeds, Doberman
ally experience complete heart block 25. 36. 120 A variety
 pinschers and boxer dogs generally present for signs
of other arrhythmia and conduction disturbances can
 of acute left-sided heart failure, such as coughing and
develop in dogs with DCM, underscoring the inpor-
dyspnea: or for signs attributable to some life-thrcaten-
tance of electrocardiographic (ECG) evaluation of all
ing arrhythmia, such as syncope, episodic weakness, or
affected dogs.
collapse20. 2 Sudden death may be the firs1 observed
Weak and rapid arterial pulses are detected in the
sign in dogs with DCM. Twenty percent to thirty per-
majority of dogs with DCM. The markedly irregular
 cent of Doberman pinschers and boxer dogs with DCM
pulse and accompanying pulse deficits are obvious in
die suddenly, often during the first or second episode
dogs with frequent premature beats or atrial fibrilla-
of collapse, The remaining dogs either die or are
tion. Pulsus alternans, an alternating arterial pulse
euthanized becausc of heart failure or some other
amplitude in the absence of cardiac arrhythmia, is a
intercurrent event. Of those Doberman pinschers de-
morc subtle and less common finding that usually
veloping cnd-stage heart failure, three-fourths present
signifies profound myocardial failure. Rales, crackles,
with isolated left heart failure whereas one-fourth man-
and increased bronchovesicular lung sounds are evi-
 ifest signs of biventricular failure (pulnonary edema,
 dent in many dogs with leftsided heart failure and
ascites, ± pleural effusion or peripheral edema).22
pulmonary edeina. In some dogs, crackles are heard
 Other large and giant brced dogs are much less likcly
only at end-inspiration ovcr the hilar region. In 1nore
to experience syncope or to die suddenly, and they
severely affected dogs, these sounds can be heard over
are more likely to prescnt with ascites and/or pleural
 all lung fields. Jugular venous distention, jugular
effusion than Dobermans or boxers. In a recent study
pulses, hepatomegaly, and ascites are detectable in
of Newfoundlands with DCM, ascites was observed in
most dogs with right-sided or biventricular heart fail-
35 percent of thc dogs.?7 This finding is even more
ure. In contrast to other species, peripheral edema
 prevalent in other giant breed dogs. These dogs usually
occurs rarely in dogs and only with profound heart
have marked left ventricular dysfunction as well, but
failure. The heart and lung sounds are sometimes
pulinonary congestion is usually less severe compared
muffled as a result of plcural effusion. Weight loss and
Imuscle wasting are cominon in soine dogs with DCM,
with DCM are presented because of subtle evidence of
but the majority of dogs have normal muscle mass and
exercise intolerance, and a small percentage of dogs
 body fat when they first present. weight loss and mus-
with DCM are identified during a physical examination
cle atrophy are more dramatic in dogs that have been
for some unrelated problem. In such cascs DCM is
symptomatic for several months.
often detected incidentally with the discovery of an
arrhythmia, gallop rhythm, or systolic murinur.
LABORATORY FINDINGS
A coinplete: blood count (CBC), blood chemistry
PHIYSICALEXAMINATION
profile, and urinalysis are prudenty performed in dogs
Most dogs with clinical signs due to DCM manifest
with DCM in order to detect other concurrent diseases
conspicuous evidence of their underlying heart disease
and to guide therapy. Serum biochemical alterations
that is detectable by a carefully conducted physical
obscrved in Doberman pinschers with CHF and also
examination. Low-pitched, protodiastolic (Ss) gallop
seen in other breeds include a moderate increase in
 sounds are a frequent and important clinical finding.
alkaline phosphatase, often with no increase in ALT
 This transient heart sound is most easily appreciated
(alanine transaminase) or AsT (aspartate transaini-
in dogs in sinus rhythm but can also be heard clearly.
nase), a mild reduction in globulins with no or only a
if intermittently, in most dogs with atrial fibrillation.
modest decline in serum albumin, a mild increase in
An S: gallop sound is strong evidence of severe ventric-
creatinine and urea, a mild reduction in amylase, a
moderate reduction in the anion gap, and a mild
DCM, a soft regurgitant systolic murmur, typically
reduction in sodium.121 An occasional dog with pro-
grade 1 to 3/6, is audible over the mitral and/or
 found heart failure may exhibit hyperkaleimia in associ-
tricuspid valve regions. Careful auscultation of the
 ation with hyponatremia, falsely suggesting Addison's
heart also often reveals an irregular rhythm because of
 disease, The CBC findings are not different from those
the presence of isolated ventricular or supraventricular
of norinal dogs except for a moderate lynphopenia
 premature beats, paroxysmal ventricular or supraven-
and occasionally a modest neutrophilia. Blood gas
tricular tachycardia, or atrial fibrillation, Atrial fibrilla-
analysis or pulse oximetry determinations are particu-
tion occurs most frequently in giant breed dogs, such
larly useful for monitoring therapeutic responses in
as Irish wolfhounds, Newfoundlands, and Great Danes.
animals with severe heart failure. Other tests have
By contrast, premature ventricular beats and ventricu-
more limited clinical utility. The taurine concentration
lar tachycardia are more likely to be detected in Dober-
in blood or plasma should be determined whenever
590 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
the patient is a cocker spaniel or golden retriever, the
pinschers and boxer dogs, which tend to manifest.
diet is unusual, or the breed is atypical. Inasmuch as
frequent ventricular arrhythmias. They can be used to
thyroidal illness does not appear to be associated with
correlate the presence or absence of arrhythmia with
DCM, litle is to be gained by routinely evaluating
the patient's symptoms, and to assess the efficacy of
thyroid function in dogs with DCM.122
antiarrhythinic medication.125
DOBERMAN PINSCHERs. Ventricular premature COm-
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHCABNORMALITIES
plexes (VPCs) and ventricular tachycardia are re-
corded in more than three-fourths of Doberman
Resting ECGs recorded fron dogs with DCM are
 pinschers with CHF due to DCM.2 In a recent study
usually abnormal. Widened or high-amplitude QRS
complexes, indicating left ventricular enlargement,
of Doberman pinschers that. subsequently died sud-
denly or developed CHF, ventricular arrhythmias were
and widened P waves, indicating left atrial enlarge-
ment, are oted in one 1hird to one half of dogs with
documented in 100 percent of the dogs, using 24-hour
DCM. It is important to note that these criteria are
Holter recordings.2 Most other large and giant breed
dogs with DCM do not exhibit VPCs as often, nor
lacking in nany affected dogs, and some dogs with
CIIF demonstrate low voltage (1.0 to 1.2 mv or less) R
do they experience complex ventricular arrhythmia as
waves and slurring of the R-wave dowistroke.!s The
frequently as Doberman pinschers. By comparison,
mean elecirical axis of the QRs in the frontal plane
atrial fibrillation is observed in only 15 perccnt to 30
is usually normal. Cardiac rhythm disturbances are
 percent of Doberman pinschers with CHF and DCM.126
common in all brceds developing DCM, but the nature
This is a lower occurrence rate than is observed in
many other large and giant breed dogs. Ventricular
and prevalence of different arrhythmias vary in differ-
ent breeds (Table 27-3). For this reason, cardiac ar-
preinature complexes are also commonly recorded in
rhythmias arc appropriately discussed in the context of
asymptomatic Doberman pinschers. ln two studies of
breed. The sensitivity of ECG recordings for detecting
193 and 103 asymptomatic Doberman pinschers, the
arrhythmia also varies with the duration of the re-
frequency of VPCs observed on a resting ECG or dur-
cording. Continuous ambulatory ECG recordings, of-
ing a subsequent echocardiogram was 13.5 percent
and 11 percent, respectively21 * Holter recordings of
ten referred to as Holter recordings, are performed
on patients during their regular activity. They offer an
asymptomatic
 Dobcrinan pinschers show an even
ideal, noninvasive means to quantify the frequency and
higher occurrence rate,127 A further discussion of the
complexity of any arrhythmia over an extended period
incidence
of ventricular arrhythmia in  Doberinan
of time, typically 24 hours, although a 6-hour re-
 pinschers can be found in the section describing oc-
cult DGM.
cording may be ample in some
circumstances, 124
Holter recordings are particularly useful in Doberman
BOXER DoGs. Ventricular arrhythmias are also very
prevalent in boxer dogs with cardiomyopathy. In con-
irast to Doberman pinschers, boxer dogs commonly
TABLE 27-3
Prevalence of Cardiac Arrhythmias and Conduction
manifest ventricular arrhythmia with no cchocardio-
 graphic evidence of nyocardial dysfunction when they
Disorders in Boxer Dogs, Doberman Pinschers, and
Newfoundlands with Dilated Cardiomyopathy
initially present. Ventricular arrhythinias are observed
in as many as 84 percent of boxers diagnosed with
Prevalence (% Affected)
DCM, and most affected dogs have more than 20
Boxers
Dobernans
Newfoundlands
VPCs/min.25. 26 The morphology of VPCs in boxer dogs
(n=112)
(n= 39)
(n=31)
is quite characteristic in that the configuration of the
Supraventricular Arrhvtlumias
complexes is almost always consistent with a right ven-
Premature depolarizations
8'81
7.7
NR
tricular origin (a wide and predominately positive QRS
Atrial tachycardia
8.0
NR
NR
defleclion in leads I, H, 1II, Vs, and V, and a predomi-
Atrial tibrillaticn
10.7
17.9
45.2
Ventriclar Arrhythmias
nately negative QRS deflection in lead V,). Monomor-
Premature depolarizations
43.5
826
16.0
phic VPCs are 2.5 times more common than multiform
Ventricular tachycardia
38.4
40.0
NR
VPCs in this breed. Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia
Conduetion Disturbances
Lelt bundle hrarcl block
2.7
NR
XR
occurs in about one third of affecied boxer dogs. The
Cornplete A-V block
2.7
NR
NR
prevalence of airial fibrillation is reported to be only
11
1 percent in boxers with cardiomyopathy, but the
NR = ot reported.
jo sulis mmoum ssop Aue popnpu uonendod Apms
Fron Harpster NK Boxer carliommyopathyA revicw ofle: lorg-terr
CIIF23. 2 Infrequent ECG abnormalities detected in
1991:CalvertCA.Dilated congestive ardomvopthyinDobeman pinshers.
this breed include paroxysms of supraventricular tachy-
the Sewoland:A sly of37cases (1981994）J AmAnim 1osp Assx
cardia (7 percent) and third-degree atrioventricular
32:465, 1996.
heart block (3 percent).
MYOCARDIALDISEASESOFDOGS591
OTHER LARGE AND GIANT BREEDs.Overall, other large
mans and boxer dogs with DCM (Fig. 27-5). Good
andgiantbreeddogswithDCMseemtoexperience
qualityradiographsarerequiredtodetermineaccu-
muchfewer andlessseriousventricular arrhythmias
ratelythepresenceandseverityofpulmonaryedema.
than Doberman pinschers and boxer dogs, and they
Early(mild)pulmonary congestion is sometimes con-
alsoseem toexperience a much lower rate of sudden
fusedwith otherdisorders such as chronicbronchitis,
death.Atrial fbrillation,however,is a particularly com-
particularlywhenprominent peribronchiolarcuffingis
mon rhythm disturbance that is recorded in as many
visible on the thoracic radiographs.This radiographic
as 75percent to 80 percent of giant breed dogs with
finding often reflects the accumulation of edema fluid
DCM25,7 112 In one study, only 16 percent of the
in thewalls of thebronchi andbronchioles.Close
Newfoundlands evaluated had VPCs,andnone had
inspection of the radiographs typically reveals dis-
documentedepisodes ofventricular tachycardia,
，but
tendedpulmonaryveins andlossofdefinitionof the
45percent of these dogshad atrial fibrillation(see
margins of thepulmonaryvessels.Thesevessels lose
Table27-3).27
theircrispdefinition asfluid accumulatesin theperi-
vascular lymphatics and theinterstitium.Theidentif-
cationofmoreseverepulmonaryedemaislessprob-
RADIOGRAPHICCHANGES
lematicastheperihilardistributionoffluidbecomes
more apparent and air bronchograms become visible.
Thoracicradiographs are obtained indogswith
DCM to evaluate heart size and to determine the pres-
enceandseverityofpulmonaryedemaorpleural effu-
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
sion.Generalizedcardiomegalyistheusualfindingin
mostlarge andgiantbreed dogs withDCM and in
Echocardiographyisessential toestablishthediag-
cocker spaniels (Fig.27-4).Evidence of biventricular
nosisofDCM and todefine the extent of systolic
heart failure, including pulmonary edema, an en-
anddiastolicdysfunction.It is thebest availableway
larged caudalvena cava,hepatomegaly,and ascites,is
definitively to exclude other causes ofheart disease,
typical in these breeds.In some cases thereis a substan-
suchas acquiredvalvular orpericardialdisease.Cham-
tialvolumeofpleuraleffusion.Cardiomegalyis less
berdilationandreducedmyocardialcontractilityare
impressiveinmostDobermanpinschers andboxer
thehallmarks of DCM,and these abnormalities can
dogs with DCM than in many other breeds. Heart size
bequicklyquantifiedbyM-modeor two-dimensional
shouldnotbeusedasameasureoftheseverityof
myocardialfailure,asthereis littlecorrelationbetween
axisend-systolicandend-diastolicdimensions ofthe
radiographic heart size and clinical outcome.
leftventricle,indexedforbodyweight,areincreased
Left atrial enlargement and pulmonary edema are
in dogs with DCM. Diastolic ventricular wall thickness
the most prominent radiographic changes in Dober-
measures are usually in the normal range, although
FIGURE27-4
Lateral (A)and dorsoventral (B)radiographs from anAmerican cocker spaniel withDCM show
biventricular and biatrial enlargement.(From Sisson DD,Thomas WP.Myocardial diseases.In
EttingerSJ,FeldmanEC(eds):Textbook ofVeterinary Internal Medicine.4thed.Philadelphia,WB
Saunders,1995,p 995.)
592DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
D
FIGURE27-5
This series of lateral (A,C,E) and dorsoventral (B,D,F)radiographs is from a Doberman pinscher
pulmonary edema is evident prior to treatment(A,B).Twenty-four hours after treatmentwithIV
furosemide and continuousinfusions ofnitroprusside and dobutamine,thepulmonary edema has
lessened (C,D).
dilation ofthechambersmakes thewalls of theheart
usually dilated, and this finding can be quickly normal-
appear thin. Failure of the walls of the LV to thicken
ized by calculation of the left atrial/aortic ratio.Right
normally contributestothiseffect.Globalandsymmet-
atrialandventriculardimensionsareincreasedin
ric left ventricular hypokinesis is observed in most
thosedogsexperiencingbiventricularfailure,but such
dogs with DCM. Asymmetric contraction of the left
findings are often absentin boxer dogs andDoberman
ventricular walls,with increased septal wall motion,is
pinschers.
observed in some dogs with DCM and moderate to
The systolic ejection phase indices,including LV
severemitral regurgitation.The excursions of themi-
fractional shortening (FS),ejection fraction (EF),and
tralvalveleaflets are often diminishedbecause of low
velocity of circumferential fiber(VCF) shortening,are
cardiac output and decreased venous return. Mitral
decreasedin proportion to the severity of systolic dys-
valveclosuremaybedelayedowing tomarkedlyele-
function.In most affected dogs,these contractileindi-
vated ventricular flling pressures. The left atrium is
ces are profoundly depressed at the time of initial
MYOCARDIALDISEASESOFDOGS593
FIGURE27-5Continued
Forty-eighthours after treatmentwasinitiated,thepulmonary edema hasresolvedand the enlarged
heart ismore clearly seen (E,F).
presentation. Fractional shortening is often in the
Systolictimeintervals(STIs),includingleftventricular
range of 12 percent to 15 percent and changes very
ejection time (LVET) and pre-ejection period (PEP),
little once overt congestiveheartfailurehas developed.
can alsobedetermined toquantify thedegreeofleft
Thedistancebetween themitralvalveatitsmaximal
ventriculardysfunctionandtoevaluatemedical
opening (E) point in early diastole and the interven-
interventions.129,1s0 In dogs with DCM, potent positive
tricular septum (EPsS,E-point septal separation）is
inotropic drugs can increase the duration of a reduced
increasedasareflectionof alowejectionfraction.
LVET and will shorten a prolongedPEP.
2.5
0,016104
1818
Franeim
14CB
16ch
RV
LV
PLEFF
BNMODA
ECG
Reblau
B
ECG
Reolau
FIGURE27-6
M-mode(A) and two-dimensional (B) echocardiogramsfrom twoDoberman pinscherswith dilated
cardiomyopathy.(A)TheM-moderecordingwasobtained from a Dobermanpinscherwith
biventricularheartfailure andshowsadilatedrightventricleandleftventricleataleveljustbelow
themitralvalveleaflets.Fractional shorteningismarkedlydecreased,andtheamplitudesof th
freewalland interventricular septum are diminished.Pleural fluid surrounds the heart echoes.(B)
Thetwo-dimensional echocardiogramfrom anotherDoberman pinscherwas obtained at end-systole
and demonstrates dilated atria and increased end-systolicdimensions of theleft and right ventricles.
5941
DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
 Spectral and color-flow Doppler echocardiography
a mean fractional shortening (FS) of 20 percent; a
are also helpful in assessing cardiac function in dogs
 mean left ventricular internal diastolic dtimension
with DCM.1se Color-flow Doppler echocardiography
(LVIDd) of 39.9 mm; and a mean left ventricular inter-
permits identification of any valve leaks, and provides
nal systolic(
dimension (LVIDs) of 31.9 mm.26. 136
a rough estimation of the severity of valvular insuff-
Twenty-seven of these 192 dogs (14 percent) also dem-
ciency. Doppler indices of systolic performance de-
onstrated at least one ventricular premature beat dur-
rived from aortic flow velocity profles, such as peak
 ing a 3- to 6-minute rhythm strip or during the echo
acceleration rate and time to peak acceleration, are
cardiogram, and 4 percent demonstrated at least. one
reduced in humans and dogs with DCM.s1 12 These
supraventricular beat. In a subsequent study, 51 dogs
measures are particularly useful for evaluating and
were identified (from the original group of 192 just.
quantifying the effects of treatment. Such measures
clescribed) that showed no evidence of arrhythmia and
may be most useful in the context of dobutamine
no deterioration in ventricular function for at least 2
stress testing, wherein the goal is to identify dogs with
 years following the initial evaluation.s In this group
subclinical myocardial dysfunction. Evaluation of spec-
of 51 dogs, which might be considered representative
 tral Doppler mitral inflow velocity profles allows non-
invasive assessment. of diastolic function, which is oth-
mean FS was 21 percent (range, 13 percent to 30
erwise quite difficult 1o accomplish. Preliminary
percent), the mean LVIDd was 39.1 mm (range, 32.7
to 45.2 mm), and the mean LVIDs was 31 mm (range,
normalities of diastolic function, such as a prolonged
25.7 to 37.9 mm).
relaxation time and increased early diastolic to atrial
Another
prospective
 investigation   followed  the
wave ratio (F/A), are associated with markedly
re
duced exercise tolerance and an adverse outcome
Twenly-nine of 103 dogs (28.2 percent) developed
(poor survival) in patients with DCM.1s3
signs of CHF or died of DCM during the 2.4year-long
PMAT qm saop g1/s1 Supnou 'ponod dn-moo
greater than 46 mm and 14/14 dogs with LVIDs
DETECTION OF EARLY, SUBCLINICAL, OR
 greater than 38 mm on the initial examination. Of the
"OCCULT" MYOCARDIAL. DISEASE
15 dogs in this study demonstrating at least one VPC
Many investigators have worked diligently over the
during the initial examination, all were dead of DCM
last decade to define the natural history of canine
by the end of the study period, and 38 percent of
DCM, and some of the most thorough studies have
 these deaths were classified as sudden death.26 After a
 been performed in Doberman pinschers. The two
a peq ssop go1 jo b 'ses g't go pouad dn-moos
 principal manifestations of Doberman cardiomyopathy
died suddenly (i.e., 24 dogs) or died from CHF (20
are cardiac arrhythmias and progressive left ventricular
dogs). Nine other remaining dogs developed progres-
dysfunction, just as the two principal causes of death
sive myocardial dysfunction,iss Based on these stucies,
related to DCM in this breed are sudden death and
criteria were proposed to identify those Doberman
refractory congestive heart failure.i2z7 13 Many studies
pinschers that are at substantial risk of developing
 have focused on defining the precise relationship be-
overt DCM. These criteria included an IVIDd of
 tween these phenomena over time, using echocardiog-
greater than 46 mm or an LVIDs of greater than 38
raphy and electrocardiography. In this fashion, these
mm. Working independently, Calvert and associates
 investigators have begun to develop criteria useful for
 developed slightly different echocardiographic criteria
identifying those dogs that are likely, over the course
of several years, to die suddenly or develop overt con-
tomatic Doberman pinschers.2. 2s These criteria in-
gestive heart failure.
clude FS less than 25 percent, LVIDd greater than 45
 Several groups of investigators have demonstrated
mm in dogs weighing less than 38 kg, LVIDd greater
that randomly selected and apparently healthy (asymp-
than 49 mm in dogs weighing more than 37 kg, E-
tomatic) Doberman pinschers have reduced myocar-
point septal separation (EPsS) greater than 8 mm, and
dial contractility compared with other breeds
J0
mean velocity of circumferential fiber shortening less
than 1.5 circ/sec.
pinschers have been shown to manifest histologic evi-
Ventricular arrhythimias also serve as a marker for
dence of myocardial disease that is typical of that
*"occult'’ myocardial disease in Doberman pinschers.
found in dogs with congestive heart failure due to
Table 27-4 shows the Holter (ambulatory ECG) fnd-
DCM.125 Such findings indicate that Doberman pin-
ings in 104 asymptomatic Doberman pinschers studied
schers have reduced myocardial reserve prior to the
at the University of Georgia. Most (70 percent) asymp
onset of heart failure, presumably as the result of some
 tomatic. Doberman pinschers less than 4 years of age
innate or acquired myocardial defect. 9-95
did not demonstrate VPCs during a 24hour Holter
 In a recent study, echocardiographic evaluation of
 recording, whereas about half of all dogs 4 years of
 192 asymptomatic. Doberman pinschers demonstrated
age and older had evidence of ventricular ectopy.
MYOCARDIALDISEASESOFDOGS
595
TABLE27-4
Percentages of Overtly Healthy Doberman Pinschers with Normal Echocardiograms That Had Ventricular
Premature Contractions (VPCs) on a 24-Hour Holter Recording
NumberofVPCs
0
1-10
11-50
51-100
>100
Age
(n=55)
(n=41)
(n=10)
(n=3)
(n=5)
P/T
<4yr(n=37)
70%
19%
3%
3%
5%
11%
4-6yr (n=47)
32%
47%
15%
4%
2%
21%
>6yr (n = 30)
47%
40%
6.5%
0%
6.5%
13%
PT = at least one pair or triplet.
From Calvert CA:Long-term ambulatory electrocardiographicmonitoring in thediagnosis ofoccult cardiomyopathyinDoberm
man pinschers.Proc Annual
Meeting American Collge of Veterinary InternalMedicine,1991,p.691.Copyright 1991 by ClayA.Calvert.
Moreover, the number of dogs with VPCs increased
dogs that died suddenly and in 15/40 (38 percent)
with advancing age. Dogs with 50 to 100 VPCs almost
dogsthatdevelopedheartfailure.Sustainedventricular
always developed progressively more severe arrhyth-
tachycardia (greater than 30 seconds) had been detected
mias and echocardiographic abnormalities, although
echocardiographic evaluation127 was normal or equivo-
40 (5 percent) dogs that developed heart failure.
cal on theirinitial evaluation.Dogs with over100VPCs
From theseandother studies,it canbeconcluded
andthosewithcomplexarrhythmiasusuallyhadatleast
thatDoberman cardiomyopathyisa chronic,slowly
subtle echocardiographic abnormalities and virtually al-
progressive,insidious disease with a protracted subclin-
ways developed progressive cardiomyopathy. It is im-
ical or occult stage.Furthermore, this disorder appears
portant to note that 12/19 (63 percent) of dogs that
toevolveinmanyDobermanpinschers overa2-to4
went on to developDCM in a follow-up period of 3 to8
yearperiodprior to the onset of CHF.The rate of
years had less than 50VPCs/24 hours on their initial
progression is somewhat dependent on the age at
examination.In arecentretrospective study,54/54Dob
whichanidentifiable abnormalityisfirst detected.Car-
erman pinschers that died suddenly or developed con-
diomyopathyseemstodevelopmorerapidlywhen
gestiveheartfailurehadVPCs onapriorHolter re-
identifiableabnormalities aredetectedindogsless
cording(Table27-5).23Nonsustainedventricular tachy-
than 2 years of age and more slowly when abnormali-
cardia(less than30seconds)hadbeendocumented by
ties begin after 6 to 7 years of age. Doberman pin-
one or more Holter recordings in 12/14 (86 percent)
schersbeyond10yearsofagewithevidenceofoccult
cardiomyopathymaydieofnonrelatedcauseswithout
the disease ever being suspected. Other factors contrib-
TABLE27-5
uting to the variability of disease progression have
OutcomeDatafrom103Asymptomatic
not yet been identified.Doberman pinschers with no
Doberman Pinschers After an Average
arrhythmias andwithanormalechocardiogrammay
Follow-UpTimeof2.4Years
develop abnormalities from developing DCM at any
Number
Males
Females
subsequent time. A threshold number of PVCs per
103
50
53
hour (from Holter recordings) that predicts dogs des-
Alive,no CHF
57
NR
NR
tined todevelopclinicalDCM hasnotbeendeter-
Alive withCHF
3
3
0
mined,butthosewithgreater than100VPCs/houron
Alive,evidence ofDCMa
17
NR
NR
aHolter recording should be highly suspect. Clearly,
Died ofDCM
26
14
12
Died of sudden deathb
the detection of infrequent VPCs in an individual dog
10
57
5
Euthanized for CHF
14
7
withoutotherevidenceofmyocardialdysfunctiondoes
Died of pump failure
2
2
0
not establish a diagnosis of cardiomyopathy in Dober-
Criteria were LVID-S>38mm,LVID-D>46mm,or ventricular ectopy,
man pinschers or any other breed. Infrequent VPCs
whereLVID-s and LVID-d=M-modeleft ventricular internal dimension at
end systole and end diastole,respectively.
lnfivedogthefrst sigfCMwassuenathllogswithateast
longer, prior to the detection of echocardiographic
oneVPCon the initial examination died during thefollow-up period due
changes,which,in turn usually occur well before the
to DCM.
onset ofclinical DCM.Depressed m,ocardialfunction
died ofDCM or developed CHF due toDCM during the follow-up period.
isusuallymore obviousbythetimefrequent and com-
Fiften dogs demonstrated anLVID-d>46mm on initial examination;13/15
died of DCM or developed CHF due toDCM during thefollow-up period.
plexrhythmdisturbances aredetected.Oncemyocar-
NR = not reported.
dial contractilitybegins to decline,it may take from
Data from O'Grady MR,HorneR.Outcome of 103 asymptomatic Dober-
5monthstoover2yearsfor overtheartfailure to
man pinschers:incidence of dilated cardiomyopathy in a longitudinal study.
Abstract.J Vet Intern Med 9:199,1995.
develop.
596 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
TIIERAPY
 larly aggressive therapy. Pulmonary edema is most ef-
The ultimate treatment goal is to reverse the under-
fectively treated using IV furosemide in combination
 lying disease process responsible for DCM before irre-
with sodium nitroprusside. Nitroprusside is a direct,
versible myocardial damage has occurred. Inasmuch
ultrashort-acting, and extremely potent vasodilator that
as the underlying cause of DCM is unknown in most
must be given by constant IV infusion. Beneficial he-
affected dogs, the goals of therapy are pragmatically
modynamic effects of nitroprusside, documented in
reduced to identifying and reversing any precipitating
 dogs with spontaneous CIIF due to DCM, include in--
cause(s) ol heart failure, alleviating the clinical signs
creased cardiac output and decreased pulmonary cap-
illary wedge pressures.1w Sodium nitroprusside shouid
of heart failure, improving the quality of life, and
 be infused initially at a rate of 2.5 pg/kg/min. The
reducing mortality. Therapeutic strategies continue to
evolve in hopes of accomplishing these goals. Drugs
the patient has stabilized or until mean systemic arte-
currently used to treat dogs with DCM include digoxin
and other more powerful inotropic drugs, diuretics,
rial pressure falls below 70 mmHg. Infusion rates
greater than 10 μg/kg/rmin are rarely needed. Furose-
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, vaso-
dilators, and antiarrhythmic drugs, including beta-ad-
mide, administered at 6 to 8 mg/kg IV and repeated
 every 4 hours for the first 12 hours, rapidly and effec-
renergic receptor-blocking drugs and calcium antago-
mists. Treatment for heart failure must be tailored to
tively reduces plasna volume in dogs with fulminant
 the circumstances of the individual patient because no
pulmonary edema. An alternative reginen for furose-
mide administration is to administer 2 to 4 mg/kg IV
single drug or combination of drugs is effective in
every dog at every stage of the disease. Further discus-
every hour until the respiratory rate is less than 30
sion of the principles of treatment and the drugs used
 breaths per minute, then continue IV furosemide al 4
mg/kg every 6 hours. Constant-rate infusion of fiurose
to treat. congestive heart failure may be found in chap
 mide, administered affer an initial IV bolus, nay pro-
ter 12.
duce the most vigorous diuresis, l
OPPORTUNITIES FOR A CURE. In two circumstances
Dobutamine, a beta-receptor agonist and potent
there is a distinct opportunity to resolve myocardial
positive inotrope, is also useful for treating dogs with
dysfunction: (1) when persistennt or recurrent tachycar-
 profound myocardial failure. Dobutamine must be ad-
dia causes heart failure, and (2) whenever taurine
ministered by constant-rate IV infusion, and it should
deficiency is identifed. In both these circumstances,
not be mixed with sodium nitroprusside. Dobutarnine
congestive heart failure must be treated using tradi-
is initially administered at an infusion rate of between
2.5 and 5.0 μg/kg/min. The infusion rate is increased
improves to normal or near-normal. Diuretics, ACE
by increments of 2.5 pg/kg/min every 2 hours until
inhibitors, and digoxin may be needed for up to 6
the heart rate increases excessively, ventricular ectopy
 months, because myocardial function improves only
increases by 20 percent, or a maximum infusion rate
gradually following elimination of the precipitating
 of 15 μg/kg/min is attained. Tolerance to dobutamine
abnormality.  Dogs  with sustained supraventricular
can develop within 24 to 48 hours after the onset of
tachycardia should be considered suspect for tachycar-
therapy. I+ Fortunately, most dogs can be weaned off IV
dia-induced heart failure, particularly when the heart
drugs and onto oral drugs within 48 hours of initiating
rate is morc than 200 bpm and a predisposed breed,
treatiment. Dobutamine is usually the first drug to be
such as a Labrador retriever, is affected. An aggressive
discontinued. In anticipation of this event, oral di-
attempt should be made to abolish the arrhythimia or
 goxin should be initiated early Oral diuretics, vasodila-
to reduce the heart rate. In many cases, there is no
tors, and ACE inhibitors are started when IV furose-
sure way to dctermine whether the arrhythmia was
mide   and  nitroprusside   are  discontinued.  Two
caused by or resulted from myocardial disease, but.
phosphodiesterase I11 (PDE3) inhibitors, amrinone
this dilemma should not deter a vigorous therapeutic
 and milrinone, are approved for short-term IV therapy
effort. Taurine dcficiency should be considered when
 of heart failure in humans. Both drugs are sometimes
 DCM occurs in a cocker spaniel or golden retriever, as
referred to as "inodilators’ because they are more
well as in atypical breeds or dogs eating unusual diets.
 potent inotropes than digoxin and possess substantial
Taurine supplementation, 250 mg bid, should be insti-
vasodilating properties. These drugs may not be as
tuted whenever plasma or blood taurine concentra-
effective as beta-receptor agonists in the treatment of
tions are reduced (see chapter 32). Taurine supple-
 severe heart failure due to decreased gene expression
 mentation should be initiated in cocker spaniels and
and activity of the milrinone-sensitive cAMP phospho-
diesterase.41 Although oral milrinone has been used
golden retrievers even if taurine deficiency cannot be
immediately confirmed.
with some success to treat dogs with DCM, no studies
have been published using the IV formulations.
TREATMENT OF ACUTE AND SEVERE CHF. Life-threatening
 Serious cardiac arrhythmias requiring treatmcnt are
 pulmonary edema caused by DCM requires particu-
often identified in patients with acutely decompen-
MYOCARDIAL DISEASES OF DOGS
597
sated DCM (see chapters 17 and 18). The heart rate is
the first ACE inhibitor approved in the United States
often greater than 200 bpm in dogs with atrial tachy-
and Europe for treatment of CIIF in dogs. The Coop-
cardia, atrial fbrillation, or atrial flutter. The occur-
erative Veterinary Enalapril (COvE) study group re-
rence of these arrhythmias in a dog with acute, decom-
 ported that enalapril, used in combination with di-
pensated heart failure warrants the use of IV digoxin.
goxin and furosernide, significantly reduces the clinical
Alternatively, a calcium channel blocker, such as diltia-
signs of heart failure and irnproves cxercise tolerance
zem, can often be used effectively to terminate the
in dogs with CHF from DCM.14 The Invasive Multicen-
arrhythmia or to reduce the heart rate. Intravenous
ter Prospective Veterinary Enalapril (IMPROVE) study
beta-blocking agenis generaly should be avoided in
group reported that enalapril, doscd at 0.5 mg/kg
the setting of profound, acute hear failure. Ventricular
arrhythmias are also treated if they are adversely affect-
illary wedge pressure (PCWP) in dogs with heart fail-
ing hemodynamic performance. Intravenous lidocaine
ure caused by DCM.147 Controlled studies have also
 or procainamide is a suitable choice for the shor-term
shown that enalapril significantly incrcases the time to
mamagement of ventricular arrhythmia in this seting.
developmenl of refractory heart failure or death in
 Intravenous lidocaine is given at an initial dose of 2
 dogs with DCM.11 The average estimated survival/time
mg/kg IV. If there is no response, another 2 mg/kg.
to treatment failure for dogs with DCM that received
dose is administered. If these doses are effective, a
 digoxin, furosemide, and placebo was 58 days, whereas 
constant-rate infusion of lidocaine should be started.
the dogs with 1CM that received digoxin, furosernide,
Procainamide can be given if lidocaine is not effective,
and enalapril was 157 days.11 Other ACE inhibitors,
but it has a more profound myocardial depressant
such as lisinopril, are likely to be as effective when
effect. Intravenous amiodarone may also be useful in
 appropriate doses are used. Combination therapy with
dogs with severe ventricular arrhythmias, but we have
 al1 arterial vasodilator (hydralazine or amlodipine) and
no experience with this approach. In rnany dogs with
 a nitrate is an acceptable alternative for patients that
DCM, ventricular ectopy declines with resolution of
do not tolerate ACE inhibitors. H. 132 These vasodilators
pulnonary edema, allowing discontinuation of paren-
may also be useful adjunct therapy for dogs with persis-
teral antiarrhythmic therapy.
tent signs of heart failure following treatinent with
digoxin, furosemide, and ACE inhibitors.
'TREATMENT OF CHRONIC HEART FAILURE. Chronic: main
 Digoxin is indicated in most dogs with DCM and
 tenance therapy for dogs with CIIF due to DCM con-
signs of heart failure.7, 15a Although its effects are vari-
sists of (l) suffcient furosemide to optimize venous
 abie and difficult to quantify, digoxin has bcen shown
 pressure and alleviate congestion, (2) an ACE inhibitor
to exert a significant positive inotropic effect in some
to inprove the quality of life and to decrease mortality,
 dogs with DCM.1 Moreover, most dogs exhibit a bene-
and (3) digoxin to control heart rate and improve
ficial clinical response. In several large clinical trials in
exercise capacity. A low-sodium diet and exercise re-
humans, digoxin therapy reduced syrnptoms. improved
striction are also important. High doses of furosemide
exercise capacity, and decreased the risk of clinical
are used initially to stimulate excretion of retained
deterioration of heart failure,las-157 The elfect of di-
sodium and water. Thereafter, the dose of furosemide
goxin on mortaliy and morbidity in a study of 6800
should be reduced to a level that controls congestive
hunan patients with heart failure and reduced ejec-
signs without causing excessive volume contraction.
 s i  d sm  m
Diuretics are not benign drugs in that they activate the.
double-blind, placebo-controlled study concluded that.
sympathetic  and  renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
sys-
digoxin reduces the rate of hospitalization and the
tems, and they promote potassium and magnesium
rate for worsening heart failure. Digoxin had a neutral
loss, thereby favoring the development of cardiac ar-
effect on mortality (survival), distinguishing it fron
rhythmia. The lowest diuretic dose that controls cor-
gestive signs should be used. In dogs with refractory
  no are a s jo ss ss 
congestive signs, the addition of a second and rarely a
be duplicated in dogs. Digoxin reduces activation of
third diuretic is sometimes required. In this circum-
the synpathetic nervous system and the renin-angio-
stance, we prefer to add spironolactone in coimbina-
tensin-aldosterone system.12s. 159 Digoxin is also moder-
tion with a thiazide diuretic (see chapter 12).
 ately effective for slowing the ventricular rate in dogs
Effective inhibition of ACE represents the corner-
with atrial fibrillation.16o The dose of digoxin should
stone of modern CHIF therapy. ACE inhibitors offer
 be adjusted, by periodic monitoring of digoxin serun
the best opportunity to extend survival and reduce the
concentration, to maintain the serum digoxin level
morbictity that accompanies congestive heart failure
between 0.9 and 1.5 ng/ml.
associated with DCM.4245 Of the many ACE inhibitors
 available for use, enalapril, lisinopril, benazepril, quin-
TREATMENT OF ARRHYTHMIAS. Atrial fibrillation and
april, and ramipril have been studied in dogs with
ventricular tachycardia are the most common rhythm
disorders requiring treatment in dogs with DCM. The
 598 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
detrimental hemodynamic effects of atrial fibrillation
ministered at 20 mg/kg q8h, and the dose can be
include reduced cardiac ouput, by as much as 25
increased 1o 30 mg/kg q8h if needed and adequate
 percent, and a substantial increase in flling pressures,
blood levels of procainamide have not been achieved.
thereby substantially worsening congestive signs. These
Continued ventricular ectopy may require the addition
changes are due to the loss of synchronized atrial
Of a beta-blocker such as atenolol or metoprolol. As in
contractions and to reduced ventricular filling re-
 dogs with atrial fibrillation, low doses are used initially
sulting from an excessively fast hearl rate. It is not
 and the dose is gradually increased to effect. Harpster
possible, with existing approaches, to re-establish and
maintain sinus rhythin in most dogs with atrial fibrilla-
boxer dogs with DCM may be improved with use of
tion developing in association with DCM. The aim of
 procainamide, usually in combination with proprano
trealrmenl is lo reduce and maintain heart rate be-
lol.*5 Calverl and colleagues reported that tocainide,
twcen 140 and 160 bpm. If the situation is not urgent,
administered at 15 to 25 mg/kg q8h, was effective in
 5 to 7 days can be allowed for digoxin to achieve a
suppressing ventricular arrhythmias in 80 percent to
 steadystate concentration; otherwise, more rapid digi-
 90 percent of Doberman pinschers with DCM, but
talization should be accomplished.
they did not commen1 on survival.16s Anorexia and
An adequate reduction in heart rate may not be
gastrointestinal disturbances occurred in 35 percent of
accomplished with digoxin alone. Combination ther-
treated dogs. Moreover, 58 percent of dogs treated.
apy using digoxin together with either a beta-adrener-
longer than 4 months experienced serious side effects,
gic receptor blocking drug or a calcium channel
including progressive corneal dystrophy and possibly
blocker is often required to optimize heart rate. Cal-
renal dysfunction.
cium channcl blockers are reported to be the most
 Sotalol and other class IlI antiarrhythmic drugs may
effective agents to reduce the heart rate,161 but chronic
also be useful for treating ventricular arrhythmia in
treatment with a beta-blocker may have a more bene-
dogs with DCM, but there are no canine studies re-
ficial effect on myocardial function in patients with
garding the effcacy or safely of these agents. Personal
DCM,s2, ios Diltiazern, dosed at 1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg q8h,
 observation suggests that sotalol is sornetimes effective.
often gives excellent heart rate control. If beta-blockers
when other treatments fail. Sotalol is initially dosed at
are used, a low dose is used initially, and the dose is
20 mg/dog ql2h in large breed dogs, and the dose
then gradually raised by 25 percent to 50 percent each
is then titrated upward. Evaluating the response to
week to achieve the desired effect. Atenolol is started
antiarrhythmic drugs is diffcull. Longevity irials are
al 12.5 mg q24h in large breed dogs, e.g., a 30-kg
required to determine effect on survival, and no such
 Doberman pinscher. Alternatively, rnetoprolol can be
studies have yet been performed in dogs. Repeated
initiated at 5.0 mg q12h. Some dogs are very sensitive
ambulatory ECG recordings of at least 6 hours are
to beta-blockers such that a trivial dose results in a
needed to deimonstrate that the targeted arrhythmia is
 Imarked reduction in heart rate and worsening heart
being effectively suppressed.12 If this is not feasible.
failure.
repeated 10-minute ECG recordings should be per-
The role of antiarrhythmic therapy for ventricular
formed in preference to 1- or 2-minute rhythm strips.
ectopia in dogs with DCM is uncertain. Studies in
 The goal of treatment is to abolish bouts of sustained
hurnan  patients suggest  that  most  antiarrhythmic
or nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, not to com-
agents, likely all the class I agents, increase the mortal-
 pletely extinguish every premature beat.
ity of patients who are not synptomatic as a result of
their arrhythmias.161--6 In rnost human patients with
NOVEL TREATMENTS OF UNCERTAIN BENEFIT. A nuInber
structural heart disease, ventricular premaure beats,
of promising drugs designed for the treatiment of DCM
even if they are very numerous, vary in morphology or
and CHF are being evaluated in human clinical tri-
occur in a bigeminal pattern or as couplets, are not.
 als.169 Currently, there is particular interest in beta-
an indication for treatment unless they are causing
adrenergic receptor blocking drugs. Beta-blockers re-
is
duce plasma norepinephrine concentrations, increase
 generally reserved for those patients who are symptom-
beta-receptor density, up-regulate the previously down-
atic from their arrhythrmia, Sustained ventricular tachy-
regulated beta-adrenergic receptors, and, paradoxi-
cardia or bursis of ventricular tachycardia with instan-
cally, increase the contractility of the failing heart (see
cause
substantial disability and should be treated.
arrhythimias, reduce myocardial oxygen demand, and
The choice of antiarrhythmic. therapy in dogs with
 inprove the efficiency of myocardial energy utilization,
DCM is controversial and somewhat arbitrary in that
resulting in improved henodynamics and reduction
no controlled studies have been performed to evaluate.
in clinical symptoms in some hurnan patients with
the safety or efficacy of any antiarrhythmic drug. Of
 DCM.12--7% Bisoprolol, metoprolol, and carvedilol are
the many possible approaches, a few can be recom-
 among a small group of beta-blockers that have been
 mended. Sustained-release procainamide can be ad-
MYOCARDIAL. DISEASES OF DOGS 599
lol and metoprolol are both beta-receptor blocking
 benefit is dependent on the pattern of left ventricular
drugs, whereas carvedilol exhibits both alpha,- and
 activation, and no hemodynamic advantage is afforded
beta;,-receptor blocking activity.
 by this modality in most dogs with DCM.i
Carvedilol and bisoprolol, but not metoprolol, have
been shown to reduce mortality in patients with
DCM.i77-17o Although these results are encouraging.
PROGNOSIS
many heart failure patients do not tolerate beta-
Owners should be advised that unlcss an underlying
blocker drugs even at very low doses. A substantial
cause for DCM can be identified and reversed, all cases
percentage of patients experience rapid cardiac de-
of DCM are terminal. Owners should also be advised
compensation and worsening congestive signs, and
that survival tines, even with optinal therapy, are
some die as a result of this treatinent. Efficacy has not.
highly variable from one patient to the next. Some
yet been demonstrated in dogs with DCM, and further
very ill dogs improve to a remarkable degree with
studies are needed before the widespread use of beta-
treatment and live a comfortable existence for imany
blockers can be recommended (see chapter 12).
months or even years. Other dogs do not survive the
After considering the potential benefits of beta-
 initial 48 hours of hospitalization. It is sinply not possi-
blockers, it is ironic to note that some patients with
 ble to predict how well an individual dog with DCM
DCM and profound myocardial failure continue to be
will respond to treatment or how long that animal will
successfully treated with intermittent infusion of the
live. In dogs with severe heart failure at the time of
beta-receptor agonist dobutamine.1o Such therapy is
 presentation, a prudent approach is to recommend
advocated as a bridge to heart transplantation in hu-
medical therapy and evaluate the initial response be-
man patients. Some patients irnprove rernarkably and
fore rendering a tentative prognosis.19
can go for months between infusions. Perpetual hope
The devastating nature of DCM is most obvious in
 prompts the continued search for a potent, safe, and
Doberinan pinschers. O'Grady and Horne reported
that of 103 Doberman pinschers that. were initially
positive inotropes reduce survival times when they are
asymptomatic, 26 went on to die of DCM during an
administered chronically. Vesnarinone and pimoben-
  9    
dan are phosphodiesterase II inhibiting drugs pos-
5). Regarding these 26 deaths, 14 owners declined
sessing attribules that might  improve their safety
further therapy for the pulnonary cderna and the
and efficacy when used chronically in patients with
dogs were euthanized, 2 dogs died of progressive
CIIF.181, Is2 Vesnarinone enhances sodium influx into
pump failure, and 10 dogs died suddenly. In this small
 myocardial cells, thereby increasing calcium delivery
follow-up group. 38 percent of all cardiac deaths were
due to sudden death and 62 percent died as a result
sensitize the contractile apparatus to intracelular cal-
of heart failure. After an average follow-up time of 4.5
cium. Given the adverse effects of other phosphodies-
years, 24 of the dogs had died suddenly, 20 dogs had
terase inhibitors on survival, the future of this entire
been euthanized because of CHF, and 11 dogs had
class of drugs is not particularly optimistic.
developed  progressive  inyocardial  dysfunction  and
A number of surgical rermedies have been devised to
were either alive or had died from noncardiac causes
rescue patients that fail to respond to medical treat-
(Table 27-6).13s Overall, 63.2 percent of 103 initially
ment. Such recourse is not an affordable or pragnatic.
asymptomatic Doberman pinschers (78 percent of the
option for most owners, and it is unlikely that this
males, and 50 percent of the females) died suddenly,
approach will play a substantive role in the manage-
 developed CIIF, or showed echocardiographic deterio-
ment of canine DCM. The most successful surgical
ration during the study. Calvert and associates reported
remedy forDCM is aheart transplant1s Othersurgical
that of 57 Doberinan pinschers dying from DCM, 40
remedies are much less successful and are generally
(70 percent) died after developing congestive heart
performed only when a heart transplant cannot be
failure, 14 (25 percent) died suddenly, and 3/57 (5
performed. Cardiomyoplasty involves covering both
 percent) died of unrelated causes.2s Sudden death in
ventricles with an envelope of skeletal muscle, usually
Doberman pinschers usually occurs during or immedi-
the latissimus dorsi, and pacing this repositioned mus-
ately following exertion but may occur during sleep.
cle to support the heart.α This procedure has been
Sudden death is frequently the first evidence of occult.
 performed in dogs. 18 An alternative surgical method
 DCM, and many Doberman pinschers that collapse
of supporting the circulation consists of placing a skel-
due to ventricular tachycardia die during the first epi-
etal muscle wrap around a small segment of the ab-
sode. Survivors of one episode of collapse often die
dominal aorta and pacing this muscle to rmimic the
during a second episode 1 day to rmany months later.
effect of intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation.1s6 Dual-
Sone lines of Doberinans show a high incidence of
chambered cardiac pacing with a short PR interval has
sudden death.
been shown to improve cardiac output and exercise
 Other recent studies have also addressed the issue
capacity in sorne human patients with DCM.1s7 Clinical
 of survival in dogs with DCM.'5. i8. 22 Most of the studies
600DISEASESOF THEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
TABLE27-6
survivors.Treatmentwasnotstandardizedinthisretro-
OutcomeDataFrom103Asymptomatic
spective study.No dogreceived dobutamine or a ni-
Doberman Pinschers After an Average
trate,and only 10/37dogs (27percent) were treated
Follow-UpTimeof4.5Years
with ACE inhibitors.Pulmonary edemaandpleural
Number
Males
Females
effusion were identified as independent prognostic in-
103
50
53
dicators.
Calvert and colleagues studied the survival of 66
Alive,no CHF
32
9
23
Alive,evidence ofDCM
9
5
4
Doberman pinschers that presented with signs of CHF
Diedof DCM
44
25
19
ofnomorethan2weeks’duration.22 Suddendeath
Died of sudden death*
24
13
11
Euthanized for CHF
20
12
occurredin20percentof thedogs.Mean andmedian
Died of unknown causes
NR
NR
survival times were 9.65weeks and 6.5weeks,respec-
CHF,died from other
2
2
tively. Dogs with atrial fibrillation or bilateral CHF at
causes
presentation had shorter survival times than dogs that
Died from other causes
12
NR
NR
Lost to follow-up
3
NR
NR
did not (Fig. 27-8).Treatment was not standardized
in this retrospective study.None of the 66dogs pre-
*In 15 dogs, thefirst historical sign of DCMwas suddendeath; 9 dogs did
sentingwithpulmonaryedemareceivednitroprusside;
suddenly after the onset of CHF.
only two dogs were treated with dobutamine,and only
whereLVIDs and LVIDd=M-modeleftventricular internal dimension at
25/66 dogs (38 percent) were treated with an ACE
end-systole and end-diastole,respectively.
inhibitor.
NR= not reported.
From O'GradyM,Horne R:Prevalence of dilated cardiomyopthy inDober-
In the only prospective study in which treatment
man pinschers: a 4.5 year follow-up.Abstract J Vet Intern Med 12:199,1998.
was standardized and controlled,the average estimated
survival time(time totreatmentfailure)was158 days
when the dogswere treatedwith digoxin,furosemide,
were retrospective studies,and mostincluded a large
andenalapril,comparedwith58dayswhentheywere
percentage of dogs that were euthanized.It isim-
treatedonlywithdigoxin andfurosemide.14Subgroup
portant to note that therapy was not standardized in
analysisrevealed thatDCMin theDoberman pinscher
most of these studies. None included an aggressive
carries a worse prognosis than in other breeds with
protocolfor treating acute CHF.Dobutamine andni-
DCM.The average estimated survival time for Dober-
troprusside were rarely if ever used, and most of the
man pinschers on enalapril was80days comparedwith
dogs studied were not treated with an ACE inhibitor.
260daysforallotherbreedscombined.14Another
For thesereasons,the data reported are more a reflec-
retrospective study also showed that survivalis shorter
tionof thenaturalhistoryofDCMthan anindication
inDobermanpinschers withDCMthan inother
of what canbe accomplishedwith treatment.
breeds.19o Variables of prognostic value in human pa-
A Swedish study reported survival data from 189
dogs (including 38 breeds) with DCM.15 Most dogs (92
percent)died or were euthanized for reasons related
toheart disease.Euthanasiawasperformedin27cases
at the time of presentation.Eighteen dogs (10 per-
cent) died suddenly, and 128 dogs (74 percent) were
S
u
eventually euthanized for treatment failure(CHF).
The survival rate was 17.5 percent at 1 year and 7.5
V
percent at 2 years (Fig.27-7).Three independent
predictors of survival were identified: age—dogs less
V
n=189
than 5 years old had shorter survival times; (2) dyspnea
at thetimeofpresentation;and(3)ascites.Treatment
wasnot standardized in thisretrospective study.No
dog received dobutamine or a nitrate, and only 9
270
360
450
006
66
percent of the dogs were treated with an ACE inhibitor.
Days
Monnet and colleagues performed Kaplan Meier
survival analysis in a diverse breed population of 37
dogs with DCM, reporting that the 50 percent proba-
FIGURE27-7
bility of survivaloccurred at 2.3months.18Probability
Survival curvefor189 dogswith dilated cardiomyopathy.Survival
of survival at1year was 37.5percent,and at 2years was
rate at 1year afterinitial diagnc.iswas 17.5percent and at 2years
was7.5 percent.Treatmentwas not standardized in this
28percent.Fourdogsdiedfromnoncardiac-related
retrospective study.Nodogreceived dobutamine or a nitrate,and
causes.The prevalence of sudden death was not re-
（FromTidholmA,Svensson H,Sylven C.Survival and prognostic
ported. Dogs surviving more than 7 months appeared
factors in189dogswithdilatedcardiomyopathy.JAmAnimHosp
to have a good probability of becoming long-term
Assoc 33:364,1997.)
MYOCARDIAI. DISEASES OF DOGS  601
Mortallty of Doberman Pinschers wlth
End-Stage Dilated Cardiomyopathy 
AF Abs*rH
(M#45]
(0Z=N)
FIGURE 27-8
(A) Survival curves comparing the influence of atrial
fibrillation (Al) versus sinus rhythm (SR) on survival. Atrial
--
fibrillation was associated with significantly shorter survival
30
A
time (P < .0ol). (B) Survival curves conparing the
Weeks
influence on survival of bilateral congestive heart ftailure
(CHF) versus Ieft-sided CHF. The presence of bilateral CHF
Mortality of Doberman Pinschers with;:
at the time of presentation was associated with signifcantly
End-Stage Dilated Cardiomyopathy
shorter suvival tinnc (P < .05). (From Calvert. CA. Pickus
(W, Jacobs GJ, ct al. Signalment, survival and prognostic
 ES-CHF ——Bilatara-CHF
factors in Doberman pinschers with endstage
IpL=N)
cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intcrn Med 11:323, 1997.)
B
Weeks
知
tients with DCM include degree of left ventricular
IICM implies that the patient is frce of valvular or
 dysfunction (ejection firaction), presence or severity of
fixed subaortic stenosis, severe systemic hypertension,
byponatremia, degree of left ventricular enlargement,
 or any one of the many metabolic disorders or endocri
presence or degree of mitral valve insuficiency, pres-
ence or severity of ventricular arrhythmias, presence
trophy. Human patients with HCM are subclassified
 of atrial fibrillation, and plasma norepinephrine, atrial
 into obstructive  and  nonobstructive calegories.1. 6
About 25 percent of people with 1IGM demonstrate
tide (BNP) concentrations.1? Larger and more sophis-
dynamic obstruction to left ventricular outflow, charac-
 ticated prospective studies are required before the ef-
terized, in most cases, by systolic apposition of the
fect of these variables can be accurately assesscd in
mitral valve with the interventricular septun. In the
dogs with DCM.
older literature, this variant of HCM was often referred
to as idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis (IHSS)
and rnuscular subaortic stenosis. The development of
HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
dynamic lefl ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruc-
IN DOGS
 tion appears to be predicated on the pattern of left
 1lypertrophic cardiornyopathy (1ICM) is pragmati-
 changes in the mitral valve apparatus.
Hypertrophic  cardioinyopathy  is  an  infrequently
of a nondilated left ventricle, occurring in the absence
identified cause of heart disease in dogs.7 92-197 The
 of an identifiable stimuus for the hypertrophy. l 6 As
majority of identified dogs have been males, and most
u e sssa eqd rr p 
have been diagnosed prior to 3 years of age, suggesting
ber of different disease processes that share certain
that. this is a congenital disorder.? Breeding trials have
functional and morphologic features. A diagnosis of
602 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
trophic cardioinyopathy has been identified in many
is present on the interventricular septum directly op-
different breeds, including Gerinan shepherds, Rott-
 posite a thickened anterior mitral valve leaflet. These
weilers, Dalmatians, cocker spaniels, Brittany spaniels,
lesions are impact lesions resulting frorm abnormal
Shih Tzus, Doberman pinschers, Airedales, poodles,
systolic anterior rmotion (SAM) of the mitral valve.4. 7
Great Danes, bulldogs, Boston terriers, Walker hounds,
A variety of mitral valve malformations, including elon-
boxers, German short-haired pointers, Weimaraners,
gation of the anterior leaflet, have been described in
miniature schnauzers, Rhodesian ridgebacks,
，and
patients with HCM, particularly in the obstructive form
golden retrievers.7 v2- Iyperrophic cardiomyopahy
of this disorder, suggesting that IICM is not sinply a
in dogs differs from the human disorder in several
disease of the myocardium.*x. 205. 06
important aspects. Two common (characteristic) fea-
 In most dogs with 1ICM, left ventricular hypertrophy
tures of HCM in people—disproportionate hypertro-
is symmetric; that is, the septum and LV free wall are
phy of the scptun and nyocardial fiber disarray
-are
 hypertrophied to the sane extent. Whern asymrnetric
-seu oseH ym ssop u Aunbayu paaisqo
 septal hypertrophy is identified, it is not as dramatic as
much as the great imajority of affected dogs evidence
in human patients. Pathologic evidence of dynamic
dynamic LVOT obstruction without these defning
LVOT obstruction is observed in nost of the dogs
morphologic criteria, it is possible that myocardial hy-
with 1ICM, while a sinall minority manifest no sign of
pertrophy, at least in some dogs, is not the primary
obstruction. In young dogs, the impact lesion on the
abnormality but is sinply a consequence of dynamic
interventricular septurn is often subtle, appearing as a
outflow tract obstruction.2 2 It is interesting that
 discrete but subule opaque area. In older dogs, a thick-
 systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve resulting in
ened plaque of connective tissue is visible just opposite
dynamic. IvOT obsiruction has been created experi-
an obviously thickened anterior mitral valve leaflet.
 mentally in dogs simply by displacing the anterior pap-
(Fig. 27-9). The mitral valve apparatus is abnormal in
illary muscle.203
many dogs with HCM. In sone dogs, the anterior
mitral valve leaflet is obviously elongated or redundant
valve tissue protrudes into the outflow tract. In other
PATHOLOGY
 dogs, the papillary muscles are abnormally oriented,
 tending to displace the mitral valve leaflet toward the
 pertrophy have been identified in humans and cats
outflow tract. In some dogs, a discrele muscular ridge
with HICM (see chapter 28),1oo The 1majority of people
is observed coursing through the long axis of the
with HCM show disproportionate (asynmetric) byper-
LVOT.
trophy of the interventricular septurn, wherein septal
 In most affected dogs (90 percent), histology shows
thickness greatly excceds the thickness of the left ven-
 hypertrophied myocardial fibers that are norinally ori-
tricular free wall. In fact, asymmetric septal hypertro-
ented. Myocardial fiber disarray has beenn reported in
phy (Asil) was once the only recognized form of
only 2 dogs with IICM.92. us.199 c00 Abnornalities of
q suand un jo Anou y suny u o
the intramural coronary arteries can be found in all 
symmetric concentric IV hypertrophy  with equal
affected dogs, particularly in the I V wall,interventricu-
involvement of the interventricular septum and free
lar
 septun, and papillary muscles (Fig. 27-9). Ob-
wall. Other less frequent but recurring patterns of
served changes include intimal byperplasia, with hy-
 hypertrophy include focal hypertrophy of the posterior
 pertrophy and hyalin degeneration of the smooth
 portion of the septum, the posterobasal free wall, or
muscle in the media. Sinilar changes have been de-
the apical region of the LV1. r The left ventricular
scribed in the intramural coronary arteries of humans
cavity is usually reduced in volume, and the left atrium
with HCM and dogs with subvalvular aortic stenosis
is usually dilated and hypertrophied. The right ventri-
(SAS) .1. 6. 1s9 w7 Associated with these vascular lesions
cle is also frequently hypertrophied, but this is not. a
are focal areas of myocardial necrosis, fibrosis, and
prominent feature of the disease.
 dystrophic calcification. Such changes are most obvi-
 One of the most prorninent pathologic features of
 ous in the papillary muscles and in subendocardial
IICM in hurnans is disarray or malaligninent of the
rcgions of the interventricular septum and IV wal.
nyofibers in the hypertrophied septun or I V free wall,
The relationship between canine HCM, fixed SAS,
and it is often cited as the most consistent feature of
and mitral valve dysplasia is uncertain.2, 2e Approxi-
mately one-half of the ICM cases reported in dogs
is considered by some investigators to be the most
involved breeds (Rottweiler, Gerrnan shepherd, and
consistent finding in people with HCM. Fiber disarray
 boxer dogs) predisposed to congenital fixed subvalvu-
has been observed in other forms of cardiac. disease,
lar aortic stenosis. Subvalvular aortic stenosis in dogs
but the anount of disarray is much more extensive in
was described in early reports as a discrete, fibrous
patients with HCM.1v9 The left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction encircling the LVOT below the aortic
is narrowed in patients with the obstructive form of
valve. Recent observations suggest that the morphol.
HCM. In these patients, a fbrous endocardial plaque
ogy of SAs is rnore diverse.l9i, voo In some dogs with
MYOCARDIALDISEASES OFDOGS603
FIGURE27-9
(A) Grosspathology of the obstructive form of hypertrophiccardiomyopathy in aRottweiler shows
markedconcentricleftventricularhypertrophy,asmallftventricularcavity,andafbrousplaqu
on the septal endocardium opposite a thickened and fibroticmitral valve.(B)Disorganized
myofibers are shownin a section of myocardium from the septum of another dogwithHCM.H&E
stainX100.(From Liu S-K,et al. Canine hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.J AmVet MedAssoc
174:708,1979.)
SAS,the obstructing subvalvularlesion is a less distinct
(vMLC2） genes, and cardiac troponin 1 (cTnl).210 A
fibromuscular bulge occupying the base of the inter-
defect in mitochondrialDNA has also been identified
ventricular septum. Some dogs with SAS have concur-
inseveralmembersofafamilyaffectedbyamaternally
rentdynamicLvOT obstruction,and some have a
inheritedformofhypertrophiccardiomyopathy.211
muscularridgeon theinterventricular septumadja-
Themechanism(s)by which these geneticabnor-
cent to the anteriorpapillary muscle coursing through
malities cause hypertrophyis unknown.Some studies
the long axis of the LVOT, similar in appearance to
suggest that there is an increase in the number of
that observed in dogs with HCM.Further complicating
calcium channels,mediating abnormal calciumfluxes
thedistinctionbetweenSASandHCMis theobserva-
andproducing,by some unknown mechanism,hyper-
tionthatmitralvalvedysplasia commonlycoexistswith
trophy and fiber disarray.6 Otherpossible causes of
SAS in dogs (see chapter 24).Consideration must be
HCM include (1）abnormal sympathetic activity;(2)
given to the possibility that some cases of suspected
abnormallythickenedintramuralcoronaryarteries
HCM in dogs represent a muscular variant of congeni-
that do not dilate normally and lead tomyocardial
talSAsor anunusualconsequence ofmitralvalve
ischemia,withresultantfibrosisandabnormalcom-
dysplasia.
pensatory hypertrophy; (3) abnormalities of the micro-
circulation,resulting in myocardial ischemia and
depletion of the energy stores essential for the seques-
PATHOGENESIS/ETIOLOGY
tration of calcium during diastole,causingincreased
The cause of HCM in dogs is uncertain, although a
diastolic stiffness;and(4)structural abnormalities,in-
heritable basis is suspected.Breeding studies per-
cluding a catenoid configuration of the septum, that
formed by one of the authors(Sisson)demonstrated
lead to myocardial cell hypertrophy and disarray.6
theheritabilityof dynamicLVOTobstruction and LV
hypertrophy in pointer dogs.198 A polygenic or autoso-
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
mal recessive pattern of inheritance best explained
the observedpattern of occurrencein this study.Fifty
Twoprincipalfunctional disturbances occur in pa-
percent to 60 percent of human HCM cases are famil-
tients with HCM: impaired diastolic filling and dy-
ial,usually showing autosomal dominant inheritance,
namicLVOTobstruction.Altereddiastolicfilling is
while the remainder are sporadic.1.6, 2o9 Genetic hetero-
themostpervasivehemodynamic change in human
geneity has been demonstrated; and linkage studies
patientsbecause itis abnormal inpatients withand
and candidate-gene approacheshavedemonstrated
withoutLVOTobstruction.16Diastolicdysfunctionre-
that affectedpatientsmayhavemutations in one of
sultsfromimpairedrelaxationinearlydiastoleand
seven different genes: cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain
fromreduced ventricular compliance.Thereduced
(cbeta MHC), cardiac troponin T (cTnT), alpha-tropo-
rateanduniformityofventricularrelaxationinearly
myosin (alpha TM), cardiac myosin binding protein
diastolearethought tobe caused by abnormal myocar-
C（cMBPC),ventricular myosin essential light chain
dial calciumkinetics,whichresultinincreased concen-
(vMLC1),ventricular myosin regulatory light chain
trations of intracellular calcium.212 Reduced ventricular
604DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
compliance results fron the combined influences of
dyiamic  obstruction  is climinatcd by beta-blockcrs.
reduced chamber size, increased wall thickness, and
These obscrvations suggest that myocardial hypertro-
phy is, at least in some dogs and to soine dcgrcc, a
tients with HCM, the scverity of diastolic impairment
conscquence of the dynamic LVOT obstruction.
does no1. corrclate with the cxtent or distribution of
hypertrophy or with the prescnce or severity of LVOT
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
obstruction.6 'The conscquences of diastolic dysfunc-
tion include an impaired ability to increase cardiac
Most dogs with 1ICM manifest no clinical signs and
ouput during stress or exercise, as wcll as a propensity
have no history of physical inpairincnt. Most affcctcd
to develop pulmonary congestion and cdema due to
  j e uum p uaq oa so
increased left atrial and pulmonary venous pressurcs.
arrhythimia prompted further diagnostic cvaluation.
Any increase in hcart rate cxacerbatcs the severity of
 Other cases are detected only at necropsy or following
diastolic dysfunction.
sudden death. Sudden death seems to occur most
 The phenomenon of left ventricular outflow tract
oflcn during or immediatcly afier exertion. Syncope
obstruction is well documented in humans, dogs, and 
and near-syincope have been noted in a few alffected
cats with HCM (see chapter 28). Dynamic obstruction
dogs. Occasionally, dogs are presented for reduced
typically develops in midsystole, aftcr most of thc
cxercisc capacity, or respiratory distress. Too few dogs
siroke volume has been ejected from the left ventricle
have been studicd to correlate the risk of death or the
(sec Fig. 24-214),2s-s1s The obstruction results from
severity of clinical signs with the prcsence or sevcrity
systolic apposition of the mitral valve to the interven-
of outflow obstruction. No such corrclation has becn
tricular septum. Systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the
found in affected human paticnts.? There is a general
mitral valve develops when the leaflets are drawn into
rclation betwecn the severity of symptoms and the
the outflow tract by Venturi forces generated by rapid
blood flow through an alrcady narrowed LVOT. The
tients. However, many people demonstrate incapacitat-
Imitral leaflets may also bc pulled into the outflow tract
ing symptoms in the facec of mild LV hypertrophy, and
by malaligncd papillary muscles or pushed toward the
many people with severe hypertrophy have mild or no
septum by the ejected blood. Regardless of the prccise
symptoms.6
Imechanisin, the lelft ventricle is divided into a large,
A systolic heart murmur is the most common abnor-
high-pressure region below the arca of apposition and
mality detccled on physical cxanination, but it is con-
a smaller, low-prcssure rcgion beyond the point of
sistently found only in those dogs with dynamic LVOT
contact, The cardinal features of dynarnic IVOT ob-
 obstruction. The systolic ejection murmur resulting
struction are the variability and lability of the resuhing
from dynamic obstruciion is best hcard (loudest) at
systolic pressure gradicnt. Any intervention or physio-
the lef-sided heart. base. An cquall loud murmur is
logic change that decreases systcmic vascular resis-
sometimcs heard at the left apcx associated with mitral
tance, rcduccs preload, or increases left ventricular
valve insufficiency caused by SAM of the mitral valvc.
contractility resulis in enhancement of the obstruction.
The heart murmur may be sof1 or absent at rest, but
Exercise, for cxample, dramatically increases the gradi-
it is usually readily heard when cxercise (short jog) or
ent across the IVOT, and isoproterenol is sometimes
excitement (1oe pinch) incrcascs hcart rate by 30 1o
administered for diagnostic purposes to mimic exer-
40 bpin. The murmur cann also be cvoked by adrninis-
cise and provoke a latent gradicnt.9s
tration of a drug that incrcases heart ralc, reduces
 Mitral regurgitation is observed in most patients
afferload, or incrcases contractility (eg., acepromaz-
with the obstructive form of HCM, prcsumably because
inc). The intensity and character of the murmur are
of the structural and functional abnormalities already
often inconsistennt froin olle cxanination to the next.
 described. Other conscqucnccs of LVOT obstruclion
 Irmportantly, soine dogs with HCM have no abnorrmali-
include incrcascd wall strcss, incrcased myocardial oxy-
ties on physical examinationn.
gen consumption, reduccd coronary blood flow, and
myocardial ischcmia.  Tachycardia worsens dynamic
LVOT obstruction and all its adverse consequences.
RADIOGRAPHIC AND ECG CHANGES
The precise relationship between myocardial hypertro-
 phy and dynamic obstruction is uncertain. There is
IICM sincc IV concentric hypertrophy causes little
litle correlation bctwcen the dcgrce of hyperirophy
change in the external sizc of the heart unless it is
and the presence or severity of LVOT obstruction in
severe (Fig. 27-10). Modest to moderate left atrial
human patients. In litters of affccted puppies exam-
enlargeincnt may be obscrved with or without cvi-
ined by one of us (Sisson), the degrec of myocardial
dence of lefl ventricular enlargement. Enlargemcint
hypertrophy was directly proportional to the sevcrity
of the pulnonary veins and pulmonary cdema are
of thc ouflow tract obstruction. Furthermore, LV hy-
observed in dogs with clevated Iy diastolic and lefl.
pertrophy tends to regrcss in some dogs whcn thcir
atrial pressures. In dogs with moderate to severe IV
MYOCARDIALDISEASESOFDOGS
605
FIGURE27-10
Lateral (A)and dorsoventral (B)
radiographs of a dog with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
showingmoderateleft heart
enlargement. (From Thomas WP,
et al.Hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy in a dog:clinical,
angiographic,andpathologic
studies.JAmAnim HeartAssoc
20:253,1984.)
hypertrophy,some evidenceofleftventricularenlarge-
dogs with HCM.In some dogs, the amplitude of the
ment is usually evident on the resting electrocardio-
mitralvalveAwaveisincreasedandtheE/Aratiois
gram.High-amplitude R waves are particularly promi-
reduced, suggesting reduced compliance.Prolonga-
nent on the left precordial chest leads (V and V),
tionin the isovolumetricrelaxation time and an in-
and they arealsocommonlyobservedonleadsII,III,
creasein the deceleration timeof thespectral Doppler
and aVr.Left axis deviation isuncommon.Arrhythmias
mitral valveEwave may alsobe observed.
reportedina small numberof dogswithHCMinclude
ventricular premature beats,paroxysmal ventricular
tachycardia,and first-degree and third-degree AV
TREATMENTANDPROGNOSIS
block.191-194
The severity and consequences of HCM in dogs and
people arequitevariable.Survival toatleastmiddle
age without clinical signs has been documented in
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
some affecteddogs,butothershave died suddenlyor
Two-dimensionalechocardiographyisthebest
developed signs of congestive heart failure.191-20o One
method for confirming a diagnosis of HCM. The most
of us (Sisson）has observed spontaneous disappear-
common echocardiographic feature of canine HCM is
ance of LVOT obstruction and resolution of hypertro-
thepresenceofleftventricular concentrichypertrophy
phyinsomeimmaturedogs aftertheyreached adult-
(Fig. 27-11).Left ventricular hypertrophy is global,
hood (1 to 2 years of age). Other dogs have achieved
andittendstobesymmetricratherthanasymmetric.7
this status after prolonged medical therapy to reduce
A muscularridgeofmyocardiumis sometimespresent
dynamic obstruction; some dogs requirelifelong treat-
in the LVOT, and this is most easily appreciated on a
ment. Too few dogs have been treated to draw defini-
short-axis view where it assumes the appearance of an
tive conclusions regarding the best treatment for ca-
accessorypapillarymuscle.Other features includeleft
nine HCM.The goals of treatment in cats and humans
atrialenlargement,reduced size of theleftventricular
with HCM are to improve diastolic flling, alleviate
lumen,SAMofthemitralvalvewithnarrowingofthe
congestive signs,reduce or abolish obstructive gradi-
LVOT (Fig.27-11),increased velocity of blood flow
ents,controlarrhythmias,andprevent sudden death
across theLVOT,and mitralvalve insufficiency.The
(see
chapter 18). Since most of the dogs we have
severity of LVOT obstruction detected by spectral
evaluatedhaveseveredynamicoutflowobstruction
Doppler varies depending on heart rate and the level
with no evidence of CHF,treaument eliminating or
ofpatientanxiety.Evidenceofobstructionmaybe
reducing the obstruction and preventing sudden death
entirely absent inthe restingpatient but is often
hasbeen largelyemphasized.
readily provoked by a toe pinch. It is often difficult to
Options for treating dynamic LVOT obstruction in-
assess the severity of a dynamic obstruction on a resting
clude drug therapy, surgery, pacemaker implantation,
Doppler examination.Provocative intervention, such
andselective alcoholization of theinterventricularsep-
as isoproterenol infusion,often unmasks a latent ob-
tum.Beta-adrenoreceptor-blocking drugs are often
struction and gives some indication of the patient's
used toreducedynamicLVOTobstructioninhuman
response to exercise.No systematic echocardiographic
patients.By slowing the heart rate,beta-blockers also
studies of diastolic function have been reported in
improve diastolicfilling,but theydonotimprovemyo-
606
DISEASES OF THEHEARTAND CIRCULATION
HEARTLAR
10ch
franei
10ch
BG0DA
833
FIGURE27-11
(A)Two-dimensional echocardiogram(cross-sectionview)of theleft ventricle through themitral
valve.Theleftventricleisconcentricallyhypertrophied,and systolicapposition of themitralvalve
with the interventricular septum is present duringmidsystole(SAM).(B)Systolic anterior motion of
themitral valve,with systolic appositionwith the septum(arrows)is evident on this M-mode
echocardiogram.
cardial relaxation.213,215,216Wehavebeen able to abol-
DDD pacing, a prolonged beneficial effect persists
ish orreducemarkedly the severity of LVOTobstruc-
even when pacing is discontinued.218. 219 To our knowl-
tion in most of the dogs we have treated with beta-
edge, only one dog has been treated in this fashion.
blockers.Atenolol is usually very effective,but other
Surgicalmyectomy of the hypertrophied septum with
beta-blockersprobablywork aswell.Thedoseofateno-
orwithout simultaneousrepair orreplacement ofthe
lol is gradually increased, from 0.5 to 1.5 mg/kg q12
mitralvalve can alsobe usedto abolish obstruction by
to 24h until the gradient is abolished or adverse signs
preventing SAM of the mitral valve.1. 20. 221 This tech-
(lethargy,bradycardia)are observed.The calcium
nique is often helpful in human patients but has not
channelblockerverapamil has alsobeen showneffec-
been attempted in dogs. Septal hypertrophy can also
tive in reducing dynamic obstruction in human pa-
be obliteratedwithoutsurgeryby alcoholization of the
tients by virtue of its negative inotropic effects.212.213215
interventricular septum (Sigwart procedure).222
We have not used this drug in dogs with HCM.Vera-
Strenuousexerciseshouldbediscouragedbecause
pamil improves diastolic filling by improving ventricu-
oftheriskofsudden death.Aggressivetreatmentwith
lar relaxation andreducing heart rate.212Diltiazem is
beta-blockers helps encourage this recommendation.
less effectiveforreducingLVOT obstruction as it does
Thevalue of antiarrhythmic drug therapy in humans
notdepress contractility asmarkedly asdoverapamil
withHCMiscontroversial.16Amiodaroneandsotalol,
or beta-blockers.212.217 Because of its vasodilating ef-
both of which are class III antiarrhythmic drugs, are
fects,diltiazem can worsen dynamic obstruction
in
usefulfor treatingsymptomaticarrhythmiainpatients
somepatients.Diltiazemmightbemoreusefulfor
withHCM,but thereisnoconclusiveevidence that
treating the nonobstructive form of canine HCM,
they improve survival(seechapter 18).1Implantable
givenitsbeneficialeffectsonventricularrelaxation
cardiacdefibrillatorsaresometimesusedinhuman
anddiastolic filing.Diuretics have been shown to
patients consideredathighriskfor suddendeath.223
improve congestive symptoms in humans with HCM,
These modalities have not been evaluated in dogs
and conservative dosing does not appear to aggravate
withHCM.
LVOT obstruction substantially.Few affected dogs have
required such treatment.
Anumber ofingeniousalternativeshavebeende-
UNUSUALORUNCLASSIFIED
vised to diminish the LVOT obstruction when drug
MYOCARDIALDISEASES
therapy is contraindicated or ineffective.In some pa-
tients,thedynamicLVOTobstruction canbereduced
CANINEX-LINKEDMUSCULARDYSTROPHY
or abolished by altering the normal sequence of ven-
tricular activation.Paradoxicmotion of theinterven-
Dystrophin is a protein that binds actin and, to
tricular septum can be induced by dual-chamber
gether with a complex of other proteins, links the
(DDD) pacing, thereby reducing SAM and the obstruc-
cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix.224Mutations
tivegradient.215In somehumanpatientstreated by
in thedystrophingeneresultinprogressivedegenera-
MYOCARDIALDISEASESOFDOGS607
tionof systemic andcardiacmuscle.225Duchenne's and
dominate in affected dogs, but severe cardiac involve-
Becker'smuscular dystrophy,collectivelyreferred to as
ment often developslater inlife.Signs of skeletal
the dystrophinopathies,are the most commoninher-
muscular dystrophy appear at about 8weeks of age
itedmusculardiseasesinpeople.Cardiacinvolvement
anddominatetheclinicalpicture during thefirstfew
ischaracterizedpathologicallybydegenerationand
years of life. Only a few dogs,most raised in breeding
fibrosis of the myocardium,centering on thepostero-
colonies,havesurviveduntil5or6yearsofage,when
lateralwall of theleftventricle.Myocardialfailure is
signs of CHF become obvious.227 Some dogs develop
the eventual culmination of these changes. Canine X-
softsystolicmurmurstypicalofmildmitralinsuffi-
linkedmuscular dystrophy(CXMD)is araremuscular
ciency.TheECGchangesin CXMDaremostobvious
diseasethatsharesmany similaritieswithDuchenne's
and Becker's muscular dystrophies in people. It is
ofage.Abnormalitiesinclude a shortenedPRinterval,
sometimesreferredtoas golden retrievermuscular
deep and narrow Q waves in leads II, III, aV, CV6LL,
dystrophy(GRMD)becauseit wasfirstrecognizedin
andCV6LU,and an increased Q/Rratio in leads
golden retriever dogs, some of which were bred and
CV6LL and CV6LU.228 Ventricular premature com-
developed as a modelof this disorder.226-228GRMD is
plexes andventricular tachycardiahave alsobeenob-
caused by a point mutation in the consensus splice
served.Radiographic cardiomegaly isusually modest,
acceptor in intron 6 of the canine dystrophin gene. As
but the cardiac apex may be distinctly pointed.22s Dis-
aresult,exon 7is skipped during processing of the
tinctiveechocardiographicchanges areobserved in
GRMD dystrophin messenger RNA.229
dogs over 6 months of age.Hyperechoic myocardial
Myocardial lesions are not grossly visible prior to 11
lesions first appear and become most extensive in the
weeks of age, but they become obvious by 6.5 months
left ventricular free wall and papilary muscles, and to
of age and are quite extensive by 6 years of age.Early
a lesser extent in the septum (Fig.27-12).The inten-
lesions,consisting of focal areas of myocyte degenera-
sity of thehyperechoicareas decreases after2yearsof
tion and mineralization,first appear in the subepicar-
age when the dimensions of theleft ventricle increase
dialregion of theLVfreewall, theLVpapillarymus-
as LVcontractilitybegins to decline,as demonstrated
cles,and interventricular septum.These later evolve
by decreased fractional shortening, increased E point
intolinearand anastomosingbandsofloosefibrovas-
septal separation, and hypokinesis of the septum and
cular tissue andeventuallyintodensefibrous connec-
LVwall.SignsofCHFcanbetreatedbytraditional
tivetissue.The mostcommonultrastructuralfeatures
means,but specific treatment for CXMD is not cur-
of CXMD areincreasedvariation inmyocyte size and
rentlyavailable.
endomysial fibrosis. Other changes include loss of
myofilaments,increasednumbers ofvariable-sizedmi-
ATRIOVENTRICULARMYOPATHY(SILENT
tochondria,and increased myelin,cytoplasmiclipofus-
cin, and lipid droplets. Immunohistochemical staining
ATRIA,PERSISTENTATRIALSTANDSTILL)
can be employed to identify affected dogs.22-27
Atrioventricular myopathy(AVM)isaprogressive
Clinical signs of skeletal muscle involvement pre-
myocardial disease of dogs andcats that is character-
B
FIGURE27-12
Two-dimensional echocardiograms recorded from a 7-month-old female dog (A) and an 8-month-old
LVshow hyperechoiclesions clumpedin theleftventricularfreewall at thelevel of thechordae
tendineae (arrow) in(A),and in the papillary muscle and LVfree wall (arrows) in (B）.(From Moise
NS,etal.Duchenne'scardiomyopathyina caninemodel:electrocardiographicandechocardiographic
studies.JAm Coll Cardiol 17:812,1991.Copyright by the American College of Cardiology.)
608
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTAND CIRCULATION
izedbyatrialenlargement,bradycardia,eventualheart
infltrates are extensive (Fig.27-13).231 Changes in
failure,and death.Someaffected dogshave apoorly
skeletalmuscleincludemuscle atrophy,hyalinized de-
characterized form of skeletal muscular dystrophy.230
generated muscle fbers,and mild to moderate
English springer spaniels and Old English sheepdogs
steatosis. Cardiomyopathy and conduction distur-
arereportedlypredisposed,butAVMalsooccursin
bancesalsocharacterizeEmery-Dreifussandsome
other pure-and mixed-breed dogs.Affected dogs typi-
cally resent forweakness,collapse,or syncope caused
relationshipbetweencanineAVMandthesedisorders
by severe bradycardia. Less commonly, dogs present
is
uncertain.
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
with signs of right or biventricular CHF. Soft murmurs
(EDMD)is an X-linked inherited muscular disorder
ofAVvalveinsufficiencyare audibleinmanycases.
characterized by the triad of progressive weakness in
The most common ECG abnormality is persistent atrial
humeroperonealmusclesandcardiomyopathywith
standstill,butheartblock and other rhythm and con-
conduction block.The gene responsible for X-linked
duction disturbances also occur.Atrialenlargementis
EDMDencodesaserine-richproteinof254amino
usually evidentonthoracicradiographs,andgeneral-
acids,named emerin,located in thenuclearenvelope
ized cardiomegaly is present in some dogs.Dilated,
andindesmosomes andfasciaeadherentesofcardiac
immobile atria can beidentified by echocardiography
myocytes.233Eightotherdystrophin-associatedmuscle
or fluoroscopy. In some cases, the atrial appendage(s)
proteins,including dystroglycans,5 sarcoglycans,and
continue tocontract after activityin therest of the
utrophin,havebeenidentified.234 Absence of alpha-
atriahasceased.TheclinicalcourseofAVMischarac-
sarcoglycaninsomepeopleisassociatedwiththepres-
terized by declining myocardial contractility,progres-
enceofdilatedcardiomyopathy andthepropensityto
siveventricular dilation,and the development of re-
developatrioventricular(AV)conduction
distur-
fractoryheart failure.Signsresultingfrom bradycardia
bances.235
canbepalliatedbyartificialpacemakerimplantation,
but most dogs soon develop clinical signs of progres-
RIGHTVENTRICULARCARDIOMYOPATHY
siveheartfailure.
At necropsy, the atria are often dilated, thin, and
Right ventricular cardiomyopathy, sometimes re-
fbrotic, with little or no visible muscle (Fig. 27-13).230
ferredto as arrhythmogenicrightventricular dysplasia,
The atrial appendages are often less severely affected
is anunusualheart disorderinpeople characterized
than the rest of the atria.Histologic findings include
bypartial or totalreplacement of therightventricular
variable amounts of mononuclear infiltration,myo-
muscle with adipose and fbrous tissue.,26In people,
fiber necrosis and disappearance, and pervasive re-
diagnosis is based on the echocardiographic demon-
placement fibrosis. In some cases, the inflammatory
stration ofa dilated,poorly contractingrightventricle,
FIGURE27-13
(A）Thisright-sidedexternalviewof theheart of a dogwithatrioventricularmyopathy shows a very
dilatedright atrium,and theatrial myocardiumhasbeen largelyreplaced byfibrous connective
tissue except for the tip of the right auricle.(Photo courtesy of Dr.W.P.Thomas.)(B)The
histologyspecimenfroma differentdogwithAVMshows extensivemononuclearcell infiltrates
surrounding healthy and dying atrial myocytes.
MYOCARDIAL DISEASFS OF DOGS 609
the finding of inverted T waves in the right precordial
150 to 240 mg/m2,210-241 Persistent arrhythmias and
ECG leads, ventricular arrhythmias of right ventricular
     s 
origin, and symptoms of palpitations and syncope. Au-
(over 150 mg/m?) cumulative dosages, and their oc-
tosomal dorminant  inheritance has  been shown
in
currence does not necessarily correlate with advanced
about one third of human cases. Similar pathologic
myocardial failure.240 242 Once thought to be a rapidly
and clinical findings were described in the only two
progressive and uniformly fatal complication, doxoru-
canine cases reported to date,237. 2ss Fox has recently
bicin-induced myocardial failure can be successfully
described this conndition in cats (sce chapter 28),
treated, with a reasonably favorable outcome, at least
in human patients.249. *50 Several studies indicate that
many patients improve with conventional heart failurc
SECONDARY MYOCARDIAL
treatment, and they have rcasonably long survival
DISEASES OF DOGS
timcs.219. 250
The overall prevalence of doxorubicin toxicity is
unknown. In one study of 175 dogs, 18 percent devel-
NONINFECTIOUS MYOCARDIAL
oped cardiac abnorinalities, but only 4 percent devel-
DISEASES
oped signs of CHE:*4 The reported prevalence of CHF
in dogs treated for lymphosarcoima has varied from 8
DRUGS AND TOXINS
Many drugs and toxins have been shown to cause
coma trcated with doxorubicin at a cunulative dose of
temporary myocardial depression (anesthetics) or per-
150 mg/m, thrce dicd or were cuthanized because of
manent myocardial injury. High cumulative doses of
cardiomyopathy and one dog died suddenly25 The
alcohol, cobalt, gossypol, catecholamines, furazoli-
most important risk faclor for cardiotoxicity identified
done, monensin, and a number of anticancer chemo-
in dogs is the total cumulative dosc of doxorubicin.
therapeutic agents cause degenerative myocardial le-
Risk factors identified in pcople include (1) high cu-
sions and cardiac failure,7 2w With the exception of
mulative total dosc, (2) high peak serum levcls (high
chemotherapcutic agents, natural exposure to large
single doses given over a short time period); (3) con-
quantities of thesc toxins is unlikely Most cases of
current administration of other cardiotoxic drugs.
drug-induced myocardial failure in dogs are caused
such as cyclophosphamide; (4) patient age, with very
by the administration of the anthracycline compound
young and very old patients at greatest risk; and (5)
doxorubicin 1o cancer paticnts.*40-241 The 4'-anthracy-
history of cardiac discasc.
cline analogue cpirubicin is also cardiotoxic, although
The tine to onset of CHF, relative to the last admin-
it is reportedly less so than doxorubicin,243 Mitoxan-
istered doxorubicin treatment, is highly variable. Echo-
trone. a dihydroxyquinone derivative of anthracene
cardiographic cvidence of moderate to advanced 1nyo-
related to doxorubicin, is reported to have no or very
cardial failure may be scen during or shortly after
litle cardiotoxicity in dogs, but this is yet. to be con-
treatment or may develop several months following
firined.216 High doses of cyclophosphamide are also
cessation of treatmcnt. It is advisable to monitor doxo-
cardiotoxic, particularly when given in combination
 rubicin therapy periodically via resting ECGs and ccho-
with doxornbicin.1. 247
cardiography. There are no agreed upon criteria for
the adninistration and monitoring of doxorubicin in
ANTHRACYCLINE CARDIOTOXICrTY. Doxorubicin is uscd
 dogs, but the following approach serves as a pragmatic
lo trcat many different types of cancer. Standard usc
guide: Chest radiographs and an ECG should be ob-
 s e e  pe s ss ti rei o
the frequency of acute and chronic cardiotoxicity. The
hcart disease and those brceds at high risk for DCM,
toxic mcchanism of myocardial cell injury is uncerlain,
such as Doberiman pinschers, should be evaluated by
but free radical generation and lipid membranc perox.
echocardiography prior to initiating doxorubicin, In
idation may be involved. Pathologic changes caused by
most circumstances, doxorubicin should be avoided in
doxorubicin include myocyte degeneration with myo-
 dogs with a fractional shortening (FS) of less than 20
fibrillar loss, cytoplasrnic vacuolization, myocytolysis,
percent, After receiving a 90 ng/m? cumulative dosage
and interstitial fibrosis and cdema.1 4 Less severe myo-
of doxorubicin, every dog should be evalualed by
cyte injury has heen demorstrated after a single injec-
echocardiography, which should bc repeated affcr
tion of doxorubicin.* Even when the cumulative dose
each subsequent dose. An earlier evaluation should
is low, doxorubicin infusionn can cause supraventricular
be scheduled if arrhythmias or exercise intolerance
or ventricular arrhythmias. These rhythm disturbances
is dctected. Treaimenl with doxorubicin should be
arc rarcly severe and generally do not require trcat-
ment. Chronic doxorubicin toxicity causes progressive
cen1, unless there is no other rcasonable treatincnt
myocardial failurc. Myocardial failure with signs of
alternative. Efforts continue to identify ar effective
CHF can occur in dogs receiving curnulative doses of
cardioprotectant for patiennts recciving high curmulative
610DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
doses of doxorubicin. At least one such agent, dexra-
and it is probably seldoin recognized antemortein. Ar-
zoxane, has shown cfficacy in humans and dogs, but
rhythmias, altered QRS complexcs with deep Q waves,
the optimal dose in dogs has not heen determined.253
ST scgment changes, and T-wave abnorimalities may be.
 detected,256 Asymmetric hypokinesis may be observed
INFILTRATIVEAND RESTRICTIVE
by echocardiography. Incrcascd aspartate transaminase
CARDIOMYOPATHIES
(AST, SGOT) and crcatine kinasc (CK) activity has
 Infiltrative myocardial diseases are rare in dogs. The
been observed by us in association with wcakiness, de-
pression,
,  ventricular  tachycardia, and subscquent
most common infiltrating cardiac tumors occurring inl
death associated with extensive myocardial infarction.
 dogs are hcmangiosarcoa, some heart base tumors,
Myocardial necrosis and fibrosis are often observcd
and lymphosarcoma. Diastolic or systolic myocardial
 in the papillary muscles and subendocardial regions
dysfunction caused by diffuse myocardial infiltralion is
 of the left ventricle in dogs dying of subvalvular aortic
very rarc. Lymphosarcoma is the most likely tumor 1o
cxhibit this behavior.? Myocardial lymphosarcoma is
stcnosis or hypcrtrophic cardioinyopathy. Such lesions
 are usually sccn in association with intimal prolifera-
tion and hypertrophy of thc smooth muscle in the
cardiomyopathy  on  echocardiography. The  clinical
manifestations of cardiac neoplasia are usually due to
media of the intramural coronary arteries. The subeil-
 dothelial nyocardium is Inost distant from the origin
pericardial cffusion, local obstruction to blood flow,
of the intramural circulation and is nost subjcct to
or arrhythmia. The diagnosis and treatment of the
common cardiac neoplasins are discussed in chapters
compromise of the coronary circulation, whether it
resulis from physical obstruction, high intramural pres-
29 a11d 36.
sure, or tachycardia. Similar myocardial lesions are
 Other diseases reported to cause restrictive myocar-
dial discasc in humans, such as ainyloidosis, sarcoido
cormnonly obscrved in old dogs with chronic degener-
sis, hermochromatosis, and cosinophilic or fibrosing
ative valve discasc in association with arteriosclerotic
lesions of the sinall intramural arterioles (see chapter
cndomyocardial diseasc, havc not been reported in
25). Myocardial nccrosis may also result from coronary
dogs. Myocardial infiltration with glycogen has been
reported in several Lapland dogs with type II glycogen
vasoconstriction  caused  by increased  catccholainine
storage discase (Pompe's discasc),24, 2ss Clinical signs
 levcls. Myocardial ischemic necrosis due to synpatheti-
cally mcdiated coronary vasoconstriction may occur
were mainly due to profound skeletal muscular wcak-
secondary to shock, severe hypotension, and central
ness and megacsophagus. None of the dogs had sigins
nervous system lesions, especially brain and spinal cord
of CHF, but cardiac arrhythmias and cardiomegaly
trauma.260. 261
were identified. Identification of the enzymatic defect
was accomplished by demonstration of decreased acid
alpha-glucosidase activity in peripheral blood leuko-
MYOCARDITIS
cytes. Autosomal recessive inheritance was suspected.
Myocarditis, simply defined, is a focal or diffuse
ISCHEMIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
involvemen1 of the heart muscle in an inflammatory
process. It can result from a variety of infectious, chem-
 Ischeimic myocardial discasc can result from obstruc-
ical, or physical agents.' Although the term is often
tion of the large coronary arteries, from obstruction
used in association with arrhythmic diseases in dogs.
 of the srnaller intramural coronary arterioles, or from
myocarditis is usually not proved in thesc cases. The
 intense and prolonged vasospasm. Of the few cases of
conscquences of myocarditis depend on the location,
 myocardial infarction reported in the literature, most.
had bacterial cndocarditis with
extent, and duration of cardiac involverment. Endo-
1coronary artery
 myocardial biopsy is esscntial for antemortem diagno-
embolization.256. 257 Myocardial infarcts have also been
sis, and this may explain, in part, why life-thrcatening
 reported secondary to septicemia and pulnonary nco
acule myocarditis and subacute myocarditis with subse-
plasms, and as the prinary disorder in cases of sudden,
 quent myocardial failure are not diagnosed very often
unexpecied death.7 25s Liu and associates described
 in dogs. Focal myocarditis may go unnoticed and undi-
the clinical and pathologic findings in 21 dogs with
 agnosed umless an important area such as the conduc-
atherosclerosis."s In this study, four dogs showed signs
of heart failure, and threc dogs had atrial fibrillation.
tion system is involved. Subclinical or mild myocarditis
is probably common in a variety of infectious and
Hypothyroidisin, hypercholesterolemia, and hyperlip-
idemia were identified as possible risk factors.
noninfectious systcmic illncsses, but the diagnosis is
The
low incidence of atherosclerosis in dogs is most likely
rarcly proved.
related to gennctic, diet, and lifestyle differences relative
to humans. In addition, the dog has an extensive cpi-
VIRAL MYOCARDITIS
cardial collateral vascular network that is abscnt in
Although many viruscs probably have the potential
humans. Diagnosis of myocardial infarction is difficult,
for causing myocarditis, few have been proved clini-
MYOCARDIALDISEASESOFDOGS611
callyor experimentallyin the dog,andthese appear
andrightventricleeventuallyculminatedinheartfail-
to be age-dependent, with a short window of suscepti-
ure.
bility in thefirstfewweeks of life.In thelate 1970s
Antemortemdiagnosis requires demonstration of
andtheearly1980s,aworldwideepidemicofcanine
parasitemiabyculture orxenodiagnosis,or serodiag-
parvovirus infection in dogs occurred. During that
nosis using complement fixation or other tests.Patho-
epidemic,a peracute viral myocarditis with very high
logic examination showsmultiplepale areas in the
mortality was described in litters of puppies between 3
myocardium,especiallyin theright atrium andventri-
and10weeks of age.262-267 Clinical signs included sud-
cle.Active granulomatous myocarditisis characterized
den,unexpected death orperacute onsetof anorexia
byinfiltrates of lymphocytes,plasma cells,and macro-
and tachypnea progressing to death from pulmonary
phages associated with clusters of T. cruzi amastigotes
edemawithinminutes tohours.Clinicalevaluation of
(Fig.27-14; see also Figs.36-9,36-10). In chronically
affectedpupsshowedtachycardia,arrhythmias,gallop
infected dogs, fibrosis is often extensive in the right
rhythms and apical systolicmurmurs,pulmonaryrales,
atriumandrightventricleandaroundtheconduction
cardiomegaly,and pulmonaryinfiltrates,indicative of
system.280-282
acute,severe left-sided heart failure.At necropsy,the
heartsweredilated and themyocardium waspale.The
TOXOPLASMOSIS ANDNEOSPOROSIS.Thelong-lived
histologic hallmark was myocarditis characterized by
bradyzoites of Toxoplasma gondiican encyst in the myo-
mononuclearcellinfiltration anddensebasophilicin-
cardium,producing a chronic infection.Subsequent
recrudescence and cystruptureresultin myocardial
nine parvoviral disease has become rare,probably due
necrosis and hypersensitivity reactions,resulting in
towidespreadimmunity from natural exposure orvac-
myocarditis, pericarditis, and, on rare occasion,heart
cination.Convincing clinical andexperimental
1evi-
failure. Serologic testing with demonstration of rising
dence indicates that myocardial failure in young dogs
titers is helpful in establishing the diagnosis.283 Neospora
less than a year old may be the result of a prior
caninum infects multiple tissues,including the heart,
parvovirus infection.Clinically,such cases may be in-
peripheral muscles, and central nervous system. Pe-
distinguishablefromotherformsofDCM.267-271
ripheral neuromuscular deficits and CNS signs often
Whether or not natural viral infections of other types
dominate the clinical presentation,but collapse and
produce myocarditis is uncertain.Certainly,no com-
suddendeathhavebeenreportedinsomeaffected
mon syndromes are recognized.Experimentalinfec-
tions of puppies with both canine distemper virus and
herpesvirus can produce myocarditis.272.273
PROTOZOALMYOCARDITIS
TRYPANOSOMIASIS (CHAGAS” DISEASE).Chagas’disease
has been reported in young dogs from the southern
United Statesand Centraland South America.274-278
The infecting organism, Trypanosoma cruzi, is a proto-
zoan parasite transmitted by a blood-sucking insect of
thesubfamilyTriatoma.Enzooticinfectionshavebeen
identified in some populations of wild animals, ro-
dents, and dogs.27-279he acute stage of the disease is
characterized by weight loss,diarrhea,lethargy, an-
orexia,lymphadenopathy,myocarditis,and sudden
death.Acute infectionis followed by a long latent
phaseofinfection and thelatebutfrequent develop-
ment of progressive myocardial disease.Immunologic
phenomena arethought toplay animportantrolein
thepathogenesis ofchronicmyocardial disease,which
is characterizedbythedevelopmentofavarietyof
arrhythmias and conduction disturbances,and eventu-
ally,by chamber enlargement and signs ofheartfail-
ure. Investigators in Panama recently described the
FIGURE27-14
clinicalcourse of Chagas’disease in 44 naturallyin-
Histopathology of trypanosomal (Chagas)myocarditis from a dog.
fected dogs,which apparently serve as chronicreser-
Amixedneutrophilicandmononuclearcellinfiltrateisvisiblein
voirs of infection.278 The most common ECG abnor-
associationwithclusters of T.cruziamastigotes(arrows).H&E stain
X100.(From Williams GD,et al. Naturally occurring
malitieswereventricularandatrialarrhythmiasand
trypanosomiasis(Chagas'disease)in dogs.JAm Vet Med Assoc
second-degreeAVblock.Dilationoftherightatrium
171:171, 1977.)
612 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
dogs.2s4 28s The diagnosis can be confirimed by immu-
and Feline Cardiology. New York, Churchill Living-
nohistochemistry, clectron microscopy, and the dem-
slone, 1988, p 467
4. Thoinas WP. Myorardial diseases of the dog. In Bona
onstration of antibodies to Neospora caninum. Severely
gura JD (ed): Contemporary lssues in Small Animal
ill dogs often dic, but succssful treatmen1 has been
Practice. Cardiology. Yew York, Churchill Livingstonc,
rcported with clindamycin, potentiated sulfonamides.
1987, p 117
and/or pyrimethamine.283.26
5. Edwards WD. Cardiomyopathies. Huun Pathol 18:625,
1987
 6. Wynne J, Braunwald E. The cardiomyopathies and myo-
BACTERIALANDMYCOTICMYOCARDITIS
carditides: toxic, chemical, and physical damage to the
heart. In Braurwald E (ed): Heart Disease: A Textbook
Bacterial myocarditis is a possibility whenever bacter-
of Cardiovascular Medicine. 4lh ed. Philadelphia, WB
einia, sepsis, or endocarditis 0ccurs (see Fig. 36-8).
Saunders, 1992. p 1394
The nost common offending agents are staphylococcal
7. Sisson DD, Thomas WP. Myocardial diseases. n Ettinger
and streptococcal spcies,272s Suppurative myocardi-
SJ, Feldinan EC (eds): Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995.
tis often develops in patients with bacterial endocardi-
p 995
tis, cither via direct extension froin an infected valvc
 8. Report of a World 1lealth Organization (W11O) Expert
or via the coronary circulation (sce chapter 26). Myo-
Committee on Carliomyopathics, WI HO Technical Re-
port Series 697, Geneva, 1984, p 7
cardial damage is sometines caused by bacterial toxins
9. Buchanan Jw. Causes and prevalence of cardiovascular
or by irmmuue-mcdiated processes. Cardiac arrhyth-
dlisease. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Curren1
mias are the principal clinical manifestation of bacte-
Veterinary Therapy XI. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
rial myocarditis. Lyme disease is a commonly men-
1992, p 647
tioned cause of myocarditis in dogs, but documented
10. Detweiler DK, Patterson DF. Prevalence auid types of
cases with provcn cardiac scquelae are exceedingly
cardiovascular
disease in dogs. Ann NY Acad Sci
127:481, 1965
rare. Lyme discase (borrcliosis) is a multisystemic dis
11. Fioretti M, Delli Carri E. Epidemiological survey of
ease dominatcd by involvemennt. of joinis, the CNS.
dilatative cardiomyopathy in dogs. Abstract. Veterinaria
cyes, and skin,290-2 Clinical signs reported in dogs are
2:81, 1988
often vague and nonspecific. Lyine discasc is caused
12. Codd MB, Sugrue DD, Gersh BJ, et al. Epidemiology
by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi and is transmitted
 of idiopathic dilated and hypertrophic cardioinyopathy:
a population-based study in Olmsted County, Minne-
principally by the dcer tick, Ixodes dammini. Most cases
sota. Circulation 80:564, 1989
of Lyme disease occur in the northeastern, westcrn
13.
3. Manolio TA, Baughman KL, Rodeheffer R, el al. Preva-
 coastal, and north central United States. Serologic
lence and etiology of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy
testing is not al present a reliable method of diagno-
(summary of a National Heart, Lung, and Blood lnsti-
sis,230-2 The organism is diffcult to isolatc from tis-
tute workshop). Am J Cardiol 69:1458, 1992
asod aa pasns aq ae ouassnd sn nq 'sans
14. Ettinger S. Lusk R, Brayley K, et al for the Cooperative
immunohistochermical staining. Histologic changes as-
Veterinary Enalapril (COVE) Study Group. Evaluation
 of enalapril therapy in dogs with heart failure in a large
sociated with Lyme myocarditis includc mulifocal
multicenter study. Proceedings. 10th Annual Veterinary
myocardial necrosis and a mixed cellular infiltrate of
Medical Forum, ACVIM, 1992, p 584
15. Iidholin A, Svensson H, Sylven C. Survival and prog-
plasma cells, lymphocylcs, ncutrophils, and macro-
nostic factors in 189 dogs with dilated cardioinyopathy.
phages.
J Am Anim IHosp Assoc 33:364, 1997
 Fungal infections of the nyocardiuun are extremely
16. Sleeper M, Lankford E, Dambach D, et al. Portuguese
rare, and they tend to occur rmainly in debilitated or
waler dog cardiomyopathy. Abstract. J Vet Intern Med
immunosuppressed patients. Infction usually spreads
12:248, 1998
to the heart hematogcnously, but local invasion can
17. Darke PGG,
Else
: RW. Canine cardiomyopathy. Vet
also occur. Mycotic cardiac infections reported in dogs
Annu 24:237,1984
18. Monnet E, Orton EC, Salman M, el al. Idiopathic di-
include cryptococcosis, coccidioidomycosis, aspergillo-
lated cardiomyopathy in dogs: survival and prognostic
sis, and those due to other saprophytic fungi.29-300
indicators. J Vet lntern Med 9:12, 1995
19. Calvert CA, Chapman Wl. Jr, Toal RL. Congestivc car-
REFERENCES
Med Assoc 181:598, 1982
 20. Calvert CA. Dilated congestive cardiommyopathy in Dob-
erman pinschers. Co1npend Con1 Educ 8:417, 1986
21. Calvert CA, Brown J. Lse of M-mode echocardiography
1. Wynne J, Braunwald E. The cardionyopathies and myo-
in the diagnosis of congestive cardiomyopathy in Dob-
carditides. In Braunwald F (ed): Heart Disease: A Text-
erman pinschers. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:293. 1986
book of Cardiovascular Medicine. 5th ed. Philadelphia,
22. Calvert^CA, Pickus CW, Jacobs G], et al. Signalinent,
WB Saunders, 1997, p 1404
survival, and prognostic factors in Doberman pinschers
2. Fox PR. Myocardial diseases. In Ettinger SJ (ed): Text-
with endstage cardioinyopathy. J Vet Intern Med
book of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 3rd ed. Philadel-
11:323, 1997
phia, wB Sauriders, 1989, p 1097
23. Calverl CA, Hall G, Jacohs G. el al. Clinical and patho
3. Fox PR. Canine myocardial discasc. n Fox PR: Canine
logic finidings in Doberinal pinschers with occull car-
MYOCARDIAL DISEASES OF DOGS 613
diomyopathy thal died or developed congestive hcart
44. Towbin JA, Hejtmancik JF, Brink P, et. al. X-linked di-
failure: 54 cases (1984-1991). J A1n Vet Med Assoc
lated cardiomyopathy: molecular genetic cvidence of
210:505, 1997
linkage to the Duchenne muscular dystropby (dys-
24. O'Grady MR, Horne R. Occult dilated cardiomyopathy:
trophin) gene at the Xp21 locus. Circulation 87:1854,
an echocardiographic. and electrocardiographic study
1993
of 193 asymptomatic Doberman pinschers. Abstract. J
45. Muntoni F, Cau M, Ganau A, et al. Brief report: dele-
Vet Intern Med 6:112. 1992
tion of the dystrophin muscle-promoter region associ-
25. Harpster NK Boxer cardiomyopathy: a revicw of the
ated with X-linked dilated cardiomyopathy. N Engl J
long-term benefis of antiarrhythmic therapy. Vet Clin
Med 329:921, 1993
North Am Small Anim Pract 21:989, 1991
46. Towbin JA. The role of cytoskeletal proteins in cardio-
 26. Harpster NK, Boxer cardiomyopathy. In Kirk RW (ed):
myopathies. Curr Opin Cell Biol 10:131, 1998
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy VIll. Philadelphia,
47. Kramer GA, Kitteson MD, Fox PR, et al. Plasina taurine
WB Saunders, 1983. p 329
concentrations in normal dogs and in dogs with heart
 27. Tidholm A, Jonsson L. Dilated cardiomyopathy in the
discase. J Vet 1ntern Med 9:253, 1995
Newfoundland: a study of 37 cases (1983-1994). J Am
48. Pion PD, Kileson MD, Rogers QR, et al. Myocardial
Anim Hosp Assoc 32:465, 1996
failure in cats associated with low plasma taurine: a
 28. Kittleson MD, Keenc B, Pion PD, et. al. Results of thc
reversible cardiomyopathy. Science 237:764, 1987
Multicenter Spaniel Trial (MUST): taurine and carni-
49. Gavaghan BJ, Kitleson MD. Dilated cardiomyopathy in
tine-responsive dilated cardiomyopathy in  American
a cocker spaniel with taurine deliciency. Aust Vet J
cocker spaniels with decreased plasma taurine concen-
76:862, 1997
tralion. J Vet 1ntern Med 11:204, 1997
50. Keene BW. Myocardial cnergy metabolism in dilated
29. Meurs KM, Spier AW, Miller MW, et al., Familial dys-
cardiomyopathy, Proceedings of the Fourth Annual Vet-
rhythmia is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait
erinary Medical Forum, 1986, p 9
in selected boxer families. Absiract. I Vet Intern Med
51. Keene Bw, ct al. Frequency of myocardial carnitine
12:199. 1998
deliciency associated withi spontaneous canine dilated
30. Sandusky GE, Capen CC, Kerr KM, et al. Histological
cardiomyopathy, Abstract. Proceedings of the Sixih An-
and ultrastructural evaluation of cardiac lesions in idio-
nual Veterinary Medical Forum, 1988. p 757
pathic cardiomyopathy in dogs. Can J Comp Med
52.1
Keene Bw, Kittleson MD, Rush JE,et al. Myocardial
48:81, 1984
carnitine deficiency associated with dilated cardiomyop-
 31. Van Vleet JF, Ferrans VJ. Myocardial diseases of animals.
alhy in oberman pinschers. Abstract. J Vet Intern Med
Am J Patho1 124:98, 1986 
3:126,1989
32. Hazlett MJ, Maxie MG, Allen DG, ct al. A retrospcctive
 53. Keene BW, Panciera DP, Atkins CE, et al. Myocardial l.
study of hcart disease in Doberman pinscher dogs. Can
carnitine deficiency in a family of dogs with dilated
Vet,』 24:205, 1983
cardiomyopathy J Am Vet. Med Assoc 198:647, 1991
33. McCarthy G. Idiopathic congestive cardiomyopathy of
54. Keene BW. L-Carnitine supplermentation in the therapy
large breeds of dogs: obscrvalions on eleven cases. Irish
of canine dilated cardiomyopathy. Vet Clin North Am
Vet J 38:155, 1984
Small Anim Pract 21:1005, 1991
 34. Thomas RE. Congestive cardiac failure in young cocker
55. Keene BW. 1-Carnitine deficiency in canine dilated car-
spaniels (a form of cardiomyopathy?): details of cighit
diomyopathy, In Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD (eds): Current.
cases. J Small Anim Pract 28:265, 1987
Veterinary Therapy Xl. Plhiladelphia, WB Saunders,
35. Gooding JP, Robinson WF, wyburn RS, et al. A cardio-
1992, p 780
myopathy in the English cocker spaniel: a clinico-patho-
 56. Regitz V, Shug AL., Fleck E. Defective myocardial carni-
logical investigation. J Small Anim Pract 23:133, 1982
line metabolism in congestive heart failure secondary
36. Staaden RV. Cardiomyopathy of English cocker span-
to dilated cardiomyopathy and to coronary, hyperten-
iels. J Am Vet. Med Assoc 178:1289, 1981
sive and valvular heart disease. Am I Cardiol 65:755.
 37. Katz AM. Membrane damage and the pathogenesis of
1990
cardiomyopathies. J Mol Cell Cardiol 17:11. 1985
57. Kawasaki N, Lec JD, Shimizu II, et al. Iong-term I-
37a. Tidholm A, Haggstrom J Jonsson I. Prevalence of
carnitine treatment prolongs survival in rats with Adria-
attenuated wavy fibers in myocardium of dogs with
mycin-induced hcari failure. J Card Fail 2:293. 1996
dilated cardiomyopathy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:1732.
 58. Costa ND, Labuc RI 1. Case report: cflicacy of oral carni-
1998.
tine therapy for dilated cardiomyopathy in boxer dogs.
38. Kasper EK, Agema WR, Hutchins GM, et al. The causes
J Nutr 124(12 Suppl):2687s, 1994
of dilated cardiomyopathy J Am Coll Cardiol 23:586,
59. Langsjoen PH, Folkers K. Long-term effcacy and safety
1994
Of coenzyme Ql0 therapy for idiopathic dilated cardio-
39. Walker J (ed): The New Doberman Pinscher. New York,
myopathy. Am J Cardioi 65:521, 1990
Howard Book House Inc, 1981
60. Hofman-Bang C, Rehnqyist N, Swedberg K, et al. Coen-
40. Day MJ. lnheritance of serum autoantibody, reduced
zyme Ql0 as an adjunctive in the treatment of chronic
serum IgA and autoimmune disease in a canine breed-
congestive heart Failure. The Ql0 Study Group. J Card
ing colony. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 53:207, 1996
Fail 1996 1:101
41. Michels VV, Moll PP, Miller FA, et al. The frequency of
61. Archard IC, Bowles NE. Olscn EGJ, et al. Detection of
familial dilated cardiomyopathy in a series of patients
persistent Coxsackie B virus RVA in dilated cardiomy-
with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med
opathy and myocarditis. Eur Heart J 8(suppl):437, 1987
326:77. 1992
62. Bowles NE, Rose ML, Taylor P, et al. End-stage dilated
42. Grunig E, Tasman JA, Kucherer Il, ct al. Frequency 
cardiomyopathy: persistence of enterovirus RNA in
and phenotypes of familial dilated cardiomyopathy. J
myocardium at. cardiac transplantation and lack of im-
Am Coll Cardiol 3l:186, 1988
mune response. Circulation 80:1128, 1989
43. Joncs KJ, North KN. Rccent advanccs in diagnosis of
63.1
Fallon JT. Myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy: dif-
the childhood muscular dystrophies. J Paediatr Child
ferent stages of the same disease? Cardiovasc Clin
Health 33:195, 1997
18:155, 1988
614DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
64. Sole MJ, Liu P. Viral myocarditis: a paradigm for under-
84. Ravens L, Davis K, Davies CH, el al. Tachycardia-in-
standing the pathogenesis and treatment of dilated car-
duced failure alters contractile properties of canine
diomyopathy. J Ain Coll Cardiol 22(suppl A):99A, 1993
ventricular myocytes. Cardiovasc Res 32:613, 1996
65. Nho WG, Sur JHI, Doster AR, et al. Detection of canine
 85. Grogan M, Smith JIC, Gersh BJ. et al. l.eft ventricular
 parvovirus in naturally infected dogs with enteritis and
dysfunction due to atrial fibrillation in patients initially
myocarditis by in situ hybridization. J Vet Diagn Invest
belicved to have idiopathic dilaled cardiomyopathy. Am
9:255, 1997
J Cardiol 69:1570, 1992
66. Lcwis AB, Neustcin HIB, Takahashi M, et al. Findings
86. Zupan I, Rakovec P, Budihna N, ct. al. Tachycardia-
 on endotnyorardial biopsy in infants and children with
induced cardiormyopathy in dogs, relation between
dilated cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol 55:143, 1985
chronic supraventricular and chronic ventricular tachy-
67. Dec GW Jr, Palacios IF, Fallon JT, et al. Active myocardi-
cardia. IntJ Cardiol 56:75, 1996
tis in the spectrum of acute dilated cardiomyopathies.
87. Atkins CE, Kanter R, Wright K, ct al. Orthodromic
N Engl J Med 312:885, 1985
reciprocating_tachycardia and heart. failure in a dog
68. Neumann DA, Burck CL, Baughman KL, ct al. Circulal-
withi a concealed posteroseptal accessory pathway J Vet
ing heart-reactive antibodies in patients with myocardi-
Intern Med 9:43, 1995
tis or cardiomyopathy. I Am Coll Cardiol 16:839, 1990
 88. Neubauer S, Krahe T, Schindler R, et al. s1p magnctic.
69.Limas CJ. Coldenberg IF, limas Cl. Autoantibodies
 Tesonance spectroscopy in dilated cardiomyopathy and
coronary artery disease: altered cardiac high-energy
cardionyopathy. Circ Res 64:97, 1989
phosphate meiabolism in heart failure. Circulation
70. Litmas Cj. Autoimmunity in dilated cardiomyopathy and
86:1810, 1992
the major histocompatibility complex. Int. J Cardiol
89. Ferrans VJ. Pathologic anatomy of the dilated cardiomy-
54:113, 1996
opathies. Am J Cardiol 64:9C, 1989
71. Schulze K, Becker BF, Schauer R, et al. Antibodies to
90. Urie PM, Billingham ME. Lltrastructural features of
the ADp/ATP carrieran autoantigen myocarditis and
familial cardiomyopathy. An J Cardiol 62:325, 1988
dilated cardiomyopathy
y-impair cardiac function. Cir-
 91. Ades I.C, Gedeen AK, Wilson MJ, ct al. Barth syndrome:
culation 81:959, 1990
clinical features and confrmation of gene localization
72. Caforia ALP, Grazzini M, Mann JM, ct al. Identification
to distal Xq28. Ain J Med Genet 45:327, 1993
 of α- and β-cardiac myosin heavy chain isoforms as
92. Bolhuis PA, Hensels GW, Hulsebos TJ, ct al. Mapping
major autoantigens in dilated cardiomyopathy. Circula-
of the locus for X-linked cardioskcletal myopathy with
tion 85:1734, 1992
neutropenia and abnormal mitochondria (Barth sy1l-
73, Cunnirghant MW, Antone SM, Gulizia JM, et al. Cyto-
drome) to Xq28. Am J Hum Genel 48:481, 1991
toxic and viral neutralizing antibodies cross-react with
 93. O'Brien PJ. Deficiencies of myocardial tropinin-T and
streptococcal M protein, enteroviruses, and human car-
crcatine kinase MB isoenzyme in dogs with idiopathic
diac myosin. Pr0c Natl Acad Sci USA 89:1320, 1992
dilated cardiomyopathy. Am I Vet Res 58:11, 1997
74. Huber SA, Moraska A. Cytolytic T lymphocytes and
94. O'Brien PJ, O)'Grady M, McCutcheon LH, cl al. Myocar-
antibodies to myocytes in Adriarmycin-trcated BALB/c
dial myoglobin deficiency in various animal models of
mice. Evidence for imtmunity to drug-induced antigens.
congestive heart failure. J Mol Cell Cardiol 24:721, 1992
Am J Pathol 140:233,1992
95. MeCutcheon I., Cory CR, Norwack L, et al. Respiratory
75. Limas CI 1imas C. H1lA antigens in idiopathic dilated
chain defect. of mitochondria in idiopathic dilated car-
cardiomyopathy. Br HIcart J 62:379, 1989
diomyopathy of Doberman pinscher dogs. Can I Phar-
76. Eckstein R. Meimpel W, Bolte IHI). Reduced suppressor
macol 70:1529,1992
cell activity in congestive cardiomyopathy and myocar-
 96. Figueredo VM, Cainachho SA. Basic mechanisms of myo-
ditis. Circulation 65:1224, 1982
cardial dysfunction: cellular pathophysiology of heart.
77. Sanderson JF, Koech D, Iha D, ct. al. T-lymphocyte
failure. Curr Opin Cardiol 8:369, 1993
subscts in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Ain J
 97. Lorrell BH. Signilicance of diastolic dysfunction of the
Cardiol 55:755, 1985
heart. Annu Rev Med 42:41l, 1991
78. O'Brien PJ, et al. Rapid ventricular pacing of dogs to
 98. Beuckelmann DJ, Yabauer M, Erdmann F. Infraccllular
heart failure: biochemical and physiological studies.
calcium handling in isolated ventricidar myocytes from
Can J Physiol Pharmacol 68:34, 1990
patients with
terminal heart failure. Circulation
79. O0'Brien PJ, O'Grady MR, Lumsden JH, el al. Clinical
85:1046, 1992
pathologic profiles of dogs and turkeys with congestive
 99. Bailey BA, Houser SR. Calcium transients in feline left.
hear failure. cither noninduced or induced by rapid
ventricular rmyocytes with hypertrophy induced by slow
ventricular pacing. and turkeys with furazolidone toxi-
progressive  pressure  overload. J  Mol  Cell  Cardiol
cosis. A1n J Vet Res 54:60, 1993
24:365.1992
80. Arnsirong PW, Stopps TP, Ford SE, et al. Rapid venric-
100. Perreault CL. Shannon RP, Komanura K, et al. Abnor-
ular pacing in the dog: pathophysiological studies of
malitics in intracellular calcium regulation and contrac-
hearl failure. Circulation 74:1075, 1986
tile function in myocardium from dogs with pacing-
 81. Redfield MM, Aarhus Ll., Wright RS, et al. Cardiorenal
induccd heart failure. J Clin Invest 89:932, 1992
and neurohumoral function in a canine model of early
101, Bouron A, Potreau D, Raymond C. The t-type calcium
left ventricular dysfunction. Circulation 87:2016, 1993
current in single hypertrophied cardiomyocytes iso-
 82. Spinalc FG. Grine RC, Termpel GE, et al. Alterations in
lated from the right ventricle of the ferret heart.
the myocardial capillary vasculature accompany tachy-
Cardiovasc. Res 26:662, 1992
cardia-induced  cardiomyopathy.  Basic  Res  Cardiol
102. Takahashi 'T, Allen PD, Lacro RV, et al. Expression of
87:65, 1992
dihydropyridine  receptor  (Ca*+ (
channel) and cal-
83. Kajstura J. Zhang X, Liu Y. el al. The cellular basis of
sequestrin genes in the myocardium of patients with
pacing-induced dilated cardiomyopathy. Myocyte cell
end-stage heart failure. J Clin Invest 90:925. 1992
103. D'Agnolo A, Luciani CB, Mazzucco A, ct al. Contractile
tion 92:2306, 1995
properties of Ca?: release activity of the sarcoplasmic
MYOCARDIAL DISEASES OF DOGS  615
reticulum in
dilated   cardiomyopathy.  Circulation
ventricular pacing, and turkeys with furazolidone toxi-
85:518.1992
cosis. Am J Ve1 Res 54:60, 1993
104. Cory CR, Shen I, O'Brien PJ. Compensatory asymme-
122. Lumsden JI1, O'Grady MR, Johnstone IB, ct al. Preva-
try in down-regulation and inhibition of the myocardial
lence of hypothyroidism and von willebrand's discasc
Ca cycle in congestive heart failure produced in dogs
in Doberman pinschers, and the observed relationship
by idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy and rapid ventric-
belween thyroid, von willebrand, and cardiac status.
ular pacing. I Mol Cell Cardiol 26:173, 1994
Abstract. I Vet Intern Med 7:115, 1993
105. Feldman AM, Tena RG, Kessler PD, et al. Diminished 
123. Calvert CA, Chapman Wl., Toal Rl. Congestive cardio-
β-adrenergic responsiveness and cardiac dilation in
myopathy in Doberrman pinscher dogs. J Am Vet Med
a ( )    Jo 
Assoc 181:598. 1982
associated withi a functional abnormality of the G stimu-
124. Connolly SJ, Cairns JA, on behalf of the CAMIAT pilot
latory protein. Circulation 8l:1341, 1990
study group: Comparison of onc-, six- and 24-hour am-
106. Bristow MR, Anderson FL, Port JD, et al. Differences
bulatory electrocardiographic monitoring for ventricu-
in β-adrenergic neuroeffector mechanisms in ischeinic
lar arrhythmia as a predictor of mortality in survivors of
versus idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Circulation
acute myocardial infarclion. Am J Cardiol 69:308, 1992
84:1024, 1991
125. Hasslick MJ, Maxic MG, Allen DG, ct al. A retrospective
107. Neumann J, Schmitz W, Scholz H, et al. Incrcase in
study of heart disease in Doberman pinscher dogs. (Can
myocardial G, proteins in hcart failure. Lancet 2:936,
Vet J 24:205, 1983
1988
126. O'Grady MR, Horne R. Outcome of 103 asymptomatic
108. Figueredo VM, Brandes R, Weiner MW, et al. Cardiac
Doberman pinschers: incidence of dilated cardiomyop-
contractile dysfunction during mild coronary flow re-
athy in a longitudinal study. Abstract. J Vet Intern Med
ductions is due to an altered calcium-pressure relation-
96616616
ship in1 rat hearts. J Clin Inves1 90:1794, 1992
127. Calvert CA. Long-term ambulatory electrocardio-
109. Camacho SA, Figueredo VM, Brandes R, et al. Calcium-
graphic monitoring in the diagnosis of occult cardiomy.
dependent fluorescence transients and phosphate me-
opathy in Doberman pinschers. Proceedings, Annual
tabolism during low flow ischemia in isolated rat hearls.
Meeting, American College of Veterinary Internal Med
Am J Physiol 26s:H114, 1993
icine, 1991, p 691
110. Hoey A. Canine dilated cardiomyopathy—are there de-
128.
Calvert CA, Brown J. Lse of M-mode echocardiography
fects at the receplor level? Abstract. Proceedings, Brit-
in the diagnosis of congestive cardiomyopathy in Dob-
ish Sumall Anim Veterinary Medical Association, 1991,
crman pinschers. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 189:293, 1986
p 142
129. Atkins CE, Snyder PS. Systolic timc intervals and their
111. Cilbert SJ, wotton PR, Tarlton JF, el al. Increased ex-
derivatives for evalualion of cardiac function. J Vet In-
pression of promatrix metalloproteinase-9 and neuuro
tern Med 6:55, 1992
phil elastase in canine dilated cardiomyopathy. Cardio-
130. Darke GG. Doppler echocardiography in canine con-
vasc Res 34:377, 1997
gestive cardiomyopathy. Procccdings of the Eleventh
112. Bonagura JD, Ware WA. Atrial fibrillation in the dog:
Annual Veterinary Medical Forum, 1993, p 531
clinical lindings in 8l cases. J Am Anim Hlosp Assoc
131. Bennet ED. Ascending aortic blood velocity and accect-
22:111, 1986
cration using Doppler ultrasound in the asscssment of
113. Naito M. 'The hemodynamic consequences of cardiac
left ventricular function. Cardiovasc Res 18:632, 1984
arrhythmias: cvaluation of the relative roles of abnor-
132. Brown KK. Noninvasive evaluation of ventricular cjec-
mal atrioventricular sequencing, irregularity of ventric-
tion dynamics in dogs. Proceedings of the Tenth An-
ular rhythm, and atrial fibrillation in a canine model.
nual Veterinary Medical Forum, 1992, p 613
Ain Hleart J 106:284, 1983
133. Werner GS, Schaefer C, Dirks R, et al. Doppler echocar-
114. Darke PGG, An evaluation of cardiac dysrhythmias by
diographic assessment of left ventricular tfilling in idio-
Doppler echocardiography. Proceedings of the Tenth
pathic dilated cardiomyopathy during a one-year follow-
Annual Veterinary Medical Forum, 1992. p 602
up: relation to the clinical course of disease. Am Heart
115. Fruhwald FM, Dusleag J, Eber B, ct al. Long-term out-
J126:1408,1993
corne and prognostic factors in dilated cardiomyopathy.
134. Calvert CA. Diagnosis and therapy of occult cardiomny-
Preliminary results. Angiology 45:763, 1994
opathy. Proceedings, XVI World Veterinary Congress,
116.
Calvert CA. Update: canine dilated cardiomyopathy. In
1991, p 27
Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary
135. Sinucker ML, Kaul S. Woodfeld JA, et al. Xaturally
Therapy X1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992, p 773
occurring cardiomyopathy in the Doberman pinscher:
117. Reddy Ps. The third heart sound. Int J Cardiol 7:213,
a possible large animal model of human cardiomyopa-
1985
thy. J Am Coli Cardiol 16:200, 1990
118. Butman SM, Ewy GA, Standen JR, et al. Bedside cardio-
136. O'Grady MR, Horne R. Occult dilated cardiomyopathy:
vascular cxamination in palients with severe chronic
cchocardiographic and electrocardiographic lindings
       n
in 192 asymptomauic Ioberman pinschers. J Vet Intern
venous distension. J Am Coll Card 22:968, 1993
Med (in press)
119. Kono T, Rosman H, Alam M, et al. Hemodynamic cor-
137. O'Grady MR, Horne R, Echocardiographic lindings in
relates of the lhird heart sound during evolution of
51 normal Doberman pinschers. Abstract. J Vet Intern
chronic heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2l:419, 1993
Med 9:202, 1995
120. Calvert CA, Jacohs GJ, Pickus Cw. Bradycardia-associ-
138. O'Grady M, Ilorne R. Prevalence of dilated cardiomy-
ated episodic weakness, syncope, and abortcd sudden
opathy in Doberman pinschcrs: a 4.5-year follow-up.
death in cardiomyopathic Doberman pinschers. J Vet
Abstract. J Vet lntern Med 12:199, 1998
Intern Med 10:88, 1996
139. Sisson D. Evidence for or against the eflicacy of
121. O'Brien PB, O)'Grady MR, Lumsden JH, el al. Clinical
afterload reducers for management of heart failure in
pathologic profles of dogs and turkeys with congestive
dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 21:945, 1991
hearl failure, either noninduced or induced by rapid
140. Unverferth DV, Blanford M, Kates RE, et al. Tolerancc
616
DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
to dobutamine after a 72-hour continuous infusion. Am
Imilrinone, digoxin, and their combinations in the treat-
J Med 69:262, 1980
ment of patients with chronic heart failure. X Engl J
141. Smith CJ. Huang R, Sun D, et al. Development of
Med 320:677, 1989
decompcnsated dilated cardiomyopathy is associated
158. The Digoxin Investigation Group. The cffect of digoxin
with decreased gene expression and activity of the milri-
  m sd  aq   
none-sensitive cAMP phosphodicsterase PDE3A. Circu-
ure. N Engl J Med 336:525, 1997
lation 96:3116, 1997
159. Ferguson DW, Berg WJ, Sanders JS, et al. Sympathoi1-
142. The SO1 VD Investigators. EIfect of enalapril on survival
hibitory responses to digitalis glycosides in heart failure
in patients with reduced left. ventricular cjection frac-
patients: direct cvidence from syrnpathetic neural re-
tions and congestive heart failure. N Engl J Med
cordings. Circulation 80:65, 1989
325:293, 1991
160. Hamlin RL, Therapy of supraventricular tachycardia
143. Cohn JN, Johnson G, Ziesche S, et al. A comparison of
and atrial fbrillation. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds):
enalapril with hydralazine-isosorhide dinitrate in the
treatment of chronic congestlive heart failure. N Engl J
WB Saunders, 1992, p 745
Med 325:303, 1991
161. Hamlin RL. Clinical use of diltiazem in aurial fbrilla-
144. The CONSENSUS Trail Study Group. Efects of enala-
tion. Abstract. Proceedings, 6th Annual Veterinar y Med-
pril on mortality in severe congestive heart failure: re-
icine Forum, ACVIM, 1988, p 759
sulis of the cooperativc North Scandinavian cnalapril
162. Waagstein F, Bristow MR, Swedberg K, el al for the
survival study (CONSENSUS). N Engl J Med 316:1429,
Metoprolol in Dilated Cardiomyopathy (MDC) Tnial
1987
Study Group. Beneficial effects of metoprolol in idio-
145. Pfefer MA, Braunwald E, Moye LA, et al. The effect of
pathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Lancet 342:1441, 1993
captopril on mortality and morbidity in patients with
163. Gottlicb SS. β-Blockers for heart failure: where are we
left ventricular dysfunction following myocardial in-
now? Curr Opin Cardiol 9:295, 1994
farction: results of the survival and ventricular enlarge-
 164. CAsT Investigators. Preliminary report: effect of encai-
ment (SAVE.) trial. N Engl J Med 327:669. 1992
nide and flecainide on mortality in a randomized trial
146. Fox PR, Sisson DID. Angiotensin-converting enzyme in-
 of arrhythmia suppression after myocardial infarction.
hibitors. In Bonagura jD (cd): Kirk's Current. Veteri-
N Engl I Med 321:406, 1989
nary Therapy XIl. Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia.
165. CAST Investigators. Failure of trcaument with moriciz-
WB Saunders, 1995, p 786
 ine to improve survival in a randomized trial of arrhyth-
147. 'The IMPROVE Study Investigators. Clinical cffects of
mia supprcssion after myocardial infarction (MI): The
cnalapril maleate in dogs with naturally acquired heart.
Cardiac: Arrhythmia Suppression Trial (CAsT). Ab-
failure: results of the invasive multicenter prospcctive
stract. J Am Coll Cardiol 19:199A, 1992
veterinary evaluation of cnalapril. J Vet Intern Med
166. Echt DS, L.eibson PR, Mitchell LB, et al. Mortality and
9:234,1995
morbidity in patients receiving encainide, flecainide or
148. Hofmann S, Kersten U. The effectiveness and tolerance
placebo. N Engl J Med 324:781, 1991
of ramipril in comparison lo captopril for heart failure:
167. Zipes DP. Specifc arrhythmias: diagnosis and treat-
in dogs. Dtsch Tierarztl wochenschr 103:159, 1996
tment. In Braunwald E (cd): Heart Disease: A Textbook
149. Morisse B, Kersten U. Treatment of hcart. failure in
of Cardiovascular Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB
dogs with ACF. inhibitors: comparison of quinapril and
Saunders, 1994, p 667
captopril. Tierarzdl Prax 23:489, 1995
168. Calvert CA, Pickus Cw, Jacobs GJ. Effcacy and toxicity
150. Pouchelon JL, and the Benazepril Veterinary lnvestiga-
of tocainide for the treatment of ventricular tachyar-
tors: Treatment of heart failure in dogs with
rhythmias in Doberman pinschers with occult cardio-
 benazepril--resuls of European double-blind placebo
myopathy. J Vet Intern Med 10:235, 1996
controlied study. Abstract. J Vet Intern Med 10:163,
169. Garg R, Yusuf S. Current and ongoing randomized
1996
 trails in heart failure and left ventricular dysfunction. J
151. Kittleson MD. The acute hemodynamic effects of capto-
Am Coll Cardiol 22(suppl A):194A, 1993
pril in dogs with heart failure. J Vet Pharinacol Ther
170. Ishida S, Makino N, Masutomo K, et al. Effect of meto-
16:1, 1993
 prolol on the β-adrenoceptor density of lymphocytes
152. Packer M, O)'Connor CM, Ghali JK. Effecl of amlodi-
in palients with dilated cardiomyopathy. Am Ileart J
pine on morbidity and mortality in severe chronic heart
125:1311,1993
failurec. N Engl J Med 335:1107, 1996
171. Heilbrun SM, Shah P, Bristow MR, et al. Incrcased β-
153. Knight DH. Efficacy of inotropic support of the failing
 receptor density and irmproved hemodynamic response:
heart. Vet Clin North Ain Simall Anim Pracl 2l:879.
to catecholamine stimuiation during long-term mcto-
1991
 prolol therapy in hearl failure from dilated cardiomy-
154. Kitlcson MD, Eyster GE, Knowlen GG, et al. Efficacy
opathy. Circulation 79:483, 1989
of digoxin administration in dogs with idiopathic con-
172. Olsen SL, Yanowitz FG, Gilbert EM, et al. Beta-blocker
gestive cardiomyopathy J Ain Vet. Med Assoc 186:162,
related improvement in submaximal cxercise tolerance
1985
155. Ureisky BF, Young,JB, Shahidi FE, et al for the PROVED
thy. Abst1act. J Am Coll Cardiol 19:146A, 1992
Investigative Group. Randomized study assessing the
173. Waagstein F, IHjalmarson A, Varnauskas E, et al. Effect
effect of digoxin withdrawal in patients with mild to
of chronic beta-adrenergic receptor blockade in con-
moderatc chronic congestive heart failure: results of
gestive cardiomyopathy. Br Hleart J 37:1022, 1975
the PROVEI) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 22:955, 1993
174.1
Heilbrun SM, Shah P, Bristow MR, et al. Increased β-
156. Arnold SB, Byrd RC, Meister w, et al. Long-term digi-
receptor densily and improved hemodynamic response
talis therapy improves left ventricular function in heart
to catecholamine stimulation during long-term mcto-
failure. N Engl J Med 303:1443, 1980
 prolol therapy in heart failure from dilated cardiomy-
157. DiBianco R, Shabetai R, Kosta KW, et al, for the Milri-
opathy. Circulation 79:483, 1989
none Multicenter Trial Group. A comparison of oral
175. Eichhorn EJ, IIeesch CM, Barnett JIl, ct al. Effect of 
MYOCARDIAL DISEASES OF DOGS  617
metoprolol on myocardial function and energetics in
195. Thomas WP, Mathewson JW, Suter PF, ct al. Hlypertro-
patients with nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy: a
phic obstructive cardiomyopathy in a dog: clinical, he-
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J
modynamic, angiographic, and pathologic studies. J Am
Am Coll Cardiol 24:1310, 1994
Anim Hosp Assoc 20:253, 1984
176. Bristow MR. Pathophysiologic and pharmacologic ratio-
196. Swindle MM, 1Iuber AC, Ran IS, et al. Mitral valve
nales for clinical management of chronic heart failure
prolapse and hyperurophic cardiomyopathy in a pup. J
with beta-blocking agents. Am J Cardiol 71:12C, 1993
Ain Vet. Med Assoc 184:1515, 1984
177. Waagstein F, Bristow MR, Swedberg K, ct al for the
197.
Marks CA. Hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy in a dog. J
Metoprolol in Dilated Cardiomyopathy (MDC) Trial
Ain Vet Med Assoc 203:1020, 1993
Study Group. Benefcial elfects of metoprolol in idio-
198. Sisson DD. Heritability of idiopathic myocardial hyper-
pathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Lancet 342:1441, 1993
trophy and dynamic subaortic stenosis in pointer dogs.
178. CiBIs Investigators and Committecs. A randomized
Abstract. J Vet 1ntern Med 4:118, 1990
trial of β-blockade in heart failure: the cardiac insuff-
199. Maron BJ, Tilley LP, Liu SK, et al. Spontaneously 0C-
ciency bisoprolol study (CIBIS). Circulation 90:1765.
curring hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in dogs and cats:
1994
a potential animal model of a human discase. In Kalten-
179. Packer M, Bristow MR, Cohn JN, et al. The cffect of
bach M, Epstein SE (eds): Hypertrophic Cardiomyopa-
thy. New York, Springer-Verlag, 1982, p 73
chronic heart failure. N Engl J Med 334:1349, 1996
200. liu SK, Roberts WC, Maron BJ. Comparison of mor-
term benefit of dobutamine in patiennts with congestive
phic. cardiomyopathy in humans, cats and dogs. Am J
cardiomyopathy. Am Heart J 100:622, 1980
Cardiol 72:944. 1993
181. Feldman AM, Bristow MR, Parmlcy WW, el al. Elfecis
201. Sisson DD. Fixed and dynanic subvalvular aortic steno-
of vesnarinone on morbidity and mortality in patients
sis in dogs. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's
with heart failure. N Engl J Med 329:149, 1993
Current Veterinary Thcrapy XI. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
182. Kubo SH, Gollub S, Bourge R, et al for the Pirmobendan
ders, 1992, p 760
Multicenter Rescarch Group. Bencficial effects of pimo-
202. Sisson D, Thomas WP. Dynamic subaortic stenosis in a
bendan on cxercise tolerance and quality of life in
   f     
patients with heart failure: results of a imulticenter trial.
Assoc 20:657, 1984
Circulation 85:942, 1992
203. levine RA, Vlahakes G], Lcfebvre X, ct. al. Papillary
I83. O)'Connel JB, Breen TJ, 1Iosenpud JD. Ileart frans-
muscle displacement. causes systolic anterior motion of
plantation in dilated hcart muscle disease and myocar-
the mitral valve. Experimental validation and insights
ditis. Eur Ileart J 16(Suppl O):137, 1996
into the mechanism of subaortic obstruction. Circula-
184. Chiu RCJ, Odim JNK, Burgess JH, and the McGill
tion 15:1189, 1995
Cardiomyoplasty Group. Responses to dynamic cardio-
204. Maron BJ. Asymmctry in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy:
myoplasty for idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Am J
the septal to free wall thickness ratio revisited. Am J
Cardiol 72:475, 1993
Cardio1 55:835, 1985
185. Orton ECl, Monnet E, Brevard SM, et al. Dynamic cardi-
205. Klues HIG, Maron BJ, [ollar AL, ct al. Diversity of
omyoplasty for treatment. of idiopathic dilatative cardio-
structural nitral valve alterations in hypertrophic car-
myopathy in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1415, 1994
diomyopathy. Circulation 85:1651, 1992
186. white RN, Cobb MA, Brownlie SF. Skeletal muscle
extra-aortic counterpulsation in dogs with dilated car-
 206. Mikarmi T, Ilashimoto M, Kudo I, et al. Mitral valve and
its ring in hypertrophic cardiomyopathya 1nechanism
diomyopathy. J Small Anim Pract 38:554, 1997
creating surplus mitral leaflet involved in systolic ante-
187. Brecker SJD, Xiao HIB, Sparrow J, et al. Effects of dual-
rior m0tion. Jpn Circ J 52:597, 1988
chambcr pacing with shorl alrioventricular delay in
207. Muna FI, Ferrans V], Pierce [E, et al. Discrete subaorlic
dilaled cardiomyopathy. 1.ancet 340:1308, 1992
188. Gordon SG, O'Grady MO), Tully L, et al. Assessmenl of
stenosis in Newfoundland dogs: association of infective
endocarditis. Am J Cardiol 41:746, 1978
the ability of physiologic dual charmbered pacing to
improve left ventricular performance in Doberman
208. Buoscio DA, Sisson D, Zachary J. Clinical and patho-
pinscheis with stable congestivc heart failure due to
logic characterization of an unusual form of subvalvular
dilated cardiomyopathy: an acute study. Abstracl. J Vet
aortic stenosis in four golden retriever dogs. J Am Anim
Intern Med 12:239, 1998
Hosp Assoc 30:100, 1994
189. Stevenson IW, Tillisch JI, IHamilton M. ct al. Impor-
 209. Conte MR, Bongioanni S, DallOrto G, et al. Fixed
tance of hemodynamic response to therapy in pre-
subaortic stenosis associated with hyperlrophic cardio-
dicting survival with ejection fraction < 20% secondary
myopathy: report. of a rare familial occurrence. G Ital
to ischemic or nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy.
Cardiol 28:53, 1998
Am J Cardiol 66:1348, 1990
210. Kimura A, Harada H, Park JE, et al. Mutations in the
190. Lamontagne J, DiFruscia R. Cardiomyopathie dilatec
cardliac troponin I gene associated with hypertrophic.
canine: la survie apres le diagnostic. Med Vet Quebec
cardiomyopathy. Nat Genet 16:379, 1997
21:141, 1991
211. Silvestri G, Berini E, Servidei S, et al. Maternally inher-
191. Franciosa JA, wilen M, Ziesche S, ct al. Survival in men
ited cardiomyopathy: a new phenotype associated with
with severe chronic left ventricular failure: due to cither
the A to G AT nt.3243 of mitochondrial DNA (MELAS
coronary heart disease or idiopathic dilaled cardiomy
1nutation). Muscle Nerve 20:221, 1997
opathy. Am J Cardiol 51:831, 1983
212. Bright IM, Golden AL. Evidence for or against eflicacy
192. Liu S-K, Maron BJ, Tilley LP, et al. Canine hypertrophic
of calcium channel blockers for management of hyper-
cardiomyopathy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 174:708, 1979
trophic cardiomyopathy in cats. Vet Clin North Am
193. Liu S-K, Maron BJ, Tlley LP, ct al. I ypertrophic cardio-
Small Anim Pract 21:1023, 1991
myopathy in thc dog. A1n J Pathol 94:497, 1979
213. Wigle ED. Novel insights into the clinical manifesta-
194. Yamada E. A canine case of hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
tions and treatment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
thy. J Jpn Vet Med Ass0c 36:12, 1983
Curr Opin Cardiol 10:299. 1995
618
DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
214. Pasipoularides A. Clinical assessment of ventricular
 234, Brown RH Jr. Dystrophin-associated proteins and the
ejection dynamics with and without. outflow obstruc-
muscular dystrophies. Annu Rev Med 48:457, 1997
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol 15:859, 1990
235. van der Kooi AJ, de Voogt WG, Barth PG, et al. The
 215. L.eachman RD. Potential mechanisns of improvement
heart in limb-girdlc muscular dystrophy. Ileart 79:73,
after various treatments for hypertrophic obstructive
1998
cardiomyopathy. Tex Ileart lnst J 22:126, 1995
236. Corrado D. Basso Cl, Thicne G, ct al. Spccirum of
216. Fox PR. Evidenice for or against effcacy of beta-blockers
clinicopathologic manifestations of  arrhythmogenic
and aspirin for managemenl of feline cardiomyopath-
righit ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia: a inulticen-
ics. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2l:1011, 1991
ter study. J Am Coll Cardioi 30:1512, 1997
217.
Cooke KL, Snyder PS. Calcium channel blockers in
 237. Simpson KW, Bonagura JU, Eaton KA. Right ventricular
veterinary medicine. J Vet Med Assoc 12:123, 1998
cardiornyopathy in a dog. J Vet Intern Med 8:306, 1994
218. McAreavey D, Fananapazir L. Altered cardiac hemody-
238. Bright JM, McEntee M: Isolated right ventricular cardio-
nanic and clectrical state in normal sinus rhyihm after
myopathy in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:64, 1995
chronic dual-chamber pacing for relief of left ventricu-
239. Gwathmey JK, Davidoff Aj. Pathophysiology of cardio-
lar outflow obstruction in hypertrophic cardiomyopa
yopathics: Part I. Drug-induced and other interven-
thy. Am J Cardiol 70:651, 1992
tions. Curr Opin Cardiol 9:369. 1994
219.(
Guize 1., Gras D, Jeanrenaud X. Pacing in hypertrophic
 240. Van Vleet JF, Ferrans VJ, Weirich WF. Cardiac diseases
obstructive cardiomyopathy. A randomized cross-over
induced by chronic Adrianycin administration in dogs
study. PIC Study Group. Eur Hleart J 18:1249, 1997
and an cvaluation of vitanin E and selenium as cardio-
220. Cohn LH. Trehan H, Collins J Jr, ct al. l.ong-term
protectants. Am JPathol 99:13, 1980
follow-up of patienis undergoing myotomy/myectomy
241. Kehoe R, Kehoe R, Singer DH, et al. Adriamycin-in-
for obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am j
duced cardiac dysrhythmias in an cxperimental dog
Cardiol 70:657, 1992
model. Cancer Trcat Rep 62:963, 1978
 221. Fananapazir I. Cannon RO 3d, Tripodi D, ct al. Impact
242. Loar AS, Susaneck SJ. Doxorubicin-induced cardiotox-
of dual-chambcr permanent pacing in patients with
icity in five dogs. Semin Vet Med Surg 1:68, 1986
obstruclive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with symp
243.
. Mauldin GE, Smith GF, Matus RE, ct al. Doxorubicin-
induced cardiotoxicosis—clinical features in 32 dogs. J
blocker therapy. Circulation 85:2149, 1992
Vet Intern Med 6:82, 1992
222. Di Mario C, Musso P, Moses IJ. Alcoholization of the
244. Page RI., Kccne Bw. Doxorubicin cardiomyopathy. In
interventricular septum (Sigwarl procedure) for treat-
Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary
ment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. G Ital Cardiol
Therapy XI. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992, p 783
28:45,1998
245. Hahn KA, Hahn EA. Epirubicin (4'-epi-doxorubicin)
223. Primo J, Geelen P, Brugada J. Hypertrophic cardiomy
chemotherapy. In Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD (eds): Curren!
opathy: role of the implantable cardioverter-defbrilla-
tor. J Am Coil Cardiol 31:1081, 1998 
phia, WB Saunders, 1992, p 392
224. Michalak M, Opas M. Functions of dystrophin and dys-
246. Ogilvie GK, Moore AS. Mitoxantrone. In Kirk RW, Bo-
trophin-associated proteins. Curr Opin Neurol 10:436,
nagura JD (eds): Current Veterinary Therapy XI: Small
1997
Animal Practice. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, I992, p
225. Brown RH Jr. Dystrophin-associated proteins and the
399
muscular dystrophics. Annu Rev Med 48:457, 1997
 247. Appelbaum FR, Strauchen JA, Graw RG. Acute. lethal.
226.Valentine BA. Winand NJ. Pradham D, et al. Canine
carditis caused by high-dose combination chemother-
X-linked muscular dysirophy as an animal model of
apy Lancet 1:58, 1976
Duchenne muscular dystrophy: a review. Am J Med
248. Unverferth DV. Magorien RD, Balcerzak SP, et al. Early
Genet 42:352, 1992
changes in human myocardial nuclei after doxorubicin.
227. Valentine BA, Cummings JF, Cooper BJ, et al. Develop-
Cancer 62:215. 1983
ment of Duchenne-type cardiomyopathy: morphologic
249. Schwartz RC, McKenzie WB, Alexander J, et al. Conges-
studies in a canine 1nodel. Am J Pathol 135:671, 1989
tive heart failure and left ventricular dysfunction com-
228. Moise NS, Valentine BA, Brown CA, ct al. Duchcnne's
plicating doxorubicin therapy. Seven-ycar experience
cardionyopathy in a canine model: clectrocardio-
using serial radionuclide angiocardiography. Am J Med
graphic and echocardiographic studies. J Am Coll
82:1109, 1987
Cardiol 17:812, 1991
250. Shulman LN, Braunwald F, Roscnthal Ds. Ilematologi-
229. Howell JM, Fletcher S, Kakulas BA, ct al. L'se of the
cal-oncological disorders and heart disease. In Braun-
wald F (ed): H leart Discase: A 'Textbook of Cardiovascu-
therapy trials. Neuromusc: Disord 7:325, 1997
lar Medicine, 5th cd. Philadelphia, WB Saaunders, 1997,
230. Miller MS, Tilley LP, Atkins CE. Persistent atrial stand-
p1786
still (atrioventnicular muscular dystrophy). In Kirk RW,
251. Price GS, Page Rl., Fischer BM, ct al. Effcacy and
Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
toxicity of doxorubicin/cyclophosplhamide mainte-
X1. Plhiladelphia, WB Saunders, 1992, p 786
nance therapy in dogs with mulicentric lymphosar-
231. Jeraj K. Ogburn PN, Edwards WD, ctal. Atrial standstill,
coma. J Vet Intern Med 5:259, 1991
myocarditis and destruction of cardiac conduction sys-
tem: clinicopathologic correlation in a dog. Am Heart
surgery and doxorubicin chemotherapy in dogs with
] 99:185, 1980
 osteosarcoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1555, 1995
232. Kubo S, Tsukahara T, Arahata K [Emery-Dreifuss mus-
253. Imondi AR, Della Torre P, Mazue G, et al. Dose-re-
cular dystrophyl. Nippon Rinsho 55:3186, 1997
sponse relationship of dexrazoxane for prevention of
233. Cartegni L., di Barleua MR, Barresi R, el al. Heart-
doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity in mice, rals. and
spccifie localization of emerin: new insights into Emery-
dogs. Canicer Res 56:4200, 1996
Drcifuss muscular dystrophy. Hum Mol Genet. 6:2257,
254. Walvoort HC, van Nes J, Stokhof AA, et al. Canine
1997
glycogen storage disease type ll: a clinical study of
MYOCARDIAL. DISEASES OF DOGS 619
four affected lapland dogs. J Am Anim Hlosp Assoc
urv  hop eueisinoT aaneu e ui zno puosonndoi aa
20:279,1984
Vet Med Assoc 177:247, 1980
 255, Mostafa IE. A case of glycogenic cardiomegaly in a dog.
278. Blandon R, Leandro IM, Johnson CM. Clinical, ccho-
Acta Vet Scand 11:197, 1970
cardiographic, and angiographic evalualion of natural
256. DeFrancesco TC, A1kins CE. Kcene Bw. Myocardial
reservoirs of Chagas’ disease in thie Republic of Pan-
infarction complicating management of congestive
ama. Rev Med Panama 20:108, 1995
heart failure in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:68, 1996
279. Barr SC, Gossctt KA, Klei 'TR, et al. Clinical, clinicopath-
257. Liu SK, Fox PR. Myocardial ischemia and infarction. In
ologic, and parasitologic observations of trypanosomia-
Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD (eds): Current Veterinary Ther-
sis in dogs infected with North American Trypanosomu
apy X1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992, p 791
cruzt isolates. Am J Vet Res 52:954, 1991
258. Bjorvedt G, Howard EB. Acute myocardial infarction in
280. Barr SC, Schmidt SP, Brown CC, et al. Pathologic fea-
a ratcing greyhound. Canine Pract 10:24, 1983
tures of dogs inoculated with Yorth Aunerican Trypano
259. Liu S-K, Tilley LP, Tappe JP, el al. Clinical and patho-
soma rrmzi isolates. Am J Vet. Res 52:2033, 1991
logic findings in dogs with atherosclerosis: 21 cases
281. Andrade ZA, Andrade: SG, Sadgursky M, ct al, Damage
(1970-1983). J Ant Vet Med Assoc 189:227, 1986
and healing in the conducting system of the heart (an
 260. King JM, Roth 1., Haschek WM, et al. Myocardial necro-
experimental study of dogs infected with Trypanosomu
sis secondary to neural lesions in domestic animals. J
cruzi). J Pathol 143:93, 1984
Am Vet Med Assoc 180:144. 1982
282. Barr SC, Simpson RM, Schmidt SP, et al. Chronic dilata-
261. Pinson DM. Myocardial nccrosis and sudden death
tive myocarditis caused by Trypanosoma cruzi in two
after an episode of aggressive behavior in a dog. I Am
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1237, 1989
Vet Med Assoc 211:1371, 1997
 283. Dubey JP, Greene CE, Lappin MR. Toxoplasmosis and
262. Hayes MA, Russcl RG, Babiuk 1.A. Sudden death in
neosporosis. In Grcene CE (ed): Infectious [iseases of
young dogs with myocarditis caused by parvovirus. J
the Dog and Cat. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1990,
An Vet Med Assoc 174:1197, 1979
p818
 263. Carpentcr Jl., Roberts RM, Hlarpster NK. Intestinal and
cardiopulmonary forms of parvovirus infection in a
spora caninum myocarditis in a dog. J An Vet Med Assoc
litter of pups. J Am Vet Med Assoc 176:1269, 1980
203:831, 1993
 264. Cagnon AN, Crowe SP, Allen DG, et al. Myocarditis in
 285. Barber JS, Trees AJ. Clinical aspects of 27 cases of
puppies: clinical, pathological and virological findings.
neosporosis in dogs. Vet Rec 2:439, 1996
Can Vet J 21:195, 1980
286. Hay WH, Shell 1G, Lindsay DS, et al. Diagnosis and
265. Lenghaus C, Studdert Mj. Generalized parvovirus dis-
trcatment. of Neospora caninum infection in a dog. J Am
easc in nconatal pups. J Aan Vet Med Assoc 181:41, 1982
Vet Mcd Assoc 197:87, 1990
266. Jezyk PF, Haskins ME, Jones CI. Myocarditis of proba-
287.
Calvert CA. Valvular bacterial endocarditis in the dog.
ble viral origin in pups of weaning age. J Am Vet Med
I Am Vet Med Assoc 180:1080, 1982
Assoc 174:1204, 1979
 288. Calvert CA, Greene CE, Bacteremia in dogs: diagnosis,
267. Robinson WF, Hluxtable CR, Pass DA. Canine parvovi-
treatment, and progress. Compend Cont Educ Pract
Ius myocarditis. A morphologic description of the natu-
Vet 8:179. 1986
ral disease. Vet. Pathol 17:282, 1980
289. Calvert CA, Greene CE, Hardie EM. Cardiovascular
 268. Lenghaus C, Studdert MJ. Animal model of human
disease: acute and chronic viral myocarditis; acite, dif-
tions, and prognosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:612, 1985
fuse nonsuppurative active myocarditis and residual
290. Greene RT, Levine JF, Breitschwerdt. EB, ct al. Clinical
and serological cvalutations of induced Borrlia burgdor-
vovirus. Am J Pathol 115:316, 1984
feri infection in dogs. Am J Vet Res 49:752, 1988
269. Kraner JM, Meunier PC, Pollock RVII. Caninc parvovi-
291.
Magnarelli 1A, Anderson JF, Kaufmann AF. et al. Bor-
rus update. VM/SAC 75:1541, 1980
reliosis in dogs from southern Connecticut. J Am Vet
270. Atwell RB, Kelly wR. Canine parvovirus: a cause of
Med Assoc 186:955, 1985
chronic myocardial fibrosis and adolescent congestive
292. Magnarelli 1A, Anderson JF, Schreier AB, ct al. Clinical
heart failure. J Small Anim Pract 2l:609, 1980
and serologic studies of canine borreliosis. J An Vet
271. Thoinas RE. Canine idiopathic congestive cardiomyopa-
Med Assoc 191:1089, 1987
thy: breed incidence from a series of 17 cases. Vet Rec
293. Edwards NJ, Rebhun WC. Generalized cryptococcosis:
121:423, 1987
a case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:439, 1979
272. Higgins RJ, Krakowka S, Metzler AE, et al. Canine dis-
294. Maddy KT. Disseminated coccidioidomycosis of the
tenmper virus-associated cardiac necrosis in the dog. Vet.
dog. I An Vet Med Assoc 132:483, 1958
Pathol 18:472, 1981
 295. Reed RE. Diagnosis of disseminated canine coccidioido-
273. Carmichael LE, Greene CE. Canine herpesvirus infec-
mycosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 128:196, 1956
tion. In Greene CE (ed): Infectious Diseases of the Dog
296. Barsanti JA, Jeffery KL. Coccidioidomycosis. /n Greene
and Cat. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, I990, p 252
CE (ed): Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat. Phila-
274. Willams GD), Adams LG, Yaeger RC, et al. Naturally
delphia, WB Saunders, 1990, p 696
Occurring trypanosomiasis (Chagas’ discase) in dogs.)
297. Wood GL, Hirsh IC, Selcer RR, cl al. Disseininated
Am Vet Med Assoc 171:171, 1977
aspergillosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 172:704, 1978
 275. Tomlinson MJ. Chapman Wl., Hlanson WI. Occurrence
298.
Mullaney TP, L.evin S, Indrieri RJ. Disseminated asper-
of antibody to Tryparosoma cruzi in dogs in the south-
gillosis in a dog. J Am Vet. Med Assoc 182:516, 1983
eastern U.S. Am J Vet Res 42:1444, 1981
299.
Littman MP, Goldschmidt MH. Systenic paecilomycosis
276.
Tippit Ts. (Canine trypai1osoniasis (Chagas’ discase).
in a dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 191:445, 1987
Southwest Vet 31:97, 1978
 300. Patnaik AK, Liu SK, Wilkins RJ, el al. Paecilomycosis in
 277. Snider TG, Yaeger RG, Dellucky J. Myocarditis caused
a dog. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 16l:806, 1972
KP
28
Cardiomyopathies
PHILIP R. FOX
DEFINITIONS AND CLASSIFICATION
Cardiomyopathy (cardio heart, myo muscle) describes a heterogeneous
class of disorders whose domirant fcature represcnts structural abrormality
and functional impairment of the hcart. muscle.'-* As such, these myocardial
discascs cxclude condlitions resulting from valvular, hypcrtensive, vascular.
 pcricardlial, pulmonary. or congenital derangcmcnts. Advancemenis in echo.
resulted in increased clinical awareness of thcse conditions and improved
diagnostic reliability,.-7 Cardiomyopathies constitute the major calegory of
cardiovascular diseases encounlercd in clinical practice.
A variety of schemes have becn proposed to define the cardiomyopa
pde aaq seu aodon (ieund) mydo wan oui. s r-r'sau
classically to dcscribc the myocardium as the solc sourcc of heart discase
when ctiology cannot be identified, whercas secondary cardionyopathy has
denotcd heart muscle disease resulting from an idlentifiable systemic, meta-
bolic, 0r nutritional disorder. In 1996, the World Hcalth Organization/
the original classification to include four types of idiopathic heart musclc
discasc: hypertrophic, dilated, restriclive, and arrhythmogenic right venticu-
lar cardiomyopathy3 In addition, thc tcrm specific cardiomyopathies is applied 
to describe hcart muscle diseases associated with specific cardiac or systemic
dlisorders, such as hypertensivc cardliomyopathy, ischemic cardiomyopathy.
mctabolic cardiomyopathy, and others.
Accordingly, classification in cats is facilitated by clinical, pathologic, or
( aord rd () on so o 
hypertrophic or dilatcd cardiomyopathy): (2) etiology (c.g., taurine dcfi-
ciency myocardial failurc; thyrotoxic heart disease): (3) rmyocardial furction
(e.g., systolic or diastolic dysfunction); (4) pathology (c.g., infiltrative cardio-
myopathy); and (5) pathophysiology (t.g., resurictive cardiormyopathy). Un-
fortunately, any schemc is selflimiting, and many cases have overlapping
features or do not fit readily into a particular category. This has given rise to
the increasingly acknowledged designation of unclassified cardiomyopathies.3 8
Despite these and other difficultics in diagnosis and classificalion, there
remains the practical problem of treating heart failure and climical abnormal-
ities associated with myocardial diseasc. As long as one recognizes that
categorics have no sharply defined boundaries, however, categories of cardio-
myopathy continue to provide clinical utility. Important causes of cardiomy-
opathies are listed in Table 28-1.
621
622 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
TABLF 28-1
of 4933 consccutivc fclinc autopsics conducted bc-
Causes of Feline Myocardial Disease
wccn 1962 and 1976 reportcd an 8.5 pcrccnt inci
clence of primary myocardlial diseasc, with a malc prc-
Idiopathic
Hypertrophie: cardiomyopathy
dominancc (60 percent male, 40 percent female). By
Restrictive cardiounyopathy
comparison, congcnital hcart anomalics were detected
Dilated cardiomyopathy
in 1.9 perccnt of this population." Although cxtcnsivc,
Arrhyrhmogenic right vcnticular cardiomyopathy
this study preceded clinical apprecialion of hyperthy-
Secondary (Including Specific Cardiomyopathies)
roidism (the most common cause of secondary feline
Inflammatory
Vinral (panleukopenia?)
cardiomyopathy, with a current incidence of 1 percent
Bacterial
to 2 percent at The Animal Medical Center), systemic
Protozoal
 hypertension, and echocardliography. In contrast, a re-
Fungal
Algal
strictive view of prevalence may result from epidemio-
Parasitic
logic studies thal rely solely on morphologic data, suich
Metaholic
as are generated by echocardiography or necropsy.
Nutritional
'This has been illustrated by human genetic screening
Taurine deficiency
survcys that utilizc molccular markcrs to detcct af-
Ohesiny
Endocrine
fected genotypes, even in the absencc of structural
Thyrooxicosis
abnormalitics.'t
Acrommegaly
Diabetes Inellitus
 I1 spite of these limitations, however, necropsy and
Lremiat
echocardiographic data clcarly indicale that cardiomy-
Cushing's syndroine
Opathies comprise the mosl important calegory of fe-
'Toxir
line cardiovascular diseases and that congenital heart
Anthracyclines (Adrianycin)
diseases are relatively rare. More detailed demographic
Infittrative
Neoplastic
information is contained in sections discussing individ-
Glycogen storage disorders
ual myocardial disorders (Fig. 28-1).
Mucopolysarcchanidosis
Fioroptastie
Endomyocardial librosis
Endocardial fibroelastosis
IDIOPATHIC (PRIMARY)
Genetic
CARDIOMYOPATHIES
Hyperrophic cardiomyopathy
Neuromuscular
Facioscapulohumeral nuscular dystrophy
Duchennc muscutar dystrophy
HEART FAILURE DUE TO DIASTOLIC
Physicat Agents
DYSFUNCTION: HYPERTROPHIC AND
Hcat stroke
Unclasifed Cardiomyopathies
RESTRICTIVE CARDIOMYOPATHY
Idiopathic unclassficd cardiomyopathy
Persistent atial standstill
OVERVIEW OF DIASTOLIC FUNCTION
Miscellaneous
Ischemia
Abnormalities of left ventricular (IV) diastolic func
Excessive left ventricular uoderator bands
tion may produce significant hemodynamic abnormali-
ties. Thcse can cause or contributc to heart failure
even when systolic function is normal.'?17 Unfortu-
INCIDENCE OF
nately, diastolic function represents a complex se-
quence of many congruent cvents whose interrclation-
CARDIOMYOPATHY
ships are conccptually difficult and remain poorly
defincd. Morcover, diastolic dysfunction is difficult to
dliagnosc or differentiatc from systolic dysfunction
There are always limitations in cstimating disease
based on history, physical examination, electrocardiog-
incidence. Prevalence information is inluenced by di-
raphy (ECG), and radiography l2. 15-20
agnostic criteria, survcy methodls, clinical and morpho-
logic heterogeneity, and uncertainties in classifica-
tion.-1l Because most data havc originated from a few
PHYSIOLOGY OF DIASTOLIC FUNCTION
major referral institutions, the highly selective nature
 Diastolic function encompasses several distinct and
 of patient referral paterns affects how these diseases
different hemodynamic phases. Classically, the cardiac
are perccived. This can result in overestimation of
cycle is divided into systole and four diastolic phascs
discasc prevalence in thc gencral population.1 For
(isovolumetric relaxation; rapid filling: slow filling, or
cxample, an Animal Meclical Center pathology survey
diastasis; and atrial contraction, or late-filling phasc)
FELINECARDIOMYOPATHIES
623
Feline CardiomyopathyPrevalence Survey
Feline CardiomyopathyBreed Prevalence
6,522Sequential Echos:1985-1998,AMC
5,672Sequential Echos:1985-1996,AMC
%Affected
RCM
DCM
DSH
48
12
Siamese
18
33
LVH
Abyssinian
14
50
12
Himalayan
34
12
Persian
8
18
27
MaineCoon
50
14
8586878889909192939495969798
LVHDCMRCM
Year
Fox PR.1998
Fox PR.1998
FIGURE28-1
Animal Medical Center.Catswere presented for cardiovascular evaluation based upon a clinical
suspicionof heart disease.Cases originatedfromNewYorkCity,LongIslandsouthernNewYork
State,northernNewJersey,and southernConnecticut.Theincidence data donot add upto100
percentbecauseonly thosecats that hadmyocardial diseasecompatiblewitha diagnosis of dilated
cardiomyopathy(DCM),restrictive cardiomyopathy(RCM),orpathologicleftventricularhypertrophy
(LVH)arelisted.(A)Prevalence ofDCM,RCM,andLVH diagnosedbetween1985-1998.Known
cases of hyperthyroidismor systemichypertensionwerenotincluded,andtheLVHcategory
first trimester.(B）Theprevalenceof felinebreedsdiagnosedwithRCM,DCM,andLVHbetween
1985-1996 are compared.(Fox PR.Unpublished data,1998.)
(see Fig. 3-14).12.17 A simpler and perhaps more clini-
(ischemia,infarction,or arrhythmias can cause differ-
cally useful approach considers the cardiac cycle in
ent ventricular segments to relax asynchronously,
terms of three segments: systolic contraction (encom-
thereby reducing chamber relaxation rate).18-20 Cham-
passingisovolumetric contraction andthefirsthalf of
bercompliancecanbereducedbyincreasedmyocar-
ejection),relaxation (consisting of a large portion of
dial stiffness,pericardialconstraint,orincreasedcham
thesecond halfofejection,isovolumetricrelaxation,
bervolume.These alterations in diastolicfunction will
and rapid filling),and filling (beginning from mitral
increase LV flling pressure and mean left atrial (LA)
valve openingand endinginits closure,duringwhich
pressure and can result in pulmonary edema.Clini-
theventriclefillswithbloodfrom theleft atrium).15
cally,relaxationabnormalitiesmayoccurwithmyocar
Majordeterminants ofleftventricularfillingare(1)
dialischemia,hypoxia,hypertrophy,andotherfactors.
ventricularrelaxation(i.e.,therateanddurationof the
Ventricularhypertrophyandabnormalventricular
decrease in LV pressure after systolic contraction), an
chamber cavity, endomyocardial fibrosis, and myofibril
energy-dependent process during which contractile el-
architectural disarray may result from a variety of pri-
ementsaredeactivatedandthemyofibrilsreturnto
mary rsecondarymyocardial dsorders791326a
their precontractile length; and (2) effective chamber
compliance (i.e.,the rate of change of volume per rate
of change in pressure).
ASSESSMENTOFDIASTOLICFUNCTION
Diastolicfunctionmay be measured by a number of
EFFECTSOFDISEASESTATESONDIASTOLIC
techniques.Invasive methods such as peak negative
changeinleftventricularpressureover time(dp/dt)
FUNCTION
and the time constant of relaxation(tau) are accepted
Disease states may alter diastolicfunction through
indexes of the rate of relaxation.1 However,these
many pathways.Three important mechanisms control-
techniques are not performed in the clinical setting. A
ling relaxation are (l) inactivation (i.e.,disengage-
noninvasiveandpractical techniquetoassess diastolic
ment of actin-myosin cross bridges (influenced by
function is Doppler echocardiography. When a pulsed-
intracellular calcium concentration,metabolicand
wave Doppler echo-sampling gate is placed at the tips
neurohumeral [sympathomimetic] control,and aden-
of themitral valveleaflets,peak velocity measurements
osine triphosphate (ATP)concentrations);(2)LV
indicatetherelativeinstantaneouspressurechangebe-
loading forces;and(3)heterogeneity ofrelaxation
tweentheLVandLA.Resultanttransmitralflowveloc-
624
4 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
A
B
C
D
NORMAL
RELAXATION
PSEUDO-
RESTRICTIVE
ABNORMALITY
NORMALIZATION PHYSIOLOGY
ECG
VRT
MC
FVRT
VRT
MO
FICURE 28-2
 Diagram depicting transmitral inflow velocity patterns obtained by pulsc wave Doppler
the left apical parasternal transducer location, four-chrauber inflow view (sec Fig. 81uA) with tlic
pulsed-wave Doppler ccho sample volume gate positioned at the mitral valve leanet.tips in diastole.
Alterations in vclocity profiles occur in myopathic conditions tliat share sinilar diastolic properties,
and there is overlap ini Doppler patterns beiween disease states. Documentation of thesc classic
filling palterns in cats is often frustrated by rapid feline heart rates and atendant summation of F.
and A waves. (A) NormafIn hcalthy cats with normal lef-sided pressures, a high-velocity early
diastolic: flling wave (E wave) is followed by a smaller (lower velocitly) late diastolic wave caused by
atrial contraction (A wave). 1he isovolumic rclaxation time (IVR') is an index of I.V relaxarion. It.
represents the tiue from aortic valve closure (AC) (approximated from the Doppler spectral trace as
the tine frou cessation of aorric: blood flow), to uitral valve opening (MO). Mc, mitral valve closure.
(B) etaxation abnormatity-Impaired LV relaxation may be indicated by a low carly peak velovcity (E
wave) and very ligh atrial velocity (A wave). The IVRT is prolonged, the acceleration time (A7) is
reduced, aund the (deccleration rime (DT) is prolonged, Left ventricular diastolic pressures may be.
increased, (C) Pseudonormal* Pseudonorualization' deseribes an apparcnly normal pattern that is
aclually a transition betwcen impaired rclaxation and restricive physiology. (D) Restrictive
physiology-Typical features include a high early velocity (E wave) and a very low atrial velocity (A
wave). Botli the IVRT and D1 are shorlened. This paltern may accompany markedly clevated 1.V
filling pressures.
ity curves can be interpreted as a representation of
the absence of other cardliac dliscasc (c.g., aortic steno-
the overall diastolic cardiac illing characteristics (Fig.
sis or arterial hypertension) or systemic or mctabolic
 28-2) and have becn uscful in diagnosis, prognosis,
abnorinalies capable of producing the magnitude of
and trcatment of diastolic function in hurnan pa-
hypertrophy evident. Ihe hallmark histopathologic
tients.12. 13.27-30
fealure is ryocyt disarray39212 A distinctive clini
Abnormal LV relaxation is a cominon manifestaion
cal feature in soine affected cats is a dynamic IV out-
of hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy. The most characteris-
flow tract obstruction and related subaortic pressurc
tic Doppler echo feature of a relaxation abnormality is
gradient (obstructive form of HICM).2
 low E vclocity, with prolonged dcccleration. and high A
filling patiern, called pseudonormalization, may reprc-
PREVALENCE AND DEMOGRAPHICS
sent dcterioration of IV diastolic function. A resrictioe
filling paltern is present in sone patients with restrictive
Liu reported a 5.2 percent incidcnce of IHCM bascd
cardionyopathy and appcars as a high E vclocity, with
upon 4933 consecutive feline necropsies at 'The Animal
rapid dcccleration and small A velocity,54 1. 15 23 Simj-
Medical Center between 1962 and 1976.* A 1.6 pcrcent
lar patterns are present in sorne cats with hypcrtrophic
 prevalence of HCM was reported from a retrospective
and resirictive cardliomyopathy (Fig. 28-2). In normal
study of cats treated at the veterinary tcaching hospital
cats, the E velocity is generally slighuy larger than the
of North Carolina State University from 1985 to 1989.3
A vclocity (see Table 8-4). Unfortunately, mitral flow
Between 1985 and 1997, lcft vcntricular hypcrirophy
velocities may vary with loading conditions, agc, and
(predominantly idiopathic HCM) was diagnosed in 26
heart ratc.12 31. 32 Also, F and A wave vclocities may
 percent to 64 percent of thc cats cxarnined for sus-
summate owing to rapid feline heart rates, making
pected hcart discasc by the Cardiology Service of The
Animal Medical Centcr (scc Fig. 28-1A). The reported
interpretation difficult.
agcs of cats dliagnoscd with HCM range frorn 3 months
HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
years.2 Doinestic shorthair cats are most frequently
DEFINITIONS AND NOMENCLATURE
rcported, followed by the domestic longhair. In certain
Hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is character-
 brccds, HCM may be heritable. The strongest evidence
 izcd by a liypertrophied, nondilated left ventricle in 
for this is in Maine coon cats,39, 10 American short-
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES
625
hairs,1 and Persians,9. 24. sx In conirast, HCM appcars
cnced by factors other than the sarcorneric genetic
uncoimrmonly in the Siamcsc, Burncse, and Abyssinian
 mutation, including rnodifier genes or environmental
breeds (see Fig. 28-1B). A male predominance (up to
triggcrs.43 590 51
Thc nonobstructive forin of HCM is more common
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
thian tle obstructive forrn.
-osse oh u o a sp jo aq v
ciatcd with diastole. In soine cases, systolic abnorinali-
ETIOLOGY
ties are present in addition to diastolic dysfunction. In
In hurnans, HCM is a fainilial dlisorder with an au-
any particular patient, one or more of thesc pathopllys-
tosoinal dorminant pattern of iransinission causcd by
iologic echanisns may be of consequence, including
genes thal encode cardiac sarcornere protein. About
(1) diastolic dysfunction, (2) dynamic ventricular out-
half the pa tients have mutations in one of six identified
flow obsiruction, (3) myocardial ischemia (4) ventricu-
genes. Mutations in the genes encoding cardiac β-
lar and supraventricular arrhythmias, and occasionally,
nyosin heavy chain, cardiac troponin T, and α-tropo-
(5) end-stage myocardial failure.
nyosin account for up to 70 percent of human faimilial
HCM; mutations of cardiac myosin-binding protein C,
Diastole
ventricular myosin cssential light chain, and vcntricu-
lar myosin rcgulatory light chain gcnes have been
DIASTOLIc DYsFUNCTION. In hunans with HCM, ab-
reported, and a seventh gene, cardliac troponin 1, is
 normal diastolic function is independent of the pres-
cnce or abscnce of symptoms or morphology (i.e.,
on chromosome 14 is most commonly responsible for
obstructive or nonobstructive HCM) so 5ass In cats, IV
hunan HCM, and mutations in this gene disrupt sar-
diastolic dysfunction has also bcen docunented with
coinere assembly and cause sarcomere disarray, the
HCM and associated congestive hcart failure,15 s5. a 37
hallrmark of ICM." HCM is genctically heterogeneous,
 Doppler ccho filling dynarnics appear to be nonuni-
meaning that mutations in dlifferent genes can pro-
form within the IV. In human HCM patients' filling
duce thie same clinical and phenotypical diseasc (i.e.,
dynamics are influenccd (reduced) by the extent of
 pathologic hypertrophy).17 Many rmisscnse 1nutations
ventricular septal hypertrophy5a and result frorn non-
 of these genes have becn identificd. Phenotype-geno-
uniforn ventricular relaxation* and stiffncss.* These
type associations could be important for clinical man-
 abnormalitics may have clinical importance. For exam-
agemcnt and breeding. For cxample, disease onsct is
ple, as a conscquence of dclaycd IV rclaxation and
dlclaycd and prognosis is bctter with human HCM
abnorimal distensibility (stiffness), left-sidcd heart fill-
causcd by mutations of cardiac inyosin protein C gcne
 compared with β-myosin hcavy chain gene.4s
to incrcased cnd-dliastolic pressures, and pulmonary
Evidence for genetic transinission of feline IICM is
venous pressures may cventually becoine clcvated. Pul-
mounting. A heritabie form of ICM has beer identi-
monary congestion may result from this and other
fied in a highly interrelated colony of Mainc coon
 associated neurohormonal changes. Factors that can
cats, compatible with autosomal dominancc with 100
contribute to abnormal ventricular filling and stiffness
include abnorinal cytosolic calcium kinctics,l abnor-
tivc of an autosoinal dorminant pattern has also bccn
mal loading conditions,20 fibrosis and nyofiber disar-
reporled in related Amcrican shorthair cats with sys-
tolic anterior motion of the mitral valve and/or
HCM,4 and in an inbred colony of Persian cats with
MYOCARDIAL. ISCHEMIA. Inirinsic diastolic function
lefft vcntricular hyper trophy.s* Nonfamilial forms of hu-
becomes  abnormal  when  myocardial  ischemia oc-
man HCM occur as well in which neither parent of
i X u  m se yg s'sn
the affected individual has the disorder De novo gene
(arteriosclerosis or "sinall vessel disease") sirmilar to
mutations, especially cardiac β-myosin heavy chain
gene, can be causative. Potentially, this may take place
changes are associated with abnormally thickened arte-
in cats as well.
riolar walls that reduce the lumen dliameters.242ia. 67
Althiough HCM is a genetic disease involving muta-
The severity of coronary flow reserve is related to thie
tions of genes that encode proteins of the sarcornere,
degree of coronary microcirculation remodeling and
feline HCM and hurnan HCM contain rnany gross
myocardial hypertrophy.f In addition to qualitative
and histopathologic sructural abnormalities invoiving
changes  in 
 Ccoronary microcirculation, quantitative
connective tissue clements. These include mitral valve
changes in subendocardial coronary arteriolar density
anormalies, abnormal intrarmural coronary arteries,
have been reported, with corresponding impairment
suggest that phcnotypic expression of HICM is influ-
tients.c These changes 1may predispose to rnyocardlial
626DISEASES OFTHE HEARTAND CIRCULATION
ischemiaandcouldexplainalterationsofmyocardial
apposition of the mitral apparatus with the hypertro-
metabolism that have been identified,even in asymp
phied inteventricular tum257.74,767779,80.8486 and
tomatic HCM patients.6sb Other causes of myocardial
has stimulated great controversy.A number of mecha-
ischemia include elevated LV flling pressures1,69 and
nismshave been proposed,including narrowing of the
prolongeddiastolicrelaxation,1resultinginincreased
subaortic outlet;longer anterior and posterior mitral
myocardial wall tension; and LV outflow tract gradients
leaflets and anteriorly displaced papillary muscles that
andtachyarrhythmias25that canincreasemyocardial
poorly support leaflet tissue;increased left ventricular
oxygen demand.70-72
outflowvelocities;aVenturieffect that sucksthemitral
leaflet toward the septum; and a high-velocity turbu-
VENTRICULARANDSUPRAVENTRICULARTACHYARRHYTH-
lentflowintheascendingaorta as aconsequenceof
MIAs.Elevated heartrates diminish systolic and diastolic
function;7² reduce diastolic filling, which can increase
systolic anteriormotion of themitralvalve.
In one echo/Doppler study of feline HCM,systolic
outflowgradients;andreduceforwardcardiac
anteriormotionanddynamicleftventricularoutflow
output.12. 14Excessive myocardial oxygen utilization and
obstructionwererecorded in42percent of the cats.
ischemia mayresult,7 increasing myocardial stiffness
ThemagnitudeofLVoutflowtractobstructionvaried
andreducing ventricular filling.Fibrosis contributes
fromtrivial tosevere(gradientsestimatedbyDoppler
importantly to the arrhythmogenic myocardial archi-
echo,26to 110mmHg).25 These LV outflow tract
tecture by enhancing re-entrant excitation (chapter
16),particularly in ischemic heart disease.72a
gradientsmaybepresentatrestor canbeprovoked
and accentuatedwithstress andexcitement.
Dynamic outflow tract obstruction and associated
Systole
pressuregradientsarepotentiallydeleteriousfor sev-
DYNAMICLEFTVENTRICULAROUTFLOWTRACTOBSTRUC
eralreasons.They canresult in increased systolicin-
TIoN.Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
traventricular pressure (and therebyincrease myocar-
(HOCM),an entity of HCM,is associated with several
dial wall stress);exacerbate subendocardial ischemia;
characteristic abnormalities:25. 26a, 73-ss (1) narrowing of
increase myocardial oxygen demand; and stimulate
the LV outflow tract,(2）systolic anterior motion
ventricularhypertrophy.Thedynamics ofintraventric-
(SAM) of the mitral valve (Fig.28-3),and (3)produc-
ular and LV outflow tract gradients,systolic anterior
tion of an LV outflow tract pressure gradient (Fig.
motionofthemitralvalveleaflets,andcardiacre-
28-4).The LV outflow tract is formed by the hypertro-
sponses are labile.Stimuli that may promote or exacer-
phied interventricular septum anteriorly and the ante-
bate LV outflow gradients include(1)reduced LV
riormitralvalveleafletposteriorly.DynamicLVoutflow
volume (preload),(2）decreased afterload,and (3)
tractobstructionis commonly associatedwith systolic
increased contractility.1, 14,74,75.86-89
A
VINGN
D
Franet
10
40
20
SAN
FIGURE28-3
Dynamicleft ventricular outflowobstructioninfelinehypertrophiccardiomyopathy defined with
echocardiography.(A)Two-dimensional recording (right parasternal long axis view).During systole,
systolic anteriormotion (SAM) with mitral valve-septal contact is present (arrow).Notice the aortic
valve leaflets (AOV),which are open during ejection.The left atrium (LA)is enlarged.IVS,
interventricular septum.(FromFoxPR,LiuSK,MaronBj:Echocardiographic assessment of
spontaneously occurringfeline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy:An animal model of human disease.
Circulation92:2645,1992,with permission.)(B)M-mode tracing showingmarkedSAMand
prolongedcontactbetweenanteriormitralleaflet and thickenedIVS,producing anoutlowgradient
of 90 mmHg.LVW, left ventricular posterior wall.
FELINECARDIOMYOPATHIES
627
FIGURE28-4
Evidenceof dynamicleftventricular outflow
obstruction in a catwithhypertrophic
cardiomyopathy.Top:M-mode echocardiographic
tracing showingpartial premature closure of aortic
valve leaflets (arrows） during systole.This corresponds
toobstructionofleftventricularoutflow.Bottom:
Continuous-waveDoppler waveform showspeak
velocity occurring in mid-systole(3.8m/sec;
estimatedoutflowgradient,55mmHg）.(FromFox
PR,LiuSK,MaronBJ:Echocardiographic assessment
ofspontaneously occurringfeline hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy:An animal model of human disease.
Circulation92:2645,1992,withpermission.)
MIDLEFTVENTRICULARGRADIENT.Inadditiontoor
insteadofLVoutflowtractgradient,someHCMcats
have a mid-LVgradient as detected by Doppler echo-
cardiography.Asimilarfindinghasbeenrecordedin
somehumanswithHCM.30Hypertrophiedpapillary
muscles and hyperdynamic contractility have been pos-
tulated as causes.
MITRALREGURGITATION.Dynamicmitral regurgitation
(MR)frequently accompaniesHCMwithobstruction
in humans90. 90a and cats.25 When SAM is evident,MR
resultsfromsystolic,anteriormalpositionofthemitral
valveandincreasedtensiononleafletscausedbypapil-
lary muscle displacement.73 The resultant MR jet is
usually directed posterolaterally (Fig. 28-5).The re-
lated cardiac murmur in cats generally becomes louder
as the pressure gradient (and degree of SAM)in-
creases.Negative inotropes can eliminate midventricu-
FIGURE28-5
larseptalcontact andLVoutflowobstructioninpeo-
Two-dimensional echocardiogram（right parasternallong axisview)
ple74 and cats.91 When the gradient and SAM are
with color-flowimaging（shown in black and white)of a cat with
markedlyreducedoreliminatedbythesetherapies
HCM.There is dynamicLV outflow obstruction (estimated outflow
(particularlyβ-blockingdrugs),both the degreeof MR
gradient,60mmHg)，whichis associatedwith systolicanterior
and theloudness of the murmur decreasein many
motion of the mitral valve.Mildmitral regurgitation (outlined)
results from disruption of themitral apparatus.Theleft atrium
cats.
(LA) is moderately enlarged.
628  DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
RIGHT VENTRICULAR OLTFLOW TRACT OBSTRLCTION AND
is often present. The hallmark histopathologic lesion
PREssURE GRADIENTs. Systolic abrrormalitics are rot lim-
is left ventricular myofiber disarray (cellular disorienta-
ited to the left ventricle. Right ventricular (RV) outflow
tion in nore than 5 percent of the tissue section),9,24-26.
tracl gradients have been recorded from cats with
 9m 102, tos Other common findings include remodeling of
HCM.* In humans, RV ouflow tract pressure gradients
the coronary microcirculation associated with arterio-
also occur, and a morphologic basis has been attrib-
sclerosis (small vessel disease), and matrix abnormali-
ulted to muscular hypertrophy of the crista supraven-
ties characterized by myocytc necrosis and fibrous con-
tricularis, moderator band, or trabeculae."s in cats,
nective tissuc changes (scc Figs. 36-2, 36-4, and
the etiology is undetermincd, and most gradients are
-a s toneul p1eo sotot 66 x-s9 9-1z'(g-96
relatively mild (< 25 mmI Ig).
quently present in catsl04 and has bcen reported in
humansboth without significant extramural (largc)
REGIONAL LEFT VENTRICULAR SYSTOLIC DYSFUNCTION.
coronary artery disease.10 In cats, the LV frce (poste-
 Regional heterogcncity of leff ventricular systolic dys-
rior) wall or LV apex is usually affected, although the
function has also been demonstrated. whereas left
 RV free wall is occasionally involved. Necropsy may
ventricular cjection performance may be normal, seg-
reveal left-sided congestivc heart failurc (CHF) (pul-
mental myocardial function (i.c., fractional thickening
monary congestion or cdema) and, less cornmonly,
and circunfcrential shortening) is reduced in areas of
right-sided CIIF (pericardial, pleural, or abdominal
thickened myocardiurn. Incrcased local wall thickness
effusions). Arterial thrornbocimbolism (saddle throm-
is related 1o worsening local wall function and may
bus) is comrnon, offen with renal infarction. Left atrial
rcflect regional variation in myocardial fiber disarray
and IV thrornbi are occasionally present (see also
and fibrosis. 94. 96
chiapter 36).
END-STAGE MYOCARDIAL FAILURE, 'The clinical coursc of
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
cats with HICM is comrnonly characlerized by acutc,
lifc-thrcatening congestive heart failure (typically pul-
HISToRy. A broad range of clinical abnormalitics
monary cderna), often with concornitant arterial
thrombocmbolism. Many cases remain asymptomatic.
cats are asymptormatic. In these cases, cardiac diseasc
Occasionally, HICM progresses to a stage of chainber
 often is first discovered during routine cxamination by
dilatation and systolic dysfunction. In hurnans, this
the prcsence of a heart murimur, gallop rhythm, or
structural and functional evolution is due to sevcre
arrhythinia. In other cases, peracutc signs (< 24
nyocyte death and massive replaceinent fibrosis, prob-
hours) associated with pulinonary cdema are heraldcd
ably associated with inpaired coronary vasodilator rc-
by scvere dyspnea and orthopnea and represent thc
serve and myocardlial ischemia produced by a11 abnor
first clinical manifestation of cardliomyopathy. Occa-
Imal coronary microcirculation.?5a Similar coronary and
sionally, observant owners may observe tachypnea in
 nyocardial lesions are observed in cats with suspectcd
early stages of decompcnsation. Anorexia and vomiting
end-stage HICM (Fox PR, Liu SK, unpublished data,
may precede respiratory signs by 1 or 2 days in some
1998). This phasc that reseinbles dilated cardiomyopa-
cats. Coughing is rarely obscrvcd, evcn in cats with
thy is usually associated withi refractory hcart failure
fulminant pulmonary edema. Acute paresis is the sec-
and poor prognosis and occurs in approximately 1
 ond most common clinical sign and is associated with
percnt to 5 percent of human HCM paticnts per
arterial thrornbocinbolisrn. The back legs arc most
ycar *6, 97 The incidence of cvolution of ICM into end-
cornrmonly affected (posterior paresis), but occasion-
stage myocardial failure in felincs is uncertain. The
ally paresis of one front lcg--generally the right
cause of this phenoncnon has not been clucidated,
   i d   n-
although impaired responses to isoproterenol infusion
pain and vocalizc during the first 12 to 24 hours.
have been related to future deterioration of LV perfor-
whercas front leg paresis appcars to be better tolcr-
mance in humans with typical HCM.*8
atcdl. In the najority of cats with arterial throinbocm-
bolism, CHF is also prescnt. Syncope occurs less com-
monly and may result  frorn tachyarrhythrnia or
PATHOLOGY
dynamic left ventricular ouiflow tract obstruction. Sud-
The principal pathologic featurc of primary (idio-
den dlcath withiout CIIF is uncornmon but has becn
documcnted by thie author in association with stress.
phicd, nondilated left ventricle in the absence of caus-
sudden aclivity, or Valsalva mancuvcrs (defecation or
ative cardiac, systemic, or mctabolic discasc (Figs.
urination).
28-6, 28-7).1 * Left ventricular hypertrophy exhibits a
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION. The left prccordial apex bcat
is usually palpably norrnal or hyperdynarmic. Ausculta-
 mon. Mild to moderate right ventricular hypertrophy
tion may reveal a sofl. systolic murmur (I to Ill/VI)
FELINECARDIOMYOPATHIES
629
B
RA
AMVL
IVS
LVW
IVS
LVW
FIGURE28-6
Grossheartspecimensfrom twocatswithhypertrophiccardiomyopathy showingpatterns and
distribution of left ventricular hypertrophy associated with a small left ventricular cavity.(A)
Ventricular septal thickeningismaximal in thebasal portion,and theLV posteriorwall (LvW)is also
substantially thickened.The left atrium(LA)ismarkedly enlarged and there isright ventricular
hypertrophy.The LV outflow tract has a fibrous contact plaque (white arow) on the basilar
interventricular septal(IVS)surface.Thisplaque isin closeproximity to the anterior mitral leaflet
(AMVL）andpresumablyresultedfrom systolic appositionof themitralvalve andventricularseptum.
The septal endocardial thickening present more distally in the mid-cavity level (black arrow) is
probably a consequence of end-systolic cavity obliteration and contact between septum and other
portions of theLVwall.(B)Ventricular septal thickeningismore prominent toward theLV apex
than thebase.Therightventricleishypertrophied.RA,right atrium.(FromFox PR,Liu SK,Maron
BJ.Echocardiographicassessment of spontaneously occurringfelinehypertrophic cardiomyopathy:
An animal model ofhuman disease.Circulation92:2645,1992,with permission.)
B
R+L
FIGURE28-7
(A)Two-dimensional echocardiogram (right parasternal short axisview)recorded at the chordae-
pathologichypertrophy is confined to the anterior portion of theinterventricular septum (VS)and a
region of the anterolateralfreewall (ALFW).A standardM-mode echobeam transecting themid
ventricular septum and left ventricular posteriorwall (Pw)would miss thisfocal hypertrophy.(B)
Postmortem gross specimensfrom the samepatient.Theheartwas sequentially sectionedfrom the
papillarymuscle level(first section at theleft) to themitral valve level (fourth section）.Segmental
hypertrophy is evident.LV,left ventricle;RV,right ventricle.
630DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
heard loudestover themitral and/or tricuspidvalve
ment (P wave > 40 ms wide), LV enlargement (Ru >
areas or over thesternum.A diastolicgalloprhythm is
0.8mV tall;QRs >40 msec wide),and ventricular and
common and usuallyrepresents afourthheartsound,
supraventricular arrhythmias. Frequently occurring ar-
S4(Fig.28-8).Rales,arrhythmias,and femoral arterial
rhythmias arelisted inTables 19-1 and28-2.
pulse deficits occur commonly with CHF.Heart and
lung sounds will be muffled if significant pleural or
RADIoGRAPHy.Survey thoracicradiographs are neces-
pericardial effusion is present.Paresis and absence of
sarytodeterminethepresenceofcardiomegaly,evalu-
femoral arterial pulses accompany distal aortic throm-
ate pulmonary parenchymal and vascular changes,and
boembolism.Abnormal jugular venous pulses may be
assess patterns of cardiovascular alterations.The so-
present with severe right-sided heart failure. Ascites
called
1“valentine-shaped"heart occurs infrequently
andcachexiaare occasionallypresent incasesof
withHCM and shouldnotberelieduponfor diagno-
sis.Theventrodorsal or dorsoventralviewis themost
sensitivepositiontodiscloseauricularenlargement
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY.ElectrOcardiographic changes
(Fig.28-9; see Figs.7-8 and 7-9), and care should be
are highly variable, generally nonspecific, and
fre-
taken to align the spine and sternum to avoid posi-
tional rotation.In symptomaticcats withpulmonary
deviationcompatiblewithleftanteriorfascicularblock
edema,thecommonestradiographicchangesinclude
interstitial and/or alveolarpulmonary densities;pul-
(seeFig.6-24)has been reported in 11 percent (Table
28-2),30 percent,37 and 33 percent100
ofcatswith
monary venous distention(congestion)with or with-
HCM.Ithas been detected in3percent to6percent
out pulmonary arterial congestion (Figs. 28-10, 28-11;
of cats with hyperthyroidismo7 and is infrequently re-
see also Figs. 7-8, 7-9, and 13-4); and occasionally,
mild pleural effusion.Pulmonary edema may be dif
cordedinotherformsofmyocardialdisease.Other
commonly recorded abnormalities include LA enlarge-
fuse,patchy, or focal in location and often involves the
right caudal lung lobe (Fig. 28-11). Severe, diffuse
edema is common with diastolic dysfunction(i.e.,hy-
pertrophicorrestrictivecardiomyopathies)butrarely
accompanies severe systolicfailure(i.e.,dilated cardio-
myopathy). With chronic or advanced HCM, cardio-
megalymaybegeneralized and accompaniedbysevere
R
biventricular failure (e.g., pleural, pericardial, or ab-
dominal effusion;hepatosplenomegaly;or pulmonary
edema)735,37,56,69100.101,106.108
ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY.Althoughcontrastradiography
4
hasbeenlargelyreplacedbyechocardiographyfor
2
clinical diagnosis,nonselective angiocardiography may
provideimportant morphologic information in some
cases (Figs. 28-12, 28-13). Characteristic angiographic
features of HCM include (1)LV free wall hypertrophy;
(2）pronouncedLVchamber reduction(which often
appears slitlike in appearance); (3) extremely hyper-
trophied papillary muscles;(4) moderate to severe
LA and sometimes RA enlargement, (5) distended
pulmonary veins;(6)normal toaccelerated circula-
tory transit time; and (7) ball thrombi in the LA or
LV.47,35,69,110-112
FIGURE28-8
ECHOCARDIoGRAPHY.Echocardiography is required
for definitive diagnosis of cardiomyopathy. It is used
Phonocardiogramfrom a cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.A
simultaneous ECG isrecorded above.There isa prominent atrial
to(1)verify and assess the severity of LV hypertrophy
gallop rhythm(S,fourth heart sound).This can often be detected
and cardiac chamber dimensions,(2）detect dynamic
by auscultation anditstiming occursjustbeforethefirstheart
LV outflow tract obstruction,(3)evaluate myocardial
sound (S).A systolic heart murmur (arrow) is also present and
function, (4) detect intracavitary ball thrombi or pre-
begins after S.The second heart sound (S) is labeled and systole
is defined as the interval betweenSand S;P,Pwave;R,Rwave;
thrombotic conditions(e.g.,spontaneous echo con-
paper speed，100mm/sec.(Modified fromTilleyLP,Liu SK
trast formation)(Fig.28-14),and (5)diagnose other
Gilbertson SR,et al.Primary myocardial diseasein the cat:A
modelfor human cardiomyopathy.AmJPathol 87:493,1977,with
cardiac conditions.Clinical diagnosis is based on echo-
permission.)
cardiographic identification of the most characteris-
FELINECARDIOMYOPATHIES
631
TABLE28-2
FrequencyofSelectedArrhythmiasRecordedfromCatswithCardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic
Restrictive
Cardiomyopathy (%)
Cardiomyopathy (%)
Myocardial Failure (%)
(n=46)*
（n=37）+
（n=49）t
1°AV block
0
7
37
LAFB
10
7
3
APCs
10
22
15
PAT/Atrial fib
10
2
2
VPCs
41
53
43
VT
10
7
23
*UnpublisheddatafromcatsnFoxPRLiuSKMaronBJ.Echocardiographic assessment of spontaneouslyocurringfelinehypertrophic cardiomyopathy:n
animal modelofhumandisease.Circulation92:2645,1992.
From FoxPR.Unpublished data,1998.
FromFoxPRPetriJ，LiuSKetalClinicalandpathologicfeaturesofcardiomyopathycharacterizedbymyocardialfilurein49cat:1990-1995;Abstact
JVet InternMed11:139,1997.Fivecats had severe taurinedepletion.
LAFB,Left axisdeviation compatiblewith leftanteriorfascicular block;APCsatrial premature complexesPAT,par
nal atrial tachycardia;Atrial fib,atrial
fibrillation; VPCs,ventricular premature complexes;VT, ventricular tachycardia.
FIGURE 28-9
Correlative radiographic and
RAu
necropsy anatomy of a cat that
diedof hypertrophic
LAu
cardiomyopathy.(A)Thoracic
radiograph,ventrodorsalview.
(B）In situ heart,ventrodorsal
view.Massive left auricular (LAu)
enlargement andmoderateright
auricular (RAu) enlargement are
evident.In thisview the auricular
appendages tend to extend out
from other cardiovascular
structures and thusaremore
readilyidentified when they are
enlarged.(C)Thoracic
radiograph,rightlateraliw.
(D)Explanted heart positioned
to correlate with its right lateral
radiographic orientation.The
gross heart in this position shows
marked RAu and LAu
enlargement,but the auricles
overlieand areradiographically
RAu
superimposed over other
cardiovascular structures.Thus,
while cardiomegaly is evident
from thelateral radiograph,the
changes in the silhouette are not
as striking as those in the
ventrodorsalview.
632
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
FIGURE28-10
Right lateral thoracicradiographfroma catwith
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Thereisa severe,generalized
interstitial andalveolarpatterncompatiblewithpulmonary
edema.
ticmorphologic expression of HCM—namely,unex-
cle (see Figs. 28-3, 28-5, 28-7, and 28-14).25.86. 99101
plained LV wall thickening with a nondilated LV cham-
No single pattern can be considered “classic”or char-
ber,in the absence of hyperthyroidism,hypertension,
acteristic of the disease.In a study assessing the distri-
or aortic stenosis.To diagnose pathologichypertrophy,
bution of LV hypertrophy in 46 cats with idiopathic
the thickness of the ventricular septum or LV posterior
HCM,fourpatternsofdistributionofLVhypertrophy
(free)wallmeasuredatend-diastolemustbegreater
were identified.25 Most often (31 cats),hypertrophy
than6mm.25
was diffuse and substantial, involving portions of the
Hypertrophiccardiomyopathyis aheterogeneous
ventricularseptum aswell asthecontiguous anterolat-
disease.It is characterized by a broad range ofpheno-
eral and posterior free wall: (1） 15 of these 31 cats
typic patterns of LV hypertrophy ranging from local-
showed aconcentricdistributionofhypertrophyof all
ized and relatively mild wall thickening involving any
segments and (2) 16 of these 31 cats had involvement
one particular wall segment, to diffuse and pro-
of the anterior portion of the septum as well as antero-
nounced hypertrophy of all portions of the left ventri-
lateral and posterior free wall (but not posterior sep-
tum). Less often (the remaining 15 of the 46 cats),
segmental patterns ofhypertrophy(seeFig.28-7)were
seen:(3) in 13 of these 15,wall thickness was confined
to only one LV segment (anterior septum in 12 and
posterior free wall in 1 cat and (4) in 2 of the 15 cats,
wall thickening involvednoncontiguous segments of
theleft ventricle,ie.,anterior septum or posteriorfree
wall.Whenviewedfromthe longitudinal axis,26 of
the 46cats showedgreater wall thickening of thebasal
rather than apicalportion of theleftventricle.Some
hadproximalseptalthickeningthatprotrudedinto
theLV outflow tract.The other 20 cats had diffuse
thickeninginvolvingthebasal and apical leftventricle.
Therefore, echocardiographic examination must in-
corporatemultipleimagingviewstointegratefindings.
In this regard, segmental wall thickening may be well
assessed from theright,parasternal,short-axisviewby
evaluating a studied, continuous base-to-apical sweep,
particularly when integrated with information ob-
tainedfromparasternallong-axisandotherviews.
Additional echofindings includeLA andoftenRA
FIGURE28-11
enlargement;decreased LVinternal dimensions with
Ventrodorsalradiographofa catwithhyperrophic
cardiomyopathywith acute dyspnea.Interstitial and alveolar
LV fractional shortening; mild hypertrophy of the RV
particularlyprominent in theright caudal lunglobe.
wallandmildtomoderatehypertrophyoftheRV
FELINECARDIOMYOPATHIES633
FIGURE28-12
Nonselective angiocardiogram of acat withhypertrophic
cardiomyopathy.This exposure was taken approximately six
seconds aftervenous injection of radiocontrast dye.A large
filling defect(arrows) caused by a ball thrombus is present
within the enlarged left atrium.The left ventricular
chamberisreduced and theleft ventricular posteriorwall is
thickened.
outflow tract;RVdilation(lateinthediseasecourse of
tiveformwaspresent.25 Tricuspidregurgitationisless
some cases);and pericardial effusion.In cases of dy-
common.CatswithSAMusuallyhaveeccentricmitral
namicLVoutflowtract obstruction,thereisSAMof
regurgitation jets (see Fig. 28-5). These are usually
the mitral apparatus and midsystolic aortic valve clo-
oriented toward the posterolateral wall and result from
sure; narrowed LV outflow tract; a fibrous plaque on
systolic disruption of the mitral valve apparatus.With
thebasalventricular septum corresponding to the
dynamicLVoutflowtractobstruction,themaximalLV
point of systolic anterior mitral valve contact; and
outflow tractvelocityisincreased.Estimated subaortic
thickening of the anteriormitral valveleaflet(seeFig.
gradientsusingthemodifiedBernoulliequation
28-6). Chordae tendineae may be elongated and the
(chapter 8) range from 25 to 110 mmHg.25 These LV
mitral valve leaflets enlargd.6,14,25,41,7378,85,10101
outflowtractDopplerwaveformsdisplayacharacteris-
ticconcaveandasymmetrically shaped pattern(see
DOPPLERECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.Anumber Of flow dis-
Fig.28-4)because they increase relatively slowly in
early systolebut then rise abruptly and peak in midsys-
tion is common.In 46cats withHCM,mild to moder-
tole.Inaddition,increasedRVoutflowtractgradients
atemitralregurgitation was detected in96percent,
may occur.92 This may be more common when LV
regardless of whether the obstructive or nonobstruc-
outflow tract gradients are present.93 Mitral inflow
LA
SN8OR2
ECO
FIGURE 28-14
FIGURE28-13
Two-dimensional echocardiogram(right parasternal long axisview)
from a cat with dyspnea and pulmonary edema.The left atrium is
Nonselective angiocardiogram of a catwithhypertrophic
severely enlarged and contains a ballthrombus attached to the
cardiomyopathy.The left atrium (LA) is dilated,the left
posterior wall (arrow).Spontaneous echo contrast (*smoke"),
ventricularchamberis small,and the papillary muscles(arous)and
appearing as echogenic(white) specks,are present in the left
walls of the left ventricle are thick.(From Fox PR.Myocardial
atrium.The leftventricleisdiffusely hypertrophic and scant
diseases.In Ettinger SJ (ed):Textbook of Veterinary Internal
pericardial efusion is present.Two days after this examination the
Medicine.3rd ed.Philadelphia,WBSaunders,1989.)
cat experienced an acute distal arterial embolism.
634DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
Doppler waveforms may be normal or show a rclax-
as early as 3 months of age and progressed to severe
ation abnorimality indicative of diastolie dysfunetion
disease between 6 and 18 months of age."
Unfortunately, predicting the clinical course and
ventricular gradient may be present.
outcome is difficult if not impossible owing to the wide
variation in complexity of disease cxpression, particu-
CLINICAL PATHOLOGY Effusions, when present, arc ob-
larly since heritablc characteristics are unknown. No
structivc transudate or modified transudate.1s Mild
 particular clinical Gnding has bcen shown to be reli-
prcrenal azotemia may result from anorexia and vom-
ably associated with subsequent sudden death or carly
iting, and anorectic cats usually have mild to moderatc
recrudlescence of CHF. Neverthcless, some survival
hypokalemia. Thcsc changes may bc exacerbated by
characteristics have begun to cmcrge. 1n a series of 46
 overzcalous diuretic adlministration.-7. ius Thrombocm-
cats with HCM in which 43 wcre followed for up to 49
bolism will cause elevations of serum muscle andl hc-
months,2 nonsurvivors showed a significantly grcater
patic enzymes and, occasionally, hyperkalemia.+8. s7, 10s
magnitude and cxtent of LV hypertrophy (maximum
Hlypcrsomatotropism has bccn reportccl in hypertro-
wall thickness, 8.1 ± 1.5 mm) than survivors (7.3
phic cats,ll! but is significance, if any, is uncertain.
± 0.9 mm); nonsurvivors had significantly larger LA
dimensions (20.1 ± 4.6 mm) compared with survivors
(16.8 ± 3.4 mm). In addition, SAM was more common
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
in survivors (16 of 18 cats [89 perccnt]) than nonsurvi-
Conditions that. cause LV hypertrophy must be cx-
vors (10 of 21 cats [48 percent]), suggesting that the
cluded beforc idiopathic HCM can be diagnosed.
nonobstruclivc form of feline HCM without SAM had
Thus, thc two most common dlifferential diagnoses
a more unfavorable prognosis.
are hyperthyroidism and systemic hypertension, Rarcly.
  e       
valvular or subvalvular aortic stenosis is cncountcred.
up cvaluation was possible,*3 mcdian survival time was
The  cormbinedl  presence of systemic  hypertension
732 days. Longevity was not affected by age, breed,
(causing LV hypcrtrophy) and restrictive cardiomyopa-
 gender, or body weight, but the presence or absence
thy (causing LA enlargement) may cause morphologic
of clinical signs did have an impact upon survival.
For cxample, cats without clinical signs lived longer
changes reseinbling IICM. Becausc right-sided CIIF
    ( ot < (s )
may occur with HCM, noncardiac causes of pleural
cffusions must be considered. When severe pericardial
signs (cats in heart failure survived a median of 92
days, and cats with arterial cmbolism survived a me
cffusion is prescnt, pericardial diseases must bc ruled
dian of 61 days). At 6 months after diagnosis, all cats
ol1f.
with embolism and 60 percent of cats with heart failure
were deadl. Cats with heart rates of less than 200 beats/
NATURALIHISTORYANDPROGNOSIS
min at initial cxamination survived significantly longcr
than those with heart rates ovcr 200 beats/min. How-
A substantial proportion of HCM cats achieve adult-
cver, sincc the minimal, maximal, and mean heart
 hood without clinical signs or appear to have a normal
rates cvaluated by 24-hour continuous ECG monitor-
life expectancy, often without the aid of major thera.
 ing vary considerably in normal cats and in cais with
peutic intervcntions. Some cats will present with fulmi-
CHF,us the clinical relevance of presenting heart rate
nant congestive failurc, become compensated with
remains uncertain. In a series of 15 HCM cats that had
drug administration, and then remain asymptomatic;
CIIF, a mean survival time of ll47 days was recorded,
some of these individuals will havc recurrent bouts of
 a  o   s 
CHF and ultimately die, whereas a small percentage
clucled.15G
will remain asymptomatic, even after discontinuation
 Diminished clinical response to diuretics is a com-
of medicaments. In contrast, many cats with HCM
mon factor confounding trcatment of CHF in peo-
will cxpericnce CHF, thromboembolism, and death.
ple. t Failure to achicve diuresis may contribute to
Morbidity and mortality differ in humans with familial
   sed  i p o y 
IICM according to the mutations involved,*s but this
to reducc cardiac preload, which leads to preservation
has not been investigated in cats.
of altercd hemodynamics, abnormal neurohormonal
 A discase pattern of HCM has been reported in a
activation, and increascd mortality. An attenuafed rc-
highly interrelated colony of Maine coon cats with
sponse to diuretics (ie., slow or partial clearance of
familial HCM. Whcn individuals with phenotypic IV
cdema despite vigorous IV furosemide) is also associ.
hypertrophy ('affected cats") wcre maled to cats with-
atcd with poor prognosis in cats.
out hypertrophy ("unaffected cats'), HCM was not
evident before I ycar of age; it usually became appar-
DOES EARLY THERAPY DELAY OR REVERSE
ent during adolescencc; and it usually progressed to
PROGRESSION OF MYOCARDIAL. DISEASE?
severe disease by 2 to 4 ycars of age. In cats from
Thc clinical course and outcome of felinc myocar-
 affectcd to affected matings, HCM bccame apparent
dial disease are difficult to predict owing to the hetero-
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES 635
gencity of cach condition, the complexity of disease
reinfarction. particularly when deercascd coniractility
cxpression. and the wide variation in natural history.
and ventricular arrhythmias were present. e1 1v2 Even at
Certainly, diuretics are not indicated in asymptomatic
low doscs, β-blockers provided cffective post-MI ther-
cats who have never had CHIF. Diurctics may activate
apy12 Morcover, left ventricular diastolic function is
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, which can
very sensitive to incrcases in synpathetic tone. '2+ Thus,
 bc potentially detrimental.u7a There is no cvidencc
use of sympathctic ncrvous system antagonists may
that standard therapies can influence the powerful
indircctly improvc ventricular compliance by reducing
biologic mechanisms that dictate morphologic hyper-
hcart rafe and myocardial ischemia. In cats with sus-
 trophy,54 However, it is unclear whether β-adrenergic
 pected ischemic myocardial injury, propranolol (Inde-
blockers, calcium channcl blockcrs, or angiotensin-
ral, Wyeth-Ayerst; 2.5 to 5 mg q8-12h P0) or atenolol
converting cnzymc (ACE) inhibitors dclay disease pro-
(Tenormin, Zeneca; 6.25 to 12.5 mg q12-24h PO) can
gresson, protect against sudden death, or improve
 be administered. Although these agents arc generally
prognosis in asymptomatie cases. There is currently no
safe, β-blockers may occasionally calse bradycardia,
conscnsus among cardiologists regarding therapeutic
hypotension, or lcthargy. Echocardiography can be
approachcs. However, several treatment strategies, as
useful to monitor cardiac chamber dlimensions, asscss
suggested next, may be justified bascd upon theoretical
IV remodeling,12n and, in cases in which myocardlial
benefis and comparative studies in human cardiology
failure is related to severc Ml, follow contractility since
Or animal models of disease.
β-blockers are ncgative inotropcs.
ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME INHBITOR THIERAPY ACE
THERAPIES IN ASYMPTOMATIC BUT
inhibitors have been advocated in human post-Ml trials
based upon their role in reducing cardiovascular re-
POTENTIALLYHIGH-RISKPATIENTS
modeling  and improving hemodymamics and  sur-
No single test can reliably predict morbidity or mor-
vival,127-129 There is clear evidencc in pcoplc that ACE
tality in HCM, and the complexity of the discase has
inhibitors decrease mortality in acute Mi, and that
created obstacles for risk identification and stratifica-
chronic therapy reduces ischemic cvents. Enalapril
tion. Nevertheless, several important fcatures of HCM
(Enacard, Merial L.td.; 0.5 mg/kg q24h PO) is probably
may increase risks of morbidlity and mortality. Accord-
the most commonly used ACF: inhibitor in cats. Othcr
 ingly, prophylactic therapy may be warranted in thcse
agcnts arc availablc, including bennazepril (Lotensin,
circumstances, bascd upon certain pathophysiologic
Ciba; 0.5 mg/kg q24h PO); lisinopril (Prinovil, Merial
considerations.
Ltdl.; 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg q24h PO); and captopril (Ca-
poten, Bristol-Myers Squibb: 3.12 to 6.25 ng q6-8h
MYOCARDLAL INFARCTION. Myocardial infarction (M1),
PO). ACE inhibitors reduce blood pressure and inay
particularly involving the LV apex or free wall (see
 be contraindicated with hypotension. Overzealous con-
Figs. 36-14 and 36-15), is more prevalent in feline
comitant diuretic therapy may cause azotemia.
cardliomyopathies than once believed to Clinical suspi-
CAI.CIUM CHANNEI. BIOCKER THERAPY: BasCd uPON CXtrap
cion of MI is based upon echocardiographic evidence
olation from human studies, one should cxcrcisc cau-
of regional left ventricular hypokinesis or dyskincsis,
  se  e  n  
LV free wall thinning (end-diastolie mcasurcmcnt < 2
mm), or ECG evidlence of marked (> 0.2 mV) ST
Calcium channcl blockers have not been efficacious
(i.c., no reduction of subsequent cardiovascular
segment elevation or depression. In cats and humans
with HICM, myocardial infarction causcs significant
and other calcium-blocking agents caused harm when
morbidity and may be relatcd to intramural arterioscle-
rosis,24 26 m,  Myocardial ischemia is commonly associ-
administered to humans with MI and left ventricular
dysfunction,3136 possibly by activaing the ncuroendo
 s  s s e   
HCM26. 2 94 w  and presumably also in cats, based
crine system.3 Accordingly, calcium antagonists are
not currently recommended for routine secondary
upon similar histopathologic lesions.9. 21. 21-26a. s9. 67、105
prevention after infarction.s* Others have advocated
lschernia is also strongly associated with severe and
that heart rate-lowering calcium antagonists (e.g., ver-
 potentially lethal arrhythmias. 118
q I m sun o passi oq (sz ede
without. CHIF, in whom a β-blocker is contraindicated,
βADRENERGIC BIOCKER THERAPY Rcsults from clinical
 or in conjunction with an ACE inhibitor1w whether
trials cvaluating myocardial infaretion therapies in hu-
or not these data arc rclevant to treatment strategies
mans offer compelling evidence for use of β-blockers.
for feline myocardial diseases remains 1o be detcr-
These agents decrcased mortality in paticnts with acute
MI and cardiac arrhythmias.. 12w In paticnts with
mined.
chronic Ml, β-blockcrs reduced long-term mortality
TACHYARRHYTHMIAs. The gencsis of atrial tachyar-
by their antiarrhythmie cffects and by prcvention of
rhythmias includes clectrophysiologie abnormalities as-
636
DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
sociated with marked LA enlargement and concurrent
rate reduction is much weaker than that resulting from
derangements in atrial cell structure.t4o In addition,
β-blocker thcrapy. Several preparations of diltiazein
myocardial necrosis, fbrosis, and scar are common
are available: Cardizem tablcis (Hoechst Marion Rous-
fcaturcs of feline myocardial disease9 21 22. 21-26. 67.9s. 11
sel), 7.5 mg q8-12h; Cardizcm CD capsules, a long-
and may serve as substrates for serious ventricular ar-
acting formulation (Hlocchst Marion Roussel), 10 mg/
rhythmia.lt2 Tachycardia diminishes systolic and dia-
kg q24h; and extendled relcase diltiazem (Dilacor XR,
stolic function,7α recluces diastolie flling that can in-
Rhone-Poulcnc Rorer; cach Dilacor XR 240-ing cap-
crease outllow graclients and reduce forward cardiac
sulc contains four controlled-released 60-mg tableis,
output,'4 14 and can result in cxcessive myocardial oxy-
and the starting dosage is 30 mg q12-24h [some cats
gen utilization and ischemia.7 Ventricular hypertrophy
may tolerate 60 mg oncc to twice daily, although vom-
is associated with increased risk of sudden death in
iting is a common side cffect]). A(E inhibitors blunt
people (merhanisms include depressed resting mem-
 neuroendocrine activation and may prevent deleteri-
branc potential, increased excitability threshold, inter-
ous cardiovascular remodeling. Thc mcrits of ACE in-
stitial Gbrosis. and abnormal intracellular calcium
hibitors for trcating feline HCM have a scicntific
handling).1: In some cases tachycardia precipitates
basis,17 152-156 and ACE inhibitors have been used safcly
weakness or syncopc. Beta-adrenergic blockcrs (pro-
 in the clinical setting.5* Enalapril (0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg
pra1olol. 5 to 10 mg q8-12h PO; atenolol, 6.25 to 12.5
24h PO) and bcnazcpril (0.5 mg/kg q24h PO) are
mg q12-24h PO) antagonize the sympathetic nervous
well tolerated.
system and nay therefore be useful for treating parox-
ysmal ventricular tachycardia or frequent multiform
 SYNcope. Recurrent syncope is a risk factor for sud-
ventricular arrhythmias. Digoxin (0.031 mg [i.e., % of
a 0.125-mg tablctl per 4.5-kg cat q48h P0) or diltiazcm
associated  with  tachyarrhythmias and  bradyarrhyth-
may be administcred for atrial tachyarrhythmias. How-
mias,'59 dynamic I V outllow obstruction,t60 altered bar-
cver, heart rate control oftcn requires the addition of
 oreflexes,61l and ischemia.8 Moreover, syncopc is usu-
a β-blocker, beginning with half of the initial dosc,
ally distressing to owners of pets. In cats, syncope is
which is then titrated to effect.
most often clinically associatcd with physical activity or
exertion and obstructive HCM. Excrtional syncope in
MASSIVE LEFT VENTRICULAR HYPERTROPHY Although
human HCM has bcen reported most often with thc
the scverity of hypertrophy is not a rccognized risk
 obstructive form.7 Symptoms in humans have often
been managed with negative inotropes (β-blockers, cal-
cium antagonists [predominantly verapamil] , and diso
an unfavorable prognosis.2. * Marked hyperurophy is
 pyramide) to alleviate or abolish dynamic LV outflow
present when the maximal LV frce wall or interventric-
tract obstruction.6. 74, 7s. 148 In cais, there is lile experi-
ular septal thickness measurcd at end-diastole exceeds
ence with verapamil, and disopyramidc has not bccn
 8 mm. Accordingly, a numbcr of drugs have been uscd
studied. Beta-blockers are much more cffcctive than
 as monotherapy in severely affected cats, but clinical
diltiazem in reducing or abolishing dynamic LV out-
benefit and comparative efficacy have not becn cstab-
flow iract obstruction. associated pressure gradient,
lished. Bcta-hlockcrs are often choscn for the following
and syncope.
notropism) and associated indircct improvement of
diastolic filling; (2) reduction of dynamic LV outflow
echo phenomenon called spontaneous echo contrast is
tract obstruction; (3) reduction in myocardial oxygen
frcqucntly observed in the IA or IV of cardiomyo-
utilization; (4) autiarrhythmic cffects; or (5) ability
pathic cats and humans with certain cardiovascular
to blunt sympathetic myocardial stimulation, Clinical
diseascs. Spontaneous echo contrast is associated with
reduction of resting heart rate to 120 to 160 bcats/
LA blood stasis. It is considered to presage thrombosis
 min is usually attainablc with alenolol (6.25 to 12.5 mg
and is associaled with increased thrombocmbolic risk
q12-24h PO) or propranolol (5 to 10 mg q8 to 12h
PO) for an average sized (4.5-kg) cat. Calcium channcl
echo contrast has been attributed to erythrocyte aggre
 blockers, most commonly verapamil, are often sclected
to improve LV relaxation and, thercfore, diastolic fill-
gatcs.167 1o Multiple interrelated factors may be in-
 ing, in human HCM,t50. 1st However, verapamil is rarely
volved in thrombogenesis, including blood stasis.
Bloods
stasis within areas of ventricular akincsis
selectcd calcium antagonist in HCM cats. Rationalc
dyskinesis may provide a mechanism by which thrombi
sasod suoond suonoe si uodn poseq si sn 1o
form.l Moreover, reduced IV contractility could pre
lusitropy, that is, to dlirectly improve ventricular dia-
cipitate left atrial blood stasis.'7o Concomitant mitral
stolic relaxation and illing.s ss,7 Diltiazem may slow
regurgitation (MR) has bccn associated with systcmic
the hcart rate in some cats but not in others, and heart
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES 637
abnormal valvular surfacc or hemodynamic irregular
bers and sensitivity, protect myocytes from exccss cate-
ity).171 although severc MR may play a protectivc role
cholamine levels, and blunt neuroendocrine activa-
in LV thrombus formation.172 Given the many patho
tion.17z-17 One must be mindful of their potential
 logic and hemodynamic derangements common to fe-
negative chronotropic and inotropic effects, however
line and human heart discase, spontaneous ccho con-
Therefore, a low starting dose of propranolol (2.5 mg
trast and stasis should be considered a clinical marker
q12h PO) or atenolol (3.15 mg q24h) may be initiated,
for incipient thromboembolism and invokc a more
followed by re-cxamination of heart rate by ECG and
aggressive therapcutic strategy (sce Arterial Thrombo-
myocardial contractility by cchocardiography.
ermbolism, latcr).
"MALIGNANT" FAMILY HISTORY (HIGH-RISK GENOTYPE).
TREATMENT OF SYMPTOMATIC CATS
Pedigrecs are occasionally identified in which a herita-
CAUSES OF CARDIOVASCLLAR EMERGENCIES. MOSt COm-
blc pattern of HCM with severe morbidity and mortal-
monly, cmergencies includle leftsided heart failure
ity is documented. For example, IV hypcrtrophy, heart
 (pulmonary edema), biventricular failure (pulmonary
failurc, thromboembolism. and death have been re-
cdema and effusions), or artcrial thromboembolism;
 ported in multiple gencrations of Maine coon cats,39. 410
less commonly, tachyarrhythmias, syncope, pericardial
tamponade, or systcmic venous congestion (effusions)
documented.41 Thus, in related ofspring, cchocardio-
resulis. Renal and clcctrolyte abnormalities may be
 graphic surveillance is warranted to cvaluate disease
present.
 progression, direet therapy, and assist prognosis. In
such animals, carly intervention with calcium channel
blockers or β-adlrenergic receptor blockers may be con-
EMERGENCY TREATMENT GOALs. Thcrapy for acutc car-
diovascular cmergencies should (1l) climinale conges-
tcmplated. Though unproved, this stratcgy is bascd
 on cxperimental and theoretical considerations which
tion (edema, cffusions) and associated clinical signs;
(2) suppress or abolish serious tachyarrhythmias; (3)
hold that a pathway to the phenotypic cxpression of
improvc ventricular relaxation and filling (diastolic
LV hypertrophy is influenced by triggers such as higher
function); (4) manage arterial thromboembolism and
its conscquences; and (5) eliminate syncopc or cxer-
be  ameliorated  by  certain  pharmacotherapies.
Irm1-
 plantablc  cardioverter-defibrilators  have  prevented
cise intolerance associated with dynamic IV outflow
sudden dcath in some human HCM patients. Thcsc
tract obstruction or tachyarrhythmia. In the sevcrely
have not bcen cvaluated in felines.
dyspneic cat, care must always be taken to avoid stress.
MYOCARDIAL FAILURE. In some HCM cats, IV contrac-
Initial Therapy (First 24 to 48 Hours)
tility is mildly to moderately reduced (e.g., fractional
shortening, 23 percent to 29 percent; IV end-systolic
TREATMENT OF ACUTE PULMONARY EDEMA. AcutC pulmo-
dimension, 12 to 15 mm). This can result from acutc
nary edema is rapidly progressive and life threatening.
 or chronic myocardial infarction, particularly involving
Diurctics decrease prcload and, thus, congestion. Ac
the IV postcrior wall. Global IV failurc has been ob-
cordingly, furosemide is administered (1.1 to 2.2 mg/
scrved, with diffuse IV necrosis and fibrosis. Occasion-
kg PRN, usually q2-6h) and is individually adjusted to
ally, HCM progresses to a stage of chamber dilatation 
resolve dyspnca quickly. Peak diuresis 0ccurs within 30
and systolic dysfunction rescmbling dilated cardliomy
minutes of IV administration. Thereforc, the first dose
opathy. This is usually associated with refractory heart.
failure and poor prognosis. Oral taurine supplementa-
nous routc, followed by intramuscular injections until
tion (250 mg ql2-24h) is initiated whenever myocar-
the pet is stable. These parenteral routes have superior
dial failure is detected, even if blood taurinc cannot
bioavailability compared with oral administration. Fu-
be immediately assessed (see discussion undcr trea1-
roscmide inhibits renal tubular reabsorption of sodium
ment for systolic [myocardiall failurc, later). An ACF.
 and its accompanying anions and promotes diuresis.
inhibitor may bc added for its beneficial cffect to
'T'his reduccs vascular volume, which decreases LV fill-
counteract neurohormonal activation and reduce dele-
ing prcssurcs (i.e., cardiac prcload) and pulmonary
tcrious remodeling.  Digoxin may  bc  administered
cdema.
(0.03 mg q48h) if contractility deteriorates, or if supra-
Resolution of severe pulmonary cdcma may be cn-
ventricular tachyarrhythmias (particularly atrial tachy-
 hanced by adding the preload reducer 2 percent nitro-
cardia or atrial fibrillation) develop. Bcta-blockcr ther-
 glyccrin ointment (Nitro-Bid Ointment, Hoechst Mar-
apy might be beneficial if Ml is suspected,
, or if a
ion Roussel; V4 to % inch q6-8h cutaneously to the
tachyarrhythmia warrants control of ventricular heart
 inside of the pinna) for the frst 24 to 48 hours. Provid-
rate despite othcr therapies. Beta-blockcrs may also
ing a 12-hour dose-frcc interval may reduce devclop-
ment of tolerance. Supplemental oxygen (40 percent
638 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
to 60 percent oxygen-enriched inspired gas) may bc
prudent to assess BUN, creatinine, and electrolytes in
beneficial to improve pulmonary gas cxchange.
anorcctic or decompensated cats receiving diuretics.!tsa
Clinical inprovement is indicatcd by the reduccd
respiratory rate and work of breathing, resolved auscul-
PHARMACOLOGIC OPTIONS AND APPROACHES TO CHRONIC
tatory lung crackles, and clearirg of alveolar infiltrates
MANAGEMENT. Wliereas diuretics represent the tradi-
shown by radiography. The end-point of diuretic ther-
tional componcnt of chronic heart failure manage-
apy is relief of clinical signs or progressive increasc
 ment, othcr agents are selected to reduce diastolic
in blood urca nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine levels.
dysfunclion or its sequela. Beta-adrenergic receptor
Improvcmcnts in brcathing should become toticeable
blockers have represented the traditional approach to
within 2 to 6 hours after beginning furosemide, and
irnprove cardiac performance since 1977,1 731. 3s.177. 17x
continue. Clcaring of pulmonary infltrates (edema),
The calcium channel blocking drug diltiazcm first
as shown by radiography, is usually completed within
gained advocacy as a therapeutic strategy in 1991.56.
24 to 36 hours.1 s. 7 Cardiac responscs to diuresis in-
3. 179 More recently, ACE inhibitors have been pro-
clude decreased LA diameter and reduced Doppler
ccho transmitral E wave velocity,*9. 176
most clinicians tend to favor β-adrcnergic blockcrs
Respiratory distress due to severc pleural clfusion
whcn tachycardia or dynamic LV outflow tract obstruc-
requires thoracocentcsis. Pulmonary cdema and plcu-
tion is present, there is a lack of conscnsus. Moreover,
ral effusion often coexist, although pleural fluid ham-
thcre are no data to indicate which is the optimal
pers radiographic detection of edema. Dehydration
thcrapy for chronic management, whether combined
and hypokalcinia can result from overzealous diuresis,
therapy is more advantageous than monotherapy, or
especially in the anorectic cat.ll3a
for that matter, whether therapy is significantly better
than no therapy at all. Drugs are therefore adininis-
 Chronic Maintenance Therapy
tered on an empirical basis, relying on clinical experi-
ences, preferences, and theoretical benefits. Accord-
 Chronic therapies are optimized to maintain cardiac
ingly, advantages and disadvantages for cach
compensatiorn;  prevent  arterial thromboembolism;
therapeutic approach are discusscd here.
halt, slow, or reverse myocardlial dysfunction (theoreti-
cally); promotc enhanced quality of life; and prolong
BETA ADRENERGHC: BLOCKERs. The relationships bctween
survivai. Underlying conditions and risk factors (c.g..
syupathctic nervous system activation and deleterious
arterial hypcrtension, taurine-deficicnt dicts, hyperthy-
cardiovascular cffects have been demonstrated in a
roidism, anemia) are treatcd when idlentified.
numbcr of human and animal models of cardiovascu-
lar discasc, and thcse rclationships provide a raionale
        
for using β-adrencrgic blocker therapy.123. 1s1-192 Pro-
rate congestive signs. As soon as congestion is reduced
longed activation of thc sympathetic nervous system
and brcathing improves. furosemide is changed from
may lead to cardliovascular injury that exacerbates dis-
IV or IM to PO acdlministration (typically, 6.25 mg
case progression,73 174+ causes arrhythmias,182 or sumu-
q12-24h PO). This is then gradually decreased to the
lates vasoconstriction and secondary tissue anoxia.17a
lowest effective dosage, which is highly individualized.
 Morcover, sustained vasoconstriction, elevated ventric-
Some cats remain stable on 1.1 to 2.2 mg/kg PO given
ular afterload, and a num ber of adlditional mechanisms
cvery other day whcreas in othcrs, diuretics may be
contribute to abnormal cardiovascular remodeling and
 largely innecessary and can bc safely discontinued.
progression to congestive heart failurc.181. ixs im4 Left
 In some cases, diuretics can bc titrated expedienuly
ventricular diastolic function is very scnsitive to in-
(typically by 1 to 2 mg/kg) to control dyspnea associ-
creases in sympathetic tone.1na By dleereasing heart
atcd with recurrent pulmonary congestion or pleural
rate, β-blockers prolong dliastole and thcreby increase
cffusion, thereby preventing hospitalizations. Compen-
 passive ventricular illing and ventricular compliance.
satory hypertrophy of thc distal nephron occurs in
Prolonged diastolic filling allows more time for coro-
response to chronic loop diuretic thcrapy. Distal so-
nary blood flow and reduces myocardial ischemia. s6-1ss
dium resorption increases to overcomc the intcnded
 In paticnts with heart failure, nonselcctive β-blockade
clinical response to furosemide.17ah As a result, di-
may have favorable inhibitory cfects on cardiac sympa-
uretic resistance may occur as heart failure progresscs,
thetic activity,'s> These agents decrease myocardial oxy.
despite high doscs of furosemide.rzbac Cats with ad-
gen requirements by reducing cardiac synpathetic
vanced, chronic CHF presenting for acute cxaccrba-
stimulation, heart rate, left ventricular contractility, sys-
tions of congestion are likely to benefit from intrave-
tolic
myocardial
1 wall strcss, and systemic blood
nous furosemide, which has higher bioavailability, or
from combining two diuretics, such as a loop diuretic
and related pressure gradicnt are often reduced or
(furosemide) and a thiazide (see Recurrent and Re-
abolished.74. 8t In addition, β-blocker thcrapy has de-
fractory Congestive HIcart Failure, later). It is always
creased mortality in human clinical studies of myocar-
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES 6
639
dial infarction and cardiac arrhythmias,1s9 rso and even
improve IV diastolic function,zw-oa although it is gen-
at low doses, provided effectivc postmyocardial in-
erally judged to be less efficacious than verapamil in
farction therapy. Bcta-blockers also reduced al-causc
cascs of IV outflow obstruction.74. 75.143 2s
mortality in humans with CHF.193
In cats with IICM and pulmonary cdcma, one study
 Propranolol and atenolol are the most commonly
compared the clinical effects of propranolol versus
used β-blocking agents in cats. Propranolol (5 to 10
diltiazcm in a small mumber of animals. The treatmcnt
mg q8-12h PO) has becn recommended for more
group receiving dliltiazem and furosemide (12 cats)
realized improvements in pulmonary congestion, LV
reduces hcart rate, decreases the severity of dynamic
IV outflow tract obstruction, and is safe, 7s, is A disad-
vantage is is nced for frequent (id) dosing bccause
comparative assessment meaningful.5 Regression of
of its short half-life (t/2, 0.49 hour).1s+ Moreover, pro-
LV wall thickness was also reported to be a common
pranolol has poor and variable oral bioavailability ow-
treatment sequela of diltiazem thcrapy in this study,
ing to cxternsive first-pass hepatic metabolism.19 Re-
but such a phenomenon is regarded to occur only
cently, atenolol has become popular. It has high oral
rarely.
bioavailability (90 ± 9 percent), resulting in small
The reported t/ of conventional diltiazem (Cardi-
interindividual kinetic variability; its h/2 is 3.66 ± 0.39
zcm, 1 mg/kg PO tid) in healthy cats was 113 ± 24
 hours, and the heart rate atenuation following oral
minutes; peak concentration following oral adlministra-
administration persists for at lcast 12 hours in normal
tiou was achieved in 45 ± 36 minutes; and bioavailabil-
cats.1 Atenolol is dosed at 6.25 to 12.5 mg q12-24h
ity was 50 pereent to 80 percent. Clinically, this dlrug
PO. Adverse reactions to β-blockers are uncommon.
is dosed at 7.5 mg tid PO. A slow-absorption, long-
Occasionally, lcthargy or hypotension will occur, typi-
acting dliltuiazem formulation (Cardizem CD, 10 mg/
cally manifesting within an hour of initial oral adminis-
kg q24h) had a reported t/2 of 411 ± 59 minutes;
tration. Thcse cffects quickly abate when the agent is
 peak concentration following oral administration was
discontinucd.3. 6. 180
 achieved in 340 ± 140 minutes; and bioavailability was
Despite thcse data, a number of important issues
22 percent to 59 percent.20s A disadvantage of the CI)
surroundling β-blockcr thcrapy require clarification.
preparation is that it is currently available only in
The conparative advantages of β-blockers relative to
capsules, thus requiring formulation for dispcnsing. A
morbidity and survival, when uscd to treat diastolic
third formulation (Dilacor XR) is availablc in ex-
dysfunction, havc yet to be validatcd by a large clinical
tended release; each 240-mg capsule contains four con-
trial. Furthermore, it is unknown whcther the potential
trolledl-relcase 60-mg tablcts. Starting dose for a 5-kg
benefits of β-blockers vary with respect to stage of
cat is 30 mg q24h, and titration to 60 mg daily is
 diseasc both within and between forms of cardiomyop-
toleratcd in some cats.
athy. and clinical cvaluations comparing various β-
 blockers have not been performed.
Becausc myocardial infarction (Ml) is a relativecly
common finding at necropsy in cats with myocardial
 diseases,1os clinical cxperiences in the management of
CA/.CRUM CIANNEI. BLOCKERs. Since the dominant patho-
myocardial infarction in humans may be rclcvant. The
physiologic abnormality in HCM is diastolic dysfunc-
tion, a rationale for using drugs that improve diastolic
usc of calcium channel antagonists in post-MI human
performance is sclf-cvident, 3 264,30 58. 5 Calcium chan-
patients with LV dysfunction was not associated with a
clinical improvement (i.c., reduction of subsequcnt
ncl blockcrs cxcrt cardiovascular effects that differ
markedly among individual agens,196a. Although clini-
cardiovascular cvents).2 Other studies. however,
cal improvements have been reported affer calcium
showed a higher adverse cardiac event rafe when cal-
antagonist thcrapy in somc humans with HCM, most
cium channcl blockers were uscd,2 Moreovcr, it is
currently recomnended tha1, for humans with myocar-
dial infarction, heart rate-lowering calcium antagonists
antagonis may reducc hcart rate (verapamil much
(e.g., verapamil, diltiazein) be reserved for patienis
more so than diltiazem) and blood pressure, cxcrt a
without. ClIF in whom a β-blocker is contraindicated
mild, negative inotropic cffect (reducing myocardial
  u    e m   
 oxygen consumption), and improve rapid cliastolic
of somc calcium channel blockers in paticnts with left
ventricular dysfunction was associated with increased
s sumeanoe aq Aqissod se:'l enejuou uo qeeg jo ys
    x e ss o
man patients with HCM.io7 This effect may bc associ-
aled with a decreasc in systolie function, improvement
arc not currently recommendcd for routine secondary
in diastolic relaxation and Gilling, and probably a re-
 prevention after infarction.207 whether or not these
duction of myocardial ischemia.1o, o-2o 1iltiazem has
data are relevant to treatment stratcgies for feline myo-
been studied in humans with HCM and appcars to
cardial discases remains to be dletermined.
640
DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME INHHBITORS. BeCaUSC
thickness, I56 Less commonly, an ACF: imhibitor is uscd
ncurohorinonal activation plays an important role in
with or without furoscmide as primary therapy for
hcart failure,2os disruption of neurohormonal activa-
IICM. Enalapril (0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg q24h PO) and
benazcpril (0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg q24h PO) are clinically
ACE inhibitors.20o, s Clinical benefits, including relief
 concerning use of these agcnts in cats. Afier oral adl-
 Of progressive ventricular dilation, and improved sur-
 ministration of cnalapril doscd at 0.25 and 0.5 mg/kg.
vival, have in fact been documented in humans with
a 95 percent reduction in ACE occurred between 2
symptomatic heart failure or asymptomatic IV dysfunc-
and 4 hours after either dosc, and it remained de-
tion following pharmacologic blockade of the renin-
pressed to less than 50 percent of control for 2 to 3
angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) 210-213 Survival
days.*s0 After single doses of benazepril (0.5 mg/kg),
and quality of life were also improved in dogs with
 peak plasma benazeprilat levels were achicvcd 2 hours
hcart failure who were treated with enalapril.24. 213
aftcr oral adminisration, and over 90 percent of
ACF. inhibitors favorably alter hemodynamics in somc
 plasma ACE inhibition persisted at 24 hours.31
humans with systolic dysfunction and reduce preload,
A number of clinically important aspccts of ACF.
afterload, and systolic wall stress, thereby increasing
inhibitor therapy in fcline HCM remain to be deter-
cardiac output without elevating heart rate 216-218
 mined, including the optimal timing for ACE inhibitor
The rationale for ACE inhibitor therapy in the treat-
administration, the most effective dosage, and the cf-
mcnt of IICM can be argued based upon the salutary
fects of thesc agents on morbidity and mortality. More-
cffects of these drugs on a numbcr of cardiovascular
ovcr, individuals who could optimally benefit fron
 ACE inhibitor therapy have not been identified. For
systolic and/or cliastolic dysfunction associated with LV
cxample, in one human coopcralive heart failurc trial,
hypertrophy and derangements of inyocardial cxtraccl-
the most beneficial response to ACF. inhibition Oc-
curred in paticnts with the most neurohumeral activa-
  sd l   n 
tion.* It has not been determined which ACE inhibi-
ing or regulating the expression of myocardial hyper-
trophy222 Furthermore, there is some cvidenee that
tors best. excrt. sclcctive cardiac RAAs blockade at doses
that do not affcct cardiac loading conditions. Enalapril
the RAAS is activatcd in cats with HCM,22a Inhibition
has low affinity for cardiac tissue ACE, whereas benaze-
of the RAAs has a beneficial effect on extracellular
remodeling in heart failure,23 and ACE inhibitors rc-
pril and others have higher affnity, but thc clinical
dlucc ventricular remodeling by blocking the tropic
importance of this is unknown. ACE inhibitors reduce
blood prcssurc, which thcoretically could be delcteri-
ACF. inhibitors may improve IV diastolie function in
ous in HCM cats with severe LV outflow tract obstruc-
hypertensive LV hypertrophy22e and improvc coronary
tions or syncopc, although such untoward effects have
hemodynamies.227 Given the clear survival benefit pro
not been reported.
vided by carly usc of ACE inhibitors in acute huunan
MI,27a background therapy with ACE. inhibitors theo-
REDUCTION/ELIMINATION OF LV OUTFLOW TRACT GRADI
retically might confer bencficial effects in similar cir-
ENT (sAM). Negative inotropic drugs that reduce or elim-
cumstanccs. Reccntly, ACE inhibitors have been uscd
inatc obstruction have been widely uscd in humans
to trcat HCM in humans228 and cats.I56 IIowever, other
with the obstruciive form of 1ICM. These agents have
investigators have highlighted the importance of thc
included disopyramide, β-adrcnergic blockers, or cal-
cardiac RAAS in development of IV diastolic dysfunc-
tion, IV subaortic obstruction, and dccreased coronary
cium channel blockers (principally verapamil),74. 23s. 231
IDrug selection is not standardized. In cats, pharmaco-
low reserves in huinan HCM patients. Selcctive inhibi-
tion of cardiac RAAS with ACF inhibitors or with an-
 logic management has becn gencrally confined to the
usc of β-adrenergic blockers (atenolol, propranolol)
giotensin II reccptor blockers might therefore lead to
more favorable clinical outcomes.2s This stratcgy has
and calcium channel blockers (principally diltiazcm),
not becn tested in cats.
 but reduction of outflow gradient is usually best accom-
 Many clinicians add an ACE inhibitor (usually cnala-
 plished with β-blockcr therapy. Stimuli that provoke or
pril) to furoscmide, combined with β-blocker or cal-
intcnsify IV outflow tract gradients should be avoided.
cium channel blocker therapy, if right-sided heart fail-
These include positivc inotropes, reduction of LV vol-
urc is prcsent, if pulmonary edema
A recurs, or if
umc, or decrcased afterload, Converscly, the gradient
progressive atrial enlargement is detected. In a retro-
may be reduced or abolished by interventions that
spcctivc study without controls, enalapril added to
increase LV yolume, such as dlecreased contractility,
standard therapics in 19 1ICM cats resulted in a small
incrcascd preload, or increascd afterload. The clinical
but statistically significant reduction in LA dimension
and intcrventricular septum and IV wall cnd-diastolic
asymptomatic cats, has not been established.
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES  641
 Recurrent and Refractory Congestive
ventricular filling: rnormal or decrcascd ventricular dia-
Heart Failure
stolic volumc; gcnerally normal systolic function; and
normal to increased ventricular wall thicknics* It rep-
When pulmonary edema or biventricular failure
resents a spectrum of conditions in humans that in-
cludes idiopathic RCM and RCM that occurs sccondary
may be required (see carlier Treatment of Acute Pul-
to systemic or metabolic disorders that affects the vcn-
monary Edema). Cardiac drug therapy is then modi-
tricles. These different etiologies result in a varicty of
fied to (1) increase the dosage of the *primary” drug
 clinical and morphologic phenotypes, pathophysio-
(i.e., β-blocker, calcium chaunel blocker, or ACE inhib-
logic derangements, and diastolic dysfunction.i-3. 9
itor), (2) change to a different class of primary drugs,
14. 938-2s2 Thus, the only justification that can be made
or (3) add a second or cvcn thired primary agent.
to describc a given case of myocardial disease by the
When congestion is refractory to these pharmacologic
term
"restrictive cardliomyopathy" is that the case
manipulations, partieularly with severc, chronie cffu-
should be characterizcd by a cardiomyopathic process
sions, upward dose titration of furosemide (e.g., 2.2 to
that restricts diastolie ventricular filling and excludes
4.4 mg/kg q8-12h PO) may be required. For refrac-
hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy. Arcordingly, RCM is a
tory rightsided heart failure, addition of a second
spccific pathophysiologic cntity characterized within a
dliuretic agent that acts at a diferent site in the ncph-
broader group of conditions that cause diastolic dys-
ron may be syncrgistic with furosemide. Choices for
function or diastolic heart failure.*s 22 Two basic cate-
thesc agcnts include hydrochlorothiazide (HydroDi-
gories of RCM are recognized in humans,I-3 8. sa 14.
uril, Merck & Co.; 1 to 2 mg/kg PO q12-24h PO)
or hydrochlorothiazide-spironolactone (Aldactazide,
well. 7 9 23 2 They include (1) myocardial RCM (most
Searle: 2.2 mg/kg/day PO).1ua Cats must bc closely
prcvalent) and (2) endoryocardial RCM.
monitored for dehydration, azotemia, hyponatremia,
and hypokalemia when using combination diuretics.
Digitalization may bc prescribed whcn right-sided
PREVALENCE AND DEMOGRAPHICS
heart failure is unresponsive to dliuretics, ACE inhibi-
Prevalencc data (see Fig. 28-1) havc becn compli-
tors, or other therapy; or if myocardial (systolic) failure
catcd by controversics in clinical diagnosis and ante-
occurs. If renal function is relatively normal, digoxin
mortem recognition. Therc arc no known gender or
may bc adlministered. The tablet form (0.125 mg) is
breed predilcctions. Agcs of affected cats are variablc,
generally betier tolerated than digoxin clixir. Guide-
but middle-agcd or older animals are most commonly
lines for oral digitalization are as follows: cats weighing
affected.239, 212
1.9 to 3.2 kg, % tablet (0.031 mg) every second day;
cats weighing 3.3 to 6 kg, %4 tablet daily; and cats
weighing more than 6 kg, /4 tablet daily or q12h. This
ETIOLOGY
maintenance dose is highly individualized and may
 Both myocardial and endomyocardial forms of fe-
need to be reduced to account for weight loss (cardiac
line RCM are idiopathic. ‘The myocardial forin is
cachexia), renal insufficiency, and hypokalemia.a 7 1Dos-
 poorly characterized in cats but is generally a noninfl-
age is titrated by assessing serum digoxin concentra-
trative discase. In humans, this form ol RCM most
tion in 10 to 14 days (1 to 2 ng/ml reprcscnts a
commonly rcsults from amyloid infiltration of the vcn-
thcrapcutie range).
tricular walls,1 2. 8. sa. 235, 237 although other etiologies
For continued refractory CHF, scveral additional
havc bcen reportcd.* A familial forin of idiopathic
stcps should bc taken: (l) asccrtain that prescribcd
myocardial RCM has also becn documented. both
drugs are being administered according to directions,
with2s2. 2ss and withou1251 skeletal myopathy, in humans
(2) recalculate drug doses based on current body
but currently not in cats.
wcight, (3) gcnerate and re-evaluate a new data basc
Endormyocardial feline RCM has been associated
(c.g., ECG, radiographs, echocardiogram, clinical pa-
with endomyocarditis of undeterinined origin in a
thology) to rule out systemic and metabolic disease,
 e issd st nn 's e'ss jo iq s
heartworms, meoplasia, (4) assess serum T; and T
carditis is a causal factor of endomyocardial diseasc.
concentrations (cats > 6 years old), and (5) refer the
The ability of many viruses to infect and potentially
animal to a cardiologist.
   n ss  
isolation of parvoviral gcnomic material from a high
RESTRICTIVE CARDIOMYOPATHY
percentage of feline hearts with idliopathic cardiomy-
opathy, including RCM,280 gives credence to a similar
DEFINITIONSANDNOMENCLATURE
-  si  sos sii  
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) is defined as
jury by several basic mcchanisms, including direct myo-
heart muscle disease that resultis in inmpaired diastolic
cardial invasion production of myocardial toxins. or
642DISEASESOF THEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
immune-mediatedmyocardial injury.261Anetiopatho-
and systemic congestion.Contractility(systolicfunc-
genic role of viral myocarditis has been suggested in
tion)isgenerallynormal or onlymildlyimpaired.
somehuman patientswho haveresidual cardiacinjury
that progresses to chronic myocardial damage and dys-
PATHOLOGY
function.262Althoughtheendomyocardialformof fe-
lineRCMischaracterizedbyendomyocardialfibrosis,
MYOCARDIALFORM(NONINFILTRATIVE,IDIOPATHIC)OF
other conditions may potentially cause infiltrative en-
RCM.Inhumans,RCMmostoftenresultsfromsystemic
domyocardial disease,including metastatic neopla-
ormetabolicprocessesthatinfiltratetheinterstitial
sia,46particularly lymphoma,which was detected in3
matrix.Amyloid is themost common cause,although
percent of cats with lymphosarcoma.262a The endomyo-
accumulation ofmetabolic storagematerial within
cardialformofhumanRCMandeosinophiliccardio-
myocytes also occurs.1.8,237
myopathy(Loffler's endocarditis）are thought tobe
AlthoughRCM is poorly characterized in cats,nei-
different manifestations of restrictive obliterative car-
ther amyloid infiltration nor deposition of abnormal
diomyopathyassociatedwitheosinophilia.263Incats,
metabolic material within myocytes has been identi-
eosinophilic cardiomyopathyhas not been described
fied.Thus,the feline condition represents a noninfil-
per se,although hypereosinophilic syndrome with
trative,idiopathicRCM.Gross pathologic features in-
multiorgan eosinophilic infiltration,
,including
the
cludemildtomoderateincreaseinheartweight and
heartweighttobodyweightratio;increasedbiatrial
genicrelationshipbetweendirecteosinophilicinvolve-
sizewithparticularly severeLAenlargement;relatively
ment or indirect immune-mediated injury is specu-
normal LVinternalcavity size;andnormaltomildly
latedforsomecases.
increased LV wall thickness (Fig.28-15).Patchy endo
cardialfibrosis is common.Ball thrombimay be pres-
ent in the LA or LV. Common histopathologic findings
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
include diffuse or patchy interstitial fibrosis and myo-
ThehallmarkofRCMisdiastolicdysfunction.Early
cytenecrosis.
LVfilling is rapid but is then suddenlyrestrained,
impededbyrigidventricular walls orendocardium
ENDOMYOCARDIALFORM OFRCM.Twoformsofendo-
that impairs myocardial elasticity.1. 14 29 This results in
myocardial RCM—endomyocardial fibrosis and hyper-
elevated filling pressures, with resultant pulmonary
eosinophilic syndrome(Loffler's endocarditis)—have
B
FIGURE 28-15
Heart from a cat with themyocardial(noninfiltrative)form of idiopathicrestrictive cardiomyopathy.
（A)Thereisbiatrial enlargement.Left auricular dilation is striking.B）Transverse section of this
heartrevealsmildRVhypertrophy,RAenlargement,anda left auricularball thrombus.Although
theventricular septum andLVfreewall appear thickened,this appearance is dueto contiguous
regions of sectionedpapilarymusclesadjacent tothe septum andfreewall,whichresultedfrom the
oblique transectionof thisgross specimen.Echocardiographic examinationhadrevealednormal left
ventricular internal dimensions and ventricular septal and LV freewall thickness.
FELINECARDIOMYOPATHIES
643
LV
FIGURE28-16
Heartfrom a cat with the endomyocardialformofrestrictive cardiomyopathy.The transectedheart
(A)and the two-dimensional parasternal long axis echo (B)reveal a largemid-ventricular
atriumisseverelyenlargedandmildpericardialeffusionispresent.IVSinterventricular septum;
LVW,left ventricular posterior wall.
received themost attention inhumans.They may rep-
CLINICALMANIFESTATIONS
resentdifferentmanifestationsof the samedisease and
areassociatedwith an eosinophiliccardiomyopathy.It
HIsTory.Tachypnea and dyspnea may be acute or
has been hypothesized that activated eosinophils cause
subacute,with pulmonary edema.In chronic stages
myocardial toxicity264 a theory supported by animal
of the disease,effusions may predominate and cause
models of hypereosinophilic syndromes.242.243.265.267A
gradualsignsofdyspneaandweightlossassociated
feline hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES)has been
withcachexia.Anorexiamayprecederespiratory
reported.In a single cat with HES,the echocardiogram
involvement.Aorticthromboembolismis common and
was unremarkable,butfocal mononuclearcellinfiltra-
results in paresis.237
tionwaspresentwithinthemyocardium.24sIn another
reportoffelineHESin3cats,2werenecropsied and
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.Findings are nonspecific.
hadsubendocardialeosinophilicinfiltrationwithout
Dyspneaand tachypnea areusuallyevident.Thoracic
fibrosis or gross cardiac lesions.245 In the endomyocar-
auscultationmayreveal dull heart andlung sounds in
dialformoffelineRCM,endomyocarditis andLVen-
domyocardial fibrosis havebeen reported occurring
the presence of marked pericardial or pleural effusion,
orrespiratory cracklesmaybeevidentif severepulmo
both sparately and together914124266
nary edemaispresent.Soft,systolicheart murmurs
Gross pathologic findings (see also chapter 36)(Fig.
28-16) include greater than normal heart weight and
maybedetected over themitral or tricuspidvalve area
or between the mitral valve area and sternum.Gallop
heartweighttobodyweightratio;severeLVendocar-
heart rhythms are sometimes present. Distended jugu-
dial scar (typically in the mid to apical cavity) often
larveinsandelevatedjugularvenouspressuresare
obliterating the distal chamber, causing midventricular
associatedwithright-sidedCHF.Irregularheartrates
stenosis or fusing and distorting the mitral apparatus;
and arterial pulse deficits indicate arrhythmias.Arterial
normaltohypertrophiedLVwall;severeLA and often
thrombosis predisposes to saddle thrombi and poste-
RA enlargement;MI; variable RV changes, including
riorparesis.
hypertrophy; and LA or LV mural ball thrombi.Histo-
logic findings include marked LV endocardial thick-
ening and scar;intramural coronary arteriosclerosis;
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY.Arrhythmiasarecommon
endomyocardial necrosis and fibrosis;and in cases of
(seeTable28-2).Avariety of ECG changes may be
LV endomyocarditis, varying degrees of endomyocar-
recorded.Low voltage QRS complexes maybe noted
dial infiltrates, predominantly neutrophils and macro-
when severe pericardial and pleural effusions are pres-
phagesbutoccasionallylymphocytes andplasma cells.
ent.Evidence of LAenlargement(Pwaveduration>
644DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
40 msec)or LVenlargement(R1>0.8 mV or QRS
lar septum (see Fig. 28-16); this may cause mild to
duration>40msec)is common.
severe midventricular constriction,resultingin a dia-
stolicandsystolicpressuregradientidentifiableby
RADIOGRAPHY. Classic radiographic changes include
Doppler echocardiography; and (2) severe LA enlarge-
moderate to severeLA enlargement and,often,RA
mentwithpronounced leftauricular dilation.Addi-
enlargement.Pulmonaryedemaandpleuraleffusion
tional features are usually present. The ventricular
arecommon.Generalizedcardiomegalymaybeevi-
septum or LV posterior (free)wall may be mildly hy-
dent if pericardial effusion is present.Ascites is occa-
pertrophied（e.g.,end-diastolicthickness5to6mm)
sionallypresent,especiallyin casesofchronicdisease.
or normal. The LV posterior wall may appear nonho-
mogeneous because of focal hyperechoic areas or dif-
ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY.Althoughechocardiographyhas
fuse speckling.Left ventricular cavity dimensionsmay
largely replaced nonselective angiocardiography for
be normal or reduced,or severe endocardial fibrosis
cardiacimaging,thelattermaybeinformative,particu-
mayresultinobliterationoftheapicalLVcavity.The
larlywithRCMdue toendomyocardial fibrosis(Fig.
RA is usually enlarged. Right ventricular changes vary
28-17).Angiographic findings include severe LA en-
from mild RV hypertrophy to dilation. Intracavitary
largement;an irregular LV cavity,often with partial
ballthrombi (LAor LV)are common.Mitraland
midventricular constriction or striking obliteration of
tricuspid valvular insufficiency is often present,but
theapicalcavitycaused by severe endocardialscar
regurgitation is usually mild. Contractility is generally
formation; and LA or LV flling defects suggesting
normal.In contrast,the myocardial form of RCM is
characterized by (l) marked LA or biatrial enlarge-
intracavitaryball thrombi.Thenoninfiltrativemyocar-
dialform of RCM is characterized by severe LA en-
ment,(2)a relatively normal LV chamber,(3)normal
largement with a relativelynormal-appearingLVcavity.
ventricular septum and LV free wall thickness or mild
Ball thrombi may also be present. Right-sided changes
hypertrophy(end-diastolicwall dimensions 5 to6
are variablewith bothforms.
mm),and (4) lack of severe,left-sided heart volume
overload (i.e., valvular insufficiency, if present, is mild).
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.Theendomyocardialandmyo-
cardialformsofRCMcangenerallybedistinguished
DIFFERENTIALDIAGNOSIS
by echocardiographic examination.The cardinal fea-
tures ofendomyocardialRCMinclude(1)pronounced
From a pathophysiologicperspective,thediagnosis
ofRCMrequireseitherDopplerechocardiographic
endocardialscar,mostcommonlyatthelevelofthe
evidence of LVrestrictive physiology or LVrelaxation
mid leftventricle,bridging thefreewall andventricu-
abnormality,in the absence of severe idiopathicLV
hypertrophy.When Doppler echo evidence of diastolic
dysfunction is lacking, a presumptive diagnosis of RCM
isbaseduponcardiacmorphologythatcloselycon-
forms to classic phenotypes of RCM (see preceding
Echocardiography)and excludes HCM,myocardial in-
farction,and other cardiomyopathies.Thus, RCM is
diagnosed from the presence of a number of structural
andphysiologicfeatures andbythe absenceof others.
LA
A diagnosis of RCM is not tenable in the presence of
significant leftventricular dilation.Likewise,severeLV
hypertrophy, particularly without LV endocardial scar,
is incompatiblewitha diagnosis of RCM.
Restrictive cardiomyopathycauses a syndrome that
LV
ishemodynamically similar to constrictivepericarditis,
an exceedingly rare condition in cats. Abnormalities
ofdiastoleinRCMandHCMdoshare some similari-
ties,and thus the clinical picture may be confusing.
Both RCM and HCM may present with acute pulmo-
nary edema, arrhythmias, and severe LA or biatrial
enlargement;moreover,someRCM caseshave equivo-
FIGURE28-17
cal LVhypertrophy ormyofiberdisorganization.Most
Nonselective angiocardiogram of a catwith restrictive
commonly,thediagnosis ofRCMis somewhatuncer-
cardiomyopathy (RCM).The left atrium (LA) is dilated and the
tain.In many cases, myocardial diseases may be more
left ventricular chamber is misshapen (arrous). (From Fox PR,
appropriately labeled unclassfied cardiomyopathy if they
BondBR.Nonselective and selective angiocardiography.Vet Clin
North Am 13:262, 1983.)
areequivocal,havemarkedmitralregurgitation and
FELINE CARDI0MYOPATHIES 645
 LA crlargement, have only mild 1.A enlargement, or
PREVALENCE AND DEMOGRAPHHICS
have normal Doppler echo transmitral filling patterns.
Historically, dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) had rcp-
resented the second most common form of feline
NATURAL HISTORY AND PROGNOSTS
heart disease (see Fig. 28-l). At The Animal Medical
Center, it accounted for about one quarter of nec-
The true natural history of RCM is difficult to detcr-
ropsy-confirmed cardiomyopathies betwccn 1962 and
mine, since asymptomatic cardiomegaly may be pres-
1976, and for up to 30 percent of prinmary myocardial
ernt for months or years. The ratc of progression of
diseases diagnosed by echocardiography before 1990.
diastolic dysfunction has not becn determined. Fre-
Ages of cats with taurine deficiency DCM varied from
quently, RCM has an insidious onset, with development
5 months to 16 years, with a mean age of approxi-
of progressive right-sided CHF. Prognosis is generally
poor whcn Imarked right-sided CHF is present, espe-
 apparently high incidence occurred in the Siamese,
cially wher accompanied with tachyarrhythmias such
Abyssinian, and Burmese breedsa 7 and a relativcly low
as atrial fibrillatiorn.
 incidence in the Himalayan and Persian brceds. There
was a male predisposition.
However, in 1987 an association hetween taurine
THERAPY
deficiency and reversible myocardial failure (DCM)
Acute therapy for pulmonary cdema is similar to
that described earlier for hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
[n response, pet food marufacturers reformulated
thy. Whcn moderate to scverc plcural cffusion is pres-
their feline dicts to include more taurine, which re-
ent, therapcutic thoracoccntesis nay be hclpful. There
sulted in a dramatic reduction of feline taurine defi-
are currently no  clinical data indicating optinal
ciency in the northcastern United States by 1990. Simi-
chronic  management  of  restrictive cardiomyopathy.
lar epidemiologic trends were reported elsewhere.2s1
Consideration may be givenn to ACE inhibitors, with
 The clinical relationship between taurine deficicncy
the rationalc for blunting neurohormonal activation
and systolic dysfunction was cvaluated in 49 cats diag-
and reducing ventricular remodcling: to β-blockers,
nosed with idiopathic myocardial failure between 1990
 particularly when myocardial infarctioin is suspected or
and 1995. Ages ranged from 2 to 20 years (mcar1, 9.8
4.4; mediarn, 9.5 years); 69 percent were male and
atrial cnlargement is severe. Digoxin can be consid-
31 percent were female. Five cats (10 pcrcent) had
cred for severe or refractory right-sided CHF.
markedly reduced taurine concentrations, and their
clinical condition was compatible with taurine defi-
ciency DCM. An additional 10 cats (20 percent) had
SYSTOLIC (MYOCARDLAL)
sonewhat reduced whole blood taurine concentrations
compared with normal.2s2
DYSFUNCTION
Currently, idiopathic myocardial failure represents
from 3 percent to 7 percent of the cardiomyopathic
cats cvaluated at The Aninmal Medical Ceriter for sus-
TAURINE DEFICIENCY, DILATED
pected heart discase. A wide variation occurs in degrec
CARDIOMYOPATHY, AND IDIOPATHIC
of systolic impairment and left ventricular morphology.
MYOCARDIAL FAILURE
ETIOLOGY
DEFINITIONSANDNOMENCLATURE
TAURINE DEFICIENCY MYOCARDIAL FAILURE. A clcar
When the ventricles fail to gencrate normal systolic
causal rclatiorship has been demorstrated berwcen
contractile force to maintain forward cardiac output,
deficiency of the amino acid taurine and revcrsible
systolic dysfunction is said to he present. Synonymous
felinc myocardial failure,26s.27-2z7 Prior to 1987, most
tcrininology includes myocardial failure, pump faiture,
 cases of DCM were apparently rclated to consumption
systolic faiture, contractile dysfunction, aned reduced contrac
of commercial cat foods that cither had an inadequate
fility. Dilated cardiomyopathy is the prototypic cxample
taurine content,275 or whosc taurine was rendered un-
of systolic dysfunction. It is chiaractcrized by LV or
available due to processing and canning.*77 However,
biventricular dilatation and impaired contractility.* Al-
 it is not certain that taurine deficiency alone is the only
though forinerly callcd congestive cardiomyopathy, thie
factor responsible for the development of myocardial
term dilated cardiomyopathy is preferred, because vcn-
failure. For cxamplc, many cats fed taurine-deficicnt
tricular dilation and decreased contractility represcnt
diets for prolonged periods of time failed to devclop
the carliest abrormalitics, whereas CHF often devcl-
clinical myocardial failure; clinical discase is no1 corisis-
ops later.!. "
tent or predictablc; the clinical incidence of DCM in
646
DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
cats consuiming commcrcial dicts implicated in taurine
and other compensatory mechanisins. Pulmonary con-
deficicncy was low, and myocardial taurinc corcentra-
 gestion, effusions, and signs of low cardiac output re-
tions in taurine-depleted cats do not readily indicate
sults, and cardiogenic shiock may occur if global car-
those that will devclop myocardial failure. 29.271 1n addi-
diac dysfunction is severe. Mild mitral insuMciency and
tion, certain brccds appeared to be at grcater risk
occasionally tricuspid insufficiency are usually prese nt.
of devcloping taurine deficiency myocardial failure.
 probably owing to the atrioventricular valve apparatus
including the Abyssinian, Siamese, and Burmese
distortion that accoinpanics severe dilation. The de-
breeds,. 7 and a genetic predisposition to feline DCM
gree of myocardial failure is variable, and prognosis is
not always direcly related to indices of contractility.
myocardial faihure (i.e., DCM) became dramatically
reduccd after commercial pet food comparies re-
TALRINE DEFICIENCY CARDIOMYOPATHY. Although this
forinulated feline diets with fortified taurine contents.
ctiology is currently rare in cats cating coinnercial cat
Although  taurine deficiency  DGM is  still cncoun-
foods, the potential for developing taurine depletion
tered,ze it has remained a rclatively rare cause of feline
currerntly cxists under several circumstances. Urinary
hcart failurc.
acidification combined with potassium depletion may
reduce tissue stores of taurine.+ Taurine deficiency
IDIOPATHIc MYOCARDIAL FAILURE. This catcgOry cnCOIn-
 can also result when inappropriate dicts are fed.26s.268.
 passes most cats diagnosed with myocardial failure
205. 296 Taurine is an csscntial dietary amino acid for
since 1990 and is prohably associated with more than
cats due to thcir limited ability to synthesize taurinc
 one disorder. Etiologies are elusive. Pathogenesis of
from cystcine and methionine. This is associated with1
human idiopathic DCM represents a common expres-
a low coniccntration of cysteine-sulfinic acid dccarbox-
sion of nyocardial injury caused by a nuinber of poorly
ylase, an cnzyme required in taurine biosynthesis.2w7. 9
urdlerstood myocardial insults. Three basic mccha-
Cats are unable to conjugate significant ainounts of
nisms of myocardial damage include (1) genetic and
 bile acids with glycine and therefore must utilize tau-
familial causcs,2m1. 2s (2) viral myocarditis and other
rine for conjugation. Thus, under conditiors of tau-
cytotoxic factors,24G-s# and (3) abnorimalitics of cellular
rine depletion as may occur with inadequate dietary
and humeral immunity29 2o A varicty of other causes,
taurine, cats lose taurine in the bile, creating severe
including crergetic, metabolie, and contractile abnor-
whole body taurine loss.29g so Taurine is essential for
malities, have been proposed.t 2 28 Some cats have had
normal structural and functional integrity of the tape-
prominent myocardial fibrosis and infarction,282 and
tum and heart and for naintenance of normal repro
familial transmission has been reported 2s The possi-
ductive function.2ss, sai-w Taurine deficicncy is a major
bility that myocarditis is associated with at least some
factor in the pathogenesis of taurine deficiency myo-
cases of feline DCM is suggested by the isolation of
cardial failure, a syndrone that is largely reversible by
parvoviral genomic DNA from myocardial tissues of
 oral taurine supplemcntation.2e, 270
cats with 1DCM.260
PATHOLOGY
PATHOPHIYSIOLOGY
'The chief morphologic feature of classic taurinc
When the 1V fails to gencratc normal contractile
dleficiency DCM is dilation of all four cardiae chan-
force and ejection fractior is severcly reduccd, cnd-
bers. Heart weights are significantly incrcased, ventric-
systolic and cnd-diastolic ventricular volumes increasc
ular walls are normal or thin, papillary muscles and
and myocardial wall tersion becomes clevated, Alter-
trabeculac are atrophied, and ancurysinal thinring of
 ations in LV relaxatior and diastolic compliancc coex-
thc IV apex may he present. Focal LV crndocardial
ist with impaired cortractile function and contributc
fibrosis may be observed. Diffusc or focal myonecro-
sis may be present. Cardiac nyocytes display various
is decreased and is significantly corrclatcd with LV
degrees of degeneration rarging fron coagulation.
function as asscssed by LV end-diastolic pressures, end-
granulation, and sarcoplasmic vacuolization to myocy-
diastolic volume and wall stress, and ejection
frac-
tolysis,9 21 21. 35-s7. 141 Gross features of idiopathic myocar-
tiorn." Activation of the sympathetic and RAAS further
cial failure are more variable (Fig. 28-18). There is
incrcases cardiac preload and afterload. End-systolic
generally hiatrial cnlargement with or without hyper-
volune incrcascs as a result of inpaired IV coritractil-
trophy. The IV is dilated, and the apex may be
ity. Left ventricular cnd-diastolic, I.A, and pulmonary
thinned. The ventricular septum may be thin or ror-
artery wedge prcssures are usually elevated. with RV
mal, and thinning of the LV free wall is common,
dilatior and failure, RV cnd-cliastolic, RA, and cerntral
typically occurring in the posterior segiment. of frce
venous pressures may be elevated as well.+ Congestivc
wall as viewed in cross-section. The RV inay be dilated,
heart failure results frorn both depresscd contractility
and the RV free wall may be thickcred or thinned.
and failure (or overconpensalion) of neuroendocrine
Myocytolysis and necrosis, fibrosis, and intramural cor-
FELINECARDIOMYOPATHIES
647
B
FIGURE 28-18
Gross heart specimensfrom
three cats withidiopathic
myocardial failure.Left
ventricular contractility was
severely depressed in catsA and
B(fractional shortening<14
percent) and was mildly
depressed (FS,25 percent) in cat
C.(A) Severe biventricular
dilatation is present.The
ventricularseptumis thinbut the
LV free wall thickness is normal.
Both atria aremoderately
enlarged.Abnormal moderator
bands are present in the left
ventricle.(B)Both ventricles are
markedly dilated.TheRV has
segmental thinning and the LV
apex ismoderately thin.The
interventricular septum is thin
and pale.These pale regions
corresponded to histological
evidenceofseverenecrosisand
replacementfibrosis.Papillary
muscles arefused andflattened.
Moderate biatrial enlargement is
present.(C)There is severe
biatrial dilationand theright
ventricleismoderately enlarged
(compare this with Fig.28-22).
The LVchamber ismildlydilated
but theventricularseptal andLV
free wall thickness are normal.
The LV apex isvery thin and
measured 0.5mm.The
myocardial disorders in cats A
andBwereclassifiedasdilated
cardiomyopathy,whereasCwas
described as unclassified
cardiomyopathywithmild
myocardiai failure.
cm
onary artery remodeling(arteriosclerosis)are com-
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION. Lethargy, depression, dehy-
mon. Ball thrombi may occur in the LA or LV.282
dration,and hypothermiafrequentlypresent.Gallop
rhythms (presumably Ss)have been reported in 20
percent to67percent; a 2 to3/6,systolicheart mur-
CLINICALMANIFESTATIONS
murheard over theleft apex,sternum,or right apex
HIsTory. Clinical signs are usuallyvague and most
is reportedtooccurinabout20percent to42percent
commonly include anorexia, dyspnea, and lethargy.
of affected cats.7.34.35.37.292Congestiveheart failure at
Vomiting is commonly reported from 1 to 3 days prior
thetimeofpresentationiscommon andwasdetected
to presentation.Paresis of a front or rear leg results
in 94percent of cats with idiopathic myocardial fail-
from acute arterial embolization.7,282 This has been
ure.282 In such cats, lung sounds may reveal crackles
recorded in approximately one fifth of cats with idio-
frompulmonary edema,or heart and lung sounds can
pathic myocardial failure diagnosed during the past
bemuffled if significantpericardial orpleural effusion
6 years.
ispresent.Jugularveinsmaybedistended or pulsatile.
648
8DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
Hydroperitoneumandhepatomegalycanaccompany
pericardial and pleural effusion if right-sided heart
failure is advanced.Centralretinal degeneration is a
commonfeatureofseveretaurine deficiency268.s03and
persists even when wholebody taurine hasbeenre-
stored to normal.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY.TheECGisoftenabnormal
(see Table 28-2). Changes may include widened P
waves (Pmitrale),indicating LA enlargement；tall R
waves or widened QRSvoltages,indicating LV enlarge-
ment;orvarious arrhythmias.Ventricular extrasystoles
andshortparoxysmsofventriculartachycardiaare
ECG
most common and have been recorded in 40 percent
Replau
to 50percent of DCM cases.Low-voltage R waves may
FIGURE28-20
indicate severe pericardial or pleural effusion.47,35.37
Two-dimensionalechocardiogram（rightparasternal longaxisview)
First-degreeatrioventricularblockisacommoncon-
ofacat withidiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.Thereis severe
dilation of theleft atrium(LA)and leftventricle(LV).The LV
duction abnormality34. 109. 110 and was recorded in 35
posteriorwall andventricular septum are thinner than normal.
percent of cats with idiopathic myocardial failure.271
Fractional shortening wasmarkedly reduced (15 percent).AO,
aorticroot.
RADIoGRAPHy.Characteristic changes include gener-
alizedcardiomegaly andpleuraleffusion(Fig.28-19).
Thelattermay silhouettethecardiacshadow.Pulmo
scured byeffusion.47,34, 35 In a series of 49 cats diag-
nary venous congestion or mild,patchy pulmonary
nosed between 1990 and 1995,pleural effusion was
edema maybepresent concurrently but is often ob-
present in 71percent and pulmonary edemain 22
percent.282
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.Two-dimensionalandM-mode
echocardiography (and to a lesser extent,Doppler
echo)are essential to(1) establish a diagnosis of myo-
cardialfailure,(2)assess the degree of cardiac cham-
ber dilation,(3)evaluate the severity of impaired LV
contractility,(4)determinethepresence anddegreeof
valvular regurgitation, (5) detect diastolic dysfunction,
and(6)identify valvular,pericardial,or other diseases.
Myocardialfailureispresentwhenthefractionalshort-
ening is less than 30 percent and the LV end-systolic
dimension is greater than 12 mm.
Several patterns of cardiac dilation(Fig.28-20) and
degreesofmyocardialfailurehavebeenidentified.
The classictaurine deficiency DCM echo displayed
generalized enlargement of all four heart chambers,
increasedLVandRVend-diastolicandend-systolic
dimensions,severelydepressedglobalfractional short-
eningandejectionfraction,andpericardial andpleu
ral effusion.47,268,272
Current cases ofidiopathic myocardial failure22gen-
erally display either LV dilation with focal segmental
LV hypertrophy,orLV dilation withventricular septal
or LV free wall hypokinesis,coupled with hyperdy-
namic motion of the opposite wall. Biatrial enlarge-
ment and variable right-sided enlargement are present.
FIGURE28-19
Indicesofleftventricularcontractilitymaybemildly
Ventrodorsal thoracicradiographofa catwithidiopathicdilated
to severely compromised, as evidenced by decreased
cardiomyopathy and right-sided congestive heart failure.There is
LV ejection time and prolonged pre-ejection period;
generalizedmoderate cardiomegaly.Pleural effusion causes the
decreased fractional shortening or circumferential fi-
lunglobestoretract(arrows)andsilhouettes thecranial
cardiovascular border.
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES649
left ventricular free wall hypokinesis; and reduced ve-
60nmol/ml;cats at risk measure less than30 nmol/
locity-timeintegral.Mild mitraland/or tricuspid insuf-
ml.However,plasma taurine concentration is very la-
ficiencyiscommonlydetected.MuralLA orLV
bile.Even24hours of fasting or anorexia can cause
thrombi may be detected.
plasmalevels tofallbelow30nmol/ml.In contrast,
wholeblood taurine concentrations areless labile,and
ANGIOCARDIOGRAPHY. Echocardiography has largely
fasting does not significantly affect values.Normal
replaced nonselective angiocardiography for clinical
whole blood taurine is greater than 200 nmol/ml; cats
diagnosis.The latter does provide useful information,
atrisk showless than100nmol/ml.268.270.27275.276,304.05
althoughwithsubstantialmorbidityandmortalityand
less accuracy comparedwith diagnosticultrasound. Sa-
DIFFERENTIALDIAGNOSIS
lientangiocardiographicfeatures(Fig.28-21)include
generalized chamber dilation,enlarged and tortuous
Idiopathicmyocardialfailure(idiopathicDCM)is
pulmonary veins (and,occasionally,pulmonary arter-
diagnosedon thebasisofsevereLVdilation and im-
ies), reduced cardiac output suggested by increased
paired contractileperformance,after excluding other
circulatory transittime ofinjectedradiocontrast dye,
known etiologicfactors.Thelatterincludeseverevol-
and LA or LV intracavitary thrombi.5-8 37.111
ume overloads caused by mitralregurgitation,aortic
regurgitation(rare),and atrioventricular fistulas;left-
CLINICALPATHOLoGY.Laboratoryabnormalitiesare
to-right shunting congenital anomalies; high-output
common.47, 34, 36. 37 Most cats are azotemic (e.g., blood
states, such as severe anemia; and taurine deficiency.
urea nitrogen: 35 to 60 mg/dl; normal is 20 to 30 mg/
Because DCM may represent an end-stage condition
dl),resultingfrom reduced cardiacoutput,decreased
resultingfromanumber of etiologies,somecasesmay
water consumption,anorexia,and fluid sequestration
displaycharacteristicsthatoverlapotherdisorders.
(effusions).With thromboembolic disease,marked ele-
vations in serum lactic acid dehydrogenase,creatinine
phosphokinase,alanine aminotransferase,and aspar-
tateaminotransferaseareusuallyrecordedwithin24
TREATMENT GOALs.Initial therapyisdirected tore
hours of the embolism.Effusions are usually obstruc-
duce or eliminate pulmonary and systemic venous con-
tive transudate or modified transudate.13
gestion,promote increased forward cardiac output,
Normal plasma taurine concentration is greater than
controlserioustachyarrhythmiasorbradyarrhythmias,
and improvemyocardial contractility. General support-
ive measures,such as external heating to combathypo-
thermia,oxygen administration,and minimization of
undue stress, are important.
Ao
THORACOcENTEsIs.If breathing is compromised by
severe pleural effusion (suggested by muffled heart
andlung sounds and a dull note derived bythoracic
percussion—or evidentbyradiography orechocardiog-
LA
raphy),thoracocentesis is advised.In the severely dys-
pneic cat,this should be performed even before radio
PA
graphs are taken.Further diagnostic tests may then be
accomplishedmoresafely.
TREATMENTOFACUTEPULMONARYEDEMA.Life-threaten-
LV
ing pulmonary edema isuncommon with myocardial
failure(incontrast to the situation with diastolic dys-
function,inwhich pulmonary edemaisthe most com-
mon sequela of CHF).When edema is severe,furose-
mide is administered (1 to 2 mg/kg ql-2h IV or
FIGURE28-21
IM) to reduce cardiac preload (LV filling pressures)
Nonselective angiocardiogram from a cat with dilated
rapidly.The administration frequency is then reduced
cardiomyopathy.The left atrium (LA)is moderately enlarged and
tothelowesteffectivelevelassoon astachypnea is
the left ventricle (LV)is severely dilated.Papillary muscles (p）are
lessened and thoracic auscultation improves. In some
atrophic.The aorta (Ao) is thin and poorly opacified (arrows)
suggesting diminished forwardstrokevolume.Thereisresidual
patients cardiac output, albeit decreased, is “sus-
radiocontrast dye in the pulmonary artery (PA）.(From Fox PR.
tained”byrelativelyelevatedpreload.Overzealous di-
Feline myocardial diseases.InFox PR(ed).Textbook of Canine
uresis may severely reduce ventricular filling (preload)
andFeline Cardiology.NewYork,Churchill Livingstone,1988,
p 435.)
andthus dropcardiacoutput,leadtoazotemia and
650DISEASES OF TIE HEART AND CIRCULATION
electrolyte abnormalities and prolong renal clearance
is undesirable as it increases impedance to ventricular
of certain drugs (e.g., digoxin),+7. mo 1sm, o Resolution
cjection. Tachycardia, arrhythmias, and increased myo-
of severe pulmonary cdeina imay he cnhanced by ad-
cardial oxygen demand inay also follow high dosage.
ministering 2 percent nitroglycerin crean (% to V
Dopamine (lntropin, American Critical Care) is doscd
plemental oxygen (40 percent to 60 percent oxyger-
alt 2 to 5 mg/kg/min (constant-rate infusion).
cnriched inspired gas) may be beneficial to improve
pulmonary gas exchange.
TAURINE SUPPLEMENTATION. The only kuown cause 0f
reversible myocardial failure is taurine deficiency. Be-
INTRAVENOLS INOTROPIC SUPPORT. Thc rationale for
causc taurine supplementation is effective in such
positive inotrope administration is based on the pre-
sumption  of  adequate  myocardial  contractile
re-
q12h PO). Analysis of blood taurine conccntration
serve.sm-an Synthetic sympathomimctic amines possess
ideally should be determined from a blood samplc
greater inotropic activity, provide quicker onset of ac-
drawn and frozen prior to taurine adiniristration.
tion, and allow finer control than dose digoxin. They
However, since this assay is not widely available, and
are administered by constant-rate infusion and titrated
because oral taurinc supplcmentation is safe and inex-
cvery 2 to 6 hours to effect to achieve clinical improve-
 pensive, oral taurine administration is endorsed for
ment (e.g., stronger femoral arterial pulses, rormaliza-
 any case of myocardial failure.
tion of arterial blood pressure if initially depressed,
stronger precordial apex bcal, louder heart sounds,
ANTIARRHYTHMIC MANAGEMENT. SymptOImatic Or hemO-
reduced lethargy, and improveinent of core body tem-
dynamically significant. tachyarrhythmias are uncom-
perature). Dobutamine (Dobutrex, Lilly; 2 to 10 μg/
mon, For life-threatening ventricular tachycardia lido-
kg/min) is the preferred agent for hemodynamic sup-
caine can be judiciously adiministered (l-mg bohuses
 port of the failing hcart. It cxerts its positive inotropic
administered slowly, up to 1 mg/kg; 15 to 30 μg/kg/
effects through direct stinulation of myocardial β-ad-
min constant rate infusion). Esnolol (Brevibloc, Du
renergic receptors310.312 313 At relativcly higher infu-
Pornt Pharmaceulicals, Inc), an ultrashort β-blockcr,
sion rates it increases cardiac output, stroke index, and
can bc added (50 to 200 μg/kg/min constant-rate
 Oxygen transport more effectively than does dopa-
infusior) if lidocaine is ineffective, or it can be given
mine.*1+ It excrts a lesser effect on the sinoatrial node
for severe supraventricular tachyarrhythmias.
(and therefore heart rate) than on myocardial tissue
and does not stimulate renal dopaminergic rccep
GENERAL sUPPORTIVE MEASLREs. ln the abscncc of pul-
aa apis asaape uouruo e daaomo zis ris orng sio
monary edema, judicious uid therapy is ocasionally
 in cats is seizures.4. * These are typically focal facial
beneficial to combat the effect of cardiogenic shock
seizures but occasionally hecone generalized. Seizures
and circulatory failure. Intravenous fluid supplementa-
 have been obscrved at infusion rales as low as 5 mg/
lion imay help prevent severe reduction in prcload
kg/min. They stop as soon as the dobutamine infusiorl
(and cardiac output) and reduces vascular volume con-
is discontinucd, and often do not recur when the dose
traction caused by diuretics, anorexia, and shock. A
is reduced by 50 percent.
mixture of 0.45 percent NaCl (or halfstrength lactatcd
 If seizures continue at the reduced dosage, dopa-
Ringer's solution) with 2.5 percent. dextrose in1 water
Imine may be substituted. Dopamine is a norepineph-
(D;W) can be given at a submaintenance dosc of 20
rine precursor that preferentially reduces renal vascu-
t0 35 ml/kg/day by constant-rate infusion. Potassium
lar resistance and increases glonerular filtration rate,
chloride must often be supplemented (c.g., 5 to 7 mEq
renal blood flow, urine flow, and solute cxcretion.si* 1t
for each 250 ml of fluids). Serum electrolytes should
directly stimulates cardiac β-adrenergic receptors as
 be monitored. The infusion rate and dose vary with
well as causing release of myocardial stores of norepi-
each patient and must be balanced to optimizc thie
nephrine.sio The latter may limit its eflicacy if such
clinical resporise withiout cxacerbating pulmonary
stores are depleted:zo At lower doses (< 5 μg/kg/
edema or effusions.1-7 Central venous pressure moni-
min), heinodynamic effects are rclatively small, but it
toring may help guide the infusion rate (chapter 15).
stimulates renal dopaminergic rcccptors, pronoting
renal cortical blood low, glomerular filtration, and
 Chronic Maintcnancc Thcrapy
diuresis. IIowever, low-cdose dopamine infusion may
 e     
A useful approach to maximize chronie therapy for
influcnce outcomes in hypoxic patients with heart fail.
 idiopathic myocardial failure emphasizes drug titration
ure,*2+ although this potential effect has not bcen stud-
to achieve maxiinun toleratcd doses of diuretics, ACE
ied in cats. Higher doses (> 5 μg/kg/min) stimulate
inhibitors, ard digoxin as necded. Drug-related toxic-
α-adrencrgic reccptors and increase systemic arterial
ity, dehydration, decrcased cardiac output (e.g., over-
and venous pressures,2 w2+ This vasoconstrictor activity
zealous preload reduction), and prerenal azotemia are
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES 651
common management challenges, particularly during
ministered to cats with taurinc deficicncy DCM.276
the first 7 to 10 days of therapy. The cnd-points repre-
However, clinical benefits of digoxin therapy in the
sent simple clinical paramcters, such as appetite, activ-
treatment of human heart failure have become evi-
ity, body weight, case (normality) of breathing. heart
dent.s29 Digoxin's efficacy 1may be related more to its
rate, serum potassium, BUN and crcatinine, and devel-
ability to modulate neurohormonal regulation by a
 opment of side cffects. Ancillary therapies are dictated
direct effect on baroreceptors thar to increase cardiac
by individual nceds and may include β-adrenergic
contracuility,30-33s
blockers, antiplatelet or anticoagulant agents, antiar-
 Digoxin may be adininistered in pill or elixir form.
rhythinics, dictary modification, and detection and
Although higher plasma levels and more accurate dos-
treatinent of contributory systemic and metabolic dis-
tases (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
 palatable to cats than are tablets. The 0.125-mg tablet.
is rcadily tolerated, but its small size inhibits accurate
 DICRETIcs. When congestion is controlled, furosc-
divisior into less than one fourth of a tablct (0.031
mide is tapered to the lowest cffective dosc, It may bc
mg).5. 7 Males may devclop higher serum levcls than
interrupted or temporarily discontinued if azoteimia,
feinales of the same hoxdly wcight. and food adininis-
anorexia, or dehydration occurs. To manage chronic
tered in conjunction with digoxin may decrease drug
elfusions, upward dose titration (1.5 to 4.5 mg/kg
absorption.831.3s The biologic halflife of digoxin in
q8-12h PO) may be effective in some cats.1-7. 37 Refrac-
hcalthy cats givcen a single IV injcction is 38.3 ± 9.5
lory cases may requirc periodic thoracocentesis and
hours. The mcan half-life affter chironic oral adiministra-
acditional diuretic agents such as hydrochlorothiazide
tion of clixir (0.05 mg/kg bid) was 79 hours (range,
and spironolactore (Aldactazide, Searle: 2.2 to 4.4
 33 to 22 hours),3s6 indicating that digoxin elimination
mg/kg q24h PO),sa. 3G although the thiazide may be
is capaciny-limited in the cat. In DCM cats given oral
ineffective in the presence of renal failurc.
digoxin in tablet form (0.007 to 0.014 mg/kg q48h),
mean half-life was about 64 hours, and steady state was
ACE INHIBIToRs. Chronic heart failure causes en-
reached after about 10 days.*2a Renal insufficiency will
hanccd RAAS activatior, which results in many detri-
reduce digoxin clearance and increase serum concen-
mental cffects, including elevated angiotensin I1, which
tration.
contributes to increased preload and afterload and
 Digoxin therapy should be initiated when the cat is
promotes sodium and water retention. ACE inhibi-
hydrated and eating. lnitial dosage is guided by body
tors are thiought to act by decreasing angiotensin Il
weight and modifed by renal function and serum
production, which in turn improves hemodynamic
digoxin concentrations. Based upon a calculated dose
function. These agents are also used in hopes of linn-
of 0.005 to 0.01 1mg/kg lear body weighit and relatively
jing progressive cardiac chamber remodeling (dila-
normal BUN/crcatinine levels, the following guide-
tion) and preventing or delaying clinical deteriora-
lines are suggested:7 for cats weighing 1.9 to 3.2 kg, /4
tion,36 327 ACE inhibitor monothierapy has been used
of a 0.125-mg digoxin tablet (0.031 mg) cvery 2 to 3
t0 manage successfully some cases of mild idiopathic
days; for cats wcighing 3.3 to 6 kg, V4 tablet daily; and
myocardial failure (fractional shortening, 23 percent
for cats wcighing morc than 6.0 kg. V4 tablet daily
to 29 percent; left vertricular cnd-systolic dimensions,
(occasionally, bid),
12 to 14 1mm) thiat have become compensated with
 Since digoxin is eliminated by renal excretion, dehy
 diuretics. In more severe cases of systolic failure, ACE
dration and azotemia may promote digoxin intoxica-
 inhibitors constitute a component of standard therapy
tion and warrant dosage reduction, longer interadinin-
that includes diuretics, and digoxin. Enalapril (0.5
istration intervals, or drug discontinuation. Seruin
mg/kg PO daily) has a wide clinical safety margin.
digoxin concentration should he cvaluated 10 to 14
Many other agents are also available (see Pharmaco-
 days after initiating therapy When blood is drawn 10
logic Optioris and Approachies to Chronic Manage-
 to 12 hours postadministration, a serum concentration
ment, ACE Inhibitors, earlier).
of 1 to 2 ng/ml is presuned to be therapeutic. Toxic
 plasma conccntrations in healthy cats ranged from 2.4
DIGITALIS (DIGoxIN). Although digitalis is thc tradi-
t0 2.9 ng/1nl.36 Anorcxia and depression are early
tional agent for chronic management of myocardial
signs of toxicity.+7 Vomiting accompanies more severe
failure, there are few available clinical data concerning
intoxication. The most striking ECG changes reported
cardiomyopathic cats, and digoxin's low therapeutic
with digoxin toxicosis in one study was ST segmcnt
index makes its role controversial. Whcn digoxin was
elevation, and P-R interval prolongation may be noted
administered to 6 cats with DCM, sinall but significant
 at nontoxic concentrations, so Clinical illness in norimal
increases in LV systolie furnction indices were demon-
cats given toxic doses may last up to 96 hours.8s4 335 In
strated in 4 animals; 3 had scrum digoxin concertra-
cardiomyopathic cats with reduced cardiac output and
tions in the toxic range,*2s Others have reported no
cvidence of cnhanced survival when digoxin was ad-
days.4. 5 Concurrent therapy withi digoxin tablets (0.01
652 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
mg/kg PO q48h), aspirin (80 mg/kg q48h), furose-
graphic inprovements become noticeable bctween 3
 mide (2 mg/kg PO bid) and commercial lowsalt diet
and 16 weeks after bcginring taurine supplementa-
(h/d, Hills) predisposed normal cats to digoxin toxic.
tion, but time to recovery is extremcly variablc. In
ity. The precisc mechanisin of altered digoxin kinetics
severcly affected cats, mortality is significarit withir the
was not identified337
first 30 days of trcatinert. Cats surviving more than 1
1morth remain clinically stable after adcquate taurine
β-ADRENERGIC BLOCKERs. Becatse syIpathctic Ncr-
intake is ensured, and discontinuation of all drugs is
vous system activation in heart failure causes important
usually possible.2 Echocardiographic improvements
deleterious cffects. β-acdrenergic receptor blockade has
include decreased IV cnd-systolic and cnd-diastolic di-
been advocated for DCM in humans. β-blocker therapy
LV fractional shortering, although not always to com-
and IV function in some human DCM patients.2.
 pletely normal 1levels,268 272 275.276 Cats with idiopathic
ss sus Potential mecharisms include reduced myocar-
 Inyocardial failurc dlo not respond to taurinc adminis-
 dial oxygen demand duc to negative inotropic. cffect,
tration.
Thcir clinical course is unpredictable, but
protcction against catecholainine-induccd 1myonecro-
syinptomatic cats generally have poor prognosis, with
sis, improved diastolic relaxatior, upregulation (in-
a 1nedian survival of approximately 13 days,2*82 A minor-
creased) myocardial β-adrenergic receptor density, and 
ity of cats may have a prolonged period of clinical
inproved myocardial calcnum handling.342-34 Despite
stability, arnd survival up to 3 years occasionally has
these encouraging findings, clinical henefits of β-block-
been observed. Thromboemholisin is a grave complica-
ers have not been evaluated in cats with myocardial
tion of cardiomyopathy regardlcss of causc.
failurc. Wlen considering their use, one musl be
mindful of their potential negative chronotropic and
inotropic cffects in cats with reduced cardiac contrac-
tility. It secms rational to judiciously add β-blockers to
ENDOCARDIAL FIBROELASTOSIS
conventional therapy if myocardial infarction is sus-
pected, or if symptomatic or elcctrically unstable tachy-
 This rare disease is characterized by diffuse thick-
arrhythmia warrants control of ventricular heart rate.
ening of left ventricular endocardium due to prolifera-
In such cases, a low oral starting dose is recommended
tion of fibrous and elastic tissue.1. s There is similarity
(propranolol, 2.5 mmg q8-12h or atenolol, %s of a 25-
hctween the primary forin of endocardial fibroelastosis
mg tablet. q24h). Altcrnatively, an initial low test dosc
(EFE) reported in humans*7. ss and that in cats. Endo-
can bc given and patiernt response obscrved. Follow-
cardial fibroelastosis has chicfly been reported in Sia
up should include one or more ECGs to assess heart.
mese 349. ao and Burmese breeds. A failial pattern of
rate and rhythm and echocardiography to cvaluate
inheritance has been described in Burmese cats si 8s
myocardial contractility, cardiac dimensions, and wall
Because clinical signs typically develop between 3
Inotion.
weeks and 4 months of age,* EFF. traditionally has
been regarded as a congenital disorder. However, re-
DIETARY MODIrICATIONs. Diet history should he asccr-
cent evidence supports a hypothesis that human endo-
taincd and adjusiments madc to eliminate causes of
myocardial fibroclastosis is a sequela of viral myocardi-
low taurine, Urinary acidification combined with potas-
tis, with rapid progression to end-stage.29
sium depletion may reduce tissue stores of taurine,294
 In cats, a clear separation may rnot exist betwecn
 Taurine deficiency can also result when inappropriate.
clinical signs exhibited by cats with dilated cardiomy-
dicts are fed.263 269.25. 296 Oral taurine supplementation
 opathy and thosc of EFE. Reportcd findings with FFE
should continue if concern exists about dietary def-
include dyspnea, systolic murmur of mitral insuff-
ciency or when taurine depletion is confirmed (plasma
ciency, gallop rhythms, tachycardia, hydrothorax, asci-
taurine less than 30 nm/ml, whole blood taurine less
les, ECG changes (especially increased R wave voltagc).
than 100 rol/ml). Prescription diets for sodiun re-
and severe LA and IV enlargement on radiography. At
striction (h/d, Hills) may be considered or home prep-
nccropsy, the heart. weight is increased; thcre is dila-
aration reduced-sodiun formulas used in advanccd
tion of the IV and to lesser degrce, the LA; ard the
heart. failurc.
IV wall is thin. Characteristically, the LV cndocardium
is diffusely thickened and appears gray-white and
opaque,* Histologic features are striking and revcal an
NATURAL IHISTORY AND PROGNOSIS
IV endocardiun thickened by dense collagenous and
Massive LV dilation is an independent contributor
elastic fibers. Therapy has heen unrewarding. A sec-
10 poor outcomc in humans with advanced heart fail
 ondary variety of EFF, with focal arcas of opaquc f-
ure, and it may sometines be stabilized by aggressive
broelastic thickening of the mural cndocardium, has
 been reported in association with congenital malfor-
cardial failure treated with oral taurine, echocardio
mations.x
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES 653
ARRHYTHMOGENIC RIGHT
the disease may lead to fibrosis and scarring, thereby
VENTRICULAR CARDIOMYOPATHY
transforming the fatty form of ARVG to the Gibrofatty
forn, the latter representing an cnd-stage of a reimote
inflammatory proccss, Alternativcly, inflamnation may
DEFINITIONS AND NOMENCLATURE
simply constitute a superimposcd condition,a Recur-
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
rent cpisodes of myocarditis could cause bivertricular
(ARVC) is characterized by progressive fibrofatty infi-
loss of myocytes, resuling in a pathologic condition
tration of the right ventricular tmyocardium. Initially,
similar to cnd-stage DCM.so* In addition, an autoim-
this is a regional phenomenorn. It progresses to global
mune response could contribute to myocardial injury
right ventricular involvement with some left ventricular
and dysfunction.so Another potential etiology relates
involvement and relative sparing of the ventricular
to massive destruction of myocytes through a mecha-
septum.3 3ss.36 Classification schemes often ovcrlap or
nism of apoptotic myocardlial cell death, xi. si7, ss Lastly,
 are controversial, and the literature contains a numher
ARVC has a familial occurrence in hnmans with aul-
of confusing terms. Some investigators have uscd dys-
tosomal dominant inheritance, various penetraricc,
plasia (i.e., ARVD), a term that implies abnormal tissue
and polymorphic phenotype expression, *2 The pos
 growth and differentiation, to descrihe this disease,x7
sibility that ARvC may be a result of genetic conse-
However, since this morbid entity is considered a pro-
quences in cats remains to be investigated.
gressive heart muscle disease of unknown etiology, a
recent. survey by the World Health Organization found
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
conserIsus
1OJ
thet
dwdofuopino uio
(i.e.,
ARVG).3 x8
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy is
A number of clinical forms of ARvC have been
a prinary hcart muscle disorder (cardiomyopathy).
described in humans and are classified under two ma-
It conslitutes a dyramic injury-repair process, with a
 jor subhcadings: (1) isolated RV dysplasia (includes
tendency to progress fron RV to LV involverment. It is
the pure form of ARVC, RV outhlow tract tachycardia.
characterized by a progressive loss of nyocardium and
Uhl's anomaly, nonarrhythmogenic ARvG, and oth-
Gbrofatty replacement, which causes cardiac electrical
crs), and (2) dysplasia with major I.V involvement.59
instability. Whether myocarditis is a primary event or
Arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy characterizcd by
 Occurs secondary to cell death or an autoimimune pro-
fibrofatty replacemcnt of RV myocardiun, with
1or
cess is still undetermined.ae Cell death and fibrofatty
without changes in wall thickness, should be dlifferenti-
replacement constitute a pathologic substrate for ar-
ated from Uhl's anomaly, which is distinguished by par-
rhythimias, including supraventricular tachyarrhyth-
tial or total absence of RV myocardium.
. 'The latter
mias and life-thrcatening ventricular tachycardia.x73.37
causcs marked RV wall thinning because of relative
Severe RV failure results froin loss of functional myo-
apposition of cndocardiun and cpicardium.360
cytes.
PREVALENCE AND DEMOGRAPIHICS
PATIIOLOGY
Many cascs of ARVC arc misdiagnosed as tricuspid
 Characteristic gross changes in cats include marked
valve dysplasia, but recognition of this distinctive car-
RV and RA chamber cnlargement (Figs. 28-22, 28-23).
 diomnyopathy should increase as its clinicopathologic
        
features become more widely published. The preva
thinned. Thinning may be focally ancurysmal (i.e.,
lence of ARVC in cats is currently unknown, but it is
cxternal bulging of a thinncd ventricular region) or
estimated to represent 2 percent to 4 percent of feline
diffuse, ard it may facilitate transilluinination of light.
Imyocarcdial diseases diagnosed at The Animal Medical
There is trabccular disarrangement with loss of soine
Center. Cats from 2 to 20 years of age have been
trahecular structure, while other trabeculae are fused
identified with ARVC, and several brecds have becn
and distorted, particularly at the RV apex. The tricus-
represented.
A auaaas o lurao panons si snerdde aalea pid
dilation and resultant papillary muscle derangemcnt.
Histopathologic lesions are pathognomonic in cats and
ETIOLOGY
closely resemble human ARVC lesions. They can be
 Thc polymorphism and wide clinical spectrum of
divided into two types: (1) fibrofatty (the predomirant
ARVC may be related to corisecutive stages of cardio-
form), and (2) fatty myocardial replaccment. The fi-
rmyopathic disease progression.361 The majority of hu-
brofatty form consists of focal or diffuse fibroadipose
inans (80 percent)ai-363 and cats*t4 with fibrofatty
replaccment. of myocyies spreading inward from the
ARVC have lymphocytic infiltrates within a background
cpicardium, with residual myocytes scattered within
of fat interspersed within the myocardium. Thus, it has
fibrofatty tissuc. A less conon but nevertheless dis-
been speculated that inlammation in carly forrns of
tinctive form is characterized by adipose replacement
654DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
RA
FIGURE28-22
Gross transverse heart sectionfrom a catwith arrhythmogenic
right ventricular cardiomyopathy.Characteristicfindings include
severe dilation of theright atrium(RA)andventricle (RV),
segmentalRVwall thinning,andRV trabecular disruption and
disorientation.
RV
ofmyocardium.Myocarditis(inflammatoryinfiltrates
condition may develop over a period of time,many
associatedwith myocyte damage or necrosis）is com-
catscanbeasymptomatic.
mon,particularlywiththefibrofattyvariety.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.Findings may reflect right-
CLINICALMANIFESTATIONS
sided CHF,including tachypnea,dyspnea,distended
abdomen,and jugular venous distention.Thoracic aus-
HISToRy.Thehistorymaybevague and reveal only
cultation may reveal muffled heart and lung sounds if
lethargy,anorexia,or dyspnea.Somecatshave syncope
pericardial orpleuraleffusion ispresent.Aholosys-
duetosustainedventricular tachycardia.Becausethis
tolic,regurgitant,soft tomediumintensity murmur of
RV
FIGURE 28-23
ventricular cardiomyopathy.Theright ventricle(RV) is severely dilated.TV,tricuspid valve.
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES655
tricuspid regurgitation is detected in some cats,
ment.Uhl's anomaly must be differentiated by histopa-
whereas in others nomurmur is present.Femoral arte-
thology.
rialpulse deficits are associatedwith arrhythmias.
THERAPY
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY.Abnormalities include supra-
ventricular tachycardias,conduction abnormalities,
Right-sided CHFis treatedwithfurosemide,digoxin,
andventricular ectopia,frequentlywith aleft bundle
and anACEinhibitor.For atrialfibrillationoratrial
branch type of pattern. Some cats may have no re-
tachycardia, digoxin combined with diltiazem or ateno-
corded changes on short rhythm strips and require
lol isused tomaintain therestingheartratebetween
Holtermonitoringtoreveal arrhythmias.
140and160beats/min.Symptomaticventriculartachy-
cardiahasbeen successfullymanaged acutelywithlido
RADIoGRAPHy.Dramatic enlargement of theRA and
caine,15 to 30 μg/kg/min constant rate infusion and
RV is characteristic. Moderate to severe LA enlarge-
chronically with sotalol (2 to 4 mg/kg q12h PO).
ment may alsobe present.Pleural,pericardial, or ab
dominaleffusions are common.
NATURALHISTORYANDPROGNOSIS
ECHoCARDIoGRAPHy.Echocardiographicexamination
This disease appears to progress through several
discloses severe segmental or diffuse RV dilatation,
phases in humans:an early
“concealed”phasein
localized RVaneurysms(akinetic or dyskineticareas
whichsuddendeathmaybethefirstmanifestation;an
with diastolic bulging),severe RA enlargement, abnor-
overt arrhythmic phase; and a final stage of biventricu-
mal trabecular muscle morphology (especially in the
lar heartfailureresembling dilatedcardiomyopathy.
apical RV cavity),and often,LA enlargement with a
Accordingly, this disorder is no longer considered to
normal LV or mild LV impairment (Fig.28-24).Color
belimited just to the right side of the heart. The
flowDopplerechomayreveal mild tomoderate tricus-
natural history of ARVD is not known in felines,al-
pid regurgitation. Minor forms of ARVC will have simi-
though an arrhythmic phase and a right-sided or biven-
larbutless severe qualitative abnormalities.
tricular CHFphasehasbeen observed in cats.Treat-
ment of right-sided CHF has been unrewarding,
although management of severe ventricular tachyar-
DIFFERENTIALDIAGNOSIS
rhythmiasfor more than 1 year has been possible.
Themost common misdiagnosis is tricuspid dyspla-
sia.Cats withARVC have striking RV morphologic
OTHERMYOCARDIALDISEASES
changes but no valve dysplasia.Tricuspid insufficiency
may result from derangement of the tricuspid valve
apparatus due to myocardial disease, and the valves
arenot dysplastic.Rightventricularhypertrophyis not
INCREASEDLVMODERATORBANDS
a feature of ARVC.This excludes diseases causing RV
dilation with RV hypertrophy (e.g., pulmonary hyper-
A pathologic condition associated with abnormal
tension,right-to-left intracardiac shunts).Biventricular
networksofLVmoderatorbandshasbeenreportedin
involvement can make diagnosis of ARVC challenging.
some cats with cardiomyopathy and heart failure.4.5.7.
Puremyocarditismay be arrhythmogenicbutwould
22,26 The significance of these bands and their relation-
notinclude characteristicright-sidedheart enlarge-
ship to the presence of concurrent heart disease is
20
FIGURE28-24
M-mode echocardiogramrecordedat themitral
30
valvelevelfromacatwitharrhythmogenicright
ventricularcardiomyopathy.Notice the severeright
ventricular dilation.RVw,right ventricularwall;RV,
right ventricular cavity；Vs,interventricular septum.
50
P84R4
656DISEASES OFTHE HEARTAND CIRCULATION
uncertainbecausemanyhealthycatsalsohavenet-
of cardiomyopathy.These cases are more appropriately
worksofLVmoderatorbands.Inastudyof21cats
labeled “unclassified cardiomyopathies.s Their de-
with increasedmoderatorbands,11older cats(mean
scription can be enhanced by adding a qualifier de-
age, 8.7 years) had dilation of the LV, and 8 younger
scribing the status of systolic function (i.e., normal
cats (mean age, 4 years) had LV or septal hypertro-
versus myocardialfailure),as thecasemay be
describedweretypicaloffelineDCMorHCM.Mean
heartweightincatswithincreasedmoderatorbands
SECONDARYMYOCARDIAL
was less than that in cats with HCM or DCM.Also,
DISEASES
conductiondisturbancesandbradycardiaweremore
commonincatswithincreasedmoderatorbandscom-
paredwith catswithothermyocardial disorders.Itwas
HYPERTHYROIDISM(CHAPTER34)
hypothesized that extensivenetworksofLVmoderator
bands(Fig.28-25)may cause or contribute to cardiac
dysfunction in some cats,but that in many instances,
Hyperthyroidism is themost common endocrine dis-
they are anincidentalcongenital anomaly.
orderofcats.Nosexorbreedpredilectionshavebeen
identified.Cardiovascularabnormalitiesaredetected
inmost affected animals,some ofwhich develop ar-
UNCLASSIFIEDCARDIOMYOPATHIES
rhythmias and signs of CHF.Early studies reported
CHF in as many as 20 percent of affected cats,but
the prevalence of this complication appears to have
Somemyocardial diseaseshavefeatures thatdonot
declinedwithincreasedawarenessandearlierdiagno
fit into a discrete category of HCM,RCM,DCM,or
ARVCordisplaycharacteristicsofmorethanonetype
sis.
ACROMEGALY
(HYPERSOMATOTROPISM)
Asyndromeresemblingacromegalyinhumanswas
reported inmiddle-aged and older cats,with a predis
position for neutered males.These animals had growth
hormone-secreting tumors of the pituitary gland.375.376
In one study of 14 cats,cardiovascular abnormalities
included systolicmurmurs(9/14),radiographicevi-
dence of cardiomegaly (12/14),and echocardio-
graphic evidence of septal (7/8) and LV wall (5/8)
hypertrophy.None had ECG abnormalities.Blood
pressure measurements were not reported.Six cats
developed congestive heart failure.Necropsy of 10 cats
revealedLVdilationin1catandLVhypertrophyin7
others.Myocardial histologiclesionsincluded myofiber
hypertrophy, multifocal myocytolysis, interstitial fbro-
sis, and intramural arteriosclerosis.375 Hypersomato-
tropism with LV hypertrophy and heart failure has also
been identified in a glucose-intolerant,nondiabetic,
12-year-old male cat.376 One study has reported in-
creased plasma growth hormone concentration in
some catswith HCM,l4 although the significance of
thisfinding,and the pathogenesis of heart disease in
cats with acromegaly,remain unclear.
FIGURE28-25
Heart from an adult cat that diedof congestiveheart failure.This
SYSTEMICHYPERTENSION(CHAPTER35)
gross specimen is transected through theleft ventricular outflow
tract and bodyof theleftventricle.There is an abnormalnetwork
of thickened and excessive moderator bandswhichbridge the
Theincidence ofclinically significantfelinesystemic
ventricular septum andfreewall.Theleft atriumwasmoderately
enlarged andmild LVhypertrophywas documentedby
hypertension is unknown,although it is animportant
echocardiography.
cause ofmorbidity in geriatric cats.Avarietyof sys-
FELINECARDIOMYOPATHIES
657
FIGURE28-26
Transversegrossheartsectionfromacatwithpericardial
andpleural ffusion,distended jugularveins,and
pulmonary edema.Lymphosarcoma hadmetastasized to
occupy both atria(obstructing venous return)and the left
ventricular chamber.
mmmmmmmmmm
temicandmetabolicdiseasesareassociatedwiththis
observed.378, 379 Heat stroke and blunt trauma (e.g-,
condition in cats,especially hyperthyroidism and
“high-rise”syndrome)arethemostcommonphysical
chronic renaldisease,as well as idiopathicarterial
causes ofmyocardial injury.
hypertension.Thepathologicfeatures offelinehyper-
tensive cardiomyopathy have not been described in
catsandmaybe indistinguishablefromthosede-
MYOCARDITIS
scribedinfelineHCM.Suitabletherapeuticstrategies
Although myocarditis is infrequently recognized,
have nowbecome availableformanycases.
itmayplayanimportantroleincertainmyocardial
diseases (see earlier etiology discussions for RCM,
MISCELLANEOUSDISORDERS
drome of acute,nonsuppurative myocarditis and
acute,unexpected death was described in 25young
INFILTRATIVEMYOCARDIALDISEASE
cats (mean age, 2.6 years).81 Pathologic lesions in-
Neoplasticcardiacinfiltrationisrare,andmostcases
cludeddiffuseorfocalendomyocardialinfiltration
involve lymphosarcoma in cats (Fig.28-26).Diagnosis
with mononuclear cells and occasional neutrophils.
is usually suspectedfrom radiographs and can some-
Etiology was not identified. Other reported causes of
times be confirmed by echocardiography. Other car-
myocarditis in cats include toxoplasmosis383 and meta-
diactumorsreportedincatsincludechemodectoma,
staticinfectionfromsepsisorbacterialendocarditis
metastatic hemangiosarcoma,pulmonary carcinoma,
(Fig. 28-27).4-7, 35,3,384, 85
cardiac abnormalities include arrhythmias and pericar-
dial and pleural effusion. Regression of neoplastic in-
filtrationwas observed in one catwithlymphomafol-
lowing treatment with combination chemotherapy.262a
DRUGS,TOXINS,ANDPHYSICALINJURY
Manyagents can injure theheart,butveryfew are
identifiedinfelinepractice.Doxorubicinhasreceived
the most attention.378-ss0Decreasedfractional shorten-
ing and increased LV end-systolic dimensions were
recordedin4of6 experimentalcatsgivencumulative
doses of 170 to 240 mg/m.380 However, neither heart
failurenorECGabnormalitieswereobserved.Patho-
logic changes were evident,including extensive myo-
cytevacuolization andmyocytolysis.Similar clinical
FIGURE28-27
observationshavebeenreported incatswithmalignan-
Photomicrographof aleftventricular sectionfroma catwith
suppurativemyocarditis.Thereisa diffuse,moderateinflammatory
ciestreatedwithdoxorubicin.Nonedevelopedovert
infiltrate comprisedpredominantly ofneutrophils.(Hematoxylin
heart failure,and arrhythmias were onlyrarely
and eosin stain,100×.)
658DISEASES OFTHE HEARTAND CIRCULATION
PERSISTENTATRIALSTANDSTILLANDOTHER
to 48 percent of HCM cats,24,396-398 29 percent of RCM,9
UNCOMMONDISORDERS
25 percent of DCM,24. 398 and 14 percent of cats with
excessive LV moderator bands.22 The prevalence in
Persistent atrial standstill has been reported in 11
the general population is undoubtedly less than that
cats (8 Siamese,one Burmese,two mixed-breed
detectedfrom necropsy surveys.Clinical studies have
cats).266.386 Seven cats were necropsied, and all had
reported incidences of arterial thromboembolism
DCMwith severe atrial myocardialatrophy.In contrast
ranging from16percent to 18percent in taurine
to dogs with atrial standstill,none of the cats had
deficiency DCM;272.276 18 percent in idiopathic myocar-
evidence of skeletal muscular dystrophy.In this series,
dial failure;26212percent inHCM;3313percentof cats
persistentatrialstandstillappearedtobeanuncom-
withnondilatedLVhypertrophy;1and19percent of
monsequela ofchronicDCM.Cardiacinvolvement
46HCMcats either at clinicalpresentation or during
hasbeen described in several catswith aDuchenne-like
long-term follow-up.2Most catswith systemic arterial
muscular dystrophy.387 Genetic mucopolysaccharidosis
thromboembolismhaveCHFconcurrently atthetime
has been reported in catsHurler's syndrome (MPS
1) in domestic shorthair cats388 and Maroteaux-Lamy
commonwithhyperthyroidism,anda3percentinci-
syndrome (MPS VI)in Siamese cats,389 but cardiac
denceofthyrotoxicosiswasrecordedin100catswith
involvementhasnot been significant.Conduction sys-
saddleembolism.396
temlesions may occur in cats with cardiomyopathy.
Ageofoccurrenceforthromboembolismranged
Bundle branch fbrosis, infltration, and degeneration
from 1 to 20 years (mean,7.7 years; median,10.5
and AV node degeneration have been reported.9.390
years） in one report. The highest incidence occurred
in4and7-year-oldcats.Amalepreponderancewas
recorded (67percent);63 percent were neutered.
ARTERIAL
Ninety-one percent were domestic varieties.396
THROMBOEMBOLISM
The site of cardiogenic embolism is variable, but
distal aortic (“saddle") embolization is the predomi-
nantclinicallocationinmorethan90percentofcats
DEFINITIONSANDNOMENCLATURE
affected with thromboemboliccomplications(Fig.28-
28).The right brachial artery is occasionally occluded
Thromboticand thromboemboliccomplicationsof
(theleftbrachial artery is onlyrarely embolized).Left-
feline cardiomyopathy have long been recognized.391
sided heartmural thrombi aresometimespresent(see
Thrombosisrepresents clotformationwithin a cardiac
Figs.28-14,28-15),particularly in the left auricle and
chamber orvascularlumen.Thrombi canbelocated
less often in the left ventricle.Various other organs
in the left atrial cavity（often referred to as“ball"”
maybecomeembolized asaconsequenceofsystemic
thrombus),left ventricular cavity, or both.Within the
embolic“showers,”especially the kidneys and,less
LA,thrombus may be found in the body of the LA,in
often,the mesenteric arteries.
the atrial appendage, or in a combination of these
areas.Embolization occurs when a clot or other foreign
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
material lodgeswithin a vessel.392393The systemic arte-
Pathogenesisof thrombosisrequiresoneormore of
rial system is almost exclusivelyinvolved,asright-sided
three essential conditions to be present:399401 (1) local
heart and deep venous thrombosis are rare in cats.
vessel or tissue injury, (2) circulatory stasis,and (3)
altered blood coagulability.Known as Virchow's triad,402
PREVALENCEANDDEMOGRAPHICS
theseprothromboticfactors areinvariablypresentto
some degree in myocardial diseases that make cardio-
Cardiogenic emboli frequently complicate the
myopathic cats predisposed to thromboembolic events.
courseofmyocardialdiseaseandresultinsignificant
morbiitadmtalit912425337,99,9
LOCALTIssUEINJURy.Endomyocardialinjuryiscom-
necropsy,thromboembolismhasbeenreported in up
mon in all forms of feline cardiomyopathy.9.21,24-26,36.
FIGURE28-28
Dissection exposing the distal aorta of cat withrestrictive
cardiomyopathythat died from heartfailure.There is an
occlusive saddle embolism at theaortic trifurcation.The distal
posterior vena cava is just above the aorta.
FELINECARDIOMYOPATHIES
659
99, 104,266,392 Myocardial infarction, ndomyocarditis,r
aneurysms may occur.More commonly,endothelial
fibrosismaybepresentin theleft atrium,leftventricle,
or both.Areas of fibrosis may be patchy, focal,or
diffuseandarecomposedofhyaline,fibrous,andgran-
ulation tissue with collagenous fibers.Such lesions may
presentreactive substrates tocirculatingblood and
trigger a thrombotic process by inducing platelet adhe-
sion and aggregation,with subsequent activation of
the intrinsic clotting cascade.In addition to fibrillar
collagen,exposed thromboplastin or tissue factors may
contribute to thrombogenicity.103.404
STASIs.Blood stasis predisposes to thrombosis.163.164,
FIGURE28-29
170.405 Cardiac chamber dilation,particularly when asso-
Distal aortic angiogramfrom a healthy cat illustrates the normal
ciatedwith reduced contractility,results inlargeend-
vascular anatomy in the region of the aortic trifurcation.
mostfrequentlyfoundintheleft atrialappendagein
catsregardless of the type of cardiomyopathy,presum-
ROLE OF COLLATERAL CIRCULATION.Collateralcircula-
ably the consequence of poor atrial emptying. Im-
tion plays a critical role in progression and resolution
paired blood flow decreases clearance of activated clot-
of clinical thromboembolic disease (Fig. 28-29),and
ting factors,which sets up clot formation in areas of
it is modulated by vasoactive substances (e.g., seroto-
tissueinjury.
ninandothers)released bytheclotandother sub
strates414,415For example,simple distal aortic ligation
does not duplicate the clinical syndrome causedby a
HYPERCOAGULABLE STATES.AhypercOagulableenvi-
saddleembolus,whereasexperimentally induced aor-
ronment maybepresentinsomecardiomyopathiccats
tic thromboembolism simulatesthe naturally occurring
withthromboembolism.Disseminatedintravascularco-
syndrome.416.417 Chemicals such as thromboxane
Ag
agulationassociatedwith consumptive coagulopathy,
also cause vasoconstrictionl whose synthesis can be
liver-mediatedcoagulopathy,orthromboembolismwas
reduced by antiprostaglandin drugs such as aspirin.419
present in more than 75 percent of affected cats.407,408
In addition,felineplateletsareveryreactive andre-
PATHOLOGIC CONSEQUENCES OF OCCLUSIVEISCHEMIA.
sponsive to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and other
The functionalintegrity of an extremity depends to a
agonists of platelet aggregation409. 410 Serotonin, a vas
large extent on adequate arterial blood supply.Sudden
active amine,isreleased from plateletswhere itis
arterialocclusionwith almostinstantaneous andcom
present in high concentrations in cats and further
pleteinterruption,coupledwithdecreasedcollateral
enhances platelet activation.li Others have reported
circulation, causes substantial tissue injury. Ischemic
thatplatelets from catswith cardiomyopathyhad in-
neuromyopathy is a predictable consequence of arte-
creased responsiveness (aggregation) to collagen but
rial occlusion and,in particular,of clot associated with
decreased responsiveness to ADP.12 Recently, the in-
inhibition of collateral circulation (Fig. 28-30).420 Is-
fluence of hypercoagulable states in human thrombo-
chemia abolishesrapid axoplasmicneuronalflowcaus-
genesis has become the focus of great interest, and a
ing conduction failure,which becomes irreversible
large menu of tests has emerged to evaluate these
after5 or6hours.Distal aortic(saddle）embolization
disorders.Thehypercoagulable states most commonly
causes peripheralnerve lesions,starting at the mid-
evaluatedinhumansatthistimeincluderesistanceto
thigh region.The majority of nerve fibers display a
factorVLeiden (APC),proteins C and S deficiency,
wallerian-type of degeneration while some exhibit
antithrombin III (AT III) deficiency, antiphospholipid
damage to the myelin sheath only.Clinically,the dura-
syndrome, and hyperhomocysteinemia.13 In a study of
tion of peripheral nerve function can induce patho-
11catswith cardiomyopathy(7due tohyperthyroid-
logic neuromuscular changes.Focal necrosis,myopha-
ism),mean ATIII activity was increased and AT III
gia,
and
architectural
changes maybe evident
behaved as an acute-phase reactant.#12 It is interesting
histologically.420Distal limbs below the stifle aremost
thathyperhomocysteinemia ispresentin somecardio-
severelyinjured.Cranial tibial musclesaremore af-
myopathic cats with thrombosis (Hohenhaus AE,Si-
fected than gastrocnemius muscles,inhibiting hock
mantov R,Fox PR,unpublished data,1998).These
flexionmore than extension.Hipflexion andexten-
andrelatedconditions mustbemorefullyevaluated
sion are maintained. The result is a dragging motion
incatswith systemic thromboembolism andmayplay
of the hind legs.Distal limb sensation is severely af-
asignificantroleintheir management and prevention.
fected.416
660
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
FIGURE28-31
Catwithrestrictivecardiomyopathy andlateralizingposterior
FIGURE28-30
paresis caused by a distal aortic (saddle) embolism.This animal
originallypresentedwithbilateralposteriorparesis.Itgradually
Distal aortic angiogram of a cat withhypertrophic cardiomyopathy
regainedmotor ability ofitsleftrearleg,whichbecameweight
takentwodaysafterit developed acuteposteriorparesis.The
bearing at the time of this photograph taken twoweeks after initial
aortic dye is abruptlyinterrupted(black arrows)by a saddle
presentation.However,an additional threeweekswasrequiredfor
embolismlocatedattheaortictrifurcation.Asmallcolumnof
the cat to support weight on its right rear leg.
contrast dye(open arrous)appears distal to the block and indicates
partial recanalization.However,thereisno significant collateral
circulation.
tion.Inmostcasestheybecomesofter24to72hours
later.Acutely affected catscanmove theirbacklegsby
virtue of flexing and extending the hip in a “drag-
CLINICALMANIFESTATIONS
ging” manner, but they cannot flex and extend the
Theclinical consequencesofarterial thromboembo-
hock.Invariably,onelegismoreseverely affectedthan
lism depend upon (1) the site of embolization, (2) the
the other. Nail beds are cyanotic, and distal limbs
severity and duration of occlusion, (3) the degree of
arecommonly swollen.Occasionally,a singlebrachial
functional collateral circulation, and (4) development
artery is embolized,causing monoparesis(usually the
ofserious complications(e.g.,hyperkalemia,limb ne-
right front leg)(Fig.28-32).Intermittent claudication
crosis,self-mutilation).If thromboembolism is sus-
maybe observed.In such cases arterial pulsesmaybe
pected, a minimum data base should be generated to
palpated,footpads feel warm (normal),and nail beds
include thoracic radiographs, ECG, echocardiogram,
are not cyanotic. This frequently precedes a more se-
biochemical profile,urinalysis,and felineleukemia
verethromboembolicevent.Lesscommon sites ofem-
virus/felineimmunodeficiency(FeLV/FIV)test.
HISTory.Distalarterialembolism characteristically
results in peracute clinical signs of lateralizing paresis,
vocalization,andpain.Occasionally,intermittent clau-
dication or right front paresis is reported. Signs of
CHF are often present concurrently, including dysp-
nea,tachypnea,anorexia,and syncope.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.Clinical signs are attributable
to CHF and specific tissues or organs that are embo-
lized (e.g., azotemia from renal infarction, bloody diar-
rhea from mesenteric infarction, posterior paresis from
saddle embolus). More than 90 percent of affected
cats present with a lateralizing posterior paresis caused
by a “saddle clot” at the distal aortic trifurcation (Fig.
28-31). Clinical signs are characterized by the four Ps
that relateto the extremities:Paralysis,Pain,Pulselesness
(lack of palpable femoral arterial pulses),and Polar
(cold distal limbs andpads).Cranial tibial and gastroc-
FIGURE28-32
nemius musclesare often firmor become sofrom
Cat withhypertrophiccardiomyopathyand acute rightfrontleg
ischemic myopathy by 10 to 12 hours postemboliza-
paresis caused by brachial artery embolization.
FELINECARDIOMYOPATHIES
661
ninelevelswererecordedin alittle over halfofcats at
presentation.396 Mild prerenal azotemia is common
since many cats are dehydrated,although renal in-
farction may play a role in some cases.4.5.8,26 407 Serum
concentrationsofalanine aminotransferase(SGPT)
andaspartateaminotransferase(SGOT)areelevated
by about12hours andpeakby36hourspostemboliza-
tion, indicating hepatic and skeletal muscle inflamma-
tionand necrosis.Lactate dehydrogenase(LDH)and
creatine phosphokinase (CPK) enzymes are greatly in-
creased shortly after embolization,indicating wide-
spreadcellularnjury.Hyperglycemiamature leukocy-
tosis,lymphopenia,and hypocalcemia may be present.
1
2
4
Acutehyperkalemiacanresultfromreperfusioninjury
SPECIMEN
ofskeletalmuscles downstreamfromtheembolus.Hy-
FIGURE28-33
pokalemiaisacommon consequence ofanorexia and
diuretic therapy.7,13a Coagulation abnormalities may
Kidneys froma catmanaged for chronic heartfailure,
cardiomyopathy,andthromboembolism.Renal surfaces contain
be detected.4osSome affected cats havehyperhomocys-
irregular sunken regions caused by chronic infarction.
teinemia (Hohenhaus AE,Simantov R,Fox PR,unpub-
lished data,1998).
bolization include renal,mesenteric,pulmonary,coro-
ECHoCARDIoGRAPHY.Echocardiography provides
nary, and cerebral arteries (Figs.28-33,28-34,28-35).
Occlusion of these sites may cause rapidly progressive
rapid,noninvasive assessment of cardiac structure and
function,detects intracardiac thrombi when present,
deteriorationanddeath.Abnormalitiesdetecteddur-
and thereby assists in formulating appropriate therapy
ing thoracic auscultationare common,includingheart
and prognosis. Multiple imaging planes are required
murmurs,gallop rhythms,pulmonary crackles,or muf-
to detect small mural thrombi, particularly in the left
fled heart and lung sounds. Most affected cats are
auricular
clinically dehydrated,andmany arehypothermic.
appendage.Spontaneousecho contrast
（smoke”)may be present in the LA or LV.It is
THORACIC RADIOGRAPHY.Cardiomegaly isusually evi-
associatedwithblood stasis and isconsidered ahar-
dent. In most cases biatrial enlargement is present,
bingerandmarkerforincreasedthromboembolic
riski62-164 (see Fig. 28-14). The mechanism of smoke
and the left auricular appendage is often prominent
has been attributed to erythrocyte aggregation at a
in theventrodorsal or dorsoventralview.Themajority
of affected cats have concurrent extracardiac signs of
Spontaneous Echo Contrast ["Smoke"] and Stasis, un-
congestive heart failure (e.g.,pulmonary edema,pleu-
ral effusion).47,25,396 Normal cardiac silhouettes were
derHypertrophic Cardiomyopathy,earlier.)Left atrial
reported in 1l percent of cats with thromboembo-
enlargement (LAE) is usually but not invariably pres-
lism.396
ent.Inaretrospectivestudyofcatswithsaddle emboli,
severeLAE(LA:Aoratio≥2.0)wasrecordedin57
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY.In one large retrospective
percent, moderate LAE (LA:Ao 1.63 to 1.99) in 14
study of cats presenting for thromboembolism, 85 per-
percent, mild LAE (LA:Ao, 1.25 to 1.629) in 22 per-
centhadECGchangeswhereas only15percenthad
cent,and 5percent of cats had normal LA measure-
no ECG abnormalities.Sinus rhythm was present in 60
ments (LA:Ao <1.25).396
percent.Seven percent had supraventricular tachycar-
dia,including atrialfibrillation;3percent hadventricu-
ANGIOCARDIoGRAPHY.Nonselectiveangiocardiogra-
lar tachycardia; and28percent had sinus tachycardia.
phycanbeconsideredinthestabilizedpatient if echo-
Isolated supraventricular(19percent)andventricular
cardiography is not available.In this scenario,it can
extrasystoles (19 percent) were also recorded.396 As
help determine the type of cardiomyopathy and dis-
underscored by continuous ECG(Holter）recordings
closethepresence of LA orLV ball thrombi,if any.It
in cats with CHF and systemic thromboembolism,im-
is occasionally used todetermine the anatomicloca-
portant changes can occur inheartrate and rhythm.
tionorextentof systemicthromboembolismandto
Developmentofatrialstandstillandasinoventricular
assess collateral flow (see Figs.28-29,28-30,28-34,
rhythm indicates hyperkalemia,a catastrophic conse-
28-35).The technique isrelatively simple and requires
quence of reperfusion muscle injury.115
sedation, jugular venipuncture with a large-gauge (e.g,
19-gauge) needle,hand injection of radiocontrast dye
CLINICALPATHOLOGY.Most catshave clinical pathol-
(0.8to 1.8mg/kg IV),andrapid,sequential exposure
ogy abnormalities.396 407 408 Elevated BUN and creati-
of radiographic cassettes.l This technique isnot with-
662
2DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
FIGURE28-34
Aortic angiogramfrom a catwith thromboembolic
complications of cardiomyopathy.The dye is
blocked just past the renal arteries,indicating a
massive embolism distal to this location.
outriskin decompensated animals.Severemyocardial
siaissometimesdiscoveredinthethoraxorabdomen
failure andhemodynamicallyorelectricallyunstable
(although the mechanistic relationship,if any, is un-
arrhythmias constituterelative contraindications.
clear),or systemic inflammation or endocarditis can
represent cardiovascular sources of emboli.
DIFFERENTIALDIAGNOSES
Differential causes of acute posterior paresis include
NATURALHISTORYANDPROGNOSIS
trauma,intervertebral disc extrusion,spinal lympho-
Short-term prognosis depends on the nature and
sarcoma and other neoplasia, and fibrocartilaginous
responsiveness of the cardiomyopathic disorder and
infarction.Acute front leg monoparesis canbe caused
heart failure state.In cases of saddle embolism,motor
by trauma,foreign body,and brachial plexus avulsion.
ability may begin to return in one or both legs within
The diagnosis is relatively easy to confirm by physical
10 to 14 days (see Fig.28-31).By 3 weeks,significant
examination (gallop rhythm;murmur;arrhythmias;
motor function (i.e.,hock extension and flexion)has
cold, pulseless limbs), radiographic and echocardio-
often returned, typically better in one leg than in the
graphic evidence of cardiomegaly and often heart fail-
other.Motorfunctionmaybecompletelynormal by4
ure, and clinical pathology abnormalities. Thrombo-
to6weeks,although aconsciousproprioceptive deficit
embolism uncommonlyoccursinthe settingof a
or conformational abnormality(e.g.,extreme hock
structurally normal ormildly abnormal heart.Neopla-
flexion)may persist in one leg.Unfortunately, most
FIGURE28-35
Nonselective angiocardiogram from a cat with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathywithcongestiveheartfailure,posterior
paresisandbloody diarrhea.The aorta is occluded bya
massive embolism afterit enters the abdomen.The diarrhea
was associated with ischemic bowel necrosis.Notice the gas-
flled loops of bowel.The catexperienced acuterenal
failure and hyperkalemia and died.
FELINECARDIOMYOPATHIES663
catsexperienceadditionalthromboembolicepisodes
withindays tomonthsoftheinitialevent,although
survivals of several years,includingrepeat embolic pi-
sodes,havebeenobserved.45.77Inonelargere
spective study,34 of 92 cats (37 percent) survived an
initial eventof saddleembolism.Follow-upinforma-
tion was available for 22 of these 34 cats,and an
average long-term survival of 1l.5 months was re-
corded.396
CLINICALINDICATORS OFARELATIVELYFAVORABLEPROG-
Nosis.Thromboembolismisawell-establishedcauseof
morbidity andmortality andrepresentsa severeclini-
suggested by (l) resolution of CHF and/or control of
serious arrhythmias,(2)lack of LA/LV thrombi or
spontaneous echo contrast,(3) re-establishment of ap-
petite,(4)maintenance of relatively normal BUN/
creatinine and electrolyte levels,(5)return of limb
viability and function (e.g., loss of swelling, return of
normal limbtemperature,return ofmotor ability),(6)
returnoffemoralarterialpulsesandpinknailbeds,
(7)lack of self-mutilation, and (8) committed owner.
FIGURE28-36
CLINICALINDICATORSOF GRAVEPROGNOSIS.Anumber
of morbid events confer a grave prognosis: (1) refrac-
This catwithhyperrophiccardiomyopathy,congestiveheart
failure,andasaddleembolismdevelopedsevereatrophyof the
toryCHF or development of malignant arrhythmias,
right rear gastrocnemius and cranial tibial muscle groups.In this
(2)acute hyperkalemia(fromreperfusion ofinjured
photograph theheadisoriented totheright,theleftrearlegisin
muscles),(3) declining limb viability (e.g., progressive
the background,and therightrearlegis in the foreground.By
hardening of thegastrocnemius and anterior tibial
fourweekspostembolization,thisresultedinpermanentflexure
contracture of themetatarsal-phalangealjointwhile theother leg
muscle group (Fig. 28-36);failure of these muscles to
regained normal function.Despite these changes,the cat could
become soft 48 to 72 hours after presentation; develop-
walk on the dorsal aspect of itsright proximal phalanges and
toleratedasmallsofpaddedfootbandage,whichtheowr
ment of distal limb necrosis),(4)clinical evidence of
changed frequently.The pet maintained an indoor-outdoor life
multiorgan or multisystemic embolization (e.g., neuro-
style and survived 14months until it experienced a second
logic signs,bloody diarrhea, acute renal failure)which
embolism.
usuallyaccompaniesextensivethromboembolism(see
Figs. 28-34, 28-35), (5) history of previous embolic
episodes,(6)presence or development of LA/LV
electrolyte levels and appetite,and (5)prevention of
thrombus or spontaneous echo contrast,(7）rising
repeated events.
BUN/creatininelevels,(8)disseminated intravascular
coagulation,(9）unresponsive hypothermia,(10） se-
THROMBOLECTOMY
vereLAenlargementwitharrhythmiaandmyocardial
Acutelyaffectedcats areahighsurgical/anesthesia
failure,and (11） uncommitted owner with limited fi-
risk due to CHF,hypothermia,disseminated intravas-
nancial resources.
cular coagulation, and arrhythmias.47,9,35-37,395,398, 406.421
Thus, acute embolectomy or surgery is generally con-
traindicated.Results have been poor, and these proce-
Therapy of Thromboembolism
dureshavefallenintodisfavor.
TREATMENTGOALS
Therapy is directed toward (1) managing concomi-
VASODILATORTHERAPY
tant CHF or serious arrhythmias when present,(2)
Various medical treatments have been proposed, al-
general patient support,including nutritional supple-
though most are empirical and efficacyisunsubstanti-
mentation,correctionof hypothermia,andprevention
ated.The use of acepromazine maleate or hydralazine
of self-mutilation,(3)adjunctive therapies tolimit
to encourage arterial vasodilation has been sug-
thrombus growth orformation,(4) closepatient moni-
toring for limb viability, heart rate and rhythm, pro-
form,andflowto musclebedsmaynot be altered.422
gression or regression of CHF, BUN/creatinine and
Moreover, these agents are potentially hypotensive,
664 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
a1d thcy have not heen shown to alter platelct-induced
ANTICOAGULATION THERAPY
reduction of collateral flow caused by vasoactive chemi-
RATTONAlE. Anticoagulants (heparin, coumarin) havc
cals such as se rotonin.
no cffects oil cstablishcd thrombi. Thcir usc has bec
bascd on thic premisc thiat by retarding clotting factor
synthesis or accclerating its inactivation. thrombosis
 THROMBOLYTIC THERAPY
from activatcd blood-clotting pathways can be prc-
RA7oNiur. Limb and/or organl viability is enhanced
vented. In cats who lhave suffered previous thrombo-
by rapid resolution of arterial occlusion, Platclets con-
embolism, or in patients with a predisposition for
stitute a large cormponent of occlusive artcrial cmboli.
thrombosis, oral anticoagulant therapy may offer a
In addition, activated platclcts provide a catalytic sur-
decreased risk of thromhoermbolism in exchange for
face for activation of prothrombin and factor X and
an incrcascd risk of major hemorrhage. It shiould not.
may  thierefore  contribute  to  thrombus  initiation,
he altempted without vigilant. monitoring and appro
growth, and cxtension.123. 4124
priate patient selection.
STREProKIvASE. Strcptokinasc and urokinasc act by
HEPAR/N HHeparin (heparin sodium, Liquaemin)
 gencrating the nonspccific proteolytic. cnzyme plasmin
binds to lysine sitcs or plasrma antithromhin IHl, cn-
through conversion of the procnzyme plasminogen.
hancing its ability to ncutralize thromhin and activated
This causes a generalized lytic state, with the incipient
factors XIl, XI, X, and IX; this prevents activation
of the coagulation process,v The efficacy of heparin
hazard of bleeding complications,122 Streptokinasc was
studicd in a feline rmodel of experimcntally induccd
 therapy hias bcen cstablished in many human trials and
aortic cmbolism.2 It was administered as an IV load-
in experimental animal rmodels for prevention and
ing dose (90.000 1U/cat. over 20 to 30 minutes), fol-
treatment of venous and pulmonary arterial thromho-
lowed by a constant-ratc infusion (45,000 1U/h) for 3
sis.1so Efficacy in treating cats with spontaneously oc-
 hours. With this approach, streptokinase predictably
curring thromboembolism has never heen established,
produced systemic fibrinolysis with no detectable ad-
and its use for this indication remains controversial.
versc effecis, but it failed to producc significant im-
Rcportcd dosagcs vary widcly. It may be administercd
proverment as mcasured by venous angiograms, ther-
01 0n) ssop A nu ue se uoisspe po sn sq e
mal circulatory indexes, or  staustically significant
200 IU/kg), thicn 50 to l00 IU/kg subcutacously
q6-8h.s The dose is then adjusted to prolong acti-
reduction in mcan throm bus weight. However. a stud-
ied clinical cvaluation of streptokinasc in naturally oc-
vated partial thromboplastin tirme (APpT) one and a
curring felinc thrormhoermbolism and cardiomyopathy
half to two timcs prctrcatmcnt values. Blceding is a
has not been reported.
rmajor complication. Clotting proliles must be closely
monitored.
RECOMBINANT TISSUE-TYIPE PLASMINOGEN ACTTVATOR.‘TISSUe
coUMARIN. The courmarin drug warfarin (Coumadin
plasminogen activator (t-PA) has a lower affinity for
Tableis, DuPont) impairs hepatir vitamin K metabo-
circulating plasminogen and docs not inducc a sys-
lism, a vitamin necessary for synthesis of procoagulants
temic fibrinolytic state. It binds to fibrin within thic
(factors Ul [prothrombin], VI1, IX, and X) .u The in-
thrombus and converts the entrapped plasminogen to
tial oral daily dosagc (0.25 to 0.5 mg/cat) is adjusted
plasmin. Tlhis initiatcs a local fibrinolysis with limited
to prolong the prothrombin time (PT) to twice thc
systermic protcolysis.127 Tissue plasminogen (Activasc,
normal value; alternativcly, it is adjusted by the interna-
 Genentcch) was cvaluated in cats witlhi spontaneous
tional normalization ratio (1NR) to maintain a valuc
thromboembolism.2 It. was administered IV at a ratc
of 2.0 to 3.0, as follows:
of 0.25 to 1.0 mg/kg/hr for a total IV dose of I to 10
mg/kg, Succcssful thrombolysis, defined as evidencc
INR = [Cat prothrombin timc ÷
of reperfusion within 36 hours of t-PA adrministration,
Control prothrombin time J'st
was reported in 50 percent of the thrombocmbolic
cats; 13 percent of the cats survived thcrapy and ambu-
By this rmonitoring technique, evaluation of anticoagu-
lated within 48 hours of prescntation. 1Iowcver, 50
lant therapy with the PT is adjusted for variations in
 percent of the cats died during therapy, which raised
thromboplastin reagent and laboratory tcchnique, The
major concerns regarding rapid thrormbolysis. Compli-
laboratory should provide an index of sensitivity of
calions resulted from hyperkaleinia due to repcrfusion
thc tlhromboplastin rcagent, called an international
syndrome (70 percent), heart failurc (15 pcrccnt), or
scnsitivity index (ISI). Warfarin and hcparin therapics
sudden dcath (15 percent). Bleeding into and around
 arc overlapped for several days in hurnaus becausc
thc kidney was also obscrvcd in scveral cats. Wide-
when coumarin treatmcnt is initiated, the level of pro-
spread clinical interest in this agent has been inhibited
tein C (a naturally occurring antithrombotic protcin)
by its high cost.
is decreased, creating a thromhogenic potential. Over-
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES
665
lappingheparintherapytheoreticallycounteractsthis
whereasprostacyclininhibitsplateletaggregation and
transient procoagulant effect before other vitamin K-
induces vasodilation.400.439 The aspirin-induced acetyla-
dependent factors (factors II,IX,and X)are affected
tion of the cyclo-oxygenase enzyme is irreversible and
by warfarin.430-432 The necessty for this maneuver in
persists for thelifeof theplatelet,which is7to10
cats has not been established.Warfarin has been pro-
days, as does platelet aggregation and release response
posedby some cardiologistsfor chronicoralmainte-
to various agonists.
nanceincasesofadvancedmyocardialdisease.Most
In cats,aspirin(25mg/kg,or 4 of a 5-grain tablet
advise caution,orreserveitfor cases of actual arterial
q48-72hPO)effectivelyinhibitsplateletfunctionfor3
embolism in indoor cats withattentive owners.Cefa-
to 5 days and isrelatively safe.440-112Improved collateral
zolin,ketoconazole,metronidazole,neomycin,tetracy-
circulation hasbeen demonstratedin aspirin-treated
cline,vitaminE,trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,and
cats with experimentally created aortic thrombosis.419
miconazolecan potentially increase the effect ofwarfa-
Concern regardingpotential inhibition ofprostacyclin
rin.33Catastrophichemorrhage isapotential compli-
cation of coumarin therapy (Fig.28-37).
dose that will inhibit thromboxane Aproductionbut
sparevascular endothelialprostacyclin synthesishas
ANTIPLATELETAGGREGATION
not yet been establishedfor cats.Because thevalue of
RATIONALE.Exposure of blood to subendothelial con-
aspirininpreventing afirst occurrence ofcardiogenic
nectivetissueleadstorapidplatelet activation,forma-
emboli is unknown, and its value in preventing throm-
tion of platelet plugs,and subsequent thrombus.Pri-
busrecurrencein catswithprevious emboli is doubt-
ful, there is need for clinical trials to assess this therapy.
maryprevention isnecessary sinceprothrombotic
factors are prevalent in feline cardiomyopathy,and
Side effects of aspirin are mainly gastrointestinal and
because prognosis for the treatment of thromboembo-
can be severe with overdosage.
lism ispoor.Pharmacologicmeasures are directed to
modifyplateletaggregation.
AMPUTATION
In situations of irreversibleloss of limb viability,
ASPIRIN.Aspirincanbeusedbased uponits theoreti-
particularly limb necrosis,amputation provides an al-
cal benefit during and after a thromboembolicepisode
ternative to euthanasia when all other patient parame-
topreventfurther embolicevents.Aspirin inducesa
ters are stable (Fig. 28-38).In selected cases,good
functional defect inplatelets byirreversiblyinactivat-
quality of life has been achieved for up to l year
ing(through acetylation)cyclo-oxygenase,an enzyme
postamputation, although repeated systemic emboliza-
critical for converting arachidonic acid to throm-
tionmustbe anticipatedandis alimitationforlong-
boxane Az434-436 and which in the vascular wall is
term success.Itshouldbenoted thatsomecatswho
responsibleforconverting arachidonic acid toprosta-
survive severe saddle embolusincur severe atrophy of
cyclin.436-438 Thromboxane A2 induces platelet activa-
their cranial tibial muscle group and sustain perma-
tion(through release of platelet adenosine diphos-
nent flexure of their metatarsus (Fig. 28-36). Such
phate)and vasoconstriction(as does serotonin),
patients,when cared forusingasoft,paddedprotec
COLON
FIGURE 28-37
Postmortem of acat thatbecame acutely anemicanddiedwhilemaintained onwarfarin
anticoagulation therapy.(A) Thelungs contained multiple large areas of hemorrhage.(B) In
additiontohemoabdomen,severeretroperitoneal bleedinghadoccurred(outlined byarrows
adjacent to the colon and bladder).
666
DISEASES OF THEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
FIGURE28-38
Cat with restrictive cardiomyopathywith a saddle embolism and heart failure.During thefirstweek
post embolization,thepet chewed andmutilated its distal extremities.Thewoundsfilledwith
granulation tissue and slowly healed by second intention over an eight-week period.(A)Despite
medical therapies,the distal leftmetatarsusbecame lichenified by about sixweekspostembolization.
These lesions progressed to avascular necrosisresulting in pathologicfracture and distraction at the
before experiencing a second saddle embolism.
tive bandage on the distallimb,may bear weight on
release ofpotassiumintothe systemiccirculation.
the leg and otherwise achieve a good quality of life.
Since thismay occur without warning,continuous ECG
monitoringofhospitalized catswith thromboembolism
SUPPORTIVEANDADJUNCTIVEMEASURES
is a useful, safe,and cost efficient method to detect
Aspirin isadministeredformyalgia associatedwith
large increases in serum potassium concentration. Se-
ischemic myopathy, in addition to antiplatelet effects.
quential ECGchangesbecome evident,including P-R
Epidural analgesia with morphine (0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg
interval prolongation and gradual disappearance of P
onetime)canbesafeandeffectivewhenadministered
waves,widening of the QRS complex,increasing T-
withinthefirst12to18hours afterembolization.Most
wave amplitude,and bradycardia.Fatalbradyarrhyth-
affected cats are anorectic, dehydrated, and hypoka-
mias progressing to asystole appear to be the mode of
lemic.It is important to maintainhydration,electrolyte
death in thesehyperkalemic cats.15 Standard therapies
balance, and nutritional support. If CHF has been
for hyperkalemia may be attempted44 but have been
resolved and the cat remains anorectic, placement of
unrewarding. Aggressive measures to reduce and main-
a nasoesophageal feeding tube is advocated for alimen-
tain serumpotassium havebeen successfulin a few
tation, particularly during the first week of therapy.
casesbyinitialIVadministrationofsodiumbicarbon-
Self-mutilation of distal limbs devitalizedby anocclu-
ate,followed by titrated doses ofregular insulin and
sivesaddle embolusiscommonly exhibitedduringcon-
glucose administered by constant-rate infusion.
valescence and is characterized by excessive licking or
chewing of the toes or lateral hock.Application of a
PRIMARYPREVENTIONOF
loose-fitting bandage,stockinette,or other barrier is
THROMBOEMBOLISM
usuallyeffective.Placement ofindwellingvenouscathe-
ters intoveins oflegs devitalized by occlusive embolus
Althoughaspirinhasbeendemonstratedtoexert
should always be avoided.
antiplatelet aggregating properties to feline platelets in
vitro,there areno data to supportroutineprophylactic
PATIENTMONITORING
administrationtocats withcardiomyopathyunless
Clinical pathology evaluations are dictated by patient
countervailing riskfactors (see earlier)have been iden-
status.Biochemical profiles are useful to assess renal
tified. Multicenter clinical trials have not been per-
function and electrolyte status,and coagulation
pro-
formedtoevaluatepreventivestrategies.
files (APTT,partial thromboplastin time [PTT],FSP,
Effective recommendationsfor prevention of arterial
plateletcount) are needed to evaluate anticoagulation
thromboembolismhavenotbeenidentified.Anti-
therapy and detect disseminated intravascular coagula-
thrombotic approaches should be based upon con-
tion.Suddenhyperkalemia canresultfrom reperfusion
cepts of pathogenesis and an appreciation of relative
syndrome(ischemicrhabdomyolysis and reperfusion)
risks.Large-scale studies are needed to evaluate epide-
whenarterialbloodflow is re-established toapre-
miology,risk factors,etiopathogenesis,and natural his-
viously ischemic region,resulting in acute catastrophic
tory of cardiomyopathy and systemic embolism. Cur-
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES 667
rent data indicate that arterial emboli originatc from
principles and evaluation. In Weyman AF. (ed): Princi-
the heart and therefore represent a cardiac disorder.
ples and Practice of Echocardiography. 2nd cd. Phila-
dclphia, Ica & Fcbiger, 1994, p 721
Cardiomyopathics commonly progress to evolve similar
13. Coiden AL, Bright JM. U'sc of relaxation half-tine as
pathiophysiologic. cnd-points that. favor thromhosis due
an index of ventricular relaxation in clinically nornal
to a triad of precipitating factors identificd by Virchow
cats and cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J
ovcr a ccntury ago: endothelial injury, a zone of circu-
Vet Res 51:1352. 1990
latory stasis, and a hypercoagulable state (sce Patho-
14. L.cvine RA. Echocardiographic assessment of the car-
plysiology, earlicr). Therefore, primary prevention of
diomyopathies. In Weynan AE (cd): Principles and
Practice of Echocardiography. Znd ed. Philadelphia.
thromboembolisn is basically a battle against the un-
Lea & Febiger. 1994, p 781
derlying cardiac disorder. No thcrapics have hccn
15. Nishinura RA, Tajik AJ. Evaluation of diastolic filling
identified that reverse or significantly rctard the devel-
of left ventricle in health and disease: Doppler echocar-
opment of feline heart disease or its related pathologic
diography is the clinicians' Rosctta stone. J An Coll
Cardiol 30:8, 1997
or prothrombotic sequclae. Moreover, it is likely that
16. Gilbert JC. Glantz SA. Determinants of left ventricular
filing and the diastolic pressure-volume relation, Circ
Res 64:827, 1989
tion, platclcts, and othcr blood components and fac-
17. Iittle WC, Downes TR. Clinical evaluation of left ven-
tors.
tricular diastolic perforimance. Prog Cardiovasc Dis
32:273, 1990
18. Brutsaert Dl. Nonuniformity: a physiologic modulator
of conuraction and relaxation of thc norinal heart. J
REFERENCES
A1n Coll Cardiol 9:341. 1987
19. Brutsaert DL, Radenakers FE, Sys SL, ct al. Analysis of
rclaxation in the evaluation of ventricular function of
thc hcart. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 28:143, 1985
20. Brutsaert DI, Radeimakers FE, Sys St. Triple control
1. Wynne JW, Braunwald, E. The cardionyopathics and
 yocarditides. In Braunwald E (ed): Hcart Discase; A
of relaxation: implication in cardiac discase. Circulation
69:190, 1984
Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicinc. 5th ed. Philadel-
21. Van Vlcet JF, Ferrans V. Myocardial diseases of animals.
phia, WB Saunders, 1997, p 1404
 2. Goodwin JF. Cardiomyopathics and specific heart mus-
Am J Pathol 124:97, 1986 
cle diseascs. Delinitions, terminology, classifications
22. Liu SK, Fox PR, Tilley LP. Excessive moderator bands
in the left ventricle of 2l cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
and new and old approaches. Postgrad Med J 68:S3,
1992
180:1215,1982
3. Richardson P, McKenna W, Bristow M, et al. Rcport
23. Liu SK. Peterson ME, Fox PR. Iypertrophic cardiomy-
of thc 1995 World 1lealth Organization/International
opathy and hyperthyroidism in the cat. J An Vet Med
Socicty and Federation of Cardiology Task Force on
Assoc 185:52, 1984
the definition and classification of cardiomyopathics.
24. Tilley LP, Linu SK, Gilbertson SR, et al. Primary myocar-
dial disease in the cat: a model for hunan cardiomyop-
Circulation 93:841, 1996
4. Fox PR. Myocardial discases. In Einger S] (ed): Texl-
athy. Am J Pathol 87:493, 1977
book of Veterinary Internal Medicine; Discascs of thc
25. Fox PR, Iiu SK, Maron BJ. Echocardiographic assess-
Dog and Cat. 3rd cd. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1989.
ment of spontaneously occurring felinc hypertrophic
p 1097
cardionyopathy: an aninal model of human diseasc.
5. Fox PR. Feline myocardial disease. In Fox PR (cd):
Circulation 92:2645, 1995
Canine and Feline Cardiology. New York, Churchill
26. Liu SK, Roberts WC, Maron Bj. Conparison of nor-
L ivingstone, 1988, p 435
 phologic findings in spontaneously occurring hypertro-
6. Sisson DD, Thomas W. Myocardial diseases. In Ettinger
phic cardiomyopathy in humans, cats and dogs. Am J
S], Feldman EC (eds): Texibook of Veterinary lnternal
Cardiol 72:944.1993
Medicine; Discases of the Dog and Cat. 4th cd. Phila-
26a. Maron BJ, Bonow RO, Cannon RO ll, et al. Hypertro-
delphia, WB Saunders, 1995. p 995
phic cardiomyopathy; interrclations of clinical maniles-
7. Fox PR. Feline myocardial diseascs. In Kirk RW (cd):
tatious, pathophysiology, and therapy (first of two
Current Veterinary Therapy Vol VIl. Philadelphia, WB
parts). N Engl J Med 316:841, 1987
Saunders, 1983, p 337
27. Nishimura RA,Housmans PR, Hatlc LK, ct al. Asscss-
8. Kushwala SS. Fallon JT, Fuster V. Restrictive cardiomy-
ment of diastolic function of the hcart: background
opathy N Engl J Med 336:267, 1997
and current applications of Doppler cchocardiography.
8a. Keren A, Popp RI. Assignment ol palients into the
Mayo Clin Proc 64:71, 1989
classification of cardiomyopathies. Circulation 86:1622,
 28. Applcton CP, Hale LK The natural history of left
1992
ventricular filling abnorinalities: assessinent of two-di-
9. Liu SK Pathology of feline heart disease. Vet Clin
mensional and Doppler cchocardiography. Echocardi-
North An 7:323, 1977
ography 9:137,1992
10. Maron BJ, Spirito P. Impact of paticnt sclection biases
29. Appleton CP, Hatle LK, Popp RL. Demonsiration of
restrictivc ventricular physiology by Doppler cchocardi-
its natural history. Am J Cardiol 72:970, 1993
ography. J Am Coll Cardiol 11:757, 1988
11. Fananapazir L. Epstein ND. Prevalence of hypcrtrophic
30. Maron Bj, Spirito P, Grcen KJ, et al. Noninvasive assess-
cardiomyopathy and limitations of screening 1methods.
ment of left ventricular diastolic function by pulscd
Circulation 92:700, 1995
Doppler cchocardiography in patients with hypertro-
12. Choong (Y. Left ventricle V. Diastolic function—its
phic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol 10:733. 1987
668DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
31. Pozzoli M, Traversi F, Ciolfi G, et al. I oading manipula-
50. Zak R. Molecular mcchanisins of cardiac hypcrtrophy
tions inprovc the prognostic value of Doppler evalua-
In H ager E (ed): Scientific Anerican Molecular Cardio
tion of nitral flow in patients with chronic heart failure.
vascular Medicine. New York, Scientific American, Inc,
Circulalion 95:1222, 1997
1995. p 177
32. Harrison MR, Clifton GD, Pennell AT, el al. Effect of
51. Lechin M, Quinones MA, Onran A, ct al. Angiotensin-
heart rate on left ventricular diastolic transmitral flow
I converting enzyme genotypes and left ventricular hy-
yelocity patcrns assesscd by Doppler echocardiography
pertrophy in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopa
in norimal subjects. An J Cardiof 67:622, 1991
thy. Circulation 92:1808, 1995
33. Atkins CF, Gallo AM, Kurzman ID, et al. Risk factors,
 52. 1layashida W, Kumada I, Kohno F, et al. Left ventricu-
clinical signs, and survival in cats with a clinical diagno-
lar regional relaxation and its nonuniformity in hyper-
sis of idiopathic: bypertrophic cardiomyopathy: 74 cases
trophic  nonobstructive  cardiomyopathy.  Circulation
(1985-1989). I An Vet Mcd Assoc 201:603, 1992
84:1496, 1991
34. Fox PR, Tiley LP, Liu SK. Thc cardiovascular systenn.
 53. Betocci S, Hess OM, Losi MA, el al. Regional lefl vcin-
In Pratt Pw (ed): Feline Mcdicinc. Santa Barbara, CA,
tricular mechanics in hypertrophic. cardiomyopathy.
Anerican Veterinary Publications, 1983, p 249
Circulation 88:2206, 1993
35.IIarpster NK. The cardiovascular system. In Hlolzworth
54. Spirito P, Maron BJ. Relation between cxtent of lefl
 J (ed): Discascs of thc Domestic Cat. Vol I. Philadel-
ventricular hypcrtrophy and diastolic filling abnormali-
phia, WB Saunders, 1986. p 820
tics in hypcrtrophic cardioinyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol
36. Van Veet J Ferrans VI, Wcirich WE. Pathologic altcr-
15:808, 1990
ations in hypertrophic and congestive cardiomyopathy
55. Briguori C, Betorchi S, Losi MA, ct al. Noninrvasive
of cats. Am1 J Vet Res 41:2037, 1980
cvaluation of left ventricular diastolic function in hyper-
37. Harpster NK Feline myocardial discases. In Kirk RW
trophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol 81:180, 1998
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy. Vol IX. Philadclphia,
56. Bright JM, Golden L. Gompf R, ct al. Evaluation of the
WB Saunders, 1986, p 380
calcium channel-blocking agents diltiazen and vera-
38. Martin L, VandeWoude S, Boon J. et al. Left ventricular
panil for treatment of feline hyperrophic cardiomyop-
hypertrophy in a closed colony of Persian cats. Abstract.
athy J Vet Intern Med 5:272, 1991
J Vet Intern Med 8:143, 1994
57. Bright JM, Hertage MF. Pulsed Doppler assessanent of 
39. Kittleson MD, Meurs KM, Kituleson J. et al. Heritablc
left ventricular diastolic function in normal and cardio
characterisics, phenotypic expression, and natural his-
niyopathic cats. Proc l5th Annu Vet Med Forum, 1997,
tory of hypertrophic cardionyopathy in Maine coon
p 212
cats; Abstract. J Vet Intern Mcd 12:198, 1998
58. L.osi MA, Betocci S, Grinaldi M, ct al. Hleterogencity of
40. Kittleson MD, Kittleson JA, Mekhamer Y. Dcvclopment
Ieft. ventricular filling dynamics in bypertrophic cardio-
and progression of inherited hypertrophic cardionyop-
1nyopathy. An J Cardioi 73:987, 1990
athy in Maine coon cats. Abstract. J Vet Intern Med
10:165,1996
pertrophic cardioinyopathy: rclation to cxtent of hyper-
41. Meurs K, Kittlcson MD, Towbin J, et al. Familial systolic
trophy J Am Coll Cardiol 15:814, 1990
alerior motion of thc initral valve and/or hypertro-
60. Gwathiney JK, Warrcn SE, Briggs GM, cl al. Diastolic
phic cardionmyopathy is apparently inherited as an au-
dysfunction in hypertrophic cardioinyopathy. Effect on
tosomal dominant traitin a family of American
active forcc gcncration during systole. J Clin Invest.
shorthair cats. Abstract. J Vet Intern Med 11:138, 1997
87:1023, 1991
42. Seidman CE, Seidman jG. Gene mutations thai cause
61. Stauffer JC, Gaasch wH. Recognition and treatincnt ol
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. In Hager E (ed):
left ventricular diastolic dysfumction, Prog Cardiovasc
Scientific  Aimerican Molecular Cardiovascular Medi-
Dis 32:319, 1990
cine. New York, Scientific American, Inc, 1995, p 193
62. Factor SF, Butany J, Sole MJ, et al. Pathologic fibrosis
43. Marian AJ, Roberts R. Rccent advances in the molccular
and matrix connective tissue in the subaortic inyocar-
genetics of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Circulation
 diun of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy J
92:1336, 1995
Am Coll Cardiol 17:13434, 1991
44. Kinura A, Harada Il, Park J-F, et al. Mutations in thc
63. Dilsizian V, Bonow RO, Epstein SF, ct al. Myocardial
cardiac troponin 1 genc associated with hypertrophic
ischemia detected by thalliun scintigraphy is frequenily
cardionyopathy. Nature Gcnetics 16:379, 1997
rclaled to cardiac arrest and syncope in young patients
45. Marian AJ, Yn Q-T, Mann Fl., et al. Exprcssion of a
with hypertrophic cardioinyopathy. J An Coll Cardiol
mutation causing hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy dis-
22:796, 1993
rupts sarcomerc assembly in adult felinc cardiac myo-
64. Grossman W, Mcl.aurin LP. Diastolic properties of the 
cytes. Circ Res 77:98, 1995
left ventricle. Ann Intern Med 84:316, 1974
46. Solomon SD, Simonetla W, Watkins H, ct al. Left ven-
65. Maron BJ. Wolfson JK, Epstcin SE, et al. Intramural
("sinall vessel') coronary artery disease in hypertro-
trophic cardionyopathy associated with mutations of
phic cardioinyopathy J Ain Cardiol 8:545, 1986
the beta-myosin heavy chain genc. J Am Coll Cardiol
 66. Tanaka M, Fuijiwara H, Onodcra T, ct al. Quantitative
22:498. 1993
analysis of narrowing of intramyocardial sinall arterics
47. Solomon SD, Jarcho JA, McKenna W, ct al. Familial
in normal heart, hypertcnsive hearts, and hearts with
hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy is a genelically heterogc-
hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy  Circulation   75:1130,
ncous disease. I Clin Invest 86:993, 1990
1987
48. Charron P, Dubourg O, Desnos M, el al. Clinical fea-
67. Linu SK. The intramural coronary arterial lesions in 102
tures and prognostic implications of familial bypertro-
cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Abstract. Sci
phic carrliomyopathy related to the cardiac myosin-
 Proc lnternat Acad Pathol, 1989, p 54
binding protein C genc. Circulation 97:2230, 1998
68. Krams R. Koflard MJM, Duncker D], ct al. Decreased
49. Watkins H, Thierfelder L, Hwang D-S, ct al. Sporadic:
coronary flow reserve in bypertrophic cardiomyopathy
hypertrophic. cardionyopathy due to de novo myosin
is rclated to remodeling ot the coronary nicrocircula-
mutations. J Clin Invest 90:1666, 1992
tion. Circulation 97:230. 1998
FELINE CARIIOMYOPATHIES 669
68a. Schwartzkopff B, Mundhenke M, Strauer BE. Alter-
ent of hypertrophic cardioinyopathy. N Engl J Med
ations of the architeclure of subendocardial arterioles
336:775, 1997
in paticnts with hypcrtrophic cardioinyopathy ad in-
8.1.
Pai RG, Jintapakorn W, Tanimoto M, et al. Role ol
paired coronary vasodilator reserve: a possible cause for
papillary muscle position and nitral valve structure in
myocardial ische1mia. J Ain Coll Cardiol 31:1089, 1998
systolic anicrior inotion of the mitral leaflets in hyper-
YN diei e 1o f ranig T Suproais Im Sunf 989
dynannic left
ventricular function. Am J Cardiol
spectroscopy detects mctabolic abnormalities in asymp-
76:623, 1995
tomatic patients  with hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy.
85. Klues IIG, Schiffers A. Maron Bj. Phenotypic spcctrum
Circulation 97:2536. 1998
and patterns of left ventricular hypertrophy in byper-
69. Lord PF, Wood A, Tilley LP. Radiographic and hemody-
trophic cardiomyopathy: morphologic observations and
nanic cvaluation of cardiomyopathy and thrombocin-
signilicance as assessed by two-dinensional echocardi-
bolism in the cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 164:154, 1974
ography in 600 patients. J Am Coll Cardiol 26:1699.
70. Sarnoff SJ, Braunwald E, Welch GH Jr et al. Hemody-
1995
nanic determinants of oxygen consumption of the
86. Klues HG, Roberts WC, Maron BJ. Morphological dc-
heart with special reference to the tension-tinc index.
terminants of echocardiographic paterns of mitral
Am J Physiol 192:148, 1958
valvc systolic anterior motion in obstructive hypertro-
71. Bocrth RC, Covcll JW, Pool PE, et al. Increascd myocar-
phic cardiomyopathy Circulation 87:1570, 1993
dial oxygen consumption and contractile stale associ-
87.
Cilligan 1DM, Chan WL, Stewart R, et al. Cardiac re-
atcd with increased heart ratc in dogs. Circ Res
sponses asscssed by echocardiography to changes in
24:725, 1969
preload in bypertrophic cardiounyopathy, Am J Cardiol
72. Canmon RO) lil, Rosing DR, Maron BJ, et al. Myocardial
73:312, 1994
88. MeCully RB, Nishimura RA, Tajik AJ, ct al. Extent
contribution of iradequate vasodilator rescrve and cle-
of clinical improvement alter surgical treatmcnt of
vated left ventricular filling prcssures. Circularion
hypcrtrophic
obstructivc cardiomyopathy. Circulation
71:234, 1985
94:467, 1996
72a. Peters NS, Wit AL. Myocardial architecture and ven-
89. Appleton CP, Hatle IK, Popp Rl. Relation of trans-
tricular arrhythmogenesis. Circulation 97:1716, 1998
mitral flow velocity patterns to left venricular diastolic
73. Levine RA, Lelcbvre X, Gucrrcro Jl., ct al. Unilying
function: new insights from a combined hemodynamic
conccpts of mitral valve fiunction and disease: SAM.
and  Doppler  cchocardiographic study.  J  Am Coll
prolapse and ischemic mitral rcgurgitation. J Cardiol
Cardiol 12:426, 1988
24 (Suppl 38):15, 1994
90. (Oki T, Fukuda N. Luchi A, ct al. Transesophageal echo-
74. Sherrid MV, Pcarle G, Gunsburg DZ. Mechanism of
cardiographic evaluation of mitral rcgurgitation in hy-
benelit of negative inotropes in obstructivc hyperiro-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy: contributions of ecccntric
phic cardiomyopathy. Circulauion 97:41, 1998
left venticular hypertrophy and related abnormalities
75. Wigle ED, Rakowski II, Kimball BP, et al. Ilypertrophic
of the miral complex. J Am Soc Echocardiogr &:503.
cardiomyopathy: clinical spccirum and trcatment. Cir-
1995
culation 92:1680, 1995
 90a. Yoezawa Y, Nihoyannopoulos P, McKenna WJ. ct al.
76. Nakatani S, Schwammenthal E, Lcver HIM, et al. New
Mitral regurgitation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; a
insights into the rcduction ol mitral valve systolic ante-
color Doppler cchocardiographic sludy. Aim I Noninvas
Cardiol 2:195, 1988
trophic obstructive  cardionmyopathy.  Am Jleart J
91. Bonagura JD, Stepien RL, Lchmkuhl 1.B. Arule effecis
131:294, 1996
of esmolol on left. ventricular ouflow obstruction in
77. Iin CS, Chcn K-S, Lin M-C, ct al. The relationship
between systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve and
echocardiographic study. Abstract. J Vet Intcrn Med
the lelt ventricular outflow tract Doppler in hypertro-
5:123,1991
phic cardiomyopathy. Am Hcart J 122:1671,1991
 92. Rishniw M, Thomas WP, Kicnle RD. Dynamic right mid-
78. Spirito P, Maron BJ, Rosing DR. Morphologic dcterni-
ventricular obstruction in 50 cats. Abstract. JI Vet Intern
nants of hemodyamic state after ventricular septal my-
Med 10:159, 1996
otonny-myectony in paticnts with obstructivc hypertro-
 93. Maron GJ, Mclntosh Cl, Klues IIG, et al. Morphologic
phic ‘cardiomyopathy: M-mode and two-dimensional
basis for obstruction to right ventricular outllow in1
echocardiographic assessment. Circulation 70:84, 1984
hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy. An J Cardiol 71:1098,
79. Jiang I., Levine RA, King ME, ct al. An intcgratcd
1993
imechanisin to cxplain thc systolic anterior motion of
94. Dong SJ, MacGrcgor JII, Crawley AP, et al. Lefl ventric-
the 1nitral valve in hypertrophic cardioinyopathy bascd
ular wall thickncss and regional systolic function in
on  cchocardiographic  obscrvations.  An  1leart  J
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy A three-di-
113:633,1987
mensional tagged magnetic resonance inaging study.
 80. Murgo JP. The hemodynamic evaluation in bypertro-
Circulation 90:1200, 1994
phic cardioinyopathy: systolic and diastolic dysfunction.
 95. Krainer C, Reickek N, Ferrari VA, ct al. Regional hcter-
Cardiovasc Clin 19:193, 1988
ogeneity of function in bypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy.
81. Knight C, Kurbaan AS, Seggcwiss H, et al. Nonsurgical
Circulaion 90:186, 1994
95a. Maron BJ、 Spirito P. Implications of lclt ventricular
opathy: outcome in the lirst series of patients. Circula-
remodeling in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. An J
tion 95:2075, 1997
Cardiol 81:1339, 1998
82. Sasson Z, Yock PC, 1latle 1.K, ct al. Dopplcr cchocardio-
 96. Spirito P, Maron BJ, Bonow RO, et al. Occurrencc and
graphic: determination of the pressure gradient in by-
significance of progressive lelt ventricular wall thinning
pertrophic cardiomyopathy J Am Coll Cardiol 11:752,
and relative cavity dilation in hypertrophic cardionyop-
1988
athy. An J Cardiol 59:123, 1987
97. Seiler C, Jenni R, Vassalli G, et al. Ieft ventricular
670 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
chamber dilatation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: re-
116. Brater DC. 'fhc use of diuretics in congestivc heart
lated variables and prognosis in patients with medical
failurc. Semin Nephrol 14:479, 1994.
and surgical therapy. Br 1eart J 74:508, 1995
117. Philbin EF, Coto M, Rocco TA, et al. Association be-
98. Kawano S, lida K, Fujieda K, et al. Response to isopro
tween diuretic use, clinical rcsponse, and death in acute
terenol as a prognostic indicator of evolution fron
heart failure. Am J Cardiol 80:519, 1997
hyperrophic cardiomyopathy to a phase rescmbling
117a. Burnier M, Brunner HR. Neurohornonal conse-
dilated cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol 25:687, 1995
quences of diureties in different cardiovascular syn-
99. Liu SK. Maron BJ, Tilley I.P. Feline hypertrophic cardio-
dromes. Eur Heart J 13(Suppl G):28, 1992
myopathy: gross anatomic and quantitative histologic
118. von Dohlen Tw, Prisant LM, Frank MJ. Significance of
features. An J Pathol 102:388, 1981
99a. Maron BJ, Gouldiener JS, Epstcin SE. Patterns and
trophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol 64:498, 1989
significancc ol distribution of left ventricular hypertro-
119. Teo KK, Yusuf S, Furberg CD. Effects of prophylactic
phy in hypertrophic cardionyopathy, a wide-angle, two-
antiarrhythmic drug therapy in acutc myocardial in-
dimensional chocardiographic study of 125 paticnts.
farction. J An Med Assoc 270:1589, 1993
Am J Cardiol 48:418, 1981
120, Kennedy HL, Brooks MM, Barker AH, et al. Beta-
100. Bright IM, Golden AL, Daniel (GB. Felinc hyperirophic
blocker therapy in the Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression
cardiomyopathy: variations on a theinc. J Simall Anim
Pract 33:66, 1992
121. ISIS-1 (first International Study of Intarct Survival) Col-
101. Petersom EN, Moisc NS, Brown CA, et al. Ileterogenciy
laborative Group. Mechanisms for the carly mortality
Of hyperurophic cardiomyopathy in feline hypertrophic
reduction produccd by beta blockadc started early in
heart diseasc. J Vet Intern Med 7:183, 1993
 acute myocardial infarction. Lancel 1:921, 1988
102. Maron BJ, Roberts WC. Quantitative analysis of cardiac
122. Yusuf S, Peto R, Lewis J, ct al. Beta blockadc during
muscle cell disorganization in the ventricular septum of
and affer nyocardial infarction: an overvicw of the
paticnts with hypertrophic cardioinyopathy. Circulation
randoimized trials. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 27:335, 1985
59:689, 1979
123. Barron HV, Viskin S, Lundstrom RJ, et al. Beta-blocker
103. St John Sutton MG, Lic JT, Anderson KR, et. al. Hlisto-
dosages and mortality after myocardial intarction. Arch
pathological spccificity of hypertrophic. obstructive car-
Intern Med 158:449, 1998
124. Clarkson PBM, Wheeldon NM, Macleod C, ct al. Sys-
fibrosis. Br Heart J 44:433, 1980
tolic and diastolic effects of beta-adrenergic stimulation
104. Liu SK, Fox PR. Myocardial ischemia and infarction. In
in normal humans. Am J Cardiol 75:206, 1997
Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (cds): Kirk's Current Veterinary
125. Dujardin Ks, Enriquez-Sarano M, Rossi A, ct al. Echo
Therapy. Vol X1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1002, p
cardiographic assessment. of left ventricular remodel-
791
ing: are let ventricular diametcrs suitable tools? J Am
105. Maron BJ, Epstein SE, Roberts WC. Hypertrophic car-
dionyopathy and  transimural nyocardial infarction
Coll Cardiol 30:1534, 1997
126. Foy SG, Crozicr IC, Turncr JG, el al. Conparison of
without significant atherosclerosis of thc extramural
coronary artcrics. Am J Cardiol 43:1086. 1979
cnalapril vs captopril on leff veniricular function and
106. Bonagura JD. Cardiovascular diseases. In Sherding RG
survival three months after acute myocardial infarction
(ed): The Cat. Discases and Clinical Managemeni. 2nd
(The “PRACTICAL" Study). A1n J Cardiol 73:1180,
cd. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1994, p 819
1994
107. Fox PR, Broussard J1D, Petcrson ME. Electrocardio-
127. Kober L、Torp-Pedersen C, on behalf of the TRACF
Study Group. Clinical characteristics and mortality of
graphic and radiographic changes in cats with hyper-
thyroidism: comparison of populations evaluated dur-
patients screened for cntry into the transolapril cardiac.
ing 1979-1982 vs. 1992-1993. Abstract. J Vet Intern
cvaluation (TRACE) study. Am J Cardiol 76:1, 1995
128. Grecnberg B, Quinones MA, Koilpillai C, ct al. Effects
Med 7:118, 1993
108. Kitleson ME. Fcline hyperrophic cardiommyopathy. In
of long-term cnalapril therapy on cardiac structure and
Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy.
funcuion in patients with left ventricular dysfunction.
Vol X11. Philadclphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 854
Results of the SOLVD Echocardiographic Substudy. Cir-
109. Fox PR, Kaplan P Feline arrhythnias. Contemp Issucs
culation 91:2573, 1995
Sinall Anim Pract 7:251, 1987
129. Torp-Pedersen C, Kober L, Burchardt H. The place of
110.
Bond BR, Fox PR Advances in feline cardionyopathy.
angiotensin-converting enzyne inhibition after acute
Vet Clin North Am 14:1021, 1984
myocardial infarction. An Heart J 134:S25, 1997
111. Fox PR, Bond BR. Nonselective and sclective angiocar-
130. Latini R, Maggioni AP, Flather M, ct al. ACE-inhibitor
diography. Vet Clin North Am 13:259, 1983
usc in patients with nyocardial infarction: suummary of
112. Fox PR, Feline cardiomyopathy. Contemp Issues Snall
cvidencc from clinical trials. Circulation 32:3232, 1995
Anim Pract 7:157, 1987
131. Rutherford JD, Pfeffer MA, Moye LA, et al. Effects of
113. Wilkins RJ. Clinical pathology of felinc cardiac diseasc.
captopril on ischeinic events after myocardial in-
Vct Clin North Am 7:285, 1977
faretion: results of thc Survival and Ventricular Enlargc-
113a. Fox PR. Current usagc and hazards of diuretic ther-
mcnt Trial. Circulation 90:1731, 1994
apy. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Current Veterinary
132. Skolnick AF, Frishman WH. Calcium channel blockers
Therapy. Vol XI. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992. p
 in myocardial inlarction. Arch Intern Med 149:1669,
668
1989
114. Kittleson MD. Pion PD.DeLellis LA, ct al, Increascd
133. 1Hager WD, Davis BR, Riba A, ct al. Absence of a delctc.
serum growth hormone concentration in feline hyper-
rious effect of calciun channel blockers in paticnts
trophic cardionyopathy J Vet Intern Med 6:320, 1992
with left ventricular dysfunction after myocardial in-
115. Fox PR, Moise Ns, Pricc RA, et al. Analysis of continu-
farction: thc SAVF stuidy cxperiencc. Am Hearl J
ous ECG (IIolter) nonitoring in normal cats and cardi-
135:406,1998
omyopathic cats in congestive heart ltailure. Abstract. J
134, Multiccnter Postinfarction Trial (MDPIT) Rescarch
Vet Intern Med 12:199, 1998
(Group. Thc clfcct of diltiazein on nortality and rein-
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES·
671
farction after myocardial infarcnion. N Engl J Med
tcim in hypertropby and the progression to heart fail-
319:385,1988
ure. Heart Failure Rev l:63, 1966²
135. Ishikawa K, Nakai S, Takenaka T, et al. Short-acting
155. Oshikawa T, 1landa S, Anzai T, et al. Early rcduction of
nifedipine and diliazem do not reducc the incidence
neurohumoral factors plays a kcy role in mediating thc
of cardiac cvents in paticnts with healed myocardial
cfficacy of β-blocker therapy for congestive hcart fail-
infarction. Circulation 95:2368, 1997
urc. Am Heart J 131:329, 1996
136. Kostis JV. lacy CR, Cosgrove RN, et al. Association of
156. Rush JF, Freeinan LM, Brown DJ、 ct al. The use of
i      
cnalapril in thc treatnent of feline hypertrophic cardio-
acute inyocardial infarction in patients with left ventric-
1nyopathy. J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 34:88, 1998
ular dysfunction, Am Hcart J 133:550, 1997
157. Maron BJ, Roberts WC, Epstein SE. Sudden cardiac
137. Packer M, Calcium channel blockers in chronic heart.
failure: the risk ot "physiological rationale” therapy.
patients. Circulation 65:1388, 1982
Circulation 82:2254, 1990
158. Maron BJ, Cecchi F, McKcnna WJ. Risk factors and
138. ACC/AHA guidelines for the management of patients
Stratification for sudden death in patients with hyper-
with acute 1nyocardial infarction. J An Coll Cardiol
trophic cardionyopathy. Br Hear J 72:s13, 1994
78:153. 1996
159. Schiavonc WA, Malonc ,ID, 1.ever HD, et al, Elcctrophys-
139. Messerli Fll, Michalewicz 1.. Safcty of heart ratc-
iologic studics of paticnts with hypertrophic cardiomy-
lowering calcium antagonists: lessons fron controlled
Opathy with syncope of undetermined ctiology. Pacing
trials. Aim Hleart J 134 (Suppl);:S21, 1997
Clin Electrophysiol 9:476, 1989
140. Boyden PA. Hilley L.P, Albala A, et al. Mechanisms for
159a. Nienaber CA, Hiller S, Spielnann RP, ct al. Syncope
atrial arrhythmias associated with cardiomyopathy a
 in bypertrophic cardiomyopathy: nultivariate analysis
study of feline hcarts with primary myocardial discase.
of prognostic determinants. J Am Coll Cardiol 15:948.
Circulation 69:036, 1984
1990
141. Liu SK, Tilley LP. Aninal models of primary myocardial
160. MeArcavey D, Dilsizian V, Panza J, et al. Favorable prog-
diseases. Yale J Biol Med 53:191, 1980
-ed Xqecloiuoes sydlonnodiy bunoi ss  sisou
142. Kimua S, Basseit. Al., Cameron JS, et al. Cellular elec-
tients during thcrapy based on hemodynamic clec-
trophysiological changes during ischemia in isolated,
trophysiologic and thallum scintigraphy findings. Ab
coronary-perfused cat ventricle with healed nyocardial
stract. Circulation 88(suppl I):1-209, 1993
infarction. Circulation 78:401, 1988
161. Gilligan DM, Nihoyannopoulos P, Chan WL, et al. In-
142a. Sicvenson WG, Slevenson LW, Middlekauff HR, ct al.
vestigation of a heinodynanic basis for syncopc in hy-
Sudden death prevention in palients with advanced
pertrophic cardiomyopathy: usc of a head-up tilt test.
vcntricular dysfunction,Circulation 88:2953,1993
Circulation 85:140, 1992
143. Maron B, Shirani J, Poliac LC, et al. Sudden dcath in
162. Black IW, Hopkins AP, Lee LCL, et al. Left atrial sponta-
young compctitive athlctes; clinical. demnographic, and
ncous echo contrast: a clinical and cchocardiographic.
pathological proliles. I Am Med Assoc 276:199, 1996
analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol 18:398, 1991
144. Wigle El. Novel insights into thc clinical manifesta-
163. 1eung DYC, Black IW, Cranney GB, ct al. Prognostic
tions and treatment of hypertrophic cardionyopathy.
implications of lelt atrial spontancous ccho contrast in
Curr Opin Cardiol 10:29, 1995
nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol
145. Yetinan AI, McCrindle Bw, MacDonald C, et al. Myo-
24:755, 1994
cardial bridging in children with hypertrophic cardio-
164. Tsai I.M, Chen JH, Fang CJ, et al. Clinical implications
Inyopathy-a risk factor for sudden death. N Engl J
 of left atrial spontaneous echo contrast in nonrheu-
Med 339:1201, 1998
matic atrial fibrillation. Am J Cardiol 70:327, 1992
146.Bristow MR. Mechanism of action of beta-blocking
165. Black IW, Chesterman CN, Ilopkins AP, ct al. Hemato-
agcnts in heart lailurc. Am I Cardiol 80:261., 1997
logic correlates of left atrial spontaneous echo contrast
147. Cody Rj. The sympathetic ncrvous systcm and the rc-
and thromboembolism in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation.
nin-angiotensin-aldosterone  system  in  cardiovascular
J Am Coll Cardiol 2l:451, 1993
diseases. An I Cardiol 80:9], 1997
166. Fatkin D, Herbert E, Feneley MP. Henatologic corre-
148. Maron BJ, Bonow RO, Cannon RO 1ll, et al. Hypertro-
lates of spontaneous echo contrast in patients with
phic cardiomyopathy. Intcrrelations of clinical manifes-
atrial fibrillation and implications for thromboenbolic
tations, pathophysiology and therapy (second of two
risk. Am J Cardiol 73:672, 1994
parts). N Engl J Mcd 316:780, 1987
167. Mahoney C, Ferguson J. The elfecl of heparin versus
149. Hcidenreich PA, Lec TT, Massie BM, Eflect of beta-
citrate on blood cchogenicity in vitro: the role of plac-
blockade on mortality in paticnts with hcart tailurc: a
lct and platelet-neutrophil aggregates. Ultrasound Med
mcia-analysis of randomizcd clinical trials. J Am Coll
Biol 18:851, 1992
(Cardiol 30:27, 1997
I68. Kearney K, Mahoney C. Effect of aspirin on spontanc-
150. Bonow Ro0. Left ventricular diastolic function in hyper-
ous contrast in the brachial veins of normal subjects.
trophic cardiomyopathy. Herz 16:13, 1991
Am J Cardiol 75:924, 1995
151. Gistn R, Cecchi F, Choudhury I., ct al. Eflect of vera-
169. Karalis DG, Ross II, Neri JI.. I.eft ventricular thrombo-
pamil on absolutc mnyocardial blood flow in hyperro-
cmbolism. Circulation 97:498, 1998
phic cardiomyopathy. An J Cardiol 74:363, 1994
170. Tsai I-M, Chen J-H1, Tsao CJ]. Relation of Iclt atrial
152. Rials SJ, wu Y, Pauletto FJ, ct al. Effect of an intrave-
spontaneous echo contrast with prcthrombotic state in
nous angiotensin-convcrting enzyine inhibitor on the
electrophysiologic features of normal and hypertro-
idiopathic dilatcd cardionyopathy, or no identiliable
phicd feline ventricles. A1n 1leart J 132:989, 1996
cansc (lone). An J Cardiol 81:1249, 1998
153. Pfeffer MA, Pfcffer JM. Pharmacologic regrcssion of
171. Tse II-F, Lau C-P, Cheng G. Relation betwcen mitral
cardiac hypertrophy in experimental hypertension. J
regurgitation and platelct activation. J Am Coll Cardiol
Cardiovasc Pharmacol 6:s865, 1989
30:1813, 1997
154. Dell'Itailia LJ, Oparil S. Cardiac renin angiotensin sys-
172. Kalaria VG, Passannante MR, Shah T, et al. Effect of
672 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
mitral rcgurgitation on left ventricular thrombus for-
tolic and diastolic eflects of bcta-adrenergic stimulation
mation in dilatcd cardioinyopathy. Am Hcart J
in normal humans, A1n J Cardiol 75:206, 1997
135:215,1998
189. Teo KK, Yusut S, Furberg CD. Effects of prophylactic
172a. Marian Aj, Roberts R. Recent advances in the molccu-
antiarrhythunic drug therapy in acute myocardial in-
lar genetics of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circula-
farction. J A1n Med Assoc 270:1589, 1993
tion 92;1336,1995
190. Kennedy Hl., Brooks MM, Barker AH, et al. Bcta-
173. Mann DI., Kent RL, Parsons B, cl al. Adrenergic cffects
blocker therapy in the Cardiac Arrhythunia Suppression
on the biology of thc adult nammalian cardiocytc.
Trial. Aim J Cardiol 74:674, 1994
Circulation 85:790, 1992
191, Hjalmarson A. Effects of bcta blockade on suddcn car-
171.
 Cohn JN. Plasrna norepinephrine and nortality. Clin
diac dcath during acute nyocardial infarction and the
Cardiol 18(Suppl 1): 1-9, 1995
postinfarction period. A1n J Cardiol 80(9B):35], 1997
175. Mancia G. Sympathetic activation in congestivc hearl
192. Cody Rj. The synpathetic nervous system and the re-
faihure. Eur Hlcart J 11(Suppl A):3. 1990 
min-angiotensin-aldosterone system in  cardiovascular
176. Gilligan DM, Chan Wl., Stewart R, ct al. Cardiac rc-
discase. Am J Cardiol 80:9J. 1997
sponiscs asscssed by ecchocardiograph to changes in pre-
193. Heidenrcich PA, Lec TT, Massic BM. Efect of beta-
load in hypertrophic cardiomnyopathy. Am J Cardiol
blockade on mortality in patients with heart failure: a
73:312,1994
meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. J Ain Coll
176a. Vasko MR, Cartwright DB, Knochel JP, ct al. Furose
Cardiol 30:27, 1997
mide absorption altered in decompcnsated congestive
191. Muir Ww. Clinical pharmacodynamics of beta-adreno
heart failure. Ann lntern Med 102:314, 1985
ceptor blocking drugs in veterinary rmedicinc, Com-
176b. Kupper AJ. Fintelinan H, Huigc MC, el al. Crossover
pend Contin Educ Pract Vet 6:156, 1989
comparison ol the fixed combination of hydrochloro-
195. Frishman WH. β-Adrenergic blockers. Med Clin North
thiazide and triamterene and the frcc combination of
Am 72:37,1988
furoseinide and triantercnc in the maintenance treat-
196. Quinones M, Dyer DC, Warc WA, et al. Pharmacokinct-
ment of congestive hcart failure. Eur J Pharmacol
ics of atcnolol in clinically normal cats. Am J Vet Res
30:312,1986
57:1050.1996
176c. Elison DH. The physiologic basis of diuretic syner-
196a. Ilenry PD. Conparative pharmacology of calcium an-
gismr: its role in treating diuretic resistance. Ann Intern
tagonists: nifedipine, verapanil, and ditiazem. Am J
Med 114:886. 1991
Cardiol 46:1047, 1980
177. Tiley I P, Weitz J. Pharmacologic and other forms of
196h. Walsh RA The effects of calcium-entry blockade on
medical therapy in felinc cardiac discasc. Vet Clin
lefl veniricnlar systolic and diastolic function. Circula-
North Am 7:415, 1977
tion 75(suppl V): V43, 1997
178. Fox PR. Evidence for and against bcta-blockers and
197. Rosing DR, Idan lpaan-Hleikkila U, Maron BJ, et al.
Use of calcium-channcl blocking drugs in hypertrophic.
Clin North Am 2l:10ll, 1991
cardiomyopathy Am J Cardiol 55:Suppl: 185B, 1985
179. Bright J, Golden I., Evidencc for or against the elficacy
198. Bonow RO, Rosing DR, Bacharach SI., et al. Effects
 of calciun channel blockers for management of hyper-
of vcrapanil on left ventricular systolic function and
trophic cardiomyopathy in cats. Vet Clin North Am
diastolic filling in patients with hypertrophic cardiony-
21:1023, 1991
opathy. Circulation 64:787, 1981
180. Fox PR. Therapy for feline imyocardial diseases. In
199. Ifess OM, Grinnn J, Kraycnbuehl HP. Diastolic function
Bonagura JD) (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy.
in hypertrophic cardioinyopathy: effects of propranolol
Vol Xi11. Philadclphia, WB Saundcrs (in prcss)
and verapamil on diastolic stiffncss. Eur Heart J 4:Suppl
181. Collucci ws. Molecular and ccllular mcchanisms of
F:17,1983
nyocardial failure. Am J Cardiol 80:15l., 1997
200. Udelson JE、 Bonow RO, O'Gara PT, ct al. Verapainil
182. Bigger JT. Why patients with congestivc heart. failurc
prevents silent nyocardial perfusion abnormalities dur-
dic: arrhyihimias and sudden cardiac death. Circulation
ing exercise in asymptomatic palients with bypertrophic.
75(Suppl IV):IV28, 1987
cardionyopathy. Circulation 79:1052, 1989
183. Francis GS, Cohn JN. Hcarl failure: mcchaniss of
200a. Iwase M, Sotobata I, Takagi S, ct al. Effects ol diltiazcm
cardiac and vascular dysfunction and the rationale for
on left ventricular diastolic bchavior in patients with
pharmacologic intcrvention. FAsEB J 4:3068, 1990
hypcrtrophic cardionyopathy: evaluation with exercise
184. Eaton GM, Cody RL., Nunziata F, ct al. Farly left. ventric-
pulsed Doppler echocardiography J Am Coll Cardiol
ular dysfunction clicits activation of synpathetic drive
2:143, 1987
and attenuation of parasympathetic tone in the paced
201. Suwa M, Hiroto Y, Kawamura K. Inprovcment in left
canine model of congestive heart failure. Circulation
ventricular diastolic function during intravenous and
92:555, 1995
oral diliawein therapy in patients with hypertrophic
185. Newton GE, Parker JD. Acute clfects of β-sclcctive and
cardiomyopathy: an echocardiographic study. Am J
nonselective β-adrenergic reccptor blockade on cardiac
Cardiol 54:1047, 1984
sympathetic activity in congestive hcart failure. Circula-
 20la. Betocchi S, Piscionc F, Losi MA, et al. Effects of diltia-
tion 94:353, 1996
zem on leff ventricular systolic and diastolic function
186. Thormpson Ds, Naqvi N. Juul SM, ct al. Effects of pro-
in bypertrophic cardionyopathy. An J Cardiol 78:451,
pranolol on 1nyocardial oxygen consumption, substratc
1996
extraction, and hacmodynamics in hypertrophic ob-
202. Natarajan D, Sharma SC, Sharrma VP. Pulmonary
structivc cardiomyopathy. Br HIcart J 44:488, 1980
edema with diltiazem in hypcrtrophic obstructive car-
187. Harrison DC, Braunwald F, Glick G, et al, Elfccts of 
diomyopathy. Am 1leart J 120:229, 1990
beta-adrenergic blockade on the circulation, with par-
 203. Johnson LM, Atkins CE, Keene BW, ct al. Pharinacoki-
licular rcference to obscrvations in patients with hyper-
netic and pharmacodynamic properies of conventional
trophic subaortic stcnosis. Circulation 29:84, 1964
and CD-formulated diltiazen in cats. J Vet Intern Med
188. Clarkson PBM, Whecldon NM, Maclcod C, et al. Sys-
10:316, 1996
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES 673
204. Hager WD, Davis BR, Riba A, ct al. Abscnce of a dcletc-
hypcrtrophy in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyop-
rious cffcct of calcium channcl blockers in paticnts
athy. Circulation 92:1808, 1995
with left ventricular dysfiunction after myocardial in-
222a. Hodges RD, Lothrop CD Jr. Atrial natriuretic factor
farction: the SAVE study expericnce. An Hcart J
concentration in thc cat: Abstract. I Vet Intern Med
135:406,1998
5:129, 1991
205. Ishikawa K, Nakai S, Takcnaka T, et al. Short-acting
223. Weber KT. Extracellular matrix reniodeling in hcart
nifedipine and diltiazem do not reduce the incidence
failurc; a role for de novo angiotensin ll gencration.
of cardiac events in patients with healed nyocardial
Circulation 96:4065, 1997
infarction. Circulation 95:2368, 1997
224. Vaughn DE, Pfeffer MA.
.Angiotensin converting en-
206. Messerli FH, Michalewicz L. Safety of heart ratc-
zyime inhibitors and cardiovascular remodeling. Cardio-
lowering calciuin antagonists: lessons trom controllcd
vasc Res 28:159, 1994
trials. Am Ileart J 134 (Suppl):S21, 1997
 225. Dahlof B. Elfcct of angiotensin 11 blockade on cardiac
207. ACC/AHA guidelines for the nanagement of patients
hypertrophy and remodeling: a revicw. J Hun Hypcr-
with acute myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol
tens 9(Suppl) :S37, 1995
78:153,1996
 226. Haber HL, Powers ER, Gimple LW, et al. Intracoronary
 208. Packer M. The ncurohormonal hypothesis: a theory to
angiotensin converting cnzyme inhibition improves dia-
cxplain the mcchanisin of disease progression in hcart
stolic function in patients with hypertensive Ieft ventric-
failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 20:248. 1992
ular hypertrophy. Circulation 89:2616, 1994
 209. Chatterjcc K Ileart failure therapy in evolution. Circu-
227. Sudhir K, Chou TM, Ilutchinson SJ, ct al. Coronary
lation 94:2689, 1996
vasodilation induced by angiotensin-converting cnzyne
210. Consensus Trial Study Group. Effects of enalapril on
inhibition in vivo: diffcrenual contribution ol nitric
mortality in severe congestive hearl failure: results of
 oxide and bradykinin in conductance and resistance
the cooperative North Scandinavian Enalapril Survival
arteries. Circulation 93:1734, 1996
Study (CONSENSUS). N Engl.J Med 316:1129, 1987
227a. ACE Inhibitor Myocardial Infarction Collaborative
211. The SOLVD Investigators. Effect of enalapril onn sur-
Group. Indications for ACE inhibitors in the early treat-
vival in patients with reduced left ventricular cjection
ment of acute myocardial infarction; systematic over-
tractions and congestive heart failure. N Engl J Med
vicw of individual data from loo.000 patients in ran-
325:293, 1991
donizcd trials. Circulation 97:2202, 1998
 212. The SOLVD Investigalors. Effect of cnalapril on mortal-
228. Ilartimann A, Puctz. A, Ilopf R. Effects of long-termn
ity and the devclopment ol heart tailure in asymptom-
ACE-inhibitor therapy in bypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy
atic patients with reduccd left ventricular cjection Irac-
(IICM). J Am Coll Cardiol Suppl A:234A, 1995
tions. N Engl J Med 327:685, 1992
 229. Kyriakidis M, Triposkiadis F, Dernelli J, et al. Effects of
213. The Acute infarclion Ramipril Eficacy (AIRE) Sudy
cardiac ycrsus circnlatory angiotcnsin-convcrting cn-
Investigators. Effect of ranipril on mortality and mor-
zyme inhibition on left ventricular diastolic function
bidity of survivors of acutc myocardial infarction with
clinical evidencc of hcart failure. Lancct 342:821, 1993
thy. Circulation 97:1342, 1998
 214. IMPROvE Study Group. Acute and short-term hcmody-
230. Sanders N, Hainlin R, Buffington T, et al. Effects ol
nanic, echocardiographic, and clinical eflects of enala-
enalapril on hcalthy cats; Abstract. J Vet Intern Med
6:139, 1992
ure: results of thc Invasivc Multicenter PROspective
231. King JN, Hlumbert-Droz R, Maurer M. Plarmacokinet-
ics ol benazepril and inhibition of plasna ACE activity
Veterinary Evaluation of Enalapril study. J Vet Intcrn
in cats; Abstract. J Vet Intern Med 10:163, 1996
Med 9:234, 1995
232. Cohn JN, Simon A, Johnson G, VHeFT Study Group.
215. COvE Study Group. Controllcd clinical cvaluation of
enalapril in dogs with heart tailurc: results of thc Coop-
Relationship of plasina orepincphrine and plasma rc-
nin activiy to mortality in heart failure: V1leFT 1I:
erative Vetcrinary Enalapril Study Group. J Vet Intern
Abstract. Circulation 84 (Suppl 11):11310, 1991
Med 9:243, 1995
233. Pollick C. Disopyramide in hypertrophic cardiomnyopa-
216. Sharpe DN, Coxon RJ, Douglas JE, ct al. Low-dose
thy: noninvasive asscssinent after oral administration,
Am I Cardiol 62:1252, 1988
effects and long-terin trcatmcnt. I ancet 2:1154, 1980
234. Rosing DR, Kent KM, Maron BJ, et al. Verapainil thcr-
217. Maslowski AH, Nicholis MG, 1kram Il, et al. 1Haemody-
namic, hormonal, and clectrolyte response to captopril
 of hypertrophic cardiomyopaihy. II. Effects on exercise
in resistant hcart failure. I ancct 1:71, 1981
capacity and symptomatic status. Circulation 60:1208.
218. Cody R], Covit A, Schaer G, ct al. Captopril pharmaco-
1979
kinetics and thc acute henodynamic and hormonal
235. Angelini A, Calzolari V, Ihienc G, et al. Morphologic
response in patients with scvere chronic congestive
spectrum of primary restrictive cardiomyopathy. Am J
heart failure. Am HIcart J 104:1180, 1982
Cardiol 80:1046, 1997
 219. Sun Y, Weber KT. Fibrosis and myocardial ACE: possible
236.
5. Hirota Y, Shinizu G, Kita Y, ct al. Spcctrum of restric-
substrate and independence from circulating angioten-
tive cardiomyopathy: report of the nalional survey in
sin 11. J Cardiac Failure 1:81, 1994
Japan. Am Hcart J 120:188, 1990
 220. Wcber KT, Brilla CC. Pathological hypertrophy and
237.
Reisinger J, Dubrey Sw, Falk RH. Cardiac anyloidosis.
cardiac interstitium. Fibrosis and renin-angiotensin-al-
Cardiol Rev 5:317, 1997
dosteronc systenm. Circnlation 83:1849, 1991
 238. Iewis AB. Clinical profile and outcome of restrictive
221. Factor SM, Butany J, Solc MK, et al. Pathologic fibrosis
cardiomyopathy in children. Am Heart J 123: J589, 1992
and matrix conncctive tissue in the subaortic mnyocar-
239. Fox PR. Restrictive cardiomyopathy. Proc 14th Annu
dium of patients with bypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J
Vet Med Forum, 1996, pp 235-236
Am Coll Cardiol 171:1313, 1991
240.
. Bonagura JB, Fox PR. Restrictive cardiomyopathy. In
222. Lechin MM, Quinones MA, (Omran A, ct al. Angioten-
Bonagura j1 (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy.
ea ai e s s  l
Vol XI1. Philadelphia, WB Saundcrs. 1995, p 863
674DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
241. Liu SK. Fox PR. Restrictive cardiomyopathy in the cat;
262. Kolbeck PC, Steenbergen C, Wolfe JA. et al. The corre-
Abstract ILab Invest 68:25A, 1993
lation of mononuclear cell phenotype in endomyocar-
241a. Saxon B. Ilendrick M, Waddle JR. Restrictive cardio-
dial biopsies with clinical history and cardiac dysfunc-
myopathy in a cat with hypereosinophilic syndroine.
tion. Arn J Clin Pathol 91:37, 1989
Can Ve1 [ 32:367, 1991
 262a. Brummer DG, Moise NS. Infiltrative cardioinyopathy
242. Stalis [H. Bossbaly M], Van Winkle T]. Feline endomyo-
responsive to chemotherapy in a cat with lymphoina. J
carditis and lefl ventricular endocardial fibrosis. Vet
Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1116, 1989
Pathol 32:122, 1995
 263. Fauci AS, Harley JB, Roberts WC, et al, The idiopathic
243. Scot Dw, Randolph JF, Walsh KM. Hypereosinophilic
hypereosinophilic syndrome: clinical, pathophysiologic,
syndrome in a cat. Feline Pract 14:22, 1985
and  therapeutic
considerations. An Intern Med
244. Pedersen NC. Giffey S, Grahn R, et al. A transmissible
97:79, 1982
Inyocarditis/diaphragmitis of cats manifested by tran-
264. Tai PC, Ackerrman S], Spry CJ, et al. Deposits of eosino-
sient fever and depression. Feline Pract 21:13, 1993
 phil granule proteins in cardiac tissues of patients with
245. MeEwen SA, Valli VEO, UHlland TJ. Hypereosinophilic
eosinophilic endonyocardial disease. Lancet 1:643,
syndrome in cats: a report of three cases. Can J Comp
1987
Med 49:248, 1985
 265. Schaffer SW, Dinayuga ER, Kayes SG. Development
246.
Zientek DM, King Dl., Dewan SJ, et al. 1 lypereosinophi-
 and characterization of a model of eosinophil-mediated
lic syndrome with rapid progression of cardiac involve
cardionyopathy in rats infected with Toxocara canis. An
ment and early echocardiographic abnormalities. An
J Physiol 262:111428. 1992
[leart J 130:1295, 1995
266. Liu SK. Cardiovascular pathology. In Fox PR (ed): Ca-
247. Arbustini E, Morbini P, Grasso M. et al. Restrictivc
nine and Felinc Cardiology. New York, Churchill Liv
cardionmyopathy, atriovenuricular block and mild to sub-
ingstone, 1988. p 625
clinical myopathy in patients with desmin-immunoreac-
 267, Berger PB, Duffy J, Reeder GS, et al. Restrictive cardio-
tivc materiaf deposits. J Am Coll Cardiol 31:645, 1998
myopathy associaled with the eosinophilia-myalgia syn-
248. Gottdiener JS. Maron BJ, Schooley RT, et al. Two-di-
drome. Mayo Clin Proc 69:162, 1994
inensional echocardiographic assessmenl of the idio-
268. Pion PD. Kitleson MD, Rogers QR, et al. Myocardial
pathie hypereosinophilic syndrome: anatomic basis of
failure in cats associated with low plasma taurine: a
nitral regurgitation and peripheral embolization, Cir-
reversible cardiomyopathy. Scie11ce 237:764, 1987
culation 67:572, 1983
 269. Pion PD, Kittleson MD, Rogers QR, et al. Taurine defi-
249. Shabetai R. Controversial issues in restrictive cardiomy-
ciency myocardial failure in the domestic cat. In Pa-
opathy. Postgrad Med J 68:S47, 1992
sante-Morales H (ed): Funclional Neurochemistry of
250. Child JS, Perloff JK. The restrictive cardiomyopathies.
Taurine. New York, Alan R Liss Inc, 1990, p 423
Cardio1 Clin 6:289. 1988
 270. Pion PD, Iewis J, Greene K, et al. Effect of meal-fceding
251. Spyrou N, Foale R. Restrictive cardiomyopathies. Curr
and food deprivation on plasma and whole-blood tatu-
Opin Cardiol 9:344, 1994.
rine concentrations in cats. J Nutr 121:S177, 1991
252. Katritsis D, wilmshurst PT, Wendon JA, et al. Primary
271. Pion PD, Kittleson MD, Lewis J. ct al. Tauine deficienncy
restrictive  cardiomyopathy
clinicaland pathologic
myocardial failure: incidence and relation to tissue tau-
characteristies. J Am Coll Cardiol 18:1230, 1991
rine concentration; Abstracl. J Vet lntern Med 5:123,
 253. Fitzpatrick AP, Shapiro LM, Rickards AF, et al. Fanilial
166T
restrictive cardiomyopathy with alrioventricular block
 272. Sisson DD, Knight DH, Ilelinski Cl, et al. Plasma taurine
and skeletal myopathy. Br Ileart J 63:114. 1990
concentrations and M-mode echocardiographice mea-
254. Aroney C, Bett N, Radford D. Familial restrictive cardio-
sures in healthy cats and cats with dilated cardiomyopa-
myopathy. N Z J Med 18:877, 1988
1hy. J Vet Intern Med 5:232, 1991
255. Mady C, Barretto AC, Oliveira SA, et al. Evolution of
273. Skrodzki M, Trauivetter E, Monch E. Plasma taurine
the endocardial fibrotic process in endoinyocardial fi-
levels in healthy cats and cats with cardiac: disorders. J
brosis. An J Cardiol 68:402, 1991
Nutr 121:S171, 1991
256. Fujioka S, Koide H, Kitaura Y. Molecular detection and
274. Pion PD, Kittleson MD, Skiles MI., et al. Dilated cardio-
differentiation of enteroviruses in endoinyocardial bi
myopathy associated with taurine deficiency in the do-
opsies and pericardial effusions from dilated cardiomy-
mestic cat: relationship to diet and myocardial taurine
opathy and myocardiis. An Heart J 131:760, 1996
content, In Lombardini JB, Schaffer Sw, Azuuna J (eds):
257. Martin A, webber S, Fricker F, et al. Acute inyocarditis:
Taurine: New Dimensions on Nutrition and Mecha-
rapid diagnosis by  PCR in children. Circulation
nisms of action. New York, Plenum Press, 1992, p 63
90:330, 1994
275. Pion PD, Kitteson MD, Thomas WP, et al. Clinical
 258. Schowengerdt KO, Ni J, Denfield SW, et al. Association
findings in cats with dilated cardiomyopathy and rela-
 of parvovirus B19 genome in children with myocarditis
tionship of findings to taurine deficiency J Ain Vet Med
and cardiac allograft rejection. Circulation 96:3549,
Assoc 201:267 1992
1997
 276. Pion PD, Kittleson MD, 1homas WP, et al. Response of
259. Ni J, Bowles N, Kin Y, et al. Viral infection of the
cats with dilated cardiomyopathy to taurine supplemen-
 nyocardium in endocardial fibroelastosis: Molecular ev-
tation. J Am Vet. Med Assoc: 201:275, 1992
idencc for the role of mumps virus as an etiologic
277. Morris JG, Rogers QR. The melabolic basis for the
agent. Circulation 95:133, 1997
taurine requireinent of cats. In Lombardini B]. Schafler
260. Meurs KM, Fox PR, Magnon A, et al. Polymerase chain
SW, Azuma J (eds). Taurine: New Dimensions on Nutri-
reaction (PCR) analysis for feline viruses in formalin-
tion and Mechanisms of Action. New York, Plenum
tixed cardlionyopathic hearts identifies panleukopenia.
Press Inc, 1992
Abstract. J Vet 1ntern Med 12:201, 1998
 278. Fox PR, Sturman JA. Myocardial taurine concentrations
261. Olindc Ki, O'Connell JB. lnflanimatory heart disease:
in cats with cardiac disease and in healthy cats fed
pathogenesis. clinical mianifestations, treatment of myo-
taurine-modified diets. Am J Vel Res 58:237, 1992
carditis. Annu Rev Med 45:481, 1994
279. Novotny MJ, 1loga1n PM, Paley DM, et al. Systolic and
FELINE CARD10MYOPATHIES 675
diastolic dysfunetion of the left ventricle induced by
302. Sturman JA.
.Tanrine in development. Physio! Rev
dietary taurine deficiency in cats. Am J Physiol
73:119, 1993
261:H121,1991
303. Wen GY, Sturinan JA, Wisniewski HIM, et al. Tapetum
280. Fox PR, Trautwein EA, Ilayes KC, et al. Comparison
disorganization in taurine-depleted cats. Invest Oph-
 of taurine, α-tocopherol, retinol, selenium, and total
thalrnol Visual Sci 18:1201, 1979
triglycerides and cholesterol concentrations in cats with
304. Trautwein EA, Hayes KC. Gender and dielary anino
cardiac disease and in healthy cats. An J Vet Res
acid supplementation influence the plasma and whole
54:563, 1993
blood taurine status of taurine depleted cats. J Nutr
281. Skiles MI, Pion PD, Hird DW, et al. Epideiniologic
121:3170, 1991
evaluation of taurine deficiency and dilated cardiomy
305. Trautwein EA, Hayes KC. faurine concentrations in
opathy in cats. Abstract. J Vet Intern Med 4:117, 1990
human plasma and whole blood: estination of error
282. Fox PR, Petrie JP. Liu SK, et al. Clinical and pathologic
from intra- and inter-individual variation and sampling
features of cardiomyopathy characterized by myocardial
technique. Ain J Clin Nutr 52:758, 1990
failure in 49 cats: 1990-1995. Abstract. J Vet Intern Med
306. Brest AN. Clinical pharmacology of diurelic drugs.
11:139, 1997
Cardiovasc Clin 14:3i, 1984
283. Lawler DF. feinpleton AJ. Monti KL. Evidence for ge-
307. Sonnenblick Ell. Force-velocity relations in rnanmalian
netic involvement in feline dilated cardiomyopathy. J
heart muscle. Am J Physiol 202:931. 1962
Vet Intern Med 7:383, 1993
308. Dyke SE. Urschel CW, Sonnenblick EI1, et al. Detection
281. Grinig E, Tasman JA, Kicherer H, et al. Frequency
of latent function in acutely ischemic myocardium in
 and phenotypes of familial dilated cardiomyopathy. J
dogs: coinparison of pharmacologic inotropic stinula-
Am Coll Cardiol 31:186, 1998
tion and post extrasystolic potentiation (PESP). Circ
285. Baig MK, Goldman JH, Caforio ALP, et al. Familial
Res 36:490, 1975
dilated cardiomyopathy: cardiac abnormalities are com-
309. Spann JF Jr, Covell JW, Eckberg Dl., et al. Contractile
n1on in asymptomatic relatives and may represent early
performance of the hyperlrophied and chronically fail-
disease. J An Coll Cardiol 31:195, 1998
ing cat ventricle. Am J Physiol 223:1150, 1972
286. Martino TA, Iiu P, Sole Mj. Viral infection and the
310. Coluxcci ws, Wright RF, Braunwald E. New positive ino-
pathogenesis
 of dilated  cardiomyopathy  Circ  Res
Lropic agents in the treatment. of congestive heart fail.
74:182. 1994
ure. Mechanisms of action and recent clinical develop-
287. Rose NR, Neumann DA, Ilerskowitz. A. Coxsackievirus
ments (first of two parts). N Engl J Med 314:290, 1986
myocarditis. Ady Intern Med 37:411, 1992
311. Colucci wS, Wrighi RF, Braunwaid E. New positive i0.
288. Iatham RD, Mulrow JP, Virmani R, et al. Recently diag-
tropic agents in treatment of congestive heart failure.
 nosed idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy: incidence of
Mechanisms of action and recent clinical devclopments
myocarditis and efficacy of prcdnisone therapy. Am
(second of two parts) N Engl J Med 314:349, 1986
Heart J 117:876, 1989
312. Kenakin Tp. An in vitro quantitative analysis of the
289. Dec GW, Fuster V. Medical progress: idiopathic: dilated
alpha adrenoceptor partial agonist activity of dobuta-
cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med 331:1564, 1994
mine and its relevance to inotropic selectivity. J Pharma-
290. Neumann DA. Autoimmunity and idiopathic dilated
col Exp Ther 216:210, 1981
cardiomyopathy Mayo Clin Proc 69:193, 1994
313. Ruffolo RR Jr, Spradlin TA, Pollock GD, et al: Alpha
291. Grossman w, McI aiurin LP, Rolett EI.. Alterations in
and beta adrenergic effecis of the stercoisomers of
left ventricular relaxation and diastolic compliance in
dobutamine J Pharmacol Exp Ther 219:447, 1981
congestivc cardiomyopathy Cardiovasc Res 13:514,
314. Shoemaker WC, Appel PI., Kram 1IB, ct al. Comparison
1979
of hemodynamic and oxygen transport properties of
292. Lord PF. Left ventricular diastolic stiffness in dogs with
dopainine and dobutamine in critically ill surgical pa-
congestive cardiomyopathy and volume overload. An J
tients. Chest 96:120, 1989
Vet Rcs 37:953, 1976
315. Maskin CS. Ie Jenmtel MD, Sonncnblick EH. inotropic
298. lnoute ‘T, Sakai Y, Morooka S, et al. Coronary flow
drugs for treatment of the failing heart. Cardiovasc
reserve inl patienls with dilated cardiomyopathy. Am
Clin 14:1, 1984
[leart J 125:93, 1993
 316. Kittleson MD:
: Dobutamine. J Ain Vet Med Assoc
294. Dow Sw, Fettman MJ, Smith KR, et al. Taurine deple-
177:642, 1980
tion and cardiovascular disease in adult cats fed a potas-
 317. Tuutle RR, Mills J. Dobutaunine: developinent of a new
sium-depleted acidified diet. Am J Vet Res 53:402, 1992
catecholamine to selectively increase cardiac contractil-
295. Ballevre O, Piguet-Welsh C, Staempfli A. et al. Taurine
ity. Cire Res 36:185, 1975
kinetics in cats fed processed diets. Vet Int 1:17, 1993
318. McDonald RH Jr. Goldberg L1, MeNay JL. et al. Effects
296. Morris JG, Rogers QR, Kim SW, et al. Dietary taurine
of dlopamine in man: augmentation of sodium excre-
requirenent of cats is determined by microbial degra-
Lion, glomerular liltration rate, aund renal plasnia flow.
dation of taurine in the gut. Vet Clin Nutr l:l18, 1994
J Clin 1nvest. 43:1116, 1964
297. Huxtable RJ, Sehring LA. Cardiovasciular actions of tau-
319. Goldberg LI. Cardiovascular and renal actions of dopa-
rine. In Kuriyama K, Huxtable RJ, lwata [l (eds): Sulfur
 mine: potential clinical implications. Pharmacol Rev
Ainino Acids: Biochemieal and Clinical Aspects. New
24:1, 1972
York, Alan R. Liss Inc, 1983, p 5
320. Chidsey CA, Sonnenblick EH, Morrow AG, et. al. Cate-
298. Sturman JA. Nutritional taurine and central nervous
 cholamine excrelion and cardiac stores of norcpineph-
system development. Ann NY Acad Sei 477:196, 1986
rine in congestive heart failure. Am J Med 39:442, 1965
299. Hayes KCi. A review of the biological function of tau-
 321. van de Borne P, Oren R, Soiners VK. Dopamine de
rine. Nutr Rev 34:161, 1976
 presses minute ventilation in patients with hcart failure.
300. Rabin B. Nicolosi RJ. Hayes KC. Dietary influences on
Circulation 98: 126, 1998
bile acid conjugation in the cat. J Nutr 106:1241, 1976
 322. Beregovich J, Bianchi C, Rubler S, el al. Dose-related
301. Knopf K, Sturman JA, Armstrong M, et al. Taurine: an
hemodynamic and renal effects of dopaminc in congcs-
essential nutrient for the cat. J Nutr 108:773, 1978
tive heart failure. Ain Heart J 87:550, 1974
676DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
323. Goldberg L1. Dopamine—clinical uses of endogenous
343. Sato I1, Hlori M, Ozaki I1, et al. Exercise-induced up-
catecholamine. N Engl J Med 291:707, 1984
ward shift. of diastolic left ventricular pressure-volume
324. Johnson RL. 1ow-dose dopamine and oxygen transport.
relation in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy Effects
by the lung. Circulation 98:97. 1998
of beta-adrenergic blockade. Circulation 88:2215, 1993
325. Tewksbury DA. Angiotensin: biochemisty and 1nolecu-
344. Ishida S, Makino N, Masumoto K, et al. Effect of meto-
lar biology. /n laragh JH, Brenner BM (eds): Hyperten-
prolol on the beta-adrenoceptor dlensity of lymphocyles
sion: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Management.
in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. Ain Heart J
New York, Raven Press, 1990, p 1197
125:1311, 1993
326. Regitz-Zagrosek V, Leuchs B, Krulls-Munch J, el al.
345. Lee TH, Hamillon MA, Stevenson IW, et al. Impact of
Angiotcnsin-converting enzyme inhibitors and β-block-
 left venuricular cavity size on survival in advanced heart
ers in long-term treatment of dilated cardioinyopathy.
failure. Am J Cardiol 72:672, 1993
An Heart J 129:754, 1995
 346. Vasan RS, larson MG, Benjainin EJ, et al. Lefl ventricu-
327. Sabah IN, Shimoyama H, Kono T, et al. Effecis of
lar dilatation and the risk of congestive heart failure in
long-term monotherapy with enalapril, metoprolol, and
people without myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med
digoxin on the progression of left ventricular dysfunc-
336:1350,1997
tion and dilation in dogs with reduced ejection frac-
 347. Moller JII, Lucas RV, Adams P, et al. Endocardial fibroe-
tion. Circulation 89:2852, 1994
lastosis: a clinical and anatomic study of 47 patients
328. Atkins CE, Snyder PS, Keene BW, el al. Eficacy of
with emphasis on its relationship to mitral insufficiency.
digoxin for treatment of cats with DCM. J An Vet Med
Circulation 30:759, 1964
Assoc 196:1463, 1990
348. Carceller AM, Maroto E, Fouron JC. Dilated and co1-
329. Gheorghiade M, Ferguson D. Digoxin: a neurohorno-
tracted forns of primary endocardial fibroelastosis: a
nal modulator in heart failure? Circulation 84:2181,
single fetal dlisease with two stages of development. Br
1991
Heart J 63:311, 1990
 330. Ctetsky BF, Young JB, Shahidi FE, et al. Randomized
349. IIarpster NK. Cardiovascular diseases of the domestic
sludy assessing the effect of digoxin withdrawal in pa-
cat. Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 21:39, 1977
tients with mild to moderate chronie congestive heart
 350. van der Linde-Sipinan JS, van den Ingh TSGAM, Koe-
[ailure: rcsults of the PROVED Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol
man JP. Congenital heart abnormalities in the cat: a
22:955,1993
tlescription of sixteen cases. Zentralbl Veterinarmed A
 331. Ferguson DW, Berg WJ, Sanders JS, et al. Syinpalhoin-
20:419, 1973
hibitory responses to digitalis glycosides in heart failure
 351. Paasch LH. The comparative pathology of endocardial
patients. Circulation 80:65. 1989
fibroelastosis in Burmese cats PhD dissertation, George
332.
Tsutamoto T, Wada A, Maeda K, et al. Digitalis increases
Washington C niversity, 1979
brain natriuretic peptide in patients with severe conges-
 352. Paasch LH, Zook BC. The pathogenesis of endocardial
tive heart failure. Am Hleart J 134:910. 1997
fibroelastosis in Burmese cats. Iah lnvest 42:197, 1980
333. Sinith ML, Kinugawa T, Dibner-Dunlap ME. Reflex con-
353. Zook BCl, Chandra RS, Casey HW. The comparative
trol of sympathetic activity during ventricular tachycar-
pathology of endocardial fibroelastosis in Burmese cats.
tdia in dogs. Circulation 93:1022, 1966
Virchows Arch| Pathol Anatl 390:211, 1981
334. Erichsen DF, Hlarris SG, Upson DW. Therapeutic and
354. Eliot TS Jr, Eliot FP, Lushbaugh CC, et al. First report
toxic plasma concentrations of digoxin in the cat. Am
 of the occurrence of neonatal endocardial fibroelastosis
Anim Hosp Assoc 14:734, 1978
in cats and dogs. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 133:271, 1958
335. Erichsen DF, IIarris SG, Upson Dw. Plasma levels of
355. McKenna WJ. Thiene G, Nava A, et al. Diagnosis of
digoxin in the cat: some clinical applicaions. J An
arrhythimogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiony-
Anim Hosp Assoc 14:734:1994, 1982
opathy. Task Force of the Working Group Myocardial
 336. Bolton GR, Powell AA. Plasma kinetics of digoxin in
and Pericardial Disease of the European Society of
the cat. Am J Vet Res 43:1994, 1982
Cardiology and of the Scientific Council on Cardiomy
337. Snyder PS, Atkins CE, Keene BW. The effect of aspirin,
 opathies of the International Society and Federation of
furosemide and commercial low salt diet on digoxin
Cardiology. Br IIeart J 71:215, 1994
kinetics in normal cats; Abstract. Proc Fifth Annu Vet
356. Giles TD. New WIIO/ISFC Classification of a task not
Med Forum, ACV1M, 1987, p 922
completed; Letter. Circulation 96;2081, 1996
338. Andersson B. Ilamm Cl, Persson S, el al. Improved
 357. Frank R, Fontaine G, Vedel J, et al. Flectrocardiologie
exercisc henodynamic status in dilated cardiomyopauhy
de quatre cas de dlysplasie ventriculairc droite arythmo-
afler beta-adrenergic blockade treatment. J An Coll
gene. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss 71:963. 1978
Cardiol 23:1397, 1994
358. Thiene G,Basso C. Nava A. About the histology of
339. Eichhorn FJ, lleesch CM, Barneut JH. et al. Effect of 
arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia; l.etter. Cir-
netoprolol on myocardial function and energetics in
culation 96:2089, 1997
palients with nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy: a
359. Fontaine G, Fontaliran F. Frank R. Arrhythmogenic
randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled study.
right ventricular cardiomyopathies, clinical forms and
J An Goll Cardiol 24:1310, 1994
main differential diagnoses. Circulation 97:1532, 1998
340. Waagstien F. Adrenergic beta-blocking agents in con-
3G0. Gerlis LM, Schmidt-Ott SC. IIo SY, et al. Dysplastic
gestive heart failure due to idiopathic dilated cardiomy-
 conditions of the right ventricular myocardium: Uhl's
opathy. Eur Heart J 16 (Suppl O):128, 1996
anomaly versus arrhythmogenic: right ventricular dys-
341. Regitz-Zagrosek V, Leuchs B, Krulls-Munch J. et al.
plasia. Br Heart J 69:142. 1993
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and β-block-
 361. Burke AP, Farb A, Tashko G, et al. Arrhythmogenic
ers in long-tcrm treatment of dilated cardioinyopathy.
right ventricular cardiomyopathy and fatty replacement
An Heart J 129:754, 1995
of the right ventricular myocardium. Are they different?
342. Asseman P, MeFadden E, Bauchart II, et al. Why do
Circulation 97:1571, 1998
362. Corrado D, Basso C. Thiene G. et al. Spectrum of
thy-frequency mismatch? Iancet 344:803, 1994
clinicopathologic  manifestations  of  arrhythmogenic
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES
677
right ventricular cardioinyopathy/dysplasia: a multicen-
383. Dubey JP, Johnstone I. Fatal neonatal toxoplasmosis in 
ter study J Am Coll Cardiol 30:1512, 1997
cats. J An Anim Hosp Assoc 18:461. 1982
363. Basso C, Thiene G, Corrado D, et al. Arrhythmogenic
384. Yamaguchi RA, Pipers FS, Gamble DA. Echocardio-
right ventricular cardiornyopathy. Dysplasia, dystrophy,
graphic evaluation of a cat with bacterial vegetative
or myocarditis? Circulation 94:983, 1996
endocarditis. J An Vet Med Assoc 183:118. 1983
364. Fox PR, Maron BJ, Basso C, et al. Spontaneous occur-
385.
Shousse Cl., Meier 1I. Acute vegetative endocarditis in
rencc of arrhythmogenic: right ventricular cardiomyop-
the dog and cat. J An Vet Med Assoc 129:278, 1956
athy in the domestic cat: a new animal model of human
386.
Tilley IP, Liu SK. Persistent atrial standstill in the dog
disease. Circulation 98(Suppl):297 (Abstr). 1998
and cat. Abstract. Sci Proc Am Coll Vet. Intern Med,
365. Fontaine G, Fontaliran F, Rosas Andrade F, et al. The
1983. p 43
arrhythmogenic right ventricle: dysplasia versus cardlio-
 387. Carpenter JL, Hoffman EP, Ramanul FC. e1 al. Feline
myopathy. Heart. Vessels 10:227, 1995
muscular dystrophy with dysurophin deficiency. Am J
3G6. Pinamonti B, Sinagra G, Salvi A, el al. ILeft ventricular
pathol 135:909, 1989
involvement in right ventricular dysplasia. Am [leart J
388.1
[laskins ME, Aguirre GD. Jezyk PF, et al. Mucopolysac-
123:711, 1992
charidosis in a domestic short-haired cat: a disease dis-
367. Mallat Z, Tedgui A, Fontaliran F, et al. Evidence of
tinct from that seen in the Siamese cat. J Ain Vet Med
apoptosis in arrhythimogenic right ventricular dysplasia.
Assoc 175:384, 1979
N Engl.I Med 335:1190, 1996
389. Haskins ME, Aguirre GD, Jezyk PF, et al. Thc pathology
368. James TN, Nichols MM. Sapire DW, el al. Complele
of feline arylsulfatase B deficient tnucopolysacchar
hcart block and fatal right ventricular failure in an
idosis. Am J Pathol 101:657, 1980
infant. Circulation 93:1588, 1996
390. Liu SK, Tilley LP, 'lashijian RJ. Lesions of the conduc-
369. Rakover C. Rossi I., Fontaine G, et al. Familial arrhyth-
tion system in the cat with cardiomyopathy. Recent Ady
Inogenic right ventricular disease. Am J Cardiol
Card Struct Metab 10:681, 1975
58:377. 1986
391.
Collet P. Thrombose de I'aorte posterieur chez un chat.
370. Nava A, Scognaniglio R, Thiene G, et al. A polyinor-
Bull Soc Sci Vet Lyon 33:136, 1930
 phic form of familial arrhythmogenic right ventricular
392.
Liu SK, Hsu FS, Lee RCT. An Atlas of Cardiovasciular
dysplasia. Am J Cardiol 59:1405, 1987
Pathology. Taiwan. Republic of China, Pig Res Inst Tai-
 371. Xava A, Thiene G.Canciani B, et al. Familial occurrence
wan, Wonder Enterprise Co, Ltd, 1989, p 311
of right ventricular dysplasia: a study involving nine
868
Waller BF. Anatomic basis of cardiac emboli: a morpho-
families. J A1n Coll Cardiol 12:1222, 1988
logic review. In Daniel WG, Kronzon 1, Mugge A (eds):
372. Canciani B, Nava A, Toso V, et al. A casual spontaneous
Cardiogenic Embolism, Baltimore, Williauns & Wilkins,
mutation as possible cause of the familial form of ar-
1.996,P 7
rhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ar-
394. Pion PD, Kileson MD. Therapy for feline aortic throm-
rhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia). Cin Cardiol
boembolism. In Kirk Rw (ed): Kirk's Current Veteri-
15:217. 1992
nary Therapy Vol X. Philadelphia, wB Saunders, 1989,
 373. Dungan NT, Garson A Jr, Gillette PC. Arrhythmogenice
p 295
right ventricular dlysplasia: a cause of ventricular tachy
395. Flanders JA. Feline aortic throinboembolism. Comp
cardia in children with apparent norinal hearts. Am
Contin Educ 8:473, 1986
Heart J 102:745, 1981
396. Laste NJ, Harpster NK. A retrospective study of 100
374. Brembilla-Perrot B, Jacquemin L, Ilouplon P. el al.
cases of feline distal aortic: thromboembolisin: 1977-
Increased atrial vulnerability in arrhythmogenic right.
1993. J An Anim Hlosp Assoc 31:492, 1995
ventricular disease.Am Heart J135:748, 1998
397.
Tilley LP, Liu SK Cardiomyopathy and thrornboembo-
375. Peterson ME, Taylor RS, Greco DS, et al. Acromegaly
lism in the cat. Feline Pract 5:32, 1975
in 14 cats. J Vet Intern Med 4:192, 1990
398. Liu SK, Tilley LP, Lord PF. Feline cardiomyopathy. Re-
376. Morrison SA, Randolph J, Lothrop CD Jr. Hypersomato-
cent Adv Card Struct Metab 10:627, 1975 
tropisn and insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus in a cat.
399.
 Furster V, Chesbro JH. Antithroinbotic therapy: role of
] Arm Vet Med Assoc 194:91, 1989
platelet-inhibitor drugs. I. Current concepts of throm-
377. Tilley L.P, Bond B, Patnaik A, et al. Cardiovascular tu-
bogenesis: role of plateleis (first of three parts). Mayo
nors in the cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:1009, 1981
Clin Proc 56:102, 1981
877a. Patnaik AK, Liu SK. Angiosarcomas in cats. J Sinall
400. 1Hirsch J. Hypercoagulability. Seinin HIemtatol 14:409,
Anim Pract 18:191, 1977
1977
378. Mauldin GN, Matus RE, Patnaik AK, et al. Efficacy and
401. Edwards WD. Aneurysms antd mural throinbi of the left
toxicity of doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide used in
ventricle. Mayo Clin Proc 56:129, 1981
the treatment of selected 1nalignant tuinors in cats. J
402. Virchow R. Neuer fall von totdllicher. Embolie der
Vet Intern Med 2:60, 1988
lungenarterien. Arch Pathol Anat 10:225, 1856
 379. Page RL, Keene BW. Doxorubicin cardiomyopathy. In
403. Badminon 1., Badminon JJ, Turitto VT, et al. Platelet
Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary
thrombus formation on collagen type I. A inotdel of
Therapy. Vol XI. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992. p
deep vessel injury-influence of blood rheology, yon
783
Willebrand factor and blood coagulation. Circulation
380. O'Keefe DA. Sisson DD, Gelberg IIB, et al. Syslemic
78:1431, 1988
toxicity associated with doxorubicin administration in
404. Drake TA, Morrissey JH, Edginglon IS. Selective cellu-
cats. J Ve1 Intern Med 7:309, 1993
lar expression of tissue factor in human tisses: implica-
381.
liu SK Myocarditis and cardiomyopathy in the dog
tion of hemostasis and thrombosis. Am J Pathol
and cat. IIeart Vessels 1 (Suppl 1):122, 1985
134:1087, 1989
382. Liu SK. Myocarditis and cardiormyopathy in the dog
405. Fatkin D, Kelly R, Feneley MO. Relations between left 
alnd cat. In Sekiguchi M. Olsen EGJ, Goodwin JF (eds):
atrial appendage blood flow veloxcity, spontaneous echo-
Myocardlitis and Related Disorders. Tokyo, Springer-
cardiographic contrast and thromhoembolic risk in
Verlag, 1985, p 122
vivo. J Ami Coll Cardiol 23:961. 1994
678 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
406. Roussell L, Biller J, Hajduczok Z, el al. Ischemic cere
mechanisms of fibrinolysis in man. Thromb 1lacnost
brovascular coinplications and risk factors in idiopathic
39:263,1978
hypertrophic subaortic sten1osis. Stroke 22:1143, 1991
426. Killingsworth CR, Eyster GE, Adams T, ct al. Streptoki-
407. Fox PR. Felinc thromboembolism associated with car-
nase treatment of cats with experimentally induced aor-
diomyopathy. Sci Proc Fifth Annu Vet Med Forum, Am
tic thrombosis. Ain J Vet Res 47: 1351, 1986 
Coll et Intern Med, 1987, p 714
427. Sherry S. Tissue plasminogen activator (-PA). N Engl J
408. Fox PR. Dodds WJ. Coagulopathies observed with spon-
Med 313:1014. 1985
taneous aortic thromboembolism in cardiomyopathic
428. Pion PD, Kittleson MD. Therapy for feline aortice throin-
cats, abstract. Sei Proc Arn Coll Vet Intern Med, 1982,
boeinbolisin. In Kirk Rw (ed): Kirk's Current Veteri-
P83
nary Therapy. Vol X. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1989,
409. Weiser MG, Kociba GJ. Platelet concentration and
p295
platclet volume distribution in healthy cats. Am J Vet.
429.
Rosenberg RD, Lam I. Correlation between structure
Res 45:518, 1984
and fiunction of heparin. Proc Natl Acad Sci CSA
410. IIelinski CA, Ross JN. Platelet aggregation in feline
76:1218, 1979
cardiomyopathy J Vet intern Med 1:24, 1987
430. Goldhaber SZ, Sors I1. Treatunent of venous thromhus
4 ll. Dodds Wy. Platelet function in animals: species specific-
and pulmonary einbolism. In Fuster V, Verstraete M
ities. In de Gactano G, Garatlini S (eds): Platelets: A
(eds): Throinbosis in Cardiovascular Disorders. Phila-
Multidisciplinary Approach. New York, Raven Press,
delphia. WB Saunders, 1992, p 465
1978. p 15
 431. Beli Rw. Metabolism of Vitamin K and prothroinbin
412. Wells EG, Boudreaux MK, Crager CS, et al. Platelet
synthesis: anticoagulants and the vitanin K-epoxide
function and antithrombin, plasminogen、 and librino-
cycle.Fed Proc: 37:2599, 1978
lytic aclivities in cats with heart disease. Ain J Vet Res
432. Baty GJ. Warfarin prophylaxis in feline aorlic thrombo-
embolism. Sci Proc 1lth Annu Vet Med Forun, 1993,
55:619, 1994
413. Jones MP, Alving BM. Evaluation of the hypercoagula-
p519
ble patient. Intern Med 18:37, 1997
433. Khosropanah S, Dinh T, Ezekowitz MD. Aspirin and
414. Schaub RG, Meyers KM. Sande RD. Serotonin as a
anticoagulant therapy. In Daniel wG, Kronzon I,
factor in depression of collateral blood flow following
Mugge A (eds): Cardiogenic Embolism, Baltinore, Wil-
experimental arterial thrombosis. J Lab Clin Med
liams & wilkins, 1996, p 290
434. Roth GJ, Stanford N, Majerus PW. Aretylation of prosta-
90:645,1977
415. Golino P, Ashton JH, Buja LM, et al. Local platelet
glandin synthesis by aspirnin. Proc Nail Acad Sci USA
aclivation causes vasoconstriction of large epicardial
72:3073,1975
canine coronary arteries in vivo. Thromboxane Ay and
435. Burch JW, Stanford Pw. Inactivation of platelet prosta-
glandin symthetase by oral aspirin. J Clin Invest 61:314,
serotonin are possible 1nediators. Circulation 79:154,
1979
1989
436. Majerus PW. Arachidonate metabolism in vascular dis-
416. Imhoff RK. Production of aortic occlusion resembling
order. J Clin Invest. 72:1521, 1983
acute aortic embolisni syndrome in cats. Nature (Lond)
437. Kyrle PA, Fichier HG, Jager C, et al. lnhibition of
192:979.1961
prostaglandin and thromboxane Ay generation by low-
417. Schaub RG.Meyers KM, Sande RD, et al. Inhibition of
dose aspirin at the site of plug formation in man in
feline collateral vessel development. following experi-
vivo. Circuation 75:1025, 1987
mental thrombotic occlusion. Cire Res 39:736. 1976
438. Preston FE. Whipps S, Jackson CA, el al. Inhibition of 
418. Grygleski Rj. Prostaglandins, platelets and atherosc:lero-
prostacyclin and platelet thromboxane A after low
sis. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 7:291, 1980
dose aspirin. N Engl J Med 304:76, 1981
419. Schaub RC, Gates KA, Roberts RE. Effect of aspirin on
439.
Moncada S, Vane JR. Pharmacology and cndogenous
collateral blood flow after experimental thronibosis of
roles of prostaglandin endoperoxides, thrornboxane-A?
the feline aorta. Aim J Vet Res 43:1647, 1982
and prostacyclin. Pharmacol Rev 30:293, 1978
420.
Griffith IR, Duncan ID. Ischaemic neuromyopathy in
440. Allen DG, Johnstone IB, Crane S. Effects of aspirin and 
cats. Vet Rec 104:518, 1979
propranolol alone and in combination on hcmostatic
421. Buchanan [W. Baker GJ, Hill JD. Aortic embolism in
determinants in the healthy cat. Ain J Vet Res 46:660.
cats: prcvalence, surgical treatment and electrocardiog-
1985
raphy. Ve1 Rec 79:496,1966
441.
. Greene CE. Aspirin and feline platelet aggregation. J
422. Oblad B. A study of the mechanism of the hemody-
Aim Vet Med Assoc 188:1820. 1985
nanic effccis of hydralazine in man. Acta Pharmacol
442. Yeary RA, Swanson W. Aspirin dlosages for the cat. J Am
Toxicol 20(Suppl 1):1. 1963 
Vet Med Assoc: 163:1177, 1973
423. Thiagarajan P, Benedict CR. Inhibition of arterial
443. Moncada S, Gryglewski R, Bunting S. et al. An enzyme
thrombosis by recombinant annexin V in a rabbit cat-
isolated from arteries transforms prostaglandin endo-
rotid artery injury model. Cireuation 96:2339. 1997
peroxides to an unstable substance that inhibits platelel
424. Bevers EM、 Conifiurius P, Zwaal RF. Mechanisms in-
aggregation. Nature (L.ond) 263:663, 1976
volved in platelet procoagulant response. Adv Exp Med
414. Wibard MD. Treatment of hyperkalemia. In Kirk RW
Biol 344:195, 1994
(ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy, Vol IX. Phila-
425. Kaplan AP, Castellino FJ, Collen D, et al. Molecular
delphia, WB Saunders, 1986. p 94
Pericardial Disease
29
and Cardiac
Tumors
DAVID SISSON
WILLIAM P. THOMAS
 Pericardial disease and cardiac tumors are being recognized with increas-
ing frequency.' This is largcly attributable to the expanded use of echocardi-
ography. In addition, the rising prevalence of some neoplasms sucli as right
atrial hemangiosarcoma may be contributory, particularly in view of the
mounting popularity of certain breeds predisposed to cardiac neoplasia.*
Although the clinical signs of pericardial disease can be casily overlooked
and physical examination will usually reveal obvious diagnostic clues. The
expcrienced clinician suspects pericardial disease in any dog or cat with
ascites or plenural effusion, particularly when heart. sounds are muffled and
external jugular veins are distended. Cardiac neoplasia presents a more
formidable diagnostic challenge. Tumors involving the heart or pericardium
can obstruct blood flow into or out of the heart, impair atrioventricular or
semilunar valve function, infiltrate the myocardium, induce arrhythmias,
precipitate cardiac tamponade, or be clinically silent for long periods of time.
ANATOMY OF THE PERICARDIUM
The hearr is cnveloped in a tough outer fibroserous mernbrane, thie
parietal pericardium, a more delicate inner serous membrane, the visceral
pericardium, which is tightly adherent to the myocardium, is composed of a
serous membrane reflects back at the heart base to line the inner aspect of
the fibrous pericardium. The serous lining of the pericardial cavity is com-
posed of mesothelial cells that are endowed with numerous microvilli and
occasional cilia. The surrounding fibrous pericardium is composed of a
dense layer of interlaced collagen fibers. This fbrous tissue is continuous
with the advenritia of the great vessels at the heart base and with the
sternopericardiac ligament that attaches the apcx of the pericardium to the
ventral aspcct of the diaphragm. In this fashion, the heart is anchored within
the thorax.
PERICARDIAL, FLUID. A small volume of fluid, rich in phospholipids, lubricates
the intcrior surfaces of the pericardial sac. In healthy dogs and cats, the
volumc of the liquor pericardi approximatcs 0.25 (±0.15) ml/kg body
weight.+ This small fluid volumc is not uniformly distributed in the pericar-
679
 680 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
dial space. Rather, it tends ro collect at thc heart base
mesothelial cclls lining the pericardial sac reduce fric-
and in the atrioventricular grooves, with only a thin
tion generated by the beating heart. The pericardium
layer over the ventricular free walls.1 As a result, intra-
 also functions to restrain cardiac flling and enhance
 pericardial pressure in the normal anirmal may not
diastolic ventricular coupling.9 11 By thcse mechanisms,
be uniform over the various chambers of the heart.
the pericardium prevents cardiac overdistention and
Pericardial fluid is typically clear, contains low protein
 helps balancc the respective ourputs of the right and
concenrration (1.7 ro 3.5 g/dl), and very few cells.
left ventricles. An intact pericardium protects against.
Borh these constituents tend to increase with patho-
cardiac rupture, minimizes tricuspid insufficiency, and
logic pericardial fluid accumulations.
right-sided heart volume distention.
vASCULAR sUppLy. The parietal pericardium dlerives its
The restraining function of the pericardium inti-
 blood supply mainly from branches of the internal
mates inherent liabilities in certain disease states. Xor-
thoracic artery, the aorta, and musculophrenic arter-
mally, intrapericardial pressure is zero or negative at
ics. 6 The cpicardium is nourished by superficial
low cardiac volumes, and the pericardium exerrs little
branches of the coronary arteries. Lymphatic drainage
effect on cardiac filling. However, becausc the pericar-
 of the pericardial sac occurs by vessels emptying into.
dium is noncompliant and its reserve volume is small,
the pretracheal and cardiac lymph nodes, by vessels 
 intrapericardial pressure rises rapidly when the volume
traveling cranially and caudally along thc phrenic
of its contents increases (Fig. 29-1).'* Intrapericardial
nerves, and by vessels returning to the sternal lymph 
 pressure also increases whenever the intracardiac vol-
node.7. * The processes regulating the production and
removal of pericardial fluid are poorly understood.
sure reduccs the transmural distending pressures of
Current consensus favors claboration of pericardial
the right and left ventricles, resulting in reduced dia-
fluid from the visceral pericardium by ultrafiltration
stolic filing and decreased cardiac output. Such
and its subsequent removal by lymphatics located in
changcs are observed during rapid intravenous infu-
the subepicardium and parietal pericardium.? In most
sions of solute or following drug administration that.
circumstances, pericardial effusion results from in-
dlecreases systemic venous capacitance, In thesc cir-
crcased capilary permcability and hemorrhage rather
cumstances, the right side of the heart dilares to oc-
than impaired lymphatic drainage.
cupy the reserve volume of the pericardial sac, thcrcby
raising intrapericardial pressure. Experimcntally, re-
INNERvATIoN. The parietal pericardium is inncrvated
 by parasynpathetic branches of both vagus nerves, the
701
left recurrenr laryngeal nerve, and tributaries of the
esophageal plexus. It is also innervated by sympathetic
wstricfive
INORMAL
Pericordra!
60
Pericardrtis
nerve fibers from several different intrathoracic gan-
Effusior
ghia, including the stellate ganglia. The phrenic nerves,
Hg1
50
which course over the lateral surfaces of the pcricar-
dium and supply motor control of the diaphragm, also
40
contain those nerve fihers that communicate pericar-
IRE
dial pain.
155
RE:
20
FUNCTION OF THE
PERICARDIUM
200
100
300
400
500
PERICARDIAL VOLUME (mI)
The function of the pericardium is sonething of an
FICURE 29-1
enigma.Like tevermiforn appendix,we can very ell do
Idealized pericardial pressure volume curves for norrmal dogs, dogs
without it,and yet tuhen it becomes diseased it. can, because
ofits strategic position,place a stranglehold around the
Pressure at the ordinate represenis pericardial or ventricular
diastolic pressure. Each curve has a relatively flat initial portion.
heart and thus threaten life itself."
followed by a steep portion at pressures abxove 10 to 15 mm Hg.
RALPII SHABETAI, M,D.9
when he pericardial clastic limit is reached.The volume of
pericardiai fluid required to procuce cardiac tamponade depends
on the ability of the pericardium to strctch. When cardiae
The pericardium, by virtue of its struclure and loca-
ramponade is prescnt,removal f arelatively small quantity ofluid
tion, protects the hcart from adjacent infection or
can causc rapid reduction in perieardial presure and, thus. relief
of clinical signs. (Fron Thomas WP. Perieardial diseasc. In Etlinger
malignancy and prevcnts dislocation of the heart by
SJ (ed). Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 2nd cd.
fixing it within the thorax. The fluid contents and
Philadelphia, wB Saunders, I983. p 1080.)
PERICARDIALDISEASEAND CARDIACTUMORS681
straintofLVfillingbythepericardium isobserved
ofchronicheartfailureindicatethatexercisecapacity
whenintravenousfluid administrationelevatesRVend-
maybelimitedby excessivepericardialrestraint.17
diastolic pressure above 4 mmHg in dogs.13 In dogs
subjected to acute volume overload,pericardiectomy
improvesLVfilling,increases cardiac output,and aids
CONGENITALPERICARDIAL
theredistributionofexcessintravascularvolumefrom
DISEASES
thepulmonary to thesystemiccircuit.
The consequences of ventricular interaction and
pericardial restraint on LV filling are also apparent
Congenital pericardial disordersareinfrequentlyen-
when therightsideoftheheartdilatesinresponseto
countered in clinicalpractice.They include perito-
an acute pressure load.Accordingly,pericardiotomy
neopericardial diaphragmatic hernia,occurring in
improves left-sidedheartfilling and cardiac output in
dogs and cats;intrapericardial cysts,observed only in
dogs with experimentally induced pulmonary hyper-
dogs; and complete absence or partial defects of the
tension.14Such considerationsmayhaveclinicalrele
pericardium, which are rare in both dogs and cats.
vance.Inarecentstudyoftenhumanpatientsunder-
Recognition of these lesions is important because they
going open heart surgery, closing the pericardium
are oftenamenabletosurgical correction.
reduced cardiac output by over 20 percent.Reopening
the pericardium increased cardiac output and reduced
systemicvascularresistance.15
ABSENCEOFTHEPERICARDIUMAND
The pericardium hypertrophies to accommodate a
PERICARDIALDEFECTS
progressively enlarging heart or gradually increasing
volumes of pericardial fluid. This is evident in dogs
Absenceoftheentirepericardium israreindogs
and cats with progressive cardiomegaly from congeni-
and cats.It does not precipitate clinical signs and is
taland acquiredheart diseasesorwithchronicpericar-
usuallydetectedatnecropsyorwhenthoracicradio-
dial effusion.Experimentally, excessive pericardial re-
graphs are obtained for some other reason.Partial
straint observed indogs shortly after creation of an
pericardial defects (perforations） are only slightly
arteriovenousfistulaisrelieved after severalweeksdue
more common,but they engender a small but signifi-
topericardialgrowth.16However,somehumanstudies
cant risk of cardiacherniation(Fig.29-2).18Hernia-
FIGURE29-2
Congenital pericardial defects.These may represent small(A)or large (B) perforations (holes）in
the pericardium.Although usuallyregarded asincidental findings at necropsy causing noclinical
impairment, herniation and entrapment of the heart are possible (see Fig.29-3).
682DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
tion of theleft andright atria,rightventricle,and the
presented for evaluation and in 0.037 percent of the
entire heart has been reported in humans. Single or
cats.No sex predilection was apparent for either spe-
multiple pericardial defects have been described in
cies. Others have reported that female cats are affected
nine dogs as incidental necropsy findings.18. 19 Four
more often than males.22 About one half of the dogs
dogs had one or more defects (holes) in the left side
andonethirdofthecatsthatwerediagnosedwere
of the pericardium,three had defects in the right side
greater than 4 years of age (Fig. 29-4).
of the pericardium, and two had defects on both sides.
Herniation of the right auricular appendage through
PATHOGENESIs. Congenital PPDH results from faulty
aright-sidedpericardial defecthasbeenobserved by
development of thedorsolateralseptum transversum
one of the authors(Sisson)in a black Labrador re-
or from failure of the lateral pleuroperitoneal folds
trieverwithatrialfibrillation.Acalcifiedthrombus
and theventromedialpars sternalis tounite.23It oc-
attached to thewallof theherniatedright auricle
curs as an isolated defect and in associationwithumbil-
was apparent on thoracic radiographs(Fig.29-3)and
icalhernias,malformed or absent sternebrae,pectus
echocardiogram. The atrial appendage containing the
excavatum, and other congenital heart defects.24-27 Per-
thrombus was surgically amputated. Traumatic partial
sian cats and Weimaraners may be predisposed to
pericardial defectshavebeenreportedin otherdogs,
PPDH.22 24 In cats, PPHD may be due to an autosomal
and several might have been congenital.20.21
recessive gene.28CongenitalPPDHand multiple car-
diac defects were reported in a litter of collies.2 A
relatedsyndromehasbeendescribedinalitterof
PERITONEOPERICARDIAL
cocker spaniel pups, in which the pericardial space
DIAPHRAGMATICHERNIA
did not communicate with the peritoneal cavity but a
portion of the abdominal contentshadmigrated crani-
ally into a Vshaped, ventrally located, diaphragmatic
PREVALENcE.Peritoneopericardialdiaphragmaticher-
hernia.27 Acquired PPDH, sometimes observed in hu-
nia (PPDH)is the most common congenital pericar-
dial anomaly in dogs and cats, accounting for 0.5
mansfollowingtraumatothediaphragmaticportion
of the pericardial sac,is not observed in dogs and cats
percent of all reported congenitalheart defects in
dogs (Chapter 23). Its prevalence is probably higher
because this anatomic arrangement is absent.
thanindicated in this survey because animalswith
PPDH often donotmanifest clinical signs or signs are
CLINICALsIGNs.Clinicalsignsvary.Theydependupon
subtle andmissed.According totheVeterinaryMedical
which organs are displaced into the pericardium and
Data Base at Purdue (January 1993 to May, 1994),
the degree to which organ blood supply and function
PPDH was diagnosed in 0.015 percent of the dogs
are compromised. The liver is herniated most fre-
B
FIGURE29-3
Lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) thoracic radiographs of a dog with a congenital pericardial defect
and herniatedright auricle.Notice thecalcifed thrombusvisibleintheright auricle,which isjust
auriclewas amputated to prevent pulmonary thromboembolism.
PERICARDIALDISEASEANDCARDIACTUMORS
683
AgeDistributionofPPDHinDogsandCats
VeterinaryMedicalDataBase,Jan1984-May1994
32
29
28
Dogs
Cats
FIGURE29-4
24
E
Age distributionofperitoneopericardial
W20
diaphragmatic hernia (PPDH).Many
18
affected animals are asymptomaticfor all
C16
or part of theirlives or arenot diagnosed
14
until chest radiographs or an
A
13
echocardiogramis obtainedfor some
12
S12
11
11
otherreason.More than one third of
10
dogs and cats with a PPDH are diagnosed
E
when they are 4years of age or older.
S
8
4
<1
1-2
2-4
4-7
7-10
>10
AGEATDIAGNOSIS(YEARS)
quently,followed by the small intestine,spleen,and
sounds aremuffledand the cardiacimpulseis absent
stomach (Fig. 29-5)2,23 26 Thus, vomitting, anorexia,
ordisplaced.Abdominalpalpationofanimalswith
anddiarrhea arecommonlyobserved.Respiratory ab-
large hernias may reveal a lack of normally palpable
normalities, varying from coughing or wheezing to
organs. Somea
affectedanimalsareemaciated
or
severe dyspnea,are the next mostfrequently observed
stunted.ThepossibilityofPPDHshouldbeconsidered
clinical signs.Signs of hepatoencephalopathy are occa-
wheneveracranialabdominalhernia isdiscovered.
sionallyobservedduetohepaticincarcerationand
Frequently PPDH is first suspected when thoracic ra-
cirrhosis.Onlyrarelyare heartfailure and cardiac
diographsarecarefully
evaluated.Radiographic
tamponadeobserved.
changes include cardiomegaly, dorsal elevation of the
trachea,silhouettingofthecardiacanddiaphragmatic
PHYSICALEXAMINATION.In manypatientsthephysical
borders, the presence of gas-filled stomach or intestine
examination is unremarkable.In some,the heart
in an intrapericardiac location,and collections of in-
Om
st
A
B
FIGURE29-5
Clinical signs in dogs and cats with peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia (PPDH)vary in
relation to the organs that are displaced into the pericardium.(A)Right lateralview(theleft
thoracic cage has beenremoved)of a cat withPPDH in which the stomach(St),smallintestine (SI),
spleen（spl),omentum(Om),and a portion of theliver herniated into the pericardial sac
surrounding the heart (H).L,lungs;P,pericardium.(B) Same view as in (A).The communication
between thepericardial sacand theperitonealcavity canbevisualized only after theherniated
organs are removed.
684DISEASESOFTHEHEARTAND CIRCULATION
trapericardialfatadjacenttothemoreradiodense
INTRAPERICARDIALCYSTS
heart (Fig. 29-6).Electrocardiographic changes in-
cludesmall amplitudecomplexes anddeviationof the
PATHOLOGYANDPATHOGENESIS.These unusualstruC-
heart'smeanelectrical axis.
tures have been described in only a few dogs less
DIAGNosIs.Herniated segments of intestine and
unilocularormultilocular“cystlike’masseswithin the
stomachmaybeeasilyidentifiedbyplainthoracicra-
pericardial sac (Fig. 29-7). Histologically they were
diographs orfollowing oralbarium administration.Ul-
cystichematomas,as they lacked epithelial or endothe-
trasonographyisparticularlyusefulwhen thespleen
lial lining cells.In two of these dogs, the cysts were
or portions of the liver have herniated into the pericar-
found in association with aPPDH.In the otherfive
dial sac.29 Liver function should always be assessed
dogs, the cyst was invested in a stalk of tissue that was
priortosurgicalintervention.Otherusefuldiagnostic
firmly attached to the apex of the parietal pericardium.
techniques include selective or nonselective angiogra-
These findings suggest that intrapericardial cysts de-
phy,tomography,positive or negative contrast perito-
velopin mostinstances as aresult of congenitalhernia-
neography,pneumography,magnetic resonance im-
tion and entrapmentofomentum or a portionof the
aging,andcomputerized axial tomography.
falciform ligament into the pericardial sac.Clusters of
thin-walled, fluid-filled cysts, similar to human pericar-
TREATMENT.Surgicalreduction of thehernia and re-
dial coelomic cysts,were discovered within thepericar-
pair of the diaphragmatic defect are advisable in many
dial sacofafemaleLhasaApso.Inhumans,pericardial
but not all instances of PPDH.22 26 Surgical imperatives
cysts arecongenital malformations outsidethepericar-
include herniation of the stomach into the pericardial
dial sacin the cardiophrenic angle.Such outpouchings
sac,bowel obstruction, and vascular embarrassment to
may(diverticula)or may not(cysts)communicate with
the pericardial space.32 Thesehave not been identified
theliver or otherherniated organ.Occasionally,a
in dogs or cats.
small PPDH is discovered in an asymptomatic older
animal or an animal with signs unrelated to the hernia.
Frequently,only the omentum or a small portion of
CLINICAL FINDINGs.Most dogs with intrapericardial
the liver has herniated into the pericardial sac. Obser-
cysts are presented with signs of cardiac tamponade
vationrather thansurgeryis often theprudent choice,
(muffledheart sounds,distendedjugularveins,ascites,
particularly in older animals with other systemic dis-
weak arterial pulses,and,less requently,leural fu
eases.
sion).Cardiacfillingmaybe compromised by accumu-
FIGURE29-6
Lateral (A) and dorsoventral (B) thoracic radiographs of a young German
shepherd dogwith a peritoneopericardial diaphragmatichernia.The
diagnosis is obviouswhen gas-filled bowelloops arevisiblewithin the confines
of an enlarged,globoid cardiac silhouette.
PERICARDIALDISEASEANDCARDIACTUMORS
685
FIGURE29-7
Unilocular (right) andmultilocular (left) pericardial cysts aremost likely cystic hematomas that
developinfatty tissue thatbecomes trappedin a small peritoneopericardial diaphragmatichernia.
Intrapericardial cysts in the dog.JVet Intern Med 7:364,1993.)
lationofpericardial fluid(cardiactamponade)or by
ACQUIREDPERICARDIAL
direct impingement of the cyst on theright sideof the
DISEASES
heart(compression).The electrocardiogram typically
reveals a change in mean electrical axis and small
amplitudeQRScomplexes.Electricalalternansis ab-
sent as theheart is notfree to swingin thepericardial
PERICARDIALEFFUSIONANDCARDIAC
space. Thoracic radiographs reveal either a globoid
TAMPONADE
cardiac silhouette or an odd-shaped,enlarged heart
shadowwitha protuberance on its right caudal aspect
(Fig.29-8A,B).Intrapericardial cysts are easily demon-
ETIOLoGy.Excesspericardial fluid accumulateswith
stratedbytwo-dimensionalechocardiography(Fig.29-
avarietyofsystemic,cardiac,andpericardialdisorders.
8C)orpneumopericardiography.Pericardialeffusion
Idiopathicpericardialeffusionisthemostfrequentlyre-
isfrequentlypresent.
ported non-neoplasticdisorder causing cardiac tam-
ponade in dogs.3-35 This poorly understood malady is
diagnosed most often in middle-aged large and giant-
TREATMENT.Cardiactamponademaybe temporarily
breeddogs.Bacterialpericardial infections arevery
relievedbypercutaneousdrainageofeither theperi-
infrequentbuthavebeenreportedsecondarytomi-
cardialfluidorthefluidwithinthecyst.Surgicalexplo-
gratingforeignbodiesbitewounds,perforation of the
ration of thepericardium anddiaphragmis thenindi-
thoracic esophagus,and extension of adjacent pulmo-
cated.Median sternotomy facilitates cystremoval and
nary infection.36-3sFungal pericarditis is unusual,with
theidentification andrepair of any associatedPPDH.
thenotableexceptionofCoccidioides immitisinfections
Cystremovaland subtotalpericardiectomyresultin
in dogs living in southwestern United States.39 Left
permanent resolution of all clinical signs.
atrialruptureresultingincardiactamponadeis an
686DISEASES OFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
FIGURE29-8
Right lateral(A) and dorsoventral(B) thoracicradiographs
of a dogwith a pericardial cyst.Note the protruding
margin of the heart on its right caudal margin (B).
Pericardial cysts are easilyvisualized by two-dimensional
echocardiography.(C)Two-dimensional echocardiographic
image (right parasternal long axis view)of the same dog.A
multiloculated cyst compresses therightventricle.LV,left
ventricle;RA,right atrium.
uncommonbutwell-documentedcomplicationof
timeslocated attheheartbase.50.51Many othertumors
degenerative valvular disease in small-breed dogs.40
arising from or metastasizing to the heart or pericar-
There are several reports of metallic projectiles lodg-
diumcan causepericardialeffusion andcardiac tam-
ing in the pericardial sac and inducing pericardial
effusion.41, 42Various cardiac or systemic diseases are
diagnosed primary pericardial neoplasm(Fig.29-
associatedwithsmallvolumesofacellularpericardial
10).52,53 It is an important cause of neoplastic pericar-
fluid, but such effusions rarely cause cardiac tampon-
dial effusion in dogs but is much less common in cats.54
ade.19,39,43
DOGs.Themostfrequentlyidentified causeofpericar-
CATs.Pericardial effusion is diagnosed muchless fre-
dial effusion and cardiac tamponade is cardiac neopla-
quently.Cardiacneoplasia is lessprevalent in cats than
sia,most commonly hemangiosarcoma or heart-base
in dogs, and idiopathic effusive pericarditis is not a
tumors (Fig. 29-9).1. 39, 42-46 The term heart-base tumor
recognized clinical syndrome in cats. Some reported
describes any tumor located at this anatomic site.Most
causesincludefelineinfectiousperitonitis,lymphosar
heart-base tumors arechemodectomas,arising from
coma,heart-base tumors,avariety of other malignan-
the aortic bodies in the periadventitial tissue of the
cies, and cardiomyopathy (Fig.29-11).55-57 Most cats
ascending aorta and base of the pulmonary artery.47-9
with cardiomyopathy haveno or only small amounts
Thyroid,parathyroid,and othertumors are also some-
ofpericardialfluid.
PERICARDIALDISEASEANDCARDIACTUMORS
687
CVC
FIGURE29-9
Twoof the most common cardiac tumors in dogs are hemangiosarcoma(A and B) and heart base
tumors (CandD）.Hemangiosarcomas usually involve the right auricle or the right atrium,causing
bloody pericardial effusion.(A)Notice the hemangiosarcoma emergingfrom the epicardium of the
right atrium near the atrioventricular junction.Caudal vena cava (coc)and right auricle (RAu).(B)
The same heartviewedfrom theright dorsolateral aspect.Theright atrialwall hasbeen dissected
away toreveal a largemass obstructingright atrial flling.Thisview also shows how the tumor
metastasized through the endocardium to emergefrom the epicardial surface.(C) Canine heart
viewed from theleft lateral aspectilustrating a heart-base tumor.Themost common heart-base
tumor is a chemodectoma arising from the aorticbodies in the periadventitial tissue of the aorta.
(D)This cross-section through the heart-base tumor shows areas of necrosis and hemorrhage.
688
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
B
FIGURE29-10
Pericardialmesotheliomas cause diffuse thickeningof thepericardium as seenhere,without
formationofdistinctiveocalmasslesions.eitherechocardiographynorgrossnecropsycaneasily
distinguish clumps ofneoplasticmesothelial cellsfrom loseaggregatesoffibrin and entrappedred
blood cell.(A)Left lateral aspect of a canine heart with pericardial mesothelioma.The pericardium
is intact and diffusely thickened.(B) The thickened pericardium has been incised and reflected
cranially and caudally toreveal theheart andfocal accumulations of neoplastic tissue.
FIGURE29-11
Felineinfectious peritonitis (FIP)and lymphosarcoma are two of the most common causes of
pericardial effusion in cats.(A) Gross specimen from a cat that diedfromFIPinfection.The left
lateral portion of pericardium has been dissected away toreveal a diffusely thickenedpericardium.
An enlarged pericardial cavity surrounds the heart within.(B)Longitudinally sectioned heart from a
cat (same as inFig.29-19)that diedfrom lymphosarcoma.Thepericardium,both atria,and heart
basearediffuselyinfiltrated.
PERICARDIALDISEASEAND CARDIAC TUMORS689
PATHOPHYSIOLOGYOFCARDIAC
modestly in accordance with Starling's law. As intraper-
TAMPONADE
icardialpressurerisesfurther,it equilibratesfirstwith
RVflling pressure, a state defined as right-sided heart
HEMODYNAMIC CHANGEs.Themisconception that car-
tamponade,and eventually with left heart filling pres-
diac tamponade is an “all-or-none" phenomenon was
sure,defined as left heart tamponade (Fig.29-13).
once advanced58under themisconception thatpericar-
Whenintrapericardialpressurerises toequalorex-
dialeffusion causesnohemodynamicchangessolong
ceed RV flling pressure, cardiac output is significantly
as intrapericardial pressure is less than right ventricu-
compromised and systemic venous pressure is substan-
lar filling pressure. More correctly, pericardial effusion
tially elevated.
beginstoexert hemodynamicconsequences as soon as
The severity of circulatory compromise is a function
intrapericardial pressurerises above zero.59 Moreover,
ofintrapericardialpressurerather thanvolumeof peri-
thehemodynamiceffectsofpericardialeffusion occur
cardial fluid.When intrapericardial pressure rises
in a graded fashion as pericardial pressure increases
slowly, signs of low cardiac output are usually accompa-
further (Fig. 29-12). Importantly, pulsus paradoxus
nied by physical signs of systemic congestion,such as
isnot areliableindicator of the severity of cardiac
ascites orpleuraleffusion.Relatively small effusions
tamponade.59
that accumulate suddenly(e.g.,traumatichemorrhage,
Aspericardialfluid accumulates andintrapericardial
rodenticide toxicity, left atrial tear, or iatrogenic coro-
pressure rises, the filling pressures of the right and
nary artery laceration)causeprofound circulatory em-
leftventricles also rise.Initially,transmural distending
barrassmentifintrapericardialpressurerisesrapidly;
pressure (ie.,intracardiac pressure minus intrapericar-
cardiogenic shockdevelopsbefore signsof systemic
dial pressure),declines slightly and strokevolume falls
congestion are apparent.
CARDIACTAMPONADE
40
Inspiratory
Declinein
SAP
(mm Hg)
0
PHASEONE
TWO
THREE
FIGURE29-12
Cardiac tamponade is a progressive phenomenon.
100%
Phase One:Patients are compromised,albeit
modestlyinthisphase,whereinpericardial pressure
Cardiac
is elevatedbutlessthanright atrial ressure.Phase
ndno
Two:Thisconstitutesright heart tamponade,dfned
as that state inwhich pericardial pressure equals or
(L/min)
exceedsright atrial pressure.Exerciseintolerance
and signs of systemic venous congestion (ascites) are
manifested.Phase Three:This is defined as left-sided
heart (or biventricular) tamponade,and cardiac
output isusually severely compromised.Femoral
PHASEONE
TWO
THREE
pulses are weak,and pulsus paradoxus isusually
evident.(Modifed fromReddy PS,Curtiss El,Uretsky
Diastolic
BF.Spectrum of hemodynamic changes in cardiac
Pressure
tamponade.AmJCardiol66:1487,1990.With
permission from Excerpta Medica Inc.)
LVEDP
10.0
RVEDP
5.0
Pericardial
PHASEONE
TWO
THREE
Pericardlal Effuslon
690
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
edema developsonly when severe tamponaderaises
pulmonary venous pressures above 25 mmHg. More
modestvenoushypertension increases therate of pleu-
ral fluid production and compromises the absorptive
abilityof subpleuralpulmonarylymphaticvessels.
Thus,respiratory distresswith chronicpericardial effu-
sionismoreoftenaresultofpleuraleffusionrather
thanpulmonaryedema.
Pulsusparadoxus isdefinedas agreater than10
percentfallininspiratory systolicarterialpressure
comparedwiththe expiratoryvalue,ora fallinpres-
sure of greater than 10mmHg (Fig.29-14).62 The
termpulsusparadoxusissomewhatamisnomer asthis
FIGURE29-13
phenomenon is simply an exaggeration of the normal
Intracardiacpressuresrecordedfrom adogwithcardiac
tendency for systemic arterial pressure to decline
tamponade due topericardialeffusion.Simultaneous pressures are
slightly during inspiration.During inspiration, there is
recorded from theleft ventricle(LV),pulmonary artery(PA),right
ventricle (RV),and right atrium (RA).Note the elevation (20 to 25
a surge of venous return to therightheart as intratho-
mmHg)andequalization of end-diastolicpressures inthese
racic pressure falls below that in the extrathoracic
chambers.ThePA and RV systolic pressures are mildly elevated
systemic veins.The right side of the heart is con-
(40mmHg),while the LV systolic pressure is normal (110mmHg).
The earlydiastolicy descenton theatrial andventricularpressure
strainedbypericardialfluidandfills attheexpenseof
tracings is not prominent (compare with Fig.29-21).(From
theleft side of theheart.Thiscausesleftventricular
Thomas WP.Pericardial disease.In Ettinger SJ (ed).Textbook of
heart stroke volume to decline.During expiration,LV
VeterinaryInternal Medicine.2nded.Philadelphia,WBSaunders,
filling improves and stroke volume increases. Thus,
1983,p 1080.)
pulsus paradoxus is a striking manifestation of ventric-
ular interdependence.It becomes most evidentwhen
pressures in the right and left ventricles equilibrate
Inthehealthy animal,ventricularfillingisprimarily
and theimportanceofpreload is accentuated.When
accomplishedinearlydiastolewhentheventricles are
actively relaxing (Chapters 3,11).The y descent of the
pericardial pressure exceeds LV filling pressure,car-
diacoutputisseverelycompromisedandalmostall
atrial pressure tracingreflects theimportant contribu-
patients evidence pulsus paradoxus.However,pulsus
tionofventricularrelaxation tocardiacfilling.With
paradoxus is observed in some patients evenwhen the
development ofcardiactamponade,cardiacfillingdur-
ing early diastole is substantially abbreviated. Intra-
rise in intrapericardial pressure is modest,that is,less
than right ventricular heart filling pressure.
pericardial pressure rises rapidly as the ventricles start
to expand, and the atrial pressure tracing shows a
markedly diminishedydescent.Consequently,venous
CLINICALMANIFESTATIONSOF
returnduring thelatediastolebecomesincreasingly
PERICARDIALEFFUSION
important;bloodfillstheheart primarily during atrial
diastole, during inscription of the x descent of the atrial
HISTORYAND PHYSICALEXAMINATION.The clinical man-
ifestationsofpericardialeffusiondependon therate
pressuretracing.
VASCULARANDSYSTEMIC ALTERATIONS.Compensatory
ECG
mechanisms,such as increased heart rate,sodium and
water retention,and venoconstriction,blunt any de-
cline in cardiac output,but they further increase car-
diac filling pressures. In contrast to other forms of
100 fernaral
heart failure,plasma concentrations of atrial natri-
Be-
uretic peptide (ANP) do not rise substantially with
cardiac tamponade.61 The usual stimulus for ANP re-
40
lease,atrial distention,is circumvented because the
20
atria are constrained by pericardial effusion.The fail-
mmg
ure ofrising atrialpressures to elicit a natriuretic re-
FIGURE29-14
sponsecontributestotherapidincrease inplasma
Directmeasurement of femoral artery pressurein a dogwith
volumeinanimalswithpericardial disease.
cardiac tamponade reveals pulsus paradoxus.There is an
Increased systemicvenous pressure causes jugular
distention and fluid transudation from systemic capil-
pressure during inspiration (INSP).ECG,electrocardiogram.(From
lary beds.Ascites develops when central venous pres-
Thomas WP.Pericardial disease.InEttinger SJ (ed).Textbook of
VeterinaryInternalMedicine.2nded.Philadelphia,WBSaunders,
sure approaches or exceeds 15mmHg.Pulmonary
1983,p 1080.)
PERICARDIALDISEASEANDCARDIACTUMORS691
ofriseinintrapericardialpressure.Although acute
causearterialhypertension.6Other alterationsin
tamponade may occur,most animals are presented
pulse quality,such aspulsusparadoxus,aremore diff
afterachroniccourseofpericardialeffusionwithless
cult to detect.
severeclinical signs.With disseminatedneoplasia or
systemicinfection,clinical signs of theunderlyingill-
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION FINDINGS.With cardiactam-
ness often dominate. The presence of a murmur in
ponade,evidence ofimpairedvenousreturn and ele-
dogswith pericardial effusionusuallyindicates the
vated right heart filling pressures are usually present
presence of some other diseaseprocess.Forexample,
and suggested by jugular venous distention or a posi-
dogs developing a left atrial tear and cardiac tampon-
tive hepatojugular reflux test.When jugular veins are
adesecondarytochronicdegenerativevalvulardisease
difficut to inspect,as in obese dogs,measurement of
oftenhave aloud systolicheart murmur,although itis
central venous pressure(CVP)will document systemic
decreasedinintensitywhencomparedwithprevious
venous hypertension.The CVP is usually greater than
examinations.
12 mmHg (normal, ≤6 mmHg) when cardiac tampon-
adeispresent.Hepatomegaly and ascites are evident
ACUTE PERICARDIAL EFFUSION.Rapidlydevelopingcardiac
on physical examination, and more subtle changes
tamponade causes acute hypotension,cardiogenic
can be evaluated by abdominal ultrasonography.Large
shock,rapidlyrogressiveweakness,dynea,collap,
volumesofpleuraleffusion altertheeffortandpattern
or sudden death. Such sequelae are common in dogs
of respiration and muffle both the heart and lung
withatrialtears,bleedingtumors,andtraumaticlacera
sounds.Weightlossoccurscommonlyindogswith
tionsofcoronaryvessels.
chronic pericardial effusion from anorexia,chronic
hepatic congestion, gastrointestinal protein loss, and
CHRONICPERICARDIAL EFFUSION.The classictriadof ab-
cachexia.If these signs arepresent with aknownheart-
normalities includes (1） muffled heart sounds,(2)
base or cardiac tumor,thyroid function should be
weak arterial pulses,and (3) distended systemic veins.
assessedto identify anectopicfunctional thyroid tu-
Theintensity oftheheart soundsisusuallydiminished,
mor.
but this finding may be subtle or absent with mild
effusion.Large pericardial effusions that accumulate
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY.Sinus tachycardia andsmall
slowlyareoftenwelltoleratedifintrapericardialpres-
amplitude QRS complexes (R<1 mVinLead II)
sure remains low owing to pericardial hypertrophy.A
are recorded in most dogs and cats with substantial
vague history of lethargy,weakness,exercise intoler-
pericardial effusion.64 Unfortunately, the predictive
ance,andanorexiais common.Chronicelevationof
valueof theseabnormalitiesislow,particularlyin cats.
pericardial pressure results in signs of right-sided con-
gestive heartfailure such as ascites or pleural effusion.
roidism,pleural effusion,obesity,intrathoracic mass
With severecardiactamponade,arterialpulseisweak
lesions, and hypovolemia. Electrical alternans (EA),
and abruptfromperipheralvasoconstriction andre-
definedasabeat-to-beatvoltagevariationoftheQRS
duced stroke volume. Hypotension may be so pro-
or ST-T complexes,is more indicative ofpericardial
found thattheperipheral arterial pulse isdifficultto
effusion (Fig. 29-15). This abnormality may be re-
locate.Uncommonly,peripheral vasoconstriction may
FIGURE29-15
M-mode echocardiogram and simultaneousECG
PE
froma dogwith severepericardialeffusion and
electrical alternans.On the ECG,notice how the R
wavevoltage alternates (electrical alternans) every
other beat (thick arrows); this is associated with the
heart swinging to and frowithin thefluid-filled
pericardial sac (thin arrows) on the echocardiogram.
TheECGalso revealed sinus tachycardia and low-
voltageQRScomplexes.The echoillustrates diastolic
collapse of therightventricle（RV),reduction of the
left ventricular dimensions (LV),and a large
pericardial effusion (PE),changes compatible with
pericardial tamponade.PERI,pericardium.
PERI
692DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
C
D
FIGURE29-16
Tumors of the heart base cause tracheal deviation and may cause pericardial effusion.(A) On the
lateral thoracic radiograph,the trachea overlying the cranial portion of theheart is pushed dorsally.
(B)On the dorsoventral view,the trachea is displaced rightward (arrows）.In both views,the cardiac
silhouetteisgreatly enlarged andgenerallygloboid,obscuringdetails of specificcardiacchamber.
（C,D)In the same dog,theheart base tumor andits relationship to the trachea and heart are
on the dorsoventral view it is evident as a large,circular mass in the left craniolateral quadrant.
less often in cats.57 66 Electrical alternans is caused by
waists and becomes globe-shaped (see Figs.7-13;29-
swingingoftheheartwithinthefluid-filledpericardial
16).Distention of thecaudalvena cava,hepatomegaly,
sac (Fig.29-15). A recent study using a nonlinear
andascites areusuallyevidentwithchroniceffusion
heartmodel showed thatEA is a rate-dependent phe-
and systemic congestion. Enlargement of the pulmo-
nomenonmostlikelytooccuratheartratesofbetween
naryveins and pulmonary edema is infrequent.Large
90 and 144 beats per minute.65 Elevation of the ST
pleural effusions will obscure many of these changes,
segment(indicativeofanepicardialinjurycurrent)
and thoracocentesisisoftenrequiredbeforethena-
andavarietyofventricular andsupraventricular ar-
ture of the underlying abnormality is appreciated. Al-
rhythmias may occur with pericardial effusion. These
though other cardiac diseases can cause similar radio-
abnormalities usually resolve followingpericardiocen-
graphic changes, an accurate “"radiographic diagnosis"
tesis.
ofpericardialeffusioncanbemadebyintegrating
radiographicfindingswithdatafrom thehistory and
RADIOGRAPHY. When pericardial fluid accumulates,
physical examination.
thecardiacsilhouettetypicallylosesitsangles and
Subtle radiographic clues suggesting the cause of
PERICARDIALDISEASEAND CARDIACTUMORS693
pericardial effusion are oftenpresent.For example,
monthsmayhavelittlehemodynamiceffect.Nonethe
pulmonary metastasis is common with RA hemangio-
less, a large volume is more likely to be clinically
sarcoma and other malignancies involving theheart
significant.
and pericardium.Multiple thoracic radiographic views
Right and leftventricular dimensions are oftendi-
shouldbemeticulouslyevaluatedforpulmonaryme-
minished and theventricular walls appear thicker than
tastasis.Heart-base tumors often cause subtle displace-
normal when pericardial effusion is severe and cardiac
ment of the trachea or main stem bronchi.Sternal
filling is impaired.7 Diastolic collapse of the right
atrium or right ventricle strongly suggests substan-
phoma or diffuseneoplasia.Unilateral pleural effusion
tialelevationofintrapericardialpressure andcardiac
withpericardial diseaseoften signifiesthepresence of
tamponade (Figs. 29-15; 29-17).71. 72 Unfortunately,
mesothelioma.Neoplasia or some other diseaseproc-
neither thepresence or absence of thesefindings is
essshould alwaysbeconsideredwhenpleural effusion
reliablefordeterminingclinicalsignificance orhemo-
isobservedbutascites andjugular distention are ab-
dynamicimportanceofaneffusion.7Pericardialpres-
sent.Many of the radiographicprocedures(fluoros-
surecanbemarkedlyincreasedwithoutdiastoliccol-
copy,angiography,and pericardiography)used pre
lapseof theright atriumorventricleif rightventricular
viously to identify the presence
and
cause
of
filling pressures were elevated prior to development of
pericardial effusion have been supplanted by echocar-
pericardial effusion.74 Conversely, significant collapse
diography.6.67
canoccurwithonlyminorelevationsinintra-
pericardialpressure inpatientsthat arevolume de-
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.Echocardiography is the safest,
pleted.75 Thus, a diagnosis of cardiac tamponade
most practical,and most cost-effective diagnostic
should be based on the constellation of all clinical
method for detecting pericardial effusion.It can detect
findingsrather thanona singleechocardiographic
very small (10 to 15 ml) accumulations of intrapericar-
abnormality.
dial fluid.6s Pericardial effusion is displayed on the
Echocardiography cannot provide a histologic diag-
echocardiogramasananechoicspacebetween
the
epicardium and pericardium (see Figs. 8-24 to 8-26;
lesions are sufficientlyconsistent topermitreasonable
29-15,29-17).The amount ofpericardialfluid can be
speculation regarding their identity.76-79 In dogs, a soft
estimated, but volume is not indicative of tamponade
tissue mass arising from theright atrium ismost likely
severity.69Rapidaccumulationofsmallormoderate
a hemangiosarcoma,and a mass arising from the as-
effusions can produce significant hemodynamic com-
cending aorta is likely to be a chemodectoma (Fig.
promise, and large effusions accumulating over
29-18).75 Similarly, diffuse myocardial infiltration in
PE
PE
ER
A牌K2
ECG
FIGURE29-17
Two-dimensional echocardiogramsrecorded at theright parasternal location,long-axisview.
Pericardial effusion(PE)appears as an anechoic(black) space between the epicardium and
pericardium (P).(A)Moderate pericardial effusion in a cat without cardiac tamponade.LV,left
ventricle.(B)Severe pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade in a dog.Notice diastolic collapse
(arrous) of theright atrium (RA) and right ventricle (RV).While not pathognomonic for cardiac
tamponade,thesefindingssuggest substantial elevation ofintrapericardial presure.Thisdogalsohas
pleural effusion(PLE)appearing as a black anechoic space,which,combinedwith pericardial
effusion,allowsboth sides of thepericardium tobevisualized.
694‘DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
B
OKE
ECE
0812
Record
FIGURE29-18
Two-dimensionalechocardiogramsrecordedfrom therightparasternal locationillustratingtwo
diameter)hear-base tumor(T)attached to the aorticroot(Ao).Histologicexaminationrevealed the
mass to be chemodectoma.LV,left ventricle.(B)Basal short-axisview of agoldenretriever dog's
heart, depicting an irregularmass at the tip of the right auricle(RAu).Histologic examination
verifiedright auricularhemangiosarcoma.PE,pericardialeffusion.
cats is highly suggestive of lymphosarcoma (Fig. 29-
COMPUTEDTOMOGRAPHYANDMAGNETICRESONANCEIM-
19).78 Echocardiography also greatly simplifies the di-
AGING.Gatedstudies arerequiredtoobtaindetailed
agnosis ofleft atrial rupture secondary todegenerative
images of the heart unobscured by motion artifacts.
valvular disease and other defects such as pericardial
Such studies are currently performed infrequently in
cysts.3 Transthoracic, two-dimensional echocardiogra-
companion animals,buttheymaybeusedmoreinthe
phyis 80to90percentsensitivefor detectingcardiac
future to image the heart, pericardium, and mediasti-
masses in dogs.75 Transesophageal imaging is more
num (Chapter 10). The value of CT and MRI for
sensitivebutrequiresgeneralanesthesia.soOwners
diagnosing constrictive pericarditis,pericardial cysts,
should alwaysbe advised that false-negative studies are
andcardiacneoplasia inhumans iswellestablished.81,82
likely in dogs or cats with pericardial mesothelioma.
PERICARDIOCENTESISANDPNEUMOPERICARDIOGRAPHY.
Pericardiocentesisisindicatedwhenevercardiactam-
ponade or infectious pericarditis is suspected.42. 43.67 We
prefer a right-sided approach.The dog is positioned in
leftlateralrecumbencytofacilitatemanualrestraint of
unsedatedanimalsandtolessenthechanceofcoro-
nary arterylaceration.Thoracicradiography orecho
cardiographycanindicatethebestsitetoperform
pericardiocentesis.Most often,the right fifth intercos-
tal space at the costochondral junction is clipped and
surgically prepared.The procedure can be performed
in many dogswithout sedation,but most cats require
chemical restraint(Chapter 38).While monitoring the
ECG,the operator advances an over-the-needle cathe-
ter,2to5inches long (depending onpatient size),
BNBOR2
toward theheart.When fluidis obtained,the catheter
ECG
is guided into the pericardial sac and the stylet is
FIGURE29-19
withdrawn.Palpable cardiacpulsations orVPCson the
Two-dimensional echocardiogramrecordedfrom theright
ECGmandateslightwithdrawalofthecatheter and
parasternal position showing a long-axisviewof a felineheart
stylet.Oncecorrectcatheter locationis ascertained,
infiltrated by lymphosarcoma (same cat as inFig.29-11B).There
the pericardial sacis drained.When pericardiocentesis
is diffuse tumor(T)infiltration of theleft and right atria and the
entire heart base.RA,rightatrium;RV,right ventricle;AO,aortic
is successfully performed, the character of the arterial
root；LV,left ventricle.Pericardial effusion ispresent.
pulse improves and systemic blood pressure normal-
PERICARDLAL DISEASE AND CARDIAC TUMORS 695
izes. The intrapericardial cathcter can also be used to
permits thc cxaminer to visualize the heart and peri-
dlcliver drugs or other medicaments into the pericar-
-isqns e saot on pue soisdoq eqo oi 'pio
tial portion of the pericardium without the morbidity
ography (Fig. 29-16C,D).
and cxpense of major surgery.
Most pericardial cffusions arc bloody or blood
tinged, and the clinician must ensure that the cathcter
NEOPLASTIC ErrUSIoNs. Prognosis for cardiac or pcricar-
dial neoplasia is generally poor Associated effusions 
umes of fluid. If fluid sourcc is uncertain, thc sample
tend to be relentlessly progressive. IIemangiosarcoma.
should be centrifuged. The packed cell volumc of
thc most conimon tumor causing cardliac tamponade
 pericardial fluid is usual much less than peripheral
in dogs, is usually highly malignant. Currently uscd
blood and its supernatant is typically xanthochromic.
chemotherapy protocols are of limited utility.sa. a Somc
Also, pericardial fluid does not clot unless very recent
hemangiosarcomas, particularly those located on the
hemorrhage into the pericardial sac has occurred.
right auricle, can be surgically excised, but most of
Pericardial fluid samples should be submitted for
these tumors alrcady have or soon will spread to the
laboratory analysis and cytologic evaluation. Most in-
lungs or other vital location. Pericardiocentesis pro-
fcctions and some tumors, such as lymphosarcoma,
vides limited benefit as pericardial effusion conmonly
can be reliably identified. Bacterial and fungal cultures
redevelops within  several days.4 Pericardiectomy is
 are requested when the cytology report or fluid analy-
rarely uscful, and the prognosis is usually grave.
sis results suggest an infectious proces. Howcver, it is
IIcart-base tumors in some animals arc slow growing
very difficult to distinguish the common neoplastic
and late to mctastasizc, whercas others arc highly ma-
cffusions of dogs (hemangiosarcoma, heart-basc tu-
lignant. If the tumor is localized and accessible, surgi-
mors) from idiopathic eusions on the basis of red
cal removal is advocatedp although it is not. usually
cell or white cell counts, protein content, or cytology.s3
possiblc to achicve disease-free margins. Local recur-
Reactive mesothclial cells within the pericardial sac
rence can be anticipated in many cases. Extcnsive tu-
are commonly interpretcd as bcing ncoplastic (Fig.
mors, particularly those locatcd on thc postcrior aspect.
36-12). Negativc cytologic findings should also be in-
of the aorta, are difficult or impossiblc to cxcise. In
terpreted cautiously as somc cardiac and pericardial
such cases, long-term relief from recurrent pericardial
ncoplasins do not readily exfoliate.
cffusion may be realized following surgical, percutane-
ous balloon, or thoracoscopic pericardiectomy 86. 47
TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS
Lymphosarcoma of the heart and/or pericardium can
be successfully treatcd by combination chemothcrapy
DIOPATIHc rrFusyONs. Coservative treatmcnt is recom-
with or without radiation.7α Pericardiocentesis may be
mended since about half of these dogs are cured by
 required to relieve tamponade.
the initial pericardiocentesis.39. 43 In the remainder,
 Metastatic tumors and pericardial mesothcliomas
 pericardial effusion recurs several days or wecks follow-
are oftcn difficult to diagnose and are always difficult
ing initial pericardioccntesis. At this time, pericardio-
to treat. Diagnosis is usually accomplished by surgical
centesis can simply bc repcated or more aggrcssive
pericardial biopsy. Ilistologic diagnosis of mesothclio.
strategies implemented. Corticosteroids are commonly
mas can be difficult, ncccssitating ultrastructural analy-
administered to humans with rccurrcnt idiopathic
sis and immunohistochemical staining,"2 Biopsy of the
pericardial efusion.*4 Although such thcrapy has not
Iymph nodes draining the pericardial sac is also diag-
been critically evaluated in animals, trial therapy with
anti-inflammatory or immunosuppressive doses of cor-
mcsothelioma, a recalcitrant pleural cffusion often de-
ticosteroids should be considered, Most dogs with per-
sistently recurring pericardial cfusion are cured by
die within a few months regardless of thcrapy, and
surgical pericardicctomy. Some dogs with a recurring
chemotherapcutic efficacy has not been established.?2
Radiocolloids, such as phosphorus* colloidal chromic
a ncsothclioma. The advantages of surgery arc (l)
phosphate. are advocatcd as palliative treatmcnt. for
previously unsuspected masses can be directly visual-
malignaint pericardlial cffusion resistannt to chemother-
ized. cxcised, or biopsied, (2) samples of pericardial
apy.93 Prospective trials are needed to evaluate therapy
tissuc and rcgional lymph nodes can be obtained for
for malignant pericardial cffusions in dogs and cats.
histologic cxamination, and (3) subtotal pericardicc-
tomy can be performcd to prevent recurrence of car-
INFECTIous EFFUsIONs. Appropriate therapy requires ad-
diac tamponade or thc development of constrictive
equate pericardial drainage combined with prolonged
 pericarditis.* The disadvantages of this approach are
antimicrobial therapy.94, 9 Surgical exploration of the
those inherent in any cxploralory surgery. Thoracos-
thorax and pericardium is usually advisable; the peri-
copic pericardiectomy is a recently described alter-
cardium can be excised, any foreign bodies rcmoved,
and adjacent organs inspected.* A notable cxception
696DISEASES OFTHEHEARTAND CIRCULATION
ispericarditis from feline infectious peritonitis in
which pericardiocentesis,corticosteroids,and/or im-
munosuppressive drug therapy is advocated.Unfortu-
nately,theusual outcome is death.
CONSTRICTIVEPERICARDITIS
In this difficult to diagnose disorder, cardiac filling
is compromised by a nondistensible, thickened and
fibrotic pericardium.Thirty cases have been reported
in dogs, primarily males 2.5 to 9.5 years old.96-9s No
cases have yet been described in cats.
PATHOLOGYANDPATHOGENESIS. Constrictive pericardi-
tis can develop from any form of chronic pericarditis,
but dogs with chronic idiopathic effusions,mycotic
pericarditis,neoplasia,orintrapericardialmetallicfor
eign bodies are particularly vulnerable.39 43,96-9s Some
affected dogs have a thickened and fibrotic visceral
andparietalpericardium,withextensiveadhesions and
only a small amount of pericardial fluid (Fig.29-20).
In most dogs, the parietal pericardium is more severely
affected, with relative sparing of the visceral pericar-
dium, and the volume of pericardial fluid is modestly
increased.In extreme cases, the parietal pericardium
maybeupto8mm thick.Histologicfindings include
FIGURE29-20
mesothelialproliferation,increased amountsof dense
Canine heart viewed from theleft lateral aspect.The thickened
fibrous connective tissue, and inflammatory cell infil-
parietal pericardiumhasbeen incised andreflected upward toward
trates of variable severity.Osseous pericardial metapla-
the cardiacbase and downward toward theright ventricle.Fibrosis
andadhesions(arrow)betweenpericardium andepicardiumhave
sia has been described in oneyoung dog.97
formed as a result of chronic infection with Coccidioides immitis.
Hemodynamic studies indicated constrictive pericarditis.
PATHoPHysIOLoGy. In most cases, early ventricular re-
laxation is normal, and ventricular filling proceeds
rapidlyuntilthelimitofventriculardistensibility
is
areanticipatedwhenallcardiacchambers areencased
reached.Inmid-diastole,thethickened,noncompliant
in the same rigid pericardial sac.Several circumstances
pericardium exerts its influence, abruptly limiting fur-
may foster exceptions to these observations. Localized
ther expansion of the ventricle.Consequently,ventric-
areas of fibrosis may preferentially constrain only one
ularfilling slows or ceases.The atrial andventricular
cardiac chamber.Inaddition,diastolicpressures may
pressuretracingsshow arapidydescentfollowedby
also be disparate when filling pressures are normal or
an abrupt rise to an elevated diastolicplateau,distin-
only slightly elevated.Such circumstances are encoun-
teredmostcommonlywhendiureticshavebeenad-
diastolic abnormality of the ventricular pressure trac-
ministered.Rapid administration of intravenous solute
ing is frequentlyreferred to as the“square root sign.”
usually sufficestorevealthepatient's true circum-
Auscultationof apericardialknockin earlydiastoleis
stances (Fig. 29-22).
attributed to the vibrations produced by theblood
As constriction worsens and cardiac filling is more
whenitstrikesthenondistensibleventricularwall and
severely compromised,cardiac output declines.The
decelerates.Theprominenty descentmaybe absent
usual declinein cavalpressure associatedwithinspira-
when a small amountofpericardialfluid ispresent
tion is often absent in dogs with constrictive pericardi-
andthevisceralpericardium is minimallyinvolved.100
tis because the intrathoracic pressure changes associ-
This condition is referred to as effusive-constrictive peri-
atedwithrespirationarenottransmittedtothecardiac
carditis.96,97,100
chambers.This important observation requires careful
Hemodynamic studies of dogs with constrictive peri-
examination of the jugular veins or the direct measure-
carditis demonstrate elevation and equilibration of the
ment of systemic venous pressure. In severe cases, sys-
pulmonary wedge; pulmonary artery; and RV, RA, LV,
temic venous pressure may increase during inspiration,
and LA diastolic pressures (Fig.29-21).Such findings
a clinical phenomenonknown asKussmaul's sign.Fluid
PERICARDIALDISEASEANDCARDIACTUMORS
697
HemodynamicsofConstrictivePericardlitis
30
PA
RV
RA
25
20
15
FIGURE29-21
10
Hemodynamic abnormalities associatedwithconstrictive
5
pericarditis.In the top tracing,note the elevation and
0
equilibration of diastolic pressuresin the pulmonary
artery (PA),right ventricle (RV),and right atrium (RA).
Therapidy descentfollowed byan abrupt riseto an
elevateddiastolic plateau inright atrial andright
ventricular pressure tracings serves to distinguish
constrictivepericarditisfrompericardial effusion
（compare with Fig.29-13).In the bottom tracing,note
the elevation and superimposition of diastolic pressures
in the pulmonary artery(PA),right ventricle(RV),and
right atrium (RA).
LV +PA
LV +RV
LV+RA
100
80-
E
60
40
20
0
retention isinitiatedbycompensatoryresponses
ble.In dogs,however, systolic murmurs,gallop heart
evoked by reduced cardiac output. As in patients with
sounds, and systolic clicks occur,possibly due to con-
effusive pericarditis, there is an inadequate circulating
currentchronic acquiredvalvular disease.
atrial matriuretic peptide concentration.101
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY ANDRADIOGRAPHY.ThemOSt
common ECG changes are sinus tachycardia, pro-
HISTORYANDPHYSICALEXAMINATION.Right-sidedheart
longedP-waveduration,andreduced QRScomplex
failure (e.g., distended jugular veins; abdominal disten-
amplitude.96Increasedsusceptibility tosupraventricu-
tion)is themost commonly noted abnormality.Less
lartachycardiaandatrialfibrillationhasbeenre-
frequently,dyspnea,tachypnea,weakness,exercise in-
ported.96.97 The cardiac silhouette may be normal or
tolerance,syncope,and weight loss are reported.Dura-
slightlyenlarged andgloboid.Pleural effusion is com-
tion of illnessvariesfroma fewweekstoseveral
mon, as is caudal vena caval enlargement. Fluoroscopy
months.In some cases,the medical history indicates
shows diminishedmotion of the cardiacborders
a prior episode of idiopathic pericardial effusion or
whereasangiocardiographysometimesindicatesatrial
thoracic trauma.The heart sounds are often dimin-
enlargement andpericardial thickening astheendo-
ished inintensity,which is accentuatedbypleural effu-
cardial-pericardialdistanceisincreasedover theright
sion.Cardiacauscultationis otherwisenot helpful.
atrial surface.CompressionoftheRVoutflow tracthas
Theearlydiastolicpericardialknockdescribedinhu
beenreported in two dogs with coccidioidalpericardi-
mans with constrictive pericarditis is usually not audi-
tis.96
698DISEASESOFTHEHEARTAND CIRCULATION
OCCULTCONSTRICTIVEPERICARDITIS
FIGURE29-22
Recording of left ventricular(open arrow)
and right ventricular (solid arrow)
pressuresina dogwith occult constrictive
pericarditis before (control) and after
intravenous saline infusion.Elevation and
40
equilibration of pulmonary wedge,
pulmonaryartry,rightventricular,right
32
atrialtvnricularanta
diastolic pressuresmay not be apparent
inaffected animals treatedwithhigh
24
doses of diuretics.However,when filling
pressures are raised by rapid
16
administration ofintravenous solute,the
patient's true circumstances aremade
apparent.Notice changes inRV pressure
trace and equilibrationofRVand LV
diastolic pressures after saline infusion.
CONTROL
AFTER500mlSALINEIV
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY.Except in extreme cases,pericar-
tumors,was reported tobe 0.17percent of hospital
dialthickness cannot bedeterminedaccuratelyby
admissions(basedon theVeterinaryMedical Database
echocardiography.Pericardialdiseasemaynot be sus-
atPurdue with 638,867 cases from 1982to 1993).108
pectedunless thereisanincreaseinpericardialfluid.
Primary cardiac tumorsin dogs include chondro(sar-
Most of the reliable echocardiographic changes reflect
co)ma,fibro(sarco)ma,hemangio(sarco)ma,leiomyo-
altered hemodynamics,including flat diastolic left ven-
(sarco)ma,
lipofibroma,
lymphangioendothelioma,
tricular wall motion,rapid E-F slope,early pulmonic
mesothelioma,myxofbroma,myxoma,neurofibroma,
valveopening,abnormalsystolicordiastolicseptalmo-
rhabdomyo(sarco)ma, and ectopic thyroid,mixed
tion,and respiratory variation in the isovolumic relax-
spindle cell, and round cell sarcomas.1o9 Metastatic
ation time.102,103 Doppler echo interrogation of trans-
carcinomasandvarioustypesofsarcomashavealso
mitral and pulmonary venous flows can be helpful in
been reported, including chemodectoma and parathy-
establishing a diagnosis.104 In humans with constrictive
roid and thyroid carcinomas.
pericarditis there is a marked decrease in pulmonary
Tumors infiltrating the heart can be exceptionally
venous and transmitral flowvelocities during expira-
difficult to diagnose, and most are fortuitously discov-
tion that is not observed in normalpatients or in
ered when echocardiography is performed for some
patients with restrictive myocardial disease.These echo
other reason.When metastaticor infiltrativelesions
changes have not yet been identified in dogs or cats.
areobserved,a careful searchfor theprimarytumor
siteshould beconducted.A cardiacbiopsymaybe
THERAPYANDPROGNOsIs.Surgeryisrequired totreat
required to establish an antemortem diagnosis.
constrictivepericarditissuccessfully95105-10Fibrosisis
primarily limited to the parietal pericardium in most
An obstructingmass in the right atrium of a dog is
dogs,allowing subtotal parietalpericardiectomy.When
mostlikelytobeahemangiosarcoma,butmyxomas are
also prone to developin this location.Right ventricular
thevisceralpericardiumandepicardiumare signifi-
cantly involved, surgery is more difficult and the out-
outflow tract tumors are usually chemodectomas or
come less favorable.In this circumstance,successful
ectopicthyroidtumors.Masses compressing theleft
surgeryrequiresdecortication andremovalofboth
atrium and obstructing pulmonary venous inflow are
theparietal andvisceralpericardiallayers.Reported
usuallychemodectomas arisingfromthecaudal aspect
complications include damage to coronary arteries,
of the aorta,but ectopic thyroid and parathyroid tu-
arrhythmias,and pulmonary thromboembolism.None-
mors also may developin this location.Theleft ventric-
theless, most patients can be expected to survive sur-
ular inflowregionmaybeoccluded bymyxoma or
geryandexperiencesubstantialclinicalimprovement.
othertumorarisingfromtheleftatriumormitral
valve.Metastatictumors andrhabdomyosarcomas tend
to infiltrate the myocardium,induce arrhythmias, or
OTHERCARDIACNEOPLASMS
causepericardial effusion.
In cats,the overall prevalence of cardiac neoplasia
ETIOLoGy. In dogs, the overall prevalence of cardiac
was less than 0.03 percent of hospital admissions
neoplasia,includinghemangiosarcoma andheart-base
(based on theVeterinaryMedical DatabaseatPurdue
PERICARDLAL DISEASE AND CARDIAC TUMORS 699
with 210.388 cases fro1m 1982 to 1993).10* Other than
interdependence on left ventricular diastolic and sys-
tolic function in patients with heart failure. Circulaion
lymphoma, feline cardiac tumors inchude chemodec-
tonia, mctastatic hemangiosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, pul-
81:15, 1990
I8. van der Gaag I, van der Luer RJT. Eight cases of pericar-
monary carcinoma, and mammary gland carcinoma.
dial defects in the dog. Ve1 Palhol 14:14, 1977
19. Reed JR. Pericardial Diseascs. In Fox PR (ed). Canine
THERAPy. 'lrcatmcnt of cardiac ncoplasia often in-
and Feline Cardiology. New York, Churchill Living-
volves a combination of surgcry, chemothcrapy. and
stone, 1988, p 495
 20. Kohler H. Ruptur des Herzbeutels bein Hund. Dtsch
Tierarztl Wochenschr 65:489, 1958
should be consultcd prior to initiating therapy.
21. Teuscher E. Fin merkwurdiger Fall von Myokardnek-
9     q 
1958
References
22. Neiger R. Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia in
cats. Compendium Small Anim Med Pract Vet 18:461,
1996
23. Evans SM, Biery DN. Congenital peritoncopericardial
1. Buchanan JW. Causcs and prcvalence of cardiovascular
diaphragmatic hernia in the dog and cat: A literature
dlisease. In Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD (eds). Kirk's Curren1
review and additional case histories. Vet Radiol 2l:108.
Veteriuary Therapy Vul XI. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
1980
1992, p 647
24. Eyster CE, Evans AI, Blanchard GL, et al. Congenital
2. Holt D. Van Winkle T, Schelling C, ct al. Corrclation
pericardial diaphragmatic hernia and multiple cardiac
defects in a fitter of collies. J Anm Vet Med Assoc
between thoracic: radiographs and postmortem findings
in dogs with heimangiosarcoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc
170:516, 1977
200:1535. 1992
 25. 1Lunney I. Congenital peritoneal pericardial diaphrag-
3. Holt JP. The
normal pericardium. Am j Cardiol
matic hernia and portacaval shunt in a cat. J Am Anim
26:455, 1970
Hosp Assoc: 28:163. 1992
26. Bellah jR, Whitton DL., Elison (GW, Phillips 1. Surgical
4. Santarmore WP, Constantinescu MS, Bogen D, et al.
Nonuniform disuribution of normal pericardial thuid.
correction of concomitant cranioventral abdominal
Basic Res Cardiol 85:541, 1990
wall, caudal sternal, diaphragmatic, and pericardlial de-
[ects in young dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1722, 1989
 5. Goto Y, Le Winter MM. Nonuniforn regional deforma-
27. Bellah JR, Spencer CP, Brown Dj, Whiton DI.. Congen-
tion of the pericardium during thc cardiac cycle in
dogs. Circ Res 67:1114, 1990
ital cranioventral abdominal wall, caudal stcrnal, dlia-
6. Bouvy BM、Bjorling DE. Pericardial effusion in dogs
phragmatic, pericardial, and intracardiac defecis in
and cais. Part 1. Normal pericardium and causcs and
cocker spaniel littermates. J Am Vet Med Assoc
pathophysiology of pericardial ellusion. Compcndium
194:1741, 1989
28. Saperstein G, Leipold HW. Congenital defects in dlo-
Small Anim Med Pract Vet 13:417, 1991
 7. Miller AJ, Jain S, Levin B. Radiographic visualization of
mestic cats. Feline Prac1 18:43, 1976
lyuphatic drainage of heart muscle and pericardial sac
29. Hay WH. Woodfield JA, Moon MA. Clinical echocardio-
in the dog. Chest 59:271, 1971
graphic, and radliographic findings of peritoneopericar-
 8. Eliskova M, Eliska O, Miller Aj. The lymphatics of the
dial diaphragmatic hernia in two dogs and a cat. I Am
canine parietal pericardium. Lymphology 27:181, 1994
Vet Mcd Assoc 195:1245, 1989
9.Shabetai R. The Pericardium. New York, Grune & Strat-
30. Sisson D, Thomas WP, Rced J, et al. Intrapericardial
ton,1981
cysts in the dog. I Vet lntern Med 7:364, 1993
10. Hamilton DR, Dani RS, Semlacher RA, et al. Right
31. Marion J, Schwartz A, Etinger Sj. Pericardial efusion
atrial and right ventricular transmural pressures in dogs
in a young dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 157:1055, 1979
and humans. Effects of the pericardium. Circulation
32. Loehr wM. Pericardial cysts. AJR Am J Roentgenol
90:2492, 1994
68:584. 1952
11. Hoit BD, Dalton N, Bhargava V, Shahetai R. Pericardial
33. Gibhs C, Gaskell CJ, Darke PGG, et al. Idiopathic peri-
influences on right and left venticular filling dynamics.
cardlial haemorrhage in dogs: A review of fouricen
Circ Res 68:197, 1991
cases. J Small Anim Pract 23:183, 1982
12. Reed JR, Thomas WP. Hemodynamics of progressive
34. Berg RJ, Wingfield WE, Hoopes PJ. 1dliopathic hemor-
pneumopericardium in the dog. Am J Vet Res 45:302.
rhagic pericardial effusion in eight dogs. J Am Vet Med
1984
Assoc 185:988, 1984
13. Applegate RJ, Johnston WE, Vinten-Johansen J, et al.
 35. de Madron E, Prymak C, Hendricks J. Idiopathic hem-
Restraining effect of intact pericardium during acute
orrhagic pericardial cffusion with organized thrombi in
volume loadling. Am J Physiol 262:H1725, 1992
a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:324. 1987
14. Coons MS, woloszyn TT, Folliguet IA, ct al. Pericardlio-
36. Aronson LR, Gregory CR Infectious pericardial eflu-
tomy improves left ventricular compliance during sep-
sion in five dogs. Vet Surg 24:402, 1995
sis-induced pulmonary artery hypertension, Am Surg
37. Ihomas WP, Sisson D, Bauer TG, ct. al. Detection of
58:32.1992
cardiac: masses in dogs by two-dimcnsional echocardiog-
15. Hunter S, Smith GH, Angelini GD. Adverse hemody-
raphy. Vet Radiol 25:65, 1984
namic effecs of pericardial closure soon afer open
38. Fuentes VL, Long KJ, Darke PGG, et al. Purulent. peri-
heart surgery. Thorac Surg 53:425, 1992
carditis in a puppy. J Small Anim Pract 32:585. 1991
16. Freeman GL., LcWinter MM. Pericardial adaptations
 39. Thomas WP. Pericardial disorders. In Etinger SJ (ed).
during chronic cardiac dilation in dogs. Circ Res
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 3rd cd. Phil-
51:294, 1984
adelphia, WB Saunders, 1989, p 1132
17. Janicki JS. Influence of the pericardium and ventricular
40. Sisson D. Acquired valvular hearl disease in dogs and
700 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
cats. In Bonagura J (ed). Cardiology. New York,
pressure in cardiac tamponade. N Eng! J Med 327:463,
Churchill Livingstone, 1987, p 59
1992
11. Straw BE, Ogburn P, Wilson JW. Traumatic pericarditis
64. Bonagura [D. Electrical alternans associated with peri-
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 174:501, 1979
cardlial effusion in the dlog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
42. Berg RJ, Wingfield w. Pericardial effusion in the dlog: a
178:574, 1981
review of 42 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:72l, 1983
65. Sacks E, widman LE. Nonlinear heart model prcdicts
43.
Thomas WP, Reed jR Pericardial discase. In Kirk RW
range of heart rates for 2:1 swinging in pericardial
(ed). Current Veterinary Therapy. Vol IX. Philadelphia,
effusion. Heart Circ Physiol 33:111716, 1993
WB Saunders, 1986. p 364
66. Thomas WP, Reed JR, Gkomez JA. Diagnostic pneumo-
44. Aronsohn M. Cardiac hemangiosarcoma in the dog: a
pericardiography in dogs with spontaneous pericardial
review of 38 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:922, 1985
effusion. Ve1 Radiol 25:2, 1984
45. Ogilvie GK, Powers BE, Mallinckrodl CH, et al. Surgery
67.
Miller MW, Sisson DD. Pericardial diseases. In Fttinger
and donorubicin in dogs with hcmangiosarcoma. J Vet
SJ, Feldman EC (eds). Textbook of Veterinary Internal
lntern Med 10:379, 1996
Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995,
46. Kleine LJ, Zook BC, Munson TO. Primary cardiac: hem-
p 1032
angiosarcomas in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc: 157:326,
68. Berry CR, Lombard Cw, Hager DA, et al. Echocardio
1970
graphic: evaluation of cardiac tamponade in dogs hefore
47. Hayes HM. An hypothcsis [or the aeliology of caninc
and aftcr pericardiocentesis: four cases (19841986). J
chemoreceptor system ncoplasms, based upon an epi-
Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1597, 1988
demiological study of 73 cases among hospital patients.
69. D'Cruz IA, Hoffman PK. A new cross-sectional echocar-
J Small Anim Pract 16:337, 1975
diographic method for cstimating the volume of large
48. Patnaik AK, Liu SK, Hurvitz. AI, et al. Camine chemo-
pericardial effusions. Br Heart J 66:448, 1991
dlectoma (extra-adrenal paragangliomas)-a compara-
70. Di Segni E, Feinberg MS, Sheinowiiz M, et al. L.eft.
tive study. J Small Anim Pract 16:785, 1975
ventricular pseudohypertrophy in cardiac tanponade:
49. Hayes HM. Sass B. Chemoreceptor neoplasia: a study
an echocardiographic study in a canine model. J Am
of the epidemiological features of 357 caninc cases.
(Coll Cardiol 21:1286, 1993
Zentralbf Veterinarmed (A) 35:401, 1988
 71. Kronzon I, Cohen ML., Winer HE, Djastolic atrial com-
50. Chcville NF. lUlurastructure of canine carotid body and
pression: a sensitive sign of cardiac tamponade. J Am
aortic body tumors. Comparison with tissues of thyroid
Coll Cardiol 2:770, 1983
and para1hyroid origin. Vet Pathol 9:166, 1972
72. Armstrong WF、 Schilt BF、 Hclpcr DJ、 ct al. Diastolic
51.
Walsh KM, Diters RW. Carcinoma of ectopic thyroid in
collapse of the right ventricle with cardiac tamponade:
a dog J Am Anim Hosp Assoc: 20:665, 1984
 an echocardiographic study. Circulation 65:1491, 1982
52. Mclonough SP, MacLachlan XJ. Tohias AH. Canine
73. Reydel B, Spodick DH. Frequency and significance of
pericardial mcsothelioma. Vet Pathol 29:256, 1992
chamber colapses during cardiac tamponade. Ain
53.
Thrall DE. Goldschmidt MH. Mesothelioma in the dog:
Heart J 119:1160, 1990
six casc reports. J Am Vet Radiol Soc 19:107, 1978
74. Vaska K. wann LS, Sagar K, et al. Pleural effusion as a
54. Tilley 1P, Owens JM, Wilkins Rj. Pericardial mesothel-
cause of right ventricular diastolic collapse. Circulation
oma with effusion in a cal. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
86:609, 1992
11:60, 1975
75. Labib SB. Udelson JE, et al. Echocardiography in low
55. Harpster NK. The cardiovascular system. /n Holzworth
pressure cardiac tamponade. Am J Cardiol 63:1156.
J (ed), Diseases of the Cat— Medicine and Surgery. Vol
1989
1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1987, p 911
76. Thomas WP, Sisson D, Bauer TG, Reed JR. Detection
56. Rush JE, Kecne BW, Fox PR. Pericardial disease in the
of cardiac masses in dogs by two-dimensional cchocardli-
cat: a rctrospcctive cvaluation of 66 cases. J Am Anim
ography. Vet Radiol 25:65, 1984
Hosp Assoc 26:39, 1990
77. Fruchter AM, Miller CW, Oy'Gracdy MR. Echocardlio-
 57. Fossum TW, Miller MW. Rogers KS, et al: Chylothorax
graphic results and clinical considerations in dogs with
associated with right-sided heart failure in five cats. J
right atrial/auricular masses. Can Vet J 33:171, 1992
Am Vet Med Assoc 204:84, 1994
78. Brummer DG. Moise NS. Infiltrative cardiomyopathy
58. Rcddy PS, Curtiss El, O'Toole J, el al. Cardiac tampon-
responsive to chemotherapy in a cat with lymphoma. J
ade: hemodynamic observations in man. Circulation
Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1116, 1989
58:265,1978
 79. Weynan AE. Principles and Pracice of Echocardiogra-
59. Reddy PS, Curtiss E1, Uretsky BF. Spectrum of hcmody-
phy 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1994, p 391
namic changes in cardiac tamponade. Am J Cardiol
80. Reeder GS, Khandheria BK, Seward JB, el al. Trans-
66:1487. 1990
esophageal  echocardiography
yand cardiac masses.
60. Louie EK, Hariman RJ, Wang Y, et al. Effect of acutc.
Mayo Clin Proc 66:1101. 1991
pericardial tamponade on thc relative contributions ot
 81. Gouliamos A, Andreou J. Steriotis J, et al. Detection of
systolic and diastolic pulmonary venous return: a trans-
pericardial heart _ disease by computed tomography.
esophageal pulsed Doppler study. Am Heart J 129:124.
Clin Radiol 35:397, 1984
1995
 82. Soulen RL. Magnetic resonance imaging of great vessel,
61. Stokhot AA, Overduin LM, Mol JA, et al. Etect of
myocardial, and pericardial disease. Circulation 84 (3
pericardiocentesis  on  circulating  concentrations
of
suppl): 1311, 1991
atrial natriuretice hormone and arginine vasopresin in
83. Sisson D, Thomas WP, Ruehl WW. Diagnostic valuc of
dlogs with spontaneous pericardial cflusion. Eur J Endo-
 pericardial fluid analysis in the dog J An Vet Med
crinol 130:357. 1991
Assoc 51:184, 1984
62. Fitchett DH, Sniderman AD. Inspiratory reduction in
84. Shabetai R. Acute pericarditis. Cardiol Clin 8:639, 1990
left heart filling as a mechanism of pulus paradoxus in
85. Hehrlein FW, Moosdorf R, Pitton M, et al. The role of
cardiac tamponade. Can J Cardiol 6:318, 1990
pericardiectomy in pericardial dlisorders. Eur Hcart j
63. Brown J, MacKinnon D, King A, et al. Elevated arterial
12 (Suppl D):7, 199i
PERICARDLAL DISEASE AND CARDIAC TUMORS
701
86. Hazelrigg SR, Mack MJ, Landreneau RJ, et al. Thoracos-
metaplasia of the pericardium in a dog. J Am Vet Med
copic pericardiectomy tor efusive pericardial disease.
Assoc 209:2091, 1996
Anm Thorac Surg 56:792, 1993
98. Campbell SL., Forrester SD), Johnston SA, et al. Chylo-
thorax associated with constrictive pericarditis in a dog.
diectomy in 12 dogs. Abstract. J Vet Intern Med
J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1561, 1995
10:164, 1996
99. Fowler NO. Constrictivc pericarditis: its history and
88. de Madron E, Helfand SC, Stebbins KE. Lse ot chemo-
current status. Clin Cardiol 18:341, 1995
therapy for treatment of cardiac hemangiosarcoma in
100. Hancock EW. Fundamentals of clinical cardliology On
a dog J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:887, 1987
the elastic and rigid forms of constrictive pericarditis.
89. Brown NO, Patnaik AK, MacEwan EG. Canine hemangi-
Am Heart J 100:9i7, 1980
101. Anand IS, Ferrari R, Kalra GS, et al. Pathogenesis of
usarcoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 186:56. 1985
cdema in constrictive pericarditis. Studies ot body water
90. Wagner SD, Breznock EM. Surgical management. of
and sodium, renal ^ funcuion, hemodynamics, and
plasma hormones before and affer pericardiectomy.
chemodcctomas. In Bojrab Mj (ed). Current Tech-
Circulation 83:1880, 1991
niques in Small Animal Surgery. 2nd ed. Philadelphia,
102. Hatle LK, Appleton CP, Popp RI. Differentiation of
Lea & Fcbiger, 1983
constrictive pericarditis and restrictive cardiomyopathy
91. Ziskind AA, Pearcc AC, Lemmon CC, ct al. Percutane-
by Doppler echocardiography. Circulation 79:357, 1989
Ous balloon pericardiotomy for the treatment of cardiac
103.(
Chandrarata PA. Echocardiography and Doppler ul-
tamponade and large pericardial effusions: description
trasound in the evaluation of pericardial disease. Circu-
of technique and report of first 50 cases. I Am Coll
lation 84 (3 Suppl):1303, 1991
Cardiol 21:1, 1993
104.
Mancuso 1., D'Agostino A, Pitrolo F, et al. Constrictive
92. Krarup-Hansen A, Hansen HH. Chemotherapy in ma-
pericarditis versus restrictive cardiomyopathy: the role
lignant mesothelioma: a review. Cancer Chemother
of Doppler echocardiography in dlifferential diagnosis.
Pharmacol 28:319, 1991
Init J Cardiol 31:319, 1991
93. Sprengelmeyer JT, Mclermot RI. Phosphorus-32-col-
105."
 Tuna IC, Danielson GK. Surgical managetnent of peri-
loidal chronic phosphate: treatment of choice for ma-
cardial discasc. Cardiol Clin 8:683, 1990
106. Brockington GM, Zebed J. Pandian NG. Constuictive
lignant pericardial effusion. J Nucl Med 3l:2034, 1990
pericardius. Cardiol Clin 8:645, 1990
94. Majid AA, Omar A. Diagnosis and management of pu-
107.
DeValeria PA, Baumgariner WA, Casale AS, et al. Cur-
rulent. pericardis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 102:413.
rent. indications, risks, and outcome afier pericardiec-
1991
tomy. Ann Thorac Surg 52:219, 1991
95. Bennet EV. Purulent pericarditis. J Thorac Cardiovasc
108. Ware WA. Cardiac neoplasia. In Bonagura J (ed). Kirk's
Surg 85:531, 1983
Curent Veterinary Therapy. Vol XII. Philadelphia, WB
96. Thomas WP, Reed JR, Bauer TG, Breznock EM. Con-
Saunders, 1995, p 873
stricuive pericardial disease in the dog. J Am Vet Med
109. Sisson D, Thomas WP. Myocardial diseases of the dog
Assoc 184:546, 1984
andl cat. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman E (eds). Textbook of
97. Wright KN, DeNovo RC, Patton1 CS, et al. Effusive-
Veterinary Internal Medicine. 4th cd. Philadelphia, WB
constrictive pericardial disease secondary to osseous
Saunders, 1994, p 995
Canine Heartworm
30
Disease
CLAY A. CALVERT
CLARENCE A. RAWLINGS
JOHN W. McCALL
EPIZOOTIOLOGY
Heartworm disease occurs throughout the United States.' Infeclion rates
of up to 45 percent occur within 150 miles of the Atlantic coast from Texas
to New Jersey and along the Mississippi Rivcr and its major tributaries. The
infection rate is lower in the rcmainder of the United States and southern
 Canada. Therc arc many othcr important world cndemic areas, including
Japan, Australia, and some Mediterrancan countrics.2
The risk of heartworm infection is corrclatcd with signalment and life
style.? Dogs housed outside are four to five times more likely to be infected
than indoor dogs; sporting brccds gencrally cxperience the highest infection
ratcs. Male caninc infections wcre reported four times more often than
female infections, although one study indicated that spaycd fcmales housed
young as I year of age can have heartworm infection, but most infected dogs
are 3 to 6 years old when diagnosed.t 'lhe hair coat docs nnot affcct the
probability of heartworm infection.
LIFE GYCLE (Dirofilaria immitis)
Heartworm infection is spread by many different mosquito species, and
the geographic distribution of infection is directly related to that of the
susceptible mosquitoes. The season and feeding habits of specific mosquito
spccies may determine the timing of hcartworm infection in susceptible
sas uo s e inq s aq u a oi a ss se se  sops
(Culex) is more likely than other mosquitos to bite felines.6
Female mosquitocs serve as intermediate hosis after obtaining blood meals
from dogs with circulating D. ionmitis microfilariae. Microfilariae develop
within the mosquito and are capable of infecting anoiher dog within 2 to
2.5 weeks.?3 8 Development of microfilariae to infective third-stage larvac (Ls)
is heat dependent. lncubation requires average daily tempcratures grcater
than 57°F. When the average daily temmperature for any 30-day period is
under 65°, transmission of infective heartworm larvac is unlikely. lnfective
larvae enter the host's skin via the mosquito's bitc wound. After 3 to 4
months, young adults (Ls) enter the vascular systcm and travel to thc small
pulmonary arteries. Microfilariae are frst scen in the blood approximately 6
months after infective larvae enter thcir ncw host. Numbers usually increase
markedlly during the next 6 months, after which microfilarial concentration
frequently declines.2
702
CANINEHEARTWORMDISEASE703
PATHOGENESISOF
adhesion of activated leukocytes andplatelets to the
damaged area (Fig.30-1).This increases vascular en-
HEARTWORMDISEASE
dothelialpermeabilitytoserumproteinsandwater,
with leakage into the perivascular interstitium.. 12Tro-
phic factors, such as platelet-derived growth factor
Disease severity and onset are determined,in part,
(PDGF),arereleased by activated platelets and leuko-
bythenumberofadultheartworms,whichvariesfrom
cytes.They stimulatemigration andmultiplication of
1 tomore than 250wormsper dog.Dogs with a
high heartworm burden generally experience greater
smoothmusclecellswithin thetunicamedia.Within3
weeks,rapidly dividing smooth muscle cells migrate
pulmonary vascular disease and more severe pulmo-
fromthemediatotheintima andmultiply.
naryhypertension than dolightly infected dogs.In an
Pulmonaryarterialvilliinducedbyheartworm-
average-sized (25-kg) dog, nearly all the heartworms
infecteddogs consistofrapidlydividing smoothmus-
residein the caudal pulmonary arteries until theheart-
cle cells and the collagen produced by them (Fig.
worm number exceeds 25.As their numbers increase,
more are found in the right ventricle and pulmonary
30-2).They range in size from a few microns to several
millimeters (Fig. 30-3).Endothelial damage and vil-
arteries.Theright atriumfrequently contains heart-
lous proliferation are most pronounced in the caudal
worms when more than 50 worms are present, and
and accessorylung lobes,reflecting the distribution
infectionswith suchhighnumbers ofwormsfrequently
result in their extension into the vena cava.1o Dogs
heartworm infections,vascular endothelial resolution
infectedwithmorethan100worms areatsubstantial
risk of developing thevena caval syndrome.8-10
occurswithin4to6weeksfollowingadulticidetreat-
ment.8.9
Large numbers ofworms can mechanically obstruct
Arteriographic abnormalities are apparent within a
the flow of blood,whether they are located in the
fewweeks of adultheartworm residence.Caudal and
venae cavae, right atrium, or pulmonary arteries.10a
In this circumstance, physical worm extraction may
immediatelyimprovecardiovascularfunction andclini-
cal signs. However, in most infected dogs, clinical signs
primarily reflect the host's responses to the worms and
their excretoryproducts,rather than their physical
presence.Clinical consequences include pneumonitis,
granulomaformation,pulmonaryendarteritis,throm-
boembolism,pulmonaryhypertension,andcorpulmo-
nale.
HOSTRESPONSETOLIVE
HEARTWORMS
Damagetothepulmonary arterialendotheliallining
is evidentwithin3daysofexperimental transplanta-
tion of adultheartworms intohealthy dogs.lPrior to
melarsomine administration, it is important that the
patient'scardiopulmonary complicationsbeimproved
as much as possible using oxygen,heparin,or other
supportive measures as required.Patients with severe
heartwormdiseasemayhavemarkedpulmonaryhy
pertension, thromboembolism and associated dyspnea,
hypoxemia, coughing, and hemoptysis. Anemia,
thrombocytopenia, disseminated intravascular coagu-
FIGURE30-1
lopathy, and ascites are often present. Echocardiogra-
Drawing of the surface of the pulmonary artery asit appears by
scanning electron microscopy.This injury can be seen within3
phymayreveal severeRVdilationwithdecreasedcon-
days afterheartworms arrivewithin the pulmonary circulation.
tractilityandreducedLVandaorticrootsizedueto
Endothelial cells(E)arerounded and disoriented compared with
inadequateRVoutput.Severelyaffecteddogswhose
normal endothelial surfaces.Leukocytes (L)that are ruffled adhere
cardiopulmonary status cannotbe stabilized may die
to a strip of arterial wall that has been denuded of endothelium.
Adhesion and activation of platelets (p)and leukocytes result in
prior to or within a few weeks of melarsomine treat-
release oftrophic factor(s)that stimulates smooth muscle cells to
ment.Heartwormsinthepulmonary arteriesproduce
form villi (see Figure 30-2).(From Rawlings CA,Keith JC Jr,
SchaubRG:Development andresolution of pulmonary disease in
endothelial swelling,widened intercellular junctions,
heartworminfection:Illustratedreview.JAmAnimHospAssoc
sloughing of longitudinal strips of endothelium,and
17:711, 1981, with permission.)
704DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
FIGURE30-2
Lightmicrograph of villi (V) projectingfrom the
surfaceofaheartworm-injuredpulmonary arteryinto
its lumen.Villi are composedof rapidly dividing
smooth muscle cells and fibrous connective tissue.
The baseof thevilli appears to arise from the tunica
media.The luminal surface,when viewed by scanning
electron microscopy,is covered by endothelium-like
cells.
accessory lobar arteries dilate,become tortuous,de
elimination of heartwormsby adulticidetreatment.15.16
velop aneurysms,and lose their normal tapering arbo-
Central arterial lesionsresolvemore completelythan
rization (Fig. 30-4). Smaller arteries appear to be
peripheral ones.15-17 Decreases in the diameter of the
abruptly pruned. Blood flow is diverted from ob-
large,lastcumonaryartries aredue,nlargea,
structed areas of the lung to the more normal lung
to the decline of pulmonary arterial pressure.16.18Re-
lobes.Arterial dilation and tortuosity, aswell as pulmo-
sidual fibrosis of themoredistal arteriesoftenremains.
nary hypertension,can resolve following reduction or
Increased interstitial densities occur on thoracicra-
FIGURE30-3
(A,B) Scanning electron micrographs (×100) of the surface
METRIC
of theright caudal lobar pulmonary artery of a heartworm-
infected dog,showing extensiverugose andvillousmyointimal
lesions.Bothlarge,round (A)and large,linear (B） lesions are
present.(C)Myointimal proliferation isvisiblegrossly on the
surface of an opened pulmonary artery.
CANINEHEARTWORMDISEASE705
sweptdistallyintosmallpulmonary arteries.There-
sponse atthepulmonary arterialsurfaceis an exacer-
bation ofthatdescribedfor liveheartworms.Exuber-
antvillousproliferationiscomplicatedbythe
developmentofthrombiandgranulomatousinflam-
mation about the dead heartworms.11 15. 16. 18 Blood
flowtocertainlung regionsbecomes severelyim-
paired16.17 (Fig. 30-6). Caudal lung lobes may become
severely consolidated,with impaired capacityfor gas
exchange or blood flow (Fig. 30-7).16-18 Severe
coughing, dyspnea, and hemoptysis may develop, and
increasedvascular resistance can produce acute right
heart failure.
OCCULTHEARTWORMINFECTIONS
FIGURE30-4
Thepercentageof occultheartworminfectionvaries
Postmortem pulmonary arteriogramfrom a dogwithheartworm
between 5 and 67 percent.20-26 It probably represents
infection.Theright caudal lobar artery(a)is dilated and severely
10 to 20 percent of the total infection in most regions
tortuous.Branchesfrom thelobar artery are also dilated and
tortuous,whereas their branches appearabruptly pruned (arrow).
of theUnited States.
The dilated arteries are large enough to contain heartworms and
Occult infections occur in several circumstances.27-29
sustain the most severevillous proliferation.
Microfilariae are not produced during the prepatent
period in dogswith single sexheartworminfections,
diographs andprobably resultfrom perivascular fluid
orwhenadultworms arerenderedinfertileasaresult
leakage and inflammatory cell accumulation.17 In-
of drug therapy.27. 28 In addition, occult infctions can
creased vascular permeability can also produce an alve-
resultwhenmicrofilariaearedestroyedbyimmune-
olar pattern (Fig.30-5).Alveolar densities typically
mediated processes.Prior to the introduction of the
resolve rapidly with appropriate treatment,whereas
macrolide antibiotics forheartworm prevention,uni-
interstitialchangesoftenpersist,even afterelimination
sex andprepatent infections accounted for 57 to85
of adult heartworms.2Much of the vascular pathology
percent of occult infections in the United States,Aus-
can be prevented with platelet-inhibiting drugs.18.19
tralia, and Japan.20-26 The extensive use of ivermectin
andmilbemycin oximeduringthepastfewyearshas
HOSTRESPONSETODEAD
probably greatly increased the percentage of drug-
inducedoccultheartwormcases.30,31Unisexinfections
HEARTWORMS
occurmorefrequentlyinregionsoflowheartworm
Themostseverepulmonarylesions occurafter adult
incidence,asfewerlarvae are inoculated into thehost.
heartwormshavediedandtheirfragmentshavebeen
Prepatent infections are common during thewinter
FIGURE30-5
Ventrodorsal thoracicradiograph depictingmixed
interstitial alveolarlung disease in thecaudal lobes.
Theright caudal lobar artery is large and tortuous
(arrows).
706
DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
and spring months in dogs that havebeen infected
during thepreviouslate summer orfall.Microfilariae
are absent from the circulation for 6 months following
inoculation.Maturefemalewormscontributemostof
the antigen detected by serologictests,andcirculating
antigen is not detectable until 7or 8months postinoc-
ulation.
Immune-mediatedoccultinfectionsresultfromhost
hypersensitivity tomicrofilarial antigens.32-35Antibody
(IgG) excess predisposes to occult infections.Anti-
body-dependentleukocyteadhesiontomicrofilariae
in thepulmonary capillariesresults in microfilarial
entrapment.3.35 Microflaria-leukocyte complexes are
engulfed byphagocyticcellsof thepulmonaryreticulo-
endothelial system, and granulomatous inflammation
ensues.Immune-mediated destructionofmicrofilariae
can produce specific clinical syndromes,such as aller-
gicpneumonitis andpulmonaryeosinophilicgranulo-
matosis.Upto70percent ofdogswithseverepulmo-
nary arterial disease have occult heartworm infections,
suggestingalargecontributionof theimmunere-
sponse to arterial lesions.
Occult heartworm infections also result from long-
FIGURE 30-7
term administration(≥6months)ofmacrolide agents
at prophylactic doses.30.36 Even when macrolides are
Ventrodorsalradiographdemonstrating partial consolidationof the
right caudal lung lobe of a dog 17 days postadulticide treatment.
withdrawn,microfilariae donotreappearformonths,
Air bronchograms are present(arrows),indicating an alveolar lung
pattern.hanimal xhbitdcoughingmoptysistachpna
pyrexia,tachycariapalmuousmmranesthargynd
anorexia.
if at all.30. 36 Initiation of monthly macrolide prophy-
laxisindogsharboringimmaturewormsconsistently
induces occultinfectionsif theworms arenotkilled.31
Microfilarial production is also suppressed by high
ivermectin doses (≥200 μg/kg) used to treat other
parasites.37Drug-inducedoccultheartworminfections
can usuallybe detected by antigen-detecting serologic
tests.
CLINICALEVALUATIONOF
HEARTWORM-INFECTEDDOGS
CLINICALSIGNSOFHEARTWORM
FIGURE 30-6
INFECTION
Right pulmonary arteriogram (enhanced by an illustrator)
demonstratingobstruction ofbloodflowto therightcaudallung
lobefollowing adulticide treatment.Distal arteries (large white
Clinical signs reflect the number of heartworms
arrow)donotfill,probably due to intraluminal thrombosis,
present,the duration of infection,and host response.
exuberantvillousproliferationsor deadheartwormfragmentswith
surroundinggranulomatousinflammation.Dead and dying
Most dogs are asymptomatic. Coughing and dyspnea
heartworms (open arrow)are characterizedradiographicallyby a
are themost common signs and are usually associated
crumpled silhouettein the area of sluggishbloodflow.Despite
with parenchymal disease of the caudal lung lobes.
severeangiographicobstructionofarterialflow,thisdogdidnot
haveclinicalcardiopulmonarysignsprobablybecauseitwasstricty
Edemaandinflammationaroundthearteriolesand
confined following thiacetarasamide treatment.(From Rawlings
small airways may stimulate coughing.
CA,KeithJCJr,chaubRG:Development andresolutionf
Eventually,increasedvascularresistance and pulmo-
pulmonarydiseaseinheartworm infection:Illustratedreview.JAm
Anim Hosp Assoc 17:711, 1981, with permission.)
naryhypertension developinheartworm-infected
CANINE HEARTWORM DISEASE  707
dogs. This decrcases cxercise ability and results in right.
lent. Successful therapy should return the dog to pre-
ventricular dilatiorn. hypertrophy, and failure.
1n-
infection status. Dogs with class 3 disease often do
blood flow and increases right ventricular work. Severe
severe clinical signs, worim extraction and antiplareler
discase restricts the ability to recruit arrerics for the
or anticoagulant treatment combined with cage con-
high blood-tlow rate necded for cxcrcise.16 Dyspnea
finement or an alternative melarsomine dihydrochlo-
results from the pulmonary vascular and parcnchyinal
nide
trcatmcnt regimen should be: considered.s 42a
 changes induced by adult heartworms, accompanying
 Such modifications may produce over 80 percent sur-
incrcase in pulnonary vascular resistance, and the
 re-
vival, cornpared with 40 to 50 percent survival whcn
sulting ventilation-perfusion mismatch. Arrerial hy-
standard therapy is used.39s w0
 poxemia exacerbares pulrnonary hypcrtension.3$
Signs of right-sided congestive heart failure, such as
ascites. develop lare. Physical examination may thcn
DIAGNOSIS OF HEARTWORM
reveal splitting of the sccond heart sound, a right
INFECTION
 apical gallop, distended jugular veins, and abnormal
lung sounds. Signs of hcart failure are often exacer-
bated by exercise. Cardiac cachexia develops with ad-
vanced heariworn disease and chronic right heart fail-
 The classic screening method that relied on identi-
urc. Hemoptysis occasionally occurs in untreated dogs
 fying microfilariae in venous blood has largely given
but is 1morc commonly observed following adulticide
way to highly sensitive and specific ininunodiagnostic.
therapy. It results from vascular and airway wall rup-
serologic tests. Antigen-dctecting serologic tests have
ture, probably induced by coughing. Bleeding usually
gained advantage because they can derect occult infec-
occurs in the caudal lung lobes, where vascular and
tions, which comprise about 20 percent of the toral
parenc hyinal changes are most severe.
numhcr of hcartworm cases. For this rcason, the inci-
 dence of falsely negative heartworn antigen tests is far
less than that of any microfilariae-dcrecting rmcthod. 3
CLASSIFICATION OF HEARTWORM-
INFECTED DOGS
IMMUNODIAGNOSTIC TESTING
Bascd on historical findings, clinical signs, physical
examination, thoracic radiograph asscssment, and lab-
Comnercially available immunodiagnostic tests de
oratory data, heartworm-infected dogs can often be
placed into one of thrcc classcs (Table 30-1),* Class 1
flarial concentration tests. Heartworm antigen tests 
dogs are asymptornatic or mildly symptormaic; class 2
 are very specific (98%), and false-positive results are
dogs have moderate diseasc; and class 3 dogs havc
uncommon when the tests are properly performed.4
Nonetheless, false-positive results pose a problem whcn
physical findings suggesting morc advanced hcart-
screning dogs where heartworm prevalence is low.
worrm disease include cxcrcise intolerance, persisternt
The predictive value of a positive test (the percent
or severe coughing, syncope, hemoptysis, weight loss,
of test-positive dogs that actually have heartworm infec-
 and ascites. Thoracic radiography most accurately rc-
tion) depends on test specificity and disease prcva-
flects the severity of heartworn disease.
lence.1s-1 In areas of low heartworm prevalencc, the
The prognosis for dogs with class 1 dlisease is cxcel-
TABLE 30-1
Classification of Heartworm Disease Severity Based on Signs, Physical Examination, and Radiographic Findings
Class
Clinical Signs
Fxamination Findings
Radiographic Findings
1
None to occasional cough
Xormal examination
No lesions
Oecasional cough and mild-to-
Incrcased lung sounds
Slight pulmonary arterial enlargement.
moderate excrcise
Fair general condition
Cireumscribed perivascular density
intolerance
plus mixcd alvcolar-interstitial
lesions
Persistcnt cough, moderate-to
Incrcased lung sounds
Moderate-to-severe pulmonary arterial
scvere cxercise intolerance
Accentuated or split S,
cnlargeent
Weight loss, cachexia
Right apical gallop
RV cnlargcment
Respiratory dlistress
Tachypnea, dysprica
Diffusc and sevcre pulmonary
Overl right hcart failure
infltrares
General loss of condition
708 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
lower than in areas of high infection prcvalencc.
of postadulticide complications. High worm burdens
Weakly positive test resulis should always be repcated,
and high levels of circulating antigen are much more
preferably utilzing a differcnr test, A positive microf-
common in the Caribbcan and Hawaii.
larial concentration test resolves the dilemma of unccr-
tain antigen test results.
MICROFILARIAE TESTING
Serologic tests detect the presence of marure female:
worms; live male worms contribute litle or nothing to
Testing for microfilariae is indicated in all heart-
worm-infected dogs. Microfilarial screening is essential
ogy tesr rcsults are rnost likcly to occur when the
in all dogs receiving or intended to receive diethylcar-
infection is recent (less than 7 nonths postinocula-
bamazine, Mierofilarial concentration tests (c.g., modi-
tion), or when female worms are absent or nuinber
fied Knott's or filrer tests) are rcasorably accurate, and
only a few. Anrigencinia is absent or too low to be
the choicc is a matrer of tradition and individual bias.
detecred up to 5 months postinoculation of Ls, and
Routincly, a drop of whole blood is hcld back frorn
false-negative test results can occur for up to 8
the concentration test sample for a direct smear. If
im ssop Suenqaa uaym jeodu si s!u s'sqiuou
the direcr smear is positive and the microfilariae are
 prepatent infections that were infected late in the pre-
identified as D). irmitis, the more timc-consuming con-
vious summer and tested in March and April.
centration test is unneccssary. Since the direct smear
Although sorne commercial antigen test kits can de-
 is less sensitive than concentration tests, a negative
tect the presencc of a single adult female worm,9
result. does not rule out infection. Over 90 percent
sensitivities are somewhar variable.* Falsely negative
of all dogs with circulating microfilariae have adult
test results arc common with less thar thrcc fcmale
infections.s The most accurate hearrworm screening
worms, particularly if they are yourger than l year
tests in dogs 6 to 7 morths of age are the microflariae-
old. A protein expressed by La hcartworm larvae has
detecting tests, becausc detectable antigen concentra-
recently becn identified and cloned by recombinant
tions are not usually prcsent until 8 months postinocu-
techniques.ta This antigen has been used cxperimen-
lation.
tally to detcct prepatent, single sex, and male worn
The microfilariae of D. immilis must be distinguished
infections, suggesting that improvements in serologic.
from those of Dipetalonema reconditum. Thc dircct wet
testing will overcome existing deficiencies.19a
smear prepared from a drop of venous blood can be
Currently, thrce companies (IDEXX Laboratories,
used for differentiation. In general, the concentration
Inc., Synbiotics Animal Healthi, and Rhone Merieux,
of D. immitis microfilariae is higher than that seen with
Inc.) produce all the hcartworm serology tests avail.
ID). reconditum, in which usually only a few are seen.
able in the United States. Most of thc available tests
Thc microfilariae of D. immitis tend to gyrate without
are enzyme-limked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) but.
 progressivc rnoveinent across the field, whereas those
one test (VetRed, Rhone Merieux, Inc.) is a hermagglu-
Of D. recomditum exhibit progressive, undulating move.
tination-based kit, and one (ICT GOLD HW) is an
Iment across the field. The D. immitis microfilariae are
immunochromatographic assay,so-51a Some tests require
larger, with a diarmerer as large as or largcr than that
serum or plasma, whereas others can be performed
of canine red blood cells.2 More spccific morphologic
using whole blood. Most tests employ positivc and
criteria have been defined based or the appcarance of
ncgativc controls; some are more convenient when
microfilariae fixed in 2 percenr formalin for the
large rurmbers of tests arc to bc run simultaneously;
Knott's test. Microfilariae of D. immitis are usually over
and some require more timc to perform. Sensitivities
290 microns in length and 6 microns in width, whereas
and specificities of some of the rapidly performcd tests
D. rrcondium are less than 275 microns long and 6
arc less than desirable. The various serology tests also
Inicrons wide. D. immitis has a tapered anterior end; D.
differ froin cach other relative to casc of interpreta-
reconditum has a blunt anterior end and a cephalic
tion.
hook."
 Antigen-detecting serologic tests are semiquantita-
 Only rarcly are microfilariae detected when antigen
tive—that is, a rapidly developing, strong reaction usu-
test results are negarive. For this reason, thc combined
ally indicates a relatively large worm burden.2 This
use of thcsc tcsts for routine scrcening purposes is not
informatior may be useful, as dogs with higher worm
burdens arc at risk for more severe pulmonary throm-
recommended.
boernbolic cvents following trcatment. Dogs with a
high concentration of hcarrworm antigen should be
CLINICAL EVALUATION OF
mcticulously cvaluarted and treated with caution.
HEARTWORM-INFECTED DOGS
 Most heartworm-infccted dogs in the continental
United States have low worn burdens as asscssed sero-
logically, and thoracic radiographs and clinical signs
Determination of hematocrit, blood urca nitrogcn
are adequate to estimare disease severiry and thc risk
(BUN); and urine specific gravity is adequate for
CANINE HEARTWORM DISEASE
709
young and asymptomatic dogs, but we prefer to obtain
with chronic right-sided congestive hcar failure. More
a complere blood count with platelet. count, serum
offen, hypoproteinemia is dilurional in such patients
chemistry profile, and urinalysis in all candidares for
as excess sodium and water is rctained and plasma
adulticide therapy. Testing for Imicrofilariae is indi-
volume increascs. Proteinuria is also a commmon se-
quela of heartworm diseasc. Although protcinuria is
by serology. Conversely, an adult antigen test is useful
mild in most patients, moderate-to-severe proteinuria
whenever the diagnosis is made by identification of
indicates scvere glomerular discase, particularly when
microfilariae.
associated with hypoalbuminemia. Irrcversible glomer-
Although thc vast majority of microfilariae-positive
ular disease is uncommon bur results in renal failure
 dogs have live adult worms, the worm burden cannot
and the nephrotic syndromc.
be predicted by the numbcr of circulating microfila-
riae. ln contrast, a strong antigcn test rcaction usually
indicates a high worm burden. Such dogs are at in-
 creased risk of severe postadulticide thromboembolic
RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS
complications. Comparison of prcadulticide with 3-
 month postadulticide antigen testing can identify per-
Thoracic radiography is the rnosr useful and cost-
sisting adult worms and their rclative numbers.
Thoracic  radiographs provide more  information
 ing the severity of heartworm discase. Common pul-
about the severity of heartworm disease than any other
monary arrerial abnormalities include (l) increased
single test. (see later),54 ss Only in selecred cases does
prominence of thc main pulmonary artery, (2) cn-
 an clectrocardiograrm (ECG) or echocardiograrm pro-
larged lobar pulmonary arterics, (3) enlargemcnt 0r
vide useful information.
abnormal tapering of the peripheral pulmonary arter-
ies, (4) interstitial and alveolar lung changes, and (5)
right ventricular enlargement.57-s9 Arterial lesions and
CLINICAL PATHOLOGY
 associated parenchymal disease tend to be more scvere
in the caudal lung lobes.16 The diameter of the caudal
Most of the hcinatologic abnormalities associated
lobar arteries at their interscction with the 9th rib
with heartworim infectiors are mild. Increascd num-
should be no larger than the narrowest diameter of
 bers of eosinophils and basophils arc a common but
the 9th rib as viewed on the dorsal-ventral projcction.2.
nonspecific finding in hcartworim-infected dogs. Such
57. ss The lateral radiograph is used to measure the
changes are often observed in dogs with occult heart-
light cranial lobar artery and to characterize the pa-
worm infections or allcrgic pncumonitis. The absence
renchymal patrern in the caudal lung lobes. The diain-
of eosinophilia or basophilia is not predictive of frec-
cter of the righr cranial lobar artery at the intersection 
dom from hcartworms. Eosinophil and basophil num-
with the righr 4th rib should nor cxceed the rarrowcst
diameter of the 4th rib.
 Excessive emphasis is oftern placed on identifying
A mild, nonregenerative anemia is commonly ob-
right ventricular cnlargemernr. Radiographic assess-
served in dogs with chronic and scvere heartworm
ment is subjective, as the morphology of the cardiac.
infection. A more severc, regenerative anenmia is sorne-
silhouctte varics with breed.37 59 Overinterprctation of
times seen in dogs with the caval syndrome or severe.
right ventricular enlargement in round-chested dogs is
pulmonary arterial disease. Rcgenerative anemia re-
common and may cause a falsc-positive diagnosis of
sults fron intravascular hemolysis and is often accom-
hearworm disease.59
panied by hemoglobinuria. It occurs most cominonly
The frequency of associated radiographic abnormali-
in dogs with caval syndrome or severe pulmonary
ties varies. In onc referral institution, 86 percent.
thrombocmbolic disease.  Thrombocytopenia is ob-
of 200 microfilaria-positive dogs had radiographic
served in dogs with low-grade or chronic disscminated
changes typical of heartworm infection.?7
Approxi-
intravascular coagulation, and in dogs with scvere pul-
ventricular cnlargerment.37. ss These percentages vary
 flammatory leukograms may occur in dogs with large
with the spectrum of disease seen in a particular prac-
pulmonary thrombi or infitration by plasma and in-
tice area. Dogs that are more heavily infected with
flammatory cells,
hcartworms usually have more severe radiographic
Hypoalburninemia occurs in dogs with chronic or
signs (Fig. 30-8). Approximately 60 to 70 percent of
 scvere hearrworm disease either as the result of pro-
heartworm-infected dogs have enlargemennt of the
tein-losing glomerulonephropathy (amyloidosis or im-
main pulmonary artery.i, ss Lobar arterial disease (en-
mune cornplex disease), or as a 1manifestation of right-
largement and/or tortuosity) is prcsent in approxi-
sided congestive hcart failurc. Hepatic insufficiency
mately
 one half of our patients and is easily
 assessed.37 ss When the diamcters of the lobar arteries
710DISEASES OF THE HEARTAND CIRCULATION
B
FIGURE30-8
Dorsoventral (A) and lateral (B) thoracic radiographs of two dogs with severe heartworm disease.
The lobar arteries arevery large and tortuous (arrows).There ismarked enlargement of themain
pulmonary artery (P)and right side of the heart.
areincreased,thelikelihoodofheartworminfectionis
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
high.57.58
The most severe parenchymal lung changes occur
Echocardiography can be used to (1)evaluate right-
followingadulticidaltreatmentwhendeadheartworms
sided heart function,(2) estimate the number and
arewashed into the distal pulmonary arteries.Radio-
location of heartworms (Fig. 30-9; see also Fig. 31-5),
graphicsignsincludealveolarandinterstitialchanges
and(3)determinetheseverityofpulmonaryhyperten-
(see Fig.30-7).Similar changes are observed less fre-
sion (Doppler studies). When pulmonic or tricuspid
quentlyprior to adulticidetreatment.Typical alveolar
valve insufficiency is present, pulmonary artery pres-
patterns include radiographic densities with ill-defined
surescanbequickly andrapidlyestimatedbymeasur-
fluffy marginsthat coalesce,that contain airbroncho-
ing the peak velocities of the regurgitant jets. Dogs
grams,that exhibitlobardistribution,orare centrally
withseverepulmonaryhypertensiontypicallyhavea
located.These are most commonly observed adjacent
dilated right ventricle with reduced contractility, right
tothelobarpulmonary arteriesinthecaudaland
atrial enlargement,andenlargedpulmonary arteries.
intermediate lung lobes.59-61
Not alldogswith severeheartworm diseasehavehigh
Alveolar lungpatterns usuallyregressrapidly follow
wormburdens.Class2dogshave ahighermean anti-
ing successfuladulticide treatment.These infiltrates
gen concentration than class 3 dogs. This indicates a
and associated clinical signs often resolve quickly with
reducedwormburdenbutmoreseverevascular dis-
corticosteroidtreatment.59,60Increasedinterstitialden-
ease in the latter group.6la The prognosis and form of
sitiesindicatefibrosisproducedbychronicdisease and
treatmentselectedareaffectedbywormburdenas
aregenerallyirreversible.
wellastheseverityofpulmonaryvasculardisease.
HEARTWORMADULTICIDE
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
THERAPY
Electrocardiographyisnotaveryusefultestfor
heartworm disease. At least 90 percent of infected dogs
Nearly allheartworm-infected dogs are acceptable
havenormal ECGs.5Severe pulmonary arterial disease
candidatesfor treatment.Successratesfor class1and
is alwayspresentbythetimetheECGcriteriaforright
class2dogs areveryhigh.Class3dogs oftencanbe
ventricularhypertrophybecomeunequivocal.Inover
helped,although the risk of severe,life-threatening,
50percent of such dogs,overt right-sided congestive
post-adulticidalpulmonarycomplications ishigher.
heart failure (CHF) is present.40. 41, 55 Thus, the main
Modifications of treatment protocols used in dogs with
valueof theECGistocharacterizethenatureof an
milder disease are strongly advised for class 3 patients
auscultatedarrhythmia.
andclass2dogswithhighwormburdens.Dogswith
CANINEHEARTWORMDISEASE
711
FIGURE30-9
Echocardiograms of a beagle-cross
dogwithsevereheartworm disease.
Frame 1:Two-dimensional echo
RA
(right parasternal long axis view)
showing heartworms in theright
atrium (RA)and right ventricle (Ru),
which appear aswhite,echogenic
specks (arrows).TheRA and Rv are
dilated whereas the left atrium (LA)
and leftventricle arereduced in
size.The interventricular septum (S)
isflattened in thisview and in the
short axisview in Frame 2.Frame 3:
M-mode echocardiogram recorded
at thelevel of therightventricle
(Ru)and aorta (A).The aortic valve
leaflets are seen toclose gradually
3
during systole(arrous)due to
decreasedforwardstrokevolume
fromheartworm disease.Normally,
PA
they stay open throughout systole,
appearing as a“box,”and close
abruptly at end-systole.TheRv is
enlarged.S,septum.Frame 4:Two-
RA
dimensional echocardiogram (left
apical long axis view)recorded 2
D
days after frames 1-3.Pleural
effusion (PIF)has developed.The
main pulmonary artery (PA) is
dilated.Heartworms(arrow）are
present in the right atrium (RA).
(Courtesy of Dr.N.Sydney Moise.)
serious concomitant problems,such as hepaticinsuffi-
normal liver function tests,biopsy-confirmed severe
ciency,renal failure,or the nephrotic syndrome,are
hepatic fibrosis, and icterus.
apy. Also,the treatment of some very old dogs may
not be appropriate,particularly if the patient has class
MELARSOMINEDIHYDROCHLORIDE
1 or 2 disease and the infection is not life-limiting.
Arsenical drugswith adulticidalpropertiesinclude
Melarsomine dihydrochloride (Immiticide,Rhone
thiacetarsamide(shortcomingsincludea narrow thera-
Merieux) is an organic arsenical. Unlike thiacetarsa-
peutic index, lack of efficacy against young female
mide,it is highly effective against all ages and both
heartworms,and the requirement for—and hazards
of—-intravenous administration),and melarsomine di-
trials inEurope and the United States4066,67,70.71 have
hydrochloride (good efficacy against immature and
demonstratedmelarsomine'sefficacyindogswithmild
youngadultheartwormswhich aretheleast sensitive
tomoderatelysevereheartwormdisease.
to thiacetarsamide).62.6s Every dog should be carefully
For standard therapy, melarsomine is administered
evaluated prior to initiating therapy and re-evaluated
at a dosage of 2.5mg/kg by deep intramuscular injec-
prior to each injection.Anorexia,persistent vomiting,
tionintotheepaxial lumbarmusculature,and it is
andicterus areindicationstoabort arsenical therapy.
given as two injections at a 24-hour interval.6 During
Suchcomplications arerarely encounteredwithmelar-
injection,care must be taken not to deposit the drug
somine but can be expected inup to 20percent of
in the tractastheneedleiswithdrawn.66Theneedle
dogs receiving thiacetarsamide.64.65
should be withdrawn quickly and digital pressure ap-
No clinicalpathologic abnormalityispredictive of
plied over theinjection sitefor 1 minute.These two
acute arsenic toxicityin overtlyhealthydogs.Routine
injections eliminate adult worms in approximately 75
monitoring of serum liver enzymes during therapyis
percent of infected dogs, and seroconversion occurs in
not helpful, as serum levels of the hepatic enzymes
up to 90percent of all dogs by 8 months after the
oftenriseindogsthattoleratetreatmentwithout other
initialtreatment.67Fourmonthsfollowinginitialther-
adverse sequelae.40,41 Contraindications toarsenical
apy,two additional injections can be given at a 24-hour
therapy in dogs include hepatic insufficiency (indi-
interval to eradicate any remaining worms.66
catedbyhypoalbuminemia,moderatelytoseverely ab-
A modified protocol for treating class 3 dogs and
7121
 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
class 2 dogs with high worm burdens consists of a
and frequent toxicity 72-76 The standard treatument regi-
single initial injcction (2.5 mg/kg), followed in
1
men is 2.2 mg/kg (0.22 ml/kg) given as four inrrave-
month by two injections at a 24-hour interval. Approxi-
nous injections over a 2-day period. It is important that
mately 50 percent of the worms are killed by the
the interval between injections docs not cxcccd 12
reduced initial dosage regimen, therefore diminishing
hours. Each injection should be given into a peripheral
the severity of postadulticide thromboembolic compli-
vein as distally as is feasible. Under no circuumstarccs
cations. One to several months later, when the pulm0-
should thiacctarsamide be injccted unless there is 100
nary response to the initial trcatmenr has subsided, a
pcrccnt certainty of proper vein cannulation. To facili-
sccond coursc of therapy is given to climinatc rc-
tate injectiors, we use a butterfly (scalp) needle and a
maining worns.
two-syringe techniquc. Aftcr carnulation of the vein, a
Adverse cffects are usually mild, consisting of tender-
suirable solution is injected in suffcient volume to
ness and mild sweling at the injection site. Some dogs
 cnsure that cxtravasation does not occur The flushing
have a reduccd appetite for 1 to 2 days. More pro-
 syringe is detached, the thiacetarsamide-containing sy-
nounced lamcness and damage to the sciaric nervc
ringe is artached, and the injection is made over a
can result if melarsomine is injected into the hind
 period of 15 to 30 seconds. Multiple injections at the
leg. Systemic side effecis are rarely serious enough
same site are not recommended. Some clinicians pre-
 to warrant interruption of treatment. However, dogs
fer ro use indwelling catheters and report no complica-
overdosed with twice the recommended dose of melar-
tions. If an indwelling cathctcr is cimployed, a flushing
somine show obvious distrcss, salivation, tachycardia,
solurion should be injccted prior to each trcarment
tachyprica, colic, restlessness, and apprchension within
t0 cnsure that cxtravasation of thiacctarsamide does
scvcral hours of administration, followed by shock.
not occur.
Toxic reactions to melarsomine are trcated using Brit-
Extravasation of  thiacetarsamide  produces pain,
ish anrilewisite (BAL), 3.0 mg/kg administered two 0r
heat, and swelling within an hour. Topical DMSO (di-
threc times 3 hours aparr. Although melarsomine is
methyl sulfoxide) or a DMSO-soluble corticosteroid
 a more cffective adulticide than thiacerarsermide, the
rmixture should be applied several times daily for sey-
severity of post-treatment pulmonary thromboembo-
eral days. This treatment usually reduces tissue nccro-
lism in dogs treated with melarsomine is reportedly no
sis.
worse than that observed with thiacetarsamide. All
An important limitation is that imrmature worms,
factors considered, the therapcutic index of melarsom-
cspecially females, are not very sernsitive to the drug.63.
 ine is superior to that of thiacctarsamide sodium
.7>6 Esscntially 100 perccnt of male heartworms aged
2, 6, 12, and 24 1months arc killed using thc standard
thiaccrarsamide treatment protocol. By comparison,
THIACETARSAMIDE
about 40 to 66 percent of the female worms 4 to 12
months old are killed.7 Increasing the dosage by as
Thiacetarsamide (Caparsolatc, Sanofi) is suffcicntly
  s      n
stable in aqucous solution for storage in multiple dose
Centagc of heartworms killed, but the risks of toxic.
vials. It deteriorates when exposed to light, room tcm-
rcactions and postadulticidal pulmonary thromboem-
perature. or air, resulting in a yellow-orange discolor-
bolic disease are also increased.? Increasing the total
ation or precipitation.
number of injections to six given over a 3day period
Its mcchanism of action is not cerrain, bur there is
does not improve the percent of heartworms kiled 7%. 7
a dircct relatiorship between blood arsenic concentra-
 Despite survival of soinc heartworrns, thiacetarsamide
tions and adulticide efficacy Half-life is approximately
treatment usually results in improvcment in clinical
45 minutes, and more than 80 pcrccnt. of thc drug is
signs and partial resolurion of pulrmonary vascular dis-
climinated during the first 48 hours after injection.63
case.
Peak concentrations of arscnic are similar following
When rnicrofilarernia persists following administra-
each injection, but the posrdistribution concentration
tion of thiaccrarsamide and two microfilaricidal doses
rises with each dose. Tissue concentrations are highest
of ivermectin, it is likely that some adult worms have
in the liver and kidneys. Low blood concentrations
survived. Several therapeutic options are available.
 persist for up to 12 days after standard treatment.
One may repeat the standard thiacetarsamide treat-
The most important determinant of efficacy is the
ment regimen immediately, but since most resistant
duration of worm cxposure to the minimum effective
infections are due to young female worms, immediate
concentration of arsenic. Worm kill appears to be less
retreatment may not be successful. Increasing the dos-
in1 dogs that metabolize and/or excrete thiacetarsam-
age of thiacetarsamide by 10 to 20 percent improvcs
ide rapidly than in dogs that eliminate thiacctarsemide
worm kill but also increases the risk of toxicity77 A
morc slowly.
preferable alternative is to place these dogs on macro
Thiacerarscinide's stecp dose-response curve and
lide prophylaxis and perform an antigen test 3 rnonths
narrow tlierapeutic index produce variable cfficacy
post-thiacctarsamide. If the antigen test is positive,
CANINE HEARTWORM DISEASE 713
adulticide trearmcnt failure is confirmed, and re-
thcrapy, or to prevent PTE in dogs with severe pulino
treatment with thiacctarsemide or melarsominc can be
nary arterial disease,77 7# Pulmonary thromboermbolism
considered. This decision to retreat depends on the
 is a common cormplication of heartworm therapy (see
severity of the initial discase, the degrce of clinical
01 0 uass 4uanhay so si 31 '(2-0g '9-og 't-og s
improvement observed, and the dog's agc, health sta-
 21 days postadulticidal treatment. On occasion, PTE
tus, and working requireinents. Quantitative or semi-
occurs sporrareously. Clinical signs of PTE include
quantitative antigen-derecting assays may be helpful. If
deprcssion, fever,
 anorexia, respirarory distress,
retrcatment with thiacerarsemide is clected, we prefer
 coughing, epistaxis, hemoptysis, pale mucous mem-
to wait 6 to 12 months to ensure that the young worrns
brancs, tachycardia, and weak pulscs. A1n inflammatory
have matured and become more sensitive to the drug.
 leukogram, thrombocyropenia, and mildly prolonged
If owners elect not to retrcat, the dog should bc placed
 activatcd clotting timc arc common laboratory abnor-
on hearrworm prophylaxis with iverinectin. Periodic
   e    s
monitoring of thoracic radiographs is also prudent.
to 150 IU/kg, SQ, tid) frequently produces clinical
improvermenr within 24 to 48 hours, The dose should
be adjusted to prolong the activatcd partial thrombo-
DISCONTINUATION OF
plastin timc (aPTT) 1.5 to 2 times norrmal. Heparin
therapy is continued for 5 to 21 days, with withdrawal
THIACETARSAMIDE TREATMENT
being gradual over several days. Dogs expericncing
PTE prior to treatnenr with an adulticide arc at in-
Adulticidal therapy should be discontinued in the
 creased risk for a recurrent episode following adultici
face of impending toxicity. Treatmcnt delay of 1 to
dal therapy.
 several months is rarcly of consequence. The principal
Low-dose calcium heparin, 50 to 100 IU/kg, subcuta-
indication to abort organic arsenical trcatment is acute
hepatic toxicity. This is recorded in up to 20 percent
neously three tirmes daily, has also been successfully
of dogs receiving thiacetarsamide and occurs most
used to reduce the sevcrity of postadulticidal thrombo-
ermbolic complications in dogs with severe pulmonary
often after the first injcction. This reaction is uncom-
arterial discase.78 It is begun 1 to 2 wecks prior to and
mon with administration of melarsomine.
 Protracted, repetitive vomiting and persistent an-
is continued for 4 to 6 weeks aftcr adulticidal treat-
menr. Such therapy is not complctcly cffectivc, but
 orexia are the principal clinical signs of toxicily. Icterus
 is an uncommon bur serious complication that may
postadulticide  1mortality  is reduced  conpared  with
 lcad to death. Inadequate pretreatment evaluation or
dogs treated with aspirin or indobufen.78
 inadequate patiernt observation increases the risk and
severity of acute toxicity. Although thiacetarscmide re-
ASPIRIN
actions car be scrious, there have been no deaths
associated with organic arsenical toxicity in our prac-
We do not recommend aspirin for the treatmenr of
tice during the past 18 years.
asymptornatic dogs. Aspirin has been used prophylac-
When acute toxicity necessitates discontinuation of
tically to reducc the severity of laboratory-induced pul-
treatment, supportive care is provided, The pet should
be discharged only when hydration is adcquate, appe-
curring severe pulmonary arterial discase40 41 5. no0 79-86
titc has returned, and renal function is normal. Restric-
(see Figure 30-8). Aspirin is adiministered for 1 to
tior1 of activity and a high-carbohydrate, low-fat. dict
several weeks (5-7 mg/kg, daily) prior to and during
 are prescribed. There is no proven benefit from "liver-
treatment, and for several weeks postadulticide.
By
sparing drugs" containing methionine, choline, and
 inhibiting platelet adhesion and activation, myointimal
 inositol. The entire trearment regimen is repeated 4.
proliferation is reduced.
to 6 wceks later, at which time acute toxicity is seldom
Clinically, aspirin has been combined with pro-
tracted cage confinement, Thus, it can be argued that
adversc reaction tolerate a second course of thiacetar-
cage rest alone may be responsible for improved sur-
samide.
vival. Aspirin and cage confinement for severe heart-
worm disease do nor totally eliminate thromboembolic
coinplications. Treatment success may require careful
ANCILLARY DRUG THERAPY
patient rmonitoring and supportive care, heparin, and
corticosteroids.41
HEPARIN
CORTICOSTEROIDS
Heparin is oftcn used to trcat symptomatic pulmo
Corticostcroids have bcen successfully used to trcar
nary thromboeinbolisn (PTE) following adulticide
hcartworm-infected dogs with eosinophilic pneumoni-
714 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
tis, pulmonary infiltrates, and eosinophilic granulomas
of the forceps are opened, advanced slightly, closed,
devcloping prior to and after adulticide therapy 50. 60.
and thc forceps are withdrawn, hopefuly with 1 to
84, s In the former two circumstances, prednisone (1.0
sevcral worms. The procedure is repeated until several
 mg/kg daily) is administered until there is clinical and
 passages fail to retrieve worns.
radiographic evidence of improvement.
If all the worms are removed, additional treatnent
The indications for and routine use of corticoste-
is not necded. Otherwise, adulticide thcrapy is admin-
roids in heartworm-infected dogs need to be critically
istered several weeks after clinical inprovemernt has
re-evaluated. Routine prophylactic admirnistration is
occurred. In any case, an antigen-detecting scrologic
not recommended. Corticosteroids are procoagulant
tcst is indicated in 3 months to determine whether any
and can rcduce pulrmonary blood flow when adninis-
heartworms rermain.
tered for scveral weeks. In addition, corticosteroid ad-
Iministration during and immediately following thiacet-
arsamide can decrease worrn kill.
STAGED TREATMENT WITH
MELARSOMINE
TREATMENT MODIFICATIONS
 Modification of the standard 1nelarsomine protocol
WITH SEVERE HEARTWORM
DISEASE
bers has bcen a successful alternative protocol. 2. a
Initially, only one dose of melarsomine (2.5 mg/kg).
rather than two, is adiministercd,12 66 After 1 month
Hcartworrm-infected dogs with more advanced pul-
of restricted activity, throinboembolic complications,
which are usually mild, will have subsided. The re-
monary arterial disease and/or high worm burdens
are challenging to trcat. Mortality of 50 to 60 percent
maining worins are ther killed using the standard
has bcen reported in such animals that reccive stan-
dosage (two intramuscular injections, 2.5 mg/kg, given
dard treatment with thiacetarsemide.10. 41 Dogs with
at a 24hour interval). This same method has been
class 3 disease typically show loss of vigor, exercise
recommended for dogs with class 2 disease and a large
intolerancc, syncope. persistent or severe coughing,.
worm burden.st Using this strategy, the initial worm
and/or signs of right-sided congestive hcart. failure,40-12
kill is limitcd, as is the severity of postadulticide throm
They tend to be older than dogs with class 1 and 2
bocinbolic lung complications. Survival of greater than
disease and are more likcly to have an occult infcc-
 90 percent has been reported using this modified 1nel-
'shop g sse ui alqeea si uapinq uom au zs uo
arsomine dosage schedule.67
but on average, it rmay be lower than that observed in
Additional restriction of activity is recom mended for
class 2.67 Radiographic findings in class 3 dogs include
 at least l month. Microfilaricidal therapy is provided,
 marked enlargeiment of thc main pulmonary artery
if appropriate, 4 to 6 wecks affer the second coursc of
melarsomine thcrapy. Reinfection during thc treat-
segrnent and lobar pulinonary arterics, as well as tortu-
 Osity and blunting of the peripheral arteries (sec Fig.
ment period is not usually a problem since melarsom-
ine will kil most of the migrating larvae. A heartworm
30-8). Parenchymal lung infiltratcs are also frequently
   r  o  s 
antigen test is performcd 3 months after the second
identifed when large numbers of worms are imaged
course of melarsomine to ensurc that worin cradica-
 by echocardiography, or by serologic detection of high
tion has been achieved.
circulating heartworm antigen concentration. To im-
 prove survival, four alternative protocols have been de.
vised:
ASPIRIN AND CAGE REST
A third approach is to reduce platelet function with
HEARTWORM EXTRACTION
aspirin (5 to 7 mg/kg once daily) and restric1. exercise
prior to thiacetarsamide therapy.10.1 Approximately 80
When severe heartworm disease is associated with a
percent survival has been achieved with this regimen,
high worm burden, most of the worms can be cx-
compared with 40 to 50 percent survival with standard
tracted from the right heart and pulmonary arteries
thiacetarsernide treatment. Aspirin reduces the severity
uilizing a long, flexible alligator forceps with fluoro-
of pulmonary arterial discase, thus inproving blood
scopic guidance.* The procedure is performed under
flow. We always combine aspirin treatrnent with strict
anesthesia, whicli is generally tolerated with few com-
cage confinement, This reduces demands on the right
plications. Either jugular vcin is surgically isolated and
side of the heart by climinating the nced to cxpel large
the forccps is introduced via venotomy and manipu-
stroke volumes through a poorly compliant pul1nonary
latcd into the heart and pulmonary artcries. Thc jaws
arterial system, thercby reducing pulmonary artcry
CANINE HEARTWORM DISEASE
715
pressure. Severe cxercise restriction reduces the com-
ing, attention to detail, and appropriate ancillary treat-
 plications of thiacetarsemide therapy and contributes
Iment.
to improved suurvival. Some argue that similar results
might be achieved with restricted activity alone, cou-
pled with thiacctarsamide treatment.
CHRONIG COR PULMONALE WITH
 Aspirin and cage confinement are continued for 3
ABSENT OR LOW WORM BURDEN
weeks prior to treatment, during trcatinent, and for
 3 weeks thereafter. This protocol is tinc-connsuming,
Some dogs present with clinical signs of severe cor
intensive, and expensive. Thromboembolic complica-
pulmonale without circulating microfilariae and a
tions often occur prior to or following thiacctarsamide
therapy. Strict patient rmonitoring of clinical status.
weak or negative artigen test, indicating either a low
worm burden or the absence of adult heartworins.
blood count, and platelet count is required. Appro-
 They exhibit exercise intolerance, syncope, or signs of
papaoid s! (uuedoq Aensn) aderon saoddns send
right-sided CIIF. They may have a history of prior
when complications arisc.
heartworm trcatment or chronic heartworm infection
without trcatinent, or no prior diagnosis of heartworrn
infection. Thoracic radiographic changes are consis-
LONG-TERM LOW-DOSE HEPARIN
A fourth approach to the treatment of class 3 dogs
clude cnlargcment of the main pulmonary artery scg-
is the prophylactic use of heparin to reduce pulmonary
 mcnt and lobar pulmonary arterics, and tortuosity and
thromboernbolisrn. Calciun heparin (50 or 100 IU/kg
pruning of the nore peripheral pulmonary arteries.
SG tid) was adninistered to heartworm-infected dogs. f2
Echocardiography can confirm pumonary hyperten-
sion, evaluate right hcart function, and identify worms.
Survival was 97.5 percent in heparin-trcated dogs, com-
pared with 73.5 percent in dogs treated with antiplate-
let drugs. Postadulticide cormplications were reduced
heartworm disease are present in some but not all
affected dogs at rnccropsy.
 Iore than with aspirin therapy. We have used heparin
 -nmpe oi soud syoom z o) I (pn 5s sy/( gz) urpos
Dogs with sevcre cor pulmonale are difficult to treat.
cidal treatment, continued during the 2 days of adulti-
successfully. Although adulticidal therapy may be ad-
cide treatment, and extended for 3 weeks post-therapy.
Ininistered when there is evidence of live heartworms
(e.g, a weakly positive antigen test), the chronic patho-
 Strict cage confinement is recommended.
'The relative merits of anti-inflarnmatory drugs (aspi-
 logic changes coupled with low worn burden suggest
that improveiment is unlikely. Corticosteroids, aspirin,
rin) and anticoagulants (heparin) for trcating or pre-
venting trearment complications are controversial.
hydralazine, and diltiazcin thcrapy have been used but
When aspirin treatment is started concurrently with
without significant benefit. Some dogs can survive with
severe exercise restriction, particularly if right-sided
thiacetarsamidc, the severity of arterial disease is
congestive hcart failure is absent.
reduced and the inpairment of blood flow is les-
sened a Iowever, in a largc prospective study, low-
dose calciurm heparin reduccd postadulticide compli-
IMMUNODIAGNOSTIC
been unable to substantiatc the benefits of aspirin or
SEROLOGY TO ASSESS
thrormbolylic drugs.87. 8x Neither aspirin nor a variety
ADULTICIDAL EFFICACY
of vasodilating and throinbolytic drugs significantly re.
duccd pulmonary arterial pressure following the injec.
tion of hcartworm segmcnts and autologous blood
clots.* Luethy and coworkers compared the severity
Heartworm serologic tests now in use are based on
of thrornboeinbolic disease in thrce groups of dogs
antigens associated with mature adult female worms.
following adulticide treatment. One group was treated
Live male worms contribiute nothing to a positive anti-
with aspirin (15 to 22 mg/kg daily), one with heparin
 gen test result."s Antigenemia is usually absent by 12
(suficicnt to producc a 1.5 to 2 times increase in
weeks post-therapy8-oi If a weakly positive test result is
clotting times), and one group served as controls. Both
obtained, an additional antigen test could be done in
treatment groups had lower angiographic scores for
1 to 2 months since seroconversion will occasionally
severity of pulmonary vascular obstructions, but nei-
 occur as late as 5 months postadulticide treatment.
ther was significantly less than the untreated control
Although immunodiagnostic serology is highly sensi-
dogs.
tive, falsely negative test results can occur if there arc
The aforementioned treatinent modifications do not
less than approximately 1 to 2 adult worms that arc
ensure a successfiul outcome and do not negatc thc
younger than 8 months old.* This fact rmay bc of little
necessity of close paticnt obscrvation, careful monitor
consequencc, sincc persisting low worm burden may
716DISFASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
not produce adverse consequenccs whcn all adult
 of the caudal lung lobes. Characteristic radiographic
heartworms have been killed.
abnormalities associated with heartworm pneumonitis
If antigenemia persists, whether or not to retrcat is
include diffuse, bilateral, linear interstitial and alveolar
dcbatablc. A decision to avoid retreatment can be
pulinonary lung lobc infiltrates (Fig. 30-10). These
bascd on (l) vcry weak antigenemia, (2) a marked
changes can reseinble those of pulnonary blastomyco
decrcase in the strcngth of the antigen test result as
sis and pulmonary edcina. Clinical pathology abnor-
compared with the pretrcatinent value, (3) mild or
malitics include cosinophilia, basophilia, and hyper.
 absent initial clinical signs, (4) abscnce of radiographic
globulinemia. Transtrachcal lavage cytology typically
evidencc of pulmonary pathology, (5) marked im-
consists of a sterile, cosinophilic exudate with some
provement in clinical and radiographic sigrs of heart
nondegcnerate ncutrophils and macrophages.
worm disease, (6) a nonworking dog, and (7) serious
concomitant problems. Factors favoring retreatnent
THERAPY. Corticosteroid hormone treatment (predni-
include (l) strong and persistent antigenemia. (2)
sone or prcdnisolone, 1 to 2 mg/kg daily, or dexameth-
initially severe clinical and radiographic abnormalities,
asone, 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg daily) is uusually successful.
(3) persistent clinical signs of heartworm discasc, (4)
Most dogs cxperience rapid and complete resolution
a working dog, and (5) no apparent. contraindications
of clinical and radiographic abnormalities within 3 t0
to retrcatment."
5 days of trcatiment; some improve within 24 hours.
Treatrment is usually givcn orally but may be adininis-
tered intramuscularly or intravenously to sevcrely af-
HEARTWORM-RELATED
fectcd dogs. Corticostcroid horinone trcatincnnt is
CLINICAL SYNDROMES
stopped when there is clinical and radiographic evi-
dence of maximum resohution of pulmonary infil-
 trates. Thiacetarsamide treatment should be initiated
 A number of pathologic sequelae to heartworm in-
soon thereafter.
fection  can be charactcrizcd into  specific clinical
syndromes. They are related to worm burden, host-
 parasite immune or allergic responses, severity of pul-
PULMONARY GRANULOMAS IN
monary myointimal proliferation, and coinplications
HEARTWORM-INFECTED DOGS
from heartworin death.
EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMATOSIS
Eosinophilic pulmonary granulomatosis is a clinical
EOSINOPHILIC PNEUMONITIS
syndrome that is often associated with heartworm in-
fection. It can be confuscd with primary and mctastatic
A hypcrsensitivity-rype pneumonitis devclops in ap-
pulmonary neoplasia, systemic mycoses, and lymph0-
proximately 10 to 15 pcrcent of dogs with immune-
eun mou o sueodu s! 1 1ot s'ssoeoues ploeu
mediated occult hcartworm infcctions.s This syn-
not all histologic diagnoses of eosinophilic granuloma-
 drome is characterized by pulnonary infltrates with
tosis represent the sane disease, and not all are due
eosinophilia (PIE) and rescinbles tropical eosinophilia
to heartworin infection. Eosinophilic granulomas pri-
(pulmonary eosinophilia), a microfilarial diseasc of
marily affect the lungs, but approximately 50 percent
human_ bcings -s Immune-mediated occul heart-
 of necropsied dogs also have eosinophilic infiltration
worm diseasc results from antibody-dependent leuko-
 and granulomas in thoracic lymph nodes, trachca, pe-
cytc adhesion to microflariae and their subsequent
ripheral lymph nodes, liver, splcen, abdominal lyinph
entrapment within the pulnonary capilaries,84 ss The
nodes, small intestine, and kidney Interalvcolar septa
inflammatory rcaction includes neutrophils and cosin-
are often thickened by fibrous conncctive tissuc, lyn-
ophils. The pncunonitis syndrome occurs when a
phocytes, and plasma cells. Alveoli often contain cosin-
hypersensitivity devclops and is characterized by an
ophilic granular material and some macrophages.
unusually high number of cosinophils in the inflam-
Granulomas consist of dense accumulations of large
matory response.*4. 3
cpithclioid cells, macrophages, and eosinophils that
obliterate the normal architectire. A few plasma cells,
CLINICAL FINDINGs. Affected dogs experience variable
lymphocytes, and mast cells are also present. Areas of
respiratory distress. Clinical signs are usually progres
necrosis are occasionally observed. Soine pulmonary
sive during a period of a few weeks to 6 months or
arteries and arterioles are infiltrated by eosinophils. At
longer: Coughing and dyspnca are the predominant
thc periphcry of granulonas, alveoli can be identified
clinical signs, but severely affected dogs may experi-
 and are characterized by proliferation of type II pncu-
encc mild cyanosis, anorexia, and weight loss. Bilateral,
mocytes with infiltrates of cosirnophils and macro-
diffusc “crackles" can be auscultatcd over the arcas
phages, A mixed eosinophilic-neutrophilic inflarnma-
CANINEHEARTWORMDISEASE717
B
FIGURE30-10
Lateralradiographsillustratingdiffuixednrstitialandalvlarnltratsnhlung
dogwithoccult heartworm disease-associated allergicpneumonitis.Prednisone therapywas
administered.Notice the radiographic lung improvement when comparing the pretreatment (A）and
post-treatment (B)films.
tion occursinzones surrounding thegranulomas.
andhemoptysismay occur.This syndromemay de-
Bronchial smooth muscle hypertrophy is prominent in
velopindogswithheartworminfectionsthathave
granulomatous areas.Perivascularlymphocytic-eosino-
been treated as well as untreated. Coughing, dyspnea,
philic infiltration is inconsistently associated with small
and pulmonary crackles are themost common physical
arterioles.
abnormalities.Fever,muffledheart and lung sounds,
peripheral lymphadenopathy,and weight loss areocca-
CLINICAL sIGNs.Chroniccoughing and dyspnea occur
sionallydetected.
mostcommonly.Respiratorysigns often occurforsev-
CLINICAL,PATHOLOGICAL,ANDRADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS.
been present for as long as 12 months in some cases.
Characteristic radiographic findings include (1) multi-
Moreseverely affecteddogsexhibit decreased appetite,
ple pulmonary masses (Fig.30-11) from1 to 20 cm in
weight los,exercise intolerance,and lethargy.Fever
diameter,(2)mixed interstitial-alveolar or interstitial,
B
FIGURE30-11
Lateral(A) and ventrodorsal(B) thoracic radiographs showing multiple pulmonary interstitial
nodules of varying sizein thelungs of a dogwith heartworm disease and eosinophilic
granulomatosis.
718DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
alveolar, and bronchial lung patterns, (3) hilar lymph-
by pleomorphic inononuclear cells, often with an an-
adenopathy, (4) pleural effusion, and occasionally, (5)
 giocentric patern and resulting in vascular oblitera-
mediastinal or intratrachieal masses. Hematologic ab-
tion.102 Historical, clinical, and radiographic findings
normalitics most coinmonly include eosinophilia and
are very similar to those described in dogs with cosino-
ncutrophilia, which are prcsent in up to two thirds of
philic granulomatosis. Surgical excision or biopsy is
 dogs with cosinophilic pulmonary granulomas. Abso-
required to distinguish lymphomatoid from eosino
lute eosinophil counts arc often betwecn 1oo0 and
philic granulomas. Treatment with prednisolone and
6000 and can excecd 50,000/pl. Basophilia occurs in
cyclophosphamide has been recommended.u" Many
approximately 50 percent of affected dogs. Ilyper-
'puodsa1 1ou op sbop
globulinemia is occasionally prcsent. Transtrachcal la-
vage may yield cxudates rich in eosinophils. Plcural
effusion, when present, usually contains a high per-
CAVAL SYNDROME
centage of cosinophils. Peripheral lymphadenopathy is
uncommon; when present, fine-needle
: aspiration
yields incrcased numbers of eosinophils.
'This devclops when large nurnbers of worns (fron
 50 to > 200) mature over a short period of tine and
MEDICAL THERAPy. Many dogs with eosinophilic pul-
localize in the cranial and caudal vena cavae and right
monary granulomas respond initially to immunosup-
atrium.13 110 Caval syndrome is virtually absent in areas
 pressive and cytotoxic drug therapy. Prednisone (1
of low heartworm incidence, but is common in some
to 2 mg/kg orally once daily) produces partial and
highly endermic regions along the Gulf Coast. Most
occasionally complete remission, The latter is more
cases occur in spring and early summer in male dogs
likely with combination therapy such as prednisone
that spend most of thcir tine outdoors. These infec-
plus azathioprine (Imuran, Burroughs Wellcome).
tioris probably represent a massive exposure to infec-
Granulomas coinmonly recur when the dosage is re-
tive larvac during the previous summer and early fall.
duced, when the interval between dosages is pro-
Caval syndrome is associated with narked pulmonary
longed, and even when the dosage and interval are
hypertension and mcchanical interference with tricus-
not altered. Adulticide trcatment is adininistered after
 pid valve closure, lcading to tricuspid rcgurgitation
significant reduction of lung pathology and improve.
and elevated central venous pressure.107
ment of clinical signs has been accomplishcd. Disease
progression or relapse occurs in most cascs within 1
CLINICAL FINDINGs. Clinical signs result from cardio
to 3 months. and additional chemotherapy is usually
genic shock, intravascular hemolysis, and hepatic and
ineffective.
renal failure. Hemolysis is caused by erythrocyte
trauma from worms and fbrin deposition within the
 SLRGICAL REMovAL. Surgical excision of eosinophilic
vena cavae and right side of the hear.tw-no Increased
granulomas has had limited application. At surgcry,
erythrocyte fragility results from alterations in serum-
multiple srmall granulomas not visualized by radiogra-
frce and estcrified cholesterol concentrations and leci-
phy are usually prescnt. Evcn when lung lobectomy is
thin acyltransferase activity.
performed in dogs with apparently localized disease.
 Caval syndrome is recognized by acute collapse in
jesions can develop in other lobes. Dogs with eosino-
high-risk dogs displaying tachypnca, tachycardia, pale
philic granulomas are often poor anesthetic risks.
Inucous membranes, weak and thready pulses, hemo
Nonetheless, given the limited success of medical ther-
 globinernia, hemoglobinuria, a gallop heart rhythm, a
apy, lobectomy is a reasonable option when the discase
heart murmur, jugular vein distention or pulsation,
is localized. Follow-up chemotherapy should bc admin-
and a split second heart sound. Ascites, icterus, and
istered if addicional disease is discovcred at surgery.
 hcrmoptysis are less common findings. Clinical patho-
Adulticidc treatment is administered after surgical rc-
logic abrormalities include regenerative anemia, an
 covery wher antigen tests indicate heartworim infec-
inflanmatory leukogram, eosinophilia, and increased
tion,
hcpatic cnzyine activity. Most afccted dogs have circu-
 lating microfilariae. Azotemia, hemoglobinuria, and
proteinuria are also common. It is inportant to test for
LYMPHIOMATOID GRANULOMATOSIS
coagulation abnorinalitics. Dissciminated intravascular
Pulmonary lymphomatoid granulonatosis is a rare
coagulation is suggcsted by thrombocytopenia, pro-
 pleomorphic lymphoid ncoplasm that can affect dogs
longed activated clouing timc, hypofibrinogencrmia.
of all ages without sex or brced predilection.1o2 About.
 20 canine cases have been reported, 3 of which had
Radiographic cvidencc of right sided heart enlargc-
been previously treated for heartworms. Gross lesions
ment and enlarged, tortuous pulmonary arteries sup-
consist of solitary or multiple, firm, nodular pulmo-
 ports the diagnosis. Common ECG findings inchude
nary masses. Histologic examination shows infiltration
a night axis deviation and tachyarrhythmias.10. 108. 109
CANINE HIEARTWORM DISEASE 719
Echocardiography can confirm the diagnosis by de-
 intermediate lobar arterics, and may producc partial
tccting largc numbers of heartworms in the venae
or complete lung lobe consolidation. Severe thrombo-
cavae and right atrium.'o* Indirect evidcnce of pulmo-
cytopenia and an inflammatory leukogram or mature
nary hypertension is indicated by enlarged pulinonary
neutrophilia are often present.
arteries, paradoxic septal motion, and right ventricular
dilatation and hypertrophy. Left ventricular dimen-
THERAPy. Thrombolytic drugs are expcnsive, and they
sions may be reduced. Doppler studics can document
have not been critically cvaluated in dogs with heart-
tricuspid and pulmonic insufficiency and pulmonary
worm-associated PTE. Heparin is used in 1nost cases to
hypertension.
limit further thrombosis.78 81 We use 75 IU/kg subcutal-
neously cvery 8 hours, which is continued until the
THERAPy. The only elfective treatment is prompt cx-
platelet count is normal. This usually necessitates ap
traction of as many worms as possible from the venae
proximately 5 to 7 days of heparin therapy, although
cavae and right atrium as soon as the syndrome is
up to 3 weeks of treatment is required in some dogs.
recognized.'o Most dogs are in shock. Chemical re
Others advocate a higher heparin dosage (100-200
straint should be minimal, and local anesthesia is pre-
IU/kg every 6-8 hours), which is adjusted to achieve a
ferred. To support blood pressure and cardiac output,
1.5 to 2-fold increase in clotting time (aPTT). Oxygen
fluid therapy may be nceded during worrn extraction.
   n e   q 
to 100 ml/kg/rmin) is also recommended.:w Oxygen
A techniquc for worin removal has becn de-
scribed uvs With the dog positioned in left lateral re-
reduccs pulinonary artcrial pressurcs and irnproves
cumbency, the right jugular vein is isolated and ligated
perfusion.111
cranially, and the ligature is used to elevate the vein
Response to therapy is usually rapid. Clinical im
provement, increased platelet count, and improved
blood gas values may occur within 24 to 48 hours.
approximate location of the heart base. Extension of
Hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria usually resolve
thc neck is often required when a rigid forccps is
 rapidly Strict cage confineinent is necessary for at least.
einploycd. Perforation of the verna cava or right atrium
3 wecks.
We oftern prescribe corticosteroids (prednisone, 1.0
can occur unless gentle instrumcnt handling is prac-
ticed, The instruinent jaws are openned and the forceps
mg/kg daily) in dogs with PTE. Whereas short-term
advanced slighuly; the jaws are then closed and the
administration (3 to 5 days) is probably not harmful,
forceps retracted, removing worms with each passage.
extensive use is not recommended since corticoste-
The process is repeated until five or six successive
roids are procoagulant and reduce pulmonary blood
attermpts fail to extract a worm. Successful treatment is
low.79. fi0,85
associated with removal of at least 50 worms. Judicious
We usually continue aspirin therapy in dogs with
-uu are soinsesu sanoddns iouo pue aderap pm
severe (Glass 3) heartworm disease unless there is evi-
taincd following surgery. Clinical and hematologic im-
derrce of gastrointestinal bleeding such as hematein-
provement occurs rapidly in successfully treated dogs.
esis, decreasing hematocrit, or melena. Melena is not,
Adulticide therapy is administered several weeks fol-
however, an carly or sensitive indicator of intestinal
lowing surgery, depending on the rate and degrce of
bleeding.
postsurgical improveinent.
MICROFILARICIDAL THERAPY
POSTADULTICIDE PULMONARY
THROMBOEMBOLISM
IVERMECTIN
Adulticide therapy is the most inportarnt recognized
 All dogs with circulating microfilariae should receive
cause of acute pulmonary thrombocmbolism (PrE)
rmicrofilaricidal treatinent within 4 to 6 weeks of adulti-
in dogs.
cidal therapy. Although not approved by the FDA for
this purpose, iverrmectin is the most practical, effective,
CLINICAL FINDINGs. Clinical signs of PTE include
and commonly used agent. To eliminate microfilariae,
coughing, dyspnea, fever, hemoptysis, weakness, leth-
ivermectin is administered as a single oral dose (50
argy, pulmonary crackles, and pale mucous mem-
μg/kg) in the morning. The dog is observed in the
branes. Thoracic. radiographs of dogs with heartworm-
hospital for adverse reactions duing the day and is
 associated PTE usually reveal marked enlargement of
discharged in the afternoon.. i3 Either (he equine
thc lobar arteries with parenchymal pulmonary in-
product Eqvalarn (Merial) or the cattle product Ivomec
filtrates40. 4 (Fig. 30-7). These infiltrates are patchy or
(Merial) can be adninistered. Both drugs are generally
hazy, tcnd to be most severe adjacent to the caudal or
dilutcd 1:9 (the former with water for immediate usc
720 DISFASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
and the latter with propylene glycol for extended shelf
microfilaricidal dosage (50 μg/kg).l1α Neither Ciba-
Sy oz iad [ I jo asesop e e paiisupe pue '(a
-dns io puauosu xueduo pue yoion ou xiiao
orally. Iverrmcctin rapidly kills microfilariae and eradi-
port offlabel use of their products.
cates thcm in at lcast 90 pcrcent of dogs by 21 days
 Because there is a risk of adverse reactions following
post-treatment.1 Most microfilariac are killed within
microfilaricide treatment, some advocate that acute
hours of ivermectin adininistration.
microfilaricide treatment not be administered. Rather,
ivermectin treatment should be administered (e.g.
ADVERSE EFFECTS
Heartgard or Heartgard-30 Plus, Merial) soon after
adulticidal trcatmcnt. The rnicrofilariae will disappcar
Adverse reactions occur in less than 10 pcrcent of
over the ncxt several months. Until that tine, however,
dogs.12. t13 The prevalence and severity of adverse reac
such dogs serve as reservoirs.
tions are related to high microfilarial counts (>
10,000/ml). Reactions begin within several hours and
usually consist of lethargy, voiniting, and occasionally
Heartworm Prophylaxis
diarrhea, which are selflimiting. Severe reactions,
which may be life-threatening, are manifested by tachy-
cardia, tachypnea, weakncs, pale mucous membranes.
Hcartworm prophylaxis is recomnended for all dogs
and decreased blood pressure. These are uncoinmon
and rmay be effectively treated with soluble (rapid-
at risk of infection. In general, it is recommended year-
round in tropical and subtropical climates. One study
acting) corticosteroid preparations and intravenous
has demonstrated that little or no transmission occurs
Crystalloid fluid adiministration. Death from such reac
in the southeastern Lnited States during the coldest.
tions is rarc and is usually attributable to late recogni-
months of the ycar, like December and January.t19
yy ym shop auog adeiaui menbapru io/pue uon
microflarial concentrations rmay experience mild leth-
Preventive medication is usually begun when the aver-
age daily temperature exceeds approximately 58° F.120
argy and aunorexia for l to 2 days after ivermectin
Soine clinicians recommend year-round prophylaxis to
administration.
Ivermcctin at a dosage of 50 μg/kg appears to
improve owner conpliance.
IIcartworm testing is an integral cormponent of pro-
be safe for administration to collie and collie-type
phylactic thcrapy. All dogs placed on hcartworm
prophylaxis for the first timc should be both microfil-
dosages under 100 pg/kg. Severe, life-threatening rc-
ariae- and antigen-free,7 All dogs that will reccive
actions reported in a subset of collics have occurred
diethylcarbamazine products must have a ncgative mi-
alt dosages of greater than 200 μg/kg and were charac-
crofilarial concentration test prior to drug initiation
terized by acute ataxia, mydriasis, weakness, seizures,
and at least annually thereafter 17 We recommend an-
co1na, and high mortality." Recovery requires several
nual antigen testing in all dogs regardless of the type
wecks and intensive care.
of heartworm prophylaxis used. Although some have
questioncd the nced for annual testing in dogs taking
CONFIRMATION OF EFFICAGY
monhly preventives, poor client conpliance is a reality
that cannot be ignorcd. Failure to properly increase
Most microfilariae arc killed within 24 hours of a
the drug dosage in largc, rapidly growing puppics rnay
singlc dose of ivermectin. However, a few microfilariac
also cause prophylactic failure.
Imay survive up to 3 weeks post-treatment. Conse-
 The choice of prophylactic drug is influenced by
quently, a 1microfilarial concentration test should be
two characteristics of the available products: (l) daily
versus monthly administration, and (2) concornitant
a prophylactic reginen is instituted. If positivc, the
control of intestinal helminths.
ivernectin protocol should be repeated. If microfila-
riac persist 3 weeks after a second administration,
adulticide failure should be considered.
DAILY PROPHYLAXIS USING
DIETHYLCARBAMAZINE
MILBEMYCIN OXIME
Diethylcarbamazine (DEG) has stood the test of
Milbemycin oxime (Interccptor, Ciba-Geigy) is mi-
tine, is safe, and is highly efficacious, Since it kills ID.
crofilaricidal at the prophylactic dosage of 0.5 to 1.0
inmitis larvae at the Ls-Ia molt stage, this narrow
mg/kg.us Some clinicians routinely prescribe Intercep-
window of opportunity necessitates daily administra-
tor for microfilaricidal use, for which it is highly effec-
tiorn. DEC is available in tablets, chewable tablets, and
tive. In general, the risk and type of adverse reactions
liquid; it is dosed at 6.6 mg/kg. Dogs must be microfi-
are sinilar to those associated with ivermectin at its
lariae-frec whcn DEC is initiated. Acute, potentially
CANINE HEARTWORM DISEASE
721
lifc-thrcatening adverse rcactions are likely (15
10
Iministered al a monthly dosage of 6 to 12 μg/kg. At
85%) when DEC is administered to microfilareimic
this dosc, Heartgard can be safcly administered in the
dogs.121-123 Although dogs with less than 50 micro-
face of circulating microfilariae. At a dosage of 50 pg/
filariae/ml of peripheral blood seldom react, microfi-
kg, ivermectin's antilarval action can be extended to 3
larial concentrations are rarcly determined in clinical
months postinoculation of Ls, with approximately 90
practice. Nondose-dependent lethargy and gastrointcs-
percent efficacy* Administration of this high dosage
tinal reactions are seen within approximately 1 hour
 can be considered when a monthly dosage has been
of administration. Vomiting, defecation, and diarrhea
missed.
Imay occur Bradycardia, signs of reduced cardiac out-
 Currenuly, ivermectin is the drug of choice to pre-
put. and peripheral blood pressure may develop. Some
vent superinfection in dogs with persisting adult worms
affected dogs then bccorme very weak, salivate, and
 e ai, e s i  so pu
develop shock.1 Dogs surviving less severe reactions
when it is used at prophylactic doses for I year,1so.150a
experience recurrencc with each dosage, and subse-
The monthly prophylactic dosage (6 μg/kg) of Heart-
quent reactions tennd to exacerbate. These rcactions
S S ui aa (%ce <) Ay s! ogps
are related to the prcsence of microfilariae and gravid
adult worins whien treatment is started 4 months af-
female worms. If a dog receiving DEG is found to be
ter inoculation of I.s and continued for a ycar30 130
microflaremic, continued daily use may not produce
 In contrast, milbemycin oxime (500 μg/kg), given
advcrse reactiors. However, should DEC administra-
monthly during the same period, was effective in less
tion be stopped for as few as 4 days or longcr, rcinstitu-
than 50 percent of the dogs.
tion can result in the aforementioned rcaction.12-124
 Ivcrmectin is safe for usc in collies at the prophylac-
Extended parasite control is provided by the addi-
tic dose, and adverse reaction cffects of any type are
tion of oxibendazole (Filarabits Plus, Norden Labora-
torics) to control roundworms, hookworms, and whip-
rmcctin plus pyrantel painoate) providcs a broader
worms as well as heartworns.12 Although this drug is
spectruin of control to includc roundworns and hook-
highly popular and efficacious, hepatotoxicity has been
worins while maintaining the convenience of monthly
uncoinrmonly associated with its use. Toxicity is charac-
 administration for hcartworm prevention.128. 129
terizcd by incrcascd serum hepatic enzyme activity
and, in some cases, abnormal hepatic function tests; it
is usually selflimiting once the drug is withdrawn.
MILBEMYCIN
Milbernycin oxime (Interceptor, Ciba-Geigy) is a
highly effcctivc, monthly macrolidc prophylactic that
MONTHLY PROPHYLAXIS USING
also controls roundworm, hookworm, and whipworm
MACROLIDE ANTIBIOTICS
infections,131 13 The drug is safe in collies, but it is
not recommended for dogs with circulating nicrofila-
 A number of macrolide antibiotic. drugs are available
riae, since the prophylactic dosage (0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg)
for heartworm prophylaxis, with some providing ex-
is also microfilaricidal. The resulting adverse reactions
arc similar to those described in some dogs recciving
when administered monthly, since larvae up to 2
 ivermcctin at the microfilaricidal dosage.
 se  aq  ae se   s
monthly usc of thcse drugs causes gradual disappear-
ance of circulating microfilariac in dogs with adult
MOXIDECTIN
heartworims. This may be due to the cffect of macro-
Moxidectin (American Cyanainid) is a highly effcc-
tive, safe, macrolide prophylactic drug administered
Amicrofilaremic infections also devclop in dogs that
are placcd on macrolides morc than 4 months after
adininistration to collies's8 and can be given to mi-
bcing inoculated by infected mosquitoes. Thus, anti-
croflaremic dogs without fear of reaction, since it is
 gen-detecting serologic tests should be used for annual
not microflaricidal at this dosage,159
screening. It is also prudent to use serologic tests when-
 ever heartworm prophylaxis is initiated more than sev-
eral months into the *'season." An antigen test should
REFERENCES
be performed 6 to 8 months after monthly prophylaxis
 is initiated and then annually thereafter,
1. Heartworm Infcction Incidence Map I986. Proceed-
VERMECTIN
ings, I Iearlworm Symposium, Washington, D.C., Ameri-
carn Hcartworm Society, 1986, inside cover
Ivermectin (and IIeartgard-30 Plus, Merial) is a
2. Rawlings CA. Heartworim Disease in lDogs and Cats.
highly effective macrolide prophylactic drug when ad-
Philadelphia. WB Saunders, 1986
722
DISFASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
3. Lewis RE, Losonsky JM. Sex and age distribution of
immitis, with special reference to periodicity Am J Trop
dogs with hcarlworm diseasc. In Otto GF (ed): Proceed-
Med 15:371, 1935
ings, Heartworm Symposium, 1977. Bonner Springs,
22. Carlisle CI. The incidencc of Dirofilaria zmmitis in dogs
KS, Veterinary Medical Publishing Company, p 8
in Qucensland. Austral Vet J 45:535. 1969
3a. Walters LL. Risk factors for heartworm infection in
23. Kume S. Canine Heartworm Disease; A Discussion of
northern California; Abstract. Program of thc 8th Tri-
the Current Knowledge. Gainesville. Fl., Cniversity of
ennial State of the Heartworn Symposium, 1995, p 16
Florida Press, 1970, p 44
4. Calvert CA, Rawlings CA. Canine hcartworm dliscase. In
24. Watson AD. A survey of caninc filariasis in Sydncy
Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy Vl. Phila-
Austral Vet J 49:31, 1973
delphia, WB Saunders, 1983. p 348
 25. Streitel RH. Stromberg PC, Dubey JP. Prevalcnce of
 5. Scoles GA. Dickson SL. New foci of caninc heartworm
 Dirofilaria immitis infections in dogs from a hunane
associated with introduction of new vector species: Aedes
shclter in Ohio. J Am Vet Med Assoc 170:720, 1977
aibopictus in New Orleans and Ae. sierrensis in Utah;
26. Jackson RF. A sturdy on thie filler technique for the
Abstract. Program of the 8th Iriennial State of the
detection and identification of canine microfilauiae. In
Heartworm Symposium, 1995, p 17
Otlo GF (ed): Procecdings, Heartworin Symposium.
6. Genchi C, Di Sacco B, Cancrini G. Role of vectors
Aulanta, Veterinary Medicine Publishing Cormpay,
in the epidcmiology of canine and feline heartworm
1978, p 31
infection in Northern Italy. In Soll MD (ed): Proccedl-
27. Anataphruty M. Studies on chemotherapy of parasitic
ings, Heartworm Symposium. Austin, TX, American
helminths. Efficacy of ivermectin on the circulating
Heartworim Society, 1992, p 39
microfilaria and embryonic development in the female
7. Orihel TC. Morphology of the larval stages of Diroflaria
worm of Dirofilaria zmmitis. Jap J Parasitol, 31:317, 1982
immitis in dogs. J Parasitol 47:25l, 1961
28. Knight DH, Campbell WC, Weiner DJ, et al. Microfilari-
8. Rawlings CA, McCall JW. 1.cwis RE. The rcsponse of the
cidal efficacy of ivermectin in adulticidc treated and
caninc's heart and luugs to Dirofilaria immitis. J Ain
untreated hcartworm infected dogs. In Otto GF (cd):
Anim [1osp Assoc 14:17, 1978
Proceedings, Hcartworm Symposium. Washington,
9. Rawlings CA, Keith JC, Schaub RG. Development and
D.C., Anerican Hleartworm Society, 1986. p 19
resolution of pulmonary dliscase in heartworm infec-
29. Rawlings CA, Dawe DL, McCall JW, et al. Four types of
tion: Ilustrated review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:711,
occult Dirofilaria immitis infection in dogs. J Aim Vet.
1981
Med Assoc 180:1323, 1982
10. Jackson RF, Kcith JC, Schaub RG. Distribution of heart-
 30. Bowman DD, Johnson RH, Clrich ME, ct al. Effects of
worins in the right sidc of the hcart and adjacent vessels
long-terim aclministration of ivcrmectin or milbeimycin
of the dog- J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 149:515, 1966
antigenemia in dogs with patent hcartworm infections.
l0a. Ishihara K, Kitagawa H. Sasaki Y, et al. Changes in
In Soll MD (ed): Proceedlings, IIcartworm Symposium.
cardiopulmonary values after heartworm removal from
Austin, TX, Amcrican Hcartworm Society, 1992, p 151
pulnonary artcry using flexible alligator forceps. Jap J
 31. McCall JW, McTier TL, Supakorndej N, ct al. Clinical
Vct Sci 50:731, 1988
prophylaxis of experimentally induced infcctions of
11. Schaub RG, Rawlings CA. Pulmoary vascular response
during phascs of canine heartworm disease: A scanning
308 beginming at four monihs PI. Minneapolis. Ameri-
clecuron microscopic study. Am J Vet Res 41:1082, 1980
cann Association of Veterinary Parasitologists, July 17-
12. Schaub RG, Rawlings CA, Kcith JC. Platelct adhesion
20,1993
 and rmyointimal proliferation in canine pulmonary ar-
 32. Knight. DI. Heartworm disease. In Ettinger SJ (ed):
tcries. Am J Pathol 104:13, 1981
Texibook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. Philadel-
13. Kcith JC, Schaub RG, Rawlings CA. Early arterial injury-
phia, WB Saunders, 1983. p 1097
induced myointimal proliferation in caine pulmonary
33. Wong MM. Studies on microfilaremia in clogs. I1. L.cvels
arterics. Vet Res 44:181, 1983
of microfilarenia in relation to immunologic responses
14. Adcock JL. Pulmonary arterial lesions in caninc dirofi-
of the host. Am J Trop Med H lyg 13:66, 1964
lariasis. Am J Vet Res 22:655, 1961
 34. Wong MM, Sutcr PF, Rhodc EA. Dirofilariasis without.
15. Rawlings CA, Losonsky JM, Schaub RG. Post-adlulticidc
circulating microfilariae: A problem in diagnosis. J Am
changes in Dirofilaria immitis-infected beagles. Am J Vet
Vet Mcd Assoc 163:133, 1973
Res 44:8. 1983
33. Wong MM. Experimental occult. dirofilariasis in dlogs
16. Rawlings CA, Lewis RE, McCall JW. Development and
resolution of pulmonary arteriographic lesions in hcart-
worm disease. J A1n Vet Med Assoc 16:17, 1980
cast Asian J Trop Mcd Public H1lth 5:480, 1974
17. Rawlings CA. Cardiopulmonary function in the dog
36. 1.ok J, Knight DI1, laPangh DA. Kinetics of Dirofilaria
with Diroflaria immitis: During infection and after trcat-
immits microfilarcmia regimen of 1milbemycin oxine.
ment. Am J Vct Rcs 41:319, 1980
In Soll MD (ed): Procccdings, Heartworm Symposium.
18. Rawlings CA, Losonsky IM. Lewis RE. Development and
Austin, TX, Amcrican Hlcartworm Society, 1992, p 143
resolution of radliographic: lesions in canine heartworm
 37. Plue RE, Seward RL, Acre KE, ct al. Clearance of Diroff-
disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 178:1172, 1981
laria zmmitis microfilaria in dogs using 200 μg/kg iver-
19. Rawlings CA, Keith JC, Lewis RE, ct al. Aspirin and
mcctin subcutancously. In Otto GF (ed): Proceedings,
predisolone modilication of  radiographic changes
HIcartworim Symposium. Orlando, FI., Veterinary Medi-
causedl by adulticide treatment in dogs with hcartworm
cinc Publishing Company, 1983. p 153
infection. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:131, 1983
38. Rawlings CA, Losonsky JM, Lewis RW. Susceptibility o!
20. Otto GF. The significance of microfilaremia in the diag-
dogs with heartworm disease to hypoxia. Ain J Vet Res
nosis of heartworm infection. In Otto GF (cd): Proceed-
38:1365, 1977
igs, Heartworm Synposium, 1977. Atlanta, Veterinary
39.
.Vczzoni A, Gcnchi C, Raynaud J-P. Adulticide efficacy
Medicine Publishing Compay, 1978, p 22
of melarsormine (RM 340) in dogs with mild and scvere
 21. Hinman EH. Stucdlics on the dog heartworm, Dirofilaria
latural heartworm infcctions. In Soll Ml) (ed): Pro-
CANINE HEARTWORM DISEASE
723
ceedings, Heartworim Symposium. Austin, 1X, Ameri-
52. Rawlings CA, Tonelli Q. Lewis RE, ct al. Semiquanlita-
can IIeartworm Society. 1992. p 231
tivc test for Dirofilaria immitis as a prcdlictor of thrombo-
40. Calvert CA, Thrall DE. Ircatmcnt of canine heartworim
embolic complications associated with heartworm freat-
disease coexisting with right-sidle heart failure. J Am Vet
ment in dogs. Am J Vet Res 54:914, 1993
Med Assoc 180:1201, 1982
53. Courtney CH, Zenng QY. The structurc of heartworm
41. Calvert CA. Treatinent of heartworim disease with asso-
populations in dogs and cats in Florida. In Oto GF
ciatcd severc pulmonary arterial discase. In Otto GF
(cd): Proceedlings, IIeartworim Symposiun. Charleston,
(ed): Proceedings,
, Icartworm Symposium. New Or-
SC, Anerican Heartworm Society, 1989, p 1
leans, 1986, p 231
54. Calvert CA, Losonsky [M, Brown J. Comparisons of
42. Ishihara K, Sasaki Y, Kitagawa H. Removal of canine
radiographic and clectrocardliographic abnormalities in
heartworms using flexible alligator forceps. In Otto GF
caninie heartworm disease. Vet Radiol 27:2, 1986
(ed): Proccedings, Heartworm Symposiuin. Austin, TX,
 55. Knight DIL. Hleartworim discasc. Adv Vet Sci Comp Med
American Hleartworm Socicty, 1989, p 33
1:107,1977
42a. Ishihara K, Sasaki Y, Kitagawa II. Clinical anid patho-
 56. Rawlings CA, Prestwood AK, Beck BB. Eosinophilia and
 logical effecis of hearrworm rcmoval from the pulmo-
basophilia in Dirofilaria immitis and Dipetalonema recond-
nary arteries using flexible alligator forceps. In Otto GF
tum. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:699, 1980
(cd): Proceedings, Heartworm Symposium. Austin, TX,
57. losonsky JM, Thrall DF, Lewis RE. Thoracic radio-
American 1Ieartworm Society, 1989, p 45
graphic abnorimaliics in 200 dogs with spontancous
43. Courtney ClI. Guidelines for thc use of parasitologic
heartworm infections. Vet Radiol 24:120, 1983
and serologic screcning of heartworm infection. In Soll
58. Lewis RE, Losonsky JM. The frequency of roentgen
MD (ed): Proccedings, Heartworm Symposium. Austin,
signs in heartworm discasc. In Otto GF (edl): Procccd-
TX, American Ieariworm Socicty. 1992. p 1
ings,Heartworm Symposium.Atlanta,Veterinary Med
44. Tonelli Q. Factors affccting the accuracy of enzyme
cine Publishing Company, 1976. p 73
inmunoassays for Dirofilaria immitis aduli antigen. In
59. Rawlings CA, Keith JC, Losonsky JM, ct al. Aspirin and
Otto GF (cd): Proceedings. Heartworm Symposium.
Charleston, SC, American Heartworm Socicty, 1989,
nary arterial diseasc in heartworm infection: Arterio-
p 161
graphic study. Am J Vet Res 44:821, 1983
45. Courtncy CH I, Zcng QY. Applications of heartworm im-
60. Rawlings CA, Keith JC, Lewis RE, et al. Aspirin and
munodiagnostic tests. In Otto GF (ed): Proceedings,
prednisolone modification of radiographic changes
Hleartworm Symposium. Charlcston SC. American
caused by adulticide treatment in dogs with heartworm
Hlcartworm Society, 1989, p 167
infection. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 182:131, 1983 
46. Atwell RB, Dixon G. Necropsy-confirimed test results
61. l.osonsky JM. Thrall D. Lewis RE. Thoracic radio-
using a wholc blood, rapid immunoassay for detection
graphic: abnormalitics in 200 dogs with spontaneous
of heartworm antigen. In Soll MD (ed): Proceedings,
heartworm infections. Vet Radiol 24:120, 1983
Heartworm Symposium. Austin, TX, Ainerican Hlcart-
 6] a. Dunavent B, Keister DM; Tanner P, et al. Correlation 
worm Society, 1992, p 11
betwcen heartworm dlisease classification, serum anti-
47. Grieve RB. Advances in thc immunodiagnostic diagno-
gen concentration, and associated clinical pathology
sis of Dirofitaria immitis infcction. Semin Vet Med Surg
parameters, Abstract. Program of the Sth Triennial
2:4, 1987
State of the IIcartworm Symposium, 1995, p 48
48. McCall JW. McTier T, Supakorndej N, et al. Further
62. Atwell RB, Searle AC. Adullicide efficacy and safety of
characterization of the sensitivity of several commcr-
RM 340 in a field trial. In Otto GF (ed): Proceedings,
cially available heartworm antigen test kits. Orlando,
Heartworm Synposium. Charleston, SC, American
FI., Xorth American Veterinary
y Confercncc: Veterinary
IHeartworm Socicty, 1989, p 143
Proccedings. Vol 8, 1994, p 461
63. Dzimianski M1, McTier Ti., McCall JW. Assessment of
49. McCall JW, Supakorndej N, MeTier TL, et al. Commer-
filaricidal activity of a new filaricide (RM 340) against
cial hcartworm antigen test kits detcct infcctions with a
immature and adult heartworms using experimental
single adult female worm but not thosc with numerous
canine nodules. In Otto GF (ed): Procecdings. Heart-
adull male worms omly. Minneapolis, Amcrican Associa-
worm Symposium, Charleston, SC, Anerican Heart-
tion of Veterinary Parasitologists, July 17-20, 1993
worm Society, 1989, p 147
49a. Hong XQ. Mejia JS, Perler FB, ct al. A promising
64. Hloskins JD, Hagstad HV, Hribernick TX. Effects of
recombinant antigen for the early detection of hcart-
thiacetarsanide sodium in Louisiana dogs with natu-
worm infection; Abstrac. Program of the 8th Triennial
rally occurring canine heartworm discasc. In Otto GF
State of the HIcartworm Symposium, 1995, p 33
(cd): Proceedings. Hlcartworm Symposium. Orlando,
50. Buurdesen PG, Martin SA, Dixon GH, ct al. An evalua-
FlL, Veterinary Medical Publishing Company, 1983, p
tion of the VetREl)" Canine Heartworm Antigen Test.
134
Aust Vct Practit 20:144, 1990
65. Sundlof SF, Courtney CH, Bell JV, et al. Pharmacokinet-
50a. McTier TL, McCall JW. Supakorndej X. Fcatures of
ics of thiacetarsamidc in relationship to thcrapeutic
heartworim antigenl test kits; Abstracl. Program of the
cfficacy. In Ofto GF (ed): Proceedlings, Heartworn Sym-
8th Triennial Statc of the Heartworm Syruposium, 1995,
posiun. New Orleans, American Hleartworn Society,
p 29
1986, p 65
51. iDi Sacco B, Genchi C, Capelli G, et. al. Study of a
66. Keister DM, Dzimianski MT, McTier TI., ct al. Dose
new serum agglutination test (VetREDF. AGEN) for
selection and confirmation of RM 340, a new filaricidle
the diagnosis of canine cardiopulmonary dirofilariasis
for the treatment. of dogs with immature and mature
(English title). Vetcrinaria 6:2, 1992
Dirofilaria immitis. In Soll MI) (ed): Proceedings, HIeart-
51a. Bland A, McTier T, Freeman KP, ct al. Evaluation of
worm Symposium. Austin, TX, Anerican Heartworm
the ICT GOlD'" 1HW heartworm antigen test kit:; Ab-
Socicty, 1992, p 225
stract. Program of thc 8th Triennial State of the IIcart-
67. Miller MW, Keistcr DM, Tanner PA, et al. Clinical effi-
worm Symposium, 1995, p 32
cacy and safety trial of melarsomine dihydrochloride
724 DISEASES OF THE HFART ANI) CIRCULATION
(RM 340) and thiacctarscmide in dogs with moderate
ceedings, Heartworm Symposium, Orlando, FI., Veicri-
(Class 2) hcartworm discasc. Program of the 8th Tricn-
nary Medicine Puhlishing Company, 1983, p 115
nial State of the Hcarrworm Symposium, 1995, p 49
82. Keith JR, Rawlings CA, Schaub Rt. Effect of aspirin
68. Rawlings CA, Raynaud JP, Lewis RE, et al. Pulmonary
therapy on caninc pulinonary arlery disease caused
thromhocmholism and hypertcnsion alter thiacetarsan-
by Diroflaria immitis. In Outo GF (ed): Proceedings.
ide vs. mclarsomine dihydrocholoride trcatment of Dir-
Heartworm Symposium. Orlando, Fl., Veterinary Medi-
ofilaria inmitis infeclion in dogs. Am J Vet Res 54:920,
cinc Publishing Company, 1983, p 519
1993
83. Keith JC, Rawlings (A, Schaub RG. Pulmonary throm-
69. McCall JW, McTier MT, Dzimianski JP, et al. Clinical
boembolism during therapy of dirofilariasis with thia-
prophylactic activity of melarsomine dihydrochloride
  s  ie (os )
J Vct Res 44:1278, 1983
beagles exposed to natural infection in thrce southeast-
 84. Schaub RG, Keith JC, Rawlings CA. Elfect of long-term
crn statcs. Vet Parasitol 52:194, 1994
 aspirin trcatment on platelet adhesion to chronically
70.King R. Clinical implications of a highly cffectivc adulti-
damaged canine pulmonary artcries. Thromb Hacmost.
cide. Proceedings, The North Anerican Veterinary
46:680, 1981
Conference. Vol 8. Orlando, FL, 1994, p 458
 85. Schaub RG, Keith JC, Rawlings CA. The ellect of acetyl.
71..
Tanner PA, Winograd H, Keister DM. Clinical field trial
salicylic acid on vascular damage and myointimal prolif-
for thc trcatmcnt of maturc and immature Diofilara
eration in caninc pulmonary arteries subjected to
immitis infestation in dogs with scverc hcartworm dis-
chronic injury by Dirofilaria immitis infection. Am J Vet.
ease. Proceedings. 38th Annual Mecting, Ainerican As-
Rcs 44:449, 1983
sociation of Veterinary Parasitologists. Minncapolis, July
 86. Rawlings CA, Keith JC, Losonsky IM, el al. An1 aspirin-
17-20, 1993
prednisolone  comhination  to  modify postadulticide
72. Holines RA, Wilson RA, McCall JW. Thiacctarsamide in
lung disease in heartworm-infected dogs. Am J Vet Res
dogs. Disposition, kinetics, and correlations with sc-
45:2371,1984
lected indocyanine green kinetic values. Am I Vet Res
87. Yeilson JA, Atwell RB. Experinental therapy choices
47:1338, 1986
for thrombocmholism in heartworm discasc. In Otto
73. Holmes RA. Thiacctarsamide Na: Pharinacokinctics
GF (ed): Proceedings Heartworm Symposium. Charles-
and the effects of decreased liver function on cfficacy
ton, SC, American Heartworm Socicty, 1989, p 67
againsl Dirofilaria immitis in dogs. In Otto GF (cd):
88. Lcuthy Mw, Sisson DD, Kneller SK, ct al. Angiographic
Proceedings, Hearworin Syinposiun. New Orlcans.
assessment of aspirin and heparin therapy for the pre-
American Heartworm Society, 1986, p 57
vention  of pulmonary thrombocmbolism following
adulticide therapy. In Ouo GF (ed): Proceedings.
74. Rawlings CA, Keith IC, McCall JW. Thiacctarsainidc
efficacy. One Inore study using a different rescarch
Heartworm Symposium. Charleston. SC, Amcrican
model. In Ouo GF (ed): Proceedings, Heartworm Sym-
Heartworm Society, 1989, p 53
posium, Orlando, FL, Veterinary Medical Publishing
89.
. Atwell RB, Van Kan DM, Cottis LE, ct al. 'Thc usc of
Company, 1983, p 141
antigen test for diagnosis as an indicator of filarial
numbers, and for asscssing filarial mortality following
75. McCall JW, Lewis RE, Rawlings CA, et al. Reevaluation
of thiacetarsanide as an adulticidal agent against Dirof-
thiacctarsamide therapy. In Otto GF (ed): Proccedings,
laria immitis in dogs. In Otto GF (ed): Proceedings,
Heartworm Symposium. New Orleans, American I leart-
Heartworm Symposium, 1980. Edwardsville, KS, Veteri-
worm Socicty, 1986, p 71
nary Medicine Publishing Company, 1981. p 141
 90. Recommended procedures for the diagnosis and man-
7G. Bhair I.S, Malatesta PF, Gerckens IS. Efficacy of thiacet-
agemcnt of hcartworm (Dirofiaria inmitis) infection. Inl
Otto GF (ed): Proceedings, Heariworin Symposium.
arsamide in cxperimentally infected dogs at 2, 4, 6, 12,
or 24 months post-infection with Dirofiaria imnitis. In
Charleston, SC, American Hcartworm Society, 1989,
Otto GF (ed): Proccedings, Heartworm Symposium.
p230
91. Recommended proccdures for the diagnosis and man-
Orlando, Fl.,Vetcrinary Mcdicine Publishing Conpany,
agement of hcariworm (Drofilaria immitis) infection.In
1983, p 130
Soll MD (ed): Proccedings. Heartworm Synposium.
77. Courtney CH, Sunlof SF, Jackson RF. New dosc sched-
Austin, TX, Ainerican Heartworin Society, 1992, p 289
ule for the reauinent of canine dirofilariasis with thia-
celarsanide. In Otto GF (ed): Proccedings, Hcartworm
92. Calvert CA, L.osonsky JM. Occult heartworn discasc-
associated allergic pncumonitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Syinposiun. Sew Orlcans. Ainerican Hearfworm Soci-
18G:1097, 1985
ely, 1986, p 49
93. Wong MM, Guest MF. Filarial antibodics and cosino-
78. Vezzoni A, Genchi C. Reduction of post-adulticidc
 philia in human subjecis in an endeinic area. Trans R
thromboembolism coinplications with low dose heparin
Soc Trop Med Hyg 63:79G, 1969
therapy. In Otto GF (cd): Proceedings, Heartworm
94. Weingarten RJ. ‘Tropical cosinophilia. Lancct 1:103,
Syinposiun. Charleston. SC. Amcrican Heartworm So-
1943
ciety, 1989, p 73
95. Van der Sar S, Hartz H. The syndrone, tropical cosino-
79. Rawlings CA, Keith JC, Schaub RG. Effect of acctylsali-
philia and microfilaria. Am J Trop Med 1Ilyg 25:83, 1945
cylic acid on pulmonary arteriosclerosis induccd by
96. Lichow AA, Hannum CA. Eosinophilia, ancylostomiasis,
a one-year Dirofilaria immilis infection. Artcriosclcrosis
and strongyloidosis in the South Pacific area. Yale I Biol
5:355,1985
Med 18:381, 1976
80. Rawlings CA, Keith JC, Schaub RC. Aspirin and cortico-
97. Raich RA, Gleason DF. Pulmonary synptoms and eosin-
steroids in the treatinent of heartworin discasc. In Otto
ophilia due to filariasis. Tubercle 50:462, 1959
GF (ed): Proceedings, Heartworin Symposium. New Or-
98.
 Donohugh Dl. lropical cosinophilia. An ctiologic in-
leans. American Heartworin Society, 1986, p 139
quiry. N Engl J Med 269:1357, 1963
81. Atwell RB, Sutton RH1, Carlisle CH. Reduction of pul-
99.
Confer Aw, Qualls Cw, MacWilliams RS, ct al. Four
monary thromboembolic disease (D. inmitis) in thc dog
cases of pulinonary nodular cosinophilic granulomato-
associated with aspirin therapy. In Otto GF (ed): Pro-
sis in dogs. Cornell Vet 73:41. 1983
CANINE HEARTWORM DISEASE 725
100. Calvcrt. CA, Rawlings CA. Pulinonary 1nanifestations of
120. Fortin JF. Devclopment of Dirofitaria imnitis in Aedes
hcartworm discase. Vet Clin North Am 15:991, 1985
triseriatus and Aedes vexans au different tempcraturcs.
101. Calvert CA, Mahaffey MD, Lappin MR, ct al. Pulinonary
Master's thesis. University of Guclph, Ontario, Canada,
and disseminated cosinophilic granulomatosis in dogs.
1979
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:311, 1988
121. Palumho NE, Perri SF, Desovitz SR, et al. Preliminary
102. Berry CR, Moore PF, Thomas WP, et al. Pulmonary
ohscrvations on adverse rcaclions to diethylcarbamaz-
lymphoinatoid granuloinatosis in seven dogs (197G-
inc (DEC) in dogs infected with Dirofilaria immitis. In
1987). J Vet Intern Med 4:157, 1990
Otto GF (ed): Proceedings, Heartworin Syinposium.
103. Jackson RF. Seymour WG, Growncy PJ, ct al. Surgical
Atlanta, Vetcrinary Medicine Publishing Conpany,
trcatmcnt of the caval syndroine of canine heartworm
1977, p 97
disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 17l:1065, 1977
122. Powers DG, Parbuoni EL, Furrow RD. Dirofilaria immitis.
104. Osburn PN, Jackson RF, Seyinour G, et al. Electrocar-
 1. Adverse reactions associatcd with diethylcarbamazine
diographic and phonocardiographic alterations in ca-
therapy in microfilaremic dogs. In Ono GF (ed): Pro-
nine heartworin discasc. In Olio GF (ed): Proceedings,
ccedings, Heartworin Symposium. Alanta, Veterinary
Heartworin Symposiun. Atlanta, Veterinary Medicine
Medicine Publishing Coinpany, 1977, p 108
Publishing Company, 1977, p 67
123. Rawlings CA, Greene CE, Dawe DI., ct al. Diethylcarba-
105. Ishihara K, Kitagawa H, Ojma M. et al. Clinicopatho-
mazine; Adversc rcaction and relationship to 1nicrofila-
logical studies in canine dirofilaria hemoglobinuria. J
remia. In Otto GF (ed): Proceedings, Heartworm Syin-
Vet Sci 40:525, 1978
posium. New Orlcans, Amcrican Heartworm Society,
106. Atwell RB. Farmer TS. Clinical pathology of thc caval
1986, p 143
syndrome in canine dirofilariasis in Northern Australia.
124. Atwell RB, Boreham PF1., Studies on the adversc reac-
J Small Ani1n Pract 23:675, 1982
tions following diethylcarbamazine lo microfilaria-posi-
107. Atkins CE, Kecne BW, McGuirk SM. Investigation of
tivc (D. immitis) dogs. In Ollo GF (ed): Proceedings,
caval syndrone in dogs experinentally infected with
Hcartworin Symposiurn. Orlando, Fl., Veterinary Medi-
Diroflaria immitis. J Vet. Intern Med 2:36. 1988
cine Publishing Company, 1983, p 83
108. Atkins CE、 Keene BW, McGuirk SM. Pathophysiology
125. McCall JW, Evans TL, Lideinann BA, et al. Chemopro-
of cardiac dysfiunction in an cxperinental inodel of
phylaxis of cxperimentally induced hearrworm and
hcartworm caval syndroine in the dog. Am J Vet Rcs
hookworm infections in dogs. Mod Vet Pract July/Aug
49:403, 1988
1987, p 417
109. Atkins CE. Caval syndroine in the dog. Semin Vet Med
126. Lok JB, Knight DH, Ramadan E-S. Fffects of iverinectin
Surg 2:64, 1987
onl cmbryogenesis in Dirofileria immitis Age. structure
110. Atkins CE. Pathophysiology of heartworin caval syn-
and spaial distribution of intrauterine forms as a func-
dromnc: Rccent advances. In Ouo GF (ed): Proceedings.
tion of dosage and tirme post trcatment. In Otio GF
HIcartworm Symposium. Charleston, SC, Anerican
(ed ): Proceedings, Heartworm Symposium. Charleston,
Heartworm Society, 1989, p 27
SC, American Hcartworm Socicty, 1989. p 85
111. Rawlings CA, Tackctt Rl., Postadulticide pulinonary hy-
127. Lok JB, Knight DH, ILaPaugh DA, el al. Kinetics of
pertension of canine heartworin disease: Successfiul
Dirofilaria immitis microfilarcinia suppression in dogs
trcatmcnt. with oxygcn and failure of antihistamines.
during and after a prophylactic regimen of milbemycin
Ain J Vet Rcs 51:1565, 1990
112. Jackson RF. Iverrmectin again. Am Heartworm Soc Bull
oxime. In Soll MD (ed): Procccdings. Heartworm Sym-
posium. Austin, IX, Amcrican Hearrworm Society,
1:9, 1984
1992. p 143
113. Jackson RF, Seymour WG, Beckett RS. Lower dosc of
128. Bowman DD, Johnson RB, Ulrich ME, el al. Effects of
ivcrmcctin as a microfilaricide. In Otto GF (ed): Pro-
 long-term administration of ivermectin and milhemycin
ceedings, Heartworin Symposium. New Orlcans, Ameri-
oximc on circulating microfilariae and parasite antigen-
can Heartworm Socicty, 1986, p 15
emia in dogs with patent hearrworm infection. In Soll
114. Jackson RF, Seyinour G, Beckeu RS. Routinc usc of
MD (ed): Proccedings, Heartworin Symposium, Austin,
0.05 mg/kg of ivermcctin as a 1nicrofilaricide. In Otto
TX, Anerican Hearworm Society, 1992, p 151
GF (ed): Proceedings, Heartworm Symposium, New Or-
leans, American Hlcartworm Socicty, 1986. p 37
129. Dzimianski MT, McCall JW. Roberson E1., ct al. Prcvcn-
115. Neer TM, Hoskins JD. Clinical experience with ivermec-
tion of hcartworin infection and clearancc of ascarid
tin used as a microfilaricide and for prophylaxis in
and hookworm infections jn dogs using a chewable
thc dog. In Otto GF (ed): Proceedings, Hlcartworm
fornulation of ivermectin plus pyrantcl panoate. In
Symposium. Charleston, SC, American Hcartworm So-
Soll MD (ed): Proceedings, Hcartworm Symposiun,
Austin, TX, Anerican Heartworm Socicty, 1992, p 201
ciety, 1989, p 95
116. Paul Aj, Tranquilli wJ, Seward RH, et al. Clinical ohscr-
130. McCall JW, Lindeinann BA, Porter CA. Prophylaclic
vations in collics given ivcrmcctin orally. Am J Vet Res
activity of ivermectin against cxperimcntally induced
48:684, 1987
Diroflara irnmitis in dogs. In Otto GF (cd): Proceedings,
117. Pulliam JD, Seward RL., Henry RI. lnvestigating iver-
Hcarrworin Synposium, 1980. Edwardsvillc, KS, Veteri-
mectin toxicity in coilics. Vet Med 80: 39, 1985
nary Medicine Publishing Company, 1981, p 126
118. Blagburn BL., Hendrix CM, Lindsay DS, ct al. Post-
130a. MeCall JW, MeTier T, Supakorndej N, et al. Clinical
adulticide, nilbemycin oxine microfilaricidal activity in
prophylactic activity
/of inacrolides on young adult.
dogs naturally infected with Dirofilaria immitis. In Soll
heartworms; Abstract. Program of the 8th Triennial
MD (cd): Proccedings. Hcartworin Symposiun. Austin,
State of the Heartworm Symposium, 1995, p 45
TX, American Heartworm Society, 1992, p 159
131. Bater AK. Efficacy of oral milbcmycin against naturally
119. Mc lier T1., McCall JW, Dzimianski MT, et al. Epidemi-
acquired hcartworm infcctions in dogs. In Otto (GF
ology of heartworm infection studied by using naturally
(ed): Proccedings, Hcartworm Symposium. (Charleston,
exposed "tracer” beagles in three southcastern states.
SC, American Hcartworm Society, 1989, p 107
In Soll MD (ed): Procccdings, Heartworm Symposium.
132. Blagburn Bl., Hendrix CM, Linsday DS, cl al. Milbe-
Austin, TX, American Hearfworm Socicty, 1992, p 47
mycin: Eficacy and toxicity in beagle and colic dogs.
726 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
In (Otto GF (ed): Proceedings, Heartworin Symposium.
naturally acquired heartworm infection in hcartworn-
Charleston, SC, Anerican Heariworm Society, 1989.
naive beagles by oral administration of moxidcctin at
p 109
an interval of cithcr one or two 1nonths. In Soll MD
133. Bradley RE. Dosc titration and cfficacy of milhcmycin
(ed): Proccedings, Heartworin Symposium, Austin, TX,
oximc for prophylaxis against Dirofilaria immitis infec-
Anerican Heartworin Society, 1992. p 1G9
tion in dogs. In Otto GF (ed): Proceedings, Heartworm
137. King RL., Courtney CH, Aguilar R. Heartworm prophy-
Symposium. New Orleans, American Heartworm Soci-
laxis with moxidectin: Field trials from a byperendeinic
ety, 1989, p 115 
arca. In Soll MD (ed): Proceedings, Heartworrm Sympo-
134. MeTier Tf., MeCall JW, Dzimianski MI, ct al. Preven-
siun. Austin, TX, American Hleartworm Socicty, 1992,
tion of cxperimental hearworm infection in dogs with
p179
single, oral doses of moxidectin. In Soll MD (ed): Pro-
138. Paul AJ. Tranquilli W], Iodd KS. el al. Evaluation of
ceedings, Heartworm Symposium. Austin, TX, Ameri-
safety of moxidectin in collies. In Soll MD (ed): Pro-
can Hcartworm Socicty. 1992, p 165
ceedings, Heartworm Symposium. Austin TX, Amcrican
135. Gricve RB, Frank GR, Stewart VA. Effect of dosage and
Heartworm Socicty, 1992, p 189
liming on heartworm chemoprophylaxis with milbe-
139. Hendrix CM, Blagburn BL, Bowles JV, et al. Safety of
Inycin. In Soll MD (ed): Proceedings, Heartworm Sym-
posium. Austin, TX, Amcrican Heartworm Socicty,
adults of D. inmalis. In Soll Ml) (ed): Proccedings,
1992, p 121
Heartworm Symposium. Austin, IX. Aincrican Heart-
136. McCall Jw, MeTier TL, Holmes RA, et al. Prevention of
worm Society, 1992, p 183
Feline Heartworm
31
Disease
RAY DILLON
Diroflaria inmiis infection has been reported worldwide in cats and is
consistently diagnosed in heartworm-endemic areas.t-14 The incrcased aware-
ness of the disease has made antemortem diagnosis more common.ts-s The
frequency of feline heartworm infection correlates with that of dogs in the
same gcographic area, but at a lower incidence.
HEARTWORM INFECTION
ADULT HEARTWORMS
Hcartworm discasc is morc difficult to produce experimentally in cats
developing into adult worms is significantly less in cats (1 to 25%) than in
dogs (40 to 90%). Cats are most at risk in heavily endemic arcas where
repeated bites by infected mosquitos are common. Experimcntally, whcn
adequate infective larvac are used, the percentage of infective larvae devel-
e yya oy se yo ed o mq mo si s  npe oi o
worms are recovered is high (66 to 90%). It appears that infective larvae in
thc cat arc poorly oricnted, and adult worms are more likely to develop at
cctopic sites (brain, cyc, subcutancous tissuc) than in the dog. After cxperi-
mcntal injections of Ly in thic cat, abnormal migration patterns result in
dcath of migrating larvac, subcutancous nodulcs, and granuloma
formation.21.2
Normally the adult worm burden is less in the cat (range, usually l to 9
worms) compared with the dog. Although adult worms reach signilicant size
in the cat (female > 21 cm, male > 12 cm), their development. seems to be
slower than in the dog,22. 26
Adult hcartworms in the cat have a relatively short life span (probably <
2 years) compared to the dog (approximately 3 years).2.26 27 The shortened
longcvity of adult worms contributes to an underestimation of the prcvalence
 of hcartworm discase in thc cat bascd on routine necropsy cxamination of
thc gencral population. A gradual decrcasc in the number of immaturc
worms found in the heart has been noted when cats are chronologically
sludied,22 23 Compared with dogs, the cat is a relatively more resistant, but
still susceptible, host for I. immilis.
INFECTIVE LARVAE
 Once infecicd by adult hcartworms via infective (Ls) larvac or by cxperi-
mental transplantation, the cat's natural resistancc results in a shortcned
727
728DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
period of patency, lower hearrworm numbers, or lack
cat survives the initial pulmonary embolism, recanali-
zation around the obstruction occurs rapidly, and the
larvac to develop into circulating microfilariae in cx-
lung markcdly improves within days. The result of thc
perimcntal fclinc infcctions is about 8 months. The
acute lung injury is Type II alveolar cell hypertrophy.
comparable period in the dog is 5 to 6.5 months.
 Postcaval syndrome with ascites and righ1-sided heart.
The cat is not an important host for D. immitis.
failure occurs rarely and accompanies very high worm
Infective larvae devcloped in about 1 percent of Anoph-
burdens. Hemoglobinuria has not been a consistent
eles sp. and Aedes sp. mosquitos that fed on cats with
finding in these infected cats. Clinical signs appcar to
patent infections.2 For a cat to become infccted, a
bc associatcd withi poor venous return and tricuspid
mosquito must bite an animal with a patent infcction
insufficicncy rathcr than due to severe hypertension.
(usually a dog) and then, after proper climate condi-
tions, bitc a cat. Some mosquito species feed on both
dogs and cats whercas others prefer one or the other.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The propcnsity of some mosquitos to prefer felines
may account for rcgionally high incidences of feline
heartworm discasc (up to 18%) reported in some ar-
EPIDEMIOLOGY
eas.
There is no age predilection in feline heartworm
disease. Rcportcd ages incorporate a wide range (1 to)
MICROFILARIAE
infected, but outdoor cats sccm to bc morc pronc to)
Microfilaremia is uncommon (< 20% of spontanc-
infection.'a A highcr incidence in males comparcd
ous clinical cases), inconsistent, and, in cats, transicnt.
to females has becn demonstrated cxpcrimentally. In
Very low numbers are usually produced (c.g., six cx-
naturaly infccted cats, males gencrally havc an in-
perincntal cats had > 2 microfilariae/mi blood).
crcascd risk of cxposure, Felinc leukemia virus infec-
 Thereforc, conccntration tests are recommended for
tion is not a predisposing factor, and heartworms are
diagnosis, and a ncgative test does not rule out heart-
not a common finding at necropsy in cats with FeLV.$
worm discasc. For this reason, some have advocated
The prevalence of heartworm infection in pet cats with
that greater volumes of blood bc uscd when per-
cardiorespiratory abnormalities in the southeastern
forming a microlilaria concentration test.
a  o pdi sm ss  aos pu
percent.lia
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
HISTORY
 Pulmonary pathology in feline heartworm discasc is
Clinical fcatures are generally referable to the car-
similar to that. describcd in the dog."
2. 20. 22 Muscular
 diopulmonary, gastrointestinal, or nervous systems or
hypertrophy, villous cndarteritis, and adventitial cellu-
are nonspecific. Coughing, dyspnea, vomiting, leth-
lar infiltrates are common and typically more severe in
argy, anorexia, and weight loss are the most common
thc caudal pulmonary arlcries. Pulmonary fibrosis and
historical complaints.2 x, 16a In chronic infcctions, vom-
smooth muscle hyperplasia can occur. The smaller pul-
iting or respiratory signs predominate, although usu-
monary arteries develop severe muscular hypcrtrophy
ally not together. Anorexia and lcthargy can be the
 in infccted cats, however, and pulmonary arterics may
 Only presenting signs in some cats.
become radiographically enlarged within 1 wcck of
When yomiting occurs it tends to be sporadic and
cxpcrimcntal heartworm transplantation.2 3 Emboliza-
unrclated to cating. The cause is unknown; however.
tion of pulmonary arteries is a major factor contribut-
relcasc of inflammatory lung mediators with resultant
ing to initiation of clinical signs. However, severe cor
chcmorcccptor trigger zone stimulation and cmesis
pulmonale is uncommon in affected cats, and associ-
has been postulated. The vomitus generally contains
ated clinical chages, including electrocardiographic
food or foam but is rarely bile stained.
right axis deviation, radiographic right-sided heart en-
Coughing can be severe and paroxysmal, with in-
largement, and right-sided hcart failurc are infre-
tervening periods  (days to weeks) ol normality.
qucnt."
Dyspnea may be sudden and may represent acute dis-
 Obstruction of blood flow, cspccially to the caudal
ease associated with worm death. Corticosteroids may
pulmonary arteries, may causc acutc clinical signs.
temporarily ameliorate respiratory signs. Hemoptysis is
However, the majority of clinical signs are associatcd
occasionally noted.
Srq s h     a
Occasionally,  abcrrant hcartworm migration may
hemorrhagic, with areas of necrosis and insult. If the
causc abnnormalitics attributable to local pathology.
FELINE HEARTWORM DISEASE 729
TABLE 31-1
adult hcartworms usually heralds the onset of severe
Clinical Signs Associated with Feline
signs,
Heartworm Disease
Chronic Signis
Acute Signs
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION FINDINGS
Sudden death
PIE+ syndromc
Respiratory
Coughing
Pulmonay enbolisn
Dyspnea
Therc arc no abnormal findings in many infected
Collapse; shock
Cardiopulmonary
Henoptysis
Lethargy
cats. In others, signs are nonspecific or relerable to
Dyspnca; cough
Weakliess
the cardiopulmonary or nervous system. A systolic
Pneuonitis
Right-sided CHF4
murrmur may be heard over the tricuspid valve arca
Dyspnca; cough
Anorexia
Gastrointestinal
and, occasionally, a gallop rhythm can bc prcscnt.
Ncurologic
Rlindress
Vomiting
IIarsh lung sounds are the most frcqucnt abnormal
Seizures
auscultatory finding and can be present even in cats
Ataxia
that do not exhibit respiratory signs. Ascites, excrcise.
Coma
Cireling
intolerance, and right-sided heart failurc are rarc.
Syncope
There does not seem to be a corrclation bctwcen the
Voniting
clinical signs, physical cxamination abnormalities, and
radiographic changcs.
*From sevex: pulnouary tlromboemolism or heartworm orchusion of
main pulmonary artery.
+Pulmonary iefilrates of cosinophilia.
ICongestive heart failure.
Modified from Calvert C. Feline heartworm disease. In Fox PR (ed). Caninc
DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
and Fcline Cadiology New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1988. p 55.
Whcn clinical sigris consistent with leartworm imfec-
Neurologic signs arc uncommon but have bccn rc-
tion are detected, a data base should be generated. A
ported with. s, s.  and without worms physically pres-
number of tests may be useful when evaluating a cat
ent within the central nervous system,
for heartworm discase (Table 31-2).
CLINICAL FEATURES
CLINICAL PATHOLOGY
Infected cats may die acutcly, cxhibit chronic signs,
Mild, nonrcgcncrative ancmia or peripheral eosino
or be asymptomatic (Table 3l-l). In thc acute cases,
dcath may be so rapid as to preclude diagnosis or
philia is prescnt in about one third of infected cats.
Thc latter depcnds on the stage of infective larvae,
treatment. Acute collapsc may occur with or without
previous clinical signs. Sudden death has been attrib-
occuring 4 to 7 months postinfection.2l. 22 The ab-
uted to circulatory collapse and respiratory failure due
sence of eosinophilia does not exclude a diagnosis of
jury.s. so 3i As few as one worm has bcen found at
fmay contain eosinophils in thie absence of peripheral
 eosinophilia. As in the dog, basophilia is highly sugges-
nccropsy accompanied by severe pulmonary conges-
tive of heartworm discase but is a rare finding. Serum
tion, infarction, and edema. Worms arc not always
found embolizing the main pulmonary arterics.
biochemistrics and urinalysis are usually normal, Hy-
When clinical signs occur, they are most commonly
 perglobulincmia occurs in some cats's but is not consis-
tent or predictable.3 27 Normal serum globulins and
associatcd with immature heartworms arriving in thic
lungs or death of adult heartworms. The initial arrival
protein electrophoresis can be rccorded in cats that
of L, larval stages in the distal pulronary arterics
induces diffuse pulmonary infiltrates and often eosino-
TABLE 31--2
philic pneumonitis. On occasion, occlusion of a pul-
Diagnostic Testing for Suspected Feline Dirofilariasis
monary artcry (right caudal bcing the most common)
by a dead or dying adult worm is associated with life-
Thoracic radiographs
Serology to detect feline antibody against adul tigen
thrcatening, acute dyspnca.2 Predictably, clinical signs
Serology to detect adulr antigen
associated with carly infections occur in the late fall
Nonselective angiocardiogranm
and carly winter months, 4 to 7 rmonths after exposure.
Krnott's test
Fchocardiogran
Antigcn testing at this time is usually negative bccausc
CRC/differential
Tracheal wash or bronchoalveolar lavage
the worms are inmature.
After an initial host response, clinical signs may
Elcctrocardiogram
Fecal examination
abate for a period of time. Ilowcver, the death of thc
730 DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
test positive for heartworm with a Knott's tcst, antibody
response to the early migration of the l.g or 14, positive
test, or antigen test.
titers are detected about 2 to 3 months affer exposure.
This is important in cats in which immature worms
causc clinical signs and in which the antigen test will
MCROFILARIAE CONCENTRATION TESTS
bc ncgative. IIowcver, with the usc of macrolides as a
 Since microfilaremia, when present, is characterized
prcventive mcdication, larvac can initiate a positive
by short duration and low numbers, most cats with
antibody response and then be killed by the macrolide.
hcartworms are not microfilarcmic when evaluated.
This produces an antibody-positive response although,
Thcrcfore, a positive blood test for microfilariae is
in reality, the cat does not have adult heartworms. A
unlikcly bu diagnostic whien prcsent. Diagnostic accu
positive antibody result indicates that a cat has bcen
racy is incrcascd when large quantitics of blood (5 ml)
infected with Ls, the Ls has molted into l.4, and the
are evaluatcd by concentration tests such as Knott's
parasitc has livcd at least 2 to 3 months. Ilowever, an
tests or filter techniques. Even with repetitive testing.
adult infection may or may not have developed.
over 80 perccnt of feline heartworm discasc is ami-
crofilaremic.
HEARTwORM ANTIGEN. Detection of heartworm anti-
 gen in blood or serum has been used successfully in
dogs. These tests have been positive in cats within days
SEROLOGY
of transplantation of mature adult worms from dogs
 Thrce types of serologic tests have been used to
into cats. However, since the antigcn bcing dctected
dctcct feline heartworm discasc: (l) an immunofluo-
sccms to be derived primarily from the adult female
resccnt antibody (1FA) test that detects antibodics di-
hcartworm reproductive tract, inadequate antigen may
rected against microfilarial antigens; (2) an cnzymc-
be present for detection with immature infcctions, a
low worm burden, a male infcction, or with scxually
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) that dctccts anti-
immature worms. Cats given large nuumbers of infcctive
tests (ELISA or colloid gold) that detcct adult hicart-
larvae experimentally may develop positivc antigcn
worm antigen. Givcn the high incidence of occult
tests 8 months later. However, cats with active heart-
disease in thc cat. serologic tests arc usually valu-
worm disease and high antibody titers can test ncgativc
ablec.2a. 16a
for antigen. Thus, because clinical signs are usually
associated with immature worms, and sincc adult.
IFA TEsT. The IFA test detecis antibodies to microfi-
hcartworms maturc slowly in low numbers, it would
be prudent to consider that a positive antigen test is
larial cuticular antigen. It is diagnostic about one third
of the time. However, immature or sterile worms or
diagnostic, but that a ncgative test docs not rule out
heartworms. With climination of the adult parasitc,
unisex worms in cats or the abscncc of a host response
the antigen test bccomes ncgativc.
to antigen does not produce a diagnostic titer.16 Use of
thc somatic IFA (detecting antibodics to microfilarial
been hclpful in researching the biology of the parasitc-
CYTOLOGY
Eosinophils are commonly identiflied by cytology
ELISA TEsTs. The ELISA test denotcs a mcthod of
from the tracheal wash or bronchoalveolar lavage of
analysis. Antigcn preparation, antibody sourccs, and
cats with heartworm disease, as well as with other respi-
techniques can vary among diagnostie laboratorics.
ratory disorders. Cytologic eosinophilia seems to be
Therefore, results may vary among assays. An ELISA
prcvalcnt 4 to 7 months after experimental L, infection
to detect feline antibodies in the serum to L, D. immitis
but may not be present later in the infection, even
antigen has shown some promise, but falsc-positivcs
whien adult worms are present. Chronic inflammation
related to cross-reactivity have been a concern.26 sz The
may be prescnt after the cosinophilic rcactiorn resolves.
usc of the EIlSA adapted from canines32. 33 to confirm
fcline infections has been hclpful, and false-positives
from cross-reactivity have not bccn observed. However,
methods used in canine testing to mncasure dog anti-
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
body to D. immis cannot be uscd on cat sera.27
Cats that have eliminated the adult parasite naturally
Although clcctrocardiographic cvidencc of right
 or aftcr adulticidal therapy devclop a negative ELISA
ventricular enlargement is occasionally indicatcd from
titer when the host antibody gradually decrcascs to
negative concentrations (i.e., 4 to 6 months). Because
tion greater than 120 degrees is rarcly prescnt on a
the antibody bcing detected is produced by the cat in
standard 6-lead ECG. Ectopic ventricular bcats and
FELINEHEARTWORMDISEASE
731
B
FIGURE31-1
Right lateral thoracicradiographs of a coughing,dyspneiccatwithdiroflariasis and allergic
pneumonitis before (A) and 3days after (B) corticosteroid therapy (prednisolone,5mg bid）.(A)
present.Lobar pulmonary arterieswere slightly enlarged on theventrodorsal butnot lateralview.
Thiscathadperipheralosinophiliayprglobulinemiaandapositivendirectfuorescentantibody
test formicrofilarial cuticular antigen.(B)Postcorticosteroid therapyradiograph shows dramatic
clearingof thepulmonaryinterstitial pattern and slightreductioninright-sidedcardiac
enlargement.Clinically,coughingwas reduced.(From Calvert CA.Felineheartworm disease.InFox
PR(ed):Canine and Feline Cardiology.1st ed.NewYork,Churchill Livingstone,1988,p551.)
other arrhythmias are rarely present after adulticide
detectible by echocardiography36a (Fig. 31-5). Nonspe-
therapyin asymptomatic cats.
cific changesmay be noted,including right ventricular
enlargement and hypertrophy,and increased main
pulmonary artery.
RADIOGRAPHY
Radiology is one of the best screening tests for feline
heartworm disease.Pulmonaryparenchymal changes
arenonspecificandcanchangerapidlyininfectedcats
(Fig.31-1).They include interstitial infltrates,diffuse
or coalescing infiltrates,perivascular densities,and
Themostdistinctiveradiographicsignoffeline
heartworm disease is enlarged pulmonary arteries with
ill-defined margins (Figs.31-3,31-4).This is most
prominent in the caudal lung lobes on the ventrodor-
salview.Bluntingand tortuosityof the pulmonary
arteriesareoccasionallyseen,butnotascommonly
as in the dog. An enlarged main pulmonary arterial
segment extending beyond the cardiac border on the
ventrodorsalor dorsoventralviewisnotaclassicfea-
tureoffelineheartworms.Anonselectiveangiocardio-
FIGURE31-2
grammaydemonstrateenlargedpulmonaryarteries
Right lateral thoracicradiographfrom a catwith dyspnea and
coughing.Thereis a generalized pulmonaryinterstitial pattern
accurate method for confirming a diagnosis of heart-
infiltrateoticethepatchofensealveolarpattrnnlta
worms.
（arrows) in the dorsocaudal lungregion.A smaller patchis present
just ventral to the caudalvena cava.Right-sided cardiomegaly is
evidencedbytheincreasedsternal contact andpronounced cranial
waist.Theventrodorsalradiograph(not pictured) showed caudal
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
lung lobe alveolar pattern infiltrates andright-sided heart
enlargement.Thesefindings were consistent with diroflariasis and
When adult heartworms are present in the right
pulmonaryinfarcts.(From CalvertCA.Felineheartwormdisease.
InFoxPR(ed):Canine and Feline Cardiology.Ist ed.NewYork,
ventricle or main pulmonary artery, they are readily
Churchill Livingstone,1988, p 551.)
732
2DISEASESOFTHEHEARTANDCIRCULATION
RV
B
FIGURE31-3
Selectiveright ventricular angiocardiogram ofacat infected with heartworms.(A)Right lateral view.
The main pulmonary arteryisenlarged(blackarrw),and caudal lobar arteryenlargement isevident
(white arrow）.In addition,therightventricle(RV)isenlarged,asevidenced byncreased sternal contact
and cardiac apex tipping.C,catheter.(B)Ventrodorsalview.Compared with theleft caudal lobar
artery,therightlobararteryisenlarged（largearrows）andobstructed(smallarows）.Lobarpulmonar
arteries are tortuous.a,left caudal lobar artery.(From Calvert CA.Felineheartworm disease.InFox
PR (ed):Canine and Feline Cardiology.1st ed.NewYork,ChurchillLivingstone,1988,p551.)
DIFFERENTLALDLAGNOSIS
possible.7However, the natural death of adult worms
canbe associated with severe respiratory signs.Some
catsmanagedconservativelybyintermittentcorticoste-
roid therapy will develop peracute signs and die from
In the cat with respiratory signs, heartworm disease
heartworm disease.Inthe cat with recurrent life
must be differentiated from Aelurostrongylus abstrusus
threatening dyspnea or with severe clinicalsigns,
(lungworm)orParagonimus kellicottiinfection,bronchi-
tis or asthma, cardiomyopathy, pyothorax, pleural effu-
adulticidal therapy should be considered.Thepoten-
sions,pneumothorax,anemia,hyperthyroidism,and
other systemic disorders.The pulmonary arterial
changesofheartworm disease areunique.Neurologic
conditions and disordersinvolving the gastrointestinal
system must sometimes be considered.
CLINICALMANAGEMENT
Thedecisionwhether ornottotreatfelineheart-
wormsisoftencomplicatedbytheunpredictablena-
tureofthediseaseandrisksof treatment sideeffects.
The latter seem to more severe than in the dog.²In
symptomatic cats,for example,clinical signs may be
chronic and intermittent, leading one into believing
that the disease is not severe.However,spontaneous
FIGURE31-4
acute complications or deathcan occur in a small
percentage of untreated animals. In contrast, this risk
Nonselective angiocardiogram (right lateral view) of a vomiting cat
withheartworminfection.Noticethecaudal lobar pulmonary
appears to be small in the asymptomatic cat compared
artery enlargement,tortuosity,andpruning.Threarelnar
with the complications of adulticidal therapy. Adult
filling defects (arrows) in the pulmonary arteries caused by adult
heartworms.A, descending aorta.(From Calvert CA.Feline
heartwormshave a shorter longevityin the cat com-
heartworm disease.InFoxPR(ed):Canine and Feline Cardiology.
pared with the dog, and spontaneous recovery is always
1st ed.NewYork,Churchill Livingstone,1988,p551.)
FELINE HEARTWORMDISEASE733
graphic signs within 24 hours in most cats with life-
threatening dyspnea and collapse.
ADULTICIDETHERAPY
BA
Thiacetarsamide sodium (2.2 mg/kg IV, bid, for 2
days)isgenerallytoleratedwithoutimmediatecompli-
cationsofhepatotoxicity orrenal toxicity.315,7Acute
signs(collapse)have occurred after rapid thiacetar-
samideinjections,butslowadministrationisgenerally
safely administered in my experience. Careful intrave-
LV
nous administration is essential and is facilitated by
sedation.Becauseofthepotentialprotectiveeffectsof
ketamine as anserotonin antagonist,a singleintramus-
cularinjectionhasbeenrecommendedbeforethefirst
doseofthiacetarsamide,alsotoassist inthelatter's
safeintravenous administration.
Pulmonaryedemaisanunpredictablebutocca-
FIGURE31-5
sional complication during the 2 days of thiacetarsam-
Two-dimensional echocardiogram (right parasternal long-axis view)
ide therapy. Oxygen therapy and corticosteroids
ofa catwithheartworm infection andright-sided congestive heart
should be considered if dyspnea or cyanosis occurs.
failure.Both the right atrium (RA)andright ventricle (RV)are
Clinical signs tend to improve after therapy. Cats
enlarged.Notice the large mass of heartworms (arrows).Worms
appearing in cros-section are evident as hyperechoicroundish
with chronic anorexia require nutritional support.Al-
structures.Pleural effusion is seen as an echo-free (black) space
though the presence of circulating microflariae is un-
external to the RA and RV.LA,left atrium;LV,left ventricle;A,
ascending aorta;IVS,interventricular septum.(Courtesy of Dr.
common,ivermectin (50 μg/kg)has been used suc-
DaveSisson.)
cessfully as a microfilaricide.
POSTADULTICIDECOMPLICATIONS
tialriskandseverityofpostadulticidecomplications
are probably greater than the risks from spontaneous
Basedon theassumption that heartwormmass is
heartworm death and embolization in the asymptom-
related to antigen load,3 a cat with a “strong positive”
atic cat.However, therapy with close post-treatment
antigen test would be more likely to develop postadulti-
observation maybepreferablein some cases compared
cidecomplicationsthanacatthathasalowworm
with not knowing when the heartworms will die on
burden and is antigen negative or "“weakly positive."
theirown ifleftuntreated.
Postadulticide reactions are peracute. This dictates
that the cat be under constant surveillance,especially
during the first2weeks.3.19Complications areusually
related to embolization,which caninducelung in-
CONSERVATIVETHERAPY
farction,hemoptysis,and dyspnea.Severe thrombocy-
topenia has not been noted.Sudden death can occur
In cases of intermittent clinical signs or when the
withinthefirst10days after thiacetarsemideadminis-
potentialrisk of adulticidaltherapyis not accepted,
tration.
owners should be educated as to the nature of per-
Embolizationmost often affects the caudal lung
acutesignsrelated toheartwormembolization.Al-
lobes, which may be evident by increased radiographic
thoughalternate-day prednisolone (5mg/kg)has
density.Oxygen therapy is indicated if dyspnea occurs.
been used successfully in some infected cats to treat
High doses of corticosteroids (prednisolone,1 mg/kg
coughing and vomiting,radiographiclesions usually
tid)withjudiciousintravenousfluid therapyareoften
progress,and acute respiratory distress and death are
helpful during this crisis.The clinical and radiographic
not prevented.An emergency dose of oral or injectable
signs of acuteembolizationcan resolve over1 to2days.
glucocorticoid shouldbe dispensedfor the owner to
Routineuse ofcorticosteroids oraspirinisnotrec-
administer if collapse or dyspnea occurs.
ommendedbeforeor after thiacetarsemide.Aspirin is
The onset of acuterespiratorysignsinaheartworm
contraindicated infelineheartwormdisease.Itmay
cat is a true emergency requiring immediate care,
inhibit prostaglandin formation and thus increase pul-
including intranasal oxygen therapy, cage rest, small
monary leukotriene production.This could increase
volumesofintravenousfluids,andinjectablepredniso-
lone.This therapy hasimproved clinical and radio-
and pulmonary hypertension.
734DISEASES OF THE HEART AND CIRCULATION
ASSESSMENT OFADULTICIDE TREATMENT
8. Noyes JD. Illinois State Veterinary Medical Association
Yearly Heartworm Survey In Outo GF (ed): Proceedings,
EFFICACY
I Icartworm Symposium. Bonner Springs. KS, Veterinary
The efficacy of thiacetarsemide cannot be evaluated
Medical Publishing Company, 1978, p 1
9. Seymore DN. Dirofilariasis in a cat. Mod Vet Pract
in many cases of occult feline heartworm disease. How-
61:251,1980
ever, current research indicales that the adulticide is
10. Sherman WA, Wechester SJ. Unusual case of heartworm
 effective. Clinical signs usually abate during the initial
discasc in a cat. Vet Med/Small Anim Clin 70:1320. 1975
weeks afler its administration.16.19. 3
11.
 Stackhouse LL, Claugh E. Clinical report: Five cases of
 Immature worms are probably resistant to thiacet-
feline dirofilariasis. Vet Med/Small Anim Clin 67:1309,
 arsemide in cats as in the dog. By serologic testing, if
1972
12. Soifer FK Dirofilariasis in a cat. Vet. Med/Small Anim
 a cat was antigen positive before treatment, the antigen
Clin 71:484, 1976
test should be negative 12 weeks after adulicide ther-
13.
Teske RH. Dirofilariasis in a cat. J An Vet Med Assoc
apy. A positive test at this time would indicate the
159:891, 1971
 persistence of adult heartworms.
14. Todd KS, Byerly CS, Small F, et al. IIeartworm infections
in Ilinois cais. Felinc Pract 6:41, 1976
15. Calvert CA, Mandell CP. Diagnosis and management of
feline heartworm  disease. J Am Vel Med Assoc
PREVENTVE THERAPY
180:5650, 1982
16. Dillon AR, Sakas PS, Buxton BA, et al. Indirect immuno-
fluorescence testing for diagnosis of occult Dirofilara
immilis infection in three cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 In highly endcmic areas, the incidence of feline
180:80,1982
 heartworm infections is high, and preventive therapy
16a. Atkins CE, DeFrancesco TC, Miller MW, et al. Preva-
 is indicated. In nonendemic areas, the incidence is not 
lence of hcartworm infection in cats with signs of cardio
 sufficient to warrant preventive therapy in cats.
respiratory abnormalities. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:517,
1998
 Infection from D. immitis can be prevented with 50
17.
.IIawe RS. The diagnosis and treatment of occult dirofi-
μg/kg of milbemycin oxime (Interceptor, Ciba Geigy)
lariasis in a cat. J Am Anim I1osp Assoc 15:577, 1979
0r 25 μg/kg of ivermectin (Heartgard, Merial) admin-
18.
Harlton Bw. Treatment of dirofilariasis in a doncstic
istered per os once a month. In endemic areas, it is
cat. Vet Med/Small Anim Clin 69:1440, 1974
19.
 Schwartz. A. Two cascs of feline heartworm disease. Fe-
suggested that. preventive medication be administered
line Pract 5:20, 1975
at. 4 to 6 wecks of age and continued for the life of
20. Byerly CS. Donahoc JMR, Todd KS. Histopathologic
 the cat. Because current antigen testing is unreliable
in cats. antigen testing before instituting preventive
immitis. In Outo GF (ed): Proceedings, Hleartworm Sym-
therapy in an adult cat does not seem to be cost
posium. Bonner Springs, KS, Veterinary Medical Publish-
jng Company, 1977
effective. Heartworm-positive cats can be placed on
21. Donahoc JR, Knellcr SK, Lewis RE. Hematologic and
ivermectin without complications.
tive larvae of D. immitis. J Ann Vet Med Assoc 168:413,
1976
22.
Donahoe JM. Experimental infection of cats with D.
REFERENCES
immitis J Parasitol 61:599, 1975
23. Fowler JL、 Matsuda K, Fernan RC. Expelimental infec-
tion of the domestic cat with D. inmtis. J Am Anim Hosp
1. Calvert CA. Feline heartworm disease. In Fox PR (ed):
Assoc 8:79, 1972
Canine and Feline Cardiology. New York, Churchill Liv-
24.
Pacheco G. Synopsis of Dr. Kume's report at the first
international symposium on canine heartworm discase.
ingstone, 1988, p 551
In Bradely R (ed): Canine Heartworm Disease: Current
2.Dilon AR, Warner AE, Molina J. Dirofilaria immitis infec-
Knowledge. Gainesville, Fl, University of Florida Press,
tion in dogs and cats results in pulmonary airway epithe
1972, p 137
lial and inicrovascular injury J Am Coll Vet Intern Med
25. Rawlings CA, L.osonsky JM, Lewis RE, et al. Response of
7:119, 1993
the feline heart to Aelurostrongylus abstrusus. J Am
2a. Manclla C, Donoghue AR. Feline heartworm liseasc
Anim Hlosp Assoc 16:573, 1980
and its diagnosis. Feline Pract 26:5, 1998
26.
Wong MM, Pedersen NC, Cullen J. Dirofilariasis in cats.
3. Dillon AR.Feline hcartworm disease. In Kirk RW (cd):
J Am Anim Hlosp Assoc 19:855, 1983
Current Veterinary Therapy IX. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
27.1
Dillon AR, Brawner wR, Grieve RB, ct al. The chronic
ders, 1986, p 420
elfects of experimentalDirofilaria immitis infection in
4. Donaloe JM, Kneller SK, Lewis RD. In vivo pulmonary
cats. Sem Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 2:72, 1987
arteriography in cats infected with D. immitis. J Am Vet
28. Otto GF. Abnormal hostabnormal location. Am HIeart-
Radiol Soc 17:147. 1976
worin Soc Bull 4:14, 1978
5. Donahoe JM, Holzinger EA. D. immitis in the brains of a
29.
 Otto GF, Occurrence of the heartworm in unusual loca-
dog and a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 164:518, 1974
tions and in unusual hosts. In Otto GF (ed): Proceed-
6. Lillis WG. D. immitis in dogs and cats from south ccntral
ings, Heartworm Symposium 1974. Bonner Springs, KS,
New Jersey J Parasitol 50:802, 1964
Veterinary Medical Publishing Company, 1974, p 6
7. Mandelker L, Brutus Ri. Feline and canine dirofilaria
30. Benard MA. Acute dirofilarial dcath. Can Vet J 1l:190,
cncephalitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 159:776, 1971
1978
FELINE HEARTWORM DISEASE
735
 31. Griffith HJ, Schlotthaucr JC, Gchrman FW. Feline diro-
cchocardiography as a diagnostic tool for detection of
flariasis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 140:6l, 1962
feline heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis) infcctions. Felinc
 32. Grieve RB, Mika-Johinson M, Jacobson RH, et al. Enzyme-
Pract 26:6, 1998
linked immunosorbent assay for mcasurement of anti-
36. Suter PF, Lord PF. Radiographic differentiation of dis
body responscs to Dirofilania immitis in cxperimentally
seminated pulmonary parenchymal discases in dogs and
infected dogs. Am J Vet Rcs 42:66, 1981
cats. Vet Clin North Aim 4:687, 1974
33. Green BJ, Iord PF, Grieve RB. Occult feline dirofilariasis 
36b. Borgarelli M, Venco L, Piza PM, et al. Surgical removal
confirmed by angiography and serology. J Am Anim
of heartworms from the right atrium of a cal. J Am Vet
Hosp Assoc 19:847,1983
Med Assoc 21l:68. 1997
34. Calvert CA, Coulter DB. Electrocardiographic values for
37. Desowitz RS, Una SR. The detection of antilbodies in
anesthetized cats in lateral and sternal recumbencies.
Am J Vet Res 42:1453, 1981
phoresis with D. mmitis antigens. J Helminth 50:53, 1976
35. Owens JM, Twedt DC. Nonsclective angiocardiography
38.
Weil GJ, Malone MS, Powers KG, et al. Monoclonal anti-
 in the cat. Vet Clin North Aim 7:309, 1977
bodies to parasite antigens found in the serum of Dirof-
35a. Venco L, Calzolari D, Mazzocchi D, et al. The use of
lania immis-infected dogs. J linnunol 2:1185, 198:
VI
Effects of
Systemic and
Metabolic
Disorders on
the Heart
Nutrition and
32
Management of
Cardiovascular
Disease
PAUL D. PION
BRUCE W. KEENE
MATTHEW MILLER
PHILIP R. FOX
The importance of nutrition and heart disease has beer underscored by
rccent advances in veterinary cardiology.' Previously, the interscction be
tween nutrition and cardiology began and ended with concerns about di-
etary sodium contert.2-s Today, the association between nutrition and cardio-
vascular biochemistry, energy production, and cardiac function is key to
understanding several common acquired disorders.
Many nutritional therapeutic recommendations arc derived from well-
meaning but weakly supported sources. Thus, whcncvcr administering drugs 
or prescribing nutritive pharimaceuticals or spccial diets, one must. consider
the source of information, strength of evidence prcsentcd, financial costs.
and potcntial risks and benefits.
Current management  of  heart  failure  emphasizes  an  integrated
(chapters 12, 17); assessment. of dietary sodium balance;7-10 awareness of
clinical dietary effects, neuroendocrine system activation, and compensatory
and periodic evaluation of electrolytes and nutritional factors. I6,22-26
ROLE OF ELECTROLYTES IN
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
SODIUM
Total body sodium is determined by the balance between sodium intake
and excretion. Passive and active carrier mechanisms effected by neuroendo-
crine control systems modlulate total body sodium and sodium ion distribu-
tion between intracellular and extracellular compartments. o
With popularization of drugs that. markedly afect sodium and water
excretion (e.g., loop diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
739
740 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
[ACEl]), rccommcndations for severe sodium restric-
with normal dogs, an impaired ability to excrcte di-
tion in humans are changing.° Recent advances in the
etary sodium has bccn rcportcd in dogs with naturally
undcrstanding of mcchanisms by which sodium and
occurring CHF, with asymptomatic cardiac disease, and
water excretion are rcgulated may alfect future dietary
with heart failure due to expcrimentally induccd val-
sodium rccommcndations,
vular disease.?" Early studies demonstrated that low-
sodium intake was clinically bencficial in some unmed-
icated dogs with asymptomatic heart disease and in
NEUROHIUMORALANDHEMODYNAMIC
some with CHF; however, the number of dogs evalu-
EFFECTS OF SODIUM RESTRCTYON
ated was small.a Some investigators have stated that
Plasma renin activity is significantly elevated in dogs
sodium intake in dogs with CHF could be safely re-
fed a low-sodium diet.1s3.13 Maintenance of blood pres-
 sure in hyponatremic animals appears to depend more
on renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system activity than
HYPONATREMIA
sympathetie nervous system stimulation. Carotid baro-
Hyponatrcmia is associated with incrcascd morbidity
carotid sinus occlusion in normal dogs who
were
and mortality in humans with hcart failure.* Although
clhronically sodium depleted.15 Sodium-depleted dogs
it is uncommon for hyponatremic patients with CIIF
 slhow a grcater elevation in blood prcssure in response
to be sodium depleted,7 * a nunber of factors may
to renal artery constriction than do sodium replete
contribute to dilutional byponatremia via retention of
dogs. This elevation was reversed by ACEI drug admin-
free waler and increased thirst. These include (l) re-
istration.17
nin-angiotensin-aldosterone system activation, (2) anti-
diuretic hormone (ADH) secretion, (3) local renal
factors (tubular flow kinetics), and (4) diuretics.* Hy-
EFFECTS OF SODIUM RESTRICTION ON
ponatremia may result. in neurologic signs dlue to de-
PLASMA SODIUM IN NORMAL DOGS
crcascd plasma osmolality. When accompanicd by dc-
 In normal dogs, the effect of low-sodium diets on
hydration, signs of low cardiac output may occur.
plasma sodium concentration is unclear. "Significant"
Although hyponatrcmia may rcsult from heart fail
decrcascs in plasma sodium have been reported, al-
ure or related therapy in some dogs and cats, it does
though tlie exact magnitudc of said decrease was
nol occur in all cases, even when patients with similar
disease severity are treated with thc sanc drugs.7 Low
 in plasrna sodiun in normal dogs fed low-sodium
serum-sodium concentration has been correlated with
diets.15. 16
increased plasma norepinephrine levels in humans
Chronic sodium restriction of normal dogs caused
with CHF"l and in dogs with severe CHF due to dilated.
significantly decrcascd cardiac output, stroke volume,
cardiomyopathy.!? Hyponatremia with heart failure
and plasma volume and significantly increased heart
confers a poor prognosis.7
rale ald peripheral vascular resistance. Thesc effects
were fully reversed with change to a sodium replete
CLINICAL APPLICATION OF DIETARY
dict.1
SODIUM RESTRCTION
Traditionally, sodium restriction has been recom-
EFFECTS OF SODIUM RESTRICTION IN
mended by veterinarians for animals with hcart dis-
CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE
ease. This has included homermade diets prepared by
 Dictary sodium restriction has long played a role in
owners (Table 32--1)22 or commercial pet foods formu-
management of human cardiovascular diseases, al-
lated as prescription diets (Table 32-2),26a The intent
though the consequences of sodium restriction have
of restricting dietary sodium is to reduce sodium and
not bccn fully explored in animals with congcstive
water retention, thereby decreasing cardiac prcload,t-1
heart failurc (CIIF). In dogs with experimentally in-
Although common sense and theory dictate avoidance
duced CHF, significant changes in plasma volume, so-
of high-sodium intake in dogs and cats with hcart
diurm excretion, and voluntary water intake were not
failure, virtually no data demonstrate or refutc a true
reflected by significant changes in plasma sodium. This
clinical advantage to feeding sodium-restricted over
suggests tliat plasma sodium concentration may be an
routine maintenance dicts. When overt CHF is present,
insensitive index of sodium and water balance
In1
dietary sodium restriction seems rational if the diet is
I d s iod a aq paidaioe
vcterinary medicine to decrease sodium delivery to
 Sodium restriction represents one of the many com-
thc distal tubule and thereby reduce “facultative reab-
ponents of heart failure management but should not
sorption' of distal renal tubular sodium.' Compared
be aggressively pursued al the expense of caloric in-
741
TABLE 32-1
 Recipes for Homemade Diets for Dogs and Cats with Cardiac Disease
Restricted Mineral and
Highly Digestible Diet for Dogs
Low-Sodium Diet for Dogs
Sodium Diet for Cats
Balanced suppleraent that fulflls the
Balanced supplcment that fulhils the
Balanced suppleiment that fulflls the
canine minimmm daily requirement for
canine rinimum daily requirement for
feline minimum daily requirenent for
all vitamins anc tracc minerals:
all vitamins and race minerals:
all vitamins and trace ininerals:
K cup farina cooked to make 2 cups
V Ib lean ground beef or pork or
1 Ih regular ground beef or lamh or
1y cups creamed coltage checsc
chicken
chickcn cooked
(low salt)
2 cups cooked rice without salt
/ Jb liver
1 large cgg, hard-cooked
1 thsp vegetable oil
1 cup cooked rice withour addedl salt
2 thsp brewer's ycast
2 isp dicalcium phosphalc
1 tsp vegetable: nil
3 tbsp sugar
1 tsp calcium carbonate
I tbsp vegetalble oil
1 tsp potassium chloride
 1 tsp dicalcium phosphale
1 tsp calcium carbonate
Cook farina accorling to package
Braisc neat, retaining fat. Add the
Conbine all ingredients.
drections, omitting salt. Cool. Add
remaining ingredienrs and mix.
 remaining ingredients to farina and
mix well.
Yicld: 2.2 1b (1 kg)
Yield: 1 Ib (0.5 kg)
Yield: 1% 1h (0.8 kg)
Analysis
Analysis
Analysis
Moisturc %
75.8
Moisture %
68.3
Moisture %
64.0
Protein %
7.1
Protcin %
6.3
Protein%
14.1
Fat %
3.7
%化
Fat %
13.8
Carbohydrate %
11.2
Carbohydratc %
17.7
Carbohydrate %
6.6
Fiber %
0.1
Sodium %*
10
Ash %
1.5
Ash %
2.1
ME (Kcal)
660/1b
Calcium %
11.24
Calciun %
0.33
Phosphorus %
0.15
fhosphorus %
0.19
Magnesinn %
0.014
fotassiun %
0.36
Magnesiun, mg/100 Keal
8
Sodium %
0.16
Sodium %
0.06
ME (Kcal)
485/1b
MF. (Kcal)
940/lb
50 mg sodium100 g dy diet.ME, metabolizable: crergy as f
Motdifeal fron Lewis LD, Morris MI.,Jr (eds), Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 3rd ed. Topeka. KS. Mark Morris Associates, 1987. p A3-1.
take. In gcneral, a less sodium-restricted, more palat-
sium intake associated with anorcxia, diuretic-induced
able dict is better than a more sodium-restricted diet
 renal potassium loss, hyperaldosteronisn, ancl pcrsis-
that a pet refuses to eat. Excessive sodium restriction
tent chloride deplction. Whereas high-sodium dicts 
alonc or in combination with certain cardiac drugs
increase delivery of sodium chloride to the distal tubu-
such as diuretics and ACE inhibitors can occasionally
lar potassium-secreting sitcs, vcry-low-sodium diets may
affect the patient adversely. The potential for hypona-
 stimulate aldosterone-induced potassium secretion.
tremia and azotemia incrcascs when dietary sodium
 The incidence of hypokalemia in dogs and cats be-
restriction is combined with high doses of loop diuret-
 ing treated with diuretics for CHF is nol. known. One
ics such as furosemide.
 study4 documentcd a clinically insignificant drop in
 serun potassium in dogs treated chronically with furo-
semide. A large multicenter investigation studying ca-
POTASSIUM
nine heart failure rcvealed no clinically significant
serum electrolyte changes in dogs treated with furose-
Electrolytes other than sodium are also important
mide and enalapril.?6a Severe hypokalemia in diuretic-
conccrns in patients with heart. disease. High dosages
treated animals is rare, but significant hypokalemia
of potent diuretics, most notably the loop diuretics
can occur,s especially in cats (chapter 28). Therefore,
such as furosemide and bumetanide, may cause hypo-
serurm potassium should be monitored in animals at
kalemia and hypomagnesemia. This is especially true
 increased risk for developing hypokalemia.
when patients are anorectic.
Hypokalemia causes increased morbidity in heart
failure patients and the need for potassium replace-
  bay r  u sey s 
HYPOKALEMIA
for ventricular arrhythmias and often rcceive digitalis
Hypokalemia is the most. common electrolyte abnor-
glycosides. The enhanced automaticity of cardiac tissuc
mality encountered during heart failure therapy in
 in response to toxic levels of digoxin is incrcased by
humans.2 Contributory factors include reduced potas-
hypokalemia.27 Also, the efficacy of class I antiarrhyth-
TABLE 32-2
Sodium, Potassium, and Magncsium Content of Selected Commercial Animal Foods
Sodiun
Potassium
Magnesium
(%)*
(%)*
(%)*
 Popular Dry Dog Foods
Mear1
0.40
69'0)
0.17
Iligh
0.68
0.99
0.30
Low
0.12
0.48
0.10
Purina Dog Chow
0.42
49'0
0.16
Alpo Beef Dinner
0.36
0.82
01.28
Gaines Gravy Train
0.40
0.80)
0.16
Friskics Conc 'N Get It
0.55
0.59
0.14
Purina Hi-Pro Dog Meal
86'0
0.50
0.13
 Kal Kan Pedigree Meal Timc
0.68
0.58
0.16
Purina Kibbles 'N Chunks
0.29
0.75
0.16
Fielel Trial Chrmks
01.48
0.76
0.30
Gaines Cycle-2 Adult
0.14
66'0
(0.19
Gaines Cycle-4 Senior
0.12
0.80
0.21
Purina O.X.E. Adult
0.50
0.54
0.10
Purina O.N.E. Lite
0.49
0.48
0.100
Premiurn/Super Preniurn Dry Dog Foods
Mcan1
0.35
0.65
0.11
High
(1.34
0.86
0.15
LOw
0.18
980
80'0
lams Less Active
0.26
0.75
0.12
Iams Chunks
tc"0
0.86
0.10
lams Eukanuba Adlt
0.33
0.80
0.08
Nutro Max
0.48
0.60
0.13
Purina Pro Plan Adult
0.11
0.55
0.10)
Purina Pro Plan Lite
0.42
0.44
(1.1()
Ilill's Science Diet Canine Maintenance
0.27
89'0
(1.12
Hill's Science Diet Camine Maintenance Light
0.24
0.84
0.15
Hill's Scicnce Diet Canine Senior
0.18
0.36
0.11
 Popular Canned Dog Foods
Mea11
66)
1.32
0.08
Iligh
1.61
1.96
0.14
Low
0.51
0.75
+0'0
 Alpo Becf Chunks Dinner
t9'0
1.32
0.07
Kal Kan_ Pedligree with Chunky Beef
1.38
1.08
(1.04
Mighty Dog Pure Beef
1.02
1.23
(1.04
Kai Kan Grand Gourmet with Chunky Bcef
1.19
1.96
0.08
Gaines Cycle-2 Adhlt
0.60
1.64
0.09
Skippy Chunky Becr Dinner
0.96
1.46
0.14
Quaker Oats King Kuts with Real Beef
1.01
1.10
0.06
Ken-I-Ration Original
1.61
1.57
0.13
Kal Kan Pedigree Sclect Dinner
1.40
1.26
0.10
Recipe Chunky Beef Stew
0.58
1.15
0.09
Cadillac Chunky Beef Dinmer
0.31
0.75
01.05
mic drugs (e.g., lidocaine, procainamide, quinidinc)
through judicious intravenous (IV) fluid administra-
is markedly diminished by hypokalemia.28 Although
 tion, avoiding exccssive fluid administration (prcload)
hypokalemia is commonly associated with heart failure
 and exacerbation of heart failure; IV potassium should
 and diuretic therapies, serum potassum may increase
not be administered fastcr than 0.5 mEq/kg/hr. Pref-
with concomitant administration of certain prostaglan-
erably, potassium can be supplemented orally using
din synthetase inhibitors, β-adrenergic blockers, potas-
 commercial replacement products, or by force feeding
 siurm-sparing diuretics, and angiotensin-converting en-
through nasoesophageal (cats) or pharyngeal (dogs)
zyme inhibitors.25. 29
tubes.
MANACEMENT OF HYPOKALEMIA. Decisions regarding
EFFECTS OF ACE INHIBITORS ON
potassium supplementation are based on serum elec-
PLASMA SODIUM AND POTASSIUM
trolyle levels. Fmpiric therapy with oral potassium
 agents should be avoided. In situations of critical hypo-
A large mulicenter trial studying the effects of enal-
kalemia, pofassium replacement can be accomplished
april in dogs with chronic acquired valvular disease
NUTRITION AND MANAGEMENT OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
743
TABLE 32-2
 Sodium, Potassium, and Magnesium Content of Selected Commercial Animal Foods Continued
Sodium
 Potassium
Magnesium
(%)#
(%)*
(%)*
Premium/Super Premium Canned Dog Foods
Mear1
(1.38
0.76
0.11
1ligh
(1.54
1.43
0.17
Low
0.26
0.37
0.08
Hil's Sciencc Dict Canine Maintenancc
0.29
0.62
0.12
Hill's Science Dier Canine Maintenance Light.
0.35
01.58
0.12
Hill's Scicnce Diet Canine Senior
0.26
0.44
0.09
Iams Beef Formula
0.33
0.73
0.10
lams Turkey Formula
0.54
0.69
01.08
Ians Chicken Formla
0.47
0.75
01.12
Iams Lamb & Rice Forrmula
0.44
0.80
(1.12
Nature's Recipe Maintenance Larnb & Rice
0.50)
1.45
0.17
Nutro Max Chicken, Lamb & Rice
0.26
0.72
(1.08
Nutro Natural Choice Laml & Rice
0.39
820
0.09
Dietary Animal Foods
Mean
01.21
0.69
0.09
Iligh
0.53
1.15
0.14
Low
0.08
0.30
0.05
Hill's Prescription Diet Caninc h/d dry
(1.08
01.72
0.12
Ilills Preseription Diet Canine h/d canned
0.08
0.83
0.13
Hill's Prescription Diet Canine k/d dry
0.23
0.38
0.08
Hil's Pescription Diet Caninc k/d canned
01.22
0.30
0.08
Hil's Preseription Diet HeaithBlend Canine Adult dry
01.22
01.54
80'0
Hill's Prescription Diet Health Blend Caine Adult canned
0.22
0.49
60'0
Hill's Prescription Diet HIcakthBlcnd Canine Geriatric dry
0.17
0.45
0.10
Hill's Prescription Diet HealthBlend Canine Gcriatric canned
0.26
01.37
0.019
Hill's Prescription Diet Feline k/d canned
(1.28
86t)
0.03
Hill's Prrscription Diet Feline k/d dry
0.25
0.89
0.05
Pro-Visions CNM CV-Formula canned
0.15
1.15
01.08
Waltham low sodium diet canmed
0.22
1.07
(1't)
Theradliet HIcart canned
0.11
0.40
0.05
Neura H diet canned
0.11
$6'0
01.09
Cadillac Speciad Formulation Diet H canmed
0.55
0.82
0.14
*Nutrient content calculated as a percentage of diet clry matter.
From Rouclk:hbush P. Strategies Ior avoiding diet-drug interactions in dogs with cardiac dlisease
and in dogs with cardliac: discas:
andl failure. Ve. Mecl
89(7) (Suppl):714-723, 1994, with permission.
(endocardiosis) and dilated cardiomyopathy found no
(e.g., ethyl alcohol, cisplatinum, amphotericin B, and
clinically significant serum elecirolytc abnormalities.
certain aminoglycoside antibiotics). Digitalis toxicity
 Moreover, the prevalence of azotemia in both placebo-
can be exaccrbated by hypomagnesemia,27 and digitalis
 and enalapril-treated animals was not significanuly dif-
     nd oe 
ferent.2s Many of these dogs were fed commercial
 magncscimia appcars to be present in some dogs with
sodium-restricted diets.
heart disease.29h. r
Serum magnesium does not usually correlate well
with tissue conccntrations. Magnesium is largcly bound
lo intracellular bufers or to bone, with only approxi-
MAGNESIUM
 mately 1 percent residing in the extracellular space.34
More reliable than serum magnesium levels are mag-
Magnesium depletion has received growing atten-
nesium assays from skeletal and cardiac muscle biop-
tion as a potential contributor to cardiovascular mor-
sies, or measurements of free or total magnesium in
 magnesium wasting occurs with both thiazide and loop
diuretic therapy, unlike urinary cacium excretion,
tests are not readily available. Serial measurements of
scrum magnesium in a given patient may reflect
which is enhanced only by loop diuretics.*2 Magnesium
 changes in total body magncsium homeostasis.
deficiency in humans results most commonly from
 poor dictary magnesium intake and increased renal
 magnesium wasting. The latter is generally due to di-
MANAGEMENT OF IIYPOMAGNESEMIA. Magnesium re-
uretics or drugs that exacerbate renal magnesium loss
placement thcrapy is usually considered when (1)
 744 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
there is high clinical suspicion of deficiency, as may
blockage of acini lcading to maldigestion. Others have
occur in a cachectic chronic heart failure patient re-
dlocumentcd protein-losing enteropathy from second-
ceiving digoxin and loop diuretics, and (2) a low-
ary intestinal lymphangiectasia associated with tricus-
normal serum rmagncsium levcl is detccted, Some
pid rcgurgitation.44 1ymphangiectasia from systcmic
ventricular arrhythmias in humans have responded fa-
venous hypertension and lymphatic hypcrtension not.
vorably to magncsium supplementation, cvcn in thc
only causes gastrointestinal protein loss, it is also associ-
face of normal serum magncsium levels.86
ated with loss of lymphocyte-rich lymph and resultant
immunologic impairment.
CARDIAC CACHEXIA
SYSTEMIC VENOUS CONGESTION
The nutritional status in cardiac cachexia may be
Cardiac cachexia has bcen recognized for centuries?7
influenced morc by systemic venous congestion than
and refers to loss of total body fat and lean body
by reduced cardiac output. Higher right atrial pres-
mass, most. notably skeletal musclc. In dogs it usually
sures and morc severe tricuspid regurgitation have
accompanies scvcrc chronic CHF. In cats it is rclativcly
been noted in patients with malnutrition and cardiac
uncommon but, when observed, is generally seen with
cachexia than in those with normal nutritional
chronic, severe, right-sided CHF. In humans, cardiac
status,3s、 44 'The importance of increased right atrial
cachexia, as dcfincd by anthropomctry and low serum
 pressurc is supported by the finding of protein-losing
severc, chronic CIIEs Protein-energy malnutrition
disease* and congenital right atrial lesions, *# in which
(kwashiorkor) and total body malnutrition (marasmus)
 left ventricular systolic function may be normal.4
have bcc1 used to describe different clinical conditions
in humans.*8a
HYPERMETABOLISM
Abnormal energy cxpenditure accelerates the wast-
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
ing process. An absolute or relative degree of hyper-
metabolism  may rcsult from  increased myocardial
 Although no unified concept explains the pathogcn-
oxygcn consumption, hypcrpnea, increased work of
csis of cardiac cachexia, a numbcr of factors may
breathing, and, occasionally, low-grade fever,17 Sym-
contribute.* 4 Decreascd caloric intake, reduced calo-
 pathetic nervous system activation associated with
ric assimilation, increased caloric utilization, hormonal
chronic CHF12 s0 may contribute to the hypermetabol-
changes, altered balance between catabolism and ana-
ism associated with cardiac cachexia.
bolism, and iatrogenic causes have been proposcd.
DRUG TOXICITIES
INAPPETENCE AND ANOREXIA
 Drugs such as digitalis glycosides and some ACEI
Inadequate intake of calories and vitamins has bcen
such as captopril may cause dircct toxicity and unto-
docunented in human heart failure paticnts.  Mild
ward gastrointestinal effects. Digitalis glycosides also
abdominal discomfort associated with ascitic distenlion
exert an inhibitory elffect on sugar and amino acid
is common in humans with right-sided heart failure
transport in the small bowel.$ Plasma electrolytes may
and may act as a deterrent. to eating, especially if eating
become altered by cardiac glycosides, ACEl, and di-
intcnsifies lic discomfort. Gastric compression by as-
uretics, affecting appctite and gastrointestinal motility.
citic fluid and hepatomcgaly may simulatc satiety or
fullncss. Reduccd gastric cmptying associatcd with al-
TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR
tercd gastric motility has been deseribed.α A common
observation in animals is that diets are made unpalat-
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) has becn implicated
able by scvere sodium and protein restriction.
 in the pathogenesis of cardiac cachexia. Also rcferred
to as cachectin, TNF is a cytokine produced primarily
by monocytes. It has cytotoxic activity against certain
MALABSORPTYON ANDMALDIGESTION
tumor cells and inhibits activity of lipoprotein lipasc,
Significant steatorrhea has been demonstrated in 56
an enzyme involved in the hydrolysis of chylomicron-
pcrcent of humans with right-sided heart. failure, and
erol,32. 52a
digestivc defcct." Intestinal mucosal congestion may
Clinical studies have documented elevated circulat-
contribute to malabsorption.Pancreatic edema may
ing TNF levels in cachectic humans and canincs with
cause functional pancrcatic cellular impairment or
chronic heart failure,5 and in some cats with heart
failure,a In humans, TNF levels were most elevated in
OMEGA-3 FATTY ACIDS
paticnts who had high plasma renin activity, low serum
 sodium concentration, and poor renal function. Renin
Fish oils and other seafoods contain a special class
and prostaglandin (especially prostaglandin Es) are
 of polyunsaturated fatty acids called omcga (@) - 3, or
relcascd in chronic CHF to regulate glomerular filtra-
n -3 (*'n minus three'), fatty acids. Thcy have been
tion and systemic vascular resistance. Concentrations
reported to exert certain antibypcrtensive cffects1 2
of prostaglandin Fy similar to those mcasured in pa-
 and possibly to reduce mortality from coronary disease
tients with byponatremic heart failurc stimulate TNF
in hurmans, although recent findingsie havc shown
production from monocytes in vitro.56. 37
limited promise for thc latter Prostaglandins and
other eicosanoids from polyunsaturatcd fatty acids af-
fect blood pressure regulation,s Alterations in blood
MANAGEMENT OF CARDIAC CACHEXIA
pressure during dietary supplcmentation with o-3
 Cardiac cachexia is dcbilitating, leading eventually
fatty acids may be due to changes in cndogenous syn-
 to severe skeletal muscle wasting and a poor prognosis.
thesis of vasoactive eicosanoids."
Other possible mechanisms havc bccn proposed.
Management includcs (l) assuring adequate caloric
For example, w -- 3 faty acids might cnhance the renal.
intakc, (2) drug therapy to improve hemodynamic
handling of clcctrolytcs; effect the releasc or rcsponsc
parameters affected by heart failure, and (3) avoidance
of drug toxicities or unpalatable dicts that contribute
to renin and related hormones; protect renal fiunc
to anorexia. Future interventions might include at-
tion by lowering artcrial pressure and reducing thc
progressive renal dysfunction with systemic hyperten-
tempts to altcr elevated circulating TNF levels. For
example, both oxpcntifylline and n-3 polyunsaturated
sion; and reduce vascular responsivcness to systemic
vasoconstrictors and a lower blood viscosity.6! The ef-
fatty acids supprcss TNF concentrations in humans.58
fects of ao -- 3 fatty acids are not likcly limited to altered
renal function but may also involve vasoactive hor-
moncs or vascular reflexes.6
ARTERIAL HYPERTENSION AND
 Ongoing veterinary studies evaluating the cffect of
DIET
insight. Specific rccommendations await further eval-
lations.
Elevation of arterial blood pressure and associated
conditions are receiving increasing attention (chapter
L-CARNITINE DEFICIENCY
 35). The roles of certain nutrients are being explored,
and dietary modifications are often included in ther
apy. Dietary management of systemic hypertension
L-Garnitine (3-hydroxy, 4Ntrimethylaminobutyric
acid) is a small, water-soluble quatcrnary amine (mo-
tion.t. 2. 92.59
lecular weight, 160), found in high concentrations in
mammalian heart and skelctal musclc. In the dog.
I-carnitine is synthesized from the amino acids lysine
SODIUM CHLORIDE
and methionine. The enzyme required for final synthe-
sis, gamma-butyrobetaine hydroxylasc, is found primar.
ily in the liver but not in mammalian hcart or skeletal
Fxcessive dietary sodium intake has been incrimi-
muscle.
nated in the pathogcnesis of human primary hyperten-
sion. Most comrmercial dog foods contain high levels
of sodium chloride, some in exccss of 1 percent on
a dry weight basis (Table 13-2).22. 26a Experimentally.
ROLE OF L-CARNITINE IN CANINE
 u o n  asd poo r
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY
 dietary sodiun chloride restriction in sorme animal
-   s    s
A poorly understood membranc transport. mecha-
nism concentrates I-carnitine in cardiac and skeletal
cats with hypertension associated with renal disease
myocytes. In normal mammals, plasma carnitinc corre-
would benefit from moderate dietary sodiun restric-
latcs closely with myocardial carnitine concentrations.
tion. Sodium intakes between 0.1 and 0.3 percent of
This close correlation is lost in canine dilatcd cardio-
the diet havc been recommended for dogs and 0.4
myopathy (DCM). Pathophysiology. metabolism, and
 percent of the diet recormmended for cats.17 22. 59
deficiency states have becn reviewed.$7 73
746 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
PHYSIOLOGIC FUNCTIONS OF
spaniels with DCM and taurine deficiency may be re-
CARNITINE
sponsive to taurine and 1.-carnitine therapy."
MYOCARDIAL ENERGY PRODUCTION
ENDOMYOCARDIAL.BIOPSY
Free carnitine is required in the myocardium for
Tissue biopsies are needed to document tissuc carni
fatty acid metabolism, and it serves an imporlant de-
tine deficiency definitively. Currently, transvenous el-
toxifying role in the mitochondria.67 Under all but
domyocardial biopsy is the best-tested method. This is
immediate postprandial conditions, long-chain free
pcrformed in sedated dogs placed in lateral recum-
fatty acids are quantitatively the most important meta-
bency under fluoroscopic control. Generally consid-
ered a research technique, the procedure is not diffi-
nitine is a critical component of the mitochondrial
cult or risky in experienced hands.72
membranc enzymes (carnitine acetyl transferase I and
II) that transport activated fatty acids in the form of
CARNITINE ASSAYS AND NORMAI
acylcarnitine esters across the mitochondrial
1 mem-
CANINE VALUES
branes to the matrix, where β-oxidation and subse-
quent high-energy phosphate generation occurs.
Methods for measuring plasma and tissue carnitinc
 concentrations have been described.7 Appropriate
samples (I ml of heparinized plasma that was immedi-
MITOCHONDRIAL DETOXIFYING ROLE
ately separated and frozen; two 5-mg endomyocardial
 Frce carnitine serves as a mitochondrial detoxifying
s ps a pe sas d
pue sdnons poe (.duduaans, 1o) sundane Aq nuase
blotted dry, and frozen in liquid nitrogen within 15
seconds of acquisition) may be sent. to commercial or
them out of the mitochiondria as carnitine esters. Many
research laboratories for analysis. The cost of a plasma
defects in mitochondrial metabolism result in the toxic.
08I$ on ogs Alaleuxoidde moj ssuen Aesse suui
accumulation of these substances. For example, propri-
per sample. lissle assays generally cost approximately
onyl-CoA (coenzyme A) decarboxylase deficiency (one
twice as much.
 of the so-called organic acidurias) causes the toxic
Canine valucs for normal total, free, and esterified
accumulation of proprionyl-CoA in mitochondria un-
carnitinc concentrations in plasma and myocardium
 less frce carnitine is available to form a proprionyl-
are listed (lable 32-3). These are similar to values
  a  a si ) sa 
reported from larger, more invasive (open chest) dog
regcneratc metabolically useful free CoA.o Similarly,
studies.74
defects in mitochondrial medium, long-chain, or multi-
ple acylCoA dehydrogenase enzymes can cause acyl-
CoA to accumulate in the mitochondria to toxic levels
CARNITINE DEFICIENCY STATES:
unless the excess acyl groups are esterified to free
CLASSIFICATION
carnitine, producing an acyl-carnitine ester and regen-
erating free CoA. Excess carnitine esters cannot be
An absolute decrcase in the plasma-free carnitine
reabsorbed by the kidney. Carnitine deficiency eventu-
concentration is termed "plasma carnitine deficicncy.'
ally results if large quantities of frec carnitine are not
Similarly,
;, “"myocardial carnitine deficiency” is diag-
      s
nosed when the myocardial carnitine concentration
 prevented if adequate free carnitine is available. IIow-
falls below the 95 percent confidence interval for nor-
ever, underlying mitochondrial defect(s) are not cor-
mal. In humans, when the ratio of esterified to free
rected by carnitine supplementation, and carnitine
 carnitine in plasma exceeds 0.4 in the face of normal
therapy in these instances is palliative.
TABLE 32-3
 Normal Canine Plasma and Myocardial Carnitine
DIAGNOSIS: CANINE CARNITINE
Concentrations*
DEFICIENCY
Myocardial Carnitine
Plasma Carnitine
(nM/mg Noncollagenous
 e a r s  o  
(μM/liter)
Proteini)
cluding encephalopathy, muscle weakness, recurrent 
Total
Free
Esterified
Tolal
Free
Esterified
infections,
.“failure to thrive,” and congestive heart
 failure.7o Carnitine deficiency has been associated with
88-31
8-36
4-0
5-13
4-11
04
 primary myocardial diseases in humans, hamsters, tur-
*Ninety-five percent confialence intervals from six healthy dlogs fedl a stan-
datd commercial dict.
plasma concentrations of free carnitine, carnitine insuf
deficiency (lable 32-3). Unfortunately, endomyocar-
fctency is said to exist.? The utility of this ratio has not
dial biopsy is generally unavailable. Plasma carnitine
becn extensively investigated in dogs. If both plasma
concentrations offer a specific but insensitive indicator
and tissue free carnitine concentrations are decreased,
of myocardial carnitine deficiency, with limited utility
systemic carnitine deficiency is present. When endomyo-
 in identifying carnitine-deficient patients. Recommen-
cardial biopsy specimens contain decreased free carni-
dations for L-carnitine thcrapy in canine DCM arc
tine despite normal or elevated plasma free carnitine
based upon a number of considerations: (l) myocar-
concentrations, myopathic carnitine deficiency is present.
 dial carnitine may be increased following oral supple-
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PLASMA AND
trations have been documented with dramatic clinical
MYOCARDIAL. CARNITINE CONCENTRATIONS
and hemodynamic improvement in a few dogs (pri-
 Plasma carnitine deficiency is a specific but insensi-
marily boxers receiving carnitine, and American
tivc marker for myocardial carnitine deficiency in dogs
cocker spaniels receiving taurine and carnitine); (3)
with DCM. Most (80 percent) of the dogs in whom
the relative safety of this compound; and (4) the ratio-
myocardial carnitine deficiency has been identified
nale that some clinical benefit may be derived from
have myopathic carnitine deficiency (see earlier), with
correcting this deficiency.
normal or elevated plasma carnitine concentrations.
L-Carnitine is probably a useful adjunct to conven-
Systemic carnitine deficiency is present in approxi-
tional phiarmacotherapy in the treatment of heart fail-
mately 20 percent of the DCM cases. Current investiga-
ure for many, but by no means all, dogs with myocar-
tions at North Carolina State University estimate (using
dial carnitine deficiency associated with DCM. There
a 95 perceint confidence interval constructed from 20
is no evidence that high doses have any effect in the
 consecutive, unrelated dogs) that myocardial free car-
 absence of myocardial carnitine deficiency.
nitine deficiency occurs in between 19 and 95 percent
of dogs with DCM, although plasma carnitine levels
CLINICAL RESPONSE TO CARNITINE THERAPY
may be normal, elevated or low. Fxperimentally,
The effcacy of carnitine supplementation on sur-
tolic myocardial dysfunction and CHF. This is also
vival or any objective parameter of myocardial function
associated withi myocardial carnitine deficicncy in thc
is difficult to measure. The natural progression of
face of normal or elevated plasma carnitine concentra-
DCM is variable, and multiple drugs are used to man-
tions.76
age associated CHF and arrhythmias.
Myocardial carnitine deficiency may represent only
MECHANISMS OF CARNITINE DEFICIENCY
part of a spectrum of deleterious biochemical changes
Several potential factors may contribute to carnitine
caused by many of the mitochondrial defects that con-
deficiency in canine DCM: (l) decreased carnitine
tribute to DCM. Therefore, carnitine supplementation
synthesis; (2) decreased dietary intake (despite endog-
 only imperfectly palliates these defects. This palliation
enous carnitine synthesis, dogs require a dietary carni-
may nevertheless be metabolically useful to the dam-
tine source to maintain plasma carnitine concentra-
aged myocardium, especially since it is obtained
tions at levels comparable to those found in other
without  the potential  metabolic or hemodynamic
 mammalian species because of their relatively limited
"penalties' often associated with many conventional
renal capacity to reabsorb carnitine); (3) intestinal
therapies. In a prospective pilot study, 18 Doberman
malabsorption; (4) increased renal loss; (5) abnor-
 pinschers with severe CHF and DCM received carnitine
mally increased esterification of free carnitine; and
supplementation regardless of initial myocardial carni-
(6) myocardial membrane transport defects.7 Because
tine concentration. Dogs with myocardial carnitine de-
approximately 80 percent of the dogs with DCM that
ficiency survived significantly longer than those that.
are fed commercial diets have myocardial carnitine
 had normal carnitine concentrations.7 Although the
deficiency with normal or elevated plasma carnitine
concentrations, it is theorized that dogs might suffer
the mean survival of Dobermans with myocardial carni-
from a membrane transport defect preventing ade-
tine deficiency treated with carnitine in addition to
quate quantities of carnitine from entering the myocar-
dium from the plasma.
proved. In a blind, placebo-controlled trial, carnitine
supplementation has been beneficial in the therapy of
CARNITINE THERAPY IN CANINE
moderately severe human heart failure.7 Carnitine has
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY
also been useful in treating CHF in Syrian hamsterss0
and American cocker spaniels.
INDICATIONS
The relatively small percentage of dogs that respond
Ideally, carnitine supplementation should be based
dramatically to carnitine therapy do so in a reasonably
on the documented presence of myocardial carnitine
predictable manner:
1. The first nolable observation is usually gcneralized
CARNITINE DEFICIENCY AND CATS
clinical improvement. This includes incrcased appe
tie and activity, typically 1 to 4 wecks after initiation
 of oral carnirine supplementation.
Currently, no data implicate carnitine deficicncy in
2. Echocardiographic improvement is not generally
feline myocardial disease, although little rescarch in
this area has becn performed. Plasma carritinc con-
demonstrable during the first 8 to 12
wecks of
 centrations measured from cardiormyopathic cats were
supplemcntation, and il may not occur at all. When
 generally higher than normal; myocardial concentra-
obscrvcd. irnprovement in systolic time intervals
 and fractional shortening begins afier 2 to 3 months
of supplemcntation. Improvement may continue for
plasma and myocardial carnitine concentration is in-
about 6i to 8 months, when a platcau is often
consistent.7x
dcspite  depressed   echocardiographic ventricular
function indices (fractional shortening rarely im-
NORMAL FELINE CARNITINE VALUES
proves above 15 to 25 percent).
 Mean carnitine concentrations were higher in adult
 3. The frequeney and severity of ventricular cctopy
cats than in kittens for skeletal muscle (total and free
generally remain unaltered by carnitine therapy.
carnitine) and myocardium (free carnitine). Plasma
4. Conventional heart failure therapy can occasionally
carnitine was similar between genders in kittens; how-
be witlidrawn fror dogs responding to carnitine
ever, adults displayed highcr total, frce, and esterified
supplcnentation.
carnitine concentrations in females than in males."l
Normal values are listed in Table 32-1.7x
DOSAGE. Orally administcred L-carnitine is rapidly
and completely absorbed. Plasma concentrations fol-
lowing a single oral dosc remain clevated for approxi-
mately 8 hours in the dog.72 In DCM dogs with myocar-
TAURINE DEFICIENCY
 dial carnitiue deficiency, highi doses of carnitine (50
to 100 mg/kg tid) given orally elcvate thc plasma
L-carnitine concentration 10 to 20 tines above pre-
Taurine (2-aminocthanesulfonic acid) is a sulfur
trcatment valucs.7 This usualy (but not always) in-
containing amino acid found throughout phylogenetic
creases myocardial L-carnitine concentrations into the
history It is largely confincd to animals and seldom
normal range, as demonstrated by endomyocardial bi-
encountered in plants.*2
opsy findings following I to 3 months of therapy. If
The majority of taurine is intraccllular, dissolved in
endomyocardial biopsy is unavailable, and the owner
the cytosolic fluid and bound to cell membranes. Tis-
is cornfortable with the financial expenditure relative
sues with the highest taurinc concentratious include
 to the unccrtain benefits, carnitine supplementation is
 heart, retina, central nervous system, and skeletal mus-
recommended. Large dogs (25 to 40 kg) receive 2
cle.* In cats, intracardiac taurine conccntrations range
grams (approximately 1 teaspoonful of commercially
0gIunisseiod mm aeduo) u gi pue g uaamq
available I-carnitine) mixcd with food three times
mM; and calcium—0.0001 mM in diastole, 0.01 mM in
daily.
trations in white blood cells and platelets.b6 87 These
SAFETy, Carnitinc appears to be extremely safe. Su-
high tissue taurine concentrations are maintained by
praphysiologic doscs have not produced serious ad-
active transport of taurine from plasma to the intracel-
verse effects. Mild diarrhea has occasionally becn rc-
 lular space that is rodulated by the β-adrenergic re-
ported in humans and one dog. The compound is
ceptor-adenylate cyclasc system.**
widely available in health food stores without a pre-
dicinal food,' and it is widcly added to carnitinepoor
PHYSIOLOGIC ROLE OF TAURINE
foods for humans without an adequate source of carni-
tine and uncerain synthetic capabilities (eg., nearly
Other than conjugation of bile acids and the detoxi-
all infant fccding formulas are now supplemented with
fication of xenobiotics via conjugation and excretion
car nitine).
in bile, the function of taurine in manmals is not well
Only thc l.-isomer must be administered, since
understood. It has bcen known since the mid 1970s
 D-carnitine inactivates carnitine-containing enzyme sys-
that taurine is essential for normal retinal functiou
tems, and mammals have no endogenous ability to
in cats.?? Taurine is cessential for normal myocardial
Converr D-carnitine to L-carnitine. Neither D-carnitine
function.so-st 1Despite in vivo and in viro studies illus-
nor the racemic mixture (D-I-carnitine) can be safely
trating the varicd and ubiquitous effects of taurine in
administered.
mammals, the basis for these effects remains unknown.
749
TABLE 32-4
 Normal Feline Plasma and Myocardial Carnitine Concentrations in Adult Cats7s
Myocardial Carnitine *
Plasma Carnitine*
(n = adull cats 14)
(μM/liter)
Male (n = 9)
Female (n = 4)
(nM/ng Nomcollagenous Protein)
Total
13.6 ± 4.3
24.8 ± 9.8
1.
80 + 68
Frec
11.1 ± 3.6
19.4 ± 7.2
Frec
2.7 = 0.6
Esterified
2.6 ± 1.6
5.4 ± 3.1
Esterificd
1.2 : 01.4
*Mean ± slatdard deviarion.
TAURINE PHYSIOLOGY AND
when compared with the cat.9 However, activity of this
METABOLISM IN THE CAT
enzymc alone does not fully explain the differencc in1
the requircment between these two species. Dogs also
Low tissue concentration of cysteine-sulfinic acid
Conjugate bile acids solely with taurine* Species differ-
ences in the balance between taurine synthesis and
decarboxylase (CSAD), a kcy enzyme in the biosynthe-
biliary taurine loss during bile acid conjugation quali-
sis of taurine,* has been reported as the reason cats
 have a limited ability to synthesize taurine from cyste-
tatively explains the dictary nced for taurine in the cat
inc and methionine. Howcver, this limited synthetic
and the lack of a dictary requirement in hcalthy dogs
 ability is not unique to the cat (e.g., humans also have
 and lumans.
Recent evidence suggests that taurine deficiency
limited synthetic ability), and it is unlikcly that this
alone is sufficicnt to explain the cat's propensity for
should be considered when formulating a differential
 developing low plasna taurine concentrations and as-
diagnosis for canine I)CM.97. 00, to1
sociated abnormalitics.
 Many mammals preferentially utilize taurine for bile
TAURINE AND THE HEART
acid conjugation, forming taurocholic acid; however if
taurine is in low supply, glycine can be utilized so that
There is extensive literature relating taurine to phys-
the inajor bile acid produced will be glycocholate (the
glycine conjugate). Cats are unable to conjugate sig-
iologic, biochiemical, and celular phenomena with re-
  m se    se 
spect to modulation of myocardial and cardliac fiunc-
tion. Taurine has beneficial effects in rabbits and
utilize taurine exclusively for bile acid conjugation,
humans?2 with valvular hcart discase. The identifica-
evenn whien dietary taurine is restricted. Continued bili-
tion of taurine deficiency-induccd rmyocardial failure
ary taurine loss, combined with a low synthetic ability,
in pet cats, and its reversal after taurine adinistra-
predisposes the cat to becoming taurine-depleted.
As an obligate carnivore, the feral cat has little risk
tion,*+ is the first. direct cvidence that tauriue defi-
of developing taurine deficiency However, pet cats
ciency can cause a clinically significant decrement in
have been put at. risk of becoming taurine-deficient.
myocardial mcchanical functionl in vivo.
through (l) the modern practice of feeding commer-
cially produced cat. foods, many of which are based
MECIIANISMS OF TAURINE DEFICIENCY
upou plant products, and (2) our incomplete under-
stauding of feline nutrition. Several significaint clinical
Mechanisms proposed to explain the action of tau-
states may result fron taurine deficiency, including
rine upon thie myocardium include (l) osmorcgula-
tion (taurine is a small, highly charged, osmotically
retinal degeneration, dilated cardiormyopathy, and in-
fertility.
active molecule, and cellular osmoregulation induced
by changes in intracellular taurine concentration may
 s sa     m
TAURINE PHYSIOLOGY AND
of tissue calcium concentrations and availability*); (3)
METABOLISM IN THE DOG
free radical inactivation;*2 and (4) other potential
Imechanisms (Nmethylation of cell membrane phos-
Taurine is not an esscntial amino acid in the dog.
 pholipids;io2 direct cffects upon the contraclile pro-
Normal dogs fed dicts with little or no taurine main-
teins;o3. t and interactions with the renin-angiotensiu-
tain plasma and whole blood taurinc conccntration
 aldosterone system105).
similar to that found in the norimal cat.*7 The activity of
The relationship belween taurine deficiency and
cystcine-sulfinic acid decarboxylase (thc ratc-limiting
Inyocardial failure as documentcd in pet cats1 iw has
enzyme in the synthesis of taurine) is high in the dog
heightened clinical focus on this rclationship in other
 750  EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
TABLE 32-5
foxeso7 and dogs,10o, tot and implications for humans
Normal Values for Feline and Canine
with 1DCM has been discussed.108
Taurine Concentrations
Feline
Plasma*
TAURINE DEFICIENCY-INDUCED
Norinal, > 60
At risk,< 30 nnol/ml
MYOCARDIAL FAILURE IN CATS
Whole bloodlt
Normal, > 200 11mol/ml
EPIDEMIOLOGY
At risk, < 100 nmol/ml
Canine97
Anl association bctween DCM in pet cats, low plasina
Plasma
 taurine concentration, and diet was reported in 1987.941
Norinal, ≥> 25 mmol/ml:
 This phenomenon has been reproduced in experimen-
91 ± 30 mmol/inl (using lithiun heparin anticoagulant)
64 ± 16 nmel/m (using sodium heparin anticoagulant)
tal animals?1 and was independently confirmed in a
Imulticenter clinical study. 1 IIowever, dilated (conges-
Plasma taurine concentration is VERY labile; 24 hour of fasting can causc
   n aie sa o 
plasma concentrations to fall below 30 nnol/ml.
+whole blood taurine conceniration is not as labile as that of plasma
concentration. Fasting does not significantly affect valuces.
had been described, and responsc to therapy was uni-
referring to idiopathic DCM in cats is suspecled to bc
rcally associated with taurine deficiency, representing
Occasionally, taurine deficiency DCM still occurs i11
cats fed commercial diets containing inadequatc
a nutritional form of secondary cardiomyopathy.
amounis of taurinc.
Not all taurine-deficient. cats devclop myocardial fail-
ure. In repcated studies performed at the University
 of California at Davis, approximately 25 percent of all
CLINICAL FINDINGs. Historical complaints, sigualment,
     s (e  
and physical cxamination have many sinilarities to
 more than 2 years developed overt 1nyocardial failure.
Other factor(s) required  for taurine deficiency-
tral retinal degeneration coupled with cvidencc of
induced overt myocardial failure are unknowm. A ge-
 hcart diseasc increases suspicion of taurinc deficiency,
 netic predisposition has been proposed.'ts Nutritional
althiough taurine 
deficiency-induced  retinal  lesions
 taurine deficiency combined with other causes of myo-
arc permanent, indicating only that taurine deficiency
cardial "stress" (e.g. congenital or acquired left ven-
occurred at some time. Not all taurinc-deficient cats
tricular volume overload or toxic, ischemic, nutri-
develop central retinal degcncratio1.
tional, endocrine, or metabolic problems) may cause
complicating effects.
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY AND RADIOGRAPHY. Th1eSe Can
not definitively(
discriminate between taurine def-
ciency-induced myocardial failure and other forms of
DIAGNOSIS
feline cardiac disease. Echocardiography will detcct
Taurine deficiency-induced myocardial failure
myocardial failure and cardiac chamber dilation but.
should be suspccted when (1) myocardial (i.e., sys-
cannot confirm the underlying cause.
tolic) failure is found concurrenf with low plasma,
whole blood, or tissue laurine concentrations (Table
BLOOD TAURINE CONCENTRATION ASSAY. Cats with any
32-5), or (2) when other systemic evidence of taurine
form of myocardial failure should have blood drawn
deficiency (e.g., central retinal degeneration) is pres-
for plasma and whole blood tauriue concentration
ent.
assays beforc taurine administration ( Iable 32-6). Oral
Confirmation of taurine deficiency requires docu-
menting norimalization of rmyocardial function by se-
rial echocardiograrns after taurine supplementation.
TABLE 32-6
No criterion conclusively differentiates between tau-
Guidelines for Processing Blood Samples for
rine deficicncy-induced myocardial failure and pri-
Taurine Analysis
mary idiopathic DCM. Lack of ccho and clinical
response to taurine suggest idiopathic DCM (chap-
Draw samples for both heparinized plasma aund heparinized whole
ter 28).
 Placc sainple on wet ice, or centrifuge the sample and separatc
plasina immcdiately
HIsToRy. Diet history should be ascertained to dis-
Make sure the sainple contains no clots or hemolysis
Store and ship saniples frozen (dry ice or ice packs)
 cern homemade diets containing inadequate taurine.
Owners necd to be educated to prevent recurrencc.
*Whole bloocl analysis is most accurate.
NUTRITION AND MANAGEMENT OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE 751
taurine is rapidly concentrated in the heart.? Even a
ing fraction 25 to 30 percent) is recorded, although
single dose will make interpretation difficult.
these cats are generally asymptomatic and rarely re-
quire therapy other than maintaining normal plasma
taurine concentrations.
THERAPY
When myocardial failure is detected or clinically
PREVENTION OF FELINE TAURINE DEFICIENCY
suspected in cats, the following guidelines are sug-
gested.
As taurine deficicncy is belicved to result from inade.
quate dlictary taurine, it is prcventable in most cascs.
1. If CHF is present, supportive and symptomatic care
A precise requirerment for taurine cannot be deter-
is essential during initial therapy (chapters 12, 28).
mined for all foods because the requiremeint depends
 Digoxin is not essential, nor is it contraindicated.
upon many factors,91. 16-1s No commercial diet should
 2. Cats with documented or suspected taurine defi-
be assumed to be taurine suffcient unless the manu-
ciency should have supplemental taurine, 250 1ng
facturer has provided feeding trial data documenting
 orally every 12 hours until echocardiographic left
that it maintains normal blood and tissue taurine con-
ventricular dimensions and contractility normalizc,
centrations while feeding for at least 6 monthis. Siuce
This usually occurs within 4 nonths in cascs of
the late 1980s, manufacturers of commercial diets have
taurine deficiency DCM. Clinical improvement is
supplemented cat foods with additional taurine, which
usually evident within about 2 weeks.
 has grcaty reduced the prevalence of feline DCM
 3. Diuretics and ACE inhibitors can be discontinued
(chapter 28) .11
when signs of CHF resolve. While withdrawing med-
ications, the respiratory rate must be monitorcd
 and prompt re-evaluation scheduled if tachypnea,
TAURINE DEFICIENCY AND
dlyspnea, or anorexia occur.
 1. Clinical examination, including radiographic or
MYOCARDIAL FAILURE IN DOGS
cchocardiographic evaluation, should be repeated
1 week after withdrawing medications.
Unlike cats, dogs are inuch less prone to plasma
5. The diet should be altered to maintaiu normal
taurine deficiency. Few studies evaluating taurine and
plasma taurine concentrations (> 60 nnol/ml) or
canine heart discase have beenl reported.
normal whole blood taurine concentration (> 200
nmol/ml).
 6. Taurine supplementation can be discontinued once
EPIDEMIOLOGY
 echocardiographic values normalize as long as diet
 In the largest study of plasna taurinc and canine
modification maintains a normal plasma taurine
hcart disease, 71 dogs with DCM and 32 with chronic.
concentration.
 -n esee z pena sram sseasp renaea panbe
7. Taurine concentration should be monitored period-
rine concentration was low (< 20 nmol/1ml) in 12 dogs
ically to assure that the diet is maintaining accept-
with DCM but was norinal or high in dogs with chronic
able blood taurine levels. If taurine concentrations
 acquired valvular disease. Breeds representing these 12
becamc depleted again, rany cats will redevelop
alfected dogs were generally not representative of
 Imyocardial failure.
breeds commonly associated with DCM. Ouly one dog
had a history of an abnormal (vegetarian) diet and
improved clinically following taurine supplerentation.
PROGNOSIS
The causc of low plasma taurine in the other dogs,
All cats with myocardial failure should inmediately
and whether it was associated with generalized tissue
have supplemental taurine. The initial prognosis is
taurine depletion, was not reported.
guarded to grave. Approximately one third of affected
 Thc relationship of taurine and myocardial failure
cats dic within the first weck after diagnosis. Hypother-
r  s     
 mia and thromboeinbolism confer a poor prognosis.
spaniels with DCM were responsive to taurine and
Taurinc supplementation does not provide survival
L-carnitine supplementation.00. io1 Plasma taurine con-
beuefit until 2 weeks after treatment is begun. ‘The
centrations at baseline were low (< 50 uM/ml).
 prognosis can be upgradcd to fair for cats that survive
Plasma taurine concentration did incrcase during tau-
I week and respond to CIIF therapy. Cats that survive
rine supplementation. Plasma carnitine concentrations
 2 weeks have a good prognosis.
were within, only slightly below, or above reported
Most taurine-responsive cats have complete resolu-
 norinal limits at bascline; they did not change during
tion of echocardiographic and clinical abnormalities
 placebo administration and increased during supple-
after taurine supplementation.l06 19 Occasionally, re-
mentation. The cause of decreascd plasma taurine con-
sidual mild myocardial failure (left ventricular shiorten-
centration in thiese dogs is unknown.
752 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
THERAPY
4. Morris ML, Patton Rl., Tecter SM. Low sodium diet in
heart disease: How low is low? VM/SAC 71:1225, 1976
In American cocker spaniels with DCM, echocardio-
 5. ILeaf A. The clinical and physiologic significance of the
graphic left ventricular dimensions did not change
serum sodium conccntration. N Engl J Med 267:24,
1962
6. Spann JF. Hurst Jw. The: recognition and management
supplementation with taurine and carnitine. The
of hcart failure. In Hlurst Jw (ed): The IIcart, Arteries
sh1ortening fraction increased significantly but 1ot into
and Veins. 7th ed. New York. McGraw-Hill, 1990, p 418
the normal range. Echocardiographic variablcs rc-
7. Bonagura JD, Lchmkuhl L.B. Fluid and diuretic therapy
mained improved at 6 months. Thus, some American
 in heart failure. In DiBartola SP (ed): Fluid Therapy in
Small Aninal Practice. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
cocker spanicls with DCM nay be taurine deficient and
1992, p 529
responsive to taurine and carnitine supplementation.
 8. Oh MS, Carrol Hj. Disorders of sodiun metabolisin:
Hypernatremia
 and hyponatremia. Crit Care Med
cocker spaniels with low plasrma taurinc conccntration
20:94, 1992
and DCM, suggesting that gencralized tissue taurine
9. Packer M, Medina X, Yushak M. Correction of dilu-
depletion was present in these cases.10o. wo1
tional hyponatremia in scvere chronic heart failure by
converting-enzyme
inhibition.  Ann Intern Med
The relative rolc of carnitine and taurine in the
100:782. 1984
pathiogenesis of canine DCM deserves grcater study.
10. Rose BD. Clinical Physiology of Acid-Basc and Electro-
lyte Disorders. 3rd cd. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1989,
p 617
11. Nicod P, Biollax J, Waeber B, el al. Hormonal, global,
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
and regional haemodynamic responses to a vascular
AND OTHER NUTRITIONAL
antagonist of vasopressin in patients with congestive
CONSIDERATIONS
J56:433, 1986
12. Ware WA, Lund DD, Subieta AR, Schmid PG. Sympa-
thetic activation in dogs with congestive heart failure
caused by chronic mitral valve disease and dilated car-
Relationships betwccn cardiovascular diseasc and
diomyopathy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1475, 1990
other nutritional abuormalities represent arcas of
13. Fray JCS, Johnson MD, Barger AC. Renin release and
incrcasing investigation. A number of nutritional dis-
pressor response to rcnal arterial hypotension: Effect
turbances have been associatcd with systemic and car-
of dietary sodium. Am J Physiol 233:f119l, 1977
14. Stephens GA, Davis JO, Freeman RII, ct al. Hemody-
diovascular manifestations in animals, including atl1-
namic, fluid, and electrolyte changes during sodium
erosclerosis,Iu obesity, 12l and deficiencies in selenium
depletion in conscious dogs. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med
and vitamin E,122 B vitamins,23 and thiamine.124
163:416, 1980
Epidemiologic relations  were cvaluated  between
15. Rocchini AP, Cant JR, Barger AC. Carotid sinus rellex
in dogs with low- to high-sodium intakc. Am J Physiol
 plasina concentrations of nutrients and feline cardio-
vascular diseases in 220 cats.2 A number o signi0cant
322:H196, 1977
16. Hamlin RL, Sinith RC, Simith CR, Powers TE. Effects of
dlifferennccs were recorded in plasna concentrations of
a corntrolled electrolyte diet, low in sodium, on healthy
α-tocopherol, retinol, total triglycerides, and choles-
dogs. VM/SAC 59:748, 1964
terol among cats with hyperthyroidism and hypertro-
17. Cowgill LD, Kallett AJ. Systemic hypertension. In Kirk
phic and dilated cardiomyopathies. The clinical impor-
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy IX: Small Animal
talicc, if any. of these abnorinalitics remains to be
Practice. Philadelphia, WB Saluders, 1986, p 360
18. Watkins L, Burton JA, Haber E、et al. The renin-angio
clucidlatcd. Elevated plasma hoinocysteine concentra-
tensin-aldostcrone system in congestive heart failure in
tion has bcen linked to a wide variety of vascular
conscious dogs. J Clin Invest 57:1606, 1986
diseases, t2 Some cats with cardliomyopathy and arterial
19.Hlamlin RI., Smith CR, Ross JN. Detection and quanti-
thrombocmbolism  have  homocysteincinia
(Ilohen-
fication of subclinical heart failure in dogs. J Am Vet
haus AE, et al. Unpublished data, 1998).
Med Assoc 150:1513, 1967
 Is  u ss y re  re 
'Texthook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. Philadel-
phia, WB Saunders, 1989, p 1031
REFERENCES
21.
Keene Bw, Rush JE. Thcrapy of heart failure. In Et-
tinger SJ (ed): Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medi-
cine. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1989, p 939
22. Ralston SL, Fox PR. Dietary management, nutrition.
1. Iamlin RI., Buflington CAT. Nutrition and thc hcart.
and the heart. In Fox PR (cd): Canine and Feline
Vet Clin Yorth Am Small Anim Pract 19:527, 1989
Cardiology. Sew York, (Churchill Livingstone, 1988, P
2.1
Ross JN. IIeart failure. In Lewis LD, Morris MI., Hland
219
MS (eds): Simall Animal Clinical Nutrition lll. 3rd ed.
23. White RJ, Chanberlain DA, Haner J、 et al. Potassium
Topcka, KS. Mark Morris Associates, 1987, p 11.1
 depletion in severe heart discase. Br Med J 2:606, 1969
3. Pensinger RR, Dictary control of sodium intake in spon-
24. Cobb MA, Michell AR. Plasima clectrolyte concentra-
tancous congestive hcart failure in dogs. VM/SAC
tions in dogs receiving diuretic therapy for cardiac fail-
59:752; 784, 1964
ure. J Smali Anim Pract 33:526, 1992
NUTRFTION AND MANAGEMENT OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE 753
25. Roudebush P, Allen TA, Kuchn NF, ct al. The elfect of
39. Pitman JG, Cohen P. ‘Ihe pathogenesis of cardiac
combined therapy with captopril, furoscinide, and a
cachexia. N Engl J Med 27l:403, 1964
sodium-restricted diet on serum electrolyte concentra-
40. Ansari A. Syndromes of cardiac cachexia and the
tions and renal function in normal dogs and dogs with
cachectic heart: Current perspcctive. Prog Cardiovasc
congestive heart failure. J Vet Intern Med 8:337, 1994
Dis 30:45, 1987
26. White RJ. Chamberlain DA, Hamer J, et al. Poiassiun
41. Iarison JV. Diet therapy in congestive heart failurc:
depletion in severe heart disease. Br Med J 2:606, 1969
Abstract. J Am Dietet Assoc 21:86, 1945
26a. Roudebush P. Strategies for avoiding diet-drug interac-
42. Bologna A, Costadoni A. Osscrvazioni sulla funzonione
tions in dogs with cardiac discase and failure. Vet Mcd
gastropancreatica nci cardiopazienti. Arch ital mal
89(Suppl):714, 1994
I'app digcst 7:215, 1938
 27. Kelly RA. Cardiac glycosides and congestive heart fail.
43. Berkowitz D, Croll MN, Likoff W. Malabsorption as a
ure. Am J Cardiol 65:10E, 1990
complication of congestive heart failurc. Ani J Cardiol
28. Woosley RL. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
11:43, 1963
ol antiarrhythimic agents in paticnts with congestive
44. Strober W, Cohen LS. Waldmann 'TA, Braunwald F,
heart failure. Am Hleart J 114:1280. 1987
Tricuspid regurgitation: A newly recognized cause of
29. Chakko SC, Frutchey J, Gheorghiade M. Life-threaten-
protein-losing cnteropathy, lymphocytopenia and im
ing hyperkalermia in sevcre heart failurc. An Ileart J
munologic deficiency. An J Med 44:842, 1968
117:1083, 1989
45. Petcrson VP, Hastrup J. Protein-losing entcropathy in
29a. The COVE Study Group. Controlled clinical evala-
chronic constrictive pericarditis: Ahstract. Acta Med
tion of enalapril in dogs with heart failure: Results of
Scand 173:401, 1963
the Cooperativc Veterinary Enalapril Study Group. J
46. Miller MW, Bonagura JD, DiBartola SP, Fossum TW.
Vet Intern Med 9:243, 1995
Budd-Chiari-like syndrome in two dogs. J Am Anirm
29b. Khanna C, Lund EM, Raffe M, et al. I Iypomagnesemia
1Iosp Assoc 25:277, 1989
47. Cohn AE, Stecle JM. Unexplained fever in heart failure.
study. J Vet Intern Med 12:304, 1998
J Clin lnvest 13:853, 1934
29c. Boiko R, Plasna-magnesiumkonzentration bei I Iun-
48. Mcllroy MB. Dyspnea and the work ol breathing in
den mit Dilatativer Kardiomyopathie und/oder Atrio-
diseases of the heart and lungs. Progr Cardiovasc Dis
ventrikularklappenfibrose. Doktors der Veterinarmedi-
1:284, 1959
zin an der Frcien Universitat Bcrlin, 1996
 49. Olson RE. Myocardial metabolism in congestive heart.
30. Gottlicb SS, Baruch I, Kukin MI., Prognostic impor-
failure. J Chronic Dis 9:442, 1959
tancc of the serum magnesiun conceniration in pa-
 50. Knowlen GG, Kittleson MD, Nachreiner RF, Fyster GE.
ticnts with congestivc heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol
Conparison  ol  plasma  aldostcrone
concelltration
16:827,1990
among clinical status groups of dogs with chronic heart
31. Ralston MA, Murnane MR, Unverferth DV, Leier CV.
failure. J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:991, 1983
Serun and tissue magnesiun concenirations in pa-
51. Csky TZ, HIetzog Hy, Fernald JW. Effects of digitalis on
tients with hcart failure and serious vcntricular arrhyth-
active intestinal sugar transport. Am J Physiol 200:459,
mias. Ann Intern Med 113:841, 1990
1961
3la. Haigncy MCl, Kaab WS, Griffths F, et al. Loss of car-
 52. Olill A. The role of tumor necrosis factor (cachetin) in
diac magnesium in cxperimcntal heart failure prolongs
cachexia. Cell 54:141, 1988
and destabilizes repolarization in dogs. J Am Coll
52a. Anker SD, Clark AL, Kemp M, et al. Tumor nccrosis
Cardiol 31:701, 1998
factor and steroid metabolism in chronic heart failure:
32. Dyckner T, Wester PO, Widiman L. Arniloride prevents
Possiblc relation to muscle wasting. J An Coll Cardiol
thiazide-induced intracellular potassium and magne-
30:997,1997
sium losses. Acta Med Scand 224:25, 1988
53. Levine B, Kalman J, Mayer I., et al. Flcvated circulating
33. Gottieb SS. Importance of magnesium in congestive
levels of tumor necrosis factor in severe chronic hcart
heart failure. Am J Cardiol 631989:39G, 1989
failurc. N Engl J Med 323:236, 1990
 34. Reinhart RA. Magnesiun metabolism. A review with
54. McMurray J. Abdullah I, Dargie Ij, Shapiro D. In-
special referencc to the relationship bctween intracellu-
creascd concentrations of tumour necrosis factor in
lar content and serum levels. Arch Intern Med
"'cachectie" patients with severe chronic hcart failure.
148:2415, 1988
Br HIeart J 66:356, 1991
35. Dorup 1l, Skajaa K, Clausen T, Kjeldsen K. Reduced
55. Freeman LM, Rush JE, Brown Dy, Roubenoff R. Ele-
concentrations of potassium magnesium and sodium
vated concentration of tumor necrosis factor in dogs
pumps in human skeletal muscle during treatment with
with congestive heart failurc; Abstract. J Vet Intern Med
diurctics. Br Med J 296:455, 1988
8:146, 1994
 36. Edwards NJ. Magnesium and congestive heart failurc;
 55a. Meurs KM, Miller MW, Fox PR, et al. Serum tumor
Abstract. Procccdings, 9th Annual ACVIM Forum
necrosis factor concentration in cats with congestivc
1:679, 1991
heart failure; Abstract. J Vet 1nternal Mcd 9:200, 1995
 37. Withering w. An account of the Foxglove and some of
56. Dzau V], Packcr M, Lilly LS, et al. Prostaglandins in
 its 1nedicinal uses. Birmingham, Swinney, 1785
scverc congestive heart failure: Rclation to activation of
 38. Carr JG, Stevenson LW, walden JA, Heber D. Preva-
rn N ranroday pue wass usuore-uai s
lence and hemodynamic correlates of malnutrition in
J Med 310:347, 1984
severe congestive: hcart failure secondary to ischenic
57. Renz H, Gong JH, Nain M, Gemsa D. Release of tumor
 or idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol
necrosis factor from macrophagcs: Enhancement and
63:709, 1989
suppression are dose dcpendently regulated by pros-
38a. Schwengel RH, Goulieb SS, Fisher MI. Protein-energy
tagiandin  Ez  and  cyclic nucleotides.  J  Immunol
 malnutrition in patients with ischemic and nonischeimic
141:2388, 1988
dilated cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failurc.
58. Endres S, Ghorhani R, Kelley VE, et al. 'IThe effect of
Am J Cardiol 73:908, 1994
dictary supplementation  with n -3 polyunsaturated
  N   N     
fatty acids on the synthesis of interleukin-1 and tumo1
78a. Fox PR. Unpublishcd data, 1992
necrosis factor by mononuclear cells, N Engl J Med
79. Keene Bw, Kitteson MD, Rush JF, ct al. Myocardial
320:265,1989
carnitine deficiency associated with dilated cardiomy-
59. Ross LA, Iabato MA. Lse of drugs to control hypcrter-
opathy in Doberman pinschers, Abstract. Proceedings
sion in renal failure. In Kirk RW (ed): Current Veteri-
of thc A(VIM, 1989
nary Therapy X: Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia,
 80. Mancini M, Rengo F, Lingetti M, ct al. Controlled study
WB Saunders, 1989, p 1201
on the therapeutic elicacy of propionyl--carnitine in
60.Stanler R, Stamler J, Grimm R. Nutritional therapy
patients with congestive heart failure. Arzneimittel-
for high blood pressure: Final report of a fouryear
forschung 42:1101, 1992
randomized controlled trial, the Hypertension Control
 81. Kohayashi A, Masumura Y. Yamazaki N. t-Carnitine
Program. JAMA 257:1484, 1987
trcatment for congestive heart faihureexperimental
61. Knapp HI, FitzGerald GA. The antihyperlensive ellecrs
 and clinical study Jpn Circ J 56:86, 1992
of fish oil: A controlled study of polyunsaturated fatty
82. Huxtable RJ. Physiological actions of taurinc. Physiolog
acid supplements in csential hypertension, X Engl J
Rcv 72:101, 1992
Med 320:1037. 1989
83. Sturman JA, Gargano AD, Messing JM, Inaki H1. Feline
62. Bonaa KH, Bjerve KS, Straume B. Effect of cicosapen-
maternal taurine deficiency: Effect on mother and ofl-
faenoic and docosahexaenoic acids on hlood pressure
spring- J Nutr I16:655, 1986
in hypertension. N Engl J Med 322:795, 1990
 84. Pion PD, Kittleson MD, Skiles ML, et al. Dilated cardio-
62a. Ascherio A, Riinm EB, Stampfer M], et al. Dictary
myopathy associated with taurine deficiency in the do-
intake of n -3 latty acids, fish intake, and risk of coro-
mestic cat: Relationship to diet and myocardial taurine
nary disease among men. N Engl J Med 332:977, 1995
content. Adv Fxp Med Biol 315:63, 1992
63. Cinotti GA, Pugliese F. Prostaglandins and hypcrten-
85. Fox PR, Sturman JA. Myocardial taurine concentrations
sion. Am J 1Iypertens 2:10s, 1989
in cats with cardiac disease and in healthy cats fed
64.1
McMillanDE. Antihypertensive cffects of fish oil. N
taurine-modified diets. Am J Vet Res 53:237, 1992
Engl J Med 321:1610, 1989
 86. Pion PD, Lewis J, Grcene K, ct al. Fllect of meal-
65. Hlamazaki T, Nakazawa R, Tateno S. Effects of fish oil
fecding and food deprivation on plasina and whole
rich in eicosapentaenoic acid on serum lipid in hyper-
 blood taurine concentrations in cats. J Nutr 121(11
lipideinic hemodialysis patients. Kidncy Int 26:81, 1984
Suppl):S177, 1991
66. Brown SA. Role of dictary lipids in renal disease in
 87. Schuller-Levis G, Mehta PD, Rudelli R, Sturman J. Im-
the dog; Absract; Procecdings, Ioth Annual ACVIM
munologic consequences of taurine defciency in cats.
Forum, 1992, p 568
J Leukocytc Biol 47:321, 1990
67. Bremer J. (Carnitine-
-metabolism and functions. Physi-
 88. I luxtable RJ, Chubb J, Azari J. Physiological and experi
olog Rev 63:1420, 1983
mcntal regulation of taurine content in the heart. Fed
 68. Roe CR, Millington DS, Malthy DA, et al. L-Carnine
Proc 39:2685, 1980
enhances excretion of propionyl coenzyne A as propio-
89. Hayes KC, Carey RE, Schmidt SY. Retinal degeneration
nyl carnitine in propionic acidemia. J Clin Invest
 associatcd with taurine deficiency in the cal. Science
73:1785.1984
69. Fngel AG, Angelini C. Carnitine deficicncy of human
188:949, 1975
 90. Huxtable RJ. From heart to hypothesis: A mechanisim
skeletal muscle associated with lipid storage myopathy:
for the calcium modulatory actions of taurine. Adv Exp
A ncw syndrome. Science 179:899, 1973
Med Biol 217:371, 1987
70. Tripp ME, Katcher ML, Peters HA, et al. Systemic carni-
 91. Takihara K, Azuma J, Awata N, ct al. Beneficial cflect
tine deficicncy prescnting as familial endocardial fi-
of taurine in rabbits with chronic congestive heart lail-
broelastosis: A rrcatablc cardionyopathy. N Engl J Med
ure. Am Heart J 112:1278, 1986
305:385, 1981
71. Kecne BW, Panciera DP, Atkins CF, et al. Myocardial L-
92. Azuma J, Sawamura A, Awata N, et al. Thcrapeulic
carnitine deficicncy in a family of dogs with dilated
cffect of taurinc in congestive heart failure: A douhle-
cardiomyopathy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:647, 1991
 blind crossover trial. Clin Cardiol 8:276, 1985
72. Rebouche Cj, Engel AG. Kinetic comparrmental analy-
 93. Schaffer SW, Scyed-Mozaffari M, Kramer J, Tan BII.
sis of carnitine metabolism in the dog. Arch Biochcm
Elifect of taurine depletion. and treatment on cardiac
Biophys 220:60, 1983
contractility and metabolism.  Prog Clin Biol Res
73. Winter SC. Plasma carnitinc deficiency: Clinical obser-
179:167, 1985
vations in 5l pediatric patients. Am J Dis Child
94. Pion PD, Kitdeson MD, Rogers QR, Morris JG. Myocar.
141:660, 1987
dial failurc in cats associated with low plasma taurine:
74. Keene BW, Kittleson MF, Atkins CE, ct al. Modifed
A reversible cardioinyopathy. Science 237:764, 1987
transvenous endomyocardial biopsy technique in dogs.
95. Morris JH, Rogcrs QR. The metabolic basis for thc
Am J Vet Res 51:1769, 1990
taurine requirement of cats. Adv Exp Med Biol 315:33.
75. Parvin R, Pande SV. Microdctermination of carnitine
1992
and acetylcarnitine transferase activity. Anal Biochem
96. Rabin B, Nicolosi RJ, Hayes KC. Dietary influences on
79:190, 1977
bile acid conjugation in the cat. J Nutr 106:1241, 1976
76. Pierpont ME, et al. Myocardial carnitine metabolism in
 97. Kramer GA, Kitleson MD, Fox PR, et al. Plasma taurine
congestive heart failure induced by incessant tachycar-
concentration in normal dogs and in dogs with heart
dia. Basic Res Cardiol 88:362, 1993
 disease. J Vet Intern Mcd 9:253, 1995
77. Treem WR, Stanley CA, Fincgold DN, et al. Primary
 98. Jacobscn JG, Thomas LL, Smith LH Jr. Properties and
carnitine deficiency due to a failure of carnitine trans-
distribution of mainmalian L-cysteine sulfinate carhoxyl
port in kidney, muscle, and fibroblasts. N Fngl J Med
ases. Biochem Biophys Acta 85:103, 1964
319:1331,1988
 99. Ilaslewood GAD. The biological significance of chemi.
78. Jacobs G, Keene B, Cornelius LM, et al. Plasma, tissuc
cal differences in bile salts. Biol Rev 39:537, 1964
and urine carnitinc concentrations in hcalthy adult cats
100. Kittleson MD, Pion PD, DeLellis LA, Tobias AII. Dilatcd
and kittens. Am J Vet Res 51:1345, 1990
cardiomyopathy in Amcrican cocker spaniels—taurine
 NUTRITION AND MANAGEMENT OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE 755
deficicncy and preliminary results of response to sup-
hemodynamic  evaluation of  cardiomyopathy and
plementation.New Orleans, ACVIM Scientific Proceed-
thromhocmbolism in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
ings, 1991
164:154, 1974
101. Kittleson MD, Kcenc B, Pion PD, el al. Results of the
115. Lawler DF, Templeton AJ, Monti KL: Evidence for ge-
Multicenter Spaniel Trial (MUST): Taurine and carni-
nctic involvement in feline dilated cardiomyopathy. J
tine responsive dilated cardiomyopathy in Amcrican
Vct Intern Med 7:383. 1993
cocker spaniels with decreased plasma taurine concen-
116. Hlickman MA, Bruss MI., Morris JG, Rogers QR. Dictary
trations. J Vet Intern Med 11:204, 1997
protein source (soybean vs. cascin) and taurine status
102. Hamaguchi 'T, Azuma J, Schaffer S. Interaction of
affect kinetics of the entcrohcpatic circulation of tauro-
taurine with methionine: Inhibition of myocardial
cholic acid in cats. J Xutr 122:1019, 1992
phospholipid methyltransferase. J Cardiovasc Pharm
117. Ilickman MA, Rogers QR, Morris JG. Taurine balancc
18:224,1991
is dillerent in cats fed purifed and commercial diets. J
103. 1ake N. Loss of cardiac myofibrils: Mcchanism of con-
Nutr 122:553, 1992
tractilc deficits induced by taurine deficiency. Am J
118. Hickman MA, Rogers QR, Morris JG. Effect of pro.
Physiol 264:111323, 1993
cessing on fate of dietary ↑14C] taurine in cats. J Nutr
104. Stccle DS, Sinith GI., Miller DJ. The clfects of taurinc
120:995, 1990
on Ca2+ uptake by the sarcoplasmic reticulum and
118a. Fox PR. Feline myocardial discases. 18th Annual
Ca2 + sensitivity of' chemically skinned rat heart. J Phys-
Waltham/OsU Symposium. Cardiology. Vernon, CA,
iol 422:499, 1990
waltham USA, 1994, p 119
105. Gentile S. Bologna E, Terracina D, Angclico M. Tau-
119. Pion PD, Kittleson MD, Thoimas WP, et al. Clinical
rineinduced diuresis and natriurcsis in cirrhotic pa-
findings in cats with dilated cardiomyopathy and rela-
tients with ascites. Life Sci 54:1585, 1994
tionship of findings to tauurine deficiency. J An Vet Med
106. Sisson DD, Knighit KH, Helinski C, et al. Plasma taurine
Assoc 201:267, 1992
concentrations and M-mode echocardiographic. mea-
120. Zhu BQ, Parmley WW. Modification of experimental
sures in hcalthy cais and in cats with dilated cardiomy
and chinical atherosclerosis by dietary fish oil. An Heart
opathy. J Vct Intcrn Med 5:232, 1991
J119:168, 1990
107. Moise NS, Pacioretty LM, Kallfclz FA, el al. Dietary
121.
 Messerli FI1. Cardiomyopathy ol obesitya not-so-Vic-
taurine deficiency and dilatcd cardiomyopathy in the
torian disease. X Engl J Med 314:378, 1986
fox. Am IIcart J 121:54l, 1991
122. Van Vlcet JF. Current knowledge of selenium-viamin
108. Tenaglia A, Cody R. Fvidence for a taurinc-deficiency
E deficiency in domestic aninals. J Ain Vet Med Assoc
cardionyopathy. Am J Cardiol 62:136, 1988
176:321,1980
109. Liu SK Congestive hcart failure in the cat. J Am Vet
123. Stcier M、 Lopez R, Cooperman JM. Riboflavin defi-
Med Assoc 156:1319, 1970
ciency in infants and childrcn with heart discase. Am
110. Harpster NK. Acquired hcart diseasc in the cat. Pro-
Hcart J 92:139, 1976
ceedings, 40th Anmual Meeting, American Animal Hlos-
124. Kawai C, Wakahayashi A, Matsumara T, cet al. Reappear-
pital Association; 1973, p 118
ance of beriberi heart disease in Japan: A study of 23
1ll.
Liu SK Pathology of feline heart disease. Vet Clin
cases. Am J Med 69:383. 1980
North Am 7:323, 1977
125. Fox PR, Trautwein EA, IIayes KC, el al. Comparison
l12. Li SK. Tilley LP. Animal models of myocardial dis-
of taurine, α-tocopherol, retinol, selenium, and total
eases. Yale J Biol Med 53:191, 1980
triglycerides and cholesterol concentrations in cats with
113. Van Vleet JF, Ferrans VJ, weirich WE. Pathologic alter-
cardiac discase and in healthy cats. Am J Vet Res
ations in hypertrophic antd congestive cardiomyopathy
54:563, 1993
of cats. Am J Vet Res 4l:2037, 1980
126. Welch GN, Loscalzo J. Hlomocysteine and athero-
114. Lord PF, Wood A, Tilley L.P, Linu SK. Radiographic and
thrombosis. N Engl J Med 338:1042, 1998
lac
33
Manifestations of
stemic and
Metabolic Disease
CLARKE E. ATKINS
The cffects of many systeimic and metabolic diseases on cardiac structure
and function are well recognized. In some cases they may constitute the
major clinical concern; in others, these effects may be subtle or of minimal
importance.1 Discussion focuses upon those disorders that are most clinically
important and for which adcquate documentation exists. Relevant therapies
are reviewed in their respective chapters.
CARDIOMYOPATHY OF OVERLOAD
Adaptive responses in the failing heart compensate for stresses imparted
by sustained volume or pressure overload. One of the main causes of cardiac
cardiac cellular alterations and affects therapeutic strategics for clinical
management.
Cardiac hypertrophy is a significant compensatory mechanism that devel
ops in response to a pressure or volume overload. It may be physiologic, be
readily reversible, and lack detrimental effects. Alternatively, it may constitute
a pathologic response to preload and afterload stresses (volume and pressure
loading, respectivcly), loss of myocytes (e.g., infaret), or diminished contrac-
tility (e.g-, cardiomyopathy).* Except in neonates in whom myocyte hyperpla
sia is active, increases in muscle mass result from hypertrophy (an increase
in individual cell size). Initially, mitochondrial mass jncreases, providing
trophy. With time, myofibrillar mass increases and ultimately outstrips mito
chondrial proliferation.3
 In the compensated state, both volume overloading and pressure overloadl-
ing change ventricular geometry and wall thickness. This minimizes cleva
tions that occur in systolic wall stress.* Endl-diastolic wall stress increases with
volume but nol with pressure overload states.
Volume overload states (e-g., arteriovenous fistulas) result in rccentric hyper-
trophy. This is characterized by ventricular dilatation with increased ventricu-
lar volume and mass. It is accompanied by an early rise and then mainte-
757
758EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
nance of cnd-diastolic pressure. Sarcomere length is
Hypertrophy generally provides short-term benefits,
optimized and maintained at 2.2 μm. Because new
whether incited by cardiac or noncardiac discase or
sarcomeres are laid down in serics, there is no disen-
neurohumoral responses to falling cardiac output (Ta-
gagement of actin and myosin myofilaments, despite
ble 33-1; Fig. 33-1).? It initially “unloads" cardiac
progressive ventricular luminal dilatation. In the com
myocytes by adding sarcomeres, which is an early, en-
pensated state of chronic volume overload, stroke vol-
ergy-sparing beneficial effect. However, these changes
ume is enhanced because the sarcomere length is opti-
may alter the relationship of the myocardium to its
mal, and individual myocardial unit function is ncarly
capillaries, increasing interrapillary distances and al-
normal. Incrcascd preload enhances contractility
by
tering oxygen perfusion. Severe hypertrophy may ulti-
increasing the sensitivity of myofilaments to calcium.3
 nl m  a e n se a
With time and large volume overload, slippage be-
needs, attended by relatively fewer mitochondria that
tween fibrils may occur, myocardial contractility de-
are receiving less nutrients for ATP production. In-
creases, and heart failure cnsues.2 3
crcased collagen synthesis associated with acute over-
Pressure overload states (i.e., increased wall sress),
loading may help maintain wall strcss by preventing
such as occurs with systemic hypertension, produces
dilatation cduring carly hypcrtrophy However, this can
cccentric and then concentric hypertrophys The latter
cventually impair cardiac diastofic properties.2
results when cardiac myofibrils are laid down in paral-
 Pathologic hypertrophy contributes to diastolic dys-
lel, which increases cross-sectional diamcter and mass.
funcuion by slowing the active, cnergy-requiring pro-
Ventricular pressures inerease (systolic ventricular pres-
cess of rclaxation and by incrcasing diastolic stiff-
sure incrcascs much more than in volume overload
ness.* Chamber stiffness can result from increased wall
states). Wall stress is "normalized"
with concentric
thickncss (caused by pressure overload), incrcased
hypertrophy and maintained at a near-normal level.3
cnd-diastolic volume (caused by volume overload),
 Decompensation is associated with alterations in ultra-
temporary ischemia, and fibrosis. Incrcased intrinsic
structural organization, myofibril lysis, cell death, and
myocardial stiffness accompanying afterload-induced
Gbrosis.2 * If this state is severe and prolonged, myocar-
hypertrophy may worsen diastolic dysfunction.7 Pro-
dial “exhaustion" and failure ensuc, with resultant
longed relaxation may occur with ventricular hypcrtro-
heart failure (Fig. 33-1).
phy associated with incrcased afterload, volume over-
load, temporary ischemia, and delayed inactivation of
contraction. The latter is associated with diminished
HEART
or slowed intracellular calcium uptake by the sarcoplas-
Myocardial
FAILURE
Cell Death
mic reticulum from  subnormal  intracellular  ATP
T
concentration.2 
+CAROIAC OUTPUT
↑Myocardral Energy
In the failing heart, ventricular walls initially thicken
Expenditure
but may then undergo thinning in end-stage failure.
Necrotir cardiac myocytes are replaced by fibrous con-
←Afterload
Inotropy
NEUROHUMORAL STIMULATION
nective tissue. Resultant chamber dilatation incrcascs
Renin-Argotensir
wall tension, which further cscalates cardiac energy
Vasoconstriction
Adrenergrc
CyIosol
rrhythmias.
Sudden Death
requirements. Ultimately, with prolonged and cxccs-
sive cardiac overloading,
decompensation occurs
InsP.
("'cardiomyopathy of overload"'). This results in sys-
HEART
tolic failure, diastolic dysfunction, and congestive
CIRCULATION
FIGURE 33-1
heart failure.?
Cardiovaseular adaptations to hear ailure associated with vlume
 In addition to thesc mechanical changes in the fail-
Or pressure loads caused by cardiac or noncardiac diseases.
ing heart, biochemical alterations occur, Cardiac mus-
Uluimately, cardiac ccll death and "cardiomyopathy of overload""
cle protein composition is altered; myosin ATPase ac-
may result (see text for details). The stimulated neurohumoral
tivity is depressed; plasma and muscle  carnitine
systems affect the circulation and heart. Vasoconstricion increases
alterload, which further decreases cardiac output and accelerates
concentrations (necessary for energy-providing fatty
myocardial cell death by increasing cardiac work. Inereased cardiac
acid entry into mitochondria) are diminished; and
tyclic AMP anl inositol-1,4,5-tris phosphate (InsPs) promote Ca1 +
sarcoplasmic reliculum calcium uptake is reduced,
cntry, augmenting contractility; along with a chronotropic effecl
(not shown), this increases cardiac (outpul. However, increased
with a negative impact on diastolic function.2 9 Arrhyth-
Ca' + entering he cylosol can overload the systems lhat pump this
mias may occur and be associated with relative ische-
ion out of the cell during diastole, thus impairing relaxation; Ca+ +
(verload may also induce arrhythmias and sudden death. 'Thus,
mia, conduction inhomogeneities resulting from hy-
whenn thc initial adaptive responses of both the circulation and the
pertrophy and Gbrosis, increased intracellular calcium
heart to a chronic low-output. state become sustained, they can
concentration, and possibly structural changes in ion
have deleterious long-term cffecis. (Reprinted with permission
from Katz AM: Cardiomyopaty of overload. N Engi J Med
channels. Finally, autonomic abnormalities occur: in-
322:100, 1990. Copyright 1990 Massachuseuts Medical Society.)
creased plasma and subnormal myocardial norepi-
CARDIAC MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISEASE
759
TABLE 33-1
Short-Term and Long-Term Responses to Impaired Cardiac Performance
Response
Short-Term Effects*
Long-Term Effecist
 Sall and water retention
Augments preload
Pulmonary congestion, anasarca
Vasoconstriction
Maintains bloocd pressure to perfusc vital
Exacerbates pump dysfunction (aficrload
organs (brain/heart)
 mismatch); ↑ cardiac energy expenditure
Synpathetic stimulation
↑ Heart rate and ejection
↑ Energy expenditure
Sympathetic desensitization
Spares energy
Hyperrophy
Unloads individual muscle fibers
Cardiac cel deterioration/death;
cardiomyopathy of overload
Capillary deficit.
Leatls to encrgy starvation
Mitochondrial cdensity
↑ Density helps meet energy demands
↓ Density leads to energy starvation
Appearance of slow myosinl
↑ Force, ↓ shortening velocity and
conuracility; energy sparing.
Prolonged axction potential
↑Contractility, energy cxpenditue
↓ Density of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca
Slows relaxation; may he energy sparing
pump sites
↑ Collagen
May reduce dilatation
Impairs relaxation
shorl-term eflects are mainly adaptive and occur after hemorrhage and in acute hcart failure.
tLong-term effecrs are mainly deleierious and occur in chronic heart tailure.
From Katz AM. Cardiomyopathy of overload. N Engl J Med 322:100, 1990. Copyight the Massachusetts Medical Society
nephrine concentrations, as well as reduced numbers
the dog and cat, it is most frequently associated with
 of beta-adrenergic receptors ("down regulation").2
heartworm emboli.
 In summary, certain adaptive mechanisms, including
myocardial hypertrophy, provide short-term compensa-
 PATHOPHYsIOLOGy. Cor pulmonale results when pul
tion in heart failure. Chronically, cardiac cellular and
molecular abnormalities develop ("cardiomyopathy of
monary vascular resistance.1 Important mechanisms
overload'), which causes structural and functional de-
are illustrated in Figure 33--2. Pulmonary vasoconstric-
rangements, clinical deterioration, and dcath.
tion may result from disorders that dirccuy or indi-
rertly alter ventilation and reduce PaO,. Alveolar hy-
poxia (PaO, < 60 mmHg in humans) is the most
CARDIOPULMONARY DISEASES
potent stimulus for pulmonary vasoconstriction (by
release of vasoactive substances) and is locally medi-
 aled 10-13 Dogs breathing 5 percent oxygen experimen-
tally sustain increased pulmonary vascular resistance
COR PULMONALE
(more than 40% incrcasc) and develop pulmonary
hypertension within 2 minutes of hypoxia onset.4
Cor pulmonale denotes right ventricular hypertro-
The duration of hypoxia requred to produce right
phy associatcd with acute or chronic abnormalitics of
yentmicular
hypertrophy (RVH) may be relatively
lung structure or function, In the chronic state, right
short.1 Acidosis also plays a clinically important role
ventricular hypertrophy and dilatation occur sccon-
ini
 increasing pulmonary vascular resistance, both
dary to long-standing diseasc of the pulmonary paren-
alone and synergistically with hypoxia.!l Pulmonary
chyma or vasculature or both. In acute cor pulmonale,
vasculature changes can occur quickly and worsen with
right ventricular strain or overload is produced by
chronicity. They diminish vascular luminal size, make
acute pulmonary hypertension, usually following mas-
 pulmonary vessels rigid, and increase pulmonary vas-
sive pulmonary embolism. Right hcart failure may
cular resistance. Such lesions include intimal thick-
result from either condition.
 ening, inflammation and fibrosis, and medial hypertro-
phy. Reversibility of these vascular changes is variable
ETIoLoGIEs. Chronic cor pulmonale often results
and poorly defined, and depends on severity and dura-
from chronic obstructive pulmonary discase (COPD),
tion.10
bronchitis, bronchiectasis, cmphysema, asthma, infil-
 eral mechanisms. The normal pulmonary vascular bed
nary embolism, thoracic malformation, neuromuscular
may accommodate increased blood flow with little
respiratory failure (myasthenia gravis), and upper air-
 pressure change. If flow alterations are severe or if
way collapse or obstruction.lo-1s In the dog, heartworm
recruitment of parallel vascular channels cannot be
disease is probably the most important etiology of cor
achicved, pulmonary artery pressure rises." Further
pulmonale. Acute cor pulmonale is usually caused by
pulmonary artery pressure elevations may result from
acute, massivc pulmonary cmbolisn in humans. In
chronic hypoxcmia and associated polycythemia, as
760
  N S   A  SE
IncitingCaus
permanently worsened by states of elevated cardiac
 output, increased blood viscosity or volume, progres-
sion or complication of' underlying disease, hypoxemia,
and acidosis. Early on, affected patients are essentially
PA
Reduced
Acidosis
espiratory
normal at rest. With exercisc, however, they exhibit
Obstruction
PA
increased pulmonary artery pressure, vascular resis-
T
Metabolic
tance, and right ventricular stroke work and reduced
Alveolar
Acidosis
Hypoxra
right ventricular cjection fraction. With severe diseasc,
hypoxemia and moderate pulmonary hypcrtension oc-
Reduced PA
cur at rest; with exercise, this worsens and is accompa-
Iypoxem
Cross-sectional
Area
nied by abnormal right ventricular filling pressures
and function.10
 Falling cardiac output initiates hypertrophy and
Polycythemia
other compensatory adaptations. If severe and pro
viscosity)
duces "*cardiomyopathy of overload"2 with right-sided
heart failurc.
CLINICAL sIGNs. These depend upon the etiology of
cor pulmonale and the extent of right ventricular fail-
Right Heart
ure. Signs of right ventricular failure may include
Failure
tachycardia, hypotension, manifestations of systemic
FIGURE 33-2
venous hypertension (c.g, jugular venous distention,
Pathoplysiologic mechanisms imporant in thc developmcnt of cor
hepatomegaly, ascites), murmur of tricuspid regurgita
puinonale and, potentially, righr heart failure. Scc text for
tion, and a split second heart sound. Rapid, shallow
explanation. PA, pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricular.
 breathing may result when respiratory muscles can no
(Reprinted with permission from Atkins CE: The role of
noncardiac disease in the development and precipitation of heart
longer cope with cxcessive loads to provide effective
failure. Vet Clin North Am 21:1035, 1991.)
ventilation.
well as conditions that enhance cardiac output such as
 or palliating the underlying pulmonary hypertension.
inotropic agents, volume overload, or cxercise (Fig.
Ideally, this involves reversal of the underlying prob-
33-2).1n-13
lem. Therapy might also include vasodilators, which
 The impact on cardiac function depends on the
have 1he potential to reduce pulmonary vascular resis-
severity and duration of increased pulmonary vascular
tance whether pulmonary hypertension is primary (id-
resistance. Right ventricular oxygen consumption is
iopathic) or secondary. Reducing chronic hypoxia with
increased (Fig. 33-3) and may be intermittently or
oxygen therapy, improving ventilation (e.g. by re-
170 -
160
150
1-14)
130
FIGURE 33-3
120 :
11
The effect of chronic pressure-induced hyperrophy
100
O1l myocardial oxygen neecls is dlepicted for the right.
antd lef ventriclcs prior to the onsel, and 18 inonths
affter the onset, of heartworm discase (HwD). Note
8 -
that the indcx of cardiac cffort ("'double
 04
Aianm Areuound jo onior jo lonpond,lonpond
3
60
peak systolic pressure and heart rate), an indication
of myocardial oxygen consumption, has increased
50
significantly (p < .02) for the right. ventricie (RV),
40
but not the left ventricle (I.V). ( Reprinted with1
34)
permission from Atkins CE: The role of noncardiac
c0 !
lisease in the development and precipitation of heart
10-
failure. Vet Clin Norih Aun 21:1035. 1991.)
RV
APrc-I1
CARDIAC MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISEASE 761
versing obesity or treating a skeletal myopathy), bron-
THERAPy. Treatmcnt of COPD varics according to
chodilation, and treatment of infectious or neoplastic
etiology but is discussed in general terms under the
pulmonary iniltrative discases may all potentially
preceding section on cor pulmonale. Management ol
lower pulmonary vascular resistance and, hence, right.
acute respiratory failure includcs correcting life-threat-
ventricular afterload. Right-sided heart failure may re-
cning hypoxemia and acidosis, treating the underlying
quire salt restriction, angiotensin-converting cnzyme
process, and preventing complications. In humans with
(ACE) inhibition (e.g., enalapril), and diuretics.
acute cxacerbations of COPD, noninvasive ventilation
was shown to reduce the nced for endotracheal intuba-
tion, the length of hospital stay, and the mortality rate.
CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY
Successful therapy was accompanicd by improveiment
 in pH and a fall in the respiratory rate within the first
DISEASE
hour of trcatment.17
While the nomenclauure for COPD is somewhat con-
 troversial, it is used here to denote conditions causing
PULMONARY THROMBOEMBOLISM
largcly irreversible airway obstruction. In the dog.
COPD has been used to describe chronic bronchitis.
 Pulmonary hypertension associated with pulmonary
bronchiectasis, cmphysema, and varying degrees of air-
thromboembolism results from increased resistance to
way collapse 13-17
systolic pressure is 30 mmHg or higher, the mean
PATHoPHYsIoLOGY In canine COPD, chronic airway
pulmonary artery pressure is greater than I8 mmHg.
injury leads to chronic inflammation, excessive and
or both. Slight incrcascs in pulmonary arterial pres-
viscid mucus production, increased airway resistancc,
sure may not cause clinical or radiographic signs. But
and diminished expiratory flow ratcs. Obstruction due
if resistance to pulmonary blood flow incrcases, right.
 to mucus plugs, inflammatory exudates, and structural
ventricular afferload clevates and may ultimatcly cause
obliteration causes air trapping and, potentially, em-
 RV failure and associated signs. Affected animals may
physema. Compromised pulmonary defense mecha-
clinically improve or succumb prior to night ventricular
nisms allow bacterial colonization, which enhances the
dysfunction, especially with acute pulmonary thrombo-
destructive process. Airway hyperactivity, airway col-
cmbolism.
lapse, and obesity represent additional adverse fac-
tors.'7 Ultimately, alveolar hypoxia results, causing pul-
ETIOLoGiEs. Most conmonly, heartworrn discasc
(chapters 30, 31) causes pulmonary thrombosis or
vascular resistance, ventilation perfusion mismatching.
thromboembolism from dead worm fragments. Addi-
hypoxemia, and the potential for cor pulmonale (see
tional cmbolic causes include air, fat, sepsis, tumor,
Fig. 33-2). The pulmonary capillary bed cross-scc-
and dcep venous thrombosis, t6. 19 Pulnonary thrormbo-
tional area is decrcased in severe states from pulmo-
cmbolism has been associated with hypercoagulative
nary parenchymal destruction and pulmonary vesscl
 states, vegetative cndocarditis, autoimmune hemolytic
compression (from increased intrathoracic pressure as-
anemia, protein-losing nephropathies, hyperadreno-
 sociated with air trapping).15
corticism, and hypothyroidism, Long-tcrm caging, pro-
With severe COPD, the respiratory muscles function
longed use of indwelling venous catheters, surgical
at maximal capacity to maintain ventilation. It may
procedures, obesity, shock states, heart failurc, para-
ultimatcly fail when the load becomes excessive (e.g,
 neoplastic syndrornes, and pregnancy are considered
elastic and resistive factors incrcase due to lung hyper-
to be predisposing factors.18
inflation and obstruction; intrinsic end-expiratory
pressure also increases the inspiratory threshold load).
PATHOPHySIOLOGy. In dogs with pulmonary thrombo-
A vicious circle may result in which worsening hypoxia,
embolism (PTE). pulmonary hypertension may de-
hypercapnia, and acidosis further impair respiratory
muscle fumction. Acidosis is especially deleterious to
cross-sectional area is occluded.1* With significant PTE.
muscle function.17a
ventilation-perfusion mismatching develops with resul-
tant broncho- and vasoconstriction. Release of vaso-
CLINICAL SIGNs. Gradually progressive coughing and
active substances from emboli further increases pulmo
dyspnca with respiratory distress, expiratory whceze,
 nary vascular resistance, elevating pulmonary arterial
and rapid, shalow breathing occur. The electrocardio-
and right ventricular pressures. Stroke volurme subse-
gram (ECG) often shows P pulmonale (sec Figure
quently falls; the right ventricle dilates and hypertro-
6-14). Acute respiratory failure is possible and must be
 phies and may ultimately fail.* Pulmonary infarction is
considered in the differential diagnosis for congestive
rare because of dual pulmonary blood supply
heart failure.
Acute right  ventricular  pressure  increases may
762 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
worsen left ventricular function by diminishing its pre-
overload will result, and a murimur of mitral insuff-
load, altering left ventricular distensibility, reducing
ciency may be noted. The shunt causes regional venous
left ventricular volume by ventricular septal shifting,.
blood to be hypcroxygenated, and the affected vessels
and causing arrhythmias.18, 19 In contrast, chronic, re-
 proliferate, increasing the number of arteriovenous
 current PTE, with partial pulmonary artery occlusion,
communications.22 Vascular proliferation is accompa-
nied by cctasia, arterial venification, and venous
lar resistance and pulmonary arterial pressure with
arterialization.22 24 Continuous shunting of blood pro-
incrcased right ventricular work. Ultimately, cor pul-
duces a volume overloadl state, with cccentric hypertro-
monale may devclop.18
phy and increased cardiovascular volumc, afterload,
and heart rate. Systolic function is typically maintained,
CLINICAL sIGNs. Signs may be dramatic, with acute,
while increased end-diastolic pressure may be adequate
severe pulmonary thromboembolism. Anxiety, dys-
to produce signs of lef-sided heart failure (pulmonary
pnea, orthopnca, cough, hemoptysis, syncope, or cya-
edema). At that point, cardiac output is typically nor-
nosis may occur.8, 19 Jugular venous distention, cardio-
mal to elevated.24 Chronic volume overloading may
genic shock, and occasionally ascites may be evident.
produce  cardiac decompensation with high-output
Auscultation may revcal pulmonary crackles, tachycar
heart failure (chapter 34) and, ultimately, systolic myo-
dia, split second heart sound, and murmur of tricuspid
cardial failure ("cardiomyopathy of overload’").2 Car-
regurgitation. Radiographic findings include pleural
diac cffects are related to rapidity of onset, shunt size
effusion, regional oligemia, and pulmonary influrate
and duration, and the prescnce of underlying heart.
represcnting hemorrhage, infarction, or
cdema.?u
discase.
 Blood gas analysis typically reveals arterial hypoxemia
(PaO, < 80 mmIIg), metabolic acidosis, and, occasion-
CLINICAL sIGNs. The affected region rmay feel warm,
ally, respiratory acidosis.t8. 2 The ECG may show sinus
appear swollen and painful, and have dermatologic
tachycardia, atrial and ventricular ectopy, and evidence
changes such as edema, necrosis, ulceration, and
of right atrial and ventricular enlargement. Echocardi-
pigmentation.22  A bruit and palpable thrill may be
ographic findings include septal motion abnormalities
 detected over the Gistuia. Other changes may be spe-
(paradoxic septal motion), cnlarged right ventricular
cific to the organ affected (e.g., ocular, central nervous
internal dimension (and RV thickening if chronic),
system dysfunction, ascites with intrahepatic. fistulas
diminished left veniricular internal dimension, and
between hepatic artery and portal vein),.22 Signs of
right atrial cnlargement. Doppler cchocardiography
congestive heart failure may accompany long-standing
may disclose abnormal flow profiles of pulmonic regur-
or severe AV fistulas.
gitation with high-vclocity tricuspid rcgurgitation.
THERAPY. Surgical interruption or coil occlusion of
THERAPy. Treatment includes resolution of predispos-
the arteriovenous communication is attemptcd when
ing causes, O therapy via nasal insufflation or Oy
possible. Heart failure requires standard therapy with
cage, pulmonary vasodilation, fresh plasma in cascs of
diurelics, salt restriction, exercise restriction, vasodila
antithrombin II deficiency, and antithrombotic ther-
tors, ACE inhibitors, and digitalis.
apy with heparin or warfarin.
ENDOCRINE AND METABOLIC
ARTERIOVENOUS FISTULAS
DISORDERS
Noncardiac arteriovenous (AV) shunts are uncom-
mon.22 They may be acquired (usually single) or con-
THYROID GLAND
genital (single or multiple).
ETIoLoGy. Acquired AV fistulas can result from blunt
 Or penetrating trauma, including iatrogenic injury,2s
 This is the most commonly recognized endocrinopa-
 or by formation of new vesscls in ncoplastic processes.
thy in the dog, but it is rare in the cat.
They are located most typically in the extremities but
can occur anywhere.
ETIoLoGy. Thyroid hypofunction may be due to im-
mune-mediated glandular destruction, or it may be
PATHOPHYsIOLOGY. ‘The fistula allows blood to shunt.
idiopathic. Although it has been generally believed
from the high-pressure arterial to the low-pressure ve-
that hypothyroidism can  complicate heart failure,
nous aspect of the AV connection. The resultant turbu-
there is little supportivc evidence. There is anecdotal
lence produces an audible, continuous bruit and often
 information, espccially in Doberman pinschers, of iso-
a palpable thnill. With significant shunting, volumc
lated hypothyroidism occurring simultaneously with di-
CARDIACMANIFESTATIONSOFSYSTEMICANDMETABOLICDISEASE763
latedcardiomyopathy.25Diminishedmyocardialfunc-
tion was reported in11 hypothyroid dogs, and cardiac
dysfunction was largely reversed after 2 months of
levothyroxine therapy.26
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY.Thyroidhormoneaffectsthe
heart by direct andindirect mechanisms.7Direct ac-
tionsthatincreasecontractilityincludeenhancedmito-
chondrial protein formation and sodium-potassium
ATPaseactivity,aswellassynthesis andstructural alter-
ationofmyosin.Enhancedsarcoplasmicreticulumef
ficiency in calcium handling improves both systolic
and diastolic function in hyperthyroidism. Thyroid
hormone alsoincreases therate of diastolicdepolariza-
tion and reduction of action potential duration in
sinoatrial nodal cells.Indirectly,thyroid hormones in-
creasenumbers andaffinityofmyocardialadrenergic
receptors.
CLINICAL sIGNs. Changes in heart rate,myocardial
contractility, andventricular size and mass are associ-
atedwithexcess orreduced serum thyroidhormone
concentrations.27.28 Cardiovascular manifestations of
hypothyroidism include slow heartrate,muffled heart
sounds,hypertension(threefold increased incidence
over euthyroid human controls)，weakened cardiac
FIGURE33-4
apex beat and femoral arterial pulses, arrhythmias in-
Coronary atherosclerosis ina2-year-oldmaleDoberman pinscher
cluding atrial fibrillation,and occasionally congestive
withhypothyroidism and hypercholesterolemia.(Reprinted with
heart failure.29 Myxedema is recognized in dogs but
permissionfromAtkins CE:Therole ofnoncardiac diseasein the
developmentandprecipitation of heartfailure.Vet ClinNorthAm
has notbeenassociatedwithpericardial effusion asin
21:1035, 1991.)
humans.25
Derangementsinserumlipid andcholesterolpredis
pose to atherosclerosis (Fig.33-4).25Ina series of 21
HYPERTHYROIDISM
affecteddogs,allhadcoronary artery atherosclerosis
andmyocardialfibrosis; allhadsmallthyroid
This is themostfrequently encountered feline endo-
glands—-19 with abnormal histologic changes. Each of
thesixdogstestedforhypothyroidismhad abnormally
lowserumthyroidhormoneconcentrations.
Reported ECG changes include low voltage com-
ADRENALGLAND
plexes,bradycardia,occasional arrhythmias,conduc-
tion disturbances,widened QRS complexes,and T-
HYPOADRENOCORTICISM(ADDISON'SDISEASE)
wave alterations.25.26.29Myocardial dysfunctionmaybe
Diminishedadrenalgland functionmayresultin
evident on echo by diminished shortening fraction,
reducedserumglucocorticoidand/ormineralocorti-
myocardial thinning,and alterations of systolic and
coid concentrations.Affected dogs are generally young
diastolic time intervals.25 26. 31 Right- and left-sided
tomiddle-agedandtypicallyfemale.Affectedcats are
heart filling pressures are typically normal, and heart
young to middle-aged without gender preponder-
failure is uncommon in the absence of underlying
ance.34
cardiac disease.25. 29 Reversible echo changes were dem-
onstrated in long-standing human myxedematoushy-
ETIOLoGy.Hypoadrenocorticism may be due to pri-
pothyroidism,andtheywerecompatiblewiththoseof
mary adrenal dysfunction,or it may be secondary to
idiopathichypertrophic subaortic stenosis.32
adrenocorticotropichormone(ACTH)deficiency.29
Clinicalmanifestations areusually attributabletolack
THERAPy. Treatment involves thyroid hormone sup-
ofbothhormones.
plementation.If hypothyroidism complicates (or possi-
bly causes)heart failure,standard therapy for heart
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY.Cortisolisgluconeogenicand cat-
failure isinstituted with thyroid supplementation.
abolic,has anti-insulin activity,stimulates erythropoie-
764 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
sis, and diminishes gut calcium absorption by interfer-
lcmia. Elcctrocardiographic changes are generally ab-
ing with vitamin
 D  activity;  it maintains  vascular
sent with isolated hypocortisolism.2
integrity and responsiveness to circulating vasoconstric-
tors. Aldosterone increases serum sodium (which af-
THERAPy. Management of shock, repletion of gluco
fects extracellular fluid volume) and decreases serum
and mineralocorticoids, and restorauion of normal
 potassium concentrations.27 Adrenal insufficiency is as-
electrolylte concentrations are primary concerns. Ad-
sociated wih diminished intravascular volume;
re
Iministration of large volumes of normal saline is advo-
 duced heart rate, cardiac output, and peak left ventric-
cated for fluid, sodium, and chloride repletion. For
ular work; and diminished Og consumption. It may
life-thrcatening hyperkalemia, additional therapy to
lead to cardiovascular collapse and death.29
decrease or counteract the effects of clevated serum
K+ includes administration of (1) 5 percent dextrose
CLINICAL SIGNs. These usually relate to the effects of
in water, with or without insulin (0.25 to 0.5 unit of
 cortisol and/or mineralocoricoid deficiency Waxing
 regular insulin/kg with 2 gm of dextrose/unit of insu-
and waning anorexia, vomiting and diarrhea, dehydra-
lin), or (2) 10 percent calcium gluconate (1 ml/kg IV
tion, weakness, and bradycardia are common. In severe
over 5 to 10 minutes), or (3) sodium bicarbonate (1 to
cases, bypovolemia, shock, collapse, hyperkalemia, and
2 mEq/kg IV). Mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid
death may ensue.2 Clinical pathology abnormalies
replacements are given.
include hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hypercalcemia,
nonregenerative anemia, lymphocytosis, cosinophilia,
hypoglycemia, azotemia, and metabolic acidosis. Less
HYPERADRENOCORTICISM (CUSHIING'S
commonly, isolated hypocortisolism may occur. Clini-
SYNDROME)
ore ass ss aie q rs sre sis 
profound hypoglyccmia with scizures may result.
Se-
 Spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism results from cx-
rum sodium and potassium concentrations are usually
cessive cortisol produclion by the adrenal cortex, It. is
normal. In affected cats, lethargy, anorexia, weight 
common in the older dog, but feline cases are rela-
loss, emesis, polyuria, dehydration, and collapse have
tively rare.29. 37
been reported. Clinical pathology includes hypona-
tremia, hyperkalemia, hypochlorcmia, azolcmia, and
ETIoLoGY. Canine hyperadrcnocorticism may occur
hypcrphosphatemia. Weak pulses, dehydrauion, and si-
secondary to pituitary adenoma (85 to 90 percent
nus bradycardia may be detected.* Myocardial failure
of cases), or be primary, associated with benign or
has been recorded in cats with low resting and post-
malignant functional adrenal tumors.29 Feline hypoad-
ACTIH  plasima  cortisol  concentrations and  eosino-
renocorticism is usually associated with diabetes melli-
philia, and without typical clectrolyte alterations.33
tus and pituitary adenomas.37
These had cchocardiographic changes similar to those
 of dilated cardiomyopathy, were taurine unresponsive,
and responded to corticosteroids.
PATHoPHrsSIOLOGy.  Hypertcnsion  is  very  common
Cardiac  manifestations reflect volume  depletion
(chapter 35),29 This is thought to be associated with
(weakness, hypotension). Thoracic radiographs show
increased sodium and water retention, increased vascu-
rnicrocardia and hypoperfused lung vasculature. Elec-
lar sensitivity to vasopressors such as epinephrine, and
cortisol-induced activation of the renin-angiotensin sys-
trocardiographic alterations may be dramatic, with
mineralocorticoid  and  glucocorticoid insufficiency.
and are characteristic of hyperkalemia (see Hyperka-
ably contribute to atherosclerosis. In humans, heart
lemia later; also see Fig. 6-30).27. 9 The ECG changes
failure may be associatcd with hypcradrenocorticism,
do not directly relate to serum K- concentration be-
probably related to hypcrtcnsion and potentiation of
atherosclerosis.12, 27
cause coexistent hyponatremia, hypocalcemia, and aci-
dosis influence the clectrocardliogram. Arrhythmias
were recorded in 46 of 100 addisonian dogs in one
CLINICAL SIGNs. Polydipsia/polyuria,  (
dermatologic
study, and included sinoventricular rhythm, brady- and
changes, lethargy, muscle wasting, and panting occur:?29
tachyarrhythmias, conduction disturbances, ventricular
Clinical pathology findings include lynphopenia, eosi-
fibrillation, and asystole.29 In a larger study that evalu-
nopenia, low urine specific gravity, hyperlipidemia, hy-
ated pretreatment FCGs in 122 dogs, atrial standstill
percholesterolemia, clevated serum liver cnzyme activi-
occurred in about 47 percent, bradycardia in 29 per-
ties, hyperglycemia, and abnormal cortisol response to
cent, atrial or ventricular cxtrasystoles in 6 percent,
ACTH or dexamethasone.
and AV block (second or third degree) in 5 percent,s5ha
Cushingoid dogs rnay have radiographic and ECG
Another report of a larger population recorded that
evidence of cardiomegaly,29 are often advanced in age,
heart failure was a rare sequcla,35. 36 although death
      
usually results froin cardiogenic shock and hyperka-
vular disease, especially mitral regurgitation. Pulmo-
CARDIAC MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISEASE
765
 nary thromboembolism can cause right-sided hcart
ism secondary to an adrenal cortical adenocarcinoma,
strain, respiratory failure, or death.
with severe hypokalemia, AV conduction abnormali-
ties, prolonged PR and QRS intervals, and paroxysmal
ve ntricular tachycardia.*9
 Although reported in humans, this condition is rare
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
in dogs and cats.
Catecholamines secreted in excess may cxcrt im-
PATHOPHYs1OLOGY. Aldosterone regulates clecurolyle
portant adverse effects on the cardiovascular system.
excretion through renal sodium relention and potas-
sium excretion and thus affects intravascular volume.
ETIoLoGy. A syndrome associated with catechola
Excessive aldosterone secretion is rcported in humans
mine-producing tumors of the adrenal medulla is rare
from adrenal adenomas producing hypernatremia, hy
in humans and animals, but cardiac manifestations can
pokalemmia, and sstemic hypertension.12.27
be profound.27. 10 1 Affected dogs are most offen aged,
with no brced or gender predisposition.
CLINICAL SIGNs. Cardiovascular manifestations in-
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY. PheochromocytoMa can cause lo-
crcased systemic vascular resistance.  Electrocardio-
cal vascular invasion (renal, adrenal, and hepatic ves-
 graphic changes in humans consist of arrhythrmias,
sels) and metastasis, or it can cffect changes by cate-
T-wave alteration, U-wave prominence, and patterns
cholamine excretion. In a series of 13 affected dogs,
 suggesting left ventricular enlargement.27 I have ob-
right and left adrenal glands were affected with cqual
served an aged cat with adrenal gland adenoma and
 frequency; bilateral involvement was noted in one dog.
Adrenal tumors were invasive in cight dogs; in five, thc
anorexia, weight loss, hypokalemia, and hyperna-
caudal vena cava was involved, producing obstruction
tremia. Cardiovascular manifestations included a mur-
and ascites in two of the five. Two of the eight had
mur, systolic and diastolic hypertension, left ventricular
distant metastases.* Catecholamines that are secreted
hyperkinesis and conccntric hypertrophy, and nonsus-
constantly, episodically, or both2 may cause hyperten-
tained AV dissociation with junctional tachycardia,
sion, “"cardiomyopathy of overload,*"2 arrhythmias, is-
modest Q-T interval prolongation, and promincnt U
chemic myocardis, or cardiomyopathy.27
waves (Fig. 33-5). Other reports include a dog with
idiopathic  hypcraldosteronism  with  borderline sys-
CLINIcAL sIGNs. Thcse may be associatcd with local
lemic hypertension, hypernatremia, and rmild hypoka-
invasion, distant metastases, or the effects of endoge-
lemia;** and an aged cat with primary hyperaldosteron-
nous catecholamine release. In dogs, the clinical pre-
1
aVR
V10
1I
oVL
FIGURE 33-5
Elecurocardiogram from an aged cat with primary
hyperaldosteronism, hypokalemia, and hyperteusion.
The QT interval is prolonged (190 msec), and a 1cfl
axis deviation is present. Note the presence of UJ
waves (arrowheads) following the T waves. P wave and
an RS complcx are indicated. (Courtesy of Dr. John1
Rush.Reprinted with permission frm Atkins CE:
111
OVF
V3
Thc role of noncardiae discase in the development
and precipitaion of heart failure. Vet Clin North Am
21:1035. 1991.)
RHYTHM STRIP: IJ
50mm/sec:lcm/mV
766
  N S     S E
se ntation may include anxiety, anorexia, hyperthermia,
reduced protein catabolism, reduced glucose utiliza-
panting, cough, dyspnca, weakness, trembling, mydria-
tion, enhanced glycogen deposition, and lipolysis.
sis, hypertensive retinopathy, proteinuria, polyuria,
Growth hormone is a potcnt diabctogenic hormone,
polydipsia, neurologic dysfumction, epistaxis, cyanosis,
and diabetes mellitus is the most comrmonly associated
flushing of pinnac, diarrhca, abdominal distention,
clinical syndrome. Other manifestations of acromegaly
collapse, and death. t0. 4t Hypertension is identified in
include proliferation of bonc, cartilage, soft tissucs,
approximately 50 percent of affected dogs in which
 and internal organs, including ihe heart.42 Acrome-
blood pressure is mcasured." ECG changes include
 galic humans have cardiomegaly, focal interstitial myo-
left ventricular enlargement and atrial and ventricular
carditis and fibrosis, accelerated coronary atheroscle-
arrhythmias. Arrhythmias, including sinus tachycardia,
rosis, hypertension, increased cardiac mass, cardiac
arc presen1. in 15 to 54 percent of the cases.10. 41 In 13
failure, and arrhythnias. Heart discase and failure is
affected dogs, sudden death was reported in 6 of 8
 related in part to hypertension and coronary arlery
symptomatic animals.1 The other five dogs were
disease and probably is due to a direct cardiotoxic
asymptomatic, with pheochromocytoma detected as an
effect of growth hormone.27
incidental postmortem finding.
 Cardiovascular manifestations documcnted in peo-
 CLINICAL sIGNs. Respiratory stridor sccondary to soff
ple include systemic hypertension, which is often inter-
mittent; ECG abnormalities in up to 75 percent of
tissue impingement on airways is the most common
patients (T-wave inversion, LV hypertrophy, shortened
clinical manifestation of acromegaly. Enlargement of
P-R and QRS intervals, ST segment alteraions, sinus 
limbs, feet, abdomen, and head is usually noted. Pyo-
tachycardia, and other arrhythmias);
echocardio-
 graphic changes (LV hypcrtrophy, systolic anterior mitral
 progestogen-induced hypersomatotropism. Neurologic
signs may accompany pituitary tumors. Also reported
valve motion during hypertensive crises, and, typically,
normal ventricular function); myocarditis; reversible car-
 are hyperglycemia, glucosuria, hyperlipidemia, hyper-
 diomyopathy, and heart failure.27 Myocardial injury is
e    
associated with excess catecholamines and related sys-
high growth hormone or somatomedin concentra-
temic hypertension, ischemia, coronary vasoconstric-
tions, clevated serum liver enzyme activities, leukocyto-
 tion, increased sarcoplasmic permeability, and intracel.
sis, hyperphosphatemia, and variable changes in the
lular calcium overload.27
erythron.12
 In six diabetic cats reported with acromegaly and
 THERAPY. Life-thrcafening arrhythmias are managed
high serum growth hormone concentrations, five had
with standard antiarrhythmic therapy, alone or in con-
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and three died of left
 junction with α-adrenergic blocking agents (c.g., phe-
hear1 failure.24. 4s Systolic murmurs, gallop rhythms,
muffled heart soumds, dyspnca, and ascites were vani-
(e.g., propranolol), alter phenoxybenzamine has becn
ably present. Thoracic radiographs disclosed cardio-
administered. Surgical removal of the adrenal tumor
mcgaly, pleural effusion, and pulmonary edema.2. 4s A
is the definitive treatment.
similar case was reported in a 12-ycar-old castrated
male cat with hypersomatotropism, pleural effusion,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hyperinsulinemia, and
HYPERSOMATOTROPISM (ACROMEGALY)
mild glucose intolerance but. without acromegaly or
Growth hormone influences many metabolic activi-
diabetes mellitus.+ In a series of 31 cats with hypertro-
ties and, when secreted in cxcess, may cause cardiovas-
phic cardiomyopathy, mean serum growth hormone
cular manifestations.
concentration was significantly greater (approximately
fourfold) than that in normal cats and those with other
ETIoLoGy Growth hormone (somatotropin) excess is 
cardiac discase, with 6l percent having concentrations
most often associated with functional pituitary adeno-
 above the expected normal range.* Eight of thesc
mas in humans and cats. In dogs it may occur second-
cats underwent postmortem cxamination. None had
arily in females after piuitary stimulation during exces-
pituitary tumors. Furthermore, none were diabetic,
 sive or prolonged progesterone exposure,27. * Alfected
 and plasma insulin concentrations were normal. A ret-
dogs and cats are of advanced age (mcan, 10 ycars).
rospective review of 74 cats with hypertrophic cardio-
No breed predilection is recognized, but male cats
myopathy16 revealed them to be substantially younger
appcar to be predisposcd.29. 42, 13
(mcan, 5.6 ± 2.9 ycars; range, 1 to 16) than cats
reported with "classic" hypersomatotropism (mean, 10
PATHoPHIYsioLoGy. Growth hormone and the insulin-
 ycars; range, 8 to 14).29 Thesc observations require
like growth factors (somatomedins) that it. stimulates
further investigation, and cause-effect relationships be-
producc a varicty of biologic effects. The most im-
twcen hypcrsomatotropism and feline cardiovascular
portant include stimulation of protein synthesis and
disease require further study.
CARDIAC MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISEASE 767
Cardiomcgaly, but not heart failure, has been recog-
nizcd in dogs with growth hormone excess.29
calcium concentrations. The latter alter diastolic myo-
cardial function and the organcllc intcgrity. as wcll
as activate destructive cnzymes. Increascd sympathetic
DIABETES MELLITUS
activity in diabctics may further contributc to cardiac
Insulin is releascd from pancrcatic β-rclls in rc-
dysfunction. Animal studics indicate that the diabetic
sponse to blood glucosc clcvation or stimuli from
hcart hias incrcascd sersitivity to the delelerious effects
of hypertension.
 other secretagogucs such as amino acids. This anabolic
hormonc stimulatcs glucosc cntry into cclls, glycogen-
 Diastolic dysfunction has bccn deinonstrated in hu-
csis, and lipogencsis. It opposes gluconeogenesis, lipol-
man diabetics. Functional changes inchude elevated
ysis, ketogencsis, and the serretion and effects of gluca-
 left veniricular end-diastolic pressure, reduced ejection
fraction and left ventricular fractional shortening, sys-
gon.
tolic time interval abnormalities, and increascd wall
stiffness.27 47 48 1Diabetic control is thought to diminish
PATHOPHYsIOLOGy. Relative or absolutc deficicncy in
the risk of diabetic cardiomyopathy. Howcvcr, two rc-
 pancreatic insulin secretion produccs glucose intolcr-
ance, hyperglycemia, glucosuria, and an array of sys-
cent studies emphasize the mild nature of diabetic
cardiomyopathy in thc absence of coronary macrovas-
temic and metabolic abcrrations. Thcse include hyper-
 cular discase and hypcrtension.50o, s1 An incrcascd risk
lipidemia, hypercholesterolemia, hypcrgluragonemia,
of hypertension or coronary artcry discase has not
hepatic lipidosis, serum liver cnzymc activity elevation,
becn demonstrated in diabctic dogs. Only mild de-
ketosis, acidosis, weight loss, hypcrosmolality, neuropa-
creases in left ventricular systolic function were present
thy, rctinopathy, glomerulopathy, and cardiovascular
in canine alloxan-induced diabetes of less than 5 years*
discasc.
 In human type I and I diabetes, the incidence of
duration (Fig. 33-6).18 In addition, a significant inverse
 hypcrtcnsion and coronary aiherosclerosis is highcr
 than in nondiabetics.27 47 Idiopathic cardiomyopathy is
 jng values indicating inferior control) and teft ventric-
ular fractional shortening was demonstrable. Changcs
 more frcqucntly recognized in human diabetics.
in diastolic performance have been mild and less con-
 Diabelic cardiomyopathy is associated with microvas-
cular diseasc, prolongcd diabctic state, and histologic
sistent. Collectivcly, thcsc findings corroborate rccent
studics in humans suggcsting that diabctic cardiomyop.
cardiac lesions (hypcrtrophy, fibrosis, glycoprotein ac-
 athy, in thc abscncc of coronary hcart discase and
cumulation, and coronary microvascular cndothelial
and subendothclial proliferalion),47, 4
hypertcnsion, is mild.
Various metabolic and struciural mechanisms are
associatcd with diabctcs-rclated syslolic and diastolic
CLINICAL SIGNs. Although cardiac failure duc to diabc-
dysfunction, Thesc include altcrations in sarcolemmal
tes mellitus may not occur in animals, rcduced cardiar
mcmbranc integrity sccondary to cholesterol deposi-
tion and diminished sialic acid concentrations-both
prc-cxisting heart discasc,
rclatcd to chronic insulin insufficiency.19 These effects
Peripheral neuropathy may causc significant mor-
1B
16
☆
14
12
10
FIGURE 33-6
difference from controls in alloxan-induced ciabetic
dogs. Mild cardiomyopathy is indicated by significant
(p< 05; stars) changes in pre-ejection period (PEP),
Ieft yentricular ejection time (LVET), and PEP/LVET.
FS, fractional shortening; Vef, velocity of
circumferential fiber shortening. (Reprinted with
permission from Atkins CE: The role of noncardiac
Li f
disease in the development and precipitaion of heart
failure. Ve Clin North Am 21:1035, 1991.)
-10
-12
-14
Heart Rale
FS
ver
PEP
LVET
PEP/LVET
Cardiac Variable
  N       
bidity in diabetic humans.27,52 Parasympathictic dysfune-
tion typically prcccdes sympathietic dysfunction. Thc
cardiovascular effects of diabetic autonomic ncuropa-
NORMAL
thy may antedate othier dysfunction and include in-
crcased heart rate; diminishcd responsiveness to vagal
maneuvcrs and pharmacologic autonomic perturba-
tion; arrhychmias; cardiac denervation; postural hypo-
HYPERKALEMIA (EARLY)
tension; increased anesthelic-related cardiopulmonary
HYPERKALEMIA (LATE)
ncuropathy has been documented in diabctic dogs53
and cats,M ECG studies of alloxan-diabetic dogs showed
n0 cvidcnce of impaired parasympathctic autonomic
function,P2 suggcsting that the dog is relatively resistant
HYPOKALEMIA
to ncuropathic effccts of diabctes.
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE
HYPERCALCEMIA
Inborn crrors of mctabolism may causc a varicty of
derangcments, some with cardiovascular effects.
HYPOCALCEMIA
ETIoLoGy. Deficiency of lysosomal acid alphia-glucosi-
dase has produred cardiac and skclctal myopathics
(Pompe's disease or type I glycogen storagc discase)
Q-T INTERVAL
in the Lapland dog.$5, 36 All affectcd dogs have bcen of
FIGURE 33-7
this breed, suggcsting a hercditary basis.
Examples of the effects of electrolyte abnormalities on the
clectrocardiogram. Hlyperkatemia: Early ECG changes include a tall,
PATHOPHrsIOLOGy. Abnormalities of myocardial dia-
peaked (*"tented'*) T wave, usually symmetric; a normal or
dlecreased Q-T interval; P-R interval prolongation with reduction in
stolic or systolic function may result from inyocardial
P wave ampitude followed by loss of the P wave, Iate ECG
changes include progressive decrease in R wave amplitude with
molecules suchi as glycogcn.
increased promirence of an S wave, widening of the QRs conplex,
S-T segment depression, and depressed intraventricular
Conduction. Ilypokatemia: There may be gTadual ST seginent.
depression, with a prominent U wave following and fusing with the
weakness, polydipsia, vomiting, mcgacsophagus and re-
T wave. In clinical prac ice, however, these changes are
gurgitation, dyspnea (due to inhalation pneumonia),
uncommonly detected until life-threatening hypokaleia is
present. llyercaicemia: The Q-T interval is prolonged. Hispocatcemia:
 dysphonia, panting, and dcath bcforc 2 ycars of agc.
The ST segment is shortened, although the correlation belween
Cardiac findings include atrial fibrillation, ventricular
serun Ca+′ concentration and QT interval is unpredlictable fQT
cctopy. tall R waves, wide QRS complcxcs, and short-
(Courtesy of Dr. Fhilip Fox.)
cned PR intervais.6 Postmortem changes includc car-
diomegaly with focal myocarditis and extensivc glyco-
gen infiltration. Congestive heart failure was not
maintaining normal vascular reactivity. ECG changes
prescnt.
arc associaied with effects of Ca++ jons on the trans-
 mcmbrane action potential. Hypercalcemia shortens
the duration of phase 2; hypocalcemia prolongs the
ELECTROLYTE ABNORMALITIES
duration of phase 2 of thc action potcntial.
Abnormal ECGs may bc rccorded in animals with
HYPERCALCEMIA
structuraily normal hearts but who havc significant
Serum Ca-+ grcater than 12 mg/dl (> 11 mg/dl
clertrolyte or acid-base altcrations. Thus, ECGs are
in cats) indicates hypercalcemia. Associaled disorders
useful to hclp diagnose and manage many extracardiac
include parancoplastic syndromcs, hypoadrcnocorti-
conditions (Fig. 33-7),
cism, hypcrparathyroidism, and atypically, renal fail-
ure.29 Cardiovascular manifestations relate predomi-
nantiy to ECG alterations and include ST scgment
CALCIUM
dcpression and shortencd Q-T interval. Thc latter does 
n1ot correlatc linearly with serum calcium concentra-
Calcium (Ca- ') plays an important rolc in cxcita-
tions, howevcr. Slowed intracardiac conduction and AV
tion and contraction of cardiac muscle fibers as well'as
block have bccn noted with severe hypcrcalcemia.29
THERAPY. Managcmcit of hypcrcalrcmia depcnds, in
conduction in response to cxtracellular K-, 'l'he sinus
part, on the underlying cause. When caused by para-
node and IHis bundle arc more resistant than ventricu-
neoplastic syndromes related to neoplasia, surgical or
lar myocardiurm to incrcascs in cxtracellular K ' , which
medical management is warranted. when associated
in turn is morc resistant than atrial myocardium. Nei-
with hypoadrenocorticism, corticosteroid and saline
ther hyper- nor hypokalcmia produccs or aggravates
therapy is indicated. Acute reduction of serum calcium
heart failure, other lhan by inducing or worscning
conccntrations is indicated when the calcium timcs
arrhythmias. Experimentally, the inotropic and lusi-
 phosphorus product is grcatcr than 60. This is accom-
plishcd with volume cxpansion (normal saline), gluco-
corticoids (prednisolonc. 1 to 1.3 mg/kg PO bid),
pokalernic dogs.co
and/or furoscimide (2 to 4 1ng/kg sid to bid PO).
HYPERKALEMIA
HYPOCALCEMIA
The ECG manifcstations of hypcrkalcmia (>5.5
A serum Ca++ concentration of less than 6.5 mg/
mEq/L) include sinus bradycardia; tall, pcakcd T
dl indicates hypocalccmia. Associated causcs include
waves; P waves with low amplitude, widened, and even-
chronic renal failure, hypoparathyroidisn, hypoalbum-
tually absent; prolonged P-R and QRS intervals and
ineimia, acute pancreatitis, and puerperal tetany. Acute,
heart rate-corrected Q-T interval; and, generally, low
severe hypocalcemia may follow hilateral thyroidec-
amplitude QRS complexes (Fig. 33-7). Although ECG
tomy for feline hyperthyroidism if parathyroid glands
 changes generally worsen with increasing serum potas-
arc inadvertently removed or injured. Ilypocalcemia
siurn conccntrations, the exact prediction of serum
(umlikc hypcrcalcernia) is associated with diminished
 potassium concentration from the ECG is impossible
 gg s  e   d 
bccausc of cocxistent acid/base and electrolyte de-
has bccn postulated that myocardial β-rcceptor *down
rangemcnts (sec
Hypoadrcnocorticism  section ear-
regulation" occurs in dilated cardiomyopathy, which
lier). Common etiologics of hyperkalemia include mct-
Imay render the inyocardial contractile state dependent
abolic acidosis, hypoadrenocortirism, massive ccllular
on cxtraccllular Ca + + concentration.s With stable
injury, rcnal failure, obstructive uropathy, umireatcd
chronic renal failure in huinans, graded increases in
diabetic ketoacidosis, and poor tissue pcrfusion.
serum Ca:+ (1.02 to 1.68 mmol/L) produccd clini-
cally significant improvement in myocardial contractil
THERAPy. Treatment is directed to redurc severc sc-
ity,$* I have observed revcrsiblc myocardial depression
rum potassium elevation by administration of (a) 5
 in a dog with ncurogenic pulnonary edcma sccondary
perrcnt dextrosc in water with or without insulin (0.25
to hypocalcemic scizures and hypoparathyroidism. Thc
to 0.5unit of regular
r insulin/kg with 2gmof
cxact rolc of hypocalcemia in the myocardial dysfunc-
dextrose/unit. of insulin); (b) l0 percent calcium glut-
tion was not clcar.
conate (1 ml/kg IV ovcr 5 to 10 minutes); or (c)
Hypocalccmia prolongs phase 2 action potential du-
sodium bicarbonate (1 to 2 mEq/kg IV). Treatinent
ration. The ECG changes classically include Q-T inter-
 also consists of resolution of the underlying discasc.
val and ST segimenl prolongation (see Fig. 33-7).
Tachycardia, tall R waves, and I-wave abnormalities
IIYPOKALEMIA
have been reported.
Common causes of hypokaleimia (< 3.5 rmEq/L)
THERAPy. I'rcatmcnt of hypocalccmia is unncccssary
includc cxcessive fluid therapy, gastrointestinal or uri-
if it is associated with hypoalbuminemia. Calcium sup-
nary K+ loss, intensive diuretic therapy, alkalosis, an-
 plementation is required if hypocalcemia causes pro-
orexia (especially cats), hyperaldosteronism, and cor-
found weakness,
cardiac
hypokinesis,
or tetany
rection of diabetic ketoacidosis.?? ECG changes include
Acutely, 10 percent calcium gluconatc (1 to 1.5 mg/
nonsustaincd AV dissociation, modest Q-I interval pro-
kg) may be infused intravenously over 10 to 20 minutes
longation, Twavc altcration, and promincnt U wavcs
with continuous ECG monitoring. In noncmergcncy
(scc Figs. 33-5 and 33-7). In humans suffering myocar-
situations, or after stabilization, oral calciun and vita-
dial infarction, the incidence of ventricular arrhyth-
 min D are administered.
mias, including fibrillation, is significantly greater, with
concomitant hypokalemia.$
POTASSIUM
THERAPy. Treatmeint involves (l) potassiuin supple-
mentation and (2) correction of the underlying cause
Cardiac cells take up potassium (K') and eject so-
 of hypokalemia. Supplemental potassium may be pro-
dium to maintain the resting negative membrane po-
vided (a) orally by dietary modification (e.g., nuts or
tential. Differcnl. cardiac cells vary in cxcitability and
fruits) or commcrcial prcparations (potassium gluco-
770
EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
nate: dogs. 2.2 mEq per 100 kcal daily caloric intake;
bccn suggested to produce direct cardiotoxic cffects.4 To
cats, 2 to 6 mEq/day) or (b) parentcrally. A commonly
my knowledge, this syndrome has not been rccognizcd
used guidcline for intravenous supplcmcntation
is
in cormpanion animals. "Uremic endocarditis" has bccn
based onn serum potassium coricentration. For a scrum
described in two of eight dogs with urcmic pericarditis
concentration of less than 2.0 1nEq/L, give 80 1mEq/L
and soft tissue mineralization.65
of fluid; 2 to 2.5, give 60; 2.6 to 3.0, give 40; and
3.1 to 3.5 mEq/l., give 25 to 30 mEq/L. Intravenous
UREMC PERCARDITIS
potassium supplementation should not be adminis-
tered at greater than 0.5 mEq/kg/hour.
Acute and chronic uremia produces pericardial in-
flammation in onc third to one half of humans pre-
sented for dialysis.64
MAGNESIUM
PATHOPHyslOLoGY.  Pathogennesis  involves  develop-
IIypermagnescmia may shorten the Q-T intcrval and
ment of serositis sccondary to uremic toxins and, possi-
delay intracardiac conduction. Experimental hypomag-
bly, to volume overloading.
nesemia is associated with focal myocardial nccrosis
and arrhytlhmias. In clinical settings, it has becn associ-
CLINICAL sIGNs. Pericarditis may cause fever, A friction
ated with ventricular ectopy.01-63
rub is sometimes detected during auscultation. Chest
Reported abnormalities may be related to the inter-
radiographs and ECG are abnormal in thc majority of 
rclationships of magnesium (Mg'-) with Ca++ and
affected humans, and heart failurc occurs up to 70
K-. Intracellular K' repletion is prevented by hypo-
percent of the time. Icss common complications of
Imagncscmia. Additionally, chronic hypomagnesemia
urcmia in humans include fibrinous pleuritis, chronic
incrcascs cytosolic and mitochondrial Ca+ + concentra-
constrictivc pericarditis, and hcmorrhagic tamponade
tions and has been associated with cardiomyopathy
associated with heparinization for dialysis.b4
in cxpcrimental animals. Hypermagnesemia interferes
In a series of 66 cats with nccropsy cvidcnce of
with calciurn influx and intracellular action, thcrcby
pericardial discasc, pcricardial effusion was associated
producing a negative inotropic cffect. Hypomagnese-
with rcnal dysfunction in 7 (1l%); 4 cats had chronic
mia occurs commonly in pcoplc treated for heart fail-
 cnd-stagc renal discase with probable hypertension; 1
ure with diuresis and anorexia. Furthcrinorc, subnor-
was8
similarly affected, but without IV hypertrophy,
mal tissue and serum Mg+ - concentrations conplicate
suggesting carly or no hypertension; 1 had acutc renal.
40 percent of human heart failure cases. Neverthcless,
failurc (ethylcne glycol intoxication); and 1 had glo
disturbances in Mg+-1
 metabolism are not cstablished
merulonephritis with hypoalbuminemia.6 In 42 dogs
in the genesis or precipitation of heart failure other
with pericardial effusion, urcmic pericarditis was idcn-
than in a potential arrhythrmogenic role. Morcover,
tified in 1 animal.67 Another study revcaled pericardial
scrum K' or Mg*+ concentrations do nol accurately
lesions in 1l of 150 dogs (7%) with rcnal failurc; 8
reflcct tissue ion levels.6l
had clear or sanguincous pericardial cffusion; and 3
had pericarditis.c
THERApy. For trcatment of hypomagnesemia and ven-
tricular arrhythrmias, magnesium sulfatc can be admin-
THERAPy. Managcmcnt of pcricardial effusion may
istered orally (dog: 8 t0 25 gin/day; cat: 2 to 5 gm/
cntail pericardiocentesis and/or pericardiectomy.  1n
day) or intravenously (25 1mg/kg IV of 50% solution,
acute syndromes, successful treatment of underlying
diluted, over 30 ninutcs).
renal discasc or institution of dlialysis resolves uremic
 pericardial cffusion in 3 to 10 days; however, less than
50% of chronic human cases resolve. Therapies using
RENAL DISEASE
nonsteroidal anti-inflarnmatory drugs and corticoste
roids (systcinic and intrapericardial) have been advo
cated.'
UREMIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
 In humans, end-stage renal failure may increase LV
GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE
strokc work index, cardiac dimensions, and end-dia-
stolic prcssure and predispose to heart failure. Cardiac
dysfunction may complicate protein-losing glomeru-
PANCREATITIS
lopathy relatcd to systemic hypertension (pressure
overload), ancimia (volumc overload), and pulmonary
 Pancreatitis may causc a varicty of systemic and mcta-
thromboembolism (pressure overload). Although the
bolic abnormalities. Howevcr, clinicall important car-
hypothesis is controversial, thc syndrome of uremia has
diac dysfunction is rare.
CARDIAC MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISEASE
771
ETIOLoGy. Inciting causes vary and are usually un-
tion: and release of mmyocardial deprcssant factor. Post-
 known. IDiagnosis is often hindcred by lack of specific
1mortem nyocardial lesions are frequently noled and
laboratory tests.
are probably associated with ischicmia and arrhythmias.
Myocardial degeneration, necrosis, and, rarely, fibrosis
PATHOPHysiOLoGy. Acutc canine hemorrhagic pan-
were reported in 62 pcrcent of 13 dogs dying with
crcatitis has been associatcd with pulmonary bypcrten-
sion, possibly duc to release of vasoactive substanccs,6
rhythmias. In experimental GDV, six (75 perccnt) of
Whcther this pulmonary hypertension is sustained or
eight dogs suffered subendocardial necrosis, with four
is of clinical importance is not known. A myocardial
 Of thcse six dogs devcloping ventricular arrhythmias.72
deprcssant factor (MDr) has bccn postulated to bc
 Expcrimental GDV has bcen associated with a reduc-
associatcd with arute hernorrhagic pancreatitis.69 Pan-
tion in a mumber of hemodynamic variables: cardiar
crcatic ischemia promotes release of this peptide,
output (by 64 to 89 percent); LV dP/dt (42 pcrcent);
which has a negativc inotropic effect, thereby lowering
 IV end-diastolic prcssure (68 perccnt); mcan arterial
 pressurc (45 to 48 percent); total peripheral resistancc
the myocardium directly or induce coronary artcrial
(33 percent): coronary blood flow (50 pcrcent); and
thrombi. Elcctrolyte disturbances contribute to the
myocardial oxygen consumption (50 pcrcent).72 1)c-
gcncsis of supraventricular and vcntricular arrhyth-
compression improves loading conditions and returns
 mias, interventricular conduction disturbanccs, and S-
cardiac output toward normal, dcspite thc rclcase of
I segment changes.
myocardial depressant factors.72-74
Myocardial depressant factor is a polypeptide (mo-
CLINICAL SIGNs. Acutc hemorrhagic pancreatitis may
lecular weight less than 1000) thought to be released
lcad to irrevcrsible shock associated with cardiac dys-
from ischemic pancreas during shock. It results inl
function, endotoxemia, sepsis, hypovolcmia, and pc-
ncgative inotropy, splanchnic vasoconstriction, and re-
ripheral vasodilation. Congestivc heart failure per se is
ticuloendothelial system dysfunction.7 Both cardiosti-
 not a recognized conplication, but ventricular and
mulatory and cardioinhibitory humoral factors are re-
supraventricular arrhythmias arc coinmon.
leased aftcr decompression in canine GDV, and thc net
effcct in 1most dogs is dininishcd carrliac performance.
THERAPY. Treatmicnt is directcd toward generalized
Because of alterations in loading conditions, exact
 patient support, including fluid thcrapy, antibiotics,
statements about the cffect of GDV on cardiac contrac-
and antiarrhythmic drugs whcn necdcd.
tility are irnpossiblc. However, sinre dP/dt/aortic
opcning pressure (a relatively load-independent index
of myocardial performance) is elevated in GDV, cn-
GASTRIC DILATATION-VOLVULUS
hanced contractility is suspecled.7 This state, probably
mediated through the sympathetic nervous systern, is
Cardiac manifestations are coinmon and frequcntly
counteracted by alterations in heart rate and rhythm,
serious in GDV. A morlality rate of 43 percent was
reduccd preload, and increased afterload, with a net.
reporled in one study, due in part to cardiac dysfunc-
reduction in cardiac output, After decompression, dP/
tion, endotoxemia, bypovolcmia, shock, and dissemin-
 ated intravascular coagulation.70
precipitously in four dogs with cxperimental GDV.
Plasma frorn thc latter four dogs had evidence of myo-
ETIOLoGy, Many thcories have bcen proposcd. Thc
cardial depressant factors in vitro, whicreas the former
 majority of cases occur in large, deep-chcsted dogs.
two had cvidence of cardiostimulalory substance(s),
probably catecholamines.74
CLINIcAL sIGNs. Cardiac arrhythmias are common and
most oftcn devclop after surgical decompression. Thcy
CLINICAL sIGNs. GDV does not produce congestive
include atrial and ventricular extrasystolcs and tachy-
heart failurc. Howcvcr, it 1may precipitate or worscn
cardias, atrial fibrillation, and, uncommonly, bradyar-
failure in dogs affected with hearl disease, cspecially
rhythmias. In 48 GDV-rclatcd arrhythmias, 19 percent
cardiomyopathy.
. The most characteristic signs are
were detected at adrmission, 18 pcrcent were rccorded
acute abdominal distention and tyrnpany, restlessness,
intraopcrativcly, and 65 pcrcent were noted postopera-
 salivation, and rapid, labored brcathing. Many dogs
tively,70
prcsent with physical examination findings of shock
(rapid pulse, palc mucous membranes, hypotension,
PATHOPHysIOLOGy. A number of mechanismis may be
prolonged capillary refill time) and arrhythmias.
 opcrative: myocardial ischemia caused by GDV-induced
bypotcnsion and tachycardia-induced reduction in dia-
THERAPY. Treaunent is aimed at alleviating gastric
stolic filling and coronary perfusion tirne; autonomic
distention; reducing the volvulus; correction of fluid,
imbalance; fluid, electrolytc, and acid-basc perturba-
acid-base, and clectrolyte disturbanccs; and controlling
     N     
serious arrhythnias. If septic shock is present, cortico
nervous systcm insult is acute, and thcre is a lag period
stcroids (dcxamcthasone sodium phosphate, 4 mg/kg
of several days before the onset of myocardial lcsions.
IV) and antibiotics are indicated, Sodium bicarbonatc
 is reserved for cases with lifc-thrcatening rnetabolic
acidosis.
HEMATOLOGIC DISEASE
HEPATIG DISEASE
ANEMIA
Hcpatocellular failure induces reversiblc systcinic va-
Ancmia is thie most conmon cause of high-output
sodilation and cnhances cardiac output as much as
states in hunans and may result in high output failure
two to four timcs.?7 Factors affccting this hypcrkinelic
in animals.76
statc includc hypoxcmia, which occurs secondary to
pulnonary microartcriovcnous fistulas, intrahepalic
PATHOPHYsIOLOGY. Cardiac output increascs as dimin
arleriovcnous shunting with cirrhosis, and diminished
ishcd blood viscosity (hemoglobin < 7 g/dl) and resul
 deactivation of vasodilators and estrogens.
tant tissuc hypoxia reduce systemic vascular resistance
Incrcased circulating catecholamines may also contrib
ute by their positive inotropic cffcct. Ecccntric cardiac
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
hypertrophy and increascd heart ratc accompany this
high-output state.
NEUROGENIC HEART DISEASE
 CLINICAL SIGNs. A midsystolic hcar murmur, gallop
rhythrn, and hyperdynamic precordial impulsc may bc
Cardiovascular lesions havc bcen reported in associa-
detected. Rarely, pulmonary edema is prcscnt, Chronic
tion with certain ncurologic disorders.
anemia (PCV < 20 percent) frequcntly produces soft,
midsystolic murmurs in dogs and cats, probably related
ETIOLoGY. Mullifocal myocardial necrosis secondary
to changes in viscosity, hcart rate, cardiac gcornetry,
t0 brain lesions (ruptured aneurysm, hemorrhage,
and cardiac output. Such murmurs may also reflect
neoplasia. and meningitis) has been documented in
unmaskcd mitral insufficiency. High-output cardiac dis-
humans.7? Electrocardiographic abnormalities are aiso
case was describcd in a profoundly anemic kitten with
recognized (ST segment and T-wave changes and Q-T
a systolic hcart murrmur, cardiomegaly, pulmonary
interval prolongation). A similar association bctween
cderma, and dininished myocardial performance.77
myocardial lesions and brain or spinal cord disease has
Thcsc signs abated and cardiac anatomy and function
been documented in each of the domestic species
normalizcd aftcr symptomatic therapy and reattain-
cxcept the cat. Myocardial lesions were identified in a
mcnt of a normal erythron.
serics of 40 dogs with neurologic discases that includcd
traurna (73%), intcrvcrtebral disk protrusion, distem-
THERAPY. Correction of the underlying cause of ane-
 per, ncoplasia, and cnccphalormalacia. Focal subcndo-
Inia, transfusion, and treating heart failure reprcsent
cardial or subepicardial streaks were identified and
therapeutic goals.
corresponded to histologic lesions of swelling and
acute degeneration; myonecrosis; and in some cases,
inflammation and fibrosis. These dogs ranged in age
DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH
from 1 month to 12 years. Clinical data were provided
INCREASED BLOOD VISCOSITY
on only two dogs, neither of which was in heart failure.
One trauma case exhibited ventricular tachycardia and
 dicd aftcr postoperative cardiac arrest.
POLYCYTIIEMIAANDHIYPERGLOBULINEMIA
ETIOLoGY. Polycyihemia 1may be related to primary
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGy. A proposed mcchanism is auto
conditions, such as neoplastic processes, or may occur
nomic irmbalancc, cspccially with sympathetic ovcracti-
vity7 Norepincphrine infusion can producc similar
case) or excessive erythropoietin hormone production
lesions. Rcserpine, which inhibits sympathetic action
fron ncoplasia or renal disease. Numerous pathologic
by depleting norepincphrine tissuc stores, protects
statcs rcsult in an increased globulin concentration,
against myocardial necrosis after head trauma.
Thc
especially multiple myeloma in dogs.7* Hyperviscosity
pattern of necrosis is similar to that of adrenergic
syndromes may result from marked clcvation in circu
nerve supply and is associated with focal depletion.of
lating immunoglobulin concentration in plasma ccll
catecholarnine granulcs. In most instarccs, the central
dyscrasias or other ncoplastic syndromes. A srnall num-
CARDIAC MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISEASE
773
ber of dogs with hyperviscosity syndrome have bcen
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY. Heat-induced
vasodilation
re-
reported,79-82
duccs systcmic vascular resistance, with resul tant hypo-
tcnsion and dereascd tissuc pcrfusion. This rmay be
PATHOPHysIOLOGy.  Polycythemia  and  hyperglobuli-
 complicatcd by reduced myocardial performance, vol-
ncmia may contribute to cardiac dysfunction by in-
crcasing ventricular afterload. " The optimal hemato-
ume contraction secondary to dchydration, and other
fluid-clcctrolyte and acid-base abnormalitics. Subendo-
crit in regard to blood flow is approximately 40
cardial hemorrhage, 1nyocyte dcgcneration and nccro-
percent. Polycythemic statcs, despite incrcascd blood
viscosity, tcnd to be accompanied by elevations in
are reported.*7 The exact role of cardiac dysfunction
blood oxygen content, cardiac output, and blood vol-
in the development of pulmonary edema is difficult to
ume.7 I ittle evidencc cxists in the veterinary literature
 dctermine, since pulmonary edema associated with
to indicate that heart failure results from polycythemia.
However, polycythemia may well contribute to cardiac
acute respiratory distress syndrome occurs in heat
stroke."
dysfumction in cyanotic congenital heart diseasc.
High-output heart failure has bccn associated with
CLINICAL. SIGNs. Multiorgan failure may occur, mani-
hypcrviscosity syndrome produced by clevated circulat-
ing immunoglobulin concentrations in human multi-
fested by panting, tachycardia, vomiting. diarrhca, con-
ple myeloma.s-ss Cardiac: dysfunction results from in-
vulsions, hemorrhage, collapse, coma, and death. Re-
creascd volume and pressurc loading, as well as rclative
nal, hepatic, pulmonary, and cardiac dysfunction may
devclop. Elcvated serum lactate dehydrogenase (IL1)H)
In one study, eight of ten patients with hyperviscosity
 artivity is a consistent finding. Sinus tachycardia, T-
syndrome (mcan scrurn total protein concentration,
13.0 g/dl; mean heimoglobin conccntration, 7.7 g/
turbances havc bcen documentcd.* Cardiac function
 dll) exhibitcd congestive heart failure.2 There was no
has becn described as being cither hyper- or hypody-
correlation between serum viscosity and the severity of
namic, the latter potentially producing cardiogcnic
signs. In another report, 8 pcrcent of 535 patients
shock.s6 *7 Heart failure is rarc. Right veitricular dilata-
with byperviscosity syndrome dicd of hcart failure.83
tion and tcmporary, but prolonged, right ventricular
Multiple myelorma, withi only mild ancmia and without 
dysfunction havc bccn noted. I have documented rc-
hyperviscosity, has also been associatcd with high-out-
versiblc myocardial failure and pulmonary edcma.
 put heart failure in humans, characterizcd by a relative
tachycardia, reduced systemic vascular resistance, cle-
THERAPy. Successfiul management is aided by rapid
vated left- and right-sided venous pressures, and abnor-
 rccognition and initial temperature reduction using
mally high cardiac output.s3 The mcchanism for high-
cool water. Ice water may interfere with hca1 exchange
output failure reinains obscure.
 by causing peripheral vasoconstriction. Heat reduction
cfforts should cease when the body temperature ap-
CLINICAL sIGNs. In dogs with reportcd hyperviscosity
 proaches 103* F. Concomitant aggressive isotonic fluid
therapy (shock doses: 90 ml/kg/hr), as wcll as rman-
diathcsis (cpistaxis) and renal, cardiac. orular, and
agcment of metabolic acidosis, secondary scpsis, coagul-
llcurologic dysfunction. Of seven reported cases, one
opathics,
arrhythinias, and specific organ systeim
dog (a 5-ycar-old male Yorkshire terricr) was diagnosed 
dysfunction, may also bc ncrcssary. Corticosteroids (dex-
amethasone sodium phosphate at 4 mg/kg IV) havc
cluded a holosystolic murmur ovcr the mitral valve
bcen advocated for their membrane-stabilizing effects.
region, sinus tachycardia, cardiormegaly, and pulno-
nary edema. 'The underlying discase was lymphocytic
leukcmia (serurn total protein, 12.8 g/dl; packed cell
HYPOTHERMIA
volume (PCV), 34%).
THERAry. The goal of reducing blood viscosity can be
Hypothermia occurs with a corc body teinpcrature
attaincd by phlebotomy, chemothcrapy for neoplastic
 of less than 35°℃ (< 95° F). It may produce multiple
polycythcmia or hypcrglobulinemia, or plasmapheresis
 organ dysfunction and inortality ratcs as high as 80
for hyperglobulinemia.
percent.8
MISCELLANEOUS DISORDERS
PATHOPHyS1OLOGY. There is little information about
 cardiac cffects resulting from hypothermia. Experimcn-
tal hypothermia in dogs causcs a period of increasing
HEAT STROKE
cardiac contractility (average maximum increase in con-
 ( ) o axo s  
tractile force of 101 percent at 27.8"C). In some dogs,
dogs. dircct thermal tissue injury produces 
heat
this was followed by a fall in contractility (observed in
strokc.86i
33 pcrccnt of the animals but only at < 20° C);
 774 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
vcntricular fibrillation (in 50 percent of dogs, all at
port, inotropic support (digoxin, dobutarninc, dopa-
<. 23.5° C); hypotension (systolic and diastolic blood
mine), and antiarrhythmic thcrapics (lidocaine and,
:( od'e1 ne jusiod ot aaexordde Aq laj snssid
ironically, electrical defibrillation) havc all bcen em-
and sinus bradycardia (average heart rate, 3l bpm at
ployed.
19.5° C)." Cardiac contractility actually increased by
26 percent at 19.5"℃.
Cardiac dysfiinction may be caused by myocardial
SEPTIC SHOCK
muscle injury due to associatcd abnormalitics in myo-
cardial microcirculation, aggravated by thc increased
ETTOLoGy. Bactcrcmia caused by gram-negative bacte-
blood viscosity that occurs with splenic contraction
ria rcprcsents the inost coimmon cause. Both gram-
and plasma loss* Metabolic acidosis also dcpresscs
 positive and gram-negative canine septic shock have
myocardial function.
bcen associated with reduced mcan artcrial pressure,
incrcascd cardiac output, reduced cjection fraction.
 CLINicAL siGNs. The sinoatrial node is tempcrature
reduced ventricular compliancc, and vcntricular dilata-
 dependent, and reduccd hcart ratcs accompany hypo-
tion.9
thermia. In humans, cardiac manifestations are oftcn
reversiblc and include sinus bradycardia and othcr
PATHOPHYsIOLOGy. Scptic shock produccs Inyocardial
arrhythmias, S-T segment changes, rcgional wall mo-
deprcssion characterized by LV dilatation, LV and RV
tion abnormalities, and reduced ejection fraction.80
functional deprcssion and altered diastolic IV pres-
surc-voluinc rclatiornships." Resultant cardiovascular
derangcmcnts may be present after 1 to 4 days of
ELECTROCUTION
shock. Although potentially revcrsiblc, thcy arc im-
portant mortality factors.
ETIoLoGY. Arcidental clectrocution occurs most. of-
Cardiovascular function in canine septic shock has
ten in young animals from chewing an clectrical cord.
reccivcd litte clinical attention. However, expcricnce
PATHOPHYsiOLOGy. Cardiac injury can result from
hcat. coagulation of myocardial protein, from disrup
sion exists with forward, but not backward, hcart fail-
tion of electrophysiologic activity, and by prolongcd
ure. With coexistent heart discase, particularly thc vol-
arrhythmia-induced hypotension and relative myocar-
ume-overload statc of aortir rcgurgitation due to
 dial ischemia during resuscitation. In dogs, subcndo
vegetative cndocarditis, lef-sided congestive heart fail-
cardial and subepicardial hcnorrhagc has bccn rc-
ure would likely cnsuc.
ported.? In electrocuted humans, widespread focal
In hydratcd human septic shock patients, cardiac
nccrosis of the myocardium, SA and AV nodcs, and
 output is normal or clevated, bul this hyperdynamic
the tunica media of the simall coronary arterics
state falls far short of meeting the necds of organs and
was
recorded. The ECG may record sinus tachycardia,
cells under the conditions of septic shock."5 Ventricular
fibrillation,
filling prcssurcs do not rise with normal or supernor-
ventricular
anid
S-T
and
T-wave
changcs s-- Variably reversible echocardiographic ab-
mal cardiac output bccause systemic vascular resistance
     sm
falls. Thercfore, signs of congestion are rare in the
kinesis and left ventricular dyskinesia.94
abscncc of other cardiac disease (e.g, vegctative endo-
Acute pulmonary cdema following clectrocution is
carditis), Iate reductions in cardiar output arc uncom-
mon but highly correlated with dcath, Thcy arc associ-
common. It may reprcscnt a form of neurogenic pul-
monary edema resulting from massive sympathetic ac-
ated with pulmonary wedge pressure clcvation and
tivity, with venous and arterial constriction clevating
reduced RV and IV strokc work. Sonc paticnts may
pulmonary venous pressurcs." Cardiac dysfunction
die during the hyperdynamic stage of septic shock.
Endotoxin adninistcred to humans and dogs pro-
may contribute to its development."2
duces similar cardiovascular changes obscrved in septic
CLINICAL SIGNs. Unconsciousncss, tonic-clonic activity,
shock. It is inportant to note that the same sequence
 oral burns, dyspnea (74 percent of dogs and 57 per-
of cardiovascular changes can be produced in dogs
cent of cats), pulmonary edema, and cmesis arc re-
givcn Staphylococcus aureus, a microorganism without
ported. The mortality in dogs (n = 26) in one study
cndotoxin, suggcsuing that cardiovascular injury dur-
was 39 pcrccnt, whereas none of seven cats suc-
ing scptic shock has a final common pathway (Fig.
cuinbed.s
33-8).96 Thc cardiovascular effects of various known
 imcdiators of scpsis have beenl established in dogs and
THERAPY. Animals
S suffering electrocution require
humans" (chapters 14, 15). Tumor nccrosis factor rc-
 managcrnent of pulmonary edema and accompanying
leased during septic shock may be an important myo-
myocardial dysfunction and arrhythmias. Furosemide,
cardial depressant factor. It has becn shown to have
oxygen, corticosteroids, mcchanical ventilatory sup-
significant in vitro negative inotropic cffccts, whcrcas
Nidus of Infection
nismofβ-adrenergic receptorsbyendotoxinare
（Abscess,perltonitis,pneumonitis,cellulitis,etc.)
thought tocontributetoimpairedresponsiveness to
endogenous catecholamines and,hence,myocardial
BloodstreamInvasionor
depression.
Local Production and Release
of Mediator
CLINICALsIGNs.Myocardial depression,ventricular di-
latation, and arrhythmias are recognized in human
Mediators Released
and canine septic shock (see also Table 15-3).
Comple
ement Derived
dial Depressant Substance
Kinins
sisFactor（TNF)
THERAPy.Eradicating the source of sepsiswith cardio-
Endolo
euBxoo
oxin(Lipopolysaccharide or
vascular supportive measures constitutes the initial
Platelet Activating Factor
(PAF)
therapy.Shockdoses ofglucocorticoids(dexametha-
Histamine
sone sodium phosphate,4mg/kg IV)，appropriate
antibiotics,and fluid therapy(crystalloids or colloids
DirectMyocardial Effects
early in septic shock) are all indicated (see Table 15-
PeripheralandPulmonary
Vascular Etfects
4). Pressor agents may be necessary in cases that de-
1.Decreased LV ejec
velop profound hypotension unresponsive to fluid
2. LV dilatation
therapy. Digoxin, dobutamine,and dopamine have
2.Vasoconstriction
ophil)
been shown to be effective for inotropic support (see
Figure 15-1).Prevention or correction of disseminated
4.Vascular endothelial cell
intravascular coagulation (DIC),oxygen therapy,and
dysfunction
management of multiple organ system failure may all
be indicated (chapters 14, 15).
"Cardiovascular Insufficiency""
Lactic acidemia
(patchy.uneven flow)
Increasedmixed venous O2
Reducedresistance toblood flow
IMMUNE-MEDIATEDAND
IMMUNODEFICIENCYDISEASES
Severe
Severe
Severe
Decrease
Myocardial
Multiple
inSystemic
Depression
Organ System
Vascular
(10%)
Dystunction
Resistance
(50%)
Cardiovascularmanifestationsmay accompany these
(40%)
disorders,as described in this section.Therapy,when
indicated, is directed at treating serious arrhythmias
Unresponsive Hypotension
MultipleOrgan
(chapters 17,18,19) or heart failure (chapter 12).
SystemFailure
Death
SYSTEMICLUPUSERYTHEMATOSUS
FIGURE 33-8
This disease is well recognized in dogs,withfemales
A schematicrepresentation of thepathogenesis of human septic
disproportionately affected.
shock.(Reprintedwith permission fromParker MM,Parillo JE:
Septic shock.JAMA 250:3325,1983.)
PATHoPHYsIOLoGY.A clear Or sanguineous protein-
aceouseffusionisassociatedwithhistologiclesionsof
theinterleukinsandendotoxindonot.Theroleof
fibrinoid degeneration, edema, and necrosis of peri-
myocardial depressant factor (MDF）has been estab-
cardial connective tissue.Myocarditis,present in 40
lished andpathophysiologicmechanisms postulated
percent of SLE patients, consists of fibrinoid necrosis
(Fig.33-8).96Nearlyhalf of septic shockpatientshave
of connectivetissue andvessels,butrarely cardiacmyo-
circulatingMDFthatis correlatedwithhigherpulmo
cytes.99Endocardiallesionsmay occur.Verrucousvalvu-
nary artery wedge pressure,end-diastolicvolume,and
larlesions(Libman-Sacksendocarditis)consistofde-
mortality; and with ventricular dysfunction.Activated
generatingvalvetissue andfibrosis,but they arerarely
complementcomponentCareducessystemicvascular
severe enough to produce valvular insufficiency.
resistance but not myocardial function.95
Lastly,reduced myocardial β-receptor numbers and
CLINICAL sIGNs.Signs are associatedwith antigen-anti-
bluntedβ-agonistresponsiveness havebeen observed
bodycomplexesandusuallyrelate tothrombocyto-
in experimental animals and septic humans,respec-
penia,glomerulonephritis,immune complex joint dis-
tively.97Elevatedplasmacatecholamineconcentrations
ease,autoimmune hemolytic anemia,polymyositis,
withβ-receptor downregulation and/ordirect antago-
polyneuritis, and dermatitis.Myocarditis and pneumo-
776 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
nitis are lcss common.* Pericarditis is thc most com-
Congestive heart failurc wcre documented with pericar-
C o dn u pdai su u uoe ser o
dial effusion and arrhythmias. Hlowcver, although
pcrcent of systcrnic lupus crythcmatosus (SLE) autopsy
 heart lesions havc been describcd in cats infected with
cases.  Physical cxaimination findings include heart
feline lentivirus (feline inmunodeficiency virus), car-
murmurs (duc to valvular insufficiency and anemia)
diac dysfumction and failure are not clinically signif-
and cardiac gallop rhythms; mufflcd heart sounds or
cant manifestations.105
pericardial friction rubs; hypertension secondary to
rcnal disease; and, occasionally, heart failure,9, 1o Both
systolic and diastolic dysfunction, as well as incrcascd
OBESITY
myocardial mass, have been associated with systemic.
SLE.to Pericarditis or pcricardial cffusion (39 per-
cent), hypcrtension (22 pcrcent), myocarditis (14 per-
cent), congestivc heart failure (l0 perrcnt), pulno-
ETIoLoGy. Morbid obcsity is present in 34 million
nary hypcrtension (9 pcrccnt), and valvular heart
adult Americans?7 and 20 to 44 percent of dogs in
disease (9 percent) were all noted. o
developed countries. In humans, obesity is associated
Comparcd with lesions in human SLE, little atten-
with an incrcased incidence of hypertcnsion, but ath-
lion has becn paid to the hearts of SLE-affected dogs.
crosclerosis is rlot a consistent association.*7 Little in-
Reviews of reported canine and feline pericardial dis-
formation is available regarding thc cardiovascular ef-
eascs reveal no mention of SIE or immunc-mcdiated
fects of obesity in companion anirmals. A British study
causes,s. i7 although feline infectious peritonitiswith
of more than 8o00 dogs showed that gross obesity was
inmmune-mediated vasculitis as the underlying lcsion-
associated with an incrcascd incidence of cardiovascu-
was the most common causc of pericardial discase in
lar disorders, whcrcas moderate obesity was not.16
66 cats.f Onc report of 30 SLE dogs describes venticu-
lar arrhythmias in 2 and heart failurc in 1 dog, al-
PATHOPHysIOLOGy. Cardiar changes are related pri-
though cardiar disordcrs werc not confirncd by nec-
Imarily to volume overloading, with resultant eccentric.
ropsy or echocardiography, and 2 of the dogs were
hypcrtrophy and, ultimately, myocardial failure (*car-
breeds prone to dilated cardionyopathy," However,
diomyopathy of overload'). An increase in blood vol-
an antinuclear antibody (ANA)-positive, female Great
ume proportional to the degree of obesity results in
Dane with vcniricular tachycardia was reported to rc-
incrcased slroke volume. Vcntricular filling prcssures
spond to steroid therapy, suggesting myocarditis, and
arc norinal at rest but rise dramatically with cxcrcise.
an ANA-positive, 4year-old female dachshund without
Thcre is also an1 increased susceptibility to arrhyth-
a 1nurmur dicd of hcart failure.9 Both dogs had other
mias.27 Hypertension adds an abnormally highi
manifestations of SLE,
afterload, further ovcrloading the hcart. Cor pulno-
nale ('pickwickian syndrome'"') is cvident with thic obe-
sity-hypoventilation syndromc (i.c., obesity results in
AMYLOIDOSIS
hypoventilation, causing alvcolar hypoxia, pulmonary
Certain types of amyloidosis are associated with myo-
Fig. 33-2). Cor pulmonalc is recognized in obese dogs
cardial infiltration and heart failure in humans. lo? Car.
with chronic obstructive pulinonary disease (COPl)).29
diac manifestations most commonly involve systolic
It is rnot clcar whether obesity precipitatcs respiratory
dysfunction and failure. Some patients suffer from dia
 discasc, which induces cor pulmonale, or whcther obe
 stolic failure (restriclive cardiomyopathy), orthostatic
sity is prirmarily rcsponsible for cardiac impairment.
hypotcnsion, or ECG abnormalities.102 Companion ani
Most likcly, obesity plays a role in aggravating or caus-
mals are relativcly frequently afflicted with amyloidosis.
ing COPD, as well as inducing hypoventilation, cach
 Renal failure is the most common manifestation. Dogs
contributing to the developmcnt of cor pulmonale.
and cats produce mainly reactive amyloid. Cardiac in-
with amyloidosis may have 1nild-to-noderate cardiac
CLINICAL sIGNs. Historical and physical cxamination
findings relate largely to chronic respiratory discascs
amyloid deposition, but advcrse clinical effects are nol
and possibly cor pulnonale. Righi heart cnlargement
reported.lui
Imay be evident radiographically, oftcn reflected by
ECG changes in dogs as P pulmonalc (scc Figure
IMMUNODEFICIENGY SYNDROMES
6-14). Ilypertension and arrhythmias call occur.
 Dilatcd cardiomyopathy and heart failurc havc been
THERAPY. Weight reduction is beneficial in rcversing
described sccondary to human acquired immunodefi-
yolumc overloading, hypertension, and hypertrophy.
ciency syndrome (AlDS).1 Systohic myocardial and
cven aftcr the onset of failure.?7
CARDIAC MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISEASE 777
NUTRITIONAL ABNORMALITIES
failure. Tumors metastatic to the heart or grcat vessels
may altcr cardiac preload (restricting filling by venous
or intracardiac obstruction. pericardial infiltration, or
ETIOLoGy. Malnutrition complicates a variety of de-
effusion), reduce systolic function (myocardial infl-
 generative, neoplastic, and infectious discases. Cardiac
tration), or affect the hematopoietic system, as de-
cachexia is a well-recognized phenomenon, frequently
scribed earlier. Infectious diseases may also produce
found in animals in heart failure (chapter 32).
heart failure or other cardiac dysfunction. Trypanoso
miasis, toxoplasmosis, borreliosis, feline infectious
 PATHOPHysIOLOGY. Consequences of malnutrition in-
 peritonitis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and parvovi-
cludle fluid and electrolyte imbalances and generalized
rus infection are cxamples of infectious diseascs associ-
 protein wasting, from which the hcart is not spared.
Cardiac manifestations include reduction in cardiac
 ble of producing cardiac disease and potcntial failure
output, contractility, compliance, systolic pressure, and
include alcohol. gossypol, doxorubicin, hcavy metals,
 pulse pressure; cardiac atrophy with myofiber atrophy
phenothiazines, hydrocarbons, catecholamines, arach-
and interstitial edema; and increased sensitivity to car-
nid stings, snake bites, pesticides, biotoxins, and oth-
diac glycosides.27
Specific nutritional deficicncics have bcen shown to
with heart failure in two dogs who dlied after consum-
cause or contribute to cardiac dysfunction in humans
ing meal containing gossypol cottonseed.1ta Lesions
and animals (chapters 27, 28, 32). One prominent
included right-sided heart failure (ascites), diminished
example is reversible dilated cardiomyopathy associ-
IV function, ECG changes (biventricular and left atrial 
 ated with inadequate dietary taurine. 1u7-n Dilated car-
cnlargement; idioventricular rhythm, andl/or QT pro-
 diomyopathy in dogs has heen associated with subnor-
 longation); and myocyte degeneration, with intra- and
mal plasma and myocardial carnitinc conccnurations
 intercellular cdema and minimal inflammation,
(chapters 27, 32),9 Selenium deficicncy produces hu-
man dilated cardliomyopathy (Keshan disease) in sele-
nium-deficient areas in China but rarely in the Lnited
States.'l' A comparison of plasma selenium concentra-
REFERENCES
 tion in healthy cats and a limited number of cats with
various types of cardiac discase showed no significant
difference.lz Severe thiamine deficiency (beriberi)
produces a high-output form of cardiomyopathy, char-
1. Atkins CF. The rolc of noncardiac disease in the devel-
opment ard prccipitation of heart [aihurc. Vet Clin
acterizcd by fulminant biventricular failure, murmur,
North Am 21:1035, 1991
andl gallop.24
2. Katz AM. Cardiomyopathy of overload. N Engl J Med
322:100, 1990
3. Braunwald F.
.. Pathophysiology of heart failure.
n
PREGNANCY
Braunwald E (ed): Heart Disease: A Textbook of Car-
diovascular Medicine. 3rd cd. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
ders, 1988, p 426
Normal human prcgnancy is associated with in-
4. Grossman W, Jones D, McLauurin LP. Wall stress and
creascs in blood volume (40 to 50 percent incrcase),
patterns of hypertrophy in the hurman left. ventricle. J
Clin Invest 56:36, 1975
cardiac output (30 to 50 percent), stroke volume, heart.
5. Lakatta EG. Starling's law of the heart is explained by
rate, and velocity of circumferential fiber shortening:
an intimatc intcraction of muscle length and nyofila-
also, reductions in systemic blood pressure, systemic
ment calcium activation. J An Coll Cardiol 10:1157,
vascular resistance, and periphcral vascular resistance.
1987
6. Meerson FZ. The myocardium in hyperfuncticn, hyper-
Cardiac murmurs, probably related to reduction in
trophy, and heart failurc. Circ Res 25:1, 1969
packed cell volume and volume overload, are dctected.
7. Mirsky I, Pfeifer JM, Pfcifer MA, et al. Thc contractile
The ECG may reveal an increascd heart rate, arrhyth-
state as the major determinant in the cvolution of left
mias, rate-related Q-T and P-R interval reduction, and
ventricular dysfumction in thc spontareously hyperten-
changes in T wave and S-T segment." Hypertension
sive rat. Circ Res 53:767, 1983
and peripartum cardiomyopathy may accompany hu-
8. Fifer MA, Borow KM, Colan SD, ct al. Farly diastolic
man pregnancy .  The importancc of this syndrome.
lef veniricular function in children and acdults with
aortic stenosis. I Am Coll Cardiol 5:1147, 1985
 in companion animals has not heen demonstrated.
9. Bonagura JD, Kcenc Bw. Therapy for heart failurc. In
Bonagura [D (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy.
Vol XI1. Philadelphia, WB Saundcrs, 1995, p 780
OTHER DISORDERS
10. McFadden ER Jr, Braurwald E. Cor pulmonale. In
Braumwald F (ed): Heart Disease: A Texthook of Car-
diovascular Medicine. 3rd ed. Philadclphia, WB Saun-
Numerous other systemic and mctabolic diseases can
ders, 1988, p 1597
affect the heart and precipitate or contribute to heart
11. Enson Y, Giuntini C, Lcwis ML、 et al. The influcncc
778
3 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDFRS ON THE HEART
of hydrogcn ion concentration and hypoxia on thie
31. Miller CW, Boone JA, Soderberg SA, et al. Echocardio.
pulmonary circulation. J Clin Invest 43:1146, 1964
graphic assessiment of cardiac function in beagles with
12. Snyder Dw. Cardiac manifestations of noncardiac dis-
cxperimentally produced hypothyroidism. J Ultrasound
ease in the elderly. In Messerli FH (ed): Cardiovascular
Med 3(suppl):137, 1984
Disease in the Elderly. Boston, Martinus Nijhoff Pub-
32. Santos AD, Miller RP, Puthcnpurakal KM, ct al. Fcho-
lishing, 1988, p 263
cardiographic characterization of the reversiblc cardio-
13. Fox PR. Cor pulmonale. In Kirk Rw (ed): Current
rmyopathy of hypothyroidlism. Am I Med 68:675, 1980
Veterinary "Therapy IX, Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
 32a. Broussard JD, Peterson ME, Fox PR, Changes in clini-
1986. p 313
cal and laboratory findings in cats with hyperthyroidisn
14. Malik AB, Kidd BSL. Tine course of pulmonary vascu-
from 1983 to 1993. I Am Ve1 Med Assoc 206:302, 1995
'1 pod I uy shp un vixo oi asuodsar 1e
32b. Peterson MF. Hypcrthyroid diseases. In Ettingcr SH.
1973
Feldiman ED {eds): Textbook of Vcterinary Internal
15. Klinger JR, Hill NS. Right ventricular dysfunction in
Medicine. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 1446
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Chest 99:715,
 33. Willard MD, Schall WD, McCaw DE, et al. Canine hypo-
1991
adrenocorticisim: Report. of 37 cascs and rcvicw of 39
16. Rawlings CA. Cardiopulmonary fumction in the dog
previously reported cascs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:59,
with Dirofilaria immitis infection: During infection and
1982
after treatment. Am I Vet Rcs 41:319, 1980
 34. Peterson ME, Greco DS, Orth DN. Primary hypoadre-
17. Amis TC. Chronic bronchitis.in dogs. In Kirk RW (ed):
nocorticism in tcn cats. J Vet Intern Med 3:55, 1989
Current Veterinary Therapy. Vol IX. Philadelphia, WB
35. Musselman EE. Endocrine cardiomyopathics. Proc
Saunders, 1986, p 306
Acad Ve1 Cardiol, 1990, p 18
17a. Juan G, Calverley P, Talamo C. ct al. Effect. of carbon
 35a. Peterson Ml, Kinizer PP, Kass PH. Prctrcatinent clini-
dioxide on diaphragmatic function in hurman beings.
N Engl .I Med 310:874, 1984
nocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:85, 1996
17b. Brochard L. Mancebo J, Wysocki M, ct al. Noninvasive
 36. Knowlton AI, Baer L. Cardiac: failure in Addison's dis-
ventilation for acute exacerbations of chronic obstruc-
casc. An J Med 74:829, 1984
tive pulmonary disease, N Engl J Med 333:817, 1995
 37. Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Smith MC. I lyperadrenocorli-
18. Burns MG. Pulmonary thromboembolism. /n Kirk RW
cisim in cats: Seven cases (1978-1987). I Am Vet Med
(cd): Current Vcterinary Therapy Vo! Vl1. Philadel-
Assoc: 193:245, 1988
phia, WB Saunders, 1983, p 257
 38. Brcitschwerdt EB, Meuten DJ、 Grecnfield CL、 et al.
19. Rosernow EC III. Osmundson PJ, Brown M1. Pulinonary
Idiopathic: hyperaldosteronism in a dog. J An Vet Med
ermbolism. Mayo Clin Proc 56:161, 1981
Assoc: 187:841, 1985
20. Fluckiger MA, Gomez J. Racliographic fndings in dogs
39. Eger CE, Robinson WF, Huxtable CRR Primary aldoste-
with spontaneous thrombosis or cmbolism. Vet Radiol
ronism (Conn's syndrome) in a cat: A casc report and
25:124, 1984
review of coimparativc aspects. J Small Anim Pract
21. Atkins CE, Lehner CE, Bcck KA, ct al. Experimental
24:293, 1983
respiratory decomprcssion sickness in shccp. I Appl
40. Iwedt DC, Wheeler SL. Pheochromocytoma in the dog.
Physiol 65:1163, 1988
Vet Clin North Am 14:767, 1984
22. Suter PF. Pcripheral vascular discases. In Ettingcr SJ
41. Bouyard 1, Feeney DA, Caywood DD. Phcochromocy-
(ed): lextbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 3rd
toma in dogs: 13 cases (1980-1985). J Am Vet Med
ed. Philadelphia, WB Saumdcrs, 1989, p 1183
Assoc 191:1620,1987
23. Aiken SW, Jakovljevic A, Lantz GC, Blcvins WE. Ac-
42. Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Growth Hormone in Carnine
quired arteriovenous fistula secondary to castration in
and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction. Philadel-
a dog. J An Vet Mcd Assoc 202:965, 1993
phia, wB Saunders, 1987, p 29
24. Grossman W, Braunwald E. High-cardiac output states.
43. Peterson ME. Unusual cnidocrinc disease in thc cat.
In Braunwald F. (cd): lleart Disease: A Textbook of
Proc Am Coll Vet Intern Med, 1988, p 6
Cardiovascular Medicinc. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB
44. Kittleson MD, Pion PD, Lothrop CD, et al. Hypersoma-
Saunders, 1988. p 778
totropism in a cal presenting with hypertrophic cardio-
25. Calvert C. Congestive cardiomyopathy in Doberman
rnyopathy (HCM) and insulin resistance but without
pinscher dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 181:598, 1982
26. Pauciera DL. Mamode echocarcdiographic and electro
Intern Med, 1989, p 1038
cardiographic findings before and after levothyroxine
45. Kittleson MD. Relationship bctwcen hyperlrophic car-
treatment in hypothyroid dogs; Abstract. I Vet Intern
diomyopathy and hypcrsomatotropism in the cat. 8th
Mcd 7:115,1993
Annual Forium, American College of Veterinary Inter-
 27. Williams GH, Braunwald E. Endocrine and rutritional
nal Medicine, 1990
dlisorders ard heart discasc. In Braurwald F (ed): Heart
46. Atkins CE, Gallo AM, Kurzman I, Cowen P. Risk factors,
Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicinc. 3rd
clinical signs, and survival in cats with a clinical diagro-
ed. Philadelphia, wB Sa1mders, 1988, p 1800
sis of idiopathic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: 74 cases
28. Buccino RA, Spanr JF, Poole E, et al. Influence: of thc
(1985-1989). J Am Vet. Med Assoc 201:613, 1992
thyroid state on intrinsic contractile properties and the
47. Fcin FS, Sonnenblick EH. Diabetic cardiornyopathy.
energy stores of the myocardium.  Clin Invest
Prog Cardiovasc Dis 27:255, 1985
46:1669, 1967
48. Atkins CE, Engeriman Rl., Kern TS. Diabctic cardiomy-
29. Fox PR, Nichols CER. Cardiac involvement in systemic
opathy. Proc Am Coll Vet Intern Med 2:9. 1988
discasc. In Fox PR (ed): Canine and Feline Cardiology.
49. Pierce GN, Blamish RE, Naranjan SD. Diabctic Cardio-
New York, Churchil Livingstone, 1988, p 555
myopathy: Present Status and Future Directions. Boca
30. Liu S. Tilley LP, Tappc IP, Fox PR. Clinical and patho-
Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1988. p 225
logic findings in dogs with atherosclerosis: 21 cases
50. Follansbce WP, Schuliman DS, Curtiss EI, et al. Diastolic
(1970-1983). J Arn Vet Med Assoc 189:227, 1986
function in diabetes: Results from the epideniology
CARDIAC MANIFESTATIONS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISEASE
779
of diabetic complicatiorrs study; Abstract. Circulation
myocardial oxygcn consurmpuion in the: dlog. Am J Vet.
80:76, 1989
Res 46:98, 1985
 51. Follansbec WP, Curtiss El. Schulman DS, et al. Diabetic
73. Orton EC,Muir WW, llemodynamics during experi-
cardiomyopathy: Final results of diabetes conplications
mental gastric dilatation-volvulus in dogs. Ain J Vet Res
study, Abstract. Circulation 80:206, 1989
44:1512. 1983
52. Atkins CE, Keene BW, Engerman Rl. Inability to detect
74. Orton EC, Muir WW. Isovolumetric indices and hu-
parasympathetic autonomic: ncuropathy in experimen-
moral cardioactive substance assay during clinical and
tal canine diabetes mellitus in an electrocardiographic
cxperimcntally induced gastric dilatation-volvtus in
surdly. Diabetes Res 11:39, 1989
dogs. Am J Vet Res 44:1516, 1983
53. Braund KG, Steiss JE, Distal ncuropathy in spontaneous
75.1
King JM, Roth L, Haschek WM. Myocardial recrosis
diabetes mellitus in the dog. Acta Neuropathol 57:263,
secondary to neural lesions in domestic animals. I Aim
1982
Vct Med Assoc: 180:144, 1982
 54. Kramek BA, Moise NS, Cooper B, ct al. Neuropathy
 76. Roscnthal Ds, Brauunwald E. Hematological-oncological
associated with diabctcs mellitus in the cat. J An Vet
disorders and heart disease. In Braurwald F. (cd): 1leart.
Med Assoc 184:42, 1984
Disease: A lextbook of Cardiovascular Medicinc. 4th
 55. Mostafa lA. A case of glycogenic cardiomegaly in a dog.
cd. Philadclphia, WB Saunders, 1988, p 1734
Acta Ve1 Scarnd 11:197, 1970
77. Yaphc W, Giovengo S, Moise Ns. Severe cardiormegaly
 56. walvoort HC, van Nes II, Stokhof AA, ct al. Canine
secondary to anemia i1 a kilten. J An Vet Med Assoc
glycogen storage disease type lI: A clinical stucdy of
202:961,1993
four affected Lapland dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
78. Hohenhaus AE. Syndromes of hyperglobulincmia: Di-
20:279,1984
agnosis and therapy. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Cur-
57. Cornor TB, Rosen BL, Blaustcin MP, ct al. Hypocal-
rent. Veterinary Therapy XII. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
cemia precipitating congestive heart failure. N Engl J
ders, 1994, p 523
Med 307:869, 1982
79. Hurvitz A1, 1laskins SC, Fisher CA. Macroglobulinemia
 58. Ginsburg R, Esserman BA, Bristow MR. Myocardial per-
with hyperviscosity syncdrome in a dog. J Am Vet Med
formance ard extracellular ionizcd calcium in a sc-
Assoc 157:455. 1970
verely failing human hcart. Ann Intern Med 98:603,
80. MacEwen EG, Hurvitz AI. Hayes A. Hyperviscosity syn-
1983
drome associated with lymphocytic leukemia in thrcc
59. Iang RM, Fellner SK, Neumann A, ct al. Left ventricu-
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 170:1309, 1977
lar contractility varies directly with blood ionized cal-
81. Shull RM, Osborne GA, Barrett RF, ct al. Serun hypcr-
cium. Arn lntern Med 108:324, 1988
viscosity syndrome associated with IgA multiple my-
60. Fitzovich DE, Harmaguchi M, Tull WB, Young BR.
eloma in two dogs. J An Anirm Hosp Assoc 14:58, 1978
Chronic hypokalcmia and the left ventricular responses
 82. Mejia EB, Carman S, Lunsden [l1. Macroglobulincinia
to cpinephrinc and preload. J An Coll Cardiol
in a dog. Can Vet J 20:28, 1979
18:1105, 1991
83. Pruzanski W, Wartt [G. Serum viscosity and hypcrviscos-
61. Dyckner T, Wester PO). Potassium/magnesium deple-
ity syndrome in lgG multiplc mycloma: Report of 10
tion in paticnts with cardiovascudar disease. Am J Med
patients and a review of the literature. Ann Intern Med
82(3A):11, 1987
77:853,1972
62. Iscri IT, French JH. Magnesium: Nature's physiologic
84. Kyle RA. Multiple myclorma; review of 869 cases. Mayo
calcium blocker. Am Heart J 108:188, 1984
Clin Proc 50:29. 1975
63. Ilollifield Jw, Magnesium depletion, diuretics, ard ar-
85. McBride W, Jackiman JD, Gammon RS,ct. al. lligh-
rhythmias. Am J Med 82(3A):30. 1987
output cardiac failure in patients with multiple my-
64. Pastan SO, Braunwald E. Renal disorders and heart
cloina. N Engl I Med 319:1651, 1988 
discasc. In Braunwald E (ed): Heart Disease: A Text-
 86. Johnston KF., Pathopbysiology of hcat stroke. Conpend
book of Cardiovascular Medicinc. 4lh ed. Philadelphia,
Contin Educ Pract Vet 4:141, 1982
WB Saunde1s, 1988, p 1828
87. Zaher D, Moscs A, weiss AT. Evidennce of prolonged
65. Madewcll BR, Norrdin RW. Renal failurc associated
myocarclial dysfunction in hcat stroke. Chest 93:1089,
with pericardial effusion in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1989
167:1091, 1975
88. El-Kassimi FA, Al-Mashhadani S, Abdullah AK, et al.
66. Rush JE, Keenc Bw, Fox PR. Pericardial diseasc in thc
Adult respiratory distrcss syndromc and disseminated
cat: A retrospcctive evaluatior1 of 66 cases. J Am Anim
intravascular coagulation complicating heat stroke.
1losp Assoc 26:39, 1990
Chcst 90:571, 1986
67. Berg RJ, Wingfield w. Pericardial effusion in the dog: A
 89. Maaravi Y, Weiss AT. Thc cffect of prolonged hypother-
revicw of 42 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:721, 1984
 mia on cardiac function in a young patient with acci-
68. Halmagyi Dr, Karis JH, Stenning FG. et al. Pulmonary
dental hypotherimia. Chest 98:i019. 1990
hypcrtension in acnute hemorrhagic pancreatitis. Sur-
 90. Goldberg L.1. Effects of hypothermia on contractility of
gcry 76:637,1974
the intact dog heart. Am J Physiol 94:92, 1958
69. Srrombcck DR. Thc pancreas. In Small Animal Gastro-
91. Kolata RJ, Burrows CF. The clinical features of injury
cnterology. Davis, CA, Stonegate Publishing, 1979, p
by chewing electrical cords in dogs and cats. J Am Anin
301
1losp Assor 7:219, 1981
70. Muir Ww. Gastric dilatation-volvulus in the dog, with
 92. Schcin RMll, Kett Dll, De Marchena EJ, Sprung CL.
cmphasis on cardiac arrhythrmias. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Pulmonary ederma associated with clcctrical injury.
180:739, 1982
Chest 97:1248, 1990
71. Muir Ww, Weisbrodc SE. Myocardial ischemia in dogs
 93. James TN, Riddick L, Embry JH. Cardiac abnormalities
with _gastric dilatation-volvulus. J An Vet Med Assoc
demonstrated postmortem in four cases of accidental
181:363, 1983
eleclrocution and their potential significance relativc
72. 1lornc WA, Gilmore DR, Dictzc AE, ct al. Effects of
to nonfatal electrical injuries of the heart, Am llcart J
gastric distention-volvuaus on coronary blood flow and
120:143, 1990
780EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
94. Homna S, Gillam LD, Weyman AE. Echocardiographic
veterinary practices in the United Kingdon. Vet Rec
observations in survivors of acute electrical"injury.
118:391, 1986
Chest 97:103, 1990
107. Pion PI), Kittleson MD, Rogers QR, et al. Myocardial
95. Cunnion RE, Parrillo [E. Myocardial dysfunction in
failure in cats associated with low plasma taiurine: A
sepsis-Rcccnt insights. Chest 95:941, 1989
reversible cardiomyopathy. Science 764, 1987
96. Parker MM, Parrillo JE. Septic shock. llermodynamics
108. Atkins C, Snyder P: Cardioimyopathy. In Allen DG (ed):
and pathogenesis. J Ain Med Assoc 250:3325, 1983
Small Animal Medicine. Philadelphia, [B Lippincot.
97. Nasraway SA, Rackow EC、 Asiz ME, el al. Inotropic
1991, p 269
 suaned ui adop pue ixolp ol astods
109. Sisson D, Knight DH, llelinski C, et al. Plasma taurine
severe scpsis, cardiac failurc, and systermic hypoperfu-
concentrations and m-mode echocardiographic: mca-
sion. Chest 95:612, 1989
sures in hcalthy cats and cats with dilated cardioinyopa-
98. Drazner FH. Systemic lupus erythematosus in thc dog.
thy. J Vet Intern Med 5:232, 1991
110. Pion PD, Kieson MD, Thomas WP, ct al. Responsc in
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2:243, 1980
99. Stollcrman GH. Rheumatic and heritable conncctivc
cats with dilated cardlioimyopathy fo taurine supplermen-
diseases of the cardiovascular systcin. In Braumwald E
tation. I Am Vet Med Assoc 201:275, 1992
111. Johnson RA. Baker SS, Fallor JT. An accidental case of
(ed): Hlcart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Med-
icine. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1988, p 1706
cardiomyopathy and sclenium deficicncy. N Engl I Med 
304:1210, 1981
100. Badui E, Garcia-Rubi D, Jimenez J. ct al. Cardiovascular
112. Fox PR, Trautwein EA, Haycs KC, et al. Comparison
manifestations in systemic lupus erythcimatosus. Pro-
of taurinc, α-tocophcrol, retinol, selenium, ancd total
spective study ol 100 paticnts. Angiology 36:431, 1985
triglycerides and cholesterol concentrations in cats with
I01. Crozier IG, Li E, Milnc MJ, Nicholls MG. Cardiac
cardiac discase and in healthy cats. An J Vet Res
involyemcnt in systemic lupus erythematosus detected
54:563,1993
by echocardiography. Am J Cardiol 65:1145, 1990
113. Perloff [K. Pregnancy and cardiovascular discase. In
109. Wynne I, Braunwald E. The cardiomyopathies and nyo-
Braunwald E (ed): Heart. Discasc: A Textbook of Car-
carditides. In Braunwald E (ed): Heart Discasc: A Text-
diovascular Medicine. 3rd cd. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
book of Cardiovascular Medicine. 3rd cd. Philadelphia,
clers, 1988, p 1848
WB Saunders. 1988, p 1410
114. Homans DC. Peripartun cardiomyopathy. N Engl J
103. DiBarlola SP, Benson MD. The pathogcnesis of reactive
Med 312:1433, 1985
systermic arnyloidosis. J Am Coll Vet Intern Med 3:31,
115. Sandusky GE, Cho D. Congestive cardionyopathy in a
6861
dog associated with pregnancy. Cornell Vet 74:60, 1984
116. Calvert CA, Dow Sw. Cardiovascular infections.
104. Cohen IS, Andcrson DW, Virmani R, et al. Congestive
In
Greene CE (cd): Infectious IDiscases of the Dog and
cardiomyopathy in association with acquired jnmrmuno-
Cat. Philadelphia, WB Saumders, 1990, p 97
deficiency syndromc. N Engl J Med 315:628, 1986
117. Murphy MJ. Toxin cxposure in dogs and cats: Pesticides
105. Pederson NC, Yarnamoto JK, Ishida T, ct al, Feline
and biotoxins. J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 205:111, 1994
immuodeficicncy virus infection. Vet Immunol lmmu-
118. Pairon CS, Legendre AM, Gompt RE, et al. Heart fail-
nopathol 21:111, 1989
urc causcd by gossypol poisoning in two dogs. J Am Vet.
106. Edney ATB, Smith PM. Study of obesity in dogs visiting
Mcd Ass0c 187:625, 1985
vroidism
34
and Other 
Hligh
itput States
PHILIP R. FOX
JOHN D. BROUSSARD
MARK E. PETERSON
CARDIAC RESPONSE IN HYPERMETABOLIC
AND HYPERKINETIC STATES
Cardiac output may be increascd by systemic and mclabolie conditions
that chronically elevate venous return. These include disorders that lower
 peripheral vascular resistance owing to increased tissue metabolism and
 oxygen demand (fever, thyrotoxicosis, or pregnancy). or that result in hyper-
kinctic states (anemia, systcmic arteriovenous fistulas) t-3 Cardiac output, the
quantity of blood pumped by thie heart through the systemic circulation per
unit of time, is determined by thie product of stroke volume and heart ralc.
Stroke volume is infuenced by venous return (preload). afterload, and
myocardial contracuility (chapters 3, 11).
High-output heart failure represents a condition in which cardiac output is
markedly clevated before the dlevelopment of heart failure and remains high
afterward. The normal hcart is capable of compensating for increased car-
diac output on a long-teru basis by cardiac dilation (in responsc to a larger
result when abnormal metabolic conditions or hyperkineuic states are im-
posed on a heart that has already devcloped intrinsic myocardial dysfunction.
 In vetcrinary medicine, the most common condition leading to high-output
heart failure is feline hyperthyroidism. Less common causes include anemia
and arteriovenous shunts.
 Cardiovascular adaptation to an abnormal workload depends on the state
 Of myocardial funcion and the magnitude of systermic burden. Moreover,
the quicker the high-output state develops, the more likely it is that hcart.
failure will cnsue.'
HYPERTHYROIDISM
Hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis) is a multisystem disorder resulting from
excessive circulating serum concentrations of thyroxine (T,) and triodothy-
ronine (Ts). Naturally occurring hyperthyroidism is the most commonly
781
782 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
diagnosed endocrinopathy of cats, although it is rarc
in dogs.* Functional thyroid adlenomatous hyperplasia
Pogyexea
(or adenoma) involving one or both thyroid lobes is
Anorexia
Dlarrhea
Polypnea
the most common etiology; thyroid carcinoma is rare
15
Diarrhea
33
PU/PD
in cats but is generally the etiology in dogs.17 The
PU/PD
60.
36
prevalence of feline hyperthyroidism at The Animal
Hyperactive
Hyperactive
cats cxamined.
Polyphagia
49.
Excessive circulating thyroid hormone may cause
Polyphagia
reversible cardiomyopathy in an otherwise healthy
heart? ? or causc compensated heart failure to become
131 Cats
202 Cats
 decompensated.l Hyperthyroidism should always be
(1983)
(1993)
considered in any cat 6 years of age or older that
FIGURE 34-1
cxhibits clinical cvidence of cardiac discase.
A comparison of the most common clinical signs rccorded firoin
1wo different populations of hyperthyroid cats studied
approximately 10 ycars apart.* Chi square analysis applied to the
conparative percentagcs indlicated that the clinical signs of
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
anorexia, polypnca, diarrhea, polyuria/polydypsia (Pt /PD),
hypcractivity, and polyphagia were significantly less common in the
1993 v. 1983 populations (P < .001).
Hyperthyroidism  causes  multiple  physiologic  de-
rangements. It incrcases metabolic rate and tissue oxy-
cats display a syndrome similar to apathetic hyperthy-
gen  consumption and decreases  peripheral vascular
roidism in humans, characterized by profound de-
resistance. Compensatory cardiac remodeling results
 pression, weakness, and anorexia.1. 7
from changes in myocardial protcin synthesis and deg-
radation that favor hypertrophy. Direct actions of thy-
PHYSICALEXAMINATIONFINDINGS
roid hormones on the heart muscle (directly influenc-
ing expression of myosin heavy chain genes), as well
 Most affected cats exhibit progressive weight loss
as T, and T; interactions with the sympathetic nervous
and hyperactivity. They can be difficult to handle and
system, stimulatc cardiac hypertrophy and increase
 become easily tachypncic and dyspneic when stressed.
plasma volume and systemic blood pressure, cardiac
 Some have unkempt hair coats with excessive shedding
output, cardiac flling pressures,
heart rate, and
and matting. Since feline thyroid lobes are loosely
contractility,1-3 9-13
attached to the trachca, enlarged lobes frequently can
 The inost important factors in the development of
be palpated as they descend ventrally from their nor-
heart failure are the chronicity and rate of develop-
ment of the thyrotoxic state and the presence and
glands are not palpablc, affcted lobe(s) may have
descended into the thoracic cavity. !
ing cascs, the increase in cardiac work may augment
 In a series of 202 hyperthyroid cats, thoracic auscul-
cardliac hypertrophy or precipitatc congestive heart
tation revealed soft-to-moderate systolic murmurs of
failure.3 9. 141# In humans, left ventricular ejection frac-
mitral and tricuspid regurgitation (54%), tachycardia
tion has becn shiown to be elevated at rest but impaired
(42%), and gallop rhythms (15%).'s (Cats with decom-
during exercise. 14
 pensated heart failurc may be dyspneic, have abnormal
respiratory crackles if pulnonary edema is present,
have muffled heart and lung sounds if pleural effusion
DIAGNOSIS
has occurred, or have palpable femoral arterial pulse
deficits. A hyperkinctic, rapid femoral arterial pulse
SIGNALMENT AND IHISTORY
 and a prominent left apical precordial beat are gener-
ally detectablc,
 Hyperthyroidism occurs in middle-aged to old cats.
( upa) so 7 o1 t si ai poi a
approximately 13 years). 1n general, hyperthyroidlism
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPIIY
is uncommon in cats less than 6 years of age. There is
A wide variety of electrocardiographic (ECG)
 no breed or sex predilection.1. 7. 1s
changes have been described with feline hyperthyroid-
Because of the multisystemic effects of hyperthy-
roidism, most affccted cats have clinical signs attrib.
 QRST corplex in feline hyperthyroidlism are listed in
utable to many organ systems. Thc most common
 Table 34-1. The frequency of ECG abnormalities in
abnormalities include weight loss, polyphagia, vom-
119 hyperthyroid cats indicated sinus tachycardia
iting. polyuria, polydipsia, and increased activity
(heart rate ≥ 240 beats/min) in 38 percent, increased
(Fig. 31-1).7 1 Approximately 5 percent of affected
R-wave ampliude in lead II (≥ 0.9 mV) in 8 percent,
HYPERTHYROIDISM AND OTHER HIGH OUTPUT STATES 783
TABLE 34-1
封址
Descriptive Characteristics of the P-QRs-T Complex in
Hyperthyroid Cats
ECG Mensural
Mean
SD
Median
Number
P-wave ampliude (mV)
0.14
0.06
0.1
118
P-wave width (nsec)
31
6.0
30
118
PR interval (msec)
70
11.6
70
116
R-wave anplirude (mV)
10
0.35
0.3
119
QRS duration (msec)
37
11
35
117
Qr interval (msec)
154
27.5
155
106
Heart rate
229
38.2
230
119
various atrial (3%) and ventricular (4%) arrhythmias,
and intravcntricular conduction disturhances (Table
34-2; Fig. 34-2).
 The ability of β-adrenergic blockers (propranolol or
atenolol) to decrease heart rate in the face of elevated
circulating thyroid hormone levels provides indirect
evidence for the contribution of the sympathetic ner-
811
vous system to these arrhythmias.3 1o Tachycardia, in-
Crcased R-wave amplitude, and many arrhythmias often
resolve  after  euthyroidism  has  been re-cstablished
FIGURE 34-2
(Figs. 34-2, 34-3).4. 7,9. 15. 18. 1
Lead I1 electrocardiograms of a 9year-old domestic shorthair cat
with hypcrthyroidism before (A) and 3 months after (B)
R waves (1.35 mV) and widened QRS complexes (45 msec). Finst-
RADIOGRAPHY
degree AV block (P-R interval, 95 mscc) is also prescnt. Hearl rate
 Thoracic radiographs commonly demonstrate cardi-
is 200 beats/min. (B) Three months afier thyroidectony: R-wave
amplitude is reduced to 0.9 mV; QRS width and P-R interval have
omegaly, especially of the lefl atriun and ventricle.
reverted to normal. Paper spced, 50 mm/sec; 1 cm = I mV.
Congestive hcart failure, manifested as pulmonary
edlema, pleural effusion, or both, may be evident in a
small percentage of hyperthyroid cats (sce later section
atrial and ventricular dilation, and hypercontractility
(manifested by increased shortening fraction and vc-
radiographic abnormalities are partially or completely
locity of circumferential fiber shortening). 15-17. 21. 22
reversible after euthyroidism  has been re-established
(Fig. 34-4).
cardial disease (hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy).2 Many
cardiac: changes resolve or revert toward normal after
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
re-establishment. of euthyroidism. This indicates the
reversiblc nature of thyrotoxic hcart disease.?. 1. i2, 15
Echocardiographic abnormalities associated with hy-
Although uncommon, a dlilatative type of cardiomyopa-
perthyroidisin include left ventricular hypertrophy, left
thy has bcen reported, with hyperthyroidism evidenced
TABLE 34-2
ah    g    sh  s o 
1983 Population
1993 Population
ECG Finding
(n =131)
(n = 119)
P
Sinus tachycardia
87 (66%)
41 (34%)
0.001
R-wave amplitde:
: >0.9 mV (lead II)
38 (29%)
9 (8%)
0.001
Atrial cxtrasystoles
(%L) 6
2 (2%)
NS
Atrial tachycardia
1 (1%)
1 (1%)
NS
Ventricular extrasystoles
3 (2%)
NS
Ventricular tachycardia
1 (1%)
0)
NS
First-degrcc AV iblock
2 (2%)
2 (2%)
NS
LAFB
8 (6%)
9(8%)
NS
RBBB
2 (2%)
11 (9%)
0.008
LBBB
2(2%)
NS
AV, ariovenrielar; IAF, lft aerior fascicular block; RBB, riglt bundll branch block; LBBB, lft budle brach block; NS, not signifcant.
784EFFECTSOFSYSTEMICANDMETABOLICDISORDERSONTHEHEART
FIGURE34-3
Lead IIelectrocardiograms of a
14-year-old domestic shorthair
cat.(A) ECG recorded 24 hours
postbilateral thyroidectomy
during a hypocalcemic crisis
(Ca++,2.8mg/dl).The Q-T
interval is abnormally prolonged
(220 msec); R wave height is 1.2
mV,indicatingleftventricular
enlargement.(B) ECG recorded
aftermedical therapy corrected
the serum calcium deficit.The
Q-Tintervalisnormal(170mV)
Paper speed,50mm/sec;1 cm
=1mV.
byreducedmyocardial contractility,markedventricu-
Theseabnormalitiesgenerallynormalizesoonafter
lar dilation,and congestive heart failure.
successful treatmentofhyperthyroidism.
CLINICALPATHOLOGY
THYROIDFUNCTION TESTs.Baseline serumTandT
concentrations are elevated above thereferencerange
Screening laboratory tests, including a complete
in most catswithhyperthyroidism.47,25Determination
blood count,serumbiochemical profile,and urinalysis,
of serum T4 is of greatest diagnostic value. Approxi-
should be performed on all cats suspected of having
mately25percent of catswithelevated serumT4con-
hyperthyroidism. This data base assists the diagnosis and
centrationshaveserumTconcentrationswithin the
may reveal other disorders.Mature leukocytosis,eosino
reference range.7.18
penia (stress response),and increased packed cell vol-
Asmallnumber ofhyperthyroidcatshaveserumTs
ume occur commonly.From a series of 202 hyperthyroid
and T4 concentrations that are within the normal to
cats,there was elevated serum alanine aminotransfer-
high-normal range.This clinical condition,termed oc-
ase (83%), aspartate aminotransferase (43%), alkaline
culthyperthyroidism,is reported infrom2to10per-
phosphatase (58%), and lactic dehydrogenase (58%).18
cent of hyperthyroid cats.18 19. 25 Possible explanations
FIGURE34-4
Ventrodorsal radiographs of an
adult domestic shorthair catwith
a unilateral thyroid gland
adenoma.(A)Pretreatment
radiograph showsbiatrial andleft
ventricular enlargement.(B) One
month after thyroidectomy,
cardiomegaly is notably reduced.
HYPERTHYROIDISMANDOTHERHIGHOUTPUTSTATES785
include(1) suppression of high serumT4 and Ts con-
centrationsinto thenormalrangebecauseofconcur-
rentnonthyroidalillness,27 and(2)fluctuation of T4
and Ts in and out of the normal range.28 When one
suspectsmildhyperthyroidismbuttheserumT4con-
centration is not high,the first step is to rule out
nonthyroidal illnessandrepeatthebasalT4measure-
mentin1 to2weeks.If theresultisagain in the
normal tohigh-normalrange,provocativetestingwith
a Tsuppression test or thyrotropin-releasing hormone
(TRH) stimulation test is recommended.28.29 Alterna-
tively,determination ofbasalfree T4concentrations
(ie.,that portion of Tnot bound to plasma proteins)
maybehelpfulin diagnosisofocculthyperthyroidism.
This is because most cats with high-normal total T4
concentrations will have high serum-freeT4levels.26a
RADIONUCLIDETHYROIDIMAGING
Thyroid imaging(scanning）delineates functioning
thyroidtissue and isa usefuladjunctfor diagnosing
hyperthyroidism: (1) It determines the extent of thy-
B
roidglandinvolvement anddetectspossiblemetastatic
or ectopic thyroid tissue;(2)it determineswhether
one or both thyroidlobes are involved and aidsin
surgical planning;(3)it will identify and localize a
thyroidlobethathasdescendedintothethoraciccav-
ity,which cannot be palpated;and (4)it detects metas-
tasis of a functional thyroid adenocarcinoma(Fig.
34-5).4 s0 Pertechnetate (9mTc) is the radionuclide of
choicebecauseofmorerapiduptakeanda shorter
half-life.
C
FIGURE34-5
Sodium pertechnetate thyroid scans of (A)a clinically normal cat,
EPIDEMIOLOGICCHANGESINFELINE
(B)a hyperthyroid cat with adenoma (adenomatous hyperplasia)
HYPERTHYROIDISM
of one thyroid lobe,and (C)a hyperthyroid cat with bilateral
thyroid gland adenomas.(A)Both thyroid lobes are symmetricin
position andsize,withuniformdistributionofradioactivity
The currentprevalence andseverityofthyrotoxic
throughout the gland.(B) The adenomatous gland is greatly
cardiovascularmanifestations appear to be lower than
enlarged and descends toward the thoracicinlet;the uninvolved
right lobe is not visualized.(C) Both lobes are abnormally
reported in the earlier literature.When populations of
enlarged and approximately similarin size and position.From
hyperthyroid cats studied 10years apart were con-
PetersonME,Kintzer PP,Cavanagh PG,et al:Feline
trasted (i.e.,202 cats examined from 1992 to 1993
hyperthyroidism:Pretreatment clinical and laboratory evaluation of
131 cases.JAm Vet Med Assoc 183:103,1983.)
compared with131cats diagnosed from1979 to1983),
changes in clinical abnormalities were recorded. The
prevalenceof sinus tachycardia andhighR-wavevolt-
Inaddition,theprevalence of many associatedclinical
age (lead 11) was lower in the 1993 population than
the 1983 population. Regarding radiographic changes,
signs,physical examination findings,and laboratory
no significant differenceswere recorded between pop-
abnormalitieshasdecreased significantlywhen com-
paring populations (see Fig. 34-1).18. 20 This is un-
ulations in the number of cats with radiographic mild,
doubtedly due to earlier recognition and therapy.
moderate,or severe cardiomegaly.However, the per-
centage of cats in which radiographs were deemed
clinically necessary was 20percent of the1993popula-
tioncomparedwith62percentin1983.Moreover,
THERAPYOFHYPERTHYROIDISM
radiographicevidenceofcongestiveheartfailurewas
significantly less(8%）in the 1993 population com-
Feline hyperthyroidism can be treated by three dif-
pared with hyperthyroid cats studied in 1983 (29%).
ferent methods:(1) chronic oral administration of an
786 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
antithyroid drug, (2) surgical thyroidectomy of the
CHRONIC ORAL ANTITHYROID DRUGS
affected lobe or lobes, or (3) radioactive iodine (131).
Methimazolc (Tapazole) and propylthiouracil (PTU)
Each has advantages and disadvantages, and several
factors must be weighed in choosing the most appro-
are the two thionamide antithyroid drugs available
priate therapy. Coexisting cardiovascular disease or
in the United States. They lower serum Ta and T:
other major disorders (c.g., renal failure) may influ-
 concen trations by inhibiting thyroid hormone synthe-
ence the sclected therapy, as do the availability
sis without destroying thyroid tissue.
of
Long-term antithyroid drug treatment avoids the
an experienced surgeon, a referral center for nuclear
imaging and treatment, and the owner's desire to fol-
 potential complication of hypothyroidism and postsur.
low a certain therapeutic or econoimic course of ther-
gical hypoparathyroidism. In  addition, antithyroid
drug therapy requires no advanced skils. training, or
apy  Only thyroidectomy or radioactive iodine is
special liccnsing and is a practical trcatment choicc
curative.1. 31
for most practitioners. Some systemic side effects arc
 possible, however, and certain clients cannot tolerate
long-term medication.
TREATMENTOFCONGESTIVEHEARTFAILURE
OR TACHYRHYTHMIA
PROPYLTHIoURACIL (PrU). Although both methimazolc
and PTT: arc effective in decrcasing serum thyroid
Long-standing thyrotoxicosis causes cardiovascular
hormone conccntrations, PTl produces a high inci-
changes, most notably a reversible, secondary lhypertro.
dence of side effects, which include anorexia, vom-
 phic cardiomyopathy. Heart failure associated with
iting, lethargy, immune-mediated hemolyic anemia,
hyperthyroidism may bc manifested as pulmonary
thronbocytopenia, and the development of serum an-
edema, pleural cffusion, biventricular failure, or ar-
tinuclear antibodies.*2 Because of the prevalence of
rhythmias.
severe hematologic complications, the rouuine use of
 Therapy is individualized bascd upon the presence
PTU for control of feline hyperthyroidism is no longer
and sevcrity of secondary heart disease. Treatment to
recommended.
re-establish the cuthyroid state promptly may signif-
METHIMAzOLE. Methimazole is better tolcrated and
 canuy reduce, if not eliminate, heart failure and associ-
safer than PTU in the cat. It is the antithyroid drug of
ated arrhythinias. Methimazole is usually chosen (5 to
choice for both the preoperative and long-term medi-
15 mg divided bid to tid) as the first antithyroid drug
cal managcmcnt of feline hyperthyroidlism. Clinical
of choice. Therapcutic thoracocentesis may be re-
side effccis are relatively common (approximately
ae eaudsp paneosse pue tosn qemaid j panrb
15%) but mild and include anorcxia, vomiting, and
severe. If pulmonary edema or effusion is present,
lethargy* In most cats they are uransient and resolvc
furosemide should be administered (1 mg/kg bid to
 despite continued drug administration. Severe side cf-
tid initially, then sid to bid). Generally, resolution of
fects necessitating discontinuaion of therapy are un-
extracardiac signs (cdema, effusion, and tachycardia)
common but include intractable vomiting, diarrhca.
occurs within 2 to 7 days after mcthimazole and furose-
 anorexia, facial prurius, hepatotoxicity, and hemato-
Imide therapy is initiated. Beta-adrenergic receptor
logic abnormalities. The latter include thrombocyto-
blocking drugs (propranolol, 2.5 to 5 mg bid to tid;
atenolol, 6.25 mg sid) are administered only if severe
penia, agranulocytosis, and hemolytic anemia. Alterna-
tive therapy with either surgery or radioiodine should
tachyarrhythmias contribute to the heart. failure state,
be considered when severe side effects occur.
but they are not otherwise given. If systolic dysfunction
Initially, methimazole should be aclministered at a
(myocardial failure) is revcaled by echocardliography,
 dose of 5 to 15 mg per day given in divided doses hid
t0 tid, depending on the severity of the hyperthyroid
inotropic cffects. Very occasionally, dligoxin may be.
state. IIowever, euthyroidism can often be maintained
useful (0.031 mg cvery 24 to 48 hours) for treatment.
with one daily dose. During the first 3 months of
 of severe right-sided heart failure, myocardial failure.
therapy (the period in which the most serious side cf-
 Or atrial tachycardia, but it is not indicated in routine
fects associated with rncthimazole therapy develop), thc
Cat should be cxamined every 2 to 3 wecks to make nec-
 Once heart failure is controlled, definitive treatment
essary dlose adjustmcnts and monitor for adverse ef-
of hyperthyroidism by surgical thyroidectomy or radio-
fects. At each recheck, serum T, concentration and
active iodinc therapy is performed. Cats that are un-
hemogram including platelet count should be deter-
able to undergo surgery or radiotherapy may be main-
mined.1.33
d  s    p
If little or no decrcase in the serum T; concentration
monitoring. Furosemide and other cardiac drugs ad-
occurs during this initial treatment period, and failure
ministered for congestive hcart failurc are usually dis-
to administer the medication properly has bcen ex-
 continucd after hyperthyroidisn is resolved.4
cluded as the cause of persistent hyperthyroidisn, the
HYPERTHYROIDISM AND OTHER HIGH OUTPUT STATES
787
daily methimazole dosage should be gradually in-
gic blocker, may have an advantage over propranolol
Creased by 2.5- to 5-mg increments. A few cats appcar
becausc of its dosage regimen (6.25 mg once daily),
to be relatively resistant to the drug, requiring doses
which appears to be effective in most cats, xs. 3
of up to 25 to 30 mg on a daily basis. In cats receiving
long-term methimazole trcatment, the goal is to main-
 tain serum Ta values within the low-normal range using
SURGICAL THYROIDECTOMY
the lowest possible daily dosage, sincc some side effects
Surgical thyroidectomy can be highly effective in
devclop less frcquently at lower doses. If serum T4
treatment of feline hyperthyroidism, although it can
concentrations fall excessively, the daily dosage should
 be associated with significant morbidity and mortality
be decreased by 2.5- to 5-mg increments. Further blood
(Fig. 34-6).4, 37-41
testing should be continued at 2- to 3-weck intervals
until the lowest daily dose that will cffectively maintain
 PREOPERATIVE cONSIDERATIONs. Prior to surgery, the
serum T4 concentrations within the low-normal range
cat should be made euthyroid by administration of
is attained.4. 33
 methimazole antithyroid drug therapy and maintained
on this medication for 1 or 2 weeks. Most systemic
complications  associated  with  hyperthyroidism  will
CARBIMAzOLE. Methimazolc is currenty unavailable
have improved or resolved in this period. This reduces
in Western Europc and other countries, and the only
ancsthctic risks associated with thyrotoxic arrhythmias
alternative to PTU is carbimazole. Carbimazole, a car-
or hcart failure.4 38
bethoxy derivative of methimazole, is rapidly converted
in vvo to methimazolc. Average staring doses of carbi-
 SURGICAL TECHNIQUEs. Many techniques for unilateral
mazole are similar to those of methimazole. Hlowever,
 and bilateral thyroidectomy have been reported 7-9. 41
strict adherence to an 8-hour dosing interval appears 
ay spouou rennsdeenxa pue iennsdeoenu qoa
to be necessary with carbimazole. Adverse reactions
been designed to excise thyroid tissue while preserving
are similar to those of methimazole, although the inci-
 parathyroid function. The goal of all techniques is to
dence appcars 1o be lcss. 1 34
removc all abnormal thyroid tissuc and preserve the
function of at least one parathyroid gland.
CAICIUM OR SODIUM IPODATE. Based upOn preliminary
data, this agent lowers serum T; concentrations, blood
INTRACA PSULAR TECHNIQUr. Thc thyroirl parenchyma is
pressure, and heart rate in hyperthyroid cats. The dosc
dissected from the capsule. The cxternal parathyroid
of 50 mg bid orally appcars to be clinically cffective
gland and its vasculature are prescrvedl, along with the
thyroid capsule, thus reducing the chance of hypopara-
for short-term management of mild-to-moderatce hy-
thyroidism. However, if small remnants of thyroid tis-
perthyroidism.34a
sue remain attached to the capsule, recurrent hyper-
thyroidism can occur.
BETA-ADRENERGIC BLOCKING DRUGs. These agents have
been used as adjunctive treatmcnt in combination with
EXTRACAPSULAR TEcHNIQUE. The thyroid gland is re-
antithyroid drugs, or alone as a preoperative treatment
 moved along with its capsule, leaving only the parathy-
in hyperthyroid cats that can not tolerate antithyroid
roid glands. The incidence of postoperative hypopara-
drugs. Although propranolol (Inderal, Wycth-Ayerst)
thyroidism can be high with this technique, since
and atenolol (Tenormin, ICI Pharma) do not lower
Addns pooq su 1o paaouai aq Aeu snssn pioiqieied
serum thyroid hormone concentrations, both agcnts
destroyed.
block some of the carliovascular and neuroinuscular
cffects of excess thyroid hormone and may temporarily
MODIFED EXTRACAPSULAR TECHNIQUE. The thyroid cap-
control related tachycardia, bypcrlension, or hypercx-
sule immediately adljacent to the cxternal parathyroid
citability.35
gland is incised and left attached to the parathyroid to
 Beta-adrenergic blocking drugs are not advocated
for routine therapy of hyperthyroidism. They are re-
relatively low incidence of severe hypoparathyroidism,
served for cats with serious tachyarrhythmias, severc
as well as a low incidence of recurrenr hyperthyroid-
systemic hypertension, or when antithyroid drugs
ism.37-39. 11
(methimazolc, carbimazole) cannot be toleraled. They
should be used with caution if congestive heart failure
POSTOPERATIVE COMPLICATIONS
 is present due their negative inotropic effects. Propran-
olol is administered at a dosage of 2.5 to 5.0 mg bid
 Many complications accompany thyroidectomy, includl-
to tid, or as required to decrease resting heart rale to
ing hypoparathyroidism, bypothyroidism, Ilorner's syI-
normal, reduce hyperexcitability, or control systemic
drome, renal failure, and laryngeal paralysis (most com-
hypcrtension. Arenolol, a β, (cardioselective)-adrener-
monly prescnting as dysphonia).
788EFFECTSOFSYSTEMICANDMETABOLICDISORDERSONTHEHEART
B
FIGURE34-6
Modified extracapsular thyroidectomy technique.(A)A ventral
midlineincisionismade,andsternohyoideus andsternothyroideus
muscles areretracted.Bilateral thyroid adenomas arerevealed.
Usingbipolarcauteryforcepsthethyroid capsuleiscauterizedat
distance of 2mm from the edge of the parathyroid gland.(B） Iris
scissors areused tocut throughthecenterofcauterized tissue.(C)
Using a cotton tipped swab,the thyroidparenchyma isbluntly
dissected from the external parathyroid.(FromPeterson ME,
Randolph JF,Mooney CT:Endocrine diseases.InSherding RG
[ed]:The Cat.Diseases and Clinical Management.2nd ed.New
York,Churchill Livingstone,1994,p1448.)
C
HYPocALcEMIA.This is the most serious side effect
requiredformaintenanceofnormocalcemia,hypo-
and may develop as a result of injury, devasculariza-
parathyroidism develops only in cats treated with bilat-
tion, or inadvertent surgical removal of the parathy-
eral thyroidectomy.Clinical signs due to severehypo-
roid glands.37,39-41 Since only one parathyroid gland is
calcemiadevelopwithin1to3daysaftersurgery.
HYPERTHYROIDISM AND OTHER HIGH OUTPUT STATES 789
Therefore, close postoperative observation is essential
roid cats. Complications of therapy arc uncommon
after bilateral thyroidectomy, and serum calcium levels
and may be easily managed. Cats that remain persis-
should ideally bc monitored daily for sevcral days fol-
tcntly hyperthyroid can successfully be retreatcd with
lowing surgery. Mild hypocalcemia (6.5 to 7.5 mg/dl)
radioiodine. Those that become hypothyroid can be
is common during the immediate postoperative pe-
rcadily supplemented with oral thyroxine (T). The
riod. However, therapy is generally not administercd
 major disadvantages of t31l thcrapy are the unavailabil-
unlcss hypocalcemia is accompanicd by muscle fascicu-
ity of facilities that can safcly handle i*l and the pro-
lations, tremors, tctany, or convulsions. Elcctrocardio-
 longed hospitalization that is required due to radiation
 graphic changes arc classic and includc QT interval
safety regulations,4. 44.43 
prolongation (see Fig. 34-3).
Emergency trcatment of hypocalccmia consists ol
intravcnous administration of 10 perccnt calcium glu-
ANEMIA
conate (0.5 to 1.5 mg/kg delivered ovcr 10 to 20
minutcs), followed by maintenancc calcium and vita-
min D supplermentation. I Iypoparathyroidism may be
permanent in somc cats, but spontancous recovery of
Cardiovascular responsc to anemia depcnds upon
parathyroid function may occur wecks to months after
the rate of red blood cell mass decrcase and its magni-
surgery, at which time therapy can be discontinued. 0
tucde of physiologic corrective mcchanisms, and the
 level of physical and metabolic activities (i.e., oxygcn 
HYPOTHYROIDIsM. Mild hypothyroidism occurs for 2
requirements) to Unlcss a coexisting cardiac or hyper-
to 3 months foilowing unilatcral thyroidcctomy, but
kinctic condition is present, anemia usually does not
serum thyroid hormone conccntrations seldom fal low
cause hcart failure in dogs or cats.
enough to requirc supplemcntation. With bilateral thy-
Under some circumstances, however, ancmia can
roidectomy, bypothyroidism tcnds to be more severc
impose abnormal hemodynamic alterations and heart
s   id     
failurc or prccipitatc dccompensation of cormpensated
 of hypothyroidism devclop (lethargy, anorexia, ohesity,
heart discasc. Sevcre generalized cardiomegaly was
or alopccia), thyroxine should be supplcmented (0.1
documcnted in a kittcn with sevcre flea bite anemia
to 0.2 mg/day). Discontinuation of thyroxine thcrapy
(packed cell volume [PCV], 3%). Left-sided congcstivc
 a  s n e  p  
heart failurc followcd whole blood transfusions but was
monitored serum T administration.
controlled with furoscmidc, Cardiomegaly resolved by
3 wecks post-therapy.47 Cardiovascular conscqucnces of
RENAL FAILURE. Treatment of hypcrthyroidlism can re-
sevcre anemia havc becn recorded in rats (cardiomeg-
sult in impaired renal function. The mean glomcrular
aly and cardiac hypcrtrophy) * and humans (cardiac
filtration ratc in 13 cats treated for hyperthyroidism
chamber dilation).9
decreased from 2.51 to 1.40 ml/kg/min, and two cats
Cardiac output is increased with anermia in dogs and
developed overt renal azotemia. Thus, blood urea
humans.46 30. si Experimental canine studies revealed
nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine shouid be monitored
that if anemia develops slowly, increased cardiac out-
after cuthyroidism has been rc-cstablished.
put results from tachycardia with little change in stroke
volumc. In chronic, severe ancmia, heart ratc may be
RECURRENCE OF HYPERTHYROIDISM. This has been rC-
normal or only minimally clcvatcd; cardiac output is
 portcd in 5 to 11 pcrcent of cats after unilateral or
increased as a conscqucnce of augmented strokc vol-
bilateral thyroidectomy, occuring 8 to 63 months fol-
ume (rcsulting from a rcduction in blood viscosity
lowing surgery,38, 4t.-43 Causes includc (1) adenomatous
and systemic arteriolar tone and increased preload).
changes in the previously normal gland, (2) ectopic
Afterload is decreascd bccause of reduced blood viscos-
thyroid tumor tissue, 0r (3) incompletc surgical tumor
ity and reduction in peripheral vascular resistance
resection, resuliimg in remaining thyroid neoplastic
(from tissue hypoxia and vasodilator metabolites).t.
tissuc.* Becausc of the potcntial for recurrence, cats
M. $2 Vasodilation incrcases venous blood return (pre-
trcated with surgical thyroidectomy should have serum
load).  Incrcased  prcload  and reduced afterload
Tq concentrations monitored once or twice a year.
s s ( se  s  
volume and result in a high cardiac output state, Car-
diac dilation, hyperrophy, and failure may occur,t
RADIOACTIVEIODINETHERAPY
il.s3 Hypertrophy associated with volume ovcerload (i.e.
Radioactive iodine (1si1) is a simple, cffectivc, safe
cccentric hypertrophy) is characterized by addition of
method for trcating feline bypcrthyroidism. It is con-
sarcomercs in scries resulting in a dilatcd hcart chan-
centrated in the thyroid gland and sclcctively destroys
bcr with normal wall thickncss.a4 In humaus, a sus-
hypcrplastic or ncoplastic thyroid tissuc. A single
tained increase in cardiac output occurs when thc
trcatmenl will rcstorc cuthyroidism in most hyperthy-
hematocrit falls bclow 25 percent (unless ancmia is
790
FFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
associated with a diseasc that produces an incrcasc in
hcart rate and peripheral vasoconstriction. Ixft ven-
viscosity such as multiple mycloma).
tricular stroke volumc increascs, and cardiac output.
Clinical manifestations of anemia include wcakncss,
may clevate as much as two to three times above nor-
pale mucous membrane color, hypcrkinetic femoral
mal. The magnitude of these changes depends primar-
artcrial pulscs, soft systolic cardiac murmur, gallop
ily on the size of the fistuta and affected artery. and
rhythm, eccentric cardiac hypertrophy, gcneralizcd
proximal arterial blood flow velocity.sx, 60
cardiomcgaly, and high-output heart failure.1 s Thcse
Chronic effects of AV fistulas are duc to clevated
changcs are largely reversible with therapy.
 cardiac output resulting from incrcaserd venous rcturn
 If congestivc hcart failure occurs in an anemic ani-
 and decreased peripheral vascular resistancc. Thcsc
 mal, cage rest and furosemide are used to control
changes in blood volume and cardiac output cxpand
extracardiac sigus of effusion or pulmonary cdema.
thc fistulous circuit, incrcasing blood flow and cardliac
 Slow transfusion (over 4 hours) of packed red blood
prcload. Congestive circulatory failurc may cnsuc.
cclls (RBC) is rccommended (6 to 10 ml of undiluted
Evcntually, elevated venous pressure, pulmonary con-
RBCs/kg reconstituted in a minimal quantity of saline
 gestion, and edema can result. Mitral valvular insuff-
to facilitate thc infusion) .s6 The pet should be reas-
ciency and myocardial failure sccondary to volumc
sesscd cvcry 6 hours for the next 24 houurs to decide
overload may develop and conntributc to congestive
whether repeat transfusion is neccssary. The underly
heart failure,1. ss
ing cause of anemia must be identified and corrccted
if possible. Inotropic support (dobutaminc, 2 to 5 μg/
kg at a constant ratc infusion) may bc added if systolic
DIAGNOSIS
(myocardial) failurc is present. Vasodilators are proba-
bly of litalc help, as impedance to left ventricular emp-
PHYSICAL. EXAMINATION
tying is alrcady reduced.
Transfusion-associated circulatory ovcrload resulting
Clinical history and signs vary according to location,
in pulmonary congestion has bcen rcported in hu-
sizc, duration, and ctiology. With large peripheral AV
spou yo uas e un uaa o x s zy'sueu
fistulas, involved arteries may be dilated; venous pulsa-
transfusion volumcs in humans and has occasionally
tion1 may be evident;, and a continuous focal vascular
been obscrved in cats.
murmur (bruit) and palpable thrill over the AV fistula
area can be detccted. Manual occlusion of the fistula
oftcnn causes Bran ham's sign, an abrupt slowing of thc
ARTERIOVENOUS FISTULAS
hcart ratc. Hyperthermia may be noted ovcr the fis-
tula, and thc distal limb may be edcmatous, swollen,
ischemic, annd painful. 'rhere is a widened arterial
Arteriovenous (Av) fistulas (arteriovcnous malfor-
esea eerdiadi ui sseaoep e on anp ainssd asnd
mations) are conge nital or acquircd abnormal commu-
resistancc and rapid diastolic runoff into the venous
nications bctwccn arteries and vcins that bypass the
circulation. Small AV fistulas of the extrcmities are no-
ticed as painless, easily compressible, warm bulges.1 53 c0
capillary nectwork. Acquired causcs are usually iatro-
genic or traumauic, resulting from blunt or penetrating
trauma, but AV fistulas may also result from infiltrative
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
ncoplasm or infection.5sa-st Commumications of the car-
diac chambers (e.g., ventricular scptal defects) or grcat
Angiography can be uscful prcoperativcly to cvaluatc
vcssels (c.g., patent ductus arteriosus) may occur as a
fistula anatomy and location and help guide surgery.
ccntrally locatcd anomaly (chaptcr 24).6
 Diagnostic ultrasound, espccially color low Doppler
echocardiography, may bc clinically useful to idcntify
and localize istulas.5# Findings includc identification
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
of intra-arterial flow at the fistula site throughout the
cardiac cycle; turbulent, pulsatile venous flow at thc
Artcriovcnous fistulas act to bypass normal blood
fistula site; and nonpulsatile venous low proximal to
flow (chapter 33). Initially, this reduces periphcral vas-
the fistula. This may result in continuous flow imaged
cular resistance and decrcases circulation to tissucs
by spcctral Dopplcr cchocardiography (Fig. 34-7). The
served by the affcctcd artery. With most peripheral
shunts, flow to tissuc distal to the shurt is maintained
timcs he identilfied.
through collatcral circulation, which develops by dila-
tion of prc-existing unused arteriolcs. Therefore, ve-
T'HERAPY
nous hypertension and increascd vcnous return to the
hcart occur. Hemodynamic responses to restorc arte-
 Surgical ligation or excision of the AV istula has
rial blood volume and pcrfusion include incrcasedl
been the trcatment of choicc, unlcss myocardial failure
HYPERTHYROIDISMANDOTHERHIGHOUTPUTSTATES
791
"Depth!
8
a/snv
FIGURE34-7
Recordings from a dog with traumatic AV fistula.(A)
PulsedwaveDopplerrecordingofa large,pulsatile,
1V0200K6
023
dilatedvessel associatedwith therightradial artery.
Notice the continuous flow,especially in diastole.(B)
Pulsed-Doppler flowsrecorded from thenormal left
Frane!
radial artery in the same dog.(From SuterPF,Fox
"Depth:
14mm
PR:Peripheral vascular disease.In Ettinger SJ,
-0
Feldman EC:TextbookofVeterinaryInternal
Medicine.4thed.Philadelphia,WBSaunders,1992,
p1074.)
-50
-100
-0.5
150
ECG
21112
Peuse
or pulmonaryhypertension ispresent.Caution must
evaluation of 131 cases.J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:103,
be observedbefore surgically correctingfistulas.Their
1983
8.Cohen MV, Schulman IC, Spenillo A,et al.Effects of
repair may abruptly increase peripheral vascular resis-
thyroidhormone onleftventricularfunctioninpatients
tance and increase myocardial stress.Diuretic adminis-
treatedforthyrotoxicosis.AmJ Cardiol48:33,1981
trationmaybenecessaryprior to surgicalligation.60
9.Forfar JC,Muir AL,Sawyers MB,et al.Abnormal left
Nonsurgical transcatheter coil occlusion has been ac-
ventricularfunction in hyperthyroidism:evidence for a
complished in a cat with a peripheral AV fistula, sug-
possible reversible cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med
gesting an alternate technique to surgery inselected
307:1165,1982
10.Dillman WH.Thyroid hormones and the heart.Thyroid
cases (Fox PR, unpublished data, 1997).
Today 6:1, 1983
11.Lewis BS,Ehrenfeld EN,Lewis N, et al. Echocardio-
graphicleftventricular function in thyrotoxicosis.Am
HeartJ97:460,1979
REFERENCES
12.Nixon JV, Anderson RJ, Mitchell LC.Alterations in left
ventricularperformanceinpatientstreatedeffectively
for thyrotoxicosis.AmJMed67:268,1979
13.Parmacek MS,Magid NM,Lesch M,et al. Cardiac pro-
1.Braunwald E, Grossman W. Clinical aspects of heart fail-
tein synthesis during thyroxine-inducedleftventricular
ure.In Braunwald E (ed):Heart disease.4th ed.Phila-
hypertrophy.Am J Physiol 251 (Cell Physiol 20):C727,
delphia,WBSaunders,1992,p458
1986
2.Gordon HW,Braunwald E.Endocrine and nutritional
14. Shafer RB,Bianco JA.Assessment of cardiac reserve in
disorders in heart disease.In Braunwald E (ed):Heart
patients with hyperthyroidism.Chest 78:269,1980
disease.4thed.Philadelphia,WBSaunders,1992,p1827
15.
Bond BR,Fox PR,Peterson ME,et al.Echocardiographic
3.Klein I, Levey GS.New perspectives on thyroid hormone,
findings in 103 cats with hyperthyroidism.J AmVet Med
catecholamines,and theheart.AmJMed76:167,1984
Assoc 192:1546,1988
4.Peterson ME.Hyperthyroid diseases.In Etinger SJ,Feld
16.MoiseNS,Dietze AE.Echocardiographic,electrocardio-
man ED (eds):Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medi-
graphic,andradiographic detection of cardiomegaly in
cine4thdhiladlphiaunr19954
hyperthyroid cats.Am J Vet Res 47:1487,1986
5.Turrel JM,Feldman EC,Nelson RW,et al.Thyroid carci-
17.MoiseNS,Dietze AE,Mezza LE,et al.Echocardiography,
noma causing hyperthyroidism in cats:14 cases (1981-
electrocardiography,andradiography of catswith dilata
1986).JAm Vet Med Assoc193:359,1988
tion cardiomyopathy,hypertrophic cardiomyopathyand
6.Guptill L, Scott-Moncrieff JCR,Janovitz EB,et al.Re-
hyperthyroidism.AmJVetRes 47:1476,1986
sponse to high-doseradioactive iodine administration in
18.Broussard JD,Peterson ME,Fox PR.Changes in clinical
andlaboratoryfindings in catswithhyperthyroidism
gone surgery.JAmVet MedAssoc 207:1055,1995
from 1983 to 1993.JAm Vet Med Assoc 206:302,1995
7.Peterson ME,Kintzer PP, Cavanagh PG,et al.Feline
19.Graves TK,Peterson ME.Diagnosis of occult hyperthy-
hyperthyroidism:pretreatment clinical and laboratory
roidismincats.ProblVetMed 2:683,1990
792 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
20. Fox PR, Broussard JD, Petcisor ME. Electrocardio-
39. Welches CD, Scavelli TD, Matthiesen DT, et al. Occur
graphic and radiographic changes in cats with hyperthy.
rcncc of problems after three techiniques of bilateral
roidisim: 1979-1982 vs. 1992. Abstract. J Vet Intern Med
thyroidectomy in cats. Vet Surg 18:392, 1989
7:118,1993
40. Peterson ME. Hypoparathyroidism and other causes of
21. Jacobs G. Hutson C, Dougherty J, et al. Congestive heart
hypocalcemia in cats. n Kirk RW, Bonagura [D (eds):
failure associated with hyperthyroidism in cats. J Am Vet
Current Veterinary Therapy. Vol XI. Philadelphia, WB
Med Assoc 188:52, 1986
Saunders, 1992. p 376
22. Jacobs C, Panciera D. Cardiovascular complications of
41. Flandlers JA, Harvey Hj, Erb HN, et al. Feline thyroidee-
felire hyperthyroidisn. /n Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds):
tomy. A comparison of postoperative hypocalccmia asso-
Current Veterinary Therapy. Vol XI. Philadelphia, WB
ciated with threc dliferent surgical techniques of bilat-
Saunders, 1992, p 756
cral thyroidecomy in cats. Vet Surg 16:362, 1987
23. Liu SK, Petcrson ME, Fox PR. Hypertrophic cardiomyop-
42. Graves TK, Olivier B, Nachrciner RF, ct al. Changes in
athy and hyperthyroidisin in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
renal fiunction associated with treatment of hyperthyroicd-
185:52, 1984
ism in cats. Am J Vet Res 55:1745, 1994
24. Atkins CE. Thyrotoxic heart disease. In August J (cd):
43. Swalec KM, Birchard SJ. Recurrerice of hyperthyroidism
Consultations in Feline Internal Medicine. 3rd ed. Phila-
after thyroidectomy in cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
dclphia, WB Saunders, 1996, p 279
26:433,1990
25. Thoday KI. Mooney C1: Historical, clinical and labora-
44. Peterson ME. Radioactivc iodinc (radioiodine) trcal-
tory features of 126 hyperthyroid cats. Vet Rec 131:257.
mcnt for hyperuhyroidism in cats. /n Bonagura JD (ed):
1992
Kirk's Current Vetcrinary Therapy. Vol XIl. Philadelphia,
WB Sanders, 1995, p 372
diographic findings in 15 cats with hyperthyroidism. J
45. Turncl JM, Feldman EC, Hays M, el al. Radioactive io
Am Vet Med Assoc 180:934, 1982
dine therapy in cats with hyperthyroidism. J Am Vet Med
26a. Peterson ME, Melian Liminana C, Nichols CE. Determi-
Assoc 184:554, 1984
Jo sisp l pe  se sise ay ' aai Jo onu
46. ILinman JW. Physiologic andl pathophysiologic effects of
 ild hyperthyroidism in cats. J Vet Intern Med 9:183,
ancnia. N EnglJ Med 279:812, 1968
9661
47. Yaphe W, Giovengo S, Moise NS. Severe cardliomegaly
27. McLoughlin MA, DiBartola SP, Birchard SJ, ct al. lnflu-
secondary to anemia in a kitten. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 ence of systemic nonthyroidal illness on serum concen
202:961、1993
tration of thyroxine in hyperthyroid cats. J Am Anim
48. Rossi MA, Carillo SV, Oliveira JSM. The cffect of iron
Hosp Assoc 29:227, 1993
deficiency anemia in the rat on catecholamine levels and
28. Peterson ME, Graves TK, Cavanagh PG, et al. Serum
heart morphology. Cardiovasc Res 15:313, 1981
thyroid hormone concentrations fuctuate in cats with
49. Balfour IC. Covitz W. Davis H, ct al. Cardiac size and
hyperthyroidisu. J Vet Irntern Med 1:142, 1986
function in children with sickle cell anemia. Am IHeart J
29. Rcfsal KR, Nachireincr RF, Stein BE,et. al. Use of the
108:345, 1984.
 jo ss  sn n
50. Vatncr SF, Higgins CB, Franklin D. Rcgional cireulatory
thyroidism in ill cats that have serum concenration of
 adjustments to moderate and severe chronic ariemia in
iodothyronines within normal range. J An Vet Med
conscious dogs at rest and during cxercise. Circ Res
Assoc 199:1594. 1991
30:731. 1972
30. Peterson MF, Bccker DV. Radionuclide imaging in 135
 51. Ingram CW, Satler LF. Rackley CE. Progressive heart
cats with hyperthyroidism. Vet Radiol 25:23, 1984
failure sccondary to a high output state. Chest 92:1117,
1987
Fngl J Med 330:1731, 1994
 52. Fowler NO, HHolmes JC. Blood viscosity and cardiac out-
32. Peterson MF, Hlurvitz Al, I.eib MS, ct al. Propylthioura-
put in acute cxperimental arremia. J Appl Physiol
cil-associatcd ancmia, thrombocytopenia, and antinu-
39:453, 1975
clear antiboxlies in cats with hyperthyroidism. J Am Ve1
 53. Roscnthal DS, Braunwald F. Hematological-orcological
Med Assoc 184:806, 1984
dlisorrlers and hcart disease. I Braunwald F (ed): I leart.
33. Peterson ME, Kinizer PP, Hurvitz Al. Methimazole trcat-
IDisease. A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 4th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saundcrs. 1992, p 1742
2:150. 1988
54. Katz AM. Cardiomyopathy of overload. N Fngl J Med
34. Mooney CT, Thoday KL, Doey DL. Carbimazole therapy
322:100,1990
of felirie hyperthyroidism. J Small Animal Pract 33:228.
 55. Varat MA, Adolph RJ, Fowlcr NO. Cardiovascular effects
1992
of ancmia. Am Heart J 83:415, 1972
34a. Murray LAS, Peterson ME. Ipodate treatment of hyper
56. Hohenhaus A. Unpublished data, 1995 
thyroidism in cats. J Vet Med Assoc 211:63. 1997
57. Popovsky MA, Dedlham, MA, Audet AM, ct al. Transfit-
35. Peterson MF. (Considcration and complications in anes-
sion-associatcd circulatory overload in orthopedic sur-
thesia with pathophysiologic changcs in thc cndocrinc
gcry paticnts: a multi-institutional study. Abstract. Trans-
system. In Short CE (ed): Principlcs and Practice of
fusion 35 (Suppl):35s, 1995
Veterinary Anesthesiology. Baltimore, Williams and Wil.
58. Olivicr NB. Pathophysiology of arteriovenous fistulae. In
kins, 1987, p 251
Slattcr DH (ed): Texthook of Small Animal Surgery.
 36. Thoday KI., Mooney CT Medical managcment of feline
Philadetphia, WB Saunders, 1985, p 923
hyperthyroilism. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (cds): Cur-
59. Igidbashian VN, Mitchell DG, Middleton WD, et al. Iatro-
rent Veterinary Therapy Vol X1. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
gcnic femoral artcriovenous fistula: cliagnosis with color
ders, 1992, p 338
flow Doppler imaging. Radiology 170:749, 1989
37. Birchard SJ. Thyroidectomy and parathyroidlectomy in
60. Suter PF, Fox PR. Diseases of ihe peripheral vessels. In.
the dog and cat. Probl Vet Med 3:277, 1991
Fttinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds): Textbook of Veterinary
38. Salisbury SK Hyperthyroidism in cats. Compend Contin
Internal Medlicine. Vol 2. 4th cd. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
Educ Pract Vet 13:1399, 1991
ders, 1995, p 1068
HYPERTHYROMDISM AND OTHER HIGH OUTPUT STATES 793
61. Bouayard H, Feency DA, Lipowitz AJ. ct al. Peripheral
62. Boragura JD, Darke PGG. Congenital heart disease. In
acquired arleriovenous fistulas: a report of four cascs
Etuinger Sj. Feldman EC (cds): Textbook of Veterinary
and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:205,
 Internal Medicine Vol 2. 4th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
1987
ders. 1995, p 892
35
pertension:
ion and
atment
MERYL P. LITTMAN
PHILIP R. FOX
THE EMERGING REALITIES OF
HYPERTENSION AND DISEASE
DEFINITION OF HYPERTENSION
The question, *What level of elevated blood pressure (i.c., bypertcnsion)
should be treated?" is the subjcct of much debate in humans and has not
been answered for dogs and cats. Concepuually, the levcl of hypericnsion
requiring treatment should be that at which the benefits of thcrapy (minus
risks and costs) cxcecd risks and costs (minus benefits) of inaction. Thc
answer to the corollary question, ^"To what level should blood pressure be
reduced?" is also unclear? and has received little vetcrinary attention.
 The diagnosis of hypertension should bc substantiatcd by rcpcated cvalua-
tions, since fright or excitcment may causc elevated recordings. The very act
of taking blood pressure measuremcnt in humans clevatcs blood prcssure.
In one study, a 27-mmf Ig rise in systolic pressure was attributable to physician
presence.3 This "whitc coat symdrome" may also cxist with animals.
 Reports of normal blood prcssures in animals vary according to investiga-
tor and techniquc (Tablc 35-1).1 #2 Ideally, normal valucs should be estab-
lishcd by the clinician utilizing equipmcnt and techniques available.
Blood pressure varics with agc, body condition, gender, and brecd in
Ul as tzssueunq ui ahe qm saseoou tosuoadaq yo Asuanba ou x shop
to late middle agc (Table 35-2). The young dog with a rapid heart ratc
tends to havc lower blood pressure than thc adult. Body condition also
underwcight dogs comparcd with ovcrweight dogs. ln humans and dogs,
obesity is a predictor and concomitant of hypertension,1. 2 and resolution
of obcsity rcduces blood pressure.4. 27 Male dogs may be prcdlisposcd to
hypertension, 5. 3 28-s1 Additionally, blood pressure may vary widcly according
to canine breed (Table 35-3).23
795
796
 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
TABLE 35-1
Arterial Blood Pressure Measurements from Untrained, Conscious Dogs and Cats
Method
Systolic BP
Diastolic BP
Mean Arterial BP
Canine
Direct
198 ± 5
74 ±6
+06
Cuotid
861 t!
1 66
113 1 16,1
Fernoral"
148 1. 16
87±8
102 ± 9
Femoral'
154 ± 30.5
96 ± 11.9
115 ± 16.2
Femoral7
200-240*
80-100*
120-147*
Femorals
141 ± 2.8
81 ± 1.7
104 ± 2.5
Fermoral'
200 ± 22.4
91.6 ± 18.6
Femoratlu
90-150
Indirec1
Auscultatoryl
94178
51-11
Auscullatory'2
132 ± 17.2
93.4 ± 15.7
106.3 ± 15.6
Auscultatorylo
100-180
60-120
Oscilluctric!s
87.8-155.6
8761-089
70.8-136
Oscillometries
152138.4
104 ± 22.8
120 1 25.2
Oscillometric
144 ± 27
91 ± 20
110 ± 21
rlajddoa
164 ± 24
91 ± 18
Doppler
145 ± 22.5
Doppleri"
147 ± 28
83 ± 15
104 ± 17
Lopplerl'"
155 ± 25
85 = 10
Doppler*t
196 ±. 24.9
94.1 + 14
Xyloi pulse inlicaltor!
142 ± 14.9
Feline
Direct.
171.3 ± 22.4*
123.0 ± 17.4*
Femorao
113
83
Indirerl
Oscillomctric'
117-149
48-102
61-124
Doppler"
118.4 ± 10.6
83.8 ± 12.2
Loppler-
113
86
Doppler2
143 ± 7
96 ± 9
tGreyhouls
TABLE 35-2
 Changes in Blood Pressure Associated with Changing Age (Healthy Dogs Only)
Systole BP
Diastolic BP
Mean ArterialPressure
Heart Rate
Age Range
Nunber of
Mean ± SD
Mean ± SD
Mean ± SD
Mean ± SD
(years)
Dogs
(mmHg)
(nmHg)
(mmHg)
(bpm)
0-1
971
119.0 + 17.7
65.7 ± 12.6
86.9 ± 13.8
124.3 + 28.8
1-2
296
128.2 ± 18.7
70.9 ±
12.8
91 + 666
103.7 ± 25.6
2-4
392
131.9± 20.1
74.8 ±
15.0
97.2 ± 16.8
104.4 ± 24.6
46
220
138.4 ± 22.8
78.1 ± 17.3
101.8 ± 18.8
108.4 ± 28.9
6-8
148
136.1 ± 19.6
491724
100.9 +
16.1
109.2 ± 26.0
8-1)
116
139.2 ± 17.4
80.5 1 14.4
104.2 ± 15.6
109.0 1 23.5
10-12
59
140.6
20.5
85.6 ± 15.6
108.0 ± 16.9
105.1 ± 18.1
From Bley AR. Systemie hypertension in the dog—fact or fictionProcecxdings, 1Sth Anual Waltham/OSL Symposium: Cardliology. Vernon. CA, 1994. p 14,
will permission
SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION: RECOGNIT1ON AND TREATMENT
797
TABLE 35-3
Breed Differences in Blood Pressure (Healthy Dogs Only, 18 Months Old Plus)
Systolic BP
Diastolic BP
Mean Arterial Pressure
Heart Rate
Number of
Mean ± SD
Mean ± SD
Mean ± SD
Mean ± SD
Breed
(mmHg)
(mmHg)
(mmHg)
(bpm)
L.ahratlor
125
118.6 ± 17.1
66.2 ± 13.1
87.1 ± 14.7
99.2·19.7
Pyrenean moutain dog
6
120.1+16.0
66.71
6.5
90.2 ± 9.9
95.4 + 15.6
Golden retriever
66
122.4 ± 13.9
69.5 ± 11.2
92.4 ± 12.1
101.2 ± 21.4
Border collie
34
130.6 ± 13.5
75.0 ±
12.0
97.8 ± 12.9
100.0 = 19.3
Cavalier King Charles spanicl
60
131.3 ± 16.1
72.3 ±
14.0
96.4 ± 14.5
124.5 ± 24.6
German shepherd tlog
12
131.6 ± 13.1
74.7 +
10.4
98.2 ± 13.1
108.5 ± 23.0
Saluki
37
142.7 + 16.2
78.4 ± 9.9
102.2 ± 10.7
88.4 ± 22.1
Greylhoudl
78
149.2 ± 20.2
87.5 上
16.1
111.0 ± 17.3
114.2 ± 28.1
Decrhound
96
152.0
120.2
 698
17.0
112.0 ± 17.2
95.8 ± 23.1
From Bodey AR. Systemic hypertension in 1he dog.-fact or fielion? Proreedings, 18th Annual Waltham/OSU Symposium: Cardiology. Vernon. CA, I994. p 14,
with pernission.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF
40 cats with hyperthyroidism, chrouic renal insuff-
HYPERTENSION
ciency, or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy showed hyper
tension in 19 (47.5%) as assessed with Doppler-shift
sphygmomanomctry; of thesc 19, 9 had clcvated sys-
Systemic hypertension is a major human risk factor
tolic blood pressurc only (164 ± 17 mmHg), and 10
for coronary, ccrebral, and rcnal vascular dliscases.2
had diastolic (118 ± 19 mmHg) and systolic hyperten-
Data show that evcn mild hypertension incrcases thc
sion.8 1n a different series of 28 cats with chronic renal
overall risk for  prcmature  cardiovascular  morbidity
failurc, the ovcrall mcan systolic (147 ± 25 mmFlg)
and mortality. Coupled with evirdcncc that cardiovascu-
and mean diastolic (97 ± 15 mmHg) blood prcssurc
lar diseasc progression can be reduced by drug admin-
was significantly grcater than controls, and sysicmic
istration, these rcalities have hcightened awareness of
hypertension was recorded in 17 (61%) affected cats.2
the dangcrs associaterd with untreatcd hypcrtension
Similarly, in 39 cases of untrealed feline hyperthyroid-
and have led to aggressive therapy.
 Increasingly, systemic hypertension has been recog-
ism, 87 perccnt werc hypertcnsive (mcan systolic, 168
± 29 mmHg: mean diastolic, 112 ± 22 mmHIg).?′ A
nized as a cause or conscquencc of clinical cisease in
study of 24 cats with end-organ damage showed sys-
temic hypertension by Doppler in 17 cats (mean sys-
mans, in whom most hypertension is primaryz (i.c.,
tolic, 219 ± 43 mm1Ig) and by fcmoral arterial punc-
essential), canine and feline hypertension is usually
ture in 15 cats (mcan systolic 233 ± 41; mcan diastolic
associated with systcmic diseases.
148 ± 29 mmHg); mild renal insufficicncy was present
  i  o i  
rernal insufficicncy), and three cats werc hypcrthy-
INCIDENCE OF HYPERTENSION
roid.32
Lack of simple, convenient, and dcpendable tech-
 both primary and sccondary forms of bypertension. In 
niqucs for noninvasive blood prcssure measurement
dogs with documented hypertension and end-organ
has limitcd detcction and asscssment of the natural
damage, renal diseasc was dletected in about 30 to 40
prevalencc. Thesc restrictions are bcing overcome as
percent; hyperadrenocorticism (either pituitary-depen-
methocds for incircct blood prcssure monitoring arc
dent or due to adrcnal tumor) was detected in another
30 to 40 pcrcent,28 29 Essential hypertcnsion has been
32. 5-x Occasionally, markcdly elevated blood pressures
requiring intervention arc documented, with acute
sion is detected in dogs secondary to pheochromocy-
blindness, rctinal dctachment or hemorrhage, or neu-
toma or polycythcmia.17 A number of diseascs that
can cause hypcrtension in humans also havc bccn
 prcssurc is associated with asymplomatic or mildly sys-
reportcd in the dog, although hypcrtension has not
temic discases, but therapy is dcemcd appropriate to
 yet been documcnted. Thesc conditions include hypcr-
aldosteronism, hypothyroidism, aortic coarctation, hy-
disorders, blood pressure clcvations may be mildly to
perestrogcnism, acromcgaly, brain tumors, and lcad or
moderately elcvated but not deemcd high enoughi to
vitamin D toxicity. Although hypcrtension was re-
ported in dogs with low serum thyroxinc (T), hypothy-
In cats, a high perccntage of hypcrtension has bccn
roidism was not proved by thyroid-stimulating hor-
reported with certain systemic discases. One report of
mone (TSH).41. t5
REGULATORY MECHANISMS OF
prcload, and afterload (chapte1 2). Thus, alterations
 in blood characteristics, cxtraccllular fluid (blood) vol-
BLOOD PRESSURE
umc, and cardliac factors will markedly influcnce blood
prcssurc. Arteriola1 resistance is the major detcrmi-
nant of blood pressure at rest; during excrcise, CO
Rcgulation of systemic blood pressure is inlucnced
assumes a morc important role. In addition, both HR
by ccntral and peripheral autonomic and neuroendo-
and TPR are modulaled by other factors, including thc
crinc mcchanisms.6 Thesc control blood volume,
Ienal body-fluid systcm, the renin-angiotensin-aldoste-
heart ratc, and vasomotor tone. Additionally, local vas-
 Ionc systcm, and ncural mechanisms (discussed later).
cular factors affect the myointimal intracellular ionic
Sympathctic nervous systcm stimulation causes direct
milieu. Total pcripheral resistancc is infuenced by
vasoconstriction, as well as adrenal mcdullary rclcasc
vasomolor tonc and blood viscosity. Vasoactivc chemi
of epinephrine and norepinephrine, which indircctly
cals may affect vasodilation or constriction. Factors
stimulates cardiac and vascular smooth muscle. In adl-
   e os r e ss
dition, angiotensin I cnhanccs relcase of norcpincph-
 arteriolar scnsitivity to thcsc chcmical agents.
rine from the adrenergic nervous system.
 Physical or pathologic conditions like arteriosclerosis
The Poiscuilc equation highlights the importancc
or atherosclerosis may affcct arteriolar structure by
of blood vessel dliamcter as the key dcteriminant of
reducing  vascular  clasticity  and  luminal
1 diametcr.
resistance:
 Blood itsclf may influcnce peripheral rcsistanc by
naturc of its viscosity, hematocril, and 1ed cell deform-
TAPr
ability.2-64
Q=
8Lm
where Q = flow, π/8 = proportionality constant, △P
THE SYSTEMIC CIRCULATION
 prcssure gradicnt, I = radius, L = vessel length,
and  = blood viscosity. This demonstrates that flow
 The circulatory system is divided into the systemic
is direcly proportional to thc prcssure gradient and to
and pulmonary circulations (chapter 2). The total
thc fourth powcr of the vessel's diameter, and inversely
cross-scctional vascular arca is greatcst in the capillar.
 proportional to the vessel length and blood viscosity.
ics. Blood pressure and rcsistancc arc intimatcly 1c-
Arterioles are well-muscled vessels that offer thc grcat-
lated and vary according to each particular scgmcnt
cst resistancc to flow. Resistancc begins increasing rap-
of systemic circulation.
idly in small arteries and is greatcst in thc arteriolcs."1
MEAN ARTERIAL PREsSURE (MAP). This Icpresents thc av-
NORMAL BLOOD PRESSURE
crage prcssurc throughout thc cardiac cycle and is
uscd as anl approximation of arteriolar rcsistance.71
Blood prcssure fuctuates throughout the day and
The MAP is slightly lcss than thc value halfway between
night, as demonstratcd by ambulatory 24-hour blood
systolic (SBP) and dliastolic (DBP) pressurcs and may
prcssurc measurcmcnts in dlogs.6 Additionally, blood
 bc approximatcd by the cquation:
fceding, noisc, and in the carly morning,sa,6-6a Blood
(SBP + 2DBP)
MAP=
flow is not a fixed entity. it is influcnccd by (l) thc
3
amount of pressure forcing blood through thc vesscl,
and (2) thc resistance to flow.0, 70
RAPIDLY ACTING MECHANISMS
CONTROLLING BLOOD PRESSURE
INTERRELATIONSHIPS: BLOOD
PRESSURE, BLOOD FLOW, AND
NERVOUS SYSTEM MECHANISMS
RESISTANCE
Thc ccntral ncrvous system (CNS) controls both
  e s su e rd
lease of circulating hormonal factors. Thus, it acutcly
Blood pressurc (BP) can bc cxprcssed as the prodl-
modifes blood pressurc and hcart ratc to promotc
uct of cardiac output (CO) muliplied by total periph-
cardiovascular homeostasis.7?
cral resistance (TPR): BP = CO X TPR. Cardiac
 Sympathetic ncrvous systcm stimulation causcs di-
output is represented by the product of heart ratc
 Icct vasoconstriction. Adrcnal mcdullary relcase of epi-
(HR) multiplied by stroke volumc (SV): CO = HR X
 nephrine and norepincphrinc indircctly stimulates car-
SV. Strokc volume is influenccd by cardiac contractility,
diac and vascular smooth musclc. In addition,
angiotcnsin II cnhanccs norepinephrine 1clease from
fo1 long-term prcssurc control. The kidncy uscs two
thc adrcnergic nervous system.
 major mechanisms. One acts by manipulaing extracel-
The baroreceptor reflex is initiated by stretch rcceptors
lular fluid volume, which, in turn, affects blood vol-
in walls of the carotid sinus and aortic arch. The
ume, cardiac output, and arterial pressure. Flevated
rcccptors convey sensory signals to the brain stem
arterial blood pressure increases renal excretion of 
vasomotor center in response to changes in arterial
sodium and water. Referred to as pressure natriuresis
blood pressure. A fallin pressurc dlccrcascs barorcccp-
and prcssurc diuresis, this reduces extraccllular fluid
to1 impulses to the vasomotor centcr. This incrcascs
volumc through incrcased urine output. Convcrsely,
sympathetic efferent. traffc and causcs vasoconstric-
Icnal cxcrction of salt and watcr is rcduccd when
tion, raiscs hcart ratc, and incrcascs blood prcssure.
arterial pressurc drops. Scvcral physiologic mccha-
nisms cnhance this systcm of prcssurc control, includ-
rcaction. Additional prcssure reccptors in thc atria and
ing thc second mcchanism, which involves thc rcnin-
pulmonary arterics assist artcrial prcssure regulation.
angiotensin-aldostcrone system and adrcncrgic systcin
Thc chenoreceptor reffex is normally less important
as described earlie1.7
for blood pressurc control. Responding presumably to
acidosis or hypercapnia, chemoreccptors locatcd in
LOCAL CONTROL. OF BLOOD FLOW
thc carotid and aortic bodies transmit afferent signals
to cxcite the vasomotor center and increase blood
A complcx and intcrrelated set of homeorcgulatory
prcssure.
mechanisms affects thc circulatory system to regulatc
blood flow. Thc mcchanisms includc humoral, ncr-
vous, and local control.70
HORMONAL MECIIANISMS
'Thc renin-angiotcnsin-aldlostcronc system plays an
HUMORAL REGULATION. At. thic ccllula1 lcvcl, vasomo-
tor tone dcpcnds on the final common pathway: cyto
 giotensin II is onc of thc most potent vasoconstrictors.
solic Ca+ + availability to interact withi smooth muscle
In hypotensivc statcs, or if renal pcrfusion is low due
myosin. Cytosolic Ca++ depcnds on flux of other cat-
to various mcchanisins, juxtaglomerular cells in the
ions (c.g, Na', K+, Mg''). Many countertransports
affercnt artcriolar walls secrete the enzyme renin into
exist. The pressor effect of Na depends on Ca'
since increased intracellular Na+ is associated with
thc blood, which hydrolyzes angiotensinogen to the dle-
capeptide angiotensin I. In pulmonary vessels, angio-
tensin-converting enzyme (ACF) catalyzcs formation
tcnsive rat (SHR) on a high NaCl dict sccrctcs much
of the octapeptide angiotensin I1 from angiotcnsin I.
lcss cndothclium-derivcd rclaxing factor (EDRF, which
As a potent arleriolar vasoconstrictor (venoconstrictor
 may he nitric oxide) than norrmal, but if supplemcnted
cffects are milder), angiotensin 1I enhanccs adrencrgic
with high K+, will sccrctc EDRF normally. Platclct
 release of norcpinephrinc. Along with incrcascd ad-
 adlhcsion to cndothclial cclls and platclct aggrcgation
renergic activity, it contributcs to incrcascd total pc-
arc1
ripheral resistance, afterload, and artcrial blood prcs-
cnough EDRF, thcrc is high risk for thromhosis; K' is
surc. Angiotcnsin lI also stimulates the adrenal cortex
protective.7*
to sccrctc thc mincralocorticoid aldosterone, which
 Many agonists (including angiotensin ll, serotonin,
promotcs rcnal Nat and fluid retention, and raises
and catecholamines via post-synaptic α,-receptors),
blood volunc (prcload).
when bound to their G-protein cell membrane recep-
tor, act via phospholipase C (PLC) to gencrate intraccl-
lular second messenger modulators.7 The activation
LONG-TERM REGULATION OF
-od supuodap- e) e saeanoe oa (ar) aeqdsord
ARTERIAL BLOOD PRESSURE
tcin kinasc (PKC) that controls a Na--H' mcmhranc
cxchange systcm; inositol triphosphate dirccts cytosolic
Many of the short-term mcchanisms affccting blood
Ca-+ from thc sarcoplasmic rcticulum, freeing it for
pressure become dirminished ovc1 time.7 Mcchanisms
action with vascular smooth muscle myosin. Angioten-
for morc sustaincd prcssure control rely on interrela-
sin, norepinephrine, and thromboxane Ay stimulate
tionships bctwccn the kidncy and vascular fluid inter-
contraction, whcrcas EDRF, kallikrein, bradykinin, and
action and are augmcnted by neurohumoral systems.
prostacyclin rclax vascular smooth muscle.
AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM REGULATION. Thc VaSO-
RENAI-FLUID VOLUME MECIIANISM
 motor center is capabie of stimulating vasoconstriction
The renal-fluid volume mcchianism is so powerful
or inhibiting it, depending upon which area is acti-
that it allows thc kirdncys to cxert the dominant force
valed.? Sympathctic stimulation to thc small artcrics
800EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
 and, cspccially, arterioles increases total systemic vascu-
lar volume depletion. L'nequal or abscnt femoral artc-
lar rcsistancc. Venous stimulation incrcases blood re-
rial pulsc pressures may indicate thrombosis.
turn to the hcart, Cardiac stimulation increases hieart
rate and forcc of contraction, Parasympathetic stimula-
tio1 rcduces heart ratc but has minimal vascular cf-
PATHOGENESIS OF
fccts.
HYPERTENSION
LOCAL CoNTRoi. The need for tissue 0xygen dclivery,
glucose, faity acids, other nutrients, and many local
factors drive local circulatory autoregulation and blood
Discases that incrcasc cardiac output or total periph-
flow. This facilitates blood supply to diffcrent tissucs
cral 1csistancc may Icsult in systcrnic hypertcnsion (Ta-
and organs, depcnding on local tissue mctabolism.
blc 35-4). Hcart rate, strokc volumc, and cardiac out-
 put may incrcasc in hypcrdynamic statcs, in conditions
favoring heightcncd sympathetic activity, or with disor-
CLINICAL CONDITIONS AFFECTING
ders activating thc renin-angiotcnsin-aldostcrone sys-
ARTERIALPRESSURE WAVES
term. Total periphcral resistance may elevatc when s0-
dium chloride is rctained, in rcsponsc to incrcased
Pulse pressure represents the differcnce betwcen sys-
tolic and diastolic pressure. It may bc affected by car-
diac stroke vohime (i.e., the greater the strokc volumc
output, the more blood pumped into the arterial sys-
TABLE 35-4
tcm and thc grcater the pulse pressure) and by arterial
Diagnostic Tests for Hypertensive Diseases
compliance (i.c., the grcater thc arterial tree compli-
ance, the less the rise in pressure per stroke volume).
Renal Parenchymal Discases
Pyclonephitis
CBC: Chemscreen, LA, UC/S, urine
Chronic interstitial nephritis
prorein/creatinine; abrominal
Polyeystic renal discase
raciography/ultrasonography:
NORMAL PULSE PRESSURE
creatinine ciearance
Thc pulse pressurc is progressivcly augnented as it.
Glounerulonephritis
ANA, Coombs’ test, serology
is transmittcd peripherally by reflection of thc pulse
Amyloidlosis
BoretDf
Clomerulosclerosis
wavc from peripheral arterics.70 The clinical signifi-
Brhesir)
Renal Arterial Disease
Renal arteriograph, renal vein PRA
cancc of this phenomenon is that systolic prcssure
 measurcd from periphcral artcries may be increased
Adrenal Diseascs
1lyperadrenocorticism
ACTII stinulation lest,
cornparcd with the ccntral aorta, and the diastolic
Pinuitary-dependent
dlexamethasone suppression test
Atrenal ncoplasia
pressurc may he comparatively reduced.
Latrogenic
Pheochromocytoina
Pasma/urinary catechotamines;
provocative tests*
ABNORMAL ARTERIAL. PULSE PRESSURE
Hyperaldosteronism
Serun Na ', K', serun aldosterone
assay
Artcrial systolic prcssure imay be incrcased whcul car-
Thyroid Diseases
Hypcrthyroidism
Serum T/T; T: suppresson test
ward stroke volune, as with patent ductus arteriosus
Hypothyroirism
TSHI stimulalion tes: TSHI assay
(PDA), arteriovenous fistula, or sevcrc aortic rcgurgita-
Anemia
1′ versus 2°%; reticulocyte count:
tion (AR). Clinical palpation of thc femoral artcry
bone rmarrow examinatiou
Polycythemia
1 versus 2"?; cardiopulnonary
may dctcct a hyperkinetic pulse. Diastolic prcssure may
workup: abdominal radiography/
declinc with conditions causing blood to shunt from
ultrasonography; reliculocyte
aorta to pulmonary artery (PDA); fromn artcrial to
count; erythropoietin assay; bone
marrow examination
venous systcm (arteriovcnous fistula); or aorta back
Hyperviscosity
Chemscreen, protein
into the left ventriclc (AR). Clinical palpation of the
elecrrophoresis, bone marrow
femoral artery may dctcct a wide, “"bounding" pulse
↑ Intracranial Pressure
Brain scan (MRI)
 pressure. Pulsc prcssurcs may also be exaggerated with
Acromegaly
Growth hormone assay; clonidine
sympathetic hyperactivity, scvcre bradycardia, and hy-
stimulatio test
perkinetic states associatcd with scvcre ancmia, fevcr,
Hypcrestrogenism
Estrogen assay; abdominal
 or other high-output states such as hyperthyroidism.
ulurasonography
 Reduced arnpliude pulse prcssurcs may be detcctcd
*With plheochromocytona, phentolanine deereases BP gieater than 35/25
by fcmoral arterial palpation whcn forward cardiac
mmIlg, clonidine does moi change BP.
output is reduced, such as with left venntricular outflow
CBC, complete blood eount: UA, urialysis, LC/S, urine culux and sensi-
tivity ANA, antinuclear antibodies; PRA, plasma renin activity ACTH. adreno-
obstruction (severe aortic stcnosis) or with intravascu-
SYSTEMIC HYPERTENS1ON: RECOGNITION AND TREATMENT 8
801
levcls or sensitivity to catccholamines or angiotensin
factors, thcy activatc turnover of mernbranc phospho-
I1. Variablc activation of thc renin-angiotensin-aldostc-
rone systern has bcen dlocumented in hypertensive cats
pasc G activity. In hypcrtenision, platelet phosphatidyl-
with chronic renal disease.soα Decrcascd circulating
inositol 4,5-diphosphate (PIPs) is decreascd, suggesting
vasodilator conccntrations accornpanying renal disease
incrcascd phospholipasc Gi activity. This could explain
may contribute. Heightened sensitivity to vasoprcssors
the incrcascd platelet Ca+ +, incrcascd scnsitivity of
occurs whien increascd intracellular (cytosolic) salts
 platelets to thrombin, serotonin, or collagcn (causing
suchi as Na+ and Ca' predisposc to high arteriolar
rclcasc of PDGF), and cnhanccd Na -H- exchange
tonc. Stcroids incrcase arteriolar scnsitivity by several
sccn in human esscntial hypcrtensives and in SHR
mechanisins thiat raise intracellular Na- and limit de
rats.79
pressor systcms,si-s4 The total peripheral resistance is
Nephrosclcrosis may also cncouragc the vicious cy-
also influenced by blood viscosity, which is related to
cle. As nephrons become hypoxic owing to afferent
hematocrit, plasma viscosity, and cellular deformahil-
 arteriolar vasoconstriction, the renin-angiotcnsin-aldo
ity 62-o Polyeythemia. hypergammaglobulinemia, and
sterone systern activates. In addition, thc discased kid-
red blood cell changcs from defective ionic pumps
ney may 1ol excrcte salt and water efficicntly. promot-
have been associated with hypertension.
ing retention, increased cardiac output, and total
 It has been suggested that hypertension may bc
peripheral resistance. L.astly, production of vasodilators
causcd by a primary vascular defcct involving cationic
(prostaglandins, kinins) may bc impaired.
channcls, growth factors, and/or phospholipase C rcg-
ulation. Many substances causc in vitro vascular smoothi
musclc growth and proliferation, including angioten-
CLINICAL CONSEQUENCES OF
sin I1, catecholamincs, vasoprcssin, growth hornonc,
insulin, and insulin-likc growth factor I, and may therc-
HYPERTENSION
fore contribute to hypcrtension.79
 A genetic predisposition described in humans with
csscntial hypertension appcars to bc polygenetic. It
may involve alterations of scvcral macromolecules scry-
gans lo injury, particularly the cycs, kidncys, and car-
ing as cnzymcs, carricrs, mcmbranc components, or
diovascular and neurovascular systems (Table 35-5).
signal substanccs. These can affect thc siructure or
Whcn high systermic blood pressure alters Starling's
function of ccllular membranes*5 leading to muscle
forces, edema may occur from transudation of fluid
hypertrophy in rcsponse 1o ordinary loads.
and clcctrolytes; or hcmorrhage may result fron cxu
Obese dogs rnay have higher than normal blood
dation of plasma protcins or ccllular blood compo-
pressure,4 14 incrcased baroreflex sensitivity,$6
and
nents, from microvascular rupture, or from capillary
permcability changes. Thus, hypertension should hc
reverse when body wcight is normalized.
suspccted (1) whcn signs or cvidencc of "target" or
gan injury (e.g., retinal hemorrhage or detachmcnt,
cpistaxis, or lefl ventricular hypertrophy) is dctcctcd,
THE “VICIOUS CYCLE" OF
sion are diagnoscd.
HYPERTENSION
Arteriosclerosis and athcrosclcrosis decrease artcrio-
lar luminal diameter, dccrcasc artcriolar elasticity, and
CARDIOVASCULAR CHANGES
raise total peripheral rcsistancc. Thcse changes causc
a *'vicious cycle" by propagating hypertension.
Vascular medial hypertrophy or hyperplasia rcsults
Mcchanical smooth musclc strctch causcd by clc-
from increased artcrial smooth muscle work induccd
vatcd blood prcssure stirnulatcs Ca++ cntry through
by vasoprcssors, high cytosolic Ca~ + , or autorcgulatory
thic "strctch-activatcd channel." This strctch reflex
vasospasin. High blood prcssurc also causcs intinal
hclps maintain incrcased smooth musclc tonc, as oc-
 damage rcsulting in arteriosclcrosis and atheroscle10-
curs in autoregulation. Thus, hypcrtension itself causcs
sis. Arteriosclerosis causcs major arterics to bccoinc
high vascular tone and incrcascd scnsitivity to vasoprcs-
stiff and thickcnedl.
sors.
 Systcmic hypertension and left ventricular hypcrtro-
Vascular remodeling occurs in hypertension. Endo-
phy arc prcdictors of prcmaturc human mortality,"3
thclial cells and platelets produce fibroblast growih
but this rclationship has not yct bccn verificd in ani-
factor and platelct-derivcd growth factor (PDGF),
mals. Lcft vcntricular hypcrtrophy and mass increasc
which are mitogenic for smooth musclc cclls.9 Besides 
from incrcascd afterload, although 
1 congcstive heart
thc hypcrtrophy/hyperplasia caused by thesc growth
failure is a rare scquela in animals.
802 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THF HEART
TABLE 35-5
 Clinical Evidence Suggesting End-Organ Injury in Hypertension
History, Physical Examination 
Clinicopathologic Abnormalitics
Cardiae*
Gallop rhyihn
Cardiomegaly
Exerrise intolerance
Left ventricular hypertrophy
Dyspnca
Pleural cffusion
Low-grade systolic: munnur
Pulmorary cdema
Arrhythmias
Heart failurc (rare)
Vascularh
Epistaxis
Tortuous aorta
Ilyaline arteriosclerosis
Medial hypertrophy/hyperplasia
librinoid necrotizing arteriolitis
Atherosclerosis
Oculare
Blindness; retinal hemorrhage/detachment 
H ypherma: glaucoma (closed-angle)
Corrcal ulceration
Relinal aurophy, hypereflectivity (old scars)
Renal
Polyuria/polydipsia (pressure diuresis)
Low urine specific gravity (USG)
 Signs of renal failure
Proteinuria; glonenalosclerosis
Fortuous intrarenal vasculature
Cercbrovascular c
lleadl tilt
Arteriosclerosis
Seizure
CNS hennorrhage
Paresis, hemiparesis
Infarcion
""Stroke"; collapsc/coma
ogs,rfs.17,28,29,38,39.42,43,46-50: cats,rets.32.34,35.37.
Dogs. refs. 8,17.28, 29, 38, 4145,49-51; cats, refs. 32.33.
Dogs、refs. 28.29.40,41,44.17,50.91,92: cats,refs. 32-34, 36,37
Dogs, rels. 8, 17、28, 29, 38. 44, 47: cats, refs, 32, 33.
Dogs, ref. 50: rats, refs, 32-34.
INTRAOCULAR CHANGES
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL
EXAMINATION FINDINGS
 Moderate-to-severe hypcrtension may result in blind-
 ncss. Lesions include rctinal hcmorrhagc, detachment,
and/or hyphema (less frcqucntly, closcd-angle glau-
coma and corneal ulceration) (Color Platc 2).
SIGNALMENT
Most hypertensive dogs and cats are middle-aged to
RENAL CHANGES
old (dogs, mcan agc, 8.9 ± 3.6 years, range, 2 to 14
ycars;9 cats, mcan agc, 15.1 ± 3.8 ycars, range, 7 to
20 ycars*2). The hypertension may bc causcd by or
 Most hypcrtensive dogs and cats havc polyuria and
coincident with geriatric diseascs. Older dogs'4 2x. 3
polydipsia, possibly duc to pressure diuresis or primary
(but not older cats2') had higher blood prcssure than
disease. Arteriosclcrosis is associated with gloncrulo
sclerosis (nephrosclerosis). Glomerular atrophy and
 ncphron loss may hc sccn. Glomerular damage predis-
and hypertension is linked to the Y-chrornosoinc in
SHR rats."4
poscs to proteinuria, and renal failure may be prescnt.
Greyhound dogs have higher blood pressure mca-
 Arteriography in hypertcnsivc dlogs has shown tortuous
intrarenal vasculaturc suspccted to be a secondary
surements than other breeds, even if ncver traincd to
racc.95 Grcyhounds have cardiac hypertrophy (unre-
changc.28.17
latcd to pathologic hypcrtension?), relatively high car
diac output with low total peripheral resistance, and
grcatcr blood and crythrocytc volume. Thcir barore-
CEREBROVASCULAR CHANGES
 'za'asus so sre pue i caos, oe sioidin
Thesc inborn changcs arc physiologic aud do not rc-
Ccntral nervous systcm artcriosclcrosis, vasospasm,
sult in incrcased morbidity to hypcrtensive pathology,
infarcts, or hemorrhage may causc ucurovascular or
exccpt for athierosclerosis whicn thc dogs arc fed high-
cerebrovascular accidents (CVAs or "strokcs"). Muulti-
fat diets.1l
focal heimorrhages have becn obscrvcd in brains of
Hereditary esscntial hypcrtcnsion was reportcd in a
hypertensivc cats with neurologic signs.32. 33
line of Siberian Husky mixed-brced dogs.8, w Thcy
SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION: RECOGNITION AND TREATMENT 803
may also have genetic cardiac hypertrophy, possibly
160/95 mmHg systolic/diastolic.2. 1o5a There arc 10
inherited separately, aud increascd platclct aggrcga-
such statistics concerning morbidity and mortality in
tion, as in humans with csscntial hypcrtension.ioe?
animals.
These changes may hc similar to thosc in the grcy-
hound and represent inbred cardiovascular adapta-
tions favoring endurance.
METHODS OF BLOOD PRESSURE
ASSESSMENT
HISTORY
DIRECTBLOODPRESSUREMEASUREMENT
 Direct arterial puncture is the oldest technique and
The history may disclose acute or chronic conse-
considered the ost accurate mcthod for animal blood
quences of end-organ damage, or underlying diseases
pressure assessment. Femoral arterial puncture is per-
associated with hypertension. Important. clues include
formed by inserting a 22- to 25-gauge ncedle co11-
polyuria/polydipsia, blindnes, cpistaxis, signs of con-
nccted by heparinized, saline-filled tubing to a physio-
gestive heart failure (CIIF), kidney failure, hyper- and
logic  pressure
transducer  and  a  hemodynamic
hypoadrenocorticism, hyper- and hypothyroidism, dia-
oscilloscope-recorder in thie nonsedated animal re-
betes, or central ncurologic. signs. Potcntial cxposire
straincd in lateral recumbency 28.47 The apparatus can
to hypcrtensive substanccs should bc qucstioncd, in1-
bc calibratcd with a mcrcury manometcr. Zcro basc
clucding high dictary salt intakc,32. 3 alpha-agonists
linc balancc is performed withi thc nccdle held at. thc
(c.g, phenylpropanolamine, topical ocular phcnyleph-
samc hcight and angle just bcforc arterial introduc-
rine'), steroids, lead, cadmium, vitamin D toxicity,1?
tion. I.ess commonly, dircct mcasurcmcnts may be re-
nicotine,0 xylazine," and ketamine.'5
corded from othcr artcrics (carotid loop,' external
auricular artcry,67 carpal or tarsal artcrics). The blood
pressure is obscrved and 1ccorded over multiple car-
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
diac cycles, until it is shown to be *stable'" and repeat-
able. Heart ratc is rccorded, and obscrvation of thc
Conplete physical  examination should be per-
pet's "anxicty" is noicd for refercncc. Sympathctic
formed, including ocular examination with direct or
stimulation will increase the heart rate above normal.
indircct ophthalmoscopy (bilatcral, but not ncccssarily
 and this observation may be helpful in interpreting
symnetric, ocular lesious are common; sec Color Plate
blood pressure readings.
2). Ncck palpation in clderly cats nay rcvcal thyroid
A disadvantage of this technique is that it requires
gland nodulcs. Soft systolic murnurs (gradc 2/6) arc
 morc physical rcstraint and induccs morc pain than
commonly auscultated in affccted dogs (57%2) and
noninvasivc methods, thereby giving rise to sympa-
cats (42%*). Ahdominal palpation may revcal hcpato-
thctic stimulation and raised blood pressure.
rncgaly from hyperadrcnocorticisrn or snall, irregular
Hypcrtension is considcred to be present whicn
kidncys. Abdominal distention may be caused
by
blood prcssurc mcasuremcnts cxcccd 160/100 mrnHg
hypcradrcnocorticisrn or protcin-losing ncphropathy
systolic/diastolic using dircct arterial puncturc in un-
and ncphirotic syndrome. Obesity may be prescnt.
acclirmatcd anirnals. This is influcnccd, howcver, by
technique, method of mcasurcment, and clinical vari-
ables. Isolatcd systolic hypcrtcnsion (160 to 200 mmHg
DIAGNOSIS AND
systolic) may indicatc synpathctic activity caused by
CHARACTERIZATION OF
fright 0r excitement. Prcssures of 220 to 240/130 to
150 mmHg systolic/diastolic have been recorded in
HYPERTENSION
hypertensive animals with ocular danage.28 29. 2*1 Re-
cordings of 275/170 mmHg have been recorded from
 a dog with essential hypertension.17
DOCUMENTATION OF ELEVATED
 BLOOD PRESSURE
INDIRECT (NONINVASIVE) BLOOD PRESSURE
Hyperteusion is diagnosed whenu elevated blood
MEASUREMENT
pressure is repeatedly recorded over multiple measurc-
Thc nccd for rapidl, noninvasivc blood pressure eval-
mcnts to exclude spuriously elevated readings from
uation has made indlircct blood prcssurc mcasureinent
fright or excitement. Clinical evidence of end-organ
 popular. Validation and comparison of indirect with
 pathology may help support the diagnosis (Table 35--
direct techniqucs in dogs* and catsf have enhanccd
5). In humans, hypertension is defined according to
blood pressure measuremcnts thiat arc associatcd with
*Refs. 4a, 5. 9, 16-18. 53-55, 107.
increased morbidity and nortality, or greater than
↑Rcfs.4a,20-22,32,56-58.
 804 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
thc utility of noninvasive methodologics. Techniques
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DISEASE AND
for noninvasive blood prcssurc include the Doppier,*
BLOOD PRESSURE ELEVATION
Dinamap,t plethysimography,20. s8 xylol indicato1, and
auscultatoryt methods. Thcsc utilize a cuff to constrict.
In humans, the risk of cardiovascular morbidity a11d
a periphcral artery (ou front lcg, hind leg, or tail) and
a transducer or rmicrophone placcd distal to the cuff
pressure levcls.109
to detect blood flow or arterial wall motion once the
 Most cats with documcnted hypertension and end-
blood pressurc overcomes the pressurc of the cuff.
organ damage have renal discasc. Howcvcr, it is nof
Various transduccrs can be usedultrasonic (Doppler
clcar whether renal alterations arc a causc or cffect,
Flow Detcctor, Parks Medical Elcctronics Inc, Aloha,
Or arc coincident with hyperteusion.21. x2. 34-8 A fcw
OR): oscillometric (Dinamap, Critikon, Tampa, FL);
cats with hypcrtension and end-organ damagc had
photoplethysmographic (Finapres, Ohmeda, Louis-
hyperthyroidisn.*2, 3+ Pheochromocytoma has been re-
villc, CO); or auscultatory audio-amplifiers. Thc cuff
ported in a cat, but hypertension was not docu-
width should be 40 pcrcent of the linb's circumfer-
mented.110
  ou  noo sna  ro m see o
 Mild hypcrtension has bcen documented in dogs
too large or too narrow, respectivcly.
with glomcrular discases (80%);6 other renal ab-
 Simultancous indirect and dircct blood pressurc
mcasurements scem to corrclatce wcll (cats,2i. 32. 56. sx
100%)6. 59. 1t and phcochromocytoma (50%); and
dogsa. 9 17 i8 s3.1w7), although somc studies show that
cats with renal diseases (61 to 65%),21, 59 ma. 10a. 153 or
indirect 1mcasurements undercstimate direct mcasurc-
hypcrthyroidism (87%).21 Sincc cnd-organ damage was
ments by 7 to 14 mrmHg in cats?7 and dogs.s In ancs-
not studied, it is unclear how clinically significant mild
thetized cats, the Doppler system placed on thc lcg
hypcrtension is,
was shown to bc morc cfficienl, accuratc, scusitive,
reproduciblc, and less expensivc compared with
thie
MANAGEMENT OF
 IDinamap and Finapres techniqucs ovcr pressures bc-
tween 40 mmHg diastolic and 240 mmHg systolic.5s
HYPERTENSION
However, the Dopplcr technique rclics hcavily on the
subjective intcrpretation of the ohscrvcr. This is espc-
Morbidlity and mortality data arc lacking for byper
cially uscr-dependent for diastolic readlings whcn thc
 Dopplcr sounds changc or become muffled.
tcnsion in dlogs and cats. Although whcn and how to
 Indirect blood pressure monitoring provides a uscful
trcat is uot well establishicd, thc rhctorical question,
*'Is treatment of hypertension bencficial>" is generally
 clinical screcning techniquc. Normal values are usually
 answercd "Yes' on faith when hypertension is cxtremc.
less than 160 to 180 mm11g systolic. Hypcrtensive ani-
mals with ocular damage usually have indircct blood
 aass r (  s a  si
prcssurc of approxinately 220 ± 40 rmmHg.*2, 34
prcssure clevations are repeatedly rccorded, (2) whcn
significant cnd-orgau injury is detectcd, or (3) in thc
 prescncc of cardiovascular risk factors. The answcr is
CLINICAL ASSESSMENT OF
Iuch lcss ccrtain for mild degrees of hypertcnsion.
Iuman antihypcrtensive therapy invoived a "step-
HYPERTENSION
care'" approach in thc 1970s and 1980s. 1f a firs-line
drug (oftcn a diuretic or β-blocker) did not lowcr
blood prcssurc sufficicntly, another medication was
 added, and if nccessary a third drug (often a vasodila-
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
tor) was introduccdl. Latcly, ACF inhibitors and cal-
 cium channcl blockcrs havc hecome increasingly popu-
lar
as
first-line
 antihypertensivc
dr11gs.52. 12.
113
Appropriatc diagnostic tests (scc Tables 35-4 and
Additional benefits, including rcgrcssion of left ventric-
 35-5) arc rcquired to (1) differentiatc csscntial hyper-
ular hypertrophy, have bcen associated with ACF inhib-
tension from secondary hypertension (i.c., that caused 
itors, α- and β-blockers, and calciun channcl blocker
by an underlying disease); (2) rcvcal end-organ dam-
thcrapy, but not with diuretics or dircct-acting vasodila-
age; and (3) guide the clinician's choice of anti-byper-
tors (Table 35-6).
tcnsion therapy.
THERAPEUTIC GOALS
*Refs. 4a, 5,9,15-17, 20-22, 32, 34.56-58, 80a, 110a.
tRefs. 4a., 5, 13, 14, 54, 55. 58.
Considering the practical issucs of treatment costs
$Rels. 10-12, 53, 107, 108.
and rigors of daily drug adininistration, a judicious
TABLE 35-6
 Drugs Used for Antihypertensive Therapy in Dogs and Cats
Generic Name (US Trade Name)
Dusage
ACE inhibitors
Benazepril (Lotensin)
0.25 mg/kg PO q 24 hr
(aodr) udende)
0.5-2.0 rmg/kg PO q 8-12 hr
Enalapril (Enacard)
0.25-0.75 mng/kg PO q 12-24 hr
Lisinopril (Prinivil)
0.1-1.0 mg/kg PO q 12-24 hr (dogs)
Ramipril (Altace)
0.5 mg/kg PO q 12-24 hr (dogs)
β-Atrenergic receptor blockers
Aterolol (Tenormin)
6.25-12.5 mg PO q 12 hr (cats)
1.0-2.0 mg/kg P0 q 12-24 hr (dogs)
Propranolol (Intderal)
5-10 mng PO q 8-12 hr (cats)
5-80 ng P0 q 8-12 hr (dogs)
t-Acrenergic receptor blockers
Prazosin (Mirnipress)
0.25-1.0 mg PO q 8-12 hr (cats)
0.25-2.0 rmg PO q 8-12 hr (dogs)
Calcium channel blockcrs
Anlodipine (Norvase)
0.625-1.25 mg PO q 24 hr (cats)
Diltiazcm (Cardizern)
7.5-15 mg PO q 8-12 hr (cats)
0.5-2.0 mg/kg PO q 8-12 hr (dogs)
Diltiazem (Cardizem CD)
10 mg/kg PO q 24 hr (cars)
Verapamil (Isoptin)
1-2 rng/kg PO q 8-12 hr (eats)
Diuretics
I ydrochlorothiazide (HydroDiuril)
2-4 mg/kg PO q 12 hr.
Furosenmide (Lasix)
1-4 mng/kg PO q 812 hr
Spironolactone (Aldactone)
2-1 mg/kg PO q 24 hr
philosophy is to (l) validate elevated blood prcssurc
corticosteroids, phenylpropanolamine, nephrotoxic
by at lcast thrcc successive mcasurements, (2) monitor
agents (aminoglycosides, anphotericin, cyclosporine),
but do not trcat “"mild" hyperteusion, (3) carcfiully
and amphetamine-like drugs. Glucocorticoids, includ-
identify and trcat sccondary conditions known to be
 ing topical steroids, should be avoided (systemic effects 
associatcd with bypcrtcnsion, and (4) base the initial
 and pituitary-adrcnal axis alterations may result).16
drug choicc on patient and discase characteristics.
Individual drug choice(s) depends on (1) hydration
WEIGHT CONTROL
status and rcnal function, (2) heart rate and cardiac
function, (3) underlying primary disease, (4) response
Weight reduction is advised for obesc anirnals. Dogs
to thcrapy, (5) advcrse effects, and (6) costs. Whcn
experimcntally
madc  overweight  developed  high
beginning drug therapy, low initial closcs should be
blood pressure that dlropped whcn their weight was
uscd with the ain of gradual blood prcssure reduction
reduccd.* Mechaunisms include massive natriuresis asso
  s a p e 
ciated with very low caloric intake,17 dccreased synpa-
widely in their responsc to drugs. No data cxist as to
thctic activity,!i* and decrcascd plasma insulin.!9
how low pressure should bc reduced for maximal ben-
efit in animals, and systcinatic animal studics compar-
ing antihypcrtensive drugs arc currently lacking. In
DIET MODIFICATION
humans, a goal of attaining 140 mmHg systolic and
Thc 1olc of dietary intcrvention is unscttlcd. Rigid
85 mmlIg diastolic is suggcstcd in conjunction with
sodium restrictiou was established for hypcrtensive hu-
reducing othcr cardliovascular risk factors.14
mans in the late 1940s when fcw other therapcutic
 oplions were available.1zo Severc salt restriction has
now been largely discarded in favor of modest sodium
NONPHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY
reduction, and this appears to bc rational for vcteri-
nary application as well. In humans, moderate dictary
Whcn possiblc, nondrug treatments should consti
sodlium reduction has bccn shiown to lowcr hlood pres-
tute initial intcrvcntion.!1 These are outlined below.
surc an avcragc of 4.9 ± 1.3 mmHg systolic and 2.6
± 0.08 rmmlIg diastolic.2 Somc dogs with essential
hypertension have been found to be salt scnsitive,9. 12
AVOIDANCE OF DRUGS PROMOTING
Thus, salt restriction in sodium-sensitive individuals
HYPERTENSION
should be bencficial.12* Animals with renal failure and
Exposurc to medications known to raisc blood pres-
hyperadrenocorticism may rctain sodium chloride and
sure should bc discontinucd. Examples include gluco-
water, and salt restriction in hypcrtensive individuals
 806 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
may be considered. Whercas sone invcstigators rccoH-
        m
mend that dietary salt not cxcccd 0.1 to 0.3 pcrccnt
sorbed.1s Thercforc, they have greater potcncy and a
more rapid onsct of action than do thiazidcs. Although
recommcndations
regarding
sodiumrestriction.23
thicy are no morc cffcctive in lowering blood pressurc
Given available human and aninal data, the potential
than are thiazides in hurnaus, thcy may be cffective in
for benefit with remote possibility of harm makcs mod-
thc facc of scvcrc renal impairment. In hypcrtcnsivc
crate dlietary sodium restriction prudent when treat-
cats, diurctic therapy was not found to be as effective
ment of modlerate-to-severe hypertension is decmcd
as β-hlockers or ACE inhibitors.* Potential side cffects
necessary, Since: K -7* and Mg*
.. ius salts may help lowcr
of diurctics include acid-basc and electrolylc abnor-
blood pressure, these may be considered as sali substi-
malitics, hypovolcmia, and dchydration.
tutcs. Other Xa' salts do not seem to raise blood
pressure the way sodium chloride does.'?i Therefore,
ADRENERGIC-INHIBITING DRUGS
hypcrtcnsive: animals with renal failure and acidosis
Imay be treated with sodium bicarbonate.
 Bascd upon pharmacologic properties, adrenergic
Antihypcrtensive cffccts of other nutricnts may also
receptors are suhdivided into three major groups: (1)
havc  poicntial  rclevancc.  Increased linolcic
acid
β-receptors (which couple to stimulatory G proteins to
(omega-6 fatty acid from sced oil) in thc diet raises
 activate adenyl cyclase), (2) α,-receptors (which couple
renal vasodilatory prostaglandin synthesis. In contrast,
to other G protcins to activate synthesis of the second
 dlietary linolenic acid (ormega-3 fatty acid from linsccd
mcssenger, inositol triphosphatc and diacylglyccrol),
oil, olive oil, cod liver oil) inhibits this synthcsis and
and (3) ay-rccecptors (which couple to inhibitory G
 Imay favor vasoconstriction and hypcrtension.127
protcins to inhibit adenyl cyclase), 131 These reccptors
 mediate various sympathetic nervous systcm and car-
dliovascular actious. Additionally, specific rcptors dis-
TREATMENT OF UNDERLYING MEDICAL
tinct fron α-adrenergic receplors have bcen identified
DISEASES
and designatcd as imidazoline reccptors (their activa-
tion by imidazoliuc causcs a hypotensivc cffcct), al-
though drugs susceptiblc to being recoguized by imi
priatc  rcognition
 and
treatmet
ofhyperthy-
roiclisrn." * Reversal of ohcsity may reducc blood pres
dazoline rcceptors arc capable of being rccognized by
αg-rceptors,1$2 Accordingly, a number of drugs act as
sure in some animals. Othicr conditions may bc less
antagonists (used mosuy in vetcrinary medicine) or
rcsponsive."*
agonists to block or occupy α- or β-receptor sitcs on
cffector cells.
PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY
BETA-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR BLOCKERs. lhe β-blocRcIS 
lival diuretics as the most frcqucntly used class of
 Many drugs have been advocatcd to trcat systcimic
 drugs in huunan antihypcrtcnsivc therapy, and thicy are
hypertension in man. A number of agents have becn
used in veterinary applications (Tablc 35-6), although
affcct a numbcr of physiologic functions that regulatc
clinical trials to cvaluate efficacy arc generally lacking.
blood prcssure,33 (3 including reducing heart ratc,
contractility, and thus cardiac output; diminishing re-
nin secrction: potentially decrcasing central synpa-
DIURETICS
thetic ncrvous outflow, and inhibiting catecholarnine
 A diuretic may be choscn to decrease blood volume
Iclease by presynaptic blockade. Clinical selection may
and cardiac output if dchydration is not present. Dj-
be influenced by pharmacologic diffcrences betwecn
uretics have been advocated from hunan studies124
β-blocker agents. L.ipophilic drugs (propranolol, mcto.
to treat mild-to-moderatc hypcrtension; they have an
prolol) have high first-pass hcpatic metabolisin and
advantage of inexpensive cost. Thiazidcs inhibit so-
thus less bioavailability. Lipophobic agcnts (atenolol,
diun and chloridc cotransport across the luminal
nadolol) arc rnainly cxcrcted unchanged by thc kid-
Icrmbrane of the early distal convolutcd tubule whcrc
ncy, have a longer half-life, and may causc fewer CNS
 5 t0 8 percent of fltered sodium is reabsorbed.t29 They
side cffects,1ss All β-blockers compctitively antagonizc
arc not as cffective as loop diurctics. When glomcrular
cardiac β,-reccptors but vary in their βy-receptor block.
filtration is significanuly irnpaired, thiazides (cxcept
ade (i.e., vcsscls, bronchi, endocrine organs). However,
mctolazone) will be ineffcctivc. A few reports describe
there may be few antihypertensive differences between
thiazide use i1n the dog28. 17. 3 and cat.*4 Loop diuretics
agents having greater (e.g, atenolol, rnctoprolol) com-
primarily block chloride reabsorption by inhibiting the
pared with weaker (c.g. propranolol) cardioselective
Na /K-/Cl cotransport systen of the lurninal mem-
properties.s Thc cardlioselective β-blockcr atenolol
brane of the thick ascending linb of Henle's loop,
seems to have thc advantage of once-daily administra-
SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION: RECOGNITION AND TREATMENT 807
tion in many animals, compared with propranolol
Hydralazinc has bccome a third-line agent (aftcr
(givcn every 8 to 12 hours). Compliancc can easily be
diuretics and β-blockers) in humans. It acts directly to
monitored with β-blockers, since heart rale should
relax vascular smooth muscle of peripheral artcrioles,
dlccrcasc rmarkedly from pretreatunent baseline values
decreasing peripheral vascular resistance and blood
whcn thc drug is bcing administered. For example,
pressure. A baroreceptor-nediated reflex cnhancing
cats recciving 12.5 mg of atenolol daily or 5 mg of
sympathetic discharge usually increases heart rate,
propranolol tid should have resting heart rates of
strokc volumc, and cardiac output coincident with va-
between approximately 120 and 150 beats/minutc. Po-
sodilation.11 Nitrates, particularly intravenous sodium
tential side effccts include bradycardia, CNS dcpres-
nitroprusside, are used in thc uncommon situation
sion, glucose intolerance, bronchospasn, and hypotcn-
whicn hypcrtcnsive crisis is cncountcrcd (i.c., situations
sion. There have bcen fcw clinical vctcrinary trials. In
in
which  irnmcdiate  blood  prcssure  1cduction  is
one sludy. propranolol was incffectivc as long-term
l1ecdcd, such as hypcrtcnsive cncephalopathy)
 monotherapy in treating hyperteusivc cats.m
ALPHA-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR BLOCKERS. TwO tyPCS Of
ALPHA-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR AGONIST
α-receptors have bcen defincd: prcsynaptic αyrccep-
DRUGS
tors, which modulatc ncurotransuitter activity throughi
 Drugs acting at the αz-receptor exert their antihyper-
negativc fccdback nechanisms that inhibit catechola
tensive effect by activating peripheral ncuronal pre-
mine rclcasc fron nerve endings when thiese receptors
synaptic Qx-receptors to reducc norepinephrine re-
are occupied by norepinephrine; and post-synaptic α--
lease, and by direculy activating postsynapiic CNS
(vascular) receptors. Prazosin blocks α -rcccptor activa-
receptors, resulting in decrcased sympathctic tract out-
tion by circulating or neurally rcleased catecholarmincs
oiau pue a se qns suy ae mo
(which normally induces vasoconstriction) . This block-
have had little clinical use in veterinary medicinc, how-
ade dilates resistance vcssels, which reduccs pcriphcral
resistance without major changcs in cardiac output.
cvcr.
 Presynaptic αy-reccptors remain capablc of binding
neuronally released norcpincphrinc (ncurotransnit-
ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME (ACE)
ter), inhibiting the latter's own rclcase and preventing,
INHIBITORS
 by direct ncgative feedback, development of reflex
tachycardia and a rise in plasma renin. e Antihyperten-
sive efficacy may be limited if plasma norepinephrinc
culating levels of angiotensin I 1+z The mechanism
increases when blood pressure falls, owing to a barorc-
involves inhibiting ACE, which norinally convcrts thc
ceptor-mediated increase in plasma norepincphrinc.137
inactive dccapeptide angiotcnsin I to the potent vaso-
Prazosin has been effectively combined with diurct-
constrictor angiotensin I1. Additional cffects likcly con-
ics or β-blockers in humans and has bccn cffcctive in
tribute to antihypcrtcnsivc actions. Thcsc iiclude de-
chronic renal failure. Tachyphylaxis to its antihypcrten-
crcascd aldosteronc sccretion rcducing renal sodium
sive action has been reported not to bc a problcm in
Ictention,s incrcascd vasodilatory prostaglandin sy-
human studics,'s* although it is ineffective in chronic
thesis,+# or direct inhibition of vascular hypertrophy.
hcart failure management. 13
 In addition, ancillary effecis of ACE inhibitors (ACFl)
may include beneficial cardiovascular actions (salutary
DRUGS BLOCKING BOTH α-AND β-RECEPTORS. I.abetalol,
effects on ventricular remodeling and rcgrcssion of
 a lipid-soluble drug, is a nonselective β,- and βx-reccp-
hypertrophy); maintain cerchral blood flow; and pro-
tor blocker and is highly selectivc for a-rcccptors.
tect renal function (c-g, prefercntial cfferent renal
In hunans, it reduces blood pressure by decreasing
arteriolar dilation following reduction of circulating
periphcral vascular resistance, with little effect on car-
angiotensin I1 incrcascs renal blood flow whilc rcduc-
diac output.te Clinical veterinary usc has hccn limited.
ing intraglomcrular prcssurc).146
Monothcrapy using ACEI drugs is often chosen for
 initial management of mild-to-moderate human hyper-
VASODILATORS
tension, especially if there is proteinuria or heart fail.
Various classification schhemes for vasodilators have
ure,2s Enalapril, benazopril, lisinopril, rarmipril, and
been proposcd. Thosc cntcring vascular srnooth mus-
captopril are ACEIs used in veterinary medicinc. Com-
cle to cause vasodilation havc been termed "direct
parison of efficacy and safety has not been studicd, but
vasodilators," whcrcas drugs acting by other mecha-
enalapril has been found to bc safc when used in dogs
nisms havc bccin called "indirect vasodilators." Thc
with hcart failure.47 1t Clinical trials cvaluating ACEIs
lattcr (c.g., ACE inhibitors, calcium-entry blockers, α-
for hypcrtension arc limited. In onc study, cnalapril
recceptor-ncdliatcd blockcrs) are described according
 provided effective long-tcrm monothcrapy in onc of
to thcir cellular site of action or signal mcchanism.
six cats with hypcrtension associated with chronic renal
808
EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
disease. A combination with low doses of diuretics
used in animals. Anorexia, lethargy, and vomiting were
 or β-adrenergic blockers may enhance ACEI efficacy
seen with verapamil at 1 mg/lb (2 mg/kg) every 8
and thus, should be contemplated before raising ACEI
hours; 0.5 mg/lb (1 mg/kg) every 12 hours did not
dosage. The tolerated dose of ACEIs may be higher
when they are used as antibypertensive agents in the
ence is available for nifedipine, which has great periph-
 absence of heart failure and renal insufficiency, or in
eral vasodilator effects. Diltiazem is relatively safe in
dogs and cats, having fewer inotropic and chrono-
risk is development of functional renal insufficiency.
tropic effects than has verapamil. Amlodipine adminis-
 potentially leading to progressive renal failure, espe-
tered once daily (0.625-1.25 mg) as a monotherapy
cially when concomitant diuretic therapy is adminis-
tered or if heart failure is present. Vomiting, diarrhea,
 pears to be safe and effective.1ma 134-155a
 and hypotension are also potential side effects. 149
HYPERTENSIVE EMERGENCIES
CALCIUM CIIANNEL BLOCKERS
These drugs lower blood pressure by interfering
with  calcium-dependent  contractions  of  vascular
Although uncommon, hypertensive emergencies 0C-
smooth muscle, thereby reducing peripheral vascular
Cur. These are typically heralded by the clinical sigin of
resistance.'s They may also decrease vascular respon-
acule blindness, neurologic signs (especially encepha-
siveness to angiotensin I. A number of agents are
lopathy, cerebrovascular events), or occasionally malig-
 available, differing with respect to sites and modes of
nant rennal disease. The goal of therapy is blood pres-
action on slow calcium channels, cardiovascular activ-
sure reduction to levels that ameliorate clinical signs.
ity, duration of action, and side effects. First-generation
Re-establishment of normal blood pressure is achieved
agents (verapamil, nifedipine, diltiazem) possess vary-
by chronic oral therapy. A precipitous drop in blood
ing side effects related to vasodilation, depressed car-
 pressure can cause hypotension, cerebral ischemia,
 diac conduction, and contractility. Verapamil exhibits
 and neurologic signs, and thus should be avoided.50. 137
 both marked arteriolar dilation as well as direct nega-
In dogs, β-blockers (propranolol, 5 to 40 mg orally
tive inotropic action  and depresses atrioventricular
tid) or vasodilators (hydralazine, 1.0 to 2.0 mg/kg
 conduction with greater effect on the AV node (versus
orally bid, or prazosin, 1 to 2 mg orally bid-tid) may
diltiazem, which affects sinoatrial nodal conduction
be first-choice agents. In cats, the calcium channel
 more). Since verapamil undergoes substantial first-pass
blocker amlodipine (0.625 mg orally daily), the β-
 metabolism in the liver, drugs or conditions that re-
blocker propranolol (2.5 to 7.5 mg orally tid), or ate1n-
 duce hepatic blood flow or liver enzyme function pro-
olol (6.25 to 12.5 mg orally sid-bid) can be selected.
 long its elimination. Half-life for elimination in dogs
Animals with severe clinical signs or who have not
and cats varies berween 1 and 5 hours.'s Diltiazem
responded to these drugs may receive, under scrutiny
produces hemodynamic and electrophysiologic effects
 Of continuous blood pressure monitoring, sodiu ni-
similar to those of verapamil, with a comparable half-
troprusside (start at 0.5 to 1 μg/kg/min, constant rate
life in dogs, but it causes less myocardial depression
infusion, titrate to effect, usually a maximum of 5
and undergoes less first-pass hepatic metabolism. In
μg/kg/min [beware of cyanide toxicity in catsl) or the
cats, a mean bioavailability of 94 percent and an elimi-
ultra-short. acting β-blocker esmolol (500 μg/kg/min
nation half-life of 2 hours were recorded (approxi-
intravenously slowly to load; 50 to 250 μg/kg/min.
mately 38% and 7 hours, respectively, for long-acting
constant rate infusion, to effect [beware of bradycar-
 diltiazem CD),s Nifedipine is a potent arteriolar dila-
dia, heart block, negative inotropism]).
tor but has been little used in veterinary medicine to
date. Newer second-generation calcium chamnel block-
ers such as amlodipine exhibit more peripheral vasodi-
PATIENT MONITORING
lation with fewer effects on heart rate or contractility.
Calcium blockers have become one of the standard
first-line treatments for essential hypertension in hu-
 Surveillance of the hypertensive animal is important
mans. Careful monitoring is advised when combining
whether or not treatment is administered. This in-
diltiazem or verapamil with a β-adrenergic blocker
cludes repeated blood pressure measurements, physi-
because of the potential adverse effects on cardiac
cal examinations, diagnostic tests individualized to de-
 conduction.1s Contraindications include second-
0r
tect end-organ changes, and monitoring for side
third-degree AV block, hypotensive states, and myocar-
effects associated with therapy. Initially, repeat examj-
dial failure. Side effects include vomiting, diarrhea,
 pun saaa z on I Ataa panbat aq ae stou
ad hypotcnsion. Verapamil has potent negative ino
animal is stable. 'Thereafter, evaluation is dictated by
tropic and chronotropic effects and is infrequently
clinical status.
SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION: RECOGNITION AND TREATMENT  809
 Animals taking antihypertensive medications may
dence and clinical significance. Kleintierpraxis 25:227.
not be able to autoregulate well, especially if they have
1980
12. Shingatgeri MK, Nambiar KTK, Govindan Nayar KN. A
significant systemic or metabolic disease. Care must
preliminary report on lhe use of a niodified compres-
therefore be taken to avoid or treat related complica-
sion cuff to fit the sphygnomanomcter in determining
tios such as hypotension, dehydration, anorexia, or
arterial blood pressure in dogs. Indlian Vet ] 40:770,
use of hypotensive anesthetics. 137
1963
13. Edwards Nj. Non-invasive blood pressure mcasure-
ments in the clinical setting. Proceedings, 8th Annual
Veterinary Medicine Forum, 1990, p 273
PROGNOSIS
14. Coulter DB, Keith JC. Blood pressures obtajned by indi-
rect neasurerment in conscious dogs. J Am Vef Med
Assoc 184:1375,1984
15. Knight DH, Rifle RA, Melbin J. Distributionn of blood
The prognosis depends on the cause of the hyper-
 pressure in Beagle: dogs as determined by a Doppler
tension and the extent of end-organ damage. Animals
ultrasound technique. Fed Proc 34:399. 1975 
with essential hypertension may live many years. Vision
16. Remillard RL, Ross JN, Eddy JB. Variance of indirect.
blood pressure measureinents and prcvalcncc of byper-
miay improve if the onset of blindness was acute, but.
tension in clinically normal dogs. J An Vet Res 52:561,
renal function often does not get better and may dete-
1991
riorate, especially in dogs who present with azoteimia.28
17. Weiser MG, Spangler WL, Gribble DH. Blood pressurc
Many cats with systemic hypertension can be well main-
mcasurement
 in the dog. J An Vel Med Assoc
aged with amlodipine.82  0. 11sa Dogs with hyer
171:354, 1977
 adrenocorticism and cats with hyperthyroidism gener-
18. Wilson RB, Clarke T]. Indirect measuremcnt of systolic
blood pressure in dogs by the use of xylol pulsce indica-
ally do well with treatment of the underlying disease
tor. J Am Vet Med Assoc 144:981, 1964
and, if necessary, antihypertensive drug administra-
19. Gordon DB, Goldblau H. Direct percutaneous determ-
tion. Dogs with essential hypertension have been main-
nation of systemic blood pressure and production of
tained for years without renal compromise.28 47. 4s
renal hypertension in the cat. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med
125:177, 1967
20. Mahoney LT, Brody Mj. A method for indirecl re-
cording of arterial pressure in the conscious cal. J
REFERENCES
Pharm Meth 1:6l, 1978
21. Kobayashi DL. Peterson ME, (Graves TK, ct al. Hyper-
tension in cats with chronic renal failure or byperthy
roidism. J Vet. Intcin Med 4:58. 1990
1. Kaplan NM. Hypertension: Prevalence, risks, and effect
22. Klevans LR, Hirkaler G, Kovacs JL. Indircct blood pres-
of therapy. Ann Intern Med 98:705, 1983
sure determination by Doppler technique in renal hy-
2. Zanchetti A. What blood prcssure level should be
pertensive cats. An J Physiol 237:H720, 1979
treated? /n Earagh I.H, Brenner BM (eds): Hyperten-
23. Bodey AR, Systemic hypertension in the dog-fact or
sion: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Management.
fiction? Proceedings, 18th Annual Waltham/OsU Sym-
New York, Raven Press, 1990, p 1967
posium: Cardiology. Vernon, CA, 1994. p 46
 3. Mancia G, Bertinieri G, Grassi G, et al. Effects of blood
24.
National Center for Health Statistics. In Rowland W,
pressurce measurement by the doctor on patient's blood
Roberts J (eds): Blood pressure levels and hypertension
pressure and heart ratc. Lancet 2(8352):695, 1983
1.
Rocchini AP, Moorehead C, Wentz E, el al. Obesity-
Advance data frorm vital and health statistics. No. 84,
induced  bypertension in the  dog.  Hypertension
DHHS Pub. No. (PHS) 82-1250. Hyatisville, MD, Public
9(Suppl 111):11-64, 1987
Health Service, October 8, 1982
4a. Wagner AE, Brodbelt MA. Arterial blood pressure
25. Kaplan NM. Systemic hypertension. In Braunwauld E
monitoring in anesthetized aninais. J An Vet Assoc
(ed): Heart Disease. 4thi ed. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
210:1279, 1997
ders, 1992, p 852
5. Chalifoux A, Dallaire A, Blais D, et al. Evaluation of
26. Grundy SM, Greenland P, Herd A, el al. Cardiovascular
the arterial blood pressure of dogs by two noninvasive
 and risk factor evaluation of healthy American adults.
mcthods. Can J Comp Med 49:419, 1985
Circulalion 75:1340A, 1987
6. Kalltt AI. Cowgil ID. Hypertensive states in the dog.
27. Kannel WB, Sorlie P. Hypertension in Framingham. In
Scientific Proceedings, American College of Veterinary
Paul O (ed): Epideiniology and Control of Hyperten-
Internal Medicine, 1982, p 79 
sion. Miami, Syinposia Specialists, 1975, p 553
7. Lupu AN, Maxwell MH, Kaufinan J, et al. Experimental
28. Littman MP, Robertson JL, Bovee KC. Spontaneous sys-
unilateral renal artery constriction in the dog. Circ Res
temic hypertension in dogs: Five cases (1981-1983). J
30:567, 1972
Am Vet Med Assoc 193:486, 1988
8. Anderson L.J, Fisher EW. The blood pressure in canine
29. Littman MF. Spontaneous systeinic hypertension in
interstitial nephritis. Res Vet Sci 9:304, 1968
 dogs: Abstrac1. Sci Proc Br Sinall Anirm Vet Assoc Con-
9. Freundlich J, Detweiler DK, Hance HE. Indirect blood
gress, 1991, p 119
pressure determination by the ultrasonic Doppler lech-
30.
Valtonen MH, Oksanen A. Cardiovascular disease and
nique in dogs. Curr Ther Res 14:73, 1972
nephritis in dogs. J Small Anin Pract 13:687, 1972
10. Wakerlin GF. Normotension and hypertension in the
31. Doursout MF, Chelly JE, Wouters P, et al. Effect of
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 102:346, 1943
gender in centrally induced angiotensin I hyperten-
11. Delweiler DK, Iraulvelter E. Hypertension in dogs, inci-
sion in dogs. Hypertension 15(Suppl 2):1117. 1990
810 EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
32. Liuman MP. Spontaneous systenic hypertension in 24
of human oscillomeuric blood pressure monitors for
cats. I Vet Intern Med 8:79, 1994
use in dogs. Am J Vet Res 51:1439, 1990
33. Littman MP. Ccrebrovascular accidents in cats with
55. Vincent IC. Michell AR, Ieahy RA. Noninvasive mca-
spontancous systeinic hypertension, Abstract. Br Small
surement of arterial hlood pressure in dogs: A potential
Anim Vet Assoc (BSAVA) Congress, 1991, p 156
indicator for the identification of strcss. Res Vet Sci
 34. Morgan RV. Systemic hyperlension in four cats: Ocular
54:195, 1993
and medical findings. J Ain Anin Hosp Assoc 22:615,
 56. McLeish 1. Doppler ultrasonic arterial pressure mcar
1986
surement in the cat. Vet Rec 100:290, 1977
35. I.csser M. Fox PR. Bond BR. Assessment of hyperten-
 57. Grandy JL., Dunlop CI, Hodgson DS, et al. Evaluation
sion in 40 cats with left ventricular hypertrophy by
of the Doppler ultrasonic method of measuring systolic
Dopplershift sphygmomanometry J Small Anim Pract
arterial blood pressure in cats. Am J Vet Res 53:1166.
33:55.1992
1992
36. Stiles J, Polzin D], Bistner SI. The prevalence of rctinop-
 58. Binns SH, Sisson ID. Buscio DA, ct al, Doppler ultraso-
athy in cats with systemic hypertension and chronic
nographic oscillometric sphygrnomanomeric, and pho-
renal failure or byperulyroidism. J Am Anin Hosp
toplethysmographic techniques for noninvasive blood
Assoc 30:564, 1994
pressure measurement in anesthetized cats. J Vet Intern
37. Turner Jl. Brogdon JD, Lees GE, et al. Idiopathic hy-
Med 9:405, 1995
pertension it a cat with sccondary hypertensive reti-
59. Ross LA. Hypertensive discasc. In E.ttinger S] (cd): Text-
nopathy associated witli a high-salt diet. J Am Anim
 book of Veterinary Interual Medicine. 3rd ed. Philadel-
IIosp Assoc 26:647, 1990
phia, WB Saunders, 1989, p 2047
38. Ilamilton WF, Pund ER, Slauglter RF、 el al. Blood
60. Twedt DC., Wheeler SL. Pleochronocytoma in the dog.
pressure values in street dogs. Am J Physiol 128:233,
Vet Clin North Am 14:767, 1984
061
Gl. Berne RM, Levy MN. Hemodynamics. In Berne RM,
39. Katz JI, Skom JHI, Wakerlin GE. Pathogenesis of sponta-
A0 sno1 s pa puz, xsoosud :(spa) NW Aaor1
ncous antd pyclonephritic hypertension in the dog. Circ
Mosby, 1988
Res 5:137, 1957
62. Chabanel A, Chien S. Blood viscosity as a factor in
40. Rubin I.F. Atlas of Veterinary Ophthalmoscopy. Phila-
human bypertension. Jn Iaragh JH, Brenner BM (eds):
delphia, Lca & Febiger, 1974, pp 110, 132
Hypertension: Pathophysiology. Diagnosis, and Manage-
41. Ruhin I.F. Ocular manifestations of arleriosclerosis and
ment. New York, Raven Press, 1990. p 329
lypertension in dogs. Proc Am Coil Ve1 Ophthalmol
63. Levi E, Baskurt OK, Dikmenoglu N. ct al. Efect of
6:56,1975
erytlirocyte defornability on renal hemodynamics and
42. McIntyre WIM, Montgomery G1. Renal lesions in Lepto-
plasrma renin activity. Ani J Nephrol 12:37, 1992
spirt canicota infection in dogs. J  Pathol Bacteriol
Isuda K, Shima H, Takeda J, et al. The role of endoge-
64:145. 1952
nous Na , K -adenosine triphosphatase inhibitory fac-
43. Stainler ], Katz LN, Rodbarrd S. Serial renal clearances
tor in the regulation of ineimbrane fluidity of erythro-
in dogs with nephrogenic and spontaneous hyperten-
cytes in esscntial lypertension. J 1Ilypertens 10:657,
sion. J Exp Med 90:511, 1949
1992
44. Paulseu ME, Allen TA. Jaenke RS, ct al. Artcrial hypcr-
65. Bovee KC, Papanck PE, Skelton MM, el al. Lability of
tension in two canine siblings: Ocular and systemic
blood pressure in genetically bypertensive dogs using
manifestations. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:287, 1989
21-hour monitoring. J Vet Intern Med 6:116, 1992
45. Gwin RM, Gelatt RN, Terrall TG, et al. IIypertensivc
66. MarinJ, Sutherland CJ, Zbrozyna AW. Habituatior and
relinopathy associated with hypothyroidisin, hypercho-
conditioning of the dcfensc rcactions and their cardio-
lesterolenia, and renal failure in a dog. J Am Anin 
vascular components in cats and dogs. Pllugers Arch
Hosp Assoc 11:200, 1978
365:37,1976
46. Breitschwerdt EB, Turk MAM, Glaze MB, et al. Chronic
67. Kutz SA, Detweiler DK, Cimprich RE, ct al. FEvaluation
azotemia aund hypertension in two Bluetick Coonhound
of a dircc1 blood pressure measurenent technique for
siblings. Comp Cont Ed 8:487, 1986
canine toxicity stundies. Fundam Appl Ioxicol 5:391,
47. Bovee KC, Liuman MP, Crahtrce BJ, ct al. Essential
1985
hypertcusion in a dog. J Aim Vet Med Assoc 195:81.
68. Engeland WC, Miler P, Gann DS. Pituitary-adrenal and
1989
adrenomedullary rcsponscs to noise in awake dogs. Am
48. Tippett FE, Padgett GA, Eyster G. Primary hypcrtension
 J Physiol 258:R672, 1990
in a colony of dogs. Hypertension 9:49, 1987
69. Iiuule RC. Physiology of the Heart and Circulation. 3rd
49. Bovee KC, Douglas PS. Ahnormal left ventricular shapc:
ed. Chicago, Ycar Book, 1985, p 329
   f s    
70. Guyton AC. Textbook of Medical Physiology. 8th cd.
4:117, 1990
Philadclphia, WB Saunders, 1991
50. Blanchard GI., Eyster GE, Carrig CB, ct al. Primary
 71. Franklin SS, Wcher MA. Measuring hypertensive cardio-
esscntial bypcrtension in a Siberian Husky dog. Fed
vascular risk: The vascular overload concept. Ain Heart
Proc 38:1350, 1979
1128:793, 1994
51. Dhupa , Litman P. Epistaxis. Comp Cont Id 14:
72. Pranzatelli MR, DeVivo DC. The role of the central
1038,1992
nervous system in blood pressure regulation. In Ioggie
52. Williauns GH. Ilypertensive vascular disease. In Wilson
 JMH (cd): Pediatric and Adolescent Hypertecnsion. Ox-
[D. Braumwald E. Issclbacher KJ. et al. (eds): Harrison's
ford, Blackwell Scientific, 1992, p 53
Principles of Internal Medicinc. New York, McGraw-
73. Niarchos AP, Pickering IG, Casc 1DB, el al. Role of
Hill, 1991, p 1001
53. Wessale JI., Smith IA, Reid M, ct al. Indirect ausculta-
'The cardiovascular effects of converting enzyme: inhibi-
tory systolic and diastolic pressures in the anesthetized
tion in normotensivc subjects. Circ Res 45:829, 1979
dog. Am1 J Vet Res 46:2129, 1985
74. Dzau VJ, Burt DW, Pratl RE. Molecular biology of the
54. Hunter,JS, McGrath C], Thatcher Cl), ct al. Adaptation
renin-angiotensin system. Am I Physiol 255:F563, 1988
SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION: RECOGNITION AND TREATMENT 811
75. Guylon AC, Hall JE, Coleman TG, et al. The dominant
agnosis, and Management. New York, Raven Press,
role of the kidneys in long-term arterial prcssure regu-
1990, p 521
91. Mertz BP, Pfister R, Brueckner R, et al. Rhegmatoge-
Bremer BM. Hypertension: Pathophysiology, Diagno-
nous retinal detachment in a hypertensive dog. Lens
sis, and Management. 2nd ed. New York, Raven Press,
Fye Toxic Res 7:67, 1990
1995, p 1211
92. Preiswerk G, Breitenfeld K. Examination of the eye of
76. Blaustein MP. Sodium ions, calciun. ions, blood pres-
renal hypertensive dogs. Expericntia 40:158, 1984
sure regulation, and hypertension: A reassessment and
93. Casale PN, Devereux RB, Miliner M, et al. Valhte vof left
a hypothesis. An J Physiol 232:C165, 1977
ventricular measurements of left ventricular mass in
77. Nicholson JP. Resnick IM, Cigarroa J The pressor cf
predicting cardiovascular morbid events in hypertensive
fect of sodium-volume cxpansion is calcium mediated.
men. Ann Intern Med 105:173, 1986
Am J Hypertens 4:904, 1991
94.Ely DL., Turner ME.Hypertension in the spontancously
78. Tobian L. rhe proteclive effects of high-potassium diets 
hypertensive rat is linked to the Y chromosoine. Hyper-
in hypertension, and the mechanisms by which high-
tension 16:277, 1990
NaCl dicts produce hypertension---a personal view. ft
95. Detweiler DK, Cox RH, Alonso R, et al. Characteristics
laragh JH, Brcmer BM (eds): Hypertension: Patho-
of thc Greyhound cardiovascular system. Fed Proc
physiology, Diagnosis, and Managemcnt. New York, Ra-
34:399, 1975
ven Press, 1990. p 49
 96. Cohen MV. Coronary vascular reserve in the greyhound
79. Meyer I. Similarities in cellular proliferativc mecha-
with  left
ventricular
hypertrophy. Carliovasc Res
20:182, 1986
Brenner BM (eds): Hypertension: Pathophysiology, Di-
97.
Dctweiler DK, Cox RI I, Alonso R, ct al. IIemodymamie
agnosis, and Management. 2nd ed. New York, Raven
characteristics of thie young adull Greyliound. Fed Proc
Press, 1995. p 299
33:360,1974
80. Braunwald F. The physical cxamination. In Braunwald
98. Cox RH, Bagshaw RJ, Detweiler DK. Baroreceptor re-
F. (ed): Heart Diseasc: A Iexibook of Cardiovascular
lex cardiovascular control in mongrel dogs and racing
Medicine. 41h ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992.
greyhounds. Am J Physiol 249:H655, 1985
p 21
99. Bovee KC, Littman MP, Saleh F, et al. Essential hyper-
 80a. Jensen J, IIenik RA, Brownfield M, ct al. Plasma renin
tension in dogs: A new animal model. J Hypertens
activity and angiotensin l and aldosterone concentra-
(Suppl 5) 4:S172. 1986
tions in cats with hypertension associated with chronic
100. Thomas jS, MeConnell MF, Saleh F ct al. Platelet aggre
renal discasc. Arn ,J Vet Res 58:535, 1997
galion and dense granule secretion in a colony of dogs
81. Nakamoto II, Suzuki H, Kagayama Y. ct al. Deprcssor
withi spontaneous hypertension. J 1lypcrtens 10:1493,
systems contribute to hypertension induced by gluco-
1992
corticoid cxcess in dogs. J Hypertens 10:561, 1992
101. Pascoe PJ, Ikiw JF, Stiles J. ci al. Arlerial hypertension
82. Nakamoto H, Suzuki H, Kagayana Y, et al. Charactcr-
associated with topical ocular use of phenylephrine in
ization of alterations of hemodynamics and neuroendo-
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1562, 1994
crine hormones in dexamethasone-induced hyperten-
102. Spangler WL, Gribble DH. Experinental vitanin D tox-
sion in dogs. Chin Exp Hypertens |A| 13:587, 1991
icity and hypcrtcnsion in the dog. Vet Pathol 12:66,
83. Saruta I, Suzuki H, Handa M, el al. Multiple factors
1975
contribute to the pathogenesis of hypertension in Cush-
103.
Vig MM. Nicotine poisoning in a dog. Vet Hum Toxicol
ing's syndromc. J Clin Endocriol Metab 62:275, 1986
32:573,1990
104. Hsu WH, Lu ZX, Hembrough FB. Efect of xylazine on
84. Lohrmcier ‘TE, Kastner PR. Chronic effecis of ACTH
and corlisol excess on arterial pressure in normotensive.
heart fate and arterial hlood prcssurc inl couscious
dogs, as influenced by atropine, 4aninopyridine, doxa-
and hyperlensive dogs. Hyperlension 4:652, 1982
pram, and yohimbinc. J Am Ve1 Med Assoc 186:153.
85. Folkow B. The structural factor in hypertension: With
1985
special enphasis on the altercd gcomctric. design of
105. Middleton DJ, 1kiw, JE, Watson ADJ. Physiologic effects
the systemic resistance arterics. In Laragh [H, Brenner
of thiopentone, ketarmine and CT 1341 in cats. Res Vet
BM (cds): IIypertension: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis,
and Managcment. 2nd ed. New York, Ravcn Press,
Sci 32:157,1982
105a. Alderman MIl, Marantz. PR. Clinical trials as a guide
1995, p 481
to intervention. Jn Iaragh JH, Brenner BM (cds): 1ly-
86. Wehberg KE, West DB, Kicswetter C, ct al. Barorcflex
pertension: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Manage-
sensitivity in the canine modcl of obesity-induced hy-
nent. 2nd ed. New York, Raven Press, 1995, p 2487
pertension. Am I Physiol 259:R981, 1990
106. O'Brien DJ, Chapman WH, Rudd FV, et al. Carotid
87. West DB. Wehberg KE, Kieswetter K, ct al. Blunted
loop nethod of blood pressure mcasureinent in the
natriuretic response to an acutc sodiun load in obese
dog- J Appl Physiol 30:161, 1971
hypertensive dogs. Hypcrtension 19 (Suppl 1):196, 1992
107. Ferris HW, Hynes JF. Indirect hlood pressure readings
 88. IIall [E, Brands MW, Dixon wX, et al. Ohesity-induced
in dogs: Description of method and report of results. ]
hypertension: Renal function and systenic hemody-
Lab Clin Med 16:597, 1931
namics. Hypertension 22:292, 1993
108. Allen FM. Auscultatory estimation of thc blood pres-
 89. Khalil RA, van Brcenen C. Calcium mobilization and
sure of dogs. J Metahol Res 4:431, 1923
homcostasis in vascular smooih nuscle and their rele-
109. MacMahon S, Peto R, Cutler ,J, et al. Blood pressure,
vancc to hypertension. In laragh JH, Brenner BM
stroke, and coronary heart discasc. Part I: Prolonged
(eds): I lypertcnsion: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and
dlifferences in blood pressure: Prospective observational
Management. 2nd ed. New York, Raven Press. 1995,
studies corrccted for the regresson lilution bias. Lan-
p 523
ce1335:765,1990
90. Schwartz SM, Majesky MW, Dilley RJ. Vascular remodel-
110. Patnaik AK, Erlandson RA, Licberman PlI, et al. Extra-
ing in hypcrtension and atherosclerosis. In Laragh JH,
adrenal phcochromocytoma (paraganglioma) in a cal.
Brenncr BM (cds): Hypertension: Pathophysiology, Di-
J Am Vet Med Assoc. 197:101, 1990
812
2EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS ON THE HEART
110a. Henik RA, Sryder PS, Volk LM. Treatmenl of systemic
129. Rose BD. Diuretics. Kidney Int 39:336, 1991
hypertension in cats with amlodipine besylate. J An Vel
130. Boles Ponto LL, Schocnwald RD. Furoscmide (frusen-
Med Assoc 33:226, 1997
ide): I1. A pharmacokinctic/pharmacodynamic review.
111.
Ortega T, Feldman E, Cowgill I., et al. Evaluation of
(Clin Pharmacokinet 18:460, 1990
arlerial hlood pressure (BP) and urine protein/crcati-
131. Strasscr RH, Ihi-Vahl R, Marquetant R. Molecular biol-
nine ratio (UP/C) in dogs with canine Cushing's syn-
Dgy of adrenergic receptors. J Hypertens 10:501, 1992
drome (CCS). J Vet Intern Med 8:164, 1994
132. Dontenwil M.Tibirica E, Grency H, et al. Role of
112. Houston MC. New insighis and new approaches for
tlie trcatinent of essential hypcrtcnsion: Selection of
J Cardiol 74:3A, 1994
therapy based on coronary heart discase risk factor
133. van Zweiten PA. α-Adrenoccptor-blocking agents in the
analysis, henodynainic profiles, quality of life, and sub-
treatmcnt of hypertension. In Laragh JH, Brenner BM
scts of hypertension. Am Heart J 117:911, 1989
(eds): Hypcrtension: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and
113.
The 1988 report of the Joint National Committee on
Managemenl. 2nd ed. New York, Raven Press, 1995,
detection, evaluation, and treatnent of high blood
pp 2917
pressure. Arch Intern Med 148:1023, 1988
134. Sinaiko AR. Influcnce of adrencrgic nervous system o1
114.1
 Kaplan NM. Treatment of hypertension: Rationale and
vasodilator-induccd renin release in the conscious ral.
goals. In Clinical Hypcrtension, Balinore, Williams &
Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 167:25, 1981
Wilkins, 1994, p 145
135. Meier J. β-Adrenoceplor-blocking agents. Cardiology 64
115, Stamler R, Stamler J, Grimm R, cl al. Nutritional ther
(Suppl 1):1, 1979
apy for high
blood pressurc. 1 Am Med Assoc
135. Fitzgerald JD. The applied pharmacology of beta-adre-
257:1484, 1987
noceptor agonists (beta-blockers) in rclation to clinical
116. Glaze MB. Crawford MA, Nachreiner RF, et al. Ophthal-
outcomes. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 5:561, 1991
mic corticosteroid therapy: Systemic effects in the dog.
137. Izzo JL Jr, Horwitz D, Kciser HR. Physiologic mecha-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:73, 1988
nisms opposing the hemodynamic effects of prazosin.
117.
Krieger DR, Landsberg 1. Neuroendocrine mecha-
Clin Pharmacol Ther 29:7, 1981
nisms in obesity-related hypertension. In Laragh JH,
138. Kincaid-Smith Ps. Alpha blockade. An overvicw of eff-
Brenner BM, Kaplan NM (eds): Perspectives in Hyper-
cacy data. Am J Med 82:21. 1987
lension. Vol 2: Endocrine Mechanisms in Hypertension.
139. Cohn JN, Archibald DG. Ziesche S, et al. Elfect of
New York, Raven Press, 1989, p 105
yasodilator therapy on mortality in chronic congestive
118. Anderson B, Flam M, Wallin BG. et al. Effect of encrgy
heart failurc: Results of a Veterans Administration Co-
restricted dict. on sympathetic muscle ncrvc activity in
operative Study. X Engl J Med 314:1547, 1986
obese women. Hypertension 18:783, 1991
140. Opie L.I1. Role of vasodilation in the antihypertensive
119. Franssila-Kallunki A, Rissanen A, Ekstrand A, et al. Ef-
fects of wcight loss on subsurate oxidation, cnergy cx-
thcrapy of combined hypertension and angina. Cardio-
vasc Drug Ther 2:369, 1988
An J Clin Nutr 55:356. 1992
141. Lin M-S, McNay JL, Shepherd AMM, et al. Incrcascd
120. Kempner W. Treatment of hypertensive vascular discase
plasma norcpinephrine accompanies persistent tacliy-
with rice diet. Am J Med 4:545, 1948 
cardia after hydralazine. Hypertension 5:257, 1983
121. Cutler [A. Follman D, Flliot P. ct al. An overview of
142. van den Mciracker AH, Man in'1 Veld AJ, Admiraal PU,
randomized trials of sodiun reduction and blood prcs-
ct al. Partial escape of angiotensin converling enzyme
surc. 1Iypertension 17(Suppl 1):27, 1991
122. Bovee KC. Variance of blood pressure response to oral
treaunent: Does it exist and does it affect the antlyper
sodium intake in hypertensivc dogs. J Vet Intern Med
tensive response? J Hypertens 10:803,1992
4:126, 1990
143. Gavras H, Garvas I, Textor S, et al. Effect of angiotensin
123. Kaplan N. Systemic hypertension therapy. In Braunwald
E (ed): Heart Disease: A Texthook of Cardiovascular
plasma renin activity, and plasma aldosterone in cssen-
Medicinc. 4th cd. Philadelphia, WB Saundcrs, 1992,
tial hypertension. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 46:220, 1977
p852
144. Quilley J. Duchin KL, Hudes EM, cl al. The antihyper-
124. Cowgill I.D, Kallel AJ. Recognition and management
tensive effect of captopril in cssential hypcrtension:
of hypertension in the dog. In Kirk Rw (ed): Current
Relationship to prostaglandins and the kallikrcin-kinin
Vetcrinary Therapy VII1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
system.,J Hypertens 5:121, 1987
1983, p 1025
145. Wang D-H, Prewitt RL.. Captopril reduces aortic micro-
125. Harlan WR, lIarlan IC. Blood pressure and calciun
vascular growth in hypxrtensive and normotensive rats.
and magncsinum intake. In Laragh JH, Brenner BM
Hypertension 15:68, 1990
(cds): Hypertension: Pathophysiology. Diagnosis, and
146. Tolins J, Raij L. Antibypertensive therapy and the pro-
Manageinent. 2nd cd. New York, Raven Press, 1995,
gression of chronic renal disease: Are there renoprotec-
p 1143
tive drugs? Semin Nephrol 11:538. 1991
126. Kurtz IW, Morris RC Jr. Dietary chloride as a detcrmi
147. Fox PR. Thc cffect of drug therapy on clinical charac-
nant of "sodium-dependent" hypertension. Science
teristics and outcounes of dogs with hcart failure. Scien-
222:1139, 1983
tific Proccedings, 10th Annual Veterinary Medical Fo-
127. Iacono JN, Dougherty RM. Blood pressure and fat in-
run, Am Coll Vet Int Med, 1992. p 592
takc. In Laragh JH, Brenner BM (eds): Hyperlension:
148. Fox PR, Sisson DD. Angiotcnsin-converting cnzyne in-
Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Management. New
hibitors: Current uses. In Bonagura JD, Kirk Rw (eds):
York, Raven Press, 1990, p 257
Kirk's Current Veterinary Thcrapy. Vol Xll. Philadel-
128. Joint National Committee. The fifth report of the Joint
phia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 786
National Committee on detcction,
evaluation, and
149. Longhofer Sl., Ericsson GF, Benitz AM, ct al. Renal
treatmcnt of high blood pressure (JNC V). Arch Intern
effects of two starting doses of enalapril maleate in dogs
Med 153:154, 1993
with hcart. failure. J Vet Intern Med 7:124(A), 1993
SYSTEMIC HYPERTENSION: RECOGNITION AND TREATMENT 813
150. Wysocki M, Persson B. Bagge U, et al. Flow resistance
anlodipinc hesylatc in normotensive cats and cats
     s e 
with systemic hypertcnsion. J Vet Intern Med 8:147.
the calcium antagonist isradipine. Eur J Clin Pharmacol
1994
43:463. 1992
155.
Henik RA, Snyder PS, Volk LM. Amlodipine besylate
l5l. Pion PD. Current uses and hazards of' calcium channel
therapy in cats with systenic arterial hypertension scc-
blocking agents. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's
ondary to chronic renal disease. J Vet Intern Med
Current Veterinary Therapy. Vol Xl. Philadelphia, WB
8:145, 1994
Sauders, 1992. p 684
155a. Snyder PS. Blinded clinical trial of amlodipine in cats
152. Aikins C, Johnson L, Kccne B, ct al. Diltiazein pharma-
withi hypertension (Abstr). J Vet Int. Med 11:139, 1997
cokinetics and pharmacodynainics in cats. J Vet Intern
156. Calhoun DA, Oparil S. Treatment of hypertensivc crisis.
Med 8:114. 1994
N Engl 1 Med 323:1117. 1990
153. Opie I.H. Calcium channcl antagonists. Part I: Funda-
157. Paulson OB, Strandgaard S. Hypcrtcnsive disease and
inental properties: Mechanisms, classification, sites of
cercbral circulation. In Laragh JH, Brenner BM (eds):
action. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 1:4l1, 1987
Hypertension: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Manage-
154. Snyder Ps. Evaluation of the antihypertensivc agent
men. 2nd ed. New York, Raven Press, 1995, p 465
VII
Cardiovascular
Pathology
cardiovascular
36
Pathology
SI-KWANG LIU
PHILIP R. FOX
THE ROLE OF CARDIOVASCULAR
PATHOLOGY IN PRACTICE
 Clinical interest in veterinary cardiology began in the 1960s, stimulated
by information gaincd from postmortem1 evaluations. Despite many scientific
advances, the goal of reducing cardiovascular morbidity and mortality re-
mains one of the most vexing challenges. Accordingly, interaction between
practitioner and pathologist is cssential to maximizc clinical insight, validate
diagnostic and treatment methods, and determine pathologic consequences
of heart disease (Table 36-1).
EXAMINATION OF THE HEART AND GREAT VESSELS
A thorough and careful cardiovascular autopsy is well worth the time and
effort. Dissection techniques are best guided by clinical information, as
necropsy without. insightful clinical input reduccs useful outcome. Cardiovas-
cular anatomy and methods for examining the hcart are described in chap-
ters 2 and 37, respectively. Detection of gross or histologic cardiovascular
lesions may suggest but not guarantee related clinical signs. Lesions can
be directly associated with functional significancc, or they may hold little
relationship to clinical signs and prognosis.
HEART FAILURE
Heart failure is not a disease but a clinical syndrome. It is usually associated
with severe cardiovascular structural or functional abnormalities, sympathetic
and renin-angiotensin-aldosteronc systen activation (chapters 3, 1l), and
 poor prognosis. Congestive heart failure is said to be prescnt when transcapil-
lary fluid movement. cxcccds compensatory lynphatic drainage owing to
elevated venous pressures, and plasma filtrate accuumulates in the lungs as
pulmonary edema, or in serosal body cavities as effusions.
817
818
CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY
CARDIOVASCULAR RESPONSES AND
TABLE 36-2
PATHOLOGY IN HEART FAILURE
 Characteristic Differences: Cell Death Caused by
Necrosis and Apoptosisa
Cardiovascular pathology may be directly attribul-
Necrosis
Apoptosis
able to congenital or acquired diseases causing struc-
Morphologie Differences
tural, functional, or inflammatory abnormalities.
. In
Cell death
Cells die in groups Deletion of single
addition, lesions may result from altered hemodynan-
cells
ics, neuroendocrine or immune system activation, or
Ccll membrane changes
Loss of inlegrity
No integrity loss:
metabolic derangements.2. * Extracardiac manifesta-
meinbrane
blebbing
 tions of a failing heart are often present.
Cell morphology changcs
Cellular swelling
Cells shrink
and lysis
(ultinately form
CARDIAC HYPERTROPHY
pgondode,
Onc of the major cardiac adjustments to increased
Inflammalory responsc
Yes
No
demand for cardiac work is compensatory hypcrtro-
Phagocylosis
By macrophages
By adjacent.
phy.* Two classic forms of left ventricular hypertrophy
normal cells, some
havc bcen described.? In concentric hypertrophy, ventricu-
macrophages
lar wall thickening results from adding sarcomeres in
L ysosoinal integrity
Ieakage
lntact
 Parallel without an increase in internal chamber diam-
(Chronatin changes
Clumping aned
Compacted into
eter. It is a typical resporise to pressure overloads such
poorly delined
uniformly dense
aggrcgation
melleria]
as aortic stenosis or sustained severe arterial hyperten-
Biochcmical Cha
sion, and it is relatcd to increased ventricular systolic
Energy
Requined
Not required
wall tension and incrcased afterload. Eccentric hypertro
Process
I.oss of ion.
Tightly regulated
phy causes a proportional increase in ventricular wall
hoinerstasis
process (synthetic
thickness and internal chamber diameter via synthesis
regulalion
and activation
of sarcomeres in scries. Ir is common in volume ovcr-
(scd.ns
load and is associatcd with a number of advcrse conse-
Synthesis requirements
No requirement
Requircs
for protein (or
quences, inchuding increased diastolic wall tension.5
nucleic acid
synthesis
synthesis
MYOCARDIAL CELL DEATH
Genc transeription
Xo new
De nouu
transcription
transcription
Two mechanisms of cell death have been reported.
Eflects on DNA
Randon DNA
Nonrandoin
One is accidental cell death through necrosis. 'The
dligcstion
oligonuclcosonal
 other is programmed deaih through apoptosis. Each
length DXA
fragmentation
has certain distinguishing features (Tabie 36-2).6-10
Fron Thonpson H], Srange R, Scedin Ij. Apoptosis in the gnesis and
prevention of cancer: Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1:597-602. 1992.
Necrosis
with permissiou.
Cellular necrosis, a passive proccss resulting from
lethal insult, is characterized by cell membrane rup-
mic reticulum and mitochondria, formation of granu-
ture and associated inflammation.6 7 This is typified by
lar mitochondrial matrix densities, and loss of calcium
cellular swelling, loss of cell membrane integrity and
and electrolyte homeostasis. These morphologic de-
breakdown, nuclear chromatin clumping into poorly
rangements often play a vital role in the deterioration
 defined masses, swelling and disruption of sarcoplas-
of cardiac fumction (Figs. 36-1 through 36-5).
TABLE 36-1
Apoptosis (Programmed Cell Death)
Five Key Cardiovascular Questions to Ask When
Seeking to Optimize Clinical Outcome
Apoptosis, also known as "progranmed cell death,"
1. When is dlie heart anatomically normal?
occurs in the absence of cell membrane rupture and
2. When is the necropsy exanination not the gold standard
inflammation. It is an active, regulated, energy-requir-
for diagnosis?
ing process under genetic control,-1 characlerized by
3. Are neeropsy abnorimalities (when prescnt) related to the
nuclear DNA fragnmentation. Nuclear chromatin be-
calise of deah and clinical signs during life?
4. Are dcteetible cardiovascular ahnommaliies helpful for
prognosis?
5. How do autopsy or biopsy lindings inprove accracy of
ated masses along the nuclear margius; the cytoplasm
condenses; nuclear fragmentation occurs; the cell sur-
noninvasive tests ancd therapies?
face develops pediculated protuberances and scparatcs
CARDIOVASCULARPATHOLOGY819
FIGURE36-1
Histologic sectionofventricularseptalmyocardium
from a 4year-old maleDoberman pinscher with
dilated cardiomyopathy.Myocytes areelongated,
wavy,and attenuatedand aresurroundedby
extracellular ground substance.Substantial areas of
myocyte degeneration andmyocytolysis are seen.
Notice a centrally situatedregionof extensive
myocytelosswith substitutedextracellularedematous
ground substance.H&E stain×100.
Fibrosis
phagocytized byadjacentcells.Morphologic andbio-
chemical features of cardiocyte apoptosis have been
Fibroblastshaveextensiveclonalheterogeneityand
reportedincanineleftventricularmyocardiumwith
diversitywithregard tomorphology,structuralprotein
experimental chronic heart failure,and in humans
synthesis,receptor expression,and their response to
with end-stage cardiomyopathy.1 Cardiocyte apoptosis
regulatory molecules.12 Fibrosis represents dispropor-
may thusplay aroleinheartfailure.
tionatestromalgrowthwithincreased myocardialcolla-
gen content.Abnormal fibrous tissue can be perivascu-
lar,interstitial,orendocardialinlocation.Itcanresult
PATHOLOGICALTERATIONSOFMYOCYTE
from tissue irritation,invasion,and other causes and
CONNECTIVETISSUE
isdeemedreactivefibrosis.Reparative(replacement)fibrosis
representsmicroscopic scarringinresponse tomyocyte
The heart is composed of parenchyma and stroma.
necrosis from any cause(see Fig.36-2;see also Color
Parenchyma consists of cardiac myocytes that are
Plates 11 and 12).Pathologic myocardial remodeling
highly differentiated and perform specialized func-
results when either form of fibrosis occurs.11
tions.Stroma contains cellular elements,including fi-
Mechanismsthatdictatehowandwhenmyocytes
broblasts and macrophages, which, in contrast, are
havebeen irreversibly injured,and thus destined for
not well differentiated,andwhosephysiologicbehavior
necrosis andpotentiallyreactive orreplacementfibro-
andphenotype are affectedby circulating and local
sis,are obscure.In cardiomyopathic cats,widespread
chemical mediators and signals.11
focalmyocardialcelldeathandreplacementfibrosis
FIGURE36-2
Histologic section ofleftventricularfreewall
myocardiumfrom a domestic short-hair cat with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.There is an extensive
region of massivereplacement fibrosis (lighter
appearing tissuerelative to darker stainingmyocytes
to the left of this image).Myocyte degeneration is
also evident.Masson's trichrome stainX 40.
820
CARDIOVASCULARPATHOLOGY
FIGURE36-3
Histologic section of myocardiumfrom an18-month-
oldmale,domestic short-hair catwith myocarditis.
Noticefocal infiltration of lymphocytes,plasma cells,
and neutrophils within and adjacent tomyocytes.
Myocyte degeneration and necrosis are evident,
especiallytoward thebottomrightof this
photomicrograph.H&E stainX150.
FIGURE36-4
FIGURE 36-5
Histologicsectionfrom theventricular septum of a6-year-old
Histologicsection of ventricular septal myocardiumfrom acatwith
domesticshort-haircatwithhypertrophiccardiomyopathy.Notice
hypertrophiccardiomyopathy.Three abnormal intramural
themarkedmyofiber disorganization;instead of the normal
coronary arteries are evidentThey exhibit severe luminal
parallelmyocyte orientation,themyocytesare arrangedatoblque
narrowing dueto smoothmuscleproliferationandincreased
orperpendicularanglesconstitutingtpeIberdisarray.In
connective tissue elements("small vessel disease').There is also
addition thereissomemyocytolysisandmyocytes areseparated by
mild to moderateintermyocytefibrosis anddiffuse myocytolysis,
severe plexiform fibrosis.H&E stainX100.
which is predominant adjacent toregions of fibrosis.H&E stainX
100.
CARDIOVASCULARPATHOLOGY821
occur,whichinfluences myocardial dysfunction,mor-
bidity, and mortality.As has been described in hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy,cardiomyocyte cell death and
fibrosis is frequently located proximal to abnormal
intramural coronary arteries, suggesting an associa-
tion.13.14
Morphologic studies of fibrous tissueresponses in
experimental models of arterial hypertension suggest
a causalrelationshipbetweenprogressive structural
myocardial remodeling that includes perivascular fi-
brosis extending into the interstitial space, and activa
tion of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.15. 16
The activities of fibroblast-like cells(myofibroblasts)to
regulate collagen turnover are thesubjectofmuch
investigation.These cells elaborate type lI and then
type I collagen, which is the major fibrillar collagen in
fibrous tissue.17.18
Interstitial Matrix Changes
Myocytes areenmeshed inanelaboratestromal
framework containing collagen, elastin, and other ele-
ments.19 The interstitial matrix,ofwhich collagen is
the major component,represents networks of pericel-
lular,interstitial,andfascicularconnective tissue.Myo-
FIGURE36-6
cardial cells are diffuselyinterconnected by this con-
Histologicsection ofventricular septal myocardiumfroma
nective tissue framework, which is composed of struts,
domestic short-hair cat with restrictive cardiomyopathy.The
morphology ofinterstitial collagen connectivetissue ismarkedly
pericellular weaves,and coiled perimysial fibers.This
altered andincludes increasedbundles ofperimysial coils and
internalmyocardialskeletalframeworkisthoughtto
accentuated fibrous weaves.ModifiedHortega silver stain×150.
participate in myocardial function, integrate individ-
ualmyocytes into three-dimensional conformational
changes during systole, and contribute to myocardial
fibrous thickening ofpulmonary capillarywalls.Occa
complianceduringdiastole.Whenalteredincardiac
sionally,infulminant,terminalpulmonaryedema,leu
disease,abnormal matrix architecture may contribute
kocytes accumulatein pulmonary capillaries,endothe-
to cardiac dysfunction.20. 21 Unlike pathologic fibrosis,
lial damage and alveolar type I epithelial cells are
whichcanbeidentifiedbystandardhematoxylin and
noted,and fibrin-rich fluid fills the alveoli.22
eosin orMasson's trichromestain,matrix components
EFFUSIONS
staining techniques (Fig.36-6).
Right-sidedheartfailureischaracterized by abdomi-
nal,pleural,and/or pericardial effusions,which are
PULMONARYEDEMA
generally sterile, obstructive transudates. Smears con-
Left-sided heart failure results in pulmonary edema.
tain a mixture of blood cells and lymphocytes,with a
Edematous lungs are wet and heavy, may not float, do
nucleatedcell-to-red cell ratioroughly equal tothat
notcollapsecompletelywhenthethoraxis opened,
of blood,and some mesothelial cells.With time,the
and oozeedema fluid from cut sections.Interstitial
effusionbecomesmodifiedandacquiresgreaternum-
edema may be clear or slightly yellow. Hemorrhage
bers of inflammatory cells and increased protein.In
causes a pinkish staining of fluid or foam.Microscopi-
long-standing effusions, mesothelial cells and macro-
cally, edema fluid is acidophilic or faintly granular,
phages may exhibit erythrophagia.23, 24 Occasionally,
filling alveoli,interstitium,and lymphatics.Protein
chylous effusion may occur;it appears milky white,
contentisverylow.Capillariesandlymphaticsaredis-
withmostlylymphocytesandvariablenumbersofneu-
tended.Intra-alveolar hemorrhage is evident.Alveolar
trophils,depending on the duration and degree of
macrophages("heart failure”cells)containing eryth-
pleuritis.25 With long-standing pleural effusions of
rocytes or hemosiderin are present and increase with
modified transudate or chyle,pleuritis may cause lung
thedurationofedema.Chroniccardiogenicedema
lobeborderstobecomefibroticorevencollapse.
andassociatedpulmonaryhypertensionmaycause
Chronic ascitesorpericardialeffusionmay result in
muscular hypertrophy of small pulmonary arteries and
fibrin deposition, especially evident around the liver
822
CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY
in the former, and adherent to epicardial surfaces in
dence has been reported as 6.8 (0.68%) per 1000 dogs
the latter.
al the University of Pennsylvania during 1987 to 1989,
and 8.5 per 1000 dogs from the nationwide Veterinary
Medical Data Base during the sane interval." In fe-
HEPATIC CONGESTION
 Passive hepatic congestion accompanying chronic
(2.8%) was reported at Angell Memorial Hospitalo
righ-sided heart failure causes time-related pathologic
and 19 per 1000 necropsies at the Aninal Medical
changes.26 Acute passive congestion results in a swollen
Center.* Inherited arrhythmias are rare, but ventricu-
liver that appears dark and bloody when sectioned.
 lar arrhythmias and sudden death have been reported
Little accentuation of the acinar pattern is evident.
in Gerinan shepherd dogs.*2
Extruded hepatic lymph is rich in clotting factors and
may cause large fbrin deposits on the capsule or be-
tween lobes. Microscopically, there is uniform sinusoi-
VENTRICULAR OUTFLOW
 dal engorgement, with rapidly following fatty change,
OBSTRUCTIONS
atrophy, and necrosis of periacinar hepatocyles. More
chronic passive congestion causes the capsule to as-
AORTIC STENOSIS
sume a finely nodular texture. Edges of the central
lobes become rounded. A reticulated acinar pattern is
Congenital fixed obstruction 1o left ventricular oul-
eade anu, s soas prs u sa
flow can be valvular, subvalyular, or supravalvular and
is caused by the contrast of red-colored periacinar
may be accompanied by other defects. In dogs, the
necrosis and blood replaccment with pale, slightly
stenosis is usually subvalvular and represents one of
raised periportal tissue conposed of fatty hepatocytes.
the most inportant canine devclopinental anoma-
IHistologically. fibrous tissue infiltrates the stroma and
e sisois renns pue eea pneost s gsl
periacinar zones, outlining sinple and compound
rare. Subaortic stenosis (SAS) is generally caused by a
acini ("'cardiac fibrosis").
subvalvular fibrous ring obstructing the LV outflow
tracl (see Figs. 8-19; 24-12, 24-19). A mode of inheri-
tance has been reported in Newfoundland dogs as
CLINICALPATHIOLOGY
polygenic or autosonal-dominant (with modifiers).
A variety of laboratory tests may be useful in diagnos-
This subvalvular obstruction may not necessarily be
ing cardiovascular abnormalities, assessing the effects
present at birthi and may develop within the first 4 t0
of drugs or cardiovascular disease on other organ sys-
8 weeks.34
In cats, subvalvular (see Fig. 2422A) and supravalvu-
teins, and revealing systemic and metabolic disorders
lar forms of congenital aortic stenosis have been rarely
causing or precipitating heart failure (chapter 33).
described;3 31. 35. 3% some cases may be confused with
Anemia and thyrotoxicosis may result in high-output
variants of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
heart failure (chapter 34). Hyperthyroidism and
chronic renal failure may causc arterial hypertension
 GROss FINDINGs. Several r1orphologic types of canine
(chapter 35). Elevations of serun creatine kinase, lac-
tate dehydrogenase, aspartate aninotransferase, and
SAS have been described from necropsy: (l) grade I
alanine aminotransferase may accompany coagulopa-
indicates the mildest forn, in which small, slightly
thics associaled with systemic throinboeinbolisu
raised nodules are present on the endocardial surface
(chapter 28). 1leartworm testing, cytologic evaluation
of effusions, biochemical profiles, and other tests pro-
aortic valve; (2) grade 2 indicates a narrow fibrous
vide useful information in selected cases.
ridge extending partially around the LV ouflow tract;
(3) grade 3 represents the most severe form. in which
a subaortic fibrous band, ridge, or collar completely
encircles the IV outflow tract.3a 37 In the rmos1 severe
CONGENITAL
cases, a fibroruscular collar can insert onto the ante
CARDIOVASCULAR DISORDERS
rior mitral valve leaflet. Aortic valve leaflets may be
thickened. The pressure overload of moderate to se-
vere SAS causes IV pressure overload and associaled
Congenital cardiovascular malformations are often
concentric IV hypertrophy; left atrial hypertrophy re-
dynamic anounalies that originate in fetal life (chapter
sults fron the elevated pressures required to fill the
1) and change during postnatal developinent (chapter
thick, stiff left ventricle; poststenotic dilatation of the
 24)* They represcnt structural abnormalities of the
ascending aorta occurs with moderate to severe SAS
heart, valves, or great vessels and constitute a small bu1.
(see Figs. 24-15, 24-22). Jet lesions may be prcsent.
clinically inportant cause of cardiovascular disease in
Bacterial endocarditis involving the aortic valves may
dogs and cats (chapters 23, 24)."* In canincs, the inci-
result from valvular endothelial injury. A less common
CARD10VASCULAR PATHOLOGY 823
form of fixed obstruction to IV outflow is a "tunnel"
annulus may be hypoplastic (see Fig. 242). Moderate
or "'tubular'’ aortic stenosis in which a fibroinuscular
to severe PS causes poststenotic dilatation of the main
charnel occupies a portion of thie IV outflow tract.
pulinonary artery (see Figs. 8-20A; 24-8, 2410); RV
 In felines, aortic valve leaflets are usually rmalformed
pressure overload with associated right ventricular hy-
rcgardless of the stenotic location. Affected cats are
pertrophy (sce Figs. 8-20B; 24-9); and tricuspid insuf-
often stunted, and acute lheart failure has been re-
ported to develop before 18 1nonths of age.*
lous coronary artery development rmay occur in some
 dogs, particularly brachycephalic breeds (see Fig. 24
HISTOLOGIC FEATUREs. The stenotic ring consists of
 3), in which a single coronary artery encircles the
collagen, loosely arranged reticular fibers. elastic fi-
stenotic RV outflow outlet and valve.*
bers, ground substance, and, occasionally, cartilage in
severe lesions.? Severc fibrous lesions 1nay encroach
HISTOLOGIC FEArLREs. Valvular changes include thick-
upon or affect the aortic valve cusps, which may them-
ening of the pulmonary valve spongiosa with loosely
selves be somewhat fibrotic. In cases of moderate lo
arranged connective tissue; bands of fusiform cells in
-snd aq eu sisy peipe 'ssoans ooe aras
a dense collagen network; and blood-flled, endothe-
ent (see Fig. 2413). Intranural coronary artery abnor-
lium-lined spaces, Ihe fibroclastic band of the reticil-
malities may be detected, including connective tissue
laris layer may be fragmented, reduccd, or absent.u 
and smooth muscle proliferation and degeneration of
thc vascular media.38. 399
OBSTRUCTION TO ATRIAL INFLOW:
PULMONIC STENOSIS
MITRAL AND TRICUSPID STENOSIS AND
Pulnonic stenosis (PS) is a coinmon canine congeni-
COR TRIATRIATUM
tal heart defect,2s. 10-iz but it is rarely detected as an
isolated lesion in the catal. 6 Obstruction to right
Although these disorders have becn reported infre-
ventricular ejection may occur at the infundibular, sub-
valvular, valvular, or supravalvular locations. In dogs,
quently,
thie
 jncrcasing  use  of  echocardiography
should increase antemortem diagnosis. Physiologic
pulmonary valve dysplasia is the most common form
conscquences are related to elevated venous filing
of PS (see Figs. 24-2, 24-3, Color Plate 3). Pulmonic:
stenosis has a hereditary basis in certain canine breeds
and has been shown to have a polygenic mode of
transmission in beagles. 2 It may be accompanied by
MITRAL AND TRICUSPID S7ENOSIS
other defects, especially tricuspid dysplasia. In cats,
isolated lesions are rare, but dysplasia of the pulmonic
Congenital mitral stenosis (MS) or tricuspid stenosis
valvc and infundibular hypertrophy have been re-
(TS) may involve the atrioventricular valve apparatus
ported   Valvular or subvalvular PS or both are com-
(i.c., annulus, valve leaflets, chordae tendineae, and
ponents of tetralogy of Fallot. Pulmonary artery atresia
 papillary muscles), or occur immediately above or con-
represents the extreme variant of Ps. Dogs may be
tiguous with the annulus (see Figs. 24-54, 24-56).27.
asymptomatic or develop low cardiac output with syn-
-51
 In dogs, mitral stenosis may be more coumnon
cope or lethargy, or righit-sided heart failure. Felines
in breeds that are prone to congenital mitral valve
are usually stunted, display intermittent dyspnea and
malformations, such as the bull terrier and Newfound-
cyanosis, and ultimately die within the first year of
land, and may be associated with other cardiac malfor-
lite.13. 44
GROss FINDINGs. In beagles withi pulrmonary valve ste-
valve complex malformation or, less cominonly, a su-
nosis, gross abnormalities comprised a spectrum of
pravalvular membrane,*1 Left aurial enlargement (see
lesions graded as follows:2 grade 1 — slight thickening 
Fig. 24-59) resulis principally from obstructior of
of pulmonary valve lealets with little or no fusion or
transmitral flow and secondarily from mitral regurgita-
hypoplasia, resulting in little or no outflow tract gradi-
tion. Lefl-sided CHF was observed in 11 of 15 affected
ent; grade 2 — 1noderate to severe thickening of pul-
dogs within l year of diagnosis in oc study," and in
monary valve leafets with fusion and/or hypoplasia
 all 3 cats from another report.3 Infrequently, MS may
resulting in moderate to severe outflow obstruction.
result from intracardiac tumors or vegetative endocar-
Other forins of PS are characterized by stricture of the
ditis in dogs, or from left atrial ball throunbi in cats.
main pulmonary artery above the valve (supraventricu-
lar PS) or narrowing of the right ventricular outhow
represent severe states of tricuspid valve dysplasia for
tract proximal to the pulnonic valve (subvalvular PS).
Some dogs with valvular Ps have fibrous thickening
immediately below the valves. The pulmonic valve
ment amnd right-sided heart failure.
824
 CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY
COR TRIATRIATUM
CONGENITAL DEFECTS CAUSING
SYSTEMIC-TO-PULMONARY (LEFT-TO.
This rarc lesion is caused by partition of either
atrium by an intra-atrial meinbrane of disputed em-
RIGHT) SHUNTING
bryogenesis, resuling in two compartments joined by
an opening or openings. The size of these openings
PATENT DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS
determines the degree of obstruction. Cor triatriatum
Normally the ductus arteriosus closes during the first.
dexter (see Fig. 24-60) is caused by an anomalous sep-
few days of life. If it remains patent, it causes lcft-to-
tum located within the right atrium or at the junction
right shunting of blood from the aorta to pulmonary
of the caudal vena cava and right atriun.i s7 This
m uau snoua paseasui 'sn 'ue shu pue aranie
usually results in clinical inanifestations of a Budd-
the ieft heart (see Figs. 1-5: 24-40). Patent ductus
Chiari-like syndrome (postsinusoidal portal hypcrtenl-
arteriosus (PDA) is the most comrmonly reported ca-
sion with hepatomegaly and ascites). Cor triatriatun
nine congenital heart anomaly2s s7 and is well recog-
sinister results from an LA partition.s Pulimonary
nized in the cat.cs 70 An inherited mode of transimission
cdema may develop.
has been described in canines.59
GROss FINDINGs. The PDA opens into thie main pul-
ATRIOVENTRICULAR VALVE DYSPLASIA
monary trunk just proximal to the pulrmonary artery
AND INSUFFICIENCY
bifurcation (sce Figs. 8-16; 24-22A, 24-39). In lef-1o-
righit shunting PDA, increascd volune overload causes
Malformations of the AV valves are prevalent in cais.
left ventricular dilation and hypertrophy: left atrial
 dilation; enlargenent of the aortic arch (descending
in which they constitute the most corrrmon congenital
disorder.+# In dogs, they are reporicd less frequenly
aorta) at the level of the PDA; and enlargement of the
main pulmonary artery. The main pulmonary artery
but predominantly in large breeds. Abnormalities cori-
Inay be dilated and display intimal fibrosis (i.e., jel.
prise a broad spectrum of structural and functional
lesions) near the ductus. Congestive heart failure (usur-
derangements in either the mitral or tricuspid valve
ally left-sided, occasionally biventricular) occurs in
complex—i.c., the annulus, AV valve leaflets, chordae
Imost animals if the PDA remains uncorrected. A non-
tendineae, papillary muscles, and associated myocar-
patent forne fruste diuerticulum nay occur in which the
dium. Generally, malformation causes atrioventricular
ductus is conpletely closed at onc end (usually at the
valve incompetence, but it may occasionally result in
pulmonary artery junction), causing an aortic ductus
stenosis. Other congenital heart anomalies may
be
diverticulum.2s, m, 02, s. 71 At least four Clinical types of
prescnt in affected animals, and nalformations of both
 PDA with varying patency have becn described: type I
AV valves often occur concomitantly.
(small PDA), no aneurysm; type II (medium-sized),
siall to medium-sized aneurysm; type 3a (large PDA
GROss FINpINGs. Atrioventricular valve complex alter
before CIIF). marked left-sided heart enlargeiment and
ations (sce Figs. 24-54 to 24-56) may include enlarged
Inediun to large ductus; type 3b (large PDA plus
annulus; valve leaflet shortening with thickening.
CHF), other conditions similar to 3a; and type 4 (large
rolled edges, or fused commissures; chordae tendineae
PDA plus pulnonary hypertension [cyanotic heart dis-
that are shortened and thickened (occasionally length-
ease]), large RA, RV, and main pulnonary artery.71
cned), with abnormal valve leaflet attachments and
 Occasionally, an aorticopulmonary septal defect (i.e..
alignmeiits (sometimes horizontally attached to leaf-
"window') occurs between the ascending aorta and
lets): upward malposition of atrophic or hypertrophic
 pulmonary trunk rather than a patent ductus arterio-
papillary muscles; or insertion of one papillary muscle
sus.72
dircctly into one or both valve leaflets. With tricuspid
 If pulimonary hypertension develops, RV hypertro-
valve dysplasia, thiere may be adherence or direct inser-
phy 1nay occur (see Fig. 24-41B, C). In right-1o-left
tion of the septal leaflel. onto the right ventricular
shunting PDA, a large-diameter ductus may be present
wall. Severe valve dysplasia may result in greater than
with pulmonary arterial medial hyperplasia, RV hyper-
normal heart weights, eccentric dilation of the affected
trophy, and hypoplasia of the LV, I.A, and ascending
ventricle, and marked atrial enlargement and hyper-
aorta.
Irophy. Congestive heart failure occurs in severe cases 
due to volume overload.
HISTOLOGIC FEATLREs. In the dog, failure of the duc-
tus to closc resulis from lack of normal or asymmctric
IHISToLOGIc FEATUREs. There is proliferation of spon-
 distribution of ducius-specific, circumferential snooth
giosa, hypoclastification, and irregular arrangement of
muscle in the fetal ductal wall and a reciprocal increase
fibrosa in affected leaflets. Endotlielium-lined, blood-
in clastic tissue in areas that should be muscular.7
filled cysts may occur in valve tissue.
These abnormalities preclude normal ductal sphincter
CARDI0VASCULAR PATHOLOGY 825
closure in response to increased oxygen tension after
thie cat. Complete endocardial cushion defects have
birth.
bcen terimed common AV canal, as all four cardiac cham-
bers coinmunicate. Affected animals usually develop
severe, generalized cardiomegaly, are stunted, and dic
ATRIAL. SEPTAL DEFECTS
of CHF before 1 year of age 28 30, 4-76
Atrial septal defects (AsDs) represent a through-
and-through cornmunication between the atria.2s. 7i-81
GROss FINDINGs. Predominant features include ab.
Although shunting depends upon the caliber of the
sence of atrioventricular septum; a cormmon atrioven-
tricular orifice with a common fibrous ring—or sepa-
orifice and the relative degree of systemic and pulmo-
nary circulatory resistance, blood usually shunts from
rate right and left AV valvular components; and
the left to the right atrium (see Fig. 24-27; Color
malformation of AV valves, including cleft anterior
Plates 7-9). Isolated ASDs are rare in dogs and cats;*8.
mitral leaflet or common atriovcntricular vave that
sn. 7A. 7-s1 they comprise an inportant component of
guards the orifice. The common AV orifice lies along
the endocardial cushion defect occuring most often
the samc horizontal plane, whereas norimal AV valves
in felines.7s. 7o AS1s are often present with other con-
have two separate orifices that lie in different planes.
genital heart anomalies (see Fig. 24-26). Large defects
with left-to-right shunts arc uncommon, but when pres-
VENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECTS
ent, may cause a volune overload and associated cn-
largeument of the RA, RV, and main pulmonary artery.
Ventricular septal defects (VSDs) are relatively corn-
mon in cats and perhaps occur less frequently in
GROss FINDINGs. Classification of ASDs is based upon
the anatomic region of the malformation (see Fig.
tive VSlDs, since the defect is usually small and systermic
1-3).27 Ostium primum defects lie in the lower atrial
pressures exceed right heart pressures (sec Fig. 24-35;
septurm (sec Figs. 24-25; 24-26B). They are uncom-
Color Plates 8, 9). They may also bc conponennts of
mon as isolated lesions and are more significant when
other malformations (tetralogy of Fallot, endocardial
they form part of a common AV canal (endocardial
cushion defect) and frequently appear withi other dis-
cushion defect). (Ostium secundum defects are the most
orders such as AV inalformations in cats.
conmon type; these involve the region of thie fossa
 Ovalis forming in the middle portion of the interatrial
GROss FINDiNGs. Most isolated, restrictive VSIs are
septum (see Figs. 8-2; 24-25). Ostium secundum de-
located high in the membranous portion of the inter-
fects may result from a shortened valve of the forainen
ventricular imlet septum, just beneath the scptal tricus-
ovale, excessive or ectopic resorption of the septum
pid valve leaflel (see Figs. 8-17A; 2431, 2432). As
primum, or a deficiency of septal growth, Sinus venosus
viewed from the left ventricular outflow tract, they
ASD is a rare variant of ostiurm secundum ASD, oc-
appear just beneath the aortic valve, when viewed
curring high in the atrial septum at the junction of
from thie right ventricle, they arc often described rela-
the cranial vena cava (see Fig. 8-3),8l A patent foramen
tive to the crista supraventricularis of the ventricular
ovale (see Fig. 24-26A) is not a true ASD) since atrial
inlet or outlet. They may be partially occluded by the
septa are present. It may be detected with conditions
tricuspid leaflet. Prolapse of an aortic valve cusp into
that increase right atrial pressurc (tricuspid insuff-
the defecl may 0ccur (sec Fig. 2433). Rarely, VSDs
ciency or tricuspid stenosis, or severe pulmonic steno-
may occur at other sites throughout the septun (see
sis). Its flaplike valve permits blood flow only fromn the
Fig. 8-17B). In largc, nonrestrictive VSDs in which pul-
righit to left atriun.
monary vascular resistance is normal, substantial left-
to-right shunting develops;: much of the shint volume
is pumped through the VSD into the pulmonary ar-
ATRIOVENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECTS
tery, to the lungs, and then returned to the 1.A, impos-
(ENDOCARDIAL CUSHION DEFEGT)
ing a large volume overload to the left heart. Left
atrial and ventricular enlargement and pulmonary
Patency of the atrioventricular septum has tradition-
ally been known as an endocardial cushion defect.
edema may develop. lf ventricular pressiures equili-
This
brate, right ventricular hypertrophy results.
was based upon the assumption thal endocardial cush-
ion tissue contributes significantly to formation of adja-
cent atrial and ventricular septal structures and con-
tiguous AV valve leaflets (see Fig. 1-3).sz As this mor-
PULMONARY-TO-SYSTEMIC (RIGHT-TO-
phogenesis has been called into question, the tern
LEFT) SHUNTING HEART DISEASES
atrioweniricular septal defect has coine to designate a
group of lesions in which the atrioventricular septun
Sometines termed cyanotic heart disease, various le-
is absent.8 Ihis 1malformation is relatively common in
826CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY
terial denaturation. This may occur when defects occur
shunts) 118. 14 are reported. Coronary artery anomalies
between pulmonary and systemic circulations, coupled
are most important when associated with congenital
with increased pulinonary afterload. The latter may
pulmonic stenosis (see Fig. 243),1* although various
result from obstruction to right ventricular blood Mow,
 abnormalities have been described.
such as pulinonary stenosis or increased pulnonary
vascular rcsistance. In this fashion, right-to-left
VASCULAR RING ANOMALIES
shunting may occur with PDA, aorticopulinonary win-
dow, VSD. a1nd ASD.27 Right ventricular hypertrophy
Reported mosuy in dogs, these nalformations are
results fron increased resistance to RV outflow.
uncormnon in cats. Regurgitation results when esopha-
geal obstruction is caused by persistent right aortic
PULMONARY LESIONS WITH EISENMENGER'S
arch (the most comnon ring abnormality)(see Fig.
2461) ,9-1vz double aoric arch,96, 9s, 9s, 1o-1 tefl aortic.
PHYSIOLOGY
arch with igamentum arteriosum.98. 1o4 or retroesopha-
Eisenmenger's physiotogy is a state of right-to-left. (i.e.
geal subclavian arteries96 9 9 Figure 1-4reviews devel-
"reversed') shunting associated with irreversible pul-
opment of the aortic arch system.
n1onary vascular resistance and pulmonary hyperten-
sion.sss Pulmonary arterial lesions (piexogenic putno-
AORTIC INTERRUPTION
nary arteriopathy)  include  intimal  thickening  and
medial hypertrophy of 1nuscular pulmonary arteries
Malformations of thc aorta result in interruption
and, especially, plexiform lesions.
(coarctation)to or focal narrowing.'v These are rare
and have been reported only in the dog.
TETRALOGY OF FALLOT
AORTICOPULMONARY SEPTAL DEFECT
A widely recognized condition in dogs and cats re-
sulting in right-to-left shunting 
istetralogy
of
Failure of the truncus arteriosus to differentiate
Fallot.27. sa. st. s9-0s In sone canine breeds (keeshond),
causes persistence of aorticopulmonary communica-
it is inherited, transmitted as a polygenic trait, and
tion between the ascending aorta and 1nain pulmonary
attribuiable to maldevclopment of the conotruncal sys
artery.lo7, to Most cases develop pulnonary hyperter-
tem.s # Affected animals often display stunted growth.
sion and subsequent right-to-left shunting.27
Sudden death can occur.
VENOUS ANOMALIES
GROss FINDiNGs. This anomaly is characterized by
four major components (see Figs. 24-47 to 24-50): (1)
 Persistence of the left cranial vena cava (see Fig.
subaortic ventricular septal defect, (2) biventricular
24-62) is a relatively common venous anomaly that
origin (i.e., dextroposition) of the aorta, (3)
ob-
can be complete or inconplete. Aside froin reducing
structed right ventricular outflow (pulnonary steno-
exposure during sone surgical thoracic procedures or
sis), and (4) secondary right ventricular hyperrophy.
 complicating cardiac catheterization, it has no clinical
There is generally mild poststenotic dilatation of the
significancc and may accompany othier congenital dis-
main pulmonary artery, a relatively small left ventricle,
orders.95.9,9,109 Anomalous pulmonary venous return
and a somewhat widened ascending aorta. In cats,
is rare but is reported in the dog!o and cat.30
the principal cause of right ventricular outflow tract
obstruction is rrarked hyperrophy of the crista supra-
venuricularis,1. 16 whereas valvular pulnonary stenosis
PERIPHERAL VASCULAR DISEASES
 is the cause of pulmonic stenosis in dogs with tetralogy
Peripheral vessels, including arteries, veins, and lym-
of Fallot, The term pseudotruncus arteriosus describes
phatics, may become affected secondary to systeinic
conditions in which pulmonary atresia is present.
and metabolic discases or may represent prirniary vas-
cular disorders.l1 I# Diseases of arteries include occlu-
sive disorders such as thiroinboeinbolism, vasculitis,
VASCULAR ANOMALIES
and arteriopathies, and nonocclusive conditions in-
cluding arteriovenous fistulas, arteriosclerosis, and ath-
A variety of vascular malformations occur in the dog
erosclerosis. Venous diseases are uncommon other
and cat. Patent ductus arteriosus is the rost cormnon
than phlebitis. Lymphiatic disorders occur infrequently.
and clinically important anomaly.27-s1, 5-7 Aortic and
including lymphangitis, lymphedema, and lymphan-
thoracic venous anomalies have been described 9-110
giectasia. Peripheral vascular neoplasia such as angi-
Peripheral ascular disorders,# including those of
oma, heinangioma, heinatoma, and hemangiosarcoma
abnornal abdominal venous drainage (portosystemic
are well described.
CARD10VASCULAR PATHOL0GY 827
NEONATAL HEART FAJLURE ASSOCIATED
substance. In very young kittens (generally less than 2
WITH ATRIOVENTRICULAR VALVULAR
weeks of age), degenerated cellular debris and edema-
MALFORMATION AND ENDOCARDIAL
tols exudate are observed in thie endocardium as well
as in and around moderator bands. In kittcus aged 3
FIBROELASTOSIS
t0 6 weeks, myocytes rmay be thin and elongated, sepa-
This ubiquitous disorder of uncertain etiology has
rated by delicate fibers and extracellular cdematous
been variably described as neonatal endocardial fi-
ground substance. Endocardium is thickened by fi-
broelastosis,'s endocardial fibrosis with cardiomegaly.
broplasia, elastosis, proliferation of myofibrocytes, and
and possibly, kitten mortality conplex,116 Acute conges-
Anichkov's cells. In older kittens (generally over 7
tive cardioryopathy withi muscle fiber degeneration
weeks), extensive endocardial fbroplasia and elastosis
and associated errdocardial fibroelastosis has been re-
 may be noted. Pulmonary alveolar septa are thickened
ported as a postulated cause of kitten mortality com-
 by proliferation of epithelial cells and histiocytes. The
plex.116
alveolar lumens are filled withi proteinaceous fluid and
We have recognized a condition resulting in neona-
active macrophages.
tal death as cardiac failure associated with corngenital
AV valvular malformation and secondary endocardial
fibroplasia. In a series of 26 affected kittens froin 16
EXCESSIVE LEFT VENTRCULAR
litters necropsied at the Animal Medical Center, the
mean age was 32 days (range, 2 to 70 days). Breeds
MODERATOR BANDS
included donestic short-hair, Siainese, Abyssinian, and 
Burmese. Litter size was usually small (two or three
Heart failure and death have been reported in cats
with nyocardial disease, characterized by excessive
kittens). Most kittens died suddenly and were de
numbers and abnormal coinplexes of left ventricular
pressed, anorectic, and dyspneic for only a few hours
before death,
moderator bands.'z2 Since excessive IV moderator
 bands have been observed in cats dying of congestive
Cats in the Animal Medical Center series displayed
heart failure al 1 wcek of age, a congenital origin is
many of the pathologic features that were described i11
suspected. Their contribution to cardiomyopathies or
humans!!7 and cats with endocardial ibroelastosis.118
congestive heart failurc has not bcen clearly estab-
Since similar lesions have been reported in association
with volume overload with mnitral regurgitation,# con-
lished, however, and in many instances, they have been
genital valvular malformations,31. 12o and following mi-
observed at necropsy as an incidental finding. The
variability in number, pattern, density, and severity of
tral valve replacement in humans,21 a relationship with
abnormal moderator band networks suggests that vari-
volume overload imust be suspected. Alternatively,
ous phenotypic expressions occur in felines.
given the relatively highi number of feline viral dis-
eases, prenatal viral myocarditis or associated iminune-
mediated reaction 1night presumably cause or contrib-
 GROss rIND1NGs. Affected hearts are small, with irreg-
ute to this condition. This hypothesis is supported by
tlarly shaped contours, rounded apexes, and occasion-
evidence that human endomyocardial fbroelastosis is
ally, indentation of the mid left ventricular epicardial
a sequela of viral myocarditis with rapid progression to
surface. Heart weighit is significantly lower than for
end-stage'1 (see also chapter 28). Fndocardial fibro-
hypertrophic, dilated, or restrictive cardionyopathic.
elastosis has also been reported in the Burmese breed
hearts but not significantly less than that of clinically
 as an inherited anomaly. is
norinal hearts. The LV cavity may be irregularly nar-
rowed in some affected hearts. This results when exces-
 GROss FINDINGs. The heart is often globular in shape,
 sive abnormal moderator band networks connect pap-
illary muscles, LV free wall, or both to the ventricular
tricular dilation is evident, and papillary muscles are
septum (see Fig. 28-25). Pulnonary edema and/or
 paunnod are anaui pauonsodeu apreadn uao
pleural effusion and thronbocnbolism have been de-
mitral valve malforination, tricuspid valve dysplasia,
tected in some cats.122
opua suuasarda seaie anbedo peaidsapim pue
dial fibroelastic tissue. 'lhe left ventricular free wall
tends to be thinner than normal in older kittens. Pul-
IISTOLOGIc FEArtREs. The moderalor bands consist
monary edema, pleural effusion, or ascites may be
 Of central Purkinje's fibers and dense, parallel collage.
present.
nous fibers covered by endotheliun. There is loose,
fibrous connective tissue between the endothelium
HISrOLOGIC FEATUREs. Myocytes are thin and Inay dis-
and the collagenous fibers. Some moderator bands are
play sarcoplasinic coagulation, granulation, vacuola-
composed of Purkinje's fibers surrounded by loose
tion, fragrmentation, and myocytolysis (often severe).
fibrous connertive tissue, adipose tissue, lymphocytes,
'They are separated by extracellular edematous ground
and blood vessels and covered by endothelium.
828 CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY
ACOUIRED CARDLAC DISEASES
 or long and thin. Occasionally, AV valve leafleis may be
exuberant and balloon or billow into the left atrium,
accompanied by long, thin chordae tendineae.
As a result of AV valvular insufficiency. the corres-
There arc numerous acquired cardiovascular disor-
ponding atria and ventricles are dilatcd and thickened
ders. Sone are idiopathic and relatively species-spe-
(eccentric hypertrophy). The AV annulus is generally
 cific, such as felinc bypertrophic cardiomyopathy or
enlarged. Jet lesions (focal, thickened, fibrotic endocar-
canine myxomatous valvular degeneration (endocar-
dial lesions) may be present and related to forceful
diosis). Many conditions occur secondary to systemic
regurgitation of blood fron the ventricle to the atrium.
or metabolic disorders (see Chapter 33).
Atrial rupture is a rare but frequently lethal end-stage
finding withi severe disease (Fig. 25-12). Calcification
may occur in valves or the AV annulus. Pulinonary
VALVULAR DISEASES
edena and pleural, pericardial, and abdominal effu-
sions may occur.
CHRONIC ACQUIRED ATRIOVENTRICULAR
VALVULAR DISEASE (MYXOMATOUS
HISTOLOGIC FEATUREs. Normal AV valves are com
DEGENERATION OR ENDOCARDIOSIS)
posed of four layers and have been described as follows
from the atrial to ventricular aspecutza. 1so atrialis, a
 Chronic acquired valvular disease is a degenerative
 thin tayer of endothelial cells supported by connective
disorder of predominantly middle-aged and geriatric
tissue and a thin layer of smooth muscle cells (inyo-
dogs (chapter 25).w I2-19 It has also been termed
 cytes are present in the basal third of the valve beneath
endocardiosis, and myxomatous transformation or degenera-
thie atrialis); spongzosa, a loose collection of collagen,
tion of the AV valves. In severe cases, significant valvular
Gibroblasts, Anichkov's cells, and elastic fibers ermbed-
incompetency. volume overload, and heart failure rmay
 dcd in mucopolysaccharide-rich ground substancc; fi-
result. The atrioventricular valves are most severely
bresa, a dense layer of compact collagen that continues
affected (Color Plate 10), whereas the pulinonic and
with the annulus and central core of chordae tendi-
aortic valves are less coinmonly involved. Reported
neae; and ventricularis, structurally sinilar to the atrialis
incidence varies from 8.3 percent in one clinical study
but lacking a layer of smooth muscle.
The histologic basis for endocardiosis is changes in
Prevalence and severity increase with advancing age.
thc spongiosa valve layer, which include proliferation
Although virtually all brceds are affected, it occurs
of loose tissues (increased collagen, elastic tissue, and
'saaq ao pe ns u xpunba aou n
in
edematous ground substance) accompanied by deposi-
which it represents the most coinnon cause of heart
tion of increased extracellular matrix. The latter con-
disease.
tains glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), formerly known as
This abnormality lhas been infrequenuly observed
acid mucopolysaccharide. '$ Disorders of collagen syn-
in cats. However, it is rarely severe enough to cause
thesis, content, or organization in humans are sug-
significant valvular regurgitation ad is usually found
gested as a cause of myxoinatous transformation in
in conjunction with myocardial diseases.
cases of nitral valve prolapse.1s2 However, the etiology
of chronic valvular disease in dogs is unknown.
GROss FINDINGs. The mitral valve is abnormal in ap-
proximately two thirds of affected dogs; both mitral
INFECTIVE (VEGETATIVE) ENDOCARDITIS
and tricuspid valves together are abnormal in about
 one third of cases. Infrequently, the uricuspid valve
 Dogs and cats may occasionally develop endocarditis
 alone is affected.
involving one or more heart valves, supporting struc-
Lesions vary widely in severity. Gross anatomic
tures, or myocardium. Bacterial infection is rmost corn-
changes (sce Figs. 8-21: 25-1) have been described as
follows:125. 125a type 1 lesionsearliest changes consist
reported.s Large breed, male, older dogs are more
 of a few small, discrete nodules or areas of opacity at.
commonly afected, and the German shepherd may
the points of valve apposition: type [I lesions—nodules 
 be predisposed. Bacterial endocarditis is rare in the
are larger and nore nurerous and begin to coalesce;
Cat. 30.31, 139
type II lesions-large nodules or plaquelike deformi-
 In dogs, the initral valve is infected most coinmonly,
ties are present with thickening of chordae tendineae
followed by the aortic valve. Involveiment of the tricus-
 at their valvular attachnent sites, type IV lesions-
pid valve is uncommon, and the pulmonic valve is
valve cusps are grossly distorted, contracted, rolled
rarely affected. Aithough preexisting valvular injury
upward, and "shrunken,' whereas chordae tendineae
favors developinent of infectious endocarditis experi
are usually thickened proximally and are occasionally
 Inentally, most affected dogs do no1. have a history off
ruptured. Chordae tendineae may be short and stout
valvular disease. Subaortic ster1osis is thie most com1non
CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY 829
congenital defect associated with bacterial endocardi-
(Fig. 28-7). The LV cavity is reduced and the LA is
lis,1441
enlarged and hypertrophied.13. 1 In dogs, the most 
consistent feature is marked generalized, concentric
GROss FINDINGs. Vegetative masses are attached to
I V hypertrophy with a sinall cavity, often with asymmel-
valve endocardial surfaces, especially the ventricular
ric septal hypertrophy, 14.13. 147
aspects of the aortic valves and the atrial surfaces of
 Absolute and relative heart weights in affected ani-
the mitral valve (see Figs. 823; 26-2). Valve leaflets are
mals are substantially increased.'+ Heart weight in rela-
edematous, hemorrhagic, deformed, and soinetimes
9 se u a ais si niam oq o 
perforated. This predisposes to valvular insuffciency
± 0.1 g/kg) and dogs (9.6 ± 0.3 g/kg) with HCM,
and associated chamber enlargement. Left-sided con-
compared with normal cats (1nean, 4.8 ± 0.1 g/kg)
gestive heart failure and systemic evidence of sepsis
and normal dogs (mean, 6.6 ± 0.3 g/kg), respectively.
are common.
 Necropsy of 51 HICM cats recorded a maximal ventricu-
lar septal thickness of 9.0 ± 0.2 mm (controls, 5.0 ±
0.2 mm) and an anterolateral IV free wall thicknes of
I1ISTOLOGIC FEATUREs. Valvular vcgetations are com-
9.0 ± 0.1 mm (controls, 6.0 ± 0.3 mm). In dogs,
 posed of amorphous strands of fibrin, necrotic debris,
disintegrating inflamrmatory cells (e.g-, mononuclear
necropsy cases are linited, but comparable measure-
cells and neutrophils), platelets, and bacteria. Necrosis
 ments from 10 HCM dogs were ventricular septum, 19
of valve strona is common. Septic enboli can seed any
± 2 mn (controls, 12 ± 0.5 mm) and LV anterolateral
organ, causing associated microabscesses or infarcts.
free wall, 18.0 ± 1.5 mm (controls, 15.0 ± 0.7 mm).14
The kidney, myocardium, spleen, and left ventricle are
Focal, endocardial fibrosis is comnon.
most commonly involved (see Fig. 26-3).134
 In cats and dogs with dynaric LV ouulow obstruc-
lion, a fibrous, mural endocardial plaque is prevalent
at the basal septum in apposition to the anterior mitral
MYOCARDIAL DISEASES
valve lealet in the left LV outflow tract. 'lhe anterior
Initral valve leaflet is also thickened in these cascs,s, s
(CARDIOMYOPATHIES)
 In affected cats, pulmonary edena is present in more
than half of necropsied cases, and pleural efusion is
Cardiomyopathies coiprise diffuse and  variable
evident. in about 20 percent; arterial thromboembolism
myocardial diseases associated  with  abnorinal  myo-
occurs in a high percentage of cases (Figs. 28-28,
cardial structure or function. They nay be primary
28-30, 28-34, 28-35) and atrial or ventricular ball
o osis mn reposs o ke o (edo)
thrombi are occasionally present (Figs. 28-12, 28-14,
metabolic conditions 3o 31. 141-1sa Myocardial disorders
28-15). Aneurysinal thinning of the LV apcx is com-
constitute the majority of feline heart disease (chapter
mon. 18. 141-145
28);13 I4, m-S1 47, ls in dogs, dilated cardiomyopathy is
thc second most common cause of heart failure
HISTOLOGIC FEATUREs. The mOst chiaracteristic histo-
(chronic acquired valvular disease is the most com-
 logic features are bizarre, disorganized celular archi-
mon), but hypertrophic cardioinyopathy is rare (chhap-
tecture (see Fig. 36-4), abnorimal small intramural
ter 27).14. 113-117a
coronary arteries (see Fig. 36-5 and Color Plate 11),
and increased ainoumts of matrix or replacement fi-
IDIOPATHIC HYPERTROPHHC
hypertrophied and have large, reciangular, hyper-
CARDIOMYOPATHY
chromic nuclei. In a series of 5l cats and 10 dogs with
Ihis diverse disease entity has varied morphologic
recorded from 15 (30%) cats and 2 (20%) dogs. Septal
similarities with idiopathic hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
disorganization comprising 5 percent or more of rele-
thy (HCM) as described in humans,4. 11 including
vant tissue sections was present in 14 (27%) cats and
HCM with fixed and dynamic obstruction of the left
2 dogs. Extensive myocyte disarray (≥25%) was pres-
ventricular outlow tract. t3 s The relationship between
ent in 7 (14%) cats and no dogs. Cellular disorganiza-
sornie cases of canine HICM and fixed subaortic sternosis
tion was predominantly type I pattern, which involved
awaits clarification1.1 45
small foci of adjacent cardiac muscle cells. Abnormally
thick intramural coronary arteries, usually with re-
GROss FINDINGs. Most cats have diffuse bul asymmet-
duced lumens, were noted in 74 percent of cats (see
ric distribution of IV hypertrophy involving substantial
Fig. 36-5) and 60 percent of dogs and were rn1ost
 portions of ventricular septuun and LV free wall (see
prevalent in sections with moderate or severe fibrosis.
Fig. 28-6). Less commonly, segmental patterns of hy-
Medial and intimal thickening was associated with in-
pertrophy occur, often with abrupt transitions in wall
creased connective tissue elements (and much less
thickness or involvement of noncontiguous segrments
commonly, sumooth muscle cells). Interstitial rnyocar-
830
CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY
dial fibrous tissue or replacement fibrosis was prcsent
normal but is less than that of hcarts with HCM. Mitral
in 53 pcrcent of cats and 40 perccnt of dogs.
valve complex alterations arc common and may in-
clude short and thick lcaflcts; shiort, stout, long, or
thin chordac tcndincac; and upward malposition of
SECONDARY CAUSES OFLEFTVENTRICULAR
 papillary muscles. Tricuspid valve complex alterations
HYPERTROPIIY
may also be obscrved, including adhesion of the septal
lcaflet to thie ventricular septum; direct insertion of
Left vcniricular hypcrtrophy can occur sccondary to
thc lateral lcaflet into papillary muscles; and short,
certain systemic and metabolic discases. In older cats,
stout, long, or thin chordae tendineae. Thesc valvular
 complex changes are often similar to thosc obscrved
comrnon. Most cascs of thyrotoxicosis result from func-
 in kittens with severe atriovcntricular valvular dysplasia.
tional thyroid gland adenoma (adcnomalous hyperpla-
Thus, it may be difficult in some cases to differcntiatc
 betwcen primary myocardial disease and end-stages of
345, 34-6). In one nccropsy study symmciric LV hy-
 severe valvular dysplasia, or to determine thic potential
pertrophy was common.14s(
Congestive hcart failurc
contribution of the latcr Endocardial fibrosis is usu-
s   i s nq no a
ally mild and limited when present. Occasionally, thc
hypertension, hcarts appcar lo have incrcascd LV mass
 and symmctric LV hypertrophy, with minimal lef atrial
myocardium will be diffiusely fibrotic, or focal palc.
cnlargcment. Congestive heart failure is rare. Other
gray areas representing myocardial infarction arc ob
served. Lesions are usually grcatest in the IV. Arterial
reported associations with LV hypertrophy include
thromboembolism is common in cats but does n01
Occur in dogs. In canine DCM there is gcnerally liule
alteration in AV valve morphology. 14# Relativcly unique
pathologic fcatures have bccn rcported in somc box-
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATIIY (DCM)
crs, including rather mild left atrial and ventricular
dilation; thickencd AV valvcs; and, occasionally, aortic
Dilated (congestive) cardiomyopathy may bc pri-
valvc leaflets.'37
mary or sccondary. More thian one discasc process can
induce associatcd structural and functional abnormali-
ties.132 Certain nutritional influences havc demonstra-
HISTOLOGIC FEATUREs. In cats lcsions are variable.
Thcre may be some endocardial fibroelastic thick-
ble impact on myocardial structure and function. Of
ening. Inflammatory reaction is absent or scanty. Myo-
notable cxample is thc association betwcen feline tau-
cardial cells appcar more thin, attenuated, and wavy
rinc deficiency and DCM, and its reversibility with
dictary taurine supplcmentation,'5s Whercas commer.
than normal and are separatcd by cdematous, cxtracel-
lular ground substances or connective tissue,Iat Myocy-
cial dict reformulation largcly climinated this ctiology
tolysis is common. Myocardial fibrosis ranges from
by the bcginming 1990s, taurinc deficiency is still en-
mild and focal to cxtensive and diffusc (Fig. 36-l; sec
countercd in dogs and cats occasionally. Idiopathic
also Fig. 27-3B, Color Platc 12). In dogs, cxtensive
fcline myocardial failure is currently recognizcd but
incompletely characterized.154. 134 A final, end-stagc
 replacement fibrosis is uncommon.
pathway for severe myocardial injury has bcen postu-
 In boxers with DCM, both activc and chronic in-
flammations havc bcen reportcd. The former includes
Aissod ae sou s pe wi'o io pe
focal myocytolysis, myonecrosis, hemorrhage, and mild
play a role in some cats. In dogs, DCM is predomi-
 nantly a discase of large and giant brceds, although
 mononuclcar cell infiltration (c.g, macrophages, lym-
phocytes, plasma cclls). Chronic changes are more
cocker spauiels and other smaller breeds arc occasio1n-
common and include widesprcad myofiber atrophiy,
fibrosis, fatty infiltration, and fatty degeneralion. Thesc
becn idcntificd in some dogs, and a small mumber of
lcsions are diffusc, but thie RV frec wall is affectcd
cascs of l-carnitine and taurine deficiencies have been
earlicst and most scverely 1s7. 158
most canine DCM is unknown.
RESTRICTIVE AND INTILTRATIVE
GROss FINDINGs. Classic. features of DCM include se-
CARDIOMYOPATHIES
verc, gencralized dilation of all four cardiac chambers,
ventricular wall thinning, incrcased end-diastolic and
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM)  is thc most.
cnd-systolic volumes, and biventricular heart failure
poorly characterized feline myocardial disorder.159.160
(scc Figs. 27-3; 28-18).31. 47.1. 143 In idiopathic fcline
Much has bcen cxtrapolatcd from human literaturelsa.
 DCM, pathologic findings are more variable,Is4a Papil
16l. i62 and remains to be verificd. The hallmark of
lary muscles and ventricular trabeculae are flattened
RCM is abnormal diastolic function resulting from
and atrophied. The hcart wcight of DCM cats cxcceds
ventricular wall stiffness thiat impedes diastolic fill-
CARDIOVASCULARPATHOLOGY831
ing.161 A number of diseaseshave been associated with
RCM in humans, including myocardial fibrosis, endo-
myocardial scarring, or infltration.148a 162 These are
variably encountered in cats but arerarein dogs.Since
not all cats with pathologic myocardial changes have
identifiableDopplerechofeaturesconsistentwith
those ofhumans,diagnosis is often ambiguous.More-
over,restrictivehemodynamicsoccurindiseasestates
that affect theheart other thanjustRCM.Two-dimen-
sional and Doppler echocardiography reveal wide phe-
notypic heterogeneity, as well as variability in indices of
diastolic function,even among patients within certain
disease categories.148a Unfortunately but not surpris-
ingly, the termRCM has become a catchwordfor un-
 classified forms of myocardiopathies.
At least two different morphologic types of feline
myocardial disease appear to qualify under the classi-
fication of RCM.Oneis characterizedby leftventricu-
lar endomyocardial fibrosis andcontains somefeatures
similar tothosedescribed inhumanswithLofflers's
other type ismore obscure and represents a heteroge-
neouscatchmentofidiopathic,noninfiltrative myocardial
disease.Cardiac amyloidosis is a common cause of hu-
man RCM164 but is not a significant condition in dogs
FIGURE36-7
andcats.
Histologicsection ofventricular septal myocardiumfroma
domestic cat with endomyocardial fibrosis.There is thick
endocardial scar(fibrosis) and severe subendocardial fibrosis.A
GROss FINDINGs.In cats with endomyocardial fibrosis,
single abnormal narrowed intramural coronary artery is evident.
the heart weight is greater than normal due to moder-
Masson's trichrome stain × 100.
ateLVhypertrophy.Dilation andhypertrophyof the
RA andRVis common.Extremebiatrial enlargement
often occurs. The LA is usually most severely affected
HISTOLOGICFEATUREs.Withendomyocardialfibrosis,ex-
and may be hypertrophied. Pronounced, diffuse LV
treme endocardial thickening resuts from hyaline,fi-
endocardial thickening with whitish-gray, opaque, fi-
brous, and granulation tissue (Fig.36-7).The surface
brous plaquelike scar is a pathologic hallmark (Fig.
is coveredby alayer ofhyalinetissue andcollagenous
28-16).This may occur in the left ventricular outflow
fibers, occasionally displaying chondroid metaplasia.
and inflow tracts, over the papillary muscles, chordae
Underneathisloose,cellular,fibrous tissue.Adjacent
tendineae,and leftventricular free wall.When endo-
to the myocardium is granulation tissue made up of
cardial scarring is severe,fbrous adhesions between
histiocytes, lymphocytes,and plasma cells.Hypertro-
papillary muscles and myocardium, distortion and fu-
phyofmyocytes and interstitialfibroplasia arecom-
sion of chordae tendineae and mitral leaflets,and
mon.Intheleftventricularfreewallandventricular
occasionally obliterationof theLVcavitymay occur.
septum, myocytolysis and arteriosclerosis may accom-
Mural,LA,or distal aortic thromboembolism is com-
pany severe endomyocardial fibrosis in advanced
mon.30.3,142.165.167 In contrast, cats with idiopathic, on-
infiltrative myocardial disease have more heterogeneous
to those in humans with restrictive cardiomyopathy.148a
162.163 A spectrum of changes has been observed with
featuresandundoubtedlyrepresentmorethanone
disease process.It is grossly characterized bya relatively
idiopathic,noninfltrativemyocardial diseaseMyocytesmay
normal LV;the LA and often RA are moderately to
behypertrophied orthinwithvarying degrees of ne
severely enlarged in the absence of conditions causing
crosis.Myocardial fibrosis is often diffuse and may be
volume overload or AV valve stenosis (see Fig. 28-15).
focally or regionally severe.Endocardial fibrosis may
The RV may become enlarged, depending on the pres-
be patchybut is generally relatively mild.
enceanddegreeofpulmonaryhypertension.There
mayberegionalendocardialfibrosisbutnotdiffuse
ARRHYTHMOGENICRIGHTVENTRICULAR
or severe endocardial scarring.Focal myocardial wall
thinning associated with infarction can be present, and
CARDIOMYOPATHY
left ventricular apical aneurysmal thinning is common.
Thisnewlyrecognizedfelinemyocardial disease is
Mural thromboses often occur.
characterized byfibrofattyinfiltrationoftherightven-
832 CARD10VASCULAR PATHOLOGY
tricular and right atrial myocardium. Severe dilatation
generation or both are associated with an inflarnma-
of these chambers is present in advanced cases (see
tory inflrate adjacent to degenerating or necrotic
Figs. 28-22 to 28-24). Some cats 1nay have variable left
myocytes.17 Many infectious agenrs can injure myo-
cardial tissue and induce degeneration or inflam-
mation.3s 17 Frequently, the myocardium is affected
common, parricularly with the fibrofatty forin. A more
complete description is containedl in chapter 28.
secondary to generalized systcmic infection or in-
flammation.
HEART FAILURE AND ABNORMAL, EXCESSIVE
LEFT VENTRICULAR MODERATOR BANDS
VIRAL MYOCARDITIs. This has rcceived most attcntion
 associated with canine parvovirus, although at present.
Moderator bands (trabeculae septomarginalis) are
canine parvovirus myocarditis appears to be rare. A
normally present in the feline right ventricler6s, o9 and
worldwide pandemic became recognized in 1978 as a
in both canine ventricles. In cats, abnormal diffuse
nerworks of left ventricular modlerator bands have
carditis resulted in infecred pups less than 12 wecks of
been reported in association with congestive heart fail-
age; fatal chronic myocarditis manifested signs of heart
urc, ventricular dilation, and hypertrophy, without
failure in dogs up to 6 months old.
brced or sex predisposition. Abnormal moderator
Gross pathologic findings included cardiac dilation,
band networks hiave also been identified in kitens as
ventricular hypertrophy, pale areas throughout tht
young as 1 day old, suggesting a congenital origin.
ventricles with sorne foci of petechiae, pulmonary
edema, antd pleural effusion. The LA and IV were
DUCHENNE-TYPE CARDIOMYOPATHY (CANNE
most severely affectedl. Histologically, 4- to 7-week-old
X-LINKED MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY)
pups affecled acutely cdemonstrated thin myocytes sep
arated by extracellular, edematous ground substance,
A muscular dystrophy recorded from a small num-
histiocyles, fibroblasts, and delicate fibrous tissue. In-
 ber of golden retriever dogs has striking similarities to
flammatory reactions were usually absent, Nuclei of
Duchenne's muscular cystrophy in humans.16sa- The
monocytes cortained single, large, distinct, homoge-
genetic delect resuits in absence of the protein dys-
neous intranuclear inclusion bodies, Myocytes dis-
trophin in skeletal and cardiac muscle.
played granulation, coagulation, and cytoplasmic frag-
mentation. In slighuy older puppies (6 to 9 weeks),
GROss FINDINGs. Clinical signs of skeletal rmuscle cdlys-
extensive inflammatory reactions were observed, con-
trophy appear ar about 8 weeks of age. Most affected.
sisting of lynphocytes and plasma cclls. Adjaccnt myo-
 dogs in experimental breeding colonies die before 5
cytes displayed cytoplasmic coagulation, granulation,
or 6 years of age, the time when congestive heart
fragmentation, and lysis. Inflamnation subsided in ju-
failure develops. Myocardial lesions are not. grossly
veniles (14 to 24 weeks of agc) and histiocytes, fibro-
visible before 1l weeks of age but become evident at
 blasts, granulation, and fbrous connective tissue pre-
6.5 months, and are extensive by 6 years of age. Focal
dominated.  Myofibrocytes  were  increased  in  and
mineralization and pale areas of myocardiuun may be
around intramural  coronary arteries. Sarcoplasmic
 evident. Lesions first develop in subepicardial regions 
grarulatior, coagulation, fragmentation, and lysis oc-
of the IV free wall, IV papillary muscles, and interven-
curred in rmyocytes within and surrounding arcas of
tricular scptum but develop more slowly in the atria
fibrosis. Microscopic changes were most severe in the
and RV free wall.168a, h
IV free wall and interventricular septum.172
 In cats, myocarditis is rarely diagnosed. Endomyocar-
HISToLOcIc FEATuREs. Early lesioris include focal myo-
ditis and left ventricular endomyocardial fibrosis have
cyte degeneration and mineralization, which evolve
into linear anastomosing bands of loose fibrovascular
tissue and, ultimately, dense fibrous connective tissue,
with concomitant congestive heart failure and high
Commonly, myocytes vary in size, and there is in-
creased endomysial fibrosis. Other histopathologic
characterized.31:
1. 1723.173 176 In a necropsy scries of 461
changes include myofilarment loss, increased numbers
cardiomyopathic cats, about 6 percent were diagnosed
of mitochondria, and increased myclin, cytoplasmic
histologically with endormyocarditis. Gross lesions com-
lipofuscin, ancl lipicd droplets. 568a t.
patible with endomyocardial fibrosis (see under restric-
tive cardiomyopathy) were common, suggesting a pos-
sible association with cndomyocarditis in some cases.175
MYOCARDITIS
Recenily, viral genormic DNA has bcen identified in
By definition, focal or diffuse myocarditis is diag-
myocardiun of cats withi hypertrophic, restrictive, and
dilated cardiomyopathy.176a
CARDIOVASCULARPATHOLOGY8
833
DIAGNosis.Viral myocarditishasbeenhistoricallydif-
ficult todiagnose,evenwhenendomyocardialbiopsies
are obtained.170 However, molecular genetic tech-
niques employing polymerase chain reaction analysis
to identify the presence ofviral nucleic acid in infected
tissues and body fluids has opened up new avenues for
its detection.176a,177
BACTERIAL MYOCARDITIs.This is usually encountered
in association with bacterial endocarditis or sepsis, al-
though myocardial abscesses are occasionally detected
at necropsy with apparently normal cardiac valves (Fig.
36-8). Histologic findings are characterized by mono-
nuclear inflammatory cells (especially neutrophils)
and bacteria (seeFig.36-3;see alsoFig.28-27).
CANINE CHAGAS MYOCARDITIS. This disease is caused
by the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi,which is
transmitted by an insect vector(Reduvidae).In the
acute stage, evaluation of a thick blood smear may
reveal the presence of circulating trypomastigotes (Fig.
36-9). Gross pathology is characterized by mild RA
and RV dilation; subendocardial gray to white foci,
streaks,or pale zones; and granulomatous myocarditis
with pseudocysts containing amastigotes (Fig. 36-10;
FIGURE 36-9
see also Fig.27-14).Chronic Chagas'disease is charac-
Photomicrographof a thickblood smearfroma dogwith an acute
terized by ventricular dilation and thinning of the
stage of Chagas’myocarditis.Circulating trypomastigotes of
ventricular freewalls;multifocal interstitial lympho-
Trypanosoma cruzi are clearly evident.(Courtesy of Dr.Matt Miller.)
plasmacytic and histiocyticinfiltrates; perivasculitis and
marked fibrosis; and a positive indirect fluorescent
antibody test.178
Bartonella elizabethae),，and spirochetal(e.g.,Borrelia
burgdorferi)mayaffect themyocardium.Infiltrativedis-
OTHER INFECTIOUS AGENTs.Agents such as viral (e.g,
eases (e.g.,neoplasia),toxic substances (e.g.,myocardial
canine distemper virus), parasitic (e.g., Toxoplasma gon-
depressant factors,heavy metals,ethyl alcohol),meta-
di,Hepatozoon canis),fungal,algae-like (e.g.,Prototheca
bolic diseases (e.g.,chronic uremia,hypothyroidism),
spp.),rickettsial(e.g.,Rickettsia rickettsi,Ehrlichiacanis,
chemicals (e.g., doxorubicin), and physical agents (e.g.,
FIGURE 36-8
Gross specimenfrom an 8-month-old cat that died of
septicemia.Notice focal whitish abscesses in the
apical leftventricularfreewallandventricular
septum.Abscesses were also detected in other organs.
This cat also had tricuspid valve dysplasia.
2
DATE
834
CARDIOVASCULARPATHOLOGY
FIGURE36-10
Photomicrographofmyocardiumfrom a dog
with acute Chagas'myocarditis.Notice a
myocyte(arrous) containing intracellular
amastigotes of Trypanosoma cruzi.Mononuclear
leukocyticinflammatory cells (lymphocytes,
neutrophils,plasma cells)are also present.H&
E stain. (Courtesy of Dr.Kathryn Meurs.)
heat stroke)cancausemyocardialdegeneration or
includebacterialendocarditisanddirofilariasis;182ne-
inflammation.138,162,170,171,175
phrotic syndrome,amyloidosis,and hypoadrenocorti-
cism have also been reported.183 184
THROMBOEMBOLICDISEASE
PULMONARYTHROMBOEMBOLISM(PTE).Dirofilariasisis
Thrombus referstoclotformation(platelets,fibrin,
the most commonly recognized cause (Fig.36-11);
coagulation factors,and cellular components)in the
nephrotic syndrome,renal amyloidosis,pancreatitis,
heart or vessels. An embolus results from migration of
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia,neoplasia,hyper-
all or part of a clot or other material(e.g., tumor
fragment, air, fat, bacteria, parasites, or foreign body).
Thrombosis mayresult from tissue (endothelial)in-
jury;circulatory stasis or turbulence;or hypercoagula-
ble state.179,180
SYSTEMICTHROMBOEMBOLISM.Arterialthromboembo-
lismis awell-recognizedcomplication of felinecardio-
myopathiesandhasbeenreportedinupto48percent
dle emboli occur in morethan90percent of affected
cats (see Figs.28-28,28-30,28-34,28-35).Brachial,
renal,and mesenteric arteries represent otherrecog
nizedsitesforemboli.Mural thrombiareoccasionally
present in the left atrium or ventricle (see Figs.28-12,
20-30
2
28-14, 28-15). Ischemic neuromyopathy results when
FIGURE 36-11
distal arterial occlusion and vasoactive chemicals (e.g.,
Heart andlungsfromadogwithsevereheartwormdisease that
serotonin）reduce collateral circulation.181 Canine
died after adulticide therapy.The pulmonary artery is dissected to
reveal an extensive thrombus(straight arrow)and adult heartworm
myocardialdiseaseshavenotbeen associatedwith
fragments (curued arrow).Ao, descending aorta; MPA,main
thromboembolism.In dogs,the most common causes
pulmonary artery.
CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY835
adrenocorticism, dlisseminated intravascular coagula
pneumonitis and pulmonary eosinophilic granuloma-
tion, and pancreatitis are other associated condi-
tosis.
tions -s PTE is a significant clisease in dogs, in which
it is generally underdiagnosed, although in cats, it
 is rarely detected. Severe PTE may cause significant
PERICARDIAL DISEASE
ventilation-perfusion abnormalities, resulting in pul-
monary hypertension or respiratory failure.
CONGENrTAL PERICARDLAL DFFECTs. Congenital pericar
dial defects are rare and represent small or large perfo-
rations in the pericardium (see Fig. 29-2). They are
VENOUS THROMBOEMBOLISM. Although common in hl-
usually incidental findings at necropsy. Large defects
mans, clinically signifcant venous thrombosis is rela-
have the potential to cause cardiac herniation (sce
tively rare. Vasculitis and thrombophlebitis may result
Fig. 29-3) with severe consequences. Periloneopericardial
from venous catheter placement or perivascular drug
diaphragmatir hernias (PPDH) are the most cormmon
administration. Varicosis can accompany arteriovenous
congeniral pericardial rmalformation29 (see Figs. 29-4
fistulas. Venous perforatior or blunt trauma is usually
to 29-6) and may be accompanied by other abnorrmali-
well tolerated. Tumors may result in venous invasion,
ties (cranial abdominal herrnia, sternal deformities)
especially chemodectorna, adrenal tumors, and heman-
and congenital heart. defects (ventricular septal de-
giosarcoma.1x2
fect),1s Traumatic PPDII is also encountered in dogs
and cats. Abdominal viscera may be found within the
pericardlial sac, sometimes with pericardial effusion or
HEARTWORM DISEASE
fibrinous lags involving viscera, endocardiun, or peri-
cardiun. Intrapericardial cysts have been reported:s6
(see Figs. 29-7, 29-8) ancl represent cystic hematomas
Heartworm disease is widely distributed  in the
that develop in faty tissues that become entrapped in
 Lnited States and many regions of Furope and Asia.
a small peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia.
 Pathology is partly related to the number of adult
heartworms. High heartworm burdens generally cause
PERICARDLAL EFFUsIONs. Pericardial clisease is ofter aC-
ore severe pulmonary hypertension, thromboembo-
companied by accumulation of variable quanties of
lism, and a propensity to develop caval syndrome.
pericardial effusion. When it develops rapidly, in-
creased intrapericardial pressure and decreased right-
sidecl heart filling (cardiac tamponade) may result in
 GROss FINDINGs. When pulmonary hypertension is
present, moderate to scvere RV hypertrophy and
secondary abdominal and pleural effusion. Efusions
are categorized according to fluid characteristics (tran-
enlargement usually dlevclop (sce Figs. 30-9: 31-5).
sudlate-hydropericardium; exudate-pericarditis; hemor-
 Pneumonitis, pulmonary granuloma formation (sec
rhage-hemopericardiurm) t" Cytologic evaluation can
Fig. 30-1l), pulmonary endarteritis, and pulmonary
identify chylous, suppurative, or mycotic pericardial
thromhoembolism (see Fig. 36-1l) may be observed.
effusiors but are generally unreliable to differentiate
Caudal and accessory lobar arteries dilate, become
 neoplastic frorm idiopathic effusions.19x Hemangiosar-
lortuous, develop aneurysms, and lose their normal
coma and chemodectoma, tumors that are commonly
tapering arborization. Large numbers of worms me-
chanically obstruct blood flow (see Figs. 304, 30-6;
enclosed within the pericardium of dogs, and cardiac
31-3, 31-4). Extracardiac signs of right-sided conges-
lymphoma of cats, seldom exfoliate into the effusion,
tive heart failure may be present.
or mediastinal masses (see Fig. 8-25). Chronic pericar-
dial efusion may contain exfoliated reactive mesothe-
HIsTOLoGIc FEATUREs. Heartworms in pulmonary ar
lial cells that normally line the pericardium (Fig. 36-
teries produce endlothclial swelling, widened intercel-
12). These can be readily misinterpreted on cytology
lular junctions, sloughing of longitudlinal strips of cn-
as neoplasia, especially mesothelioma.19s
 dothelium, and adhesion of activated leukocytes and
platelets to sites of injury (see Figs. 30-1 to 30-3).
PERICARDITIs. Infective pericarditis is uncomnon in
Pulmonary arterial villi are formed by activated smooth
dogs and cats, but it may occur from bacterial or fungal
muscle cells and collagen. Endothelial lesions and vil-
lous proliferation are most severe in caudal and acces-
been a reported cause of pericarditis in cats.2o With
sory lung lobes. 190-192 After adulticidal therapy, emboli-
 bacterial infections particnuarly, the pericardium may
zation of worins and their fragments may cause severe
be thickened and contain a shaggy, fibrinopurulent.
pulrmonary lesions, including pulmonary arterial
exudate; the epicardium is infiltrated by polymorpho-
thrombosis and granulomatous infammation.19s. 194 Im-
nuclear leukocytes. Pericardial exudate may be sero-
mure-mediated occult infectiors rmay result in allergic
sanguineous or turbid and fibrinous and is frequently
836CARDIOVASCULARPATHOLOGY
some cases.203 A series of Doberman pinschers with
sudden death and AVnodal degeneration has been
reported.204 However, in Doberman pinschers and
other dogs of various ages,chondroid metaplasia of
thecentralfibrousbody and aorticrootwasrecorded
asanormaloccurrenceinlarge-breeddogs.204aCon-
ductionsystemabnormalitieshavebeendetectedin
cardiomyopathic cats from6months to16years of
age.Histologicchangesincluded degeneration and
fibrosis of the AV node and degeneration and infiltra-
tion by fibrous granulation tissue of the left and right
bundle branches.31. 172
INHERITEDSUDDENCARDIACDEATHIN
GERMANSHEPHERDS
FIGURE36-12
Inheritedventricular arrhythmias and sudden death
Cytologicspecimen ofpericardial fluid from a dogwithidiopathic
have recently been reported in German shepherd dogs
pericardial effusion.Notice the cluster of mesothelial cells
characterized bymoderatepleomorphism;moderate,finely
withoutevidenceofcardiomyopathyorheartfailure.32
granular tovacuolatedbasophilic cytoplasm;a central nucleus that
Deathismostcommonbetween4and8monthsof
exhibits coarselyclumpedchromatin;andsecretoryvacuolesin
some of thecells.Normally,mesothelial cells are more uniform in
age andfrequently occurs during sleep or duringrest
appearance and exhibit an eosinophilic corona.Reactive
following exercise.No gross or histologic lesions have
mesothelial cellsmaybedifficult to distinguishfrom carcinoma
been identified.
cells.× 400.(Courtesy of Dr.Matt Miller.)
PERSISTENTATRIALSTANDSTILL(SILENT
tenacious and purulent.Adhesions may occur that
ATRIA,ATRIOVENTRICULARMYOPATHY)
obliterate thepericardial space.
Arare,acquired,progressive myopathy ofdogs and
cats involves severe atrial enlargement and thinning,
NEOPLAsIA.In cats,lymphosarcoma,the most com-
with subsequent ECG changes of persistent atrial stand-
mon hematopoietic feline tumor, is also the most com-
mon cardiac tumor (Fig. 28-26). Many cases are associ-
still,althoughcompleteheartblockandother arrhyth-
mias have been recorded.Congestive heart failure was
ated with feline leukemia virus infection (FeLV),but
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)may also have a
present in some animals.A potential predisposition
role in lymphomagenesis.Lymphosarcoma rarely in-
was suggestedforEnglish springer spaniels and Sia-
volves the pericardium directly (see Figs. 29-11B, 29-
humanswithpersistent atrial standstil1206borearesem-
19). In dogs, hemangiosarcoma (see Figs. 29-9A,B,
blance to those of affected dogs. Reported animals
29-18B) and chemodectoma (seeFigs.29-16,29-18A)
were subdivided into three categories based upon clini-
arethemostcommontumorsenclosedwithinthe
cal signs, which included long-standing cardiomyopa-
pericardial sac.Pericardial mesothelioma with pericar-
thy (especially the dilated form in cats); muscular dys-
dial effusion is described infrequently(seeFig.29-10).
trophy(fascioscapulohumeral type);and anidiopathic
Immunohistochemical staining
helpsdifferentiate
mesotheliomafromcarcinoma.201
condition withoutevidence of other pathology.It is
not clear whether these clinical associations represent
unique conditions or different disease stages.
MISCELLANEOUSCARDIOVASCULAR
GROss FINDINGs.Atria are greatly enlarged and paper-
DISEASESANDCONDITIONS
thin with little visible muscle (Fig.36-13).Skeletal
muscle wastingwas a feature observed in affected dogs
CONDUCTIONSYSTEMLESIONS
but not cats.In thelatter, dilated cardiomyopathy with
Arrhythmias, syncope,and sudden death have been
atrial hypoplasiawasrecordedinnecropsied cats.Asci-
reported with a variety of acquired conduction system
tes and pleural effusion were variably present.205
lesions.Associated conditions include infections,in-
flammatory diseases, and cardiomyopathies30.31, 11, 02
HISTOLOGIC FEATUREs.Atrial changes include myo-
Terminal narrowing of small arteries in the region
fibernecrosis,replacementfbrosis,fbroelastosis,and
oftheconductingsystemmaycausedegenerative
fatty infiltration(Fig.27-13).Ventricularinvolvement
changes, and hereditary factors may be involved in
is more variable.In dogs with skeletal muscular dystro-
CARDIOVASCULARPATHOLOGY
837
FIGURE36-13
Right sideof theheart from a3.5-year-old male
Englishspringerspaniel with persistent atrial
standstill.Therightatriumisextremelydilated,with
severemembranous thinning.Theright ventricle is
alsodilated.Histologyrevealedreplacement ofright
atrialmyocyteswithfibrousconnective andadipose
tissues.
phy, skeletal muscles were hyalinized, with degenerat-
rareidiopathicdiseasereported toaffect extramural
ingmusclefibersandmildtomoderatefattyinfiltra-
and intramural coronary arteries.216 Arteriosclerosis
tion. Skeletal muscle biopsies (upper forearm and
thoughttobeassociatedwithsystemichypertension
scapularregion)in most affecteddogswith severe
has beenreported in cats,including idiopathic arterial
muscle atrophywere compatiblewith afascioscapulo-
mineralization involving a variety of arteries.217-219 Its
humeral type of dystrophy.205
bearing,if any,on coronary arteries is unclear.
GLYCOGENSTORAGEDISEASE
MYOCARDIALINFARCTION
A heritable deficiency in Lapland dogs of lysosomal
Myocardial infarction is uncommonly reported in
acid alpha-glucosidase causes cardiac and skeletal my-
dogs and catsbut does occur in anumber of diverse,
although often poorly characterized, settings.207-210.213.
changes included cardiac enlargement with focal myo-
215, 220.22,2aWhereasmost infarctions in humans result
carditis and extensive glycogen infiltration.
from coronary atherosclerosis with superimposed coro-
nary thrombosis,canines and felines usuallyhave non-
CORONARYARTERYDISEASE
atheromatouscoronaryarterydisease.
In felines,myocardial infarction is frequently ob-
The pathology of canine coronary artery disease has
served atnecropsy tobeassociatedwithcardiomyopa-
thies.213 215 220 In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with
arteries is quite uncommon in dogs207, 211,213-216 and
thromboembolism,infarctionhasbeennoted atthe
cats.213A number of dogs with atherosclerosis associated
LV apex (Fig. 36-14) and may involve the papillary
withhypothyroidismhavebeendocumented.212-214Ste-
muscles;occasional extramural coronary arterial
nosis ofextramural coronary arteries caused byfibro-
thrombosis has also been recognized in these cases.213
elastic intimal thickening, discontinuity of internal
In addition,cases of idiopathic myocardial failure,re-
elasticlamella,andfocalatrophyofmedialsmooth
strictive cardiomyopathy, and unclassified myocardial
musclewasreportedin twoadultLabradorretriev-
diseaseshavebeen observedwithregions ofinfarcted
ers.211 In contrast, narrowing of small intramural coro-
LV posterior wall at the papillary muscle level (Fig.
nary arteries is relatively common in aged dogs with
36-15).
chronic mitralvalve endocardiosis(caused by muscu-
In dogs,myocardial infarction (especially micro-
loelastic intimal thickening, intimal cushions,mi-
scopic)hasbeen observedin avariety ofconditions.
Theseincludeinthehearts of olddogswithdegenera-
withcongenitalsubaorticandpulmonicstenosis
tivevalvular disease,in subaortic stenosis,inoccasional
myocardial disorders,and secondary to noncardiac
cats with idiopathic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (see
conditions,including sepsis and pulmonaryneoplasia.
Fig.36-5)(caused by increased connective tissue ele-
ments and smooth muscle cell proliferation of the
GROss FINDINGs. Infarction appears grossly as focal,
media and intima).13, 14,144 145Necrotizing polyarteritis is a
dark gray,or pale myocardium.Atherosclerosis is a
838
8CARDIOVASCULARPATHOLOGY
contraction bands; myocytolysis and fragmentation.
There is excessive extracellular ground substance and
occasional extravasation of erythrocytes separating af-
fectedmyocytes.Atherosclerotic,thromboembolic,am-
yloid,orvasculiticcoronary arteriesareusually en-
closed in adjacentnecroticmyocardium.Contraction
bands,fragmentation,andvacuolizationofsarcoplasm
withorwithoutextravasationoferythrocytesinand
aroundtheaffectedmyocytesisobservedincircular
myocardial necrosis, with minimal coronary artery
changes.In cases of severe feline hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy, focal interstitial or massive myocardial f-
brosisand acutevacuolarand/orcoagulativenecrosis
mayoccur.Abnormal coronary arteries characterized
bythickenedwalls anddecreasedluminal size oc-
curred in about one third of affected hearts.127, 207-210.
213-215,220. 221 In old dogs with chronic acquired valve
disease,myocardial necrosis and fibrosis in the pres-
ence ofintramuralcoronary artery diseasesis acom-
monly reported microscopic finding, presumably re-
FIGURE36-14
A heart transected in the longaxis of a cat with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and sudden death.A large,acutemyocardial
infarct encompasses the apical third of thehypertrophied left
ventricle,appearing darker than adjacentmyocardium.Arrows
delineate theborder of infarcted myocardium.
rare finding, but affected animals may have yellow-
white,dilated,and tortuous coronary arterieswith ad-
LVW
jacentirregular,dullfoci ofinfarctedmyocardium(see
Fig. 33-4).207,212 With coronary amyloidosis and myo-
VS
cardial necrosis, gross changes are nonspecific,but the
LVmay containfocalordiffusepaleinfarctedareas
associatedwithvariabledegreesofcoronaryarterial
nary emboli has been associated with neoplastic tissue
from the lungs.2os Others have reported that dogs with
septicemia222orvegetativeendocarditisandcoronary
vasculitishadcoronary thromboembolism andhemor-
rhagic necrosis of adjacent myocardium.127, 215.220. 223
In dogs with severe right or left ventricular pressure
1
2
overloadfrompulmonic oraortic stenosis,respectively,
3
FIGURE36-15
circularmyocardial necrosis may occur as a concentric,
pale, dull, or dark purple region involving subendocar-
A heart transected inthe long axisfrom a 15-year-oldmale
domestic short-hair catwith myocardialfailure.Necropsy
dial portions of hypertrophied ventricular myocar-
measurement of theinterventricular septum (IvS)was
dium, including papillary muscles and trabeculae car-
approximately 9mm,and thebasal LV freewall (LVW)was 7.5
mm.Notice the dramatic segmental thinning of the LV free wall,
neae.215,220
which measured3mm between the arrows(contrast this to the
thicker contiguous basal and apical wall segments).
HISToLoGIC FEATUREs.In general, infarcted myocar-
Echocardiographicimaging showed thisthinned segmenttobe
dium reveals myocyte streaking and waviness; sarco-
severely hypokinetic.Thisregionwas characterizedhistologically by
replacementfibrosis associated witha chronic transmural
plasmic coagulation, vacuolization, and fragmentation;
myocardial infarction.Ao, aortic root;LAu, left auricle.
CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY 
688
sulting from focal ischemia caused by narrowing of
patterns of hypertrophy in the human left ventricle. J
affected intramural arteries. 127, 207. 210. 221 Microscopic
Clin Invest 56:56, 1975
3. Ross J Jr. Adaptations of the left ventricle to chronic:
intramural myocardial  infarction  (MIMI)  in these
yolume overloadl. Circ Rcs 35 (suppl 2):64, 1971
hearts had been reported in early literature?24 but has
6. Jen nings RB, Ganote CE. Structural changes in myocar-
 received little attention in the past 3 decades.
dium during acute ischemia. Cire Res 35 (Suppl 3):
136, 1974
7. Schocn FJ. Thc heart. In Cotran RS. Kumar V, Robbins
AGE AND THIE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Sl. (eds). Pathologic Basis of Discasc. Sth ed. Philadel-
phia, WB Saunders, 1994, p 538
Age-associated changes havc been well documented
the genesis and prevention of cancer. Cancer Epidem
in the hurman cardiovascular system and could influ-
Biomarkers Prev 1:597, 1992
 cnce diagnosis and treatment in certain geriatric pa-
 9. Sharov VG, Sabbah HN, Shimoyana H, el al. Evidence
tients.23-2 Increased LV wall thickness has been re-
of cardiocyte apoptosis in inyocardium of dogs with
ported to involve the interventricular septum in one
chronic heart failure. A1n J Pathol 148:141, 1996
studly26 and the 1V posterior wall in another,27 al-
10. Narula J, Haider N, Virimani R. et al. Apoptosis in
myocytes in cnd-stage heart failure. N Engl J Med
though overall cardiac size did not change. Mean heart
335:1182. 1996
weights progressively increased, then declined in very
11.
Weher KT. The healing wound: a case for cxiraccllular
old age. Mean valve circumferences increased progres-
matrix. Heart Failurc Rev 1:53. 1996
sively with age. In the myocardiun, increased myocyte
12.
Sappino AP, Schurch W, Gabbiani G. Differentiation
repertoire of fibroblastie cells: expression of cardioskel-
size with age-associated loss of nyocyles occurs. Dcgen-
ctal protcins as marker of phenotypic modulations. 1ab
crativc changes include lipid deposition; tubular dila-
Invest 63:141, 1990
tion; lipofuscin deposition; decreased mitochondrial
13. Fox PR, liu SK, Maron BJ. Echocardiographic assess-
oxidative phosphorylation; delayed protein synthesis;
ment of spontaneously occurring felinc hypertrophic
a dccreascd number of SA nodal cells (AV node and
cardiomyopathy. An animal model of huunan disease.
Circuilation 92:2645, 1995
His bundle show less chiange); and a slight increase in
14. Liu SK, Roberts WC, Maron BJ. Comparison of mor-
elastic tissue, fat, collagen, and fibrotic foci.2s In the
 AV conduction system of large breed dogs over 5 years
phic cardiomyopathy in humans, cats and dogs. Am J
of age, increascd Gbrous connective tissue, infiltration
Cardiol 72:944, 1993
15. Webcr KT. Brilla CG. Pathological hypertrophy and
of adipose tissue, loss of conduction fibcrs, and focal
carrliac interstitium. Fibrosis andl renin-angiotensin-al-
fibrosis extending from the central fibrous body have
dosterone system. Circulation 83:1849, 1991
bcen cdocumented. Thickened mcdial and intimal pro-
16. Sun Y, Weber KT. Fibrosis and nyocardial ACE: possible 
liferarion in small intramural coronary arterioles sup-
substrate and independence fron circulaing angioten-
plying the AV node were detected in half of these
sin 11. J Cardiac: Failurc 1:81, 1994
17. Mukherce D, Sen S. Collagen phenotypes during devel-
dogs.2ma A profound age-related decrease in cardliac β-
opment and regression of myocardial hypertrophy i11
adrenergic responsiveness (including down regulation,
spontancously hypertensive 1ats. Circ Res 67:1474, 1990
decreased agonist binding of β-1 receptors, uncou-
18.
Bishop J, Greenbaun J, Gihson ID, et al. Enhanced
pling of β-2 rcceptors, and abrormal G protcin-
dleposition of predominantly type I collagen in myocar-
mecliated signal transduction) has been reported in
dial disease. J Mol Cel Cardlioi 22:1157, 1990
19. Caulfield JB, Borg TK. The collagen network of thc
humansz2 and in animal nodcls. Systolic function in
hcart. Lab Invest 40:361, 1979
humans is well preserved, but dliastolic filling is drarmat-
 20. Robinson TF. Structural arrangement of myocytes and
ically alrered by aging, withi elderly subjects exhibiting
fibrillar connective tissue in heart muscle. A Robinson 
a doubling of percent atrial contribution to ventricular
TF, Kinne RKH (cds). Cardiac Myocyte-Connective Tis-
filling."27
sue Interactions in Health and Disease. Issues in Bio-
medicine. Vol 13. Basel, Karger. 1990, p 33
21. Factor SM. Pathologic altcrations of myocyte-con-
nective tissue interaclions in cardiovascular disease. In
References
Robinson TF, Kinnc RKH (cds). Carrliac Myocytc-
Connective Tissue Intcractions in Health and Diseasc.
Issues in Biomedicine. Vol 13. Bascl, Karger, 1990, p 130
22. Dungworth DL. The respiratory systcim. In Jubb KVF,
Kennedy PC, Palner N (eds). Pathology of Domestic:
1. Isner JM. The cardiologist as clinician and pathologist:
Animals. 1th cd, Vol 2. San Dicgo, Academic Prcss,
the interactions of both and the limitations of cach. /n.
1993, p 539
Virinani R. Atkinson JB, Fenoglio J (eds). Cardiovascu-
23.
lar Pathology. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1991, p 21
Vet Clin North Am 7:283, 1977
2. Opie I.H. The Hcart, 2nd ed. Xew York, Raven Press,
2.1.
Sherding RG. Diseases of the pleural cavity. /n Sherdling
1991. p 369
RG (ed). The Car; Discases and Clinical Management.
3. Katz AM. Thc cardiomyopathy of overload: an unnatu-
2nd ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1994, p 1053
ral growth response in thc hypertrophied heart. Ann
25. Fossum TW, Forrester SD, Swenson CL, et al. Chylotho-
Intern Med 121:363, 1994
rax in cats: 37 cases (1969-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc
4. Grossman W, Joncs D, McLaurin IP. Wall stress and
198:672, 1991
840 CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY
26. Kclly WR. The livcr and biliary systen. In Jubh KVF.
graphic, and Doppler imaging characteristics of mitral
Kennedy PC, Palmer N (eds). Pathology of Domcstic.
valve stenosis in 2 dogs. J Ain Vet Med Assoc: 201:1575,
Animals. 4th ed, Vol 2. San Dicgo, Academic Press,
1993
1993. p 319
50. Lchrmkuhl LB, Warc WA, Bonagura JD. Mitral stenosis
27. Perleff JK. Thc Clinical Recognition of Congenital
in 15 dogs. J Vct Intcrn Med 8:2, 1994
Hcart Disease. 4th cd. Philadclphia, WB Saumders, 1994
51. Stamoulis ME, Fox PR. Mitral valve stcnosis in thrce
28. Bonagura JD, Darke PGG. Congenital heart diseasc. In
cats. J Simall Anim Pract 34:452, 1993
Ettinger SJ. Feldman EC (eds). Textbook of Vetcrinary
52. Brown WA, Thormas WP. Balloom valvuloplasty of tricus-
Internal Medicine. 4th cd. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
pid stcnosis in a Iabrador rctrievcr. J Vet. Imtern Med
1995. p 892
9:419, 1995
29. Buchanan JW. Causes and prcvalence of cardiovascular
53. Lord PF, Liu SK, Carmichael JA. Congenial tricuspid
disease. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds). Current Vetcri-
stcnosis with righit ventricular hypoplasia in a cal. J Am
nary Therapy. Vol XI. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992.
Vet Med Assoc 153:300. 1968
p 647
 54. Tobias AIH, Thormas WP, Kitleson MD, el al. Cor triatri-
 30. Harpster NK. The cardiovascular system. In Holzworth
atum dexter in two dogs. J Ain Vet Med Assoc 220:285.
J (cd). Diseases of thc Cat. Vol i. Philadelphia. WB
1993
Saunders, 1987. p 820
 55. Jevens DJ, Johnston SA. Joncs CA, ct al. Cor triatriatun 
31. Liu SK. Pathology of felinc hcart discase. Vet Clin
dexter in rwo dogs. J Ami Anim Hosp Assoc 29:289, 1993
North Am 7:322, 1977
56. Millcr MW, Bonagura JD, DiBartola SP, et al. Budd-
32. Moisc NS, Meycrs-Wallcn V, Flahive WJ, ct al. Inheritcd
Chiari-like syndromc in two dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
ventuicular arrhythimias and sudden death in Gerrman
Assoc 25:277, 1989
shephcrd dogs. J Ain Coll Cardiol 24:233 1994
57. MacIntirc DK, Henderson RH, Banficld C, et al. Budd-
33. Ichirmkuhl LB, Bonagura JD. Caninc suhvalvular stcno-
Chiari-likc syndromc in a kitten, caused by menbra-
sis. In Bonagura JD (cd). Kirk's Current Vcterinary
nous obstruction of the caudal vena cava. J Am Anim1
'Thcrapy. Vol XII. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995,
Hosp Assoc 31:484, 1995
p 822
 58. Gordon B, Trautvcttcr E, Pallerson DF. Pulmomary conr-
34. Pyle R1., Peterson DF, Chacko S. Thc gcnctics and
gestion associated with cor triatriauum in a cat. J An
pathology of discrcte suhaortic stcnosis
s in the New
Vet Mcd Ass0c 180:75,1982
foundland dog. Am Hcart J 92:324, 1976
 59. Patterson DF, Pyle RL, Buchanan JW, et al. Hercditary
35. Harpster NK. Cardiovascular discascs of the domcstic
patent ducus arteriosus and its scquclae in the dog.
cat. Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 2:39, 1977
Circ Res 29:1, 1971
36. Stepieu Rl., Bomagura JD. Aortic stenosis: clinical find-
60. Detweiler DK, Pattcrson DF. Prevalence and types of
ings in six cats. J Simall Anim Pract 32:341, 1991
cardiovascular
diseasc in dogs. Ann NY Acad Sci
37. Patterson DF. Congenital defects of the cardiovascular
127:481, 1965
systcm of dogs: studies in comparative cardiology Ady
61. Eyster GE, Eyster Jr, Cord GB、 et al. Patent ductus
Sci Comp Mcd 20:1. 1976
 arteriosus in the dog: characteristics of occurrencc and
38. Flickinger GL, Patterson DF. Coronary lesions associ
results of surgery in one hundred consecuive cases.
aled withi congenital subaortic stcnosis in the dog. J
Ain J Vet Res 168:435, 1976
Pathol Bacteriol 93:133, 1967
62. Pyle Rl., Park RD, Alexandcr AF, el al. Patcnt ductus
 39. Pyle RL, Lowensohn HS, Khouri EM, et al. Left circum-
arteriosus with pulmonary hypertension in the dog. J
flex coronary artery hemodynamics in conscious dogs
An Vet Med Assoc 178:565, 1981
with congenital suhaortic stenosis. Circ Res 33:34, 1973
63. Pattcrson DF, Dctweiler DK Hereditary transmission 
40. Fingland RB, Bonagura JD, Myer CW. Pulnonic stei10-
 of patent duclus arteriosus in the dog. Am Heart J
dso ry uy I (1861-261) ss 6g p  u sis
74:289,1967
Assoe 189:218, 1986
64. Weirich WE, Blevins WE, Rebar AH, el al. Late conisc-
41. Eyster GE. Pulmonic stenosis. In Bojrab MJ (ed). Cur-
quences of palent ductus arteriosus in thie dog: a rcport
rent Techniques in Small Animal Surgery. 2nd ed. Phil-
of six cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:40. 1978
adelphia, WB Saumders, 1983, p 462
65. Ackerman NA, Burk R, Hahn AW, ct al. Patent ducus 
42. Patterson DF, Haskins ME, Schinarr WR. Hereditary
arteriosus in the dog: a retrospective study of radio-
dysplasia of thie pulmonary valve in heagle dogs. Am J
graphic, epidemiologic, and clinical findings. Am J Vet.
Cardiol 47:631, 1981
Res 39:1805,1978
43. Hawc RS: Pulmonic stenosis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
 66. Patterson DF Epidemiologic and genetic studies of con-
Assoc 17:777, 1981
genital heart discase in the dog. Circ Res 23:171, 1968
44. Tashjian RJ, Das KM, Palichi WE, el al. Studies on car-
67. Patterson DF. Camine congenital heart diseasc: epidemi-
diovascular disease in the cat. Ann NY Acad Sci
ology and ctiological hypotheses. J Small Anim Pracl
127:581, 1965
12:263, 1971
15. Fox PR. Congcnital feline hcart discase. In Fox PR
 68. Jones, CI , Buchanan JW. Patent ductus arleriosus: anat-
(cd). Caninc and Feline Cardiology
New York,
omy and surgery in a cat. J Am Vct Mcd Assoc
Churchill Livingstone, 1988, p 391.
179:364, 1981
46. Boltou GR, Liu SK. Congcnital hearr discasc in the cat.
69. Jeraj K, Ogburn P, Lord P, Wilson IW. Patent ductus
Vct (Clin North Am 7:34i, 1977
arteriosus with pulmomary hypcriension in a cal. J Am
47. Liu SK. Cardiovascular pathology. In Fox PR (cd). Ca-
Vet Med Assoc 172:1432. 1978
ninc and Feline Cardiology. New York, Churchill Liv-
70. Cohen JS. Tilley LP, Liu SK, DeHoff WD. Patent ductus
ingstouc. 1988, p 641
arteriosus in five cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoe 1l:95,
48. Buchanan JW. Pulmonic stcnosis caused by single coro-
1975
nary artery in dogs: four cases (1965-1984). J Am Vet
 71. Buchanan JW. Patcnt ductus arteriosus. Semin Vet Med
Mcd Assoc 196:115, 1990
Surg (Small Anin) 9:168, 1994
49. Fox PR, Miller MW, Liu SK. Clinical, cchocardio-
72. Eyster GE, Dallcy JB, Chaffce A, ct al. Aorticopuln0-
CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY
841
nary septal defect in a dog. J Am Vct Mcd Assoc
96. Hclphry MI. Vascular ring anomalics in the dog. Vet
167:1094, 1975
Clin North Am 9:207, 1979
73. Buchanan JW. Morphology of the ductus artcriosus in
97.
Van den Ingh TSDAM, van der Linde-Sipman JS. Vascul-
fetal and neonatal dogs genetically prcdisposed to pa-
lar rings in tic dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 164:939, 1974
tent ductus arteriosus. Birth Dcfects 14:349, 1978
98.
Elison GW. Vascular ring anomalies in the dog and cat.
74. Eyster GE. Atrial and ventricular septal defects. Scimin
Comp Contin Educ 1l:693, 1980
Vet Mcd Surg (Small Anim) 9:227. 1994
99. Etringer SJ. Suter PF Canine Cardiology. Philadclphia.
75.Tashjian Rj. Das KM, Palich WE, ct al. Studics on car-
WB Saunders, 1970
diovascular discasc in the cat. Ann NY Acad Sci
100. Shircs PK, Liu SK. Persistent right aortic arch in dogs:
127:581,1965
a long-term foliow-up after surgical correction. J Am
76. Liu SK, Ettingcr Sj. Persistcnt cormmon atriovcntricular
Anim Hosp Assoc 17:773, 1981
canal in two cats. J Am vet Med Assoc 153:556, 1968
101. Aultman SH, Chiambers JN, Vestre WA. Double aortic
arch and pcrsistent right aortic arch im two litier mates:
mal ventricular concduction presented as righit bundle
surgical treatment. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:533, 1980
branch block in a dog with an atrial scptum prirmum
102. Whcaton LG, Blevins WE, Weirich WE. Persistent righit
defect. J An Anim Hosp Assoc 15:417, 1979
aortic arch associated with other vascular anomalies in
78. Eyster GE, Anderson LK, Krenbeil JD, ct al. Surgical
two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:848, 1984
repair of atrial septal dcfect in the dog. J Am Vet Med
103. Martin DG, Fcrguson EW. Double aortic arch in a dog.
Ass0c 169:1081, 1976
J A1n Vet Med Assoc 183:967. 1983
79. Pyle RI., Pattcrson DF. Multiple cardiovascular malfor-
104. Hurlcy K. Millcr MW, Willard MD, ct. al. I eft. aortic arch
nations in a fanily of Boxer dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoe
and right ligamentum arteriosum causing esophageal
160:965. 1972
obstruction in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:110, 1993
80. Hamlin RL. Smith CR, Sinetzer DL. Ostium secundum-
105. Eyster GE, Carring CB, Baker B, et al. Coaretalion of
type interatrial septal defects in thc dog. .J Am Vet Med
thc aorta in a dog. J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 169:426, 1976
Assoc 143:149, 1963
106. Nichols JB, Eyster GE, Dulisch ML, et al. Aortic incr
 81. Jeraj K, Ogburn PN, Johnston GR, ct al. Atrial scptal
ruption in a dog.J An Vet Med Assoc 174:1091, 1979
defect (sinus venosus type) in a dog. J Am Vet Med
107. Nelson Aw. Aorticopulmonary window in a dog. J Am
Assoc 177:342, 1980
Vet Mcd Assoc 188:1055, 1986
82. Anderson RH. New light on morphogenesis of atrioven-
108. Will Jw. Subvalvular pulmonary stenosis and aorlicopul-
tricular septal defects. Int J Cardiol 18:79. 1988 
monary scptal dcfect in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
83. Wenuick ACG, Zevallos J. Devclopmental aspects of atrio-
154:913, 1969
ventricular septal defects. lnt J Cardiol 18:65. 1988
109. Buchanan JW. Persistent cranial left vena cava in dogs:
84. Hamlin RI., Smelzcr DL, Smith CR. Intcrventricular
angiocardiography, significance, andl coexisting anoma-
septal defects (Roger's disease) in the dog. J Ain Vet
lics. J Am Vet Rad Soc 4:1. 1963
Med Ass0c 145:331, 1964
110. Hiwig RL, Bishop SP Anomalous pulmomary venous
85. Sisson D, Luethy M, Thiomas WP. Ventricular septal
relurn in a Grcat Danc. A1n J Vct Rcs 36:299, 1975
defcet accompanicd by aoruic regurgitation in fivc dogs.
111, Hosgood G. Artcriovenous fistulas: pathophysiology, di-
J An Anim Hosp Assoc 27:441, 1995
agnosis, and trcaument. Comp Cont Ed 11:5, 1989
86. Ware WA, Bonagura JD. Muluplc congenital cardiac.
112. Suter PF, Fox PR. Penipheral vascular disease. In Et-
anomalics and Eisenmenger's symdromc in a dog. Coin-
tinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds). Texibook of Veterinary
pend Small Anim Med Pract Vet 10:932, 1988
Internal Medicinc. 4th cd, Vol I. Philadclphia, WB
87. Turk JR, Millcr JB, Sandc RD. Plcxogenic pulmonary
Saunders, 1995, p 1068
arteriopathy in a dog with ventricular septal defect and
113. Rutgers HC, Batt RM, Haywood S. Hcpatic organellc
pulrmonary hypcrtension. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
pathiology in dogs with congenital portosystemie shunts.
18:608, 1982
J vet Intern Med 5:351, 1991
88. Nimmo-Wilkie JS, Feldrman EC. Pulmonary vascular lc-
114. Birchard SJ. Fclinc portacaval shunts. Compend Small
sions associated with congenital heart defects in three 
Anim Med Pract Vet 14:1295, 1992
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoe 17:485, 1981
115. Liu SK. Pathology of feline heart diseases. In Kirk R
89. Patterson DF, Pylc RL, van Mierop L HS, et al. Heredi-
(ed). Current Veterinary Therapy. Vol V Plhiladclphia,
tary defects of thie conotruncal septuun in Keeshond
WB Saundcrs, 1974, p 341
dogs: pathologic and gcnctic studics. Am J Cardiol
116. Scott FW, Weiss RC, Post JE、 cl al. Kittcn rmortality
34:187,1974
complcx (nconatal FIP). Feline Pract 9:44, 1979
90. Ringwald RE, Bonagura JD. Tetralogy of Fallot in the
117. Bryan CS, Oppenheimer EH. Ventricular endocardial
dog: clinical findings in 13 cases. J Am Anim Hosp
fibroelastusis: basis for its presencc or abscrnce in cascs
Assoc 24:33,1988
of pulmonic and aortic atresia. Arch Pathol Lah Med
91. Patterson DF, Pylc RL., van Mierop 1.HS, et al. Heredi-
87:82,1969
tary defects of ahc conotruncal septum in kceshond
118. Paasch LH, Zook BC. The pathogenesis of endocardial
dogs: pathologic and gcnetic studics. Am J Cardiol
fibroelastosis in ihe Burmesc cal. Lab Invcst 42:197,
34:187, 1974
1980
92. Eyster GE, Weber W, McQuillan W. Tetralogy of Fallot
119. Moller JH, Lucas RV, Adams P, ct al. Endocardial fibro-
in a cal. J A1n Vet Med Assoc 171:280, 1977
clastosis: a clinical and anatomic study of 47 palients
93. van Heerdcn J, Iourens DC. Tctralogy of Fallot in a
with emphasis on its rclationship to mitral insufficicney.
two-and-one half-ycar-old cat. J An Anim Hosp Assoc
Circulation 30:759, 1964
17:129, 1981
120. Liu SK, Tilley LP. Malformations of the canine mitral
94. Hawe RS, Witter WR, Wilson JB. Tetralogy of Fallot in
valve complcx. J Am Vet Med Assoc 167:465, 1975
a five-ycar-old cal. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:329, 1979
121. Roherts WC, Morrow AG. Secondary left ventricu-
95. Lombard CE, Twitchell MJ. Tetralogy of Fallot, persis-
lar endocardial fibroelastosis following mitral  valvc
tent left cranial vena cava, and relinal detachmcnt in a
replaccmentcause of cardiac failure in late postopera-
cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:624, 1978
tivc period. Circulation 37(suppl 11): 101, 1968
842
CARDIOVASCLLAR PATHOLOGY
12la. Ni J, Bowles X, Kim Y, el al. Viral infection of the
146. Liu SK. Maron Bj, Iillcy LP. Hypertrophic cardiomyop-
myocardium in cndocardial fibroclastosis. Molecular cv-
athy in thc dog. Am J Pathol 84:497, 1979
idcnce for thc rolc of munps virus as an ctiologic
117. Ssson DD. Heritabiity of idiopathic myocardial hyper-
agent. Circulation 95:133, 1997
122. Liu SK, Fox PR, Tilley LP. Exccssive 1noderator bands
(Abstract). J Ver Intern Med 4:1i8, 1990
in the Icft ventricle of 21 cats. J An Vet Med Assoc
147a. Thomas WP, Mathiewson JW, Suter PF, cl al. Hypcrtro)
180:1215. 1982
phic obstructive cardiomyopathy in a dog: clinical, hc-
123. Kcene Bw, Bonagura JD. Valvular hcarl discase. In Kirk
modymamic, angiographic and pathologic studies. J Am
RW (ed). Current Veterinary Therapy. Vol VIHl. WB
Hosp Assoc 20:258, 1984
Saunders, Philadelphia, 1983. p 311
148. Liu SK, Peterson ME, Fox PR. Hypertrophic cardiomy-
124. Zook BC. Some spontancous cardiovascular lesions in
opathy and hyperuhyroidism in thie cat. J Am Vct Mcd
dogs and cats. Comparativc pathology of thc hcart. Adv
Assoc 185:52, 1984
Cardiol 13:148, 1974
148a. Kushwaha Ss, Fallon JT, Frurster V. Medical progress:
125. Joncs IC, Zook BC. Aging changes in thc vaseular
restrictive cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med 336:267, 1997
system of animals. Ann NY Acad Sci 127:671, 1965
125a. Buchanan JW. Valvular discase (endocardiosis in1
cats. J Vet Intern Mcd 8:79, 1994
dogs). Adv Vet. Sci Comp Med 21:75, 1079
150. Lcsser M, Fox PR, Bond BR. Asscssiment. of hyperten-
126. Das KM, Tashjian RJ. Chronic mitral valve diseasc in
sion in 40 cats with left ventricular hypertrophy by
thc dog. Vet Med 60:1209, 1965
Doppler-shift sphygmomanomctry. J Simall Anim Pract
127. Derwciler DK, Luginbuhl H, Buchanan JW, el al. The
33:55,1992
natural history of acquired cardiac disability in the dog.
151. Fox PR, Broussard JD, Petcrson1 ME. Electrocardio-
Ann NY Acad Sci 147:318. 1968
graphic and radiographic changes in cats with hyper-
128. Buchanan JW. Clhronic valvular disease (endocardiosis)
thyroidisrn: 1979-1982 vs 1992. J An Anim Hosp Assoc
in dogs. Adv Vet Sei Comp Med 21:75, 1977
(in press)
129. whiney JC. Cardiovascular pathology J Small Anim
151a. Kittleson ME, Pion PD, DcLellis LA, et al. Incrcascd
Pract 8:459, 1967
serum growth hormone comcentration in feline hyper-
130. Fenoglio U. Iuan DP, Wit AL、et al. Canine mitral
trophic cardiomyopathy. J Vet lntern Med 6:320, 1992
complex. Circ Res 31:417, 1972
152. Factor SM, Sonnenblick EH. Pathogenesis of clinical
131. Chakrabarti B, Park JW. Glycosaminoglycans: structure
and cxperimcntal cardiomyopathies: recent. concepts.
and interaclion. CRC Rev Biochen 8:225, 1980
Prog Cardiovase Dis 27:359, 1985
132. King BD, Clark MA. Baba N, ct al. "Myxomatous"
133. Pion PD, Kittlesoi1 MD, Rogers QR. ct al. Myocardial
mitral valvc: collagcn dissolution as the prirmary defect.
failure in cats associated with low plasina taurinc: a
Circulation 66:288, 1982
reversible cardiomyopathy. Science 237:764, 1987
133. Calverl CA. Endocarditis and bacteremia. In Fox PR
154. Fox PR. Feline myocardial discase. 18thi Anmual Wal-
(ed). Canine and Fcline Cardiology. New York,
tham/OSL Symposium. Vernon, CA, Waltham, USA,
Churchill Livingstonc, 1988. p 419
1994, p 119
134. Calvert CA. Valvular bacterial endocardiis in the dog.
154a. Fox PR, Petnie JP, Liu SK, el al. Clinical anrd patho-
 .J Ain Vet Med Assoc 180:1080, 1982
 logic fcatures of cardiomyopathy characterized by tnyo-
135. Anderson CA, Dubiclzig RR. Vegctative cndocarditis in
cardial failure in 49 cats: 1990-1995 (Abstr). J Vet Int
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:149, 1984
Med 11:139, 1997
136. Murdorh DB, Bakcr JR. Bacterial endocarditis in the
154b. Tidholm A, Haggstrom J, Jonsson L. Prevalencc of
dog. J Small Anim Pract 18:687, 1977
alttenuatcd wavy fibers in myocardium of dogs withi
137. Sisson D, Thormas WP. Encdocarditis of thc aortic valve
dilated cardiomyopathy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:1732.
in the dog. J Am Vct Med Assoc 184:570, 1984
1998
138. Fox PR, Nichols CER. Cardiac involvcment in systcmic
155. Fuster VF, Gersh BJ, Guiliani ER. ct al. Ihe natural
disease. In Fox PR (cd). Caninc and Felinc Cardiology.
history of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathies. Am J
New York, Churchill Livingstonc, 1988, p 565
Cardiol 47:525, 1981.
139. Yamaguchi RA, Pipers FA, Gamble DA. Echocardio-
156. Keene Bw. I-Carmitine deficiency in canine dilated car-
graphic evaluation of a cat with bacterial vegctalive
diomyopathy. In Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD (eds). Kirk's
endocarditis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:118, 1983
Current Veterinary Therapy. Vol XI. Philadelphia, WB
140. Muma WFI, Ferrans V], Pierce JE, et al. Diseretc subaor-
Saunders, 1992, p 780
tic stenosis in Newfoundland dogs: association of infec-
156a. Kramer GA, Kittleson MD, Fox PR, el al. Plasma tal-
tive endocarditis. Am J Cardiol 41:746, 1978
 rine concentrations in normal dogs and dogs with heart.
141. Van Vlect JF, Ferrans VJ. Myocardial diseases of animals.
disease. J Vet Intern Med 9:253, 1995
Am J Pathiol 124:98, 1986
156b. Kittleson MD, Keene B, Pion PD, cl al. Results of the
1412. Fox PR. Feline myocardial diseases. In Fox PR (ed).
multicenter spaniel trial (MUST): taurine- and carni-
Canine and Felinc Cardiology.
. New York, Churchill
tine-responsive dilated cardiomyopathy in Amcrican
Livingstonc, 1988, p 467
cocker spaniels with decreascd plasma taurine concen-
143. Sisson DD, Thomas wP. Myocardial diseases. In Ettinger
tration. J Vet Int Med 11:204, 1997
SJ, Feldman EC (eds). fexthook of Veterinary lnternal
157. Harpster NK: Boxer cardiomyopathy. In Kirk RW (ed).
Medicinc. 4th cd, Vol 1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
Current Vetcrinary Therapy. Vol VII1. Philadelphia, WB
1995, p 995
Salmndcrs, 1983, p 329
144. Tilley LP, Liu SK, Gilbertson SR, et al. Primary myocar-
158.
.Harpster NK. Boxer cardiomyopathy. A review of the
dial disease in the cal. A model for human cardiormyop-
long-term benefits of antiarrhiythmic therapy. Vet Clin
athy. A1n J Pathol 87:493, 1977
 North Am: Small Anim Pract 21:989, 1991
145. Liu SK, Maron BJ, Tilley LP. Fclinc hypertrophie cardio-
159. Fox PR. Rcstrictive carcdiomyopathy. Procecdings, 14
Annual Veterinary Medicine Forun, 1996, p 235
fcatures. Am J Pathol 102:388, 1981
160. Boagura JD, Fox PR. Restrictive cardiomyopathy. In
CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY 843
Bonagura JD (ed). Kirk's Current Veierinary Therapy.
178. Barr SC, Schmidt SP, Brown CC, ct al. Pathologic fca-
Vol XI1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995, p 863
tures of dogs inoculated with North American Trypano
I6l. Benotti JR, Grossman W, Wohn PF. Clinical profile of
sona cruzi isolates. A1n J Vct Rcs 52:2033, 1991
restrictive cardiomyopathy. Circulation 61:1206. 1980
179. Hirsch J. Hypercoagulability. Scmin Hematol 14:409,
162. Wynne J, Braunwaid E. The cardiomyopathies and myo-
1977
carditidcs. In Brauunwald E (ed). Heart Disease, A Text-
180. Furster V, Chescbro JH. Antithrormbotic thcrapy: role
book of Cardiovaseular Medicinc. 5th cd, Vol 2. Phila-
of platelet-inhibitor drugs.  1. Current concepts of
delphia, WB Saunders, 1997, p 1404
thrombogenesis: role of plateleis. Mayo Clin Proc.
56:102, 1981
endornyocardial disease, and its relationship to endo-
181. Griffiths I, Duncan ID. Ischacmic ncuromyopathy in
myocardial fibrosis. In Yu PN, Goodwin JF (cds). Prog-
cats. Vet Rec 104:518, 1979
ress in Cardiology. Vol 8. Philadclphia, Lea & Febiger
182. Suter PF, Fox PR. Peripheral vascular diseasc. In Et-
1979, p 281
tinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds). Icxtbook of Vetcrinary
164. Levine RA. Echocardiographic assessment of thc car-
Intcrnal Medicine. 4th cd, Vol 1. Philadelphia, WB
diornyopathies. In Weyiman AE (ed). Principles and
Saundcrs, 1995, p 1068
Practicc of Echocardiography. 2nd ed. Plhiladclphia,
183. Green RA. Russo EA, Greenc RT, et al. Hypoalbuni-
Iea & Fcbiger. 1994, p 781
neinia-related platelct hypersensitivity in two dogs with
165. Bossbally MJ, Stalis I. Knight D. ct al. Feline endoimyo
nephrotic syndrone.J Am Vet Mcd Assoc. 186:485, 1985
carditis: a clinical/pathological study of 41 cascs (Ab-
184. De Bartola SP, Meuien DJ Renal anyloidosis in two
stract). J Vet Interm Med 8:144, 1994
dogs prcscnted for thrombocmbolic phcnomcna. I Am
166. Stalis IHi, Bossbaily Mj, Van Winklc TI. Felinc cndomyo-
Anim Hosp Assoc 16:129, 1980
carditis and lefl ventricular cndocardial fibrosis. Vet
185. Burns MG, Kelly AB, Hornof WJ, ct al. Pulmonary
Pathol 32:122, 1995
artery thrombosis in three dogs with hyperadrenocorti-
167, Iiu SK, Tilley LP. Animal models of primary myocardial
cism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 178:388, 1981
discasc. Yale J Biol Mcd 53:191. 1980
186. LaRue MI, Murtaugh RJ. Pulmonary thirormbocmbolisin
168. Truex RC, Warshow IJ. The incidencc and size of thc
in dogs: 47 cascs (1986-1987). J Am Vet Mcd Assoc
modcrator band in mal and in mammals. Anat Rec
197:1368. 1990
82:361,1941
187. Fluckiger MA, Gomez JA. Radiographic findings in dogs
168a. Valentinc BA. Dcvelopment of Duchenne-type cardio-
with spontaneous pulmonary thrombocmbolisn or cm-
myopathy: morphologic studics in a canine modcl. An
bolism. Vct Radioi 25:124, 1984
J Pathol 135:671, 1989
188. Klein MK, Dow SW, Rosychuck RAwl. Pulmonary
168h. Valenuinc BA. Canine X-linked muscular dystrophy as
thromhoemholism  associated with  inmume-mcdiatcd
au animal model of Duchennc muscular dystrophy: a
anemia in dogs: ten cases (1982-1987). J An) Vet Med
revicw. Ain J Med Genet 42:353, 1992
Assoc 195:246. 1989
168c. Morsc NS. Duchenne's cardiomyopathy in a canine
189. Baty CJ. Hardie EM. Pulmonary thromboembolism: di-
model: clcctrocardiographic and echocardiographic
agnosis and treatment. In Kirk RW, Bonagura ID (eds).
studies. Am J Cardiol 17:812, 1991
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy. Vol Xl. Philadel-
169. Millcr ME, Christensen GC, Evans HE. Anatomy of the
phia, WB Saunders, 1992, p 137
Dog. 2nd ed. Philadclphia, WB Saunders, 1964
190. Schauh RG, Rawlings CA. Pulnonary vascular rcsponsc
170. Aretz H1, Billinghiam ME, Edwards WD, et al. Myocardi-
during phases of canine heartworm disease: a scanning
tis: a histopathologic definition and classification. Am J
eleciron microscopic study. Am J Vet Res 41: 1082, 1980
Cardiovasc Pathol 1:3, 1987
191. Schaub RG, Rawlings (A, Keith JC. Platelet adhesion
171. Atkins CF. The rolc of noncardiac discase in the devel-
opment and precipitation of heart failurc. Vet Clin
terics. Am J Pathol 104:13, 1981
North Am 21:1023, 1991
192. Keith JC, Schauh RG, Rawlings CA. Early arterial injury
172. Liu SK. Myocarditis andl cardiomyopathy in thc dog
jnduccd myointimal proliferation in caninc pulmonary
and cat. In Sekiguchi M, Olscn ECj, Goodwin JF (eds).
arterics. Vct Res 44:181, 1983
Myocarditis and Rclatcd Disordcrs. Tokyo, Springer-
193. Rawlings CA, Losonsky JM, Schaub RG, Post-adulticide
Verlag, 1985, p 122
changes in Dirofilaria immitis-infected beagles. Am J Vet.
173. Carpenter Jl., Roberts RM, Harpster NK, King NW.
Res 44:8, 1983
Intestinal and cardiopulmonary forms of parvovirus
194. Rawlings CA, Losonsly JM, Lewis RE. Developmcnt and
infection in a litter of pups. J Am Vet Med Assoc
resolution of radiographic lcsions in caninc heartworm
176:1269, 1980
diseasc. J Am Vct Med Assoc 178:1172, 1981
174. Meunicr PC, Cooper BJ、 Appel MJG, et al. Experimen-
195. Bcllah JR, whitton DI., Ellison GW, et al. Surgical cor-
tal viral myocarditis: parvoviral infcction of nconatal
rection of concomitant cranioventral abdominal wall,
pups. Vet Pathol 21:509, 1984
caudal stcrnal, diaplragmatic, and pericardial defects
175. 1ini SK, Keene BW, Fox PR. Myocarditis in the dog and
in young dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1722, 1989
cat. In Bonagura JD (ed). Kirk's Churrent Vetcrinary
196. Sisson D, Thomas WP, Rced J. et al. Intrapcricardial
Therapy. Vol X11. Philadelplhia, WB Saunders, 1995.
cysts in the dog. J Vet lmtern Mcd 7:364, 1993
p 842
197. Reed JR. Pericardial discascs. In Fox PR (cd). Canine
176. Lin SK Myocarditis and cardiomyopathy in thc dog
and Fcline Cardiology. New York. Churchill Living-
and ca. Hcarl Vcssels I:122, 1985
stone, 1988, p 495
176a. Meurs KM, Fox PR, Magnon A, ct al. Polymcrase chain
198. Sisson DD, Thomas WP, Ruchl WW, ct al. Diagnostic
reaclion (PCR) analysis for feline viruses in formalin-
valuc of pericardial fluid analysis in the dog. J Am Vet.
fixed cardiornyopathie hcarts identifies panlcukopcnia
Mcd Assoc 184:51, 1984
(Abstr). J Vet Ini Mcd 12:201, 1998 
199. Millcr MW, Fossum TW. Pericardial diseasc. In Kirk
177. Eisenstein B1. Ihe polynerase chain reaction: a new
RW, Bonagura JD (eds). Kirk's Curent Veterinary
mcthod of using molccular genctics for mcdical diag-
Therapy Vol X1. Philadclphia, WB Saunders, 1992, P
nosis. N Engl J Mcd 322:178, 1990 
725
200. Rush JE, Kcene BW, Fox PR. Pericardial disease in the
lnstitute, Wondcr Enterprises Co Ltd amd Shin Chaan
cat: a retrospcctive cvalualion of 66 cases. J Aim Anim
Color Printing lnc, 1989
Hosp Assoc 26:39, 1990
214. Liu SK, Tilley IP, Tappe JP, Fox PR. Clinical and patho-
201. McDonough SP, Macl.achlan NJ, Tobias AH. Canine
logic finds ini dogs with athcrosclerosis: 21 cases (1970-
pericardial mnesothelioma. Vet Pathol 29:256, 1992
1983). J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:227, 1986
202. Liu SK. Acquired cardiac lesions leading to congestive
215. Liu SK. Myocardial infaretion in aninals. Proccedings,
hcart failure in thc cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 3l:2071,
2nd International Symposium on thie Pig Model for
1970
Bioincdical  Rescarch, ^ Miaoli. Taiwan, Republic of
203. Meierhcnry EF, 1liu SK. Atrioventricular bundle degen-
China, Pig Research Institute, 1992, p 205
cration associated with sudden death in the dog. J Am
216. Detweiler DK. Spontancous and induced arterial dis-
Vet Med Assoc 172:1418. 1978
easc in the dog: pathology and pathogenesis. Toxicol
204. James TN, Robertson BT, Malds AL、et al. Hereditary
Pathiol 17 (Part 2):94, 1989
stenosis of the His bundle in the Pug dog. Circulation
 217. Lucke VM. Rcnal discasc in thc domestic cat. J Pathol
52:1152, 1975
Bactcriol 95:67, 1968
204a. Sandusky GE, Kcrr CM, Capen CC. Morphologic varia-
218. Mohr FC, Carpenter JI.. Arteriosclcrosis in a cal. Vet.
tions and aging in thc alrioventricular conduction sys-
Pathol 24:466, 1987
tem of large brccd dogs. Anat Rce 193:883, 1979
 219. Lefbom BK, Adams WH, Wcddle DL. Mineralizcd arte
205. Tilley 1.P, Liu SK. Persistent. atrial standstill in the dog
riosclcrosis in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37:420, 1996
and cat (Abstract). Sci Proc Am Coll Vet lntern Med.
 220. Liu SK, Fox PR. Myocardial ischemia and infaretion. In
1983, p 43
Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds). Kirk's Currcnt Veterinary
205a. Miller MS, Iilley LP, Atkins CE. Persistent atrial stand-
Therapy. Vol XI. Philadelphia, WB Saumdcrs, 1992, p
still (atrioventricular muscular dystrophy). In Kirk RW.
791
Bonagura JD (cds). Kirk's Current Vetcrinary Therapy.
221. Guarda F, Bussadori C, Scotti C, el al. Corrclazioni
Vol Xi. Philadelphia. WB Saunders, 1992, p 780
anatomo-clinichc nella cardiopatia ischemica dcl canc.
206. Bloomfield MB, Sinclair-Smith BC. Persistent atrial
Veterinaria 3:5, 1989
standstill. Am J Mcd 39:335, 1965
22la. DeFrancesco TC, Atkins CE, Keene BW. Myocardial
206a. Mostafa LA. A case of glycogenic cardioncgaly in a
infarction complicating management of  congestive
dog. Acta Vet. Scand 11:197, 1970
hcart failure in a dog. J Am Anirn Hosp Assoc 32:68.
206b. Wakoort HC, van Ness I, Stockhof AA, et al. Canine
1996
glycogen storage discasc type Il. A clinical study of four
222. Sandcrsleben JV. Der Infarkt und seine Bedeutung
affected Lapland dogs. J Anim Hosp Assoc 20:279, 1984
bcin HIaustier Tierarzil Wschr G8:590, 1961
207. Jonsson L. Coronary arterial lesion and myocardial in-
223. Niclsen Sw, Niclsen LB. Coronary einbolism in valvular
farets in the dog. A pathologic and microrangiographic
bacterial cndocarditis in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
study. Acta Vet Scand (Suppl 38) 13:1.1972
125:376. 1954
208. Luginbthl H, Detweiler Dk. Cardiovascular Icsions in 
224. Hamlin Rl. Prognostie value of changcs in thc cardiac
dogs. Ann NY Acad Sci 127:517, 1965
silhouettc in dogs with mitral insuficicncy. J Am Vet
209. Luginbuhl H. Jones JET Detwciler DK. The morpliol-
Med Assoc 153:1436, 1968
ogy of sponiancous arteriosclerotic lesions in the dog.
225. Scholz DG, Kitziman Dw, Hagen PT, et al. Agc-related
In Roberts JC Jr, Straus R (cds). Comparativc Artcrio-
changes in normal human hcaris during the first 10
sclerosis. New York. Harper & Row, 1965, p 161
decadcs of life. Part I (growth): A quantitativc anatormic
210. Lindsay S, Chaikoff IL, Gilmore JW. Arteriosclerosis in
study of 200 spccimens fron subjccts from birth to 19
thc dog. I, Spontancous lesions in the aorta and coro-
ycars old. Mayo Clin Proc 63:126, 1988
uary arterics. Arch Pathol 53:281, 1952
 226. Scholz DG, Kitzman DW, Hagen PT, et al. Agc-related
210a. Callanan J. Joncs BA, Willett BJ, ct al. Histologic
changcs ini normal huunan hcaris during the first 10
classification and inmunophenotype of lymphosarco-
decades of lifc. Part II (maturity): A quantitative ana-
mas in cats with naturally and cxperinentally acquired
tomic study of 765 specimens fron subjects 20 to 99
felinc immunodcficiency virus infcetions. Vet Pathol
years old. Mayo Clin Proc 63:137, 1988
33:264, 1996
227. Pearson AC, Gudipati CV, Labovitz AJ. Effecis of aging
211. Kelly DF. Gaskecll CJ, I.ce MA. Arteriosclcrosis of coro-
on left ventricular structurc and function. Am Hcart J
nary arteries in L abradors with congestivc hcart failure.
121:871, 1991
J Snall Anim Pract 33:437, 1992
228. Wci JY. Agc and the cardiovascular systcm. X Engl J
212. Robinson M. Gencralized athcrosclerosis in a dog. J
Med 327:1735, 1992
Simall Anim Pract 17:45, 1976
229. white M, Roden R, Minobe W, ct al. Age-related
213. Lin SK, Hsu Fs. Iee RCT. An Atlas of Cardiovascular
changes in β-adrcnergic ncuroeffector systems in the
Pathology Taiwan, Republic of China, Pig Rcsearch
human hcar1. Circulation 90:1225, 1994
Necropsy
37
Techniques for
the Heart and
Great Vessels
SANFORD P. BISHOP
OBJECTIVES FOR THE NECROPSY
EXAMINATION
The major goal of necropsy is to record gross anatomic abnormalities and
determinc the cause of dcath. Spccializcd mcthods for specilic anatomic,
immunohistochemical, and electron microscopic examination are sometimes
cmploycd. Postmortem methods should be guided by a thorough review of
thc clinical history and data base and have been developed for cxamination
of the cardiovascular system.1 
NECROPSY PROCEDURES
EXTERNAL EXAMINATION
A thorough external cxamination is first conducted. Body wcight and
general body condition arc rccorded. Particular attention is given to any
ahnormal fluid accumulations that will affcct measured rarios of heart or
chamber weight to hody wcight. / The left thoracic cavity is opcncd by cutting
the ribs at the sternal border ncar their vertcbral connection, and reflecting
the rib cage dorsally Thoracic arteries and veins are dissected in situ amd
cxamined for abnormalities. For example, autention is dircctcd to the liga
mcntum arteriosus (possible palent ductus arteriosus); vesscls originating
fron the aortic arch (aberrant origin of lefi subclavian artery); location of
 t ea e l nssd) aa soae Pe  aa 
prescnce of thrombi or masses; the general relationship of thc heart and
great vcsscls, and any adhesions.
EXTRACTING THORACIC ORGANS
The heart and lungs are then removed en bor from the thorax, including
845
846
CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY
mitral valve insufficieney,7 or for thrombi in cats.? Mi-
vessels at the thoracic inlet and diaphragm. The peri-
tral valve leaflets are carefully inspected from the left
cardium should be opened, noting any fluid accumula-
atrium before incising the mitral annulus, taking care-
tion, and the lungs removed by transecting the pulmo-
ful note of the valve surface and the chordae tendineae
nary artery and veins 1 to 3 cm from their origin. The
for thickening, vegetations, or rupturc.
aorta and venae cavac are transected 1 to 3 cm from
An imcision is thcn made down the left vcntricular
the hcart. Thc cxternal cardiace surface is cxamined
posterior wall bctwccn the posterior papillary musclc
for Gbrin tags, scars, or other abnorimalities.
of the left. ventricle (LV) and the interventricular sep-
tum (it is necessary to cul some of the chordae tendi-
ncae of the mitral valvc). If it is desired not to cut.
OPENING THE HEART
these chordac tendincae, the incision should be made
 directly through the middlle of the posterior papillary
RIGHT ATRIUM AND VENTRICLE
muscle. In this fashion thic LV is opened with an inci-
Next, the hcart is opened by an initial incision into
sion from the LA to thc left ventricular apex, bisecting
the main pulmonary artery. This is then cxtcnded into
the postcrior papillary muscle. The LV incision is thicn
the right ventricle along thc junction of the right
continued from thc apcx toward thc basc, along the
ventricular frec wall and the interventricular scptum,
antcrior wall of the hcart and into thie LV outflow tract
downward to thc cardiac apex following the septal wall,
to thc aorta (Fig. 37-1C,D). In the cat, care should be
 o o  d  d a 
taken to avoid inadvertent cutting of ahnorinal left.
right atrium (RA). ln thc RA, the incision is made
ventricular nodcrator bands, if present, which may
approximatcly 1 cm dorsal and parallel to the coronary
bridge thc left ventricular septun and free wall.9 Uuti-
groove into the right auricle. Thc cranial vena cava is
mately, these may need to be severed to permit reflec-
not incised, since this would destroy the sioatrial
tion of the leffi ventricular wall. ‘The hcart is now
node for histologic examination (Fig. 37-lA,B).
completcly opened, and all the valvular complexes and
endlocardium may be examined.
LEFT ATRIUM AND VENTRICLE
By inserting a blade into one of the pulmonary veins
NECROPSY MEASUREMENTS
and exiending the incisiou into the lefl. auricle, the
left atrium (IA) is opcned. The endocardial surface
ATRIOVENTRICULAR ANNULUS
of the IA is examined for focal endocardial thick-
Using a flexiblc ruler or a picce of string, the
ening, jet lesions, or endocardial tears indicative of
opened left and right atrioventricular (AV) valvc rings
D VALVE
RIGHT
VENTRCLE
FIGURF 37-1
RIGHT VENTRICLE
Diagram of heart opened along
ALVE
lines of blood flow as described
B
in text. Nmnbered drawings
A
illustrate thc shape and location
of tissues removed for histologic
section. (A) Right ventricular
ORTA
cavity, right ventricular cuthlow
tract, and pulmonary artery. (B)
Right ventricle and right atrium.
(C) Left ventricle, lefi ventricular
outflow rract. anl aorta. (D) Lefl
ventricle and left atrium.
NTERVENT!
LAR
LEFT
INTERVENTRICULAR
VENTRICLE
：
VENTRICLE
SEPTUM
NECROPSY TECHNIQUES FOR THE HEART AND GREAT VESSELS
847
TABLE 37-1
Heart Weight, Body Weight, and Associated Ratios in Normal Dogs and Cats
BW
HW/BW
RV/BW
LV+S/BW
RV/HW
LV+ S/HW
LV +S/RV
(kg)
(g/kg)
(g/tg)
(g/hg)
(g/kg)
(g/kg)
(g/kg)
Normal
(mcan)
10.22
6.69
1.37
4.25
0.207
(0.650)
3.13
Beagle (n = 26)
(SD)
1.23
0.68
0.17
0.42
0.014
0.034
0.23
Normal
(mean)
13.49
7.41
1.67
4.71
0.225
0.635
2.82
Mixedl-breed dogs (n = 17)
(SID)
5.18
1.02
0.26
0.67
0.2
0.028
0.23
Normal
(mean)
80'%
3.68
490
2.41
0.184
0.659
3.56
Cats (n = 33)
(SD)
0.57
0.60
0.13
0.37
0.025
0.025
0.23
BW. body weight; Iw, total hart weight; 1V+S, Iefl venricle plus sepu: RV. right ventieular ree wall; SD, stancard deviation.
should hc rncasured. These are expresscd as a ratio of
greater than normal heart weight to body weight ratio.
leff-o-right AV ring circiumference. The normal ratio
Normal total cardiac and regional weight ratios for a
for thc dog (mcan ± standard deviation) is 0.90 ±
group of colony-raised beagles, a group of mixed-brced
0.07; for thc cat, 0.82 ± 0.07. Deviations from this
dogs, and normal adlult cats are given (Table 37-1).
ratio are useful indicators of AV ring dlilation.
Hcart weight to body weight ratios in various feline
myocardial discases and for anothcr group of normal
cats are also listed (Tahle 37-2).'o The use of a mea-
HEART WEIGHT RATIOS
surcmcnt not affected by body condlition, such as tibial
The hcart is wcighed after completely trimming ex-
length or brain weighir, has been utilizcd by some
trancous tissue at the base. The ratio of heart wcight
investigators
to
11ormalize
Cardiac
weights,
thus
ooads 1o sep.eo sssse on pasn si 1bram xpoq [eion 0
avoiding the problem of changes in body condition.
hcart chamber mass and hypertrophy betwccn aiimals
or to a normal sct of values (Tables 37-1, 37-2). To
WALI. THICKNESS
quantify the degree of left or right ventricular hypcr-
 trophy or aoial enlargement, weights of the combined
Measurement of wall thickness ol the ventricles is
atria, right ventricular free wall, and thc combined IV
markedly affccted by the stagc of rigor mortis, which
 and intcrventricular septun should be obtained. The
is influenced by terminal disease conditions, time affer
dlissection is made by completing the separation of the
 death, and temperature. Thus, posimortcm changes
right ventricular free wall from the RA at the coronary
may altcr wall thickness, resulting in values consider-
groove, continuing through thc crista supraventricu-
ably different from prcinortem valucs. Gcnerally, LV
laris to the pulnonic valve. The IA is scparatcd com-
wall thickncss at necropsy excecds that rccorded by
pletely from the LV at the AV ring. The RV free wall
cchocardiography during life.'2
weight and combined IV and interventricular septal
Wall thickness measurements of the interventricular
wcight. arc obtained.
 septum and the left ventricular free wall are useful to
One must be careful to avoid spurious changes in
 assess various forms of hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
total body weight resuling from discase or therapy.
thy 10-13 To makc this measurement, an incision is made
For example, norbid obesity, scvcrc ascites, or other
from base to apex, perpendicular to thc cndocardial
effusions will cause thc hcart wcight to body wcight.
 and cpicardial surfaccs, through thc intcrventricular
ratio to become lower than normal; coniversely, sevcrc
scptum bclow the aortic valvcs and thc IV free wall
loss of body weight as in chronic cachexia may causc a
bctween1 the papillary muscles. Wall thickuiess is mca-
TABLE 37-2
Heart Weight, Body Weight, and Associated Ratios in Normal and Cardiomyopathic Cats
Body Weight
Heart Weight
Hear1 Wt/Body Wt
Myocardial Disease
Number
(hg)
(g)
(g/kg)
Hyperthyroid
3.3 ± 0.3
22.6 + 2.1
7.0 ± 0.3
Restrictivc
15
4.5 + 0.2
30.6 ±
1.7
6.4 ± 0.3
Symmctric hypertrophic
35
4.5 = 0.2
27.5 + 0.8
1'0 ± 69
Asymnetric hypcrurophic
1.6
4.4 = 0.1
27.5 ± 0.8
6.3 10.3
Dilatedl (congestive)
21
4.5 = 0.1
24.1 ± 0.9
5.4 ± 0.3
Excessive moderalor band
21
4.5
·0.2
21.6 ± 0.8
4.5 ± 0.2
Control (norinal)
36
4.8 = 0.2
18.4 = 0.6
3.83 10.2
Values are mcan ± SEM.
From Liu SK Petersont ME, Fox PR: IIyper
1 hyperthyroidlisn in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:52, 1984.
848
CARDIOVASCULAR PATHOLOGY
sured at the thickest point in cach wall, usually about.
mcrsion fixation of the cntire hcart is recquired if com-
 one fourth thc distance from the basce to the apcx,
 parisoni of gross chamber ancd wall measurements with
 avoiding papillary or trabecular muscles. Normal ratios
antemortcm imaging tests is desired." Each atrium
of  intervcniricular  scptum/LV frec  wall  thickness
should first be opened by a single short incisio, and
the blood removed by flushing with an isotonic solu-
 Ratios grcatcr than thesc valucs indicate asymmetric
tion such as saline. The vcntricles and atria are looscly
scptal hypertrophy.
Mcasurcment of chanber diameter is difficuit and
formalin to hold the chamber walls in a shapc approxi
imprccise ini the unfixed opened heart. Nevertheless,
mating that in vioo. Thc cntire hcart is then innersed
a subjective evaluation of the degree of chambcr dila-
tion or hypertrophy is made by inspecting the general
days. After fixation, the packing is removed and the
chamber shape, and the size of the papillary muscles.
heart opened by either transverse or longitudinal cuts.
Papillary muscles assumc a smaller, more flattened
The "breadloaf method of opening the heart (Fig.
form in dilated hearts and a more thickened, promi-
 37-2) is useful for examining and measuring wall and
ncnt form with hypertrophy.
chamber dimcnsions to provicde comparison with simi-
lar1
mcasurenents obtained during life. Successivc
ru anenb aq ae xade on osq o s
HISTOPATHOLOGIC
sured with conputcr-assisted digitizer mcthods to de-
EVALUATION
terimine ventricular mass, areas of fibrosis, infarct. sizc,
chamber
dimensions.  and  wall-to-lumen  rclation-
OF THE HEART
ships.14. t5
Comparison of the fixed heart with base-apex views
obtained by two-dimensional echocardiography is best
Tissue for histopathology should he fixed in 10 per-
 done by opening the heart longitudinally from base to
cent phosphate-buffered formalin for a minimum of
apex (Fig. 37-3) The fxed heart should bc transcctcd
24 hours. All clotted blood should first be removed
through both atria, the LV frce wall, interventricular
by gentle washing in fixative. Histopathologic sections
scptum, and RV free wall to revcal all walls and cham-
should hc takci as blocks of tissuc less than 3 mm
thick. The location and shape of tissue blocks, which
should includc all major anatomic: regions of the heart,
hypertrophy assessd by two-dimensional cchocardiog-
is illustrated in Figurc 37-1. To aid in histopathologic
raphy in cats.
cvaluation, a hematoxylin and cosin stain, a trichrome
stain (for fibrosis), and an clastin stain are recom-
PERFUSION FIXATION
mcnded. The Goinori aldehyde fuchsin stain with a
Perfusion fixation of the heart is the preferred
Gonori trichromc counterstain is uscful to identify
method for electron microscopy and is essential for
collagen and elastic tissue.
SPECIAL FIXATION PROCEDURES
The choice of fixative depends on the studies to bc
performed. For light mieroscopy. 10 percent phos-
 phatc-buffered formalin is appropriatc. Electron mi-
croscopy requires glutaraldehyde or paraformaldehyde
fixation. A 2 percent phosphate- or cacodylate-buffered
glutaraldehyde gives ideal fixaion for elctron micros-
copy bu1. renders the lissue somewha1 britle, causing
difficulty in sectioning paraffin-embcdded tissue. A
coinbination of 1 percennt glutaraldehyde and 1 pcr-
cent paraformaldehyde (modified Karnofsky fixative)
 provides a compromise, with excellent fixation and
cutting properties for both paraffin- and epoxy-cmbed-
ded tissues.
FIGURE 37-2
IMMERSIONFIXATTON OFTIIEENTIREHEART
Diagran illustrating a tcchrique for evaluating the heart using
multiple, transversc, cross-sectional slices from apex (slice a) to
base (slice g). This is usefinl for obsenving distribution of
nlyocardial wall lesions or pallerns of ventricular hyperlrophy,
morc prccise gross and histopathologic cvaluation. In-
NECROPSYTECHNIQUESFORTHEHEARTANDGREATVESSELS849
oplegic solution; the other,a fixative.Alternatively,
cannulaemaybeplacedinoneormoreindividual
coronaryarteriesforselectiveperfusion.Perfusionis
performed atapressure equivalenttoinvivodiastolic
pressure(about90 mmHg).Itismaintained either by
gravity,placingthereservoirbottles attheappropriate
height, or by a pump with a manometer. The heart is
arrestedwithsaturatedKClandtheisotonicsolution
flow started.Simultaneously,aortic branches are li-
gated to direct all flow to the heart, and theRA'or
vena cava opened to allow escape of fluid returning
fromthecoronary sinus.Within2to4minutes,blood
willhavebeenwashedfromthevasculature,andflow
is switchedto thefixative solution.Flow is continued
for 10 to15minutes until theheart is uniformlyhard-
ened.
REFERENCES
1.Liu SK.Postmortemexamination of theheart.Vet Clin
North Am 13:379,1983
2.Layman TE,Edwards JE.A method of dissection of the
FIGURE37-3
heart andmajor pulmonaryvessels.ArchPathol Lab
Canineheart openedaccordingtoa transversebase-to-apex
Med 82:314,1966
orientation.Thismethod of dissection is particularly suitablefor
3.Coffin DL.Necropsy procedure for the dog and cat. In
comparing the gross heart to tomographic planes accessible with
Jones TC,Gleiser CA (eds):Veterinary Necropsy Proce-
two-dimensionalechocardiography,especiallytherightparasternal
dures.Philadelphia,JBLippincott,1954
long axisviw.RArightatrium;Aftatrum;inrventricul
4.Harrison BM.Dissection of the Cat.5th ed.St.Louis,
septum;VW,leftventricularfreewall;Rw,rightventricularwall;
CVMosby,1966
A,ascending aorta;p,papillary muscle.Curved black arrowsbelow
5.Evans HE,deLahunta A.Miller's Guide to the Dissection
theLApoint to themitral valveleaflets and define theleft
ventricular inflow tract;white arrowsbelow theRA point to
of theDog.2nd ed.Philadelphia,WB Saunders,1980
tricuspidvalveleaflets and define therightventricularinflowtract;
6.
EdwardsWD,Tajik AJ,Seward JB.Standardizednomen-
straightblack arrowisintheleftventricular outlowtract,and
clatureandanatomicbasisforregionaltomographic
aortic valve cusps lie just distal to the arrow.This dog had
analysis of the heart.Mayo ClinProc56:479,1981
documented primary pulmonaryhypertension.Therightventricle
7.Buchanan JW:Chronicvalvular disease(endocardiosis)
is enlarged,and hypertrophy of therightventricularwallis
in dogs.Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 21:75,1977
present.(Courtesy of Dr.Philip R.Fox.)
8.VanVleet JF,Ferrans VJ,Weirich WE.Pathologic alter-
ationsinhypertrophicandcongestivecardiomyopathy
of cats.Am JVetRes 41:2037,1980
9.Liu SK,Fox PR,Tilley LP.Excessive moderator bands
quantitativestudiesofvascularmorphology.Itsuseis
in theleft ventricles of 21 cats.JAmVet Med Assoc
generally reserved for research applications.Due to
180:1215,1982
the elasticnature of bloodvessels,severe morphologic
10.Liu SK,Peterson ME,FoxPR.Hypertrophic cardiomyop
distortionresultsfromimmersionfixationfromvascu-
athy and hyperthyroidismin thecat.JAmVetMedAssoc
lar contraction.Perfusion fixation is the preferred
185:52,1984
technique to counteract these potential artifacts.
11.Liu SK,Maron BJ,Tilley LP.Feline hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy.Gross anatomic andquantitative histologic
features.AmJPathol102:388,1981
TECHNIQUE.Perfusion fixation is best accomplished
12.Fox PR,Liu SK,Maron BJ. Echocardiographic assess-
in situ under deep anesthesia but can also be done
mentof spontaneously occurring feline hypertrophic
on a freshly extirpated heart. After wide left lateral
cardiomyopathy.An animal model of human disease.
Circulation 92:2645,1995
thoracotomy,looseumbilical tapeligatures areplaced
13.Liu S-K,Maron BJ,TilleyLP.Feline hypertrophic cardio-
around thebrachycephalic and subclavian arteries.As
myopathy.AmJPathol1102:388,1981
largea cannula aswillbe accommodated is tiedretro-
14.Ideker RE,Wagner GS,Ruth WK,et al.Evaluation of a
gradely into the descending thoracic aorta,with the
QRSscoring system for estimatingmyocardial infarct
tip in the aortic archdirected toward theheart.The
sizeII.Correlationwith quantitative anatomicfindings
for anteriorinfarcts.AmJCardiol49:1604,1982
cannulaisconnectedbyaYconnectorandtubingto
15.Ideker RE,Behar VS,Wagner GS,et al.Evaluation of
tworeservoir bottles.Onecontains aphysiologicsolu-
asynergy as an indicator of myocardialfibrosis.Circula-
tion(phosphate-buffered saline)or a suitable cardi-
tion 57:715,1978
VIII
Cardiovascular
Surgery and
Procedure
nes
and
38
he Heart
DLANE E. MASON
JOHN A. E.HUBBELL
Cardiovascular disease stimulates physiologic and ncurohumoral compcn.
salory rechanisms (chapter 11), which can modify myocardial and pulmo-
nary function, result in arrliythmias and circulatory disturbanccs, and
thereby modify the effects of anesthesia. Some animals have only rild heart
disease, incidental to the more significant conditions for which anesthesia is
required. ln other cases, cardiovascular derangemcnt constiturcs a major
clinical concern complicating anesthetic induction and maintenance, or it
poses increased anesthctic risk.
 Incrcasingly, trends in veterinary mcdicine cmphasizing the human-animal
bond call for rmore sophisticated medical and surgical trcatinent. This often
involves anesthetic management of relatively high-risk paticnts bccause of
congenital or acquired cardiovascular dlisorders or systcinic dliscases.
All anesthetic agcnts eithcr depress cardiovascular fiunction dircctly or
affect reflex cardiovascular 1nechanisms indirectly, Although routine anesthe-
tic techniques are generally well tolerated by hcalthy pets, they may polen-
tially destahilize animals with heart disease. No single ideal anesthetic regi-
   a    sd   e si 
individually assessed with regard to cardliovascular pathophysiology, cocxis1:
ing systemic or metabolic diseascs, hemodynamic elfccis of the surgical
proccdurc, influcnce of ancsthcsia on the cardiovascular system, and potcn-
tial interactions betwccn the ancsthctics and concurrent mcdication (Table
38-1).1. 2
Prior to ancsthetic induction, altention is directcd toward cardiovascular
assessment and patient stabilization. Sclcction and administration of appro-
priate anesthetic drugs require thorough knowledge ol their effecis on
cardiovascular hemodynamics; appropriate patient rmonitoring, carly recog-
nition, and trcatent of complications if thcy arisc.
PREOPERATIVE PATIENT ASSESSMENT
'The presence of heart disease usually dictates ihat a morc specific and
complcte prcopcrative: workup than normal be complcted.2a
HISTORY
A complete and insightful history helps determine the presence of sys-
teimic, metabolic, or cardiovascular compromise; thc stage of hearr failure;
and the rate of diseasc progression, Kinowledge of current drug therapy and
associated palient. response is important. Specific questions should be asked
853
854
CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY AND PROCEDLRE
TABLE 38-1
 General Templates and Examples of Sedation, Analgesia, and Anesthesia for Cardiac Patients*
Anesthesia
Cardiovascular
Sedation
Analgesia
Disorder
Only
Only
Premedication
Induction
Maintcnance
Avoid
Dog
MR (moderate)
A, AOp, Op
B, M, O, Fp
A, AOp. Op
KBen, P,
1+ Op
X
OBen, FBen
MR (severc)
A, AOp, Up
B, M, O. Fp
A,AOp,Op
KBen, OBcn,
1=0p
X
KBcn, OBen.
FBcn
DCM
Op, OpBen
B, M, O, Fp
Up. OpBen
1±p
A.X
FBen
SAS
Op, OpBen
B. M, O. Fp
Op. OpBcn
Khcn, P,
1:Op
A, At, Gy,
 OBcn, FBen
1=Op
X
I'S
A,AOp,Op
B, M.O, Fp
A, AOp. Op
OBen. FBcn, P
PH
A, AOp. Op
B, M, O, Fp
doidoy'y
OBen, FBcn. P
1± (p
X
AF
Op. OpBcn
B. M, O. Fp
Op.OpBcn
OBcn, FBcn, P
I-Op
At, Gy. X
SSS
do 'dov,v
B, M. O, Fp 
A, A0p. Op
KBen, P.
1±0p
OBen, FBen
PDA
A,AOp.0p
B, M. O, Fp
A, AOp.Op
KBcn, P,
I+Op
OBen, FBen
Cat
ICM (no failure)
A,AB, AM
B,M, O,Fp
A, AB, AM
KBcn. P
I±M
HCM (failure)
B, BBen, M,
B, M. O. Fp
B. BBen, M.
P, I
1±M
A,X
MBen
MBen
KOI
B, M, KBen
B. M, O, Fp
B. M, K
KBcn. 1
I:M
X
IT
B, BBen, M.
B, M. O, Fp
B, BBcn, M,
P. I
1+M
K. X
MBen
MBen
SHP
A, ABcn, AB,
B, M, O. Fp
A,ABen, AB,
P, 1
I-.M
K, X
ABBcn
ABBen
int the sane syringe). Check package insert for compatibilty
A
- Aceprmazine (0.0]-0.05 mg/kg IM. SC. or IV)
A'T
Atropine
一
Butorpanol (0.05.2 mg/kg IM, SC. or IV)
bel
-- Fentanyl (0.01-0.2 mg/kg IV)
Fp
= Femtanyl patch
Giy
= Glycopyrrolate
Isofhurane
K
Ketamine (5-8 mg/kg IV)
M
= Mor phine (0.5-1.0 mg/kg IM, 2-1 hours) or oxymorphoue (0.0s-0.1 mg/kg IV, f-8 hours)
Oxymorphone (0.2 ing/kg)
Op
Opicid choiee inctudes butorphanel (0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM. SC, or IV), oxymorphone (0.05-0.15 mg/kg IM. SC. or IV). mepericline (2-5 mg/kg IM,
Sc), morphine (0.5-1.0 mg/kg IM or SC)
P
Propotil (G-8 mng/kg)
=Xytazine
Specife Cardiovascular Diseases
AF
一
Atrial tilrillation
DCM=Dilatedl cardiomyopathy
HCM =IIyperirophic cardiomyopathy
HT
= Iyperthyroid
MR
Mieral regargitation
PDA
  
PH
= Putmontary hypertension
PS
=Plmonic stcneosis
SAS
=Subaortie stesis
SH1
= Systemic hypertension
SSS
=Siek sius syndrome
Courtesy of Dr. Paula Meome.
about the cormon signs of cardiac discase, including
tion (chapter 5). The cxamination helps judge sys-
coughing, dyspnca, weight loss, cdlema, exercise intol-
temic output (e.g., pallor or prolonged capillary refill
erancc, or syncopc (chapter 4),
tine, mental depression, abnormal jugular venous or
femoral arterial pulscs); uncovcr stenotic or incompe-
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
tcnt cardiac valves (auscultation); detect arrhythunias
(palpate arterial pulse deficits while auscultating brady-
Important henodynamic conscquences of heart dis-
(r tachyarrhythmias); uncover respiratory diseasc or
case may be disclosed by thorough physical examina-
pulmonary edema (auscultale abnormal lung sounds);
ANESTHESIA AND THE HEART 855
 percuss abnormal fhuid accumulations; and dctect ab-
philic stippling of reticulocytes and nucleated red
Hormal cardiac loading conditions (efusions, jugular
blood celis]),
venous pulses, respiratory crackles).
BLOoD GAs ANALysIs. Arterial and venous blood gas
analysis can indicate metabolic status and ventilatory
DATA BASE
capacity and provide evidence for the prcsence of
shunts. Mctabolic acidosis may result frorn poor tissuc
pcrfusion and warrant mcasures to improve cardiac
The 1minimum prcanesthetic cardiac data basc in-
output. Basc deficits can bc detecied and correctedl.
Ventilatory support, cithcr bcfore or immediately after
rhythm strip, (2) thoracic radiographs, (3) a biochcmi-
 ancsthetic induction, may help maintain normocapnia
cal profile (for adult and geriatric animals or juvcniles
if respiratory acidosis is present. Metaholic alkalosis,
with congestive heart failure), and (4) serum thyroxine
 often accormpanied by hypokalcmia, is a potential com-
(14) assay or triodothyronine (Ts) suppression test for
plication of chronic dliuretic therapy"
oldler cats (>7 ycars of age) with suspected hyperthy-
roidlism.
 SERUM THYROD HORMONE DETERMINATION. Untreated
hyperthyroidism poscs incrcased ancsthetic risk. Sc-
BIOCHEMICAL PROFILE AND LRINALYSIS. Systcmic Or met-
rum 14 concentration should be mcasured in older
abolic diseascs that can advcrscly infuence ancsthesia
 u o pdss (o jo sek 2 <) seo
(chapter 34). Hypcrthyroidism is associated with hcart
serum clectrolytes (Na-, K+, Cl-, Ca*+), renal indiccs
failure and arrhythmias.fia
(BUN, crcatinine), serum albumin, liver cnzymes (ala-
Hine aminotrarsfcrasc, aspartate aminotransferasc, sc-
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM. The ECG records hcart rate
rurm alkaline phosphatase), and serun glucosc. Car-
and rhythm; rccords nonspecific changes with certain
diac arrhythmias and poor myocardial performancc
acidl-basc andl clectrolyte irmbalances, lnypoxia, or
may bc associatcd with clcctrolyte inbalances.2. & Hy-
myocardial infarctior; and implies cardiac chamber
percalccmia may indicatc parancoplastic syndlrormcs
chlargement. Certain arrhythmias confer incrcased an-
 caused by neoplasia. Elcvatcd BUN and crcatinine may
csthetic risk, cspecially when combined with the de-
suggest low cardiac output, cspecially in animals with
pressant effects of anesthetics. These include pcrsistent
systolic (i.c., pumping) dysfunction or primary renal
ventricular tachycardias (especially those nonrespon-
insufficicncy.  Prercnal azotemia is common
in
pcts
sive to antiarrhythrmic therapy); heart rates less than
with deconpcnsated hcart failure. Rcnal insufficicncy
seo u! og treqn ssal pue sop u sru iod siesq 09
Can be cxacerbated by hypotcnsion with prolonged
 that do not increase in response to anticlrolinergics;
alcsthesia, cspccially if rcnal dysfunction is already
or right bumdle branch block that develops as a mani-
prcsent.+ Ancsthetic agents should bc sclcctcd that
fcstation of progressive heart disease. Symptomatic
minimally decrease systemic blood pressure, and they
 bradycardias rmay require preanesthetic placement of a
should be combined with intravenous volume cxpan-
sion to rmaintain rcnal perfusion. Elevations of livcr
output, cspccially during anesthesia for permanent
enzyines may occur from chronic passive liver conges-
paccmaker implantation.?
tion caused by licart failure and with feline hyperthy-
roidlisin. Decreased serum alburin levels may indicate
THORACIC RADIOGRAPHS. Chest films indicalc cardio
liver dysfunction or protein-losing diseasc. With heart
 megaly and vascular perfusion; confirm and dclincate
failure, it may contribute to peripheral and pulmonary
rcspiratory and heartworrm dlisease; and disclose the
edlcma formation. The dosagc of highly protcin-bound
prcsence
of pulmonary edema, pleural cffusion,
dlrugs may need to be reduccd owing to an increase in
masses, or other cardiopulmonary disorders.
the unbound active drug fraction. Lrinalysis should
accoinpany any geriatric data base.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY. Valuable inforImation Ca11 bc ob-
taincd aboul cardiac structure and function. This is
HEMoGRAM, Anemia can impair oxygenation during
espccially useful for congenital hcart disease, pcricar-
 anesthesia: polycythemia incrcascs blood viscosity, de-
dial disease, feline myocardial disorders, a number of
creases tissue oxygenation, and often indicates signif-
 acquired cardiac conditions, and when pleural cffusion
cant right-to-left shunting of hlood. Packed cell volume
obscures radliographic evaluation of the cardiac silhou-
and total protein give an indication of hydration status.
ctte.
Elevated white blood cell coumts may indicate stress,
infection, or inflammatory discases. Cellular atypia
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION. Noninvasive bloOd pressure
may suggest systemic disorders (leukemia, hcartworms
mcasurement, angiography, or cardiac cathcterization
[cosinophilia and basophilia], or lcad toxicity [baso-
is sometimes required.
856 CARDIOVASCLIAR SLRGERY AND PROCEDURE
PREOPERATIVE PATIENT
Imias, and as palliative therapy for tetralogy of Fallot.
Certain cautions mus be considered with these agents
PREPARATION
rcgarding ancsthcsia. For example, their atiadrcner-
gic activity can add to the negative inotropic cffects of
 inhalation agents. Bronchoconstriction may be cxacer-
The patient should bc siabilized before induction of
batcd in asthmatics or in patients with chronic. obstruc-
anesthesia. Serious arrhythimias should be corrccied
tive pulmonary discase because bronchodilation, a re-
whenever possible. It is inportant to establish a stahle
sponse to β-acrenergic stimulation, is blocked by
rhythm that maximizes cardiac output and rinimizes
propranolol. Bul hecausc sucdden withdrawal of pro-
the potential ol malignant arrhythmia development.
prarrolol can result in tachycardia, arrhythuias, and
Before administering antiarrhythrnic drugs, either sys-
hypcrtcnsion," it should be continued prior to amcsthe-
temic or metabolic abnormalities or concurrent medi-
sia with appropriate patient monitoring. If nccessary,
cation responsible for the rhythm disturbance should
the β-blockade of propranolol may be overcome intra-
be discovered and corrected. The choice of appra-
 opcrativcly with β-adrenergic agonisis. such as dlopa-
oe  e  re  
rmine or dobutamine.*
clectrolyte balance and maintain intravascular volume.
avoid puhmonary cdema in cardliac patients and main-
CARDIOGENIG PULMONARY
tain adequate preload in volume-deplcted animals.
EDEMA
INTERCURRENT DRUG
This should be treaicd prcoperatively with furose
THERAPIES
mide, vasodilators, and positive inotropes where indi-
cated (chapter l3).8 Intraoperativc mcasures to im-
prove gas exchange after cndotracheal intubation may
A rule of thumb for decidling the neccssity for con-
be beneficial and inclucle supplemental oxygen admin-
current drug therapy is to continue drugs if (1) thcy
istration, bronchodilators, and suction. Positive end-
have improved the patient's condition, (2) they have
 cxpiratory prcssure (PEEP) and positivc-prcsure venti-
produced hemodynamic or metabolic stability, or (3)
lation (PPV) after intubation may also hclp increase
drug discontinuation could be associated with adverse
the arterial oxygen content by reducing alvcolar lood-
cffects or patient instability. The concurrent use of
ing by cdema.l
dlrugs with significant protein binding may decrease
the requircd dosc of certain anesthetic drugs, such as
barbiturates or dtaze pam..
CIRCULATORY SHUNTS
INOTROPIC SUPPORT
'These may have a direct effect on induction of anes
thesia. Leff-to-right shunts, such as a large ventricular
For cnhanced prcoperative or intraoperativc inotro-
scptal defect or palcnt ductus arteriosus, caluse pulmo-
pic support, the synpathominctic agents dopaminc
nary  hypcrperfusion.  Rapid uptakc of  inhalation
or dobutainine can be adininistered by intravenous
constant rate infusion. Thesc drugs arc rmorc potent
nervous system (CNS) deprcssion. A left-to-right shunt
than digitalis, and thcir cardiovascular cffects are more
Imay cause a dlelay in aesthetic effect after adlministra-
easily controlled (chapters 12, 15).* In aninals rcceiv-
tion of an intravenous induction agent because a por-
ing digitalis glycosides, drugs should be continued
tion of the bolus is rccirculated through the pulmo
prior to anesthesia if thcy arc controlling supraventric-
nary vasculature before rmaking its way to the central
ular arrhythinias or hclping rmaintain cardiac com-
ncrvous systcm (CNS). Fatal ovcrdosage could result
pensation. It is important to maintain normal scrun
if the initial bolus is pronpuly followed by additional
potassium levels in the digitalizcd paticnt to avoid
drug administration before adequale time for indluc-
exacerbating toxicity.
tion has clapsed.
Right-to-left shunts, such as tetralogy of Fallot, produce
pulmonary bhypoperfusion.
Dccreased   pulmonary
BETA-ADRENERGIC BLOCKING AGENTS
blood flow may result in slow induction when using
inhalation agents. By contrast, intravcnous indluction
 Propranolol, atenolol, and similar drugs are uscd to
treat hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and tachyarrhythi-
boluses partially bypass the pulmorary circuit, travel
ANESTHESLA AND THE HEART
857
ing immediatcly to the systemic circulation and the
strategy (Table 38-2). A classification scheine devised
CNS.: Morcovcr, anesthesia may cxacerbate a right-t0-
by the Ncw York Hcart Association for fuctional
left shunt by lowering Uhe systemic blood pressure.!l
phases of heart failure in humans has been modified
Maintaining a stable and adequatc mean systemic
and adapted for dogs's (chapter 12).
blood prcssure is csscntial to avoid this problern.
Class I heart failure is characterizcd by normal exer-
cise tolerance and no overt clinical signs of heart dis-
ease. These animals would be placed in ASA catcgory
PERICARDIAL EFFUSION
2. Virtually any drug among the list. of premedicants
or induction agents (tables 38-3 and 38-4) would
be suitable, including potcnt inhalation agcnts and
Pericardiocentesis is recommended prior to anesthe.
nitrous oxide.
tic induction when significant pericardial effusion or
Class II heart failurc is characterized by occasional
cardiac tainponade is documented. Pericardlial effu-
coughing and dyspnca after strenuous cxercise, but
sion may cause severe ventricular underflling,
de-
the animal is usually coinfortable at rest. These pa-
crcasc cardiac ouiput, lower syslemic blood pressure,
tients can be placed in ASA category 3. Premedication
alter coronary blood flow, and predispose to myocar-
should bc confined to cliazepan, narcotics, or keta-
dial ischemia.? Anesthesia under thesc condlitions
minc. Induction can be carried out with intravenous
could lead to ventricular fibrillation. Morcovcr, thc
diazepan/ketamine, narcotics, low dosages of thiobar-
cardiac output of paticnts with pericardial cffusion is
biturates or propofol, thiopental/lidocaine, or etomi
oftcn highly depcndent on hcart ratc, sincc strokc
date. Any of the potent agenis are acceptable, but it.
volume is linited by an underfiled left ventricle.
may bc safer to supplemcht anesthcsia with narcotics
'Thcrcforc, avoidlance of drugs that result in bradycar-
rathcr than to mainrain ancsthcsia solcly with inhala
dia and prevention of decp arnesthctic levels are im-
tion agents.
portalnt.
Class Ill hcart failurc paticnts cough or becormc
dyspncic aficr rminimal exercisc and at night. Class
IV hcart failurc describes fulminan1. congestive hearl.
PLEURAL EFFUSION AND
failure that is clinically obvious at rest. Class Ill and
ASCITES
early Class IV hcart failure paticnts become grouped
under ASA category 1. Greal care must be taken for
 successful anesthesia in these patients. Diazepam pre-
medication in dogs and low doses of ketamine in cats
Sevcre cffusions can be detrimental to the anesthe-
could be uscd if necessary. Narcotic supplementation
tized animal. Diaphragmatic pressure from ascites may
with lower doscs of inhalation agents will rnaintain an1
interfere with thoracic cxpansion and ventilation. Se-
adequale depth of ancsthesia.
vere pleural effusion will restrict lung expansion. Pre-
operativc drainage of a portion of the effusion will
Late Class IV heart failure animals are at very high
risk and are placed in ASA category 5. The potential
rcduce associatcd respiratory distress.
bencfit to be dlerived from surgcry must be weighed
Carefully against the risk of anesthesia. In dlogs, uar-
PNEUMOTHORAX
cotic agcnts are the safest, combined with neuromuscu-
lar blocking drugs and local anesthcsia, whcn possiblc.
Lower dosages are necessary when heart failure be-
comes more advanced.
When pnelmothorax is severe, lung excursion and
rclated ventilation are impaired. Preoperative removal
by aspiration is required.
TABLE 38-2
American Society of Anesthesiologists Risk
Categories for Anesthesia
ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
ASA
Category
Patient Description
/
Normal patient; no organic disease
ESTABLISIIING ANESTHETIC RISK
23
Patient with mild systeunic diseuse'
Paticnt with severe systemic disease limitinng
Once the patient is medically evaluatcd and stabi-
activity but net incapacitating
lized, the severity or stage of cardiac discasc and the
4
Patient with incapacitating systemie disease that.
is a comstant. threat to life
relative risk of ancsthesia arc dctermined. The Ameri-
5
 Moribund patient not expected to live 24 hours
can Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has devclopcd
with or without surgery
F
Emergeney operarion, designel by placing F
a classification of patient risk catcgory to decide the
individual risk of ancsthesia and appropriate drug
after appropriate calegory
858
CARDIOVASCUIAR SLRGERY AND PROCEDLRE
TABLE 38-3
 Premedicants for the Cardiovascular Paticnt
Drug
Dosage (mg/kg)
Dog/Cat
Route
Class of Heart Failure
ASA Category
Arropine
0.02-0.06
Both
IM/TV
I-I1
2-
Glycopyrrolate
0.005-0.01
Both
IM/IV
I-III
2-4
Lenperone
0.2-1.0
Bothi
IM
2
Diavepam
0.2-0.5
Both
IV
I-IV
2-5
Ketaunine
5-10
Cal
KI
I-IV
2-5
Innovar-Vet
0.1
Dog
IM
I-IV
2-5
Morphine
0.2-0.5
Dog
1M
I-IV
2-5
0.050.1
Both
1M
I-IV
2-5
Butorphanol
0.1-0.4
Both
IM
I-IV
2-5
Buprenorphine
0.005-0.02
Both
IM
I-IV
2-5
IM, intraruscnlar; IV, inuavenous.
ANESTHESIA AND THE HGH-RISK
cardiac output (c.g., capillary refill time, ucous mem-
PATIENT
branc color, urine output), and contractility (inferred
by apex bcat and heart souncds). Indirect blood prcs-
Anesthetic agents may directly affect cardiac myocar-
sure measuremcn1. is bccoming incrcasingly available
dial, mcchanical, or electric activity. Alternarively, thcy
(chapter 35).
may indirectly influence cardiac function through
tlicir action on the ncrvous systein or vasculature (Ta-
blcs 38-5 and 38-6). Normally, animals lhavc a largc
PREANESTHETIC DRUGS
cardliovascular reserve that allows the stress of ancsthe-
sia to be well toleratcd. However, patients with cardio-
Premedication can decrease pain and anxiety and
vascular coimpromise may havc exhausted much of this
thus reducc adlverse changes in autonoinic tone. Doses
 rescrve and are often unable to compcnsate for the
are titrated according to dliseasc. In cardiac patients,
effects of anesthetic agcnts. In these cases, drug dos-
routinely administercd drugs include opioids (dogs)
ages must be carefully titrated to the minimal amount
and benzodiazepines. Agents generally avoided
in-
required.
clude acepromazine, Telozol, azagonists (xylazine),
Therc are many ways to induce and maintain ancs-
thcsia in the compromised, high-risk cardiac patient.
'Table 38-1).1%a
Balanced anesthesia cmploying a combination of sev-
eral drugs may be the best approach. It permits thc 
ANTICHOLINERGICS
usc of lower doses, minimizes cardiovascular depres-
sion, and allows for adjustnent of variables, such as
Atropinc and glycopyrrolalc are anticholincrgic pre-
 analgesia, rmuscle relaxation, and hypnosis.
 Clinical
medicanis used rmainly to increase heart rate and re-
cvaluation of ancsthetic drug effects on cardiovascular
function should focus on changes in heart ratc and
 peripheral vagolyic as well as transient central vagomi-
rhythm (ECG monitoring), arterial blood pressurc,
metic cffects. Peripherally, their vagolytic effects in-
TABLE 38-4
 Intravcnous Agcnts for the Cardiovascular Patient
Drug
Dosage (rmg/kg)
Dog/Cat
Class of Heart Failure
ASA Catcgory
8-15
Both
I-II
2
Thiopental/lticocaine
4 (cach cdrug)
Dog
I-III
2-3
Ltoumirlate:
1-2
Both
I-IV
2-4
Propofol
2-6
Both
1-Iv
2-4
Diazepam (2.5 mg/1ml)
0.1-0.5 ml/kg
Both
I-IV
2-1
Ketamine (50 mg/ml)
aoydouixo
0.025-0.1
Bothi
I-IV
2-5
Fentanyl
0.002-0.006
Dog
I-IV
2-5
Iu1novar-Vet.
0.5 ml/kg
Dog
I-IV
2-5
Panturoniul
0.01
Boih
I-IV
4-5
Atracurium
0.15-0.50
Both
AI-I
2-5
Vecnraniun
0.05-0.25
Both
I-IV
2-5
*)ose in milliters of I:I diazepam:ketarine: mixturc.
ANESTHESIA AND THE HEART
859
TABLE 38-5
 Clinical Effccts of Conmon Premcdicants
Myocardial Oxygen
Drug
Rate & Rhythm Changes
Contractility
Blood Pressurc
Consumption
Cardiac Output
Anticholinergics
Transient AVB; sinus
Slight ↑
tauchycardia
Phenothiazines
Reilex tachyeardia:
antiarrhythimic
Reflex tachycarrlia;
 Slight ↓
NC
NC:
antiarrhythmie.
Benzocliazepines
NC:
NC:
NG
NC:
Xylazin1c:
Brarlycardia; 1′ 2" AVB:
lnitial ↑. then ↓
arrhythuogenic
Kctami1e
Sinus tachycarclia
十
十
Morphine
Bradycardia; 1, 2 AVB
NC:
May ↓(histamine)
NC
(mpeq)↑e
Mepericline
Bradyearrlia; 1°, 2° AVB;
NC:
reflex tachycardia
Oxymorphone
Bradycardlia: 1", 2° AVB
NC:
XC
NC
May ↓ (hradycardia)
Fertanyl
Bradycardia; 1°, 2° AVB
NC
NC
NC.
May ↓(brartycardia)
Innovar-Vet
Bradycardia: 1°, 2° AVB
N
NC
NC:
May ↓(bradycardia)
N, no change: ↑, inercase: ↓ dereas; I, first degree 2 second degree; AVB, atrioventricular block.
crease the rate of sinoatrial (SA) node discharge and
anesthcsia, Furthermorc, cxcessive incrcases in hcart
reduce atrioventricular (Av) node conduction time.
rate from anticholinergics may critically elevalc myo-
As heart rate increascs, cardiac output and blood pres-
 -e on osodsisnd pue ondunsuo usixo jepien
sure may become clevated secondarily. Arrhythmias
rhythmias.
may occur due to altered AV conduction. For cxample,
when atropine is administered intravenously, transient.
PHENOTHIAZINES
heart ratc slowing annd first- or second-degree atrioven-
tricular (Av) block may result from initial ccntral ner-
Phenothiazincs provide exccllent tranquilization but
vous system vagomimctic activity.4
should be used with grcal caution in the carcliac-co-
A major indication for anticholinergic use is devel
promiscd patient. Phcnothiazincs are potcnt α-adlren-
opmcnt of hemodynamically scvcre bradycardia. Anti-
crgic and dopaminergic blocking drugs.s They have a
cholinergic prencdication is also indicatcd in animals
dlirect negative inotropic effect, and their action on α-
whose cardiac output is highly rate dependent, such as
adrenergic receptors in vascular smooth muscle results
may occur with sevcre pericardial disease.
Thc advan-
 in vasodilation and hypotension. Hypotcnsion is oftern
tage of increascd stable hcart rate causcd by anticho-
followed by reflex tachycarrlia, which secondarily in-
linergics must be weighed against their vagolytic effects
creases myocardial oxygen consumption. Rarcly, ace-
causing inability to detect carly anesthetic-induced rc-
 promazine can cause profound bradycardia with first-
duction in hcart ratc that could indicate dcepcning
Or sccond-dcgrce AV block. Altliough phcnothiazines
TABLE 38-6
 Clinical Effecis of Common Intravenous Agcnts
Myocardial Oxygen
Drug
Rate & Rhythm Changes
Contractility
Blood Pressure
Consumplion
Cardiac Output
Thiobarbiturates
Reflex lachycardia;
bigeminy: ventricular
cctopia
Thiopental/
Reflex tachycardia:
lidocaine
 antiarrhythmie
Etomilate:
NC
NC
Slighu↓
NC:
NC
Propofol
Variable:
Slight. ↓
Slight. ↓
Inmovar-Vet
Bradycardia: 1°, 2° AVB
NC
NC
May ↓ (bradycartia)
Diazepan/ketaumine
Rale increasc
个
↑
Pancuronium
Rate incrcase; ventricular
N
↑
个
arrhythunias
Atraruriun
Rate inercase at highi dose
NC
May ↓ (histamine)
IN
NC
duc to histamine release
Vecuronium
NC
NC.
NC
NC:
NC:
I , Inercax: I , deerease; NC, no change; I°. first degree; 2 sccond degree.
860CARDIOVASCULAR SLRGERY AND PROCEDURE
are antiarrhythmic and protect the myocardiun
KETAMINE
against both barbiturate- and epinephrine-induced ar-
rhythmias." this property must be weighed against
Appropriate for most cardiac diseases, kctamine
combincd with diazepan provides cxcellent aud safc
their deleterious cffects.
induction, Becausc of its ability to causc cxciteincnt,
dlclirium, and convulsions, kctaninc should be com-
bined with a CNS sedative (c.g., diazeparn1), particu-
BUTYROPHENONES
larly in dogs. The dircct myocardial cffect of ketamine
Like phenothiazincs, butyrophenones are α-adrener-
is to decrcase contractility. However, it offcn acts as a
gic blocking drugs and can confer protection to the
positive inotrope through its sympathetic ncrvous sys-
myocardium  from  catecholamine-induced  arrhyth-
tenl effecis that override its dircct myocardial depres-
mias.'7 Cardiovascular depressant propcrties of butyro-
sant property23 2+ An increasc in heart rate, rmyocardial
phcnones are similar to those of the phenothiazine
 oxygen consumption, cardiac output. and systeinic
tranquilizers but are less severe,# Although the butyro-
blood pressure can result, Ketamine may cxert myocar-
phcinone tranquilizers havc fewer deleterious side cf-
dial depressant cffects on the cardiac paticnt whose
fects than the phenothiazines, they should be uscd
sytpathetic 1one is already high due to cardiac decoin-
with caution and the dose titrated to produce the
pensation, Ketamine (1 to 4 tmg/kg intravenously) is
desircd clfect. Droperidol, in combination with fen-
also used as a sliort-term 1ranquilizer in cats, although
tanyl (lnnovar-Vet), is the butyrophenone tranquilizer
it may precipitatc or exaccrbate cxirasystolcs when
most commonly uscd in dogs.
 administered to cats with advanccd hyperthyroidism or
severe heart failure.
BENZODIAZIPINES
NARCOTICS
Diazepam is a benzodiazepine derivative that can be
Narcotics are useful in dogs for premedication, in-
safely used in the cardiac patient. It prodluccs minimal
duction, and maintenancc of ancsthesia.Thcy have
Cardiovascular deprcssion, resulting in littlc change
 predictable but minimal hemodynamic cffecis in the
 in hcart rate. contractility, blood pressure, or cardiac.
critically ill animal. Analgesia is cxcellent and, in most
ouput.,"v 1iazepan may inprove coronary blood flow
instances, the level of provided sedation-hypnosis is
and at the same time decrcase myocardial oxygen con-
good. A narcotic antagonist (e.g., naloxone) may in-
sumption,? It has an antiarrhytlimic effect bccause of
duce arousal of the severely depressed animal or rever-
its ability to decrease syinpathetic tone centrally, and i1.
sal of respiralory depression.
is cormpatible with most other anncsthetic agents. How-
Morphine may cause bradlycardia by inducing cen-
evcr, whcn used in combination with high doses of
tral vagal stimulation. This effcc1 can be prcvented
fentanyl, diazepan significantly decrcases stroke vol-
with administration of anticholinergics, if necessary.
une, cardiac outpul, and systemic blood pressure."1
Myocardial performance is maintained with morphinc,
Owing to the solubility characteristics of diazcpam, it
although histamine rclease may be stimulated. This
is formulated in a 40 percent propylene glycol basc.
can decreasc peripheral vascular resistauce and poten-
Although rapid intravenous administration of propy-
tially contibute to hypotcnsion.25 26
lene glycol can be cardliotoxic and cause hypotcnsion
Meperidine has onnc tenth the analgesic potency of
and bradycarrdia, these cffccis are rarely ohserved with
morphine but is a much greater cardiovascular depres-
dliazcpam.
sant.27 1t decrcases 1nyocardial contractility directly,
causes peripheral vasodilation, and mcdiates liypoten-
sionl.
XYIAZINE
Oxyorphone is commonly used in combination
Xylazine is a poor choice as a sedative in coinpro
dog or cat, Oxymorphone is ten times more potent an
mised cardiac patients. An α-agonist, xylazine causes
analgesic than inorphine. Its use redluces the rcquired
central reduction of sympathetic tone. Afer adminis-
dosage of other agents nccessary for induction. Oxy-
tration, vagally medliated bradycardlia and reduction
 orphone is an excellcnt intraoperative drug in thc
in contractility occur. Its α-agonistic effects result in
 dog or cat for supplementing a light plane of ancsthe-
transicnt hypertension hccausc of increased peripheral
sia, provided thc animal is monitored for bradycardia.
vascular resistance, but this is followed by prolonged
Fenntanyl is also a uscful narcotic for intraoperative
hypotensioin.  Cardiac  ouput is  adversely
affected
anesthetic supplementation. Its rapid onset of action
through negative inotropy, bradycardia, and incrcased
is advantageous. Fentanyl may cause dysphoria and
afferload.2 Xylazinc potentiatcs arrhythimias and in-
muscle rigidlity when used in the conscious dog. There.
crcases myocardial sensitivity to catecholainines,It6
fore, it is mos. oftcn given in coinbination with droper-
ANESTHESIA AND THE HEART  861
idol in the neuroleptanalgesic conbination, Innovar-
 Because the severity of adverse drug cffects is direcly
Vet. Fentanyl with dropcridol provides excellent.
corrclated with dosc, sinall doses of thiobarbiturales
cardiovascular stability, whcther administered intramus-
may be tolerated for induclion in thc dleprcsscd or
cuarly for scdation or intravenously, as long as bradycar-
well-sedated animal.
dia is prcvcntcd or alleviatcd by anticliolinergic adlminis-
 Intravenous use of a thiobarbiturale with lidocaine
tratio (c.g., atropinc). Innovar-Vet may increasc
in dogs ray offer a safe alternative to induction with
 peripheral vascular resistance, acutely incrcasc
syS-
thiobarbiturates alone.?! Lidocaine reduccs the
temic blood prcsure, and significantly incrcasc left
amount of thioharhiturate rcquircd for induction by
ventricular contractility and coronary blood fow."s
approximatcly 50 percent. Additionally, lidocaine has
The agonist-antagonist type of narcotics, such as bu-
ventricular antiarrhythmic properties and may dlimi-
torphanol and buprenorphinc arc generally safe and
ish rehlex responses to cndotrachcal intubation (i.e.
ellective in dogs and cats with cardiovascular disease.
laryigospasn and tachycardia). The two drugs should
Buprenorphine's duration of action is longer tlran that
Hot be rmixed in the sainc syringe to avoid precipita-
of other commonly uscd opioids. Both agents cause
tion.
relatively less scvere respiratory deprcssion compared
with most narcotics.27
ETOMDATE
This intravenous liypnotic agent. has potential yaluc
for anesthetic indhuction in dogs or cats with cardiovas-
DRUGS USED FOR ANESTHETIC
cular compromisc. Bolus administration produces a
INDUCTION
clinical effect similar to that of the thiobarbiturates,
but with little or no hcrodyramic change. Cardiac
contractility is not advcrscly affected. A small redluction
Injectable ancsthetic doses should be as low as possi-
of artcrial blood prcssurc occurs, but mean coronary
ble to minimize cardiorespiratory depression. Preoxy-
blood flow is preserved.2
genation with 100 pcrcent oxygen for 3 to 5 minutes
may be performcd for anirals who will tolerate a face
PROPOFOL
mask. Large doses of thiobarbituratcs cause marked
A phenol derivative that produces rapid onsct, intra-
cardiorespiratory dcprcssion. Thiobarbiturate risks arc
venous propofol causes short-duration, noncumulative
reduced whcn dosed at less than 8 mg/kg IV. Mask
alesthesia in dogs and cats,s Cardiovascular cffects
induction with halotliane or isoflurane may causc
are similar to those of thiobarhiturates and are dosc-
markcd cardiovascular depression associated with i-
 duction doses and is not recommencded 1sa
related. Propofol incduction significantly decrcases sys-
tcmic blood pressure. Reductions of 20 to 40 percent.
A number of drugs or drug coinbinations may be
have bcen reported 3a This is primarily duc to a de-
uscd 1o induce anesthesia (see lables 38--1, 38-3, and
 38-6). Intravenous Innovar-Vet and diazcpam with keta-
crcasc in vascular resistance.* Direct myocardial de-
 pressant effects arc lcss than those produced by the
Imine have already becn mcntioned.
ui (A1 Sy/ 9'9) loodoil w g snmqeqo
over 60 seconds, followed by halothane or isoflurane
THIOBARBITURATES
inhalant anesthesia, is safe and cffcctivc in hcalthy
 dlogs.sa Aninals with good ventricular function and
Thcse are the most frequently administcred intrave-
normal cardiovascular reserve undergo little change
Hous induction agenis. They are uscd rost safcly in
 in cardiac output when given propofol.*4 Ilowever, it
many compromised animals when low doscs are given
 cular function and prccxisting hypotension are pres-
cffects can occur.? For example, thiobarbiturate bo-
ent,7 and it should be reserved for animals that arc
 luses may cause impaired myocardial contractility and
hemodynamically stable.
vasodilation. This may lead to peripheral pooling of
 Respiratory deprcssion and apnca are serious side
venous blood and result in decrcased ventricular filling
effects, particularly when propofol is administered at
 pressures and an overall decrcase in cardiac output.
rapid ratcs of infusion. Apnea incrcascs inn a dosc-
Tlhe resultant hypotension and decrcased cardiac oul-
dependent manner at dosages grcater than 14 rg/
put cause a reflcx tachycardia through sympathetic
kg.*7a Small dloscs ray be toleraled and adequate for
nervous systcm stimulation, which increases myocar-
inchiction of the depressed or wcll-scdatcd animal.
dial oxygcn consumption. The development of ar-
rhythrnias, cspccially ventricular bigeminy or other
DRUGS USED FOR ANESTHETIC
ectopia, can occur,so The pet with poor systolic ventric-
MAINTENANCE
ular fuction or unstable cardiac rhythm is a poor
candlidate for thiopental induction. Additional major
Ancsthetic maintenance can he achicved in dogs
side cffects are respiratory deprcssion and apnca.0
 and cais using inhalation agents titrated to effect. In
862CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY AND PROCEDURE
dogs, a combination of high-dose narcotics with skele-
dose is the widest of any of the modern potcnt inhala-
tal muscle relaxants can also be used (see Table 39-1).
tion agents, and isoflurane is offen chosen as thc safcst
 inhalation agent for aninals with heart disease.* How-
ever, it is the most hypotensive of thc inhalation agents
INHALATION AGENTS
and must be used with caution in pets with shock or
 Maintcnance with inhalation agents has the advan-
hypotension. The use of 1.3 mean alveolar concentra-
tages of case of administration and ability to control
tion (MAC) isoflurane in normal cats results in mini-
the level of anesthesia. These agents are compatible
mal cardiopulmonary depression, but 2.0 MAC
with essentially all other anesthetic drugs. Their cardio-
isoflurane causes hypotension and hypercapnia and
vascular dcpressant effects are dose related. Thus, if
should be avoided in cats.Ma
 analgesia is supplemented with the concurrent use of
  u se  go ss a 
SERvOFLURANE. This agent has cardiovascular cffects
effective, even in the high-risk small animal patient.
similar to those of isofurane. Its main advantage is
 All potent inhalation agents depress myocardial func-
very low solubility, which provides rapid onset and
 tion and decrease systemic blood pressure in direct
recovery. This allows rapid changes in the plane of
proportion to the depth of anesthesia.38
 anesthesia in the event of poor drug tolerance in ani-
mals with decormpensated heart disease. Servofluranc
HALOTHANE. Because of its arrhythnogenicity and
 will cause hypotension but is not arrhythmogenic and
marked  myocardial  depressant  quality,  halothane
does not cause myocardial depression at clinically
should be used with caution in the cardiac patient.
used levels.39
consumption* and sensitizes the myocardium to cate-
 NITRous oxine. Beneficial for use in the cardiac pa-
cholamines. The latter effect does not appear to be
tient, NO does not alter blood pressure by itself. While
dosc related.10 In fact, light planes of halothane anes-
NO is a myocardial depressant, it reduces the concen-
thesia rmay exacerbate its arrhythmogenic. properties
tration of required inhalation agents when used in
 due to endogenous catecholamine release in response
combination with other potent inhalation ancsthctics.
to surgical stress.
It slighuly increases sympathetic cardiac activity and
provides hemodynamic stability* In combination with
METHOxYFLLRANE. This drug depresses cardliac out-
fentanyl, it causes a marked decrease in cardiac. output
put and decreases total peripheral resistance, resulting
 and systemic blood pressure."' Nitrous oxide should be
in hypotension.* Since its cardiac depressant effects
avoided or a1 least discontinued 10 to 15 minutes
 are dose related, methoxyflurane can be used success-
before chest closure begins to prevent exacerbation of
fully at reduced doses in the cardiac patient. It is an
a pneumothorax after thoracotomy It should bc
excellent analgesic even in light planes of anesthesia.
 avoided in an animal with poor oxygenation prcopera-
 Its high tissue solubility causes prolonged induction,
tively and discontinued if hypoxemia devclops during
recovery, and slow change in anesthetic depth. These
the anesthetic period.
properties can be disadvantageous in the critically ill
patient.
BALANCED ANESTHESIA
 ENFLURANE. Due to its cardiac depressant properties,
The advantages of classic balanced anesthesia (nar-
enllurane causes a decrease in systemic blood pressure.
cotics plus tranquilization and neuromuscular block-
It also reduces total peripheral resistance. Since its
ing agents) in dogs include (1) decreased myocardial
 potency is less than that of other inhalation agents,
depression, (2) maintenance of more adequate levels
the need to maintain animals at higher alveolar con-
of systemic blood pressure, and (3) easy reversibility.
centrations in order to achieve adequale anesthesia
However, this technique using drug combinations is
may increase the direct cardiodepressant effecis.*9 The
complex and requires careful patient monitoring well
into the postoperative period. Narrotics havc bee11
to catecholamincs is less than that of halothane.
discussed in relationship to their minimal cardiovascu-
lar effects.
ISOFLURANE. Isoflurane causes significant hypoten-
 sion by decreasing total peripheral resistance; caution
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING DRUGS
must be exercised when using it in animals with
marked hypotension, At surgical planes of anesthesia,
Nondepolarizing muscle relaxants such as atracu-
it does not alter myocardial contractility and does no1.
rium, vecuronium, or pancuronium are the preferrcd
sensitize the heart to catecholamine-induced arrhyth-
neuromuscular blocking agents in the cardiac patient
mias,* Cardiac output is well maintained at anesthetic
(see Table 38-4). Nondepolarizing agents do not alter
dosages. The margin between the lethal and anesthetic
serum potassium levels as might occur with a depolariz.
ANESTHESLA AND THE HEART 863
 ing ncuromuscular blocker. Neither pancuronium nor
CENTRAL VENOUs PREssURE, Monitoring CVP can pro-
vecuronium causes significant histamine release, and
vide valuable information to guide the rale of fluid
both are reversible postoperativcly. Thcir cardiovascu-
administration during surgcry. Normal CVP is O to 5
lar effects include an increase in heart rate, blood
cm HO. If the cardiac output appears adequate (i.e.,
 prcssurc, and cardiac output. 12
normal peripheral perfusion, strong arterial pulses,
and cardiac apex beat suggesting normal arterial blood
pressure), a satisfactory cardiovascular statc rmay exist.
INTRAOPERATIVE PATIENT
If Muid administration increases CVP more than 8 to
10 cm IIO, fluid overload or cardiac failure may hc
MONITORING
evident. Measurements in the range of 15 to 20 cm
HO are generally too high. Fluid administration may
need to be reduced or temporarily disconinucd. Mea-
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHIC MONITORING. ‘'The  ECG
sures to improve cardiac function include decreasing
should be monitored throughout anesthesia. Pharma-
anesthetic depih and positive inotrope infusion (e.g..
cologic intervention is not always required for intraop-
dopamine or dobutamine). Administration of colloid
crative arrhythmias. Identification of reversible factors
rather than crystalloid fuids may decrcase the likeli-
associated with arrhythmias includes hypoxia or hyper-
hood of pulmionary edema formation, provided the
 capnia, acid-base disturbances, excess endogenous cat-
alveolar-capillary  membrane  is  intact.  Furosemide
echolamines, electrolyte abnormaliries, autonomic. re-
should be given intravenously if pulmonary edema
flexes, and anesthetics.13
develops. A low CVP generally indicates hypovolemia.
Fluid administration should be increased to elevate
INTRAvENoUs AccEss sITEs. These are essential in any
CVP to the upper limit of normal.45.46
high-risk patient undergoing anesthesia. Two IV lines
facilitatc rapid infusion of intravenous fluids through
ARTERIAL BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING. This is bene-
onc catheter and drug administration through the
ficial in the anesthetized cardiac patient and is the best
othcr, they also allow for simultaneous fluid, blood, or
way of assessing whether adequate tissue perfusion
plasma administration as necessary.
pressures are being maintained (chapter 35). IIear1.
ratc and pulse pressure correlate poorly with actual
FLLID THERAPY MONITORING. The cardiac patient may
 arterial blood pressures and could be misleading when
 bc unable to receive or pump blood effectively because
relied on solely as a perfusion estimate.1s. 7 Arterial
 of poor ventricular compliance, elevated preload, or
pressure alone is not an indicator of cardiac output.
myocardial (pumping) failure. These issues must be
Indirect blood pressure can be monitored using oscil-
factored into patient monitoring. An administrarion
lometric devices (Dinamap, Criticon, Tampa, FL),*
rate of 10 ml/kg/hr is a basic intraoperative guideline.
S q s a pe  to isq om 
If hypotension and poor cardiac output are evident,
consistently in small dogs and in cats.4 Commercial
volume expansion may be accomplished by increasing
 devices using ultrasonic kinetoarteriography (Doppler
the rate of Muid administration. Fluids are continued
ultrasoundl) are also available (Arteriosondc, HIoff-
postoperatively unril hemodynamic stability and ade-
man-La Roche, Cranberry, NJ),50, 51
quate urine production are achieved. Conversely, ani-
mals with heart failure, pulmonary hypertension, and
CONTROLLED VENTILATION. This is neccssary during
Conditions inhibiting ventricular filling (e.g.. pericar-
 dial tamponade, intracardiac masses) may develop con-
thoracotomy and prolonged surgical procedures. It is
gestion when receiving fluid therapy calculated for a
important  to maintain a proper inspiratory-lo-expi-
normal patient.
ratory time ratio. Prolonged inspiratory timcs cause
extended periods of positive pressure within the tho-
URINE oUTPuT. 'This can be a useful indicator of ade-
racic cavity, decreasing cardiac venous rcturn. An inspi-
quate fluid therapy. Renal perfusion is sensitive to
ratory-expiratory ratio of 1:2 to l:4 is therefore recom-
changes in autonomic tone. Urine output depends on
mended to avoid adverse effects on cardiac output.
maintaining a mean arterial blood pressure of at least 
70 mmHIg.*4 Reduced urine output results when renal
BLOOD GAS MONITORING. To help assess the effective-
perfusion and renal function are inadequate. This
 ness of ventilation, blood gas monitoring is hclpful. If
hypercapnia occurs, ventilation should be improved by
(e.g, decrcasing anesthetic depth, volume expansion
 increasing the number of breaths per minute or tidal
to correct hypotension, positive inotropic agents to
volume (i.e., the amount of air moving into the lungs
improve cardiac output). Dopamine is used as a renal
with each inspiration). Inadequate oxygenation with
vasodilator ar low dosages (1l to 2 μg/kg/min), improv-
normal arterial PCO, (PaCOg) can be caused by cer-
ing renal perfusion and urine production.
tain cardiac shunts, or it could indicate a ventilation-
864 CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY AND PROCEDURE
perfusion mismatch as occurs with low cardiac output
REFERENCES
states or lung pathology (e.g., pulmonary edema).5?
PULSE oxIMETRy. This provides a means for continu-
1. Bull Ap. The anesthetic evaluation and managemenl of
ous noninvasive monitoring of paticnt oxygenation.
the surgical paticnt with heart. disease. Surg Clin North 
Pulse oximcters determine the percent of oxygen satu-
Am 63:1035.1983
ration of hemoglobin in artcrial blood by detccting
 2. Stark DCC, Silvay G. Anesthelic managcment for cardiac.
differences in rcd and infrared light absorbance in the
surgery not rcquiring carrliopulmonary by-pass. Int An-
pulsatile component of tissue blood flow." The per-
csthesiol Clin 17:71, 1979
2a. Wilkund RA, Rosenbaun SH. Anesthesiology. First of
cent of oxygen saturation of hemoglobin in arterial
two parts. X Engl J Med 337:1132, 1997
blood indirectly reflects the patient's PaOy, Currenuy,
 3. Vaughan RS. Lunn JN. Potassium and the anacsthetist.
pulse oximeters are coming on the market (PALCO
Anaesthesia 28:118, 1973
Laboratorics, Santa Cruz, CA; Sensor Deviccs Inc,
4. Maddern PJ. Anaesthcsia for the patient with impaired
Waukesha, WI) with prohes designcd spccifically for
renal function. Anaesth Intensive Care 11:321, 1983
5. Saidman Lj. Uptake, distribution and clinination ot bar-
veterinary application.
biturates. In Eger El (ed): Anesthctic Uptake and Action.
Baliunore, Waverly Prcss, 1974. p 270
6. Bonagura [D. Fluid and electrolyte managenent of the
CLINICAL PATHOLOGy. Hemalocrit, total protcin, plalc-
cardiac patienl. Vet Clin North Ain 12:501. 1982
lets, and clotting profiles may need to he asscssed.
 7. Bonagura JD、 Helphrey ML, Muir WW. Complications 
 Surgical blood loss can bccomc a critical factor during
associated with permanent. pacemaker implantation in
anesthetic management. Whole blood for transfusion
thc dog: J Am Vct Med Assoc 182:149, 1983
8.
8.Pennock JL. Perioperative managcment. of drug therapy.
should be obtained
  prior to the ancsthetic  period
Surg Clin1 North A1m 63:1049, 1988
whencver significant blood loss is anticipated. Fresh
9. Muir ww, Sams R. Clinical pharmacodynamics and phar-
plasma transfusion alone may be suffcient with hypo-
mac:okinetics of beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs in vet-
proteincmia, thrombocytopenia, or clotting disorders.
erinary medicine. Compcnd Con1 Ed 6:156, 1984
10. Sibbald WJ, Calvin JE. Holliday Rl., et al. Coinccpts in
thc pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic support ol
cardliovascular function in critically ill surgical patients.
Surg Clin Yorth Am 63:455, 1983
PATIENT MONITORING
11. Bland JW, Williams WI1. Anesthesia for treatment of
congenital hcart defects. In Kaplan JA (ed): Cardiac
Ancsthesia. New York, Grune & Stratton, 1979, p 281
12. Shabctai R, Fowler NO, Gunlheroth WG. The hemody
nanics of cardiac tamponadc and constrictive pericarri-
Close obscrvation of heart rate and rhythm, mucous
tis. Am J Cardiol 26:480, 1970
 membrane color and refil time, arterial pulse pressure
13. Etuinger SJ, Suter PF. Canine Cardiology. Philadelphia,
WB Saundcrs, 1970
I3a. Hellyer Pw. Ancsthesia in patients with cardiopulno-
tial. Body temperature must be followed. Hypothermia
nary discasc. In Bonagura JD, Kirk RW (eds): Kirk's
is a dclcterious consequence of anesthesia in many
Currcnt Veterinary Therapy X1. Philadelphia, WB Saun-
cats and dogs and may occur during or after surgical
ders, 1992, p 655
complction. Animals should he kept warm postopera-
14. Muir ww. Effects of atropine on cardiac rares and
rhythms in dogs. J An Vet Med Assoc: 172:917, 1978
tivcly with cxlernally applied heat and warmed fluids.
15. Baldessarini RJ. Drugs used in thc treatment of psychial-
 Shivering uses a great deal of mctabolic cncrgy. Elec-
ric dlisorders. In Gilman AG, Rall Tw, Nics AS, cl al
trocardiographic monitoring is essen tial and may necd 
(eds): Goodman and Gilman's fhe Pharmacologic Basis
to bc continucd postoperatively for some animals.
of Therapcutics. 8th cd. New York, Pergamon Press,
Emergency resuscitative equipment and drugs should
1990, p 383
 bc on hand at all times during and after anesthesia
16. Muir WW, Werner LL, Haunlin RL. Effects of xylazine
andl acetylproinazine upon induced ventricular fbrilla-
(chapter 21). Arterial blood pressure, pulse oximictry.
tion in dogs aricsthetized with thiamylal and halothanc.
and ccntral venous pressure monitoring may bc re-
Am J Vet Res 36:1299, 1975
quired in decompensated animals. Additionally, intra-
17. Bertolo L, Novakovic I., Penna M. Antiarrhythmir cffects
of droperidol. Anesthesiology 37:529, 1972
vascular fluid volume (PCV, 1otal solids), urine output
18. Hall IW, Clarke KW. Veterinary Anaesthesia. 9thi ed.
(ideal, > 1 ml/kg/hr), and renal function may need to
London, Bailliere Tindall, 199l, p 51
be asscssed. Progressive iniraopcrative or postopcrative
19. Abel RM, Staroscik RN, Rcis RL. The elfects of diazepam
 decline may require decrcasing anesthetic depth, venti-
(Valium) on lefl ventricular function and systermic vascu-
latory support, and expanding circulating blood vol-
lar resistance. J Pharmacol Exp [her 173:364, 1970)
 20. Abel RM, Rcis RI., Staroscik RN. Coronary vasodilatation
umc (IV crystalloid or colloid fluids; blood or blood
tollowing diazepam (Valiun). Br J Pharinacol 38:620.
componcnts). Inotropes (dopamine, dobutamine) may
1970)
be required.
21. Reves, IG, Kissn I, Fournier SE. Additive ncgative inotro-
ANESTHESIA AND THE HEART  865
pic effect of a connbination of dliazepam and fentanyl.
37. Ikiw JE, Pascoe PJ, Hlaskins SC, et al. Cardiovascular and
Anesth Analg 63:97, 1984
respiralory effeets of propofol administration in hypovo-
22. Kide AM, Calderwood HW, Sona LR. Cardiopalmonary
lemic dogs. Ain J Vet Res 53:2323, 1992
effect of xylazine in dogs. Am J Vet Rcs 36:931, 1975
37a. Muir WW III, Gadawski JE. Respiratory deprcssion and
23. Wright M. Pharmacologic effects of ketaminc and its use
apnca induccd by propofol in dlogs. Am J Vet Res
in veterinary medicine. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:1462,
59:157, 1998
1982
38. Hickcy RF, Eger El. Circulatory cffects of inhaled anaes-
24. Haskins SC, Farver TB, Patz JD. Ketamine in tlogs. Am J
thetics. In Prys-Roberts C (ed): The Circulation in Anaes-
Vet Res 46:1855. 1985
thesia. London, Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1980,
25. Vatner SF, March JD, Swain JF. Effects of morphine on
p 441
coronary and left ventricle dynamies in conscious dogs.
39. Steffey EP. Inhalation anesthetics. In Thurmon JC, Tran-
J Clin lrivest 55:207, 1975
quilli WJ, Benson GJ (eds): Lumb & Jones Veterinary
26. Roscow CE., Moss J, Philbin DM, el al. Histaminc releasc
Anesthesia. Srd cd. Baltimore, williains & Wilkins, 1996,
duing morphine and fentanyl ancsthesia. Anesthesiol-
p 297
ogy 56:93, 1982
 39a. Hodgson DS, Dunlop CI, Chapman PL., ct al. Cardio-
27. Thiurmon JC, Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ. Lumb & Jones
pulmonary cflects of anesthesia incluced and maintained
Veterinary Anesthesia. 3rd cd. Baltimore. williams &
with isoflurane in cats. An J Vet Res 59: 182, 1998
Wilkins, 1996, p 183
40. Bednarski RM, Muir WW. Arrhythmogenicity of dopa-
28. Buckhold DK. Erickson IHI1, Lumb WV. Cardiovascular
 mine, dobutamine and cpinephrinc in thiamylal, halo-
respouse to fentanyldroperidol and atropinc in the dog.
thane anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 44:2341, 1983
Am J Vct Rcs 38:479, 1977
41. Bovill JG, Sebel PS, Stanley TH. Opioid analgcsics in
29. Conway CM, Ellis DB. Henodynamic cffects of short-
anesthesia: with special refercnce to their use in cardio-
acting barbiturates. Br J Anaesth 41:534, 1969
vascular ancsthesia. Anesthesiology 61:731, 1984
30. Muir ww. Electrocardiographic intcrpretaion of thio-
42. Savarese IJ, Philbin DM. Cardliovascular ceffecis of ncuro-
barbiturate induced dysrhythmias in dogs. J Am Vet Med
muscular blocking agents. Int Anesthesiol Clin 17:13.
Assoc 170:1419, 1977
30a. Quandt JE, Robinson EP, Rivers WJ, ct al. Cardliorespira-
1979
43. Philbin DM, Hutter AM Jr. Intraoperative cardliac ar-
tory and ancsthetic effects of propofol and thiopental in
dlogs. Ain J Vet Res 59:1137, 1998
rhythmias.Int Auesthesiol Clin 17:55, 1979
31. Bjorling DE, Rawlings CA. Indluction of anesthesia with
44. Osborne CA, Polzin DJ. Azotemia: A revicw of what's old
thiopental-lidocaine combination in dogs with cardiopul-
and what's new. Part II. Localization. Compend Cont
monary dlisease. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:145, 1984
Educ Pract Vet 5:561; 1983
45. Kelman GR. Interpretation of CVP mcasurcments. An-
32. Gooding IM, Weng JT, Snith RA, et al. Cardiovascular
and pulmonary responscs following ctonidate induction
 acsthesia 26:209, 1971
of ancsthesia in patients with demonstraled cardiac dlis-
46. Haskins SC. Shock. In Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary
easc. Aresth Analg 58:40, 1979
 Therapy Vol VII1. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1983, p 2
33. Wcaver BMQ, Raptopoulos D. Induction of anaesthesia
47. Cullen Df. Interpretation of blood-prcssure mcasurc
in dogs and cats with propofol. Vet Record 126:617, 1990
ments in anesthesia. Anesthesiology 40:6, 1974
33a. Grounds RM, Twigley AJ, Carli F, ct al. The hemody
48. Meldrum SJ. Thc principles anderlying Dinanap-A mi-
namic effects of intravenous induction. Conparisons of
thc effects of thiopcntone and propofol. Anesihesia
mination of mean arlerial pressure. J Med Eng Technol
40:735, 1985
2:243, 1978
34. Sebel PS, Lowclon JD. Propofol: A ncw intravenous anes-
 49. Kittleson MD, Olivier NB. Measurement of systemic artc-
thctic. Anesthesiology 71:260, 1989
rial blood pressurc. Vet Clin North Am 13:321, 1983
35. Azari DM, Cork RC. Comparative nyocardial depressive
50. Klevans LR, Hirhaler G, Kovacs JL. Indirect blood pres-
effects of propofol and thiopental.  Ancsth’ Analg
sure determination by Doppler technique in renal hyper-
77:324.1993
tensive cats. Am J Physiol 237:H720, 1979
 36. Park WK, Lynch C. Propofol and thiopental depression
51. Morgan RV. Systemic hypertension in four cats. Ocular
of myocardial contractility: A conparative sludy of me-
and medical fndings. J Am Anin Hosp Assoc 22:615,
chanical and electrophysiologic cfects in isolatcd guinea
1986
pig ventricular muscle. Anesth Analg 74:395. 1992
52. Shapiro BA, Harrison RA, Walton [R. Clinical Applica-
36a. Bufalari A, Miller SM, Giannoni C, ct al. Thc use of
tion of Blood Gases. 3rd ed. Chicago. Year Book Medlical
propofol as an induclion agent for halothane and
Publishers. 1982, p 77
ossy dson uuy uy ssop u eisuie suos
53. Clark JS, Votteri B, Arigno RL, et al. Noninvasivc assess-
34:84, 1998
Hcnt of blood gases, Am Rev Respir Dis 145:220. 1992
39
cardiovascular
gery
 and
Procedures
GEORGE E. EYSTER
PREREQUISITES FOR SUCCESSFUL
INTERVENTION
Successful outcome of cardiovascular surgery requires accurate diagnosis,
thorough understanding of anatomy and physiology. medical managcmcnt
to control or correct cardiovascular compromise or serious arrhythmias,
Congenital hcart diseascs are reviewed in detail with respect to clinical
characteristics, diagnostic features, and therapy (chapter 24). Thc cpidemiol-
ogy and prevalence of cardiovascular diseases are discussed in chapter 23.
Anesthetic considerations (chapter 38) and anatomy (chapters 1 and 2) have
 been thoroughly reviewed. Additional information concerning diagnostic,
pathophysiologic, and therapeutic aspects of cardiovascular discascs is con-
tained elsewhere in this book.
CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY
 Surgical intervention remains the preferred trcatment for many congeni-
tal and acquired cardiac diseases. Surgery may offer paliative but stabilizing
results in some disorders; in others, anatomic repair and hemodynamic
hemostasis, atraumatic tissue handling, secure knot tying) must be combined
open heart surgery. The latter requires venous inflow occlusion (<4 min-
utes) to allow short procedures to be performed, or cardiopulmonary bypass
tive supportive care arc cssential for successful surgery.
INTERVENTIONAL CATHETERIZATION
 Intcrventional cardiac cathcterization is gaining popularity for treating
ccrtain cardiovascular conditions (see chaptcrs 9 and 24). The most common
866
BASIC CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY AND PROCEDURES 867
applications include balloon dlation (valvuloplasty) of
nerve stimulation induccs bradycardia unless a vago-
stenotic pulmonic and aortic valvesa * and transcathe-
lytic drug is uscd.
ter techniques 1o close patent ductus arteriosus." The
cardiovascular foreign bodies in animals can obviatc
SURGICAL APPROACHES AND
thoracotomy and cardiotomy in some cascs.4 1o The
TECHNIQUES
importance of clinical diagnosis andl therapy is thc
same as described above.
PERICARDIOCENTESIS
PATIENT MONITORING
Pericardial effusion is easily diagnosed by cchocardi-
 Evaluation of ventilation is critical during and affer
ography (chapter 8). Pericardiocentesis may bec indi-
surgery. Arterial COg tension (PaCO2) is a good mea-
cated to obtain fuid for diagnostic purposcs, as whcn
infectious pericarditis or neoplastic cffusion is sus-
surc of alvcolar ventilation. Hypoventilation is indi-
cated by a PaCO greater than 40 mmHg. Other blood
pected, or to relieve intrapericardial prcssurc in cascs
gas determinants such as arterial oxygen tension
of cardiac tamponade. 'This technique is described in
detail in chapter 29.
[PaO,] (maintaining PaO, > 80 mmHg) are also infor-
 mative. Monitoring cardiac electrical activity (ECG) for
heart rate, arrhythmias, and P-QRs-T morphology is
mandatory. Also recommended is artcrial blood prcs-
MEDIAN STERNOTOMY
sure monitoring (maintain systolic pressurc > 90
mmHg and mean blood pressure > 65 mmIIg) and
ADvANTAGEs. Median stcrnotomy has several advan-
 pulse oximetry monitoring (maintain hemoglobin oxy-
tages over a lateral thoracotomy: (1) visualization off
gen saturation [SaO,] > 90%). A simplc central ve-
both sidcs of thc thorax, (2) proximity to the right
 taq aa si sis ansad sn
ventricular outlow tract, (3) visualization of all heart
between 5 and 10 cm H,O), particularly in right-sided
chambers, and (4) reduced hemorrhage for some pro-
cedurcs requiring heparin therapy. Bilateral partial lo.
hear1. disease.
During open chest procedures, one may visually ob-
bectomy is easily performed, but. complete lobectomy
serve and dircctly palpate cardiovascular and pulmo-
is offen difficult. The caudal vena cava, main pulmo-
nary structures. The lungs are assessed for appropriate
nary artery, and both sides of the heart can bc manipu-
cxpansion in response to positive-pressure ventilation.
latedl.
The pericardial sac is examined for pericardial effu-
 sion. Thc pink appearance of the mnyocardium, particu-
DISADvANTAGEs.  A major  disadvantage of median
larly the lefl atrium, suggests good ventilation and
sternotomy is dclaycd healing if pleural effusion con-
d sd   as asd s
tion is present, the myocardium appears darker (pre-
encc for sternal positioning, the pleural effusion will
seep into the surgical site. This will delay and occasion-
 proximation of arterial blood prcssure is determined
ally inhibit healing.
 by palpating the aortic arch or dcsccnding aorta. As a
rough rule of thumb: (1l) application of digital aortic
SURGICAL. TECHNIQUES
pressure should cause thc aorta to movc away from
the prcssurc point if thc arlerial pressure is greater
 Median sternotomy is popular in humans but has
than 110 mmHg: (2) if thc vessel wall indents and
 not been used extensively in the dog or cat. It is an
the whole artery moves as it is prcssed, pressure is
ideal technique for certain procedures that include
approximatcly 80 to 110 mmHg: (3) if, with digital
cardiac tumor removal, right ventriculotomy, pericar-
pressure, the artcry indents easily and partially
OC-
diectomy, and exploratory surgery. This approach 10
clhudes before it is moved, arterial pressure is less than
the heart can be accomplished by placing the animal
 80 mmHg, and the animal is too deeply anesthetized
in dorsal recumbency and incising the skin from just
or is in a low cardiac output state.
cranial to the manubrium to just caudal to the xiphoid.
 Bradycardia accormpanies an excessively deep anes-
 The procedure need not extend along the full length
thcic plane and should be avoided. Administration of
of the sternum unless wide exposurc of the thorax is
atropine (0.03 to 0.04 mg/kg) or glycopyrrolate (0.01.
required. The approach to the cranial heart and ante-
to 0.015 mg/kg) SC or IM redluces dlificult-to-managc
rior mediastinum may require the median sternotomy
bradyarrhythmias. This is particularly important in pa-
only from the manubrium to the midsternal arca,
tients requiring manipulation of the cardiac base (c.g-
whereas most procedurcs on the heart may be accom-
with patent ductus arteriosus surgery), since vagal
plished wih incisions only in the posterior two thirds
868
CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY AND PROCEDURE
 of the sternun. By opening only a portion of the
 to identify the fourth intercostal space. The serratus
sternum, closure is simplified, healing is facilitated,
ventralis muscle is divided between its heads at thc
 and patient postoperative pain is greatly reduced. Thc
appropriate rib space. The fascia and connective tissue
 incision is made strictly on the midline (avoiding the
are then divided over the 4th intercostal space, reveal-
nccd to transect muscles) and continues between the
ing the intercostal muscles, External and internal in-
 pectoral muscles to the sternebrae. 'The sternebrae are
tercostal muscles are divided in the posterior one third
divided by saw, chisel, or heavy scissors. Closure usually
of the rib space, thereby protecting the intercostal
requircs wiring the sternebrae. At least three layers of
artery, vein, and nerve. The pleura is then visualized.
tissue are then closed. Healing is facilitated if the
The anesthesiologist should permit the lungs to col-
sternebrac have not been cut from manubrium to
lapse as a small hole is surgically made in the pleura.
xiphoid, so that several sternebrae may be left to stabi-
'The pleural incision is than cxtcnded dorsally and
lize the sternum.
ventrally (Fig. 39-1). At the ventral end of the incision,
care should be taken not to interrup1 the internal
LATERAL THORACOTOMY
thoracic artery as it courses within I cm of the lateral
border of the sternum. Rib retractors are then placed.
 ADVANTAcEs. Most cardiovascular procedures are per-
'To complete the lateral thoracotomy, the left anterior
formed using a left lateral thoracotomy al. the 4th
lung is rotaled at its base and packcd posteriorly.
 intercostal space. This approach is adequate for most
clinical conditions requiring surgical intervention in
SURGICAL PROCEDURES FOR
the heart and grcat vessels. It allows exposure to the
right ventricular outflow tract and main pulmonary
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
artery and the ductus arteriosus. The basirc thoracot-
PULMONIC STENOSIS
 othcr intercostal spaces. A right intercostal thoracot-
omy allows exposure of the right auricle, atrium, and
 Pulmonic stenosis (PS) represents congenital nar-
ventricle; cranial and caudal vena cavae; azygos vcin;
 rowing of the pulmonic valve, right ventricular outflow
and right lung lobes.
tract, or pulmonary artery. In the dog, valvular Ps is
 DISADVANTAGEs. With a dedicated (e.g., left 4th inter-
the most common form. Muscular infundibular PS
costal) thoracotomy approach, visualization of struc-
may occur singularly or secondary to any of the other
tures lying on both sides of the tlhorax is not possible.
types. Supravalvular or peripheral pulmonary artery
 Proximity to the right ventricular outflow tract and
PS is rarc. Pulmonary valve dysplasia may present as a
visualization of all heart chambers arc less than with a
Ialformed valve, including the immediate subvalvular
median sternotomy.
tissue, although isolated subvalvular Ps is rare. Preop-
crative considerations require careful characterization
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
 Of the anatomic type, location, and severity (see chap-
With the animal in right lateral recurnbency, the left
ters 8, 9, and 24).
q asod s e panuapi si seds rensoi u
Cardiac catheterization has been the gold standard
der of the scapula. The skin incision is made frorm the
for diagnostic confirmation and localization, and to
level of thc ventral portion of the vertebrae to just
 gauge severity of the stenotic lesion. At the tinc of
proximal to the ventral midline of the animal. Thc
catheterization, a balloon dilation can also bc consid-
cutancous trunci and subcutaneous tissues are then
os opond on so .'edai, Ad e dne m pa
 divided, using scissors; most thoracotomy bleeding will
clinical improvement and retard progression until thc
occur at this layer. The latissimus dorsi muscle is thc
animal grows and other surgical approaches can bc
first major structure to be cut and is partially tran-
sected from its ventral border, approximalely halfway
lent outcome when PS is causcd by fusion of pulmo
to its dorsal border. The lalissimus dorsi docs not need
 lary valve leafleis. Surgery is generally reserved for
to bc transected but requires constarnt dorsal retraction
cases of PS caused by fibromuscular lesions, severe
throughout the procedure if the partial transection
dysplasia, or pulmonary valve hypoplasia (chapters 9
is not performed. The scalenus muscle inserts as an
and 24). Based upon catheterization-derived pressure
aponcurosis beginning at the 5th rib. 'The fibrous apo-
recordings, guidelines to grade the severity of PS are
 neurosis should be transected and the scalenus re-
as follows:
flected anteriorly. At this point, the intercostal space
(1) No intervention (surgery or balloon valvuloplasty)
should be verified by palpating beneath the latissimus
is recommended whcn right ventricular systolic
 dorsi to 1he thoracic inlet and counting the ribs. In
pressures are less than 70 mmIIg, or when gradi-
extremely small animals, a curved hemostat may
be
ents across the obstruction arc less than 50
passed to thc thoracic inlet and reflected off each rib
mmI g:
littlevalueinsubvalvarPSorcasesofseverelydysplastic
pulmonaryvalves.A seriousdisadvantageofbistoury
repairformuscularPSislackofvisualizationofthe
obstructed area.However, it is a relatively simple tech-
nique to perform and has been used in veterinary
medicine since 1953.11, 12
Surgical Techniques
Thevalue of thisprocedureisrelated toits simplic
ity.Either a left lateral thoracotomyin the4thintercos-
tal space or median sternotomy provides surgical ac-
cess.Therightventricular outflow tractisvisualized
andapursestringsutureplacedinthisrelativelyavascu
larregion.A stab incision ismade into theright ventri-
cle,a bistoury (frequently a teat bistoury)is intro-
ducedintotherightventricularoutflowtract across
the stenotic valve,and several cuts are made in the
valve (Fig.39-2).The bistoury is then removed, the
pursestring is tightened down,and the chest is closed
routinely.This technique requires minimal aftercare,
Sk
and theimmediateresults aregenerallyexcellentin
purevalvularPS.
MODIFIEDBROCKPROCEDURE
FIGURE39-1
Left lateral thoracotomy at the 4th intercostal space.Craniad is to
Indicationsand Contraindications
theleft.Visible,fromleft toright,are skin(Sk),cutaneous trunci
（T),latissimus dorsi (D）at the forceps (F),the anteriorlyreflected
Thissimpletechniqueisusedeffectivelyonlyfor
scalenus (S), serratus ventralis (V), and the intercostal muscles (l).
solitary muscular orinfundibular PS.It is of novalue
The pleura (P) is being cut and the lung (L)is seen through the
thoracic opening.
(2）Interventionis probablyindicatedwhenrightven-
tricular (RV) pressures of 70 to 120 mmHg or
gradients of 50 to 100 mmHg are present;
(3）Intervention is invariably indicated with RVpres-
suregreater than120 mmHg and gradients
LAI
greater than 100 mmHg.
PA
Whenlow-to-mediumpressuresarerecordedinma-
ture animalswithPs,intervention is usually not re-
quired. However, when similar pressures are recorded
in growing dogs with PS,it is anticipated that the
disease will become more severe and that the animal
willbecomeacandidateforintervention.
It is important torecognize that anesthesia signifi-
RV
cantlydepressespressure gradients up to50percent
compared with those measured by Doppler echocardi-
ography in the awake dog.Therefore,many cardiolo-
gistsprefergradientmeasurementsgeneratedby
Doppler echocardiography (see chapter 24).
FIGURE39-2
BISTOURYTECHNIQUE
Left lateral thoracotomy at the 4th intercostal space.A bistoury (B),
introduced through apursestring suture in aRumel tourniquet (R)
Indications and Contraindications
to control bleeding,hasbeen advanced into therightventricle
(RV).Itis passed through the obstruction,where cuts are then
This technique isindicatedforvalvularPS.It isof
made in the muscular or fibrous subvalvar ring.L,lung;PA,
pulmonary artery; LA,left auricle.
870CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY AND PROCEDURE
for the other types of Ps. The rmajor disadvantage of
Surgical Technique
this procedure lies in the inability 1o visualize the right
ventricular myocardium being surgically excised.
Inflow occlusion and pulmonary arteriotomy (Swan
PS caused by valvular, inmediate subvalvar, or pulm10-
Surgical Techniques
nary valve dysplasia lesions.s Although induction of
This procedure resembles the bistoury technique
 mild hypothermia is part. of this technique when used
for humans, this is not necessary in dogs.
exccpt that the instrument introduced into the right
The infow occlusion pulmonary arteriotomy repair
ventricular ouulow tract is an infundibular rongeur.
for Ps is accomplished through a left lateral thoracot-
The offending tissue is excised with this instrument.
Chest closure and postoperative management are iden-
omy in the 4th intercostal space. The lungs arc re-
flected and umbilical tapes placed around the cranial
tical to that of the bistoury technique.12
and caudal vena cava. The cranial vena cava is identi-
fied by careful blunt dissection. It is located cranial to
VALVULOTOME VALVOTOMY
the heart and ventral to the brachycephalic artcry.
 Once the vena cava is identifed, umbilical tape is
Indications and Contraindications
 passed around the vessel, and a Rumel tourniquct is
loosely positioned over the umbilical tape. The caudal
Valvulotome valvotomy for PS is a moderately com-
vena cava is poorly identified from a 4th intercostal
plicated technique that may be effective in valvular,
 space, requiring that the heart be rotated cranially.
subvalvular, and dysplastic. PS. Its disadvantages include
lack of visualization of the offending right ventricular
This necessitates breaking dlown the mediastinum cau-
myocardium as the valvulotorme cuts are made. How-
dal to the heart.
Once the caudal vena cava is visualized, a tourniquet
ever, when patients are appropriately selected, valvo-
is placed around it similar to that of the anterior cava.
toiny using a valvulotome may be very effective.
The pericardium is then opened dorsal and parallel to
the phrenic nerve. Pericardial basket sutures are
Surgical Techniques
placed on both edges of the cut pericardium, and
the heart is elevated using the basket sulures. The
Valve dilation using a valvulotome is similar to the
pulmonary artery is identified, and a double row of 4-
 previously described techniques. In using a valvulo-
0 vascular stay suturcs is placed in the poststenotic
tome, both valvular and fibrous subvalvular stenoses
dilatation, or slightly toward the heart from the post-
 and most dysplastic pulmonary valve obstructions can
stenotic dilation. The animal must be well ventilatcd,
 be opened. The technique is identical to the previously
and the Rumel tourniquets are tightened to occlude
 described procedures; however, in this case the valvulo-
the vena cava.
tome is introduced into the right ventricle and is
Approximately 15 seconds are required for the right
passcd into the obstructed area. As the valvulotome is
side of the heart to empty, and an incision is then
thenl opencd, cuts are made in either the valve, subval-
made in the pulmonary artcry bctween the stay su-
yular tissue, or both. Closure and postoperative man-
tures. The pulmonary artery is opened (Fig. 39-3),
agement are identical to the previously described tech-
suction is applied to permit visualization, and the ste-
niques.
notic pulmonary valve or subvalvular tissuc is incised
andl/or removed by scalpel, scissors, or valvc dilator.
Thc valve is reformed to approximate a normal valve
INFLOW OCCLUSION AND PULMONARY
or it is excised, depending on the type of discasc. The.
ARTERIOTOMY
stay sutures are then elevated, a partially occluding
Indications and Contraindications
clamp (Satinsky) is placed on the pulmonary artery
closing the opening, and the tourniquets are removed
 Pulmonary arteriotomy is effective in valvular sub-
from the vena cava to re-establish the circulation.
valvar and dysplastic valves. It is not effective in rmuscu-
Throughout thie occlusion procedure, some hemor-
lar infundibular stenosis, nor is it effective in supraval-
rhage will occur, since the azygos vein and coronary
var PS. The technique has the significant advantage of
 sinus blood flow continues, necessitating the necd for
permitting visualization of the offending obstructive
suction. The occlusion time should be confined to less
tissue. Disadvantages of inflow occlusion for PS are (1)
thian 3 minutes, preferably less than 2 minutes, which
the slightly more difficult surgical technique, and (2)
is almost always adequate to accomplish the repair; if
the fact that in immature animals the fibrosis associ-
more time is needed, a second occlusion can be initi-
ated with the surgery will become permanent. This
ated after a 5-minute rccovery.
technique is therefore not recommended in animals
After circulation is re-established, the pulmonary
younger than 6 months of age.
 arlery is closed with a 40 continuous suture pattern.
BASICCARDIOVASCULARSURGERYANDPROCEDURES871
opening the ventricle and pulmonary artery to the
patch.However, in severe PS,particularly with right
ventricularhypertrophyanddysplasticorveryfibrous
valves,theproceduremaybedifficulttoperform suc-
cessfully.
Thistechniqueis accomplished through aleft lateral
thoracotomy in the4th intercostal space orbymedian
sternotomy.Therightventricularoutflowtracttothe
pulmonaryvalve is identified.A cuttingwireisplaced
into theventricle and pushed out themain pulmonary
artery.This approach is facilitated by passing the wire
through an over-the-needle catheter (a smallurinary
catheter or large14to16-gauge over-the-needleinjec-
tion catheter can be used).The difficulty ofidentifying
the ventricular chamber enclosed within the hypertro-
phiedrightventricularwallisobviatedwhenthecathe-
terpenetratestheventricularchamber andbloodflows
FIGURE39-3
through the catheter.Theventricular chamber is thus
Left lateral thoracotomy at the 4thintercostal space.The lungs are
identified,the catheter is passed into the pulmonary
reflectedtoexposetheheart.Elevation of theheart isfacilitated
artery,and a stylet is placed into the catheter.This
bypericardialbasketsutures.Vascularstay suturesareplaced in
the poststenotic dilation.The pulmonary artery is opened.Suction
styletfacilitatesthecatheterexitingfromthepulmo-
(S)is used to remove blood from the surgical field as the stenotic
nary artery throughthe-arterial wall.A Gigliwire
pulmonary valve is incised (arrow) with a #1l scalpel blade.
is passed through the catheter, and the catheter is
P,pericardium.
withdrawn.A small (6-0) pursestring suture is placed
inthepulmonaryarteryaround thecatheteratits
Closure andpostoperative management areroutine.
pointofexit toeliminatebleedingwhilethepatch
Patients tend to have a slight,1-to 2-hour delay in
is being sutured into place. A Dacron, Gore-Tex, or
pericardial patch is then placed over the wire from the
anestheticrecovery,whichis probably associatedwith
theshortperiod of anoxia sustained duringtheinflow
pulmonary arterytotherightventricle.Itissecured
occlusion.
bycontinuous suture,with thelast one or twosutures
not drawn down (Fig. 39-4).When the patch is in
PATCH-GRAFTTECHNIQUE
Indications and Contraindications
Thegreatest advantageof thismethod is that it
permits expansion and decompression of the right
ventricular chamber.Also,thepatch can bemadevery
large to facilitate growth in the young patient with
PA
severePS,whichwould otherwiserequiremultiple op-
erations.Disadvantagesare related tothedifficulty
ofentering therightventricularlumenwhen severe
hypertrophy is present, the brutal manipulation in-
volvedin cutting therightventricle,and thedifficulty
RV
in some cases of cutting through thefibrous,thickened
PS with the cutting wire. An anomalous left coronary
artery(originatingfrom a singlerightcoronary artery)
thatencirclesthestenoticrightventricularoutlet and
valve is an absolute contraindication (see Fig.24-3).14
SurgicalProcedures
FIGURE39-4
Left lateral thoracotomy at the 4th intercostal space.The lungs (L)
The patch-graft technique is an effective procedure
arereflected.The pericardium (P)is incised paralleland ventral to
forrelievingvalvular and subvalvular dysplasticvalves
the phrenicnerve.Pericardial basket sutures are placed to assist in
and muscular Ps.15 This was first performed with a
elevating the heart.A patch-graft of wovenDacron is in placefrom
the pulmonary artery (top arrow)to the body of theright ventricle
(bottom arrow).PA,pulmonary artery；LA,left auricle;RV,right
that when the wire is pulled,the ventricular wall is cut,
ventricle.
872
2CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY AND PROCEDLRE
place, the cutting wire is then pulled out, and the right
 pulinonary artery can be useful to bypass the obstruc-
ventricle. proximal pulmonary artery, and obstructed
tion. In rare cases of tricuspid valve atresia, conduits
area of pulmonic stenosis are opened into the patch
from the right atrium to the pulmonary artery (Fontan
Digital pressure controls the bleeding at the last two
 procedure) can bypass the obstruction. To date, the
sutures as the wire is reinoved at the ventral portion
 only successful use of conduits in veterinary medicine
of the patch. These last suures are then secured.
 has been froin proximal pulmonary artery to distal
A chest drain tube should be placed and renain for
pulmonary artery or from the right ventricle to the
 24 hours postoperatively. If pleural effusion develops
 pulmonary artery. Because of the many problems asso-
as a result of foreign material (e.g., Dacron), il is
ciated with conduits, these procedures are recom-
manually evacuated. The chest drain tube is reinoved
 Inended only for supravalvar PS.
approximately 12 hours afier pleural effusion abates.
We prefer to place animals undergoing patch-graft
Surgical Technique
Otics that are continued for l week after surgery. Once
The surgical procedure is accomplished by a left
the chest drain tube is removed, patient management.
lateral thoracotomy in the 4th intercostal space, The
is sinilar to the previously described tchniques.
conduit is attached distally to the pulmonary artery
If a patch-graft is to be used to include the right
by cnd-to-side anastomosis after the distal pulmonary
ventricular outflow tracl and pulinonary artery,
, then
 artery has been partially ocluded. The proximal at-
the normal coronary artery anatomy must be validated
tachment of the conduit is identical to the attach-
preoperatively by lef-sided cardiac catheterization and
ment distally.
coronary arteriography. This procedure mus1. not be
used in dogs in which an aberrant coronary artery
courses bclow the main pulmonary artery (see Fig.
OPENIEART SURGERY
243).14
 Open heart surgery is effective for all types of Ps but
has a higher mortality rate. Since the closed techniques
ORTON MoDIFICATION. This 1nodification combines a
described are elfective, safe, and more cost cffective,
form of inflow occlusion and patch-graft techniquc in
Open heart surgery for PS repair cannot be recom-
which no cuiting wire is used.16 Bleeding and trauma
Imended for clinical practice at this tine.
t0 1he right. veniricular wall are markedly reduced. In
this technique, after placing an overlarge patch-graft a
double row of stay sutures is inserted in the graft, and
AORTIC STENOSIS
the graft. is then cut between the stay sutures. Inflow
occlusion is instituted as noted earlier, and the right.
 Aortic stenosis represents a congenital narrowing of
ventricle to pulmonary artery cut is made with scalpel
the left ventricular outflow tract (subvalvular), aortic
Or scissors directly into those tissuies with direct visual-
valve (valvular). or aorta (supravalvular). Subvalvular
ization. The right ventricle, stenotic valve area, and
aortic stenosis (SAS) is the predominant lesion in dogs.
Aortic stenosis is rare in cats.
the patch. Direct visualization of the opening into the
patch is thereby permitted, which eliminates the risk
 Indications and Contraindications
associated with the occasional unwanted tear by the:
cutting suture. This modification has become our pre-
The severity of aortic stenosis based upon cardiac
ferred patch-graf. technique since it. climinates the
catheterization is considered by our laboratory as fol-
 bleeding during patch placement. and difficulty of plac-
lows:
ing the wire in the lumen.
(1)  Mild with gradients across the aortic valve of less
than 50 1nmI Ig.
(2) Moderate when gradients are 50 to 90 mmHg. or
CONDUIT REPAIR
(3)  Severe with gradients of greater than 90 mmHg
 Indications and Contraindications
In humans, critical aortic stenosis is present when gra-
Although a variety of PS lesions can be repaired by
dients exceed 100 inmHg. Adult dogs with mildly cle-
condhuits, this technique has not met carly expecta-
vated gradients tend to reinain asyiuptomatic (median
 survival, 50.1 inonths), whereas those with severe gradi-
is for supravalvular PS since it preserves the normal
cnis (>
 80 mmHg) lhave a greatly increased risk of
pulmonic valve. Here, a conduit can be inserted from
death within 3 years (median survival, 18.9 months).18
the proximal pulmonary artery to the distal pulmonary
 Thus, surgical intervention should be attempted only
artery around the obstruction.'7 In some types of se-
with severe aortic slenosis, since perioperative morlal-
vere dysplasia, conduits froin the right ventricle to the
ity and norbidity are relatively high. In the syrnptom-
BASIC CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY AND PROCEDURES 8
873
atic growing dog, surgery should be accomplished be-
VALVE DILATION
fore severe left ventricular hypertrophy occuurs.
Clcar predictions of long-terin outcomes associated
Surgical Techniquc
with interventional lechniques  will  require  further
Valve dilation can be accomplished using percutane-
study. Long-term data of valve dilation using balloon
ous balloon valvuloplasty (see chapters 9 and 24) intro-
valvulotomy and valvulotome 1echniques are just now
duced through the femoral or carotid artery and di-
 becoming available and require further study. In con-
rected under fluoroscopic guidance through the aortic
trast, studies following left ventricular to aortic conduit
valve. Favorable short-term results have been re-
years) with open heart. surgical techniques are variable.
e u  a sp s 
ing," with transvalvular gradients often increasing back
to pre-in terventional levcls.
half have developed congestive cardiomyopathy at 5 to
Surgical closed transventricular valve dilation of the.
7 years of age. Whether this is related to cardioplegia
fibrous, subvalvular aortic ring, using a valve dilator,
used during surgery, disease-related myocardial injury
has been described.2 The procedure is best. accom-
that. preceded surgery, or to other factors is unknown.
plished via a median sternotoiny, but it can be done
with difficulty through a left lateral thoracotomy at the
 5th intercostal space. The apex of the left ventricle is
VALVE CONDUITS
identificd, and a large, deep, double pursestring suture
is placed there. A stab incision is then inade into the
Surgical Technique
left ventricular cavity, and the valvulotome is intro-
duced into the left. ventricle. The left index finger is
Valved lefl ventricular apical-aortic conduits have
placed around the base of the heart at the aortic valve.
been used for the past decade'? to treat aortic stenosis
to act as a guide to direct the valvulotoine toward the
in the dog. The conduit is attached proximally to the
 aortic valve. When the tip of the valvulotome is pal-
apex of the left veniricle and to the descending aorta
pated in the aorta, the valvulotome is pulled back
 distally. The device pernits decompression of the left
through the aortic valve and opened, and the obstruct-
ventricle and provides an alternative exit for blood
ing lesion is cut. Multiple cuts are then made as the
from the left ventricle, reducing the critical hyperiro
valvulotome is retracted through the subvalvar area,
phy that occurs with the disease. A valve in the conduit
incising the obstructive ring. When the valvulotone
 protects against aortic regurgitation. However, results
can be opencd fully and the subvalvar area dilated, the
have been variable. The cost. of valve conduits is high,
valvulotome is removed from the left ventricle and the
and the requirement for anticoagulation is compli-
pursestring suture is tied. Closure is routine. Results of
cated. Consequently, these conduits cannot be advo-
surgery using the valvulotome appear to be good to
cated currently for veterinary patients.
date, with survival exceeding 80 percent. Postoperative
management is uncomplicated, requiring 72 hours for
observation and management of arrhythmias. Results
OPEN HEART SURGICAL RESECTION
of 5-year follow-up are favorable.
Surgical Techniqucs
Open resection of the subvalvular fbrous ring dur-
ATRIAL SEPTAL DEFECTS
ing cardiopulmonary bypass has been described in
 Atrial septal defects are uncoinnon. Ostium primum
be performed at the same time on the obstructing
defects are generally large and 1nay contribute to com-
fibromuscular tissue beneath the aorlic valve, de-
 plex  atrioventricular septal  defecis or endocardial
 pending on the degree of hypertrophy and outflow
cushion defects, especially in felines (see chapter 24).
tract obstruction. In successful cases, the gradient has
These lesions cause voluine overload resuiting in con-
been reduced both at surgery and 1 year poslopera-
gestive heart failure.2 Although rare in the dog, this
tively.? Patients with isolated, discrete subvalvular rings
lesion is usually significant when encountered and
 may be more successfully correcied than those with
should be repaired.25-26a In contrast, solitary ostium
complicated or tunneilike lesions. Although this tech-
secundum atrial septal defects rarely cause significant
nique appears to be effective, the intraoperative mor-
volume overload. For those lesions that warrant sur-
tality (10 to 20 percent), plus the cost of open heart
gery, cardiopulmonary bypass is required; the right
surgery, has limited the availability of this procedure.
atrium is opened and secundum defects are closed
 Successful postoperative reduction in the leff ventricu-
lar outflow gradient does not elininate the risk of
the defect. size. Ostium primun defects require patch
sudden death.
repair.2
874
CARDIOVASCULARSURGERYANDPROCEDURE
VENTRICULARSEPTALDEFECTS
Ventricularseptaldefects(VsDs)resultfromfailure
orincompletedevelopmentofthemembranousor
muscular interventricular septum.Most VsDs are lo-
cated high in the membranous septum,although atrio-
ventricular septal defects occur infrequently.24.28 The
majority ofDs are small,restrictive,and generally
asymptomatic.More advanced,larger, or complex le-
sions mayrequire surgical intervention.
PULMONARYARTERYBANDING
U
Indications and Contraindications
Definitivetreatmentof symptomatic animals re-
quires open heart surgery using cardiopulmonary by-
pass,29 but this carries a high risk and is expensive.
FIGURE39-5
Deep hypothermic circulatory arrest is curative,is
Left lateral thoracotomy at thefourth intercostal space.The lungs
extremely time consuming,carriesan evenhigherrisk,
(L)are reflected,and the pericardium is incised parallel and dorsal
andrequires extensivetraining.Pulmonaryartery
tothephrenicnerve.Pericardial basket sutures assist inelevating
bandingispalliative,isrelativelysimple,andhasavery
the heart.An umbilical tapeis positioned around the pulmonary
low risk, but it cannot be performed in immature
artery（arrous）),tightened,andheldinpositionwithrightangle
animals.31, 32 It is the preferred technique in mature
forceps.Thepulmonaryartery diameterisreduced toone third
the diameter of thepulmonary artery atits origin,the pulmonary
patients.This technique creates a supravalvularPS that
valve annulus. Sutures are then placed (e.g.,needle holder) and
increasesrightventricular pressures,thereby diminish-
tied in the umbilical tape tomaintain this tape diameter.P,
pericardium;PA,pulmonary artery (labeled at the approximate
ing the severityof left-to-right shunting throughthe
level of the pulmonary valve annulus);RV,right ventricle.
VSD.If excessive banding increases RVpressures too
much,right-to-left shunting and cyanosis will result.
too tightly,potential right-to-left shunting through the
VSD can produce severe cyanotic heart disease. The
SurgicalTechniques
pulmonary artery pressure should be reduced by one
Surgery is performed through a left lateral thoracot-
half and therightventriclepressureincreased to twice
omy in the 4th intercostal space. By careful blunt dis-
theprebandingpressure.Thesepressures canbemea-
section using a right-angle forceps, the main pulmo-
sured by a small needle inserted directly into the pul-
naryarteryisseparatedfromtheaortaonthemedial
monary arterydistalto theband or into theright
side. Inadvertent tearing of the right pulmonary artery
ventricularlumen.
is less likely to occur when careful dissection is per-
Closure and postoperativemanagement areroutine.
formed around the arteryfrom a cranial to caudal
Animalswithpulmonaryarterybandingrecover
direction.Thedissection shouldbe carried out close
quicklyandshouldbemonitoredforaweekto10days
totheheart sincethemainpulmonary arteryin the
for cyanosis.If cyanosis occurs, right-to-left shunting
dog is quite short.
hasdeveloped and theband must be removed or
After the instrumenthas circled behind themain
loosened.With successful surgery,animalsmayhave
pulmonary artery,umbilical tapeispassed around the
normal longevity, albeit with reduced activity in some
vessel.The pulmonary artery can then be compressed
instances.In the dog this technique has produced
withtheumbilical tapeuntilthepulmonaryarteryis
effective results in excess of 10 years.
one third its original diameter or, if distended,one
third the apparent diameter at the pulmonary valve
(Fig.39-5).The umbilical tape is then sutured at that
TETRALOGYOFFALLOT
positiontomaintain thepulmonary artery at theone-
third-normal diameter.If desired,aknot canthen be
This complex congenital defect is composed of four
placed in the umbilical tape. Pulmonary artery size
components:(1）pulmonic stenosis (right ventricular
should decrease,and the color of thepulmonary ar-
outflow obstruction),(2) secondary right ventricular
teryshoulddarkenwithreductionoftheshunt.
hypertrophy,(3） high ventricular septal defect, and
If the band is placed too loosely,right ventricular
（4）
overriding (dextropositioned) aorta. Some pets
pressure willnotbe elevated sufficiently to reduce
will tolerate this condition for years with medical man-
shuntflowfromtheleftventricle.Ifthebandisplaced
agement.
BASICCARDIOVASCULARSURGERYANDPROCEDURES875
Indications and Contraindications
Surgicaltreatmentshouldbeinstitutedonlywhen
medical therapyfails.Surgicalpalliation or correction
can be considered.Although some caseshave been
P
corrected by open heart surgery using cardiopulmo-
nary bypass,32a the procedure is costly and carries a
highmortality.Palliativeprocedures using systemicto
pulmonary artery shunts appear to be effective and are
advocated when medical therapy fails.These shunts
include the classic Blalock-Taussig anastomosis, Pott's
anastomosis,orgraftorconduit connections..34
BLALOCKANASTOMOSIS
BV
Surgical Techniques
The purpose of shunt surgery is to return a large
portion of the partially oxygenated systemic blood to
thelung,to thenbe oxygenatedandreturned tothe
leftside of theheart.TheBlalock anastomosishas
been used successfully in humans since 1947, first as a
FIGURE39-6
final repair,andcurrently as apalliativetechnique.
Left lateral thoracotomy at the 4th intercostal space.The lungs (L)
Blalockanastomosisisaccomplished throughaleft
arereflected posteriorly.The left subclavian artery(S)wasrotated
thoracotomy at the 4th intercostal space.The dark-
and anastomosed to the mainpulmonary artery (PA) in an end-to-
ened pulmonary artery can be visualized.The left
side pattern(arrow).ThisBlalock anastomosis is used to palliate
clinical signsassociatedwith tetralogy ofFallot.P,pericardium;A
subclavian artery is identified,ligated asfar distally as
left auricle;RV,right ventricle.
possible,clamped using a bulldog clamp,and tran-
sected distally.Theleft subclavian artery is then mobi-
lized toward thepulmonary artery.If nokinking devel-
ops at the origin of the left subclavian artery, a direct
POTT'SANASTOMOSISANDCONDUITSHUNTS
end-to-sideanastomosisoftheleftsubclaviantopulmo-
Surgical Techniques
nary artery can be accomplished.Thepulmonary ar-
tery is partially occluded with a Satinsky-type clamp,
Pott'stechnique usesa simple side-to-sidepulmo-
and the anastomosis is completed using a continuous
nary artery to aorta anastomosis.Conduit shunt from
suture pattern.The pulmonary artery clamp is re-
aorta to pulmonary arteryhasbeen described inveteri-
moved,the sutureholes are allowed tofill withblood,
narymedicine for tetralogy.The techniquesrequire
and1or2minuteslater thesubclavianarteryclamp
microsurgical skills and are probably limited to large
can be removed (Fig. 39-6).
institutions at this time.4The surgeryrequires theuse
If the animal is small,orif the left subclavian artery
of expensivePott's clamps,which are used to occlude
kinks at the originfrom the aortawhen rotated toward
the aorta partially. Techniques of anastomosis are simi-
thepulmonary artery,arevision of theleftsubclavian
lartothoseofothervascularanastomoses,butthesize
artery origin should be considered.The aorta should
andlengthofthefistuladevelopedmustbecarefully
be clampedwith apartially occluding clamp at the
monitored lest extreme pulmonary recirculation and
pointwhere the subclavian arteryexits.Adiamond-
left-sided heart failure develop.Accordingly,Pott's
shapedincision,partially includingthe aorta andpar-
anastomosishasfallenindisfavorinhumanmedicine
tiallyincludingtheleft subclavian artery,canbemade
andisnotrecommended atthistimeforsmall animals.
at the junction of the subclavian artery and aorta.The
subclavian arteryisthenrotated toward thepulmonary
artery and the two angles of the diamond are sutured
PATENTDUCTUSARTERIOSUS
together. This makes a more direct outflow from the
aortatotheleftsubclavianarteryandremovesthe
Indications and Contraindications
shelf of tissue produced by thekinking of the vessel as
it is rotatedventrally andposteriorly.Thefinal portion
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)is nearly always fatal
oftheanastomosistothepulmonaryarteryiscarried
if left untreated,and intervention should be done
out in routine manner. An alternative operation is to
at the earliest possible date.Fortunately,left-to-right
extend thelength of theshort subclavian arterywith a
shunting PDA can be cured surgically with a success
Gore-Tex conduit.
rate of over95 percent.35-3sSmall size is not a contrain-
876CARDIOVASCULARSURGERYANDPROCEDURE
dicationforsurgicalrepair36;however,atrialfibrillation
(particularly in large,older dogs)confers a signifi-
cantly lower success rate.7Increasingly,nonsurgical
transcatheter coil occlusion of the persistently patent
ductus arteriosus is being used in place of surgery.7-9
SmallerbreedswithPDAtendtodevelopleft-sided
heartfailure at anearlierage and overa shorter time
period than do larger breeds.In our experience,half
thedogswithPDApresentedfor surgeryhavemitral
regurgitation associated with left ventricular and mitral
annulusdilationresultingfromvolumeoverload.
These animals are more prone to develop pulmonary
edema.However,when theyareadministered furose-
mide 12 hours prior to surgery, they are at no in-
creased anestheticrisk.
Preoperativecareismostconcernedwith animals
whohaveseveremitralregurgitation orpulmonary
edema.Congestiveheart failure should be treated with
FIGURE39-7
vigorous diuresis and other agents as needed to effect
a compensated state prior to surgery. PDA closure
Left lateral thoracotomy at the 4thintercostal space.The lungs
have been reflected,the vagus nerve (V)his been elevated (top),
shouldthenbeaccomplishedwithoutdelay.
and thephrenicnerve (p)is visualized at thebottom.The patent
Occasionally, animals withPDA may developmalig-
ductus arteriosus is exposed and isbarely visible(within arrows)
nant pulmonary hypertension and secondary right-to-
between the aorta (A)(dorsal) and the pulmonary artery (PA)
(ventral）.The patent ductus arteriosusliesmedial to thevagus
left shunt(Eisenmenger'ssyndrome),particularlydogs
nerve.
who live athighaltitudes.Morefrequently,right-to-lft
shunting indogs results frompersistence of the fetal
circulation,so that the embryologicright-to-left pulmo-
The aortic side of the ductus is tied first.Closure
nary to aortic flow persists into the neonatal period.
is routine.
Right-to-left shunting PDA,regardless of cause,is a
In dogs heavier than 7 kg, safety ties may be placed
contraindication to surgery or coil occlusion.
on thearchvesselsinanefforttocontrolbleedingif
it occurs.These are simply accomplished with umbili-
cal tape by looping the left subclavian and brachyce-
STANDARDDISSECTIONTECHNIQUE
phalicarteriesandplacingaBlalocktourniquet
Surgical Techniques
around thedescending aorta.An additional incision is
madein thepericardiumventral tothephrenicnerve.
Left lateral thoracotomyat the4thintercostal space
With these safety measures,bleeding produced by a
isperformed.Preoperative atropine administration
tear in the ductus can be controlled.The umbilical
blunts the parasympathetic stimulation that occurs
tapes are tightened on the subclavian and brachyce-
when the vagus nerve ismanipulated in the process of
phalicarteriesandontheaortatocontrolallsystemic
visualizing the ductus. The left cranial lung lobe is
arterial backflow to the ductus. A large vascular clamp
rotated posteriorly,revealing the right ventricular out-
is placed across the pulmonary artery and aorta
flowtract and descending aorta.An incision is made
throughtheopeningmadeinthepericardium at the
intothepericardiumparallel to andbetweenthevagus
transverse sinus of the pericardium.This stops all for-
and phrenic nerves.The vagus nerve is identified,
wardbleedingfromtheaorta and thepulmonary ar-
loopedwith umbilicaltape,andelevated along with
tery.Once back-bleeding from thepulmonary artery
the pericardium off the heart and the aorta. Using
is stopped, all blood flow in the circulatory system is
right-angleforceps,thenormal cleavageplanebetween
stopped, and a clamp or suture can be placed on the
the cranialdorsal aorta andposterior ventral pulmo-
torn ductus.Duration of occlusion should beless than
nary artery is opened.This plane lies just cranial to
2 minutes.Animals smaller than 7 kg would hemor-
the ductus.The ductus cannowbevisualizedbeneath
rhage excessively before the safety sutures and clamps
the elevated vagus nerve,ventral to theaorta and
could be applied; therefore, this safety technique is
dorsal to the pulmonary artery (Fig.39-7).The right-
generally not recommended in these patients.
angle forceps is then passed beneath the aorta, poste-
Postoperative management of PDA patients is un-
rior to the ductus, and around and down to the pre-
complicated and routine. The owner should be cau-
viouslyopenedcleavageplane.With theright-angle
tioned that the animal should not engage in strenuous
forceps beneath the ductus,two double-Osilk sutures
exercise during the ensuing 3weeks,butnoother
are carried behind the ductus,positioned, and tied.
restrictions are required.
BASIC CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY AND PROCEDURES
877
JACKSON TECHINIQUE
SURGICAL. CONSDERATIONS FOR
Surgical Techniqucs
RECANALIZATION FOLLOWING DUCTAL
LIGATION
An additional technique for suture placement
Approximately 1.5 percent of ductus ligations will
around the ductus eliminales dissection beneath the
friable ductus. This Jackson technique* requires pass-
recanalize, typically within 2 months after the initial
ing one end of the suure beneath the aorta cranial to
surgical repair. The cause of recanalization is fre-
the ducus and out the prepared cleavage point be-
quently unknown; however, infection at. the surgery
tween the aorta and pulmonary arlery. The other cnd
 site may precipitate it. When recanalization has oc-
of the suture is carried under the aorta from dorsal to
curred, the animal should be reoperated and the duc-
ventral posterior to the ductus (Fig. 39-8) after dis-
tus surgically divided. Disseclion is difficult and re-
secting the back wall of the aorta frce of the mediasti-
quires
the  placeimenl of expensive patent ductus
 clamps. The ductus is divided between the clainps and
nal tissue. When the ends of the suture are pulled
together and tied, the suture is pulled bencath the
sltured with 6-0 vascular suture. This technique is
aorta around the ductus, thercby occluding it.
cxtremely cifficull, carries a high risk, and should be
considered only by surgeons experienced in vascular
surgery.
ATRIOVENTRICULAR VALVE DISEASE,
VALVE REPLACEMENT AND REPAIR
MITRAL VALVE DISEASE
Chronic acquired valve disease is the most common
cardiac disorder in dogs (chapter 25),* Medlical ther-
B
apy constitutes the standard form of management
(chaptcr 12), yet in a significant. number of these
A
dogs the disease is inexorably progressive to congestive.
heart failure and death. Accordingly, surgical replace-
ment or repair of the atrioventricular valves has been
reported in a small number of dogs.1 However, the.
extensive costs and the requirements for cardiopulmo-
 nary bypass and valve replacement and advanced surgi-
cal training limit these techniques for all but. a few
C
patients at several selective institutions. Ideally, poten-
tial surgical candidates must be in good heaith, have
FIGURE 39-8
normal myocardial function (this precludes dogs with
Suture placement for ligation of the patcnt ducus arteriosus using
dilated cardiomyopathy), and receive valve replace-
the Jacksor technique. (A) Prior to suture placement, the
ments well before cnd-stage disease has developed.
mediastinal tissues are bluntly dissected dorsal and cranial to the
One casc of mitral valve reconstruction has becn
aorta (A), from the left subxlavian artcry to) the patent ductus
artcriosus (D). The aorta is frecd from surrounding tissue on is
uoneioosse u! pawiojad Sop paauq Aon e u polodat
medial side. LPA, left pulmorary artery. (B) Suture positioning is
with a private practice.a3 The valve was partially re-
illusurated prior to ligating the patent ductus arteriosus. Right-
angle forceps are carefully passed bctwcen the aorta and the
moved and rcconstructed in a manner to reduce the
pulmonary artery in the clcavage plane posterior to the arch of the
valve annulus and the associated regurgitation. Since
aorta, verntral to thc desccnding aorta, cranial to thic ductus
the valve was not replaced, there was no need for
aricriosus, and dorsal to the pulmonary artery. If further dissectior
is necessary, it should be performed ncar the strong aorta. The
cxpensive valve prosthesis; postoperative long-term an-
midpoirt of the 00-silk suture is grasped and the suture is pulled
ticoagulation was not needed; and the surgery bypass
netwt
een the aorta and the pulmonary artery cranial to the ducrus.
time was reduced. A study in 1997 supported the feasi-
(C) Similarly, the forceps is passcd undcr thc aorta posicrior to
bility of low-flow hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass
thic ductus; the ends of the suture are grasped and then pulled
laterally candal to the ductus. Care should be taken to assure that.
in small dogs (< 10 kg).45
forceps placement is dorsal to the lefl pulmorary artery. (D)
 aosins sapa qen su on yoeodde iaouy
Gentle traction is applied to the sulure. causing it to be posilioned
around thc ductus: the cranial looped cnd is cut, leaving two
taken an entircly different tack and involves reduction
sutures. The aortic side is tied first; 30 seconds later tlhie pulronary
of the mitral valve annulus size without cardiopulino-
artery side (not shown) is lied. The knol types should be either a
granny (so thal the second throw can be slipped down tight)
lollowed by a square knot, or a surgeon's tie (so that tlhe first
 suture placed around the mitral annulus; when tight-
throw will rot. loosen).
ened, it. constricts the mitral annulus and thus reduces
878CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY AND PROCEDURE
the degree of mitral regurgitation. This suture is
the ligamentun arteriosum or PDA may be identified
 placed from outside the heart with the help of a special
as it obstructs the csophagus. With blunt dissection,
guide. Although case numbers are currenly small and
the obstructing band is isolated, double ligated, and
mortality is still high, this technique appcars to hold
divided. Approximately 10 percent of the bands are
promise.
patent. At the dorsal, rightward cnd of the band, the
 Mitral valvc stenosis may be congenital or acquired.
aorta may be just visualized. The ventral, leftward pul-
These conditions are rare in small animal veterinary
monary artery is easily visualized. After the liga-
medicine. Surgical considerations are therefore not.
mentum arteriosium is divided, the esophagus is bluntly
addressed here.
freed from surrounding mediastinal tissue, which
might act as a continuing constriction by adhesion. At
this time, the csophagcal stethoscope should be passed
TRICUSPID VALVE DISEASE
from the distended csophagus through the constricted
 Severe right-sided heart volume overload resulting
area into the caudal csophagus.
from tricuspid insuffciency may result in cffusions
If additional anomalous vessels are identified at the
(pleural, pericardial, or abdominal) or, less commonly,
time of surgery, they can be divided. In cases of double
 periphcral edema. Surgical repair of the tricuspid valve
aortic arch, a decision rmust be made as to which arch
is currently not performed in veterinary medicine.
to sacrifice. Preferably, the one without. branches or
Consequently, iricuspid insuffciency and associated
the least proininent arch should be chosen. If the left
clinical abnormalities are treated mcdically. Alihough
aortic arch appears to be the largest, the patient's
surgery for tricuspid dysplasia, or Ebstein's anomaly,
chesl. should be closed. At a later convenient time, a
has been performed,:6 outcone is generally unsatisfac-
right thoracotoiny should be performcd and the right
tory, and surgery cannot. be recommended at this time.
aortic arch divided. Postoperative management. of
 In addition, tricuspid valve replacement requires long-
other vascular ring anomalies is similar to that of per-
term anticoagulation, which has not proved to be reli-
sistent. right aortic arch. The prognosis for treatnent
able in the dog. Tricuspid stenosis, a very rare condi
of aberranl. arch vessels is very good. Prognosis for
tion, has been relieved by balloon valve dilation.5
success with double aortic arch is very poor, but these
lesions occur only rarely.
 If the esophagus is still somewhat constricted, bou-
VASCULAR RING ANOMALIES
gienage should be performed. This can be accom-
plished using a Foley catheter with the baloon placed
 Indications and Contraindicalions
at the constricted arca. After freeing the esophagus
and dilating it internally, the chest. is closed in routine
For the purposes of this discusson, vascular ring
manner.
 Postoperatively, the paticnt should be fed small
aortic arch and others. Because of the high incidencc
amounts of liquid diet frequently, preferably in an
of persistent right aorlic arch (95 percent),17 this lesion
elevated position, until norinal esophagcal activity re-
is generally assiumed to be present and is casily verified
turns. The animals can be slowly returned to a normal
by a contrast study following a barium swallow. The
feeding plan in a period of 2 to 6 wecks. In1 scverely
differential diagnosis of persistent right aortic arch or
affected animals, esophageal inotility may never re-
 othcr vasclar ring anomalies usually requires angiog-
turn.
raphy. Ilowever, since the surgical exposure is similar
'The prognosis depends on the severity of esophageal
for other types of' vascular ring anomalies, further diag-
distention and associated esophageal injury. If surgery
l1ostic workup is usually not. recommended. Treatment
is performed before severe esophageal distention and
 involves surgical division of the tissues obstructing the
pocketing occur, the results can be excellenl, although
esophagus.
a recent study suggested that persistence of mega-
esophagus and regurgitation in the early postoperative
 Surgical Techniqucs
 period did not indicate a poor long-term outcome,18
Surgery for persisten1 right aortic arch, as in other
vascular ring anomalies. is performed through a lateral
thoracotomy in the left 4th intercostal space. The di-
COR TRIATRIATUM AND CAVAL
lated esophagus is readily identified, and the obstruc-
ANOMALIES
tive vascular structure can be found inmediately call-
dal to the dlilation of the esophagus (sce Fig. 24-61).
These rare conditions are generally corectable with
In1 persistent right aortic arch, the rightward aorta is
surgery. Cor triatriaturn is poorly responsive to medical
usually not. visualized since il is to the right of thc
therapy. Atrial septectomy during inflow occlusion,
dilated esophagus. The tight, white, glistening band of
when successful, resolves clinical signs. Succesful sur-
BASIC CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY AND PROCEDURES 879
 gical dilation and tearing of the anomalous membrane
includes dogs that had concurrent severe renal or
has been reported.r A right 5th intercostal thoracot-
hepatic dysfunction, restricting the use of arsenical
e sua sosize pue eaeo yog posn si qoeoudde Ao
cormpounds. However, with melarsornine hydrochlo-
encircled with urmbilical tapes that are incorporated in
ride, the therapeutic index is greater than with thiacet-
 Rumel snares. The pericardium is opened ventral to
arsamide. Another situation involves the valuable field
the phrenic nerve. The portion of right atrial wall over
 dog that would be compromised by pulmonary eniboli-
the septum separating thc cranial and caudal right
zation due to routine adulticide treatment. The surgi-
atrial chambers is cntrapped with a tangential vascular
cal techniques that are effective for this type of heart-
clamp. The atriuin within the clamp is incised. Venous
worm disease were previously described for PS and!
inflow of the vena cava and azygos veins is occluded
involve right ventriculotony, using alligator forccps
and the heart is perinitied to empty (circulatory arrest
rather than the bistoury, and worrn rermoval by the
should be less than 4 rninutes). 'The atrial wall clamp
forceps. Pulmonary arteriotoiny after inflow occlusion
is rermoved and the abnormal septum is excised, The
and direct removal of the worms is a preferable proce.
atrium is closed with a simple continuous suture pat-
dlure. Ihe surgical techniques are relatively simple and
tern and oversewn.
have a lower morbidity in critical heartworm paticnts
Caudal vena caval abnormalities are rare. Reported
than does routine medical therapy. Open heart surgery
cases include extraluminal compressive masses and in-
may allow removal of adult heartworms.?5
lraluminal obstruction from neoplasia, trauma, and
membranes.  Surgical  correction provides successful
management in many instances 70-i2
PERICARDIECTOMY
SURGICAL REMOVAL OF ADULT
Imdications and Coniraindlications
HEARTWORMS
Pericardicctomy is a technically simple proccdurc
used for management of some cases of chronic pericar-
Indications and Contraindications
dial discase in the dog.** Occasionally, cases of severe,
chronic pericardial disease cause marked pericardial
Although rarely needed and uncommonly per-
formed, surgical removal of heartworms has been a
thickening with extensive vascularization and granulo-
matous changes (chapter 29), making surgery very
successful and valuable treatment for selected patients
(lifficult. Pericardial windows may not be effective in
with severe heartworm disease-particnlarly, becausc it
is the only successful trcatment for severe caval syn-
these cases because pericardial adhesions form postop-
 drome.*8, s* These dogs can be managed by right. jugu-
crativcly. Even when surgical management seems effec-
lar venotomy and removal of the hcartworms by alliga-
tive, pericardial effusion can recur as much as 4 years
tor forceps.
later in some cases.57
Surgical Technique
Surgical Techniques
CAVAL sYNDROME. Local anesthetic infltration Over
 Median slernotomy provides the besl surgical expo-
the right jugular vein is usually all that is necessary,
sure since removal of mos1 or all pcricardium is re-
 since these patienis are prostrate and require litde,
quired for successful pericardiectomy Electrocautery
if any, sedation. Fluoroscopy can permit visualization
is advised for this dissection becausc of the vascular
during rmanipulation but is not necessary.
nature of the affected pericardium. Unfortunately, if
An incision is made over the right jugular furrow.
the procedure is not curative, persistent postoperative
The jugular vein is identified, occluded distaly, and
bleeding or effusion may be life threatening, since
opened. Long alligator forceps are introduced into the
bleeding will interfere with healing of the median
 jugular vein and advanced into the heart, and worms
sternotomy incision. However, bccausc untreated
are grasped and removed. At completion, the jugular
chronic pericardial discase is eventualy fatal, the risk-
vein is ligated and the skin closed. The technique is
benefit ratio favors surgical intervention.
effective in approximately 85 percent of dogs with
 Median sternotomy is performed as described pre-
caval heartworm syndrome, which would otherwisc be
viously, incising approximately the posterior two thirds
fatal. The technique has also been used to reduce the
to three fourths of the sternum. The phrenic nerves
worm load prior to medical treatment.
are carefully dissected free of the pericardium, and the
 pericardium is removed using electrosurgery as close
OTHER APPLICATIONs. In rare situations, dogs with se-
to the heart base as can safely be acconplished. Strict
vere heartworm infection 1nay be considered as candi-
control of hemorrhage must be 1naintained. Chest clo-
dates for surgical adult worm removal. One sitation
 sure is routine. Postoperative chest drainage should be
880
CARDIOVASCLLAR SURGERY AND PROCEDLRE
maintained for at least 24 hours, or unil litle addi-
PACEMAKER THERAPY
tional pleiral effusion is collected.
If adequate removal of the pericardinm is accom-
 Symptomatic bradycardia in dogs and cats unrespon-
 plished and postoperative cffusion is limited. pericar-
sive to medical therapy may be treated by cardiac
diectomy is a very clffective procedure for chronic
pacing. For many years, implantation of a permanent
pericardial efusion and tanponade. Excessive postop-
pacemaker  required a  thoracotomy  or  abdominal
erative cffusion or inadequale removal of pericardium
transdiaphragmatic approach through which an cpi-
may produce unacccptable results, including heart fail
cardial clectrode was attached to the left ventricular
ure and death.
 apex. Transvenous lead insertion of a right ventricular
endocardial elcctrode has become popular due to the
relatively simpler nature of this technique. Chapter 20
discusses pacemaker therapy in detail.
CARDIAC TUMORS
REFERENCES
Right atrial hemangiosarcoina and chemodectoma
(the most common cardiac neoplasia) generally are
1. Fossum TW. Small Animal Surgery. St Louis, Mosby-Ycar
not. amenable to surgery; occasionally, however, surgi-
Book, 1997
cal intervention with palliative pericardiectomy has
2.
Orton EC (ed): Advances in carcdiovascular surgcry.
 produced sormewhat favorable results.57. 58
Scmin Vet Med Surg 9:1, 1994
3. Brown WA, Thomas W. Balloon valvuloplasty of tricuspict
sten1osis in a l abrador retricvc1. J Vet Intern Med 9:419.
HEMANGIOsARCOMA. Ihis mctastatic tumor is oflen
1995
associated with the right heart, particularly the right
4. Buchanan JW. Surgery versus catheter valvuloplasty for
 atrium. It is usually delected in dogs who are presented
thc trcatimert of common carcdiac dcfects in small ani-
mals. Procccdings WSAVA World Congress, 1993, p 343
for signs associated with pericardial tamponade. If
5. deLellis LA, Thomas WP, Pion PD. Balloon dilation ol
identified early without gross evidence of multiorgan
congenital subaorlic stenosis in the dog. J Vet Intern
metastasis, it can sometimes be surgically removed,
Med 7:1532, 1993
6. Fox PR, Bond BR, Sommer Rj. Nonsurgical transcathctcr
particularly when it is localized to the right. auricnlar
coil occlusion of patcnt ductus arteriosus in two clogs
appendage. Surgery involves isolating the tumor with
using a preforned nitinol snarc delivery technique. J
 a vascular clamp beneath the basc of the tumor, exci-
Vet Intern Med (in press)
sion, and closure of the atrium. Alternatively, the right
7. Snaps FR, McEntee K, Saunders J. Doncdclinger RF.
auricle can be cxcised with a thoracoabdominal sta-
Trcatmcnt of patent ducius arteriosus by placement of
intravascular coils in a pup. J Am Vet Med Assoc
pling instrument when the tumor is locatcd in this
207:724, 1995
8. Schreider M, Hagel K-J, Schncider I, Ncu H. Transvenos
the tumor, the typical advanced stage at the time of
Coil-Embolisalion zum  Verschluss des persisticrcnden
detection, and perioperative dificulties have contrib-
Ducus artcriosus (Botalli) bei einern Huncl. Klcinticr-
utedl to poor results.
praxis 41:685 1996
9. Fox PR, Sos TA, Bond BR. Nonsurgical removal of a
catheter enbolus from thc hcart of a dog. J Am Vet Med
CHEMODECTOMA (*HEARTBASE TUMOR"). The
Assoc 187:275, 1985
term
10. Gravcs TK, Lchmkuht LB, Pcterson J, et al. Transverous
aue on pade aasoo uaq see o seq eat,.
removal of intravcnous cathctcr cmboli from the righit-
tumor situated at the cardiac basc. Chemodectoma
side heart of a cat and from thc lefi caucdal pulmonary
is the most common neoplasia located in that area,
artcry of a dog- J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:327, 1993
11. Ripps JH, Henderson AR. Congenital pulmonic valvular
although  other 1nalignancies  and   non-neoplastic
stenosis in a dog: report of a case surcessfully trcated
masses can also occur. Chemodectoma is a relatively
surgically. J Am Vet Mcd Assoc 123:292, 1953
slow-growing, locally invasive cancer. It. is commonly
12. Brock RC. Pulmonary valvotomy for thc reliefof congen-
 located between the aorta and pulrmonary artery and
ital pulmonary sten1osis. Br Med J 1:1121, 1948
can somelimes grow to cnormous size before clinical
13.5
Swan H, Zcavin J, Blount SG Jr, Virtue Rw. Surgery by
signs (pericardial or pleural effusion) are recognized.
clircct vision in thc opcn hearu during hypothermia. J
 Surgical excision of the tumor from the wall of the
An Med Assoc 153:1081, 1953
14.1
Buchanan JW. Pulmonic stcnosis causcd by a single coro-
 great vessels and atria, followed by chemotherapy or
nary artery in dogs: four cases (1965-1984). J Am Vet
radiation therapy, has been advocated. Flectrocautery
Mcd Assoc 196:115, 1990
is used to decrease hemorrhage. Although soine cases
15. Brcznock EM, Wood GL. A patchi-graft techniquc for
appear to respond, clinical outcome is usually unre-
corrcction of pulmonic stenosis in dogs. J Am Vet. Med
warding. Palliative pericardiectomy may be cffective
Assoc 169:1090, 1970
when clinical signs are associated with chronic pericar-
16.
 Orton CE, Bruecker KA, MeCracken IO. An opcn patch-
grafl techrique for correction of pulmoric stenosis in
dial cffusion.
the dog. Vet Surg 19:148, 1990
BASIC CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY AND PROCEDURES
881
17. Ford RF, Spaulding GL, Eystcr GE. UIse of an extracar-
resulis of surgery in onc hundrcd consecutive cases. J
diac conduit in the repair of supravalvular pulmonic
Am Vct Mcd Assoc 168:435, 1976
stcnosis in a dog. J Am Vct Med Assoc 172:922, 1978
 38. Jackson WF, Henderson RA. Ligaturc placement in clo-
18. Kicnle RD, Thomas WP, Pion PD. The natural clinical
sure of patent ductus arteriosus. J Am Anim Ilosp Assoc
history of canine congenital subaortic stenosis. J Vct
15:55. 1979
Intern Mcd 8:123, 1994
 39. Detweiler DK, Hubben K, Pattcrson DF. Survey of cardio-
19. Breznock FM, Whiting P. Pendrays D, ct al. Valved apico-
vascular discasc in dogs. Preliminary report on the first.
aortic conduit for relief of lcft ventricular hypertension
1000 dogs surveyed. Am J Vet Res 21:329, 1960
caused by discrcte subaortic stcrnosis in cdogs. J Am Vet
40. Eyster GE, Wcber W, Chi S, ct al. Mitral valvc prosthesis
Med Assoc 182:51, 1983
for corrcction of mitral regurgitation in a dog. J An Vet
20. Komtcbeddle J, llkiw J, Follcic DM, et al. Resection
Med Assoc 168:1115, 1976
 Of subvalvular aortic stenosis: surgical and periopcrativc
 41. Brcznock EM, Bauer T, Sirack D, ct al. Prosthetic mitral
managcmcnt in seven dogs. Vet Surg 22:419, 1993
and tricuspid valvc implantation in dogs using dccp sur-
21. Monnet E, Orton C, Gaynor JS, et al. Open rcscction
facc hypothermia. Proc Am Coll vet Surg, 1983
for subvalvular aortic stenosis in dogs. J Am Vet Med
42. Klemcnt P, Feindel CM, Scully H, et al. Mitral valvc
Assoc 209:1255, 1996
replacement in dogs: surgical technique and postopcra-
22. Harrison KJ, Davidson CJ, leithc ME、el. al. Scrial left
tivc management. Vet Surg 16:231, 1987
yentricular performance cvaluatcdi by cardiac cathcter-
43. Boggs LS, Dewan SJ, Ballard SE. Mitral valve reconstruc-
lion in a toy-brced dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1872,
ization before, immediately after ancl at. 6 months aftcr
balloon aortic valvuloplasty J Am Coll Cardiol 16:1351,
1996
44. Kertscttcr K, Bucharrau JW. Mitral valvc rcpair. Proe A111
1990
Coll Vet Surg, 1986
23. linn KA. Orton E(. Closcd transventricular dilation of
45. Lew LJ, Fowier D], Egger CM, el al. Decp hypothermic
discrcte subvalvular aoruic stcnosis in dogs. Abstract.
low-flow cardiopulmonary bypass in small dogs. Vet Surg
Proc Am Coll Vet Surg, 1991
24. Tashjian RJ, Das KM, Palich WE, et al. Studics on cardio-
26:281, 1997
46. Eyster (GE, Anclerson LK, Evans AT, ct al. Ebstein's anom-
vascular diseasc in thc cat. Ann NY Acad Sci 127:581,
aly: a report of thrcc cases in the dog. J An Vet Mcd
1965
Assoc 170:709, 1977
25. Monnet E, Orton EC, Gayror J, et al. Diagnosis and
47. van den Ingh TSAM, van dcr Linide-Sipmar JS. Vascular
surgical repair of atrioventricular septal defects in two
rings in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 164:939, 1974
clogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:569. 1997
48. Muldoon MM, Birchrard SJ. Ellison GW. Long-term re-
26. Eyster GF. Atrial sepial defcct and ventricular scptal
sults of surgical correction of persistent. right aortic arch
defcct. Semin Vet Med Surg 9:227, 1994
in dogs: 25 cascs (1980-1995). J Am Vet Mced Assoc
26a. Monnet E, Orton C, Gaynor J, ct. al. Diagnosis and
210:1761, 1997
surgical repair of partial atrioventicular septal defcts
49. Fossum TW, Millcr Mw. Cor 1riatriatum and caval abnor-
in two dogs.] Am Vet Med Assoc 211:569, 1997
malitics. Semin Vel.Med Surg (Small Anim) 9:177. 1994
27. Eyster GE, Andcrson LK, Krehbiel JD, ct al. Surgical
49a. Wancder KW, Monnet E, Orton EC. Surgical correction
repair of atrial scptal ctefeet in a dog. J Am Vet Med
 of cor triatriatun sinister in a kitten. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 169:1081, 1976
Assoc 34:383, 1998
 28. Patterson DF. Canine congcnital hcart disease: epidemi-
50. Malik RM, Hunl. GB, Chard RB. ct al. Congenital ob-
ology and ctiological hypothesis. J Small Anim Prac1.
struction of thc caucdal vena cava in a dog. J Am Vet Med
12:263, 1971
Assoc 197:880,1990
29. Braden TD, Appleford MD, Hartsfeld SM. Correction
 51. Cornelius L, Mahaffey M. Kinking of the intrathoracic
of a ventricular septal dcfcct. in a dog. J Am Vet Mcd
calidal vcna cava in five dogs. J Small Anim Pract 26:67,
Assoc 161:507, 1972
1985
 30. Weirich WF, Blevins WE. Vertricular scptal clefeet. repair.
52. Crowc DT Jr, l.orenz MD, Hardic EM, ct. al. Chronic
Vet Surg 7:2, 1978
peritoncal cffusion due lo partial caudal vena caval ob
31, Mann PG, Stock JE, Sheridan JP. Pumonary artery band
struclion following blunt trauma: diagnosis and success-
ful surgical treatmenl. J Am Anim Hosp Assoe 20:231,
ing in a cat: a case report. J Small Anim Pract 12:45, 1971
32. Eyster GF, Whipple RD, Anderson LK, et al. Pulmonary
1984
arlery banding for ventricular septal defect in dogs and
 53. Jackson WF, Seymour WG, Growney PG, Otto GF. Surgi-
cal trcatment of the caval syndrome of canine heart-
cats. J Am Vct Mcd Assoc 170:434,1977
32a. Lcw 1,J. Fowler JD, McKay R, et al. Open-hcart corrcc-
worm discase. J Am Vet Mccl Assoc 171:1065. 1977
54. Rawlings CA, Calverl. CA, Glaus TM. Jacohs GJ. Surgical
Lion of tetralogy of Fallot in an acyanotic dog. J Am Vet
renoval of hcartworms. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small
Med Assoc 213:652, 1998
Aninm) 9:200, 1994
33. Eyster GE, Bradcn TD, Appleford MD, ct. al. Surgical
55. Shiang H, Juracdo R, Linu SK, ct al. Ninc-month evaluation
management of tetralogy of Fallot. J Small Anim Pract
of dogs after open-hcart surgical removal of hcartworms.
18:387, 1977
J Am Vet. Med Assoc 190:1425. 1987
34. Miller CW, Ilolmberg DL, Bowcn V, et al. Microsurgical
 56. Berg R, Wingfield wE, Hoopes PJ. ldiopathic henor-
rhagic pericardial effusion in 8 dogs. J Am Vet Med
Med Assoc 186:708, 1985
Assoc 185:998, 1984
35. Buchanan JW. Patcnt ductus arieriosus. Scmin Vet Med
 57. Berg J. Pericardial lisease and cardiac ncoplasm. Semin
Surg (Smail Anim) 9:168, 1994
Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 9:185, 1994
36. Bircharcd SJ, Bonagura JD, Finglancd RB. Results of liga-
38. Aronsohn M. Cardiac hcmangiosarcoma in the dog: a
tion of patent ductus arteriosus in dogs: 201 cases (1969-
rcview of 38 cascs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:922, 1985
1988) j Am Ve1 Mcd Assoc 196:2011, 1990
 59. Wykes PM, Rouse GP, Orton EC. Removal of five caninc
37. Eystcr GE, Eyster JT, Cords GB, et al. Patcnt ductuus
cardiac tumors using a slapling instrument. Vet Surg
artcriosus in the dog: charactcristics of occurrcncc and
15:103, 1986
01
Diagnosis
Heart Disease
and Ireatment of
Heart
Failure in Small Animals
This document was created by the International Small Animal Cardiac Health
Council (below), starting in May of 1992, to provide guidelines for diagnosing
common cardiac diseases in small animals and for treating the heart failure that
occurs secondary to these diseases.
The International Small Animal Cardiac Health Council has included the following
members:
Dr. John Bonagura, University of Missouri; 1)r Claudio Bussadori, Milan, ltaly;
Dr. David Church, The Lniversity of Sydney, Australia; Dr. Peter G. G. Darke,
University of Edinburgh, Scotland; Dr. Philip Fox, Animal Medical Center,
NY; Dr. Robert Hamlin, Ihe Ohio State University; Dr. Bruce Keene, North
Garolina State University, Dr. Mark D. Kittleson, University of California; Dr.
Chris Lombard, Universitat Bern, Switzerland; Dr. Iakeo Minami, Japan; Dr.
Sydney Moise, Cornell Lniversity; Dr. Michael O'Grady, University of Guelph,
Canada; Dr. Paul D. Pion, Lniversity of California; Dr. Jean l.ouis Pouchelon,
Alfort National Veterinary School, Franice; Dr. David Sisson, University of
inois; Dr. william P. Thomas, University of California; Dr. Larry P. Tiley,
Santa Fe, NM: and 1)r. Yoshihisa Yamane, Japan.
The Internatiomal Small Animal Cardiac Health Council activities are supported by
an educational grant from Merial Ltd.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF HEART DISEASE
LEADING TO HEART FAILURE
HEART DISEASE is defined as the presence of any cardiac finding ouuside the
accepled limits of normality, such as a systolic murimur or systolic click heard on
auscultation, a buudle branch block on the electrocardiogram, or reduced wall 
motion on the echocardiogram.
The major functions of the cardiovascular system are to maintain normal (1)
systemic arterial blood pressure, (2) blood flow (cardiac output), and (3) venous
and capillary pressures. When cardiac disease becomes severe, the ability of the
cardiovascular system to maintain these functions deteriorates. Consequently,
heart failure may mauifest as edema resulting from high capillary pressure, low
MYOCARDIAL FAILLRE is defined as a decrease in myocardial contractility.
Many types of heart disease (e.g., dilated cardiomyopathy) result in myocardial
failure. Although patients with myocardial failure commonly develop signs of
88
884
APPENDIX
heart failure, myocardial failure may be present when
DEFINITION OF HEART
heart failure is not. Myocardial failure is not a consis-
tent feature of heart failure and in many cardiac
FAILURE
diseases myocardial systolic functionn is normal, yet
heart failure is present (e.g., hypertrophic cardiomyop-
athy, mitral regurgitation in small dogs, and chronic
HEART FAllLRE occurs whei1 heart disease be-
 pericardial tamponade).
 Comes severe enough to overwheln the compensatory
ACUTE HEART FAILURE can be severe enough to
mec hanisms of the cardiovascular system. IIeart failure
lead to cardiogenic shock. Hypoperfusion and hypo-
is not a disease. Ileart failure is present whenl a me-
tension usually prevail because chronic compenisatory
chanical inadequacy of the heart results in elevated
mechanisins have not had time to become effective.
venous and capillary pressures, leading to congestion
CIIRONIC HEART FAILURE usually allows time to
and edema formation in the tissues (CONGESTIVE or
physiologically compensate for heart disease. Compeil-
BACKWARD HEART FAILURE) or imadequate cardiac
sation commonly takes the form of renal sodium and
output (FORWARD or LOW-OUTPUI HEART FAIL-
water retention, which produces an increase in cir-
URE) or both. The presence of identifiable heart dis-
culating blood volume. As venous return increases,
ease does not in any way imply that heart failure is
the myocardium in the affected veutricle is stretched,
present or will ever manifest as a clinical problem.
While there are many proposed definitions of heart
stimulating it to grow into a larger chamber (volume
failure, none is universally accepted. Four currcntly
owerload or eccentric hyperirophy). The increase in end-
diastolic volume provided by volume overload hyper-
employed definitions include:
trophy allows the affected ventricle to accommodate
 An inability of the hcart to delivcr enough blood to the
a larger diastolic volume without increasing diastolic
peripheral tissucs to Ineet mectabolic tissuc demands. A de-
ventricular pressure and to pump more blood for any
creascd cardiac output and a rise in atrial pressurcs are the
 given amount of myocardial shortening (shortening
hallmarks of the syndrome. In mild forins of hcart failurc,
cardiac output falls and atrial pressures risc in response to
fraction).
physical cxertion. As the hcart failurc syrdrome worsens.
Renal sodium and water retention is stimulated
clinical signs arc detectable at lowcr levels of exertion aund
through a number of different mechanisms that are
firally arc apparent at rest. (Parmley wW, Chatterjec K.
activated by a decrease inl systemic and, therefore,
Principles in ihc naragement of congestivc hcart failure.
In Parmley WW, Chatterjcc K: Cardiology. Philadelphia, JB
renal blood flow or circulating blood volume. The
Lippincoft, 1988, p 1.)
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) is one of
Pathophysiologic state in which an abrorinality of cardiac:
the most importat mechanisms for stimulation of salt
functioni is rcsponsiblc for failurc of the heart to punp
and water retention. When the ability of the veintricle
blood at a rate coinmensurale with the requircincnts of the
to enlarge reaches a maximum and becomes over-
metabolizing tissues or do so only at an clevated filling
prcssure. (Braunwald E: Pathophysiology of hcart failure. n
whelmed, the kidneys continue to retain salt and water
Braumwald E. Discascs of the Heart, 4th ed. Philadelphia,
because of the continued suboptimal cardiac output
WB Saundcrs, 1992, p 393).
and renal perfusion. At this stage, the salt and water
Whcn the cardiovascular system fails to circulate sufficiennt
retention increases diastolic ventricular pressure to a
blood to neet the metabolic deimands of the body for nutri-
clinically significant level.
erts or when the blood backs up within a venous or capillary
bed, the patient marifesis a complex of clinical signs. Ihesc
SIGNS (OF HIEART FAILURE are associated with (1)
clinical signs resulting from cardiac dysfunctior translate
diseases of the left side of the heart, manifested by
into a reduced quality of life and/or longevity.
pulmonary congestion and edema, called left-sided con-
"Heart failure is a pathophysiologic condition that bc.
gestive heart failure. Congestion and edema formation
or diastolic cardiac dysfunction or both, scverc cnough to
are the most common manifestations of chronic heart
perfusion, or a combination thereof, at rest or with exer-
used syuonymously with heart failure; (2) diseases 0f
cise."
the right side of the heart, which manifest differently
among species. In dogs and cats, right-sided congestive
heart failure usually results in ascites and, occasionally,
CLASSIFICATION OF HEART
pleural or pericardial effusion or subcutaneous edema.
FAILURE SEVERITY
Also, congestive right and left heart failure together
commonly produce pleural effusion. Chronic heart
failure patients can also have clinical signs referable to
It is useful to think of heart disease and failure as a
poor perfusion (low-output failure), but these signs are
 continuun that may progress from heart disease to the
less common and generally occur late in the course
preclinical phase to a phase with overt clinical signs.
of the disease. These animals do not usualy become
clinically hypotensive.
1. Heart disease includes numerous anatomic and physi-
APPENDIX A885
 ologic abnormalities of diversc etiology that may or 
MID TO MODERATE HEART FAILURE
 may not become clinically significant to the patient.
2. The preclinical phase has identifiable cardiac struc-
Clinical signs of heart failure are evident at rest or
tural abnormalities (e.g., by radiography, electrocar-
with mild exercise and adversely affect the quality of
diography, echocardiography). However, these are
life. Typical signs of heart failure include exercise intol-
erance, cough, tachypnea, mild respiratory distress
not apparent to the owner because of compensatory
(dyspnea), and mild to moderate ascites. Hypoperfut-
mechanisms that inhibit development of clinical
signs of heart failure.
sion al rest is generally not present.
3. A phase vith overt clinical signs evident to the client
s s ie p  si san 
and clinician heralds advanced congestive heart fail-
ure.
ADVANCED HEART FAILURE
Clinical signs of advanced congestive heart failure
are immediately obvious. These include respiratory dis-
HUMAN SCHEME (NEW YORK HEART
tress (dyspnea), marked ascites, profound exercise in-
tolerance, and hypoperfusioil at rest. I1n the most se-
vere cases, the patient is moribumd and suffers from
Hunmans with heart disease and heart failure are
cardiogenic shock. 1Death or severe debilitation is likely
categorized according to a functional classification
without therapy.
scheme based on the signs and symptoms evident at
st aren auoq (t) smono se papiaipqns si aseis s.
rest and during exercise (New York Heart Association
possible, (2) hospitalization is mandatory.
functional classes 1 through 4). This scheme often
 does not conveniently or appropriately apply to veteri-
nary patients with heart failure primarily because many
SYSTEMATIC APPROACH TO
of these patients do not exercise vigorously. The Inter.
national Small Animal Cardiac Health Council unai-
THE DOG OR CAT WITH
mously concluded that this scheme did not serve the
CARDLAC DISEASE
veterinary profession well and that the therapy of heart
failure would be better guided by a classification system
based on anatomic diagnosis and the severity of clinical
Signalment
signs at rest. Consequently, a new classificatioin sc heme
was developed that the Council believes is more appli-
Age, breed, and sex of the patient heip formulate a
cable to the veterinary situation.
rule-out list and help determine prognosis.
1istory
INTERNATIONAL SMALL ANIMAL
Note current and pre-existing diseases. Record cur-
CARDIAC HEALTH COUNCIL HEART
FAILURE CLASSIFICATION
rent drugs or medications and clinical response to
these medicaments. Record presenting clinical signs
and duration and progression of the illness.
THEASYMPTOMATICPATIENT
Heart disease is detectable; however, the patient is
Physical Examination
not overtly affected and does not demonstrate clinical
signs of heart failure. Diagnostic findings could in-
In addition to a complete physical examination, per-
clude a cardiac murmur, arrhythmia, or cardiac cham-
form a thorough cardiovascular examination, includ-
ber enlargement that is detecied by radiography or
 ing all of the following:
echocardiography.
'This stage is subdivided as follows:
· Auscultation, noting heart rate and presence or
absence of the following:
1. No signs of compensation, such as volume or pres.
sure overload ventricular hypertrophy, are evident.
1. Heart murmur (point of maximum imtensity, radi-
ation, loudness, timing, character)
2. Radiographic or echocardiographic evideice of
compensation, such as volume or pressure overload
2. Gallop sound (rhythm)
ventricular hypertrophy, is present.
3. Other abnormal heart sounds (e.g, spliting of
S or Ss, clicks, rubs)
The need for treatment here is arguable but not
4. Arrhythmias
justifiable with currently available data.
5. Abnormal luug sounds
886 APPENDIX
* Femoral pulse palpation (character, rate, rhythm,
CLINICAL FINDINGS IN HEART
pulse deficits)
DISEASE AND HEART FAILURE
• Capillary refill time and mucous meimbrane color
tvaluation
* Jugular vein observation for distention or puisation
· Precordial palpation for apical impulse, presence of
1. Clien1 Complaints
thrills
•'Thoracic percussion
· Dyspnea, orthopnea (pulmouary edema, pleural
effusion)
· Abdominal palpation to assess organomegaly and
· Cough (pulmonary edema, compression of a
detect ascites
bronchus by the left atrium)
- Tachypnea (pulmonary edema, pleural eflusion)
 Select from the following diagnostic tests, as
indicated on a case-by-case basis:
*Exercise intolerance (low cardiac output,
pulmonary edema)
·Abdominal distention (ascites)
·Weakness (low cardiac output)
Elcctrocardiography
· Syncope (episodic cessation of cercbral blood low)
·Weight loss
Assess the rate. rhythm, and axis; evaluate the P-
·Anorexia
QRS-T complex morphology.
· Depression
'T'horacic Radiography
2. Physical Fxamination (Gencral)
· Respiratory signs, such as tachypnea, dyspnea
Evaluate cardiac size and shape for evidenice of heart
•Ascites
disease, cardiomegaly, specific chamber enlargement,
· Distended and posibly pulsating jugular vcins
a11d pulmonary and sysiemic vascular chauges. Evalu-
· Abnormal ferroral pulses (hypokinetic,
ate for signs of heart failure, such as pulmonary edema
hyperkinetic)
and plcural cffusio11.
·Precordial thrills
· Palpable rhythm irregularities
·Hepatosplenomegaly
Echocarcdiography
·Pale mucous membranes
· Prolonged capillary refill ime (> 2 sec)
Assess cardiac structure and function lo determine
the type aud severity of the cardiac disease present.
3. Auscultation
Look for fluid accumulation. With radiography, look
for possible noncardiogenic causes of current clinical
*Murmurs
signs.
· Rate and rhythm irrcgularities
· Abnormal intensity of heart sounds
Gallop sounds
Clinical Pathology
· Crackles aiid wheezes (most commonly due to
chronic bronchial disease)
· Complete blood count (CBC)
· Muffled heart or lung soumds
· Sernim biochemical profile
· Serum electrolyte concentrations (potassium,
4. Radiography
sodium, chloride, calcium)
· Urinalysis
· Cardiormegaly (generalized or specific chambers)
• Acid-base status (blood pH, PcO, bicarbonate)
· Aortic root or main pulmonary arlery bulges
· Blood gases (arterial and venous oxygenn tensions)
·Pulmonary edema
Serum thyroxine concentration
· Pleural effusion
· Cytologic cvaluation of effusions
· Heartworm antigen serology, microfilaria detection
· Pulmonary vascular patterns; for example,
· Other tests when appropriate (blood culture, feline
 pulmonary venous congestion, pulmonary arterial
leukemia virus tests, feline immunodeficiency [FIV]
enlargement, pulmonary arterial blunting
serology, plasma and whole blood taurine
· Lung lobe collapse or torsion
concentration, plasma carnitine concentration,
• Pulmonary infilurates, such as inflammatory
plasma lactate concentration)
infiltrates, metastatic lesions
APPENDIX A
887
 5. Electrocarliography
acute mitral regurgitation or aortic regurgitation is
diagnostic for acute congestive lelt heart failure.
· Increased or decreased heart rate
 4. Ascites, and rarely peripheral edema, in a patient
• Abnormal cardiac rhythm
with enlarged hepatic veins on ultrasound or obvi-
· Abnormal mean electricai axis
ously distended jugular veins is diagnostic for con-
· Morphologic abuormalities of P wave or QRS
gestive right heart failure.
complex
5. Ascites, and rarely clinically significant peripheral
· ST segment or T-wave changes
cdema, in a patient with moderate to severe right
atrial enlargement is diagnostic for congestive right
6. Echocardiography
heart failure.
6. Ascites, and less commonly peripheral edema, in
· Anatomic cardiac lesion, such as atrial or
a patient with pericardial disease is diagnostic for
ventricular scptal defect, atrial enlargement, intra-
congestive right heart failure.
 or extracardiac tumors or thrombi, valvular lesions
7. Pleural effusion in a patient with right or left heart
· Cardiac hypertrophy patterns: Eccentric
disease is diagnostic for congestive right or left
hypertrophyvolume overload ventricular
heart failure. Cardiogenic pleural effusion in cats
hypertrophy (commonly termed dilation). Concentric
 may be pseudochylous or truly chylous and respond
hypertrophypressure overload ventricular
to therapy for congestive heart failure.
hypertrophy (thickened ventricular myocardium)
8. Low cardiac output or cardiac index in a patient
Abnormal ventricular move ment: hypo- or
with heart disease is diagnostic for low-output
hypcrkinetic wall motion1
heart failure.
· Pericardial or pleural fluid accumulation
 9. Increased blood lactate or low venous oxygen ten-
sion at rest or with mild exercise in a patient with
7. Clinical Pathology
congestive heart failure or severe cardiac disease is
diagnostic for low-output heart failurc.
· Low venous oxygen tension
· Low arterial oxygen tension
NOTE: NONCARDIOGENIG ascites, pleural effu-
· Increased blood lactate concentration
sion, pulmonary edema, or peripheral edema can be
· Prerenal azotemia resulting from severe
found in paticnts that do not have heart failure. 1n
hypoperfusion or inadequate water intake
these patients, PCWP and central venous pressure
secondary to malaise
(CVP) will be normal anid other diagnoses should be
· Mild elevation of liver enzymes
pursued.
• Hlypoproteinemia (congestive right heart failure)
· Elevated seruum thyroxine concentration (cats)
· Low plasma or whole blood taurine concentration
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES
(cats, some canine breeds)
THAT COMMONLY LEAD TO
· Iow plasina carnitine concentration (some dogs)
- Flectrolyte abnormalities
HEART FAILURE
- Positive heartworm test.
· Positive blood culture seen with endocarditis
The most common acquired heart diseases in dogs
and cats that lead to heart failure are as follows:
DEFINITIVE DIAGNOSTIC
· Chronic, acquired degeneration of the
CRITERIA FOR HEART FAILURE
atrioventricular valves (common in dogs; rare in
cats)
. Cardiomyopathy
1. An clevated pulmonary capillary wedge pressure
1. Dilated cardiomyopathy (common in dogs; rare
(PCWP), measured with a Swan-Ganz or other end-
in cats)
hole cardiac catheter in a patient with left heart
 2. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (common in cats;
disease, is diagnostic for congestive left heart fail-
rare in dogs)
ure. An increased central venous or right atrial
 3. Unclassified cardiomyopathies (cats)
pressure inl a patieilt with right heart disease is
4. Restrictive cardiomyopathy (cats)
diagnostic for congestive right heart failure.
 2. Pulmonary edema in a patient with moderate to
• 1Dirofilariasis and other causes of cor pulmonale
severe left atrial elargenent is diagnostic for co1l-
(common in dogs, uncommon in cats)
gestive left heart failure.
·Pericardial disease or effusion (common in dogs,
 3. Pulmonary edema in a patient with confirmed
rarely clinically significant in cats)
888
APPENDIX
· Rhythm and conduction abnormalities (dogs and
gitation is much more common than right heart failure.
cats)
resulting from tricuspid regurgitatio11.
· Hyperthyroid heart disease (cats)
The valvular leak initially leads to a decreased
· Hypertensive heart disease (dogs and cats)
amount of blood pushed forward into the aorta. Af
· Bacterial endocarditis (dogs and cats)
thisstagethereduced cardiacoutput islnical significan
- Cardiac tmors (common in dogs; rare in cats)
only because of the compensatory mechanisms that it initiates,
not because it is of sufficient nagnitude to cause clinicat
signs in most patients. The kidneys sense the decrease in
CHRONIC ACOUIRED
systemic blood flow and retain sodium and water to
increase blood volume in compenisation. This increases
DEGENERATTVE VALVULAR
venous return to the heart, which initially "stretches"
DISEASE
the myocardium in the affected veitricle. The affected
ventricle responds to this stretch by growing larger to
increase the end-diastolic volume. As a result of this
ecentric (wolune overload) hypertrophy, the ventricle is
Definition
able to pump a grealer quantity of blood to compen-
Chronic acquired degenierative  valvular disease,
sate for blood lost through the valvular leak without a
sometimes called endocardiosis, is an idiopathic de-
significant increase in the end-diastolic pressure within
generative disease of the atrioventricular (AV) valves
the ventricle, atria, pulmonary veins, or capillaries.
that leads to valvular insufficiency.
Iypically, this condition worsens over time, with thc
It is a common cause of cardiac disease in the dog.
veintricle growing larger as the mitral orifice enlargcs
characterized by nodular thickening of the edges of
 and regurgitation worsens. The left atrium dilates to
the atrioventricular valves. (Blood DC, Studdert VP:
 accommodate the increased amount of incoming sys-
Bailliere's Comprehensive Veterinary Dictionary, 2nd
tolic blood flow. Compensalory mechanisms maintain
ed. A Bailliere Tindall book. Philadelphia, WB Sau1-
adequate forward blood flow without increasing lef.
ders, 1998.)
atrial (and therefore pulmonary capilary) pressure
        
hanced pulmonary lymphatic drainage, until the leak
Pathology
becomes severe and left atrial pressure increases to the
point that pulmonary edema results.
The mitral and tricuspid valves are most commonly
Clinical consequences of advanced mitral valve insuf-
affected. A spectrum of AV valve lesions may be ob-
served; however, the most common change is a short-
fcienlcy include elevated pulmonary venous pressure,
pulmonary edema, left atrial enlargement with bron-
ening and thickening of the valves, leading to incom-
 chial compression, supraventricular arrhythmias such
pelency. Chordae tendineae often shorlen, become
as atrial premature contractions and atrial fibrillationl.
thick and nodular, and may rupture. Histologic
and, late in the course of the disease, ventricular myo-
changes in the valve and chordae tendineae include
cardial dysfiunction. The most common clinical signs
proliferation of the spongiosa layer secondary to infil-
associated with severe mitral regurgitation include ex-
tration and increased deposition of a1l extracellular
ercise intoleranice, coughing, and respiratory distrcss
matrix material called glycosaminoglycans.
(dyspnea).
 Pathologic consequences of chronic AV valve insuf-
 Because normal right ventricular systolic pressure is
ficiency include dilation and hypertrophy (volume
low (<30 mmHg), regurgitant flow across all but the
overload hypertrophy) of the atria and ventricles, en-
most severe tricuspid valve lesions is not very large in
docardial fibrosis of the atrium (jet. lesions), and occa-
magnitude, and congestive heart failure secondary 1o
sionally a full thickness left atrial tear.
mon. Consequences of tricuspid regurgitation are usu-
Pathophysiology
ally related to elevated systemic venous pressures, with
hepatomegaly, ascites, and rarely subcutaneous ederma.
The AV lesions result in an orifice where the valve
In many patieuts in which signs of right heart failure
leaflets would have normally met. The orifice permits
 are identified, pulmonary hypertension is also present.
regurgitation of blood from the ventricle into the
Biventricular heart failure may manifest as pleural effu-
atrium during ventricular contraction. For any given
si01.
size of defect, the magnitude of blood regurgitating
 Syncope can occur in advanced valvular heart dis-
back across the mitral valve is greater than across the
ease and may he related to paroxysmal arrhythmias or
tricuspid valve because the left ventricle develops
vigorous coughing with reduced venous return. Syn-
much greater force than the right ventricle does. Con-
 cope may occur in patients with no other clinical signs
sequenuy, left heart failure resulting from mitral regur-
of heart failure.
APPENDIXA 889
Signalment
A. THE ASYMPTOMATIC PATIENT
Degenerative AV valve disease affects a broad range
History
 Of breeds and ages; however, this disease is most com-
No visible clinical siguis of heart disease are preseilt.
mon in middle-aged or older sinall breed dogs.
For the forgoing reasons, clinical signs are more
common in acquired left AV valve disease; therefore,
 Physical Examination
the following discussion describes left. AV valve myxo-
 matous degeneration. Extrapolation to right AV valve
Detection of a cardiac murmur during a routie
examination is usually the first chue that valvular de-
myxomatous degeneration is straightforward.
generation has begun. Cardiac findings are typically
restricted to auscultation, which reveals a systolic mur-
mur heard best over the left cardiac apex with mitral
Suggestive Diagnostic Fincdlings
regurgitation or the tricuspid valve region with tricus-
pid regurgitation. Typically, the murmur is soffer in
1. A systolic murmur over the left cardiac apex in a
the early stages of vaive incompetency. It is common
mature dog
for the murmur to become louder and pansystolic as
 2. Radiographic, echocardiographic, or electrocardio-
valvular regurgitation progresses. Although loud holo-
 graphic (ECG) evidence of left heart enlargement
systolic and pansystolic murmurs are typical of more
 3. Radiographic evidence of pulmonary venous disten-
advanced disease, the severity of mitral regurgitation
tion or pulmonary tdema
cannot be reliably predicted by auscultation alone
Radiography
Definitive Diagnostic Criteria
The thoracic radiograph during this stage may be
1. Evidence of left ventricular volume overload hyper-
normal or may show mild to moderate left atrial and
trophy and left atrial enlargement, thickened mitral
left venitricular enlargement. Thoracic radiography is
particularly valuable in following the progression of
valve leaflets, and normal to increased shortening
valvular incompetency and the cardiomegaly that de-
fraction on an echocardiogram in conjunction with
velops with more advanced disease.
a typical left apical systolic mur mur
 2. Presence of a regurgitant jet across the mitral valve
o1l spectral or color flow Doppler, in conjumction
Electrocardiography
with criteria in #1
The FCG is usually normal in this stage, although P-
 3. Regurgitation of radiopaque dye into the left atrium
wave abnormalities may occur, and evidence of left
after dye injection into the left ventricle at the
ventricular enlargement may hecome apparent if the
time of cardiac catheterization, in conjunclion with
disease has progressed to the moderate stage.
criteria in #1
Echocardiography
Differential Diagnoses
The echocardiogram reveals no lo moderate left
atrial and left ventricular enlargement, depending on
1. Previously unrecognized congenital malformation
the severity of the disease. The mitral valve leaflets may
 of the atrioventricular valve apparatus--eg., 1mitral
appear thickened.
valve dysplasia—results in similar pathophysiology
and clinical signs.
 T'herapeutic Recommendations (See Appendices
 2. Bacterial endocarditis of the left AV valve—results
 B and C for specific medicaments and dlosage
in1 similar pathophysiology and climical sigis.
3. 1Dilated cardiomyopathy—may have similar clinical,
rccommendations)
electrocardiographic, and radiographic  
appear
ln the absence of cardiac enlargement, there is no
allce.
evidence that any therapy is indicated or beneficial.
4. Primary respiratory diseases, especially tracheal col-
 Some Council members believe that in the presence
lapse, chronic bronchitis, amd pulmonary fibrosis-
of moderate to severe cardiomegaly, angiotensin con-
may manifest with cough and exercise intolerance.
verting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor therapy may be bene
 5. Neurologic and metabolic disorders-may result in
ficial. Evidence is currently lacking in dogs. The Coun-
a shop sos u uass ados on reus saposida
cil will continue to review this issue as new data
mitral insufficiency.
become available.
890 APPENDIX
B. MILD TO MODERATE HEART
ohserved but are less common than in dogs with di-
 lated cardiormyopathy Changes in1 the P waves are com-
FAILURE
mon and include widened P waves (*P mitrale") and
 Signs of heart failure are evident to the client and
increased amplitude P waves ('P pulmonale"). The
frontal mean electrical axis is typically noral, but
may be visible on presentation.
increased amplitude R waves are sometimes observed
in leads II and a VF.
Ilistory
Client complaints generally include reports of epi-
Echocardiography
sodic cough, exercise intolerance, lethargy, difficult
Typical echocardiographic changes include moder-
breathing, tachypnea, and nocturnal restlessness.
ate to severe left atrial enlargement, left ventricular
volume overload (eccentric hypertrophy), and a hyper-
Physical Examimation
dynamic left ventricular motion (shortening fraction
exceeding 40% and commonly >50%). Myocardial
The dog may appear normal, particularly in the
mildest phases of congestive heart failure. This is par-
function is usually normal at this stage as evidenced by
a normal end-systolic diameter, The increased shorte1l-
ticularly true if coughing is caused by left main stem
ing fraction is the result of the increase in end-diastolic
bronchial compression (not a sign of heart failure)
diameter with a normal end-systolic diameter. Exuber-
and not by overt pulmonary edema. A systolic cardiac
ant mitral valve excursionl and thickening of the mitral
murmur is always present, usually loudest over the
valve leaflets are typical findings. Progressive mitral
left apex. In many cases palpable precordial thrills
regurgitation is associated with increasing cardiac di-
associated with mitral and/or tricuspid regurgitation
mensions and  left  ventricular shortening fraction.
are evident. The cardiac rhyihm may be regular or
Doppler echocardiography (spectral or color flow)
irregular. lsolated atrial premature complexes are com-
may be used to document the presence of mitral regur-
mon. More advanced arrhythmias may be anticipated
gitation and may be useful in estimating the severity
in some dogs. The arterial pulse may be normal or
brisk. Irregularities of the pulse are expected with
of the regurgitation.
cardiac arrhythunias. Congestive left heart failure is
evident as exercise intolerance, fachypnea, and possi-
Therapeutic Recommendations (See Appendices
 ble inspiratory and early expiratory crackles. (Caution:
 B and C for spccific medicamenis and dosage
absence of these sounds does not rule out pulmonary
rccommcndations)
tdema, and presence of pulmonary crackles is more
commonly identified in older dogs with primary lung
1. Diuretic
disease.) A wheeze may he detected in dogs with com-
2. ACE inhibitor
pression of the left main stem bronchus by the left
 3. Sodium-restricted diet, if tolerated by the patient
atrium. When tricuspid regurgitation is prominent, he-
4. Digitalis glycoside: The Council could not reach a
patomegaly and ascitic fluid accumulation may be
consenisus regarding digitalis therapy for this class
1loted.
of canine patient.
Radiography
C, ADVANCED HEART FAILURE
Cardiomegaly, which is usually left sided, is evident.
 Dorsal deviation of the trachea in dogs that are not
Clinical findings such as dyspnea at rest, markedly
lat chested and elevation and compression of the left
diminished exercise tolerance, alveolar pulmonary
main stem bronchus are common findings. Presence
edema, cachexia, or obvious ascites are seen in patients
of left atrial and left auricular appendage enlargement
with advanced congestive heart failure. Pallor of the
is expected on both dorsoventral and lateral thoracic
mucous membranes secondary to low cardiac output
radiographs. Pulmonary edema is characterized most
and pronounced vasoconstrictioin may occur, although
frequently by increased perihilar and caudodorsal lung
normal mucous membrane color and refill time do
densities.
 not. rule out forward hear1. failure or systemic hypoper-
fusion.
Elcctrocardiography
History
The ECG rate and rhythm may be normal. Atrial
 premature complexes may be observed with progres-
 Client complaints generally include reporis of fre-
sive atrial distcntion. Ventricular extrasystoles may be
quent cough, exercise intolerance, lethargy, diffcult
APPENDIX A
¥891
breathing, tachypnea, and nocturnal restlessness. Own-
rupture. Severe left atrial and left ventricular enlarge-
ers may also report syncope.
ments are present at this stage. Global left ventricular
function (shortening fraction) is usually well pre-
Physical Examination
be decreased in some dogs, especially large breed
 Unless heart failure results from a peracute incident,
 dogs, at this stage. In severe miral regurgitation, de-
such as a chordal rupture, many dogs with advanced
creased myocardial function is characterized by a 11or-
heart failure are in poor body condition and have
mal or below normal shortening fraction, increascd
experienced weight loss. Respiratory distress aiid tach-
separation between the mitral valve opening point (E
 ypnea are typical clinical findings. In biventricular fail-
 point) and ventricular septum, and an increased end-
ure or right heart failure, the patient may have ascites.
systolic diameter.
 Systolic murmurs, as previously described, are present.
The increase in end-systolic diaineter denotes the
'The arterial pulse may be weak or normal and may be
 decrease in myocardial function seen in late stage mi-
irregular because of premature depolarizations or
tral regurgitation, and the increase in end-diastolic.
atrial fibrillation. Dogs with respiratory distress may
diameter usually keeps the shortening fraction in the
have crackles secondary to pulmonary edema but of-
normal range or above.
ten have only increased bronchovesicular sounds sec-
ondary to hyperpnea. In advanced cases of right heart
failure, 1here will be considerable ascites as well as
'T'herapcutic Recommendations
hepatomegaly. Jugular venous pressure is often ele-
THERAPY FOR ADVANCED HEART FAILURE-HOME CARE POSSI-
vated, and jugular pulsations may be evident, Arrhyth-
 BLE (See Appendices B and C for specific medicaments
 mias are very common in this phase, and atrial fibrilla-
 and dosage recormendations)
tio1n is a frcquent cause of deterioration in class from
moderate to severe heart failure.
1. Furosemide
Note: Older small breed dogs are seen commonly
2. ACE inhibitor
with pulmonary crackles and a murmur of mitral re.
3. Digitalis glycoside
gurgitation, Many of these dogs have primary respira-
4. 1lydralazine titration*
tory disease rather than heart failure, and the finding
 5. Addition of another class of diuretic
 of a heart murmur is incidental.
 Possible use of the following:
Radiography
1. Sodium restriction, if the dog will accept it.
 2. Antiarrhythmic therapy, if needed
I11 addition to radiographic abnormalities previously
mentioned, alveolar infitrates typical of cardiogenic
 3. Nitrates 
4. 'Theophylline
pulmonary edema will be observed. These infiltrates
 5. Codeine or other cough suppressants
are usually most evident in the hilar region but may
be diffuse. Infiltrates are asymmetrical in some dogs,
with the right side more dense than the left side.
THERAPY FOR ADVANCED HEART FAILURE—HOSPITALIZATION
Cardiomegaly may be extreme and may mimic. pericar
 a S  N  
dial effusion in some dogs, although usually the mark-
C for specific medicaments and dosage recommenda-
edly enlarged left atrium can be identified. Abdominal
tions)
radiographs demonstrate hepatomegaly and may show
1. Oxygen therapy
fluid accurmulation if right heart failure is also present.
 2. Intravenous furosemide or another loop diuretic*
 3. Preload reduction with topical nitroglycerine or
Elcctrocardiography
nitroprusside (blood pressure must be monitored
if nitroprusside is used)
In addition to the abnormalities mentioned in the
4. Afterload reduction with hydralazine or sodinm
previous section, cardiac arrhythmias are quite com-
nitroprusside to reduce mitral regurgitaint frac-
mon. Atrial fibrillation is probably the most frequently
tiont
encountered sustained cardiac arrhythmia. Ventricular
tachyarrhythmias may also be observed.
*In the presence of left main sierm bronchial conpression, refrac-
tory or progressive left-sided heart failure, or insulicient response
Echocarcdiography
to ACE inhibitor therapy, the addirion of hydralazine shouid be
considered. If axided onto ACE inhibitor therapy, care must be taken 
'The mitral valve leaflets usuaily are markedly thick-
not to induce profound hypotension. The drug should generally be
ened, and there may be evidence of mitral valve pro-
fool., A board-certified cardiac specialist should be consulted.
lapse or flail, which is evidence of chordae tendineae
↑Most effertive at reducing life-hreatening pulmonary edema.
892
APPENDIX
 5. Amrinone or milrinone infusion
the most. remarkable finding usually is the vast amounf
6.Dobutamine
of relatively normal appearing myocardium. Except
7. Morphine
in rare cases of myocarditis (e.g., Chagas' discase),
 8. Theophylline
inflammatory cells are sparse or ahsent.
9. Antiarrhythmic therapy (if needed)
10. Pleurocentesis (if needed) *
Pathophysiology
If ascitic fluid accumulation or pulmonary edema is
Dilated cardiomyopathy occurs when a primary dis-
refractory to therapy with one diuretic, a second di-
tase of the myocardium results in a decrease in myo-
uretic can be added. Examples include hydrochlorothi-
cardial contractility and causes idiopathic primary
azide or a combination of hydrochlorothiazide plus
myocardial failure. This disease progresses insidiously
spironolactone. Also, the addition of hydralazine
over a nuumber of years. In the early and middle stages
should be considered as outlined earlier in refractory
 of the disease, the dog appears normal, and the disease
left heart failure.
can usually only be identified by echocardiographic
examination
As a consequence of depressed myocardial contrac
CANINE DILATED
tility, end-systolic diameter and volume initially in-
CARDIOMYOPATHY
crease. The chamber eccentrically hypertrophies sec-
ondary to renal salt and water retention to increase
end-diastolic diameter and volume. This allows the
 Definition and Etiology
heart to compenisale for the depression in contractility
and to maintain a normal stroke volume at a normal
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a condition in
end-diastolic intraventricular pressure. As the disease
which myocardial disease results in decreased myocar-
progresses, myocardial contractity is further de-
dial contractility (primary myocardial failure). Volume
 pressed, and the heart grows larger.
Overload hypertrophy of one or both ventricles occurs
At the end-stage of the disease, the ability of the
 to compensate for the myocardial failure.
heart to hyperrophy further becomes limited. ‘The
 Most cases of cardiomyopathy in dogs are idiopathic;
kidneys retain more sodium and water, and blood vol-
however, a variety of definable conditions may lead to
llme continues to increase without further chamber
myocardial failure and produce clinical signs indistin-
enlargement, resulting in increased ventricular dia-
guishable from idiopathic DCM. The likely site of the
stolic pressure. This inicrease in diastolic pressure backs
disease is subcellular, and in some cases dilated cardio-
up into the atrium, veins, and capilary bed behind
 myopathy is reversible upon supplementation of a de-
the affected ventricle, causing edema. When the ven-
ficieint nutrient. American cocker spaniels with 1DCM
tricular size is increased, AV valvular regurgitation
are taurine and possibly carnitine deficient and usally
commonly occurs and further aggravates the increase
respond to supplementation. Other dogs with DCM
 in atrial, venous, and capillary pressures, although the
belonging to breeds in which DCM is not prevalent
amount of regurgitation is usualy mild. Cardiac output
may be similarly affected. Some large breed dogs are
may also become inadequate at this stage, resulting in1
carnitine deficient aiid responsive to supplementation;
clinical  signs  of hypoperfusion.
.Tachyarrhythmias,
this has been reported in a family of boxer dogs.
such as atrial fibrillation, may result ini worsened hemo-
dynamics and may promote further myocardial deteri-
oration.
Pathology
 Global volume overload hypertrophy of all four car-
Signalment
diac chambers is common and characterized by a
Affected dogs are predominantly male, middle-aged
marked increase in heart weight and chamber enlarge-
 to geriatric, and large or giant breeds, such as Dober-
ment with wall thickness that is normal to thinner than
 man pinschers, Great Danes, Irish wolhounds, and St.
normal. Endomiyocardial fibrosis may be present, as
well as dilation of the atrioventricular (AV) valve an-
Bernards. Spaniels are a notable exception, as springer
spaniels and cocker spaniels are sometimes affected
nuli. The AV valves are generally normal or show mini-
mal degenerative change.
with this disease. A wide range of age groups may be
Histologic manifestations of idiopathic DCM include
affected, including dogs as young as 6 months of age
or older than 10 years of age.
 atenuated, thinned myocytes that appear "wavy'’ and
separated. Myocardial degeneration, cytoplasmic vac-
uolization, 1ecrosis, and fibrosis are usually seen, but
Diagnostic Criteria for Dilated Cardiomyopathy
The echocardiograrm is the gold staudard for diag10-
*Most effective at reducing life-threatening pleural effusion.
sis of dilated cardiomyopathy. Ventricular chamber en-
APPENDIX A:
893
largement with decreased ventricular shortening frac-
Radiography
tion is the feature most characteristic of this disorder.
The thoracic radiograph may be normal, or general-
A presumptive diagnosis of dilated cardliomyopathy
can usually be made under the following condiions:
ized mild to moderate cardiomegaly, mos1. commonly
left-sided, may be evident. Pulmonary venous disten-
1. Identification of a predisposed breed (dilated car-
tion may indicate incipient hear1. failure.
dliomyopathy is unusual in other breeds and mixed
breeds)
Electrocardiography
 2. Radiographic evidence of generalized cardiomegaly
 3. Ausculltation of a gallop sound (rhythm)
The ECG may be normal or demonstrale left heart
4. Demonstration of objective signs of congestive heart.
enlargement, a ventricular conduction abnormaliy, or
failure or physical examination and radiography
isolaled atrial or ventricular premature complexes.
5. Evidence of cardiac arrhythmias: atrial fibrillation
and ventricular 1achyarrhythmias are most charac
Echocardiography
teristic
In some breeds, ventricular tachyarrhythmias may pre
Eend-systolic diameter is always inereased because of
the decrease in myocardial contractility. fnddiastolc
cede echocardiographically recognizable reduction in
diameter is usually increased 1o compensate for the
myocardial function.
myocardial failure. When echocardiographic evidence
of myocardial failure is present in the absence of clini-
Differential Diagnoses
cal sigrs, the cardiac chambers are usually at or slighily
above the upper limits of normal for end-diasiolic
1. Previously unrecognized congenital hear1. disease,
diameter, and left ventricular shortening fraction (SF)
especially paten1. ductus arteriosus and mitral valve
is decreased to between 15% and 25% because of the
dysplasia*
imcrease in end-systolig diameter. However, a SF <15%
 2. Miral regurgitation caused by degenerative valve
is occasionally observed in asymptomatic patienis.
disease in a large-breed dog*
3. Pericardial disease
Thcrapcutic Recoinmendations (Sce Appcndices
4. Bacterial endocardlitis
 B and C for specific nedicainents and dosage
5. Primary cardiac arrhythmia
recommendations)
 6. Severe endocrine deficiency, such as hypothyroid-
ism, Addison's disease
The Council could not reach a consensus regarding
 7. Neurologic disease in the patient with syncope
recommendations for treating asymplomatic canine
 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy.
 Some members believe therapeuic intervention is
appropriate al this stage. Others decline to recom-
A. THE ASYMPTOMATIC PATIENT
mend therapy at 1his poin1. Those Council members
in favor of pharmacologic intervention in echocardio-
History
 graphically confirmed cases of dilated cardiomyopathy
 No visible clinical signs of disease are present.
suggest one or boih of the following medicamenis:
ACE inhibitors, digitalis.
Note: L-Carnitine and taurine can be supplemented
if a deficiency is clearly documented. The benefits of
Physical Examination
supplementation of both nutrients have been demon-
Serendipitous detection of a systolic heart murmur,
strated in Anerican cocker spariels with the disease.
which is usually soft, an audible third heart sound
(gallop sound), or an arrhythmia should prompi con-
sideration of occul. cardiomyopathy. The detection of
B. MILD TO MODERATE HEART
cardiomegaly during rouline thoracic radiography or
FAILURE
during evaluation of another condition may be an
early clue to the presence of myocardial disease. Occa-
History
sionally an affecied dog is identified via echocardio-
graphie screening.
Signs of heart failure have become evident to the
clien1 at this siage and are ofien visible at the time
 of presentation. Common historical findings include
*These differential diagnoses are most. conimon and are often
 dyspnea, cough, weight loss, exereise intolerance, leth-
failure may be a prominent component.
 argy, and depression. The onset of congestive left heart
894
APPENDIX
varying degrees of regional left ventricular wall dys-
tress. Affected dogs may exhibit a mild or intermittent
function, Variable and chaotic contraction of the ven-
cough. Dogs with right heart failure commonly have as-
tricular walls is typical in palien ts with atrial fibrillation.
cites.
Color flow Doppler echocarrliography usually reveals a
small mitral regurgitant jet. Ultrasound of the liver in
Physical Examination
patients with right hcart failure demonstrates enlarged
hepatie veins.
 Some dogs with mild to moderate heart failure re-
sulting from dilated cardiomyopathy demonstrate sig-
Iherapcutic Recommendations (See Appendices
nificant weight loss. Careful auscultation usually indi-
 B and C for specific medicamcnts and dosage
ya e 1o (tupa) punos does e jo aouasard syi sains
apical systolic murmur. Cardiac rhythm abnormalities
recommcndations)
may be evident on auscultation and palpation of the
1. Digitalis glycoside
femoral pulse, The arterial pulse is normal to hypoki-
2.
Diuretic
netic. Jugular venous pressure is usually normal in
 3. ACE inhibitor
mild heari failure but may become elevaied with pro-
4.
Antiarrhythmic therapy when indicated: digoxin,
gression of disease. Congestive left heart failure is typi-
beta-blocker, diltiazem for atrial fibrillation; ventric-
cal and is characterized on physical examination by arl
ular antiarrhythmic drugs for ventricular arrhyih-
increased respiralory rate. End-inspiratory crackles are
mias
5.
 Dietary sodium restriction, if tolerated
 include elevated jugular venous pressure, hepatomeg-
 6. 1-Carnitine or taurine may be supplemented when
aly, and mild ascites.
 appropriately based on suitable laboratory tests.
Both should be administered to American cocker
Radiography
 spaniels with DCM
7. 1.ow-dose beta-blocker*
Iypical findings are lefi-sided or generalized cardio
megaly with lefi. auial enlargemen1, pulmonary venous
distention, and increased pulmonary densities typica!
C. ADVANCED HEART FAILURE
 Of pulmonary edema. A small pleural effusion may
 be evident. Hepatomegaly is a common finding on
History
abdominal radliography.
Most canine patients with DGM present with ad-
vanced heart failure. Disease onset offen appears acute
Electrocardiography
t0 the owner even though the disease has been prog-
Cardiac rhythm disturbances are common ard in-
ressing for years. Clinical findings such as dyspnea
chude atrial premature complexes, veniricular prema-
a1. rest,
markedly diminished exercise tolerance. or
ture complexes, paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia,
abdominal distentior are reported in patients with
and more sustained tachyarrhyihmias. Airial fibrilla-
advanced congestive heart failure.
lion may be evident in some dogs; in dogs with myocar-
 dial failure, the onset of atrial fibrillalion commonly
Physical Examination
contributes to progression to more advanced stages of
congestive heart failure, P waves may be widened, and
 Dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy in advanced heart
alterations in the QRS morphology are
expecled.
failure are offen cachectic, weak, lethargic, anorectic.
Other ECG changes may include increased amplitude
and dyspneic. Dogs in cardiogenic shock from severe
R waves, widened QRS complexes, and slurring of the
hypoperfusion may be moribund. Simus iachycardia.
R wave descent. Nonspecific ST-segment and T-wave
 atrial fbrillation, or sinus rhythm with premature ven-
changes are also commonplace.
tricular complexes is usually detected. A gallop sound
(rhythm) is a consistent finding but may be dlifficult to
Echocardiography
delect in arrhythmic patients and by untrained person-
nel. Sysolic murmurs of mitral or tricuspid regurgita-
Characteristic fealures are a marked increase in end-
tion may be heard. The arterial pulse may be hypoki-
systolic diameter, with secondary left ventricular eccen-
tric (volume overload) hypertrophy and moderately
*The Council could not reach a consensus regarding the efcacy
 increased end-diasiolic dianeter, resuluing in left ven-
and ardvisability of low-dose beta-blocker therapy. Beta-blockers are
tricular hypokinesis (SF usually <15%), inereased sep-
eficacious at inproving nvocardial function in some humans with
dilated cardiomyopathy. There arc no published studies of heta-
aration between the ventricular septum and the initial
blocker therapy in dogs with DCM, and pilot studies havc not hecn
opening (E poinl) of the sepial mitral leaflet, and
encouraging.
APPENDIX A
895
netic and may be irregular bccause of a cardiac
1. Digitalis
arrhythmia. Jugular venous disiention may be de-
2. Diuretic therapy
1ected.
3. ACE inhibitor
Most dogs with advanced heart failure manifest signs
 4. Dietary sodium restriction, if accepted
 Of leff. or biventricular heart failure; usually respiratory
5. Antiarrhyihmic drug therapy, when appropriate,
distress  and tachypnea  resulting from  pulmonary
to conirol heart rate in atrial fibrillation (e.g-.
edema, pleural effusion, or both are evident.
digoxin, diltiazem, beta-blocker) or when required
10 suppress ventricular ectopia (e.g, procain-
amide, tocainide, elc.)
Radiography
 6. No consensus was reached regarding the use of
Cardiomegaly is usually moderate to severe, and the
low-dose beta-blockade therapy in this stage of car-
heart is usually globally enlarged. Cardiomegaly may
dlionyopathy. There was a consensus, however, thal.
be difficult to appreciate in some deep-chested dogs.
beta-blockade was appropriate if used to control
ventricular rate response in dogs with atrial fibril-
especially in Doberman pinschers. Oiher conmon ra-
lation.
 diographic changes include pulmonary venous disten-
7. Taurine
 or carnitine supplementation, as de-
tion, alveolar lung infiltrates of pulmonary edema, and
 pleural effusion.
scribed previously
Alternative therapies include the following:
Elcc trocardiography
8. Hydralazine
9. Nitrates
Previously described elecirocardiographic abnormal-
10. Bronchodilators, such as theophylline and related
ities are expecied. Atrial fbrillation or sinus rhythm
spumoduoo
with paroxysmal ventricular tachycardlia is common al.
this stage.
wise fashion in those dogs for which additional drug
Echocardiography
cardiac failure. Hydralazine is particularly likely to be
Previously described echocardiographic abnormali-
helpful when there is concurrent moderale mitral re-
ties are present but more severe. Moreover, pleural
gurgitation. However, combination yasodilator therapy
may be associated with clinically significant hypoten-
and small pericardial effusions secondary to heart fail-
sion and impaired renal perfusion. Blood pressure
ure may be seen.
monitoring should be available. Corsultation with a
board-certified cardiologist is encouraged.
Therapeutic Recommendations
 Dilated cardiomyopathy is associated with a higher
 THERAPY FOR ADVANCED HEART FAILLRE WHEN HOSPITALIZA.
mortality rate than the other diseases that lead to heart
TION IS MANDATORY
failure. ACE inhibiors have been shown to prolong
 (See Appendices B and C for specific medicaments
(suoepusuosat asesop pur.
survival with dilated cardiomyopathy.  Beta-blockers
sds o  js d o u q a
1. Intravenous diuretic (furosemide* or another loop
with dilated cardiomyopathy; however, studies in dogs
diuretic)
are lacking, and preliminary studies are discouraging.
 2. Dobutamine* or amrinone infusion
Dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy die from heart
3. Oxygen
failure or die sudderly, presumably from ventricular
 4. Preload reduction using nitroglycerine ointment or
arrhythmia deteriorating into ventricular fibrillation.
sodium nitroprusside* (arterial blood pressure
Effecive therapy to prevent sudden death has not
must be monitored during sodium nitroprusside
 been elucidated in dogs. Therapy oulined here is
(herapy).
for heart failure. Ventricular antiarrhythmics can be
5. Morphine
administered but are believed to be ineffective in pre-
      a a
venting sudden death.
cardiar arrhythmias
Advanced heart failure is subdivided therapeutically
into two subclasses:
THIERAPY FOR CARDIAC ARRHYTHIMIAS
Cardiac arrhythmias are of particular concern in
THIERAPY FOR ADVANCED HEART FAILLREHIOME CARE IS POS.
 dogs with dilated cardionyopathy, and antiarrhythmic
SIBLE
(See Appendices B and C for specific medicaments 
*These are thc inost cffective drugs for controlling severe pul-
and dosage recommendations)
onary cdena.
896
APPENDIX
drug therapy should be prescribed when arrhythmias
presumably secondary lo dead adul. worms, and exu-
 are prese nt.
berant microvillus forrmation may produce blockage of
Atrial arrhythmias, particularly atrial fibrillation:
blood flow through the pulmonary arteries.
 Pulmonary parenchymal reactions also can occir in
1. Digoxin
2. Beta-blockers
heartworm disease. Sequestration of microfilaniae and
reaction to sequestered microflariae in the lung pa-
3.Diltiazem
renchyma can cause pneumonitis. The exact mecha-
Note: Both diltiazem and beta-blockers depress myo-
nisms of pulmonary injury are not fully elucidated, but
cardial contractility at higher dosages. In using these
 pathologic fndings include eosinophilic pneumonitis,
drugs to control ventricular rate response, a low initial
 pulmonary fibrosis as well as pulmonary thrombosis,
staring dosage should be chosen, namely 0.1 1o 0.2
and infarclion secondary to worm death.
mg/kg of body weight orally three times a day for
The severity of heartworn disease is often, but not
propranolol and 0.5 mg/kg orally three times a day
 always, related to the parasite burden. Dogs tha1 are
for diltiazem. Incremental doses shouid be used 10
severely allergic to the parasites commonly have severe
gradually obtain the desired heart rate effect.
Ventricular arrhythmias
ease and are commonly amicrofilaremic. In dogs with
 Isolated or periodic ventricular extrasystoles:
No
 large numbers of adult parasites, retrograde migration
consensus was reached by the Council regarding the
of worms into the right atrium and tricuspid valve
treatment of these isolated rhythm disturbances; how-
apparatus may occur, resuling in caval syndrome.
ever, the use of Holter monitoring or additional con-
 suliation was believed to be worthwhile.
Pathophysiology
Sustained ventricular arrhythmias:
The presence of adult heartworms results in the
1, L idocaine
aforementioned anatomirc changes in affected pulmo-
2. Procainamide
nary arteries. Changes include narrowing of the vascu-
3. Tocainide
lar lumina and limitation of pulmonary blood flow.
4. Mexiletine
 If pulmonary arlery disease is severe, and especially
5. Quinidine
if thromboemboli are present, pulmonary vascular re-
 6. Beta-adrenergic blockers
sistance increases, resulting in significant. pulmonary
hypertension. Right heart enlargement (eccentric hy-
CANINE HEARTWORM DISEASE
 pertrophy) and right heart failure may then ensue.
Why the hear1. develops eccentric rather than the ex
pected concentric hypertrophy is unresolved. Pulmo-
nary parenchymal changes, which may lead 1o alveolar
Definition
hypoxia, add a reversible aspect. of vasoconstriction
Heartworm disease is the clinical manifestation of
that further increases pulmonary vascular resistance.
parasitism by Dirofilaria immilis, a filarial nematode.
Dogs with advanced dirofilariasis show marked exercise
Adult nematodes injure the pulmonary vascular tree
intolerance and may develop congestive right heart
and the lung, leading to pulmonary artery injury and,
failure.
sure overload on the right ventricle. The heart and
Signalment
-pe u panfu sue&io jediouud aqi Aensn aue Sun
vanced dirofilariasis.
There are no age or breed predilections for heart-
worm disease; however, large breed, male dogs are
Pathology
more commonly affected, probably because they are
frequently outdoors. The earliest signs of heartworm
The presence of Dirofilaria adulus injures the pulmo-
disease are not likely to be seen before 7 months of
nary arterial endothelium, resulting in swelling, al-
 age because of the life cycle of D). inmitis.
tered iniracellular junctions, and platele1. and leuko-
cyte activation. These activated cells release factors that.
Diagnostic Criteria
stimulate collagen formation, intimal thickening and
proliferation, and medial hyperirophy of the pulmo-
1. Identification of circulating microfilariae of D. immi
nary arteries. Intimal smooth muscle cells proliferate
tis in dogs older than 5 months of age; transplacen-
and migrate toward the surface, producing villus prolif-
tal transfer of microflariae is considered possible in
eration from the pulmonary arterial surface.
younger dogs. Microfilariae must be differentiated 
Consequent to these changes, the pulmonary arter-
from those of Dipetalonema reconditum.
ies enlarge and narrow. Pulmonary thromboemboli,
 2. A positive serologic tes1. for adult heartworm anti-
APPENDIXA897
gen, especially with typical signs or radiographic
B. MILD TO ADVANCED HEART FAILURE
changes of heartworm disease
3. Clinical signs of exercise intolerance, coughing. or
History
congestive right heart failure in conjuncuion with
Clienl complaints usually include exercise intoler-
compatible radiographic changes (a heartworm an-
tigen test is also recomended to verify the diagnosis)
ance, possible syncope, and loss of condition. Diffcult.
breathing, tachypnea, and coughing are frequent signs
if there are concurrent pulmonary parenchymal com-
Differential Diagnoses
plications. The opportunity for frequent exposure to
mosquitoes and a lax preventive program are obvious
1. Primary respiratory disorders, including infectious,
risk factors for developmen1. of advanced dirofilariasis.
parasitic, inflammatory, and neoplastir diseases
 2. Pulmonary neoplasia—primary or metastatic
3. Other forms of cardiac disease, such as dilated car-
Physical Examination
diomyopaihy, tricuspid valve malformation or de-
Clinical signs of advanced heartworm disease can be
generation, congenital hear1 disease, pericardial dis-
grouped into respiratory signs, cardiovascular signs,
ease
signs referable to caval syndrome, and signs secondary
to other disorders occurring as a result of heartworm
infestation. The last category includes renal disease,
A. THE ASYMPTOMATIC PATIENT
 disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, anemia, and
dysproteinemia.
 Respiratory signs generally include tachypnea, dys-
History
pnea, and coughing. Hemoptysis is seen occasionally
Diagnosis of asymptomatic dirofilariasis is most often
 and is probably related to rupture and hemorrhage of
made by a positive microfilaria test or positive antigen
bronchial or pulmonary arteries into the lung paren-
tes1. during routine screening for heartworm disease.
chyma. These signs are the resul. of heartworm infesta-
tion, not of heart failure. Cardiovascular signs that are
related to pulmonary vascular changes and pulmonary
Physical Examination
hypertension include weakness, which is often epi-
sodic, exercise intolerance, syncope, and clinical signs
 Usually no abnormalities are identifed on physical
 of congestive right heart failure.
examination.
 Dogs with advanced heartworm discase usually show
weight loss and a poor hair coat. Cardiac auscultation
may demonstrate a normal hear1. rhythm or occasion
Radiography
 e   o  d 
Thoracic radiographs may be normal or may show
second heart soumd may be normal, louder than nor-
 mal, or split, the latter as a consequence of pulmonary
varying degrees of pulmonary artery enlargement.
 blunting, and tortuosity; and right heart enlargement.
hypertension. A systolic mmurmur of tricuspid regurgita-
tion may be evident over the right hemithorax.
The arterial pulse is usually normal but central ve-
Elcctrocardiography
nous pressure is increased when heart failure has oc
curred. Jugular vein distention and pulsations are com-
The electrocardiogram is usually normal at this
mon in advanced dirofilariasis. Auscultation of the
stage.
lungs may demonstrale increased bronchial sounds or
crackles if there is pulmonary parenchymal reaction 10
the parasite or substantial pulmonary thromboembo
Echocardiography
lisin, Clinical signs of congestive righ1. heart failure
include hepatomegaly and ascites.
The echocardiogra is usually normal at this stage,
although mild right heart enlargement and main pul-
 monary arlery enlargement may be identifed.
Radiography
Radiographic changes include right ventricular and
Therapeutic Recommcndations
 possibly right atrial enlargenen1. Increased size of the
main pulmonary artery commonly occurs. In advanced
As per the recommendations of the American Heart-
cases, a reversed "D" configuration to the cardiac
worn Society (see Appendix A for specific medica-
silhouette is evident. Lobar pulmonary arteries be
ments and dosage recommendations).
come dilated, torluous, and blunted, which is known
898APPENDIX
as pruning of the arteries. These changes are typically
 ment for congestive heart failure. The Council rec-
most severe in the caudal lobar arteries. Increased
ommends the administration of a second diuretic,
lung densities are often evident and may be related t0
such as hydrochlorothiazide or hydrochlorothiazide
noncardiogenic edema, eosinophilic infiltrates, pulmo-
plus spironolactone, or triamterene, in the event of
nary embolism and infarction, or pulmonary fibrosis.
refractory ascites. Malabsorption of orally adminis-
tered diuretics is possible, and parenteral adminis-
tration of loop diuretics may be more effective in
Electrocardiography
some patients.
The ECG is often normal in hearlworm disease;
 2. Cage rest is essential in dogs with heart failure
however, with pulmonary hypertension sufficient to
caused by dirofilariasis. Benefits of cage rest include
cause right heart failure, changes in the P waves and
improved mobilization of edema and possibly in-
QRS complexes may occur. Interestingly, P pulmonale
creased patient survival following adulticide admin-
(increased P-wave voltage) is relatively uncommon in
istration,
heartworm disease; however, widening of the P wave
 3. Digitalis glycosides-the use of digitalis glycosides is
controversial in this setting. Some members of the
ay be an indication of right atrial enlargement or
conduction delay. An axis deviation to the right, char-
Council believe these drugs may be effeciive and
 acterized by prominent S waves in leads I, I1, III, aVF,
safe provided serum digoxin concentration is care-
and the lower left chest leads, is conmonly observed
fully monitored and conservative dosages are ad-
in dogs with severe right ventricular enlargement, right
ministered initially.
heart failure, or both. Rhythm disurbances ranging
4. Aspirin—although
aspirin  is  commonly  recom-
from sinus tachycardia to more profound irregulari
 mended 1o reduce pulmonary vascular reaction, no
 consensus was reached by the Council regarding i1s
ties, including right ventricular exurasystoles and atrial 
fibrillation, may be present.
efficacy. Suricl attention must be direcled to the
 possible development of gastric ulceration when as-
 pirin is prescribed.
Echocardiography
5. Antiarrhythmicoccasionally antiarrhythmic drug
therapy is required to manage arrhythmias associ-
Fchocardiography can be used to dlocument enlarge
aled with heartworm disease.
ment of the right ventricle. However, echocardiogra-
6. ACE inhibitor—the benefits of ACF. inhibitor ther-
phy is most useful in dogs with caval syndrome, in
 apy in leftsided and biventricular heart failure have
which masses of heartworms can be readily identified
 been documented, but the benefits in isolated right
in the tricuspid valve orifice, or in some dogs with
occult dirofilariasis, in which adult heartworms may be
have not been studied, For this reason, the Council
visible in the pumonary arteries by high quality, two
recomends careful monitoring of any patient re-
dimensional echocardiograms. Echocardiography may
ceiving this form of therapy.
altain greater prominence with the use of flexible alli-
7.1
Thiacetarsemideadministration  should  be   at-
gator forceps to manually remove heartworms from
tempted if andl when heart failure is stabilized. Suc-
the pulmonary arteries.
cessful adulicide therapy may result in significant
Echocardiographic
 manifestations   of   advanced
regression of pulmonary hypertension and, conse-
heartworm disease leading to right heart failure in-
quently, regression of signs of heart failure.
clude right atrial, right ventricular, and pulnonary
artery dilation. Flattening and abrormal motion of
the ventricular septu is typical of right ventricuiar
FELINE HYPERTROPHIC
pressure or volume overload. Linear echogenic densi-
ties compatible with adult heartworms may be evident
CARDIOMYOPATHY
in the main pulmonary artery or occasionally in the
heart chambers. Left ventricular contracility is typi-
cally preserved, but the left ventricular luminal dimen-
Defnition
sions may be decreased, resulting in decreased short.
 Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is an idiopathic
ening fraction.
myocardial disorder characterized by prinmary, and in-
appropriate, concentric hypertrophy of the left ventri-
 Therapeutic Rccommendations (See Appcndiccs
cle. Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a diagnosis
 B and C for specific medicaments and dosage
of exclusion, Potential causes of secondary lefl ventric-
ular concentric hypertrophy in cats include hyperthy-
recomncndations)
roid heart dlisease, systemic hypertension, acromegaly,
1. Diureticmaintenance therapy with a loop diurelic
congenial subaortic stenosis, and congenital aortic ste-
such as fiurosemide is recommended as initial treal.
nosis.
APPENDIX A
899
Pathology
Signalment.
Left veniricular concentric hypertrophy is the classic
The age range of affected cats is very broad. Males
 feature of feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The
are affected more commonly than females. Domestic
ventricular free wall and/or ventricular sepuum may
short-hair cats, followed by domestic long-hair cats,
be hypertrophied. Papillary muscle thickening is com-
appear to be most frequently affected. A genetic form
mon. In some cats, the leff ventricular outflow tract
 of the disease occurs in Maine coon cats and may be
appears narrowed as a consequence of septal hypertro-
present in other breeds as well.
phy adjacent to the septal mitral leafle1.
Histologically, myocardial hypertrophy is the pri-
Diagnostic Criteria
mary abnormality. Disorganization of myocytes is com-
monly observed. Interstifial and interfibral fibrosis may
1. Hyperirophic cardiomyopathy should be a ruleout
Occur, Sclerosis and narrowing of intramural coronary
whenever the following are identified: cardiomegaly
 (especially lef atrial enlargement), a gallop sound
arleries is a frequent microscopic feature. The lefl.
atrium is commonly distendedi and also hypertrophied,
(rhythm), a systolic murmur, arterial thromboembo
and thrombi may be observed in this chamber or
lism, or congestive left heart failure. Definitive diag-
remote to the heart. A frequent complication is a
nosis of hypertrophic cardliomyopathy is based 011
dlistant thromboembolus, which typically lodges at the
either echocardiographic or angiographic evidence
 of left ventricular hyperirophy. However, other
aortic trifurcation (i.e., a sadldle thromboembolus).
known causes of lefl ventricular hypertrophy must
 be excluded before this diagnosis is made.
Pathophysiology
 2. Echocardiographic evidence of let ventricular hy-
pertrophy, generally associated with lefl atrial el-
largement, is suffcient evidence of hypertrophic
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is characterized by di-
cardiomyopathy in the absence of other causes of
astolic dysfunction of the left ventricle. As a conse-
ventricular hypertrophy.
quence of many factors, inclucding gross hypertrophy
 3. Selective or nonselective angiography may be used
of the wall, myocardial fbrosis, and possibly insuffi-
cient coronary perfusion, the left ventricle becomes
to demonstrate lefl ventricular hypertrophy; how-
stiff and less distensible. Elevated left atrial pressure is
ever, these techniques are invasive and are not rec-
ommended when echocardiography is available.
required to fill the ventricle, leading to dilation and
hypertrophy of the lefl atrium. Chronic elevations in
left veniricular diastolic pressure are translated into
Differential Diagnoses
the pulmonary vascular tree, leading to pulmonary
1. Other forms of cardiomyopathy: restrictive, dilated
venous congestion and edema.
 The two major syndiromes recognized in cats with
2.
Myocarditis
feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are congestive
3. Hyperthyroidism
 4. Hypertensive heart disease
heart failure and aortic thromboembolism. Stresses
 5. Acquired valvular disease
that lead to tachycardia may abruptly increase left
ventricular stiffness by increasing myocardial oxygen
 6. Congenital heart disease
demand. Functional abnormalities of relaxation may
ensue, which fiurther impair ventricular filling. This
may explain the development of acute pulmonary
A. THE ASYMPTOMATIC PATIENT
ederma in cats that were previously well compensated
History
 for their disease during clinical examinations and pro
cedures.
The diagnosis is most commonly made after the
Additional functional  abnormalities may develop
serendipitous detection of a systolie cardiac murmur or
during systole. Mitral regurgitation is common in cats
gallop sound (rhyihm) during the course of a clinical
ex
examinatiorn. Cardiomegaly may be detected when tho-
plained either by geometric changes in the left ventri-
racic radiography is umdertaken for another reason.
cle and papillary muscles or by systolic anterior motion
 Other affected cats may be identified because of echo-
of the mitral valve during systole. Movement of the
cardiographic screening for the disease,
anterior (septal) miral valve toward the ventricular
septum in systole may be associated with narrowing of
the lefi ventricular outlet, generation of a pressure
Physical Exainination
 gradient, and a functional outflow obstruction.
The
The most frequent clinical finding in an asympto-
overall significance of outflow obstruction in this dis-
matic cat is a left apical or sternal border systolic
ease is unresolved al this time.
murmur or a gallop sound (rhythm).
900APPENDIX
Radiography
there is an aortic thromboeimbolus. The jugular venous
pressure is usually normal. Cats with left heart failure
Thoracic radiographs may appear normal or may
rarely cough, although they may cough with tracheal
show evidence of leff atrial or left venuicular enlarge-
palpation in the examining room. Most demonstrate
ment. No pulmonary edema is present.
tachypnea. Auscultation of the lungs may reveal fine
inspiralory crackles related to pulmonary edema or
Electrocardiography
simply harsh bronchovesicular soumdls.
 If an aortic thromboembolus is present, typical vas-
The ECG may be normal or may show evidence of
cular, musculoskeletal, and neurologic defcits will be
left ventricular enlargemen1. or left axis deviation.
evident. These include cold limbs, absen1. or very weak
 pulses, paresis, contracture of affecied muscle groups,
Echocardiography
 pain, and progressive lower motor neuron neuropathy.
The diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is
Radiographiy
based  on  echocardiography.  Echocardiographic
changes can range from mild, diffuse, or focal left
Cardiomegaly is evident and is often more easily
ventricular wall thickening to severe left ventricular
 detected on the dorsoventral view, on which enlarge-
wall thickering with or without mild left arial enlarge-
ment of the left auricle will be most prominent, Gener-
mennt.
ally, there is mild elongation of the cardiac silhouette
compatible with left ventricular hyperirophy. Pulmo-
nary edema is evident as an increased interstitial or
Therapcutic Rccommendations (See Appendiccs
 alveolar patiern and is frequently patchy and focal in
B and C for specifc medicaments and dosage
appearance. Perihilar lumg edema is not a common
recommcndations)
feature of congestive heart failure in cats, unlike the
1. Diltiazem or a beta-blocker. The Council could not
case in dogs.
reach a consensus; however, many me mbers believe
thal one of these two medicaments should be pre-
Elcctrocardiography
scribed.
A wide variety of ECG abnormalities have been de-
2. Aspirin, administered orally every third day. The
tected in this disease, In some cats the ECG is normal.
Council could not reach a consensus of opinion
Other cats manifest increased amplitude or duration
regarding the efficacy of this therapy.
P waves, compatible with atrial enlargemen1. Increased
amplitude R waves or a lefl cranial axis deviation may
be observed. Increased duration of the QRs conmplex
B. MILD TO MODERATE HEART
also may be recognized.
FAILURE
Echocardiography
History
This modality is the mosl accurate technique for
 Clinical signs of mild to moderate heart failure gen-
diagnosing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and is also
erally include tachypnea, exertional dyspnea, and non-
helpful in assessing the severity of disease. Typical
specific signs of anorexia, listlessness, or rarely
echocardiographic findings include ventricular septal,
coughing. Coughing is usually mistaken for vomiting
left ventricular wall, and papillary muscle hypertrophy.
by the owner. Decreased activity may be a clinical sign
Left ventricular luminal size is comnonly decreased
but is difficult to document in cats. Some cats with
when global hyperirophy is severe. The left atrium is
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may be affected by aortic
enlarged in symptomatic cats. The shortening fraction
thromboembolism, with minimal to no signs of conges-
is usually normal to elevated. Abnormal systolir motion
tive heart failure.
 of the septal (anterior) mitral leaflet may be observed.
particularly in cats with a narrowed lefl ventricular
 Physical Exainination
outflow tract. Thrombi may occasionally be identified
 in the left atrium or left atrial appendage.
Cats with heart failure, urlike dogs with heart fail-
ure, often maintain body conditior. Many cats have
Therapeutic Recommendations (See Appendices
abnormal cardiac auscultation that is characterized by
 B and C for spccific medicaments and dosage
either sinus tachycardia, the presence of occasional
 prenature beats, a systolic murmur near the left apex
recommcndations)
and along the sternal border, or a gallop sound
1. Furosemide
(rhythm). Arterial pulses are usually normal unless
2. Minimize stress
APPENDIX A 901
3. Diltiazem or bela-blocker The Council could not.
sounds, or dullness to percussion. Signs of thromboen1-
reach a consensus regarding the superiority of one
bolism are evident in some cats. A systolic murmur or
of these treatments over the other. (Note: The use
gallop sound (rhythm) is usually evident, and sinus
of nonspecific beta-blockers should be avoided in
tachycardia, premature beats, or atrial fibrillation may
the presence of pulmonary edema. Beta-blockers
be identified
may be prescribed, however, following resolution of
pulmonary edema.)
Electrocardiography
 4. Nitrates-may be beneficial as supplemental treat-
ment for pulmorary edema or if the cat is resistant
 Electrocardiographic findings are the same as in cais
to oral administration of medicaments.
with mild to moderate failure. In addition, there is a
 5. Antiarryhythmic therapyif an abnormal cardiac
 greater tendency toward atrial and ventricular arrhyth-
rhythm is identified and is sustained
 mias. Cats with massive left atrial dilation may develop
 6. 1Dietary sodium restriction, if tolerated
alrial fibrillation, which is poorly tolerated in cats with
this dlisease.
C. ADVANCED HEART FAILURE
Radiography
 Radiography demonstrates cardiomegaly, which may
Cats in this category demonstrate obvious signs of
 be more generalized. There is usually marked left atrial
congestive heart failure, lypically respiratory distress.
and auricular appendage enlargement. Diffuse or
Respiratory dlistress can usually be traced to the pres-
 patchy alveolar infilurates of pulmonary edema or pleu-
ence of alveolar pulmonary edema and occasionally
ral effusion are evident.
pleural effusion, or both.
 Special caution should be taken when evaluating
Echocardiography
and treating these cats as even minor restraint or ma-
nipulatiorn can lead to marked exacerbation of respira-
 The echocardiographic features are those discussed
tory distress and death. Many members of the Council
 in the previous section. Left atrial enlargement is often
emphasized that diagnostic tests should, in most cases,
more severe.
 be delayed until symptomatic relief has been provided
by oxygen and diuretic therapy and pleurocentesis. if
 Therapeutic Recommendations (See Appendices
significant pleural effusion is present.
B and C for specific medicaments and dosage
recommendations)
History
As a general rule, the hospital and home care of
Severe dyspnea at rest is the predominan1 clinical
cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and severe con-
sign in most cats with advanced heart failure.
gestive heart failure are qualitatively similar.
1. Oxygen
 2. Diltiazem and possibly a beta-blocker. The Council
Physical Examination
generally agreed that diltiazem was preferable to a
 The physical findings of advanced heart failure in
 beta-blocker in this seting.
cats are an extension of those notedl in the previous
 3. Furosemide
section. Severe pulmonary edema manifests as dys-
 4, Nitrale or ACE inhibitor, or both
pnea, tachyprnea, cyanosis, and possibly pulmonary
 5. Thoracocentesis if pleural effusion is present
crackles. If pleural effusion is present, there may be
6. Referral if the patient is persistently difficult to
evidence of a pleural fluid line, muffling of heart
manage
common C
cardnovascu
00
Drugs and
Recommendec
Losdoe
nternatnonal
sardndc
Health Council
DISCLAIMER: The dosage ranges listed in this document are recommendations
of the Council at the time this docunent was prepared. Primary responsibility for
 decisions regarding treatment of patients remains with the attending clinician. All
patients should be carefully monitored for desired efficacious and umdesired toxic
effects during the instiution, litration, and maintenance of therapy.
Drugs are listed in alphabetical order by general classification. The order
of presentation in no way reflects the Council's preference for use. General
recommendations for therapy may be found in the main body of this documen1.
Knowledge of specific indications and contraindications is the responsibility of
the attending clinician.
Drug (Trade Name)
Route
Dose
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
Captopril (Capoten)
Both
0.5-2 mg/kg q8h
Emalapril (Enacard)
Dog
PO
0.5 ug/kg q12-24h
Enalapril (Enacard)
Cal
IO
0.5 mg/kg q12-72h
Beta-Adrenergic Blockers
Atcnolol (Tenormin)
Cat
10
6.25-12.5 mg q12-24h (total dosc; stari low; litrate)
Esmolol (Brevibloc)
Bothi
IV
0.25-0.5 mg/kg, iv slow holus; 50-200 μg/kg/min infusion
Proprarolol (Inderal)
Dog
PO
higher doses used for other arrhythmias)
Propranolol (Indcral)
Cat
PO
2.5-5 mg q8h (total dose; start low, titrate)
Propranolol (Inderal)
Bothi
IV
0.01-0.1 mg/kg (start low; titrate to effect for supraventricular
tachyarrhythuuias)
Calcium Channel Blockers
Diltiazem (Cardizeu)
Dog
PO
0.5-1.5 mg/kg q8h (start low:; titratc to cflect for atrial fibrillation)
Diltiazem (Cardizem)
Cat.
PO
7.5 mg q8h (total dosc)
Verapamil (various)
Dog
IV
0.05 mg/kg (slow iv over 23 inin; repeat. saune dose to effect up to a
total dose of 0.15 mg/kg over 15-30 min for supravenuricular
tachycardia)
Diurelics
Furosemide (Lasix)
Both
PO
I4 mg/kg q8-24h, depcnding on necd
Furosemide (Lasix)
IV
2-8 mg/kg q1-6h (short-teru emergency therapy)
Hycirochlorothiazide (various)
Dog
PO
2-4 mg/kg q12h
Spironolaclone (various)
Dog
PO
1-2 mg/kg q12-24h
Table continued on folowing page
606
904 APPENDIX B
Drug (Trade Name)
Species
Route
Dose
Positive Chronotropes
Atropine (various)
Both
IV, IM, SC
0.02-0.04 mg/kg (as 11ccded)
Glycopyrrolate (Robinul)
Both
IV. IM, SC
0.005-0.01 mg/kg (as necded)
Isoprotcrenol (various)
Both
IV
0.01-0.1 μg/kg/min constant rate infusion: 1 mg dilued into 500 ml
0f 5% dcxtrose or larctated Ringer's solution and infuse to desired
Positive Inotropes
Amrinone (Inocor)
Dog
1 3 mg/kg (bolus), 10-100 μg/kg/min (comstant rale inlusion; start.
low; titrate)
Digitoxin (Grystodigin)
Dog
10
0.02-0.03 mg/kg q8h
*Digoxin (Lan-/Cardoxin)
Dog
10
4%1h 3y/811 [10'0-900:0 :(8x G1 >) 800
Dog (> 15 kg): 0.22 mg/m² body surface arca q12h
*Digoxin (Lanoxin)
Dog
IV
0.0025 mng/kg q1h × 4 h (total 0.0l mg/kg)
*Digoxin (Lau-/Cardoxin)
Ciat.
10
Cat (2-3 kg): 1/4 of a 0.125-1ng tab q481
Cat (4-6 kg): 1/4 of a 0.125-mg tab q24h
b q u-gz10 e Jo /1 :(8 y <) 1)
Dobutaminc (Dobutrex)
Dog
IV
2.5-20 μg/kg/min (constant rale infusion)
Dobutamine (Dobuuex)
Cal
IV
2-10 μg/kg/min (constant rate infusion)
Dopanine (Intropin)
Dog
IV
2.5-15 pg/kg/min (constant rate infision)
Dopanine (lntropin)
Cal.
IV
2-10 μg/kg/min (constant rate infusion)
Vasodilators
Hydralazine (Apresoline)
Dog
PO
0.5-3 mg/kg q12h (start low, titrate)
Nitroglycerin vintnen
Dog
Topical
4-15 mg q6-12h (1 inch = 15 mg)
(various)
Xitroglycerin ointment
(iat
Topical
3-4 mg q6-12h
(various)
Nitroprusside (Nipride)
Log
IV
0.5-10 μg/kg/min (constant rate infusion)
Prazosin (Minipress)
Dog
PO
Dog (small): 0.5-1.0 mg qSt; begin with 0.5 mg
Sul 0'1 4um msaq (ygb Su 0r7-0'1 :(o3ie[ o unpau) hod
Ventricular Antiarrhythmics
Aniodarone (Cordaronc)
Dog
PO
loading dose: 10-20 rng/kg q24h × 7-10 days naintenance dose:
3-10 mg/kg q21h
Esmolol (Brevibloc)
Dog
IV
0.25-0.5 rng/kg, iv slow bolus: 50-200 μg/kg/min infusion
Lidocaine (Xylocaine)
Dog
IV
2-6 mg/kg slow bolus: 40-100 μg/kg/min infusion
Mexiletine (Mexitil)
Dog
PO
5-8 rng/kg q8h
Phenytoin (Dilantin)
Dog
PO
ugb 3y/8u c8-07
Procainamide (Pronestyl)
80
IV. IM
5-15 mg/kg slowly q6h
Procainamide (Pronestyl)
Dog
PO
10-30 rng/kg q6-8t1
Quinidine (various)
Dog
PO, IM
6-16 mg/kg q6-8h
Tocainide (Tonocard)
Dog
PO
5-20 ng/kg q8h
while reducing the probability of toxiciy. Serum concentrations belwecn 0.5 and 2.0 ng/ml sampled 6 to 8 hours after the lasr dosre are lhe: conmonly quoted
normal ranges. Consult your clinical laboratory for rccommended protocols and desired scrun concentration ranges.
ANCILLARY DRUGS COMMONLY USED
CONCURRENTLY WITH CARDIOVASCULAR
DRUGS AND DOSAGES
Drug (Trade Name)
Species
Route
Dose
Anticoagulant/Antiplatelet
Aspirin (various)
Dog
PO
5-10 mg/kg q24-18h
Aspirin (various)
Cat.
10
80 mg q48-72h
Cough Suppressants and Bronchodilators
Butorphanol
Dog
PO
0.55 rmg/kg q6-12h
(Torbutrol, Torbugesic)
Codeine (various)
Dog
PO
0.1-0.3 mg/kg q6-8h
Hydrocodone bitartrate
Dog
10
2.5-5 mg P0 q6-24h (total dose)
(o))
Thcophylline/aminophylline
Log
10
5-10 mg/kg q8h
(various)
APPENDIX B
905
Drug (Trade Name)
Species
Route
Dose
Heartworm Adulticide
Thiacetarsamide
Dog
IV
2.2 mg/kg twice daily for 2 days
(Caparsolate)
Sedative/Analgesics
Morphine (various)
Dog
IV
0.1 mg/kg q2min to effect (up to I.0 mg/kg); repear total dose q6l1
Morphine (variomus)
Dog
SC, IM
0.5-1.0 mg/kg (as needed)
Morphine (various)
Ca
SC, IM
0.03-0.1 mg/kg (as needed)
Oxymorphone (Nurmorphan)
Cat
SG. IM
0.02-0.06 rng/kg (as necded)
The International Small Animal Cartiac: Healilhi Council, 1994.
THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES FOR CONGESTIVE
HEART FAILURE IN THE DOG: OPINION POLE
FROM THE 8th INTERNATIONAL CARDIAC
HEALTH COUNCIL*4
Convering
Angiotensin
Enzyrmne
β-adrenergic
Low Salt
(ACE)
Blocker or
Heart Faitue Seoerilyt
Dict
Furoscmide
Inhibitor
Digoxin
Diltiazem
 No cardiac enlargeinent
0
+
0
0
Moderate-scvere left atrial
0
0
-++
0
cnlargenent. (LAE)
Moderate-severe LAF
+++-
plus: pulrmonary
venous congestion 1
nild pulmonary edema
Moderatesevere LAE
plus: moderate
pulmonay cdeina
A)Atrial ibrillation
++++
十一
B)Atrial fibrillation
presenl
Moderate-scvere LAF
plus: severe pulmonary
edema
A) Aurial fibrillation1
++++
+一+
absent.
B) Atrial fibrillation
1+十
+·—-
1 ++ +
+++-
1+++
presen.
San Diego, Caliornia, 1998.Membes in atendance included Clark Arkins, Claudio Buadori, Philip Fox, Virginia LuisFuentcs, Roher Hain, Ruce
Keene, Mark Kileson, Clarence Kvart, linda Lemkuhl, Maul Miller, Kate Meurs, Fakao Minami. Sydney Moise, Yoshito Wakao.
Degee Consenss o Treat0,Zero cncurrence:+，15-38%Couneil coneurrence-+.61%Coil cncurrene; +++.76-92%Cmeil onere
+ + - -, Ioo% Courcil concurrcnce.
Endoardiois ordiladcadioyopay
Appendix C
Cardiovascular
Drugs--Dosages,
Formulations, Indications,
Side Effects:
Recommendations Suggested
by Fox PR, Sisson D, and
Moise NS
907
Trade Names,
Approxinate
Major
Drug
Formulations*
Dosaget
Category
Indications
Side Fffects
Comnents
Adenosine
Adenocard
Dog:
Antiarrhythmie
Supraventrienlar
Nausca, bralycarclia, hcart
I3 mg rapid IV bolus
tachycarrlias
block,
bronchoconstriclicon
Albuterol
Proventil, Ventolin
Dog, Cat:
Bronchodilator, selective
Bronchodilation.
Tachycardia, tremors,
2, 4 mg tablets
0.02-0.05 mg/kg bid-tid
βxadrenergie agonist.
bradycardia
restlessness, vormniting,
2 mg/5 ml syrup
PO
anorexia
Aminophyllinc
Various
Dog:
Bronchodlilator.
Bronchodilationn
Tachycardia, tachypnea,
100. 200 mg tablets
8-11 mg/kg tid-qid IV,
competitive inhibitor of
anxiousness, deprcssion,
25 mg/ml injcctable
IM. IO
phosphodiesterasc
vomiting. diarrhea,
Cat:
all0rexia
45 1ng/kg (approx 25
1ng) bid PO
Amiodaronc
Cordarone
Dog:
Complex antiarrhythmic
Difficult to control
Hepatotoxicity, anorexia,
200 mg tablets
10-20 ng/kg sid PO for
(class I, II, II, IV
supravcntricular or
bradycardia, AV block,
7-10 days (loading
activity, potassium
ventricular arrhythmias
depression, negaive
dose)
channel blocker)
inotropie effect:
3-15 mg/kg sid, or 5
extensive list of side
ng/kg cod PO)
cffects in humans
(maintenance dose)
Anlodipine besylate
Norvasc
Dog:
Calcium channel blocker
Artcrial hypcrtcnsion
Hypotension
2.5, 5 mg tablers
0.05-0.1 mg/kg sid-bid PO
(dihydropyridine)
Cat:
0.625 mg sid-bid PO
Amrinone lactatc
Inocor lactate
Dog:
Ihosphodiesterasc
Severe myocardial falure
Hypotensicnl, careliac:
5 mg/ml injectable
13 mg/kg slow IV bolus;
inhibitor, positive
arhythmias,
10-100 μg/kg/min (CRl
inotrope, vasodilator
hepalotoxieity, vomiting,
(start low, titratc to
alltrexia
effect)
Aspirin
Various
Dog:
Antiplatclct aggrcgatiol
Prevent or reduce
Voniting, gastrointestinal
Buflered preparations
81, 325 mg tablets
5-20 mg/kg sid-eod PO
thromboembolisinl
ulccration, bleeding
administered with food
Cat:
may decrcasc
25 mg/kg q3days PO
gastrointcstinal
complications.
Atenolol
Dog:
Selective β--adrenergic.
Tac hyeardia, arrhythrnias.
Sinus bradycardia. AV
Responsc 1o β-adrenergic
25. 50. 100 ng tablets
6.25-25 mg sid-bid, or
blockcr
arlerial hypertension,
block. negative inotropic
bloc:kadle canlbc valiable
25 ng/ml oral
0.25-1 1ng/kg sidl-bid
diastolic dysfunction
elfect, weakness,
and depends upon the
suspension
PO
(e-g., IICcM)
tdlepression, hypotensionl
palicnt's Jevel of
0.5 mg/ml. 10 ml
Cal:
synpathetic tonc and
ampules injectable
6.25-12.5 mg sid-bid PO
underlying disease.
When plauning to
discontinue. taper
dlosage—do not stop
abruptly.
+ The brands listed here do not includc specific product endorsement but are intended to tervc as a relerenee onl Frequenly additional commercial producs or generic agents are availahlc.
 This table suggests approximate dosages. Sale and effective doses may vary widel bxeween patients. and therefore all dosages should ulimately be individualized. Always read manufactarer's recommendations.
iternational normalization ratio: ISI. international sensiivity index (the jndex of sensitivity of the thromboplastin reagent): IV, irravenous: PO, per os (oraly): PTr, parial thromboplastin tine, qid, every 6 hours: SC.
subrutaneonus; sid, every 24 hours; SR, sustained release: 'TI, transdermal; tird, every 8 hours.
Noter Antihy pertensive dosages ot'angiotensin-convering enzyme inhibitors, B-adrenergic blockers, and diurcties may be higher than those that are indicated above for treatment of heart failure.
Atropine sulfate
Vaiious
Dog, Cat:
An ticholinergic,
Bradycardia, advanced AV
Tachyeardia, ransient AV
0.1 mg/ml injectable
0.01-0.04 mg/kg IV, IM,
Do not combine with
antimuscarinic
block
block,constipation, dry
SC:
alkaline solutions.
mucous membranes.
Benazepil
Angiotensin-converting
ileus
Lotensinl
Dog, Cat:
Congestive heart failurc.
Hypotenusion
5, 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
0.25-0.5 1ng/kg sid-bid PO
tnzyme inhibitor
artenial hypertcnsion
Fortckor
Bretylium tosylate
Brctylol
Dog:
Antiarhythmic (classIII),
Prevent ventricular
Tachycartlia,
50 mg/m, 10 ml vial
 2-10 1mg/kg IV
antifbrillatory
fibrillation
proarrhythmic,
injectablc
Bunetanide
vomiting, hypotension
Bumex
Dog:
onainp dooI
Congestive heart failure
Hypovolemia, clectrolyte
0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets
0.03-0.06 mg/kg sid-bid
depletion, acid-base
0.25 mg/ml injectable
P)
disturbances、azotemia
Butorphanol tartrate
Torhutrol
Dog:
Antitussive,analgesic
Coughing, pariculaly
Lethargy, anorexia,
Different injectable
1, 5, 10 1ng tablets
Antinussive:
with large airway discase
depression, vormiting
0.5-1 mg/kg bid to qid
Tobugesic:
0.5, 10 mg/ml
availablc—avoid
0.05-0.1 ng/kg bid-qid SC
PO
inadvertent overdosing.
injeclablc
Aalgesic:
0.2-0.8 mg/kg IV, IM. SQ
tid-qid
Cat:
Analgesic:
0.4 mg/kg tid-qid SC
0.2 mg/kg idl-qid IV
0.5-1.1 ng/kg bid-qid PO
[dode
Capoten
Dog, Cat:
Angiotensin-converting
Congestive heart failurc,
1,2.5, 25, 50, 100 mg
0:5-2 mg/kg tidl PO
Hypotension, anorexia,
Chizyne inhibitor,
arterial hypertension
voniting azotenia
tablets
vasodilator
Carnitine
Carnitor
Dog:
Amino acid
Systolic failure due to
Diarrhea (rare)
Use only L-carnitine (avoid
(1-Carnitine)
1olqea hu 088
50-100 1ng/kg tid PO
myocardial carniine
Gencric bulk powder
D-cainitinc or D-L-
deficicncy
canitine, which
inactivates carnitine-
con taining enzyme
Chlorothiazide
Diuril
Thiazide diuretic
Pulmonary edema, ascites,
sysleIms).
Dog, Cat:
250, 500 ng tablets
Hypovolemia.
Decrease initial dosc 50%
20-10 mg/kg bid PO
 50 mg/ml oral
(monotherapy)
periphcral cdeina
hypokalemia, vomiting,
when used as adjunctive
(usually adrded to
anorexia, azotcmia, acid-
suspcusio11
thcrapy with
furoscmide for
basc alicrations
fuuroscinide.
refractory ClIF), arteral
Decreased glomerular
hypertension
filuation ratc (renal
lailure) reduces thiazide
activity.
Tablecontinuedfollong pae
606
Trade Names,
Approximate
Major
Major
Drug
Formulations*
Dosaget
Category
Indications
Side Effects
Comments
Digitoxin
C'rystocdigin
Ixg:
Positive inotrope
lieart failure
0.05, 0.1 mg tablets
0.02-0.03 mg/kg tid PO
Digoxin
Cardoxin, Lanoxin
Dog:
Positive inotrope,
Heart failurc,
Arrhythmias, AV block,
0.125,0.25,0.5 mg
Dosc based upon lean
0.22 mg/m* bid or
vagomimetic:
suipraventricular
anorexia, vomiting,
0.005-0.ol mg/kg bid PO
hody weight.
tablets
arrhythinias
diarrhea
Monitor serun levels by
0.05, 0.1, 0.2 mg
0.0025 ng/kg IV bolus,
Toxicily exacerbated by
sanpling blood 8 hours
capsules
repcat hourly thrce or
hypokaleillia,
after administration
0.05, 0.15 1ng/ml oral
four times (total up to
hyponatremia,
(1-2.4 ng/ml,
suspcusion
0.01 ing/kg)
hypercalcemia,
therapeutic serum
0.25 mg/ml injcctable
Cat:
hypothyroidisn, renal
concentration).
1/4 of 0.125 mg tablet
failure (digoxin is
Many adverse drug
(0.31 mg) eod-sid PO
(y ayi iq paxa
intcraclions.
L sual maximu dose in
Dobeimans is 0.25 mg
bidl.
Diltiazen
Cardizem
Cardizen
Calcium channcl blockcr
Supraventricular
Bradycardia, AV block,
May be
cauriously
30, 60, 90, 120 ing
Dog:
(benzothiazine)
Lachycardia、 diastolic
depression, anorexia,
combinied with β-
tablets
0.5-2 mg/kg tid PO)
dysfunction (e.g., 1ICM)
lethargy
adrenergic blockers
25 mg/5 ml injcctable
Cat:
and/or digoxin to tTeat
Cardizem CI)
7.5 mg bid-tid P)
supraventricular
120,180, 300 g
Dog, Cat: 0.1-0.2
tachycardias.
capsules
mg/kg IV bolus, then
The 60 mg tablets
Dilacor XR
2-6 μg/kg/1nin IV CRI
contained within Dilacor
120.180, 240 1g
Cardizem Cl)
XR capsules are used
capsules
)
individually for dosing.
10 mg/kg sid PO
especially in cats.
Dilacomr XR
Dog:
1.5-6 mg/kg sid PO
Cat:
30-60 mg sid-bid PO
Disopyranide
Norpace
Dog:
Antiarhythnic
Supraventricular and
Prvarrhythmic, AV block.
Lncommonly used
phosphate
100, 150 ing capsules
10-20 mg/kg qid rO
(class la)
ventricular arrhythimias
hypotension, negative
because the half-life in
inotropic effect
dogs is only 2 to 3 hours
(potentially deleterious
(recommended dosing
with CHF and
intervals vary widely)
myocardial failure)
Dithiazanine iodide
Dizan
Dog
Microfilaricidal
Microfilaria
Vomiting, diarrhea
Uncommonly used today
10,50, 100, 200 mg
6.6-11 mg/kg PO for 7-10
hecause of effectivencss
tablets
days
of ivermecti11.
Dobutaninc
Dobutrex
Dog:
(Catecholainine-like agent
Acute management. of
Anhythnias at high doses,
Do not. mix with
12.5 mg/ml, 20 ml vial
5-20 μg/kg/min IV CRI
(adrenergic agonist.
myocardial failure
scizures (cats),
 alkalinizing solutions.
injcctablc
Cat:
posiive inotrope)
arrhythmias
Dilute 250 mg in 1 lier of
2-10 (usually, 2-5)
5%dextrosc.
μg/kg/min IV CRI
Dopainine
Intropin, Dopastat
Dopaminergit activity:
Catecholamine-like agent
Acute managcment ol
Arterial hypcrtension,
Can counteract effects of
40 mg/ml, 80 mg/ml,
Dog. Cat:
with dose-dependent
ClIF or nyocartlial
anrhythmias, voniting
β-adrenergic blockers.
160 mg/ml. 5 11l
13 μg/kg/nin IV CRI
dopaninergic/
failure (low doses);
Protecct solurion frorm
vials injectable
Iotropic(β-adrenergir
inotropic/pressor
vasopressor to trcat
light.
agonisty uctiuity:
acLion1s
hypotension/shock
After dilution, must use
Dog, Cat;
(high doses cause
within 24 h.
35 μg/kg/min IV CRI
peripheral
Vasopressor (α-agonis)
actirity:
Dog, Cat:
5-10 μg/kg/nin Iv CRI
Doxapran
Dopran
Dog, Cat:
Respiratory stimulant
Respiratory anest
Seizures, hypertension,
hydrochloride
20 mg/m1 injcctable
[-i0mg/kg IV
(acts on carotid
arrhythirnias
Neonate: i5 mg SC,
chenoreceptors)
sublingual, or via
umbilicalvein
Edrophonium
Tensilon, Enlon,
Dog, Cat:
Parasympathouninetic,
Acute management ol
Cholinergic crisis
Very short acting.
chlonide
Rcversol
0.1-0.2 mg/kg IV
an ticholinesterase
supraventricular
(uemors, vorniting,
Administer atropine to
10 ing/ml,
tachycardlia
diarrhea,bronchospasm,
treat cholinergic crisis.
1, 10 nl apules
pulnonary edeina,
injectable
Tespiratory arrest,
hypoucnsion,
bradycardia)
Enalapril
Fnacard
1)og:
Angiotensin-converting
Congestive heart failure,
llypotcnsion, auorexia,
1,25, 5, 10, 20 mng
Avoid excessive diuresis.
inaleate
0.5 ng/kg sid-bid PO
enzyme inhibitor
artcrial hypertension
lerhargy
Monitor renal function.
tablets
Cat:
Azotemia whten
0.25-0.5 mg/kg eod-bid
administered with
Vasotce.
(typical dosc is 0.5
excessively high duretic
2.5,5, 10, 20 mg
mg/kg sid) PO
dosagc
tablets
Epinephrinic
Adrenalin chloride
Dog, Cat:
Catecholainine (α-and β-
Cardiac arrest; acutc, ife.
Tachyairhythmias, arterial
Duration of cllect is very
1 ing/ml (1:1000)
0.2 mg IV (double for
adrenergic activity)
threatening
hypertension, vomiting.
shorl.
injectable
intratracheal
bronchospasm
tremor, cxcitenent
Be careful to note the
adninistration)
("'asthma"'):
concentration when
Generic:
anaphylactic reactions
dosing.
0.1 mg/ml (1:10,000)
injectable
Esmolol
Brevibloc
Dog, Cat:
β-adicnergic blocker
Supraventricular
Bradycardia, AV block,
[0 mg/ml, 250 mg/ml
(001-0c xensn) 00g-09
(ultrashort-acting)
tachyarrhythmias,
hypotension, negative
injectable
μg/kg IV bolus every 3
ventricular tachycardia,
inotropic effect
min (up to 500 μg/kg
dynamic outflow uract
11lax)
50-200 μg/kg/min CRI
obstructions
Flecainide
Tambocor
Ixog:
Antiarrhyihmic (class 1c)
Supraventricular
Proarrhyhinice,
Sclectcd cases of
50, 100. 150 mg tablets
1-5 mg/kg bid-tid PO
arrhyl hnias
hypotension, sinus
supraventricular
bradyeardia, QT interval
airhythumias may benefit.
prolongation, negative.
(e-g, intermittent atrial
inotropic effect,
flutter tor atiial
voniting, anorexia,
fibrillation).
depression
Tabie continued onfolowingpage
+
Trade Names,
Approximate
Major
Major
Sua
Formulations*
Dosaget
Category
Indications
Side Effects
Comments
Furoseinidc
Lasix
Dog:
Loop diuretic
Fist-line diuretic for CHF
Hypochloremic metabelic
In scvcre, acute
Veterinary12.5, 50
2-8 (usually 24) mg/kg
(pulinonary edena,
alkalosis. hypokalenia,
pulmonary edema, IV
n1g tablets
sid-tid P(
ascites. peripheral
hyponatremia
doses may lleed to bc
lluman—20, 40, 80 mg
 2--1 mg/kg IV, IM, SC
edema)
dehydration,
repeated hourly to
tablets
PRN
hypotension. azotemia
effect (max, 8 mg/kg
Cat:
[dog| or 4 mng/kg
10 mg/ml syrup
14 (usualy 1-2) mg/kg
[cat]].
cod-bid PO
Lasix
0.5-2 ing/kg IV, IM. SC
 50 mg/ml injectable
PRN
Glycopyrrolate
Robinu!
Dog, Cal:
Antinmuscarinic,
Sinus bradycarclia, 2nd
Sinus tachycardia, cry
(Oral dose is not
1, 2 mg tablets
0.005-0.01 mg/kg IV, IM;
parasympatholytice
degree AV block
mucous menbranes
cstabiishcdl.
0.2 mg/ml, 20 ml vial
0.01-0.02 img/kg bid-tid
injectable
SC:
lieparin calciun,
Calciparinc, Liquaemin
Dog. Cat:
Anticoagulant
Throboeinbolism
Bleeding
Many protocols and
heparin socium
Sodium
load with 100-200 L/kg
d oI Ad
dosing schennes are
1000 U/ml, 10,000
IV
thronbosis)
proposed.
L /ml, other
Dog:
Monitor and mainlain
concentrations
100-500 U1/kg tid SC
ITT or ACT at 2-2.3
injeciable
Cal:
tirmes pretreatment
100-300 L /kg tid SC
baseline values.
Hydralazine
Apresoline
Dog:
Arterial vasodilator
CHF、 particularly dlue to
Hypotcnsion, tachycardia,
IV dosc is not cstablished.
hydrochloride
10,25, 50,100 mg
0.5-3 mg/kg bid PO
(afterload reducer)
severe mitral
Bu
tablets
Cat:
regngitation
2.5 mng sid-bid PO)
(endocardiosis):
 20 mg/nl, 1 ml vial
systemic hypertension
injectable
Hydrochlorothiazide
HydroDIURIL, Oretic,
Dog, Cat
Thiazide diuretic
Pulmonary cdema, ascites,
Dchydrarion, tethargy,
Decrcase initial dose 50%
Esidrix
2~1 mg/kg bid P
peripheral edema
electrolyie depletion,
when used as acljuctive
24. 50, 100 ng tablets
(monotherapy)
(usually added Ao
acid-base alteralions
therapy with
furosemide for
furosemide.
Hydrozide injectable
relractory Cl IF);
Decreased glomerular
25 mg/ml injectable
systemic hypertension
filtration rate (renal
failure) reduccs thiazidc
aclivily.
Hydrocodone
llycodan, Tussigon
Dog:
Antitussivc, opiate agonist
Coughing
CNS depression, repiratory
1.3, 5 mg tablets
0.1-0.25 ing/kg bid qid
depression, sedation
1 mg/ml toral
P(
suspension
Isoprotercnol
lsuprcl
Dog, Cat:
Syinpathommimelic, β- and
Bradycardia. poor cardiac
Tachyarrhythmias,
Standard dilution is 1 ng/
0.2 mg/ml (1:5000)
0.01-2 μg/kg/min IV CRI
βy-adrencrgic agonist,
(ltput
hypotension with higher
500 ml of 5% dextrose
injectable
positive innotrope,
ass
tor lactatd Ringer's
positive chronotrope
solulion and
adninistered CRI to
effect.
Isosorbide dinitiate
Isordil, Isorbid,
Dog, Cat:
Nitrate venodilator
Congestive heart failure
Hypotension
Tolerauce can develop buit
Sonbitralc
0.2-1 mg/kg bid PO
(preload reducer)
is lessened by
2.5,5,10, 20, 30, 40
intennite11
mg tablets
administration.
Dog:
 Macrolide antibiotic
Heartworm
Transient, mild lethargy,
Use caution in collie dogs.
Ivermectin
Ilcarguard
Canine: 68, 136, 272
Heartarmm prophylaxis:
chemoprophylaxis,
vomiting; uncommonly,
μg tablets
6 μg/kg every month P(
microfilaricide
tachypnea, tachyeardia,
Feline: 55. 165 pg
Cat:
shock (rclated to rapid
tablets
24 μg/kg cvery month PO
first-dose reducion of
lvomcc
Microflaricide:
microfilaria)
10 mg/ml solution
Dog:
50 μg/kg PO
Lidocaine
Dog:
Antiarrhythmic (class 1b)
Ventricular arrhythunias
Seizures, tremors, CNS
For effecive results, seru
Xylocaine
hydrochloride
 20 mg/ml injectable
2.2-8.8 mg/kg IV over 5
an1d respiratory
potassim must. be
min (administer 2.2
depression, voimiting
normal.
1ng/kg boluses slowly)
25-80 μg/kg/min IV CRI
4-6 mg/kg IM q2-1 h
Cat:
0.25-1.0 ng/kg IV bolus
over 5 min (or 1 ing
boluses, up to 4 mg max
over 5 rnin)
10-40 μg/kg/min IV CRI
L.isinopril
Prinivil,
Dog:
Angiotensin-converting
Congestive heart failurc,
Hypotension, anorexia,
Avoid excessive diuresis.
Zcstril
0.23-1.0 (usually 0.5)
enzye inhibitor
arlerial hypertension
lethargy; azotemia when
Monitor renal functicon.
2.5, 5, 10,20, 40 mg
1ng/kg sicl-bid pO
adrninistered with1
lablets
Cat:
excessivcly high dliuretic
0.25-0.5 ng/kg sid PO
dlosage
Melarsomine
lmmiticide
Dog:
Organoarsenical
Heartworm adulticide
Transient musclc soreness
Stage treauncnts for severe
Two 2.5 1ng/kg doses by
chemoiherapy
as injection site
hcartworm infection
hydrochlonide
Sterile powder
reconstituted to 25
ccp IM injcction 21 h
(see nanufacturer's
mg/nl injectable
apart; repcat in 4
instructions).
months (standard
(herapy)
ozce.
Cats:
Antithyroid hormone
Hyperthyroitlis111
Transient anorcxia:
Monitor CBC and platelet.
Melhimazolc
5. 10 mg tablets
5 mg bid-id PO)
synthesis agent
voniting, lethargy:
count cvery 2-3weeks
occasional head/ncck
for first 3 inonths of
excoriaton; rarely
therapy.
thrombocytopenia,
Deternine serum thyroid
agranulocytosis
concentrations and
adjust. dose accordingly.
Dog, Cat:
Selective β-adrencrgic
‘Tachyarrhythunias, arrerial
Bradycardia. AV block,
When planming to
Metoprolol
Lopressor
50, 100 mg tablets
0.25-1.0 ng/kg bid-tid PO
blockcr
hypertension
lethargy, negative
dliscontinue taper
inotropic cffect,
dosage—do not stop
I mg/ml, 5 ml ampule
hypotension
abrupily.
injectable
Response to β-adrennergic.
blockade can bc variable
Toprol XL
and depends upon the
50. 100, 200 1ng tablets
patient's level of
syinpathctic tone and
underlying disease.
Tablermtmuedonfottowingpage
Trade Names,
Approximate
Major
Major
Drug
Formulations*
Dosaget
Category
Indications
Side Effects
Dog:
Antiarrhythmic (class 1b)
Ventricular arrhythmias
Depresson, CNS signs.
Mexiletinc
Mexitil
In some cases, most
150, 200, 250 mg
4-8 mg/kg id PO
tremors, vomiling.
elfective when
capsules
hypote11si011
combined with β-
adrcnergic blocker.
Milbenycin oxime
Interceptor
Dog, Cat:
Macrolide antibiotic
Mild, transient signs
Side effecis related 10
2.3, 5.75, 15, 23 mg
0.5 mg/kg onthly PO
chemoprophylaxis and
related to rapid, first-
microflaria
tablets
1icrofilaricide
dlose redutction in
concenitiation.
nierofilaremia
(weakness, pale
meimbranes, tachypnea)
Morphine sulfate
Varied
Dog:
Opiate
Acute cardiogenic
Respiratory depression/
0.1 mg/kg IV q2min to
pulmonary edema
arrest, depression,
effect (up to I mg/kg
bronchoconstriction,
1max)repeat. q6h;
vormiting, defecation,
0.5-1.0 mg/kg 1M, SC
CNS stimulation/
PRN
behavior changes,
Cat:
hypothermia
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM, SC
Natlolol
Corgard
Iog, Cat:
Nonselective βadrenergic
Tachyarrhythmias, systemic
Bradycardia, depression,
Response to β-adrenergic
10,80,120, 160 mng
0.25-0.5 ing/kg bid P0)
blocker
hypertension, (fiastolic.
AV block, negative
blockade can be variable
tablets
dlysfunction (c.g., HCM)
jnotropic. effect,
andl dlependls upon the
hypotension
patient's level of
underlying discase.
When planning to
liscontinue, taper
dosage-do not stop
abruptly.
Nitroglycerin
Nitrol, Nitro-Bid,
Dog:
Venous vasodilator
Congestive heart failure
Hypotension
 Ruh oinunent into skin
Nitrostat
1/4-1 inch cutaneously
(preload reducer)
(wear glowesavoid skin
2% oinunent, 20, 30,
tid-qid
contact); wipe ofl crcan
60 g tubes
Cat:
ide aoq aseq
(1 inch = 15 ing)
1/8-1/4 ineh cutaneously
next dose.
tidl-qid
Tolerance caun be lessened
by interuittent
aduinistration,
Nitroprusside
Nipride, Nitropress
Dog, Chat:
Arterial and venous
Acute, sevcre cardiogenic
Profound hypotcnsion,
Protect soluion fioun light.
sodium
 50 ng vial injectablc
0.5-10 μg/kg/imin CRI
vasodilator
pulunonary edenna
cyamogen or thiocyanate
(once reconstituted, the
loxicity, delirium
soluion is stable for
24 h).
Reconstitue in D5W.
Discard if solution turms
blue, red, or green.
Constant arterial blood
pressure monitoring
required.
Phenylephrine
Neo-Syephrine
Dog:
α-Adrenergic agonist.
Supraventricalar
Arterial hypertension,
Monitor arterial blood
hydrochloride
10 mg/mi. I ml
0.005-0.0l mg/kg IV
tachycardia, hypotension
rellex sinus bracycardia
pressurc.
ampules injectable
bolus
Effect is short lived.
Phenytoin
Dilantin
Dog:
Antiarrhythmic
Digitalis toxic arrhythmias
Induces hepatic enzymes.
30, 100 mg capsules
20-35 mg/kg tid PO
in the dog
therefore may alter
125 1ng/5 ml
1 mg/kg/min IV (up to 6
kinetics of other drugs
suspension
g/kg total)
(e.g, lidocaine,
quinidine, mexiletine).
Potassinm
Various
Dog. Cat:
Electrolyte
Rapid corection of
Latrogenic hyperkalemia
Adininistration rate must
chloride
Injectable
1040 nEq/500 ml fluids,
moderate to severe
not exceed 0.5 mEq
administer IV according
hypokalemia
KCI/kg/h IV.
to senun polassium
concentration and
cardiovascular status
Potassium
Kaon elixir
Dog, Cat:
Oral potassiun
Gastrointestinal irritation1
gluiconate
20 mEq/13 ml
2.2 mEq/100 kcal of
supplement
 hypokalemia, prevention
Tumil-K
energy/day PO
of recurrent
2 mEq/1/4 sp powder
Cat:
hypokale mia
2 mEq tablet.
2-6 mEq/day
2 mEq/1/2 sp gel
Prazosin
Minipress
Dog:
Postsynaptic α-adrenergic
Corgestive hcart failure,
Hypotension, lethargy.
Tolerance may develop.
hydrochloride
1, 2, 5 mg capsules
1 mg/15 kg bid-tid PO
blocker, arterial and
arterial hypertension
vomiting
venous vasodilator
Procainamide
Pronestyl, Procanide
Dog:
Antiarrhythmic (class Ia)
Supraventricular and
Depression, arorexia.
Sustained relcase (SR)
250, 375, 500 mg
10-20 1ng/kg qid (tid if
ventricular arrhythmias
diarrhea, vomiting,
hydrochloride
tablets or capsules
SR preparation) PO
proarrhythmic,
variable absorption, and
Pronestyl SR, Procan
5-15 mg/kg IV (slow
hypotension, QI
blood concentrations
SR
bolus); begin low titrate
prolongation, negative
help guide therapy.
250, 500, 750, 1000 mg
u1p to effect
inotropic effect
'To be effective, serum
tablets
25-50 μg/kg/min IV CRI
potassium concentration
100 mg/1nl, 10 ml
Cat:
must be normmal.
vials, 500 mg/ml, 2
2-5 mg/kg bid-id PO
ml vials injectable
Propafenone
Rhythmol
Dog:
Antiarrhythmic (class 1c)
Supravcntricular and
Bradyeardia, some
300 mg tablet
3-10 mg/kg tid PO
ven tricular arrhythmias
negative inotropic effect
[ou.do1d
Inderal
Dog:
Nonselective β-adrenergic
T'achyarrhythmias, arterial
Bradycardia, depression,
Resporse to β-adrenergic
10, 20, 40, 60,80, 90
0.2-1.0 mg/kg tid PO
blocker
hypertension, diastolic
AV block, negative
blockade cain be variable
mg lablees
0.01-0.1 mg/kg IV
dysfunction (e.g., HCM)
 inotropic effecl,
and depends upon the
4 mg/ml oral
(slow bolus)
lhypotension
patient's level of
suspension
Cat:
sympathetic tone ard
lnderal IA (extended
2.5-10 mg per cat bid-tid
underlying disease.
release)
PO
When planning to
60, 80, 120, 160 mg
0.01-0.1 mg/kg IV
discontinue. taper
tablets
(slow bolus)
dosage—do not stop
1 mg/ml, 1 ml
abruptly.
ampules injectable
Quinidine
Quinaglute Dura-Tabs,
Dog:
Antiarrhythmic (class Ia)
Supraventricular and
Hypotension (espccially by
 Injectable solution is
gluconate
Quin-Release
5-20 mg/kg lid-qid (tid
veritricular arrhythimias
IV route),
sensitive to light.
(sustained release)
for sustained releasc)
proarrhythumic,
Be cautious when used
324 mg tablets
IM, PO
anorexia, vomiting,
with digoxin (elevates
Duraquin (sustained
5-10 mg/kg IV (slow
diarrhea, prolonged QT
serum digoxin
reclcase) 330 mg
bolus)
interval, negative
concentration).
table:ts
Dose calculated on
inotropic cifcct
 Serum potassium must be
80 mg/ml, 10 ml vials
amount of quinidine
normal to be effective.
injectable
base. See comments.
Quinidine ghuconate is
62% base (324 mg
quinidine gluconate =
202 mg quinidine base).
Tubte continuedonfollowingpage
Trade Names,
6
Approximate
Drug
Major
Dosaget
Category
Major
Formulations*
Indications
Side Effects
Comments
Quinidine sulfate
Cin-Quin, Quinora
Dog:
Antiarrhythnic (class la)
[00.200,300 mg
 Supraventricular and
Ilypotension (especially by
5-20 mg/kg qid IM, PO
Injectable solution is
rableis; 200, 300 mg
ventricular arrhythmias
TVroute),
for sulfale, tid for
scnsitive to light.
proarrhythmic,
L'se caution when uscd
capsules
200 mg/ml injcctable
sustaincd release
anorexia,vomiting,
with digoxin
5-10 mg/kg IV (slow
Quinidex Extentabs
diarrhca, prolonged QT
(willincrease serum
bolus)
interval, negative
(sustained relcase)
Dose is calculated orn
digoxin concentrations).
300 mg tablets
inotropic effcct
Seruin potassium
amount of quinidine
base. Sec commments.
concentratior must be
normal to be effective.
Quinidine sulfatc is 83%
quinidine base (300 mg
quinidine sulfate
250
Ramipril
Altace
Dog:
Angiotensin-converting
ng quinidine base).
1.25, 2.5, 5. 10 mg
Congestive heart failure,
Hypotcnsion, anorexia,
Avoid cxcessive diuresis.
0.5 mg/kg sid-bid PO
cnzyme inhibitor
arterial hypcrtension
lethargy; azoteinia when
Monitor renal function.
tapsiuls
Cat:
administrated with
0.5 mg/kg sid PO
excessivcly high diurctic
Sotalol
Bctapace:
Dog:
dosage
Antiarrhythmic (class I1
80,160, 210 ng tablets
Ventricular arrhythmias
0.5-2 mg/kg bid PO
Proarrhythinic,
and class I action)
bradyeardia, QI
Cal:
prolongation. negative
1/8 of 80 mg tab bid PO
inotropic cffect,
Spironolactonc
Aldactone
depression, anorcxia
Dog, Cat:
Aldosterone comperirive
Congestive heart failure,
Hyperkalemia,
25, 50.100 mg tablcts
Rarely uscd as
1-2 mg/kg bid PO
an tagonist diuretic
dehydration, voniting,
Inonotherapy.
(usually combined with
(potassium-sparing
potassium loss is
anorexia, lethargy, acid-
Monitor potassium
furosemide or thiazide
diuretic)
desirable
base disturbances
concentration, especially
diuretic)
whien givcn with
angiotensin-converting
Streptokinase
Streptasc
enzyme inhibitors.
Cat:
Thrombolytic agent
Artcrial thrombocmbolism Blccding, hyperkalemia
Causes a generalized lytic
30,000 IL /ml
90,000 IL IV infusion over
injectable
1 h, then 45,000 IU/h
state (avoid if animal is
Buren ro pazundu
250,000, 750.000, or
IV CRI for a total of
1,500,000 1U/6.5 ml
Coumadin)
6-8 h
vials injectable
Acute, severe
hyperkalemia duc to
reperfision of skeletal
Taurine
Generic
Taurine deficiency
muscles may follow.
Dog:
Amino acid
500 mg bid PO
myocardial failurc
Cal:
250 mg bid PO
Terbutalinc
Brethine, Bricany!
Dog:
Bronchodilator,
Bronchoconstriction
1.25-5 mg bid PO
Sinus tachycardia,
2.5, 5 mg tablets
B-adrenergic agonist.
I mg/mi, 1 ml ampule
anxiousness,
Cat:
nervousness, vomiting
injectable
0.15 mg/kg (or approx
0.625 mg/cat) bid PO
Thcophylline
Theo-Dur (sustained
Dog:
Bronchodilator,
Bronchodilation
T'achycardia, anxiousness,
release)
 20 img/kg bid PO
100, 200, 300. 450 mg
compctitive
depression, vomiting.
Cat:
phosphodiesterase
diarrhea, anorrxia,
tablets
25 mg/kg sid PO
inhibitor
tachypuea
Choledyl (sustained
Dog: 25-30 mg/kg bid PO
action)
Thiacctarsamide
Dog:
Organoarsenical
Heartwom adulticide
HIepatotoxie: may causc.
Does not dependably kill
10 mg/ml injectable
2.2 mg/kg bid IV for 2
chemotherapy
sodlium
severe inflammation and
all adult wons.
days
necrosis at injection site
if injected
subcutaneously
T'issuc
Activase
Cat:
Fibrinolytic agent (tissue
Thrombolytic therapy
Bleecing, hyperkalemia,
Avoid if animal is
plasminogen1
1 mg/ml,50, 100 mg
0.25-1 mg/kg/h (for a
plasminogen activator)
metabolic acidosis
activator (t-PA)
vial injectable
total dose of 1-10
Coumadin.
mg/kg) IV
Acute, severe
hyperkalermia duc to
reperfusion of skeletal
muscles inay follow.
Tocainide
Tonocard
Dog:
Antiarrhythmice (class Ib)
Ventricular arrhythmias
Anorexia, CNS toxicily
Side cffects are common.
100, 600 mg tablets
10-20 mg/kg bid PO
(tremors,ataxia),
corncal edema
Triamlerenc
Dyrcnium
Dog, Cat:
Potassium-sparing diurctic
Congestive heart failure,
Ilyperkalemia,
Rarely uscd as
100 mg capsules
12 mg/kg bid PO
especially when limiting
dehydration, voniting,
nonotherapy.
potassium loss is
al1orexia, lethargy, acid-
 Monitor potassiumi
desirablc
basc disnurbances
concentration,especially
when given with
angiorensin-converring
cnzyme inhibitors.
Verapanil
Calan, lsopuin
Dog:
Calcium channel blocker
Supravcntricular
Ilypotension, bradycardia,
'sc cautiously if combined
80, 120 mg tablets
1-5 mg/kg tid PO
tachycardia
Av block, negative
with β-adrenergic
(240 ng sustained
0.05 mg/kg IV (slow
inotropic clfects,
blockers
releasc tablet)
bolus) q10-30 min (up
anorcxia
5 mg/ml, 2, 4, 5 ml
to 0.15 mg/kg max)
vials injectable
Warfarin
Counadin
Dog:
Anticoagulart
Prevent throunboeinbolisin
Blccding
Protect from light.
1, 2. 2.5, 4 mg tablets
0.1-0.2 mg/kg sid PO
Adjust dosage to maintain
Cat:
the prothrombin tine to
0.25-0.5 mg/cat sid PO
twice normal; or, adjust
INR to maintain a value
of 2.0-3.0 as follows:
INR = [Cat or Dog
Prothrombin Timc +
Control Prothironbin
Tine ]ist
Constant Rate Infusion (CRl) Dosing Formula Worksheet
Volume (ml) of fluid to be removed from
CRI dose (μg/kg/min)
1000μg/mg
X Body weigh. (kg) X Volume of fluids (ml) to he administered × 60 min/h1
card
Volume (ml) of drug to be added back
ncentration of drug (mg/nl)
to the fluid bottle or bag
For routinc: nainemance, the: volume of fluid to Ibe aclministered approxim
INDEX
Note: Page numbers in ialics refer to illustrations; page numbers followed by (t) refcr to tables.
 Abdormen, compression of, in basic life
Afghan hounel. See also Dog(s).
Ambulatory electrocardiography(Continued)
supporl,434
carcliomegaly in, dilated cardiomyopathy
in detection of canine arrhythmias, 331-
Crana, radiographic appearance of, 17
and,256
332. See also Dog(s),etecrocardiogra-
examination of, 50
dilated cardiomyopathy in, 583
phy in.
swollen, significance of, 44,47
radliographie findings associated with,
Americarni Cocker spaniel. See also Dog(s).
ultrasonography of, signs of hcart failure
256
dilated cardiomyopathy in, 583
on, 153
heart failure in, dilated cardiomyopathy
cardiomcgaly accompanying.591
in dog, 153
and, 256
radiographic findings associated with,
ACE inhibirors.See Angiotensir-converting
radiographic findings associated with.
591
enzyme inhibitors.
256
Amikacin, for endocarditis, 577(t)
Aceproinazine, for anxiety, in cat with
M-mode cchocardiography in, rormal
Aminophylline. See also Theophylline.
pulmonary edema, 260, 260(t)
findings on, 145(t)
adverse cffects of, 908(t)
Acoustie enhancement, 132
pulmonary cdema in, dilated cardiomyop
as bronchodilator, 908(t)
Acoustic impedance, 131
for pulmonary edema, 260(t)
Acoustic shadowing,132
athy and, 256
heart failure and, 256
for sick sinus syndrome, in dog, 450
Acquired atrioventricular valve disease,
Afterdepolarizations, delayed, 298-299, 300
for tussive syncope, in dog, 453
chronic.See Endocardiosis.
early, 298, 299
recommended dosages of, for cat, 908(t)
Acquired heart disease, 536-559, 828-839.
Afterload. 25
for dog, 904(t), 908(t)
Sce also Endocardiosis.
Age, and changes in blood pressure, in
Aniodarone,322-323
arrhythmias associated with, in cat, 387
adverse effects of, 315(1), 323, 908(0)
dog.796(1)
888
on dog, 367
prevalence of, in cat, 465
drugs inicracting with, effcts of, 326(t)
in dog,463-165
siveness, 839
and risk of infectious endocarditis, in
elecirocardiographic parameters affected
Acquired pericardial disease, 685-696. See
by.,311(t),323
also Cardiac tanonade Pericardial
dog.568
and risk of pericardial/peritoneopericar
for arrhythmias, 322, 908(t)
effusion.
in dog,$15(t),350,354,363,366
Acquired valvular disease, 536-559. Scc also
dial diaphragmatic hernia, in cat,
for atrial fibrillation, in dog, 354
Endocardiosis.
683
for supraventricular tachycardia, in dog,
Acromcgaly (hypersornatotropism),766
in dog, 683
Air bronchograns,as sign of pulmonary
350
in cat, 656
for ventricular tachyeardia, in dog, 363,
cardiovascular abnormalities associatcd
elerma, 256,257,258,259,261
Airway, in basic life support, 429, 431
reconmended dosages of, for dog.
366
with,656
Aclion potentials, 70-71、 71. 292
Alburnin, in rmanagement. of shock, 279
Albuterol, adverse effects of, 908(t)
904(1)
hcart darnage affecting, 293-295, 294,
Amlodipine,adverse effects of, 908(t)
295
bronchodilation with, 908(t)
for heart failure, 237(t), 238
Addison's disease (hypoadrenocorticism).
recommended dosages of, for cat, 908(t)
in dog with tniral regurgitation, 552
763-764
[or dog, 908(t)
for hypertension, 805(t), 908(t)
Adenosine, adverse effecis of, 315(t),.
Aldosterone, 765
for mitral regurgitation and hcart failure,
Aldosteronism (Conn's disease), 765
908(t)
in dog,552
for arrhythmias, 908(t)
 clectrocardiographic findings in, 765,
in dog, 315(t)
765
for dog, 908(t)
factors limiting use of, 349
Aliasing, and Doppler-derived blood flow
Amoxicilin, for endocardius,577(t)
in man, 349
velocity, 137, 139-140
Ampicillin, for endocarditis, 577(t)
recommended closages of, for dog,
Alphaadrenergic blocking agents. Sec also
Amputation, of paralyzed linh, in cat with
()806
Prazasin.
thromhoeinbolisn, 665, 666
Adrenal gland, dysfunction of, 763-765
for hypertension, 805(t), 807
Amrinone, adverse effects of, 908(t)
Adulticide therapy, for heartworm disease,
Alvcolar-capillary structure, of lung, 251,
for hearl failure, 224, 229(t), 234, 908(t)
in cat, 733
252
recommendled dosages of, for dog.
in dog, 710-713
effects of injury to, 253-254. Sce also
904(t), 908(t)
ancillary drugs used in, 713-714
Pulmonary edema.
Amyloidosis,cardiac manifestations of,776
thrombocinbolism due to. 719
Ambulatory electrocardiography, 102, 102.
Analgesies, for cat, 854(t)
Advanced life support, 435-437, 436. See
See also Electrocardiography.
for dog, 854(1)
also Cardioputmonary cerebrat
in detection of arrhythimias and syricope,
Ancchoic tssue, 132. See also
restescitation.
448,449
Echocardiography.
919
920 INDEX
Anemia,789-790
Antiarrhythmic(s) (Contimued)
Aortic stcnnsis (Continued)
cardiac manifestations of, 772, 789, 790
classification of, 307-310, 309(t), 310(t)
cchocardiographic evidencc of 139, 488,
Anesthesia, 853-864
drugs interacting with, effects of, 326(t)
489,490
agents uscd in, 854(t), 858(t), 861862
electrophysiologic and cardiographie pa
in dog. 136.159,159,490, 491,492
drug intcractions with,856
raneters affected by, 309(t), 310(t),
clectrocardiographic findings associatcd
bradyeardia induced by. 867
311(t)
with, 490
in cat, 92
in dog, 361, 361
in dog, 189
for cardiac catheterization, 174
in dog with atrial flultter or fibrillation,
gross morphology of, in cat. 823
monitoring rcsponse to. 863-861
353
in dog, 486-487, 488, 822-823
prcnmedicants used in, 858(t), 858-861.
in dog with supraventricular tachycar-
heart failure associated with, treatment.
859(t)
dia, 349.350, 351
of, 228
risks of, 857, 857(t), 858
emergency use. of, 137438
heart murmur acompanying, in dog. 60,
Angiocardiography. 187-190
parasympathetie cllccts of. 309(0)
60-61
aortic stcuesis on, in dog,189
pharinacokinetics of, 310. 312-313
myocardial compcnsation for, 207(t)
ASD-related findings on, 498-499
recommended dosages of, for cat, 315(t)
myocardial filbrosis associated withi, 487-
coinplieations associated with, 180
for dog, 315(t), 348-354, 904(t)
488
congenital hcarl defecis on, 475
sympathetic cffects of, 309(t)
echocardiographic evidence of, 488,
DCM-rclated changes on. in cat, 649. 649
Anibiotic (s), for endocarditis, 576, 577(t)
489
double-chambered right ventriclc on, in
for shock, 284(t), 284-285
prevalence of, in dog, 459(t), 460
dog.487
Antibiotic prophylaxis, against cndocarditis,
radiographie fiudings associaled with.
HCM-rclatcd changcs on, in cat, 630,
577-578
489
633, 662
against heartworm discase, in cat, 734
in dog. 491
mitral valve dysplasia on, 524
in dog, 721
in dog、189, 525
Antichelinergics, as preancsthctic agents.
Aartic valve, 20
normal findings on, in cat, 188
858(1), 858-859, 859(t)
blood flow in tor aeross, Doppler-derived
in dog,188
Anticoagulant therapy, for
velocitly of. in cat, 154(t)
PDA-related findings on, 508-509
throimboembolism, in cat, 664-665
in dog, 154(t)
jn cat, 189
complications associated with, 665,
regurgitant. See Aortie regurgitation.
in dog. 508
665
stenosis of. See Aortir stenosis.
pulmonic regurgitation on, 559
Antihypertensives, 805(t), 806-808
surgical dilation of, 873
puluonic stenosis on, 481-482
Antiplatclet thcrapy, for thrormboembolis,
Apex bcat, 50
in dog,189,484
in cat, 665
Apoptosis, 818(t)
radionuclidc.194、194
Antiprostaglandins, in manageent of
 nyocardial. heart. failure and, 818-819
in evaluation of shunts, 194. 194-195,
shock,285-286
Arrhythmia(s),331-375, 386-398
195, 196
 Antithyroid drugs, for hypcrthyroidisin, in
 abnormal impuse conduction and, 299-
in cvaluation of ventricular function.
cat, 786-787, 913(t)
Anxiolytics, for cat with pulmonary edema,
608
195-199, 197, 197(0), 198
acquinred heart disease and, in cat. 387-
RCM-related changes on, in cat, 644,644
260, 260(t)
for dog with pulmonary cdema. 260,
388
subaortic stenosis on, in dog, 189
260(t)
autoinaticity and, 296-297, 297, 298
tetralogy of Fallot on, 517
caninc brccd prcdisposilion to, 465-466
in cat, 511
Aorta, 21
cardiomyopathics and, in cat, 387, 387(t)
in dog, 189. 514
coarctation of, 494
descending, compression or cross-clarnp-
in dog, 369
tricuspid valve dysplasia on. 525
causcs 0f, 295-303, 296(1), 308(0)
VSD-related findings on. 505
ing of, in basic life support, 435
distal, as site of "saddle” embolism. See
conduction blocks and, 299-300. Scc also
in dog, 189, 501,502
Atrionentricntar hloch.
Angiography. See also Angiocardiography.
Enbotism, distat aortir.
thromboembolism of, prcvalencc of, in
 congenital heari disease and, in cat, 386-
aortic, distal cmbolus on. in cat, 660, 662
387
Angicolensin-couverring enzyme inhibitors,
cat, 467
Aortic arch(es), 21
consequences of, in cat, 388
240
diagnosis of, in cat. 388-389
for DCM and hcart failure, in cal. 651
development of, 6-7, 7
in dog. 331-332
in dog. 597
cnlarged radiograplic appearance of,
dilated cardiomyopathy and, in cat,
for HCM. in cat, 635, 636, 640
0%1-611
right. persistent. 528
387(1)
for HCM and myocardial infarction. in
in cat, 528
trcatment of, 650
tat, 635
in dog, breed predisposition to. 462
in dog, 369-370, 590, 590(t), 591
for hcart failure. 237(0), 240-242
prevalence of, 459(t), 462
treatmenl of, 597, 598, 895-896
adverse eflects of, 242-243
slurgery for, 878
evidcncc of drug effecliveness in,
int cat with dilated cardiornyopathy, 651
Aortic insufficiency. See Aartic regurgitatiom.
on ECG, 353
in dog with dilated cardiomyopathy,
Aorticopulnonary septal defect,528
drugs for. See Antiarrhythmic(s).
597
pathology of, 826
clectrocardiographic detection of, 77(t),
in dog with mitral regurgitation, 51
Aortie regurgitation, 559
001-06
International Small Animal Cardiac
aortic stcnosis and, 492
in cat, 389-390
H calth Council recommendations
cchocardiographie findings associated
resulis of. See specific findings cited
regarding, 905(t)
with，492
underCats)electrrerdiograph
for hypcrtension, 805(t), 807808
in dog, 490
im.
for mitral rcgurgitation and heart. failure,
hcart failure associated with, treatment.
in dog, 331-332
in dog, 551
of, 228
 results of. Sec specific findings cited
lor myocardial infarction, in cat with hy-
hcart murmur accompanying, in dog, 61
under Dog(s),clertrorardiography
pertrophic cardiomyopathy, 635
Aortic stenosis, 158-159, 485-494
recommended dosages of, for cat, 903(t)
angiocardiographie findings associated
clectrocardiographic detcetion of syn--
for dog. 903(t)
with, in dog. 189
cope accompanying, 448-449, 449
Angiotcnsin Il, cffecis of, 211, 211-212
aortic regurgitation accompanying, 192
electrophysiologic mechanisms for, 295-
Anthracyclines, as cardiotoxins, 609
echocardiographie findings associated
303, 296(0)
Antiarrhyuhmic(s),307-327, 348-355,
with, 492
enhanced impulse initiation in cctopic
362-368.also specif agent,
in dog, 190
foci and, 296. 296-299
Lidocaine.
 canine brecd predisposilion to, 460,
frequency of, by type, in dog, 458(1).
adversc effects of, 315(t)
460(t)
465-466
INDEX921
Arrhythmia(s) (Continued)
Arterial pulsc (s), 62-64, 63
Atrial fibrillation (Continued)
heart failure and, in cat with cardiomyop-
abnormal, in infectious endocarditis, 573
occurring asymptomatically, among
athy, 387, 387(t)
monitoring of, in CPCR. 440
largc breeds. 466
in dog, 224, 371
Arterial thromboembolisn, in cat, 658-667.
tenporary, 354
Ireatment of, 224-225
See also Thromboenhotism.
treatinent of, 352, 354
heart sound variations in relation to,
Arteriopathy, pulmonary, plcxogcnic,
evidence of drug effectiveness in, on
57-58
Eisenmenger's physiology and, 826
ECG, 353
Hloler rnonitoring for. See also Llectrocar
Arteriotorny, pulmonar y, inflow oeclusion
murnurs and altered heart soumds associ-
diography.
and, for pulmonic stenosis, 87u-871,
atcd with, 57
in dog, 331-332
871
Alrial flultcr, 9495
Holter monitoring for syncope accompa-
Arteriovcnous fistulas, 790-791
in cat, 391-392
nying,448,449
cardiac manifestations of, 762.790
in dog, 95,342,342-343, 401
hypcrihyroidism and,783(t).786
diagnosis of, 790
treatmcnt of,352
hypcrrophic cardiomyopathy and, in cat,
cchocardiography in, 790, 791
evidence of drug effectiveness in. on
387, 387(0), 626, 630, 631 (t), 635-
Arthritis, infectious endocarditis and, 570
FCXG. 353
636
Ascites, in surgical patient, 857
Atrial septal defect, 157-158.495-499
in cal, 386-398
significancc of, 47
angiocardiographie findings associared
in dog. 331-375
ASD. See Atriat septal defect.
with, 498-499
infecious cndocarditis and, 573, 575, 576
Ashman phenoinenon, 1oo, 101
canine brced prcdisposition to, 462
 junctional, 97
Aspirin, adverse cffects of, 908(t)
corrccted, cchocardiographic findings fol
in dog.97,346-347
for myalgia, in cat with ischemie limb,
Jowing, in dog, Platc 9
management of. See Artiarrhythunic(s);
echocardiographic evidence of, 157-158,
Pecermcthur:
666
for thrornbocinbolisn, 908(1)
498
modulating factors in, 347
in cat, 665, 908(t)
in dog.134,135,496,Plates 7&8
myocardiad diseascs and, in ca, 387,
in dog, 908(t)
clectrocardiograplic findings associated
387(t)
recommended dosagcs tof, for cat, 904(t).
with, 498
in dog, 369
908(t)
 in dog, 199
paccmaker for. Sce Pacemaker
for dog, 904(1), 908(t)
gross morphology/pathology of, 493-496,
pacemaker-induccd,423
for dog with hcartworm disease, 713,
825
re-entant activation and, 102, 300-303,
714.
in cal, 495
301. See also Re-entrart tachyrardia.
Asystole, ventricular, 99-100
heart murmur accompanying, 61
restrietive cardioinyopathy and, in cat,
Atenolol, 321-322
ostium prinun-type,495.825
387(1)
advcrse clfccts of, 315(1), 322, 908(t)
cchocardiographic findiugs associated
right ventricular dysplasia and. Scc Ar-
clectrocardiographic parameters affcctcd
wirh, in dog, 496, Plate 8
rhythmogenicrghtvntriardysplai
gross morphology of, 825
sinus,92,92
by, 311(t)
substrate for, 347
for arrhythnias, 321, 908(t)
inn cat, 195
ostium sccundumn-type. 157. 495, 825
supraventricular, in cal. 391-393
in cat, 315(t), 398
in dog, 338-347
in cat with hypcrirophic cardioinyopa-
echocardiographie findings associated
differentiation of, from ventricular
thy, 636
with, in dog, 134
arrhythinias,332(t),32-338
in dog, 315(t), 349
gross morphology of, 825
P wavc and QRS complex in.
 in dog with dilated cardiomyopathy,
in cal, 495
388-334,336,337,338
869
prevalence of, in dog. 459(0), 462
QRS complex norphology in,
for congenital heart disease, 485(t)
shunt(ing) accompanying, 157, 496-497
[or DCM and arrhythmias. in dog, 598
cchocardiographice findings associated
333,333, 334, 335
unreliability of rhythtn (ir) regu-
for HCM and arrhythmias, in cat, 636
with, ini dog, 134, 133
Jarities and pause length in,
for lICM and left venricular outflow
sinus vensus-type,157,495,825
334-335
uact obstruction, in cat, 639
cchocardiographic findings associated
vagal mancuvers in, 335-336,
with, in dog, 135
in dog, 606
338,339,310
for HCM and nyocardial infarction, in
surgery for, 873
treatmcnt. of, 347-355
echocardiographie findings following.
cal.635
adversc effects of, 351332
for heart failure, 243
in dog. Platc 9
cvidenee of drug effectiveness in,
Alrial standstill, persistent. Sec
in cat with hypertrophic. cardiomyopa-
0n ECG, 349, 350,351, 353
Atrioventriculrmyopathypersistentatrial
thy, 637
syncope associated with, 450-451
for hypertension. 805(t), 908(1)
stamdstillj.
clectrocardiographic momioring for,
Atrial tachycardia, 96
for byperthyroidisn,786.787
448-449,449
in cat, 391, 392
for left ventricular outflow tract olstrue-
treatiment of, 450, 45 1
in dog. ectopic, 341.341-342
tion, in cat wih hypertrophic cardio-
triggers for, 297-298,347
treatment of, 350-351
myopathy,639
ventricular, in cat,98, 99, 396-398, 397
Atrioventricular annulus, mcasurcment of, 
in dog with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
in dog, 98, 99, 99, 355-361
846-847
lethality of, 356-357, 370, 836
thy, 606
Atrioventrienlar block, 8181
v. supraventricular arrhythmias. See
in cat, 82, 83. 394-396, 395, 401
Arrhythmia(s),supraventrieutar in
perrophic cardiomyopathy,633
as indication for pacemakcr, 403
for supraventricnlar tachycardia, in dog.
dog. differentiation of.
in dog,82,82,83,375, 101
mechanisms for, elcctroplysiologic,
349
as indication for paccmaker, 402
for ventricular lachycardia, in cat. 398
296(t)
pharmacorherapy for: 909(1)
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dyspiasia,
recomimended dosages of, for cat, 903(t),
with altered hearr sounds.5758
in cat, 653-655, 654, 655. 831-832
908(t)
Atrioventricular junctional arrhythmias, 97,
jn dog, 609
for dog, 908(t)
97
in man, 608-609
Alrial cxtrasystoles, 94
Atrioventricular myopathy (persistent atrial
Arterial blood pressure. See Blood pressure;
in cat. 391, 391
standstill),81, 836-837
fypertension.
in dog, 94
in cat, 392, 658. 836
Arteriai catheterization, peripheral, in
Aurial fibrillation, 9495
electrocardiographic characteristics of,
CPCR, 441
in cat, 392, 392
81,1
 in lcfl-sided cardiac catheterization,
in dog,95,343,343,344.345,401
in dog, 403, 466, 607-608, 608, 836. 837
177, 178, 179-180. See also Car-
and dilated cardiomyopathy, 588, 591
clcctrocardiographic characteristies of.,
tiat catheterization.
lcthality of, 60!
81
922INDEX
Atrioventricular nyopathy (persistent auial
Automatic junctional achycardia (ectopic
Beta-adrencrgic blocking agents (Continued)
standstill) (Continued)
junctional tachycardia), in dog.
in dog with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
hyperkalcinia and, 89
346-347
thy, 606
Atrioventricular nodal re-entrant
Axial resolution, in ultrasonography, 131
for myocardial infarction, in cat with hy-
tachyeardia, in dog, 345-346, 3-16
Azimuthal resolution (elevational
pertrophie cardiomyopathy, 635
Alrioventricular node, 22
resolution),in ulrasonography, 131
for supraventricular tachycardia, in dog.
Atrioventricular node-dependent
348
supraventricular tachycardia, in dog.
for surgical patien1, 856
338,345-347
for ventricular tachyeardia, in cat, 398
treatment of, 354-355
Bacteremia, and cndocardiis, 568. See also
recommended dosages of, for cat, 903(t)
Arrioventricular node-independent
Encdocarlitis,infectious
supraventricular tachycardia, in dog,
and shock. See Sepsis and Septic enitries.
for dog, 903(t)
Bicarbonate, usc of, in CP(R, 431(t), 438
338-345
Bacterial endocardifis. See Endocarditis,
in management of shock, 286
trcatinent of, 348-354
infectious.
Bidirectional shunt, atrial septal defect and,
Atriovenuricular orifice, left, 17
Bacterial myocarditis, 839
in dog, cchocardiographic findings
right, 17
in cal, 833
in dog, 612
associated with,135
Atrioventricular septal defects, pathology
Bioavailahility, drug, dosage caleulations
of, 825
Balloon valvuloplasty. for pulmonic stenosis,
Atrioventricular valve(s), 20. Scc also Mitral
based on, 310
190.868
Banding, of pulmonary artery, in surgery
Bipolar pacemaker, 409, 110. See also
valve and Iricuspid vatve.
Atriovcntricular valve discase, chronic
for ventrieular septal defects, 874, 871
Pacemaker.
Basic life support, 429, 431-435, 432. Sec
Bipyridine compounds (PDF II inhibitors),
acquired. See Endocardiosis.
also Caodioputmonary cerebral
for heart failure, 224, 229(t), 234-235
Atioventricular valve dysplasia, 158
Blalock anastomosis, in surgery for
cchocardiographic lindings associated
resscitation.
Barsset hound. Sec also Dog(s).
tetralogy of Fallot, 875, 875
with, 158
Bleeding, gasuointestinal, shock and, 286
in dog, 158
clectrocardiography in, signs of pulmonic
stenosis and right ventricular byper
secondary to warfarin therapy, in cat,
pathology of, 824
Atrium (alria), 16-17. See also Atrial
trophy on, 482
665, 665
Beagle crossbrced. See also Dog(s).
Blood, hypercoagulability of, secondary to
entrics.
contraction sequence for, in cardiac pac.
cchocardliography in, hearrworm-rclated
shock,287
changes on, 711
viscosity of, 33
ing, 411, 412
Benazepril, adverse effects of, 909(1)
 inerease in, cardiac manifestations of,
lcft, 15. 17
blood stasis in, and risk of throunbosis,
for HCM, in cal, 635,636,610
772-773
for ICM and myocardial infarction, in
Blood cysts, in tricuspid valve, prevalence
in cal, 659
and spontaneous cchocardiographic
cat, 635
of, in dog, 463-464
for heart failre, 237(t), 242, 909(1)
Blood flow. See also Cirrutlation.
contrast ("smoke"), 167
enlargemcnt of. See also Cardiomegaly.
for hypertension, 805(t), 909(t)
coronary, 33-34, 34
clectrocardiographic findings associ-
for myocardial infarction, in cat with hy-
fetal, 8, 8
pertrophic cardiomyopathy, 635
 transition from, to cireulation in new-
ated with, 78, 78
radiographic appearancc o, 113-116
recommended dosages of, for cat, 909(1)
born arimal, 89
opening of, at necropsy, 846
for dog, 909(1)
laminar, 137
rupturc of, endocardiosis and, 534*
Benzodiazepines, as prcanesthetic agents,
monitoring of, in CPCR, 440
555,555
858(0), 859(t), 860
regurgitant, quantification of, via Dopp-
right, 15, 16-17
Bcta-acrenergic blocking agents. See also
ler echocardiography, 154
enlargement of. See also Cardionegats.
specifie drugs, e.g.. Propranolot.
sites of. Sec Aortic regurgriation; Mitratl re
clectrocardiographic findings associ
cardioseleetivity of, 311(1)
yurgritation, cle.
aled with, 77-78, 78
[or arrhythmias, 315(t)
Reynold's number for, 137
radiographic appcarance of, 116
in cat, 398
turbulent,137
hemangiosarcoma of, 880
in cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
velocity of. 1Doppler-derived. See Doppler
cchocardiographic findings associ-
thy,636
echocardiography,biood flowvelocityde
ated with, 166, 168, 694
in dog, 348, 352
pited frm.
in dog, 166, 687, 694, 880
in dog with dilated cardiotnyopathy,
Blood pressure, 798-800. See also
surgery for, 880
598
Hypertension.
opening of, at necropsy, 846
for atrial fbrillation, in dog, 352
elfect of pacemaker on, 411
seplum betwccn, 17
for DCM, in cat, 652
in dog, 412
s
in man, 652
heart. rate in relation to, 28, 28
formation of. 5, 6
for DCM and arrhythmias, in dog, 598
in cat, 796(t)
silent. See Atrioventricular myopathy (perses-
for HCM, 218
clevated, 468
tent utriat standstill).
in cat, 635, 636, 637, 639
pharmacothicrapy for, 805(1)
Atropine, adverse effects of, 315(1), 909(t)
for HCM and arrhythmias, in cat, 636
in dog, 796(t)
as preanesthetic agent, 858(t). 859(t)
for IICM and left ventricular outflow
brced differences in, 797(t)
emergency use of, 431(t), 438
tract obstruction, in cat, 639
changes in, with aging. 796(t)
for arrhythmias. in dog, 315(t)
in dog. 606
elevated, 468, 797
for atriovenuricular block, 909(t)
for HCM and tmyocardial infarction, in
pharinacotherapy for, 805(t)
in cat, 396
cat,635
measurement of, 803-804
[or bradycardia, 909(t)
for heart failure, 243-244
monitoring of, in anestheuized patient.
for cardiopulmonary arrest, 431(t), 438
adverse effects of, 244
898
for cardioyascular drug-induced hypoten-
in cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
in CPCR, 440
sion, in dog, 351
thy, 637
in management of shock, 280-281
recommended dosages of, for cal, 904(t),
 International Small Animal Cardiac
regulation of, 798-800
909(1)
Health Council recommcndations
 Blood products, in management of shock,
[or dog, 904(t), 909(t)
regarding, 905(1)
279-280
Attenuation, in ultrasonography, 131
for hypcrtension, 805(t), 806-807
Blood sample, as souree for culturc. in
Auscultation, 50-53, 51, 53. Sec also lleart
for hyperthyroidism, 786, 787
diagnosis of IE, 375. See also
(s)punos punal sunuinu
for left ventrieular outflow traet obstrue-
Endocatitisinfectios.
Automaticity, and arrhythmias, 296-297.
tion, in car with hypertrophic cardi
Blood stasis, in left atrium, and risk of
297, 298
6g96qedolu
thrombosis, in cat, 659
INDEX923
Blood stasis (Continued)
Butorphanol, adverse effecis of. 909(1)
Captopril (Continued)
and spontaneous echocardiographic
analgesic dosages of, 909(t)
for hypertension, 805(1), 909(t)
contrast ("smoke'"), 167,636
cough-suppressant dosages of, 904(t).
Body weight, excessive, cardiac
909(1)
pertrophic cardiomyopathy, 635
manifestations of, 776
for tussive syncope, in dog, 453
recommended dosages of. for cat, 903(1).
loss of, causes of, 44, 47, 744
rccommcnded dosagcs of, for cat, 909(t)
(1)606
ratio of heart weight to, 847
for dog.904(t), 909(t)
for dog, 903(t), 909(t)
in cat, 847(t)
with aceproinazinc, for anxiety, in cat
Carbenicillin, for endocarditis, 577(t)
in cal with cardiornyopathy, 847(t)
with pulmonary edema, 260, 260(t)
Carbimazole, for hypcrthyroidisim, 787
in dog, 847(t)
Butyrophenones, as preanesthetic agents,
Carbon dioxide partial pressure.
Borrelia burgdorferi infection, in dog, 612
858(1), 859(1). 860
monitoring of, in CPCR, 441
and myocarditis, 612
Bypass tract-mediated macro-re-entrant
Cardiac cachexia. 47, 48, 744-745
Bowcl, cinbolization to. in infcctious
tachyeardia, in dog. 347, 355
Cardiac. catheterization, 173-180
endocarditis, 571
anesthesia for, 174
Boxer. See also Dog(s).
balloon dilation via, for pulmonic steno-
arrhylhmias in,cardiomyopathy and,369
sis, 190, 868
atrial septal defeet in, echocardiographic
Cachexia, cardiac, 47. 48, 744-745
coil oeclusion via, for patent. ductus artc-
findings associated with, /34
Cage rest, for dog with heartworin diseasc,
riosus, 190
cardiornyopathy and arrhythrnias in, 369
714-715
in dog, 511, 512
dilated cardiomyopathy in, 583, 584
Calcium balance, disturbances of. See
complications associated with, 180
electrocardiographic findings associ-
Calerum defieit; Catcium excess.
conditions contraindicating. 174
ated with, 590, 590(t)
Calcium channet blockers. Sec also specific
clectrophysiologic applications of, 190
paceinaker problems in, clectrocardio
agents, e.g.,、Diltiazem.
equipment for,174. 175. 176, 177
graphic evidence of, 424
adlversc effects of, 315(1), 325
guidewires used in, 177
vasovagal syncope in,432
 and hypotension, in dog, 351
hemodynamic monitoring via. See liemo-
Brachial artery cmbolization, in cat,
drugs interacting with, effects of, 326(t)
dynumic. monitoring.
scquelae of, 660
for arrhythtmias, 315(t), 324
imaging during. SeeAngiorardiography.
Bradyarrhythmias. See also Bradycardia
in cat, 393
  suo
in cat, 390, 401
in dog, 348, 352
interventional, 866-867
and syncope, 451
for atrial fibrillation, in dog. 352
for patent duetus arteriosus, 190
as indication for pacemaker, 400, 403
for IICM, 218
in dog, 511, 512
ini dog, 371-375, 401
for heart failure, 237(t), 238, 244245
for pulmonic stenosis, 190
and syncope, 451
for hypertension, 805(t), 808
left-sided, 177, /78, 179-180
as indication for pacemaker, 400, 402--
recommended dosages of, for cat, 903(1)
patient preparation for, 174
403
for dog, 903(t)
right-sided, 177, 178
with altered heart sounds, 57-58
risks of use of, in therapy for myocardial
percutaneous (Seldinger) approach to.
Bradycardia. See also Bradyarrhythumias.
infarction, in cat, 635, 639
174-175
anesthesia-induced, 867
Calciun deficit, 769
valvuloplasty via, for pulmonic stenosis,
in cat, 92
electrocardiographic characteristies of,
190
pharmacotherapy for, 909(t)
768, 769, 784
vascular cutdown facilitating, 175
sinus, 91
post-Lhyroidcctomy, in cat, 788-789
Cardiac cycle, 33-35, 34
in cat, 390
electrocardiographic characteristics
Cardiac dlisease. See Iteart disense(s).
surgical anesthetic complications
of,784
Cardiac jelly, 4
and. 92
Calcium excess, 768-769
Cardiac loop. See also Hear.
Brain, diseases of, cardiac manifestations
electrocardiographic characteristies of,
formation of, 3-4, 4
of, 772
768, 768
eevclopment following, 4, 5
cmbolization to, in infectious endocardi-
Calcium gluconate, emergency use of,
Cardiac massage, in basic life support,
tis, 571
431(t), 438
434-435
Breathing, in basic life support, 431-433
for hypocalcemia, in thyroidectomized
Cardiac output, 184
 obscrvation of, in diagnosis of cardiovas-
high, anemia and. 789
cular disease, 46
Calcium ipodate, for hyperthyroidisn, 787
aurteriovenous fistula and, 790
Brced predisposition. Sce Canine breed
Cancer, cardiac. See Hrart, tumors of.
1h-1az suisnes suonpuon
preisposition,Felinebreedpredispusiti.
chemotherapy for, cardiotoxicity of, in
heart failure in presence of, 781
Bretylium, 323
cat, 637
hyperkinetic conditions and, 781
adverse effecis of, 315(t), 323, 909(t)
in dog, 609
hypermelabolic conditions and, 781
cimcryeney use of, 437-438
Canine breed predisposition. See also
hyperthyroidism and, 782
for arrhythmias, 323, 909(t)
Dog(s).
low, heart failure in presencc of, 225
in dog, 315(t)
to) arrhythmias, 465-466
mcasurement of, 183-186, 185
for cardiopulmonary arrest. 437-438
to cardiogenic syncope, 451(t)
Cardiac silhouettc, 108, 111(t). Sec also
for ventricular fibrillation, 909(t)
to chronic valvular hear disease, 463,
Cardiomegaty.
recommended dosages of, for dog.
463(0)
Cardiac tanponade, 689-690
()606
to congenital heart disease, 459(t)
 cchocardiographic findings associatcd
Brock procedure (inodified), for pulmonic.
461 (t), 463(t)、 472(t)
with,164
stenosis,869-870
to dilated cardiomyopathy. 582(t), 582-
in dog, 165
Bronchi, collapse of, 121
583,583,584
pathophysiology of, 689, 689-690, 690
 Bronchodilators, for pulmonary edema,
to endocardiosis, 463, 463(t), 540, 511.
pericardial effusion and. See Pericardial ef
259-260, 260(1)
See also King Chartes spaniet, endocar
ftsion.
Bull terrier. See also Dog(s).
diosis in.
pericardiocentesis for. 694695
aortic stenosis in, gross morphology of.
to respiratory discase, 43(t)
Cardiac ulurasonography See
488
to sick sinus syndrome, 355, 466
Lchacardiography.
Bulldoy. See also Dog(s).
to valvular heart discase, 459(t)-461(t),
Cardiac valve(s). See Hieart, valve(s) of.
 cchocardiography in, cardiac tumor on,
460, 461,462, 463, 463(0)
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema. See Hearf
166
(Captopril, adverse effecis of, 909(t)
faiture.
pulmonic stcnosis on, 186
for HCM and myocardial infarction, in
Cardiogcnic shock, 272-273, 273(1). Sce
Bumetanide, for heart failure, 909(t)
cat, 635
also Shock.
Bundle branch block, 84, 84-85, 85
for heart failure, 241, 909(t)
Cardiogenic syncope, 446, 450-452
924INDEX
Cardiogcnic syncope (Contimued)
Cardiovascular discase (Continued)
Cat(s)(Continnert)
canine brecd predisposition to, 451 (t)
diagnosis of, 41-64
RCM-related changes on, 644, 644
Cardiomegaly 11-117,12
angiocardiography in. See Angiocardiog
signs of tcralogy of Fallot on, 514
congenital heart discasc and, 474475
raphy.
aortie embolism in. See under Embotism.
dilated cardiomyopathy and. See also Df
ausculation in, 50-53, 51, 53. Scc also
aortic stenosis in, gross imorphology of.
latedcardiomyopathy.
llenrt murmur Heart sound(s).
678
jn cal. 648
clectrocardiography in. See Flectrorardi-
aortic valve blood flow velocity in, Dopp-
in dog, 256, 591, 591, 592
ography.
ler-derivcd, 154(t)
electrocardiographic findings associated
history in, 4145, 42(t)
arrhythmias in, 386-398. See also Arrhyth.
with, 77-80. 78-80
phonocardiography in. See Phonocardi-
mlie(s).
endocardiosis and, I13
ngraphy.
acquired heart diseasc and, 387-388
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, in cat,
physical examination in, 46-64
cardiomyopathy and. 387, 387(0)
114,115,258,630,631
radiography in. See Radiography.
congenital heart discasc and, 386-387
in dog.601, 605
specialized imaging techniques in,
dilated cardiomyopathy and, 387(t)
restrictive cardionyopathy and, in cat,
193-200
treatnent. of, 630
64.1
ultrasonography in. See Echocardiogra-
electrocardiographic dcteetion of, 389
throinbocmbolisn and, in cat, 661
phy.
390.See also Cats),electrocardiogra
trieuspid rcgurgitation and, 557
drugs for. See Antiarrhythmic(s); Cardiovas-
phy in.
in dog, 174
cnlar drugs.
heart failure accormpanying cardiomy-
(ardionyopathy (cardiomyopathics),
prevalencc of, 457-468
opathy and, 387, 387(1)
581-612, 621-658
signs of, 42-64, 43(t), 47(1)
hyperkalernia and. 388
arrhythmias associatcd with, in cat, 387,
interpretation of, 12
hyperthyroidism and, 388
387(t)
surgery for. See Surgery.
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, 387,
in dog. 369
Cardiovascular drugs. Sce also specifc
387(t),626,630,631(0),635-636
congestive. See Ditated cardiomyopathy.
classcs and agents.
myocardial diseases and, 387, 387(t)
dilatcd.See Dilated ardiomyopathy.
body distribution of. Sce specifies cited
potassium exeess and, 388
Duchenne's, in dog. 607, 607, 832
under Drug(s).
restrictive cardioinyopathy and, 387(t)
cchocardiographic findings associated
cincrgcncy use of, 431(t),437-438
supravenrrieular, 391-393
with, 161-163
routes for, 435-437
syncope associated with, 450. 451
in cat, 633-634, 644, 648-649
recommended dosagcs of, for cal and
thyrotoxicosis and. 388
ini dog, 591-594, 605, 607
dog, 903(t)-917(t)
treatncnl. of, 315(t), 390, 392, 393,
elcctrocardiographic findings associated
sidc cffccis of, 908(t)-917(t)
394.396,397, 398
with, in cat, 630, 63t(t), 643-644,
and hypotcnsion, in dog, 351. 351
ventricular, 98, 99, 396-398, 397
6i48
and syncope, 453
arrhythmogenie right venuricular dyspla-
in d0g, 590(t), 590-591. 605
Cardiovascular' system. See also Heart.
sia in, 653-655. 654, 655, 831-832
heart failure and arrhythmias associated
anatomy of, 13-23
arterial thromboermbolism in, 658-667.
with, in cal, 387, 387(t)
disorders of. Scc Cardiovascular disease
See. also Thromhoembolism.
in cat, 621-658
and sperifie conditions.
atrial extrasystoles in,391,391
in dog. 581-612, 582(t)
physiology of, 25-36. See also Heart, elec-
atrial fibrillation in, 392, 392
infiltrative. 698. See also Heart, tumors of
atrial flutter in, 391-392
trphysinlogyof.
Cardioversion, in CPCR, 438-439
arial septal defect in, gross morphology
in cat, 657.657, 688, 694
in dog. 610
with antiarrhythmics. See Antiarrhyth
ol, 495
ischemic. Sce Ischemia,myocardial.
atrial tachyeardia in, 391, 392
mice(s).
prevalence of in cat, 465
atrioventricular block in, 82, 83, 394-396,
Carnitine,746
in dog, 464-465
395, 401
radiographie findings associated wiuh, in
in cat, 748
as indication for paccmakcr, 403
cal, 630,631, 632,644,648, 648
in dog. and cardiomyopathy, 586. 747
atriovcntricular myopathy (persistent
in dog, 591. 591, 592, 604, 605
Carnitine supplementation, for dog,748,
atrial standsuilly in, 392, 658, 836
restrictive. See Restrictiuve cardiomyopathy.
bacterial nyocarditis in. 833
909(t)
right ventricular, in1 cat, 653-655, 654.
blood pressure in, 796(t)
Carotid artery, lcf-sidcd cardiae
elevated, 468, 656-657, 797. Sec alsoi
655, 831-832
catheterization via, 178, 179. Sce also
in dog, 609
Cardiat catheterization.
Hypertension.
Carorid sinus hypersensitivity, and syncope,
pharmacotherapy for, 805(t)
in man, 608-609
body weight. loss in, 44
urenmic、770
452
weight ratios affected by, in eat, 847(1)
body weight of, ratio of heart weight to,
Carotid sinus massage. 450
Cardiopulnonary arrest, 427-128
847(t)
in diferentiation of tachyarrhythmias, in
as aflcctcd by cardiomyopathy,
Cardiopulnonary cerclral resuscitation,
dog, 335-336, 339
in provocative testing for syncopc, 450
847(t)
427-441
brachial artery cnbolization in, serquelae
advanccd life support in,435-437,436
Carvedilol, for hcart failure, 243
f, 660
basic life support in, 429, 431435, 432
(at.(s). See also Feltine breed predisposition.
bradyarrhythmias in, 390. 401. See also
defibrillation in, 438-439
acquired heart discase in. Scec also Ar-
Catts,brudycardi in.
drugs used in, 431(t), 437-438
quired heart disense.
and syncope, 451
routes of acdministration for, 435-437
arrhythmias associated with, 387-388
as indication for paceumaker, 400, 403
cquipment for, 429
prevalence of, 465
bradycardia in. See also Cat(s), bradyar-
monitoring in, 439-441
acromcgaly in, 656
hsthmiasin.
personnel for, 428
cardiovascular abnormalities associated
sinus, 390
readiness for, 428429
with, 656
surgical anesthetic complicatioms
checklist establishing, 430(t)
analgesics for. 854(t)
Cardiopuhuonary diseases,759-762
and, 92
anestheties for, 854(t). 858(1). See also
syncope associated with. 4151
Cardioselectivity of beta-adrenergic
Anesthesia.
bundle branch block in, 84, 85
blocking agents, 311(t)
angiocardiography in, 188
cancer chenotherapy in, cardiotoxicity
Cardiotoxicity, of chemotherapcutic agents,
DCM-rclated changes on, 649, 619
of, 657
in cat, 637
HCM-related changes on, 630, 633,
cardiac blood flow in, across valves, Dopp-
in dog. 609
662
 ler-derived velocity of, 154(t)
Cardiovascular disease. See also lieprt
normal findings on, 188
cardiac tumors in,657,657, 688,698
disease(s) and specific conditions.
PDA-related findings on, 189
699, 836
INDEX
925
Cat(s) (Continued)
Cat(s) (Continued)
Cat(s) (Gontinued)
cchocardiographic findings associated
mitral regurgitation on, hypertrophic
exeessive left ventricular modcrator
wih, 691
cardiomyopathy and, 627
bands in, 465. 635-656. 656, 827
prevalencc of, 167
rnitral stenosis on, 136
heart failurc associatcd with. 832
cardiomegaly in. Sce also Cardiomegaly.
mitral valve blood flow velocity derived
fascicular block in, 85
dilated cardiomyopathy and, 648
from,134(t),624
fibrillation in, atrial, 392, 392
bypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, 114,
abnorinal, 624
first-degrec arrioventricular block in, 82,
115, 258, 630, 631
noral fndings on, 146(t)
394,395
restricrive cardiomyopathy and. 644
pleural cffusion on. 165, 168
flutter (atrial futter) in, 391-392
thromhoembolisn and, 661
pulnonic valve blood vclocity derivcd
growth hormone cxcess in, 656
cardiomyopathy in, 621-658, 622(t). Sce
[rom,154(t)
cardiovascular abnormalities associated
also Cardiomyopathy (cardionyopathies)
restrictivc cardiomyopathy on, 643. 644
with, 656
and specific types.
"smoke" (spontaneous contrast) on, 
hcart discase in. Ste Heart disease(s).
cardiovascular drug dosages for, 903(1)
IICM and, 633
heart failure in. Scc Heart failue.
917(4)
tricuspid valve blood flow vclocity dc-
hcart sounds/hear murnurs in, hyper-
chenothcrapeutic agents uscd in, cardio-
rived from, 154(t)
trophic cardiomyopathy and, 628,
toxicity of, 657
valvular blood flow velocities derived
630, 630
collapse of. syncopal. See Cat(s), synzope
from, 154(t)
 heart weight to body weight ratio in,
in.
valvular stcnosis on, 136
847(t)
colorflow Doppler cchocardiography in,
venricaatn
as affected by cardiotnyopahy, 847(1)
ventricular septal defect on, Plate 5
clectrocardiography in, 75, 75(t), 389-
heartworm disease in, 727-734. Sce also
Congenital hcart disease in. See Congeni-
390. See also Flectrocardiography.
Hfeartuorm disease.
fat heart disease.
arrhythmia detection via, 389-390
hemorrhage in, secondary to warfarin
continuous-wave Dopplcr cchocardiogra-
atrial cxtrasystoles on, 391, 391
therapy, 665, 665
phy in. See also Cat(s), Doppler erhocar-
atrial fbrillation on, 392, 392
hypercosinophilie syndromc in, 643
diography in.
atrial flutter on, 391
hypcrkalemia in, arrhythmias associated
hypertrophic cardiouyopathy on, 627
atrial tachycardia 0n, 391, 392
with, 388
mitral stcnosis on, 136
atrioventricular block on, 82, 83, 394
rcperfusion of ischemic limh and, 666
yalvular stenosis on1, 136
395.395, 401
bradyarrhythmias on, 101
hypersomatotropism in, 656
dilated cardiomyopathy in, 645-652. See
cardioyascular abnormalitics assoriated
also Ditatedcardiomyopathy.
anesthcsia-induced, 92
bundle branch block on, 84. 85
with, 656
dirofilariasis in. 727-734.See also JHeart-
hyperlension in, 468, 636-657, 797. See
worn disease.
cardiomyopathic changes on, 630,
631 (t), 643-644, 648
also Hypertem.siom.
distal aortic embolism in. See under Em
pharmacotherapy for. 805(t)
DCM-related changes on, 648
bolisn
fascicular block on, 85
hyperthyroidisin in. See Hyperthyroidisn.
Doppler chocardiography in. See also
first-degree atrioventricular block on,
hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy in. 624-
Cat(s),echocardiography in;Dopplerecho
641See also Hyperirophicrardiomyop
82
carcliography.
HCM-related changes on, 630, 631(t)
thy.
aortic valve blood flow velocity derived
left atrial cnlargetncnt manifested on,
hypokalemia in, potassiumn supplencnts
from, 154(t)
countering, 915(t)
hypcrrophic cardiomyopathy on, 627,
78
left bundlc branch block on, 84
idiopathie myocardial failure in, 631 (t),
6.33-634
mitral stenosis on, 136
left venrieular enlargement mani-
cntries under Drilaterl cardionyopathy.
mitral valve blood flow velocity derived
fested on, 79, 80, 80
persistent atrial standstill on, 81, !
infectious endocarditis in. Sec Encdocaordi-
from, 154(t), 624
RCM-rclated changes on,631(t),643-
tis, infections.
abnormal, 624
infectious peritonitis in, pericardial le-
644
pulmonic valve blood flow velocity de-
right. bundle branch block on, 85
sions accompanying, 688
rived from, 154(t)
right vcntricular cnlargermenl mani-
infltrative cardiomyopathy in, 657, 657,
tricuspid valve blood flow velocity dc-
festcd on, 79
688, 691
rived from, 154(t)
second-degrce auritoventricular block
intraventicular conduction abnormalities
valvular blood flow vclocities derived
on, 83, 101
868“u!
from, 154(t)
sinus bradycardia on, surgical anesthe-
 jugular venous distention in, significance
valvular stenosis on, 1.36
tic complications and, 92
or. 18 
vemtricular septal defect on, Plate 5
sinus nodal disturbances on, 390
lefl atrial enlargement in, electrocardio-
dysplastic righit ventricle in. See Cat(s), ar
sinus tachycardia on, hyperthyroidisn
graphie findings associated with. 78
rhythmogenirightuenicuardsplesia
and, 90,90
left bundle braneh block in, 84
in.
supravcntricular arrhythmias on. 391
Jeft venmicular enlargement in, electro-
cchocardiography in. See also Echocardiog-
third-degree atrioveniricular block on.
cardiographie findings associated
raphy.
401
with, 79,80.80
aortic valve blood velocity derived
thrombocmbolism manifested on, 661
left venuricular outfleyw ract obstruetion
from, 154(t)
ventricular arrhythmias on, 98, 99, 396,
in, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
cardiae tumor on, 694
397
and, 626, 626, 627
Cardiornyopathy 0n, 633-634, 644,
ventricular cxtrasystoles on, 396, 396
treatment. of, 639
648649
yentricular prc-excitalion 0n. 399, 394
limb conuacturc in, IICM-rclated throm-
dilated cardiomyopathy on, 648, 648-
cimbolism in, Sec Embalism, aortic; Throm-
boemholism and. 663
649
boemialism,in rat
limb paralysis in, anputation in manage-
dirofilariasis-rclated changes on, 731,
endocardial fibroelastosis in, 527, 652,
inent of, 665, 666
733
827
dilated cardiomyopathy and, 647
heartworm-relatcd changcs on, 731.
cndocarditis in, infectious. Sec Endocardi-
hypertrophie cardiomyopathy and, 628,
733
tis, infectious.
660
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy on, 626,
cndomyocardial fbroxis in,465, 831, 831
reperfusion following, complicatcd by
627, 629, 633, 633-634
cndomyocardial form of RCM in, 641.
hypcrkalemia, 666
infiltrative cardiomyopathy on. 694
642,643, 613. See also Restrictive car
thromboenmbolism and, 44, 660, 660
left ventricular ouuflow tract olstruc-
diomyopathy.
low-sodium diet for, 741(t). Sce also Lou-
Lion on, hypertrophic cardiornyop-
cndomyocarditis in, 465,832. See also En-
sodium diet.
athy and, 626, 627
docardiis and Myocarditis.
lymphosarcoma in, 836
926INDEX
Cat(s)(Continued)
Cat(s)(Continued)
Cat(s)(Contimued)
and infiltrative cardionyopathy, 657,
pulinonic valve bloori flow velocity in,
supraventricular,391, 392
688, 694
Doppler-derived, 154(1)
ventricular, 397-398
i-left ventricular gradient in, hypertro-
radiography in. Sec also Radiography.
taurine deficieney in, and dilated cardio-
phic cardiomyopathy and, 627
cardiomegaly on, dlilated cardiomyopa-
nyopathy, 645-646, 750-751
mitral regurgitation in. See also Mitrat re-
thy and, 648
supplements countering, 637, 650, 751,
gurgitation.
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and,
916(1)
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, 627,
258, 630, 631
tetralogy of Fallgt in, angiocardiographic
627
restricive cardiouyopathy and, 644
mitral stenosis in, echocardiographic
findings associated with, 514
throinbocmbolism anr, 661
findings associated with, 736
pathology of, 826
cardiouyopathic changes on, 630, 631,
third-degrce atrioventrieular block in,
pathology of, 823
632, 644, 648, 648
itral valve blood flow velocity in,Dop
395, 395, 401
DCM-rclatced chariges on, 648, 648
as indication for pacemakcr, 403
 pler-derived, 154(t), 624
diroflariasis-relatcd changes on, 123,
thrombosis in, 658-667. See also Thrombo
abnormal, 624
731,731
M-odc cchocardiography in. See also
embolism,in cat.
features of hcarl failure on, 258
Cats),echecardiography in.
thyrotoxic heart disease in. See Thyrotoxir
IICM-related changcs on, 114, 115,
hypertrophie cardiomyopathy on, 626
heart disense.
258,630, 631, 632
tricuspid valvc blood flow velocity in,
627
heartworm-relatedi changcs on, 123,
Doppler-rderived. 154(1)
normal fintdings on, 146(t)
781, 731
two-dimensional echocardiograpby in,
pleural effusion on, 168
pleural effusion on, dilated cardioiny.
Mobitz-type atrioventricular block in, 83,
cardiac tumor on, 694
opathy anrl, 648
dliroflariasis-rclated changes on, 733
395, 395
pulnonary cdema on, 258
myocardial discasc in, 621-658, 622(1).
heartworin-related changes on, 733
Scc also Cardiomyopathy (cardiomyopa
HCM and, 630, 632
hypertrophic cardiomyopatlhy on, 626,
thies) and spccifie types.
heart failure and, 258
627,629,633
Iyocardial forn of RCM in, 641, 642,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and,
 mitral regurgitation on, hypertrophic
642.Scc also Restrictive cardiomyopa-
258
cardiomyopathy and, 627
RCM-rclated changes on, 644
 pleural effusion on, 165
thy.
myocardial infarction in, hypertrophic
thoracic conformation on, 110
restrictive cardiouyopathy on,643
renal infarction in, thrombocmbolism
cardiomyopathy and, 635, 837, 838
'uo (.ayous,) isunuoo snosueuods
myocardial ischemia in, hypertrophic car-
and, 661
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and,
dionyopathy andi, 625-626
reperfusion synriroine in,hypcrkalcmia
633
myocarditis in,657, 657, 820, 832, 833.
rlue to, 666
vagal maneuvers in, aiding diagnosis of
Scc also Cat(s), endomyorarditis in.
restrictive cardionyopathy in, 641-645.
arrhythmias, 389
ostium prium-type atrial scptal defect
Scc alsoRestrirtiverardiomyopathy.
valvular heart discasc in, 136, 462, 463,
in, gross norphology of, 495
right bundle branch block in, 84
823
right ventricular cardiomyopathy in, 653
ventricular arrhythmias in, 98, 99. 396
fect in, gros inorphology of, 495
635, 654, 655, 831-832
398,397
right ventricular cnlargement in, electro
pacemakcr for. Scc Paremaker.
ventricular cxtrasystoles in, 396, 396, 397,
patent ductus arleriosus in, angiocardio
cardiographic findings associated
398
 graphic fndings associated with, 189
with, 79
ventricular pre-excitation in, 393, 393-
pericardial discase in, 466, 679, 681-698,
right ventricular outflow tract obstruction
394
683, 688. Sec also Pericardial cntries.
in, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
ventricular septal defect in, echocardio-
peritoniris in, infeclious, pericardial le-
and, 628
 graphic findings associated with,
sions accompanying, 688
sccond-degree atrioventricular block in,
Plate 3
persistent atrial standstil (atrioventricu-
83, 394-395, 395, 401
gross morphology of, 500
lar yopathy) in, 392, 658, 836
sedatives for, 854(t)
ventricular tachyarrhythmias in, 98, 99,
electrocardiographic charactcristics of.
sinus bradycardia in, 390
396-398, 397
81,81
surgical anestheic coinplications and,
ventricular tachycardia in, 397-398
 persistent right aortic arch in, 528
92
wcighht loss in, 44
phonocardiography in, HCM-related
sinus nodal disturbances in, 390
weight of, ratio of heart weight to, 847(t)
changes on, 630
sinus tachycardia in, 390
as affected by cardiomyopathy,
hyperthyroidism and, 90, 90
847(t)
thy anri, 648
sodium-restricted dliet for, 741 (t). See
Catecholaunine-sccrcting tumors, 765-766
cchocardiographic findings associated
also Sodiun-restrirtend. diet.
Cathcterization, cardiac. Scc Cardiac
with, 165, 168
subaortic stenosis in, gross inorphology
catheterizatiun.
radiographic findings associated with,
of, 823
central venous, in CPCR, 441
648
supravcntricular arrhythmias in, 391393.
 peripheral arterial, in CPCR, 441
potassiun cxcess in, arrhythmias associ-
392
in leftsided cardiac catheterization,
alerl with, 388
syncope in. See also Synrope.
177、178, 179-180. See also Car
reperfusion of ischcunic limb and, 666
bradyarrhythinias and, 451
lia: catheterizution.
potassium supplencnts for, 915(t)
hypertrophic carrliounyopathy and, 636
Caudal vena cava, 17
preanesthetic drugs for, 858(t). Sec also
tachyarrhythinias and, 450
radiographic appcarauce of, interprcta-
Anesthesia.
systcmic hyperlension in, 656-657
tion of, 120
pulnonary edena in. See also Putmonary
tachyarrhythmias in. See also Cat(s), ar-
Caval syndroune, in dog with heartworin
ertema.
rhythmias in.
discasc, 718-719
anxicty reduction in treatment of, 260,
hyperthyroidisin and, 783(t), 786
surgery for, 879
260(t)
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and. Scc
Cefaclor, for endocarditis, 577(t)
heart failure and, 258
underArrhythmia(s)hypertrophiccar
Ccfazolin, for cndocarditis, 577(t)
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, 258,
diomyopathy and.
Cefotaxime, for cndocarditis, 577(t)
628,630,632
supravcntricular,391-393
Cefoxitin, for cndocarditis, 577(1)
treatment of, 26l, 637-638
syncope associated with, 450
Cell death, 818(1)
radiographic findings associated with,
ventricular, 98, 99. 396-398, 397
nyocardial, in heart failure, 818-819
258,258
tachycardia in, atrial, 391, 392
Ceniral cyarnosis, 4849
pulnonic stenosis in, pathology of, S23.
sinus.390
Central nervous systein, discases of, cardiac
Sce also Putmonir stenosis.
hyperthyroidism and, 90, 90
manifestations of, 772
INDEX927
Central nervous system (Continued)
Collapse (Contimued)
Continuous-wave Doppler
syncope due to,447,452-453
tracheal, rardiographic appearance of,
echocardiography (Continued)
Central venous catheterization, in CPCR,
121,122
advantages of, 138-139
441
Colloid solutions, 277, 278(t)
aortic regurgitation on, subaortic stenosis
Central venous pressure inonitoring, in
 in manageinent of shock, 277-279
and, in dog,490
care of anesthetized patient, 863
Color-flow Doppler cchocardiography, 139
aortic stcnosis on, in dog, 136, 490
in mamagemenmt of shock, 280
aplications of,55974,Plat3,lat
disacivantages of, 139
Cephalexin,for endocarditis,377(t)
to 10
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy on, in cat,
Cephalosporins, for endocarditis, 577(t)
Color M-mode echocardiography, Plate 4
627
for shock, 284(t), 285
Compliance, ventricular, 30, 31, 217.
left-to-right shunt on, ventricular septal
Cerebrovascular accident, hypertension
217-218
defcct and,in dog,504
and, 802
Compression, of abdomen, in basic life
mitral regurgitaon on, in dog, 137
Chagas’ diseasc (trypanosomiasis), and
support,434
nitral stenosis on, in cat, 136
myocarditis,833
of chest, in basic lifc support, 433434
pulmonic stcnosis on, in dog, 136, 486
in dog, 611, 611, 833
factors liniting effectiveness of,
subaorstsisnng
Chemodecloina, cardiac, cchocardiographic
434(1)
tricuspid valve dysplasia on,in dog.158
findings associated with, in dog, 166.
of descnding aorta, in basic lfe suport,
valvular stenosis on, in cat, 136
694
435
in dog, 136
surgery for, 880
Conputcd electrocardiography, 102
ventricular septal defect on, in dog, 504
Chenotherapeutic agcnts, as cardiotoxins,
Computed tomography, of heart, 199,
Contracturc, HCM-rclatcd
199-200
in cat, 657
thrombocmbolism and, in cat, 663
in dog. 609
Concentric myocardial hypertrophy.
Contrast cchocardiography, 134, 134, 135
Chest. See Thorarir entrics.
prcssurc overload and, 208, 758, 818
atrial sptal ecton,inog,134,135
Chloramphenicol, interaction of phcnytoin
Conduction, ventriculoatrial, as
COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary
with, effects of, 326(t)
complication of cardiac pacing, 412,
(lisease), 761
Chlorothiazide, adverse effects of, 909(1)
413, 414
Cor pulmonale, 759-761, 760
for cdema, 909(t)
Conduction abnorinalities, 100-10l, 101,
heartworm discase and, in dog, 715
for heart failure, 235(t),237
299-303
Cor triatriatum, 526-527,527
for hypertension, 909(t)
echocardiographic characteristics of,
pathology of, 824
for pulmonary cdema,909(t)
98--08
rccommcnded dosagcs of, for cat, 909(t)
 intraventricular, 84-86
Corgi. See also Dog(s).
for d0g, 909(t)
in cat, 398
M-morie cchocardiography in, nurmal
Chordac tendincac, 19-20
Conduction blocks, 299-300. Sce also
findings on, 145（t)
rupturc of, and pulmonary cdeina, in
Atrioventrictar btock.
(oronary artery(ics), 21
dog, 261
Conduction systein of hcart, 22, 301
discasc of, 837
in association with endocardiosis, 553-
developnent of, 7
left, 21
554
lesions of, 836
right, 21
Chroraxie, in programning of pacenaker,
Conduit repair, in surgery for pulmonic
Coronary sinus, 17, 21
404, 405
stenosis,872
Coronary vesscls, blood flow through,
Conduit shunts, for tetralogy of Fallot, 875
33-34,34
Chronic acquired arioventricular valve
discasc. Scc Endorardiosis.
Congenital heart disease, 471-529. See als0
development of, 7
specific lesions, c.g., Tetralogy of Falot.
Corticosteroicis, use of, in CPCR. 438
Chronic obstrucive pulnonary rlisease
angiocardiographic assessment of, 475
in managcmcnt of shock, 285
(COPD), 761
Chronotropic drugs, positive, See specific
arrhythmias associated with, in cat, 386-
in treating sequelae of heartworn dis-
387
ease, in dog,714,716,718
agcnts, e.g, Atropine; Glycopyrrolate:
canine brecd predisposition 1o, 459(t)--
Costocervical vcin, right, 418
Isoproterenot.
Cireulation, 26, 26. Scc also Btood flou.
461 (t), 463(t), 472(t)
paccmakcr implantation via, 415,
blood volune and, 25-27
cardiomegaly in、474-475
417(t)
cchocardiographic cvaluation or, 154
Cough, 43-44
fetal, 8, 8
160, 475-476
heart disease and, 43(t)
transition fron, to blood flow in new-
clccirocardiographic findings associated
lung discasc and, 43(t)
born animal, 8-9
with,476
syncope associated with, in dog, 453. See
 in basic life support, 433-434
pharmacotherapy for, 485 (t)
also Synrope.
pulmonary 251-232
prevalence of, in cat,462463
"Cough drop” syncope (tussive syncope),
Clearance, of drugs, 312
Clicks, systolic, 54
in dog, 458-462, 459(t)
in dog, 453. Sec also Syncope.
radiographic evaluation of, 127, 127(t),
Cough suppressants, for dog, 904(1),
Clindamycin, for cndocarditis, 577(t)
Closed-chest compression, in basic lfe
474-475
909(t), 912(1)
Congenital pericardial discasc, 681-685,
Countershock, for ventricular fibrillation,
support,433-434
835. Scc also spccific typcs, c.g,
factors liniting effectiveness of, 434(1)
438-439
CPCR. See Cardiopulmonary cerebral
Coagulopathies, shock and, 287
peritonewprirardicl.
Coarctation of aorta, 494
restuscitation.
Congestive cardiomyopathy Scc Diated
CPR. See Cardiopulmonary ceretral
Cocker spaniel. See also Dog(s).
dilated eardiomyopathy in, 582().583
cardiomyopathy.
restescitation.
Congestive heart failure. See Heart failure.
Cranial vena cava, 17
cardiomegaly acconpanying, 591
Conn's disease (aldosteronisn), 765"
left, persislcnt, 529
radiographic fincings associated with,
clcrocardiographic ndings in,765,
in dog, 529
591
765
Crossbred beaglc. Sce also Dog(s).
 M-mode cchocardiography in, norual
Constant rate infusion. dosing formula
echocardiography in, heartworn-related
findings on, 145(t)
workshcct for, 917
changes on, 711
Codeine, recoinnended dosages of, for
Constriclivc pericarditis, 696-698
Cros-clamping, of desccnding aorta, in
rlog, 904(t)
in dog, 696-698
basic life support, 435
Coding, of pacenaker, 406, 407
henodynanic effects of, 680, 696, 697.
Crystalloid solutions, in inanagement of
Coil enbolization, for patenl ductus
698
shock, 276-277
arleniosus, 190
pathology 0f, 696, 696
Cullure, blood sample as source of bacteria
in dog, 511, 512
Continuous heart nurmurs, 62
for, in diagnosis of infectious
Collapse, bronchial, 121
Coninuous-wave Dopplcr
endocarditis, 575. See also Fndocarditis,
syncopal. See Syncope.
681-8g1 %ydeBop.reooyoo
infectims.
928INDEX
Cushing's syndrome
Digitalis prcparations (Continued)
Dilated cardiomyopathy (Comtiued)
(hyperadrenocorticism), 764-765
for arrhythmias, 325, 910(t)
elcctrocardiographic findings associated
Cyanosis, 44, 48-49, Plate 1
in cat, 315(t), 393
with, in cat,648
Cyst(s), blood, in tricuspid valve,
in cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
in dog, 590(t), 590-591
prevalencc of, in dog, 463-464
thy. 636
in dog with episodic weakness. 449
intrapericardial, 681-685, 685, 686
in dog, 315(t), 349, 330, 352
in dog without. overt signs of disease.
cvidencc of cffectiveness of, on ECG,
594-595, 595 (t)
35.3
eliopathogencsis of, in cat, 645-646
in dog with dilated cardiornyopathy,
in dog,585-587
DCM. Sec Diatrd cardionyopathy.
598
felinc, 645-652
Death, cardiopulmonary arrest and, 428.
cvirdicncc of cfectiveness of, on ECG,
genetic/famital basis for, in dog, 585
See also Cardiopulnomary cerebrat
.3.53
in 1nau, 585
Fesusciiafiomr.
for atrial fibrillation, in dog, 352
hcart failure demonstrable with, in dog,
dilated cardiomyopathy and, in dog,
evidence of cffectiveness of, on ECG,
668-768
595(t), 599, 600, 600(1)
353
heart failure potentiating lethality of, in
supraventricular tachycardia and, in dog,
for DCM and arrhiythmias, in diog, 598
dog.601
348
cvidence of cffectiveness of, on ECG,
hcart failure treatunent in, 223, 224, 225-
ventricular arrhythmias and, in dog, 356-
35.3
227
357.370,836
for DCM and heart failure, in car, 651 
for cat, 649, 650, 651, 652
Deerhound. See also Dog(s).
in dog, 597
for dog, 596, 597, 894, 895
dilated cardionyopathy in.583
for HCM and arrhythmtas, in cat, 636
heart. soyunds and murmurs associated
M-mode echocardiography in, normal
for HICM and heart failure, in cat, 637,
with, in dog. 56, 589
findings on, 143(t)
641
immune-mediated disorders and, in dog:
Defibrillauon, in CPCR, 438439
for hcart failure, 224, 229(t), 229-233,
587
Degeneration, myxomatous, of
485(t), 910(t)
in man, 587
alrioventricular valves. Sec
in cat, 260(t)
laboratory findings associated with, in
bndorardiusis.
in cat with dilated cardiomyopathy, 651
reg, 589
Delayed afterdepolarizations, 298-299, 300
inn cat with hyperthyroidisin, 786
lethality of, in dog, 595(t), 599, 600,
lescending aorta, comprcssion or cross-
in cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
600(t)
clamping of. in basic life support, 435
thy, 637, 641
Hinb paralysis arcompanying, in cat, 647
Dexamethasone. cmergency usc of, 431(t),
in dog, 260(t)
"occult," in dog, 591-595
438
in dog with dilated cardiomyopathy.
pathoslogy of, in cat, 646, 647
for sequelae of heartworn disease, in
597
in dog,583-585,584,819
dog,716
 in dog with mitral regurgitation, 551-
pathophysiology of, in cat.46
Dextrans. 278, 278(t)
552
in1 dog, 587-588
in management of shock.278-279
Internarional Suall Animal Cardiac
phonocardiographic findings associated
Diabetes mellitus, 767-768
Health Council recommcndations
with, in dog, 56
Diaphragmatic hernia, pericardial/
regarding, 905(t)
physical findings associated with, in dog.
peritoneopcricardial, 526, 682-684,
for mitral regurgitation and heart failure,
589
683
in dog, 551-552
precursors of, in dog, 594-595, 595(t)
abnormalities accompanying. 835
for supraventricular tachyarrhythnias, in
prevalence of, in cat, 623, 645
age distribution of, in cats, 683、
cat,393
in dog, 582(t), 582-583. 583, 584
in dogs, 683
in dog, 349, 350
prognosis associated with, in cat,652
cysts associaterd with, 684
recomnendcd dosages of, for cat, 904(t),
ini dog, 599-601, 600, 600(t), 601
radiographic findings associatcd with,
(0)016
pulmomary ederma accompanying, treat-
118, 526, 683-684
for dog, 904(t), 910(1)
ment of, 223-224. Sec also Dilated
in dog. 684
Dilated cardiomyopathy, 582-601
cardiomyopathy,hearfaiterereat
Diastolic dysfunction, hyperrophic
angiocardiographic fidings asociated
cardiomyopathy and, in man, 625
with, in cat, 649, 649"
in dog, 261-262
therapeulic approach ro, 217-218
radiographic findings associated with, in
Diastolic function, 622-623
arrhythmias accompanying, in cal. 387,
cat, 648. 648
abnornal. See Diastolir dysfunction.
387(t)
in dog, 256, 591, 591, 592
assessment of, via Doppler echocardiogra-
treatment of, 650
tachycardia and, in dog, 587
phy,623
in dog, 369-370, 590, 590(t), 591
taurine deficieney and, in cat, 645-646,
effects of disease states on, 623. Sec also
trcatmcnt of, 597, 598, 895-896
750-751
Diestolic. tysfunction.
cvidence of cdrug effectiveness in,
in dog, 585-586. 751-752
Diastolic heart murmurs, 6l-62. See also
on ECG, 353
supplemenis countering. Sce Tauine,
Heart murmurs.
"asyinptomaie" carly course of, in dog,.
steppiementat.
Diastolic heart sounds, early, 55
594-595
therapy for, in ca1, 649-652
Diet, mineral content of. as provided in
atrial fibrillatiron and, in dog, 588, 591
in dog, 596-599
commercial dog loods, 742(t)-743(t)
lethality of, 601
in man, 652
sodium-restricted, in managcmcnt of
brced predisposition to, among cats, 623
thrombocmbolism associated with, in cat.
hearr failure, 237. 531
among dogy,582(t),582-583,583,584
658. Sce also Thromboembolism.
 International Small Animal Cardiac
caninc, 582-601
viral ctiology of, in man, 586
Health Council recom mcnda-
cardiormegaly associated with, in cat, 648
Diltiazem, 324-325
tions regarding, 905 (1)
in dog, 256.591, 591,592
adverse effects of, 315(1), 325, 910(t)
in inanagement of hypericnsion, 745,
carnitinc deficiency and, in dog, 586. 747
and hypotension, in dog, 351
805-806
clinical inanifestations of, in cat, 647-649
drugs interacting with, effects of, 326(0)
Diethylcarbam azine, for heartworm discase,
in dog, 588-589
in dog, 720-721
compcnsation for, 207(t)
by, 311(t),349
Digitalis preparations.325
early "asymptomatie" course of, in dog.
for arrhythumras, 324, 910(t)
adverse effects of. 315(t), 325, 744,
594-595
in cat, 315(t), 393
910()
cchocardiographic findings associated
in dog,815(t),348,849
in dog.97,352
with，162
evidence of effectiveness of, on ECG.
clectrocardiographic parainelers affectcd
in cat, 648, 648-649
349
by, 311(t), 325, 353
in dog. 591-594, 593
for HCM, in cat, 636, 639
INDEX
929
Diltiazcm (Continued)
Doberman pinscher (Continued)
Dog(s) (Continued)
for heart failure, 244245
dilated cardiomyopahy on, 593
dilated cardiomyopathy aud, 369-370,
 International Small Animal Cardiac
electrocardiography in, DCM-related
590, 590(t), 591
Hlealth Council recommendations
changes 0n, 590, 590(t)
trcaumcnt of,597,598, 895-896
regarming, 905(t)
DCM risk prediction bascd on, 594-
cvidence of drug cffectiveness in,
for hypertension, 805(t)
595,595（t)
tn ECG, 353
for supraventricular tachyarrhythinias, in
M-inode echocardiography in, dilated car-
clectrocardiographic detection of, 31-
cat,393
diomyopathy ori, 593
332. Scc adso Dog(s), electrorerdiogra-
in dog,348,349
"occult’ dilated cardiomyopathy in, 594
phey in.
cvidencc of effectivcness of, on ECG,
595
frequeney of, by fype, 458(t), 465-466
6
oslium primum-type atrial septal defcct
hecart failure and, 224
recormmended dosages of, for cat, 903(t),
in, cchocardiographic findings associ-
trcatment of. 224
(1)016
ateri with, 496
junctional,97,346-347
for dog, 903(1), 910(1)
radiography in, cardiomegaly on, dilated
sinus.92
Dirofiaria immitis. See also Hleartuorn
cardiomyopathy and, 592
supraventricular. Sce Dogrs), suprurentric-
diseruse.
Dobutamine, 233-234
tartachyarrhythumices in.
lifc cycle of, 702
adverse effects of, 910(t)
syncope associated with, 450, 431
Dirofilariasis. Scc lieartworm disease.
for DCM and heart failurc, in cat, 650
treatmcnt of. 315(t), 347-355
Dislodgment, of paccaker learis, 415, 417,
in dog, 596
 management of dilated cardiomyopa-
419, 420
for heart failure, 224, 229(t), 234, 260(t),
thy anri, 597, 598
Disopyranide, 316-317
910(t)
ventricular, 98, 99, 99, 355-361
adversc clfects of, 315(t), 317, 910(1)
in ancmic animal, 790
lethality of, 356-357, 370, 836
for arrhythunias, 316
in cat with dilated cardiomyopathy, 650
vs. supraventricular arrhythmias. Scc
in dog, 315(t), 910(t)
in dog with dilated cardiounyopathy.
Dog(s),supraventrirutar tarhyar
Disscninated intravascular coagulopathy,
596
rhythnias in,differentietiom of
shock and, 287
for shock,283, 283(t)
arrhythmwgenic right ventricular dyspla-
Distributive shock, 273, 273(t). Sce also
recommendied dosages of, for cat, 904(t),
sia in1,609
Diurctics. Sec also spccific agents.
Shock.
()016
"asymptomatic" carly coursc of DCM in,
for DCM and heart. failure, in cat, 649,
for dog, 904(t), 910(t)
594-595
Dog(s). See also Canine breen prerlisposition.
atrial cxirasystoles in, 94
651
abdominal ultrasonography in, signs of
atrial fibrillation in, 95, 343, 343, 344,
in dog, 596, 597
for HCM and hcart failure, in cal, 637.
heart failure on, 153
345,401
acquired heart disease in, 463-465. Scc
and ilated cardionyopathy, 588,591
638, 641
also Dog(s), endorardiosis in.
for hcart failurc, 235(t), 235-237
lethality of, 601
analgesics for, 854(t)
occurring asymptomatically,among
in1 cat with dilated cardionyopathy,
anesthetics for, 854(t), 858(t). Scc also
649, 651
large brecds, 466
in cat with hypcrtrophic cardiomyopa-
Anesthesia.
temporary, 354
angiocardiography in, 188
treatment of, 332, 354
thty, 637, 638, 64[
in cat with mitral regurgitation, 551
artic stenosis on,189
evidence of drug effectiveness in, on
in dog with dilate cardionyopathy,
evicdence of double-chambered right
ECG,353
596,597
ventricle on, 481
atrial fhutter in. 95, 342, 342-343, 401
initral valve dlysplasia on, 189, 525
 in dog with mitral regurgitation, 551
treatument. of, 352
normal findings on, 188
cvidencc of drug effectiveness in, on
for hypertension, 805(t), 806
for rmitral regurgitation and heart failure,
PDA-rclated findings on, 508
ECG,353
pulmonic stcnosis on, 189. 484
atrial septal defect in. Scc also Arial sp
in dog or cat, 55t
for pulmouary cdema, 259, 909(t),
racdionuclide, 194
corrced, cchocardiographic fiuings
tal defect.
912(t). See also Diuretics, for heart fal-
ventricular abnormalities on, 194,
uTe.
198
following, Plate 9
recounmended dosages of, for cat, 903(t)
subaortic stenosis on, 189
echoeardiographic evidence of. / 34,
for dog, 903(t)
teralogy of Fallot on, 189, 514
135, 496, Plates 7 & 8
Doberiman pinscher. See also Dog(s).
VSD-related findings on, 189, 501, 502
electrocardiographic findings associ-
"asymptomatice' early course of DCM in,
aortic regurgitation in, 61
ateri with, 499
591-595
hcart murmur associated with, 61
prevalcncc of, 459(t), 462
altrial septal defect in, cchocardiographic
subaortic stenosis and, cchocardir-
shunt(ing) accompanying, cchocardio-
findings associated with, 496
graphic findings associated with,
graphic findings associated with,
cardliomegaly in, dilated cardiomyopathy
490
134, 135
and, 592
aortic stenosis in, 60. Scc also Aortic steo
atrial tachyeardia in, cctopic, 341, 341-
dilatcd cardiomyopathy in, 369-370,
5ts,
342
582(t), 583, 584
angiocardiographic findings associated
treatrment of, 350-351
cardiomegaly accompanying, 592
with, 189
atriovcntricular block in, 82, 82, 83, 375,
cchocardiographic findings associated
cchocardiographic cvidence of, 136,
401
with, 593
159,159,490, 491,492, Platc 4
as indication for paceinaker, 402
clectrocardiographic findings associ-
clectrocardiographic fincdings associ-
atrioventricular myopathy ( pcrsislenl
ated with, 590, 590(t)
atcd with, 489
atrial standstill) in, 403, 466, 607-
clectrocardiographic findings pre-
gross umorphology of, 486-487, 488,
608, 608, 836, 837
dictive 0f, 594595, 595(t)
822-823
electrocardiographic characteristies of.
histologic findings associated with, 584
hcart inurur associated with, 60,
81
lethality of, 595(0), 599, 600(1)
60-61
hyperkaleinia and, 89
pathology of, 584, 819
prevalence of, 459(t), 460
atriovcntricular norial reentrant tachycar-
precursors of, 594-595, 595(t)
radiographic findings associated with,
dia in,345-346, 346
radiographic findings associatcd with.
491
atric wenuricular node-dependent supra-
592
aortic valvc blood flow veloxity in, Dopp-
ventricular tachycardia in, 338, 345-
carly "asymptomatic" course of DCM in,
lcr-derived, 154(t)
347
594-595
arrhythmias in, 331-375. Scc also Arrhyth-
treatment of, 334355
cchocardiography in, atrial scptal defecl
mie(s).
atrioventricular norde-independent supra-
on,496
breed predisposition to, 465466
ventricular tachycardia in, 338-345
930INDEX
Dog(s) (Continued)
Dog(s) (Gontinned)
Dog(s) (Continned)
trcatment. of,348-354
chronic acquired atriowentricular valve
subacrie stenosis on, 136
atriroventricular valvc discase in, chronic
discasc in. Sec Dog(s), enudocardiasis
tricuspid valve blood flow velocity de-
acquired. See Dog(s), endocardiosis in.
271.
riveri from, 154(t)
dlysplastic, chocardiographie findings
collapse of, syncopal. Scc Dog(s), syneope
tricuspid valve dysplasia on, 158
associated with, 158
i7l.
valvular blood ilow velocities derived
automatic (cctopic) junctional tachycar-
color-flow Dopplcr cchocardiography in
from, 154(t)
dia in, 346-347
Plate 3. Platcs 5 to 10
valvular dysplasia on, 158
bacterial endocarditis in, cchocardic
commercial foods for, rmincral content
valvular stenosis on, 136, 160
graphie findings in, 164
of,742(t)-743(t)
ventricular septal defect. on, 504, Platc
vegetative mass associated with, 164
com puted tomography in, cardiac tumor
bacterial myocarditis in, 612
double-chambered right yentricle in, an-
6
n1,199
bidirectiona shunt in, atrial septal defcct
congenital heart discasc in. Scc also Com
giocardiographic findings associated
and, cchocardiographic fintings axso-
genitat henrt disease.
with, 48}
ciatcd with,135"
breed predispositiom to, 459(t)-461I (t),
cchocardiographic fincdings associated
bloori pressure in, 796(t)
463(t), 472(1)
with, 48!
breed diflerences in, 797(t)
prevalence of, 458-462. 459(t)
Duchcnne's cardiomyopathy in, 607, 607.
changes in, with aging,796()
constrictive pericarditis in. 696-698
832
effect.of pacemaker on, 412
hermodynanic effecis of, 680, 696, 697.
dyspnea in, sigus acconpanying, 47
elevated, 168, 797. See also Hyperten-
698
carly "asynptonatic" couse of DCM in,
pathology of, 696. 696
594-595
 phar macotherapy for. 805(t)
continuous-wave Doppler cchocardiogra-
echocardiography in, 133. See als Fcho
body weight loss in. 44
phy in.See als Dog(s)Dopper erho
tardliographey.
heart failure and, 47, 48
cardiography int.
aortie regurgitation on, subaortic stene-
body weight of, ratio of hcart wcight to,
aortic rcgurgitation on, subaoric steno-
sis and, 490
847(0)
sis and, 490
aortic stenosis on, 136, 159, 159, 490,
Borretia brpdorferi infection in. 612
aortic stcnosis on, 136, 490
491, 492. Platc 4
and myocarditis, 612
left-to-right shuut. on. ventricular septal
aortic valve blood flow velocity derived
bradyarrhythmias in, 371-375,401
defect and, 504
from, 154(1)
and syncope.451
mitral regurgitation on. 137
atrial septal delcct on. 134, 135, 496,
as indication for pacemakcr, 400, 402-
pulmonic stenuosis on, 136, 486
Plates 7 & 8
403
subaortic stenosis on, 136, 490
atriovenricular valve dysplasia or, 158
bundle branch block in, 84, 84, 85, 85
tricuspid valve dysplasia on, 158
bidirectional shunt on, atrial septal de-
bypass tract-mediated macro-re-entrant.
valvular stenosis on, 136
fect and. 135
tachycardia in, 347, 355
venricular septal refect on, 504
cardiac tanponade on、165
cancer chemotherapy in, cardiotoxicity
contrast cchocardiography in. Scc also
cardiac tumors on, 166, 693, 694
0of. 609
cardiomyopathy on, 591-594, 605, 607
cardiac blood flow in, across valves. Dopp-
atrial septal defcct on, 734. 1.35
chemodectoma on, cardiac, 166, 694
Ier-derived velocity of, 154(t)
shunt(ing) on, atrial septal defect antd,
cardiac cachexia in,47,48
134,135
dilated eardiomyopathy on, 591594,
cardiac tamponade in, echocardiographic
cor pulmonalc in, heartworm rliscase
593
findings associated with, 165
anrdi, 715
diroflariasis-related changes on, 710,
cardiac tu1nors in, 610, 686, 687, 688,
cor triatriatum in, cchocardiographie
711
698
findings associated with, 527
double-chambereri right venricle con,
romputed tomographic appearance of,
"cough drop”' syncopc (tussivc syncope)
481
199
in, 453. See also Syncope.
Duchenne's cardioinyopathy on, 607,
echocardiographic findings associated
death of, supraventricular lachycardia
607
with, 166, 693,694
and, 348
endocardiosis and mitral regurgitation
prevalence of, 466
ventricular arrhythmias and, 356-357,
(n.SceDo(s),ethurdiography ,
radiographie findings associated with,
mitrat regurgitation on.
692
digitalis toxicity in, 97, 352
cvidence of cndocarditis on. 164
cardionegaly in, 112. Scc alse Cardiomeg-
dilated cardiormyopathy in, 582-601. Sec
heartworin-relaied changes on, 710.
aty.
alsoDilate.carliomyopathy.
711
dilated cardionyopathy and, 256. 591,
dirofilariasis in, 702-721. Sec also 1feart-
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy on, 605,
591.592
uorm disense.
606
cndecardicsis and、 113
Doppler cchocardiography in. Sec also
inraperieardial cyst. on, 686
hypcrtrophie cardiomyopathy and, 604.
Dog(s),echocardiography in
left-to-right shunt on, patent. ductus ar-
605
aortic rcegurgitation on, subaorlic steno-
lcriosus and.156,510
tricuspid regurgitation and, 114
sis and. 490
venuricular septal dfect and, 504
cardiomyopathy in, 581-612, 582(t). Scc
aortic stenosis on. 136
mitral rcgurgitation on, 137, 161, Platc
alsCitomyopathy (cardiomyopathies)
aortic valve blood flow vclocity derived
10
and specific types.
from, 154(t)
mitral valve blood flow vclocity derived
cardiovascular drug dosages for, 903(t)
atrial sptal defect on, 134, 135, 496,
from. 154(t)
917(t)
Plates 7 & 8
uscular dystrophy-related myoxcardial
carnitine deficiency in, and cilated car-
atrioventricular valvc dysplasia on, 158
lesious on, 607, 607
diounyopathy, 586, 747
lefl-to-right shunt on. patent ductus ar-
nrmat lindings on, 133, 145(t)
carnitine supplcinentaion for, 748,
teriosus and, 156
ostium primum-type atrial septal de-
909(1)
ventricular septal defect and, 504
fect on,496,Plate 8
Caval syndirome in, heartworm disease
mitral regurgitation on, 137, Piate 10
(ostium secundum-type atrial septal de-
and, 718-719
nitral vaive blood low vclocity derived
fect on, 134
Chagas'discasc in, 611
from, 154(t)
patent ductus artcriosus on, 156, 510
and rnyocarditis,61l,611,833
patent ducuus arteriosus on, 156
pericardial cyst on, 686
chemodertoina in, cardiac, cchocardio-
pulmonic stenosis on, 136, 160, 486
pericardial effusion on, 165, 167, 691,
graphic finding associated with,
pulmonic valve blood flow velocity de-
693
166, 694
rived from, I54(t)
pleural effusion on, 165, 693
chemotherapcutic agents used in, cardio-
shunt(ing) on, patent duetus arteriosus
pulmonic stenosis on, 136, 160,160,
toxicity of, 609
and, 156
486. Plate 3
INDEX  931
Dog(s) (Continued)
Dog(s) (Continued)
Dog(s) (Cortinned)
pulmonic valve blood flow velocity te-
PDA-related findings on, 510
first-degree atrioventricular block in, 82,
rived fron, 154(t)
pericardial cffusion-rclated changes
82,375
right atrial hemangiosarcoma on, 166,
on, 69!
flutter (atrial flutter) in, 95, 3/2, 342-
694
 persistent atrial standstill on, 81
343.401
right-to-left shumt on, atrial septal de-
hyperkalenia and, 89
trealment of, 352
fect and,134
right atriai cnlargement manifested
evidenec of drug cflectiveness in, on
right ventricle on, double-chambered,
on, 77
ECG,353
18
right bundile branch block on, 85, 85
fungal myocarditis in, 612
shunt(ing) on, atrial septal defect and.
right ventricular hypcrirophy or en-
heart diseasc in. Sce Hieert disewse(s).
134, 135
largemcnt manifestcd on, 78-79.
heart failure in. See YHeart failure.
patent ductus arteriosus and，156
79.482
heart murimurs in. See also Hearf mur-
sinus venosus-type atrial septal defect.
sccond-dcgrcc atriovcntricular block
murs.
on, 135, Plate 7
on, 82,401
dilated cardiomyopathy and, 589
subaortic stcnosis on,/36, 159, 159,
sick sinus syndronme on, 93, 93, 401
endocardiosis and, 540, 541, 541-545
490, 491, 492, Plate 4
sinoatrial block on. 81
correlaterd withi scverity of associaled
tetralogy of Fallot on, 516
sinus nodal re-cntrant lachycardia on,
heart failurc, 544, 545
tricuspid valvc blood ilow vclocity de-
339
hypertrophic cardicmyopathy and. 604
rived from, 154(t)
sinus node tachyeardia on, 338
patent ductus arteriosus an, 62
tricuspid valvc dysplasia on, 158
subaortic slcnosis manifested on, f89
valvular discasc and, 59, 60, 60, 61, 62,
valvular blood flow velocities derived
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias on,
62
from, 154(t)
%
heart weight to bodly weight ratio in,
valvular dysplasia on, 158
vs. ventricular tachyarrhyuhmias,
847(t)
valvular stenosis on, 136, 159, 159, 160,
333-334,333-338
hcartworin discase in, 702-721. Sce also
160
third-degree atriowentricular block on,
Hearturorm riseuse.
83,401
hermangiosrcoma in, right atrial, 166.
164
tricuspid valve dysplasia manifested on,
ventricular septal defecl on. 157. 501,
687, 694
324
echocardiographic findings associ-
502, 504, Platc 6
ectopic atrial tachycardia in, 341, 341-
venticular cxtrasystoles on. 98
ated with. 166, 694
ventricular pre-excitauion on, 86
highly dligestible diet for. 741(t)
342
ventricular tachyarrhythmias on, 98,
Hlolter monitoring in, 331-332. See also
trearment of. 350-351
99, 99
Dog(s),electrorardiography in.
cctopic (automatic) junctional tachycar-
vs. supravcntricular tachyanhyth-
hyperkalermia in, clectrocardiographic
dia in, $46-347
mias, 333-334, 333-338
findings associated with, 89
clectrical alternans in, pericardial cffu-
VSD-rclated findings on. 504
hypcrrension in, 468, 797. See also Hyper-
sion and, 90, 691
clcrocardiography in, 75, 75(t), 331
tinbolis in. See Dogys),thromboembolism
terrsiort.
332. See also Electrocerdiography.
pharmacotherapy for, 805(t)
cndocardiosis in. See also Endocardiosis.
hypertrophic cardiouyopathy in, 601-
antiarrhythuie drug effects evidenced
breed predisposition to, 463, 463(t).
606.SeealsoHyertrophiccardiomyopt
n,349, 350, 351,353, 361, 361
540, 541. Sce also Kimg Charles
arrhythmia detection via, 331-332
thy
ASD-related findings on, 499
spaniel,enocrdiosisin.
hypotension in, cardiovascular drug--
atrial cxurasystoles on, 94
heart murmur acromparying, 540,
inducerd, 35l. 351
atrial fibrillation on, 95, 343, 343, 344,
541, 544-545
immune-mediated disorders in, and di-
401
intensity of, and scverity of associ-
lated cardiomyopathy, 587
atrial flutter on, 95, 342, 342, 401
ated heart failurc, 544. 545
infectious cndocarditis in, 569. See also
atrioventricular block on, 82, 82, 83,
left atrial rupture as sequela of, 555
Fndoearditis,inferts.
401
mitral regurgitation associated with.
incrcased risk of, with aging, 568
atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachy-
Scc Togs),nitrat regurgitation i.
prcvalcnce of, 464, 567, 568
carrdia 1, 345, 346
neurohorinoral response associated
vcgctative mass associated with, 164
bradyarrhythmias on, 401
with, 542, 543
infectious myocarrditis in, 465, 610-612.
bundle branch block on, 84, 84, 85, 85
pathology of, 539
768
bypass tract-mediated macro-re-cntraint
prognosis associated with.553
infiltrative cardiomyopathy in, 610
tachycardia on, 347
radiographic fcatures of.113
interatrial septal defect in, prevalence of,
cardiomyopathic chauges on, 590(t),
endocarditis in, infectious, 569. Scc also
459(1), 462
590-591. 605
Fnlocardits,infectious.
internal cardiac aratomy of. 18. Scc also
DCM risk prediction bascd on, 594-
incrcased risk of, with aging, 568
Hecrt.
595, 595(t)
prevalcncc of. 464, 567,568
interventricular septal defect in, preva-
DCM-related changes on. 449. 590(1).
vegetative mass associated with, 164
lence of, 459(t), 461
590-591
episordic weakness in. Sec also Syncope.
intrapericardial cyst in. 686
digitalis-induced abnormalies ou. 97
DCM aud, clectrocardiographic find
intrapericardial pressurcvolume relation-
ectopic atrial tachycardia on, 341,341
ings associated with,449
ships in, 680
electrical alternans on. pericardial effu-
exercise-incducer syncope in, 449, Scc
constrictive pericarditis and, 680
sionn and, 90,691
also Syncope.
pericardial effusion and, 680
first-degree atrioventricular block on,
cxternal cardiac anatomy of, 16, 16, 17.
junctional arrhythmias in,97, 346347
82, 82
See alse Heart.
lcft atrial cnlargement in, elcctrocardio
HCM-relatedi changes on, 605
fibrillation in, atrial, 95, 343,343,344.
graphic findings associated with, 78,
junctional arrhythmias on,97,347
345, 401
78
left atrial cnlargerment manifested on,
and dilated cardiomyopathy, 588,
left atrial rupture in, endocardiosis and,
78, 78
591
55.5
Ieft bundle branch block on, 84, 84
lethality of, 601
 left bundle branch block in, 84, 84
left ventricular eulargement mani-
tccurring asymptomatically, among
left ventricular enlargenment in, clectro-
fested on, 79, 80
large breeds. 466
cardiographic findings associated
mitral yalve dlysplasia nanifested on,
temporary, 354
with, 79, 80
524
treatment of, 332, 354
left ventricular outflow tract obstruction
pacenmakcr effects on, 404, 407, 408.
evidence of drug effectiveness in,
in, hypertrophic cardiormyopathy
411, 413, 419-422. 424
on ECG, 353
and, treatmcnt of, 606
932
INDEX
Dog(s) (Cortinued)
Dog(s) (Continued)
Dog(s) (Conlinued)
left-to-right shunt in, patent ductus arteri-
paceinaker for. See Paremaker
scizures and,259
(sus and. Sec Dog(s), patent ductus ar-
patcnt ductus artcriosus in. Sce also Duc-
 pulinonic regurgitation in, and heart
feriosus in.
tus arteriosus, patent.
murmur, 62
ventricular septal defcct and, echoeardi-
angiocardiographic fiudings associated
pulnonic stenosis in,823
ographic findings associated with,
with, .508
 angiocardiographic findings associated
504
coil occlusion of, 511, 5/2
with,189,484
low-sodiurn diet for, 741(t). See also Low-
echocardiographie findings associated
echocardiographic cvidcnce of, 136,
sodium diet.
with. 156, 510
160, 160, 486, Plate 3
lung disease in, breed predisposition to,
clectrocardiographic findings associ-
grossmorphology of,478,479,480,
43(t)
ated with, 510
823
dirofilariasis and, 716-718
intcrventional cardiac cathelerization
prevalence of, 459(1), 460-461
treatnent. of,714,716,718
for, 511, 572
radiographic findings associated with,
vascular, prcvalenec of, 467
pathology of, 824
482
Lyme disease in, 612
 phonocardiographic findings associ-
right ventricular hypertrophy accompa-
and myocarditis. 612
atcd with,62
nying,482
lyrnphadenopathy in, appearance of, on
trcatment of, 228,51l, 512
pulinonic valve blood flow vclocity in,
radiography, 121
coplicaticons of, 51l, 512
Doppler-derived, 154(1)
lymphmatoid granulomatosis in,hcart-
 pericardial cyst in, 686
pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography
worn disease and, 718
pericardial effusion in. See also Pericar
in.Sec alsoDog(s),Doppterechcardog
macro-re-entrant tachycardia in, bypass
dial effusion.
raphy im;Dog(s),echocardiography in.
tract-rmediaicd, 347, 355
echocardiographic findings associated
mitral regurgitation on,137
miral regurgitation in. See also Mitrat re-
with, 165, 167, 691, 693
patcnt ductus arteriosus on, 156
gurgittion.
effect of, on pericardial pressure-vol-
pulmonic stcnosis on,486
echocardiographic findings associated
umc relationships. 680
radiography in. See also Radiography.
with,137, 161
electrocardiographic findings associ-
aortic stenosis evidenced on, 491
heart murmur accompanying, 59, 60
ated with, 90, 691
cardiac silhoucttc on, 108. Sce also
Inagnetic resonance imaging ol, 200
cliology of, 685-686
Dogis).radiographyin,carliomegay
pulmonary edema acronpanying, treat-
prevalencc of, 466
cardiae tunor-related changes on. 692
r.
mcnt of. 261
radiographie appearance of, 118, 118
radionuclide angiocardiographic find-
tumors causing, 686
cardiomcgaly on, /12
ings associated with,198
pericardial mesothelioma in, 686, 688
dilated cardiomnyopathy and, 256,
rniral steosis in,heart mrmr accom
pericardial/peritoneopericardial dia-
591, 591, 592
panying. 61,62
phragmatic hernia in, 683, 684.Sec
endocardiosis and, 113
pathology of, 823
alsDiragnatihmiuprardat
hypertrophic cardliomyopathy and.
miral valve blood flow velocity in, Dopp-
peritoneopericardiat.
604. 605
ler-derived, 154(t)
pericardial pressure-volume relationships
tricuspid regurgitation and, 114
mitral valve dysplasia in, angiocardio-
in, 680
cardiomyopathic changes on, 591, 591,
graphic findings associated with,
constrictivc pericarditis and, 680
592, 604, 605
DCM-related changes on, 256, 591.
189, 525
pericardial effusion and, 680
electrocardiographic findings associr
pericarditis in, constrictive, 696-698
591,592
dirolilariasis-rclated changes on,117,
aterl with, 524
hemodynamic cffects of, 680, 696.
prevalcnce of, 459(t). 462
123, 125, 709-710, 710, 717, 717-
697,698
radiographic rmanifestations of, 523
pathology of, 696, 696
718
Mmodeechocardiographyin133SccC
features of heart failurc on, 256, 257
 persislcnt alrial stanristill (atrioventricu-
also Fog(s), echocardiography in.
HCM-rclated changes on, 604, 605
lar myopathy) in,403.466.607-608,
608,836, 837
heartworm-rclated changes on, 117,
aoric stcnnosis on, 497. Plate 4
123, 125, 709-710, 710, 717, 717-
dilated cardiomyopathy on,593
elccrocardiographie characterislics of,
dirofilariasis-related changes n,711
718
81
heartworm-related changes on, 711
hyperkalemia and, 89
intrapericardial yst on,686
lynphadcnopathy on,121
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy on, 606
persistent left cranial vena cava in, 529
maifestations of mitral valvc dysplasia
normal findings on, 133, 145(t)
persistent right aortic arch in, prevalence.
pericardial eflusion on, 167, 691
of, 459(t), 462
on,523
pericardial cyst on, 686
subaortie stenosis on, 491, Plate 4
 phonocardiography in. split sccond heart
pericardial cffusion on, 118, 118
MRI in. rnitral regurgitation on,
200
sound on, .55
muscular dystrophy in, 606-607, 832
third hcart. sound on, abnormal, di-
myocardial lesions associated with,607,
phragimatic hernia on, 684
lated cardionyopathy and, 56
pulmonary edema on,258
607
plcural cfusion in, cchocardiographic
dilatcd cardiomyopathy and, 256
mycotic myocarditis in, 612
findings associated with, 693
heart failure and, 256, 257
myocardial discasc in. 581-612. 582(1).
potassium overload in, electrocardtio-
noncardiogenic, 259
SeealsoCardiomyopathy (cardiomyopa-
graphic findings associated with. 89
ruptured chordac rendineae and,
thies) and specifie types.
preanesthetic drugs for, 858(t),. Scc also
261
yocardial infarction in,610
Aresthesin.
scizures anri, 259
myocardial ischemia in, 610
protozoal myocarditis in, 611-612
right ventricular cnlargement on, 117
myocardiis in. 465, 610-612, 611, 832,
pulmonary cdema in. Scec also Pulmonary
signs of pulmonic stcnosis on,482
8.3.3
erema.
signs of subaortic stenosis on, 491
ncosporosis in, 611-612
dilated cardiomyopathy and, 256
small hcart on, I1!
" occulr"' dilated cardionyopathy in, 594
trcatmcnt of, 261-262
thoracic conformation on, 109, 110
595
heart. failure and, 256,257
tracheal collapse on,122
occult heartworm disease in, 705-706
mitral regurgitation and, treatment of.
tricuspid valve dysplasia manifested on,
ostium primuum-type atrial septal defect
261
114,523
in, cchocardiographie findings associ-
morphine for, anxiolytic effects of, 260,
VSD-related findings on, 503
ated with, 496, Platc 8
260(t)
radionuclide angiocardiography in, 194
(ostiun secundum-type atrial septal de-
radiographice findings associated with,
ventricular abnormalics on, 19f, 198
Icct in, echoeardiographic findings
256,257,258,259,261
re-entrant tachycardia in, atrioventricular
associated with, 134
ruptured chordae tendineae and, 261
nodal, 345-346, 346
INDEX
666
Dog(s) (Continuel)
Dog(s) (Contimued)
Dog(s) (Contimued)
bypass tract-nediated, 347
treatment of, 354-355
prevalence of, 459(0). 461-462
sinus nodal, 339, 341
AV node-indcpendent, 338-345
radiographic manifestations of, 11f,
right atrial enlargenent in, clcctrocardio-
treaument of, 348-334
graphie findings associared with, 77
523
death risk associated with, 348
trypanosomiasis in, 611
right atrial hemangiosarcoma in, 166,
F waves associated with. See Dog(s),
and myocarditis, 611, 611, 833
687, 694, 880
atrialfiilatinnDogs)ar
tussive syncope ("cough drop" syncope)
cchocarrdiographice findings associated
flutter in.
in, 453. Scc also Syrcope.
with, 166,694
syucope in. See also Syncope.
24-hour electrocardiographic monitoring
right bundle branch block in, 85, 85
bradyarrhythmias and, 451
in,331-332.See also Dog(s),eectrocar
right-te-left shunt in, ASD and, cchocardi-
brecd prerdisposition to, 451 (t)
liography ire.
ographice findings associated with,
exercise testing for, 149
two-dinensional echocardiography in.
134
sick sius syndroe and, 450
uynpmusoosas
right ventricular cardioinyopathy in. 609
tachyarrhythmias and. 450
aortic stenosis on, 159. 159, 492
right vcntricular clargement in, electro-
tussive ("cough drop"), 433
cardiac tamponade on、 165
cardiographic findings associated
vasovagal. 452
cardiac tumor on, 69f
with. 78-79, 79
systemic vascular disease in, prevalcncc
radiographic appcarance of, 117
tf,467
dilated cardiomyopathy on. 593
right ventricular hypertrophy in, electro-
tachyarrhythmias in. 338-347, 355-361.
dirofilariasis-related changes on. 711
cardiographic findings associatcd
Ste als Dogs), tachyrardia in.
Duchenne's cardiomyopathy on, 607
with,482
supraventricular See Dog(s), supraventric-
endocardiosis on, 161
ruptured chordae tendineae in, and pul-
ular tachyarrhythmias in.
cvidence of endeoearditis on, 164
imonary edema. 261
syncope associated with, 450
heartworm-rclated changes on, 711
second-degrce atrioventricular block in.
ventricular, 98, 99, 99, 355-361
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy on, 606
82,375,401
differentiation of, from supravcntric-
ular tachyarrhythumias. Scc
intrapcricardial cyst on, 686
sedtatives for, 854(t)
leftto-right shunt on, patent ductus ar-
scizures in, pulmonary edema secondary
Dog(s), supraventrcular arhyar-
rhythmainlifferenitnf
teriosus and, 156, 510
to, 259
mitral rcgurgitalion on, endocardiosis
shunt(ing) in, atrial septal defcct and,
lachycardia in. Sce also Dogs, supraven
and, 161
cchocardiographic findings associ-
tricutar tachyarrhythmias in.
muscnlar dystrophy-relatedi myocardial
ated with, 134, 135
atrioventricular nodal re-entrant, 345-
lesions on, 607
patent ductus arteriosus and. See
346, 346
patcnt ductus arteriosus on, 156, 510
Dogs)patent tusrteriost
autouatic (ectopic) junctional, 346-
pericardial cyst on, 686
ventricular setal ect nd,chocard
347
pericardial cffusion on. 165, 693
ographic findings associated with,
bypass tract-mediated macro-re-en-
pleural effusion on, 165, 693
50-f
trant, 347, 355
dilaterd cardiomyopathy associaterd
pulmonic stcnosis on, 160
sick sins syndrome in,93,93,402-403
subaortic stenosis on, 159. 159, 492
brecd predisposition 10, 355, 466
with, 587
ectopic atral, 341, 341-342
tctralogy of Fallot. on, 516
electrocardiographic findings associ-
trcatment of, 350-351
valvular stcnosis on, 159, 159. 160
alled with, 93, 93, 401
vegetativc mass on, endocarditis and,
syncope accompanying, 450
cctopic_(automatic) junctional, 346
164
tachycardia associated with, 355
347
heart failurc associated with, 587
ventricular septal defect o1, 157, 502
sinoatrial block in, 8!
sick sinus syndrome and, 355
vagal mancuvers in, aiding differentiation
sinus arrhythmia in, 92
sinus nodaf re-cntrant, 339. 841
of tachyarrhythmias, 335-336, 338.
sinus nodal re-cntrant tachycardia in,
sinus node, 338-339
339, 340
339,341
supraventricular. See Dog(s), suprauentrc-
valvutar heart discase in. Sce also valve-
sinus node tachycardia in, 338-339
ular tartycardia m
specife subentres, g. Dog(s), m
sinus venosus-type atrial septal defect in,
echocardiographic findings associ-
ventricular, 98, 99, 99
tral stenosis in.
taurine rleficicncy in, and ctilated cardio-
arquired, 463(t). 463-464. Sec also L-
ated with, 135
myopathy, 585-586
docardiosts.
sordirnm-restricted dict for, 741(t). See
supplements countering, 596, 916(1)
brced predisposirion t, 459(t)-161(1),
als Sodium-restricted diet.
termporary atrial fibrillation in, 354
460, 461、462, 463, 463(t)
subaoric stenesis in. See Dog(s), aortie ste-
tetralogy of Fallot in, angiocardiographic
congenital, 459(t)-461 (t), 460-462,
nosis ir.
findings associated with, 189, 514
463(t)
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias in,
echocardiographic findings associated
prevalencc of, 159(1), 460-462, 163,
338-347
with, 516"
464
dlifferentiation of, from ventricular
pathology of, 826
vascular disease in. pulmonary, preva-
tachyarrhyuhrmias. 332(1), 332-
prevalence of, 459(t), 462
lcncc of. 467
866
third-degree arrioventricular block in, 83,
systemic, prevalence of、 467
P wave and QRS complex in, 333--
375, 401
vastwagal syncope in, 452. See also Syn-
334,336, 337, 338
as indication for pacemaker, 402
cope.
QRS complex morphology in, 333,
throinboenbolism in, aspirin for, 908(t)
ventricular arrhythmias in, 98, 99. 99,
333,334,335
heparin for, as clcment of therapy for
355-361
mreliability of rhythm (ir)regulari-
heartworm discasc, 713, 715, 719
lethality 0f, 356-357, 370, 836
ties and pausc length in, 334
pulmonary, prevalcnce of.467
ys. supraventricular arrhyth mias. Scc
335
warfarin for, 917(t)
Dogs),avntriracyrh
vagal mancuvers in, 335-336, 338,
toxoplasmosis in, and myocarditis, 611
mias in,cifferentiation of.
339, 340
tracheal collapsc in,radiographic appear
ventricular cxtrasystoles in, 98
treatnent of, 347-355
ance of, 122
breed predisposition to, 166
adversc cffects of, 351-352
tricuspird stenosis in, 823
ventricular pre-excitation in, 86
tvidenee of drug efectiveness in, n
tricuspid valve blood fow velocity in,
ventrricular septal defeet in, angiocardio-
ECG, 349, 350,351, 353
Doppler-derived, 154(t)
graphie findings associated with,
supravcntricular tacbycardia in, 96, 338
tricuspid valve dysplasia in, echocardio-
189,501.502
347. Scc also Dog(s). supraventricular
graphic findings associated with, 158
radionuclirde, 194
farheyarrhythmias in.
electrocardiographice findings associ-
echocardiographic cvidence of, 157,
AV nodc-depcndent, 338, 345-347
aled wih, 524
501, 502, 504, Plate 6
934
INDEX
Dog() (Continued)
Doppler echocardiography (Continued)
Drug(s) (Continued)
clccrocardiographic findings associ-
ventricular septal defect and, in dog.
half-life of, 213
atcd with,504
504
preanesthetic, 858(t), 858-861, 859(t).
prevalence of, 459(t). 461
left vcntricular relaxation abnormality
Scc also Anesthesia.
radiographie findings assoctated with,
on, 624.624
sedative, for cat and dog. 854(t)
503
Initral regurgitation on, in dog, 137,
volume of distribution of, 312-313
ventricular tachyarrhyihmias in, 98, 99,
Platc 10
Duchennc's cardiomyopathy, in dog. 607.
99, 355-361
mitral stenosis on, in cat, 136
607, 832
ys. supraventricular tachyarrhythmias.
Initral valve blood flow velocity derived
Ductus arteriosus, patent, 505-512
See og(s), suprauentricuar lachyar
[rom, in cat, 154(t). 624
angiocardiographic findings associated
rhythmis in,diferentiation. of.
in cat with cardiovascular abnorinali-
with, 508-509
viral myocarditis in, 610-611, 832
ties, 624
in dog,508
weakness in, cpisodic. Sec also Syucope.
in dog, 154(1)
canine breed prcdisposition Ao, 460,
DCM and, electrocardiographic: find-
myocardial discases on,162,168
460(t)
ings associaled with, -f49
patent ductus arteriosus on, in dog, 756
coil occlusion of, 190
weight loss in, 44
pscudonormalization on. 624, 624
in dog. 511, 512
hcart failure and. 47, 48
pulnonic stcnosis on, 159-160
cchocardiographic cvidencc of, 154-
wcight of, ratio of heart weight to. 847(t)
in dog, 136, 160, 486, Plate 3
155, 507
X-linked nuscular dystrophy in, 606-607,
pulnonic valve blood flow velocity de-
in dog, 156, 510
832
rived from, in cat, 154(t)
clectrocardiographic findings associ-
myocardial lesions ass
xciated with, 607,
in dog, 154(t)
ated with, 507
607
pulsed-wave. See Pulsed-oaue Doppler eco-
in dog. 510
Dog foods, conumercial, mineral content of,
cardiogruphy.
heart murmurs accompanying, 62
742(0)-743(1)
restrictive flling partern on, 624, 624
in dog, 62
Dopanine, 233
shunt(ing) on,patcnt ductus arcriosus
interventional cardiae catheterization
adversc effecis of, 911(t)
and, in dog, 156
for, 190
cmergcncy usc of, 438
ventricular septal defect and, in dog,
in dog,511,512
for atrioventricular block, in cal, 396
50.f
left-to-right shunt accommpanying, 507-
for DCM and lheart failure, in cat, 650
subaortic stenosis on, 159
508, 824
for heart failurc, 224, 229(t), 233, 260(1),
in dog.136, 190
cchocardiographic findings associ-
()116
Tetralogy of Fallot on, 160
ated with, 154135, 507
 in cat with dilated cardiormyopathy, 650
tricuspid valve blood flow velocity derived
in dog. 156, 510
for renal failure associated with shock,
from, in cat, 154(t)
treatment of, in dog, 51l, 512
286
in dog, 154(t)
pathology of, 824
for shock. 282-283, 283(t), 286
tricuspid valve dysplasia on, 158
in dog, 824
recominended dosages of, for cat, 904(t),
in dog, 158
prcvalence of. in dog, 159(t), 459-460
911(t)
valvular blood flow velocitics derived
pulmonary hypericnsion accormpa-
for dog, 904(t). 911(t)
frorn, in cat, 154(t)
nying. See Ducfus arteross, patent,
Doppler echocardiography, 135-138, 153,
in dog,154(t)
"reversed.""
155.Scc also Echocardiography.
valvular disease on, chronic acquired,
"reversed," 509-512
aortie regurgitation on, subaortic stenosis
161
cchocardiographic findings associ-
and, in dog. 490
valvular dysplasia on, 158
ated with, 135, 510
aortic stcnosis on. 159
in dog, 158
right-to-lelt shunt accompanying. 509-
in dog.136,490
valvular regurgitation guantfied via, 134
512. 824
aortie valve blood flow velocity derived
valvular stenosis 0n, 159-160
echocardiographic findings associ-
fron. in cat, 154(t)
in cat, 136
ated with, 155, 510
in dog, 154(1)
in dog, 136, 160
trcaument of, 190, 876, 876-877, 877
alrial septal defecr on, in dog, 134, 135,
ventricular scpual defect on. in cat, Plate
in dog. 511, 512
496, Platcs 7 & 8
5
complications of, 511, 512
atrioventricular valve dysplasia on, 138
in dog, 504, Plate 6
in dog with heart failure, 228
in dog, 158
Double-cham bered right veruricle, 480
recanalization following, 877
blood fow monitoring via, in CPCR, 440
in dog. 481
volume overload associated with, 209-
blood flow velocity derived from. 137
Donble-ontlet. right ventricle, 519
210,210
aliasing amd. 137, 139-140
Doxapran, adivcrsc effects of, 911(1)
Duelus venosus, palent, 529
intercept angle and, 136-137
for respiratory arrest, 911(t)
Dysplasia, atrioventricular valve, 158
Nyquist limit and, 139-140
recommended dosages of, for cat. 911(t)
cchocardiographic findings associaled
yalvnlar, in cat, 154(1)
for dog, 911(t)
with, 158
in dog. 154(t)
Doxorubicin, as cardioloxin. in cat, 657
in dog, 158
cardiormyopathy on, 162,163
in dog, 609
pathology of, 824
chronic acquired valvular diseasc (cndo-
"Drop" (collapse), syncopal. See Synrope.
naitral valve, 523-524, 525, 526
cardiosis) on, 16[
Drug(s), analgesic. for cat and dog, 854(t)
angiocardiographic findings associatcd
colorllow, 139
anesthetic. Sec also Anesthesia.
with, 524
applicarions of, 559, 374, Plate 3,
for cat and dog, 854(t),858(t)
in dog, 189, 525
Plates 5 to 10
bioavailability of, dosage caleulations
canine breed predisposition to, 462
conlinlous-wave.See Confinuous-aue
bascd on, 310
clectrocardiographic fincdings associ-
Doppterrchorerdiogruphy.
cardiovascular, Sce also spccific pharma-
atcd with, 523
diastolic function assessed via, 623
ceutical classes and agents.
inn cdoyg, 524
dilated cardiounyopathy on, 162
cmergeney usc of, 431(1), 437-438
prevalcnce of, in dog, 459(1), 462
endocardiosis on, 161
routes for, 435-437
radiographic findings associatcd with,
evidence of cndocarditis on, 574
recommended dosages of, for cat and
523
hypertrophie cardiomyopathy on, 163
dog, 903(t)-917(t)
in dog, 523
in cat, 627, 633-634
side elfects of, 908(1)-917(1)
right ventrieular arrhythmogenic, in cat.
irmaging planes for, 143
and hypotension,in dog,351.351
653-655, 654, 655, 831-832
indications for, 153-154
and syucope,453
in dlog. 609
leli-to-right shunt on, patent. cductus arte
clearancc and cxtracion of. 312
in1 man, 608609
riosus and, in dog、 156
by liver, 312
tricuspid valve, 158, 524-526
INDEX
966
Dysplasia (Contimued)
Fchocardiography (Contimue)
Fchecardiography (Continued)
angiocarrliographie findings associated
atrial septal defeet on, in dog、134,135
in dog, 156, 510
with.525
shunt(ing) on, atrial seplal defect and.
"'reversed, 155, 510
canine breed predisposition to, 461-
in dog,134,135
pericardial cyst. on. in dog, 686
462
cor triatriatuin on, in dog, 527
pericardial effusion on, 164, 167, 693
cchocardiographic findings associated
ctiastolie funclion assessed via, 623
in dog, 165, 167, 691, 693
with, 158
dilated cardiormyopathy on,162
pleural cffusion on, 167
inl dog, 158
in cat, 648, 648-649
in cal. 165, /68
 clectrocardiographic lindings associ-
in dog,591-594,593
in dog. 165, 693
ated with, 525
dirofilariasis-rclated changes on, 167
pscudonormalization on, 624, 624
in dog, 524
in cat,731,733
pulmonic regurgitation on, 559
prevaence of, in dog, 459(t), 461-462
in dog, 710, 711
pulmonic stenosis 11, 159-160.482-483
racdiographie findings associated with,
Doppler studies in. Sec Doppler erhorardiog-
in dog, 136, 159-160. 160, 486, Ptatc 3
525
raphy.
pulnonic valve blood low velocity de-
in dog, 114, 523
 double-chambered right. ventricle on, in
rived from, in cat, 154(t)
valvular, 158
dog: 481
in dog, 134(t)
echocardiographic findings associated
Duchenne's cardiomyopathy on, in dog.
restrictive cardiormyopathy on,163
with, 158
607. 607
in cat, 643, 644
in dog. 158
Eiscnmenger's physiology on, 519
restrictive filling pattern on, 624, 624
Dyspnea, 46
cndocardiosis and mitral regurgitation
"'reversed" patent ductus arteriosus on,
causes of, 43
on.SeeFchadigrahymitle
155, 510
signs accompanying, 46, 47
right atial hemangiosarcona on, in dog.
gitation wn.
Dystrophy, muscular, in dog.606-607,832
endomyocardial scarring on, idiopathic,
166, 691
myocardial lesions associated with,
163
right-to-lefl shunt on. 134
607,607
cvidencc of endocarditis on, 163, 578-
atrial scptal dcfect and, in dog, 134
575..574
patcn ductus arteriosus and,55.510
in dog. 164
right venrriclc on, doublc-chanbered, in
cxannination table for. 140, 140
rlog, 481
Farly afterdepolarizations, 298, 299
feline.See Cat(s),echtocardiography in.
scarring on, endormyocardial, idiopathie.
Larly diastolic hcart sounds, 55
heart. disease on, acquired, 160-168
163
Ebstein's anomaly, 158
congennital, 154-160, 475-476
shunt(ing) on, atrial septal defect and, in
Eccentric myocardial hypertrophy, volume
heartworm-related channges o, 167
dog, 134, 135
overload and, 208, 757. 818
in cat, 731, 733
patcnt ductus arlcriosus and. 154-155,
ECG.SeeElectrocardiogruphiccharacerist
in dog, 710, 711
507, 510
Flectrocarctiogruphy.
hermnangiosarcoma on, right alrial, in
in dog, 156, 510
Echocardiography, 130-168
dog, 166,694
ventricular septal defect and, in dog.
acquired heart diseasc on, 160-168
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy on, 163
.504
aortic regurgitation on, subaortic stenosis
in cat, 626, 627, 629, 633, 633-634
sinus venosus-type atrial septal defect ou.
in dog. 605, 606
SceEchcadiariaft
and, 492
in dog. 490
idicpathic endomyocardial scarring on,
aortic stenosis on, 159, 488, 489, 490
163
spontancous contras1 (*smoke") on, 167,
in dog, 136, 159, 159, 490. 491, 492,
inaging planes for, 133, 141-143, 141-
686-637, 661
Plate 1
in cat with hypertrophie cardionyopa-
144
aortice valve blood flow velocity derived
intrapericardial cyst on. in dog, 686
thy, 633
from, in cat, 154(t)
left-to-right shunt on, paient ductus arte-
subaortic stenosis on, 159, 488, 489, 490
in dog. 154(t)
riosus and,154155, 507
in deg、136,159, 159, 490, 491. 492.
arteriovcnous fistula on, 790,791
inn dog. 156, 510
Platc 4
atrial septal defect on, 157-158, 498
ventricuiar septal defcct and, in tog,
tetralogy of Fallot on, 160, 517
inn dog.134,135,496
504
in rdog,516
thrce-dimcnsional, 134
atrioventricular valve diseasc on. chronic
left ventricular outflow tract obstruction
arquired. Sec Echorardiography, emdo-
on, HICM and, in cat, 626, 627
thyrotoxicosis-related heart lesions on, in
lefl ventrieular relaxation abnormality
cat, 783
cardiosis or.
atrioventricular valve dysplasia on, 138
transcsophagcal, 132, 134
on, 624, 624
tricuspird regurgitalion on, 557-558
in dog,158
mitral regurgitation on, 161, 546-550
tricuspid vaive blood flow velocity derived
blood flow vclocity derived from, See
in cat, 627
from. in cat. 154(t)
Doppterechocardiographybuoodflou
in dog, 137, 161, Plate 10
in dog, 154(t)
lrcity derired from.
mitral stenosis on, in cat, 136
tricuspid valvc dysplasia on.158
canine. See Dog(s), echocardiography in.
mitral valve blood fow velocity derived
cardiac tamponade on, 164
fron, in cat, 154(t), 624
in dog. 158
two-timensional. Sce Tuo-timensiouat rho
in dog. 165
in cat with cardiowascular abnormali-
cardiography.
cardiac turmor on, 168
ties, 624
valkvular blood fow velocities derived
in cat, 694
in dog, 154(t)
from, in cat, 154(0)
in dog, 166, 693, 694
M-rnode. Sce M-node echocardiography.
cardiomyopathy on,162,163
in dog, 154(t)
muscular dystrophy-related myocardial le-
valvular dysplasia on, 158
in cat, 633-634, 648-649
sions on, in dog, 607, 607
in cdog, 591-594, 605, 607
myocardial discases on. Scc Echorardioga-
in dog, 158
valvular regurgitation quantified via, 154
chcmodectoma on, carrdiac, in dog, 166,
phy.cardiomyopathy on.
valvular stcnosis on. 159-160
694
myocardial fibrosis on, aortice stenosis
in cat, 136
and, 488, 489
in dog, 136, 159, 159, 160, 160
applications of, 559, 574, Plate 3,
normal findings on, in cat, 146(t)
vegctative mass on, endocarditis and. 163
Plates 5 to 10
inn dog, 133. 145(t)
in dog, 164
color M-modc, Plate 4
ostium primum/ostiun secundum-type
ventricular septal defect 0on. [56-[57
congenital heart discase on, 134-160.
atrial septal defect on. See: Echoeard-
in cat, Plate 5
475-476
ography.atriat septat defet o
in dog, 157, 501, 502, 50f, Plate 6
constrictive pericarditis on. 698
patcnt cuctus ateriosus on,154155,
vs. radiography. in terms of diagnostic
contrast,184.134,135
507,510
yicld, 107
936 INDEX
Ectopic arrial rachycardia, in dog. 341,
Llcctrocardiographic characteristics
Elecirocardiographic characteristics
341-342
(Contimted)
(Contimued)
treament of, 330-351
of bradyarrhythimias, in cat. 401
in anesthetized cat, 92
Fctopic beats. See also Extrasystotes.
in1 dog. 401
of sintus nodad disttrbances, in cat, 390
and abnormal hcart sounds, 57
of buudle brach block, 84, 84-85, 85
in dlog.338,339
Ectopic junctional tachycardia (automatic
 of bypass tract-mediated macro-re-cu-
f sinus tachycardia, 9]
junctional tachycardia), in dog,
trant tachycardia, in dog, 347
in hyperthyroid cat. 90
346-347
of cardiomegaly. 77-80, 78-80
of subaortic: stenosis, 490
Edema, chlorothiazide for, 909(t)
of cardiomyopathy, i1 cat, 630, 631(t),
in1 dog,189
hydrochlorothiazide for. 912(t)
643-644, 648
of supraventric tlar tachyarrhyihumias, 96
peripheral, causcs of, 44, 47
in dog. 590(1), 590-591.605
in cat, 391
puhnoary. See Pulmonary edema.
of couccaled conduction, 101, 101
jn dog, 96
Edrophonitm, adverse effects of, 91l (t)
of congcnital hcart discase, 476
vs, ventricular tachyarrhythmias,
for arrhythmias, 911(1)
of coustrictive pericarditis, 697
333-334, 333-338
recormnended dosages of. for cat, 9t1(t)
of dilated cardiornyopathy, in cat,648
of tetralogy of Fallor, 517
for dog. 911(t)
in dog. 590(t), 590-591
of thromboembolism, in cat, 66]
Edrophonjum chloride, for
in dog with episodic weakness, 149
 of thyrotoxic heart disease, in cat, 83. 90,
supraventricular tachycardia. in
il1 dog withotut overt signs of disease,
90, 782-783, 783, 783(1)
dog.349
594-595,595(t)
of tricuspid alve dslasia, 55
cvidencc of cffctiveness of. on FCG
of ectopic atrial tachycardia, in dog, 341.
in dog,524
351
341
of ventricular asystolc, 99-100
Effusion, pericardial. Sec Pericardial effusion.
of cctopic (autoatic) junctiomual tachy-
of ventricular cxtrasystoles. 97-98
plcural, 126
cardia, in dog, 347
in cat, 396. 396
tchocardiographic indings associatcd
of clectrical alterians due to pericardial
in dog, 98
with, 167
cffusion, 90, 691-692
of ventricular fibrillarion,99,99
il1 cat, 165, 168
in dog. 90, 691
of ventricular flutler, 99
in1 dog, 165, 693
of endocarditis, 573
 of ventricnlar pre-cxcitation, 86-87
in surgical patient, 857
of fascicular block, 85, 85-86
in cat,393, 394
radiographie findings assoxciated with,
of hypercalcemia.768, 768
in dog, 86
126
ol hyperkalemia, 89-90, 768, 769
of venricular septal defect, 503
in cat with dilated cardiomyopathy.
in dog, 89
in dog. 504
648
 of hypertrophic cardliomyopathy, inl cat,
of ventricular tachyarrhythmias. 98-99
Einthovcn triangle, in clec rocardiography.
630, 631(t)
in cat, 98,99,396,397
74.76
in dog, 605
in1 dog, 98, 99. 99
Eisenmenger's physiolog, 157, 518-519
of hypocalcemia, 768, 769
s. supraventricular tachyarrhyth-
pulmonary lesious associated with. 826
in thyoidectomized cat, 784
mias, 333-334, 333-338
Ejectio1 souids, 54
of hypokalenia, 768, 769
Flecrocardiography, 67-103, 73. Scc also
EKG.Sce Elertrocrdiographir characteristis
of infectious cndocarclitis, 575
Flectrocrdiographi.charrcteristirs.
Electrocardiography.
of lef arial elargenent,78,78
aunbulatory See Electrocardiography, lfoler
Electrical altermas, pericardial cffusion
 of left buclle braunch block, 84, 84
{24-hour).
a11d, 90, 691-692
of left ventricular enlargcmen. 79-80, 80
arrhythmia detection via、 77(t), 90-100
in dog, 90, 691
of mitral regurgitation, 545
Electrocardiographic characteristics. See
of mitral valve dysplasia,523
results of. See spccific findings cited
alsoElecircardiography
in1 dog, 524
underCats),eectrocardiograpy
of aberramt conduction, 100-101, 10f
of myocardial infarction, 88-89, 89
in.
of aldostcronisin (Coun's disease), 765,
of pacemaker effects, in dog, 404, 407.
in dog, 331-332
76.5
408, 411, 413,419-422, 424
results of. See specific findings cited
of antiarrhythumic drng effects, 311(t)
of parasystole, 101-102
undcrDogs),elertrorardiography
in dog. 361, 361
of patent ductus arteriosus, 507
i7l.
in dog with atrial flutter or fibrillauon,
in1 dog,510
arrhythmia plus syucope detcclioui via,
3.53
of pericardial cffusion, 90, 691-692
448-449.449
in dog with supraventricular tachycar-
in dog, 90, 691
combined with phonocardiography 52,
dia,349,330.351
of pcrsistent arial srandsill, 81
52
of aortic stcnrosis、 490
in1 cat, 81, 81
computed, 102
in dog. 489
jn dog, 81
Einthoven triangle in, 74, 76
of atrial extrasystoles. 94
in dog with hyperkalemia, 89
F waves on. See Firillation; Flautter.
in cat, 391, 391
of potassiun dcficit, 768, 769
hcart rate calculation via. 74
in dog. 94
of potassum overload, 89-90, 768, 769
historical development of, 67
of atrial fibrillaion, 95-96
in dog, 89
Holer (24-hour). 102, 102
in1 cat, 392, 392
of pulmonic regurgitation, 559
in deteclion of arrhythunias and sy11-
in dog,95,343,343,341,401
of ptlnonic stenosis, 481
copc,448,449
of atrial flutter, 94-95
in dog, 482
in detection of canine arrhythmias,
in cal, 391
of re-entrant acrivation. Sce Re-ntrant e11-
331-332. Sce also Dog(s), etectrocar-
ini dog. 95, 342, 342, 401
trics.
tiography in.
 atria septal defeet, 198
of restrictive cardiomyopathy, in cat.
in CPCR, 440
in dog, 199
631(1), 643-644
indieations for, 72, 73(t)
of atrial standstill due to hyperkalemia,
 of right atrial clargement, 77-78
intracavitary, 103. 103
in dog, 89
of right bundlle branch block, 8485,85
ladder diagrams in, 100, 100, 101
of atrial tachycardia, in cal, 391, 392
of right vetricular enlargeme, 78-79.
leads for, 68,68(1), 69, 70,75, 76
of atriowentricular block, 81-84
79
limitauons of. 73, 77
in cat,82,83,394-395,395,401
of sick sinus syudrome, ini dog, 93. 93,
mcan clectrical axis in1, 74, 76
in dog, 82, 82, 83. 401
401
normal restlts of, 73(t)
of atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachy
of sinoatrial block, 80, 81
postoperativc, results of, in thyroidecto
cardia, in dog. 345, 346
of sinus arrest, 92-93, 93
mized cat, 783, 784
 of automatic (eclopic) jumctjonal tachy-
of sinus arrhythmias, 92, 92
P wave on. See P toave.
cardia, in dog. 347
of sinus bradycartdia. 91
QRS counplex on. See QRS compifex.
INDEX 937
Electrocarcliography (Contimued)
Endocardiosis (Comtinud)
Enhancement, acoustic,132
QT interva on. See QT intervat.
in dog. 539
Eurofloxacin, for cndocarditis, 577(1)
recordling of resnlts in, 68, 68
proguosis associatcd with. 553
Eosinophil(s), pulmonary infiltration of in
signal-averaging, 103
in dog, 553
dog with heartworm disease, 716
ST segrnent on. Sec ST semen.
radiographic features of, 113
treatment of, 714, 716, 718
surface, 71
rupture of chordac tcndlincae as sequela
subendocardial infiltration of, in cat, 643
traustclephomnic, 102
of,553-554
Ephedrine, for shock, 283. 283(t)
T wave on. See T woaue.
rupture of left atrium as scqucla of, 534
Epicardial pacemaker implantation, 415.
24h1our. Scc Electrocardiography, Flalter (24-
555, 555
419(0)
hourj.
sigs of, 541-545
Epicardium (visceral pericardium), 14, 15.
Electrocntion, cardiac: manifestaious of,
surgery for. 877
679, 680. See also Peicardial enties.
Endocarditis. See also Myocarditis.
Epinephrine, emergency use of, 431 (0),
Electronic stethoscopes, 52
infectious, 567-578
437. 911(t)
Elevational resoluion (azimuthal
advancing agc as risk factor for, in dog.
for shock, 283, 283(1)
568
Episodic weakness, 446. See also Syncope.
Einbolisin. See also Thromboemholism.
allHibioties for, 576. 577()
canine DCM and, electrocardiographic
aortic,dstal,in cat,658,658,660,662
prophylactic use of,577578
fidngs associated with, 449
sequclae of, 44, 660, 663
diag11osis of, 571-575
lifferential diagnosis of, 447(t)
prevalence of, in cat, 467
criteria for, 572(t)
Equilibrium radionuclide
brachial artry, in cat, sequelae of,0
echocardiographie findings associated
angioeardiography. 195
saddle.See Enolism,urti,disal.
with,163, 573-575.574
in dog, 164
i11 cvalua tion of ventrietlar fuiiction,
Ernbolization, and infarction, as scquelae of
195-198, /97, 197(t), 198
infectious endocarditis, 370, 571
epidemiology of, 567-568
Equipnment, for cardiac cathcterization,
Embolization lechique, in reatment of
organisuns commonly associated with,
174, 175, 176, 177
patcnt ductus arteriosus, 190
576(t)
for cardiac pacing, 406-411, 410. See
in dlog, 511, 512
pathrogenesis of, 568-570
also Pauemualer.
Emcrgeucy managemcnt. of
pathology of, 567-568, 569
for cardiopulmonrary cercbral resuscita-
cardliopulmouary arrest, 427-441. See
in dog, 569
tion, 429
alsoCerdiopulmonary rrerat
prevalence of, in cat, 567
Equivalen1 dipole theory, 71-72. 72
resuscifetion.
in1 dog,464, 567.568
Erythrocyic(s), inerease in mass of, cardiac
of hypcrtension, 808
prevcntion of, 577-578
manifestations of, 772-773
Enalapril, adverse effects of, 911(t)
sequelae of. 370-571, 571, 573
substitutes for,i miaagement of shock.
for DCM and hearl failurc. in cal, 651
therapy for, 576-577.577(t)
280
valvular lesions in, 569, 570
in dog,597
Esnolol, 322
for 11CM, in cat, 635, 636, 640
vegctative,163.567-568,569
adlversc effects of, 322. 911(t)
for HCM and myocardial infarction, in
echocardiographic appearaice of,
electrocardiographic parameters affected
cat,635
164.573,574
by, 311(t)
for heart failure, 237(t), 241-242, 485(t),
i1 dog,164
for arrhythmias, 322, 911(1)
911(t)
thrombotic, nonbacterial, 568
Endocardium, 15. See also Endocardlial
in cat, 398
int cat with dilated cardioyopathy, 651
in cat with dilatced cardionyopathy, 650
i dog with dilated cardliomyopathy,
cntries and Endocarditis.
in dog, 315(t), 348
597
cardiac jelly separating nyocarditm
for DCM and arrhythumias, in cat. 650
for hypertension, 805(1), 911(1)
from, 4
cushion defects of, pathology of, 825
for supravcntricnlar tachycardia, in dog.
for nyocardial infarction, in cat with hy-
fibroelastosis of, 466. 527-528, 652
85
pertrophic cardliomyopathy, 635
for ventricular rachycardia, in cat,398
for pulmonary edeima. See also Enaiapil,
in cat, 527, 652, 827
recormnended dosages of, for cat. 903(0),
for hedrt faitere.
Endouyocardial fibrosis, in cat, 465, 831.
837
911(t)
in cat with hypertrophic cardionyopa
for dog, 903(t), 904(t), 911(1)
Endlomyocardial form, of RCM. in cat, 641.
thy261
642, 643, 643. See also Restricti
Esophagus, anomalies compressing. 120.
recominended doxages of. for cat, 903(t),
cardiemyopethy.
528
(1)116
ultrasonographic trausduucer in, 132
for dog, 903(t), 911(t)
Endomyocardial scarring, idiopathic,
cchocardiographic findings associated
Elonidate, as anestheic agent, 861
Endocardial cushion defects, pathology of.
Examnation table,for cchocardiography,
with, 163
825
Eidonyocarditis. See also Endocarditis ald
140, /40
Fndocardial Gbroclastosis, 466, 527528,
Exercise itolerancc, 46-17
652
Myocarditis.
 conditions contributing to. 43(t). 44
in cat, 527, 652
in cat, 465, 832
Endotracheal drng delivery, in advanced
Exercise testing, for syucope,in dog, 449
Endocardial paccmaker, implantation of.
life support, 433-436
414 415, 416(t)-418(t)
Endotracheal intbation, in basic life
volune overload, 209
Endocardiosis, 536-558, 888
Exicrnal chest conpressons, in basic life
canine brecd predisposition to, 463,
support, 429
Enflurane, as anesthetic agent, 862
support, 433-134
463(1),540, 541. See alsoKing
English bulldog. See also Dog(s).
factors limiting eflectiveness of, 434(t)
heniosin.
cchocardiography in, cardiac tumor ol,
Extcrnal jugular vein, right-sidled cardiac
cpidenmiology of, 540, 554
catheterization via, 177, 178. See als)
English Cocker spaniel See also Dogtsy.
166
ctiologyof,538-539
Cardia. ratheterization.
heart failurc in1. 888-892. Scc also Hleart
dilated cardiomyopathy in, 583
External pacemaker, 108. See also
faiture,mitral regurgitation nd.
M-mode cchocardiography in, norimal
Premaker.
heart murmur accompanying, in dog.
findings on. 145(t)
inplantation of, 111(t)
540.541, 544-545
English Setier. See also Dog(s).
Extracardiac stinulatonby pacemake 492
correlatcd with severily of associatcd
cchocardiography in, evidence of endo
Extraction ratio, drug clearance and, 312
heart failure, 544, 545
carditis ou, 164
hepatic, 312
mitral regurgitalion associated with, 161,
English shcepdog. Scc also Dogfs.
Extrasystoles. See also Eetopur entries.
536-353. See als0 Mitra rgurgitation.
dilated cardiomyopathy in,582(t), 583
atrial, 94
ncurohormonal responsc associated with,
English springer spaniel. See also Dogts).
in cat, 391. 391
in dog.542. 343
atriowenuicular myopathy in, pathology
inl dog. 94
pathology of.537-338, 828
of, 837
junctional. 97
938
INDEX
Extrasystolcs (Contimued)
First-pass raclionuclide angiocardiography,
Gastric: cilatation-volvulus, carliad
in dog.97
194,194
manifestations of, 771
ventricular: 97-98
in evaluation of shunts, 194, 191-195,
Gastrointestinal tract, discascs of, cardiac.
in cat, 396, 396, 397. 398
195./96
manifesrations of. 770-772
in dog. 98
in evaluationofventricular functio
effects of shock on, 286
 brecd predisposition to, 166
198-199
cmbolization to, in infeclious encocardi-
with abnormal heart sounds, 57
Fistula(s), arteriovcnous. 790-791
tis, 571
Eye(s), effcts of hyperteusion on, 802,
cardiac manifestations of, 762. 790
Gated equilibrium radionuclide
802(t). Plate 2
diagnosis of, 790
angiocardiography,195
rcsults of cxaunitation of, in1 diagnosis of
echocardiography in, 790.791
in evaluation of ventricular function,
cardiovascular diseasc, 43, 49, Platc
Fixation, of heart, 848-849
195-198. 197, 197(r), 198
2
Flccainide, adverse effects of, 91l(t)
Gennetic/Camilial basis, for dilated
for arrhythumias, 911(t)
cardiouyopathy, ini dog, 585
in dog, 350, 354
in man, 585
for atrral fibrillation, in dog, 354
for hypertrophic cardionyopathy. in cal,
F waves, ini dog with supraventricular
for supravenuicular tachycardia, in dog,
625,637
tachycardia. See Fibrillation,atrial, in
350
j man, 625
og Futte, atriuat, in dog.
recormmended dosages of, for dog.
Gentamicin, for endocarditis, 577(t)
Failing hearl. Sce Heart failure.
911(t)
Germran shepherdl. See also Dog(s)
Famijlial disorders. Scc Genetiuc/familial basis.
Flnid therapy, i management of shock,
dlilated cardiomyopathy in, 582(t)
Far field, in ulrrasonography, 131
270, 275-279
echocardiography in, pericardal effusion
Fascicular block、85, 8586
Flutter, atrial, 91-95
011,165
 Feline brcd predisposition, to dilated
in cat, 391-392
radiography in, sigus of pericardial/per-
cardiomyopathy, 623
in dog, 342, 342-343, 401
toneopericardial diaphragmatic: her-
to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 623.
treatment ol, 352
nia on, 684
624-625
cvidence of drug effectiveness in.
small heart on, 111
Feline infectious peritonitis, pericardial
on ECG, 353
sudden death of, ventricular arrhythmias
lesions arcounpanying, 688
ventricular, 99
and,370,836
Fenoral artery, lef-sided cardiac
Foramen ovale, 17
Gianrurco coil embolization, for patent
catheterization via, 179-180. Scc also
Fossa owalis, 17
ductus arteriosus, 190
Cirdiac catheteriatim.
Fourth aortie arch, right, persisten. See
in dog. 511. 512
Femoral vein, right-sided cardiac
Globulin(s), clevated scrun Ievcls of,
catheterization via, 177. Sec also
Fourth heart sound, 56
cardiac manifestations of, 772-773
Cartiarcatheterization.
Fox terricr. Sce adso Dog(s).
Glumerulonephnitis, infectious endecardis
Fetus, cardiac work overload in, effecl. ot,
radiography in, sigus of pulmonic steno-
and, 370
9-10
sis on, 482
Glucose, in management of shock, 286
circulation in, 8. 8
Frank-Starling law, 29-30
Glycogen slorage lisease, 768, 837
trasition from, to blood flow in new-
Frequency, of sound waves. 131
Glycopyrrolate, adverse effecrs of, 315(t),
borll animal, 89
Fungal nyocarditis, in dog. 612
912(4)
myocardial cell growth in, 9
Furoscnide, 236
as preanesthelic agent, 858(t), 859(1)
Fever, infectious endorearditis and, 572
adverse cffecis of. 912(t)
clectrocardiographic paraunetcrs affectcd
Fibrillation, atrial, 94-95 
for DCM al1d heart failure, il1 cat, 649.
by, 311 (t)
in cat, 392, 392
651
for arrhythmias, 912(t)
in dog. 95, 343. 313, 344, 345,401
in dog.596,597
i11 dog, 315(t)
and dlilated cardionyopathy, 588.
for HCM and heart failure, in cal, 637,
for atrioventricular block,in cat,396
591
638, 641
for cardiovascular drug-induced hypoten-
lethality of, 601
for heart failure, 223. 235(t), 236, 485(t),
siou, in dog, 351
orcurring asynptonatically, among
912(t)
recommeuded dosages of, for cat, 904(t).
large breeds, 166
in cat with dilated cardliomyopathy,
912(t)
temporary. 354
649, 651
for dog, 904(1), 912(t)
treatment of, 352, 354
in cat with hyperthyroidism, 786
Golden retriever. See adso Dog(s).
evidence of drug cllectiveness in,
i cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
cardiac rumor in, echocardiographic fiud
on EIX, 357
thy, 637. 638, 641
ings associatcd wihi, 166
murmurs and allered heart sotuds as-
in cat with mitral regurgitation, 551
dlilated cardiomyopathy in, 583
sociated with, 57
in dog with dlilated cardiomyopathy,
M-mode echocardiography in, nornal
ventricnlar, 99, 99
596.597
findings on, 145(t)
bretyliun for, 909(1)
 in1 dog with mitral regurgitation, 551.
muscular dystrophy in. 607, 832
coutershock for, 438-139
552
pulmonary hypervascularity in,radio
Fibroelastosis, endocardial, 466, 527-528,
[nterrational Small Animal Cardiac
graphi apparane of122123,24
652
llealth Couneil rccommendations
Gordon selter See also Dogtsj.
inl cat, 527, 652, 827
regarding, 905(t)
occlusion of patent ductus arteriosus il1,
Fibrosis, endomyocardial, in cat, 465, 831,
for hypertension, 805(t)
.512
837
for mitral regurgitation aud heart failure,
Granulomatosis, cosinophilic, in dog with
myocardial, aortic stcnosis and, 487-488
in cat, 551
hcartworm disease, 716-718
echocardiographic findings associ-
in dog,551.552
bmphomatoid, in dog with heartworn
aled with, 488, 489
for pulnonary cdema. 259, 260(t). See
discasc,718
heart failurc and, 819, 821
alsoFrosenideforheartfaire
Grcat Dane. See alst Dug(s).
pulnoary, radliographic findlings associ-
for renal Cailure associated with shock,
dilated cardioynyopathy in, 582(1), 583,
ated with, 126
987
584
thronbogenicity of, 659
recormnended dosages of, for cat, 903(t).
pericardial cffusion in, cchocardio-
Fick equation. 184
912(t)
graphie findings asociated with,165
First hcart sound, 34
for dog: 903(t), 912(t)
Grcat vesscis. Sce Heart, vates) f.
split, 54
Greyhound. See also Dog(s).
First-degree atrioventricular block, 82-83
M-mode echocardiography in, normal
in cal, 82, 394, 395
findings on, 145(t)
in dog, 82, 82, 375
Gallop rhythms, 56-57
Growth horrmone (somatotropin). 766
INDEX939
Growth hormone (somatotropin)
Heart (Continued)
llearl (Contimued)
(Continued)
in form of myocardial hypcrtrophy.
work ovcrload on. See Heart, overtoad ce.
txcess sccrction of, 766
208. 757-758, 818
worns in. Sce Deartzeorn disease.
in cat, 656
physiology of, 25-36. See also Heart, eler-
Heart. bloxck. See specilic types, e.g-.
Cardiovascular abnormalities associ-
trophysiologyof.
Atrioventricutar bleck.
ated with, 656
septation of, 46, 6
Heart disease(s). See also specific.
Guide wires, sclcction of, for cardiac
shape and size of, on radliography. 110
colnditions.
catheterization, 177
117. Sce also Cardimegaly.
acquired, 536-559, 828-839. Scc also Fn-
Surgery of. See Surgey.
dorerrdiosis.
tamponade of, 689-690
arrhythmias accompanying, in1 cat,
echocardiographic findings associated
387-388
Half-life, of drugs, 213
with, 164
prevalence of, in cat, 162, 463
Ialf-power distancc, in ultrasonography.
in dog, 165
inl dog, 463-465
pathophysiology of, 689, 689-690, 690
aids to diagnosis of. See Codiowarutar dis
131
Halothane, as anesthcic agent, 862
pericardial effusion and. Sec Effusion,
pase,diagrosis of.
HCM, See Iypertrophic rardiomyopathy.
pericartiat.
arrhythnias associated witl. See Arrhyt-
Hcad and ncck, exaimination of, 47-50
pericardiocentcsis for, 694695
miets).
Hcart, 15-21
tuinors of, 120, 168, 679, 698-699, 836
canine breed predisposition to, 459(t)-
acquired discasc of. See Flert disease(s),
and pericardial effusion, 686,695
461(t), 460-463, 463(t), 582(1). 582-
acquired and specific conditions.
in cat, 657, 657, 688, 698-699
583
anatomy of, 15-21
echocardiographic findings associ-
congenital. Scc Congenital heart disease
external. 16, 16, 17
ated with, 694
and specific lesions.
intcrnal, 18
prevalencc of, 467
drugs for.Sce Cerdiouascutar drugs.
angiography of. See Angiocardiography.
in dog,610,686, 687, 688, 698
Ccline breed predisposition to.462,463
apex of, 15.16
 computed tomographic appcaraucc
infectious. See Fnfectious mdorarditis; Infer-
airial septal defect in. See Atriat septal de
of,199
tious myoarditis.
fect.
cchocardiographic findings associ-
lung diseases combined with, 126, 759-
atria of. See Atriun fatria).
ated with.166,693.694
762
atscutatiou of,52-53,53.See also 1leart
prevalence of, 466
lung discases differentiated from, 43(t)
murmurs; Heart soumd(s).
radiographic findings associated
lug field in,radiogTaphic,121125
base of, 15, 19
with, 692
neoplastic. See Heart, tumors of.
fibrous “skcleton"at, 15, 19
surgery for, 880
1eurogenic, 772
catheterization of. See Cardiac catheteriza.
ulrasongraphy of. Se Lchargrhy.
nutritional factors in, 739-752
valve(s) of, 19, 20-21. Scc also specific
parasitic. Scc artaworm disese.
fi.
computed tomography of. 199, 199-200
valves, e.g.. Mitral vake.
pathology of, 817-839
conduction systen of. See Condurtion en-
acquircd discasc of, 536-559. See also
prevalcncc of, 457-467
Findorerdios.
in cal, 458, 458(t), 162-463, 165
tries.
in dog, 457-467, 459(t)
Cougcnital disease of. Se: Comgeitatl heart
in cat, 462,463
in dog,463(t), 463-464
signs of, 42-64, 43(1). 47(1)
disecse.
contraction aund relaxation of, cycle of.
blood flow in or across. Doppler-de-
interpretation of, 42
rived velocity of, in cat, 154(t)
surgery for. See Surgery.
33-35.34
thyrotoxic, in cat, 782-789, 830. Sec alsco
damage to, affecting acuon potentials,
in1 dog, 154(t)
Fsperthyronitisn, in cat.
293-295. 294, 295
regurgitant, quantification of、via
disorders of. Sce Hfeart disease(s); Heart
Doppler echocardiography. 154
arrhythmias associated with, 388
sites of. Sce Aortic regurgiation; Mi-
changes in1 presenntation of, in reccnt
failure, aud speciffc conditious.
decades,785
drug injection in, and cardiopulmomary
tral regurgitation: ett.
electrocardiographic lindings associ-
cercbral resuscitation, 436
congenital diseaseof,i cat62163
ated with. 83, 90, 90, 782-783,
Ebstcin's anomaly of, 138
ii dog,459(1)-461(t),460, 461,462,
783, 783(1)
electrophysiology of,291-293
463. 163(t)
radiographic cvidence of, 783, 784
abnormal, anid arrhythmias, 295-303,
devclopment of, 6, 6
valvular. See uuder Hrart, valoe(s) of aud
296(t). See also Arrhythmia(s)
defectivc, 6
sce also specifie condinions.
enbryologic devclopment of, 3-7
dysplasia of, 138
Heart failure, 205-245
cnlargcmcnt of. See Cardionegaty.
echocardiographic findings associ-
abdominal ultrasonographie findings asso-
failure of. See Fleort failure.
ated with, 158
ciated with, 153
fixation of. 848-849
in dog, 158
in1 dlog.153
Frank-Starling ltaw of, 29-30
sites of. See site-specific sub-cntries
anemia and.790
growth of. 9, 9
under Iysplasia.
aortic regurgiaion aud, reamen of,
histopathologic secioning of, 848, 848
stenosis of, 158-i59
228
inpaired perlornance of, responses to.
cchocardiographic findings associ-
aortic stenosis anid, treaumen1 of, 228
759(t)
ated with, 139-160
arrhythmias associated with, in cat with
innervation of, 22-23
in cat, 136
cardiomyopathy, 387, 387(t)
laycrs of. See Endocardium: Epicardim
in dog, 136,159,159,160,160
in dog.224, 371
Myocardium.
sites of. Scc Aortic stenosis, Mitral ste-
trcatmelt. of, 224225
magnetie resonance imaging of 200, 200
nosis Pulmnic stenasis; Fricuspi
biochemical derangements and, 205-206,
stenrasis.
206
muscle of. See Mfyocardium.
vegetatious on, in IE, 567-568, 569.
cachexia sccondary to),47,48.744-745
necropsy of, 845-849
Sec also Infectious endocarditis.
catuses of, 887-888
muclear imaging of. Se Radionuclide angi-
echocardiographie appcarance of,
classification of, 216-217, 225
ocaerdiography.
164,573, 574
by lnternational Small Animal Cardiac
opening of, at necropsy, 846, 846, 849
ill dog. 164
Health Council, 885
outer fibroserous menbrane of. See Per?-
ventricles of. See Lef ventriele, Right ventr-
trcatment in relation to. 226
rardium.
cle;Ventricte(s) of heart.
deliitions of, 205,884
output. of. See Cardiac output.
weight of, in rclation to body weight, 847
diagnostic criteria for. 887
Overload on, respouse to,209-210
in cat, 847(t)
clilatcd cardiomyopathy and. See "heart
during feral period, 9-10
inl cat with cardionyopathy, 847(t)
failue" sub-cntries uder Dilated rar
during postatal period. 10
in dog, 847(t)
diomyopathy.
940INDEX
Heart failure (Contiy ued)
llearr failure (Continued)
lcartworm disease (Comtimued )
dirolilariasis and, in dog, 897898
tachycardia and, in dog, 587
in dlog, 721
drugs for, 23-224, 229-245. Scc also spe-
treatme1t of, 216-245
canninc.702-721
cific agenits and pharamaceutical
drugs used in1, 223-224. 229-245. See
caval syndrome assoxciated with, in dog.
classes.
also specific agenits and pharma
718-719
cndocardiosis and, 888-892. Sce also
ceutical classes.
68 
Heart feilure,nitrat regurgitation ad.
fuctional classification and, 226
classificauon of, in dog, 707, 707(t)
excessive left. ventricular moderator
goals of, 217(t)
clinical aspects of, in cat, 728-729. 729(1)
bands and, in cat, 832
in-hospital, 260(t)
in dog. 706-707, 709
functional deragmnt and20607
International Simall Animal Cardiac
cor pulmonale associated with, in dog.
hearworu disease and, in dog, 897-898
llcalth Council recommendations
715
hepatic congestion accornpanying, 822
on,905(t)
diagnosis of, in cat, 729(t), 729-730
high-output, 781. Scc also Cardiac output,
low-soditm dict in. 237. 551, 740-741
in dog,707-708
high.
oxygen supplementation in. See Heart
dliethylcarbamazine for, in dog, 720-721
hypertension and, trealmcnt of, 228
differeurial diaguosis of, in cat,732
hyperthyroidlism1 and, 782, 786. See also
timig of, 226
cchocardiographic: findings associatcd
Heert disensets),thyrotoxir.
lleart murmurs, 56, 58-62. See also Heari
with, 167
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, in cat,
souned(s).
in cat,731, 733
258, 628, 900
aortic regurgitation ad in dog. 61
ii dog, 710,711
treatiment of. 225.637, 638, 641,901
aortic stcnosis aud, in1 dog, 60, 60-61
cosinophilia as sequela of, in dog, 716
idiopathic, in cat, 631(t), 645-652. Se
atrial septal defect and, 61
treaimenl. of, 714, 716, 718
continuous,62
cpizootiology of, in dog. 702
Ditated cardiomyopathy.
diastolic, 61-62
feline. 727-734
infectious endocarditis and, 376
dilated cardionyopathy and, in dog,589
granulomatosis secondary to, in dog.
 Internatioal Snall Animal Cardiac
endocardiosis and, in dog.540,541,544
716-718
hear failurc associated with, in dog,
Hlealth Coucil approach to, 883
545
901
i1 dog with heart failure, 544, 545
868-268
left-sided, vs. right-sided hcart failtre.
hyperirophic cardiomyopathy and. in cal,
index of cardiac effort in presenice of,
222-223
628.630, 630
760
low-ouput, 225
in dog, 604
ivermecin for, in cat, 734. 913(t)
low-sodiun diet in1 managemenl of, 237,
infectious endocarditis and, 572-573
in dog. 719-720.721,913(t)
jmnocent, 58-59
melarsomine dihydrochloride for,in og.
551. 740-741
International Small Animal Cardiac
mitral regurgitatio aud, 59-60
711-712, 714, 913(t)
microflaricidal therapy for, in dog. 719-
Health Council recommcndatiois
in dog, 59, 60
regarding. 905(t)
mitral stenosis ad, in dog, 61, 62
720
malagcment of See Heart failue, treat
patent duclus arteriosus aud, 62
milbemycin oxime for, in cat, 734, 914(t)
in dog, 62
in dog. 721, 914(1)
ment iof.
mechanical derangements and, 206, 206
physiologic, 58-59
moxidectin for, in dog. 721
mitral regurgitation and, 544
pulonic regurgitation and, 559
occult, in1 dog, 705-706
902-802 Sop u 10 ssuasoued
urcalnent of. 225-227, 531-553
in dog,62
nyocardial pathology in, 209, 818-819.
pulmonic stenosis and, 61
pathology of, 835
nconatal, cndocardial fibroelastosis and,
systolic, 58-61
in cat, 729
tricuspid regurgitation and. 60. 557
in dog,703-705,703-705,709
827
l1eurohorimonal response to, 214, 758
ventriculr epl defet an
pathophysiology of, in cat. 728
oxygcn thcrapy for, 23
prophylaxis against, n cat,34
Hleart rate, 27
in cat with dilated cardiomyopathy, 650
blood pressure in relaliou to, 28, 28
ini dog, 720-721
radiographic findings associated with,in
i1 cat with hypertrophic cardioinyopa-
calrulatioi1 of, from clectrocardiogram.
thy,637-638
cat, 123, 731, 731
74
pacemaker-rclatedl, 422-423
duralion of diastole and systolc corre-
ini dog, 117,123, 125, 709-710, 710,
717, 717-718
patent ductus arteriosus and, treatment
latcd with. 33
cffects of heart failure on, 214
strgery for,in dog, 714、879
0f, 228
thiacetarsamide for, in cat, 733
pathology ol, 817-822
impulses affecing,27,28
in dog, 712, 713, 905(0), 917(t)
pathophysiology of,205-214
nonitoring of, in CPCR,439
Heal stroke, cardiac manifesrarions of. 773
pericardial discasc and, mauragement of,
Heart sound(s), 53-58. See also Heart
Hemangiosarcoma, right atial, 880
218
'STU
echocardiographic Iindings associated
pharmacotherapy for, 223-224, 229-245,
lst, 54 
with, 166, 168, 694
185(t). See also specific drug classes
split, 54
in dog. 166,687, 694,880
and agents.
2nd, 54-55
088208s
in-hospital, 260(t)
split, 55, 55, 55(t)
Icmatocysts, in tricuspid valvc, prevalence
pulmonic stenosis and, treatmnent of, 228
3rd. 55-56
of,in dog, 163-464
radiographice findings associated with.
aborrmal, in dog with dilated cardio-
Hematologic discascs, cardiac
107
myopathy.56
mauifestations of, 772-773
in cat, 258
4th, 56
Hemodynamic: momitoring, 181-184
in dog, 256,257
classification of, 53-54
in CPCR, 441
refractory, 228
diastolic, early, 55
in maiagenent of shock. 266(c), 266
renal cousequences of, 211-214、2/2
ejection1, 54
269, 280-282, 281, 281(0)
restrictive cardiornyopathy aud. in cat,
gallop rhythm,56-57
restlts of, prognostic sigificance of,
treatment of, 225
monitoring of, in CPCR,439
267,268,268
right-sided, vs. leff-sided heart failure,
systolic click. 54
inraoperative. 863, 867
222-223
variations in,with arrhythmias,5758
output measurements in,183-186.185
shock and, 286
llcartworm discase, 702-721.727-734
pressure mcasurements in, 181-183. 182,
sodium-restricted diet in1 management of,
adulticide therapy for, in cat,733
183
237.551
in dog. 710-713
results of, 207(t),282(1)
subaoric stenosis and, treatmenl of, 228
ancillary drugs used in, 713-714
acccptablc to optimal range of, 282(t)
syncope associated with, 451
thromboembolism due to, 719
systemic effects ot,2/3
antibioic prophylaxis against, in cat, 734
207(t)
INDEX941
Hemodynamie monitoring (Contimued)
Hydrococone (Continued)
Hypertonic saline, in ltuid therapy for
proguostic significance of, in shock,
for tussive symcope, in dog, 433
shock, 277
267,268,268
Ilydroxyethyl starch, 277. 278(t)
Hyperrophic cardliomyopathy, 601-606.
tricuspid regurgitation indicated by
in maagenen1 of shock, 277-278
62-1-641
557
Hyperadrcnocorucism (Cushiung's
angiocarcliographic findings associated
Hemoglobin sarurarion, monitoring of,i1
syndrome), 764765
with, in cat, 630, 633, 662
(CPCR, 440
Hyperaldosteronism (Coni1's discasc), 765
arrhyhnias associated with, in cat, 387,
Hemehage, gastroitestinal, shock and,
electrocardiographic: findings in, 765,
387(1), 626, 630, 631(1), 635-636
286
765
breed predisposion to, anong cats. 623,
sccondary to warfarin therapy, in cat,
Hypercalcemia, 768-769
624625
665, 665
cardiomegaly assciatecd with, in cat, 114,
1lleparin, acverse cffects of, 912(t)
768,768
115,258,630,631
for dissemiated intravascular coagulopa-
Hypercoagulability secondary to shock, 287
in clog, 591. 605
thy, 287
Hyperechoic: tisste, 132, See also)
clinical nanifestarions of, in cal., 628, 630
for thromboembolism, 912(1)
Echocardiography.
dliastolic dysfunction associated with, in
in cat, 664, 912(t)
1lypercosinophilic syudrone, in cat, 643
man, 625
in dog, 912(t)
Hyperglobulinemia, cardiac manifestations
dlifferential diagnosis of, in cat, 634
as ciement of therapy for heartworm
of, 772-773
echocardiographic findings associated
disease, 713, 715
1lypcrkalcimia、769
with, 163
recommended dosages of, for cat, 912(t)
arrhytlhmias associated with, in cat, 388
in cat, 626, 627, 629, 633, 633-634
for dog. 912(t)
clectrocardiographic findings associated
in dog. 605. 606
llepatic clearance and cxtraction, of drugs.
with, 89-90, 768, 769
electrocardiographic findings associated
in dog. 89
with, in cat, 630, 631(t)
1lepatic congestion, heart failure and, 822
in dog. 605
Hepatic discases, Cardiac: mmauifestations of,
in dog, 89
ctiopathogencsis of, in cal, 625
772
reperfusion syudrone and, in cat with is-
in1 dog, 603
Hepatoccllular failtrc, cardiac
chemic: limb, 666
in1 m1a11, 625
manifestatioas of, 772
llyperkinctie conditioms, and high cardiac
genetic/familial basis for, in cat, 625, 637
Hepatonegaly, radliographic appearance of,
18z ndino
in man, 625
127
Hypermagnesemia, 770
hcart failture acconpanying, in cat, 258.
Hernia, diaphragmatic, pericardial/
Hypermetabolic: conditions, and high
628, 900
peritoneopericardial, 526,
cardiac ouput, 781
treatncnt of,225,637,638,61.901
682-684, 683
Hyperplasia, myocardial, during normal
heart sounds and murmurs associated
abnormalities accompanying, 835
fetal and early neonatal growth, 9
with, in cat, 628, 630, 630
age distribution of, in cats, 683
Hypersensitivity, carotid sinus, and syncope,
in dog, 604
in dlogs,683
4.52
in cat, 624-641
cysts associated with, 684
Hypersomatotropism (acromcgaly), 766
in1 dog. 601-606
radiographic findings associated
ill cat, 656
lefl vetricular ouflow tract obstr uction
with, 118, 526, 683-684
cardiovascular abuormalitics associatcd
associated with, 604
in dlog.684
in1 cat, 626, 626, 627
Hetastarch, 277, 278(t)
with, 656
Hypertension1, 793-809
treatment of, 639
jn management of shock. 277-278
in cdog, treatment. of. 606
diag1ostic workup for. 467-468, 800(0)
Iigh-output heart failure, 781. Sec also
cnd-organ disease due to, 468, 801-802
limb contracrure secondary to, in cat,
Cardiar outprt.high.
signs of, 802(t), Plate 2
663
Iigh-permeability pulmonary cdema.
limb paralysis accompanying. in cat, 628,
heart. failure associated with, treatment
253-254
660
Ilistory, in diagosis of cardiovascular
of, 228
mid-left ventricular gradient accompa-
in cat, 468, 656-657, 797
disease, 41-45, 42(t)
nying. in cat, 627
lolter monitoring, 102, 102. Sec also
pharmacotherapy for, 805(t)
mitral regurgitation accompanying. in
Flectwcardiugrapihy.
in1 dog, 468. 797
 pharmacotherapy for, 805(t)
cat,627, 627
for arrhyumias and syncope,448, 449
myocardlial infarction accompanying, in
left ventricular hypertrophy secomdary to,
for canine arrhythmias, 331-332. Sec also
cat, 635, 837,838
Dog(s), electrotartograpy in.
830
myocardlial ischemia accompanying. in
Hydralazine, adverse effects of, 912(t)
pathogencsis of, 800-801
cat, 625-626
for heart failure, 224, 485(t). 912(t)
pulnonary, patent ductus arteriosus and.
natural history of, in cat, 634
in dog with nital regurgiation,552
See Ductus arteiasus, paen,r
pathoiogy of, 829. Scc also Fhypertrophy,
for hypertension, 912(t)
versed."
treatment of, 804 808
myocardiat.
for mitral regurgitation and heart failure,
in cat. 628, 629, 631, 634. 819, 820,
in dog. 552
diel in, 745, 805-806
829, Platc 11
for pulmonary ederma, 260, 260(t)
drug therapy in, 805, 805(t), 806-808
in dog, 602, 603, 829
n dog with mitral regurgitation, 261
encrgency ncasures in, 808
pathophysiology of, in cat, 628
for shock, 283, 283(1)
omega3 fatty acids in, 745
in dog. 603-604
recommended dosages of, for cat, 912(t)
liyperthyroidisn, in cat,781789
 phonocardiographic findings associated
for dog, 904(t), 912(t)
antithyroid drugs for,786-787,913(t)
with, in cat, 630
llydrochlorothiazide, acverse cffects of,
arrhythumias associated with, 90. 90,
plysical findings associatcd with, in cat.
912(t)
388
628,630
for edema, 912(1)
cardiac. manifestations of. See Heart dis
i11 dog. 604
for heart failre, 235(t), 237、 485(t)
ease(s), thyrotoxic,i cal.
prevalcnicc of, am1oug cats, 623, 624-625
in cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
occult, 784-785
proguosis associated with, in cat, 634
thy, 641
radioactive iodinc therapy for, 789
putmonary edema accompanying, in cat.
for hypertension, 805(1), 912(t)
recurrent, after thyroidectomy, 789
258, 628, 630. 632
for pulmonary edema, 912(t)
scintigraphic findings in, 785, 785
trcatment of, 261, 637-638
recommended dosages of, for cat, 912(t)
surgery for, 787,788. Scc also Thymdec-
radiographic fiudings associated with, in
for dog. 903(1), 912(1)
tomy
cat, 114, 115,258,630、631, 632
Hydrocodone, adverse effecis of, 912(1)
complications of, 787-789
in1 dog, 604, 605
cough-suppressant dosages of, 904(t).
systemic sig1s of, 782, 782
right ventricular outflow tract obstruction
912()
methimazolc for, in cat, 913(t)
associated with, in cat, 628
942INDEX
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Continued)
Imaging plancs, for cchocardiography, /33.
Infectious peritonitis, feline, pericardiad
spontaneous echocardiographic coutrast
141-143,141-144
lesious accompanying, 688
("'sunoke') associated with, in cat.
Imipenem. for endocarditis, 576, 577()
 lnfitrativc cardiomyopathiy, 698. See also
633
Imncrsion fixation, of hcart, 848
Feart, tumoms of.
syncope associated with, 451
Immune-mediated disorders, and dilared
in cat. 637. 657, 688, 694
in cat, 636
cardiomyopathy, in dog, 587
in dog. 610
systolic dysfuncuion accompanying, 628
in man, 587
Inflamatory response, systemic, syndrome
rachyarrhythmias accornpaying. Sec Hy-
cardiac 1mauifestauions of, 775-776
of, 274, 274(0, 273()
pertrpirrdimpthrhthmias
secondary to infectious endoearditis, 570
treatment of. 276(1)
associated with.
lmmtuodeficiency syudromes, cardiac
luflow occlusion and pulmonary
therapy for, 218
mauifestations of, 776
arteriotomy, for pulinonic slenosis,
in cat, 635-641
Immunodiagnostic testing, for heartworm
870-871, 871
in dog. 606
disease, in cat, 730
Inhralant anesthetic agcuts, 862
llronboenbolism associated with, in cat,
in dog, 707-708, 715-716
Inotropic drugs, posive. Sec also specific:
658. See also Thromboembolism.
Impedance, acoustic, 131
agents, c.g..Digitatis preparations;
Hyperlrophic osteopathy, infectious
Implantation, of pacemaker, 414(t),
Dobutamine: Dopamine.
endocarditis and, 370
414-415, 415, 416(0)-419(1)
for heart failure, 224, 229(0), 229-235,
Hyperrrophy, nyocardial. Sce also
Impulsc conduction, abnormalities of, and
260(t)
arrhythmias,299-303
in cat with dilatcd carcliomyopathy.
Iypertropy,ventricutr
intraventricular, n cat,398
650
concentric, pressure overload and, 208,
Impulsc initiation, cnhanced. in cctopic
in dog with dilated cardiomyopathry,
758, 818
foci, and arrhythmias, 296, 296-299
596
cccentric, volume overload and, 208,
Indicator dilution, in identification of
for pulmouary edema, 260. See also
757,818
shunts.186, 186-187
Positventrifrherf
normal postnatal growth and, 9
in measurement. of cardiac output, 184
uPe.
ventricular, 116.See also Hypertrophy, yo-
186.185
for shock, 270, 282-283.283(t)
rardiat.
Infarction, embolization ad, as sequelac of
for surgical patient, 856
in dog with pulnonic stenosis, 482
infectious endocarditis, 570. 571
recormmended dosages of, for cal,
sccondary to hypertension. 830
myocardial, 837-839
904(t)
secondary to thyrotoxicosis, 830
clecurocardliographic findings associ-
for dog, 904(1)
without dilation. See Hyperrophic cardio-
ated with, 88-89. 89
Inslin, 767
myopathy.
in cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
instuffcient secretion of. 767-768
Hyperviscosity syndromes, cardiac
thy,635,837,838
Interatrial septum, 17
mamifestations of, 772-773
in dog, 610
pofp ys  u wp
Hypoadrcnocorticism (Addison's disease),
pathology of, 837-839, 838
forumation of, 5. 6
763-764
thaliun scan indicating, 199
 Interccpt angle, and Doppler-derived bloxod
Hypocalcemia、 769
renal, in cat with throuboembolism, 66!
flow velocity, 136-137
electrocardiographic characteristics of.
Infection, disorders due 1o. See Fnfectirus
 International Small Animal Cardiae Health
768,769. 784
 cntries and Septic shock.
Council, 883
in thyroidectomized cat, 788-789
pacemaker, 123
approach of. to heart failure, 883-901
clectrocardiographic cvidence of, 784
veclor of, for Dirofilaria immilis, 702. Sce
cardliowascular drug dosages recon-
Hypoechoic tissuc, 132. Scc also
talso Heartworn diseaw.
mended by, 903(t)-917(t)
Echocartiography.
Infcctious endocarditis, 567-578. See also
Interventional cardiac catheterizalion,
Ilypokalemnia, 769-770
Infectious rnyocartitis.
866-867
clectrocardiographic findings awociated
advancing age as risk faclor for, i dog.
for patent ductus arteriosus, 190
with. 768. 769
568
ini dog, 511. 5/2
potassitu chloride for, 915(t)
antibiotics for, 576, 577(0)
for pulmonic stenosis, 190
potassium gluconatc for, 915(1)
prophylactic use of, 577-578
Intcrvcnricular septum, 15. 20
Hlypomagnesemia,743-744,770
1 o s
defectin.SeeVentricr spal dfct.
Ilypoalremia,740
criteria for, 572(t)
formation of, 45, 6
Hypoparathyroidisrn, following
echocardiographic findings asso
iale
lntestine, cmbolization to, ini infectious
thyroidectomy, 788, 789
with, 163, 573-575, 374
endocarditis, 571
Hypotcnsion, cardiovascnlar drug-induced,
in dog, 164
Intracardiac drug injecion, in CPCR. 436
in dog.351, 351
cpideniology of, 567568
lntracavitary clectrocardiography, 103, 103
syncope due to, 446
organisms conmouly associateed with,
Intralingual drug injection, in CPCR.
Hypothernia, cardiac manifestations of,
576(t)
436-437
pathogenesis of, 568-570
Intraosseous drug delivery, in CPCR, 436
Hypothyroidism, 762-763
pathology of, 567-568, 569
Itrapericardial cysts, 684685, 685, 686
following lyroidectomy,789
in dog, 569
Intrapericardial pressure-volume
Hypovolenmic shock, 273. 273(t). See also
prevalence of, in cat, 567
relationships,680
Shorh.
in dog,464,567. 568
inn dog, 680
1lypoxermic shack, 273, 273(t). Sec also
prcveuion of, 577-578
in dog with constrictive pericardis.680
Shorh.
sequelae of, 570-571, 571, 373
in1 dog with pericardial eflusion, 680
therapy for. 576-577, 577(0)
lntravascular coagulopathy, disseminated,
valvular lesions in, 569, 570
shock and, 287
vegetative,163, 567-568, 569
Intravenous drug injection, in CPCR, 435
Lbutilide, for atrial fibrillation, 354
echocardiographic appearancc of,
lntravcntricular conduction defects, 8486
Idiopathic endomyocardial scarring.
164,573.574
in cat, 398
cchocardiographic findings associated
ill dog, 164
Innubation, in basic life support. 429
with,163
Infectious myocarditis, 832-833. See
als
lodine,radiacive,for hyperthyroiis,
Idioparhic myocardiad failure, in cat,
Infectious endocarditis.
789
qs . 1e0 0, 0s[e 2as 299-9t9 '(1) 189.
in cat, 833
Irish setrer. See also Dog(s).
sub-cntrics under Dilated cartiomyopathy.
in dog, 465, 610-612, 832, 833
radiography in. VSD-rclatcd findings o11,
ldiopathic pericardial cffusion,685
Infec tious pericardial effusion, 685
503
Lreatment of, 695
trcatncnt of, 695
Irish wolfhound. See also Dogrs).
IE. Scc fectious endacarditis.
Infectious pericarditis, 835
c8c 0)8 u pedouom pmp
INDEX 943
Hnish wolfhound (Contimued)
Labrador retriever (Continued)
Lhasa apso. Scc alse Dog(s).
Mmode echocardiography in. normal
bypass tract-mediated macro-re entrant
M-mode echocardiography in, cndocar-
findings on, 145(t)
tachycardia in, 317. 355
diosis on, 162
Ischenia, nyocardial, in cat with
dilated cardiomyopathy in, 582(0), 583
Lidocaine, 317-318, 362-363
hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy,
Ladder diagrams, in electrocardiography.
adverse effects of. 315(t), 318. 362,
969-979
100, 100,101
(0)816
in dog.610
Laminar blood flow, 137
drugs interacting with, effects of, 326(t)
thalliun scan indicating, 199
Laplace's law, 32,207208
electrocardiographic parameters affected
Isoflurane, as anesthelic agent, 862
Lateral resolon,  ulrasonography, 131
by, 311(0), 318
Isoprotercnol, for atrioventricular block,in
Lateral thoracolomy, 868, 869
eergenncy tusc of, 431(1), 437
cat, 396
emergecy, in basic life support,43435
for arhyuhmias, 317, 913(1)
for cardiovascular drug-induced hypoten-
Lcads,oardogahi.688(1),69
in cat, 315(t), 398
sion1, in dog. 351
70, 75, 76
in cat with dilated cardioruyopathy, 650
indications for, 913(t)
paccrmaker, 409, 410
in dog, 315(0), 362-363
reconmmencled dosages of. for cat, 904(t),
problems with, 415, 417, 419, 420, 421
in dog with dilated cardliomyopathy.
(0)16
Left atriovcntricular orifice, 17
for dog. 904(t), 912(t)
597
Lcfl atriowcntricular valve, See Mitral vatle.
Isosorbide dinitate, adverse cflects of,
Left atritum, 15, 17
for cardiopnlmouary arrest, 43l(t), 437
for DCM and arrhythmias, in cat,650
913(t)
blood stasis ini, and risk of thronbosis, in
for hcar1 failurc, 224, 237(t), 240, 913(t)
in dog.597
Cat, 659
in dog with nitral regurgitation, 552
for ventricular rachycardia, in cat, 398
recommended dosages of. for cat, 913(1)
and spontaeous echocardiographic
mcchamism of acuion of, 362, 364
cotrast (*'simoke"), 167. 636
for dog, 913(1)
tnlargement. of. Se also Cardiomegaly.
recommended dosages of, for cat, 913(t)
Isosorbide mononitrate, for heart failure,
(or dog, 904(1), 913(0)
electrocardiographic findings associ-
237(1),240
Life support. Sce also Cardioputmonary
ated withi, 78, 78
 i11 dog with mitral regtrgitation, 552
radiographic appcarance of, 113-116
Cerebral resuscitation.
Ivermcctin, for hearwonm disease, in car,
advanced, 435-437, 436
opening of, at necropsy. 846
734.913(t)
basic, 429, 481-135, 432
ruprure of, cndocardiosis and, 554535.
in dog, 719-720, 721, 913(t)
Ligancntum arleriosun, 21
555
Left coronary artery, 21
I inb contractre, 1ICM-related
thrombocmbolism and, in cat, 663
Left raial vena cava,pesistent.529
Limb paralysis, ampuration in management
Jackson techuique, of surgery for patenl
in dog, 529
I.ctt lung. 13
of, in cat, 665. 666
ducus arteriosus, 877, 877
Left venitriclc, 15, 20
dilated cardiomyopathy and, in cat, 647
Jelly, cardiac, 4
cnlargement of. See also Cardiomegaly;
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, in cat.
Jugular vein(s), distention of. signilieance
Rfventrice,hpertrophyf
628,660
of, 47, 48.49,50
clectrocardiographic findings associ-
reperfusion following, conplicated by
cxamination of, 49
ated with, 79-80, 80
hyperkalemia. in cat, 666
pulse patrer11 in, 49, 49, 50
radiographic appcarance of, 113
thrombocmbolism and, in cat, 44, 660,
pacemaker implantatiou via, 416(t)-
excessive moderator bands of, in cat,
660
418(1)
465, 655-656, 656, 827
Liquor pericardi (pericardial luid).
right-sided cardiac catheterization via,
177, 178. See alsr) Cardiar catheteriza
and heart failure, 832
679-680
function of, radionuclide angiocardiogra-
accunulation of excess of. See Perirardial
tion.
 Juncuonal arrhythmias, 97
effusion.
phy in evaluation of, 197(t)
Lisinopril, adverse erfects of, 913(t)
in dog, 97, 346-347
hypertrophy of. See also Myocardiat hyper-
for IiCM aud nyoxcardial infarction, in
fruphey.
secoudary to hypertension, 830
cat, 635
secondary to thyrotoxicosis, 830
for heart failurc, 237(t). 242, 913(1)
Ketamine, as preanesthetic agent, 858(0),
withoutdilatieHpeophici
for hypertension, 805(1), 913(1)
859(t), 860
for myocardlial infarction, in cat with hy
Kidney(s), disease of, cardionyopathy
opening of, at necropsy. 846
pertrophic cardiomyopathy, 635
associated with, 770
outflow tract obstruction jn. 822-823
recommended dosages of, for cat, 913(t)
infectious endoearditis and, 570, 57!
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, 604
for dog, 913(1)
pericarditis associatcd with, 770
in cat, 626, 626, 627
Liver, congestion of. heart failure and. 822
cffects of hcart failurc on, 211-214, 212
in dog, treatment of, 606
diseases of, cardiac rmanifestatious of, 772
cffecis of hypertcnsion on, 802, 802(0)
relaxation of. See Myocardial rlaxation.
drug clearance and extraction by, 312
cffects of shock on, 286
wall stress-voltme loop for, 219
cnlarged, radiographic appearance of,
cmbofization 1o, in infectious endocardli-
effects of 1myocardial failure on, 220
127
tis. 571
Lef-sided cardiac catheterization, 177, 178,
Loop diuretics. Sec also specific agents,
failure of, as complication of thyroidec-
179-180. Sce also Cardiac catheterizafion
e.g.,Fursemide.
tomy. 789
Lcfi-sided hcart failure. See also Hert
for hcart failre, 235(), 236
shock and, 286
failure.
Low-output hcart failure.225
infarction of, in cal with thronlboembo-
vs. right-sided heart failure, 22-223
Low-sodiun diet, for cat, 741 (t)
lism, 661
L.eft-to-right. shumt, 824-825
for dog, 741(1)
King Charles spaniel, See also Dog(s).
as probien in sturgical patient, 856-857
in management of heart failure, 237,
endoxcardiosis in,554
indiceator dilution idenifying, 186
heart murmur accompanying, 540, 54!
551, 740-741
patent ductus arteriosus and, 507508,
International Small Aninal Cardiac
intensity of, and severity of assocj
aled hcart failure, 544, 545
824
Health Council recommendations
echocardiographic findings associated
neurohormonal response associalcd
regarding, 905 (t)
with, 134-135, 507
n maagement of hypertension, 745
with, 543
prognosis associated with， 553
in dog, 156, 510
Lung(s), 15. See also Lung disrases and
Kussmatl's sign. constricive pericardiis
treatnent of, in dog, 511, 512
Pulmonry cntries.
radionuclidc angiocardliography in cvalua-
and, 696
alvcolar-capillary structure of, 251, 252
tion of, /94, 194-195,/95
effects of injury to, 253-254. Sce also
velntricular septal defcct and, cchocardio-
Pulnonary edema.
graphic findings asociated with, in
disorders of See Lwng diseasers).
Labrador retriever. See also Dog(s).
dlog.504
edema of. See Pulmomary edema.
944
INDEX
Laung(s) (Continued)
Mesotheliorma (Continued)
Mitral sten1osis, 823
effects of shock on, 286-287
in dog,686, 688
echocardiographic findings associated
cosinophilic infiltration of, in dog with
Metabolic shock, 273(t), 273-274. Sce also
with, in cal. 136
hcartworm discase, 716
Shock.
heart murimur accompanying, in dog, 61,
treatment of. 714. 716, 718
Metastatic infection, as complication of
62
lefl. 15
cndocarditis, 570
pathology of, 823
right, 15
Methimazole, for hyperthyroidism, 786-787
in cat, 823
Lung disease(s). See also Purnonary entries.
Methoxyflurane, as anestheic agent, 862
in dog, 823
canine breed predisposition to, 13(t)
Metoprolol. adverse cffects of, 913(t)
Mitral valve, 20, 537
cardiac diseases conibined with, 126,
for arrhythmias, 913(t)
blood flow in or across、 Doppler-derived
759-762
in dog, 315(1)
velocity of, in1 cat, 154(t), 624
Cardiac dliseases differentiated from.
 in dog with dilated cardionyopathy,
in cat with cardliovascular abormali-
43(0)
869
ties,624
dirofilariasis ad. in dog, 716-718
for hearl failure, 243-244
in dog. 154(t)
treamet of, 714, 716, 718
for hypertension, 913(t)
regurgitant. See Mitral regurgitation.
 obstruclive, chronic, 761
for vasowagal syncope,452
dysplasia of, 523-524, 525, 526
signs of, 43(t)
recommended dosages of, for cat, 913(t)
angiocardiographic findings asoxciated
thromboenbolic, 761-762
for dog. 913(1)
with, 524
prevalence of. in dog, 467
Metronidazole, for endocarditis, 577(t)
in dog. 189, 525
vascular, prevalencc of, in dog.467
Mexiletine, 319
canine breed predisposition to, 462
Lung field, in radiography. 121125
adversc cffects of, 315(1), 319, 914(t)
electrocardiographic findings associ-
Lung sounds, pulmonary edema and, 256
clectrocardiographic paraneters affectcd
ated with, 523
Lupus erythematosus, systenic, cardiac:
by. 311(t)
in dlog, 524
nanifestarions of, 775-776
[or arrhyahmias, 319, 914(t)
prcvalcncc of,in dog, 459(t), 462
Iyme disease, in1 dog. 612
in dog, 315(t), 365-366
radiographicfinding associaedwith,
and myocarditis, 612
for ventricular tachyeardia, in dog, 365-
523
Lymph, 21
996
in dog,523
Lymph nodes, 21, 29
recommended dosages of, for dog.
stenosis of Sce Mitral stenosis.
L.ymphadenopathy, appcarancc of, 11
904(t), 914(1)
M-mode echocardiography. 132. See also
raliography 120, 121
Mierofilariae testing, in cat, 728, 730
Echocardiography.
Lymphaties, pulmonary, 252
in dog. 708
advantages of, 132
Lynphonatoid grantulomatosis, in dog with
Microfilaricidal therapy, in dog, 719-720
aortic: stenosis on, in dog, 491, Plate 4
heartworm discasc, 718
Mid-left ventricular gradient,in cat with
chronic acquired valvular diseasc (ende
Lymphosarcoma, in cat, 836
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 627
cardiosis) on, in dog, 162
and infiltrative cardiomyopathy, 637,
Milbemycin oxime.for heartworm disease,
color. Platc 4
688. 694
in cat, 734, 914(t)
dilated cardiomyopathy on, in dog, 593
 in dog, andl infiltrative cardiomyopathy.
in dog. 721, 914(0)
dirofilariasis-relatcd changcs on, in dog.
610
Milrinone,for heart failure, 224, 229(t),
711
23-1-235
disadvantages of, 132
Miniature poodle. See also Poodle, Dog(s).
endocardiosis on, in dog,/62
cardiac tumor in, cchocardiographic find
evidence of endocarditis on, 574. 574
Macrolidc antibiotics, in managem
ings associated with, 166
heartworm-related changes on, in dog.
nenl.of
shock, 285
M-mode echocardiography in, orinal
711
 i11 prophylaxis against heartworm diseasc,
findings on, 143(t)
hypertrophic cardiomyoparhy ou, in cat,
in1 cat, 734
Miniaturc schnauzcr. Sce also Dog(s).
626, 627
in dog, 721
sick sinus syndrome and tachycardia in,
i11 dog. 606
Macro-re entrant tachycardlia. bypass
imaging planes for, /33, 142
tract-mediated, in dog, 347, 355
sinoatrial block in. 81
normal findings on. in cat, 146(t)
Magnesiun, dictary as provided in1
Mitral regurgitation, 220-222, 536-555
in dog. /33, 145(1)
commercial dog foods, 742(t)-743(0)
cchocardiographic lindings assxiated
pericardial effusion on, i dog, 167, 691
diminished serum levels of, 743-744, 770
with, 161, 546-550
pleural effusion on, in cat. 168
elevated serun levels of, 770
in1 cat with hypertrophie cardionyopa
subaortic stcnosis ol, in dog,49l, Plate 4
valvular discasc om, chronic acquired. in
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), of
thy, 627
hcart, 200, 200
in1 dog. 137, 161, Plate 10
dog,162
Malnutrition, cardiac manifestations of, 777
Mobitz-type atriovetricular block, 82-83
electrocardiographic findings associated
Mannitol, for renal failure associated with
ini cal, 83, 395, 395
with, 545
Moderalor bands, excessive, in lefi ventricle
sh1ock, 286
cndocardiosis and, 161, 536-555. Scc
Massage, cardiac, in basic lie suprt,
of cat, 465, 655-656, 656, 827
also Fndocarfiosis.
as causc of hcarl failure, 832
434-435
heart failure associated with, 544
treatment of, 225-227, 551-553
Morphine, adverse effects of, 914(t)
carotid sirus, 450
in differerntiation of tachyarrhythmias,
as analgesic, for cat with ischenic linb,
heart murmur acconpauying, 59-60
666
in dog. 335-336, 339
in dog,59,60
as anxiolyuic,for dog with pulnonary
in provocarive testing for syncopc, 450
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, in cat,
cdea, 260, 260(t)
Mean clectrieal axis, in
627,627
for pulmomary edema, 914(t)
electrocardiography.
: 74, 76
magneric resonance imaging of. in dog.
recommended dosages of, for cal, 905(),
Median sternotomy, 867
200
914(t)
Mediastintm, 11
pathophysiology of, 540-543
for dog, 905(1), 914(0)
radiography of, 120-121
pulinonary edema accompanying. See
Mosquito, as host to Diroflaria immitis, 702.
Medical history, in diagnosis of
alsMitralregurgitton,heartfaure
Scc also Heartuorm disease.
cardiovaseular discase, 41-45, 42(1)
associated rwith.
 Mouth-to-mouth ventilation, in basic lifc
Melarsonine dihydrochloride, for
mauagemen1 of, 23-224
support, 431
heartworm discase, in dog. 71l-712,
in dog, 261
Mouth-to-nose ventilation, in1 basic life
714, 913(t)
radionuclide angicardiographic liudings
support, 431
Mesothclial ccls, reactive, in pericardial
associated with, in dog, 198
Moxalactan, for cndocardiuis, 577(1)
effusion.836
82828  A8s
 Moxidectin, for heartworm discasc, in dog.
Mesothelioma, pericardial, 695
treatment of, 550-553
721
INDEX
945
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), of
Myocarditum (Contimued)
Neeropsy, of hearl aund great vesscls,
heart, 200, 200
compensatory capacity of, 207(t)
815-849
Mucosal sloughing, froin gastrointestinal
compliance of, 30,31, 217, 217-218
Necrosis, 818(t)
tract, secondary to shock, 286
contractility of, 29. Sce also Myocardium,
yocardial, 818
Mucous menbranes, changes in color of,
fore of contraction of.
in cat, Platc 12
significance of, 44-45, 47-49, Flate 1
diseases of. See Cardiomyopathy (cardiomyop-
Nespoanby61
monitoring of color of, in CPCR,439
athiesy.
Nervous system, central, diseases of, cardiac:
Multiple organ dysfunetiomu syudrome,
cxhaustion of, in rcsponsc to volune
manifestations of, 772
274(0), 274-275, 275(0), 571. Sec also
overload, 209
syncope due to, 447, 452-453
Septir shoch.
failure of. See Heart failure.
Neurocardiogenic syncope, 152
trcauncnt of, 276(t)
filbrosis of, aorlic slcnosis auidl. 487-488
Ncurogenic heart discasc, 772
Murmurs. See Herf murmurs.
cchocardiographic findings associ-
Neurogenic syncope, 447, 452-153
Muscular dystrophy, in dog, 606-607, 832
ated with, 488. 489
Neurohormonal responses. in
myocardial lesions asociated with, 607,
hcart failurc and, 819. 821
cndocardiosis, 542, 543
607
forcc of contraction of, 28-29
in heart failure, 214,758
Mycotic myocarditis, in dog. 612
dependency of, ou preload, 2930
Neurologic impairment, as sign of
Myocardial cell death, in heart failure.
growth of, during normal fetal and carly
cardiovascular discasc, 45
818819
neonatal development, 9
Neuromuscular blocking drugs, for surgical
Myocardlial compliance, 30, 31, 217,
during normal postuatal development,
patient,862-863
217-218
6
Newborn. cardiac work overload in, cffect
Myocardial contractility, 29. See also
hyperfunclion of, in respouse to volume
of, 10
Myocardim,foreofconractiof
overload, 209
circulation in, transition froun feral blood
Myocardial depressant factor, 771
hyperplasia of, during nornal fetal and
flow to, 8-9
Myocardial diseases. See Cardiommyopathy
carly eonatal growth, 9
myocarclial cell growth in. 9
(cardiomyopathies).
hypertrophy of. See Myocardiat hypertro-
ventrienlar growth in, 9, 9
Myocardial cxhaustion, in response t0
phy.
Newfoundland. Scc also Dog(s).
volune overload, 209
infarction of. See Myocardiat infaretion.
cilatcd cardiomyopathy in,583
Myocardial failure. Sce Heart failure.
infection/inflanumation of. See Myocardi-
elecirocardiographic findings associ-
Myocardial fibrosis, aortic stenosis and,
ated with, 590(1)
487-488
injgry to, from volume overload, 209
Nitrates. See also specific agents, c.g..
echocardiographic findings associatcd
ischemia of, in cat with hypertrophic car-
Nitrogtyerin; Nitroprusside.
wih,488,489
diomyopathy, 625-626
for heart failure, 223-224, 237(0), 239-
hcart failure and, 819, 821
in dog, 610
240
Myocardial form, of RCM, in cat, 641, 642,
thalliun scan indicating, 199
 in dog with mitral regurgitation, 552
642. See also Restrictive cartioyopathy.
necrosis of. 818
Nitroglycerin, adverse effecrs of, 914(t)
Myocarcdial hypcrfuction, in responsc to)
in cat, Plate 11
for heart failure, 224. 237(t), 239-240,
volume overload, 209
oxyge1 content of, 33, 33
914(t)
Myocardial hypcrplasia, dluring nornal fetal
perfusion of, evaluation of, based on up-
in cat with dilated cardionyopathy, 650
aud carly neonatal growth, 9
take of radioisotopes, 199
in cat with hypertrophic cardionyopa-
Myocardial hypcrtrophy. See also
relaxation of, 217
thy, 637
Hypertrophiccardiomyopathy:Hspertrophy,
abnormal, electrocardiographic find-
in dog with mitral regurgitation 552
ventricuter
ings associated with, 624, 624
for pulmonary edenma, 260, 260(t). Sce
concentric, pressurc overload and, 208.
sarconere function in, 29.29
also Nitroglycerin. for hrart failure.
758, 818
stiffncss of 30, 30, 32
recommended dosages of, for cat, 904(t),
ecceatric, volume overload and, 208, 737,
ultrastructure of, 10, 10-11. /1
911(t)
818
Myopathy. See also Cardliomyopaty
for dog, 904(t), 914(1)
normal postnatal growth and, 9
(cardiomyopathies).
Nitroprussidc, adverse effecrs of, 914(t)
Myocardial infarction, 837-839
atriovcntricular, 81, 836-837
for heart failure, 223-224, 237(1)
electrocardiographic findings associated
in cat, 392, 658, 836
in dog with dilated cardionyopathy.
with,88-89,89
electrocardiographic characterisics
596
 in cat with hyperrophic cardiomyopathy,
of, 81, 81
for pulmomary edema, 260, 260(t).
635, 837, 838
in dog, 403, 466, 607-608, 608, 836,
914(1). Scc also Nitroprusside, for heart
in dog, 610
837
faiture.
pathology of, 837839,838
clectrocardiographic characteristics
in dog with dilated cardiomyopathy.
hallium scandicating,199
 of. 81
261
peoaao aunoa uy hmfu jepieso
hyperkalcmia and, 89
in dog with mitral regurgitarion, 261
209
Myxomatous degeneration, of
for shock,283,283(1)
Myocardial ischemia, in cat with
atriovcntricular valves, See
recomnended dosages of, for cat, 914(t)
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 625-626
Fndocartiosis.
for dog, 904(0), 914(1)
in dog. 610
Nirous oxide,as ansthtic agent,8
thalium scan indicating, 199
Nonbacterial thrombotic: endoearditis, 568
Myocardial oxygen consumption, 33. 34
Noucardiogenic pulnonary ederma, 254,
Myocardial perfusion, evaluation of, baset
Nadoleol, adversc cffects of, 914(1)
259. Scc also Putmonary edena.
on uptake of radioisotopes, 199
for arrhythumias, 914(t)
treatment. of, 262
Myocardial relaxation, 217
in dog, 315(t)
Nomrestricive ventricular septal defects.
abnormal, electrocardiographic findings
for heari failture, 244
157
associated with, 624, 624
for hypertension, 914(t)
Nonselective angiocardiography, 187. Scc
Myocardial sliffness, 30, 30, 32
rccommended dosages of, for cat, 914(t)
alsAngiocardiography.
Myocarditis, 832-833. See also Endocarditis.
for dog, 914(t)
Norepinephrine, for shock, 283, 283(t)
in cat, 657, 657, 820, 832, 833
Nafeilln, for cndocardius, 577(t)
Norfloxacin, for endocardlitis, 577(t)
11 dog, 465, 610-612, 611, 832, 833
Narcotics, as preanesthetic agents, 858(t),
Suclear cardiology. Sce Radionuctide
Myocardinun. 15. See also Myocardial entries
859(t), 860-861
rmgiocardiography.
au1d Myocerditis.
cough-suppressan1.904(1), 909(t),912(t)
Nutritional deficiencies, cardiac:
apoptosis of, heart failure and, 818819
Ncar ficld, in ultrasonography, 13!
manifestations of. 777
Cardiac jelly separating cndocardium
Near-syucope,446. See also Syncope.
Nuritoal spor, n manage f
from, 4
Neck and head, cxamination of, 47-50
shock, 287
946
INDEX
Nyquist limit, and Doppler-derived blood
Pwave (Continuen)
Patent ducius arleriosus (Continued)
flow velocity 139-140
and QRS complex, in supraventricular vs.
canine breed predisposition to, 460.
ventricular tachyarrhythmiasin dog.
460(t)
333-334, 336, 337, 338
coil occlusion of, 190
Pacemaker, 400-424
Obesity, cardiac manifestations of, 776
in dog, 511, 512
bipolar, 409,410
echocardiographic evidence of. 154-155,
Object resolution, in ultrasonography, t31
Obstrucive pulmonary isease, chronic.
coding of, 406, 407
507
comnplicarioms associated with, 412, 414,
in dog, 156, 510
761
Obstructive shock, 273, 273(t). See also
415, 417, 419-424
electrocardiographic findings associated
in dog, 413,419-422, 24
with. 507
Shock.
Ocult hyperthyroidisn, 784-785
elecarocardiographie findings associated
in dog, 510
Ocular lesicons, hypertension and, 802,
with, in dog, 404, 407, 408, 411,413,
heart murmurs accompanying, 62
802(t),Platc 2
419-422,42-1
in dog. 62
electrophysiologic characteristics of, 403
interventional cardiac catheterization for,
rcsulis of examination for, in diagnosis of
cardiovascular disease, 45, 49, Plate
10-'90F
190
endocardial, implantation of. 414-115,
in dog. 511, 512
2
416(t)-418(t)
left-to-right shunt accompanying, 507-
Omega-3 falty acids, effects of, on blood
epicardial, implamtation of, 415, 419(t)
pressure,745
508,824
Open-chest cardiac massage, in basic life
external, 408
echiocardiographic findings associated
support, 431-435
im plantation of, 414(t)
with, 154-155, 507
Open-hearl surgery, for aortic stenosis, 873
hemodynamic: characteristics of, 41 1-414,
in dog, 156, 510
inadlvisability of. in treatment of pul-
412
treatment of. in dog, 511, 512
monic stenosis, 872
implantation of, 414(t), 414-415, 415,
pathology of. 824
416(0)-119(t)
 Ohgan dysfumction, inultiple, syndrone of,
in dog.824
274(t),274-275,275(0)
indications for, 400, 402-403
prevalence of, in dog, 459(t), 459-460
treatment of, 276(t)
leads for, 409, 410
pulmonary hypertension acconpanying.
Orthopnea, 46
problems with, 415, 417, 419. 420, 421
ScePaen dutusrterisus,rrd.
Orton modification, of patch-grafl surgery,
permanent, 108-409
"'reversed, 509-512
for pulmonic stcnosis, 872
programming of, 411
echocardiographic findings associated
Osteopathy, hypertropic,inectious
problens with,419
with, 155, 510
endocarditis and, 570
rheobase and chronaxy in, 404, 405
right-to-left shunt accompanying, 509-
paap rdas ene ad-nad u
right atrial, implantation of, 418(t)
5t2. 824
495, 825
strength-duration curve for, 404, 404-405
echocardiographic findings associated
echocardiographic findings associated
temporary. 408
with, 155, 510
with, in dog, 196, Plate 8
implantation of, 414(t)
treatment of, 190, 876, 876-877. 877
gross morphology of, 825
unipolar, 409. 410
in dog. 511, 512
in cat, 495
ventricular, implantation of, 416(t)
complications of, 511, 512
Ostium secndum-type atrial scptal defect.
417(0. 419(1)
in dog with hearr failure, 228
157, 495. 825
Pacemaker syndrome, 423
recanalization following, 877
echocardiographic findings associated
Palpation, of neck, 50
volume overload associated with, 209-
witht, in dog, 134
Pancreas, inflammatory disease of, cardiac
210, 210
gross merphology of, 825
Patent ductus venosus, 529
in cat,495
insulin secretion by, 767
Overicad, onheart, respouse to, 209-210
PDA. See Patent ductus arteriosux.
insufficient, 767-768
PDE. (phiosphodiesterase) Il inhibitors, for
during fetal period, 9-10
Pancreatitis, cardiac manifestations of,
heart failure, 224, 229(t), 234-235
during postnatal pcriod, 10
Pernbroke Welsh corgi. See also Dog(s).
in forn of myocardial hypertrophy,
Papillary muscles, 19
M-mode cchocardiography in, normal
208, 757-758.818
Paralysis, limb, ampuation in mamagement
findings on, 145(t)
Oximetry 183-184
of, in car, 665, 666
Penicillins, for endocarditis, 577(t)
in CPCR, 410
in monitoring of anesthetized palient,
dilated cardiomyopathy and, in cat,
for shock, 284(t), 284-285
647
Tercutaneous approach, to right-sided
864
hypertrophic cardionyopathy and, in
cardiac catheterizalion, 174175. See
Oxygen. consumption of, in shock, 268,
cat, 628.660
also Cardiac catheterization.
269,282
reperfusion following, complicated by
Percutaneous transtracheal oxygen
and oxygen debl, 269
hyperkalemia, in cat, 666
insuflation, in basic life support, 429
myocardial, 33.31
thromboembolism and, in cat, 44, 660.
Perfusion fixation, of hear1, 848849
delivery of, in shock, 268, 269, 282
oniroring of partial pressure of. in
099
Perfusion indices, monitoring of, in CPCR,
Parasitic infestation. See Ieurtwowrm disease.
439,440
（CPCR.441
Parasynpathetic effects, of antiarrhythmics,
monitoring of transport of, in CPCR, 440
in management of shock, 267
()606
myocardial, based on uptake of radioiso-
in managcment of shock, 267
Oxygen therapy, and basic: life support. in
Parasystole, 101-102, 303
topes,199
CPCR, 431-432
Parathyroid glands, inadvertent resection
Pericardial cavity, 14, 679
for heart failure, 223
of, during 1hyroidectony, 788
Pericardial effusion, 690-696
in cat with dilated cardiomyopathy, 650
Paresis. See Paratysis.
acute, 691
in cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
Parietal pericardium, 679, 680. See also
Cardiac tampomade in relation to. See
thy, 637-638
Pericardial entries.
Tumponade,curdiac.
for pumonary edema. 258-259. See also
Partial pressure, carbon dioxide,
chronic, 691
Oxyen therapy, for heart failure.
monitoring of, in CPCR, 441
clinical manifestalions of, 690-691
Oxyglobin, as red blood cell substitute, 280
oxygen, monitoring of, in CPCR, 441
cytologic evaluation of, 695
Oxymorphone, rccommended dosages of,
Patch-grafl technique, of surgery for
echocardiographic findings associated
for cat, 905(t)
pulmonic stenosis, 871, 871-872
with, 164, 167, 693
Oxyradicals, toxic, complicating shock,287
Patent ductus arteriosus, 505-512
in dog, 165,167, 691,693
angiocardiographic findings assoxciated
effect of, on pericardial pressure-volume
with, 508-509
relationships, in dog, 680
in cat, /89
electrical ahernans acconpanying, 90,
P wave, 72,74
in dog, 508
691-602
INDEX947
Pericardial effusion (Contimued)
Pericardium (Comtinued)
Pleural effusion (Continued)
in1 dog, 90, 691
visceral, 679, 680
radiographic findings associated with,
electrocardiographie findings associated
Peripheral arterial catheterization, in
126
with, 90, 691-692
CPCR, 441
in cat with dilated cardiomyopathy. 648
ini dog, 90, 691
 in left-sided cardiac catheterization, 177,
Plexogenic pulmonary arteriopathy,
etiology of,in cat,6
178. 179-180. See also Cardiac cathe-
Eisenmenger's physiology and, 826
in dog,685-686
terization.
Pueumonitis, cosinophilic, in dog with
idiopathic, 685
Peripheral cyanosis, 49
heartworm disease, 716
treatment of, 695
Peripheral edema, causes of, 44, 47
Pneumothorax, in surgical patient, 857
infectious, 685
Peripheral perfusion, monitoring of, in
Polyarthritis, infectious endocarditis and,
treatment of, 695
CPCR, 439
049
in sugical patient. 857
Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia.
Polycythemia. cardiac manifestations of.
pathology of.835
See Pericardiai/peritoneopericardil
772-773
pericardiocentesis for, 694-695
diaphragmati hernia.
Poocdle. Sec also Dog(s).
physical findings associated with, 691
Peritoniis, infectious, feline, pericardial
echocardiography in, endocardiosis on,
prevalence of,in cat,466
lesions accompanying, 688
161, 162
inn dog. 466
Permanent pacemaker 408-409. See also
miniature. See Miniatwe poodle.
radiographice findings associated with,
Pucenaker.
radiography in, fealures of heart failure
692-693
Persistent atrial standstill (atrioventricular
on, 256
in dog, 118, 118
myopathy),81, 836-837
pulmonary edema on, 257
rearctive mesothelial cels in, 836
in cat, 392,658,836
Positioning, for radiography. 108
surgery for, 695
electrocardiographic characteristics of,
Positive chronotropic drugs. See specilite
tumors causing, 686, 695
81.87
agenis, c.g,Atropine; Gtyropyrniate;
Pericardial Hluid (liquor pericardit).
in dog, 403,466.607-608,608,836,837
Isoproterenot.
679-680
 electrocardiographie characteristics of,
Positive inotropic drugs. See also specific
accummulation of excess of. See Paicardial
81
agents, e.g, Digials preperatios;
hyperkalemia and, 89
Dobutamine: Dopamine.
efflusion.
Pericardial/peritoneopericardial
Persistenr left cranial vena cava, 529
for heart failure, 224. 229(1), 229-235.
diaphragmatic hernia, 526,682684,
in dog, 529
260(1)
683
Persistent right aortic arch, 528
in cat with dilated cardiomyopathy, 630
abnormalities acconpanying, 835
in cat, 528
in dog with dilated cardiomyopathy.
age distribution of, in cats, 683
ini dog, breed predisposition to, 462
596
prevalence of, 459(t), 462
for pulmonary edema, 260. See also Pust.
in dogs, 68.3
Cysts associated with, 684
surgery for. 878
tite inotropic drugs,for heart failare.
radiographic findings associated with,
Pharmacotherapy. See Irug(s).
for sh0ck. 270. 282-283, 283(t)
118,526,683-684
Phenothiazines, as preanesthetic agents,
for surgical paticnt, 856
ir dog, 684
859(1), 859-860
recomnended dosages of, for cat, 904(t)
Pericardiectomy, 879-880
Phenylephrine, adverse effects of, 914(t)
for dog, 904(t)
Pericardiocentesis, 867
for arrhythmias, 914(t)
 Positive pressure ventilation, in basic life
for pericardial effusion or cardiac: tam-
for shock, 283, 283(t)
support,432-433
for supraventricular tachyeardia, in dog.
Posterior paresis. See also Puratysis, limb.
ponade, 691-695
Pericarditis, 835-836
in cat. with thromboembolism, 44
recommendled dosages of, for dog,
Potassiun, in commercial dog foods,
constrictive, 696-698
in dog. 696-698
914(t)
742(1)-743(t)
hemodynamic effecis of, 680, 696.
Phenytoin, adverse efects of, 315(t), 915(t)
Potassium balance, disturbances of. See
Potassium defecit: Potassiam excess.
697, 698
elec:rocardiographic parameters affected
Potassium chloride, for hypokalemia,
infectious, 835
by, 311(1)
for arrhythmias, 915(t)
915(1)
uremic, 770
Potassium deficit, 741-742, 769-770
Pericardium, 14, 679-681. See also
in dog, 315(1)
electrocardiographic characteristics of,
Pericardiad entries and Pericarditis.
 interaction of chloramphenicol with, ef-
absence of, 681
768,769
fects of, 326(t)
acquircd diseases of, 685-696
recommcnded dosages of, for dog.
supplements countering, 915(1)
Potassinum excess, 769
anatonny of, 679-680
904(t),915(t)
arrhythmias associacd with,in cat,388
congenital diseases 0f. 681-685, 835. See
Pheochromocytoma, 765-766
electrocardiographic. characlerislics of,
also specific types, eg., Peicardial/per-
Phonocardiography, 52, 52. See also Heurt
spunos umsenunu
89-90, 768, 769
itoneopericardialdiaphragmati:hernic.
constrictive lhuickening of. See Pericarditis.
HCM-related changes on, in cal. 630
in dog, 89
constrictive.
heart. murmurs on, in dog, 59, 60, 62
cysts in,684-685, 685, 686
split second heart sound on, in dog. 55
in dog, 89
reperfusion sydrome and, in cat with is-
disease of, 681698. See also Pericardial
third heart sound on, in dog with dilated
chemic: limb, 666
entries.
cardiormyopathy, 56
Potassium gluconalc, for hypokalemia,
management of, 218
 Phosphodiesterase If inhibitors, for heart
915(t)
surgery in, 879-880
failure, 224, 229(t), 234235
Potassium-sparing diuretics. See also
pathology of, 835-836
Pltysical exanination, in diaguosis of
specific. agents, e.g.. Spironolactone.
function of, 680-681
cardiovascular disease, 46-64
for heart failure, 235(t): 237
innervation of, 680
Pinscher. See Doherman pinsrher.
Potts' anastomosis, inadvisability of. in
mesothelioma of, 695
Plasma, in management of shock,279
surgery for tetralogy of Fallot, 875
in dog. 686, 688
vs. other colloids, 278(1)
Prazosin,239
parietal, 679,680
Pleura(e). 14
adverse effects of, 915(t)
perforations in, congenital, 681, 681-682
Pleural cavities, 14
for heart failure. 237(1), 239, 915(t)
pressure-volume relationships in, 680
Pleural effusion, 126
in man, 552
in clog, 680
echocardiograptic findings associated
for hypertension, 805(t). 915(t)
in dog with constrictive pericarditis,
with, 167
recommended dosages of, for dog,
089
in cat. 165, 168
904(t).915(0)
in dog with pericardial effusion, 680
in dog, 165, 693
Preanestheic drugs, 858(), 858-861,
vascular supply of, 680
in surgical patient, 857
859(1)
948
INDEX
Prednisone. Scc alse Steroids.
Propranolol (Continued)
Pulmonary hypertension, patent ductus
for sequelae of heartworm disease, in
for myocardial infarction, in cat with hy-
arteriosus and, See Patert ducfus
dog, 714, 716, 718
pertrophic cardiomyopathy, 635
arteriosus, “rewersed."
Pregnancy cardiac hanges occurring
for supraventricular tachiycardia, in dog.
Pulnonary hypervascularity, racliographic
during,777
348, 349
appearance of, 122-123.124
Preload, 24-25
for ventricular tachycardia, in cat, 398
Pulmonary lymphatics, 252
force of myocardial contraction in rela-
recommended dosages of, for cat, 903(t),
Pulmonary trunk, 15, 21
tion to, 29-30
915(1)
 cnlarged radiographic appearance of.
Prcmature beats. See Extrasystoles.
for dog, 903(t), 915(t)
119, /20
Pressure overload, and concentric
Propylthionracil, for hypertyroidisn, 786
Pulnonary valve. See Putmonie vatuw.
myocardial hypertrophy, 208, 758, 818
Protozoal myocarditis, in dog, 61l-612
 Pulmonary veins, 15
Presyncope, 446. See also Syncope.
P'seudonormalization, echocardliographic
development. of, 7
Procainamide, 314,316, 363
findings associated with. 624, 624
Pulmouic regurgitation,859
adverse elfecis of, 315(0), 316, 915(t)
Pseudetruncus arteriosus, 573, 576, 520
and heart murmur, 559
tlectrcardiographic parameters affected
Psychoacousic aspecis、 of auseultation, 51,
 in dlog, 62
by, 311(t), 316
51
Pulmonic stenosis, 159, 478485
for arrhythmias, 314, 915(t)
Pulnonary arteriopathy, plexogenic,
angiocardiographic findings associated
in cal, 315(t), 398
Eisenmenger's physiology and, 826
with. 481-482
in dog, 315(t). 350, 363, 364-365
Pulmonary arteriotomy, inllow occlusion
in dog, 189, 484
in dog with dilated cardiomyopathy,
and, for pulmonic stenosis, 870-871,
balloon dilation for, 190, 868
865
871
canine breed predisposition to, 461.
for supraventricular tachycardia, in dog,
Pulmonary artery(ies), as site of
461(t)
350
heartworms.See fieartworm disense.
cchocardiographic evidence of, 159-160,
for ventricular tachyeardia, in cat. 398
banding of,in surgery for ventricular
sep
482-483
in dog, 363, 364-365
tal defects, 874, 87.f
in dog. /36, 159-160. 160, 486, Platc 3
rccommended dosages of. for cat, 915(t)
catheterizalion of, in CPCR 441
clectrocardiographic findings associated
for d0g, 904(t), 915(t)
Pulmonary cireulation, 251-252
with, 481
Programning, of pacemaker, 411
Pulmonary edema, 251-262
in dlog, 482
problens with, 419
air bronchograns as sign of, 256. 257,
gross morphology/patology of, 823
rheobase and chronaxy in, 404, 405
258,259,261
in cat, 823
Propafenone, 319-320
cardiogenic. See leart faiure.
in dog, 478. 179, 480, 823
advcrse effects of. 315(t), 319-320,
clinical manifestatious of, 256
heart failure accompanying, treatment
915(0)
diagnosis of, 256-258
0f, 228
drugs interacting wit, effects of, 326(t)
dilated cardiomyopathy and, in dog, 256
heart murmur associated with, 61
telecirocardiographic parameters afected
treaument of, 261-262
 interventional cardiac catheterization for,
bry, 311(t)
treatment of, 223-224
190
for arrhythnuias. 319, 915(t)
dinuretics for, 909(t), 912(t)
prevalence of, in dog, 459(t), 460-461
in dog, 315(0), 350, 354
genesis of, 210, 210-211,252-254
radiographic findings associated with,
evidence of elfectiveness of, on ECG.
stages of, 254-256
481
.351
heart failure and. See leur faiave.
in dog. 482
for atrial fibrillation, in dog. 354
high-permeability, 253-254
right ventricular hypertrophy accompa-
for supraventricular tachycardia, in dog.
hypertrophic cardionyopathy and, in cat,
ying, in dog, 482
350
258, 628, 630, 632
surgery Ior, 869, 869-872, 871
evidence of effectiveness of. on ECG,
treatment of, 261, 637-638
Pulmonic valve, 21
350
in surgical patient, 856
blood flow in or across, Doppler-derived
recommended dosages of, for dog,
lung sounds in relation to, 256
velocity of. in cat, 154(t)
915(t)
mitral regurgitation and, treatment of,
inn dog, 154(t)
Propantheline, for sick sinus syndrome, 450
223-224
regurgitant. See Pulmonir regurgitation.
for vasovagal syucope, 452
in dog, 261
stenosis of. See Paulmonie stenosis.
Propofol, as ancsthc age, 61
noncardiogenic, 254,259
Pulse(s), arterial, 62-64, 63
Propranolol, 320-321
treatmenl of. 262
 abnormal, in infectious endocardlitis.
adverse effects of. 315(t), 32t, 915(t)
0xygen therapy in management of, 258-
849
drugs interacting with, effects of, 326(1)
259.Salslfrexye
monitoring of, in CPCR, 440
elccrocardiographic parameter affcted
apy for
jugular venous,49,49,50
by. 311(t)
primary alveolar-capillary membrane in-
Pulse oxinetry, in CPCR, 440
in dog with atrial lter, 353
 jury and, 253-254
in monitoring of anesthetized patient.
for arrhythmias, 320, 915(1)
radiographic findings associaied with,
+98
in cat, 315(t), 398
125-126, 257-258
Pulsed-wave Doppler echiocardiography, 138
in cat with hypertrophic: cardiomyopa
in cat,258,258,630,632
88I jo sabenueape
thy, 636
in dog, 256, 257,258,259,261
disadvantages of, 138
in dog. 315(t), 348, 349
ruptured chordae tendineae and, in dog.
mitral regurgitation on, in dog, 137
for congenital theart disease, 485(t)
261
patent ductus arleriosus on, in dog, 156
for licM and arrhythnias,in cat,636
seizure and, in dog, 259
pulmonic stenosis on, in dog, f86
for HCM and heart failure, in cat, 637
sodiun nitroprusside for. See Nitroprus
Pulsus alternaus, 63, 63
for HCM and left ventricular outlow
side, for pumonary edemt.
Pulsus bigeininus, 63. 63
tract. obstruction, in cat, 639
thyrotoxic heart failure and, manage-
Pulsus paradoxus, 63, 63, 690
for HCM and myocardial infarction, in
ment of, in cat, 786
cat, 635
treatmen1 of, 258-262, 260(t). See also
for heart failure. 243
Hert fuiture, treatment of.
in cat with hypertroptic cardiomnyopa-
anxiety reduction in, 260, 260(t)
QRS complex, 72. 74
thy, 637
diuretics in, 909(t). 912(t)
morphology of.in supraventricular vs.
for hypertension, 805(0. 915(1)
morphine in, 914(t)
ventricular achyarrtythmias, in dog.
for hyperthyroidism, 786, 787
sodium nitroprusside in. See Ntroprus-
333, 333, 334, 335
for left ventricular oulow tract obstruc-
side,for puimonary edema.
I wave and, in supraventricular vs. venl-
tion, in cat with hypertrophic cardio-
Pulmonary fibrosis, radiographir: findings
tricular tachyarrhythmias, in dog.
689 Kpedoiu
associated with, 126
333-834, 336, 337,338
INDEX
949
QT interval, 74
Radiography (Continued)
Re-entranl tachycardia (Comtinued)
abnormal, 87, 87-88
lynphadenopathy on,120.121
sinus nodal, in dog, 339, 341
Quinidine, 313-314
mediastinal structures on. 120-121
Reflex syncope, 452
adverse effects of. 314. 315(0), 915(t),
initral valve dysplasia manifested on, in
916(t)
dog, 52.3
Doppler echocardiography, 154
drugs interacling with, effects of. 326(t)
pericardial cysts on, in dog, 686
sites of. See Aortic regurgitation, Mitral p-
electrocardiographic parameters alfected
pericardial effusion-related changes on,
gurgitation; etc.
by, 311(t). 313
869-769
Rclaxaton, myocardial. 217
for arrhythmias, 313. 915(t). 916(t)
in dog. 118, 118
abnormal,echocardiographic findings
pericardial/peritoneopericardial dia-
associated with, 624. 624
for supravcntricular tachycardia, in dog.
phiragmatir: hernia on, 118, 526,
Renal pathology. See Kidney(s).
189-689
Renin-ngitensin system11241
350
recommended dosages of, for dog.
in dog, 684
Reperfusion syndrome. hyperkalemia due
904(t). 915(1), 916(t)
pleural effusion on, 126
to, in cat with ischemie limb, 666
in cal, 648
Resistance, vasculat, systemic, 32, 33
positioning for, 108
Resolution, in ulurasonography, 131
prominent pulmonary trunk on,119,120
Respiratory disease, See Lung disease(s).
Radioactive iodine, for hyperthyroidism.
pulmomary edema on, 125-126, 257-258
Respiratory failure, doxapran for, 9i1(t)
789
in cat, 258, 258, 630, 632
shock amd, 286-287
Raliography 107-128
in dog,256,257,258,259,261
Restrictive cardiomyopathy, 641-645
abdominal structures on, 127
pulmonary fibrosis on, 126
echocardiographic findings associated
aortie arch on, size of. 119-120
pulmonary hypervascularity on,12123.
with, 163
aortic stenosis evidenced on, 489
24
in cat, 641-645
RCM-related changes on, in cat, 644
angiocardiograplic findings assoxciated
in dog. 491
cardiac silhouelle on, 108, 111(t). See
right atrial enlargement on, 1l6. See also
withi, 644, 644
Radiography, cardiomegaly om.
arrhythmias associated with, 387(t)
alsc Radiography.cardiomegaly on.
cardiac tumor-related changes on, 120
rigt ventricular enlargement on, 116,
clinical manifestations ol, 643
116-117,117. See also Radiography,
differential diagnosis of, 644
in dog, 692
Cardiomegaly on, 111-117、/12
cardiomegaly on.
echocardiographie findings associated
congenital heart disease and. 474-475
signs of pulnonic regurgitation on, 559
with, 643, 644
dilated cardiomnyopathy and, in cat,
signs of pulmonic stenosis on, 481
electrocardiographtic findings associ-
648
in dog, 482
ated with, 631(t), 643-644
in dog, 256,591, .591, 592
signs of subaortic slenosis on, 489
endonyocardial form of, 641, 642.
endocardiosis and, 113
in dog.491
643, 613
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, in
sigus of thrombcembolism on, in cat,
etiopathogenesis of, 641-642
heart failure accompanying, treatmenl
cat,114,115,258,630,631
644
small heart on, 1ll, 111
(of, 225
in dog,604, 605
techuical aspects of, 108
myocardial form of, 641, 642, 642
thromboembolism and, in car, 661
thoracic conformation on, 109, 110
pathology of,642,642-643.643,821
tricuspid regurgitation and, 57
thyrotoxicosis-related heart lesions on, in
pathophysiology of, 642
in dog, U!4
physical findings associated with.643
cardiomyopathic changes on, in cat, 630.
calt, 783, 784
631, 632, 644, 648, 648
tracheal collapse on,121,122
prevalence of, 623
in dog,591.591,592,604, 605
tricuspid valve dysplasia manifested on,
therapy for, 218, 645
thromboembolisn associated with, 658.
caudal vena cava on, 120
525
See also Thronboembolism.
congenital heart defecis on, 127、 127(t),
in dog,114,523
views used in, 108, 109, 110
in man, 641
474-475
v. echocardiography, in terms of diagnos-
Restricive filling paern,
constrictive pericarditis on, 697
echocardiographic findings associated
DCM-retated changes on, in cat, 648. 648
lic yiell, 107
VSD-related findings on, 503
with,624, 624
in dog. 256,591. 591.592
Iransition between impaired relaxation
dirofilariasis-related changes on, in cal,
in dog, 503
Radionuclide angiocardiography 194,194
and,624. 624
123, 731, 731
 Restrictive ventricular septal defects, 157
in dog,117,123,125,709-710,710,
in evaluation of shunts, /94, 194195,
Resuscitaion. See Curdioputmonary cerebral
717, 717-718
195.196
evidence of endocardiosis on, 113
in evaluation of ventricular function,
restescifation.
Retriever. See specific types, e.g, Golden
evidence of endocarditis on, 575
195-199, 197, 197(t), 198
retrever; Labrudor retriever.
features of heart failure on, 107
Radionuclide imaging, of thyroid gland, in
"Reversed” patent ductus arteriosus,
in cat, 258
diagnosis of hyperthyroiclism, 785, 785
Ramipril, adverse effects of, 916(t)
509-512
in dog, 256, 257
ec:hocardiographie findings associated
focal pulmonary lesions on, heart disease
for heart failure, 916(t)
with, 155, 510
and, 126
for hypertension, 805(t), 916(t)
Reynold's mumber, for blood flow. 137
HCM-related changes on, in cal, 114,
recominended dosages of, for cat, 916(t)
Rheobase, in programming of pacemaker.
115, 258.630, 631, 632
for dog, 916(t)
RCM.SeeRestrictive rrdiomyopathy
104,405
in dog, 604, 605
Right aortic arcl, persistent, 528
heart size on, 11l1-117. See also Radiogra-
Reacfive mesothelial cells, in pericardial
in1 cat, 528
phey, cardiomeguly on.
cffusion, 836
in dog. bred predisposition to, 462
heartworm-related changes on, in cal,
 Recanalization, following surgery for patent
prevalence of, 459(0), 462
123,731,731
ductus arteriosus, 877
surgery for, 878
in dog.117, 123,125, 709-710. 710,
Red blood cell(s), increase in mass of,
Righit atrial pacemaker, implantation of,
717, 717-718
cardiac manifestations of. 772-773
418(t)
hepatomegaly on, 127
substiutes for, in management of shock,
Rigit atrioventricular orifice, 17
intrapericardial cysts on, in dog.686
280
Right atrioventricular valve. See Tricuspid
left atrial cnlargement on, 113116. See
Re-entrant activation, and arrhythmias, 102,
vutue.
alsoRadiography.cardiomegalyo
300-303.301
Right atrium, 15, 16-17
left ventricular enlargement on, 113. See
Re-cntrant. tachycardia, atrioventricular
enlargement of. See also Cardiomegaly.
alsoRudiography,cardiomegralyon.
1odal, in dog. 345-346, 346
electrocardiographic findings associ-
lung field in, i21-125
bypass tract-mediated, in dog, 347
ated withi, 77-78. 78
950INDEX
Right atrium (Comtinued)
Saline, hypertonic, in lluid therapy for
Stock (Contimued)
radiographic appearance of, 116
shock, 277
pathophysiology of, tenporal aspccts of,
hemangiosarcoma of, 880
Sal-resricted diet. See Sodium-restricted dit.
266
cchocardiographic findings associated
Saluki. See also Dog(s).
prognostic factors in, 267, 268, 269
with, 166, 168, 694
pacemaker for, electrocardiographic find-
seplic, 273(0), 274-275, 571
in dog, 166, 687, 694, 880
ings associated with, 404
cardiac manifestations of, 774-775
surgery for, 880
Sarcomere, 29,29
drug therapy lor, 283(t), 284(1). 284
 opening of, at necropsy. 846
Scarring, endomyocardial, idiopathic,
285
Rigit coronary artery. 21
echocardiographic findings associated
infectious cndocarditis and, 571, 577
Right costocervical vein, 418
with, 163
pathogenesis of, in man, 775
 pacemaker inplantation via, 415. 417(1)
Scattered echoes, 131
Shunt(ing), 824826
Righit lung, 15
Sehnauzer, niniature. See also Dog(s).
atrial septal defecl and, 157, 496-497
Righit. ventricle, 15, 17, 19-20
sick sinus syndrome and tachycardia
echocardiographie findings associated
double-chanbered, 480
998 'u1
with, in dog, 134,135
angiocardiographic findings associated
sinoatrial block in, 8!
bidirctional, AsD and, echocardio.
with, in dog.481
Scintigraphy. See Raionurlide entries.
graphic findings assowialcd with, in
cchocardiographic findings associated
Scottish deerhound. See also Dog(s).
dog, 135
with, in dog, 481
dilated cardiomyopathy in, 583
iudicator dilution identifying, 186, 186-
double-outct,519
Sccond-degree atrioventricular block, 82-83
187
dysplasia of, arrhythmogenic. Sce Right
in cat, 83, 394-395, 395, 401
left-to-right, 824-825
tmttriclercardiomyopatey.
ini dog, 82, 375, 401
as problem in surgical patient, 856
enlargemcnt of. See also Cardiomegaty;
Second heart. sound, 5455
indicalor dilution identifying, 186
Rightentrieperropof
split, 55, 55, 55(1)
patent ductus arlcriosus and. 507-508,
Sedatives, for cat. 854(t)
824
ated with. 78-79, 79
for dog, 854(t)
echocardliograplic: findings associ-
radiographic appearance of, 116, 116
Seizure(s), 448
ated with, 154-135, 507
117,//7
pulmonary edema secondary to, in dog.
in dog. 156, 510
function of, radionuclide angiocardiogra-
259
trcaument of in dog, 511, 512
phy in evaluation of, 197(t)
vs. symcope, 447-448
radionuclide angiocardiography in cval-
hyperrophy of,I16.See also Myocardial
Seldinger technique, of cardiac
uation of, 794,194195, 195
catheterization, 174175. See also
ventricular septal defect and, echocardi-
electrocardiographic findings associ-
Caurdiac catheterization.
ographic findings associated with,
ated with, in dog with pulmonic
Selective angiocardiography, 187-188. See
in dog, 504
stcnosis, 482
hydoopwuuyose
patent ducus arteriosus and, 507-512,
opening of. at necropsy. 846
 Sepsis syndrome, 570-571
821
ouflow tract bstruction in, hypertrophir:
Septation, of heart, 46, 6
echocardiographic findings associated
cardionyopathy and, in cai, 628
Septice shock, 273(t), 274-275, 571
wilh, 154-155, 507, 510
Right ventricular cardiomyopathy, in cat,
cardiac manifestations of, 774-775
in dog, 156, 510
653-635, 654, 655, 831-832
drug therapy for. 283(t), 284(0), 284-285
treaunent of, in dog, 511, 5/2
in dog, 609
infectious endocarditis and, 571,577
radionuclide angiocardiography in evalua-
in man, 608-609
pathogenesis of, in man, 775
tion of, 194, 194-195, 195, 196
Right-sided cardiac cathetcrization, 177,
Seroma, in pacmakcr recipient, 424
right-to-left, 825-826
178. Sce also Cardinc. catheterization.
Setter. See also Dogis).
as problein in surgical patient, 856857
percutaneous (Scldinger) approach to.
 echocardiography in, evidence of endo-
atrial septal defecl and, cchocardio-
174175
carditis on, 16
graphie finclings associated with.
Right-sided heart failure. See also Hear!
occlusion of palent ductus arteriosus in,
in dog, 134
fauittre.
512
cchocardiographic demonstration of,
vs. lef-sided heart failure, 222-223
racliography in, VSD-related findings on.
Right-to-lefl shunt, 825-826
503
in dog, 134
as problem in surgical patient. 856-857
Sevoflurane, as anesthetic agent, 862
indicator dilution idenifying, 186
atrial septal defect and, echocardio-
Shadowing, acoustic, 132
 patent ductus arteriosus and, 509-512,
graphic findings associated with.in
Sheepdog, Fnglish. See also Dog(s).
824
dog,1.3-1
dilated cardiomyopathy in, 582(t). 583
cchocardiographie fincings associ-
echocardiographic demonstration of, 134
Shilh-tzu. See also Dogts).
ated with, 155. 510
in dog, /34
radiography in, right ventricular enlarge-
radiomuclide angiocardiography in eval.
indicator diluion identifying, 186
ment.om,/17
uation of, 195,196
patent ductus arieriosus and, 509-512.
Shock, 265-287
ventricular septal defcet and. 157
824
cardiogenic, 272-273, 273(1)
echocardiographic findings associated
echocardiographic: findlings associated
classification of. 272-274, 273(1)
with. in dog. 504
wih, 155.510
distribulive, 273, 273(0)
indicator dilution idenifying. 186
radiomuclidc angiocardiography in evalua-
hypovolcmie, 273, 273(0)
Siamesc cat. See also Calfsj.
lion of,195, /96
hypoxemic, 273,273（t)
persistent atrial standstilln, electrocar-
Roll weiler. See also Dog(s).
managcment of, 270-271, 275-286
diographic characteristics of. 8f
hyperrophic cardiomyopathy in, pathol-
drug therapy in, 270-271, 282-286.
Siberian hiusky. See also Dog(s).
ogy of, 603
283(t). 284(t)
radiography in, pulmonary edeina or,
Rupnre, of chordae lendineae, 553
goals of, 269-270
259
aud pulmomary cdcma, in dog. 26!
hemodynamic monitoring in. 266(t),
seizures in, pulmonary cdema sccomdary
in association witht endocardiosis, 553-
266-269, 280-282, 281, 281(1)
to.259
554
results of. prognostic significance of,
Sick sinus syndrome, in dog, 93, 93,
of left atriun, in association with endo-
267,268,269
402-403
cardiosis, 554-555, 555
obstrucuive, 273,273(t)
breed predisposition to. 355, 466
organ-specific effects of, 286-287
electrocardiographic findings associ-
oxygen consumplion in, 268, 269, 282
ated with, 93, 93, ·101
and oxygen debt, 269
syncope accompanying,450
"Saddle”’ einbolism. See Embolism. aortic,
0xygen delivery in, 268. 269. 282
lachycardia associated with, 355
distal.
oxygen trausport in, monitoring of, 267
Signal-avcraging clectrocardiography, 103
INDEX
951
Sigmalment, in hyperthyroidism.782、782
Sotalol, 323-324
Subaortic slenosis (Contimued)
Silent atria. See Peristent ariat standstill
adverse effects of, 315(0). 324, 916(t)
echocardiograptic findings associated
(yrpouonuaoup)
 om dog, 367
withi, 492
Sinoatrial block,80,81
drugs interacting with. effects of, 326(t)
in dog, 190
Sinoatrial node, 22
electrocardiographic parameters affected
canine breed predisposition to, 460.
Sinus arrest, 92-93
by 311(t)
460(t)
Sinus arrhythmia, 92,92
for arrhythmias, 323-324, 916(1)
echocardiographic evidenee of, 159, 488,
Sinus bradycardia, 91
in dog,315(t),350,354,364.366
489,490
jn cat, 390
inn dog with dilated cardiomyopathy,
ini dog,136,159,159,490,491,492
surgical anesthetic co
598
electrocardiographic lindings associated
92
for auial fibrillarion, in dog, 354
with. 490
Sinus nodal distubances, in cat, 390
for DCM and arrhythmias, in dog, 598
in dog, 489
Sinus nodal re-entrant tachycardia, in dog,
for supraventricular tachycardia, in dog.
gross morphology of, in cal., 823
350
in dog,486-487,188,822-823
Sinus tachrycardia. 91
for ventricular tachycardia, in dog, 364,
heart failure accompanying, treament
inl cat. 390
366
of, 228
hyperthyroidism and, 90, 90
recommended dosages of, for cat. 916(t)
heart murmur associated with, 60, 60-61
jn dog, 338-339
for dog. 916(t)
myocardial fibrosis accompanying, 487-
Sinus venosus-type arial septal defect, 157.
Spaniel. Se spccific types,eg. Cocer
488
495, 825
spaniet,King Charles spaniet.
echocardiographic evidence of, 488,
echocardiographic findings associated
Specular echoes, 131
489
with, ini dog, 135, Plate 7
Spironolactone, 237
prevalence of, in dog, 459(t), 160
Skin/mucous membranes, changes in color
adverse effects of, 916(t)
radiographie findings associated with.
of, significance of, 44-45, 4749, Plate
for heart failure, 235(t), 237, 485(t),
489
916(1)
in dog. 491
monitoring of color of, in CPCR, 439
in cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
surgery for, 872-873
Small intestine, embolization to, in
thry. 641
Supraventicular tachyarrhythmias, 96
infecious endocarditis, 571
for hypertension, 805(t)
in car,391-398
"Smoke” (spontaneous echocardiographic
recommended dosages of, for cat, 916(t)
in dog. 338-347
contrast),67,636637,661
for dog, 903(t), 916(1)
differentiation of. from ventricular
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, in cat,
Spliting, of first heart sound.54
tachyarrhythmias, 332(t), 332-
6.33
of second heart sound, 55, 55. 55(1)
828
Sodium, dietary, Sce aso Sodium-restrirted
Spontaneous echocardiographic contrast.
P wave and QRS complex in, 333
("smoke”).167,636-637,661
334, 336, 337, 338
diet,
as provided in conumercial dog foods,
hiyperrophic cardiomyopathy and, in cat,
QRS complex morphology in, 333.
742(t)-743(t)
633
333, 334. 335
Sodium bicarbronatc, use of, in CPCR,
Springer spaniel. See also Dog(s).
unreliability of rhythn (ir)rcgulari-
atrioventricular myopathy in. pathology
ties and pause length in, 334
431(t), 438
inn management of shock, 286
of, 837
988
Sodium ipodate, for hyperthyroidisn, 787
dilated cardiomyopathy in, 583
vagal maneuvers in, 335-336, 338,
Sodium ritroprusside, adverse effecs of,
echocardiography in, ventricular septal
339, 340
defect. on, 502
treatment of, 347-355
914(t)
for heart failure. 223-224, 237(t)
St. Bernard. See also Dog(s).
adverse effects of, 351-352
in dog with dilated cardiomyopathy,
dilated cardiomyopathy in, 583
evidence of drug effectiveness in, on
ECG. 349. 350, 351, 353
596
ratiography in, roumded-chest. conforma-
Supraventricular tachycardia, 96
for pulmomary edema. 260, 260(t),
tion on,109
911(t).Sce also Sodium nitwprusside,
Standstill, alrial. See Persistent murial standstill
in cat, 391, 392
in dog, 96,338317.Sce also Supraventri-
for hwart fuilaure.
(atrimntriculer myopathy).
Stenosis. valvular, 158-159
uiar tachyarrtemiasin og
 in dog withi dilaled cardiomyopathy.
AV node-dependent,338, 345-347
261
echocardiographic findings associated
in dog with mitral regurgitation, 261
with, 159-160
trearment of, 354-355
AV node-independent, 338-345
for shock, 283, 283(0)
in cat, 136
treatmenl of, 348-354
recommended dosages of, for cat, 914(t)
in dog, 136, 159, 159,160, 160
death risk associated with,348
for dog, 904(t), 914(t)
sites of. See Aortic stemosis; Mitral steno-
F waves associated with. See Pibrilation.
Sodium-restricted diet, for cat, 741 (t)
sis; Paulmomic stenasis; Tricuspid steno
atrial,in dog:att atrialindog.
for dlog, 741(1)
sis.
Surface elecrocardiogram. 71
in mauagement of heart. failure, 237.
Sternotomy, 867
Surgery, 866-880
551, 740-741
Steroids, use of, in CPCR, 438
anesthesia for, See Anesthwsia.
International Small Animal Cardiac
in management of stiock, 285
correcivc procedures preceding. 857
Health Council recommendatiomns
in treating sequclae of heartworm dis-
for aorlic stenosis, 872-873
regarding, 905(t)
case,in dog.714.716, 718
for arteriovenous fistula,790-791
in managenent of hypertension, 745,
Stethoscopic examinalion, 51. See also
for atrial septal defeci, 873
805-806
Heart murmurs: Hieart sound(s).
echocardiograplic findings following.
Somatotropin (growth tormone), 766
clecuonic. 51
in dog, Plate 9
excess secretion of, 766
Stiffness, myocardial. 30, 30, 32
for cardiac tmors, 880
in cat, 656
Strength-duration curve, for pacermaker.
for caval syndrome. in dog, 879
cardiovascutar abuormalities associ-
-01, 404-105
for cor triatriatum,878-879
ated with, 656
Sreptokinase, adverse effects of, 916(0)
for drflariasis in dog,71479
Sonography.130-132
for thromboembolism, in cat, 664, 916(t)
for endocardiosis, 877
abdominal, signs of heart failure on, 153
recommended dosages of, for cat, 916(t)
for eosinophilic granulomatosis, in dog
in dog, 153
SI segment, 74
with hieartworm diseasc, 718
cardiac. Sce Echocardiography.
significauce of changes in, 87, 87
for heart base chemodectoma, 880
transducer in, 13l, 140
Subaortic stenosis, 158-159, 485-494
for heart disease, 866-880
esophageal placement of, 132
angiocardiographic: findings associated
for heartworm disease, in dog. 714, 879
Sonolucent tissue, 132. See also
with. in dog, 189
for hyperthyroidism, complications of,
Eichocardingraphy.
aortic regurgitation acconnpanying, 492
787-789
952INDEX
Surgery (Continued)
Systolic dysfunction (Comtinued)
Tachycardia (Continued)
in cat,787, 788. See also Thywidectmy.
therapeutic approach to, 218-222
ventricular. See facheyarrhythmia(s), ventric
for lef-to-rightshunting patent duclus ar-
Systolic heart murmurs, 58-61. See also
lar
teriosus, in dog. 511
snuinu an
Tachypnea, 46
complications of, 511, 512
Ta1nponade, cardiac, 689-690
for mitral regurgitation, 877-878
echocardiographic findings associated
for patent duclus arteriosus, 876, 876
with, 164
877,877
T wave, 72, 74
in dlog. 165
in dog, 511
abnormal,88,88
Tachyarrhylhmia(s), 96, 98-99. See also
pathophysiology 0f, 689, 689-690.690
complications of, 51l, 512
pericardialefusion and. See Pricodil
Tecanalization following, 877
Arrheythmia(s).
for pericardial disease, 879-880
hyperthyroidism and, in cat, 783(t), 786
effusion.
pericardiocentesis for, 694-695
for pericardial effusion, 695
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, in cat.
See under Arrheytmia(s).hspertrophic
Taurine, 748-749
for persistent righit aoric arch, 878
for pulmonic stenosis, 869,869-872,871
deficiency of, 748-749
cardiomyopathy and.
and dilated cardiomyopathy, in cat.
for right atrial hemangiosarcoma, 880
supraventricular, 96
for subaortic stenosis, 872-873
in cat, 391-393
645-646. 750-751
ini dog, 586-586, 751-752
for tetralogy of Fallot, 875, 875
in dog, 338-347
supplemental. for cardiyopay, in ca,
for tricuspid valve lesious,inutility of, 878
differentiation of, from ventricular
tachyarrtythmias, 332(0)
637, 650. 751. 916(t)
for vascular ring anomalies. 878
for ventricular septal defects, 874, 874
in dog, 596, 916(t)
to implant pacemiaker 414(1), 414415,
Ternperature regulation, dysfimctional,
P wave and QRS complex in,
415, 416(1)-419(0)
333-334,336,337,338
cardiac manifestations of, 773-774
Swollen abdomen, significance of, 44, 47
QRS complex morphoiogy in.
Temporary atrial fibrilltion, in dog, 354
Synpathetic effects, of antiarrhythmics,
333.333,334,335
Tenporary pacemaker, 408. See also
309(t)
ureliability of rhythum (ir)regu-
Pucemaker.
Synpathominetic amines. See also
larities and pause lengih in,
implantation of, 414(t)
ohutumine;Dopamine.
334-335
Tendon of Todaro, 22
for heart failure, 224, 229(t), 233-234
Terbutaline, adverse effecis of, 916(t)
vagal maneuvers in.335-336.
Syncope, 446-453
338, 339, 310
bronchodilation with, 916(t)
altered blood constituents and, 447
Featment of, 347-355
for sick sinus syndrome. 450
arrhythmias and, 450-451
adverse effects of, 351-352
recommended dosages of, for cat, 916(t)
elecrocardiographic monitoring for.
evidence of drug effectiveness in,
for dog, 916(t)
Terrier. See also Dog(s).
148-449,449
on ECG,349,350,351,353
aortic: stenosis in, gross morphology of.
treaument of, 450, 451
 syncope associated with, in cal, 450
bradyarrhythmias and. 451
in dog. 450
488
cardiogennic, 446, 450-452
ventricular, 9899
dilated cardionyopathy in. 582(t)
canine breed predisposition to, 451(1)
in cat. 98, 99, 396-398, 397
pulmonic stenosis in, echocardiographic
carotid sinus hypersensitivity and, 452
in dog, 98, 99, 99, 355-361
findings associated with. 486
cause (s) of. 43(t), 44, 446-447, 450-453
Vs. supraventricular tachyarrhyth-
radiographirc signs of, f82
determination of. clinical approach to,
mias. See fuhyarrhythmia(s), st
tracheal collapse in, radiographic appear-
447
praventriclrin dog,differentia
ance of, 122
dlifferential diagnosis of, 447(t)
taon of.
Tetralogy of Fallot, 515-518
drug-related, 453
with altered heart sounds, 57
angiocardiographic assessment of, 517
heart failure and, 451
Tachycardia. See also Tachyarrhythmia(sj.
in cat, 514
hypertrophie cardiomyopathy and, 451
alrial, 96
in cdog.189,514
in cat, 636
in cat, 391, 392
radionuclide. /96
liypotensivc, 446
in dog, ectopic, 341, 341-342
canine breed predisposition to, 462
management of, 450-153
echocardiographic findings assoxciated
treatment of, 350-351
Heurocardiogenic, 452
atrioventricular nodal re-entrant, in dog.
with, 160, 517
neurogenic, 447, 452-453
345--346, 346
in dog, 516
provocative lesting for, using vagal ma
bypass trarct-mediated macro-re-entrant.
electrocardiographic findings associated
nenvers, 419-450
in dog, 347, 355
with,517
via exercise, in dog. 449
dilated cardiomyopathy in relation to, in
gross morphology/pathology of. 826
reflex. 452
dog,587
in cat, 826
sick sinus syndrome and, in dog, 450
heart failure due to, in dog, 587
in dog, 826
 specialized testing for, in man, 450
junctional, 97
prevalenice of, in dog, 459(t), 462
structural hcart disease and, 451-452
in dog, 346-347
surgery for, 875,875
tachyarrhythmias and, 450
sick simus syndrome and, in miniature
Theophylline. Sec also Aminophylline.
tussive ("cough drop'), in dog, 453
schinauzer, 355
adverse effecis of, 917(t)
vasovagal, 452
sinus, 91
bronchodilation with, 917(t)
ventricular underfiling and. 451-452
in ca1, 390
recommended dosages of, for cat, 917(t)
vs. seizures, 147-448
hyperthyroidism and, 90, 90
for dog. 904(t).917(t)
Systemic: hypertension. See Hyperteusion.
in dog, 338-339
Thermoregulatory dysfumction, cardiac
Systemic inflanmatory response syndrome.
sinus nodal re-entrant, in dog, 389, 341
manifestations of. 773-774
274, 274(t), 275(0)
supraventricular, 96
Thiacetarsamide, for heartworn disease, in
treament of, 276(t)
in ca1, 391, 392
cat, 733
Systermic lupus erythematosus, cardiac
in dog, 96, 338-347. See also Tachyar-
in dog. 712,713, 905(0), 917()
manifestations of, 775-776
rhythmias),supraventrict,n dog
Thiazide diuretics. See also specific agents.
Sysemic sequlae,fnfou
AVnode-dependent, 338,345-347
eg.,Chtorothiide;Ilydrochlorthizie
endocarditis, 570-571, 571, 573
treatment of. 354-355
for heart failure, 235(t), 236-237
AV node-independent, 338-345
Thiobarbituratesas anestheric ages, 
dog. 467
treaunent. of, 348-354
Third heart sound, 5-56
Systemic vascular resistance. 32, 33
death risk associated with, 348
abnormal, in dog with dilated cardiomy.
Systolir: rlicks, 54
F waves associated with. See Fibrilla-
9sXqedo
Systolie dysfunction. hypertrophic
tion,ai,indogFlut,atri
Third-degree atrioventricular block, 83-84
cardiomyopathy and, 628
in dog
in cat, 395, 395, 401
INDEX
953
Third-degree atrioventricular block
Thyroidectomy (Continued)
Trans-septal approach, to lefl-sided cardiac
(Continated)
electrocardiographic findlings subse
catheterization, 180. Sce also Cardiac
as indicaion for pacemaker, 403
quent to,783.784
ratheterization.
in dog, 83, 375, ·401
extracapsular technique of,787
Transtelephonic electrocardiography, 102
as indication for pacemaker, 102
modified,787, 788
Transtracheal catheter ventilation, in basic
Thoracic cavity, analoimy of, 13-14. /4, 15
hyperthyroidism recurring after, 789
life supporl. 429, 431
Thoracic compressons, n basic life
hiypocalcemia following. 788-789
Transtracheal drug delivery, in advanced
support,433-131
electrocardiographic evidence of.
life support, 135436
farctors limiing effectiveness of, 434(t)
781
Transtracheal xygninsuatininbasi
Thoracie conformation, on radiography.
life support, 429
109,110
788,789
Transvenous implantation, of pacemaker.
Thoracie durct, 22
hypothyroidism due to, 789
416(t)-118(t)
Thoracic examination, 50
intracapsular techmique of, 787
Triamterene, adverse cffecrs of. 917(1)
aluscultation in. 50-53, 51, 53. See also
renal failure as complication of, 789
for heart failure, 235(t). 237, 917(t)
lfertmtrmurs; ffeart sotemd(s).
Thyrotoxic heart disease. in cat, 782-789,
recommended dosages of, for cat, 917(1)
Thoracic: inlel, 13
830. See also Hypertheyroidism.
for dog, 917(t)
Thoracic organs, removal of, at necropsy.
arrhythmias accompanying, 90, 90, 388
Triangle of Koch, 22
845-846
changes in prcsentation of, in recent
Tricuspid regurgitation, 227-228, 555-558
Thoracic radiography. See Radiography.
decades, 785
cardiomegaly accompanying,114,557
Thoracic surgery See Suryery.
electrocardiographic: findings associ-
heart murmur associated with, 60, 557
Thoracic venous anomalies, 529
aled with, 83, 90. 90, 782-783,
Tricuspid stenosis, 823
Thoracotomy, 868, 869
783, 783(t)
Tricuspid valve, 20, 556
emergeney inbasi lf suport,43445
radiographic evidence of, 783, 784
blood flow in or across, Doppler-derived
Three-dimensional echocardiography. 134
Thyrotoxicosis. See Hyperthyroidism;
velocily of, in cat, 154(1)
Thromboembxolism, 834-835
Thyrotoxic heurt disease.
in dog. 154(1)
in cat, 658667
Thyroxine, abnormal secretion of, 762-763,
regurgitant. SeeIricuspid regergitation.
aworta as site of. See Embolism, aortie.
781-789. See also Hyperthyroidism,
dysplasia of, 158,524526
cchocardiographic "smoke' (spontanc-
Hspothyrvidism,Theyrotoxic henrt diseae.
angiocardiographic finclings assoxciated
(ns conuast) presaging, 633
replacement therapy with, in thyroidecto-
with,525
limb paralysis or contracture as sequela
canine breed predisposition to, 461-
of, 44, 660, 660, 663
mized cal, 789
Ticarcillin, for endocardlitis, 577(t)
462
prevention of. 666-667
Tissue perfusion, monitoring of, in CPCR.
echocardiographic findings associated
renal infarction as scquela of. 661
140
with,158
therapy for,663-666
in management of shock, 267
in dog, 158
amputation in, 665, 666
electrocardiographic findings associ-
aspirin in, 665. 908(t)
Tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA),
adverse effects of, 917(1)
ated with. 525
complications associated with, 665,
for thromboembolisn1. in ca1, 664, 917(t)
in dog, 524
66.5
prevalence of,in dog, 459(t),461162
heparin in, 664, 912(t)
recommended dosages of, for cat, 917(t)
Tocainide, 318-319
radiograplhic findings associated with,
resuults of, 664
adverse elfects of, 315(0), 319, 917(t)
525
streptokinase in, 64, 916(t)
Lissuc plasminogen activator in, 66,
clectrocardiographic parameters affected
in dog, 114, 523
by, 311(t)
hematocysts in, prevalence of, in dog.
917(t)
warfarin in, 664, 917(1)
for arrhythmias, 318, 917(t)
463-464
in dog, 315(t)
stenosis of 823
complications associated with, 665,
inl dog with dilated cardiomyopathy.
surgery of, imtility of, 878
665
598
Truncus arteriosus, 519
in dog, aspirin for, 908(t)
lesion mimicking, 513, 516, 520
heparin for, 912(t)
recommended dosages of, for dog.
901(), 917(t)
Trypanosoumiasis (Chagas' disease), and
as element. of therapy for heartworm
myocarditis, 833
disease, 713, 715, 719
Tomography. computed, of heart, 199,
in dog,611, 611, 833
prevalence of, 467
199--200
Tongue, drug injection in, and CPCR,
in dog, 6!1 
warfarin for, 917(t)
and myocarditis, 611, 611, 833
pulmonary, 761-762
436-437
Tumor(s), aldosterone-secreling, 765
prevalence of, in dog, 467
Toxoplasmosis, and myocardiis, in dog,
cardiac, 120, 679, 698-699, 836
"smoke” (spontaneous echocardio-
611
and pericardial effusion,686,695
graphic: contrast) presaging, 167,
t-PA (Lissue plasminogen activator), acdverse
in cai, 657, 657, 688, 698-699, 836
636, 637, 661
effects of, 917(t)
echocardiographic findings associ-
in cat, 633
for thromboembolism, in cal, 664, 917(t)
Thrombogenesis, Virchow's triad in, 658
ated with. 694
reconmended dosages of, for cal, 917(1)
Thrombolytic: therapy. See specific agents
prevalence of, 467
Tracheal collapse, radiographic appearance 
cited under Thromboemholism, in cat;
ini dog,610,686, 687, 688, 698
of,121.122
Thromboemhotism, in dog.
Tracheal sucrion, in basic life support, 433
echocardiographic findings associ-
Thrombotic endocardits, honbacrerial, 568
ated with,166,693,694
Tracheotomy, in basic life supporl, 429.
Through-transmission, in ultrasonography,
prevalence of, 466
Tranquilizers, for anxionus dog or cat with
radiographic findings associated
1.32
Thyroid gland, functioning of. abnormal,
pulmonary edcma, 260, 260(0)
with, 692
Transcatheter occlusjon, of patent ductus
762-763, 781-789. See also
surgery for, 880
Hsperthyrodism;Hothyrdim;
arteriosus, 190
catecholamine-secreting, 765-766
in dog, 511, 5/2
Thyrotoxic heart disease
chemotherapy for, cardiotoxicity of, in
tests of, indiagusis of hyperthod
Transducer, in ultrasonography, 131, 140
cal, 657
ism, 784
esophageal placcment of. 132
in dog, 609
radiomuclide imaging of, in diagnosis of
Trarsesophageal echocardiography, 132.
Turbulent blood low, 137
hyperthyroidism, 785, 785
134
Tussive syncope ("cough drop"' syncope),
rescction of. See Thyroidectmy
Transfusion, in anemic aninal with heart
inl dog, 453
Thyroidectory, in cat, 787.788
failure, 790
Twenty-four tour ambulatory monitoring
diminished cardiomegaly following,
in management of shock, 279-280
(Holter monitoring), 102, 102. See
Transient hearl sounds. See Heart sorunds.
alsoElectrorardiography.
954INDEX
Twenty-four hour ambulatory monitoring
Two-dimensional ultrasonography.
Vasodilators (Continued)
(Holter monitoring) (Continued)
abdouninal, signs of heart failure on, in
for heart failure. 223-224, 237(t). 237-
for arrhythrmias and syncope, 448, 149
dog.153
243
for canine arrhythmias, 331-332. See also
cardiac.SeeTaoo-dimensionalechocardiogr
 in dog with mitral regurgitation, 52
Dog(s),etectrocardiograpey in.
phy.
for hypertension, 807
Two-dimensional echocardiography,132.
See also Echoxardiography.
for pulmonary edema. 260, 260(t). See
alsoVasdiltrsforhrfare.
advantages of. 132
for shock, 283(0), 283-284
aortic stenosis on. 489
Ultrasomography. 130-132
recommended dosages of, lor cat, 904(t)
in dog, 159, 159, 492
 abdominal, signs of heart failure on, 153
for dog, 901(1)
cardiac tamponade on, in dog, 165
in dog.153
Vasopressor impulses, 33(1)
cardiac turmor on, in cat, 69f
cardiac. See Fchocardiography.
Vasovagal syucope, 452
in dog. 694
transducer in, 131, 140
cardiornyopathy on, 162, 163
Vaughan-Williauns classification, of
esophageal placcment of, 132
antiarrhythmics,307, 308, 309(t), 310
chronic acquired valvular disease on. See
Lnipolar pacemaker, 409, 410. See also?
Two-dimensional echocardiography,endo
Vectorcardiography 70. 70
Pacemaher.
Vegetations, on heart valves, in IE, 163.
cardiosis om.
L'remia. See Kidney(s).
567-568, 569, 570. Sec also
cor triatriatum on, in dog, 527
dilated cardionyopathy ,162
Infetious endocurditis.
echocardiographic appcarance of.
in dog, 593
diroflariasis-related changes on. in cat,
164.573, 574
Vagal maneuvers, in diagnosis of
in dog, 164
733
arrhythumias, in cal, 389
Velccity, of blood flow. See Blood flow;
in dog, 711
in differentiation of tachyarrhythmias, in
Doppterhoardirytouo
disadvantages of, 132
Duchenne's cardiomyopathy on, in dog,
dog, 335-336, 338, 339, 340
velocity derived from
 in provocative testing for syncope, 449-
607
of sound waves,131
450
Vena cava, caudal, 17
endocardiosis on, 161
Valve conduits, in surgery for aortic
radiographic appearance of, interprcta-
ini dog, 161
mitral regurgitation accompanying,
ste10sis,873
tion of, 120
Valve(s) of hearl, 19, 20-21. See also
161
cramial, 17
specific yalves, e.g. Mitonl valu.
in dog, 161
persistent left cranial, 529
acquired disease of, 536-559. See also En-
evidence of endocarditis on, in dog. 164
ini dog, 529
hcarrworm-relatcd changes on, in cat,
docardiosis.
Vena caval syndrome, in dog withi
733
in cat, 462, 463
heartworms,718719
in dog, 711
in dog, 463(t), 463-464
surgery for, 879
blood llow in or across, Dopplerderived
Venous anomalies,thoracic,529
hypertrophie cardiomyopathy on, 163
velocity of, in cat, 154(t)
in cat, 626, 627, 629
Ventilation, in basie life support, 431-433
in dog. 154(1)
in dog, 606
in management of shock, 275
regurgiant. quantification of via Dop-
imaging planes for, 141-142, 141-144
Ventricle(s) of hearl, 17, 19-20. See also
intrapcricardial cyst on, in dog, 686
ler echocardiography, 134
Ventricular entries.
leff-to-right shu on, patent ductus arte-
siles of. See Aortic regurgiation; Miral
compliance of, 30, 31. 217, 217-218
riosus and, in dog,156, 510
regurgitatiom; etc.
formation of, 4
mitral regurgitation on, cndocardiosis
congenital disease of. in cat, 462, 463
fnction of,radionuclide angiocardiogra
and, 16t 
ini dog, 459(t)-461(t), 460-462, 463(t)
phy in evaluation of, 195-199, 197,
inl dog. 161
development of, 6, 6
197(1), 198
in cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
defective, 6
growth of, 9, 9
thy, 627
dysplasia of, 158
Hypertrophy of. Sce Hlyperbophy, uentricu-
muscular dystrophy-related myocardial le
echocardiographic firdings associated
lar
sions on. in dog. 607
with, 158
interdependence of, 32
myocardial diseases on. See Tioo-dimen-
in dog, 158
lefl. See Ieft ventricle.
sionalehorardiography.cardiomyopathy
sites of. See site-specific sulentries -
opening of, at necropsy, 846
der Dysplasia.
right. See Right ventricie.
myocartlial Gibrosis on, aortic stenosis
stenosis of, 158-159
septum berwcen, 15, 20
and, 489
echocardiographie fincdings associated
dcfectin.eeentricr septat deft.
patent ductus arteriosus on, in dog, 156,
with.159-160
formation of. 4-5, 6
510
in cat, 136
sequential contractions of atria and, in
pericardial cyst on, in dog, 686
in dog, 136, 159, 159, 160, 160
cardiac pacing, 411, 412
pericardial cffusion on, in dog, 165, 693
siles of.SeeAortic stenosisMitul stn
thickness of walls of, measurement of,
pleural effusion on, in cat, 165
sis;Putmonic stenosis;Tricuspid steno
847-818
in dog, /65, 693
52.S,
underfilling of, and syucope, 451-452
pulmonic stenosis on, 159
vegetations on, in IE, 163, 567-568, 569.
Ventricular arrhythinias, 98-99
in dog,160
Sce also Infertious endocurditis
in cat, 98, 99, 396-398, 397
restrictive cardiomyopathy on, in cat. 643
echuocardiographic appearance of,
in dog, 98, 099, 99, 355-361
spontancous contrast ("smoke") on, in
164, 573, 574
lethality of 356-357, 370. 836
cat with hypertrophic cardionnyopa-
in dog, 164
vs. supraventricular arrhythmias, Sec
thiy. 633
Valvuloplasty, balloon, for pulmonic
Tachyarreytmia(s),suprarnrnla
subaortic stenosis on, 489
stenosis, 190, 868
indog,differentiationof
ini dog, 159, 159, 192
Valvulotome valvotony, for pulmonic
mechanisms for, clectrophysiologic,
tetralogy of Fallot on. 160
slenosis, 870
296(t)
in dog, 516
Vascular disease, pulmonary, prevalence of,
Ventrieular asystole, 99-100
valvular disease on, chronic acquired. See
inn dog, 467
Ventricular extrasystoles. 97-98
fuo-dimensionalechocrdiography,endo
systemic, prevalence of, in dog, 167
in cat, 396, 396, 397.398
rrdiosis on.
Vascular resistancc, sysremic,32.33
in dog, 98
valvular stenosis on. in dog. 159, 159, 160
Vascular ring anomalies, 120-121, 528, 826
brecd predisposirion to, 4166
vegetative mass on, endocarditis and, 16f
surgery for. 878
Ventricular fibrillation, 99. 99
ventricular septal defect on, in dog, 157,
brerylium for, 909(t)
502
agents,e.g,Hydratazine.
countersh1orck for, 438-439
INDEX
955
Ventricular flutter, 99
Ventriculoatrial conduction, as
Wavelcngth, of sound, 131
Ventricular pacemaker implantation,
complication of cardiac pacing、 412,
Weakness, causes of, 14
416(t)-417(t), 419(t). Sce also
413,414
episodic, 446. See also Synrope.
Prucermaker
Verapamil, 324-325
canine DCM and, clectrocardiographic
Ventricular pre-excitation. 86-87
adverse effecis of, 315(t), 325, 917(t)
findings associated with, 449
in cat, 393, 393-394
drugs interacting with, effects of, 326(t)
diferential diagnosis of, 47(t)
in dog, 86
for arrhythmias, 324,917(t)
Weight. See Body weight.
Ventrilar sptal defect156137,499505
in dog.315(1),348,349
Welsh corgi. See also Dog(s).
angiocardiographic findings associated
evidencc of effectiveness of, on FCG,
M-mode echocardiography in, normal
with, 505
350
findings on, 145(t)
in dog. 189,501,502
for hypertension, 805(1)
radionuclide.194.195
West Highiland terrier. See also Dog(s).
for supravcntricular tachycardia, in dog,
 in dog, 194
echocardiography in, pulmonic stenosis
canine brced predisposition to, 461.
348,349
011,186
evidence of effectiveness of, on ECG,
Whole blood, in managenent of shock,
461 (t)
echocardiographic evidence of, 156-157,
350
recormmencled dosages of, for dog,
279-280
503-504
Wolff-Parkinson-Whirte syndrome, 86
in dog, 157, 501, 502, 504, Plate 6
903(t), 917(t)
Viral infection, dilated cardiomyopathy due
Wolfhonnd,. See also Dog(s).
electrocardiographic findings associated
Irish, diated cardiomyopathy in, 582(1)
with, 503
1o, in man, 586
myocarditis due to, 833
583
in dog. 504
in dog, 610-611, 832
M-mode cchocardiography in, normal
gross morphology/pathology of, 501, 825
Virchow's triad. in thrombogenesis, 658
findings on, 145(t)
in cat,500
Visceral pericardium (epicardium), 14, 15,
Work overload. Sce Ouertoad.
heart murmur caused by, 61
lesions accompanying, in tetralogy of Fal.
679, 680. See also Pericardial enuies.
Worm infestation, in pulmonary arteries
Viscosily, of blood, 33
arid heart. See lieurtworm disease.
lot. See Tetraiogy of Fallot.
nonrestrietive, 157
increase in, cardiac manifestations of,
prevalence of, in dog, 459(t), 461
772-773
radiographic findings associated with.
Volume of disuribution, of drugs, 312-313
609
Volume overload, 220
X-linked muscular dystrophy, in dog,
in dog, 503
patent ductus arteriosus and. 209-210.
606-607, 832
restictive, 157
210
myocardial lesions asociatcd with, 607.
shunt(ing) accompanying. 157
response to, 209-210
607
echocardiographic: findings associated
in form of eccentric myocardial hyper-
Xylazine. as preanesthctic agent, 859(t),
withi. in dog, 504
trophy, 208, 757, 818
860
 indicator dilution in identification of,
VSD. Sec Ventricular septal defect.
186
surgery for. 874, 874
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias, 98-99
Warfarin, adverse effects of, 917(1)
Yorkshire terrier. See also Dog(s).
ini cat, 98, 90, 396-398, 397
for thromboembolism, in cat, 664, 917(t)
trac heal collapse in, radiographic appcar-
in dog. 98, 99, 99, 35-361
vs. supraventricular tachyarrhythmias.
complicatious associated with, 665,
ance of, /22
SeeTachyarrhythmies),upraventr
665
tlar, in dog, differentiation of.
in dog. 917(1)
Ventricular underfilling. and syncope,
recommended dosages of, for cat, 917(t)
451-452
for dog, 917(t)
Z. bands, around sarcomere, 29
ISBN 0-7216-4044-3