Cojytiglted Matenlal
PETERSONITALCOTT
SMALL ANIMAL
Toxicology
Third Edition
ELSEVIER
httpy/evolve.eisever.com
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Index of Toxins by System
Substances Potentially Associated with Blindness
selamectin, abamectin, etc.), lead, metaldehyde, paintballs, salt (e.g, homemade and com-
mercial play dough, ice melts, water deprivation), pyrethrins/pyrethroids, activated charcoal
(hypernatremia).
Substances Potentially Associated with Cardiac Abnormalities
Acetylcholinesterase-inhibiting compounds (e.g, organophosphate and carbamate insecticides),
Aconitum (monkshood), amitraz, amphetamines, antidepressants, Apocynum (dogbane), Ascle-
pias (milkweed, pleurisy root), avocado (Persea), Bufo (toads), caffeine, calcipotriene or calcipot-
riol, calcitriol, cantharidin, cholecalciferol (and related products), Cassia (senna), cobalt, cocaine,
(white snakeroot), fluoroacetate and fluoroacetamide (Compounds 1080 and 1081), gossypol
(Gossypium—-cottonseed), ice melts (e.g., magnesium chloride, potassium chloride), ionophores
(e.g., laidlomycin, lasalocid, monensin, narasin, salinomycin), kalanchoe (Kalanchoe), lizard (Helo-
derma), Kalmia (laurel), minoxidil, mushrooms, Nerium (oleander), Persea (avocado), petroleum
hydrocarbons (e.g., diesel fuel, gasoline, kerosene), Phoradendron (mistletoe), Pieris (Japanese
pieris), pit viper venom, Rhododendron (rhododendron, azalea), Sassafras (sassafras), selenium,
Taxus (yew), theobromine, tricyclic antidepressants, Urginea (red squill), Veratrum (false helle-
bore), Vicia (vetch), vitamin D (and related compounds), xylazine, Zigadenus (death camas)
Substances Potentially Associated with Gastrointestinal Abnormalities
 Abrus (precatory bean), acetylcholinesterase-inhibiting organophosphate and carbamate pes-
ticides, aluminum/zinc/magnesium phosphide, antimony, arsenic, Asclepias (milkweed),
cadmium, caffeine, cantharidin, cationic detergents, cholecalciferol (and related products), chro-
mium, Colchicurm (Autumn crocus), copper, corrosives, 2,4-D (2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid),
diethylene glycol, Digitalis (foxglove), diethylene glycol, digitoxin, digoxin, diquat, ethanol, eth-
ylene glycol, Euphorbia family, fireworks, flares, fluoroacetate and fluoroacetamide (Compounds
1080 and 1081), gorilla glue, grapes, Hedera helix (English ivy), Helleborus (Christmas rose),
Hyacinthus (hyacinth), Hydrangea (hydrangea), ice melts (e.g., urea, calcium carbonate, calcium
magnesium acetate, sodium chloride, magnesium chloride, potassium chloride), Hlex (holly),
iron, kalanchoe (Kalanchoe) Kalmia (laurel), lead, Ligustrum (privet), lilies, mace, matches, mer-
cury, mothballs, mushrooms, Narcissus (daffodil, jonquil), nicotine, nitrate, nonionic detergents,
non-steroidal antinflammatory agents, nutmeg, oil of wintergreen, paintballs, paraquat, phenol
phenoxy herbicides, phosphorus, Phoradendron (mistletoe), Phytolacca (pokeweed), play dough,
raisins, Rhododendron (rhododendron, azalea),Ricinus (castor bean—ricin), Robinia (black
locust), salt, Sassafras (sassafras), soaps, thallium, theobromine, trichothecene mycotoxins (e.g..
deoxynivalenol—vomitoxin or DON), Viscum (mistletoe), zinc.
Substances Potentially Associated with Heinz Bodies and/or Hemolysis (see also
Substances Potentially Associated with Methemoglobin Production]
Acetaminophen, Allium (e.g., onions, garlic, chives), chlorate, copper, coral snake venom, Cru-
ciferae family (e.g., kale, broccoli, cauliflower, rapeseed, mustard), drugs (e.g., acepromazine,
benzocaine, bupivacaine, chloramphenicol, griseofulvin, lidocaine, prilocaine, tetracaine, trime-
thoprim sulfa), freworks, flares, insect stings,matches, methylene blue, mothballs (naphthalene),
mushrooms, nonionic detergents, overhydration, paracetamol, pit viper venoms, propylene gly-
col, skunk spray, spider venom (Loxosceles—-brown recluse), zinc.
Substances Potentially Associated with Hemostasis Abnormalities
Anticoagulant rodenticides (e.g., brodifacoum, bromadoline, chlorophacinone, coumafuryl,
difenacoum, difethialone, diphacinone, phenindione, pindone, valone, warfarin), nonsteroidal
anti inflammatories, pit viper venom, sulfaquinoxaline, toxins associated with liver failure (e.g.
aflatoxin, acetaminophen, copper, cyanobacteria, iron, mushrooms, sago palm, xylitol, zinc),
toxins associated with thrombocytopenia (e.g., antibiotics—cephalosporins, diuretics, heparin,
phenol, quinidine, quinine).
Substances Potentially Associated with Hepatic Abnormalities
Acetaminophen, aflatoxin, carbon tetrachloride, carprofen, coal tar, copper, cyanobacteria
(i.e., blue-green algae), diazepam (cat), germander, iron, lead, mebendazole, melarsomine,
mothballs, mushrooms, nitrosamines, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, paracetamol,
penitrem A, pennyroyal oil, petroleum hydrocarbons (e.g, diesel fuel, gasoline, kerosene),
phenacetin, phenobarbital, phenol, phenytoin, primidone, pyrrolizidine alkaloids, sago palm
(Cycas), sulfonamides, phenol, phosphorus, quinine, Sassafras (sassafras), stanozolol, tannic
acid, thiacetarsamide, toluene, trimethoprim sulfas, valium, vitamin A, xylitol, zinc.
Substances Potentially Associated with Hyperthermia
Bromethalin, cocaine, dinitrophenol, disophenol, halothane, hops, pentachlorophenol, seizures
(or muscle tremors).
Substances Potentially Associated with Methemoglobin Production (see Substances
Potentially Associated with Heinz Bodies and/or Hemolysis)
Acetaminophen, aniline dyes, benzocaine, chlorate, chloroquine, copper, dibucaine hydrochlo-
ride, gallic acid, lidocaine, naphthalene (mothballs), nitric and nitrous oxide, nitrite (nitrate),
nitrobenzene, nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, phenacetin, phenazopyridine, phenol, prilocaine,
primaquine, propitocaine, pyridium, pyrogallol, resorcinol, silver nitrate, sulfonamides, sulfone,
tannic acid.
Substances Potentially Associated with Nervous System Depression
Acetone, amitraz, barbiturates, benzodiazepine, cholecalciferol (and related products), citrus oils,
diethylene glycol, ethanol, ethylene glycol, ice melts (e.g., potassium chloride, magnesium chlo-
ride), isopropanol, ivermectin and ivermectin-like parasiticides (e.g, moxydectin, eprinomectin,
selamectin, abamectin), lead, lizard (Heloderma), marijuana (Cannabis), methanol, mushrooms,
nicotine, opioids, pentobarbital, phenothiazines, pine oil, piperazine, pit viper venom, propylene
glycol, tranquilizers, turpentine, xylitol.
Substances Potentially Associated with Nervous System Excitation
Acetylcholinesterase-inhibiting organophosphate and carbamate pesticides, 4-aminopyridine,
amitraz, amphetamines, antidepressants, Asclepias (milkweed), Atropa (belladonna), atropine,
bromethalin, Bufo (toad), caffeine, camphor, chlorinated hydrocarbons (e.g., aldrin, chlordane,
endosulfan, heptachlor), cholecalciferol, Cicuta (water hemlock), citrus oils, cocaine, cyanide,
cyanobacteria (i.e., blue-green algae), Datura (jimsonweed), DEET, Dicentra (bleedingheart,
bane), ice melts (e.g, sodium chloride), Ipomea (morning glory), imidacloprid, ivermectin and
ivermectin-like parasiticides (e.g, moxydectin, eprinomectin, selamectin, abamectin), khat, Lat-
rodectus spider venom, lead, Lobelia (lobelia), LsD, mace, ma huang, melaleuca oil, mercury,
metaldehyde, metronidazole, mushrooms, nicotine, nutmeg, opioids (cat), paintballs, pemoline,
penitrem A, phencyclidine, play dough, potassium bromide, propylene glycol, pyrethrin, pyre-
thrum, pyrethroids (e.g., allethrin, tetramethrin, resmethrin, permethrin), roquefortine, rote-
(sassafras), scopolamine, sodium fluoroacetate and fluoroacetamide (Compounds 1080 and
1081), Sophora (mescal bean), strychnine, Taxus (yew), theobromine (chocolate), theophylline,
tricyclic antidepressants, valproic acid, xylitol, yohimbe, zinc/magnesium/aluminum phosphide.
Substances Potentially Interfering with Oxygen Transport and/or Hemoglobin Binding
Carbon monoxide, cyanide (e.g., mining activity, plants), hydrogen sulfide.
Substances Potentially Associated with Renal Abnormalities
Acetaminophen, antibiotics (e.g., amphotericin B, bacitracin, gentamicin, neomycin, oxytetra-
cycline, paromomycin, polymyxin-B, sulfonamides), Aristolochia (birthwort), bismuth, boric
acid, 2-butoxyethanol, cadmium, calcipotriene, calcipotriol, calcitriol, cantharidin, carbamate
fungicides, carbon tetrachloride, cholecalciferol, chromium, citrinin, copper, currants (Vitis),
diethylene glycol, diquat, ethylene glycol, grapes, lead, lilies (Hemerocallis, Liliurm), mercury,
mothballs, mushrooms, nonsteroidal antinflammatory agents, ochratoxin, oxalic acid (e.g,
Oxalis, Rheum, Rumex), paraquat, petroleum hydrocarbons (e.g., diesel fuel, gasoline, kerosene),
phenol, raisins, toluene, uranium, vitamin D-containing plants (e.g., Cestrum diurnum, Solanum
malacoxylon),zinc.
Substances Potentially Associated with the Respiratory System
Acetylcholinesterase-inhibiting organophosphate and carbamate pesticides, C-naphthyl thiourea,
ammonia, chlorinated hydrocarbons (e.g., aldrin, chlordane, endosulfan, heptachlor), formal-
dehyde, freon, hydrochloric acid, hydrofluoric acid, hydrogen sulfide, iodine, mercury, nitrogen
fuel, gasoline, kerosene), pine oils, selenium, turpentine, zinc/magnesium/aluminum phosphide.
Substances Potentially Associated with Skeletal Muscle Abnormalities/Paralysis
Acetylcholinesterase-inhibiting organophosphates, arsenic, botulism, coral snake venom, cigua-
tera, cyanobacteria (blue-green algae), curare, ionophores (e.g., laidlomycin, lasalocid, monen-
sin, narasin, salinomycin), macadamia nuts, phenoxy herbicides (e.g., 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic
acid), roquefortine, saxitoxin, spider (Latrodectus—black widow), succinylcholine.
Substances Potentially Associated with Excessive Salivation/Oral Irritation
Acetylcholinesterase-inhibiting compounds (e.g., organophosphate and carbamate insecticides),
acids and alkalis (e.g., detergents, disinfectants, soaps), batteries, bleaches, Bufo (toads), cationic
detergents, citrus oils, corrosives, cyanobacteria (i.e., blue-green algae), DEET, formaldehyde,
glow jewelry (dibutyl phthalate), ivermectin and other macrolide antiparasitic agents (e.g., sela-
mectin, moxidectin, doramectin, eprinomectin, abamectin, milbemycin), lizards, metaldehyde,
mushrooms, nonionic detergents, insoluble oxalate-containing plants (e.g., Alocasia [Alocasia],
Arisaema [Jack-in-the-pulpit], Calla [calla], Colocasia [elephant's ear], Dieffenbachia [dumb-
Cane], Monstera [split leaf philodendron], Philodendron [philodendron]), phenol, pine oil, pyre-
thrins, pyrethroids, spider (Latrodectus—black widow), strychnine, superglue, tremorogenic
mycotoxins (e.g., penitrem A, roquefortine), turpentine.
pageburst
Elsevier Digital Books
What you need, when you need it, how you want it
DESKTOP
MOBILE
ONLINE
Access your entire library of Elsevier textbooks from a simple, smart interface. Pageburst integrates Elsevier’s 
trusted corntent with powerful interactive tools to hclp you crcate a rmorc productivc, cnjoyablc lcarning cxpcrierncc.
 Pageburst offers quick, easy access to the
 Pageburst makes It easy to search, taxe notes,
Elsevier content you use anc rely on. along witli
lnighlight contert, and collaborate wth classmates
organizatioral tools to ncrease your efficiency.
or colleagues.
Buy digital books at http://pageburststore.elsevier.com
3RD EDITION
Small Animal
Toxicology
Michael E. Peterson, DVM, MS
Reid Veterinary Hospital
Albany, Oregon
Patricia A. Talcott, MS, DVM, PhD, DABVT
Professor
 Department of Veterinary Comparative Anatomy.
Pharmacology & Physiology
Washington State University, College of Veterinary
Medicine
Pullman, Washington
Veterinary Diagnostic Toxicologist
Analytical Sciences Laboratory
University of Idaho
Moscow, Idaho
Veterinary Diagnostic Toxicologist
Washington Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory
Washington State University
Pullman, Washington
ELSEVIER
ELSEVIER
SAUNDERS
3251 Riverport Lane
St. Louis, Missouri 63043
SMALL ANIMAL TOXICOLOGY, THIRD EDITION
ISBN: 978-1-4557-0717-1
Copyright @ 2013, 2006, 2001 by Saunders, an irmprint of Elsevier lnc.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
a ai a e aa a i a se ys s m se i pe sa
Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other than
as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this f eld are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our
understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and
using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or
methodsthey should bemindful oftheirown safety and the safetyofothers,including parties forwhom they
have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identin ed, readers are advised to check the most
current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (i) by the manufacturer of each product to be
administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and
contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own experience and knowledge oftheir
all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any liabil-
asmaoioauaaugen sonpadyaaeu ese Aadad no suosad o aeuep nopue unu ue ioj !
or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Small animal toxicology / |edited byI Michael E. Peterson, Patricia A. Talcott.—3rd ed.
P. ; c.
Rev. ed. of Small animal toxicology / Michael E. Peterson, Patricia A. Talcot. 2nd ed. c2006.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4557-0717-1 (hardback : alk. paper)
1. Dogs—Diseases—Treatment. 2. Cats—Diseases—Treatment. 3.Poisoning in animals.
4. Veterinary toxicology. I. Peterson, Michael
E. (Michael Edward), 1953- I1. Talcott, Patricia A. II1. Peterson, Michael E. (Michael Edward)
1953- Small animal toxicology.
4. Veterinary Drugs—toxicity. SF 757.5|
SF992.P64P48 2013
636.089'59—dc23
2012041928
Vice President and Publisher: Linda Duncan
Content Strategy Director:Penny Rudolph
Content Devetoprent Specialist: Brandi Graham
Publishing Services Manager: Gayle May
Production Manager: Hemamalini Rajendrababu
Sernior Project Manager: Antony Prince
Design Manager: Teresa McBryan
Designer: Brian Salisbury
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
 Printed in the United States of America
www.elsevier.com | www.sookaid.org | www.sabre.org
Last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
ELSEVTERBookAlDSabre Foundation
Dedication
 I would like to dedicate this edition to my wife Kate and my children Greyson,
Rosie, Rube, and Cory. I would also like to express my gratitude to Tim Reid
and the staff at Reid Veterinary Hospital for their support of my academic
endeavors, and as always thanks to Dr. Talcott.
Michael E. Peterson
I would like to dedicate this book to all of my past and present students whc
continually challenge me to do my best in the classroom, and who keep my
passion in toxicology alive through their interest, support, and humor. I also
q       n     s
supportive and patient in my attempts to balance a career and family.
Patricia A.Talcott
ontributors
Rodney S. Bagley, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)
Cheryl Braswell, DVM
Professor and Chair
Educational Programs Coordinator
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
   s  
College of Veterinary Medicine
Thousand Oaks, California
Iowa State University
Supportive Care ofthe Poisoned Patient
Ames, Iowa
Anticonvuisants
Ahna G. Brutlag, DVM, MS
Assistant Director of Veterinary Services
E. Murl Bailey, Jr., DVM, PhD, DABVT
Pet Poison Helpline
Professor of Toxicology and Emergency
SafetyCall International, PLLC
Medicine
Bloomington, Minnesota
 Department of Veterinary Physiology and
Approach to Diagnosis for the Toxicology Case
Pharmacology
Metaldehyde
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences
Annie V. Chen, DVM, MS, DACVIM
Texas A&M University
(Neurology)
College Station, Texas
Assistant Professor
Botulism
 Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery
Ricin
College of Veterinary Medicine
Washington State University
A. Catherine Barr, PhD, DABT
Pullman, Washington
 Quality Assurance & Safety Manager
Anticonvulsants
Texas Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory
College Station, Texas
Heather E. Connally, DVM, MS, DACVECC
Household and Garden Plants
Head of the Emergency and Critical Care
Service
Karyn Bischoff, DVM, MS, DABVT
Veterinary Specialty Center
Assistant Professor
Tucson, Arizona
Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences
Ethylene Glycot
Toxicologist
New York State Animal Health Diagnostic Center
Alastair E. Cribb, DVM, PhD, FCAHS
Cornell University
Dean
Ithaca, New York
College of Veterinary Medicine
Diethylene Glycot
University of Calgary
Methanol
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Propylene Glycot
Adverse Drug Reactions
Keith Boesen, PharmD, CsPI
Camille DeClementi, VMD, DABT, DABVT
Managing Director
Senior Director
Arizona Poison and Drug Information Center
Animal Health Services
Tucson, Arizona
ASPCA
Toxicologic Information Resources
Urbana, Illinois
Instructor
Kelly Green Boesen, PharmD, BCPS
 Department of Veterinary Biosciences
Clinical Pharmacology Coordinator
College of Veterinary Medicine
University Physicians Hospital
University of Illinois
Tucson, Arizona
Urbana, Illinois
Toxicologic Information Resources
Arsenic
T
vi Contributors
Linda K. Dolder, DVM
Gregory F. Grauer, DVM, MS, DACVIM
Consulting Veterinarian in Clinical Toxicology
(SAIM)
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
 Professor and Jarvis Chair of Small Animal
Urbana, Illinois
Internal Medicine
Methylxanthines: Caffeine,
Kansas State University
Theobromine,Theophylline
Manhattan, Kansas
Ethylene Glycot
Caroline Donaldson, DVM, DABT
Toxicologist
Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant, DVM, PhD,
ASPCA
DABVT, DABT
Urbana, Illinois
Adjunct Instructor
Paraquat
 Department of Comparative Biosciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
David C. Dorman, DVM, PhD, DABVT,
University of Illinois
DABT
Urbana, Illinois
Professor of Toxicology
Toxicology Consultant
 Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences
Veterinary Information Network
North Carolina State University
Davis, California
Raleigh, North Carolina
Miscellaneous Indoor Toxicants
Bromethalin
Christmastirme Plants
Macadamia Nuts
Eric K. Dunayer, MS, VMD, DABT, DABVT
Nonsteroidat Antiinflammatories
Associate Professor
Oxalate-Containing Plants
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Atypical Topicat Spot-On Products
School of Veterinary Medicine
St. Matthew's University
Jeffery O. Hall, DVM, PhD, DABVT
Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands
Head, Diagnostic Toxicology
Small Mammal Toxicology
Utah Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Utah State University
Tim J. Evans, DVM, MS, PhD, DACT, DABVT
Logan, Utah
Associate Professor and Section Head
lonophores
Department of Toxicology
Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory
Lilies
 University of Missouri
Columbia, Missouri
Dwayne W. Hamar, PhD
Toxicokinetics and Toxicodynamics
Associate Professor
Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female
 College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Companion Animals
Sciences
Colorado State University
Kevin T. Fitzgerald, PhD, DVM, DABVP
Fort Collins, Colorado
Associate Veterinarian
Ethylene Glycot
VCA Alameda East Veterinary Hospital
Denver, Colorado
Steven R. Hansen, DVM, MS, DABT, DABVT
Taking a Toxicologic History
Senior Vice President
Establishing a Minimum Database in Smalt
Animal Poison Control Center
Animat Poisonings
ASPCA
Poisonings in the Captive Reptile
Urbana, Illinois
SnokeInhalation
Pyrethrins and Pyrethroids
Carbon Monoxide
Cyanide
Elizabeth A. Hausner, DVM, PhD, DABT,
Insects-Hymenoptera
DABVT
Metronidazole
 Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
United States Food and Drug Administration
Silver Spring, Maryland
Hazards Associated with the Use of Herbat and
Other Natural Products
Contributors  vii
Lynn Rolland Hovda, DVM, MS, RPh, DACVIM
Katrina L. Mealey, DVM, PhD, DACVIM,
Director of Veterinary Services
DACVCP
Pet Poison Helpline
Professor
SafetyCall International
Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Bloomington, Minnesota
College of Veterinary Medicine
Effective Use of Veterinary Poison Control Center
Washington State University
Pullman, Washington
Safdar A.Khan, DVM, MS, PhD, DABVT
Ivermectin:MacrolideAntiparasitic Agents
Senior Director of Toxicology Research
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Charlotte Means, DVM, MLIS, DABVT,
ASPCA
DABT
Urbana, Illinois
Senior Toxicologist
Pyrethrins and Pyrethroids
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Urbana, Illinois
Michael W. Knight, DVM, DABVT, DABT
Organophosphate and Carbamate Insecticides
Senior Toxicologist
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
Matthe w S. Mellema, DVM, PhD, DACVECC
Urbana, Illinois
Assistant Professor
ZincPhosphide
 Department of Surgical and Radiological
Sciences
Gary R. Krieger, MD, MPH
Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital
Associate Professor
University of California - Davis
Department of Toxicology
Davis, California
School of Pharmacy
Initiat Management ofthePoisoned Patient
University of Colorado
Xylitol
Denuer, Colorado
Indoor Environmentat QualityandHeatth
Steven Mensack, VMD, DACVECC
Medical Director
Michelle Anne Kutzler, DVM, PhD, DACT
 Pet Emergency Clinics and Specialty Hospital
Associate Professor of Companion Animal
Ventura, California
Industries
Supportive Care ofthe Poisoned Patient
 Department of Animal Science
Oregon State University
Caroline Moore, BS
Corvallis, Oregon
School of Veterinary Medicine
Considerations in Pregnant or Lactating Patients
University of California
Davis, California
Jerry J. LaBonde, MS, DVM
Cyanobacteria
Veterinarian and Owner
Avian and Exotic Animal Hospital at Homestead
Michelle S. Mostrom, DVM, MS, PhD,
Centennial, Colorado
DABVT, DABT
Poisoning in the Avian Patient
Veterinary Toxicologist
Deartment of Veterinary Diagnostic Services
Justine A. Lee, DVM, DACVECC
North Dakota State University
Associate Director of Veterinary Services
Fargo, North Dakota
Pet Poison Helpline
Grapes and Raisins
SafetyCall International
Minneapolis, Minnesota
Motoko Mukai, DVM, PhD, DABT
Considerations in the Geriatric Poisoned Patient
Senior Research Associate
Animal Health Diagnostic Center
Jude McNally, RPh, DABAT
College of Veterinary Medicine
Vice-President, Medical Science Liaison
Cornell University
Rare Disease Therapeutics, Inc.
Ithaca, New York
Franklin, Tennessee
Diethylene Glycot
Toxicologic Information Resources
Spider Envenomation:Black Widow
Spider Envenomation: Brown Recluse
vil   Contributors
Lisa A. Murphy, VMD, DABT
Mathieu Peyrou, DVM, MSc
Assistant Professor of Toxicology
Faculte de Medecine Veterinaire
Department of Pathobiology
University de Montreal
University of Pennsylvania
Quebec, Canada
Kennett Square, Pennsylvania
Adverse Drug Reactions
Responding to Mass Exposures
Konnie H. Plumlee, DVM, MS, DABVT,
Michael J. Murphy, DVM, PhD, JD, DABVT
DACVIM
Veterinary Medical Officer
Veterinary Medical Officer
Center for Veterinary Medicine
USDA-APHIS-Animal Care
Food and Drug Administration
Ozark, Missouri
Rockville, Maryland
Citrus Oils
Medicotegat Considerations in Toxicology Cases
DEET
Anticoagulant Rodenticides
Nicotine
Kristin L. Newquist, BS, AAS, CVT
Robert H. Poppenga, DVM, PhD, DABVT
General and Exotic Practice Technician
Professor of Veterinary Clinical Toxicology
VCA Alameda East Veterinary Hospital
California Animal Health and Food Safety
Denver, Colorado
Laboratory
Poisonings in the Captive Reptile
School of Veterinary Medicine
 University of California - Davis
Gary D. Osweiler, DVM, MS, PhD, DABVT
Davis, California
Professor Emeritus
Hazards Associated with the Use of Herbal and
Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal
Other Naturat Products
Medicine
Veterinary Toxicologist, Retired
Birgit Puschner, DVM, PhD, DABVT
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Professor
Iowa State University
 Department of Molecular Biosciences
Ames, Iowa
California Animal Health & Food Safety
General Toxicologic Principles for Clinicians
Laboratory
School of Veterinary Medicine
Kathy Parton, DVM, MS
University of California
Senior Lecturer
Davis, California
Institute of Veterinary, Animal and Medical
Approach to Diagnosis for the Toxicology Case
Sciences
Cyanobacteria
Massey University
Metatderyde
Palmerston North New Zealand
Mushrooms
Sodium Monofluoroacetate (1080)
Merl F. Raisbeck, DVM, MS, PhD, DABVT
Michael E. Peterson, DVM, MS
Professor of Veterinary Toxicology
Associate Veterinarian
Department of Veterinary Sciences
Reid Veterinary Hospital
University of Wyoming
Albany, Oregon
Laramie, Wyoming
ToxicologicDecontamination
Organochlorine Pesticides
Indoor EnvironmentalQuatity and Heatth
Petroleum Hydrocarbons
Toxicotogic Considerations in the Pediatric
Poisoned Patient
Jill A. Richardson, DVM
Poisonous Lizards
Pharmacovigilance Veterinarian
Sake Bite:North American Pit Vipers
Department of Pharmacovigilance
Snake Bite: Coral Snakes
 Merck Animal Health
SpiderEnvenomation:Black Widow
Summit, New Jersey
Spider Envenomation: Brown Recluse
Amitraz
Toads
Ethano
Contributors  ix
Brian K. Roberts, DVM, DACVECC
John H. Tegzes, MA, VMD, DABVT
 Director of Emergency and Critical Care
Professor of Toxicology
Veterinary Specialists of South Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Cooper City, Florida
Western University of Health Sciences
Toads
Pomona, California
Mercury
Wilson K. Rumbeiha,DVM,PhD, DABVT,
Sodium
DABT
Professor
Mary Anna Thrall, DVM, MS, DACVP
Veterinary Diagnostic & Production Animal
Professor and Section Chief
Medicine
Department of Pathobiology
College of Veterinary Medicine
School of Veterinary Medicine
Iowa State University
Ross University
Ames, Iowa
St. Kitts, West Indies
Cholecalciferot
Ethylene Glycot
Rance K. Sellon, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
Mark D. Van Ert, PhD, CIH
Associate Professor
Adjunct Clinical Associate Professor of Public
Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Health
Washington State University
Environmental and Occupational Health
Pullman, Washington
Concentration
Acetaminophen
Mel and Enid Zuckerman College of Public
Health
John B. Sullivan Jr., MD, MBA
Arizona Health Sciences Center
Associate Professor
University of Arizsona
College of Medicine
Tucson, Arizona
University of Arizona
Indoor Environmentat QualityandHeatth
Tucson, Arizona
IndoorEnvironmentatQualityand Heatth
Petra A. Volmer, DVM, MS, DABVT, DABT
Manager of Pharmacovigilance
Patricia A. Talcott, MS, DVM, PhD, DABVT
Ceva Animal Health, LLCs
Professor
Rutherford, New Jersey
Department of Veterinary Comparative
"Recreationat”Drugs
Anatomy, Pharmacology and Physiology
College of Veterinary Medicine
Katie Von Derau, RN, CPN, CSPI
Washington State University
Supervisor
Pullman, Washington
Washington Poison Center
Effective Use ofa Diagnostic Laboratory
Seattle, Washington
Miscellaneous Indoor Toxicants
Use ofHuman Poison Centers in the Veterinary
Miscellaneous Herbicides,Fungicides,and
Setting
Nematocides
Anticoagulant Rodenticides
Tina Wismer, DVM, DABVT, DABT
Copper
Medical Director
Mycotoxins
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center
NonsteroidatAntinflammatories
Urbana, Illinois
Strychnine
Lead
Zinc
Preface
This book was originally written with two goals in mind: to provide a valuable aid to the
 practicing small animal clinician and to supply a textbook for veterinary students that
would supplement their classroom instruction. Dr. Peterson approached this text from the
viewpoint of an active small animal clinician with an academic background in toxicology
and public health. He is also an authority on clinical management of animals envenomated
by a variety of zootoxins. Dr. Talcott, a Diplomate of the American Board of Veterinary Tox-
and as a professor and instructor of 22 years teaching veterinary students at Washington
State University College of Veterinary Medicine.
This edition of the book has eight new chapters, which brings the total volume to
85 chapters. All the chapters have been updated with the most recent information avail-
able by experts in their fields. Ihe book has also been expanded to four sections from the
previous three. Ihe first section, "Toxicologic Concept's" reviews both general toxicologic
principles and clinical approaches to diagnosis and initial stabilization of the poisoned
patient. Ihis section includes areas such as toxicokinetics and toxicodynamics, effective
use of poison centers, taking an adequate history, minimum databases, decontamination,
and general supportive care, among other topics. The second section,"General Exposure's"
covers large areas of toxicology such as indoor environmental quality, mass exposures,
reproductive toxicology, and special classes of intoxicated patients such as pregnant and
lactating, pediatric, geriatric, reptile, avian, and small mammals among others. The third
section, “Miscellaneous Toxicant Group's"” covers large classes of toxicant such as adverse
drug reactions, recreational drugs, herbal and natural products, plants, and miscellaneous
herbicides among others. The fourth section, “Specific Toxicant's” covers more than 5 spe-
cific compounds such as lead, grapes and raisins, copper, and many more. All these chapters
have the same format, starting with a brief highlighted outline of critical pieces of infor-
mation in the chapter, and then followed by sections on sources, toxic dose, toxicokinet-
ics, mechanism of toxicity, clinical signs, minimum database, confirmatory test, treatment,
prognosis, gross and histologic lesions, and differential diagnoses.
 In addition to the added chapters and updated information, an index inside the look's
front cover list toxins by their most likely affected biologic system. Ihe index has been
expanded to aid the clinician in finding information quickly and helping to speed identi-
fication of the most likely offending toxicant. We hope this textbook will be of assistance
to both those students and veterinarians looking for an updated resource on small animal
toxicology.
Michael E. Peterson
Patricia A. Talcott
Xi
SEcTloN 1 Toxicologic Concepts
CHAPTER
General Toxicologic
Principles for
Clinicians
Gary D. Osweiler, DVM, MS, PhD, DABVT
Toxicology is the science and study of how poisons affect organisms.
Toxicology uses information extensively from medicine, pathology, chermistry.
epidemiology, and statistics to reach the best diagnostic and therapeutic outcormes.
· Dosage is the most important factor that deterrmines response to poisons.
Toxicity is the quantitative armount of toxicant (dosage) required to produce a
defined effect.
Hazard or risk of poisoning depends on toxicity of the agent, characteristics of the
 anirnal's biology, and probability of exposure to the toxicant under conditions of 
use.
Acute, subacute, and chronic toxicity are different chronological designations
of chemical toxicity and are determined by relative dosage and the time and
circurmstances of exposure.
· LDso values are useful for cormparison of toxicity differences among chermicals but
do not define the nature of toxicosis produced or the safe dosage for a majority of
animals.
· The lowest known clinical toxic dosage is of greatest value for clinical toxicology.
· Many factors alter an animal's response to toxicants, including those inherent in
the toxicant (chemical structure, solubility), the animal (metabolism, excretion), the
environment (pollutants, natural toxins), and combinations of these major factors.
· Clinical toxicology evaluation depends heavily on deterrmination of exposure,
nature of clinical effects, and evidence for interacting factors that can alter toxicity
· Determination of dosage and concentration are essential for thorough toxicologic
evaluation and prognosis.
Dosage Makes the Poison
cine, this means understanding sources of poisons, circumstances of exposure, diagnosis
of the type of poisoning, treatment, and use of management and educational strategies to
prevent poisoning.14
 Toxicology is based on the important principle of dose and response. There is a graded
and possibly predictable response based on increasing exposure to the toxicant. In the
words of Paracelsus, a physician-alchemist of the sixteenth century, "All substances are poi-
sons; there is none which is not a poison. Ihe right dose differentiates a poison from a
remedy"24 Paracelsus's principle of dosage and poisoning is still true and relevant in the
1
2 SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
daily practice of nutrition, therapeutics, and toxicologic analysis. Today, with emphasis on
synthetic drugs, natural or alternative therapies, and the rapidly growing fields of nutraceu-
ticals and nanotoxicology, there is continuing interest in evaluating dosage and response
principles for both beneficial and detrimental effects in the daily practice of veterinary
medicine. Many toxicants discussed in this book provide examples of how dosage deter-
mines whether the agent is a nutrient, a remedy, or a poison.
Determinants of exposure that affect dosage may be more than simply the gross amount
of material ingested or applied to the skin. Rather, the effective dosage at a susceptible
receptor site determines the ultimate response. Thus species differences in metabolism,
vehicle differences that promote skin penetration, specific drug or chemical interactions
that potentiate response, and organ dysfunction that limits elimination can all influence
the ultimate dosage.235 Clinicians must consider all of these possibilities when working to
Dosage Is Affected by Animal Systems for Absorption, Metabolism,
and Elimination
Toxicology involves the knowledge of poisons, including their chemical properties, iden-
tification, and biologic effects, and the treatment of disease conditions caused by poisons.
Toxicology shares many principles with pharmacology. The term toxicokinetics includes
absorption, distribution, storage, metabolism, and elimination; another term, foxicody-
narmics, describes mechanisms of action and effects of poisons on the biochemistry and
physiology of animals. These important concepts are more fully described in Chapter 2,
"Toxicokinetics and Toxicodynamics."
 n i o i  si s as 
inportant when reading toxicology literature, reviewing laboratory reports, or describing
effects to colleagues. The following are some of the more useful toxicologic terms.
A poison or foxicant is any solid, liquid, or gas that, when introduced into or applied to
the body, can interfere with homeostasis of the organism or life processes of its cells by its
aeaua ane pue saos sioo i aeuo ie suosid aqsap ct pasn s uixg al
classified as biotoxins. Biotoxins are further classified according to origin as zootoxins (ani-
mal origin), bacterial toxins (both endotoxins and exotoxins), phytotoxins (plant origin),
phycotoxins (from seaweed and algae), and mycotoxins (fungal origin).2.3.5
 Poisons may be categorized as organic, inorganic, metalic, or biologic and may be syn-
thetic or natural. Synthetic agents may have been designed specifically as toxicants or for
loy sanip da'a) Aloixoi jo aauei mouieu Aian no peoiq Aian e aneq Aeu jei sasodind 1an
cancer chemotherapy) or may produce effects in very specific targets. Natural products
used in nutrition, medicine, or commerce are sometimes believed to be less hazardous than
synthetic products. However, natural products are not inherently more or less toxic than
synthetic molecules. Indeed, some of the most toxic agents known (e.g., botulinum toxin,
tetrodotoxin) are of natural origin. Knowledge of the chemical nature and specific effects of
toxicants is the only certain way to assess hazard from exposure
The terms foxic, foxicity, and toxicosis are often misunderstood or misused.35 The word
foxic describes the effects of a toxicant (e.g., the “toxic" effects of organophosphate insec-
ticides are cholinesterase inhibition—lacrimation, salivation, vomiting, dyspnea, and diar-
rhea). However, toxicity is used to describe the quantitative amount or dosage of a poison that
will produce a defined effect (e.g., the toxicity of ethylene glycol for cats is 2 to 5 mL/kg body
weight). The toxic effects of ethylene glycol are acidosis and oxalate nephrosis; the result of
being poisoned by ethylene glycol is ethylene glycol toxicosis. Poisoning and toxicosis mean
essentially the same thing and either may be used.
Dosage Defines Exposure in an Accurate and Reliable Format
Dosage is the correct terminology for toxicity expressed as amount of toxicant per unit of
grams per kilogram (mg/kg) body weight. However, toxicity can also be expressed as moles
Chapter l | General Toxicologic Principles for Clinicians  3
Table l-1
or micromoles of agent per kilogram body weight.
Comparison of
In some experimental studies, comparisons of
Body Weight to Surface Area for
large and small animals relate dosage to the body
Animals of Representative Sizes
surface area, which is approximately equal to
body weight.2.3.5 The use ofbody surface area dos-
Body Weight (kg) Body Surface (m2)
 ages is advocated by some as a more accurate way
0.5
0.06
to account for very different body sizes in veteri-
1.0
0.10
nary medicine. Examples in Table 1-1 show that as
5.0
0.29
animals increase in weight, the body surface area
10.0
0.46
increases proportionally less, and this may affect
20.0
0.74
the rate of metabolism, excretion, and receptor
40.0
1.17
interaction with toxicants.? For many toxicants,
1 Aq pauosiod aq Aeu seuue iaie[
relatively
lower body weight dosages than smaller mammals.5 However, other factors, such as species
differences in metabolism, excretion, or receptor sites, can alter this generalization.
 Dose is a term for the total amount of a drug or toxicant given to an individual organism.
In veterinary medicine, the extreme ranges of body weight and surface area, even within
species, generally make the term dose relatively inaccurate or imprecise.
Characteristics of the LDso
A commonly used means to compare the toxicity of compounds with one another is the
median lethal dosage, also known as the oral LDso in a standard animal, such as the labora-
tory rat. Ihe LDs, value is usually based on a single oral exposure with observation for 1 to
7 days after the chemical is administered to determine an end point for total deaths. Ihe
LDso is a standardized toxicity test that depends on a quantal (i.e., all or none) response to a
range of three or more regularly increasing dosages at logarithmic or geometric intervals. In
some cases a multiple-dosage LDso is used to show the acute effects (typically up to 7 days)
 produced by repeated dosages in the same animals. When cumulative deaths are plotted on
linear graph paper, the dose-response curve is sigmoid, and the most predictable value is
usually around either side of the LDso (Figure 1-1).
The end point of an LDso study is death, and the published LDso value provides no
information about severity or characteristics of clinical signs observed in the surviving ani-
mals.235 Twenty or more animals may be used to arrive at an estimate of the LDso, which
may limit the use of LDso trials in animals of economic significance. In some species, such
as birds and fish, toxicity is often expressed on the basis of the concentration of the sub-
stance in air, fed, or water. The acute oral toxicity for birds might be expressed as the
LCso (i.e., the lethal concentration for 50% of animals exposed) and may be measured as
12
10
8
6
De
4
2-
6
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
Dosage (mg/kg)
Figure l-l Dose-response curve for a typical LDso study
4 SECTION 1Toxicologic Concepts
milligrams of compound per kilogram of the toxic medium (e.g., air, water, feed). For fish,
the LCso refers to a concentration of toxicant in the water.
Definition of Response to Toxicant Exposures
Other terms are used in some circumstances (e.g., safety testing) to define toxicity of com-
pounds. The highest nontoxic dose, also known as the no observed adverse effct level, is
the largest dose that does not result in hematologic, chemical, clinical, or pathologic drug-
induced alterations. The toxic dose low or the lowest observed adverse effect level is the
lowest dose to produce toxicant-induced alterations. The lethal dose low is the lowest dose
that causes toxicant-induced deaths in any animal during the period of observation. Various
%os (at) %l  ot panbai sasop ateiput oiana T a ct pauee aq ues saseuaiad
(LDso), or 100% (LDoo) of the test animals. Another acronym occasionally used is MTD. It
has been used to note the maxirmum folerated dose in some situations or riniral foxic dose.
Thus one should read such abbreviations carefully and look for the specific term defined.
Time Relationships of Poisoning
Acute foxicity is a term usually reserved to mean the effects of a single dose or multiple
doses measured during a 24-hour period. If toxic effects become apparent over a period
of up to 7 days, it may be considered an acute effect. Subacute toxicity may refer to any
effects seen between 1 week and 1 month of exposure, whereas chronic often refers to effects
produced by prolonged exposure of 3 months or longer. Ihe interval between 30 days and
90 days postexposure may be called subchronic.
Toxicant Characteristics Can Define Acute or Chronic Response
the effects is the chronicity factor. Chronicity factor is determined by acute LDso/90 day
LDso. For warfarin in rats the acute LDso is 1.6 mg/kg, and the 90-day LDso is 0.077 mg/kg,
resulting in a ratio of 1.6/0.077, which is a chronicity factor of 21. On the other hand, the
single-dose LDso for caffeine in rats is 192 mg/kg and the 90-day LDso is slightly lower at
150 mg/kg, giving an acute to 90-day ratio of 192/150 or 1.3. Ihis demonstrates the chronic
or cumulative nature of warfarin versus caffeine.
 Animals may also develop tolerance for a compound such that repeated exposure serves
to increase the dosage required to produce lethality. The single-dose LDso of potassium
cyanide in rats is 10 mg/kg, whereas rats given potassium cyanide for 90 days are able to
tolerate a dosage of 250 mg/kg without mortality. Ihus cyanide has a very low chronicity
factor as a result of tolerance developed with time.
Toxicity Is Different from Risk or Hazard
The concept of risk or hazard is important to clinical toxicology. Although toxicity defines
the amount of a toxicant that produces specific effects at a known dosage, hazard or risk
is the probability of poisoning under the conditions of expected exposure or usage. Com-
pounds of high toxicity may still present low hazard or risk if animals are never exposed to
the toxicant. For example, ethylene glycol antifreeze is defined as low toxicity (2 to 5 mL/kg
body weight), but because it is often readily available in homes, is voluntarily consumed by
cats, and is diffcult to reverse once clinical signs have developed, it is seen as a high-risk
 or high-hazard toxicant. By comparison, potassium cyanide is a recognized, very potent
poison, but is virtually unavailable in most homes, so risk is low because it is generally not
available to pets.
Another way to define risk is to compare the ratio of the lowest toxic or lethal dosage
(e.g., the LD,) with the highest effective dosage, which could be defined as the EDg9. The
ratio of LD/EDg is defined as the standard safety margin, and it is useful for comparing
the relative risk of therapeutic drugs, insecticides, anthelmintics, and other agents applied
to animals for their beneficial effects.25 For a therapeutic drug or animal insecticide, if the
LD, is 10 mg/kg and the EDgg is 1 mg/kg, then the safety margin is 10 and the likely lethal
effect is much higher than the probable use level.
Chapter l | General Toxicologic Principles for Clinicians  5
 If all animals in an LDso study were the same, then the LDso would actually be a standard
toxic dosage for allanimals. However, at the same LDso dosage, not exactly 50% of animals
will die each time. Ihis biologic variation can be due to many factors, and veterinary clini-
cians must exercise judgment about the response of animals to a given toxicant.
Even more variability is expected because of the differences in species, age, body size,
route of exposure, inherent differences in metabolism, and pregnancy and lactation effects.
Remember also that the slope of the LDso curve is important and is not revealed from the
LDso value alone. An LDso with a very steep dose-response slope indicates a toxicant or
drug has a very narrow margin between no effects and maximal lethal effects.35 Although
ticides because of lower probability of survival of target animals.
Factors That Influence Toxicity
Many factors inherent in the toxicant, the animal, or the environment can alter a toxicity
value determined under defined experimental conditions. Ihe toxicity of a compound var-
ies with the route of exposure. Usual routes of exposure are oral, dermal, nasal, intravenous,
intraperitoneal, and subcutaneous. In addition, the most potent routes of exposure are usually
the intravenous, intrapulmonary, and intraperitoneal routes. In clinical veterinary toxicology
oral and dermal routes of exposure are the most common, and these routes generally delay
the absorption and diffuse exposure over a longer period. A daily dosage of toxicant mixed
in food and consumed over a 24-hour period may cause much less effect than that same
dosage given as a bolus at one specific time. However, retention in the gastrointestinal tract,
including enterohepatic cycling, and dermal or hair retention of poisons can significantly
a compound is concurrent organ damage as a result of other causes. This is most important
for diseases that alter liver or kidney function, leaving the animal with insuffcient resources
to metabolize and excrete toxicants. Chapter 2 deals with the inportant aspects of biotrans-
formation, excretion, and toxicodynamics that greatly influence toxicity of many chemicals.
Species and breed differences exert important influences on toxicity. The familiar example
of cats and their intolerance to phenolic compounds results directly from their limited gluc-
uronyl transferase activity, which is necessary to produce glucuronides for the excretion of
phenolic metabolites. A common example is acetaminophen, which is quite toxic to cats partly
as a result of ineffective excretion of the toxic metabolite. In addition, the amino acid and sulf-
hydryl content of feline hemoglobin and a relative lack of methemoglobin reductase in eryth-
rocytes makes it more susceptible to oxidant damage caused by the acetaminophen metabolite.
As a result, the cat is more likely to be poisoned by agents that induce methemoglobinemia.
Occasional differences within a species can increase the probability of toxicosis. The anthel-
mintic ivermectin provides an example of breed susceptibility differences, with collies and
individuals inotherherding breedsbeing genetically more susceptible than most otherbreeds.
Many environmental and physiologic factors can influence the toxicity of compounds,
and one should remember that such factors, or possibly other unknown factors, can sub-
stantially influence an individual's response to toxicants. Entire publications are devoted
to drug and chemical interactions, and the reader is encouraged to be aware of toxicologic
interactions that are illustrated throughout this text. Some examples of factors that alter
response to toxicants are presented in Table 1-2.
Biologic Variation and Toxicity Data in Veterinary Practice
Biologic variation is a significant factor in interpretation of clinical and diagnostic data
used in toxicology. A single toxicity figure will not define the range of toxicity and effects
in a given population. Because LDso or other values are usually defined in very similar ani-
mals (e.g., laboratory rats and laboratory beagles), the laboratory toxicity figure does not
reflect the biologic variation and differences in toxicity that may occur in a diverse group of
 breeds within the canine or any other species. For animals of veterinary importance, there
6SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Table l-2
Factors That May Alter Response to Toxicants
 Alteration or Change
Mechanism or Example
Impurities or
Recently melamine and cyanuric acid contaminants in cat food
contaminants
caused renal failure. For dogs, aflatoxin contaminated corn
in dog foods has caused bleeding and liver failure.
 Changes in chemical
Toxicity of metals may be altered by valence state. Trivalent
composition or
arsenicals are much more toxic than pentavalent arsenic. Specific
salts of inorganic
salts also alter toxicity (e.g., barium carbonate is cardiotoxic,
agents
whereas barium sulfate is insoluble and nearly nontoxic).
Instability or
decomposition
conditions can decompose to form more toxic degradation
of chemical
 products. Zinc phosphide rodenticide decomposes rapidly to
release highly toxic phosphine gas.
Ionization
Generally, dependent on pH and pKa, compounds that are
highly ionized in the stomach (e.g., strychnine) are poorly
absorbed and thus less toxic.
Vehicle effects
 Nonpolar and lipid-soluble vehicles usually increase toxicity
of toxicants by promoting absorption and membrane
 penetration. Examples are petroleum products and highly
volatile hydrocarbons.
Protein binding
Binding to serum albumin is common for many drugs and
toxicants, limiting the bioavailability of the agent and
 reducing toxicity. Agents displaced from protein binding
(e.g., vitamin K responsive anticoagulants) enhance toxicity
by allowing more freely available toxicants.
Chemical or drug
Chemicals may directly bind, inactivate, or potentiate one another.
 interactions
One chemical may also induce microsomal enzymes to influence
the metabolism of another. Barbiturate drugs stimulate metabolic
 activation of many toxicants to a more toxic metabolite.
Biotransformation*
 Prior exposure to the same or similar chemical may induce
 increased metabolic activity of microsomal MFOs. Foreign
compounds activated by MFOs can then be conjugated
by phase II metabolism and be excreted. If toxicants are
activated by MFO activity, toxicity may be increased. Liver
disease, very young or very old animals, and specific breeds
or strains of animal can be factors that lead to altered
 ability of MFO to begin metabolism followed by phase II
detoxification of foreign compounds.
Liver disease
Reduced synthesis of glutathione, metallothionein, and
coagulation factors may alter response to acetaminophen,
cadmium, and anticoagulant rodenticides, respectively.
Nutrition and diet
 Natural dietary compounds, such as calcium and zinc, may
affect absorption and response to lead. Vitamin C and
vitamin E can aid in scavenging of free radicals and repair
of cellular protective mechanisms.
MFO, Mixed function oxidase.
*See Chapter 2 for details on biotransformation.
is usually insufficient information on the variability of effects from low or moderate expo-
sures. Furthermore, individual environmental and husbandry conditions vary widely and
can affect the severity of response in any particular group of animals for a specific toxicant
and dosage. Therefore thorough clinical and environmental investigation and good labora-
tory diagnostic procedures are essential to toxicologic evaluation in a suspected exposure.
Chapter 1 |General Toxicologic Principles for Clinicians  7
Calculations for Toxicology
As indicated earlier, the basis for toxicologic effects is the dosage versus response relation-
ship. In a practical clinical situation, the dosage is often not defined. Rather, an animal is
 ill with clinical signs that suggest toxicosis, and there is potential exposure to a known or
suspected amount of poison that is probably at some concentration less than 100% in a
commercial product or natural source. Alternatively, the animal owner may have seen an
exposure, such as an animal consuming some tablets or a potential toxicant such as choco-
late. Sometimes animals with subacute or chronic signs are suspected of consuming some
toxicant in the food. Analysis of a food may reveal a concentration in parts per million
(ppm), mg/kg, mcg/g, or percentage, and the concentration in the food must be related to
a known toxicity based on milligrams per kilogram of body weight. In all these circum-
stances, the veterinary clinician must first relate a probable amount of toxicant to a body
 If dosage is low, careful observation with no treatment may be a valid option. Ihus the
 clinician should investigate the probable dosage as part of the decision process for whether
therapy or observation is more appropriate.
The ability to accurately convert numbers relating to concentration and dosage and
to convert different expressions of exposure or concentration is essential to the practice
of medicine, and is equally important in clinical toxicology. Ihe principles of dosage and
calculations practiced in pharmacology and therapeutics are similar to those used in
and convert different expressions of concentration as stated on labels or obtained from
laboratory analysis. Ihe toxicologist is further challenged to correlate the level of con-
tamination in food, water, or baits to the clinical signs observed in a suspected poison-
ing. The following examples are intended
to clarify some of these calculations and
Table 1-3
to show how they are used in clinical
Common Comparative
toxicology.
 and Equivalent Values in Veterinary
Toxicology
Concentration and Dosage
Expression or
Measurement
Equivalent Value
in Veterinary Toxicology
1 ppm
1 mg/kg or 1 mg/L
The amount of a toxic agent in feed, water,
1 ppm
1 μg/g or 1 μg/mL or 1
baits, and solutions is often expressed as
 mcg/g or 1 mcg/mL
a weight/weight relationship (e.g., g/ton,
1 ppm
0.0001%
1000 ppb
mg/kg, mcg/g), as a weight/volume rela-
1 ppm
1,000,000 ppt
tionship (e.g., mg/mL, mg/dL, mg/L), or
1 ppm
as a proportion of the toxicant to the total
1 ppb
0.000001%
medium in which it is held, such as per-
1ppb
1 ng/g
1 μg/kg or 1 mcg/kg
centage, ppm, parts per billion (ppb), and
1 ppb
parts per trillion (ppt). For correct toxi-
1%
10,000 ppm
cologic evaluation, one must understand
(Convert % to ppm by moving decimal
the relationships among these expres-
 point four places to the right)
1 mg/dL
10 ppm or 10 mg/ L
sions. Relationships and equivalencies
1 ounce
28.35g
of common expressions of concentration
453.6g
useful in calculations and interpretation
1 pound
1kg
for veterinary toxicology are shown in
2.205 1b
1liter
0.908 qt
Table 1-3.
3.785 L
In addition, the clinician may fnd
1 gallon
toxicity data expressed as milligrams per
1 teaspoon
5 mL
kilogram body weight of animal (dosage),
1 tablespoon
15 mL
1cup
but may receive a label or statement of
8 oz or 227 mL
1 quart
32 oz or 946 mL
analysis that expresses the feed, water, or
bait concentration as proportional or as
8SECTlON 1 Toxicologic Concepts
mon denominator.
 One common clinical situation is the need to convert a feed or bait concentration to
body weight basis toxicity. The following clinical problem illustrates this calculation.
Clinical Problem l
Is This a Toxic Exposure? If the acute toxicity of cholecalciferol
rodenticide is 2000 mcg/kg of body weight and the bait concentration is 0.075%, is a
 1-oz package of bait likely to be toxic to a 70-lb German shepherd that consumes the
entire package at one time?
Solution
To evaluate this risk, one must know or assume the following:
· Amount of food or bait consumed (1 oz)
Weight of the animal at risk (70 lb)
· Concentration of toxicant in the food or bait (0.75%)
 In this case, first convert as much as possible to the metric system:
70-1b dog/(2.2 1b/kg) = 31.8 kg
+0.075% is 750 mg cholecalciferol/kg or 0.75 mg cholecalciferol/g of bait
+ One ounce of bait × 28.35 g/oz = 28.35 g bait
Thus total consumption of cholecalciferol is expressed as:
α28.35 g bait × (0.75 mg cholecalciferol/g bait) = 21.26 mg cholecalciferol consumed
m  1 9=8 u 9
Thus toxic dosage is not consumed.
From the calculations, it is apparent that this exposure would cause a low risk of toxico-
sis from cholecalciferol.
 If the concentration of vitamin D in a complete pet food is known or assumed, one may
also need to calculate the potential for toxicosis based on feed contamination.
Clinical Problem 2
Is There a Cumulative Toxic Exposure? Continuing cholecalcif-
erol to another example, assume that vitamin D at 2000 IU/kg body weight/day for 1 to
 2 weeks can cause subacute toxicosis to dogs. If a dog food were accidentally fortified
with a concentration of 10o0 IU/b, would long-term consumption likely result in
toxicosis in a 35-lb dog?
Solution
In this case, the needed information is expanded from Clinical Problem 1, because we
do not know the amount of contaminated material consumed. Also, convert compo-
nents to the same system (metric units).
+Convert a 35-1b dog to kg (i.e., 35 1b + [2.2 1b/kg]) = 15.9 kg; 15.9 kg × 0.025 =
0.3975 kg [amount ingested].
· Vitamin D in feed at 1000 IU/lb: 1000 IU/lb × 2.2 lb/kg = 2200 IU/kg of feed
Daily total vitamin D intake = 0.3975 kg/day × (2200 IU/kg feed) = 874.5 IU/day.
esop uatam Apog :ep/8/1 s = 8 6st/ep/1 s8 = op 8-6's a o aes*
Daily body weight dosage at 55 IU/kg is far below the toxic dosage of 2000 IU/kg body
weight/day.
Chapter 1 I General Toxicologic Principles for Clinicians  9
 In this clinical example, the daily dosage of 5s IU/kg on a body weight basis is approxi-
mately twice the recommended requirement but far below the known toxicity of 2000 IU/kg.
Small animal toxicants may sometimes be expressed in blood or body fluids by different
units. Most common are ppm, milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL), and milliequivalents per
iter (mEq/L). If laboratory results are given in one of these units, but toxicity information
is available to the clinician in different units, the ability to convert to comparable units is
essential to interpretation. Clinical Problem 3 illustrates this conversion.
Clinical Problem 3
Converting Laboratory Values from ppm to mEq/L In a dog
exhibiting neurologic signs and a suspected salt toxicosis, toxicology laboratory results
are returned indicating a serum sodium value of 4320 ppm. Expected normal values in
your practice are 135 to 145 mEq/L. Is the laboratory analysis indicative of hypernatre
mia suggesting salt toxicosis?
Solution
 In this case, it is necessary to convert the laboratory analysis results to mEq/L for
interpretation. There is a common formula for converting mg/dL to mEq/L. To use this
formula, do the following:
 Convert ppm to mg/dL
Tp/au = 01 Aq udd Bupiaip uau ‘T/au 0l = Tp/au I pue ‘T/au I = udd 1 asnesag
(4320 ppm divided by 10 = 432 mg/dL).
g 8 =  x 1 x 7 =  / x a x / = Tg 
Result provides laboratory confirmation of hypernatremia.
Clinical Problem 3 illustrates the tenfold difference between ppm and mg/dL (1 mg/dL
= 10 ppm) and shows that to convert from mg/dL to mEq/L one must know the valence and
atomic weight of specific toxicants or metals.
Toxicoses, although difficult clinical problems, can best be managed by using basic
principles and calculations to estimate probable exposure to toxicants and the factors that
may alter those responses. Adding to this knowledge of the systemic and medical effects of
toxicants and the principles of antidotal and detoxification therapy should result in the best
possible outcome in response to small animal toxicoses.
Clinical Problem 4
Owners Suspect Acute Aflatoxicosis—Is It Likely? A reported
LDso for aflatoxin in dogs is 0.80 mg/kg of body weight. If a beagle dog is exposed to
Solution
 In this scenario, the toxic body weight dosage must be compared against risk from
a known or presumed concentration in the diet. The body weight dosage must be
converted to a dietary concentration. In addition, remember the principle that dietary
dosage is affected by the amount of food consumed. No weight was given for the dog,
but it is a beagle, so one can assume a weight of 22 lb for purposes of calculation.
· First, convert all weights to the metric system. A 22-ib beagle can reasonably be
assumed to weigh 10 kg (22 lb/2.2 kg).
 Next, estimate the food intake of the beagle. As in Clinical Problem 2, a reasonable
intake is 2.5% of body weight daily.
Calculate food ingested daily: 10 kg × 0.025 = 0.25 kg food.
·Calculate the amount of aflatoxin in 0.25 kg food: 200 ppb = 200 mg/kg = 0.2 mg/kg
or 0.2 ppm; at 0.2 mg/kg × 0.25 kg the food consumed contains 0.05 mg aflatoxin.
10 SECTlON 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Calculate the dosage of aflatoxin in mg/kg of body weight: 0.05 mg/10 kg body
weight = 0.005 mg/kg.
body wt in kg
mg/kg BW =
10 kg
Conclusion: 200 ppb (0.2 ppm) dietary aflatoxin is not an LDs, dosage of aflatoxin.
Clinical Problem 5
Express the following concentrations in ppm and in percent
 Combination Mixture
Concentration {%}
Concentration (ppm)
a. 17 ounces in 12 liters
4.19
41990
b. 0.25 quarts in 56 gallons
0.1116
1116
c. 9.27 grams in 1 kilogram
0.927
9270
d. 30 lb premix in 2 tons of dog food
0.75
750
e. 34 ounces in 200 gallons
0.1328
1328
f. 54 mg caffeine in 12 oz
0.0152
152
Mountain Dew
Solurtions
a. Convert to percentage by making a ratio in the same units. (Note: There are 33.81
:( sad  [e au) dd oi % pue % oi on jaos ua (T/sauo
Ratio
%
ppm
17 oz
17 oz
= 0.0419 ratio = 4.19% = 41,990 ppm
12 L×33.81 oz/L
405 oz
b. Create ratio in same units (e.g., quarts, then use [ratio × 100 = %] and [% × 4
decimals right]:
0.25qt
0.25qt
= 0.001116 = 0.1116% = 1116 ppm
56 gal × 4 qt/gal
224 qt
c. 9.27 g in 1 kg (first convert both terms to grams):
9.27 g
9.27
= 0.00927 = 0.927% = 9270 ppm
1 kg × 1000 g/kg
1000
d. 30 lb of premix in 2 tons of dog food (first convert all terms to pounds, and then
calculate ratio, percent, and ppm):
 30 lb premix
30 lb premix
=0.0075 =0.75% = 750 ppm
2 tons dog food
4000 lb food
e. 34 ounces in 200 gallons:
34 oZ
34
= 0.001328 = 0.1328% = 1328 ppm
200 gal × 128 oz/gal
25,600
Chapter l | General Toxicologic Principles for Clinicians  
11
f. 54 mg caffeine in 12 oz soda (convert ounces to milliters, then grams, then
milligrams):
54 mg
54 mg
54 mg
54 mg
12 oz × 29.6 mL/oz
355.2 mL×1 g/ m L
355.2gX1000 mg/g
355,200 mg
= ratio of 0.000152113 = 0.0152% = 152 ppm
 Quick Guide Figure 1-2 provides a range of body weight dosages and food
consumption for quick reference in estimating equivalent ppm concentrations in
the diet without using calculations. Remember that as a higher proportion of food
is consumed relative to body weight, then the same dietary concentration will cause
increasing dosage of the toxicant per unit of body weight.
ppm toxicant in diet
1
10
50
100
500
1000
1
0.01
0.1
0.5
1
5
10
Consumed
2
0.02
0.2
1
2
10
20
3
0.03
0.3
1.5
3
15
30
4
0.04
0.4
2
4
20
40
BW
5
0.05
0.5
2.5
5
25
50
%
10
0.1
1
5
10
50
100
Equivalent body weight dosage (mg/kg)
100-
06
80
BW
70
Dosage in mg/kg l
□2
60
3
50
口
40
5
30
口
10
20
10
D
% Body weight
consumed
6
8
500
ppm in diet
Figure l-2 Relationships of food intake and body weight dosage.
12SECTlON 1 Toxicologic Concepts
References
1. Beasley VR, Dorman DC, Fikes JD, Diana SG, Woshner V: A systems affected approach to veterinary toxt-
cology, Urbana, Ill, 1999, University of Illinois.
2. Eaton DL, Gilbert SG: Principles oftoxicology. In Klassen CD, editor: Casarette and Doull's toxicology: the
basic science of poisoms,ed 7, New York, 2008, McGraw-Hill, pp 11-43.
3. Osweiler GD, Carson TL, Buck WB, Van Gelder GA: Clinical and diagnostic veterinary toxicology, ed 3,
Dubuque, Iowa, 1985, Kendall Hunt, pp. 3-26.
4. Stine KE,Brown TMI: Principles of toxicology,ed 2, Boca Raton, 2006, CRC Press: Taylor & Francis Group,
Pp.1-13.
5. Osweiler GD: Toxicology. The National Veterinary Medical Series, Philadelphia, 1996, Williams & Wilkins,
Pp.1-16.
CHAPTER
Toxicokinetics and
2
Toxicodynamics
Tim ]. Evans, DVM, MS, PhD, DACT, DABVT
Definitions
 The basic concepts regarding the toxicokinetics and toxicodynamics of xenobiotics are
clinically relevant to veterinary toxicology and need to be understood by veterinary practi-
tioners, professional students, and other personnel who will be participating in the diagno-
sis and treatment of small animal intoxications. In discussing the aspects of toxicokinetics
and toxicodynamics most pertinent to small animal toxicoses, it is first necessary to define
or, in other words, any compound not occurring within the normal metabolic pathways of
a biologic system.2 Depending on the compound and the level of exposure, interactions
between xenobiotics and animals can be benign, therapeutic, or toxic in nature. Ihe phar-
macokinetics and pharmacodynamics of a therapeutic xenobiotic influence the time course
and efficacy of that compound in a pharmacologic setting. Likewise, the toxicokinetics and
toxicodynamics of a toxic xenobiotic determine the “when,” "how long” "what,” and "why
for the adverse effects of that toxicant.2
The disposition of a xenobiotic is what the animal's body does to that compound fol-
lowing exposure. The disposition or fate of a xenobiotic within the body consists of the
chemical's absorption, distribution, metabolism (biotransformation), and excretion charac-
teristics (ADME).23 Toxicokinetics refers to the quantitation and determination of the time
course of the disposition or ADME for a given toxic xenobiotic.3 There are a variety of spe-
cialized toxicokinetic terms, including bioavailability, volume of distribution (Va), clearance,
half-life, one-compartment model, and frst- and zero-order kinetics, which are discussed
later in this chapter under the separate components of ADME.
The term toxicodynarmics describes what a toxicant does physiologically, biochemically,
and molecularly to an animal's body following exposure. The toxicodynamics of a given
toxic xenobiotic depend on the mechanism of action of that toxicant and the relationship
between toxicant concentration and the observed effects of the toxicant on biologic pro-
cesses in the animal (i.e., the dose-response relationship). The disposition and toxicokinet-
ics of a particular xenobiotic also play a role in determining the organs or tissues affected
by a toxicant, and the clinical presentation and time course of a toxicosis resulting from
excessive exposure to that compound.12
Toxicokinetics and Disposition
Xenobiotic Absorption
With the exception of caustic and corrosive toxicants that cause adverse effects at the site of
exposure, atoxic xenobiotic is generally first "absorbed" or taken up into the body.3 Absorp-
tion involves crossing cellular membranes, which are typically composed of phospholipid
bilayers containing various sized pores and embedded proteins.? The route of exposure and
physiochemical properties of a toxicant, such as its resemblance to endogenous compounds
its molecular size and relative lipid and water solubilities, the magnitude of a molecule's
13
14  SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
association constant, and whether a compound can be classifed as a weak acid or as a weak
base, all determine the manner and quantities in which a xenobiotic is absorbed across cell
membranes.
Routes of Xenobiotic Exposure and Xenobiotic Bioavailability
The most common routes of exposure for xenobiotics in small animal toxicology are oral
(gastrointestinal), dermal (percutaneous), and inhalation (pulmonary). In rare instances of
iatrogenic intoxications, xenobiotics can be injected subcutaneously, intramuscularly, intra-
peritoneally, or even intravenously.3 There are unique aspects to the absorption of xenobiot-
potential toxicants.
 Bioavailability (often represented by F in toxicokinetic equations) represents the fraction
of the total dose of a toxic xenobiotic that is actually absorbed by an animal.? In intravenous
exposures, the bioavailability of a toxic xenobiotic is 100% because the entire dose of the
toxicant reaches the peripheral circulation. The absorption of gases and vapors in the respi-
ratory tract largely depends on the ratio (blood-to-gas partition coefficient) between the
equilibrium concentrations of the toxicant dissolved in the blood and the gaseous phase of
the toxicant in the alveolar spaces.23 The size of aerosolized particles determines to a large
degree whether a xenobiotic is deposited in the nasopharyngeal region (particles >5 μm) or
within the alveoli of the lungs (<1 μum).2 The stratum corneum and its associated keratinized
structures often impede the percutaneous absorption of xenobiotics, and there are varia-
tions in the absorptive ability of skin in different anatomic locations.4 Dermal absorption
frequently depends on the vehicle in which a toxicant is dissolved and is generally greater
for lipid-soluble compounds as cormpared with chemicals that are highly soluble in water.2.4
The bioavailability of toxic xenobiotics that are ingested can be negatively affected by acidic
degradation in the stomach and enzymatic breakdown in the small intestine.? Decreased
gastrointestinal transit time can diminish xenobiotic bioavailability by limiting the access of
potential toxicants, especially certain heavy metals (e.g., lead and cadmium), resemble
essential minerals such as calcium and zinc, respectively. The gastrointestinal absorption of
these toxic nonessential metals involves interactions with dietary levels of the correspond-
ing essential metals and regulated mechanisms of gastrointestinal uptake designed for thiese
required minerals.
Hepatic biotransformation of xenobiotics, which is discussed in greater detail later in
this chapter, can also influence the apparent bioavailability of ingested toxicants. Following
oral exposure, xenobiotics absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract are transported to the
(and in some instances prior biotransformation in gastrointestinal cells) prevents access of
the compound to the systemic circulation, resulting in an apparently decreased bioavail-
ability from what is termed the first-pass effect or presystemic elimination.34 In contrast, the
 bioavailability of some chemicals is enhanced by a cycle of biliary excretion and subsequent
reuptake from the intestines referred to as enterohepatic recirculation.4
Mechanisms of Xenobiotic Absorption
The passage of xenobiotics through cellular membranes can be either energy-independent
(passive transport) or can require the expenditure of energy through specialized or active
diffusion or fltration. Specialized, energy-dependent, cellular transport systems include
the process specifically referred to as active transport, along with facilitated transport and
pinocytosis.23
Passive Transport of Xenobiotics
Simple diffusion and filtration are nonsaturable processes, which do not require the expen-
diture of energy to transport xenobiotics across cellular membranes.23 Both of these mech-
Chapter 2 | Toxicokinetics and Toxicodynamics  15
with the rate of transport being proportional to the difference in that chemical's concen-
tration between the two sides of a particular membrane (Fick's law).2 Simple diffusion is
the most common mechanism by which xenobiotics cross cellular membranes. Uncharged
(nonionized), lipid-soluble molecules, especially small molecules, are more readily diffus-
ible across the phospholipid bilayers of biologic membranes than charged (ionized) mol-
ecules, which are generally less lipid-soluble.23 The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation can
be used to predict whether a particular xenobiotic will be in the nonionized or ionized
tion constant (pKa), which is equivalent to the pH at which equal amounts of a xenobiotic
are in the nonionized and ionized states, and the pH of the biologic matrix in which the
xenobiotic will exist (i.e., pKa - pH) is equal to the common log of the quotient of nonion-
ized xenobiotic divided by ionized xenobiotic for weak acids and the log of the reciprocal
quotient (ionized xenobiotic divided by nonionized xenobiotic) for weak bases.24 Filtration
involves the passage of xenobiotics through patencies or pores within cellular membranes
and is determined, in large part, by the size of the xenobiotic molecule and pore size, which
varies in different organs and tissues.2
Specialized Transport of Xenobiotics
Active transport is an energy-dependent, saturable process by which xenobiotics are
transported across biologic membranes against electrochemical or concentration gra-
dients.24 Specifc exarmples of active transport systems include the ABCB transporters
(P-glycoproteins) and members of the organic cation transporter family.3 Facilitated or
transport, xenobiotic transport by this mechanism is not against a concentration gradient.23
Pinocytotic transport involves cellular engulfment of small amounts of xenobiotics and the
transfer of this amount of chemical through the cellular membrane.?
XenobioticDistribution
Distribufion refers to the translocation of a xenobiotic from the site of absorption to various
body organs and tissues and involves both transport of the chemical within the circulation
and cellular uptake of the xenobiotic.l3 The rate of xenobiotic transfer into a particular
organ or tissue is determined by the physiochemical properties of the specific xenobiotic
(e.g., lipid solubility and molecular weight), the blood flow to the organs or tissues in ques-
tion, and the rate of diffusion of the xenobiotic across the endothelial walls of the capillary
bed into cells within a particular organ or tissue.2-4 The Va for a given xenobiotic represents
the quotient of the total amount of that chemical in the body divided by the concentration
of the xenobiotic within the blood, and is used to describe the extent to which a xenobi-
 otic is distributed within the body.24 Ihe Va is a clinically relevant indicator as to whether
a chemical is primarily contained within the plasma compartment (relatively low V) or
whether a compound is widely distributed throughout the body within the interstitial or
intracellular compartments of various organs and tissues (relatively high Va).2.3
Xenobiotic Storage Depots
Xenobiotics can be stored within a variety of different body organs and tissues. Depending
 on the anatomic and physiologic relationships between the storage depot and the target
organs and tissues for a specific toxicant, storage of toxic xenobiotics can function as either
a protective mechanism or as a means by which the toxic effects of a xenobiotic are poten-
tiated. An understanding of the storage sites of toxic xenobiotics can provide additional
insight about circumstances that would be expected to exacerbate a particular toxicosis,
and can indicate which organs or tissues would be expected to have the highest concentra-
tions for diagnostic sampling. Plasma proteins represent a storage site for many xenobiotics
(e.g., salicylates, barbiturates, cardiac glycosides) and important physiologic constituents,
including steroid hormones, vitamins, and various essential minerals.? Displacement of
toxic xenobiotics from plasma proteins can greatly increase the amount of unbound toxi-
Ul aiemme soqouax jo Aianea apim v pe'anssi ao sueio iaren ot panqstp iu
16SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
the liver and kidneys, making these organs ideal sites for postmortem sample collection in
cases of suspected toxicoses.? Some toxic metals, such as cadmium, accumulate in the liver
-ooeau go uosnut pue suoeuasus snouaaopua uaiu aul go asneaq shaupi pue
nein in these organs. Fat and bone are storage depots for a variety of different xenobiotics,
and rapid depletion of body fat stores (weight loss) or increased remodeling of bone during
 growth or pregnancy have the potential to increase the exposure of target organs or tissue
to previously stored toxicants.34
Potential Tissue Barriers to Xenobiotic Distribution
sh oi pan u aiai a a u pau uanba s aq u-oo a
ability to limit exposure of the central nervous system (CNS) to toxic xenobiotics.? Other
potential barriers to chemical uptake also occur in the eyes, testes, prostate, joints, and pla-
centa. In these instances only small, nonionized, lipid-soluble molecules are able to cross
the membranes and gain access to potential target tissues.4
The blood-brain barrier to xenobiotic uptake consists of the relatively nonporous CNS
capillary endothelium, which contains multidrug-resistant protein and is surrounded for
the most part by glial cells.34 Ihe extremely low protein content of the interstitial fluid
within the CNS also contributes to the apparent inability of many protein-bound, toxic
xenobiotics to reach clinically relevant concentrations in the brain.? Because the blood-
 brain barrier is not fully formed at birth and is less well-developed in some breeds of dogs
(e.g., collies and collie crosses), immature animals and collie-related breeds are more sus-
ceptible to the adverse effects of compounds normally blocked by the blood-brain barrier.3.5
Xenobiotic Metabolism and Biotransformation
The term metabolism can be used to refer to the fate or disposition of a xenobiotic or the
sum total of the chemical transformations of normal body constituents, which occur in
living organisms.6 Biotransforrmation, on the other hand, is a general term referring to
the metabolic conversion of both endogenous and xenobiotic chemicals into more water-
soluble forms.6 For the purposes of this chapter, xenobiotic rmetabolis and biotransfor-
ration are synonymous and refer to the generally two-phase process by which chemicals
are converted to more water-soluble forms for excretion from the body.12 In xenobiotic
metabolism or biotransformation, the lipophilic (lipid-soluble) properties of xenobiotics
that favor absorption are biotransformed into physiochemical characteristics (hydrophi-
licity or water solubility) that predispose compounds to excretion in the urine or feces.6
Although multiple organs within the body have biotransformation capabilities, most xeno-
biotics are biotransformed in the liver.2.6
Phase I and Phase Il Xenobiotic Biotransformation
Xenobiotics are usually biotransformed in two phases (I and Il), which involve enzymes
having broad substrate specificity.26 Phase I reactions generally involve oxidation, hydrol-
ysis, or reduction, and convert apolar, lipophilic xenobiotics into metabolites, which have
 greater polarity and hydrophilicity. In these instances, hydroxyl, amino, carboxyl, or thiol
moieties are usually either exposed or added to increase water solubility.6 Oxidation reac-
tions, especially those catalyzed by cytochrome P450 enzymes, are the phase I biotransfor-
mations most commonly involved in xenobiotic metabolism, and many xenobiotics are able
to induce cytochrome P450 activity.25.6 During phase II biotransformation, the xenobiotic
or its metabolites are conjugated with a functional group (e.g., glucuronide, sulfate, amino
acids, glutathione, or acyl or methyl groups), resulting in a compound with dramatically
increased water solubility.26 Not all mammalian species have equal phase II biotransforma-
tion capabilities, and the inability of domestic cats to biotransform glucuronidate xenobiotics
is especially clinically relevant to veterinary toxicologists.2.5
Most xenobiotic biotransformations result in less toxic metabolites. However, there are
xenobiotics (e.g., acetaminophen and aflatoxin B,) for which the products of hepatic phase
I metabolism are actually more toxic than the parent xenobiotic.25 In these instances of
metabolic activation, bioactivation, toxication, or lethal synthesis, any factors that increase
Chapter 2 |  Toxicokinetics and Toxicodynamics  17
hepatic biotransformation of the parent compound enhance the amount of toxic metabolite
 to which the animal is exposed.57
Xenobiotic Excretion
The final step in the disposition of a xenobiotic is excretion, whereby the xenobiotic or its
metabolites are removed from the body via a number of different routes.? Renal excretion
is the most common means by which xenobiotics and the products of their biotransforma-
tion are eliminated from the body, but toxicants can also be excreted in the feces (biliary
excretion or elimination of unabsorbed xenobiotic), saliva, sweat, cerebrospinal fluid, or
Even the milk, which is clinically relevant in xenobiotic-exposed bitches or queens nursing
offspring.2.35 In instances of exposures to toxic vapors or volatile xenobiotics, exhalation
can also be a major route of elimination from the body.23 Xenobiotics and their metabolites
can be excreted by more than one route of elimination, and the total excretion is generally
broken down into renal and nonrenal routes.
Toxicokinetic Aspects of Xenobiotic Elimination
With regard to toxicokinetics, elirmination of a xenobiotic generally incorporates both the
processes of biotransformation and excretion.2& Clearance, which is expressed for the whole
body and individual organs in terms of the volume of blood that is cleared of the chemical
per unit time, is an indicator of the body's ability to eliminate a given toxicant from the body
by processes such as metabolism, excretion, and exhalation.2& The toxicokinetic aspects of
 xenobiotic elimination are clinically relevant to the management and diagnosis of veteri-
nary toxicoses. These quantitative indices can be used to predict the duration of a toxicosis
and the period necessary for therapeutic intervention. Toxicokinetic aspects of xenobiotic
elimination can also be used to determine the time frame and biologic samples that are best
suited for diagnosing a specific toxicosis.
When developing toxicokinetic models, assumptions are often made with regard to
whether a given xenobiotic best fits a one-cormpartment or a multicompartent model. A one-
compartment model is the simplest toxicokinetic model and assumes that changes in xenobi-
otic concentrations in the blood or plasma are accurate reflections of what is occurring in the
tissues. Assuming that a one-compartment model is appropriate for a particuar xenobiotic,
elimination ofthis compound is most likely via first-order kinetics, in which the involved pro-
cesses are most likely nonsaturable and the rate of elimination at any given time point is pro-
portional to the amount of compound that remains in the body at that point in time.24.& With
first-order kinetics in a one-compartment model, it is possible to calculate the elimination
half-life of a xenobiotic using the Va and the clearance for a given xenobiotic.8 In this instance,
half-life indicates the time required for the blood or plasma concentration of the xenobiotic
to be reduced by one half, with approximately 97% of a xenobiotic being eliminated from the
circulation in five half-lives.5s The term half-life can also be used in terms of elimination of
xenobiotic from body storage depots rather than from the blood or plasma.5 It is important to
know the context in which this particular term is being used and the compartmental model
involved to understand what process in the xenobiotic's disposition is actually being discussed.
 a e  a sssd a r  sn a ae a
saturable and the rate of elimination is independent of the amount of chemical remaining in
the body at a given point of time.28 Under these circumstances, the pathways of elimination
for a given xenobiotic can be described in terms of zero order kinetics. Only a finite amount
of xenobiotic can be eliminated per unit time.
Toxicodynamics
Interactions between Xenobiotic Toxicodynamics and Disposition
or Toxicokinetics
 In contrast to toxicokinetics, the toxicodynamics of a particular xenobiotic describe what
that compound actually does to adversely affect an animal's health rather than how the
18SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
animal handles the exogenous chemical. However, a xenobiotic's toxicodynamics and toxi-
cokinetics are not mutually exclusive. What a toxicant does physiologically, biochemically
and molecularly to a living organism following exposure not only depends on that xenobi-
 otic's mechanism of action and its dose-response relationship, but also on its disposition or
toxicokinetics within an exposed animal.12*
The first step in the development of a toxicosis is the delivery of the “ultimate toxicant"
a si oax d a saaux aa,  ue jo as si a
term farget is often used to describe a molecule that interacts with the ultimate toxicant,
 inclusive term referring to the cell types, organs, or tissues most susceptible to the effects
of a toxic xenobiotic.5.7
The distribution and biotransformation of a xenobiotic often limit the delivery of the
ultimate toxicant to susceptible target cells, organs, or tissues. Distribution of xenobiotics to
the disposition of a toxicant can be protective and can limit the adverse effects of a particu-
lar xenobiotic on an animal.3 Presystemic elimination or the first-pass effect prevents toxic
 xenobiotics from ever reaching the general circulation and therefore many potential sites of
action.4 Most biotransformations produce metabolites that are more water soluble and as a
result more readily eliminated from the body.23
 In contrast to circumstances in which the disposition of a xenobiotic decreases the risk
of toxicosis, there are also instances in which the distribution and biotransformation of a
given toxicant actually increase the likelihood that an ultimate toxicant will be delivered to
the site of action. A chemical's toxicity can be enhanced by specialized transport mecha-
nisms and by physiochemical characteristics that facilitate the accumulation of ultimate
toxicants within susceptible cells.7 The toxicity of a xenobiotic can also be facilitated by
processes, such as enterohepatic recirculation, that increase its bioavailability.47 Xenobiotic
biotransformations that result in lethal synthesis or bioactivation predispose animals to
toxicoses and can, in some instances, actually occur within target cells.57 Although some
 biotransformations result in metabolites that react more effciently with target enzymes or
receptors, it is more common for intoxication to result in chemical species, such as electro-
philes, free radicals, nucleophiles, and redox-active compounds that are indiscriminately
reactive with endogenous molecules.?
General Mechanisms of Xenobiotic Action
The basis for most toxicoses is cellular damage, and this damage is often most dramatic in
cells with high rates of metabolism and replication.? A toxic xenobiotic's mode or mecha-
nis of action is the activity of that compound or its metabolites at the molecular or cellular
level that results in adverse effects.l5 Although most of the chapters of this text review the
specific mechanisms of action of toxicants to which small animals are commonly exposed,
there are a number of general ways in which toxic xenobiotics adversely affect cellular
structure and function.
Although a toxic xenobiotic can adversely affect cells by changing their biologic micro-
environment through alterations in pH or occupation of a particular receptor site, as men-
tioned previously, ultimate toxicants generally interact with target molecules or cells.7 Some
xenobiotics mimic the actions of normal nutrients and endogenous hormones or neu-
rotransmitters. Specific receptors can be stimulated or blocked, and enzymes can be inacti-
vated or inhibited. Electrophiles, free radicals, nucleophiles, and redox-active compounds
are often generated through biotransformations, and these chemical species can react indis-
criminately with target macromolecules to exert their toxic effects.57 At the cellular level
chemicals can alter cellular maintenance, both internally and externally, by adversely affect-
ing membrane integrity and the ability of cells to regulate their volume and their energy
metabolism.7 Cellular injury and death often result from the impaired cellular synthesis
of adenosine triphosphate, uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation, and the inability of
cells to regulate their intracellular calcium concentrations. The cellular production of vital
Chapter 2 I Toxicokinetics and Toxicodynamics  19
proteins and the regulation of gene expression within cells can also be disrupted by toxi-
cants.5.7 Ultimately, high enough exposures to toxic xenobiotics cause cellular dysfunction
and injury and, sometimes, disrepair, and these adverse effects can be observed clinically as
abnormalities in the structure and function of different organs and tissues.7
References
1. Hodgson E, Mailman RB, Chambers JE, editors: Dictionary of toxicology, New York, 1999, Grove's
Dictionaries.
2. Spoo W: Toxicokinetics. In Plumlee K,editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2004, Mosby.
3. Rozman KK, Klaassen CD: Absorption, distribution, and excretion oftoxicants. In Klaassen CD, Watkins
III JB, editors: Casarett e Doull's essentials of toxicology, New York, 2003, McGraw-Hill.
State University Press.
5. Osweiler GD: Toxicology (The National Veterinary Medical Series), Philadelphia, 1996, Williams &
Wilkins.
6. Parkinson A: Biotransformation of xenobiotics. In Klaassen CD, Watkins IlI JB, editors: Casarett @
Doull's essentials of toxicology, New York, 2003, McGraw-Hill.
7. Gregus Z, Klaassen CD: Mechanisms of toxicity. In Klaassen CD, Watkins III JB, editors: Casarett &
Doul's essentials of toxicology, New York, 2003, McGraw-Hill.
8. Medinsky MA, Valentine JL: Toxicokinetics. In Klaassen CD, Watkins III JB, editors: Casarett & Doulls
essentials of toxicology, New York, 2003, McGraw-Hill.
CHAPTER
Toxicologic
3
Information Resources
Jude McNally, RPh, DABAT
Keith Boesen, PharmD, CsPl
Kelly Green Boesen, PharmD, BCPS
onsidering the exponential rate at which the body of toxicology information grows
combined with today's improved tools to disseminate this information can easily cause
Toxicologic information is available as primary, secondary, and tertiary literature on a
variety of media from textbooks to computer databases to portable electronic devices. Ihe
purpose of this chapter is to introduce veterinary practitioners to some of the resources
found to be beneficial when approaching a toxicologic problem.
Primary Literature
More than 30,000 biomedical journals are published annually. These are the primary lit-
erature sources that bring us detailed accounts of research in specialized areas. Ihe level of
detail, such as methodology, results, and discussion, exceeds that found in secondary and
tertiary resources. This affords readers greater opportunity to determine for themselves the
value of the conclusions offered in the study.
There are considerably more toxicologic references written for human medical practi-
tioners than for veterinarians. Any thorough search of a toxicologic topic must query the
primary literature in both toxicology and veterinary medicine. Primary literature may be
particularly important to the veterinarian practitioner because historically much of the tox
icology information is initially elucidated in animal models with the intent to extrapolate
this information to the human model.
 Primary literature has the advantage of offering the most up-to-date information. How-
Ever, the conclusions derived are often subject to revision as this research is merged with
other work and further scrutinized by the scientific community. A partial list of journals on
 toxicology is found in Box 3-1. An abbreviated list of veterinary medical journals offering
articles pertaining to toxicology is found in Box 3-2.
Secondary Literature
Secondary literature attempts to compile the primary literature through either an index ser-
vice or an abstracting service. Indexing services are limited to bibliographic information,
whereas abstracting services provide brief descriptions of the source cited. In both cases
this literature is generally useful as a means, not an end, to a search for information. Today
much of the secondary literature has become available online and through applications on
portable electronic devises, although CD-ROM formats may also be available. Examples of
secondary literature are:
Biosis Previews. These abstracts, which are updated weekly, pertain to biologic research
(including biomedical literature) and are available in print and electronic form.
21
22SECTlON 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Current Contents. Toxicologic information may be found in Current Contents Life Sci-
ences or Current Contents Clinical Medicine. This abstracting service is available in
print, on CD-ROM, and as an online service.
Medline (Ovid [lhttp://www.ovid.com/site/index.jsp] and PubMed [http://www.ncbi
.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/]). Medline is a service of the National Library of Medi-
cine located within the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland. This
is the world's largest medical library, providing access to primary, secondary, and
tertiary literature areas of biomedicine and health care. Both are available online
and PubMed is also available for portable electronic devices. It is a large database of
literature dating back to 1966. The articles are collected from various countries and
 include both human- and animal-related issues. Ovid does require a subscription;
however, many public and medical libraries provide free access. PubMed provides
 abstracts at no charge on the Internet.
Box 3-1
Partial List of Toxicology Journals
Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology
Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology
Archives of Toxicology
Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology
Cell Biology and Toxicology
Chemical Research in Toxicology
Clinical Toxicology
Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology, Part C, Pharmacology, Toxicology and
Endocrinoiogy
Critical Reviews inToxicology
Drug and Chemical Toxicology
Ecotoxicology andEnvironmental Safety
Experimental and Toxicologic Pathoiogy
Food and Chemical Toxicology
Human and Experimental Toxicology
Immunopharmacology and Immunotoxicology
Journal ofAnalytical Toxicology
Journal ofAppliedToxicology
Journal of Biochemical andMolecular Toxicology
Journal of Environmental Pathology,Toxicology and Oncology
Journal of Pharmacological and Toxicological Methods
Journal of Toxicological Sciences
Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health
Neurotoxicology
Neurotoxicology and Teratology
Journal of Pharmacology and Toxicology
Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacoiogy
Reproductive Toxicology
Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology
Toxicologic Pathology
Toxicological Sciences
Taxicology
Toxicology and Applied Pharrmacology
Toxicology and Industrial Health
Toxicology Letters
Toxicon
Veterinary and Human Toxicology (discontinued in 2005)
Chapter 3 | Toxicologic Information Resources 23
Search techniques need to be learned before a thorough search can be done on
Medline. Using terms like OR and AND will help broaden and focus the search. For
example, ibuprofen OR Motrin will locate all articles that contain either of these terms
in its text, whereas using ibuprofen AND Motrin will only locate the articles that contain
both of these terms. An additional technique to achieve a thorough literature search is
to include in your search strategy all forms of the toxin and any categories it falls into.
For example, a search for Prozac may consist of the terms Prozac, fluoxetine, selec-
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitor, and SSRI. Other terms, such as truncate, focus, and
explode, can be learned from use of the database. Once a search has been completed, the
resulting information is either the reference to the article, an abstract, or the complete
reference.
VJIndex.com. More than 100,000 major veterinary journals are available via VJIndex.com
covering the past 20 years with an average of 5000 added each year. Ihe database is
 available by CD and is updated with a new CD every 6 months. A subscription fee
may be required.
Box 3-2
Partial List of Veterinary Journals with Toxicology Articles
American Journal of Veterinary Research
Animal Genetics
Animal Reproduction Stience
Australian Veterinary Journal
Avian Diseases
British Poultry Science
Canadian Journal of Veterinary Research
Canadian Veterinary Journal
Domestic Animal Endocrinology
Experimental Animals
Japanese Journal of Veterinary Research
Journal oftheAmerican Animal Hospital Association
Journal ofthe American Veterinary Medical Association
Journal ofAnimal Science
Journal ofSmall Animal Practice
Journal ofthe SouthAfricanVeterinary Association
Journal of Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation
Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine
Journal of Veterinary Medical Science
Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics
Journal ofWildlifeDiseases
Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine
Laboratory Animal Science
Laboratory Animals
Preventive Veterinary Medicine
Research in Veterinary Science
Tropical Animal Heaith andProduction
Veterinary Clinics of North America, Small Animal Practice
Veterinary and Human Toxicology (discontinued in 2005)
Veterinary Journal
Veterinary Quarterly
Veterinary Record
Veterinary Research
24SECTlON 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Tertiary Literature
Tertiary literature refers to textbooks, compendia, and full-text computer databases. These
are often the preferred resources of clinicians because they are familiar and contain concise
overviews of a wide variety of topics. These resources conveniently cover the most fre-
quently encountered clinical problems. Ihe paucity of tertiary literature focusing on veteri-
nary toxicology was the initial inspiration for the first edition of this text.
Some tertiary references have been scanned electronically and can be accessed via the
Internet through various search engines. This provides an economical alternative to pur-
chasing them, but they can be diffcult to read and the reference needed may not always be
available in this format.
UpToDate is a valuable tertiary reference. Experts in their felds provide evidence-based
summaries about clinical issues provided by the health care community. This database is
available online and as an application for portable electronic devices. UpToDate and a few
other tertiary references are updated frequently but this is the exception more than the
norm
 Disadvantages inherent in tertiary literature include space limitations requiring priority
may be outdated by the time it is published. Full-text computer databases may have a bet-
ter chance of overcoming these problems. Recently published tertiary references are often
available for download to portable electronic devices. Although not solely dedicated to ani-
mal poisoning, references such as VetPDA and The 5-Minute Veterinary Consult include
chapters on poisoning exposure, which are available for portable electronic devices. Other
examples of tertiary toxicology literature are listed in Box 3-3.
Box 3-3
 Partial List of Veterinary and Medical Toxicology Textbooks
AMA Handbook of Poisonous and Injurious Plants (American Medical Association)
Casarett and Doulls Toxicology: The Basic Science of Poisons (McGraw-Hill)
Clinical Toxicology of Commercial Products (Williams &Wilkins)
Clinical Veterinary Toxicology (Mosby)
Ellenhorn's Medical Toxicology—Diagnosis and Treatment of Human Poisonings
(Williams & Wilkins)
Field Guide to Common Animal Poisons (Iowa State University Press)
Handbook of Mushroom Poisoning (CRC Press, Inc.)
Handbook of Pesticide Taxicology, 3 Volumes (Academic Press)
Handbook of Small Animal Toxicology and Poisonings (Mosby)
Hidden Hazards in House and Garden Plants (Pictorial Histories Publishing Co., Inc.)
Lexi-Tox (Lexicomp, Wolters Kluwer)
POISONDEX (Micromedex, Thomson Reuters)
Merck Veterinary Manual (Merck & Co.)
Natural Toxicants in Feeds and Poisonous Plants (Interstate Publishers, Inc.)
Principles of Clinical Toxicology (Raven Press)
Poisoning and Toxicology Handbook (Lexi-Comp, Inc.)
Poisonous Plants of California (University of California Press)
Small Anirmal Medicine Therapeutics (Lippincott Williams & Wilkins)
Srmall Animal Toxicology and Poisonings (Mosby)
Toxicology, The National Veterinary Medical Series (Williams & Wilkins)
Veterinary Drug Handbook (lowa State University Press)
Veterinary Drug Therapy (Lea & Febiger)
Veterinary Pharrmaceuticals and Biologicals (VPB) (Medical Economics Data)
Veterinary Toxicology (Butterworth-Heinemann)
Chapter 3 |Toxicologic Information Resources 25
Computer Databases
Computer databases have been compiled to provide rapid access to toxicologic informa-
 sei rns isar a san e suas d ee aas a
sondex ( Ihomson Reuters' Micromedex), is currently used by all U.S. poison control centers
as well as the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Animal Poison
Control Center (ASPCA-APCC) and the Pet Poison HELPLINE. This database identifies
ingredients for hundreds of thousands of commercial, biologic, and pharmaceutical prod-
ucts. The systems link individual products to management recommendations; these often
include case reports of animal poisonings. Other databases offering specific information
in subspecialty areas of toxicology include Reprorisk (Thomson Reuters Micromedex), a
compilation of reproductive risk information, and Tomes ( Thomson Reuters' Micromedex),
specializing in hazardous chemicals in the workplace and the environment. Ihese databases
can be expensive to subscribe to; alternatively, the information they provide are usually
available through your regional poison center.
Lexicomp is also available over the Internet and consists of a variety of medical and
pharmaceutical databases covering drug information, dental resources, genomics, calcu-
lations, abbreviations, and toxicology. Lexicomp requires a subscription and is available
online or can be downloaded to a portable electronic device. Many poison centers also have
access to this database.
The introduction and advances in portable electronic devices have allowed for unpre-
cedented access to information resources. Some are available from reputable sources but
many have been created by general users and should be used with some caution. Costs vary
but are usually less expensive than buying the traditional resource.
Internet Resources
The Internet provides access to a vast array and a prolific volume of information on toxicol-
ogy topics. As a resource, the Internet, unlike conventional textbooks and journal articles,
poses a daunting challenge with regard to its sources' authenticity, reliability, accuracy, and
usefulness to the reader. Concern for the quality of the information obtained from a web-
based source is a much greater issue when compared with that for the print and broadcast
media. The freedom and ease with which authors and contributors of "information" can
place and disseminate material online have created a need for the information search to
become a more critical and careful process. Critical thinking about and evaluation of web-
 based sources must be done with considerable skill and discriminating persistence.
To illustrate this point, a study was performed that examined the accuracy of Internet
information by searching Google for the terms aspirin, overdose or intoxication, and treat-
rment. Two blinded toxicologists evaluated the first 10 websites that appeared to make treat-
ment recommendations. They concluded that the treatment recommendations of 5 of the
10 sites were “significantly substandard."
Other pitfalls of using websites include the dangers of obtaining information from a site
o iaup a pue apea au uu o uue si l um mqe inid a sas 
obtaining information from a site that has not been updated and is no longer current and
accurate. Accurate, reliable websites are often those created and supported by reputable
 organizations, such as the Centers for Disease Control, the Food and Drug Administra-
tion, the World Health Organization, the Environmental Protection Agency, the ASPCA-
APCC, the Pet Poison HELPLINE, and local and national organizations recognized as
experts in the field (e.g., Veterinary Information Network and the American Board of Vet-
erinary Toxicology [www.abvt.org]). The information obtained from the Internet should
specialists. The criteria for evaluating the reliability and validity of authored materials on
the web at a minimum should include the following: (1) author's institutional affliation;
(2) author's Internet address; (3) date of information posting;(4) copyright dates; (5) state-
ment of institutional responsibility, sponsorship, or ownership; and (6) clear references to
26 SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
all information sources used. In addition to questioning the purpose and source of a web-
based information resource, the following questions about content evaluation and review
need to be answered: (1) Is the origin of material clearly stated? (2) Does it seem accurate?
(3) Is it comprehensive? (4) Is it current, having a recent update? and (5) Are the hyperlinks
relevant and appropriate? A well-designed Internet site enhances the information it offers.
You will fnd good organization, clear and appropriate writing style, and ease of navigation
and search capabilities when you pay a visit to such a site.
Poison Control Centers
         i     
goal of a poison center is the reduction of morbidity and mortality from poisoning through
service as an updated resource for toxicologic information.
Today there are 57 poison centers throughout the United States. All provide treatment
advice and referral assistance 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to both the public and health
care providers. Most established centers are members of the American Association of Poi-
son Control Centers (AAPCC). In 2009 the AAPCC member centers provided consultation
for 116,408 animal-related exposures; this represented 4.5% of all exposure cases called into
poisoncenters.
The AAPCC provides a framework for the development of voluntary standards for
poison center operations. Unfortunately, these association guidelines do not specifically
address standards for the provision of care in veterinary cases. As a result, the range and
level of services available to veterinary caregivers is variable. Some centers deny consul-
tation for animal exposures, whereas others maintain veterinary referrals and establish
formal relationships with veterinary consultants. Nurses or pharmacists with additional
training in toxicology most often staff poison centers. Upon satisfying criteria established
by the AAPCC, these nurses and pharmacists become eligible to sit for an examination
that will certify them as poison specialists. A board-certified medical toxicologist provides
medical direction in most poison control centers. At a minimum, most poison centers are
able to provide veterinarians with specific product information and recommendations for
medical management of human patients, necessitating interpretation by the attending vet-
erinarian. Access to regional poison control centers is obtained by calling (800) 222-1222
from anywhere in the United States. Your call will be automatically routed to the poison
center designated to provide services in your area. A complete list of AAPCC-certified poi-
son centers can also be found on the Internet at http://ww w.aapcc.org/.
Animal Poison Control Centers
 The APCC was the first animal treatment-oriented poison center in the United States. The
APCC is a division of the ASPCA. Specially trained veterinarians staff this emergency hot-
line. Their collective experience has been gained through handling more than 850,000 ani-
mal poisonings to date. Because of their background and training, center veterinarians are
prepared to deal with the complexities of animals exposed to poisons. The center is a mem-
ber of the AAPCC and does work closely with human centers to provide information on
animal poisonings. Many human centers refer serious cases directly to the ASPCA-APCC
center. The ASPCA-APCC can be contacted by telephone at 888-426-4435. Ihere is a $65
consultation fee for the initial telephone consultation; follow-up calls are free. There is no
charge if the product involved is covered by the Animal Product Safety Service. Another
nationwide 24-hour service hotline is the Pet Poison HELPLINE (800-213-6680), offered
by the Safety Call Pet Poison Control Center. Ihere is an initial $39 consultation fee; all
additional follow-up contacts are free.
CHAPTER
Effective Use of a
Veterinary Poison
Control Center
Lynn Rolland Hovda, RPh, DVM, MS, DACVIM
here are currently two veterinary poison control centers in the United States.* Both are
staffed by veterinarians and specialists with extensive training in veterinary toxicology.
They offer telephone assistance to animal owners and veterinarians 24 hours a day, 7 days
a week, and provide legitimate websites related to animal poisoning. Their websites are
updated in a timely manner by knowledgeable individuals and provide accurate and com-
prehensive information involving a number of substances. Although the majority of cases
handled by veterinary poison control centers are for small animals, both centers are capable
of providing poison information for pocket pets, birds, exotics, aquatics, and large animals
(primarily horses and ruminants)
The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Animal Poison Control
Center (APCC) is located in Urbana, Illinois. It is staffed by a large number of veterinarians,
veterinarians boarded in general toxicology (American Board of Toxicology) and veteri-
nary toxicology (American Board of Veterinary Toxicology), and certified veterinary tech-
nicians with specialized training in veterinary toxicology. The APCC has a well-established
database incorporating 30 years of veterinary toxicology information that can be used to
assist in case management. In addition, the APCC works with a variety of organizations,
including human poison control centers, government agencies, animal parks, and zoos, to
obtain and disseminate information on current and potential veterinary toxicologic prob-
lems. Ihe APCC veterinarians have provided textbook chapters; written articles for veteri-
nary journals; and speak at local, state, and national veterinary meetings. Ihe APCC can be
reached by telephone at 1-888-426-4435, with a consultation fee of $65 for most cases. Ihere
is no fee for case follow-up and there is no fee in those instances in which the manufacturer
has contracted with the APCC to provide services through the Animal Product Safety Divi-
sion. The website for the APPC is www.aspcapro.org.
The Pet Poison HELPLINE (PPH), located in Bloomington, Minnesota, is a 24-hour
poison control center dedicated to animal poisonings. It is staffed by a large group of veter-
inarians, veterinarians who are board eligible or certified in general toxicology (American
Board of Toxicology), veterinary toxicology (American Board of Veterinary Toxicology),
emergency and critical care (American College of Veterinary Emergency and Critical
Care), and internal medicine (American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine), as well
as certifed veterinarian technicians with specialized training in veterinary toxicology.
They are supported by experts in human poisonings (PharmDs and physicians) and a spe-
cialist in snakes and venomous animals. PPH maintains an affliation with the University
of Minnesota. The toxicologists at PPH have more than 30 years of veterinary experience
and have managed 2.5 million poisonings. They work closely with the federal government
*ASPCA-APCC: 888-426-4435: $65.00 for most cases.
Pet Poison HELPLINE: 800-213-6680: $39.00 for most cases.
27
28SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
toxicologic issues. Ihe veterinarians at PPH have authored a textbook; provided chapters
in other textbooks; published in veterinary and medical toxicology journals; and presented
at local, state, and national meetings. PPH is a division of SafetyCall International, the
world’s largest industry poison control center, which provides toxicology information to
consumers on a wide variety of substances such as agricultural products, dietary supple-
ments, household goods, personal care products, pesticides, and pharmaceuticals. PPH
can be reached by telephone at 1-800-213-6680 with a consultation fee of $39 in most cases.
There is no additional fee for follow-up consultations. Ihe website for PPH is www.petpo
isonhelpline.com. Recently, PPH now offers a handy iPhone application that contains an
extensive database of foods, drugs, chemicals, and plants commonly found in the home
and yard that are poisonous to pets—information about this application can be found at
their website.
The use of a veterinary poison control center is encouraged for all potential animal-
son information that no other centers have access to. The veterinary poison control center
staff uses knowledge built on years of experience inthe field of veterinary toxicology as well
as advanced studies in toxicology to complete a risk assessment for each poisoned animal.
Hazards for each toxicant and an assessment of various routes of exposure are considered
and evaluated prior to making any recommendations. The detailed understanding of vet-
erinary pharmacokinetics and species-related variations in dose and response provide the
caller with the most accurate information available for each individual animal poisoning.
Callers to a veterinary poison control center come from a wide variety of backgrounds
and include owners, veterinarians, pesticide control officers, humane society agents, police
oficers with service dogs, crop agents, and others involved with poisoned animals. Each
caller needs to provide an open, honest, and complete history to receive the most effective
and comprehensive information regarding a potential poisoning. Although this may seem
cumbersome or unimportant, it is in fact essential for a positive outcome. Veterinarians at
the center are well trained to ask specific questions that assist with the case management
and weed out those answers that are unimportant or mask significant details. This is dif-
ficult, however, when an animal has been exposed to illegal or illicit drugs as the caller is
often reluctant to offer much information. When this occurs, the referring veterinarian
needs to more firmly question the owner and provide this information to the veterinary
poison control center specialist.
 Providing specific product identification and an estimation of exposure amount is the
  i  a  'e   rg i   i ds 
just a guess should be obtained so the dose of active ingredients associated with the toxi-
cants as well as dosage of recommended treatment options may be determined. In those
torn label, etc.), specialists at the veterinary poison control center are often able to use their
databases to assist with identification.
Species and breed identification are commonly provided with small animals but may be
 lacking in other instances. Ihe toxic dose as well as lethal dose and no effect limit for each
 individual toxicant are species-dependent, making this an important piece of information
to obtain. In addition, ruminants have a more complicated gastrointestinal tract resulting
in variable absorption of oral toxicants as well as recommended treatments and antidotes.
Many toxicants are metabolized in the liver using pathways limited in some species, and
some toxicants, such as lilies, are harmful only to one species (i.e., the cat). Some breeds
such as the collie, collie crosses, and others, exhibit an ABCBl delta gene mutation (for-
merly referred to as MDRl), making them susceptible to toxicosis from several substances
at much lower doses than other breeds.
 i ae o sd s a ao   ss  
should not be overlooked. Very young and old animals may have limited kidney or liver
function, thus prolonging metabolism and excretion. These animals may develop a more
serious toxicosis than expected or clinical signs may last for an extended period. Preexist-
ing medical conditions, current medications, and any treatments given to the animal prior
Chapter 4 I Effective Use of a Veterinary Poison Control Center 29
to contacting a veterinary poison control center should be noted. Not only do they play a
role in the current presentation of the animal but become important when formulating a
treatment plan.
The presence or absence of clinical signs should be provided as well as the estimated
time of exposure to the toxicant. Caution needs to be used when interpreting signs as some,
such as those associated with parasympathomimetic or parasympatholytic agents, are very
specific and others are very vague. Clinical signs may be used to assist with unknown poi-
sonings but need to be carefully evaluated by an experienced veterinary poison control
veterinarian in conjunction with the time of exposure and onset of signs. In these instances
particular attention should be paid to the cardiovascular system and any abnormalities
reported as some plants and medications result in specific signs that may be useful in the
diagnosis.
Veterinary poison control centers are very effective in providing asstance when there is
the veterinary poison center veterinarian to interpret data and make suggestions for fur-
ther diagnostic testing. Veterinarians at the center are generally able to provide information
on sample collection and submission as well as interpretation of the results. In addition,
documentation provided by a veterinary poison control center is normally very thorough
and complete. When an unusual poisoning is reported, veterinarians at a veterinary poison
control center are able to connect with and gain information from a network of other vet-
Regardless of the caller's ability, veterinary poison control centers are an excellent
resource in what is often a stressful situation. Ihey provide a calm, rapid response in an
emergency situation and additional support if the case progresses or becomes more dif-
maximizes the effectiveness of the call and provides the caller with concise and comprehen-
sive information needed to treat the animal.
Suggested Readings
Gwaltney-Bramt SM: Toxicology information resources. In Poppenga RH, Gwaltney-Brant SM, editors:
Small animal toxicology essentials, Sussex, UK, 20l1, John Wiley and Sons.
Osweiler GD, Hovda LR, Brutlag AG, et al: Blackwell's five-minute veterinary consult clinical companion.
small animal toxicology, Ames, IA, 2011, Wiley-Blackwell.
CHAPTER
Use of Human Poison
Centers in the
Veterinary Setting
Katie Von Derau, RN, CPN, CSPI
. Hurman Poison Control Centers (PCC): 800-222-1222
Open 24-hours a day, seven days a week
Some, but not all, are free of charge for veterinarians
espite the differences in the toxicity of substances among species, human poison cen-
 ters have had a place in treating veterinary poisonings. Unfortunately, this is becom-
ing more diffcult as their funding is threatened. Veterinary calls usually take longer for
a human poison center to handle than human calls because they require more research
into species differences and the necessity to access additional veterinary references. Centers
previously managing veterinary calls at no cost can no longer afford to do so, forcing them
either to stop handling? animal calls or to charge a fee.
these calls. The majority of veterinary exposures reported to WAPC are for household pets,
especially dogs and cats, and until the decision to charge for these calls in mid-2009 the
veterinary call volume had continually increased ( Table 5-1).
The choice to charge a fee has had a double effect: A minimal income is generated for the
center and, because of the number of callers declining the fee, the overall call volume has
decreased to a manageable level for the center's staff. WAPC anticipated losing approximately
30% to 50% of their animal calls; however, calls dropped significantly more than anticipated
(Table 5-2). In 2008, WAPC had 8562 veterinary calls, slightly more than 9% of the total call
volume,4 whereas in 2010 calls dropped to 1021, or approximately 1.4% of the call volume.4
WAPC staff were resistant to charging for information they had previously provided for
free. Many owners and veterinarians who depended on the center in the past were outraged.
Because poisons act fast, there was increased frustration for both staff and callers as a result
of the requirement to obtain billing information prior to handling the call. WAPC does
offer veterinarians the option to have an open account and to be invoiced for calls. This is
not an option for owners.
An unexpected outcome after implementing the fee was that, despite the increased com-
plexity of veterinary calls, the quality of call handling and call length improved. There was
also a 7.33% increase in the number of cases that were followed beyond the initial call.4
Assessment and Exposure
Animals can be poisoned by human or veterinary medications, plants, chemicals, or clean-
ing agents as a result of an accidental ingestion, spill, or therapeutic error. Human poison
centers receiving calls from owners or veterinarians triage animal exposures just as they do
Exposure calls from the parents of toddlers. The animal, ike the toddier, is unable to convey
IE
32SECTlON 1 ToxicologicConcepts
Table 5-1
Veterinary Exposure Calls to the Washington Poison Center by Species4
Rodent and
Sheep and
Year
Cat
Dog
Bird
Aquatic
Cow
Horse
Lagomorph
Other
1999
1113
4426
80
5
25
18
39
2
53
2000
1122
4671
72
2
33
21
37
12
51
2001
1086
4342
45
3
1
19
38
11
35
2002
1130
4905
46
3
1
17
40
6
26
2003
1011
4805
36
1
0
17
42
8
21
2004
1024
5364
46
4
1
16
28
1
15
2005
964
5543
28
2
0
15
34
14
31
2006
1050
6474
30
2
13
33
12
22
2007
1066
6955
29
4
2
16
22
11
16
2008
1017
7443
32
1
0
23
21
8
17
2009
472
3871
13
1
1
9
23
6
11
2010
91
921
2
0
0
1
2
0
4
Table5-2
All Veterinary Calls to the Washington Poison Center4
Total Percent of
Percent of Exposure
Total Number of
Percent of Animal
Veterinary Calls
Calls Referred to the
Animal Exposure
Exposures Out of
(Information and
Poison Center by
Year
Calls
Total Exposure Calls
Exposure)
Veterinarians
1999
5761
6.86
4.36
Tracking began in
2000
6021
7.43
5.18
third quarter
2001
5580
7.21
5.86
of 2005.
2002
6174
8.06
6.53
2003
5941
8.26
6.7
2004
6505
8.76
7.16
2005
6631
8.89
7.27
2006
7641
10.2
8.26
19.1%
2007
8121
10.7
8.66
17.7%
2008
8562
11.22
9.24
12.5%
2009
4407
6.23
5.24
9.2%
2010
1021
1.6
1.38
3.0%
threat is not only related to the potency of the poison, but also to the quantity involved, the
 duration of the exposure, and the presence of other ingredients, such as propellants and
solvents. The degree of danger and the necessity for decontamination or other treatment are
able to be determined only after a thorough assessment.
 The poison center must seek specific information concerning the exposure. Exact product
identification, the estimated amount and concentration of the product involved, the time
and route of the exposure, the species and weight of the animal, any signs the animal dem-
onstrates, and any treatment already given are all obtained. Accurate identification of the
product or medication involved is essential because of variations in formulations. The spe-
cific product name, manufacturer, and ingredients need to be verified by the poison center
and confirmed with the original product container, if available. This includes the strength or
 concentration of the medication or chemical and the form (solid, liquid, etc.) of the product.
 Tablets, liquids, solids, gases, and granules all pose different risks. Aerosol sprays pose an
 additional risk from the propellant, which can be more toxic than the active ingredient.
Medication toxicity depends on the species and weight of the animal and the specific
dose of ingested medication. Cleaning products can vary from simple irritants to dangerous
Chapter 5 I Use of Human Poison Centers in the Veterinary Setting 33
corrosives; even similarly named products by the same manufacturer can have many differ-
aq aeu siaiaiap pue sdeos 'sauapina juauateue husuos snu pue siaipanun ja
anionic or nonionic, representing little risk, or cationic with the potential for greater harm.
The species, breed, age, gender, weight, and number of animals involved are all part
increased or decreased sensitivity to various toxic agents and ought to be considered when
recommending decontamination, treatment, referral, and follow-up. Differences in physi-
ology and metabolic pathways exist among species, which may alter the range of toxicity,
time to onset of signs, and treatment. It cannot be assumed that an exposure that is deter-
mined to be nontoxic for humans will also be nontoxic for other animals.
Frequently the amount of toxin in a veterinary exposure is unknown. Together the poi-
son center and the caller try to estimate the amount of product missing or the maximum
available to the animal. This is not the toxic amount for the particular animal, but is an esti-
mate of the amount of product actually involved in the exposure. The following questions
may be asked to assist the caller in remembering:
+ Who used the product last and when?
- Do you remember the level in the container before the animal disturbed it?
· Is this container ever refilled from a larger container, and if so, was it refilled with the
exact same product?
+ When was the container purchased?
+ What was the usual dose or amount used?
+ Is there a spill or are there pill fragments around the animal?
If it is possible to calculate a toxic dose, successful questioning can often determine that
a toxic amount was not actually available before the exposure. Having the owner reapply
the product and measuring what he or she just used or having the owner apply the amount
calculated to be toxic and comparing it with what was applied before the exposure are two
methods used by the poison center to estimate the amount involved.
I is important to determine if the product was diluted, and if so, how it was diluted.
Dilution decreases the concentration or strength and possibly the pH of many toxins, often
ais e n azaaue yuans- udde op v 'mir ssat annsodxa an au
container is at more risk than a dog lapping diluted antifreeze that was then rinsed off the
driveway and collected into a puddle. If the product was mixed with anything, it may be
necessary to determine the toxicity of the additive as well.
The time of the call to the poison center can be from minutes to hours after the time of
the exposure. Owners may actually witness the exposure and cal immediately, they may
not realize the exposure is a potential problem and delay calling, or they may return home
to discover their pet has been very busy. The time since the exposure may affect treatment
advice or the necessity for a veterinary referral.
Any possible benefits of decontamination depend on early detection. With veterinary
exposures there are frequently several different routes of exposure with the same incident
(Table 5-3). A dermal exposure often becomes an oral exposure as the animal grooms itself,
and inhalation of fumes can occur while ingesting a liquid.
The poison center needs to evaluate all possible signs the animal might be exhibiting by
asking specific questions about obvious distress, level of activity, signs of irritation, irritabil-
for relatedness to another toxin or possible medical conditions unrelated to a poisoning.
either not possible or ineffective need to be referred immediately to the veterinarian.
 Many pet owners institute appropriate first aid measures before they call the poison
center, and it is important to know what has already been done or not done. They may
have provided fresh air or fluids, the two most popular emergency treatments, and may
be calling simply for additional decontamination or treatment information. Calls from
veterinarians usually come to the poison center after the animal has been given emergency
34SECTlON 1 Toxicologic Concepts
treatment, and additional specifc product, antidote, or treatment information is desired
(Table 5-4).
 In cases in which the ingestion has occurred within 2-3 hours, it is often useful to induce
vomiting. It is the job of the poison center to remain in contact with the owner because
failure to produce emesis may result in the need for a veterinary referral. Depending on the
toxin, if the ingestion is large, even after adequate home decontamination, it is often neces-
sary to refer the animal to the veterinarian for further evaluation because it is impossible
 to fully ermpty the stomach. Ingestion of large amounts of some medications (e.g., aspirin,
acetaminophen, digoxin) may necessitate a drug level, even though the animal has vomited.
Ocular exposures pose a different threat to animals. Adequate home decontamination
is almost impossible, and animals may give no indication of the exposure by their behavior.
The risk of injury to both the owner and the animal while trying to rinse the eye is so great,
Even with the most compliant pet, that these animals need immediate referral to the veteri-
narian for evaluation and treatment.
Determining risk to the animal requires knowledge of different toxins and their
 effects on various species. Many reference books list therapeutic doses of medicines used
 in humans and animals along with usual daily doses, and these may prove helpful as a
 guide. The animal's weight, past medical history, and a thorough history of the exposure are
Table 5-3
Veterinary Routes of Exposure4
Route
1999
2000
2001
2002 2003
200420052
20062007200820092010
Ingestion
5437
5710
5302
5889
5663
6168
6334
7325
7815 8256 4260 987
 Inhalation/
83
81
73
80
59
87
85
96
105
61
52
15
Nasal
Aspiration
2
0
2
2
1
1
0
0
1
0
3
1
Ocular
29
31
28
36
30
41
44
39
36
29
19
2
Dermal
448
453
433
459
425
461
391
402
404
395
177
40
Bite or
18
20
17
13
13
18
12
15
6
15
9
1
Sting
 Parenteral
5
6
6
6
5
18
9
7
11
7
11
1
Rectal
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
Otic
0
2
1
3
1
1
2
3
1
4
1
0
Vaginal or
8
2
2
1
1
4
2
2
1
2
1
0
Other
Unknown
83
47
33
32
42
54
38
39
46
37
13
Table 5-4
Calls to the Washington Poison Center from Veterinarians4
Animal Exposure Calls
Animal Information Calls
Other Poison Calls
Total Calls
1999
795
82
37
914
2000
821
83
45
949
2001
803
58
31
892
2002
837
61
27
925
2003
844
60
27
931
2004
931
69
27
1027
2005
869
92
21
982
2006
927
95
23
1045
2007
952
113
36
1101
2008
1065
85
7
1157
2009
574
30
5
609
2010
69
5
3
77
Chapter 5 I Use of Human Poison Centers in the Veterinary Setting 35
reviewed with the owner to try to establish the relative risk to the animal. It is important to
discuss the toxicity of the product, along with the expected associated signs, with the owner.
A subtoxic ingestion can have mild to moderate signs or normal medication side effects.
The management of the animal is determined by the severity of expected signs and the need
for observation of the animal over time.
Without specific guidelines to provide the range of toxicity, it is often necessary for the
poison center to follow some basic principles in adapting human toxicity information. Sev-
a particular ingestion. These include standard human and veterinary textbooks, the Micro-
medex Healthcare Series, and many books and journals on toxicology.
Examples of Toxicants
 More than 37% of the veterinary exposure calls to WAPC in the past 5 years were associated
with exposure to medications.4 Veterinary toxicology books are available to aid the poison
center in determining a toxic dose of a medication for a particular species. However, if a
toxic dose is not available, veterinary drug handbooks6 can be used to determine a thera-
peutic dose and act as a guide. If no veterinary therapeutic dose for the particular medi-
cation can be found, then the poison center can assess risk by using the dose of a similar
medication.
 Benzodiazepines are common hypnotic and sedative drugs. Because of their popular
human use, they are frequently available for ingestion by animals, as are antihistamines
and decongestants. These patients should be decontaminated when the amount ingested
exceeds 1% times the usual total daily dose for the exposed species.
Antidepressants vary significantly in their degree of toxicity. Selective serotonin reup-
take inhibitors are generally safer than other antidepressants and observation may be all
that is necessary for an ingestion of up to 1% times the usual daily dose. Tricyclic anti-
depressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors are more of a problem, as are the usual
antipsychotic medications, and patients are generally decontaminated when the exposure
exceeds l time the usual daily dose.
Pain medications containing opioids, with or without acetaminophen, aspirin, or ibu-
profen, are also common in many homes. These medications pose a double threat to the
animal: Toxicity from the opioid and toxicity from the accompanying analgesic may both
result. The signs of opioid ingestion can be either central nervous system depression or
central nervous system excitation depending on the species and the time since ingestion.
Acetaminophen, aspirin, and ibuprofen are the most common over-the-counter medi-
cations. All can be toxic to animals in small amounts. The range of toxicity for cats versus
dogs, the type of toxicity, and presenting signs can differ with these medications. Depend-
ing on the species there may not be a usual daily dose because some animals are so sensi-
tive to these medications that they cannot be used therapeutically. Some animals lack the
ability to metabolize these medications, or they are so sensitive to the toxic effects that
u uonsaui al go juoe pxa ai ssaun esixon aeuaod aq us sasop aus uana
be determined, it is safest to "vomit”" the animal. If the time of the ingestion is unknown or
the amount of the ingestion is very large, vomit the animal and refer to a veterinarian for 
follow-up evaluation.
Ingestion of oral hypoglycemic agents and diuretics, as with humans, requires observa-
tion, fluids, and foods. If the owner is unable to closely monitor the animal and provide
treatment as needed until the medication's effect has peaked, then decontamination or vet-
erinary referral may be required.
Oral ingestion of topical ointments and creams generally requires only observation, but
tinal signs from the laxative effect of many creams and ointments. Topical medications of
concern are those with high methyl salicylate content and products that containing vitamin
 D-type compounds. One unit of vitamin D is approximately the equivalent of 25 ng of
cholecalciferol.' Some anticancer ointments can be problematic as well.
36SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Cardiac medications and antihypertensives can usually be tolerated at 1 to 1%2 times the
usual daily dose. If veterinary doses are not available for the particular medication for the
exposed species, it is best to decontaminate the patient.
Hormones and antibiotics are generally well tolerated in cats and dogs and pose no
required. Mild gastrointestinal distress may be noted with a very large ingestion, but decon-
tamination is rarely necessary. Hypersensitivity to antibiotics is uncommon in animals.
All homeopathic medications are well tolerated with home observation. It is important
not to confuse homeopathic medications with herbal preparations that could potentially
dients so small that they are considered nontoxic.
Exposures to iron can be due to ingestion of lawn care products, iron in medications,
and even hand and foot warmers. Usually the amount required to cause harm from a lawn
care product exceeds the residual amount clinging to a pet after rolling in the yard. Human
 vitamins with iron, supplemental iron, birth control pills with iron, and now hand and foot
warmers continue to be the important sources of iron exposures in small animals. There is
even an iron-containing molluscicide on the market.
 The most common concern with indoor plants is oral irritation from insoluble oxalate
crystals. These exposures usually require only dilution with milk or sugar water and home
observation. Ihere are some plants with species-specific concerns (e.g., cats and certain
lilies—Lilium, Hemerocallis) so the poison center must be diligent in researching. Dieffen-
bachia ingestions can result in significant oral edema and potential airway compromise.
Ingestion of this plant should be diluted with milk or sugar water and referred to the veteri-
narian if there are any signs indicating air way compromise.
Witnessed ingestion of outdoor plants, for which there is some certainty of the amount
ingested, can be treated with the same range of toxicity as for a child. An exception to this is
plants that are known to cause toxicity in a specific species (e.g., cats and Chrysanthermum
spp.). In this situation, decontamination and referral to the veterinarian may be necessary.
An unwitnessed ingestion of a toxic plant should be treated aggressively according to the
toxicity of the plant. Emesis of asymptomatic animals and referral of symptomatic animals,
 or those with large amounts of plant returned, should be standard policy.
Biologics, such as plants, toads, salamanders, newts, spiders, and snakes, all vary in
toxicity depending on their locale and can potentially be problems in different areas of
the country. The poison center should know those biologic toxins posing a risk in their
area and provide appropriate treatment recommendations. Exact mushroom identification
over the telephone is difficult, and the amount of mushroom ingested by animals is usu-
ally unknown. Every attempt should be made to remove any amount of a potentially toxic
mushroom from the stomach. If emesis fails to bring the mushroom up, activated charcoal
 in the veterinary setting can be of benefit.
Hydrocarbons and petroleum distillates are surprisingly well tolerated as long as they
remain in the gut, are noncaustic, and are not aspirated into the lungs. Dilution with milk
to decrease stomach irritation and home observation for at least 4 hours, with referral of
any symptomatic animal, are usually all that is required. Respiratory signs, such as repeated
coughing and rapid breathing, that persist for longer than 10 minutes can indicate that
aspiration has occurred.
Chemical exposures can include products that are low in toxicity, such as fertilizers, to
those with a high degree of toxicity, such as rodenticides. Herbicides, insecticides, cleaning
products, solvents, and wood preservatives are all chermicals with frequently overlapping
management guidelines and varying ranges of toxicity. As in humans, emesis is contrain-
dicated for products that are corrosive (such as acids or alkalis) and burn during ingestion.
to the veterinarian.
Chemical reference texts, Micromedex Healthcare Series with TOMES System5, jour-
mals, textbooks, and manufacturer or other appropriate websites are all used in the poison
center setting. Many of these references provide species-specific information, including the
Chapter 5 I Use of Human Poison Centers in the Veterinary Setting  37
LDso for a particular chemical. Using these references makes it possible to more accurately
establish relative risk for a particular animal, especially if thorough history taking was done
and the amount missing can be precisely estimated.
The responsibility of the poison center to the animal and its owner does not end with the
 initial call. For those exposures that require induction of emesis or when moderate signs are
expected, follow-up calls ought to be made and the owner encouraged to call back to the
poison center as necessary. The passage of time can be a helpful diagnostic tool, and these
follow-up calls can help guide treatment.
To locate a poison center accredited by the American Association of Poison Control
Centers (AAPCC), call the national toll-free number, I-800-222-1222, or check the AAPCC
website at http://w ww.aapcc.org/dnn/AAPCC/FindLocalPoisonCenters.aspx.
References
1. American Association of Poison Control Centers: Poison centers federal appropriations cut by nearly
25 percent in proposed FY 20ll continuing resolution; damaging impact to states'ability to help citizens
[press release]http://www.apc.org/dnn/Portals/0/prrel/pressreleasehr1 FINAL3.pdf. Retrieved from
2011.
2. Georgia Poison Center: Poison FAQs: pets, from http://www.georgiapoisoncenter.org/faq_pets.html.
Retrieved 1 Nov 2011.
3. Washington Poison Center: Noticeable changes to the Poison Center [Press Release]http://wapc.org/pdf/
media/ W A %20Poison%20Center%20Changes.pdf. Retrieved from 2009.
4. Washington Poison Center: AAPCC Statistics for 1999 through 2010 (see Tables 5-1 to 5-4).
5. Micromedex Healthcare Series, Greenwood Village, CO, Thomson Reuters. (Edition expires 12/2011.)
6. Plumb DC: Plumb's veterinary drug handbook,7th ed, Stockholm, WI,2011, Pharma Vet.
7. Poisindex Toxicological Managements: Ibuprofen MICROMEDEX healthcare series, Vol. 150. (Expires
12/2011.)
8. Poisindex Toxicological Managements: Salicylates MICROMEDEX healthcare series, Vol. 130. (Expires
12/2011.)
9. Poisindex Toxicological Managements: Acetaminophen MICROMEDEX healthcare series, Vol. 130.
(Expires 12/2011.)
10. Poisindex Toxicological Managements: Vitamin D MICROMEDEX healthcare series Vol. 130. (Expires
12/2011.)
 11. Poisindex Toxicological Managements: Penicillin MICROMEDEX healthcare series, Vol. 130. (Expires
12/2011.)
CHAPTER
Taking a Toxicologic
History
Kevin T. Fitzgerald, PhD, DVM, DABVP
The shortest distance between two points is the truth
Irish Proverb
istory taking is a vital skil. Combined with performing a thorough physical exami-
nation, obtaining an appropriate minimum database, and establishing a difrential
diagnosis, it allows the clinician to potentially arrive at a correct diagnosis. It is a technique
that must be continually improved and perfected, both consciously and constantly.
History taking is especially important in cases of suspected animal poisoning. Tak-
ing a complete toxicologic history refines and focuses the trajectory of the interview in an
attempt to detect the involvement of any potential poison. Let us begin this discussion by
reviewing the basic history-taking techniques ( Box 6-1).
If any part of veterinary medicine is an art, it is the act of securing from an owner the
facts surrounding an animal's clinical signs. Ihe clinician must be sympathetic, gentle,
and patient in an effort to quickly establish the trust of the person. Such trust will facili-
tate spontaneous volunteering of important information by the owner. If a person feels
intimidated by the veterinarian, he or she may not offer pertinent observations that are
crucial to the case, and valuable time will be lost. If the history is to provide any type of
working diagnosis, the veterinarian's interview must be meticulous, caring, and thorough
in scope.
able, and sometimes purposely deceitful. Veterinarians must realize that many owners
may feel guilty about the duration a condition has existed, how long it has been since
the last veterinary visit, how long an animal is left alone each day, how the animal actu-
ally came across a poison, how long it took the owner to realize it, or the level of care
with which toxic substances are stored or disposed of in the home. Owners frequently
say things they think the veterinarian wants to hear in an attempt to be seen as a more
responsible pet owner. Owners often deliberately falsify a history (as in the case of an
animal's ingestion of an illicit drug) because of fear of legal repercussions and poten-
tial grounds for prosecution. Furthermore, the veterinarian must recognize the fears,
anxieties, and emotional distress of many people as they face a potentially devastating
health problem in their companion animal. The veterinarian must be a calming influ-
ence if a reliable account of events is to be obtained. If it is not possible to obtain an
adequate history from the pet owner, it may be necessary to question other family
members, neighbors, and friends. Finally, owners have different emotional make-ups,
different educational backgrounds, different intellectual levels, and different economic
realities. Language differences, physical disabilities, and other barriers may prevent
English, there may be a person fluent in the owner's language in the veterinarian's prac-
tice. A certified professional interpreter may be available who can act as an interpreter for
the deaf or hard of hearing (www.rid.org). Veterinarians must be inventive and flexible
in their approach to listening to and communicating with their clients. Clinicians must
68
40SECTlON 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Box 6-1
Key Items in the Toxicologic History
+ Listen to the client. Avoid any bias or preconceptions.
*At the same time, observe the animal. Although you can't always believe the client,
you can believe clinical signs of the animal.
Identify and treat immediate, life-threatening problems (e.g., arrhythmias, seizures).
 Do not wait for confirmation of poisons involved to initiate supportive therapy.
+ Identify the animal's entire home environment. Could other poisons or other
animals or children be involved?
· Identify any current medications, underlying conditions, or pertinent previous
(and said aaui 'asas iar "e'a) ue a o Aons ea
· History of the exposure event. How long ago, what toxin, what concentration, how
much? Does the occupation or hobby of the owner predispose to the presence of
any particular poisons in the home?
· If possible, identify the poison (or poisons). Estimate the mg/kg dose for the
exposure and establish a worst-case scenario. Estimate the risk for the animal
and the possibility of a toxic or lethal exposure.
· Ask the owner if any treatment was initiated at home. For instance, were they
successful in making the animal vomit at home before coming to the veterinary
hospital?
· Establish a timeline of exposure and onset of clinical signs. Is the animal getting
better, deteriorating, or showing no signs?
-Establish a minimum database.
Treat the patient, not the poison. Never lose sight of the patient's condition.
+ Treat the patient, not the laboratory results. Do not wait for laboratory results to
initiate therapy.
consciously strive to eliminate any preconceptions that they may have about owners that
will bias the history and affect their diagnostic ability.
The task of the veterinarian is to translate the owner's account into a comprehensive
medical history. Remember that clients have not been schooled to give an accurate history
in a precise chronologic order and they may have failed to recognize important changes in
vital signs or the onset of clinical signs that veterinarians are trained to identify. Just as the
clinician must avoid having his or her own preconceptions, incorrect perceptions of owners
that their animal has been poisoned must be identified because these can lead veterinarians
to search for a toxicologic cause of a problem that is in fact nontoxicologic in origin. Vet-
erinarians must never suggest that a client's animal has been poisoned unless there is
adequate evidence to support such a conclusion. Last, it is up to the clinician to organize
the history in an orderly and logical manner and to establish the exact chronology of events
leading up to the animal's clinical presentation. For some veterinarians, a standardized his-
tory form is an effective aid in obtaining a complete, thorough, and objective history.
The history and all initial data obtained should be recorded at the time of the original
presentation. Ihe animal's record is a medicolegal document that can be subpoenaed, and
it should be treated accordingly. Suspected poisoning cases have a particularly high poten-
tial for legal action because of possible liability and criminal activity. The recorded history
spiosan Aue aei iou oi st qumi go amu poos y 'atarduos pue 'aqial pazqueio aq pmous
that are incomplete or disorganized or that you would be ashamed to have reviewed by your
peers or officers of the court.
The history must be organized concisely and logically and must include any and all
introductory data. Such data include species; breed; age; sex; reproductive status; vaccine
history; previous or current medical problems; current medications; diet; home environ-
ment; presence of other animals in the house and any potential appearance of clinical
signs in them; recent boarding or kennel history; any recent impoundment and potential
Chapter 6 |  Taking a Toxicologic History  41
exposure to sick or unvaccinated animals; and any recent application of herbicides, pes-
ticides, household cleaners, fnishing products, paints or stains (or spills thereof), or use
 of automotive products or any solvents. Previous or referring veterinarians' notes or any
should be identified, examined, and added to the record. Additional helpful information
can be obtained by calling the previous or referring veterinarian. This technique provides
ent problem or to underscore the significance of previously obtained data. Next, the chief
complaint should be identified, its duration noted, and the physical examination initiated.
Taking a toxicologic history differs a little from the standard clinical history in that it
attempts to more specifically establish the time of onset of clinical signs and link them with
   's d dss  iss  r   a
faced with one of three scenarios: (1) the animal has been exposed to a known toxin, (2) the
animal has been exposed to an unknown substance that may be a toxin, or (3) the animal
displays signs of disease of an uncertain or undetermined cause for which toxins must be
considered as part of the differential diagnosis. Ihe toxicologic history focuses on the ani-
mal. The following questions must be answered: Are there predisposing factors that make
there a potential source of toxins? Have there been any recent chemical applications?
Despite the often unreliable and possibly unknown nature of the owner's account of
events leading to a suspected poisoning, veterinarians must try to obtain as definitive a his-
tory as possible. Just as veterinarians must not be misled when owners are convinced that
their animals have been poisoned when other causes are actually responsible, clinicians
must also never forget that preexisting infections or metabolic, congenital, and neoplastic
conditions can mimic the clinical signs of a poisoning or can predispose the animal to
a toxicosis. The correlation of an accurate history with the physical examination is cru-
cial. Veterinarians must know the vital signs for the species they care for and must be
sads o sau, ssaie an pue suis e aeat a azonan ci ae
poisonings.
Jo proaie suasaan aos ai ue siaumo  u sme aqsso ae a
events before and during the onset of the illness. Veterinarians must obtain and organize
this information in a logical and orderly manner. Specific criteria characteristic of a toxi-
cologic history include what poison or poisons are involved, when the exposure occurred,
how much poison the animal was exposed to, and the route of the exposure (e.g., der-
mal, oral, inhalation, intravenous, subcutaneous, or intraperitoneal). An important further
question is whether other animals at home could also have been exposed.
cat? An outdoor-only dog? What are the animal's normal daily activities? Is it free to roam?
How long is it gone each day? This line of questioning provides helpful information, par-
 s  d   o  s   a
ent in their house and yard unless specifically asked. Likewise, information about weather
conditions and season and the activities, hobbies, and occupations of the owner may all be 
H is of tremendous help if the owner can bring in the original container of the toxic
substance. For most suspected poisonings, the exact quantity of toxin ingested is unknown.
However, by examining the container in which the poison was stored and questioning the
owner, the amount of toxin previously present in the container may be determined. Using
this information, the largest amount the animal could have ingested can be estimated. This
amount can be compared with the known lethal dosage for an animal of that size. Not only
amounts, but also active ingredients, potential antidotes, and related manufacturer infor-
mation sometimes can be obtained from the package. If the original prescription bottles or
containers are not available, the imprint codes from tablets or capsules can be used to iden-
tify the substance in question. Imprint codes can be identified in the Physicians' Desk Refer-
ence, the Internet (e.g., Drugs.com, RxList), regional poison and drug centers, and various
pharmacologic sources. Finally, the veterinarian must determine if the owner has initiated
42SECTlON 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Box 6-2
Initial Telephone Contact
adaan u a n uais u suusid jo juanl u a nn ssans
contact. Telephone personnel must establish:
 Name, address, and phone number of person they are speaking with.
pe sieis aainpoidan xas ate paaaq satads daa) paosiod uaaq seu ieum
weight)?
What toxin is involved (e.g., amount, concentration; form: liquid, powder, gas, etc.)?
Are original containers listing ingredients, concentrations, potential antidotes, or
When did it happen? (How much time has elapsed since ingestion or exposure? Did
the caller see it happen?)
Route (e.g., ingestion, dermal, inhalation, or ocular)
Where did it happen (on the owner's premises)?
How much was ingested? (Original containers allow estimation of how much was
consumed and how much remains.)
What is the animal's present clinical status? (What is the animal doing? Educate the
 owner about the clinical signs and course of progression for that poisoning.)
and toxic dose information to establish the risk for this animal; determine a timeline
between exposure and onset of clinical signs for this toxin.)
 Other: Find out (1) other toxins the animal could have been exposed to simultaneously,
(2) medications the animal is currently taking or other underlying medical conditions
(e.g., heart disease, kidney problems, pregnancy), and (3) other animals or children
who might have been exposed.
 Determine from this information whether the animal needs to be seen and treated or
can be managed conservatively at home and observed. The animal can be observed
at home only if a follow-up mechanism is in place (i.e., the owner is familiar with
the course of the poisoning and clinical signs and calls frequently [or is called] with
 progress reports). Final recommendation to treat or observe must rest with the
veterinarian.
any treatment before seeking veterinary help. Induction of emesis, bathing to remove der-
mal toxicants, or administration of any prescription or over-the-counter drugs to offset
poisonings are all activities often begun by owners. For example, if the owner has been suc.
cessful at home in making the animal vomit, this is important. Likewise, well-intentioned
owners may unwittingly give medications at home that complicate successful therapy. The
first line of defense in the management of poisonings is the telephone. For this reason, all
telephone personnel at animal hospitals should be trained as much as possible in the most
common small animal poisonings, their relative toxicities, how they are managed, and what
to tell people about the treatment (Box 6-2).
Some clinicians and veterinary hospitals use a prepared toxicology history form as a
prompt to help them ask the right questions and successfully direct the initial interview
in cases of suspected poisoning. Such a standardized document includes the animal's age,
weight, environment, and any present medications used. What toxin or toxins are suspected
is of course a critical concern. How much poison may have been involved, route of expo-
ns u sidon suaund te are pano aosia asoxa euaod al uam pue 'ans
a list of questions. If and when clinical signs (and their nature) were first noted is likewise
tremendously important. The form also helps determine if other toxins may be implicated
and if other animals in the home may also have been exposed. This type of direct-line
questioning may help the veterinarian quickly obtain valuable information and aid in more
inBox6-3.
Chapter 6 |Taking a Toxicologic History 43
Box 6-3
 Sample Toxicology History Form
+ What is the animal's name, species, breed, and sex? Is the animal intact or neutered?
What is the animal's age and weight?
What medications is the animal presently receiving?
What other medical history might be pertinent?
What is the suspected poison involved?
What is the maximum amount of toxin suspected (worst-case scenario)?
Was the original container found?
What is the potential route of exposure suspected?
When did possible exposure occur?
When were clinical signs first noted? Describe them.
+ Could other poisons be involved?
* Could other animals have been exposed?
·Did the owner initiate any treatment at home (e.g., emesis, baths, etc.)?
+ Describe the animal's environment (e.g., where animal is kept, how long left alone,
hobbies of owner, anything that might lead to poisoning).
 If these history-taking techniques are used and applied in toxicology cases, valuable
information can be obtained that will allow the clinician to establish a working diagnosis
and determine the most appropriate course of treatment. The toxicologic history is com-
bined with a thorough physical examination, an appropriate minimum database, and a
sound list of differential diagnoses. The history is an integral part of the picture in formu-
lating a correct diagnosis and a treatment plan. It is up to the veterinarian to organize it in
a logical sequence and then, through correlation with the physical examination, clinical
signs, and a complete list of differential diagnoses, identify the diagnosis and undertake an
efficacious therapeutic regimen.
Suggested Readings
Carson TL: Taking and interpreting a toxicological history. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, editors: Current
veterinary therapy X,Philadelphia,1992,WBSauns.
Galey FD, Hall JO: Field investigation of small animal toxicoses, Vet Clin N Am Small Animal Pract
20(2):283-291, 1990.
Lohmeyer C: Taking a toxicological history. In Poppenga RIT, Gwaltney-Brant SM, editors: Small animal
toxicology essentials, Oxford, UK, 2011, Wiley and Blackwell, pp 27-32.
CHAPTER
Approach to Diagnosis
7
for the Toxicology Case
Birgit Puschner, DVM, PhD, DABVT
Ahna G. Brutlag, DVM, MS
n small animal practice, intoxications are infrequent, but when they present, exten-
sive diagnostic and therapeutic measures are required. Accurate diagnosis is the key
enl aienbape rog moe ues sisoueip e uns ases suruosiod jenuand e buroeondde cn
ment of poisoned animals and can prevent additional cases. Unfortunately, there is no
simple procedure that will test for all toxicants. Rather, these cases require a multifacto-
compiled includes a complete case history, clinical and clinicopathologic data, postmortem
findings, results from chemical analyses, and occasionally bioassay findings.! The approach
to the toxicology case presented here allows small animal veterinarians to develop a com-
prehensive diagnostic approach to reach an accurate diagnosis. As clearly illustrated by the
tragic outbreak of melamine-cyanuric acid poisoning in dogs and cats in 2007,2.3 the public
expects the veterinary profession to provide professional guidance in the single poisoning
case or series of cases with a calm and coherent approach.
Case Presentation and Initial Approach
The small animal practitioner usually must treat one or a few animals, unlike the livestock
veterinarian, for whom a toxicology case is more likely to involve large numbers of animals
with emphasis on herd health, economics, and food safety in addition to the welfare of an
individual. The small animal case presents a further challenge because a wandering animal's
recent whereabouts is not always known.
A Poisoning Should Be Suspected If:
· An unexplained death has occurred.
+ The animal is sick with no known exposure to infectious disease.
+ The animal has been recently exposed to a new environment.
+ There has been a recent change in food.
+ There has been recent pesticide application in the environment or home.
+ There has been recent construction activity in the environment or home.
+ An uncommon clinical condition exists.
+ There has been a potential threat for a malicious poisoning.
Approach
As mentioned earlier, diagnosis of a toxicology problem involves the assimilation of sev-
eral classes of data, including the history, clinical signs, clinical chemistry, the presence or
absence of lesions, analytical chemistry, and occasionally bioassay.45 Evidence from one
class of data rarely provides a definitive diagnosis in the absence of the others. For example,
blood cholinesterase activity. Analysis for an organophosphorus or carbamate insecticide
may be negative, yet the animal may have responded to atropine therapy. Historical review
of the case might suggest exposure to a short-lived carbamate insecticide (undetectable at
45
46  SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
sampling), exposure to a pond with neurotoxic cyanobacteria, or exposure to a nicotinic
plant, such as tree tobacco (Ncotiana glauca) or poison hemlock (Conium sp.)
What to Do
*Obtain a complete history.
· Consult with a veterinary toxicologist or animal poison control center (see Chapter 4,
"Effective Use of a Veterinary Poison Control Center").
+ Pet Poison Helpline, Minneapolis, MN, 800-213-6680, $39 per case fee
· American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Animal Poison Control
Center, Urbana, IL, 888-426-4435, $65 per case fee
+ Perform a complete physical examination.
+ Perform an exposure assessment.
*Perform a postmortem examination, if an unexplained death has occurred.
+ Collect specimens suitable for toxicologic testing ( Table 7-1).
+Contact a veterinary toxicology laboratory (www.aavld.org).
+ Report a pet food complaint or adverse drug experience to the Food and Drug Administra-
tion (http://www.fda.gov/Animal Veterinary/SafetyHealth/ReportaProblem/default.htm).6
History
A thorough review of a case history helps identify possible sources of a toxicant, predis-
posing factors, situations compatible with exposures, toxicant dose, and clinical signs. Ihe
feeding, environmental, and medical histories should be taken along with that of the cur-
rent problem. The surrounding and immediate areas must be assessed for toxic sources and
hazardous conditions. Samples for analysis can be obtained or sought as the investigation
proceeds. Potential hazards should be removed as soon as they are identified to prevent
additional exposures. Ideally, the entire environment should be inspected for potentially
toxic plants, poisonous mushrooms, contaminated water, or household chemicals. When
environmental inspection is not possible, the pet owner should be thoroughly questioned
about the pet's access to such hazards. Other common hazards include access to garbage;
access to a purse or backpack (chewing gum or breath mints with xylitol, cigarettes, medica-
tions); recent baking activities (chocolate, raisins, xylitol, or raw dough); over-the-counter
and prescription medications in the household; new toys; new cages; or pest control activi-
ties with such chemicals as rodenticides, insecticides, or herbicides. Additionally, be sure to
inquire about food including human foods such as grapes, macadamia nuts, and sugar-free
products with xylitol; pet foods; and dietary supplements and treats. Identify new or differ-
ent sources. Also inquire about any recent visitors to the home such as friends or relatives.
Well-meaning visitors may unknowingly feed the pet harmful fods or have medications
stored in their luggage that may be accessible by the pet. Animal husbandry practices, such
as types of foods used or outdoor patterns may help identify common sources if multiple
animals are affected. The practitioner should discreetly note cultural traits that may yield
owner about the administration of common human medications such as aspirin, ibuprofen,
acetaminophen, and antihistamines with decongestants (e.g., loratadine with pseudoephed-
 rine [Claritin-D] and diphenhydrarmine [Benadryl-D]) may reveal additional helpful infor-
mation. Well-meaning but uninformed pet owners may attempt to "treat" their ill animal
with drugs such as these. The time of year can also yield important clues. Car radiators are
replenished in the autumn, leading to antifreeze exposures; specific plants such as Easter
lilies are predominantly sold at certain times during the year.
 The signalment of the affected animal should also be identified. The breed of dog may
generate information about drug sensitivity. For example, collies, Australian shepherds, and
other herding breeds are overly sensitive to the anthelmintic ivermectin and the antidiar-
rheal loperamide (Imodium). The species and size of animal are also crucial for assess-
ing toxicant exposures. A small cat is more sensitive to a given amount of ethylene glycol
than a larger cat or a similar-sized dog. To highlight interspecies differences, consider that,
Chapter 7 | Approach to Diagnosis for the Toxicology Case 47
Table 7-1
Key Specimens for Toxicologic Testing
Specimen
Condition
Select Possible Tests
Gastric
Frozen
Comprehensive poison screen for unknowns,
contents
strychnine, metaldehyde, insecticides, drugs,
(vomitus,
anatoxin-a, microcystins, zinc phosphide,
lavage)
plant toxins, metals, ionophores, amanitin;
identification of plant parts and seeds
Urine
Frozen
Drugs (amphetamine, cocaine, THC, LSD,
ephedrine, methamphetamine, morphine,
nicotine, psilocin), anatoxin-a, strychnine,
metaldehyde, ethylene glycol, amanitin,
paraquat, caffeine
Serum
Separated from
Zinc, copper, iron, sodium, ethylene glycol,
clot promptly
diethylene glycol
and frozen
Blood
Refrigerated
Lead, cholinesterase activity, thallium, mercury
Liver
Frozen
Comprehensive poison screen for unknowns,
anticoagulant rodenticides, metals, certain
drugs, strychnine, amanitin, organophos-
phorus and carbamate insecticides, pyre-
thrins and pyrethroids, vitamins E and A
Kidney
Frozen
 Ethylene glycol, melamine and analogues,
oxalate, calcium, phosphorus, amanitin,
vitamin D
Brain
Frozen
Cholinesterase activity, sodium, bromethalin
Lung
Frozen
Paraquat
Food and
 Dry material
Comprehensive poison screen for unknowns,
source
should be kept
strychnine, metaldehyde, organophosphorus 
material
dry at room
and carbamate insecticides, pyrethrins/
temperature;
 pyrethroids, microcystins, zinc phosphide,
moist mate-
 plant toxins, metals, ionophores, amanitin,
rial should be
bromethalin, anticoagulants, ethylene
frozen
glycol, mycotoxins (aflatoxins, vomitoxin,
penitrem A), melamine and analogues,
vitamins A and E, and plant, mushroom and
seed identification
Water
Refrigerated
Microcystins, anatoxin-a, pesticides, poison
screen
LSD, Lysergic acid diethylamide; THC, tetrahydrocannabinol
 although concentrated pyrethroids are routinely safely applied to dogs for flea and tick con-
trol, even a small vial of these products applied to a cat may prove fatal.
Exposure Assessment
The significance of an exposure depends on a great many factors. One of the most signifi-
cant is the effect on the species in terms of habit and metabolic differences. The toxicity of
a xenobiotic may also be affected by its route and rate of exposure and by the animal's age,
nutritional status, preexisting disease status, diet, water intake, environment, and manage-
ment. Considering all factors, the most important is the dose of the xenobiotic that is taken
into the system.
48SECTION 1  Toxicologic Concepts
Dose-Response Assessment
As Paracelsus instructed, "The dose determines the poison"7 Almost all compounds,
including water, may be toxic if a susceptible animal is exposed to a sufficient quantity.
Consideration of dose response involves multiple factors in addition to the animal-related
variables previously mentioned. Ihese factors include the magnitude of the dose; the fre-
quency of exposure; and the slope of the dose-response curve for the animal's species, age,
nutritional status, disease status, gender, and many other related factors.
The magnitude of the exposure determines toxicity because most poisons act at spe-
cific sites or receptors. The action at those sites can usually be related to the magnitude
of effect in the patient. Dose-response relationships exist for chemicals that have a wide
variety of effects. For example, a small amount of diluted sodium hypochlorite (a few mil-
liters of bleach in the toilet bowl at greater than 1:23 dilution) probably will not cause
oral mucosa and esophagus may result. A small dog that ingests the tissue of a mouse that
suffers from a marginal dose of an anticoagulant rodenticide (<1 ppm in tissue) is not likely
to be poisoned. However, if the mouse still has a stomach full of the active rodenticide at
approximately 0.005%, or 50 ppm, a mild hazard may exist for the dog. Additionally, some
potentially toxic chemicals may be essential nutrients in low concentrations. For example
cats require approximately 10,000 IU/kg of diet of vitamin A for optimal health. Yet chronic
toxicosis may result if the diet contains more than 100,000 IU vitamin A per kilogram of
food material
If a sufficient amount of a toxicant is ingested, acute poisoning may occur after one
exposure. At lower levels, however, a toxicant may not cause disease until after it has been
ingested repeatedly or until a sufficient amount of the chemical has accumulated at the
receptor site. For example, repeated daily doses of compounds that can accumulate, such as
an anticoagulant rodenticide like brodifacoum or a metal like lead, are toxic at much lower
 jo suis aun 'suns aos r sreuo asop ane aus e un siaa
toxicosis can be different from the acute signs. A bird that has been soaked in an organo-
chlorine insecticide (e.g., dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) may develop neurologic signs
and die. Daily exposure to low levels of the organochlorine, however, may not cause acute
toxicosis. Rather, chronic long-term effects may result, leading to abnormal reproduction,
including eggshell thinning and liver degeneration.
I is also important to understand the slope of the dose-response curve. Many texts
provide the practitioner with the median lethal dose (LDso) or, in some cases, the median
toxic dose. However, that measure simply describes the dose at which 50% of an exposed
population may be expected to die or develop toxicosis. More important to the clinician is
the dose at which a hazard to any animal may exist. Obviously, that will be a lower value.
For toxicants with a steep dose-response curve, the minimum toxic dose will be very close
to the median toxic dose. For example, a highly toxic plant, such as oleander (Color Plate
26-2), may kill at almost any dose for which there is an effect. For other toxicants such as
 organochlorine insecticides, which have a shallow dose-response curve, some effects may
be seen at levels that are orders of magnitude (10x) below the median lethal dose.
Exceptions exist to the dose-response relationship in toxicology. For example, hypersen-
sitivity is not generally dose responsive. Once an animal has been sensitized to a xenobiotic
(e.g., venom from a bee sting), a very tiny amount later may trigger a massive anaphylactic
response. Additionally, some carcinogens may not follow a dose-response curve. For exam-
ple, one key genetic injury may trigger the formation of a cancer. Nevertheless, for the great
majority of toxicants, understanding that the dose determines whether a compound may
 be toxic to an animal helps the practitioner decide whether an animal has been exposed to
a toxic dose of a xenobiotic.
Exposure Assessment Calculations
Given that the dose-response relationship is the major determinant of toxicity, perform-
  ixn iaod e jo aisodxa a aaia sdar soeo aisodxa iseq 
patient. The practitioner must understand the basic units of concentrations, their sources,
Chapter 7 | Approach to Diagnosis for the Toxicology Case 49
annsodxa aul aiedos ol [aaa[ aimsodxa ue ol uoeiuaouo ainos e jaauoo ol mon pue
with known toxicity data.
When conducting an assessment, one must identify the source of the denominator for
various concentration units. Additionally, concentration data must be scrutinized to deter-
mine whether the level is on an as-is basis or a dry-weight basis. Dry-weight concentrations
appear to be much higher than as-is levels for moist samples. The toxicity of a compound
is generally expressed in terms of milligrams of toxicant per kilogram body weight. Gener-
ally, the practitioner must have information regarding the toxicant concentration in food
or source material, and a known toxicity in an animal species (usually obtained from the
literature or an animal poison control center). Thus the likely amount of toxicant taken in
by the patient is calculated as follows:
Known data:
source material)
+ Body weight (BW) of patient (in kilograms)
+Toxicity of chemical (milligram of toxicant/kilogram BW)
Estirmation: Weight (in grams or kilograms, for example) of source material taken in
(or approximate intake of feed or water) or the milligram dose of tablets or capsules;
if only an estimate, a good rule of thumb might be to double the estimated intake to be
conservative.
Goal: Determine the milligram/kilogram BW taken in to compare with toxic level.
Forrula:
kg source X mg toxicant/kg source = mg toxicant intake (pure compound ingested)
mg toxicant intake/kg B W = mg/kg (actual exposure)
Interpretation: The calculated value is then compared with the known toxicity value for
minimal for the toxicant of interest in the species of interest (such as dogs or cats) but
may exist for rodents. Conservative advice is to treat exposures within fivefold of an LDso
value (i.e., LDso/s) determined in the species of interest as potential toxicoses, but not to
dismiss those that are tenfold lower than the LDso as innocuous exposures. Uncertainty
is greater when dealing with LDso values from other species. It is best to treat exposures
within tenfold of an LDso value as potential toxicoses and to not dismiss those that are
 50-fold lower than the LDso as innocuous exposures.
uaiap u das a e ae asdxa go agis an uaap o sue
as has been demonstrated, but common sense must be applied to be sure that the estimates
and assumptions are as correct as possible.
Example: Brodifacoum Exposure in a Dog
A 20-kg dog was observed to have ingested as much as one 3-oz packet of rodent bait. The
remains of the packet revealed that the product contained 0.005% of brodifacoum as-is, a
potent “one-bite” formulation of anticoagulant rodenticide. Looking in the literature, you
ascertain that the canine oral LDso of brodifacoum may be as low as 0.25 mg brodifacoum
per kilogram of body weight. After decontamination, the veterinarian needs to assess
whether this dog should be treated with vitamin K,
The calculation is as follows:
 600 = 8 06 = (1exo1dde) z0/8 00 × z0  :a1mos 8y :s1o 01 1a1 1s1 *
juasnipe ou) eq ay/unoseaiq au os = udd os = %soo'o :unosepoq ay/au q
meeded for dry weight because toxicity is listed as "as is").
50 SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
+ Next, divide the canine LDso by 5 to determine the treatment threshold: 0.25 mg/kg ÷ 5 =
0.05 mg/kg.
+ Estirmation: 0.09 kg bait × 50 mg brodifacoum/kg bait = 4.5 mg brodifacoum ingested
+ Result: 4.5 mg brodifacoum/20 kg BW = 0.225 mg/kg (actual exposure)
· Interpretation: The patient received up to 0.225 mg/kg BW of brodifacoum. Because this
value exceeds one fifth of the LDs, (0.05 mg/kg), the safest recommendation is to treat the
patient as if it received a toxic dose.
Clinical Signs and Clinical Pathologic Findings
Once the history is understood, the clinical presentation may suggest a toxicant and which
organs have been affected. Signs may be specific, like inducible seizures caused by the
rpdenticide strychnine. Conversely, nonspecific signs, such as vomiting and drowsiness,
ae  se ys  e ro udaso e aq po onsa  e aui 
pressant or muscle relaxant, to perhaps ethylene glycol. The rate of onset and progression of
signs may also be useful to the astute diagnostician. Sudden onset of convulsions may sug-
gest strychnine, metaldehyde, or penitrem A (moldy walnuts or cream cheese) toxicoses.
 opment of liver failure following a course of gastrointestinal upset and transient recovery
may suggest amanitin(mushroom) toxicosis.
As for other phases of the investigation, it is best to keep an open mind and open eyes.
Vomitus shouldbe examined for foreign objects and saved for potential diagnostic testing.
Pills or leaves from some plants may be present in recognizable form. Distinct colors and
dyes may be due to the ingestion of paintballs, the coating of a medication, or rodenticide
baits (Color Plates 7-1 to 7-3). If something is found, the owner can be encouraged to return
with source material that might resemble that in the vomitus, giving the practitioner a quick
diagnostic comparison.
Assessment of clinical pathologic data may indicate a possible toxicant. Elevations in
organ-specific enzymes or metabolites in serum may help to identify affected organs. For
example, a dog poisoned by the mushroom toxin, amanitin, likely has very high concen-
trations of liver-specific enzymes. Animals suffering from ethylene glycol intoxication
have a metabolic acidosis, elevated anion gap, increased serum osmolality, and eventually
azotemia
 In addition to clinical pathologic testing, samples from the live animal may be useful
for analytic toxicology testing and are listed in Table 7-1. The most diagnostically useful
 s sa ae i iass e r sd e e  s
contents, fecal material, urine, whole blood, serum, and occasionally cerebrospinal fluid
Tissue biopsies may also be useful.
Once obtained, all samples should be frozen, except whole blood (which may be
refrigerated). Serum should be separated from the clot as soon as possible before freez-
ing. Some analytes, such as vitamin E or zinc, may be altered by time spent in contact
with the clot because red cells continue to metabolize them or release additional mate-
rial. Because some rubber is hardened with zinc, the use of a rubber plunger syringe or
a red-stoppered clot tube invalidates most testing for zinc. If zinc testing is required,
all-plastic or special trace element clotting tubes should be used. Vacutainer systems are
suggested for the actual collection of the sample. Avoid the use of serum separator tubes
for toxicologic testing. All samples should be properly labeled before being shipped to
thelaboratory.
Testing for ethylene glycol, lead, zinc, cholinesterase, strychnine, metaldehyde, and
drugs such as acetaminophen can often be performed on an immediate basis, giving the
practitioner a quick answer. Others, like anticoagulant rodenticides or toxic plants, may
require a day or longer to allow for extraction and purification before analysis can be com
pleted. In areas where a veterinary diagnostic laboratory is not readily accessible, contacting
a local human hospital for immediate testing is recommended.
Chapter 7 |  Approach to Diagrosis for the Toxicology Case  
51
Postmortem Examination and Sampling
Necropsy of dead animals should be complete. Partial necropsy should be avoided because
 it could result in missing a pertinent lesion or perhaps a critical sample. Before performing
the postmortem examination, inquire about the legal status of the case so that any required
sampling (for insurance, legal, or other purposes) can be done. Many suspected toxicoses
have turned out to be due to infectious causes and vice versa, so try to keep an open mind
during the examination. Also, eyes and nose are often the best diagnostic tools.
Note any external markings and appearance (e.g., bruises or singed fur) before opening
the body cavity. Samples needed for diagnosis of infectious diseases (e.g., cultures) should
be obtained first to avoid contamination. Next, obtain all the urine from the bladder using a
screw-capped vial for storage or shipping. Despite some myths, urine is still much more use-
ful for testing for drugs than tissue. Next, carefully examine and sample the internal organs
and tissues. Inspect the ingesta for unusual material, including plant parts, pills, or chemical
granules. The foreign matter should be identified and saved apart from other samples of
-a ae sixn au asaq sat ea  masn anadsa are eisan isa
olized after absorption to such an extent that they may not be detected in other tissues.
Samples of major organs should be placed in fixative for histologic examination. Addi-
tionally, samples of appropriate organs, including the brain, should be packaged individu-
ally and frozen fresh (not fixed) for toxicologic testing ( Table 7-1). Do not combine all organ
samples into one bag as this may result in invalid tissue test results.
Lesions from poisoning can be specific, nonspecific, or even absent. For example, bire-
fringent crystals in the renal tubules support the diagnosis of ethylene glycol toxicosis. On
s da) sd  g a e is a saa  e  a a
bean plant [Ricinus] or an insoluble oxalate containing Philodendron spp.), metals (e.g.
arsenic, zinc, iron), or pesticides (e.g., anticoagulant rodenticides). Other toxicants, such as
organophosphorus and carbamate insecticides, may cause very little postmortem damage
Except some nonspecific pulmonary edema and serosal reddening. Thus lesions must be
interpreted in light of other data collected.
Sample Collection and Toxicology Testing
 In-house or bedside tests for certain toxicants such as ethylene glycol and illicit drugs may
be useful but should be used with caution. Oten, these tests may be quite sensitive but lack
specificity. For example, many commercial bedside ethylene glycol tests yield a false positive
in the presence of propylene glycol (found in "pet safe” antifreeze and injectable diazepam
as well as other drugs),β sorbitol (common cathartic in activated charcoal preparations),
mannitol, and isopropyl alcohol (do not swab the venipuncture site prior to sampling).
Over-the-counter human urine drug screens designed to detect illicit substances such as
marijuana, cocaine, methamphetamine, and so on have been used with varied success in
pets. In dogs, marijuana is notoriously difficult to detect with such tests and will frequently
result in a false negative.? Alternatively, other common drugs such as diphenhydramine
may yield a false positive result for phencyclidine (PCP) and opioids in humans.i0 It is not
yet known if this occurs in veterinary species. Thus results from these tests must be inter-
preted inlight of clinical presentation and should not be relied on for a definitive diagnosis.
A good approach in a case of unknown cause of illness or death is to hold toxicologic
samples until the results of other tests (e.g., clinical pathologic, histopathologic, and bacte-
riologic analysis) are available. Ihen the involved toxicologic testing can be performed in
a focused manner based on the history and available diagnostic data. Recently, new meth-
odologies such as liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry, gas chromatography and
mass spectrometry, and direct analysis in real time (DART) mass spectrometry allow for
comprehensive screens for unknown toxicants. However, these techniques are not avail-
able at all veterinary toxicology laboratories. Key samples for toxicology testing (Table 7-1)
52  SECTION 1  Toxicologic Concepts
should be saved for possible future testing, including samples from the live animal, samples
nua seuue an ui paias sardes pue (aqeidde j) Asdonau u panaon
ment (e.g., food, water, plants, source material, bait). It is better to toss out an unneeded
sample than to wish it were available for a crucial test. Samples should be refrigerated or
frozen and stored in separate containers. Dry foods and other sources can be stored in a
cool, dark, dry place. Plants to be identified can be submitted fresh to a diagnostic labora-
tory or other plant expert (including herbaria, local colleges, and plant stores) if the submis-
sion can be made quickly. Otherwise, it is best to press the plant carefully in a newspaper
between some books and then submit the dried plant. Mushrooms should also be submit-
ted dry for identification or wrapped in paper towels if fresh. Avoid placing mushrooms or
moist plants in plastic bags and putting them in the refrigerator as they tend to rot in that
environment. Where the specimen was collected is essential information for both plant and
mushroom identification, so this information must be included with the specimen (e.g..
town, county, under a deciduous tree, near a woodpile, etc.).
Summary
Complaints involving poisoning of pets are not the most common cases presented to vet-
erinarians. When such cases are presented they may be complicated and may involve much
emotion. Consultation with personnel in a veterinary toxicology laboratory or animal poi-
and treatment protocol in a suspect poisoning case. It is hoped that the approach presented
here can help the practitioner handle these cases with confidence and reach an accurate and
confrmed diagnosis.
Acknowledgment
The authors wish to acknowledge the exceptional contribution of Dr. Frank Galey, who co-
authored this chapter for the previous edition of the book.
References
1. Galey FD: Diagnostic toxicology for the small animal veterinarian, Calif Vet Sept-Oct:7-10, 1994.
 2. Puschner B, Poppenga RH, Lowenstine LJ,et al: Assessment of melamine and cyanuric acid toxicity in
cats, I Vet Diagn Invest 19:616-624, 2007.
3. Brown CA, Jeong KS, Poppenga RH, et al: Outbreaks of renal failure associated with melamine and
cyanuric acid in dogs and cats in 2004 and 2007, I Vet Diagn Invest 19:525-531, 2007.
4. Galey FD: Diagnostic toxicology. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2004,
Mosby, pp 22-23.
5. Volmer PA,Meerdink GL: Diagnostic toxicology forthe small animal practitioner, Vet Clin North Am
Small A nim Pract 32:357, 2002.
6.Food and Drug Administration: Report α problem. Retrieved July 14, 2010, from http://www.fda.gov/
AnimalV eterinary/SafetyHealth/ReportaProblem/default.htm.
 7. Borzelleca IF: Paracelsus: herald of modern toxicology, Toxicol Sct 53:2-4, 2000.
8.Acierno MJ, Serra VF,Johnson ME,et al: Preliminary validation of a point-of-care ethylene glycol test
for cats,IVet Emer Crit Care 18:477-479, 2008.
Hosp A ssoc 45:59-66, 2009.
10. Moeller KE, Lee KC, Kissack JC: Urine drug screening practical guide for linicians, Mayo Clin Proc
83:66-76, 2008.
CHAPTER
Establishing a
Minimum Database
in Small Animal
Poisonings
Kevin T. Fitzgerald, PhD, DVM, DABVP
 uccessful diagnosis of a particular poisoning is based on a complete history, a thor
ough physical examination, and physical parameters and laboratory results obtained
through establishment of a minimum database. Identification of the presence of a specific
toxin allows the clinician to rapidly initiate a specific treatment that may lead to a success-
ful outcome.
Thousands of different molecules have the capacity to poison living organisms. Unfortu-
nately, less than 5% of all potential toxins have antidotes or effective physiologic antagonists.
Nevertheless the public has unrealistic expectations about antidotes and "poison screening”
tests available to veterinarians to identify toxicants. Veterinary toxicology laboratories are
currently able to detect and quantitate 200 to 300 or so true poisons. Because of the limi-
tations of (1) expense; (2) time necessary to obtain the samples, run the tests, and obtain
results; (3) required sample volumes; and (4) the sheer staggering number of potentially
poisonous molecules in existence, toxicology screening tests are not commonly pursued
in veterinary medicine. However, because only approximately 15 or 20 types of substances
account for almost 90% of all small animal veterinary poisonings, if the clinician has a high
index of suspicion of a particular toxin, certain screening tests can be very rewarding and
should not be overlooked.
Screening tests are maximally effective only if the clinician has good reason (based on
the history and clinical signs) to suspect a particular poison and requests a specific labora-
tory procedure. Just as specific antidotes should not be administered without a definitive
diagnosis, the use of toxicology tests as “fishing expeditions" should be avoided if they are
to be successful or meaningful. In cases with potential medicolegal consequences, the use
of toxicology tests to confirm or deny the presence of a particular poison and its concentra-
tion may be recommended. Identification of a poison in toxic levels in appropriate tissues
and organs of an animal that is thought to be poisoned is often the only way to confirm a
diagnosis. What steps must be taken to obtain samples to provide such information?
Clinical Signs
Following a complete history, a thorough physical examination and assessment of any clini-
cal signs that may be present must be undertaken to arrive at a diagnosis of poisoning. Vet-
erinarians must be thoroughly familiar with the vital signs of the species that they care for
[isaud ean isn a ane suis ea 'suais euqe aue azioan auisu us aan ien os
data the veterinarian receives. Respiratory rate and nature, heart rate and rhythm, pulse
rate and rhythm, core body temperature, capillary refill time, mucous membrane color,
53
54 SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
and any apparent dehydration all reveal clues about an animal's condition. Electrocardi-
 ography, pulse oximetry, and Doppler blood pressure monitoring are all readily available
methods of documenting an animal's immediate condition more accurately. If the animal is
in a life-threatening state, emergency methods must be initiated long before a diagnosis of
poisoning can be obtained or therapy started. A final diagnosis is not necessary to stabilize
 or correct a life-threatening condition. Once the animal is stable, the specific tests and steps
Physical examination and assessment of clinical signs are invaluable and cannot be
separated from either the history or laboratory results in the attempt to obtain a definitive
diagnosis of poisoning. At the same time, it should be noted that clinical signs for many
conditions are stereotyped and similar, and that cells, tissues, and organs can respond in
only a limited number of ways that can look much the same, regardless of the cause (e.g.
traumatic, toxicologic, infectious, metabolic, or neoplastic). For this reason, poisoning is
rarely diagnosed through the physical examination or clinical signs alone. Finally, basing
a diagnosis solely on the clinical signs is unreliable because the veterinarian may be seeing
n dia i sasd iaea suoi passu aa Aeu pue asastp al yo aserd auo A
reveal the identity, course, and chronology of the intoxication.
Minimum Database
In developing a minimum toxicologic database, the small animal clinician must keep
in mind what diagnostic tests laboratories are capable of running, which toxins can be
detected and which cannot be detected, sample types and minimum sample volumes, the
turn-around times involved in obtaining results, and the costs. Laboratory results remain
a supportive adjunct to a complete history, a thorough physical evaluation of the animal,
and recognition of specific clinical signs of certain poisons. To maximize the efficacy of
laboratory results, veterinarians must have knowledge of the proper use of each test, a basic
 grasp of specific laboratory procedures, and an understanding of how to obtain and handle
specimens properly. This information can be readily obtained by consulting directly with
laboratory personnel. The best guide to the diagnosis, treatment, and selection of the most
appropriate laboratory tests is the clinical condition of the animal in question. In addition,
the small animal clinician can also check with local human hospitals to see what routine
toxicology tests are available.
 For every suspected life-threatening poisoning, routine laboratory studies should
include a complete blood count and a serum chemistry panel that includes determination
of serum electrolytes, glucose, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and calcium. A urinalysis
should be routinely obtained. Prothrombin time, activated clotting time, or a coagulation
panel can be included to identify abnormal coagulation. Pulse oximetry and electrocardi-
ography are performed to assess both hemoglobin saturation (SpOz) and cardiac irregulari-
ties. Liver enzyme tests are usually performed to monitor damage caused by poisons that
are directly toxic to or degraded by the liver. Arterial blood gas evaluation is included when
available to evaluate respiratory status and acid-base abnormalities. The anion gap should
be determined to assist in the diagnosis and management of certain types of poisonings.
Finally, radiographs should be taken of both the chest and the abdomen to help identify
pulmonary edema, aspiration pneumonia, and any radiopaque toxins in the gastrointesti-
nal tract. Vomitus must be examined as an indicator of recent oral ingestion of any type of
poison. Feces should also be collected. Veterinarians need to assist the laboratory by includ-
ing a list of suspected toxins.
Clinicians must remember to “treat the patient, not the poison? There is no single accu-
rate, rapid, and inexpensive method ("poison screen") that can detect all toxins. Just as spe-
cific antidotes should not be used without a narrow index of suspicion based on a matching
history, confirming physical examination and clinical signs, and supportive laboratory
results, veterinarians must never delay supportive therapy while awaiting a confirmatory
laboratory test or positive toxin level in a critically ill animal. The following are the indi-
vidual components of the minimum toxicologic database.
Chapter 8 I  Establishing a Minimum Database in Small Animal Poisonings  S5
Complete Blood Count
A complete blood count reveals hemoconcentration; anemia (e.g., possible zinc ingestion);
aplastic anemia; platelet deficiency; potential basophilic stippling; and the morphologic
characteristics ofthrombocytes,erythrocytes, and leukocytes. Blood is also useful for detect-
ing most elements and metals, some pesticides, cholinesterase activity, ethylene glycol, iron,
ethanol, methanol, and many drugs (e.g., acetaminophen, salicylates, theophylline, digoxin).
Serum Electrolytes (Sodium, Chloride, Potassium, Magnesium, Phosphorus,
Bicarbonate)
Metabolic acidosis results either from the increased production or decreased excretion of
nonvolatile acids or from the loss of body alkali. The serum anion gap helps to distinguish
between these two types of metabolic acidosis. Most toxins produce an increased anion gap
by the accumulation of organic acids. The anion gap is measured by subtracting the mea-
sured anions (Cl- and HCO) from the measured cations (Na and K). Ihe normal anion
 gap is 12 to 25 mEq/L. Accumulation of unmeasured anions (e.g., sulfates, phosphates, pro-
tein, and organic acids) results in an increased or abnormal anion gap. Most often a high
anion gap is associated with metabolic acidosis and is caused by accumulation of organic
acids, such as lactate or formate. Toxins that can cause an elevated anion gap and metabolic
acidosis include alcohol, methanol, toluene, ethylene glycol, propylene glycol, paraldehyde,
iron, salicylates, and any toxin that causes lactic acid build-up. Ethylene glycol should be
placed high on the differential diagnostic list whenever an animal presents with a high
anion gap of unknown cause. Another electrolyte abnormality that has been seen in dogs is
hypokalemia related to albuterol intoxication.
Arterial Blood Gas Analysis
Arterial blood gas analysis is not always available, but if it is, it can be used to evaluate respi-
ratory status and acid-base abnormalities in the poisoned animal. Toxic exposures can cause
vomiting, diarrhea, seizures, and respiratory irregularities. As a result, these developments
can be responsible for an overall acidosis (metabolic, respiratory, or lactic acidosis) or alka-
losis (metabolic or respiratory). Severe metabolic acidosis may require the use oftherapeutic
sodium bicarbonate. Toxins responsible for respiratory depression and subsequent hypoven-
tilation trigger respiratory acidosis. (See
Box 8-1 for a list of toxins affecting respi-
ratory rate.) Substances causing seizures
Box 8-1
may produce a lactic acidosis as a result of
 Affecting Respiratory Rate
increased muscle activity. (A list of the most
Bradypnea (l)
common poisons causing seizures [a com-
Barbiturates
mon toxidrome] is included in Table 8-1.)
Severe vomiting and diarrhea can result in a
Ethanol
Neuromuscular blockers
metabolic alkalosis. This will rarely resolve
Opioids
until gastrointestinal losses of metabolites
 Sedative hypnotics
are addressed. Respiratory alkalosis is a
side-effect of hyperventilation. Intoxicants
Tachypnea (t)
that cause excitement and stimulate the
Carbon monoxide
respiratory system can result in hypoxemia.
Cyanide
Excessive ventilation by mechanically ven-
Ethylene glycol
tilating a patient may lead to respiratory
Methanol
alkalosis, just as patients treated with high
Methemoglobin-producing agents
dosages of opioids and anticonvulsants may
Nicotine
demonstrate hypoventilation and a subse-
 Organophosphates and carbamates
quent respiratory acidosis.
Salicylates
 Sympathomimetic agents
Lactate
Theophylline
Monitoring比
blood lactate has become
an important tool in identification of
Table 8-1
 Toxins and Specific Toxidromes
Toxin
Vital Signs
Mentation
Signs
Clinical Findings
SE
Normal (early on)
Normal
Anorexia, vomiting
Jaundice (later)
CTION
1. Acetaminophen
2. Amphetamines
Tachycardia, tachypnea,
Agitation
Anxiety, panic
Mydriasis—hyperactive
 hyperthermia, hypertension
peristalsis
3.Antihistamines
Hyperthermia, tachycardia,
Agitation, altered mentation, Dry mouth, visual problems,
 Dry mucous membranes,
hypotension, hypertension
lethargy to coma
difficulty in urination
mydriasis, urinary
retention
4. Arsenic (acute)
Hypotension, tachycardia
Alert to coma
Vomiting, diarrhea, dysphagia,
Dehydration
abdominal pain
Co
5.Barbiturates
 Hypothermia, hypotension,
Altered, lethargy to coma
Stumbling, ataxia
Hyporeflexive, cold,
bradypnea
blank stare
6.β-Adrenergic
 Hypotension, bradycardia
Altered, lethargy to coma
Ataxia
Cyanosis, seizures
antagonists
7. Calcium channel
Hypotension, bradycardia
 Altered, lethargic, confused
Anorexic, vomiting
Slow heart rate
blockers
 8. Carbon monoxide
Often normal
 Altered, lethargy to coma
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
Seizures
ataxia
9.Cocaine
Hyperthermia, hypertension,
 Anxiety, agitation, delirious
Anxiety, restlessness, panic
Mydriasis, nystagmus
tachypnea, tachycardia
10. Cyclic antidepressants Hypotension, tachycardia
Lethargy to coma
Dry mouth, difficulty in
Mydriasis, dry mem-
urination, confusion, ataxia
branes, distended
bladder, seizures
11. Digitalis
Hypotension, bradycardia
 Normal or lethargic
Anorexia, vomiting
None seen
12. Ethanol
 Hypotension, tachycardia
Altered
 Ataxia, anorexic, vomiting
Ataxia
13. Ethylene glycol
Tachypnea
 Lethargy to coma
 Abdominal pain
Ataxia, stumbling, coma
(antifreeze)
14. Iron
Hypotension, tachycardia
 Normal or lethargic
Anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea
Hematemesis
15. Lead
Hypertension
Lethargy to coma
 Anorexic, vomiting, constipation, Peripheral neuropathy,
belly pain
seizures, gingival
pigmentation
16. Mercury
Hypotension (late)
Altered, anxiety
Anorexic, salivation, vomiting
Ataxia, stomatitis,
tremors
17. Opioids
Hypotension, bradycardia,
Lethargy to coma
Ataxia, confusion
Miosis, decreased
bradypnea, hypothermia
peristalsis
oter
18. Organophosphates
Hypotension or hypertension,
Lethargy to coma
Vomiting and diarrhea, belly
Salivation, lacrimation,
and carbamates
bradycardia or tachycardia,
pain, visual deficits
urination, defecation,
8
bradypnea or tachypnea
miosis, fasciculations,
Est
seizures
abli
19. Phenothiazines
Hypotension, tachycardia,
Lethargy to coma
Ataxia, dry mouth, difficulty in
Miosis or mydriasis,
ish
hypothermia or
urination
 decreased gut sounds
ning
hyperthermia
Agitation, then lethargy
20.Salicylates
Hyperthermia, tachycardia
Anorexia, vomiting
Heart failure
Minim
to coma
 21. Sedative-hypnotics
Hypotension, bradycardia,
Lethargy to coma
Ataxia, stumbling
Hyporeflexia
um
hypothermia, bradypnea
Data
22. Snail bait
Hyperthermia, tachypne a,
Lethargy to coma
Ataxia, vomiting, diarrhea
 Incoordination, muscle
(metaldehyde)
tachycardia
tremors, seizures
a5e
23. Iheophylline
Hypotension, hyperthermia,
Agitation, anxiety
Anorexia, vomiting
Tremors, seizures, car-
(methylxanthine)
tachycardia, tachypnea
diac arrhythmias
Small
24. Pyrethrins and
Variable
Lethargy to coma
Anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea
Salivation, vomiting and
pyrethroids
diarrhea, muscle fas-
Ani
ciculations, tremors,
a
seizures
58 SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
hypoventilation. In instances of impaired oxygen delivery to tissues and abnormalities or
disturbances of normal perfusion, resultant anaerobic metabolism produces lactate. Nor-
Tlo  u saea siaal ilou sz ui ssa ane sies pue sop e u sane [eu
reveal severe tissue hypoxia. During therapeutic resuscitation, serial measurements of lac-
tate can help evaluate the effectiveness of treatment. Monitoring blood lactate every 2 hours
after therapy is initiated can help determine the progress of treatment efforts. Once normal-
can signal problems in treatment. For severely compromised animals, lactate may rise after
the initial start of fluid therapy as improved tissue perfusion pushes lactate out of the poorly
perfused areas. This increase is only transient. As blood supply to compromised tissues
increases and fluid therapy continues, lactate values should normalize. A variety of toxins
may result in hypoperfusion, thus making lactate measurement an important marker.
Blood Glucose
Numerous toxins and toxin look-alike disease states can affect the blood glucose level. Glu-
cose levels can be rapidly, inexpensively, and accurately assessed by widely available com-
mercial glucometers. Such swift determination allows rapid initiation of therapy.
Blood Urea Nitrogen and Creatinine
A wide variety of toxins can damage the kidneys. This damage can result from a direct insult
to the renal tissues by the poison or indirectly through toxic byproducts of the metabolized
xenobiotic. Also, decreased renal perfusion can result from various intoxicants or any toxin
that causes shock, hypovolemia, or vascular collapse. Initial assessment of kidney measure-
ments reveals the presence of acute injury and can direct rapid therapy, but serial measure-
ments of blood urea nitrogen and creatinine should be taken when poisons are suspected
that may have delayed onset of action. Assessment of renal function is discussed in more
detail in the later section on urinalysis.
Calcium
Hypercalcemia is most commonly seen in patients with lymphosarcoma, hyperparathyroid-
ism, or a toxicosis caused by vitamin D-containing products. The calcium level should be
monitored to help determine whether a poison, neoplasia, or metabolic disease is involved.
Hypocalcemia can be seen in cases of ethylene glycol poisoning.
Urinalysis
Urinalysis is necessary in establishing a minimum database for poisonings. When blood
levels of toxins are too low to be detected, urine samples may still be revealing. Drugs with
rapid elimination or those that have large volumes of distribution can best be screened in
the urine. Both qualitative and quantitative methods of detection of toxicants are available
(Box 8-2). Antihistamines, phenothiazines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, sedative hyp-
notics, and tricyclic antidepressants are examples of such drugs. Urinalysis can confirm
the presence of crystals (e.g., calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals specific for ethylene
glycol toxicity), casts (which are the hallmark of acute proximal tubule damage and signal
Box 8-2
Urine Color Changes and Causative Agents
Dipyrone: brown-red
Doxorubicin: pink
Methemoglobin: brown-red
Naphthalene (mothballs): red
Propofol: green
Myoglobin: red
Anticoagulants: yellow-orange
Rhubarb: black-brown
Ibuprofen: pink-red
Carrots: yellow
Metronidazole: yellow-brown
Beets: red
Azulfidine: orange-yellow
Paprika: orange
Chapter 8 I Establishing a Minimum Database in Small Animal Poisonings 59
impending renal failure), blood, bilirubin, and hemoglobin. Urine production should also
be monitored to identify either oliguric or anuric states. If urine production falls precipi-
tously, aggressive fluid therapy for renal failure must be initiated. Techniques that use urine
specimens to detect toxins have a higher rate of positive findings for many substances com-
pared with analysis of blood or gastric contents.
Liver Enzymes
pected toxins. Because the liver is the site of metabolism of many molecules, these hepatic
measurements are sensitive to any injury suffered by the liver. Serial measurements should
be taken when there is a lag time in the metabolism of the suspected substance or when
damage to the liver may be ongoing. The animal must be monitored closely because damage
to the liver can lead to encephalopathy, coagulation deficits, and other signs of hepatic dis-
ease. Ultrasound and ultrasound-directed needle biopsy can be invaluable in determining
the extent of liver damage caused by toxicity.
Coagulation Panel
In small animal practice there are some substances (e.g., anticoagulant rodenticides)
that can profoundly alter coagulation. The onset of the actual internal bleeding may be
delayed, or bleeding into a body cavity may not be evident initially, so prolonged clotting
times may be the first abnormality discovered. A finding of this type should prompt the
veterinarian to undertake a more thorough evaluation to identify the cause. The test for
proteins induced by vitamin K absence or antagonism can be used to test for poisoning
with a vitamin K antagonist. Other tests that reveal the animal's capacity for coagulation
include the complete blood count and hematocrit, platelet count, prothrombin time, acti-
vated partial thromboplastin time, activated clotting time, fibrinogen levels, and fibrin and
fibrinogen degradation products. Prolonged clotting times can also occur with any sub-
or bluegreen algae.
Kits
For a few intoxications there are some rapid screening kits commercially available to prac-
titioners (ethylene glycol, a 10-minute test by Kacey Diagnostics; and RapidCheck Pro 5
for illicit drugs by Craig Medical). Ihese tests use blood or urine and can be helpful in
obtaining a diagnosis. Nevertheless, for the vast majority of intoxicants, no such quick test
exists and for all potentially toxic episodes, the diagnoses of poisoning must continue to be
based on evidence obtained from the history, observation of clinical signs, and informa-
tion obtained from relevant diagnostic tests. For some intoxications, samples can be sent
out to human hospitals and laboratories for definitive analysis; however, the clinician must
request screening for specific toxicants based upon a high index of suspicion.
Pulse Oximetry and Electrocardiography
The pulse oximeter is a powerful tool that provides information about hemoglobin oxy-
gen saturation in pulsating vessels. From these data, predictions can be made concern-
ing arterial oxygenation and whether supplemental oxygen should be administered. The
electrocardiogram can detect arrhythmias caused by toxins and abnormalities caused by
shock or hypoxemia. A list of toxins potentially causing arrhythmias is included in Box 8-1.
 Pulse oximetry and electrocardiography tell the clinician more about the actual state of the
animal, and this information can be used to initiate specific therapies to stabilize animals
in life-threatening crises. Pulse oximetry units and electrocardiography machines are non-
invasive, inexpensive, widely available, and invaluable in handling a variety of emergencies.
Radiographs
Radiographs of the chest and abdomen are useful in diagnosing aspiration pneumonia,
pulmonary edema, or the ingestion of radiopaque toxins. Opacities that show up on
60 SECTlON 1 Toxicologic Corkepts
Box 8-3
Radliopaque Toxins in Small Animals
Ammonium chloride
Iron
Antivert
Lead (fishing sinkers)
Aspirin (enteric-coated)
Mothballs
Bethanechol
Paradichlorobenzene (highly opaque)
Calcium carbonate
Naphthalene (faintly opaque)
Chloral hydrate
Multivitamins with iron
Compazine
Placidyl
Copper (coins)
 Potassium chloride
Crack vials
Sustained-release products
Drug packets
Thorazine
Elavil
Zinc (pennies)
radiographs include chloral hydrate, heavy metals such as zinc (e.g., pennies, toys, cage
pieces), lead, iodine, phenothiazines, and enteric-coated tablets (Box 8-3).
Chest radiographs may also supply clues to the source of the problem and should be
taken whenever pulmonary edema, aspiration pneumonia, or hypoxemia are suspected.
Toxins can cause respiratory complications, including toxic pneumonitis (e.g., metals,
phosphine gas, ammonia, smoke, nitrogen oxide), aspiration pneumonia secondary to
nary edema, and atelectasis. Radiographs should be taken only if the animal is stable and
will not be stressed excessively when the films are obtained.
usually develop more than 24 hours after exposure and initial films may be inaccurate in
predicting the extent of the damage. For this reason, for chest radiographs to be effective in
documenting the injury, serial radiographs must be taken over time for comparison.
Ultrasound
In the past decade, ultrasound has quietly come into its own as a supporting diagnostic
tool for some intoxications. In poisonings as diverse as ethylene glycol toxicity, potentially
caustic foreign bodies such as batteries, and the expansive “gorilla” glues, ultrasound can be
helpful in obtaining a diagnosis. In cases of tacrolimus ingestion, ultrasound can assist in
identifying the medication-induced intussusceptions. Additionally, the tremendous value
of ultrasound-directed needle biopsy in determining the extent of tissue damage caused by
a toxicity should not be underestimated. Undoubtedly, the future will reveal new uses for
ultrasound and other forms of imaging in the diagnoses of poisonings.
The Toxidrome Approach
paosiod au go uonineaa ai on yeoide a aireuns o ndane isu sueeuana
implicating the exact toxicologic cause of a condition. Becoming skilled and meticulous
observers can increase the likelihood of success of therapeutic intervention and also can
help determine when adjustments in the initial therapy may be required.
Clinicians must learn to recognize the most commonly occurring toxic syndromes. Practi-
tioners can readily learn to identify a pattern of changes suggestive of a particular drug or toxin
or group of drugs or toxins. A group of signs and symptoms that consistently result from par-
ticular toxins are known as foxidromes (from toxic syndromes). Some of the more commonly
seen toxidromes are listed in Table 8-1. It should be noted that actual clinical manifestations
of intoxications can be much more variable than the static list of signs included in a table in a
textbook. Clinical signs of poisoning can be full blown, partial, or nonexistent. The absence of
clinical signs or partial presentations does not automatically imply less severe conditions and as
a result are no less critical to diagnose. Some important typical toxins affecting respiratory rate,
body temperature, pulse, and blood pressure are listed in Table 8-1 and Boxes 8-1, 8-4 to 8-6.
Chapter 8 I Establishing a Minimum Database in Small Animal Poisonings 
61
Box 8-4
Commonly Seen Toxins
Box 8-5
Commonly Seen Toxins
Affecting Body Temperature
 Affecting Pulse
Hyperthermia (t)
Bradycardia (l)
Amphetamines
Antiarrhythmic drugs
Anticholinergics
α- and β-Adrenergic agonists
Antihistamines
Baclofen
Bromethalin
Calcium channel blockers
Cocaine
 Digitalis glycosides
Cyclic antidepressants
Opioids
Hops
Organophosphates
Metaldehyde
Carbamates
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Pentachlorophenol
Tachycardia (t)
Amphetamines
Phencyclidine
 Pyrethrins and pyrethroids
Antihistamines
Salicylates
Atropine
Anticholinergics
Thyroxine
Strychnine
Arsenic
Caffeine
Hypothermia (l)
Carbon monoxide
Carbon monoxide
Cyclic antidepressants
Ethanol
Ethanol
Ethylene glycol
Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine
Hypoglycemic agents
 Epinephrine
Macrolide antibiotics (e.g.
 Organophosphates and carbamates
ivermectin)
Phenothiazine
Opioids
Theophylline
Pyrethrins/pyrethroids
Thyroxine
Sedative hypnotic agents
BOX 8-6
Commonly Seen Toxins Affecting Blood Pressure
Hypotension (l)
Hypertension (↑)
α-Adrenergic antagonists
Amphetamines
Angiotensin-converting enzyme
Cocaine
inhibitors and antagonists
Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine
Antiarrhythmic drugs
Epinephrine
β-Adrenergic antagonists
Ergot alkaloids
Calcium channel blockers
Lead
Cyanide
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Cyclic antidepressants
Nicotine (early)
Ethanol
Phenylpropanolamine
Nitrates and nitrites
 Nitroprussides
Opioids
Organophosphates and carbamates
Phenothiazines
 Sedative hypnotic agents
Theophylline
62 SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Conclusions
Unfortunately for both veterinarians and poisoned animals, all too frequently the exact
identity of the toxic agent involved is unknown. As a result, small animal clinicians must
construct a minimum database to establish the condition of the animal and to gain clues
about the nature of the poison suspected. Indiscriminate use of antidotes or initiation of
specific therapy without confrmatory evidence should be avoided. However, as stated
before, supportive therapy should never be withheld while one is awaiting toxicology
test results. Support must be the basis of therapy for the animal that is thought to be
poisoned, and monitoring of vital signs, cardiac function, and blood oxygen saturation
is mandatory. Multisystemic monitoring in conjunction with blood and urine studies
should be undertaken, and appropriate supportive treatment should be promptly initi-
ated when any specific system disturbance is detected. It must be remembered that some
agents have a latent phase, and subsequent effects may have a delayed onset. Iherefore,
the patient must be observed for delayed pulmonary, hepatic, renal, and hematologic
manifestations of poisoning, and serial tests may have to be performed to monitor for
such effects.
 Finally, veterinarians must learn the capabilities of the laboratories they deal with and
the tests that are available, must understand what is detectable and what is not, and must
familiarize themselves with the nature and clinical signs of the most common intoxications
that are frequently seen in small animal practice. Once they have accomplished these goals,
the diagnosis can be made more effectively and the outcome of these poisoning cases will
be more rewarding.
Suggested Readings
Bronstein AE, Spyker DA, Contilena LR,et al: Annual Report ofthe American Association of Poison Centers
National Data System (NPDS): 27th Annual Report 2010, Clin Toxicol 48:979-1178, 2010.
Gfeller RW, Messonnier SP: Small animal toxicology, St Louis, 1977, Mosby.
Heliwell M, Hampel G, Sinclair E: Value of emergency toxicological investigations in differential diagnosis
of coma, Br Med J 2:819-821, 1979
Petrollini-Rogers E, McNally B: Initial management of acute intoxications. In Poppenga RH, Gwaltney-Brant
SM, editors: Small animal toxicology essentials, Ames, IA, 2011, John Wiley and Sons.
Osterloh ID: Laboratory diagnoses and drug screening. In Haddad LS, Shannon MW, Winchester JF, editors:
Clinical management of poisoning and drug overdose, Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
Osweiler ED: Toxicology, Baltimore, 1996, Williams & Wilkins.
Shannon MW, Haddad LS: The emerging management of poisoning. In Haddad LS, Shannon MW,
WinchesteJF,editors:Clinicalmaagementfpoisoning and drugverdosePhiladelphia199WB
Saunders.
Taylor RL, Cohen SL, White JD: Comprehensive toxicological screening in the emergency department an aid
to clinical diagnosis, Am J Emerg Med 3:507-511, 1985.
Teitelbaum DT, Morgan J, Gray G: Nonconcordance between clinical impression and laboratory findings in
clinical toxicology, Clin Toxicol 10:417-422, 1977.
Volans G, Willop G: Laboratory investigations in acute poisonings, Br Med J 289:426-428, 1984.
CHAPTER
[nitial Management of
9
the Poisoned Patient
Matthew Mellema, DVM, PhD, DACVECC
he 2010 Annual Report of the American Association of Poison Control Centers
(AAPCC) National Poison Data System (NPDS) notes that the NPDS logged 94,823
poison exposures in animal species in that year.' This report also demonstrates that animal
exposure calls to centers contributing to the NPDS have remained largely static in number
for the past decade. Although this information makes it quite clear that real or suspected
exposure of companion animals to poisons occurs, the report also highlights the large spe-
cies differences in the frequency of exposures. Ihe NPDS report makes clear that poison
exposure is reported or suspected far more commonly in dogs than in other species. Of the
94,823 exposures logged by the NPDS, more than 90% were in dogs and 8.4% in cats. No
other species made up even 0.3% of the reported exposures. Ihe 2010 report also indicates
that the vast majority of exposures occurs via ingestion (75%-90%), and dermal exposure
appears to be the next most common exposure route. Inhalational and ocular exposures
appear to be muchless common. Despite the preponderance of canine ingested-toxin expo-
sures, the small animal clinician needs to be prepared to handle intoxications in other com-
panion animal species and by other routes. Treatment of poisonings can be among the most
-eisa u aare sat auaa au aeid u sase uen isu a pe uema
ing both an organized approach and open, forthright communications with the owner.
 The aim of this chapter is to provide an overall approach to the acutely poisoned patient
in a manner similar to the approach taken to any critically ill patient. Decontamination,
general supportive care, antidote administration, and other related topics are covered else-
where in this text, but are mentioned herein when appropriate to highlight certain key
points.
Telephone Triage
The initial contact with the owner or caregiver of an animal is often via the telephone.
This initial telephone-based encounter is often termed telephone triage despite the techni-
cal meaning of triage, which is the process of evaluating groups of patients rather than a
single patient. Vital information that should be obtained early in the conversation is the
species, breed, age, and body weight of the animal. It is largely unknown whether gender
or intact or neutered status affects the pathophysiology of most poisonings, and this infor-
mation should be obtained as well. It is important to note whether the weight given is an
owner estimate or a known historical value. Owner estimates of weight differ from actual
weight by a considerable margin and this can affect the clinician's assessment of whether
a hazardous amount of an agent has been ingested. Historical information that should be
obtained early include the following: (1) whether this incidence represents a known, pos-
sible, or likely exposure; (2) estimated length of time since the exposure; (3) a summary
of any owner contact with poison control hotline personnel; and (4) the form, type, and
amount of potential toxicant.
It is impossible over the telephone to fully determine the condition of the animal, but it
is important to try to establish the level of consciousness and whether respiratory distress
63
64 SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
is present. Level of consciousness can be categorized by three levels. Obtunded means the
 animal has a blunted response to its environment. It may appear lethargic, drowsy, or gen-
erally disinterested in its surroundings. Owners will typically use the word “depressed" to
describe this state, although depression is a symptom, not a clinical sign, and is thus an
 inappropriate term in regard to veterinary patients. Stuporous mentation indicates that the
patient is only responsive to noxious stimuli. Such a patient may not respond to the owner's
voice, but may respond when pinched or jostled. Comatose patients are unresponsive to
all forms of stimuli. Additional components of altered mental states may include agitation,
aggression, inebriation, or fearful or hiding behavior.
If the time before arrival at the hospital will bring the total time elapsed since exposure
to more than an hour, it may be of benefit to have the owner induce emesis. Induction of
emesis should not be recommended if the animal is significantly mentally compromised, if
the level of consciousness cannot be determined, if respiratory distress is evident, or if pre-
disease). Induction of emesis is also contraindicated in animals that have ingested caustic
substances such as strong acids or alkalis. Owners of animals that have ingested alkali or
acid materials should be instructed to give the pet large amounts of water or milk to dilute
the material and proceed as quickly as possible to a veterinary hospital for further care.
tial emetics available in the home environment include syrup of ipecac, table salt, and 3%
au buei aq sisaa aonui oi ieadde apixonad uaopau pue ies 'apixaiad uasarpau
pharyngeal and gastric sensory neurons and altered afferent signaling by these neurons
stimulates central nervous system (CNS) neuron pools involved in emesis. Ihe use of table
salt is never recommended as it may lead to electrolyte and metabolic derangements that
are more life-threatening than the ingested toxin itself. One recent case report highlights
the risk of inducing emesis with table salt. In this report, a patient that had ingested a dose
 of chocolate that was unlikely to be toxic ultimately suffered severe complications arising
from massive salt ingestion.2 Hydrogen peroxide ingestion is also not without some degree
of risk as its use has been associated with a few cases of fatal air emboli and mucosal ero-
sions in humans.? There are indications that inducing mucosal erosions can occur in cats
following the use of hydrogen peroxide as an ermetic, albeit rare; apparently this is even
lad uoodseal I jo iapio aul uo ane apixoiad uaboipau jo sasop [esidi saop ui aiei arou
5 pounds of body weight (1 mL per pound) up to a maximum of 3tablespoons (9 teaspoons)
in the largest breeds of dog.
Syrup of ipecac is readily available over the counter despite markedly decreased usage in
human medicine. Ihe recommended oral dose is 1-2 mL (dogs) or 3.3 mL (cats) per pound
of body weight.4 Ipecac directly stimulates the gastric mucosal receptors and indirectly
stimulates the chemoreceptor trigger zone in the posterior medulla to stimulate emesis.
Although ipecac syrup has a high margin of safety, many adverse side effects of its use have
been reported, including prolonged vomiting and diarrhea, lethargy, fever, and irritability
along with isolated cases of gastric rupture, intracranial hemorrhage, and diaphragmatic
hernia in humans. Recently, the AAPCC has issued guidelines for the use of syrup of ipe-
cac for out-of-hospital poison ingestions in humans. Based on an exhaustive review of
concluded that the use of syrup of ipecac might have utility in rare settings such as the fol-
lowing: (1) there is no contraindication to the use of ipecac syrup, (2) there is substantial
risk of serious toxicity to the victim, (3) there is no alternative therapy available or effective
to decrease gastrointestinal absorption (e.g., activated charcoal), (4) there will be a delay of
s n () e   go s eo u  aq  d
administration will not adversely affect more definitive treatment that might be provided
 at a hospital. Such criteria are unlikely to be met in the vast majority of animal poisonings
and its routine use is not advised.
 If vomiting is induced, it should be in cases of witnessed toxin ingestion and should be
performed within 60 minutes of ingestion, and the gastric contents should always be saved
Chapter 9 | Initial Management of the Poisoned Patient 65
and brought to the hospital with the pet for visual and toxicologic examination. Although
it is often recommended to repeat the emetic in 15 minutes if no vomiting has occurred, it
 by that time. One should bear in mind that owners are often quite agitated during potential
poisonings of their pet and may be well served by the clinician making several common-
sense recommendations such as the following: (1) induce emesis in a location in which it
will be easy to collect and clean up the vomitus such as an outdoor patio or balcony or a
linoleum-floored area such as the kitchen or bathroom; (2) if no such area is available the
owners can lay down a bed sheet and have the animal restrained to that area until vomiting
occurs; and (3) line the crate or area of the car that will be used for transport with mate-
rial such as blankets, sheets, or towels to facilitate cleanup in case emesis occurs or persists
during transport.
If the animal is having seizures or muscle tremors, care should be taken to avoid trauma
Pmous saumo 'endsou ai on jodsuen aunp uaed an oi eunei-as no siaumo al o
be advised that a pet with an altered mental state, or one that is anxious or uncomfortable,
may bite or react unexpectedly and atypically. It should be emphasized that injury to them
will only delay effective treatment and they should take all prudent measures to reduce risk
in this regard. A heavy blanket can serve multiple roles in this setting, including aiding in
restraint and serving as a barrier to bite or scratch injury as well as helping to preserve body
heat in recumbent animals.
At the Veterinary Hospital
Management of an acute case of intoxication can be organized into five main areas as fol-
lows: (1) the ABCs of critically ill patient stabilization: air way, breathing, and circulation; (2)
gaining control of seizures, muscle tremors, or exsanguinating hemorrhage; (3) assessment
of medical and metabolic derangements and institution of a plan for their management; (4)
gastrointestinal decontamination; and (5) supportive care. The focus of this chapter will be
on the first three areas as both decontamination procedures and supportive care are covered
elsewhere in this text (see Chapters 10 and 1l, respectively). Although the frst three areas
are often addressed by the clinician simultaneously, for the sake of clarity they are discussed
sequentially herein.
On arrival at the veterinary hospital, an initial assessment of vital signs and the six
perfusion parameters (i.e., mentation; mucous membrane color; capillary refill time; heart
rate; pulse quality; and toe web, ear tip, or other peripheral site temperature). If signs of
ineffective breathing are present (e.g., apnea, stertor, stridor, hyperpnea with minimal air
flow, hypopnea, marked prolonged inspiration, or agonal breathing) then a patent airway
should be established with a cuffed endotracheal tube. Ventilation should be augmented
as needed with manual positive pressure breath delivery. Anticonvulsants should be
administered as necessary (see later in this chapter), and hydration, effective circulating
volume, and metabolic status should be assessed and addressed rapidly. Poisoned patients
may have severely altered homeostatic mechanisms and therefore may be hypothermic or
the toxicosis alone. In many cases, the sequelae of the intoxication may present a greater
threat to survival than the initial insult. For example, immediate life-threatening concerns
need to be addressed prior to moving forward with decontamination procedures despite
the undeniable importance of such.
The ABCs of Critical Patient Care
Airway
Any animal that is unconscious, appears to have neuromuscular paralysis or paresis, or is in
severe respiratory distress should be evaluated for the need for intubation. If there is no vol-
untary respiratory effort or if gastric lavage is planned, then intubation is strongly advised.
66SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Anesthesia is required for intubation if the animal is conscious. These patients may or may
not also require positive-pressure ventilation. A cuffed endotracheal tube of appropriate
size is placed, the cuff is inflated, and the tube is tied securely to the muzzle or around the
back of the skull depending on the patients' conformation. When possible, a blood sample
is collected for arterial blood gas determination to aid in the determination of the adequacy
 of alveolar ventilation and the need for oxygen supplementation. Apnea monitors, pulse
oximetry, and capnography may all be enlisted to aid in continuous, real-time evaluation of
these same parameters.
Breathing
Hypoventilation generally indicates a need for assisted ventilation. In the clinical set-
ting, hypoventilation is defined by the presence of hypercapnia (Pacoz > 45 mm Hg;
Pvcoz > 50-52 mm Hg in a hemodynamically stable patient if the sample is drawn from
a central vein). If assisted ventilation is contraindicated or is unavailable, a degree of
"permissive hypercapnia” may be well tolerated by the patient. Guidelines for permis-
sive hypercapnia state that a Pacoz > 50 mm Hg may be well tolerated if the pH remains
above 7.25 and cardiovascular function is adequate.6 Hypoventilation may be due to
reduced respiratory drive, excessive respiratory load, or reduced respiratory capacity
and thus may be central or peripheral in nature. Permissive hypercapnia is contraindi-
cated in patients with CNS disease or cerebral edema because the resultant acidosis and
cerebral vasodilation may lead to worse outcomes. Supplemental oxygen is advised to
avoid hypoxemia; however, hyperoxia (Pa0z > 300 mm Hg in particular) may also be
associated with worse neurologic outcomes in some settings.7
xo ans m ae a ous (aa s ie  u  > o) exo
as required to maintain Pa0z above 65 mm Hg. If continued increases in the inspired oxy-
gen concentration do not improve the Paoz or alleviate excessive respiratory effort needs,
then assisted ventilation is indicated. If the toxin was not inhaled (or is not known to cause
pulmonary pathologic conditions such as is seen with paraquat intoxication), then the
reasons for the hypoxemia should be investigated. Aspiration pneumonia and the pres-
ence of preexisting respiratory disease should both be considered, and a diagnostic work-
up performed when the patient is suitably stable. The management of patients requiring
mechanical ventilation for all but a few hours is complex and requires an organized team of
clinicians and technicians. Ihe interested reader is referred to several excellent recent book
chapters describing the approaches used at the author's practice.&,9
Circulation
Adequate oxygen delivery depends on the volume of blood in the vessels, the pumping
function of the heart, the functional integrity of the blood vessels, and the oxygen content of
the arterial blood. An early assessment of the electrocardiogram aids in the determination
of heart rate and the identification of the cardiac rhythm. Cardiac rhythm as well as pump
function may be affected by a wide area of toxins including oleander (Color Plate 26-2), fox-
glove, other related and unrelated cardiotoxic plant species, organophosphates, albuterol,
methylxanthines, and therapeutic drug overdoses. Many hydrocarbons and industrial
chemicals have arrhythmogenic properties as well.10
The vascular volume status of intoxicated patients varies greatly among individuals. The
presence of a deficit in interstitial or vascular volume or both depends on the nature of the
intoxication, how acute or severe the insult was, whether the animal has been taking in food
and water, whether the patient has been vomiting or having diarrhea, whether the toxin
induces a diuresis or increases capillary permeability, and the presence of preexisting medi-
cal conditions. As in any emergency situation, tachycardia, cold extremities, pale mucous
membranes, and slow capillary refill time indicate a vascular volume deficit and perhaps
hypovolemic (vasoconstrictive) shock. A patient with these signs should be resuscitated
quickly with isotonic crystalloid solutions (60-90 mL/kg body weight [BW] in dogs; 40-50
mL/kg BW in cats), colloid solutions (10-20 mL/kg BW in dogs; 5-10 mL/kg BW in cats), or
 a combination of these. If the poison was a vitamin K antagonist, the preferred fluid may
Chapter 9 | Initial Management of the Poisoned Patient 67
 be frozen plasma (with or without packed red blood cells) or whole blood depending on
availability and needs. In my practice the preferred fluid resuscitation plan for hypovolemic
patients secondary to vitamin K antagonist rodenticide poisoning is 10-20 mL/kg intrave-
nous (IV) of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) as a bolus over 20 minutes. Transfusion reactions
uu juaed aul ol Ysu iamol iej e juasandan pue aieu u Pu Aeiauag ane eseld ol
persistent hemorrhagic shock. Frozen plasma (as opposed to FFP) would serve just as well
but is not carried in my practice. One point must be made that may be of interest regarding
colloids. Although generally considered safe and effective volume expanders, there is grow-
ing concern that the current formulations of hetastarch may be themselves nephrotoxic to
a degree in some individuals.1l If such adverse effects are confirmed to be of importance in
veterinary species as well as humans, then they may represent an undue risk in the resus-
citation of poisoned patients, particularly those in whom a nephrotoxin is considered the
most likelyagent.
 Interstitial deficits are identified by decreased skin turgor, dry or tacky mucous mem-
branes, sunken eyes, and abrupt decreases in body weight. The serum sodium concentra-
tion may be high if the patient has had free water losses in excess of solute losses or if table
salt has been given as an emetic. Conversely, the serum sodium may be low if the patient
has had losses of solute and water via vomiting, diarrhea, or polyuria, but has continued
to take in oral water. The percentage of deficit should be estimated and the deficit volume
calculated by multiplying the percent deficit by the lean body weight. The deficit can safely
be replaced over 24 hours, but I see no advantage to taking more than 4 hours in most cases.
In any patient whose cardiovascular system can handle the volume over 4 hours, there
seems to be no benefit to allowing the patient to remain dehydrated for a longer period.
All but patients with oligoanuric kidney disease, severe sodium abnormalities, or advanced
heart disease should well tolerate a 4-hour rehydration approach. An isotonic crystalloid is
the appropriate fluid choice to replace extracellular fluid deficits. Maintenance needs and
abnormal ongoing losses should also be accounted for in the fluid plan and an isotonic
or hypotonic crystalloid serves most patients in this regard. Active diuresis and enhanced
 renal blood flow may be achieved by providing IV fluids in excess of patient needs. Such a
strategy may be employed to enhance toxin elimination or reduce adverse effects of toxins
(e.g., nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs) or both. Depending on the nature of the toxin,
serial evaluation of urine volume and character may be indicated.
If fluid therapy alone does not restore adequate circulatory performance, the heart
may be unable to establish adequate cardiac output because of toxin-induced cardiac
compromise (heart rate, contractility, diastolic function, or some combination of fac-
tors). Inotropic agents may be justified in this setting if adequate monitoring is available.
Continuous electrocardiography is always indicated in this setting. Dobutamine may be
delivered as a continuous IV infusion at 5-20 mcg/kg/min. Dopamine is an effective first-
line vasopressor at an initial dose of 2-10 mcg/kg/min titrated to effect. Higher doses may
lead to tachycardia, tachyarrhythmias, and vasoconstriction with no further improvement
in cardiovascular performance. Epinephrine may be used if dopamine is unsuccessfully
used to address hypotension. Epinephrine is a potent alpha and beta agonist that may
increase both cardiac output and systemic vascular resistance (two main determinants
of arterial blood pressure). As with dopamine, higher doses may lead to tachycardia,
tachyarrhythmias, and vasoconstriction with no further improvement in cardiovascular
 performance. In addition, the use of high-dose epinephrine may predispose patients to
rine is an alternative therapy and is a potent vasoconstrictor. Perfusion to the periphery
and the viscera may be compromised while preserving flow to the heart and brain. Infu-
sion doses in the range of 0.05-2 mcg/kg/min are commonly used. It must be noted that all
of these sympathomimetic agents may be contraindicated in some poisoned patients even
if hypotension is present. In a patient intoxicated with methylxanthines (e.g., theobromine
or caffeine), the use of sympathomimetics likely represents an unacceptable risk for the
development of severe cardiac arrhythmias, regardless of hypotension. In this setting, the
use of alternative agents such as vasopressin may be preferred.
68SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Toxins may affect the vasculature either by direct effects on endothelium and vascu-
 lar smooth muscle cells or indirectly by altering levels of circulating mediators and auto-
nomic tone. Vascular endothelium is exposed to any blood-borne toxin, and accumulation
 of toxin in endothelial cells can occur. Toxins can also induce the release of inflammatory
mediators from activated cells and these mediators can profoundly influence vasomotor
tone. Widespread cellular injury and activation can lead to initiation of multiple inflamma-
tory and other homeostatic cascades and induce systemic inflammatory responses. In this
setting the management of arterial blood pressure becomes challenging and maintaining a
mean arterial blood pressure of more than 60 mm Hg should remain a goal. Even in settings
 of markedly abnormal vasomotor tone the augmentation of blood volume remains a pri-
mary means of blood pressure support. When hypotension persists in the face of adequate
volume loading, systemic administration of vasoactive agents becomes necessary.
Hypertension may also develop in the poisoned patient. If blood pressure is found to
 be markedly elevated (mean arterial pressure greater than 140 mm Hg) and the patient is
volume replete, then vasodilatory agents may be required to reduce systemic vascular resis-
tance and restore adequate blood flow to tissues and ameliorate end-organ damage. Agents
such as hydralazine, amlodipine, or nitroprusside are commonly used for this purpose. Ihe
use of these agents is best reserved for patients that have adequate myocardial function
in blood pressure than desired. Hydralazine is primarily an arteriolar vasodilator that is
thought to act via a reduction in cytosolic calcium levels. It may be administered by enteral
or parenteral routes at doses ranging from 0.5-3.0 mg/kg every 8-12 hours. Onset of action
[as rg saia ai ae siaa an mq 'saiu oe-ot  mois eas si
hours. Heart rate may increase and should be monitored. Reflex increases in heart rate
may limit the degree to which blood pressure is reduced and concurrent use of β-blockers
may be required in rare instances. Amlodipine is a calcium channel blocker with effects
 largely limited to the vasculature rather than the myocardium or other sites. Doses range
from 0.625 mg/cat once daily (increase if needed to 1.25 mg/cat) to 0.1 mg/kg PO q24h for
dogs. The onset of action is relatively slow. Nitroprusside is a venous and arteriolar vaso-
dilator. It is given as an IV infusion and its onset of action is nearly immediate. The dosage
of nitroprusside is 0.5-1.0 mcg/kg/min. This drug should be used cautiously in patients
with renal or hepatic disease. The metabolites of nitroprusside include cyanide-containing
compounds and I have witnessed iatrogenically created clinically relevant cyanide toxicity
in at least three patients with reduced renal function (i.e., hypertensive dialysis-dependent
acute kidney injury patients) when this agent was used in that setting. Administration of
any vasoactive agent requires close monitoring of the electrocardiogram, blood pressure,
and intravascular volume status. Ihese drugs are all potentially arrhythmogenic and can
dangerously alter arterial blood pressure when used incautiously. Their use warrants inten-
sivemonitoring.
The oxygen-carrying capability of the blood is affected by several toxins. The blood oxy-
gen content is a sum of the oxygen bound to hemoglobin and that dissolved in the plasma.
Toxins may cause reduced oxygen carrying capacity by creating a true or functional anemia.
A true anemia may be the result of red blood cell loss (e.g., anticoagulant rodenticides)
or chronic bone marrow suppression (e.g., many chemotherapeutic agents). A functional
anemia can arise when there is an adequate amount of hemoglobin present, but it is in a
form unable to adequately bind oxygen (e.g., carbon monoxide and acetaminophen). When
true anemia is present the only effective therapy is to either increase bone marrow output
or provide increased red cell mass via transfusions. The treatment of functional anemia
caused by agents such as carbon monoxide or acetaminophen is discussed elsewhere in this
text (see Chapters 32 and 39). The short-term administration of supplemental oxygen is
to increase hemoglobin saturation, increase dissolved plasma oxygen concentrations to a
limited degree, and enhance elimination of some toxins such as carbon monoxide.
Parameters such as heart rate, mucous membrane color, distal extremity temperature,
and mentation should be monitored, along with clinical laboratory parameters to aid in
Chapter 9 I Initial Management of the Poisoned Patient 69
adjustment of the fluid plan as the patient's condition changes. Urine output is an impor-
tant indicator of renal perfusion and blood pressure adequacy. Monitoring urine output
accurately requires placement of a urethral catheter and a closed collection system. A urine
output of less than 1 mL/kg/hr suggests a vascular volume deficit, hypotension, or a reduc-
 tion in renal function, and should be evaluated and treated promptly.
Controlling Seizures and Muscle Tremors
Many toxins can lead to seizures, muscle tremors, or both (e.g., metaldehyde). The two may
be distinguished by determining whether the patient is conscious. Generalized seizures are
associated with an unconscious mental state, whereas muscle tremors are not inherently
associated with unconsciousness. Both of these clinical signs must be distinguished from
shivering, which generally occurs during the inspiratory phase of respiration alone. Anti-
convulsants and muscle relaxants may be required to control seizures and tremors. Initially,
IV administration of diazepam is indicated to control seizure activity (dose: 0.5 mg/kg).
However, interruptions in the supply of benzodiazepines are frequent in the United States
at present and the well-prepared veterinary hospital will have alternatives such as injectable
levetiracetam or barbiturates in stock. Repeated administration of diazepam or conversion
to a continuous infusion of benzodiazepines approach may be required if seizure activity
persists. Pentobarbital (if available) may be used at 2 to 15 mg/kg IV to effect or as a con-
 d a azasae a qd  a a  g e uisnu ae j
so, intubation is indicated. Propofol can also control gross motor activity during seizures,
but without electroencephalography the clinician cannot other wise be certain that cortical
activity is being adequately suppressed. Blood gases, capnography, and pulse oximetry are
all indicated for the monitoring of the patient in this setting. If high doses of barbiturates
are required for seizure control, respiratory drive may be sufficiently suppressed to warrant
mechanical ventilation. Rapidly deteriorating mental status, newly developed anisocoria, or
depression of brainstem reflex responses all may be an indication of an elevation of intra-
cranial pressure. Mannitol infusion at 0.5-1 mg/kg over 10-20 minutes is indicated to reduce
neuronal volume and reduce intracranial pressure in this circumstance.
      o e  od  
bined with an additional muscle relaxant, or barbiturate anesthesia to control tremor
activity. Methocarbamol is a centrally acting muscle relaxant. It is a CNS depressant and
can itself cause salivation, emesis, ataxia, and sedation, making it difficult to assess these
monitoring parameters. The manufacturer's recommended dose in dogs and cats is 44-220
mg/kg IV, generally not to exceed 330 mg/kg/day.
 In seizing and tremoring patients, hyperthermia can be a significant clinical concern.
Body temperatures exceeding 106° F are not uncommon in this setting. The high tempera-
ture need not be treated per se as it will come down when the excessive muscle activity
ceases. Sedatives, anesthetics, and muscle relaxants may cause the body temperature to
drop quickly and steeply, resulting in hypothermia. Monitoring for temperature fluctua-
tions and heating or cooling as necessary is very important. Rectal temperature probes can
be placed for continuous monitoring.
Assessment of Metabolic Status
The availability of inexpensive, rapid tests for blood chemistry and blood gases has made
themselves and the secondary consequences of their ingestion (e.g., vomiting, diarrhea,
seizures, and tremors) can induce varied derangements in acid-base and electrolyte values
as well as azotemia, and, in some cases, specific organ failure. Mild metabolic acidosis or
alkalosis can often be corrected by instituting fluid therapy and treating the underlying
disease. For instance, the metabolic acidosis present in seizing or tremoring patients is in
large part the result of increased lactic acid production as a result of mismatch of oxygen
demand and delivery in the skeletal muscles. Lactic acid quickly resolves once the excessive
70 SECTION 1 ToxicologicConcepts
muscle activity is controlled. Mild changes in bicarbonate and pH usually resolve with fluid
therapy and treatment of the underlying disease.
Metabolic acidosis with a pH level less than 7.2 or a base excess more negative than -8
may on rare occasion require treatment with sodium bicarbonate infusion. Although there
are formulas for calculating bicarbonate dose, my preferred approach is to infuse 1, 3, or
5 mEq/kg of bicarbonate over 30 minutes for mild, moderate, or severe acidenmia, respec-
tively. The serum bicarbonate concentration, pH, and Pcoz are rechecked after adminis-
tration of this dose, and treatment is repeated as necessary. It important to note that in
hypoventilating patients the administration of bicarbonate will result in increased CO2
production and CO, accumulation in the cellular compartment. Thus the administration of
bicarbonate to hypoventilating patients ultimately may just shift an extracelular acid load
to the intracellular compartment, which is not desirable.
 Respiratory acidosis is a result of hypoventilation and can occur in the acutely poisoned
patient either as a result of the direct effects of the toxin on the neuromuscular axis or, as
discussed earlier, because of the medications used to control seizure activity and tremors.
Respiratory acidosis is identifed when the Pacoz is greater than 45 mm Hg. The patient
may or may not be concurrently acidemic (low pH) depending on metabolic (nonrespira-
tory) factors. Respiratory acidosis is the result of alveolar ventilation that is inadequate
to keep up the carbon dioxide production. Ihe most (if not only) effective treatment is
to increase alveolar ventilation. This may be achieved by reducing respiratory load (e.g.,
alleviating or bypassing airway obstructions), increasing respiratory drive (e.g., reducing or
discontinuing respiratory depressants), or supplementing respiratory capacity with positive
pressure ventilation.
Metabolic alkalosis in the poisoned patient is usually a result of excessive losses of
chloride ion via gastrointestinal losses. Treating the underlying cause, administering
chloride-rich IV fluids, and controlling the underlying disease are usually suffcient to
address metabolic alkalosis in this setting. Normal (0.9%) saline may be the preferred fluid
type because of its high chloride concentration and acidifying effects. It is rare that meta-
bolic alkalosis requires treatment beyond these interventions in small animal practice.
Respiratory alkalosis is a result of hyperventilation (Pacoz < 35 mm Hg). It usually
results from disorders that cause hypoxemia or stimulate the respiratory center (e.g.,
ventilation as well and should prompt an adjustment of the settings. Generally, the identi-
fication and treatment of the underlying disorder is sufficient.
Other Metabolic Parameters
I is sometimes useful to calculate the osmolality in an acutely poisoned patient and compare
it to the measured value (i.e., the osmolar gap). If the osmolar gap exceeds 15 mosm/kg, the
presence of an unmeasured osmole in excessive amounts should be expected. The osmo-
lar gap can be an important tool for detecting the presence of toxins or their metabolites
that might otherwise have been missed. Ethylene glycol and its metabolites are important
a e  asd a u paa a s aase a as asm sn
osmolar gap in an acutely ill patient. There are more than 20 published forrmulas for the
Osmolality = 2(Na + K) + Glucose/18 + blood urea nitrogen/2.8
H should be noted that the evidence establishing the “normal" osmolar gap in dogs is
extremely limited and nearly nonexistent in cats. The early acquisition of chemistry panel
results can be important inthe acutely ill patient for many reasons, including obtaining pre.
cise values for glucose and blood urea nitrogen so that the osmolar gap may be determined.
 Blood glucose, calcium, sodium, potassium, and chloride concentrations can all be
altered by various poisons. In the case of specific toxins or overdoses, such as calcium chan-
nel blockers, digoxin, and vitamin D-based products, the alterations in these chemical mea-
surements are caused directly by the toxins' effects. In other cases, these abnormalities are
Chapter 9 | Initial Management of the Poisoned Patient  71
a result of the body's response to the disease process (e.g., profuse vomiting). For instance,
hypoglycermia may develop with prolonged seizures because of depletion of extracellular
carbohydrate sources. Although hypoglycemia, hypercalcemia, and hypocalcemia must be
 drawal or elimination of the agent, and restoration of adequate circulation that will provide
long-term improvement.
Summary
Poisonings are a frequent cause of acute illness in dogs and cats. Ihe vast majority involve
assessment, but cannot replace the crucial step of physical examination of the patient.
 Inducing emesis prior to hospital arrival may be indicated in some cases. On hospital
arrival, the approach to the acutely poisoned patient differs little from the approach to any
other type of acutely injured or ill small animal patient. An organized, thorough approach
emphasizing the ABCs of emergency medicine is likely to achieve optimal outcomes com-
pared with other approaches.
Acknowledgments
I consider it a great honor to step in to update this chapter as a proxy for Doctors Drellich
and Aldrich (first and second editions). Janet Aldrich is a gifted emergency clinician who
developed the emergency medicine service at the University of California-Davis School
of Veterinary Medicine and founded the residency program in Small Animal Emergency
and Critical Care at that institution. She served as a mentor to both me and Dr. Sharon
Drellich while we were residents there many years ago. She is enjoying her richly deserved
retirement. Sharon Drellich was a skilled clinician and beloved friend who was taken from
us far too early and is dearly missed by all who knew her. Although I have taken over the
writing duties at present, this chapter will always belong to them, and every attempt has
been made to write it as I feel they would have.
References
1. Bronstein AC, Spyker DA, et al 2010 Annual Report of the American Association of Poison Control
2. Pouzot C, Descone-Junot C, et al: Successful treatment of severe salt intoxication in a dog, J Vet Emer
Crit Care 17:3, 2007.
3. Henry MC, Wheeler J,et al: Hydrogen peroxide 3% exposures, I Toxicol Clin Toxicol 34:3, 1996.
4. DeClementi C: Prevention and treatment of poisoning. In Gupta CG, editor: Veterinary toxicology, San
Diego, 2007, Academic Press-Elsevier.
5. Manoguerra AS, Cobaugh DJ: Guideline on the use of ipecac syrup in the out-of-hospital management
of ingested poisons, Clin Toxicol (Phila) 43:1, 2005.
6. Ijland MM,Heunks LM,et al Bench-to-bedside review: hypercapnic acidosis in lung injury—from “per-
missive′to “therapeutic,” Crit Care 14:6, 2010.
 7. Kilgannon IH, Jones AE, et al: Relationship between supranormal oxygen tension and outcome after
resuscitation from cardiac arrest, Circulation 123:23, 2011.
8. Hopper K: Basic mechanical ventilation. In Silverstein DC, Hopper K, editors: Small animal critical care
medicine, St Louis, 2009, Saunders Elsevier.
9. Hopper K: Advanced mechanical ventilation In Silverstein DC, Hopper K,editors: Smallanimal critical
care medicine, St Louis, 2009, Saunders Elsevier.
10. Ramos RH, Chacon E, Acosta D: Toxic responses of the heart and vascular systems. In Klaassen CD,
editor: Casarett e Doulls toxicology: the basic science of poisons, New York, 1996, McGraw-Hill.
see-au e nu au ae pue ss soud e as raouazua  ue l
of randomized trials, Crit Care 14:5, 2010.
CHAPTER
Toxicologic
10
Decontamination
Michael E. Peterson, DVM, MS
his chapter explores multiple decontamination procedures. Other chapters in this text
cover the use of specific antidotes, supportive care, and emergency management of
the poisoned patient. Owners and staff should be advised to protect themselves from toxic
exposure when decontaminating a patient; this principle is particularly true with dermal
toxins and toxins that are easily volatilized. An important rule in toxicologic decontamina-
tion is not to contaminate the decontaminators. The aim of successful decontamination is
to inhibit or cease further toxin absorption and enhance elimination from the body.
Ocular Decontamination
Contaminated eyes should be flushed with copious quantities of water or physiologic saline.
The eyes should be flushed for a minimum of 15 minutes; often multiple flushings are
before flushing. As a first-aid measure, owners should be advised to flush contaminated
eyes at least 15 minutes before transporting the patient to the veterinary facility for cormplete
Evaluation and specific medical intervention.
Dermal Decontamination
 As already mentioned, it is paramount for the veterinarian and paraprofessional staff to protect
themselves from dermalexposure when transporting or decontaminating the dermally exposed
patient. Rubber gloves and aprons should be used by the attending staff Toxic dermal exposures
allow both transdermal absorption and oral exposure ifthe patient tries to clean itselfby licking.
Long-haired patients may benefit from having the hair clipped before cleaning the skin.
may be required. Oily substances can often be removed with commercial hand-cleaning
degreaser compounds, such as Gojo or Goop. These compounds themselves may be toxic
if ingested and should be removed by washing with warm water and soap. Hypothermia
is possible, and the patient's overall physical status should be continually evaluated while
decontamination procedures are ongoing.
Special care is necessary when decontaminating acid and caustic burns. Toxin-exposed
skin should be copiously flushed with tepid water. The damaged tissue is easily traumatized,
and extreme care should be taken not to add mechanical injury to the wound when remov-
ing the toxin from the skin.
Gastrointestinal Decontamination
Emesis
 The effectiveness of vomiting and the percentage of the gastric contents recovered depend
on several factors. These factors include the physical properties of the toxin ingested, the
73
74 SECTloN 1 Toxicologic Concepts
time elapsed from toxin ingestion to induction of emesis, the volume of gastric contents
 and the emetic agent used.
 Emesis is contraindicated when the risk of aspirating vomitus is great. Ihis includes
situations in which the patient is stuporous, neurologically depressed, or unconscious or
at risk of becoming so before the emetic can work. Additionally, if the animal is having
seizures or is at serious risk of a seizure before the emetic works, the risk of aspiration is
increased. No emetic should be employed when oil, gasoline, or other petroleum distillates
(e.g., volatile compounds) have been ingested. Emesis is contraindicated if vomiting will
caustic or corrosive compounds.
Studies have indicated that the more rapidly emesis is induced, the greater the percent-
Aiaosan uxon wuxeu au 'sop u Apns ao ul p'shuatuos ssea jo Aiaosan jo ane
reported was 75% (range, 9% to 75%) with a mean recovery of 49% when emesis was
induced within 11 to 30 minutes after toxin ingestion. Generally, gastric recovery in dogs
ranges from 17% to 62% if emesis is induced within 60 minutes after toxin ingestion.1-4 In
humans, mean toxin recovery achieved by emesis induction ranged from 21% to 60% .5.6
 In all these studies, the emetic was administered within 60 minutes after toxin ingestion.
Emesis has been successful in removing toxins when it is administered longer than
1 hour postingestion; however, it should be stressed that the volume recovered decreases
generally of little value.
The usefulness of emetics also depends on the toxic corpound ingested. If the toxin has
strong antiemetic activity, emetics may be ineffective. As a general rule, if a specific emetic
fails to induce vomiting after two doses, it will not be effective. For example, apomorphine,
a potent emetic, works by stimulating the chemoreceptor trigger zone in dogs. However, it
also directly depresses the emetic center, so if the initial dose fails to induce emesis, subse-
quent doses are not likely to be effective. Additionally, emetics themselves can be toxic if
normal dosages are exceeded.
Emetics are usually classified into two groups—those used by the owner at home as a
form of first aid and those used by the veterinarian in the medical facility. Home-use emet-
and table salt (NaCl). Veterinary emetics include apomorphine, xylazine, and several other
less commonly used compounds in cats (e.g., dexmedetomidine, cefazolin, hydromor-
phone, and midazolam).
I do not routinely advise home induction of emesis. Often the time spent by the owner
finding the emetic and then catching and trying to dose the animal usually consumes
more time than it would take to drive promptly to the veterinary facility. Generally, home-
administered emetics usually succeed only in delaying prompt medical evaluation and
specific therapeutic intervention. Additionally, home emetics may not be as successful as
clinically available compounds. Owners often miscalculate the weight of the animal and
al auaisue pue asop au uos ui aissne coi no aaissed coi aa aq ue
compound. The toxin ingested may cause mental depression before the home-administered
emetic takes effect, leaving the patient with no air way protection. Ihe risk of aspiration and
other secondary side effects of available home emetics is significant. Generally, most owners
can transport the animal to a veterinary facility within 30 to 45 minutes. Often the best first
aid is rapid transport of the patient and toxin container to the nearest veterinary facility,
where prompt induction of emesis is possible.
Home-Use Emetics
7%Syrup of Ipecac
Syrup of ipecac is derived from the dried root of Cephaelis ipecacuanha, which is indig-
enous to South America. The active alkaloids are emetine and cephaeline. This product
should not be confused with ipecac fluid extract, which is 14 times stronger. Outdated
products can be used, but may be less effective. The mechanism involved is direct gastric
Chapter 10 |Toxicologic Decontamination  75
2 mL/kg orally (PO); the dosage for cats is 3.3 mL/kg. Some recommend that the cumulative
dosage should not exceed 15 mL in either species. The dose can be repeated once. Effective
vomiting should result within 10 to 30 minutes, although it can be delayed for up to 1hour.
 Problems with syrup of ipecac include diffculty in administering the compound to con-
scious patients because of its bitter taste, which is particularly repugnant to cats. Also, a
lack of effectiveness in inducing emesis in 50% of small animal patients has been observed.
Additionally, if the patient fails to vomit, the ipecac should be removed from the stomach by
lavage because of its potential cardiotoxic arrhythmia-inducing action. In humans the most
common complications related to ipecac administration are diarrhea, lethargy, depression,
and prolonged vomiting. The use of the emetic is not routinely recommended.
3% Hydrogen Peroxide
Hydrogen peroxide is most effective if it is administered after a small meal. Recommended
dosage in dogs and cats is 1 to 5 mL/kg PO (alternatively, 1 mL per pound), generally not to
exceed 50 mL for dogs (although many veterinarians exceed this total dose with negligible
complications reported) or 10 mL for cats. The mechanism of action is believed to be gastric
iritation. There are no significant risks from HzO ingestion; however, there have been recent
concerns regarding the use of this in cats inducing a hemorrhagic gastritis. Because of this,
some toxicologists do not recommend the use of hydrogen peroxide as an emetic in cats; and
if it is used, it is not recommended to repeat the dose. This risk, albeit low, appears to be even
lower in dogs. However, the owner should be careful to prevent the patient from aspirating
the hydrogen peroxide when it is being administered If it is successful, 3% hydrogen peroxide
usually induces emesis within 10 minutes. Ifit is unsuccessful,the dose can be repeated in dogs.
Sodium Chloride (Table Salt)
The recommended dosage in dogs and cats is 1to 3 tsp PO. Sodium chloride acts as a direct
gastric irritant. It usually induces emesis within 10 to 15 minutes. Several negative sequelae
are possible with administration of sodium chloride, including hypernatremia, particularly
in young animals, if emesis is not induced. Additionally, hematemesis can occur. In chil-
dren oral sodium chloride administration has produced hypernatremia, cerebral edema,
and convulsions. If emesis induction is unsuccessful,lavage should be considered to remove
the excess salt. If emesis is successful, water should be available as needed. The use of table
salt as an emetic in companion animals is actively discouraged because of the potential for
inducing more harm than good.
Liquid Dishwashing Detergent (e.g., Palmolive, Dove, Ivory)
The recommended oral dosage in dogs and cats is 10 mL/kg body weight of a mixture of
3 tbsp detergent to 8 oz of water. Vomiting usually results within 20 minutes after admin-
istration. Detergents containing phosphate are most effective. Ihe mechanism of action is
primarily gastric irritation. In one human trial, liquid dishwashing detergent appeared to
be safe, and emesis was initiated in 83% of patients compared with 97% of controls given
ipecac.7 The effectiveness of liquid detergent in the veterinary population has not been fully
elucidated. These detergents should not be confused with caustic detergents, such as electric
 dishwasher soap or laundry detergent, which are alkaline and are extremely caustic and
Veterinary Emetics
One advantage of "veterinary emetics" is the possibility of using them in conjunction with
activated charcoal. Once emesis has been induced, the emetic can be readministered after
the patient has received a dose of activated charcoal.
Apomorphine (6.25-Mg Tablets)
phine is generally the emetic of choice in dogs because of its rapid onset and the ability to
76SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
reverse its action. Apomorphine is given at a dose of 0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg intravenous (IV)
or intramuscular (IM). It can also be administered by placing it directly behind the eyelid
in the subconjunctival sac. Diluting the pill with sterile water minimizes ocular irritation.
Apomorphine solutions are not stable and must be made fresh before each administration.
Vomiting usually ensues within 4 to 6 minutes. When used conjunctivally, the eye should be
flushed copiously once vomiting occurs. Apomorphine can be used in cats but at the lower
end of the dosage; however, it appears that apomorphine is much less efficacious in induc-
ing emesis in cats (10% effective by one report) as compared with dogs. Adverse side effects
administered subcutaneously often has a delayed onset of action, and the duration of action
may be prolonged.
Apomorphine can induce central nervous system (CNS) excitability in patients intoxi-
cated with snail bait (metaldehyde), and its use in these patients is not recommended. Apo-
morphine may also be contraindicated when further CNS depression will significantly alter
the patient's condition. Rare adverse side effects include CNS and respiratory depression,
excessive vomiting, and occasionally CNS stimulation. "Morphine mania" is also an adverse
Event that may occur in cats.
Xylazine
Xylazine can be used as an emetic in cats with limited effectiveness (approximately 60%
effective by one report) at a dosage of 0.44 to 1 mg/kg IM or subcutaneous (SC). Xyla-
zine has centrally acting az-agonist activity. If effective, this drug usually induces vom-
fing within 10 minutes. A potential adverse effect of xylazine is respiratory depression.
The activity of this drug can be reversed with yohimbine, an az-antagonist, at a dosage of
0.1 mg/kg IV in both dogs and cats.
Others
I is generally noticed by many veterinarians that inducing vomiting in cats can be a chal-
lenge. Some clinicians have suggested the use of cefazolin (300 mg fast IV) or a combination
of hydromorphone and midazolam (0.05 mg/kg + 0.2 mg/kg, respectively) as emetics for
cats. One drug that seems to be emerging as an effective emetic in cats is dexmedetomidine,
(e.g., 1-2 mcg/kg IV; 40 mcg/kg IM), and the sedative effects can be successfully reversed
with atipamezole.
Gastric Lavage
The purpose of gastric lavage is to remove ingested toxins from the stomach by irrigation.
The procedure may be indicated if emesis induction is ineffective or contraindicated. The
 patient must be unconscious or lightly anesthetized, placed in right lateral recumbency. A
cuffed endotracheal tube must be in place. A large stomach tube is passed into the stomach
no farther caudal than the xiphoid process. The patient is placed in an inclined position
with the head down at approximately a 20-degree angle. If the patient is tilted at too great
Water or physiologic saline is then instilled by gravity flow at a volume of 10 mL/kg body
weight. Physiologic saline is the lavage fluid of choice in smaller patients, which are more
prone to fluid and electrolyte abnormalities. Care should be taken to prevent overdisten-
tion of the stomach. The degree of gastric distention can be felt by placing a hand on the
abdomen. Lavage fluid should be warm to slow gastric emptying and prevent hypothermia
of the patient. Manual agitation of the stomach is performed while the lavage fluid is aspi-
rated, and the procedure is repeated until the recovered lavage fluid is clear. Often a bilge or
stomach pump is employed to churn the stomach contents and aid in recovering the lavage
(sas a o oi st uago) paai aensn ae p ae yo sunue so 
and the practitioner should be prepared for disposal of the same volume. The fluid initially
recovered should be saved for toxicologic examination. An activated charcoal suspension
can be instilled before the stomach tube is kinked and removed.
Chapter 10 | Toxicologic Decontamination 77
further absorption of the toxin. Removal of the toxin-charcoal complex becomes the goal
of gastric lavage. Additional activated charcoal is then instilled after the lavage procedure
has been completed.
Several studies of lavage have been performed in animals, and none has demon-
strated substantial drug recovery, particularly if the procedure was delayed for more
than 60 minutes after ingestion of the toxin.1-3 When lavage was performed within 15 to
20 minutes of toxin ingestion, the mean recoveries were 38% and 29%, respectively. If
lavage was delayed until 60 minutes after ingestion of the marker, the mean recoveries
were 13% and 8.6%. In the majority of poisoned patients that present to the veterinary
the mechanics of seting up a lavage procedure are performed and lavage is started, this
tion procedure is questionable.
H seems prudent to enmploy this technique if the ingested material is chunky, and large
fragments of material can be expected to be recovered. However, chunky material larger
than the diameter of the stomach tube will obviously not be retrieved. Additionally, lavage
may be more effective in combating ingestions of toxins that delay gastric ermptying, such as
salicylates, anticholinergics, and cyclic antidepressants. Concretions may not be recovered.
Other examples of anticipated poor recovery are toxins similar to iron tablets, which may
adhere to the gastric lining, or large amounts of chocolate, which may melt into a significant
ball of material that is difficult to retrieve.
The major complications of gastric lavage are aspiration pneumonia, laryngospasm,
hypoxia, hypercapnia, fluid and electrolyte imbalances, and mechanical injury to the throat,
esophagus, and stomach. Gastric lavage is contraindicated in patients with an unprotected
airway, with ingestions of substances that carry a high risk of aspiration (e.g.,hydrocarbons)
tion that increases the risk of hemorrhage or gastric perforation, and in patients that are
postsurgical or have medical conditions that may be compromised by the lavage procedure.
Another version of this technique is enterogastric lavage. This entails gastric lavage com-
 tracheal tube and then instilling an enema solution until it passes from the stomach tube.
Whole-Bowel Irrigation
In whole-bowel irrigation ( WBI), the gastrointestinal tract is cleaned by the enteral admin-
istration of large volumes of osmotically balanced polyethylene glycol electrolyte solution
(PEG-ES) until a clear liquid stool is achieved. The goal is to physically remove the intralu-
minal contents of the gastrointestinal tract. The concentration of electrolytes and osmolality
in the PEG-ES are balanced so that no net gain or loss of electrolytes or changes in water
balance occur.
WBI has a theoretical value in a limited number of toxic ingestions. This technique
is indicated in patients with ingestion of toxins that are in a sustained-release or enteric-
coated form. It may possibly be of value in cases in which iron pills have been ingested.
Studies in dogs have shown that the average total body clearance of paraquat was
increased from 5.67 L/hr to 13.2 L/hr with WBl, which removed 68.9% of the ingested
dose.&,9 Human volunteer studies have reflected mixed results. Studies with ampicillin,
delayed-release aspirin, and sustained-release lithium demonstrated toxin reductions of
67%, 73%, and 67%, respectively.10-15 However, in a study in which coffee beans were used as
the marker, no significant improvement was demonstrated in the rate of removal from the
gastrointestinal tract with WB1.16
WBI requires a nasogastric tube, a type of nasogastric feeding bag, a large quantity of
PEG-ES, and an easy-to-clean location in the hospital. The nasogastric tube is necessary
because the patient will not willingly consume an adequate volume of PEG-ES at a sufficient
rate. Force feeding an adequate volume of PEG-ES is difficult to manage over a 24-hour
period. If the patient is in an upright position, the incidence of emesis is decreased because
78 SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
gravity aids in moving the solution into the intestinal tract. The solution is usually adminis-
tered at a rate of 500 mL/hour. If vomiting occurs, it is best controlled with metoclopramide
because of its antiemetic and gastric emptying effects. If this does not work, the flow rate of
PEG-ES should be reduced by 50% for 60 minutes and then returned to the original infu-
sion rate. Ihis procedure should be continued until the fecal efluent is clear. The technique
may take several hours.
WBI is contraindicated in patients with an obstructed or perforated bowel; ileus; sig-
nificant gastrointestinal hemorrhage; hemodynamic instability; uncontrollable vomiting;
and an unprotected, compromised airway. PEG-ES interactions with activated charcoal are
unclear. The charcoal does not significantly alter the osmolality of the solution. The binding
capacity of the charcoal may be decreased if it is administered concurrently with the PEG-
ES. Complications of WBI generally include nausea and vomiting (particularly in patients
receiving emetics before the irrigation procedure). Human patients occasionally complain
of abdominal cramps and bloating.
lon Exchange Resins, Cathartics, and Activated Charcoal
lon Exchange Resins
Ion exchange compounds are used to bind the toxin to a carrier, thereby trapping it in the
gastrointestinal tract until it is passed in the stool. Cholestyramine and activated charcoal
are the two most commonly used compounds. Cholestyramine (Questran) and to a lesser
extent colestipol (Colestid) are anion exchange resins that bind with lipoproteins and bile
acids, thereby preventing intestinal absorption of toxic compounds taken up through these
systems. Additionally, cholestyramine can interrupt enterohepatic recirculation of sub-
stances excreted through the bile. Some examples of susceptible compounds include phe-
nobarbital, tetracycline, penicillin G, anticoagulants, thyroxine, chlorothiazide, digitalis
β-blockers, some pesticides, any highly lipophilic compound, and heat-stable Escherichia
coli enterotoxin.
 Cholestyramine is packaged as a powder, containing either 444 mg or 800 mg of dried
der with 60 to 180 mL of water, milk, fruit juice, or other noncarbonated beverage. The
recommended dose is 50 to 75 mg/kg PO. Patients should be well hydrated during therapy.
Cholestyramine has a wide margin of safety. The potential side effects include nausea, hypo-
proteinemia, constipation, steatorrhea, and loss of fat-soluble vitamins.
Cathartics
 Another decontamination approach is the use of cathartic solutions to speed the transit
time of the toxicant through the gastrointestinal tract, thereby decreasing the time allowed
for toxin absorption. Saline cathartics work by altering the physical-chemical forces within
the intestinal lumen. Osmotic forces increase the fluid volume within the gastrointesti-
nal tract, which stimulates motility and speeds expulsion of the gastrointestinal contents.
Cathartics are especially useful in aiding the elimination of ingested solid toxicants and
enteric-coated or timed-release compounds.
The two primary types of osmotic cathartics administered to poisoned patients are saline
solutions and saccharide solutions. Saline cathartics include sodium sulfate, magnesium
sulfate, and magnesium citrate. The most common saccharide cathartic is sorbitol. Min-
eral oil (paraffn oil) is generally not recommended for use as a cathartic in dogs and cats.
Mineral oil has a higher risk of pulmonary aspiration than other cathartics and is no longer
recommended for use in organic compound ingestions or organochlorine insecticide intox-
ications. Mineral oil has been advocated in the past as an adsorbent for lipid-soluble toxins.
Mineral oil should not be used concurrently with dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate because
emulsification could occur that could cause hepatic accumulation of the indigestible oil.
Animal studies that measured the effectiveness of cathartics used alone showed no
statistically significant difference in toxin clearance between controls and treatment
Chapter 10 | Toxicologic Decontamination 79
tion and cathartic administration were less than those expected in an actual toxicosis.
The most rapid and potent cathartic is sorbitol, which is administered as a 70% solution
at a dosage of 1 to 2 mL/kg. If catharsis is to be attempted it should be instituted within
60 minutes after toxin ingestion. Multiple doses can be dangerous and can intensify side
effects, such as vomiting, nausea, abdominal cramps, dehydration, and possible hypoten-
to be very safe with few side effects (but may be less effective at binding toxin).
Contraindications to cathartic administration include a lack of bowel sounds, inges-
tion of a corrosive substance, presence of diarrhea, recent abdominal trauma, or intestinal
obstruction or perforation. Additionally, patients with hypotension, volume depletion, or
electrolyte abnormalities should not receive a cathartic. Based on current data, there are
no definitive indications for the use of cathartics alone in the management of the poisoned
patient.
Activated Charcoal
Activated charcoal, the most commonly used adsorbent, is often called the universal anti-
dote. The large surface area of the charcoal adsorbs the toxicant,thus reducing or prevent-
ing systemic absorption (Box 10-1). The quality of the various charcoal products depends
 eoieu paieae jo a aeaae uo eoieu go uia iad aie aens pue azis ai uo
approximately 1000 square meters of surface area. Activated charcoal is produced by heating
wood pulp to 900° C and, then washing it with inorganic acids and drying it. Ihe result-
ing small charcoal particles are “activated" with steam or strong acids. The final adsorptive
surface contains several carbon moieties that adsorb compounds with varying degrees of
affinity. In vitro adsorption to activated charcoal in aqueous solutions is a nonspecific pro-
cess that reaches equilibrium in less than 30 minutes. Once equilibrium is reached, some
in conjunction with a cathartic, most commonly sorbitol, to speed gastrointestinal transit
and thereby decrease the time available for desorption to occur.
Activated charcoal has an undisputed role in the treatment of acutely poisoned patients.
The earlier it is administered after toxin ingestion, the more effective it is. Activated char-
coal is particularly effective against large nonpolar compounds. Neutral molecules are more
adsorptive than ionized toxins. Activated charcoal interferes with endoscopic visualization.
 In human volunteers an average of 62 hours elapsed after administration before stools were
no longer black.21
 The dosage of activated charcoal to be used varies with the individual product and other
Ever, the dose-response curve indicates that higher doses are more effective. If the volume
of toxicant is known, the general rule is to administer the activated charcoal in a dose of
10 times the dose of toxicant. Activated charcoal tablets and capsules are not as effective as
activated charcoal slurries.2.23
For animals, the recommended dose of powdered activated charcoal and water is 2 to
5 g/kg of body weight (1 g activated charcoal in 5 mL water). If sorbitol is added as a cathar-
tic, it is given at a dose of 3 mg/kg and mixed with the activated charcoal. If the intoxicant
is subject to significant enterohepatic recirculation, repeat administration of activated char-
coal every 4 to 6 hours for 2 to 3 days may be indicated. When multiple doses of activated
charcoal are used, it is important that the patient be adequately hydrated to prevent consti-
pation (kaolin-containing products can enhance the probability of causing constipation).
Additionally, repeat dosing with sorbitol may cause significant hypotension or hypovolemic
shock, particularly in small patients or those with underlying cardiovascular instability.
As mentioned, cathartic use in conjunction with activated charcoal has been advocated.
Several cathartics have been used; however, sorbitol seems to have the fewest drawbacks
and enhances the flavor of the suspension. Other cathartics used are sodium sulfate (Glau-
80SECTlON 1 ToxicologicConcepts
Box 10-1
Partial List of Compounds That Bind to Activated Charcoal
Acetaminophen
Meprobamate
Amphetamines
Methyl salicylate
Antibiotics
Methylene blue
 Anticoagulant rodenticides
Morphine
Anthelmintics
Muscarine
Aspirin
Narcotics
Atropine
Nicotine
Barbiturates
Nortriptyline
Camphor
Organic iodine
Cantharides
 Organic metal compounds
Carbamates
Organochlorine insecticides
Carbamazepine
Organophosphorus insecticides
Chlordane
Phenobarbital
Chloroquine
Phenothiazine
Chlorpheniramine
 Phenylbutazone
Cocaine
 Phenylpropanolamine hydrochloride
Diazepam
Phenytoin
2,4-D (dichlorophenoxy acetic acid)
Quinacrine hydrochloride
Digitalis
Quinidine
Digitoxin
Quinine
Ethylene glycol
Salicylamide
Fungicides
Salicylates
Hexachlorophene
Strychnine
Ipecac
Sulfonamides
Isoniazid
 Theophylline
Mefenamic acid
Tricyclic antidepressants
in patients exhibiting CNS depression. Mineral oil should not be used in conjunction with
activated charcoal because it coats the activated charcoal, blocking its ability to adsorb gas-
trointestinal toxicants.
Activated charcoal is contraindicated in patients with a compromised airway (without
intubation), with hydrocarbon ingestion (because of an increased risk of aspiration), or
with a gastrointestinal tract that is not anatomically intact. Activated charcoal should not be
used in patients that have ingested caustic substances nor in those that are vomiting, having
seizures, or are comatose unless endotracheal intubation has been accomplished to protect
the compromised airway. The major complication of activated charcoal administration is
emesis. Those patients receiving concurrent sorbitol cathartics are at higher risk of vomit-
30% sorbitol frequently induces emesis.19
Care should be taken when using activated charcoal as it is very osmotically active and
the potential exists to induce a clinically significant hypernatremia that might be difficult to
control ( more commonly seen in small breed animals, less than 30 lb). If possible a baseline
sodium level should be obtained, and if the toxicant is known its ingredients should be
reviewed. Hypernatremia can occur in patients with preexisting hypernatremia (e.g., dehy-
drated) or if the toxicant has excess sodium chloride (e.g., sodium bicarbonate, modeling
'saue a-ns sapues ua a) saueisns aae aeuso o (anp ed e
sorbitol, paintballs, glycerol, bulk artificial sweeteners).
Cathartic and Activated Charcoal Combinations
Administration of a cathartic and activated charcoal combination has been advocated with
the rationale that the charcoal binds the toxicant and the cathartic speeds expulsion of the
Chapter 10 |  Toxicologic Decontamination  81
charcoal-toxicant moiety from the gastrointestinal tract before significant desorption of the
toxicant from the activated charcoal occurs. Several manufacturers of activated charcoal
supply it in a 10 to 20% sorbitol slurry solution. This combination is administered at a dose of
10 mL/kg. Ihe earlier this combination is administered, the more effective it is. Administra-
tion of activated charcoal with a sorbitol cathartic may be beneficial even as late as 6 hours
after toxin ingestion. Studies have shown that the addition of sorbitol to activated charcoal
does not affect the adsorption of acetaminophen and actually increases the adsorption of
aminophyline.4.25 However, salicylate elimination was slowed with administration of an
activated charcoal-sorbitol combination compared with charcoal use alone.
When treating patients that have ingested sustained-release or enteric-coated toxins or
toxins with delayed absorption or marked hepatic biliary recirculation, “pulse? dosing of 
the activated charcoal is advocated (every 6 hours for 2 to 3 days). There is a risk of dehy-
dration if all doses of activated charcoal are mixed with a cathartic. It is recommended that
subsequent doses of activated charcoal not be mixed with a cathartic solution unless the
clinician is confident that the patient's fluid balance will not be compromised.
Forced Diuresis
Forced diuresis is induced by administering a fluid overload and a diuretic concurrently.
The patient must not be anuric or significantly oliguric. The object is to increase urine flow
rates to 3 to 5 mL/kg/hr to force renal clearance of the toxicant. The most common diuretics
employed are furosemide (5 mg/kg every 6 to 8 hours) and mannitol (1 to 2 g/kg IV every
6 hours). Intoxications that are most likely to respond to forced diuresis are those with a
high level of renal excretion of the primary toxicant (e.g., bromide, lithium, amphetamine,
phenobarbital, and salicylate). Protein-bound toxins are not cleared efficiently by diuresis.
The primary problems associated with forced diuresis include potential fluid overload
and electrolyte abnormalities. The practitioner should monitor for hyponatremia, hypo-
kalemia, water intoxication, pulmonary edema, and cerebral edema. Additionally, some
sid a asar sdaas a  sssaae isl se ns s
susceptibility to interstitial pulmonary edema. Forced diuresis is contraindicated in these
intoxications.
lon Trapping
Ion trapping alters the urine pH to inhibit reabsorption of toxins across the renal tubular
membranes. Ihe principle behind this approach is to "trap” the toxin in its ionized form in
the urine where it can be excreted. Most nonionized molecules diffuse across membranes
because of their high lipid solubility (i.e., nonionic diffusion). Ionized molecules usually
cannot diffuse across cellular lipid membranes. The toxic compounds most successfully
 trapped are weak acids and bases.
 Ion trapping can be successful only in the presence of the following conditions: the
compound is excreted predominantly unchanged through the kidneys, the compound is a
weak electrolyte with a suitable pKa, and the toxicant is primarily distributed to the extra-
cellular space and is not protein bound. Ion trapping is contraindicated when the toxicant
has alarge volume of distribution, is strongly protein bound, is highly lipid soluble, and is
monitoring of baseline urine pH, serum sodium and potassium levels, and blood pressure.
 Urine pH should be reevaluated hourly and sodium and potassium levels every 1lto 2 hours
as indicated by the patient's condition and trends in serial laboratory values.
Acid diuresis is most commonly employed in patients intoxicated with compounds
such as amphetamines and phencyclidine. Acidification is achieved by the administration
 of ammonium chloride at a dose of 100 mg/kg every 12 hours PO. A problem with urinary
acidification is that many intoxicated patients already have a preexisting metabolic aci
dosis. Acidification may also affect the excretion rates of other drugs being used to treat
the patient.
82SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Alkaline diuresis is achieved with sodium bicarbonate administered at a dose of 1 to
2 mEq/kg of body weight added to intravenous fluids infused over 6 hours. Complica-
tions of alkaline diuresis include volume overload, hypernatremia, decreased serum ionized
calcium, decreased oxygen delivery to tissue, paradoxical CNS acidosis, and hypokalemia.
Contraindications for alkaline diuresis include any existing metabolic alkalosis (especially
Gastrotomy
Gastrotomy and actual physical removal of toxins may be necessary if these toxins are
refractory to other methods of decontamination. One example is ingestion of iron tablets
that adhere to the gastric lining and have to be physically scraped off the gastric wall.
Lipid Emulsion
Intravenous fat emulsions usually composed of triglycerides and phospholipids can be
used therapeutically for some toxicities with fat-soluble compounds (e.g., pyrethrins,
permethrin, ivermectin, ionophores, marijuana). These fat emulsions theoretically form
chylomicron-like droplets in the patient's serum, which may act as a 'sink" for highly lipid-
soluble xenobiotics. Compounds pulled into this “sink” are then unavailable for binding at
their sites of action or to their target organs. The use of lipid ermulsion therapy is new and
its effectiveness against a growing list of lipid-soluble toxic compounds is being studied.
Authors of individual chapters in this text highlight the effectiveness of this therapy against
a variety of toxic xenobiotics.
References
1. Arnold FJ, Hodges JB Jr,Barta RA Jr:Evaluation ofthe efficacy oflavage and inducedemesis in treatment
of salicylate poisoning, Pediatrics 23:286-301, 1959.
2. Abdallah AH, Tye A: A comparison of the efficacy ofemetic drugs and stomach lavage, Am J Dis Child
113:571575, 1967.
3. Corby DG, Lisciandro RC, Lehman R W, et al: The efficiency of methods used to evacuate the stomach
after acute ingestions, Pediatrics 40:871-874, 1967
4. Teshima D,Suzuki A,Otsubo K,et al: Efficacy of emetic and United States Pharmacopoeia ipecac syup
in prevention of drug absorption, Chem Pharm Bull 38:2242-2245, 1990.
 5. Neuvonen PJ, Vartiainen M, Tokola O: Comparison of activated charcoal and ipecac syrup in prevention
of drug absorption, Eur J Clin Pharmaco24:557-562, 1983.
6. Tenenbein M, Cohen S, Sitar DS: Efficacy of ipecac-induced emesis, orogastric lavage, and activated
charcoal for acute drug overdose, Ann Emerg Med 16:838-841, 1987.
7. Gieseker DR, Troutman WG: Emergency induction of emesis using liquid detergent products: a report
of 15 cases, Clin Toxicol 18:277-282, 1981.
8. Mizutani T, Yamashita M, Okubo N, et al: Efficacy of whole bowel irrigation using solutions with or
without adsorbent in the removal of paraquat in dogs, Hum Exp Toxicol11:495-504, 1992.
9. Burkhart KK, Wuerz RC, Donovan IW: Whole bowel irrigation as adjunctive treatment for sustained-
release theophylline overdose, Ann Emerg Med 21:1316-1320, 1992.
drug overdose, Arch Intern Med 147:905-907, 1987.
11. Rosenburg PJ, Livingstone DJ, McLellan BA: Effect of whole bowel irrigation on the antidotal efficacy of
oral activated charcoal, Ann Emerg Med 17:681-683, 1988.
12. Olsen KM, Ma FH, Ackerman BH, et al: Low volume whole bowel irrigation and salicylate absorption: a
comparison with ipecac-charcoal, Pharmacotherapy 13:229-232, 1993.
13. Kirshenbaum LA, Mathews SC, Sitar DS, et al: Whole bowel irrigation versus activated charcoal in
sorbitol for the ingestion of modified-release pharmaceutical, Clin Pharmacol Ther 46:264-271, 1989.
14. Mayer AL, Sitar DS, Tenenbein M: Multiple-dose charcoal and whole-bowel irrigation do not increase
dearance of absorbed salicylate, Arch Intern Med 152:393-396, 1992.
15. Smith SW, Ling LJ, Halstenson CE: Whole-bowel irrigation as a treatment for acute lithium overdose,
Ann Emerg Med 20:536-539, 1991.
16. Scharman EJ, Lembersky R, Krenzelok EP: Efficiency of whole bowel irrigation with and without
metoclopramide pretreatment, Am I Emerg Med 12:302-305, 1994.
Chapter 10 | Toxicologic Decontamination 83
17. Gaudreault P, Freidman PA, Lovejoy FH Jr: Efficacy of activated charcoal and magnesium citrate in the
treatment of oral paraquat intoxication, Ann Emerg Med 14:123-125, 1985.
18. Van de Graaff WB, Thompson WL, Sunshine I, et al: Adsorbent and cathartic inhibition of enteral drug
absorption, I Pharmacol Exp Ther 221:656-663, 1982.
19. Picchioni AL, Chin L, Gillespie T: Evaluation of activated charcoal-sorbitol suspension as an antidote,
Clin Toxicol19:433-444, 1982.
 20. Chin L, Picchioni AL, Gillespie T: Saline cathartics and saline cathartics plus activated charcoal as anti-
dotal treatments, Clin Toxicol 18:865-871, 1981.
21. Minocha A, Herold DA, Bruns DE,et al: Effect of activated charcoal in 70% sorbitol in healthy individu
als, Clin Toxicol 22:529-536, 1985.
 22. Otto U, Stenberg B: Drug adsorption properties of different activated charcoal dosage forms in vitro and
man, Svensk Fram Tids 77:613-615, 1973.
23. Tsuchiya T, Levy G: Drug adsorption effcacy of commercial activated charcoal tablets in vitro and in
man, J Pharm Sci 61:624-625, 1972.
 24. Van de Graaff WB, Thompson WL, Sunshine I, et al: Adsorbent and cathartic inhibition of enteral drug
absorption, I Pharmacol Exp Ther 221:656-663, 1982.
25. Scholtz EC, Jaffe JM, Colaizzi JL: Evaluation of five activated charcoal formulations for the inhibition of
aspirin adsorption and palatability in man, Am J Hosp Pharm 35:1355-1359, 1978.
CHAPTER
11
Supportive Care of the
Poisoned Patient
Cheryl Braswell, DVM
Steven Mensack, VMD, DACVECC
he poisoned patient will almost always require broad-based monitoring and supportive
on imsan Aeu Ainjui uedio aheep ueaio [eiaielos pue ioainp isuege piena cl aies
the direct effects of the poison/intoxication or secondary consequences, such as hypoper-
fusion, hypoxemia or ischemia, and subsequent reperfusion. Poisoned patients may have
respiratory, cardiovascular, neurologic, gastrointestinal, renal, hepatic, or hematologic
abnormalities. The potential for multiorgan dysfunction necessitates vigilant monitor-
ing and appropriate supportive care. Ihere are important nursing care considerations in
patients that are recumbent, stuporous, or comatose.
Within the text, the authors have provided numerical parameters for various organ sys-
tems to help guide the assessment of the poisoned patient and direct therapy. Readers are
an aas aneao panadsan a se ssau ae u i aaqan rn pa
"Tests measure what they measure and they don't measure anything else” (Steve Haskins
 o   d an in sm s a (a    a 
numerical data and not just the numbers themselves.
Respiratory
Breathing Rate, Rhythm, Nature, and Effort
Breathing rate can vary widely in normal animals and, except for extreme variations, is of
limited value as a respiratory monitor. A change in breathing rate, however, is a sensitive indi-
cator of a change in the underlying status of the patient. Bradypnea may be a sign of respira-
tory center depression secondary to intracranial or extracranial disease. The underlying cause
should be identified and treated if possible. Irregular breathing patterns usually indicate a
problem within the central pattern generator in the brainstem, and such a finding suggests a
poor prognosis. A weak breathing effort may be caused by central or peripheral neurologic
impairment or neuromuscular dysfumnction, depending on the specific poison or toxin. Brady-
pneic, arrhythmic, and weak breathing patterns may be associated with hypoventilation, and
such patients should be intubated and assisted ventilation should be instituted. Tachypneic
 pain, or opioid administration, and seldom should be treated specifically, but the underlying
cause should be investigated and addressed if possible, as in the case of opiate toxicity.
Buaq ane jeq siuaned u panou aq Aeu ose suais Aieuoumdenxa pue sasod Apog
respiratory difficulty. These may include extension of the head and neck to decrease upper
airway resistance, reluctance of the patient to lie down, flaring of the nostrils, abduction
of the elbows, sucking of skin over the thoracic inlet, and/or an abdominal component to
breathing.
Audible Sounds
Low-pitched, snoring, or high-pitched, squeaky inspiratory noises heard without the aid
Uaaaxo aaiasai pmous suaed yong uosnisqo Aemae iaddn ue isaaans adossouas e jo
85
86 SECTION 1  Toxicologic Concepts
therapy and may need general anesthesia to gain access to the airway. Large airway obstruc-
tions must be removed or bypassed (by intratracheal oxygen insuflations, endotracheal
intubation, or temporary tracheostomy). Mid-pitched, wheezing, asthmatic sounds heard
during inspiration and expiration suggest a fixed, large airway obstruction or narrowed
lower airways, as would occur in bronchospasm or with the accumulation of airway exu-
dates (pneumonia). Bronchodilators should be used if bronchospasm is thought to be the
Auscultation of crepitation or bubbling is indicative of small airway fluid, as would
occur in pulmonary edema (transudate), pneumonia (exudate), or hemorrhage. Such
patients may require positive pressure ventilation if oxygen therapy alone does not remedy
the hypoxemia. Aspiration is a common problem in obtunded patients that vomit or regur-
gitate. The aspirated material may cause airway obstruction and sets the stage for pneumo-
nia. Aspirated gastric fluid with a pH ofless than 2 is also associated with epithelial necrosis
and inflammation.
 Diminished, muted, or absent lung or heart sounds may indicate a pleural space dis-
order, such as pneumothorax or hemothorax. Ihoracic radiography may be a useful diag-
nostic tool for intrathoracic abnormalities but should only be attermpted if the respiratory
distressis not considered life threatening at the moment. The focused assessment by sonog
raphy in trauma of the thorax (t-FAST) examination has been developed in canine and
feline patients and validated in canine patients. Ihe t-FAST scan is a noninvasive, rapid,
and repeatable examination that can be performed within minutes of a patient's arrival
while the technical staff is initiating resuscitative measures. The t-FAST procedure has
good sensitivity and specificity for detection of free fluid and/or air within the pleural and/
or pericardial space. With this scan, fluid and/or air can be localized and samples col-
lected with ultrasound guidance or treatment of life-threatening pleural effusions, pericar-
dial effusions, or pneumothoraces can be initiated very shortly after presentation. In some
instances, injuries or other pathology to the lungs or other thoracic structure also may be
detected during a t-FAST examination. If ultrasound is not immediately available, life-
threatening pleural space disease is suspected, and the patient is too unstable for radiogra-
phy, a diagnostic/therapeutic thoracocentesis may be indicated before any imaging studies.
 If pneumonia is detected radiographically, it should be treated with broad-spectrum
antibiotics (empiric initially, later supported by airway secretion culture and sensitivity
testing), nebulization and coupage, postural drainage, and early ambulation (to the extent
possible). Cough suppressants should be avoided.
Ventilometry
Ventilation volume can be estimated by visual observation of the chest wall and can be
measured by ventilometry. Normal tidal volume ranges between 8 and 20 mL/kg. Normal
total minute ventilation ranges between about 150 and 250 mL/kg per minute for dogs.
The arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Pacoz) defines alveolar minute ventilation
and the measured minute ventilation should be appropriate. A large minute ventilation in
combination with a normal (or high Pacoz) is indicative of dead space ventilation, as might
occur in hypovolemia and pulmonary thromboembolism.
Partial Pressure of Carbon Dioxide
The arterial Pcoz (Pacoz) is a measure of the ventilatory status of the patient and normally
ranges between 35 and 45 mm Hg. A Pac0z in excess of 60 mm Hg may be associated with
excessive respiratory acidosis and often represents suffcient hypoventilation to warrant
alkalosis and a decreased cerebral blood flow, which may impair cerebral oxygenation and
negatively impact mentation.
There are additional ways to estimate Pacoz without arterial blood sampling. Venous
Pcoz (Pvcoz) is usually 3 to 6 mm Hg higher than Paco, in stable states, and generally can
during hypovolemic or anemic states. An increased arterial-venous Pcoz gradient (larger
Chapter ll I Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient  87
Pacoz also may be estimated by measuring the carbon dioxide in a sample of gas taken
at the end of an exhalation. End-tidal COz (ETCO) values are typically 2 to 10 mm Hg
less than that of Pacoz, so ETCO2 readings can give relatively accurate reflections of
Pacoz in dogs and represents a good estimate of ventilatory status in the intubated
patient.
Hypoventilation
Hypoventilation is treated with positive pressure ventilation. Whether manually ventilat-
tion are the same. Peak proximal airway pressure should be about 10 to 15 cm H,O; tidal
volume should be about 10 to 15 mL/kg; inspiratory time should be about 1 second (or
just long enough to achieve a full tidal volume); ventilation rate should be about 8 to 12
times per minute.
Diseased lungs and some lungs in older patients are stiffer (less compliant) than nor-
mal lungs and therefore are much more difficult to ventilate. It is a common finding that
the preceding guidelines are insufficient to adequately ventilate a patient with diffuse pul-
monary parenchymal disease or significant age-related changes. To improve ventilation
in these patients, the proximal air way pressure could be increased in a slowly progressive
manner up to 60 cm HzO (or to the limit of the ventilator) and the ventilatory cycle rate
[i a 'ainu iad seaq og oi dn iauuu aaissanoid Aimois e u pasanun a Po
volume should be decreased in a patient with diffuse lung disease because such lungs have
a reduced vital capacity; a normal tidal volume could overdistend the reduced number
of remaining lung units, leading to rupture and potential pneumothorax. Protective lung
strategies currently aim for very small tidal volumes (i.e., 4-6 mL/kg) with a higher venti-
lator frequency. If blood oxygenation must be improved, (1) the inspired oxygen could be
increased up to 100% for short periods of time or up to 60% for prolonged periods of time;
(2) positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) can be added or increased (≤20 cm HO);
or (3) the inspiratory time or the inspiratory plateau could be increased. Use of inspired
oxygen concentrations of greater than 60% (F10z >60%) for longer than 6 to 24 hours
(the higher the Fioz, the shorter the time) has been associated with oxygen-induced lung
injury. Positive end-expiratory pressure increases transpulmonary pressure and functional
residual capacity and keeps small airways and alveoli open during the expiratory phase
and improves ventilation and oxygenation, thus potentially decreasing the F1oz. Positive
end-expiratory pressure also minimizes the repetitive collapse and reopening of small air-
tory (I/E) ratio must allow sufficient time for exhalation of all of the last breath; other wise
air trapping will occur. However, positive pressure ventilation can lead to hemodynamic
alterations. By increasing transthoracic pressure, there can be significantly decreased
venous return, especially when supraphysiological air way pressures are used.
Cyanosis
A blue to gray hue to the mucous membranes is caused by the presence of unsaturated
hemoglobin in the capillaries. Cyanosis is most often caused by hypoxemia and always
should be considered to be a late sign of severe hypoxemia. Because 4 mg/dL of unsaturated
the anemic patient. Cyanosis may also be caused by sluggish capillary circulation. Methe-
moglobinemia, as can be noted with acetaminophen toxicity, can cause a brownish to bluish
discoloration of the blood and mucous membranes.
Partial Pressure of Oxygen
The arterial Poz (Paoz) measures the tension of oxygen dissolved in the plasma, irrespec-
tive of the hemoglobin concentration. The Paoz is a measure of the oxygenating ability
of the lungs. The normal PaO, is considered to range between 80 and 110 mm Hg when
an animal is breathing room air at sea level (F1oz = 21%), and greater than 500 mm Hg
88SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
when breathing 100% oxygen (F10z = 100%). Hypoxemia could be caused by low inspired
oxygen, hypoventilation while breathing 21% oxygen, and lung disease such as pulmonary
hemorrhage, edema, or pneumonia. A Paoz less than 60 mm Hg is commonly selected as
a trigger for supplemental oxygen therapy.
Venous Poz (Pvoz) reflects tissue Po, and bears no correlation to Paoz. Mixed or central
venous PvOz ranges between 40 and 50 mm Hg. Values below 30 mm Hg may be caused
by anything that decreases the delivery of oxygen to the tissues (e.g., hypoxemia, anemia,
low cardiac output, vasoconstriction); values greater than 60 mm Hg suggest reduced tissue
uptake of oxygen (e.g., septic shock, metabolic poisons, shunting). Venous blood for such
evaluations must be taken from a central vein, such as the jugular, anterior vena cava, or
pulmonary artery; peripheral venous Po, values are highly variable and dificult to interpret.
Hemoglobin Saturation with Oxygen
When red to infrared light is transmitted through a blood sample, the various forms of
hemoglobin present in the blood sample will absorb a certain proportion of light as oxy-
hemoglobin, methemoglobin, carboxyhemoglobin, and reduced hemoglobin. A benchtop
co-oximeter measures and displays values for the first three. Ihe displayed oxyhemoglobin
is functional (i.e., it is expressed as a percentage of the amount of hemoglobin available for
Oxygen binding [total hemoglobin minus methemoglobin and carboxyhemoglobin]], as
opposed to fractional oxyhemoglobin, which is expressed as a percentage of total hemo-
globin irrespective of methemoglobin or carboxyhemoglobin. Normally, methemoglobin
and carboxyhemoglobin are less than 1% each and so usually functional and fractional
oxyhemoglobin measurements are quite similar. To the extent that either methemoglobin
or carboxyhemoglobin is present in large concentrations, fractional oxyhemoglobin will
be variably lower than functional.
Hemoglobin saturation (Soz) measures the percent saturation of the hemoglobin and is
related to Paoz by a sigmoid curve (Fig. 11-1). In general, a Pa0z of 100 mm Hg is equivalent
to an Soz of about 98%; a Pa0z of 80 mm Hg is equivalent to an Soz of about 95%; a Po of
60 mm Hg is equivalent to an Soz of about 90%; and a Po, of 40 mm Hg is equivalent to an
So, of about 75%. This oxyhemoglobin equilibrium curve is not a stationary line and can
be influenced by acid-base status, blood CO, levels, and temperature. Hypoventilation/
increased COz, increased temperature, and metabolic acidosis all shift the curve to the
right, meaning that hemoglobin will not bind oxygen as avidly. Conversely, hyperventila-
tion, hypothermia, and metabolic alkalosis will all shift the curve to the left, implying that
hemoglobin will bind more avidly to oxygen. The clinical information derived from the
measurement of arterial Soz (Saoz) is similar to that obtained from a Pao, measurement
in that they both are a measure of the ability of thelung to deliver oxygen to the blood.
Pulse oximeters estimate oxyhemoglobin saturation in the pulsatile blood of periph-
eral tissues (Spoz). The probes are commonly attached externally to a patient (via tongue,
lps, tail, ear, or vulva). The accuracy of a pulse oximetry reading is greatest within the
range of 80% and 95% and is determined by the accuracy of the empirical formulas that are
programmed into the instrument. Tissue, venous and capillary blood, nonpulsatile arte-
background absorption from that of pulsatile arterial blood. It does this by measuring light
absorption during a pulse and subtracting from that the light absorption occurring between
the pulses. If the pulse oximeter cannot detect a pulse, it will not make a measurement.
One of the common reasons for poor instrument performance is peripheral vasoconstric-
tion. Other reasons for inaccurate pulse oximetry readings include heavily pigmented
membranes, patient motion, venous pulsation caused by right-sided heart disease or the
edema, and severe anemia.
When a low Spoz measurement is obtained, particularly when it seems incongruous for
the patient's condition at the time, retry the measurement in several different locations and
then either take the average of the readings or the highest reading and, if possible, confirm
the reading with a Paoz measurement. Methemoglobin and carboxyhemoglobin absorb
Chapter ll I Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient 89
100
(Haldane effect: O2 displaces CO2 from Hb)
90
80
→pH
↑pH
turation)
70
↑Temp
60
50
(Bohr effect: t CO2, ↓ pH)
oglobin
40
Oxyhemc
30
20
10
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90100
PO2 (mm Hg)
Figure ll-l Oxyhemoglobin equilibrium curve.
light and impact the measurement made by a two-wavelength pulse oximeter designed to
measure only oxyhemoglobin. Because of the biphasic absorption of methemoglobin at
both 660- and 940-nm wavelengths, abnormal accumulations tend to push the oximeter
reading toward 85% (underestimating measurements when Sa0z >85% and overestimat-
ing it when <85%). Carboxyhemoglobin absorbs light like oxyhemoglobin at 660 nm, but
 hardly at all at 940 nm. When present in increased concentrations, it increases the apparent
oxyhemoglobin measurement.
Oxygen Therapy
Oxygen therapy may be beneficial when the predominant cause of the hypoxemia is
substantially beneficial if the predominant cause of the hypoxemia is hypoventilation or
small airway and alveolar collapse; positive pressure ventilation is preferred in these situa-
tions. High inspired oxygen concentrations can be attained via multiple methods ( Table 11-1).
A facemask is a quick and easy way to provide supplemental oxygen therapy. If the animal
does not tolerate the facemask, the oxygen outlet should be held as close to the animal's nose
as possible (within 3-4 cm). Oxygen cages and hoods are commercially available or can be
homemade. Oxygen tents and infant incubators are available from used medical equipment
suppliers. Enclosed oxygen environments should not be used during the initial stabiliza-
tion stages but are useful afterward when the patient needs to be maintained in an oxygen-
enriched environment. In any enclosed environment, it is important to measure and control
the oxygen concentration, eliminate the carbon dioxide produced by the animal, and control
the temperature. High humidity is acceptable as long as the temperature is controlled at a
comfortable level.
90SECTlON 1 ToxicologicConcepts
A convenient way to increase the inspired oxygen concentration is via insuflation. Com-
mercially available nasal prongs can be used or a soft, flexible catheter can be inserted into
the nasal cavity, to about the level of the medial canthus of the eye. Ihe catheter is sutured
as it passes through the lateral alar notch and again at points along the side of the face or
the top of the head to keep the catheter out of the patient's view (Fig. 1l-2). An oxygen flow
rate of 100 mL/kg per minute is initially recommended; flow rates should be subsequently
adjusted to the needs of the patient. Medical oxygen is anhydrous and should be humidified
by bubbling it through warm water.
 The effectiveness of the oxygen therapy, however it is applied, should be evaluated
shortly after beginning therapy. If therapy is not judged to be effective, positive pressure
ventilation may be indicated.
Table 1l-1
Inspired Oxygen Concentrations Obtainable for Different Oxygen
Delivery Devices at Various Oxygen Flow Rates
Device
Flow Rate
F102
Flow-by
6-8 L/ min
35%
Mask
6-10 L/min
35%-55%
Nasal prongs
100 mL/kg/min
50%-60%
Nasal cannula(s)
100 mL/kg/min
30%-50%
300 mL/kg/min
50%-75%
Cages
50%
Hood
0.2-0.5 L/min
30%-40%
Tracheal insuflation
50 mL/kg/min
40%-60%
Tracheostomy
100 mL/kg/min
100%
Figure ll-2 Nasal oxygen catheters.
Chapter ll I Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient 
91
Cardiovascular
Heart Rate and Rhythm
Heart rate and stroke volume are important to cardiac output. Slower heart rates are nor-
mally associated with larger end-diastolic ventricular volumes and consequently, larger
stroke volumes. Up to a point, larger stroke volumes preserve cardiac output. Heart rate is
too slow when it is associated with low cardiac output, hypotension, or poor tissue perfu-
sion. This may occur when the heart rate falls to less than 60 beats/minute in the dog or 90
beats/minute in the cat. Common causes for bradycardia are excessive vagal tone second-
ary to visceral inflammation, distention, or traction; hypothermia, hyperkalemia, atrioven-
tricular (AV) conduction block, end-stage metabolic failure, hypoxia, acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors, organophosphate and carbamate poisonings, rapid administration of hypertonic
saline, and digitalis overdose.
hypoxemia, pain, parasympatholytics [e.g., atropine], sympathomimetics, or supra-
ventricular or ventricular ectopic pacemaker activity). In people, because of coronary
beyond oxygen delivery capabilities. In animals, in whom coronary artery disease is
rare, tachycardia only becomes a problem for the patient when there is not enough time
for diastolic filling, which results in a decrease in cardiac output. Specific treatment of
sinus tachycardia may be indicated when the heart rate is greater than 180 in dogs or
the high 200s in cats.
Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias (SVTs) may be caused by certain toxins (e.g., digi-
talis glycosides, bufotoxins), sequelae to the effects of the toxin (e.g., anemia,hypoxemia,
electrolyte, and acid-base imbalances), or comorbid disease (e.g., cardiomyopathy). They
originate in the atria or AV node or are secondary to a re-entrant circuit. Ablation of
the SVT may occur after performing a vagal maneuver, such as carotid sinus massage. If
this is ineffective in resolving the SVT, then drug therapy is indicated (Table 11l-2). Other
treatment options include direct current cardioversion or cardiac pacing; these therapies
are more effective for re-entrant SVT rather than accelerated automaticity of the atria or
AV node.
Ventricular dysrhythmias may be caused by sympathomimetics, hypoxia, hypercapnia,
Table 11-2
Injectable Antiarrhythmic Drugs
Drug
Mechanism
Indication
IVDosage
Lidocaine
Sodium channel blocker
VPCs
1.0-4.0 mg/kg;
25-80 mcg/kg/min
Procainamide
Sodium channel blocker
VPCs; SVPCs
2.0-10.0 mg/kg;
25-50 mcg/kg/min
Quinidine
Sodium channel blocker
VPCs; SVPCs
6.0-20.0 mg/kg
Amiodarone
 Sodium channel blocker 
VPCs
5.0 mg/kg over
and other effects
20 min
Atenolol
β-blocker
SVPCs; VPCs
0.2-1.0 mg/kg
Esmolol
β-blocker
SVPCs; VPCs
0.2-0.5 mg/kg;
10-200 mcg/kg/min
 Propranolol
β-blocker
SVPCs; VPCs
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
Diltiazem
Calcium channel blocker
SVPCs
0.05-0.25 mg/kg
Verapamil
Calcium channel blocker
SVPCs
0.025-0.05 mg/kg;
 2-10 mcg/kg/min
SVPCs, Supraventricular arrhythmias; VPCs,ventricular arrhythmias.
92 SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
factors released from various debilitated abdominal organs, intracranial disease, or digitalis
intoxication. Ventricular dysrhythmias become a problem for the patient when they inter-
fere with cardiac output, arterial blood pressure, and tissue perfusion. Ventricular tachyar-
hythmias are also of concern when they threaten to convert to ventricular fibrillation when
(1) the minute-rate equivalent exceeds the high 100s for dogs and the low 200s for cats; (2)
the complexes are multiform; or (3) the ectopic beat overrides the T wave of the preceding
depolarization. Total elimination of ventricular dysrhythmia is not necessarily the goal of
therapy because large dosages of antiarrhythmic medications (Table 1l-2) have deleterious
cardiovascular and neurologic effects. A simple decrease in the rate or severity of the dys-
hythmia may be a suitable end point to the titration of the antiarrhythmic medications.
Ventricular dysrhythmias can be caused by several mechanisms that are not readily
e a  l   aasa e a go ae  ai  ae
rhythmic may be effective in one mechanism and ineffective or potentiate the dysrhyth-
mia in another. Antiarrhythmic therapy is always a clinical trial. Lidocaine is usually a first
choice antiarrhythmic for ventricular dysrhythmias because it selectively affects abnormal
cells without affecting automaticity or conduction in normal cells.
Pulse Quality
Assessment of pulse quality by digital palpation involves an evaluation of both the height
 air st assd asd a eu m pes asnd asd a go im p
reflection of stroke volume and vessel size. It is not a measure of arterial blood pressure per
se, although in a general way, vessels with low pressure are easier to collapse and vice versa.
Peripheral pulse quality (e.g., the dorsal metatarsal artery in the dog) decreases and disap-
pears earlier than do larger, more central pulses (e.g., the femoral artery) with progressive
hypovolemia. The relative pulse quality of more peripheral versus more central arteries
may provide a rough index to the magnitude of the hypovolemia. Small stroke volumes
occur with hypovolemia, poor heart function, tachycardia, and ventricular arrhythmias.
Central Venous Pressure
Central venous pressure (CVP) is the luminal pressure of the intrathoracic vena cava.
information but is subject to unpredictable extraneous influences. Central venous pres-
sure (or PVP) is the relationship between venous blood volume and venous blood volume
capacity. Venous blood volume is determined by venous return and cardiac output. For
CVP, verification of a well-placed, unobstructed catheter can be ascertained by observing
small fluctuations in the fluid meniscus within the manometer, synchronous with the heart-
with each heartbeat may indicate that the end of the catheter is positioned within the right
ventricle.
The normal CVP is 0 to 10 cm HzO; PVP would be on average 2 to 3 cm H,O higher
Venous pressure is a measure of the relationship between blood volume and blood volume
capacity and could be measured to help determine the end point for large fluid volume
resuscitation. Below-range values suggest hypovolemia and that a rapid bolus of fluids
should be administered. Above-range values indicate relative hypervolemia and that fluid
therapy should be stopped. Venous pressure is also a measure of the relative ability of the
heart to pump the venous return and should be measured whenever heart failure is a con-
cern. Venous pressure measurements are used to determine whether there is "room" for
additional fluid therapy in the management of hypotension.
Arterial Blood Pressure
Arterial blood pressure is the pressure of the blood against the inner walls of the arteries. It
is determined by flow and the resistance to flow. It needs to be sustained from the arteries to
the capillaries to ensure that enough blood reaches vital organs and tissues. Ihis perfusion
ue aisem soqenau jo uaxaaurxa 'sanssi pue sun o niddns uannu sasua
delivery of oxygen to the tissues.
Chapter 1l I Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient 93
Blood pressure measurement consists of three components: the systolic arterial pressure
(SAP), diastolic arterial pressure (DAP), and mean arterial pressure (MAP). Ihe systolic
blood pressure is the pressure produced on the arteries with each contraction of the heart.
The DAP is the pressure produced on the arteries while the heart is at rest. It is determined
 by duration of the resting phase of the heart (diastole), amount of circulating blood vol-
ume, and degree of arterial elasticity. Mean arterial pressure is physiologically the most
important because it represents the mean driving pressure for organ perfusion. Mean arte-
rial pressure is a value of the average pressure on the arteries throughout duration of one
complete cycle of the heartbeat (contraction and relaxation). The relationship between SAP
and MAP is variable, depending on the shape and duration of the pulse pressure waveform;
systolic blood pressure should always be assessed with this in mind. The formula for esti-
mating the mean blood pressure is:
(SAP + 2×DAP)
3
The regulation of blood pressure involves complex interactions among multiple sensors of
inno seipies isne ot siosuas au o puodsan ieu sueio admu pue annssand poon
blood volume, and vascular diameter and tone. The sensors of blood pressure are found in
the major arteries and kidneys. Ihe major effector organs include the kidneys, the central
and peripheral nervous system, and the heart.
Arterial blood pressure can be measured indirectly by sphygmomanometry or directly
via an arterial catheter attached to a transducer system. Sphygmomanometry involves the
application of an occlusion cuff over an artery in a cylindrical appendage. The width of the
occlusion cuff should be about 40% of the circumference of the limb to which it is applied.
A cuff that is too small will measure the blood pressure erroneously higher than normal
and a cuff that is too large will measure the blood pressure erroneously lower than normal.
The occlusion cuff should be placed snugly around the limb. If it is applied too tightly, the
pressure measurements will be erroneously low because the cuff itself, acting as a tour-
niquet, will partially occlude the underlying artery. If the cuff is too loose, the pressure
measurements will be erroneously high because excessive cuff pressure will be required to
occlude the underlying artery Inflation of the cuff applies pressure to the underlying tissue
and will totally occlude blood flow when the cuff pressure exceeds systolic blood pressure.
As the cuff pressure is gradually decreased, blood will begin to flow intermittently. When
the cuff pressure falls below systolic pressure: (1) systolic blood pressure can be estimated
as the manometer pressure at which needle oscillations begin to occ ur during cuff deflation
(caused by the pulse wave hitting the cuff); (2) systolic blood pressure can be estimated also
as the manometer pressure at which one can digitally palpate a pulse distal to the cuff; (3)
systolic blood pressure can be estimated as the manometer pressure at which the first blood
 flow sounds are heard via a Doppler ultrasound crystal placed over an artery distal to the
occluding cuff; and (4) oscillometry analyzes the fluctuation of pressure in the cuff as it is
slowly deflated and provides a digital display of systolic, diastolic, mean blood pressure,
and heart rate. Most of these instruments can be set to recycle at discrete time intervals.
 Small vessel size and motion can interfere with measurements. Most external techniques
are least accurate when vessels are small, the blood pressure is low, and the vessels are
constricted. However, newer technology using high-definition oscillometric measurement
can reduce the inaccuracies associated with motion, high heart rates, arrhythmias, and low
blood pressures.
 Direct measurements of arterial blood pressure are more accurate and continuous com-
pared with indirect methods, but require the introduction of a catheter into an artery by
percutaneous or cutdown procedure. The dorsal metatarsal, tibial, femoral, and ear arteries
are commonly used in dogs and cats. The subcutaneous tissues around dorsal metatarsal
and ear arteries are tight and hematoma formation at the time of catheter removal is rarely
a problem. Once the catheter is placed, it is connected to a monitoring device. The catheter
must be flushed with heparinized saline at frequent intervals (hourly) or continuously to
94SECTlON 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Table 1l-3
Blood Pressure Ranges and Level of Risk of End-Organ Damage
Risk Level
Systolic Pressure
Diastolic Pressure
RiskofEnd-OrganDamage
Hypotension
<80
<50
<150
<95
Minimal
I1
150-159
95-99
Mild
1II
160-179
100-119
Moderate
IV
≥180
≥120
Severe
siue pi auo e aq Po aiaa sunsau a uoisno io pooq suaaa
set suspended from the ceiling. However, different fluid administration sets have differ-
ent compositions and thus are slightly softer or harder. Ihis difference in distensibility of
the fluid administration set can artificially increase or decrease the pressure measurement
(stiffer tubing gives higher readings than softer tubing). Therefore, monitoring of trends
in blood pressure measurement by this method can provide more information than single
measurements. Fluid is instilled into the tubing via a three-way stopcock to a very high level
and then allowed to gravitate into the artery until the hydrostatic pressure of the column
of water is equalized with the mean arterial blood pressure of the patient. Because blood
pressure oscillates, the system should be closed between measurements to prevent blood
from entering into, and clotting, the end of the catheter. The arterial catheter also can be
attached to a commercially available transducer and recording system. The extension tub-
ing between the catheter and the transducer should not be excessively long and should be
constructed of nonexpansible plastic to prevent damped signals. The transducer should be
"zeroed” periodically. With computerized patient monitors, the transducer can be placed
anywhere with reference to the patient. Ihe monitor will compensate internally with an
“offset pressure” for any vertical differences between the patient and the transducer. If the
relative vertical position between the patient and the transducer changes, the transducer
must be"zeroed" again.
 Normal systolic, diastolic, and mean arterial blood pressures are approximately 100 to
140, 60 to 100, and 80 to 120 mm Hg, respectively. In general, one should be concerned
when the SAP falls below 100 mm Hg or the MAP falls below 80 mm Hg (Table 1l-3). In
general, one should be very concerned when the SAP falls below 80 mm Hg or the MAP
falls below 60 mm Hg. Hypotension may be caused by hypovolemia, poor cardiac out-
vasoconstriction. High SAP, not associated with a high MAP, is generally attributed to an
(a jel pue juaed ieu io) uaiss aunseau aul jo asuodsan asuana aendonddu
Hypertension can cause increased hemorrhaging, retinal detachment, increased intracra-
nial pressure, and high afterload to the heart and should be treated when MAP exceeds
140 mm Hg. High MAP may be caused by a light level of anesthesia, hyperthermia, sym-
(renin-angiotensin), pheochromocytoma (epinephrine), and increased intracranial pres-
sure. With increased intracranial pressure, the hypertension is most likely caused by Cush-
ing's response to maintain an adequate cerebral perfusion pressure and should not be treated.
Cardiac Output
Cardiac output can be measured by a variety of techniques in clinical patients, but in
the forefront of one's monitoring and therapeutic considerations; it is after all the whole
point of adequate cardiovascular function. Poor cardiac output is implied when preload
parameters (CVP or PVP, pulmonary artery occlusion pressure, jugular vein distention,
ultrasound image) are high and the forward flow parameters (pulse quality, arterial blood
pressure, signs of vasoconstriction, urine output, and physical and laboratory measures of
Chapter ll I Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient 95
Table 11-4
Cardiovascular Drugs
NDICATION
Heart
Vasomotor
Drug
Contractility
Rate
Tone
VDosage
Dobutamine
↑↑
↑
 5-15 mcg/kg/min
Dopamine
 5-15 mcg/kg/min
Epinephrine
0.1-1 mcg/kg/min
Norepinephrine
NC
0.2-2mcg/kg/min
Phenylephrine
0
1-5 mcg/kg/min
Vasopressin
0
0.5 units/kg
Arterial
Venous
Hydralazine
0
什
0
0.5-1 mg/kg
Nitroprusside
0
↑↑
1-5 mcg/kg/min
Acepromazine
0
↑
↓
0.01mg/kg
Morphine
0
↑
↑
0.1-0.5 mg/kg
Diltiazem
↑
↑
↑
0.05-0.25 mg/kg;
0.05-0.3 mg/kg/hr
Enalaprilat
0
NC
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
tissue perfusion) are abnormal. Cardiac output is a flow parameter and can be low even
when arterial blood pressure is normal.
Cardiac output may be reduced by poor venous return and end-diastolic ventricu-
lar flling (e.g., hypovolemia, positive pressure ventilation, inflow occlusion); ventricular
restrictive disease (e.g., hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy, pericardial tamponade,
pericardial fibrosis); decreased contractility; excessive bradycardia, tachycardia, or arrhyth-
mias; regurgitant atrioventricular valves; or outflow tract obstruction. Poor cardiac output
should be improved by correcting the underlying problem when possible. Preload should
be optimized. When poor contractility is thought to be the problem, sympathomimetic
 therapy ( Table 11-4) may be indicated.
OxygenDelivery
Oxygen delivery (DOz) is the product of cardiac output and arterial oxygen content
(Fig. 11-3). Oxygen content is determined by hemoglobin concentration (most important)
and PO. Oxygen delivery must be adequate to meet metabolic requirements (oxygen con-
sumption). Excessive anemia, hypoxemia, bradycardia, arrhythmias, reduced stroke vol-
ume, poor heart contractility, valvular lesions, tamponade, and hypovolemia may cause
inadequate oxygen delivery. Combinations of these abnormalities can compound the
oxygen delivery deficit. Excessive oxygen consumption can occur with hyperthermia and
intense muscular activity, such as seizures. A disparity between oxygen delivery and oxy-
gen requirement results in an increased oxygen extraction, low venous oxygen, metabolic
(lactic) acidosis, and an increased arterial-mixed venous Pcoz gradient. Treatment of an
 oxygen delivery deficit should be directed at the underlying cause(s). If hypovolermia is
thought to be the primary problem, fluids should be administered to re-establish an effec-
tive circulating volume. If contractility is thought to be the primary problem, dobutamine
should be administered (dopamine if the patient is also hypotensive).
Fluid Therapy
Poisoned patients are commonly dehydrated and hypovolemic, and such issues must be
addressed early in the course oftheir management. Hypovolemia is defined as alow circulat-
ing blood volume. Dehydration is defined, for the purposes ofthis discussion, as a low extra-
cellular volume caused by the loss of a crystalloid solution (sodium and water). The clinical
signs of hypovolemia and extracellular dehydration are different. Hypovolemia is identified
96SECTION1ToxicologicConcepts
Cerebral
Visceral
Preload
andcoronary
 perfusion 
perfusion
Systematic
Contractility
vascular
Arterial
resistance
Afterload
blood
pressure
Stroke volume
Cardiac
ndino
Oxygen
Heart rate
delivery
Oxygen
Hemoglobin
Venous
oxygen
content
Oxygen
Arterial oxygen
consumption
Figure ll-3 Overview of cardiopulmonary function.
by low preload (e.g., low CVP, PVP, or pulmonary artery occlusion pressure; collapsed jugu-
lar veins; radiographic appearance of a small postcava; and cardiac ultrasound appearance of
a small end-diastolic diameter) and low forward flow (e.g., poor pulse quality, hypotension,
vasoconstriction, oliguria in a patient that does not have renal disease, increased oxygen
extraction, low venous oxygen, metabolic [lactic] acidosis, and an increased arterial-mixed
venous Pcoz gradient). Dehydration is identified by an acute loss of body weight, a decrease
in skin elasticity, dry mucous membranes in a patient that is not open-mouth breathing
and has not received an anticholinergic, and high urine specific gravity and high sodium
concentration in a patient that does not have renal disease and has not recently received
a bolus of colloids or a diuretic. Hemoconcentration may occur, depending on the nature
of the fluid loss. By definition, dehydrated patients have lost extracellular fluid and there-
fore all dehydrated patients are to some extent hypovolemic. However, the magnitude of the
dehydration and hypovolemia do not necessarily correlate; therefore each should be evalu-
ated independently. Animals with evidence of subcutaneous edema may be associated with
hypervolemia (e.g., heart failure, renal failure, and iatrogenic fluid overload) or hypovolemia
(e.g., hypoproteinemia/hypocolloidemia and increased vascular permeability). In general,
hypovolemia requires an initial, rapid fluid therapy plan (over a period of 10-60 minutes),
whereas dehydration requires a slow fluid plan (over a period of 4-24 hours).
The crystalloid fluids are the mainstay of fluid therapy. Crystalloid fluids consist primar-
ily of water with a sodium or glucose base, plus the addition of other electrolytes and/or
buffers. The concentration of these different solutes dictates their indication in various clin-
ical situations. Within the crystalloid group are four different types of fluids: replacement
solutions, maintenance solutions, hypertonic solutions, and dextrose in water. Replacement
crystalloid solutions contain dissolved solutes that approximate the solute concentration
found in plasma water ( Table 1l-5). Ihese solutions are indicated for the rapid replacement
of intravascular volume and electrolytes, as seen with shock and hemorrhage or severe
volume depletion secondary to the losses associated with vomiting, diarrhea, third body
spacing, or excessive diuresis. With replacement crystalloid fluids, only 20% to 25% of the
infused volume of fluid remains within the intravascular space 1hour after infusion. There-
fore large volumes of replacement crystalloids need to be administered to replace intra-
vascular volume. The commonly available replacement solutions include normal saline
(0.9% NaCl), Ringer's solution (lactate or acetate), Normosol R, and Plasmalyte. Each type
of replacement fluid listed above has a specific composition that makes its use in certain
situations preferential.
Maintenance solutions are also composed of dissolved solutes but their concentrations
approximate the solute concentration found in extracellular fluid. Ihe difference in these
solutions conpared with replacement solutions is that maintenance solutions are designed to
Chapter ll | Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient 97
Table 11-5
Canine and Feline Extracellular Fluid Normal Values and Replacement
Crystalloid Composition
Feline
Canine
Lactated
Lactated
Normal
Normal
Ringer's
Normosol R or
Ringe's +
Values
Values
1DEN %6'0
Solution
Plasmalyte A
Dextrose
Na+mEq/L
155
145
154
130
140
130
K+ mEq/L
4
4
0
4
S
4
Ca2+ mg/dL
9
10
0
3
0
3
Mg+ mg/ dL
2.5
3
0
0
3
0
Cl mEq/L
120
110
154
109
98
109
Buffer
None
Lactate
Acetate/
Lactate
Gluconate
pH
7.35-7.45
7.35-7.45
4.5-7.0
6.0-7.5
6.5-8.0
4.0-6.9
Osm
310
300
308
273
294
525
fulfill the electrolyte requirements of patients with normal daily electrolyte losses that are
unable to maintain adequate fluid or electrolyte intake. Because these solutions are hypo-
tonic, they can cause hyponatremia and hyperkalemia, and less than 10% of the infused
volume remains within the vascular space 1 hour after infusion. Therefore they are rarely
infused at rates greater than that necessary to meet the patient's maintenance needs. Com-
mercially available maintenance fluid solutions include half-strength saline (0.45% NaCl),
half-strength saline + dextrose, lactated Ringer's + dextrose, and Plasmalyte 56. Commonly
potassium supplementation is added to maintenance solutions and/or replacement solutions
to further balance them for the patient's electrolyte requirements, especially if a replacement
solution is being used to meet maintenance needs.
 Hypertonic saline (7.2%-23% NaCl) is commonly used to rapidly increase intravascular
volume. This fluid is used where severe hypovolemia is present that may lead to impending
death, when low-volume resuscitation is appropriate, such as with cerebral edema, or when
large volumes of crystalloids cannot be infused fast enough to have the rapid desired effect.
Because of the sodium rapidly diffusing out of the vasculature, the effect of hypertonic
saline is very transient (lasts up to 30 minutes). To prolong this effect, hypertonic saline is
often combined with a colloidal fluid to help keep the fluid that has shifted from the extra-
istered after hypertonic saline infusion to replace the fluid that was translocated into the
vasculature. Contraindications for hypertonic saline include patients that are dehydrated
(inadequate fluid to draw into intravascular space), hyperosmolar, hypokalemic, those that
may develop problems with hypervolemia (preexisting heart or lung disease), or that have
uncontrolled hemorrhage (intraabdominal hemorrhage or pulmonary contusion).
Five percent dextrose in water (D;W) is not commonly used in veterinary medicine.
This fluid contains no active solute; therefore it readily redistributes throughout the body.
 The most common indications for DsW are as a vehicle for infusion of other medications
    as ( i e    ai  
large volumes of this fluid can lead to dilution of serum electrolytes and/or the develop-
ment of edema.
Colloids are fluids with high-molecular-weight compounds in a crystalloid base that
do not readily leave the intravascular space. Ihey exert their effect of expanding intravas-
cular volume by holding and potentially drawing water into the vasculature. Colloid fluid
solutions are indicated for the treatment of hypovolemia, sepsis, and other inflammatory
patients with low albumin from protein loss secondary to renal or gastroenteric disease,
vasculitis, or burns. Colloid solutions include plasma, human serum albumin (5% and
98SECTION 1  Toxicologic Concepts
25%), canine- and feline-specific albumin concentrates, and synthetic compounds such as
hydroxyethyl starch, dextrans, and modified gelatin solutions. Contraindications for the
use of colloidal fluids include coagulopathies, potential for volume overload (heart disease,
pulmonary disease, oliguric renal failure), and anaphylactic reactions.
When choosing a fluid type for your patient, an important question to think about
is, "What am I trying to accomplish?" The most common reasons for administration of
supplemental fluid therapy include replacing deficits of intravascular volume (relative or
absolute) to improve tissue perfusion, replacing deficits of tissue volume (dehydration),
meeting the maintenance fluid needs of patients that are not consuming sufficient quanti-
ties of fluid, and replacing ongoing losses resulting from vomiting, diarrhea, pneumonia,
burn or wound exudates, and third body spacing. In most of these situations, crystalloid
fluid therapy is all that is required, although colloids can be very beneficial in providing
intravascular volume.
At certain times a fluid diuresis is required, such as in patients with renal disease or
to hasten the elimination of toxins that are excreted by the kidneys. In these situations,
replacement crystalloid fluids are the fluid of choice. Rates required to induce a suffcient
diuresis can be as high as 2.5 to 4 times a patient's maintenance requirements.
 In situations in which the patient is anemic, whole blood (fresh or stored) or packed
red blood cells can be administered to provide oxygen-carrying molecules. In situations
 a n d  r  oo s i an r 
clotting factors. Fresh-frozen plasma provides all clotting factors and frozen plasma pro-
vides all clotting factors except the most labile (factors V and VIIl). When a patient has
low plasma proteins such as protein-losing disease, prolonged starvation, or vasculitis,
fluids with osmotically active particles such as colloids (preferred) or plasma (fresh fro-
zen or frozen) should be administered for colloidal oncotic support. Finally intravenous
nutritional solutions are indicated when the patient is not able to consume sufficient food
for a prolonged period of time.
Fluid therapy is administered as subcutaneous therapy, a rapid intravenous bolus, or an
intravenous constant rate infusion. Fluid therapy also can be administered intramedullary
in small patients in which venous access is not able to be obtained. A regular hypodermic
needle or power-driven IO system such as the EZ-IO works well in the older animal. The
bony prominence at the proximal humerus and proximal tibia and the trochanteric fossa of
the femur are common sites for needle introduction.
Subcutaneous fluid therapy is indicated for the replacement of deficits, for maintenance
needs, or to counteract ongoing losses. It is usually used on an outpatient basis, as intrave-
nous fluid therapy has proved more effective in the hospital setting. Because only a limited
amount of fluid can be administered subcutaneously, it has the limitation of possibly not
being able to fully account for the patient's needs in a single treatment. A contraindica-
tion for subcutaneous fluid therapy is a severely volume-depleted patient. In this situation,
blood is shunted away from the cutaneous vasculature, leading to poor and inconsistent
absorption of fluids.
In the hospitalized setting, intravenous is the preferred route of fluid therapy adminis-
is inappropriate because most patients do not lose or require fluid therapy in these mul-
tiples. Fluids may be administered as a bolus or constant rate infusion. Bolus fluid therapy is
indicated in the severely volume-depleted patient (absolute or relative) and the dehydrated
patient. In the intravascular volume-depleted patient, the volume of the bolus is determined
based on resolution of the clinical signs known as perfusion parameters (e.g., slower heart
rate and respirations, improved pulse quality, improved mucous membrane color). Therefore
frequent reassessment of the volume-depleted patient is required. Bolus fluid therapy for
intravascular volume replacement that should be administered is approximately 20-mL/kg
aliquots for dogs and 10-mL/kg aliquots for cats until the signs of hypovolemia are not
severe. Complete normalization of cardiovascular signs is not necessarily the objective of
this initial rapid fluid plan. This may require fluid doses in the range of 90 mL/kg in the dog
Chapter ll | Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient 99
and 55 mL/kg in the cat. Ihe immediate objective is to achieve an acceptable circulating
volume; fine tuning to normal should be accomplished more slowly. Colloids also can be
administered as boluses to rapidly improve intravascular volume. The patient should be re-
assessed after each bolus of crystalloid or colloid to determine if the bolus has been effective
in resolving the volume-depleted state or additional boluses are indicated. Crystalloid fluids
are often administered along with colloids to augment their vascular volume-expanding
effect. Smaller doses of crystalloids are necessary with the concomitant use of colloid to
improve intravascular volume. In the dehydrated patient, the quantity of a fluid bolus is
based on part of the estimated degree of dehydration.
Constant rate fluid administration is indicated in several situations. As described, it is
used to replace dehydration deficits. It is also necessary to account for a patient's mainte-
nance fluid requirements if the patient is not consuming sufficient quantities of fluid on its
own. Daily maintenance needs for patients varies on the age and size of the patient. Most of
us were taught that the maintenance crystalloid fluid needs of a patient are approximately
54 to 66 mL/kg per day (lower end in large dogs and higher end in small dogs and cats).
This may lead to under- or over-administration of fluids. Ihe volume of fluids required to
fulfill the maintenance needs of a patient can be assumed to be between 50 mL/kg per day
-annbai aui siuated oeiad un sies pue saop leus ioy Aep iad a/tuu sz io saop aiel io
ments may be as high as 90 mL/kg per day. With the use of colloid fluid therapy, infusions
at rates of up to 20 mL/kg per day (dog) or up to 10 mL/kg per day (cat) have been used
to provide continuous intravascular volume support. With the use of infusions of colloid
fluids, lower infusion rates of crystalloid fluids are necessary. If a patient has ongoing losses
because of vomiting, diarrhea, third spacing (ascites, pleural effusion), or diuresis (postob-
structive diuresis, glucosuria, diseases that produce polyuria such as hyperadrenocorticism
or renal failure), these losses should be replaced by 2 to 3 mL per estimated 1 mL lost. When
the fluid therapy plan is being constructed, it is usually not known how much fluid will
be lost over the day beyond the patient's maintenance needs. One could either leave this
category blank for the time being or add fluid to the plan as losses occur. If the patient has
a disease or effects of a toxin, which is known to be associated with unrelenting fluid losses,
an estimated volume could be factored in at the time of the construction of the initial fluid
plan and then adjusted upward or downward as the patient progresses.
 Just as with any other administered medication, monitoring for the desired effect as
well as potential adverse effects is necessary for successful fluid therapy. Proper moni-
toring of the patient receiving fluid therapy is a hands-on endeavor. Much of the infor-
mation we need is gained through serial examinations. No single parameter evaluated
will necessarily provide all the information required to guide fluid therapy. Physical
examination parameters that should be evaluated include a patient's weight, mentation,
skin turgor, pulse rate and quality, respiratory rate and effort, serial lung auscultation
for rales, mucous membrane color, and capillary refill time. If an indwelling urinary
catheter is in place, serial evaluation of fluid input and urine output can provide sig-
nificant information regarding whether too little or too much fluid therapy is being
administered. Renal chemistry parameters (blood urea nitrogen [BUN], creatinine) in
conjunction with urine specific gravity measurement provide additional information.
Serum lactate measurement and/or acid-base status can provide information regard-
ing tissue perfusion. Ihe gold standard in veterinary medicine for evaluating adequacy
 of fluid therapy is serial CVP measurement. This method allows the clinician to make
adjustments to fluid type and rate based on the ability of the patient's heart to handle
the infusedvolume.
 There are several situations in which fluid therapy is not necessarily in the best interest
of the patient. The most common situation occurs when a patient has congestive heart dis-
ease. In this situation, the patient develops congestion because the heart is not able to pump
its current volume. However, heart disease is not an absolute contraindication. In some
situations, there may be concomitant dehydration or the need for medications infused at a
constant rate of infusion to treat the heart disease and judicious use of fluid therapy may be
warranted. In these patients, hypotonic fluids such as the maintenance crystalloids or DsW
100  SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
are indicated. Meticulous monitoring of vital parameters, urine output, and central venous
pressure is necessary for successful use of fluid therapy in this patient population.
patient is consuming adequate volumes of water and is adequately hydrated. In this situa-
tion, fluid therapy may lead to dilution of blood cell or plasma volume, medullary wash-
out, or development of pulmonary edema if occult heart disease is present. However, even
in this situation, fluid therapy may be warranted if fluid diuresis is necessary because of
toxic ingestion or a medication needs to be administered via constant rate infusion.
 Discontinuing fluid therapy is as important as initiating fluid therapy. In most instances,
fluid therapy should not be abruptly discontinued, especially if the patient is receiving high
flow rates. During fluid therapy, the solute gradient in the kidneys may be changed because
of the fluid therapy (medullary washout). If the fluid therapy is abruptly discontinued, the
patient may not be able to concentrate urine well and may continue to lose excessive fluid
 in the urine for several days. This can be a serious problem if the patient is not ingesting
adequate amounts of water, leading to dehydration. The patient should be gradually weaned
offluid therapy. In the ideal situation, the fluid therapy should be tapered to a submainte-
nance rate for at least 24 hours before the discontinuation of fluid therapy. However, this
is not always possible. In this situation, the patient should consume adequate quantities of
water and the owner informed of the patient's increased water requirements over the next
several days.
Neurologic
The neurologic status of the patient should be characterized as part of the initial examina-
tion. Mental awareness and cranial nerves should be evaluated. Muscle weakness, twitch-
ing, tremors, or hyperexcitability should be noted. Continued re-evaluation at frequent
Mental Awareness and Cranial Nerves
Consciousness is maintained by the ascending reticular formation (in the midbrain and
pons of the brainstem) and the cerebral cortex. Dysfunction of either area causes decreased
mentation. Degrees of mental unawareness (when not asleep) may be classified as (1) nor-
not spontaneously care about its environment but responds to loud or brusque external
stimuli—responses may be inappropriate (disoriented, confused) or erratic (delirium);
(4) severely obtunded and responds only to deep pain stimulation (stuporous); and (5)
comatose—no conscious responses (reflexes are present). A loss of vision, menace, and the
presence of obtundation while maintaining subcortical reflexes (e.g., pupillary light reflex
[PLR], dazzle reflex, vestibulo-ocular nystagmus, corneal reflex, eyeball retraction, and pal-
pebral reflex) are suggestive of cerebral disease.
The menace reflex is done by pretending to poke the eye with a finger; the animal should
 blink and may move the head away from the danger. When performing this test, one must
take care not to touch or stimulate the whiskers because this may result in a false-positive
response. The menace reflex tests the ability of the animal to see the danger (optic n.),
interpret it (cortical), and react to it (blink, facial nerve [n.] VII). Cerebellar lesions can also
interfere with the menace reflex (unilateral cerebellar lesions cause ipsilateral loss of men-
ace) via the corticotectopontocerebellar pathway in the rostral colliculi of the midbrain,
without loss of vision. Corticocerebellar disease may result in the loss of the menace reflex,
whereas the subcortical corneal and dazzle reflexes remain.
Normal ocular position should have both eyes looking ahead in the same direction
at the same time. Strabismus is caused by lesions of the oculomotor n. (ventrolateral),
abducens n. (medial), or trochlear n. Strabismus may also occur in some positions with
vestibular disease. Strabismus may also be caused by retrobulbar masses. Gaze deviation,
when both eyes are looking in the same direction but off to the side, is attributed to severe
cerebral injury.
Chapter ll | Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient  101
Mydriasis is caused by adrenergic stimulation of the iris dilator muscle and simulta-
neously inhibition of cholinergic stimulation of the sphincter muscle. Miosis is caused
by cholinergic stimulation of the sphincter muscle and inhibition of adrenergic stimula-
tion of the dilator muscle. Direct examination of each eye, including the fundus, must
be made to rule out ocular causes such a uveitis, which causes miosis, or glaucoma or
retinal disease/atrophy, which cause mydriasis. Asymmetrical or bilateral miotic pupils
pupils represent irreversible brainstem disease. In general, in order of increasing sever-
ity of lesion and decreasing prognosis: (1) normal pupil size and PLR; (2) slow PLR;
 isudsu uodud ()  o isudsn sis (ae () oosue ()
(6) bilateral mydriasis, unresponsive. Anisocoria is caused by an imbalance between the
parasympathetic and sympathetic influences (oculomotor nerve) and several intraocular
diseases.
The pupils should dilate in the dark (or when the eyelid is closed) and should constrict
in the light (or when a bright light is shined on the retina). Both eyes should be checked
for both direct and indirect responses. Observe (1) latency of the response; (2) the speed
of the response; and (3) the magnitude of the contraction. Ihe intensity of the light stimu-
lus is important; use the same bright light source each time. Diseases such as iris atrophy
glaucoma, posterior synechia, high sympathetic tone or sympathomimetic therapy, or anti-
cholinergic therapy cause mydriasis, anisocoria, and diminish the pupillary light reflex.
Retinal or preoptic chiasmal disease is suspected if pupillary dilation occurs when that
retina is exposed to light at the same time that light is removed from the contralateral retina
("swinging flashlight test" or the “cover-uncover test").
The dazzle reflex occurs when one or both eyelids blink in response to the bright light
shined on the retina. It is a subcortical reflex.
The oculovestibular reflex (physiologic nystagmus; "doll's eyes") is normal. It occurs
only when the head (or head and body) is being rotated; its absence indicates vestibu-
lar n., brainstem, medial longitudinal fasciculus, or oculomotor/abducens n. dysfunc-
tion. If the nystagmus continues after the head motion is stopped, vestibular disease
should be suspected. Unilateral absence suggests ipsilateral oculomotor or abducens
nerve lesion. Absence of the oculovestibular reflex in association with coma suggests
brainstem injury.
static) indicates inner ear, vestibular n., brainstem or cerebellar dysfunction. Horizon-
tal nystagmus when the head is in a normal position is commonly seen in peripheral
vestibular dysfunction (fast phase is usually away from the side of the lesion within the
brain). Vertical nystagmus when the head is in an abnormal position, such as lateral or
dorsal recumbency, is more commonly seen in central vestibular, brainstem, or cerebellar
dysfunction. Rotary nystagmus is not localizing.
 The corneal blink reflex is a blink when the cornea is stimulated. To prevent injury to
the cornea, stimulate the cornea with a puff of air from a syringe rather than direct digital
stimulation. An animal that blinks spontaneously but not in response to corneal stimula-
tion has a sensory problem but not a motor problem. Head withdrawal requires conscious
perception of the stimulus. A blink or head withdrawal before actually touching the cornea
is the menace test and requires both vision and conscious perception.
The palpebral reflex (blink) when the medial canthus is touched is mediated by the tri-
 geminal n. (sensory) and the facial n.(motor). Its absence suggests brainstem disease.
The nasal sensation is assessed by passing a cotton-tipped swab into the nose;it should
evoke an avoidance response. Its absence suggests brainstem disease.
Swallowing and gagging are mediated by the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves (both
are both afferent and efferent). Their absence suggests brainstem disease.
 Irregular breathing patterns (tachypnea, Cheyne-Stokes, apneustic, cluster-breathing.
bradypnea, or apnea) suggest brainstem injury.
 Brainstem involvement carries a very poor prognosis. It is heralded by a constellation
of signs: unconsciousness; bilaterally unresponsive miotic or mydriatic pupils; absent gag.
102 SECTlON 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Box 1l-1
swallow, and laryngeal reflexes; strabis-
Toxic Etiology of
mus; absent physiologic nystagmus; spon-
Muscle Weakness
taneous or positional nystagmus; irregular
Aminoglycoside antibiotics
breathing rhythms/apnea; decerebrate pos-
Botulism
turing (extensor rigidity of all four limbs
 Cationic detergents (fabric softeners,
and opisthotonus). Compression of the
sanitizers)
brainstem can result in abrupt changes in
lonophores
respiration, heart rate, and blood pressure,
Ivermectin (and similar compounds)
which are often the immediate cause of
Lead
death.
Macadamia nuts
Neuromuscular Status
Myasthenia gravis
Polyradiculoneuritis
Toxic etiologies of muscle weakness can
Spinal cord disease
be found in Box 11-1. The symptomatic
Tick paralysis
therapy of muscle-weak patients is first
to protect them from self-induced injury
if they are "flopping around" because they
have enough muscle strength to be active
but not enough to do it in a coordinated fashion. If they are mostly immobile, they should
be managed as per the recumbent care protocol discussed later in the chapter. If the muscle
weakness is so severe that it interferes with ventilation, the patient must be intubated and
ventilated until such time that adequate ventilatory muscle strength returns. Toxins asso-
ciated with muscle tremors, twitching, and hyperexcitability are listed in Box 1l-2. Ihese
patients also must be protected from self-induced injury. If the hyperexcitability is not too
short acting, perhaps the best option would be no therapy but rather hospitalization and
observation to assure resolution of the modest clinical signs in a timely fashion. Sedatives
 or tranquilizers, however, are often required for these patients to facilitate their manage-
ment. Almost any sedative or anesthetic except ketamine can be used; however, there are
some important caveats. First, almost all sedatives or anesthetics have been associated with
seizure activity in the human literature. Etomidate and propofol occasionally cause muscle
twitching. Phenothiazines have a reputation for paradoxical hyperexcitability but are thera-
peutic at least for phencyclidine-induced hyperexcitability. Opioids cause central nervous
system (CNS) excitation (delirium) in modest dosages in cats and in high dosages in dogs,
but the threshold for this side effect may be lowered in the face of hyperexcitable poisons
and toxins. Benzodiazepines are not reliable sedatives in normal patients, causing hyper-
excitability. They are more reliable in patients with preexisting CNS disease or sedation.
The benzodiazepines diminish the hyperexcitable effects of ivermectin intoxication but are
GABA-receptor agonists and might potentiate the CNS depressant effects of the ivermectin
(which is also a GABA agonist). Unfortunately, barbiturates, propofol, and etomidate also
have GABA-receptor agonist activity; therefore it is a difficult problem to escape. Inhala-
tional anesthetics could be used to anesthetize such patients, but they must be intubated to
minimize environmental pollution with the anesthetic and protect the patient's airway. The
goal of sedation is simply to take the “edge? off of the hyperexcitability, not necessarily to
make it go away entirely or anesthetize the patient. To this end and specifically because an
advantageous effect without a disadvantageous effect of the anesthetic cannot be predicted,
it is recommended to start with very small dosages and titrate to effect. Comatose or anes-
thetized patients have lost any ability to take care of thermselves (Box 11-3). These patients
require the care described for the unconscious patient discussed at the end of this chapter.
Management of Deteriorating Neurologic Status
The intracranial contents consist of the brain (cellular structures, neurons and intersti-
tium), cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and blood encased in a nonexpandable vault of bone
(Monro-Kellie doctrine). An increase in the volume of one must be accompanied by
either a decrease in volume of another (usually CSF or blood volume) or an increase in
Chapter ll | Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient 103
Box 11-2
Toxins Associated with
Box 11-3
Toxins Associated with
Twitching. Tremors,
Obtundation to Coma
and Hyperexcitability
Barbiturates
4-Aminopyridine
 Benzodiazepines (large dose)
Amphetamines
 Phenothiazines
 Benzodiazepines (small dose)
Opioids
Blue-green algae
Ivermectin (and similar compounds)
Bromethalin
Amitraz
Cationic detergents (fabric softeners,
Marijuana
sanitizers)
Ethanol
Chocolate
Xylitol
Cocaine
Methanol
5-Fluorouracil
 Ethylene glycol
Hypocalcemia
Propylene glycol
Hypomagnesemia
Mushrooms
Herbal ephedra, ma huang, or guarana
 Metabolic disease (hepatic encepha-
lopathy, hypoglycemia, uremia,
1001
 Ivermectin (and similar compounds)
hypoxia, hypoosmolality or hyper-
Lead
osmolality, heat stroke)
Marijuana
 Neoplasia
Metaldehyde
Infectious or inflammatory disease
Methylxanthines (cafeine)
Thromboemboli
Moldy foodstuffs (mycotoxins-
Coagulopathies
penitrem A)
Mushrooms
intracranial pressure. The normal brain
Nicotine
has some margin for safety in this pro-
Opioids (large dose)
cess (intracranial compliance), because
 Organophosphates and carbamates
early changes in volume are not associ-
Organochlorine insecticides
ated with much of an increase in pressure.
Paraquat
This is accomplished by fluid shifts in the
Permethrins
cerebral vasculature and CSF. However,
Pseudoephedrine
the limit can be reached rapidly such that
Phencyclidine
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids
additional, small, incremental increases
in intracranial volume are associated
1080 — sodium monofluoroacetate
with logarithmic increases in intracra-
Strychnine
Tricyclic antidepressants
nial pressure. As intracranial pressure
increases, cerebral perfusion is decreased.
Vitamin D rodenticides
Increases in intracranial volume can
Zinc phosphide
accrue with cellular swelling (cytotoxic
cellular edema); interstitial edema (vaso-
 genic); an increase in cerebrospinal fluid
(hydrocephalus); an increase in blood volume (venous outflow obstruction, arterial vaso-
dilation, hypertension); hematoma formation; or neoplasia. Elevated intracranial pressure
can subsequently result in: (1) interference with neuronal function; (2) diminished cere-
bral blood flow; and eventually (3) subtentorial herniation of the cerebrum or foramen
magnum herniation of the cerebellum; causing brainstem compression.
Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) is the difference between mean arterial blood pres-
sure and intracranial pressure. For reasons of maintaining adequate CPP, it is commonly
recommended to maintain the mean arterial blood
 pressure greater than 60 mm Hg in
patients with normal intracranial pressure (ICP) and greater than 90 mm Hg in patients
with suspected elevated ICP. Ihe cerebral ischemic reflex (Cushing's reflex) is a late clinical
sign reflecting severe increases in intracranial pressures. Ihe decrease in cerebral blood
flow from increased intracranial pressure triggers an elevation in systermic blood pressure.
104SECTION 1 ToxicologicConcepts
The resulting systemic hypertension causes a reflex bradycardia. The recognition of this
reflex mandates immediate therapy.
Support of respiration and circulation is the frst priority in the patient with deterio-
importance. Avoid events and drugs that increase intracranial blood flow (aggressive fluid
therapy, drugs such as alphaz-agonists, ketamine), cause cerebral vasodilation (hypercapnia,
hypoxemia, hyperthermia, or inhalational anesthetics), or decrease outflow (jugular vein
cbstruction, aggressive positive pressure ventilation, head-down positioning). The blood-
 brain barrier of the cerebral capillaries prevents the movement of most particles, including
sodium, from the vascular to the interstitial spaces as long as it remains intact. Isotonic
replacement crystalloid solutions are effective in supporting cerebral blood flow without
increasing cerebral interstitial volume. The benefits of rapid, adequate fluid resuscitation in
patients suffering from brain trauma have been demonstrated. Although fluid overload is to
paoddns jou st apis Aip aul uo, siuated euumeil peaq budaay jo aneid au papioae aq
by current clinical and experimental evidence. Hypertonic saline and mannitol are both
effective in decreasing intracranial pressure because they create osmotic gradients from
the intracellular to the vascular space. Ihe rheologic effects of mannitol and its beneficial
effects on cerebral blood flow (CBF) and CPP make it a useful part of the overall fluid
therapy plan. Mannitol is currently the first choice hyperosmotic for increased intracranial
pressure. However, hypertonic saline has been found to be neuroprotective as well as hyper-
osmotic and is currently being investigated as a preferred therapy for increased intracranial
pressure. The usual dose of hypertonic saline is 4 mL/kg of a 7.2% solution, as a bolus over 5
minutes; rapid bolus administration of hypertonic saline can cause reflex bradycardia. Ihe
duration of effect (for cerebral edema) is 15 to 75 minutes. Ihe dose of mannitol is contro-
versial (0.5-1.5 g/kg), usually 0.5 g/kg administered over 20 minutes. Mannitol should be
administered as intermittent 20-minute infusions and not as a continuous infusion. The
duration of the rheologic effect is approximately 75 minutes. The goal with mannitol is to
achieve a serum osmolality, which exceeds calculated osmolality [2(Na + K) + BUN/2.8 +
glucose/18] by about 20 mOsm/kg. The actual measurement of plasma osmolality can only
be ascertained with appropriate laboratory equipment (osmometer). Administration of
tion. Concurrent administration of furosemide with mannitol is no longer recommended.
Glucose-containing solutions should be avoided unless they are specifically indicated
to treat hypoglycemia. Hyperglycemia and the administration of glucose-containing solu-
tions (whether or not they produce hyperglycemia) have both been associated with worse
neurologic outcome in brain-injured patients.
Corticosteroids have only been found to be beneficial in vasogenic cerebral edema sec-
aa yixo u as aq on puoy uaaq lou Aal a1 Ao lon isidoau oi A1e
bral edema or traumatic brain injury, but also the use of these drugs increases mortality
in human studies. The potential sequela of hyperglycemia, immunosuppression, delayed
wound healing, and gastric ulceration contraindicates corticosteroid administration.
Deep barbiturate anesthesia reduces cerebral blood flow and metabolic oxygen con-
sumption and may be protective in some instances of traumatic or hypoxic brain dam-
age but is not generally recommended for the poisoned patient. Deep barbiturate coma,
in the case of traumatic brain injury, is only considered when other methods of managing
increased intracranial pressure have failed.
Hyperventilation (to a Pacoz of about 25 mm Hg) results in vasoconstriction and
reduces cerebral blood flow to areas of the brain with intact reactive vasoactivity. This
to carbon dioxide and blood flow to these regions may actually increase when the patient
is hyperventilated secondary to a decrease in blood flow to the normal regions. Hyper-
ventilation is not normally recommended but may represent a temporary adjunct for the
acute management of patients with deteriorating neurologic function suspected to result
from increased intracranial pressure. However, any beneficial effect of hyperventilation is
transient as the brain adjusts its internal pH after just a few (4) hours.
Chapter ll I Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient 105
Systemic or regional cooling has been experimentally demonstrated to reduce the
magnitude of neuronal degeneration associated with traumatic or hypoxic brain injury.
Hypothermia is currently thought to decrease metabolic brain demands, reduce release of
excitatory neurotransmitters, inhibit posttraumatic inflammatory response, and preserve
the blood-brain barrier. Intentional systemic cooling has a significant array of problems
(coagulopathy, hypotension, bradycardia, and dysrhythmias) and is not currently recom-
mended for veterinary patients. Ihese complications usually occur at temperatures of 30° C
or lower. In human medicine, induced moderate hypothermia (32° C-34° C) is considered
in the therapy of traumatically brain-injured patients and post-CPR resuscitation. Hyper-
thermia should be avoided.
 Reactive oxygen metabolite inhibitors (calcium channel blockers, allopurinol, superox-
ide dismutase and catalase, deferoxamine), scavengers (mannitol, dimethylsulfoxide), and
membrane protectants (corticosteroids, 2l-aminosteroids, vitamins E and C) have been
 demonstrated to have beneficial effects in the laboratory models of traumatic and hypoxic
brain damage, but clinical efficacy remains to be determined. Ihere is not enough known
about the mechanisms of excitotoxic or inflammatory cascade-mediated neuronal damage
to provide therapeutic recommendations.
Temperature
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is commonly encountered in the critically ill poisoned patient. Severity of the
secondary effect is commensurate with the patient's temperature and can include cardio-
vascular, respiratory, electrolyte, nervous system, acid-base, and coagulation abnormalities.
The cardiovascular effects of clinically relevant hypothermia include bradycardia, hypoten-
sion, dysrhythmias, decreased cardiac output, and asystole. The pulmonary consequences
include decreased respiratory rate and depth, pulmonary tissue injury, and oxygen dissocia-
tion disturbances. Neurologically, patients have decreased mentation that can progress to
unconsciousness. The initial renal response to hypothermia is inappropriate diuresis, which
may result in dehydration and azotemia. With progressive decrease in body temperature,
renal blood flow and consequently glomerular filtration rate decreases and can result in
acute renal failure. With progressive hypothermia, hepatic enzyme activity decreases, which
can lead to decreased metabolism of medications such as anesthetics. Metabolic acidosis
(lactic acidosis) can occur as a result of decreased tissue perfusion and increased muscle
activity (shivering). Primary immune functions (chemotaxis of and phagocytosis by granu-
locytes, macrophage movement, oxidative killing by neutrophils) are impaired in hypother-
mic patients. Both primary and secondary hemostatic mechanisms (decreased) as well as
the fibrinolytic equilibrium (impairment of intrinsic inhibitors of fibrinolysis) are affected.
Rewarming technique is dictated by the degree of hypothermia and patient stability.
Core body temperatures down to 36° C (96° F) are not associated with detrimental effects
to the patient; if the patient is protected from further heat loss (passive rewarming through
wrapping in insulated blankets), it should rewarm spontaneously. Active rewarming can be
achieved by circulating warm water or air blankets, infrared heat lamps (optimal distance
75 cm), or radiant heat warmers or hot water bottles placed under the drapes (avoid contact
with the skin if the water temperature exceeds 42° C). These measures should be applied
to the trunk of the patient, not the extremities. If extremities are warmed frst, peripheral
active core warming such as administration of warmed IV crystalloid fluids, flushing the
abdominal cavity or colon with warm, sterile, isotonic, polyionic fluids, or by extracorpo-
real techniques. The rewarming rate should be limited to about 1° C per hour.
Hyperthermia
106SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Mild degrees of hyperthermia (<40° C or 104° F) are not per se harmful to the patient and
106° F. Hyperthermia, without a reset thermostat, is pathologic. It is usually caused by inad-
equate heat dissipation secondary to exposure to high environmental temperatures, excessive
muscular activity (seizures, eclampsia, metaldehyde toxicity), excessive exercise (in humid
dlimate, obese dog or those with brachycephalic syndrome) or certain metabolic conditions
(malignant hyperthermia, hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma). Direct thermal injury to
cells occurs at body temperatures greater than 42° C (108° F) when oxygen delivery can nolon-
ger keep pace with the racing metabolic activity and increased oxygen consumption. Severe
hyperthermia causes multiple organ dysfunction and failure; renal, hepatic, and gastrointesti-
nal failure; myocardial and skeletal muscle damage; cerebral edema, disseminated intravascu-
lar coagulation, hypoxemia, metabolic acidosis, and hyperkalemia. True fever always should
be ruled out before active cooling measures are initiated.
Surface cooling techniques are most effective with room temperature fluids; it is the
Evaporation of the water from the skin surface that causes the cooling. The haircoat should
be soaked to the skin. Ice water should be avoided because it causes vasoconstriction, which
can impede heat loss from the core until skin temperature is less than 10° C, at which time
vessel paralysis and vasodilation occur and core temperatures decrease precipitously. Con-
vective heat loss can be enhianced with fans. Conductive heat loss can be enhianced with ice
Gastrointestinal
Many poisons and toxins are associated with vomiting and diarrhea. Diarrhea may be
caused by irritant or corrosive intoxicants, dietary indiscretion (moldy foodstuffs), arsenic,
detergents, paraquat, heavy metal intoxication (iron, lead, zinc), mushroom poisoning.
and a host of other diseases not associated with poisoning or intoxication (e.g., infections,
food allergies, foreign bodies). Symptomatic therapy often includes activated charcoal
(toxins), sucralfate, and appropriate fluid and electrolyte restoration. Diarrhea is associ-
ated with an alkaline, crystalloid loss containing variable amounts of albumin and red
blood cells. The gastrointestinal irritation/inflammation may be associated with abdomi-
nal pain and the translocation of bacteria and bacterial endotoxin into the systemic cir-
culation. Ofen therapy with antibiotics against gram-negative and anaerobic bacteria is
indicated. Motility modifiers (opioids and anticholinergics) and antisecretory drugs are
not generally indicated.
Vomiting
Vomiting is the active, forceful elimination of stomach contents caused by contraction of
the abdominal muscles. The "vomiting center" in the reticular formation of the brainstem
is stimulated by the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CRZ), ascending vagal or sympathetic
influences, the vestibular apparatus, or cerebral cortex influences. Ihe CRZ is primarily
stimulated by humoral substances such as uremia and toxemias; digitalis, opioids, and
other drugs; infections; and motion sickness. Mechanical stimulation/inflammation of the
gastrointestinal tract, peritoneum, genitourinary tract, heart and lungs, and liver activates
ascending vagal and sympathetic afferent nerves. Vomiting is associated with antipros-
taglandins, ethylene glycol, mushrooms, organophosphates, carbamates, pyrethrins, per-
methrins, arsenic, iron, lead, zinc, phenols, detergents, disinfectants, bleach, chlorinated
hydrocarbons, crayons, and organic solvents.
obtunded patients. This may be associated with physical obstruction of the airway, tra-
cheobronchitis, and bronchopneumonia secondary to bacterial contamination of the
respiratory tract. If the pH of the aspirant is less than about 2, an immediate contact
necrosis of the airway epithelium occurs. If the vomiting is prolonged, it will cause dehy-
dration and electrolyte abnormalities. Animals vomiting only gastric fluids tend to be
hypernatremic, hypochloremic, hyperbicarbonatemic, and hypokalemic. Most dogs and
Chapter ll | Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient 107
cats, however, reflux considerable amounts of duodenal secretions into the stomach and
lose a net alkaline solution. These animals are generally hypernatremic, hyperchloremic,
hypobicarbonatemic, and hypokalemic. Ihese “duodenal vomiters" are by far the most
common and can be verifed by observing greenish or yellowish coloration in the vomitus
or measuring the pH of the vomitus. Animals that have been drinking water in association
with the vomiting are commonly hyponatremic.
When the cause of the vomiting is not known and it is protracted, symptomatic ther-
apy is indicated. Antiemetics should be administered on a trial basis and in sensible
combinations until an effective therapy is established. Central and peripheral receptor
Many antiemetic drugs exhibit multiple receptor activity and therefore have multiple
mechanisms (and sites) of potential effectiveness. An empty stomach and forward gut
 motility are important aspects of therapy. Drugs that encourage gastric ermptying include
metoclopramide, erythromycin, domperidone, and bethanechol.
Metoclopramide is a Dz-dopaminergic and 5-HT-serotonergic receptor antagonist
that inhibits vomiting induced by gastrointestinal irritation and the chemoreceptor trig-
ger zone stimulation. The drug has some sedative effects and may cause extrapyramidal
signs, disorientation, and excitement (especially in high dosages). It should, perhaps, not be
used in patients with seizure disorders. Metoclopramide also enhances gastric emptying by
or biliary secretions. Ihe drug increases lower esophageal sphincter tone (inhibiting gastric
reflux), relaxes the pyloric sphincter tone, and increases duodenal and jejunal peristalsis
(but not colonic). It may cause abdominal pain and diarrhea and it should not be used in
patients with intestinal obstruction. The dosage is 0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg q 6 to 8 hours, PO, SC,
IM, slowly IV, or 1-2 mg/kg/day as a CRI (constant rate infusion).
Prochlorperazine is a Dz-dopaminergic, alphaj&2-adrenergic, M,-cholinergic,and H&z
histaminergic receptor antagonist with tranquilizer, antiemetic, and vasodilatory effects.
I may cause hypotension, sedation, and extrapyramidal signs (tremors, incoordination).
H is generally considered to be a very effective antiemetic. The dose is 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg q 8
hours, SC or IM.
Diphenhydramine is an H,-receptor antagonist with sedative, anticholinergic, antitus-
sive, and antiemetic effects. It may cause drowsiness, dry mouth, and excitation. The dosage
is 2 to 4 mg/kg q 8 hours, PO or IM.
Ondansetron and dolasetron are 5-HT,-serotonergic antagonists that inhibit vomiting
by actions on the chemoreceptor trigger zone and the vagal afferents. Side effects include
sedation and head shaking. The dosage for ondansetron is 0.1to 0.5 mg/kg IV or PO q 12 to
 24 hours. Dolasetron is only available inthe injectable form. Ihe dosage is 0.6 mg/kg IV/SQ
q 24 hours for nausea and 1 mg/kg IV/SQ q 24 hours for vomiting.
 Domperidone is a Dz-dopaminergic antagonist that inhibits vomiting by actions on the
gastrointestinal (Gl) smooth muscle. It has both prokinetic and antiemetic activity (che-
moreceptor trigger zone). It does not cross the blood-brain barrier and is therefore devoid
of other CNS effects (drowsiness, excitation, extrapyramidal signs). It has no cholinergic
activity and is not inhibited by atropine. Ihe dosage is 2 to 5 mg (total dose) PO q 8 to 12
hours for vomiting due to gastritis (dogs only) or 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg PO q 12 to 24 hours as a
prokinetic (dogs and cats) 0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg q 12 hours.
Scopolamine is an M,-cholinergic antagonist that inhibits vomiting by actions in the
e a g isee ue st ose li az an rdaaus ue seide req
therefore inhibits gastric emptying and gut peristalsis. Side effects include dry mouth, GI
stasis, and drowsiness. Ihe dosage is 0.03 mg/kg q 6 hours SC or IM.
 Yohimbine is an alphaz-adrenergic antagonist that inhibits vomiting by actions in the
 chemoreceptor trigger zone and emetic center. It may cause excitation and sedation. The
dosage is 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg q 12 hours, SC or IM.
Sucralfate reacts with hydrochloric acid to form a complex that binds to proteinaceous
exudates at ulcers and protects the site from further damage by pepsin, acid, or bile. It
108SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
an e a a  ae i p ig uisd aes oe 
effect similar to misoprostol. It does not alter acid, trypsin, or amylase secretion. Sucralfate
decreases the bioavailability and absorption of other drugs and may cause constipation.
 The dosage is between 0.25 and 1 g q 6 to 8 hours PO for a small dog or cat to a large dog.
respectively.
Cimetidine, ranitidine, and famotidine block the H, receptor on the basolateral mem-
brane of the parietal cells of the stomach. They decrease acid production and do not alter
 gastric emptying time or lower esophageal or pyloric sphincter tone or pancreatic or bili-
ary secretion. Cimetidine inhibits P-450 microsomal enzyme function in the liver and
may alter the metabolic rate of other commonly used drugs (β-blockers, calcium-channel
 blockers, diazepam, metronidazole, acetaminophen). Cimetidine binds H, receptors on
red cells and platelets and may be associated with anemia and thrombocytopenia. Cimeti-
dine crosses the blood-brain barrier and may be associated with mental confusion and
 depression. All agents, by virtue of increasing gastric fluid pH, may allow repopulation of
the stomach and mouth with potentially pathogenic organisms, which in turn predispose
to nosocomial pneumonia. The dosage of cimetidine is 5 to 10 mg/kg PO, IV, IM q 6 to
 8 hours; the dosage of ranitidine is 0.5 to 2 mg/kg PO IV, IM q 8 to 12 hours; and the dosage
of famotidine is 1 to 2 mg/kg PO, IV, SC, IM q 12 hours.
Omeprazole is a gastric acid proton pump inhibitor. In an acid environment, it is acti-
vated to a sulfonamide derivative that binds irreversibly to the H+/K+ exchange ATPase
enzyme on the secretory surfaces of the parietal cells. Recovery from the drug's effects
depends on the synthesis of new H+/K+ ATPase protein (3 days). The drug also inhibits the
cytochrome P-450 mixed function oxidase system in the liver and therefore inhibits metab-
olism of a variety of other drugs, such as sedatives and anesthetics. It may cause abdominal
cramping, vomiting, or diarrhea. The dosage is 0.5 to 1 mg/kg PO q 24 hours. The current
assessment is that proton pump inhibitors are more beneficial than H, receptor antagonists;
however, it may take up to 72 hours for the full effect. Consequently, famotidine is often
started concurrently and discontinued after 72 hours.
Antacids have largely been supplanted by sucralfate and H,-blockers because the latter
work better and have fewer side effects. Antacids neutralize gastric acid, inhibit the proteo-
lytic activity of pepsin, and have alocal astringent effect. They may be used as a supplement
to the other drugs and are still recommended for the therapy of hyperphosphatemia in
renal failure; they may cause hypophosphatemia in patients without renal failure. Mag-
nesium products should not be used in renal failure. Some products contain significant
amounts of sodium and potassium and should be used with caution in patients with hyper-
natremia or hyperkalemia. Aluminum products may delay gastric emptying and should be
used with caution in renal-compromised patients. Aluminum and calcium products may
cause constipation, whereas magnesium products may cause diarrhea. These drugs should
also be given remote to other oral medicants. The dosage of aluminum, calcium, or magne-
sium hydroxide is 1 to 10 mL, depending on the size of the animal.
 Misoprostol directly inhibits gastric parietal cell acid secretion and is cytoprotective by
increasing secretion of gastric mucus and bicarbonate. Ihe drug also enhances mucosal
defense mechanisms and healing of acid-induced injuries. It is specifically therapeutic for
the Gl complications of antiprostaglandin therapy but does not interfere with the antin-
flammatory/analgesic effects of those drugs. Misoprostol enhances uterine contractions
and specifically should not be used in the pregnant animal. It also enhances GI motil-
ity; cramps, diarrhea, or vomiting may be a problem. The dosage of misoprostol is 2 to
5 mcg/kg PO q 8-12 hours.
Renal
Acute renal failure can occur as a direct result of some poisons and intoxications
(e.g., ethylene glycol, vitamin D rodenticides, some mushrooms, grapes, lilies, some snake
or spider envenomation, lead, zinc) or as an indirect consequence of the systemic hemody-
namic and inflammatory effects of other poisons. Urine flow is an indirect measure of renal
Chapter 1l | Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient  109
 blood flow and renal blood flow is an indirect measure of visceral blood flow. Maintaining
visceral blood flow and urine output is an important aspect of managing the poisoned or
intoxicated patient. Renal blood flow is optimized by restoring and maintaining an effective
circulating blood volume. Urine output can be assessed by serial palpation of the urinary
bladder, weighing bedding/litter boxes, or by actual measurement following aseptic place-
ment of a urinary catheter. Normal urine output should be about 1 to 2 mL/kg per hour.
 If oliguria or anuria persists after restoration of an effective circulating volume, a diuretic
should be administered: furosermide (0.5 to 5 mg/kg IV bolus ± 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg per hour)
or mannitol (0.5 g/kg IV bolus ± 0.1 g/kg per hour). Statistically, diuretic therapy does not
prevent acute renal failure, but it does facilitate the medical management of the case. Oligu-
ria (<1 mL/kg per hour) or anuria (0 mL/kg per hour) lead to fluid and electrolyte retention
(edema, hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis) and failure to excrete normal metabolic prod-
ucts (azotemia) as well as the poison or toxin.
Many poisons and toxins are weak acids or bases. Modification of urine pH, by increas-
ing the ionized component of the product, can facilitate its elimination. Acidification of
the urine can enhance the excretion of weak bases such as amphetamine, phencyclidine,
and strychnine. Oral ammonium chloride is administered at a dosage of 200 mg/kg/day
divided q 6 hours to enhance renal elimination of certain toxins or drugs in dogs and
20 mg/kg q 12 hours in the cat for urine acidification. Urine pH should be monitored to
assure adequate urine acidification and plasma ammonia should be monitored to prevent
hyperammonemia. Alkalinization of the urine can enhance the excretion of weak acids
such as salic ylates, ethylene glycol, and barbiturates. Sodium bicarbonate is administered
(depending on the size of the patient and pretreatment pH) at a dosage of 650 mg to 5.85 g
PO per day (dog and cat). Potassium citrate may also be used at 40 to 75 mg/kg q12 hours
or 50 to 100 mg/kg q 12 hours (dog and cat, respectively). Urine and plasma pH should
bemonitored.
Hepatic
 The liver plays an important role in the detoxification of exogenous and endogenous poi-
oiane aa) surxon pue suosiod jenaaas jo jaien Aiud e ose si lI suixon pue suos
phen, mothballs, mushrooms, cycads, xylitol, cyanobacteria). Hepatocellular damage and
cholestasis can be ascertained by routine measures of hepatic enzymes and function tests
(alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, and biliru-
proteinemia, and coagulopathy are discussed in the following. Hyperammonemia may be
associated with an encephalopathy. Acute renal failure may occur secondary to acute liver
failure (hepatorenal syndrome). Significant reversible renal vasoconstriction is considered
 the etiology of the renal component in this syndrome; however, the exact mechanism is
unknown.
General hepatosupportive measures include the administration of glutathione donors
(N-acetyl cysteine, S-adenosyl methionine), silymarin, vitamins C and E, carnitine, ursode-
oxycholic acid, and low doses of vitamin K.
Hematological
Hemoglobin
Anemia is associated with a number of poisons and toxins resulting from intravascular
hemolysis (bee stings, some snake or spider envenomation, anionic detergents, zinc), extra-
vascular hemolysis (mothballs, onions, garlic), gastrointestinal blood loss (antiprostaglan-
dins, iron, arsenic, phenols, detergents, disinfectants, bleach, chlorinated hydrocarbons,
and organic solvents) or the lack of red cell production. Anticoagulant rodenticide
intoxication and disseminated intravascular coagulation can be associated with bleeding
anywhere. Historically, in humans, the trigger for a hemoglobin transfusion has been a
110 SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
hemoglobin concentration of 10 g/dL (a packed cell volume [PCV] of 30%). Recent studies in
humans have suggested that a more relaxed trigger of 7 g/dL (PCV = 21%) is associated with
at least as good, and perhaps better, morbidity and mortality statistics. In veterinary medicine,
in animals with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, it is well accepted to withhold blood
transfusions until the hemoglobin concentration is less than 5 g/dL (PCV = 15%). There are
many examples of human and veterinary patients surviving much greater levels of anemia.
It may not actually be possible to define a minimum hemoglobin concentration, given
the complexities of cardiac output and oxygen extraction compensatory mechanisms. An
animal can tolerate greater degrees of anemia if it has the wherewithal to increase cardiac
output. Metabolic markers of tissue oxygenation may help guide the need for hemoglobin
transfusions. Blood may need to be administered in volumes of 10 to 30 mL/kg in the dog.
depending on the magnitude of anemia. Cats have a smaller blood volume (50-55 mL/kg),
and bolus dosages of all fluids should be approximately 50% of canine recommendations.
The amount of blood to administer also can be calculated: (desired PCV - current PCV) X
BW (kg) × 2 mL whole blood (or 1 mL packed red blood cells).
OncoticPressure
Plasma oncotic pressure is an important vascular fluid retention force. When depleted,
there is an increased risk of interstitial edema, but because of an off-setting decrease in
perimicrovascular oncotic pressure, hypoproteinemia is not as edemagenic as might be
expected. An increased capillary hydrostatic pressure and vascular permeability are, in
contrast, potent causes of edema. Colloid oncotic pressure (COP) can be measured; values
in normal animals are 20 to 25 mm Hg. Values of 15 to 20 mm Hg are common in critically
ill patients but are not thought to be of important concern. Values in the low teens should
trigger therapy and values in the single digits should cause great concern. Colloid oncotic
 pressure can be qualitatively approximated from an albumin measurement (albumin nor-
mally accounts for about 70% of the COP). Albumin values in normal dogs and cats are 2.9
moqe um pateioosse st urnqle ul aseaiap %0s y Xlaaisadsa1 'ip/8 6'g 01 6't pue 7' 01
a 50% reduction in COP.
One cost-effective way to augment COP is the administration of an artificial colloid
such as dextran 70 or hetastarch in bolus dosages (if volume augmentation is also desir-
able) of 10 to 20 mL/kg or continuous infusions of 1to 2 mL/kg per hour. Recently canine
lyophilized albumin has been made available. A total of 5 to 6 mL/kg of canine albu-
min (16%) is recommended for the correction of hypoalbuminemia with a maximum of
200 mg/kg per day. The maximum rate of administration in normovolemic patients or
patients with preexisting conditions resulting in volume overload is 1 mL/minute. Dogs
with anemia or extreme dehydration should not receive canine albumin unless concur-
rent red blood cell products or appropriate fluid therapy is frst administered. Plasma
because of cost and volume required; however, plasma may be indicated if there are con-
current coagulation issues, and whole blood may be indicated if there are concurrent
hemoglobin issues.
 In the face of normal liver function, providing appropriate caloric intake is another
method of increasing albumin levels. Nutrition may be delivered via enteral or parenteral
routes, although enteral is usually preferred.
Coagulation
Coagulopathies can be primary (platelets), secondary (clotting factors), or tertiary (fibrino-
gen). Platelet numbers can be assessed with a platelet count or a platelet screen on a blood
smear (normal = 12 to 25 per oil immersion field, in a good blood smear without platelet
dlumping; platelet count is estimated at 15,000 × number of platelets per oil immersion feld).
Platelet function can be assessed by examining for petechia or a buccal mucosal bleeding
time (normal, <4 minutes). Coagulation factors are assessed by in vitro tests such as pro-
thrombin time (PT, normal values are laboratory dependent), partial thromboplastin time
(PTT, normal values are laboratory dependent), activated clotting time (ACT <120 seconds
Chapter ll | Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient 1ll
at 37° C), and whole blood clotting time (<4 minutes at 37° C; 8 minutes at room tempera-
ture). Elevated fibrin degradation products represent activation of the clotting/fibrinolytic
cascades; elevated d-dimer represents fibrinolysis. Decreased antithrombin levels (normal
80%-140% in the dog) may be indicative of a protein-losing “-opathy” and prothrombotic
state or may represent consumption and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Thromboelastography provides an integrated assessment of clot formation that can be used
Coagulopathies may or may not need to be treated. If bleeding is minor (not into a vital
organ), and blood can easily be replaced by transfusion, specific therapy may not be neces-
sary. Specific treatment with fresh-frozen plasma is used if platelets are not required, but
 aan e u r g ig  s  se rs s a
vitamin K antagonist poisoning, any plasma will suffice (fresh or frozen). The goal of plasma
therapy is to stop the bleeding. Laboratory tests can be improved, but it is not the objective
of therapy to push them to normal. Thrombocytopenia cannot be markedly improved with
plasma therapy, is very expensive, and probably would not be possible because of hypervol-
emia. Platelet concentrate is available; however, it is also expensive and requires significant
volumes. Spontaneous bleeding from thrombocytopenia is not anticipated until platelet
counts are less than 30,000/μL.
Glucose
An adequate level of blood glucose is important for cerebral metabolism. Hypoglycemia
might occur during hepatic failure or sepsis; hyperglycemia is also a common nonspecific
hormonal response to stress hormones. Blood glucose less than 60 mg/dL should be treated
with a 2.5% to 5% glucose infusion. Severe hypoglycemia should be treated, in addition,
with a bolus of glucose (0.1-0.25 g/kg). There is growing evidence that persistent moder-
ate hyperglycemia (>200 mg/dL; >ll mM/L) in the intensive care setting is associated with
significantly poorer outcomes. In this setting, it has been recommended to enforce glycemic
control with insulin in quantities sufficient to maintain the blood glucose concentration
below 150 to 200 mg/dL (8-11 mM/L),
Metabolic Acid-Base Status
Lactic metabolic acidosis results from inadequate tissue oxygenation. The marker for
metabolic acidosis is a decreased bicarbonate concentration (normal = 20-24 mEq/L in
the dog; 18-22 mEq/L in the cat); a decrease in total carbon dioxide concentration (nor-
mally 1-2 mEq/L higher than bicarbonate); or an increase in the base deficit (normal = 0 to
-4 mEq/L in the dog, -3 to -7 in the cat). Lactate is the marker for lactic acidosis (normal
= <2 mM/L), which is usually presumed to represent inadequate tissue oxygenation but
also can be elevated as a result of other abnormalities, such as catecholamine-stimulated
Na-K-ATPase activity.
Mild to moderate metabolic acidosis does not need to be treated specifically; correction
of the underlying problem should suffice. Severe metabolic acidosis (pH <7.20) in the face
of adequate effective circulating volume may benefit from therapy with sodium bicarbonate:
desired base deficit - measured base deficit × body weight (kg) × 0.3
These dosages of bicarbonate should be administered over a period of at least 20 minutes.
Sodium
Sodium concentration is an expression of the relative numbers of sodium molecules to
water molecules in the extracellular fluid (ECF). Sodium concentration is important to
transcellular fluid flux. Abnormalities in sodium concentration (hyponatremia <140 mEq/L
dog, <149 mEq/L cat; and hypernatremia >150 mEq/L dog, >162 mEq/L cat) may occur
in any combination with abnormalities in ECF sodium and water content (dehydration,
edema). Abnormalities in sodium concentration usually can be attributed to changes in free
water. Free water must be added to reduce a sodium concentration (hypernatremia = free
112SECTION 1ToxicologicConcepts
water deficit) and taken away to increase it (hyponatremia = free water excess). Free water
may be gained by drinking water, may be administered in the form of 5% dextrose in water
Or may occur secondary to high levels of antidiuretic hormone. Free water may be lost
via evaporation (lungs and skin) or losing fluids, which are low in sodium compared with
normal ECF (diarrhea, vomitus, urine). Abrupt changes of sodium concentrations of more
than about 15 to 17 mEq/L (in either direction) should be avoided because they may be asso-
ciated with untoward transcellular water shifts and unfavorable neurologic consequences.
The combination of hypernatremia and hypervolemia can be caused by impermeant
combination of hypernatremia and normovolemia can be caused by diabetes insipidus
 s a i   so    
may be iatrogenic (inadequate access to water). The combination of hypernatremia and
hypovolemia (dehydration) can be caused by water loss in excess of sodium through extra-
renal routes (vomiting, diarrhea, third space, burns) or via renal routes (osmotic or chemi-
cal diuresis, chronic renal failure, postobstructive diuresis). Hypernatremia causes ECF
hyperosmolality and intracellular dehydration. The cells first manifesting signs of dehydra-
tion are those of the CNS (depressed mentation, restlessness, irritability, muscle twitch-
ing/tremors, hyperreflexivity, muscle rigidity/spasticity, ataxia, myoclonus, tonic spasms,
coma). Tissue shrinkage can cause intracranial hemorrhage. Acute hypernatremia (<6
hours) should be treated by the rapid administration of free water (in the form of 5% dex-
trose in water). In acute hypernatremia, the plasma sodium level may be corrected more
quickly. In time the intracellular compartment increases its intracellular osmoles to offset
the effects of the extracellular sodium aberration and restore intracellular water volume
toward normal. Chronic hypernatremia (>24 hours) must be treated with caution to lower
the sodium no faster than 1 mEq per hour to avoid water intoxication. The clinical signs of
patient initially should be treated with a solution with a sodium concentration that is close
to that of the patient (within 6 mEq of the patient's plasma sodium level). The sodium
concentration is then slowly decreased by administering 5% dextrose in water at the rate of
about 3.7 mL of water/kg body weight per hour.
The combination of hyponatremia and normal plasma osmolality is referred to as pseu-
dohyponatrermia and is most often associated with hyperlipidemia or hyperproteinemia.
Hyponatremia with high plasma osmolality is usually the result of hyperglycemia or man-
nitol infusion. Patients with hyponatremia and low plasma osmolality are further divided
based on volume status. Causes of hyponatremia, low plasma osmolality and hypervolemia
include congestive heart disease, severe liver disease, nephrotic syndrome, or advanced
renal failure. If the patient is normovolemic (with hyponatremia and low plasma osmo-
lality) antidiuretic drugs, myxedema coma of hypothyroidism, or hypotonic fluid therapy
should be considered as possible etiologies. Hypovolemic patients (with hyponatremia and
low plasma osmolality) may have renal (hypoadrenocorticism, diuretic administration) or
extrarenal causes (vomiting, diarrhea, third space, cerebral salt wasting, syndrome of inap-
propriate antidiuretic hormone secretion).
Hyponatremia causes intracellular edema and has been associated with obtundation,
anorexia, muscle weakness and wasting, and GI signs. Common coexisting electrolyte prob-
lems include hypochloremia, hyperkalemia, and hyperphosphatemia. Mild hyponatremia
requires no special consideration beyond therapy directed to the underlying disease process
and volume restoration with any ECF replacement solution. Acute severe hyponatremia
(<6 hours) should be treated by the rapid administration of saline. In time the intracellu-
lar compartment decreases its intracellular osmoles to offset the effects of the extracellular
sodium aberration and restore intracellular water volume toward normal. Chronic hypo-
natremia (>24 hours) must be treated with caution so as to raise the sodium no faster than
0.5 mEq per hour to avoid myelinolysis. Initially, volume problems should be treated with a
solution having a sodium concentration that is close to that of the patient. The sodium con-
centration is then slowly increased by administering a hypertonic saline solution at a rate of
about 0.3 mEq of sodium/kg per hour. Ihe clinical signs of myelinolysis occur 2 to 7 days
Chapter ll | Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient 1l13
after inappropriate correction of severe hyponatremia and include spastic quadriparesis,
facial palsy, dysphagia, vocal dysfunction, and mental confusion to coma.
Potassium
Most of the potassium in the body is located in the intracellular fluid compartment (140
mEq/L), whereas very little of it is located in the extracellular fluid compartment (4 mEq/L).
 Repolarization of electrically excitable cells is largely attributed to the rapid eflux of potas-
sium. Resting membrane potential is determined by the equilibrium between potassium
moving out of the cell in response to the intracellular to extracellular potassium gradient,
and potassium moving back into the cell in response to the extracellular to intracellular
electronegativity.
Hyperkalemia is primarily caused by decreased urinary excretion (oliguric/anuric renal
disease, hypoadrenocorticism, ruptured bladder, urethral obstruction, selected Gl disease,
or certain drugs such as ACE inhibitors, ACE receptor antagonists, cyclosporine, potas-
sium sparing diuretics, nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs, heparin, or trimethoprim).
Hyperkalemia also may be caused by translocation from intracellular to extracellular such
as insulin deficiency (diabetic ketoacidosis, DKA), acute tumor lysis syndrome, reperfusion
after aortic thromboembolism, rhabdomyolysis, metabolic (inorganic)/respiratory acidosis,
periodic familial hyperkalemia, infusion of lysine or arginine intotal parenteral nutrition, or
certain drugs such as nonspecific beta-blockers and cardiac glycosides. It also can be iatro-
genic from rapid infusion of potassium-containing fluids at excessive rates. Pseudohyperkale-
mia can occur if the blood sample is not analyzed for a period of time because of hemolysis.
or from platelet or white cell degradation (only in severe thrombocytosis or leukocytosis).
Hyperkalemia causes membrane hypopolarization, which may result in extrasystoles/
tial or asystole when resting membrane potential is slightly less negative. Hyperkalemia also
increases potassium permeability, which augments the repolarization phases of the electro-
cardiograph (tall, tented, narrow T wave) and diminishes the depolarization phases (small P
waves, prolonged PR intervals, bradycardia, and widened QRS complexes). Hyperkalemia also
may be associated with peripheral muscle weakness, decreased contractility, and weak pulse
quality. Finally there is a blending of the QRS and T waves (a sinusoidal pattern), hypotension,
and either ventricular asystole or fibrillation. Calcium is cardioprotective in patients with clin-
ically relevant dysrhythmia attributed to hyperkalemia (1.0-1.5 mL of 10% calcium gluconate),
administered intravenously. By virtue of its effect on membrane threshold potential, calcium
atagonizes the effect of hyperkalemia and immediately returns the electrical performance
toward normal. The effects of calcium, however, are short-lived, lasting only until the cal-
cium is redistributed. Therapies to specifically address hyperkalermia include a dextrose bolus
(stimulating endogenous insulin), administration of exogenous insulin and dextrose (0.25-0.5
units/kg of regular insulin/kg administered as an intravenous bolus and 2 g of glucose per unit
of insulin, administered as an intravenous infusion over 2 hours) and sodium bicarbonate
(1-2 mEq/kg slow IV bolus). In human medicine the administration of beta agonists, such as
terbutaline, has been shown to redistribute potassium intracellularly.
diarrhea) or renal (chronic failure, aldosterone-mediated, hyperadrenocorticism) losses
or secondary to drugs such as diuretics (loop or thiazide) and amphotericin B. Hypoka-
lemia may be caused by a lack of intake such as potassium free fluids or severely aberrant
diet. It may also be caused by translocation in catecholamine administration, insulin- or
glucose-containing fluids, alkalosis, bicarbonate therapy, betaz-agonist administration,
(electrical paralysis) and decreases potassium permeability (diminishes repolarization
processes and enhances the depolarization processes). Hypokalemia is associated with
general muscle weakness (skeletal, gastrointestinal, and myocardial) and may be asso-
ciated with electrocardiographic changes opposite to those of hyperkalemia (although
   iaa  ae a s  se ro  sa a
U waves (a positive deflection following the T wave), elevated P wave, increased R wave
114SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
amplitude, and depressed ST segment. Hypokalemia is also associated with CNS depres-
sion and an impaired ability of the nephrons to concentrate urine. A severely hypokalemic
patient needs to be potassium loaded. As a general rule, potassium can be administered
at rates up to 0.5 mEq/kg per hour. Moderately hypokalemic patients should be treated by
supplementing the potassium concentration in the administered fluids to 20 to 50 mEq/L,
depending on the magnitude of the hypokalemia.
Calcium
Plasma calcium exists in three forms: ionized (55%), nonionized chelated (10%), and
albumin-bound (35%). Ihe ionized is physiologically the most important and the form
that is regulated by the body. Normal total calcium concentrations in the dog and cat are
about 9 to 11 mg/dL (2.2-2.8 mM/L); ionized calcium concentrations are about 1.1 to 1.4
mM/L (4.4-5.6 mg/dL).
Hypercalcemia impairs the function of most cells in the body by decreasing threshold
potential (less negative transmembrane potential) for excitable cells (making them less
excitable and slowing conduction), increasing the contractile state of smooth and skele-
tal muscle, increasing ATP use by cell membrane and endoplasmic reticulum membrane
calcium pumps, and interfering with ATP production associated with the mitochondrial
accumulation of the calcium. This is manifested clinically by obtundation, poor diastolic
heart function, increased arteriolar vasomotor tone, impaired nephron concentrating abil-
ity, lethargy and muscle weakness, arrhythmias, muscle twitching, and seizures. Chronic
hypercalcemia is also associated with gastric hyperacidity and vomiting, and calciuresis,
urolithiasis, and renal failure. Pathologic hypercalcemia is caused by hyperparathyroid-
ism, hypervitaminosis D (rodenticides, calcitriol glycoside plants, antipsoriatic creams,
tologic malignancy (multiple myeloma), granulomatous disease (blastomycosis, dermati-
tis, panniculitis), diuretic phase of acute renal failure, chronic renal failure, and idiopathic
hypercalcemia of felines. The mainstay of hypercalcemia treatment is effective therapy of the
support and saline diuresis. The latter can be augmented by furosemide; thiazides should
be avoided. Sodium bicarbonate therapy decreases the ionized calcium concentration via
alkalinization and increased protein binding. Corticosteroids may lower serum calcium if it
is elevated because of neoplasia, hypoadrenocorticism, or granulomatous disease. Cortico-
steroids also decrease intestinal reabsorption, increase renal excretion of calcium, and
decrease bone demineralization. Life-threatening hypercalcemia could be treated with che-
lating agents such as sodium or potassium phosphate (0.25-0.5 mM/kg IV over 4 hours),
EDTA (50 mg/kg per hour IV to effect), sodium citrate, or calcium-channel blockers.
s sies pue siop u enaeiada ieanl on pasn uaq sir ose adenan aidsods
therapy has been associated with the development of renal impairment, which appears to be
dependent on the rate of infusion and bisphosphonate chosen. Pamidronate, at 1.3 mg/kg in
150 mL of 0.9% saline given over 2 hours IV, rapidly decreases serum calcium with minimal
side effects. Peritoneal or hemodialysis also could be used to remove calcium from the body.
 Hypocalcemia lowers (more negative) threshold transmembrane potential and increases
the excitability of the nervous system and muscles. This may be manifested by muscle trem-
ors, fasciculations, and twitching; muscle contractions, cramps, and tetany; disorientation,
restlessness, hypersensitivity to external stimuli, paresthesias, and facial rubbing; panting and
hyperthermia; prolapse of the third eyelid; and arrhythmias and hypotension. Hypocalcemia
commonly may be attributed to hypoalbuminemia, acute or chronic renal failure, eclamp-
 sia, or acute pancreatitis. Conditions occasionally associated with hypocalcemia are soft tis-
Sue trauma or rhabdomyolysis, ethylene glycol poisoning, hypoparathyroidism, phosphate
enema, and after NaHCO administration. Other less common conditions are intestinal
products or EDTA, hypomagnesemia, nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism, tumor
lysis syndrome, and laboratory error. Ihere is no broad agreement as to when hypocalcemia
should be treated, but as a general guideline, ionized concentrations less than 0.75 mM/L
Chapter ll | Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient 115
should be treated. Calcium gluconate can be administered as a slow IV bolus (0.5-1.5 mL of
the 10% solution) and if needed, an IV constant rate infusion (5-15 mg/kg ofthe 10% solution/
kg per hour) to maintain normal calcium. Patients should be monitored for bradycardia.
Magnesium
Magnesium is a cofactor for many intracellular enzyme systems and metabolic pathways,
including formation and degradation of ATP and as a cofactor with ATP in driving intracel-
lular ion pumps such as Na/K-ATPase, HCO,-ATPase, and Ca-ATPase. Because Mg-ATP
potassium concentration and sequester cytosolic calcium. By virtue of its pivotal role in the
handling of intracellular calcium, magnesium is important in cardiac excitability, contrac-
tion, and conduction as well as the smooth muscle of peripheral vasculature. Magnesium
is vital in DNA synthesis and transcription, nucleic acid polymerization, and production
of intracellular second messengers. Magnesium exists in plasma in three forms: ionized
(55%); nonionized, chelated (15%); and bound to albumin (30%). The ionized fraction is
the biologically active form. Normal total magnesium concentrations in the dog and cat are
about 1.7 to 2.5 mg/dL (0.7-1.0 mM/L); ionized magnesium concentrations are about 0.8 to
1.3 mg/dL (0.3-0.55 mM/L).
muscle weakness and paralysis, respiratory depression, vasodilation, and hypotension. It may
also be associated with heart block and coma. Hypermagnesemia can be iatrogenic by the
administration of magnesium-containing antacids, cathartics, or magnesium-supplemented
fluid therapy. Hypermagnesemia may be treated with aggressive fluid and diuretic therapy, and
can be antagonized with 0.5 to 1 mL of 10% calcium gluconate/kg per hour (4.65-9.3 mg/mL).
Hypomagnesemia lowers the threshold potential (more negative) for excitable cells,
which increases their excitability, enhances the release of calcium from stores in the endo-
plasmic reticulum, facilitates the release of neurotransmitters, inhibits the Na-K-ATPase
membrane pump, and enhances the leakage of potassium from the cell (eventually rais-
ing resting membrane potential toward or beyond threshold potential), and is generally
associated with widespread impaired cellular function. Hypomagnesemia is manifested
by neural and neuromuscular excitability: hyperexcitability and noise hypersensitivity,
muscle twitching, fasciculations, spasms, tetany, and eventually coma and muscle paraly-
sis. Hypomagnesemia may be associated with refractory hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia,
hyponatremia, and hypocalcemia. It also may be associated with ventricular arrhythmias;
ECG changes may be similar to those of hyperkalemia. Hypomagnesemia may be caused
by malnutrition and malabsorption, chronic diarrhea, colonic neoplasia, diabetes mellitus
DKA, diuresis (loop diuretics, osmotics, thiazides, saline, polyuric renal failure, hyperaldo-
steronism, hyperthyroidism), renal tubular acidosis, concurrent electrolyte abnormalities
otics, cisplatin, cyclosporine, citrate-anticoagulated blood, and lactation. Hypomagnesemia
should be treated if the patient is symptomatic, serum magnesium concentrations are less
than 1.0 mg/dL (0.4 mM/L) total or less than 0.2 mM/L (0.45 mg/dL) ionized. An initial
dose of magnesium sulfate (0.2 mEq/kg) can be slowly administered to see if clinical signs
improve. Magnesium sulfate can be administered at a daily dosage of 0.75 to 1.0 mEq/kg per
day administered as a continuous-rate infusion. There are many oral magnesium supple-
ments available for longer-term supplementation.
General Principles in the Care of Critically
Ill Poisoned Patients
Infection Control
All critically ill poisoned patients should be considered susceptible to nosocomial infec-
tions; that is, those acquired during hospitalization and not present or incubating at the
116SECTION 1 ToxicologicConcepts
time of admission. Ihere are many factors that may lead to this increased susceptibility.
These patients are nonspecifically stressed by their disease process; they may have comorbid
diseases such as viral infections, diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, or uremia, which
 lower their resistance to infection; they have high levels of immunosuppressive endoge-
diagnostic, or therapeutic procedures and/or indwelling devices and often suffer varying
degrees of malnutrition. These patients may concurrently be receiving antibiotics, which
predispose them to resistant bacterial or fungal overgrowth. They are surrounded by other
patients with possible infections and environments contaminated with virulent organisms;
and they are minimally mobile.
 The emphasis of nursing care protocols should be in maintaining asepsis. Precautions
should be taken to prevent the spread of infections to other patients. Precautions should
include both personal protection as well as environmental decontamination. Personal
protection is needed to prevent the spread of infectious organisms that may contami-
nate the caretaker and be transmitted to the critically ill poisoned patient. Personal pro-
tection should include clean disposable gloves and proper hand decontamination at the
immediately.
As important as personal protection is, environmental decontamination is even more
important. Because of this, the hospital environment can be a reservoir for infection to naive
dogs. Environmental decontamination should include the area where the critically ill poi-
soned patient is located and any objects that come in contact with the patient or caretaker who
handles the patient. Soiled bedding and bandages should be placed in designated receptacles
and not on the floor or counter. Floors, counters, and kennels should be regularly cleaned and
decontaminated. Also, stethoscopes, thermometers, and writing implements should be rou-
tinely cleaned and decontaminated. Effective sanitation requires applying a germicidal agent
to a basically clean surface. This requires use of both detergent and disinfectant products.
Detergents in themselves do nothing to kill germs. Their purpose is to remove any organic
matter before disinfection. Although some disinfectants can also act as detergents, many (e.g..
 bleach) do not. Ihe majority of disinfectants used in veterinary hospitals are inactivated by
organic material, so they are less effective when applied to surfaces that have not been thor-
oughly cleaned first. Periodically, a stronger degreaser should be used to remove body oils
and other grunge that builds up on surfaces over time and can also inactivate disinfectants.
All surgical, diagnostic, or therapeutic procedures should be completed under strict
aseptic conditions using properly sterilized equipment. All indwelling devices should
all fluids drained from the patient should be collected in sterile containers, which are com-
pletely closed to the atmosphere. All administration and collection apparatus should be
changed at regular intervals. All mechanical therapeutic equipment to which the patient is
attached should be properly sterilized and changed at regular intervals. Immobile patients
should be repositioned regularly (every few hours), and convalescing patients should be
encouraged to ambulate early to minimize the accumulation of respiratory secretions in
lower lung regions that predispose to pneumonia.
Insertion and Maintenance of Indwelling Vascular Catheters
The incidence of catheter-related infection increases with duration. A catheter-related
infection should be suspected if an other wise unexplainable fever or leukocytosis develops
or if there is any evidence of inflammation (pain, redness, heat, or swelling) at the skin
puncture site. The ideal treatment for a catheter-related infection is to remove it, culture the
tip of the catheter, culture the blood, and aseptically replace a new catheter in another loca-
tion. When there is no other location to place the new catheter, an over-the-wire catheter
exchange is the compromise.
Catheters should be aseptically placed and then taped (on appendages) or sutured (on
flat surfaces) close to the skin puncture site to prevent it from sliding in and out of the vessel.
Chapter ll I Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient l17
site can be used but are not universally recommended. The site should be wrapped occlu-
sively. Indwelling catheters should be redressed and inspected every 24 to 48 hours. All
soiled bandage material should be discarded. The puncture site should be cleaned with
antiseptic solutions and the occlusive wrap reapplied.
 Infusion fluids and administration tubing must be sterile. Connections should not be
disconnected unless absolutely necessary and then must be done aseptically. All injec-
tion caps should be cleaned well with an antiseptic solution before needle insertion. The
fluid bottles and all administration tubing should be changed every 24 to 48 hours. Tubing
should be changed after blood or colloid infusion. A peripheral over-the-needle-type cath-
eter should not be used for the collection of blood samples except in emergencies. Periph-
erally inserted central catheters or central venous catheters can be used safely for blood
collection, as long as strict aseptic protocol is followed.
Insertion and Maintenance of Indwelling Urinary Catheters
An indwelling urethral catheter is indicated if the urinary bladder cannot be easily
expressed, urine needs to be quantified, or to maintain the cleanliness and comfort of
recumbent or neurologically inappropriate patients. Urinary catheters should be soft, flex-
ible, and made of the least reactive material available to lessen irritation of the urethral
mucosa. Urinary catheters must be placed aseptically and attached to a closed drainage
system; all joints should be firmly attached or taped to prevent accidental disconnection.
The collection system should be positioned so that urine drains downhill with gravity. The
collection system also should be kept from direct contact with the floor. Draining the col-
lection reservoir or needle puncture of the collection tube to obtain a urine sample for
analysis must be accomplished aseptically. Ihe collection tubing should be taped to the tail
a hind limb, or abdomen to prevent accidental traction on the catheter and suture sites.
qu pu go auen iy e uaed a moe on duqni ai ul apiaoid aq pous yeis yanoug
motion. Antibiotic flushes have not been shown to prevent urinary infections, only to delay
them and select for resistant infections. The bag should be drained only every 8 to 12 hours
unless more discrete output measurements are desired.
 The prepuce or vestibule should be flushed with a dilute chlorhexidine or povidone
iodine solutionthree times daily to prevent migration of infectious agents into thebladder
along the outside of the catheter. The urinary catheter should be removed when it is no
longer necessary.
Patient Comfort
The patient should always be clean and dry. Urine, feces, and other secretions are irritating
to the skin and predispose to dermatitis. The emotional needs of the patient also must be
addressed frequently. Critically ill patients must be allowed time to sleep. Make sure that
some of the caregiver interactions are pleasant and not associated with poking, prodding,
and injecting. Owner visitations are almost always helpful to the patient's sense of well-
being; only an occasional animal gets very upset because of separation anxiety when an
owner leaves. In human patients, this contact has been shown to improve patient comfort
and to shorten hospital stays.
The Recumbent Patient
Positioning
Immobility and positional stasis for prolonged periods of time (1) predispose to tissue
mecrosis and decubitus over bony protuberances, (2) are associated with the accumulation
of secretions and atelectasis in the lower regions of the lung, (3) are associated with con-
tracture and stiffening of muscles and ligaments, and (4) may be associated with regional
appendage edema because of poor lymphatic drainage.
The recumbent or debilitated poisoned patient should be kept in a well-padded cage
or kennel, especially when the patient does not move around much. Pressure sores, or
118SECTION 1ToxicologicConcepts
decubital ulcers, are open wounds that develop over bony prominences when a patient
lies in the same position for a prolonged period of time. In people, these sores are
known as bed sores. To prevent the development of decubital ulcers, patients should
be placed on sof bedding, be kept clean and dry, and be turned periodically. Special
s iae aeiadsa 'sauauid auoq o aimsand daa oi papaau aq ae saepuq
cal procedures. If decubital ulcers do develop, pressure must be kept off the area that
has ulcerated to allow it to heal. This is another instance in which special bandages may
be beneficial. These wounds may have to be surgically addressed and antibiotics are
warranted.
 Prolonged recumbency can also cause the lung to collapse on the bottom, a condi-
tion called atelectasis. During breathing, air follows the path of least resistance, which
is the upper lung. Over time, all the air will be removed from the alveoli of the lower
lung because of normal gas exchange and pressure of the weight of the tissues on top
 of the lung. When the lung collapses, fluid secretions can accumulate in the air spaces
and/or the air space collapses. These patients are also prone to aspiration pneumonia
or secondary bacterial pneumonia. To help prevent this, patients should be turned fre-
quently. Alternating among right lateral, lef lateral, and sternal recumbency can help
with lung lobe expansion. Supplemental oxygen therapy sometimes is needed in animals
with cardiovascular or respiratory compromise until the lung recovers. Postural drain-
Minimally, this is performed by putting the patient's head down from the remainder
of the body by around 20 degrees from horizontal for at least 5 to 10 minutes. Thoracic
formed by clapping cupped hands on the thoracic wall over the affected lung. Correct
adno pasn ag go juoe a uu odu anou ae auosod pue anbua
should not be performed over normal lung because it will cause atelectasis. Coupage
a un o s n qau jn ussas e re pad aq a
keep the respiratory secretions hydrated, making them easier to be “coughed up.” Poi-
soned patients that are cardiovascularly unstable or those with pleural space disease,
severe thrombocytopenia, open wounds, thoracic tumors, and pain should not receive
coupage.
In the recumbent poisoned patient, the body and all appendages should be padded,
positioned comfortably, and repositioned every 4 hours. The critically ill patient commonly
requires some form of physical therapy, preferably every 4 hours. The goals of physical
therapy are preventing limb edema, preserving joint range-of-motion, and preventing con-
tracture and atrophy of muscles because of inactivity. Massage and range-of-motion exer-
cises are the most common forms of therapy. These procedures should be considered early
in the course of hospitalization to be most effective. There are five components to massage
for it to have its desired effect: rhythm, rate, pressure, direction, and frequency. Obtaining
some training in massage techniques is important for massage to be effective and to prevent
injury or pain to the patient. Massage is most effective if it is combined with range-of-
motion exercises. Because critically ill patients are commonly very weak, passive range-of-
motion and active-assisted range-of-motion exercises are used. The time spent performing
all of this therapy helps the healing process and has been shown to increase patient comfort
and shorten hospital stays.
Optimizing Fluid Therapy
The moistness and mobility of airway secretions depends on adequate systemic hydration.
With exudative secretions (pneumonia), patients should be maintained in the upper range
of normal hydration to keep the fluid secretions moist and able to be expectorated. Patients
with transudative secretions (pulmonary edema) should be maintained in the lower range
 of normal hydration to minimize fluid flux into the lungs. Patients that are being mechani-
cally ventilated tend to retain sodium and water because of high aldosterone levels. Fluid
ins and outs, body weight, and physical evidence of edema should be evaluated frequently
as part of the normal assessment of a patient's hydration status.
Chapter ll | Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient 119
The Unconscious, Heavily Sedated, or Anesthetized Patient
Many toxins have undesired effects on the neurologic, neuromuscular, or respiratory sys-
tem. Some patients present comatose, or require heavy sedation or anesthesia to manage
the neurologic or neuromuscular manifestations, or require anesthesia to manage the air-
way or provide mechanical ventilation for those patients that display significant respiratory
compromise because of toxic exposure.
Endotracheal Intubation
Unconscious patients should have air way access via endotracheal intubation or temporary
tracheostomy to (1) assure an open airway, (2) protect the airway should the patient vomit
or regurgitate, and (3) provide a means of positive pressure ventilation should the need
arise.
Avoiding traction on the tube when the patient is moved or rotated prevents accidental
tube dislodgment. Tubes should be secured by tying around the maxilla, mandible, or back
of the head (for orotracheal tubes) or around the neck (for tracheostomy tubes). These ties
should be snug enough to prevent the tube from dislodging or moving excessively if the
patient suddenly regains consciousness. Ties around the muzzle should be moved every
4 hours to minimize pressure points and lip necrosis.
 The endotracheal or tracheostomy tube cuff should not be inflated unless positive pres-
sure ventilation is being per formed or frequent vomiting or regurgitation is occurring in
these unconscious patients. Keeping the cuff deflated allows the patient to move some
air around the tube if it becomes obstructed. If the endotracheal or tracheostomy tube
cuffs are to be inflated, remember that these cuffs are round but the trachea is not. To seal
some portions of the circumference, other portions are likely to be subjected to exces-
sive cuff pressure. Asymmetrical tube cuffs and overinflated cuffs magnify the problem.
 Because the endotracheal or tracheostomy tube may be in place for several days, preven-
tion of pressure-induced tracheal damage by the inflated cuff is of paramount importance.
Use high-volume, low-pressure cuffs for long-term intubations. Inflate the cuff with just
enough air to barely stop the flow of air around the tube (auscult over the larynx) when
degree of cuff inflation; it is used only to indicate that there is air in the cuff, and it bears
no correlation whatsoever with the amount of pressure being applied to the tracheal wall.
aq us s ud asand gs a au aeioad on snae aq a 
accomplished with endotracheal tubes by deflating the cuff every 4 hours and moving the
tube slightly inward or outward. The cuff is then carefully reinflated. Before cuff deflation,
flush the mouth, pharynx, and the lumen of the trachea rostral to the cuff with saline. All
fluid should be removed by suctioning before deflating the endotracheal tube cuff.
Mucus and debris elevated from the depths of the airways and being produced second-
ary to the presence of the tube accumulate at the end of the tube. Intubated animals cannot
cough and accumulated secretions can dry and obstruct the tracheal tube. The inner can-
nula of a double-cannulated tracheostomy tube can be easily removed and cleaned every
4 hours. Tracheal tubes without inner cannulas and endotracheal tubes must be suctioned
and should be exchanged every 24 to 48 hours (depending on the quantity and viscosity of
the secretions).
Tracheal suctioning should be performed every 4 hours irrespective of the tube type
and more frequently if there are a lot of secretions. There are always some secretions; tra-
cheal suctioning should never be ignored. Suction catheters should be soft and flexible and
should have more than one hole in their tip to prevent sucking an epithelial plug into a
single hole, which would then be ripped away when the catheter is withdrawn. The suction
 catheter should have a proximal thumb hole so that suction can be applied in a controlled
manner. Ihe inside diarmeter of the catheter should be as large as possible to facilitate the
removal of thick secretions. The outside diameter of the catheter should be no larger than
50% of the diameter of the endotracheal tube or tracheostomy tube adapter. The air that is
suctioned through the catheter must come from the room and must be able to flow freely
120 SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
down around the outside of the suction catheter to prevent excessive reduction in airway
 pressure and small air way and alveolar collapse.
The suctioning procedure must be atraumatic and aseptic. The airway should be well
humidified just before the suctioning. The animal should breathe 100% oxygen for 5 min-
utes before suctioning to minimize the inevitable hypoxemia. Secretions can be mobi-
lized into the central airways by chest coupage just before suctioning. Inject 0.2 mL/kg
of saline into the tracheal tube and then manually hyperinflate the lungs several times.
Gently insert the suction catheter into the trachea as far as it will advance without any suc-
tion applied to the suction catheter. Suction is applied with a rotating and winding motion
while the catheter is being withdrawn. Suction should not be applied to the airways for
more than about 5 seconds to minimize small airway and alveolar collapse. The suctioning
procedure should cease immediately if discomfort, restlessnes, or changes in cardiac or
respiratory rhythm occur. Ihe patient shiould be manually hyperinflated with oxygen after
suctioning to alleviate the small airway and alveolar collapse. The entire procedure should
be repeated several times if it is productive.
Tracheal suctioning should always net some airway secretions. If not, it is because they
are too dry. Better humidification and secretion liquefaction are necessary. The presence of
blood in the aspirant indicates an excessively traumatic procedure. Try a gentler aspiration
technique with less pressure and lower flow rates and perhaps a smaller suction catheter if
blood is seen in the aspirate.
Airway Humidification
Humidification is the provision of water vapor to dry air or supplemental oxygen to
help prevent the drying of airway secretions. Endotracheal intubation and temporary
tracheostomy bypass the upper nasal passages, which are very effcient at humidifying
inspired air.
For patients receiving mechanical ventilation, in-line humidifiers should be heated and
sealed by a semipermeable membrane so that there is no water-air interface (warm water
supports growth of infectious organisms, which are a source of nosocomial pneumonia).
Unsealed humidifiers should be exchanged with sterile equipment every 24 hours. Cooling
between the heated humidifier and the patient causes water to condense in the inspiratory
tubing; it will need to be periodically drained. As an alternative to a commercial humidifier,
sterile distilled water can be instilled into the inspiratory tubing and endotracheal/trache-
ostomy tube about every 2 hours. There are commercial condenser/humidifiers that attach
to the tracheal tube and function as an artificial nose.
For patients receiving oxygen insuflation, the supplemental oxygen provided is anhy.
cation. Ihis is usually accomplished with a bubble humidifier.
Systemic hydration is of paramount importance in ensuring airway hydration. In a
dehydrated patient, airway humidification procedures are not very effective in keeping the
air ways and secretions moist, as the fluid is systemically absorbed.
Nebulization is the provision of particulate water droplets to therapeutically moisten
desiccated secretions. This is usually accomplished with an ultrasonic nebulizer, which
produces a dense mist of appropriately sized water droplets, which is then inhaled by the
patient. The nebulization treatment is generally applied for about 20 minutes at about
 4-hour intervals. This procedure may be followed by coupage to mobilize the now-hydrated
secretions.
Oral Care
Unconscious patients do not eat, drink, or swallow. The mouth and pharynx accumu-
late secretions, which soon become colonized with resident bacteria and predispose the
animal to nosocomial infections. The mouth and pharynx should be washed with sterile
saline and suctioned at about 4-hour intervals. It is important to prevent torque or traction
on the tracheal tube during this procedure. The pharynx and mouth should then be rinsed
with a commercial chlorhexidine-based oral antiseptic solution.
Chapter 1l | Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient  12l
The tongue will dry out if it is allowed to protrude from the oral cavity for any significant
length of time and may develop pressure-induced ulcers if it is allowed to drape across teeth
or if a pulse oximetry clip is left in one place for too long. The tongue should be cleaned
along with the mouth. It should be left wholly within the mouth between cleanings. It can
be wrapped in a saline and glycerin-soaked gauze sponge to keep it moist and minimize
sublingual edema.
Ocular Care
Some patients may be so debilitated from their toxic exposure or under the influence of
heavy sedation or anesthesia that they are unable to blink their eyes. Blinking allows the
eye to spread tears over the cornea, preventing it from drying out. When the cornea dries
 out, corneal ulcers can develop. This can be prevented by placing a tear-like lubricant
(drops or ointments) in the eyes at 2- to 4-hour intervals. If corneal ulceration is suspected,
 a fluorescein stain should be applied to the eye to check for corneal damage, and if cor-
neal damage is noted, broad-spectrum antibiotic ophthalmic ointments or drops should be
applied to the injured eye.
Bladder Care
Unconscious patients often do not urinate normally and when they do, the urine soils the
skin. Human infant absorbent diapers, properly positioned, work very well for collecting
the urine and preventing it from soaking the skin. The diapers can be weighed to quantitate
the urine output. If the patient does not urinate regularly, the bladder should be expressed;
however, a urinary catheter is often placed to facilitate urine collection, sanitation, and
patient comfort and to quantitate urine output. Ihe catheter must be inserted and main-
tained in an aseptic manner as described.
Colon Care
Comatose, heavily sedated, or anesthetized patients often do not defecate normally. Ihe
colon should be palpated daily to check for constipation. A warm saline enema, sometimes
with the addition of an osmotic stool softener such as dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate may
be indicated. Long hair in the perineal region should be clipped to facilitate the cleaning of
feces. If diarrhea develops, clipping of perineal fur and wrapping of the tail will help keep
the area clean and lessen the chance of developing dermatitis.
Nutrition
 Nutritional supplementation is vital to the recovery process for many poisoned patients.
However, many of these patients do not receive sufficient nutrition during this recov-
ery process. Over time, this lack of proteins, minerals, and energy substrates can lead to
a state of general illness, malnutrition, and profound disability, a condition defined as
cachexia. A cachectic patient has the potential to develop anemia, reduced cardiac mass
and function, decreased pulmonary function and respiratory drive, and altered intestinal
morphology and impaired absorptive ability. By providing nutrition to a patient unable
to consume sufficient food, we can improve immune function, improve tissue synthesis
and repair, improve intermediary drug metabolism, suppress the body's hypermetabolic
response, reverse any carbohydrate imbalance, and reduce protein catabolism.
The first key in assessing whether a patient requires supplemental nutrition is to deter-
mine which patients are at risk for malnutrition. These patients may include those with a
recent weight loss greater than 5% of body weight resulting from incidental comorbidity,
those with partial or complete anorexia of more than 3 days duration, or those unable to
take in food because of neurologic deficit, toxic neuromuscular effects, or heavy sedation or
anesthesia. For some patients, proactive nutritional intervention is beneficial. These are the
pue saiddnd auaan pue eieuoau se lam se shep s oie ioy iea iou im ioadsns am ssuaed
kittens and obese cats. Unfortunately, there are no current biochemical markers that help to
consistently determine which patients will benefit from supplemental nutrition.
122  SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Once those patients who may benefit from supplemental nutrition are identified, the
next key to a nutritional program is determining what type of nutrition will suit them best.
When all or part of the GI tract is available and functional, it is best to attempt to pro-
vide at least a portion of the patient's nutritional needs via the enteral route. This route has
advantages because there are more options for nutritional supplementation and the cells
lining the GI tract derive their nutrition via direct absorption from the intestine rather
than through the blood. If the GI tract is not functioning sufficiently, then the parenteral or
still a reason that not all nutritional requirements can be provided through enteral routes.
In these situations, a combination of enteral and parenteral nutrition can be given.
However, there are potential drawbacks to these methods, including stress and insufficient
or inconsistent caloric intake, and they are not practical in mentally inappropriate, uncon-
scious, heavily sedated, or anesthetized patients. Because of these issues, assisted feeding
through tubes may have to be used. Options for feeding devices include nasogastric or
nasoesophageal feeding tubes, gastrostomy tubes, and enterostomy tubes.
Many different calculations for determining caloric requirements are available. Most of
these methods of calculating nutritional requirements are based on a patient's ideal body
Weight. Some of these methods also incorporate an "illness factor” although these are fall-
ing out of favor. The reason behind this is that studies are now showing that these illness
factors tend to lead to oversupplementation of nutrients and calories, which also can have
detrimental effects. Commonly accepted formulas for determining caloric requirements in
Resting Energy Requirement
Aep/[esy = sa(ay u uatam Apoq) × 0
10
30 × (body weight in kg) + 70 = kcal/day for patients with body weight 2.0 to 45.0 kg
In some patients that are not able to tolerate full nutritional requirements by an enteral
route, providing microenteral nutrition may still be of benefit. Microenteral nutrition is the
1800
1600
30 × (BW in kg) + 70
= 70 × (BW in kg)0.75
1400
1200
1000
kcal/day
800
600
400
200
0
05101520253035404550556065707580859095
Figure ll-4 Resting energy requirements.
Chapter ll I Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient  123
delivery of small amounts of water, electrolytes, and readily absorbed nutrients directly to
the Gl tract to maintain mucosal cell integrity. Patients that are candidates for microenteral
nutrition include those that are predisposed to or already have developed stress gastric
ulceration or direct GI injury because of the toxin. Microenteral nutrition may assist these
protection against GI bacterial and endotoxin absorption, and promoting progressive gas-
tric motility.
The Gl tract receives its nutrients from intraluminal absorption. Food within the GI
sg i, sads a aau so an oi sia jo aos iai e s sas 
that are preferentially used as energy substrates by enterocytes, colonocytes, and immune
 ainan enaiua a la al go uosodn an uo tupaap sasand aq ae iel si
feeding also stimulates mesenteric blood flow, the autonomic nervous system, secretion
of various digestive enzymes, hormones, and growth factors; increases Gl mucus produc-
tion and helps prevent ileus. Finally, the sources and processing of nutrients in a diet can
influence the makeup of the Gl microflora. When the GI tract does not receive sufficient
nutrients, several pathologic consequences can occur. Ihese include villous atrophy lead-
ing to increased mucosal permeability, decreases in gut-associated lymphoid tissue, and
decreased surface area for absorption of nutrients for systemic use.
When gut barrier failure occurs in critical illness secondary to shock, trauma, or sepsis,
it allows translocation of bacterial and endotoxin into the portal and, sometimes, systemic
circulations. Ihis gut-derived sepsis may lead to a systemic inflammatory response, which
can alter the function of distant organs, possibly leading to multiorgan failure and death.
Patients that are candidates for microenteral nutrition include those that are predis-
posed to or already have developed stress gastric ulceration, patients with orofacial or
cervical injury, patients that are actively vomiting, and those that are early in recovery
from severe GI disease or GI surgery. Microenteral nutrition is commonly delivered by
nasoesophageal or nasogastric feeding tubes. Nasoesophageal and nasogastric tubes are
among the easiest and least expensive forms of feeding tubes available for use. Argyle
infant feeding tubes are ideal. They are soft and pliable and are well tolerated by most
patients after placement. Red rubber feeding tubes are a viable alternative, although they
can be more reactive with the nasal mucosa.
 Microenteral feedings are accomplished at a low, continuous rate infusion. Feedings are
started at rates of 0.25 to 0.5 mL/kg per hour to asses the patient's tolerance for feeding.
If tolerated, rates can be increased to 1 to 2 mL/kg per hour. The patient is monitored for
deleterious effects of administering large volumes of fluid/food, including vomiting and
potential aspiration, worsening of pancreatitis, and diarrhea. Gastric decompression of
both air and residual fluid is beneficial, if indicated. The removal of residual air can decrease
 gastric distention, making the patient more comfortable, decreasing the chance of emesis,
and increasing gastric motility. Ihe removal of residual food or fluid also decreases gastric
distention and prevents food from stagnating within the stomach if limited motility is pres-
ent. The volume of fluid should be quantifed to help monitor fluid balance (ins/outs), and
 electrolytes should be monitored because gastric secretions are being removed along with
the introduced food or fluid.
Gastric stasis resulting in the accumulation of previous feedings is a common problem
and with continued feeding results in gastric distention and regurgitation. Gastric residuals
must be checked before each feeding and should not be allowed to exceed approximately
10 mL/kg. Gastric motility may require augmentation by metoclopramide, cisapride, bethan-
echol, or the use of microenteral nutrition.
Just because patients start eating does not mean an abrupt end should be brought to
supplemental enteral nutrition. Gradual discontinuation of assisted feeding should be per-
aan aa un h yo ye i ie sau aeu sad an uam pa
ments. Unfortunately, there are no good tests to determine when assisted feeding is no
longer needed. These clinical decisions should be based on when the patient has achieved
good electrolyte balance and blood sugar control. Depending on the type of assisted feed-
124SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
tube. Removal of the tube is appropriate once assisted feeding is discontinued for a short
period in patients receiving nutrition via a nasogastric, nasoesophageal, or esophagostomy
tube should only have their feeding tube removed after assisted feeding is discontinued for
several days or after 7 to 10 days after tube placement, whichever is later. This will lessen the
likelihood of leakage from the stoma in the stomach or intestine.
CHAPTER
Effective Use of a
12
Diagnostic Laboratory
Patricia A. Talcott, MS, DVM, PhD, DABVT
and sensitive analytical methods. Most toxicology laboratories are integrated within
full service veterinary diagnostic laboratories, which also provide pathology, histopathol-
and other diagnostic services. Combining results from analyses from all diagnostic “sec-
tions” will provide a high probability of establishing an accurate diagnosis, especially if
the “diagnostic puzzle" is used to narrow the search. Toxicologists and their analytical staff
work closely with other personnel within the diagnostic laboratory from the other sec-
tions to fine tune the diagnostic approach to maximize the use of the submitted samples
and hopefully achieve a successful diagnosis. Many veterinary diagnostic laboratories have
close established contacts and working relationships with clinical experts present in associ-
ated teaching hospitals. This close working relationship helps the toxicologist narrow down
 or sometimes expand the list of potential toxins that may be involved in the case at hand.
Getting Started
Your first contact with a veterinary diagnostic laboratory should start with a telephone
consultation. In most veterinary diagnostic laboratories a veterinary toxicologist provides
differentials for a case, and assists in choosing appropriate diagnostic testing and proper
sample collection. Good communication in the early stage of a suspected poisoning case
between the practitioner and the diagnostic toxicology laboratory personnel is one of the
most useful tools in an investigation and will guarantee proper sample collection and accu-
for the initial treatment of a potentially poisoned animal. Consulting with laboratory per-
sonnel to determine the laboratory's analytical capabilities, costs of analyses, turn-around
times, and interpretation abilities is critical so that everyone involved is kept thoroughly
informed. The toxicologist can help expand or narrow down the focus of the investigation,
s uo u an q uaais o, a  use ou st uu a  os
select differentials to target for testing. This also can be the appropriate time for a practitio-
ner to pass along critical pieces of history regarding the case that may be too cumbersome to
write on the accession forms. The telephone consult also can provide necessary information
regarding packaging, preserving, and shipping the samples of interest. Some laboratories
are open for Saturday deliveries, but many are not. You might need to know this in case
samples arrive later than expected and are potentially perishable. Many laboratories have
much of this information on Internet websites, but often it is a good idea to contact the
laboratory directly to make sure that all information on the website is current and correct.
Box 12-1lists the American Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians (AAVLD)-
accredited veterinary diagnostic laboratories located in the United States and Canada.
*http://www.aavld.org/accreditation
125
126SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Box 12-1
AAVLD-Accredited Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratories—20ll
 State or Province
Laboratory Information
United States
Arizona
Arizona Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Tucson, AZ 85705
520-621-2356
Arkansas
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Arkansas Livestock and Poultry Commission
Little Rock, AR 72205
501-907-2430
California
California Animal Health and Food Safety Laboratory System
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA {Main lab) 95617-1770
530-752-8709
Colorado
Colorado State University Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Fort Collins, CO 80523
970-297-1281
Connecticut
 Connecticut Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory
Storrs, CT 06269-3089
860-486-4000
Florida
Bronson Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory
Kissimmee, FL 34741
321-697-1400
Georgia
University of Georgia
Athens Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Athens, GA 30602-7383
706-542-5568
University of Georgia Veterinary Diagnostic and Investigational
Laboratory
Tifton, GA 31793
229-386-3340
Illinois
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
University of Illinois, College of Veterinary Medicine
Urbana, IL 61802
217-333-1620
Indiana
 Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
765-494-7440
Iowa
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
 Iowa State University
Ames, LA 50011
515-294-1950
Kansas
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
 Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS 66506
785-532-5650
Kentucky
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Lexington, KY 40511
859-253-0571
Breathitt Veterinary Center
Murray State University
Hopkinsville, KY 42240
270-886-3959
Chapter 12 | Effective Use of a Diagnostic Laboratory 127
Louisiana
Louisiana Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
225-578-9777
Michigan
Diagnostic Center for Population and Animal Health
Michigan State University
Lansing, MI 48910-8104
517-353-0635
Minnesota
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
 University of Minnesota
St. Paul, MN 55108
612-625-8787
Mississippi
Mississippi Veterinary Research and Diagnostic Laboratory
System
Pearl, MS 39208
601-420-4700
Missouri
Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65211
573-882-6811
Montana
Montana Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Bozeman, MT 59718
406-994-4885
Nebraska
Veterinary Diagnostic Center
University of Nebraska
Lincoln, NE 68501-2646
402-472-1434
New York
Animal Health Diagnostic Center
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
607-253-3900
N. Carolina
Department of Agriculture & Consumer Services
Raleigh, NC 27607
919-733-3986
North Dakota
Department of Veterinary Diagnostic Services
 North Dakota State University
Fargo, ND 58105
701-231-8307
Ohio
 Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory
Reynoldsburg, OH 43068
614-728-6220
Oklahoma
 Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory
Oklahoma State University
Still water, OK 74078
405-744-6623
Oregon
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331
541-737-3261
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania Veterinary Laboratory System
 Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture
Harrisburg, PA 17110-9408 (Main lab—others located in Univer-
 sity Park and Kennett Square)
717-787-8808
Continued
128SECTION 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Box 12-1
AVLD-Accredited Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratories—2oll—cont'd
S. Carolina
Clemson Veterinary Diagnostic Center
Clemson University
Columbia, SC 29229
803-788-2260
South Dakota
 Animal Disease Research and Diagnostic Laboratory
South Dakota State University
Brookings, SD 57007-1396
605-688-5171
Tennessee
CE Kord Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory
Nashville, TN 37220
615-837-5125
Texas
Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory (TVMDL) - College
 Station; others located in Amarillo, Gonzales, Center
College Station, TX 77843
979-845-3414
Utah
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Logan, UT 84341
435-797-1895
Washington
Washington Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory
Washington State University
Pullman, WA 99164-7034
509-335-9696
Wisconsin
Wisconsin Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Madison, W1 53706
608-262-5432
Wyoming
Wyoming State Veterinary Laboratory
University of Wyoming
Laramie, WY 82070
307-742-6638
Canada
BC
Animal Health Centre
Abbotsford, BC V3G 2M3
604-556-3003
Ontario
Animal Health Laboratory
University of Guelph
Guelph, ON N1G 2W1
519-824-4120
Filling out the paper work to accompany the samples is sometimes time consuming, but
essential to the case. It allows the consultant to refresh his or her memory of any previous
 telephone contacts and may provide additional pieces of information that were not appar-
ent at the time of initial contact. The laboratory accession sheet also provides the laboratory
with critical pieces of information that are necessary for internal tracking and appropriate
owner and submitting veterinarian's name, address, and contact information (including
telephone and facsimile numbers and e-mail address); number of animals affected and/
or dead (age, breed, sex, and weight); animals at risk; numbers and types of animals on
the premises; duration of problem; location of lesion(s); clinical history; disease conditions
 suspected; date the samples were collected; amount and types of specimens collected; and
tests desired. The information provided on the paperwork should be complete and legible,
Chapter 12 | Effective Use of a Diagnostic Laboratory 129
Samples submitted to the toxicology unit should be individually packaged and labeled
unique specimen handling; this is why initial contact with the laboratory is essential to
make sure that all samples are submitted appropriately. For example, some samples should
should be frozen to prevent volatile compounds from escaping; and some samples should
be wrapped in foil instead of using traditional plastic bags to prevent potential contami-
nation by organic chemicals. All specimens should be double-bagged, and submitted in
appropriate shipping containers to prevent leaking and that comply with the shipping stan-
dards of the shipping carrier you are using. A typical selection of tissues for toxicology
testing is listed in Table 12-1.
ethylene glycol poisoning from fixed kidney sections). For this reason one should consider
collecting as cormplete a selection of tissues as possible, particularly during postmortem
examinations. Both fixed and fresh tissues should be collected, in case tissues need to be
examined elsewhere in the laboratory system. Many times toxicology testing is used to con-
firm a diagnosis that is initially made by examination of fixed tissues. Do not limit your
tissue selection to those systems only deemed abnormal by clinical examination or gross
postmortem inspection; the laboratory may pick up interesting and perhaps important
changes or lesions in tissues or systems that were thought to be unaffected. Many cases
labeled as potential toxicology cases turn out to be something entirely different, so it is use-
ful to have as complete a tissue selection as possible so as not to limit the diagnostic labora-
tory's capabilities. A complete set of tissues collected from postmortem examination should
include, but is not limited to, the brain, eyeball, thymus, thyroid, heart,lung, spleen, kidney.
liver, urinary bladder, pancreas, lymph nodes, skin, adrenal glands, various sections of the
gastrointestinal tract, ovaries, placenta, testes, and skeletal muscle. In a multiple animal
outbreak, submitting samples from more than one animal is advised.
Capabilities
Toxicology test methods range from simple visualization (e.g., identification of plant parts)
to the use of modern analytical chemistry techniques. In many cases, several analyses have
to be performed to reach a diagnosis. The techniques used in a toxicology laboratory are
very specific and potentially very time consuming and expensive. Most veterinary toxi-
cology laboratories provide routine testing for the most commonly encountered toxins in
small animal practice, such as insecticides, rodenticides, avicides, molluscicides, herbicides,
metals, drugs, and mycotoxins. Some laboratories also provide testing for unusual or less
frequently encountered toxins, such as blue-green algae (cyanobacteria) toxins or mush-
room toxins. Because of intensive networking between the veterinary diagnostic labora-
tories worldwide, a veterinary toxicologist can identify a suitable laboratory that can offer
analytical and technical support and therefore provide the best advice regarding diagnostic
workup of a particular case.
Analysis of metals, such as lead or zinc in blood, serum, plasma, tissue, or source mate-
rial, is typically achieved through the use of spectroscopy. Spectroscopy employs absorption
or emission of characteristic light waves following atomization (superheating) of samples.
Spectroscopy is rapid and accurate and allows analysis of liquids, such as blood for lead,
free the metals before they can be analyzed, and therefore these types of analyses can take
several hours to a few days.
Analyses for drugs, pesticides, and other organic toxins are usually performed using
chrormatography methods. Chromatography is the separation of compounds based on their
chemical properties inliquid (high-performance liquid chromatography), solids (thin-layer
chromatography), or gas (gas chromatography). After chromatographic separation, chemi
130SECTlON 1 Toxicologic Concepts
Table 12-1
 Samples That May Be Needed for Analytical Toxicology Testing*
Sample
Amount
Condition
Examples of Toxicoses
Antemortem
Whole blood
1-3 mL
EDTA or heparin
Lead,arsenic,mercury,
anticoagulant
 selenium, pesticides,
anticoagulants
Urine
10-50 mL
 Plastic screw-capped
 Drugs, some metals,
vial
paraquat, alkaloids
Serum
5 mL
Remove from clot;
Trace metals (no rubber
element tubes
 contact if testing for
zinc), some drugs,
ethylene glycol,
pesticides
Cerebrospinal
1 mL
Clot tube
Sodium
fluid
Gastrointestinal
100g
 Obtain representative
Pesticides; plant-, metal-,
contents
sample
 and feed-related poisons
Body fluids
10-20 mL
Clot tubes
Anticoagulants
Hair
1-5 g
Rarely useful
Call laboratory; chronic
selenosis
Postmortem
Urine, serum,
1-50 mL
 Same preparation
Drugs, metals, pesticides
body fluids
and tests as for
antemortem
 samples; get serum
from heart clot
Liver
100g
 Plastic (foil for organics)
Pesticides, metals
Kidney
100g
 Plastic (foil for organics)
Metals, compound
1080 (sodium
monofluoroacetate),
ethylene glycol,
cholecalciferol
Brain
50%
 Cut sagittally; put half
 Organochlorines, sodium,
in plastic for analysis
bromethalin
(fix other half for
histopathologic
examination)
Fat
100g
Foil in plastic
Organochlorines
Lung
100g
Plastic
Paraquat
Pancreas
100g
Plastic
Metals (zinc)
Gastrointestinal
100g
 Obtain representative
 Pesticides/baits; plant-,
contents
sample
metal-, or feed-related
toxicants
Bone
100 g
One long bone
Fluoride
Miscellaneous
 Injection sites, spleen
 Some drugs (barbiturates
in spleen)
Environmental
Baits/sources
200 mL
Clean mason jar
Unidentified chemicals,
(liquid); plastic vial
organics
(write chemical
name if available)
Chapter 12 | Effective Use of a Diagnostic Laboratory  131
Table 12-1
Samples That May Be Needed for Analytical Toxicology Testing*—-cont'd
Sample
Amount
Condition
 Examples of Toxicoses
Feed
1kg
Plastic, box; must be
Mycotoxins, feed additives,
representative
plants, pesticides
Plants
Entire
 Fresh or pressed, send
Identification, chemical 
plant
all parts
assay
Water
1 L
Clean mason jar;
Metals, nitrates, pesticides,
foil under lid for
cyanobacteria, organics
 organics, plastic lid
for metals
Modified with permission from Galey FD: Effective use of an analytical laboratory for toxicology problems
In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, editors: Current veterinary therapy, smal anial pratice Xi, Philadelphia, 1992,
WB Saunders.
*Submit samples frozen except for blood and brain, or if very dry. Amounts given are optimum amounts;
smaller samples may be accommodated (call laboratory about testing for smaller-sized samples). Appropriate
tissue samples should be fixed in formalin for histologic analysis as well. Do not submit material in syringes.
light, fluorescence, oxidation/reduction, electron transfer, and mass weight. Chromatogra-
phy is often more labor intensive and time consuming than spectroscopy because extrac-
tion of the chemical from the sample by means of solvent and purification is frequently
required before testing can proceed. If a chromatography screen has detected a suspicious
compound, additional testing may be required to confirm and quantify that substance.
Some analytical methods, such as that for cyanide, rely on the use of characteristic
chemical reactions for analysis. Assays of cholinesterase enzyme activity in brain or blood
can be done within hours to asses exposure to compounds, such as organophosphorus and
carbamate insecticides.
Pitfalls
There may be many reasons that a diagnostic laboratory cannot confirm a clinician's suspi-
cions. However, there are some common problems that toxicologists routinely face. Many
times the wrong sample is collected for thetest requested. This canbe minimized by making
sure you have collected a complete set of specimens or by calling the laboratory in advance.
Another cormmon problem that hampers a toxicology service is low sample volume being
submitted for the test(s) requested. Most toxicology tests are designed to be run on a mini-
mum sample volume; below this volume there is decreased sensitivity and accuracy. It is
always better to submit too much than submit too little.
Reporting
The veterinary toxicologist typically interprets analytical findings to determine their signifi-
cance in light of the historical, clinical, and pathological findings. For example, a variety of
types of information are necessary to prove the presence of chronic chlorpyrifos (organo-
phosphate) toxicosis in a cat. Clinical signs may include vomiting, anorexia, and depres-
sion, all of which are fairly nonspecific abnormalities. Identification of the compound in
vomitus or blood confirms exposure. Depressed cholinesterase activity in blood or brain
nificant. A veterinary toxicologist can also provide consultation about possible toxic dif-
ferential diagnoses for a case, treatment of affected animals, and steps to take to prevent
additional animals from being poisoned. If a poisoning case results in alegal investigation,
the veterinary toxicologist can provide specific advice necessary for documentation, test-
ing, and data collection.
132SECTION 1 Toxicologic Conkcepts
seq uouuos sou a ssouep Aoosixot ioy man aie saesso jo sadi om
say is monitoring patients for response to treatment with known antidotes. For example,
a dog suffering from an organophosphorus insecticide toxicosis may be given a test dose
of atropine at a preanesthetic dose (0.02 mg/kg). Failure to develop the typical evidence
phosphorus or carbamate insecticide. Following that, successful alleviation of clinical signs
with therapeutic doses of atropine (approximately 0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg IV, IM, or SC) is further
evidence of exposure to one of those insecticides.
eau ane soau eeue iao e jn Auo paad si aesse go adi puas a
tive. This assay involves feeding or otherwise administering sources suspected of being
toxic to animals in the laboratory to demonstrate a toxic effect. The need for such testing is
very rare, but is occasionally necessary to protect other pets or livestock from toxicants. If a
toxic source is identified, further research can be done in an attempt to identify a new toxin
and perhaps at some future date a chemical assay of diagnostic use.
Very few toxicology diagnoses are reportable diseases. However, in cases involving
malicious poisonings, a multiple animal outbreak, potential risks to the public, or misuse
of pesticides, it might be judicious to report your findings to an appropriate regulatory
agency (e.g., state or federal department of agriculture or local law enforcement agency).
 The toxicologists can assist and direct you to the appropriate agency or individual in these
cases.
Conclusion
Your approach to using a diagnostic facility should be thoughtful, logical, and insightful.
There is no such test as the “poison screen” that can test for alltoxicants (because everything
is toxic in the right dose). You should refine your approach so that it is systematic and rea-
sonable, and employs all aspects of the diagnostic laboratory so as to maximize your efforts
at an affordable price to achieve a successful resolution to the case.
SEcTloN 2 General Exposures
CHAPTER
Medicolegal
13
Considerations in
Toxicology Cases
Michael 1. Murphy, DVM, JD, DABVT, PhD
· Most pet poisonings are accidental; sometimes they are intentional. In some
states this intent may make the poisoning a crime.
There have been several high profile cases during the last few decades involving
poisoning of hundreds of companion animals from consurmption of commercial
pet food contaminated with toxic levels of compounds (e.g., melamine and
Cyanuric acid, aflatoxin, vitarnin D, deoxynivalenol).
The pet owner and/or veterinarian can find information about pet food recalls
involving chemical contarmination, along with the steps required to report a pet
food cornplaint, at the following website: http:/www.fda.gov/AnirnalVeterinary/
default.htm.
· With suspected contaminated pet food, the owner should save the original
container/bag and maintain a record of the exact product name, date purchased,
location purchased, lot number, and bar code. The food material should be
double-bagged in ziplock baggies and frozen until it is decided what tests should
be run.
ompanion animal practitioners may hear from a client that “the neighbor poisoned
my pet” with varying frequency throughout a career. Although in many cases the pet
has not been poisoned, or the poisoning is accidental, intentional pet poisoning does occur.
Pet poisoning cases may involve the legal system in insurance claims, civil claims, or crimi-
nal prosecution. This chapter presents some areas to consider when a pet poisoning case
becomes a "legal" case. Ihese areas are medical records, client confidentiality, and animal
cruelty.
Medical Records
The medical records of the veterinarian(s) making or supporting a diagnosis of pet
poisoning are likely to be reviewed in a medicolegal setting. The medical records may
include “registration forms, consent forms, radiographs, estimate sheets, billing records,
telephone consultations, controlled drug logs, laboratory results, surgery reports, dis-
charge records, imaging recordings, patient history, treatment records, and consultation
reports."]
The content of veterinary medical records may be defined by the state. For example, the
Minnesota Board of Veterinary Medicine has established, by rule, the minimum standards
133
134SECTlON 2 General Exposures
for medical records for veterinary practice in Minnesota. Some of these record-keeping
requirements are:
A. A veterinarian performing treatment or surgery on an animal or group of animals, whether in
the veterinarian's custody at an animal treatment facility or remaining on the owner's or caretaker's
premises, shall prepare a written record or computer record concerning the animals containing, at a
minimum, the following information:
(1) name, address, and telephone number of owner;
（2）
identity of the animals, including age, sex, and breed;
(3) dates of examination,treatment, and surgery;
(4) brief history of the condition of each animal, herd, or flock;
(5) examination findings;
(6) laboratory and radiographic reports;
(7) tentative diagnosis;
(8)  treatment plan; and
(9) medication and treatment, including amount and frequency.
Minnesota Rule g10o.8o0 sub. 4. A
Practitioners may choose to consult their state licensing board to determine if rules or
guidelines exist in that state for veterinary medical records.
Documenting telephone consultations in the medical record, including the results
of specific toxin testing, the owner's decision to decline such testing, and any consulta-
tion reports obtained, may strengthen the final diagnosis reached in a specific case. Ihe
veterinary diagnostic laboratory (http:// www.avld.org), or veterinary teaching hospi-
tal to receive advice on which samples and what testing may be desirable. Notation of
the rationale used to rule in the toxicosis and rule out other differential diagnoses is
extremely useful.
 Updating a medical record may be necessary at times. However, the record should be
updated only in a way that allows the original record to be read. "Entries that are completely
 blacked out or obliterated always raise suspicion when records are viewed by a third part..
 The corrected entry should be signed and dated by the person making the correction"!
Client Confidentiality
Client confidentiality should be considered whenever a veterinarian considers report-
ing an animal's condition to one who is not the client. Balancing client confidential-
ity with mandatory reporting requirements may be more difficult if the veterinarian
suspects that the animal was intentionally poisoned by the client. Briefly, some states
have mandatory animal cruelty reporting requirements or immunity from liability if
animal cruelty is reported. Specifically, Arizona, California, Illinois, Kansas, Minne-
sota, Oregon, West Virginia, and Wisconsin have laws requiring the reporting of ani-
mal cruelty.? Arizona, California, Colorado, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Florida, Kansas,
Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Mississippi, New Hampshire, New York,
Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Vermont, Virginia, and West Virginia offer
some immunity from liability for reporting suspected animal cruelty.2 See Require-
ments for Mandatory Reporting of Anirmal Cruelty for an expanded discussion of this
issue. Veterinarians should consult their state licensing board for guidance before con-
cluding that animal poisoning is animal cruelty that requires reporting to entities other
than the client.
Are Drugs of Abuse Considered Poisons?
Alcohol, marijuana, cocaine, or other human drugs of abuse occasionally are encoun-
tered by veterinarians in emergency clinics or practices. Animals may certainly experience
adverse effects after exposure to alcohol or these drugs. Many practitioners may not equate
alcohol with “poison" in the routine veterinary practice. The Maine animal cruelty statute
Chapter 13 I Medicolegal Considerations in Toxicology Cases  135
includes the phrase “gives poison or alcohol to an animal” apparently distinguishing alco-
hol from poison.
Screening a pet's urine can be done to detect drugs of abuse using over-the-counter kits.
The kits are often used as a practical way to indicate to concerned pet owners that such
drugs are not detected in the urine of their animals when the tests give a negative result
(though false positives are known to occur). Any positive results should probably be con-
frmed with analytic chemistry testing because most human kits have not been validated for
use in animal urine. See http://www.aavld.org for laboratories that may be able to perforrm
such analytical chemistry testing. It may be wise to consult the state licensing board to
determine if positive findings for alcohol or human drugs of abuse identified in the urine of
Animal Cruelty
 Most pet poisonings are accidental; sometimes they are intentional. In some states this
-dns Au ju yn juaana sl sais aos u an e uusd a aeu au sua
port an argument that a crime of animal cruelty has been committed. Animal cruelty stat-
utes that include a version of the term "poison" are found in Arkansas, California, Hawaii
Maine, Michigan, Minnesota, North Carolina, New Mexico, Nevada, Ohio, Pennsylvania,
Texas, Utah, and Vermont at the time of this writing. Statutes may use the terms "know-
ingly" "willfully" "intentionally” or "maliciously" Animal cruelty may be a misdemeanor or
 a felony. In most states animal cruelty may be a felony.' For example, in Texas a person may
aou no aeuau uosiad an yn asuo [e ais e jo am puoi aq
(5) kills, seriously injures, or administers poison to an animal, other than catle, horses, sheep, swine,
or goats, belonging to another without legal authority or the owner's effective consent....
{Tex. Penal Code Ann. 5 42.09)
As an example, a criminal case is presented to highlight some of the issues that may arise
when an animal toxicosis involves the legal system.
Celinski v. State
The criminal application of the Texas animal cruelty statute was reviewed in the case of
Celinski v State.3 Mr. Celinski was found guilty of cruelty to animals in part for poisoning
two cats with acetaminophen. He appealed the conviction. The conviction was upheld by
the Texas court of appeals based on the evidence. Ihe evidence cited by the Texas court of
appeals in upholding Mr. Celinski's conviction was:
(1)  The cats were in good health when Jones [the owner] left; they were very sick when he returned the
following day. They had diarrhea, were foaming at the mouth, and were too weak to stand.
(2) The veterinarian who treated the cats concluded that they were suffering from acetaminophen
 poisoning, based upon his observation of their physical symptoms and upon the results of a blood
test.
(3) The veterinarian was unable to reverse the results of the poisoning with an antidote. He estimated
that the cats had ingested the equivalent of five to six tablets apiece some time during the afternoon
of February 21, 1994.
(4) Texas A&M laboratory results confrmed that Sugar Ray and Bonnie died of acetaminophen
poisoning
(5) The veterinarian had seen a dozen cases of feline acetaminophen poisoning in his 14 years of prac-
tice, but had never heard of a cat voluntarily ingesting acetaminophen, norhad he ever seen a case
of multiple cats simultaneously ingesting acetaminophen.
(6) Appellant testified there were no pills lying about the apartment the day the cats became sick--pills
they could have accidentally ingested. He was the only person present in the apartment with the
cats on that day.
{Celinski v. State)
Celinski demonstrates the importance of medical records in legal cases. The first four
points above may have been useful to determine whether the cats had previous illnesses,
136SECTlON 2 General Exposures
whether the cats were exposed to a potentially toxic dose of acetaminophen, and whether
the previously known adverse effects of acetaminophen were observed in the cats. The
last two points reviewed by the court of appeals were more directly aimed at determining
whether the exposure was accidental or intentional. The veterinarian's medical record may
contain important facts in a legal case.
Commercial Pet Food Contamination Issues
There have been several high profile cases during the last few decades involving poisoning
of hundreds of companion animals from consumption of commercial pet food contami-
nated with toxic levels of compounds (e.g., melamine and cyanuric acid, aflatoxin, vita-
min D, deoxynivalenol). As veterinary toxicologists, we receive telephone queries routinely
from pet owners who are highly suspicious because, "their pet became ill following inges-
tion of newly acquired/newly opened pet food" The veterinarian must always be aware of
the fact that a temporal relationship almost always exists between the pet eating and the cli-
ent observing adverse clinical signs—this is because most pets, like ourselves, eat daily and
many illnesses that pets succumb to cause abrupt onset of ill effects. It is the responsibility
of the veterinarian to obtain a very thorough history to determine whether this temporal
relationship between eating and onset of ill effects is truly a cause and effect relationship.
 And the reverse may be true: pet owners may not relate their pets' illness to consumption
of contaminated pet food because of a delay between time of ingestion and onset of initial
clinical signs.
Once it is established that there might be an issue with food contamination, it is abso-
lutely essential that the veterinarian perform a complete physical examination of the
 patient, including running appropriate diagnostic tests. It is important that veterinarians
not get tunnel vision, and make sure that they keep an extensive list of differential diagnoses
that can elicit similar clinical signs and laboratory abnormalities that mimic toxins that may
be found in the pet food. The pet owner and/or veterinarian can find information about
a pet food complaint, at the following website: http://www.fda.gov/Animal Veterinary/
default.htm. In addition to the veterinarian performing a thorough diagnostic workup on
the patient based on history and clinical signs, all steps must be accurately documented in
the medical record. In addition, the pet owner should save as much of the remaining sus-
pect pet food as possible. The owner should save the original container/bag and maintain a
record of the exact product name, date purchased, location purchased, lot number, and bar
code. Ihe food material should be double-bagged in ziplock baggies and frozen until it is
decided what tests should be run.
With the easy access and availability of the Internet to pet owners, concerns about pet
food contamination can quickly “go viral” on the Internet. On a positive note, when these
pet food contaminations have been proved to be valid, this has provided a medium to rap-
idlly disseminate accurate information to warn pet owners and prevent further poisonings
 of pets. However, there have been instances where Internet postings of pet food poisoning
have been inaccurate, which led to “Internet hysteria” and further led to erroneous claims
 pet food. Some veterinarians became so focused, like their clients, on the suspect pet food
problem that they failed to perform adequate medical history taking, as well as failing to
perform a thorough diagnostic workup to rule out other differential diagnoses. When it
was discovered that there was no contaminant in the pet food, veterinarians were put in an
As an example, a pet food contaminant that has been the cause of several recent pet food
recalls is the mycotoxin, aflatoxin. Aflatoxin, at toxic doses, can lead to liver disease. Pets
eral lethargy and depression, abdominal pain, and vomiting. However, pets suffering from
hepatic disease associated with a cholangiohepatitis, chronic-active copper storage disease,
or hepatic tumors may present with a very similar cluster of clinical signs. It is important
Chapter 13 I Medicolegal Considerations in Toxicology Cases  137
that the veterinarian separate out those pets with true aflatoxicosis from all the other pets
with abdominal neoplasia or copper storage disease that are receiving the same pet food.
 In summary, veterinary medical records may be useful when cases of pet poisoning
involve the legal system. These records may contain differential diagnoses and the results
of examination, laboratory testing, consultation, and specific diagnosis. It may be wise for
veterinarians to consult their state licensing board to determine if (1) standards for medical
records exist in their state, (2) poisoning an animal could be considered animal cruelty, and
(3) their state requires the reporting of animal cruelty.
References
1. Scott JF: Veterinary Medical Records, Proceedings ofthe American Veterinary Medical Law Association,
A VMLA,2006 CE Program.
 2. Babcock SL, Neihsl A: Requirements for mandatory reporting of animal cruelty, I Am Vet Med Assoc
228(5):685, 2006.
3. Celinski v. State 911 S. W.2d 177 (Tex. App. 1995).
CHAPTER
14
Indoor Environmental
Quality and Health
John B. Sullivan Jr., MD, MBA
Mark D. Van Ert, PhD, CIH
Gary R. Krieger, MD, MPH
Michael E. Peterson, DVM, MS
fthe 71 million employees who work indoors in the United States, the Bureau of Sta-
tistics estimates that more than 21 million are exposed to some degree of poor indoor
air quality. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) estimates that
69,000 persons reporting severe headaches and 105,000 persons reporting respiratory prob-
lems in the workplace may be suffering from poor indoor environmental quality.' Similar
environmental quality problems exist in homes, possibly at a more severe degree, because
 no regulatory agency monitors indoor home environments. The impact of these indoor
home conditions on the companion small animal population is unknown. However, it is
reasonable to hypothesize that the impact may be greater in that group than in their human
counterparts, particularly in view of the fact that many animals never leave the indoor
m  as u a a sa ua u  ai n m u 
specific sources, such as flooring contaminated with biologic agents like mold or chemical
agents including pesticides and cleaning products.
The goal of this chapter is to familiarize the veterinary practitioner with the conditions
and issues involved in indoor environmental quality problerms. Ihe magnitude of the prob-
lem in human medicine has not yet been fully elucidated, and the field has been practically
unaddressed by the veterinary community. It is hopedthat information shared inthis chap-
ter may begin to define a possible problem that the veterinary practitioner may consider in
patients with nebulous clinical signs. It is not the purpose of this chapter to make the vet-
erinarian an indoor air specialist but only to make him or her conversant in the feld. Any
attempts to characterize the suspected environmental problem and to remedy the problem
should be lef to a trained environmental specialist, such as an industrial hygienist.
Sources and Causes of Poor Environmental Quality
Changing energy use strategies in the 1970s resulted in construction of buildings with
improved energy efficiency and tighter sealing to prevent energy loss. As a consequence,
human health complaints relating to indoor environments began to increase, and the terms
fight building syndrome and sick building syndrome (SBS) were adopted to describe this
problem. Complaints relating to the environment had previously been attributed to either
poor working conditions or psychological factors. It soon became apparent, however, that
health complaints could also be attributed to inadequate ventilation, mold overgrowth, lack
of fresh air exchange, excess biological and chemical contaminants, and dampness or inad-
equate dilution of indoor contaminants.l9 Ihe phrase poor indoor air quality is used to
describe indoor environmental conditions that can result in clinical signs attributable to the
buildup of airborne contaminants. llnesses, however, are often multifactorial. Increased
incidences of allergic diseases, coughing, wheezing, shortness of breath, asthma, bronchitis,
139
140SECTION2GeneralExposures
Box 14-1
Symptoms Commonly Expressed in Cases Involving Poor
Environmental Air Quality
Mucous Membrane Irritation
Constitutional
Eye irritation
Nausea
 Nasal symptoms
Abdominal complaints
Throat irritation
Myalgia
 Drying of mucous membranes
Arthralgia
 Drying of skin 
Rashes
Neurological and Neurobehavioral
Sinus congestion
Headache
Fatigue
Respiratory symptoms
Cough
Dizziness
Lethargy
Chest tightness
Difficulty in concentrating
Sore throat
Voice changes and hoarseness
Memory problems
Asthma
Difficulty in breathing
Bronchial hyperresponsiveness
headaches, eye irritation, muscle aches, fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are
reported among children and adults exposed to indoor biological contaminants; these sub-
stances encompass a wide array of contaminants and biochemical byproducts.
Ihe World Health Organization (WHO) characterized SBS in 1983. Since then health
complaints associated with poor indoor air quality have been classified as either SBS or
building-related illness (BRi). This classification, although lacking refinement, serves to
categorize this type of illness as traceable or untraceable to a defined cause or source.
The term SBS defines a set of clinical signs and, in humans, symptoms whose origin is
uncertain or is related to ill-defined factors in the environment (Box 14-1). Affected indi-
ea sasnn rns un sueds rea anea saas pue a aaadxa sen
complaints tend to cease when the individual leaves the site and recur when the individual
reenters the site.
The term BRI applies to a definable medical condition that can be traced to a single
source and is documented by specific signs consistent with a known disease. Examples
organic dusts and bioaerosols, carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning, and allergy-mediated
asthma caused by identifiable allergens.
The seriousness of BRI became apparent in the infection of 182 members of the Ameri-
can Legion who attended a convention in 1976 in Philadelphia; they were infected with
Legionella pneurophila, which resulted in 29 fatalities. Dissemination of these bacteria
from contaminated ventilation systems emphasizes the contribution of the multiple factors
of humidity, biological growth, and ventilation in the cause of illness.
Vague complaints relating to mucous membrane irritation, respiratory signs, and head-
ache commonly occur in indoor environments.34,9,10 But sources and causes of such health
complaints are multiple and can be difficult to identify Investigations of the sites involved
show that deterioration of indoor environmental quality is most often because of problems
with airborne contaminants that are chemical, biological, or physical in nature.
A dynamic mixture of chemical, biological, and particulate pollutants arising from a
variety of sources circulates in indoor air (Box 14-2). Ihese pollutants are influenced by air
movement, ventilation, temperature, and humidity. Most of the chemical sources of indoor
contaminants are volatile organic chemicals (VOCs). Analyses of indoor air samples have
demonstrated that between 50 and 300 different VOCs can be present at low levels in non-
Chapter 14 | Indoor Environmental Quality and Health  141
Box14-2
Sources of Common Indoor Air Contaminants
Chemical Sources
Chemicals emitted from building materials and furnishings
Cleaning materials and disinfectants
Chemicals emitted from office machines and materials
Pesticides
Tobacco smoke
Combustion products from cooking and fireplaces
Physical Sources
Ventilation problems
Dust
Particulates
 Fibers, such as asbestos or fiberglass
Biological Sources
Pollen
Mold and fungi
Biological byproducts of microbes
Bacteria
Viruses
Dander from pets
 Insects and insect parts
Human skin particles
Dust mites
Biological sources of indoor pollution include mold, fungus, pollen, spores, bacteria,
viruses, and insects, such as dust mites and roaches. Water reservoirs and damp areas pro-
vide nutrient sources for the growth of microorganisms. Relatively high levels of humidity
and moisture allow biological agents to increase to levels that, when disserminated indoors,
can trigger illness and allergies. Reports indicate that indoor dampness and mold growth
  's pe sie u ss asn   sse aes
humidity also encourages growth of the dust mite population, which can cause allergies and
asthma. More attention is being focused on biochemical products of microorganisms as
potential causes of indoor-related respiratory illness. These include endotoxin, 1,3-β-glucan,
mycotoxins, peptidoglycan, and VOCs emitted from fungi.9
 Physical factors, the third source of indoor-related illness, include dusts, fibers, par-
ticulates, and overall comfort factors, such as ventilation, lighting, temperature, humidity,
noise, and vibration. Dust and particulate matter are always present indoors. Each cubic
meter of air contains small concentrations of millions of particulates, of which 99% are
invisible to the eye.?
Energy conservation strategies dating from the 1970s have contributed to declining indoor
air quality. Building design and operational changes have focused on decreasing energy con-
sources. But energy-efficient buildings may sacrifice ventilation effectiveness to reduce overall
energy costs.4.17Suchefforts mayresult inbetterinsulatedbuildings but reduced performance
of ventilation systems. The overall result is often inadequate fresh air exchange for building
Occupants that allows concentration of airbome chemical contaminants and pollutants.
Building Materials and Furnishings
Products used in construction contain chemicals that can off-gas into the indoor envi-
ronment. Building materials are constantly changing, and new products are entering the
142SECTION2 General Exposures
Table 14-1
Common Sources of Volatile Organic Chemicals
Source
Volatile Organic Chemicals (vOcs)
Building Materials
Plywoods
Formaldehyde, terpenes, methylacetate, n-butanol,
tetrachloroethylene, toluene, nonanol, n-undecane,
tetradecane, naphthalene, p-dichlorobenzene, xylenes 
Polystyrene foam
Styrene, ethylbenzene, aromatics
 Rubber-backed nylon carpet 
Toluene, benzene, n-decane, 4-phenylcyclohexane
New vinyl flooring
Isoalkanes, methylbenzenes, xylenes, ethylbenzene,
toluene, 2-ethylhexanol, formaldehyde
Rubber floor covering
1,1,1- Trichloroethane, styrene, indane, 1,3/1,4-
diisopropylbenzene, isodecane, acetophenone
Solvents and Adhesives
Solvent-based adhesives
Toluene, styrene, n-decane, n-undecane, cyclohexane,
methylcyclopentane, alcohols
Water-based adhesives
Nonane, decane, undecane, octane
Wall/flooring adhesives
Toluene, benzene, ethyl acetate, styrene, ethylbenzene
Sealants
Methylethyl ketone, butyl propionate, 2-butoxyethanol,
butanol, benzene, toluene
Wood stains
 Nonane, decane, undecane, methyloctane,
 dimethylnonane, trimethylbenzene
Polyurethane varnish
Nonane, decane, undecane, methylethyl ketone,
ethylbenzene, xylene
 Solvent-based waxes/
Alkanes, alkenes, terpenes 
detergents
Water-based waxes/
Alcohols, esters, alkoxy alcohols, terpenes, alcohols/
detergents
acetates
Deodorizers
Nonane, decane, undecane, ethylheptane, limonene
Liquid cleaners/
Limonene, p-cymene, undecane, α-pinene, heptene,
disinfectants
decane, nonane, heptanes
market, so it is difficult to keep track of the large variety of volatile chermicals contained
in these products. Building products ranging from structural materials to coatings con-
tain chemicals that are emitted indoors.1-3.18 Emissions of VOCs from building materials
depend on the nature of the material, the chemicals involved, and the location of the mate-
rial in the structure ( Table 14-1). Emission rates can vary from an initial high release in min-
utes or hours to long-term off-gassing that occurs over weeks, months, or even years. Such
products include wood, insulation, plastics, sealers, caulking, adhesives, paints, varnishes,
waxes, finishes, lacquers, fabrics, and carpets.
Wood furnishings purchased for use in homes are rarely solid wood anymore; rather,
they may have a wood facing on a product mainly composed of particleboard or plywood.
Formaldehyde and other contaminants that are “outgassing" from these products into
energy-effcient "tight" homes can result in significantly elevated indoor air exposures.
Furnishings and fabrics can act as “sinks" that absorb airborne chemicals, releasing
them slowly back into the indoor environment depending on temperature, humidity, and
ventilation. In general, warmer temperatures and higher humidity increase the rate of emis-
sion of VOCs.
Human Factors
Human activity contributes to indoor contamination by introducing irritating cleaning
agents, pesticides, solvents, tobacco smoke, particulates, dust, fbers, mold, and allergens.
Chapter 14 | Indoor Environmental Quality and Health 143
Humans also shed millions of skin particles and microbes indoors. Cooking and other
combustion sources introduce carbon dioxide (CO,), CO, nitrogen dioxide (NOz), sulfur
dioxide (SOz), and particulates into indoor air.19.20 Computers, copiers, fax machines, laser
printers, and other office machines emit volatile chemicals and ozone (O3).
 Smokers contribute to the indoor chemical and particulate pollutant load, with many
of the ingredients of cigarette smoke adsorbing to porous surfaces such as fabrics and car-
peting. Although environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) has previously been considered a
nuisance by most nonsmokers, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) considers it a
substantive risk factor for cancer and heart disease.2l.22 Ihe EPA classifies ETS as a group A
carcinogen, meaning that it causes human cancer. Although the EPA's cancer conclusions
are being questioned, ETS remains a prime contributor to cough, shortness of breath, and
chest tightnes in exposed human asthmatics.23 ETS also contributes to significant formal-
dehyde exposure indoors.24.25
VentilationSystem
Up to 50% of cases involving poor indoor air quality can be traced to a ventilation prob-
lem.6.17 A properly functioning ventilation system provides adequate fresh air and dilutes
and removes pollutants. It also balances indoor air quality with comfort. Ventilation is
a dominant cost of building maintenance and energy use, and decreasing ventilation is
sometimes employed as a cost-saving measure. However, such approaches can lead to the
 buildup of pollutants indoors. Improperly maintained ventilation systems can also serve as
a source of indoor contaminants. Air ducts contaminated with dirt, dust, and moisture can
provide sources for microbial growth that may cause illness. The 1976 discovery of legion-
naires' disease in Philadelphia underscores the fact that serious illness and death can result
from a contaminated ventilation system.
 Breathing produces CO, as a byproduct, and its concentration indoors is a useful measure
of air freshness. Accumulation of CO, concentrations above 800 parts per million (ppm) of
air indicates an inadequate fresh air supply and in humans can be associated with health
complaints, such as fatigue, headache, lethargy, and general discomfort. Ihe American Soci-
ety of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) recommends that
tions of more than 800 ppm may signal the buildup of other indoor pollutants caused by
their inadequate removal or dilution. Direct reading instruments are available to track COz
levels in various environments to ensure that adequate fresh air is available to occupants.
Temperature
Thermal comfort is usually achieved between a temperature range of 68° F to 79° F (20° C
to 26° C). Illness caused by airborne chemicals can be exacerbated by higher tempera-
 tures.2& Warmer temperatures also enhance chemical emissions from building materials
and furnishings. Formaldehyde release from particleboard or other sources increases in
warm, humid environments. Copier machines release more volatile chemicals into the air
in warmer temperatures. Turning the thermostat down about 5° F to 10° F can help to allevi-
ate some of the irritant symptoms caused by poor indoor air quality.
Humidity
 In humans excessive dampness indoors increases the risk of childhood asthma and other
respiratory symptoms.5.78 Relative indoor humidity values more than 60% are associated
wall spaces, insulation, ceiling tiles, window seals, and other areas of the indoor environ-
ment. Humidity below 20% can cause drying of skin and mucous membranes, leading to
irritation. High relative humidity increases upper airway moisture, allowing dusts and
water-soluble toxic chemicals to dissolve more easily, thus contributing to upper airway
irritation, inflammation, and cough. A humidity range of 45% to 50% is recommended by
ASHRAE and the EPA.2l Properly functioning ventilation systems help to maintain the rela-
tive humidity between 20% and 60%.17
144SECTlON 2 General Exposures
Biological Mechanisms of Indoor
Environment-Related illness
Pollutants, thermal comfort, humidity, adequacy of ventilation, and air movement play
interacting roles in the quality of home environments. Health complaints, such as head-
ache, sinus congestion, and fatigue may be diffcult to separate from general symptoms
the indoor environment and illness is often difficult because of the numerous variables
involved.28 However, there are patterns of illness that can be correlated with environmental
clues. Poor indoor environmental quality should at least be considered if typical clinical
signs occur in a site characterized by one or more of the following: presence of chemical
odors, recent remodeling, newly constructed building, presence of moisture or water dam-
age, heavy use of cleaning agents, indoor combustion sources, mold contamination and
discoloration of walls and ceilings, musty or stale odors, excess dust or particulates on walls
or other surfaces, new carpet odors, recent indoor pesticide treatment, and office machines
in unventilated areas or in direct sunlight.
Affected persons or animals show improvement of signs when they are away from the
suspected indoor environment and recurrence of signs when they return. In humans, the
duration of exposure seems to be important in determining how quickly symptoms resolve
in anecdotal cases. Ihe longer the exposure, the slower the resolution of symptoms. The
search for biological models to explain the causes of these signs and symptoms has focused
on the following mechanisms: inflammation involving upper and lower airways, mucous
membrane irritancy, neurobehavioral and neurological effects of VOCs, allergic reactions
and hypersensitivity to chemicals and biological agents, stress and psychological reactions,
 Inflammation and irritation of mucous membranes are primary mechanisms at the root
of many indoor air quality-related health problems. Underscoring the complexity of the
problem, environmental factors, such as temperature and humidity, can interact with air-
a re  ss ioe re aa a a aq a s  aa
ened susceptibility to inflammation.30,3s Still, clinical signs associated with poor indoor
air quality are sometimes difficult to distinguish from those caused by common allergies
 because allergens and nonallergens share similar pathways of inflammation and illness
production.
 Because humans and animals breathe thousands of liters of air daily with most passing
is unavoidable.29 Thus, those with a predisposition to inflammation by either nonimmune
stimuli or immune stimuli may be more prone to respiratory irritation and inflammation
caused by airborne contaminants.30.32
Xenobiotic-lnduced Inflammation and Immune Responses
A xenobiotic is any substance foreign to the body. Xenobiotics include chemicals, infec-
tious agents, bioaerosols, dusts, and other agents, such as proteins and allergens, to which
the body responds.33 Host defenses against airborne toxins, ow-molecular-weight chemicals,
and allergens include nonspecifc (passive) and specific (immune-mediated) defenses.
Once the passive air way defense barriers are breached by a chemical or allergen, subsequent
respiratory defense is either immune mediated or nonimmune mediated or a combina-
tion of these. Mast cells are central to a type I hypersensitivity reaction, and their sudden
degranulation is a hallmark of IgE-mediated response and allergic-mediated asthma. The
next line of defense following the breaching of passive barriers includes nonspecific phago-
cytosis by macrophages and tissue monocytes or specific immune responses (e.g., antibod-
ies and cell-mediated immune mechanisms).
Activation of a specific immune response requires processing of an antigen by
antigen-presenting cells (APCs). The airways contain efficient APCs that can process
antigens by endocytosis, digest them, and associate the digested antigen with the major
Chapter 14 I Irdoor Environmental Quality and Health  145
histocompatibility complex (MHC) before transporting the antigen-MHC combination to
the cell's surface to present it to lymphocytes.3136 Naive T lymphocytes can be activated
by the antigen-MHC complex to differentiate into specific T cells that express cell surface
markers. Chemicals, especially those of low molecular weight, can be allergenic when they
serve as haptens via binding to proteins or amino acids.
Irritation and Pungency Caused by Airborne Contaminants
Airborne contaminants include particulates, bioaerosols or chemicals, and respirable air-
borne particles of 10 μm in diameter or less that can penetrate the airways. Detection of
airborne chemicals and particulates by the nasal passages and upper airways involves the
common chemical senses (CCS), a specialized network of nerves emanating from the tri-
these chemical sensory pathways by airborne hazards serves to warn of danger by produc-
ing an irritancy reaction. If this CCS interaction with irritants is unregulated or if a constant
activation occurs, inflammation can result.
The CCS responds quantitatively and qualitatively to stimulation by chermical vapors
 to large differences in chemical potencies. The nerve receptors in the membranes of the
nose and mouth are very close to the surface, separated only by a thin film of moisture. Air-
C  sa aau   i    s d  s a
be significant that small companion animals often have much larger nasal surface areas and
therefore an increase in the size of the CCS apparatus.
VOCs and low-molecular-weight chemicals can activate the CCS nerve receptors by
either physical or chemical reactions. Those that bind chemically produce a more potent
reaction.3.37 Examples of such chemicals are formaldehyde, acrolein, chlorine, ozone, sul-
fur dioxide, and aldehydes.
The nerves of the CCS release neuropeptides in response to environmental irritants.
This type of inflammatory response is termed reurogenic inflammation. Neuropeptides
(also called neurokinins) are found in nerve fibers of the nose, dental pulp, and eyes and
can be released by lung tissue. Therefore, volatile chermicals can produce irritant effects
and release inflammatory neuropeptides at nerve sites in various locations in the body and
throughout the nasal mucosa, lungs, and other sites that store such mediators.32.3435 Neu-
ropeptide release results in a cascade of events leading to more inflammation, swelling,
pain, and release of other inflammatory mediators from tissue, amplifying the effects and
producing clinical signs. Desensitization of these sensory nerves may also occur, causing
the irritation response to fade. No single predictor dictates which response may occur in a
given individual.
 Disorders in the regulation of neurogenic inflammation can lead to prolonged and
more intense responses to environmental stimulants. Neurogenic inflammation is con-
trolled through neural endopeptidase, which degrades neuropeptides. Conditions that
decrease neural endopeptidase activity may increase neurogenic inflammatory responses.
 Irritant chemicals and respiratory viral infections that inhibit neural endopeptidase regu-
latory activity therefore can contribute to an individual's sensitivity to airborne pollut-
ants. This mechanism may explain some individuals' symptomatic reaction to indoor air
pollutants.
Respiratory Irritation, Bronchial Hyperreactivity, and Asthma
The lungs also respond to airborne chemicals and hazards through inflammation. The sur-
face epithelial cell layer of the lungs forms a physical barrier against inhaled toxins and
hazards. These cells secrete a thin, sterile moisture barrier over the surface of the lungs and
 bronchioles. Other specialized cells secrete a thick mucous layer on top of the water layer.
Together, these layers form a gel phase that traps chemicals, particles, and dusts. Ihe surface
lining of the lower air way is made up of ciliated epithelial cells, forming a brush border that
constantly pushes trapped substances toward the mouth, where they can be expectorated
or swallowed.
146SECTION 2 General Exposures
Besides epithelial cells that can release cytokines and other mediators of inflammation,
nerve endings can be stimulated by irritants to cause bronchoconstriction. If the cell layer
lining the airway is damaged by an inhaled hazard, nerve endings can react by constricting
[m s n anxa ane iaa e  isan a ua s emie a
exposure. Also, pulmonary macrophages and epithelial cells release mediators in response
to stimuli by irritants, causing an inflammatory cascade that results in an acute or chronic
response.
Because the tissue of the airways forms an interactive protective mechanism, irritants
and toxins that affect one cell or tissue type affect others. Toxins and particulates that dam-
age the protective mechanism and result in inflammation of the airway (referred to as toxic
inflammation) can cause cough, shortness of breath, chest tightness, wheezing, and asthma.
 Once an inhaled hazard induces the inflammatory process, chemical mediators of inflam-
mation are released by epithelial cells and macrophages.40 Once released these chemical
mediators activate other cells, causing a cascade of inflammation.
Acute exposures produce an inflammatory response that differs from that of chronic
exposures. Also, chronic exposures that produce ongoing inflammation may result in patho-
logic alterations in airway tissue, including fbrosis and increased production of mucus.
The term reactive airways or nonspecijfic bronchial hyperresponsivenessis used to describe
nonimmune-mediated asthma caused by inhaled respiratory irritants. Once an individ-
ual has developed reactive airways, exposure to chemically unrelated airborne irritants
may trigger the onset of symptoms through inflammation.4l In humans an entity termed
reactive airways dysfunction syndrome (RADS) has been described following a high-level
exposure to irritant chemicals. Signs and symptoms of respiratory irritation occur quickly
 uss e e s   m aa e ns m
throat. Reexposure to irritating vapors or fumes can precipitate signs of cough, wheezing,
and shortness of breath. Pulmonary function test results may be abnormal but are usually
reversible on treatment with a bronchodilator
Another inflammatory syndrome in humans of a nonallergic nature attributed to air-
borne pollutants is reactive upper airways dysfunction syndrome (RUDS). It too has been
described following an acute high-level exposure or following chronic low-level exposure
sossss
(runny nose), nasal stuffiness, eye burning, sinus congestion, facial pain, and severe head-
ache almost of a migraine nature.30,32.37.39
Irritant-Associated Vocal Cord Dysfunction
Irritant-associated vocal cord dysfunction (IVCD) is a newly recognized human medical
disorder that is often misdiagnosed as asthma.42 Cases of IVCD have occurred following
acute high-level occupational or environmental exposures. Vocal cord dysfunction is a dis-
order of the larynx in which the vocal cords adduct inappropriately during inspiration or
expiration. Signs and symptoms of IVCD include wheezing, cough, shortness of breath,
luis e ndan i ym suan aas Aresai a o sasd y u no u
increase in chest complaints.
Indoor Pollutants
Chemical Emissions from Office Products
outdoor environment has resulted in a wide variety of innovations dedicated to the devel-
opment of sustainable manufacturing and consumption processes. However, this emphasis
niche between manufacture and disposal. This unique niche is the indoor environment sur-
rounding product use. Concern about the outdoor environment has caused many compa-
mies to spend more resources attempting to understand how a product will affect a sanitary
Chapter 14 I Indoor Environmental Quality and Health  147
landfill than how that same product will affect the indoor environment and its occupants.
Although traditional product safety is a major concern for most manufacturers, the impact
of a product on the indoor environment is complex.
Although efforts in the United States to minimize air and water pollution have met with
measurable success, there is increasing public concern about a new generation of pollu-
tion-related human illnesses in the office, home, and transportation environments. High-
speed printers, copiers, visual display terminals, duplicators, and microfiche and blueprint
machines are point sources of indoor contaminants that cannot be disregarded, especially
when they are used in inadequately ventilated locations. Most modern electronic products
emit low levels of volatile organic compounds into the indoor environment. These fugitive
emissions arise from the plastics, solvents, coatings, adhesives, and encapsulants associated
with manufacture of the product and from consumable supplies, such as toners, inks, paper,
potential rate of chemical emissions. Whether a product's emissions will affect an indoor
cal emitted and (2) the rate and effectiveness of that environment's ventilation ( Table 14-2).
 Home office and clerical work environments are common sites of poor indoor air qual-
ity. In these offices computers, copiers, fax machines, laser printers, and paper products
are used. Ihey also depend on centrally controlled ventilation systems. Laser printers and
copiers located in unventilated rooms contribute to elevated levels of ozone and volatile
irritant chemicals.
Chemical Emissions from Building Materials
Materials used for building, remodeling, and construction vary from wet to dry. Most
 building products contain chemicals that can be emitted indoors (Table 14-2). Building
products emit VOCs indoors at varying rates that are affected by volatility, temperature,
and humidity. Ihe distribution and persistence of these VOCs in the indoor environment
are influenced by air exchanges per hour, air circulation, the presence of reabsorbing sinks"
(other materials in the environment that reabsorb the chemicals and then slowly release
them over time), and air filtration.
 Many other variables affect mammalian responses to low-level volatile chemicals, such
as exposure duration, time of day, temperature, and humidity. Temperature and humidity
act additively with the total volatile chemical load indoors to initiate symptoms. Most out-
gassing of VOCs occurs when a building is new and slowly declines over time with a variety
of half-lives depending on the chemical, environmental factors, and the building material.
In addition there may be odors associated with VOCs in a closed environment.
Building materials, such as self-leveling mortar containing casein, have been shown to
release trace amounts of 2-ethyl-1-hexanol, ammonia, isopropylamine, ethylamine, trieth-
ylamine, dimethylamine, trimethylamine, and dimethyl sulfde. In addition to the irritant
effects of these chemical emissions, an objectionable odor results from the casein content
of the mortar and possibly texturing materials for ceilings and outgassing of sulfhydryl
compounds into the indoor environment.
Vapor emissions from building materials can persist for days to months and even years
for formaldehyde emissions from particleboard and pressed wood products.43 Sources of
formaldehyde emissions are sealants, mortar, caulking compounds, paints, woods compos-
ies, plastics, vinyl products, foams, paper products, and insulation materials. New homes
release VOCs over a period of months, with the highest concentration occurring immedi-
ately and then tapering off over a few months; low levels may persist for years. Formalde-
hyde concentrations, however, tend to fluctuate, with higher indoor emissions occurring in
the warmer months.
NewCarpet
A variety of chemicals may be emitted from new carpets and the adhesives used to
attach carpet to floors. Ihe distinctive new carpet odor has been traced to the chemical
4-phenylcyclohexene (4-PC).44.45 The source of 4-PC is styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR) latex
148SECTION 2 General Exposures
Table 14-2
VOC Emissions from Building Materials, Interior Furnishings.
and Office Equipment
Material
Volatile Organic Chemicals Emitted
Adhesives
Alcohols
2-Methylnonane
Amines
Nonane
Benzene
Pinene
Decane
 n-Propylbenzene
Dimethylbenzene
Terpenes
Dimethyloctane
Toluene
Formaldehyde
Undecane
Limonene
Xylenes
Caulking compounds
Acetic acid
Diethylbenzene
Alkanes
Ethylbenzene
Amines
Formaldehyde
Benzene
Methylethyl ketone
Butanol
Nonane
 2-Butoxyethanol
Toluene
 Butyl propionate
Xylenes
Carpeting
Alcohols
4-Phenylcyclohexene
Formaldehyde
Styrene
4-Methylethyl-benzene
Ceiling tiles
Acetone
Hexanol
Chipboard
Alkanes
 Isopropanol
Paneling
Amines
Limonene
Plywood
Benzaldehyde
 Methylethyl ketone
Gypsum board
Benzene
 3-Methylpentane ethanol
Fiberboard
Butanone
Pinene
3-Carene
Propanol
Ethylbenzene
 n-Propylbenzene
Formaldehyde
Terpenes
Hexane
Toluene
Floor and wall coverings
Acetates
3-Methylpentane
Alcohols
4-Methyl-2-pentanone
Wallpaper
Alkanes
Methyl styrene
Linoleum floor covering
Amines
Nonane
Benzene
n-Propylbenzene
Vinyl coatings
Dodecane
Toluene
Ethyl acetate
1,2,3- Trimethylbenzene
Ethylbenzene
1,2,4-Trimethylbenzene
 Formaldehyde
Undecane
Heptane
Xylene
Methylethyl ketone
Wood stains and varnishes
Acetates
Ethylbenzene
Acrylates
Formaldehyde
Latex paints
Alcohols
Hexanol
Polyurethane floor finishes
Alkanes
Limonene
Amines
Methyloctane
Floor lacquers
Benzenes
Nonane
Butanone
1,1-Oxybisbutane
n-Butanol
Polyurethane
Chapter 14 I Indoor Environmental Quality and Health 149
Table 14-2
VOC Emissions from Building Materials, Interior Furnishings.
and Office Equipment-cont'd
Material
Volatile Organic Chemicals Emitted
Butyl propionate
2-Propanol
Decane
 Propylbenzene
Dimethylnonane
Toluene
Dodecane
Trimethylbenzene
 2-Ethoxyethyl acetates
Undecane
Xylene
Appliances
Carbon monoxide
Polyaromatic
hydrocarbons
 Nitrogen dioxide
Sulfur dioxide
Computers/video display
n-Butanol
Dodecamethyl
terminals
2-Butanol
cyclosiloxane
2-Butoxyethanol
Ethylbenzene
Butyl-2-methylpro-
Hexanedioic acid
pylphthalate
 2-Ethoxyethyl acetate
Caprolactam
Toluenez
Cresol
Xylene
 Disooctyl phthalate
 Duplicating machines
Ethanol
1,1,1- Trichloroethane
Methanol
Trichloroethylene
Electrophotographic printers
 Ammonia
Styrene-acrylate
copolymer
Ammonium salts
 Photocopiers and related
Benzaldehyde
Terpene
supplies
Benzene
Toluene
Microfiche developers
Butyl methacrylate
1,1,1- Trichloroethane
and blueprint machines
Carbon black
Trichloroethylene
Nonane
Xylenes
Ozone
Zinc stearate combustion
Polyolefin wax
products
Styrene
Carbonless copy paper
Ammonia
Diethylethane
Chlorobiphenyl
Formaldehyde
Cyclohexane
Kerosene
Dibutylphthalate
Naphthalene
 Preprinted paper forms
Acetaldehyde
Heptane
Acetic acid
Hexamethyl
Acetone
Hexanol
Acrolein
Hydroxy-4-methyl
pentanone
Benzaldehyde
Isopropanol
Butanol
Paper dust
Cyclosiloxane
 Propionaldehyde
1,5-Dimethylcyclopentene
1,1,1- Trichloroethane
2-Ethyl furan
 Typewriter correction fluid
Acetone
1,1,1- Trichloroethane
Artificial essences
Aromaticfragrances
Limonene
Fragrances
Decane
Nonane
Ethylheptane
Undecane
continued
150SECTlON 2 General Exposures
Table 14-2
VOC Emissions from Building Materials, Interior Furnishings.
 and Office Equipment—cont'd
Material
Volatile Organic Chemicals Emitted
Room deodorants, air
Acetaldehyde
Isobutyl acetate
fresheners
Acetols
Isopropane/isobutane
Alcohols
 Isopropyl alcohol
Aldehydes
Lactones
Benzylacetate
Methylchloroform
n-Butanol
Nonylphenol
Brucine sulfate
Paradichlorobenzene
Cyclomenaldehyde
Pinene
Essential oils
Propyl acetate
Esters
 Propylene glycol
Ether
Resins
Ethyl acetate
Terpenes
Hexanol
Tertiary butyl alcohol
Hexylene glycol
Triethylene glycol
Sealants
Acetic acid
Petroleum hydrocarbons
Aliphatic hydrocarbons
Toluene
Hexane
Xylene
 Methylethyl ketone
Cleaning agents
Ammonium
Hydroxide
Detergents
2-Butoxyethanol
Isobutane/Isopropane
 Diethylene glycol methyl
Isopropanol
ether
 Dipropylene glycol methyl 
 Phosphates
ether
Ethyl alcohol
 Phosphoric acid
Ethylenediamine tetraacetic Pine oil
acid (EDTA)
Ethylene glycol monobutyl  Polyalkoxylated alcohol
ether
Sodium carbonate
Sodium hydroxide
Sodium metasilicate
Glazing compounds
Acetic acid
 Dry cleaning fluids
Tetrachloroethylene
Trichloroethylene
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
New clothing
Formaldehyde
Resins
Butyl acrylate
Polymers
Textile and leather finishes
Carpet shampoos
Pentachlorophenol
Disinfectants
Wood preservatives
Hexachlorobenzene
Tetrachlorophenol
Fungicides
Pentachlorophenol
 Insulation materials
Formaldehyde
n-Propylbenzene
Pinene
Styrene
Floor waxes
Decane
o-Ethyltoluene
Dimethyloctane
Nonane
Chapter 14 I Indoor Environmental Quality and Health 15l
Table 14-2
VOC Emissions from Building Materials, Interior Furnishings.
and Office Equipment-cont'd
Material
Volatile Organic Chemicals Emitted
 Ethylmethyl benzene
a-Terpene
Ethyltoluene
1,2,3-Trimethylbenzene
m-Ethyltoluene
Trimethylc yclohexane
m,p-Ethyltoluene
Undecane
Paint removers
Carbon tetrachloride
Trichloroethylene
Grease cleaners
Ethylbenzene
Undecane
Cleaning fluids
Methylene chloride
Xylene
1,1,1-Trichloroethanol
Paint and lacquer solvents
Acetone
Naphtha
n-Butyl benzene
Toluene
Chlorobenzene
Trichloroethylene
Cyclohexane
Xylene
Deodorizers
m-Dichlorobenzene
p-Dichlorobenzene
Moth balls
o-Dichlorobenzene
Molding tape
n-Butanol
Toluene
Edge sealing
 Isobutanol
Joint compounds
n-Butanol
Styrene
 Ethylbenzene
Toluene
Formaldehyde
1,2,4-Trimethylbenzene
 Isobutanol
Xylene
Nonane
Heaters
Carbon monoxide
Formaldehyde
 Unvented gas heaters
 Unvented gas ovens
Carpet (latex backed)
 Formaldehyde
Xylene
 4-Phenylcyclohexene
Plastics
Dibutylphthalates
 Propyl acetate
Carbon paper
Carbon black
Oleic oil
Crystal violet
 Stearic oil
Methyl violet
Victoria blue
Mineral oil
Waxes
 Nigrosine
Paints
Butyl acrylate
N-Methylol-acrylamide
Epoxy acrylate
Pentaer ythritol triacrylate
Ethoxyethanol
Titanium dioxide
Ethoxyethylacetate
Trimethylpropane
triacrylate
Ethyl acrylate
 Tripropylene glycol
 triacrylate
 2-Ethylhexyl acrylate
Latex
152 SECTION 2 General Exposures
Box 14-3
Irritant Chemicals in Disinfectants and Cleaning Agents
Benzalkonium chloride
Ethyl alcohol
Benzoyl peroxide
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)
Isopropanol
Quaternary ammonium chlorides
Formaldehyde
Cationic detergents
Glutaraldehyde
 Octyl decyl dimethyl ammonium
Phenol
chloride
Alcohols
Dioctyl dimethyl ammonium
Chlorine compounds 
chloride
Potassium permanganate
 Didecyldimethyl ammonium
Free iodine
chloride
Povidone iodine
 n-Alkyl dimethylbenzyl ammonium
Thimerosal
chloride
Gentian violet
Nonionic surfactants
Hexachlorophene
Sodium metasilicate
Chlorhexidine
Fragrances
 Phenylphenol
Colorant
used to bind the backing of new carpet. Analysis of carpet pieces demonstrated that 4-PC was
 a common contaminant in several environments reported to cause health effects after new
carpet had been installed. In humans acute and subacute exposure to low parts per billion of
4-PC may be responsible for symptoms of headache, lethargy, and skin and mucous mem-
brane irritation.46 In commercial lays of carpet, adhesives are frequently employed to adhere
carpet directly to floors. These adhesives are either water or solvent based. The latter can serve
as significant sources of volatile organic compounds that contribute to indoor air pollution.
Cleaning Agents, Disinfectants, and Pesticides
Many cleaning agents, disinfectants, and pesticides can contribute to poor indoor air qual-
ity Cleaning agents and disinfectants contain a variety of irritating and sensitizing chemi-
cals that can cause ocular and respiratory irritation, exacerbate reactive airway symptoms,
cause dermatitis, and may cause asthma (Box 14-3). Ihe use of these agents in poorly ven-
tilated areas or on large surfaces in enclosed spaces may result in exposure of occupants
pounds, surfactants, and alkyl benzyl ammonium chloride. Contact and allergic dermatitis
may occur following exposure to some chemicals in these products. Also, chronic exposure
may cause bronchial hyperreactivity and air way inflammation.
Disinfectants, cleaning products, and pesticides can be responsible for chemical odors
and respiratory irritation. Chemicals in these products are amines, surfactants, cationic and
anionic detergents, ammonia, acids, hypochlorites, phenols, alcohols, and caustic agents.
When such products are used in confined spaces, significant pulmonary irritation and
potential permanent damage can occur. Substituting less irritating agents for these cleaning
agents can be helpful in eliminating indoor pollution sources. Indoor application of pesti-
cides should be avoided or used with considerable caution. Both the active ingredients and
"inert” diluents, which may be organic solvents, can contribute to indoor odors and contam-
ination. Because these products are generally applied to flooring surfaces, pets especially are
likely to come into repeated contact, increasing their dose and potential for toxicity. Exte-
rior applications are generally safe provided exterior air handler rooms are not treated.
e n e  n sn a u s pi u 
dleanup will prevent any potential adverse effects.
Indoor Combustion Sources
Pilot lights and cooking and gas appliance use contribute to nitrogen dioxide, a respiratory
irritant. Natural gas is used by almost 50% of households in the United States, potentially
Chapter 14 | Indoor Environmental Quality and Health  153
exposing occupants to byproducts of combustion such as carbon monoxide, carbon diox-
ide, and oxides of nitrogen. Besides gas appliances, other combustion sources are freplaces,
tobacco smoke, cooking appliances, internal combustion machines, and charcoal fres. If
wood stoves or coal stoves are not airtight, pollutants can escape indoors. Airflow patterns
indoors may be altered, causing backdrafting of combustion byproducts. Faulty design of
freplace flues can also result in backdrafts of emissions. Burning treated wood products
may lead to particularly toxic emissions and should be avoided.
Formaldehyde
Formaldehyde is a common indoor contaminant and a known upper airway, eye, and skin
irritant. Formaldehyde has many sources: fabrics, pressed wood products such as plywood
and particle boards incorporating phenol- and urea-formaldehyde resins, binders in fiber
glass insulation, cosmetics, food, and combustion byproducts. Formaldehyde is a colorless
gas at room temperature but is also found in liquid and solid forms. Low concentrations of
formaldehyde are present in ambient air, primarily caused by burning of petroleum fuels and
automobile exhaust. Formaldehyde emissions from building materials indoors occur in the
following materials (listed in order by decreasing emission rate): chipboard, ply wood, plas-
terboard, bituminized fberboard, 15-mm plywood, mineral wool insulation, and curtains.43
Formaldehyde releasers are used as preservatives in many commercial products includ-
ing cleaning agents, shampoos, soaps, paints, lacquers, cutting oils, cosmetics, coloring
agents, skin care products, toilet cleaners, automotive cleaning agents, disinfectants, dish-
washing liquids, and descaling agents. In most cases, the levels are sufficiently low as to be
of no concern, although skin reactions can occur in susceptible individuals.
Health effects from formaldehyde include upper airway irritation and eye irritation.
Some individuals experience asthma exacerbations on exposure to formaldehyde. Patch
testing can determine whether an individual has an allergic hypersensitivity skin reaction
to formaldehyde.
Environmental TobaccoSmoke
The burning of tobacco indoors introduces chemical pollutants and particulates. Tobacco
dlassified environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) as a group A carcinogen, meaning that there
is sufficient evidence to prove that it causes cancer in humans.
Nitrogen Oxides
Nitrogen oxide sources are fossil fuels, industrial processes, and motor vehicles. Nitrogen
dioxide (NO2), the most common ofthe oxides of nitrogen, has an acrid irritating odor. Nitro-
gen oxides are involved in the photochemical generation of ozone. Indoor exposure to nitro-
 gen oxides ocurs from gas-burning appliances, unvented furnaces, stoves, hot water heaters,
tobacco smoke, kerosene space heaters, and influx of outdoor air contaminated by vehicle
exhaust. Gas stoves are a principal source of nitrogen dioxide indoors, and when a gas stove is
used for cooking, the peak nitrogen dioxide concentration in a kitchen can be 1 ppm or higher.
Nitrogen oxides are insoluble in water and therefore can penetrate to the lower respi-
ratory tract. Pediatric patients are particularly susceptible to NO because of their devel-
oping respiratory systems. Studies have linked NO, exposure and increased respiratory
illness in children.19.20 Low levels of NO, cause rhinorrhea, throat irritation, eye irritation,
and cough. Asthmatics are sensitive to low NO, levels. Mild exposure causes shortness of
ae saam z oi dn issiad ues eu ssauzz pue easneu aniey yanos 'auepy 'ean
exposure. Exposure to massive concentrations of nitrogen oxides can produce severe lung
damage, asphyxiation, laryngospasm, and death. The irritant effects of NO, do not occur
until concentrations reach about 13 ppm.20
Sulfur Dioxide
 The main source of sulfur dioxide (SOz) is burning of sulfur-containing fuels. Sulfur diox-
ide is a component of both indoor and outdoor pollution arising from automobile exhaust.
154 SECTION 2 General Exposures
It is found in lower concentrations indoors than outdoors. The use of kerosene space heat-
ers can generate significant concentrations of indoor SO.
Sulfur dioxide is very soluble in water and tends to be absorbed in the upper respiratory
tract. Nasal breathing filters out most inhaled SOz, preventing its passage into the more
 sensitive areas of the lungs. Mouth breathing tends to increase the amount of SO, that
reaches the lungs.
Sulfur dioxide is highly irritating to the eyes and airways. Its odor is detectable at 0.5
ppm. Concentrations above 6 ppm induce clinical signs of irritation including eye irrita-
tion, tearing, runny nose, coughing, shortness of breath, bronchospasm, chest tightness,
 bronchitis, airway inflammation, chronic cough, increased mucous secretions, and clearing
of the throat. Massive exposure to sulfur dioxide can result in severe permanent pulmonary
damage.
Ozone
Ozone (O3) is a naturally occurring, colorless or light blue gas with a very repugnant elec-
trical-type odor. It is a potent chemical respiratory tract irritant and is the principal oxidant
in photochemical smog. Exposures occur more commonly in urban and suburban environ-
 ments, particularly during air pollution alerts. Ozone is a common outdoor pollutant and is
consumed in the transformation of nitrogen monoxide into nitrogen dioxide.
Ozone concentrations are higher outdoors than indoors, but indoor levels can increase
when windows or doors are open. Ozone is found in disinfectants and bleaching agents.
Copiers, laser printers, electrostatic air filters, and some negative ion generators are other
sources of ozone indoors.
Ozone has a short half-life, and consequently interaction with mammals is limited to
an air-fluid interface, such as the mucous membranes of the upper airway, the respiratory
tract, or the eye. Because ozone is not very water soluble, it can penetrate to deep areas of
the respiratory tract. Fifty percent of ozone is taken up in the upper airway and nasal pas-
sages. Ozone that reaches the lower airways can actually be absorbed into the blood to a
small degree. Because ozone contains a potent oxidizing agent, it can damage tissue.
Signs and symptoms of ozone exposure include cough, headache, chest pain, chest
tightness on deep inspiration, shortness of breath, a dry throat, wheezing, and difficulty in
breathing. Ozone significantly impairs the ability to perform sustained exercise, probably
through the discomfort that it produces on inspiration during intensive periods of exer-
cise. Other human symptoms include extreme fatigue, somnolence, dizziness, insomnia,
decreased ability to concentrate, acrid taste and smell, and eye irritation.
Biology of the Indoor Environment
Biological contamination of the indoor environment has increasingly become a major focus
 of indoor environmental quality investigations. Biological contaminants are complex mix-
tures of microorganisms and particulates that may circulate indoors as bioaerosols or con-
taminate moisture-damaged areas. Biological contaminants consist of one or a combination
of the following: bacteria, fungi, spores, hyphal elements, viruses, amoebae, insects, dust
mites, insect droppings, plant particles, pollens, chemical byproducts of microorganisms
(β-glucan, enzymes, ergosterol, and mycotoxins), and animal proteins.47
Concern about biological contamination has escalated since studies have linked
indoor dampness and mold growth with increased respiratory symptoms in adults and
children.57.48.5l Excessive moisture promotes mold growth and is associated with an
increased prevalence of symptoms caused by irritation, allrgy, and infection.49 Besides
asthma, bronchitis, rhinitis, and allergies, some individuals exposed to indoor biological
contaminants complain of fatigue, headache, myalgia, fever, nausea, vomiting, and arthral-
 gia. Common sites of microorganism overgrowth indoors are areas where moisture damage
to a structural element provides a nutrient source, such as in kitchens, bathrooms, window
frames, mattresses, carpets, wood and other flooring, wallpaper, cellars, insulation, crawl
Chapter 14 | Indoor Environmental Quality and Health  155
spaces, soil of indoor potted plants, stagnant water, basement surfaces, moisture-damaged
walls, and ventilation systems. Relative to mold, proximity to the source of contamination
can enhance the health impact for an individual or pet.
Fungi and bacteria are the most common biocontaminants found indoors; in addition
dust mites and animal dander are found in homes. Penicillium, Cladosporium, Stachybotrys,
and Alternaria species are the most prevalent fungi found normally in indoor environ-
ments.52 However, because a wide variety of bacteria and fungi are normally found both
outdoors and indoors, numbers and taxa of suspected indoor contaminants must be com-
pared with those found outdoors or in other reference environments to determine whether
a true contamination situation exists. A history of water intrusions or visible staining may
 be useful in determining that a source of hidden mold contamination exists in an indoor
environment.
conditions must be combined: (1) temperature, usually between 2° C and 43° C (35° F to
109° F); (2) appropriate humidity, usually greater than 80%; and (3) nutrients for growth
and amplification, such as moisture and organic material. For biological agents to become
a health hazard, they must be respirable in size. When fungal or bacterial overgrowth is
disturbed by airflow or mechanical disruption, high concentrations of bioaerosols that can
be inhaled are generated.
airborne concentrations of gram-positive bacteria (Bacillus subtilis) may indicate over-
crowding and inadequate ventilation. High levels of gram-negative bacteria in the indoor
environment suggest contamination sources such as sewage (black water) contamination.
Gram-negative bacteria may be associated with respiratory diseases when they contaminate
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems or humidification systems in
Pseudormonas, or endotoxins usually indicates a source of contamination. Actinomycetes,
which can cause hypersensitivity pneumonitis, are unusual in nonagricultural indoor envi-
ronments, and their presence is a health concern.
Ventilation and Indoor Environmental Quality
The ventilation system or air-handing unit of a home is frequently referred to as the HVAC
system. The HVAC system consists of the mechanical and functional components of duct
work, air flter, air conditioning, and heating unit. The primary functions of the HVAC
system are cooling, heating, and humidification; maintenance of overall comfort, odor con-
trol; and maintenance of oxygen and carbon dioxide levels at acceptable concentrations.
HVAC systems in some homes are installed to service zones. As the number and size of
zones increase, so does the cost of ventilation. A zone is typically defined by the presence
of a thermostat.
The HVAC system is frequently cited as a cause of indoor air quality problems, typically
because of insufficient fresh air and/or contamination. The National Institute for Occupa-
tional Safety and Health (NIOSH) identified the following major concepts of ventilation-
related health problems in studies of more than 1300 cases of poor indoor air quality:
· Fifty percent of cases were related to deficiencies in ventilation, lack of outside fresh air,
poor air distribution, uncomfortable temperature, or uncomfortable humidity.
+ Thirty percent of cases were related to indoor chemical or biological contaminants.
+ Ten percent of cases were attributed to an outdoor pollutant introduced to the indoors.
· Forced ventilation was common in sites with health problems
+ Health complaints increased as the density of people indoors rose.
Understanding HVAC functioning is critical to indoor air quality evaluations. HVAC
systems for commercial and industrial operations often have an outside air intake on the top
156SECTlON 2 General Exposures
or side of a building that brings outdoor air inside. The outdoor air is then mixed with recir-
culated air from the occupied area. The mixed air usually passes through a filter to remove
pressure, forcing the air through coils that either cool or heat. A drain pan beneath the coils
collects water that condenses on the cooling coil. Air leaving the coil may be humidified or
dehumidified depending on the circumstances. This conditioned air then moves through a
ventilation duct at a speed of 10 to 20 mph to a distribution box. Ihe supplied air then trav-
els from the distribution box through small ducts to terminal ducts and diffusers and from
there into the rooms. The supplied air migrates throughout the room and eventually enters
an air return vent, also called a plenum, where it is recirculated or exhausted outdoors.
Inadequately functioning or maintained HVAC systems allow indoor contaminants to
accumulate, contributing to stale and stagnant air and may even introduce outdoor pollut-
ants and allergens into the indoors, especially ifthe air is unfltered. A frequently occurring
problem is an imbalance between the flow of fresh air and the outflow of stale air. This can
create “dead zones" in which there is an absence of air movement or circulation indoors.
 HVAC systems can be sources of moisture, which allows mold and other microorganisms
to grow and then be circulated indoors. Moisture can be supplied by plugged condensate
drains and leaks in roofs, water and sewer lines, and chiller systems. Over time, dust, dirt,
and debris build up in the ventilation system serving as potential sources of nutrients for
mold growth. Proper maintenance can help prevent accumulated dirt and dust from being
circulated indoors.
Evaluating Indoor Environment-Related Health Problems
Evaluation of indoor environmental quality-related illness requires a systematic approach
because of the complexity of the potential causes. The objectives of the investigation are
to gather information about the building, identify the signs and symptoms of those with
health complaints, locate and identify potential causes, determine the work-relatedness of
any illness, and remedy the cause by removing or isolating the source. For these reasons, a
qualifed environmental specialist, such as a trained industrial hygienist, should be used to
evaluate the indoor environment. An evaluation of the building includes:
1. Building inspection. On concluding the building inspection, the investigators should
provide a preliminary assessment of their findings, recommendations for changes,
and recommendations for any further evaluations and monitoring. Easily identified
causes of health complaints should be addressed immediately. At this phase, more in-
monitoring.
 2. Health audit. A health questionnaire can be useful in determining the health status of the
building occupants and can help identify individuals who manifest symptoms associated
with poor indoor environmental quality. After completing the questionnaire, symptoms
can be tabulated so that the actual incidence and prevalence of illness can be deter-
mined and the location associated with the symptoms identified. Often, a detailed his-
tory examining the temporal relationship between an activity (e.g., pesticide treatment,
a new floor stripper, appearance of water stains or mold on ceilings, musty odor) and the
onset of symptoms will reveal the likely cause of a reported health problem. Symptoms
can be generated by the buildup of low concentrations of multiple indoor contaminants.
including outgassing from building materials, emissions from office machinery, and sol-
vents and other chemicals used in office work and building maintenance. This synergy
of low-level multiple pollutants is accentuated by a suboptimally performing HVAC
system.
 Monitoring strategies for pollutants are based on the environmental assessment and
health survey. Decisions about monitoring for VOCs and biological contaminants are
Chapter 14 | Indoor Environmental Quality and Health 157
driven by what is found on the inspection and the pattern of illness of the occupants. Moni-
tored variables may include the following:
1. Presence of carbon dioxide (should be <800 ppm)
2. Relative humidity: winter, 30% to 50%; summer, 40% to 60%; plenum and ductwork,
<70%
3. Ambient air temperature
 4. HVAC system function and condition
 5. Total number and concentrations of VOCs
6. Specific volatile chemicals
7. Combustion products, such as CO, NO, SO2, and O;
 8. Biological contaminants, bioaerosols, and chemical byproducts
9. Lighting level
10. Airflow: supply diffusers, return grills, and local exhaust systems
11. Airflow between spaces
12. Vertical air temperature
13. Air fltration
14. Noise and vibration
References
1. U.S. Department of Labor: Occupational Safety and Health Administration: Indoor air quality, Federal
Register 59(65):15968-16039, 1994.
 2. Dales R, Burnett R, Zwanenburg H: Adverse health effects among adults exposed to home dampness and
molds, Am Rev Respir Dis 143:505-509, 1991.
3. Amalkin R, Martinez K, Marinkovich V,et al: The relationship between symptoms and IgG and IgE
antibodies in an office environment, Environ Res A 76:85-93, 1998.
4. Norback D, Wieslander G, Bjornsson E, et al: Eye irritation, nasal congestion, and facial skin itching in
relation to emissions from newly painted indoor surfaces, Indoor Buiid Environ 5:270-279, 1996.
5. Dales R, Zqanenburg H, Burnch R,et al: Respiratory health effects of home dampness and molds among
Canadian children, Am I Epidemiol 134:196-203, 1991.
6. Menzies D, Bourbeau J: Building related illness, N Engl I Med 337(21):1524-1531, 1997.
role of sensitization to dust mites and molds, Am J Epidemio? 141:103-110, 1995.
 8. Waegemaekers M, VanWageningen N, Brunckreef B, et al: Respiratory symptoms in damp homes,
Allergy 44:17, 1989.
9. Seltzer JM, et al: Effects of the indoor environment on health, Occup Med State Art Rev 10(1):229-244,
1995.
 10. Middaugh A, Pinney S, Linz D: Sick building syndrome: medical evaluation of two work forces, I Occup
Med 34(12):1197-1203, 1992.
11. Lagoudi A, Loizidou M, Asimakopoulos D: Volatile organic compounds in office buildings: presence of
volatile organic compounds in the indoor air, Indoor Build Environ 5:341-347, 1996.
12. Lagoudi A, Loizidou M, Asimakopoulos D: Volatile organic compounds in office buildings: identifica-
tion of pollution sources in indoor air, Indoor Build Environ 5:348-354, 1996.
13. Holcomb L, Seabrook B: Indoorconcentrations of volatile organic compounds:implications forcomfort
health and regulation, Indoor Environ 4:7-26, 1995.
14. Mendell M, Smith A: Consistent pattern of elevated symptoms in air conditioned office buildings: a
reanalysis of epidemiologic studies, Am J Pub Heaith 80:1193-1199, 1990.
15. Diasty R, Olson P: Improving indoor air quality through healthy building envelope design and systems
selection, Indoor Environ 2:285-290, 1995
16. Rolloos M: HVAC systems and indoor air quality, Indoor Environ 2:204-212, 1993.
17. Burton J: General ventilation of nonindustrial occupancies. In Plog B, Niland J, Quinlan P, editors: Fun-
damentals of industrial hygiene, ed 4, Itasca, IL, 1996, National Safety Council.
18. Girman IR: Volatile organic compounds and building bake-out. In Cone JE, Hodgson MJ, editors: Occu-
pational medicine: state ofthe art reviews, vol 4, Philadelphia, 1989, Hanley & Belfus.
19. Linaker C, Chauhan A, Inskip H, et al: Distribution and determinants of personal exposure to nitrogen
dioxide in school children, Occup Environ Med 53:200-203, 1996.
20. Strom J, Alfredsson L, Malmfors T, et al: Nitrogen dioxide: causation and aggravation of lung diseases,
Indoor Environ 3:58-68, 1994.
158SECTlON 2 General Exposures
21. Steenland K: Passive smoking and the risk of heart disease, JAMA 7(1):94-99, 1992.
 22. Humble C, Croft J,Gerber A: Passive smoking and 20-year cardiovascular disease mortality among non-
smoking wives, Am I Pub Health 80:599-601, 1990.
23. Stankus R, Menon P, et al: Cigarette smoke-sensitive asthma: challenge studies, I Allerg Clin Immunol
82(3 Pt 1):331-338, 1988.
24. Godish T: Formaldehyde exposure from tobacco smoke: a review, Am J Pub Health 79:1044-1045, 1989.
25. Hodgson MJ: Environmental tobacco smoke and the sick building syndrome. In Cone JE, Hodgson MJ,
editors: Occupational medicine: state ofthe art reviews, vol 4, Philadelphia, 1989, Hanley & Belfus.
26. Stricker S, et al: Physiological responses to elevated carbon dioxide levels in buildings, Indoor Build Envi-
ro# 6:301-308, 1997.
27. Tumer W: Ventilation in occupational medicine, Ocup Med State Art Rev 10(1):41-57, 1995.
 28. Molhave L: Controlled experiments for studies ofthe sick building syndrome, Acad Sci 641:46-55, 1992.
 29. Molhave L, Liu Z, et al: Sensory and physiological effects on humans of combined exposures to air tem-
peratures and volatile organic compounds, Indoor A ir 3:155-169, 1993.
30. Bascom R, Kesavanathan J, Swift D: Human susceptibility to indoor contaminants, Occup Med State Art
Rev 10(1):119-132, 1995.
31. Frew J: The immunology of respiratory allergies, Toxicol Lett 86:65-72, 1996.
32. Damgard G:Mechanisms of activation ofthe sensory iritant receptor by airborne chemicals, Toxicology
21(3):183-208, 1991.
33.Schook L, Laskin D, editors: Xenobiotics and inflamation, San Diego, 1994, Academic Press.
34. Dusser D, Djokic T, Borson D, et al: Cigarette smoke induces bronchoconstrictor hyperresponsiveness
1989.
 35. Mygind N, Dahl R, Nielsen L: Efect of nasal infammation and of intranasal anti-inflammatory treat-
ment on bronchial asthma, Respir Med92:547-549, 1998.
36. Hirsch F, Kroemer G: The immune system and immune modulation. In Kresina T,editor: Immune
modulating agents, New York, 1998, Marcel Dekker.
37. Cometto-Muniz J, Cain W: Relative sensitivity of the ocular trigeminal, nasal trigeminal, and olfactory
systems to airborne chemicals, Chem Senses 20(2):191-198, 1995.
38. Cometto-Muniz J, Cain W: Thresholds for odor and nasal pungency, Physiology Behav 48:719-725, 1990.
39. Meggs WJ: RADS and RUDS - The toxic induction of asthma and rhinitis, Clin Toxicol 32(5):487-501,
1994.
40. Farley I: Inhaled toxicants and airway hyperresponsiveness, Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol32:67-88, 1992.
41. Lemanske R, Busse W: Asthma, JAMA 278(22):1855-1873, 1997.
42. Perkner J, et al: Iritant associated vocal cord dysfunction, J Occup Environ Med 40(2):136-143, 1998.
43. Crump D, Squire R, Yu C: Sources and concentrations of formaldehyde and other volatile organic com-
pounds in the indoor air of four newly built unoccupied test houses, Indoor Build Environ 6:45-55, 1997.
 44. Harving H, Dahl R, Molhave L: Lung function and bronchial reactivity in asthmatics during exposure to
volatile organic compounds, A m Rev Respir Dis 143:751-754, 1991.
45.Van Ert MD, Clayton JW,Crabb CL,et al: Identification and characterization of4-phenylcyclohexene,
Francisco, May, 1988.
46. Vogelman I, Clayton JW, Crutchfield CD, et al: Evaluation of 4-phenylcyclohexene concentrations in
home and chamber environments. Presented at the American Industrial Hygiene Conference, San Fran-
cisco, May, 1988.
47. Burge H: Aerobiology ofthe indoor environment, Orcup Med State Art Rev 10(1):27-40, 1995.
tors, Arch Dis Childh 63:473-478, 1988.
49. Jaakkola M, et al: Indoor dampness and molds and development of adult-onset asthma: a population-
based incident case-control study, Envir Hlth Persp 110(5):543-547, 2002.
 50. Gent F,et al: Levels of household mold associated with respiratory symptoms in the first year of life in a
cohort at risk for asthma, Envir Hfth Persp 110(12):A781-786, 2002.
51. Stark P, et al: Fungal levels in the home and lower respiratory tract illness in the first year of life, Am
Respir Crit Care Med 168:233-237, 2003.
52. Smith J, Anderson J, Lewis C: Cytotoxic fungal spores in the indoor atmosphere of the damp domestic
environment, FEMS Microbiol Lett 100:337-344, 1992.
CHAPTER
15
Responding to Mass
Exposures
Lisa A. Murphy, VMD, DABT
his chapter explores disaster situations that may necessitate the evacuation and decon-
tamination oflarge numbers of people and their pets (Color Plate 15-1). Common natu-
ral disasters include hurricanes, floods, tornadoes, and earthquakes. Other incidents may
be related to human activities such as transportation or power plant accidents or intentional
terrorist activities. All of these events could potentially result in the dispersion of chemical
contaminants into the environment, and sometimes even biological agents or radioactive
substances. When this occurs, both humans and animals may need to be decontaminated as
they evacuate the scene of the incident. In large-scale emergencies the availability of trained
personnel and the necessary resources for the decontamination of large numbers of pet
animals may be very limited, particularly in the early stages of the incident. Other chapters
in this text cover the decontamination and care of individual animals. Universal standards
for the decontamination of large numbers of domestic animals do not currently exist. This
chapter will discuss the challenges of animal decontamination, and aspects such as plan-
ning and triage, that are critical to ensuring the health, safety, and well-being of humans and
companion animals affected by mass catastrophes.
Initial Considerations
Human Safety and Animal Welfare
Human safety will be the first and most important consideration when making decisions
about decontaminating large numbers of animals. Only personnel with appropriate hazard-
Ous materials training should participate in animal decontamination operations. An incident's
safety officer will assess the hazards and risks to responders, determine what kinds of activities
can occur within the disaster area, and formulate personal safety plans to protect the health of
all on-scene personnel. Hazards associated with the care of domestic animals include bites and
scratches, exposure to bodily fluids and zoonotic diseases, and injuries related to lifting.2 All
personnel who intend to be involved in the decontamination and care of animals at a disaster
site should obtain prior medical clearance and prophylaxis against likely biological hazards.
The main role of veterinarians at a disaster scene will be assisting with an assessment
of the number of animals affected by an incident and the current status of their condition,
making a plan to decontaminate animals and provide veterinary care when indicated, and
requesting appropriate resources for the subsequent care and medical treatment of recovered
animals. In situations where veterinary personnel are unable to directly access the disaster
site,remote communications may enable recommendations tobe made from a safe distance.
Making the Decision to Decontaminate
Establishing Control Zones
Control zones—hot, warm, and cold—are established around dangerous areas to limit
access and contain the hazard.3 The hot zone is where the actual hazard is located and
159
160 SECTION 2 General Exposures
allowed to enter.
The hot zone is immediately surrounded by the warm zone, where contaminants are
expected to be present though at lower levels than in the hot zone. Ihis is where some
veterinary triage and all animal decontamination activities will take place. Only animals
and personnel that have been decontaminated in the warm zone's contamination reduction
corridor will be permitted into the cold zone.?
The cold zone surrounds the warm zone. Multiple incident-related activities will occur
in this location, including at least initial medical care, and sheltering of animals. Even
though risk of exposure to contaminants should be minimal or nonexistent in this area,
access by nonessential personnel should still be prevented.
Minimizing Further Animal Contamination
As detailed decisions regarding animal decontamination are being determined, actions to
minimize direct contact with known or suspected toxicants will benefit both humans and
animals.4 If a disaster site can be made safer by stopping or removing a point source of con-
tamination such as a leaking chemical container or vehicle, and adequate supplies of food
and water are either in place or can be provided, it may be reasonable to have people and
their pets remain in place until decontamination teams are in place. Ihis also assumes that
all companion animals are safely confined or under the control of their owners or another
responsible party. Depending on the nature of the incident or the potential hazard involved,
i may instead be necessary to evacuate human and animal populations to a safe staging
area until decontamination operations can begin. Ideally this site should be located in the
warm zone and be staffed by medical and veterinary personnel that can triage patients upon
arrival.
Decontamination of Live Animals
Technical Decontamination
Technical decontamination is a thorough and time-consuming decontamination process
that may involve dermal, ocular, and possibly even gastrointestinal or internal decontami-
nation that are discussed elsewhere in this text. For the external decontamination of com-
panion animals, large volumes of water will be needed and liquid dishwashing detergents
are recommended for the removal of most chemicals.5 Eyes, ears, and noses should also be
cleaned and inspected. All of these can be decontaminated by gently flushing with copious
amounts of tepid water, though some debris may need to be manually removed from ear
canals and nasal passages using sof toothbrushes, cotton swabs, or gauze.4 Under most
circumstances more involved gastrointestinal and internal decontamination procedures
should be performed beyond the decontamination line in the cold zone.
Mass Decontamination
Mass decontamination may be used rather than technical decontamination in events
involving the contamination of large numbers of people.3 Tents and trailers have been
designed for the mass decontamination of people, because of necessity alternatives such
as fre hoses and hydrants, locker rooms, and swimming pools have also been utilized.
Although similar techniques have been described using chutes and corrals for groups of
livestock and horses,4 it is unlikely that individual companion animals could be safely
comingled and adequately contained to facilitate this type of decontamination without
significant risk of injury or escape. Because this essentially limits the companion animal
decontamination process to several people working on one individual at a time, the entire
process will require significant time, personnel, and resources if many animals are affected
by a large-scale event.
Emergency Decontamination
Emergency, or gross, decontamination is a life-saving measure that involves the
rapid removal of as much contamination as possible, and is typically restricted to
Chapter 15 |  Responding to Mass Exposures  161
decontamination of the haircoat and skin.4 Emergency decontamination can facilitate
the rapid transfer of a critically injured or gravely ill animal from a contaminated area
to a location where immediate veterinary care can be provided. Examples of conditions
that may require emergency decontamination include airway obstruction, pneumotho-
rax, shock, arterial hemorrhage, and unconsciousness.36 Because these animals may still
retain contaminant residues either on the outside of their bodies or internally, they should
ideally be treated and housed in a warm zone location that is isolated from other decon-
taminated animals.
Medical Decontamination
 Once companion animals have passed through the decontamination line, additional treat-
ments such as intravenous fluids, activated charcoal, specific antidotes, and gastric lavage to
limit absorption of toxic substances may be indicated4 and are discussed in detail elsewhere
in this text.
Euthanasia
Humane euthanasia may need to be considered for animals that are unlikely to survive
the decontamination process because of injuries or illness, either preexisting or associated
with the incident. When large numbers of companion animals are impacted by an incident
or decontamination personnel or resources are limited, decontamination and additional
treatments should be performed on the animals that are most likely to live. These deci-
sions wil be very stressful for both owners and the emergency personnel working with
the animals, so the presence of a veterinarian will be critical for determining the course of
action that best addresses the human-animal bond, public health and safety, and animal
welfare.
Special Considerations
Animal Identification and Documentation
Whether an animal is brought to a decontamination line by a family member or is pre-
sented by a rescuer or other individual, adequate identification and documentation pro-
cedures must be in place to best ensure that pets and owners are later reunited. Ideally
medical and veterinary personnel would be processing people and their pets in parallel
decontamination lines, and then transporting them together to a pet-friendly shelter, but
this will not always be possible. Because leashes, collars, and harnesses will generally have
to be removed as hazardous waste during the decontamination process, these unique items
should either be photographed or otherwise preserved or documented in a way that will
later assist in the positive identification of individual animals, especially when these items
contain owner names and addresses.2 Animals themselves should also be individually pho-
tographed and a unique identifer should be assigned to each pet until it can be returned
to its proper owner.
Physical Restraint
Although under normal circumstances many companion animals, particularly dogs, may
not object to routine bathing, pets that are stressed and brought into an enclosed location
 for decontamination by unfamiliar people may not be as easy to handle. In addition, it is
important to expect that emergency personnel wearing PPE will frighten many animals.!
PPE worn during the decontamination of animals should ideally protect against common
injuries such as bites and scratches, but these same injuries could also damage the PPE
itself, jeopardizing the health and safety of emergency responders. An adequate supply of
clean leashes, harnesses, collars, and muzzles should be available to facilitate the safe and
secure handling of animals during decontamination.
To minimize the risk of injury to both animals and people, it may be helpful to place a
frightened or fractious animal inside a portable plastic or metal animal carrier of an appro-
the animal's well-being (Color Plate 15-2). If the carrier can then be securely placed on an
162 SECTION 2 General Exposures
elevated surface it should be possible to at least grossly decontaminate the animal without
having to directly restrain it.
Chemical Restraint
Some companion animals may be either too stressed or aggressive to be safely decontami-
nated using physical restraint techniques alone. Although the administration of sedatives
is commonly performed in veterinary hospitals, it should not be considered a routine
procedure during an emergency evacuation. Stressed, injured, debilitated companion ani-
mals or those with preexisting medical conditions may potentially develop hypotension or
arrhythmias, or become ataxic or otherwise unstable.4 Some aggressive animals become
more unpredictable when sedated. Should complications arise, animal safety may be com-
promised by the lack of immediate access to emergency care. Human personnel may be at
increased risk of accidental needle sticks and other injuries because of the decreased dex-
terity and mobility and limited field of vision typically experienced when working in PPE
Wastewater Management
Contaminated wastewater generated during the decontamination of animals should be
managed in such a way that prevents animals from ingesting it and keeps the water from
being dispersed into the surrounding area. Environmental oficials should be consulted
 before decontamination operations begin and again after they are completed, in order to
determine the best method for disposal of wastewater, along with accumulated urine, feces,
and hair.
Decontamination of Deceased Animals
Not all companion animals may survive a large-scale disaster. Even though pets are fam-
ily members and owners may want to bring their remains with them when they evacuate,
environmental concerns and legal/jurisdictional issues may preclude this. If access to water,
personnel, and other decontamination resources is limited, decontamination of live people
and animals will have to take precedence. In addition, if the nature of the incident is poten-
tially the result of either human error (such as a transportation accident) or an intentional
malicious act, the affected area will be considered a crime scene. As part of their investiga-
tion, local, state, or federal law enforcement officials may need any deceased animals as
evidence. Also the presence of chemical, biological, or radiologic contaminants may neces-
sitate handling of dead animals as hazardous waste under the direction of local, state, or
federal environmental authorities.4
Laws and Regulations Related to Animal Decontamination
The Pets Evacuation and Transportation Standards Act was signed into federal law and
requires that pets and service animals be included in disaster and emergency plans;4 how-
Ever, there are few laws that would require emergency personnel to decontaminate animals.
Local, state, and federal authorities may have jurisdiction over other issues related to animal
decontamination operations, such as disposal of wastewater (environmental protection),
worker health and safety (OSHA, EPA, public health), and disposition and care of domestic
animals (agriculture).
Working and Service Animals
pasn aus ane saop suom t'saso pue sop anu Aneii se sum
animals must be afforded the same rights and protections as their handlers, including access
to decontamination and veterinary care during emergency deployments.
 Most jurisdictions also afford special privileges to animals that are specially trained to
assist their disabled owners.4 In addition to dogs, other service animals such as monkeys
mals must remain in close proximity to their owners at all times, not only is it imperative
that they be adequately decontanminated so they do not transfer contaminants to people, but
Chapter 15 | Responding to Mass Exposures 163
i may also be necessary to adapt procedures so service animals and their disabled owners
can be decontaminated together (Color Plate 15-3).
Luckily most working and service dogs are accustomed to frequent bathing; however,
certain animals, particularly police dogs, may be most easily and safely decontaminated
with the assistance of a familiar person. Because many working dog handlers may them-
selves be emergency responders with hazardous materials training, they may be able to
significantly assist with the decontamination of their animals.
Commonly Encountered Contaminants
Although an incident involving a point-source release may make identification of the spe-
cific agent involved relatively simple, larger-scale natural and manmade disasters can result
in the vast dispersion of unknown quantities of a variety of toxic and hazardous contami-
nants. Floodwaters are known to contain heavy metals such as lead;7 household, agricul-
tural, and industrial chemicals; and fecal coliforms.2 Contaminants associated with urban
disaster areas include automotive fluids, polychlorinated biphenyls, pesticides, molds, haz
ardous metals, asbestos, toxic gases, cleaning products, and solvents. Intentional crimi-
nal acts may involve chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, and explosive materials, or
 merely conveniently available hazardous substances.4
Personal Protective Equipment
Level D
 Level D personal protective equipment (PPE) consists of everyday attire and equipment
that is needed to safely conduct a specific activity.3 When working around animals this
should include coveralls or other durable clothing, protective gloves, protective footwear,
 and safety glasses. This level of protection is only appropriate if there is minimal risk of
exposure to contaminants and zoonotic diseases, so it may be best suited to personnel car-
ing for animals in the cold zone.
Level C
Level C PPE includes all of the elements of level D, with the addition of an outer layer that is
chemical- and splash-resistant, and a National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
(NIOSH)-approved air-purifying respirator. 34 Prior medical clearance and certification are
provides a good level of protection against many diseases and contaminants, and would
likely be the most common type of PPE worn by personnel performing animal triage and
decontamination. Because of the potential for bites and scratches when working with com-
panion animals, all PPE should be thoroughly inspected for leaks or other damage before,
during, and after routine use.
Levels A and B
Levels A and B PPE incorporate everything used at level C; however,they derive their air
lating chemical protective suit. This level of protection is reserved for environments that
pose the highest risks to human safety, because of the presence of either unknown con-
vides the highest level of respiratory protection that is achieved with level A, but less skin
protection against splashes.4 Because of the advanced training and frequent recertifications
needed to work in levels A and B PPE, it is unlikely that most veterinary personnel will be
qualified or permitted to work in such highly contaminated locations. In reality, few or no
animals would be expected to survive under such over whelmingly hazardous environmen-
tal conditions.
164SECTION 2 General Exposures
Post-Decontamination Monitoring and Aftercare
Sheltering of Decontaminated Animals
Many human evacuation shelters do not admit animals, except for working or service
animals. With this in mind, animal decontamination planning should include the iden-
tification of designated locations that can temporarily house otherwise healthy animals
that have been decontaminated. Most local jurisdictions have some sort of animal shelter-
ing facility; however, these sites may become either inaccessible or otherwise unusable if
directly impacted by the emergency situation. Conventional facilities immediately outside
the disaster zone such as animal shelters, kennels, and veterinary hospitals may quickly fll
to capacity, and following a large-scale incident alternative locations such as schools, gym-
nasiums, stadiums, and fairgrounds may already be in use for human evacuees. National-
level animal sheltering groups and local and state animal response teams may be able to
assist with the establishment of temporary sheltering operations, and preparations should
be made to transport animals to other suitable nearby locations.
Short-Term Monitoring and Care of Hospitalized Animals
Following decontamination, symptomatic animals or those that are otherwise at risk for
developing adverse clinical signs associated with exposure to contaminants should receive
symptomatic and supportive care, including the administration of specific antidotes when
indicated as discussed throughout this text.
In addition to problems related to toxicant exposures, animals emerging from disaster
sites may also require veterinary care for other injuries and health problems. Acute injuries
and illnesses documented in dogs that deployed in response to the September 11, 2001, ter-
 abrasions, gastrointestinal signs, skin problems, urinary tract problems, and lameness.9.10
Long-Term Surveillance
There are no uniform protocols or procedures for the long-term monitoring of compan-
ion animals that have been affected by large-scale releases of contaminants; however, some
monitoring data is available from the assessments of working dogs that responded to the
September 11, 2001, disaster sites and were extensively exposed to environmental contami-
nants.10.1 Initial collection of blood samples for a complete blood count and serum biochem-
istry profile should be part of a complete physical examination. Depending on the known or
suspected toxicants associated with a specific incident, thoracic and abdominal radiographs
and collection of additional samples for toxicologic analysis may also be warranted.
Long-term care should consist of physical examinations at least yearly, and more fre-
quently if health problems arise that are suspected to be associated with a previous exposure
to contaminants.
References
1. Murphy LA: Basic veterinary decontamination: who, what, why? In Wingfield WE, Palmer SB, editors:
Veterinary disaster response, Ames, Iowa, 2009, Wiley-Blackwell.
 2. Soric S, Belanger MP, Wittnich C: A method for the decontamination of animals involved in floodwater
disaster disasters, JA VMA 232(3):364-370, 2008.
3. Wenzel JGW: Awareness-level information for veterinarians on control zones, personal protective
equipment, and decontamination, JA VMA 231(1):48-51, 2007.
4. Murphy L, Slessman D, Mauck B: Decontamination of large animals. In Gimenez R, Gimenez T,
May KA,editors: Technical large animal emergency rescue, Ames, Iowa, 2008, Wiley-Blackwell.
 5. Wismer TA, Murphy LA, Gwaltney-Brant SM, et al: Management and prevention of toxicoses in search-
and-rescue dogs responding to urban disasters, JAVMA 222(3):305-310, 2003.
6. Otto CM, Franz MA, Kellogg B, et al: Field treatment of search dogs: lessons learned from the World
Trade Center disaster, I Vet Emerg Crit Care 12(1):33-42, 2002.
7. Marris E: First tests show food waters high in bacteria and lead, Nature 437:301, 2005.
8. Murphy LA, Gwaltney-Brant SM, Albretsen JC, et al: Toxicologic agents of concerm for search-and-
 9  ss     
Chapter 15 | Responding to Mass Exposures165
9. Sensky KA, Drobatz KJ, Downend AB, et al: Deployment morbidity among search-and-rescue dogs
used after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, JA VMA 225(6):868-873, 2004.
10. Fox PR, Puschner B, Ebel JG: Assessment of acute injuries, exposure to environmental toxins, and five-
year health surveillance of New York Police Department working dogs following the September 11, 2001,
World Trade Center terrorist attack, JA VMA 233(1):48-59, 2008.
11. Otto CM, Downend AB, Serpell JA, et al: Medical and behavioral surveillance of dogs deployed to the
World Trade Center and the Pentagon from October 2001 to June 2002, JA VMA 225(6):861-867, 2004.
CHAPTER
Reproductive
16
Toxicology of
Male and Female
Companion Animals
Tim 1. Evans, DVM, MS, PhD, DACT, DABVT
oung ainrn, e aeassa si it 'eaiains saioads rg painbau si uonnodan yno
tion, with respect to individual animal longevity. This is especially true in compan-
ion animals, in which a relatively small proportion of animals are maintained exclusively
for breeding purposes and millions of unwanted animals are euthanized each year. In
fact, reproductive toxicants or the potential toxic effects of nonreproductive toxicants on
reproductive performance in small animals often receive very limited attention in toxicol-
ogy texts. However, there are many instances in which optimal individual canine and/
or feline reproductive effciency is critical for owner or caretaker satisfaction. Many of
these animals were not selected for breeding purposes based on criteria related to fertility,
and some of these animals might even be older and have age-related health problems. As
a result of this selection process, a subpopulation of these animals chosen for breeding
might be inherently more susceptible to subtle, xenobiotic-induced effects on reproduc-
tive function. Although impaired reproductive function can have a single toxic etiology,
the causes of diminished reproductive performance are often multifactorial, involving var-
ious predisposing factors and/or stressors, including toxicants. The purpose of this chapter
is to provide the basic facts concerning canine and feline reproduction and briefly discuss
 xenobiotics, meaning any chemicals foreign to the body, such as drugs or toxicants, not
only as the primary causes of observed reproductive abnormalities, but also in the con-
text of other variables, including physiology, genetics, nutrition, infectious disease, envi-
Selected toxins of fungal and plant origin, as well other xenobiotics are listed and briefly
reviewed. The recognition and prevention of the potential adverse reproductive effects
of these toxic stressors and their interactions are essential for optimal canine and feline
reproductive performance.
Introduction
The major objective of this chapter is to provide a quick and practical review of (1) canine
and feline reproductive physiology; (2) the basics of what is currently known regarding small
animal reproductive toxicology and the ways in which xenobiotics, meaning any chemicals
foreign to the body, such as drugs or toxicants, might pose a risk to reproductive function in
companion animals; and (3) specific xenobiotics, especially potential pet food and environ-
mental contaminants, as well as common medications, which can adversely affect spermato-
genesis, estrous cycles, and embryonic and fetal development, in females (Tables 16-1to16-3).
167
168SECTION2General Exposures
Table 16-1
 Summary of Essential Facts Pertaining to Small Animal Reproduction*
Reproductive Parameter
Dog
Cat
Peak breeding age
2-6 years of age
15-7 years of age
Postnatal testicular
Completed by 6-8 weeks
Completed by 6-8 weeks
descent
 Prepubertal mobility
 Prepubertal mobility
Onset of male
7-10 (up to 12) months
7 to 10 months
puberty
Range of 5-12 months
 Duration of cycle of
~13.2 ± 0.7 days
~10.4 ± 0.3 days
seminiferous
epithelium
Duration of
~62days
~46.8 days
spermatogenesis
Epididymal transit time
~12 days
10+ days?
Threshold semen
≥300 × 106 sperm/ejaculate 
≥30 × 106 sperm/ejaculate 
parameters
≥70% progressive motility
≥70% progressive motility
Onset of female puberty
6 to 14 months
 Range of 5 to 12 months
Larger dogs by 18 to 24
Most by 6 to 9 months
(30?) months
 Frequency of estrous
Monestrous
Polyestrous
cycles
Seasonality of estrous
Possible seasonal influences/
 Seasonal long-day breeder
cycles
whelping year-round?
 Average duration of
~9 days (6-11 days)
~0-2 days
proestrus
Range of 3-25 days
Might not be exhibited
Average duration of
~9 days (5-9 days)
~7days
estrus
Range of 2-20 days
 Range of 1-21 days
 Follicular phase: estrus
1:1
Possibly ≥1:1
ratio
Type of ovulation
Spontaneous
Induced or "reflex”
Average duration of
~60 days ± pregnancy
~60 days with pregnancy
diestrus
~40-45 days if not pregnant
Average duration of
Minimum of 7-8 weeks
~3-4 months
anestrus
Usually 18-20 weeks
Range of 30-90+ days
Type of oocyte ovulated
Primary
Secondary
 Interestrous interval/
5-11 months
Interestrus or "postestrus"
periodt
Range of 3.5-13 months
Range of 8-15 days
Gestational length
65 ±1 days after LH surge
63-66 days after P4 1
63 ± 1 days after ovulation
Entry into uterus
10-13 days after ovulation
5-6 days after ovulation
Beginning of fetal stage
~33 days after ovulation
~28 days after ovulation
Sources of
Corpora lutea
Corpora lutea
gestational
 Prolactin is luteotrophic
Placenta after 40+ days
progesterone
 Type of placentation
 Zonary/endotheliochorial/
 Same as dog
deciduate
Biochemical alterations
 Normocytic, normochromic anemia/lcalcium 7-9 weeks
during canine
after estrus
pregnancy
↑Cholesterol, total protein, clotting factors, 3-8+ weeks
after estrus
*Information is adapted from the text of this chapter, based on References 4-12.
+Interestrous interval does not mean the same thing in the dog as it does in the cat (see text).
Chapter 16 I Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 169
Table 16-2
Summary of Reproductive Effects of Selected Predisposing
Factors and Stressors*
Predisposing Factors and Stressors
Adverse Effects on Reproduction
Physiological factors:
Stress and o/Q infertility
Stress/fever
Fever damages sperm and germ cell 
precursors
Genetic factors:
↓ /Q fertility with these predisposing factors
Lack of hybrid vigor/disease
Some breeds predisposed to diseases/
predisposition
conditions
Nutritional factors:
Delayed onset of puberty
↓ Body condition/nutritional
Stress and C/Q infertility from malnutrition
deficiencies
Environmental factors:
Heat- and radiation-damaged gametes
Heat/microwaves/radiation/stray
↓ /Q fertility with these stressors
voltage
Infectious diseases and parasitism:
 Brucellosis and ↓ /Q fertility/Pyometra pre-
 Bacteria/viruses/parasites
vents pregnancy. Bacteria, viruses, and
 parasites cause abortions/neonatal death.
Xenobiotic Stressors
Mycotoxins:
Aflatoxins are hepatotoxic/ Vomitoxin affects
Aflatoxins/vomitoxin/zearalenone/
GI.
10813
Zearalenone is estrogenic/Ergot toxins
↓ prolactin.
Phytotoxins:
 Stress and C/Q infertility from systemic
Phytotoxins/phytoestrogens
disease
 Phytoestrogens have been associated with
↓fertility.
Heavy metals:
↓ Testosterone and ↓ sperm number with Cd
Cadmium/lead/mercury
 ↓ Sperm quality and teratogenesis in CNS
with Pb and Hg
Rodenticides:
Stress and C/Q infertility from systemic
Anticoagulants/strychnine/zinc
disease/other effects
phosphide
 Teratogenesis/neonatal coagulopathies with
anticoagulants
Insecticides and molluscicides:
Stress and /Q infertility from systemic
OPs/carbamates/pyrethroids/
disease
metaldehyde
Pyrethrins/pyrethroids can be
antiandrogenic.
Fungicides:
DBCP is testicular toxicant.
Dibromochlorpropane (DBCP)/
Vinclozolin has antiandrogenic activity.
vinclozolin
Herbicides:
Testicular degeneration reported with 2,4-D
 2,4-D/diquat and paraquat
 Diquat and paraquat alter sexual
differentiation
Organic pollutants:
 Systemic effects with high doses; also endo-
HAHs: Dioxins/PCBs/PBDEs/others
crine disruptors
↓ Number of normal gametes and
teratogenesis
Plasticizers and plastic byproducts:
Endocrine disruption
 Bisphenol A/phthalates
BPA is estrogenic and phthalates cause
testicular effects.
*Information is adapted from the text of this chapter, based on References 1, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 14.
170SECTION2 GeneralExposures
Table 16-3
Potentially Adverse Reproductive Effects of Selected
Commonly Used Medications*
Xenobiotic
Effect on Males
Safety DuringPregnancy+
Anticancer Drugs
Cyclophosphamide
↓ Sperm number and
C: ↓ Fertility and teratogenesis
teratogenesis
Doxorubicin
Assume abnormal
C: Embryotoxic, teratogenic,
spermatogenesis
abortifacient
Vincristine
↓Sperm number
C: Safety not established in
 Possible reversibility
dogs and cats
Assume fetotoxic and terato-
genic effects
Methotrexate
Assume abnormal
C: Abortifacient, teratogenic,
spermatogenesis
mutagenic
↑ Abnormal sperm
Anticonvulsant Drugs
Diazepam
Impotence and ejaculatory
C: Teratogenesis in rodents
failure
and humans
Phenobarbital
Chronic low-dose exposure:
B: Possible teratogenesis
↓ Sperm motility
 Bleeding tendencies in
neonates
Phenytoin
Chronic exposure:
C/D: Teratogenesis in rodents 
↓ Sperm motility
and humans
 Fetal hydantoin syndrome
Primidone
Converted to phenobarbital
C: Same risks as phenobarbital
 Same risks and I hepatotoxic
↑Hepatotoxicity
risks
Valproic acid
Chronic exposure to high
C: Teratogenesis
doses:
Neural tube defects in humans
↓ Sperm number and
motility
Anti-inflammatory Drugs
Acetaminophen
Delayed spermiogenesis
C: Toxic in cats
↑ Abnormal sperm
Safety not established in dogs
Nonsteroidals
↓ Seminal prostaglandins?
C: Embryotoxic in rodents
(NSAIDs)
↓ Sperm motility and
 Safety not established in dogs
fertilization?
and cats
Glucocorticoids
↓ Testosterone and libido
C: T Incidence of cleft palate
↓ Sperm number and
Premature labor or abortion
motility
Antifungal Drugs
Ketaconazole/
↓ Testosterone and libido
B/C: Antiandrogenic?
miconazole
↓ Sperm number and
↑ Stillbirths?
motility
"Safe” in dogs and cats
Griseofulvin
No adverse effects with
D: Teratogenic in rats
routine usage
Feline skeletal/brain
malformations
Antimicrobial Drugs
Aminoglycosides
 Possible spermatogenic
C: Crosses the placenta easily
effects
8th nerve toxicity/
 Routinely used in semen
nephrotoxicity
extenders
Chapter 16 I Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 171
Table 16-3
Potentially Adverse Reproductive Effects of Selected
Commonly Used Medications*—-cont'd
Xenobiotic
Effect on Males
Safety During Pregnancy+
β-Lactams
No adverse effects with
A: Crosses placenta easily
routine usage
No harm to fetus
demonstrated
Cephalosporins
No adverse effects with
A: Crosses the placenta easily
routine usage
No harm to fetus
demonstrated
Fluoroquinolones
High doses:
D: Articular cartilage defects
↑ Abnormal sperm and
Avoid use during pregnancy
↓ sperm number
Xenobiotic
Effect on male
Safety during pregnancyt
Metronidazole
High doses:
C: Teratogenic in lab animals
 ↑ Abnormal sperm and
 Safety not established in dogs
↓ sperm number
and cats
Sulfonamides
High doses or long-term
B/C: Teratogenic in lab
treatment:
animals
 ↓ Sperm number and
"Safe" in dogs and cats 
motility
Tetracyclines
Very high doses:
D: Maternal toxicity
 ↓ Sperm number and
Bone and teeth malformations
capacitation
Trimethoprims ±
B/C: Folate and bone marrow
sulfas
↓ Sperm numbers by
effects?
7%-88%
"Safe" in dogs and cats 
Antiparasitic Drugs
Avermectins
No adverse effects with
A: No adverse effects
routine usage
demonstrated
Benzimidazoles
No adverse effects with
A: Safe according to repro-
routine usage
ductive studies
B: Thiabendazole and toxemia
in ewes?
Organophosphates
No information available
B/C: Little information
Avoid use because safer
available
alternatives
Congenital intoxications in
some species
Piperazine
No adverse effects with
A: No adverse effects
routine usage
demonstrated
 Praziquantel
No adverse effects with
A: Safe when tested in dogs
routine usage
Pyrantel pamoate
 Safe with routine, approved
 A: Safe in pregnant and nurs-
usage
ing pets
 Class C in pregnant women
Praziquantel/
Conflicting information on
Safety of Praziquantel/Pyran-
 Pyrantel pamoate/±
testing in breeding dogs?
tel pamoate?
Febantel
DO NOT give Febantel during
pregnancy
Thenium closylate
No adverse effects with
A: No adverse effects
routine usage
demonstrated
Use in young puppies
contraindicated?
continued
172SECTlON2 General Exposures
Table 16-3
Potentially Adverse Reproductive Effects of Selected
Commonly Used Medications*—-cont'd
Xenobiotic
Effect on Males
Safety DuringPregnancy+
Cardiovascular Medications
ACE inhibitors
Testicular effects with
C: Embryotoxic in lab animals
chronic use
and goats
 Possible alterations in sperm
motility
Cardiac glycosides
Testicular effects with
A: Safe when tested in dogs
chronic use
 No adverse effects in humans
Altered testosterone
or rodents
secretion?
Dopamine
No adverse effects with
B: Probably safe at therapeutic
routine usage
doses
Furosemide
Chronic exposure:
B: Probably safe at therapeutic
Possible effects on testicular
doses
function
No adverse effects reported
Heparin
Probably no effect with
B: Probably safe at therapeutic
routine usage
doses
↑ Bleeding might affect
 Does not appear to cross
fertility
placenta
Isoproterenol
 Probably no effect with
C: Possible fetal tachycardia
routine usage
β-adrenergics inhibit uterine
Testicular effects with
contractions
chronic usage
Lidocaine/
Probably no effect with
A/B: Probably safe in dogs
Procainamide
routine usage
and cats
↓ Sperm motility in vitro
Possible fetal bradycardia
Thiazide diuretics
Chronic exposure:
C: Possible I incidence in
Possible effects on testicular
perinatal death
function
Warfarin
Probably no effect with
 D: Crosses placenta rapidly
routine usage
Abortions/stillbirths from ↓
↑ Bleeding might affect
clotting
fertility
Xenobiotic
Effect on male
Safety during pregnancyt
Gastrointestinal Drugs
Antacids/Sucralfate
 Safe with routine, approved
A: Safe when tested in dogs
usage
Not absorbed systemically
Diphenhydramine
↓Sperm motility
B: Safe if used short term
Dimenhydrinate
Cimetidine/
↓Sperm number
B/C: "Safe" in dogs and cats
Omeprazole
Hormones
Androgens/
 ↓ Sperm number, quality, and
D: Masculinization of female
Anabolics
motility
fetuses
 Testicular degeneration
Estrogens/DES
↓ Sperm number
 D: Feminization of male
Behavioral feminization
fetuses
Cancer in daughters of treated
women
Progestogens
↓ Sperm number and quality
D: Masculinization of female
fetuses
Chapter 16 I Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 173
Table 16-3
Potentially Adverse Reproductive Effects of Selected
Commonly Used Medications*—-cont'd
Xenobiotic
Effect on Males
Safety During Pregnancyt
Preanesthetic and Anesthetic Drugs
Atropine
↓ Ejaculated sperm and semi-
B/C: Crosses placenta easily
nal fluid
Fetal tachycardia and
↓ gonadotropins?
Glycopyrrolate
↓ Ejaculated sperm and semi-
 B: Crosses placenta less than
nal fluid?
atropine
 No teratogenesis in rats and
rabbits
Phenothiazine
 Priapism and impotence
C: Nervous disorders and
derivatives
↓Spermatogenesis
jaundice in humans
CNS depression if given near
term
Xylazine
Retrograde flow of sperm
D: No information on
into bladder
teratogenesis
Premature labor or abortion
Ketamine
 Possible ↓ sperm number
B/C: Premature labor/neonate
and motility
depressed
"Safe" in dogs and cats
Barbiturates
↓ Testosterone?
C/D: Pentobarbital high fetal
↓ Sperm motility?
mortality
All barbiturates depress
neonates
Opiates/Butorphanol
↓ Hormone production?
B: Possible neonatal
↓ Sperm number and
depression
motility
 Safe in dogs and cats 
Propofol
No adverse effects with
B: Useful for cesarean section
routine usage
induction in dogs
↓ Possible apnea/hypoxia with
O2
Sevoflurane/
Possible ↓ sperm number
B: Possible neonatal
Isoflurane
and motility
depression
 Safe in dogs and cats
Halothane/
 Possible ↓ sperm number
C: Neonatal depression
Methoxyflurane
and motility
↑ Bleeding with halothane
Polyspermy in female?
*Information is adapted from this chapter, based on References 1, 4, 5, 8, 9, 49, 50, and 51.
+Definition of categories both categories listed (eg., B/C), ifinformation is conflictingl:
A: Probably safe. No specific studies have proved the safety of all drugs in dogs and cats, but no reports of
adverse effects in laboratory animals or women.
B: Safe for use if used cautiously. Studies in laboratory animals might have discovered some risk, but these 
wan ieau paiasiuiwpe you j! ajes ae jo sieo pue saop ui ajes aq on jeadde sam.p
smp asaui, sys paaaasip aaey siewue in aldad u sais sysu aad aae aualu sansp asaui s
should be used cautiously, as last resort, yf benefits outweigh risks.
D: Contraindlicated. These cdrugs cause congenitat malforations or embryotoxicity.
174 SECTION 2 General Exposures
Furthermore, the author's experiences as a theriogenologist and toxicologist suggest several
other basic concepts and possible misconceptions that this chapter should address within the
context of these objectives:
1. Dogs and cats selected for breeding based on nonreproductive criteria and older canine
and feline breeding animals might be predisposed to subfertility.
2. Xenobiotics can either directly affect reproductive organs or functions or indirectly
affect reproductive function by having adverse effects on other organs or body
systems.
3. Reproductive abnormalities can be the first direct or indirect xenobiotic effects observed,
and changes in canine and feline reproductive performance might serve as biomarkers
for similar effects in humans.
4. Xenobiotics can play a primary role in causing reproductive ineficiency or, because of
interactions with other factors or stressors, a secondary role in causing subfertility.
 5. Synthetic as well as natural xenobiotics can adversely affect reproduction.
The Relevance of Reproduction in Small Animals
Reproduction is a critical biological process in aliving systems and is required for species
survival. Reproduction is also essential for the production of such important agricultural
commodities as milk and meat for human and companion animal consumption. How-
ever, on an individual animal basis, reproduction can be essentially viewed as a luxury
function, or even in some cases a nuisance, unless of course fertility is among the criteria
used for culling animals from livestock production systems or breeding colonies. Most
aspects of sexual reproduction in domestic mammalian species, including embryonic
and fetal development, actually can be suppressed or impaired by stress, which implies
excessive stimulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the release
of large amounts of endogenous glucocorticoid.l.2 Reproductive processes, in particular
those associated with pregnancy, also can be adversely affected by diseases, including
intoxications, which affect other organ systems and not the reproductive tract directly.
The mechanisms for those adverse effects might be stress-related or might involve other
interactions between those organ systems and various aspects of pregnancy and fetal
development. Furthermore, with respect to companion animal species, it is rarely essen-
tial to use an individual pet for breeding purposes, especially when one considers that
three to four million unwanted dogs and cats are euthanized each year.^ In fact, it can be
argued that most dogs and cats are perhaps too fertile, and companion animal popula-
tion control, rather than propagation, is a primary focus of the majority of small animal
practices.
With the exception of the previous edition of this book, reproductive toxicants or
in small animals often receive very limited attention in small animal toxicology text-
books.45 However, there are many instances in which individual canine and/or feline
reproductive efficiency is critical for the livelihoods of owners or caretakers and their
particular specialized lineages can be desired as pets or used for purposes of exhibi-
tion, service to individuals with disabilities, security and protection of military or law
enforcement personnel, detection of illicit drugs and explosives, search and rescue,
and/or participation in hunting and other sporting activities. There are also dogs and
cats carrying selected gene mutations, which are used for biomedical research, as well
as species of endangered canids and felids, in which gene pool conservation and/or
expansion (particularly in instances of relatively closed breeding colonies) are very
worthwhile objectives. Additionally it should not be forgotten that companion animals
live in environments and consume foodstuffs very similar to those of their owners and
caretakers.
Chapter 16 I Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 175
Overview of Breeding Selection and Reproduction
in Small Animals
Selection of Dogs and Cats for Breeding Purposes
Before going into greater detail about potential negative reproductive outcomes and
the variables that can adversely affect reproductive function in small animals, including
u sies pue saop moq maian Aaq ot aiendondde si il 'snoqouax sixoi Aeuaiod
be selected for breeding purposes and what is considered normal reproductive function
sassasond saoroisayd jo aauei apim aul sasseduosua uomsnpoiday z'r'sies pue shop u!
and the associated behaviors and anatomical structures necessary for the birth of the next
 su e si unan ti a u umus s ge'see yo uua
involving precise coordination and integration of the functions of multiple organs, within
and between both male and female animals, as well as the conceptus or, in litter-bearing or
polytocous species (e.g., dogs and cats), conceptuses.12 The efficient production of viable
and functional gametes and their transport and union to form a zygote or zygotes that
Puberty
Sexual
Reproductive
Maturity
Postnatal Survival
Senescence
and Growth
Steroidogenesis
Spermatogenesis
Oogenesis
Parturition
Lactation
Libido
Fetal Development
and Maturation
Copulation
Erection and Ejaculation
Organogenesis
Standing Estrus
Placental Formation
and Function
Sperm Transport
and Capacitation
Oocyte Transport
Implantation or
Attachment
 Fertilization
 Zygote Transport
Embryogenesis
Figure 16-l The continuum of developmental stages and reproductive functions taking
place in males and/or females, as well the embryo and fetus, are shown schematically and
llustrate the complexity of reproduction in companion animal species. (Borrowed with
permission from Evans TJ: Reproductive toxicity and endocrine disruption. In Gupta
RC, editor, Reproductive and developmental toxicology, New York, 20li, Academic Press/
Elsevier. The artwork is courtesy of Don Connor and Howard Wilson.)
176SECTlON 2 General Exposures
develop into a healthy and fertile individual or a litter of such individuals require that strin-
gent physical, physiologic, and metabolic needs be met in at least three distinct animals
(i.e., two parents and their offspring).12.6 Companion animals that are selected for breeding
Kissaloa anpodan on aia isou are ieu suonemdodqns an uasaidan seme rou o
An understanding of which dogs and cats are chosen to breed and what might constitute
normal reproductive function for a given species (see Table 16-1) is invaluable in discerning
what truly represents abnormal reproductive performance and whether xenobiotics might
play a role in decreased reproductive efficienc y.
Either because of their own or their offspring's accomplishments, many dogs and cats are
likely to be bred when they are older. There is usually some point at which fertility decreases
[eiuaiod ol sasodxg zr'(sies ui siean < pue shop ui siean g< "a'l) aae Bunoueape ym
stressors are more likely to be chronic in nature in older animals, and they are also more
likely to have preexisting health conditions, the treatment of which can require the adminis-
tration of medications associated with adverse reproductive effects. In addition, unlike live-
stock species selected for breeding soundness, many dogs and cats selectively bred by their
owners or caretakers often have not had to meet any minimum requirements associated
with reproductive performance. Ihese animals are often selected based on their individual
qualities, most of which have little to do with potential reproductive performance. Although
many of the dogs and cats being selectively bred are very likely to be extremely fertile, non-
reproductively based culling and inbreeding have the potential to result in breeding ani-
mals predisposed to certain breed-specific conditions and with less than optimal fertility. In
addition, many of the primary uses of these animals might not be conducive to reproduc-
tive efficiency or are associated with procedures or environments that can diminish fertil-
ity. Iherefore, although the vast majority of dogs and cats appear to be able to reproduce,
or rather overproduce, with amazing efficiency, a subpopulation of these high-performing
companion animals from which progeny are desired might actually already be potentially
subfertile, resulting in an inherent, increased susceptibility to the adverse effects of various
stressors, including certain xenobiotics.2 These individual animals are also more likely to
a anda aisuu ao io undan pasisse go  s aba
very likely requiring consultation with a boarded theriogenologist, so as to ensure optimal
reproductive performance and the production of offspring. Possible preexisting subfertility.
by surplus sperm in normal ejaculates or the possibility of multiple, potentially fertile ovula-
tions, which can mask subtle xenobiotic-induced abnormalities in reproductive function.
Review of Canine and Feline Reproductive Physiology
Familiarity with canine and feline reproductive physiology is necessary for the early recog-
nition, treatment, and/or prevention of abnormal reproductive function, as well as subtle
changes in optimal reproductive efficiency in dogs or cats with traits considered worthy
of reproducing.1.2.6 A full appreciation of the major take-home points of this chapter, with
regard to potential negative reproductive outcomes and the primary or secondary role of
specific xenobiotics in causing subfertility, requires some familiarity with additional back-
of reproduction are more susceptible to the effects of stressors, including xenobiotics, than
others (see Fig. 16-1). Early postnatal development, and especially those events leading to
puberty, can be adversely affected by exposures to xenobiotics and other stressors, and the
multiple replications and differentiation steps inherent to spermatogenesis increase its sen-
sitivity to various toxicants, medications, and thermal stress.6 The developing embryo and
fetus are particularly susceptible to certain types of chemical exposures and infections, both
of which are characterized by rapidly multiplying and differentiating populations of cells.12.6
Detailed species-specific information is also valuable if one is using or considering the use
of assisted reproductive technologies, which require more intensive reproductive manage-
ment, especially if the animals they are working with are in less than optimal health and/or
already experiencing reproductive difficulties. Furthermore, subtle changes in companion
Chapter 16 | Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 177
risks posed to humans. Ihe essential canine and feline reproductive facts briefly discussed
in the sections that follow are summarized in Table 16-1 and are covered in detail in refer-
ences cited extensively in this chapter.7.9
Puberty in the Male Dog and Cat
The testes are generally descended within the scrotum by 6 to 8 weeks of age in both species,
but there is usually free mobility within the inguinal canal until the early stages of puberty
(see Table 16-1).β Species, photoperiod (cats), nutritional status, and environmental factors,
as well as stress and disease, can all influence the onset of puberty in male dogs and cats.6- 9
Mature spermatozoa can first appear in the lumina of the seminiferous tubules where they
Alensn ane eozoieads ,sies pue shop aeu qoq ui age jo suuou / oi g Aq pasnpond ane
frst noted in the ejaculate by 7 to 9 months of age.? However, puberty in the male, most
often defined by the ejaculation of threshold amounts of potentially fertile sperm, accom-
panied by adequate libido and the ability to copulate, and generally takes place during the
range of ages shown in Table 16-1 or just slightly earlier in smallr dogs and tom cats.79
There should not be undue concern if some large breed dogs do not satisfy these criteria
until after 12 months of age.? It also should be remembered that male reproductive perfor-
mance is not maximized until after puberty, most likely corresponding with peak reproduc-
tive performance in females.6- 9
Compared with the relatively dramatic differences in female reproductive physiology
between the bitch and queen, discussed later in this chapter, spermatogenesis and other
reproductive processes in the male dog and tom are relatively similar to one another, with
more being known about sperm production in the male dog than the tom cat. Spermato-
zoa are highly specialized haploid cells equipped with a self-powered flagellum to facilitate
motility, as well as an acrosome to mediate penetration of the zona pellucida.6 Spermato-
genesis in the male, unlike oogenesis in the female, begins around the time of puberty and
continues throughout the lifetime of the male, with possible seasonal influences observed
in cats.6.& The preovulatory hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hor mone (GnRH) surge
center, which is well developed in the female, is diminished in the male, and the tonic release
of GnRH allows for multiple daily gonadotrophic pulses, which facilitate the androgen-
dependent endocrine milieu necessary for the maintenance of a population of stem cells
and continuous spermatogenesis, as well as the stimulation of typical male sexual behav-
ior.l.6 Testosterone and its more potent metabolite, 5α-dihydrotestosterone (DHT), are
Testosterone is produced by Leydig cells in the interstitium of the testes in response to ante-
rior pituitary luteinizing hormone (LH), as early as 6 months of age.12.6.79 Serum concen-
trations of testosterone increase to adult concentrations by 8 months of age in male dogs,
in the male cat.? It also should be noted that the primary role of androgens, normal male
reproductive function, including sexual behavior and epididymal sperm maturation and
 stimulated by follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), provide the basic architecture for the
structure of the seminiferous tubules, and junctional complexes between adjacent Sertoli
cells form the blood-testis barrier.1.6.,9
Canine and Feline Spermatogenesis
uoaiud s oi paaan saeis no saserd aarr ou papiaqns aq us sisauaroiads
(also called spermatocytogenesis or mitosis), meiosis, and diferentiation (also called sper-
different developmental process, and as such these phases have the potential to differ intheir
susceptibility to the mechanisms of action of various reproductive toxicants.l2 The prolif-
spermatocytes, followed by primary and secondary spermatocytes undergoing meiosis (i.e.
division that results in haploid sperm precursors referred to as round spermatids) during
178SECTlON 2 General Exposures
the meiotic phase.2.6.9 Differentiation is a very specialized stage of spermatogenesis. Ihe
haploid round spermatids formed during the meiotic phase are dramatically transformed
      ss  ss a o
formed acrosomes, limited cytoplasm, and specialized flagella.1.26.7 Mature spermatozoa
are released into the lumen of the seminiferous tubules by a process referred to as spermia.
tion, and are transported within the testicular parenchyma, from the seminiferous tubule to
the rete testis (rete tubules) and mediastinum, eventually reaching the excurrent or extrago-
nadal duct system for each testis, which consists of the efferent ductules, epididymidis duct,
and ductus deferens (vas deferens).6.7.9
Various distinct associations of spermatogonia, spermatocytes, round, and/or elongate
spermatids or mature spermatozoa are referred to as stages of the seminiferous epithelium,
for which there are eight in both the dog and cat.l910 These stages repeat in a cyclic man-
ner along a seminiferous tubule, and the earliest type A spermatogonium progresses and
transforms through approximately four and a half cycles of the serminiferous epithelium
before undergoing spermiation as a mature spermatozoa.l.6,9.10 The length of each cycle of
the seminiferous epithelium dictates that canine spermatogenesis lasts 62 days (i.e., 4.5 ×
13.6 = 62 days) and the duration of spermatogenesis in the cat is 46.8 days (i.e., 4.5 × 10.4
= 46.8 days).7.9.10
Postgonadal Sperm Maturation and Transport Before and During Copulation
Mature spermatozoa leaving the testis are actually neither motile nor capable of fertiliza-
tion and undergo further maturation to acquire at least the potential for these capabilities,
as well as transport and storage, within the various segments of the epididymal duct (i.e.
initial segment, head, body, and tail) before ejaculation.l.6.7 Epididymal transit is estimated
to be approximately 12 days in the male dog, but this length of time is subject to variation,
based on frequency of ejaculation, in particular the duration of storage in the tail of the
epididymis (see Table 16-1).78 Both male dogs and cats have prostate glands, with cats also
having bulbourethral glands, and these accessory sex glands are considered to be primarily
ia a yo asse am se spu asa go suas au gruauap uie
 duct or epididymis, are important components of seminal fluid and are required for opti-
mal reproductive performance in the male.6-9 Adequate libido and female sexual receptiv-
ity, as well as suffcient concentrations of testosterone, are necessary for penile erection,
which facilitates intromission and ejaculation during copulation.l.6 Erection of the penis is
generally considered to be dependent on parasympathetic neuronal stimulation, whereas
the events that lead to emission of the secretions of the accessory sex glands and ejacula-
tion of spermatozoa generally involve both tactile stimuli and stimulation by sympathetic
neurons.6.8
Normal Canine and Feline Ejaculates and Their Evaluation
Although most canine ejaculates contain more than 300 × 106 spermatozoa (see Table 16-1),
-s raa as u u so a  saea i ins saan a
matozoa (i.e., 200 × 106) and still be quite normal.7.9 Certainly this is the case with male
cats (see Table 16-1), for which there appears to be less information than there is for dogs
and in which normal ejaculates, depending on the method of collection, usually contain
greater than or equal to 30 (electroejaculation) or greater than or equal to 50 × 106 sperma-
tozoa (artificial vagina).  In addition to the information presented in Table 16-1, it should
be remembered that usually more than 70% to 80% of ejaculated sperm should be morpho-
logically normal.5.&.9 However, although baseline information for the“average male is liable
to be very useful, there might be fertile males for which the measured semen parameters fall
slightly below these thresholds. In these instances, it is important to know what is normal
for that individual and to be aware when there are alterations from those normal thresholds
for that particular male.
Appropriately performed assessments of fertility, using semen parameters ± bacterial
cultures, hormone concentrations ± gonadotropin response tests, ultrasound examina-
tions, and evaluations of testicular biopsies (initially fixed in Bouin's or modified Davidson's
Chapter 16 | Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 179
solution), as well as confirmed pregnancy rates and numbers of live offspring born, are
critical for monitoring male reproductive function.l.6-8 Sperm precursors and spermato-
zoa are extremely sensitive to thermal stress, and testicular thermoregulatory mechanisms
and the absence of fever are critical for optimal male reproductive performance (see Table
 16-2).1.6 The approximate duration of less severe, reversible stressor exposures affecting the
testes, including those involving thermal stress, and the populations of sperm precursors
most susceptible to those exposures, can be evaluated by observing changes in the relative
numbers of normal and abnormal spermatozoa in serial ejaculates collcted over time.17.9
For severe but reversible thermal or toxic insults to the testes, the duration of both sper-
matogenesis and epididymal sperm transport (i.e., total of ~74 days in dogs and ~60 days in
cats; see Table 16-1) can be used to reasonably estimate when normal spermatozoa might be
expected to reappear in ejaculates.1.7.8 Diminished numbers of normal, motile spermatozoa
or the complete absence of any spermatozoa in serial ejaculates from a given male dog or
tom cat, persisting beyond this time frame, which is inclusive of spermatogenesis and epi-
didymal transit, are indicators of the severity and irreversibility of stressor-induced damage
to the testes.1.7.9
Puberty in the Female Dog and Cat
The onset of puberty in the female dog or cat signals the maturation of the hypothalamic
preovulatory GnRH surge center, which, as mentioned, is diminished in the male hypothal-
(HPG) axis. The mature GnRH surge center and HPG axis both play a role in the initiation
and regulation of the cyclic pattern of FSH and LH release from the anterior pituitary gland,
which is typical for the female of each of these species.4 As in the male, animal species,
photoperiod, nutritional status, size, breed, and individual variation, as well as stress and
disease, can be major determinants of when these endocrine events begin in canine or feline
females.6.8 In fermale dogs, the occurrence of the first proestrus is the primary indicator of
puberty. Puberty generally does not occur until the female reaches at least 80% of mature
body weight.79 Females belonging to smaller breeds of dogs generally experience their first
aq al aos r uosun jou st ll g'g'saeag paaq are u naea ssaid
bitches to experience their first proestrus between 18 and 24 months of age and, in some
cases, as late as 30 months of age (see Table 16-1).6-9 Some bitches can experience "silent"
heats, especially when they are younger, and the occurrence of these “silent” or unobserved
heats can erroneously increase the female's age at what is thought to be the “first" proestrus.
The onset of puberty in the queen is similarly influenced by body condition and the attain-
ment of at least 80% of adult body weight. However,the occurrence of proestrus is very
variable in the queen, and the queen is also dependent on photoperiod (i.e., sufficient day
length for the occurrence of her first estrus).6-9 In most instances, female dogs are not eval-
uated for cyclicity until 24 months of age and queens not until they are at least 12 months
old, unless one is involved in clinical circumstances dealing with multiple smaller dogs or
cats, when photoperiod is not a determining factor (see Table 16-1).9
Canine and Feline Estrous Cycles and Their Evaluation
Unlike the male, in which gametogenesis begins during the pubertal process and spermato-
genesis increases until sexual maturity (peak reproductive age) and remains an ongoing
 and continuous process, the female is born with all the primary oocytes she is ever going
to have in her lifetime.46 These oocytes, which are undergoing nuclear arrest and have not
completed the first meiotic division, actually decline in numbers between birth and the
onset of puberty.6 A female's oocytes are arranged in follicles, surrounded by granulosa
and thecal cells that are responsible for the synthesis of the gonadal steroids, estradiol (pre-
between the reproductive function of the males of these two species, there are notable dif-
estrous cycles each consist of proestrus, estrus, diestrus, and anestrus, but unlike the bitch,
the queen is a seasonally polyestrous, induced or reflex ovulator, with coitus required for,
180SECTlON 2 General Exposures
but not guaranteeing, sufficient LH secretion for ovulation of secondary oocytes.67 Because
ovulation might not necessarily occur and, unlike the bitch, because another estrus will be
occurring in a matter of days rather than months, some references have assigned the queen
another stage of the estrous cycle referred to as postestrus or the nonestrous or interestrous
(estradiol) is the primary gonadal steroid produced by ovarian follicles during proestrus
and estrus, and progesterone is the primary gonadal steroid produced following ovulation
and during diestrus, when the female is neither attractive nor receptive to males.
Most dog breeds, unlike cats, are not seasonal breeders. Most dogs can have their annual
estrus and produce puppies throughout the year, with subtle peaks in cyclicity and whelp-
ing noted during the late winter/early spring and possibly fall.8 Following puberty and
depending on the breed of dog, proestrus generally occurs every 7 months in most females
(4 to 4.5 months for German shepherds; every 12 months for Basenjis).6.& Ihe time between
the end of one estrus and the start of the next proestrus is referred to as the interestrous
interval, and its duration is extremely variable among individuals.6- 9 Similarly, the lengths
of the various stages of the canine estrous cycle differ a great deal among individual dogs,
but are often consistent for a given bitch during her period of optimal reproductive func-
tion, between 2 and 6 years of age.? The durations of these various stages are shown in Table
16-1.6.&9 The female dog is unique in that, unlike females of other species, such as the quen,
the bitch ovulates primary rather than secondary oocytes (preovulatory LH surge very early
in estrus), and there is a longer than usual interval between the completion of ovulation
and fertilization (~2 or 3 to possibly almost 6 days after ovulation; almost immediately to
1 day after ovulation in most other species), as well as the beginning of diestrus, based on
vaginal cytology.679 In addition, the female dog is, surprisingly, usually in standing heat 
and being bred in an unusual endocrine milieu, where circulating concentrations of estra-
without pregnancy, followed by several months of anestrus.6.&,9 Changes in female behav-
ior, the gross appearance of any vaginal discharge, hormone concentrations, the results of
vaginoscopic and digital examinations, as well as cultures, and especially, cytologic char-
acteristics of vaginal smears can be used to distinguish the stages of the estrous cycle from
 one another to evaluate any suspected irregularities.7.9 General trends for delayed onset
of puberty, especially in smaller breeds of dogs, and excessively short or long interestrous
intervals in multiple females might warrant evaluation of factors, such as management, ani-
mal health, genetics, nutrition, and/or possible xenobiotic exposures that might influence
the occurrence or detection of normal estrous cycles.
Feline reproductive physiology is obviously very different from that of dogs. Cats are
polyestrous, long-day breeders. Estrous cycles in the average queen, between the optimal
breeding ages of 1.5 and 7 years, occur between February and October in the Northern
hemisphere.7& Likewise, cats in the Northern hemisphere generally experience anestrus
from October through December or, occasionally, January.79 Males are attracted to nonre-
ceptive females during proestrus.6 However, many cats do not clearly exhibit this stage of
the estrous cycle.& It is simplest to view the queen as having polyestrous breeding seasons,
in which repeating periods of estrus characterized by sexual receptivity are associated with
recurring follicular phases.8 However, the association between periods of sexual receptivity
e a u euaan a u oen lie uasidan Assaau lou saop aie e pue
age, estrus behavior lasts longer than the corresponding follicular phase. In fact, distinct
waves of follicular development, maturation, and degeneration, as indicated physiologically
by elevated blood estradiol concentrations, might occur during what appears to be only one
estrus.6-9 Estrous behavior usually lasts 7 days (range of 1-21 days) and, somewhat coun-
terintuitively, is actually usually of longer duration (8.5 vs 6 days) if there is coitus, plus or
minus ovulation, than in the absence of coital contact.? As mentioned, feline ovulation of
secondary oocytes (not primary, as in the dog) requires sexual contact for the preovula-
tory LH surge and formation of progesterone-secreting ovarian luteal structures or corpora
lutea.6-9 Unlike the female dog, the duration of diestrus in the queen is dependent on the
Chapter 16 | Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals  18l
presence or absence of at least one conceptus and the secretion of progesterone of most
likely placental origin (see Table 16-1).&9 Postestrus or interestrus, which occurs when there
is estrus without ovulation, lasts 8 to 10 or 8 to 15 days.79 It also should be noted that preg-
nant queens frequently experience lactational anestrus, which generally resolves 14 to 60
days after weaning.7 The onset of reproductive abnormalities can be difficult to monitor
 and rather insidious, especially when owners and caretakers are inexperienced in breeding
 u saemai ais sisa i suail aa p aziuoan oi sioi si li sie
tiple queens might warrant evaluation of factors such as photoperiod, management, animal
health, genetics, nutrition, and/or possible xenobiotic exposures, which might influence
the occurrence or detection of normal estrous cycles. As in the bitch, changes in blood hor-
mone concentrations and especially cytologic characteristics of vaginal smears and culture
results can be used to distinguish the stages of the queen's estrous cycle from one another
and evaluate any suspected irregularities.7.9
Canine and Feline Gestational Length
Pregnancy begins at the time of fertilization in the uterine or fallopian tubes of the female,
and ends at the time of parturition. Progesterone is necessary for pregnancy maintenance,
and gestational sources of progesterone are summarized in Table 16-1.6-9 Because the female
dog ovulates primary oocytes, which can be viable for approximately 9 to 10 days, and
ae aos nog pue '/ Aianexondde se buol se iog aqeia Aensn ane eozoieads auu
dogs, up to 9 to 11 days (fresh semen) in the female reproductive tract, the length of gesta-
Likewise, in the queen gestational length can range from 56 to 69 days (some references
suggest 52-74 days) after the first breeding because coitus does not necessarily guarantee
frst, potentially fertile mating, is not a consistent parameter on which to evaluate changes
in canine or feline reproductive efficiency.7& On the other hand, knowing the precise tim-
ing of the canine preovulatory LH surge, ovulation, and/or the first day of diestrus, the due
date for a given bitch can be predicted fairly accurately as 65 ± 1 days after the preovulatory
LH surge, 63 ± 1 days after ovulation, 60 ± 1 days after fertilization, and 56 to 58 days after
the first day of diestrus (see Table 16-1).79 Similarly feline gestationlasts 63 to 66 after the
initial rise in blood progesterone concentration, which correlates fairly well with ovulation.7
Canine Prenatal Development
In the dog, prenatal development of what begins as a zygote, after fertilization of an oocyte
by a single sperm, can be divided into three distinct periods, denoted as the period of the
ovum (days 3-17 after ovulation), the period of fhe ermbryo (days 18-32 after ovulation), and
the period of the fetus (days 33 to ~63 after ovulation; see Table 16-1).11 During the period
of fhe ovum, an actively dividing cluster of cells reaches the uterotubal junction (~days 10
to 13 after ovulation; ~7-10 days after fertilization) and enters into the uterus at the 16-cell,
morula, or possibly, the blastocyst stage of development (see Table 16-1).6.1 From days 10 to
15 postovulation, free-floating blastocysts migrate within the uterus, including the uterine
horn on the opposite side of the uterine tube from which they emerged." Before fixation
and implantation (not the same as "true" implantation described in primates and rodents)
approximately 15 to 17 days after ovulation, these blastocysts distribute themselves uni-
formly within the uterine horns.12.6.8.1 The period of the embryo corresponds to germ layer
formation, a cephalocaudal sequence of organogenesis (which is particularly susceptible
to the effects of nonendocrine disrupting teratogens), and finally, the development of the
heartbeat detectable by postovulatory days 21 to 22, there is little discernible canine anat-
on day 33 after ovulation, the conceptus is clearly recognizable as being canine.791l Many
of the key events occurring during the fetal stage have to do with sexual differentiation
182SECTlON 2 General Exposures
of multiple primary oocytes, the Y chromosome-controlled testis determining factor has
facilitated the transformation of a sexually indifferent gonad into a testis.l6.ll Secretion of
Millerian inhibiting substance by differentiated Sertoli cells in the testis cause the regres-
sion of the precursors of the female tubular genitalia.l6 Testosterone production by fetal
Leydig cells, as well as the subsequent synthesis of DHT from testosterone, results in the
sequential, androgen-induced formation of the epididymides and ductus deferentes (testos-
 terone) and fnally the prostate, penile urethra, penis, and scrotum (DHT).6.ll
Feline Prenatal Development
Although overly simplistic to some investigators, who prefer to view mammalian gesta-
tional development in terms of 10+ stages (up to 22 in some references), prenatal life in the
cat, like that in the dog, can be also subdivided into the period of the ovurm, the period of
fhe embryo, and finally, the period of fhe fetus.lll2 Likewise, much of what occurs in feline
prenatal development is very similar to what is observed in dogs; however, there are several
notable exceptions, particularly with respect to timing of several specific events.&.1z Fertil-
ized feline ova or zygotes usually can be observed within the oviducts by 20 to 28 hours
after coitus.12 Unlike canine blastocysts, which take longer to develop afer ovulation of
primary oocytes and fertilization, feline embryos generally enter the uterus, as morulae or
Even blastocysts, approximately 5 (morulae) to 6 days (blastocysts) after ovulation of sec-
ondary oocytes and fertilization, which generally occur within hours of each other in this
se ae ( + s  (i  as sad aesss
to be free-floating and mobile until approximately 13 to 14 days after ovulation and fer-
tilization, when they appear uniformly spaced within the uterine horns and fixation and
the fetal heart (with a detectable heartbeat) and neural tube development can be noted by
ing embryo has completed organogenesis and is clearly identifiable as a fetal feline (see
Table 16-1).712 Between 32 and 38 days after ovulation, the Millerian duct regresses in the
male feline fetus, with the testicular formation well under way, and a penis is identifiable in
these individuals by days 44 to 48 days postovulation.12
Physiology of Parturition and Lactation
Although less well-defined than in ruminants, maturation of the fetal HPA axis and the
appropriately timed release of cortisol by the fetus play key roles in initiating the cascade
of events leading to parturition, under normal physiologic circumstances.126 This cascade
of physiologic events essentially involves a cortisol-induced decline in the placental pro-
 gesterone/estrogen ratio (i.e., progesterone converted to estrogen) and the release of pros-
taglandins Fz, leading to myometrial contractions, luteolysis, cervical stimulation, and the
release of oxytocin and relaxin.4.7 It should be evident that pregnancy maintenance and
  i  s a a  a a q  
centration of cortisol. Ihe fetal membranes are deciduate in both dogs and cats, and they
are either shed soon after the delivery of each fetus or as several sets of fetal membranes
shed together after the delivery of their corresponding fetuses.6-9 Litter size is highly vari-
able in dogs and cats (i.e., range of 1to 16+ in dogs; range of 1-10 in cats) and is generally
dependent on the size of the mother (i.e., larger females and larger breeds having larger
litters).7-9 It is advisable for owners and caretakers to know what is normal for a given breed
of dog or cat, as well as for a given female that has previously given birth. Lactogenesis
 or the initiation of lactation (i.e., milk synthesis and secretion by the mammary glands)
occurs in two stages and is essential for neonatal survival in all mammalian species in the
absence of human intervention. The first stage of lactogenesis involves cytologic and enzy-
responds to copious secretion of all the components of milk and is dependent on changes
in blood concentrations of progesterone, estrogen (estradiol), and especially, prolactin.
Unlike ruminants, pregnant dogs and cats do not secrete placental lactogens, which have
Chapter 16 | Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 183
growth hormone- and prolactin-like effects. Prolactin synthesis and secretion by adenohy-
t paieipau-auuedop seeodq Aq led ae u paemai si sadooie reisrdod
centrations of estradiol, act on the hypothalamus and adenohypophysis to overcome the
tonic inhibition of prolactin secretion, resulting in elevations in blood concentrations of
esis, is dependent on prolactin secretion in dogs and cats, as opposed to growth hormone
incattle.l2
Diagnosis and Evaluation of Pregnancy and Fetal Health
Canine and feline pregnancies can be diagnosed and monitored by a number of differ-
ent methods, including abdominal palpation and various forms of ultrasound, endocrine
assays, and radiographs.7.9.l1z Although progesterone concentrations likely will not be
 different between pregnant and non-pregnant animals during diestrus (depending on the
circumstances, referred to as physiological or clinical pseudopregnancy), relaxin is preg-
nancy-specific in the bitch and queen.7 Real-time, B-mode ultrasonography can be very
useful in assessing embryonic loss and fetal viability and growth, as well as movement and
even fetal stress, and tocodynamometry can be used to monitor premature myometrial
contractions.7.9.l12 It also should be remembered that puppies and kittens, unlike the off-
spring of domestic livestock species, are not precocious and are completely dependent on
their mothers and, in some breeds of dogs and cats, their owners and caretakers to ensure
the delivery and survival of offspring.7 Instances of fetal or neonatal death should be inves-
tigated in an extremely timely manner on, ideally, fetuses or neonates kept refrigerated
or on ice packs (not frozen, if possible). Necropsy examinations (gross and microscopic)
should include the fetal membranes from abortions or stillbirths and should be performed
by a veterinarian or ideally a board-certified pathologist. Appropriate ancillary testing for
infectious and parasitic diseases, as well as possibly exposures to toxicants also should be
performed on properly collected and stored samples.
Negative Reproductive Outcomes and Potential
Xenobiotic-Related Mechanisms of Action
Delayed puberty and estrous cycle abnormalities, impaired gametogenesis, inability to
copulate, anovulatory follicles, cystic endometrial hyperplasia, pyometra, conception fail-
ure, embr yonic death, teratogenesis, abortions and stillbirths, and agalactia are all negative
reproductive outcomes that can have devastating effects on the various key steps involved in
outcomes can arise either from direct effects of the xenobiotic on the reproductive tract or,
probably more likely, indirectly where impaired reproductive function arises from adverse
effects on other organs or functions initially targeted by xenobiotics.13
Pathogenesis of Xenobiotic-lnduced Negative Reproductive Outcomes
Direct Effects of Xenobiotics on Reproduction
An attempt to understand the basic mechanism of xenobiotic exposure-related reproduc-
tive abnormalities can be extremely useful in improving reproductive management and,
ultimately, reproductive performance.l13 Sexual reproduction requires copulation at the
appropriate time and the union of a normal ovum of female origin with a functionally
mature sperm cell produced by the male. In natural breeding situations, male animals must
be able to detect sexually receptive females in estrus and successfully introduce adequate
These accomplishments on the part of the male are necessary for induced ovulation to
occur in felines and to ensure that enough normal motile sperm cells are transported to the
female's uterine tubes for one healthy spermatozoa to be available and able to fertilize each
viable ovum, which is transported to the site of fertilization.l.24-6.13 Many xenobiotics have
184SECTION2GeneralExposures
Puberty
Sexual
Maturity
Postnatal Survival
and Growth
Steroidogenesis
 Spermatogenesis
Oogenesis
Parturition
Postnata!
Lactation
Gonada
Devefopment
Lactogenesis
Libido
Fetal Development
Pospuberta
and Maturation
Reproouctive
Function
Copulation
Erection and Ejaculation
Sexua!
Organogenesis
Differentiation
Standing Estrus
Placental Formation
and Function
Sperm Transport
 and Capacitation
Oocyte Transport
Implantation or
Attachment
 Fertilization 
Zygote Transport
Embryogenesis
Figure l6-2 The continuum of developmental stages and reproductive functions, which
or directly or indirectly susceptible to the effects of endocrine disrupting chemicals or
compounds (EDCs), are shown schematically. (Borrowed with permission from Evans TJ:
Reproductive toxicity and endocrine disruption. In Gupta RC, editor, Reproducfive and
developrmental toxicology, New York, 2011, Academic Press/Elsevier. The artwork is cour-
tesy of Don Connor and Howard Wilson.)
the potential to mimic or antagonize the effects of estrogens or androgens or, in some other
way, including alterations in hormone synthesis and secretion, metabolism, and excre-
Reproduction, by its very nature, is dependent on normal biologic signaling mechanisms,
including neurologic and endocrine or hormonal functions. As shown in Figure 16-2,
the onset of puberty, female cyclicity, oogenesis and spermatogenesis, libido, conception,
turition, and lactation are all directly or indirectly susceptible to the effects of endocrine
 se cn n aq n oe m s  (a s s
events associated with oogenesis, spermatogenesis, and the development and function of
the tubular genitalia in females and the epididymal ducts and accessory glands in males,
 ductive tract can be impaired by exposure to xenoestrogens of plant origin (i.e., phytoes-
shsue ioidaan ausedop r a Aq panaui aq ues sisauaoin eu pue (suaon
found in ergotized grains, both of which are examples of naturally occurring endocrine
disruption.12,1316
Chapter 16 I  Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals  185
Some of the most devastating negative reproductive outcomes in dogs and cats involve
abnormal fetal development, as well as prenatal and/or neonatal mortality. It is generally rec-
ognized that the embryo and fetus are the stages of life that are most sensitive to the adverse
effects of most xenobiotics.1213.14 Althoughthe placenta has traditionally been represented as
an effective “barrier” to harmful chemicals and infectious agents, many if not most xenobiot-
ics and microorganisms can cross the placenta by simple diffusion, which is primarily depen-
dent on molecular size and solubility.12.6.14 Teratogenesis can be characterized by embryonic
or fetal mortality, structural or functional abnormalities, and/or alterations in birth weight.
Indirect Effects of Xenobiotics on Reproduction
Optimal reproductive function is dependent on overall animal well-being. Therefore, it 
performance by directly “targeting” other, nonreproductive organ systems or functions that
affect reproduction. Induction of stress is one way in which xenobiotics can indirectly cause
adverse effects on several reproductive processes. In many species, the anmplitude of the pul-
satile release of LH canbe greatly reducedby glucocorticoids.2.6.13.37If prolonged,this effect
has the potential to impact the release of gonadal steroids (i.e., estrogens and androgens) in
sexually mature animals.2 In addition, as mentioned, appropriately timed release of cortisol
-id oi uea sna jo apeseo ai sunu ui aon puo ue shed say al q
life threatening by homeostatic mechanisms within the dam and/or fetus, such as maternal
and/or fetal hypoxia, can trigger a stress response, activating the maternal and/or fetal HPA
Xenobiotic exposures also can indirectly affect reproductive function by decreasing body
condition, which is another determinant of reproductive performance.2 Male and female ani-
mals generally must be healthy and not debilitated and have suffcient fat stores to ensure ade-
quate libido and successful copulation between fertile males and sexuallyreceptive females.12.6
Puberty in both males and females and normal female estrous cycles are extremely dependent
on sufficient energy stores and body condition.6 Initial adverse effects on reproductive func-
tion related to decreasing body condition will most likely reflect that there are not adequate
energy reserves for optimal reproductive efficiency. Severe depletion of fat stores and drastic
inducing stress through the activation of the HPA axis. Any of the aforementioned factors
that influence exposure to suffcient artificial or natural light can also dramatically diminish
reproductive efficiency in cats because of effects involving photoperiod.
I should be evident by now how xenobiotic-related effects on nonreproductive organs
or functions can manifest themselves as abnormal reproductive outcomes. In fact, in some
instances, impaired reproductive performance in dogs and cats regularly used for breeding
might be the first indicator of altered well-being and health in these individual animals.
This will be especially true if a particular xenobiotic's direct effects on the primary target
organ are subclinical because they are not obvious or have not been diagnosed. Stress can
diminish the numbers of extra spermatozoa present in an ejaculate, and likewise decrease
the number of potentially fertile ovulations.Excessive endogenous or exogenous gluco-
corticoids can also negatively affect the survivability of some neonates, thereby removing
factors that might mask subtle changes in reproductive performance.
Single Etiology/Multifactorial Causes of Negative
Reproductive Outcomes
Primary versus Contributory Roles of Xenobiotics in Abnormal
Reproductive Function
One of the purposes of this chapter is to discuss the possible primary and secondary
roles (or, alternatively, sole and contributory involvement) of xenobiotics in diminished
186SECTlON 2 General Exposures
tion can have a single, diagnosable, toxic etiology (i.e., the proverbial smoking gun), the
precise causes of diminished reproductive efficiency in dogs and cats, like those in live-
stock species, are more often nutritional, environmental, or infectious in nature or, alter-
natively, extremely difficult to distinguish and therefore probably multifactorial in many
reproductive abnormalities are indirect effects of stress arising from metabolic diseases,
failures of major organs, or malnutrition caused by xenobiotics in combination with a vari-
ety of other possible etiologies. Consequently, cases of subfertility, especially those without
any known or apparent etiology, very likely have multiple causes involving various predis-
posing factors and/or stressors, including potentially toxic xenobiotics.13 It is important 
to understand how these factors and stressors might interact with one another to cause
reproductive inefficiency.
Predisposing Factors and Stressors
Enzootic Physiologic or Genetic Factors
A number of predisposing factors and stressors are generally enzootic in nature because
 they are inherent to a given individual, a particular animal species or breed, a given use,
and/or a specific geographical location (Fig. 16-3). Enzootic physiologic or genetic predis-
posing factors can influence reproductive function or interact with each other and/or with
various types of stressors to impact reproduction (see Table 16-2).13 Certain individuals
because of physiologic factors, might be predisposed to a disease or syndrome, such as
Cushing syndrome, hypo- or hyperthyroidism, or diabetes mellitus, which in some ways
negatively affects reproduction.& Certain stages of embryonic and fetal development, when
key structures are forming or important functions are being acquired, are much more sus-
ceptible to stressor-induced alterations than other aspects of embryonic or fetal develop-
and cats might also include the potentially indiscriminant eating habits of many dogs, the
relative lack of Phase II metabolism in an animal, glucuronidation conjugation pathways
in cats (e.g., enhanced acetaminophen toxicity), and the potential for cystic endometrial
cats exhibit hybrid vigor, which can be observed in some reproductive traits and overall
fertility.79 Some breeds of dogs and cats are more susceptible to certain metabolic diseases
and neoplasias, and brachycephalic breeds in particular are frequently bred with the intent
Enzootic Nutritional, Environmental, Infectious, and/or Toxic Stressors 
Similar to the aforementioned physiologic and genetic predispositions, a variety of nutri-
tional, environmental, infectious, and/or toxic stressors can also, either alone or through mul-
tifactorial interactions, influence reproductive performance (see Table 16-2 and Fig. 16-3). As
estrous cycles, and/or adversely affect pregnancy rates (see Table 16-2)1.6-9 Nutritional deff-
ciencies can also impair immune function, making animals more susceptible to infections
that can affect reproduction.4.13 Spermatogenesis and, to a lesser degree, oogenesis are sensi-
tive to elevations in body temperature.l.6.i3 Suboptimal environmental conditions can affct
oiai usaap o uonaid uads ued q saem admu u uug anaida
 in both males and females. Environmental factors can also predispose animals to exposures
duction. Ihe mechanisms by which bacteria, viruses, and parasites can impair reproduction
include stress, physical debilitation, and the release of pyrogens (e.g., endotoxin), as well as
specific effects on the reproductive tract, including the conceptus (e.g., pyometra, orchitis,
As discussed, various xenobiotics, some of them enzootic in nature, can diminish repro-
ductive performance either directly or indirectly. Mycotoxins, which are secondary fun-
gal metabolites produced within cereal grains or other substrates, under specific growth
Chapter 16 | Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 187
JENT
Puberty
Kenobio
Sexual
Postnatal Survival
Maturity
and Growth
Steroidogenesis
Spermatogenesis
Parturition
Cogenesis
Lactation
1
Libidlo
Fetal Development
and Maturation
A
Erection and Ejaculation
Organogenesis
Standing Estrus
Placental Formation
and Function
SpermTransport
and Capacitation
Oocyte Transport
Implantation or
Attachment
Fertilization
Zygote Transport
Nutrition
log
Figure 16-3 The possible influences of genetic and physiological predispositions, as well
as nutritional, environmental, infectious, and, especially, toxic stressors, on decreased
reproductive performance, are shown schematically. The role that management can play
in modulating those influences on reproductive function is also illustrated. (Borrowed
with permission from Evans TJ: Diminished reproductive performance and selected
toxicants in forages and grains. Vet Clin North Arm Food Anirm Pract 27(2):345, 2011. The
artwork is courtesy of Don Connor and Howard Wilson.)
conditions, can contaminate pet foods and cause many of the same direct or indirect
adverse reproductive effects in dogs and cats as they do in livestock species and possibly
concentrations, contribute to multifactorial causes of impaired reproductive function (see
Table 16-2 and Fig. 16-3).113 Similarly, by virtue of the way small animals are often selected
for breeding purposes, offspring might be desired from older animals with chronic diseases,
 including neoplasia or metabolic diseases, which require treatment with xenobiotics known
to adversely affect reproduction.
The relative role of mycotoxins, medications, and other xenobiotics in decreased repro-
ductive effciency is often determined in large part by the size of the dose and the duration 
ux an ie sisns oux uaaia e go as  e i asdxg er'asoxa go
might very likely play a potentially primary role in causing the observed adverse repro-
ductive effect, even if organ systems other than those immediately involved in reproductive
188SECTlON 2 General Exposures
function are more severely or directly affected by a given xenobiotic. On the other hand, an
exposure involving a lesser but still potentially relevant dose of the xenobiotic could suggest
the possibility that the xenobiotic most likely played a contributory role in the observed
negative reproductive outcome. In this instance, other stressors also played a part in impair-
ing reproductive performance, regardless of whether reproductive function was directly or
indirectly targeted.13 Somewhat more challenging for interpretation is the role played by a
xenobiotic in an observed reproductive problem when the dose of the xenobiotic is rela-
tively low but the duration of exposure is chronic in nature. The reproductive tract might be
directly targeted by a given xenobiotic. On the other hand, there might very likely be a target
organ or function other than the reproductive tract that is affected directly by a given xeno-
biotic. Under these circumstances, the direct toxic effects on the primary target organ might
be subclinical in nature, already resolved, or simply not of major interest and, therefore not
obvious at first glance. The first observed abnormalities caused by a particular xenobiotic
exposure might actually be subfertility, as evidenced by abnormalities in semen quality,
decreased diagnosed pregnancy rates, or number of live offspring delivered per litter, and/
or other negative reproductive outcomes. Alternatively, there might be multiple stressors
involved in this scenario, with each playing some part in either specifically targeting various
aspects of reproductive function (i.e., direct effects on reproductive organs or function) or
debilitating the exposed animal (i.e., indirect reproductive effects because of stress, malaise,
decreased body condition, or systemic illness), or even possibly a combination of direct and
indirect reproductive effects caused by multiple predisposing factors and/or stressors.
The estimated exposure dose for a given xenobiotic exposure always must be taken into
consideration when determining the cause or causes of a reproductive problem. On the
other hand, it is inportant when there is no smoking gun or an obvious single cause of
diminished reproductive performance to take an integrated approach and objectively eval-
uate the relative contributions of a wide variety of variables to the apparent reproductive
problems. Multiple predisposing factors and stressors, including toxicants, plus possible
contributions of interactions involving these variables and even management can all have
adverse effects on fertility (see Fig. 16-3).13
The Importance of Management Factors to Optimize
Reproductive Efficiency
Management constitutes an important interface between enzootic predisposing factors and/
or stressors andthe ultimate goal of optimal reproductive performance (see Fig. 16-3).13 Man-
agement can maximize reproductive efficiency or, conversely, augment the adverse repro-
Artificial insemination (Al) of chilled semen and cryopreserved semen has become rela-
tively routine in canine reproduction. Although semen collection in cats is not nearly as easy
as the method of digital manipulation commonly used in dogs, electroejaculation, artificial
vaginas, and urethral catheterization techniques are all means by which adequate numbers
 of spermatozoa can be collected for Al in felines.79 Vaginal deposition and nonsurgical
transcervical or surgical insemination directly into the uterus or, with surgery, the uter-
ine horns or uterotubal junctions, using chilled or cryopreserved semen, involve relatively
low numbers of sperm already stressed by cooling and especially freezing and thawing, as
Well as limited opportunities for insemination.7.9i3 In addition, in vitro fertilization (IVF)
and cloning techniques have also been used successfully in dogs and cats.7 In all of these
assisted reproductive technologies, the large room for error or tolerance for errors or expo-
sures to stressors, which are inherent to companion animal breeding when healthy males
deposit millions of surplus, norrmal, progressively motile spermatozoa into the reproductive
tract of fertile females ovulating multiple viable ova, can be greatly diminished by the use of
advanced reproductive methods without appropriate training and attention to detail. This
observation is especially true when individual animals with preexisting suboptimal fertility
are selected for breeding purposes by relatively inexperienced owners or caretakers.
Chapter 16 | Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 189
Management Factors
The following management factors can have the greatest impact on reproductive efficienc y:13
1. Type of breeding colony, breeding selection criteria, and owner and/or caretaker
expectations
2. Knowledge and experience with animal husbandry, health care, and reproductive
management
3. Understanding of causes of suboptimal reproductive performance in small animals
4. Quality of nutrition relative to physiologic demands
 5. Supervision and veterinary participation in health and reproductive management
6. Prophylactic measures for common infectious agents and contagious diseases and
parasites
 7. Structure and hygiene of facilities, especially during prenatal and neonatal periods
 8. Pre-breeding examinations of males and females and semen evaluation at each
collection
 9. Appropriately timed breeding, insemination, pregnancy diagnosis, and monitoring
10. Adequate surveillance and assistance during parturition and early neonatal period
Implications of Management Factors 1 to 5
Just as in large animal production systems, small animal breeding colonies must be of a
size and scope of operation that is appropriate for the levels of knowledge and experience
and infrastructure available to adequately manage the individual animals that have been
selected for reproductive purposes. Within reason and practicality,it can be argued that the
reproductive efficiency and ultimate success of a breeding colony depend on Management
Factor 1 to set the bar for what is required for Management Factors 2 to 5, which in turn are
the major determinants of Management Factors 6 to 10. In other words,the type of breeding
colony (i.e., size, location, species, breed, animal use), along with breeding selection criteria
and owner/caretaker expectations, determine the necessary levels of knowledge and prac-
tical husbandry skills as well as the amount of participation by a veterinary professional,
which essentially dictate the requirements for facilities and hygiene, pre-breeding screening
procedures, reproductive management, pre- and post-parturient husbandry considerations
for the bitch and queen, and neonatal and postnatal puppy and kitten care.13
Stated somewhat differently, all of the Management Factors for a specific breeding colony
rmust be consistent with and suffcient for one an other for that particular operation to be
tion, with high breeder/caretaker expectations, will require more expertise and supervision,
as well as intense health and reproductive management and ongoing veterinary involve-
ment, than a small breeding colony. High levels of expertise, supervision, and intense man-
agement, in turn, will necessitate up-to-date prophylaxis for common puppy and kitten
diseases, well-managed and pristine facilities, routine pre-breeding examinations, includ-
ing semen evaluations for males, and carefully monitored pregnancies and parturitions. All
tion scenarios, should result in a maximum number of weaned, healthy puppies or kittens,
and, especially if these offspring meet expectations, owner/caretaker satisfaction. This par-
ticular model, particularly if state-of-the-art assisted reproductive techniques are used, is
animal reproductive specialists (i.e., theriogenologists), and potentially significant capital
r'soeiadxa ua suuae au ia o sisos roqen pue juasaa
Although the aforementioned large-scale example is undoubtedly a bit unrealistic for
most situations, it nevertheless illustrates several principles that are most commonly dis-
cussed in the context of large animal production settings. The general tendency to think
that bigger, newer, and more modern always equate to improved reproductive function and
greater breeding success canlead to poor management decisions that can precipitate animal
health concerns and subfertility, as well as unfulfilled expectations and owner/caretaker
190SECTION 2 General Exposures
frustration. The scale of a breeding operation must be compatible with the amount of
management expertise necessary and available to ensure that basic animal husbandry
requirements are met and animals selected for breeding can successfully produce sufficient
numbers of satisfactory progeny.13 Small animal owners and caretakers accustomed to the
almost effortless procreation associated with most dogs and cats in a casual and more natu-
on dudso anoid oi pambai saaos shoga al rog paiedandun aq ues unas 
certain exceptional individuals. Advanced assisted reproductive techniques and the skills of
reproductive specialists are best used when there is appropriate management and supervi-
sion to compensate for the diminished wiggle room attendant to the reduced numbers of
sperm and fewer opportunities for insemination associated with these methods.7.913 Own-
ers and caretakers also need to have realistic expectations for potential reproductive suc-
cess, given the age and health of animals being bred and husbandry-related factors, such as
nutritional status, parasite control, and facility cleanliness.
Management Practices to Identify and/or Prevent Impaired
Reproductive Function
Subtle abnormalities in male reproductive performance, possibly related to xenobiotic
exposures, will be more evident and caught earlier in well-managed colonies in which male
dogs or even cats are being collected regularly for AI using fresh, chilled, or frozen-thawed
semen. These assisted reproductive procedures require routine semen evaluations to
quickly detect unsatisfactory collections which do not meet specific criteria and generally
use lower numbers of sperm for insemination doses, thereby increasing the likelihood that
decreased reproductive effciency will be evident. Suboptimal semen quality can result in
collections unsuitable for further use, decreased diagnosed pregnancy rates, or fewer than
anticipated puppies or kittens per litter. Adequate management of breeding males should
 not only involve appropriate health care, including pre-breeding tests (e.g., Brucella canis
in dogs), vaccinations, and deworming, routine semen evaluations, and proper semen han-
dlling procedures, but also satisfactory health and semen collection records.
Likewise, diminished female reproductive effciency associated with exposures to vari-
ous xenobiotics is most evident in well-managed colonies when bitches or queens are being
bred, either naturally or by Al, on a regular basis. Similar reproductive problems observed
in multiple females, which are managed in the same breeding colony environment or in
dlose proximity, give added credence to the possibility of xenobiotic-related subfertility.
Suspect xenobiotics might be contaminants in the diet, an administered medication, or
even some chemical in the animals' immediate surroundings, which directly or indirectly
play a primary or secondary causative role in less than optimal female reproductive eff-
ciency. Each females general health and well-being (e.g., Brucella canis testing for dogs;
vaccination and deworming histories), stage of each female's estrous cycle, timing and fre-
quency of breeding, subsequent pregnancy status, litter size, and birth weights should be
appropriately determined and/or monitored and recorded to optimize female reproductive
performance.
the breeding colony, special emphasis should be given to recording any observed changes
in individual animal atitude or behavior, any suspected illnesses, all medications adminis-
tered and chemicals used for environmental pest control or disinfection, shipments or pur-
chase of pet food diets fed to breeding animals (including tags with lot numbers), and most
important, variations in routine semen evaluation parameters, estrous cyclicity, pregnancy
rates, and numbers of live offspring born. All of this recorded information can be used to
evaluate alterations in indices of reproductive performance and temporally related changes
in health status, diet, and other factors or even stressors in the animal's environment.
Xenobiotics that temporarily impair spermatogenesis can affect semen quality for up to
the total length of spermatogenesis and epididymal sperm transport (see Table 16-1). One-
onic or fetal development can have devastating consequences (see Table 16-1). Nonessential
Chapter 16 I Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 191
xenobiotic exposures should be avoided, if at all possible, when animals are being bred or
collected on a regular basis or when they are pregnant or lactating. Deworming proce-
dures to minimize prenatal or perinatal parasitic exposure that can be very detrimental to
the neonatal health would definitely be considered essential, particularly if such infections
have historically been a problem. Breeding facilities should not contain lead-containing
pipes or paint. Medications should be administered only if they are absolutely necessary
to maintain animal health and survival. Pesticides must only be used in areas and for pur-
poses for which they are explicitly labeled. If applicable, dilution and spraying instructions
should be strictly followed. Regardless of whether the chermical is considered safe, if the
luadimba tonaioid euosad pazieioads ream ol paimban st apinsad aul duisn uosiad
(PPE), then animals and containers used for feeding and watering should be removed from
the areas that are being treated. Owners and caretakers, particularly those responsible for
larger numbers of animals, in which commercial diets are more likely to be bought in larger
quantities and consist of a single lot, also should be informed regarding pet food recalls.
Large-scale pet food recalls are frequently reported in the popular media, but there are also
 governmental, veterinary, and animal poison control websites that report these events in an
objective and accurate manner.3.18.20
The Adverse Reproductive Effects of Specific Xenobiotics
Tables 16-2 and 16-3 are brief summaries of predisposing factors and stressors, including
selected xenobiotics, which can negatively impact reproduction, and these topics are cov-
ered in additional detail in several other texts.* As is apparent from reviewing Tables 16-2
and 16-3, there are many xenobiotics that can directly or indirectly influence reproductive
performance. Ihese xenobiotics can adversely affect male and/or female fertility, as well as
prenatal development, either alone or in combination with some of the various predispos-
ing factors and/or stressors, including other xenobiotics, listed in Table 16-2.
Although some of the xenobiotics listed in Table 16-2 represent classes of compounds
with well-documented adverse effects on dogs and cats, several chemicals are listed, such
as bisphenol A and phthalates, for which potential adverse effects on companion animals
have not yet been clearly demonstrated. However, these and other environmentally relevant
xenobiotics are mentioned for completeness, because their effects on wildlife, rodents, and
potentially humans have been publicized extensively and are of great interest to the general
 public, their manufacturers and principal users, and government regulatory agencies.
For most of the chemicals listed in Table 16-2, the precise exposure dose for a given
xenobiotic is very difficult to evaluate. In the case of large-scale food contaminations or
environmental catastrophes, the levels of acute, subacute, or perhaps even subchronic expo-
sure are likely to be relatively high and toxic in nature in vague terms. However, it is still
 challenging, especially in mycotoxin contaminations, to determine precisely how long and
how much a specific individual animal was exposed to a given mycotoxin. Secondary fungal
metabolites generally are unequally distributed within the contaminated grain matrix, and
sufficient samples of raw ingredients and finished product might not have been retained
by some manufacturers. Low-level exposures to common environmental contaminants are
more likely to be chronic in nature, but will be even more diffcult to evaluate with respect to
exposure dose and toxic dose. Many of these xenobiotics are ubiquitous in the environment
at very low concentrations, and there are even very likely yet-to-be-determined differences
in the bioavailability, metabolism, and/or toxic effects of different forms or metabolites of
these chemicals, especially with respect to nonrodents.
Table 16-3 lists several classes of common medications used in small animal practice,
and the potential adverse effects of these therapeutic agents on male reproduction and
pregnancy are summarized. In stark contrast to the xenobiotics listed in Table 16-2, the
drugs and therapeutic agents listed in Table 16-3 are intentionally given to dogs and cats
*References 1,2, 4,5,7-9,13.
192SECTION 2 General Exposures
at well-defined, therapeutically effective doses. Iherefore, the magnitude of the exposures
Although analyses can be performed, for many of these medications analytical results are
only useful in confirming exposure to a given therapeutic xenobiotic in most instances.
Mycotoxins
Aflatoxins, Vomitoxin, and Zearalenone
Commercially prepared pet foods continue to be the best sources of safe and nutritionally
balanced diets for companion animals. Ihat said, in recent years, several manufactured
pet food products have been associated with mycotoxin contamination, in particular those
mycotoxins that can contaminate corn used in these products.2 In most cases, the root
causes of these contaminations have been lapses in normally stringent mycotoxin surveil-
lance programs, and most recent mycotoxin-related pet food recalls have been primarily
precautionary in nature.8
Aflatoxin-induced hepatic dysfunction or decreased immunity associated with expo-
sure to aflatoxin or vomitoxin can interfere with an animal's optimal reproductive function
(see Table 16-2). However, the adverse reproductive effects of these toxins should be con-
sidered collateral damage of the direct effects on their primary target organs, even if those
effects might be subclinical or possibly resolved when the observed subfertility is being
investigated. Unlike the indirect reproductive effects of aflatoxins and vomitoxin resulting
from stress and altered nutrition, zearalenone is a naturally occurring xenoestrogen that
can directly affect reproductive function by virtue of its estrogenic or antiestrogenic effects,
even in dogs, depending on its concentration relative to that of endogenous estradiol (see
Table 16-2).2-24
 The simplest approach to preventing mycotoxin-related problems in companion ani-
mals is elimination of these xenobiotics from pet food products. Unfortunately, it is prob-
ably neither possible nor economically feasible to eliminate all measurable mycotoxins
from pet diets. The number of mycotoxins that have currently been identified probably
oqea eun Aiepuoas sixn aieuaod al go [e jo aqant au go d a sn suasanda
were present in a given pet food diet, other currently unknown xenobiotics of fungal origin
could be present in that product. Certain uncontrollable, agronomic conditions continue to
induce unavoidable fungal contaminants in grain to produce mycotoxins. In addition, ana-
lytical capabilities keep improving their abilities to detect lower concentrations of known
fungal metabolites and identify new fungal metabolites.
However, although low-level mycotoxin contamination is inevitable, there is also abso-
lutely no nutritional requirement for mycotoxins, including aflatoxins, vomitoxin, and
ticular, those intended for show, sporting, service, military/police, or breeding purposes-
as the ultimate destination for grains deemed unsatisfactory for consumption by humans.
A reasonable management approach to possible mycotoxin contamination in rations fed
to potential or current breeding animals (and one used by most pet food manufacturers)
is at least maintaining concentrations at or below current Food and Drug Administration
guideline levels applying to aflatoxin and vomitoxin in food intended for human consump-
tion (i.e., <20 mcg/kg of aflatoxins and 1 mg/kg of vomitoxin) and less than 0.5 mg/kg
of zearalenone.1 Although admittedly, clinical signs would most likely not be observed
if these thresholds were exceeded slightly, particularly with short-term exposures, these
concentrations take into consideration sampling differences, heterogeneous distributions
of mycotoxins in feedstuffs, and the possibility of more chronic exposures to mycotoxins.
Ideally these current threshold concentrations for mycotoxins should provide a cushion or
safety net to prevent undue concern, but they could conceivably be modified if new infor-
mation came to light concerning health risks associated with lower concentrations of these
contaminants. Almost all veterinary diagnostic laboratories and many grain elevators, pet
 food manufacturers, regulatory agents, and independent analytical laboratories have some
means to measure these particular common mycotoxins, as well as possibly other currently
Chapter 16 | Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 193
identifiable fungal contaminants in diets manufactured for consumption by companion
animals.
Ergot and Ergopeptine Alkaloids
 Ergopeptine alkaloids produced by Claviceps purpurea are not routinely tested for in pet
foods, and elevated concentrations of these compounds only occur sporadically in small
grains (not corn), including wheat, rye, triticale, oats, and barley.' However, their direct
hypoprolactinemic effects could present as agalactia in dogs and cats or potentially as pre-
mature labor, abortion, stillbirths, or even dystocia in female dogs, which depend on pro-
lactin for the maintenance of corpora lutea and the secretion of progesterone (see Table
aflatoxins, vomitoxin, and zearalenone, it is possible to have suspect pet foods evaluated
for the presence of these xenobiotics, particularly if canine abortions have been observed.
Phytotoxins
Similar to aflatoxins and vomitoxin, which initially have systemic effects, many toxins
of plant origin, including ricin in Ricinus comrmunis (i.e., castor bean plant), cardiac gly-
cosides in Digitalis species (i.e., foxgloves), and the unknown nephrotoxin in Liliurm or
Hermerocallis species of "true" lilies, are much more likely to affect systems other than the
reproductive tract (see also Chapters 54 and 74).25 Exposures to these phytotoxins, unlike
those to aflatoxins and vomitoxin contaminating corn or other cereal grains incorporated
into pet foods, would be much less common in larger breeding colonies than in household
settings. However, similar to the systemic effects of aflatoxins and vomitoxin, these plant
toxins affect nonreproductive organs, inducing the release of glucocorticoids or creating
enough maternal or fetal stress to initiate parturition and, if too early in gestation, abortion
osyai sued uo paseq ansn st uim asoxa uxird go Aroist e pue sauis
Phytoestrogens
Unlike the aforementioned plant toxins in castor bean plants, foxglove and “true” lilies,
phytoestrogens, such as the isoflavones found in soybeans (Glycine max) have direct effects
on the reproductive tract. These isoflavones, such as the estrogenic mycotoxin zearalenone,
zearalenone can also function as antiestrogens when high enough concentrations of these
ndanan uaonsa r suaoisa snouaaopua um aadno ci juasand ane suaonsaoun
binding.1314 Therefore, the phenotypic effects of either of these natural xenoestrogens vary
-nsae c ( aixa pue sua r go pua a) ansa o
genic (e.g., prevention of the preovulatory LH surge), depending on the exposure dose, an
exposed individual's stage of sexual development or where they are in the estrous cycle at
selective ER rmodulators which refers to synthetic antiestrogenic xenobiotics that can also
toestrogens.14 Recent reports of phytoestrogen-related effects in canids and felids demon-
strate the range of adverse effects that can occur in these animal species.26-z8 It also should
be taken into consideration that phytoestrogen and zearalenone contamination, although
present in different grains, are not mutually exclusive of one another and in fact their
combined estrogenic effects could be additive in nature. Reproductive problems involving
phytoestrogens shouldbe suspected when estrous cycle irregularities and conception rates
occur in companion animals consuming diets known to contain soybeans or their byprod-
ucts or “secret” natural ingredients. Some laboratories can test for dietary concentrations
can measure estrogenic activity of feedstuffs using breast cancer cells or other cell lines
stimulated by estrogenic compounds, and these analyses might be helpful under certain
circumstances of observed subfertility.
194 SECTION 2 General Exposures
Heavy Metals
Heavy metals, such as cadmium, lead, and mercury, can all be either directly or indi-
rectly associated with sperm abnormalities (see Table 16-2).1.5.29 Exposures to these met-
 als and metalloids, such as arsenic, always should be minimized, especially in pregnant
females.l2930 However, unfortunately humans are still routinely at risk for exposures to
inhaled cadmium, and there are still human occupational exposures to very high concen-
trations of lead, arsenic, cadmium, zinc, aluminum, and beryllium.5.29
Lead and Mercury
Similarly, prenatal exposures to lead and mercury continue be a problem in humans, as well
-su no ue oz'rsua as a u uil see s auod se
tion of soils highly contaminated by previous mining and/or smelting operations is one
Consumption of water from lead-containing pipes and the ingestion of the remnants of
1o sasnou iapio ui 1msso ues peal oi ainsodxa suouo iei saem auo omi are juied peal
animal husbandry facilities (see Chapter 53).i29 Transplacental lead transport most likely
makes use of calcium-binding proteins and other mechanisms used to preferentially sup-
 s ad sas u jd ie sa mna an   a
cats, can be exposed to methylmercury by eating contaminated fish, and this small mol-
ecule is rapidly transported acrossthe placental barrier (see Chapter 57).1.2.30 Both lead and
methylmercury, which is the cause of Minamata disease, are teratogenic because of their
histories, husbandry environments, and diets might be suggestive of potential exposures to
lead and methylmercury. Whole blood samples or even semen samples from males can be
monitored for lead, with concentrations greater than 10 mg/dL lead in the blood suggesting
excessive exposure to this element.
Pesticides
Fungicides, herbicides, molluscicides, insecticides, and rodenticides all represent classes
of compounds that are considered pesticides. Obviously direct exposures to any of these
compounds are to be avoided, but it is especially important to prevent direct animal con-
tact with these xenobiotics, by males within 60 days of collections or breeding, cycling
females, bred or pregnant bitches or queens, and neonates or growing puppies and kit-
tens, if at all possible. These products and disinfectants should always be used in exact
accordance with label instructions. Use of products in secondary containers labeled only
as weed killer, bug killer, or rat killer should not be used. Furthermore, the "Less is good;
more is better" principle should definitely never be applied to the use of these classes of
xe nobiotics. Although the most common reproductive problems associated with exposure
to toxic amounts of these pesticides can be attributed to toxicosis-related stress and its
effects on male and female fertility and gestational length, both dibromochloropropane
and vinclozolin are fungicidal chemicals that have fairly well-defined, direct effects in
ane anau se'(z-i aei aas) luaudonaaap jo saeis snon ie 'satads snonn jo sae
also specific considerations that should be taken into account, with regard to the use of
pyrethrin and pyrethroid insecticides as well as anticoagulant insecticides around facili-
ties in which breeding animals, pregnant females, and neonatal puppies and kittens are
being housed.
Pyrethrins and Pyrethroid Insecticides
Fly control is always a concern in facilities housing animals, but appropriate sanitation
and design of facilities can be used to minimize the need for excessive use of insecti-
cides. Pyrethrins and pyrethroid-type compounds are some of the most common insec-
ticides used and generally are considered to be extremely safe. However, it is important
aas al oi ioadsan ym pasn st Aeiaua ixaus sil u afos an a iei iapisuo on
Chapter 16 I Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 195
those observed in cats (see Chapter 73).32 Data in the recent literature suggest that some
of these types of insecticides also have the potential for antiovulatory, antiprostaglandin,
and especially antiandrogenic activities in vitro as well as in vivo, resulting in subtle altera-
tions in fertility.5.33-36 Given the frequency of their use, the possibility of pyrethrin- or
pyrethroid-associated subfertility is surprising to many people who have used these insec-
ticides uneventfully for many years. However, it is extremely likely, under normal condi-
tions of use in animals bred infrequently or bred only under natural breeding conditions,
that the effects of any minor changes in semen quality in exposed males would be masked
by the safety net of millions of extra sperm present in each ejaculate and the multiple
healthy, secondary oocytes usually available for fertilization in dogs and cats. This would
be particularly true with animals producing exceptionally high-quality semen, which
greatly exceeds the threshold of normal parameters outlined in Table 16-1. On the other
hand, subtle changes in semen quality resulting from the inappropriate use of these and
other related insecticides in breeding facilities in which semen is being evaluated regu-
larly before insemination or cryopreservation, would be much more likely to be detected
under these circumstances, dictating the rejection of affected ejaculates. Based on recent
experimental results, the direct adverse reproductive effects of pyrethrins and pyrethroids
generally would be expected to be short term and reversible in nature and would be antici-
to pyrethrins and pyrethroids are most likely to be repeated and chronic in nature, it is
not unreasonable to prevent direct contact with these compounds, if at all possible, by
valuable breeding and developing animals. Ihis approach is particularly appropriate when
considering the use of new unfamiliar products that have not been previously used on a
given premises. Diagnosis of such problems would require a close temporal relationship
between a recent pyrethrin or pyrethroid exposure and sudden declines in semen quality
and/or less than optimal post-thaw sperm motility or viability, as well as possibly detection
of pyrethrins or pyrethroids, especially in semen or other biologic samples collected from
exposed individuals.
Anticoagulant Rodenticides
Anticoagulant rodenticides, particularly the newer coumarin derivatives, which have half-
lives up to 10 times more than that of warfarin (~14 hours), are ubiquitous around animal
husbandry facilities.37.39 In fact, the serum half-life of brodifacoum, a second-generation
coumarin anticoagulant, which is the xenobiotic most commonly involved in rodenticide
toxicoses in the United States, has a reported serum half-life of 6 ± 4 days.38 In addition,
exposure doses of commercially available baits containing brodifacoum, which have been
associated with acute lethality, especially in dogs, are extremely low (i.e., 0.06 oz of bait/lb of
body weight in dogs; much higher in cats).37 The coumarin class of anticoagulants antago-
nize the vitamin K 2,3-epoxide reductase enzyme (also referred to as vitamin K, epoxide
reductase or vitamin K epoxide reductase) and cause coagulopathies because of the deple-
tion of clotting factors II, VIl, IX, and X, which require active vitamin K, for activation of
their precursors.37.39
Coumarin derivatives can cross the placenta, resulting in placental hemorrhage and
vaginal bleeding, abortions, stillbirths, and neonatal mortality38.39 Fetuses and neonates
possibly no clinical signs in a mother with a high rate of stillbirths and neonatal mortality).
Fetal and neonatal susceptibility to the adverse effects of coumarin derivatives are enhanced
by the absence of alternative vitamin K, reactivation pathways present in adults, the slow
transplacental transfer of vitamin K to fetuses, and the lower concentrations of active clot-
ting factors in fetuses and neonates.38 with respect to the presence of coumarin derivatives
in the milk from exposed females, there are conflicting reports, with individual compounds
 probably varying in their ability to be excreted in the milk.37.39 Some references have stated
that coumarin anticoagulants are generally not excreted in the milk.3 However, other ref-
erences have expressed concerns about the lactational transfer of coumarin derivatives
196SECTlON 2 General Exposures
Treatment of anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication is covered in detail in several
references, including the current and previous editions of this text, but it is necessary
to address several specific points related to intoxications involving pregnancy and lac-
tation.3739 Obviously, antidotal therapy with vitamin K, should start in the pregnant
female as soon as anticoagulant rodenticide exposure and/or intoxication are confirmed
or, at least, are highly suspect. Whole blood or plasma transfusions can be used to pre-
 genic, there is a reasonable chance that normal, viable neonates will still be born when
coumarin anticoagulant intoxication is diagnosed and treated during the first half of
pregnancy.479.33 However, even though the pregnant female herself might respond to
antidotal vitamin K, therapy, multiple stillbirths and neonatal deaths of her offspring
might still occur and be attributed to vitamin K,-related coagulopathies, when antico-
agulant rodenticide exposures are not diagnosed and treated until late pregnanc y.38 Care
 of offspring exposed to coumarin derivatives, either prenatally or neonatally, poses some
additional challenges to owners, caretakers, and veterinarians.37 The need for postna-
tal treatment of previously exposed neonates depends on several factors, including the
coumarin derivative involved in the exposure (might not be known), the timing of the
anticoagulant exposure (possibly unknown), and the severity of the mother's and neo-
was initiated (all of which should be known). Vitamin K, is fat soluble and and con-
centrates in human breast milk; therefore if the lactating mother is being treated with
vitamin K, postnatal treatment of prenatally exposed fetuses is most likely not neces-
sary. However, it is also important to know whether prenatally or postnatally exposed
offspring are nursing their exposed and treated dam and how well the female is actually
lactating. The health status of the puppies or kittens and, unfortunately, under some
circumstances, their monetary value can be additional parameters that come into play
in the decision-making process about neonatal treatment. Decreased body weights of
neonates can indicate impaired postnatal growth, hemograms can reveal anemia, and
blood clotting profles can be used to monitor the abilities of the mother's and prena-
tally exposed neonates' blood to clot. Analyses of blood from live animals or unfixed
liver collected during postmortem examinations of dead animals for the presence of
anticoagulant rodenticides can be used to confirm the diagnosis and identify the specific
coumarin derivative involved. However, the results of these analyses are not available
immediately, therefore necessitating the initiation of antidotal vitamin K, therapy almost
always before the diagnosis is confirmed (unless consumption was witnessed or bait was
discovered in vomitus, gut contents, or feces).
Despite the debate in the current literature, there are likely to be specific circumstances,
such as confirmed exposures occurring during late gestation or especially those taking
 place during lactation, where there is added concern about possible milk transfer of a spe-
cific anticoagulant—in particular, newer, more potent, and longer-lasting anticoagulant
formulations—to nursing offspring.3739 Some references have alluded to the ability of cou-
marin anticoagulants to be excreted in the milk, and early weaning of puppies or kittens has
been suggested as one way to address this concern about lactational exposure to coumarin
derivatives (see Chapter 32).3739 If this conservative early weaning approach is followed,
then neonates being treated with vitamin K, that are no longer nursing their mothers most
likely should be treated for 2 to 3 weeks with oral vitamin K,. 37 The decision to feed and care
for neonates should take into consideration multiple factors, including the specific anti-
coagulant rodenticide suspected in the exposure, the age of the offspring, and the owner's
and/or caretaker's desire and capabilities to provide such care in an appropriate manner, as
well as in many instances the perceived value of the puppies or kittens. Based on the timing
of the anticoagulant exposure and/or evaluation of the potential for adequate foster care,
early weaning and feeding of neonates might not seem necessary or practical. Under these
circumstances, the post-partum mother can still be treated with vitamin K, and neonatal
health and clotting ability can be monitored, with postnatal vitamin K, therapy ± blood
Chapter 16 | Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 197
Organic Environmental Contaminants
Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor-Mediated Endocrine Disruption
Xenobiotics, including dioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and polybrominated
diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), and related chemicals are common environmental contami-
compounds, classified collectively as halogenated or polyhalogenated aryl hydrocarbons
(HAHs or PAHs), can also cause endocrine disruption by interacting with the aryl hydro-
carbon receptor (AhR). The antiandrogenic and antiestrogenic properties HAHs arise
from their ability, even in low concentrations, to directly induce enzymes involved in
androgen and estrogen metabolism. Adverse reproductive effects mediated by the AhR
can interfere with the biosynthesis of testosterone and disrupt testosterone signal trans-
ductive effects in wildlife species and/or laboratory animals.l.l4 In addition, there are
epidemiologic data indicating that environmental spills of dioxins, such as 2,3,7,8-tetra-
chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and PCBs can have long-term effects on reproductive
for human populations for exposures to these types of compounds has been recognized,
PBDEs.44 It is important to be aware of the environmental history or previous use of the
geographical locations and facilities selected for breeding colonies. It is also important
that individuals understand that adverse effects noted in animals might also be impor-
tant to humans. Although not possible in all laboratories, exposures to some of these
compounds can be confirmed by analyzing serum, urine, or especially, fat samples from 
potentially exposed animals.
Endocrine Disruption Associated with Bisphenol A and Phthalates
 Bisphenol A (BPA) and phthalates are both ubiquitous environmental contaminants, which
have had well-documented (and highly publicized) endocrine-disrupting effects on wildlife
species, as well as laboratory rodents. However, the potential for these xenobiotics to have
real-life adverse effects on larger mammalian species, especially humans and their pets, has
been the subject of numerous acrimonious discussions, both within and without the scien-
as au pa as ed u s s a t's s
impact of chronic exposures to low-level environmentally relevant concentrations of BPA
and phthalates, are ongoing, and the possible causative roles of BPA and phthalates, along
with a multitude of other endocrine disruptors, in human and animal health problems are
still being studied.1.2.14,45.46
The primary uses of BPA are the manufacture of polycarbonate plastics and epoxy resins
typic effects, like those of other SERMs, can be estrogenic or antiestrogenic, depending
 on a number of factors (i.e., exposure dose, sexual maturity of exposed individual, and
 e siaied se pas ae saieed gtstt'aena uaqiaa ada 
a unique antiandrogenic mechanism, which involves alterations in fetal Leydig cell func-
actually eliminate BPA much more efficiently than immature rodents, especially mice.4
H has also been recently reported that a small sampling of canned pet foods contained
extremely low concentrations of BPA.46
Although the aforementioned results should be reassuring, several practical steps can
be taken by those owners and caretakers still wishing to further minimize their animals
exposures to BPA and phthalates.1848 It is useful to be aware of which types of plastics are
 likely to be involved in unintentional exposures to BPA and phthalates. Exposures to BPA
are often associated with polycarbonate plastics (recycling code 7), and polyvinyl chloride
and caretakers concerned about BPA and phthalates should select products made from
198SECTlON 2 General Exposures
polyethylene,non-polycarbonate,ornon-PVC,phthalate-freeplastics(recyclingcodes1,2,4,or5),
especially for water and food conatainers.i&4 Alternatively, stainless steel containers,
without plastic liners, also can be used for these purposes.4& Polycarbonate- or PVC-con-
taining plastics, if used around pregnant females and neonatal puppies and kittens, should
not be exposed to excessive heat (i.e., microwaves or dishwashers) or trauma, to prevent
leaching of BPA and exposure to phthalates.184& For those owners and caretakers who
are extremely concerned about BPA exposures arising from cans containing epoxy res-
ins, some consideration might be given to avoiding canned diets when selecting diets for
breeding animals and neonatal puppies and kittens. However, high concentrations of BPA
lu arau pue sinoid pauu jo sadi syads asan u panensuoap aq on ian aa
be prescription pet food diets that can only be purchased in cans.46 In these instances,
the benefits of using those prescription diet products for an individual animal with a spe-
cific health condition or nutritional needs should definitely take precedence over concerns
associated with animal exposures to BPA and phthalates. Depending on the findings of
ongoing investigations, it is possible that analyses for BPA concentrations in serum and
urine samples might become more available in the future to confi rm companion animal
exposures to this xenobiotic.
Medications
Table 16-3 is intended to be a quick guide to classes of therapeutic agents or specific xenobi-
or harm a developing conceptus. Although the female estrous cycle and ovarian function
ally less susceptible to nonendocrine disrupting effects than the rapid cellular replications
and differentiations during gametogenesis in the male and prenatal development. Accurate
interpretation and prudent application of the information provided in Table 16-3 requires
consideration of the essential reproductive facts presented in Table 16-1 and a thorough
understanding of why a given animal needs to be medicated and for how long. While Table
16-3 is based on an A, B, C, D classification system to characterize the safety of adminis-
tering certain medications during pregnancy, other recent references have also provided
similar information based on an A, B, C, D, X system for describing the potential risks asso-
classified as "D" in Table 16-3 or as "X" using the alternative classification scheme should
"C” are similar to those cormpounds in Category D in the other reference and should only
of what specific classification systems are used to characterize the relative safety of medica-
tions in animals used for breeding purposes, the overall guiding principles for administer-
ing therapeutic xenobiotics to breeding animals, pregnant females, and neonates are fairly
straightfor ward:
1. NO medications are without potentially toxic effects, BUT the anticipated benefits of a
therapeutic approach MUST outweigh its associated risks.
 2. HIGHER doses and/or CHRONIC administration of medications are MORE likely to be
"TOXIC" than lower doses and/or one-time use.
 3. Medications should be administered to valuable breeding stock, especially during preg-
nancy and lactation, ONLY in accordance with product LABEL INSTRUCTIONS AND
PRECAUTIONS.
4. Animals used for breeding should be treated long enough to produce desired THERA-
PEUTIC EFFECTS, WITHOUT COMPROMISING reproductive function.
5. When possible/practical, REPRODUCTIVE PARAMETERS should be MONITORED
over the course of a treatment regimen to minimize adverse reproductive effects.
However, it is naive to think that reproductive complications arising from drug ther-
Chapter 16 | Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 199
are intentionally used at pharmacologic concentrations to mimic the beneficial effects
of gonadal steroids or endogenous glucocorticoids, which obviously also play key roles
in reproduction and its associated feedback mechanisms (see Table 16-3). Likewise
medications that affect abnormally replicating cells (i.e., anticancer drugs) or those that
counteract the inflammatory effects of prostaglandins (i.e., NSAIDs and glucocorticoids)
cannot be expected to not have some potential negative impact on normal cellular rep-
lications and prostaglandin-mediated signaling pathways that are inherent to sexual
reproduction.14.5.s,9
On the other hand, some therapeutic xenobiotics can, if necessary, be used safely dur-
are relatively safe for use in breeding animals and pregnant females. In addition, within
most of the other classes of drugs listed, there are some therapeutic alternatives that are
more appropriate for use in breeding males, females during gestation, and neonates than
others.4.5.8.9 For instance, phenobarbital is a better alternative as an anticonvulsant than
valproic acid in pregnant females, and cephalosporins and β-lactams (i.e., penicillins)
are considerably safer for the fetus than aminoglycosides or fluoroquinolones (quino-
lones).4.8.9 Of particular interest to veterinarians performing canine cesarean sections,
especially those considered elective, are which anesthetic drugs are likely to be safest for
 both the pregnant female and her puppies. A variety of anesthetic protocols have been
used successfully to minimize maternal and neonatal mortality. Propofol induction of
anesthesia, in combination with supplemental Oz and anesthetic maintenance with iso-
flurane (via endotracheal tube) has been found to be preferable to similar canine anes-
thetic protocols using barbiturates or other anesthetics, such as ketamine, for anesthetic
induction.7s0.51 Mask induction using isoflurane and anesthetic maintenance with isoflu-
rane (via endotracheal tube) has also been used successfully for cesarean sections, but the
incidence of maternal and fetal hypoxia is greater under these circumstances than with
propofol induction.7 Additionally, sevoflurane and isoflurane generally are thought to be
safer than halothane and methoxyflurane for use as inhalation anesthetics (via endotra-
 or lidocaine also has been found to be useful ± inhaled anesthetics, especially in severely
compromised pregnant patients, when it is particularly desirable minimize anesthetic
depth.7.51
Reproductive Safety of Selected Medications for Which Chronic Administration
MightBeNecessary
A growing number of treatable veterinary diseases require chronic administration of
selected medications. As is evident from Table 16-3, long-term treatment with antineo-
plastic medications, anticonvulsants, steroidal as well as nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs, and therapeutic xenobiotics mimicking the effects of various gonadal steroids
will, in most instances, have direct, adverse effects on reproductive function in small ani-
mals.14.5.8,9 On the other hand, chronic administration of thyroxine, cardiac glycosides, and
the 5α-reductase inhibitor finasteride reportedly can be administered with some degree of
safety for the treatment of hypothyroidism, congestive heart failure, and benign prostatic
that DHT synthesis can be decreased enough to diminish the size of the prostate without
adversely affecting testosterone production and the quality of semen. However, this obser-
vation emphasizes a basic therapeutic principle. With these chronic treatment regimens it is
e ose si  aseas yas e u i ueanu aaa s ym pe o ae
carefully monitor any changes in reproductive parameters over the course of therapy. Using
these observations and the information provided in Table 16-1 will help dictate the possible
need to discontinue treatment and will assist in determining the aspects of reproduction
most sensitive to a specific medication. Such information also can be used to predict when
essa a ci aaelan eu in uau iu sianaid aanoidai asuas is asa
tion of xenobiotic administration.
200SECTlON2 General Exposures
Reproductive Safety of Herbal Medicinal Preparations
Given the information presented in Table 16-3, it is important to remind the reader that
manufactured medications can have very beneficial effects when used appropriately,
according to label instructions. However, that said, there is growing interest in the use of
"natural" herbal preparations to enhance health and even reproductive function in humans
as well as companion animals. Natural is not necessarily synonymous with safe, and many
xenobiotics of plant origin, such as phytoestrogens, have the potential to alter reproductive
efficiency while potentially having seemingly positive health effects on other organ systems
(Carica papaya), cottonseed (Gossypium hirsutum), and chaste tree (Vitex agnus-castus)
Botanical preparations, unlike purified synthetic medications, are often complex mix-
tures of secondary plant metabolites, with variable active ingredients and biologic effects.
uct, especially if they are not familiar with the manufacturer's level of quality assurance.
Herbal medicines should be used very cautiously in animals intended for reproductive
purposes, particularly breeding males and pregnant females. Owners, caretakers, and
veterinarians should be familiar with all of the ingredients of a given herbal preparation
(even those not of plant origin) as well as the potential effects of each of those constituent
 xenobiotics before administering a given botanical medicine to their breeding animals or
 Even potentially their pets not used for reproductive purposes. Historically some herbal
preparations have been found to contain high concentrations of arsenic or even adrenal
or pituitary extracts from slaughtered cattle. There is a growing number of manufacturers
of herbal medicines that provide guaranteed analyses of the products they are selling, and
it is probably worthwhile to preferentially purchase these types of preparations from these
manufacturers if one desires to use natural therapeutic xenobiotics.
Conclusions
This chapter was written from the perspectives of a clinical and diagnostic toxicologist
and theriogenologist, with the intent of taking a somewhat novel yet practical integrated
approach to reproductive toxicology in companion animals. Although this is an area that
generally receives limited attention in most veterinary toxicology textbooks, many vet-
erinarians and dog breeders are concerned about the possible roles of xenobiotics—in
particular, mycotoxins in dog food, environmental contaminants, and even various thera-
peutic agents— in observed cases of reproductive failure. Companion animals also have the
potential to act as sentinel populations for possible human exposures to many xenobiotics.
Health and fertility trends in dogs and cats might be indicative of xenobiotic-related effects
that are also applicable to susceptible human subpopulations, particularly pregnant women
and infants.
I should be evident that xenobiotics can directly or indirectly (i.e., by stress-, nutrition-,
 or other body/organ system-related effects) impact the reproductive function of breeding
animals within these species, many of which are selected for reproductive purposes based
on nonreproductive criteria. It also should be apparent that potential reproductive toxicants
can have primary as well as contributory roles in causing observed reproductive abnormali-
ties in companion animals. The contributory roles of xenobiotics in diminished reproduc-
tive performance most likely involve interactions among various predisposing factors and/
or stressors also associated with subfertility. Although it is much more convenient to think
 of impaired reproductive function having a single, obvious toxic etiology (i.e., a smok-
ing gun), the causes of diminished reproductive performance in small animals are most
as an interface among various predisposing factors and stressors and normal reproductive
function. It is important that the size, location, and type of breeding operation, as well as
breeding selection criteria and owner/caretaker expectations, are always consistent with the
levels of managerment, veterinary support, and animal husbandry infrastructure provided.
Chapter 16 I Reproductive Toxicology of Male and Female Companion Animals 201
Table 16-1 provides a helpful review of essential facts associated with canine and feline
reproduction. Tables 16-2 and 16-3 contain information pertinent to the potential adverse
reproductive effects of certain predisposing factors and enzootic stressors (see Table 16-2),
as well as medications commonly used in companion animal medicine (see Table 16-3). It
is hoped that this chapter will help in the future recognition, diagnosis, management, and,
ultimately, prevention of xenobiotic-related subfertility in companion animals.
References
1. Evans TJ: Reproductive toxicity and endocrine disruption. In Gupta RC,editor: Veterinary toxicology:
basic and clinical principles, New York, 2007, Academic Press/Elsevier.
gy: basic and clinical principles, New York, 2011, Academic Press/Elsevier.
3. http://www.aspca.org/.
4. Wilker CE, Ellington JE: Reproductive toxicology of the female companion animal. In Peterson ME,
Talcott PA,editors: Small animal toxicology,ed 2, St Louis, 2006, Elsevier-Saunders.
5. Ellington IE, Wilker CE:Reproductive toxicology ofthe male companion animal In Peterson ME,Talcott
PA, editors: Small animal toxicology, ed 2, St Louis, 2006, Elsevier-Saunders.
6. Senger PL: Pathways to pregnancy and parturition, rev ed 2, Moscow, ID, 2005, Current Conceptions.
7.England G,von Heimendahl A,editors: BSA VA manual ofcanine and feline reproduction and neonatol
ogy, ed 2, Gloucester, UK, 2010, British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
8. Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Canine and feline endocrinology and reproduction, ed 3, St Louis, 2004,
Saunders.
9. Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV: Olson PNS: Canine and feline theriogenology, Philadelphia, 2001,
Saunders.
production in domestic cats (Felis catus), Biol Reprod 68(5):1554, 2003.
11.Pretzer SD: Canine embryonic and fetal development: a review, Theriogenology 70(3):300, 2008.
12. Knopse C:Periods and stages ofthe prenatal development ofthe domestic cat, Anat Histol Embryol31:37,
2002.
 13. Evans TJ: Diminished reproductive performance and selected toxicants in forages and grains, Vet Clin
North Am Food Anim Pract 27(2):345, 2011.
14. Evans TJ: Endocrine disruption. In Gupta RC, editor: Reproductive and developmental toxicology,New
York, 2011, Academic Press/Elsevier.
St Louis, 2004, Mosby.
16. Cheeke PR: Natural toxicants in feeds,ed 2, Danville, IL, 1998, Interstate Publishers.
17. Gulati K, Ray A: Stress: its impact on reproductive and developmental toxicity. In Gupta RC, editor:
Reproductive and developmental toxicology, New York, 20l1, Academic Press/Elsevier.
18. http://www.accessdata fda.gov/scripts/newpetfoodrecalls/.
19. 1
http:/www.avma.org/petfoodsafety/recalls/default.asp.
 20. http://www.petpoisonhelpline.com/.
21. Dereszynski DM, Ceneter SA, Randolph JF, Brooks MR, et al: Clinical and clinicopathologic features
of dogs that consumed foodborne hepatotoxic aflatoxins: 72 cases (200s-2006), JA VMA 232(9):1329,
2008.
22. Minervini F, DellAquila ME: Zearalenone and reproductive function in farm animals, Int I Mol Sct
9(12):2570, 2008.
23. Gajecka M, Janowski T, Jakimiuk E, et al Histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations
and changes in proliferation activity ofthe uterus in bitches followingzearalenone mycotoxicosis, Polish
J Vet Sci 10(3):143, 2007.
24. Gajecka M, Obremski K, Jakimiuk E, et al: Histopathological examination in bitches after zearalenone
mycotoxicosis, Polish I Vet Sci 11(4):363, 2008.
25.F
 26. Setchell KD, Gosselin SJ, Welsh MB, et al: Dietary estrogens: a probable cause of infertility and liver
disease in captive cheetahs, Gastroenterology 93(2):225, 1987.
27. McClain RM, Wolz E, Davidovich A, et al: Subchronic and chronic safety studies with genistein in dogs
Food Chem Toxicol 43(10):1461, 2005.
28. Mostrom M, Evans TJ: Phytoestrogens. In Gupta RC,editor: Reproductive and developmental toxicology
New York, 2011, Academic Press/Elsevier.
29. Flora SJS, Pachuari V, Saxena G: Arsenic, cadmium, and lead. In Gupta RC, editor: Reproductive and
developmental toxicology, New York, 2011, Academic Press/Elsevier.
202SECTlON 2 General Exposure5
30. Ni M, Mareilha dos Santos AP, Farina M,et al: Mercury. In Gupta RC, editor: Reproductive and develop-
mental toxicology, New York, 2011, Academic Press/Elsevier.
transport mechanisms and complexes with calcium-binding proteins, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 186:77,
2003.
32. Boland LA, Angles JM: Feline permethrin toxicity: retrospective study of 42 cases, / Feline Med Surg
12(2):61, 2010.
33. Zhang J, Zhu W, Zheng Y, et al: The antiandrogenic activity of pyrethroid pesticides cyfluthrin and
β-cyfluthrin, Reprod Toxicol 25:491, 2008.
34. Liu J,Yang Y, Yang Y,et al: Disrupting effects ofbifenthrin on ovulatory gene expression and prostaglan-
din synthesis in rat ovarian granulosa cells, Toxicology 281(1-2):47, 2011.
35. Ji G, Xia Y, Gu A, et al: Effects of non-occupational environmental exposure to pyrethroids on semen
quality and sperm DNA integrity in Chinese men, Reprod Toxicol 31(2):171, 2011.
36. Ahmad M, Hussain I, Khan A, et al: Deleterious effects of cypermethrin on semen characteristics and
testes of dwarf goats (Capra hircus), Exp Toxicol Pathol 61(4):339, 2009.
37. Murphy MJ, Talcott PA: Anticoagulant rodenticides. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA, editors: Small anima?
toxicology,ed 2, St Louis, 2006, Elsevier-Saunders
39.Osweiler GD,HovdaLR,Brutlag AG,et al:Blackwell'sfive-minute veterinary consult clinicalcompanion
small animal toxicology, Ames, IA, 2011, Wiley-Blackwell.
40. Safe SH,Khan S, Wu F,et al: Chemical-induced estrogenicity. In Gupta RC,editor: Veterinary toxicology:
basic and clinical principles, New York, 2007, Academic Press/Elsevier.
41. Warner M, Eskenazi B, Mocarelli P, et al: Serum dioxin concentrations and breast cancer risk in the
Seveso Women's Health Study, Environ Health Perspect 110:625, 2002.
42. Mocarelli P, Gerthoux PM, Patterson DG Jr, et al: Dioxin exposure, from infancy through puberty, pro-
duces endocrine disruption and affects human semen quality, Environ Health Perspect116:70, 2008.
43. Eskenazi B, Warner M, Samuels S, et al: Serum dioxin concentrations and time to pregnancy, Epidemiol-
ogy 21:224, 2010.
nol 41(18):6350, 2007.
45. Doerge DR, Twaddle NC, Vanlandingham M: Pharmacokinetics of bisphenol A in neonatal and adult
 CD-1 mice: inter-species comparisons with Sprague-Dawley rats and rhesus monkeys, Toxicol Letts
207(3):298, 2011.
46. Schecter A, Malik N, Haffner D, et al: Bisphenol A (BPA) in U.S. food, Environ Sci Technol44(24):9425,
2010.
47. Mahood IK, McKinnell C, Walker M, et al: Cellular origins of testicular dysgenesis in rats exposed in
utero to di(n-butyl) phthalate, Int J A ndrol 29(1):148, 2006.
48. http://www.niehs.nih.gov/.
49. Wiebe VJ, Howard IP: Pharmacologic advances in canine and feline reproduction, Top Companion A ni-
mal Med 24(2):71, 2009
50. Funkquist PM, Nyman GC, Lofgren AJ, et al: Use of propofol-isoflurane as an anesthetic regimen for
cesarean section in dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 211(3):313, 1997.
51. Luna SP, Cassu RN, Castro GB, et al: Efects of four anaesthetic protocols on the neurological and car-
diorespiratory variables of puppies bom by caesarean section, Vet Rec 154(13):387, 2004.
52. Papich MG: Saunders handbook of veterinary drugs,ed 3, St Louis, 2011, Elsevier, pp 1-858.
53. Van Wyk BE, Wink M: Medicinal plants of the world, London, 2004, Timber Press, pp 1-478.
CHAPTER
Considerations in
17
Pregnant or Lactating
Patients
Michelle Anne Kutzler, DVM, PhD, DACT
ooqouax oi asuodsan iai oi ioadsan um uoemdod anbiun e ane seuue jueuan
exposures, either therapeutic or accidental. The dynamic physiologic changes that
occur within the maternal-placental-fetal unit during pregnancy influence the pharma-
cokinetic processes of xenobiotic absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination.
 In lactating patients, the xenobiotic concentration in milk is directly proportional to
the corresponding concentration in maternal plasma. For most xenobiotics, the amount
ingested by neonates rarely attains toxic concentrations. However, xenobiotic toxicity can
develop in the pregnant or lactating animal, fetus, or neonate when sufficient compound
is present to exert a damaging effect on cells. Conversely, subtherapeutic concentrations
 of xenobiotics may lead to treatment failures in the pregnant or lactating animal.1 There
is a scarcity of data on specific pharmacokinetic measurements during pregnancy and
lactation in dogs and even less in cats. Most specific information on pharmacokinet-
ics presented in this chapter is based on comparative data from humans and laboratory
animals (Box 17-1).
Pregnant Patients
General Considerations
 In dogs, apparent serum concentrations of progesterone and estradiol are similar in pregnant
and nonpregnant cycles except for the abrupt decrease of both at parturition. However, if
 corrections are made for the hemodilution that occurs during pregnancy, both steroid hor-
mone concentrations are significantly higher in the last half of gestation This is supported by
increased fecal estradiol and progesterone concentrations during the second half of pregnancy.?
Increased hepatic clearance and increased metabolism by the uterus and mammary gland also
contribute to the absence of obvious increase in estradiol and progesterone concentrations
during pregnancy.4 In addition, thyroxine and adrenocortical hormones are increased during
the latter half of gestation. The combined effect of increased hormone secretion during preg-
nancy results in alterations in dermal, pulmonary, cardiovascular, renal, gastrointestinal, and
hepatic function ( Table 17-1). Although these changes are necessary for a successful pregnancy,
unique absorption, distribution, metabolism, and clearance of xenobiotics must be considered
when using drugs to treat or prevent disease or in res
esponse to accidental toxin exposures.
Absorption
Gastrointestinal
The site of absorption for most xenobiotics is the small intestine because of its large sur-
face area and the fact that the oral route is a common route of administration. Xenobiotic
203
204SECTION 2 General Exposures
Box 17-1
Did You Know That Xenobiotics ...
 Xenobiotics are chemical compounds (e.g., medications, other organic substances)
that are found in animals but are not normally produced or expected to be present
(or present at that concentration).
absorption across the small intestine
Table 17-1
 Physiologic Changes
is similar between dogs and humans,
during Pregnancy That Alter
and is often faster than the rate of gas-
Pharmacokinetics
tric emptying, such that gastric empty-
Physiological Parameter
Change
ing is a rate-limiting role in xenobiotic
Absorption
Au io 9'san 06 si [ea e i
Gastric pH
Increased
therapeutically useful drugs, the biologi-
Gastric emptying time
Increased
cal half-time is long enough to ensure
Intestinal motility
Decreased
that stomach enmptying is not a critical
Pulmonary function
Increased
parameter. However, a slower intestinal
Cardiac output
Increased
transit time can significantly increase
Blood flow to the skin
Increased
 xenobiotic absorption. High progester-
Absorption from
Increased
one concentrations during pregnancy
IM-administered
result in delayed gastric emptying and
xenobiotics
reduced small intestinal motility, with
Distribution
the net effect of orally administered
Plasma volume
Increased
 an aluo e upuads sunodo
Total body water
Increased
both the stomach and small intestine.7
Plasma proteins
Decreased
As a result of prolonged intestinal transit
Body fat
Increased
time, there is an increase in absorption
of poorly water-soluble (hydrophobic)
Metabolism
xenobiotics and an increase in metabo-
Hepatic metabolism
Increased or
lism of xenobiotics by the intestinal wall
decreased*
These modifications may affect (increase
Extrahepatic
Increased or
or decrease) the oral absorption of a
metabolism
decreased*
drug.&9 Gastric pH is also increased dur-
Intestinal wall
Increased
ing pregnancy as a result of reduced gas-
metabolism
tric acid secretion and increased gastric
Excretion
mucous secretion. The increase in gastric
Protein binding
Decreased
pH increases the ionization of weak acids
Glomerularfiltration
Increased
within the stomach, which reduces their
rate
absorption.
Renal blood flow
Increased
Pulmonary
 Pulmonary blood flow
Increased
Tidal volume
Increased
Respiratory rate is unchanged during
pregnancy, but tidal volume (the amount
*Changes to metabolism depend upon whether the
of air per breath) and pulmonary blood
xenobiotic agent is hydrophobic (increased metab-
flow are increased, which alters the kinet-
olism) or hydrophilic (decreased metabolism).
ics of inhaled xenobiotics in favor of
alveolar uptake and elimination by exha-
lation.10.ul Aerosol (bronchodilator com-
pounds) absorption is increased. Highly lipid-soluble anesthetic agents would be absorbed
more rapidly and cleared more rapidly during pregnancy. Although the rate of anesthetic
induction with volatile agents is not faster, the dose requirements for volatile anesthetic
drugs (e.g., halothane, isoflurane, methoxyflurane) are reduced.12 Volatile anesthetics also
have been shown to delay intramuscular absorption of ketamine ( Box 17-2).13
Chapter 17 I Considerations in Pregnant or Lactating Patients 205
Box 17-2
Did You Know That During Pregnancy ...
Box 17-3
Did You Know That DuringPregnancy ..
insecticides are more likely to result in toxicity.
Skin
 In humans, substantial changes in blood flow to the skin occur during pregnancy, such that
circulation to the hand increases by sixfold.14 Alterations in dermal blood flow may have
a significant impact on the pharmacokinetics of transdermal xenobiotic exposure (e.g.)
 rse  d us q se 
administration of compounded pharmaceuticals or insecticides may result in toxicity dur-
ose st unsuue em umo usqe sqoux ara uad u
enhanced during pregnancy because of increased tissue perfusion secondary to vasodila-
tion (Box 17-3).
Distribution
 During pregnancy, increases in body weight, total body fat, cardiac output, total body
water, extracellular water, and intravascular volume can influence xenobiotic distribution
(Fig. 17-1). Increases in body fat allow for a larger volume of distribution for lipophilic
xenobiotics. Cardiac output increases by greater than 20% in sheep, guinea pigs, goats,
and rabbits and about 40% in humans during pregnancy. However, in dogs, cardiac out-
 one secretion and results in increased renal fluid retention. During pregnancy in most
species, the resting concentration of plasma angiotensin-2 is increased.2 The concentra-
tion of vasopressin is also increased relative to plasma osmolality in humans and rats.2l
 Despite an increase in blood volume, mean arterial pressure is decreased.2l Increased total
body water results in an increased hydrophilic xenobiotic distribution.22 For example,
pharmacokinetic parameters calculated from the results of the intravenous administra-
tion of lidocaine in pregnant ewes showed that the volume of distribution was increased,
resulting in an increase in half-life.23 Beginning in midgestation and lasting 1 to 2 months
after parturition, hemodilution occurs as reflected in a decrease in hematocrit and plasma
albumin concentration.? In humans, the size of the fetus and number of fetuses influence
the increase in plasma volume, but this relationship has not been studied in domestic ani-
 mals.4 As a result of this pregnancy-associated dilutional hypoalbuminemia, there is a
decrease in total plasma concentration of a protein-bound xenobiotic substances. In addi-
tion, steroid and placental hormones and serum lipids (from increased body fat) will dis-
place xenobiotics from protein-binding sites, resulting in a rise in free (active) xenobiotic
concentration of agents that would normally be protein-bound and potentially result in an
increased physiological (toxic) effect. This is most noticeable for acidic xenobiotics that are
highly protein-bound.
 Almost all xenobiotics cross the placenta and reach pharmacologic concentrations in
the fetus after exposure of the mother. Drugs administered to the mother may cross the
placenta by passive diffusion, facilitated transport, and active transport. Lipophilic, nonion-
ized molecules less than 500 Da can cross the placenta by passive diffusion.2s.26 In women
diazepam,2930 and atropine3 occur such that fetal cord vein concentrations are several
times higher than maternal. To date, these pharmacokinetic studies have not been done
206SECTION2 GeneralExposures
Gastrointestinal tract
Plasma
Bound drug
Moth
Liver
+
Kidney
Unbound drug
心电电电心
Placenta
豆
erv
sm-
Plasma
Bound drug
otic
Heart
1
W
Unbound drug
Metabolites
Figure 17-l Xenobiotic distribution in the maternal-placental-fetal system. Factors
affecting the pharmacokinetics and xenobiotic effects on mother and fetus are (1) altered
maternal absorption; (2) increased maternal unbound xenobiotic fraction; (3) increased
maternal plasma volume; (4) altered hepatic clearance; (5) increased maternal renal blood
flow and glomerular filtration rate; (6) placental transfer; (7) placental metabolism; (8)
placental blood flow; (9) maternal-fetal blood pH; (10) preferential fetal circulation to
the heart and brain; (1l) undeveloped fetal blood-brain barrier; (12) immature fetal liver
enzyme activity; and (13) increased fetal unbound xenobiotic fraction.
in domestic animals but inferences have been made based on the use of these anesthetics
and neonatal survival in dogs. Alpha-2 agonists (e.g., xylazine, metdetomidine), ketamine,
thiobarbiturates (e.g., thiopental, thiamylal) and methoxyflurane should be avoided.32.33
 The current recommended anesthetic protocol for canine and feline patients undergoing
cesarean sections is hydromorphone or fentanyl premedication, propofol induction and
 inhalant anesthetic maintenance.34 If premedicating with an anticholinergic, glycopyrrolate
Maternal and fetal blood pH and plasma protein binding also influence the rate
of passive diffusion across the placenta. The fetal plasma pH is slightly more acidic
than the maternal. Consequently, xenobiotics that are weak bases are nonionized and
able to easily penetrate the placental barrier. However, after crossing the placenta and
making contact with the relatively acidic fetal blood, these molecules become more
ionized, leading to "ion trapping" Protein-bound xenobiotics do not cross the pla-
with those of the dam (e.g., ampicillin), with the exception of a few xenobiotics (e.g..
salicylates) that have a greater affinity for fetal plasma proteins than maternal. Com-
amsodxa soiqouax jo jodap e juasaidan suraiond [eiay oi punoq auosaq ieul spunod
in the fetus that would prolong fetal exposure after cessation of maternal exposure.
Although hydrophilic compounds cannot cross the placenta by passive diffusion, they
cross via aqueous diffusion through the water-filled pores between the cells (paracel-
lular pathway) (Box 17-4).25
Chapter 17 | Considerations in Pregnant or Lactating Patients  207
Box 17-4
Did You Know That During Pregnancy ...
During pregnancy, almost all xenobiotics reach pharmacologic concentrations in
the fetus after exposure of the mother and umbilical vein concentrations are typically
several times higher than maternal.
Metabolism
 Alterations in the hormonal milieu of pregnancy are associated with changes in xenobiotic
metabolism. In most cases, xenobiotic metabolism occurs primarily in the liver. Decreased
transformation, a process that renders a xenobiotic more water soluble and thus readily
in rats and to a much lesser extent in domestic animals. Changes in xenobiotic metabolism
may have an impact on the first-pass effect of drugs given orally during pregnancy. Some
microsomal enzymes of the hepatic cytochrome P-450 system are induced by progester-
one, resulting in a higher rate of xenobiotic metabolism by the liver.36 For example, it has
been found clinically that the phenytoin dosage needs to be increased during pregnancy to
maintain plasma concentrations that are adequate to control epileptic seizures in women.37
However, the capacity for hepatic biotransformation is six times greater in dogs compared
with humans.3s Some microsomal enzymes are competitively inhibited by progesterone
and estradiol, resulting in impaired xenobiotic metabolism.39 Because of hormonal inhi-
bition of hepatic microsomal oxidases, theophylline degradation is delayed during preg-
nancy.40 Elevated progesterone during pregnancy also inhibits hepatic glucuronidation and
treated with lamotrigine during and after pregnancy, the authors concluded that pregnancy
has little or no effect on glucuronidation.42
 p s an s a s s e a  
drug to the site of metabolism (e.g., liver) and by increasing the activity of the enzymatic
system (e.g., hepatic cytochrome P-450 family). However, during pregnancy, there may
be decreased expression of genes encoding for hepatic cytochrome P-450.43.44 Most bio-
transformation reactions present in the liver have also been described within the placenta,
although placental biotransformation capacity is many times less than that of the liver.45
The placenta contains several enzymes that are capable of metabolizing xenobiotics via
oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis, and conjugation pathways. For example, the placental
cytochrome P-450 enzyme 1A1 is induced following exposure to aromatic hydrocarbons
found in tobacco smoke.46 Alternatively, toxic intermediate formation may result from the
placental oxidative biotransformation system. Xenobiotics that are not metabolized by the
placenta enter the fetal hepatic circulation via the umbilical vein. However, approximately
50% of umbilical venous blood flow will bypass the liver via the ductus venosus, contrib-
uting to a possible accumulation of xenobiotics within the fetus. The near-term dog fetus
shows evidence of a functioning enterohepatic circulation of bile salt, and xenobiotics can
be found in meconium. Because of the small bile salt pool, apparent limited capacity of the
 gallbladder to concentrate bile, and evidence of a functional hepatic bypass, fetal hepatic
metabolism is immature compared with that of the adult.47
Elimination
As a general rule, lipophilic compounds will be cleared mainly by metabolism, whereas
hydrophilic compounds will be subjected to renal and/or biliary clearance. Xenobi-
   s u  sop u rasey aa si esed  a 
30 mL/minute per kg;48.49 metoclopramide: 8 vs 25 mL/minute per kg;s0 domperidone: 10 vs
20 mL/minute per kg;l and pentobarbital: 1 vs 2 mL/minute per kg52,53). In dogs, renal blood
blood flow is increased by 60% to 80% and glomerular filtration is increased by 50% during
208SECTION 2 General Exposures
Box 17-5
Did You Know That During Pregnancy ..
During pregnancy, the amount of ampicillin necessary to maintain antimicrobial drug
concentrations doubles and the elimination half-life for cephalosporins is reduced.
pregnancy.56 Decreased protein binding during pregnancy results in more unbound xenobi-
otics available for renal excretion. As a result of increased glomerular fltration rate, the rate
of elimination for compounds cleared by the kidney is enhanced (e.g., resulting in a reduced
half-life), which can have a significant impact on drug treatment. For example, the amount of
ampicillin necessary to maintain antimicrobial drug concentration doubles during pregnancy
because of the combined effect of increased volume of distribution and rate of elimination.57
The elimination half-lives are also reduced for cephalosporin and some anticonvulsants.
Opposite results were described for gentamicin because increased clearance and decreased
fetus relies largely on the maternal system for elimination of xenobiotics. Elimination from
the fetus to the mother via the placenta is by diffusion. However, because most xenobiotic
metabolites are polar and not capable of simple diffusion, they can accumulate within the fetal
compartment. Placental eflux transporters (e.g., P-glycoprotein) actively remove xenobiotics
from the fetal circulation into the maternal circulation for elimination (Box 17-5) 38.62-65
Lactating Patients
General Considerations
During lactation, estrogen and progesterone concentrations are at baseline, whereas pro-
lactin concentrations are elevated. Milk is produced in marmmary alveolar cells from which
it is expelled by contractile myoepithelial cells into the duct system. Prolactin stimulates
the synthesis of milk proteins such as α-lactalbumin. Milk proteins are synthesized within
ribosomes in the rough endoplasmic reticulum and transported to the Golgi region of the
mammary alveolar cells, where the protein is packaged into vacuoles. The milk protein vac-
uoles are pinched off and fuse with the alveolar cell membrane to become released into the
alveolar lumen. The major proteins found in the milk are casein, lactoferrin, α-lactalbumin,
and IgA. a-Lactalbumin, along with galactosyltransferase, uridine diphosphogalactose,
and glucose form lactose.6 Lactose is the principal osmotically active compound in milk.
Although water is the principal component of milk, the amount of water within milk is
regulated by the quantity of lactose. A reciprocal relationship among lactose and sodium,
potassium, and chloride concentrations is maintained to keep the total osmolality of milk
similar to that of blood.67 Fat is delivered to mammary tissue from serum chylomicra of
hydrolyzed at the capillary level, whereupon glycerol and free fatty acids enter the mam-
mary alveolar cells by passive diffusion. Unlike plasma, canid milk contains on average
9.5% of emulsified fat.68 Milk fat can concentrate lipid-soluble xenobiotics, causing the
total amount of xenobiotic in milk to increase. For highly lipid-soluble drugs (e.g., diaz-
epam and chlorpromazine), well more than half of the total amount of drug in milk is
found in milk fat.69
Xenobiotics enter and exit the alveolar lumen by passive diffusion through the lipid
portion of the alveolar membrane or via active transport through protein channels in
the membrane. Passive diffusion is the most common route in which xenobiotics enter
milk. Xenobiotics pass through the mammary epithelium by passive diffusion down a
concentration gradient on each side of the membrane. With passive diffusion, the xeno-
biotic concentration in milk is directly proportional to the corresponding xenobiotic
concentration in maternal plasma. Ihe higher the dose administered to the mother, the
more xenobiotic that will pass into the milk. Milk concentrations are the highest following
Chapter 17 | Considerations in Pregnant or Lactating Patients 209
Box 17-6
Did You Know That During Lactation ...
During lactation, milk concentrations of xenobiotics are the highest following
intravenous administration compared with other routes of administration.
Box 17-7
Did You Know That During Lactation ...
During lactation, xenobiotics that are weak bases (e.g., erythromycin and antihis-
tamines) are more likely to pass into milk than weak acids (e.g., barbiturates and
penicillins).
Table 17-2
For those drugs excreted in milk,
Milk to Plasma (M:P)
lactation can markedly increase drug
 Ratios Relating to the Ratio between
clearance.70 Ihe physicochemical charac-
the Area Under the Curve of the Drug
teristics of the xenobiotic (i.e., molecular
in Women
size, plasma protein binding, lipophilicity,
Drug
and ionization) also determine how much
M:P Ratio
 of the compound will be transferred into
Amoxicillin74
0.014-0.043
milk. The mammary epithelium mem-
Penicillin7s
0.02-0.2
brane acts as a semipermeable lipid bar-
Prednisolone76
0.078-0.221
rier. Small pores permit xenobiotics with a
Diazepam77
0.08-0.13
low molecular weight (<200 kDa) to pass
Cephalothin74
0.14
through the alveolar membrane. Larger
Metronidazole78
1.7
xenobiotic molecules must dissolve in
Fentany]79
2.45
the outer lipid membrane of the epithelial
Morphines0
2.46
cells, diffuse across the aqueous interior
Acyclovir81
2.94
 of the cells, dissolve in and pass through
the opposite cell membrane, and then pass
into the milk. Only unbound xenobiotics
 in maternal plasma can diffuse across the alveolar membrane and accumulate in milk. High
plasma protein binding decreases the amount of xenobiotic excreted into milk, whereas
high milk protein-binding results in the sustained presence of a xenobiotic in milk. Casein
 proteins do not bind xenobiotics well.72 As milk (pH 7.2) is slightly more acidic than plasma
(pH 7.4), compounds that are weak bases (e.g., erythromycin and antihistamines) are more
xenobiotic ionization, determined by the xenobiotic pKa (ionization constant) and the pH
of the plasma and the milk, plays a role in determining the amount of xenobiotic excreted
in the milk in a process called "ion or xenobiotic trapping"” similar to the fetal circulation.
A good example of ion trapping can be seen with orbifloxacin because, like other fluoroqui-
nolones, it is amphoteric with its carboxylic acid group and basic amine functional group
and it extensively passes from blood into milk (Boxes 17-6 and 17-7).73
Although water-soluble xenobiotics must cross through pores within the alveolar mem-
brane, lipid-soluble xenobiotics dissolve into the lipid bilayer of the alveolar membrane. The
more lipid-soluble the xenobiotic, the greater the quantity and the faster the transfer into
milk. Another factor that comes into play is the retrograde diffusion of xenobiotics from the
milk back into maternal plasma. Studies in catle indicate that compounds instilled directly
into the udder pass out of the milk and are detectable in the plasma. Ihe milk-to-plasma
ratio (M:P) compares milk with maternal plasma xenobiotic concentrations and serves as
an index of the extent of xenobiotic passage into milk to estimate a neonate's exposure to
xenobiotics through milk (Table 17-2). The milk xenobiotic concentration usually does
not exceed the maternal plasma concentration but even when M:P is greater than 1, the
amount of xenobiotic ingested by a neonate is rarely sufficient to attain therapeutic or toxic
210SECTlON 2 General Exposures
concentrations. Peak drug concentrations after oral administration occur 1 to 3 hours after
the dose.
Analgesics and Anesthetics
Ibuprofen, naproxen, and diclofenac do not cross into milk (M:P = 0.01).2 However, the
former two are known to cause toxicity in dogs and should therefore be avoided in both
lactating and nonlactating canids. On the other hand, aspirin crosses into breast milk
(M:P = 0.3) and is slower to be eliminated from milk than the plasma. A cumulative effect
elimination half-life of aspirin is considerably longer in neonates than mature animals,
which increases the likelihood of drug accumulation and adverse effects. As a general rule,
nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs should be avoided during lactation.83
Meperidine (pethidine) also crosses into breast milk (M:P ~1). Ihe half-life of pethidine
(13 hours) and its hepatic metabolite, norpethidine (63 hours), in the neonate can lead to
high neonatal plasma concentrations over time. Neonates nursing from mothers who were
treated with intravenous pethidine following a cesarean section were neurologically and
behaviorally depressed.34 Dipyrone and its metabolites are passed into milk and have resulted
in cyanosis in a human nursing neonate.? Benzodiazepines with long-acting metabolites can
accumulate in infants, especially neonates, because of their immature excretory mechanisms
 and have caused adverse effects in infants.86 Milk halothane concentrations equal or surpass
concentrations in maternally inhaled air.87
Antibiotics
 Penicillins appear in milk in amounts that could lead to disruption of neonatal gastroin-
testinal flora. Similar to penicillins, cephalosporins could lead to disruption of neonatal
gastrointestinal flora.74 First- and second-generation cephalosporins are considered to be
normal flora.
 Following oral administration, clavulanic acid is transferred into the milk but no harm-
fl effects have been reported.&& Sulfamethoxazole is secreted into milk and has a long elim-
ination half-life in neonates (36 hours for human neonates).
Xenobiotics Affecting Lactation
In addition to the effects of xenobiotics on the neonate, the potential effects of xenobiotics
on lactation should be considered. Many xenobiotics affect prolactin secretion centrally.
Cyproheptadine, bromocriptine, cabergoline, and metergoline lower maternal plasma
prolactin concentrations and should be avoided unless cessation of lactation is desired.
Sympathomimetics can also decrease milk production, probably by centrally decreasing
suckling-induced oxytocin and prolactin release and peripherally reducing mammary
blood flow.&9 Metoclopramide, a dopamine agonist, is used to stimulate lactation and is
may be elevated after maternal administration of metoclopramide.90 Like oxytocin, pros-
taglandin Fza administered intranasally increases milk ejection.? Fenugreek is an herbal
product used in human medicine92.94 and has been shown to have oxytocin-like activity
in animals.95 Although the use of herbal products seems to be increasing because they are
viewed as safer or more natural alternatives to pharmaceutical products, the potential exists
for herbal products to have all of the properties of pharmaceuticals, ranging from clinical
usefulness to toxicity.
Conclusion
Although the majority of pregnant or lactating patients are healthy and drug administra-
tion can be avoided, acute disorders such as infection may require short-term medical
treatment. The results of one veterinary survey indicate that the possibility of pregnancy
Chapter 17 | Considerations in Pregnant or Lactating Patients  21l
veterinary medicine, pharmacokinetic data are typically generated in small groups of nor-
mal healthy animals, and it is often assumed that these data will reflect the drug's kinetic
properties across the intended patient population. Few pharmacokinetic studies of drug
absorption, metabolism, distribution, and elimination during pregnancy or lactation exist
specifically for canids and felids. Information to modify dose schedules to ensure efficacy
and minimize the risk of toxicity is definitely necessary. Whenever drugs are used in preg
nant and lactating patients, the prescribing clinician must explain the relative benefits and
risks associated with the treatment and obtain informed consent from the owner.
References
1. Rebuelto M, Loza ME: Antibiotic treatment of dogs and cats during pregnancy, Vet Med Int 2010:
385640, 2010.
 2. Concannon PW, Powers ME, Holder W,et al: Pregnancy and parturition in the bitch, Biol Reprod16:517
1977.
3. Gundermuth DE, Concannon PW, Daels PF,et al: Pregnancy-specific elevations in fecal concentrations
ofestradiol, testosterone and progesterone in the domestic dog(Canis familiaris), Theriogenology 50:237,
1998.
4. Concannon PW: Canine pregnancy, I Reprod Fertl Suppt 57:169, 2001.
5. Clark B, Smith DA: Pharmacokinetics and toxicity testing, CRC Crit Rev Toxicol 12:343, 1984.
6. Theodorakis MC: Extemal scintigraphy for gastric emptying in beagles,Am I Physiol239:G39, 1980.
 7. Davison JS, Davison MC, Hay DM: Gastric emptying time in late pregnancy and labour, JObstet Gynaecol
Br Commonwealth 77:37, 1970.
8. Dawes M, Chowienczyk PI: Drugs in pregnancy. Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy, Best Pract Res Clin
Obstet Gynaecol 15:819, 2001.
9. Qasqas SA, McPherson C, Frishman WH, et al: Cardiovascular pharmacotherapeutic considerations
during pregnancy and lactation, Cardiol Rev 12:201, 2004.
10. Kerr MG: Cardiovascular dynamics in pregnancy and labour, Br Med Bull 24:19, 1968.
11. Metcalf J, Stock MK, Barron DH: Maternal physiology during gestation. In Knobil E, Neil J, editors: The
physiology of reproduction, New York, 1988, Raven Press.
Anesthesiology 41:82, 1974.
13. Wood M: Pharmacokinetic drug interactions in anaesthetic practice, Clin Pharmacokinet 21:285, 1991.
14. Mattison DR: Transdermal drug absorption during pregnancy, Clin Obstet Gynecol 33:718, 1990.
15. Wilson D, Pettifer GR, Hosgood G: Effect of transdermally administered fentanyl on minimum alveolar
concentration of isoflurane in normothermic and hypothermic dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 228:1042,
2006.
17. Barr DB, Ananth CV, Yan X, et al: Pesticide concentrations in matemal and umbilical cord sera and their
relation to birth outcomes in a population of pregnant women and newboms in New Jersey, Sct Total
Environ 408:790, 2010.
(DEET) in pregnancy, Am I Trop Med Hyg 65:285, 2001.
19. Williams JG, Ojaimi C, Qanud K, et al: Coronary nitric oxide production controls cardiac substrate
metabolism during pregnancy in the dog, Am I Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 294:H2516, 2008.
20. Williams JG, Rincon-Skinner T, Sun D, et al: Role of nitric oxide in the coupling of myocardial oxygen
consumption and coronary vascular dynamics during pregnancy in the dog, Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol 293:H2479, 2007.
22:143, 1995.
 22. Carlin A, Alfirevic Z: Physiological changes of pregnancy and monitoring, Best Pract Res Clin Obstet
Gynaecol 22:801, 2008.
sheep, I Pharm Sct 69:32, 1980.
multiple pregnancy, Am I Obstet 93, 1965
25. Schneider H, Sodha RJ, Progler M,et al: Permeability ofthe human placenta for hydrophilic substances
studied in the isolated dually perfused in vitro perfused lobe, Contrib Gynecol Obstet 13:98, 1985.
26. Wiebe VJ, Howard JP: Pharmacologic advances in canine and feline reproduction, Top Companion
Anim Med24:71, 2009.
212SECTION 2 General Exposures
27. Elli ngson A, Haram K, Sagen N, et al: Transplacental passage ofketammine after intravenous administration,
Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 21:41, 1977.
transfer, concentrations in breast milk, and neonatology effect: a preliminary study, Anesthesiotogy
71:827,1989.
29. Gamble JAS, Moor J, Lamki H,et al: A study of plasma diazepam levels in mother and infant, Br Journa?
Obstet Gynaecol 84:588, 1977.
 30. Idanpaan-Heikkila JE, Jouppila PI, Puolakka JO,et al: Placentaltransfer and foetal metabolism ofdiazepam
in early human pregnancy, A m I Obstet Gynecol 109:1011, 1971.
31. Kivalo I, Saarikoski S: Quantitative measurements of placental transfer and distribution of radioactive
atropine in fetus, Ann Chir Gynaecol Fenn 59:80, 1970.
32. Moon PF, Erb HN, Ludders JW, et al: Perioperative risk factors for puppies delivered by cesarean section
in the United States and Canada, I A m Anim Hosp Assoc 36:359, 2000.
33. Moon-Massat PF, Erb HN: Perioperative factors associated with puppy vigor after delivery by cesarean
section, I Am A nim Hosp Assoc 38:90, 2002.
35.Proakis AG,Harris GB: Comparative penetration of glycopyrrolate and atropine acrossthe blood-brain
and placental barriers in anesthetized dogs, Anesthesiology 48:339, 1978.
36.Tabei T,Heinrichs WL:Hepatic steroid hydroxylase and aminopyrine N-demethylase activities in preg-
nant rats and rabbits and the effect of phenobarbital, Biochem Pharmacol 25:2099, 1976.
37. Eadie MJ, Lander CM, Tyrer JH: Plasma drug level monitoring in pregnancy, Clin Pharmacokinet 2:427,
1977.
38. Unadkat JD, Dahlin A, Vijay S: Placental drug transporters, Curr Drug Metabol 5:125, 2004.
the neonate, Biol Neonate 20:58, 1972.
40. Davis M, Simmons CJ, Dordini B, et al: Induction of hepatic enzymes during normal pregnancy, J Obstet
Gynaecol Br Commonwealth 80:690, 1973.
41.
Hsia DY, Riabov S, Dowben RM: Inhibition of glucuronosyl transferase by steroid hormones, Arch
Biochem Biophys 103:181, 1963.
42. Matar KM, Nicholls PJ, Tekle A, et al: Effects of pregnancy on the pharmacokinetics of lamotrigine in
dogs, Epilepsiα 40:1353, 1999.
throughout pregnancy, Theriogenology 68:646, 2007.
44. Dickmann LJ, Tay S, Senn TD,et al: Changes in maternal liver Cyp2c and Cyp2d expression and activity
during rat pregnancy, Biochem Pharmacol 75:1677, 2008.
45. Juchau MR: Drug biotransfomation in the placenta, Pharmacol Ther 8:501, 1980.
46.
 Pasanen M: The expression and regulation of drug metabolism in human placenta, Adv Drug Deliv Rev
38:81, 1999.
47. Smallwood RA, Lester R, Piasecki GJ, et al: Fetal bile salt metabolism, J Clin Invest 51:1388, 1972.
48. Branch RA, Shand DG, Wilkinson GR, et al: The reduction of lidocaine clearance by dl-propranolol: an
example of hemodynamic drug interaction, I Pharm Exp Ther 206:431, 1978.
49. TuckerGT, Wiklund L, Berlin-Wahlen A,et al: Hepatic clearance oflocal anaesthetics in man, / Pharma
cokinet Biopharm 5:11, 1977.
J Pharm Pharmacol 28:32, 1976.
51. Heykants J, Knaeps A, Meuldermans W, et al: On the pharmacokinetics of domperidone in animals and
man, Eur I Xenobiotic Metab Pharmacokinet 6:27, 1981.
52. Davis LE, Baggot JD, Davis CAN, et al: Elimination kinetics of pentobarbital in nephrectomized dogs,
Am I Vet Res 34:23, 1973.
 53. Ehrnebo M: Pharmacokinetics and distribution properties of pentobarbital in humans following oral
and intravenous administration, I Pharm Sci 63:114, 1974.
54. Davis JO, Lindsay AE, Southworth JL: Mechanisms of fluid and electrolyte retention in experimental
preparations in dogs. I. Acute and chronic pericarditis, Bull Johns Hopkins Hosp 90:64, 1952.
 55. Robb CA, Davis JO, Johnson JA, et al: Mechanisms regulating the renal excretion of sodium during
pregnancy, I Clin Invest 49:871, 1970.
 56. Dawes M, Chowienczyk PJ: Pharmacokinetics in pregnancy, Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 15:819,
2001.
 57. Jeffries WS, Bochner F: The effect of pregnancy on drug pharmacokinetics, Med I Austral 149:675,
1988.
58. Locksmith GJ, Chin A, Vu T,et al: High compared with standard gentamicin dosing for chorioamnionitiss
a comparison of maternal and fetal serum drug levels, Obstet Gynecol 105:473, 2005
Chapter 17 | Considerations in Pregnant or Lactating Patients  213
59. Lazebnik N, Noy S, Lazebnik R, et al: Gentamicin serum half-life: a comparison between pregnant and
non-pregnant women, Postgrad Med J61:979, 1985.
60. Oukessou M, Toutain PL:Influence ofthe stage ofpregnancy on gentamicin disposition in the ewe,Amn
Rech Vet23:145, 1992.
 61. Santschi EM, Papich MG:Pharmacokinetics of gentamicin in mares in late pregnancy and early lactation,
I Vet Pharmacol Ther 23:359, 2000.
62. Ganapathy V, Prasad PD: Role of transporters in placental transfer of drugs, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
207:381, 2005.
and function, Reprod Toxicol22:400, 2006.
64. Aye IL, Paxton JW, Evseenko DA, et al: Expression, localisation and activity of ATP binding cassette
 65. Vahakangas K, Myllynen P: Drug transporters in the human blood-placental barrier, Br I Pharmacol
158:665, 2009
66. Noel GL, Suh HK,Frantz AG: Prolactin release during nursing and breast stimulation in postpartum and
nonpostpartum subjects, I Clin Endocrinol Metabol 38:413, 1974.
67. Nichols BF, Nichols VN: Lactation, Adv Pediatr 26:137, 1979.
 68. Oftedal OT: Lactation in the dog milk composition and intake by puppies, I Nutr 114:803, 1984.
69. Syversen GB, Ratjke SK: Drug distribution within human milk phases, I Pharm Sci74:1071, 1985.
 70. Martinez M, Modric S: Patient variation in veterinary medicine: part I Influence of altered physiological
states, / Vet Pharmacol Ther33:213, 2010.
 71. Stebler T, Guentert TW: Binding of drugs in milk: the role of casein in milk protein binding, Pharm Res
7:633, 1990.
 72. Atkinson HC, Begg EJ: Prediction of drug concentrations in human milk from plasma protein binding
and acid-base characteristics, Br J Clin Pharmacol 25:495, 1988.
73. Marin P, Escudero E, Fernandez-Varon E, etal: Pharmacokinetics and milk penetration of orbifloxacin after
intravenous, subcutaneous, and intramuscular administration to lactating goats, I Dairy Sci 90:4219,2007.
74. Kafetzis DA, Siafas CA, Georgakopoulos PA, et al: Passage of cephalosporins and amoxicillin into the
breast milk, Acta Paediatr Scand 70:285, 1981.
75. Greene HJ, Burkhart B, Hobby GL,et al: Excretion of penicillin in human milk following parturition, Am
JObstet Gynecol 51:732, 1946.
76. Ost L, Wettrell G, Bjorkhem I, et al: Prednisolone excretion in human milk, I Pediatr 106:1008, 1985.
Drαgs 17:55, 1985
78. Erickson SH, Oppenheim GL, Smith GH: Metronidazole in breast milk, Obstet Gynecol 57:48, 1981.
79. Steer PL, Biddle CJ, Marley W S,et al: Concentration offentanyl in colostrum afteran analgesic dose, Can
JA naesth 39:231, 1992.
Ther 29:625, 1981.
S1. Bork L, Benes P: Concentration and kinetic studies of intravenous acyclovir in serum and breast milk of
apatient with eczema herpeticum, / Am Acad Dermatol 32:1053, 1995.
82. Townsend RJ, Benedetti TJ, Erickson, etal: Excretion ofibuprofen into human milk, Ann J Obstet Gynecol
49:184, 1984.
 83. SallamiS, Ben Rhouma S, Ben Rais N,et al: Renal colic in pregnancy and lactation: diagnostic andthera-
peutic approaches, Tunis Med 89:593, 2011.
84. Wittels B, Glosten B, Faure EA, et al: Postcesarean analgesics with both epidural and intravenous
patient-controlled analgesia: neurobehavioral outcomes among nursing neonates, A nesth Anaig 85:600,
1997.
85. Rizzoni G, Furlanut M: Cyanotic crises in a breast-fed infant from mother taking dipyrone, Human
Toxico/3:505, 1984.
86. Kanto JH: Use of benzodiazepines during pregnancy, labour and lactation, with particular reference to
pharmacokinetic considerations, Drugs 23:354, 1982.
87. Cote CJ, Kenepp NB, Reed SB, et al: Trace concentrations of halothane in human breast milk, Br J
Anαesth 48:541, 1976.
88. Matsuda S: Transfer of antibiotics into maternal milk, Biol Res Pregnancy Perinatol5:57, 1984.
89. Thomas GB, Cummins JT, Doughton BW, et al: Direct pituitary inhibition of prolactin secretion by
dopamine and noradrenaline in sheep, J Endocrinol 123:393, 1989
90. Kauppila A, Arvela P, Koivisto M, et al: Metoclopramide and breast feeding: transfer into milk and the
newborn, Eur J Clin Pharmacol 25:819, 1983.
91. Toppozada MK,El-Rahman HA, Soliman AY: Prostaglandins as milk ejectors: the nose as a new route of
administration, Adv Prostagiandin Thromboxane Leukotriene Res 12:449, 1983.
214SECTlON2 GeneralExposures
92. Betzold CM: Galactogogues, I Midwifery Womens Health 49:151, 2004.
93. Gabay MP: Galactogogues medications that induce lactation, I Hum Lact18:274, 2002.
94. Tiran D: The use of fenugreek for breast feeding women, Complement Ther Nurs Midwifery 9:155, 2003.
95.E
Fleiss P: Herbal remedies for the breastfeeding mother, Mothering Summer 68, 1988.
96. Landsbergen N, Pellicaan CH, Schaefers-Okkens AC: The use of veterinary drugs during pregnancy of
the dog, Tijdschr Diergeneeskd 126:716, 2001.
CHAPTER
Toxicologic
18
Considerations in the
Pediatric Patient
Michael E. Peterson, DVM, MS
relatively unexplored area in veterinary medicine is that of age-related responses to
toxic xenobiotics. Ihe majority of differences between adult and pediatric patients
exposed to toxicants are developmental. These differences can markedly affect the four
components of drug disposition: absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion. The
information contained in this chapter is designed to illustrate these differences and how
they may affect the toxin-exposed pediatric patient.
Physiologic Considerations in the Pediatric Patient
Pups and kittens may be exposed to xenobiotics through several routes—ingestion (includ-
 ing the ingestion of mother's milk), topical exposure, inhalation, and ocular contact. In
dogs and cats the term pediatric generally refers to the first 12 weeks of life. Further division
St sabeis (saam Zi oi 9) seiad pue (saam g oi 7) sueui (saam 7 oi o) [eieoau oiu!
justified because of the significant developmental changes that occur during this 12-week
period. Physiological alterations associated with these maturation stages can predispose the
pediatric patient to be more susceptible to adverse reactions.
 Differences between adult and pediatric physiology can signifcantly impact a victim's
response to xenobiotic exposure,both toxic and therapeutic. Pediatric patients have dif-
ferences in regional organ blood flow that may alter toxin disposition. Proportionally
 greater blood flow to the heart and brain in pediatric patients increases the risk of adverse
effects resulting from exposures to lower concentrations of cardiac and central nervous
toxins.1
 Pediatric patients have no significant blood-brain barrier until 3 months of age.
This protects the brain from deficiencies in nutritional fuels in stressful states because
oxidizable substrates such as lactate can pass from the blood into the central nervous
system.? However; this mechanism also increases the potential for central nervous
central nervous system (CNS) blood flow relative to adults. Most xenobiotics will have
equivalent plasma and CNS concentrations. Brain cells normally protected in adults are
at higher risk of exposure to toxins in the neonate.
levels by 6 weeks to a few months of age dependent on the breed maturation rate. Also
decreased are the stroke volume and vascular resistance. Ihe heart rate, cardiac output, and
plasma volume are increased in these patients. Central venous pressure approaches adult
levels by 7 months. The autonomic nervous system is incomplete in the heart and blood
vessels. This limits the ability to increase cardiac output by altering contractility or affecting
preload, making the neonate less responsive to either xenobiotics or therapeutics that target
the autonomic nervous system. Preservation of cardiac output is dependent on increased
heart rate and preserving low vascular resistance.
215
216SECTlON 2 General Exposures
Pediatric patients also have minimal glycogen stores and limited capacity for gluconeo-
genesis or glycogenolysis. Additionally, nephrogenesis is not complete until 3 weeks. Corti-
cal blood flow alterations and maturation of nephrons cause various regions of the kidney
to be very vulnerable to drug toxicities. Protein, glucose, and amino acid levels are normally
higher in pediatric urine than in the adult.
 Packed red cell volume is approximately 47% at birth and drops to a nadir of approxi-
mately 24% at 6 weeks of age. Hematopoiesis does not begin until about 6 to 12 weeks of
age. Prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, and antithrombin levels are increased
compared with adults until approximately 1 week of age. Hemoglobin concentrations are
less than those for adults.
Following is a review of aspects of drug disposition—absorption, distribution, metab
olism, and excretion—affected by these dramatic developmental changes as the neonate
matures34 (Box 18-1).
Absorption
 Following oral exposure, toxin absorption occurs primarily in the small intestine. The pediat-
ric patient has a decreased gastric enmptying time and irregular peristalsis because motility is
more controlled by distention than electrical activity until 40 days of age, causing a slower rate
of absorption resulting in lower peak plasma toxin levels.56 This decreased rate of absorption
may actually protect against toxic drug concentrations. However, in neonates before colostrum
is absorbed these protective mechanisms may not be present. Before colostrum absorption the
permeability of the intestinal mucosa is increased, which also increases the rate of toxin uptake
including the uptake of compounds that normally would not reach the systemic circulation.
Intestinal permeability rapidly decreases after colostrum ingestion.67 This closure may well
enous supplementation of these hormones to the mother within 24 hours prepartum prevents
the increase in permeability and uptake of colostrum.
Several other factors may affect small intestinal drug absorption in pediatric patients.
Newborns have a neutral gastric pH, and the rate of progression to adult levels depends
Box 18-1
Altered Xenobiotic Disposition in Pediatric Patients
Alteration
Impact
 Increased intestinal per meability
Increased oral uptake; toxic plasma
concentrations
 Increased gastric pH
 Increased oral uptake of weak bases and
acid-labile conmpounds; prolonged and elevated
plasma levels; toxic plasma concentrations
Altered peristalsis (decreased gastric
Decreased absorption; lower plasma levels of
emptying time)
toxin
 Decreased plasma proteins
Toxin may accumulate, leading to more
unbound compound and thus a potentially
longer half-life
Decreased body fat
 Increased plasma levels; decreased
accumulation of lipid-soluble toxins
Increased total body water (more
 Decreased plasma concentrations; longer
extracellular fluid)
half-life
 Increased uptake of volatile gases
High plasma concentrations; increased
response and toxicity
 Increased dermal absorption
Higher or prolonged plasma exposure levels;
toxicity increased
Immature P-glycoprotein system
Poor ability to clear toxins
Chapter 18 | Toxicologic Considerations in the Pediatric Patient  217
on the species involved.5.7 Achlorhydria (increased gastric pH) may cause decreased
absorption of many compounds that require disintegration and dissolution or that need
to be ionized in a more acidic environment (e.g., weak acids). Milk diets can interfere with
absorptionof toxic compounds by reducing gastric motility or interacting directly with the
toxins. The "unstirred water layer" adjacent to the surface area of the mucosal cells is thicker
in the neonate compared with the older pediatric patient, and this may limit the rate of
absorption of some compounds.
Newborns have decreased bile flow and lower bile acid concentrations until 8 weeks
of age. Absorption of fat-soluble compounds increases as biliary function develops. Both
extrahepatic metabolism and enterohepatic circulation may be altered as microbial coloni-
neonates.
Absorption of xenobiotics administered parenterally to pediatric animals varies from
that in adults. As muscle mass develops, with its accompanying increase in blood flow
and maturation of the vasomotor response, the rate of absorption following intramuscular
administration of xenobiotics is altered.8 Subcutaneous administration of potentially toxic
drugs may exhibit variable absorption rates relative to the patient's age. Smaller amounts
of body fat but greater water volume may result in quicker absorption of xenobiotics com-
pared to that in adults.10
 Ambient temperature directly affects physiologic responses in the neonate. As an example
a normal neonatal body temperature is 96° F with a normal heart rate of 200 to 250 bpm. A
drop ofbody temperature to 70° F results in a heart rate of 40 bpm. Body temperature of less
than 94° F induces gastrointestinal ileus and decreased lymphocyte function. It is suspected
that environmental temperature influences subcutaneous absorption. This is especially true
in neonates whose thermoregulatory mechanisms are poorly functional. If the neonate is in
a cold environment, subcutaneous xenobiotic absorption tends to be reduced.
 Percutaneous absorption of xenobiotics may be greater in pediatric patients. Percutane-
exposure to potentially toxic lipid-soluble compounds (e.g., hexachlorophene and organo-
phosphates) places the pediatric patient at higher risk of significant absorption.
Volatile gases are absorbed rapidly from the pediatric respiratory tract owing to greater
minute ventilation. Pediatric patients have two- to threefold higher oxygen tissue demand
relative to their body weight compared to adults. This results in a higher respiratory rate.
Tidal volumes are similar to those in adults; however, pediatric patients have a lower func-
tional residual capacity. The respiratory system approaches that of the adult by 3 weeks of
age. If normal environmental temperatures are present, panting is almost always an indica-
tor of respiratory distress.
Distribution
The two major differences between adult and pediatric patients relative to xenobiotic distri-
bution are those of body fluid compartments and toxin or drug binding to serum proteins.
Body fluid compartments undergo tremendous alterations as the neonate grows. As the
neonate matures, significant changes occur in both the percentage of total body water and
the ratio of compartmental volumes. Although both the percentage of total body water and
the volume of the extracellular versus the intracellular compartment decrease as the animal
ages, the change in the ratio of extracellular to intracellular volume is significantly greater.!
oid iaaiee asnesaq siuaied sead pue eieoau u iaieaia are siuaaimbai pin Ae
portion of their body weight is represented by body water. The net effect on xenobiotic
distribution depends on these differences in body compartments. Most water-soluble com
pounds are distributed into extracellular fluids. Plasma concentrations of these compounds
are lower in pediatric patients compared with adults, because the volume into which the
compound is distributed is greater in the young. Unbound lipid-soluble compounds have
the same type of distribution because they are distributed into total body water. Changes in
xenobiotic distribution directly alter the half-life of that xenobiotic. Increases in distribution
218SECTlON 2 General Exposures
directly decrease the plasma concentration, a fact that may potentially protect the pediatric
patient from toxic xenobiotic concentrations.12
Distribution of lipid-soluble compounds that accumulate in the fat (e.g., some
organophosphates and chlorinated hydrocarbons) may be decreased owing to a smaller
proportion of body fat in the pediatric patient. Xenobiotic plasma concentrations may be
higher, but the half-life is shorter. Ihe movement of many fat-soluble compounds may be
facilitated by their high tendency to bind to plasma proteins. Ihis binding decreases their
ability to be distributed to target tissues.
Predicting the distribution of highly protein-bound compounds is complicated in the
pediatric patient. Most compounds are bound to serum albumin, and basic toxins have a
high affinity for alpha-1-glycoproteins. Both of these proteins are available in lower concen-
trations in pediatric patients.3 Albumin levels reach adult values at approximately 8 weeks
of age and exposure before this age can be an issue, with protein-bound drugs resulting
 in an increase in active compound or increased ty. Additionally, differences in albumin
structure and competition with endogenous substrates (e.g., bilirubin) for binding sites
may decrease protein binding.614 If bound toxins are displaced, the risk of toxicity increases
as the concentration of free pharmacologically active compound rises. When a compound
has a narrow therapeutic index and is highly protein bound, these age-related changes are
significant. Xenobiotic half-life may rise owing to increased amounts of compound that are
unbound, allowing free distribution to the tissues and decreasing the plasma concentra-
tion.l4 Despite the increased volume of distribution, the half-life of a compound may be
"normalized" by the increased clearance of free toxin.
Metabolism
Pediatric metabolism is significantly different from that of the adult. Hepatic and renal
excretion is limited in neonatal and pediatric animals, thus decreasing toxin elimination.
 Intoxication by xenobiotics in young animals may be induced by decreased clearance.36
Pediatric patients have decreased protein synthesis and immature hepatic enzyme
systems until 5 months of age, including microsomal cytochrome P450, which directly
results in incomplete hepatic metabolism affecting reduction, hydroxylation, and demeth-
ylation of xenobiotics. Both phase I (e.g., oxidative) and phase I (e.g., glucuronidation)
reactions are reduced.15-17 Maturation of various metabolic pathways occurs at diferent
rates. Neonatal puppies may not manifest phase I activity until the ninth day of life; this
activity steadily increases after day 25 until it reaches adult levels at day 135.16 Because
hepatic xenobiotic metabolism is decreased, plasma clearance of toxins is decreased,
plasma half-life is increased, and toxic plasma compound concentrations may result.
The oral bioavailability of compounds with a significant frst-pass metabolism is
probably greater in pediatric patients. Xenobiotics whose toxicity is generated from
 p g  si a  so s aq a sqa o
components. For example, children less than 9 to 12 years of age have a lower incidence
of hepatotoxicity following overdose of acetaminophen than adults.l Pediatric hepatic
[ieqouad q aru aqot eadde op (od aois ga) sazua ugeiau
and other drugs.
Excretion
  s  sm as   a a n  s
tion, which decreases the clearance of renally excreted parent compounds and the products
 of hepatic phase II metabolism. As pups age glomerular fltration and renal tubular func-
tion steadily increase.20.21 The total number of glomeruli remains constant. Adult levels of
glomerular filtration and tubular function are attained by 22 months of age. If normal
levels of body fluids and electrolytes are maintained, pediatric renal tubular resorption is
Chapter 18 I Toxicologic Considerations in the Pediatric Patient  219
have decreased clearance and extended half-lives. Decreased urine blood flow results in
decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Water soluble compounds have decreased clear-
ance and increased elimination half-lives (tl). GFR and tubular function is at adult func-
tion levels by 3 months of age. Normal pediatric urine specific gravity generally is in the
1.006 to 1.017 range for the first 8 weeks of life.
An example of this phenomenon is the recommendation that pediatric patients require
higher doses (because of the increased volume of distribution) and longer dosing intervals
(because of increased distribution and decreased clearance) of gentamicin. One can antici-
pate alterations in excretion in sick or dehydrated pediatric patients.
Maternal Transfer of Toxin
Almost all xenobiotics cross the placenta and reach pharmacologic concentrations in
the fetus after exposure of the mother. (See Chapter 17, "Considerations in Pregnant or
Lactating Patients.") Drugs administered to the mother may cross the placenta by pas-
sive diffusion, facilitated transport, and active transport. Protein-bound xenobiotics do
not cross the placenta. Factors affecting the pharmacokinetics and xenobiotic effects on
mother and fetus are (1) altered maternal absorption, (2) increased maternal unbound
xenobiotic fraction, (3) increased maternal plasma volume, (4) altered hepatic clear-
ance, (5) increased maternal renal blood flow and glomerular fltration rate, (6) placental
transfer, (7) placental metabolism, (8) placental blood flow, (9) maternal-fetal blood pH,
(10) preferential fetal circulation to the heart and brain, (1l) undeveloped fetal blood-
brain barrier, (12) immature fetal liver enzyme activity, and (13) increased fetal unbound
xenobiotic fraction.
 Passive diffusion is the most common route in which xenobiotics enter milk. Xenobi-
otics pass through the mammary epithelium by passive diffusion down a concentration
gradient on each side of the membrane. The higher the dose received by the mother, the
more xenobiotic will pass into the milk. Generally, milk proteins do not bind xenobiotics
well. Because milk (pH 7.2) is slightly more acidic than plasma (pH 7.4), compounds that
are weak bases are more likely to pass into milk than weak acids. The more lipid soluble the
xenobiotic, the greater the quantity and the faster the transfer into milk.
Most Common Inquiries to Poison Centers
for Pediatric Patients
Common exposures in pediatric canine and feline patients are listed in Box 18-2.
Rodenticides
 Rodenticides (e.g., bromethalin, anticoagulants) are commonly available and dogs are
intoxicated more frequently than any other domestic animals. The veterinarian should read
the product label to identify the exact compound involved. The majority of anticoagulant
rodenticides inhibits the recycling of vitamin K, blocking the victim's ability to clot. More
than half of the victims exhibit anorexia, weakness, coughing, epistaxis, and dyspnea. Labo-
of vitamin K, is therapeutic but may take several hours to have a therapeutic effect.
Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (human and animal products) are a com-
mon cause of toxicity in puppies and kittens. Ihese animals have extensive enterohepatic
recirculation of NSAIDs, increasing their toxicity. NSAIDs are a particular problem for cats
because they are deficient in glutathione hepatic pathways, thereby prolonging the half-life
of these compounds. The most common clinical manifestations are gastrointestinal. Clinical
signs include vomiting, depression, diarrhea, anorexia, ataxia, bloody stool, polyuria, poly-
ddns aiare st aeanl pue aoiue syads ou st anau eauden pue eis
220SECTION2 GeneralExposures
Box 18-2
The Most Common Groups of Toxicants (Both Serious and Not So
Serious) for Animals under I Year of Age
Dogs
 Rodenticides (bromethalin, anticoagulants, and unknown) were the top category
 NSAIDs (human and animal products)
Antidepressants
Herbicides
Mushrooms
Silica gel
Cleaning products
Chocolate
Amphetamines (prescription and illicit)
Birth control pills
Cats
 Flea products (sprays, spot-ons, collars, dips) far and away the #1 category
NSAIDs
Silica gel
Insoluble calcium oxalate plants
Liquid potpourri
Courtesy Tina Wismer, ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center.
Antidepressants
Antidepressant exposures generally involve the tricyclic antidepressants or serotonin
reuptake inhibitors or monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Once ingested, clinical signs usually
develop within 60 minutes initially but their anticholinergic activity can inhibit gastrointes-
tinal motility, slowing further uptake. These drugs are highly protein bound. Several com-
pounds have toxic metabolites. Life-threatening clinical signs are related to the compounds'
effects on the central nervous system and cardiovascular aberrations. Clinical signs include
ataxia, lethargy, hypotension, disorientation, vomiting, dyspnea, mydriasis, hyperactivity,
urine retention, ileus, seizures, and cardiac arrhythmias.
Herbicides
Herbicide exposure from pesticide-treated plants is unlikely to result in intoxication in
 puppies and kittens. Exposure to concentrates can induce clinical signs and treatrment is
supportive. Acute exposures rarely induce altered biochemical profle data, unlike long-
term feeding trials. Vomiting is a common nonspecific clinical sign.
Mushrooms
Mushroom ingestion can occur year round. Common clinical signs are those of gastroin-
testinal distress including abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea. A wide variety of toxins
nervous system (excitation, hallucinogenic, and muscarinic), kidneys, red blood cells, and
liver. A confirmed diagnosis is difficult to obtain, and clinicians should become familiar
with the mushroom species available in their geographic region.
Silica Gel
Silica gel is used as a desiccant and often come in paper packets or plastic cylinders. They
are used to absorb moisture in a variety of packaging. Silica is considered “chemically and
 biologically inert” upon ingestion. Clinical signs, though rare, would consist of gastrointes-
tinal upset manifested as nausea, vomiting, and inappetence.
Chapter 18 I  Toxicologic Considerations in the Pediatric Patient  221
Home Cleaning Products
The list of home cleaning products is extensive, highlighting the need forthe owner to bring
in the toxin container if possible.
Methylxanthines
The active (toxic) agents in chocolate are methylxanthines, specifically theobromine and
caffeine. Methylxanthines stimulate the CNS, act on the kidney to stimulate diuresis, and
increase the contractility of cardiac and skeletal muscle. The relative amounts of theobro-
mine and caffeine will vary with the form of the chocolate (see Chapter 60).
The lethal dose of 50% theobromine and caffeine are 100 to 300 mg/kg, but severe and
life-threatening clinical signs may be seen at levels far below these doses. Based on Animal
Poison Control Center experience, mild signs have been seen with theobromine levels of
20 mg/kg, severe signs have been seen at 40 to 50 mg/kg, and seizures have occurred at
60 mg/kg. Accordingly, less than 2 ounces of milk chocolate per kg is potentially lethal to
 sia, bloating, vomiting, diarrhea, and restlessness. Signs progress to hyperactivity, polyuria,
 ataxia, tremors, seizures, tachycardia, PVCs, tachypnea, cyanosis, hypertension, hyperther-
mia, and coma. Death is generally caused by cardiac arrhythmias or respiratory failure.
Hypokalemia may occur later in the course of the toxicosis. Because of the high fat content
of many chocolate products, pancreatitis is a potential sequela.
Amphetamines
Amphetamines (prescription and illicit) have a minimum oral lethal dose of 20 to 27 mg/kg
for amphetamine sulfate and 9 to 1l mg/kg of methamphetamine hydrochloride in dogs.
tion, tachypnea, tremors, hyperthermia, ataxia, seizures, and tachycardia.
Birth Control Pills
Birth control pills generally come with each packet containing 21 tablets of estrogen and/or
ossanddns man aoq asnes pos uasonsg sid oqased  aqissod pue aaison
at levels greater than 1 mg/kg in adult dogs. Some oral contraceptives also contain iron.
 Decontamination is not necessary unless the level of estrogen is greater than 1 mg/kg or the
level of iron is greater than 20 mg/kg.
Flea Products
 Flea products (sprays, spot-ons, collars, dips are still a major problem for inducing toxicity
for flea control. These compounds reversibly alter the activity of sodium ion channels in
nervous tissue. Clinical signs result from allergic, idiosyncratic, and neurotoxic reactions.
The majority of toxicities are from pyrethrin and pyrethroid flea products applied to cats.
Cats are much more sensitive than dogs and the dog products have several times higher
concentration of the active ingredient (cat products often 2%, dog products often 45%-
65%). The most common problem is misapplication of dog products onto the cat or splitting
alarge dog product onto several cats.
Calcium Oxalate Plants
 Insoluble calcium oxalate plants are generally overrated as a toxic exposure. The calcium
oxalate contained in the plant is an irritant to the mucous membranes, which generally
inhibits ingestions of large volumes.
Liquid Potpourri
Liquid potpourri may contain essential oils and cationic detergents; because product labels
q suiiuos jnodiod pinbi uaii e ien ausse oi asim st ll 'suaipaiun i iou Au
ingredients. Essential oils can cause mucous membrane and gastrointestinal irritation,
222SECTlON2 GeneralExposures
central nervous system depression, and dermal hypersensitivity and irritation. Severe clini-
cal signs can be seen with potpourri products that contain cationic detergents. Dermal
exposure to cationic detergents can result in erythema, edema, intense pain, and ulceration.
Ingestion of cationic detergents may lead to tissue necrosis and inflammation of the mouth,
esophagus, and stomach. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
References
1. Robinson EP: Anesthesia of pediatric patients, Compend Cont Educ 5(12):1004-1011, 1983.
2. Hellmann J, Vannucci RC, Nardis EE: Blood-brain barrier permeability to lactic acid in the newborn
dog: lactate as a cerebral metabolic fuel, Pediatr Res 16:40-44, 1982.
 3. Green TP, Mirkin BL: Clinical pharmacokinetics: pediatric considerations. In Benet LZ, Massoud N,
Gambertoglio JG, editors: Pharmacokinetic basis for drug treatment, New York, 1984, Raven Press.
4. Boothe DM, Tannert K: Special considerations for drug and fluid therapy in the pediatric patient,
Compend Cont Educ 14:313-329, 1991.
5. Heimann G: Enteral absorption and bioavailability in children in relation to age, Eur I Clin Pharmacol
18:43-50, 1980.
6. Rane A, Wilson JT: Clinical pharmacokinetics in infants and children. In Gibaldi M, Prescott L, editors:
Handbook of clinical pharmacokinetics, New York, 1983, ADIS Health Science Press.
7. Gillette DD, Filkins M: Factors affecting antibody transfer in the newborn puppy, Am I Physiol
210(2):419-422, 1966.
8. Morselli PL, Morselli RF, Bossi L: Clinical pharmacokinetics in newborns and infants: age-related
differences and therapeutic implications. In Gibaldi M, Prescott L, editors: Handbook of clinical
pharmacokinetics, New York, 1983, ADIS Health Science Press.
9. Jones RL: Special considerations for appropriate antimicrobial therapy in neonates, Vet Clin North Am
Small A nim Pract 17(3):577-602, 1987.
10. Shifrine M, Munn SL, Rosenblatt LS, et al: Hematologic changes to 60 days of age in clinically normal
beagles, Lab A nim 23(6):894-898, 1973.
Med 139:330-335, 1972.
12. Davis LE, Westfall BA, Short CR: Biotransformation and pharmacokinetics of salicylate in newborn
animals, Am I Vet Res 34(8):1105-1108, 1973.
13. Poffenbarger EM, Ralston SL, Chandler ML, et al: Canine neonatology. Part I. Physiological differences
between puppies and adults, Compend Cont Educ 12(1):1601-1609, 1990.
14. Ehrnebo M, Agurell S, Jalling B, et al Age differences in drug binding by plasma proteins: studies on
human fetuses, neonates and adults, Eur I Clin Pharmaco? 3:189-193, 1973.
15. Reiche R: Drug disposition in the newborn. In Ruckesbusch P, Toutain P, Koritz D, et al: Veterinary
pharmacology and toxicology, Westport, CT, 1983, A VI Publishing.
16. Peters EL,Farber TM, Heider A,et al: The development of drug-metabolizing enzymes in the young dog.
Fed Proc Am Soc Biol 30:560, 1971.
17. Inman RC, Yeary RA: Sulfadiamethoxine pharmacokinetics in neonatal and young dogs, Fed Proc Am
Soc Biol30:560, 1971.
18. Rumack BH: Acetaminophen overdose in young children: treatment and effects of alcohol and other
additional ingestants in 417 cases, Am I Dis Child 138:428-433, 1984.
19. Horster M, Kemler BJ, Valtin H: Intracortical distribution of number and volume of glomeruli during
postnatal maturation in the dog, I Clin Invest 50:796-800, 1971.
 20. Horster M, Valtin H: Postnatal development of renal function: micropuncture and clearance studies in
the dog, I Clin Invest 50:779-795, 1971
21. Cowan RH, Jukkola AF, Arant BS: Pathophysiologic evidence of gentamicin nephrotoxicity in neonatal
puppies, Pediatr Res 14:1204-1211, 1980.
 22. Bovee KC, Jezyk PF, Segal SC: Postnatal development of renal tubular amino acid reabsorption in canine
pups, Am I Vet Res 45(4):830-832, 1984.
23. Keinman LI: Renal bicarbonate reabsorption in the newborn dog, I Physiol 281:487-498, 1978.
CHAPTER
Considerations in the
19
Geriatric Poisoned
Patient
Justine A. Lee, DVM, DACVECC
Geriatric Patients
In veterinary medicine there is a growing population of geriatric patients, which may be due
to advances in the quality of medicine. With this increase in the geriatric patient popula
seen in geriatric patients include organ-related dysfunction (e.g., age-related hepatic
changes, age-related nephron loss),12 changes in body composition,12 changes in cardiac
output (resulting in changes in regional and organ blood flow), decreased compensatory
physiologic responses, and other miscellaneous effects on the body (e.g., decreases in met-
abolic rate, diminished receptor response, underlying diseases).1'3 Concurrently, oxygen
consumption is decreased while there is a decline in physiologic functions (Box 19-1).3
All these changes may markedly affect the pharmacokinetics (i.e., altered drug concen-
tration at the site of action), pharmacodynamics (i.e., altered drug action), and the four
components of drug disposition: absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion
(Box 19-2). These changes directly affect the body's ability to dispose of drugs and how the
d smaa m e s9t ousai m sn 
and how it applies to the geriatric poisoned patient.
The definition of a geriatric patient is one that has reached 75% of the expected lifespan.
lost.3 In human medicine, this is generally defined as 80 years of age.? In veterinary medi-
cine, the definition of *geriatric” is not well defined, and is more subjective due to variability
in species, breed, and overall size. For example, a 5- to 7-year-old Great Dane may be con-
sidered geriatric, whereas for a Chihuahua this may be at 9 to 15 years of age.
Organ-Related Dysfunction
Age-Related Hepatic Changes
As the liver plays a key role inthe metabolism of xenobiotics, age-related changes in hepatic
function can result in increased potential toxicity of these compounds. Age-related hepatic
changes include decreases in hepatic function, decreases in hepatocyte numbers (with a
resultant decrease in overall liver mass), decreases in hepatic and splanchnic blood flow,
and an overall reduction in the liver's intrinsic activity of drug-metabolizing enzymes.12
Decreases in the ability of the liver to produce sufficient protective compounds (e.g., oxygen
radical scavengers), along with alterations in hepatic function, nutrition, and oxygenation,
may further contribute to xenobiotic-induced hepatotoxicity in the geriatric patient.3 All
these changes result in a net decrease in both hepatic oxidation and the primary xeno-
biotic metabolizing enzyme cytochrome P450, resulting in changes in the liver's ability
to metabolize compounds that require either capacity-limited or flow-limited hepatic
metabolism.? For example, nonsteroidal antiinflammatories (NSAIDs) are compounds that
223
224SECTlON 2 General Exposures
Box 19-1
Age-lnduced Physiologic Alterations
Hepatic
Gastrointestinal Tract
 Decreased protein synthesis
Increased gastric pH
Decreased numbers of hepatocytes
Decreased active transport
Phase I xenobiotic metabolism altered
 Decreased rate of gastric emptying
Decreased liver size
 Decreased esophageal peristalsis
 Decreased gastric secretions
Renal
Creatinine clearance decreased, serum
Cardiovascular
creatinine normal
Heart
 Decreased tubular absorption
 Decreased cardiac output
 Decreased glomerular fltration rate
Cardiac hypertrophy
Decreased renal blood flow
Decreased stress response
Body Composition
Vascular
 Increased body fat
 Decreased tissue perfusion
 Decreased total body water
Decreased vascular elasticity
 Decreased plasma volume
Increased systolic blood pressure
Decreased plasma albumin
Increased vascular wall thickness
 Decreased lean body mass
Box 19-2
 Factors That Affect Xenobiotic Disposition
Pharmacologic Factors
Metabolic disease
Pharmaceutical interactions
Other disease
 Therapeutic inequivalence
 Drug protein binding
Direct drug-drug interactions
 Drug-diet interactions
Physiologic Factors
Route of exposure
 Pharmacokinetic interactions
Species variations
 Pharmacodynamic interactions
Genetic (breed) factors
Pathologic Conditions Modifying
Age
Drug Action
Sex
Gastrointestinal disease
Body weight/surface area
Hepatic disease
 Pregnancy/lactation
Renal disease
Diet/nutrition
Cardiovascular disease
Temperament
Pulmonary disease
Environment
Neurologic disease
Circadian rhythms
require primarily capacity-limited hepatic metabolism, and geriatric patients may exhibit
prolonged hepatic clearance.3 Likewise, drugs like opioids are compounds which undergo
  a aa sd a a  a pm
-d siuated iaunon u papaau jeu ueqi anip ssal %s oi %og samban iel asuodsa
ily because of reduced drug elimination.3.78
Hepatic clearance (Clh) is determined by the liver's intrinsic ability to extract the drug
 a r(o) m o a ae pe (il oa ia )
such as lidocaine, propranolol, morphine, isoproterenol, and verapamil have a high ERH
(approaching 1), meaning that their hepatic clearance is almost equal to hepatic blood
flow. Therefore, drugs with a high ER are highly influenced by changes in hepatic blood
flow. However, when these drugs are given orally,they undergo high “first-pass effect” and
Chapter 19 I Considerations in the Geriatric Poisoned Patient 225
typically do not reach high systemic concentrations because of high clearance of the drug.
In the geriatric patient, the first-pass effect is diminished; therefore, in drugs with a high
ERH, systemic toxicity may occur because of increased oral bioavailability of the drug:
ClH =(QH)(ERH)
Conversely, drugs with a low ER (<0.2) such as phenobarbital, benzodiazepines,
chloramphenicol, and phenylbutazone are not significantly affected by hepatic blood flow.?
These drugs with a low ER are not typically affected by the first-pass effect. Rather, changes
in protein binding and hepatic microsomal enzyme systems may affect drug clearance.
In the geriatric patient, the level of albumin decreases relative to the increase in globu-
lins (therefore maintaining normal total protein values).3 If a geriatric patient is exposed
 to highly protein-bound toxicants, the portion of the xenobiotic that is free (versus pro-
tein-bound) may then be increased.3 For example, most NSAIDs are close to 99% protein
bound; even a small decrease of 1% (e.g., 99% to 98% binding) results in a doubling of the
concentration of the pharmacologically active drug.3 Some protection against this elevated
plasma concentration may occur with the increased clearance of unbound compound by
both the liver and kidneys.3
 Age-Related Nephron Changes
Also in the geriatric patient, age-related nephron loss occurs along with reductions
in renal blood flow. As a result both the glomerular filtration rate and the active secre-
tory rate of the nephron unit are diminished,3 resulting in a decline in renal xenobiotic
clearance. Because most xenobiotics are renally excreted, age-related nephron changes and
alterations in renal clearance can lead to increased blood concentrations of the parent or
patient at increased risk of toxicosis. For example, the use of certain xenobiotics that are
known to be nephrotoxic (e.g., NSAIDs, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and
aminoglycosides) should be judiciously considered in the geriatric patient.3 Again, because
of the decreased nephron population and increased fltering load per nephron,39 increased
nephrotoxicity.
Changes in Body Composition
In the geriatric patient, decreases in total body and interstitial water, decreases in muscle
mass, and increases in fat content occur. For example, in human geriatric males, body
fat content is typically 50%, whereas in young males, body fat content is typically 18%.5
Although this has not been well evaluated in veterinary medicine, these changes in body
composition can result in altered pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. For exam-
ple, geriatric patients with decreased muscle mass may have increased plasma concen-
trations of drugs that distribute normally to skeletal tissue (e.g., digoxin).2 Likewise, in
geriatric patients with decreased total body water, increased plasma concentrations of
water-soluble drugs (e.g., aminoglycosides, digoxin) can occur.2 Because these water-
soluble drugs have poor fat distribution, dosing should ideally be performed on lean
body weight.
Changes in Cardiac Output
In geriatric humans, cardiac output decreases by 30% to 40% over time (typically at a
rate of approximately 1% a year). In veterinary medicine, a decrease in cardiac output
also occurs in our geriatric pets, resulting in decreases in regional and organ blood flow
and a resultant increase in circulatory transit time.? Alternations in these cardiovascular
dynamics likely affect the disposition (e.g., absorption, distribution, metabolism, and
direction—decreased absorption and distribution or increased metabolism and excre-
tion.510 As a result of decreased cardiac output, blood is preferentially shunted to key
organs (e.g., heart, brain), which can result in increased risk of toxicity to these organs
226SECTION 2 General Exposures
receiving more blood flow.l3 Likewise, decreased cardiac output can result in a prerenal
Decreased Compensatory Physiologic Responses
In geriatric humans, response to catecholamines is diminished. As a result, compensa-
tory responses to hypotension or cardiac arrhythmias may be blunted, resulting in poor
response to drug-induced hypotension or hypovolemia. As geriatric patients often have
underlying cardiac (e.g., chronic valvular heart disease) or metabolic (e.g., hyperthyroid-
ism) disease, further ability to compensate may be affected. Geriatric patients also have
age-related alterations in GABA receptors and decreased dopamine concentrations; this
may make geriatric patients more sensitive to excessive sedation and adverse events (e.g.
tremoring from metoclopramide) to drugs, respectively.2
Miscellaneous Changes (e.g., Decreases In Metabolic Rate, Diminished
Receptor Response, Underlying Diseases)
Geriatric patients have reduced gastrointestinal motility (including pharyngeal and esopha-
geal),3 decreased salivation and deglutition,2 decreased absorptive capacity, and diminished
 gastric acid secretion (resulting in secondary increased gastric pH). In addition, age-
related atrophy of intestinal villi may occur, increasing the potential for risk of bacterial
 of adverse gastrointestinal effects by certain compounds (e.g., chemotherapeutic agents,
NSAIDs).
Age-related changes are also seen in the pulmonary system. Decreases in residual lung
volume, vital capacity, and overall respiratory function occur in the geriatric patient, result-
gradients are seen in geriatric patients. Finally, geriatric patients have diminished central
nervous system responses to hypoxemia or hypercapnea, making them less likely to com-
pensate for xenobiotics that potentially affect ventilation (e.g., opioids, baclofen).
 m     a  a sd n
patients, which may increase the risk of toxicosis from immunosuppressive agents (e.g.
5-fuorouracil, chemotherapeutic agents, steroids) Lastly, geriatric patients are morelikely
to have underlying metabolic disease (e.g., hepatic, renal, neoplasia), which may affect
xenobiotic disposition.
Conclusion
Geriatric patients may have alterations in pharmaokinetics and pharmacodynam-
ics because of age-related changes. Geriatric patients exposed to toxicants should be
changes, age-related nephron loss),.2 changes in cardiac output (resulting in changes in
regional and organ blood flow), changes in body composition,12 decreased compensa-
tory physiologic responses, and other miscellaneous effects on the body which may
affect the patient's response.l3 Because geriatric patients are often receiving multiple
drugs for underlying medical conditions, there is potential for increased risk of drug-
drug or drug-toxin interactions.3 Aggressive therapy (including decontamination) and
for the best outcome.
References
1. Trepanier LA: Neonatal and geriatric pharmacology, Proceedings of International Veterinary Emergency
and Critical Care Symposium,2007.
2. Dowling PM: Geriatric pharmacology, Vet Clin North Am 35:557-569, 2005.
3. Boothe DM, Peterson ME: Considerations in pediatric and geriatric poisoned patients. In Peterson ME,
Talcott PA, editors: Small animal toxicology, St Louis, 2006, Saunders.
4. Massoud N: Pharmacokinetic considerations in geriatric patients. In Benet LZ, Massoud N,
Gambertoglio JG, editors: Pharmacokinetic basis for drug treatment, New York, 1984, Raven Press.
Chapter 19 | Considerations in the Geriatric Poisoned Patient 227
5. Ritschel WA: Gerontokinetics: The pharmacokinetics of drugs in the elderly, W. Caldwell, NJ, 1988,
TelfordPress.
6. Feely J, Coakley D: Altered pharmacodynamics in the elderly, Clin Pharmacol 6:269-283, 1990.
7.E
Enck RE: Pain control in the ambulatory elderly, Geriatrics 46:49-60, 1991.
8. Workaman BS, Ciccone V, Christophidis N: Pain management for the elderly, Aust Fam Physician
18:1515-1527,1989.
 9. Frazier DL, Dix LP, Bowman KF, et al: Increased gentamicin nephrotoxicity in normal and diseased
dogs administered identical serum drug concentration profiles: increased sensitivity in subclinical renal
dysfunction, I Pharmacol Exp Ther 239:946-951, 1986.
10. Aucoin DP: Drug therapy in the geriatric animal: the effect of aging on drug disposition, Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract19:41-48, 1989.
11. Schultz RD: The effects of aging on the immune system, Compend Cont Educ 6(12):1096-1105, 1984.
CHAPTER
20
Poisonings in the
Captive Reptile
Kevin T. Fitzgerald, PhD, DVM, DABVP
Kristin L. Newquist, BS, AAS, CVT
·Exotic animals are increasingly being kept as pets in Armerican homes.
· Exotic anirnals present special diagnostic challenges to veterinarians when they
become ill.
· Because of captivity, reptiles can become accidentally poisoned in a number of
ways.
· The basic tenets of emergency medicine are the same for all animal species,
despite their rare or exotic nature
 Veterinarians seeing small animal emergency cases must make an attempt to
farmiliarize themselves with the large body of literature and resources that is
developing regarding nontraditional companion species.
"Gentle mercy even to the snakes."
SHAKESPEARE
Introduction
Increasing numbers of exotic species are being kept as household pets. Reptiles, in particu-
lar, are enjoying a huge rise in popularity in American homes. These exotic species present
a special challenge when they become ill. Veterinarians are often not familiar with rare or
less frequently encountered exotic species and may not recognize particular syndromes or
know how to effectively treat them. In this discussion we will look at the care and manage-
ment of the poisoned reptile.
Emergency Management of the Poisoned Reptile
Emergency situations in reptiles are not always obvious for veterinarians and certainly not
for average reptile owners. Many veterinarians are not familiar with the anatomy, physiol-
ogy, and vital signs of captive reptile species. In addition, like other wild animals, exotic
reptiles do much to mask outward signs of disease. However,the basic tenets of emergency
medicine remain the same regardless of species.
Emergency care begins with a sound history. How long has the reptile been in the home,
what is its origin, are cage mates involved, what type of cage setup is employed, and heat
and light sources (how long a photo period and how warm is the cage setting) are all perti-
nent questions. How often is the animal fed and watered, what type of diet is used, and how
often is the environment cleaned and with what chemicals? A thorough physical examina-
tion is performed next. Heart rate, respiration, hydration status, neurological condition,
and mentation are all critical cues to both diagnosis and prognosis. However, physical
229
230SECTlON 2 General Exposures
examination and clinical signs are only part of obtaining a successful diagnosis. Labora-
tory parameters will also help determine what treatment modalities are necessary. Reptiles
injured or seriously ill nearly always benefit from administration of fluids. Various methods
of fluid administration are touted, but actual intravenous fluid therapy is not practical for
most reptiles. Many reptiles (particularly desert species) can tolerate dramatic degrees of
dehydration. Lizards, snakes, and turtle relatives all show sunken eyes and changes in skin if
dehydrated. Intraosseous catheters are a legitimate alternative to intravenous types. Enteral
intracoelomic, and subcutaneous fluids are also available to support the poisoned reptile.
Reptiles are ectothermic and dependent on environmental temperature for their
warmth. Reptilian species have their own preferred body temperature and optimum ther-
aq us sadan paneaa 'saads a uo suauadap si atuen 'sada iso ag 'az 
so weak that they cannot move away from heat sources and may end up overheating or
even being burned. Use only safe heat sources, such as heating small rooms, overhead heat
lights, and under-tank heating pads. Cage thermometers must be diligently monitored to
ensure that animals are kept within a safe thermal range. Rigorous, persistent nursing care
can often help save severely poisoned reptiles
Common Toxicants
Vitamin A Toxicity
Vitamin A is necessary for the health of normal skin and periocular tissue. Chelonians
(turtles and tortoises) are particularly sensitive to vitamin A deficiency. Turtles with hypo-
vitaminosis typically show ocular discharge, palpebral edema and blindness, hyperkeratosis
of skin and mouth parts, and aural abscesses. Patients can improve with vitamin A supple-
mentation (2000 IU/kg IM q 7 days) and improved dietary management.1
Excessive iatrogenic administration of vitamin A can cause a separate set of problems.
Hypervitaminosis A can cause inappetence, full-thickness skin sloughing, secondary bacte-
rial infection, discoloration of the skin, and extreme lethargy. Generally this occurs at doses
of 10,000 IU/kg or higher given IM as a single injection. Treatment involves ceasing vitamin
A administration, antibiotics, fluid therapy, wound management, and nutritional support.
Skin lesions may heal slowly, but animals managed supportively can recover completely.
VitaminDToxicity
Excesses of water-soluble vitamins can be excreted into the urine. This makes their margin
of safety very large. For fat-soluble vitamins, such as vitamin A and vitamin D, this is not
the case. Owners, breeders, and veterinarians often oversupplement captive reptiles with
disastrous results. Doses of 50 to 1000 times the minimum daily requirement are often
given for weeks to months. This can be insidious, particularly when the minimum daily
 The mechanism of action of the toxicity of vitamin D is related to the hypercalcemia
and hyperphosphatemia it induces. This prolonged hypercalcemia and hyperphosphate-
mia causes dystrophic calcification of the gastrointestinal tissue, the kidneys, lungs, heart,
blood vessels, and joints.3 Complete removal of vitamin D-containing supplements and
administration of cortisone may help control hypercalcemia, but resolution of soft-tissue
calcification may not be successful.
 In light of the inherent calcium problems of captive reptiles, it is incumbent on veteri-
narians to counsel clients about proper husbandry, nutrition, and dietary requirements and
idde Aeuanan inom seuue in uaaia ae suaadns ou iel ainsua c
Antimicrobial Toxicity
Selection of antibiotics should be made judiciously. Selection depends on experience of the
clinician; empirical considerations; the type of infection present based on culture and sen-
sitivity and Gram stains; and, last but not least, the size, age, species, and condition of the
reptilian patient. There is no antibiotic that can be relied on to be effective for all situations.
Chapter 20 |Poisonings in the Captive Reptile 231
In addition, antibiotics are no substitute for good wound management, nursing care, nutri-
tion, or husbandry.
Gentamicin
Gentamicin is an aminoglycoside antibiotic. Other aminoglycosides include amikacin,
is a broad spectrum antibiotic (except against streptococci and anaerobic bacteria).4 Its
mechanism of action involves inhibition of bacterial protein synthesis by binding to 30S
ribosomes. Gentamicin is indicated for acute serious infections, such as those caused by
gram-negative bacteria. Amikacin is more consistently active against resistant strains of
bacteria.
 Nephrotoxicity of gentamicin in reptiles is well documented.5-β Patients must have ade-
quate fluid and electrolyte balance during therapy. Ototoxicity in reptiles has also been
reported. Recommended dosage for gentamicin varies from 2.75 to 6 mg/kg IM q 72 hours
given no sooner than every third day.
Amikacin
Amikacin is also an aminoglycoside, bactericidal, broad spectrum in activity, and operates
 on bacteria through the same mechanism of action as gentamicin. It is indicated particularly
Like gentamicin, nephrotoxicity is the most dose-limiting effect of amikacin. Patients
must be maintained in fluid and electrolyte balance during therapy. Ototoxicity has also
been reported. If used together with anesthetic agents, aminoglycosides may show neuro-
frequently than every third day.
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol is an antibacterial agent with a broad spectrum of activity against gram-
positive bacteria, gram-negative bacteria, and Rickettsia. Its mechanism of action is by inhi-
bition of bacterial protein synthesis by binding with ribosomes.
The major toxicity of chloramphenicol is hematological.? In all vertebrates studied,
it produces direct, dose-dependent bone marrow depression resulting in reductions in
red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Ihis manifestation is aggravated by inap-
propriate doses, extended treatments, and repeated use of the drug. Treatment of chlor-
amphenicol intoxication is supportive and may require blood transfusions. Ihe drug
r  a aissns aae a o an  oe s
is being used less frequently as safer antibiotics become available. The recommended
dosage for chloramphenicol is 50 mg/kg IM (SC in snakes) administered once daily or
every other day.
Enrofloxacin
Enrofloxacin is a fluoroquinolone antibacterial drug. It is bactericidal with a broad spec-
trum of activity. Its mechanism of action involves inhibition of deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) gyrase, thus inhibiting both DNA and ribonucleic acid (RNA) synthesis.4 Sensi-
tive bacteria include Staphylococcus, Escherichia coli, Proteus, Klebsiella, and Pasteurella.
Pseudomonas is moderately susceptible but requires higher doses. In most species studied,
enrofloxacin is metabolized to ciprofloxacin. Damage to cartilage has been seen in growing
animals treated with fluoroquinolones. Doses of enrofloxacin range from 5 mg/kg IM or PO
q 24 hours. There are other choices of antibiotics for use in reptiles, based on Gram staining,
culture and sensitivity, and age of the animal. We have seen many species of reptiles (e.g.
lizards, snakes, and turtles) develop lesions after enrofloxacin injections.
Metronidazole
Metronidazole is used as an antibacterial, an antiprotozoal, an antiparasitic, and an appetite
stimulant in reptiles. It is formulated as a suspension, as an injectable, and as tablets.
232 SECTION 2 General Exposures
The activity of metronidazole is specific for anaerobic bacteria and protozoa. It is spe-
through reaction with intracellular metabolites.10
The most severe side effect of metronidazole is dose-related central nervous system
(CNS) toxicity. High doses can cause ataxia, inability to walk, nystagmus, opisthotonos,
tomatic and supportive.
Metronidazole has been recommended for a variety of conditions in reptiles. Particular
care must be given when this drug is used regarding dose, duration, and size of the animal.
Antifungal Toxicity
A variety of fungal infections have been documented in reptiles. Ranging from dermato-
phytes to systemic mycotic infections, these conditions are treated with a variety of antifun-
gal medications. Treatment with antifungals can lead to serious intoxications, based on the
small size of the reptilian patient, the mechanisms of action of these drugs, and idiosyncra-
sies of reptilian physiology.
Amphotericin B
Amphotericin B is a macrolide class antibiotic unrelated to erythromycin. This antifun-
 gal inhibits ergosterol synthesis.3 Ergosterol is a conmponent of the cell membrane unique
[uai jo suis sanpond ll truxoondau juanod e si g uiianoqduy ssiuelio [esuny o
toxicity in 80% of patients that receive it. Its action causes renal vasoconstriction, reduces
glomerular filtration rate, and has direct toxic effects on the membranes of the renal tubule
cells. Ihrough these mechanisms, amphotericin B causes acute tubular necrosis. Hypoka-
lemia develops in almost 35% of human patients treated with amphotericin B, which is
sufficient to warrant potassium supplementation.
Clinical signs mimic acute renal failure: anorexia, lethargy, weight loss, and other signs.
Elevated blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine with decreased potassium and sodium
are commonly seen.15
Treatment includes discontinuing the drug, aggressive fluid therapy to prevent further
kidney damage, and diminishing renal effects with sodium chloride-containing fluids.
Treatment with mannitol may help increase the elimination of amphotericin B.
Prognosis after amphotericin B toxicity depends upon the severity of the renal damage.
Amphotericin B is still listed as a treatment for aspergillosis in reptiles (1 mg/kg intracoe-
lomically once daily for 2 to 4 weeks).16 There may be safer drugs available. A less toxic,
new formulation of amphotericin B is available for humans and may soon be available
for veterinary use. Amphotericin B should not be used in animals that already have renal
disease.
Griseofulvin
This antifungal works by inhibiting fungal spindle activity and leads to distorted, weakened
fungal hyphae.7 It has also been shown to cause bone marrow suppression in mammals
although the mechanism of this action is unknown.
Anorexia, lethargy, diarrhea, and anemia have been reported in intoxicated animals. In
reptiles the recommended dosage for fungal dermatitis is 20 to 40 mg/kg given orally every
third day for five treatments. It is available as a tablet and a topical ointment.
Treatment includes discontinuing the drug and treating the patient supportively. There
is no specific antidote. Griseofulvin has been shown to be teratogenic in pregnant animals
of many species. Topical treatments can be removed with tepid water and gentle hand soap.
Antifungal overdoses can be best avoided by preventing fungal infection through good
husbandry.
Imidazoles (Ketoconazole) and Triazoles (Fluconazole and Itraconazole)
These antifungal drugs inhibit fungal replication by interfering with ergosterol synthesis.
Ketoconazole also has direct effects upon the fungal membrane. Ihe liver metabolizes these
Chapter 20 | Poisonings in the Captive Reptile  233
fungistatic drugs. Itraconazole is more potent than ketoconazole and is better tolerated by
patients.
  e ss am  iae a  e sis 
vated liver enzymes may be present in intoxicated animals. Dosages recommended for rep-
tiles include 2 to 5 mg/kg orally daily for 5 days for fluconazole, 15 to 30 mg/kg given orally
There seems to be little problem with miconazole preparation applied topically19
There is no specific antidote for toxicity by these antifungals. Treatment involves stop-
ping the drug, decontaminating any topical material remaining, and supportive therapy
(fluids, warmth). For ketoconazole, treatment includes countering the hepatotoxicity. Mild
intoxications usually improve with simple cessation of the drug.
The safest, most effective drugs must be selected for use in fungal infections in reptiles
and must reflect the severity of the infection, the size of the animal, and the condition of
the animal before treatment. Doses must be meticulously checked, particularly for topicals
and dips to be used on reptiles. Finally, reptiles must never be left alone in any bath or
medicated dip.
Organophosphates and Carbamates
Organophosphates are the most commonly used insecticide worldwide. In the United
States alone, 250 million pounds of organophosphates are used annually.20 Ihey are found
phates are meant to stay on surfaces to which they are applied, and others are absorbed and
become systemic in animals. They are the active ingredients in a long list of products. For
animal use as insecticides, they are formulated as dips, sprays, topical medications, systemic
parasitic agents, and flea collars. This group of insecticides includes chlorpyrifos (Dursban),
dichlorvos, diazinon, cythioate (Proban), fenthion (ProSpot), malathion, ronnel, parathion,
metrifonate, and vapona. Iheir cousins, the carbamates, include aldicarb, carbaryl (Sevin),
bendiocarb, methiocarb, propoxur, and carbofuran. As newer, safer insecticides are mar-
keted, these two groups are involved in fewer accidental poisonings but still account for a
large number of intoxications.
Organophosphates and carbamates interfere with metabolism and breakdown of acetyl-
choline at synaptic junctions.2l Acetylcholinesterase is the enzyme responsible for breaking
down the neurotransmitter at these sites. Acetylcholinesterase is inhibited by organophos-
phates and carbamates at these cholinergic sites. As a result, acetylcholine accumulates at
the synapses, which at first excites and then paralyzes transmission in these synapses, giving
it the characteristic “nerve gas" signs associated with organophosphate toxicity.2 This inhi-
bition of the synapse is irreversible with organophosphates and reversible with carbamates.
Organophosphates are readily absorbed by all routes: dermal, respiratory, gastrointestinal,
and conjunctival. Overdose with organophosphates may happen more readily if given
together with imidothiazoles, such as levamisole.
Clinical signs seen in reptiles include salivation, ataxia, muscle fasciculations, inability
to right themselves, coma, and respiratory arrest. Death results from massive respiratory
secretions, bronchiolar constriction, and effects on respiratory centers in the medulla lead-
ing to the cessation of breathing.
 Animals with dermal exposure should be washed with a mild dishwashing detergent
and copious amounts of water. Animals should be dried after rinsing to prevent further
uptake of the insecticide. The need for fluid therapy to counter dehydration and electrolyte
imbalances should be considered. The specific physiological antidote, the muscarinic antag-
onist atropine, should be given (0.4 mg/kg IM). This should help with salivation, broncho-
spasm, and dyspnea. Diazepam may be given as needed for seizures. Use of antihistamines
to treat insecticide poisonings is controversial and most likely not that effective. Prognosis
is dependent on dose, duration of exposure, and size of the animal. Therapies both more
effective and safer than organophosphates and carbamates exist for treatment of parasites
in captive reptiles. These therapeutic regimens are outlined in detail elsewhere in various
sources dealing with reptilian parasitology.
234 SECTION 2 General Exposures
Pyrethrins and Pyrethroids
Pyrethrin is the oldest used botanical insecticide. It is made from the dried and ground
flowers of Chrysanthermum cinerarifolium (Color Plate 20-1). Pyrethroids are synthetic
derivatives of pyrethrin and are widely available. Pyrethroid insecticides have enhanced
stability, potency, and half-life corpared with the parent molecule. A variety of dilute pyre-
thrin- and pyrethroid-containing sprays have been recommended for reptiles.
The mechanism of action of both pyrethrins and pyrethroids is the same. These mol-
ecules affect parasites by altering the activity of the sodium ion channels of nerves. Ihese
poisons prolong the period of sodium conductance and increase the length of the depolar-
conditions or at higher doses, these compounds can intoxicate host animals. Because of
the potential for transcutaneous absorption, pyrethrin and pyrethroid sprays must be thor-
oughly rinsed from the animal immediately after their application. Rinsing with lukewarm
water is usually sufficient.
Like ivermectin, organophosphates, and carbamates, pyrethrins and pyrethroids should
never be given concurrently with cholinesterase-inhibiting compounds.
Clinical signs have been reported for pyrethrins and pyrethroids, particularly if sprays
used also contain insect growth regulators (e.g., methoprene). Signs can develop in ani-
mals within 15 minutes of application. Signs include salivation, ataxia, inability to right
at much lower doses than expected. A small percentage of animals appear to be extremely
sensitive to pyrethrins and pyrethroids.
If caught early enough, treatment for pyrethrin and pyrethroid toxicity involves dermal
decontamination (bathing in copious amounts of water), isotonic fluids, and diazepam for
seizures. Care must be taken to keep pyrethrin and pyrethroid sprays away from the reptile's
eyes and mouth to prevent intoxication. Prognosis depends on the strength of the agent
used, the duration of the exposure, and the size of the animal involved. Animals that are
treated early do best.
A variety of pyrethrins and pyrethroids have been recommended for use against reptile
parasites. If used prudently, they are both safe and effective. Animals are sometimes satu-
rated with the spray. As soon as the parasiticide is applied, it should be rinsed off Gently
running lukewarm tap water should be used to wash off the insecticide. This very brief
exposure is enough to kill the parasites. Pyrethrin and pyrethroid sprays should not be left
on to prevent absorption and systemic toxicity in host animals. In smaller animals that have
larger surface-to-volume ratios, most sprays should be diluted to the smallest effective dose
 to prevent accidental intoxication from transcutaneous absorption.
Ivermectin
Ivermectin is an antiparasitic from a family of chemicals called avermectins. These are mac-
rocyclic lactones made from the fermentation broth of the fungus Strepfomyces averrmiti-
lis.25 The macrolide ivermectin is available as an injectable, a spray, and an oral formulation.
 It has activity against a variety of parasites including nematodes, arthropods, and arachnids.
y-aminobutyric acid (GABA). They stimulate release of GABA by presynaptic sites and
increase GABA binding to postsynaptic receptors. This causes neuromuscular blockage.
Avermectins also open chloride channels in membranes of the nervous system and further
Ivermectin is absorbed systemically by host tissue. When parasites bite the host they then
absorb the ivermectin. Ivermectin is active against intestinal parasites, mites, microfilaria,
and developing larvae. Concurrent treatment with diazepam, which also works through
GABA potentiation, may heighten deleterious effects.
rs u    sid s s  
susceptible to ivermectin toxicosis may have a blood-brain barrier more permeable than
in nonsensitive species. This greater permeability may be due to p-glycoprotein mutation
in membranes of the CNS. Another theory postulates the existence of a specific protein
Chapter 20 | Poisonings in the Captive Reptile  235
demonstrated. Ivermectin toxicity has also been reported in several species of lizards and
snakes.27 Ball pythons (Pyfhon reginus) in particular may show mild neurological signs when
treated. As a result, if there is any question regarding safety, it may be more prudent to use
ivermectin only as a topical.
There is no known antidote or physiological antagonist for ivermectin. Treatment is sup-
portive and should include decontaminating any topical sprays with soap and water, pro-
viding fluid therapy, nutritional support, monitoring electrolytes, and respiratory support.
Recovery may take days to weeks. One debilitated tortoise recovered fully after 6 weeks. We
have seen two box turtles completely recover in 4 weeks. IV lipid therapy has been used to
 Ivermectin, and similarly related compounds, should never be given to chelonians, preg-
'aneuane ue puy io eidoi e se Auo ll asn 'uosanb Aue si aiaul l paeisaau aq pmots
Fenbendazole
Fenbendazole is a benzimidazole type of antiparasitic drug.2 It is safe and effective against
many helminth parasites in animals. Fenbendazole inhibits glucose uptake in the parasites.
Because of its wide range of activity, its high degree of efficacy, and its broad margin of
safety, this anthelmintic is frequently prescribed by veterinarians. Fenbendazole has a good
margin of safety and has been reported to be well tolerated, even at six times recommended
dose and three times recommended duration.29 It has been extensively used as an anthel-
mintic therapy in reptiles at a dosage of 50 to 100 mg/kg PO once (repeated in 2 weeks) or
50 mg/kg P0 q 24 hours for 3to 5 days.30,31
Toxic effects have been reported in birds, rats, cats, and dogs.32.36 Recently, evidence of
fenbendazole overdose has been reported in individuals of a small snake species given an
exceedingly large dose of the drug. Four adult Fea’s vipers (Azermiops feae) died after being
administered single doses of fenbendazole ranging from 428 mg/kg to 1064 mg/kg.29 Nec-
Fenbendazole is regarded as a safe anthelmintic drug at recommended therapeutic doses.
Chlorhexidine Toxicity
Soaking living animals in any solution can be potentially life threatening. Recently, turtles
soaked for 1 hour in chlorhexidine scrub were shown to become intoxicated.37 Cutaneous
absorption of the solution and possible oral ingestion of these soaks have been postulated
as the cause of the problem. Before using any substances as a soak, review the literature for
preferred usage, dose, and duration of the soak. Affected animals should be removed from
the soak, rinsed, and supported with warmth and fluids. Remember to neverleave any rep-
tile unattended in a bath. Animals can drown much faster than anticipated. Also, particular
attention must be paid to the depth of fluids reptiles are bathed and soaked in.
Bleach
Various hypochlorite bleach solutions can be found in most households. Typically, these are
3% to 6% hypochlorite solutions in water.3 Bleaches are moderately irritating. If contact with
skin is prolonged, the damage is worsened. Bleaches can be very effective in treating cage
parasites of reptiles, but should ne ver be applied to live animals. Bleach can cause alkali burns
if splashed in the eyes of lizards and turtles. Immediate irrigation of the eye with copious
be washed with a mild soap and lukewarm water. Animals should be kept out of recently
 bleached cages a minimum of 24 hours to prevent respiratory tract iritation. Cages should
 be allowed to air out, and residual disinfectant removed by wiping with a clean cloth or towel.
Zinc Toxicosis
Zinc is an essential trace element. It is necessary for the synthesis of more than 200 enzymes
required for cell division, growth, and gene expression. Chronic zinc deficiency from
236SECTION 2 General Exposures
improper diet is more commonly seen than acute zinc poisoning from excessive zinc intake.
Zinc toxicosis may result from overzealous administration of supplements, ingestion of
galvanized metal objects, zinc oxide ointment, or from ingestion of pennies. Before 1982
US. pennies were more than 90% copper; since that time they are 97% zinc. We have seen
 two iguanas and one snake with gastrointestinal tracts full of pennies exhibiting signs of
zinc toxicity.
The precise mechanism of action of zinc toxicosis is not known. However, the red blood
cells, kidneys, pancreas, and liver are affected most. Intravascular hemolysis is the most
consistent abnormality seen. It is thought that zinc causes oxidative damage that leads to
lysis of the red blood cell membrane, which leads to anemia.39
Clinical signs of zinc toxicosis depend on the amount and form of the zinc ingested.
Signs are delayed if coins are the source of the zinc. As few as one or two pennies can cause
toxicity. First, the animal may be anorexic and lethargic, and the zinc ingestion may mimic
gastrointestinal enteritis. Ihis is followed by intravascular hemolysis, hemoglobinemia, yel-
low discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes, and weight loss. Palpation may be
positive for coins, but in larger animals radiographs may be necessary to reveal the pennies.
Elevated zinc levels can be confirmed on a serum sample antemortem and liver, kidney, and
pancreas postmortem.
Treatment consists of removing the zinc-containing foreign object. Surgery may be
required, but we have been very fortunate with removal of the coins via endoscopy. Addi-
 tional supportive therapy involves fluid treatment to maintain hydration, possible blood
transfusion to control anemia, and in severe cases use of a zinc chelator (e.g., ethylenedi-
aminetetraacetic acid, penicillamine)
Prognosis depends on the amount of zinc ingested, the duration of the toxic exposure,
and the severity of the resulting anemia. Reptiles must be kept in environments free of
potential sources of zinc ingestion.
Smoke Inhalation
Dangerous fires are still a daily occurrence in the new millennium. In the continental
United States alone, every 17 seconds a fire department responds to a fire call.40 Depending
on the source, it is estimated that 50% to 80% of fire deaths are the direct result of smoke
inhalation rather than injuries from bur ns or trauma.
si al yo au se sais pa a m al yo isan an rm pa ua
death rates caused by fire. This may be attributable to wider use of synthetic materials for
building and furnishings. These synthetic substances generally produce much more toxic
scrapers, and multifloor dwellings, all make it much harder to escape from the effects of a
disastrous fire and much harder to quench these fires once started.
The pathophysiology of smoke inhalation is dealt with in Chapter 29. Suffice it to say
that a toxic combustion product (i.e., smoke) exerts its poisonous effects by filling enclosed
vital airways with gases other than oxygen and by inducing local chemical reactions in
the respiratory tract; chemical asphyxiants elicit toxic changes in tissue distant from the
lung. Water solubility of toxic inhalants is the most important factor in determining the
level of injury. Injury from water-soluble molecules occurs in the upper airways. Chenmical
toxicants with low water solubility reach the lungs, where they then exert their damaging
effects. In addition, duration of exposure, concentration of the combustion products, and
toxin particle size all contribute to the overall severity of the injury. Pathological changes in
'shep oi simou sano ssaiaoid Aeuu sanssti Aoendsau pue ssun a
In our practice, several captive reptiles have come in after being exposed to the damag-
ing smoke of house fres. Two young Ball pythons arrived after a particularly aggressive
apartment fire. Direct laryngoscopy of the animals revealed the accumulation of soot and
carbonaceous debris, copious secretions, and edematous laryngeal tissue. Both snakes
were in severe respiratory compromise. Their breathing was weak and rapid, and the air-
ways became increasingly edematous. The animals were treated by intubating and admin
istering 100% oxygen, supportive fluids, and antibiotics. Despite our aggressive efforts,
Chapter 20 | Poisonings in the Captive Reptile 237
the smaller snake continued to deteriorate and expired. After 2 days of therapy, the larger
snake survived. A box turtle presented after a residential fire. Ihe reptile displayed no
burns, was nonresponsive, and never regained consciousness despite our efforts, which
included supplemental oxygen, fluid therapy, antibiotics, and suctioning of airways. Ihe
turtle died roughly 2 hours after exposure. Effective management of smoke inhalation
quent airway suctioning and removal of both debris and secretions, and cardiovascu-
lar support. Early intubation is often more beneficial than watching for the animal to
decompensate.
 Smoke inhalation patients are labor intensive to manage but may result in successful
outcomes if animals are managed early and aggressively.
Rodenticides
Each year rodents destroy crops in the field, eat food in storage, serve as vectors for human
diseases, bite people, and cause material damage by gnawing. As a result, a variety of roden-
 ticides are ubiquitously employed in an attempt to control populations of these animals.
 These substances prove to be nearly as dangerous to humans and nontarget species as they
are to rodents. Rodenticide intoxication has been documented in a variety of species, rep-
tiles included. It is certainly worth the effort if the original container housing the poison
e ai aad aq  sni aie  os e a a   
appropriate treatment can be initiated.
Anticoagulants
The long-acting anticoagulants are responsible for 80% of rodenticide poisoning in humans
  s   s  a ts  a i se 
action as warfarin. However, thiey are more potent and their half-life is longer. They are effec-
tive in single or very limited feedings when compared with older rodenticides. They act by
decreasing the activity of the vitamin K-dependent blood-clotting factors (II, VIl, IX, and
X). When clotting factors are sufficiently reduced, bleeding occurs. The most common and
most toxic second-generation anticoagulants in use are brodifacoum and bromadiolone.
Clinical signs depend on the site and extent of hemorrhage. Ihe majority of intoxicated
animals show anorexia, weakness, and lethargy.42 The most common clinical sign is dys-
pnea. Typically animals bleed into body cavities, abdomen, thorax, and joints. Most of these
plant materials can attract herbivorous or omnivorous reptiles. Newer formulations of these
baits are dyed turquoise.
We have seen one iguana and one box turle intoxicated by anticoagulant bait inges-
suspected of consuming anticoagulant poisons. One antidote for anticoagulant poisoning.
vitamin K, should be administered in animals if the PT is increased. The daily dose rec-
ommendation for vitamin K, is 2.5 mg/kg. Therapy with this antidote must be maintained
until toxic amounts of the poison are no longer present in the animal. Length of treatment
depends on the dose and type of anticoagulant ingested, but may be as long as 3 to 4 weeks.
A PT test should be run 48 hours after cessation of vitamin K, treatment. If clotting time is
normal, therapy is discontinued. If the clotting time is increased, therapy is continued for
another week. Vitamin K, treatment can be given by subcutaneous injection or orally. Intra-
include possible oxygen support and plasma transfusions.
Bromethalin
Bromethalin is one of the “newer” rodenticides. It is formulated in baits of pelleted grain
and may be dyed green or turquoise. Bromethalin is a neurotoxin, but because of its name
i can be confused with the long-acting anticoagulants bromadiolone and brodifacoum.
Clients should be encouraged to bring in original containers to obtain valuable label infor-
mation concerning ingredients.
238 SECTION 2 General Exposures
The mechanism of action of bromethalin is the uncoupling of oxidative phosphoryla-
tion. The brain is the primary target for bromethalin because of its unique dependence on
oxidative phosphorylation. The drug causes brain electrolyte disturbances and results in the
development of cerebral edema.43
Clinical signs include hindlimb paralysis, abnormal postures, fine muscle tremors, and
 s a a s  so  s   s
24 hours of ingestion.
Bromethalin is a nonselective vertebrate poison. No antidote exists, and treatment
is initially directed at reducing gastrointestinal absorption and providing supportive
    a     o r  
ings. Administration of dexamethasone and mannitol has been recommended to con-
trol bromethalin-induced cerebral edema. Unfortunately the efficacy of these diuretic
showing severe signs, such as seizures, paralysis, or coma, generally have a grave
prognosis.
Cholecalciferol
Cholecalciferol (vitamin D3), a “"newer” rodenticide, exploits the fact that rodents are
extremely sensitive to small percentage changes in the calcium balance in their blood.
Cholecalciferol causes hypercalcemia through mobilization of the body's calcium stores,
predominantly found in bone.44 This dystrophic hypercalcemia results in calcification of
blood vessels, organs, and soft tissue. It leads to nerve and muscle dysfunction and cardiac
arrhythmias.
The rodenticide is formulated in pelleted baits of grain or seed. Accidental ingestion
of human medication containing vitamin D; or its analogues by animals is also possible.
 Iatrogenic over supplementation of vitamin D, to reptiles is likewise possible.
Clinical signs include depression, weakness, and anorexia. Eventually signs of renal dis-
ease become evident as the glomerular filtration rate decreases.
Treatment usually involves corticosteroid and diuretic therapy. Corticosteroids suppress
 bone resorption and intestinal calcium absorption and promote calciuresis. Prednisone (6
mg/kg PO) and furosemide (1 to 4 mg/kg PO) have been recommended.44.45 Supportive
fluids (physiological saline) are essential. Calcitonin therapy has been recommended, but
its efficacy is questionable. Pamidronate disodium (Aredia), a biphosphonate, has been rec-
 ommended in dogs, with 1to 2 mg/kg given slowly (over 2 hours).4s
Prognosis is poor for animals in which dystrophic mineralization has already occurred.
Metaldehyde
Metaldehyde is the active ingredient in most slug and snail baits. It is formulated in gran-
ules, powder, pellets, and a liquid. Protein-rich material, such as bran or grain, is usually
added to the bait to make it more attractive to snails. Unfortunately, other animals find it
more palatable as a result. Metaldehyde poisoning has been reported in a wide range of spe-
cies ranging from dogs to livestock. This is not a common intoxication in reptiles; however,
the authors did see one captive tortoise fatality after encountering the poison in a household
backyard garden.
The mechanism of action of metaldehyde poisoning was once thought to be a result
of the degradation of the compound to acetaldehyde. Recent studies suggest metaldehyde
iself may be the agent that affects the CNS.46 GABA levels are decreased by metaldehyde,
and this decrease can lead to depression, seizures, and coma.
abnormal postures, and convulsions.47 The tortoise involved presented as comatose, nonre
sponsive, and with the head and legs rigidly extended. Clinical signs develop within a few
hours of ingestion.
There is no specific antidote for metaldehyde poisoning. Instead, animals are treated
  a e  h  a,  a  s ss
Chapter 20 |  Poisonings in the Captive Reptile  239
diazepam or other appropriate anticonvulsants and steps are taken to counter the hyper-
thermia. Prognosis is generally better if the animal survives the first 36 hours.
Mushrooms
Confirmed mushroom toxicities are relatively rare, but the potential for such poisonings
remains constant (see chapter 62). For humans poisoned by mushrooms in the United
States, in more than 95% of the cases the exact species is never identified.48 Furthermore,
for humans known to have ingested toxic mushrooms, the individuals show no symptoms
more than 50% of the time. Far and away the most toxic North American mushrooms are
This relative rarity of mushroom poisoning, the sparsity of lethal or even serious inges
tions, and the inability of most physicians and veterinarians to correctly identify mushroom
species involved all contribute to complicating the successful diagnosis of such toxicities.
Nevertheless, a successful strategy and treatment plan for suspected mushroom poisoning
is necessary.
Veterinarians must strive to learn the toxic varieties of mushrooms in their region and
their general incidence. Successful diagnosis includes gross identification of the mushroom
specimen and a microscopic spore assessment ("spore-prints") by trained mycologists.
Investigation and confirmation of species by such collaboration is crucial to distinguishing
toxic mushrooms from those mistakenly believed to be edible.
Captive reptiles can be exposed to mushrooms in yards and greenhouses, in household
terrariums, and as additives to their diet. Owners witnessing potential toxic mushroom
ingestions in small animals must be instructed to bring portions of the culprit mushroom
in for identification. We have seen one case where a pet iguana ingested Amanita panthe-
lethargic and ataxic. The owners brought parts of the remaining mushrooms along with the
lizard.
A. pantherina can occur throughout the United States and usually exists singly It has a
brilliant red cap and is often photographed by naturalists because of its dramatic appear-
ance. These mushrooms contain ibotenic acid and muscimol, its decarboxylated metabolite.
Muscimol is very similar to the neurotransmitter, GABA, and acts as a GABA agonist with
typical GABA signs and manifestations.
Treatment is supportive. Most GABA manifestations respond solely to supportive care,
and the animals completely recover. Benzodiazepines, such as diazepam, may be required
for the management of seizures.
The iguana involved in our hospital responded within a few hours to fluids, warmth,
and tube feeding. No long-lasting effects were noted, and the animal was released after 24
hours. This case represents the value of owners bringing in the mushroom involved for
correct identification. Veterinarians must establish solid contacts with other local health
professionals, such as human toxicologists, university mycologists, and laboratories well
versed in toxicologic analysis.
Plant Poisonings
Some plants can produce very powerful poisons. For many years veterinary toxicology
largely dealt with livestock suffering from plant poisonings. The last 20 years have seen a
 tremendous growth in our understanding of small animal intoxications.50 Because many
reptiles are either partially or entirely herbivorous, the potential for the accidental ingestion
of toxic plants is very real ( Box 20-1). Although consideration of all plants potentially toxic
to reptiles is beyond our present discussion, this section will examine the more frequently
encountered plant poisonings and those commonly reported in the literature.
Heathis
The heath family plants (e.g., azaleas, laurel, rhododendrons) are commonly planted
in the United States as ornamental shrubbery (Color Plate 20-2). These plants contain
240SECTlON 2 General Exposures
Box 20-1
Factors Affecting the Potential Toxicity of Poisonous Plants
Geographical and Seasonal Variables
● Plants known to be poisonous in one part of the world may not be so toxic in other
areas.
+ Season may also affect toxicity of plants.
Plant Part Ingested
● Not all parts of poisonous plants are always toxic.
Example: tomato—a very edible fruit, but the stems and leaves contain toxic
alkaloids
 Example: apples, peaches, and apricots possess cyanide-containing seeds; the fruit
itself is edible
Absorbability of Toxins
* Apples, peaches, apricots—cyanide not released unless seeds are broken
· Castor bean—poison (ricin) not released unless seeds are chewed
Species Ingesting the Plant
· Much of poisonous plant intoxication depends directly on which species has done
the ingesting.
grayanotoxins (diterpenoids) that interfere with membrane-based sodium channels.51
The toxin is found in the stem, leaves, flower, and nectar. Dogs and people may develop
bradycardia. Ingestion of small amounts can lead to gastrointestinal signs; larger amounts
can cause depression, ataxia, and convulsions. No antidote exists, and treatment is sup-
portive. We have seen two iguanas stricken after eating azalea, and one of the lizards
subsequently died. The editor was aware of a case where three tortoises ingested rhodo-
dendron leaves; all three died.
Yews
Ground hemlock, Florida yew, English yew, Pacific yew, and Japanese yew are all members
of a group of shrubs and trees that contain taxine, a cardiotoxic alkaloid. This substance
is a sodium channel blocker that can cause both cardiac and neurological toxicity.52 The
 bark, leaves, and seeds are poisonous but not the red fruit surrounding the seeds of these
ornamental shrubs. No antidote exists. Poisonings have been reported in livestock, dogs,
and caged birds.
Lilies
Easter lily, tiger lily, day lily, Japanese show lily, and Asiatic lily are known to be poisonous
to cats by causing renal toxicosis (Color Plate 20-3).53 All parts of the plant are poisonous.
In addition, lily of the valley contains a potent cardiac glycoside. In our experience, toxic
plant ingestion by reptiles is more than possible; captivity exposes animals to a wide variety
plants. We have administered activated charcoal to an iguana that ingested Easter lilies. In
 general, treatment is supportive.
Fruit Seeds
The seeds of apples, apricots, cherries, peaches, plums, and the jetberry bush contain cya-
nogenic glycosides. The seeds are dangerous if the seed capsule is broken. In humans as few
0h sas jo Aiqe aul sidnastp apiuea bs'sisoixoi apiueao asnes ues spaas uao s ois se
use oxidative phosphorylation by poisoning mitochondria. The net effect is tissue hypoxia.
The onset of clinical signs may be very rapid, and death can occur suddenly. Treatment for
cyanide toxicosis is often not successful, but does include 100% oxygen administration,
supplemental fluids, and perhaps sodium nitrite or sodium thiosulfate.
Chapter 20 | Poisonings in the Captive Reptile  241
Avocado
Avocado (Persea americana) has been shown to be toxic to rabbits, mice, and caged
birds.55 All above-ground parts of the plant are toxic. Persin, a compound isolated
from the leaves, is believed to be the toxin responsible for avocado toxicity. Intoxicated
mammals display cardiac arrhythmias, necrosis of the myocardium, and acute death.
Caged birds show respiratory distress. Until more is known concerning the nature of
avocado poisoning, they should not be included in the diet of herbivorous captive
reptiles.
Ricin (Castor Bean Intoxication)
 s d  n n d    sd q r
poison is present in the whole plant, but most concentrated in the seed.56 Chewing or
breaking of the seed coat is necessary before intoxication can take place. For mice, rats,
rabbits, and dogs, as few as one seed can be fatal. In dogs clinical signs involve the gas-
trointestinal tract, but can lead to kidney failure and convulsions. No known antidote
is available. All ingestions of castor beans should be taken seriously because of the high
toxicity of ricin. However, seed coats are not always chewed or broken when animals
ingest seeds.
Cycad (Sago) Palms
These plants are used as houseplants and occur naturally in tropical and subtropical regions
(Color Plate 20-4). All parts of the plant are toxic. The nuts (seeds) are most toxic and only
produced by female plants. Ihe toxins induce gastrointestinal and hepatic signs (cycasin),
neurological signs (B-methylamino-L-alanine), and an unknown toxin causes additional
 No antidote exists, and treatment is supportive. Clients should be encouraged to bring in
the chewed plant to help identify the species.
Holly, Mistletoe, and Poinsettia
During the holiday season, several potentially toxic plants are brought into the home.
Although their toxicity is exaggerated, reptiles may blunder into them. Here is an overview
of the most common holiday plants.
Mistletoes (Phoradendron species) are evergreen parasitic plants that grow on trees
(Color Plate 20-5). Human exposures usually involve the berries either eaten by small chil-
 se ui suis e anida c sda gs'an o pama saa a no ua
dote is available, and treatment is supportive.
Holly (lex species) includes the English or Christmas holly, American or white holly,
and winterberry. Berries contain the saponin, ilicin, which is a potent gastrointestinal irri-
jo lasdn si uis uous iso a sanads ueu unudo pue sq un sg'u
the digestive tract. No antidote exists, and treatment is symptomatic.
 Poinsettia (Euphorbia pulcherrima) possesses a milky sap rich in diterpenoids. These
molecules are fairly irritating to the skin, mucous membranes, and gastrointestinal tract.
Reports of toxicity stem from a single account.58 Poisoning is rare, and treatment is
supportive.
Cardiac Glycosides
Several plants contain cardiac glycosides, including oleander (Nerium oleander), foxglove
(Digitalis purpurea), and lily of the valley (Convallaria majalis)."" For oleander (Color Plate
26-2), all parts of the leaf are poisonous; a single well-chewed leaf has been reported to be
lethal. Foxglove leaves and seeds are toxic. Lily of the valley poisoning occurs from inges-
tion of the leaves, flowers, or roots. The cardiac glycosides are gastrointestinal irritants, may
be responsible for a variety of cardiac arrhythmias (e.g., irregular pulse, bradycardia, rapid
thready pulse, ventricular fibrillation), and can be fatal. With plant ingestions, the exact
amount of toxin involved is never known.
242SECTlON2GeneralExposures
Ivy
ivy, Irish ivy, Persian ivy, Atlantic ivy, and others are all potentially toxic (Color Plate 20-6).
tion, gastrointestinal irritation, and diarrhea. Most ingestions are not serious, and treat-
ment is supportive.
Nicotine
Tobacco products including pipe tobacco, cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, and snuff
contain the alkaloid nicotine. Nicotine is a stimulant of the central nervous and cardiovas-
 po  a a sas   aas sas  is e
sure.60 High-dose exposures can cause paralysis of the chest muscles and lead to respiratory
-uadap auu jo a c on sh on aeaae saaei isane sepies pue asnd
ing on the brand. Cigars have four to five times the nicotine content of cigarettes. Chew-
 ing tobacco is even more palatable to animals because of flavors added (e.g., honey, sugar,
molasses, cinnamon, licorice, various syrups). Aids to stop smoking can also be a source of
accidental nicotine ingestion. Nicotine “patches" usually contain between 7 and 25 mg, and
nicotine gum contains 2 to 4 mg per piece.61 Some garden spray insecticides contain 40%
nicotine (Black Leaf 40).
Captive reptiles may ingest cigar and cigarette butts, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, or
nicotine patches and gums. We have seen death in one tortoise and one iguana after eating
cigarette butts. Clinical signs ofhigh-dose nicotine intoxication include excitement followed
 by depression, diarrhea, seizures, coma, and respiratory or cardiac arrest. There is no known
antidote. Treatment includes frequent monitoring of heart rate, and animals may benefit
from fluid therapy and oxygen administration. Prognosis is poor for high-dose intoxica-
tions. As few as two cigarettes have been shown to cause lethal poisonings. No data exists
for secondary cigarette smoke intoxication, but an association between chronic respiratory
conditions in captive reptiles and househiolds with one or more smokers has been suspected.
Oak Poisoning
Oak trees are found almost worldwide. Acorns, buds, twigs, and leaves have been impli-
cated, but most incidents of intoxication involve either immature leaves in the spring or
freshly fallen acorns in the spring.
Toxicosis from oak is produced by high concentrations of tannic acid and its metabo-
lites, gallic acid, and pyrogallol.62 Ingestion of toxic amounts of oak has been shown to cause
ulcerative lesions in the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract, liver lesions, and necrosis of
proximal renal tubular epithelial cells.
A fatal episode of oak intoxication has been reported in a tortoise. An African spurred
tortoise (Geochelone sulcata) was found dead in an outdoor enclosure possessing numerous
oaks hanging over and into the area.63 Necropsy of the tortoise revealed a markedly dis-
tended stomach with partially digested oak leaves. Extensive necrosis was found in the oral
cavity, esophagus, stomach, and kidneys. Ihe proximal renal tubules showed 45% necrosis.
Marijuana
Marijuana continues to be by far the most used illicit drug in the United States.64 Cannabis
sativa has been used for centuries for its hemp fiber, as rope, and for its psychoactive resins.
Totally or partially herbivorous captive reptiles may encounter growing marijuana plants or
ingest dried stems, leaves, and flowers.
concentration of this psychoactive constituent is found in the leaves and the flowering tops
of plants. Hashish is the dried resin of flower tops. Ihe precise mechanism of action of THC
is unknown, but the psychoactive effects of this drug are thought to stem from a number of
sites within the CNS, including cholinergic, dopaminergic, serotoninergic, noradrenergic,
inhaled smoke; however, the effects of ingested THC last much longer.
Chapter 20 | Poisonings in the Captive Reptile 243
Clinical signs after ingestion of marijuana include mydriasis, weakness, ataxia, brady-
cardia, hypothermia, and stupor. The extent of clinical signs following marijuana ingestion
is almost totally dose related.
Treatment for marijuana ingestion is primarily supportive and symptomatic. Marijuana
intoxications are rarely fatal because of the wide margin of safety of THC. Activated char-
coal administration is recommended to decrease enterohepatic recirculation. Despite its
relative safety margin, recovery following ingestion may be prolonged and take up to 3 to
4 days. Fluids and monitoring body temperature may be beneficial.
We have seen two reptiles ingest fairly large amounts of marijuana. A 10-pound Sulcata
tortoise showed no effects after eating four marijuana cigarettes. However, a 6-pound male
 green iguana was stuporous after eating into a “baggie" of marijuana. Both animals recov-
ered completely.
Undoubtedly, reptiles have blundered across other “under-the-counter" drugs. Various
over-the-counter drugs kept on nightstands, kitchen counters, or bathroom shelves may be
encountered by captive reptiles given free range in the house. For their own safety, captive
animals should be confined and all medications kept in their original containers in child-
and animal-proof cabinets.
Venomous and Poisonous Animals
Snake Envenomation
Snake venoms are complex mixtures of enzymatic and nonenzymatic proteins.66 Derived
from modifed salivary glands, snake venoms immobilize prey and predigest their tissue.
Hyaluronidase is present in most snake venom and works by catalyzing the cleavage of
internal glycoside bonds and mucopolysaccharides. This action potentiates the activity
of many of the other toxic agents. Phospholipase A, which causes hydrolytic breakdown
of membrane phospholipids, is common to many snake venoms.67 This molecule displays
cytotoxic, anticoagulant (prevents activation of clotting factors), and neurotoxic activities.
 Collagenase is also found in snake venom, leading to the digestion of collagen and breaking
down of connective tissue.
Snake venoms are incredibly complex, diverse combinations of toxins and may vary even
between closely related species.68 Many of the toxic principals in snake venom have yet to
be precisely identified. Snake venom toxins are usually named either after the snake venom
that they were first identified in or after their primary pharmacological effect on the victim.
Snake venoms are approximately 90% water and, in addition to enzymatic and nonen-
zymatic proteins, can contain lipids, carbohydrates, and biogenic amines. The actual toxins,
which compose the "killing fraction" are referred to as venins. The entire mixture is called
there is also tremendous variability in susceptibility to different snake venoms by potential
prey species.69
I has been proposed since ancient times that venomous snakes are more resistant or
Even immune to their own venom. Venomous snakes do appear to be relatively more resis-
tant to their own venom. Neutralizing antibodies have been documented in the serum of
many snakes to the toxins of their own venom. However, the authors have seen fatalities in
venomous snakes bitten by conspecifics. The severity of the response appears to be depen-
dent on the location of the bite, the volume of venom injected, and the size of the bite
recipient. It should also be mentioned that we have seen bites between conspecifics and
self-inflicted bites that were nonfatal.
Certain nonvenomous snake species that prey on other snakes (including venomous
C asisai as a an radde ose sn sdod 'aus u a se yns (sa
venom.70
 Effective antivenins exist for some venomous snake venoms.
Poisonous Lizards
Out of the approximately 3000 species of lizards, there are only two known poisonous
species.7l The Gila monster Heloderma suspectum (with two subspecies) and the Mexican
244SECTlON2General Exposures
beaded lizard Heloderrma horridum (with three subspecies) make up the venomous lizards
and are only found in the Americas. Their venom is only used in defense.72
The venom of these lizards is antigenically unrelated to snake venom.73 The venom
glands are in the lower jaw, and the venom is delivered to the gums at the base of the teeth.
Delivery of the venom is dependent on intense chewing action.
Heloderma venom consists of multiple enzymatic proteins including hyaluronidase,
phospholipase, arginine hydrolase, and kallikrein-like enzymes. Other proteins have been
identified in this venom, including gilatoxin and helothermine.
Hyaluronidase acts as a spreading factor, decreases the viscosity of connective tissue,
and catalyzes the cleavage of acid mucoglycosides. Arginine hydrolase causes hydrolysis of
peptide linkages, and the kallikrein-like enzymes cause vasodilation, increase capillary per-
meability, lead to edema, and affect the contraction or relaxation of extravascular smooth
muscle.
 Phospholipase has been documented in many types of venom and contributes by releas-
ing other enzymes leading to membrane destruction. It also stimulates histamine, kinin,
and serotonin release. Gilatoxin is a neurotoxic protein. Helothermine has been shown to
depress the body temperature in mice subjected to this poison.74 Bites of these lizards in
for venormous lizard bites, and treatment is supportive. Gila monsters appear to be relatively
resistant to the effects of their own venom.
Amphibian Toxins
Certain amphibians are poisonous and can cause intoxications. In the United States two
toad species (genus Bufo) are the source of the majority of toad poisonings. The cane or
marine toad (Bufo marinus) and the Colorado River toad (Bufo alvarius) are the two species
most implicated.75.76
All Bufo species of toads have parotid glands that release toxic substances when the
animals are threatened. These toxic substances are biologically active compounds, such as
dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, serotonin, bufotenine, bufogenin, bufotoxins, and
indolealkylamines. Severe toxicosis has been seen in small animals that bite, masticate, or
hold these toads in their mouths. Ihe active compounds secreted from the toad's parotid
gland are rapidly absorbed by the mucous membranes of the predator and enter the sys-
temic circulation.
Once these compounds have entered the circulation, the greatest effects are seen on the
peripheral vascular system, the CNS, and the heart. Bufotenine has pressor effects on blood
vessels, but may act as a hallucinogen as well. Bufogenin has digitalis-like effects.7 It causes
alterations in heart rate and rhythm. Bufotoxins are vasoconstrictors and add to the pressor
effects. Indolealkylamines have activity similar to the hallucinogen LSD.
 Dogs are the animals most commonly affected by amphibian parotid toxins. However,
cats and ferrets have been reported to be affected. Exposure in reptiles has not been docu-
mented; however, it is logical to assume predatory reptiles that include amphibians in their
diet might encounter and ingest poisonous toads. No specific antidote is available, and
treatment is basically supportive. Therapy includes thoroughly flushing the oral cavity with
running water. Severely affected animals may require seizure intervention and medications
to stabilize heart rhythms. Supportive care involving fluids may be necessary in badly debil-
itated animals. Many other toxicoses and conditions can lead to neuropathies, and cardiac
 arrhythmias can present with signs very similar to those of toad poisonings.
Fire Ants
In the early 1900s the imported fire ant reached the United States from South America. The
 black fire ant, Solenopsis richteri, has remained in a small area of central Alabama and Mis-
sissippi. Ihe red imported fre ant, Solenopsis invicta, has now reached 13 southern states
from Texas to North Carolina. They are highly adaptive insects that have both supplanted
and interbred with local ant species. New fire ant hybrids display a greater tolerance against
cold and drought, which enables their spread much farther into the continental United
Chapter 20 |  Poisonings in the Captive Reptile  245
 States. In some areas as many as 60% of local humans report being stung at least once
annually.78
 The fire ants and hybrids are small and are similar in appearance to native house and
garden ants. These fire ants bite and sting. First the ant uses powerful mandibles to bite and
 anchor itself to the skin of the victim; then it uses its abdominal stinger to inject venom in
 a series of stings rotating in a circle around the head. Unlike the venom of most stinging
insects, ant venom is composed primarily of alkaloids, particularly piperidine. Ant venoms
have local necrotic and hemolytic effects.79
The authors have seen several small reptiles victimized by these predatory ants in Loui-
siana and Florida. Neonatal reptiles are especially vulnerable to these aggressive insects. In
Florida we saw several small snakes fall prey to them.
No antidotal therapy exists; however, the use of antihistamines, topical steroid oint-
ments, topical alcohol, and warm water baths may provide symptomatic relief.
Fire ants generally build mounds in warm, sunny areas, places similar to where reptiles
typically bask. We can expect more reptile species to fall victim to the bites of these ants as
asalyo peaids au oios oi shogg auen ial puedxa cianuos siasu aroepand asa
ants so far have not been effective.
Firefly Toxicosis
Reptile caretakers often supplement the diet of captive animals with freshly caught insects.
Fireflies of the genus Photinus have been shown to contain steroidal pyrones (lucibufagins)
that are poisonous.&0 The pyrones are structurally similar to cardenolides of plants and
bufodienolides of toads, both of which are well-studied toxins. Ihese two compounds
cause nausea and vomiting at low concentrations and can be potentially cardiotoxic at
higher doses. If extrapolations from mammals are correct, less than one half of a firefly
could be lethal to a 100-g lizard.
flies.82 In both cases documented the lizards showed signs 30 to 60 minutes postingestion.
Clinical signs included pronounced oral gaping, intense color change in the neck area, and
dyspnea. Both animals died within 90 minutes of eating the fireflies. At present no effective
therapy is kno wn.
Lucibufagins protect fireflies from predators.&3 Spiders, birds, and several species of
lizards have been shown to avoid freflies.84.85 Like many lizards, bearded dragons show
indiscriminate eating strategies and may ingest toxic substances. Furthermore the bearded
dragon, an Australian native, has no natural contact with Photinus species of freflies and
thus may exhibit no self-protective avoidance behavior.
 Keepers must be advised to feed only safe food items. Any questions should be referred
to a veterinarian. Fireflies should not be fed to reptiles or additionally any insects that
sequester cardenolides, such as monarch butterflies (Donaus plexippus), queen butterflies
(Donaus gilippus), and lygaeid bugs (Oncopeltus fasciatus). Other lizard species and other
should not be offered as food.86
Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate
 Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (DsS) is an anionic surfactant substance that traditionally
has been recommended as a laxative and stool softener for a variety of vertebrates ranging
from humans to rodents. DSS has been advocated for the same use in reptiles.
DSS generally is regarded as a relatively safe pharmaceutical agent with a low toxicity,
but reports of toxic effects exist in the literature for horses, dogs, monkeys, rats, rabbits,
in reptiles after oral use of DSS have been reported.94 One study documents severe change:
in gastric and esophageal mucosa in Gopher snakes (Pituophis melanoleucus) given oral
DSS at a dosage of 250 mg/kg.
A specific dose of DSS has not been established for reptiles, but dosages for other species
range from 50mg for dogs and 40mg for cats to 200 mg/kg for horses.92.9s Concentrations
246SECTlON 2 General Exposures
(dilutions) of 1:30 have been recommended for reptiles.96 A DSS dosage of 15 mg/kg PO has
been recommended.
The study in the gopher snakes and the several reports in various other species indicate
that DSS may not be as innocuous as once popularly believed. These studies demonstrate
that DSS can have adverse effects, and, in reptiles, levels greater than 250 mg/kg can cause
caustic changes to epithelial surfaces. In addition, the potential for overzealous adminis-
care must be taken if DSS is to be used, and the use of other laxatives, stool softeners, and
enhancers of gastric motility should be explored
Diets to Avoid
Although some foods may be relished by reptiles, nevertheless, many of these same foods
have potentially toxic components and should only be fed in small quantities. Spinach,
rhubarb, and beets contain the chelating agent oxalic acid, which binds with calcium ions
in the blood to form calcium-oxalate crystals. This can lead to a decrease in calcium levels
and predispose to bladder stones.
Broccoli, brussels sprouts, and cabbage contain mustard oil glycosides, which have been
photosensitivity. Iguanas fed buckwheat may develop blepharitis and conjunctivitis when
exposed to sunlight. This condition is self-limiting and can be remedied without treatment
if animals are kept in the dark and out of the sun for 48 hours.97
References
1. Rossi IV: Dermatology. In Mader DR, editor: Reptile medicine and surgery, Philadelphia, 1996, Saunders.
2.Frye FL: Biomedical and surgical aspects of captive reptile husbandry. vol 2,ed 2, Melbourne, FL, 1991,
Krieger Publishing.
3. Lewis LD, Morris ML Jr, Hand MS,et al: Small animal clinical nutrition, Topeka, KS, 1987, Mark Morris
Assoc.
4.Papich MG: Handbook of veterinary drugs, Philadelphia, 2002, Saunders.
5. Montali RJ, Bush M, Smeller JM: The pathology of nephrotoxicity of gentamycin in snakes, Vet Pathol
16:108-115, 1979.
6. Bagger-Sjoback D, Wesall J: Toxic effects of gentamycin on the basilar papilla in the lizard Calotes versij-
color, Acta Octolaryngol 81:57, 1976.
7. Funk RS: A formulary for lizards, snakes, and crocodilians, Vet Clin of North A mer Exot Pract 1:333-358,
2000.
Saunders.
9. Holt D, Harvey J, Hurley R: Chloramphenicol toxicity, Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 12:83-95, 1993.
10. Papich MG: Metronidazole. In Papich MG, editor: Handbook of veterinary drugs, Philadelphia, 2002,
Saunders.
11.
Bennett RA: Neurology. In Mader DR,editor: Reptile medicine and surgery, Philadelphia, 1996, Saunders.
12. Lawton MPC: Neurological disease. In Benyon PH, editor: Manual ofreptiles, British Small Animal Vet-
erinary Association, Ames, IA, 1992, Iowa State University Press.
13. Haddad LM, Herman SM: Antibiotics and anthelminthics. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW, Winchester
JF,editors: Clinical management of poisoning and drug overdose, Philadelphia, 1998, Saunders.
14. Hoitsma AJ, et al: Drug-induced nephrotoxicity aetiology, clinical features, and management, Drug
Safety 6(2):131, 1991.
15. Plumb DC: Veterinary drug handbook, ed 3, Ames, IA, 1999, Iowa State University Press.
16. Bonner BB: Chelonian therapeutics, Vet Clinics of N Amer Exotic Pract 3(1):207-232, 2000.
17.Roder JD: Antimicrobials. In Plumlee KH,editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology,St Louis, 2004, Mosby.
18. Funk RS: A formulary for lizards, snakes, and crocodilians, Vet Clinics of N Amer Exotic Pract 3(1):
833-358,2000.
19. Scott FW,et al: Teratogenesis in cats associated with griseofulvin therapy, Teratology l1:79, 1975.
 20. Carlton FB, Simpson WM, Haddad LM: The organophosphates and other insecticides. In Haddad LM,
Shannon MW,Winchester JF,editors: Clinical management ofpoisoning and drug overdose, Philadelphia,
1998, Saunders.
21. Blodgett DJ: Organophosphate and carbamate insecticides. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA, editors: Small
animal toxicology, Philadelphia, 2001, Saunders.
Chapter 20 |  Poisonings in the Captive Reptile  247
 22. Jamal GA: Neurological syndromes of organophosphorus compounds, Adv Drug React Toxicol Rev
16(3):133-170, 1997.
23. Hansen SR: Pyrethrins and pyrethroids. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA,editors: Small animal toxicology
Philadelphia, 2001, Saunders.
Rept Amph Veterin 137-147, 1997.
25. Papich MG: Ivermectin. In Papich MG, editor: Handbook of veterinary drugs, Philadelphia, 2002,
Saunders.
26. Teare JD, Bush M: Toxicity and efficacy of ivermectin in chelonians, I Am Vet Med Assoc 183(11):1195,
1983.
27. Wosniak EJ, et al: Ectoparasites, Jour Herp Med Surg 10(3):15-21, 2000.
28. Papich M: Handbook of veterinary drugs, London, 2002, Saunders.
29. Alvarado TP, et al: Fenbendazole overdose in four Fea's vipers (Azemiops feae), Proc Assoc Rept Amph
Vet35-36, 1997.
30. Stein G: Reptile and amphibian formulary. In Mader DR,editor: Reptile medicine and surgery, Philadel-
phia, 1996, Saunders.
31. Carpenter JIW, Marion CJ: Exotic animal formulary, Philadelphia, 2012, Saunders.
32. Dalvi RR: Comparative studies on the effect of fenbendazole on the liver and liver enzymes of goats,
quail, and rats, Vet Res Commun 13:135-139, 1989.
33. Howard LL,et al: Benzimidazole toxicity in birds, Proc Annu Conf Am Assoc Zoo Vet 36, 1999.
34. Papendick RI,et al: Suspected fenbendazole toxicity in birds, Proc A nnu ConfA m Assoc Zoo Vet144-146,
1998.
35. Shoda T, et al: Liver tumor promoting effects of fenbendazole in rats, Toxicol Pathol 27:553-562, 1999
36. Stokol T, et al: Development of bone marrow toxicosis after albendazole administration in a dog and a
cat, I Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1753-1756, 1997.
37. Lloyd ML: Chlorhexidine toxicosis in a pair of red-bellied short-necked turtles, Emydura subglosa, Bull
Assoc Rept Amph Vet 6(4):6-7, 1996.
chester JF, editors: Clinical management of poisoning and drug overdose, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1998.
Saunders.
39. Talcott PA: Zinc poisoning. In Peterson ME,Talcott PA, editors: Small animal toxicology, Philadelphia,
2001, Saunders.
40. Holstege CP, Kirk MA, et al: Smoke inhalation. In Goldfrank LR, editor: Toxologic emergencies, ed 7,
New York, 2002, McGraw-Hill.
41. Metts BC, Stewart NJ: Rodenticides. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW, Winchester JF, editors: Clinical
management of poisoning and drug overdose, Philadelphia, 1998, Saunders.
42. Murphy IM, Talcott PA: Anticoagulant rodenticides. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA,editors: Small animal
toxicology, Philadelphia, 2001, Saunders.
43. Dorman DL: Bromethalin. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA, editors: Small animal toxicology, Saunders, 2001.
44. Rumbeiha W K: Cholecalciferol. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA,editors: Smallanimal toxicology, Philadel-
phia, 2001, Saunders.
45. Morrow CK, Volmer PA: Cholecalciferol. In Plumlee KH,editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis,
2004, Mosby.
46. Puschner B, Metaldehyde: In Peterson ME, Talcott PA,editors: Small animal toxicology, Philadelphia,
2001, Saunders.
47.Gfeller RW,Messonnier SP: Metaldehyde. In Gfeller RW,Messonnier SP, editors: Handbook of small
animal toxicology and poisonings, St Louis, 2004, Mosby.
48. Goldfrank LR: Mushrooms. In Goldfrank LR, et al, editors: Goldfrank's toxicologic emergencies, ed 7,
New York, 2002, McGraw-Hill.
Toxicol Clin Toxicol 30:12-22, 1992.
50. Plumlee KH: Plant hazards, Vet Clin North Amer (Small Animal Pract) 32(2):383-395, 2002
51.PuschnerB:Grayanotoxins. InPlumlee KH,editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology,St Louis, 2004, Mosby.
52. Casteel S: Taxine alkaloids. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2004, Mosby.
53. Hall J: Lily. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2004, Mosby.
54. Fitzgerald KT:Cyanide. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA,editors: Smallanimal toxicology, Philadelphia, 2001,
Saunders.
 55. Pickerell JA, Oehme F, Mannala SA: Avocado. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology,
St Louis, 2004, Mosby.
56. Albretsen JC: Evaluation ofcastor bean toxicosis in dogs: 98 cases, J A m A ni Hosp Assoc 36(3):229-233,
2000.
248SECTlON2GeneralExposures
57. Albretson JC: Cycasin. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2004, Mosby.
cal management of poisoning and drug overdose, Philadelphia, 1998, Saunders.
59.
Galey D: Cardiac Glycosides. In Plumlee KH,editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2004, Mosby.
60.Plumlee KH: Nicotine. In Peterson ME,TalcottPA,editors: Smallanimal toxicology, Philadelphia, 2001,
Saunders.
61. Haddad LM: Nicotine. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW, Winchester JF, editors: Clinical management of
poisoning and drug overdose, Philadelphia, 1998, Saunders.
62.
 Plumlee KH: Tannic Acid. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2004, Mosby.
 63. Rotstein DS, et al: Suspected oak Quercus, toxicity in an African Spurred Tortoise, Geochelone sulcata,
Jour Herp Med and Surgery 13(3):20-21, 2003.
64. Martin B, Szara S: Marijuana. In Haddad EM, Shannon MW, Winchester JF, editors: Clinical manage-
ment of poisoning and drug overdose, Philadelphia, 1998, Saunders.
65. Volmer PA: Drugs of abuse. In Peterson M, Talcott PA, editors: Small animal toxicology, Philadelphia,
2001, Saunders.
66.Fowler ME: Veterinary zootoxicology, Boca Raton, FL, 1993, CRC Press.
67.Peterson ME,Talcott PA: Smallanimal toxicology,Philadelphia, 2001, Saunders.
68. Walter FG, Fernandez MC, Haddad LM: North American venomous snakebites. In Haddad LMI
1998, Saunders.
 69. Ovadia M, Kochva E: Neutralization of Viperidae and Elapidae snake venoms by sera of different anj-
mals, Toxicon 15(6):541, 1977
70. Philpot VB, Smith RG: Neutralization of pit viper venom by king snake serum, Proc Soc Exp Biol Med
74:521, 1950.
71. Peterson ME: Poisonous lizards. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA, editors: Small animal toxicology, Philadel-
phia, 2001, Saunders. 2001.
72. Fowler ME: Venomous lizards. In Fowler ME,editor: Veterinary zootoxicology, Boca Raton, FL, 1993,
CRC Press.
73. Heradon RA, Tu T: Biochemical characterization of the lizard toxin gilatoxin, Biochemistry 20:3517-
3522, 1981.
74. Mocha-Morales J, Martin BM, Possani LD: Isolation and characterization ofhelothermine, a novel toxin
from Heloderma horridum horridum (Mexican beaded lizard) venom, Toxicon 28:299-309, 1990.
75. Peterson ME: Toad venom toxicity. In Tilley LP, Smith WK,editors: The five-minute veterinary cornsult,
Philadelphia, 1997, Williams & Wilkins.
76. Peterson ME: Amphibian toxins. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA, editors: Small animal toxicology, Philadel-
phia, 2001, Saunders.
toad Bufo marinus, Am J Physiol 271:R325-R332, 1996.
of poisoning and drug overdose, Philadelphia, 1998, Saunders.
79. Tracy J,et al: The natural history of exposure to the imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta), I Allergy Clin
Immumo95:824, 1995.
80. Eisner T, et al: Lucibufagins: Defensive steroids from the fireflies Photinus ignitus and Photinus marginel-
lus (Coleoptera:Lampyridae), Proc Nat Acad Sci 75:905-908, 1978.
81. Fieser LF, Fieser M: Natural products related to phenanthrene, New York, 1999, Reinhold.
82. Glor R,et al: Two cases of firefly toxicosis in bearded dragons, Pogonα vitticeps, Proc Assoc Rept Amph
Vet27-30,1999.
83. Eisner T, et al: Firefly “femme fatales” acquire defensive steroids (lucibufagins) from their frefly prey,
Proc Nat Acad Sci 94:9723-9728, 1997.
 84. Sexton OJ: Differential predation by the lizard Anolis carolinensis on unicoloured and polycoloured
insects after an interval of no contact, Anim Behav 12:101-110, 1964.
85. Lloyd JE: Firefly parasites and predators, Coleopt Bull 27:91-106, 1998.
86. Sydow SL, Lloyd JE: Distasteful fireflies sometimes emetic, but not lethal, Entomo? 58:312, 1998.
 87. Case MT,et al: Acute mouse and chronic dog toxicity studies of danthron, dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate,
poloxalkol and combinations, Drug Chem Toxicol 1(1):89 -101, 1977-1978.
88. Donowitz M, Binder Hj: Effect of dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate on colonic fluid and electrolyte move
ment, Gastroenterology 69:941-950, 1975.
89. Da Fox, et al: Surfactants selectively ablate enteric neurons of the rat jejunum, / Pharmacol Exp Ther
277(2):539-544, 1983.
90. Karlin DA,et al: Effect on dioctyl sodium sulfasuccinate feeding on rat colorectall,2-dimenthylhydrazine
carcinogenesis, I Natl Cancer Inst 64:791-793, 1980.
Chapter 20 | Poisonings in the Captive Reptile 249
91. Lish PM: Some pharmacological effects of dioctyl sodium sulfasuccinate on the gastrointestinal tract of
the rat, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 41(6):580-584, 1961.
92. Moffat RE,et al: Studies on dioctyl sodium sulfasuccinate toxicity: clinical, gross and microscopic pathol-
ogy in the horse and guinea pig, Can J Comp Med 39:434-441, 1975.
93. Saunders DR, et al: Effect of dioctyl sodium succinate on structure and function of human and rodent
intestine, Gastroenterology 69(2):380-386, 1975.
 94. Paul-Murphy I et al: Necrosis of esophageal and gastric mucosa in snakes given oral dioctyl sodium suc-
cinate,Procedings of the Ist International Conference ofZoological and Avian Medicine,Honolulu, HI,
1987.
95. Kirk RW: Current veterinary therapy in small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1976, Saunders.
96.Frye FL: Biomedical and surgical aspects ofcaptive reptile husbandry,Edwardsville,KY,1981,Veterinary
Medical Publishing.
97.9
 Shumacher J, Kohler G, Maxwell LK, etal: Husbandry and management. In Jacobson ER,editor: Biology,
husbandry, and medicine of the green iguana, Malabar, FL, 2003, Krieger Publishing.
CHAPTER
Small Mammal
21
Toxicology
Eric K. Dunayer, MS, VMD, DABT, DABVT
The poisoned small mammal patient may present a special challenge to the veterinary
practitioner although the basic approach should be the same as for dogs and cats.
Some toxicants are of particular interest in small mammals.
As with dogs and cats, decontamination is important to limit toxicant absorption.
Rodents and rabbits do not vomit, so emesis should not be attempted in them
saads iaael aie Aayl se siuapoi ui snoiaauep Aemoiled aie sappiuapoy
uncontrollable seizures.
· Ferrets are very sensitive to both ibuprofen and acetarminophen.
Introduction
Many people keep small mammals as pets. Ihese include rodents (rats, mice, hamsters,
guinea pigs, gerbils, and chinchillas), rabbits, ferrets, and other small mammals such as
 Sugar gliders and hedgehogs. These animals present challenges from a toxicologic stand-
point for several reasons. First, many are curious and easily escape their enclosures and thus
can be exposed to toxicants in the environment. Second, their small size means that even
small ingestions can lead to very large dosages on a mg/kg or mg/m? basis. Finally, their
physiology may present unique challenges in treating a poisoned animal.
Small mammals are exposed to the same toxicants as dogs and cats. In most cases, the
approach to treatment is the same. To cover all possible toxicants is beyond the scope of
this chapter. Iherefore, this chapter mainly covers differences in treatments between small
mammals and dog and cats, as well as toxicants of special interest in these species.
Decontamination
The approach to a poisoned small mammal should be the same as for larger animals, with
appropriate adjustment for their size and physiology. As with any poisoning, decontamina-
tion can be important to lessen exposure and reduce the risk of serious signs developing.
Appropriate decontamination is based on species exposed, toxicant, and clinical signs being
exhibited.
Although emesis is a standard procedure performed in dogs and cats, it cannot be used
in many of these animals. Rodents and rabbits are incapable of vomiting. Ferrets, however,
are capable of vomiting. Emesis can be attempted by using 3% hydrogen peroxide (1 mL/lb
by mouth [PO], repeated once if no emesis after 15 minutes, not to exceed 10 mL) or apo-
morphine (0.04 mg/kg intravenous or intramuscular [IM]).2 As with dogs and cats, emesis
should not be attempted in a ferret who is already vomiting or showing signs of central
nervous system depression or coma.
251
252SECTlON 2 General Exposures
Gastric lavage can be used with caution. Normally, gastric lavage should be performed
lavage fluid.! This may be diffcult inthe small patients. In addition, aggressive gastric lavage
in rabbits, who have thin-walled stomachs,3 can lead to a gastric rupture.
Some small mammals, such as hamsters, have cheek pouches. These are used to store
food and allow the animal to carry food back to their den where it can be eaten in safety.
In hamsters, the cheek pouches should be everted and a swab should be used carefully to
remove any material from them to prevent later ingestion.
Activated charcoal can be used for toxicants when its use is appropriate. It is most effec-
tive against large organic molecules and of limited to no use against small molecules (such
 as ethanol and ethylene glycol), heavy metals, and inorganic compounds. Careful atten-
o ay/a c-I st asop aul 'eauan un uoendse jo ystu aul anpai on papaau st aumon oi uo
1-3 mg/g. In many small mammals, the activated charcoal may need to be given by stomach
tube because the animal may be reluctant to voluntarily ingest it, or it may be mixed with a
tasty food to encourage ingestion.1.2
Cathartics, which speed up the movement of the toxicant through the gastrointesti-
nal tract, can be used. Generally, these should not be administered more than once a day
if multiple doses of activated charcoal are being given. Additionally, cathartic (especially
osmotically active ones like sorbitol) may enhance the loss of free water into the gut and
the development of hypernatremia. The patient should be monitored closely for signs of
hypernatremia such as depression, tremors, or seizures.2
For exposure to caustic or corrosive compounds, as well as petroleum distillates, dilu-
tion is the treatment of choice. Emesis is contraindicated, as is the use of activated charcoal.
In addition, gastric lavage should not be performed. Water, milk, fruit juices, or juicy fruits
(e.g., grapes or oranges) can be used as diluents.l2 However, the use of acidic fruits and fruit
juices should be avoided following an exposure to an alkaline substance as the resulting
testinal tract.l The administration of a large volume of diluent, particularly in species that
can vomit, can cause emesis and defeat the purpose for their use.
Dermal exposure is another common route of poisoning. Depending on the substance,
significant toxicant can be absorbed dermally,leading to system signs. In addition, in species
that are active groomers, dermal toxicants can become an oral exposure. As soon as possible
after exposure, the animal should be bathed. For water-soluble agents, flushing with large
volumes of water may be sufficient. If the substance is oily, a liquid hand dishwashing deter-
gent such as Dawn should be used. Human shampoos, pet shampoos, and flea shampoos
should not be used as these don't adequately degrease the fur and may be toxic to the patient.
The animal should be bathed and rinsed until there is no toxic residue remaining. The water
temperature should be carefully controlled to prevent chilling of small patients. The patient
should be stabilized prior to attermpting bathing as the stress may worsen clinical signs.2
In the case of ocular exposure, the eye should be flushed with tepid water or saline solution.
Contact lens soaking and cleaning solutions, as well as ocular decongestants, should not be
used. In large mammals, a slow stream of water from a tap may be used. In smaller mammals,
d a ,  n saqu  ae aim y aae
under a stream from the faucet. The eye should be flushed for 10-15 minutes but this can be
done in short intervals to allow the animal to recover between flushings. After flushing, the
eye should be monitored for signs of inflammation or ulceration and treated appropriately.12
 Intravenous fluids, when appropriate, should be administered. Although intravenous
catheterization is possible in some species, in smaller animals, intraosseous fluid adminis-
tration may be required. Careful attention to fluid rates is needed to avoid fluid overload.1
Rodents
 Ironically, although rodents are commonly used in toxicology testing and in development
and regulation of drugs, pesticides, and other consumer products, there is virtually noth-
ing written on clinical toxicology in these species. Although LDso values exist for many
Chapter 2l | Small Mammal Toxicology 253
chemicals in rats and mice, such data is of limited use clinically. LDso values do not indicate
what the minimum toxic or lethal doses are, what signs are expected from an exposure, or
what treatments are indicated. Therefore, the use of such results should be used with cau-
tion. However, other toxicology data on drugs may be available via a literature search.
A few toxicants are of particular importance in rodents and are discussed.
Rodenticides
Ys ieed ie ane siuapau lad siuaee asaul rog saioads iaaiei al ane suapon asmesag
if they are exposed. Again, their curious nature, small size (which allows them to get into
small areas where the agents are placed), and low body weight all predispose the animals
to increased risk. In addition, baits are formulated to be particularly palatable to rodents;
most are grain based and sweetened to attract rodents. Currently there are five rodenticides
approved for use in the United States: anticoagulants, bromethalin, cholecalciferol, strych-
nine, and zinc phosphide. All of these are discussed elsewhere in the book, so Ilimit discus-
sion here. Many of the comments in this section also apply to rabbits and ferrets.
Anticoagulant rodenticides work by blocking the recycling of vitamin K, which is
needed for activation of precoagulation factors to their active form. Most anticoagulant
rdenticides sold today are the second-generation or long-acting agents; a single feeding is
capable of leading to a fatal bleeding diathesis. Treatment for an exposed rodent is, for the
most part, the same as for any other animals. Because emesis is not an option, gastric lavage
may be attempted with care. A dose of activated charcoal can be given to reduce absorption
of the toxicant. The main treatment is administration of vitamin K, (phytonadione) either
orally or by injection (injected vitamin K, carries an increased risk of anaphylactic reaction
regardless of route). The dose for vitamin K, in dogs is 2.5-5 mg/kg divided twice a day;
length of treatment depends on the compound ingested and ranges from 14-30 days mini-
 mum.4 One source recommends 1-10 mg/kg IM for rodents and rabbits.5 One of the biggest
 problems is accurately dosing the vitamin K,. Ihe smallest tablet available comes as 5 mg,
whereas a small rat or mouse may require less than 1 mg for each dose. Although overdose
 of oral vitamin K, is usually well tolerated, there have been reports of hypersensitivity reac-
can be given orally. Vitamin K, injection is reported to have a foul taste. However, because
vitamin K, should always be given with a fatty meal to enhance absorption, the liquid can
be mixed with peanut butter or other suitable fatty food to mask the taste.2
In patients who are actively bleeding, the goal is to restore clotting function and volume
as needed. Vitamin K, administration is important; however, there may be a lag period of
16-24 hours or more before sufficient levels of active factors have been produced. There-
fore exogenous factors, usually through a whole blood or fresh plasma transfusion, need
to be given to breach the gap.5 This involves finding a suitable donor and obtaining blood
for administration. Logistically this may be difficult in small mammals. In addition, blood
cross matching would need to be done to avoid adverse transfusion reactions, especially if
whole blood is used.
 Bromethalin is a neurotoxic rodenticide. Guinea pigs are relatively resistant to the toxic
effects of bromethalin. Although LDsos in most species are in the 2-10 mg/kg range, it is
1000 mg/kg in guinea pigs. They lack the hepatic enzymes to desmethylate bromethalin to
form the much more toxic metabolite desmethylbromethalin.6
Unlike anticoagulants, no effective antidotes exist for bromethalin and treatment is
  d a  sia   s  a 
Again, because emesis is not an option in rodents and rabbits, administration of activated
charcoal is important. Multiple doses of activated charcoal should be given to both prevent
absorption of bait in the gastrointestinal tract as well as to interrupt enterohepatic recir-
culation. In dogs and cats, at least 6 doses of activated charcoal over a 48-hour period are
recommended.6 Once signs begin, treatment is supportive and symptomatic. The use of
agents to reduce cerebral edema (such as mannitol, furosemide, and corticosteroids) has
not been shown to be useful. One study in rats’ demonstrated that ginkgo biloba extract
administered at 100 mg/kg immediately after an exposure to bromethalin reduced edema
254SECTlON 2 General Exposures
formation. However, the study followed rats for only 48 hours postexposure so the long-
term efficacy of this treatment is unknown. Apparently no follow-up studies have been
performed.
 Cholecalciferol (vitamin D) rodenticides cause hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia
leading to mineralization of sof tissue. Death is generally due to acute renal failure. As with
bromethalin, aggressive decontamination with multiple doses of activated charcoal is indi-
cated. Standard treatment for cholecalciferol toxicosis includes saline diuresis, furosemide,
and corticosteroids to increase renal calcium loss as well decrease gastrointestinal calcium
absorption. One of the most effective treatments is the administration of pamidronate, a
bisphosphonate, to decrease calcium mobilization from the bone. The drug is expensive
 and must be administered intravenously, which may limit its use in small patients.
Strychnine ingestion causes rigid paralysis and seizures. Onset of signs can be rapid and
death can occur before treatment can be rendered. Generally treatment consists of gastric
lavage, administration of activated charcoal (although aspiration is a serious risk), and con-
trolling the neurologic signs. Muscle relaxants (such as methocarbamol), acepromazine,
seizure control, and assisted ventilation may be indicated.? The prognosis is generally poor.
Zinc phosphide is an inorganic compound. In an acid environment (i.e., the stomach),
zinc phosphide is converted to phosphine gas. Signs may be delayed if the stomach is empty
and may occur rapidly after a meal. In general, animals who can vomit have a higher toler-
ance to zinc phosphide because they can self-decontaminate; therefore rodents are more
mals who recover may develop renal or hepatic failure up to 2 weeks after the exposure.
Treatment is supportive and symptomatic.1
Antibiotic Enterocolitis
 of antibiotics can lead to antibiotic-associated enterotoxemia. These animals have a gut
flora that is mainly gram-positive bacteria; antibiotics can eradicate these bacteria, leading
leading to hemorrhagic typhilitis. Antibiotics that cause this condition include β-lactams
(ampicillin, penicillin), lincosamides (clindamycin, lincomycin), erythromycin, and chlor-
tetracycline.13 There may be a dose-related effect, with the animal able to tolerate lower
doses of the drugs.
Treatment, which is symptomatic and supportive, includes supporting body tempera-
ture and maintaining hydration. Supplemental oral administration of bacteria to reestab-
lish normal flora may speed recovery. The administration of Lactobacilhus spp. or use of
species-appropriate fecal slurries has been recommended. Chloramphenicol (50 mg/kg q8h
 PO) may suppress the clostridial overgrowth. In rabbits, cholestyramine (an ion-exchange
resin) has been shown to absorb bacterial toxin and improve survival; this may be useful
in other species.11
 Prevention includes using the proper antibiotics and at proper dosages. Simultaneous
oral administration of Lactobacillus spp. or yogurt during antibiotic treatment and for sev-
eral days beyond may be helpful as well.
Rabbits
A review of toxicology in rabbits has been published in the Veterinary Clinics of North
America—ExoticPractice.3
Fipronil
 The use of fipronil-containing flea products such as spot-ons or sprays has been associated
with seizures in rabbits.3 Following exposure, the rabbits develop anorexia and lethargy
aliquid hand dishwashing detergent (such as Dawn) as soon as possible after the exposure,
uaisue paisaans aae as eixanoe au r aies aaodns pue snendus pue
Chapter 2l | Small Mammal Toxicology 255
activated charcoal as the rabbit may have ingested the agent. Benzodiazepine anticonvul-
sants such as diazepam can be used to attempt to control the seizures. However, in my
experience, prognosis is guarded once seizures begin.13
Avocado
Ingestion of avocado (Persea americana) can be toxic to rabbits.l4 Ingestion of the leaves
    se q s d i a s   
does, a sterile mastitis can develop. Although the animals usually recover, they may have a
myocardial necrosis leading to cardiac arrhythmias, submandibular edema, and death.
Prognosis for these rabbits is poor.14
Household Plants
 As grazers, rabbits may ingest household and garden plants. They may be adapted to certain
plant toxins and so are more resistant to some plants than carnivores. For instance, rabbits
have an atropinase in their blood that makes them resistant to plants that contain tropane
allkaloids.'5 Rabbits are also resistant to muscarinic mushrooms because of poor absorption
of the toxin. However, ingestion of any plant known to be toxic to other species should be
should be based on general therapies for that plant.
Ferrets
As with rodents, not much information exists about toxic exposures in ferrets. At least
one review of exposures reported to the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals Animal Poison Control Center has been publishied.16 The agents that ferrets were
exposed to were very similar to those seen in dogs and cats (Box 21-1). In most cases, signs
are similar to those seen in dogs and cats, and treatments are the same. However, some
agents of special concern are discussed.
Ibuprofen
Ferrets appear to be particularly sensitive to ibuprofen toxicosis.17 Signs can develop in as
ittle as 4 hours but may take up to 48 hours to develop. Unlike dogs and cats, in which
gastrointestinal and renal signs predominate, ferrets develop neurologic signs, including
ataxia, tremors, seizure, and coma. Neurologic signs developed in almost 95% of ferrets in
one study.17 In addition, gastrointestinal and renal signs may develop. Dosages of more than
 220 mg/kg can be lethal; this can be as little as one 200-mg tablet in a ferret.
 Following ingestion, emesis can be attermpted in asymptomatic ferrets. This can be
followed with multiple doses of activated charcoal because ibuprofen undergoes entero-
hepatic recirculation. Ferrets showing neurologic signs are at an increased risk for aspi-
ration if they vomit the activated charcoal. Other treatment should include intravenous
diuresis (two times the maintenance dose for at least 48 hours) to protect the kidneys and
gastrointestinal protectants such as Hz blockers and sucralfate (Carafate) to minimize
gastric ulcers.7 Misoprostol, a synthetic prostaglandin, may prevent gastric ulceration.
However, because of the ferret's small size, accurately administering the drug is dificult
unless it is compounded. Comatose ferrets should be kept warm and closely monitored,
particularly in regard to respiration. Seizures should be controlled as needed. The use of
naloxone to reverse coma has been suggested but has not been fully evaluated. Gener-
prognosis is guarded.
Acetaminophen
Ferrets appear to be particularly sensitive to acetaminophen'& although not as sensitive as
the ferrets given 200 mg/kg died.19 Acetaminophen overdose can cause hepatic necrosis
256SECTlON 2 General Exposures
Box21-1
 Most Common Exposures Reported to the Animal Poison Control
Center for Ferrets
 Miscellaneous medications
Cleaning products (including bleaches)
Insecticides
 Fea products
Ibuprofen
Anticoagulant rodenticides
Chocolate
Acetaminophen
Venlafaxine (Effexor)
Bromethalin
Toxic plants
Paint
 Soaps and shampoos
Adapted from Dunayer E: Toxicology of ferrets, Vet Clin Exot Anirm ll:301-314, 2008
(sa gia jo mo soda ao o 0i) 2oz Jaqadas-oz aqwaa 
and methemoglobinemia. Treatment consists of aggressive decontamination (emesis and
activated charcoal), monitoring hepatic enzymes (especially leakage enzymes such as
alanine aminotransferase), monitoring for methemoglobinemia, and N-acetylcysteine.
metabolite and enhance removal from the body. It is administered as a 5% solution orally;
a loading dose of 140-280 mg/kg is given, and then 70 mg/kg is given every 6 hours for an
additional 7 doses. The drug can be given intravenously if a sterile solution is available.20
Conclusion
 Although treating small mammals that have been exposed to poisons may present unique
 problems, a careful approach, keeping in mind species-specific differences, can lead to a
successful therapeutic outcome.
References
1. Lichtenberger M, Richardson JIA: Emergency care and managingtoxicoses in exotic animal patients, Vet
Clin Exot Anim 11(2):211-228, 2008.
 2. DeClementi C: Prevention and treatment of poisoning. In Gupta RC, editor: Veterinary toxicology,
St Louis, 2007, Elsevier, pp 1139-1158.
3. Donnelly TM: Rabbits: basic anatomy, physiology, and husbandry. In Hillyer EV, Quesenberry KE,
editors: Ferrets rabbits, and rodents: clinical medicine and surgery, Philadelphia, 1997, Saunders,
Pp 147-168.
4. Means C: Anticoagulant rodenticides. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis,
2004, Mosby,pp 444-446.
5. Plumb DC: Phytonadione vitamin K1. Plumb's veterinary drug handbook,ed 5, Malden, MA,2005, Black-
well, pp 635-637.
6. Dunayer E: Bromethalin: the other rodenticide, Vet Med 98(9):732-736, 2003.
7. Dorman DC, et al: Efects ofan extract of ginkgo biloba on bromethalin-induced cerebral lipid peroxida-
tion and edema in rats, Am J Vet Res 53(1):138-142, 1992.
8. Morrow CK, Volmer PA: Cholecalciferol. In Plumlee KH,editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis,
2004, Mosby, Pp 448-451.
9. Talcott PA: Stychnine. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2004, Mosby,
PPp 454-456.
10. Albretsen JC: Zinc phosphide. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2004,
Mosby, pp 456-458.
Chapter 21 | Small Mammal Toxicology 257
11. Schaeffer DO: Gastrointestinal diseases of guinea pigs. In Hillyer EV, Quesenberry KE, editors: Ferrets,
mbbits, and rodents: clinical medicine and surgery, Philadelphia, 1997, WB Saunders, pp 261-263.
12. Harkness JE, Wagner JE: The biology and medicine ofrabbits and rodents,ed 3, Philadelphia, 1989, Lea &
Febiger, p 56-57.
13. Johnston MS: Clinical toxicology of domestic rabbits, Vet Clin Exot A nim 11:315-326, 2008.
14. Pickrell JA, et al: Avocado. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2004, Mosby,
Pp 424-425.
15. Richardson VCG: Rabbits: health, husbandry, and disease, Malden, MA, 2000, Blackwell, p 151.
16. Dunayer E: Toxicology of ferrets, Vet Clin Exot A nim 11:301-314, 2008.
Emer Crit Care Soc 11(1):53-59, 2001.
18. Wickstom ML, Eason CT: Literature search for mustelid-specific toxicants, Sci Conservations 127E:
57-65, 1999.
19. O'Connor CE: Evaluation of new toxins for mustelid control. Wellington, New Zealand, 2002, Depart-
ment of Conservation. From http://www.doc.govt.nz/upload/documents/science-and-technical/DSIS56
pdf Accessed October 20, 2007.
20. Sellon RK: Acetaminophen. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA, editors: Small animal toxicology, ed 2, St Louis,
2006, Elsevier-Saunders, pp 550-558.
CHAPTER
22
Poisoning in the Avian
Patient
Jerry l. LaBonde, Ms, DVM
Principles of Avian Toxicology
In avian toxicology it is difficult to generalize from mammals to birds because of the
uniqueness of the avian physiology. Often, what is considered safe for a human or other
mammal may be toxic to a bird. There is considerable variation between avian species in
their response to different toxins. In general, the smaller the bird, the more sensitive it is
to toxic exposures. Toxins have a more profound effect in very young, very old, or com-
promised birds (especially with liver disease). The avian respiratory system is extremely
sensitive to many different types of gases and smoke. Relatively rapid transit times and
gastrointestinal (Gl) absorption combined with a high metabolic rate accelerate the effects
of an ingested toxin. In aviary or multiple-bird homes, usually many birds are affected.
Environmental conditions such as ventilation and temperature affect toxin exposure.
Free-ranging wildlife such as raptors, waterfowl, and game fowl can be exposed to numer-
ous toxicants in their environment. Toxicant exposure can result in mortalities, but often
morbidity is a more significant factor manifest as decreased reproductive performance
and inability to thrive. Ihese exposures can be from primary exposure to a toxicant or a
of the food chain with a wide range of distribution, play a role as biomonitors or sentinels
of ecosystem health.
Toxicoses in avian species are a dose-response relationship. The dose of a toxicant is
the most important factor in determining the response in an avian patient. There are many
household and environmental substances that may affect a bird's homeostasis. There are
also many therapeutic options for birds such as synthetic and natural drugs, nutraceuticals,
and alternative therapies for which safe levels have not been established.
The diagnosis of a toxicosis in the avian patient is sometimes a clinical challenge. This
diagnosis is based largely on history and clinical signs because specific tests for most toxi-
cants are not available. Most owners are unaware of potential toxic substances and a com-
plete history may be diffcult to obtain. Birds readily chew or ingest foreign materials and,
as a group,they appear overly sensitive to toxicants. It is difficult to generalize about clinical
disease of toxicants and birds because each species may respond in a specific way, there are
many classes of poisons, and toxicosis can mimic other diseases. When presented with wild-
life cases, toxicosis should always be on the differential diagnosis until proven otherwise.
Diagnosis of Toxicoses
It is not uncommon for birds to be brought to the veterinarian with an acute toxicosis. Tox-
icity is usually dose dependent. A fundamental diagnostic approach starts with a history,
including a review of potential toxicant sources and routes of exposure. However, often the
owner is unaware of toxin exposure to the bird. Without a history of toxin exposure, the
diagnosis is often made by ruling out infectious, contagious, and metabolic diseases. Occa-
sionally the clinical signs may reveal a fingerprint or toxic syndrome indicative of a specific
259
260SECTION 2 General Exposures
poison (e.g.,hematuria and neurologic signs are a fingerprint forlead toxicosis). Identifying
the toxicant is secondary to stabilizing the patient and treating the clinical signs.
may be limited on the vast array of toxicant substances birds may be exposed to. Ihe
Veterinary Information Network can provide Internet access to information from board-
certified veterinary toxicologists. Poison information centers are helpful and provide
rapid access to critical information. Ihe Certified Regional Poison Control Centers
the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Animal Poison Control
Center, and Pet Poison HELPLINE may have sketchy amounts of avian-related informa-
tion, but they do provide information on the physiologic effects of various compounds
and chemicals. Knowing the physiologic effects of a toxicant can direct the veterinarian's
course of treatment.
 i ps a sison e un u masn ae sn os
laboratory to confirm its ability to handle small samples and the amount of sample required
before submission. Samples that are submitted include plasma, serum, whole blood, tissue
(frozen or fresh), and gastric contents. The submission of paired samples from unaffected
rarely show a toxicologic cause. Two sets of tissues should be collected at postmortem, one
set for histopathologic examination in 10% buffered formalin and one set frozen for toxico-
logic examination. For toxicologic examinations, brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves
should be included in both sets of tissues.2
Management of Toxicoses
A fundamental six-step approach in the treatment of avian toxicities appears to work best.
 One must focus on treating the patient, not the toxin.
Step I: Stabilize the patient. This includes emergency therapy to maintain normal meta-
bolic, respiratory, cardiovascular, and neurologic function.
Step 2: Prevent further exposure. Remove all birds from the affected environment. Ven-
tilate the area. Flush or wash the bird's skin and feathers to remove the toxin. For
ingestion of acids (corrosive), internally dilute with milk or water. Externally flush
with water and apply sodium bicarbonate paste. For ingestion of alkali compounds
(caustic), internally dilute with vinegar (1:4), lemon juice, or diluted egg whites fol-
lowed by a cathartic. Externally flush with water and apply vinegar.3
Step 3: Delay further absorption. Because emetics are contraindicated in birds, absorp-
tion of toxins is delayed by crop or proventricular lavage, the use of adsorbents and
cathartics, or surgical removal. Intubation of an anesthetized bird is necessary for
crop or proventricular lavaging. Activated charcoal is an adsorbent. Prepare a slurry
(e.g., 1 g/5-10 mL H,O) dose 1-4 g/kg.45 Many commercial activated charcoal slurry
   s as ai s o 'i  s s  sio
coal alone. Pulse dosing every 4-6 hours should be considered with toxins that have
enteric coatings or marked hepatic biliary recirculation.? Activated charcoal (with-
out sorbitol) is recommended for pulse dosing if the bird is dehydrated. Activated
charcoal is not effective for corrosive substances, petroleum distillate, or heavy met-
als. A second, weak adsorbent is bismuth sulfate at 1-2 mL/kg orally.4
Step 4: Institute physiologic antagonist therapy. There are few antidotes for specific
toxins.
Step 5: Facilitate removal of absorbed toxicants. Diuresis, heat, and the use of cathartics
or bulk diets aid in the removal of toxins. Be careful with cathartics because they can
 cause dehydration and hypotension. Bulk diet: % tsp of psyllium in 60 mL of baby
food, gruel, or tube-feeding mixture.3
 includes heat, fluids, nutritional supplementation, antibiotics, and other indicated
drugs.
Chapter 22 | Poisoning in the Avian Patient  261
latrogenic Toxicoses
Any pharmaceutical, supplement, or homeopathic compound is potentially toxic when used
in inappropriate doses or routes in birds. There is a wide variety of potential toxic reactions
to drug agents used by veterinarians and over-the-counter or prescription drugs used in the
home. More notable iatrogenic toxicoses in pet birds are aminoglycosides, fenbendazole
and albendazole, and over-supplementation of vitamins D and A.67 If a toxic reaction to an
over-the-counter drug is suspected, consulting with poison information centers is advised
to learn the potential physiologic effects of the drug. Parrots have been known to chew on
owners' medications, but determining how much was ingested can be difficult. Activated
charcoal is indicated for suspicious ingestions, and if the bird is presented immediately
is based on clinical signs.
Inhalant Toxins
 Inhalant toxicoses are the most common toxicoses observed in pet birds. The effciency
al u sang io sasea oi aqdassns ano spiq sae uuaisas Aroendsan ueiae a jo
sniq iad al eau Ainxoid ro asn aeindoidd jo isan e ae aor al u aunio
Ventilation, temperature, and humidity can affect the toxic potential of many airborne
toxins. Smaller avian species are more susceptible to inhalant toxins. Smoke from cook-
ing or burning material and fumes from aerosols or cleaning agents are frequent causes
of inhalant toxicosis. Any strong odor or aerosolized particulates from any household
product can be potentially toxic. Many standard vacuum cleaners have a filtered exhaust
that can emit microaerosolized particulates into the air. When inhaled, these particu-
lates can cause respiratory compromise. Standard ventilators or stove-top filters do not
sufficiently clear the air of toxic particles. When any gases or fumes are present in the
home or aviary, the birds should be removed from the house and windows opened for
ventilation.
With any toxic inhalant exposure, the veterinarian needs to treat the clinical signs pre-
ics for pulmonary edema, broad-spectrum antibiotics, antinflammatories, analgesics, and
supportive fluid and heat therapy. The use of antinflammatory steroids is controversial and
in some cases may even worsen the condition.8 Residues from smoke can be washed off the
feathers with diluted dish soap once the bird is stable.
Polytetrafluoroethylene
Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), or polymer fume fever, poisonings are one of the more
common airborne toxins reported in birds. Sources of PTFE are nonstick surfaces on prod-
ucts such as cookware, drip pans (which can reach temperatures of 600° F), heat lamp cov-
ers, irons, and ironing board covers. The gas is emitted when the surface undergoes pyrolysis
at 280° C (536° F) and the PTFE is degraded.910 Acute death resulting from respiratory
failure is the most common result, but mild exposures exhibit moist rales, dyspnea, ataxia,
depression, or anxious behavior. At necropsy, hemorrhagic and edematous lungs are the
 on histopathologic analysis as well as pulmonary edema, hemorrhage, and necrosis.1l1z
Smoke Inhalation
The primary cause of death in most smoke inhalation toxicoses is carbon monoxide (CO).
There are, however, other irritant (aldehydes, HCl, sulfur dioxide) and nonirritant (CO,
dsan aiaaas asnes us iel sa aneied se tam se sasea (aiuas uaoipay ro
tory trauma. Carbon monoxide from incomplete combustion of fires, combustible engines
(such as poorly ventilated vehicles, a concern with raptors being transported), and some
poorly maintained furnaces can result in acute deaths. Carbon monoxide does not injure
262 SECTlON 2 General Exposures
the lungs, but it decreases the oxygen-carrying capacity of hemoglobin in the blood result-
ing in dyspnea, depression, ataxia, nausea, and death. Carbon dioxide buildup will lower
available oxygen as well as acting as a respiratory stimulant, resulting in increased inhala-
tion of other toxic constituents of smoke. Hydrogen cyanide causes cellular inability to use
 Oxygen, further complicating smoke inhalation.13
The primary concern with irritant gases (aldehydes, HCl, sulfur dioxide) is delayed,
complicated pulmonary failure. These clinical problems may not surface for days.3 There-
fore persistent monitoring and treatment should continue for days up to 3 weeks following
smoke exposure.14
Treatment of smoke inhalation includes access to fresh air immediately, followed
by emergency therapy as needed. Oxygen in a dark, stress-free environment is used to
stabilize, and, if possible, humidified oxygen or nebulized saline in oxygen will mini-
mize drying of secretions and seeding of bacteria. Bronchodilator therapy can be used to
alleviate reflex bronchospasms. Bronchodilator therapy includes terbutaline 0.01 mg/kg
intramuscularly (IM) every 6 hours or nebulization of terbutaline at 0.01 mg/kg in 9 mL
of 0.9% saline.415 Fluid therapy will aid in cardiac output and enhance oxygen delivery
to tissues.
Tobacco smoke via passive inhalation can result in chronic respiratory problems, pul-
monary fbrosis, increased susceptibility to bacterial invasion, ocular irritation, and some
dermatologic problems, most commonly on the feet or face. Coughing, sneezing, and con-
junctivitis are the most common clinical signs. Exposure to second-hand smoke has been
shown to increase atherosclerotic plaques in cockerels.12 The ingestion of nicotine can also
cause problems such as vomiting, diarrhea, hyperexcitability, seizures, and death. Therapy
for secondary illnesses caused by tobacco exposure will only help if the bird is removed
from the chronic exposure to these products.
There are many household products that have been anecdotally reported as toxic to
birds. The primary cause of respiratory compromise is due to contact irritation of lungs and
air sacs. Any aerosolized product from a spray or aerosolized from wind or vacuuming can
be potentially toxic. Many of these products may be considered nontoxic unless airborne
and inhaled in a specific concentration.
 Inhaled or aspirated particulates or medications can cause severe tracheal inflammation
(Box 22-1). Mucoid obstruction can occur in the trachea or at the syrinx. Humidified air,
 bronchodilators, and placement of an abdominal air sac for breathing should be considered
for treatment.
Box 22-1
Inhalant Household Toxins
Air fresheners and scented candles
Ammonia and strong bleach
Automobile exhaust, carbon monoxide
Bug bombs, pesticide strips and sprays
Burning foods and cooking oils
Chemical sprays (i.e., disinfectants, deodorizers, furniture polish, etc.)
Fluoropolymers from spray starch
 Glues, paints, nail polish and polish remover 
Hair permanents and hair sprays
Hair dryer fumes (primarily from new hair dryers)
Leaded gasoline fumes
 Most nonstick cooking surfaces (i.e., pots, pans, woks, drip pans, ovens, baking sheets,
irons)
Mothballs (naphthalene, paradichlorobenzene)
Self-cleaning ovens
Smoke (tobacco or any other source)
Chapter 22 | Poisoning in the Avian Patient  263
Miscellaneous Household Toxins
There are numerous household products to which a bird could potentially be exposed.
When inappropriate use occurs, birds are easily affected, with a clinical history of acute
onset with no changes in diet or environment. Pet bird owners should always be questioned
if any household products, aerosols, or cleaning agents have been recently used in the home
  a a a o  s a  m sd  a 
 sensitivity their birds have to everyday products. For example, an Amazon parrot exhibited
Aqeau e ol seinaioid ueistue to-aeds e patdde rauao te iae ssans Aroieiidsai anaaa
sofa.l6 Because of the numerous products used in the home, birds should be treated accord-
ing to their clinical signs and condition.
 Clinical signs and therapy of some common household product exposures are briefly
discussed.17.18
Alcohol
Exposures can be from ingestion or topical absorption. Clinical signs depend on the amount
of exposure and include lethargy, ataxia, regurgitation, and death. Therapy includes fluid
therapy and placing the bird in a warm, dark incubator.
Aluminum Chloride
 Aluminum chloride is found in deodorants and can cause oral irritation, hemorrhagic gas-
ventriculus and administration of GI protectants.
Ammonia
 Ammonia is found in cleaning agents. The primary clinical sign is respiratory irritation.
 Treatment involves fresh air, oxygen, and supportive therapy.
Chlorine
Chlorine is found in bleaches and hot tub and pool chemicals. Clinical signs include epiph-
ora, photophobia, respiratory distress, and Gl irritation. Treatment involves flushing the
eyes or skin with water or milk, or, in the case of ingestion, milk of magnesia orally or dilu-
tion with water.
Cooking Oils
Common problems caused by cooking oils include skin burns and hypothermia with con-
 tact exposures. With ingestion (preening feathers), diarrhea, dehydration, regurgitation,
and pneumonia may occur. Activated charcoal is helpful, but hypothermia and sepsis from
burns are the primary concerns. An absorbent towel or corn starch can be used to soak up
excess oil, but a series of warm, mild detergent baths may be needed. Baths should only be
given once the bird is warmed and stable.
Disinfectants (Phenolic Compounds)
Phenolic compound products are rapidly absorbed through ingestion, inhalation, or dermal
contact. Corrosive burns can occur on the skin, eyes, and respiratory tract. GI burns of the
mouth, pharynx, and esophagus may occur. Clinical signs include open-mouth panting.
vomiting, ataxia, shock, coma, and death. Treatment is similar to that required by cationic
soaps, with special attention to acid base status and renal and hepatic function.
Disinfectants (Pine Oils)
Pine oil products can be mixed with phenols or terpene alcohols. Irritation to mucous
membranes can result in conjunctivitis, photophobia, vomiting, and abdominal pain.
Respiratory depression, ataxia, and death may also occur. Treatment includes dilution with
264SECTION2 GeneralExposures
Nicotine
 Sources include tobacco products. Depression, tachycardia, cyanosis, and dyspnea can be
observed. Treatments include absorbents, cathartics, and supportive therapy.
Petroleum-Based Products
Petroleum-based products include mineral spirits, nail polish remover, furniture polish,
gasoline, and paint removers. Clinical signs include skin irritation, mental depression, and
sure, wash with a mild detergent. If ingestion has occurred, sucralfate (25 mg/kg, PO every
8 hours) is indicated if vomiting is not present.4 Supportive therapy, oxygen, and treatment
for potential pneumonia is indicated.
Soaps and Detergents (Anionic)
Anionic soaps and detergents are usually alkaline corrosive products found in laundry
detergents, dish washer detergents, and shampoos. Clinical signs include ocular irrita-
tion, vomiting, diarrhea, and GI pain. Treat by flushing the eyes with water, or, if ingestion
occurs, milk or water should be given to dilute. Activated charcoal may be of benefit. Ani-
mals with cutaneous exposures should be thoroughly bathed.
Soaps and Detergents (Cationic)
Cationic soaps and detergents are usually quaternary ammonium compounds found in
clearning products, fabric softeners, germicides, and sanitizers. Clinical signs can be severe
and include vomiting, corrosive damage, weakness, muscle tremors, seizures, coma, and
a   u s  
mic, isotonic saline for 15-20 minutes.
Food and Plant Toxicoses
Foods
Iron storage liver disease, hemochromatosis, can occur in soft-bill species sensitive to dietary
level of iron such as toucans, mynahs, hornbills, birds of paradise, and starlings.19,20 To a lesser
extent, lories show a species predilection to iron storage liver disease, but it is unclear if it is
due to high levels of dietary iron or excess of dietary vitamin C or A that facilitate iron absorp-
tion.2l Clinical signs include anorexia, dyspnea, and ascites. Clinical pathologic findings often
reveal elevated packed cell volume,liver enzymes, and bile acids. Treatment involves restricted
vitamin C and vitamin A and low-iron diets.2z23 Abdominal centesis of ascetic fluid to aid in
respiration can help stabilize a critical patient. Phlebotomies and iron chelators such as def-
Eroxamine mesylate (Desferal) and deferiprone (Ferriprox) should be considered as well.4.24
Chocolate toxicosis usually occurs as a result of overindulgent owners or pet psittacines
having free range in the home. Toxic doses have not been established in birds, but what may
seem a small amount to the owner could be a toxic dose in a small bird. Clinical signs are
due to methylxanthines (caffeine and theobromine) and include tachycardia, hypertension,
ventricular arrhythmia, diarrhea, polyuria, and seizures. In avian cases, hepatic, renal, pul-
monary, and central nervous systems are affected.12.25
Onion and garlic (Allium genus) are human foods that can cause problems when pro-
vided in significant amounts related to the size of the bird. Garlic is used by humans as a
neutraceutical for parasite control or as an antioxidant that can be dangerous when given
to birds.12.26 A Pionus parrot was presented dead after the owner administered a % clove
 of garlic orally because the bird was not feeling well. All parts of the plants contain sulfur-
containing compound and are considered toxic; they are toxic when fresh, dried, or cooked.
malities include anemia, anisocytosis, intra- and extravascular hemolysis, hemoglobinuria,
hemoglobinuric nephrosis, and hemosiderin in the liver.26
Chapter 22 | Poisoning in the Avian Patient 265
Avocado (Persea americana) ingestion can elicit variable toxic reactions. Ihere may also
be variability in toxicity between different types of avocados. Not all species of birds are
equally affected, making a dose-response relationship difficult to establish. Studies in budge-
rigars fed 1-mL doses of a water and avocado mixture led to death within 24 to 48 hours.27
Larger birds can exhibit agitation, feather pulling, lethargy, and dyspnea. At necropsy, sub-
cutaneous edema, pericardial effusion, and organ congestion are observed. Persin has been
identified as the toxin in mammals but has not been established in birds.12
Sodium chloride or salt toxicities can be observed from ingestion of excessive amounts
of salt (salted nuts and crackers) or from contaminated water. 28 Clinical signs include poly-
dipsia, depression, hemoglobinuria, excitement, tremors, torticollis, opisthotonus, ataxia,
and death. Neurologic signs are due to cerebral edema. Treatment involves diuretics and
fluids such as 5% dextrose in water or 2.5% dextrose in 0.45% saline.14
Plants
Plant toxicoses are a common concern among pet bird owners. However, the frequency
of clinical toxicoses from exposure is rare. Toxic plant species reported in clinical studies
are listed in Table 22-1. There is wide species variation to plant toxins, and adverse effects
are often dose dependent. Frequently, the plant is chewed on but not ingested. The most
common clinical signs are oral lesions, lethargy, and regurgitation. Treatment includes sup-
portive care, and the use of adsorbents and cathartics may be indicated.
For reported plant toxicities in clinical cases or studies, see Table 22-1.
Heavy-Metal Toxicities
Heavy-metal poisoning is one of the most commonly reported avian toxicoses because of
the ubiquitous availability of heavy-metal sources and the tendency of birds to chew on
objects in their environment. Lead is the most common toxicity and is followed by zinc,
copper, and iron.
Lead
 There are numerous sources of lead that birds can chew on and ingest, including toys with
lead-based metal, bells with lead clappers, hardware cloth, galvanized wire, stained glass
windows, Tiffany lamps, antique or costume jewelry, curtain weights, lead solder, fishing
weights, foil from champagne or cognac bottles, improperly glazed ceramics, mirror backs,
batteries, and paint applied prior to 1955.33 For wildlife, the primary concern is ingestion of
lead shot or fishing weights. Lead shot has been banned for use on state and federal lands
since 1991 in the United States, but can still be used on private land for game bird or rodent
De Ty a io mam aq dn d aq us sae aa u ue uas 
Exposure can occur in scavenging birds such as crows, ravens, eagles, hawks, vultures, and
condors.3s Ingestion of the metal is most likely needed for a toxicosis. Lead shot or frag-
ments imbedded in tissue does not appear to be a toxic burden to the animal; however,
long-term exposure in the tissue can lower the dose needed at ingestion of lead to produce
clinical signs.l.36
 Clinical signs of lead exposure are dose dependent and multisystemic, involving the
hematopoietic, neurologic, Gl, and renal systems. Renal effects are not observed in rap-
tors. In pet birds, the most common clinical signs, in decreasing order, are depression,
weakness, regurgitation, polyuria and polydipsia, seizures, hemoglobinuria, and diarrhea.
In waterfowl and raptors, blindness, drooped wings, peripheral neuropathy, Gl stasis,
bright green diarrhea, and biliverdinuria are additional clinical signs observed.34.37 Spe-
cies’ tolerance variations are reported in raptors. Turkey vultures (Cafharfes aura) and
as bald eagles (Haliaeetus leucocephalus), before showing clinical signs.l3& Birds with acute
exposures appear in good flesh but may be mildly anemic and hypoproteinemic, with slow
and have hemoglobinuria or biliverdinuria. Birds suffering from chronic exposures are
Table 22-1
Toxic Plant Species
Plant
Clinical Signs and Pathologic Findings
Toxin and Plant Parts
266
Avocado (Persia americana)
Agitation, feather pulling, anorexia, dyspnea, death; pulmonary
 Persin: All parts of the plant
and organ congestion, subcutaneous edema, hydropericardium
Furocoumarins: Seeds and foliage
SE
Bishop's weed (Ammi majus)
Photosensitization
Blacklocust (Robinia pseudoacacia)
Robin: Leaves, seed, and bark
CTION
Depression, dyspnea, coughing, sneezing, and regurgitation
Blue-green algae (Microcystis, Anabaena,
Acute death, hepatitis, and photosensitization; edema; petechia-
Microcystin, anatoxin-a,
Aphanazomenon, Oscillartoria)
tion and hemorrhage, weakness, depression, seizures
anatoxin-a(s)
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
 Regurgitation, abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea, seizures, renal
Ricin: Seeds (see Color Plate 74-1, C)
2
failure, and death
Ge
Clematis (Montana rubens)
Regurgitation
Leaves
lera
Coffee bean (Sesbania drummondii)
Restlessness, hyperactivity, tachycardia, polyuria, regurgitation,
Caffeine: Bean
muscle tremors, and seizures
Crown vetch (Coronilla varia)
Tachypnea and neurologic signs
Nitroglycosides: Leaves
Dieffenbachia (Dieffenbachia spp.)
Oxalate raphides
Elephant's ear (Colocasia or Alocasia spp.)
Skin and oral irritation, hypersalivation, and regurgitation
Oxalate raphides
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea)
Vesicular dermatitis, dry gangrenous necrosis of tongue, comb,
Ergotamine
and wattles
Lily of the valley (Convallaria majalis)
Lethargy, weakness, bradycardia, arrhythmias, diarrhea, and
Cardiac glycoside: Leaves
regurgitation
Locoweed (Astragalus spp.)
Neurologic signs and hypersalivation
Miserotoxin: All parts of the plant
Maternity plant (Kalanchoe spp.)
Regurgitation, diarrhea, ataxia, cardiac failure
Lanceotoxin: Foliage and flowers
Milkweed (Asclepias spp.)
Regurgitation, diarrhea, ataxia, respiratory distress, and seizures
Cardenolides: All parts of the plant
Nightshade (Solanum spp.) (Color Plate 22-1) R
 Regurgitation, dyspnea, tachycardia, and weakness
Alkaloids: Berries and leaves
Oak (Quercus spp.)
Anorexia, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and regurgitation
Pyrogallol tannins: Acorns, leaves,
and buds
Oleander (Nerium oleander)
Lethargy, subcutaneous hemorrhage, diarrhea, weakness, tetanic
 Oleandrin: Leaves (see Color Plate
spasms, salivation, and regurgitation
26-2, C)
Philodendron (Philodendron spp.)
Skin and oral irritation, choking, regurgitation, diarrhea
Oxalate raphides
Poinsettia (Euphorbia pulcherrima)
Oral irritation, regurgitation, red stained feces, gastroenteritis,
 Diterpene ester: Leaves and milky sap
and hepatic necrosis
Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana)
Gastrointestinal irritation, regurgitation, and diarrhea
Phytolaccatoxin: Roots, berries, leaves
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)
Lethargy, weakness regurgitation, diarrhea, and bradycardia
Grayanotoxins: Leaves
Tobacco (Nicotiana spp.)
 Regurgitation, tremors, tachycardia, seizures
Nicotine: Leaves
Virginia creeper (Parthenocissus quinquefloia)
Lethargy and regurgitation
Leaves
Yew (Taxus spp.)
Ataxia, regurgitation, and dyspnea
Taxines: Fruit and leaves
Chapter 22 |  Poisoning in the Avian Patient  267
emaciated and have crop stasis or GI signs. Chronic low-grade exposure can be immuno-
 suppressive. Subclinical lead toxicosis in raptors can be present in birds presented for other
causes such as trauma.
The severity of the clinical pathologic condition depends on dose and chronicity of
ingestion. Abnormalities include heterophilia, hypochromic regenerative anemia, cytoplas-
mic vacuolization of red cells, and elevations in lactic dehydrogenase, aspartate transami-
nase, creatinine phosphokinase, and uric acid.39.40
A diagnosis of lead poisoning is based on history of exposure, clinical signs, clinical
pathologic findings, blood-lead concentration, and radiographic evidence of metallic den-
sities in the GI tract. Ihe absence of metal particles does not rule out heavy metal toxicosis,
especially in raptors. Blood-lead concentration is the definitive test to confirm lead poison-
ing. When the lead is ingested, it is solubilized in the proventriculus and ventriculus and is
absorbed in the small intestine. The lower the pH in the digestive tract (raptors), the more
rapid the absorption compared with higher-pH environments (psittacines and granivorous
birds).l Lead then binds to the red blood cells and is distributed to the body. Ihe blood,
parenchymal organs, nervous system, and soft tissues will carry approximately 6% of the
total body burden of lead and approximately 94% of the burden will be in bone. Bone has a
slower rate of exchange of lead than the soft tissues. Therefore blood-lead values represent
 only a small amount of the total body burden.40
Heparinized whole blood concentrations greater than 20 mcg/dL (0.2 ppm) are sugges-
tive, and concentrations greater than 50 mcg/dL (0.5 ppm) are diagnostic for lead poison-
ing.3.41 Prognosis for patients with levels of more than 1 ppm is guarded.40 Most laboratories
need a small sample to assay blood-lead concentrations, but one should check with each
individual laboratory before submission. In-house blood-lead levels can be obtained with
the Lead Care Analyzer (Lead Care Blood Testing System, ESA Inc.).
Treatment is tailored to the patient's physical condition and the blood-lead concen-
tration. Treatment with chelation therapy forms nontoxic complexes in the blood that
are excreted in the bile and urine. Ihe initial chelator of choice is calcium disodium
versenate (CaEDTA). CaEDTA appears to have minimal chelation effect in soft tissue
but is very effective in bone. CaEDTA injections (35-50 mg/kg IM) are administered
longed therapy CaEDTA can be diluted with saline and administered subcutaneously.1
 Further treatment may be indicated as lead concentrations equilibrate from bone into
soft tissue and blood. Treatment ends when the blood-lead concentration is normal,
there is no radiographic evidence of metal, and the bird is clinically normal. The blood-
lead concentration is rechecked three to four days after CaEDTA treatment has ended.
Restarting CaEDTA therapy until results of the blood-lead concentrations are known is
recommended. Nephrosis, neurologic toxicity, and incidental chelation of zinc have been
reported as side effects of prolonged chelation therapy, but have not been observed clini-
cally in birds. Samour and Naldo reported extended treatment of 23 days in falcons with
no deleterious effects.42
Alternative chelation therapies include the use of dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA).
DMSA is the preferred oral chelator (25-35 mg/kg by mouth [PO] q12h) and can be
used with CaEDTA if needed.43 Oral chelators should be used with the same frequency
      r  s   
able (CaEDTA) for prolonged treatment.44 DMSA does not chelate lead from bone but
is effective in soft tissues. Combination therapy with CaEDTA and DMSA has been
shown to be effective and in some cases has shown to increase survivability compared
with either chelator used alone.34 Considering that CaEDTA primarily chelates from the
bone and DMSA chelates from soft tissues, combination therapy should be considered
in advanced cases.
 D-penicillamine (PA) is another chelator that has the advantage of oral administration.
 PA (30-55 mg/kg PO q12h for 7-14 days) can be used in conjunction with or after CaEDTA
injections or by itself. Side effects such as regurgitation are reported, and PA is not recom-
mended if CaEDTA or DMSA are available
268SECTlON 2 General Exposures
Hastening the removal of particles with the use of bulk diets and cathartics is recom-
mended and may prevent the need for surgical removal. Rat skins with hair can be fed to
raptors to stimulate cast formation and egestion of lead particles in the ventriculus.45 As
long as the bird is given chelation therapy and is improving, there is no urgency for surgery.
Many of the particles break down and pass on their own. Large burdens of heavy metals
in the intestinal tract will need to be removed. Endoscopic removal with or without gastric
lavage should be considered before surgery.
anorexia. Antioxidative therapy with vitamin C and vitamin B complex to aid recovery of
injury to the nervous system may be helpful.
Zinc
 The diagnosis and signs of acute zinc toxicoses are similar to that of lead except hemo-
 globinuria is rare.3.45 Frequently, birds simultaneously have lead and zinc poisoning. Zinc
plasma concentrations are reported in asymptomatic macaws at 1.3-2 ppm and 1.25-2.29
 ppm in clinically normal Hispaniolan Amazon parrots.41 Clinical signs are observed when 
concentrations are more than 10 ppm. Zinc concentrations more than 5 ppm are sugges-
tive of toxicosis.1246 Plasma is collected in nonrubber-stopper containers or in royal blue-
stopper containers to prevent zinc contamination from leaching into the sample. The liver,
kidney, and pancreas are the tissues of choice for postmortem zinc analysis.
The more remarkable pathologic lesions of zinc poisoning include ileus and focal mono-
nuclear degeneration of liver, kidney, and the pancreas. In waterfowl, necrotizing ventricu-
litis and pancreatic lesions are observed.40
The treatment of choice is similar to lead therapy employing CaEDTA, DMSA, and PA.
A distinct difference between lead and zinc is that zinc is not stored in the bone and there-
fore equilibrates and chelates faster.43 Removal of zinc particles can be done by endoscopy.
gastric lavage, or surgery if needed.
Sources of zinc include galvanized containers, galvanized mesh, hardware cloth, staples,
 galvanized nails, fertilizers, some paints, zinc pyrithione shampoos, zinc oxide, zinc undec-
ylenate (Desenex cream), and pennies (post-1982).340.47
Other Heavy Metals
uo 'addos ony suosiod imq 'si iad u aen aie saiixon ieia-aae ia
and mercury can occur. Copper sources include wire and pennies manufactured before
1982. The treatment of choice is PA or DMSA. Iron toxicoses can result from cast-iron
feeding bowls with chipped enamel.341 Deferoxamine (Desferol 40 mg/kg PO, subcu-
taneously [SC], or IM q24hr for 7 days to months) is the treatment of choice in mam-
mals, but safe dosing levels are not established in birds and intestinal absorption is
 poor when give orally.3.4 Mercury ingestion is more of a concern in wild birds and
bulbs, thermometers, lubricating oils), inorganic (blistering agents, skin creams and
trial contamination of aquatic food chains). Elemental mercury is not absorbed well
in the intestinal tract and generally will not cause toxicity except in high amounts.48
Methyl mercury, the most toxic form for wildlife, is readily absorbed and easily crosses
the blood-brain barrier. Clinical signs are neurologic as well as decreased reproductive
performance and hatchability.12.49 Diagnosis is based on history, clinical signs, and kid-
ney tissue residue concentrations exceeding 40 mcg/g wet weight.46 Gastric lavage and
activated charcoal are used for acute oral exposures. DMSA has been used in mammals
as an effective chelator.48
Pesticides
Pesticide toxicities primarily are the result of inappropriate application or use of insecti-
cides, rodenticides, and herbicides.
Chapter 22 | Poisoning in the Avian Patient 269
nsecticides
Organophosphates (OPs) and carbarmates (CBMs) are the most common causes of avian
insecticide toxicoses. OPs include fenthion, famfur, disulfoton, diazinon, dichlorvos, and
malathion. CBMs include carbaryl, carbofuran, and aldicarb. LDso concentrations indicate
avian species are up to 20% more susceptible than mammals to the toxic effects of these
products.50 Inhalation is the primary source of exposure in pet birds, but ingestion from
contaminated feeds and environment (e.g., ingestion of insects exposed to the pesticides) is
a greater concern with confined outdoor birds and wildlife.51.52
The mechanism of action of OPs and CBMs is acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibition
resulting in acetylcholine (ACh) accumulation in cholinergic synapses. Accumulation
of ACh causes cholinergic hyperstimulation of end organs such as heart and airways
followed by paralysis of skeletal muscles. OP bonds to AChE are essentially irreversible,
and the CBM bonds are slowly reversible. Death is usually caused by neurologic and
muscular dysfunction. Initial response to OP toxicity is stimulation leading to nerve
impulse inhibition.53 Early clinical signs include anorexia, weakness, diarrhea, crop
stasis, ataxia, wing twitching, and prolapsed nictitans. More severe signs are muscular
tremors, stiffness, dyspnea with rales, bradycardia, paralysis, and seizures. Death is usu-
ally caused by respiratory failure.16,54
An organophosphorus ester-induced delayed neuropathy has been observed 2 weeks
following exposure to an OP in a white-front Amazon parrot. This bird exhibited ascending
progresive paralsis, and death resulted from respiratory failure.6
Diagnosis of OP or CBM toxicosis is based on history, clinical signs, and response to
treatment. If bradycardia is present and does not reverse with administration of 0.02 mg/kg
of atropine intravenously (IV), OP toxicity is considered. Cholinesterase assays from whole
blood, plasma, serum, or brain tissue are used to determine toxic exposure. These samples
are submitted with paired nonexposed samples to determine whether depressed concen-
trations of cholinesterase are significant. In acute toxicoses, little or no cholinesterase will
be found. Chronic toxicoses show concentrations of less than 50% of the normal sample,
and a 20% decrease suggests an exposure. One effect of chronic exposure is decreased egg
production and poor hatchability. Depressed AChE concentrations from CBMs may not
be found owing to rapid regeneration if the samples are not submitted as soon as possible.
Submission of gastric contents and environmental sources aid in diagnostic investigations-
these samples, along with liver and kidney postmortem, can be used to test for the specific
pesticide.is3,54
Treatment includes atropine (0.2-0.5 mg/kg IM) every 3 to 4 hours as needed. One
fourth of the initial dose is administered IV.4 Atropine, a competitive muscarine receptor
antagonist, will interrupt actions of ACh on the heart, GI tract, and airway. Atropine has
little or no effect on nicotinic receptors and used alone will not counteract neuromuscular
paralysis. Pralidoxime (2-PAM, 10-20 mg/kg IM) is administered every 8 to 12 hours as
needed. 2-PAM is only effective if used within the first 24 to 36 hours of exposure.4.53 A
dose of 100 mg/kg given IM within 24 hours of an OP toxicity has been reported as effec-
tive in raptors; however, 20 mg/kg has been reported as toxic.5 2-PAM is contraindicated
or should be used with caution with some CBM toxicities as it has been shown to inhibit
AChE activity.53
Organochlorine (OC) toxicoses are a concern for free-ranging birds and have been
reported in waterfowl ingesting treated grains or germinating seedlings. Sources can
persist in the environment for long periods and include chlordane, dieldrin, aldrin, toxa-
phene, heptachlor, and dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) analogues.34 Clinical signs
include weight loss, muscle fasciculations, clonic convulsions, disorientation, ataxia, and
death. Chronic low level exposures result in decreased fertility, egg shell thinning, and
 decreased hatchability.56 During periods of stress or malnutrition OC compounds are
logically there are no gross lesions. High levels of OCs in brain and liver tissues may be
helpful in confirming a diagnosis.46
270 SECTION 2 General Exposures
Naphthalene and paradichlorobenzene (mothballs and mite protectors) toxicities result
from contaminated foods or inappropriate ingestion. Clinical signs include diarrhea, weight
Adan aoddns s saain 'sainzias ue san sedaq ussndnsou ss
Paradichlorobenzene can be radiopaque on radiographs.
sodium, calcium, and chloride channels.12 Clinical signs are similar to those seen in mam-
mals and include tremors, hyperthermia, seizures, and death. Treatment includes diazepam,
methocarbamol, supportive care, and bathing with diluted dish soap once the bird is stable.
Rodenticides
ary ingestion of affected rodents.$7 First-generation rodenticides (i.e., warfarin) have short
biologic half-lives and may require chronic exposure to produce clinical signs. Second-
odxa aauis e aan auo pue sxi aou ane (ueoq "a) suds ueau
sure. This necessitates long-term therapy because of their long half-life.58
Interference with vitamin K epoxide reductase cycle results in decreased vitamin K and
is the primary mechanism of action of anticoagulant rodenticides.5 Birds rely more on the
a  a    a a    
their decreased sensitivity to anticoagulant rodenticides. 2 However, toxicoses do occur, but
species sensitivity has been documented at doses less than 1 mg/kg and up to 20 mg/kg.12
Clinical signs include depression, anorexia, subcutaneous hemorrhage, bleeding from the
nares, bloody droppings, and oral petechia.3.57 Diagnosis is based on history and clinical
signs. Clotting profiles on avian blood have not yet proven effective in diagnosis of these
toxicoses.
Treatment includes vitamin K, (Veda-K1, 0.2 to 2.2 mg/kg IM or PO) every 4 to 8 hours
until stable.4 Daily oral administration of vitamin K is used until the toxin is metabolized.
Treatment length for brodifacoum toxicities is as long as 3 to 4 weeks. Gastric lavage fol-
lowed by administration of activated charcoal is helpful in acute exposures.
Other rodenticides include cholecalciferol analogs that produce a hypercalcemia and
polyuria and polydipsia, cardiac conduction disturbances, renal failure, and metastatic cal-
cifcation.58 Treatment is directed to lowering blood calcium concentrations by diuresis,
glucocorticoids, and an antihypercalcemic.59 Once calcium levels are normal for 96 hours,
treatment can be discontinued.5 Doses of antihypercalcemics have not been established in
birds.
Zinc phosphide and crimidine toxicants are used as grain-based rodent baits. Grain
eating birds such as waterfowl, wild turkeys, doves, pigeons, quail, and pheasants are most
likely to be exposed.12 Clinical signs are regurgitation, cyanosis, and decreased blood pres-
sure. Treatment is supportive care and reducing acidosis.
Oil Toxicoses
Oil toxicoses are primarily observed in wild avian species. Topical exposure decreases the
feathers' ability for water proofing, insulation, and fight. Ingestion or aspiration causes
pneumonia, GI irritation, ulceration, and hemolytic anemia.12.34 Numerous accidental
exposures have occurred in pet birds. Cooking oils, household petroleum-based products,
and inappropriate use of oil-based pharmaceutical ointments are common sources of toxi-
coses. Clinical signs include burns and hypothermia from external contact and diarrhea,
regurgitation, and dehydration from ingestion (i.e., preening feathers).1s Pneumonia and
tracheitis are also concerns that results from aspiration of oil-based products. Treatment
includes heat; supportive care; nutritional support; and warm, mild detergent baths with
frequent rinses after the bird is stabilized. A “dry” way to treat oil exposures in birds too
stressed for detergent baths involves a dusting with corn starch to absorb the oils. The use
of iron powder and magnetic removal of oil from feathers has been studied, but risk of
Chapter 22 | Poisoning in the Avian Patient  271
toxicity from ingestion should be considered.12 Silver sulfadiazine cream is very effective
for burn therapy.
Mycotoxins
Mycotoxins are fungal metabolites most commonly found in grains and feeds stored in
humid conditions.46 Hundreds of mycotoxins have been identified, but mycotoxicosis is
often a difficult diagnosis to confirm. There are numerous potential toxins, and the specific
toxin may not be in the feed at the time of testing. Therefore what is tested may not be the
Toxicities are usually dose dependent, and acute overt intoxications are rare. Avian species
appear to be more sensitive than other species to aflatoxicosis.2 Cases can be insidious
and chronic, resulting in nonspecific signs such as poor production, unthriftiness, diphthe-
ritic lesions in the oral cavity and esophagus, ataxia, and blindness. Immunosuppression,
chronic hepatitis, poor reproductive performance, and renal disease are some of the more
common conditions caused by mycotoxins.12.46
Prevention includes proper handling and storage of feed material. The shells from
mycotoxin-contaminated peanuts have been the most common source of mycotoxin-
induced hepatitis in parrots. Ihere is no specific treatment; however, birds may benefit from
glucomannans and organic selenium to decrease the hepatotoxic and neurologic changes
associated with exposure.12
References
1. Redig PT, Arent LR: Raptor toxicology, Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 11(2):261-282, 2008.
2. Poppenga RH: Diagnostic sampling and establishing a minimum data base in exotic animal toxicology,
Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 11(2):195-210, 2008.
3. LaBonde JI: Toxic disorders. In Rosskopf WJ, Woerpel RW,editors: Diseases of caged and aviary birds,
ed 3, Philadelphia, 1996, Williams and Wilkins, pp 511-522.
4. Carpenter JW: Exotic animal formulary, ed 3, St Louis, 2005, Elsevier Saunders, pp 226-229.
5. Peterson ME: Toxicological decontamination. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA, editors: Small animal toxicol-
ogy, ed 2, St Louis, 2006, Elsevier Saunders, pp 127-140.
6. Howard LL, Papendick R, Stalis IH, et al Fenbendazole and albendazole toxicity in pigeons and doves,
IAvian Med Surg 16(3):203-210, 2002.
7. Lightfoot T: Warming: fenbendazole in cockatiels, Exot DVM Vet Mag 1(4):39, 1999.
8. Verstappen FALM, Dorrestein GM: Aspergillosis in amazon parrots after corticosteroid therapy for
smoke-inhalation injury, I Avian Med Surg 19(2):138-141, 2005.
9. Forbes NA, Jones D: PTFE toxicity in birds, Vet Rec 140(19):512, 1997.
10. Lyman R: Polytetrafluoroethylene toxicity. In Harrison G, Harrison L, editors: Clinical avian medicine
and surgery, Philadelphia, 1986, Saunders, p 487.
11. Wells RE, Slocombe RF: Acute toxicosis of budgerigars (Melopsittacus undulates) caused by pyrolysis
products from heated Polytetrafluoroethylene: microscopic study, Am J Vet Res 43(7):1243-1248, 1982.
12. Lightfoot TL, Yeager MY: Pet bird toxicity and related environmental concerns, Vet Clin North Am Exot
Anim Pract 11(2):229-260, 2008.
13. Beasley VR: Smoke inhalation, Vet Clin North Am Small Animal Pract 20(2):545-556, 1990.
14. LaBonde JI: Toxicity in pet avian patients, Sem Avian Exot Pet Med 4(1):23-31, 1995.
15. Lichtenebrger M, Richardson JA:Emergency care and managing toxicoses in the exotic animal patient,
Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 11(2):211-228, 2008.
16. LaBonde JI: Two clinical cases of exposure to household use of organophosphate and carbammate insecti-
cides, Assoc Avian Vet Conference, New Orleans, 113-118, 1992.
17. Kore AM, Kiesche-Nesselrodt A: Toxicology of household cleaning products and disinfectants, Vet Clin
North Am Small Animal Pract 20(2):529-538, 1990.
18. LaBonde JI: Household poisonings in caged birds. In Bonagura JD, Kirk RW, editors: Kirk's current
veterinary therapy Xll small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1995, W.B. Saunders, pp 1299-1302.
19. Sheppard C, Dierenfeld E: Iron storage disease in birds: speculation on etiology and implications for
captive husbandry, I Avian Med Surg 16(3):192-197, 2002.
20. Crissy SD, Ward AM, Block SE, et al: Hepatic iron accumulation over time in starlings (Sturnus vugaris)
fed two levels of iron, I Zoo Widl Med 31(4):491-496, 2003.
272SECTlON 2 General Exposures
 21. West GD, Garner MM, Talcott PA: Hemochromatosis in several species oflories with high dietary iron,
JAvian Med Surg 15(4):297-301, 2000.
22. Otten BA, Orosz SE, Auge S,et al: Mineral content of food items commonly ingested by toucans (Ram-
phastos sulfuratus), J Avian Med Surg 15(3):194-196, 2001
by dietary modification in toco toucans (Ramphastos toco) with iron storage disease, I Avian Med Surg
18(2):101-105, 2004.
 24. LaBonde JI: Medicine and surgery of mynahs. In Rosskopf WJ, Woerpel RW, editors: Diseases of caged
αnd aviary birds, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1996, Williams and Wilkins, pp 928-932.
25. Cole G, Murray M: Suspected chocolate toxicosis in an African Grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus), AssoC
Avian Vet Conference and Expo, Monterey, CA, 8-12, 2005.
26. Wade LL, Newman SJ: Hemoglobinuric nephrosis and hepatosplenic erythrophagocytosis in a dusky-
155-161, 2004.
27. Hargis AM, Stauber E, Casteel S,et al: Avocado (Persea americana) intoxication in caged birds, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 194:6466, 1989.
 28. Wilson H, Brown CA, Greenacre CB, et al: Suspected sodium hypochlorite toxicosis in a group of psit-
tacine birds, I Avian Med Surg 15(3):209-215, 2001.
29. Barr AC: Household and garden plants. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA, editors: Small animal toxicology,
ed 2, St Louis, 2006, Elsevier Saunders, pp 345-409.
30. Shropshire C, Stauber E, Arai M: A screening study of potential toxic plants in budgerigars, Unpublished
paper, Pullman, 1989, Washington State University. 1989.
31. Oehme FW, Davis J: Plants poisonous to free living or caged birds. In Hoff G, Davis J, editors: Noninfec-
Med Sturg 20(2):97-100, 2006.
33. LaBonde JI: Avian toxicology, Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract 21(6):1329-1343, 1991.
34.I
Degerness L: Waterfowl toxicology: a review, Vet Clin North AM Exot Animal Pract 11(2):283-299, 2008.
35. Church ME, Gwiazda R, Risebrough RW,et al: Ammunition is the principle source of lead accumulated
by California Condors re-introduced to the wild, Environ Sci Technol 40(19):6143-6150, 2006.
36. Sanderson GC, Anderson WL, Foley GL, et al: Effects oflead, iron, and bismuth alloy shot embedded in
the breast muscles of game-farm mallards, I Wildl Dis 34:688-697, 1998.
37. Platt SR, Helmick KE, Graham J, et al: Peripheral neuropathy in a turkey vulture with lead toxicosis, J Am
Vet Med Assoc 214:1218-1220, 1999
38. Carpenter IW, Pattee OH, Fritts SH, et al: Experimental lead poisoning in turkey vultures (Cathartes
qra), I Wildl Dis 39:95-104, 2003.
39. Hoffman DL, Patee OH, Wiemeyer SN, et al: Effects of lead shot ingestion on delta-aminolevulinic
acid dehydratase activity, hemoglobin concentration, and serum chemistry in bald eagles, I Wildl Dis
17(3):423-431, 1981.
40. Mautino M: Lead and zinc intoxication in zoological medicine: a review, I Zoo Widl Med 28:28-35, 1997.
41. Osofsky A,Jowett P, Hosgood G,et al: Determination ofnormal blood concentrations oflead, zinc, cop-
42. Samour J, Naldo JL: Lead toxicosis in falcons: a method for lead retrieval, Sem Avian Exot Pet Med
14(2):143-148, 2005.
toxicosis in cockatiels, Am J Vet Res 61(8):935-940, 2000
dimercaptosuccinic acid, I Zoo Witldl Med 34(1):82-87, 2003.
 45. Holz P, Phelan J, Slocombe R, et al: Suspected zinc toxicosis as a cause of sudden death in orange bellied
parrots (Neophema chrysogaster), I Avian Med Surg 15(3):209-215, 2000.
46. Degerness L: Avian toxicology: common problems, Proc Ann Meeting Assoc Avian Vet, San Diego, CA,
193-205, 2010.
47. Reece R: Zinc toxicity (new wire disease) in aviary birds, Aust Vet J63:199, 1986.
48. Tegzes JH: Mercury. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA, editors: Small animal toxicology, ed 2, St Louis, 2006,
Elsevier Saunders, pp 822-829.
49. Richardson J: Implications of toxic substances in clinical disorders. In Harrison GJ, Lightfoot T, editors:
Clinical Avian Medicine, Palm Beach, 1999, HBD Intemational Inc, pp 1030-1049.
 50. Humphreys DJ: Veterinary toxicology,ed 3, London, 1998, Baillere Tindall. 179-182.
51. Reece RL, Handson P:Observations on the accidental poisonings of birds by organophosphate insecti-
cides and other toxic substances, Vet Rec 11l:453-455, 1982.
Chapter 22 | Poisoning in the Avian Patient 273
 52. Kwan Y: Pesticide poisoning events in wild birds in Korea from 1998-2002, I Wildl Dis 40(4):737-740,
2004.
53. Meerdink GL: Organophosphorous and carbamate insecticide poisoning. In Kirk RW, editor: Current
veterinary therapy, vol. 10, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders, pp 135-137.
54. Hill EF, Fleming WJ: Anticholinesterase poisoning of birds: field monitoring and diagnosis of acute
poisonings, Environ Toxicol Chem 1:27-38, 1982.
55.9
Shlosberg A:Treatment of monocrotophos-poisoned birds of prey with pralidoxamine iodide,J Am Vet
Assoc 169(9):989 -990, 1976.
56. Lightfoot T: Organochlorine disaster in Florida—2 years later, J Avian Med Surg 15(2):138-140, 2001.
Proc AM Assoc Zoological Parks and Aguariums, 1987.
58.1
 Dorman DC: Anticoagulant, cholecalciferol, and bromethaline-based rodenticides, Vet Clin North Am
Small A nimal Pract 20(2):339 -352, 1990.
 59. Mellema MS, Haskins SC: Supportive care of the poisoned patient. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA, editors:
Small animal toxicology,ed 2, St Louis, 2006, Elsevier Saunders,p 116-118.
SEcTloN 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
CHAPTER
Adverse Drug
23
Reactions*
Alastair E. Cribb, DVM, PhD, FCAHS
Mathieu Peyrou, DvM, MSc
 n adverse drug reaction (ADR) is any noxious or unintended response to a drug that
occurs at appropriate doses used for prophylaxis, diagnosis, or therapy. They may
vary from minor annoyances to severe, life-threatening events. Because ADRs are an ever-
present threat when drugs are used in clinical practice, communication with owners about
risk and response to ADRs are an important part of client education. The frequency with
which ADRs occur in the average clinical veterinary practice or in teaching hospitals is
ued o oinqiuos jesyuis e si dav ue je paidasoe aeiaua si i mq umou nou
morbidity and mortality.
Drug toxicity includes all toxicity associated with a drug, including that observed in
overdose situations (e.g., poisonings with drugs). Side efects, on the other hand, gener-
ally refers to relatively minor adverse effects that occur during therapy, such as polydipsia
or polyuria in dogs on corticosteroids. Lack of therapeutic efficacy may also be an ADR.
However, lack of response may also be caused by an incorrect diagnosis or inappropriate
treatment and so is not necessarily an ADR.
When using a drug, the veterinarian has an obligation to minimize the likelihood of an
ADR occurring, to be aware of the potential clinical signs of an ADR so that a prompt diag-
nosis can be made, and to know the appropriate clinical care to administer should an ADR
Occur. Ihe veterinarian should educate clients as to the risk of ADRs associated with the
drug so that they can rationally balance this risk against the expected therapeutic benefit of
the drug for their animal. The owners must also be informed of the clinical signs expected
should an ADR occur and what steps they should take on observing these signs (e.g., stop
the drug, transport the patient to the clinic).
Assessment of Risk
The decision to use a drug is based on a risk-benefit analysis for the individual patient. No
accept the risk associated with a therapy depends on the relative risks and benefits of the
drug compared with the risk of no treatment or the risk associated with alternative treat-
ments, such as surgery. A drug should not be used without a specific therapeutic goal, so
that efficacy and toxicity can be balanced appropriately.
When assessing risk, the veterinarian needs to look at the population risk (how frequent
and severe is the ADR?) and the individual risk (does this patient have any characteristics
that increase or decrease risk?). Assessing the risks of an ADR may be frustrating because
the information necessary to truly assess risk is not available. Veterinarians are often using
*FDA Adverse Event Reporting System; +1 88 463-6332; +1 301 796-3400:; druginfo@fda.hhs.gov
Surveillance/ AdverseDrugEffects/default.htm
275
276 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
drugs with limited published clinical data in veterinary species and what information is
available on ADRs is often vague. Finding information on the actual frequency and severity
 of ADRs is often difficult. Iherefore, an understanding of the mechanism or pathogenesis
 of ADRs is often helpful, as discussed in detail in this chapter.
Although mechanisms are in place for reviewing and recording ADRs of licensed prod-
ucts, information for drugs used off-label is less readily available. Many standard veterinary
textbooks list adverse reactions that have been reported to drugs without incorporating
information on species differences or indeed noting if the adverse reactions have been
reported in veterinary species. Furthermore, information on the frequency and severity of
ADRs is often lacking. For licensed animal products, the company marketing the product is
a good source of information, either through information on the package insert or through
direct contact with the company. The Center for Veterinary Medicine, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and the Veterinary Drugs Directorate, Health Canada, maintain a
record of adverse events that have been reported and use this information to recommend
(see the “Animal and Veterinary” section of the FDA website) and is a good source of up-to-
date information on potential ADRs that have been reported.
Once an animal is receiving treatment, the identification and response to an ADR
becomes important. Ihe same caveats for prospectively assessing risk for the patient apply
to deciding if a clinical event represents an ADR. That is, we often rely on cross-species
extrapolation and a rather limited database to decide if an ADR has occurred. We must
often rely on our knowledge of the pharmacologic and toxicologic characteristics of the
and in deciding appropriate therapy. The diagnosis and response to ADRs is discussed in
the following sections.
In summary, to make the most use of the information available, to tailor our decisions to
the individual patient, and to make rational clinical decisions, an understanding of the basic
principles of ADRs is invaluable. Therefore this chapter first presents general principles that
can be applied in many clinical situations to guide therapeutic decisions. This is followed by
a brief overview of hepatic and renal ADRs.
Classification of Adverse Drug Reactions
Several different systems for classifying ADRs exist, based on either clinical presentation or
mechanism of toxicity. Ihe clinical presentations of ADRs depend on the pharmacologic
and chemical properties of the drug and the target organ damaged. In many cases, the exact
mechanism of toxicity is not known or understood. This can make classification of drug
toxicities difficult but does not prevent us from employing a broad mechanistic classifica-
tion that will assist in making clinical decisions.
Dose-Dependent Adverse Drug Reactions
Most ADRs are dose-dependent. That is, the larger the dose, the greater the number of
patients affected and the more severe the reaction. Ihese types of ADRs or toxicities are
generally predictable and can be reproduced in experimental models. The majority of
patients experience a dose-dependent ADR if the drug is given at a sufficient dose or for a
on the care with which the products are used and knowledge of specific dose adjustment
that may be required. They can occur at therapeutic doses or plasma concentrations in
some individuals, but they are commonly associated with elevated drug plasma concen-
trations resulting from altered pharmacokinetics in the patient caused by concurrent dis-
ease, pregnancy, age, or a drug interaction. This is particularly true for drugs with a narrow
therapeutic index, in which changes in pharmacokinetics result in a functional overdose
despite use of a normally safe therapeutic dosage regimen. The majority of dose-dependent
toxicities can be avoided by careful and appropriate selection of the dose, taking into con-
sideration patient characteristics and concurrent drug use.
Chapter 23 | Adverse Drug Reactions 277
Box 23-1
Examples of Pharmacologic Toxicities
 Digoxin-induced cardiac arrhythmias
Ulcers associated with inhibition of cyclooxygenase activity by nonsteroidal antin-
flammatory drugs
 Pancytopenia from estrogens in dogs
Hypotension from acepromazine (a-1 antagonism)
latrogenic Cushing's from excessive corticosteroid use
Ivermectin neurotoxicity
Patients may be hypersusceptible to a
Box 23-2
Examples of Intrinsic
dose-dependent ADR, so that they have a
Toxicities
reaction at doses (or plasma concentrations)
lower than typically observed. Hypersus-
Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity and
ceptibility may result from altered pharma-
ototoxicity
cokinetics, either through disease, genetic
Acetaminophen methemoglobinemia
 and hemolytic anemia
variation, or a drug interaction, that leads
to higher than expected drug concentra-
Acetaminophen hepatotoxicity
tions in the circulation or at specific sites
Sulfonamide-induced hypothyroidism
Doxorubicin cardiotoxicity
for a given drug dose. Alternatively, there
may be a receptor or target organ sensitiv-
ity that results in an adverse reaction at a
lower concentration.
The occurrence of a dose-dependent toxicity in a patient is not necessarily an absolute
contraindication to future use of the drug. If possible, the reason for the occurrence of the
ADR should be ascertained. For example, was a dosing error made or was the ADR the
result of a drug interaction?
 Dose-dependent ADRs can be further subdivided into pharmacologic toxicity or intrin-
sic toxicity. The general principles of dose-dependent ADRs apply, but the diagnosis and
treatment of these two different classes of ADRs may differ.
Pharmacologic Toxicity
Pharmacologic toxicity (also referred to as mechanism-based, receptor-mediated, aug-
rented, or Type A adverse reactions) is a form of dose-dependent ADR that arises through
exaggerated or undesirable pharmacologic effects of a drug (Box 23-1). Pharmacologic tox-
with a specific target or receptor. These effects may be related to the intended therapeutic
target or to additional, inseparable secondary pharmacologic actions. In the latter instance,
the ADRs are often called "side effects." For example, a minor side effect is mydriasis associ-
ated with the use of atropine as a preanesthetic agent.
Intrinsic Toxicity
Intrinsic toxicity is determined by the chemical properties of the drug, not its pharma-
cologic properties. Ihat is, the toxicity depends on the intrinsic chemical properties of
the drug—hence the term intrinsic toxicity. The drug or its metabolites do not bind to
specific receptors to cause these toxicities, but instead bind nonspecifically to a variety of
proteins or nucleic acids or disrupt membranes or organelle function (Box 23-2). Intrin-
sic toxicity may have a short course (e.g., acetaminophen toxicity) or a longer course
(augmented) or Type C (chronic) adverse reactions, depending on the nature and course
of the reaction.
Intrinsic toxicity frequently depends on the metabolism of the parent drug to toxic
metabolites, a process referred to as bioactivation. The site of toxicity therefore depends on
the sites of accumulation of the toxin, the localization of enzymes necessary for metabolism
278 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
of the compound, and the susceptibility of specific cells to the toxic effects. A typical intrin-
sic toxin is acetaminophen. Acetaminophen is metabolized to reactive metabolites that
cause methemoglobinemia, hemolytic anemia, or liver damage, the primary clinical mani-
festations depending on the species of animal affected. Drugs or chemicals with carcino-
genic properties, which bind to deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) or damage DNA through
other mechanisms, would be included in this category.
 Clinical Pharmacologic Characteristics of Dose-Dependent Adverse Drug
Reactions
Dose-dependent ADRs have the potential to occur in all patients, but they may be avoided
in many instances by careful selection of the dose, taking into account the patient charac-
teristics. Patient evaluation becomes very important in deciding whether an adjustment in
the recommended standard dose is required or if it is safe to use the drug. In some cases,
sex and age (e.g., fluoroquinolone-induced cartilage changes) are important characteristics
that must be considered. Susceptibility to dose-dependent ADRs can be enhanced through
factors that lead to greater drug exposure (i.e., decreased clearance and increased absorp-
tion) or that enhance the pharmacologic effect (e.g., concurrent medications; presence of
epileptic foci in the brain). This hypersusceptibility may also be referred to as patient idio-
syncrasy. For example, hypersusceptibility of collie dogs to ivermectin neurotoxicosis is
the central nervous system.l2 Inhibition of metabolism or clearance of a drug can lead
to accumulation to toxic levels. Glucocorticoids and nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) have synergistic effects on the occurrence of gastropathy. In the case of intrinsic
toxicities that depend on bioactivation to toxic metabolites, factors that alter metabolism of
the drug or affect cell defense mechanisms (e.g., deplete cellular glutathione) also enhance
susceptibility.
The target organ and clinical signs depend on a number of factors. For pharmacologic
toxicity, the observed signs depend on the pharmacologic effects. For intrinsic toxicities,
the clinical manifestations depend on the affected organ. The target organ depends on accu-
mulation of the drug, the cell defense mechanisms present in those organs, and the pres-
ence of the enzymes required for bioactivation of the drug. For example, the nephrotoxicity
of aminoglycosides depends in part on their accumulation in renal tubular cells. If this
accumulation is prevented by appropriate dosing regimens, then the risk of nephrotoxicity
is decreased.
Treatment in dose-dependent toxicities should involve discontinuation of the drug and
if clinically indicated, removal of the drug from the body through appropriate measures.
When appropriate, therapy can be directed at the specific pharmacologic target to either
example, misoprostol is the best and most effective therapy to prevent NSAID-induced gas-
tropathy.′ Once ulcers or erosions have occurred, discontinuation of the NSAID followed
by appropriate therapy with sucralfate or an acid inhibitor such as omeprazole is appropri-
ate. On the other hand, because loss of prostaglandin is not the primary mechanism behind
steroid-induced gastric bleeding, misoprostol is not effective in preventing steroid-induced
gastropathy.4,5
For intrinsic toxicities, drug withdrawal and supportive care are the most important
steps. In certain cases, treatment directed at supporting specific cell-defense mechanisms
may be appropriate. N-acetylcysteine can function both as an antioxidant to alleviate met-
hemoglobinemia associated with acetaminophen toxicity and as a precursor for glutathione
to scavenge reactive metabolites associated with hepatotoxicity.6 Other antioxidants can
also be employed to minimize the hematologic toxicity associated with acetaminophen.
In summary, dose-dependent ADRs are the most common class of ADRs encountered
clinically. They can be minimized by careful and judicious use of the drug, taking into
account the individual patient. The clinical manifestation and treatment is directed by the
pharmacologic properties of the drug or the mechanism of the chemically based toxicity
Chapter 23 | Adverse Drug Reactions 279
and the target organ. Ihe previous occurrence of a dose-dependent ADR in an animal is a
clear indication for modification of the therapeutic regimen but does not necessarily con-
traindicate the use of the causative or a related drug in the patient.
Idiosyncratic Adverse Drug Reactions
Idiosyncratic ADRs are the second major class of ADRs. Ihey are also referred to as host-
dependent, dose-independent, Type B (bizarre), Type Il, or patient-related ADR. These
terms are often used interchangeably (Box 23-3). Unfortunately, because of our lack of
understanding of the pathogenesis of many idiosyncratic ADRs, considerable confusion
remains. Many clinicians use the term idiosyncratic to denote "unknown mechanism"
idiosyncratic ADRs become elucidated. Ihe defi ning characteristic of idiosyncratic ADRs
is that they occur in patients at serum concentrations within the therapeutic range and
will not occur in the majority of patients despite increasing the dose to otherwise toxic
levels. That is, a specific interaction must occur between the patient and the drug to result
in the adverse reaction. They are not classically dose-dependent and are highly depen-
dent on the characteristics of the individual patient (host-dependent or patient-related).
mentally and in the clinical setting, their occurrence is unpredictable. Ihe incidence of
idiosyncratic ADRs is usually much lower than dose-dependent ADRs, but in certain
populations they may be relatively frequent. Idiosyncratic ADRs depend on the chemical
properties, not the pharmacologic properties, of the drug. They are distinguished from
hypersusceptibility to pharmacologic or intrinsic toxicities in that they cannot be pro-
duced simply by elevating the dose or increasing the exposure in the target population or
in experimental animals.
The clinical presentation of idiosyncratic drug reactions is variable and depends on
the exact mechanism underlying the reaction. For example, malignant hyperthermia from
qae se ps  aa p sidu asa a
idiosyncratic ADRs. They have a distinct pathogenesis and distinct clinical signs. However,
the majority of idiosyncratic ADRs have characteristics associated with an immunologic
pathogenesis and many people are referring to these types of reactions (hypersensitivity
reactions, “drug allergies, immune-mediated drug reactions) when they use the term idio-
syncratic reactions.
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome reactions,drug-induced hemolytic anemia or throm
dapaupau-aunuui panpu-nup pue anaf nup sndn panpu-snp puadoroog
atitis are all terms used to describe idiosyncratic reactions that are thought to have an
immunologic basis. The clinical manifestations of idiosyncratic hypersensifivity syndrome
titis, nephritis, leukopenia, agranulocytosis, eosinophilia, thrombocytopenia, and aplastic
anemia. This type of idiosyncratic reaction is relatively rare (frequency estimated to be
<1/1000) and has a delayed onset, with clinical signs generally manifesting 7 to 14 days or
ie aiae i eidai an g iou ae Aa zadeal go jis ai iae iao
ized by anaphylaxis or urticaria occurring immediately after drug administration, which is
Box 23-3
Examples of Idiosyncratic Adverse Drug Reactions in Veterinary
Species
 Propylthiouracil and methimazole toxicity in cats
Sulfonamide polyarthritis, thrombocytopenia, hepatotoxicity in dogs
 Diazepam hepatotoxicity in cats
Mebendazole hepatotoxicity in dogs
Malignant hyperthermia triggered by halothane in pigs and dogs
Carprofen hepatitis
280 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
an immunoglobulin (Ig) E-mediated immediate hypersensitivity reaction directed against
the drug.
 Idiosyncratic reactions are important in veterinary medicine from a patient treatment
standpoint, but they also have an influence on veterinary practice from another perspec-
tive. Fear of idiosyncratic toxicity in humans may be the reason for the banning of products
for use in food animals (e.g., chloramphenicol causes aplastic anemia in rare individuals)
or may lead to the withdrawal of a drug from the market. Some practitioners are reluctant
to prescribe drugs that have been associated with idiosyncratic ADR in humans for fear of
precipitating an event in the owner. In general, owners should be warned about the poten-
tial for drugs employed in veterinary practice to cause idiosyncratic reactions in humans
(Box 23-4) and be instructed to wash their hands immediately after administering the drug
to their animals. It is wise to inquire if the client or any immediate family members have
drug allergies before dispensing a drug so that they can take appropriate precautions, such
as wearing gloves and washing hands.
Pathogenesis of Idiosyncratic Adverse Drug Reactions
The pathogenesis of idiosyncratic ADRs is complex and depends on the reaction under con-
sideration. For example, malignant hyperthermia is related primarily to mutations in the
ryanodine receptor in the muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum? so that muscle calcium homeo-
stasis cannot be maintained in the face of challenge with certain muscle relaxants, caffeine,
and, although a mutated receptor is responsible for susceptibility, interaction of halothane
san u isou a aa e a a oipaan ou st raan sads e 
of idiosyncratic reactions, however, involve celular damage, leading to organ-specific damage,
such as nephropathies, hepatopathies, blood dyscrasias, and dermatopathies. These reac-
tions commonly depend on bioactivation to a reactive intermediate that can either directly
cause cellular damage or trigger a pathologic immune response.
Clinical signs consistent with an immunologic pathogenesis for many idiosyncratic reac-
tions include a delayed onset, typically 7 to 14 days after the start of therapy, fever, skin
rash, and occasionally eosinophilia. The clinical signs are highly variable, depending on the
patient and other clinical factors. Patients may display a clearly systemic disease with multiple
organs affected, or may have a single abnormality, such as thrombocytopenia, neutropenia,
skin rash, or hepatitis. A previous exposure
to the drug may have occurred, but is not
necessary. If an animal has tolerated a drug
Box 23-4
Some Drugs Associated
for more than 6 to 8 weeks, the likelihood
with Idiosyncratic Reactions in Humans
of experiencing an idiosyncratic reaction
Penicillins
 drops. Despite the variable clinical presen-
Cephalosporins
tation, it appears that common pathogenic
Erythromycin
events underlie the clinical disease.
Sulfonamides
The immunologic responses that have
Trimethoprim
been identified in cases of idiosyncratic
Chloramphenicol
reactions in humans and animals have been
 Aromatic anticonvulsants, including
directed against either drug-modified pro-
phenobarbital, phenytoin, carba-
teins or autoantigens. Drugs are themselves
mazepine, and felbamate
generally too small to trigger an immuno-
Phenylbutazone
logic response; however, ifthey are metabo-
lized to reactive metabolites, they may form
Dipyrone
Phenothiazine derivatives
drug-protein conjugates (Figure 23-1) that
 are capable of triggering an immunologic
(chlorpromazine)
Aeu asuodsal aunuu aul s's'asuodsan
Halothane, isoflurane
be directed against the drug-protein con-
Methimazole, propylthiouracil
Captopril
jugate or against the protein itself (auto-
Procainamide
antigen) that was altered by the drug. The
factors that determine which animals will
Chapter 23 | Adverse Drug Reactions  281
experience an idiosyncratic reaction remain obscure, although genetic and environmental
differences in metabolic capacity and immunologic responsiveness appear to play roles.
The general scheme of Gell and Coombs for the classification of immunologic reac-
tions is frequently applied to drug-induced immune reactions but is of limited usefulness
in classifying idiosyncratic reactions. True drug allergies are typical type I (IgE-mediated)
immediate hypersensitivity-type reactions, but idiosyncratic hypersensitivity syndrome
reactions can have manifestations of type II (antibody-directed cell cytotoxicity), type III
(immune-complex disease), and type IV (delayed hypersensitivity—cell-mediated) reac-
iads uen-iaien al go siseq au suad ieniaiu ue um saanaap auaiea o suo
ity of idiosyncratic adverse reactions and the variable clinical presentations are not fully
understood but appear to depend on the sites of bioactivation of the drug, the stability of
the reactive metabolites formed, and the sites of covalent binding of the reactive metabo-
lites, and the nature of the immune response in individual animals.
Clinical Pharmacology of Idiosyncratic Adverse Drug Reactions
From a clinical perspective, the major dificulty with idiosyncratic ADRs is their unpre-
dictability. They are not dose-dependent and so cannot be avoided by careful dose selec-
tion. Although they are usually rare, they are potentially fatal. Although their delayed onset
ouasoii ue j Kiaes aauna iou saop ansodxa an-ous snoiaand e ien suea
reaction has not occurred during or after a prolonged exposure (e.g., 4-8 weeks), it is
3ai aa) Aaiate anap anil e st uonoean e jl 'sainsodxa juanbasqns uo smsso oi Aiaum
mediated), a previous exposure is required and reexposure may precipitate an acute ana-
thus very different from the delayed-onset hypersensitivity reaction described previously.
A major dilemma with idiosyncratic reactions is diagnosis. Often the clinical signs may
not be clearly distinguishable from those associated with the primary disease process. Ihe
clinician should consider idiosyncratic reactions on their differential diagnosis list when
unexpected changes in clinical progress occur.
 Owners should be warned of the possibility of idiosyncratic ADRs. Drug withdrawal is
the most important step and owners should be told to stop the drug immediately should
any untoward events occur. Clinical manifestations depend on the target cell or organ, but
they are usually systemic reactions. Often the first signs noted by the owner are lethargy.
depression, and anorexia. The treatment should be directed at the clinical manifestation of
the ADR. The effectiveness of corticosteroids in treating idiosyncratic hypersensitivity ADRs
is poorly documented. However, anecdotal experience in humans and the documentation
0n bupuodan pou seue jeul sisaans suoean au oi juauodos sorou ue jo
doses, not antinflammatory doses). Animals that manifest neutropenia as a clinical sign
Sulfonamide
Cytochrome P450 
Sulfonamide
hydroxylamine
Cellulardamage
(reactive metabolite)
 Clinical syndrome
Covalent binding
to cellular proteins in
Pathological immuneresponse
target organs
Figure 23-l Simplified scheme of the pathogenesis of sulfonamide hypersensitivity
reactions.
282 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
oaond in se sedaid uadspeaq aidade ue um paiean an pons
against secondary bacterial infections.
If an animal has experienced an idiosyncratic ADR, use of the suspected or a chemically
related drug should be considered contraindicated unless no other alternative exists for a
life-threatening illness. In that case, a desensitization protocol should be considered as part
of the reinitiation of therapy. Unfortunately, there is essentially no published experience
with these protocols in veterinary patients
Incidence of Adverse Drug Reactions
The incidence of many ADRs in veterinary medicine is often unknown because of the dif-
ficulties in attributing clinical events to drug administration and the dependence on spon-
taneous reporting of ADRs. Many ADRs are not apparent until the drug has been used in
the best or safest choice for therapy, particularly when considering drugs developed for
use in humans. A drug relatively safe for use in humans is not necessarily safe in dogs and
cats. Clinical studies demonstrating safety of drugs should also be evaluated carefully to
determine if the patient population studied is representative of the population in which you
wish to use the drug.
Small experimental studies at higher-than-normal clinical doses may indicate what
 dose-dependent toxicities to be aware of and give an indication of the therapeutic index, but
they do not determine the incidence of dose-dependent or idiosyncratic reactions to expect
als and postmarketing surveillance necessary to determine the incidence of ADRs are not
available in veterinary medicine. Many times the impression of the incidence or importance
 of an ADR is colored by personal experience. Although this may be useful experience, it can
often be misleading. In general, dose-dependent ADRs tend to be more common but less
serious, whereas idiosyncratic ADRs tend to be relatively rare but more serious (e.g., the
The unpredictability and potential severity of idiosyncratic toxicities gives them an effect
disproportionate with their incidence.
I is always important to remember that the likelihood of an ADR in the patient being
treated is more important than the frequency of occurrence in the general population and
the decision to use the drug should be based on an assessment of risk in the individual
patient. Particular vigilance for adverse reactions in neonates, older animals, animals with a
previous history of an ADR, and animals receiving multidrug therapy is required. Many fac-
duration, vehicle, and drug interactions from concomitant therapy. Patient factors include
species or breed, genetic and environmental variation in drug metabolism, age, sex, body
composition (fat vs. lean weight), pregnancy status (teratogenicity), concurrent disease
 states, immunologic status, and concurrent drug or chemical exposures. How these factors
contribute to the development of an ADR depends on the drug and the type of toxicity.
Diagnosis of an Adverse Drug Reaction
Attribution of a clinical event to a drug can be diffcult. Perhaps the most important clues to
link a clinical event with drug treatment are an appropriate temporal relationship, a previous
report of a similar ADR associated with the drug, and a lack of another clinical explanation
of the event. There are many algorithms or probability methods that have been developed
for diagnosing potential ADRs. However, essentially they simplify down to the following
questions, which reflect a rational approach to attributing a clinical event to an ADR:
aa al o adondde uaan p m jua al yo uosse eo a si "
  o  nse  ag  am ss  i go
1 month, but could be longer in some situations) after drug discontinuation, they are
Chapter 23 |Adverse Drug Reactions283
unlikely to be related to the drug. The temporal association should be appropriate
for the suspected ADR and not incompatible with the pathogenesis of the suspected
reaction. For example, an anaphylactic reaction would not occur 7 days after drug
administration.
2. Has the suspected ADR been previously reported? If the signs are consistent with a pre-
viously reported ADR, the probability is much higher that the signs are the result of an
ADR. If the ADR has not been previously reported, the probability is lower but this does
hi  a   a '  p aisd  aa assa o
(particularly the safety section), the FDA's Adverse Event Reporting System website and
drug handbooks are good places to find drug-specific information.
3. Are there other possible explanations for the clinical signs? It is important to differentiate
clinical signs attributable to the disease from those that may be related to the drug. Other
drugs that the animal may have been receiving should also be considered.
 4. Has the drug been administered previously to the patient and what was the outcome?
This needs to be interpreted in a manner consistent with the suspected ADR. If a previ-
a uo pateiau snip aq oi aia arou si ll asuodsan ieus e pasnpaid annsodxa sno
other hand, a previous uneventful exposure, although decreasing the likelihood, does
not rule out an ADR.
not ethical to reexpose an animal to a drug suspected of causing an ADR, but this may
occur inadvertently or in clinical situations in which alternative therapies are limited.
6. Is there evidence of dosing error or elevated plasma concentrations? When in doubt, the
dose should always be recalculated. If available, therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) can
be a useful tool in deciding if toxic drug concentrations exist.
For example, use of an NSAID and an aminoglycoside may increase the risk of neph-
rotoxicity, whereas concurrent use of an NSAID and a glucocorticoid will increase the
likelihood of gastric ulceration. Does the animal have a concurrent disease, which may
increase susceptibility to an adverse event (i.e., underlying hepatic or renal disease or
diabetes)?
Drug Interactions
tive or absolute contraindications to the concurrent use of drugs. Drug interactions may lead
to a diminished or an enhanced effect of a drug or may lead to the occurrence of toxicity.
In general, drug interactions have either a pharmacodynamic or a pharmacokinetic basis.
Pharmacodynamic interactions are the pharmacologic effects of two drugs that may
 siaa ansoddo ar aueop pue apndooia "ia) ao yna oi addo an
renal blood flow), work at the same site (e.g., two NSAIDs), or enhance the effects through
sequential or complementary effects (e.g., effects of glucocorticoids on βz-receptors and use
 of a βz-agonist, such as terbutaline; effects of corticosteroids and NSAIDs on gastric integ-
rity). Drug combinations should be assessed carefully for drug interactions before their
use. There are many possible pharmacodynamic interactions, some of which are listed in
Table 23-1.
Pharmacokinetic interactions occur when drugs inhibit or enhance each other's
metabolism or renal excretion (Table 23-2). One drug may also displace another from
protein binding sites, leading to greater free drug concentrations and hence pharmaco-
logic effect. Drug interactions can lead to the occurrence of ADRs at doses or plasma
concentrations lower than typically expected, depending on the mechanism of the
interaction.
Knowledge of pharmacokinetic drug interactions in small animals remains limited.
Probably the most common mechanism for pharmacokinetic interactions is metabolic
284SECTION3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
Table 23-l
Some Pharmacodynamic Drug Interactions
Drugs
Interaction
Mechanism
Glucocorticoids and
Increased
NSAIDs primarily inhibit prostaglandin
NSAIDs
gastrointestinal
production, whereas corticosteroids
toxicity
increase gastric acid secretion and 
decrease mucosal defenses.
Furosemide and ACE
 Increased diuretic
ACE inhibitors decrease aldosterone
inhibitors
effect
secretion, which subsequently
increases the diuretic effect of
furosemide.
Furosemide and
Increased diuretic
Work at different sites in diuretics the
thiazide diuretics
paa
 renal tubule, leading to a synergistic
diuretic effect.
Glucocorticoids and
Increased
Glucocorticoids upregulate and increase
β-2 agonists
bronchodilatory
the responsiveness of β-receptors.
effect
Sucralfate and gastric
Decreased efficacy
Sucralfate requires an acid pH for
acid secretion
of sucralfate
maximal efficacy; if gastric acid
inhibitors
secretion inhibitors (e.g., cimetidine,
ranitidine, omeprazole) increase
gastric pH, efficacy of sucralfate may
be decreased.
NSAIDs and
Increased bleeding
Combination of inhibition of platelet
anticoagulants
aggregation (NSAIDs) with inhibi-
tion of other coagulation pathways
(heparin, warfarin) will lead to
increased bleeding tendency.
Opioids and general
Enhanced respiratory (
 General anesthetics generally enhance 
anesthetics
depression by
the respiratory depressant effects of
opioids
opioids.
ACE, Angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSA ID, nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug.
interaction at the level of cytochrome P450 in the liver. Ihe cytochrome P450 family of
-a oz uul aou jo pasos st ln uansas anbiun e si sauazua suzoqeiau-an
ent enzymes, of which 4 or 5 are likely responsible for the majority of drug metabolism.
There are significant species differences in the regulation and substrate specificity of these
enzymes. Ihus although there are many similarities between species, cytochrome P450-
based drug interactions in dogs or cats are not necessarily the same as those in humans.
Hence, although we rely heavily on extrapolation of potential drug interactions in humans
 m n a aq se nu a sn i e so u s  
required in companion animals to fully elucidate the extent of clinically significant meta-
bolic drug interactions. Nevertheless, a reasonable rule of thumb is to avoid when possible
combining drugs with a clearance that depends on metabolism and when interactions have
been reported in other species unless they have been shown not to occur in veterinary spe-
cies. Table 23-2 summarizes some of the possible drug interactions and their mechanisms
in small animals, primarily dogs.
Drug Incompatibilities
 Drug incompatibilities are chemical interactions that occur between drugs in vitro. Drugs
[auan e sy deq pim io aauas e u iauaot paxiu aq iou pmous aqeduoou ane ie
nule, do not mix drugs unless necessary and then only if you know they are compatible.
Chapter 23 | Adverse Drug Reactions 285
Table 23-2
 Some Pharmacokinetic Drug Interactions in Dogs
Drug
Interaction
Mechanism
PB
 Propranolol-
—decreased
 PB induces several cytochrome
efficacy
 P450 enzymes, increasing the
Lidocaine—increased clearance
metabolism of several drugs.
Chloramphenicol—decreased
 The increased hepatotoxicity
efficacy
when combinations of
anticonvulsants are used is
 likely because of increased
bioactivation.
Cimetidine
Theophylline—-increased
Cimetidine is a moderate inhibitor
toxicity
of several different P450
Metronidazole—increased
enzymes and so decreases
toxicity
 metabolism of several drugs.
Midazolam—increased effects
Propranolol— increased effects 
Chloramphenicol
Phenobarbital—pharmacologic (
Chloramphenicol inhibits
toxicity
phenobarbital metabolism.
Enrofloxacin
Theophylline—pharmacologic
Enrofloxacin inhibits theophylline
toxicity
clearance.
Digoxin
Quinidine, verapamil, keto-
These drugs inhibit
conazole, itraconazole-
P-glycoprotein-dependent
decrease digoxin clearance
renal clearance of digoxin.
leading to toxicity
PB, Phenobarbital.
Most standard drug handbooks contain information on drug incompatibilities and should
be consulted before mixing drugs.
Drug-lnduced Hepatotoxicity
Drug-induced liver damage remains one of the most important ADRs. Because of its strate-
gic location between the intestine and the systemic circulation, the liver can be exposed to
relatively high drug concentrations. When coupled with its high metabolic capacity, partic-
ularly through the cytochrome P450 enzymes, the liver has the greatest exposure to reactive
metabolites. Intrinsic hepatotoxicity is often related to bioactivation to reactive metabolites
that damage liver cells and cause hepatic necrosis (e.g., acetaminophen hepatotoxicity; see
Chapter 30). It may also occur subsequent to disruption of mitochondrial function or dis-
ruption of bile transport, leading to cholestatic injury Idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity is nearly
always related to bioactivation to reactive intermediates. Dose-dependent hepatopathies
are usually identifed during the drug development process but may still contribute to clini-
cally important drug-induced toxicity. However, the majority of serious cases of hepatotox-
icity are idiosyncratic in nature.
Box 23-5 provides a list of the most clinically important hepatotoxic drugs in small ani-
mals. This is not a complete list of potential hepatotoxins but rather a list of drugs that have
been associated with hepatotoxicity in dogs and cats. Ihere are other drugs that have been
shown to be hepatotoxic in other species (humans and rodents) but that have not been
reported or observed to cause clinically significant hepatotoxicity in veterinary species. For
example, many complementary or alternative health products (e.g., certain kava products
and germander) have been reported to cause hepatotoxicity in humans and conceivably
may do so in animals, but no specific reports exist.
286SECTION 3 MiscellaneousToxicantGroups
Phenobarbital
One of the most commonly used hepatotoxins that remains a clinical challenge for veteri-
narians is phenobarbital. A small percentage of dogs on chronic phenobarbital administra-
tion will develop hepatopathy and eventually hepatic cirrhosis.1l Phenobarbital is known
to cause elevations in serum liver enzyme activities that are not directly correlated to the
occurrence or degree of hepatotoxicity.12.13 Although elevations in serum liver enzyme activ-
ities have been attributed to enzyme induction,this is far from clear.12.13 Minor elevations in
serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and alkaline phosphatase (AP) activities are gener-
ally not a cause for concern, but elevations in ALT that are three to five times the upper limit
of normal should be monitored carefully. It should also be noted that dogs with significant
hepatic cirrhosis may not have marked elevations in serum liver enzyme activities despite
extensive liver damage. If elevations in AP and ALT activities are accompanied by decreases
in albumin concentration or serum urea nitrogen, they should be considered more seri-
ously. Additional diagnostic work-up, including a bile acid test, is indicated. Although
hepatic biopsy may help to document actual liver damage, no histopathologic changes that
are hallmarks of early phenobarbital hepatotoxicity have been identified.12
 (   ) od o so s   s
thought to be at increased risk of phenobarbital-associated liver damage. Although ele-
vated serum phenobarbital concentrations are often observed in dogs that have devel-
oped hepatopathy,ll it has been difficult to separate cause and effect. Ihat is, loss of liver
function may lead to decreased clearance of phenobarbital and elevated serum concen-
trations. Dogs with low serum concentrations of phenobarbital may still develop liver
disease (Cribb, unpublished observations). Yearly evaluation of serum enzyme activities
is often recommended but has not been clearly shown to prospectively identify dogs at
risk of developing hepatotoxicity. Unexpected increases in serum phenobarbital concen-
trations may also be an indication of hepatic dysfunction. If dogs are removed from phe-
likely. Dogs should be carefully weaned from phenobarbital and therapy with an alterna-
tive anticonvulsant, such as potassium bromide or levetiracetam, instituted if hepatopa-
thy is demonstrated or highly suspected.
Box23-5
Clinically Important
Idiosyncratic Hepatotoxicity
Idiosyncratic hepatitis clearly occurs with
Hepatotoxins
sulfonamides, carprofen, methimazole,
Intrinsic Hepatotoxins
diethylcarbamazine-oxibendazole, meben-
Acetaminophen (dogs)
dazole, and diazepam in companion ani-
 Phenobarbital, primidone, phenytoin
mals. In all cases, the incidence is rare
Glucocorticoids
(probably less than 1/1000). The most com-
Mitotane
mon signs of idiosyncratic hepatotoxic-
Tetracycline
ity are acute onset of anorexia and malaise
Cyclosporine
within the first 2 to 8 weeks of therapy.
Griseofulvin
However, hepatotoxicity can develop sooner
Thiacetarsamide
or may have a delayed onset. Although
Ketoconazole
periodic screening for elevations in serum
Idiosyncratic Hepatotoxins
liver enzyme activities is sometimes rec-
Diazepam in cats
 ommended for idiosyncratic hepatotoxins,
 Propylthiouracil and methimazole in
there is no evidence that this is effective in
predicting or preventing hepatotoxicity. The
cats
onset of liver damage is quick once it occurs
Trimethoprim and sulfonamide antimi-
crobials in dogs
so that dogs or cats can go from normal
serum activities to clinical liver damage in
Mebendazole
Carprofen
a few days' time. When commencing drugs
that are associated with idiosyncratic hepa-
Diethylcarbamazine and oxibendazole
totoxicity, it is useful to establish a baseline
Chapter 23 | Adverse Drug Reactions 287
for serum activities before the start of therapy. It is also important to remember that fluctua-
tions of serum enzyme activities out of the normal range are not uncommon and simple eleva-
tion is not necessarily an indication to stop the medication, although it is a clear indication for
enhanced clinical and biochemical monitoring of the patient.
The most important treatment for idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity is immediate cessation
of therapy and diagnosis. The owners should be instructed to immediately stop the drug
and bring the animal in for evaluation should it become anorexic or depressed. Serum liver
enzyme activities should be determined and, if elevated, a presumptive diagnosis of idio-
once the reaction has started is more likely to lead to a fatal outcome. Although hepatic
biopsy may serve to confirm the hepatic damage, this is rarely indicated and is probably
not helpful in differentiating idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity from other causes. There is no
specific therapy for idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity. In severe cases that continue to deteriorate,
treatment with corticosteroids, on the assumption that there is an underlying immune-
sin ioddns oi saipns eiun poo ou ane anaun inq pal aq ues 'sisauaoued paieipa
 aian n  u e
Drug-lnduced Nephrotoxicity
Because of their large perfusion (approximately 25% of the cardiac output), their ability
to concentrate and accumulate toxicants, and their high metabolic activity, kidneys are
highly vulnerable to drug-induced toxic injury. Ihe most common drugs associated with
nephrotoxicity in small animals are presented in Box 23-6. It is important to note that
Box 23-6 and this section describe toxic events associated with drugs that are intrinsi-
cally nephrotoxic and do not address drugs, such as furosemide, that can cause renal
dysfunction through their pharmacologic properties. As a general principle, two poten-
tially nephrotoxic drugs should not be used together and nephrotoxic drugs should be
avoided in animals with known or suspected renal dysfunction. To minimize the risk of
nephrotoxicity, it is important to maintain the hydration status of the animal and ensure
adequate urine output.
Aminoglycosides
Nephrotoxicity is a major limiting factor for aminoglycoside administration. Aminoglyco-
side toxicity results in renal failure with hypoosmotic polyuria, enzymuria, glucosuria, and
proteinuria. Serum creatinine can be increased after a few days of administration. Renal
failure is usually reversible but can become irreversible if administration is prolonged. Toxic
mechanisms are not fully understood but probably involve active uptake of the drug by
tubular cells and accumulation in lysosomes, Golgi apparatus, and endoplasmic reticulum.
Histopathologically, aminoglycoside tubular cell toxicity is associated with formation of
myeloid bodies that result from the accumulation of phospholipids in a concentric lamellar
disposition within enlarged and dysfunctional lysosomes. Rupture of overwhelmed lyso-
 somes is believed to be a major trigger for tubular cell death. Impaired synthesis of protec-
tive prostaglandins and inhibition of mitochondrial respiration and of protein synthesis
have also been proposed as additional toxic
mechanisms.
Box 23-6
Drugs Associated with
 As low trough levels of aminoglycosides
Nephrotoxicity
have been associated with decreased neph-
Aminoglycosides
rotoxicity in multiple human trials, single
Amphotericin B
daily administration is currently used in
humans and horses.14.15 However, multiple
Cyclosporin A
 Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs
once-daily intramuscular administrations of
 gentamicin have been associated with signs
Sulfonamides
Tetracyclines
of renal damage in dogs (increased serum
Radiocontrast agents
creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, renal
Methoxyflurane
tubular casts, and decreased specific urine
gravity) and so care must still be exercised.16
288  SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
To minimize the risks associated with aminoglycoside-induced nephrotoxicity, patient hydra-
tion should be maintained, co-administration with other nephrotoxic or diuretic drugs
(antinflammatory drugs, furosemide) should be avoided, and TDM should be used. TDM
 dose adjustment is related to the patient's pharmacokinetic parameters and minimal inhibi-
that produces a peak concentration 8 to 10 times more than the MIC and a trough concen-
tration of less than 2 mcg/mL, and preferably less than 1 mcg/mL. Prostaglandin analogue
supplementation (misoprostol) does not seem to be effective for the prevention or treat-
ment of gentamicin-induced renal injury.
β-Lactams
Cephalosporins have been commonly cited as being potentially nephrotoxic drugs. The
early cephalosporins (i.e., cephaloridine) had clear nephrotoxic properties and a number of
was selective to the S2 segment of the proximal tubule as a result of active uptake through
appears to be associated with a significant risk of nephrotoxicity.
Among other β-lactams, only imipenem is significantly nephrotoxic. Iherefore it is
administered in combination with cilastatin to inhibit its metabolism by dehydropeptidase
I on the brush borders of renal tubular cells to minimize its uptake into renal tubular cells
and subsequent nephrotoxicity.
Amphotericin B
 In its conventional colloidal dispersion form (Fungizone), amphotericin B is associated
with high risks of renal toxicity in humans and in veterinary species. It induces an intense
renal arteriolar vasoconstriction and is directly cytotoxic in relation with its ability to
bind cholesterol and form membrane pores, leading to tubular necrosis. Several protocols
have been developed for the administration of amphotericin B to minimize nephrotoxic-
ity. New lipid-based formulations have lowered the toxic events related to amphotericin B
administration in human medicine.17 Clinical trials have not been performed in veterinary
medicine to date and therefore use of safer azole antifungals is preferred to amphotericin B
wherever possible.
Cisplatin
associated with acute renal failure and chronic renal failure. Although not fully docu-
mented in veterinary clinical settings, renal toxicity of cisplatin should be carefully moni-
tored. Toxicity results from bioactivation of cisplatin to more toxic metabolites in the rena
tubular cells, oxidative stress, and direct cytotoxicity of cisplatin through the inhibition of
 DNA and protein synthesis.
Cyclosporine A
As cyclosporine A renal toxicity is a common problem in human medicine, its increased
use in veterinary medicine, especially for dermatologic diseases, has raised the question of
nephrotoxic risks in veterinary species. In contrast to humans, dog and cat kidneys do not
seem to be a major target of cyclosporine toxicity. Very few cases of renal impairment have
been reported in the literature.!8
Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
 Renal synthesis of prostaglandins by cyclooxygenase constitutes a regulatory mechanism
to cope with diminished renal perfusion that may occur in volume-contracted states (i.e.
dehydration, diuretics) or reduced cardiac output (i.e., congestive heart failure).19 Because
NSAIDs can inhibit prostaglandin synthesis, they may impair renal function in high-
risk patients, culminating with acute renal failure. The nephrotoxic potential of selective
COX-2 inhibitors is unclear in human medicine20 and has not been addressed thoroughly
Chapter 23 | Adverse Drug Reactions 289
in veterinary species. It is clear, however, that relatively selective COX-2 inhibitors can
cause nephrotoxicity under the right circumstances. NSAIDs can also damage the kidney
by direct toxicity, usually after massive administration. Both mechanisms may be involved
in acute renal papillary necrosis, which has been reported in dogs and cats.2.22
Radiocontrast Agents
Hyperosmolar radiocontrast agents have been associated with renal damage and decreased
renal clearance, especially in dogs with heart failure. Transient renal ischemia, direct
tubular toxicity, and changes in glomerular capillary permeability have been proposed to
explain these alterations.23 New nonionic agents with lower osmolarity (i.e., iopamidol)
have decreased risks of toxicity.
Sulfonamides
Idiosyncratic toxicity of sulfonamides in dogs has been associated with proteinuria, which
may result from drug-induced glomerulonephritis.24.25 However, renal toxicity is less
common than some other signs (i.e., fever, arthropathy, and blood dyscrasias). Sulfon-
amides may also cause crystalluria if high doses are administered to animals or if they are
dehydrated.
Tetracyclines
In dogs, high doses of oxytetracycline (25 mg/kg intravenously) have been associated with
tubular nephropathy. Clinical signs include vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration, and isosthe-
nuria with azotemia, hypercreatininemia, and hyperphosphatemia.26 Renal damage has
also been described with the use of outdated or degraded tetracycline.
Conclusion
By taking a rational approach to ADRs based on an understanding of the general principles
of mechanisms of toxicity, the veterinary clinician can go beyond the consultation of a list
of adverse reactions to a thoughtful assessment of risk and causality in our patients. This
will lead to the safer, more appropriate use of drugs and better patient care. Although all
veterinarians will experience the occurrence of ADRs in their patients, careful use of drugs
will minimize the frequency and consequences.
References
1. Mealey KL, Bentjen SA, Gay IM, et al: Ivermectin sensitivity in collies is associated with a deletion muta-
tion of the mdr1 gene, Pharmacogenetics 11:727-733, 2001.
2. Paul AJ,Tranquilli WJ,Seward RL,et al: Clinical observations in collies given ivermectin orally, Am J Vet
Res 48:684-685, 1987.
3. Cribb AE: Adverse effects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. In Ka W, editor: Clinical pharma-
cology: principles and practice, Las Vegas, 1998, Western Veterinary Conference.
4. Hanson SM, Bostwick DR, Twedt DC, et al: Clinical evaluation of cimetidine, sucralfate, and misopro-
58:1320-1323, 1997.
5.Rohrer CR, Hill RC,Fischer A,et al: Efficacy of misoprostol in prevention of gastric hemorrhage in dogs
treated with high doses of methylprednisolone sodium succinate, Am I Vet Res 60:982-985, 1999.
6. St Omer VV, McKnight ED Il: Acetylcysteine for treatment of acetaminophen toxicosis in the cat, J Am
Vet Med Assoc 176:911-913, 1980.
7. Cribb AE, Lee BL, Trepanier LA, et al: Adverse reactions to sulphonamide and sulphonamide-trime-
thoprim antimicrobials: clinical syndromes and pathogenesis, Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 15:9-50,
1996.
8. Fujii J, Otsu K, Zorzato F, et al: Identification of a mutation in porcine ryanodine receptor associated
with malignant hyperthermia, Science 253:448-451, 1991.
9. Park BK, Coleman JW, Kiteringham NR, et al: Drug disposition and drug hypersensitivity, Biochem
Pharmacol 36:581-589, 1987.
10. Bunch SE: Hepatotoxicity associated with pharmacologic agents in dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am
Small A nim Pract 23:659 -670, 1993.
290SECTlON 3 MiscellaneousToxicantGroups
(1985-1989), I Am Vet Med Assoc 199:1060-1066, 1991.
12. Gaskill C, Miller LM, Mattoon JS, et al: Liver histopathology and serum alanine aminotransferase and
alkaline phosphatase activities in epileptic dogs receiving phenobarbital, Vet Pathol 42:147-160, 2005.
13. Muller PB, Taboada J, Hosgood G, et al: Effects of long-term phenobarbital treatment on the liver in
dogs, I Vet Intern Med 14:165-171, 2000.
14. Godber LM, Walker RD, Stein GE, et al: Pharmacokinetics, nephrotoxicosis, and in vitro antibacterial
activity associated with single versus multiple (three times) daily gentamicin treatments in horses, Am }
Vet Res56:613-618, 1995.
15. Tudor RA, Papich MG, Redding WR, et al: Drug disposition and dosage determination of once daily
administration of gentamicin sulfate in horses after abdominal surgery, I Am Vet Med Assoc 215:503-506,
1999.
16. Albarellos G, Montoya L, Ambros L, et al: Multiple once-daily dose pharmacokinetics and renal safety of
gentamicin in dogs, I Vet Pharmacol Ther 27:21-25, 2004.
17. Fukui H, Koike T, Saheki A, et al: Evaluation ofthe efficacy and toxicity of amphotericin B incorporated
in lipid nano-sphere (LNS), Int J Pharm 263:51-60, 2003.
18. Robson D: Review of the pharmacokinetics, interactions and adverse reactions of cyclosporine in people,
dogs and cats, Vet Rec 152:739-748, 2003.
19. Whelton A: Nephrotoxicity ofnonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs: physiologic foundations and clinj-
cal implications, Am I Med 106:13S-24S, 1999.
20. Sandhu GK, Heyneman CA: Nephrotoxic potential of selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors, Ann
Pharmacother 38:700-704, 2004.
 21. Silverman LR, Khan KN: “Have you seen this? Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-induced renal
papillary necrosis in a dog, Toxicol Pathol 27:244-245, 1999.
  e  s    s   e a     
Pathol 28:84-87, 1991.
23. Margulies K, Schirger J, Burnett J Jr: Radiocontrast-induced nephropathy: current status and future
prospects, Int Angiol 11:20-25, 1992.
24. Giger U, Werner LL, Millichamp NJ, et al: Sulfadiazine-induced allergy in six Doberman pinschers, I Am
Vet Med A ssoc 186:479-484, 1985.
25. Trepanier LA, Danhof R, Toll J, et al: Clinical findings in 40 dogs with hypersensitivity associated with
administration of potentiated sulfonamides, I Vet Intern Med 17:647-652, 2003.
26. Moalli MR, Dysko RC, Rush HG, et al: Oxytetracycline-induced nephrotoxicosis in dogs after intrave-
nous administration for experimental bone labeling, Lab A nim Sci46:497-502, 1996.
CHAPTER
Miscellaneous Indoor
24
Toxicants
Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant, DVM, PhD, DABVT, DABT
undreds of household and commercial products are available in homes and businesses.
Although many household products are not highly toxic, cleaning substances, cosmet-
ics, and personal care products are a common source of exposure for pets.
Household products are often complex chemical mixtures of organic and inorganic
compounds designed for specific applications. When an animal has been exposed to a
household product, it is important for the veterinarian to obtain the following information
if possible: full trade name of the product, ingredients in the product (both active and inert)
and their concentrations, amount and dilution of the product the animal came in contact
with, clinical signs and their progression in relation to the time of exposure, and any treat-
ments given by the owner before coming in with the animal. It is helpful to instruct the
owner to bring in the original container of the product in question.
Even when this information is obtained, it may still be difficult for the clinician to assess
the situation because the toxicity of many household products is not always predictable on
among ingredients within a single product and among different products when present in
combination further complicate the toxicologic risk assessment. This predicament may be
alleviated in part by appropriate consultations. Information on the ingredients and clinical
toxicology of a particular product may be obtained from human and animal poison control
centers, emergency medical centers, and manufacturers product safety and information
hotlines. Many commercial products have specific manufacturer's information and tele-
phone numbers as part of their labels, and poison control center numbers are available in
local telephone directories.
This chapter updates an earlier review of the clinical toxicology of common indoor
toxicants, such as cleaning agents, corrosive and caustic agents, disinfectants, alcohols, and
other miscellaneous products.' Described also is general management of companion ani-
mals with oral, dermal, and ocular exposures to these classes of compounds.
Soaps, Detergents, and Cleaning Agents
Soaps and detergents are among the most frequently encountered household products. This
class of compounds includes hand soaps, shampoos, spray cleaners, dishwashing liquids
and powders, and laundry products. Soaps and detergents are surfactants (i.e., agents that
lower the surface tension of water to enable it to wet surfaces more efficiently). Surfactants
also help to remove dirt, disperse soil, and emulsify fat or grease.
Soaps and detergents are classified according to their chemical structure. True soaps are
salts of fatty acids, usually made by the reaction of alkali with natural fats and oils or with
the fatty acids obtained from animal or vegetable sources. Detergents are surfactants that
contain inorganic ingredients, such as phosphates, silicates, or carbonates. Detergents are
further classified as nonionic surfactants, anionic surfactants, or cationic surfactants based
on their ionic charge when in solution.
291
292SECTlON 3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
Soaps
sdeos apean se qns sdeos aos ranamon iixon enn un mol Aeiaua ane sdeos
and laundry soaps, have an appreciable content of free alkali, thus presenting a possible
cause emesis and diarrhea because of gastrointestinal irritation. This irritation may result
in part from the essential oils used as fragrances in bar soaps.2 Treatment involves the use
of demulcents and diluents, such as milk or water. Induction of emesis may be considered if
the ingested quantity exceeds 20 g of soap/kg body weight (BW), and the soap is nonalka-
line (noncorrosive), or if spontaneous emesis has not occurred within 30 minutes of inges-
tion. If diarrhea or excessive vomiting occurs, symptomatic treatment and efforts should be
started to maintain fluid and electrolyte balance.
Nonionic Detergents
Many products contain nonionic synthetic detergents formulated into hand dishwashing
 detergents,shampoos, and some laundry detergents. Nonionic surfactants are uncharged in
aqueous solutions at neutral pH. Examples of nonionic detergents are alkyl ethoxylate, alkyl
phenoxy polyethoxy ethanols, and polyethylene glycol stearate.4
The majority of nonionic detergents have a low order of irritation and thus low toxicity.
exposures to nonionic detergents generally do not produce extensive liquefaction of the
corneal epithelium.2 Depending on the exposure route, treatments for nonionic detergent
exposures should include diluting ingestions with milk or water, rinsing exposed eyes with
copious amounts of water, or thorough rinsing of detergents from skin and hair coats. If
protracted vomiting occurs, treatments to reverse the effects and measures should be per-
formed to maintain fluid and electrolyte balance.
Anionic Detergents
Anionic surfactants are primarily sulfonated or phosphorylated straight-chain hydrocar-
bons. These compounds are used commonly in laundry detergents, electric dishwashing
allkyl sodium sulfates, alkyl sodium sulfonates, dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, sodium
lauryl sulfate, tetrapropylene benzene sulfonate, and linear alkyl benzene sulfonates.4
Many of these materials contain alkali builders, such as sodium phosphate, sodium car-
bonate, sodium metasilicate, or sodium silicate, to increase their effectiveness in hard
water.
Most anionic detergents are slightly to moderately toxic. Electric or automatic dish-
washing detergent products are considered most toxic because of their high alkalinity. Ihe
caustic potential of automatic dishwashing detergents has recently been evaluated and
remains the topic of great controversy. The pH of 1% solutions of automatic dishwashing
detergents is less than the supposedly critical pH traditionally associated with corrosive
injury to the esophagus*; however, large ingestions of automatic dishwasher detergents are
tion, physical form, duration of exposure, and viscosity of the product. In general nonphos-
phate-containing electric dishwashing detergents induce greater tissue irritation and injury
than phosphate-containing automatic dish detergents.6
 Ingested anionic detergents are well absorbed from the intestinal tract. Healthy skin
appears to be a good barrier to anionic surfactants, but such surfactants can be absorbed
through irritated or broken skin. Anionic detergents are metabolized by the liver, and the
metabolites are excreted in the urine. Intravascular hemolysis may occur with anionic
to be related to the detergent concentrations in the blood.2 Prolonged or repeated cutaneous
exposure to anionic detergents may result in irritation. Ocular exposure to automatic dish
detergents has been reported to cause corneal erosion and opacity.? Ingestions of anionic
detergents often result in vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, and gastrointestinal discomfort. Most
exposures cause illness but are not fatal.
Chapter 24 | Miscellaneous Indoor Toxicants 293
Oral administration of milk or water to dilute the detergent is advised. Activated char-
coal should be given if large quantities of detergent have been ingested and if corrosive
injury has not occurred to the gastrointestinal tract. With ocular exposure, the eyes should
be rinsed with copious amounts of water. Thorough bathing and rinsing is recommended
for dermal exposures. If protracted vomiting occurs, symptomatic treatment and measures
should be instituted to maintain systemic fluid and electrolyte balance. The patient should
be monitored for the development of hemolysis. If hemolysis does occur, intravascular flu-
ids are recommended to prevent renal tubular damage from the precipitation of hemoglo-
bin in renal tubules or the resultant hypoxia, and renal function should be monitored. In
patients that have ingested automatic dishwashing detergent, evaluation may be warranted
of the mouth, oropharynx, and esophagus for corrosive injury. Treatment for corrosive
injuries should be started as described later in this chapter in the section "Corrosives"
Cationic Detergents and Potpourris
Cationic detergents are used as fabric softeners, liquid potpourris, germicides, and sanitiz-
ers and are considered highly or extremely toxic. The American Society for the Preven-
tion of Cruelty to Animals Animal Poison Control Center (ASPCA-APCC) reports that
exposures to liquid potpourri are the sixth most common toxicosis reported in cats.7 In
addition to the cationic detergents, potpourris contain essential oils that are well absorbed
dermally and through mucous membranes and can cause mucous membrane and GI irrita-
tion, along with central nervous system depression and dermal hypersensitivity and irrita-
tion. The cationic surfactants are quaternary ammonium compounds with aryl or alkyl
substituent groups, one of which is often a long hydrophobic carbon chain. Generally a
halogen, such as bromide, iodide, or chloride, is also attached. These agents include benze-
thonium chloride, benzalkonium chloride, alkyl dimethyl 3,4-dichlorobenzene, and cetyl
pyridinium chloride.4
Toxicoses in animals and humans have been reported from quaternary ammonium
compounds.&-10 Ihe observed toxicity of cationic detergents can be divided into local
effects, depending on concentration and systemic effects, which are dose related.0 Cationic
detergent concentrations as low as 1% are damaging to mucous membranes, and solutions
containing more than 7.5% of cationic detergents may cause corrosive burns of the mouth,
pharynx, and esophagus.
Quaternary ammonium compounds are absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, but
several factors modify this systemic absorption. Ethanol and isopropanol, which are often
In contrast, food and chyme in the stomach reduce absorption by forming unabsorbable
ejanu eu sus se sdsaxa
tion for these compounds, although quaternary ammonium compounds may be absorbed
through damaged skin.2 Ingestion of these detergents from licking or grooming irritated
skin surfaces and paws is also a significant exposure pathway for dogs and cats.
A mechanism explaining the systemic effects of cationic detergent toxicity has not been
established. There are conflicting reports of cholinesterase inhibition caused by quaternary
ammonium compounds.3 These compounds also possess ganglionic blocking potential
and a curare-like action that causes paralysis of the neuromuscular junctions of striated
muscles.3.10 This hypothesis is supported by the structural similarities between quaternary
ammonium compounds and decamethonium, a neuromuscular blocking agent, and hexa-
methonium, a ganglionic blocking agent.3
possible hematemesis, muscle weakness, fasciculations, central nervous system (CNS) and
respiratory depression, fever, seizures, collapse, and coma. These effects are very similar
to, and must be differentiated from, those of pesticide poisonings. In cats, exposures to
liquid potpourri products resulted in hypersalivation, hyperthermia, vomiting or retching,
depression, dyspnea and abnormal respiratory sounds, and oral ulcers.2 Cationic deter-
gent ingestions usually result in corrosive damage to the mucous membranes of the mouth,
tongue, pharynx, and esophagus. Shock may develop early or as the toxicosis progresses.
294 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Hair loss and skin ulcerations are frequently seen in cats,  and inflammatory lesions of the
exposure may result in clinical effects of mild discomfort to very serious corneal damage,
depending on the concentration of the detergent.
Treatment of ingestions requires the giving of milk, water, or egg whites. Vomit-
ing should not be induced when the concentration of cationic detergent in the product
consumed is greater than 7.5%. Oral dilution may be followed by the administration of
activated charcoal and a saline cathartic. Esophagoscopy for evaluation of the degree of
corrosive damage is appropriate if stridor, dysphagia, or prolonged hypersalivation is pres-
ent. General supportive care should include maintenance of respiration, adequate caloric
(e.g., sucralfate), antibiotics, analgesics (e.g., butorphanol tartrate, fentanyl), corticoste-
roids, intravenous (IV) fluid therapy (monitor blood gas and acid-base status, and serum
electrolytes), and treatment of any seizures that may occur. Patients should be monitored
closely for shock. Any exposed skin should be gently but thoroughly washed with soap and
water. Ihe eyes should be thoroughly evaluated, and if ocular exposure has occurred, the
eyes should be lavaged with isothermic isotonic saline for 20 to 30 minutes. Corneal ulcers
should be promptly and persistently treated if present.2
Corrosives
A number of household products are capable of causing corrosive injury to contacting
membranes. Most corrosives are classified as acids or alkalis, depending on their pH in
solutions. Strongly alkaline or basic compounds tend to produce more severe injury than
acidic materials.13.14
Acidic household products typically contain hydrochloric (muriatic), sulfuric, nitric,
or phosphoric acid, or sodium bisulfte, which forms sulfuric acid in water. In addition,
aqueous solutions of free halogens (e.g., chlorine, bromine, or iodine) can also be corro-
sive. Common acidic products include antirust compounds, toilet bowl cleaners, gun barrel
cleaning fluid, automobile batteries, and swimming pool cleaning agents. Acids typically
produce a localized coagulative necrotic lesion. Because of the rapid surface protein coagu-
lation, acidic burns rarely penetrate the entire thickness of the mucosal membrane. Contact
with strong acids induces immediate intense pain, so most animals become alerted to the
danger and do not ingest significant quantities.3
Alkaline agents are also found in a variety of household products, such as drain clean-
ers, washing products, liquid cleansers, and toilet bowl products. Common ingredients are
lye formulations (e.g., sodium and potassium hydroxide or potash, sodium and potassium
carbonate), ammonium hydroxide, and potassium permanganate.2 These alkaline products
cause immediate liquefactive necrosis on contact. The lesions tend to be deeper and more
immediate pain on contact, unlike acids, there is less potential for animals to be repelled
 by discomfort, making more extensive exposure possible. Full-thickness esophageal burns
 s g aaap a u ia u ue s Hd  as  o a
cases of severe esophageal injury and resulting secondary stricture have occurred from con-
tact with substances with a pH greater than 10.
Concentrated ammonia solution ingested by a cat was shown to cause obliteration of the
esophageal wall, seizures, and death within 5 minutes. The increased viscosity of alkalis may
 contribute to faster and deeper penetration of the esophageal mucosa.'5
In general, corrosive burns of mucosal membranes first appear milky white or gray.
Soon, however, the area turns black and may look wrinkled because of eschar formation. The
animal may vocalize or become depressed; some animals manifest pain by panting. Hyper-
salivation and inability to swallow may be noted. Other effects are hematemesis, abdominal
pain, polydipsia, epiglottic edema with secondary respiratory distress, and possible shock.
Esophageal involvement is less common with acid exposures than with alkali ingestions.
The character of the commercial formulation also affects the resulting toxicity—solid or
Chapter 24 | Miscellaneous Indoor Toxicants 295
granular substances tend to be more painful initially, and burns are more common in the
perioral area.14 Liquids may be less painful initially and thus tend to be swallowed, leading
to esophageal and gastric injuries. One cannot assume that the absence of oral lesions indi-
cates that the esophagus and gastric mucosa are not damaged—0% to 30% of patients with
 esophageal burns have no oral lesions; the reverse can also be true.13.15
Once a corrosive substance comes into contact with mucosal membranes, blood vessel
thrombosis, cellular necrosis, bacterial infltration, and lipid saponification occur and are
followed by mucosal sloughing. There is an increase in fibroblastic activity. Strictures may
form several weeks after the initial injury. It is believed that strictures are most likely to
Occur after circumferential burns.13
Food and fluid tend to buffer alkaline substances in the stomach; however, corrosive
substances tend to induce pylorospasm. Ihe most severe gastric injuries thus occur around
the pylorus, and pyloric stenosis or perforations with secondary peritonitis are possible
trointestinal bleeding, edema, aspiration, fistulae, and gastric outlet obstruction.
If ocular or dermal exposure occurs, serious burns can result. Ocular exposures to either
alkaline or acidic solutions are extremely painful and can lead to corneal and conjunctival
necrosis. The extent of corneal damage may not be immediately evident. When the stroma
of the cornea is injured, perforation or opaque scarring may result. Acids tend to penetrate
the eye more slowly than do bases.2.3.13
Treatment consists of immediate dilution of the exposure with milk or water. Dilution
est return to physiologic normalcy. Attempts to neutralize the burn chemically (e.g., acids
added to basic exposures and basic solutions added to acid exposures) are contraindicated
because exothermic reactions will result, producing elevated local heat and causing thermal
burns. Unfortunately, the action of corrosives is so rapid that dilution is sometimes of little
apparent benefit. Controversially, excessive dilution may lead to vomiting, thus increasing
esophageal contact time and the opportunity for secondary aspiration. In general, however,
dilution is recommended and should be appropriately performed.13
Gastric lavage is contraindicated in caustic ingestions, and charcoal is ineffective in bind-
ing caustics. After administration of a diluent, the animal should be given supportive care.
IV fluids are often indicated. If severe pharyngeal edema is present, an endotracheal or tra-
cheostomy tube may be placed to ensure unobstructed respirations. Careful endoscopy with
a flexible scope is valuable the first 12 to 24 hours after ingestion, because outward clinical
signs do not always correlate with the severity of injury. The procedure should be halted at
the first sign of esophageal mucosal injury. Radiographic evaluation is another alternative.
Surgical resection of damaged tissue is sometimes advised; however, it is not always possible
to easily identify the damaged area, and after-resection leaking of esophageal contents may
occur at sites of anastomoses. Corticosteroids, because they decrease fibroblastic activity
and inflammation, have been recommended to reduce stricture from circumferential alkali
burns. Steroid treatment should be started within the first 48 hours and be accompanied by
prophylactic antibiotic therapy. Analgesics are often indicated for pain control. Antibiot-
ics are specifically indicated in animals with perforations. Severely affected patients may
require placement of a PEG tube for alimentary nutritional support. It is useful to monitor
 blood gas and acid-base status and concentrations of serum electrolytes. Iherapy for shock
may also be required; uncorrected circulatory collapse can lead to renal failure, ischemic
lesions of vital organs, and acute death. Affected skin should be aggressively flushed with
copious amounts of water, and exposed eyes must be flushed with sterile saline for at least
Disinfectants
 Disinfectants are applied to inanimate objects to destroy microorganisms or inhibit their
growth. Such cleaners are often formulated as combinations of one or more disinfectant
compounds and detergents.
296 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
 Disinfectant cleaners are more toxic than soap and plain detergent compounds. Disin-
fectants found in cleaning products include quaternary armmonium compounds, phenols,
pine oils, bleaches, and alcohols. Quaternary ammonium compounds were reviewed earlier
in the section on cationic detergents; the alcohols are discussed in "Solvents and Alcohols"
later in this chapter.
Phenols
 Phenol is an aromatic alcohol derived from coal tar that is a highly reactive and corrosive
contact poison. Phenolic disinfectants are generally formulated with chlorophenols (3% to
8%), phenylphenol (2% to 10%), soaps and detergents (10% to 20%), glycerin (1% to 2%),
and alcohols and glycols (1% to 20%). Some concentrated phenolic disinfectants contain
pure phenol at concentrations from 20% to 50%.
The oral LDso of phenol in dogs is approximately 0.5 g/kg BW. Cats are more sensitive
than dogs to phenol and phenolic products because of their limited detoxifying glucuronide
transferase activity. Phenol and phenolic compounds are rapidly absorbed through inges-
tion, inhalation, or dermal contact. The degree of dermal absorption depends more on the
magnitude of exposed skin area than on the concentration of the solution.3 Phenols are
detoxified by the liver and excreted in urine as glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
 Phenol denatures and precipitates cellular proteins and thus directly poisons al contact-
ing cells. Phenol at concentrations greater than 5% has resulted in oral burns, and concen-
trations of more than 1% have produced dermal burns. Phenol derivatives are considered
less corrosive than phenol. Ocular and cutaneous exposure to phenols is often accompanied
by a short interval of intense pain followed by local anesthesia.2 Animals tend to be more
sensitive to the formation of coagulative necrotic skin lesions from phenols because their
hair coat serves to retain the phenol-containing solution, thus providing longer contact
time with the skin.16 Affected areas tend to turn white and then develop dry eschars over
the next several days. Ocular exposure to phenolic compounds results in severe burns and
penetrating corneallesions.
Oral exposure to phenolic compounds produces corrosive burns of the mouth, oro-
pharynx, and esophagus. Initial clinical signs are vomiting, hypersalivation, apprehension,
hyperactivity, ataxia, and panting. As the clinical syndrome progresses, fasciculations,
shock, cardiac arrhythmias, methemoglobinemia, and coma may develop.2 Hepatic and
renal damage may occur within the next 12 to 24 hours. Respiratory alkalosis develops sec-
ondary to centrally mediated respiratory stimulation.7 Histologic examination of the liver
shows severe centrilobular hyperemia, fatty degeneration, and necrosis, and the kidneys
display renal tubular degeneration and necrosis.
Toxicoses from exposure to phenolic disinfectants are medical emergencies. Dilution of
phenol exposures with water is controversial because such dilution may enhance systemic
absorption. It is advantageous that gastrointestinal demulcents (milk or eggs) be given
at home before the owner brings the exposed animal to the veterinary clinic. Severity of
 aae ss auane aran passasse aq is xuarono an oi ap eson
severe mucosal damage is present, gastric lavage and emesis are contraindicated. Activated
charcoal and a saline cathartic may be administered if no or minimal mucosal damage is
compounds is polyethylene glycol or glycerol, followed by washing with a mild liquid dish
detergent and thorough rinsing with water. Humans who contact the exposed areas should
wear heavy rubber gloves and protective clothing to protect themselves from contamina-
tion. After the final rinsing, dressings soaked in 0.5% sodium bicarbonate may be applied
to injured areas. Oily dermatologic dressings should be avoided because they enhance
absorption of phenol. For ocular exposures, the eyes should be flushed with isothermic
isotonic saline for 20 to 30 minutes. Corneal erosions are managed by appropriate medical
procedures.2
Aggressive supportive care is necessary to manage phenol toxicoses. Acid-base status,
cardiovascular function, renal function, and hepatic function must all be closely monitored.
uoddns pue sp ambai pue suaouo gueduo aie uoissadap Aioendsau pue yous
Chapter 24 | Miscellaneous Indoor Toxicants  297
respiratory efforts. N-acetylcysteine (140 mg/kg loading dose IV and, then 70 mg/kg four
times daily orally for 3 days) may limit hepatic and renal toxicity.2
Pine Oils and Turpentine
Pine oils, derived by steam distillation of wood from pines, consist of a mixture of terpene
alcohols. Pine oil-based compounds may contain small amounts of phenol derivatives. The
concentration of pine oil in disinfectant cleaners varies from 0.3% to 60%.18 Many “pine
oil" cleaners marketed in the United States are pine scented but contain little or no actual
pine oil, so it is important to check the label on pine-scented cleaners. Pine Sol, one of the
most widely used pine oil cleaners, contains 8% to 12% pine oil, 3% to 7% alkyl alcohol
ethoxylates, 1% to 5% isopropanol, and 1% to 5% sodium petroleum sulfonate in its “Origi-
 nal" formulation'9; other cleaners branded as Pine Sol contain no pine oil. Turpentine is a
hydrocarbon mixture of terpenes derived from pine oil rather than petroleum and is often
applied as a paint thinner.
The oral LDso of pine oil ranges from 1 to 2.7 mL/kg BW. A substantially lower dose
results in severe toxicosis.2 Pine oil is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and is
metabolized by the liver to be excreted in urine as glucuronide conjugates. High concentra-
tions of ingested pine oil are demonstrable in lung tissue, lending a characteristic pine or
turpentine odor to the breath.1β As is true for phenolic compounds, cats are more suscep-
tible than other species to pine oil toxicoses.20
Pine oils are directly irritating to mucous membranes, producing erythema of the oro-
pharynx, mouth, and skin. Ocular exposure causes marked blepharospasm, epiphora,
photosensitivity, and erythema of the conjunctiva and sclera.^ Ingestion results in nausea,
hypersalivation, bloody vomiting, and abdominal pain. Systemic effects include weakness and
to aspiration during ingestion or from emesis or may be due to chemical pneumonitis from
absorption of the pine oil through the gastrointestinal tract with subsequent deposition in
the lung.18 Myoglobinuria and acute renal failure may develop following massive ingestions.
A cat that ingested 100 mL of undiluted Pine Sol had severe depression, ataxia, unresponsive
 pupils, and shock, and died within 12 hours.20 Pulmonary edema, acute centrilobular hepatic
 Prompt dilution with milk, egg white, or water should occur following ingestion of
pine oil disinfectants. Because of rapid onset of depression and the danger of aspiration
pneumonia, emesis is often contraindicated, and even gastric lavage with placement of a
cuffed endotracheal tube poses risk. Dilution should be followed by the administration of
activated charcoal and a saline or osmotic cathartic. Symptomatic and supportive care, con-
sisting of maintenance of renal perfusion and acid-base and electrolyte balance, is crucial.
Animals that have their dermis exposed should be bathed with soap and then rinsed with
copious amounts of water as soon as feasible after the exposure.
Bleaches
Most common household bleach preparations contain sodium hypochlorite at concentra-
tions between 3% and 6%. Hypochlorite salts are widely used as disinfectants, deodorizers
and water purifiers. Industrial strength bleaching solutions and swimming pool chlorine
 products may contain up to 50% hypochlorite. Powdered chlorine laundry bleaches have
calcium hypochlorite, trichloroisocyanuric acid, or dichlorodimethylhydantoin com-
d aq un gs e u a  s i sd
rations, known as colorfast bleaches, may contain sodium peroxide, sodium perborate, or
enzymatic detergents.4
Chlorine bleaches are hazardous when mixed with strong acids or ammonia solutions
because such mixtures produce chlorine or chloramine gas, respectively, which are severe
respiratory and eye irritants.
Hypochlorite toxicosis results from its corrosive effect on skin and mucous membranes.
This action is due to the oxidizing potency of the hypochlorite ion, which is measured as
available chlorine" and approximates that of similar concentrations of sodium hydroxide
298 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
solutions. Ihe clinical effects of ingested hypochlorite depend on the product's hypochlorite
ion concentration and resulting pH rather than the ingested dose (quantity). In the acidic
environment of the stomach, hypochlorite forms hypochlorous acid, which penetrates
mucous membranes, is reduced by proteins, and causes local protein coagulation.2l
Household chlorine bleaches are mild to moderate irritants and generally are not associ-
ated with significant tissue destruction. Oropharyngeal, esophageal, and gastric burns have
been reported from some chlorine bleach ingestions, but the clinical incidence of effects
is extremely low. Ihe more concentrated hypochlorite solutions and bleaching powders
brane exposure, and the duration of exposure is prolonged. The common toxic effects from
household chlorine bleaches are irritation of the oropharynx, salivation, vomiting, and
abdominal pain. The exposed animal may smell of chlorine, and bleaching of the hair may
be seen.2 Systemic reactions to chlorine bleaches are rare, and if present often are secondary
to local membrane and tissue injury. Inhalation of fumes or powders from chlorine bleach
Nonchlorine bleach products are of low toxicity. Sodium peroxide dissociates in the
gastrointestinal tract to release oxygen and may cause mild gastritis and emesis. Sodium
perborate-containing bleaches decompose to peroxide and borate; these bleaches are more
alkaline and thus irritating. Ihey may also produce systemic effects from boric acid.4
Ingestions of bleaching solutions are best treated by the administration of milk or water
to dilute the ingested solution and to serve as demulcents. Acidic antidote medications
should not be used because they enhance tissue penetration and injury by forming hypo-
chlorous acid. Areas of dermal contact should be washed with soap and rinsed with abun-
dant amounts of water. Because of the low incidence of esophageal damage likely from
household chlorine bleach ingestions, the decision to perform endoscopy should be made
 based on the patient's clinical signs and prognostic necessity. Animals with dysphagia, dys-
pnea, or significant oropharyngeal burns should undergo careful evaluative endoscopy and
[2a'lasand satam fu anisoios Aue rog Aianenidondde paieanl aq
Solvents and Alcohols
Acetone
Acetone is common in nail polish removers, varnishes, glues, and rubber cements as a clear,
colorless, volatile, highly flammable liquid with a characteristic aromatic fruity odor and
pungent, sweetish taste. It may be absorbed orally, by inhalation, and through dermal appli-
cation. Although acetone is relatively low in toxicity (lowest oral canine lethal dose, LDLO.
'x aq Au a/ g on z un naea susa (y/tu g Aiaxndde st
Signs of exposure roughly simulate those of ethanol intoxication, although the CNS
depressant action of acetone is greater. The characteristic odor of acetone on the breath and
elevated urinary ketones are sensitive indicators of exposure. CNS depression, ataxia, and
vomiting occur following mild exposure; stupor and coma are present in severe intoxica-
tions. Hyperglycemia and ketonemia with acidosis may be present and require differentia-
tion from acute diabetic coma.
Effective treatment is largely symptomatic and appropriate supportive care. Patients
with signs of recent ingestions (i.e., within 2 hours with an intact gag reflex) may benefit
from emesis followed by oral administration of activated charcoal and a cathartic. Giv-
ing IV fluids containing sodium bicarbonate will help manage the associated acidosis. Ihe
plasma half-life of acetone is relatively long (28 hours); hence clinical improvement may be
relatively slow.
Isopropanol
Isopropyl alcohol is a common household disinfectant and solvent. It is also common
similar to the effects of ethanol, but more severe. Isopropanol is metabolized by alcohol
Chapter 24 | Miscellaneous Indoor Toxicants   299
dehydrogenase more slowly than ethanol to produce acetone, itself a CNS depressant, as the
major metabolite. Ihe reported toxic dose of 70% isopropanol (rubbing alcohol) is 1 mL/kg,
but as little as 0.5 mL/kg may cause adverse effects. Signs of toxicosis develop within 30 to
60 minutes; ataxia, vomiting, and hematemesis can develop, which may progress to CNS
and respiratory depression, severe hypotension, mild acidosis, coma, and loss of deep ten-
don reflexes.
within 1 hour and the animal is relatively asymptomatic at the time of presentation. Acti-
vated charcoal administration is of little value because it is relatively ineffective in bind-
ing alcohols. IV fluids should be administered, and electrolyte and acid-base status must
be monitored. Hemodialysis is effective in reversing severe hypotension and coma from
isopropanol.
Methanol
Methyl alcohol, or wood alcohol, is often found in automotive windshield cleaner fluids
and lock antifreeze products (see Chapter 59). It is metabolized by alcohol dehydrogenase
to formaldehyde as its major metabolite; the formaldehyde is further metabolized to formic
acid by aldehyde dehydrogenase. Although formic acid accumulation is associated with
severe acidosis and blindness in humans exposed to methanol, blindness and acidosis do
not occur in dogs or cats ingesting methanol. This clinical difference is due to differences in
the rate of methanol metabolism between humans and animals and the greater availability
of tetrahydrofolate in the livers of nonprimate species.22 The lethal dose of oral methanol
in dogs is 4 to 8 mL/kg.
mia, respiratory depression, and coma. Treatment of such poisonings is similar to that for
isopropanol toxicosis.
Miscellaneous Household Hazards
Batteries
The small disc or button batteries used to power calculators, hearing aids, cameras, and
in toys, flashlights, and so on can be a risk as well. Fortunately, most disc batteries pass
that may require intervention are the larger manganese (21 to 23 mm) and mercury batter-
ies (sales of mercury batteries were discontinued in the United States in 1996).
Dry-cell batteries can contain sodium or potassium hydroxide (alkaline dry cell) or
ammonium chloride and manganese dioxide (acidic dry cell), along with varying amounts
of heavy metals (e.g., lithium, nickel, zinc, silver, cadmium). Mercury button batteries con-
tain 15% to 50% mercuric oxide or, on average, 1to 5 g of mercury.23 The main hazard from
'snaeudosa aul u paisedui saalieq uoi sneeudosa aul oi aeeep anisoios si saaneq
This tissue damage is caused by leakage of the battery alkalis, the electrical current gener-
ated by the battery's contact with the cells of the esophageal wall and within the electro-
a ai ssau asd saa s e n a a go sas
esophageal wall from the impacted batteries.
Most ingested disc batteries pass through the digestive tract spontaneously within 24 t0
36 hours without producing any adverse effects. The presence of gastrointestinal distress or
related signs suggests possible battery retention and impaction with resulting obstruction,
tissue necrosis, and potential pending perforation. Clinical signs that may develop include
fever, dysphagia, vomiting, tachypnea, abdominal tenderness, anorexia, and black non-
melanotic stools.23 The location of an ingested battery may be determined by radiography.
 If an initial radiograph is taken shortly after ingestion, the radiopaque object may be fol-
lowed through the gastrointestinal tract and delayed passage identified. Batteries retained
for more than 36 hours should be given priority for removal.
300 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Batteries lodged in the esophagus and stomach should be removed by endoscopy.
Patients with batteries passing through the stomach should be monitored for the devel-
opment of clinical effects; however, if the battery has been chewed or split apart, more
aggressive actions may be necessary to ensure rapid passage through the intestines. Ihis
may require the use of fiber bulk laxatives, saline cathartics, and enemas in asymptomatic
patients. Timely surgical retrieval of impacted or chewed pieces of batteries is necessary in
patients with evidence of mucosal hemorrhage or bowel per foration. Following ingestion of
damaged mercury-containing disc batteries, monitoring of urinary mercury levels is espe-
cially important when the battery has been split or chewed into pieces. Chelation therapy
with dimercaptosuccinic acid or d-penicillamine, as for lead poisoning, may be required
for patients with elevated urine mercury levels or those having signs of mercury toxicity:
weight loss, anorexia, ataxia, and CNS stimulation and dysfunction.
Birth Control Pills
Although there are a variety of birth control pills on the market, they all have very similar
compositions: estrogen and progesterone in very low concentration. "Mini-pill" birth con-
trol pills have only progesterone in them. Some birth control pills also contain supplemen-
tal iron. Birth control pills are dispensed in containers of 21, 28, 81, or 84 tablets; 28-count
containers generally have 4-7 inert pills. Most of the active tablets contain 0.035 mg or
less of estrogen and varying amounts of progesterone.24 Birth control pills are quite differ-
ent from hormone replacement pills, which some women refer to as "birth control pills"
but which contain much higher levels of estrogen. It is always safest to verify the product
aa a st lt ea u sad a paia aaq a sid po rq uam pa
content of the tablets that is of concern, as estrogen doses of more than 1 mg/kg may result
difficult to get near this dose even if all the tablets of a month's supply are ingested. Single
high doses of the progesterone content of the tablets are unlikely to cause more than mild
gastrointestinal upset. For iron-containing tablets, calculate the dosage of iron; doses of
more than 20 mg/kg merit decontamination (see Chapter 51). Decontamination is rarely
needed even when patients have ingested an entire month's worth of tablets, unless there is
a foreign body concern resulting from package ingestion.
Cold Packs and lce Packs
Cold packs and ice packs are commonly used as frst aid to reduce swelling and inflam-
mation and to help refrigerate foods, drugs, and other perishables during transit in cool-
ers. Some are designed for cold use only, whereas others can be heated and used as hot
packs, primarily as first aid. “Instant" cold packs contain water surrounding atube or bag of
ammonium nitrate; the pack is activated by crushing the interior container, which releases
ammonium nitrate and precipitates an endothermic reaction that can cool the pack to
approximately 35° F for 10-15 minutes. Large amounts of ingested ammonium nitrate can
cause gastritis, acidosis, and nitrite toxicity manifesting as methemoglobinemia, but severe
toxicosis is not expected from the amounts present in most cold packs.25 Mild gastrointes-
tinal upset may occur and should be treated symptomatically.
Gel-based cold packs are refrigerated or frozen to the desired temperature and retain
that termperature for a prolonged period. Gel-based packs are composed of approximately
60% to 75% water combined with a variety of compounds including hydroxyethyl cellu-
lose, carboxyl methyl cellulose, glycerin, vinyl-coated silica gel, and polyacrylamites. These
products have relatively low oral toxicity and are unlikely to cause more than mild gastro-
ponents, such as diethylene glycol or ethylene glycol. In January 2012, the U.S. Consumer
Product Safety Commission issued a recall on gel cold packs included in some lunch boxes
and food carriers after receiving reports of two dogs becoming ill following ingestion of the
cold pack contents.26 One dog was reported to have died, although the other recovered with
glycol.
Chapter 24 | Miscellaneous Indoor Toxicants301
Cough Drops (with Menthol)
There are many different formulations of cough drops, consisting mostly of menthol and
sugars. Menthol has a wide margin of safety, with an oral LDso in dogs of 3-4 g/kg BW.
Exposures to extremely large amounts of cough drops can cause gastrointestinal distress
(e.g., abdominal pain, diarrhea) due to the sugar and sugar alcohols. In extreme cases, the
menthol can lead to renal, lung, and heart dysfunction along with central nervous system
depression. Menthol can also be found in candy, cigarettes, creams, gum, mouthwash, and
many ointments.
Cyanoacrylate Adhesives (Superglue)
Cured cyanoacrylate adhesives are nontoxic if ingested; however, uncured cyanoacrylate
adhesives form an almost instantaneous bond when applied to the hair or skin, resulting in
an annoyed animal and a frustrated owner presenting the animal to a veterinarian. Adhered
skin may be manipulated by soaking the affected areas with warm, soapy water as quickly
as possible, one hopes before a full adhesive cure occurs. After irrigation the surfaces may
be peeled apart gently or the surfaces may be rolled apart using a blunt object. Do not
pull the surfaces apart with direct opposing actions. Clipping the hair may be required to
reduce tension on skin or eyelids. If small areas of skin away from the face and eyes are
affected, the area may be soaked with acetone for several minutes and repeated attempts
made to separate the hair or skin. In the case of eyelid or eyeball adhesions, wash the area
thoroughly with warm water and apply a gauze patch and an Elizabethan collar to prevent
self-trauma by the animal; do not attempt opening the eye with forceful manipulation or
the use of solvents. The eye should be able to be opened within a few hours to a few days
with no residual tissue damage.
Expanding Wood Glues (Gorilla Glue, Elmer's ProBond Wood Glue, etc.)
Woodworking adhesives and expanding insulations that contain polymeric diphenylmeth-
ane disocyanate react with hydrogen ions in acids, alcohols, and water to form urethane
and related compounds. These products typically expand, foam, and cure within 15 minutes
and are technically "nontoxic:"27 However, when ingested, a relatively rapid increase of the
material volume within the confined space of the stomach produces acute gastric or gas-
trointestinal blockage. An in vitro study documented a greater than eightfold increase in
material volume over a 2-hour period.28 Vomiting, lethargy, and a painful abdomen may
be apparent within hours of ingestion. Emesis to remove the material is contraindicated;
it is recommended that the animal take nothing by mouth and that radiographs be taken
 to localize the mass. Abdominal surgery is often required to remove the digestive tract
obstruction.
Glow Jewelry (Dibutyl Phthalate, Zinc Sulfide, Strontium Aluminate)
Dibutyl phthalate is present in many of the glow-in-the-dark products, and its toxicity
potential is considered to be quite low. However, indoor pets chewing on these products
and releasing the liquid contents may experience salivation, along with hyperactivity and
aggressive behavior. The chemical is considered to be unpleasant, thereby limiting exces-
sive exposures. Rinsing the mouth is generally all that is required to potentially dilute the
Some glow-in-the-dark products contain a combination of zinc sulfide and strontium
aluminate. These compounds are also known to have irritating properties, along with caus-
ing ataxia, confusion, cardiac irregularities, and acute respiratory arrest. Treatment aims are
symptomatic and supportive in nature.
Glucosamine-Based Joint Supplements
Glucosamine-based joint supplements have been used in veterinary patients with osteoar-
thritis for over two decades. Although there is some debate on the efficacy of these supple-
ments in limiting pain and improving mobility, recent studies and reviews have concluded
ou yanou gz'sionpond asau oi sasuodsau aaisod aaer oi seadde op stuated aos ie
302 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
prescription products exist, a myriad of differing products are available over the counter
and through veterinarians. Most products contain glucosamine in combination with other
ingredients, including chondroitin sulfate, dimethyl sulfone, creatine monohydrate, doco-
sahexanoic acid, eicosapentaenoic acid, ascorbic acid, vitamin E, and thioctic acid, along
with a variety of other trace elements, flavors, and fllers. Although safety studies on these
products are not readily available, they tend to be well tolerated by most animals at the rec-
a pe aeed at aq oi pae aq oi pan siaid asa sas aua
able, which increases the risk for excessive ingestion if animals obtain access to the product
containers.
In most cases, overdoses are not expected to cause more than mild gastrointestinal
upset.30 However, the ASPCA APCC has reported on 21 dogs that developed liver injury
following ingestion of large amounts of glucosamine-based joint supplements.3 Amounts
cosamine, 418-2667 mg/kg creatine, and 45-4000 mg/kg dimethyl sulfone. Signs included
vomiting, diarrhea, and lethargy, which developed anywhere from 30 minutes to 2 days fol-
lowing ingestion. Increases in serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activity were detected
as early as 5 hours following ingestion, although the majority of increases in ALT were noted
between 24 and 48 hours following exposure; in two thirds of the dogs, ALT values exceeded
1000 U/L. Of nine dogs with follow-up information, four dogs recovered with veterinary
care, two were euthanized because of poor response to treatment, and three remained on
11 days after exposure revealed severe centrilobular necrosis, acute renal tubular necrosis,
pancreatic necrosis, and myocardial necrosis. Ihe cause of liver injury in these cases was
not known; possibilities include some type of contaminant in the supplement, interaction
between active ingredients or other medications, or preexisting health issues. Based on
these cases, toxicologists at APCC recommend aggressive decontamination, monitoring,
and symptomatic and supportive care in dogs that present with overdose of glucosamine-
based joint supplements.
Homemade and Commercial Play Dough
Ingestion of homemade and commercial play dough has been associated with severe hyper-
natremia in dogs.32 The lowest toxic dose for dogs is 2 g NaCl/kg BW and the lowest lethal
dose is 4 g NaCl/kg BW. A typical recipe found on an Internet search for homemade play
dough consists of 2 cups of flour, 1 cup of salt, and % to 1 cup of water; this is roughly equiv-
alent to 8.4 g of sodium chloride per tablespoon of play dough.32 A commercial playdough
was found to contain 4.3% sodium. Clinical signs have been observed in dogs following
ingestion of as little as 1.9 g of play dough/kg BW; they include vomiting, polydipsia, poly-
d saad ju gsias pe  sn 
exposures should include basic decontamination procedures in the asymptomatic patient,
followed by monitoring serum sodium levels. Seizures were commonly reported in those
natremia is a necessity and involves the use of IV fluids and warm water enemas to help
dilute the serum sodium level.33 In cases in which hypernatrermia has persisted for more
than 18-24 hours, the formation of idiogenic osmoles in the CNS make treatment more
challenging, as rapid rehydration may result in cerebral edema caused by the osmotic effect
in the brain.34 In these more chronic hypernatremia cases, slowly lowering the sodium
concentrations over a 48- to 72-hour period with isotonic or hypertonic fluids is neces-
sary. It has been recommended not to lower the sodium concentrations faster than 0.5 to
 1 mEq/L/h.32 Additional treatment options are based on the signs that the animal is exhib-
iting at the time.
Hops
Hops (Hurmulus lupulus) are cultivated for their use in beer making; the flowers of the female
plant are used to impart the bitter flavor and pungent aroma to beer. Ingestion of both
fresh and spent hops has been associated with the development of malignant hyperthermia
Chapter 24 | Miscellaneous Indoor Toxicants  303
in dogs.35 Breeds that may appear to be particularly susceptible to this problem include
greyhounds and golden retrievers. Treatment is directed toward basic decontamination
aa yi an au pe anan si asodxa a j inl saus a jo
eae n (sansu uos sea sn  "a) se paae au u sa
dantrolene, a skeletal muscle relaxant that has been used in humans to manage malignant
hyperthermia, may be used at an initial dose of 2-3 mg/kg IV or 3.5 mg/kg PO followed by
3.5 mg/kg every 12 hours as needed.36
Ice Melts
 Ice melts can cause mild to moderate risk to pets, depending on the active ingredient pres-
the most commonly observed clinical signs immediately following oral exposures. These
include products that contain urea, calcium carbonate, and calcium magnesium acetate. Ice
melts that contain sodium chloride also can lead to serious hypernatremia and an osmotic
diuresis if the exposure dose is high enough, which can ultimately lead to muscle tremors,
acidosis, and seizure activity. Muscle weakness and cardiac abnormalities can result from
chloride can additionally cause muscle weakness, cardiac abnormalities, and hypotension.
Treatment of exposures is symptomatic and supportive in nature.
Iron-Based Hand Warmers
Air-activated hand warmers contain reduced iron, activated charcoal, water, water reser-
voirs (e.g., vermiculite), cellulose (e.g., wood powder), and salt.37.38 Similar formulations are
also used as "oxygen absorbers" that are included in packaged dehydrated foods to prolong
shelf life. On contact with oxygen, the iron is converted to iron oxide (rust), releasing heat
in the process. Depending on the individual formulation, temperatures generated by hand
m pasop sie 6g'sinou 0z 0h I jo uonennp e ioy I 0st 0i d aoot uony aue1 ues shaem
hand warmer contents (2 g/kg) developed no evidence of toxicosis.40 A case series of four
older adult humans who had ingested hand warmer contents revealed no or mild clinical
and gastric corrosive injury was reported in an older adult woman who ingested the con-
tents of multiple hand warmers.38 A dog that ingested one or two oxygen absorber packets
 developed vomiting, rmelena, elevated serum iron levels, and elevated ALT.37 In most cases,
few clinical effects are expected following ingestion of hand warmers, but a few patients
may develop mild to moderate gastrointestinal signs. Gastrointestinal protectants (e.g..
sucralfate, acid reducer) and, as needed, antiemetics should be initiated in animals with
a au ssie uit jo uodosqe sass i s asau je are usau u o
gastrointestinal mucosa.41 For this reason, animals showing more than mild gastrointestinal
upset following hand warmer ingestion should have serum iron levels evaluated. Chelation
with deferoxamine is rarely warranted and is contraindicated if iron is still present in the
 gastrointestinal tract, as the chelator can increase gastrointestinal absorption of iron.42 For
patients with iron remaining in the gut that are in need of chelation therapy, the use of the
oral iron chelator deferasirox should be considered. Deferasirox (20 mg/kg by mouth [PO]
single ingestion) has been shown to significantly reduce serum iron levels in humans fol-
lowing ingestion of supratherapeutic levels of iron.43
Matches, Fireworks, and Flares
Matches are generally considered nontoxic when ingested, but they do contain 40% to
60% potassium chlorate in the match heads. Potassium chlorate is a moderately effective
oxidizing agent that can cause methemoglobinemia. The oral LDio of potassium chlorate
in dogs is 1200 mg/kg (75 sticks/kg BW); a box of 20 wooden matches (16 mg/stick) has
320 mg of potassium chlorate, whereas a book of paper matches contains 110 mg of potas-
sium chlorate. Ihe development of clinical signs from the ingestion of several books or
 boxes of matches would not be expected, but in the occasional animal that ingests a large
304  SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
number of matches, vomiting, CNS depression, hypotension, cyanosis, and hemolysis can
occur. The affected animal may be successfully treated symptomatically unless clinically
significant methemoglobinemia develops. The methemoglobinemia may be treated intra-
venously with 1% methylene blue at 4 mg/kg in dogs or once at 1.5 mg/kg in cats. The oral
use of 20 mg/kg ascorbic acid is often recommended in cats, but its effectiveness is usually
too slow for practical use.
Most household fireworks are relatively harmless if swallowed. The toxic ingredients are
nitrate, and potassium perchlorate. Flares typically contain sodium nitrate, sulfur, and
various hydrocarbons. The most common problems associated with ingestion include gas-
trointestinal irritation and ulceration (e.g., vomiting, salivation, abdominal pain). Severe
ingestions can lead to the formation of methemoglobin, hemolysis, and seizure activ-
  sion q  ioe q s s as, e  (a a
human.44 Severe obtundation, cardiac dysrhythmia, and respiratory failure were associated
with profound hypokalemia and serum barium levels of more than 20,000 mcg/L (nor-
mal <200 mcg/L). Large fireworks for commercial or municipal use can contain potentially
toxic compounds such as arsenic, antimony, bismuth, barium, concentrated chlorates and
perchlorates, lead, thallium, and white and red phosphorus.
Methionine-Based Lawn "Savers" (Urine Scald Preventers)
There is a wide range of products available on the market purported to help prevent scald-
ing of lawns by dog urine through alteration of urine chemistry. One of the more popular
ingredients used in these products is DL-methionine, a sulfur-containing amino acid that
aids in acidifying urine. At the levels in the individual chewable tablet or chews (usually
100-150 mg per item), DL-methionine poses no hazard to dogs, but because of the palat-
ability of these products, accidental overdoses can occur when dogs obtain access to entire
packages of product.45 At DL-methionine doses of less than 200 mg/kg, mild, self-limiting
gastrointestinal upset may occur, whereas doses of more than 200 mg/kg may result in
ataxia and doses of more than 400 mg/kg may result in signs resembling hepatic encepha-
lopathy, including ataxia, disorientation, tachypnea, hyperesthesia, seizures, and coma
(ASPCA APCC, unpublished data, 2011). Doses of 2 g/kg of methionine in cats has been
associated with anorexia, methemoglobinemia, Heinz body formation, ataxia, cyanosis,
and hemolysis.46 Patients should be managed by early decontamination (emesis and acti-
vated charcoal within 2 hours of exposure), and, if symptomatic, IV fluid diuresis and oral
or rectal lactulose can aid in reducing the signs. Symptomatic care should be given for acid
or base, hematologic, or CNS signs. Most animals make full recoveries within 24-48 hours
when provided with appropriate veterinary care.
Mothballs
The major types of mothballs available commercially for home use contain naphthalene
or paradichlorobenzene (i.e., 1,4-dichlorobenzene). Naphthalene mothballs are present in
"old-fashioned" preparations, whereas paradichlorobenzene mothballs are used as cake
deodorizers in garbage and diaper pails and in bathrooms.
The LDio of naphthalene is approximately 400 mg/kg, but cats are more sensitive to
the chemical than dogs. A naphthalene mothball can weigh between 2.7 and 4 g; therefore
ingestion of a single mothball is a potential toxic risk for a companion animal. Clinical
scented breath, methemoglobinemia, hemolytic Heinz body anemia, hemoglobinuria,
hepatic injury, and possible nephrosis from the hemoglobinuria or hypoxia. Appropriate
treatment following naphthalene mothball ingestion is induction of emesis followed by
oral administration of activated charcoal and a saline cathartic, 4 mg of 1% methylene blue/
kg IV in dogs or one dose of 1.5 mg 1% methylene blue/kg in cats for methemoglobinemia
(20 mg ascorbic acid/kg orally in cats is usually inefficient therapy), and IV bicarbonate-
containing fluids to reduce hemoglobin precipitation in the kidneys from the red blood
cell hemolysis.
Chapter 24 | Miscellaneous Indoor Toxicants  305
Paradichlorobenzene is an organochlorine insecticide with an LDso of approximately
 500 mg/kg. Clinical signs associated with ingestion are vomiting, abdominal pain, trem-
ors, seizures, and liver and kidney damage. Treatment for paradichlorobenzene ingestions
should include prompt gastrointestinal decontamination, fluid administration to induce
 s e gn a as suis e  asan s sis
seizure control with parenteral benzodiazepines.
Paintballs
Potential ingredients in paintballs include polyethylene glycol, glycerin, gelatin, sorbi-
tol, dipropylene glycol, mineral oil, dye, ground pigskin, and water.33 Ingestions in dogs
have led to vomiting, ataxia, diarrhea, and tremors; less commonly observed signs include
tachycardia, weakness, hyperactivity, hyperthermia, blindness, and seizures.3 Clinical
pathologic changes reported include hypernatremia, hyperchloremia, acidosis, and hypo-
kalemia.33 The exact toxic dose is yet to be well defined. Treatment in asymptomatic patients
includes basic traditional decontamination procedures, such as emesis and gastric lavage.
The use of activated charcoal and a cathartic should be considered carefully; their use may
provide little benefit and some of the ingredients of paintballs may act as osmotic cathartics
themselves. One should also carefully monitor the patient for potential problems in acid-
base status, along with various electrolyte changes. Hypernatremic patients should benefit
from IV fluid, 5% dextrose in water or 2.5% dextrose in 0.45% saline, at 1.5 to 2 times
maintenance.33 IV potassium should be instituted to those hypokalemic patients at a rate
not to exceed 0.5 mEq/kg/h.46 Other treatment modalities are based on the clinical needs
of the patient. Most cases resolve within a 24-hour period after basic supportive measures
areinstituted.
Silica Gel Containing Desiccant Packs
These moisture absorbents are commonly found in shoe boxes, lamps, medication bottles,
electronic equipment and food items (e.g., jerky). The packs can be paper or plastic packets
or plastic cylinders with powder, granular or liquid contents. Ihe main active ingredient is
silica gel, though some can contain iron. Silica gel has alow degree of toxicity and mild gas-
trointestinal upset is generally the most one would expect to see following oral exposures.
However, there is a recent report of a dog that ingested one or two oxygen absorber packets
that developed vomiting, melena, elevated serum iron levels, and elevated ALT.37
Xylitol
secretion from the pancreas of dogs27.47 (see Chapter 83). Its increased marketing and use
have resulted in canine intoxications associated with products containing this sweetener,
including sugar-free gums, candies, and baked goods. Xylitol can also be found in some
sugar-free medicinal syrups or elixirs and in some veterinary dental products (e.g., mouth-
wash, toothpaste); in the latter, toxicosis would be of concern only if a dog was to ingest the
concentrated product. Some of the dental products contain a high concentration of xylitol.
35% xylitol. Current literature reports that xylitol doses of more than 100 mg/kg have caused
hypoglycemia in dogs, although the APCC reports at least one case of hypoglycemia in a
dog ingesting as little as 75 mg/kg (ASPCA APCC, unpublished data, 2011). Clinical signs
aq a suis no 'jo1nax jo uosa suooy sain o oi oe se a s u doaap A
delayed up to 12 hours.48 Weaknes, ataxia, collapse, and seizures may persist as long as 12
to 24 hours, perhaps caused by the slow release and absorption of xylitol from the ingested
formulations.49 Serum chemistry abnormalities in affected dogs include hypoglycemia,
hyperglycemia (Somogyi-like phenomenon), hypokalemia, and hypophosphatemia. Addi-
tionally, some dogs ingesting xylitol have subsequently developed acute liver failure.4 Six of
eight dogs that developed liver failure subsequent to ingestion of xylitol did not have initial
signs of hypoglycemia, but instead developed vomiting and lethargy 9-72 hours follow-
Aedomleos padoiaaap aime iaatl pateiosse-ox ym saoa lox oi aimsodxa u
306SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
severely elevated ALT activity, hyperbilirubinemia, thrombocytopenia, mildly elevated
alkaline phosphatase activity, moderate hypoglycemia (attributed to liver failure rather than
direct xylitol effect), and mild to moderate hyperphosphatemia. Development of hyper-
phosphatemia was considered a poor prognostic indicator. The lowest estimated xylitol
dose associated with liver injury was 500 mg/kg, but it is not known whether liver injury is
dose-related or idiosyncratic in nature.4 Twelve Pekingese dogs experimentally dosed with
1 or 4 g/kg of xylitol did not develop liver failure, although all developed hypoglycemia that
resolved within 3-4 hours, and all dogs developed mild and transient elevations in ALT and
included hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia, and hypercalcemia.
ing should be done soon after ingestion and only in dogs that are clinically normal. Acti-
vated charcoal binds poorly to xylitol and is not likely to be beneficial.4&8,50 Dogs that have
ingested between 75 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg of xylitol should be hospitalized and blood glu-
cose measurements taken every 1-2 hours for at least 12 hours.46 If hypoglycermia develops,
manage with IV dextrose and monitor for hypokalemia (supplement as needed). If more
than 500 mg/kg has been ingested, the recommendation is to start IV dextrose immediately,
as well as hepatoprotectants and antioxidants. If hospitalization of dogs ingesting low doses
of xylitol is not possible, oral feeding of several small amounts of sugar or sugar-containing
meals is reasonable, with clients instructed to present the dog should signs of hypoglycemia
develop.49 Response from hypoglycemia is usually rapid, with most dogs recovering within
12 to 24 hours. Mild elevations in liver enzyme activities generally resolve within a few
days, although a recheck at 72 hours is recommended. Dogs experiencing significant liver
injury have a more guarded prognosis, although many have survived with aggressive and
appropriate treatment for liver failure. A Staffordshire terrier developed vomiting 3 hours
after ingesting eight home-baked muffins containing 250 g of xylitol (10.5 g/kg).5l The dog
presented to the veterinarian 48 hours later with persistent vomiting, reluctance to walk,
hypoglycemia, and ALT too high to measure, as well as elevated hematocrit, blood urea
nitrogen and albumin consistent with dehydration. The dog subsequently developed coag-
ulopathy and thrombocytopenia and had a documented ALT of 25,050 IU/L (reference:
 uua suaioidoedaq asoa sp Ai ym paan sm sop a (i 06-91
 gastrointestinal protectants, and antibiotics, and fully recovered over the course of 10 days.
Conclusions
Hundreds of different household products along with over-the-counter and prescription
medications are available in homes, presenting potential hazards to pets as cornplex mix-
tures of chemicals that vary widely in their toxic potential. Prevention of toxicoses in com-
panion animals follows the same guidelines as those recommended for children: Hazardous
cleaning and other chemical products should be kept out of the reach of pets, they should
not be left in open containers, solutions of cleaning products should not be unattended
where animals may get into them, the product containers should be tightly sealed and prop-
erly labeled, and cleaning or other chemical household solutions intended for waste should
be promptly discarded. Medications should always be kept out of reach of all companion
animals.
If a companion animal has ingested or spilled a cleaning product or disinfectant on
itself, it is important to promptly assess the risk to the animal. Most product labels contain
warnings about the corrosive, irritating, or toxic potential of the product together with
instructions for preliminary action in the event of accidental oral, dermal, or ocular expo-
sures. These instructions offer initial guidance until further information about the product
can be obtained or until specific advice can be received from the emergency hotline of the
product's manufacturer (frequently part of the label information), from available animal
poison control contacts, or through the nationwide 24-hour toll-free telephone number
(800-222-1222) of human poison control information centers. Clinicians seeking more
Chapter 24 | Miscellaneous Indoor Toxicants 307
direct "in clinic" information on the numerous possible household chemical hazards are
referred to the many written resources available.5253
Acknowledgment
The editors wish to acknowledge the exceptional contribution of Drs. Anita Kore and Fred
Oehme, who authored this chapter for the previous editions of the book. Their contribution
served as the foundation for the material appearing in this edition.
References
1.Oehme FW, Kore AM: Common indoor toxicants. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA,editors: Small animal
toxicology, ed 2, Philadelphia, 2006, WB Saunders.
2. Coppock RW, Mostrom MS, Lillie LE: The toxicology of detergents, bleaches, antiseptics and disinfec-
tants in small animals, Vet Hum Toxicol 30:463-473, 1988.
3. Gosselin RE, Smith RP, Hodge HC: Clinical toxicology of commercial products, ed 5, section IIl, Balti-
more, 1984, Williams & Wilkins.
4. McGuigan MA: Bleach, soaps, detergents, and other corrosives. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW,
Winchester JF, editors: Clinical management of poison and drug overdose, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1998, WB
Saunders, pp 830-835.
5. Krenzelok EP: Liquid automatic dishwashing detergents: a profle of toxicity, Ann Emerg Med18:60-63,
1989.
6. Lee JF,Simonowitz D,Block GE: Corrosive injury ofthe stomach and esophagus by nonphosphate deter-
gents, Am / Surg 123:652-656, 1972.
7. Merola VM, Dunayer EK: The 10 most common toxicoses in cats, Vet Med101:339-342, 2006.
8. Grier RL: Quatemary ammonium compound toxicosis in the dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 150:984-987,
1967.
9. Trapani M, Brooks DL, Tillman PC: Quaternary ammonium toxicosis in cats, Lab A nim Sci 32:520-522
1982.
10. VanBerkel M, DeWolff FA: Survival after acute benzalkonium chloride poisoning, Hum Toxicol 7:
191-193, 1988
11. Arena J MI: Poisonings and other health hazards associated with use of detergents, JAMA 190:56-58, 1964.
12. Richardson J A: Potpourri hazards in cats, Vet Med 94(12):1010-1012, 1999.
13. Howell JMI: Alkaline ingestions, Ann Emerg Med 15:820-825, 1986.
14. Muhlendahl KEV, Oberdisse U, Krienke EG: Local injuries by accidental ingestion of corrosive sub-
stances by children, Arch Toxico?139:299-314, 1978.
15. Vancura EM, Clinton JE, Ruiz E,et al: Toxicity of alkaline solutions, Ann Emerg Med9:118-122, 1980.
16. Abdullahi SU: Phenol toxicity in a dog, Vet Hum Toxicol25:407, 1983.
17. Dreisbach RH: Handbook of poisoning: prevention, diagnosis and treatment, Los Altos, CA, 1980, Lange
Medical Publications.
18. Brook MP, McCarron MM, Mueller JA: Pine oil cleaner ingestion, Ann Emerg Med 18:391-395, 1989.
19. The Clorox Company: Pine Sol material safety data sheet, Oakland, 2005. Retrieved January 2012 from
http://www.thecloroxcompany.com/dowmloads/msds/pinesol/originalpine-solbrandcleanerl.pdf
20. Rousseaux CG, Smith RA, Nicholson S: Acute Pine Sol toxicity in a domestic cat, Vet Hum Toxicol
28:316-317, 1986.
21. Bryson PD:Other chemicals that burn. In Bryson PD, editor: Comprehensive review in toxicology, ed 2,
Rockville, MD, 1989, Aspen Publishers.
22. Koestner A, Norton S: Nervous system. In Haschek WM, Rousseaux CG, editors: Handbook of toxico-
logic pathology, New York, 1991, Academic Press.
23. Ellenhorn MJ, Barceloux DG: Medical toxicology: diagnosis and treatment of human poisoning, New
York, 1988, Elsevier.
 24. Gwaltney-Brant SM: Toxicology of common household hazards, Baltimore, MD, 2010, Proceedings ofthe
CVC.
25. Challoner KR, McCarron MM: Ammonium nitrate cold pack ingestion, J Emerg Med 6(4):289-293, 1988.
26. US Consumer Product Safety Commission: Expandable lunch boxes recalled by California Innovations
due to freezer gel pack ingestion hazard. Release #12-089, January 23, 2012. Retrieved February 2012 from
27. Cope RB: Four new small animal toxicoses, Aust Vet Practit 34:121-123, 2004.
28. Lubich C, Mrvos R, Krenzelok: Beware of canine Gorilla Glue ingestions, Vet Hum Toxicol 46:153-154,
2004.
308SECTlON3MiscellaneousToxicantGroups
thritis in dogs, / Am Vet Med Assoc 230(4):514-521, 2007.
30. American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Animal Poison Control Center database
(unpublished data), 2009.
31. Khan SA, McLean MK, Gwaltney-Brant S:Accidental overdosage of joint supplements in dogs,/ Am Vet
Med A ssoc 236(5):509 -510, 2010.
32. Barr JM, Khan SA, McCullough SM,et al: Hypematremia secondary to homemade play dough ingestion
in dogs: a review of14 cases from 1998-2001, I Vet Emer Critical Care 14(3):196-202, 2004.
33. Donaldson CW: Paintball toxicosis in dogs, Vet Med98:995-997, 2003.
34. Thompson LJ: Sodium chloride (salt). Veterinary toxicology: basic and clinical principles, New York,
2007, Academic Press.
 35. Duncan KL, Hare WR, Buck WB: Malignant hyperthermia-like reaction secondary to ingestion of hops
in five dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 210(1):51-54, 1997.
36. Talcott PA: Foods, medications and other household hazards your pet should avoid, Las Vegas, 2008,
Proceedings ofthe Western Veterinary Conference.
37. Brutlag AG, Flint CTC, Puschner B: Iron intoxication in a dog consequent to the ingestion of oxygen
absorber sachets in pet treat packaging, IMed Toxicol8(1):76-79, 2012.
38. Tseng YJ, Chen CH, Chen WK, Dong-Zong H: Hand warmer related corrosive injury, Clin Toxicol
39(9):870-871, 2011.
January 2012 from http//www.heatmax.info.
40. Tam AY, Chan YC, Lau FL: A case series of accidental ingestion of hand warmer, Clin Toxicol 46(9):
900-904, 2008.
41. Hooser SB: Iron. Veterinary toxicology: basic and clinical principles, New York, 2007, Academic Press.
42. Gwaltney-Brant SM, Rumbeiha WK: Newer antidotal therapies, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
32(2):323339, 2002.
43. Griffith EA, Fallgatter KC, Tantama SS, Tanen DA, Matteucci MJ: Effect of deferasirox on iron absorp
tion in a randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover study in a human model of acute supratherapeutic
iron ingestion, Ann Emerg Med 58(1):69-73, 2011
44. Rhyee SH, Heard K: Acute barium toxicity from ingestion of “snake^ fireworks, J Med Toxicol 5(4):
209-213, 2009.
45. Villar D, Carson TL, Osweiler G, Bryan R: Overingestion of methionine tablets by a dog, Vet Hum Toxt-
col 45(6):311-312, 2003.
46. Plumb DC: Veterinary drug handbook, Ames, Iowa, 2002, Iowa State University Press.
47. Xia Z, He Y, Yu J: Experimental acute toxicity of xylitol in dogs, I Vet Pharmacol Ther 32(5):465-469,
2009.
48. Dunayer EK: New findings on the effects of xylitol ingestion in dogs, Vet Med 101:791-796, 2006.
49. Dunayer EK: Hypoglycemia following canine ingestion of xylitol-containing gum, Vet Hum Toxicol
46:87-88, 2004.
50. Cope RB: A screening study of xylitol binding in vitro to activated charcoal, Vet Hum Toxicol 46:
336-337,2004.
tol ingestion in a dog, Aust Vet Pract 40(4):142-147, 2010.
52. Kore AM, Kiesche-Nesselrodt A: Toxicology of household cleaning products and disinfectants, Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 20:525-537, 1990.
53. Owens JG, Dorman DC: Common household hazards for smallanimals, Vet Med 92:140-148, 1997.
CHAPTER
"Recreational" Drugs
25
Petra A. Volmer, DVM, MS, DABVT, DABT
Many illicit drug preparations contain impurities that can confuse the cinical
picture.
· Amphetamines are cormmonly prescribed for the treatment of obesity.
narcolepsy, and attention deficit disorder in humans.
. They are highly toxic, rapidly absorbed, and eliminated in the urine.
· Treatment is aimed at controlling seizures and cardiac arrhythmias and
 promoting elimination.
· Barbiturates are used therapeutically as sedatives and anticonvulsants and for
the induction of anesthesia
· They tend to be lipophilic drugs that readily enter the central nervous systerm
(CNS) to produce sedation.
· Treatmnent is aimed at maintaining respiratory function and enhancing
elimination with repeated doses of activated charcoal.
. The benzodiazepines are used as sedatives, antianxiety agents, and
anticonvulsants.
· They are well absorbed orally, are metabolized in the liver, and can produce
active metabolites.
· Most exposures can be treated with good supportive care. Flumazenil is a
specific benzodiazepine antagonist that is effective in cases of extreme CNS
depression.
· Cocaine has very restrictive medical uses, and most exposures are due to access
to illicit supplies.
· It is highly toxic, well absorbed orally, and excreted in the urine.
· Treatment is aimed at stabilizing the neurologic and cardiac systems and at 
maintaining acid-base status.
· Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) is rapidly absorbed, metabolized in the liver,
 and excreted in the bile.
· Treatment is symptomatic. Most exposures are selflimiting, requiring no
medical intervention.
· The active ingredient in marijuana is delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, which has a
wide safety rnargin.
· Exposures are rarely fatal, and treatment is symptomatic and supportive. IV
lipid therapy might be tried.
· Phencyclidine can be easily and cheaply synthesized.
· It is well absorbed from the alkaline intestinal environrment and undergoes
extensive enterohepatic recirculation, prolonging its half-life.
608
310SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
· Phencyclidine can produce unpredictable clinical effects, and treatment is
symptomatic. Activated charcoal is effective in decreasing the half-life and enhancing
elimination.
·Opioids cause CNS and respiratory depression in dogs; they can have a stirmulatory
effect in cats.
· Individual agents can act as agonists, partial agonists, or antagonists at opioid
receptors
· Treatment is aimed at preventing CNS and respiratory depression. Naloxone is a
specific opioid antagonist that has no agonistic activity and can be used to reverse
opioid-induced respiratory and CNS depression.
The tricyclic antidepressants can be lethal at doses of 15 mg/kg or more.
· They are rapidly absorbed and metabolized in the liver and undergo enterohepatic
recirculation. Their halflives can be quite variable and long.
· Treatment is aimed at preventing seizures and cardiac toxicity. Activated charcoal
interrupts enterohepatic recirculation, and intravenous (Iv) sodium bicarbonate has
been shown to reduce cardiac toxicity.
lthough animal exposures to human "drugs of abuse" do not occur frequently in vet-
lerinary medicine, most such exposures are emergency situations. O wners are often
reluctant to admit the possibility of illicit drug exposure until the animal is in severe
 distress. The veterinary clinician should be familiar with the most common drugs of
abuse, clinical courses, and treatments. It is important to remember that most “street"
drugs are not pure and may contain combinations of drugs, thereby confusing the clini-
cal picture. Because of the surge of recreational drug use and the addictive properties of
many of these agents in humans, most of these compounds have been closely regulated.
A thorough history of federal drug regulation can be found on the United States Drug
Enforcement Agency (DEA) website at http://www.usdoj.gov/ dea/pubs/history/.l A brief
synopsis follows.
 In response to America's increasing drug problem, in 1968 the Bureau of Narcotic and
Dangerous Drugs (BNDD) was formed by merging the Bureau of Narcotics (under the
Treasury Department) with the Bureau of Drug Abuse Control (under the Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare). Ihe new agency, BNDD, was placed under the Depart-
ment of Justice and became the primary drug law enforcement agency overseeing interna-
 tional and interstate drug activities.
 In 1970 the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) was passed by Congress. It went into effect
in 1971, was enforced by the BNDD, and ultimately replaced more than 50 pieces of drug
legislation. This law established a single system of control for narcotic and psychotropic
drugs for the first time in U.S. history. It also established five schedules classifying con-
trolled substances according to how dangerous they are, their potential for abuse and addic-
tion, and whether they possess legitimate medical value. The CSA, although amended on
several occasions, has remained the legal framework from which the DEA has derived its
authority.
A lack of coordination, communication, and cooperation among the various entities
involved in drug control (including the BNDD, U.S. Customs Service, Offce for Drug
Abuse Law Enforcement, and the Office of National Narcotics Intelligence) prompted Presi-
dent Richard Nixon in 1973 to declare “an all-out global war on the drug menace." Reor-
ganization Plan No. 2 was sent to Congress and resulted in the establishment of the DEA
within the Department of Justice. This move consolidated drug enforcement operations
and placed a single administrator in charge of federal drug enforcement.
Chapter 25 | "Recreational" Drugs 31l
The DEA specifies schedules for each controlled substance and assigns them to a sched-
ule depending on their abuse potential. A summary of the regulatory aspects of addictive
and abused drugs follows.2
Schedule I (C-I) drugs have a high abuse potential and are not currently accepted in the
United States for use in any practice situation, although they may be obtained for research
or instructional use. Examples include heroin, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), mescaline,
dihydromorphine, and morphine methyl sulfonate.
Schedule II (C-Il) drugs have a high abuse potential. Their use can produce severe
psychic or physical dependence in humans, and they apparently have similar effects
in animals. Examples include opium, morphine, codeine, methadone, meperidine
(Demerol), cocaine, phenmetrazine (Preludin), methylphenidate (Ritalin), methaqua-
lone (Quaalude), amobarbital (Amytal), pentobarbital (Nembutal), and secobarbital
(Seconal).
Schedule II (C-Ill) drugs have less abuse potential than those in the previous two sched-
ules. These drugs produce moderate or low physical dependence but often induce high
psychologic dependence in humans. They include nalorphine, benzphetamine, paregoric,
and some barbiturates.
Schedule IV (C-IV) drugs have alow abuse potential that can lead to limited physical or
psychological dependence in humans. Examples include barbital, phenobarbital, methyl
phenobarbital, chloral hydrate, ethinamate, meprobamate, chlordiazepoxide (Librium)
and diazepam (Valium).
Schedule V (C-V) drugs have the lowest abuse potential.
Amphetamines
Sources
The amphetamine class of drugs consists of a number of derivative molecules that are struc-
turally related to the parent compound amphetamine. Amphetamine is the common name
for alpha-methylphenylethylamine, and is a member of the family of phenylethylamines.
Numerous substitutions are possible, resulting in a number of amphetamine analogues.
They are subject to close regulation under the federal CSA of 1970. Amphetamine itself is no
longer used in veterinary medicine. Before the CSA was passed, amphetamine was used as
a central nervous system (CNS) and respiratory stimulant in dogs to overcome the depres-
sant effects ofbarbiturates.2
There are a large number of legitimate amphetamine pharmaceuticals that contain
various amphetamine analogues. They are indicated for the treatment of obesity, atten-
tion deficit disorder, and narcolepsy in humans. By far, most small animal exposures
occur as accidental ingestions of these prescribed medications. Table 25-1 lists the
most commonly prescribed amphetamines, their trade names, and therapeutic uses.
Illegal amphetamine production also occurs in clandestine laboratories. Some street
taiaudue roy (sanuuaq, pue (saxap, xap, siaddn, paads, apnou sauu
"ice" and “glass" for the clear, translucent crystals of methamphetamine, and “crys-
Designer amphetamines include 4-methylaminorex ("ice, “U4EUh"), 3,4-methylene-
ethylamphetamine ("Eve"), and methcathinone ("cat").5 Methylphenidate (Ritalin)
has become an increasingly popular stimulant in college students studying for exams.
The U.S. DEA reports methylphenidate as one of the most frequently stolen medica-
tions.6 Psychoactive “bath salts" have become popular in recent years. The ingredients
in these synthetic designer drugs are not chemically related to any detergent or soap,
a ua ai-auaue ue anid o suei spun sus ane mg
(mephedrone) under the street names “White Rush, "Cloud Nine, “Ivory Wave, or
"Vanilla Sky"78
312SECTlON 3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
Table 25-1
Some Prescription Amphetamine Products, Their Trade Names.
and Therapeutic Uses
Compound
Trade Name
Therapeutic Uses
Amphetamine (C-I1)
 Benzedrine
CNS stimulant
Benzphetamine (C-III)
Didrex
Anorexiant
 Dextroamphetamine (C-II)
Dexedrine
Narcolepsy, ADD, anorexiant
Diethylpropion (C-IV)
Tenuate, Tenuate Dospan
Anorexiant
(long acting)
Fenfluramine (C-IV)
Pondimin
Anorexiant
Mazindol (C-IV)
Mazanor, Sanorex
Anorexiant
Methamphetamine (C-I1)
 Desoxyn, Methampex,
ADD, anorexiant
Desoxyn Gradumets
(long acting)
Methylphenidate (C-II)
Ritalin, Ritalin SR
ADD, narcolepsy
Pemoline (C-IV)
Cylert
ADD
Phendimetrazine (C-II1)
Bontril-PDM, Wehless,
Anorexiant
Metra Phenzine, Plegine,
Statobex Prelu-2,
Adipost, PT-105,
Melfiat-105 Unicelles,
Timecells (long acting)
Phenmetrazine (C-II)
Preludin
Anorexiant
Phentermine (C-IV)
Fastin, Adipex-P, Ionamin,
Anorexiant
Termene, Phentrol,
Obermine
Phentride, Obestin-30
Obephen, T-Diet, Dapex,
Obenix
 Dextroamphetamine and
Adderall
ADD, anorexiant
amphetamine
Fenfluramine and
"Fen-Phen"*
Anorexiant
phentermine
A DD, Attention deficit disorder; CNS, central nervous system.
*Marketing was discontinued in 1997 because of the associated incidence of cardiac valvulopathy.3
Toxic Dose
The oral median lethal dose (LDso) for amphetamine sulfate in the dog is 20 to 27 mg/kg,
and for methamphetamine hydrochloride it is 9 to 11 mg/kg.? The IV LDs, for amphetamine
in the dog is 5.85 mg/kg.10 Death from methamphetamine has been reported in humans at
a dose of 1.5 mg/kg.ll
Toxicokinetics
 In general, amphetamines are well absorbed orally with peak plasma levels occurring by 1 to
3hours. Sustained-release preparations have a slower rate of absorption, and peak levels are
delayed. Amphetamines are highly lipophilic, readily crossing the blood-brain barrier.4 They
undergo hepatic metabolism, and both unchanged amphetamine and its metabolites are
excreted in the urine. Some metabolites may be pharmacologically active.4 Renal excretion
of unchanged amphetamine is pH dependent, with an acidic urine greatly enhancing elimi-
nation.4.12 The half-life in humans with a urine pH ofless than 6.6 is 7 to 14 hours, whereas it
 is 18 to 34 hours in those with a urine pH of greater than 6.7.13 A study in dogs demonstrated
ahalf-life of 6.13 hours at a urine pH of 7.5 and 3.67 hours at a urine pH of 5.96.14
Chapter 25 | "Recreational" Drugs 313
Mechanism of Toxicity
 The exact mechanism for the CNS effects of the amphetamines is unknown, but they have
a stimulant effect on the cerebral cortex, on the reticular-activating system,2 and on the
medullary respiratory center. '5 Peripherally, amphetamines cause release of norepinephrine
from adrenergic nerve terminals and have a direct stimulant effect on a-adrenergic and
β-adrenergic receptors.12 They are also inhibitors of monoamine oxidase, thus depressing
catecholamine metabolism.'5 Amphetamine is a dopamine excitatory receptor agonist and
can be blocked centrally by phenothiazine derivatives that have dopamine excitatory recep-
tor antagonism.16
clinical Signs
lessness, mydriasis, hypersalivation, vocalization, tachypnea, tremors, hyperthermia,
ataxia, seizures, and tachycardia. Some animals exhibit depression, weakness, and
bradycardia.
Minimum Database
The minimum database should include a serum chemistry profle and blood gas analy-
sis in symptomatic animals to determine acid-base status, electrolyte abnormalities,
and the extent of hypoglycemia. The cardiac rate and rhythm should be monitored for
tachyarrhythmias. Animals should also be observed for signs of CNS stimulation and
hyperthermia.
Confirmatory Tests
Amphetamines can be detected in blood, urine, and saliva. Consultation with a diagnostic
toxicologist is recommended before sample collection and submission.
Treatment and Prognosis
For recent exposures (less than 30 minutes) emesis can be induced and activated charcoal
administered. The animal should then be monitored closely for signs of amphetamine toxi-
cosis. For extremely large ingestions or for animals exhibiting clinical signs, gastric lavage
followed by activated charcoal is indicated. Sustained-release preparations may require
repeated doses of activated charcoal.
amphetamines and are generally not recommended. Chlorpromazine given IV at 10 to
18 mg/kg prevented lethal effects of amphetamine in experimentally dosed dogs'7 and has
also been recommended for controlling CNS excitation and seizures because of its dopa-
 mine excitatory receptor antagonist properties.16 Phenothiazines should be used with the
knowledge that they may lower the seizure threshold. Hyperthermia should be corrected
using cool IV fluids, ice packs, fans, or cool-water baths. Animals should be closely moni-
tored to prevent subsequent hypothermia.
Tachyarrhythmias can be controlled with a beta blocker, such as propranolol or meto-
prolol. Ventricular dysrhythmias can be treated with lidocaine.
 IV fluids are necessary to maintain renal function and promote elimination of amphet-
amines. Urinary acidification using ascorbic acid or ammonium chloride has been shown
to enhance the elimination of amphetamine,3 but this procedure is contraindicated if
the patient's acid-base status cannot be closely monitored or if myoglobinuria is present.
 Intense muscle activity caused by tremors or seizures can result in a metabolic acidosis and
rhabdomyolysis. Fluid diuresis will help to prevent acute renal failure from myoglobinuria
secondary to rhabdomyolysis, which is very rare but can occur. IV lipid therapy can pos-
sibly be considered with the more lipophilic compounds.
 Prognosis depends on the severity and duration of clinical signs at presentation. Trauma,
hypoxia, hyperthermia, or cerebral edema can result from uncontrolled seizure activity.
Renal failure can result from myoglobinuria (rare) and acidosis.
314 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Differential Diagnoses
Other agents that can cause CNS stimulation should be included in the differential diagnosis
list. Ihese include methylxanthines, metaldehyde, tremorgenic mycotoxins, pseudoephed-
rine, strychnine, tricyclic antidepressants, permethrin (cats), 5-fluorouracil, organo-
chlorine insecticides, organophosphorus and carbamate insecticides, 4-aminopyridine,
sodium ion toxicosis, lead, and herbal preparations containing ma huang, guarana root,
or ephedra.
Barbiturates
Sources
The barbiturates as a class are barbituric acid derivatives. Barbituric acid itself has no CNS
activity. Various side chain substitutions on barbituric acid influence the particular bar-
biturate's lipophilicity, potency, and rate of elimination. The barbiturates are used thera-
peutically as sedatives and anticonvulsants and to induce anesthesia. Barbiturate use has
declined in favor of safer alternatives, such as the benzodiazepines.l The barbiturates have
been classified as ultrashort-, short-, intermediate-, or long-acting based on their duration
of action (0.3, 3, 3 to 6, and 6 to 12 hours, respectively).19 Table 25-2 lists the most com-
mon barbiturate preparations, trade names, and classifications based on duration of action.
Primidone is a phenobarbital congener that is metabolized to produce phenobarbital and
phenylethylmalonamide. The parent compound and its metabolites have anticonvulsant
activity.
Most small-animal exposures occur as a result of accidental ingestion of human or
veterinary prescription preparations. However, toxicoses have also resulted from iatro-
genic overdose, ingestion of illicit preparations (known as “downers,” “reds, “Christmas
trees,” and “dolls"), accidental administration of euthanasia solutions, and ingestion
 of tissue of euthanized animals.20.2l Barbiturates can persist in euthanized carcasses for
months and even years depending on environmental conditions. The barbiturate found
 a aos si  a d si ss isa iso u
euthanasia solutions and their active ingredients. Recently the Food and Drug Admin-
istration's Center for Veterinary Medicine added an environmental warning to labels of
pentobarbital-containing euthanasia solutions.2z Veterinarians and animal owners are
responsible for proper disposal of euthanized carcasses. Accidental poisoning of wildlife
that scavenge euthanized carcasses may result in criminal penalties for the animal owner
and veterinarian.23,24
Table 25-2
Some Pharmaceutical Barbiturates Classified According to
Duration of Action
Barbiturate
Trade Names
Classification
Thiamylal (C-III)
Surital, Bio-Tal
Ultrashort
Thiopental (C-III)
Pentothal
Ultrashort
Methohexital (C-IV)
Brevital
Ultrashort
Pentobarbital (C-II)
 Nembutal
Short
Secobarbital (C-II)
Seconal
Short
Butabarbital (C-III)
 Buticaps, Butisol, Barbased,
Intermediate
Butalan, Sarisol
Amobarbital (C-II)
Amytal
Intermediate
Mephobarbital (C-IV)
Mebaral
Long
Phenobarbital (C-IV)
Luminal, Solfoton, Barbital
Long
Amobarbital and secobarbital
Tuinal
Short
(C-II for combination)
Chapter 25 | "Recreational" Drugs 315
Toxic Dose
 The oral LDs, for phenobarbital in the dog is 150 mg/kg; the minimum published oral lethal
dose (LDLo) for phenobarbital in the cat is 125 mg/kg.i0
Toxicokinetics
The barbiturates are well absorbed orally or following intramuscular (IM) injection. The
aip a go anos pidi spie aa au uu paqosqe Aiden anou ae ses uos
determines distribution of the barbiturate in the body and thus the duration of action.
Short-acting barbiturate anesthetics (e.g., thiamylal) are highly lipid soluble, are distributed
into all body tissues (including the brain) very rapidly, and then are redistributed very rap-
idlly into fat and total body water. The anesthetic effect is terminated when the drug exits
the brain. Less lipophilic barbiturates enter and leave the brain more slowly, resulting in a
more gradual onset and longer duration of action (e.g., phenobarbital). Because of the rapid
distribution phase of the highly lipophilic anesthetic barbiturates, it is difficult to correlate
true half-life with duration of action for these compounds.19
The barbiturates are metabolized in the liver by hepatic microsomal enzymes and both
unchanged compound and metabolites are excreted in the urine. Acutely the barbiturates
may bind to P450 enzymes and interfere with the metabolism of other compounds. Chronic
use of barbiturates increases hepatic microsomal enzyme activity (e.g., enzyme induction)
and can accelerate biotransformation of exogenous and some endogenous substances (e.g-
steroids). In very young or very old animals or those with hepatic disease, metabolism of
d go  ay  pad e u un mos aq u se
barbital is excreted unchanged in the urine. Urine alkalinization enhances phenobarbital
excretion by ion trapping.19 For phenobarbital, urinary alkalinization can increase excre-
tion fivefold to tenfold. Urine alkalinization is ineffective for the short-acting barbiturates
because they are more highly protein bound, have higher pKa values, and are primarily
Table 25-3
Trade Names of Some Euthanasia Solutions
and Their Active Ingredients
Trade Name
Active Ingredients (mg/mL)
Beuthanasia-D Special (C-III)
Pentobarbital sodium (390)
Phenytoin sodium (50)
Euthanasia-6 (C-II)
Pentobarbital sodium (390)
Euthanasia solution (C-II)
Pentobarbital sodium (324)
Euthasol (C-III)
Pentobarbital sodium (390)
Phenytoin sodium (50)
FP-3 (C-II1)
Pentobarbital sodium (390)
Lidocaine (20)
 Pentobarbital sodium injection (C-II)
Pentobarbital sodium (390)
Repose (C-III)
Secobarbital (400)
Dibucaine (25)
Sleepaway (C-II)
Pentobarbital sodium (260)
Socumb-6 Gr (C-I1)
Pentobarbital (360)
Somlethol (C-I1)
Pentobarbital sodium (389)
T-61*
Embutramide (200)
Mebezonium (50)
Tetracaine (5)
Uthol (C-II)
Pentobarbital sodium (324)
*T-61 was a widely used euthanasia solution and was not subject to the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. It
contains no barbiturate but a narcotic analgesic (embutramide), a neuromuscular blocker to cause skeletal
muscle relaxation (mebezonium), and a local anesthetic (tetracaine)
316SECTlON 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Mechanism of Toxicity
The barbiturates activate inhibitory Y-aminobutyric acid-a (GABAa) receptors and inhibit
excitatory glutamate receptors.8 They can also inhibit the release of norepinephrine and
acetylcholine.26 Ihey are considered CNS depressants, but in some patients they can pro-
a  pue ap o a sss saieyo sasp  aa a
ceptor drive, resulting in respiratory depression. Anesthetic concentrations of barbiturates
can depress sodium and potassium channels in the heart, and direct depression of cardiac
of extreme hypotension in patients with acute barbiturate intoxication.
clinical Signs
Clinical signs include depression, ataxia, incoordination, weakness, disorientation, recum-
bency, coma, hypothermia, tachycardia or bradycardia, and death.
Minimum Database
A complete blood count and chemistry profle should be performed, and acid-base status
should be evaluated in patients exhibiting severe clinical signs. Cardiac and respiratory
function should be evaluated.
Confirmatory Tests
Barbiturates can be detected in stomach contents, blood, urine, and feces. Consultation
with a veterinary diagnostic toxicologist is recommended before sample collection and
submission.
Treatment and Prognosis
For recent ingestions, emesis followed by repeated doses of activated charcoal and a cathartic
should be administered. For animals exhibiting severe depression, emesis is contraindicated
by repeated doses of activated charcoal and a cathartic. Magnesium-containing cathartics
(Epsom salts) should be avoided because magnesium may exacerbate CNS depression.27 It
has been shown that repeated doses of activated charcoal greatly reduce the plasma half-life
of phenobarbital. 28-3z Activated charcoal acts as a 'sink" to enhance diffusion of barbiturates
Respiratory depression is the major cause of death, so initial treatment should include assess-
ment of respiratory function. Intubation, administration of oxygen, and assisted ventilation
may be required Hypothermmia is a common sequela in severely depressed animals and should
be monitored and corrected Cardiac monitoring is required because some barbiturates (e.g.
thiopental sodium and thiamylal sodium) are arrhythmogenic.27 Also, profound hypothermia
resulting from barbiturate intoxication can cause ventricular fibrillation and cardiac arrest.19
Some barbiturates undergo hepatic metabolism with renal excretion, so increased renal
blood flow with IV fluids may enhance elimination. Forced alkaline diuresis may promote
removal of some barbiturates, especially phenobarbital, which is subject to ion trapping
 in the urine.'9 Intravenous lipid therapy might be considered in severely affected patients.
Differential Diagnoses
Other causes of CNS and respiratory depression should be included in the differential diag
nosis. These include benzodiazepines, xylitol, macrolide antiparasiticides (e.g., ivermectin),
encephalopathies, amitraz, ethanol, ethylene glycol, propylene glycol, diethylene glycol,
Benzodiazepines
Sources
The benzodiazepines are used as sedatives, antianxiety agents, and anticonvulsants. The first
benzodiazepine, chlordiazepoxide, was synthesized by accident in 1961 by the laboratories
Chapter 25 | "Recreational" Drugs 317
Table 25-4
Some Common Benzodiazepines and Their Trade Names
Compound
Trade Name
Alprazolam (C-IV)
Xanax
Chlordiazepoxide (C-IV)
Libritabs, Librium, Sereen
Clobazam (C-IV)
Frisium
Clonazepam (C-IV)
Klonopin
Clorazepate (C-IV)
 Cloraze Caps, Cloraze Tabs, GenENE, Tranxene
Diazepam (C-IV)
Valium, Valrelease (sustained release)
Estazolam (C-IV)
ProSom
Flurazepam (C-IV)
Dalmane
Halazepam (C-IV)
 Paxipam
Lorazepam (C-IV)
Ativan
Midazolam (C-IV)
Versed
Oxazepam (C-IV)
Serax
Quazepam (C-IV)
Doral
Temazepam (C-IV)
Restoril
Triazolam (C-IV)
Halcion
Zolazepam
Telazole (zolazepam in combination with tiletamine is
Telazol)
of Hoffman La Roche.3 The term benzodiazepine refers to the chemical structure of the
compound: a benzene ring bound to a seven-member diazepine ring. Modifications in this
structure have led to the development of a number of benzodiazepine derivatives that vary
in therapeutic use and half-life. Table 25-4 lists some of the commonly used benzodiaz-
epines and their trade names. All of the benzodiazepines are schedule C-IV drugs accord-
ing to the CSA of 1970. Most small-animal exposures result from ingestion of prescription
formulations. A very potent benzodiazepine, flunitrazepam (Rohypnol), has made its way
into illicit use as a "date rape" drug. It produces sedation in humans within 20 to 30 minutes
that may last for hours.34
Toxic Dose
The oral LDs, for diazepam in the rat is 249 mg/kg and for the mouse, 48 mg/kg. Ihe IV
LDso in the rat and mouse is 32 and 25 mg/kg, respectively.10 The oral LDso of alprazolam in
the rat and mouse is 1220 and 770 mg/kg, respectively.10
Toxicokinetics
The benzodiazepines are wellabsorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. They are highly lipid
soluble and highly protein bound. The benzodiazepines are widely and rapidly distributed
in brain, liver, and spleen and are then more slowly redistributed to more poorly perfused
sites, such as adipose tissue and muscle.35 Biotransformation occurs in the liver, and some
benzodiazepines produce active metabolites with half-lives that exceed those of the parent
compound. Conjugation with glucuronide occurs with elimination in the urine.36 Benzo-
diazepines without major active metabolites include alprazolam, clonazepam, oxazepam,
temazepam, and triazolam.34.37
The major metabolite of diazepam in the dog is nordiazepam. It is just as pharmaco-
logically active on the CNS as diazepam.33 The plasma half-life of diazepam following IV
injection in the dog is 2.4 hours; the half-life of nordiazepam is 2.85 hours. In the cat, the
 mean elimination half-life of diazepam is 5.46 hours, and of nordiazepam it is 21.3 hours
following IV administration.38
Mechanism of Toxicity
The benzodiazepines interact with benzodiazepine receptors that modulate GABA, an
inhibitory neurotransmitter. Benzodiazepine receptors are widely distributed in the
CNS but are also present in kidney, liver, heart, and lung.38 The function of peripheral
318 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
benzodiazepine receptors is unknown.33 Of the GABA receptor subunits, GABAa appears to
contain the benzodiazepine receptor, which is distinct from the GABA binding site. When
benzodiazepines bind, gating for chloride channels is triggered, resulting in hyperpolariza-
tion of the cell and a decrease in neuronal excitation.33 The effect on GABA appears to be
the main mechanism by which benzodiazepines act, but a number of other neurotransmit-
ters, including acetylcholine, catecholamines, serotonin, and glycine may be involved in
benzodiazepine activity as well.38
clinical Signs
The respiratory and cardiac effects of the benzodiazepines are minor in normal healthy
 individuals.39 Clinical presentations can include ataxia, depression, disorientation, and
doses can produce coma and even seizures. In some normal animals therapeutic doses of
diazepam can produce excitation.38 There have been reports of cats developing liver failure
following exposure to oral formulations of diazepam.
Minimum Database
In animals exhibiting severe signs, body temperature and cardiac rate and rhythm should
be monitored.
Confirmatory Tests
Benzodiazepines and their metabolites can be detected in blood and urine.40 Consultation
with a diagnostic toxicologist is recommended before sample collection and submission.
Treatment and Prognosis
Most benzodiazepine exposures can be treated with appropriate supportive care. In patients
with recent ingestions, emesis should be induced, and activated charcoal with a cathartic
should then be administered. If the animal is severely depressed, emesis is contraindicated
because of the risk of aspiration. Most patients require no further treatment beyond gas-
tric emptying, activated charcoal, and monitoring.35 For patients exhibiting extreme CNS
depression, the specific benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil (Romazicon) can be admin-
istered at a dose of 0.1 mg/kg IV.4l Flumazenil is a competitive benzodiazepine blocker with
an average half-life in humans of approximately 1 hour.35 Because of the short half-life of
flumazenil compared with those of most of the benzodiazepines or their active metabolites,
animals should be closely monitored and flumazenil repeated if clinical signs recur. Body
temperature should be monitored and corrected. For the highly fat-soluble compounds, IV
lipid therapy might be considered in severely affected patients.
Differential Diagnoses
Barbiturates, opioids, ethanol, ethylene glycol, propylene glycol, diethylene glycol, metha-
nol, macrolide parasiticides (e.g., ivermectin), amitraz, phenothiazines, isopropanol, ace-
tone, xylitol, hypoglycemia, and encephalopathies should be included in the differential
diagnosis.
Cocaine
Sources
Cocaine is a natural alkaloid that is derived from the leaves of Erythroxylon coca. This shrub
grows predominantly in Mexico, South America, the West Indies, and Indonesia.42 Colom-
bia produces approximately 75% of the world's cocaine from cocaine base that is imported
from Peru and Bolivia or produced locally in Colombia.6 Cocaine is a schedule II drug
and, as such, is under very strict control according to the CSA of 1970. Medical uses are
restricted to topical administration as a local anesthetic on the mucous membranes of the
oral, laryngeal, and nasal cavities. It can also be used diagnostically to ascertain the cause of
Chapter 25 | "Recreational" Drugs 319
a miotic pupil (i.e., Horner's syndrome). Most exposures in small animals are due to inges-
tions of ilicit cocaine supplies.
Cocaine is often adulterated with inert substances used to dilute it (e.g., lactose, inositol,
amines, caffine, heroin, phencyclidine, ergot, or strychnine.42 There are two main forms
of cocaine: the hydrochloride salt and "free base? The hydrochloride salt is the powdered
form of cocaine and readily dissolves in water. It can be taken intravenously or intrana-
sally. Free base is the conversion of the hydrochloride form to the pure cocaine alkaloid
heated (i.e.,"crack," "rock,”" or "flake").6.4z It readily vaporizes rather than burns and so can
be smoked. It can also be taken orally. It is lipophilic and crosses alveolar-capillary and
pue au, pue asou, moy, eal, a ahm, cO, mous, gisnp 1eis, ismp Po,
"white lady."6.44
Toxic Dose
The LDso for pure cocaine in the dog is 13 mg/kg IV, and orally in the mouse it is 99 mg/kg.10
The lowest published lethal dose in the dog is 3.5 mg/kg subcutaneously (SC); in the cat it
is 7.5 mg/kg IV and 16 mg/kg SC.10
Toxicokinetics
Cocaine is well absorbed from all mucosal surfaces. Peak plasma concentrations in humans
can occur 15 to 120 minutes following nasal mucosal application, but peak concentrations
can occur sooner following administration by the oral route.45 Inflamed or irritated surfaces
enhance absorption. Cocaine is hydrolyzed by serum esterases and undergoes demethyl-
ation in the liver. Cocaine and its metabolites are excreted in the urine. Less than lo% to
20% is excreted unchanged in the urine.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Cocaine is a strong CNS stimulant because of its sympathomimetic effects. It blocks the
reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin at adrenergic nerve terminals, resulting in an
cells to give an exaggerated response to catecholamines (i.e., tachycardia).43 IV injection of
cocaine in dogs causes significant increases in mean arterial pressure, heart rate, cardiac
output, and body temperature, and a significant decrease in arterial pH.46 Conduction dis-
turbances, coronary vasospasm and hypoxia, and a direct toxic effect on the myocardium
clinical Signs
Signs expected following cocaine ingestion in animals include hyperactivity, ataxia, mydri-
Minimum Database
A serum chemistry profle and blood gas analysis should be performed immediately to
determine the patient's electrolyte and acid-base status. Monitoring of cardiac rate and
rhythm and body temperature is required.
Confirmatory Tests
Cocaine can be detected in serum and plasma, stomach contents, and urine.4950 Con-
sultation with the diagnostic laboratory is recommended before sample collection and
submission.
Treatment and Prognosis
Treatment is aimed at decontamination, stabilizing the neurologic and cardiac systems, and
maintaining acid-base status.
320 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Acute ingestions in animals not exhibiting clinical signs should be managed by inducing
vomiting immediately. Because cocaine is rapidly absorbed, and clinical signs can become
severe in a short time, induction of emesis should be undertaken with caution. The stimu-
U uman 'annias e aeniand Au lue sds e ui sisaa unui jo u
aspiration. Sedation and gastric lavage followed by administration of activated charcoal
may be a better alternative.
The initial drug of choice for tremors and seizures is diazepam. For refractory seizures a
 barbiturate may be required. Chlorpromazine given before treatment (12 mg/kg IV) effec-
tively antagonized the effects of cocaine in experimentally dosed dogs.46 It reduced the
severity of the seizures and maintained arterial pH and body temperature at predrug con-
trol levels. Because chlorpromazine is a phenothiazine tranquilizer, consideration must be
 given to the possibility of lowering the seizure threshold.
Life-threatening tachyarrhythmias should be treated with a beta blocker, such as pro-
pranolol. IV fluids maintain renal blood flow and promote diuresis. Acidosis should be
monitored and treated with sodium bicarbonate. Hyperthermia can be corrected with cool
IV fluids, cool water baths, and fans. Close monitoring is necessary to prevent the occur-
rence of hypothermia once excess muscle activity has been controlled.
DifferentialDiagnoses
Amphetamines, pseudoephedrine, caffeine, chocolate, metaldehyde, permethrin (in cats),
nine, lead, tremorgenic mycotoxins, and herbal preparations containing ma huang, ephe-
dra, or guarana root should be on the differential diagnosis list.
Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD)
Sources
The synthesis of LSD was the result of research with the ergot alkaloids derived from
Claviceps purpurea.51 The Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann accidentally discovered its hal-
lucinogenic properties when he unintentionally was exposed via the topical route.51 LSD
was marketed by Sandoz under the trade name Delysid in 1947. In the 1950s LSD was
used experimentally as a model for schizophrenia and as an aid in analytical psychother-
apy. It was thought that LSD could aid the patient in releasing repressed information.
The Central Intelligence Agency experimented with the use of LSD as a mind-control
agent and as a tool for interrogating suspected criminals.5l In the 1960s LSD became
popular as a recreational drug and was banned by federal law in 1966. LSD is classified
as a schedule I agent with high abuse potential. There is a lack of established safety data
for LSD, even under medical supervision, and there is no known use of LSD in medical
treatment.51
LSD is a mixture of four stereoisomers: D-, L-, D-iso, and L-iso LSD. Only the D-LSD
isomer has hallucinogenic activity. It is a water-soluble, colorless, tasteless, and odorless
powder. LSD is taken orally in capsules or applied to a variety of ingestible substances.52
I is typically sold as liquid-impregnated blotter paper, microdots, tiny tablets, and “win-
dow-pane” gelatin squares.651 Street names for LSD include “acid” "blotter acid,” “cubes,"
can be found in morning glory seeds and has one-tenth the potency of LSD.51 The estimated
human hallucinogenic dose is 200 to 300 seeds.52 The intact seed coat prevents absorption,
and so the seeds must be pulverized to release the toxin.5l Animal exposures to LSD are
uncommon.
Toxic Dose
The minimum oral toxic dose of LSD in humans ranges from 700 ng/kg to 2800 ng/kg.10
The IV LDso in the rat is 16 mg/kg.10
Chapter 25 | "Recreational" Drugs 321
Toxicokinetics
LSD is rapidly absorbed following oral administration, and peak plasma levels occur within
30 minutes to 5 hours.53 Plasma protein binding is more than 80%.51 Efects in humans
begin at 40 to 60 minutes, peak at 2 to 4 hours, and gradually return to baseline over 6 to
 8 hours.54 LSD is metabolized in the liver via hydroxylation and glucuronidation, and 80%
is excreted in the bile to be eliminated in the feces.53 The excreted metabolites are pharma-
cologically inactive.5l The elimination half-life is between 2 and 5 hours.
Mechanism of Toxicity
The actual mechanism of action of LSD has not been clearly defined, and it appears to
 act at multiple sites in the CNS. However, research supports a common site of action at
the central serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) receptors.51 The 5-HTzA receptor is
thought to modulate hallucinogens.5l Other neurotransmitters may also be involved in
hallucinations, in particular, glutamate and dopamine.5l The effects can be either inhibi-
tory or stimulatory. Consequently the clinical course of LSD exposure can be difficult to
predict.
Clinical Signs
 In humans LSD alters visual and sensory perception and can produce states of euphoria.
During "bad trips,” however, psychotic attacks and panic reactions can occur. It is not
known if animals experience similar effects. Signs in animals may include disorientation,
mydriasis, depression, excitation, and vocalization.
Confirmatory Tests
 LSD can be detected in urine, serum,55 and feces.52 Testing only confirms exposure and is
often quite difficult because LSD undergoes rapid metabolism. Most veterinary diagnostic
laboratories are not prepared to analyze for LSD. The practitioner is encouraged to contact
 at a human laboratory may be required.
Treatment and Prognosis
Treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Most cases of LSD ingestions are self-limiting
and require no medical intervention.52 Decontamination with activated charcoal is rec-
ommended before the onset of signs, but may worsen signs if already present. In humans
gastric lavage is ineffective and may exacerbate psychotic reactions.$5 Diazepam can be used
for extreme agitation, and the animal should be monitored for tachycardia and hyperther-
mia. Placing the animal in a dark, quiet environment is recommended. Excessive restraint
should be avoided because of concerns for hyperthermia and rhabdomyolysis (rare, but
may occur).51
Differential Diagnoses
 Differential diagnoses include phencyclidine, marijuana, hallucinogenic mushrooms, stim-
ulants, and depressants.
Marijuana
Sources
Crude marijuana consists of the dried and chopped stems, leaves, seeds, and flowers of the
plant Cannabissativa(Color Plate 25-1). The major active constituent in marijuana is delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), although as many as 66 cannabinoids have been identified.5é
 The concentration of THC found in plants depends on environmental conditions, includ-
THC in a sample decreases with time.7 In humans the most common routes of exposure are
inhalation ("marijuana cigarettes,” “joints,”“reefers,” and “bongs") and oral ("hash brownies").
322SECTIlON 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Marijuana is often used in conjunction with other drugs, such as opium, alcohol, cocaine
heroin, phencyclidine, ketamine, and formaldehyde.57 Most animal exposures occur as
a result of ingestion of the owner's illicit supply, although secondhand smoke exposures
can occur. It is becoming much more popular for pets to ingest “marijuana butter” Since
the THC is fat soluble, it is becoming common practice to sautee the plant in butter so
that the THC will leach into the butter (the plant material is ultimately strained out of
for the THC effect without experiencing the bitter/crunchy taste of the plant. In most
areas of the country, possession of marijuana is illegal, but some states, such as Cali-
fornia and Arizona, have allowed the medicinal use of crude marijuana under certain
circumstances. However, in 1997 Arizona passed a law nullifying a physician's right to
prescribe schedule I substances without federal approval.56 Purified THC analogues are
now available by prescription (dronabinol [Marinol]—schedule Ill, nabilone [Cesa-
met]—schedule Il) for the treatment of nausea associated with cancer chemotherapy,
appetite stimulation for acquired immune deficiency syndrome patients, glaucoma, and
multiple sclerosis.56.5s THC and crude marijuana are schedule I drugs under the CSA.59
Attempts have been made to reclassify crude marijuana as a schedule II drug, but these
have failed.56,58
Marijuana refers to any part of the plant. Some street names include “pot,” "Mary Jane”
"MJ" "weed” "grass,” "puff” and "hemp?"s Hashish is the dried resin from flower tops and
can contain up to 10% or more THC. Hashish oil can contain up to 20% THC.5& Sinsemilla
is seedless marijuana with a THC content of around 5%. Ihis form accounts for 85% of
domestic production.58
 In 2010 the popularity of synthetic marijuana surged. Marketed as designer marijuana
and herbal incense, these combinations of potent synthetic cannabinoids were sold in
aa Pm, n, , aids, se yns sau iapun sdous pea pue suoeis sed
“Head Trip,"“Purple Haze,” and "Zombie Matter" Although labeled as “not for human con-
sumption,” smoking produced more severe effects than that of marijuana alone, including
seizures, hallucinations, tremors, and paranoia, with resulting injury and death in users,
prompting the passage of the Synthetic Drug Control Act of 2011.60
Toxic Dose
The minimum lethal oral dose in the dog for THC is greater than 3 g/kg.6l Ihis dose is 1000
times the behaviorally effective dose in the dog, indicating a wide safety margin for THC.62
Toxicokinetics
Oral absorption of THC, the most common route in animals, is increased with fatty foods,
and the onset of effects begins within 30 to 60 minutes. In humans THC is 97% to 99% pro-
tein bound, and peak plasma levels occur within 2 to 3 hours. THC is highly lipid soluble
and is distributed into body fat, liver, brain, and kidney. It is rapidly metabolized in the liver;
11-hydroxy-delta-9-THC is the primary metabolite. It is more potent than THC and readily
crosses the blood-brain barrier.63 Ten percent to 15% of THC or its metabolites is excreted
in the urine, and the remainder is eliminated in the feces through biliary excretion. It is
enterohepatically recirculated.57 Because of its high lipid solubility, THC has a very short
initial plasma half-life. Adipose storage produces a biological half-life of 25 to 30 hours.64
 Nabilone, a THC analogue, has a half-life of 2 hours for the parent compound and 35 hours
for its metabolites.64
Mechanism of Toxicity
Two cannabinoid receptors have been identified: CB1 and CB2. CB1's wide distribution in
of movement.63 CB2 has not been detected in the CNS and is restricted to the periphery.
This distribution suggests a potential analgesic effect for THC.57 Both CB1 and CB2 recep-
tors have been identified in immune cells and modulate the effect of THC on the immune
response.57
Chapter 25 | "Recreational" Drugs 323
Clinical Signs
The most common signs reported in dogs include depression, ataxia or incoordination,
bradycardia, disorientation, and hypersalivation.65 Other possible signs include stupor
nystagmus, tachycardia, hyperexcitability, apprehension, tachypnea, hyperthermia, and
vocalization.
Minimum Database
aq isnu eq suais Auo au Aiensn ae uqq pue aen sepies pue amenaduan Apog
monitored.
Confirmatory Tests
Stomach contents and urine can be tested for cannabinoids. Because of their lipophilicity
and enterohepatic recirculation, urine levels can remain detectable for several days follow-
ing acute exposure.66 Consultation with the diagnostic laboratory before sample collection
and submission is recommended. It is common to see false negatives with store-bought
drug kits that test for marijuana in human urine.
Treatment and Prognosis
Treatment is primarily symptomatic and supportive. Because of the wide margin of safety
of the cannabinoids, toxicosis is rarely fatal. Emesis should be induced following an acute
ingestion. Repeated doses of activated charcoal and a cathartic may reduce the half-life
of THC by interrupting enterohepatic recirculation. If signs of CNS stimulation occur,
treat with a benzodiazepine. Body temperature must be closely monitored and corrected
if abnormal. Recovery may take 24 to 72 hours, or longer (up to 5 days), depending on the
dose ingested. IV lipid therapy might be considered in severely affected patients.
Differential Diagnoses
Opioids, LSD, phencyclidine hydrochloride (PCP), ethanol, tranquilizers, ethylene glycol,
propylene glycol, diethylene glycol, methanol, isopropanol, acetone, macrolide parasiti-
cides (e.g., ivermectin), xylitol, depressants, muscle relaxants, and hallucinogenic mush-
 rooms can cause similar clinical signs.
Opioids
Sources
Opium is the dried milky exudate derived from the unripe seed capsules of the poppy
plant, Papaver somniferum.67 Opium contains 24 alkaloids including morphine, codeine,
and thebaine (dimethylmorphine).67 Raw opium consists of at least 10% morphine, but
variability exists by growing region.68 Laudanum is the deodorized tincture of opium,
and paregoric is the camphorated tincture of opium.6 The opioids have found great use
medicinally for their analgesic properties and recreationally for their psychoactive effects.
In 1914 because of concerns regarding addiction and toxicity, the Harrison Narcotic Act
was enacted to make the nonmedical use of opioids illegal. The opioids are classified as
agonists, partial agonists, or antagonists based on their ability to bind and exert pharma-
cologic effects at the various opioid receptors (Table 25-5). Most animal exposures occur
as a result of oral exposures to pharrmaceutical preparations; however, malicious exposures
sometimes occur (i.e., a case involving a suicidal heroin addict who injected her dog before
herself).
Toxic Dose
The minimum lethal subcutaneous dose in the dog for morphine is 210 mg/kg, and in the
cat, 40 mg/kg. The IV LDso for morphine in the dog is 133 mg/kg." The oral LDso for
morphine in the rat is 335 mg/kg, and in the mouse, 524 mg/kg.0 The minimum lethal dose
324SECTlON3MiscellaneousToxicantGroups
Table 25-5
Some Opioid Agonists, Partial Agonists, and Antagonists and Their
 Classification According to the Controlled Substance Act*
Agonists
Schedule Classification
Opioid Agonists
Alfentanil
C-I1
Codeine
C-I1
Diphenoxylate
C-V in combination
Etorphine
C-I
Fentanyl
C-II
Heroin
C-I
Hydrocodone
C-II alone or C-IlI in combination
Hydromorphone
C-I1
Levomethadyl acetate
C-II
Levorphanol
C-I1
Loperamide
Not scheduled
 Meperidine
C-II
Methadone
C-II
Morphine
C-lI alone or C-IlI in combination
Opium
C-II alone or C-III or C-V in combination
Oxycodone
C-I1
Oxymorphone
C-II
Propoxyphene
C-IV
Sufentanil
C-II
Partial Agonists
Buprenorphine
C-V
Butorphanol
Not scheduled
Nalbuphine
Not scheduled
Pentazocine
C-IV
Antagonists
Diprenorphine
C-11
Nalorphine
C-III
Naloxone
Not scheduled
Naltrexone
Not scheduled
Nalmefene
Not scheduled
*Some drugs have received alternate scheduling status based on their use alone or in combination with other
paun aua u paaadde aie auydiouaidp ssuoteue shl pue auudiog (suoedaid ny pue pion dal) samp
States for use in wild or exotic species.67
for heroin in the dog is 25 mg/kg SC, and in the cat, is 20 mg/kg orally.10 The IV LDso for 
codeine in the dog is 69 mg/kg; the oral LDso for codeine in the rat is 427 mg/kg, and in the
mouse, 250 mg/kg.10
Toxicokinetics
The opioids are well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and are rapidly metabolized in
the liver. Most morphine-like drugs undergo significant first-pass metabolism and are mark-
33% protein bound. Morphine is conjugated with glucuronic acid to produce morphine-
is more active as an analgesic than morphine itself.69 Codeine is metabolized to morphine.
which accounts for its pharmacologic activity. Most morphine-6-glucuronide is excreted
by the kidney; very little morphine is excreted unchanged. Some of the glucuronides are
Chapter 25 | "Recreational" Drugs 325
excreted in the bile and are hydrolyzed in the gut.6? Enterohepatic recirculation of mor-
phine and its glucuronide occurs.7D Cats are deficient in glucuronyl-S-transferase, and this
may account for their sensitivity to opioid compounds.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Four major opioid receptors have been identified (μ [mu], k [kappa], & [delta], and 
[sigma]] as well as other minor opioid receptor subtypes (e- [epsilon], ( [zeta]). Opioid
receptors have been found in the central and autonomic nervous systems, gastrointestinal
tract, heart, kidney, vas deferens, pancreas, fat cells, lymphocytes, and adrenal glands.67
Opioids differ in their specificity and efficacy at different types of receptors. Some agents act
iso ag 'laoue je sisuogeue io sistuoge eiled se pue ioidasan yo adi auo je sistuoe se
of the clinically useful opioids bind to μ receptors. The analgesic effects of morphine-like
Aroendsai saeipauu adiqns znl al seaiaum adiqns ln au oi bupu jo imsai e aie sn
depression.67 Partial agonists have agonistic activity at one or more types of opioid recep-
tors and antagonistic effects at others. Naloxone is the most commonly used antagonist. It
is a pure competitive antagonist with no agonist activity and has a high affinity for the μ
receptor.
Apomorphine is a morphine analogue. It is a rapidly acting emetic, which exerts its
clinical effects through dopamine-2 receptor subtype agonism within the chemoreceptor
trigger zone of the medulla.68 Excessive doses may result in respiratory, cardiac, or CNS
depression, and protracted vomiting. Naloxone may reverse thie CNS and respiratory effects
of the drug but is not expected to stop the vomiting.7 Apomorphine is not scheduled.
clinical Signs
ataxia. In severe cases, respiratory depression, constipation, hypothermia, coma, seizures,
and cyanosis can occur. Pulmonary edema is recognized as a possible sequela of opioid
overdose in humans. Patients awakening from an opioid coma, either spontaneously or
following administration of a reversal agent, may develop hypoxemia and pulmonary rales.
It is not clear whether the pulmonary edema is a result of naloxone administration or if the
administration of the reversal agent uncovered an acute lung injury.68 Cats often exhibit
excitatory behavior.72
Minimum Database
gases of an exposed patient.
Confirmatory Tests
Morphine may be detected in urine or serum. Consultation with the diagnostic laboratory
before submission is recommended.
Treatment and Prognosis
For recent ingestions with no clinical signs, vomiting should be induced and activated
charcoal administered with a cathartic. The animal should be monitored for signs of CNS
depression. Respiratory depression with resultant hypoxia is the most common cause of
death in cases of opioid overdose. Establishment of a patent airway, assisted ventilation, and
Oxygen may be required. In animals exhibiting CNS or respiratory depression, naloxone at
a dose of 0.01 to 0.04 mg/kg IV, IM, or SC is indicated.73 Naloxone may have to be repeated
because of its short half-life in relation to that of the opioids. It will reverse respiratory
depression but may not restore full consciousness.70 Naloxone has a high affnity for the μ
receptor, but less for the other receptors. Larger doses are required to reverse the effects of
pentazocine, propoxyphene, and buprenorphine, which also bind to K and o receptors.74.75
Gastric lavage, activated charcoal, and a cathartic may be effective even several hours after
exposure because pylorospasm is produced by the opioid, causing much of the drug to
remain in the stomach.76
326SECTlON 3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
Differential Diagnoses
Barbiturates, ethanol, ethylene glycol, propylene glycol, diethylene glycol, methanol, iso-
propanol, acetone, marijuana, amitraz, encephalopathies, macrolide parasiticides (e.g.
ivermectin), benzodiazepines, xylitol, and phenothiazines should be included on the dif-
ferential diagnosis list.
Phencyclidine and Ketamine
Sources
In the 1950s PCP (1-[1-phenylcyclohexyl] piperidine) was originally marketed for human
anesthesia under the trade name Sernyl, but it was discontinued in 1965 because of a high
incidence of postoperative psychoses and dysphoria. It was briefly reintroduced for veteri-
nary anesthesia in 1967 as Sernylan but was quickly removed because of its emergence as
a drug of abuse.77 PCP is known for inducing violent rages, seizures, coma, and death.6 It
has been classifed as a schedule II drug under the CSA. Phencyclidine can be easily and
cheaply synthesized in clandestine laboratories and is available as a powder, tablet, crystal
 or liquid. In its original state, PCP is a white crystalline powder. Its most popular form is
a liquid mixture of PCP dissolved in formaldehyde and methanol ("embalming fluid").6
 Tobacco or marijuana cigarettes are dipped into the liquid and smoked. Some street names
include “angel dust,”“angel hair, “boat,” “love boat,“dummy dust,”“CJ” “embalming fluid,”
isnpies, csseia iadns, cany layooi, clhd aead, cdd, cany at, csnp bou, cgou,
"whack,” and "zombie dust."6.77
PCP has more than 60 analogues, including ketamine, a chloroketone analogue.
Ketamine has approximately one-tenth to one-twentieth the potency of PCP It has a
much shorter duration of action and produces fewer seizures than PCP78 Like PCP,
individuals anesthetized with ketamine feel detached or disconnected from their pain
and environment. PCP and ketamine are therefore known as dissociative anesfhetics,
not hallucinogens. In addition, ketamine has both analgesic and amnesic properties.6
Because of the greater control it provides in clinical use compared with PCP, ketamine
is regularly used in human operating rooms, emergency departments, and veterinary
clinics.7s The pharmacologic properties that have made ketamine clinically popular
account for its nonmedical popularity as a drug of abuse. Ketamine is not produced
in clandestine laboratories as is PCP but is obtained illicitly from medical, dental, and
veterinary sources and has been sold over the Internet as a “date-rape" drug.7 Because
of its abuse potential, ketamine was classified as a schedule Ill drug in 1999. Ketamine
can be ingested, injected IM or IV, smoked, or snorted.6 On the street ketamine is sold
"Jet” and "Cat Valium."6
Toxic Dose
The oral LDso for phencyclidine in mice is 75 mg/kg.10 Marked clinical signs of intoxication
in the dog can occur at oral doses of 2.5 to 10 mg/kg and in the cat at 1.1 to 12 mg/kg.79 IV,
Toxicokinetics
Phencyclidine is poorly absorbed from the stomach. It is a weak base with a pKa of between
 8.6 and 9.4 and has a high lipid-to-water partition coefficient.78 Thus it tends to be ionized
in the gastric environment. It is, however, well absorbed from the comparatively alkaline
intestinal environment and the respiratory tract. Extensive recirculation occurs as phency-
clidine is secreted into the stomach and then is reabsorbed from the intestinal lumen, pro-
longing its half-life. In humans the onset of effect occurs within 30 to 60 minutes following
oral exposure, and the effects can last up to 24 to 48 hours.77
 Phencyclidine is well distributed and because of its lipophilicity and pKa, it is found
in high concentrations in the CNS and in adipose tissue. In dogs 68% of a single dose is
Chapter 25 | "Recreational" Drugs 327
metabolized in the liver, and only 32% is excreted unchanged by the kidneys. In cats 88% of
the parent cormpound is renally excreted.79 Phencyclidine can be ion trapped in the neph-
ron when the urine pH is less than 5.5.79
Ketamine is primarily metabolized in the liver by demethylation and hydroxylation.
Ketamine and its metabolites are eliminated in the urine. Following IM injection in the cat,
peak plasma levels occur in approximately 10 minutes. Elimination half-life in the cat, calf,
and horse is approximately 1 hour.82
Mechanism of Toxicity
PCP and ketamine functionally and electrophysiologically “dissociate” the somatosen-
fully understood.7 PCP, ketamine, and their analogues bind with high affinity to the
cortex and limbic structures of the brain, blocking the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptors. Ihe NMDA receptor is normally activated by glutamate, an excitatory amino
acid. Dissociative agents, such as PCP and ketamine, bind to the NMDA receptor at
a site independent of glutamate and thus block the receptor noncompetitively.78 PCP
and ketamine also bind to the biogenic amine reuptake complex (i.e., norepinephrine
and dopamine) but with less affinity than to the NMDA receptor. This may account for
the sympathomimetic and psychomotor effects seen clinically. Both PCP and ketamine
affect heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac output but PCP more inconsistently so.78
NDMA antagonists affect behavior, sensation, and cognition to produce a clinical con-
recall, learning, and retention of new information.78 Other effects that may be involved
in the action of dissociative agents are inhibition of GABA and stimulation of alpha and
opiate receptors.77
Clinical Signs
Effects on muscle tone are variable, but generally ketamine either causes no change in mus-
 cle tone or increased muscle tone.2 It does not abolish the pinnal and pedal reflexes, nor
the photic, corneal, laryngeal, or pharyngeal reflexes.82 Ketamine increases cardiac output,
In humans, phencyclidine overdose can cause coma, seizures, hypotension or hyper-
tension, and muscular rigidity accompanied by hyperthermia and rhabdomyolysis.3 Signs
may last for days. Lower doses can cause ataxia, slurred speech, hyperesthesia, blank star-
ing, or hostility.77 Dogs dosed with phencyclidine exhibit grimacing, jaw snapping, muscu-
lar rigidity salivation, seizures, and blank staring.81.84
Minimum Database
Animals exhibiting severe signs should be evaluated for acidosis, hypoglycemia, electrolyte
abnormalities, hypother mia or hyperthermia, and myoglobinuria.
Confirmatory Tests
Most veterinary diagnostic laboratories are not prepared to analyze for PCP, ketamine, 0or
their analogues. The practitioner is urged to check with the laboratory or diagnostic toxi-
cologist before sample collection and submission. Submission to a human laboratory for
detected in serum and possibly gastric contents.78
Because of the distribution of phencyclidine, blood levels do not correlate well with
clinical findings.8 Phencyclidine may be detected in urine for 2 weeks or longer after expo-
sure.77 PCP, ketamine, and their analogues and metabolites may cross-react in immunoas-
say kits, although the extent to which this occurs may be variable.73
Treatment and Prognosis
Phencyclidine produces unpredictable effects, so treatment is symptomatic. In mild cases
the patient should be maintained in a dark, quiet, nonstimulating environment. For animals
328SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
exhibiting severe hyperactivity, rigidity, aggression, or seizures, diazepam can be adminis-
tered. Phenothiazine tranquilizers are contraindicated because they may lower the seizure
threshold, exacerbate anticholinergic effects of PCP, and produce hypotension.77 In patients
with severe seizures, barbiturates or general anesthesia may be required.
Activated charcoal has been shown to decrease the toxicity and increase the LDso of
phencyclidine in dogs and rats, respectively.&4 Activated charcoal prevents the recirculation
of phencyclidine in the gut and enhances elimination. Charcoal should be administered
with a cathartic to promote passage of the drug.
Forced diuresis, mannitol, and furosemide can increase the rate of urinary clearance of
phenc yclidine. Urinary acidification can greatly enhance elimination of phencyclidine, but
this should not be attempted unless the patient's acid-base status can be closely monitored.
Acidification may exacerbate a metabolic acidosis and increases the risk of myoglobinuric
renal failure (rare). Dextrose may be required for hypoglycemic patients. Body temperature
should be closely monitored.
Prognosis depends on the clinical condition of the animal at the time of presentation.
Patients with alarge degree of self-inflicted trauma or rhabdomyolysis (rare, but may occur)
have a poorer prognosis. Those that undergo immediate decontamination, monitoring, and
supportive care have a good prognosis.
Differential Diagnoses
Some differential diagnoses include LSD, hallucinogenic mushrooms, hops, and marijuana.
Tricyclic Antidepressants
Sources
Tricyclic antidepressants were developed in the 1950s and are still commonly prescribed
today. Ihey are named for their three-ringed chemical structure, which is common to most
agents in this class (exception: the tetracyclic drug maprotiline and the dibenzoxazepine
drug amoxapine).86 Imipramine was the first tricyclic antidepressant used for depression.
Newer cyclic antidepressants have been developed in an attempt to decrease the cardiovas-
cular and CNS toxicity of older members of the class. Although other antidepressants, such
as the monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) (e.g., phenelzine sulfate, tranylcypromine
sulfate), selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (e.g., fluoxetine, paroxetine, and
nefazodone), and novel antidepressants like bupropion have been introduced, the tricyc-
lics are still widely prescribed in human medicine. They have also been used in veterinary
medicine for the treatment of certain behavior disorders. Table 25-6 lists some tricyclic
antidepressants and their trade names.
Table 25-6
Some Commonly Prescribed Tricyclic Antidepressants
and Their Trade Names
Tricyclic Antidepressant
Trade Name
Amitriptyline
Elavil, Amitid, Endep, Amitril
Amoxapine
Asendin
Clomipramine
Anafranil, Clomicalm
Desipramine
Norpramin, Pertofrane
Doxepin
Adapin, Sinequan
 Imipramine
Tofranil, Presamine, SK-Pramine, Janimine
Maprotiline
Ludiomil
Nortriptyline
Aventyl, Pamelor
 Protriptyline
Vivactil
Trimipramine
Surmontil
Chapter 25 | "Recreational" Drugs 329
Toxic Dose
Tricyclic antidepressants have a low margin of safety because even small overdoses may
produce toxicity. Exposures of more than i5 mg/kg should be considered potentially lethal
doses.87
A review of the ASPCA APCC database indicates that dogs have exhibited tremors with
oral doses as low as 5.5 mg/kg and 2.2 mg/kg of the MAOIs phenelzine and tranylcypro-
mine, respectively.88 The toxicity of the SSRIs varies greatly with the individual compound.
Sertraline at 10 mg/kg in dogs was shown to cause mydriasis and anorexia, with the mini-
mum oral lethal dose of 80 mg/kg.8990 Fluvoxamine is another SSRI, and oral exposures
of 10 mg/kg were shown to cause depression and tremors.88 Doses of nefazodone hydro-
chloride of 100 mg/kg given orally twice a day in dogs did not lead to fatalities. ? Trazodone
hydrochloride, another popular SSRI, has a reported LDso in dogs of 500 mg/kg, and clinical
signs can occur (ataxia, tremors, seizures) at 6-8 mg/kg dosages.92 Venlafaxine hydrochlo-
ride, another SSRI, can cause mild depression at oral doses of 1 mg/kg, and tremors are
observed at 10 mg/kg.8 Bupropion hydrochloride, a novel antidepressant, has a very short
half-life of 1.73hours indogs and depression can be seen with dosages of 10 mg/kg oral.&93
Toxicokinetics
The tricyclic antidepressants are readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, although
absorption may be prolonged, especially in overdose situations, because of the anticholin-
ergic effects of the drugs. Peak plasma levels generally occur within 2 to 8 hours but can be
delayed for more than 12 hours.94 Clinical signs can occur within 1 hour of ingestion. Oral
bioavailability is low and variable because of extensive first-pass metabolism.86 The tricyclic
Imipramine in rabbits and amitriptyline in mice and rats are more highly concentrated in
heart than in skeletal muscle. The concentrations of several tricyclic antidepressants admin-
istered to rabbits were found to be 40 to 200 times greater in cardiac tissue than in plasma.95
The tricyclic antidepressants are highly protein bound, readily cross the placenta, and are
distributed into the milk.96 A low blood pH may make the drug more available by decreas-
ing protein binding.86 Metabolism occurs in the liver, and enterohepatic recirculation may
occur as lipophilic metabolites are reabsorbed. Half-lives of the tricyclic antidepressants
jo ani noeu au ys'smou vs oi 6 uo suuen suo aq i puai inq aqeen almb ane
excretion is urinary, although some compounds may be excreted in the feces through bile.96
MAOIs are rapidly absorbed and signs are generally seen within 1to 2 hours of ingestion,
but can be delayed for up to 24 hours.88 The SSRIs are all well absorbed and highly protein
bound. In general, half-lives for the SSRIs are less than 20 to 30 hours.
Mechanism of Toxicity
 The major organ systems involved in tricyclic antidepressant toxicosis (as well as the other
classes of antidepressants) are the cardiovascular and neurologic systems. Tricyclic anti-
depressants inhibit the fast sodium channels in the ventricular myocardium, slowing ven-
they act similarly to class I antiarrhythmic drugs, such as quinidine. Slowed conduction
may contribute to the development of electrical reentry impulses, resulting in ventricular
tachycardia or fibrillation. Electrocardiographic changes can include increased PR inter-
vals, QT intervals, and QRS duration.87 Clinically, bradycardia, cardiac arrhythmias, and
severe hypotension may be noted. Elevation of blood pH has had a beneficial effect in ani-
mal models of tricyclic antidepressant toxicosis.98 Studies in dogs have shown a correla-
tion between an elevated blood pH and reversal of tricyclic antidepressant-induced cardiac
toxicity.9.100
The CNS toxicity of tricyclic antidepressants is complex and has not been fully elu-
cidated. A combination of factors, including increased concentrations of monoamines
such as norepinephrine, antidopaminergic effects, anticholinergic properties, inhibition of
sodium channels, and interactions with GABA receptors, are allikely involved.86
330SECTlON3MiscellaneousToxicantGroups
clinical Signs
The onset of signs and the progression of the clinical course may be rapid. Initial signs
can include vomiting, hyperexcitability, hyperthermia, tremors, tachycardia, mydriasis
vocalization, and seizures. As the toxic syndrome progresses, lethargy, ataxia, bradycardia,
coma, hypotension, and cardiac arrhythmias can develop. Ihe major cause of death in tri-
hyper(hypo)tension, ataxia, restlessness, tachycardia, arrhythmias, respiratory depression,
shock, coma, and seizures.8 Clinical signs associated with SSRI overdose include lethargy
Or agitation, vomiting, ataxia, tremors, seizures, hypertension and tachycardia.ss Clinical
signs of bupropion overdose include vomiting, dypnea, salivation, ataxia, arrhythmias,
tremors, hypotension, and seizures.88
Minimum Database
 The minimum database should include an evaluation of neurologic status, cardiac rate and
rhythm, and acid-base status.
Confirmatory Tests
Tricyclic antidepressants, along with the other antidepressants, can potentially be detected
is suggested before submission of samples.
Treatment and Prognosis
Clinical signs of tricyclic antidepressant overdose can develop rapidly, and induction of
vomiting in recently exposed animals should be undertaken with caution. Emesis can trig-
ger seizure activity in tricyclic antidepressant-poisoned animals, causing risk of aspiration.
Sedation with an ultrashort-acting barbiturate and gastric lavage followed by activated
charcoal may be a better alternative.7 Atropine should be avoided because of the anti-
cholinergic properties of the tricyclic antidepressants. A cathartic should be administered
with the charcoal, but magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts) should not be used; tricyclic anti-
depressants decrease gastrointestinal motility, and large amounts of magnesium could be
absorbed. Alternative cathartics are sorbitol or sodium sulfate (Glauber's salts). Repeated
 doses of activated charcoal are recommended to interrupt enterohepatic recirculation of the
tricyclic antidepressants.
Animals should be closely monitored because of the possibility of rapid deteriora-
tion. Sodium bicarbonate should be administered for acidosis or signs of cardiac toxicity
Tricyclic antidepressant-induced cardiac toxicity can be reversed by elevating the blood
pH.9,1oo Maintaining blood pH at more than 7.5 prevented death in experimentally poi-
soned dogs.871oz In the absence of acid-base monitoring, sodium bicarbonate at a dose
of 2 to 3 mEq/kg IV during a period of 15 to 30 minutes is recommended.87 Cardiac
monitoring should continue, and sodium bicarbonate should be repeated as clinical signs
recur.
Seizures can be treated with diazepam or phenobarbital.87 Good supportive care includ-
in excess of 24 hours because of the often long and variable half-lives of individual tricyclic
antidepressant agents.
Treatment options for MAOI- and SSRI-exposed patients are similar and should include
consideration of decontamination procedures (emesis, activated charcoal, cathartic), along
with symptomatic and supportive care. Patients exhibiting the serotonin syndrome may be
treated with cyproheptadine hydrochloride at a dose of 1.1 mg/kg orally.&8
Differential Diagnoses
Some agents that should be considered in the differential diagnosis include amphetamines,
guarana root, quinidine, propranolol, and albuterol.
Chapter 25 | "Recreational" Drugs 331
References
1. United States Drug Enforcement Administration: A tradition of excellence, http://www.usdoj.gov/deal
pubs/history/.
2. Adams HR: Drugs acting on the autonomic and somatic nervous systems. In Adams HR, editor: Veteri-
nary pharmacology and therapeutics, ed 7, Ames, 1995, Iowa State University Press. 1995.
3. Connolly HM, Crary JL, McGoon MD, et al: Valvular heart disease associated with fenfluramine-
phentermine, N Engl I Med 337(9):581, 1997.
4. Albertson TE, Van Hoozen BE, Allen RP: Amphetamines. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW, Winchester
JF,editors: Clinical management ofpoisoning and drug overdose,ed 3, Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
5. Amphetamines and designer drugs In Ellenhorn MJ,editor: Ellenhon's medical toxicology, ed 2, Balti-
more, 1997, Williams & Wilkins. 1997.
6. Street drugs: α drug identification guide, Plymouth, MN, 2003, Publishers Group LLC, www.street
drugs.org.
7. Benzie F, Hekman K, Cameron L, et al: Emergency department visits after use of a drug sold as “bath
salts"—Michigan, November 12, 2010-March 31, 2011, MM WR 60(19):624-627, 2011,
9. Zalis EG, Kaplan G, Lundberg GD, et al: Acute lethality of the amphetamines in dogs and its antago-
nism by curare, Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 118(2):557, 1965.
10. RTECS: Registry of toxic effects of chemical substances. From MDL Information Systems Inc. (elec-
tronic version). Thomson MICROMEDEX, Greenwood Village, CO, Vol. 61, expires August 31, 2004.
11. Zalis EG, Parmley LF: Fatal amphetamine poisoning, Arch Intern Med 101:822-826, 1963.
12. Amphetamines general statement. In McEvoy GK, editor: AHFS drug information, Bethesda, MD,
2003, American Society of Health-System Pharmacists Inc.
13. Anggard E, Jonsson LR, Hogmark AL,et al: Amphetamine metabolism in amphetamine psychosis, Clin
Pharmacol Ther 14(5):870, 1973.
14. Baggot JD, Davis L W: Pharmacokinetic study of amphetamine elimination in dogs and swine, Biochem
Pharmacol 21:1967, 1972.
15. Editorial Staff: Amphetamines (pharmacology/toxicology). In Klasco RK, editor: POISINDEX System,
Thomson MICROMEDEX, Greenwood Village, CO, Vol. 121, expires September 2004.
16. Gross ME, Booth NH: Tranquilizers, dg-adrenergic agonists, and related agents. In Adams HR, editor:
Veterinary pharmacology and therapeutics, ed 7, Ames, 1995, Iowa State University Press.
17. Catravas JD, Waters I W, Hickenbottom JP,et al: The effects of haloperidol, chlorpromazine and pro-
pranolol on acute amphetamine poisoning in the conscious dog, I Pharmacol Exp Ther 202(1):230, 1977.
18. Hobbs WR, Rall TW, Verdoorn TA: Hypnotics and sedatives; ethanol. In Hardman JG, Limbird
LE, editors: Goodman and Gtman's the pharmacological basis of therapeutics, New York, 1996,
McGraw-Hill.
19. Haddad LM, Winchester JF: Barbiturates. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW , Winchester JF,editors: Clint-
cal management of poisoning and drug overdose,ed 3, Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
20. Reid TC: Barbiturate poisoning in dogs, NZ Vet I 6(7):190, 1978.
 21. Humphreys DJ, Longstaffe JA, Stodulski JBJ, et al: Barbiturate poisoning from pet shop meat: possible
association with perivascular injection, Vet Rec 107(22):517, 1980.
22. Waming added to euthanasia products, I Am Vet Med Assoc 223(6):773, 2003.
23. Euthanatized animals can poison wildlife: veterinarians receive fines, / Am Vet Med Assoc 220(2):
146-147, 2002
 24. Secondary pentobarbital poisoning of wildlife. US Fish Wildlife Service fact sheet. December 2003.
http://cpharm.vetmed.vt.edu/USFWS/USFWSFPentobarbFactSheet.pdf.
25. Lee DC: Sedative-hypnotics agents. In Goldfrank LR, Flomenbaum NE, Lewin NA, et al: Goldfrank's
toxicologic emergencies, ed 7, New York, 2002, McGraw-Hill.
26. Barbiturate pharmacology. In Plumb DC, editor: Veterinary drug handbook,ed 4, Ames, 2002, Iowa
State University Press.
27. Kisseberth W C, Trammel HL: Illicit and abused drugs, Vet Clin North A m Small Anim Pract 20(2):413,
1990.
28. Boldy DAR, Vale JA, Prescott LF: Treatment of phenobarbitone poisoning with repeated oral adminis-
tration of activated charcoal, Q I Med 61(235):997, 1986.
29. Vale JA, Ruddock FS, Boldy DAR: Multiple doses of activated charcoal in the treatment of phenobarbj-
tone and carbamazepine poisoning, Vet Hum Toxicol 29(2):152, 1987.
infant, I Emerg Med 8(4):449, 1990.
 31. Veerman M, Espejo MG, Christopher MA, et al: Use of activated charcoal to reduce elevated serum
phenobarbital concentration in a neonate, Clin Toxicol 29(1):53, 1991.
332 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
32. Lindberg MC, Cunningham J A, Lindberg NH: Acute phenobarbital intoxication, South Med J85(8):803,
1992.
phia, 2003, Churchill Livingstone.
34. Editorial Staff Benzodiazepines (Overview). In Klasco RK, editor: POISINDEX System. Thomson
MICROMEDEX, Greenwood Village, CO, Vol. 121, expires 9/2004.
35. Farrell SE, Roberts IR: Benzodiazepines. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW, Winchester JF,editors: Clinical
management ofpoisoning and drug overdose,d3,Philadelphia,1998, WB Saunders.
36. Diazepam. In Plumb DC, editor: Veterinary drug handbook, ed 4, Ames, 2002, Iowa State University
Press.
37. Benzodiazepines general statement. In McEvoy GK, editor: AHFS drug information, Bethesda, MD,
2003, American Society of Health-System Pharmacists Inc.
38. Gross ME, Booth NH: Tranquilizers, az-adrenergic agonists, and related agents. In Adams HR, editor:
Veterinary pharmacology and therapeutics, ed 7, Ames, 1995, Iowa State University Press.
39. Hobbs WR, Rall TW, Verdoom TA: Hypnotics and sedatives: ethanol. In Hardman JG, Limbird LE
editors: Goodman and Gilman'sthe pharmacological basisoftherapeutics, New York, 1996, McGraw-Hill.
40. Benzodiazepines. In Ellenhorn MJ, editor: Ellenhorn's medical toxicology, ed 2, Baltimore, 1997,
Williams & Wilkins.
41. Flumazenil. In Plumb DC, editor: Veterinary drug handbook,ed 4, Ames, 2002, Iowa State University
Press.
42. Hollander JE, Hoffman RS: Cocaine. In Goldfrank LR, Flomenbaum NE, Lewin NA,et al: Goldfrank'
toxicologic emergencies, ed 7, New York, 2002, McGraw-Hill
43. Steffey EP,Booth NH: Local anesthetics In Adams HR,editor: Veterinary pharmacology and therapeu
tics, ed 7, Ames, 1995, Iowa State University Press.
44. Albertson TE, Marelich GP, Tharratt RS: Cocaine. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW, Winchester JF,
editors: Clinical management of poisoning and drug overdose, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
45. Cocaine hydrochloride. In McEvoy GK,editor: AHFS drug information, Bethesda, MD, 2003, American
Society of Health-System Pharmacists Inc.
46. Catravas JD, Waters IW: Acute cocaine intoxication in the conscious dog: studies on the mechanism of
lethality,J Pharmacol Exp Ther 217(2):350-356, 1981
47. Kabas JS, Blanchard SM, Matsuyama Y, et al: Cocaine-mediated impaiment of cardiac conduction in
the dog: apotential mechanism for sudden death after cocaine, I Pharmacol Exp Ther 252(1):185, 1990.
48. Williams RG, Kavanagh KM, Teo KK: Pathophysiology and treatment of cocaine toxicity: implications
for the heart and cardiovascular system, Can } Cardiol12(12):1295, 1996.
49. Frazier K, Colvin B, Hullinger G: Postmortem diagnosis of accidental cocaine intoxication in a dog, Vet
Htum Toxicol 40(3):154-155, 1998.
 50. Lindgren JE: Guide to the analysis of cocaine and its metabolites in biological material, JEthnopharma
cof 3:337, 1981.
51. Tucker JR, Ferm RP: Lysergic acid and diethylamide and other hallucinogens. In Goldfrank LR,
Flomengbaum NE, Lewin NA,et al: Goldfrank's toxicologic emergencies, ed 7, New York, 2002,
McGraw-Hill.
52. Haddad LM: LSD, natural hallucinogens, and miscellany. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW, Winchester JF,
editors: Clinical management of poisoning and drug overdose, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
53. Editorial Staff LSD (Kinetics). In Klasco RK, editor: POISINDEX System, Thomson MICROMEDEX,
Greenwood Village, CO, Vol. 121, expires September 2004.
54. O'Brien CP: Drug addiction and dnug abuse. In Hardman JG, Limbird LE, editors: Goodman and Gil-
man's the pharmacological basis of therapeutics, New York, 1996, McGraw-Hill.
 55. Hallucinogenic drugs. In Ellenhorn MJ, editor: Ellenhorn's medical toxicology, ed 2, Baltimore, 1997,
Williams & Wilkins. 1997.
 56. Voth EA, Schwartz RH: Medicinal applications of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and marijuana, A nn
Intern Med 126(10):791, 1997.
57. Otten EJ: Marijuana. In Goldfrank LR, Flomengbaum NE, Lewin NA, et al: Goldfrank's toxicologic
emergencies, ed 7, New York, 2002, McGraw-Hill.
58. Marijuana and other cannabinoids. In Ellenhorn MJ,editor: Ellenhorn's medical toxicology, ed 2, Balti-
more, 1997, Williams & Wilkins.
59. U.S. Department of Justice Drug Enforcement Administration: Controlled substance schedules, http://
www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/schedules/index.html.
60. Synthetic drug control act of 2011, H.R. 1254: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-112hr1254rh.pdf.
 61. Thompson GR, Rosenkrantz H, Schaeppi UH, et al: Comparison of acute oral toxicity of cannabinoids
in rats, dogs, and monkeys, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 25(3):363, 1973.
Chapter 25 | "Recreational" Drugs 333
62. Waller CW: Chemistry, toxicology and psychic effects of cannabis. In Keeler RF, Tu AT, editors: Hand-
book of natural toxins, Vol I, Plant and fungal toxins, New York, 1983, Marcel Dekker.
63. Ameri A: The effects of cannabinoids on the brain, Prog Neurobio 58:315-348, 1999.
64. Editorial Staf: Marijuana (kinetics). In Klasco RK, editor: POISINDEX System, Thomson MICROME-
DEX, Greenwood Village, CO, Vol. 121, expires September 2004.
65. Janczyk P, Donaldson CW, Gwaltney S: Two hundred and thirteen cases of marijuana toxicoses in
dogs, Vet Human Toxicol 46(1):19-21, 2004.
66. Hallucinogenic drugs. In Ellenhorn MJ, editor: Ellenhorn's medical toxicology, ed 2, Baltimore, 1997,
Williams & Wilkins.
 67. Branson KR, Gross ME, Booth NH: Opioid agonists and antagonists In Adams HR,editor: Veterinary
pharmacology and therapeutics, ed 7, Ames, 1995, Iowa State University Press.
68. Nelson LS:Opioids. In Goldfrank LR, Flomenbaum NE, Lewin NA,et al: Goldfrank's toxicologic emer-
gencies,ed 7, New York, 2002, McGraw-Hill
69. Analgesic drugs. In Rang HP, Dale MM, Ritter JM, editors: Pharmacology, ed 5, Philadelphia, 2003,
Churchill Livingstone.
70. Reisine T, Pasternak G: Opioid analgesics and antagonists. In Hardman JG, Limbird LE, editors: Good-
man and Gilman's the pharmacological basis oftherapeutics, New York, 1996, McGraw-Hill
71. Apomorphine In Plumb DC,editor: Veterinary drug handbook,ed 4, Ames, 2002, Iowa State Univer-
sity Press.
72. Davis LE, Donnelly EJ: Analgesic drugs in the cat, I Am Vet Med Assoc 53(9):161, 1968.
73. Kisseberth WC, Trammel HL: Illicit and abused drugs, Vet Clin North A m Small Anim Pract 20(2):413,
1990.
74. Acute reactions to drugs of abuse, Med Lett Drugs Ther 38(974):45, 1996.
75. Schwartz M: Opiates and narcotics. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW, Winchester JF, editors: Clinical
management of poisoning and drug overdose, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
76. Opiate agonists general statement. In McEvoy GK, editor: AHFS drug information, Bethesda, MD,
2003, American Society of Health-System Pharmacists Inc.
77. Wright RO, Woolf AD: Phencyclidine. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW, Winchester JF, editors: Clinical
management of poisoning and drug overdose,ed 3, Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders. 1998.
78. Olmedo R: Phencyclidine and ketamine. In Goldfrank LR, Flomenbaum NE, Lewin NA, et al: Gold-
fank's toxicologic emergencies, ed 7, New York, 2002, McGraw-Hill.
79. Coppock RW, Mostrom MS, Lillie LE: Ethanol and illicit drugs of abuse. In Kirk RW, editor: Current
veterinary therapy X: small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
 80. Vaupel DB, Jasinski DR: Acute single dose effects ofphencyclidine (PCP) in dogs, Fed Proc 38(3,1):435,
1979.
 81. Boren JL, Consroe PF:Behavioral effects ofphencyclidine (PCP) in the dog: aposible animal model of
PCP toxicity in humans, Life Sci 28(11):1245, 1981.
82. Ketamine. In Plumb DC, editor: Veterinary drug handbook, ed 4, Ames, 2002, Iowa State University
Press.
83. Acute reactions to drugs of abuse, Med Lett Drugs Ther 38(974):45, 1996.
84. Picchioni AL, Consroe PF: Activated charcoal-a phencyclidine antidote, or hog in dogs, N Engl J Med
300(4):202, 1979.
85. Phencyclidine. In Ellenhorn MJ, editor: Ellenhorn’s medical toxicology, ed 2, Baltimore, 1997, Williams
&Wilkins.
86. Liebelt EL, Francis PD: Cyclic antidepressants. In Goldfrank LR, Flomenbaum NE, Lewin NA, et al:
Goldfrank's toxicologic emergencies,ed 7, New York, 2002, McGraw-Hill.
87. Johnson LR: Tricyclic antidepressant toxicosis, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20(2):393,
1990.
88. Wismer TA: Antidepressant drug overdoses in dogs, Vet Med 95(7):520, 2000.
89. Koe BK, Weissman A, Welch WM, Browne RG: Sertraline, 1S,4S-N-methyl-4-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-
1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-1-naphthylamine, a new uptake inhibitor with selectivity for serotonin, J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 226(3):686, 1983
 90. RTECS: Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances., National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health, Cincinnati, OH, Micromedex, Englewood, CO.
91. Shukla UA, Kaul S, Marathe PH, Pittman KA, Barbhaiya RH: Pharmacokinetics of nefazodone follow-
ing multiple escalating oral doses in the dog, Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 17(4):309, 1992.
92. Antidepressants. American Hospital Formularry Service, Bethesda, MD, 1999, American Society of
Health-System Pharmacists 1894.
93. Butz RF, Schroeder DH, Welch RM, Mehta NB, Phillips AP, Findlay JW: Radioimmunoassay and phar-
334SECTlON 3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
 94. Baldessarini RJ: Drugs and the treatment of psychiatric disorders: depression and mania. In Hardman
JG, Limbird LE, editors: Goodman and Gilman's the pharmacological basis of therapeutics, New York,
1996, McGraw-Hill.
95. Jandhyala BS, Steenberg ML, Perel JM, et al: Effects of several tricyclic antidepressants on the hemody-
namics and myocardial contractility ofthe anesthetized dogs, Eur J Pharmacol 42:403-410, 1977.
96. Tricyclic antidepressants general statement. In McEvoy GK, editor: AHFS drug information, Bethesda,
MD, 2003, American Society of Health-System Pharmacists Inc.
97. Editorial Staff: Tricyclic antidepressants (kinetics). In Klasco RK, editor: POISINDEX System, Thomson
MICROMEDEX, Greenwood Village, CO, Vol. 121, expires 9/2004.
tors.In Haddad LM,Shannon MW, Winchester JF,editors: Clinical management ofpoisoning and drug
overdose, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
 99. Sasyniuk Bl, Jhamandas V, Valois M: Experimental amitriptyline intoxication: treatment of cardiac
toxicity with sodium bicarbonate, Ann Emerg Med 15(9):1052, 1986.
100. Stone CK, Kraemer CM, Carroll R, et al: Does a sodium-free buffer affect QRS width in experimental
amitriptyline overdose? Ann Emerg Med 26(1):58, 1995.
101. Cyclic antidepressants. In Ellenhorn MJ, editor: Ellenhorn's medical toxicology, ed 2, Baltimore, 1997,
Williams & Wilkins.
102. Callaham M, Schumaker H, Pentel P:Phenytoin prophylaxis of cardiotoxicity in experimental amitrip-
tyline poisoning, I Pharmacol Exp Ther 245(1):216, 1988.
CHAPTER
26
Hazards Associated
with the Use of Herbal
and Other Natural
Products*
Elizabeth A. Hausner, DVM, PhD, DABVT, DABT
Robert H. Poppenga, DVM, PhD, DABVT
· The use of herbal remedies for the prevention and treatment of a variety of
 illnesses in small anirmals has increased tremendously in recent years.
· Although most herbal remedies, when used as directed and under the
supervision of knowledgeable individuals, are safe, the potential for adverse
effects or intoxications certainly exists.
· Because of inherent toxicity, some herbal rermedies should not be used under
any circumstances.
· Because nearly all herbal remedies contain multiple biologically active
on clinicians to be aware of those herbs that can cause intoxication and to be
cognizant of potential herb-drug interactions.
There are a number of evidence-based resources available to assist clinicians in
the safe use of herbal remedies.
roadly defined, herbs are plants used for medicinal purposes or for their olfactory or
flavoring properties. There is increasing interest in the use of herbs and other “natural”
products by both veterinarians and animal owners to treat medical problems (herbal medi-
cine). Ihe reasons underlying the increased use of herbal and other “alternative” medical
modalities in human health have been investigated extensively and are multifactorial.1-3
Social, economic, and philosophical reasons often underlie the decision by an individual
to turn to alternative modalities, such as herbal medicine. Unfortunately, similar investiga-
tions into the motivation of pet owners to employ such modalities for the treatment of their
pets have not been conducted. However, it is likely that the same motivations apply.
Plants have been used for medicinal purposes by people since the beginning of recorded
history and undoubtedly well before. In the West, many modern medicines, either in the
form of a "parent” compound or as a synthetic derivative, originated from plants. Examples
of parent compounds include salicylates (from Salix spp. or willow bark), digitoxin and
*The views and opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent the Food and Drug Administration
336 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
digoxin (from Digitalis spp. or foxglove), quinine (from Cinchona spp. or cinchona bark),
and morphine (Papaver spp. or opium poppy). The pharmaceutical industry continues to
search for new and effective plant-derived compounds. Herbs are important components
of traditional Chinese medicine, ayurvedic medicine, and the medical practices of many
indigenous cultures. Herbs were important components of both human and veterinary
medicine in Europe and North America before the advent of purified natural and synthetic
drugs.
Herbal medicine and conventional pharmacology differ in three fundamental ways.4
First, herbalists use unpurifed plant extracts containing several different constituents in
the belief that the various constituents work synergistically (the effect of the whole herb
is greater than the summed effects of its individual components). In addition, herbalists
believe that toxicity is reduced when the whole herb is used instead of its purified active
constituents; this is termed buffering. Secondly, several herbs are often used together. Ihe
theories of synergism and buffering are believed to be applicable when herb combinations
are employed. In conventional medicine, polypharmacy is generally not considered to
be desirable because of increased risks of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) or interactions.
 Lastly, herbalists and many other alternative medical practitioners approach patients in a
more "holistic" way than do many conventional medical practitioners who tend to focus
more narrowly on the disease and exclude consideration of the patient as an individual.
Regulations
 In 1994 Congress passed the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act (DSHEA),
supplements include minerals, vitamins, amino acids, herbs and any product sold as a
"dietary supplement" before October 15, 1994. Ihus, in the United States, dietary supple-
aunsuo n uodirsaidon pue juauaddng Areiat au poo se paemai aie sua
Protection Act became effective in December 2007. The law requires collection of adverse
event reports by the manufacturers, distributors, and retailers of dietary supplements. Ihe
labels of these products are also required to provide information to facilitate such report-
ing. Under the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and the Public Service Health Act, the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) has also implemented requirements for the safety and
quality of dietary supplements. Part of this entails good manufacturing practices. Another
part is the establishment of adulteration standards specific to supplements. The burden of
yuais, siuasand ionpond e jo uoeiatpe jeu anensuouap oi juauuaaog au uo st joond
cant and unreasonable risk of illness or injury? It should be noted that supplements are also
adulterated if they are prepared, packed, or held under conditions that do not meet current
good manufacturing practice regulations.5 A complication to these safeguards comes from
the Internet. Pet owners have the opportunity to purchase products from vendors who may
or may not adhere to these regulations.
Active Herbal Constituents
There are five broad classes of active chemical constituents in plants: volatile oils, resins
alkaloids, glycosides, and fixed oils.6 Volatile oils are odorous plant ingredients. Examples
of plants that contain volatile oils include catnip, garlic, and citrus. Ingestion or dermal
exposure to volatile oils can result in intoxication. Resins are complex chemical mixtures
that can be strong gastrointestinal irritants. Alkaloids are a heterogeneous group of alka-
line, organic, and nitrogenous compounds. Ofen these compounds are the most phar-
macologically active plant constituents. Glycosides are sugar esters containing a sugar
(glycol) and a nonsugar (aglycon). Glycosides are not typically toxic. However, hydrolysis
of the glycosides after ingestion can release toxic aglycones. Fixed oils are esters of long-
chain fatty acids and alcohols. Herbs containing fixed oils are often used as emollients
demulcents, and bases for other agents; in general these are the least toxic of the plant
constituents.
Chapter 26 I Hazards Associated with the Use of Herbal and Other Natural Products 337
Many of these plant-derived chemicals are biologically active and potentially toxic.
There are numerous case reports in the medical literature documenting serious and
potentially life-threatening adverse effects following human and animal exposure to
herbal preparations. It is worth noting that in several instances the incidence of animal
lel its popularity.7& However, it is important to point out that, considered as a whole,
the use of herbal products does not appear to be associated with a higher incidence of
serious adverse effects than ingestion of conventional prescription or over-the-counter
(OTC) pharmaceuticals. Serious ADRs to conventional pharmaceuticals in hospital-
[a Aiaexde u 6z aiaxae aq on paesa uaq a suand pa
incidence of hospital admissions caused by ADRs has been reported.o A recent study
estimated that approximately 25% of all herbal remedy- and dietary supplement-related
calls to a regional human poison control center could be classified as ADRs." The most
common ADRs were associated with zinc (38.2%), echinacea (7.7%), chromium pico-
linate (6.4%), and witch hazel (6%). Only 3 out of 233 ADRs were considered serious
enough to warrant hospitalization. It is likely that ADRs are underreported for both
conventional drugs and herbal remedies. Unfortunately, there is almost no information
regarding the overall incidence of ADRs to conventional drugs or herbal remedies in
veterinary medicine.
There are various ways in which poisoning of an animal might occur. Use of a correctly
identified herbal that contains a known toxin is one possibility. For example, chronic use of
an herbal remedy containing hepatotoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs) may result in liver
failure. Pennyroyal oil containing the putative hepatotoxin, pulegone, was responsible for
the death of a dog after it was applied dermally to control fleas.2 Alternatively, administra-
tion of a misidentifed plant may result in poisoning. Contamination of commercially pre-
pared herbal remedies with toxic plants has been documented in the medical literature.13.14
Seeds of poison hemlock (Conium rmaculafum) have been found in anise seed. Recently,
plantain sold as a dietary supplement was found to contain cardiac glycosides from Digitalis
 spp. Just as with traditional prescription medications, pet intoxication following accidental
sop um ai aemied si s sso Aeu aaan paos Aadondu u jo usu
because of their indiscriminate eating habits. Dr. Poppenga was involved in a case in which
a miniature poodle ingested several tablets of its owner's medication containing rauwolfia
alkaloids and developed clinical signs within 2 hours of ingestion. Reserpine was detected
in the medication and the urine of the dog.
Some herbal remedies, particularly Chinese patent medicines, may contain heavy met-
als, such as arsenic, lead, or mercury, which were added intentionally as part of the formula
or unintentionally, along with contaminant pesticide residues. Intentionally added pharma-
ceuticals, such as nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), corticosteroids, caffeine,
 or sedatives, have also been reported.15.16 Natural toxins commonly found in Chinese patent
medicines include borneol, aconite, toad secretions (Bufo spp., Ch' an Su), mylabris, scor-
 pion, borax, acorus, and strychnine (Strychnos nux-vomica).'s
Because herbal preparations contain numerous biologically active compounds, the
potential exists for ADRs when they are used in conjunction with conventional pharma-
ceuticals. In addition, many naturally occurring chemicals found in herbal remedies cause
induction of one or more liver cytochrome P450 metabolizing enzymes or share other met-
liver enzyme activity.17 This can result in altered metabolism of other drugs or chemicals
resulting in either enhanced or diminished drug efficacy or toxicity. Coexisting liver or
renal disease can alter the metabolism and elimination of herbal constituents, thus pre-
disposing to adverse reactions. Apparent idiosyncratic reactions to herbal remedies have
 been documented in people. Such reactions might be due to individual differences in drug
metabolizing capacity.18.19
Of particular concern to veterinarians is the possibility of species differences in sus-
ceptibility to the toxic effects of herbal constituents. For example, cat hemoglobin is quite
susceptible to oxidative damage. The volatile oil in garlic contains oxidants, such as allicin.
338SECTlON 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Thus one can hypothesize that oxidant-induced Heinz body anemia would be more likely
substantiate or refute such a hypothesis. Unfortunately, little evidence-based information
exists on which informed judgments may be made about potential hazards of specific herbs
to different animal species.
According to annual surveys of herbs sold in the United States, the most commonly
used herbs include coneflower (Echinacea spp, Color Plate 26-1), garlic (Alliurm sativa),
ginseng (Panax spp.), ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba), St. John's-wort (Hypericum perforaturm), saw
palmetto (Serenoa repens), sweetleaf (Stevia rebaudiana), aloe (Aloe spp.), resveratrol ( Vitis
vinifera), cayenne (Capsicum spp.), bilberry (Vacciniur myrtillus), and cat's claw (Uncaria
formentosa). Presumably, these are the herbs to which pets are most likely to be exposed.
internally), and cayenne (used internally) should be considered safe when used appropri-
ately. Garlic, ginseng, ginkgo, St. John's-wort, goldenseal, aloe (gel used externally, dried
juice used internally), and cayenne (used externally) have some restrictions for use.20 For
example, in humans garlic should not be used by nursing mothers, and cayenne should not
be applied to injured skin or near eyes. Both ginkgo and St. John's-wort are contraindicated
in individuals taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors because of potential herb-drug inter-
actions. There is little data available for bilberry, sweetleaf, resveratrol, or cat's claw to make
a determination regarding their safety across species. However, no observed adverse effect
level for resveratrol of 600 mg/kg/day was determined in a subchronic oral toxicity study
using beagles.21
 The overall incidence of human dietary supplement adverse events (DSAE) appears
to be relatively low, although inadequate and poor-quality reporting of DSAE are major
limitations of dietary supplenment safety monitoring in the United States.2 Of inter-
est are studies listing the most common herb-related calls to a regional human poison
control center.23,24 The most frequent calls, in descending order of frequency, involved
St. John's wort, ma huang, echinacea, guarana, ginkgo, ginseng, valerian, tea tree oil,
goldenseal, arnica, yohimbe, and kava kava. Not all of the calls could be categorized as
ADRs.
Summaries of the Safety of Common Herbs
Not all of the following herbs, essential oils, and dietary supplements are used in herbal
medicine because of well-recognized risks of intoxication. However, they are included in
the following discussion precisely because of their inherent toxicity. Unless other wise speci-
fied, the following information is taken from three primary sources: Botanical Safety Hand-
Medicines,2 and Review of Natural Products.26 Other herbs of toxicologic concern are listed
in Table 26-1.
5-Hydroxytryptophan
5-Hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), also known as Griffonia seed extract, is a popular dietary
supplement that is available OTC for a variety of conditions including depression, chronic
headaches, obesity, and insomnia in humans. A retrospective study by the American Soci-
Ety for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Animal Poison Control Center (ASPCA-
 APCC) reported 21 cases of accidental ingestion of products containing 5-HTP by dogs
between 1989 and 1999.8 Clinical signs of intoxication developed in 19 of the 21 dogs and
consisted primarily of seizures, depression, tremors, hyperesthesia, ataxia, and hyperther-
mia. Vomiting and diarrhea were also frequently reported. The pharmacologic and toxico-
logic action of 5-HTP is believed to be due to increased concentrations of serotonin in the
central nervous system (CNS).27 The estimated minimum toxic oral dose from the APCC
study was 23.6 mg/kg, and the minimum lethal oral dose was estimated to be 128 mg/kg. Of
the 19 symptomatic dogs, 3 died, and 16 of 17 dogs receiving symptomatic and supportive
care recovered.
Table 26-1
 Additional Herbs of Toxicologic Concern
Scientific Name
Common Names
Active Constituents
Target Organs
Acorus calamus
Acorus, calamus, sweet flag, sweet root,
β-Asarone (procarcinogen)
 Liver—potent hepatocarcinogen
pter
sweet cane, sweet cinnamon
Aesculus hippocastanum
Horse chestnut, buckeye
 Esculin, nicotine, quercetin,
26
Gastrointestinal, nervous
rutin, saponins, shikimic acid
Arnica montana and A. latifolia
Arnica, wolf 's bane, leopard's bane
Sesquiterpene lactones
Skin—dermatitis
Atropa belladonna
 Belladonna, deadly nightshade
Atropine
Nervous—anticholinergic syndrome
Conium maculatum
Poison hemlock
Coniine, other similar alkaloids
Nervous—nicotine-like toxicosis
Convallaria majalis
Lily-of-the-valley, mayflower, conval lily
 Cardiac glycosides
Cardiovascular
Cytisus scoparius
 Scotch broom, broom, broom tops
L-Sparteine
 Nervous—nicotinic-like toxicosis
Datura stramonium
 Jimsonweed, thorn apple
Atropine, scopolamine,
 Nervous—anticholinergic syndrome
ted
(Color Plate 26-3)
hyoscyamine
with
Dipteryx odorata
Tonka, tonka be an
Coumarin
Hematologic—-anticoagulant
Euonymus europaeus;
European spindle tree; wahoo, eastern
 Cardiac glycosides
Cardiovascular
the
E.atropurpureus
burning bush
Use
Eupatorium perfoliatum;
 Boneset, thoroughwort; joe pye weed,
 Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
Liver
E.purpureum
 gravel root, queen-of-the meadow
9
fHerbal
Heliotropium europaeum
Heliotrope
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
Liver
Hyoscyamus niger
Henbane, fetid nightshade, poison
Hyoscyamine, hyoscine
 Nervous—anticholinergic syndrome
tobacco, insane root, stinky
nightshade
Oth
Ipomoeapurga
Jalap
Convolvulin
Gastrointestinal
Mandragora officinarum
Mandrake
Scopolamine, hyoscyamine
 Nervous—-anticholinergic syndrome
Nati
Podophyllum peltatum
 Mayapple, mandrake 
Podophyllin
Gastrointestinal—gastroenteritis
Sanguinaria canadensis
 Bloodroot, red puccoon, red root
Berberine
Gastrointestinal
ural
Solanum dulcamara, other
Woody, bittersweet, or climbing
 Numerous glycoalkaloids
Gastrointestinal, nervous,
Solanum spp. (Color Plate 22-1)
nightshade
including solanine and
cardiovascular
chaconine
Tussilago farfara
Coltsfoot
PA alkaloid, senkirkine
Liver
Vinca major and V.minor
Common periwinkle, periwinkle
Vincamine
Immune system
340 SECTlON 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Absinthe (Wormwood)
The name wormwood is derived from the ancient use of the plant ( Artermesia absinthium) and
is extracts as an intestinal anthelmintic. Wormwood was the main ingredient in absinthe, a
largely banned, toxic liqueur, the chronic consumption of which was associated with absin-
thism. Absinthism was characterized by mental enfeeblement, hallucinations, psychosis,
delirium, vertigo, trembling of the limbs, digestive disorders, thirst, paralysis, and death.
The toxins found in wormwood are α- and β-thujone. In rats, intravenous (IV) injection of
thujone at 40 mg/kg and 120 mg/kg induces convulsions and death, respectively. According
to the German Commission E, indications for the use of wormwood include loss of appe-
tite, dyspepsia, and biliary dyskinesia. Thujone-free plant extract is used as a flavoring agent
in alcoholic beverages, such as vermouth. The FDA classifies the plant as an unsafe herb.
The American Herbal Products Association (AHPA) indicates that the herb should not be
used during pregnancy or lactation or for long-term use.
Aconite
asthma, and heart disease. It contains several cardioactive alkaloids including aconitine,
aconine, picraconitine, and napelline. These act on the heart by increasing sodium flux
through sodium channels. Acute toxicosis can be induced following the ingestion of 5 mL
of aconite tincture, 2 mg of pure aconitine, or approximately 1 g of the plant. Clinical signs
include burning sensation of the lips, tongue, and throat, and gastrointestinal upset char-
acterized by salivation, nausea, and emesis. Cardiac arrhythmias with unusual electrical
characteristics have been observed following intoxication. Death can occur from minutes
to days following ingestion. Although little used in the United States, it continues to be used
in traditional medicine in Asia and Europe. Ihe most common herb-related adverse reac-
tion in China involves aconite root. The AHPA suggests that the herb be taken only under
the advice of an expert qualified in its appropriate use.
Aloe
Mucilaginous leaf gel (aloe gel) from parenchymatous leaf cells of Aloe spp. is used as an
emollient and for wound healing. Dried juice or latex (aloe) from cells below the leaf skin
has been used as a laxative. Ihe gel is the product most frequently used by the cosmetic
and health food industries. Ihe gel is not intended for internal use. External use of the
gel on intact skin is generally considered safe and is not associated with adverse reac-
tions. The latex contains a number of chemicals of which the anthraquinone, barbaloin
(a glucoside of aloe-emodin), is the most abundant. Aloe-emodin and other anthraqui-
nones are gastrointestinal irritants that exert a strong purgative effect and cause severe
cramping.
Aristolochia
Traditionally, aristolochia (Aristolochia spp.) has been used as an antinflammatory agent
and for the treatment of snakebites. More recently, it was found to be a contaminant of a
weight loss preparation.4 The active ingredient in aristolochia is aristolochic acid, which is
carcinogenic, mutagenic, and nephrotoxic. The rodent IV LDso is 38 to 203 mg/kg. In rats
doses as low as 5 mg/kg for 3 weeks have been associated with various neoplasias. This herb
is not recommended for use.
Blue-Green Algae (Cyanobacteria)
Blue-green (BG) algae are single-celled organisms that have been promoted for their nutri-
tional properties and used to enhance plumage color in birds. Several BG algal species pro-
duce potent toxins. Microcystis aeruginosa produces the hepatotoxic microcystins. Anabaena
flos-aquae produce the neurotoxins anatoxin-a and anatoxin-as,. Aphanizomenon ffos-aquae
can also produce the neurotoxins saxitoxin and neosaxitoxin. Efforts are underway to better
lish safe concentrations of total microcystins in marketed products. Spirulina has also been
Chapter 26 I Hazards Associated with the Use of Herbal and Other Natural Products 341
s aee g ouaixi e panaisuos iou si pue juaadns leuonu e s panond
However, some products have been found to be contaminated with mercury, and microbial
contamination could possibly be a concern if harvested algae grow in water contaminated
with human or animal wastes.
Chaparral
Traditionally, a tea made from chaparral (Larrea tridentate) has been used to treat acne,
abdominal cramps, bronchitis, common colds, chickenpox, and snakebites. Additionally
the plant was believed to have analgesic, anticarcinogenic, and antiaging properties. Cur-
rently, this plant is not recommended for use because of its hepatotoxic properties, carci-
nogenicity, and ability to cause contact dermatitis, and it was removed from the generally
recognized as safe category by the FDA in 1970. Nordihydroguaiaretic acid is believed to
be responsible for most of the biological activity of the plant. Several human case reports
associated the ingestion of chaparral tablets or capsules for 6 to 12 weeks with reversible
hepatotoxicity.
Comfrey
Chronic consumption of Symphytum spp. has been associated with hepatotoxicity caused
by the presence of pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs) in the plant. PA metabolites form adducts
with proteins, deoxyribonucleic acid, and ribonucleic acid in hepatocytes resulting in cell
damage and death. In addition, several PAs in comfrey are carcinogenic to rats. Tradi-
tionally, the plant has been used externally to promote wound healing and treat hemor-
rhoids and internally to treat gastric ulcers and as a blood purifier. Even when applied
externally to rat skin, PAs have been detected in urine. Comfrey is unsafe for use in any
form.
Digitalis
Digitalis spp. contain several cardiac glycosides including digitoxin, gitoxin, and lanato-
sides that inhibit sodium-potassium adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) activity. All
parts of the plant are toxic. Toxic doses of fresh leaves are reported to be approximately
6 to 7 oz for a cow, approximately 4 to 5 oz for a horse, and less than 1 oz for a pig. Suck-
ing on the flowers or ingesting seeds and leaves of the plant have intoxicated children.
Ornamental varieties of foxglove contain notably lower concentrations of the glyco-
sides. Clinical signs of intoxication include gastrointestinal upset, dizziness, weakness,
muscle tremors, miosis, and potentially fatal cardiac arrhythmias. Digitalis glycosides
have a relatively long half-life and may accumulate, leading to intoxication. Poisoning
by foxglove is one of the few plant intoxications for which there is a specific antidote.
Digoxin-specific Fab antibodies are effective in treating acute intoxications.28 A number
of other plants contain cardiac glycosides including Nerium oleander, Thevetia peruvi-
ana, Convallaria majalis, Taxus spp., Strophanthus spp., Acocanthera spp., and Urginea
maritima.
Ephedra (Ma Huang)
The dried young branches of ephedra (Ephedra spp.) have been used for their stimulating
and vasoactive effects. In addition, ephedra has been used in several products promoted
ephedrine and pseudoephedrine. In commercial use, dried ephedra should contain no less
than 1.25% ephedrine. Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are sympathomimetics, and acute
intoxication is associated with insomnia, restlessness, tachycardia, and cardiac arrhythmias.
Nausea and emesis are also reported to occur. A case series involving intoxication of dogs
following ingestion of a weight loss product containing guarana (caffeine) and ma huang
(ephedrine) was reported.7 Estimated doses of the respective plants associated with adverse
effects were 4.4 to 296.2 mg/kg and 1.3 to 88.9 mg/kg, respectively. Clinical signs included
hyperactivity, tremors, seizures, behavioral changes, emesis, tachycardia, and hyperther-
 ss   ' aa      s1  
342SECTlON3MiscellaneousToxicantGroups
ephedra (also called "Mormon tea") have not been shown to contain any pharmacologically
active alkaloids.
The use of ephedra in humans has been associated with a greatly increased risk for
adverse effects compared with other commonly used herbs. One study reported that prod-
ucts containing ephedra accounted for 64% of all reported adverse effects from herbs,
although they accounted for only 1% of herbal product sales.24.29 The actual frequency of
adverse effects in patients using ephedra could not be determined because the study was
based on calls received by human poison control centers. However, based on such studies
 the FDA initiated aban on ephedra-containing products in April of 2004. This marked the
first time that the FDA banned the sale of a dietary supplement since the passage of the
DSHEA in 1994.
Garlic
Alliur sativurm is a member of the onion family. The plant contains 0.1% to 0.3% of a
strong-smelling, volatile oil containing allyl disulfides, such as allicin. Extracts from
 garlic are reported to have a number of biocidal activities, to decrease lipid and cho-
lesterol levels, to prolong clotting times, to inhibit platelet aggregation, and to increase
fibrinolytic activity.30.3l Acute toxicity of allicin for dogs and cats is unknown; its LDso
for mice following subcutaneous or IV administration is 120 mg/kg and 60 mg/kg,
respectively. The oral LDso for garlic extracts given to rats and mice ranges from 0.5
mL/kg to 30 mL/kg. In chronic toxicity studies with garlic oil or garlic extracts, anemia
has been observed in dogs. A single 25-mL dose of fresh garlic extract has caused burn-
ing of the mouth, esophagus and stomach, nausea, sweating, and lightheadedness.3
Topical application of garlic oil causes local irritation, which can be quite severe. The
sensitivity of cat hemoglobin to oxidative damage may make cats more sensitive to
adverse effects.
Germander
Germander (Teucriurm charaedrys) contains polyphenol derivatives, diterpenes, flavo-
noids, and tannins. Plant constituents are hepatotoxic, perhaps requiring metabolism to
toxic metabolites. The toxicity of germander is not well defined. It is categorized as a class
3 herb by the AHPA, which indicates that it should not be administered except under the
advice of an individual qualified in its appropriate use.
Guarana
Guarana is the dried paste made from the crushed seeds of Paullinia cupana or P sorbi-
lis, a fast-growing shrub native to South America. Currently, the most common forms of
guarana include syrups, extracts, and distillates used as flavoring agents and as a source of
caffeine for the soft drink industry. More recently, it has been added to weight loss formula-
tions in combination with ephedra. Caffeine concentrations in the plant range from 3% to
 5%, which compares with 1% to 2% for coffee beans. Oral lethal doses of caffine in dogs
and cats range from 110 to 200 mg/kg body weight and 80 to 150 mg/kg body weight, respec-
ingesting a product containing guarana and ephedra.33
Kava Kava
The German Commission E has recommended the root and rhizome of Piper methysti-
cum for the treatment of nervous anxiety, stress, and restlessness. The plant contains at
least 18 kava pyrones, which are posible dopaminergic receptor antagonists. The toxicity of
kava kava is not well defined, although chronic use in humans is associated with dry, flak-
ing, discolored skin, and reddened eyes (kavaism). More recently, kava kava has received
increased scrutiny because of potential hepatotoxicity, and kava extracts have, in fact, been
banned by the European Union and Canada.'4 A total of 78 cases of possible hepatotoxic-
ity following use of the herb are available from a variety of databases. Only a few of these
cases can be reliably linked to kava kava use, and hepatotoxicity appears to be idiosyncratic.
Chapter 26 I Hazards Associated with the Use of Herbal and Other Natural Products  343
 Postulated mechanisms of hepatotoxicity include inhibition of cytochrome P450 enzymes,
reduced liver glutathione concentrations, and inhibition of cyclooxygenase enzyme activ-
ity.34.35 Overall the safety of kava kava extracts is good and compares favorably with the
safety of conventional anxiolytics.34 Kava kava does have the potential to interact with a
number of other drugs and exacerbate the toxicity of other hepatotoxic agents. Where kava
kava extracts are still available they should not be used during pregnancy, lactation, or clini-
cal depression. In humans the duration of use should be limited to 3 months to prevent
habituation.
Khat
Severe adverse effects in humans, including migraine, cerebral hemorrhage, myocardial
infarction, and pulmonary edema have been associated with khat (Catha edulis) use. Khat
contains tannins that are potentially hepatotoxic. The active constituents in khat include
cathine and cathinone; both have stimulant properties with the potency of stimulation
between that of caffeine and amphetamine. Animal studies indicate that cathinone can
depress testosterone levels, cause testicular tissue degeneration, and decrease sperm num-
bers and motility. Khat use by pregnant women has been associated with notably lower
birth rates. It may also be teratogenic and mutagenic.
Kratom
Kratorm usually refers to the leaves of Mitragyna speciosa, a plant indigenous to Southeast
Asia. Kratom, or Krypton, has been used traditionally for pain, depression, and anxiety.
There is some recent use for opiate withdrawal. The leaves contain several active compo-
nents, including mitragynine and 7-hydroxymitragynine.36 Despite structural similarity to
yohimbine, mitragynine acts as a μ-opioid receptor partial agonist. The relatively minor
component, the indole alkaloid 7-hydroxymitragynine, is reported to be more potent
than morphine. Kratom is a controlled substance in some countries but not in the United
a ia se inq suem u sua asiaape jo shodai ases pausnd aos aie anau ze'saes
clinical information for animals exists.38
Lobelia
Traditionally, Lobelia inflata has been used as an antispasmodic, respiratory stimulant,
relaxant, emetic, and euphoriant. The plant contains pyridine alkaloids, such as lobeline,
lobelanine, and lobelanidine. Lobeline has nicotinic agonist properties (~5% to 20% of the
potency of nicotine). Toxicity has been associated with ingestion of 50 mg of dried herb,
1 mL of a tincture, and 8 mg of pure lobeline. Clinical signs of intoxication include hypo-
thermia,hypertension, respiratory depression, paralysis, seizures, euphoria, nausea, emesis,
abdominal pain, salivation, tachycardia, and coma. The German Commission E does not
recommend it for use, but the AHPA suggests that there is no substantiated evidence of
severe signs or death following use of the plant. Ihe AHPA does suggest that the plant not
be used during pregnancy or taken in large doses.
Mistletoe
Mistletoes are grouped into two broad categories: the European mistletoe (Viscum album)
and the American mistletoe (Phoradendron serofinum) (see Chapters 27 and 39). The
European mistletoe is suggested for use in degenerative joint disease and as a palliative
for malignant tumors. Plant constituents include β-phenylethylamine, tyramine, and
structurally related compounds. In addition, European and American mistletoes contain
proteins called viscotoxins and phoratoxins, respectively, with similar toxicity to abrin and
ricin (found in Abrus precatorius and Ricinus cormmunis, respectively). These compounds
produce dose-dependent hypertension or hypotension, bradycardia, and increased uter-
ine and gastrointestinal motility. All parts of the plant are considered toxic, and prompt
gastrointestinal decontamination and symptomatic and supportive care should be insti-
tuted following ingestion. However, a review of the human toxicity of mistletoe indicated
344 SECTlON 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
deaths.39 Ingestion of up to three berries or two leaves is unlikely to produce serious
human toxicity.
Noni Juice
Noni juice is derived from Morinda citrifolia, sometimes called "starvation fruit” or "vomit
fruit" because of a taste unappealing to humans. Traditionally, noni juice, also called Bq
F'Tian, Indian Mulberry, or Wild Pine, has been used for conditions ranging from asthma to
smallpox, premenstrual syndrome, and leprosy, but is not well studied for any one of those
conditions. The herbal has a high potassium content, which may predispose to interac-
tions with potassium-sparing diuretics and certain antihypertensive medications. Xeronine
and proxeronine are components mentioned in advertising but at this time have not been
chemically identified or studied medically. Although there are several reports of hepatic
damage in humans, there is insufficient data at this time to assess safety and efficacy in
aninmals.40-42
Nutmeg and Mace
Nutmeg is derived from the seed of Myristica fragrans, and the spice, mace, is derived from
the seed coat. Current uses of the plant include the treatment of gastrointestinal distur-
bances, such as cramps, flatulence, and diarrhea. It has been investigated as an antidiar-
rheal medication in calves.3 It has potential anticancer and biocidal activities. The toxicity
acute toxicity can occur. Two tablespoons of ground nutmeg, one to three whole nutmegs,
or 5 g of powdered nutmeg may cause clinical signs of hallucinations, nausea, and severe
 a e a aad e se d a sis  iss a a i
suggests that it only be used under the supervision of an individual knowledgeable about
its potential effects.
Oleander
 Despite its toxicity, oleander (Neriurm oleander) has been used for its medicinal properties
for centuries (Color Plate 26-2). The plant contains a number of cardiac glycosides with
activities similar to those of digitalis. In birds ingestion of as little as 0.12 to 0.7 g of the
plant can be fatal. Ingestion of as little as 0.005% of an animal's body weight in dry oleander
leaves can be fatal (~10 to 20 leaves for an adult horse).44 Ingestion of oleander should be
considered serious and prompt medical attention sought. The editor is aware of a fatal expo-
a ai on ad sem e auaa u  eu sae  go as
paalra bop au aeeael ssel eia paaoai aq iou pmos ie saaeat lapueao paioedos
severe cardiac arrhythmias and ultimately died from seizures and cardiac arrest. Digoxin-
specific Fab fragments are antidotal. The extreme toxicity of the plant precludes its use in
any form.
PleurisyRoot
Asciepias fuberosa root traditionally has been used to ease the pain and facilitate breathing
in patients with pleurisy. Ihe toxicity of the plant is not well defined; cardiac glycosides
and neurotoxic resinoids are found in many Asclepias spp. The glycosides inhibit sodium-
potassium ATPase. Clinical signs of intoxication include fatigue, anorexia, emesis, cardiac
arrhythmias, bradycardia, and hypokalemia. Ihis plant is best avoided.
Pokeweed
Phytolacca spp. are ubiquitous in the United States and have a long history of use in folk
remedies for rheumatism and arthritis and as an emetic and purgative. Active plant con-
stituents include triterpene saponins, a tannin, a resin, and a protein called pokeweed mito-
Aea al ui mona peul saaeal punana anoqe aul idaoxa srxol ane puerd aul go sied ia 'ua
spring, which can be eaten after proper preparation. Toxic components are highest in the
rootstock, less in the mature leaves and stems, and least in the fruit. Ingestion of poisonous
plant parts causes severe stomach cramping, nausea, emesis, persistent diarrhea, dyspnea,
Chapter 26 I Hazards Associated with the Use of Herbal and Other Natural Products  345
weakness, spasms, hypotension, seizures, and death. Severe poisonings have been reported
in adult humans who ingested mature pokeweed leaves and as little as one cup of tea brewed
with  tsp of powdered pokeroot. There is unlikely to be a valid medical indication for the
use of this plant.
Senna
Cassia spp. have been used for their laxative effects caused by anthraquinone glycosides
(sennosides) present in the plant. These compounds increase gastrointestinal motility,
induce fluid movement in the lumen, and have direct irritant effects. Catharsis can result
from ingestion of teas containing 1 to 2 tsp of dried senna leaves. Chronic use of laxa-
by poor gastrointestinal motility in the absence of their use. Appropriate use of senna may
 be associated with mild abdominal cramping. More prolonged use can cause electrolyte
disturbances, especially hypokalemia.
St. John's wort
A number of chemical constituents have been isolated from St. John's wort (Hypericurm
perforatur), including anthraquinone derivatives (hypericin and pseudohypericin), the
phloroglucinols hyperforin and adhyperforin, flavonoids, phenols, tannins, and a volatile
oil. External indications for use include acute injuries or contusions, myalgia, and frst-
degree burns. Taken internally, it is used to treat depression, anxiety, or nervous unrest.
Assessment of possible antiviral properties is ongoing. Hyperforin is the most neuroactive
component of the plant and is believed to be responsible for its CNS effects. It modulates
neuronal ionic conductance and inhibits serotonin reuptake. Hypericin is a photodynamic
agent, and when ingested it can induce photosensitization. Most reports of photosensiti-
zation in humans are associated with excessive intake of the plant. Other side effects are
usually mild. As an aside, considerable variations in active constituent concentrations have
been documented in different brands of St. John's wort. In humans, the use of St. John's
wort can interfere with the safety and effcacy of numerous other drugs, including car-
contraceptives, paroxetine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rizatriptan, sertraline, sumatriptan,
theophylline, warfarin, and zolmitriptan.
White Willow
 go  a  a saeas a (s x a n s a
cosides salicortin and salicin) and tannins. Current indications for plant use include fever,
rheumatism, and as an antinflammatory. Therapeutic and adverse effects occur through
inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis. In addition, salicylates inhibit oxidative phosphory-
lation and Krebs cycle enzymes. In cats acetylsalicylic (AS) acid is toxic at 80 to 120 mg/kg
given orally for 10 to 12 days. In dogs AS at 50 mg/kg given orally twice a day is associated
with emesis; higher doses can cause depression and metabolic acidosis. A dose of 100 to
300 mg/kg orally once daily for 1 to 4 weeks is associated with gastric ulceration; more pro-
an inability to rapidly metabolize salicylates. Presumably, salicylates in willow have approx-
imately equivalent toxicity. Most standards for medicinal willow bark require salicylates
to be present at greater than 1% dry weight, although this is difficult to achieve with many
source species. There are a number of other plants that contain salicylates, including Betuia
spp. (birch), Filipendula ulmaria ( meadowsweet), and Populus spp.
Yohimbine
Pausinystalia yohirmbe bark contains the alkaloid yohimbine at a concentration of ~6%.
 Yohimbine is an az-adrenergic receptor blocker and has purported aphrodisiac and hallu-
cinogenic properties. Yohimbine causes peripheral vasodilatation and CNS stimulation. In
intoxications, yohimbine causes severe hypotension, abdominal distress, and weakness. CNS
stimulation and paralysis have been reported. An acute IV toxic dose for dogs is 0.55 mg/kg.
346SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
The drug or crude product should never be given without adequate medical supervision.
Human formulations have been combined with other purported sexual stimulants.
Essential oils
Essential oils are the volatile, organic constituents of fragrant plant matter and contribute
to plant fragrance and taste. Ihey are extracted from plant material by distillation or cold
pressing. There are a number of essential oils that are not recommended for use because
of their toxicity or potential for toxicity.46 They are listed in Table 26-2. Ihese oils have
unknown or oral LDs, values in animals of 1 g/kg or less. Most toxicity information has
been derived using laboratory rodents or mice; such data should only be used as a rough
guide because it cannot always be extrapolated to other species. They are best avoided for
aromatherapy or for dermal or oral use. Essential oils that are more difficult to assess for
safety, but which are best avoided, are given in Tables 26-2 and 26-3, along with their oral
LDs values (between land 2 g/kg).Essential Oil Safety: A Guide for Health Care Profession-
als46 is an excellent reference for in-depth discussions of general and specific essential oil
toxicity. The following essential oils are of particular concern.
Camphor
Camphor is an aromatic, volatile, terpene ketone derived from the wood of Cinnamormum
camphora or synthesized from turpentine. Camphor oil is separated into four distinct
fractions: white, brown, yellow, and blue camphor.46 White camphor is the form used in
aromatherapy and in OTC products (brown and yellow fractions contain the carcinogen
safrole, and are not normally available). OTC products vary in form and camphor content;
external products contain 10% to 20% in semisolid forms or 1% to 10% in camphor spirits.
It is used as a topical rubefacient and antipruritic agent. Camphor is rapidly absorbed from
Table 26-2
Toxic Essential Oils34
1.0
Genus, Species
Oral LDso (g/kg)
Toxic Component
Boldo leaf
Peumus boldus
0.13
Ascaridole 16%
Wormseed
Chenopodium
0.25
Ascaridole 60%-80%
ambrosioides
Mustard
Brassica nigra
0.34
Allyl isothiocyanate
99%
Armoise
Artemisia herba-alba
0.37
Thujone 35%
Pennyroyal (Eur.)
Mentha pulegium
0.40
Pulegone 55%-95%
Tansy
Tanacetum vulgare
0.73
Thujone 66%-81%
Thuja
Thuja occidentalis
0.83
Thujone 30%-80%
Calamus
Acorus calamus var.
0.84
Asarone 45%-80%
angustatus
Wormwood
Artemisia absinthium
0.96
Thujone 34%-71%
Bitter almond
Prunus amygdalus var.
0.96
Prussic acid 3%
amara
Tree wormwood,
Artemisia arborescens
Not established
Iso-thujone 30%-45%
large wormwood
Buchu
Barosma betulina;
 Not established
 Pulegone 50%
B.cremulata
Horseradish
Cochlearia armoracia
Not established
Allyl isocyanate 50%
Lanyana
Artemisia afra
Not established
Thujone 4%-66%
Pennyroyal (N. Am.)
Hedeoma pulegioides
Not established
 Pulegone 60%-80%
Southernwood
Artemisia abrotanum
Not established
Thujone
Western red cedar
Thuja plicata
Not established
Thujone 85%
Chapter 26 | Hazards Associated with the Use of Herbal and Other Natural Products 347
the skin and gastrointestinal tract, and toxic effects can occur within minutes of exposure.
 In humans signs of intoxication include emesis, abdominal distress, excitement, tremors,
and seizures followed by CNS depression characterized by apnea and coma. Fatalities have
occurred in humans ingesting 1 to 2 g of camphor-containing products, although the adult
human lethal dose has been reported to be 5 to 20 g.46.47 One teaspoon of canmphorated oil
(~1 mL of camphor) was lethal to 16-month-old and 19-month-old children. Chronic inges-
Citrus Oil
Citrus oil and citrus oil constituents, such as D-limonene and linalool, have been shown
to have insecticidal activity. Although D-limonene has been used safely as an insecticide
 on dogs and cats, some citrus oil formulations or use of pure citrus oil may pose a poi-
soning hazard.4 Fatal adverse reactions have been reported in cats following the use of
an “organic" citrus oil dip.49 Hypersalivation, muscle tremors, ataxia, lateral recumbency,
coma, and death were noted experimentally in three cats following use of the dip according
to label directions.
Table 26-3
Potentially Toxic Essential Oils34
1!0
Genus, Species
Oral LDso (g/kg)
Toxic Component
Wintergreen
Gaultheria procumbens
1.20
Methyl salicylate 98%
Cornmint
Mentha arvensis var.
1.25
L-menthol 35%-50%
piperascens
Menthone 15%-30%
Pulegone 0.2%-5%
Savory
Satureia hortensis;
1.37
Carvacol 3%-67%;
(summer)
S.montana
Thymol 1%-49%
Para-cymene 7%-26%
Clove leaf
Syzygium aromaticum
1.37
Eugenol 70%-95%
Isoeugenol 0.14%-0.23%
Basil
Ocimum basilicum
1.40
Estragole 40%-87%
Methyleugenol 0.3%-4.2%
Linalool 0.5%-6.3%
Hyssop
Hyssopus officinalis
1.40
Pinocamphone 40%;
 Iso-pinocamphone 30%
Sassafras
Ocotea pretiosa
1.58
Safrole 85%-90%
(Brazilian)
Myrrh
Commiphora spp.
1.65
Not established
Birch (sweet)
Betula lenta
1.70
Methyl salicylate 98%
Bay leaf (W.
Pimenta racemosa
1.80
Eugenol 38%-75%
Indian)
Oregano
Origanum vuigare;
1.85
Thymol-varies
Coridothymus
Carvacrol-varies
capitatus and others
Sassafras
Sassafras albidum
1.90
Safrole 85%-90%
Tarragon
Artemisia dracunculus
1.90
Estragole 70%-87%
Methyleugenol 0.1%-1.5%
Tea tree
Melaleuca alternifolia
1.90
Terpenes 50%-60%
Cineole 6%-8%
Savin
Juniperus sabina
Not established
Sabinyl acetate 20%-53%
Sabinene 20%-42%
348SECTlON 3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
Melaleuca Oil
Derived from the leaves of the Australia tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia), melaleuca oil is
often referred to as tea free oil. Ihe oil contains terpenes, sesquiterpenes, and hydrocarbons.
A variety of commercially available products contain the oil (e.g., shampoos), and the pure
oil has been sold for use on dogs, cats, ferrets, and horses. Tea tree oil toxicosis has been
reported in dogs and cats.50.5l A case report describes the illness of three cats exposed der-
mally to pure melaleuca oil for flea control.5l Clinical signs in one or more ofthe cats included
hypothermia, ataxia, dehydration, nervousness, trembling, and coma. Ihere were moderate
increases in serum alanine transaminase and aspartate transaminase concentrations. Two
cats recovered within 48 hours following decontamination and supportive care. However,
one cat died approximately 3 days following exposure. The primary constituent of the oil
terpinen-4-ol, was detected in the urine of the cats. Another case involved the dermal appli-
um zstadan ea e se so oi yo seq ai uoe o go sdop sia ci uaaas go uoe
approximately 12 hours, partial paralysis of the hind limbs developed in one dog, along with
ataxia and depression. The other dog only displayed depression. Decontamination (bathing)
and symptomatic and supportive care resulted in rapid recovery within 24 hours.
Pennyroyal oil
A volatile oil derived from Mentha pulegiurm and Hedeoma pulegiodes, pennyroyal oil has
a long history of use as a flea repellent and has been used to induce menstruation and
abortions in humans. Ihere is one case report of pennyroyal oil toxicosis in the veteri-
nary literature in which a dog was dermally exposed to pennyroyal oil at approximately
2 g/kg.12 Within 1 hour of application, the dog became listless and within 2 hours began
vomiting. Thirty hours after exposure, the dog exhibited diarrhea, hemoptysis, and epi-
staxis. Soon thereafter, the dog had seizures and died. Histopathologic examination of liver
tissue showed massive hepatocellular necrosis. The toxin in pennyroyal oil is thought to be
pulegone, which is bioactivated to a hepatotoxic metabolite called menthofuran.
Oil of Wintergreen
Derived from Gaultheria procurmbens, this oil contains a glycoside that, when hydrolyzed,
releases methyl salicylate. Ihe oil is readily absorbed through skin and is used to treat mus-
cle aches and pains. Salicylates are toxic to dogs and cats. Because cats metabolize salicylates
much more slowly than other species, they are more likely to be overdosed. Intoxicated cats
 bone marrow hypoplasia, hyperpnea, and hyperpyrexia.
Sassafras Oil
asa oi au au pue eisy uasa ci anu sanl am ci pade au a si sufss
North America (Sassafras albidurm). All parts of the tree are aromatic, and the oil is obtained
from the peeled root. The main constituent of the oil is safrole (up to 80%). Sassafras has
 been used as a sudorific and flavoring agent and for the treatment of eye inflammations.
 The oil has been used externally for relief of insect bites and stings and for removing lice.
Because safrole is carcinogenic, the FDA has banned the use of the oil as a food additive. A
dose of safrole of 0.66 mg/kg is considered hazardous for humans. Tea samples, prepared
as recommended in commonly used herbal medicine information sources or on product
o  sz uuu inpod auo esdn iad u 'v pue u 6oo uaamaq ueus sa
sassafras bark per tea bag, was estimated to provide up to a 200-mg dose of safrole.54 The
actual amount of safrole ingested depends on the safrole content, the duration of the infu-
sion, and the amount of tea consumed. Oil of sassafras is toxic in doses as small as 5 mL to
adult humans.5 Because of toxicity, carcinogenicity, and lack of therapeutic benefit, the use
of this plant cannot be recommended under any circumstance.
Product Adulteration
Kong,being adulterated with metals, conventional pharmaceuticals, or natural toxins.5,56.5
Chapter 26 I Hazards Associated with the Use of Herbal and Other Natural Products 349
Sedatives, stimulants, and NSAIDs are common conventional pharmaceuticals added to
patent medicines without labels indicating their presence. Commonly found natural toxins
in Chinese patent medicines include borneol, aconite, toad secretions (Bufo spp, Ch' an Su),
mylabris, scorpion, borax, acorus, and strychnine (Strychnos nux-vomica).15
The motivation for adulterating patent medicines is unclear. Perhaps there is abelief that
the conventional pharmaceuticals are necessary to provide immediate relief to the patient
while waiting for the herbs, with a slower onset of action, to have their desired effect. It is
also possible that without the addition of potent conventional drugs, the herbal prepara-
tions would not be efficacious.
Chinese patent medicines often contain cinnabar (mercuric sulfide), realgar (arsenic
sulfide), or litharge (lead oxide) as part of the traditional formula. Recently, dietary supple-
ments, purchased largely from retail stores, were tested for arsenic, cadmium, lead, and
mercury.58 Of the 95 products tested, 84 contained botanicals as a major component of
the formulation. Of those 95 products, 1l contained lead at concentrations that would have
caused lead intake to exceed recommended maximum levels for children and pregnant
women had the products been used according to label directions.
Serious adverse health effects have been documented in humans using adulterated Chi-
nese herbal medicines.57 There are no published cases in the veterinary literature, although
n a go aqu e pasau op rs e rm ui a ao jo aae si eado 
"balls" which were prescribed to its owner for arthritis. The dog came to a veterinary clinic
in acute renal failure several days after the ingestion. Analysis of the formulation revealed
low-level heavy metal contamination (mercury and lead) and rather large concentrations
of caffeine and the NSAID indomethacin. The acute renal failure was most likely caused by
NSAID-induced renal damage.
Herb-Drug Interactions
Herb-drug interactions refer to the possibility that an herbal constituent may alter the phar-
macologic effects of a conventional drug given concurrently or vice versa. The result may be
either enhanced or diminished drug or herb effects or the appearance of a new effect that is
not anticipated from the use of the drug or herb alone. Although there are several proposed
ways to categorize herb-drug interactions, the most logical characterizes interactions from
either a pharmacokinetic or a pharmacodynamic perspective.59 Possible pharmacokinetic
interactions include those that alter the absorption, metabolism, distribution, or elimina-
tion of a drug or herbal constituent and result in an increase or decrease in the concentration
of active agent at the site of action. For example, herbs that contain dietary fiber, mucilages,
or tannins might alter the absorption of another drug or herbal constituent. Herbs contain-
ing constituents that induce liver enzymes might be expected to affect drug metabolism or
elimination. Induction of liver-metabolizing enzymes can increase the toxicity of drugs and
other chemicals via increased production of reactive metabolites. The production of more
toxic reactive metabolites is termed bioactivation.'9 Alternatively, enhanced detoxification
of drugs and other chemicals can decrease their toxicity. Long-term use of herbs and other
dietary supplements can induce enzymes associated with procarcinogen activation, thus
increasing the risk of sorme cancers.19.60 Ihe displacement of one drug from protein binding
sites by another agent increases the concentration of unbound drug available to target tis-
sue. Pharmacodynamic interactions or interactions at receptor sites can occur; these can be
agonistic or antagonistic in nature.
The quality of evidence documenting various herb-drug interactions varies. Some inter-
actions are documented in clinical trials and some are inferred from in vitro experiments.
whereas others are only suspected based on theoretical grounds. In one study evaluating
the reliability of published reports of herb-drug interactions, only 13% of the reports were
considered to be well documented, whereas 68% could not be evaluated because of poor or
incomplete information.61
 Table 26-4lists potential herb-drug interactions based on conventional drug therapeutic
class. Obviously, some therapeutic classes of drugs are not used in veterinary medicine,
such as antiparkinsonism drugs, but they are included to provide as complete an overview
Table 26-4
 Potential Herb-Drug Interactions Based on Drug Therapeutic Class53
350
 Therapeutic Class
Potential Herb Interactions
Possible Adverse Effects
Analgesics
Herbs with diuretic activity (e.g., corn silk, dandelion, juniper, uva ursi)
Increased risk of toxicity with antiinflamma-
Herbs with corticosteroid activity (e.g., licorice, bayberry)
tory analgesics
CTION
Herbs with sedative effects (e.g., calamus, nettle, ground ivy, sage, borage)
Potential reduction of plasma salicylate
concentration
Possible enhancement of sedative effect
LW
Anticonvulsants
Herbs with sedative effects (e.g., calamus, nettle, ground ivy, sage, borage)
Possible increase in sedative side effects
Mis
Herbs containing salicylates (e.g., poplar willow)
 Increased risk of seizure
Ayurvedic Shankapuspi
 Potentiation of phenytoin action
Decreased phenytoin half-life
Antidepressants
Herbs with sympathomimetic amines (e.g., agnus castus, calamus, cola broom,
Increased risk of hypertension with MAOIs
U5
licorice)
Potential sedative side effects
10
Ginkgo biloba
Use with tricyclic antidepressants or other
medications that ↓ seizure threshold not
advised
Antiemetic and
Herbs with sedative effects (e.g., calamus, nettle, ground ivy, sage, borage)
 Potential increased sedative effect
antivertigo drugs
Herbs with anticholinergic effect
Antagonism
Antiparkinsonism
Herbs with anticholinergic effect
Potentiation of effects
drugs
Herbs with cholinergic effect
Antagonism
Antipsychotics
Herbs with diuretic activity (e.g., corn silk, dandelion, juniper, uva ursi)
Potentiation of lithium action; increased risk
Herbs with anticholinergic effect
of intoxication
Ginseng, yohimbine, and ephedra
Reduction of phenothiazine concentrations;
increased risk of seizures
Concomitant use with phenelzine and
monoamine oxidase inhibitors may result
in increased side effects
Anxiolytics/hypnotics
(aeroq 'aes ai punia anau sees aa) siaa aaiepas ym sqia
Potentiation
Phenobarbital
Thujone-containing herbs (e.g., wormwood, sage, or gamolenic)
 May lower seizure threshold
Acid-containing herbs (e.g., evening primrose oil borage)
NSAIDs
Feverfew
Reduced effectiveness of feverfew
Herbs with antiplatelet activity (e.g., ginkgo biloba, ginger, ginseng, garlic)
May increase risk of bleeding caused by
gastric irritation by NSAIDs
Stimulants
Ginseng
Increased risk of side effects
Antiarrhythmics
Herbs with cardioactive effects
Antagonism
Herbs with diuretic activity (e.g., corn silk, dandelion, juniper, uva ursi)
Antagonism if hypokalemia occurs
二
Anticoagulants
Herbs with coagulant or anticoagulant activity (e.g., alfalfa, red clover,
 Antagonism or potentiation
apter
chamomile, ginkgo)
Decreased platelet activity
Garlic
Inhibition of thromboxane synthetase
Ginger
activity, thus increasing bleeding time
Herbs containing salicylates (e.g., poplar, willow)
Potentiation
Hazards
Antihyperlipid-
Herbs with hypolipidemic activity (e.g., black cohosh, fenugreek, garlic,
Additive effect
emic drugs
plantain)
Antihypertensives
Herbs containing hypertensive (blue cohosh, cola, ginger) or mineralocorticoid
Potentiation
A55
(e.g., licorice, bayberry) action
Antagonism
Herbs with hypotensive action (e.g., agrimony, celery, ginger, hawthorn)
Potentiation
ted
Herbs with high levels of amines or sympathomimetic action (e.g., agnus castus
Antagonism
with
black cohosh, cola, mate, St. John's-wort)
Herbs with diuretic activity (e.g., corn silk, dandelion, juniper, uva ursi)
the
β-Blockers
Herbs containing cardioactive constituents
Antagonism
Use
 Herbs with high levels amines or sympathomimetic action (e.g., agnus castus,
 Risk of severe hypertension
of
black cohosh, cola, mate, St. John's wort)
Her
Cardiac glycosides
Herbs with cardioactive constituents (e.g., broom, squill, mistletoe, cola nut,
Antagonism or potentiation
figwort)
Increased risk of bleeding
rbal
Hawthorn, Siberian ginseng, Kyushin, uzara root
pue
Diuretics
Herbs with diuretic activity (e.g., corn silk, dandelion, juniper, uva ursi)
 Increased risk of hypokalemia
 Other
Herbs with hypotensive action (e.g., agrimony, celery, ginger, hawthorn)
 Difficulty controlling diuresis
Nitrates and cal-
Herbs with cardioactive constituents (e.g., broom, squill)
Antagonism
Natural
cium channel
Herbs with hypertensive action (e.g., bayberry, broom, blue cohosh, licorice)
Antagonism
blockers
Herbs with anticholinergic effects (e.g., corkwood tree)
Reduced buccal absorption of nitroglycerin
 Sympathomimetics
Herbs containing sympathomimetic amines (e.g., aniseed, capsicum, parsley,
 Increased risk of hypertension
vervain)
 Increased risk of hypertension
Herbs with hypertensive action (e.g., bayberry, broom, blue cohosh, licorice)
Antagonism
Herbs with hypotensive action (e.g, agrimony, celery, ginger,hawthorn)
Continued
Table 26-4
 Potential Herb-Drug Interactions Based on Drug Therapeutic Class53—-cont'd
352
Therapeutic Class
Potential Herb Interactions
Possible Adverse Effects
SE
Antifungals
Herbs with anticholinergic effects (e.g., corkwood tree)
Decreased absorption of ketoconazole
CTION
(ketoconazole)
Antidiabetic agents
 Herbs with hypoglycemic or hyperglycemic principles (e.g., alfalfa, fenugreek,
Antagonism or potentiation
ginseng)
Antagonism
Effect on blood glucose levels altering drug
M
Herbs with diuretic activity (e.g., corn silk, dandelion, juniper, uva ursi)
Miscel
Chromium, karela
requirements
Corticosteroids
Herbs with diuretic activity (e.g., corn silk, dandelion, juniper, uva ursi)
Risk of increased potassium loss
llar
Herbs with corticosteroid activity (e.g., licorice, bayberry)
Increased risk of side effects, such as sodium
eo
Herbs with immunostimulant effects
retention
Antagonism of immunosuppressive effect
Herbs with hormonal activity (e.g., alfalfa, bayberry, black cohosh, licorice)
10
Sex hormones
 Potential antagonism or potentiation
XIC
Estrogens
Herbs containing phytoestrogens (e.g., dong quai, red clover, afalfa, licorice,
Hyperestrogenism
black cohosh, soybeans)
Drugs for hyper-
Interference with therapy
Herbs with high concentrations of iodine
thyroidism or
Horseradish and kelp
hypothyroidism
Oral
Herbs with hormonal activity (e.g., black cohosh, licorice)
May reduce oral contraceptive effectiveness
contraceptives
Methotrexate
Herbs with salicylates (e.g., meadowsweet, poplar, willow)
Potential for toxicity
 Drugs with immu-
Herbs with immunostimulant effects (e.g., boneset, Echinacea, mistletoe)
Antagonism or potentiation
nostimulant or
immunosup-
pressive action
Probenecid
Herbs with salicylates (e.g., meadowsweet, poplar, willow)
Inhibition of uricosuric effect of probenecid
Acetazolamide
Herbs with salicylates (e.g., meadowsweet, poplar, willow)
Potential for toxicity
General anesthetics
Potentiation of hypotension
Muscle relaxants
Herbs with diuretic action (e.g., broom, buchu, corn silk)
Possible potentiation if hypokalemia
 Depolarizing mus-
Herbs with cardioactive constituents (e.g., cola, figwort, hawthorn)
Risk of arrhythmias
cle relaxants
MAOI, Monoamine oxidase inhibitor; NSA ID, nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug.
Chapter 26 I Hazards Associated with the Use of Herbal and Other Natural Products 353
as possible. If an interaction is listed, the reader should consult more detailed sources of
information to determine its clinical relevance. It is important to point out that information
regarding herb-drug interactions is expanding rapidly. There are several references that can
 be consultedto obtain in-depth information about specific herb-drug interactions.17.20,59,62.63
Diagnosis of Intoxication
Without a history of exposure to an herbal remedy, the diagnosis of intoxication is difcult
Clinical signs are often nonspecific, and the animal may have concurrent signs caused by
an underlying disease condition. Vomitus or gastric lavage material should be examined for
the presence of plants or other possible herbal formulations. Essential oil exposure might
be suspected based on the odor of stomach contents or skin. In some instances, a constitu-
was found in liver tissue from a dog intoxicated by pennyroyal oil.1z Some laboratories have
the capability to detect potential patent medicine adulterants. However, many veterinary
diagnostic laboratories do not have such broad capabilities to detect natural products, and
laboratory confirmation of exposure or intoxication is often impossible. In suspected herbal
poisonings, a veterinary toxicologist should be consulted about available laboratory proce-
dures and appropriate tissue samples for submission.
Treatment of Intoxication
 Treatment is directed toward undertaking appropriate decontamination procedures, such
as inducing emesis and administering activated charcoal with or without a cathartic.64
Indications and contraindications for decontamination procedures should be followed. In
 i  's n  'i   st   
be available (i.e., digoxin Fab fragments for cardiac glycosides). The adage "treat the symp-
toms and not the patient? is appropriate in most suspected poisonings caused by herbal
preparations.
Sources of Information
 Because of the increased interest in natural products, there is an explosion of information
regarding their use and potential hazards of use. It is important to have access to objec-
tive, science-based information to make rational decisions regarding the safety and efficacy
of plant-derived chemicals. Three excellent resources are the Botanical Safety Handbook,20
prepared for the standards committee of the AHPA; the German Commission E mono-
graphs,25 which have become available in English; and, more recently, the Review ofNatural
Products.26 An excellent lay-oriented reference is entitled The Honest Herbal: A Sensible
Guide to the Use of Herbs and Related Remedies.33 In addition, there are excellent chapters
regarding risks associated with the use of natural products in several human-oriented toxi-
cology textbooks.6.J5.65 Essential oil toxicology is extensively covered in a text by Tisserand
and Balacs and a chapter by Vassallo.46.66
A relatively recent study suggested that six commonly used herbal references contained
insufficient information for the assessment and management of suspected ADRs of herbal
remedies.24 We considered the Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database (www.natural
 database.com) to be the most complete and useful reference source.
Finally, several other websites provide herb-related information and links to
other herb information resources. These include the American Botanical Council
(www.herbalgram.org), the Herb Research Foundation (www.herbs.org) and the Ameri-
can Society of Pharmacognosy (www.phcog.org) websites. Unfortunately, member-
ship or a subscription is required to fully access the information on the sites. The FDA
(www.fda.gov) and the National Institute of Health's National Center for Complementary
and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM) (nccam.nih.gov) are two government-sponsored
sites that provide free information. Ihe FDA site provides consumer alerts and advisories
354 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
about herbs and dietary supplerments and mechanisms for reporting possible adverse
effects related to herb and dietary supplement use. Ihe NCCAM site, in addition to pro-
viding alerts and advisories, provides suggestions for evaluating medical resources on the
web for objectivity and accuracy. HerbMed (www.herbmed.org) is an interactive, elec-
tronic herbal database sponsored by the Alternative Medicine Foundation that provides
hyperlinked access to evidence-based data on the use of herbs for health. A subscription
is required to obtain all of the information from the site. For access to the scientific litera
ture, PubMed (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi), sponsored by the National
Library of Medicine, contains more than 14 million citations from the biomedical literature
dating back to the 1950s.
References
1. Astin J A: Why patients use alternative medicine: results of a national study, JAMA 279:1548-1553, 1998.
2. Blais R, Maiga A, Aboubacar A: How different are users and non-users of alternative medicine? Can J
Pub Health 88:159 -162, 1997.
3. Elder NC, Gillcrist A, Minz R: Use of alternative health care by family practice patients, Arch Fam Med
6:181184, 1997.
4. Vickers A, Zollman C: ABC of complementary medicine: herbal medicine, BMJ 319:1050-1053, 1999.
5. Abdel-Rahman A, Anyangwe N, Carlacci L,et al: The safety and regulation of natural products used as
foods and food ingredients, Toxicol Sci 123(2):333-348, 2011.
6. Hung OL, Lewin NA:Howland MA: Herbal preparations. In Goldrank LR, Flomenbaum NE, Lewin NA,
et al: Goldfrank's toxicologic emergencies, ed 6, Stamford, CT, 1998, Appleton and Lange.
 7. Ooms TG, Khan SA, Means C: Suspected caffeine and ephedrine toxicosis resulting from ingestion of an
herbal supplement containing quarana and ma huang in dogs: 47 cases (1997-1999), I Am Vet Med AssoC
218:225-229, 2001.
8. Gwaltney-Brant SM, Albretsen JC, Khan SA: 5-Hydroxytryptophan toxicosis in dogs: 21 cases (1989-
1999), I Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1937-1940, 2000.
9. Lazarou J, Pomeranz BH, Corey PN: Incidence of adverse drug reactions in hospitalized patients. A
meta-analysis of prospective studies, JAMA 279:1200-1205, 1998.
10. Pirmohamed M, James S, Meakin S, et al: Adverse drug reactions as a cause of admission to hospital:
prospective analysis of 18,820 patients, BMJ 329:15-19, 2004.
11. Yang S, Dennehy CE, Tsourournis C: Characterizing adverse events reported to the Califomia poison
control system on herbal remedies and dietary supplements: a pilot study, I Herb Pharmacother 2:1-11,
2003.
12. Sudekum M, Poppenga RH, Raju N, et al: Pennyroyal oil toxicosis in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 200:
817-818, 1992.
Keller K, Hansel R, et al: Adverse effects of herbal drugs I, Berlin, 1991, Springer-Verlag.
14. Vanherweghem LJ: Misuse of herbal remedies: the case of an outbreak of terminal renal failure in Bel-
gium (Chinese herbs nephropathy), I Altern Complement Med 4:9-13, 1998.
15. Ko RJ: Herbal products information. In Leikin JB, Paloucek FP,editors: Poisoning and toxicology com-
pendium, Cleveland, OH, 1998, Lexi-Comp.
16. Harris ES, Cao S, Litlefield BA, et al: Heavy metal and pesticide content in commonly prescribed indi
vidual raw Chinese herbal medicines, Sci Total Environ 409(20):4297-4305, 2011.
17. Blumenthal M: Perspectives on the safety of herbal medicines. In Leikin JB, Paloucek FP, editors: Poison-
ing and toxicology compendium, Cleveland, OH, 1998, Lexi-Comp.
18. Stedman C: Herbal hepatotoxicity, Sem Liv Dis 22:195-206, 2002.
19. Zhou S, Koh H, Gao Y, et al: Herbal bioactivation: the good, the bad and the ugly, Life Sci 74:935-968,
2004.
20. McGuffin M, Hobbs C, Upton R,et al: Botanical safety handbook, Boca Raton, FL, 1997, CRC Press
21. Johnson WD, Morrissey RL, Usborne AL, et al: Subchronic oral toxicity and cardiovascular safety phar-
macology studies of resveratrol, a naturally occurring polyphenol with cancer preventive activity, Food
Chem Toxicol49:3319-3327, 2011.
22. Gardiner P, Sarma DN, Dog TL, et al: The state of dietary supplement adverse event reporting in the
United States, Pharmacoepidem Dr S17:962-970, 2008.
23. Haller C, Kearney T, Bent S,et al: Dietary supplement adverse events: report of a one-year poison center
surveillance project, J Med Toxicol4:84-92, 2008.
24. Haller CA, Anderson IB, Kim SY: An evaluation of selected herbal reference texts and comparison to
published reports of adverse herbal events, Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 21:143-150, 2002.
Chapter 26 I Hazards Associated with the Use of Herbal and Other Natural Products 355
25. Blumenthal M, Busse WR, Goldberg A,et al: The complete German Commission E monographs, Boston,
1998, Integrative Medicine Communications.
26. DerMarderosian A, editor: Review of natural products, St Louis, 2001, Facts and Comparisons.
27.
Birdsall TC: 5-Hydroxytryptophan: a clinically effective serotonin precursor, Altern Med Rev 3:271-280,
1998.
28. Roberts DJ: Plants: cardiovascular toxicity. In Ford MD, Delaney KA, Ling LJ, et al: Clinical toxicology,
Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders Co.
29. Bent S, Tiedt TN, Odden MC, et al: The relative safety of ephedra compared to other herbal products.
Ann Intern Med 138, 468-447, 2003.
30. Siegers CP: Alium sativum. In DeSmet PAGM, Keller K, Hansel R,et al: Adverse effects ofherbal drugs 1,
Berlin, 1991, Springer-Verlag.
31. DerMarderosian A, editor: Review of natural products, St Louis, 2001, Facts and Comparisons.
32. Carson TL: Methylxanthines. In Peterson ME,Talcott PA,editors: Smallanimal toxicology,Philadelphia
2001, WB Saunders Co.
33. Tyler VE: The honest herbal: a sensible guide to the use of herbs and related remedies,ed 3, New York,
1993, Pharmaceutical Products Press.
34. Couatre DL: Kava kava: Examining new reports of toxicity, Toxicol Lett150:85-96, 2004.
35. Anke J, Ramzan I: Kava hepatotoxicity: are we any closer to the truth? Planta Med70:193-196, 2004.
36. Horie S, Koyama F, Takayama H, et al: Indole alkaloids of a Thai medicinal herb, Mitragynα speciosa,
that has opioid agonistic effect in guinea pig ileum, Planta Med 71(3):231-236, 2005.
37. Babu KM, McCurdy CR, Boyer EW: Opioid receptors and legal highs: Salvia divinorum and kratom,
Clin Toxicol46(2):146-152, 2008
38. Kapp FG, Maurer HH, Auwarter V, Winkelmann M, Heimanns-Claussen M: Intra-hepatic cholestasis
following abuse of powdered kratom (M. speciosa), I Med Toxicol 3:227 -231, 2011.
39. Hall AH, Spoerke DG, Rumack BH: Assessing mistletoe toxicity, Ann Emer Med 15:1320-1323, 1986.
40. Yu EL, Sivagnamam M, Ellis L, Huang IS: Acute hepatotoxicity after ingestion of Morinda citrifolia (noni
juice) in a 14-year-old boy, I Pediatr Gastroenterology Nutr 52:222, 2011.
(Morinda citrifolia), Eur  Gastroenterol Hepatol17:445, 2005.
42. Stadlbauer V, et al: Hepatotoxicity of noni juice: report of 2 cases, World I Gastroenterol 1(30):4758-
4760,2008.
43. Stamford IF, Bennett A: Treatment of diarrhea in calves with nutmeg, Vet Rec106:389, 1980.
44. Kingsbury JM: Poisonous plants of the United States and Canada, Engelwood Cliffs, NJ, 1964,
Prentice-Hall.
45. Osweiler GD: Over-the-counter drugs and illicit drugs of abuse. The national veterinary medical series:
toxicology, Philadelphia, 1996, Williams and Wilkins.
46. Tisserand R, Balacs T: Essentiat oil safety: α guide for health care professionais, Edinburgh, 1999, Churchill
Livingstone.
47. Emery DP, Corban JG: Camphor toxicity, I Paediatr Child Health 35:105-106, 1999.
containing linalool, D-limonene, and piperonyl butoxide applied topically to domestic cats, Vet Human
Toxicol30:206-210, 1988.
49. Hooser SB, Beasley VR, Everitt JI: Effects of an insecticidal dip containing D-limonene in the cat, J Am
Vet Med Assoc 189:905-908, 1986.
50. Villar D, Knight MJ, Hansen SR,et al: Toxicity of melaleuca oil and related essential oils applied topically
on dogs and cats, Vet Hum Toxicol36:139-142, 1994.
51. Bischoff K, Guale F: Australian tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia) oil poisoning inthree purebred cats, / Vet
Diagn Invest 10:208-210, 1998.
52. Kaluzienski M: Partial paralysis and altered behavior in dogs treated with melaleuca oil, I Toxicol Clin
Toxicol 38:518, 2000.
53. Carlson M, Thompson RD: Liquid chromatographic determination of safrole in sassafras-derived herbal
products, JAOAC 80:1023-1028, 1997.
54. Segelman AB, Segelman FP, Karliner J, et al: Sassafras and herb tea Potential health hazards, JAMA
236:477, 1976.
55. Grande GA, Dannewitz SR: Symptomatic sassafras oil ingestion, Vet Human Toxicol 29:447, 1987.
 56. Au AM, Ko R, Boo FO,et al: Screening methods for drugs and heavy metals in Chinese patent medicines,
Bull Environ Contam Toxicol65:112-119, 2000.
 57. Emst E: Adulteration of Chinese herbal medicines with synthetic drugs asystematic review, I Intern Med
252:107-113, 2002.
58. Dolan P, Nortrup DA,Bolger M,et al: Analsis of dietary supplements forarsenic, cadmium, mercury,
and lead using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, I Agr Food Chem 51:1307-1312, 2003
356SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
 59. Blumenthal M: Interactions between herbs and conventional drugs: introductory considerations, Herb-
aGram 49:52-63, 2000.
rats and humans, Food Cosmet Toxicol 41:861-866, 2003.
61. Fugh-Berman A, Ernst E: Herb-drug interactions: a review and assessment of report reliability, I Clin
Pharmacol 52:587-595, 2001.
62. American Botanical Council: Herb reference guide (pamphlet), 1998.
63. Herr SM: Herb-drug interaction handbook, ed 2, Nassau, NY, 2002, Church Street Books.
64. Poppenga R: Treatment. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2004, Mosby.
65. Palmer ME, Howland MA: Herbals and other dietary supplements. In Ford MD, Delaney KA, Ling LJ,
t al: Clinical toxicology, Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders.
66. Vassallo S: Essential oils. In Ford MD, Delaney KA, Ling LJ, et al: Clinical toxicology, Philadelphia, 2001,
WBSaunders.
CHAPTER
27
Household and Garden
Plants
A. Catherine Barr, PhD, DABT
An excellent website for a listing of toxic and non-toxic plants to cats and dogs
http://www.aspca.org/pet-care/poison-control/plants/
This chapter is designed to support small animal veterinarians in cases of potential toxic
plant ingestion. With the client's help, the veterinarian should refer to Box 27-1 to deter-
mine whether any of the plants listed have been available to the patient. Note that plants
have been listed in multiple categories when associated with multiple clinical signs. Veteri-
narians should be aware that common names of plants can differ in different locations of
the United States. Accurate physical identification of the plants is essential, and this may
necessitate gaining access to other resources (e.g., garden nurseries, horticulturists, college,
university, or extension support staff, botanists, books, and the Internet). For the plants
listed, one can then refer to Table 27-1 to determine the potential scope of the toxic syn-
drome and its prognosis. Ihe patient is then treated as indicated. Information about the
plant or plants involved is shared with the client, and isolation of the patient from the plants
is recommended in the future. When possible, alternative plants from Table 27-2 should be
suggested.
Treatment of Plant Intoxications
 In most cases the primary treatments for toxic plant ingestion include decontamination and
symptomatic supportive care. A large proportion of toxic plants cause vomiting, which in
many cases alleviates the necessity for further decontamination. However, with some plants
vomiting is delayed, and decontamination procedures should include induced emesis or
gastric lavage (depending on patient condition). Stomach content or vomitus is reserved
for later examination because plant material may be helpful in identifying causative agents
and guiding clients toward preventing future incidents. Emesis is followed with activated
charcoal and saline cathartic to extend decontamination. The patient is monitored during
catharsis, and fluids are administered as necessary. Ihere are very few specific treatments
for plant intoxications; when they exist, they have been listed in Table 27-1. Only treat-
ments that are consistently helpful have been noted. For the remainder, the patient is treated
symptomatically and given supportive care. Veterinarians who have questions should call a
diagnostic toxicologist, generally located at their nearest full-service veterinary diagnostic
facility (see Chapter 12).
357
358SECTlON3MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
Box 27-1
Toxic Plant Quick Reference Based on Clinical Signs
Gastrointestinal System
African milk bush (Synadenium grantii)
Ageratum, floss-flower (Ageratum spp.)
Alder buckthorn (Rharmnus spp.)
Amaryllis (Armaryllis spp.)
Anemone, Pasque flower, windflower, meadow anemone, crowfoot (Anemone spp.)
Apple (Malus spp.)
Apricot, peach, plum, bitter almond, cherry, choke cherry (Prunus spp.)
Arnica (Arnica montana)
Arum (Aram italicum)
Aucuba, Japanese aucuba, Japanese laurel, spotted laurel (Aucuba japonica)
Azalea (Rhododendron spp.)
Baby's breath(Gypsophlia paniculata)
Bagpod sesbane (Sesbania vesicaria)
Barberry, pipperidge (Berberis spp.)
Bird of paradise (Caesaipinia spp.)
Bittersweet, woody nightshade, wild nightshade (Solanum dulcamara)
Black bryony (Tamus communis)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
Black locust (Robinia pseudoacacia)
Black nightshade (Solanum nigrum)
Bleeding heart, Dutchman's breeches, squirrel corn, staggerweed (Dicentra spp.)
Blood lily, powderpuff lily (Haemanthus rmultifforus)
Bluebell (Hyacintheides non-scripta)
Blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides)
Blue tannia,blue taro, caladium, elephants ear, malanga, tannia, yautia (Xanthosora
spp.)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Broom (Cytisus spp.)
Buttercup, meadow buttercup, crowfoot,lesser spear wort (Ranunculuspp.)
Caladium, elephant's ear (Caiadiu spp.)
Calla lily (Zantedeschia spp.)
Candelabra aloe, octopus plant, torch plant, Barbados aloe, medicinal aloe (Aloe spp.)
Candelabra cactus, false cactus, mottled spurge, dragon bones (Euphorbia lactea)
Castor bean (Ricinus comunis)
Century plant, maguey, American aloe (Agave americanum)
Ceriman, Swiss cheese plant, fruit-salad plant, split-leaf philodendron, Mexican
breadfruit (Monstera spp.)
Chenille plant, red-hot cattail (Acalypha hispida)
Cherry laurel (Prunus laurocerasus)
Chinaberry tree (Melia azederach)
Chinese evergreen (Aglaonema spp.)
Chinese lantern, winter cherry, Cape gooseberry (Physalis alkekengi)
Chinese yam, cinnamon vine (Dioscorea batatas)
Christmas rose, black hellebore (Helleborus spp.)
Cohosh, baneberry, dolls eyes (Actaea spp.)
Common bean ( Phaseolus vulgaris)
Coontie, cardboard palm, camptie, yugulla (Zamia spp.)
Coral bean, coral tree (Eryfhrina spp.)
Crinum lily, spider lily, swamp lily (Crinurm spp.)
Croton (Codiaeum variegatum or Croton tiglium)
Crown of thorns (Euphorbia milii)
Chapter 27 | Household and Garden Plants  359
Box 27-1
Toxic Plant Quick Reference Based on Clinical Signs—cont'd
 Daffodil, trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp.)
Death camas (Zigademus spp.)
Devil's ivy, ivy arum, pothos, hunter's robe, taro vine (Epipremnu aureum)
Dieffenbachia, dumb cane (Dieffenbachia spp.)
Dogbane, Indian hemp (Apocymm cannabinum)
Easter lily, star-gazer lily, tiger lily (Liliur spp.)
Elder, dwarf elder, Danewort (Sambucus ebulus)
Elephant's ear (Alocasia spp.)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Ephedra, ma huang, Mormon tea (Ephedra spp.)
 Eucalyptus, blue gum, cider gum, silver dollar, Australian fever tree (Eucalyptus spp.)
Euonymus, spindle (Euonyrmus spp.)
Euphorbium (Euphorbia resinifera)
European mistletoe (Viscum album)
False hellebore, white hellebore ( Veratrur spp.)
Fetter bush, stagger bush (Lyonia spp.)
Firethorn (Pyracantha spp.)
Fishtail palm (Caryota mitis)
Flamingo flower (Anthurium spp.)
Foxglove, common foxglove, long purples, dead men's fingers
(Digitalis spp., (Color Plate 27-1))
Gloriosa lily, glory lily, climbing lily (Gloriosa superba)
Golden chain tree (Laburmm anagyroides)
Golden dewdrop (Duranta repens)
Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis)
Golden spider lily, red spider lily, magic lily (Lycoris spp.)
Goosefoot, nephthytis, African evergreen, arrowhead vine (Syngonium spp.)
Greater celandine (Chelidonium majus)
Green earth star (Cryptanthus acaulis)
Guelder-rose, high-bush cranberry (Viburmu spp.)
Herb-Paris (Paris quadrifolia)
Holly, yaupon, possum-haw (lex spp.)
Horse chestnut, buckeye (Aesculus spp.)
Horseradish, red cole (Armoracia rusticana)
Hyacinth, garden hyacinth, Dutch hyacinth (Hyacinthus orientalis)
Hydrangea, hills of snow, French hydrangea, hortensia (Hydrangea macrophylla)
India rubber vine, purple allemande (Cryptostegia spp.)
Iris, crested iris, dwarf iris, fleur-de-lis, blue flag, butterfly iris, poison flag, yellow iris
(Iris spp.)
Jack-in-the-pulpit (Arisaema triphyllum)
Jerusalem cherry, Christmas cherry, winter cherry, Natal cherry (Solanum
pseudocapsicum)
Kaffir lily (Clivia miniata)
Kalanchoe, Palm-Beach-bells, feltbush, velvet elephant ear, devil's backbone, lavender-
scallops (Kalanchoe spp.)
Lantana, shrub verbena, yellow sage, bunchberry (Lantana carmara)
Larkspur (Delphinium spp.)
Laurel, bay laurel, sweet bay (Laurus nobilis)
Lily of the palace, naked lady, amar yllis (Hippeastrurm spp.)
Lily of the valley (Convallaria majalis)
Continued
360SECTION3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
Box 27-1
 Toxic Plant Quick Reference Based on Clinical Signs—cont'd
Liriope (Liriope spp.)
Lobelia, cardinal flower, blue lobelia (Lobelia spp.)
Loquat, Japanese plum (Eriobotrya japonica)
Lords-and-ladies, cuckoo pint, Adam and Eve (Arum rmaculatum)
Lupin, lupine, bluebonnet (Lupinus spp.)
Male fern (Dryopteris filix-mas)
Manchineel tree, manzanillo (Hippormane mancinella)
Marigold, African marigold, French marigold, bog marigold, Aztec marigold (Tagetes
spp.)
Marsh marigold, kingcup (Caltha palustris)
May apple, mandrake (Podophyllum spp.)
May lily (Maianthemum bifolium)
Meadow saffron, autumn crocus (Colchicum aufumnale)
Mescal bean, mountain laurel, frijolito, Eve's necklace (Sophora spp.)
Mezereon, spurge olive (Daphne spp.)
Milkweed, butterfly weed (Asclepias spp.)
Mock azalea, rusty-leaf (Menziesia ferruginea)
Monkshood (Aconitum spp.)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp.)
Netted vriesea ( Vriesea fenestralis)
Nettle, stinging nettle, noseburn ( Urtica spp., Cnidoscolus spp., Tragia spp.)
Ngaio tree (Myoporum laetum)
Night-blooming jessamine, Chinese inkberry (Cestrum nocturnum)
Nightshade (Soianur spp.)
Oak (Quercus spp.)
Old man's beard, traveler's joy, virgin's bower (Clematis spp.)
Oleander (Nerium oleander)
Oregon grape, trailing mahonia (Mahonia spp.)
Ornamental pepper (Capsicum annuum)
Oyster plant, boat lily, Moses in a boat ( Rhoeo spathacea)
Peace lily, white sails, white anthurium, spathe flower, Mauna Loa (Spathiphyllum
spp.)—very low toxicity
bia tirucalli)
Periwinkle ( Vinca spp.)
Persian violet, alpine violet, sowbread (Cyclamen spp.)
Peyote, mescal, mescal buttons (Lophophora williarsii)
Pheasant's eye (Adonis spp.)
Physic nut, Berlander nettlespurge (Jatropha spp.)
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
Pineapple, pineapple tree (Ananas comasus)
Pink quill (Tillandsia cyanea)
Poinsettia,Christmas star(Euphorbia pulcherrima)—very low toxicity
Pokeweed, pokeberry, pokesalad (Phytolacca arericana)
Potato (Solanum tuberosum)
Primrose, German primrose, poison primrose ( Prirmula spp.)
Privet, wax-leaf ligustrum (Ligustrum spp.)
Pulsatilla (Pulsatilla spp.)
Red bryony, white bryony (Bryonia spp.)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)
Chapter 27 | Household and Garden Plants 361
Box27-1
Toxic Plant Quick Reference Based on Clinical Signs—cont'd
Rhubarb, garden rhubarb, pie plant, water plant, wine plant ( Rheum rhabarbarurm)
Rosary pea, prayer bean, jequirity, precatory bean (Abrus precatorius)
Rouge plant, pigeon berry ( Rivina hurmilis)
Rowan, mountain ash, service tree, whitebeam (Sorbus spp.)
Sandbox tree, monkey pistol (Hura crepitans)
Savin (huniperus sabina)
Scheflera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Schefflera spp.)
Sea onion (Urginea maritima)
Sensitive plant, shame plant, touch-me-not, action plant, humble plant (Mirmosa
pudica)
Skunk cabbage (Symplocarpus foetidus), yellow skunk cabbage (Lysichiton americanum)
Snowberry, wolfberry, Indian currant (Syrmphoricarpus spp.)
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis)
Solomon's seal (Polygonatum spp.)
Sorrel, wood sorrel (Oxalis spp.)
Spider lily, crown-beauty, sea daffodil, basket flower, alligator lily (Hymenocallis spp.)
Spurge, creeping spurge, donkey tail (Euphorbia myrsinites)
Squill, starry hyacinth, autumn scilla, hyacinth scilla, Cuban lily, Peruvian jacinth,
hyacinth of Peru, bluebell (Scilla spp.)
Star of Bethlehem, summer snowflake, dove's dung, nap-at-noon (Ornithogadum spp.)
Sweet-flag (Acorus calarus)
Taro, dasheen cocoyam (Colocasia esculenta)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Ncotiana spp.)
Tomato (Lycopersicon lycopersicum)
Tuberous begonia (Begonia tuberhybrida)
Tulip (Tulipa spp., hyb)
Tung oil tree (Aleurites spp.)
Urn plant (Aechmea fasciata)
Water hemlock, cowbane (Cicuta spp.)
Water lettuce, shellflower (Pistia stratiotes)
Wax begonia (Begonia sempervirens-cultorum)
Weeping fig, Java willow, Benjamin tree, small-leaved rubber plant (Ficus benjamina)
White cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
White mustard, charlock (Sinapis spp.)
White snakeroot (Eupatorium rugosum)
Wild calla, wild arum (Calla palustris)
Wild radish(Raphanus rhaphinistrum)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Wisteria, Chinese kidney bean ( Wisteria sinensis)
Wormwood, sagewort, sagebrush (Artemisia spp.)
Yellow allamanda, Nani Ali'i, flor de barbero (Allarmanda cathartica)
Yellow oleander (Thevetia peruviana)
Yesterday today and tomorrow (Brunfelsia spp.)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp.)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp.)
Zephyr lily, rain lily,fairy lily,fire lily (Zephyranthes spp.)
Zulu potato, climbing onion (Bowiea vohubilis)
Central or Peripheral Nervous System
Pinpoint Pupils
Azalea (Rhododendron spp.)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
Continued
362SECTION3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
Box 27-1
 Toxic Plant Quick Reference Based on Clinical Signs—cont'd
California poppy (Eschscholzia californica)
Herb-Paris (Paris quadrifolia)
Kaffir lily (Clivia miniata)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp.)
Opium poppy (Papaver sorniferum)
Pieris (Pierisjaponica)
Poppy (Papaver spp.)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Dilated Pupils (Mydriasis)
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp.)
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia, geranium-leaf aralia, wild
coffee, coffee tree (Polyscias spp.)
Bittersweet, woody nightshade, wild nightshade (Solanurm dulcamara)
Black nightshade (Solanum nigrum)
Candelabra cactus, false cactus, mottled spurge, dragon bones (Euphorbia lactea)
Christmas rose, black hellebore (Helleborus spp.)
Croton (Croton figlium)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Euphorbium (Euphorbia resinifera)
Golden dewdrop (Duranta repens)
Hemlock(Conium maculatum)
Henbane ( Hyosc yamus niger)
Jerusalem cherry, Christmas cherry, winter cherry, Natal cherry (Solanum
pseudocapsicum)
Jimsonweed, thorn-apple, moonflower (Datura stramonium)
Kentucky coffee tree (Gymnocladus dioicus)
Milkweed, butterfly weed (Asclepias spp.)
Morning glory, bindweed, pearly gates (Ipomoea spp.)
Pencil tree, milkbush, Indian tree, rubber euphorbia, finger tree, naked lady
(Euphorbia tirucalli)
Peyote, mescal, mescal button (Lophophora williamsi)
Potato (Solanum fuberosum)
Sandbox tree, monkey pistol (Hura crepitans)
Scheflera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Schefera spp.)
Tomato (Lycopersicon lycopersicum)
Tung oil tree (Aleuritespp.)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp.)
Hyperexcitability, Muscle Twitches
Azalea (Rhododendron spp.)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
Coffee (Coffee arabica)
Day-blooming jessamine (Cestrum diurnum)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
Golden chain tree (Laburmm anagyroides)
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs, fitweed, fumitory (Corydalis
(dds
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Horse chestnut, buckeye (Aesculus spp.)
Jimsonweed, thorn-apple, moonflower (Datura stramonium)
Karaka nut (Corynocarpus laevigatus)
Chapter 27 | Household and Garden Plants 363
Box 27-1
Toxic Plant Quick Reference Based on Clinical Signs—cont'd
Kentucky coffee tree (Gymnocladus dioicus)
Marijuana (Cannabis sativa)
Mezereon, spurge olive (Daphne mezereum)
Mock azalea, rusty-leaf (Menziesia ferruginea)
Moonseed, sarsparilla(Menispermum canadense)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp.)
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
Pinkroot, West Indian pinkroot (Spigelia spp.)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Yesterday today and tomorrow (Brunfelsia calycina)
Delirium, Hallucinations, Behavioral Changes
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp.)
Christmas rose, black hellebore (Helleborus spp.)
Deadly nightshade(Atropa belladonna)
Golden chain tree (Laburmm anagyroides)
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Jimsonweed, thorn-apple, moonflower (Datura stramonium)
Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus)
Male fern (Dryopteris filix-mas)
Marijuana (Cannabis sativa)
Mescal bean, mountain laurel, frijolito, Eve's necklace (Sophora spp.)
Morning glory, bindweed, pearly gates ( pomoea spp.)
Nutmeg (Myristica fragrans)
Peyote, mescal, mescal buttons (Lophophora williarmsii)
Trembling, Ataxia, Weakness, Depression
Ageratum, floss-flower (Ageratum spp.)
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp.)
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia, geranium-leaf aralia, wild
coffee, coffee tree (Polyscias spp.)
Azalea (Rhododendron spp.)
Bittersweet, woody nightshade, wild nightshade (Solanum dulcamara)
Black nightshade (Solanum nigrum)
Bleeding heart, Dutchman's breeches, squirrel corn, staggerweed (Dicentra spp.)
Bluebell (Hyacinthoides non-scripta)
Blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Chinaberry tree (Melia azederach)
Coral bean, coral tree (Erythrina spp.)
Daffodil,trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp.)
Easter lily, star-gazer lily, tiger lily (Liliurm spp.)
Ephedra, ma huang, Mormon tea (Ephedra spp.)
Foxglove, common foxglove, long purples, dead men's fingers (Digitalis purpurea)
Gloriosalily, glory lily, climbing lily (Gloriosa superba)
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs, ftweed, fumitory (Corydalis spp.)
Hemlock(Conium maculatum)
Horse chestnut, buckeye (Aesculus spp.)
Horsetail (Equisetum spp.)
Hound's-tongue (Cynoglossum offcinale)
Jerusalem cherry, Christmas cherry, winter cherry, Natal cherry (Solanum
pseudocapsicum)
Continued
364SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Box 27-1
 Toxic Plant Quick Reference Based on Clinical Signs—cont'd
Kalanchoe, Palm-Beach-bells, feltbush, velvet elephant ear, devil's backbone, lavender
scallops (Kalanchoe spp.)
Kentucky coffee tree (Gymnocladus dioicus)
Lantana, shrub verbena, yellow sage, bunchberry (Lantana camara)
Larkspur (Delphinium spp.)
Lobelia, cardinal flower, blue lobelia (Lobelia spp.)
Lupin, lupine, bluebonnet (Lupinus spp.)
Mescal bean, mountain laurel, frijolito, Eve's necklace (Sophora spp.)
Mezereon, spurge olive (Daphne mezereum)
Milkweed, butterfly weed (Asclepias spp.)
Mimosa, silk tree (Albizia julibrissin)
Monkshood (Aconitum spp.)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp.)
Nettle, stinging nettle, noseburn ( Urtica spp., Cnidoscolus spp., Tragia spp.)
Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum)
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
Poppy (Papaver spp.)
Red bryony, white bryony (Bryonia spp.)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)
Sago palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese fern palm (Cycas revoluta, Cycas spp.)
Scheflera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Schefflera spp.)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp.)
Water hemlock, cowbane (Cicuta spp.)
White snakeroot (Eupatorium rugosum)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Yesterday today and tomorrow (Brunfelsia calycina)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp.)
Zephyr lily, rain lily, fairy lily, fire lily (Zephyranthes spp.)
Paralysis
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp.)
Azalea (Rhododendron spp.)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
Blood lily, powderpuff lily (Haemanthus mulifforus)
Broom (Cytisus spp.)
Coral bean, coral tree (Erythrina spp.)
Coyotilla, tullidora (Karwinskia humboldtiana)
Day-blooming jessamine (Cestrum diurnum)
Death camas (Zigadenus spp.)
False hellebore, black hellebore (Veratrum spp.)
Hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Kaffir lily (Clivia miniata)
Kentucky coffee tree (Gymnocladus dioicus)
Larkspur (Delphinium spp.)
Lily of the palace, naked lady, amaryllis (Hippeastrum spp.)
Meadow saffron, autumn crocus (Colchicum autumnale)
Monkshood (Aconitum spp.)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp.)
Persian violet, alpine violet, sowbread (Cyclarmen spp.)
Pieris (Pieris spp.)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Chapter 27 | Household and Garden Plants 365
Box27-1
Toxic Plant Quick Reference Based on Clinical Signs—cont'd
Convulsions
Amaryllis (Arnaryllis spp.)
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp.)
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia, geranium-leaf aralia, wild cof-
fee, coffee tree (Polyscias spp.)
Black locust (Robinia pseudoacacia)
Bleeding heart, Dutchman's breeches, squirrel corn, staggerweed (Dicentra spp.)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Broom (Cytisus spp.)
Candelabra cactus, false cactus, mottled spurge, dragon bones (Euphorbia lactea)
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
Chinaberry tree (Melia azederach)
Croton (Croton tiglium)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Euphorbium (Euphorbia resinifera)
Fetter bush, stagger bush (Lyonia spp.)
Golden chain tree (Laburmum anagyroides)
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs, fitweed, fumitory (Corydalis
spp.)
Golden dewdrop (Duranta repens)
Karaka nut (Corynocarpus laevigatus)
Loquat (Eriobotrya japonica)
Meadow saffron, autumn crocus (Colchicum autumnale)
Mediterranean thistle (Atractylis gurmrifera)
Milkweed, butterfly weed (Asclepias spp.)
Mimosa, silk tree (Albizia julibrissin)
Moonseed, sarsaparilla (Menispermum canadense)
Ngiao tree (Myoporum laetum)
 Pencil tree, milkbush, Indian tree, rubber euphorbia, finger tree, naked lady (Euphor-
bia tirucalli)
Persian violet, alpine violet, sowbread (Cyclarmen spp.)
Sago palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese fern palm (Cycas revoluta, Cycas spp.)
Sandbox tree, monkey pistol (Hura crepitans)
Scheflera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Scheffera spp.)
Sea onion (Urginea maritima)
Spurge, creeping spurge, donkey tail (Euphorbia myrisinites)
Squill, starry hyacinth, autumn scilla, hyacinth scilla, Cuban lily, Peruvian jacinth,
hyacinth of Peru, bluebell (Scila spp.)
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp.)
Tung oil tree (Aleurites spp.)
Water hemlock, cowbane (Cicuta spp.)
White cedar ( Thuja occidentalis)
Yellow jessamine, Carolina jessamine (Gelsemium sempervirens)
Yesterday today and tomorrow (Brunfelsia spp.)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp.)
Zulu potato, climbing onion (Bowiea volubilis)
Hepatoencephalopathy
Comfrey (Symphytum oficinale)
Common ragwort, tansy ragwort (Senecio jacobaea)
Crotalaria (Crotalaria spp.)
Continued
366SECTION3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
Box 27-1
Toxic Plant Quick Reference Based on Clinical Signs—cont'd
Dusty miller, cineraria, butterweed, Cape ivy, German ivy, Natal ivy, parlor ivy, water
ivy, wax vine (Senecio spp.)
Fiddleneck, tarweed (Amsinckia spp.)
Hound's-tongue (Cynoglossum offcinale, Color Plate 27-14)
Lantana, shrub verbena, yellow sage, bunchberry (Lantana camara)
Purple viper's-bugloss, Calamity Jane, Patterson's curse (Echiurm lycopsis)
Sago palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese fern palm (Cycas revoluta, Cycas spp.)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp.)
Unconsciousness, Coma
Ageratum, floss-flower (Ageraturm spp.)
Amaryllis (Armaryllis spp.)
Apple (Malus spp.)
Azalea (Rhododendron spp.)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
California poppy (Eschscholzia californica)
Calla lily (Zantedeschia spp.)
Cherry laurel (Prunus laurocerasus)
Chinaberry tree (Melia azederach)
Coontie, cardboard palm, camptie, yugulla (Zamia spp.)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Fetter bush, stagger bush (Lyonia spp.)
Hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Horseradish, red cole (Armoracia rusticana)
Jimsonweed, thorn-apple, moonflower (Datura stramonium)
Kentucky coffee tree (Gymnocladus dioicus)
Lobelia, cardinal flower, blue lobelia (Lobelia spp.)
Loquat, Japanese plum (Eriobotrya japonica)
Mescal bean, mountain laurel, frijolito, Eve's necklace (Sophora sp.)
Mezereon, spurge olive (Daphne mezereum)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kalmia spp.)
Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum)
Poppy (Papaver spp.)
Potato (Solanum tuberosum)
 Sandbox tree, monkey pistol (Hura crepitans)
Sorrel, wood sorrel (Oxalis spp.)
Spurge (Euphorbia spp.)
Sweet-flag (Acorus calarmus)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp.)
Water hemlock, cowbane (Cicuta spp.)
White snakeroot (Eupatorium rugosum)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Zamia (Macrozarmia spp.)
Cardiovascular System
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp.)
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp.)
Aralia, Balfour aralia, dinner plate aralia, Ming aralia, geranium-leaf aralia, wild
coffee, coffee tree (Polyscias spp.)
Arnica (Arnica rmontana)
Chapter 27 | Household and Garden Plants 367
Box 27-1
Toxic Plant Quick Reference Based on Clinical Signs—cont'd
Avocado (Persea americana)
Azalea (Rhododendron spp.)
Black laurel, mountain laurel (Leucothoe davisiae)
Black locust (Robinia pseudoacacia)
Broom (Cytisus spp.)
Castor bean (Ricinus cormmunis)
Christmas rose, black hellebore (Helleborus spp.)
Common bean (Phaseolus vuigaris)
Croton (Croton tiglium)
 Daffodil, trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp.)
Day-blooming jessamine (Cestrum diurnum)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
Death camas (Zigadenus spp.)
Desert rose, mock azalea (Adenium spp.)
Dogbane, Indian hemp (Apocymum cannabium)
English ivy, Irish ivy, common ivy (Hedera helix)
Ephedra, ma huang, Mormon tea (Ephedra spp.)
Euonymus, spindle (Euonymus spp.)
False hellebore, white hellebore (Veratrum spp.)
Fetter bush, stagger bush (Lyonia spp.)
Foxglove, common foxglove, long purples, dead men's fingers (Digitalis purpurea)
Golden dewdrop(Duranta repens)
Hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Horseradish, red cole (Armoracia rusticana)
India rubber vine, purple allamanda (Cryptostegia spp.)
Jimsonweed, thorn-apple, moonflower (Datura stramonium)
Kalanchoe, feltbush, velvet elephant ear, devil's backbone, lavender-scallops
(Kalanchoe spp.)
Licorice (Glyeyrrhiza glabra)
Lily of the palace, naked lady, amaryllis (Hippeastrurm spp.)
Lily-of-the-valley (Convallaria majalis)
Lobelia, cardinal flower, blue lobelia (Lobelia spp.)
Lupin, lupine, bluebonnet (Lupimus spp.)
Monkshood (Aconitum spp.)
Moonseed, sarsaparilla (Menispermurm canadense)
Morning glory, bindweed, pearly gates ( pomoea spp.)
Mountain laurel, dwarf laurel (Kairmia spp.)
Nettle, stinging nettle, noseburn ( Urtica spp., Cnidoscolus spp., Tragia spp.)
Night-blooming jessamine (Cestrurm nocturnum)
Oleander (Nerium oleander)
Periwinkle (Vinca spp.)
Pheasant's eye (Adonis spp.)—very low toxicity
Pieris (Pieris japonica)
Potato (Solanum fuberosum)
Privet, wax-leaf ligustrum (Ligustrum spp.)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)
Saffron crocus, meadow saffron (Crocus sativus)
Schefflera, umbrella tree, rubber tree, starleaf (Schefflera spp.)
Sea onion (Urginea maritima)
Silk vine (Periploca graeca)
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis)
Continued
368SECTION3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
Box 27-1
 Toxic Plant Quick Reference Based on Clinical Signs—cont'd
Squill, starry hyacinth, autumn scilla, hyacinth scilla, Cuban lily, Peruvian jacinth,
hyacinth of Peru, bluebell (Scilla spp.)
 Star of Bethlehem, summer snowflake, dove's dung, nap-at-noon (Ornithogalum spp.)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp.)
Tulip (Tulipa spp., hyb.)
Wild rosemary (Ledum palustre)
Wintersweet, Bushman's poison, poison bush (Acokanthera spp.)
Yellow oleander ( Thevetia peruviana)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp.)
Zephyrlily, rain lily, fair lily, fire lily (Zephyranthes spp.)
Zulu potato, climbing onion (Bowiea volubilis)
Respiratory System
Dyspnea, Cyanosis
Apple (Malus spp.)
Apricot, peach, plum, bitter almond, cherry, choke cherry ( Prunus spp.)
Arnica (Arnica montana)
Bleeding heart, Dutchman's breeches, squirrel corn, stagger weed (Dicentra spp.)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Caladium (Caladium spp.)
California poppy (Eschscholzia californica)
Calla lily (Zantedeschia spp.)
Ceriman, Swiss cheese plant, fruit-salad plant, split-leaf philodendron, Mexican
breadfruit (Monstera spp.)
Cherry laurel (Prunus laurocerasus)
Day-blooming jessarmine (Cestrum diurnum)
Devil's ivy, ivy arum, pothos, hunter's robe, taro vine (Epipremnur aureum)
Dieffenbachia, dumb cane (Dieffenbachia spp.)
Elephant's ear (Alocasia spp.)
False hellebore, white hellebore (Veratrur spp.)
Flarmingo flower (Anthurium spp.)
Golden corydalis, bulbous corydalis, scrambled eggs, fitweed, fumitory (Corydalis
spp.)
Goosefoot, nephthytis, African evergreen, arrowhead vine (Syngonium spp.)
Lords-and-ladies, cuckoo pint, Adam and Eve (Arum maculaturm)
Marijuana (Cannabis sativa)
Nettle, stinging nettle, noseburn ( Urtica spp., Cnidoscolus spp., Tragia spp.)
Philodendron, sweetheart plant (Philodendron spp.)
Potato (Solanum tuberosum)
Tulip (Tulipa spp., hyb.)
Respiratory Depression or Paralysis
Angel's trumpet (Brugmansia spp.)
Barberry, pipperidge (Berberis spp.)
Bittersweet, woody nightshade, wild nightshade (Solanum dulcamara)
Box, common box, boxwood (Buxus sempervirens)
Broom (Cytisus spp.)
Coral bean, coral tree (Erythrina spp.)
Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
False hellebore, white hellebore ( Veratrurm spp.)
Gloriosa lily, glory lily, climbing lily (Gloriosa superba)
Golden chain tree (Laburmur anagyroides)
Hemlock(Conium maculatum)
Chapter 27 | Household and Garden Plants369
Box 27-1
Toxic Plant Quick Reference Based on Clinical Signs—cont'd
Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Jimsonweed, thorn-apple, moonflower (Datura stramonium)
Kentucky cofee tree (Gymnocladus dioicus)
Larkspur (Delphiniur spp.)
Lupin,lupine, bluebonnet (Lupinus spp.)
Meadow saffron,autumn crocus(Colchicum auturmnale)
Milkweed, butterfly weed (Asclepias spp.)
Monkshood (Aconitum spp.)
Opium poppy (Papaver sormniferum)
Oregon grape, trailing mahonia (Mahonia spp.)
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)
Tobacco, tree tobacco (Nicotiana spp.)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp.)
Renal System
Barberry, pipperidge ( Berberis spp.)
Black locust (Robinia pseudoacacia)
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
Day-blooming jessamine (Cestrum diurnum)
Easter lily, star-gazer lily, tiger lily (Liliurm spp.)
Gloriosa lily, glory lily, climbing lily (Gloriosa superba)
Licorice (Glyeyrrhiza glabra)
Oregon grape, trailing mahonia (Mahonia spp.)
Red bryony, white bryony (Bryonia spp.)
Saffron crocus, meadow saffron (Crocus sativus)
White cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
Wild radish (Raphanus rhaphinistrum)
Calcium Oxalate Crystalluria
Dock, curly dock (Rurmex spp.)
Rhubarb(Rheum rhabarbarum)
Sorrel, wood sorrel (Oxalis spp.)
Hematuria, Azotemia
Barberry, pipperidge (Berberis spp.)
Black locust (Robinia pseudoacacia)
Castor bean (Ricinus communis)
Garlic (Allium spp.)
Onion (Allium spp.)
Oregon grape, trailing mahonia (Mahonia spp.)
Rosary pea, prayer bean, jequirity, precatory bean (Abrus precatorius)
Liver Damage
Amaryllis (Amaryllis spp.)
Borage (Borago offcinalis)
Comfrey (Symphytum officinale)
Common ragwort, tansy ragwort (Senecio jacobaea)
Coontie, cardboard palm, camptie, yugulla (Zarmia spp.)
Crotalaria (Crotalaria spp.)
Daffodil, trumpet narcissus, jonquil (Narcissus spp.)
Day-blooming jessamine (Cestrum diurnum)
Dusty miller, cineraria, butterweed, Cape ivy, German ivy, Natal ivy, parlor ivy, water
ivy, wax vine (Senecio spp.)
Continued
370SECTlON 3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
Box 27-1
Toxic Plant Quick Reference Based on Clinical Signs—cont'd
Fiddleneck, tarweed (Amsinckia spp.)
Heliotrope (Heliotropiur spp.)
Hound's-tongue (Cynoglossum offcinale)
Lantana, shrub verbena, yellow sage, bunchberry (Lantana camara)
Oak (Quercus spp.)
Purple viper's-bugloss, Calamity Jane, Patterson's curse (Echiurm lycopsis)
Rhubarb, garden rhubarb, pie plant, water plant, wine plant ( Rheur rhabarbarurm)
Sago palm, leatherleaf palm, Japanese fern palm (Cycas revoluta, Cycas spp.)
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis)
White cedar (Thuja occidentalis)
Wild radish (Raphanus rhaphinistrum)
Zamia (Macrozamia spp.)
Jaundice, Icterus
Borage (Borago offcinalis)
Comfrey (Symphytum officinale)
Coontie, cardboard palm, camptie, yugulla (Zamia spp.)
Crotalaria (Crotalaria spp.)
Fiddleneck, tarweed (Amsinckia spp.)
Heliotrope (Heliotropium spp.)
Hound's-tongue (Cynoglossum officinale)
Lantana, shrub verbena, yellow sage, bunchberry (Lantana camara)
 Purple viper's-bugloss, Patterson's curse, Calamity Jane (Echiurm lycopsis)
Primary Photosensitization
Bishop's weed, Queen Anne's lace (Armmi majus)
Dutchman's breeches ( Thamnosma texana)
Hogweed, giant hogweed, common parsnip (Heracleum spp.)
Marigold, African marigold, French marigold, bog marigold, Aztec marigold (Tagetes
spp.)
St. John's wort (Hypericum perforatum)
Emaciation, Ascites, Edema of Dependent Extremities
Borage (Borago offcinalis)
Comfrey (Symphytum officinalis)
Common ragwort, tansy ragwort (Senecio jacobaea)
Crotalaria (Crotalaria spp.)
Dusty miller, cineraria, butterweed, Cape ivy, German ivy, Natal ivy, parlor ivy, water
ivy, wax vine (Senecio spp.)
Fiddleneck, tarweed (Amsinckia spp.)
Heliotrope (Heliotropium spp.)
Hound's-tongue (Cynoglossum ofcinale)
Purple viper's-bugloss, Calamity Jane, Patterson's curse (Echiurm lycopsis)
Sudden Death
Bagpod sesbane (Sesbania vesicaria)
Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea)
Kalanchoe, feltbush, velvet elephant ear, devil's backbone, lavender-scallops (Kalan-
choe spp.)
Oleander (Nerium oleander)
Yellow oleander ( Thevetia peruviana)
Yew, Japanese yew (Taxus spp.)
Table 27-1
 Toxic Plant Inforrmation Summary
Latin Name
Common Names
Clinical Signs, Prognosis, Additional Treatment
Toxins, Plant Parts, Lethal Doses
Abrus precatorius
 Rosary pea, prayer
Delayed 3 hours to 2 days; severe gastroenteritis,
Abrin (toxalbumin/lectin, 2 chain) stops protein
bean, jequirity,
vomiting, serious hemorrhagic enteropathy,
synthesis
precatory bean—
fluid loss; bleeding from retina and serous
LD: adults 0.5-2 seeds, children 1-2 seeds
broken seeds only
membranes is characteristic
Acalypha
Chenille plant, red-hot 
Gastroenteritis, gastrointestinal inflammation; eye
 Euphorb latex, diterpene esters
hispida
cattail
irritant
Aconitum spp.
Monkshood
Burning and tingling of mouth, fingers, and
Aconitine and others (diterpene or norditerpene
toes within 10-20 minutes; distal paresthesia
alkaloids with ethylated or methylated amine);
gradually extending centrally, followed later
aconitine 0.3%-2% in tubers, 0.2%-1.2% in
by vomiting, diarrhea, paralysis, intense pain,
leaves; LD adult human 3-6 mg/kg (=few
 respiratory paralysis, cardiac failure, and death
 grams plant material); also well absorbed
while conscious
percutaneously
Acokanthera spp.
Wintersweet,
 Arrhythmias, bradycardia; potentially
Cardiotoxic cardenolides
Chapter
Bushman's poison,
hyperkalemia
poison bush
Acorus calarmus
Sweet-flag
 Rapid respirations, stupor, vomiting, bloody
Soluble oxalates
diarrhea, coma, hypocalcemic tetany
Actaea spp.
Cohosh, baneberry,
Hypersalivation, vomiting, abdominal pain,
Fruits and roots only; contact irritant, vesicant
Househe
dolls' eyes
 possible diarrhea; blistering, ulceration of
toxin not identified
mucosae
Adenium spp.
PIOL
Desert rose, mock
Arrhythmias, bradycardia; potentially
Entire plant; cardiac glycosides
azalea
hyperkalemia
and
Adonis spp.
Pheasant's eye
Vomiting, hyperkalemia, bradycardia,
Adonitoxin, 20 other cardenolides 0.25% in plant;
 arrhythmias; subepidermal vesicant essentially
poorly absorbed protoanemonin (vesicant
nontoxic
irritant)
Aechmeafasciata
Urn plant
Severe irritation of skin and mucous membranes,
Insoluble calcium oxalate, proteolytic enzymes
itching, burning, inflammation, possible
an
blistering hoarseness, salivation, vomiting
Continued
Table 27-1
372
Toxic Plant Information Summary—cont'd
Latin Name
Common Names
Clinical Signs, Prognosis, Additional Treatment
Toxins, Plant Parts, Lethal Doses
SE
Aesculus spp.
Horse chestnut,
Vomiting, diarrhea; ataxia, muscle twitches,
 Aescin (saponin complex) in seeds and twigs;
CTION
buckeye
sluggishness or excitation
unknown additional neurotoxin; poorly
absorbed
Agapanthus
African blue lily, blue
Conjunctivitis; irritation and mouth ulceration,
Unknown; not likely to be fatal because of
M
orientalis
African lily
vomiting
immediate oral discomfort
Misc
Agave
Century plant, maguey,
Local mucosal irritation
Insoluble calcium oxalate
americanum
American aloe
lal
Ageratum spp.
Ageratum, floss-flower
Vomiting, ataxia, unconsciousness 
Precocenes I and II, hepatotoxic chromenes
Aglaonema spp.
Chinese evergreen
Irritation of skin and mucous membranes,
Insoluble calcium oxalate; also soluble oxalates
us
inflammation,hoarseness,salivation,vomiting;
10
rarely oxaluria
Albizia julibrissin
Mimosa, silk tree
 Tremors, convulsions appear abruptly
5-Acetoxymethyl-3-hydroxy-4-methoxymethyl-
2-methylpyridine (alkaloid) in the legumes; 
seizures prevented by pyridoxine; mechanism
may be impaired GABA synthesis
Aleurites spp.
Tung oil tree
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea
Tigliane-type phorbol esters in seed oil/sap
Allamanda
Yellow allamanda, Nani
 Conjunctivitis; irritation of lips, tongue, and
Plumericin, bioactive iridoid irritant; seeds, fruit,
cathartica
Ali'i, flor de barbero
mouth; vomiting, diarrhea
leaves, bark, sap; herbal cathartic
Allium spp.
Garlic, onion
Contact allergens; Heinz body anemia (hemolytic)
Tulipalins; n-propyl disulfde
Alocasia spp
Elephant's ear
Severe irritation of skin and mucous membranes,
Calcium oxalate raphides and idioblasts; also
inflammation, possible blistering, hoarseness,
 some unknown proteinaceous toxin
 salivation, vomiting; if large amounts,
Small amounts of root or leaf may be fatal
 dysphagia, respiratory compromise; severe
 because of restricted airway in very small
pain in mouth, lips, throat, stomach
animals
Aloe spp.
Candelabra aloe,
 Inhibits stomach acid secretion; inhibits water
Barbaloin (0.1%-1.2% dry weight in leaf), other
 octopus plant, torch
 and electrolyte absorption from colon; potent
anthraquinone glycosides; small amount of
plant,Barbados
 cathartic—-causes abdominal cramping and
leaf = purgative dose
aloe, medicinal aloe
diarrhea
Alpinia spp.
Shell ginger, shell
Eye irritation; not much else
One species, mild cardioactive compound
flower, ginger lily,
(Yakuchinone-A) (herbal)
pink porcelain lily
Alstroemeria
Peruvian lily, lily of the
Allergic dermatitis
Tulipalin A (1%-2% throughout plant)
aurantiaca, hyb.
Incas
Armnaryllispp.
Amaryllis
Hypersalivation, vomiting, abdominal pain,
 Amaryllidaceae alkaloids, lycorine, mostly in the
diarrhea, hypotension, dehydration, electrolyte
outer layers of the bulb
imbalance
Ammi majus
Bishop's weed, Queen
 Primary photosensitization
 Furocoumarins, highest in seeds, also in foliage
Anne's lace
Amsinckia sp.
Fiddleneck, tarweed
Much delayed (weeks to months) anorexia,
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids; probably requires chronic
(ColorPlate
depression, rough pelage, diarrhea, emaciation,
consumption
27-2)
 constipation icterus, hepatoencephalopathy,
death
Ananas comosus
Pineapple, pineapple
Irritation of lips, tongue, and mucosal surfaces,
Bromelin (digestive enzyme), calcium oxalate
tree
vomiting; allergen
 raphides, ethyl acrylate (skin sensitizer)
Anemone spp.
Anemone, Pasque
Mucosal blistering and ulceration, profuse
Protoanemonin (related to cantharidin),
pter
flower, windflower,
salivation, intense gastrointestinal irritation,
subepidermal vesicant; also saponins
meadow anemone,
abdominal pain, vomiting with blood,
Z
crowfoot
diarrhea; ataxia, seizures
Anthurium spp.
Household.
 Flamingo flower
Severe mucosal irritation and inflammation,
Calcium oxalate raphides and idioblasts; also
possible blistering, dysphagia, salivation,
soluble oxalates
vomiting
Apocynum
 Dogbane, Indian hemp
Vomiting, diarrhea, cardiovascular collapse
Apocynamarin (cardioactive glycoside)
and
cannabium
Arisaema
Jack-in-the-pulpit,
Oral, pharyngeal, and esophageal irritation,
 Insoluble calcium oxalates
Gar
triphyllum
green dragon
salivation, edema, vomiting
rden
Armoracia
Horseradish, red cole
 Potent skin and eye irritant, vomiting; horseradish
Sinigrin (allyl glucosinolate)
Plants
rusticana
syncope occurs in some individuals
vasodepressor mechanism initiated by direct
 irritation of the gastric or upper respiratory tract
Continued
Table 27-1
374
Toxic Plant Information Summary—cont'd
Latin Name
Common Names
Clinical Signs, Prognosis, Additional Treatment
Toxins, Plant Parts, Lethal Doses
SE
Arnica montana
Arnica
Vomiting, diarrhea, bleeding, edema, respiratory
Helenalin ester (sesquiterpene lactone with
CTION
stimulation, brief tachycardia dyspnea,
strong SH crosslinking ability)
followed by cardiac paralysis, death; allergic
contact dermatitis
LW
Artemisia
Wormwood, sagewort,
Mucosal irritation and erythema, vomiting,
Thujone (monoterpene) in essential oil
Miscellan
absinthium
sagebrush
diarrhea
Arum maculatum,
Lords-and-ladies,
 Mucosal irritation, possible ulceration,
Insoluble calcium oxalates; toxicity varies with
Arum italicum
cuckoo pint, Adam
hypersalivation, vomiting, abdominal pain,
ripeness of berries and locality of plants
leous
and Eve, arum
diarrhea; possible dehydration
Asclepias sp.
Milkweed, butterfly
Vomiting, diarrhea, ataxia, weakness, dilated
Cardenolides; 0.05%-2% of animal's body weight
10XI
(Color Plate
weed
pupils, convulsions, respiratory paralysis, death
in plant material can be fatal
27-3)
Asparagus spp.
Asparagus
Contact allergen; slight "indisposition”
Sitosterol, stigmasterol, and their glucosides
(steroidal saponins); highest levels found in
berries
Atractylis
Mediterranean thistle
Strychnine-like convulsions
Atractyligenin, atractyloside, and
gummifera
carboxyatractyloside; blocks oxidative
phosphorylation
Atropa belladonnaI
Deadly nightshade
Tachycardia, dryness of mucous membranes,
 Atropine, scopolamine, L-hyoscyamine; all plant 
mydriasis, excitation, confusion, frenzy,
parts toxic, 0.4%-0.85% dry weight; seeds,
hyperthermia, coma; occasional hypersensitive
unripe fruits almost all hyoscyamine; ripe
individuals
fruits have racemate atropine (approximately
half the CNS activity); birds are immune,
mammals are not; yellow varieties and those
in heavier soils and higher altitudes contain
alkaloids up to 30% dry weight; may be
glycosidase inhibitors (long-term neurologic
deficits)
Aucuba japonica
Aucuba,Japanese
Vomiting, occasionally fever
 Aucubin (triterpenoid saponin of the β-amyrin
aucuba, Japanese
group); berries
laurel spotted laurel
Begonia
Waxbegonia
Mucosal irritation and inflammation,
Insoluble calcium oxalates, soluble oxalates;
semperflorens-
hypersalivation, vomiting; no cases reported
underground parts only
cultorum
Begonia
Tuberous begonia
Mucosal irritation and inflammation,
Insoluble calcium oxalates, soluble oxalates,
tuberhybrida
hypersalivation, vomiting
cucurbitacin B; tubers only
Berberis spp.
Barberry, pipperidge
Confusion, epistaxis, vomiting, diarrhea, renal
Berberine (isoquinoline alkaloid); root and
irritation; high doses cause primary respiratory
stem bark, at 5.3%-15.3% dry weight; berries
arrest, hemorrhagic nephritis
harmless
Borago offcinalis
Borage
Much delayed (weeks to months) anorexia,
 Pyrrolizidine alkaloids; probably requires chronic
depression, rough pelage, diarrhea, emaciation,
consumption
constipation, icterus, hepatoencephalopathy,
death
Bowiea volubilis
Zulu potato, climbing
Vomiting, diarrhea, bradycardia, arrhythmias,
Bufadienolide cardiotoxins: bovicide A, B, C, and
onion
conduction defects, Ca2+-binding
D, hellebrin; entire plant and bulb
hyperkalermia, seizure agents reduce lethality
Brassaia
Schefflera, umbrella
Vomiting, copious diarrhea, ataxia, anorexia,
Soluble oxalates (0.9%-1.5%) wet weight leaves;
Cha
actinophylla
tree, rubber tree,
leukopenia, tachycardia, stupor, mydriasis,
falcarinol (alkylating agent, irritant)
pter
(Scheflera
starleaf
seizures
actinophylla)
Z
Brunfelsia spp.
Yesterday-today-and-
 Anxiety, excitation, persistent sneezing, vomiting.
Unknown
(ColorPlate
tomorrow
muscle tremors worsening to ataxia, seizures,
27-4)
death withinafewhours
Bryonia spp.
 Red bryony, white
 Drastic purgative, abdominal pain, bloody
Cucurbitacins (9) (tetracyclic triterpenes); 6-8
bryony
diarrhea, ataxia, renal inflammation,
berries
and
 respiratory paralysis; dermal irritant,
progressing to inflammation and blistering
Gar
Buxus
Box, boxwood,
Vomiting, diarrhea, awkward gait, dyspnea,
 Buxine (cyclobuxine, pregnane alkaloids); leaves
rden
sempervirens
common box
vocalizing, ataxia, convulsions, respiratory
up to 1% dry weight; 0.1 g/kg fatal to dogs;
failure death
750-g leaves fatal to horse; tannins
Continued
E
376
Table 27-l
Toxic Plant Inforrmation Summary—-cont'd
SE
Latin Name
Common Names
 Clinical Signs, Prognosis, Additional Treatment
Toxins, Plant Parts, Lethal Doses
CTION
Caesaipinia spp.
Bird-of-paradise,
Delay of % to several hours; profuse, persistent
Seeds and pods contain tannins; child
pride of Barbados,
vomiting: later diarrhea, possible dehydration;
hospitalized after ingesting 5 pods
poinciana
recovery within 24hours
M
Caladium spp.
Caladium
Severe mucosal irritation, inflammation, possible
Calcium oxalate raphides and idioblasts; leaves
Miscel
 blistering, hypersalivation, vomiting; if large
and bulbs
amounts, dysphagia, air way obstruction,
ell
respiratory compromise
Calla palustris
Wild calla, wild arum
Severe mucosal irritation, inflammation, possible
 Insoluble calcium oxalates
us
blistering, hypersalivation, vomiting; if large
10
amounts, dysphagia, airway obstruction,
XIC
respiratory compromise
tant
Caltha spp.
Marsh marigold,
Mucosal irritation and inflammation, profuse
Alkaloids and saponins, protoanemonin
cowslip, kingcup
salivation, bloody vomiting and diarrhea,
 severe abdominal pain, ataxia, seizures
Cannabis sativa
Marijuana
Depression, excitation, dyspnea, muscle tremors,
Tetrahydrocannabinol
hallucination, aberrant behavior, subnormal
temperature, sweating
Capsicum annuum
 Ornamental and
Mucosal irritation, inflammation, abdominal pain, 
Capsaicin, 0.2%-1%; less dihydro-, nordihydro-,
 cultivated peppers
vomiting, diarrhea
homo-, and homodihydro-capsaicin;
capsaicin accounts for 70% of irritant capacity,
release of substance P from sensory nerves,
pain response and inflammation
Caryota mitis
 Fishtail palm
 Mucosal irritation and inflammation, blistering.
Calcium oxalate raphides; berry contains 0.05%
hypersalivation, vomiting, airway constriction
Catharanthus
 Madagascar periwinkle
Severe abdominal pain and profuse diarrhea,
Vinca alkaloids (cytotoxic, inhibit microtubule
ros4s
dehydration, electrolyte imbalance; later
formation); all parts of plant
 peripheral neuropathy, bone marrow
suppression, cardiovascular collapse
Caulophyllum
Blue cohosh
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, dehydration,
Lupin alkaloids (quinolizidine alkaloids),
thalictroides
hypertension, muscular weakness, coma,
N-methylcytosine (nicotinic alkaloid),
respiratory paralysis, death
saponins
Cestrum diurnum
Day-blooming
Hypercalcemia, hypophosphatemia, bone
1,25-Dihydroxy-cholecalciferol
jessamine
weakness, calcinosis of heart, liver, kidneys,
 and lungs
Cestrum
Night-blooming
Dry mucosa, tachycardia, hyperthermia,
Anticholinergic alkaloids; green berries most
nocturnum
jessamine, Chinese
mydriasis, excitation
toxic; ripe berries not very toxic; also present
inkberry
in foliage
Chelidonium
Greater celandine
Vomiting, abdominal pain, severe bloody
2l alkaloids (benzo-phenanthridine and
majus
(bright yellow sap)
diarrhea, dehydration
protoberberine) with chelidonic acid; herb
0.3%-1.0%, root up to 2%, fruits approximately
0.15%; seasonally variable; benzyltetrahydro-
isoquinoline alkaloids (10 groups) and
triterpenoid saponins (weak)
Cicuta spp.
Water hemlock,
Within an hour of ingestion, vomiting, salivation, 
 Cicutoxin (GABA receptor antagonist or
Cha
cowbane
 abdominal pain, dizziness, vomiting,
 potassium channel blocker); one bite of
pter
unconsciousness, tonic-clonic convulsions,
chambered rootstock can kill a child; even
bitten and spit out, artificial respiration and
Z
death
 muscle relaxant therapy required
Clematis spp.
Old man's beard,
Subepidermal vesicant; mucosal inflammation
Protoanemonin (related to cantharidin)
traveler's joy, virgin's
and blistering, profuse salivation, intense
bower
abdominal pain, bloody vomiting and
diarrhea; ataxia, seizures
Kaffir lily
and
Clivia miniata
 Delayed severe vomiting, hypersalivation,
Lycorine (0.43% dry weight) and galanthamine;
diarrhea, dehydration, electrolyte imbalance
few grams of bulb may be fatal to a child
Gar
Cnidoscolus spp.
 Nettle, stinging nettle,
 Salivation, vomiting, arrhythmias, dyspnea,
Acetylcholine, histamine in plant hairs 
rden
noseburn
weakness, collapse
Coffee arabica
Coffee
 Central stimulation; allergic reactions
Methylxanthines, 1%-2%; allergen
Continued
E
Table 27-1
378
Toxic Plant Information Summary—cont'd
Latin Name
Common Names
Clinical Signs, Prognosis, Additional Treatment
Toxins, Plant Parts, Lethal Doses
SE
Colchicum
Meadow saffron,
Within 2-12 hours, abdominal pain, vomiting,
Colchicine (antimitotic, inhibits microtubule
CTION
autumnale
autumn crocus
 profuse diarrhea, fatal shock caused by
formation) in all parts; flowers (0.1%), seeds
dehydration; in 4-5 days, bone marrow
(0.8%), corm (0.6%); 1.5-2 g plant material,
suppression, peripheral neuropathy,
2-3 seeds, or l flower fatal
M
cardiovascular collapse
Miscel
Colocasia
Taro, dasheen, cocoyam 
 Mucosal irritation and inflammation, possible
Insoluble calcium oxalates
esculenta
blistering, hypersalivation; if large amounts,
lar
dysphagia, airway obstruction, respiratory
1e0
compromise
us
Conium
Hemlock, poison
 Beginning approximately 12 minutes after
 Conine (piperidine alkaloid); nicotinic alkaloid;
To
maculatum
hemlock
ingestion, pupillary dilatation, hypertension,
 content seasonally variable in plant; 0.25%-4%
XI
(Color Plate
trembling, ataxia, muscle weakness, paralysis,
of body weight in green material can be fatal
27-5)
 coma, respiratory paralysis, death
Convallaria
Lily-of-the-valley
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, bradycardia,
Cardenolide cardiotoxins (primarily
majalis
cardiac arrhythmias; hyperkalemia
convallotoxin, convallamarin) highest in seeds
Ipecac emetic contraindicated as cardiac
(0.45% ), flowers (0.4%), leaves (0.13%-0.2%
glycosides affect the vagus
dry weight); poorly absorbed; fruit skin,
 flowers contain steroidal saponins
Corynocarpus
Karaka nut
Convulsions, cardiovascular collapse
Prototoxin karakin is hydrolyzed to beta-
laevigatus
nitropropionic acid; inhibits succinate
dehydrogenase (Krebs cycle); seeds are toxic;
ripe fruit (excluding seeds) is edible
Crinum spp.
Crinum lily, spider lily,
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, potential
Lycorine, crinidine, bulbispermine,
swamp lily
electrolyte imbalance
crinine, powelline, hippadine, and other
phenanthridine alkaloids; all plant parts
are toxic, bulbs contain highest levels; like
Narcissus
Crocus sativus
Saffron crocus, autumn
 Extensive bleeding from skin, severe collapse,
 Safranal (from protocrocin precursor, a
crocus
nephrotoxicity
 tetraterpene glycoside); 5-10 g powdered
stigmas (saffron) deadly
Crotalaria spp.
Crotalaria, rattle box
Much delayed (weeks to months) anorexia,
Monocrotaline and other pyrrolizidine alkaloids;
depression, rough pelage, diarrhea, emaciation,
rarely, acute hepatic failure
constipation, icterus, hepatoencephalopathy,
death
Croton figlium
Croton
Vomiting, diarrhea; pupillary dilatation, giddiness,
Crotin (toxalbumin) in seeds; tigliane phorbol
delirium, convulsions
esters in seed oil and sap; few drops of sap can
cause a reaction
Cryptanthus
Green earth star
Severe mucosal irritation and inflammation,
 Insoluble calcium oxalates, proteolytic enzymes
acaulis
possible blistering, salivation, vomiting
Cryptostegia spp.
India rubber vine,
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, bradycardia,
Cardioactive glycosides
purple allamanda
cardiac arrhythmias; hyperkalemia
Cycas spp.
 Sago palm, leatherleaf
Violent emesis,diarrhea,ataxia,seizures,coma,
Cycasin, neocycasin A and B, macrozamin;
 palm, Japanese fern
death; few bites cause massive hepatic necrosis 
BMAA; MAM; 0.2%-0.3% dry weight in
palm
in dogs, hepatoencephalopathy; lower doses
seeds; also high levels in root, less in foliage
carcinogenic and teratogenic
Chapter
Cyclamen
Persian violet, alpine
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea; if absorbed,
Cyclamin (triterpenoid saponin); mostly in roots,
persicum
violet, sowbread
convulsions and paralysis
 little in leaves; small pieces of tuber may cause
convulsions
27
Cytisus spp.
Broom
Vomiting, abdominal pain, circulatory collapse,
 Sparteine (quinolizidine alkaloid)
cardiac arrhythmias, gradual paralysis,
Househol
convulsions, respiratory paralysis, death
Daphne mezereum
 Daphne, mezereon,
 Severe mucosal irritation and inflammation,
Mezerein (daphnane diterpene ester); LDs0
spurge olive
hypersalivation, dysphagia, severe abdominal
mouse: 0.275 mg/kg; vesicant found in all 
 pain, vomiting, bloody diarrhea, narcosis,
 parts; 2-3 fruits fatal to child
and
muscle twitching
Datura spp.
Jimsonweed, thorn
Classically described: “Red as a beet, dry as a
 Atropine, scopolamine, L-hyoscyamine; alkaloid
Gar
(Color
apple, moonflower,
bone, blind as a bat, and mad as a hatter!"
in leaves 0.38%, flowers 0.61%, shoots 0.16%,
rden
Plate 26-3,
devil's trumpet
Excitation, tachycardia, hyperthermia, confusion,
fruits 0.66%, pericarp 0.05%, seeds 0.58%,
Brugmansia
mydriasis, dry mouth, constipation,
roots 0.23% dry weight; scopolamine up to
spp.)
hallucinations, frenzy, coma
65% of alkaloid content in some flowers
Continued
Table 27-1
Toxic Plant Information Summary—cont'd
380
Latin Name
Common Names
Clinical Signs, Prognosis, Additional Treatment
Toxins, Plant Parts, Lethal Doses
SE
Delphinium spp
Larkspur
Uneasiness, vomiting, weakness, ataxia, paralysis,
MLA, other reversible nicotinic ACh receptor
CTION
respiratory paralysis, death
binders; highest levels found in seeds and
Neostigmine or physostigmine is of limited use
immature plant, decrease as flowers bud
Dicentra spp.
 Bleeding heart, squirrel
Trembling and staggering; convulsions; frothing
Aporphine, bulbocapnine, protoberberine,
M
(Color Plate
corn, Dutchman's
at the mouth; vomiting; dyspnea; diarrhea;
 protopine (isoquinoline alkaloids); all parts
Miscellan
27-6)
breeches,
glassy-eyed, pain-flled expressions
toxic; foliage 0.17%, root 0.76% dry weight
staggerweed
alkaloids D. spectabilis
Dieffenbachia sp.
Dieffenbachia, dumb
Severe mucosal irritation and inflammation,
Calcium oxalate raphides and idioblasts; also
(Color Plate
cane
possible blistering, hypersalivation, vomiting; if
soluble oxalates and dumbcain, a proteolytic
us
27-7)
large amounts, dysphagia, airway obstruction,
enzyme
10XI
respiratory compromise
Digitalis purpurea
Foxglove, common
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, lethargy,
Cardenolide cardiotoxins: up to 1% dry
foxglove, long
bradycardia, ventricular arrhythmias;
weight in leaves: desacetyldigilanid A,
purples, dead men's
hyperkalemia
desacetyldigilanid B, glucogitaloxin; 10%-20%
fingers
 Ipecac emesis contraindicated because of effect of
hydrolyzed to digitoxin, gitoxin, gitaloxin;
cardiac glycosides on the vagus
 seeds more toxic than leaves; also saponins
digitonin, gitonin, tigonin
Durantarepens
Golden dewdrop
 Hyperthermia, mydriasis, tachycardia,
Saponins
convulsions; gastrointestinal irritation,
vomiting, diarrhea, electrolyte imbalance
Echium spp.
Purple viper's-bugloss,
 Much delayed (weeks to months) signs: anorexia,
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids; probably requires chronic
Paterson's curse,
 depression, rough pelage, diarrhea, emaciation,
consumption
Calamity Jane
 constipation, icterus, hepatoencephalopathy,
death
Ephedra spp.
Ephedra, ma huang,
Vomiting, tachycardia, hypertension, ataxia,
 Ephedrine, pseudo- and norpseudoephedrine;
Mormon tea
weakness, potential myocardial infarction 
sympathomimetic amines
Epipremnum
Devil's ivy, ivy arum,
Mucosal irritation and inflammation, vomiting,
Insoluble calcium oxalate raphides
aureum(Color
pothos, hunter's
hypersalivation; if large amounts, dysphagia,
Plate 27-8)
robe, taro vine
airway obstruction, respiratory compromise
Eriobotrya
Loquat, Japanese plum
 Delayed abdominal pain, vomiting, lethargy,
Seed pits contain amygdalin (cyanogenic
japonica
coma, convulsions, cardiovascular collapse
glycoside)
Erythrina spp.
Coral bean, coral tree
Uneasiness, vomiting, weakness, ataxia, paralysis,
 Isoquinoline alkaloids, reversible nicotinic ACh
respiratory paralysis, death
receptor binders
Eschscholzia
California poppy
Narcosis, muscular relaxation, depression of the
Rhoeadine-type alkaloids: thebaine,
californica
central respiratory center, pinpoint pupils,
papaverrubines, papaverine; small amounts
cyanosis, respiratory failure, death
 compared with opium poppy
Eucalyptus spp.
Eucalyptus, blue gum,
 Mucosal irritation and erythema, vomiting,
Essential oils 4.8%-6.6% of leaf dry weight,
cider gum, silver
diarrhea
largely cineole
dollar, Australian
fever tree
Euonymus
Euonymus, European
 Delayed vomiting, abdominal pain, severe
Evonoside, evobioside, evomonoside (cardiac
europaeus
spindle tree
 diarrhea, bradycardia, arrhythmias
glycosides) in berries and seeds, evonine,
Emesis contraindicated because of cardiac
neoevonine, 4-deoxyevonine (alkaloids)
glycoside effect on vagus
Eupatorium
White snakeroot
Delayed 3-1l days: trembling, ataxia, weakness,
Tremetol and tremetone; 0.5%-1.5% of body
hapter
rugosum
severe repeated vomiting, constipation and
weight is fatal; recovery rare, slow, can be
thirst, acetone breath, prostration, delirium,
incomplete
coma, death
Euphorbia lactea
Candelabra cactus,
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea
Diterpene esters in milky sap (type not specified)
false cactus, mottled
spurge, dragon
bones
PIOL
Euphorbia mili
Crown of thorns
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea; thorns tend
 Hydroxyphorbol diterpene esters in milky sap
and
to limit consumption and access
(milliamines A through I); also triterpenes,
flavonoids
Euphorbia
Spurge, creeping
 Dermal blistering can take a week to heal; no
 Ingenane diterpene esters in milky sap
der
myrisinites
spurge, donkey tail
mention of oral route
 Poinsettia, Christmas
Euphorbia
Hothouse varieties: at most mouth irritation and
Very little diterpene ester; considerable natural
pulcherrima
star
some vomiting
variability in milky sap
Continued
382
Table 27-l
Toxic Plant Inforrmation Summary—-cont'd
SE
Latin Name
Common Names
Clinical Signs, Prognosis, Additional Treatment
Toxins, Plant Parts, Lethal Doses
CTION
Euphorbia
Euphorbium
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea; one of the
Daphnane diterpene esters (resiniferatoxin) in
resinifera
most irritating euphorbs
milky sap
Euphorbia tirucalli
 Pencil tree, milkbush,
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea
 Phorbol diterpene esters in milky sap
LW
 Indian tree, rubber
Misc
euphorbia, finger
tree, naked lady
llar
Euphorbia spp.
Spurges
 Mucosal inflammation, gastroenteritis, vomiting.
Phorbol, daphnane, and ingenane diterpene
1e0
abdominal pain, diarrhea
esters in milky sap; toxicity varies with season,
us
 species exposed, amount of latex and time
10
exposed
XIC
Galanthusnivalis
Snowdrop
Persistent vomiting, diarrhea, sedation,
 Lycorine; galanthamine (centrally acting
an
hypotension, seizures, electrolyte imbalance
 anticholinesterase); bulb
Gelsemium
Yellow jessamine,
 Dry mouth, ataxia, dysphagia, strychninelike
 Indolizidine alkaloids, gelsemine, gelsemicine
sempervirens
Carolina jasmine
muscular contractions
Ginkgo biloba
Ginkgo
Large amounts of seeds, possible delayed,
4-o-methylpyridoxine (suppresses GABA
recurrent seizures, preceded by vomiting and
production); urushiol-like compounds in the
diarrhea
seed coat
Gloriosa superba
Gloriosa lily, glory lily,
Within 2-12 hours: abdominal pain, profuse
Gloriosine and colchicine, both antimitotic;
climbing lily
vomiting, diarrhea, dysphagia, oliguria or
 3 mg/g tuber, 7-11 mg colchicine is fatal to
anuria; fatal hypovolemic shock; if lower dose,
adult humans
bone marrow depression in 4-5 days; alopecia
at 12 days; respiratory failure
Glycyrrhiza glabra
Licorice
Glycyrrhizin (triterpenoid saponin)
failure
Gymnocladus
 Kentucky coffee tree
Hypertension, mydriasis, seizures; weakness,
Cytisine (nicotinic alkaloid)
dioicus
 paralysis, coma, respiratory paralysis
Gypsophila
Baby's breath
 Dermal irritant and allergen; vomiting, diarrhea
Unknown
paniculata
Haemanthus
 Blood lily, powderpuff
Salivation, vomiting, diarrhea, paralysis, collapse
Lycorine, chidanthine, hippeastrine,
multiflorus
lily
 haemanthidine, haemultine; bulb
Hedera helix
English ivy, common
 Hypersalivation, vomiting, abdominal pain,
Hederasaponins B and C, rutin, caffeic
(Color Plate
ivy, Irish ivy
diarrhea, electrolyte imbalance tachycardia,
acid, chlorogenic acid, alpha-hederin,
27-9)
stupor, mydriasis, convulsions
emetine, berries; falcarinol, falcarinone,
didehydrofalcarinol (alkylating agents,
irritants)
Heliotropium spp.
Heliotrope, scorpion's
Much delayed (weeks to months): anorexia,
 Pyrrolizidine alkaloids; effect probably requires
tail
depression, rough pelage, diarrhea, emaciation,
chronic consumption
 constipation, icterus, hepatoencephalopathy,
death
Helleborus spp.
Christmas rose, black
Intense vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea,
 Hellebrin, other bufadienolide cardiotoxins;
hellebore
mydriasis, bradycardia, arrhythmia,
protoanemonin, ranunculin in foliage;
idioventricular rhythm, ventricular fibrillation,
helleborin (steroidal saponin)
hyperkalemia, hallucination
Chapter
Lidocaine has been effective to control
arrhythmias
Heracleum spp.
Hogweed, giant
 Primary photosensitization
6,7-Furanocoumarins
Z
hogweed, common
parsnip
Hippeastrum
Lily of the palace,
Nausea, vomiting, salivation, some diarrhea,
Lycorine (phenanthridine alkaloid) in bulb
aulicum
naked lady,
paralysis, and central collapse
amaryllis
Hippomane
 Manchineel tree,
 Mucosal irritation and damage, vomiting, severe
White latex includes hippomane A (same as
and
mancinella
manzanillo
abdominal pain, diarrhea
huratoxin) and B, daphnane diterpene esters
Hura crepitans
 Sandbox tree, monkey
 Mucosal irritation and damage, vomiting, severe
Hurin (toxalbumin), huratoxin in seeds;
Gar
pistol
abdominal pain, diarrhea
daphnane diterpene esters in seed oil/sap
rden
Hyacinthoides
Bluebell
Choking, central depression, attempted vomiting,
Glucosidase inhibitors; leaves, fruits, and bulbs:
 DMDP (up to 1% dry weight); in leaves:
Plar
nonscripta
weak, slow pulse, hypothermia, bloody
diarrhea
D-AB1
Continued
8
384
Table 27-l
Toxic Plant Information Summary—cont'd
SE
CTION
Latin Name
Common Names
Clinical Signs, Prognosis, Additional Treatment
Toxins, Plant Parts, Lethal Doses
Hyacinthus
Hyacinth, Dutch
Vomiting, hypersalivation, diarrhea
 Lycorine (phenanthridine alkaloids) in bulb; less
orientalis
hyacinth
toxic than Narcissus
M
Hydrangea
Hydrangea, hills of
 Abdominal pain, vomiting, lethargy; in high
Hydrangin (cyanogenic glycoside): highest levels
macrophylla
snow, French
 doses, coma, convulsions, cardiovascular
in flower buds
iscellan
hydrangea,
collapse
hortensia
leous
Hydrastis
Goldenseal
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea
Berberine
canadensis
Hymenocallis spp.
10
Spider lily, crown-
Very persistent vomiting, abdominal pain,
Lycorine (emetic) and tazettine (hypotensive)
beauty, sea daffodil,
 diarrhea, dehydration, electrolyte imbalance
(phenanthridine alkaloids) in bulb
basket flower,
alligator lily
Hyoscyamus niger
Henbane
Dry mouth, dysphagia, tachycardia, mydriasis,
Atropine, L-hyoscyamine, scopolamine up to
confusion, frenzy, coma
40% of total alkaloid; roots 0.08%, leaves
0.17%, seeds 0.3% dry weight
Hypericum
St. John's wort, Klamath
 Primary photosensitization
Hypericin and hyperforin
perforatum
weed
Ilex spp.
Holly, yaupon,
Abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea with more
Foliage: tannins, caffeine, theobromine; berries:
possumhaw
than two berries
triterpene compounds, saponins, low level 
cardiotonic activity
Ipomoea spp.
Morning glory,
Depression, mydriasis, muscle tremors, ataxia,
Indole alkaloids; D-lysergic acid amide,
 bindweed, pearly
increased deep tendon reflexes, diarrhea,
 D-isolysergic acid amide, and elymoclavine;
gates
hypotension, hallucinations
seeds only; 200-300 seeds necessary to
produce hallucinations
Iris spp.
Iris, crested iris, dwarf
Vomiting, abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea
Iridin (irritant phenolic glycoside), myristic
iris, flag, fleur-de-lis,
acid, irisoquin (benzoquinone); highest in
blue flag
rhizomes
jatropha spp.
 Physic nut, jicamilla,
Vomiting; profuse, sometimes bloody diarrhea;
Curcin (toxalbumin); phorbol esters; seeds
peregrine, bellyache
ataxia; dehydration; electrolyte imbalance
approximately 60% oil
bush
Juniperus sabina
Savin
Profuse vomiting, diarrhea
Podophyllotoxins: sabinene, sabinyl acetate
(terpene derivatives); has been used to control
warts
Kalanchoe spp.
Kalanchoe, feltbush,
Vomiting, diarrhea, ataxia, trembling, sudden
Lanceotoxin A (cumulative bufadienolide
(Color Plate
velvet elephant ear,
death by cardiac failure
cardiotoxins)
39-5)
devil's backbone,
lavender-scallops
Kalmia spp.
Mountain laurel, dwarf
Copious salivation, excitation, vomiting, miosis,
Grayanotoxins (cardioactive diterpenoid),
laurel
diarrhea, bradycardia, severe hypotension,
sodium channel activators
conduction disturbances, weakness, ataxia,
paralysis, coma, occasional seizures
Emetic contraindicated owing to vagal effects
Karwinskia
Coyotilla, buckthorn,
Long (weeks) latency; ascending posterior
Karwinol A (neurotoxic polycyclic polyphenol)
Cha
Fumboldtiana
tullidora
 paresis by demyelination; terminal respiratory
in berries (also called buckthorn toxins T-496,
pter
paralysis
T-514, T-544)
Golden chain tree,
Vomiting, hypersalivation; hypertension,
 Cytisine (nicotinic quinolizidine alkaloid); entire
Z
Laburnum
anagyroides
 laburnum
excitation, seizures; higher doses: weakness,
plant is toxic, especially seeds; laburnine,
 paralysis, coma, respiratory paralysis, death
laburnamine
Lantana camara
Lantana, shrub
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, ataxia,
 Unripe berries most toxic; pentacyclic triterpenes
verbena, yellow
 depression, cholestasis, bilirubinemia, hepatic
lantadene A and B, 0.5%-2.2% dry weight, in
sage, bunchberry
damage, lethargy, coma, death
leaves
pue
Ledum palustre
Wild rosemary
 Delayed approximately 1 hour: copious salivation,
Grayanotoxin I (cardioactive diterpenoid); ledol,
excitation, vomiting, perspiration, miosis,
palustrol (sesquiterpene alcohols) found in
Gar
 diarrhea, bradycardia, severe hypotension,
essential oil
rden
conduction disturbances, weakness, ataxia,
 paralysis, coma, seizures
Induced emesis contraindicated owing to vagal
effects
385
Continued
386
Table 27-1
Toxic Plant Information Summary—cont'd
Latin Name
Common Names
dinical Signs, Prognosis, Additional Treatment
Toxins, Plant Parts, Lethal Doses
Leucothoe spp.
Blacklaurel, mountain
Delayed approximately 1 hour: copious salivation,
Grayanotoxins (cardioactive diterpenoid); ledol,
CTION
laurel
excitation, vomiting, perspiration, miosis,
palustrol (sesquiterpene alcohols) found in
 diarrhea, bradycardia, severe hypotension,
essential oil
conduction disturbances, weakness, ataxia,
LW
paralysis, coma, occasional seizures
Mis
 Induced emesis contraindicated owing to vagal
effects
ell
Lilium spp.,
Easter lily, star-gazer
Vomiting, depression; renal failure in cats
Unknown: small amounts of flower, stem, and
hybrids
lily, tiger lily (Color
leaves
U5
Plate 20-3)
10
Ligustrum spp.
Privet, wax-leaf
Abdominal pains, vomiting, watery diarrhea,
 Syringin (ligustrin), irritant glycoside; whole
ligustrum
 rapid pulse
 plant, especially berries
Lobelia spp.
 Lobelia, cardinal flower,
 Salivation, vomiting, tachycardia, hypertension,
Lobeline, nicotinic alkaloids
blue lobelia, Indian
mydriasis, seizures; in larger amounts,
tobacco
weakness, ataxia, depression, coma, death
Lonicera spp.
Honeysuckle
 No clinical signs, to vomiting, abdominal pain,
Saponins in berries; at least 30 berries for clinical
diarrhea
signs (adult human)
Lophophora
 Peyote, mescal, mescal
Mydriasis, vomiting, diarrhea, ataxia,
Mescaline; all parts toxic
williamsii
button
hallucinations
Lupinus spp.
Lupin, lupine,
 Dry mucous membranes, hyperthermia,
Sparteine, lupinine, lupanine (quinolizidine
bluebonnet (not
mydriasis, confusion
 alkaloids); entire plant; anticholinergic
Texas bluebonnet)
Lycopersicon
Tomato
Delayed 4-9 hours: vomiting, severe diarrhea,
Solanines in foliage; cholinesterase inhibition;
lycopersicum
possible dehydration and electrolyte imbalance
ripened fruits are nontoxic
Lycoris spp.
Golden spider lily, red
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, dehydration,
Lycorine, phenanthridine alkaloids
spider lily, magic lily
electrolyte imbalance
Lyonia spp.
Fetter bush, stagger
 Hypersalivation, vomiting, abdominal pain,
 Lyoniol A, similar to grayanotoxins, sodium
bush
diarrhea, bradycardia, dysrhythmias, coma,
channel activator
convulsions
Lysichiton
Yellow skunk cabbage
Irritation to the GIT; if large amounts ingested,
Insoluble calcium oxalates
americanum
 airway obstruction, respiratory compromise
Macrozammia spp.
Zamia
Violent emesis, diarrhea, ataxia, seizures, coma,
Macrozamin, cycasin, neocycasin A and B; amino
 death; massive hepatic necrosis in dogs; lower
acid MAA; MAM
 doses carcinogenic and teratogenic
Mahonia spp.
 Oregon grape, trailing
Confusion, epistaxis, vomiting, diarrhea, renal
 Berberine (isoquinoline alkaloid); root and
mahonia
irritation; high doses: primary respiratory
stem bark contain 0.06% dry weight; berries
 arrest and hemorrhagic nephritis
harmless
Maianthemum
May lily
Gastrointestinal irritation, vomiting
Saponins
bifolium
Malus spp.
Apple
Hypersalivation, vomiting, lethargy, coma,
Amygdalin (cyanogenic glycoside) in seeds only;
convulsions, cardiovascular collapse
1cup seeds fatal to adult human
Melia azederach
Chinaberry, chinaberry
Vomiting, diarrhea, weakness, ataxia, depression,
Meliatoxins Al, A2, B1 (limonoid
tree
convulsions, coma
tetranorterpenes) in fruits and bark; 5-6 fruits
fatal to young dog within 48 hours
Menispermum
Cardiac dysrhythmias, neurologic excitation,
Chapter
Moonseed, sarsaparilla
 Dauricine, potassium channel inhibitor, in fruits
canadense
seizures
Menziesia
Mock azalea, rusty leaf
Hypersalivation, excitation, vomiting, miosis,
Grayanotoxin I (cardioactive diterpenoid); ledol,
ferruginea
diarrhea, bradycardia, severe hypotension,
palustrol (sesquiterpene alcohols) found in
Z
conduction disturbances, weakness, ataxia,
essential oil
Househol
paralysis, coma, occasional seizures
 Induced emesis contraindicated because of vagal
effects
Monstera spp.
Split-leaf philodendron,
 Mucosal irritation and inflammation, possible
Calcium oxalate raphides and idioblasts; found
and
ceriman, Swiss
blistering, hypersalivation, vomiting; if large
throughout the plant
cheese plant, fruit-
amounts: dysphagia, airway obstruction,
Gar
salad plant, Mexican
respiratory compromise
breadfruit
Myoporum laetum
 Ngaio tree
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, dehydration,
 Ngaione (essential oil) furanoid sesquiterpene
electrolyte imbalance; seizures
ketone in leaves and fruit
Myristica fragrans
Nutmeg
 Depression, aggression, disturbed vision 
Myristicin
3
Continued
388
Table 27-l
Toxic Plant Inforrmation Summary—-cont'd
SE
Latin Name
Common Names
Clinical Signs, Prognosis, Additional Treatment
Toxins, Plant Parts, Lethal Doses
CTION
Nandina
Heavenly bamboo
 Incoordination, weakness, seizures, respiratory
Cyanogenic glycosides: all parts potentially
domestica
failure
problematic
Narcissus spp.
 Daffodil, jonquil,
Vomiting, hypersalivation, diarrhea, dehydration,
Lycorine, other phenanthridine alkaloids, highest
LW
narcissus
sedation, hypotension, electrolyte imbalance
levels in bulb, also found in stem and leaves
Mis
Nerium oleander
Oleander
Vomiting, diarrhea, bradycardia, arrhythmias,
Oleandrin (cardenolide cardiac glycoside), as
hyperkalemia, sudden death
little as 0.005% of animal's body weight in
 Induced emesis contraindicated because of vagal
plant material can be fatal
effects
us
Nicotiana spp.
Tobacco, tree tobacco
Vomiting, diarrhea, tremors, hypertension,
Nicotine; leaves 0.5%-9.0% dry weight; all parts
mydriasis, seizures; in larger doses, weakness,
aiden dds auos u auseqeue ose ixo
 paralysis, coma, respiratory failure
absorbed through skin, mucous membranes
Ornithogalum spp.
Star of Bethlehem,
Vomiting, diarrhea, hyperkalemia, bradycardia,
Convallotoxin (0.04%), convalloside, and other
wonder flower,
heart block, arrhythmias
cardioactive glycosides found mostly in bulb
dove's dung,
Induced emesis contraindicated because of effect
nap-at-noon
on the vagus
Oxalis spp.
Sorrel, wood sorrel
 Rapid respirations, stupor, vomiting, bloody
Soluble sodium and potassium oxalates
diarrhea, coma, hypocalcemic tetany; renal
throughout entire plant
 oxalosis can occur if large amounts consumed
Papaver spp.
Poppies
 Narcosis, muscular relaxation, central respiratory
Rhoeadine-type alkaloids, papaverrubines,
 depression, miosis, cyanosis, respiratory
thebaine, papaverine; very small amounts
failure, death
compared with opium poppy
Paris quadrifolia
Herb Paris
Vomiting, diarrhea, miosis 
 Steroidal saponins (old names: paristyphin,
paridin); whole plant toxic
Periploca graeca
Silk vine
Vomiting, diarrhea, bradycardia, arrhythmias,
Cardioactive glycosides
collapse, death
Philodendron sp.
 Philodendron,
Mucosal irritation and inflammation,
Calcium oxalate (up to 0.7% dry weight) found
(Color Plate
sweetheart plant,
hypersalivation, vomiting, diarrhea
throughout the plant
27-10)
parlor ivy
Physalis spp.
Chinese lantern,
Vomiting, diarrhea
Solanine glycosides in unripe fruits
 ground cherry, Cape
gooseberry
Phytolacca
Pokeweed, pokeberry,
Gastrointestinal irritation, delayed vomiting,
Phytolaccatoxin and other triterpenoid saponins;
americana
 poke salad, ink plant
abdominal pain, diarrhea
levels much higher in roots than in leaves;
least in berries
Pieris spp.
Pieris, fetterbush, lily-
Delayed hypersalivation, excitation, vomiting,
Grayanotoxin (cardioactive diterpenoid sodium
of-the-valley bush
diarrhea,bradycardia, arrhythmias,
channel activator); as little as 1 g of fresh
hypotension, weakness, ataxia, paralysis, coma,
leaves/kg fatal to goats
occasional seizures
Induced emesis contraindicated because of vagal
effects
Pista stratiotes
Water lettuce,
Mucosal irritation and inflammation, possible
Insoluble calcium oxalates
shellflower
blistering, hypersalivation, vomiting
Plumbago spp.
Cape plumbago, cape
Vomiting, gastritis, diarrhea
Plumbagin (quinone) found in root; vesicant
leadwort, Ceylon
irritant
apt
leadwort
Podophyllum spp.
ter
 May apple, mandrake
 Oropharyngeal pain, delayed intense abdominal
Podophyllatoxins (lignan beta-glycosides);
Z
 pain, profuse watery diarrhea, dehydration,
cytotoxic, inhibiting microtubule formation;
electrolyte imbalance, peripheral neuropathy,
fruit least toxic
bone marrow suppression, cardiovascular
collapse
Polyscias spp.
 Balfour aralia, dinner
 Tachycardia, stupor, mydriasis, seizures
 Falcarinone (alkylating agent, irritant); saponins
 plate aralia, Ming
and
aralia, geranium-leaf
aralia, wild coffee,
Garden
coffee tree
Polygonatum spp.
Solomon's seal
Vomiting, diarrhea
Steroidal saponins, especially fruits, seeds;
 Plants
aglycone is diosgenin
Continued
390
Table 27-1
Toxic Plant Information Summary—cont'd
Latin Name
Common Names
Clinical Signs, Prognosis, Additional Treatment
Toxins, Plant Parts, Lethal Doses
SE
Prunus spp.
Apricot, Damson plum,
Sublethal HCN acid poisoning: dizziness, local
 Kernel within the pit contains varying
CTION
bitter almond,
irritation, vomiting (may smell of bitter
concentrations of amygdalin (up to 8%);
bird cherry, choke
almonds), pink mucous membranes, dyspnea
cyanide blocks cellular respiration at
cherry, peach, wild
cytochrome oxidase
M
black cherry
Miscel
Prunus
Cherry laurel
Sublethal HCN poisoning: see P armeniaca
Prunasin: in leaves 1%-1.5%, very low levels in
laurocerasus
fruit pulp; amygdalin very high in seeds
llar
Pulsatilla spp.
 Pulsatilla
 Intense oropharyngeal pain and inflammation,
 Protoanemonin (lactone of y-hydroxyvinyl-
leous
mucosal blistering, hypersalivation, bloody
acrylic acid); subepidermal vesicant
vomiting and diarrhea; ataxia, seizures
10XI
Quercus spp.
Oak
Marked lack of appetite, diarrhea, hepatic injury,
Pyrogallol, tannins in acorns
colic
Ranunculus spp.
Buttercup, blister wort,
 Intense oropharyngeal pain and inflammation,
 Protoanemonin and ranunculin in sap
crowfoot
mucosal blistering, hypersalivation, bloody
(subepidermal vesicant); 0.27%-2.5% dry
vomiting and diarrhea; ataxia, seizures
weight in foliage of various species
Raphanus
Wild radish
Gastroenteritis, liver and kidney disorders
Glucosinolates
rhaphinistrum
Rhamnus spp.
Alder buckthorn, bear-
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea
Glucofrangulin (anthracene glycoside) in fruits,
berry, coffeeberry,
bark, seeds; bark and fruits used as a purgative
cascara sagrada
and laxative
Rheum spp., hyb.
Rhubarb, pie plant,
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea; with large
Anthraquinone glycoside cathartics in leaves;
wine plant
amounts, hypocalcemia, renal damage
soluble oxalate (0.28% dry weight of leaf
material)
Rhododendron
Azaleas,
 Delayed hypersalivation, excitation, vomiting,
Grayanotoxins I, II, III (cardioactive
sPP.
rhododendrons
miosis, diarrhea, bradycardia, arrhythmias,
diterpenoids); in flowers, leaves, nectar,
hypotension, weakness, ataxia, paralysis, coma,
honey; not all species and hybrids toxic, great
occasional seizures
variability; sodium channel activator
Induced emesis contraindicated because of vagal
effects
Rhoeo spathacea
Oyster plant, Moses in
Mucosal irritation, vomiting, abdominal pain
Unidentifed irritant
aboat
Ricinus communis
Castor bean plant
 Delayed 2-72 hours, dose dependent: vomiting.
Ricin (toxalbumin, two chains) stops protein
(Color Plate
abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea, dehydration
synthesis; one chewed seed can be fatal; 1 mg
74-1)
circulatory collapse, death
ricin/g seed; LD mouse (rat, dog) = 1 mcg/kg;
rabbit = 0.1 mcg/kg
Rivina humilis
Rouge plant, pigeon
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea
Unknown toxin similar to phytolaccatoxin
berry
Robinia
Black locust
Vomiting, abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea,
Robin (toxalbumin/lectin, two chains, not linked)
pseudoacacia
dehydration
 found in seeds, bark, leaves; less toxic than
abrin or ricin
Sambucus spp.
Elderberry, elder, dwarf
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, coma,
Cyanogenic glycosides, or a toxalbumin, entire
(Color Plate
elder
convulsions
plant, especially root
27-12)
Scheflera spp.
Schefflera, umbrella
Vomiting, copious diarrhea, ataxia, anorexia,
Falcarinol (alkylating agent, irritant); soluble
tree, rubber tree,
leukopenia, tachycardia, stupor, mydriasis,
oxalates, 0.9%-1.5% wet weight in leaves
hapter
starleaf
seizures
Scilla spp.
Squill; star hyacinth,
Vomiting, diarrhea, bradycardia, arrhythmias
Proscillaridin A (bufadienolide cardiotoxin);
Cuban lily, Peruvian
inhibits glycosidases
jacinth, hyacinth of
Hous
Peru
Senecio spp.
Ragwort, cineraria,
Acute hepatitis if large amount; chronic or low
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids: 0.3%-0.4% dry weight;
Seh
butterweed,
level: much delayed anorexia, depression,
not all species proved to contain alkaloids
PlOL
groundsel
rough coat, diarrhea or constipation,
emaciation, icterus, hepatoencephalopathy,
death
Sinapis spp.
White mustard,
Acute gastroenteritis, pain, diarrhea
Gucosinolates
der
charlock
Solanum spp.
Nightshade, bittersweet,
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, tachycardia,
Variable major alkaloids: solanine, tomatine,
(Color Plate
love apple, Carolina
weakness, ataxia, respiratory failure, death
solamarine, solasodine: green berries often
27-13)
 horsenettle, nipple-
contain highest concentrations, followed by
fruit, potato vine
leaves, shoots, and ripe berries
Continued
392
Table 27-l
Toxic Plant Inforrmation Summary—-cont'd
SE
Latin Name
Common Names
Clinical Signs, Prognosis, Additional Treatment
Toxins, Plant Parts, Lethal Doses
CTION
Solanum
Jerusalem cherry,
Vomiting, mydriasis, drowsiness
Solanocapsine, solanocapsidine, solanine found
pseudocapsicum
Christmas cherry,
in all plant parts; ripe and unripe berries
(Color Plate
Natal cherry, winter
 similarly toxic; cholinesterase inhibition
LW
22-1)
cherry, ornamental
Mis
addad
Sophora spp.
 Mescal bean, mountain
Hypersalivation, vomiting, diarrhea; hypertension,
 Cytisine, nicotinic alkaloids (lupine-type); one
laurel, frijolito, Eve's
mydriasis, trembling, weakness, paralysis,
seed, masticated, is lethal; foliage at 1% body
necklace
death due to respiratory failure
weight is toxic, 2% is fatal
u5
Sorbus spp.
 Rowan, mountain
 Minor gastroenteritis
Low levels amygdalin in seeds; parasorbic acid
10
ash, service tree,
(local irritant)
whitebeam
Spathiphyllum sp.
 Peace lily, white
Mucosal irritation and inflammation
 Insoluble calcium oxalate raphides; possible
(Color Plate
anthurium, spathe
proteinaceous toxin
27-11)
flower, Mauna Loa
Spigelia spp.
Pinkroot, West Indian
Muscle spasms to severe seizures; possible
Spigeline (strychnine-like alkaloid)
pinkroot
rhabdomyolysis and resultant renal effects
Symphoricarpus
 Snowberry, wolfberry,
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea
 Saponin, and some chelidonine (isoquinoline
spp.
 Indian currant
 alkaloid) in berries
Symphytum
Comfrey
Much delayed (weeks to months): anorexia,
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids; toxicity probably requires
officinale
depression, rough pelage, diarrhea, emaciation,
chronic consumption
constipation, icterus, hepatoencephalopathy,
death
Symplocarpus
Skunk cabbage
 Mucosal irritation and inflammation, possible
Insoluble calcium oxalate raphides and possible
foetidus
blistering, hypersalivation, vomiting; iflarge
proteinaceous toxin
 amounts, dysphagia, air way obstruction,
 respiratory compromise
Synadenium
African milkbush
Mucosal irritation and inflammation, potential
Tigliane-type diterpene esters (primary irritants,
granti
blistering; vomiting, diarrhea
cocarcinogens)
Syngonium spp.
Goosefoot, nephthytis,
Mucosal irritation and inflammation, possible
Calcium oxalate raphides and idioblasts; also
African evergreen,
blistering, hypersalivation, vomiting; if large
soluble oxalates
arrowhead vine
 amounts: dysphagia, airway obstruction,
 respiratory compromise; rapid respiration,
 stupor; rarely hypocalcemic tetany
Tamus communis
Black bryony
 Mucosal irritation and inflammation, possible
Calcium oxalate raphides and idioblasts; traces
blistering, hypersalivation, vomiting, diarrhea
of alkaloids; saponins (20 mg diosgenin/kg);
photosensitive phenanthrene derivative
Taxus spp.
Yew; Japanese, English,
 Ataxia, mydriasis; abdominal pain,
 Taxines (cardioactive glycoalkaloids); various
western, Canadian,
hypersalivation, vomiting, bradycardia,
 bioflavonoids with CNS-depressant, analgesic,
and Florida yew
hypotension, hyperkalemia, death
or antipyretic activity; cyanogenic glycosides
Induced emesis contraindicated because of effects
(not significant); fleshy red aril around seeds
on thevagus
not toxic
Yellow oleander
Vomiting, diarrhea, bradycardia, arrhythmias,
Peruvoside, thevetins, thevetoxin (cardiac
peruviana
hyperkalemia, collapse, death
glycosides); entire plant is toxic, 8-10 seeds
 Induced emesis contraindicated because of effects
necessary to kill an adult human
Cha
on the vagus
pter
Thuja occidentalis
White cedar
Gastric bleeding, hepatic degeneration, renal
Thujone (monoterpene, strong local irritant)
 damage, tetanic convulsions
Z
Tillandsia cyanea
 Pink quill
Severe mucosal irritation and inflammation,
 Insoluble calcium oxalates, proteolytic enzymes
 possible blistering, hypersalivation, vomiting
Tragia spp.
 Nettle, stinging nettle,
 Salivation, vomiting, arrhythmias, dyspnea,
Acetylcholine, histamine in plant hairs
noseburn
weakness, collapse
dds vdun
Tulip, garden tulip
Vomiting, hypersalivation, arrhythmias, dyspnea
Tuliposides A, B (convert to tulipalins A, B,
and
lactone allergens); a lectin that inhibits DNA
 synthesis; mostly in bulb
Urginea maritima
 Red squill, sea onion
Vomiting, diarrhea, bradycardia, arrhythmias,
Proscillaridin A (bufadienolide cardiotoxins),
Tden
hyperkalemia, seizures
noncumulative
Ca2+-binding agents decrease lethality
Plar
Continued
394
SE
CTION
M
Mis
Table 27-l
Toxic Plant Inforrmation Summary—-cont'd
Latin Name
Common Names
Clinical Signs, Prognosis, Additional Treatment
Toxins, Plant Parts, Lethal Doses
leous
Urtica spp.
 Nettle, stinging nettle,
Salivation, vomiting, arrhythmias, dyspnea,
Acetylcholine, histamine in plant hairs
noseburn
weakness, collapse
Veratrum spp.
False hellebore, white
 Distal paresthesia gradually extending centrally,
Protoveratrines A and B (tetraesters),
hellebore
followed by vomiting, diarrhea, paralysis,
jerveratrum (furanopiperidines); steroidal
intense pain, hypothermia, dyspnea,
 alkaloids; sodium channel activators
arrhythmias, hypotension, collapse, respiratory
paralysis, cardiac failure
Viburnum spp.
Guelder rose, highbush
Mild smooth muscle stimulant, vomiting, diarrhea Bark, leaves only; berries edible in moderation
cranberry
Vinca spp.
 Periwinkle
Vomiting, collapse
Vincamine, vinblastine, vincristine (indole
alkaloids)
 European mistletoe
Local irritant, vomiting, diarrhea, hypotension
Viscotoxins; viscumin (toxalbumin) in leaves,
stems, berries
Vriesea fenestralis
Netted vriesea
Severemucosalirritation and inflammation,
Insoluble calcium oxalate, proteolytic enzymes
 possible blistering, hypersalivation, vomiting
Wisteria sinensis
Wisteria, Chinese
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea
Wisterin “sapotoxin"; bark and roots; lectins in
kidney bean
all parts
Xanthosoma spp.
Malanga, blue taro,
Mucosal irritation and inflammation, possible
Insoluble calcium oxalate raphides, possible
tannia, yautia
blistering, hypersalivation, vomiting; if large
proteinaceous toxin
amounts, dysphagia, airway obstruction,
respiratory compromise
Zamia spp.
Coontie, cardboard
Violent emesis,diarrhea,ataxia,seizures,coma,
Cycasin (hydrolyzes to MAM)
 palm, camptie,
death; hepatoencephalopathy; lower doses
yugulla
carcinogenic and teratogenic
Zantedeschia spp.
Calla lily, arum lily
Mucosal irritation and inflammation, possible
Calcium oxalate raphides and idioblasts; all plant
blistering, hypersalivation, vomiting; if large
parts are toxic; one spadix put a child in a
amounts: dysphagia, airway obstruction,
12-hour coma; recovered at 24 hours; can be
respiratory compromise
fatal
Zephyranthes spp.
Zephyr lily, rain lily,
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea (may be
Lycorine, haemanthamine; bulbs and leaves are
fairy lily, fire lily
bloody), dehydration, electrolyte imbalance
toxic, bulbs more so
Zigadenus spp.
Death camas
 Distal paresthesia gradually extending centrally
Zygadenine, zygacine, isogermidine,
followed by hypersalivation, vomiting,
neogermidine, protoveratridine (steroidal
 diarrhea, hypothermia, muscle tremors,
alkaloids like those of Veratrum); sodium
dyspnea, bradycardia, hypotension, paralysis,
channel activators
respiratory paralysis, cardiac failure
dihydroxypyrrolidine; GA BA, Y-aminobutyric acid; HCN, hydrocyanic; LD, lethal dose; MAA, methylazoxymethanol; MA M, metabolite methylazoxymethanol; MLA, methlycaconitine.
pter
Z
Household.
and
Gar
Tden
395
396SECTlON3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
Table 27-2
Listing of Common Household and Garden Plants for Which No
Incriminating Information Has Been Discovered—Possible Pet-Friendly Alternatives
Latin Name
Common Name(s)
Abutilonhybridum*
Chinese bellflower, flowering maple, parlor maple
Acanthus spinosus
 Bear's bush, bear's breech, spiny bear's breech
Achillea millefolium*
Yarrow, fernleaf yarrow, sneezewort
Achimenes hyb.
Hot-water plant
Aeschynanthus spp.
Basket plant, lipstick plant
Ajuga spp.
Ajuga, bugleweed
Alcea rosea
Hollyhock
Alchemilla spp.
Lady's mantle, mountain lady's mantle
Alyssum saxatilia
 Basket-of-gold
Amelanchier spp.*
Juneberry
Anaphalis spp.
Pearly everlasting
Anthemis tinctoria
 Marguerite, golden marguerite, chamomile
Aphetandra hyb.
Zebra plant
Arabis spp.
Rock cress
Araucaria heterophylla
 Norfolk Island pine
Arenaria spp.
Mountain sandwort, moss sandwort
Aruncus spp.
Goat's beard
Aster spp.
Alpine aster, Michaelmas daisy
Aubrieta deltoidea
Rockcress
Beloperone guttata
 Shrimp plant
Bletia hyb.
Orchids
Bougainvillea glabra hyb.
 Bougainvillea, paper flower
Bouvardia hyb.
Bouvardia
Brassia hyb.
Orchids
Buddleia davidii
Buddleia, butterfly bush
Cactaceae family
 Rattail cactus, Peruvian torch, Christmas and Easter
cacti
Calathea spp.
Peacock plant
Callisia elegans
Striped inch plant
Callistephus chinensis
China aster
Canna indica
Canna, canna lily (not a true lily), Indian-shot
Catalpa speciosa
Western catalpa tree
Cerastrium spp.
Snow-in-summer
Chaenomeles spp.*
Ornamental quince
Chrysanthemum spp.,hyb.
Chrysanthemum, marguerite, painted daisy (human
contact allergen)
Chrysopsis spp.
Golden asters
Cichorium endivia*
Endive
Citrofortunella mitis hyb.
Calamondin
Citrus limon Meyer”
Meyer's lemon
Clarkia grandiflora
Godetia, satinflower
Coleus spp.*
Painted nettle, Spanish thyme, Indian borage
Coreopsis grandiflora
Coreopsis, tickseed
Cornus spp.*
 Dogwood, dogberry, Cornelian cherry, pink flowering
dogwood
Cosmos bipinnatus
Cotoneaster spp.*
Cotoneaster, service berry
Crassula spp.
Silver jade plant, silver dollar, happiness tree, sickle plant
Crataegus spp.*
Hawthorne
Crossandra infundibuliformis Firecracker flower
Chapter 27 | Household and Garden Plants 397
Table 27-2
Listing of Common Household and Garden Plants for Which
No Incriminating Information Has Been Discovered—Possible Pet-Friendly
Alternatives——cont'd
Latin Name
Common Name(s)
Cryptotaenia japonica*
Mitsuba
Cuphea spp.*
Firecracker plant, cigar flower, red-white-and-blue
flower
Cydonia spp.*
Quince
Cymbidium hyb.
Orchids
Cyperus spp.
 Egyptian paper plant, papyrus, umbrella plant
Cyrtomium falcatum
Japanese holly ferns
Dahlia pinnata hyb.*
Dahlia, dwarf dahlia
Dendrobium hyb.
Orchids
Deutzia scabra
Deutzia
Dianthus spp.*
Carnations, pinks, sweet William
Dioscorea batatas*
Chinese yam, cinnamon vine
Dryopteris flix-mas*
Male fern
Echeveria spp.
Baby echeveria, painted-lady, red echeveria
Echinacea spp.
Coneflowers, purple coneflower
Echinops spp.
Globe thistles
Epimedium spp.,hyb.
Epimedium (evergreen flowering mat)
Eryngium spp.
Eryngo, sea holly, rattlesnake master 
Erythronium spp.*
 Dog-tooth violet, trout lily, avalanche lily
Ficus benjamina*
Weeping fig, Java willow, Benjamin tree, small-leaved
rubber plant
Fitftonia verschaffeltii
Mosaic plant
Forsythia spp.
Forsythia, golden bell, border forsythia
Fraxinus ornus
Flowering ash, manna ash
Fuchsia spp., hyb.*
Fuchsia, lady's eardrops
Gaillardia spp.
Gaillardia, blanketflower
Ganzania spp.
Ganzania, treasure flower
Gardenia jasminoides
Gardenia, Cape jasmine 
Gaultheria procumbens*
Checkerberry, creeping wintergreen
Gaura spp.
Gaura, white gaura
Geranium spp., hyb.
Cranesbill, geranium, filaree 
Gerbera jamesonii
Gerber daisy, Barberton, Transvaal daisy
Geum spp.
 Scarlet avens, Chilean avens, prairie smoke
Grevillea spp.*
Sillky oak, grevillea, kahili flower, silver oak, he-oak
Helianthus spp.
Sunflowers
Heliopsis helianthoides
Oxeye, sunflower, heliopsis
Hypoestes phyllostachya
Freckle-face, polka-dot plant
Iberis spp.
Candytuft, perennial candytuft
Impatiens spp.*
 Impatiens, garden balsam, busy Lizzie, jewel weed
justicia carnea
 Brazilian plume, king's crown, flamingo plant
Lactuca spp.*
Great lettuce, garden lettuce
Laeliocattleya hyb.
Orchids
Lagerstroemia indica
Crape myrtle
Laurus nobilis*
Laurel, bay laurel, sweet bay
Leontopodium alpinum
Edelweiss
Liatris spicata
Gayfeather, blazing star
Linum spp.
Flax, blue flax, golden flax
Magnolia spp.
Magnolias: laurel, Oyama, saucer, southern, star
Continned
398 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Table 27-2
Listing of Common Household and Garden Plants for Which
No Incriminating Information Has Been Discovered—Possible Pet-Friendly
Alternatives-
-cont'd
LatinName
Common Name(s)
Malva spp.
Hollyhock, mallow, musk mallow
Matricaria chamomilla*
Wild chamomile
Mespilus spp.*
Medlar
Mimosa pudica*
 Sensitive plant, shame plant, touch-me-not plant, action
plant
Nephrolepis spp.*
Boston fern, dwarf Boston fern, ladder fern, sword fern
Odontogiossum hyb.
Orchids
Oenethera spp.
Primroses: beach, evening, Ozark, white evening;
fluttermills 
Oncidium hyb.
Orchids
Palmae family
Palms: Areca, butterfly, coconut, date, fan, Weddell (not
Cycads or Caryota)
Pelargonium spp., hyb.*
Geraniums: horseshoe, ivy-leaved, zonal
Peperomia spp.*
American rubber plant, pepper face, emerald-ripple
Phalaenopsis hyb.
Orchids
Philadelphus coronarius
Mock orange, syringe
dds xod
 Phlox, creeping phlox, moss pink, ground pink, moss
phlox
Photinia spp.
 Photinia, red-tip photinia
Phyllitis scolopendrium
 Hart's-tongue fern
Pilea cadierei*
Watermelon plant
Polemonium spp.
Jacob's ladder, creeping Jacob's ladder
Portulaca spp.
 Portulaca, purslane, rose moss
Potentilla spp.
Cinquefoils: bush, Himalayan, shrubby
Primulus spp.*
Primrose, German primrose, poison primrose
Pyrus spp.*
Pear, ornamental pear
Rudbeckia spp.
Coneflower, rudbeckia
Saintpaulia ionantha hyb.
African violets
Salvia spp.
Sages: silver, azure, mealycup, velvet, meadow
Sansevieria trifasciata*
 Mother-in-law's tongue, snake plant
Schlumbergera bridgesii
Christmas cactus, Easter cactus
Sedum spp.*
Sedum, gold moss, stonecrop, wall pepper, October plant
Sempervivum spp.*
 Hens-and-chickens, houseleek, stonecrop
Setcreasea pallida var.
Purple heart
purpurea
Sinningia speciosa hyb.
Gloxinia
Sparmannia africana*
African hemp, indoor linden
Targetes spp.*
Marigold
Tolmiea menziesii*
 Piggyback plant, pickaback plant, thousand mothers,
youth-on-age
Toxicodendron spp.*
 Poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac
Tradescantia spp.*
Wandering Jew, flowering inch plant, spider wort,
widow's tears
Zebrina pendula
Wandering Jew
Zinnia elegans
Zinnia, youth-and-old-age
*May produce hypersensitivity reactions in some humans.
Chapter 27 | Household and Garden Plants 399
References
1.Bianchini F,Pantano AC: Simon and Schuster's guide to plants and flowers, New York,1974, Simon and
Schuster.
2. Botha CJ, van der Lugt J, Erasmus GL,et al: Krimpsiekte, a paretic condition of small stock poisoned
by bufadienolide-containing plants ofthe Crassulaceae in South Africa. In Garland T, Barr AC, editors:
Toxic plants and other natural toxicants, Wallingford, Oxon, UK, 1998, CAB International.
3. Burrows GE, Tyrl RJ: Toxic plants of North America, Ames, 2001, Iowa State University Press.
4. Calanasan CA, Capon RJ, Gaul KL, et al: Toxic analogues of wedeloside and carboxyatractyloside from
tochemical and agricultural aspects, Wallingford, Oxon, UK, 1994, CAB International.
5. Carson TL, Sanderson TP, Halbur PG: Acute nephrotoxicosis in cats follwing ingestionoflily (Lilum sp).
Abstracts of the 37th Annual American Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians, Grand
Rapids, 1994, Mich.
6. Chiusoli A, Boriani ML: Simon and Schusters guide to house plants, New York, 1986, Simon and Schus-
ter/Fireside Books.
Wallingford, Oxon, UK, 1998, CAB International.
8. Fowler M, editor: Poisonous plants: α veterinary guide to toxic syndromes (CD-ROM), Davis, CA,1998,
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California-Davis.
9. Frohne D, Pfander HJ: A colour atlas of poisonous plants (English translation), London, 1984, Wolfe
Publishing Ltd.
10. Hare WR: Chinaberry (Melia azederach) poisoning in animals. In Garland T, Barr AC, editors: Toxic
plants and other natural toxicant, Wallingford, Oxon, UK, 1998, CAB International.
11. Ivie GW: Toxicological significance of plant furocoumarins. In Keeler RF, Van Kampen KR, James LF,
editors: Efects of poisonous plants on livestock, London, 1978, Academic Press.
12. Kim HL, Stipanovic RD: Isolation of karwinol A from coyotillo (Karwinskia humboldtiana) fruits. In
Garland T, Barr AC, editors: Toxic plants and other natural toxicants, Wallingford, Oxon, UK, 1998, CAB
International.
13. Kingsbury JM: Poisonous plants of the United States and Canada, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1964,
Prentice-Hall.
14. Nash RJ, Watson AA, Winters AL, et al: Glycosidase inhibitors in British plants as causes of livestock
disorders. In GarlandT,BarrAC,editors: Toxic plantsandother naturaltoxicants, Wallingford, Oxon, UK,
1998, CAB International. 1998.
15. Nelson LS, Shih RD, Balick MI: Handbook of poisonous and injurious plants, New York, 2007, The New
York Botanical Garden, Springer Science and Business Media
16. Norton S: Toxic effects of plants. In Klaassen CD, editor: Casarett e Doull's toxicology: the basic science
of poisons, ed 5, New York, 1996, McGraw-Hill.
17. Oelrichs PB, Kratzmann S, MacLeod JK, et al: A study of persin, the mammary cell necrosis agent from
avocado (Persea americana), and its furan derivative in lactating mice. In Garland T, Barr AC, editors:
Toxic plants and other natural toxicants, Wallingford, Oxon, UK, 1998, CAB International.
18. Osweiler GD, Carson TL: Toxic plants and zootoxins. In Morgan RV,editor: Handbook of small animal
medicine, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1997, WB Saunders.
19. Riet-Correa F, Pfster J, Schild AL,et al: Poisoning by plants, mycotoxins and related toxins, Wallingford,
Oxon, UK, 20ll, CAB Intemational.
19a. Robinson GH, Burrows GE, Holt EM, et al: Evaluation of the toxic effects of the legumes of mimosa
(Albizia julibrissin) and identification of the toxicant In Garland T, Barr AC, editors: Toxic plants and
other natural toxicants, Wallingford, Oxon, UK, 1998, CAB International.
20. Rumbeiha WK, Francis JA, Fitzgerald SD, et al: A comprehensive study of Easter lily poisoning in cats,
JVet Diagn Invest 16:527-541, 2004.
21. Seiber JN, Lee SM, McChesney MM, et al: New cardiac glycosides (cardenolides) from Asclepias species.
Plant Committee, Queensland Department of Primary Industries, 1985, Animal Research Institute.
22. Sharma OP: Plant toxicoses in northwestern India. In Colegate SM, Dorling PR,editors: Plant-associated
International.
23. Shlosberg A, Ohad DG, Bellaiche M, et al: Monitoring of physiological and pathological changes in
turkey poults fed leaves of potentially cardiomyotoxic Nerium oleander and Persea americana. In
Garland T, Barr AC, editors: Toxic plants and other natural toxicants, Wallingford, Oxon, UK, 1998,
CA B International.
400SECTlON3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
 24. Spainhour CB, Flory W,Reagor IC:The intoxication ofa canine bythe fruit ofthe garden shrub Brunfel-
siα calycina var, floribunda, Texas Vet Med J 51:22-23, 1989.
25.9
Spoerke DG Jr, Smolinske SC: Toxicity of houseplants, Boca Raton, FL, 1990, CRC Press.
26.Stegelmeier BL, Panter KE, Pfister JA,et al: Experimental modification of larkspur (Delphinium spp)
toxicity. In Garland T, Barr AC, editors: Toxic plants and other natural toxicants, Wallingford, Oxon,
UK, 1998, CAB International.
CHAPTER
28
Miscellaneous
Herbicides, Fungicides,
and Nematocides
Patricia A. Talcott, MS, DVM, PhD, DABVT
 Suspected pet poisonings with herbicides, fungicides, and nematocides are
proportional to the frequency of use by the general population.
Vomiting is a nonspecific commonly observed clinical sign.
There are no specific antidotes for most herbicide, fungicide, or nematocide
poisonings.
· Exposure to pesticide-treated plants is unlikely to result in intoxication in
companion animals. Misapplication of herbicides at some point produces visible
signs of phytotoxicity.
·Acute exposures to these pesticides rarely produce altered clinical chermical data,
which are cormmonly seen in long-term animal feeding trials.
The EXtension TOXicology NETwork is an excellent resource for toxicologic
information of many pesticides: http: //extoxnet.orst.edu/.
ublic perception of risk is greatly influenced by the voluntary nature of the risk. Thus
consumers who purchase pesticide products for their own use often have a different
perception of risk from these products compared with products used by others, such as
veterinarians, farmers, or pest control or lawn care service operators. With the exception
of the anticoagulant rodenticides, inquiries about possible pesticide poisoning in pet ani-
mals are more directly proportional to the frequency of use of the pesticide than to the
toxicity ranking of the pesticide. Ihe Environmental Protection Agency reports that U.S.
pesticide expenditures totaled $11.8 billion in 2006 and $12.5 billion in 2007. Herbicides
are the largest group of pesticides purchased, followed by insecticides and miticides, fun-
gicides, and others. U.S. pesticide amount used in both 2006 and 2007 exceeded 1.1 billion
pounds.1 The most commonly used pesticides around the home and garden are shown in
Table 28-1. Cancellations of the residential uses of chlorpyrifos and diazinon have resulted
in a significant decrease in the use of organophosphate insecticides in the home and gar-
den sector.
Suis u smus ad  um d arsad e siads ima jad e uno is
within a short time following a known environmental pesticide application. In virtually
all incidents of illness, the pet owner wants a diagnosis of causation. If exposure to a toxic
substance is suspected, an effort should be made to identify the substance, the date of appli-
cation and exposure, and the method of pesticide use and exposure.
The clinical signs should be biologically consistent with the toxicology of the suspected
toxicant. Seizures, for example, will not occur from exposure to urea fertilizer at any dose.
The Internet is an excellent resource for information on pesticides. The Extoxnet site
401
402 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
contains summaries of many pesticides.2 Material safety data sheets (MSDSs) are available
from suppliers and manufacturer home pages. And of course, "the dose makes the poison"
Therefore, because the MSDS for a product lists the potential toxic effects, it is inportant
to determine if the exposure was to the undiluted product or to some end-use dilution
before concluding that there was a cause-and-effect relationship. For example, many liquid
formulations of herbicides that must be diluted before use are severe eye irritants and may
Even be corrosive to the eye in the undiluted form. Yet when diluted for use (e.g., 1 tsp/gal
of water), the end-use dilution can be less irritating to the eye than ordinary hair shampoo.
uis aun ieul syadsuou os si pue sies pue sop un ueiduo uoun e si suo
itself is not sufficient to establish a cause-and-effect relationship to a known pesticide expo-
sure. It is generally well known that dogs and cats vomit after eating grass, whether or not
it has been treated with an herbicide. The time course of onset of signs following pesti-
cide exposure is also important. Both environmental degradation and low application rates
make it most unlikely that exposure to pesticide application residues several days after the
application would be toxicologically significant. Errors that result in overapplication of
herbicides to plants most often produce visible damage to the plant. A twofold to threefold
error in application of herbicide-fertilizer combinations to lawns produces obvious signs of
phytotoxicity.
Phenoxy Herbicides
2,4-D
Chemically, 2,4-D is 2-chloro-4-phenoxyacetic acid. It is usually formulated as salts, esters,
or amine derivatives.2 2,4-D is used for control of broadleaf weeds on residential and com-
mercial properties and in some areas on roadside rights-of-way. Residues on treated turf
are in the range of 35 to 75 ppm and dissipate rapidly in the first several days following the
application. A residue tolerance of 300 ppm has been established on pasture grasses.
 Poisoning is almost always caused by accidental ingestion of concentrates or sprays.
Technical-grade phenoxy herbicides are irritating to the eye and mucous membranes and
somewhat les irritating to skin, and are also phytotoxic to most plants. Dogs appear to be
somewhat more sensitive to phenoxy herbicides than other species of domestic animals.
The approximate oral median lethal dose (LDso) for 2,4-D in the dog has been reported
to be 100 mg/kg.3 However, Beasley and colleagues4 orally dosed English pointers
with 8.8, 43.7, 86.7, 175, and 200 mg/kg 2,4-D, and all survived. Doses of 175 or 220 mg/kg of
body weight produced overt signs of toxi-
cosis characterized by myotonia, vomiting,
Table 28-1
Quantities of
and weakness. Ihe lower doses did not
Pesticides Most Commonly Used in
produce overt clinical signs, but electro-
Nonagricultural Sectors of the U.s.
myographic abnormalities were detectable
Home and Garden Market
at exposures of 8.8 mg/kg. Multiple dos-
ages of 20 mg/kg daily for approximately
Pesticide
Millions of Pounds
3 weeks or 25 mg/kg for 6 days were lethal
1. 2,4-D
8-11
for dogs.3.5
 2. Glyphosate
5-8
Even at an exposure of 20 mg/kg of
3. Carbaryl
4-6
body weight, it is not likely that dogs will
4. MCPP
4-6
be significantly poisoned by exposure to
 5. Pendimethalin
3-5
properly treated lawns. The greatest hazard
6. Pyrethroids
2-4
to dogs is ingestion of undiluted product,
7. Malathion
2-4
discarded or excess spray that had been
8. Dicamba
1-3
previously mixed, or pools of spray that
9. Trifluralin
1-3
have collected in low spots or in contain-
10. Pelarganoc acid
<1
ers. Arnold and colleagues6 attempted to
produce 2,4-D toxicosis by placing English
Approximate quantities, 2005 and 2007.
pointers on enclosed turf plots to confine
Chapter 28 I Miscellaneous Herbicides, Fungicides, and Nematocides 403
the animals for controlled periods of continuous exposure. One enclosure was sprayed
with 2,4-D at a rate of 168 mg/square meter, which is the maximum recommended
rate for lawns, and another enclosure was sprayed at four times the maximum recom-
mended rate. The dogs were placed in the enclosures within 30 minutes of spraying and
were observed five times each day for a period of 7 days. Detailed clinical examinations
included electromyograms, which were performed on days 1 and 7 after exposure. No
adverse effects were detected in any of the clinical, hematologic, biochemical, electro-
   o    sa  o
of body weight) in the diet caused no ill effects in dogs during a 2-year study. The level
of 2,4-D at which no observable effects were noted in chronic toxicity in dogs was deter-
mined to be 1 mg/ kg/ day.7
Orally administered 2,4-D is rapidly and extensively absorbed by the gastrointestinal
tract. Ihe extent of dermal absorption varies according to the chemical form of the product
 and the species of animal, varying from approximately 5% for the acid in humans to 85%
for the ester in rats. Absorbed 2,4-D salts and esters are rapidly converted to 2,4-D acid and
EKcreted by the renal anion transport system. The renal anion transport system is saturable
Bop al ut Aiiixoi ol Aiaisuas iaieaa pue ay-eq auol aul roy sumosoe oi sieadde pue
2,4-D concentrations of 718 mcg/mL and 1075 mcg/mL were present in the serum of dogs
dosed with 175 or 220 mg 2,4-D/kg of body weight, respectively. Ihe peak serum concentra-
tion was 121 mcg/mL following an oral exposure of 8.8 mg/kg of body weight.
2,4-D is widely distributed in tissues with little accumulation in fat. Plasma or serum
appears to be the best specimen to use for laboratory confirmations of 2,4-D (as well as
other phenoxy herbicides) poisoning. Kidney tissue and urine are alternative samples that
can be used. Pharmacokinetic data suggest that kidney to plasma ratios approach unity
as the renal organic anion system becomes saturated. Data also suggest that plasma and
kidney concentrations of up to 100 ppm may be present in animals that do not show signs
ofintoxication.
 The clinical signs in dogs are characteristic and include vomiting and an initial disin-
clination to move and a passivity that gradually becomes worse as a pattern of myotonia
develops.? This rigidity of skeletal muscles is combined with ataxia, progressive apathy,
depression, and muscular weakness, particularly of the posterior limbs. Myotonia has been
produced by exposure to 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T in dogs. At high doses, the condition can be
induced in less than 1 hour after administration. Spontaneous movement ceases, and when
startled, animals make sudden spastic movements and sometimes lose the ability to stand
or rise. Opisthotonos may also occur. A potential biochemical lesion associated with myo-
tonia is an increase in basic paranitrophenyl phosphatase related to increased passive flux
of potassium. This may lead to myotonia through a compensatory decrease in chloride
conductance. Periodic clonic spasms and finally coma are the typical sequelae of phenoxy
anorexia; there may be vomiting and occasionally passage of blood-tinged feces. Postmor-
tem examination often reveals necrotic ulcers of the oral mucosa, signs of irritation in the
gastrointestinal tract, and sometimes necrosis of the small intestine, and focal necrosis in
the liver and degeneration of renal tubules. However, there are no reports of renal failure in
dogs from any exposure to 2,4-D.
There are no specific antidotes. Because 2,4-D is excreted almost quantitatively in urine
as the free acid, forced alkaline diuresis should enhance excretion. Unless there is severe
central nervous system (CNS) depression (rare), recovery should be rapid.
in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute (NCI) in 1991.9 This report not only raised
concern by homeowners and veterinarians, but also in some instances was used to indict
lawn care in a generic sense. The NCI reported a twofold increase in risk of canine malig-
nant lymphoma associated with four or more yearly homeowner applications of 2,4-D. It is
  -  n (s   )   g 
more times per year; thus the validity of pet owners' responses to the NCI questionnaire or
interviews concerning the application of lawn care products is questionable.
404SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Two critiques of the NCI report have been published. A panel of experts concluded that
because of numerous limitations in the design of the study, an association was not estab-
lished between 2,4-D and canine malignant lymphoma.0.1
Kaneene and Miller did not confirm a dose-response relationship between 2,4-D use
and canine malignant lymphoma and concluded that the occurrence of canine malignant
lymphoma was not significantly associated with the use of 2,4-D.
An increased risk of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder of Scottish
Terriers exposed to lawns or gardens treated with phenoxy herbicides was reported by
Glickman and colleagues.2z The authors proposed a gene-environment interaction to the
development of the bladder tumors. The cause-effect relationship was based on infor
mation obtained by questionnaires completed by owners of dogs in the case and contro
groups. Additional studies are needed to replicate the results and to more specifically con-
firm exposures.
MCPA
4-Chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid (MCPA) has been used in the United States, but has
been the more widely used phenoxy herbicide in Europe, where it has been extensively used
in forest management. MCPA is used for control of broadleaf weeds on residential lawns.
The rat oral LDso for MCPA ranges from 600 mg/kg to 1470 mg/kg of body weight.
Dogs given single oral doses of MCPA at 25 mg/kg of body weight exhibited no clinical
signs during a 48-hour observation period. Oral administration of MCPA to male and
female beagles at doses of up to 48 mg/kg of body weight for 13 weeks resulted in increases
in hepatic enzymes and blood urea nitrogen, with severe signs of toxicity observed at the
highest dosage tested. The dogs had pustules, dead skin spots, persistent mouth lesions,
diarrhea, loss of appetite, decreased food consumption, loss of body weight, pus-forming
of body weight/day. In a 1-year dietary feeding study in dogs fed 6, 30, or 150 ppm of MCPA.
there were no deaths, but dose-related increases in creatinine and blood urea nitrogen were
observed. The effects were minor at the 30 ppm level, and none were observed at the 6 ppm
exposurelevel.
 The toxicokinetics, clinical signs, and treatment are similar to those described for 2,4-D
exposures. At necropsy, jaundice, an enlarged gallbladder, discolored liver, and hemor-
rhages of the lungs, stomach, and intestines were observed in dogs receiving MCPA by
gelatin capsule for 13 weeks.13
MCPP
 2-Methyl-4-chlorophenoxypropanoic acid (MCPP) has the generic name mecoprop. MCPP
is used exclusively for nonagricultural purposes, primarily for broadleaf weed control on
lawns. The toxicology of MCPP is very similar to that of 2,4-D and MCPA. The rat oral LDs0
'aiam Apoq yo Bx/8uu 007h o1 0sg uo1y sague1
Glyphosate
Glyphosate is N-(phosphonomethyl)glycine. It is a systemic herbicide with agricultural
industrial right-of-way, and urban domestic applications. Glyphosate is the second most
widely used herbicide in the home and garden market and is a nonselective herbicide (i.e.
i will kill all plants). It is used to kill all unwanted vegetation along fences, edges of grassed
areas, mulched ornamental beds, and perimeters near trees, parking lots, and driveways.
Residues on grass following normal application range from 0.2 ppm to 100 ppm.
Ihe rat oral LDso is 4320 mg/kg of body weight, and the rabbit dermal LDso is greater
than 794 mg/kg of body weight for females and greater than 5000 mg/kg of body weight
for males. Technical glyphosate is not an irritant, but the formulated products contain
approximately 15% surfactant, which may be irritating. Dogs receiving glyphosate by
gelatin capsule at dosages of 100 and 500 mg/kg/day for 1 year exhibited a decrease in
pituitary weights. No detectable toxic effects were observed when rats were fed glyphosate
Chapter 28 | Miscellaneous Herbicides, Fungicides, and Nematocides 405
for 2 years at dietary concentrations of 0, 30, 100, and 300 ppm. In a subsequent study, rats
were fed levels of 0, 1000, 5000, and 30,000 ppm glyphosate for 2 years. There was a slight
increase in the incidence of renal tumors that was not statistically significant from the con-
trol animals.
The metabolism of glyphosate in the dog or cat has not been reported. In the rat,
gyphosate does not undergo biotransformation. Approximately 36% and 51% of an oral
glyphosate dose of 10 mg/kg of body weight was eliminated in the urine and feces within
7 days.
Intoxication of pet animals by glyphosate is an extremely rare event because of the
low toxicity of the compound. Human ingestion of the formulated product Roundup has
produced massive fluid and electrolyte loss attributed to the surfactant, which composes
i5% of the formulated product. The fluid and electrolyte loss triggered acute renal
tubular necrosis.14 Activated charcoal should adsorb glyphosate in the gastrointestinal
tract. Fluid therapy should be implemented to maintain urine flow and replace diminished
electrolytes.
Dicamba
Dicamba is a benzoic acid herbicide (3,6-dichloro-2-methoxybenzoic acid). It is widely
used as apostemergent broadleaf herbicide on lawns or grasslands and on numerous crops.
Dicamba has low toxicity, with oral LDso values in rats, mice, guinea pigs, and rabbits that
range from 566 to 3000 mg/kg of body weight.'5 Dogs fed dicamba for 2 years at a dietary
concentration of 50 ppm exhibited no observable effects. When dicamba was fed at a dose
of 250 ppm, the only adverse finding was mild hepatic discoloration.
 Dicamba is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and is readily excreted in
urine, with about 80% to 90% of the dose excreted within the first 24 hours. The major
excretory product is unchanged dicamba and a glucuronide conjugate.
Signs of acute dicamba toxicosis in animals are muscle spasms, urinary incontinence,
shortness of breath, cyanosis, and collapse. Poisoning by dicamba is not commonly reported
in dogs or cats, nor is there data on gross or histologic lesions. The relatively rapid rate
of excretion suggests that conservative supportive therapy, if any, should lead to a satisfac-
tory outcome. Exposure to dicamba can be confirmed through plasma serum and urine
testing.
Pendimethalin
Pendimethalin is a dinitroaniline compound (N-[1-ethylpropyl]-3,4-dimethyl-2,6-
dinitrobenzenamine). It is an orange-yellow dye and stains hair and vinyl floor coverings.
White hair stains green. Pendimethalin is the most widely used preemergent herbicide in
the urban residential environment. It is used in the spring and has increasingly replaced
bensulide and dacthal. Pendimethalin is also used to control grasses and weeds in field
crops.
The rat oral LDso is 1250 mg/kg of body weight, and the rabbit dermal LDso is greater
than 5000 mg/kg of body weight. Pendimethalin was given to beagles by gelatin capsule for
2 years at doses of 12.5, 50, and 200 mg/kg of body weight. Ihe no observable effect level
was determined to be 12.5 mg/kg. Although there was no effect on body weight or food
intake, there was a dose-related increase in serum alkaline phosphatase concentrations, and
microscopic liver lesions were seen at the higher doses of 50 and 200 mg/kg.
Pendimethalin is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and is largely excreted
unchanged in feces. Poisoning by pendimethalin in dogs and cats is not common. Pendi-
methalin is unlikely to cause significant hepatotoxicity at any level of exposure. The pen-
dimethalin stain may be removed by application of a waterless hand cleaner such as GOJO
or D&L Hand Cleaner followed by a shampoo and thorough rinsing. To be effective, the
waterless cleaner should be applied to dry hair and blotted off, and the hair then shampooed
and rinsed.
406 SECTlON 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Prodiamine
 Prodiamine is another dinitroaniline herbicide, which has fewer staining properties than pen-
dimethalin, yet has similar properties as a preemergent herbicide. Ihe rat oral LDso is greater
Aqyo u oo u aea s os eap a pue am oqgo u oo ue
Fungicides
Fungicides that are used to control diseases of plants are generally low in mammalian tox-
icity. A major use of fungicides is in the preservation of wood. Pentachlorophenol-treated
 lumber is used primarily for barns, fence posts, railroad ties, and wooden bridges. In resi-
dential settings, chromated copper arsenate (CCA)-treated lumber was historically the
choice, but its purchase and use for residential purposes has been largely discontinued.
CCA-treated lumber can still be used in agricultural and industrial settings. Ihis is often
called Wolmanized lurmber. Ihe safer alkaline copper quaternary (types B and D) and cop-
per azole (CBA-A, CA-B) compounds are largely replacing the CCA-containing products.
and to prevent mold growth on carpeting that has become wet from flooding. Organic tin
compounds leach into water, resulting in unacceptable toxicity to lower forms of aquatic
life, and their use has been restricted.
Pentachlorophenol
The toxicity of pentachlorophenol has been clouded by the poor characterization of
the technical material and the presence of dioxin contaminants. The oral LDso for
pentachlorophenol ranges from 27 to 211 mg/kg of body weight in rats. Pentachlorophenol
paos un ainsodxa jo sas u jusyuis aq ues stu uoeeut aq sixon st pue aeoa st
spaces with little ventilation. For example, plants rarely survive in log cabins built from
pentachlorophenol-treated logs. Pentachlorophenol is also toxic via the dermal route, with
ai st annsodxa eaa iam Aoq go s oee o 96 u suun sanea 0sat a
most toxic route of exposure and is particularly hazardous for newborn animals.
Pentachlorophenol is readily absorbed from all routes of exposure and is excreted
unchanged or as a glucuronide conjugate. Ihe half-life in blood ranges from 15 to 78 hours.
Pentachlorophenol is an uncoupler of oxidative phosphorylation and therefore produces
pyrexia in poisoned animals. It is an irritant and may produce eye and skin irritation, hair loss,
throat or respiratory irritation, and abdominal pain. High exposure conditions can lead to
CNS effects, such as excitation or seizures. Chronic exposures cause decreases in body weight.
Except for signs of irritation, gross lesions are not remarkable. The liver, kidneys, and
CNS are the major target organs. Removal of the patient from the site of exposure and sup-
portive treatment should result in a favorable prognosis. Decontamination of skin is advis-
able following exposure to recently treated surfaces.
Chromated Copper Arsenate-Treated Lumber
The safety of CCA-treated lumber has been reviewed extensively in consideration of can-
cer risks to children using treated playground equipment. Ihe arsenic is highly bound to
wood, and the dislodgeable residues are negligible in relation to background levels of arse-
nic from soil. Iherefore risks to pets are also negligible. CCA-treated lumber is no longer
being commercially made as of December 2003 for residential use. But stores can continue
to sell remaining stock after production ceases. Toxicities have been seen in livestock that
 ingest ash of burned treated lumber; arsenic appears to be the element responsible for the 
problems observed.
Thiram
Thiram is tetramethylthiuram disulfide. Although it is a crop protection fungicide, the use
of thiram as an animal repellent is the most likely source of exposure to pet animals. Thiram
Chapter 28 | Miscellaneous Herbicides, Fungicides, and Nematocides 407
has a low acute toxicity, with oral LDso values ranging from 620 to 1900 mg/kg of body
weight in rats and dermal LDso values greater than 5000 mg/kg of body weight. Thiram is
irritating to the eyes, skin, and respiratory tract and is also a potent sensitizer. A dietary
sop ut ioaya ou peu (/uu v) rean I roy pay udd ooz jo [aaa
l go saadond jaadan au oi sanqius ropo ims al ie aumsse in eo st i
ram. Carbon disulfide is formed during the metabolism of thiram. Thiram inhibits a vari-
ety of enzymes, including cytochrome P450 and alcohol dehydrogenase. Worker exposures
have shown an interaction with alcohol but not with drugs metabolized by the cytochrome
P450 system.
 In rats and mice, thiram produces incoordination, hyperactivity, loss of muscle tone,
dyspnea, and seizures. In humans, allergic hypersensitivity to thiram is common. Repeated
and daily oral doses of 49 mg/kg/day in laboratory animals produced weaknes, muscle
incoordination, and limb paralysis. There are no diagnostic lesions.
Nematocides
Several classes of chemicals are used as nematocides. Ihe organophosphate and carbamate
classes are discussed elsewhere (Chapter 67).
Imidacloprid
Imidacloprid is a member of a newer class of insecticides, the chloronicotinyl class. Ihe
mode of action of imidacloprid is to block neurotransmission by postsynaptic antago-
nism of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. It is used to control grubs in lawns and as a ter-
miticide in residential environments.
The acute toxicity of imidacloprid is low, with the oral LDso ranging from 5ll to
1084 mg/kg of body weight in rats. Ihe dermal LDso is greater than 5000 mg/kg of body
weight. Rabbits were administered imidacloprid by the dermal route for 3 weeks at a dose
of 1000 mg/kg for 6 hours a day, 5 days a week. Local or systemic effects were not observed.
Dogs were administered imidacloprid for 1 year at dietary concentrations of 200, 500, or
1250 ppm. Because of the absence of significant effects, the high dose was increased to
a  an ie prao si s al y rn a  sa  e u o
included decreased food consumption, increased liver weights, and elevated serum cho-
lesterol levels. Ihe no observable effect level was determined to be 500 ppm (12.5 mg/kg
of body weight).
 Imidacloprid is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and excreted via urine
and feces. Approximately 96% of the dose is recovered within 48 hours. Poisoning by imi-
dacloprid has not been reported in dogs and cats. Insects become disoriented at sublethal
doses and stop foraging for food. The limited data reported on dogs suggest that mild
reported at doses up to 2500 ppm.
Acknowledgments
 The author would like to recognize the previous contributions of an esteemed colleague Dr.
Roger A. Yeary to this chapter.
References
1. Environmental Protection Agency: Pesticide industry sales and usage, 2006 and 2007 market estimates.
2. Extoxnet: the extension toxicology network, http://ace.orst.edu/info/extoxnet. (Although not specifi-
cally cited, the Extoxnet pesticide information files were reviewed for each of the pesticides in this
chapter.)
3. Drill VA, Hiratzka T: Toxicity of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid and 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid:
a report on their acute and chronic toxicity of dogs, Arch Ind Hyg Occup Med 7:61-67, 1953.
4. Beasley VR, Arnold EK, Lovell RA: 2,4-D toxicosis I: a pilot study of 2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid and
dicamba-induced myotonia in experimental dogs, Vet Hum Toxico?33:435-440, 1991.
408SECTlON3MiscellaneousToxicantGroups
5. Hill EV, Carlisle H: Toxicity of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid in experimental animals, Ind Hyg Toxicol
29:8595, 1947.
6. Arnold EK, Lovell RA, Beasley VR: 2,4-D toxicosis IIl: an attempt to produce 2,4-D toxicosis in dogs on
treated grass plots, Vet Hum Toxicol33:457-461, 1991.
7. Charles JM, Dulgard DW, Army HC, et al Comparative subchronic dietary toxicity studies on 2,4-
dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, amine, and ester in the dog, Fund Appl Toxicol 29:78-85, 1996.
8. Chen AV, Bagley RS, Talcott PA: Confirmed 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid toxicosis in a dog, JAAHA
46:1-5.
9. Hayes HM, Tarone RE, Cantor KP,et al. A case control study of canine malignant lymphoma: posi
tive association with dog owners' use of 2,4-dicholorphenoxyacetic acid herbicides, J Natl Cancer Inst
83:1226-1231, 1991.
10. Carlo GL, Cole P, Miller AB, et al: Review of a study reporting an association between 2,4-
dichlororphenoxyacetic acid and canine malignant lymphoma: report of an expert panel, Reg Toxicol
Pharmacol 16:245-252, 1992.
11. Kaneene JB, Miller R: Re-analysis of 2,4-D use and the occurrence of canine malignant lymphoma
Vet Human Toxicol41:164-170, 1999.
12. Glickman LT, Raghavan M, Knapp DW, et al: Herbicide exposure and the risk oftransitional carcinoma
of the urinary bladder in Scottish Terriers, I Am Vet Med Assoc 224:1290-1297, 2004.
13. European Commission, Health & Consumer Protection Directorate-General, MCPA, July 2008, http://
e.europa.eu/food/plant/protection/evaluation/existactive/list_mcpa.pdf.
Hum Exp Toxicol10:103-107, 1991.
15. Hayes WJ, editor: Herbicides and pesticides studied in man, Baltimore, 1982, Williams & Wilkins.
CHAPTER
29
Smoke Inhalation
Kevin T. Fitzgerald, PhD, DVM, DABVP
· Srmoke inhalation is the leading cause of death from fire
Termperature, oxygen concentration, and the chermical cornposition of the
material burning determine the combustion products.
The astonishing array of different materials in an animal's environment and their
wide variety of toxic combustion products guarantee that there is no "typical"
smoke.
Toxic cormbustion products are grouped as simple asphyxiants, iritant toxins,
and chemical asphyxiants
Water solubility of toxins is the most important chemical characteristic in
deterrnining level of the respiratory tract injury.
 Smoke is a complex mixture of heated air, suspended solid and liquid particles,
gases, furmes, aerosols, and vapors.
 The most common clinical sign of smoke inhalation is respiratory compromise.
The most valuable dagnostic tools in evaluation of a suspected smoke inhalation
victim are arterial blood gas analysis, carboxyhemoglobin levels, methermoglobin
concentration, and thoracic radiographs
· Smoke inhalation treatment includes maintenance of airway patency,
ventilation and oxygenation, countering pulrnonary debris, and stabilization of 
hermodynamic imbalances.
· Differential diagnoses for smoke inhalation include any syndrome that manifests
 itself as respiratory compromise.
Sources
Smoke inhalation is the leading cause of death from fires for both humans and animals.
More than 80% of fire-related deaths are the result of smoke inhalation and not from sur-
face burns. Smoke itself is the complex mixture of vapors, gases, fumes, heated air and
particulate matter, and liquid and solid aerosols produced by thermal decomposition. Ther-
mal decomposition can result from flaming combustion or from pyrolysis, which is the
application of intense heat. These thermal decompositions can result in the rapid oxidation
of a substance by heat. Pyrolysis occurring with high heat and relatively low oxygen con-
centration is known as smoldering. Although flaming combustion generates light (flame),
heat, and smoke; smoke can be produced in the absence of flames. Thus flames are not a
prerequisite for smoke production, and furthermore the gaseous product of combustion
(smoke) is not always visible.
409
410SECTlON3MiscellaneousToxicantGroups
Table 29-1
Combustion Products of Frequently Encountered Material
Source
Combustion Product
Wood, paper, cotton
Carbon monoxide, acetaldehyde, formaldehyde,
acetic acid, formic acid, methane
Silk
Ammonia, cyanide, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide
Wool
 Phosgene, cyanide, hydrogen chloride, chlorine
Nylon
Ammonia, cyanide
Rubber
Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide
Plastics
Ammonia, aldehydes, cyanide, phosgene, chlorine,
hydrogen chloride
Polyvinyl chloride
Carbon monoxide, phosgene, chlorine, hydrogen
chloride
Polyurethane
Cyanide, isocyanates
Fluorinated resin
Hydrogen fluoride
Sulfur-containing material
Sulfur dioxide
Nitrogen-containing material
Cyanide, isocyanates
Fire-retardants
Hydrogen bromide, hydrogen chloride
 Petroleum products
Carbon monoxide, acetic acid, formic acid
Polystyrene
Styrene
Acrylic
Carbon monoxide, hydrogen chloride, acrolein
Combustion products are difficult to predict in fires. Even within the same fire, the con-
centration of the smoke may vary.? Temperature, oxygen concentration, and the chemical
composition of the burning material determine the combustion products.
 In recent years, the use of newer synthetic building materials and furnishings has led to
an increase in inhalational injuries caused by fres. Although more rigorous building codes
make new structures less likely to burn, the materials used to make them have become
more dangerous when they do catch fire through their production of more toxic smoke. At
about the time of World War Il, differences were noted between natural materials and syn-
thetics in terms of their combustion products and relative toxicity when burning. It is now
recognized that, compared with natural materials (e.g., cotton, wood, wool), plastics gener-
ate more heat more swifly, spread flames faster, generate larger amounts of denser visible
smoke, and release more toxic and greater concentrations of invisible products of thermal
decomposition. Despite testimonials to the contrary, plastics are neither nonburning nor
self-extinguishing and, like many other synthetic substances, burn hotter and smokier than 
wood or other natural substances. Some of the more common and more toxic combustion
products are listed in Tables 29-1 and 29-2 and Box 29-1.
Every 12 seconds a fire department responds to a fire alarm in the United States.4 When
compared with other countries, the United States has one of the highest numbers of fre-
related deaths in the world. The majority of fires in the United States (more than 70%)
Occur in residential homes. Carelessness with cigarettes, heating devices, matches, flam-
mable liquids, and malfunctioning electrical appliances is overwhelmingly the most com-
mon initiatory cause of fires. Every year there are nearly 3600 human deaths in the United
States related to fires. More than half of smoke inhalation cases (53%) occur between
November and February. This may be explained by the greater number of house fres
in the colder months resulting from space heater malfunctions, increased use of poten-
tially faulty heating pads and electric blankets, malfunctioning heaters, and the increased
use of candles and Christmas tree lights during this time. Deaths in companion animals
as a consequence of fre are harder to quantify, but certainly thousands of animals suf-
fer fre-related injuries and smoke inhalation each year. Although smoke inhalation is
infrequently presented to veterinary hospitals in companion animals, when it does appear
victims must be dealt with swifly and effciently. Practicing clinicians must recognize the
Chapter 29 |Smoke Inhalation 41l
Table 29-2
Common Toxic Products of Thermal Decomposition
Agent
Toxic Products
Effects
Physical Agent
Heat and flame
 Flaming combustion
Burns, laryngotracheitis
Soot
Organic material
Airway obstruction
Steam
Water heated to boiling
Laryngotracheitis, bronchitis,
alveolitis
Oxygen depletion
Combustion, pyrolysis
Burns, laryngotracheitis
Trauma
Explosions, collapsing
Burns
structures
Chemical Agent
Acrolein
Cotton, paper, wood, acrylics, 
Respiratory tract irritation
polystyrene
Aldehydes
ABS, polyester (alkyds)
Respiratory tract irritation
phenolics
Carbon monoxide
Incomplete combustion of
Functional anemia, cellular
 organic material
asphyxia
Carbon dioxide
 Complete combustion of
 Simple asphyxia, narcosis
organic material
Halogen acids, such
Acrylics, vinyl (polyvinyl
Respiratory tract irritation
as hydrochloric,
chloride), film, resins, fire
hydrobromic, and
retardants
hydrofluoric acid
Cyanide
 Paper, silk, wool, urethane
Cellular asphyxia
acrylonitriles
Isocyanates
Urethane (foam)
Respiratory tract irritation
Organic acids
Cotton, paper, wool, wood
Respiratory tract irritation
Nitrogen oxide
 Paper, petroleum products,
Respiratory tract irritation
wood
Phosgene
Fire retardants, vinyls,
Respiratory tract irritation
polyvinyl chloride
Styrene
ABS, polystyrene
Respiratory tract irritation
Sulfur oxides
Rubber, fur, hair, hide, wool,
Respiratory tract irritation
petroleum
A BS, Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene.
clinical signs of smoke inhalation, its pathophysiologic characteristics, and the proper
san g ueu sauon) seuue iatunon iel pauaumop uaaq seu l josoiond juaeal
of age) are most likely to present suffering from smoke inhalation. It has been suggested
that younger animals are not more at risk but rather more likely to survive smoke expo-
 sure. Studies have documented that older dogs fare worse than younger ones follwing
such experiences.6
Toxic Dose
There is no standard toxic or lethal dose for smoke inhalation in animals. The com-
position of smoke can vary tremendously even from the same fire. Combustion prod-
ucts and their concentrations are difficult to predict, and the relative toxicity of smoke
produced depends on the composition of the substance burning, amount of oxygen
available, the temperature of the fire, the length of exposure, and the size of the animal
involved. In addition, the incredible variety of materials currently used in an animal's
412SECTlON3 MiscellaneousToxicant Groups
Box 29-1
Toxic Combustion Products
Simple Asphyxiants
Carbon dioxide
Methane
 Oxygen-deprived environment 
Chemical Asphyxiants
Carbon monoxide
Hydrogen cyanide
Hydrogen sulfide
Oxides of nitrogen
Irritants
(nu Aeme addn) Aqns aem 
Acrolein
Sulfur dioxide
Ammonia
Hydrogen chloride
 Intermediate water solubility (upper and lower airway injury)
Chlorine
Isocyanates
 Poor water solubility (pulmonary parenchymal injury)
Phosgene
Oxides of nitrogen
environment and their wide spectrum of toxic combustion products ensure that there is
no such thing as "typical" smoke.
If burns are present and respiratory tract tissue displays burn edema, the episode
becomes much more serious and much more likely to be life threatening. Increased vascu-
lar permeability of burned, edematous respiratory tissue greatly enhances the toxic effects
of smoke inhalation. In one study in humans, mortality as a result of smoke inhalation
alone was 12%; in cases in which smoke inhalation was also associated with burns, 61%
were fatal.7 Thus mortality from smoke inhalation is dramatically increased in animals with
concomitant thermal burns.
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Toxicity
The pathophysiologic characteristics of smoke inhalation can be traced to the mechanism
of action of the individual toxins involved, their subsequent physiologic effects, and the
cause of clinical toxicity after exposure. Toxic combustion products are classified as simple
asphyxiants, irritant toxins, and chermical asphyxiants. These categories and their production
products are included in Box 29-1.
Simple asphyxiants are space occupying and fll enclosed spaces at the expense of oxy-
gen. In addition to this effect, combustion uses oxygen and creates an oxygen-deprived
environment. The net effect is less oxygen available to the animal.
Iritant toxins are chemically reactive substances. They produce local effects on the tissue
or the respiratory tract. Ammonia is produced by burning wool, silk, nylon, and synthetic
resins.? Ammonia has high water solubility and dissolves in moist membranes of the upper
 respiratory tract, resulting in nasopharyngeal, laryngeal, and tracheal inflammation. Acrolein
is lipid soluble and penetrates cell membranes. It denatures nucleic acid and intracellular pro-
teins and results in cell death. Acrolein is a very common iritant gas generated by combus-
tion. Sulfur dioxide is found in more than 50% of smoke from fires.? Sulfur dioxide reacts
Chapter 29 | Smoke Inhalation 413
with the moist respiratory membrane mucosa, producing the potent caustic, sulfurous acid.
 Polyvinyl chloride is ubiquitous in floor coverings, office and home furniture, electrical insu-
lation, and clothing. Ihe resultant combustion products phosgene, chlorine, and hydrogen
chloride are produced in many residential fires.10 Together with water in the mucosa, chlorine
produces hydrogen chloride free oxygen radicals and is very damaging to tissue. Phosgene
descends and produces more delayed alveolar injuries. Isocyanates are produced from burn-
ing and smoldering upholstery, and intense iritation of both upper and lower respiratory
tissue results
Organic material produces finely divided carbonaceous particulate matter on combus-
tion. This particulate matter or soot is suspended in the gases and hot air of smoke. Soot has
not only carbon, but also aldehydes, acids, and reactive radicals that adhere to its surface.8
The inhalation of soot and associated aerosols heightens the effect of other irritant toxins.
Soot binds with respiratory mucosal surfaces, allowing other irritant chemicals to adhere
respiratory tract depend on size. Small particles (1 to 3 μm) reach the alveoli. In various
animals, lung injury decreases when smoke is filtered to remove particulate matter. Sulfur
dioxide shows a high propensity to adhere to soot. In addition, polyvinyl chloride combus-
tion produces a large amount of soot-containing smoke coated with its particular combus-
tion products phosgene, chloride, and hydrogen chloride. In addition to soot and related
particles, irritant gases, acids, and other combustion products can also adhere to aerosol
droplets.
The most important determining factor in predicting the level of respiratory injury is
the water solubility of the toxin. Water-soluble chemicals injure the mucosa of upper respi-
ratory airways by releasing the mediators of inflammation and deleterious free radicals.
 This type of inflammation increases microvascular membrane permeability and results in a
net influx of fluid from intravascular spaces into the upper respiratory tissue. The underly-
ing tissue of the supraglottic larynx may become terrifically swollen and edematous. This
pe ssaoid oi anuuo 'ainsodxaisod simot o sanu u isan ues uosean snoieaa
close off upper airways completely.
and produce delayed toxic effects. Concentration of the toxic element inhaled, particle size,
duration of exposure, respiratory rate, absence of protective reflexes, preexisting disease,
and size and age of the animal also contribute to the level and degree of respiratory injury
in addition to the water solubility of toxic products.
An intense inflammatory reaction develops secondary to the initial injury to respira-
tory mucosal cells by toxic combustion products." Inhaled soot and toxic gases generate
increased airway resistance caused by inspissated secretions, increased mucosal airway
edema, and associated bronchospasm. Damaged mucosal cells stimulate copious exudates
rich in protein, inflammatory cells, and necrotic debris. If this reaction continues, muco-
sal sloughing ensues. Ihe degenerative exudates, bronchorrhea, and extensive sloughing
            s 
airway resistance by blocking major airways and prevent oxygen passage to the alveoli. In
addition, increased vascular permeability of respiratory tissue contributes to airway block-
the toxic mucosal injury.
Chemical asphyxiants produce toxic systemic effects at tissue distant from the lung
Carbon monoxide is generated during incomplete combustion and is regarded as the most
serious systemic agent to smoke inhalation victims. Carbon monoxide prevents oxygen
monoxide inhibits release of oxygen, thereby shifting the oxyhemoglobin dissociation
curve to the left. Carbon monoxide itself has other toxic effects that cause lipid peroxida-
tion and directly damage cellular membranes. Carbon monoxide is invariably present in
smoke from fires and is thought to be the cause of most immediate deaths from smoke
inhalation.13 Nitrogen-containing products, such as wool, silk, nylon, plastics, paper, rub-
ber, pyroxylin, polyurethanes, and polyacrylonitriles, all produce cyanide at combustion.
414 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Cyanide has been detected in samples from many other types of fires as well. Together with
carbon monoxide, cyanide has at least an additive and perhaps synergistic toxic effect in
victims of smoke inhalation. Nitrogen-containing compounds produce oxides of nitrogen
on their burning, which are potent respiratory irritants. Other combustion products can
cause systemic and local toxicity. Metal oxides, hydrogen fluoride, hydrogen bromide, and
various hydrocarbons can all be retrieved from toxic smoke. Benzene can be detected in the
smoke of plastic and petroleum fires.14 Antimony, cadmium, chromium, cobalt, gold, iron,
lead, and zinc have all been recovered from smoke samples during fires. Natural disasters,
accidents at illegal drug labs, transportation accidents, industrial fires, and acts of terrorism
are situations in which unusual types of toxic smoke combustion products may be encoun-
tered. In fact the entire spectrum of potentially toxic combustion products from fires is
endless, and we must remain vigilant.
 Super-heated air and steam in smoke result in thermal burns to tissue of the respiratory
in affected individuals. Exposure to dry air heated to 200° C for 5 minutes or to 125° C for
of 350° C to 500° C results in tracheitis in dogs. Exposure to steam alone results in trache-
steam or heat alone is relatively uncommon in animals.
Combustion progressively consumes oxygen. This decrease in oxygen concentration
a t inoi si iaa eas e u uax eu a eixardse so sao
-ond %ol oi uonpan y eaudsp ui isai ost oi suoeig uahxo juaque ui suonpan
duces dyspnea and altered mentation, and fractions from 8% to 6% cause loss of conscious-
ness followed by death in less than 8 minutes.
It is noteworthy to examine the dynamics of smoke dispersal from fires. Spreading
smoke initially accumulates and forms a hot layer mainly at the ceiling, which gradually
descends to the floor. Ihe main toxic combustion agent threats (e.g.,heat, irritants, asphyxi-
ants, noxious gases, and particulate material) are found in this ceiling layer.16 Depending
on the size of the enclosed room, the amount of smoke produced, and duration of time
the toxic products will eventually disperse to the floor. Thus, at least initially, animals at the
floor are breathing cooler and much less contaminated air and are receiving less radiant
heat. Because of this pattern of dispersal, the chance for survival exists for limited periods.
Carcinogens are also some of the toxic products of thermal decomposition. All fres
produce benzopyrene, the classic initiator of carcinogenesis. Plastic fres, particularly those
involving polyvinyl chloride, produce arsenic, benzene, chromium, and acrylonitrile, all of
duces the potent carcinogen, formaldehyde. Soot, so long known to cause cancer in chim-
ney sweeps and tobacco smokers, is a principal product of most fires. The exact association
of smoke inhalation and the development of cancer are unknown for animals at present.
Smoke inhalation causes progressive physiologic dysfunction and ultimately can lead
to death. Irrespective of cause, asphyxia is the underlying mechanism. This asphyxia may
be due to inhibition of cellular respiration, impaired oxygen transport and delivery, central
respiratory depression, direct or indirect occlusion of airways, or a decreased supply of oxy-
gen. For smoke inhalation, there is a direct correlation between the duration of exposure
and the severity of effects. Finally, the greater the exposure the more rapid and pronounced
are the effects observed.
Clinical Signs
Smoke inhalation victims generally have signs of respiratory compromise, systemic toxic-
ity, or a combination of both.17.18 Concomitant surface burns may be noted and cutaneous
burns of more than 15% body surface area, a history of exposure in an enclosed space,
altered mentation and carbonaceous sputum or saliva production are all associated with a
high incidence of bronchopulmonary injury.1? The presence of extensive body burns indi-
cates greater exposure and a potentially larger, hotter fire, and is typically associated with
Chapter 29 | Smoke Inhalation 415
a higher incidence of both upper and lower respiratory tract injury and a worse prognosis.
A respiratory abnormality may worsen with time after presentation, and signs of systemic
toxicity are maximal at the time of exposure.
Signs of smoke inhalation may be notoriously nonspecific and include cough, dyspnea
tachycardia, tachypnea, and hypoxemia. Almost always, signs of lacrimation, conjuncti-
vitis, pharyngitis, and rhinitis are present. Erythema, edema, and soot may be evident on
examination of the nose, mouth, and throat. Corneal abrasions are common, and exposure
to fire or prolonged heat can produce corneal bums. Mucosal ulcerations and hemorrhagic
areas may be present.
 Drooling, dysphagia, hoarseness, and stridor are all signs of laryngotracheal involve-
ment and injury. In severe cases, copious exudates combined with severe laryngeal edema
can result in complete upper air way obstruction. Blistering, erythema, ulcerations, mucosal
sloughing, mucosal edema, hemorrhage, and laryngospasm may all be evident with the aid
of a laryngoscope.20 The increased secretions may contain soot and carbonaceous particu-
late matter. Laryngeal edema and tracheal narrowing may be visible on radiographs.
Auscultation of the lungs may reveal rales, rhonchi, and wheezing. In bronchospasm
breath sounds can be virtually inaudible. Rales or crackles may be localized (atelectasis) or
diffuse (pneumonitis). Fever and leukocytosis may accompany atelectasis and pneumonitis.
Radiographs obtained soon after fire exposure may be normal. After progression, chest
radiographs can reveal peribronchial cuffing (caused by airway edema) and diffuse infl-
trates (caused by atelectasis, pneumonitis, or pulmonary edema).2l Crusts, casts of debris
and exudates, and plugs of mucus and soot may develop and block air ways.
-ss eaaan suiis uunshp renies pue suis (sn) aisas snanau (ena
temic toxicity caused by hypoxia and hypercapnia. Further CNS effects can include agita-
tion, confusion, ataxia, abnormal posturing, transient loss of consciousnes, and seizures.
Cardiovascular signs include hypotension, dysrhythmias, and cardiac arrest.
Ocular injuries are not uncommon in animals involved in fires or subsequently exposed
to smoke. Pawing at the eyes, blepharitis, epiphora, conjunctivitis, corneal ulceration, and
edema may all occur as the result of exposure. Therefore a thorough ophthalmic examina-
tion of the lids, conjunctiva, cornea, and sclera must be performed on all potential smoke
victims.
As with any severe shock or prolonged period of tissue hypoxia, elevated plasma lactate
concentration (0.1 mEq/L) may be present. However, this finding is by no means specific to
smoke inhalation. The methemoglobin fractions are elevated in virtually all animals with
significant signs of either smoke inhalation or systemic toxicity. Notable methemoglobin-
emia appears to be a rare finding. Signs indicating increased risk of smoke inhalation injury
are summarized in Box 29-2.
Minimum Database and Confirmatory Tests
Details of fre and smoke exposure, current medications, past medical treatment, and any
therapy before hospital arrival should all be obtained in a good history from family mem-
bers of the victim. Of particular importance is what substance generated the smoke (e.g.
wood, plastic, polyvinyl chloride), a description of the smoke (odor, intensity, and color),
the duration of the exposure, and whether the exposure took place indoors or in the open.
The nature and types of signs displayed by the animal at the time of the exposure and at
the time of hospital arrival are helpful in determining the severity of the exposure. Altered
mentation, ataxia, collapse, and syncope at the time of exposure all suggest carbon monox-
ide or cyanide intoxication. Ihese substances can be easily missed if delayed presentation
has allowed clinical improvement by the time of hospital presentation or if oxygen was
administered in the field.
Vital signs cannot be overlooked. Physical examination should first focus on deter-
mining the patency and condition of airways, adequacy of respirations, and assessment of
ventilation. The respiratory rate of the animal involved is critical. The heart rate, mucous
membrane color, CNS function, body temperature, and skin turgor should all be closely
416SECTlON 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Box 29-2
Signs Indicating Increased Risk of Smoke Inhalation Injury
Being confined to a small, closed space
Loss of consciousness
Respiratory compromise
Central nervous signs
Carbonaceous sputum
Edema of larynx-pharynx
Presence of burns
Singed hairs
Stridor
Ocular manifestations (blepharitis, conjunctivitis, epiphora, corneal ulcer, etc.)
monitored. Animals showing respiratory signs must be assessed for hypoxia, hypercapnia,
and upper airway obstruction. All fire victims should receive a thorough ophthalmic evalu-
ation, including retinal examination, checking for particulate matter under the lids, and
fluorescein stain evaluation of the cornea for ulcerations.
 In addition to the heart rate, respiratory rate, body temperature, and central nervous
function, pulse oximetry (SpOz) should be obtained in all smoke-inhalation animals. Oxy-
gen saturation obtained through this method may be falsely elevated and near normal when
methemoglobinemia and carboxyhemoglobinemia are present. Cyanosis that is unrespon-
sive to oxygen in an animal without respiratory distress is suggestive of methemoglobin-
emia. Any animal with cyanosis with normal vital signs and an SpOz greater than 90%
should have a methemoglobin fraction measured.
Animals with altered mental status, respiratory distress, and atypical chest auscultations
should be assessed for hypercapnia and acid-base imbalances by formal blood gas analysis.
Decreased oxygen saturation measured by cooximetry in conjunction with a normal POz
(and hence normal calculated oxygen) suggests a diagnosis of either carbon monoxide poi-
soning or methemoglobinemia. The difference between calculated and measured oxygen
saturation can be used to estimate either the fraction of carbon monoxide or methemoglo-
 bin. If a metabolic lactic acidosis is present, and carboxyhemoglobin and methemoglobin
and PO are all normal, then cyanide poisoning should be suspected. Unresponsive hypo-
tension and coma are likewise suggestive of cyanide poisoning.
Diagnostic tests must focus on the animals oxygenation and ventilation.Thus,for the
suspected smoke inhalation victim, arterial blood gas analysis, carboxyhemoglobin con-
centration, methemoglobin levels, and chest radiographs are the most valuable diagnostic
tools to be used. Establishing whether a metabolic acidosis is present can help in diagnosing
underlying tissue hypoxia.
The presence of elevated carboxyhemoglobin concentrations in smoke victims indi-
cates substantial exposure to toxic combustion products has occurred, and the potential
for ongoing, developing smoke-related pathologic conditions exists. However, carboxyhe-
moglobin concentrations alone are poor predictors of severity of exposure because low or
nondetectable concentrations do not rule out the possibility of significant underlying tissue
damage and potential for progressive pathologic conditions. Admission carboxyhemoglo-
bin levels do not reflect peak blood concentrations and are usually significantly decreased
 by the time the animal reaches the veterinary hospital. Furthermore, it is important to note
that transcutaneous measurement of oxygen saturation (pulse oximetry) is unreliable in
smoke inhalation patients because it overestimates actual oxygen saturation in the presence
of methemoglobin.
Lactic acidosis seen in animals suffering from smoke inhalation is a result of tissue hypo-
perfusion, carbon monoxide poisoning, and cyanide poisoning resulting in pulmonary
dysfunction. Nevertheless, lactic acidosis also is an insensitive indicator of smoke inhala-
tion because hypoxia from any cause impedes aerobic metabolism and generates lactic acid.
Chapter 29 | Smoke Inhalation 417
Chest radiographs are most commonly normal at the time of and for the first few hours
following smoke inhalation. Ihus early radiographs are another inaccurate predictor of
pulmonary injury. Within 24 to 36 hours of exposure, radiographic changes ranging from
patchy atelectasis to diffuse interstitial and alveolar involvement may be evident. Subtle
radiographic findings within the first 24 hours of exposure can include perivascular hazi-
ness, peribronchial cuffing, bronchial wall thickening, and subglottic edema.22 For radio-
graphic studies to be helpful in diagnosis of smoke inhalation, serial chest radiographs must
ui s n as su d  a a an a a
usually develop more than 24 hours after smoke inhalation and can include acute lung
tissue injury, aspiration, infection, volume overload, respiratory distres, and cardiogenic
pulmonary edema.
 Animals demonstrating abnormal cardiac rhythms and hypertension and those suffering
from underlying cardiovascular disease should receive an electrocardiogram after episodes
rarely done in veterinary medicine for diagnosis alone.
Finally, effective, aggressive therapy for smoke inhalation victims should never be post-
poned while awaiting blood results. Blood results (e.g., carboxyhemoglobin levels, methe-
moglobin concentrations, confirmation of blood cyanide levels) may take hours or longer
to obtain. Initiation of treatment for acutely smoke-poisoned animals must never await
results of laboratory analysis.
Treatment
Successful management of smoke inhalation begins with prompt and safe removal of the
animal from the smoke-filled environment. Care must be taken, and unless rescuers possess
skin, respiratory, and eye protection, removing animals from fires is best left to profes-
sional firefighters. Never enter smoky environments without adequate protection. Basic
emergency support measures can be instituted as necessary at the scene of the expo-
sure. Decontamination measures, such as irrigation of eyes and skin, can be initiated
immediately.
 The cornerstones of smoke inhalation therapy are maintenance of airway patency, ade-
quate ventilation and oxygenation, aggressive measures for countering pulmonary debris,
and stabilization of hemodynamic imbalances. A major concern in managing smoke inha-
lation patients is failing to appreciate their potential for rapid deterioration. Critical air way
compromise can develop suddenly and insidiously in these animals. The patency of upper
airways must be rapidly ascertained and established if compromised. Upper airway injury
is always almost certain if obvious oropharyngeal burns are present. If teltale burns are
not present, it is very easy to underestimate the degree of injury after episodes of smoke
inhalation. If evidence of upper airway injury is present, endotracheal intubation should
be undertaken rather than waiting for the injured animal to decompensate and deterio-
rate. Animals displaying coma, visible burns, full-thickness neck burns, edema of the oro-
pharynx, and stridor should all be swifly intubated. Fluid administration to burn victims
contributes to the formation of upper air way edema. As a result, burned animals receiving
aggressive fluid therapy also require intubation.
 Inhalant βz-adrenergic agonists are the first line of defense for acute reversible broncho-
constriction (e.g., asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). Although effective
for these conditions, their effcacy has not been established in smoke inhalation victims.23
tion. Corticosteroids are effective in treatment of refractory acute asthma, but mortality
and infection rates are increased in animals with smoke inhalation that receive steroids.
Furthermore, benefits of corticosteroid treatment of smoke injury have not been demon-
strated in clinical animal studies.24,25,26 Both cough suppressants and pain-relieving opioids
should be avoided because they suppress the cough reflex necessary for the expectoration
of inhaled smoke particles.
418 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
Mammalian lungs may show progressive pathophysiologic changes over time (hours to
days) after exposure to smoke. Counters for progressive respiratory compromise and failure
include mechanical ventilation techniques, continuous positive airway pressure, positive
end-expiratory pressure, and vigorous clearing of pulmonary secretions and debris. Fre-
pe suoansas patessidsun sises 'sd eas on ressanau aq ae ns aemre suanb
necrotic debris.
Toxic combustion products damage the respiratory tract but also potentially the skin,
eyes, and other mucous membranes. Ihe extent of chemical injury to eyes, skin, and other
and the animal's tissue. The eyes of all animals suffering from smoke inhalation must be
thoroughly examined for corneal burns caused by thermal, chemical, or irritant injury.
Animals with signs of ocular injury should have the eyes irrigated copiously with artificial
tears or normal saline. Dermal decontamination should be initiated if necessary to prevent
ongoing dermal burns from toxin-laden soot adherent to the skin. Rapid removal of soot
 and smoke debris from skin may prevent continued injury and burns.
Candidates for immediate endotracheal intubation include animals with respiratory
distress and signs of upper airway obstructions and animals that are cyanotic or hypoxic
(SpO, <90%) despite aggressive maximum oxygen therapy with a nonrebreathing mask.
Animals with respiratory depression (<10 to 12/min or PCOz >50 mm Hg), pulmonary
edema, depressed mentation, and full-thickness neck or face burns also should be intu-
 bated. Any animal should be considered for intubation that does not improve with oxygen
delivered by mask. Intubation should be done with the largest possible endotracheal tube
so that suction can be employed, or bronchoscopy can be performed if required. The use
of nasal catheters for oxygen delivery may be necessary in animals with excessive airway
edema, if extensive perioral burns and constricting neck burns are present, or if direct visu-
alization of the larynx for intubation is impossible. Be certain to evaluate the whole animal
for other injuries (e.g., neck trauma and cervical spine injury) by performing a thorough
physical examination. Do not focus only on the smoke inhalation. The potential for other
injuries occurring during fires should never be overlooked
Once intubated, the airway should be suctioned regularly to remove secretions, inhaled
of respiratory tissue and secretions. Positive and expiratory pressure should be routinely
administered to prevent and to treat atelectasis and for those who remain hypoxic despite
administration of 100% oxygen. Bronchoscopy can be employed to help direct effective
removal of bronchial secretions. Repeated suctioning may be necessary to help break up
inspissated mucous plugs, casts, and accumulated debris.
Tracheostomy is reserved only for animals with complete airway obstruction, either
caused by constriction, edema, or trauma, or for those that may require prolonged intuba-
tion. Performing a tracheostomy must be carefully considered because it requires upkeep,
can be associated with significant complications, and is usually reserved for animals that are
tremendously compromised.
Animals that do not require intubation nonetheless may benefit from inhalant, aerosol-
ized, and racemic epinephrine. However, they still must be carefully monitored for sudden
deterioration and may still need to be intubated.
Experimental evidence exists for a variety of smoke-inhalation therapies, ranging from
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug administration, antioxidants, and free radical scav-
engers to inhaled nitric oxide. Hyperbaric oxygen may be of benefit in the treatment of
carbon monoxide poisoning,cyanide poisoning, cerebral edema, andthermal burns associ-
ated with fires and smoke inhalation. It can also be considered in animals with refractory
hypoxemia. Nevertheless, the availability of hyperbaric oxygen is still limited for veterinary
medical applications.
 The treatment of carbon monoxide poisoning in animals associated with smoke inhala-
tracheal tube. The amount of cyanide exposure in animal victims of smoke inhalation is
Chapter 29 | Smoke Inhalation 419
not predictable. However, cyanide poisoning should be suspected in animals with serious
episodes of smoke exposure. Because hydroxocobalamin therapy has become available in
the United States, cyanide poisoning is treated according to the usual guidelines. Methe-
moglobinemia can result from inhalation of certain toxic products of combustion. Oxygen
therapy alone is effective for most instances. Methylene blue should be reserved for only
those cases in which methemoglobin concentration is greater than 20% to 30%.
Treatment with antibiotics should only be initiated in patients with a documented infec-
lation is of no benefit and in fact may help implement the development of infection with
antibiotic-resistant organisms. Selection of antibiotics should be directed by the results
from the Gram stain and culture and sensitivity of the sputum and secretions collected.
Animals with fever and persistent leukocytosis more than 2 days postexposure should be
treated with antibiotics. Empirical therapy with agents effective against Staphylococcus
aureus (such as cefazolin) and gram-negative organisms like Pseudormonas (gentamicin)
can be started in the absence of culture results.
 Intravenous fluid therapy may be indicated for animals displaying hypotension and to
prevent drying of normal airway secretions. Nevertheless, fluid therapy must be admin-
istered prudently because smoke damage to pulmonary endothelial cells can result in
increased pulmonary vascularity and overhydration may result in accumulations of pulmo-
nary fluids, compounding respiratory distress.
Because of the high incidence of sudden deterioration and decompensation in cases
of smoke inhalation, it is recommended that exposed animals be observed closely for
6 to 8 hours postexposure before they are released. No smoke inhalation victims should
be discharged until they are asymptomatic, normal on physical examination and ancillary
tests, and otherwise stable. All discharged animals should be seen again within 72 hours to
 Definite therapy and treatment is available for animals suffering from smoke inhalation.
Early intervention and respiratory support are essential in these cases. Establishing and
mssans ro siseq an st uahxo mo-uiu go Aianiap a pue saem iie jaed uuu
mens is being explored in the hope of more effective therapy for smoke-intoxicated animals.
Prevention and Prognosis
Prevention of smoke inhalation injuries begins with the prompt and safe removal of ani-
mals from environments filling with smoke. However, no rescues can be attempted unless
rescuers have adequate skin, eye, and respiratory protection. In many instances remov-
ing animals from fires and contact with toxic smoke is best left to professional firefighters.
Common sense must outweigh emotion and hazardous heroics.
The simple use of smoke alarms and sprinkler systems cannot be underestimated in reduc-
ing the hazardous effects of fires. The mere presence of a smoke alarm is a tremendous deter-
rent to fire-related injury simply through its early-warning merits. If sprinkler systems are in
no action from occupants, do not depend on their presence or location, and immediately
quench the toxic potential of fire and smoke.27 In the absence of smoke detectors and sprin-
 kler systems, fires can progress to their most dangerous potential. Both smoke detectors
and sprinkler systems are widely available, fairly inexpensive, and relatively easy to install.
Commercial fire extinguishers using a variety of retardants are also easily and inexpen-
sively obtainable at home improvement outlets. Family members should all be well versed
in where smoke alarms and fire extinguishers are located in the home and be instructed
in their function. Stickers for doors are available informing rescuers how many and what
types of animals live in that residence. These should be prominently placed and currently
updated.
from asymptomatic, unaffected animals to rapid upper airway occlusion, to a few to several
420 SECTlON 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
days later the appearance of delayed pulmonary edema and progressive pathologic changes.
Prognosis depends on several factors, such as duration of exposure, the concentration of
the inhaled smoke, the toxic combustion products of the smoke involved, and the presence
of preexisting underlying disease. Animals suffering from smoke inhalation may have a
 variety of complications caused by a number of pulmonary sequelae. Wheezing and chronic
cough may reflect underlying chronic hyperreactive airways. Chronic bronchitis, bronchi-
ectasis, bronchial stenosis, pulmonary fbrosis, bronchiolitis obliterans, and atelectasis may
result after exposure to smoke and subsequent inflammation and scarring. Tracheal ste-
nosis has been seen as a complication of long-term endotracheal intubation.28 The precise
outcome of smoke inhalation exposure may not be evident for some time. As a result, these
cases often require extensive follow-up, serial radiographs, bronchoscopy, and other diag-
nostics to document the extent and the nature of pulmonary injuries and how much normal
function will be maintained. Studies have revealed that, for both dogs and cats displaying
respiratory signs on presentation following smoke inhalation, the best prognostic indicator
Because of the potential deterioration of patients in the days following admission, smoke
victims should be hospitalized for at least 48 hours for observation, monitoring, and to
perform diagnostic tests. Early intervention certainly is beneficial in the prognosis and
outcome of smoke inhalation cases. Finally, we must continue to strive to identify safer,
less toxic construction and furnishing materials that do not release poisonous combustion
products when burned.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
The effects of smoke inhalation can be characterized with regard to the mechanism of
action of the individual toxicants, their physiologic effects, or their course of toxicity after
exposure. Thermal burns are caused by hot air and steam, and chemical and thermal burns
saaa) saseins [esosn us ane aos rog anssil ialren 'sas sei aq panoid ane
and respiratory tract), and any mucous membranes. Ihe effects of smoke irritation are
mediated by polymorphonuclear leukocytes, arachidonic acid metabolites (leukotrienes,
thromboxanes, and prostacyclins), cytokines (platelet activity factors), and free radi-
cals (such as superoxides, peroxides, and hydroxyl).31 Minimal exposure results only in
inflammation, but prolonged exposure to smoke can cause ulceration and cellular necro-
sis. Smoke causes inflammation of the larynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, and alveoli
which then produces local edema, bronchospasm, cessation of ciliary function, loss of sur-
factant, and increased permeability of microvasculature membranes, upper and lower air-
way obstruction, atelectasis, loss of lung compliance, and ventilation-perfusion mismatch
may develop.32
dysfunction that can ultimately be fatal. Asphyxia is the end result, no matter what the
predisposing causes or smoke sources. Asphyxia can be due to a number of causes: inhibi-
tion of cellular respiration (carbon monoxide and cyanide), impaired oxygen transport and
monoxide, cyanide, and carbon dioxide), direct or indirect occlusion of airways (effects
of irritant gases, heat, soot, and humidity), or a decreased supply of oxygen (air robbed of
oxygen by combustion or containing toxic gases that lower the partial pressure of oxygen).
There is a strong correlation between duration of exposure and severity of pathologic
inj uries.
Following smoke inhalation the clinical sequence of events can be divided into early.
intermediate, and late phases. In the initial 24 to 36 hours, the systemic effects of carbon
monoxide, cyanide, and methemoglobin and the airway effects of heat, humidity, irritant
gases, and soot predominate. From 6 hours to 5 days following exposure, pulmonary edema
 becomes the most significant problem.33 It can develop swiffly, progress to severe respira-
tory distress, and a high mortality rate. Cerebral edema is present in animals with severe or
prolonged hypoxia. Lesions attributed to carbon monoxide toxicity associated with smoke
Chapter 29 | Smoke Inhalation 421
 inhalation have been identifed in the brains of exposed dogs.34 These lesions were detected
primarily in the caudate nucleus, the globus pallidus, and substantia nigra but were also
found in the cerebellum, cerebral cortex, and dorsal thalamus.
 In days to weeks after exposure, late manifestations include permanent CNS damage
secondary to anoxia, bronchiectasis, and subglottic stenosis as a result of airway injury
and prolonged endotracheal intubation, and sepsis and pneumonia secondary to edema,
debris, impaired defense mechanisms, and opportunistic bacteria. Pneumonia is the most
common late complication, and it can have a mortality rate approaching 50%. Early pneu-
monia (within 3 to days of exposure) is usually due to S. aureus, and Escherichia coli is
usually the culprit when pneumonia occurs later in the progression of pathologic events.
Chronic sequelae, such as asthma, pulmonary fibrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease, bronchiolitis obliterans, and neoplasia, can develop months to years after the original
exposure injury.
-nsop ot pasn aq le ues Adosououoq pue 'sisat uoun Aieuoumd duieu eaonn
ment chronic pulmonary lesions following smoke inhalation. These types of studies are
often more sensitive than changes detectable by radiographs.
The morbidity and mortality of smoke inhalation increase greatly when associated with
thermal burns. Burned animals demonstrate increased vasc ular permeability that leads to
a large fluid flux from the circulatory plasma to the interstitial spaces.13 The more exten-
sive the cutaneous burns, the more severe is the resultant lung edema formation. Animals
with combined burn and smoke inhalation injuries show an increase in transpulmonary
fluid flux (lung lyrmph flow), an increase in lung water content, and a significant drop in
the partial pressure of inspired oxygen as a result of the edema. This constriction also
monary gas exchange is the development of airway obstruction. By 48 to 72 hours postex-
posure, there is a progressive reduction in bronchi and bronchiolar luminal cross section.
This reduction in cross section is due to the progressive development of obstructive casts
and exudative material that occludes the lumen of the airway. This poor oxygenation of
blood leads to hypoxemic events in tissue distant to the respiratory tract. Therapy tar-
geting these pathologic mechanisms, removing obstructive materials and cellular debris,
and preventing the development of permanent pathologic pulmonary changes might be
a more effective way of successful airway management and smoke inhalation treatments
in the future.
Differential Diagnoses
The manifestations of smoke inhalation can be unfortunately nonspecific. Most of the time,
smoke inhalation causes injuries that preponderantly involve the lower respiratory tract.
Look-alikes of smoke inhalation include any situation leading to respiratory compromise.
A list of potential differential diagnoses for smoke inhalation is shown in Box 29-3.
Box 29-3
DifferentialDiagnosesforSmokeInhalation
Asthma
Heart disease
 Allergic bronchitis
Inhalation of other toxic solvents
Pneumonia
Metabolic disease
 Neoplasia
Trauma
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Pneumothorax
422 SECTION 3 Miscellaneous Toxicant Groups
References
1. Gad SC, Anderson RC: Combustion toxicology, Boca Raton, FL, 1990, CRC Press.
2. Orzel RA:Toxicologic aspects offire smoke polymerpyrolysis andcobustion, Oup Med 8&414-429
1993.
3. Bowes PC: Casualties attributed to toxic gas and smoke at fires: a survey of statistics, Med Sci Law 16:
104110, 1976.
4. Karter M: Fire loss in the United States during 1999, Quincy, MA, 2000, National Fire Protection
Association.
5. Drobatz KJ: Smoke inhalation. In King KG, editor: Textbook of respiratory disease in dogs and cats,
St Louis, 2004, Saunders, Pp 480-486.
6. Nieman G, Clark WR, Wax S,et al: The effect of smoke inhalation on pulmonary surfactant, A nn Surg
191:171-181, 1980.
7. Clark WR, Nieman GF: Smoke inhalation, Burns 14:473-494, 1988.
8. Holstege CP: Smoke inhalation. In Goldfrank LR,et al, editors: Goldfrank's toxicologic emergencies, ed7,
New York, 2002, McGraw-Hill.
9. Charan NB, et al: Pulmonary injuries associated with acute sulfur dioxide intoxication, Am Resp Dis
119:555-560, 1979
235:393-397, 1976.
11. Thurning DR,et al: Pulmonary responses to smoke inhalation: morphological changes in rabbits exposed
to pine wood smoke, Hum Pathol 13:355-364, 1982.
12. Bizovi KE, Leikin JD: Smoke inhalation among firefighters, Occup Med 10:721-733, 1995.
13. Anderson RA, Watson AA: Fire deaths in the Glasgow area:the role of carbon monoxide, Med Sci Law
21:288, 1981.
14. Treitman RD, Burgess WA, Gold A: Air contaminants encountered by firefighters, Am Ind Hyg Assoc I
41:796-802, 1980.
15. Terril JB, Montgomery RR, Reinhardt CF: Toxic gases from fires, Science 200:1343, 1978.
16. Enkhbaatar P, Traber DL: Pathophysiology of acute lung injury in combined burn and smoke inhalation
injury, Clin Sci 107:137-143, 2004
17. Jasani S, Hughes D: Smoke inhalation. In Silverstein DC, Hupper K, editors: Small animal critical care
medicine, St Louis, 2009, Saunders.
18. Clarke DL, Drobutz KJ: Smoke inhalation. In Osweiler GD, Hovda LR, Brutlag AG, Lee JA, editors: Small
animal toxicology, Ames, IA, 2011, Wiley and Sons.
19. Mosley S: Inhalation injury: a review ofthe literature, Heart Lung17:3, 1988.
20.Linden CH: Smoke inhalation. In Haddad LM, Hannon MW, Winchester JF,editors: Clinical manage-
ment of poisoning and drug overdose, Philadelphia, 1988, WB Saunders, pp 876-885.
 21. Peitzman AB, et al: Smoke inhalation: evaluation of radiographic manifestations and pulmonary dys-
function, I Traumα 29:1232, 1989.
 22. Lee MJ, O'Connell DJ: The plain chest radiograph after acute smoke inhalation, Clin Radiol 39:33-37,
1988.
23. McFadden ER: Therapy for acute asthma, J Allergy Clin Immunol 84:151-158, 1989.
24. Nieman GF, Clark WR, Hakim T: Methylprednisolone does not protect the lung from inhalation injury,
Burns 17:384390, 1991
 25. Dressler DP, Skornik WA, Kupersmith S: Corticosteroid treatment of experimental smoke inhalation,
Ann Surg 183:46-52, 1976.
 26. Robinson NB, Hudson LD, Reim M,et al: Steroid therapy following isolated smmoke inhalation injury,
JTraumα 22:876-879, 1982.
27. Alarie Y: Toxicity of fire smoke, Crit Rev Toxicol 32(4):259-289, 2002.
 28. Lee-Chiong TL: Smoke inhalation injury, Postgrad Med 105(2):55-62, 1999.
29. Drobatz KJ, Walker LM, Hendricks JC: Smoke exposure in dogs: 27 cases (1988-1997), J Am Vet Med
Assoc 215(9):1306-1311, 1999.
30. Drobbatz KJ, Walker LM, Hendricks JC: Smoke exposure in cats: 22 cases (1988-1997), I Am Vet Med
Assoc 215(9):1312-1316, 1999.
31. Traber D1, Linares HA, Herndon DN: The pathophysiology of smoke inhalation—a review, Burns14:357,
1988.
 32. Parrish JS, Bradshaw DA: Toxic inhalation injury: gas, vapor, and vesicant exposure, Respir Care Clin
10:43-58, 2004.
33. Marsh PS: Fire and smoke inhalation injury in horses, Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 23(1):19-30, 2007.
34. Kent M, Creevy KE, Delahunta A: Clinical and neuropathological findings of acute carbon monoxide
toxicity in Chihuahuas following smoke inhalation, I A m Anim Hosp Assoc 46(4):259-264, 2010.
SEcTloN 4 Specific Toxicants
CHAPTER
30
Acetaminophen
Rance K. Sellon, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
Expected single toxic doses of acetaminophen range from 50 to 100 mg/kg
(cats) to 600 mg/kg (dogs). Toxicity may be observed with lower doses,
particularly with chronic exposure.
Clinical signs of toxicity usually reflect hepatic injury or failure (dogs) and
hemolytic anemia from methemoglobinemia (cats).
· Dignosis is typically made from a history of exposure coupled with compatible
clinical and laboratory findings.
The mainstay of therapy is administration of N-acetylcysteine at a loading dose of
140 mng/kg intravenously (IV) or orally (PO) every 6 hours, followed by 70 mg/kg
IV or PO every 6 hours for five to seven or more doses. Accormpanying treatment
options include cirnetidine and ascorbic acid. S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) may
also be therapeutic for intoxicated animals
· Supportive treatment measures, such as IV fluids and blood, are necessary in
many cases.
Sources
Acetaminophen is a widely available analgesic and antipyretic (weak anti-inflammatory
properties) contained in many over-the-counter and prescription preparations intended
for human use. Exposure to dogs and cats occurs through administration of one of these
 preparations by an uninformed but well-meaning owner intending to treat fever or pain
perceived in the pet or by accidental ingestion of a toxic dose. Accidental ingestion of a
toxic dose has been the most common cause of toxicosis in dogs. The editor is also aware
of acetaminophen being used to maliciously poison companion animals. Acetaminophen
may also be generated from the metabolism of phenacetin, an ingredient of some analgesic
mixtures. In Australia and Great Britain, paracetamol is the equivalent of acetaminophen.
Toxic Dose
Dogs
The recommended therapeutic dosage of acetaminophen in dogs is 15 mg/kg given orally
(PO) every 8 hours. The reported dosage required to produce signs of toxicity in dogs is
approximately 600 mg/kg, although clinical signs of toxicity have been seen in dogs at
dosages much less than this. One should be concerned when exposure doses exceed
50 mg/kg, and signs are commonly observed when exposures exceed 100 mg/kg. Higher
exposure doses (>200 mg/kg) are generally required to cause methemoglobinemia in dogs.
423
424SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
In one published report, a dog with hematologic evidence of acetaminophen toxicosis was
administered roughly 46 mg/kg daily for 6 weeks.3 The author is aware of cases of clinical
toxicosis in dogs following chronic administration of therapeutic doses. Acetaminophen
exposures lower than reported toxic doses can lead to keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
 particularly in small breed dogs.
Cats
Compared with dogs, cats are extremely sensitive to the toxic effects of acetaminophen and
can have clinical signs of toxicity with dosages in the range of 50 to 100 mg/kg. Toxicosis
has been occasionally observed with dosages as low as 10 mg/kg.4 In cats that have received
subtoxic doses of acetaminophen, subsequent doses can prove rapidly fatal
Toxicokinetics
Because of product formulations, most acetaminophen poisonings that develop in dogs
tal circulation and metabolized in the liver by glucuronidation, sulfation, and cytochrome
P450-mediated pathways. In dogs, as in many other species, low doses of acetaminophen
are metabolized primarily through the glucuronidation and sulfation pathways, with the
resulting nontoxic conjugates excreted in bile and urine.$ Although the amount of acet-
aminophen metabolized through the cytochrome P450 pathway is usually small, the prod-
uct of this metabolic pathway, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI), is toxic. The toxic
effects of NAPQI are normally limited by its conjugation with glutathione, a compound
essential for cellular protection against oxidative injury, to form nontoxic cysteine and mer-
capturic acid conjugates. Because the metabolism of acetaminophen by glucuronidation
and sulfation pathways is capacity limited, increasing doses of acetaminophen lead to an
pue uaishs ostd anros a aq pazoqeiau st ie anap a jo uoodond pasaiou
an increase in the production of the toxic NAPQl. Cellular stores of glutathione become
depleted during conjugation of the increased amounts of NAPQI. In addition, synthesis
of glutathione is suppressed in the face of high concentrations of acetaminophen. The end
result is increased concentrations of unconjugated NAPQl. In dogs the biotransformation
of acetaminophen is also a dose-dependent event: The higher the dose, the longer it takes
for the biotransformation process to occur.2
Cats, like dogs, also exhibit dose-dependent toxicokinetics, albeit with some important
differences.2 Relative to a number of other species, cats have low hepatic levels of high-
affinity acetaminophen uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase.6 Therefore, com-
pared with dogs, cats have a diminished capacity to metabolize acetaminophen through the
glucuronidation pathway, and more of the drug is transformed through the sulfation path-
way. As in dogs, the sulfation pathway of cats is also capacity limited. Additionally, the dose
dependency of biotransformation in cats occurs at doses approximately one-tenth those
observed for dogs. A capacity-limited sulfation pathway, poor glucuronidation capacity,
and lower threshold for dose-dependent biotransformation explain the sensitivity of cats to
acetaminophen toxicity, which occurs at much lower doses than in dogs.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Central to the mechanism of acetaminophen poisoning in dogs and cats is depletion of
cellular glutathione. In the absence of glutathione conjugation, increased concentrations
of NAPQI accumulate. Because of its electrophilic properties, NAPQI covalently binds to
cellular proteins (e.g., enzymes, structural and regulatory proteins),thereby disrupting pro-
tein function and damaging cellular membranes through lipid peroxidation. Additionally,
glutathione depletion renders cells susceptible to oxidative injury that contributes to loss of
mitochondrial function, depletion of adenosine triphosphate, and cell necrosis. In dogs the
liver is more susceptible to the toxicity of acetaminophen (it is estimated that 70% of hepatic
glutathione must be depleted before hepatotoxicity occurs), whereas in cats the red blood
Chapter 30 | Acetaminophen 425
cell is most susceptible to oxidative injury following glutathione depletion. Historically, the
reasons for the differences in tissue affected have been attributed to the comparative sus-
ceptibility of red blood cells to oxidative injury. Feline hemoglobin contains eight sulfhydryl
groups, compared with four sulfhydryl groups in other species. Feline erythrocytes are thus
much more prone to oxidative injury, making the development of methemoglobinemia a
much earlier and more prominent feature of toxicosis in cats than in dogs.
Arecent study has suggested that another metabolite, para-aminophenol, contributes to
tion of para-aminophenol in dogs and cats is fostered by an absolute or relative deficiency of
the enzyme N-acetyltransferase as compared with other species and may be the more likely
cause of methemoglobinemia than NAPQI.
 In addition to the direct effects of toxic metabolites, consequences of cell death induced
by acetaminophen toxicity have gained attention as contributors to the clinical conse-
quences of intoxication—in particular, hepatic injury. Numerous lines of evidence, primar-
ily from rodent models of acetaminophen-induced hepatic injury, are demonstrating that
sterile inflammatory cascades initiated by hepatocellular necrosis provoke further hepato-
cellular injury and necrosis.9
Clinical Signs
Dogs
In dogs the clinical signs of acetaminophen toxicosis most commonly reflect hepatocel-
lular injury and necrosis. At higher toxic doses, clinical signs of methemoglobinemia may
methemoglobinemia than to hepatotoxicity.10.l Vomiting, lethargy, trembling, chemosis,
anorexia, tachycardia, and tachypnea are most often described. There may be abdominal
pain and icterus. If methemoglobinemia is present, cyanosis, hemoglobinuria, and hematu-
ria may also be observed. Facial and paw edema are commonly reported (Color Plate 30-1).
Cats
Clinical signs of acetaminophen toxicosis in cats are similar to those for dogs except that
include cyanosis (Color Plate 30-2) or muddy mucous membranes, methemoglobinemia
lethargy, anorexia, respiratory distress, edema of the face and paws, hypothermia, and vom-
iting. Icterus may also develop, most commonly as a consequence of hemolysis. Signs asso-
ciated with hepatotoxicosis in cats are more commonly seen in high-dose exposures and
in males.
Minimum Database
Abnormalities seen in a laboratory database in both dogs and cats may include methemo-
globinemia, which may impart a brown tinge to whole blood, possibly followed by hemo
lysis depending on the extent of the oxidative damage. Hemolytic changes include anemia,
hemoglobinemia, and hemoglobinuria. Increased activity of serum alanine transaminase
(ALT) may be seen in both species, in dogs because of direct hepatotoxicity, and in dogs and
transaminase activity following acetaminophen toxicity have been described in dogs.
In the frst 24 hours, ALT and aspartate transaminase increase, with extreme (more than
1500 times higher than normal) increases possible by 48 hours. Progressive decreases in
blood urea nitrogen, cholesterol, and albumin and increases in serum bilirubin are con-
sidered indicative of impaired hepatic function. On urinalysis there may be evidence of
hemoglobinuria or hematuria.
 In animals with chronic liver injury, hyperbilirubinemia may be found. In cats hyperbil-
irubinemia occurs early in the course of toxicity (within 48 hours) secondary to hemolysis,
426SECTION4SpecificToxicants
with increases in liver enzymes possible 3 to 6 days following ingestion. In animals with
severe liver injury, there may be evidence of marked hepatic failure accompanied by pro-
However, in a small proportion of people intoxicated with acetaminophen, the laboratory
database suggests acute renal failure in the absence of evidence of hepatocellular injury. In
one study, acute renal failure developed 2 to 5 days after ingestion of toxic doses of acet-
aminophen.l3 Although acute renal failure has not been reported in dogs or cats with acet
aminophen toxicity, the similarities to people in the clinical picture of toxicity, especially in
dogs, suggest the possibility that such could occur in rare instances.
Confirmatory Tests
When confirmation of a diagnosis of acetaminophen poisoning is necessary, plasma, serum,
or urine concentrations of acetaminophen may be measured by many methods (e.g., immu-
noassay, gas-liquid chromatography, thin-layer chromatography, high-performance liquid
chromatography). However, assays are not widely available in veterinary diagnostic labora-
tories, and documentation of toxic concentrations of acetaminophen is rarely accomplished
in clinical practice. Human hospitals or diagnostic facilities can offer assays with relatively
short turnaround times (less than 24 hours). In dogs and cats, a diagnosis of acetamino-
phen poisoning is typically established following correlation of clinical signs and laboratory
abnormalities with documentation of exposure to the drug obtained through the history.
Treatment
The treatment of acetaminophen toxicosis is directed at preventing additional absorption of
the drug, providing supportive measures, and administering drugs that more directly coun-
teract the toxic mechanisms (e.g., replenish glutathione stores, convert methemoglobin to
hemoglobin, prevent or treat hepatic necrosis). Induction of emesis or gastric lavage, fol-
lowed by administration of activated charcoal (2 g/kg PO) within the first 4 to 6 hours, may
help prevent absorption of acetaminophen remaining in the gastrointestinal tract. Support-
ive therapy often includes administration of oxygen and intravenous (IV) fluids to maintain
hydration and electrolyte balance, especially in the presence of vomiting. Although the best
fluid to administer to dogs or cats with acetaminophen toxicity has not been established,
one study in mice reported a benefit in hepatic recovery with administration of lactated
Ringer's solution (LRS). 4 Compared with saline-treated mice, mice administered LRS had
more rapid reductions in ALT and less hepatocellular necrosis 72 hours after induction of
toxicity. If anemia is severe enough (as judged by the hematocrit or packed cell volume and
clinical signs of anemia), administration of packed red blood cells or whole blood may be
auaoq pagnd se yns samsns poota Kiedes auies-uahxo anrasand oi panbai
hemoglobin, can support tissue oxygenation in the absence of traditional blood products.
However, clinical studies of the treatment of acetaminophen poisoning using blood substi-
tutes in veterinary patients have not been reported, and use of such products in this situa-
tion represents an extra-label use.
The specific “antidote” for acetaminophen poisoning provides a source of glutathione
precursors for repletion of cellular glutathione stores. N-acetylcysteine, available as a 10%
or 20% sterile solution, has been the historical standard and is administered at a dose of
140 mg/kg initially either IV or PO in animals that are not vormiting; it is then repeated at
a dosage of 70 mg/kg IV or PO every 6 hours for an additional five to seven treatments.
N-acetylcysteine may be administered IV either undiluted or diluted in a 5% dextrose solution.
A human study suggests that administration of activated charcoal before N-acetylcysteine
treatment does not reduce the effectiveness of orally administered N-acetylcysteine,'5 but
comparable studies have not been done in dogs or cats.
Other sources of sulfur donors may be of benefit if N-acetylcysteine is not available.
ssd aa  sad  ar   se sas a
Chapter 30 | Acetaminophen 427
important for cell membrane function, and glutathione. SAMe has proven beneficial in the
against the development of acetaminophen-induced erythrocyte oxidative injury.16.17 The
suggested dosage of SAMe for dogs is 40 mg/kg PO once followed by 20 mg/kg PO every
24 hours for 9 days.16 Optimum dosages for cats with clinical toxicity have not been estab-
lished, but protective benefits were demonstrated in an experimental model of feline toxic-
ity when SAMe was administered at 180 mg PO every 12 hours for 3 days, then 90 mg PO
every 12 hours for 14 days. 17 It has not been determined whether administration of activated
charcoal around the time of SAMe administration impairs absorption of SAMe. Sodium
sulfate (50 mg/kg of a 1.6% solution IV every 4 hours for six treatments) is another alterna-
 tive that has proven beneficial effects.1 Treatment of acetaminophen toxicity is encouraged
Even if not initiated until late (more than 18 hours) in the course of intoxication because
positive clinical outcomes can still be obtained with administration of antidotes and appro-
priate supportive care.
Ascorbic acid (30 mg/kg PO every 6 hours for 6 treatments) and methylene blue
(1 mg/kg IV of a1 solution given every 2 to 3hours for two to three treatments) can be admin-
istered to reduce methemoglobin to hemoglobin. In a study of limited numbers of experi-
mentally intoxicated cats, combination therapy with methylene blue and N-acetylcysteine
offered little advantage over N-acetylcysteine alone.1^ Methylene blue was shown not to be
toxic to cats when used at therapeutic doses for a limited number of treatments.20 Methy-
lene blue offers the advantage over ascorbic acid in that it has a more rapid onset of action.
Cimetidine has been advocated as a component of the treatment protocol for dogs
and cats with acetaminophen toxicity.12z20 The rationale behind its inclusion is that, as an
inhibitor of the cytochrome P450 system, it will inhibit metabolism of acetaminophen into
toxic compounds. Experimental evidence in rodent models of toxicity supports its use,2l
but its administration to people with acetaminophen toxicosis has not been consistently
recommended.13.223 Some have suggested that the concentrations of cimetidine required
than is typicaly achieved with routine human therapeutic doses.24 Controlled prospective
clinical studies addressing the use of cimetidine or other cytochrome P450 antagonists
in the treatment of acetaminophen toxicosis have not, to my knowledge, been conducted
in dogs or cats. Ihe few studies that have addressed the use of H, antagonists as cyto-
chrome P450 inhibitors in the setting of acetaminophen toxicosis have been performed
in experimentally intoxicated dogs treated with the antagonist before acetaminophen was
administered.25.26
Prognosis
The prognosis of animals with acetaminophen poisoning is a function of the dose received
and the amount of time that passes before treatment is instituted. In a study of 17 cats with
acetaminophen poisoning, fatalities were observed with doses as low as 10 mg/kg, but cats
that had received higher doses survived.4 Survivors were generally treated within 14 hours,
whereas cats that died were not treated until 17 hours or more after exposure. Dogs may die
within the frst 72 hours if lef untreated.12 As with many toxicoses, the sooner therapy is
inplemented, the better the prognosis. Elevations in serum liver enzymes have been sug-
gested as being a useful prognostic indicator.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
 Dogs and cats that die or are euthanized from acetaminophen poisoning may exhibit evi-
dence of methemoglobinemia and pulmonary edema. Icterus may also be seen secondary
to hemolytic disease or to cholestasis with chronic toxicity or repeated acute insults. Other
changes that have been described, typically in animals with more chronic toxicity, include
proliferation of bile ducts, cholangitis, and infiltrates of mononuclear cells. Hepatocytes
may be necrotic, have vacuolar changes, or show lipid accumulation.27
428SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
In dogs, and in occasional cats, that die from acute toxicity, centrilobular necrosis
and congestion of the liver is observed. Renal tubular edema and degeneration and pro
teinaceous tubular casts have also been described in dogs with experimentally induced
toxicosis.27
Differential Diagnoses
Several other substances are known to cause methemoglobinemia in dogs and cats. These
include nitrites, phenacetin, nitrobenzene, naphthalene, phenol and cresol, sulfites, and
some topically applied anesthetics, such as benzocaine.28 Questions that address the drug
ent toxicoses. The list of substances capable of causing acute hepatic injury is long, and
the reader is referred to other sources for this information.2 Some of the more common
hepatotoxins in companion animals include cyanobacteria (blue-green algae), copper, zinc,
iron, xylitol, mushrooms, aflatoxin, and sago palm. Some of the more common differential
diagnoses for the clinical signs seen in dogs include pancreatitis, infectious hepatitis (par-
 ticularly leptospirosis and Rocky Mountain spotted fever), and toxicoses induced by many
drugs.
References
1. Jones RD, Baynes RE, Nimitz CT: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug toxicosis in dogs and cats: 240
cases (1989-1990), I Am Vet Med A ssoc 201:475-477, 1992.
2. Hjelle J, Grauer GF: Acetaminophen-induced toxicosis in dogs and cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:
742-746,1986.
 3. Harvey JW, French TW, Senior DF: Hematologic abnormalities associated with chronic acetaminophen
administration in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 189:1334-1335, 1986.
4. Aronson LR, Drobatz K: Acetaminophen toxicosis in 17 cats, J Vet Emerg Crit Care 6:65-69, 1996.
5. Center SA: Pathophysiology of liver disease: Normal and abnormal function. In Guilford WG,
1996, WB Saunders.
6. Court MH, Greenblatt DJ: Molecular basis for deficient acetaminophen glucuronidation in cats. An
interspecies comparison ofenzyme kinetics in liver microsomes, Biochem Pharmacol 53:1041-1047, 1997.
 7. McConkey SE, Grant DM, Cribb AE: The role of para-aminophenol in acetaminophen-induced methe-
moglobinemia in dogs and cats, I Vet Pharmacol Therap 32:585-595, 2009.
8. Hinson JA, Roberts DW, James LP: Mechanisms of acetaminophen-induced liver necrosis, Handb Exp
Pharmacol 196:369-405, 2010.
9. Imaeda AB, Watanabe A, Sohail MA, et al: Acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity in mice is dependent
on Tlr9 and the Nalp3 inflarmmasome, J Clin Invest 119:305-314, 2009.
10. Schlesinger DP: Methemoglobinemia and anemia in a dog with acetaminophen toxicity, Can Vet J
36:515-517, 1995.
11. MacNaughton SM: Acetaminophen toxicosis in a Dalmatian, Can Vet J44:142-144, 2003.
12. Center SA: Acute hepatic injury: hepatic necrosis and fulminant hepatic failure. In Guilford WG,
Center SA, Strombeck DR, et al, editors: Strombecks small animal gastroenterology,ed 3, Philadelphia,
1996, WB Saunders.
13. Eguia L, Materson BJ: Acetaminophen-related acute renal failure without fulminant liver failure, Phar-
macotherapy 17:363-370, 1997.
aminophen toxicity, BMC Gastroenterol 11:125-134, 2011
15. Spiller HA, Krenzelok EP, Grande GA, et al A prospective evaluation of the effect of activated charcoal
before oral N-acetylcysteine in acetaminophen overdose, Ann Emerg Med 23:519-523, 1994.
16. Wallace KP, Center SA, Hickford FH, et al: S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAMe) for the treatment of acet-
aminophen toxicity in a dog, I Am A nim Hosp Assoc 38:246-254, 2002.
17. Webb CB, Twedt DC, Fettman MJ, et al: S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) in a feline acetaminophen
model of oxidative injury, I Feline Med Surg 5:69-75, 2003.
 18. Savides MC, Oehme FW, Leipold HW : Effects of various antidotal treatments on acetaminophen toxico-
sis and biotransfomation in cats, Am / Vet Res 46:1485-1489, 1985.
19. Rumbeiha WK, Lin Y-S, Oehme FW: Comparison of N-acetylcysteine and methylene blue, alone or in
combination, for treatment of acetaminophen toxicosis in cats, Am J Vet Res 56:1529-1533, 1995.
Chapter 30 | Acetaminophen 429
20. Rumbeiha WK, Oehme FW: Methylene blue can be used to treat methemoglobinemia in cats without
inducing Heinz body hemolytic anemia, Vet Hum Toxicol34:120-122, 1992.
21. Al-Mustafa ZH, Al-Ali AK, Qaw FS, et al: Cimetidine enhances the hepatoprotective action of
N-acetylcysteine in mice treated with toxic doses of paracetamol, Toxicology 121:223- 228, 1997.
 22. Burkhart KK,Janco N, Kulig KW, et al: Cimetidine as adjunctive treatment for acetaminophen overdose,
Hum Exp Toxicol14:299-304, 1995.
23. Zed PJ, Krenzelok EP: Treatment of acetaminophen overdose, Am / Health Syst Pharm 56:1081-1091,
1999.
 24. Sattery IT, McRorie TI, Reynolds R,et al: Lack ofeffect of cimetidine on acetaminophen disposition in
humans, Clin Pharmacol Ther 46:591-597, 1989.
 25. Francavilla A, Makowka L, Polimeno L, et al: A dog model for acetaminophen-induced fulminant
hepatic failure, Gastroenterology 96:470-478, 1989.
26.
Panella C, Makowka L, Barone M,et al: Effect of ranitidine on acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity in
dogs, Dig Dts Sci 35:385-391, 1990.
27. Savides MC, Oehme FW, Nash SL, et al: The toxicity and biotransformation of single doses of acetamino-
phen in dogs and cats, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 74:26-34, 1984
28. Houston DM, Myers SL: A review of Heinz-body anemia in the dog induced by toxins, Vet Hum Toxicol
35:158161, 1993.
CHAPTER
Amitraz
31
Jill A. Richardson, DVM
·Amitraz is primarily used to treat demodicosis in dogs but is also used for
external parasites in several species.
The most common signs of amitraz toxicity include sedation, bradycardia, and
ataxia.
·Yohimbine and atipamezole have been used successfully to treat amitraz toxicity.
Sources
Amitraz is a formamidine antiparasitic agent. Amitraz dips are primarily used to treat
demodicosis in dogs, but are also used for external parasites in several species, including
cattle, rabbits, goats, and cats. Mitaban? is available as a 19.9% topical solution for dilution
in 10.6 mL bottles; this product is approved in dogs only. Amitraz is also found in tick con-
trol collars for dogs and contains 9.0% amitraz. Collars weigh 27.5 g, are 25" long, and there
are 2500 mg of amitraz per collar (Preventic? package label insert). These collars are labeled
for dogs 12 weeks and older. ProMeris? for Dogs is a topical spot-on 150 mg/mL solution
approved for dogs and puppies 8 weeks of age or older.
Toxic Dose
The oral median lethal dose (LDso) of amitraz in dogs is 250 mg/kg [Registry of Toxic
Effects of Chemical Substances (RTECS)]. According to a study, beagles receiving 4 mg/kg
PO daily for 90 days exhibited signs of transient ataxia, CNS depression, hyperglycemia,
decreased pulse rates, and lowered body temperature. In another study, dogs that were
given 100 mg of amitraz/kg body weight at three dose rates showed clinical signs of sedation,
bradycardia, polyuria, hypothermia, and hyperglycemia.? It is recommended to use amitraz
cautiously in cats, rabbits, and diabetic patients.
Toxicokinetics
Amitraz is rapidly absorbed orally. Following doses of 100 mg/kg in dogs, peak plasma
concentrations were observed after 5 hours with an elimination half-life of approximately
24 hours.3
Mechanism of Toxicity
The exact pharmacologic action of amitraz is not completely known; however, it does pos-
sess Oz-adrenergic activity. Amitraz can cause a notable increase in plasma glucose levels,
possibly from inhibiting insulin release through α.z-adrenergic activity.1.4
431
432 SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
clinical Signs
Clinical signs of amitraz toxicosis include hypersalivation, lethargy, ataxia, bradycardia,
vomiting, dyspnea, hypothermia, tremors, and seizures.15 Ihe most commonly reported
adverse effect after amitraz topical administration in dogs is transient sedation, which may
persist for 24 to 72 hours. Adverse effects are more likely to be seen in debilitated, geriatric,
or toy breed dogs. Because of the drug's effects on plasma glucose, use amitraz with caution
in diabetic patients.l4 Severe effects can be expected with ingestion of amitraz-containing
insecticide collars.
Minimum Database and Confirmatory Tests
Assessment of the hydration status and urinary function are necessary because the kidneys
are the primary sites of elimination of amitraz. Evaluation of heart rate, serum glucose, and
blood pressure are also recommended. Some laboratories can test for amitraz in plasma,
urine, skin, blood, or stomach contents.67 However, these results can only confirm the exposure
and absorption of amitraz because toxic levels have not been determined for tissue. There
are no specific gross or histologic lesions on postmortem examination.
Treatment
If the exposure is dermal, treatment would include initial stabilization and bathing with a
mild dishwashing detergent.
Treatment of animals ingesting amitraz-containing collars should consist of emesis in
asymptomatic animals, retrieval of the collar using endoscopy, if possible, and administra-
tion of activated charcoal and a cathartic to remove any remaining collar fragments.
Yohimbine at a dose of 0.11 to 0.2 mg/kg IV (start with low dose) may be of benefit for
Overdose effects.l.s.9 Because yohimbine has a short half-life, it may need to be repeated,
particularly if the animal has ingested an amitraz-containing collar that has not been
retrieved from the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract. Atipamezole, at a dose of 50 mcg/kg IM,
has also been used to treat anitraz toxicity and is thought to have fewer cardiorespiratory
effects than yohimbine.1.10
Supportive hydration and close monitoring of the cardiovascular system is also
recommended.
Prognosis
 In most situations, exposed animals usually recover in 24 to 72 hours with prompt veteri-
nary care and use of α,-adrenoreceptor agonists.
Differential Diagnoses
Other toxicants causing CNS depression, along with possible ataxia, bradycardia, and seda-
tion include ethanol, methanol, isopropanol, macrolide antiparasitics, marijuana, ethylene
glycol, propylene glycol, 2-butoxyethanol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, xylitol, antide-
pressants, CNS trauma, and primary CNS disease.
References
1. Plumb DC: Veterinary drug handbook,ed 4, Ames, IA, 2002, Iowa State University Press.
2. RTECS: Registry of toxic effects of chemical substances. National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health, Cincinnati, CD ROM, Englewood, CO, 2000, MICROMEDEX.
3. Hugnet C, Buronrosee F, Pineau X, et al Toxicity and kinetics of amitraz in dogs, Am J Vet Res
57(10):1506-1510, 1996.
4. Hsu WH, Schaffer DD: Effects of topical application ofamitraz on plasma glucose and insulin concentra-
tions in dogs, Am J Vet Res 49(1):130-131, 1988.
Chapter 31 |Amitraz 433
5. Cullen LK, Reynoldson JA:Cardiovascular and respiratory effects ofthe acaricide amitraz, J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 10(2):134-143, 1987.
6. Queiroz ME, Valadao CA, Farias A, et al: Determination of amitraz in canine plasma by solid-phase
microextraction-gas chromatography with thermionic specific detection, IChromatogr BAnalyt Technol
Btomed Life Sci 794(2):337-342, 2003.
 7. Ameno K, Fuke C, Ameno S, et al: A rapid and sensitive quantitation of amitraz in plasma by gas
chromatography with nitrogen-phosphorus detection and its application for pharmacokinetics, IAnal
Toxicol 15(3):116-118, 1991.
8. Hsu WH, Lu ZX, Hembrough FB:Effect of amitraz on heart rate and aortic blood pressure in conscious
dogs: influence of atropine, prazosin, tolazoline, and yohimbine, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 84(2):418-422,
1986.
9. Hsu WH, Hopper DL:Effect of yohimbine on amitraz-induced CNS depression and bradycardia in dogs,
I Toxicol Environ Health 18(3):423-429, 1986.
10. Andrade SF,Sakate Mi: The comparative efficacy of yohimbine and atipamezole to treat amitraz intoxica-
tion in dogs, Vet Hum Toxicol 45(3):124, 2003.
CHAPTER
32
Anticoagulant
Rodenticides
 Michael J. Murphy, DVM, PhD, JD, DABVT
Patricia A. Talcott, MS, DVM, PhD, DABVT
Anticoagulant rodenticides available in the United States may include
brodifacoum, bromadiolone, chlorophacinone, coumafuryl, difenacoum,
difethialone, diphenadione (diphacinone), pindone, valone, and warfarin.
· Dogs are intoxicated more commonly than cats or other domestic animals.
Anticoagulant rodenticides act by inhibiting the "recycling" of vitamin K to
induce a coagulopathy. Animals with an anticoagulant rodenticide-induced
coagulopathy may spontaneously bleed from any site.
· The site, volume, and rate of hemorrhage determine the clinical signs observed.
The clinical signs observed in more than half of anticoagulant rodenticide-
intoxicated anirnals are anorexia, weakness, coughing, epistaxis, or dyspnea
caused by hermorrhage within the lung. However, hermorrhage can occur
anywhere; ranging from petechiation and ecchymoses all the way to hematuria,
hemoabdomen and even subdural hemorrhages of the central nervous system.
· Abnormalities observed in cinical laboratory tests may include a regenerative or
nonregenerative anemia, hypoproteinemia, thrombocytopenia, slight elevation in
alkaline phosphatase activity, hyperfibrinogenemia, elevated FDPs, low CO2, low
Po2, and most important—-elevated coagulation times (ACT, OSPT, and APTT).
Although allthese abnormalities are not present at alltirmes in a given case,
elevated coagulation tirmes distinguish exposure from toxicity in all cases.
Exposure can be confirmed by analysis of serum or whole blood or liver
(postmortem) for the specific anticoagulant.
Treatrment options include blood or plasma transfusions, oral or SC vitamin K
(4-week duration), oxygen, antibiotics, thoracentesis or abdominal paracentesis,
cage rest, and attention to caloric intake as indicated by the status of the anirnal.
The prognosis is guarded to good, depending on the severity and location of the
hemorrhage.
esticides are involved in more animal exposures and deaths than any other cat-
egory of toxins. The term pesticide includes rodenticides, insecticides, herbicides,
fungicides, avicides, and other miscellaneous compounds. Common rodenticide toxi-
coses involve anticoagulant rodenticides, bromethalin, cholecalciferol, strychnine, and
zinc phosphide. This chapter is devoted to anticoagulant rodenticide toxicosis. It has
been estimated that greater than 90% of all rodenticides used commercially are of the
ant icoagulant type.
435
436SECTION4SpecificToxicants
Sources
The anticoagulant rodenticides were developed following investigations of moldy sweet
clover poisoning in cattle. In this historical, well-known syndrome, the naturally occurring
coumarin in the clover is converted by fungi to dicumarol, the toxic agent. Warfarin was
initially synthesized during these investigations of moldy sweet clover poisoning and was
subsequently marketed as a rodenticide. Rodent species, however, have since developed
resistance to it, so compounds effective against warfarin-resistant rodents have been devel-
oped. The first-generation rodenticides, like warfarin and pindone, generally have shorter
elimination half-lives and require higher concentrations and consecutive intake over days
in order to deliver a lethal dose. Second-generation anticoagulant rodenticides were devel-
oped and are far more toxic than the first-generation anticoagulant compounds. Second-
They include brodifacoum, bromadiolone, chlorophacinone, coumafuryl, difenacoum,
difethialone, and diphacinone. Coumachlor, coumatetralyl, and flocoumafenhave not been
marketed in the United States, and valone distribution in the United States was discon-
tinued in 1993. The greater effcacy of these products against rodents is associated with a
Domestic animals are sometimes inadvertently, and occasionally maliciously, exposed
to anticoagulant rodenticide baits. In fact, anticoagulant rodenticides are second only to
cholinesterase inhibitors as a cause of death in dogs and cats. Dogs are more commonly
poisoned than cats. Some reports have indicated no seasonal predilection; however, in the
Pacific Northwest, the majority of confirmed anticoagulant cases occurs in the late fall and
early spring when rodent activity is high. Ihis apparent discrepancy may be associated
with the source of the samples received—such as urban versus rural and national versus
regional. Nevertheless, brodifacoum is the active ingredient most commonly identified in
cases of anticoagulant rodenticide-induced coagulopathies diagnosed in the Washington
State University (WSU) Veterinary Teaching Hospital. Diphacinone (diphenadione), bro-
madiolone, and chlorophacinone come in as distant second, third, and fourth. Warfarin
and other compounds account for less than 5% of diagnoses. A partial list of the many
anticoagulant rodenticide products on the market is presented in Table 32-1. Anticoagu-
lant rodenticide products come in grain-based pellets, minipellets, wax-paraffin blocks,
meal baits, dry concentrates, water bait, tracking powder, ground spray, whole and bro-
ken grains, nylon pouches, coated talc, and dust. Concentrations of the active ingredi-
ent vary from 0.05% to 0.25% between products, but are generally consistent for a given
product. To decrease the incidence of exposure of these compounds to children, pets, and
wildlife, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has instituted measures that require
over-the-counter sales of some products for residential use be available in tamper-resistant
bait stations and that some compounds be classified for restricted use.
ToxicDose
At least 10 anticoagulant rodenticide active ingredients are distributed in the United States.
They may be obtained over the counter or through pest control operators. They are catego-
rized as first- or second-generation anticoagulant rodenticides on the basis of their efficacy
against warfarin-resistant rats. Anticoagulant rodenticide compounds that are effective
against warfarin-resistant rats are termed second-generation anticoagulant rodenticides by
definition.
 e sn d a a sn  eas 
aa au e a si asp a suus uaaa-sg um pau uam 
 of vitamin K, treatment is longer when treating nontarget species with toxicoses from
The likelihood of secondary toxicity occurring in a rodent-eating pet is of interest when
anticoagulant rodenticides are used. Although secondary poisoning is theoretically more
likely with the second-generation compounds, it is extremely uncommon to confirm field
Chapter 32 | Anticoagulant Rodenticides 437
Table 32-1
Trade Names and Names of the Active Ingredient for Some
Anticoagulant Rodenticide Products*
Trade Name
Chemical Name
Acilone
Bromadiolone
Actosin C
Chlorophacinone
Banarat
Bromadiolone
Bar Bait
Warfarin
Boot Hill
Bromadiolone
Bromacal
Bromadiolone
Bromalone
Bromadiolone
Bromapoint
Bromadiolone
Bromone
Bromadiolone
Caid
Chlorophacinone
Castrix D
Difenacoum
Cekurat
Bromadiolone
Chlorocal
 Chlorophacinone
Contracts
Bromadiolone
Contrax-W
Warfarin
Contrax-D
Diphenadione
Co-Rax
Warfarin
Coumafene
Warfarin
Cov-R-Tox
Warfarin
D-Cease
Difethialone
D-Con
Brodifacoum
D-Con Mouse-Prufe II
Brodifacoum
Denkarin
Warfarin
Dethmor
Warfarin
Dicusat M
Chlorophacinone
Dicusat E
Warfarin
Diphacin
 Diphenadione
Ditrac
Diphenadione
Drat
 Chlorophacinone
Enforcer Mouse Kill
Brodifacoum
Famarin
Coumachlor
Final
Warfarin
Forwarat
Brodifacoum
Frunax-DS
Difenacoum
Fumarin
Coumafuryl
Havoc
Brodifacoum
Hawk
Bromadiolone
Jaquar 50 Rodenticide Place Pac
Brodifacoum
Just One Bite
 Bromadiolone
Killrat
Bromadiolone
Kill-Ko Rat and Mouse Blues
Coumafuryl
Kill-Ko Rat Killer
 Diphenadione
Klerat
Brodifacoum
Kukbo Rat KO
Bromadiolone
Kukbo Stunt
Coumatetralyl
Kukbo Yaong
Brodifacoum
Kypfarin
Warfarin
Lafar
Bromadiolone
Lepit
Chlorophacinone
Lightning
Bromadiolone
Continned
438SECTlON 4Specific Toxicants
Table 32-1
Trade Names and Names of the Active Ingredient for Some
Anticoagulant Rodenticide Products*—cont'd
Trade Name
Chemical Name
Lim-N8
Brodifacoum
Liphadione
Chlorophacinone
 Kill-Ko Rat and Mouse Blues
 Difenacoum/Brodifacoum
LM 91
Chlorophacinone
Luxarin
Warfarin
Maki
Bromadiolone
Matikus
Brodifacoum
Matrak
Difenacoum
Microzul
Chlorophacinone
Mole Patrol
Chlorophacinone
Mouse Maze
Diphenadione
Mouse Out
Chlorophacinone
Neosorexa
Brodifacoum/Difenacoum
Nofar
Brodifacoum
Parakakes
 Diphenadione
PCQ
 Diphenadione
Pivacin
Pindone
Pival
Pindone
Pivaldione
Pindone
Pival Parakakes
Pindone
Pivalyn
Pindone
Place-Pax
Warfarin
 PMP tracking powder
Valone
Prolin
Warfarin
Promar
 Diphenadione
Prozap
 Diphenadione
Racumin
Coumatetralyl
Ramik
Diphenadione
Ramik Mouse Pack
Diphenadione
Ramik Mouser
Diphenadione
Ramorin
Warfarin
Ramucide
Chlorophacinone
Ratak
Difenacoum
Ratak Plus
Brodifacoum
Rat & Mouse Blues II
Diphenadione
Rat and Mouse Killer
Warfarin
Raterex
Bromadiolone
Ratilan
Coumachlor
Ratimus
 Bromadiolone
Ratomet
Chlorophacinone
Ratox
Bromadiolone
Ratoxin
Warfarin
Ratimus
Bromadiolone
Rat Zap rodent bar
Diphenadione
Raviac
 Chlorophacinone
RAX
Warfarin
Redentin
Chlorophacinone
Rodent Cake
Diphenadione
Rodex
Warfarin
Rodex Blox
Warfarin
Chapter 32 | Anticoagulant Rodenticides 439
Table 32-1
Trade Names and Names of the Active Ingredient for Some
Anticoagulant Rodenticide Products*—cont'd
Trade Name
Chemical Name
Ropax
Brodifacoum
Rosex
Bromadiolone
Rozol
Chlorophacinone
Salsbury Ropax Bars
Warfarin
Sorexa
Difenacoum/Brodifacoum
Storm
Flocoumafen
Stratagem
Flocoumafen
Super Caid
Bromadiolone
Talon
Brodifacoum
Tomcat
Bromadiolone
Tomorin
Coumachlor
Topitox
Chlorophacinone
Tox-Hid
Warfarin
Trap-NA-Sak
 Diphenadione
Tri-ban
Pindone
Trokat Bait
Chlorophacinone
Volid
Brodifacoum
Warf 42
Bromadiolone
Warfarin Concentrate
Warfarin
Warfarin Plus
Warfarin
Warfarin Q
Warfarin
Warficide
Bromadiolone
Warfotox
Warfarin
WeatherBlok
Brodifacoum
Woprodenticide
Warfarin
Zoocoumarin
Warfarin
*Some products may be discontinued and unavailable for purchase.
cases of toxicosis in domestic species caused by secondary poisoning. This may be related
to the “dilution effect”" of the rodent species ingesting the bait. For example, a brodifacoum-
poisoned rodent may have a liver concentration of brodifacoum of 2 to 5 ppm, whereas
the bait is typically 50 ppm. Secondary poisonings are commonly seen in raptors or any
animals whose diet consists mostly of rodents and who stay in areas where there is high use
of the anticoagulant rodenticide baits.
Toxicokinetics
Plasma, liver, milk, and fetus are the tissues of most interest in a veterinary setting, although
anticoagulant rodenticides may travel to a number of other tissues. Peak plasma concentra-
tions of anticoagulant rodenticides occur within minutes to hours of oral exposure. How-
ever, the onset of clinical signs (accompanied with abnormal clotting times) is normally at
least 36 hours after exposure for the reasons discussed in the mechanism section below.
Plasma elimination half-lives in the dog are about 14 hours for warfarin, 4% days for diphen
adione, and about 6 days for brodifacoum. Consequently, whole blood is the specimen of
choice by some laboratories for anticoagulant rodenticide analysis in a live animal.
Liver is the tissue of choice for analysis in a dead animal because it has the highest
concentration of most anticoagulant rodenticides. Conclusive studies on the passage of the
anticoagulant rodenticides into milk or into the fetus have not been reported in dogs or
cats. Warfarin is known to pass in the milk of lactating humans. A few field cases indicate
440SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
Table 32-2
Toxicity of Some Anticoagulant Rodenticides
Acute oral LDso
Bait Concentration
Compound (mg/kg BW)
Bait* (oz/# BW)
Active Ingredient
(ppm or mg/kgbait)
Dog
Cat
Dog
Short Acting
Warfarin
250
20-50
5-30
1.3
Fumarin
250
NA
NA
NA
Pindone
250
5-75
NA
0.3
Valone
250
NA
NA
NA
Long Acting
Chlorophacinone
50 (0.005%)
50-100
NA
NA
Brodifacoum
50 (0.005%)
0.2-4
25t
0.06
Bromadiolone
50 (0.005%)
11-15
>25+
3.5
Difethialone
25 (0.0025%)
4
>16
2.6
Diphacinone
50 (0.005%)
3-7.5
14.7
1
*Ounces of finished bait per pound ofbody weight required to achieve the lowest LDs, value reported in
the dog.
tAnimals shouldbe closely observed and reexamined at the end of therapy.
Limited data.
NA, Data not available.
that intramammary and transplacental distribution of anticoagulant rodenticides should be
'shnpoid asaul ol pasodxa siad jueuaand no bujeise u paiapisuos
Mechanism of Toxicity
The clinically relevant toxic event in anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning is a coagulopathy.
The coagulopathy occurs because of reduction in activatable forms of clotting factors Il,
Vll, IX, and X. Ihe reduction in activatable forms of these clotting factors occurs because
of insufficient amounts of vitamin K, at the site of posttranslational modification of these
clotting factors.
Vitamin K, is required for synthesis of the forms of clotting factors II, VIl, IX, and X
that are active in fbrin formation. To be active in fibrin formation, these factors need to be
able to bind calcium. To bind calcium, there need to be dicarboxylic acid groups on several
locations on each clotting factor. Initial synthesis of each of these clotting factors provides
only a single carboxylic acid on these locations. Vitamin K, is required for the addition of
the second carboxylic acid group-this is termed a posttranslational modifcation of the
clotting factor protein. Vitamin K, becomes oxidized to vitamin K,-epoxide during the pro-
cess of adding the second carboxylic acid group. Vitamin K-epoxide is normally reduced
back to vitamin K, by one or more enzymes. This reduction is sometimes referred to as the
recycling of vitamin K,. The activity of recycling enzymes is inhibited by the anticoagulant
rodenticide compounds. This inhibition results in a decrease in vitamin K, and an increase 
in vitamin K,-epoxide concentrations in hepatocytes and plasma.3
Synthesis of activatable clotting factors I, VIl, IX, and X is subsequently impaired. Fac-
tors V11, IX, and X have plasma half-lives of 6.2, 13.9, and 16.5 hours, respectively, in the
dog, so they become somewhat reduced in circulation 24 to 64 hours after exposure of the
animal to the anticoagulant rodenticide. Clinical coagulopathy occurs after depletion of
vitamin K, in the liver and then depletion of activatable factors VIl, IX, and X in plasma.
This indirect mechanism of action is responsible for the lag time commonly observed
between the ingestion of bait and the onset of clinical signs. This lag time is normally 3 to
5 days. These proteins are ineffective in clot formation because they do not have sufficient
Chapter 32 | Anticoagulant Rodenticides 441
 dicarboxylic acid groups to bind calcium. The vitamin K-dependent cloting factors are
involved in both the intrinsic and extrinsic cloting cascades, so one-stage prothrombin
time (OSPT), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), and activated clotting time
(ACT) become prolonged.
clinical Signs
Following depletion of active clotting factors, animals may hemorrhage from virtually any
site. It is the authors' experience that approximately half of anticoagulant exposed compan-
ion animals will hemorrhage into their lungs; therefore, bilateral epistaxis, hemoptysis, weak-
ness, lethargy, pallor, exercise intolerance, and dyspnea are commonly reported clinical signs.4
Unfortunately, since the other half of exposed animals can bleed anywhere, presenting signs
are quite varied: melena, hematochezia, hematuria, lameness (joint hemorrhage), paresis or
paralysis (epidural or subdural hemorrhage),ecchymoses, gingival bleeding, acute collapse
(hemorrhage into a major body cavity), seizures (cerebral hemorrhage), acute upper airway
obstruction (laryngeal or thymic hemorrhage), abdominal distention and pain, and shak-
ing. Extensive bruising of the skin can occur, depending on how the patient was handled
at the time the coagulopathy was present. Occasionally a diagnosis of anticoagulant roden-
ticide poisoning is made after surgical procedures have been performed on patients when
uncontrolled hemorrhage occurs at the incision site after surgery. Checking an ACT time
before surgery is wise if there is a suspicion of a rodenticide being consumed.
Minimum Database
The minimum database should include collection of blood before treatment for a com-
plete blood count, serum chemistry panel, hemostasis screen, and major and minor cross
matches. Red cell counts, total protein, platelet count, and prothrombin time (PT)/partial
thromboplastin time (PTT) are parameters that should be frequently monitored through-
out the progression of the disease. Mild to severe anemia, thrombocytopenia (rarely do
they fall to <35,000/μL), and hypoproteinemia are observed in most patients. Ihese abnor-
malities are not seen all the time and depend on the site and severity of hemorrhage. Lack
of these abnormalities should not rule out the possibility that problems might occur in
the future, particularly when exposure is well documented. Depending on how soon the
patient is examined, the anemia may or may not be regenerative. A mild elevation in alka-
line phosphatase level is considered nonspecific and is most likely related to the degree of
hypoxia present. Notable elevations in liver enzymes are probably an indicator of severe
for the development of clinical illness. We are aware of a case of a dog suffering from both
brodifacoum poisoning and liver failure secondary to metastasis of a mammary adenocar-
cinoma. This dog did not respond to vitamin K, therapy, most likely because of the liver's
inability to produce the necessary coagulation proteins.
Evaluation of clotting times is crucial in confirming a coagulopathy. An ACT can be
rapidly performed in house while awaiting OSPT or APTT results. Ihe OSPT is prolonged
first in poisoned patients, but prolongation of both OSPT and APTT is normally present
before the onset of clinical signs. Fibrin degradation products and hyperfibrinogenemia
have also been documented in approximately 50% of anticoagulant-poisoned patients.5
 A reduction in elevated coagulation parameters 12 to 24 hours after adequate vitamin K,
treatment supports a diagnosis of vitamin K,-responsive coagulopathy, which is virtually
always an anticoagulant rodenticide-induced coagulopathy.
Blood gas analysis can be useful in guiding supportive treatment if it is readily available.
A mild acidosis with low CO levels, PO, values of less than 50 mm Hg, and an anion gap
that is normal to slightly elevated are common observations.
Thoracic or abdominal radiographs or ultrasound can be very useful in identifying
most commonly reported abnormalities include pleural effusion with increases in lung
442SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
opacification, hemothorax, air bronchogram signs, interlobar fissure lines, extraluminal
compression of the trachea, and loss of abdominal or retroperitoneal detail.5 Thoracentesis
or abdominal paracentesis may yield a bloody effusion with a high packed-cell volume that
does not clot in a serum tube.6
Confirmatory Tests
 Identifying the specific compound involved may influence the dose or duration of vitamin
K, treatment. It is reasonable to assume that an exposure would be to a long-acting, anti-
coagulant compound until proved otherwise, given how easily available these products are
to pets.
 Analytical methods are available to identify specific anticoagulant rodenticides in
blood, serum, plasma, liver, gastrointestinal contents, and suspect bait. High-performance
in several veterinary diagnostic laboratories in the United States. These methods are most
commonly used when the specific agent must be identified. However, analytical results are
often not available for several days, and clinicians should not delay initiating treatment
waiting on confirmation of the specific chemical involved. Ihe concentration of the spe-
cifc anticoagulant rodenticide detected in blood or liver is not related to the severity of
the disease because of the toxicokinetics of the various compounds and the fact that the
exposure dose is rarely known with certainty in field cases. Detecting the presence of an
anticoagulant rodenticide chemical in an animal with a coagulopathy supports a diagnosis
of an anticoagulant rodenticide-induced coagulopathy. In a clinical setting, the main rea-
son for needing to know the specific anticoagulant rodenticide is to help establish the dose
and duration of vitamin K, therapy. The easiest way to make this decision is to evaluate the
ingredient listing on the box of bait used at the home if available.
Treatment
Treatment regimens vary depending on when the exposed patient is presented to the clinic
and whether there is evidence of a coagulopathy. Traditional decontamination procedures
of inducing emesis, then administering activated charcoal, followed by a cathartic may be
performed in patients that come in within a few hours of exposure. These procedures are
not generally indicated if coagulation abnormalities are already present. The dilemma that
most clinicians face at this point is whether or not to initiate vitamin K, therapy or have the
patient return 36 hours later to check PT and PTT times. This decision should be based on
an estimate of the exposure dose, the success of decontamination procedures, and the time
interval between exposure and presentation of the patient.
 Determining the risk to the patient can be done by either estimating the exposure dose
and then comparing with a known toxic dose (if amount consumed and percentage of active
ingredient of the anticoagulant in the bait are both known), or determining how much of
the bait the patient would have had to ingest in order to receive a toxic/lethal dose and
determining whether this scenario is feasible or not, based on history. Regardless of how
the risk assessment is done, one must use available toxicity data for the known compounds
(see Table 32-2). It is important to note that most toxicity data for the anticoagulants are
reported as LDsos—the dose that will induce lethality in 50% of the exposed patients. It is
the authors' suggestion that when using the data to asses risk, you should reduce the LDso
vide a margin of safety in an attempt to make a safer prediction of risk.
When vitamin K, therapy is not initiated, a clotting parameter, such as OSPT, PTT, and
ACT, can be checked at 36 hours and perhaps again at 96 hours after exposure. Additional
times are prolonged, aggressive vitamin K, treatment and plasma transfusion are warranted.
Primary treatment aims for the bleeding patient are to replace the inactive clotting fac-
tors by transfusion(s) and vitamin K, to maintain adequate cardiovascular support, and to
Chapter 32 | Anticoagulant Rodenticides 443
category that are admitted to the WSU Veterinary Teaching Hospital are transferred imme-
diately to the intensive care unit where they can be continuously monitored for at least the
first 24 hours. Ihe length of stay can range from 24 hours to several days. Clotting factors
can be immediately restored with one or more transfusions of either plasma or whole blood
once blood samples have been collected for clinical evaluation. The choice of fluid therapy
depends on the degree of anemia present. Plasma should be administered at 6 to 10 mL/kg
or whole blood at 12 to 20 mL/kg depending on whether clotting factors or red cells, respec-
tively, are indicated. An estimate of the total volume of whole blood transfused should be
 based on the packed-cell volume. Autotransfusion with thoracentesis or abdominal para-
centesis fluid may be used in emergency situations to replace red cells and plasma fluid
volume, but not clotting factors. Consultation with a clinical pathologist may be necessary
in some cases.
Vitamin K,—but not vitamin K;—should always be administered to patients with an
anticoagulant rodenticide coagulopathy or to patients where the risk is high of develop-
ing a coagulopathy. This form of the vitamin is immediately available for synthesis of new
clotting factors. Other chemical forms of vitamin K are not. In fact, vitamin K, is ineffective
in the treatment of warfarin? or dicoumarol toxicosis, so it is contraindicated for the treat-
ment of anticoagulant rodenticide toxicosis. Dogs dosed with 25 mg/kg of vitamin K; may
develop Heinz body anemias, hemoglobinuria, urobilinuria and urobilinogenuria, methe-
min K, was suspended in 1985 for safety and efficacy reasons by the Center for Veterinary
Medicine of the Food and Drug Administration.
However, vitamin K,has no direct effect on coagulation, and clinically significant synthe-
sis of new clotting factors commonly requires approximately 6 to 12 hours. Thus, emergency
need for replacement of circulating clotting factors can only be met with a transfusion.
Oral or subcutaneous are the most commonly used routes of administering vitamin
K,. Vitamin K, may be administered by the intravenous (IV), intramuscular (IM), sub-
cutaneous (SC), or oral routes. Differences of minutes in the absorption of vitamin K, are
not clinically significant between the administration routes, so patient factors determine
the preferred route of administration. The IV route is not recommended for reasons of
safety—the potential for anaphylaxis is always present with IV vitamin K administration.8
Similarly the IM route is not recommended for reasons of safety because of the pain and
hemorrhage that may result. In general, the clinician is often faced with deciding whether
to use the oral or SQ route; the oral route should be chosen unless the patient parameters
indicate other wise. Animals with severe hypovolemia may have poorly perfused peripheral
tissue, thus reducing vitamin K, absorption from a SC site. Oral administration of vitamin
K, should be reconsidered in animals known to have a fat malabsorption problem, those
that are vomiting, or those that were given oral activated charcoal.
Nevertheless, the two most commonly recommended routes of vitamin K, administra-
tion are oral and SC. The bioavailability of oral vitamin K, is increased four to five times
when given with canned food. 9 Feeding is likely to stimulate the availability of bile salts and
formation of chylomicrons necessary for vitamin K absorption.10
Daily dosage recommendations of vitamin K, range from 0.25 to 2.5 mg/kg in animals
exposed to warfarin; however, these warfarin compounds are rarely encountered by pets
because of limited use. A commonly utilized dosage recommendation for most exposures
in pets is 1.25 to 2.5 mg/kg every 12 hours (twice daily). Ihe author recommends twice daily
dosing; however, there are others who advocate one-time daily dosages of 2.5 to 5 mg/kg.
Loading doses are sometimes given at the same dose recommended for daily treatment. The
 of the coagulopathy. Be aggressive! Adverse effcts from proper administration of vitarmin
K, are not known to occur.
Vitamin K, treatment must be maintained until toxic amounts of the compound are no
longer present in the animal, because vitamin K, does not appear to affect the metabolism
or elimination of the rodenticide. The length of vitamin K, treatment depends on the dose
444SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
and kinetics of the specific anticoagulant rodenticide. Abnormal coagulation may last for
lant rodenticides (see Table 32-2). The times necessary for therapy in this table are based on
dogs that were experimentally dosed with an oral LDs, dose of the respective rodenticide.
In agiven case,the length of therapy required is directly related tothe amount of anticoagu-
lant ingested. Most field cases of anticoagulant rodenticide toxicosis receive a 3- to 4-week
treatment protocol with good success.
In clinical situations the exposure dose and the specific anticoagulant may not be known,
receive vitamin K therapy for 3 to 4 weeks. Then OSPT or ACT evaluations are performed
36 to 48 hours after cessation of vitamin K, treatment. If the clotting time is prolonged,
therapy is continued for another week. If the clotting time is normal, the rodenticide may
be adequately eliminated and treatment can be discontinued. Remember that even though
clotting times are normal, individual clotting factors may still be greatly reduced.11
to be more sensitive to reexposure to anticoagulant rodenticides. The fact that the clotting
times have returned to normal does not mean that the animal has completely eliminated the
second-generation anticoagulant rodenticide compound. Animals may develop a coagu-
ei ueui ssal si ieu punoduos uoeiaua-puosas e jo asop e oi annsodxa iage Auedo
listed in Table 32-2. Owners should be strongly urged to remove all bait before reintroduc-
ing their pet to the environment.
Additional nonspecific supportive care measures include cage rest to prevent self-
induced trauma, oxygen therapy (e.g., nasal catheter, oxygen cage, and tracheotomy),
IV fluid therapy to maintain cardiovascular support, and broad-spectrum antibiotics (e.g.
enrofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and cephalosporins), particularly in patients with pleural effu-
sions. Ihoracentesis may be necessary to alleviate severe dyspnea, and pericardiocentesis
may be necessary to alleviate cardiac tamponade. Approximately 50% of blood in the thorax
or abdomen will be reabsorbed in 48 hours, so many patients will undergo some degree of
auto-transfusion. A multitude of drugs has been either documented or theorized to inter-
act with anticoagulant rodenticides; clinicians should refer to hospital formularies or vet-
erinary drug handbooks for a comprehensive list. Paretic patients require intensive care to
should be paid to meeting their nutritional needs.
Lactating and pregnant animals present a special problem. The most conservative
approach to treating exposed lactating animals is to wean the pups or kittens early and
provide them with oral vitamin K, for 2 to 3 weeks. The bitch or queen can also be treated
with vitamin K, depending on the evaluation of exposure dose and evidence of coagulopa-
thy. Another option is not to wean the pups or kittens but treat the bitch or queen directly
while monitoring the coagulation status of the pups or kittens and/or treating the pups and
kittens. Bitches and queens exposed to anticoagulant rodenticides while pregnant should be
treated with vitamin K, until whelping or queening occurs.
Prognosis
The prognosis in patients with anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning is generally guarded to
good, depending on the site and severity of hemorrhage. Predisposing liver disease or other
complications may of course interfere with the animal's ability to respond to therapy or to
control life-threatening hemorrhage.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
I is important to emphasize that anticoagulant rodenticide-poisoned animals may hem-
coming to either the WSU Veterinary Teaching Hospital or presenting to the Washington
Chapter 32 | Anticoagulant Rodenticides 445
sites include cerebral, thymic, laryngeal, intramedullary, renal, perirenal, thoracic, abdomi-
nal, hepatic, pericardial, gastrointestinal, and mediastinal hemorrhages. Petechiation and
 n a a s   a   ss ar siso
 tract. The author is aware of a case involving a pregnant dog that died from an anticoagu-
 lant rodenticide. Ihe bitch was necropsied, and the pups showed gross evidence of internal
 bleeding. Ihis provides further evidence that anticoagulants can pose a risk to developing
pups and kittens in utero.
Differential Diagnoses
Anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning (prolonged ACT, PT, PTT) in the dog and cat must be
differentiated clinically from other causes of coagulopathy, such as disseminated intravas-
cular coagulopathy, congenital factor deficiencies (e.g., von Willebrand's disease), liver dis-
ease, chronic gastrointestinal malabsorption, and exposure to sulfaquinoxaline. Response
to appropriate vitamin K, treatment distinguishes the anticoagulant rodenticides from many
of these differentials.
References
1. Smith WK: Relation ofbitterness to the toxic principle in sweetclover, J Agr Res 56:145, 1938.
 2. Jackson WB,Brooks JE,Bowerman AM,et al: Anticoagulant resistance in Norway rats, Pest Control5:14,
1975.
3. Suttie JW: Current advances in vitamin K research, Proceedings of the Seventeenth Steenbock
Symposium, June 21-25, 1987.
4. DuVall MD, Murphy MJ, Ray AC, et al: Case studies of second-generation anticoagulant rodenticide
toxicities in non-target species, I Vet Diagn Invest 1(1):66, 1989.
6. Sheafor SE, Couto CG: Clinical approach to a dog with anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning, Vet Med
94(5):466-471, 1999.
7. Nangeroni LL: Injectable vitamin Ks, I Am Vet Med Assoc 189:850, 1986.
Vet Rec 75(46):1210-1213, 1963.
9. Gerken DF: Unpublished data, 1987.
10. Mandel HG, Cohn VH: Fat soluble vitamins. In Gilman AG, Goodman LS, Rall TW, et al: The
pharmacological basis of therapeutics, New York, 1985, Macmillan.
11. Mount ME,Feldman BF: Mechanism of diphenadione rodenticide toxicosis in the dog and its therapeutic
implication, Am J Vet Res 44:2009-2017, 1983.
CHAPTER
Anticonvulsants
33
Rodney S. Bagley, DVM, DACVIM
Annie V. Chen, DVM, MS, DACVIM
There are numerous anticonvulsant medications on the market today for
companion animals, each with its own wnique side effects and toxic effects
 Poisoning may result from acute oral exposures, or more commonly, poisonings
can be the result of dhronic, long-terrm use.
Detailed history taking, complete clinical diagnostic workup, and determination
of serum concentrations of the drug are necessary for an accurate diagnosis of an
anticonvulsant problem.
 nticonvulsants are used for the treatment of tremor and seizure disorders in animals.1-8
 Tremors are defined as involuntary, rhythmic, oscillating movements of a body part.
Tremors can result from toxins affecting the cerebellum or from toxins directly stimulating
 muscles and nerves. Seizures are defined as involuntary, paroxysmal brain disturbances
that are a non-specific response to insults to the cerebral cortex. Seizures are considered
reactive when the insult arises from outside the brain, like with toxins. Most reactive sei-
zures are generalized in nature and are typically manifested by uncontrollable muscular
activity (paddling), autonomic dysfunction (urination, defecation, salivation), loss of con-
sciousness and altered behavior during the immediate post-ictal phase. Cluster seizures
are defined as two or more seizures in a 12 to 24 hour period, with the patient regaining
consciousness between seizures. Status epilepticus is defined as continuous seizure activ-
ity that lasts for more than 5 minutes or as 2 or more discrete seizures with incomplete
recovery of consciousness between seizures. Numerous anticonvulsants have been used for
treatment of seizures in animals, with some being more commonly used in the modern era,
and others having been used historically and are less commonly used today. Additionally,
newer anticonvulsants are constantly being identified for use in human seizure disorders.?
These newer anticonvulsants invariably are administered to animals, usually when standard
anticonvulsants are ineffective or are associated with side effects. Although these newer
anticonvulsants often have theoretical benefits, much less toxicologic data exist for these
drugs in the clinical setting. In rare instances, animals may ingest anticonvulsants that are
intended for the owner or another family member.
Therapeutic anticonvulsants are primarily administered either to acutely terminate sei-
zures, such as in an emergency setting, or are administered more chronically as a mainte-
nance medication to reduce or eliminate overall seizure frequency or severity. For rapid
terminationof seizure activity,such as inthe emergency setting,diazepam is most commonly
administered. The two most commonly used maintenance anticonvulsants in animals in the
current era are phenobarbital and potassium bromide. Historically, anticonvulsants, such
as primidone and phenytoin, were used in some dogs, but are infrequently administered
in the modern era. Newer maintenance anticonvulsants include drugs such as gabapentin
(Neurontin), lamotrigine (Lamictal), zonisamide (Zonegran), and levetiracetam (Keppra).
447
448SECTlON 4 SpecificToxicants
Phenobarbital
Sources
 Phenobarbital is a barbiturate that has been used for a number of years as a monotherapy
for seizures in dogs and cats. Phenobarbital is available through a number of human phar-
maceutical distributors. Phenobarbital is available by prescription only because this is a
class II scheduled drug. Phenobarbital is most often administered orally, intravenously, or
rarely, intramuscularly1-8
Toxicokinetics
Bioavailability of oral phenobarbital is between 88% and 95%. Ihe serum half-life (Tiy2) is
approximately 47 to 74 hours in most mongrel dogs. The Ti/z in beagles is 25 to 38 hours. The
Ti/z is approximately 34 to 43 hours in cats.10 When phenobarbital is administered chronically.
such as a maintenance anticonvulsant, half-lives will decline as a result of autoinduction of
the drug's own metabolism. Maximum concentrations are observed 4 to 8 hours after oral
administration, although food may delay peak concentrations by an additional 2to4hours.1-,.1
Phenobarbital is primarily metabolized via hepatic microsomal enzymes, although up
to 25% of the unchanged drug is eliminated by pH-dependent renal excretion.-& Glucuron-
idation is not an important mechanism of elimination, and therefore cats do not appear
to metabolize this drug differently from dogs. Metabolism increases with use because of
hepatic enzyme induction.
Mechanism of Toxicity and clinical Signs
Doses of phenobarbital that are associated with both effcacy and toxicity may vary
between individual animals. Serum concentrations have been more closely correlated with
therapeutic beneft than the administered dose. Therapeutic levels of 20 to 40 mcg/mL
have been suggested to maximize seizure control while minimizing side effects.l-s.li The
risk of hepatotoxicity is greater when the level is above 35 mcg/mL. Trough levels histori-
cally correlate better with therapeutic outcome than with peak levels; however, this may
not be as significant as initially thought.
Side effects associated with phenobarbital administration include sedation, ataxia,
polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, nystagmus, restlessness or hyperexcitability, drug rash,
hyperprothrombinemia, blood dyscrasias, and osteomalacia.l Polyuria is thought to
be caused by central inhibition of aldosterone release, whereas polyphagia is believed
to result from suppression of the satiety center in the ventromedial hypothalamus. Phe-
nobarbital has been shown to induce coagulation defects in cats by reducing vitamin
K-dependent clotting factors (Il, Vll, IX, and X). Phenobarbital, displaced by sulfon-
amides and salicylates, may lead to an increase in the metabolism of other co-adminis-
tered drugs. Phenobarbital may decrease measured serum T4 levels caused by increased
phenobarbital administration may induce the production of some commonly measured
serum indicators of liver dysfunction, such as alkaline phosphatase (AP) and alanine
to 7 months to return to normal after discontinuing the drug. Elevation ofliver enzymes,
with alkaline phosphatase higher than alanine aminotransferase, is common and does not
necessarily indicate clinicalliver disease.
Toxicity with phenobarbital administration includes those clinical signs associated with
acute barbiturate overdose, but may also result in liver failure and cirrhosis. Common clini-
cal signs of acute phenobarbital overdose include sedation (which may progress to coma),
respiratory depression, ataxia, paresis, and possibly death. Co-administered drugs, such
as chloramphenicol, decrease the metabolism of phenobarbital, and this can cause severe
depression, sedation, and coma.1-3
Clinical signs of phenobarbital-associated liver disease are similar to signs of liver dis-
ease in general. General ill thrift, polyuria, gastrointestinal abnormalities (vomiting and
diarrhea), abdominal enlargement, and icterus are possible. Increases in liver-associated
Chapter 33 | Anticonvulsants 449
enzymes (ALT, AP) and liver function tests (bile acids) and decreases in albumin, glucose,
and cholesterol may be observed.1-8.15.18
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of phenobarbital toxicity is supported by the appropriate clinical signs in
association with serum phenobarbital concentrations increased above the commonly rec-
ognized therapeutic range (i.e., greater than 35 mcg/mL). The diagnosis of liver disease is
often aided by liver biopsy.
Treatment
Treatment for phenobarbital toxicity is directed toward maintaining respiratory function,
basic supportive care for life, and elimination of additional phenobarbital administration.
Drugs that may potentiate phenobarbital's effects or decrease phenobarbital metabolism
should similarly be discontinued. Adminstration of multiple dose activated charcoal and
alteration of urine pH to 7.5 to 8.0 may increase the elmination of parent compound. If liver
failure accompanies phenobarbital toxicity, therapy for liver disease should be employed.
The prognosis for recovery from phenobarbital toxicity varies with severity of clinical signs
before recognition of this toxicity. Phenobarbital should only be used if the patient has no
underlying liver disease as assessed by blood work and post-prandial bile acids.
Potassium Bromide
Sources
Potassium bromide (KBr) is actually a chemical product, not a drug formulation.1-3.5-3,9.23
Potassium bromide has reasonable efficacy for treatment of seizures in dogs and may be
used as a monotherapy or in combination with other anticonvulsants. This chemical was
historically difficult to obtain in formulations for administration to dogs, but this is less of a
problem currently because there are a number of veterinary compounding laboratories that
 provide therapeutic distribution of the drug.
Toxicokinetics
 Potassium bromide has a relatively long serum half-life (~24 days in dogs and 11 days in
o dn) aeis Apeans e yean oi a go jumoe juesgis e sanban aoganan pue (sies
level of potassium bromide sooner, a loading dose of potassium bromide can be given at the
initiation of treatment. Potassium bromide is often loaded orally and then maintained at 20
and 35 mg/kg/day. Therapeutic blood level of potassium bromide is 1to 3 mg/mL. If sodium
brormide is used, the dosage is slightly reduced to 17 to 30 mg/kg/day. If more rapid seizure
control is necessary, an initial dose of 400 to 600 mg/kg, usually divided over a 2 to 3 day
period, can be administered. Potassium bromide, when administered in increased concen-
trations in a single dosing period, is often irritating to the stomach and results in vomiting.
To prevent this problem, the loading dose is administered in multiple, smaller doses over
the 2-to 3-day period. It oftenhelps when using the loading dose to first calculate the main-
tenance dose expected. This will most likely be the capsule size that can be formulated by a
S iano uaaia st asop bupeol lenoi aun potad supeo aul buninq Anotenoqel buipunoduos
to 72 hours by giving multiple doses of the maintenance dose of the medication.
clinical Signs
Potassium bromide is reasonably safe but has some side effects. The bromide component is
toxic to humans, who can exhibit headaches, skin rashes, tremors, and gastrointestinal dis-
turbances following administration of the chemical.1-35-8,19.2.24 Owners should be careful
therefore in handling the medication and not expose themselves to the chemical. This may
after touching the capsule. Diets with relatively high chloride (sodium chloride) content
450SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
may increase bromide elimination because bromide competes with chloride for elimina-
tion. Renal disease may decrease elimination of bromide, requiring decreases in the dose of
bromide up to 50% of normal levels to prevent toxicity.19.24
The most common side effects of potassium bromide administration in dogs include
sedation and ataxia. Pancreatitis is associated with the use of this drug, but the actual cause
and effect relationship is not clear.26 With some doses, vomiting may occur because of the
local irritant effects on the stomach. Diet, alterations in fluid intake, or dehydration may
alter the therapeutic KBr levels in the blood. Rarely, skin irritation, itchiness, or rashes may
 be noted. Other reported side effects include polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, and hyper-
Caution should be exercised when using this drug in cats, and if any respiratory signs are
noted, the drug should be stopped immediately. Rarely, dogs may become aggressive while
receiving bromide therapy. When performing routine serum chemistry evaluations, mea-
sured serum chloride concentrations will appear to be increased because some analytical
methods may measure the serum bromide as chloride.
Diagnosis
Similar to phenobarbital, serum concentrations of KBr can be measured to provide a more
objective measure of circulating KBr concentrations. Therapeutic levels should range from
1to 3 mg/mL. Ihis range, however, is not correlated with effcacy or toxicity as reliably as
serum phenobarbital concentrations. With KBr, toxic effects are usually evident clinically
(primarily sedation and ataxia).
Treatment
If toxic levels of bromide are present, diuresis is used to eliminate the drug from the body
in addition to discontinuation of the drug. Intravenous administration of NaCl-contain-
ing fluids is used for diuresis over a 12- to 24-hour period. Clinical signs of ataxia and
sedation will usually resolve within 1 to 4 days following discontinuation of the drug and
diuresis. Obviously, if KBr is providing some antiseizure effect, decreasing the KBr serum
concentrations may result in increases in seizure activity. The risk of increasing seizure
activity is often weighed against the toxicity risks. Because KBr has a relatively long serum
half-life,the drug may be discontinued for lto 3 days, but then reinstituted at a lower dose.
Diazepam
Sources
Diazepam is a benzodiazepine that has been used for a number of years to more rapidly
terminate seizures in dogs and cats.l-β Diazepam is available through a number of human
pharmaceutical distributors. Diazepam is a class II drug and is thus available by prescription
only. Because of the short half-life of diazepam in dogs (2-4 hours) and the development of
tolerance, diazepam should only be used for emergency management of seizures. Diazepam
can be given IV, intranasally, and rectally as boluses, and can be repeated as needed to control
seizures. Diazepam can also be given as a constant rate infusion (CRI), titrated to effect. The
CRI is usually discontinued slowly after the patient has been seizure free for 8 to 12 hours.
The CRI is decreased by 50% every 4 to 6 hours for two decreases. Diazepam has a tendency
to precipitate when mixed with other products so it is the safest to give the drug straight
a ose st uedazei aiaues Auo-edazeip paeuisap e un pue dnd ahuas e yano
sensitive, so allexposed lines and syringe will need to be covered by dark-colored Vet Wrap
or towel. Diazepam binds to plastic, so minimizing the amount of line to the patient is best.
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Action
 Diazepam is metabolized via the liver primarily by demethylation to nordiazepam (des-
methyldiazepam) and oxazepam. Metabolites have 25% to 33% of diazepam's anticonvul-
sant activity. Because of an extensive first pass effect, oral systemic availability is only 1%
Chapter 33 | Anticonvulsants 451
to 3%. Drugs, such as cimetidine, that inhibit hepatic microsomal enzyme activity will
prolong the serum half-lives of diazepam and nordiazepam. Tachyphylaxis is noted with
repeated doses of benzodiazepines, probably caused by a feedback-regulated increase in
benzodiazepine receptors or a decreased production of y-aminobutyric acid (GABA).
 Diazepam appears to bind to benzodiazepine receptors, causing allosteric changes that
facilitate binding of GABA to its receptor. This binding opens Cl- channels, allowing for
Cl- influx and enhanced inhibition of the postsynaptic neuron.
Doses of diazepam necessary for termination of acute seizure activity vary in individual
 animals. Initial doses range from 1 to 2 mg/kg IV or rectally for acute seizures.1-8,2728 In
continuous intravenous infusion at dosages between 5 and 20 mg/h and is administered for
at least 4 hours beyond the last seizure episode.
Clinical Signs and Treatment
Signs associated with acute toxicity include sedation, drowsiness, lethargy, and malaise. In ani-
mals with hepatic portovascular anomalies or liver functional abnormalities, even relatively
small doses of diazepam can result in stupor, coma, and death. In cats diazepam administra-
tion has been associated with idiosyncratic liver failure.29.30 This side effect may not be dose- or
administration rate-dependent and may occur with either oral or intravenous administration.
Treatment of diazepam toxicity includes discontinuation of the drug and general sup-
portive care. In cats with liver failure, general treatment of animals with liver disease should
be considered.
Historical Anticonvulsants
Primidone
Primidone is rapidly oxidized to phenobarbital and phenylethylmalonamide (PEMA) by
hepatic microsomal enzymes.1-&.31 The phenobarbital metabolite contributes 85% of the
anticonvulsant activity, and the effectiveness of primidone correlates best with serum phe-
nobarbital concentrations. Ihe T1/z of PEMA and primidone is 10 to 14 hours. Primidone
was usually administered at dosages of between 10 and 55 mg/kg/day divided every 8 hours.
This drug was not approved for use in cats and has been suggested to be toxic in cats.-8
This may be because cats metabolize the drug differently from dogs. Acute toxicity with
primidone includes sedation, ataxia, polyuria and polydipsia, nystagmus, profound tachy-
cardia, episodic hyperventilation, and anorexia. Hepatotoxicity may be associated with the
6 months of therapy in dogs include hepatocellular hypertrophy and necrosis, lipidosis,
and extramedullary hematopoiesis. If medication is discontinued after this time, these
changes will result in hepatic fibrosis with some permanent loss of function. Dermatitis
associated with the use of primidone in a dog included excessive licking of paws, alopecia,
pruritus, scaling,pigmentation, and ulceration over the back, elbows, hocks, face,and ears.
Biopsy of these skin lesions showed severe diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis of the epi-
dermis and hair follicles, frequently associated with epidermal hyperplasia, dyskeratosis,
and intra-cellular vacuolation.
Phenytoin
 Phenytoin is a more common anticonvulsant in human beings. It is degraded to parahydroxy
metabolites, which have a T/2 of approximately 22 hours.1 β In dogs phenytoin is metabolized
primarily to a metahydroxy metabolite that has a Ti/z of 4 hours. Biotransformation of this
drug ocurs via hepatic microsomal enzymes. A smaller volume of distribution and shorter
d  usn oisee spe m a se sand ua 
sowly in cats. The eliminationhalf-lifeis approximately 4l hours in adult cats and kittens fol-
lowing intravenous administration and between 24 and 108 hours after oral administration.
452SECTlON 4 SpecificToxicants
Phenytoin appears to interfere with sodium ion conductance, thereby stabilizing
neuronal membranes and restricting the spread of electrical discharges. Dosages up to
35 to 50 mg/kg orally every 8 hours or more often may be required to maintain serum
therapeutic concentrations.
Acute toxicity results in sedation, ataxia, and anorexia in dogs. A hepatopathy has been
associated with chronic administration of this drug in dogs.32 This hepatopathy results in
hepatocellular hypertrophy and necrosis, lipidosis, and extramedullary hematopoiesis. This
drug may also result in vitamin K-dependent coagulation defects. A reversible dermal atrophy
in cats and gingival hyperplasia in dogs has also been associated with the use of this drug. Simi-
lar to phenobarbital, concurrent chloramphenicol administration increases phenytoin toxicity
 ad may decrease measured serum thyroid hormone (T4) concentrations. Phenytoin appears
toxic to cats because of an inability to hydroxylate phenolic compounds, and its use can result
in sialosis, frequent vomiting, and weight loss. Because of poor efficacy and associated side
effects, phenytoin is not used as a maintenance anticonvulsant in animals in the modern era.
Clonazepam (Klonopin)
Clonazepam is an extremely potent benzodiazepine that is occasionally used for treatment
of seizures in dogs.1-& The hepatic clearance is apparently much greater in dogs compared
with human beings, which may result in relatively short (1.6 to 2.9 hours) elimination half-
lives. Elimination of clonazepam is further enhanced by phenobarbital; this is an effect
caused by hepatic enzyme induction rather than an alteration in hepatic blood flow. Clo-
nazepam is suggested to be administered at a dosage of 0.5 mg/kg orally every 8 to 12 hours
to achieve peak serum concentrations of 130 to 179 ng/mL and trough concentrations of
22 to 77 ng/mL. These serum concentrations are near the therapeutic range in human
beings. Side effects and toxicity of this drug primarily include sedation progressing to
stupor and coma. After prolonged treatment with this drug, abrupt cessation of therapy
may result in acute withdrawal signs including “"wet dog shakes," listlessness, weight loss,
increased body temperature, and dorsal recumbency. Signs are most severe 2 days after
cessation of the drug and usually subside within l week of withdrawal.
Clorazepate (Tranxene)
sue a m pas id auauq d ssa e si aa
This drug is rapidly and completely hydrolyzed in the stomach to nordiazepam, but less
information exists for clinical use of this drug in dogs. Preliminary evidence indicates
that the dosage of 2 mg/kg every 12 hours produces peak nordiazepam concentrations
near 1 mcg/mL, with maximum concentrations occurring between 1 and 2 hours after
 oral administration. Additional dosage recommendations for this drug in dogs include
0.5 to 1 mg/kg orally every 8 hours.
Little information also exists regarding side effects and toxicity with this drug. It is
assumed to have similar side effects to other benzodiazepines with regard to sedation.
Carbamazepine
Carbamazepine is an iminostilbene derivative used as an anticonvulsant and also for relief
of pain in trigeminal neuralgia in human beings.1-β This drug appears structurally related to
tricyclic antidepressants. Published reports regarding clinical use, side effects, and toxicity
in dogs are unavailable. In humans this drug may have sedative, anticholinergic, antide-
pressant, muscle relaxant, antiarrhythmic, antidiuretic, and neuromuscular transmission-
inhibitory actions.
Vigabatrin (gamma-vinyl-gamma-aminobutyric acid)36
This drug is a structural analogue of GABA and is a selective and irreversible inhibitor of
GABA-aminotransferase (GABA-T). One clinical report exists of the use of this drug as an
anticonvulsant in dogs. An optimum dose is not known. Clinically, dogs have been given
between 35 and 125 mg/kg/day (divided every 8 to 12 hours) therapeutically; the drug was
often given concurrently with phenobarbital.36
Chapter 33 | Anticonvulsants 453
report of use in dogs, immune-mediated anemia developed in one treated dog. Intramy-
elinic edema was present in dogs experimentally administered this drug. Sedation, dizzi-
ness, and headache may be noted in humans in association with this drug's use.
Newer Anticonvulsants
Felbamate (Felbatol) (2-phenyl-1,3-propanediol dicarbamate)
 Felbamate has been used in some instances of medically refractory seizures in dogs.37.40
This drug is extensively metabolized by the liver via hydroxylation and conjugation, with an
approximate half-life in dogs of 5 to 6 hours. his drug appears to be well absorbed after oral
administration. The precise mechanism of action is not known; however, this drug appears
to work on the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. Ihe optimum dose of the drug is
not known. Some dosing protocols have been described for dogs; for dogs less than 10 kg, it
is 200 mg orally every 8 hours with a 200-mg/wk increase up to a maximum dose of 600 mg
orally every 8 hours or until seizure control is obtained. For dogs greater than 10 kg, it is 400
mg orally every 8 hours with a 400-mg/wk increase up to a maximum dose of 1200 mg orally
every 8 hours or until seizures are controlled. Another dosing recommendation describes
an initial dose of 15 mg/kg every 8 to 12 hours orally and increasing in 15-mg/kg increments
every 2 weeks until seizures are controlled. Doses of 60 to 70 mg/kg were not shown to be
toxic to dogs. A reported toxic dose of felbamate appears to be approximately 300 mg/kg.
Felbamate has been associated with aplastic anemia and hepatic failure in humans,
which has resulted in its limited use. In dogs severe hepatic disease has been described
when this drug was used as a monotherapy or in combination therapy with phenobar-
bital. Other reported side effects associated with felbamate in humans include anorexia,
insomnia, weight loss, nausea, dizziness, fatigue, ataxia, and lethargy.
Gabapentin (Neurontin)
This drug was developed to be structurally similar to GABA; however, it does not appear
to work at the GABA receptor. 941-43 The mechanism of action and optimum drug dose is
not known for dogs. Some dosage protocols have been described for dogs. One suggests
beginning at 100 mg orally every 8 hours with a gradual increase up to 900 mg orally
every 8 hours over the next 4 weeks or until seizures are controlled. Other recommenda-
tions include beginning at 100 to 300 mg/dog every 8 hours orally, with increases in the
dose upward every 1 to 2 weeks until seizures are controlled or the maximum dosage of
1200 mg/dog orally every 8 hours is obtained. An additional recommendation is 25 to
60 mg/kg/day divided every 6 to 8 hours. Another recommended anticonvulsant dose
in dogs is 2.5 to 10 mg/kg every 8 to 12 hours, orally; 5 to 10 mg/kg every 12 hours, orally,
is a recommended dosage in cats.
Drowsiness, tiredness, fatigue, somnolence, dizziness, ataxia, nystagmus, headache,
tremors, nausea, and vomiting may be seen in association with administration of this drug
in human beings. Side effects in dogs at higher doses include sedation and gastrointestinal
upset. Side effects and toxicity associated with this drug in pets are currently unknown. The
oral solution contains xylitol, which can be toxic to dogs at doses exceeding 0.1 g/kg. With
standard gabapentin doses, it is unlikely that a toxic dose of xylitol will be achieved, but one
should use caution.
Management of overdose is generally supportive. Ihere is no evidence that forced
diuresis increases urinary elimination.
Lamotrigine (lamictal) (3,5-diamino-6-[2,3-dichlorophenyl]-1,2,4-triazine)
This drug is believed to stabilize presynaptic neuronal membranes by blocking voltage-
dependent sodium channels, thereby preventing the release of excitatory neurotransmitters,
such as glutamate and aspartate.? An optimum dose is not known for dogs and cats. Skin
rashes, anorexia, ataxia, insomnia, headache, ataxia, diplopia, nausea, dizziness, vomiting.
454SECTlON 4SpecificToxicants
somnolence, and weight loss have been associated with administration of this drug in human
beings.
Zonisamide (Zonegran)
This drug is a sulfonamide-based anticonvulsant. Its mechanism of action is unknown, but
may include blockage of T-type calcium and voltage-gated sodium channels in the brain, mod-
ulation of CNS dopaminergic metabolism, scavenging free radicals, enhancing CNS GABA
release, or inhibiting carbonic anhydrase.94i445 Anefficacy dose is not known for dogs or cats.
x/a g ol  st aesop iaoue pue simo 7l Aiaa Aeio Sy/au 0l si aesop paisaans au
day. Serum therapeutic levels in humans are suggested to be 10 to 40 mg/L, whereas in dogs.
it may be 18 to 24 mcg/mL. Minimal side effects were noted in beagles treated with 75/mg/kg/
day. Ataxia, drowsiness, and gastrointestinal dysfunction may be associated with this drug's use.
Levetiracetam (Keppra)
This drug is a pyrrolidine-based anticonvulsant.4146.50 Levetiracetam works by binding
 to synaptic vesicle protein 2A in the brain. Levetiracetam is not metabolized by the liver,
so it is especially advantageous for use for liver patients exhibiting seizure activity. The
elimination half-life is 4 hours in the dog and 3 hours in the cat. An efficacious dose of this
drug is not known for dogs or cats. Suggested dosages are 20 mg/kg orally every 8 hours
10g snloq A1 a[auis By/u 0e e se uaaia aq ose ues eiaoe1nanaT Xep/au 0oot 0l 0os 10
the treatment of cluster seizures and status epilepticus. Minimal side effects occurred in
beagles treated with less than 400 mg/kg/day. Salivation, restlessness, vomiting, and ataxia
are possible, with signs resolving within 24 hours of discontinuation of the drug.
References
1. Boothe DM: Anticonvulsant therapy in small animals, Vet Clin N Amer Sm Anim Pract 28:411, 1998.
2. Boothe DM: Anticonvulsants and other neurologic therapies. In Boothe DM, editor: Small animal
clinical pharmacology and therapeutics, Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders Co.
3. Knowles K: Idiopathic epilepsy, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 13:144, 1998.
4. LeCouteur RA, Child G: Clinical management of epilepsy in dogs and cats, Prob Vet Med 1:578, 1989.
5. Podell M: Antiepileptic drug therapy, Clin Tech Small A nim Pract 13:185, 1998.
6. Podell M: Seizures in dogs, Vet Clin N Am Small A nimal Pract 26:779, 1996.
7. Thomas WB: Idiopathic epilepsy in dogs, Vet Clin N A mer Sm Anim Pract 30(1):183, 2000.
8. Thomas WB: Seizures and narcolepsy. In Dewey CW, editor: A practical guide to canine and feline
neurology, Ames, 2003, Iowa State Press.
9. Dichter MA, Brodie MJ: New antiepileptic drugs, N Engl I Med 334(24):1583, 1996.
10. Cochrane SM, Parent JM, Black WD, et al: Pharmacokinetics of phenobarbital in the cat following
multiple oral administration, Can J Vet Res 54:309-312, 1990.
11. Levitski RE, Trepanier LA: Efects oftiming of blood collection on serum phenobarbital concentrations
  5    s   
12. Kantrowitz LB, Peterson ME, Trepanier LA, et al: Serum total thyroxine, total triodothyronine, free
thyroxine, and thyrotropin concentrations in epileptic dogs treated with anticonvulsants, / Am Vet Med
Assoc 214:1804, 1999.
and adrenal axis and adrenal function tests in dogs, J Vet Intern Med 14:157, 2000.
thyroid-stimulated hormone ceoncentration in epileptic dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 215:489, 1999.
15. Chauvet AE, Feldman EC, Kass PH: Effects of phenobarbital administration on results of serum bio-
chemical analyses and adrenocortical function tests in epileptic dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1305, 1995.
(1985-1989), I Am Vet Med Assoc 199:1060, 1991.
17. Muiller PB, Taboada J, Hosgood G, et al: Effects of long-term phenobarbital treatment on the liver in
dogs, I Vet Intern Med 14:165, 2000.
18. Bunch SE, Baldwin BH, Hornbuckle WE, et al: Compromised hepatic function in dogs treated with
anticonvulsant drugs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 184:444, 1984.
19. Podell M, Fenner WR: Bromide therapy in refractory canine idiopathic epilepsy, J Vet Intern Med
7:318, 1993.
Chapter 33 | Anticonvulsants 455
20. Podell M, Fenner WR: Use of bromide as an antiepileptic drug in dogs, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
16:767, 1994.
dogs treated with potassium bromide alone or in combination with other anticonvulsants: 122 cases
(1992-1996), I Am Vet Med Assoc 213:1449, 1998.
22. Trepanier LA: Pharmokinetics and clinical use of bromide, Proceedings of 1lth ACVIM Forum 878-880
1993.
23. Boothe DM, George K, Couch P, et al: Disposition and clinical use of bromide in cats, J Am Vet Med
Assoc 221(8):1131, 2002.
mide for refractory seizures, I Am Vet Med Assoc 201:468, 1992.
 25. Nichols ES, Trepanier LA,Linn K: Bromide toxicosis secondary to renal insufficiency in an epileptic dog.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 208:231, 1996.
26. Gaskill CL, Cribb AE: Pancreatitis associated with potassium bromide/phenobarbital combination
therapy in epileptic dogs, Can Vet J 41:555, 2000.
27. Papich MG, Alcorn J: Absorption of diazepam after its rectal administration in dogs, Arm I Vet Res
56:1629, 1995.
sop u sazs appo uauaeueu ane auroy auou ne ua iad uedazejo asn au lpod sm
I Vet Intern Med9:68, 1995.
29. Center SA, Elston TH, Rowland PH, et al: Fulminant hepatic failure associated with oral administration
of diazeparm in 11 cats, I Am Vet Med Assoc 209:618, 1996.
30. Hughes D, Moreau RE, Overall KL, et al: Acute hepatic necrosis and liver failure associated with benzo-
 31. Schwartz-Porsche D, Loscher W, Frey HH: Therapeutic effcacy of phenobarbital and primidone in
canine epilepsy: a comparison, I Vet Pharmacol Therap 8:l13, 1985.
32. Bunch SE, Cascleman WL, Baldwin BH,et al: Effects oflong-term primidone and phenytoin administra-
tion on canine hepatic function and morphology, Am J Vet Res 46:105, 1985.
delivery tablets in dogs, I Vet Pharmacol Theurap 14:126, 1991.
34. Forrester SD, Wilcke JR, Jacobson JD, et al: Effects of a 44-day administration of phenobarbital on
disposition of clorazepate in dogs, Am I Vet Res 54:1136, 1993.
35. Scherkl R, Kurudi D, Frey HH: Clorazepate in dogs: tolerance to the anticonvulsant effect and signs of
physical dependence, Epiiepsy Res 3:144, 1989.
for control of seizures in dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 198:995, 1991.
37. Adusumalli YE, Gilchrist JR, Wichmann JK, et al: Pharmacokinetics of felbamate in pediatric and adult
beagle dogs, Epilepsia 33:955, 1992.
38. Adusumalli YE, Yang IT, Wong KK, et al: Felbamate pharmacokinetics in the rat, rabbit, and dog.
Drug Met Disp 19:1116, 1991.
39. Dayrell-Hart B, Tiches D, Vite C, et al: Efficacy and safety of felbamate as an anticonvulsant in dogs with
refractory seizures, I Vet Int Med 10:174, 1996.
40. Ruehlmann D, Podell M, March P: Treatment of partial seizures and seizure-like activity with felbamate
in six dogs, J Small Anim Pract 42:403, 2001.
 41. Podell M: Strategies of antiepileptic drug therapy, In proceedings of 19th ACVIM Forum, Denver, 430,
2001.
dogs, and monkeys, Drug Metab Disposition 23(4):441, 1995.
43. Vollmer KG, von Hodenberg A, Kolle EU: Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of gabapentin in rat, dog
and man, Drug Res 36(1):830, 1986.
44. Matsumoto K, Miyazaki H, Fuji T, et al: Absorption, distribution and excretion of 3-(sulfamoyl [4C]
methyl)-1,2,benzisoxasole (AD-810)in rats, dogs and monkeysand of AD-810 in men, Drug Res33:961, 1983.
45. Walker RM, DiFonzo CJ, Barsoum NJ, et al: Chronic toxicity ofthe anticonvulsant zonisamide in Beagle
dogs, Fundammt Appl Toxicology 11:333, 1988.
46. Harden C: Safety profile of levetiracetam, Epilepsia 42(Suppl 4):36, 2001.
47. Hovinga CA: Levetiracetam: a novel antiepileptic drug, Pharmacotherapy 21(1):1375-1388, 2001.
48. Krakow K, Walker M, Otoul C,et al: Long-term continuation oflevetiracetam in patients with refractory
epilepsy, Neurology 56:1772, 2001.
 50. Shorvon SD, van Rijckevorsel K: A new antiepileptic drug: Levetiracetam, a pyrrolidone recently licensed
as an epileptic drug, (Editorial), I Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 72:426, 2002.
CHAPTER
34
Arsenic
Camille DeClementi, VMD, DABT, DABVT
·Arsenic is a ubiquitous element.
· Ingestion of arsenic-containing ant and roach baits is the most cormmon exposure
 scenario in dogs and cats.
Average oral lethal dose of sodium arsenite in most species is 1 to 25 mg/kg of
body weight.
· Clinical signs of acute poisoning include severe gastrointestinal distress along with
signs associated with dehydration.
 Treatrment aims include aggressive intravenous fluid therapy and chelation with
dirmercaprol.
Confirmation of poisoning is best done antemortem by assessing urine arsenic
levels, and it is best done postrortem by assessing liver and kidney levels.
·Prognosis is grave once clinical signs become severe.
Sources
Arsenic (As) is actually a metalloid but is often referred to as arsenic metal. It is ubiquitous
and can be found naturally in rocks, soil, water, and living organisms in concentrations of
parts per million (ppm) or parts per billion (ppb). It is rare to find elemental arsenic free
in the natural environment. Instead arsenic combines with oxygen and hydrogen and many
other elements including sulfur, nickel, cobalt, copper, iron, aluminum, barium, bismuth,
calcium, lead, magnesium, manganese, uranium, and zinc. Arsenic can be found in both
organic and inorganic forms and it occurs in both the pentavalent (+5) and trivalent (+3)
 forms. Human activities concentrate and redistribute arsenic in the environment.2
H is impossible for animals, including humans, to avoid exposure to natural sources of
arsenic. Complete avoidance may not be a good thing even if it were possible because ani-
mal studies show that trace amounts of dietary arsenic are beneficial.3 Because of arsenic's
pervasive nature, all food sources contain some arsenic.
Arsenic in water usually comes from natural sources. Naturally high arsenic concentrations
occur in water from hot springs, ground water in areas of thermal activity, ground water in
areas with high arsenic content in rocks, and water with a high dissolved salt content. High
arsenic levels in rivers and lakes are usually caused by human sources (e.g., mining).
Commercial use of arsenic has been declining since the 1960s. A large percentage of
commercial arsenic is still used in wood preservation; however, the EPA banned the use of
chromated copper arsenate (CCA)-treated lumber for residential use as of January 2004.
This ban targets areas around the home, including decks and playsets. According to the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, potential sources of arsenic exposure include
the following:
457
458SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Natural sources: volcanoes (as released into air), arsenic-containing mineral ores, and
ground water (especially near geothermal activity).
Cormrmercial products: wood preservatives, pesticides, herbicides (weed killers, defoliants),
fungicides, cotton desiccants, cattle and sheep dips, paints and pigments, antifouling
 paints, leaded gasoline, and fre salts.
Food: wine (grapes sprayed with arsenic-containing pesticides), tobacco (plants sprayed
with arsenic-containing pesticides), seafood (especially bivalves, certain cold water and
bottom-feeding finfish, and seaweed).
Industrial processs: smelting, purifying industrial gases (removal of sulfur), burning fos-
sil fuels, burning wood treated with arsenic preservatives, electronics manufacturing,
hardening metal alloys, preserving animal hides, bronze plating, and clarifying glass
and ceramics.
Medicinals: feed additives for domestic animals, Fowler's solution, antiparasitic drugs,
Donovan's solution, folk remedies, kelp-containing health foods, and some naturopathic
remedies.
In the past, roach and ant baits were common sources of arsenic poisoning in small animals.
However, in 1989 the Environmental Protection Agency instituted a phase-out of certain
arsenic-containing ant poisons in an attempt to reduce the risk of children ingesting arse-
nic.4 Ihe ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center (APCC) receives fewer calls about arsenic
to ingestion of ant baits still on the market. In the past, the organic arsenic thiacetarsamide
(Caparsolate) was used for the treatment of heartworm disease and could cause systemic
poisoning in apparently healthy dogs. Currently the only drug approved to treat heartworm
disease in dogs is another organic arsenical called melarsomine (Immiticide?).
Toxic Dose
I am an evil, poisonous smoke ..
But when from poison I am freed,
Through art and sleight of hand
Then can I cure both man and beast,
From dire disease ofttimes direct them
But prepare me correctly, and take great care
That you faithfully keep watchful guard over me;
For eise I am poison,and poison remain,
That pierces the heart of many a one.
Valentini, 1694
This poem exposes the double-edged nature of arsenic. By 2000 BC arsenic trioxide, pro-
duced as a byproduct of copper smelting, was used as a medicine and a poison. Professional
 poisoners used arsenic extensively in the Middle Ages. In fact, in the nineteenth century,
one third of the criminal poisonings in France were blamed on arsenic.6
In the 1700s and 1800s, a 1% solution of arsenic trioxide called Fowler's solution was used
extensively as medicine to such diseases as psoriasis and bronchial asthma. The mild toxic
side effects of gastrointestinal discomfort and pain were ignored. If the oral dose could not
be tolerated, per rectum administration was used. If the treatment caused severe signs of
vomiting and diarrhea, the dose was lowered.6
Factors affecting the toxicity of inorganic arsenic include purity, solubility, particle size,
increases as the purity and solubility increase, and the particle size decreases. Trivalent
arsenicals are 4 to 10 times more toxic than pentavalent arsenicals. Susceptibility to inor-
ganic arsenic varies among domestic species and is highest in cats (lethal dose <5 mg/kg
of sodium arsenate) followed by horses, cattle, sheep, swine, and birds.7 Humans are also
very susceptibile to poisoning by inorganic arsenic. As expected, weak, debilitated, and
Chapter 34|Arsenic459
dehydrated animals are more susceptible to arsenic toxicosis than are normal healthy ani-
mals.? Ihe lethal dose, because of the aforementioned factors, varies greatly; however, the
single lethal oral dose of inorganic trivalent arsenic in most species falls within a range of
1 to 25 mg/kg of body weight. In swine, exposure to 500 ppm arsanilic acid in the feed
for 7-10 days caused feed additive toxicosis.7 In a dog, 7.3 mg/kg of thiacetarsemide
(three times overdosage) resulted in death caused by severe respiratory depression and pul-
monary edema, and melarsomine at 7.5 mg/kg (three times overdosage) in healthy dogs
caused death.10
Toxicokinetics
The gastrointestinal tract and skin readily absorb soluble arsenicals.7 If the arsenical is rela-
tively insoluble, it will have limited contact with the gastrointestinal mucosa and will not be
extensively absorbed. Limited gastrointestinal absorption also occurs if the particle size of
a powdered arsenical is too large. Lack of absorption is why insoluble arsenical compounds
or arsenicals consisting of coarse particles are less toxic than are highly soluble arsenicals.
Topically applied inorganic arsenicals not only cause local skin damage, but also can cause
systemic poisoning. Respiratory absorption depends on the chemical form of the inorganic
arsenical inhaled.
After absorption, arsenic is transported in the blood to all organs of the body. Clear-
ance of arsenic from the blood of most species follows a two- or three-phase exponential
curve. The first phase is the largest (>90%). Arsenic is eliminated rapidly with a half-life of
1 to 2 hours. Ihe second and third phases have estimated half-lives of 30 and 200 hours,
respectively.
From the blood, arsenic accumulates to the greatest extent in the liver, spleen, kidney,
lungs, and gastrointestinal tract. Clearance from these organs is rapid. Chronic residues
are found in tissues that contain keratin, such as skin, hair, and nails.4 Placental transfer of
arsenic has been shown in hamsters, mice, and monkeys.ll.iz Two to 3 days after a one-time
exposure to inorganic arsenic, the concentration of arsenic in most organs falls off rapidly.
 In most species, 40% to 70% of an absorbed dose of inorganic arsenic is excreted in the
urine within 48 hours.13 Urinary excretion rates of arsenic are affected by valence, degree
of methylation, dose, route of exposure, and animal species.13 Urinary arsenic is present as
inorganic arsenic, methylarsonic acid, or cacodylic acid.
-ra uoy oi pappe si dnon [aua e uan uoy juaeainl a o panan st ug
sonic acid, and a second methyl group is added to form dimethylarsinic acid. The more
efficient the methylation process is, the more effcient the urinary excretion. Sweat, hair,
milk, skin desquamation, and exhalation are arsenic elimination routes of low signifi-
cance relative to urinary excretion. Limited amounts of systemic arsenic are eliminated
in the feces.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Trivalent arsenicals are 4 to 10 times more toxic than pentavalent arsenicals. Trivalent
arsenicals interact with sulfhydryl groups of compounds in biologic systems. In many cases
this alters the activity of vital pathways and causes toxicosis. Although most documentation
involves inactivation of enzymes, coenzymes and substrates also can be affected.14 Long lists
Pentavalent arsenicals are reduced to more toxic trivalent forms in vivo. However, pen-
tavalent arsenic ion (arsenate) can also cause direct toxic effects. Squibb and Fowlerl4 have
phosphate ion. Therefore arsenate can substitute for phosphate in many important metabolic
reactions. The arsenate esters formed undergo instantaneous spontaneous hydrolysis that
down of crucial intermediates, such as glucose-6-arsenate. Also, cell energy stores can be
460SECTION4SpecificToxicants
depleted by the production of adenosine diphosphate arsenate instead of adenosine tri-
 phosphate, which spontaneously hydrolyzes,thereby producing no energy.14.16
Many acute toxic effects of inorganic arsenicals are attributed to effects on the vascu-
lar system.4.17.18 Congestion, edema, and hemorrhage are commonly found in the visceral
organs of animals with acute poisoning. This effect appears to be due to the relaxation and
increased permeability of capillaries. Research in dogs with thiacetarsemide, a trivalent
organic arsenical, shows a direct effect on arteries and the coagulation system.19.20 Because
trivalent organoarsenicals and inorganic arsenicals are considered to have the same mecha-
nism of action, this finding supports the previous conclusion that inorganic arsenic is a
"vascular poison." It is clear that splanchnic capillary networks are affected by arsenic.
 u  gn s a  e q s e  
attempts to produce cancer in experimental animals have been inconclusive.4.2l
clinical Signs
Inorganic and organic trivalent arsenicals cause similar clinical signs. Peracute to acute
oral poisonings induce dramatic signs, with resulting high morbidity and mortality. Signs
 may occur within minutes and death within hours if a high dose of dissolved arsenic is
ingested. Signs develop as follows: intense abdominal pain, salivation, vomiting, stagger-
ing gait and weakness, diarrhea, rapid weak pulse, prostration, subnormal temperature,
collapse, and death. The course of subacute oral poisoning is basically the same as the
acute course but is slightly prolonged. Death occurs in several days. This is long enough
for anorexia and oliguria to develop and be assessed. Urine may contain protein, red blood
cells, and casts.,9
If acute toxicosis occurs by skin contact, systemic signs may occur. However, skin lesions
 are prominent with blistering, edema, cracking, bleeding, and secondary infection.22
There is little documentation of spontaneous chronic arsenic poisoning in animals.
However, the human medical literature is filled with descriptions of human populations
that have been chronically exposed to arsenic. The descriptions vary considerably and may
Even conflict, reflecting the variation in exposure scenarios. Pershagen reviewed numer-
ous epidemiological studies of chronic human exposure to arsenic. The major changes cited
were hyperpigmentation, palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, basal cell carcinoma, and squamous
cell carcinoma of the skin; rhinopharyngolaryngitis; nasal septum perforation; bronchitis;
emphysema; lung cancer; portal hypertension, cirrhosis, and angiosarcoma in the liver; car-
diovascular disease; anemia; granulocytopenia; lymphocyte chromosome abnormalities;
neoplasia of the hematopoietic and lymphatic systems; peripheral neuropathy; encepha-
lopathy; congenital defects; and spontaneous abortion.
Subchronic to chronic experimental oral exposure of dogs to inorganic arsenic causes a
dose-dependent weight loss or reduced weight gain.23.24 Weight loss in dogs was shown to
 be an effect of feed rejection, not a direct effect of arsenic.24
Although the liver and the kidneys are considered major target organs, only subtle
changes occur consistently in chronic studies. After 6 months of exposure to dietary arse-
nic, dogs exhibited mild increases in serum aspartate transaminase (AST) and serum ala-
 nine transaminase (ALT). Other notable changes in the cellblood counts, urinalyses, and
serum chemistries were not present.?24 Anemia has been reported in cases of chronic arsenic
intoxication in dogs.23
Organic pentavalent arsenical feed additives cause different clinical signs than those
caused by inorganic arsenic. These arsenicals cause incoordination and paralysis as a result
of peripheral neuropathy.' Adverse effects associated with therapeutic use of thiacetars-
amide sodium in treating heartworm disease in dogs include vomiting, nephrotoxicity,
hepatotoxity, thrombocytopenia, and pulmonary artery emboli. If the product leaks from
the vein during injection, swelling and pain and skin sloughing may ocur at the injection
site. Overdosage may cause respiratory depression, pulmonary edema, and death. Adverse
effects associated with therapeutic use of melarsomine in treating heartworm disease in
dogs may include injection site reactions, coughing, lethargy, anorexia, hypersalivation,
Chapter 34 | Arsenic 461
hyperthermia, lung congestion, vomiting, and pulmonary thromboembolism. An overdos-
age of melarsomine can cause respiratory distress, hypersalivation, restlessness, panting,
vomiting, diarrhea, tremors, ataxia, cyanosis, and death.10
Minimum Database
A serum chemistry panel and complete blood count are indicated in cases of poisonings,
along with mild elevations in liver enzymes, are consistently observed changes. An urinalysis
should be per formed to determine the extent of renal damage and asses the animal's ability
to excrete the arsenic.
Confirmatory Tests
If an animal has a history and clinical signs that are consistent with arsenic toxicosis, chemi-
cal analysis should be performed to confirm the presence of arsenic. Specimens that can be
used for analysis include urine, liver, kidney, gastrointestinal contents, and the suspected
source of contamination. Results of the analysis must be interpreted in light of the specific
circumstances of the case, such as clinical signs, species of animal, type of specimen, time
since exposure, exposure route, and type of arsenical.
s ci asa ja go a  r s isaq a aq a a
Normal background levels of arsenic in urine from dogs and cats should be less than 1
ppm. Depending on the factors listed earlier, urine arsenic levels in confirmed cases can
vary from 2 to 100 ppm.924 Urine concentrations drop dramatically within days once the
exposure to arsenic has ceased. Ihe kidney and liver are the next best specimens for arse-
nic analysis. Kidney and liver concentrations also drop rapidly after arsenic exposure has
stopped. Normal liver and kidney arsenic values are 0.5 ppm or less. Concentrations of
elemental arsenic greater than 10 ppm on a wet weight basis in the liver and kidney confirm
arsenic poisoning.9.25 Hair is a good dose-dependent indicator of chronic arsenic exposure
in humans. However, confirmation of arsenic toxicosis using hair concentrations is not well
documented in dogs and cats. In a 6-month dietary arsenic study, the control dogs had hair
concentrations of 0.4 ppm of elemental arsenic.24 With exposures of up to 4 mg of dietary
sodium arsenite per kilogram of body weight per day for 6 months, hair concentrations
averaged around 25 ppm of elemental arsenic. However, all dogs in the study were asymp-
tomatic. Blood is generally not a useful specimen for the confirmation of arsenic exposure
in domestic species, due to its short half-life. However, this test is offered by most laborato-
ries and can be useful in some exposure circumstances.
Treatment
Critical patients should be stabilized before performing decontamination procedures.
Patients that are exhibiting hypovolemic shock should be started on oxygen therapy and
intravenous access obtained. Appropriate fluid therapy may include crystalloids, blood
products, or colloids.26 Once the patient is stabilized, decontamination measures can be
instituted if the clinician feels the benefits of doing them outweigh the risks.
Decontamination for asymptomatic patients may include induction of emesis. For
patients that can safely vomit, emesis may be effective if performed within 4 hours of
ingestion.27 If the patient is unable to safely vomit (e.g., is a species that cannot vomit or is
symptomatic), gastric lavage using warm water ora 1% sodium bicarbonate solution can be
considered.9 Lavage should be performed with care since arsenic causes significant damage
to the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract. Activated charcoal is not recommended in arsenic expo-
sures because it does not bind well to metals?? and may complicate the course of treatment
in the case of a GI perforation.
Depending on the solubility and concentration of the arsenical ingested, the time before
462SECTlON 4Specific Toxicants
hours. The rapid onset of vomiting may protect dogs from severe toxicosis, depending
on the amount of arsenic absorbed before the animal vomits. In other cases, especially in
cats, if the arsenical ingested is highly concentrated and water soluble, a lethal dose can be
absorbed even if vomiting starts within minutes of ingestion.
Chelation should be considered in arsenic exposures. Dimercaprol (British anti-lewisite,
BAL) is a sulfhydryl-containing compound that chelates arsenic. British anti-lewisite is not
very effective in advanced cases, so it should be given early after exposure. Ihe drug itself is
toxic, and therapy should be administered with care and clinical judgment. Signs of BAL tox-
icosis are vomiting, tremors, convulsions, and coma, culminating in death. However, toxic
effects of BAL at therapeutic levels are not severe and are reversible as the drug is excreted.
British anti-lewisite is excreted rapidly over a period of 3 to 4 hours. Therefore it is best to
administer BAL at recommended (frequent) intervals to maximize its therapeutic effects and
minimize its toxic effects.29 Arsenic stored in tissue may be mobilized by chelator treatment,
causing increased circulating arsenic levels and exacerbation of clinical signs of arsenic toxi-
cosis. If this happens, a little extra BAL might be given. If therapy makes the animal worse
over 2 to 3 days, the BAL dose may be toolarge for that animal.29 When BAL binds to arsenic,
the resulting relatively nontoxic complex is water soluble and is readily excreted in the urine.
In small animals, the dose of BAL is 2.5 to 5 mg/kg of body weight given intramuscularly
as a 10% solution in oil. The dose of 5 mg/kg of body weight should be used only in acute
cases and only on the first day of treatment. Injections should be repeated every 4 hours for
the first 2 days, every 8 hours on the third day, and twice a day for the next 10 days until full
recovery occurs.30
Meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA or succimer) is a metal chelating agent that
is less toxic than BAL. Because DMSA is hydrophilic, it may not remove arsenic that has
escaped from the extracellular space as rapidly or completely as BAL. Therefore in cases of
severe acute intoxication, especially with lipophilic organoarsenicals, BAL is preferred.31
Meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid has been shown to be an effective antidote in dogs
exposed to methylmercury and lead32.33 and in mice, rats, and rabbits exposed to arse-
nic.34.35.36 DMSA has been used successfully to chelate arsenic in humans, often following
initial treatment with BAL once gastrointestinal injury has resolved and gut motility has
Mous o sop ui saipns suase ou ane aal al sl i ze'suaed  Aine u paua
the effectiveness or appropriate dose of this compound. However, the dose that is effec-
tive in dogs exposed to lead is 10 mg/kg of body weight per os every 8 hours for 10 days.3
Experimentally hemodialysis facilitates an increased removal rate of arsenic from dogs.38
Intensive supportive care is crucial to a successful outcome in an arsenic exposure.
Aggressive fluid therapy may be necessary to reverse dehydration caused by vomiting and
diarrhea, and enhance arsenic excretion through the kidneys. Renal failure, liver damage,
and electrolyte abnormalities should be monitored and appropriate therapy administered
as indicated. The animal should be kept warm and comfortable and given symptomatic
care.39 Parenteral antibiotics are recommended to prevent secondary bacterial infections
in the gut.? Antiemetic medications may be needed and other symptomatic and support-
ive care to control diarrhea. A high-quality diet should be fed in small portions, and the
amounts given increased as the patient's GI tract can tolerate the food.40
Treatment of chronic poisoning starts with the removal of the source of the arsenic.
Chelation therapy is usually not necessary because of the rapid excretion rate of arsenic.36
Prognosis
Prognosis for animals with acute poisoning is grave unless the diagnosis is made and treat-
 ment is started before clinical signs are advanced.9.40
Gross and Histologic Lesions
 Peracute poisoning causes death so rapidly that no gross or microscopic lesions may be pres-
ent. Gross lesions of acute and subacute poisoning consist of multifocal to diffuse reddening
Chapter 34 | Arsenic 463
of the mucosa of the stomach and proximal small intestine; variable amounts of watery fluid
in the gastrointestinal tract; a sof, yellow liver; and wet, red lungs. Ifthe animal lives longer
than a few hours, edema, hemorrhage, and necrosis of the gastrointestinal tract can lead
 to the presence of blood and shreds of mucosa in the stool. Perforation of the stomach
       s a    
serous membranes. Hemorrhages are especially prominent in the heart.16 Gastrointestinal
lesions are the most consistent and prominent of those listed; the others may not be present.
Histologic lesions may include gastrointestinal mucosal and submucosal congestion,
edema, and variable hemorrhage; gastrointestinal mucosal epithelial necrosis and slough-
ing; mild fatty degeneration and necrosis of the liver; renal tubular degeneration; and, if
the animal lives 3to 4 days following exposure, cerebral edema and petechiation.916 Frank
 liver necrosis is not common, but has been reported in rabbits exposed to inorganic arseni-
ituase sueio e ue ause on pasxa sa pe ses
 Renal tubular degeneration is reported by many authors as a common lesion produced
by inorganic arsenicals. Tsukamoto and colleagues43 reported renal tubular degeneration
and necrosis in dogs exposed to intravenous sodium arsenate.
If the poisoning occurs by skin contact, many of the same systemic signs described
previously occur. However, in these cases skin lesions are also prominent with blistering,
edema, cracking, bleeding, and secondary infection.2l Jubb and colleagues describe arsenic-
induced dermatitis as intense erythema, necrosis, and sloughing. The residual ulcerative
lesions are indolent.17
Differential Diagnoses
Because of the severe gastrointestinal signs, the differential diagnoses include viral or bacte-
rial gastroenteritis (e.g., canine parvovirus), pancreatitis, paraquat, zinc phosphide poison-
ing, and ingestion of caustic agents or irritating plants. Other heavy metal toxicoses may
cause similar signs (e.g., copper, zinc, inorganic mercury, thallium).
References
1. National Academy of Science: Arsenic (NAS), Washington, DC, 1977, National Academy of Science.
2. Liu J, Goyer RA, Waalkes MP:Metals. In Klaassen CD,editor: Casarett and Doull's toxicology, ed 7, New
York, 2008, McGraw-Hill Medical.
3. World Health Organization: Arsenic: trace elements in human nutrition and health, Geneva, 1996, World
Health Organization.
4. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry: Arsenic toxicity case studies in environmental medicine,
Washington, DC, 1990, US Department of Health and Human Services.
5. Hoskins JD: Thiacetarsamide and its adverse effects. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy X,
small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
6. Pershagen G: The epidemiology of human arsenic exposure. In Fowler BA, editor: Biological and
Environmental effects of arsenic, New York, 1983, Elsevier.
7. Osweiler GD: Toxicology, Philadelphia, 1996, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
8. Hayes WJ: Pesticides studied in man, Baltimore, 1982, Williams & Wilkins.
9.Osweiler GD,Carson TL, Buck WB, et al: Clinical and diagnostic veterinary toxicology, Dubuque, IA
1985, Kendall/Hunt.
10. Plumb DC: Plumb's veterinary drug handbook, ed 5, Ames, IA, 2005, Blackwell Publishing.
11. Hanlon DP, Ferm VH: Placental permeability ofarsenate ion during early embryogenesis in the hamster,
Experientia 33:1221-1222,1977
12. Lindgren A, Vahter M, Dencker L: Autoradiographic studies on the distribution of arsenic in mice and
hamsters administered (74)As-arsenite or -arsenate, Acta Pharmacol Toxicol 51:253-265, 1982.
13. Vahter M: Metabolism of arsenic. In Fowler BA, editor: Btological and environmental effects of arsenic,
New York, 1983, Elsevier.
14. Squibb KS, Fowler BA: The toxicity of arsenic and its compounds. In Fowler BA, editor: Biological and
environmental effects of arsenic, New York, 1983, Elsevier.
15. Webb JL: Enzyme and metabolic inhibitors, vol 3, New York, 1966, Academic Press.
16. Moore SA, Moennich DMC, Gresser MJ : Synthesis and hydrolysis of ADP-arsenate by beef heart submi-
tochondrial particles, I Biol Chem 258:6266-6271, 1983.
464SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
17. Jubb KVF, Huxtable CR: The nervous system. In Jubb KVF, Kennedy PC, Palmer N, editors: Pathology of
domestic animals, ed 4, vol 1, New York, 1993, Academic Press.
18. Hanna C, McHugo PB: Studies on the capillary and cardiovascular actions of intravenous sodium
arsenate and arsenite, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2:674-682, 1960.
19. Boudreaux MK, Dillon AR: Platelet function, antithrombin-II activity, and fbrinogen concentration
in heartworm-infected and heartworm-negative dogs treated with thiacetarsamide, Am J Vet Res
52(12):1986-1991, 1991.
20. Maksimowich DS, Bell TG, Williams J, et al: Effect of arsenical drugs on in vitro vascular responses of
pulmonary artery from heartworm-infected dogs, Am I Vet Res 58(4):389-393, 1997.
 21. Chan PC, Huff J: Arsenic carcinogenesis in animals and in humans: mechanistic, experimental, and
epidemiological evidence, Environ Carcino and Ecotox Rev 15(2):83-122, 1997.
 22. Evinger JV, Blakemaore JC: Dermatitis in a dog associated with exposure to an arsenic compound, I Am
Vet Med Assoc 184:1281-1282, 1984.
ing of sodium arsenite or sodium arsenate, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 10:132-147, 1967.
24. Neiger RD, Osweiler GD: Effect of subacute low level dietary sodium arsenite on dogs, Fund Appl Toxicol
13:439-451, 1989.
25. Neiger RD, Osweiler GD: Arsenic concentrations in tissues and body fluids of dogs on chronic low-level
dietary sodium arsenite, J Vet Diagn Invest 4:334-337, 1992.
26. Matthews KA: Veterinarry emergency and critical care manual, Guelph, 2006, Lifelearn.
2007, Academic Press.
28. Rosedale ME: Decontamination strategies, Vet Clin Small Anim 32:311-321, 2002.
29. Hatch RC: Poisons causing abdominal distress or liver or kidney damage. In Booth NH, McDonald LE,
editors: Veterinary pharmacology and therapeutics, ed 6, Ames, IA, 1988, Iowa State University Press.
 30. Szabuniewiez M, Bailey EM, Wiersig DO:Treatment of some common poisonings in animals, Vet Med
Small A nim Clin 66:1197, 1971.
31. Muckter H, Leibl B, Reichl FX, et al: Are we ready to replace dimercaprol (BAL) as an arsenic antidote?
Hum Exp Toxicol 16(8):460-465, 1997.
32. Kostyniak PJ: Methylmercury removal in the dog during infusion of 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid
(DMSA), J Toxicol Environ Health 11(4-6):947-957, 1983
33. Ramsey DT, Casteel SW, Faggella AM, et al: Use of orally administered succimer (meso-2,3-
dimercaptosuccinic acid) for treatment of lead poisoning in dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 208(3):371-375,
1996.
34. Tripathi N, Flora SJ: Effects of some thiol chelators on enzymatic activities in blood, liver and kidneys of
acute arsenic (I11) exposed mice, Biomed Environ Sci 11(1):38-45, 1998.
35. Flora SJ, Dube SN, Arora U, et al: Therapeutic potential of meso 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid or
2,3-dimercaptopropane 1-sulfonate in chronic arsenic intoxication in rats, Biometais 8(2):111-116, 1995.
36. Inns RH, Rice P, Bright JE, et al: Evaluation ofthe efficacy of dimercapto chelating agents for the treat-
ment of systemic organic arsenic poisoning in rabbits, Hu Exp Toxicol 9(4):215-220, 1990.
47:241-243,1981.
38. Sheabar FZ, Yannai S, Taitelman U: Efficiency of arsenic clearance from human blood in vitro and from
dogs in vivo by extracorporeal complexing haemodialysis, Pharmacol Toxicol 64(4):329-333, 1989.
39. Gossel TA, Bricker ID: Principles of clinical toxicology, New York, 1984, Raven Press.
40.Furr AL: Arsenic poisoning. In Kirk RW,editor: Current veterinary therapy VI: small animal practice,
Philadelphia, 1977, WB Saunders.
duced by arsphenamine, Arch Intern Med 60:509-521, 1937.
42. Von Glahn WC, Flinn FB, Keim WF: Effect of certain arsenates on the liver, Arch Pathol 25:488-505,
1938.
43. Tsukamoto H, Parker HR, Gribble DH, et al: Nephrotoxicity of sodium arsenate in dogs, Am J Vet Res
4:2324-2330, 1983.
CHAPTER
Botulism
35
E. Murl Bailey Jr., DVM, PhD, DABVT
Botulinum toxins are the most toxic substances known.
· Animals are susceptible to at least three of the seven known types of botulism
toxins.
· Exposures may be either oral or inhalation.
· The disease is characterized by a progressive, ascending paralysis. Cranial nerve
involvement also occurs.
·Death results from skeletal muscle paralysis and ventilatory failure
· Identification of the toxin is difficult in cases of inhalation exposure, but can be
identified from intestinal contents following oral exposures.
·An antitoxin is available but not effective after the toxin has entered the nerves
· Treatment includes respiratory support and good nursing care.
 otulism is a disease caused by one or more of the seven toxins that may be produced by
various strains of Clostridium botulinum, a spore-forming, obligate anaerobic bacillus,
commonly found in the soil and very easily isolated. The clostridial neurotoxins are the
most toxic substances known, and only tetanus toxin from C. tetani and Shigella neurotox-
ins appear to have potencies of the same order of magnitude.2.3.4
In the 1930s the Japanese biological warfare group (Unit 731) fed C. botulinurm cultures
to prisoners in Manchuria, and the United States' biological weapons program, which was
ended in 1970, produced botulism toxin and botulism toxoid in the 1940s in response to
suspected German toxin weapons.? Botulism is an acute, afebrile, symmetrical, descend-
ing flaccid paralysis that always begins in the bulbar musculature in humans, but is a pro-
gressive, symmetrical, ascending paralysis in dogs.45 Botulinum toxin remains a potential
terrorist weapon delivered either by contaminating food- or feedstuffs or in an aerosol
form. The likelihood of botulinum toxin contaminating municipal water supplies is highly
unlikely because the toxin is rapidly inactivated by standard potable water treatments, and
large amounts of toxin would be required.4 There are some doubts whether botulinum toxin
could be a weapon because of constraints in concentrating and stabilizing the toxin for
aerosol dispersion.2 A deliberate release of a point-source aerosol botulinum toxin in an
urban environment could incapacitate or kill approximately 10% of the exposed human
 population.2 At a minimum, the same percent morbidity and mortality could be expected
of an exposed animal population.
Sources
The seven distinct botulinum toxins are defined by their antigenicity.? In addition to C.
botulinum, other clostridial strains may produce the toxins. The toxin is a dichain poly-
a 50-kDa “light” chain. Botulinum toxin in solution is colorless, odorless, and, as far as
465
466SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
is known, tasteless. It is inactivated by heat (>85° C for 5 minutes).2 The seven types of
botulinum toxins (A-G) do not necessarily cause diseases in all mammals. Types C and D
normally occur in domestic animals and wildlife, and type G is a soil isolate from South
America. Primates are susceptible to aerosol samples of all three.2 Types A, B, E, and F have
q susno Aeeu on annsodxg sun u sass uosid poo un paeost uaaq
sod pue suem jo ase a un poo paarasand Aood umsuo Aq nmo e uxoi mu
sibly small animals, dogs and cats ingesting carrion, spoiled meat and compost piles, and
animals ingesting decomposing animal carcasses.5.7
Toxic Dose
LDsos (IV and intraperitoneal [IP]) of the various botulinum toxins range from 0.1 to
40 ng/kg (1 ng = 0.000001 mg).β The cattle IV median lethal dose is 0.388 ng/kg.7 It is esti-
mated that the oral dose of botulinum toxin is 500 to 700 times greater than the parenteral
dose and 77 to 100 times greater than the inhalational dose.? The estimated human parenteral
lethal dose is 1.3 to 2.4 ng/kg, and the parenteral minimum lethal dose in humans is estimated
to be 1 ng/kg. The human inhalational lethal dose is approximately 0.01 mcg/kg, and the oral
lethal dose is 1 mcg/kg.4 Most avian species are affected by botulinum toxin, including domes-
ticated and wild fowl.?10 Based on a limited number of birds, the American turkey vulture
(Cathartes aura septentrionalis) appears to be resistant to the effects of botulinum toxin.2.4.10
Toxicokinetics
Botulinum toxins may be absorbed via any mucosal surface but most commonly are
 absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract following oral exposure.2 In the case of inhala-
tional exposure, botulinum toxins may be absorbed through the lungs, as has been shown
experimentally in primates and humans after a laboratory mishap.1l The botulinum toxin
weapon was developed for this purpose. Botulinum toxins may be absorbed through devi-
talized wounds containing anaerobic tissue. The toxins do not penetrate through intact skin.
The botulinum toxins are distributed by the blood to the various tissues, but they do not
penetrate the blood-brain barrier. The biotransformation mechanisms and excretion mech-
anism of the botulinum toxins are unknown,2 but neutralizing antibodies play a role in the
biotransformation of it.12 The botulinum toxins are not tightly bound to blood constituents
and the elimination Ty of the botulinum toxins from the blood is 230 to 260 minutes.12
Although it is not known whether botulinum toxins are excreted in milk, ifbotulinum toxins
were placed in milk and milk products before pasteurization, the pasteurization termperatures
would inactivate 99.5% to 99.99% of the toxin.13
Mechanism of Toxicity
Botulinum toxin binds to the presynaptic membrane at the neuromuscular synapse, but
the structure of the receptor(s) is (are) unknown. Ihe receptor-bound toxin is internal-
ized by a mechanism known as receptor-mediated endocytosis, and the vesicles are trans-
the vesicle, and prevents the synaptic vesicle containing acetylcholine from fusing with the
neuronal membrane. This action prevents the release of the acetylcholine and results in a
flaccid paralysis in which the muscles are unable to contract.47 Interestingly, botulinum
toxin A has been demonstrated to have therapeutic efficacy in the treatment of urinary
incontinence in female dogs lasting up to 4 months.15
clinical Signs
With naturally occurring botulism, there might be a history of unsupervised animals with
access to carrion, garbage, and compost piles. In the case of inhalational exposures, present-
ing animals may be the first indication of a terrorist action in the area. The chief complaint
Chapter 35 | Botulism 467
is a progressive rear end weakness or paresis starting 12 hours to 6 days postexposure. Pos-
sible signs include progressive, symmetrical paresis and/or paralysis beginning in the pelvic
slow pupillary light response, decreased jaw tone, decreased palpebral and gag reflexes, and
weak vocalization. Keratitis and conjunctivitis may occur because of weak palpebral reflexes.
The respiratory pattern is characterized by diaphragmatic respirations with limited costal
respirations. Bradycardia, constipation, and urinary retention are common. As in humans,
there is no loss of mental awareness or pain perception. Interestingly, in dogs the tail wag is
gr's aes aq u eaud uease pe sneoa suasad aen
Minimum Database
There are no common laboratory abnormalities typical of botulism. The occurrence of
secondary bacterial infections may cause white blood cellabnormalities, and, depending on
the time sequence, an increased packed-cell volume may be seen if dehydration is occur-
ring. An electromyogram (EMG) may or may not be beneficial. Because megaesophagus
commonly occurs, thoracic radiographs are indicated.14
Confirmatory Tests
The definitive diagnosis depends on toxin identification. In the case of oral exposures, most
diagnostic laboratories that offer this analysis require at least 4 mL of serum and 50 g of
vomitus, feces, or ingested food samples. It is best to call the laboratory that is doing the
testing in advance to find out what samples are most appropriate and how to properly pre-
serve them. In the case of inhalational exposure with botulinum toxins, the toxins cannot
be identified in body fluids other than nasal secretions. Iherefore the best diagnostic
sample for immunological identification is from nasal mucosal swabs obtained within
24 hours of exposure.2.17
Treatment
 Treatment in cases of botulism normally includes supportive therapy consisting of main-
including a tracheostomy and intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV), may be
indicated. In animals able to swallow, hand feeding and watering may be used. If the ani-
mal is unable to swallow, enteral feeding is indicated via a nasogastric, esophagostomy, or
gastrotomy tube.14
Soft bedding with frequent repositioning is required to prevent decubital ulcers and
atelectasis leading to the development of pneumonia. Animals with megaesophagus may
 develop aspiration pneumonia. Additional nursing care may include eye ointment to pre-
Alicensed antitoxin is available but is of no value for toxins already internalized into the
neurons.2 If available, 5 mL of the antitoxin should be administered IV or IM once as early as
possible, but within 5 days of exposure.5 The antitoxin is made from horse serum; therefore,
the clinician should administer a test dose of the antitoxin intradermally before administer-
ing the antitoxin to determine any hypersensitivity. The clinician should be ready to treat
an allergic reaction.
Prognosis
The prognosis for clinically affected animals is guarded to poor.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
No specific gross or histologic changes have been reported.
468SECTlON 4Specific Toxicants
Differential Diagnoses
 Differential diagnoses should include tick paralysis, coonhound paralysis, myasthenia gra-
vis, the dumb form of rabies, coral snake bite, ionophore poisoning, macadamia nut inges-
tion, and low-dose exposure to some organophosphate insecticides.5.16
In the case of tick paralysis, there will be a history of finding either Derracentor variabilis
Or D. andersoni in the United States or Ixodes holocyclus in Australia.5.16 There are no cranial
following tick removal and/or treatment with organophosphate insecticide solutions along
with appropriate nursing care.
Pronounced muscle atrophy is usually present, and cranial nerve signs are either mild or
absent.
 In animals with myasthenia gravis, the signs are episodic and most commonly related to
exercise.5.16 Edrophonium causes an improvement of clinical signs and may be treated with
supportive care and/or anticholinesterase drugs. A large number of these animals may have
a spontaneous recovery.16
Animals with the dumb form of rabies sometimes exhibit muscular weakness. Immuni-
zation status should be confirmed and the possibility of exposure to rabid animals explored.
 Appropriate safeguards must be instituted until a diagnosis is made.
Coral snake venom causes an ascending flaccid paralysis and depression in dogs and
cats.18 The onset of the clinical signs may be delayed for 10 to 18 hours. This is in contrast to
the 12-hour to 6-day delay of onset of signs in botulism. A history of exposure and/or the
presence of bite wounds should assist in the diagnosis.18
after an acute or chronic exposure to some organophosphate insecticides.19.zo This syn-
drome has been characterized as the “intermediate” syndrome.19.20 Many of these animals
respond to appropriate doses of atropine and pralidoxime (2-PAM) for several days.19.20
Acetylcholinesterase levels may be depressed at the time of presentation.
 Ionophore intoxication generally can be confirmed through exposure history and ana-
lyzing serum, stomach contents, or suspect feed material for the presence of ionophores.
 Macadamia nut ingestion is generally confirmed through exposure history.&
References
1. Robinson RF, Nahata MC: Management of botulism, Ann Pharmacother 37:127-131, 2003.
2. Middlebrook JL, Franz DR: Botulinum toxins. In Sidell FR, Takafuji ET, Franz DR, editors: Medical
aspects of chemical and biological warfare, Washington, DC, 1997, Offce ofthe Surgeon General at TMIM
Publications, Borden Institute, Walter Reed Army Medical Center.
3. Lamanna C: The most poisonous poison, Science 130:763-772, 1959.
4. Amon SS, Schecter R, Inglesgy TV, et al: Botulinum toxin as a biological weapon: medical and public
health management, JAMA 285(8):1059-1070, 2001.
5. Manning AM: Standards of care: emergency and critical care medicine, Vet Learn Sys 3(10):1-6, 2001.
6. Kalluri P, Crowe C, Reller M, et al: An outbreak of foodbome botulism associated with food sold at a
salvage store in Texas, Clin Infect Dis 37:1490-1495, 2003.
7. Moeller RB, Puschner B, Walker RL, et al: Determination ofthe median toxic dose of type C. botulinum
toxin in lactating dairy cows, I Vet Diagn Invest 15:523-526, 2003.
8. Gill DMI: Bacterial toxins: a table of lethal amounts, Microbiol Rev 46(1):86-94, 1982.
9. Poppenga RH: Common toxicoses of waterfowl, loons, and raptors. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, editors:
Current veterinary therapy Xl: small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1992, Saunders.
10. Levine ND: Listerosis, botulism, erysipelas and goose influenza. In Biester HE, Schwarte LH, editorsi
Diseases of poultry, ed 5, Ames, IA, 1965, Iowa State University Press.
11. Street CS: Experimental botulism in the monkey. In Hassett CC, editor: Proceedings of α conference on
botulinum toxin, Arsenal, MD, June 28-29, 1965, Edgewood.
12. Ravichandran E, Gong Y, Al Saleem FH, et al: An initial assessment of the systemic pharmacokinetics of
botulinum toxin, J Pharmacol Exp Ther 318:1343-1351, 2006.
Chapter 35 | Botulism 469
13. Weingart O, Schreiber T, Mascher C,et al The case of botulinum toxin in milk: experimental data, Appl
Environ Microbiol 76:3293-3300, 2010.
14. Hackett R, Kam PCA: Botulinum toxin: pharmacology and clinical developments: a literature review,
Med Chem 3:333-345, 2007.
15. Lew S, Makewski M, Radziszewski P, Kuleta Z: Therapeutic efficacy of botulinum toxin in the treatment
     s    go
16. Shelton GD: Myasthenia gravis and disorders of neuromuscular transmission, Vet Clin North A m Sm
Anim Pract 32(1):189-206, 2002.
17.
 Bruchim Y, Steinman A, Markovitz M, et al: Toxicological, bacteriological and serological diagnosis of
botulism in a dog, Vet Rec 158:768-769, 2005.
18.Peterson ME:Snake bite:coral snake. In Peterson ME,Talcott PA,editors: Small animal toxicology,ed2
Philadelphia, 2006, Saunders.
19. Jaggy A, Oliver JE: Chlorpyrifos toxicosis in two cats, I Vet Int Med 4:135-139, 1990.
20. Anonymous: The Merck veterinary manual,ed 9, Whitehouse Station, NJ, 2005, Merck.
CHAPTER
36
Bromethalin
David C. Dorman, DVM, PhD, DABVT, DABT
· Bromethalin is a neurotoxic rodenticide that produces cerebral edema in dogs,
cats, and other species (Color Plate 36-1).
 Mininal oral toxic doses are approximately 0.3 and 2.5 mg/kg in cats and dogs,
respectively.
Extremely high doses produce muscle tremors, increased activity, hyperthermia,
and seizures within 2 or more hours after ingestion.
More frequently bromethalin poisoning develops 12 to 24 hours after ingestion.
Poisoned animals develop progressive ataxia, paresis, and hindlimb paralysis
and intensifying central nervous system depression that may ultimately result in
semicoma or coma. The most prominent lesion is diffuse white matter edema
throughout the central nervous systerm.
Dagnosis of bromethalin toxicosis is based on a history of exposure,
development of compatible clinical signs, and chemical confirmation of
brormethalin residues in fat, brain, liver, kidney, or other tissues.
· Treatrment is via gastrointestinal tract decontamination, including appropriate
use of emetics and repeated administration of oral activated charcoal. Control of
cerebral edema is crucial. Mannitol, dexamethasone, and furosermide have been
used with variable success. Symptomatic and supportive care, including control
of seizures, is recommended.
Introduction
Bromethalin (2,4-dinitro-N-methyl-N-[2,4,6-tribromophenyl]-6-[trifluoromethy] benzene-
amine) was discovered in the mid-1970s' and has subsequently been incorporated into a
number of rodenticide products. Bromethalin inhibits brain adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
production and can be used to control warfarin-resistant rats and mice. Although the inci-
dence of poisoning is not known, widespread use of bromethalin-based products occurs in
the United States. As with other commonly used rodenticides, accidental poisoning of dogs,
cats, and other companion animals with bromethalin is not uncommon. Malicious poison-
 ings with bromethalin have also been documented.
Sources
Bromethalin-containing rodenticides have been marketed under a variety of trade names
including Assault, Gladiator, Trounce (PM Resources, Inc., Bridgeton, MO), Fastrac?,
471
472SECTlON 4SpecificToxicants
and Tomcat? (Bell Laboratories, Inc., Madison, WI), among others. Because pesticide for-
whenever an animal consumes a rodenticide. Bromethalin-based products usually con-
tain 0.01% bromethalin and are often manufactured in a pelleted or paraffinized bait
block form. Pelletized products are typically sold as individual paper or plastic “place
pack" envelopes that contain 16 to 42.5 g (0.57-1.5 oz) of bait. Ihe size and weight of the
rodenticide pellets vary depending on manufacturer and product use. Bromethalin is also
sold to commercial pest control operators in bulk and in a concentrated (2%-10%) liquid
or solid form.
Toxic Dose
Among the common experimental animal species evaluated to date, only guinea pigs
have been demonstrated to be relatively resistant to bromethalin toxicosis. The basis
for this resistance stems from the decreased ability of guinea pigs to metabolize bro-
methalin to its more toxic N-demethylated metabolite.2 The reported median lethal
dose (LDso) of bromethalin is greater than 1000 mg/kg in the guinea pig.2 In all other
aexodde uon saun osat ieno (asop-aauis) aine an aep o paurxa saiads
saa srxoi al oi ainsas iso saads al jo ao aq oi eadde sie ay/u si oi1
of bromethalin. For example, the oral LDso of powdered bromethalin bait was found
to be 0.54 mg/kg in experimental cats, whereas the LDso in dogs was 3.7 mg/kg.3.4
The reported oral LDso of technical grade bromethalin ranges from 1.8 mg/kg in the
cat to 4.7 mg/kg in the dog.These acute LDsos provide an estimate of the amount of
bromethalin required to be ingested to induce toxicity in dogs and cats. It is possible
that individual cats and dogs could develop severe clinical signs following exposure
to lower doses (e.g., ≥1/10 of an LDso), especially with repeated exposure. Deaths have
been reported in dogs ingesting bromethalin at doses as low as 0.95 to 1.05 mg/kg.
se Mol se saesop oi pasodxa Buiaq iane Aiiixoi jo suais [esiuno umous aney sie
s a  usa se yo(x a d as u 
tion of bromethalin-poisoned rodents has not been demonstrated experimentally.5
However, the author is aware of cases in which relay toxicosis most likely accounted
for the animals' exposure.
Toxicokinetics
 Most of the information about the metabolism and toxicokinetics of bromethalin has been
obtained from experimental studies conducted with rats.2 On ingestion, bromethalin is rap-
idly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract (absorption half-life, approximately 2.7 hours)
and peak plasma concentrations occur within 4 hours of ingestion. Bromethalin is rapidly
metabolized by liver mixed-function oxygenases to its more toxic N-demethylated metabo-
lite, desmethylbromethalin.
Bioactivation appears to play a crucial role in the development of toxicity because
animal species (e.g., guinea pigs) that are unable to metabolize bromethalin to desmeth-
ylbromethalin are resistant to its toxic effects. Bromethalin and its metabolite are readily
distributed throughout the body and reach their highest concentrations in body fat.5 Bro-
methalin is excreted from the body relatively slowly with a plasma excretion half-life of
approximately 6 days in the rat.2 Urinary excretion of bromethalin is minimal and accounts
for less than 3% of an oral dose; thus diuresis or other therapies directed at enhancing
renal excretion are ineffective at altering bromethalin pharmacokinetics. Excretion of bro-
methalin occurs primarily through the bile. Total biliary excretion can account for 5% to
25% of an orally administered dose. Reabsorption of bromethalin excreted into the bile by
the gastrointestinal tract probably occurs with subsequent cycling between the hepatobil-
of bromethalin is a mainstay of decontamination therapy and relies on the repeated oral
administration of activated charcoal.
Chapter 36 | Bromethalin 473
Mechanism of Action
The presumed biochemical mechanism of action of bromethalin and its active metabolite,
desmethylbromethalin, is uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation. Uncoupling of oxi-
dative phosphorylation has been demonstrated to occur in vitro in brain and liver mito-
chondria isolated from normal rats.? Uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation results in
decreased tissue ATP concentrations and reduced activity of ATP-dependent sodium and
potassium ion channel pumps. Ihe brain is the primary target site for the biochemi-
cal effects of bromethalin, most likely because of its enhanced dependence on oxidative
phosphorylation. Inhibition of ATP production leads to impaired ion pump function,
subsequent brain electrolyte imbalances, and the associated movement of fluid into the
myelinated regions of the brain and spinal cord. Increased cerebral lipid peroxidation also
occurs following bromethalin ingestion and may likewise contribute to the development of
clinical signs.6
clinical Signs
The primary target for bromethalin is the central nervous system (CNS), and most clinical
signs are generally referable to that system. Clinical signs in affected animals can vary tre-
in which the animal is observed. Most animals that ingest a potentially toxic dose of bro-
methalin remain asymptomatic for the first several hours. Ihe subsequent onset of clinical
a go (are) asop eaedns e isaun en sr aad-asop st suis
is characterized by severe muscle tremors, hyperthermia, and extreme hyperexcitability.
running fits, hyperesthesia, and focal motor and/or generalized seizures that appear to be
precipitated by light or noise.34 In many respects, the clinical signs induced by high-dose
bromethalin exposure resemble toxic syndromes induced by strychnine or monosodium
quently occur, and thus this acute-onset syndrome is rarely reported.
More commonly dogs and cats are exposed to lower doses of bromethalin, which pro-
duce a more delayed onset of neurologic signs. In these circumstances, it is not unusual
out a 1- or 2-week period.34 Clinical signs observed in poisoned dogs and cats with this
more typical toxic syndrome usually include hindlimb ataxia and paresis with associated
decreased conscious proprioception of the hindlimbs (Figure 36-1). Severely affected ani-
mals eventually develop hindlimb paralysis followed by a diminished or absent deep pain
response, patellar hyperreflexia, and upper motor neuron bladder paralysis. Mild to severe
CNS depression is usually also present in animals presenting with bromethalin-induced
ataxia and paresis, with severely affected animals developing semicoma or coma. Abdomi-
nal distention is occasionally observed in poisoned cats and has been characterized radio-
graphically by the presence of enlarged bowel loops. Additional clinical signs that can be
seen include vomiting, anorexia, anisocoria, behavioral changes ("dementia"), positional
nystagmus, abnormal postures (e.g., Schiff-Sherrington, forelimb extensor rigidity), loss
 of vocalization, opisthotonus, and fine muscle trermors. 34.7 Focal motor or generalized sei-
zures also occur in the latter stages of this syndrome. Severely poisoned dogs and cats may
develop a decerebrate posture (Figure 36-2) during the terminal phases of the syndrome
Minimum Database
 In general, changes in serum electrolytes and chemistries are unremarkable following bro-
mia during the toxic syndrome. Changes in routine serum electrolytes and chemistries
consistent with prolonged anorexia and dehydration could also occur during bromethalin
toxicosis.
474SECTlON 4SpecifikcToxicants
after administration of bromethalin (0.45 mg/kg). (From Dorman DC: Emerging
neurotoxicities. In August JR, editor: Consultations in feline internal medicine, ed 2,
Philadelphia, 1994, WB Saunders, 429-436.)
As anticipated from the mechanism of action, clinical signs, and lesions, bromethalin
toxicosis is associated with the development of increased cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pres-
modest elevation in CSF pressure (e.g., mean CSF pressure values observed in bromethalin-
exposed dogs were 122 mm CSF versus 80 mm CSF in control dogs). Ihe increase in CSF
pressure observed in lethally poisoned dogs is not as severe as that observed with many
other causes of cerebral edema (e.g., trauma). Localization of the edema to affected myelin
sheaths likely limits the magnitude of the CSF pressure increases that occurs in poisoned
 protein concentration, specific gravity, and cell count and was thus of limited diagnostic
valule.3
Although not specific for bromethalin toxicosis, electroencephalographic (EEG) abnor
malitiesfrequently occur inbromethalin-poisoned dogs and cats.&9 Electroencephalographic
Chapter 36 | Bromethalin475
Figure 36-2 Severe CNS depression, recumbency, hindlimb extensor rigidity, and fore-
limb flexion present in a cat 14 days after bromethalin (0.45 mg/kg) administration. This
posture is often referred to as decerebrate posture. Animals placed on their backs dem-
onstrate forelimb as well as hindlimb extensor rigidity. (From Dorman DC: Emerging
neurotoxicities. In August IR, editor: Consultations in feline internal medicine, ed 2,
Philadelphia, 1994, WB Saunders, 429-436.)
abnormalities include increased spike and spike-and-wave activity associated with an
irritative or seizure focus, marked voltage depression indicative of cerebral hypoxia, and
abnormal high voltage slow wave activities that are associated with the presence of cerebral
provide limited diagnostic utility.
Confirmatory Tests
An antemortem diagnosis of bromethalin poisoning rests on an exposure history to a
potentially toxic dose of a bromethalin-based rodenticide and the subsequent development
presence of hypodensities and other changes that were suggestive of brain edema that was
predominantly affecting the white matter.l0 A postmortem diagnosis of bromethalin poi-
soning is often suggested by the presence of diffuse white matter vacuolization in CNS
samples and can be confirmed by the presence of bromethalin residues in frozen fat, liver,
kidney, and brain tissues.5.10.ll Chemical confirmation of bromethalin residues is not widely
available and may have limited clinical application in patients with a delayed presentation.
Treatment
Treatment of the exposed dog or cat is initially directed at reducing gastrointestinal absorp-
tion of bromethalin and providing symptomatic and supportive care. Because of its rapid
absorption, emesis must be performed quickly after ingestion (1 hour) to produce a clinical
476SECTION4SpecificToxicants
benefit. Emetics that can be given safely to alert dogs and cats can include 3% hydrogen
peroxide (1 mL/lb given per os [PO]), apomorphine (0.04 mg/kg,given intramuscularly [IM],
in dogs), and xylazine (0.4 up to 1.1 mg/kg, IM or subcutaneously [SC], in cats) (see Chap-
ter 10 for more information on emetics). Emetics should not be given to animals that are
displaying dyspnea, hypoxia, seizures, CNS depression, or abnormal pharyngeal reflexes.
All animals should be given oral activated charcoal whenever a potentially toxic expo-
X 0l) iaiem u uoisuadsns e se (3x/Buu 0sz) atems uumios io (sx/Tu e ie uonlos %o)
volume) can be administered orally or by gastric tube. The use of magnesium sulfate as a
saline cathartic is not recommended in animals with bromethalin toxicosis because ele-
vated serum and brain magnesium levels may further exacerbate the development of CNS
depression, especially in animals with decreased renal function. Some animals poisoned
with bromethalin develop enlarged bowel loops consistent with adynamic (paralytic)
ileus, and in these cases cathartics should not be used. Experimental studies conducted
in dogs and cats have demonstrated that repeated administration of activated charcoal is
more effective than administration of a single activated charcoal dose.41z Smaller subse-
quent oral doses of activated charcoal (1 g/kg) with reduced sodium sulfate (125 mg/kg)
should be given every 4 to 8 hours for at least 2 to 3 days to all animals that may have
consumed a potentially lethal dose. The increased efficacy of repeated activated char-
coal administration is likely due to its ability to disrupt the enterohepatic recirculation
of bromethalin. Unfortunately, even repeated administration of activated charcoal may
not be very effective, because delayed deaths were observed in cats 15 to 19 days after
bromethalin administration despite the initial administration of four doses of activated
istration of activated charcoal may be required following ingestion of a potentially lethal
dose. Iherefore, it is crucial that careful measures be used to maintain hydration status
and monitor electrolyte balance after repeated cathartic use, especially when mannitol is
used concurrently to control cerebral edema. Single or repeated doses of activated char-
situations, particularly when the patient is dehydrated or the toxin contains significant
amounts of sodium.
I is also vital to control the cerebral edema and elevated intracranial pressure that occur
in severe poisoning cases. Diuretic agents may be used to control bromethalin-induced
that a constant infusion of mannitol or urea or the daily administration of dexamethasone
the beneficial effects of mannitol and urea were transient and CSF pressure began to rise
once these infusions were stopped. Several experimental studies have examined whether
the combined administration of mannitol and dexamethasone could be effective in manag-
ing dogs or cats given a lethal dose of bromethalin.4.12z Unfortunately, these therapies were
neither effective in preventing signs from developing nor in reversing the neurotoxic syn-
drome once it had developed. Observed treatment failures with combined corticosteroid
and mannitol therapy in dogs and cats given a lethal dose of bromethalin may indicate that
in these species the toxic syndrome is not solely caused by cerebral edema. Alternatively, it
is possible that the intramyelinic location of the edema may limit the effectiveness of corti-
costeroid and mannitol therapy.
Despite the treatment failures observed with mannitol and dexamethasone in research
dogs and cats, the use of a hyperosmotic agent such as mannitol (250 mg/kg, given every
6 hours IV) is still indicated for the control of bromethalin-induced cerebral edema. Side
renal failure, and pulmonary edema. Animals receiving several days of mannitol therapy
often become dehydrated during treatment. Rehydration of bromethalin-poisoned animals
that have been subsequently treated with intravenous mannitol may produce a worsening
of neurologic signs, probably because of the development of so-called rebound cerebral
and pulmonary edema. Careful maintenance of the animal's hydration status is critical
Chapter 36 | Bromethalin 477
and can be accomplished most safely through the frequent oral administration of small
amounts of water.
 In many ways, furosemide (1 mg/kg, given IV every 4-6 hours) may be better than man-
nitol and other hyperosmolar agents because furosemide administration is not associated
with rebound cerebral or pulmonary edema, fluctuations in serum osmolarity, or hyperna-
tremia. High doses of dexamethasone (2 mg/kg, every 6 hours IV) can be used in conjunc-
tion with either mannitol or furosemide for the management of cerebral edema.
Diazepam (1-2 mg/kg, given IV as needed) and/or phenobarbital (5-15 mg/kg, given
 IV as needed) may be given to abolish severe muscle tremors and seizures. Many animals
recovering from bromethalin toxicosis exhibit prolonged anorexia and may require supple-
mental feeding to maintain caloric intake. Recumbent animals should be placed in padded
 cages to prevent the development of decubital ulcers.
Prognosis
Some animals may recover from bromethalin toxicosis. In mild poisoning cases, overt clini-
cal signs usually resolve within several weeks of ingestion, although subtle signs of neuro-
logic dysfunction may persist. Animals with more severe clinical signs, including coma or
 paralysis, generally have a grave prognosis.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Lesions are generally confined to the CNS. Gross evidence of cerebral edema may occur but
is generally mild. Spongy degeneration of the cerebrum, cerebellum, brainstem, spinal cord,
and optic nerve white matter occurs in lethally poisoned dogs and cats.5.13 The myelin lesion
is generally not associated with a leukocytic inflammatory response, gitter cell response, or
axonal degeneration and may indeed be reversible. Ultrastructural findings include separa-
tion of myelin lamellae at the interperiod lines resulting in apparent intramyelinic edema,
spongy changes owing to the rupture and coalescence of these intramyelinic vacuoles, and
Differential Diagnoses
Bromethalin poisoning in the cat and dog must be distinguished clinically from other
neurologic syndromes produced by trauma, neoplasia, cerebral vascular disorders, and
infectious and other toxic agents (e.g., macadamia nuts, ionophores, botulism, OP-induced
intermediate syndrome, or delayed neuropathy). Similar clinical signs and white matter
lesions may occur in hexachlorophene- or trialkyltin-poisoned animals; however, compan-
References
 1. Dreikorn BA, O'Doherty GO: The discovery and development of bromethalin, an acute rodenticide with
a unique mechanism of action. In Magee PS, Kohn GK, Menn JJ, editors: Pesticide synthesis through
rational approaches, Washington, DC, 1984, American Chemical Society.
 2. VanLier RBL, Cherry LD: The toxicity and mechanism of action of bromethalin: a new single-feeding
rodenticide, Fundam Appl Toxicol 11:664-672, 1988.
3. Dorman DC, Parker AJ, Buck WB: Bromethalin toxicosis in the dog: I. Clinical effects, / A m A ssoc Anim
Hosp 26:589-594, 1990.
4. Dorman DC, Parker AJ, Dye JA, Buck W B: Bromethalin neurotoxicosis in the cat, Prog Vet Neurol 1:
189-196, 1990.
Invest 2:123-128, 1990.
6. Dorman DC, Cote LM, Buck WB:Effects of an extract of Gingko bilobαon bromethalin-induced cerebral
peroxidation and edema, Am I Vet Res 53:138-142, 1992
 7. Martin T, Johnson B: A suspected case of bromethalin toxicity in a domestic cat, Vet Hum Toxicol 3:
239240, 1989
478SECTION4SpecificToxicants
8. Dorman DC, Parker AJ, Schaeffer DJ, Buck WB: Quantitative and qualitative electroencephalographic
changes in normal and bromethalin-dosed cats, Prog Vet Neurol 1:451-460, 1990.
9. Dorman DC, Parker AJ, Buck W B: Electroencephalographic changes associated with bromethalin toxi-
cosis in the dog, Vet Hum Toxicol33:9-11, 1991.
10. Pasquale-Styles MA, Sochaski MA, Dorman DC, et al: Fatal bromethalin poisoning, I Forensic Sci
51:1154-1157, 2006.
11. Braselton WE, Johnson M: Thin layer chromatography convulsant screen extended by gas chromatogra-
phy-mass spectrometry, I Vet Diagn Invest 15:42-45, 2003.
12.I
Dorman DC, Parker AJ, Buck WB: Bromethalin toxicosis in the dog: II. Treatment of the toxic syndrome,
IA m Assoc A ni Hosp 26:595-598, 1990.
13. Dorman DC, Zachary JF, Buck WB: Neuropathologic findings of bromethalin toxicosis in cats, Vet
Pathol 29:139-144, 1992.
CHAPTER
Carbon Monoxide
37
Kevin T. Fitzgerald, PhD, DVM, DABVP
Carbon monoxide is a product of incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons and
is produced by fires; autornobile exhaust; propane-powered engines; portable
generators; kerosene heaters; gas log fireplaces; spray paint; and cigarette, cigar,
and pipe smoke.
The lethal dose is 1000 ppm (0.1%) for all animals. An automobile running in a
closed one-car garage for 10 minutes can achieve this level.
 Clinical signs include nausea, vomiting, ataxia, tachypnea, tachycardia, syncope,
hypotension, lactic acidosis, seizures, pulmonary edema, and coma.
 Dagnosis is based on history, clinical signs, and response to therapy. No single
laboratory test exists to establish carbon monoxide poisoning. Blood levels of 
carboxyhermoglobin usually have fallen substantially by the tirme of amival at the
veterinary facility.
· Treatment involves removing the animal from the source of carbon monoxide
and inrnediately administering 100% oxygen.
 Gross and histologic lesions of carbon monoxide poisoning include renal
tubular necrosis, myonecrosis, endothelial damage to the blood vessels, and 
dermyelinization injury to the CNS.
Sources
Carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning is the most common form of intoxication in humans
in the United States. The molecule is produced by the incomplete combustion (oxida-
tion) of carbon-containing compounds. Possible sources of carbon monoxide include
d sae sui seies (smes  pe s da) sa paa-aad
table generators, kerosene heaters, gas log freplaces, natural gas appliances, hibachi cook-
ers, automobile exhaust, fres and subsequent smoke inhalation, and paint strippers and
spray paints (Box 37-1). An improperly vented natural gas heater can make the air within
a small room unsafe to breathe within a matter of minutes. However, several cases of
carbon monoxide poisoning have occurred outdoors in association with the use of faulty
equipment.
Animals have long been used as sentinels to provide early warning of the risk of
human exposure to potentially noxious gases. In the last century, canaries were kept in
mines to alert workers to the presence of carbon monoxide and other toxic inhalants.
In homes, domestic dogs and cats may likewise serve as sentinels. Pets are at increased
exposure risk compared with humans because of their faster breathing rate and smaller
479
480SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
volume of distribution. Thus, companion animals may display recognizable signs of
pauoloid 1o rauing juaaaid ci uonne ael ol aldoad mole cl qanoua Aea sisooixol
exposure.
Gasoline internal combustion engine exhaust contains from 3% to 7% carbon mon-
oxide. Newer emission standards for new cars in the United States require limitation of
carbon monoxide emission to 0.5%. Numerous cases of intoxication of dogs and cats
have been reported when they have been inadvertently left in enclosed garages in the
wintertime while owners warmed up their cars. Another potent source of carbon mon-
oxide is the smoke of cigarettes, cigars, and pipes, which can contain levels up to 4%.
Likewise, diesel engines emit notable levels of CO in their exhaust. In the past decade
and cooking devices, have accounted for a growing number of poisonings. Fire contin-
ues to be an important source of exposure. Carbon monoxide is the leading cause of
death in fire victims.
Toxic Dose
Lethal concentrations of carbon monoxide can be achieved within 10 minutes from an
automobile running in the confines of a closed one-car garage. An ambient CO concen-
saoq 'anmsodxa inou-g ue buinp suais [esiu ou saonpond (%roo) wudd ool jo uonenl
can tolerate 200 ppm (0.02% CO concentrations) for 90 days with no clinical signs. How-
ever, CO concentrations more than 1000 ppm (0.1%) cause unconsciousness, respiratory
failure, and death if exposure is continued for 1 hour. Chronic poisoning in the sense of
accumulation of carbon monoxide with repeated exposure does not occur. Nevertheless,
repeated anoxia from carbon monoxide causes central nervous system (CNS) damage.
Carbon monoxide exposure is particularly deleterious to pregnant animals because of
fetuses' greater sensitivity to the harmful effects of the gas. Final carboxyhemoglobin
levels in the fetus may exceed levels found in the mother. The exaggerated leftward shift
of fetal carboxyhemoglobin makes tissue hypoxia more severe because less oxygen is
available to fetal tissue. Also, it is estimated that fetal elimination of carbon monoxide
takes 3.5 times as long as maternal elimination of the poison. Although the teratogenicity
of carbon monoxide is controversial, the risk of fetal injury caused by carbon monoxide
pue 'sanads uouedos 'seuue en) saiads au jo seue puuaaid susyis s!
humans) have been shown to be at increased risk when exposed to toxic levels of carbon
monoxide.
Toxicokinetics and
Box 37-1
Carbon Monoxide
Mechanism of Toxicity
Sources
Propane-powered engines
In its pure form, carbon monoxide is
·Forklifts
undetectable. It is colorless, odorless, and
*Chain saws
nonirritating, and it disperses readily in
Catalytic radiant heaters
room air and does not stratify (Box 37-2).
Portable generators
Because it is slightly lighter than air, car-
Kerosene heaters
bon monoxide tends to rise throughout
Gas log freplaces
a building. Carbon monoxide combines
Natural gas appliances
with hemoglobin to form carboxyhemo-
Automobile exhaust
globin. This molecule is incapable of car-
 Fires (subsequent smoke inhalation)
rying oxygen (Oz), and tissue hypoxia
Paint strippers
results. Hemoglobin has an affinity for
carbon monoxide that is 240 times greater
Spray paint
Hibachi cookers
than that of Oz. In addition, the presence
Cigarette, cigar, and pipe smoke
of carbon monoxide increases the stabil-
ity of the hemoglobin-O, bond. Thus the
Chapter 37 | Carbon Monoxide 481
fixation of carbon monoxide on any one of the four oxygen-binding sites of hemoglobin
increases the oxygen affinity at the remaining sites. As a result, carbon monoxide reduces
the availability of oxygen to tissue in two ways: first, by its direct combination with hemo-
globin, which thereby reduces the amount of hemoglobin able to carry oxygen, and second,
by preventing the release or unloading of oxygen bound to hemoglobin at peripheral body
tissues. This increased affinity for oxygen, known as the Haldane effect, causes the leftward
shift of the oxygen hemoglobin dissociation curve. The carboxyhemoglobin molecule is
oxygen-carrying capacity of hemoglobin and the oxygen-unloading function of the mol-
ecule. The net effect of these two processes is decreased availability of oxygen to cells of the
body. Levels of carboxyhemoglobin in the blood can help determine overall toxicity of the
exposure. Normal levels in nonsmoking humans and normal animals typically are less than
2%; smokers can have chronically elevated levels around 7% to 12%.
 In addition to the strong affinity of carbon monoxide for hemoglobin, carbon monoxide
has a significant affinity for all iron- or copper-containing sites and competes with oxygen
at these active sites. In particular, muscle myoglobin has a selective affinity for carbon mon-
oxide that is 40 times greater than that for oxygen and, like hemoglobin, displays aleftward
Oxygen dissociation shift when carbon monoxide is present. This binding with myoglobin is
further enhanced by hypoxic conditions. Interference with cellular respiration at the mito-
chondrial level by carbon monoxide also has been demonstrated. Carbon monoxide binds
with cytochrome oxidase in conditions of hypoxia and causes the release of mitochondrial-
based free radicals. These molecules attract leukocytes that release proteases that activate a
cascade of events that damage endothelium, destroy brain microvasculature, and result in
lipid peroxidation of brain membranes.
Carbon monoxide toxicity cannot be explained based solely on a carboxyhemoglobin-
mediated hypoxia. Clinical effects, tissue destruction, and subsequent neurological deficits
cannot be predicted by only the extent of binding between carbon monoxide and hemo-
globin. Dogs breathing 13% carbon monoxide die within 1 hour with carboxyhemoglobin
levels of 54% to 90%. However, blood transfusions from the dying dogs into healthy dogs
produced no deleterious effects. Ihis observation suggests that the carbon monoxide itself
is responsible at least partially for its pathological effects. In poisoned animals, 10% to 15%
of total body carbon monoxide is found to be extravascular. Ihe delivery of carbon mon-
oxide itself intracellularly, its binding to heme proteins and other molecules other than
hemoglobin, the migration and attachment of leukocytes to damaged endothelium and
their destructive release of proteases, free radicals, and degradative enzymes all contribute
to the toxicity of carbon monoxide in addition to its hypoxic effects.
Clinical Signs
Clinical signs of carbon monoxide poisoning are notoriously nonspecific and may be evi-
dent in a wide variety of presentations, depending on the concentration of the poison in
air, the duration of the exposure, the ventilation present, the age and size of the animal,
and the presence of underlying cardiac or cerebrovascular disease. Ihe earliest clinical
signs of carbon monoxide poisoning are easily confused with other illnesses, especially
viral syndromes and food poisoning. In
humans as many as 5% of those treated for
influenza are thought to be actually suffer-
Box 37-2
Carbon Monoxide
ing from the subclinical effects of carbon
Properties
monoxide exposure. Ihe principal mani-
festation of carbon monoxide poisoning
Molecular weight: 28.01 Daltons
Gas density: 0.968 (air = 1)
is dyspnea. However, the earliest signs in
Odor: none
mild exposures are nausea, vomiting, and
Color:none
dizziness. In moderate exposures, seri-
Irritating: no
ous signs appear, including tachycardia,
tachypnea, weakness, and ataxia. In more
482SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
severe carbon monoxide poisonings, syncope, seizures, hypotension, and coma may ensue
（Box37-3)
Cardiac arrhythmias, such as premature ventricular contractions, atrial fibrillation,
heart block, and ischemic changes, may all be present on electrocardiograms. Cardiac signs
are frequently observed after carbon monoxide poisoning. At levels of carboxyhemoglobin
greater than 6%, there is an increased frequency of premature ventricular contractions.
Life-threatening dysrhythmia, myocardial infarction, and cardiac arrest have all been
described after carbon monoxide exposure. Acute death from carbon monoxide is usu-
ally the result of ventricular dysrhythmia, the cause of which is the underlying devastat-
ing hypoxia. Although the heart is readily affected by carbon monoxide, the brain is the
ansodxa snonuo juapiaa aq Aeu suais esidonoimu pue ueaio jaaiel aansuas iso
to ambient CO concentrations of more than 1000 ppm (0.1%) for more than 1 hour results
in unconsciousness, respiratory failure, seizures, and death.
Minimum Database and Confirmatory Tests
For fire victims and animals suffering from smoke inhalation, carbon monoxide poison-
ing is usually swifly addressed. However, for the comatose animal having no history, the
diagnosis can be easily missed. In one ret-
rDspective study in humans, the incidence
Box 37-3
Clinical Signs of Carbon
of misdiagnosis of carbon monoxide poi-
Monoxide Poisoning
soning was 30% over a 3-year period. It is
inmportant to obtain a detailed toxicologic
Nausea
history, inquiring about the physical sur-
Vomiting
roundings of the animal and about any gas
Tachycardia
stoves, gas heat, or gas water heaters in use
Tachypnea
in confined spaces with the animal.
Arrhythmias
Animals intoxicated with carbon mon-
Hypotension
oxide seldom display bright red gums and
Ataxia
mucous membranes and seldom have
Syncope
the classic “cherry red" blood described
Lactic acidosis
in textbooks. They may be hypotensive,
Obtundation
display arrhythmias on electrocardio-
Seizures
grams, and have lactic acidosis. Because
 Pulmonary edema
carboxyhemoglobin absorbs light at the
Coma
same wavelength as oxyhemoglobin,
Respiratory arrest
apulse oximeter shows falsely elevated or
normal oxyhemoglobin saturation levels.
Carboxyhemoglobin levels may be taken
Box 37-4
from specimens obtained to measure arte-
Minimum Database
rial blood gases. Many human hospital lab
for Carbon Monoxide
facilities can run this test fairly quickly.
Poisoning
However, an elevated carboxyhemoglo-
Vital signs
bin level is not a reliable indicator of the
Electrocardiogram
severity of the poisoning, and a poor cor-
Pulse oximetry
relation exists between the carboxyhemo-
 Doppler blood pressure
globin level and clinical signs. Typically,
Complete blood count
diagnosis is based on history, clinical
signs, blood work, and response to oxygen
Biochemical profile
therapy (Box 37-4).
Urinalysis
Blood gases (if possible)
An accurate predictor of the severity
Anion gap determination
of carbon monoxide intoxication and a
Radiographs
better indicator of treatment required
and eventual outcome has long been
Carboxyhemoglobin level (if possible)
sought. Carboxyhemoglobin levels are a
Chapter 37| Carbon Monoxide483
ansoxa uguos Aeu sanat uaiu pue ssuuosind paisaans ui looi ssouenp man
however, as mentioned, carboxyhemoglobin is not predictive of the severity of the poi-
soning and correlates poorly in predicting treatment outcome. In addition, carboxyhe-
moglobin levels can vary with duration of exposure, timing of the measurement, rate of
elimination, and concentration of carbon monoxide in the inspired gas. Initial hydro-
gen ion concentration may be a better index of the severity of poisoning based upon its
effect on cellular metabolism as a result of the binding of carbon monoxide to intracellular
Oxygen-carrying proteins, such as cytochromes, rather than solely to hemoglobin. Poi-
soning of the cytochrome system results in cellular dysfunction and metabolic acidosis.
Hydrogen ion concentration may be a more sensitive and logical marker of tissue poison-
information as to the severity of the toxic episode. Furthermore, animals with such an
acidosis should be thought to have significant carbon monoxide exposure even if carboxy-
hemoglobin levels are low.
Finally, a rapid, cheap, and noninvasive diagnostic test for potential carbon monoxide
poisoning that could be easily put to use in the veterinary emergency hospital or triage room
would be very welcome. Concentration of carbon monoxide in end expiratory breath bears
a close relationship to carboxyhemoglobin concentration in the blood. Handheld breath
analyzers are commercially available and are suitable for detection of carbon monoxide
frorm any cause. In human beings, breath analysis for carbon monoxide is inexpensive, easy
to perform, and fairly accurate and provides an answer in a reasonably short time frame.
Breath sampling methods should be further investigated to determine if this might be an
effective way of measuring carbon monoxide exposure in animals.
Treatment
 The antidote for carbon monoxide poisoning is 100% oxygen administered by endotracheal
tube or a tight-fitting mask. Cardiac monitoring should be conducted and any arrhyth-
mias treated. Hypotension should be corrected with administration of intravenous nor-
mal saline. Severely poisoned animals should be screened and treated for lactic acidosis if
necessary. Animals arriving in emergency situations from closed-space fires with notable
metabolic acidosis or elevated lactate levels should also be evaluated for possible concomi-
tant cyanide poisoning.
Use of 100% oxygen facilitates the dissociation of carbon monoxide from hemoglobin.
The half-life of carbon monoxide is reduced from more than 240 minutes at room air to
60 minutes when 100% oxygen is delivered via endotracheal tube. Administration of 100%
oxygen should not be employed for longer than 18 hours to prevent subsequent oxygen
toxicity. This syndrome is thought to be caused by the formation of oxygen radicals that
directly damage endothelial and epithelial cells leading to cytotoxicity, increased endothe-
lial permeability, and subsequent inflammation of tissues. For most mammalian species, it 
has been discovered that prolonged exposure (24 hours or greater) to high concentrations
of oxygen is damaging to the lungs. For these reasons, the use of 100% oxygen must be
monitored judiciously.
aa sa) assad sse u ana ie ae ux t  a a
baric oxygen) can shorten the half-life further to about 23 minutes. In several studies
s l aaq x   a   si uax qa
energy metabolism, prevents lipid peroxidation, and decreases neutrophil adherence. In
by carbon monoxide. Disadvantages of hyperbaric oxygen include risks associated with
transport to treatment centers, initiation of hyperoxic seizures, and barotrauma. At present
these techniques are not widely available in veterinary medicine. Seizures caused by carbon
monoxide poisoning may be treated with appropriate anticonvulsants.
 In 1922 carbon dioxide-induced hyperpnea was shown to be effective in treating car-
bon monoxide poisoning. This technique fell into disfavor in the 1960s with the advent
484SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
of successful treatment of carbon monoxide poisoning with hyperbaric oxygen. Recently,
eucapnic hyperoxic hyperpnea was shown to increase the elimination of carbon monoxide
in dogs and in humans by two to three times that of normal breathing of 100% oxygen.
With appropriate equipment, this technique could be applied at the time and site of loca-
tion with a portable circuit. Providing more rapid elimination of carbon monoxide earlier
in the course of treatment of this poisoning could dramatically improve prognosis. Because
hyperbaric chambers are still relatively rare (only 340 in the United States) and not readily
available to veterinary patients,this method of treatment deserves serious reevaluation.
Finally, correction of any underlying acidemia with bicarbonate is controversial because
it can result in further cellular hypoxia secondary to a left shift of the oxyhemoglobin
dissociation curve. At this time it is not recommended as part of the treatment regimen.
Prevention and Prognosis
All combustion devices must be vented to the outside air. Flame water heaters, gas stoves,
gas refrigerators, internal combustion engines, propane- and kerosene-driven tools and
vehicles, and paint-stripping devices must all be checked routinely for safety. Animals
should not be kept in poorly ventilated areas with such machines, nor should they be kept
in confined spaces (such as garages) where owners warm up their automobiles. Animals
should not be returned to such enclosed areas until the source of carbon monoxide has
been repaired or removed.
Early diagnosis is crucial in preventing much of the morbidity and mortality associated
with carbon monoxide toxicity, particularly in nonintentional poisonings. The availability
and use of much-improved home carbon monoxide detecting devices should provide an
added dimension to prevention of exposure. Identification and treatment of affected cohabi-
tant animals is likewise critical from a standpoint of prevention. Informing owners of the
danger to cohabitants and overseeing their swift evaluation may prevent further needless
poisonings. In cases of suspected accidental exposure, local fire departments and utility com-
panies can check home equipment and measure ambient levels of carbon monoxide using
portable monitoring equipment. Until rescue personnel arrive at sites of accidental poison-
heaters, and natural gas-fueled appliances; open doors and windows; and evacuate the area.
Au aeep Sn yo suis xienpena ssanaai uuosiod po suis shaaosan uuia au 
be permanent. Complete recovery is unlikely if signs persist for more than 3 weeks. Because
of the wide variety of nonspecific clinical signs, diagnosis of carbon monoxide poisoning
can be easily missed. However, if the toxicosis is treated early and aggressively, therapy
can be successful. The use of hyperbaric oxygen in the management of carbon monoxide-
poisoned veterinary cases deserves broader attention. Dogs appearto be more resistant to car-
bon monoxide intoxication than either human beings or cats. Tabulations for the incidence
of carbon monoxide poisonings in dogs and cats (and their outcome) as documented by
the American Association of Poison Control Centers (AAPCC) for 2010 are included in
Boxes 37-5 and 37-6. Recommendations for the prevention of carbon monoxide intoxica-
tion are included in Box 37-7.
Box 37-5
Total Number of Reported Carbon Monoxide Cases—Canine—2010
Confrmed exposures:
32
Outcome
Death:
0
 Moderate effects:
5
Minor effects:
9
Animal recovered:
32
American Association of Poison Control Centers (AAPCC), 2010.
Chapter 37 | Carbon Monoxide 485
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Carbon monoxide toxicity appears to result from a combination of tissue hypoxia and
direct carbon monoxide-mediated damage at the cellular level. After severe poisoning,
myonecrosis, retrobulbar optic neuritis with neuroretinal edema, pulmonary edema,
damage to the renal tubules, and increased fbrin deposition have all been documented.
In addition, carbon monoxide exposure has been shown to cause lipid peroxidation lead-
ing to demyelinization of CNS lipids. Exposure to carbon monoxide also may lead to
the formation of destructive oxygen radicals that result from the conversion of xanthine
dehydrogenase to xanthine oxidase. In humans a delayed neuropsychiatric syndrome
(3 to 240 days postexposure) has been described. This may be because of a postischemic
reperfusion injury and the effects of carbon monoxide on vascular endothelium and oxy-
gen radical-mediated brain lipid peroxidation.
Severe carbon monoxide poisoning is followed within a few hours by a rise in hydroxyl
radicals in the brain. Ihese molecules are responsible for the neural tissue damage and
lipid peroxidation of the brain. Necropsy results for several species show decreased density
in the central white matter and globus pallidus. Other areas including the cerebral cortex
hippocampus, cerebellum, and substantia nigra are affected by severe exposures. Animal
studies have revealed that areas permanently damaged in serious cases of carbon monoxide
poisoning are the areas of the brain with the poorest vascular supply. A transitory deafness
has been documented in both dogs and cats following carbon monoxide exposure. How-
ever, it has been reported to resolve with time.
Box 37-6
Total Number of Reported Carbon Monoxide Cases—Feline—2010
Confirmed exposure:
81
Outcome
Death:
1
Moderate effects:
17
Minor effects:
21
Animal recovered:
80
American Association of Poison Control Centers (AAPCC), 2010.
Box 37-7
Carbon Monoxide Prevention
° Have heating system, water heaters, and any gas, oil, or coal-burning appliances
serviced yearly by qualified personnel.
 Installbattery-operated CO detectors in your home (on each level). Replace all
batteries each time you change your clocks every spring and fall. If detector alarm
sounds—leave premises immediately and call 9i1. (Some states now have laws
requiring detector installation in new homes and buildings.)
 Clinical signs of early carbon monoxide poisoning may include light-headedness,
dizziness, and nausea. Seek medical attention if you suspect CO poisoning might be
the cause.
° Never operate generators, charcoal grils, camping stoves, or gasoline, propane, or 
charcoal-burning devices inside your home, basement, or garage.
- Never run cars or trucks inside a garage—even if the door is open. (Never house
es uuuna e bunsno aeea ies-auo pasoo e un samu oi saen lI 'saeiea ui siad
to achieve lethal CO levels for a 10-pound cat.)
Don't burn anything in a stove or fireplace that is unvented
+ Don't heat homes with gas ovens or kerosene heaters.
486SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Box 37-8
Differential Diagnoses
Acute changes of the brain after severe
Exposures can be documented within 12
for Carbon Monoxide
hours using computed tomography (CT)
Poisoning
scans. Loss of density in the globus pal-
Food poisoning
lidus, caudate nuclei, and putamen fre-
Heart disease
quently can be observed. Normal initial
CT scans generally predict a favorable
Alcohol intoxication
outcome. Changes in the globus pallidus
Acute solvent intoxication
and subcortical white matter within the
Barbiturates
frst day following poisoning usually indi-
Cyanide
 Ischemic cerebral disease
cate a poor outcome. Magnetic resonance
Cerebral hemorrhage
imaging appears to be a superior technique
in identifying lesions of the basal ganglia.
Cerebral neoplasia
Neuroimaging does not direct treatment
Viral syndromes
choices and should be reserved for ani
Metabolic disease
mals showing poor response to therapy or
who have an equivocal diagnosis. Delayed
neurological effects caused by carbon mon-
oxide poisoning involve lesions in the cerebral white matter and basal ganglia. Retinal hemor-
rhages have been seen in several species following prolonged exposures to carbon monoxide.
Differential Diagnoses
A diagnosis of carbon monoxide intoxication can be easily missed because of a poor history
of toxicologic exposure given by the owner and the nonspecific clinical signs characteristic
of this toxicosis. A list of differential diagnoses and potential look-alikes is included in
Box 37-8. Differentials must include viral syndromes, food poisoning, heart disease, other
intoxicants, ischemic cerebral disease, and cerebral neoplasia. Ihe most common signs of
carbon monoxide poisoning are nonspecific, such as nausea, dizziness, and syncope. A high
index of suspicion is necessary to make the diagnosis of carbon monoxide toxicity, espe-
cially when the avenue of exposure is not immediately evident.
Suggested Readings
23:309, 1985.
Kao LW, Nanggs KA: Toxicity associated with carbon monoxide, Clin Lab Med 26(1):99-125, 2006.
Olson KR: Carbon monoxide poisoning mechanisms, presentation, and controversies in management,
I Emerg Med 1:233, 1984.
Bronstein AC, Spyker DA, Canitena LR, et al: Annual Report ofthe American Association of Poison Control
Bartlett R: Carbon monoxide poisoning. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW, Winchester JF, editors: Clinical
management of poisoning and drug overdose,ed 3, Philadelphia, 1988, Saunders
Rosenstock L, Cullen M, Brodkin C, et al: Textbook of clinical occupational and environmental medicine,
ed 2, Edinburgh, 2004, Saunders.
Forkowski CM, et al: Rhabdomyolysis and acute renal failure following_ carbon monoxide poisoning:
two case reports with muscle histopathology and enzyme activities, / Clin Toxicol 30:443, 1992.
Penney DG: Hemodynamic response to carbon monoxide, Environ Health Perspect 77:121-130, 1988.
Ernst A, Zibrak JD: Carbon monoxide poisoning, N Engl I Med 330(22):1603-1608, 1998.
Zagami AS, Lethlean AK, Mellick R: Delayed neurological deterioration after carbon monoxide poisoning.
JNeuro240:113-116, 1993.
Aslan S, Karcioglu O, Bilge F, et al: Post interval syndrome after carbon monoxide poisoning, Vet Human
Toxicol 46(4):183-185, 2004.
Crocker PJ, Walker JS: Pediatric carbon monoxide toxicity, I Emerg Med 3(6):443-448, 1985.
78:233-238, 2002.
Goldbaum LR, Ramirez RG, Absalon KB XIll: What is the mechanism of carbon monoxide toxicity? Aviat
Space Environ Med 46(10):1289 -1291, 1975.
Chapter 37 | Carbon Monoxide 487
Gorman D, et al: The clinical toxicology of carbon monoxide, Toxicology 187(1):25-38, 2003.
Okeda R, et al: Comparative study on pathogenesis of selective cerebrallesions in carbon monoxide poison-
ing and nitrogen hypoxia in cats, Acta Neuropathol 56:265-272, 1982.
Pejsak Z, Zmudski J, Wojnicki P: Abortion in sows associated with carbon monoxide intoxication, Vet Rec
162(13):417, 2008.
Piantadosi CA: Carbon monoxide poisoning, N Engl I Med 347(14):1054-1055, 2002.
Rabinowitz PM, Conti LA: Carbon monoxide. In Rabinowitz PM, Conti LA, editors: Human-animal medi-
cine, St Louis, 2010, Saunders.
TakeuchiA,et al: A simple “new? methodto accelerate clearance of carbon monoxide, Am I Respir Crit Care
Med 161(6):1816-1819, 2000.
Tomaszewski C: Carbon monoxide. In Goldfrank LR, editor: Goldfrank's toxicologic emergencies, ed 7,
New York, 2002, McGraw-Hill.
 Tumer M, Esaw M, Clark RJ: Carbon monoxide treated with hyperbaric oxygen: metabolic acidosis as a
predictor of treatment requirements, I Accid Emerg Med 16(2):96-98, 1999.
2002.
Kent M, Creevy KE, Delahunta A: Clinical and neuropathological findings of acute carbon monoxide
toxicity in Chihuahuas following smoke inhalation, I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 46(4):259-264, 2010.
 Kein J: All clear: laws, codes expanding to help prevent caron monoxide tragedies, Occup Health Saf
76(5):82-84, 2007.
United States Environmental Protection Agency: Carbon monoxide, 2008, http://www.epa.gov/iaq/co.html.
CHAPTER
Cholecalciferol
38
Wilson K. Rumbeiha, DVM, PhD, DABVT, DABT
The most common sources of vitamin D toxicosis in small animals are
accidental ingestion of rodenticides containing cholecalciferol and hurman
rmedications containing vitarin D or its analogues.
· Adulterated pet food has been a source of chronic vitarmin D poisoning in dogs.
· A single oral lethal dose of cholecalciferol in a mature dog can be as low as 2
mg/kg (80,0oo IU/kg), and signs can been seen at doses as low as 0.1 mg/kg. A
single minirmum oral toxic dose of calcipotriol or calcipotriene in dogs is as low as
10 mcg/kg body weight and a single oral lethal dose is 65 mcg/kg body weight.
Clinical signs of toxicity can be seen at doses of 2.5 ng/kg of calcitriol. One mcg
vitarmin D3 equals 40 IU.
Clinical signs of vitamin D toxicosis arise from hypercalcemia and involve the
central nervous, muscular, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, endocrine, and renal
systems. They include depression, weakness, and anorexia. As the disease
progresses, vomiting, hematemesis, polyuria, polydipsia, constipation, melena,
and dehydration set in.
Confirmatory tests include serum parathyroid hormone (iPTH), total and ionized
calciun, phosphorus levels, 25(OH)D3 and 1,25(OH),D; levels. In vitamin D
toxicosis, iPTH is suppressed. Anirnals are frequently azotermic. Analysis of bile
and kidney for vitamin D metabolites is also available postmortem.
Treatment may include gastrointestinal decontarmination, reduction of
hypercalcemia using calcitonin or bisphosphonates, and dietary calcium and
phosphorus restriction. Supportive therapy should include fluid therapy.
corticosteroids, phosphate binders, antiemetics, and use of gastrointestinal
protectants.
The prognosis is good if treatment is initiated early before persistent
hypercalcermia, hyperphosphatemia, and dystrophic mineralization set in.
here are two active forms of vitamin D in mammals—the plant-derived ergocalciferol
(vitamin Dz) and the animal-derived cholecalciferol (vitamin D3). Both vitamin D
and vitamin D; are prosteroid hormones.l In addition to these naturally occurring vita-
mins, there are several synthetic analogues of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol (25[OH]D3) and
1,25 dihydroxycholecalciferol (1,25[OH]Ds) that cause effects similar to the corresponding
natural metabolites of vitamin D3.2 When pet owners call with a complaint that their pet
owner about the specific compound and strength.
489
490SECTlON 4 SpecifikcToxicants
Sources
Cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) is naturally synthesized in mammalian skin from its precursor,
and toxicosis from natural oversynthesis of cholecalciferol in mammalian skin has not been
reported to date. A common source of vitamin D toxicosis in small animals is acciden-
tal ingestion of rodenticides containing cholecalciferol as the active ingredient.? Roden-
ticide baits containing cholecalciferol as the active ingredient are sold over the counter.
Some common proprietary names of these rodenticides include Muritan, Mouse-B-Gone
Mouse Killer, Quintox Mouse Seed, Ceva True Grit Rampage, Quintox Rat and Mouse Bait,
and Rampage Rat and Mouse Bait. Ihese products are available in different formulations
(e.g., granules, flakes, tablets, cakes, or briquettes) containing 0.075% cholecalciferol.
The other common source of vitamin D toxicosis in small animals is accidental inges-
tion of human medications.4 Medications containing vitamin D are currently used for
the treatment of a number of human diseases, including hypophosphatemic disorders,
hypoparathyroidism, osteomalacia, osteoporosis, and renal failure. Newly discovered
functions of vitamin D in cell differentiation and immune function have recently ushered
in a new generation of vitamin D medications for prophylactic treatment of cancer and
immunosuppression. For example, Dovonex (calcipotriene or calcipotriol), an analogue of
e yo usaun sun ui sisosd jo puaanl ai o asn auas st "a(Ho)s'
psoriasis petroleum-based creams containing calcipotriene has become a potential source
of vitamin D intoxication in dogs.4 Other vitamin D analogues of similar therapeutic uses
include 1α(OH)D3, 1α(OH)D2, dihydrotachysterol, calcitriol (a 1,25(OH),D; analogue),
and tacalcitol. Some of these vitamin D analogues have potent calcemic and phosphatemic
properties and are potentially lethal when ingested at much smaller doses than the parent
D drugs for inflammatory and immune-mediated disorders will likely increase the poten-
tial for pet exposure, and these drugs may become the major source of vitamin D toxicosis
in pets in the future.
 In the past few years there have been outbreaks of vitamin D poisoning in dogs associ-
ated with feeding of pet foods that had high levels of vitamin D. One case in 2010 involved
dogs that had been fed three Brands of Blue Buffalo pet food that were found to be tainted
with 25-hydroxy vitamin D, (HyD@). This particular brand of vitamin D is not approved
for use in pet food and inadvertently contaminated the pet food as a carryover. However,
inadvertent oversupplementation of pet food with cholecalciferol has also sickened or
killed dogs in the recent past.3l In 1999 there was a recall of DVM Nutri-Balance High
protein dog food and Golden Sun Feeds Hi-Pro Hunter dog food. In February 2006 there
was a recall of ROYAL CANIN Veterinary Diet". Other sources of vitamin D toxicosis
in dogs include iatrogenic oversupplementation of diets in the treatment of dogs with
hypoparathyroidism and ingestion of diets containing high concentrations of vitamin
D, such as fatty fish, eggs, milk, or liver. Vitamin Dz and cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) are
fat soluble. Iherefore, suckling animals, which are more sensitive to vitamin D toxicosis
than adults, are at risk of exposure through milk. To date there has been no report in
dogs or cats of an equivalent form of williams syndrome, an idiopathic form of juvenile
hypercalcemia in human infants characterized by exaggerated production of 25(OH)D;
in the presence of normal dietary vitamin D content. It is not clear at the present time
whether this condition exists in dogs or cats. However, an idiopathic disease in 3- to
10-week-old puppies of several breeds of dogs, characterized histologically by extensive
soft tissue mineralization—-especially of the lungs, stomach, and kidneys—has been rec-
ognized recently. Granulomatous diseases, such as blastomycosis, result in an endoge-
nous increase in 1,25(OH),D; in humans and animals. However, these granulomatous
disease-related hypercalcemias have not been widely reported in small animals. Vitamin
 D-containing plants, such as Solanum malacoxylon and Trisetum flavescens, pose little
risk of toxicosis for pets because of the large amount of plant material a pet has to con-
sume to induce a poisoning. There are also reports in the literature of Cestrum diurnurm
Chapter 38| Cholecalkiferol 491
(e.g., common names jasmine and jessamine) poisoning. This plant may be used as an
ornamental plant and presumably contains 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3.&
Toxic Dose
The toxic effects of vitamin D can result from either acute or chronic exposure. In either
case, the toxic dose varies depending on the biochemical form of vitamin D involved. Vita-
min D, and vitamin D; parent compounds or their metabolites and analogues have differ-
ent potencies and are toxic at different doses. Vitamin D is about 10 times more potent than
vitamin Dz on an equimolar basis with respect to enhancing intestinal calcium absorp-
tion. One international unit (IU) of vitamin D; is equivalent to 0.000025 mg of vitamin
D3. Ihe reported oral LDso for vitamin D; in dogs is 88 mg/kg. Ihe single oral lethal dose
 :(i oos) rta oq   ioqe si op a e u oaao j
'1oey uI g's'saop ul sixo1 aq 01 palroda1 uaaq seY (8x/nI 000'08) 8y/8u 7 se Mo[ se asop
doses around 0.1 mg/kg vitamin D; (4000 IU/kg) can cause mild GIT signs, and doses
greater than 0.5 mg/kg vitamin D; (20,000 IU/kg) can result in hypercalcemia, hyperphos-
phatemia, and renal failure. For newer compounds, such as calcipotriol (calcipotriene), a
potent 1,25(OH),D; analogue, the minimum oral toxic dose in dogs is as low as 10 mcg/kg
body weight, and the single oral lethal dose is 65 mcg/kg BW.7 The therapeutic dose for
a very narrow margin of safety, since hypercalcemias have been reported at that dose.
There is limited information available on the chronic toxic dose of vitamin D com-
pounds in dogs and cats. Ihe daily requirement for vitamin D in dogs as stipulated by
the National Research Council is 22 IU (0.55 mcg)/kg of body weight. Ihe AAFCO min-
oi B/ni oos si spooy sop Aip ui slaaal Q uuen papuauuosan uunuxeu pue uunu!
5000 IU/kg. In terms of metabolizable energy (ME), the AAFCO maximum guidelines for
vitamin D in dog food are 1429 IU/1000 kcal ME. For cats the guidelines recommend a
maximum of 2500 IU/1000 kcal ME. Daily intake of 500 to 1000 mcg cholecalciferol/kg of
Aaam 2a uena jo S Sh go uosatu [eio s'saam g oiz ui shop ui sixoi sm ubtam Apo
for 2 months was toxic to puppies.? A toxic dose for vitamin D in dogs has been reported to
be 100,000 IU/kg diet, dry matter.
 In general, pups are more sensitive to vitamin D toxicosis than adults, and cats are more
sensitive than dogs.3.10.1 Unfortunately, information on the toxic doses of the several vita-
to remember that the toxic dose of vitamin D depends on the specific form of the vitamin
involved. Some of the newer-generation vitamin D compounds, such as the analogues of
1,25(OH)D3, are potent calcemic agents and are potentially lethal at much smaller doses
than the parent vitamin D compounds. Furthermore, animals with predisposing condi-
tions (e.g., renal disease and hyperparathyroidism) or animals ingesting a high calcium
and phosphorus diet are likely more sensitive to vitamin D toxicosis than healthy animals.
Animals with the preexisting diseases listed in Table 38-1 are more susceptible to vitamin
 D toxicosis than normal animals. In addition, puppies and kittens are more sensitive to
vitamin D toxicosis than adult animals, perhaps because young rapidly growing animals
have a higher normal serum total calcium concentration than mature adults. High dietary
calcium and phosphorus levels and dehydration are other factors that predispose to vitamin
D toxicosis. Interestingly, there is a wide individual variation in susceptibility to vitamin
D toxicosis, even among mature dogs, for reasons yet unknown. Consequently, the sever-
toxic dose of cholecalciferol on a body weight basis respond with varying degrees of disease
severity. The causes of individual variations in susceptibility to vitamin D intoxication are
not clear but may include differences in toxicokinetics, which have yet to be explored in
Buuq-q uuea oi punoq paodsunl aie saoqeiau ( u 'uas u 'sies pue sao
protein. It has been shown experimentally that the physiologic activity of vitamin D is a
result of the active unbound metabolites interacting with receptors.30 The serum concen-
tration of free metabolites versus bound metabolites may vary among individual animals
492SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
Table 38-1
Serum Markers in Differential Diagnosis of Vitamin D Toxicosis
and Other Hypercalcemic Disorders in Dogs and Cats
Disease
konized Ca Total P Intact PTH 25(OH)D; 1.25(OH),D;
:Na/K Ratio
Cholecalciferol, vitamin Dz,
←
f
N
N
or 25(OH)D; toxicosis
1,25(OH),D; 0r 1α(OH)D;
↑
↑
↑
N
↑
N
 Dihydrotachysterol, calci-
↑
N
N
N
potriene, and analogues 
Malignancy
↑
N
↑
N
↑
N
Primary
↑
N
N
N
N
hyperparathyroidism
Granulomatous diseases
↑
N
↑
N
(e.g., blastomycosis)
Hypoadrenocorticism
N*
N
N
N
↓
Primary renal failure
N*
N
N
N
*Total serum calcium is increased.
**Not known.
N, Normal; I, increased; I, decreased
and may affect the severity of the disease. Other possible explanations include variations in
numbers of vitamin D receptors in target organs, interindividual differences in biotransfor-
mation (activation and degradation) of vitamin D metabolites, and other unknown factors.
Toxicokinetics
Following ingestion, cholecalciferol is rapidly absorbed and transported in plasma to the
liver by vitamin D-binding protein.12 Vitarmin D-binding protein also transports al vita-
min D metabolites in plasma. In the liver, cholecalciferol is very rapidly metabolized in the
endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria by 25-hydroxylase, a cytochrome P-450 mixed
function oxidase enzyme, to 25(OH)D3, the principal circulating metabolite. In dogs the
normal range of serum 25(OH)D3 concentration is 60 to 215 nmol/L (24-86 ng/mL).13 In
cats the normal range is 65 to 170 nmol/L (26-68 ng/mL).13 Following acute ingestion of
toxic amounts of cholecalciferol, the concentration of 25(OH)D, increases at least 15 to 20
times the normal concentration to 3 to 4 μmol/L within 24 hours.14 The synthesis of 25(OH)
 D, from cholecalciferol in the liver is not regulated and is primarily dependent on substrate
concentration.
This primary circulating metabolite, 25(OH)D, is further metabolized primarily to
1,25(OH),D; (calcitriol) and 24,25(OH),D; in renal proximal convoluted tubule epithelial
cell mitochondria by renal 1α-hydroxylase, also a mixed function oxidase enzyme.s This
step, the synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D3 in the kidney from 25(OH)D, by renal 1α-hydroxylase,
is tightly regulated. Calcitriol is the principal active metabolite of cholecalciferol following
a 'sies pue siop ui oraesaou yo sasop sorosrd io sonoisaud oi amsoxa
normal background serum concentration of 1,25(OH),D; is 20 to 50 pmol/L in the dog.3 In
cholecalciferol toxicosis, this metabolite is increased only approximately three times nor-
mal to 60 to 150 pmol/L, with peak concentrations reached 48 to 96 hours after a single
oral cholecalciferol dose. Because of the tight regulation of its synthesis in the kidneys, the
serum 1,25(OH),D; concentration falls rapidly to normal or subnormal levels within 1 week
of a single oral toxic exposure. In addition to the kidneys, there are other minor extrarenal
sources of 1,25(OH),D in mammals, such as the lymphohematopoietic system16
 The toxicokinetics of parent vitamin D compounds and their metabolites and analogues
has not been widely investigated in dogs and cats. Most of the information on the toxicoki-
netics and metabolism of these compounds is derived from rodent and/or human studies.
Chapter 38 | Cholecalciferol 493
In general cholecalciferol and vitamin Dz parent compounds are lipid soluble and are exten-
sively stored in the adipose, liver, and muscle tissues. Consequently, the half-life of these
parent compounds is measured in months.17 In comparison, the half-life of 25(OH)D, is
15 days, whereas that of 1,25(OH)D; is 4 to 8 hours.18.,9 However, following exposure to
cholecalciferol, the half-life (functional) of 25(OH)D, in the dog is 29 days because the
ongoing metabolism of the parent compound in the liver adds more metabolite to the
pool.14 For similar reasons, the functional half-life of 1,25(OH)D3 following cholecalciferol
exposure is approximately 3 days. Therefore, identification of the biochermical form of vita-
min D involved in each case is important in estimating the duration of therapy required and
netics of chronic vitamin D intoxication in dogs and cats. As such, the minimum chronic
toxic dose of cholecalciferol in dogs and cats is not known and more work is needed in this
area.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Vitamin D plays an important role in calcium homeostasis. It enhances calcium and phos-
phorus absorption from the gut and plays a role in the reabsorption of calcium from the
distal tubules in the kidney.7 Although 90% to 99% of calcium in glomerular filtrate is
reabsorbed independent of vitamin D, both vitamin D and parathyroid hormone (PTH)
mediate the reabsorption of 1% to 10% of the filtered calcium in the distal tubules. Vitamin
D, by enhancing calcium absorption in the gastrointestinal tract and distal renal tubules,
helps to maintain optimum serum calcium concentrations and allows proper bone min-
eralization to proceed. Another major function of vitamin D is to induce mobilization
 of calcium from bone to prevent hypocalcemia, a potentially life-threatening condition
in humans and animals. Calcium plays other vital functions in the body besides skeletal
mineralization, including nerve impulse conduction and muscle function, which are also
impaired in the presence of subnormal serum calcium concentrations.17 Hypocalcemia is
usually compensated by mobilizing calcium from bones if dietary sources are insufficient
to meet the demand. The mobilization of calcium from bones requires both vitamin D and
 PTH, although the actions of the two hormones are independent of each other.'5 Although
the precise mechanisms of bone demineralization are not clear, it is known that vitamin D
 plays an important role in osteoclastic-mediated bone resorption.20
When given in physiologic or pharmacologic doses, the active metabolite of vitamin D
is 1,25(OH),D3. This metabolite binds to an intracellular vitamin D receptor (VDR) within
tional events. In intoxications involving ergocalciferol, cholecalciferol, or medications con-
taining 25(OH)D3, tissues respond to 25(OH)D, not 1,25(OH)D3.18,21 Following ingestion
 of toxic doses of these compounds, the concentration of 25(OH)D, is increased at least
15 times the normal concentration. This is in contrast to the concentration of 1,25(OH),D3,
which is increased only two to three times normal at most. When present in high con-
centrations, 25(OH)D; prevails over 1,25(OH),D, for binding to the VDR and is the pri-
mary cause of biologic effects in target tissues, such as intestines and bone. This explains
why the hypercalcermic effects of cholecalciferol toxicosis persist for weeks after the serum
concentration of 1,25(OH),D; has returned to normal or subnormal concentrations. How-
ever, it is known that exogenous administration of calcitriol up-regulates VDR numbers,
at least in the gut and kidneys.β The biologic activity of calcitriol is proportional to VDR
 density.2 Theoretically, it is possible that target tissue responds more eficiently to physi-
ologic amounts of 1,25(OH)D; and this may result in notable hypercalcemia because of the
increase in receptor density in the course of vitamin D toxicosis.
clinical Signs
Clinical signs of vitamin D toxicosis result from hypercalcemia (and concurrent hyper-
phosphatemia) and involve the central nervous, muscular, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular,
494SECTlON 4 Specifikc Toxicants
and renal systems.310.723 The latent period between the time of exposure and the appear-
 'adxa g ao  ua o  an u ad spuadap suis lu yo a
cases of cholecalciferol intoxication in dogs, clinical signs are usually observed at least 36
to 48 hours after ingestion. However, in intoxications involving 25(OH)D, or 1,25(OH),D;
and their analogues, clinical signs become apparent only 8 to 24 hours after ingestion. The
time lag before the appearance of clinical signs represents the time required for metabolic
activation and for overcoming the regular calcium homeostatic mechanisms.
The earliest clinical signs observed in dogs and cats include depression, weakness, and
anorexia. As the disease progresses, vomiting, polyuria, polydipsia, constipation, and dehy-
dration become apparent. The high calcium ion concentration alters the action of vaso-
pressin on renal tubules, leading to reduced urinary concentrating ability and polyuria.
The specific gravity of urine is hyposthenuric (1.002-1.006). Ihe feces may become dark
(melena) because of gastrointestinal bleeding. Hematemesis is a grave sign that is usually
observed in the more advanced cases. Hematemesis is a result of gastric ulceration, and if
not treated immediately, the animal may die of shock within a few hours. Gastric ulceration
is caused by mineralization of the stomach wall. Calciuria is one of the earliest changes
noted with vitamin D toxicosis, generally preceding hypercalcemia, but is usually missed
because it is not looked for on a routine basis and is difficult to analytically assess. As renal
 failure progresses, calciuria may be armeliorated because calcium clearance is reduced as a
consequence of the reduced glomerular filtration rate. Sometimes bleeding in the lungs may
result in dyspnea. Cardiac signs may include bradycardia and other ventricular arrhyth-
mias. Electrocardiographic changes include shortened QT and prolonged PR intervals. Sei-
zures, although not common, have been reported. When the serum calcium X phosphorus
product (both in mg/dL) exceeds 60 to 70, metastatic mineralization of tissues tends to
occur and this can cause a variety of clinical problems depending on the tissue(s) affected.
Minimum Database
The diagnosis of vitamin D toxicosis is based on a history and clinical signs consistent with
vitamin D exposure. Animal owners should be questioned about the use of cholecalcif-
erol rodenticides or vitamin D medications that may be accidentally accessible to pets. In
live animals, blood samples should be taken to monitor serum total and ionized calcium,
phosphorus, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine levels, which are elevated in vitamin D
toxicosis. The normal range of total blood calcium concentration in a mature dog is about
9.5 to 11.5 mg/dL. However, the normal serum calcium concentration may be as high as
12.5 mg/dL in young, rapidly growing dogs. In vitamin D toxicosis, the total serum calcium
concentration increases to atleast 13 mg/dL, but is usually as high as 15 to 18 mg/dL or greater.
In dogs the normal range of serum ionized calcium is 5.2 to 6.2 mg/dL; this is increased to
6.6 to 8 mg/dL in dogs with vitamin D toxicosis. Total serum phosphorus is increased from
the normal range of 3.5 to 5.5 mg/dL to more than 8 mg/dL in dogs. Often the hyperphos-
phatemia is observed to be elevated up to 12 hours before the serum calcium concentration
become elevated. Urinalysis shows a fixed specific gravity and calciuria.
Confirmatory Tests
In live animals, confirmatory tests include serum intact PTH, ionized calcium, 25(OH)D3,
ae ul tr assaidns s Hid ieiun sisosixo a uena yim seue u a(Ho)s't pue
vitamin D; and 25(OH)D; toxicosis, serum 25(OH)D; is increased at least 15 times, and
1,25(OH)Dis present at normal to subnormal concentrations. An increase in 1,25(OH)D;
aHO) oi oi pasodxa sem euue au le sisaans a(Ho)szu asaiu ou ym au
or 1,25(OH),D3. Unfortunately the competitive protein binding assays currently used for
serum 1,25(OH),D; are unable to detect analogues of 1,25(OH),D3, such as calcipotriene
(Dovonex) and dihydrotachysterol.1β Therefore, intoxications caused by 1,25(OH),D; ana-
logues are difficult to confirm at present because test results for 25(OH)D; and 1,25(OH),D
are normal. Intoxication involving these products should be considered if both total and
Chapter 38 | Cholecalciferol 495
ionized calcium are elevated, serum phosphorus is elevated, intact PTH is suppressed, and
the history suggests possible exposure to these products.
Confirmation of vitamin D intoxications in dogs at necropsy can be challenging. The
current gold standard for confirmation of vitamin D toxicosis is the finding of characteristic
histopathologic lesions, such as mineralization of kidneys, lungs, stomach, atria, and major
blood vessels (e.g., the aorta). Considering that soft tissue mineralization may result from
a number of hypercalcemic disorders, these histologic findings are not pathognomonic.
Bile and kidney can be tested for 25-hydroxycholecalciferol levels and reference values are
available for these matrices. An alternative diagnostic approach is to perform trace min-
eral analysis of the kidney. Increased renal calcium and phosphorus concentrations have
been reported in primary renal disease and in animals with vitamin D, ethylene gly-
col, and soluble oxalate toxicoses. Ihe normal renal calcium concentration in dogs is
50 to 200 ppm on a wet weight basis. In dogs that have died of acute vitamin D toxicosis,
 In comparison, dogs that have died of ethylene glycol toxicosis generally have a much
higher renal calcium concentration, at least 8000 ppm on a wet weight basis. Ihe calcium
to phosphorus ratio of 0.4 to 0.7 in the kidney cortex strongly suggests vitamin D toxico-
sis. In ethylene glycol poisonings, this ratio is often greater than 2.5. In normal dogs this
ratio is less than 0.1. These ratios should be considered as general rules of thumb; excep-
tions to these criteria have been observed and results of these tests are only suggestive
and not confirmatory.
Treatment
Treatment of vitamin D toxicosis depends on how soon postexposure the animal is seen.
 In general, treatment may include gastrointestinal decontamination, reduction of hyper-
calcemia and hyperphosphatemia, dietary calcium and phosphorus restriction, supportive
therapy to ensure adequate hydration to maintain adequate tissue perfusion and urine flow,
and the use of antiemetics.3.10.1723
Gastrointestinal decontamination is recommended if exposure is knowm to have occurred
within the past 6 hours. This involves inducing emesis with apomorphine or 3% hydrogen
peroxide in dogs and cats. Following emesis, activated charcoal should be given followed by
a saline cathartic, such as sodium sulfate (1 g/kg), 20 to 30 minutes later. Ihe saline cathartic
facilitates emptying of the activated charcoal-bound vitamin D from the gastrointestinal
tract. Repeated doses of activated charcoal should be performed to decrease enterohepatic
recirculation of vitamin D; careful monitoring of sodium levels in small breed patients is
recommended. Serum calcium levels (total and ionized) and phosphorus concentrations
should be monitored at the time of admission to establish baseline values and every 24 to
 48 hours during the first 6 days after exposure.
However, because cholecalciferol toxicosis has a slow onset and clinical signs are not
observed until 36 to 48 hours after exposure, usually it is too late for gastrointestinal decon-
tamination to be of any value because absorption is already complete by the time the animal
is brought in for treatment. When evaluating a patient showing clinical signs of vitamin
D toxicosis, treatment should be considered urgent because persistent hypercalcemia,
along with hyperphosphatemia, can be life threatening. Calcitonin has historically been
recommended for the treatment of vitamin D-induced hypercalcemia, although controlled
studies on the effcacy of calcitonin in vitamin D toxicosis in dogs are lacking. The recom-
mended dosage of salmon calcitonin in dogs is 4 to 6 IU given IM or subcutaneously (SC)
Every 6-12 hours until the calcium concentration stabilizes.? Calcitonin therapy is not only
tedious, but is associated with side effects, such as anorexia, anaphylaxis, and emesis, but
also has questionable effectiveness. In practice calcitonin therapy or bisphosphonates (see
below) is usually combined with corticosteroid and diuretic therapy. Corticosteroids sup-
press bone resorption, reduce intestinal calcium absorption, and promote calciuresis by
reducing distal tubular calcium absorption. The recommended dosage of prednisolone is
2 to 6 mg/kg given IM or per os (PO) every 12 hours. For diuresis, loop diuretics are
496SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
preferable, and the dose of furosemide in dogs is 2 to 6 mg/kg, and in cats it is 1to 4 mg/kg
given SC, IV, or IM every 8 to 12 hours or as necessary.
Bisphosphonates (a newer class of specific inhibitors of bone resorption) have proved
efficacious in the treatment of cholecalciferol toxicosis in dogs.25 Pamidronate disodium
(Aredia ) is a drug used for the treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy and Paget disease
in humans. For the treatment of cholecalciferol toxicosis in dogs, pamidronate disodium is
given by slow intravenous infusion at a rate of 1.3 to 2 mg/kg of body weight in 0.9% sodium
chloride over 2 to 4 hours. Two infusions given 4 days apart were sufficient in treating
dronate disodium has the advantage of a long-lasting inhibitory action on bone resorption,
therefore requiring only two infusions for the treatment of cholecalciferol toxicosis in dogs.
Total serum calcium and blood urea nitrogen should be monitored 48 and 96 hours after
the last infusion. Excessive use of pamidronate disodium should be avoided because it has
the potential to confound nephrotoxicity. Dietary calcium restriction may be beneficial, but
was not necessary when pamidronate disodium was used in test studies.
Supportive therapy in animals with vitamin D toxicosis should include adequate
hydration using a 0.9% saline infusion (2-3 times maintenance) to enhance calcium
excretion and to ensure adequate tissue perfusion and urine flow. Dehydration con-
founds hypercalcemia because it causes reduced glomerular fltration. Dietary calcium
restriction is recommended to reduce gastrointestinal calcium uptake. Antiemetics such
 as maropitant in dogs (1 mg/kg SC q24hr) or ondansetron in dogs and cats (0.1-0.2 mg/kg
IV, PO q6-12hr) may be required because, if not checked, emesis may cause complica-
tions, such as electrolyte and acid-base imbalances. The recommended dosage for meto-
clopramide is 0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg IM or IV every 8 hours. Treatment for gastrointestinal
ulceration should include use of antacids (e.g., H, blockers, omeprazole), gastrointestinal
protectants, such as sucralfate, and gut rest. The recommended dosage of magnesium
hydroxide is 5 to 10 mL/kg PO every 4 to 6 hours; for sucralfate, the total dosage is 0.5 to
1 g PO every 8 to 12 hours in dogs (0.25 g in cats). Orally administered phosphate binders
such as aluminum or magnesium hydroxide, can help lower serum phosphorus levels.
 Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine should be monitored periodically throughout the
course of treatment. Radiographs can be used as a prognostic tool—evidence of sof tissue
calcification imparts a poor prognosis.
Prognosis
The prognosis is good if treatment is initiated early before hypercalcemia, hyperphosphate-
mia, and dystrophic mineralization set in. If treatment is initiated after severe hypercalce-
mia or hyperphosphatemia has already occurred, prognosis is guarded to poor. Persistent
severe hypercalcemia causes disruption of tubular basement membranes, which prevents
epithelial cell regeneration. The animal may die of irreversible renal failure. Lung miner-
alization is also a consequence of persistent calcemia and phosphatemia and may result
in hemorrhage. Death may result from dyspnea. Ihe prognosis is grave for animals that
have hematemesis. Hematemesis usually signals the terminal phase of the disease, indi-
cating that in addition to renal failure and lung mineralization, severe gastric ulceration
has occurred. Anemia and hypovolemia resulting from hematemesis confound renal and
respiratory failure. Mineralization of the heart may lead to cardiac failure.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
 Dehydration is a frequent finding at necropsy. Ihe stormach is usually ermpty because the
animal has been either vomiting and/or anorexic. In advanced cases, the stomach contents
may be bloody because of severe gastric ulceration and bleeding. The gastric mucosa is usu-
ally swollen and hyperemic, and ulceration is obvious.26 Grossly, kidneys may look normal
or may have a mottled appearance. The lungs may look normal, edematous, or hemor-
rhagic. The urinary bladder may contain clear dilute urine.
Chapter 38 | Cholecalciferol 497
The major histologic findings of cholecalciferol intoxication include mineralization of
the kidneys, heart (particularly the atria), stomach wall, lungs, and major arteries (e.g.-
aorta). In the kidney, mineralization frequently involves the proximal convoluted tubules,
blood vessels, and glomerulus.26.27 This results in epithelial cell necrosis and exfoliation.
Mineralized cellular debris is present along the entire length of the uriniferous tubules.
In the glomerulus, mineralization involves the mesangium and the glomerular capsule.
 In the stomach, mineralization involves the smooth muscles and the lamina propria.
Necrosis and erosion of the mucosal epithelium of the stomach wall are evident, and the
stomach wall is usually congested. In the lungs, mineralization, hemorrhage, and thick-
ening of the alveolar septa are present.ll In the major blood vessels, such as the aorta,
mineralization usually involves the smooth muscles. There is intimal proliferation and
 subintimal edema with separation of elastic and collagen fibers. In the heart there is myo-
cardial degeneration.
Differential Diagnoses
The differential diagnosis of vitamin D toxicosis from other causes of hypercalcemia is
summarized in Table 38-1. Ihe major differential diagnoses of vitamin D toxicosis in dogs
and cats are hypercalcemic diseases, such as pseudohyperparathyroidism in which PTH-
like proteins are produced ectopically in neoplasia, primary hyperparathyroidism, acute or
chronic renal failure, granulomatous diseases, pheochromocytoma, osteolytic lesions, and
hypoadrenocorticism.18.28.29 Lymphosarcoma and anal sac apocrine gland adenocarcinoma
are the most common neoplastic diseases associated with hypercalcemia in dogs.24.28 Pal-
pation of lymph nodes may help rule out neoplasia. Lymph node enlargement may signal
the presence of a neoplastic condition. Primary renal disease can be confirmed by ruling
out all other possible causes of hypercalcemia (see Table 38-1). Hypercalcemia and tissue
mineralization in the absence of increased serum 25(OH)D, or 1,25(OH),D; metabolites
is suggestive of primary renal disease. The serum sodium-potassium ratio is decreased in
hypoadrenocorticism but normal in vitamin D toxicosis.28 Granulomatous diseases, such
as blastomycosis, are usually associated with elevated serum 1,25(OH),D; levels because
of the endogenous synthesis of this hormone by the granulomas. Elevated intact PTH in
serum characterizes primary hyperparathyroidism. Primary hyperparathyroidism in dogs
is especially prevalent in the Keeshond breed.29 Other diseases or conditions that cause
hypercalcemia in humans and may do the same in small animals include immobilization,
juvenile hypercalcemia, thiazide diuretics, lithium, estrogens, antiestrogens, testosterone,
and vitamin A toxicosis.
References
1. Host RL, Reinhardt TA: Vitamin D metabolism. In Feldman D, Glorieux FH, Pike JW, editors: Vitamin
D, San Diego, 1997, Academic Press.
Glorieux FH, Pike JW, editors: Vitamin D, San Diego, 1997, Academic Press.
3. Dorman DC, Beasley VR: Diagnosis of and therapy for cholecalciferol toxicosis. In Kirk RW, editor:
Current veterinary therapy X, small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
4. Campbell DD: Calcipotriol poisoning in dogs, Vet Rec 141(1):27-28, 1997.
5. Tylor AB, Stern PH, Bell NH: Abnormal regulation of circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D in the Williams
syndrome, N Engl I Med 306:972-975, 1982.
6. Qarke ML, Harvey DG, Humphreys DJ: Vitamins. In Clarke ML, Harvey DG, Humphreys DJ, editors:
Veterinary toxicology, ed 2, London, 1981, Baillere Tindall.
7. Volmer P: Personal communication, 1998.
8. Spangler WL, Gribble DH, Lee TC:Vitamin D intoxication and the pathogenesis of vitamin D nephropa-
thy in the dog, Am I Vet Res 40:73-83, 1979.
1975, Williamms & Wikins.
10. Moore FM, Kudisch M, Richter K, et al: Hypercalcemia associated with rodenticide poisoning in three
cats, I A Vet Med Assoc 193:1099-1100, 1988.
498SECTION4SpecificToxicants
11. Palmer N: Vitamin D poisoning. In Jubb KVF, Kennedy PC, Palmer N, editors: ed 4, Pathology of domestic
animais, vol 1, San Diego, 1993, Academic Press.
12. Haussler M, McCain TA: Basic and clinical concepts related to vitamin D metabolism and action, N Engl
IMed 297:1041-1050, 1977.
13. Refsal K: Personal communication, 2010.
Ds-induced toxicosis in dogs, Am I Vet Res 60:1092-1097, 1999.
15. Haussler M, McCain TA: Basic and clinical concepts related to vitamin D metabolism and action, N Eng!
JMed 297:974-983, 1977.
16. Mawer EB, Hayes ME: Renal and extrarenal synthesis of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D, Prog Endocrinol
87:382-386, 1992.
17. Drazner FH: Hypercalcemia in the dog and cat, I Am Vet Med Assoc 178:1252-1256, 1981.
Glorieux FH, Pike JW, editors: Vitamin D, San Diego, 1997, Academic Press.
19. DeLuca HF: The vitamin D story. A collaborative effort of basic science and clinical medicine, FASEB J
2:224-236,1988
20. Suda T, Takahashi N, Abe E: Role of vitamin D in bone resorption, I Cell Biochem 49:53-58, 1992.
21. Hughes MR, Baylink DJ, Jones PG, et al: Radioligand receptor assay for 25 hydroxy D/D; and 1,25-
dihydroxyvitamin D/D: an application to hypervitaminosis D, I Clin Invest 58:61-70, 1976.
22. Walters MR, Rosen DM, Norman AW,et al: 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D receptors in an established bone
cell line. Correlation with biochemical responses, I Biol Chem 257:7481-7484, 1982.
JAm Vet Med Assoc196:1265-1268, 1990.
 e s   a aa     a   
quences, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 16:1299-1324, 1994.
25. Rumbeiha WK,Kruger JM, Fitzgerald SF,et al: The use of pamidronate disodium for treatment ofvitamin
ticians Meeting, Louisville, 1997, Kentucky. (Abstract).
26. Gunther R,Felice IL, Nelson KR,et al: Toxicity of vitamin D rodenticide to dogs, JAm Vet Med Assoc
193(2):211-214, 1988.
27. Roedner BL,Darr CA, Williamson J: Chronic nephrosis associated with hypervitaminosis D in a
9-month-old bitch, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 79(2):205-214, 1984.
28. Kruger JM, Osbome CA: Canine and feline hypercalcemic nephropathy. Part II. Causes and conse-
quences, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 16:1445-1459, 1994.
29. Dorman D, Osweiler GD: Vitamin D toxicity. In Tilley LP, Smith FWK, MacMurray AC, editors: The
5-minute veterinary consult, Baltimore, 1997, Williams & Wilkins.
30. Bouillon R, Van Assche FA, van Baelen H, et al: Influence of vitamin D binding protein on serum con-
centration of1,25-dihydroxyvitamin Ds: significance ofthe free 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin Ds concentration,
J Clin Invest 67:589-596, 1981.
31. Rumbeiha W, Morrison J: A review of Class I and Class II pet food recalls involving chemical contami-
nants from 1996 to 2008, JMT 7(1):60-66, 2011.
CHAPTER
Christmastime Plants
39
Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant, DVM, PhD, DABVT, DABT
·Amaryllis (Hippeastrum) ingestion can lead to vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia,
and excessive salivation in pets
Christrmas cactus (Schlumbergera truncata), rmistletoe (Phoradendron spp.), and
 English holly (llex aquifolium) ingestions and oral exposures to a wide variety
of evergreen trees can cause rmild to rmoderate gastrointestinal upset (vormiting.
diarrhea, depression, and anorexia).
.Vomiting, depression and lethargy, and diarrhea are the most comrmonly
reported problems seen in pets ingesting Christmas kalanchoe (Kalanchoe
blossfeldiana). With excessive exposures, cardiac abnormalities may be observed.
 Poinsettias (Euphorbia pulcherrima) are highly overrated as to their toxicity. Signs
of most exposures are very mild and self-limiting and include contact irritation,
hypersalivation, and vomiting.
 Oral exposures to rosermary (Rosmarinus officinalis) can lead to gastrointestinal
signs, hypotension, renal disease, and seizures.
hristmastime brings with it a large assortment of plants that are used for decorative
purposes throughout the holiday season. Because of their novelty, when they seasonally
appear in the house, and because these plants are kept primarily indoors,there is increased
potential for household pets to be exposed to them. Both dogs and cats have been known
to chew on houseplants, with the primary difference between these two species being the
amount of plant material ingested. Although cats often only nibble on a few leaves, many
dogs will devour the entire plant, including potting soil, if the opportunity arises. Other
indoor pets, such as birds and rabbits, may similarly be exposed to these decorative plants.
Fortunately, few of the plants common to the Christmas holiday have the potential to cause
serious or life-threatening signs in pets if ingested, and the majority are generally expected
to cause at most mild gastrointestinal upset.
When dealing with an exposure of a pet to any plant, it is important to determine the
identity of the plant (ideally, genus and species name) and whether any plant care products
's ro ud ai in pade uaaq a au (saiiasu saisas aieiasa)
Amaryllis (Hippeastrum spp.)
Sources
Amaryllis (Hippeastrum spp.; Color Plate 39-1) is a popular Christmastime plant, native
to South America, which blooms from late December until early June. The large blossoms
occur in a variety of solid, striped, or variegated colors ranging from white to salmon to red.
499
500SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
Mechanism of Toxicity
Amaryllis and other members of the Amaryllidaceae family contain phenanthridine alka-
loids, such as lycorine and tazetine. The alkaloids are primarily concentrated within the bulb
and leaves, where they can be present in concentrations up to 0.5%. Lesser amounts of alka-
loids are present in the bulbs and flowers. Lycorine, the principal alkaloid responsible for
dinical effects, is a centrally acting emetic. In dogs, lycorine acts primarily upon neurokinin-1
receptors, with lesser involvement of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) receptors.2 Various other
alkaloids found in amaryllis have cholinergic, analgesic, hypotensive, and cytotoxic effects. In
although ingestion of parts of the bulb may lead to more severe signs.1.3
Toxic Dose and Toxicokinetics
Studies on lycorine in dogs indicated that subcutaneous dosages of 0.5 to 2 mg/kg body
weight were sufficient to cause nausea and vomiting in a dose-dependent fashion; at 2 mg/kg,
100% of dogs vomited.4 The oral bioavailability of lycorine in dogs is 40%. Clinical effects of
nausea and vomiting lasted less than 2.5 hours after a single parenteral exposure, but would
 likely last longer if bulb material was ingested and remained in the gastrointestinal tract.4
clinical Signs
Mild to moderate vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, and hypersalivation are the most common
signs seen when animals ingest leaves, flowers, or small amounts of amaryllis bulb.2 More
severe gastrointestinal upset may be manifested by restlessness, tremors, or dyspnea. Less
commonly, hypotension, sedation, or seizures may occur, especially if large amounts of
bulb material have been ingested.3 In humans asthma has been associated with exposure to
amar yllis, but this has not been reported in small animals.5
Minimum Database
Because protracted vomiting and/or diarrhea may result in dehydration and electrolyte
abnormalities, animals showing severe or prolonged gastrointestinal upset should have their
hydration and electrolyte status monitored. Hepatopathy has occasionally been reported
to be associated with amaryllis ingestion,′ so measurement of baseline and 72-hour liver
enzyme values may also be indicated in more severe cases. Complete evaluation of hema
tologic and serum biochemical values is usually prudent for aged animals or those with
preexisting health problems.
Treatment
Decontamination via emesis and/or administration of activated charcoal should be consid-
ered with ingestion of large amounts of leaf material or when parts of the bulb have been
   s    s    
taining the animal with nothing per os for a few hours to allow the stomach to rest. Moderate
to severe or persistent vomiting may necessitate the use of antiemetics and/or gastroin-
testinal protectants. In a study of lycorine-induced vomiting in beagle dogs, maropitant (a
neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist) completely blocked vomiting when administered before
lycorine administration, whereas ondansetron (a 5-HT, receptor antagonist) significantly
reduced but did not prevent, lycorine-induced vomiting.2 Other antiemetics such as diphen-
hydramine, scopolamine, and metoclopramide did not effectively block lycorine-induced
vomiting. Based on this study, maropitant appears to be the antiemetic of choice, followed
by ondansetron, in managing severe vomiting caused by ingestion of lycorine-containing
plant material. Intravenous fluid therapy and correction of electrolyte abnormalities may be
required in severe cases. Seizures, should they occur, can usually be managed by the use of
diazepam or barbiturates to effect.
Prognosis
asan aensn suis pue oo aran si sisouond an usatui ssee yo sases iso u
within 24 hours. Ingestion of large amounts of bulb material or ingestion of amaryllis by
Chapter 39 | Christmastime Plants 501
animals with prior health conditions may result in more severe signs or prolongation of the
course of the toxicosis.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
 No significant gross or histopathologic lesions have been reported in association with ama-
ryllis ingestion in small animals.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for the gastrointestinal upset caused by amaryllis ingestion could
include ingestion of other gastrointestinal irritants (e.g., other plants, arsenic, lead, zinc,
zinc phosphide poisoning), bacterial or viral gastroenteritis (e.g., parvoviral enteritis), and
pancreatitis.
Christmas Cactus (Schlumbergera truncata)
Sources
Christmas cactus (Schlumbergera fruncafa; Color Plate 39-2), also known as crab's claw cactus
is a member of the cactus family that is native to the jungles of Brazil.6 These popular cacti
have flattened, spineless branches tipped with flowers that range in color from red to pink,
white, yellow, or orange.
Mechanism of Toxicity
 In humans exposure to Christmas cactus has occasionally been associated with type 1
hypersensitivity, resulting in urticaria and rhinoconjunctivitis.7 However, in dogs and
cats, the primary clinical effects are caused by irritation of the gastrointestinal tract from
ingested leaves.6
Clinical Signs
Clinical signs following ingestion of Christmas cactus include vomiting (with or without
blood), diarrhea (with or without blood), depression, and anorexia.6.& In cats ataxia has
occasionally been reported as well.8 These signs are generally mild and rarely require more
than withholding of food and water to allow the digestive tract to recover. Aged animals or
requiring veterinary intervention, including the use of antiemetics or antispasmodics, and
correcting any hydration or electrolyte abnormalities.
Minimum Database
In most cases of Christmas cactus ingestion, there is little need for evaluation of clinical
laboratory values because signs are generally mild and transient. Animals showing more
than mild signs should have clinical laboratory values evaluated to rule out other potential
causes for the clinical signs.
Prognosis
The prognosis for complete recovery following ingestion of Christmas cactus is excellent in
most cases, with signs often subsiding within a few hours of ingestion.6
Gross and Histologic Lesions
No specific lesions would be expected with ingestion of Christmas cactus.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for the clinical signs produced by ingestion of Christmas cactus
include dietary indiscretion and other causes of mild, self-limiting gastrointestinal upset.
Signs that are persistent or especially severe should lead the clinician to reevaluate the animal
to rule out other potential causes of gastrointestinal upset.
502SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Christmas Trees
Sources
A large variety of evergreen trees are sold for use as Christmas trees in the United States.
Generally the broad categories of trees that are most commonly used as Christmas trees
include the firs (Abies spp., Pseudotsuga menziesi), pines (Pinus spp., Color Plate 39-3),
cypresses (Cupress spp.), spruces (Picea spp.), and cedars (huniperus spp. and Cedrus spp.).
Christmas trees are most commonly cut before being brought indoors, although occasionally
live trees with root-balls will be used as Christmas trees, with the trees planted outdoors
after the holiday is over. Indoor pets may ingest needles, cones, branches, or bark from the
trees. Cut trees are usually placed in a receptacle into which water is placed, and pets may
also be exposed to sap and soluble plant components by drinking the water in the recep-
tacle. (A word about commercial Christmas tree preservatives: These products usually are
composed of small amounts of fertilizer and dextrose and are in themselves unlikely to
produce more than mild gastric upset if ingested from the water receptacle. However, the
potential exists for bacterial or fungal growth over time if the water-fertilizer substance is
not routinely changed and could result in more severe gastroenteritis if the contaminated
where an indoor cat succumbed to copper-induced hepatic failure following drinking the
growth).
Mechanism of Toxicity
The seed cones from some species of huniperus have been used as food by wildlife and
humans, and seed cones and foliage from other huniperus species have been used medici-
nally for their diuretic and uterine stimulant effects.l Juniper berries contain approximately
 0.5% to 1.5% essential oils (primarily α-pinene), whereas the leaf of junipers contain approx-
imately 0.25% essential oils (primarily sabinene).2 Needles, branches, and bark of many of
the evergreens used as Christmas trees contain monoterpenes and diterpenes and a variety
of essential oils. Some of the terpenes and essential oils have been demonstrated to produce
fetal deaths and malformations in laboratory rodents. In livestock, ingestion of green or
dry needles, bark, or budding branches of various evergreen plants has been associated with
stillbirths, abortions, and other reproductive disorders.' Reproductive effects in livestock
In small animals, where relatively small amounts of evergreen material might be ingested
and chronic ingestion is unlikely, reproductive effects should not be expected. Concen-
trated essential oils of a variety of evergreens (e.g., thujone from cedar oil) have been shown
to cause CNS effects, including seizures in animals, but exposure to the level of essential
oils in Christmas tree material is unlikely to cause significant CNS effects in pets.
The mechanisms of action for the majority of the constituents of Christmas tree ever-
greens are not known. Some Juniperus species contain podophyllotoxin, which binds
tubulin, resulting in arrest of cell division in metaphase and that may contribute to the
teratogenic and reproductive disorders seen in livestock ingesting these plants. Some vola-
tile oils in evergreens have been demonstrated to induce hepatic P-450 enzymes, which
can alter xenobiotic metabolism.12 In small animals, ingestion of plant material would be 
expected to cause gastrointestinal upset, either through mechanical irritation or irritation
from terpenes or essential oils. Rarely, ingestion of large quantities of evergreen needles,
bark, or cones might result in gastrointestinal foreign body obstruction.
Clinical Signs
In small animals,the most common clinical signs expected with ingestion of evergreen tree
material are vomiting, anorexia, abdominal pain, and depression (American Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals [ASPCA] Animal Poison Control Center, unpublished
data). Some varieties of evergreens have sharp needles and/or cones, which may cause
mechanical trauma to mucous membranes of the alimentary tract. In most cases clinical
Chapter 39 | Christmastime Plants 503
signs are expected to be mild and self-limiting, although animals with preexisting health
problems may be at increased risk for complications, such as dehydration or electrolyte
imbalances. Typical signs of gastrointestinal foreign body obstruction (e.g., abdominal dis-
comfort and persistent vomiting) may occur following ingestion of large quantities of plant
material.
Minimum Database
evaluation is rarely necessary, although monitoring of hydration and electrolyte status is
recommended in animals with preexisting health problems. Animals with severe or pro
obstruction and other potential causes of vomiting (e.g., pancreatitis, liver disease, renal
disease).
Treatment
In most cases clinical signs associated with ingestion of Christmas tree material are self-
limiting and require little treatment beyond withholding food and water to rest the gas-
trointestinal tract. Antiemetics would be indicated for severe or protracted vomiting, and
is evidence of mechanical mucosal injury. Correction of hydration and/or electrolyte abnor-
malities via the use of crystalloid fluid therapy might be required in rare instances. Treatment
of foreign body obstruction (e.g., surgical or endoscopic removal of plant material) might be
Prognosis
The prognosis for animals ingesting Christmas tree material is very good, and most signs
are expected to be mild and self-limiting. Animals having more severe or protracted signs
should be worked up for other potential causes of gastrointestinal distress.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Other than potential mechanical damage to oral, pharyngeal, and gastric mucosa, no sig-
nificant lesions are expected from ingestion of Christmas trees by pets.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for ingestion of Christmas tree material would include other causes
obstruction, infectious gastroenteritis, and neoplasia.
Holly (llex aquifolium)
Sources
Hlex aquifolium (Color Plate 39-4), also known as Christmas or English holly, is a popular
holiday ornamental plant prized for its shiny green, spiny leaves and bright red berries.As
with other Christmas plants, animals that live indoors are at increased risk of exposure to
these plants.
Mechanism of Toxicity
 In addition to mechanical damage from the spiny leaves, holly contains a variety of poten-
tially injurious substances within the leaves and berries, including saponins, triterpenes,
polyphenols, methylxanthines, and cyanogens.6.9 Fortunately the latter two substances do
leaf extracts of holly were lethal when injected into mice, but fruit extracts caused no toxic
effects in mice.? The primary toxic effects of holly ingestion are owing to gastrointestinal
irritation from the saponins.
504SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Ingestion of holly in small animals generally causes no more than mild to moderate
Apoq uaiaoy un isan Ae saneal go siumoe ahiel jo uonsanun g'lasdn [eusanuoiss
obstruction, although this is not a common occurrence.
clinical Signs
In dogs and cats, the most common signs of holly ingestion are hypersalivation, vomiting.
anorexia, diarrhea, head shaking, and smacking of the lips.6 Mechanical injury to the oral
mucosa from the leaves is also possible, resulting in mild oral ulceration or lacerations.
Foreign body obstruction caused by ingestion of a very large number of leaves could lead to
more severe gastrointestinal signs.
Minimum Database
Because signs from ingestion of holly leaves and berries are expected to be mild, laboratory
evaluation is rarely necessary, although monitoring of hydration and electrolyte status is
recommended in animals with preexisting health problems. Animals with severe or pro-
tracted vomiting should receive a complete laboratory workup to rule out foreign body
obstruction and other potential causes of vomiting (e.g., pancreatitis, renal disease, liver
disease).
Treatment
Most cases of holly ingestion can be managed at home. In cases in which large amounts
of leaves and berries have been ingested, bulking the stomach (e.g., bread) and inducing
emesis might be recommended to minimize development of more severe vomiting later.
Symptomatic animals may be managed by instructing owners to withhold food and water
for 1 to 2 hours to allow the stomach to settle, and gradually reintroducing water, and then
food. Animals that appear to have oral discomfort (e.g., lip smacking, head shaking) may
find relief if the mouth is rinsed with small amounts of water.6 Antiemetics, although rarely
necessary, may be used in cases in which there is protracted vomiting. Animals display-
potential causes or the presence of foreign body obstruction. Intravenous fluid therapy
would be indicated in cases in which protracted vomiting and/or diarrhea have resulted in
hydration or electrolyte abnormalities.
Prognosis
The prognosis for animals ingesting holly leaves and/or berries is excellent, with most signs
resolving quickly. Animals with prior health issues or those with foreign body obstruction
may have a more protracted clinical course.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
 Other than potential mechanical damage to oral, pharyngeal, and gastric mucosa, no sig-
nificant lesions are expected from ingestion of holly by pets.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for the clinical signs produced by ingestion of holly include dietary
indiscretion and other causes of mild, selflimiting gastrointestinal upset. Signs that are
persistent or especially severe should lead the clinician to reevaluate the animal to rule out
foreign body or other potential causes of gastrointestinal upset unrelated to holly ingestion.
Kalanchoe (Kalanchoe blossfeldiana)
Sources
Kalanchoe blossfeldiana (Color Plate 39-5), also known as Christmas kalanchoe and flaming
Katy, is a member of the Crassulaceae family and a native of Madagascar.' Many Kalanchoe
species have been introduced in the United States and grow wild in the South or are cultivated
Chapter39 |ChristmastimePlants505
as landscaping or houseplants. Christmas kalanchoes have bright, vivid flowers ranging from
white to orange-gold to red and can be induced to bloom in the winter.
Toxic Dose
All members of Kalanchoe are toxic, and losses to livestock occur in South Africa and Aus-
tain the highest levels of cardiotoxic compounds compared with stems, roots, or leaves.13
Dogs are reported to be particularly sensitive to the cardiotoxic effects of Kalanchoe. Toxic
doses of Kaianchoe spp. other than K. blossfeldiana have been determined for livestock and
 birds, but not for small animals. Death was reported in an iguana that ingested an entire
K. blossfeldiana plant.'
Mechanism of Toxicity
 The primary toxic principles of Kalarchoe spp. are cardiotoxic bufadienolides that are pres-
shae srxonoiien aes al oi paiean aie spumodo asaun rsueid al jo shed ie un sa
responsible for toxicity of Bufo spp. toads and have a mechanism of action similar to digoxin.
Bufadienolides inhibit Na-K adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) activity in the myocardial
cell membrane, increasing intracellular sodium and decreasing intracellular potassium,
which results in reduction of the normal membrane resting potential.13.14 Normal electrical
conduction is inhibited, and there is a decrease in the ability of the myocardium to act as a
pacemaker. Ultimately complete loss of normal myocardial electrical function may lead to
asystole. Hyperkalemia occurs, especially in severe toxicosis.
Clinical Signs
rhea.l Diarrhea, which may be bloody, is reportedly the most consistent sign in livestock.
Cardiac abnormalities include bradycardia, various arrhythmias, and heart block and are
manifested by weakness, dyspnea, collapse, and death. Neurologic signs such as nystagmus,
delirium, tetany, and mild seizures have been reported in dogs following Kalanchoe inges-
tion.'3 A review of cases from the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center indicated that
the most conmon signs in dogs and cats ingesting Kalanchoe spp. were vomiting (57%),
depression and/or lethargy (42%), and diarrhea (29%) (ASPCA Animal Poison Control
Center, unpublished data). Other signs included weaknes, dyspnea, anorexia, tachycardia,
and vocalization. No deaths were reported in dogs or cats following Kalanchoe ingestion.
Minimum Database
Animals having clinical signs following Kalanchoe ingestion should have the heart rate and
rhythm, blood pressure, and electrolyte status closely monitored. Hyperkalemia is a com-
mon occurrence in cardiac glycoside toxicosis as a result of the shifting of potassium out
of cells. Serum chemistry analysis should be performed to determine the status of liver and
kidney function, and renal function should be monitored throughout the toxicosis because
hypotension may lead to renal injury. Hyperglycemia has been reported in Kalanchoe intox-
ication, so monitoring of blood glucose is recommended.'
Confirmatory Tests
Immunoassays for digoxin or digitoxin cross-react with plant-derived cardiac glycosides.15
Therefore these assays can be used to aid in confirming a diagnosis of Kalanchoe intoxi-
cation, provided animals have had no concomitant exposure to other cardiac glycosides
(e.g., digoxin). However, serum levels may not necessarily correlate to the degree of toxicity.15
 Most human hospitals have the capability to run these tests on a 'stat" basis if necessary.
Treatment
Asymptomatic patients should be decontaminated (emesis and activated charcoal) and
monitored for development of gastrointestinal signs. Animals developing more than mild,
transient vomiting and/or diarrhea should be brought to a veterinarian for evaluation of
506SECTION4SpecificToxicants
cardiac and electrolyte status. Gastrointestinal signs should be managed as necessary, and
ean on ueiod si i os iea ues seuaue seipie pansu aq pous Adeal pi
the arrhythmia present; atropine may be helpful for bradyarrhythmias, and beta-blockers
may be used for tachyarrhythmias. Correction of electrolyte abnormalities, especially
hyperkalemia, is important; sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate) may be used to aid
in reducing serum potassium levels.16 Management of pulmonary edema, renal failure, asci-
tes, or other complications secondary to cardiac failure may be required.
situations where serum potassium exceeds 5 mEq/L in the face of severe intoxication and/
or where severe arrhythmias that are poorly responsive to therapy are present.17 These anti-
body fragments bind the cardiac glycosides within the bloodstream, then the glycoside-
Fab complexes are removed via glomerular filtration. The use of d-Fab in cardiac glycoside
intoxication can result in rapid improvement of cardiovascular status, but recrudescence of
signs may occur because of redistribution of the remaining glycoside in the body, requiring
additional treatment. Further, animals with impaired renal function may experience relapse
as dissociation of the unexcreted glycoside-Fab complexes occurs. Serum potassium levels
may drop dramatically following administration of d-Fab because of reactivation of the
Na-K ATPase pump, so close monitoring of potassium levels is required. Dosing of d-Fab is
generally based on digoxin levels, and there is a formula for determining the recommended
dose. In veterinary cases, digoxin levels may not be readily obtainable, and it can be cost
prohibitive to administer the initial five vials that are recommended in human cases when
digoxin levels are not available. Therefore in these cases it is recommended that one to two
vials be used initially and the effects observed.17 The primary drawback to d-Fab is its cost,
which can be several hundred dollars per vial.
Prognosis
Kalanchoe is generally good. Animals developing severe gastrointestinal signs are at risk for
cardiovascular effects, and the prognosis in animals displaying significant cardiac arrhyth-
mias and/or hyperkalemia is guarded.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Lesions from animals dying from Kalanchoe ingestion are reflective of the cardiac failure.
Gross cardiac lesions may be unapparent or mild and may consist of scattered ecchymotic
hemorrhages on the epicardium and pale foci within the myocardium. Histopathologic
examination of these foci reveals areas of degenerating myofbers, myocardial necrosis,
edema, and mononuclear cell infiltrates. Other lesions of cardiac failure, such as pulmo-
nary edema or ascites, may be present depending onthe duration and severity of the clinical
effects.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for the gastrointestinal signs from Kalanchoe include ingestion of other
tinal irritants, foreign body obstruction, pancreatitis, and infectious gastroenteritis. Differential
diagnoses for the cardiovascular effects include ingestion of other cardiac glycoside-containing
products (e.g., pharmaceuticals, plants, toads), other cardiac drugs (e.g., beta-blockers), sym-
Mistletoe (Phoradendron spp.)
Sources
Mistletoes are worldwide in distribution, but it is the American Christmas mistletoe
(Phoradendron tomentosurm) that is used as a holiday decoration.? European mistletoe
(Viscur spp.) is used in a variety of folk-medicine products and has been investigated
Chapter 39 | Christmastime Plants 507
pharmacologically for its immunomodulating properties,α but is not commonly used as
holiday decoration in the United States. All members of Viscaceae are semiparasitic plants
that live on tree branches, and toxicity is thought to vary with the type of host tree on which
a particular plant grows.! In general the American mistletoes are considered less toxic than
the European varieties.
Toxic Dose
Although mistletoe contains a variety of potentially toxic compounds, serious poisonings
from mistletoe appear uncommon. Several studies of Phoradendron ingestion in humans
revealed that the majority of cases remained asymptomatic, with mild gastric upset being
the primary clinical finding in humans ingesting leaves, berries, or extracts of the plant.19
Instances of more serious effects, including hypotension, collapse, ataxia, seizures, and
of animals to Phoradendron leaves or berries have not been reported to be associated with
serious clinical signs.18-20
Mechanism of Toxicity
Mistletoes contain glycoprotein lectins that can inhibit protein synthesis, leading to cell
death; although these lectins are of the same class as the very toxic ricin found in castor
beans (Ricinus communis), thelectins in Phoradendronare muchless toxic. Phoratoxins and
ligatoxin A found in mistletoe are small proteins that can act as cardiac depressants, causing
hypotension, bradycardia, and decreased contractility. Other potential pharmacologic and/
or toxicologic agents present in mistletoe include various alkaloids, gamma aminobutyric
acid, phenols, phenethylamines, phenylpropanoids, polysaccharides, and flavonoids; how-
Clinical Signs
The most common effects seen in animals ingesting mistletoe are vomiting and depression.6
Diarrhea and hypotension may also be seen, although the latter would not be expected to
be a common finding. Serious clinical signs are not expected, and most signs are expected
to be mild and self-limiting. Fluid and electrolyte abnormalities could develop in animals
with protracted vomiting or with prior health problems.
Minimum Database
Because signs from ingestion of mistletoe leaves and berries are expected to be mild, lab-
oratory evaluation is rarely necessary, although monitoring of hydration and electrolyte
status is recommended in animals with preexisting health problems. Animals with severe
uiang ino ai cn dnom Aroienoqel aialduos e aaianan pmous aura paieond 1
liver disease). Monitoring for hypotension is recommended in animals showing more mild
gastrointestinal upset and depression.
Treatment
As with many of the other Christmastime plants, the majority of cases of mistletoe inges-
tion by pets can be successfully managed at home by decontamination (if a large amount
of plant was ingested) and withholding food and water in the vomiting patient. Animals
with more severe vomiting should be evaluated, and fluid and electrolyte abnormali-
ties should be corrected as necessary. Severely affected animals should be evaluated for
hypotension.
Prognosis
recovery following ingestion of mistletoe is excellent. If signs develop, they are generally
mild and self-limiting.
508SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Gross and Histologic Lesions
No specific lesions would be expected with ingestion of mistletoe.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for ingestion of mistletoe would include other causes of gastrointes-
tinal upset, including pancreatitis, ingestion of other irritants, foreign body obstruction,
infectious gastroenteritis, and neoplasia.
Poinsettia (Euphorbia pulcherrima)
Sources
Poinsettia (Euphorbia pulcherrirma; Color Plate 39-6) is a very popular Christmas plant that
is brought into many households during the holiday season. The uppermost leaves of the
plant develop red, white, or pink coloration, resembling a flower. However, the actual flowers
are the tiny yellow structures resembling stamens.6
Toxic Dose
Historically, poinsettias have received a great deal of negative publicity because of their pur-
ported toxicity. However, based on animal and human exposures, it appears that the toxicity
of poinsettia is greatly exaggerated because studies of the plant and reviews of incidents of
ingestion by humans have failed to show any serious effects.6 All Euphorbia contain milky
sap that has irritant properties. Although the sap from some Euphorbia species has been
associated with serious illness and even death in humans, the sap from poinsettias appears
to be much less potent.' Feeding 8 to 30 g/kg of poinsettia to cattle caused gastrointestinal
irritation of several days duration, and feeding 20 g/kg to sheep produced no effects. When
poinsettia sap was administered orally to rats at levels of125 g/kg for 5 days, no adverse effects
were observed, although skin photosensitivity was induced by topical application to the skin
of albino rats.23 In small animals, poinsettia ingestion has been associated with mild and
self-limiting signs.6
Mechanism of Toxicity
The irritation from the milky sap of poinsettia is thought to be caused by the presence of
diterpenoid euphorbol esters and steroids with saponin-like properties that exert a deter-
gent-like effect on tissue. In humans dermal iritation and hypersensitivity from the milky
sap has been reported, and humans with latex allrgy may react similarly to poinsettia.74
latex allergy. 25
Clinical Signs
 The most common clinical signs expected from poinsettia exposure reflect the irritant
nature of the sap. Dermal contact may result in irritation, erythema, and pruritus. Inges-
tion of the plant material can result in irritation of the mucous membranes of the alimen-
tary tract, causing hypersalivation, vomiting, and rarely, diarrhea. Conjunctivitis caused
by ocular exposure to the sap is also possible. Signs are normally expected to be mild and
may result in hydration or electrolyte disorders that may need to be addressed.
Minimum Database
[a Aroinoqel  aq on paisadxa ane easuod jo uosatun on suis asniag
uation is rarely necessary, although monitoring of hydration and electrolyte status is
recommended in animals with preexisting health problems. Animals with severe or pro-
tracted vomiting should receive a complete laboratory workup to rule out foreign body
obstruction and other potential causes of vomiting (e.g, pancreatitis, renal disease, liver
disease).
Chapter 39 | Christmastime Plants 509
Treatment
Induction of emesis should only be considered if very large amounts of plant material have
been ingested. In most cases dilution with water and milk and having owners monitor for
vomiting is sufficient. Should vomiting develop, food and water should be withheld for a
few hours to allow the gastrointestinal tract to settle. If protracted vomiting develops or in
animals with significant prior health conditions, monitoring of hydration and electrolyte
status is recommended and correction of abnormalities with appropriate fluid therapy may
be indicated.
For dermal exposures, bathing with a mild soap and water is recommended. If ocular
aem den piat  aues um aisn pausn aq prs aa a ao s aoa
for 15 to 20 minutes followed by thorough examination of the cornea.
Prognosis
The prognosis for complete recovery following ingestion of poinsettia is excellent because
signs are generally mild and self-limiting. Deaths from poinsettia ingestion by small animals
have not been reported
Gross and Histologic Lesions
No specific lesions would be expected with ingestion of poinsettia.
Differential Diagnoses
 Differential diagnoses for ingestion of poinsettia leaves would include other causes of gastro
infectious gastroenteritis, and neoplasia.
Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis)
Sources
Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis; Color Plate 39-7) is a small evergreen shrub with thick
aromatic leaves that is used primarily as a culinary herb prized for its rich pungent flavor.22
Rosemary also has been used extensively as a medicinal herb for its astringent, spasmolytic,
antinflammatory, expectorant, carminative, antirheumatic, analgesic, antimicrobial, and
hypotensive properties. 926 Ihe use of the rosemary leaf to treat dyspepsia, high blood pres-
2e go jo saspeg uossuo ua aq paade sem useunupue ans
Other pharmacologic effects attributed to rosemary include antimutagenic, anticancer, hep-
mas plant used for creating wreaths and other aromatic holiday decorations. Recently the use
of rosemary for Christmas decorations has undergone a renaissance because many people
choose traditional or "old-fashioned" themes for their holiday decorations, thus increasing
the opportunity for indoor pets to become exposed to the plant.
ToxicDose
Rosemary contains a variety of volatile essential oils, including monoterpene hydrocar-
bons, camphene, limonene, camphor, borneol, cineole, linalool, and verbinol.z The plant
also contains a variety of flavonoids, diterpenes, polyphenols, and high levels of salicy-
lates. At the low levels of rosemary used in cooking, these agents are of little toxicologic
 isan u s io sixa Aas jo sa are go uosau iq aui
gastrointestinal irritation, renal injury, and neurologic effects. Rosemary is also reportedly
an abortifacient.22
Mechanism of Toxicity
The mechanism of several of the pharmacologic activities of rosemary have been eluci-
dated (e.g., anticancer properties have been attributed to the induction of anticarcinogenic
enzymes, such as quinone reductase, or inhibition of metabolic activation of procarcinogens
510SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
by P-450 enzymes),22 but the mechanism of toxicity of rosemary is not as well understood.
Gastrointestinal irritation from ingestion of large quantities of rosemary may result from
the direct irritant effect of the essential oils on the mucosa. The hypotensive effects of rose-
mary are considered to be a result of a spasmolytic action on smooth and cardiac muscles.
Rosemary can prevent embryonic implantation, but the mechanism of the abortifacient
activity of rosemary has not been established.30 The monoterpene ketones in rosemary are
reportedly convulsants.22 Allergic contact dermatitis has also been reported with dermal
exposure to rosemary.
Clinical Signs
The primary clinical signs expected with ingestion of small to moderate amounts of rose-
result in hypotension that is characterized by weakness, pale mucous membranes, and
iting, dehydration, weight loss, depression, and in severe cases, signs of uremia (e.g., oral
doses of rosemary. Reproductive failure and abortion may also result from ingestion of
large amounts of rosemary.
Minimum Database
Symptomatic animals that have ingested large amounts of rosemary should be evaluated
for hydration, and electrolyte and renal abnormalities. Monitoring of blood pressure, urine
output, and neurologic status is indicated in animals displaying more than mild gastroin-
Treatment
Early decontamination via emesis and administration of activated charcoal with a cathartic
das si juaain paisau ane Aieasan jo siune alr uam papuanan si
atic and supportive for those animals showing clinical signs. Antiermetics, fluid therapy,
and pressor agents should be used as necessary to maintain blood pressure and hydration.
Diuretics may be indicated if oliguria or anuria develops. Seizures should be managed with
diazepam or barbiturates.
Prognosis
The prognosis for rosemary ingestion depends on the amount of plant material ingested
and the type of clinical signs that develop. In most cases mild gastrointestinal upset is likely
to be the extent of the clinical signs, and these animals are expected to make full recoveries.
Animals with seizures or renal dysfunction have a more guarded prognosis until response
to therapy can be evaluated.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
No specific lesions have been reported associated with ingestion of rosemary.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for the gastrointestinal signs from rosemary include other causes
of gastrointestinal upset, including pancreatitis, ingestion of other irritants, foreign body
obstruction, infectious gastroenteritis, and neoplasia. Differential diagnoses for hypotension
include primary cardiovascular disease, shock, and ingestion ofhypotensive pharmaceuticals.
References
1. Burrows GE, Tyrl RJ: Toxic Plants of North America, Ames, IA, 2001, Iowa State University Press.
2. Kretzing S, Abraham G, Seiwert B,et al: In vivo assessment of antiemetic drugs and mechanism of lycorine-
induced nausea and emesis, Arch Toxicol, 2011http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00204-011-0718-9.
Philadelphia, 2001, Saunders.
Chapter 39 | Christmastime Plants 51l
4. Kretzing S, Abraham G, Seiwert B, et al: Dose-dependent emetic effects of the Amaryllidaceous alkaloid
lycorine in beagle dogs, Toxicon 57:117-124, 2011.
 5. Jensen AP, Visser FJ, Nierop G: Occupation asthma to amaryllis, Allergy 51:847-849, 1996.
6. Volmer PA: How dangerous are winter and spring holiday plants to pets? Vet Med 97:879-884, 2002.
7. Paulsen E, Skov PS,Brindslev-Jlensen C, et al: Occupation type I allergy to Christmas cactus, Allegy
52:656-660, 1997.
8. ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center: Household plant reference, Urbana, IL,1998, ASPCA APCC
9. Barceloux DG: Medical Toxicology ofNatural Substances I, Hoboken, NJ, 2008, Wiley
10. Pages N, Fournier G, Chamorro G: Teratological evaluation of Juniperus Sabina essential oil in mice,
Plantα Med 55:144-146, 1989.
11. Millet Y, Youglard J, Steinmetz MD: Toxicity of some essential plant oils. Clinical and experimental
study, Clin Toxicol 18:1485-1498, 1981.
12. Burek JD, Schwetz BA: Considerations in the selection and use of chemicals within the animal facility,
Lab Anim Sct 30:414-421, 1980.
13. Smith G: Toxicology brief: Kalanchoe species poisoning in pets, Vet Med99:933-936, 2004.
14.Adams R:Veterinary pharmacology and therapeutics,ed7,Ames,IA,1995,Iowa State University Press.
15. Klasco RK: POISiNDEX* System, Greenwood Vllage, CO, edition expires 6/2004, Thomson
MICROMEDEX.
16. Roder JD: Cardiovascular drugs. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2004,
Mosby.
17. Gwaltney-Brant SM, Rumbeiha WK: Newer antidotal therapies, Vet Clin Small Anim 32:323-339, 2002.
18. Gorter RW, van Wely M:Tolerability of an extract of European mistletoe among immunocompromised
and healthy individuals, Altern Ther Health Med 5:37-44, 1999. 47-48.
19. Krenzelok EP, Jacobsen TD, Aronis J: American mistletoe exposures, Am J Emerg Med 15:516-520,1997.
21. Spiller HA, Willias DB, Gorman SE,et al: Retrospective study of mistetoe ingestion, I Toxicol Clin Toxt-
co 34:405-408, 1996.
Comparisons.
23. Winek CL, Butala J, Shanor SP, et al: Toxicology of poinsettia, Clin Toxicol 13:27-45, 1978.
24. Bala TM, Panda M: No poinsettia this Christmas, South Med J99:772-773, 2006.
 25. Kimata H: Anaphylaxis by poinsettia in infants with atopic eczema, Allergy 62:91-92, 2007.
 26. Takaki I, Bersani-Amado LE, Vendruscolo A, et al: Anti-infammatory and antinociceptive effects of
Rosmarinus officinalis L. essential oil in experimental animal models, I Med Food 11:741-746, 2008.
27. Fahim FA, Esmat AY, Fadel HM, et al: Allied studies on the effect of Rosmarinus officinalis L. on experi-
mental hepatotoxicity and mutagenesis, Int I Food Sci Nutr50:413-427,1999.
28. Sotelo-Felix JI, Martinez-Fong D, Muriel P, et al: Evaluation ofthe effectiveness of Rosmarinus offcinalis
(Lamiaceae) in the alleviation of carbon tetrachloride-induced acute hepatotoxicity in the rat, I Ethno-
pharmacol 81:145-154, 2002.
29. Johnson JI: Carnosol: a promising anti-cancer and anti-infammatory agent, Cancer Lett 305:1-7, 2011
30. Lemonica IP, Damasceno DC, di-Stasi LC: Study of the embryotoxic effects of an extract of rosemary
(Rosmarinus offcinalis L.), Braz J Med Biol Res 29:223-227, 1996.
CHAPTER
Citrus Oils
40
Konnie H. Plumlee, DVM, MS, DABVT, DACVIM
· Citrus oils can be toxic even though they have a natural origin. The primary
toxins are limonene and linalool.
Citrus oils are used in some products marketed for insect control in pets.
Cats appear to be more sensitive to citrus cils than dogs.
The most common clinical signs include excessive salivation, hypothermia,
muscle tremors, and ataxia.
 Severe cutaneous reactions can also occur
itrus oils are derived from botanical sources and so are considered “natural” or
"organic" by the consumer, who often has the mistaken belief that the products are
completely safe. Most cases of toxicoses are a result of pet owners who fail to follow the
dilution directions on the product label. However, severe idiosyncratic skin reactions have
also been reported.
Sources
Citrus oil extracts, including d-limonene and linalool, are derived from citrus fruit skin.
d-Limonene is a monocyclic terpene with insecticidal properties, especially from the
vapor, which primarily acts as a desiccant.l d-Limonene is toxic to all life stages of
the flea with the order of sensitivity from most to least being eggs, adults, larvae, and
pupae.
 Several products containing citrus oils are marketed to control ticks, fleas, and other
insects. Ihese products include insect sprays, pet dips, shampoos, and soaps. Solvents, fra-
 grances, and cleansers are other types of products that may contain citrus oils.
Toxic Dose
In dogs the oral toxic dose of limonene is 680 g/kg; however, cats appear to be more sensi-
tive than dogs.2 A dermal study demonstrated that cats had clinical signs when a commer-
cial pet dip containing 78.2% d-limonene was used at five times the recommended dose.3 In
another study, three cats were dipped in a citrus product marketed for dogs. Even though
the product was diluted according to label directions, one cat subsequently died, one cat
became symptomatic but recovered, and one cat remained asymptomatic.4 A third study
examined the use of a ready-to-use spray containing d-limonene, linalool, and piperonyl
 butoxide (a mixed function oxidase inhibitor). Mild signs appeared with a single dose
513
514 SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
 in one of six cats. In one case report, a cat had severe clinical signs and was euthanized
 following the reportedly correct uise of a 1% d-limonene-based shampoo labeled for dogs
and cats.
Toxicokinetics
Citrus oils are absorbed rapidly both via the dermis and orally, and the distribution within
the body is similar to that of other lipid-soluble compounds.2 d-Limonene reaches maxi-
mum blood concentrations 10 minutes after dermal exposure. The urinary tract is the main
route of excretion, and less than 10% of excretion is by the fecal route.2
Mechanism of Toxicity
The complete mechanism of action for toxic reactions is unknown. However, d-limonene
hypotension in cats may be associated with generalized vasodilation in the skin.
clinical Signs
Hypersalivation, which may be accompanied by ataxia and/or muscle tremors, develops in
cats. The hypersalivation is transient and may be partially or entirely a reaction to the taste
of the product following grooming. The brain cholinesterase is not depressed in cats that
have hypersalivation.4 Mild to severe hypothermia often develops.3.6 Muscle tremors must
 be differentiated from a shivering reaction caused by the hypothermia. Other reported
signs include weakness, lethargy, vocalization, aggressive behavior, recumbency, general
 paralysis, vasodilation, mydriasis, slowed pupillary response, and hypotension.2.5
Various skin reactions have been reported. A cat developed acute necrotizing derma-
titis and septicemia after being bathed with a limonene-based shampoo labeled for cats
and dogs.' As the cat's condition progressed, acidemia, hypoglycemia, miosis, and neuro-
logic signs developed consistent with diffuse cerebral edema and possible right vestibu-
lar involvement. Excoriation of the scrotal and perineal areas was described in male cats
dipped in a d-limonene preparation that was 15 times the recommended concentration.3
[  a 1ae a ia  o e paqsa ioa as a
cutaneous erythema 24 hours after being dipped in a product containing d-limonene. The
dog developed erythema multiforme major and diffuse intravascular coagulation (DIC)
before death.7 In another case a dog developed toxic epidermal necrolysis shortly after
being dipped in a d-limonene product. Within 5 minutes of being dipped, the dog exhibited
hypersalivation, tonic-clonic seizures, and aggressive behavior. The dog subsequently had
focal alopecia, thrombocytopenia, prolonged clotting times, and dark red urine contain-
ing blood and protein. A large section of the skin over the thorax and abdomen became
necrotic and eventually sloughed.8
Confirmatory Tests
No diagnostic laboratory tests are available for citrus oil toxicosis.
Treatment
No antidote is available. Decontamination is best done with a mild dishwashing detergent
to remove any product dermally applied. Thermoregulation is frequently necessary to con-
trol the hypothermia that may develop. Other treatments are supportive in nature and
depend on the clinical signs and their severity.
- eaa e uns sueai sn j paem s adeal aaisae ar
forme or toxic epidermal necrolysis, occur. Ihese conditions can result in loss of the epider
mal barrier followed by secondary bacterial infection and sepsis. Antibiotic administration,
Chapter 40 | Citrus Oils  515
fluid therapy, wound treatment, and pain control are warranted. Corticosteroids have
not been proven beneficial for toxic epidermal necrolysis and may result in increased
complications.
Prognosis
Clinical signs can last a few hours to several days. The prognosis is good for most animals
that receive appropriate care. However, the survival rate is lower in animals in which a skin
reaction develops that compromises the epidermal barrier.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
There are no specific lesions for this toxicosis. Lesions can range from mild excoriation of
the skin to severe diffuse epidermal necrosis.37
Differential Diagnoses
Diagnosis is made from a history of recent exposure to a citrus oil product along with the
appropriate signs. Most toxicoses that involve muscle tremors result in a body temperature
that is normal or elevated, whereas many cases of citrus oil toxicoses have decreased body
temperatures. Affected animals often have a strong citrus odor.
References
1. Lee JA, Budgin JB, Mauldin EA: Acute necrotizing dermatitis and septicemia after application of a
d-limonene-based insecticidal shampoo in a cat, JA VMA 221:258, 2002.
 2. Osweiler GD: Citrus oil extracts. In Osweiler GD, editor: Toxicology, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1996, Williams &
Wilkins.
3. Hooser SB, Beasley VR, Everitt JI: Effects of an insecticidal dip containing d-limonene in the cat, JA VMA
189:905,1986.
4. Hooser SB: Citrus insecticide hazardous to cats, JA VMA 184:236, 1984.
5. Powers KA, Hooser SB, Sundberg IP,et al: An evaluation ofthe acute toxicity of an insecticidal spray con-
taining linalool, d-limonene, and piperonyl butoxide applied topically to domestic cats, Vet Hum Toxicol
30:206, 1988.
6. Hooser SB: D-limonene, linalool, and crude citrus oil extracts, Vet Clin North Am Small Ani Pract
20:383, 1990.
 7. Rosenbaum MR, Kerlin RL: Erythema multiforme major and disseminated intravascular coagulation in
a dog following application ofa d-limonene-based inseticidal dip, JA VMA 207:1315, 1995.
8. Frank AA, Ross JL, Sawvell BK: Toxic epidermal necrolysis associated with flea dips, Vet Hum Toxicol
34:57, 1992.
CHAPTER
Copper
41
Patricia A. Talcott, MS, DVM, PhD, DABVT
· Acute copper poisoning in dogs and cats is an uncommon occurrence.
Potential sources include copper-containing coins, copper sulfate solutions and
feeds, copper oxide capsules, and miscellaneous copper-containing items
(e.g., wire, coils, and jewelry).
 Copper is primarily stored and metabolized by the liver and excreted into the
bile. Excess copper that is not excreted is stored in lysosomes.
Varying degrees of hepatocellular necrosis are seen following acute toxicosis.
 Cornmon signs of illness reported include vomiting, depression, lethargy.
inappetence, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Icterus and hermoglobinemia or
hemoglobinuria are less commonly observed
 Confirmation of poisoning is based primarily on compatible microscopic lesions
 in liver tissue, along with excessive copper concentrations in liver and kidney 
tissues. Serum copper concentrations are not necessarily a reliable indicator of
excessive copper intake.
Treatrment is primarily supportive in nature, and the prognosis depends on the
severity of hepatic damage.
his chapter focuses on “copper" (Cu) poisoning in small animals as opposed to the
 chronic or inherited form of copper toxicosis (i.e., copper storage disease, chronic
active hepatitis) described in Bedlington terriers and other susceptible breeds of dogs. A
section at the end of this chapter briefly addresses this disease. Acute copper poisoning in
dogs and cats is uncommon, and only a few cases have been documented in the literature.
Acute onset of chronic copper exposure is a well-known occurrence in sheep and to a lesser
extent in cattle, camelids, and goats. The sources of copper poisoning in small animals are
quite different from those in livestock, which most likely contributes to the rarity of this
disease in dogs and cats.
Sources
Coins appear to be the primary potential source of excessive oral copper exposure in
both dogs and cats. Copper poisoning was documented in a cat follwing ingestion of
32 Canadian pennies.1 Canadian pennies minted up to 1997 are composed of 98.5% cop-
per. American pennies (standard weight, 2.5 g) minted up to and including the year 1983
s) s  adds 9 s ( g am s) si add % 
dard weight, 2.268 g), quarters (standard weight, 5.67 g), and half-dollars (standard weight
517
518SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
11.34 g) contain approximately 91.7% copper. Susan B. Anthony dollars (standard weight,
 8.1 g) contain 87.5% copper. Copper poisoning could also conceivably occur as a result of
excess copper leaching from copper piping. This would be highly unusual and most likely
would not cause an acute intoxication.
containing excessive copper concentrations following application of copper sulfate to a
small, artificial pond.2 Copper sulfate is a common ingredient in fungicides and algicides
and is also used in footbaths or topical solutions for cattle and sheep to control hoof
infections. I am aware of an anecdotal report of a cat drinking copper-treated water out
 of a Christmas tree stand and succumbing to acute liver failure. Copper sulfate is also
commonly incorporated into various feeds or drinking water (e.g., for swine, rabbits,
cattle, and poultry) to prevent deficiency diseases or to act as a growth promotant or
oxide-containing capsules intended for oral supplementation for cattle could conceiv-
ably be ingested by dogs and cats. I am aware of a dog ingesting an unknown amount
of copper-containing wire and exhibiting mild gastrointestinal signs prior to removal.
Other miscellaneous sources of copper include jewelry, pipes, toy parts, kitchenware, and
numerous household objects.
Toxic Dose and Toxicokinetics
 No reported toxic doses for copper in dogs and cats were found in the literature. Approxi-
mate normal dietary range of copper in cats and dogs appears to be in the 3 to 10 ppm and
7 to 10 ppm range, respectively, on a dry weight basis. Adequate dietary intake for cats has
been reported to be between 0.08 and 0.80 mg Cu/kg body weight/day.3 The current Asso-
ciation of American Feed Control Officials Food Nutrient Profiles lists the minimum
dietary copper requirement for dogs as being 7.3 mg/kg diet, with an upper limit of
lab 8-'e e yim u as1 e jo a1eme e I 'iatp ay/a s 'ses ioy pue y/a 09
small-breed dog (weight unknown) exhibiting signs of intermittent vomiting, lethargy.
and abdominal tenderness associated with elevations of liver enzymes. The serum cop-
per concentration was normal.
 Elermental copper is primarily absorbed by the smallintestine. The majority of copper
is absorbed by active transport, whereas passive diffusion is known to occur at higher con-
centrations of dietary copper. The bioavailability and eventual uptake of copper can vary
tinal mucosal cells regulate copper transfer into the portal circulation in part by the use of
is mostly bound to albumin. The liver is the primary organ of copper metabolism. In the
liver, copper stores are dividedinto four intercellular pools: the biliary pool, ceruloplasmin,
metalloenzymes, and copper-metallothionein complexes. Any excess copper is stored by
lysosomes. The normal liver metabolizes copper by excreting excess copper into the bile as a
copper-molybdenum-sulfate complex. Small amounts of copper are also normally excreted
into the urine.
Mechanism of Toxicity
The specific events occurring in the liver in cases of acute copper poisoning are unclear.
Typically, copper accumulates in the liver as a result of excessive intake, or of a primary
defect in copper excretion, or secondary to cholestasis. Inherited hepatic copper poisoning
has been well described in various breeds of dogs, and this has been attributed to defects in
copper excretion and copper-binding proteins. However, in cases of acute poisoning, there
seems to be some evidence suggesting that copper is directly cytotoxic to red blood cells or
induced free radical formation) and can cause hemolysis and hepatocyte degeneration and
Chapter 4l | Copper 519
necrosis. However, the hemolytic event is not always seen, and too few cases of acute copper
poisoning have been reported in companion animals to accurately estimate the incidence of
this occurrence. Various forms of copper, depending on the concentration, can be caustic
to the gastrointestinal mucosa.
clinical Signs
 The onset of signs associated with acute copper poisoning can range from a few hours to
several days following the initial exposure. This range can mostly be attributed to the form
of copper and to the severity of the lesions in the gastrointestinal tract or liver induced by the
copper. Typical signs described in cats and dogs following ingestion of copper-containing
coins include mild depression and dehydration, anorexia, intermittent vomiting, and mild
abdominal pain. Diarrhea can also occur. Copper-containing coins do not appear to be
physically altered by the acidic gastric environment as quickly as zinc-containing coins.
Therefore the clinical signs of copper poisoning often do not appear initially to be that
dramatic, and copper coins seem to be less likely to cause systemic toxicosis. However, I am
aware of a case in a cat in which an unknown source and unknown duration ofexcess copper
exposure resulted in a dramatic two-day history of vomiting and depression, which ended
in death caused by severe, acute hepatocellular necrosis. Acute intravascular hemolysis was
associated with copper poisoning in rabbits; however, the exposure in this case was most
likely more chronic.4 Severe central nervous system depression, lethargy, and icterus were
reported in two sibling ferrets with copper poisoning. The authors hypothesized that the
disease may have been due to an inherited inability to metabolize copper because histologic
examination of the liver tissue indicated a chronic hepatopathy.
Minimum Database
The minimum database should include collection of blood for a complete blood count and
serum chemistry panel. Specific values to be evaluated include any evidence of intravascu-
lar hemolysis (e.g., anemia, hemoglobinemia), along with elevations in liver enzymes (e.g.
alanine transaminase, aspartate transaminase, lactate dehydrogenase)and other evidence
of hepatic dysfunction (e.g., hyperbilirubinemia, elevated bile acids). Urinalyses may be run
to confirm the presence of hemoglobin or bilirubin. Abdominal radiographs may reveal
the presence of radiodense foreign objects in animals that have swallowed coins or metallic
items. Lack of visual presence of these objects should not eliminate copper poisoning as a
possible cause because vomiting by the patient could have successfully removed the objects
before presentation. Histopathologic examination of aliverbiopsy tissue sample (e.g., ultra-
sound guided or exploratory surgery) can be very useful in helping to confirm the presence
 of abnormal accumulation of copper and compatible histologic lesions.
Confirmatory Tests
Serum copper concentrations may or may not be elevated in cases of acute copper poi-
soning. A normal serum copper range in cats, generated by our laboratory, was 0.33 up to
1.05 ppm; normal serum range in dogs has been reported as being 0.20 to 0.80 ppm.3 Liver
copper concentrations are much more diagnostic inconf rming this type of poisoning. Ade-
quate amounts of liver and kidney tissue (samples ideally should be approximately 1 g but
analyses can be done on lesser volumes) are easily collected postmortem for copper quan-
tification, but are much more difficult to collect antemortem. Often insufficient tissue is
collected from a biopsy to perform both histopathologic analysis and copper quantification
(at least 0.1 to 0.2 g of tissue is necessary, depending on the analytical methodology).
Copper staining of formalin fixed tissue can be helpful in identifying excessive copper
stores, but this is not definitive, and this should only be considered a screening tool.
Adequate copper levels for cats in liver and kidney tissues, respectively, are reported to
saop ui palnodai sianal iaddos aienbapv guatam jam udd 2'z oi 7'z pue udd sh ot 2e aq
520SECTlON 4 SpecificToxicants
for liver and kidney, respectively, are 30 to 100 ppm and 5 to 15 pm, wet weight.3 Copper
levels that are notably higher than these, accompanied by an appropriate history, clinical
signs, clinical pathologic data, and histologic lesions, are compatible with a diagnosis of
copper poisoning.
Treatment
There are too few cases in the literature to know exactly what treatments are effective. Sur-
gery to remove foreign objects is generally recommended. Chelation with penicillamine or
dimercaprol, or treatment with zinc acetate is most likely not necessary in cases of acute
cant hepatic dysfunction or hemolysis (e.g., intravenous fluids [lactated Ringer's solution
or 0.9% saline with potassium chloride], B-complex vitamins, glucose, transfusions, SAMe,
milk thistle). Because of the potential necrotic effects on the gastrointestinal mucosa,
s se aaed (aens a) suae aad u auaq ae sd
port, and prophylactic broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Prognosis
The prognosis for acutely poisoned patients is guarded to poor, depending on the source
and solubility of ingested copper and how rapidly it is absorbed by the gastrointestinal
mucosa. Ihe severity of liver dysfunction and possibly hemolysis are the primary factors in
determining the outcome.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Coagulative necrosis of the gastrointestinal mucosa may be observed both grossly and
histologically. Varying degrees of hepatocellular degeneration with marked accumula-
tion of rhodanine- or rubeanic acid-positive granules have been described6 and more
severe lesions of centrilobular, midzonal, and diffuse hepatocellular necrosis can be seen.
Rhodanine- or rubeanic-positive granular material can also be seen in the epithelium of the
proximal convoluted tubules and collecting ducts of the kidney. Hemoglobin casts may be
seen within the convoluted tubules and collecting ducts.
Differential Diagnoses
Acute copper poisoning in the dog and cat must be differentiated from acute zinc or lead
poisoning and from a multitude of potential hepatotoxic agents (e.g., iron, phenolics, acet-
anmninophen, nonsteroidal antinflarmmatory agents, aflatoxin, xylitol, cyanobacteria, mush-
rooms, sago palm, and pennyroyal oil).
Copper Storage Disease
Numerous canine breeds have been reported as developing copper storage disease, in
which the liver abnormally accumulates excessive copper concentrations over time. This
is due to an autosomal recessive trait in Bedlington terriers, but the exact mechanism
for the copper accumulation has not been worked out for the other breeds (e.g., West
Highland white terrier, Skye terrier, Dalmatian, Doberman pinscher, Labrador retriever).
Although the onset of clinical signs can be rather abrupt in some of these animals, the
accumulation of copper is generally considered a chronic event. Many patients exhibit
a chronic waxing and waning of lethargy, anorexia, and weight loss. Massive release of
copper from the hepatocytes leading to an intravascular hemolytic event has rarely been
iau iou si staaa iaddo uas uissasse am uosn Areud ai st si aoda
in establishing a diagnosis. The presence of the disease is generally confirmed by com
Chapter 4l | Copper 521
often considered compatible with a copper storage disease. Readers are recommended to
 go elsewhere for a more comprehensive description of this disease.7
References
1. Poortinga EW: Copper penny ingestion in a cat, Can Vet I 36:634, 1995.
2. Henderson BM, Wintefield RW: Acute copper toxicosis in the Canada goose, Avian Dis 19(2):385-387,
1975.
3. Puls R: Copper-dog, cat. In Puls R,editor: Mineral levels in animal health, Clearbrook, British Columbia,
1994, Sherpa International.
4. Cooper GL, Bickford AA, Charlton BR, et al: Copper poisoning in rabbits associated with acute intravas-
cular hemolysis, I Vet Diagn Invest 8:394-396, 1996.
5. Fox IG, Zeman DH, Mortimer JD: Copper toxicosis in sibling ferrets, I Am Vet Med Assoc 205(8):1154-
1156, 1994.
6. Haynes JS, Wade PR: Hepatopathy associated with excessive hepatic copper in a Siamese cat, Vet Pathol
32:427-429, 1995.
7. Twedt DC: Copper storage hepatopathy. In Tilley LP, Smith FWK, editors: The 5-minute veterinary con-
sult, canine and feline, Philadelphia, 2004, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
CHAPTER
42
Cyanide
Kevin T. Fitzgerald, PhD, DVM, DABVP
Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) and cyanide salts are used in a variety of common
industrial processes.
For most species, the lethal dose of HCN is 2 mg/kg. Exposure to cyanide can
occur via inhalation, ingestion, or dermal exposure.
 Cyanide disrupts the ability of cells to use oxygen (O2) in oxidative phosphorylation.
The net result is histotoxic tissue hypoxia.
 Clinical signs include vomiting, hyperpnea, tachycardia and cardiac arrhythmmias,
seizures, coma, and apnea.
· Plasma lactate levels and increased anion gap values may be the best indicators
of both the presence and severity of cyanide poisoning. Whole-blood cyanide
levels are available in many human laboratories. It may take time to obtain the
results, so these tests are often of little use in ermergency situations.
Treatment consists of removing the animal from the source of exposure, initiating
supportive measures (100% O2 and intravenous fluids), decontaminating skin
and fur, and, if exposure is certain, administering antidotal therapy. Recently.
hydroxocobalamin has been employed as a cyanide antidote in humans and
 has been shown to reverse cyanide toxicity and reduce mortality in a canine
model.
· The classic bitter almond smell and cherry red blood are rarely seen outside of
textbooks.
 Differential diagnoses include pcisonings with carbon monoxide or acute solvent
inhalation, heart disease, cerebral disease, and cerebral neoplasia.
Sources
Small animals may encounter cyanide in a surprisingly broad array of forms. Hydrogen
cyanide (HCN) and cyanide salts are used in a wide variety of common industrial pro-
cesses. Cyanide is used in electroplating techniques, photographic processes, metal clean-
ing, and gold mining, and HCN gas is used as a fumigant rodenticide. Some fertilizers
contain cyanamide. Some coyote traps are still used that fre sodium cyanide baits into
pe pim yissnad se umou ose st NH (shana-aonos, "a') seue aul go srnu a
the nitroprussides are used as hypotensive drugs. Combustion of many plastic compounds
produces HCN gas. As a result, many smoke inhalation victims suffer from cyanide toxicity
and carbon monoxide poisoning.
523
524SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Box 42-1
PotentialCyanideSourcesorExposures
Fires
Gold mines
Fumigation
 Electroplating and jewelry manufacturing
Photographic chemicals
Manufacture of plastics, rubber, and synthetic fiber
Pesticides (rodenticides, insecticides)
Burning rubber
Certain drugs
Ingestion of certain plants
Terrorist attack
Cyanogenic compounds (e.g., laetrile, amygdalin from plants, and nitriles) can release
cyanide during metabolism, which most commonly occurs in the gut. Naturally occurring
cyanogenic glycosides, such as amygdalin, are found in numerous plants. Seeds of apples,
plums, cherries, apricots, and the jetberry bush all release cyanide on digestion and are
dangerous if the seed capsule is broken. As few as 5 to 25 seeds can cause intoxication.
Natural oil of bitter almonds contains 4% HCN. In addition, some species of lima bean
contain notable amounts of HCN. Ihe dried root of cassava (i.e., tapioca) contains fairly
large amounts of cyanide and can cause poisoning when eaten in large amounts or if it
is improperly cooked. Other forms of cyanide include glue-on nail removers containing
acetonitrile and acrylonitrile, which are used in the production of synthetic rubber. Isocya-
nates (e.g., methyl isocyanate, toluene disocyanate, and others) are potent skin and mucous
membrane irritants, but do not release cyanide after absorption.
 i d si aii gn as  s an se a ro
damaged, hail-damaged, or freshly trampled dead or wilted plants are more dangerous
than intact specimens. The liberation of HCN does not begin until the plant tissue is dam-
aged or starts to decay. In humans the vast majority of cyanide poisonings are intentional.
Most involve drinking a sodium cyanide-containing insecticide. Ihe second most com-
mon cause of cyanide toxicity in people is smoke inhalation. A list of potential sources of
cyanide exposure is included in Box 42-1. Confirmed exposures to cyanide in dogs and cats
in 2010 are included in Boxes 42-2 and 42-3.
Toxic Dose
 The minimum toxic dose of free HCN and of potassium cyanide given orally in most mam-
malian species is approximately 2 mg/kg HCN (Box 42-4).
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Toxicity
The kinetics of cyanide are not well understood. Cyanide disrupts the ability of cells to use
the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase system. As a result, a shift to anaerobic metabo-
lism occurs, a decrease in adenosine triphosphate synthesis ensues, and depletion of cel-
lular energy stores and greatly increased lactic acid production follow, causing an anion
 anm siop un ei nss srrs e st a iu a siie sgena dea
cyanide levels may be four or five times greater than serum levels because of the concentra-
tion of cyanide in erythrocytes. The elimination half-life (T) in dogs is 19 hours. The toxic
step defining acute cyanide poisoning is that oxygen released by oxyhemoglobin cleavage
Aresn pue ssan uendsan eas go aeoq sai e s puoq aq iauo ou ue
arrest follows within a few minutes. In addition to the development of tissue hypoxia, it has
Chapter 42 | Cyanide 525
Box 42-2
American Association of Poison Control Centers 2010
Total number of reported cyanide cases: 2010
Feline confirmed exposures: 0
Box 42-3
American Association of Poison Control Centers 2010
Total number of reported cyanide cases: 2010
Canine confirmed exposures: 6
Outcome:Dogs
Death
Moderate effects
Minor effects
4
Animal recovered
5
been shown that cyanide also exhibits direct toxic action on cellular membranes, resulting
in their necrosis.
clinical Signs
The clinical signs of cyanide poisoning depend on the dose, route of exposure, and
-n  uou go susa aed a asoa as asdea al
containing compounds are rapid tachypnea, hypotension, and convulsions leading to
coma. Severe acute cyanide poisoning progresses rapidly from convulsions to coma to
shock to respiratory failure to death. The process is faster with inhalation than with
ingestion. Animals with inhalation exposure in enclosed spaces may lose conscious-
ness after only a few breaths, and death follows rapidly within 1 to 15 minutes. Clinical
signs may not develop for up to 30 minutes to 1 hour after exposure in animals ingesting
amounts large enough to be fatal. Delayed onset of clinical signs (as late as 12 hours)
occurs following ingestion of cyanide-containing compounds, such as laetrile, amygda-
lin, and the nitroprussides.
Chronic poisoning with cyanide is far less common than acute intoxication. Repeated
inhalation of small amounts of cyanogen chloride causes dizziness, hoarseness, conjuncti-
vitis, weakness, loss of appetite, and weight loss. Chronic ingestion of cyanide-containing.
cyanide-containing fertilizer by animals has been reported to cause neurologic signs.
H has been often stated in previous references that dermal exposure canlead to systermic
cyanide intoxication. However,it is difficult to document actual reported cases of poisoning
from dermal exposure other than in animals with total body exposure in confined spaces in
which inhalation and ingestion also undoubtedly occurred.
 In small animals that do not display sudden collapse, the initial signs may resemble
anxiety or hyperventilation. Early signs include tachycardia, hyperpnea, and dyspnea. Later
signs of cyanide poisoning are nausea and vomiting, hypotension, generalized seizures,
coma, apnea, dilated pupils (either sluggish or totally nonreactive), and a host of cardiac
effects, including tachycardia, bradycardia, ventricular arrhythmias, erratic supraventric-
ular arrhythmias, ischemic changes on electrocardiography, atrioventricular blocks, and
eventual asystole (Box 42-5).
The smell of bitter almonds has been reported often, but the ability to detect this odor is
genetically determined, and many people cannot do so. Cyanosis is a late sign that may not
be present until the animal is agonal, at the stage of apnea and circulatory collapse. Noncar-
diogenic pulmonary edema may occur, even after ingestion alone.
526SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
Box42-4
Cyanide
Molecular weight
26.02 D
Airborne
Immediately fatal
270 ppm
Life threatening
110 ppm
Legal workplace limits
47 ppm
Lethal dose
200 mg
Box 42-5
Clinical Signs of Cyanide Poisoning
Sudden collapse (inhalation)
Nausea
Vomiting
 Dilated pupils
Hypotension
Cardiac signs (electrocardiogram)
Tachycardia
Ventricular arrhythmias
Atrioventricular blocks
Eventual asystole
Hyperpnea
Seizures
Coma
Apnea
To understand the causes of the clinical signs of cyanide poisoning, the mechanism of
action of the toxin must be reevaluated. The hallmark of cyanide toxicity is tissue hypoxia
based on the disruption of normal oxidative phosphorylation and the ability of cells to
use oxygen. Those tissues that most depend on oxidative phosphorylation (e.g., heart and
brain) are affected most rapidly and severely. Subsequent central inhibition of the respi-
ratory centers leads to hypoventilation, which produces additional hypoxia. Myocardial
depression with decreased cardiac output produces an additional stagnation hypoxia.
Until the final stages of respiratory depression or arrest, the blood is normally oxygen-
ated. However, the tissue is unable to extract or use the oxygen because of the cyanide,
and this leads to a greater than normal oxygen level on the venous side and the classic
"therry red” color of the superoxygenated blood. Stomach contents may produce a bitter
almond smell, and if excessive plant material or fertilizer was ingested, signs of gastroen-
teritis may be observed.
Minimum Database and Confirmatory Tests
 Diagnosis is based on the physical examination and centers on the vital signs and the sys-
tems affected (e.g., cardiovascular, respiratory, and the central nervous system). Animals
pue iannq e aieaa  saueqau snon pan iaq al aedsi iou Au in a
smell. Whole-blood cyanide levels are available in many human laboratories, but the results
may take time to be obtained and therefore cannot be relied on to direct therapy in an
emergency situation. However, they can contribute to the documentation of the diagnosis
and can aid later in any subsequent medicolegal action.
Chapter 42 | Cyanide 527
Severe metabolic acidosis occurs in acute cyanide poisoning. Cyanide produces lactic
acidosis, which can be determined directly by serum lactate measurements or indirectly
on arterial blood gas pH measurements. However, most private veterinary practices do
not have blood gas machines. Lactic acidosis may also be reflected in an elevated anion
 gap on the serum-electrolyte biochemical profle. Normal serum lactate levels are 1 mEq/L
(mmol/L) or less. A diagnosis of lactic acidosis can usually be made when serum lactate
levels are greater than 2 mEq/L (mmol/L). Plasma lactate levels and increased anion gap
values may be the best indicators of both the presence and severity of a potential cyanide
poisoning. Continuous vital sign and electrocardiographic monitoring should be per-
formed in any animal with suggested cyanide intoxication.
Treatment
Animals must be swifly removed from enclosed or confined spaces with high airborne
concentrations of cyanide. Rescuers, likewise, must not enter such areas without full pro-
tective clothing and proper respirators or self-contained breathing apparatus. Mouth-to-
mouth breathing should be avoided, and care must be taken not to inhale the animal's
exhaled breath. Exposed skin, fur, and eyes should be copiously flushed with water or nor-
mal saline in an attempt to decontaminate the animal.
Many cyanide-exposed animals with only anxiety and hyperventilation can be treated
with supportive measures alone without antidotal therapy. All cyanide antidotes are toxic,
and therapy may be not only unnecessary but also dangerous. Supportive measures alone may
tion of 100% supplemental oxygen by tight-fitting mask or endotracheal tube; placement of
at least one intravenous line for administration of fluids and sodium bicarbonate if shock and
presumed metabolic acidosis are present; decontamination of skin, eyes, and fur with copious
amounts of water or normal saline; and administration of antiarrhythmic or anticonvulsant.
Induction of emesis must be closely gauged because the disease process can lead poten-
tially to rapid progression of coma and seizures. Gastric lavage may be beneficial if the
material was ingested within the past 60 minutes. Although the older literature questions
the efficacy of activated charcoal administration, one dose (1 to 4 g activated charcoal/kg
 body weight) is recommended for animals known to have ingested cyanide-containing
compounds. Amyl nitrite antidotal therapy, which is prominently used in human treat-
ment, is not recommended in animals.
If a diagnosis of cyanide poisoning is certain, sodium nitrite should be given as soon
as possible. Sodium nitrite has potentially significant toxicity. This nitrite forms met-
hemoglobin, which combines with cyanide to form cyanmethemoglobin. It is a potent
vasodilator, and rapid administration may result in hypotension. Frequent blood pressure
monitoring is mandatory during administration of this compound. Another potentially
serious adverse effect of sodium nitrite administration is induction of excessive methe-
moglobin levels. This can be fatal if cyanide poisoning is not present. The usual dose of
sodium nitrite is 16 mg/kg IV of a 3% solution. Sodium nitrite is followed by the admin-
istration of sodium thiosulfate (1.65 mL of a 25% solution) given intravenously. Thiosul-
fate converts cyanide to thiocyanate. No cases of significant adverse effects of sodium
thiosulfate therapy have been reported in the 50 years this drug has been used clinically.
 In animals with less severe poisoning, sodium thiosulfate and supportive measures alone
may be sufficient. Second doses of sodium nitrite and sodium thiosulfate at one half of
the initial amounts may be given 30 minutes after the frst dose if a clinical response is
not forthcoming. Administering further prophylactic doses to patients that have regained
consciousness, are breathing spontaneously, and have stable vital signs is unnecessary
and potentially dangerous.
 In other parts of the world, alternative antidotes in clinical use include hydroxo-
cobalamin, dicobalt-ethylenediaminetetraacetic (EDTA) acid (Kelocyanor), and
4-dimethylaminophenol. At present there is a lack of international consensus about the
definitive treatment of choice.
528SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
Hydroxocobalamin was first licensed for treatment of cyanide poisoning in France in
1996 and is currently available in the United States; 50 g of hydroxocobalamin binds 1 g of
cyanide, which is then excreted by the kidneys. In humans a dose of 5 g of hydroxoco-
balamin is administered when cyanide poisoning is suggested, and a second dose may be
 necessary in response to continued progression of the clinical syndrome. Whether this
antidote is able to pass through the blood-brain barrier to potentiate direct detoxification
in the central nervous system remains unknown.
Hydroxocobalamin (vitamin Biza) is the precursor molecule of cyanocobalamin
(vitamin Bz). It is used in the treatment of pernicious anemia in humans. Hydroxoco-
balamin binds with cyanide on an equimolar basis to form cyanocobalamin and thereby
detoxify cyanide. It has less inherent toxicity than other antidotes, has proven effective
in restoration and support of cardiovascular function, and in years of foreign clinical
experience has been shown to be a safer antidote than either dicobalt edetate or sodium
nitrite. Cyanide poisoning has been studied in a variety of species including mice, rats,
guinea pigs, rabbits, dogs, and primates. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
 of a cyanide antidote have been elucidated in dogs and the canine model is considered
predictive of antidotal effects in humans.
Dicobalt-EDTA (Kelocyanor) is currently used in Europe, particularly in the United
Kingdom, but is not currently available in the United States. Dicobalt edetate releases
cobalt ions that react with cyanide ions. Highly stable cyanide-cobalt complexes are then
released by the kidneys. A 300-mg dose is given over 1 minute, and a further 300-mg dose
may be repeated in 5 minutes if no improvement is seen. Numerous side effects have been
reported in humans, including vomiting, tachypnea, chest pains, hypotension, ventricu-
lar arrhythmias, seizures, urticaria, facial-laryngeal-neck edema, and anaphylactic shock.
Each injection of cobalt edetate should be followed immediately by 50 mL of 50-1-glucose.
Cobalt-EDTA works faster than the nitrites; however, growing concern about cobalt toxic-
ity led to its recommendation as a second-line antidote.
 Finally, 4-dimethylaminophenol, introduced in Germany, also acts by generating met-
hemoglobin. Subsequent intravenous administration of sodium thiosulfate is required to
promote the conversion of cyanide to thiocyanate ion, which is then excreted from the
body. Side effects to this drug are severe and include reticulocytosis, hemolysis, and neph-
rotoxicity. A comparative evaluation of currently used antidotes for cyanide poisoning is
included in Table 42-1.
Another promising investigational antidote of cyanide is α-ketoglutaric acid. The molec-
ular configuration of this antidote renders it amenable to nucleophilic binding of cyanide.
In various animal studies, pretreatment with α-ketoglutarate reduced lethal outcomes and
increased efficacy of sodium thiosulfate. The main benefit to α-ketoglutarate is the direct
binding of cyanide without the generation of methemoglobin.
Numerous attempts have been made to identify the most effective antidote in cyanide
treatment and obtain international consensus. For an antidote to be universally accepted,
there are several important prerequisites. First, it must be readily available. Next, it must
be demonstrably effective. Finally, it must be safe. Safe means that it should not be harmful
if given to nonpoisoned patients. Many drugs are effective antidotes to cyanide. At present
the selection of antidotes used varies from country to country. In the United States sodium
nitrite is the cyanide antidote of choice. It has a wide margin of safety, but if large doses are
given, methemoglobin concentrations must be monitored.
 Dicobalt edetate is the antidote to cyanide most preferred in the United Kingdom. It
be confirmed without doubt to be suffering from cyanide toxicity before the drug is
given.
 Dimethylaminophenol is the most frequently recommended cyanide antidote in Ger-
many. It is responsible for a quick and profound methemoglobinemia. As a result, close
monitoring of methemoglobin levels must be performed.
Hydroxocobalamin is the most recommended antidote to cyanide in France. Ihe mol-
ecule is a precursor of vitamin Bjz and has little toxicity. It is a large molecule and binds
Chapter 42 | Cyanide 529
Table 42-1
Currently Used Antidotes for Cyanide Poisoning
Antidote
Advantages
Disadvantages
 Methemoglobin formers
 Potent
 Impairment of O delivery
to tissue
Sodium thiosulfate
Efficient
 Delayed action
Safe
Cobalt-EDTA
Very potent
 Numerous side effects
Immediate action
Effective if taken
Hydroxocobalamin
Less potent
Expensive
Immediate action
Red discoloration of skin
Safe
and urine
EDTA, Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid.
cyanide in an equimolar fashion. Ihe main disadvantage of this antidote is the cost. Ihere
is growing consensus that this is the most efcacious and nontoxic cyanide antidote, and
it is also relatively safe for administration when unsure of cyanide poisoning. Recently
this cyanide antidote has become available for use in the United States. Studies of cyanide
 poisoning in dogs has revealed that hydroxocobalamin therapy was efficacious in reducing
mortality when compared with a saline vehicle.
Prevention and Prognosis
Because many individuals cannot detect the odor of cyanide,the exposure limit in confined
 spaces must be closely monitored. Likewise, animals should be restricted from industrial
areas where cyanide is used in chemical synthesis. Cyanide-containing compounds should
be kept in their original containers listing ingredients and concentrations and should be
made pet proof. Most animals that recover from acute cyanide poisoning do not have per-
manent sequelae.
Asymptomatic animals with apparent minimal exposure should be observed for 6 to
 8 hours. If known exposure to a nitroprusside (or to other nitriles) has occurred, the onset
of action may be delayed up to 12 hours, and a longer period of observation and monitor-
ing is necessary.
Animals that have suffered from serious signs of cyanide poisoning (e.g., shock,
metabolic acidosis, convulsions, coma, cardiac arrhythmias, hypoventilation) and all
those receiving antidotes should be hospitalized and monitored for 24 hours following
resolution of the clinical signs. Follow-up examinations should be scheduled for several
months to screen for the development of rare central nervous system effects. In a few
isolated human cases, parkinsonian-like states with memory deficits and personality
changes have been reported following cyanide intoxication. This has not been documented
in animals.
Hemodialysis cannot be considered standard therapy for cyanide poisoning, but may
be of value for treating high thiocyanate levels that have developed in animals (a less toxic
compound produced from cyanide metabolism).
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Pathologic findings in cyanide poisonings are not characteristic. Ingestion of potassium
cyanide or sodium cyanide causes congestion of the blood vessels and corrosion of the
gastric mucosa. The smell of bitter almonds and the cherry red blood color seem to be
observed mainly in textbooks.
530SECTION4SpecificToxicants
Box 42-6
 Differential Diagnoses for Cyanide Toxicity
Acute solvent inhalation
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Heart disease
Cerebral disease
Cerebral neoplasia
Cyanide poisoning most affects those cerebral structures with the highest oxygen
requirement. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies of the rare individuals that sur-
vive acute cyanide intoxication reveal greatest damage to the cerebellum, cerebral cortex,
basal ganglia, and sensorimotor cortex. Ihese injuries are manifested as hemorrhagic
necrosis in the basal ganglia and pseudolaminar necrosis in the cerebral cortex. The damage
Bumsan eixodau ienqanas aul ong iou pue apues jo uone sixoi ioai Aq pasnes si
from the acute intoxication cellular process. MRI is the method of choice for determining
the exact extent and severity of lesions in cyanide-sensitive areas of the brain in animals
that survive the initial toxic exposure.
Differential Diagnoses
 x s a ss  a aa i  a a p si 
includes a list of differential diagnoses. Differential diagnoses of cyanide poisoning must
include any condition that results in loss of consciousness.
Suggested Readings
Baud FJ, Borrow SW, Magarbane B, et al: Value of lactic acidosis in the assessment of the severity of acute
cyanide poisoning, Crit Care Med 30:2044-2050, 2002.
Beasley DMG, Glass WI: Cyanide poisoning: pathophysiology and recommendations, Orcupational Med
48:427-431, 1998.
Bhattacharya R, Vijayaraghavan R: Promising role of α-ketoglutarate in protecting against the lethal effects
of cyanide,Human Exp Toxicol 21:297-303, 2002.
Borron S, Megarbane B, Baud FJ: Hydroxocobalamin is an effective antidote in severe cyanide poisoning in
man: abstract, Int J Toxicol 23:399 -400, 2004.
Borron SW, Barriot P, Imbert M, Baud FJ: Hydroxocobalamin for empiric treatment of smoke-inhalation
Am Emerg Med S77, 2005.
Boron SW,Stonerook M, Reid F:Efficacy ofhydroxocobalamin forthe treatment ofacute cyanide poisoning
in adult Beagle dogs, Clin Toxicol 44:5-15, 2006.
Breen PH, Isserles SA, Tabac E,et al: Protective effect of stroma-free methemoglobin during cyanide poison-
ing in dogs, Anesthesiology Sep 85(3):558-564, 1996
Bronstein AC, Spyker DA, Canitena LR, et al: Annual report ofthe American Association of Poison Control
Centers National Poison Data System (NPDS): 27th annual report 2010, Clin Toxicol 48:979-1178, 2010.
Campbell A, Jones AL: Cyanide poisoning managed with hydroxocobalamin in the UK, I Toxicol Clin Toxicol
39(3):294, 2001
Cummings TF: The treatment of cyanide poisoning, Orcupational Med 54:82-85, 2004.
De La Coussaye JIE, Houeto P, Sandouk P, et al: Pharmacokinetics of hydroxocobalamin in dogs, I Neurosurg
Anesthesiol 6:111-115, 1994.
Eyer P: Therapeutic implications of the toxokinetics and toxodynamics in cyanide poisoning, I Toxicol Clin
Toxicol 38:212-214, 2000.
Firtin JL, Ruttimann M, Domonski L, Kowalski JJ: Hydroxocobalamin: treatment for smoke inhalation asso-
ciated cyanide poisoning. Meeting the needs of fire victims, JEMS 29(Suppl):18-21, 2004.
Forsyth JC, Mueller PD,ecker CE,et al: Hydroxocobalamin as a cyanide antidote: safety, efficacy, and phar-
macokinetics in heavily smoking normal volunteers, Clin Toxicol 31:277-294, 1993.
Hall AH, Rumack BH: Clinical toxicology of cyanide, Ann Emerg Med 15:1067, 1986.
Hall AH, Rumack BH: Cyanide and related compounds. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW, Winchester JF, edi-
tors: Clinical management of poisoning and drug overdose,ed3, Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
Chapter 42 | Cyanide 531
 Kerns W, Isom G, Kirk MA: Cyanide and hydrogen sulfide. In Goldfrank LR, et al Toxicologic emergencies,
ed 7, 2002, McGraw-Hill.
Megarbane B, et al: Antidotal treatment of cyanide poisoning, I Chin Med Assoc 66:193-203, 2003.
Megarbane B, Borron SW, Baud F: Hydroxocobalamin versus conventional treatment in cyanide poisoning,
I Toxicol Clin Toxicol 40(3):314, 2002.
Rachinger J, et al: MR changes after acute cyanide intoxication, Am I Neuroradiol 23:1398-1401, 2002.
Rosenthal RE, Bogaert YE, Fiskum G: Delayed therapy of experimental global cerebral ischemia with acetyl-
L-carnitine in dogs, Neurosci Lett 18(328):82-87, 2005.
Sousa AB,et al: Toxokinetics of cyanide in rats, pigs, and goats after overdosing with potassium cyanide, Arch
Toxicol 77:330-334, 2003.
Von Landenberg F, Stonerook M, Judge M, Borron SW: Efficacy of hydroxocobalamin in a canine model of
cyanide poisoning: a pilot study: abstract, Clin Toxicol42:692, 2005.
Way IL: Cyanide intoxication and its mechanism of antagonism, Ann Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 24:451, 1984.
CHAPTER
43
Cyanobacteria
Birgit Puschner, DVM, PhD, DABVT
Caroline Moore, Bs
· Cyanobacteria are ubiquitous organisms that pose risks to companion animals
all year round.
· Cyanotoxins are either hepatic or neurologic in nature.
· Clinical signs following exposure to the hepatoxic cyanotoxins include lethargy.
depression, vomiting, diarrhea, weakness, pallor, shock, and death.
Clinical signs following exposure to the neurotoxic cyanotoxins include rapid
onset of salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, muscle rigidity, tremors,
seizures, respiratory paralysis, and death.
 Treatment for both syndromes is supportive.
Confirmation of exposure includes history of exposure to a contaminated water
source, identification of cyanobacteria in water or stormach contents, and toxin testing
of a variety of biologic specimens (e.g., stomach contents, liver, urine, and bile)
yanobacterial proliferations occur in freshwater and saline ecosystems under certain
environmental conditions leading to so-called algal blooms (Color Plate 43-1). Of the
2000 species identified based on morphologic criteria, 40 are considered toxigenic. The
first scientific report of cyanotoxin poisoning in animals was made in Australia by Francis
than reports of neurologic presentations. However, the true frequency of blue-green algae
poisonings in animals is unknown and likely greatly underestimated because of a lack of
routine diagnostic methods to confirm exposure. In the past, most cases were diagnosed by
positive identification of the algae in the suspect water source along with the occurrence of
consistent clinical signs and pathologic findings. New analytic methods can now be applied
to detect toxins in biologic specimens of animals and humans with suspect exposure to
toxic algal blooms. These capabilities will allow for in-depth diagnostic investigations and a
 better estimate of the true frequency of blue-green algae poisonings in livestock, pets, and
wildlife.
Sources
auu pue yan u aimom pu ae so (ae ua-an) eaieqo sixo
waters, including rivers, ponds, lakes, estuaries, and oceans. Several factors, such as
nutrient-rich runoff (nitrogen and phosphorus), increased water temperatures, stagnant
water conditions, and low rainfall, can increase the production of cyanotoxins in surface
waters. Most blooms form during the warm summer months but blue-green algae can
533
534SECTION4SpecificToxicants
proliferate year-round and survive in both arctic and tropical weather, and thus the toxins
may be detected year round. Animals and humans can be exposed to cyanotoxins when
using surface waters for drinking, in their daily living activities, and during recreation.?
Additionally, animals might find algae-contaminated water more palatable.3 Cyanotox-
ins have also been found in algae health supplements4 and may move up the food chain
because of bioaccumulation.
The most commonly reported deaths of domestic animals have been caused by micro-
cystins, nodularins, and anatoxin-a. These cyanotoxins can be produced by a number of
cyanobacterial species, including Anabaena spp., Microcystis spp., Aphanizomenon spp.,
sa go ae ad  sas as ds x  ds 
 and thus it is dificult to predict the nature and the level of the toxin production during
a bloom event. A 2010 study of 23 lakes in the midwest showed that microcystins were
found in al sarmples, with 95% having mutiple microcystin variants and almost half having
multiple cyanotoxins.6 Anatoxin-a, saxitoxins, cylindrospermopsin, and nodularin-R were
also detected. Interestingly, there are no documented reports of cyanotoxin poisoning in
cats. Possible reasons include lack of exposure, lack of diagnostic work-up, and decreased
susceptibility to cyanotoxins by felines.
Hepatotoxins: Microcystins and Nodularins
Toxic Dose
 Considering that most microcystin-producing algal blooms contain several of the 80-plus
structural variants of microcystins, it is dificult to estimate the toxicity potential of a bloom.
To date, the median lethal dose (LDso) of microcystins has not been determined in dogs.
 In mice, the oral LDso for microcystin-LR is 10.9 mg/kg, whereas the intraperitoneal LDso
is 50 mcg/kg, suggesting low bioavailability of microcystins.7 Currently, there are seven
known natural variants of nodularins, yet specifics about each are not well documented
and an oral LDsg for nodularins in animals is unknown. In rats the intraperitoneal LDso for
nodularins is 30-50 mcg/kg.8
Toxicokinetics
There is very limited data on the toxicokinetics of microcystins. In mice, microcystins
are absorbed by the small intestine and rapidly distributed to the liver, lung, heart, and
capillaries.? After oral exposure, the liver is the primary target organ, followed by the
kidney and gastrointestinal tract.71o As microcystins can cross the blood-brain barrier
and enter neurons,l1z they may also exhibit neurotoxicity. Laboratory studies have also
suggested microcystins are immunotoxic.13 In dogs, clinical signs of microcystin poison-
ing are seen as quickly as 1 hour after exposure.14 Death in dogs may occur within hours
of ingestion.15.16
From limited data, it is assumed that toxicokinetics of nodularins are similar to those
described for microcystins. Nodularins target the liver and kidney1 after being absorbed in
sure. Death may occur between 1 and 5 days following exposure.1720 There has been some
speculation that hepatotoxic cyanotoxins can be immunotoxic; this was confirmed recently
in two dogs that died from nodularin poisoning. The dogs had hepatic and renal necrosis
along with changes to their lymphoid organs. An analysis of liver, lung, spleen, heart,
kidney, stomach, intestine, pancreas, adrenal gland, skeletal muscles, and brain performed
 5days following exposure to nodularins in a dog resulted in only the liver and kidney show-
ing necrosis.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Microcystins and nodularins are cyclic peptides with unique amino acids. After oral
exposure, microcystins and nodularins are absorbed in the ileum and enter hepatocytes
and nephrons via the bile acid transporter mechanism.12 Ihey inhibit serine-threonine
Chapter 43 |Cyanobacteria 535
protein phosphatases 1 and 2A, resulting in disruption of the cytoskeletal components
pea us sil sasop yai i zz'tr'use snouaty yo juaauiean paieiosse ue pue
to acute liver necrosis, intrahepatic hemorrhage, and shock.15.16.18 At low doses, micro-
cystins and nodularins can lead to a slower onset of liver and kidney failure.4.17.19,20
Microcystins also lead to free radical formation, mitochondrial alterations, intracellular
calcium level alterations, and oxidative stress, which can contribute to apoptosis and
hepatotoxicity.23
Clinical Signs
Microcystin intoxication should be suspected in cases of acute hepatotoxicosis that pre-
sent with diarrhea, vomiting, weakness, pale mucous membranes, and shock. Although
most animals die within a few hours of exposure, some animals may live for several hours
to days and develop hyperkalemia, hypoglycemia, nervousness, recumbency and convul-
sions. A golden retriever vomited blue-green material, had diarrhea, and became lethar-
gic 1 hour after ingesting an unknown amount of stagnant tide pool water in California.14
Twelve hours later, the dog was icteric, severely depressed, blind, tachypneic, and had
mild epistaxis. Despite treatment, the dog became acutely dyspneic and nonresponsive
and was subsequently euthanized. Other reports of fatal microcystin poisonings in dogs
have no description of clinical findings.15.16
rhea, and inappetence. During the frst 24 hours after exposure, dogs may stabilize before
developing liver or kidney failure. Melena and hematuria can also be seen. Progression of
clinical signs in animals with nodularin poisoning is slower than in microcystin-poisoned
animals. In dogs with nodularin poisoning, the time from exposure to death ranges from
1-5 days.17.20
Minimum Database
 Establishing a history of access to algal-contaminated water is critical when suspecting
microcystin poisoning. In some cases, animals may have vomited up algal-containing
material or may have algal material on their fur. The key abnormalities when evaluating a
serum chemistry panel are related to liver damage: increased alkaline phosphatase (ALP),
alanine transaminase (ALT), and aspartate transaminase (AST) activities; hyperbilirubi-
nemia; hypoglycemia; and mild hypokalemia. Other abnormalities may include hyperam-
monemia, abnormal coagulation parameters, and leukocytosis with a mature neutrophilia,
lymphopenia, and monocytosis.14 Animals that are alive for longer periods after exposure
may develop renal failure.
Serum chemistry abnormalities in dogs with nodularin poisoning include elevated
ALT, ALP, AST, bilirubin, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and phosphorus levels. Ihrom-
bocytopenia, anemia, and increased activated partial thromboplastin time, D-dimer, and
thrombin time may also be seen.17.20 However, laboratory findings in individual cases of
nodularin poisoning vary, with some dogs displaying all or none of the clinical chemistry
abnormalities.
Confirmatory Tests
Identification of microcystin- or nodularin-contaminated water in the environment, on
the animal's fur or skin, or in the gastric contents, aids in the diagnosis. Algal samples
should be chilled, not frozen, preserved in 10% formalin (v/v 50:50), and submitted to a
phycologist for identification. Positive identification, however, does not confirm intoxi-
cation. As mentioned earlier, the toxicity of cyanobacteria is strain specific, and mor-
phologic observations alone cannot confirm a suspect diagnosis. Although many assays
are available to analyze water samples for microcystins, there are only limited methods
available to reliably and accurately detect microcystins or nodularins in biologic speci-
mens (stomach contents, liver) collected from potentially poisoned animals. Veterinary
diagnostic laboratories should be consulted to provide confirmatory testing in suspect
cases(www.aavld.org)
536SECTION4SpecificToxicants
Treatment and Prognosis
 There is no antidote for microcystin intoxication and no specific therapy has been proven
effective, especially with the rapid onset of hepatotoxicosis. Further exposure to contami-
nated water must be stopped immediately and contaminated skin should be washed with a
mild detergent. Supportive care should include fluids, plasma transfusions, hepatoprotec-
tants, and vitamin K. There are no data on the efficacy of activated charcoal in microcystin
exposures in dogs; in fact, in mice dosed with microcystins, activated charcoal did not
prove protective. Antioxidants may help reduce oxidative stress, but efficacy data is lacking.
Antibiotics such as rifampin, ampicillin, and amikacin have shown mixed effects in ani-
mals.14 Because of the rapid onset of acute hepatotoxicosis, therapeutic intervention is often
ood oi papiena si sisouoid 'ti aie saiei Aeio pue tupiemam
Treatment is supportive and may include fluids, antiemetics, vitamin B complex, gas-
and antioxidants.17.19 However, there are no successful outcomes of confirmed nodularin
poisonings despite therapeutic intervention. Thus nodularin poisoning has a very poor
prognosis.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
During necropsy, algal bloom material may be identified in the gastrointestinal tract or
on the fur of the animal. Grossly, there is generally only liver enlargement without other
lesions. Histopathologic lesions include progressive centrilobular hepatocyte rounding, dis-
sociation, and necrosis, breakdown of the sinusoidal endothelium, and intrahepatic hemor-
rhage. Ihe kidney may have moderate to severe glomerulosclerosis, shrunken glomerular
tufts, and renal casts.14
Because animals may be alive for several days after nodularin exposure, icterus may be
noted during necropsy. The abdominal cavity may contain large amounts of fluid, and vis-
cera may have subserosal edema. The liver is generaly swollen and friable with a prominent
reticular pattern.1718.20 Petechial hemorrhages can be found in thymus, lungs, and endocar-
dium.s.20 Kidneys may be swollen and pale.7 Histopathologically, diffuse centrilobular to
panlobular hepatic necrosis and hemorrhage, acute multifocal tubular degeneration and
necrosis of the proximal tubules, and scattered necrotic myocardial fibers may be found.17
Lymphoid depletion of the spleen, lymph nodes,thymus, and gut-associated and bronchus-
associated lymphoid tissues can also be observed.18
Differential Diagnoses
Other toxic causes of acute hepatic failure include amanitins, cocklebur, cycad palm, afla-
royal oil, and acetaminophen. Careful evaluation of the history, food, and environment of
the animal can help eliminate most of the toxicant differentials on the list.
Neurotoxins: Anatoxin-A, Homoanatoxin-A, Anatoxin-A(s)
ToxicDose
The oral LDs, for anatoxin-a in dogs is unknown. In mice, the intraperitoneal LDso of
anatoxin-a is 200 mcg/kg, whereas the oral LDso is greater than 5000 mcg/kg.'4 Several
studies have shown that there are significant species differences with regard to anatoxin-
a toxicity. Based on the measured concentration of anatoxin-a in collected bioflm, the
ap o1 isabut 01 aneu Pmom sop ax-sz 1o -s'z e jeu [enateu eale jo junoue paneusa
from anatoxin-a poisoning is 6 and 60 g of algal material, respectively.25 Homoanatoxin-a
is a methyl derivative of anatoxin-a and often co-produced with anatoxin-a by the same
species of cyanobacteria.26 The intraperitoneal LDso of homoanatoxin-a in mice is
250 mcg/kg.27 Toxicity data for dogs are not known. Anatoxin-a(s) is much more toxic
than anatoxin-a or homoanatoxin-a with an intraperitoneal LDso in mice of 20 mcg/kg.28
Chapter 43 | Cyanobacteria 537
Although toxicity data for dogs is not available, anatoxin-a(s) has been implicated in dog
deaths.29
Toxicokinetics
Data on the toxicokinetics of anatoxin-a, homoanatoxin-a, and anatoxin-a(s) does not exist.
 Based on the rapid onset of clinical signs after oral exposure to any of these neurotoxins,
rapid absorption is suspected. Dogs exposed to anatoxin-a-contaminated water developed
clinical signs as soon as 5 minutes later and died shortly thereafter.25,30.35 Anatoxin-a is
partly excreted unchanged by the kidney and liver as it has been detected in urine and bile
in a poisoned dog.35
Mechanism of Toxicity
 Anatoxin-a and hormoanatoxin-a are potent agonists at nicotinic cholinergic receptors in
neurons and at the neuromuscular junctions.36 After initial continuous electrical stimula-
tion, a nerve block will result in respiratory paralysis and death. Anatoxin-a can also trig-
ger dopamine and noradrenaline release.37.33 Homoanatoxin-a can initiate the opening of
endogenous voltage-dependent neuronal L-type Ca?+ channels resulting in the release of
acetylcholine from peripheral cholinergic nerves.39 The mechanism of toxicity of anatoxin-
a(s) differs from that of anatoxin-a and homoanatoxin-a. Anatoxin-a(s) is a naturally occur-
ring irreversible acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, which leads to persistent stimulation and a
neuronal muscular block.40 This mechanism is very similar to that of organophosphorus
and carbamate insecticides, except anatoxin-a(s) is incapable of crossing the blood-brain
barrier and its effects are peripheral.
Clinical Signs
 Sharing the same mechanism of toxicity, anatoxin-a and homonanatoxin-a poisonings
have identical clinical presentations. Clinical signs develop rapidly and include rigidity and
muscle tremors, followed by convulsions, paralysis, respiratory failure, cyanosis, and death.
Death typically occurs within minutes to a few hours after exposure. Other signs include
characterized by a rapid onset of excessive salivation (s stands for salivation), lacrimation,
diarrhea, and urination, all of which are clinical signs subsequent to muscarinic over-
stimulation. Nicotinic overstimulation can result in tremors, incoordination, recumbency,
convulsions, and respiratory arrest. Progression is very rapid and animals may die within
30 minutes of exposure.29
Minimum Database and Confirmatory Tests
As with other suspect cyanobacteria intoxications, algal identification in water samples
or in samples collected from the animal's skin or gastric contents greatly assists with the
diagnostic workup. Algal-containing samples should be chilled, not frozen, preserved
in 10% formalin (v/v 50:50), and submitted to a phycologist for identification. As toxic-
ity of cyanotoxins is strain-specific, positive identification does not predict the hazard
level.
Anatoxin-a, homoanatoxin-a, and anatoxin-a(s) poisonings do not result in specific
 changes in serum chemistry parameters. In fact, because of the rapid progression and
death with these neurotoxins, blood work is rarely performed. If available, possible
nonspecific changes are hyperglycemia, acidosis, mild hypophosphatemia, and mild
linesterase activity along with an adequate brain cholinesterase activity supports the
diagnosis.
 pan ae suas soo u sun te rg ssee ooi
establish a diagnosis. Anatoxin-a can be analyzed by liquid chromatography and tandem
mass spectrometry30 in algal material, water, gastrointestinal contents, urine, and bile.35
 Select veterinary toxicology laboratories can perform analysis of biologic specimens for
anatoxin-a(s).4]
538SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Treatment and Prognosis
The treatment plan goals are to prevent further exposure and absorption, to control central
 yo iasu pider a o assag a aiodns aiand oi pe suis aisas sai
signs and rapid progression to death, treatment is often impossible or unsuccessful. As with
hepatotoxic cyanotoxins, there is no data on the absorptive efficacy of activated charcoal
for neurotoxic cyanotoxins. In addition, decontamination procedures are likely contrain-
dicated because of existing neurologic signs. Seizures can be controlled with diazepam,
phenobarbital, or pentobarbital. In animals with anatoxin-a(s) poisoning, administration
of atropine can alleviate muscarinic signs. Ihe use of 2-pyridine aldoxime methyl chloride
(2-PAM; pralidoxime) is not recommended in anatoxin-a(s) poisoned animals.40
Cases of recovery from suspected anatoxin-a exposure in dogs have been documented
ood st sisouaid pue aie[ oot uayo st juauea ieul Apidei os ssaiaoid
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Animals poisoned with anatoxin-a, homoanatoxin-a, or anatoxin-a(s) may have algal mate-
rial on their fur or skin or in the stomach. Typically, there are no specific gross lesions
observed at necropsy. Nonspecific gross findings noted in anatoxin-a-poisoned dogs
include hemorrhagic liver, algal material in the stomach, and blood-tinged froth in the
include patchy eosinophilic fluid in lungs, congestion of the kidneys, and autolytic changes
 in liver and kidneys.32
Differential Diagnoses
Anatoxin-a, homoanatoxin-a, and anatoxin-a(s) poisonings need to be differentiated from
other neurotoxicants, such as organophosphorus and carbamate insecticides, strychnine,
zinc phosphide, metaldehyde, 4-aminopyridine, ethylene glycol, penitrem A, methylxan-
thines, amphetamines, saxitoxins, 4-aminopyridine, bromethalin, chlorinated hydrocar-
bons, certain mushrooms, certain drugs of abuse, and neurotoxic plants.
Other Cyanotoxins
Poisonings with microcystins, nodularins, and anatoxin-a make up the majority of case
reports in dogs, but many other cyanotoxins are considered toxic to small animals and may
result in illness and death. Thus there are likely many unreported cases because of lack of
proper diagnostic workup and confirmatory testing. Without further data it is impossible to
estimate the frequency of cyanobacteria poisoning or to better understand the cyanotoxins
involved in small animals.
Cylindrospermopsin is hepatotoxic and nephrotoxic and blocks protein synthesis, result-
ing in possible damage to the liver, kidneys, adrenal glands, intestine, lungs, thymus, and
heart.42 Although there are no confirmed cases in small animals, cylindrospermopsin poi-
soning has been confirmed in cattle and humans.42.43
Saxitoxins belong to the group of paralytic shellfish poisoning toxins, but can also be
produced by several freshwater cyanobacteria, especially Lyngbya wollei. The toxins are
very toxic to mammals by blocking voltage-gated sodium channels, ultimately lead-
ing to respiratory arrest, neuromuscular weakness, and cardiovascular shock.44 In cats,
saxitoxin poisoning has resulted in cardiovascular shock that is responsive to adrenergic
agonists.45
β-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) is a newly confirmed neurotoxic amino acid pro-
duced by a cyanobacterial species commonly found in the southeastern United States.46 In
birds, BMAA is associated with avian vacuolar myelinopathy, resulting in ataxia, tilting,
weakness, and death. The toxicity potential of BMAA in small animals is not known.
Lyngbyatoxin-a,debromoaplysiatoxin,and aplysiatoxin are produced by Lyngbya
spp. in primarily marine waters and have dermonecrotic and tumor-promoting activities.
Lyngbyatoxin-a is lipophilic and can penetrate skin, resulting in acute dermatitis. This has
Chapter 43 | Cyanobacteria 539
been reported in humans swimming in Hawais and Florida's ocean waters.4748 Debro-
moaplysiatoxin and aplysiatoxin can cause rashes and skin blisters.47
Cyanobacterial ipopolysaccharides have been implicated as causing a variety of health
effects. However, from what little is known to date, the toxic potential of cyanobacterial
lipopolysaccharides is debatable and requires more research. Not all lipopolysaccharides
are toxic and the toxicity of lipopolysaccharides in humans difers from animals, resulting
in extremely limited data on the toxicity of cyanobacterial lipopolysaccharides in small ani-
mals. It is possible that lipopolysaccharides enhance the toxicity of cyanotoxins, although
they only possess weak toxicity.49.50
References
1. Francis G: Poisonous Australian lake, Nature 18:11-12, 1878.
 2. Van Apeldoorn ME, van Egmond HP, Speijers GJ,et al: Toxins of Cyanobacteria, Mol Nutr Food Res
51:7-60, 2007.
3. Lopez Rodas V, Costas E: Preference of mice to consume Microcystis aeruginosa (toxin-producing
cyanobacteria): a possible explanation for numerous fatalities of livestock and wildlife, Res Vet Sci 67:
107110, 1999.
 sn     e s e na h e   a  t
blue-green algae dietary supplements, Environ Health Perspect 108:435-439, 2000.
5. Smith JL, Schulz KL, Zimba PV,et al: Possible mechanism for the foodweb transfer of covalently bound
microcystins, Ecotoxicol Environ Saf73:757-761, 2010.
6. Graham JL, Loftin KA, Meyer MT,et al: Cyanotoxin mixtures and taste-and-odor compounds in cyano-
bacterial blooms from the Midwestern United States, Environ Sci Technol 44:7361-7368, 2010.
7. Fawell JK, Mitchell RE, Everett DJ, et al: The toxicity of cyanobacterial toxins in the mouse: I microcys-
tin-LR,Hum Exp Toxicol 18:162-167,1999.
8. Chorus I, Falconer IR, Salas HJ, et al: Health risks caused by freshwater cyanobacteria in recreational
waters, I Toxicol Environ Health Part B, Crit Rev 3:323-347, 2000.
9. Ito E, Kondo F, Harada K: First report on the distribution of orally administered microcystin-LR in
mouse tissue using an immunostaining method, Toxicon 38:37-48, 2000.
10. Falconer IR, Dornbusch M, Moran G, et al: Effect of the cyanobacterial (blue-green algal) toxins from
Microcystis αeruginosα on isolated enterocytes from the chicken small intestine, Toxicon 30:790-793,
1992.
murine whole brain cells, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 234:247-255, 2009.
12. Fischer WJ, Altheimer S, Cattori V, et al: Organic anion transporting polypeptides expressed in liver and
brain mediate uptake of microcystin, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 203:257-263, 2005.
13. Shen PP, Zhao SW, Zheng WJ, et al: Effects of cyanobacteria bloom extract on some parameters of
immune function in mice, Toxicol Lett 143:27-36, 2003.
14. DeVries SE, Galey FD, Namikoshi M, et al: Clinical and pathologic findings of blue-green algae (Microcystis
aeruginosa) intoxication in a dog, J Vet Diagn Invest 5:403-408, 1993.
15. Walker SR, Lund JC, Schumacher DG,et al: Nebraska experience. In Hudnell HK,editor: Cyanobacte-
rial harmful aigal blooms: state of the science and research needs, 619, Springer New York, NY, 2008,
Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology, pp 139-152.
16. Wood SA, Heath MW, Holland PT, et al: Identification of a benthic microcystin-producing filamentous
2010.
17. Simola O, Wiberg M, Jokela J, et al: Pathologic findings and toxin identification in cyanobacterial
(Noduiaria spumigena) intoxication in a dog. Veterinary Pathology OnlineFirst, published on August 8,
2011, as http:// dx.doi.org/10.1177/0300985811415703.
18. Algermissen D, Mischke R, Seehusen F,et al: Lymphoid depletion in two dogs with nodularin intoxica-
tion, Vet Rec 169:15, 2001.
19. Harding WR, Rowe N, Wessels JC, et al: Death of a dog attributed to the cyanobacterial (blue-green
algal) hepatotoxin nodularin in South Africa, J S Afr Vet Assoc 66:256-259, 1995.
ceae) in a brackish lake at the German North Sea coast, J Plankton Res 15:867-872, 1993.
21. Falconer IR, Yeung DSK: Cytoskeletal changes in hepatocytes induced by microcystis toxins and their
relation to hyperphosphorylation of cell-proteins, Chem Biol Interact 81:181-196, 1992.
tases 1 and 2A, Biochem Biophys Res Commun 216:162-169, 1995.
540SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
23. Ding WX, Nam Ong C: Role of oxidative stress and mitochondrial changes in cyanobacteria-induced
apoptosis and hepatotoxicity, FEMS Microbiol Lett 220:1-7, 2003.
24. Stevens DK, Krieger Rl: Effect of route of exposure and repeated doses on the acute toxicity in mice of
the cyanobacterial nicotinic alkaloid anatoxin-a, Toxicon 29:134-138, 1991.
25. Gugger M, Lenoir S, Berger C,et al: First report in a river in France ofthe benthic cyanobacterium Phor-
midium favosum producing anatoxin-a associated with dog neurotoxicosis, Toxicon 45:919-928, 2005.
26. Namikoshi M, Murakami T, Watanabe MF, et al: Simultaneous production of homoanatoxin-a, ana-
toxin-a, and a new non-toxic 4-hydroxyhomoanatoxin-a by the cyanobacterium-a by the cyanobacte-
rium Raphidiopsis mediterranea Skuja, Toxicon 42:533-538, 2003.
27. Skulberg OM, Carmichael WW, Andersen RA,et al: Investigations of a neurotoxic oscillatorialean strain
(Cyanophyceae) and its toxin—isolation and characterization of homoanatoxin-a, Environ Toxicol Chem
11:321-329, 1992.
28. Matsunaga S, Moore RE, Niemczura WP, et al: Anatoxin-a(S), a potent anticholinesterase from Anα-
baena flos-aquae, I Am Chem Soc 111:8021-8023, 1989.
29. Mahmood NA, Carmichael WW, Pfahler D: Anticholinesterase poisonings in dogs from a cyanobacte-
rial (blue-green algae) bloom dominated by Anabaena flos-αquae, Am J Vet Res 49:500-503, 1988
Invest 20:89-92, 2008.
31. Gunn GJ, Rafferty AG, Rafferty GC, et al: Fatal canine neurotoxicosis attributed to blue-green algae
(cyanobacteria), Vet Rec 130:301-302, 1992.
32. Wood SA, Selwood AI, Rueckert A, et al: First report ofhomoanatoxin-a and associated dog neurotoxi-
cosis in New Zealand, Toxicon 50:292-301, 2007.
33. Edwards C, Beattie KA, Scrimgeour CM, et al: Identification of anatoxin-a in benthic cyanobacteria
(blue-green algae) and in associated dog poisonings at Loch Insh, Scotland, Toxicon 30:1165-1175,1992.
 34. Hoff B, Thomson G, Graham K: Neurotoxic cyanobacterium (blue-green alga) toxicosis in Ontario, Can
Vet J 48:147-147, 2007.
35. Puschner B, Pratt C, Tor ER: Treatment and diagnosis of a dogwith fulminant neurological deterioration
due to anatoxin-a intoxication, I Vet Emer Crit Care 20:518-522, 2010.
36. Thomas P, Stephens M, Wilkie G,et al: (+)-Anatoxin-a is a potent agonist at neuronal nicotinic acetyl.
choline receptors, I Neurochem 60:2308-2311, 1993.
37. Barik J, Wonnacott S: Indirect modulation by alpha 7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors of noradrenaline
release in rat hippocampal slices: interaction with glutamate and GABA systems and effect of nicotine
withdrawal, Mol Pharmacol 69:618-628, 2006.
release induced by anatoxin-A, Neurochem Int56:850-855, 2010.
39. Aas P, Eriksen S, Kolderup I,et al Enhancement of acetylcholine release by homoanatoxin-a from Oscit-
latoria formosa, Environ Toxicol Pharmacol 2:223-232, 1996.
40. Hyde EG, Carmichael WW : Anatoxin-a(s), a naturally occurring organophosphate, is an irreversible
active site-directed inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase (EC 3.1.1.7), I Biochem Toxicol6:195-201, 1991.
coupled to electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry, Toxicon 55:92-99, 2010.
42. Griffiths DJ, Saker ML: The Palm Island mystery disease 20 years on: a review of research on the cyano-
toxin cylindrospermopsin, Environ Toxicol18:78-93, 2003.
43. Saker ML, Thomas AD, Norton JH: Cattle mortality attributed to the toxic cyanobacterium Cylindro-
spermopsis raciborski in an outback region of north Queensland, Environ Toxicot14:179-182, 1999.
44. Cestele S, Catterall WA: Molecular mechanisms of neurotoxin action on voltage-gated sodium channels,
Biochimie 82:883-892, 2000.
nent of paralytic shellfish poison (PSP), in cats, Toxicon 37:447-464, 1999.
46. Bidigare RR, Christensen SJ, Wilde SB,et al: Cyanobacteria and BMAA: possible linkage with avian vacu-
olar myelinopathy (A VM) inthe south-eastern United States, Amyotroph Lateral Scler 10(Suppl 2):71-73,
2009.
47. Osborne NJT, Webb PM, Shaw GR: The toxins of Lyngbya majuscula and their human and ecological
health effects, Environ Int 27:381-392, 2001.
48. Burns J: Toxic cyanobacteria in Florida waters. In Hudnell HK, editor: Cyanobacterial harmful algal
blooms: state of the science and research needs, 619, Springer New York, NY, 2008, Advances in Experi-
mental Medicine and Biology, pp 127-137.
control, Ecol Eng 16:51-60, 2000.
50. Mohamed ZA: Toxic cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins in public hot springs in Saudi Arabia, Toxicon 51,
2008. 1130-1130.
CHAPTER
DEET
44
Konnie H. Plumlee, DVM, MS, DABVT, DACVIM
Insect repellents can contain 5% to 100% DEET.
The most common clinical signs include hypersalivation, vomiting,
hyperexcitability, tremors, ataxia, and seizures.
· No antidote is available, so treatment is supportive.
Sources
N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide (DEET) is an insect repellent marketed for humans and pets to
control mosquitoes, flies, and ticks. Ihe various formulations include sprays, sticks, creams,
lotions, and gels. Products range in DEET concentration from 5% to 100%, although those
marketed for use on pets generally contain less than 10% DEET. Pet products may also con-
tain a pyrethroid insecticide in conjunction with the DEET.
Toxic Dose
 Dogs displayed tremors and hyperactivity following each dose when dosed orally with
0.1 to 0.3 mL/kg of 95% DEET isomers daily for 13 weeks.1.2
Toxicokinetics
In dogs 7.9% to 12.8% of DEET is absorbed from the skin.1 Experimentally, 19% to 48% of
a topical dose of DEET penetrated intact skin of guinea pigs within 6 hours.? Furthermore,
topical DEET can accumulate and persist in skin and enhance the dermal absorption of
certain chemicals.2
The repellent is metabolized in the liver and is excreted chiefly in the urine; there is a
small amount of enterohepatic elimination.3
Mechanism of Toxicity
The toxicologic mechanism of action has not been described.
clinical Signs
Clinical signs in rabbits and rats include depression, excitation, ataxia, tremors, seizures,
and coma.? Hypersalivation, vomiting, hyperexcitability, tremors, ataxia, and seizures
 reportedly can develop in dogs and cats.1.3
541
542 SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Minimum Database
Evaluation of the hydration status and urinary function are necessary because the kidneys
are the primary site of elimination. Evaluation of liver function may be warranted because
the liver is the primary site of metabolism.
Confirmatory Tests
DEET can be detected in serum, urine, liver, bile, and kidney. Greater than 20 ppm DEET
in serum is considered diagnostic for poisoning in dogs and cats.4 Urine concentrations
of more than 1 ppm and tissue concentrations of more than 10 ppm support a diagnosis of
DEET toxicosis.4
Biochemistry panels, complete blood counts, urinalyses, cerebrospinal fluid analysis,
Treatment
If the exposure is dermal, the animal should be washed with a mild dishwashing detergent.
Induce emesis if oral exposure is recent and the animal is asymptomatic. Activated charcoal
followed by a cathartic can also be used for decontamination. Treat clinical signs with sup-
portive and symptomatic care. No antidote is available.
Prognosis
 Sublethally exposed animals usually recover in 24 to 72 hours with timely veterinary care.3
Differential Diagnoses
Diagnosis is usually based on a history of recent, excessive exposure to DEET along with
the appropriate clinical signs. Diseases to be included on the differential list include any
nontoxic conditions that can cause stimulation of the nervous system, such as neoplasia,
 trauma, infection, metabolic disorders, and congenital disorders.
Toxic agents that should be ruled out include metaldehyde, strychnine, lead, macro-
lide antiparasitic agents, organochlorine insecticides, and anticholinesterase insecticides
(organophosphates and carbamates). Tremorgenic syndromes can be caused by roquefort-
ine, which is a mycotoxin found in moldy blue cheese and other foodstuffs, and by penitrem
A, which is a mycotoxin found in moldy English walnuts, cream cheese, and other foods.
References
1. Dorman DC: Diethyltoluamide (DEET) insect repellent toxicosis, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
20:387-391, 1990.
2. Dorman DC, Buck W B, Trammel HL, et al: Fenvalerate/N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide (DEET) toxicosis in
two cats, I Am Vet Med Assoc 196:100-102, 1990.
3. Osweiler GD: Insecticides and molluscacides. In Osweiler GD, editor: Toxicology, Philadelphia, 1996,
Williams & Wilkins.
4. Mount ME, Moller G, Cook J,et al: Clinical illness associated with a commercial tick and flea product in
dogs and cats, Vet Hum Toxicol 33(1):19-27, 1991.
CHAPTER
45
Diethylene Glycol
Karyn Bischoff, DVM, MS, DABVT
Motoko Mukai, DVM, PhD, DABT
Diethylene glycol (DEG) is used as an automotive brake fluid, an industrial
lubricant, and a solvent.
Contarmination of pharmaceuticals and health products with DEG have resulted in
large-scale human pcisoning.
· The kidney is the major target organ of DEG. It also has a direct narcotic effect.
Clinical signs initially include depression, vomiting, and diarrhea, which are later
followed by anuric renal failure.
·Severe oxalate nephrosis does not occur.
 iethylene glycol (DEG), which is composed of two ethylene glycol molecules linked
by an ether bond, is a common industrial solvent found in or near the home as an
automotive fluid and as a component of chafing fuel such as that marketed by Sterno.
Most cases of poisoning in humans have been of epidemic proportions as the result
of contamination of pharmaceuticals and healthcare products. The frst epidemic of
DEG poisoning occurred in the United States in 1937, when DEG was used as a solvent
it resulted in a law requiring safety testing of new drugs in the United States. In the
late 1990s, 99 of 109 affected Haitian children died of acute renal failure after ingest-
ing acetaminophen syrup that was contaminated with DEG.12 In 2006 12 of 21 affected
adults died from ingestion of DEG-contaminated prescription cough syrup in Panama.3
Toothpaste imported from China and sold in the United States and in various coun-
tries in South America, the Caribbean, and Asia was found to be contaminated with
DEG in 2007.4 During a period from June to August of 2007, several companies recalled
products suspected to contain DEG after the Food and Drug Administration issued
a warning and an import alert, but thankfully no deaths were reported. As recently
as 2008 there were two outbreaks of DEG poisoning: intentional, illegal use of DEG
as a solvent in Armillarisin-A in China that resulted in 12 deaths out of 15 affected,
and accidental contamination of teething formula in Nigeria resulting in the deaths of
 84 children out of 111 affected.6.7
Sources
DEG has physical properties similar to those of ethylene and propylene glycol. This solvent
is a viscous liquid with a specific gravity of 1.1l8. It is colorless, nearly odorless, and palat-
able to children and small animals.8 It is used as an automotive brake fluid, an industrial
543
544SECTlON 4SpecificToxicants
lubricant, a solvent, and in liquid chafing fuel. DEG is less toxic than ethylene glycol in most
species, but more toxic than propylene glycol. It has occasionally been used as a less expen-
sive substitute for propylene glycol or glycerin in pharmaceutical preparations, resulting in
hundreds of human deaths.6.7.17
Toxic Dose
Accidental DEG toxicosis has been reported in humans.26.10,13-1 Experimental toxicosis
has been produced in laboratory animals, cats, dogs, and cattle.&.19.23 Toxicosis can result
from one oral dose or from cumulative dosing.16.24 The oral median lethal dose (LDso) for
 DEG in dogs, cats, and most laboratory animals is between 3.6 and 11.6 g/kg body weight.25
Humans seem to be more sensitive to toxicity of DEG. The oral minimum lethal dose in
humans, based on several outbreaks, has ranged from 0.014 to 0.35 mL/kg, and the oral
LDso is approximately 1.3 mL/kg.6.26
Toxicokinetics
DEG is absorbed rapidly in the digestive tract. Ihere is a report of DEG toxicosis result-
ing from topical exposure to damaged skin in burn patients.17 A proportion of a dose of
DEG is metabolized by hepatic alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase to
nate DEG almost entirely within 36 hours.25 Like ethylene glycol, the kidney is the target
organ of DEG, but unlike ethylene glycol toxicosis, severe oxalate nephrosis is not seen.l.i0.19
The mechanism of DEG toxicosis is not well understood.l19 Metabolites of DEG are most
likely responsible for the clinical toxicosis.6.26 Like other glycols and alcohols, DEG has a
direct narcotic effect.15
Clinical Signs
usually minor unless a large amount has been ingested. When a relatively small amount has
been ingested, the initial effects resolve quickly and the animal can appear normal for a day
or more. Anuric renal failure, which occurs several days after ingestion and is preceded by
polyuria or oliguria, is the hallmark of DEG poisoning.2 Lumbar pain has been reported in
A dog in a recent case report ingested a small amount of tire mounting wax containing DEG
and presented after an acute onset of vomiting and diarrhea with oliguria. The dog was
markedly azotemic and isosthenuric.28
Minimum Database
 Unless a large dose is ingested, animals are most likely to present to the veterinarian in the
include elevated serum urea nitrogen, creatinine, and potassum; lactic acidosis; low urine
specific gravity; and erythrocytes present in the urine.18.29 As with other glycols, the osmo-
lar gap is elevated early in the progression of toxicosis.26
Confirmatory Tests
 Suspicion of DEG toxicosis is usually based on a history of exposure, evidence of renal
failure, and kidney lesions. DEG can be detected in the blood and urine by gas chroma-
tography.6.20 The osmolar gap is increased early. Because of the rapid elimination rate,
this toxicant is unlikely to be detectable in blood or urine for more than a day or two
after exposure.
Chapter 45 | Diethylene Glycol545
Treatment
ouaeip aea uo spuadap pue aoddns rseuuas si huuoiod aa go juaea
sis. Gastrointestinal evacuation is not warranted unless ingestion was very recent, because
gastrointestinal absorption of DEG is rapid and central nervous system (CNS) depression
Occurs soon after ingestion. Supportive care includes correcting body temperature, elec-
trolyte abnormalities, and acidosis. B vitamins can be added to intravenous fluids.?6 Early
fomepizole therapy and peritoneal dialysis or hemodialyses are indicated to treat renal fail
ure in the veterinary patient. Dialysis alone has not been a suffcient treatment in people,
but it has been effective when used in conjunction with fomepizole therapy similar to that
described in survivors of DEG poisoning.3.29,30
Prognosis
The prognosis is guarded to fair in the early stages, but it is poor for animals in the uremic
phase of the toxicosis. Many affected humans have required prolonged dialysis and treat-
tality rate in human outbreaks has been due both to the age of the affected individuals (who
are often small children) and the difficulty in diagnosing DEG toxicosis.6
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Renal lesions predominate in animals that have died from DEG poisoning. The kidneys
are pale, swollen, and mottled. The renal cortex bulges at the cut surface and hemorrhage
is often visible grossly.16 Microscopic changes include degeneration and necrosis of the
 proximal convoluted tubular epithelium.6.9.25 Tubules blocked with protein casts and swol
len epithelial cells become ectatic.16.17.22.25 Calcium deposition in the proximal convoluted
tubules has been reported in children.13 Severe oxalate nephrosis does not occur in DEG
and pleura has been reported in humans.14.16 Fatty liver, centrilobular hepatocyte degenera-
tion, and necrosis have been seen in some species, but have not been reported in dogs.23
Central and peripheral nervous lesions have been reported in cattle and humans.4.19.2z
Myocardial lesions have been reported in guinea pigs.2l
Differential Diagnoses
Toxicants causing CNS depression include ethylene glycol, formaldehyde, methanol, pro-
pylene glycol, 2-butoxyethanol, ivermectin, amitraz, isopropanol, and other macrolide
antiparasitic agents, sedatives, and tranquilizers. Ethylene glycol, grapes and raisins
(dogs), paraquat and diquat herbicides, nonsteroidal antinflammatories, melamine and
cyanuric acid, and lily plants (cats) are capable of causing renal damage.
References
1. Malebranche R, Hecdivert C, Lassengue A, et al: Fatalities associated with ingestion of diethylene glycol-
contaminated glycerin used to manufacture acetaminophen syrup—Haiti, November 1995-June 1996,
MM WR 45(30):649 -662, 1996.
2. O'Brien KL, Selanikio JD, Hecdivert C,et al: Epidemic of pediatric deaths from acute renal failure caused
by diethylene glycol poisoning, JAMA 279(15):1175-1180, 1998.
3. Rentz ED,Lewis L, Mujica OJ, Barr DB, Schier IG,Weerasekera G,et al: Outbreak of acute renal failure
in Panama in 2006: a case-control study, Bull World Health Organ 86(10):749-756, 2008.
4. Bodgdanich W: Toxic toothpaste made in China is found in US, New York Times, 2 June 2007. Available
from http://www.nytimes.com/2007/06/02/us/02toothpaste.html.
546SECTlON 4 SpecificToxicants
5. Lin BL, Zhao ZX, Chong YT, Li JG, Zuo X, Tao Y,et al: Venous diethylene glycol poisoning in patients
with preexisting severe liver disease in China, World I Gastroenterol 14(20):3236-3241, 2008.
toxicity), Arch Dis Child 95(12):1062-1064, 2010.
7. Bonati M: Once again, children are the main victims of fake drugs, Arch Dis Child 94(6):468, 2009.
8. Mathews JM, Parker MK, Matthews HB: Metabolism and disposition of diethylene glycol in rat and dog
Drug Metab Dispos 19(6):1066-1070, 1991
Med I 32(11):1105-1109, 1939.
10. Wax PM: It's happening again—another diethylene glycol mass poisoning, I Toxicol Clin Toxicol
34(5):517-520, 1996.
11. Scalzo AJ: Diethylene glycol toxicity revisited: the 1996 Haitian epidemic, J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
34(5):513-516, 1996.
elixir: the Bangladesh epidemic, Br Med I 311(6997):8-91, 1995.
13. Bowie MD, McKenzie D: Diethylene glycol poisoning in children, S Afr Med I 46(27):931-934, 1972.
14. Okuonghae OH, Ighogboja IS, Lawson JO,et al: Diethylene glycol poisoning in Nigerian children, Amn
Trop Paediatr12(3):235-238,1992.
67(10):655-666, 1993.
16. Geiling EMK, Cannon PR: Pathologic effects of elixir of sulfanilamide (diethylene glycol) poisoning
JAMA 111(10):919-926, 1938.
Ann Imterm Med 106(3):478-479, 1987.
18. Sing J, Dutta AK,Khare S,et al: Diethylene glycol poisoning in Gurgaon, India, 1998, Bull World Health
Organ 79(2):88-95, 2001.
19. Winek CL, Shingleton DP, Shanor SP: Ethylene and diethylene glycol toxicity, J Toxicol Clin Toxicol
13(2):297-324, 1978.
20. Coppock RW, Mostrom MS, Khan AA, et al: Toxicology of oil field pollutants in cattle: a review,
Vet Hum Toxicol 37(6):569 -576, 1995.
21. Ogbuihi S, Petkovits T, Brinkmann B: Diethylene glycol (DEG)-associated myocardial changes: a pilot
1992.
1991.
24. Hanzlik PH, Newman HW, Van Winkle W Jr,et al: Toxicity, fate and excretion of propylene glycol and
some other glycols, I Pharmacol Exp Ther 67(12):101-113, 1939.
25. Hesser L: Diethylene glycol toxicity, Food Chem Toxicol 24(3):261-265, 1986.
26. Marraffa JM, Holland MG, Stork CM, et al: Diethylene glycol: widely used solvent presents serious poj-
soning potential, I Emerg Med 35(4):401-406, 2008.
27. Ballantyne B, Meyers RC: The comparative acute toxicity and primary irritancy of the monohexyl ethers
of ethylene and diethylene glycol, Vet Hum Toxicol 29(5):361-366, 1987.
28. Lewis DH, Goggs RA: Possible diethylene glycol toxicity in a dog, Vet Rec 164(4):127, 2009.
triethylene glycol poisoning a case report, Vet Hum Toxicol 39(1):26-28, 1997.
30. Rollins YD, Filley CM, McNutt JT: Fulminant ascending paralysis as a delayed sequela of diethylene
gycol (Stemo) ingestion, Neurol59:1460-1463, 2002.
CHAPTER
46
Ethanol
Jill A. Richardson, DVM
Ethanol is used therapeutically to treat ethylene glycol poisoning in dogs and
cats.
The most common signs of ethanol toxicity include sedation, weakness, and
ataxia.
Ethanol poisoning has occurred following bread dough ingestion in dogs
 Ethanol poisoning has also occurred following ingestion of rotten apples in a dog.
.  Treatment includes rmaintaining adequate hydration and correcting any
respiratory or CNs depression.
Sources
Ethanol is made by fermentation of sugar or by the hydration of ethene. Ethanol is com-
monly found in households in the form of alcoholic beverages. The percentage of ethanol
found in alcoholic beverages is one half of the value of the drink's proof value. Ethanol is
also used for manufacturing paints and varnishes, as a carrier in various medications, as a
disinfectant, in some types of thermometers, as a fuel substitute, and in some forms of anti-
freeze. The principal use of ethanol in veterinary medicine is in the treatment of ethylene
glycol antifreeze poisoning (Box 46-1). In humans and nonhuman primates, ethanol is
sometimes used to treat methanol poisoning.
 Ethanol intoxication has been described in dogs ingesting alcoholic drinks intended for
human consumption.4 Ethanol poisoning in dogs following ingestion of uncooked bread
dough has also been reported. Additionally, ethanol intoxication has been reported in a
dog from ingestion of rotten apples.6
Toxic Dose
The intravenous minimum lethal dose (LDio) in dogs is 1600 mg/kg, and the oral LDio is
5500 mg/kg.7 The oral median lethal dose (LDso) of ethanol in rats is 9000 mg/kg.
Toxicokinetics
Ethanol is well absorbed orally. It rapidly distributes throughout the body and crosses the
blood-brain barrier. Ethanol also crosses the placenta. Ethanol is metabolized by hepatic
 alcohol dehydrogenase, and its metabolites can be excreted in the urine, along with unme-
tabolized parent compound.
547
548SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
Box 46-1
Doses of Ethanol for Ethylene Glycol Treatment in Dogs and Cats2.3
Dogs
 1. 5.5 mL/kg of a 20% solution IV q4h for five treatments, then q6h for four additional
treatments
2. 22 mL/kg IV of a 5% solution q4h for six treatments, then q6h for four treatments
 3. Constant rate IV infusion of 5% solution to run at 5.5 mL/kg/h
Cats
1. 5 mL/kg of a 20% solution IV q6h for five treatments, then q8h for four additional
treatments
2. Constant rate IV infusion of 5% solution to run at 5 mL/kg/h
3. 1.3 mL/kg of a 30% ethanol solution given as a bolus, followed by a constant IV
infusion of 0.42 mL/kg/hr for 48 hours.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Ethanol is suspected of inhibiting N-methyl-D-aspartate glutamate receptors in brain cells
 and the related production of cyclic guanosine monophosphate.
Clinical Signs
Clinical signs seen with ethanol treatment and overdose include central nervous system
(CNS) depression, ataxia, lethargy, sedation, hypothermia, and metabolic acidosis. Clini-
cal signs (ataxia and depression) would be expected within an hour if the animal ingested a
toxic dose. Excessive gas buildup in the gut and flatulence can be noted in animals ingesting
fermented bread dough. Adverse effects associated with intravenous therapy include pain
and phlebitis.
Minimum Database and Confirmatory Tests
Blood should be collected to monitor fluid and electrolyte status. Most laboratories are
capable of determining ethanol levels in blood. In a report, a dog exhibited vomiting, ataxia,
tremors, dehydration, and died 48 hours later with an alcoholemia of 300 mg/dL.4
Treatment
Alcohols in general are absorbed very quickly via the gastrointestinal tract. Emesis
should only be attempted with extreme caution in asymptomatic animals with recent
ingestion (less than 15 minutes). Because ethanol can cause depression, inducing emesis
in a symptomatic animal may result in aspiration of vomitus. Activated charcoal has
been shown not to be effective with ethanol overdoses and is not recommended.? Intra-
venous fluids can be used to correct any dehydration present and to enhance renal etha-
nol excretion. Feeding ice chips or lavaging the stomach with cold water will help break
apart bread dough in the stomach.
Acid-base balance monitoring is recommended in symptomatic animals. Treatment for
acidosis may include administration of sodium bicarbonate. Yohimbine has been recom-
mended to treat CNS depression in dogs caused by ethanol poisoning.5
Prognosis
Most cases involving mild signs usually will resolve with close monitoring and supportive
issaidap uaisas Aroienndsai io SN araaas pue sis
Chapter 46 丨 Ethanol 549
Gross and Histologic Lesions
There are no specific gross and histologic lesions observed in ethanol-poisoned animals.
Differential Diagnoses
Other toxicants with sedative or CNS-depressant effects include barbiturates, ethylene gly-
col, propylene glycol, diethylene glycol, methanol, 2-butoxyethanol, isopropanol, benzodi-
azepines, macrolide antiparasitics, amitraz, xylitol, and marijuana.
References
1. Plumb DC: Veterinary drug handbook,ed 4, Ames, 2002, Iowa State University Press.
2. Forrester S, Lees G: Disease of the kidney and ureter. In Birchard SJ, Sherding RS, editors: Saunders
manual of small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1994, WB Saunders Co.
3. Firth A: Treatments used in small animal toxicoses. Kirk's current veterinary therapy: Xill small animat
practice, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders.
4.Van Wuijckhuise L,Cremers GG: Alcohol poisoning in dog, Tijdschr Diergeneeskd 128(9):284, 2003.
5. Means C: Bread dough toxicosis in dogs, I Vet Emerg Crit Care 13(1):39-41, 2003.
6. Kammerer M, Sachot E, Blanchot D: Ethanol toxicosis from the ingestion of rotten apples by a dog
Vet Hum Toxicol 43(6):349-350, 2001.
7.RTECS: Registry of toxic effects ofchemical substances: CD Rom, National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health, Englewood, CO, 2000, MICROMEDEX.
8. Snyder R, Andrews LS: Toxic effects of solvents and vapors. In Klaassen, editor: Casarett  Doull's
toxicology: the basic science of poisons, ed 5, New York, 1996, McGraw-Hill.
9.Poppenga Robert H: Decontaminating and detoxifying the poisoned patient, Proceedings of the Western
Veterinary Conference, February 2002.
CHAPTER
Ethylene Glycol
47
Mary Anna Thrall, DVM, MS, DACVP
Heather E. Connally, DVM, MS, DACVECC
Gregory F. Grauer, DVM, MS, DACVIM
Dwayne W. Hamar, PhD
 Ethylene glycol (EG) has a very high potential for lethal results, but with early
recognition of the syndrome and tirmely institution of therapy, animals can be
saved.
· Clinical signs and laboratory findings are very useful in diagnosing the early stage
of EG poisoning
Treatment of EG toxicosis should be instituted as quickly as possible when EG
poisoning is suggested. Prognosis is excellent in dogs treated in less than 5 hours
following ingestion and is good in cats treated in less than 3 hours following 
ingestion.
· Fomepizole, not ethanol, is the therapy of choice for dogs in which EG ingestion is
 suggested, and data support use of higher doses of fornepizole in cats suspected
of ingestion.
thylene glycol (EG) poisoning is common in dogs and catsl-4 and often results in death
if it is not diagnosed and treated promptly.5 The mortality rate in dogs is reported
St uoeixoiui Dg 'sies uT 1auatu uaa aq oi 1uanou st pue s%oz ot %6s o1y aue1 0
the second most common cause of fatal poisoning in animals according to the American
Association of Poison Control Centers.6 This high incidence is due to the ready availability,
possible pleasant taste, and small quantity of EG necessary to induce poisoning. Bittering
agents have been added to some EG formulations to deter ingestion. It is not known how
effective this has been in reducing the number of poisonings in pets. Although most EG
poisonings are accidental, malicious poisonings also occur. Ihe incidence of poisoning is
States each year.7& Ihe vast majority of these are unintentional, and approximately one
third of the cases occur in children.7 EG is the most common cause of human poisoning
in some countries, such as Poland.9 Ihe first reported case of EG intoxication in a human
being occurred in 1930,0 but the toxicity of EG was not fully realized until 1938 when
76 persons died after consuming an elixir of sulfanilamide containing 96% diethylene
glycol. Since then many reports of EG poisoning in humans and other animals have been
published.3.12-30
Sources
EG (CHgOz) is a colorless, odorless, possibly sweet-tasting liquid used primarily as an anti-
freeze and windshield deicing agent. Its small molecular weight (62 Da) makes it effective
551
552SECTION4SpecificToxicants
in lowering the freezing point of water. EG is also used as a cryoprotectant for embryo
preservation, in the manufacture of polyester compounds, as a solvent in the paint and
brake fluid, motor oil, inks, snow globes, paints, and wood stains.3l Ihe most readily
available source of EG in the home is antifreeze solution, which consists of approximately
95% EG. All dogs and cats that have been brought to Colorado State University Veteri-
nary Teaching Hospital with EG toxicosis are thought to have ingested antifreeze, with
the exception of one cat that ingested photographic developing solution.3 The source of
antifreeze is usually an open container or a puddle of antifreeze that has drained from a
radiator. Rarely, dogs may chew open a plastic container of antifreeze. Intoxication occurs
most commonly in the fall, winter, and spring, the seasons in which antifreeze is most
commonly used.3.26
Toxic Dose
The minimum lethal dose of undiluted EG is 6.6 mL/kg in the dog32 and 1.5 mL/kg in the
cat. 33
Toxicokinetics
Following ingestion, EG is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract; the rate of
absorption is delayed when food is in the stomach.34 It is then quickly distributed through-
out the blood and tissue. The plasma half-life of EG is approximately 3 hours.35.36 A variable
amount, depending on dose and species, is eliminated unmetabolized in the urine.35.37.38
The remaining EG is metabolized, primarily by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH)
and other hepatic enzymes, to glycoaldehydes and organic acids. The elimination system
appears to be saturable, with semilogarithmic rates of elimination at low doses giving way
to zero-order elimination kinetics at higher doses. Metabolites are present for up to several
days, and calcium oxalate is present in tissue for much longer.31
 The liver is the major site of EG metabolism, although small amounts of ADH are pres-
dehyde by ADH, and glycoaldehyde is then oxidized to glycolic acid and then to glyoxylic
acid. Glyoxylic acid is primarily converted to oxalic acid but may follow several metabolic
pathways; end products may also include glycine, formic acid, hippuric acid, oxalomalic
acid, and benzoic acid. EG and glycolic acid are excreted in urine in higher quantities than
any other metabolites because their metabolism is rate limiting.41l42 Calcium is bound to
oxalic acid, resulting in calcium oxalate crystal formation. Calcium oxalate crystal deposi-
tion is widespread but is most severe in the kidney, and crystalluria is a consistent finding
in animals producing urine.34.43
Mechanism of Toxicity
Before it is metabolized, EG is no more toxic than ethanol, although EG is a more potent
shaa roeu ou sel as iad i tt'touia s ui sussaidap (sn) aisas snoaiau enua
other than gastrointestinal irritation, increased serum osmolality, and CNS depres-
sion. However, unlike ethanol, EG is biotransformed to highly toxic metabolites that
result in severe metabolic acidosis and acute renal failure, which are hallmarks of EG
poisoning.331,45
Cytotoxicity
 The cytochrome P450 system is partially responsible for and is inhibited by the metabolism
of EG. Electron transfer within the P450 system is affected, resulting in the production of
oxygen radicals that are probably toxic to tissue. Moreover, the organic acid metabolites
inhibit oxidative phosphorylation, cellular respiration, glucose metabolism, protein syn-
 thesis, and deoxyribonucleic acid replication.4647 The wide range of tissue toxicities seen in
Chapter 47 | Ethylene Glycol 553
animals with EG toxicosis may be due to the fact that different tissues use different isoen-
zymes of the cytochrome P450 family.
Gastrointestinal System and Liver
EG is a gastric irritant that commonly results in vomiting in dogs and cats.26 Nausea, vomit-
ing, hematemesis, abdominal pain, and cramping have been associated with EG ingestion
in human beings.3l Calcium oxalate deposits and focal hemorrhages may be found in the
gastric mucosa at necropsy. Ultrastructural evidence of hepatocellular damage has been
reported,48.49 although serum biochemical and histopathologic evidence of hepatotoxicity
is not usually associated with EG poisoning in dogs and cats.
Nervous System
Glycoaldehyde is thought to be the metabolite primarily responsible for CNS dysfunction;
respiration, glucose, and serotonin metabolism are depressed, and CNS amine concentra-
tions are altered.19.22 Marked cerebral edema is commonly seen during the later stages of
cium oxalate deposition may contribute to CNS signs, although the concurrent metabolic
acidosis shifts calcium to the ionized active state, reducing the chances of hypocalcemia-
associated clinical signs. Acidosis is also thought to lead to altered levels of consciousness
and cerebral damage.
Metabolic Acidosis
Metabolic acidosis is often severe and has a deleterious effect on multiple organ systems.
Glycolic acid accumulation is the primary cause of the metabolic acidosis associated with
EG intoxication,52 although other acid metabolites also contribute. Glycolic acid accumu.
lates because the lactic dehydrogenase enzyme that metabolizes glycolic acid to glyoxylic
acid becomes saturated.
Renal Failure
Renal failure is the most profound consequence of EG poisoning in dogs and cats. In human
beings, permanent renal failure, as evidenced by tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis, is
rare; renal function is usually restored within 2 months after EG ingestion. However, dogs
and cats are rarely maintained for this period and are commonly euthanized during the
anuric or oliguric stage of acute renal failure.26
sible for the cytotoxicity, renal epithelial damage has now been shown to be associated
with calcium oxalate monohydrate (COM) crystal formation within the renal tubules.53
The severity of renal damage correlates well with the total accumulation of COM crystals in
kidney tissue. Studies in cultured kidney cells have demonstrated that only COM crystals,
not the oxalate ion, glycoaldehyde, or glyoxylate, produce cell death. The COM crystals
adhere to renal tubular cell membranes, and are then internalized by the cells, where they
alter cell membrane structure and function and increase reactive oxygen species and pro-
duce mitochondrial dysfunction, resulting in cell death.54
clinical Signs
oqeiaun aq pasnnn asou oui papiaip aq us pue suauadap asop are suis enu
lized EG and those caused by the toxic metabolites of EG. Ihe onset of clinical signs is
almost always acute. Early clinical signs are usually observed 30 minutes after ingestion and
often last until approximately 12 hours after ingestion; they are primarily associated with
include nausea and vomiting, CNS depression, ataxia and knuckling, muscle fasciculations
decreased withdrawal reflexes and righting ability, hypothermia, and osmotic diuresis with
resultant polyuria and polydipsia.3.2634 As CNS depression increases in severity, dogs drink
554SECTlON 4 SpecificToxicants
less, but osmotic diuresis persists, resulting in dehydration. In dogs CNS signs abate after
approximately 12 hours, and patients may briefly appear to have recovered. Cats usually
remain markedly depressed and do not exhibit polydipsia. Animals may be severely hypo-
thermic, particularly if housed outside during the winter months.
Clinical signs associated with the toxic metabolites are primarily related to oliguric
renal failure, which is evident by 36 to 72 hours following ingestion in dogs and by 12 to
24 hours following ingestion in cats. Clinical signs may include severe lethargy or coma,
seizures, anorexia, vomiting, oral ulcers and salivation, and oliguria with isosthenuria.
Anuria often develops 72 to 96 hours after ingestion. Ihe kidneys are often swollen and
painful, partic ularly in cats.
Minimum Database
Abnormal laboratory findings can also be divided into those associated with early EG
intoxication, which may be related to the presence of EG per se or to its toxic metabolites,
and those associated with late EG intoxication, most of which are related to renal failure.
Complete Blood Count
The complete blood count is not particularly useful in the diagnosis of EG poisoning. Hema-
tologic abnormalities, when present, are associated with dehydration (increased packed-
cell volume and increased plasma protein concentration) and stress (mature neutrophilia
and lymphopenia).326 Erythrocytes ocasionally exhibit echinocytosis. The mechanism for
this is not understood and may be related to abnormal serum electrolyte concentrations
or increased serum osmolality.
Serum Biochemical Profile Abnormalities Associated with Early Ethylene
Glycol Intoxication
Abnormalities are primarily due to the presence of acid metabolites of EG in the serum
that result in metabolic acidosis and include decreased plasma bicarbonate concentration
and an increased anion gap. Additionally, hyperphosphatemia may occur because of inges-
tion of a phosphate rust inhibitor present in some commercial antifreeze products.26.34 The
decreased plasma bicarbonate (HCO;-) concentration (sometimes reported as total CO, on
 biochemical profiles) can be seen as early as 1 hour following EG ingestion.
Metabolites of EG notably increase the pool of unmeasured anions and cause an
increased anion gap. Ihe anion gap (the mathematical difference between measured anions
and measured cations) is usually reported on biochemical profles, but if not it can be calcu-
lated by subtracting the sum of the HCO3- (or total COz) and chloride (Cl-) concentrations
from the sum of the sodium (Nat) and potassium (K+) concentrations. For example, if
a patient has an Na+ value of 155 mEq/L, K+ of 6 mEq/L, Cl- of 110 mEq/L, and HCO- of
10 mEq/L, the anion gap is 41 mEq/L. Under normal conditions, the anion gap for dogs
and cats is 8 to 25 mEq/L and 10 to 27 mEq/L, respectively, and is composed of phosphates,
sulfates, and negatively charged proteins that are not included in the equation. Ihe anion
gap is increased by 3 hours after ingestion, peaks at 6 hours after ingestion, and remains
increased for approximately 48 hours.43
Biochemical Profile Abnormalities Associated with Late Ethylene Glycol
Poisoning
With the onset of renal damage and subsequent decreased glomerular filtration, serum
creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) concentrations increase. In the dog, these
  un sai i g so t p i aiaq aso o aaq sa
ag usa ae s i aae asau i uaaq a pe na
polydipsia does not develop in cats, this may be in part due to dehydration. Serum phos-
phorus concentrations increase because of decreased glomerular filtration, but increases
as high as 10 mg/dL may also be observed 3 to 6 hours following EG ingestion because
of the phosphate rust inhibitors present in antifreeze solutions. In these cases, serum
Chapter 47 | Ethylene Glycol 555
phosphorus concentrations return to normal and then increase again with the onset of
azotemia. It is important to realize that hyperphosphatemia in the absence of an increased
 BUN or creatinine is most likely due to increased intake and is not an indication of compro-
mised renal function. Hyperkalemia develops with the onset of oliguria and anuria.
A decrease in serum calcium concentration is observed in approximately half of
patients3,26 and is due to chelation of calcium by oxalic acid. Clinical signs of hypocalcemia
are infrequently observed because acidosis results in a shift to the ionized, physiologically
active form of calcium.
Increased serum glucose concentration is also observed in approximately 50% of dogs
and cats326 and is attributed to the inhibition of glucose metabolism by aldehydes, increased
epinephrine and endogenous corticosteroids, and uremia.
Urinalysis
Dogs are isosthenuric (urine specific gravity of 1.008 to 1.012) by 3 hours following inges-
tion of EG because of osmotic diuresis and serum hyperosmolality-induced polydipsia.34.43
The urine specific gravity in cats is also decreased by 3 hours after ingestion, but may be
above the isosthenuric range.$s Animals remain isosthenuric in the later stages of toxicosis
because of renal dysfunction and an impaired ability to concentrate urine.
Calcium oxalate crystalluria is a common finding and may be observed as early as 3 and
6 hours after ingestion in the cat and dog, respectively, as a result of oxalic acid combining
with calcium.435s COM crystals are variably sized, clear, six-sided prisms (Figure 47-1). In
animals and people poisoned with EG, the monohydrate form is observed more frequently
than the dihydrate form, which appears as an envelope or Maltese cross.26.29 Dumbbel
or sheaf-shaped crystals are observed infrequently. The monohydrate form was previously
considered unusual in EG poisoning and was likely to be misidentifed as hippuric acid
crystals.356-60 Not only do monohydrate calcium oxalate crystals resemble hippuric acid
crystals, theoretical arguments have supported hippuric acid crystal formation in patients
with EG toxicosis.5960 X-ray diffraction, however, has definitively identifed the needle-
 shaped crystals as the monohydrate form of calcium oxalate rather than hippuric acid.61.64
The detection of calcium oxalate crystalluria, particularly the monohydrate form, provides
an important adjunct in the diagnosis of EG poisoning.
 Urine pH consistently decreases following EG ingestion. Inconsistent findings include
hematuria, proteinuria, and glucosuria. Granular and cellular casts, white blood cells, red
blood cells, and renal epithelial cells may be observed inthe sediment of some patients.326
Confirmatory Tests
Because very few abnormalities may be detected in a minimum database in animals with
early EG poisoning, other laboratory tests must be performed when EG poisoning is sug-
gested from the history or clinical signs. These include testing for the presence of EG in the
blood or urine or measuring serum osmolality.
Serum Ethylene Glycol Concentration
a ou aensn st i pue sau mog sno g ot I sead suoeauos unas 
detectable in the serum or urine 48 to 72 hours after ingestion.34.43.66 Inexpensive com-
mercial kits* are available that estimate blood EG concentrations at greater than or equal to
50 mg/dL, and the results correlate relatively well with other established methods of mea-
suring EG concentrations, such as gas chromatography,67 although the presence of pro-
pylene glycol, glycerol, or other compounds in the blood may cause a false-positive test
result (some activated charcoal suspensions, formulations of diazepam, and semimoist
diets contain propylene glycol). Ethanol and methanol do not result in a false-positive test
*Ethylene Glycol Test Kit, PRN Pharmacal Inc, 5830 McAllister Avenue, Pensacola, Florida, 32504 (phone
800-874 -9764)
556SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Figure 47-l Monohydrate calcium oxalate crystals in urine sediment of a dog with ethyl-
ene glycol toxicosis.
result. Some hospitals and diagnostic laboratories can determine quantitative concentra-
tions quickly enough to be diagnostically useful using enzymatic assays, although markedly
increased concentrations of serum lactate dehydrogenase and lactic acid may result in a
false-positive EG concentration result.29 Laboratory measurement of serum glycolic acid
concentration, although diagnostically useful, particularly after EG has been metabolized,
is rarely available at reference laboratories.68 Cats may be intoxicated with a lethal dose of
EG that is still less than the 50 mg/dL detectable level of the EG test kit. Therefore, if the
test kit result is negative and historical findings and clinical signs are compatible with EG
ingestion, the recommendation is to initiate appropriate therapy for EG intoxication and
submit a serum sample to a reference laboratory capable of determining a quantitative con-
centration. It is important to note that whatever kit is used, when EG is detected in serum
it confirms exposure only (if it is a true positive), and does not reliably predict whether
animals will succumb to clinical signs of intoxication.
Serum Osmolality
 Determination of serum osmolality is very useful for diagnosing early EG toxicosis.69
Serum osmolality is increased by 1 hour after ingestion of EG, increasing in parallel with
serum EG concentrations.43 Hyperosmolality occurs because EG is an osmotically active,
small-molecular-weight substance. When measured serum osmolality (by osmometry) is
comnpared with calculated serum osmolality, the difference is referred to as the osmole gap.
If calculated osmolality is not provided on the biochemical profile printout, osmolality in
mosm/kg may be calculated using the following formula:
1.86(Na+ + K+) + glucose/18 + BUN/2.8 + 9
Normal serum osmolality is 280 to 310 mosm/kg, and the normal osmole gap is less than
10 mosm/kg. Serum osmolality as high as 450 mosm/kg serum and an osmole gap as high
as 150 mosm/kg serum may be seen 3 hours after ingestion, depending on the quantity of
for approximately 18 hours after ingestion. Multiplication of the osmole gap by five yields an
approximate serum EG concentration in milligrams per deciliter.7l More specifically, each
100 mg/dL (16 mmol/L) increment increase in EG concentration contributes approximately
Chapter 47 | Ethylene Glycol 557
16 mosm/kg of HzO to the serum osmolality.2 Simultaneous or sequential increases in
osmole and anion gaps are very suggestive of EG intoxication. As EG is metabolized, its
contribution to the osmole gap diminishes because the accumulating negatively charged
metabolites do not contribute to the osmole gap.29 Animals presenting with signs of late
EG poisoning are likely to have little to no osmole gap increase, but will have an increased
osmolality (whether calculated or measured) because of the azotemia.
Two types of instruments are used to measure osmolality: freezing-point osmometers
and vapor pressure osmometers. Because EG is nonvolatile (boiling point, 197° C), it is
 detected by either the freezing-point or vapor-pressure methods. However, methanol,
ethanol, and other volatile compounds, although contributing to serum osmolality, may
go undetected if assayed by the vapor pressure method. Most clinical laboratories use the
freezing-point method.72 Osmolality can be measured using serum or plasma; if the latter
is used, heparin is the preferred anticoagulant. Other anticoagulants, such as ethylenedia-
minetetraacetic acid, can markedly increase osmolality and can result in spurious increases
in the osmole gap.72
Other Procedures
Another diagnostic procedure that may be helpful in detecting early EG intoxication is
examination of the oral cavity, face, paws, vomitus, and urine with a Wood's lamp to deter-
mine whether they appear fluorescent. Many antifreeze solutions manufactured today
contain sodium fluorescein, a fluorescent dye that aids in the detection of leaks in vehicle
coolant systems. The dye is excreted in the urine for up to 6 hours following ingestion of the
antifreeze.73 A negative test result does not eliminate the possibility of EG ingestion because
not all antifreeze solutions contain the dye.
Utrasonographic patterns in the kidneys of EG-intoxicated dogs and cats may be help-
fl in diagnosing late EG poisoning. A pattern of greater than normal cortical and medul-
lary echogenicity with persistence of areas of lesser echo intensity at the corticomedullary
junction and central medullary regions has been observed concurrent with the onset of
clinical anuria and is referred to as the halo sign.74 Histopathologic examination of kidneys
taken at biopsy or necropsy from EG-poisoned animals is usually confirmatory because the
renal tubules contain calcium oxalate crystals.
Treatment
Treatment should be instituted before confirmatory tests because EG is metabolized so
quickly. Therapy for EG poisoning is aimed at preventing absorption, increasing excre-
tion, and preventing metabolism of EG. Supportive care to correct fluid, acid-base,
and electrolyte imbalances is also helpful. Although therapeutic recommendations
have traditionally included induction of vomiting, gastric lavage, and administration
of activated charcoal,75.76 it is likely that these procedures are not beneficial because
of the rapidity with which EG is absorbed.3l Moreover, activated charcoal may not be
of benefit because large quantities of charcoal are necessary to bind small amounts of
EG.77 Absorption of ethanol can be inhibited to some extent by charcoal. Thus when
 oral ethanol is used as an emergency antidote, activated charcoal should definitely not
be given.78
The most critical aspect of therapy is based on prevention of EG oxidation by ADH,
Historically, treating EG toxicosis has been directed toward inhibiting EG metabolism
with ethanol, which is a competitive substrate that has a higher affinity for ADH than
EG.79 Ethanol was first described as an effective antidote for EG intoxication in human
beings in 1965 and was the therapy of choice for several years.80.82 Ethanol therapy was
described in dogs and cats in the early to middle 1970s.16.83-85 Ethanol has numerous
disadvantages because it enhances many of the metabolic effects of EG. Both ethanol
and EG are CNS depressants, and it is the compounded CNS depression that most limits
the usefulness of ethanol as an antidote. The CNS depression produced by high serum
558SECTION4SpecificToxicants
ethanol concentrations usually mandates intravenous (IV) fluid therapy for at least 48
hours. Moreover, ethanol, because of its short half-life as a competitive substrate of
ADH,s0.84.86 must be administered every 4 hours (IV) or, preferably, as a continuous
 IV drip, which often results in continuous intensive patient care. One suggested regi-
A1ana Al luaiam Apoq a/loueula %oz jo Tuu s's aaia oi si shop paiesixoul lea1l oi uau
4 hours for five treatments and then every 6 hours for four additional treatments to
maintain a serum ethanol concentration of approximately 50 to 100 mg/dL.7 A lower
dosage is suggested for cats: 5 mL of 20% ethanol/kg body weight IV every 6 hours for
five treatments and then every 8 hours for four additional treatments.75.87 Maintenance
of more consistent serum levels of ethanol may be safer and more effective; a lower
dose of 1.3 mL/kg of a 30% ethanol solution given as a bolus, followed by a constant IV
infusion of 0.42 mL/kg/hr for 48 hours, has been shown to be as effective in preventing
EG metabolism.8 Serum ethanol concentrations as low as 50 mg/dL (11 mmol/L) satu-
rate ADH.82 Older references suggest intraperitoneal (IP) administration of ethanol to
cats; however, ethanol is irritating to the peritoneum, and this route of administration
offers no advantages over IV drip administration. If pure ethanol for IV administration
 is unavailable, ethanol can be given orally, but gastric irritation may result in vomiting.
An effective dose is approximately 2 to 3 mL/lb of an 80 proof (40% ethanol) alcoholic
beverage.
Bolus injections, whether IV or IP, may increase serum ethanol concentrations to
soned with EG and then treated with IP ethanol at a dosage of 5 mL of 20% ethanol/
kg of body weight every 6 hours, serum ethanol concentrations ranged from as low
as 16 mg/dL at 6 hours after IP ethanol to as high as 240 mg/dL 30 minutes after IP
ethanol. Cats with serum ethanol concentrations of more than 200 mg/dL appeared to
sion and coma usually develop when the serum ethanol concentration is 400 to 500
mg/dL, death caused by respiratory arrest has been reported in a human with a serum
ethanol concentration of 260 mg/dL.90 Concentrations of 600 to 800 mg/dL in humans
are almost always fatal.91
Additional disadvantages of ethanol treatment include its metabolism to acetaldehyde,
which impairs glucose metabolism and is a cerebral irritant. Ethanol also contributes to
metabolic acidosis by enhancing the formation of lactic acid from pyruvate?2 and may
potentiate hypocalcemia.93 Moreover, ethanol compounds the effects of EG-induced osmotic
diuresis and serum hyperosmolality because, like EG, it is a small, molecular weight
substance.72 The recommended therapeutic serum concentration of ethanol, 100 mg/dL
(22 mmol/L), contributes 22 mosm/kg of HO to the osmole gap.29 Another substrate with
a high affnity for ADH, 1,3-butanediol, has been used experimentally in dogs and rats to
prevent the metabolism of EG and has some advantages over ethanol.6.94 However,it also
contributes to the hyperosmolality, and metabolites of 1,3-butanediol contribute to meta-
bolic acidosis.66 Despite its disadvantages, until recently ethanol has remained the therapy
of choice in cats.55.95
4-Methyl-1H-pyrazole (fomepizole66) has become the preferred antidote in dogs and
more recently cats.24.2638,43.66,9 Fomepizole is anADH inhibitor, not acompetitive substrate,
and it does not induce CNS depression (in dogs), diuresis, or hyperosmolality at the rec-
 ommended dose. The parent compound, pyrazole, was reported to inhibit ADH in 1963.96
Fomepizole is a more potent inhibitor of ADH than pyrazole7 and has none of the toxic
of fomepizole therapy was compared with that of ethanol, dogs treated with fomepizole 3
hours after EG ingestion were clinically normal within 24 hours, whereas ethanol-treated
dogs remained recumbent for 36 hours and were still severely depressed 72 hours after
ingestion. Fomepizole-treated dogs continued to drink water, whereas ethanol-treated dogs
were unable to drink, thus necessitating IV fluid therapy.38 When fomepizole was given to
xa sm i go  Axe si a g s se A se so
Chapter 47 | Ethylene Glycol559
the past 30 years, hundreds of dogs examined at Colorado State University's Veterinary
Teaching Hospital for suggested or confirmed EG intoxication have been treated with
fomepizole.24.26 Adverse clinical signs associated with the administration of fomepizole
are rare. Tachypnea, gagging, excess salivation, and trembling occur occasionally.26
The recommended dosage of fomepizole for dogs is 20 mg/kg of body weight IV ini-
tially, followed by 15 mg/kg IV at 12 and 24 hours, and 5 mg/kg IV at 36 hours.26.75.87 For
humans receiving concurrent hemodialysis, it is suggested that a continuous infusion of
1 to 1.5 mg/kg/hr of fomepizole be given during the hemodialysis procedure because the
drug is lost in the dialysate.1o0.10l Presumably, additional fomepizole should be given to dogs
if peritoneal dialysis is used as concurrent therapy. Ihe blood concentration of fomepizole
The effcacy of fomepizole treatment in cats was evaluated using the dose for dogs
and was found to be ineffective.55 Results of an in vitro study indicated that canine ADH
was more effectively inhibited by fomepizole than feline ADH and suggested that higher
doses of fomepizole might be more effective.103 An in vivo study was then performed in
cats to assess the efficacy of high-dose fomepizole compared with ethanol. Six cats were
split into two groups: three received high-dose fomepizole and three received ethanol.
Of the three cats that received high-dose fomepizole, all survived; however, one devel-
oped transient acute renal failure. Of the three that received ethanol (5 mL 20% ethanol/
kg IV every 6 hours for 5 treatments, then every 8 hours for 4 more treatments), only
-aaul s paziuenna aram pue aimey [euan ainne anaaas padonaaap oml ipaaiains auo
fore, we recommend high-dose fomepizole therapy over ethanol to treat EG-intoxicated
cats. Ihe recommended dose is 125 mg/kg IV initially, followed by 31.3 mg/kg IV at
12, 24, and 36 hours after the initial dose. If ingestion of a large amount of EG is sus-
pected, repeating serum quantification tests (via a reference laboratory or human hos-
pital) would be advantageous to determine whether continuation of therapy beyond 36
hours is necessary. Alternatively, additional doses of fomepizole can be administered
empirically.
 Although the advantages of fomepizole therapy in dogs have been recognized since the
early 1980s,66 lack of approval by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) limited its use
in animals because veterinarians were required to obtain an investigational new animal
drug (INAD) number from the FDA before purchasing the drug from a chemical supplier.
An additional inconvenience was the necessity to prepare a filtered 5% solution of the drug.
Fomepizole has now been approved for veterinary use as an antidote for suggested or con-
firmed EG intoxication and is commercially available as Antizol-Vet,* which can be conve-
niently reconstituted. Fomepizole is also considered the therapy of choice for EG poisoning
may be enhanced by the administration of thiamine and pyridoxine.z.13.11,16
tissue perfusion, and promote diuresis. The fluid volume administered should be based
on the maintenance, deficit, and continuing loss needs of the patient (Box 47-1). Frequent
measurement of urine production, serum urea nitrogen and creatinine, and blood pH,
bicarbonate, ionized calcium, and electrolytes daily or twice daily will help guide fluid and
electrolyte therapy. 17 Bicarbonate should be given slowly IV to correct the metabolic acido-
sis (See Box 47-1 for replacement recommendation). Ionized calcium should also be moni-
tored closely, and calcium gluconate or calcium chloride can be supplemented as necessary
(seeBox 47-1).
Hypothermia, if present, can be controlled with blankets or the use of a pad with circu-
latingwarm water.
In animals that are azotemic and in oliguric renal failure when brought to the veteri-
narian, almost all of the EG has been metabolized, and treatment to inhibit ADH is likely
to be of little benefit. However, ADH inhibitors should be given up to 36 hours following
*Antizol-Vet (fomepizole) for injection. Orphan Medical Inc, 1391l Ridgedale Drive, Suite 475, Minnetonka, Min-
nesota 55305. Available through the WA Butler Co (phone 800-551-3861).
560SECTION4SpecificToxicants
ingestion to prevent the metabolism of any residual EG. Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base
disorders should be corrected and diuresis established, if possible. Diuretics, particu-
larly mannitol, may be helpful. The tubular damage caused by EG may be reversible,
Mo n I on dn a u ste s o sam an us rdan rqn ing
ing EG toxicosis to regain concentrating ability, and some remain isosthenuric. Sup-
portive care to maintain the patient during the period of renal tubular regeneration
is necessary, and peritoneal or pleural dialysis may be useful.s-1zo Hemodialysis has
been attempted in dogs with EG-induced renal failurel21 and has been shown to have
a relatively good success rate in cats with acute renal failure.1zz Renal transplantation
has also been used with variable success in cats with renal failurel23124 and has been
described in dogs.125 CNS disorders are a common and often fatal complication of renal
transplantation in cats.123.126
The development of a pharmacologic approach to reduce COM crystal adherence to
tubular cells and its cellular interactions would be valuable as this would decrease the renal
toxicity in late treated cases of EG poisoning.53.17
Prognosis
EG has a very high potential for a lethal outcome, but with early recognition of the
syndrome and timely institution of therapy, animals can be saved. The quantity of EG
ingested, rate of absorption, and time interval before the institution of therapy are vari-
ables that affect the prognosis. The prognosis is excellent in dogs treated with fomepizole
within 5 hours of ingesting EG. The importance of early diagnosis and treatment was
fomepizole. Of the 18 dogs that had azotemia when initially treated, none survived. Of
the 19 dogs that did not have azotemia when initially treated, 17, or approximately 90%,
survived.26 The prognosis for cats is reasonably good if treatment is instituted within
3 hours following ingestion.5.5
 In contrast, the prognosis in human beings who survive the initial syndrome of severe
acidosis is very good. Terminal renal failure in human beings is rare, and most human
because of the effectiveness of hemodialysis therapy in humansl2s and suggests that many
more dogs and cats would survive if hemodialysis were more available and economically
feasible in animals.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Histopathologic lesions described in dogs and cats primarily relate to the kidneys. Lesions
seen in animals dying of acute renal failure include proximal tubular degeneration and
necrosis and intraluminal calcium oxalate deposition. The tubular basement membrane is
usually intact, and evidence of tubular regeneration may be present. When chronic renal
failure develops in animals, interstitial fibrosis and mononuclear inflammation may be
present. Focal hemorrhages may be present in the gastric lining, and calcium oxalate crys-
tal deposition may be found in all organs, including the intestinal mucosa, liver, heart, and
 brain. CNS lesions may include cerebral edema, focal hemorrhages, neuronal blebbing, and
perivascular infltration by inflammatory cells.
Differential Diagnoses
Ethanol, methanol, propylene glycol, xylitol, barbiturate, ivermectin, and marijuana
toxicosis can produce ataxia and other CNS signs similar to those seen in acute EG poi-
soning.129-132 These disorders can be differentiated by the diagnostic laboratory tests dis-
cussed earlier. Ethanol and methanol toxicosis is rare in domestic animals. Other causes
 of an increased anion gap include diabetic ketoacidosis and lactic acidosis; these disor-
ders can also be differentiated by appropriate laboratory tests. Other causes of increased
Chapter 47 | Ethylene Glycol 561
Box 47-1
Treatment Recommendations for Ethylene Glycol Intoxication
Steps to Inhibit EG Metabolism
Dogs*: Use One of the Following Three Therapies:
1. Fomepizole 20 mg/kg IV initially; 15 mg/kg IV 12 and 24 hours after initial bolus;
5 mg/kg IV 36 hours after initial bolus
2. Ethanol as an IV CRI: 1.3 mL of 30% ethanol/kg body weight IV bolus, then CRI of
0.42 mL/kg/hr for 48 hours
3. Ethanol as IV bolusest: 5.5 mL of 20% ethanol/kg body weight IV every 4 hours for
five treatments, then every 6 hours for four treatments
Cats*: Use One of the Following Three Therapies:
1. Fomepizole 125 mg/kg IV initially; 31.25 mg/kg IV 12, 24, and 36 hours after initial
bolus
 2. Ethanol as an IV CRI: 1.3 mL of 30% ethanol/kg body weight IV bolus, then con-
stant rate infusion CRI of 0.42 mL/kg/hr for 48 hours
 3. Ethanol as IV bolusest: 5 mL of 20% ethanol/kg body weight IV every 6 hours for
five treatments, then every 8 hours for four treatments
Steps to Correct Acid-Base and Electrolyte Imbalances
1. For severe metabolic acidosis (pH <7.2, bicarbonate <12 mEq/L), calculate bicar-
bonate replacement: base deficit × body weight (kg) × 0.3 = mEq bicarbonate
required; base deficit can be obtained from an arterial blood gas or can be calcu-
lated using serum bicarbonate [20-measured serum bicarbonate]; replace % to / of
this amount over 30 minutes; can give the rest over 4 to 6 hours (in bag of fluids),
then reassess blood gas.
2. For severe hypocalcemia (measurement of ionized calcium ideal)
 a. Monitor heart rate, respiratory rate, and heart rhythm during infusion
b. Dogs: Calcium gluconate 10%, 50-150 mg/kg (0.5-1.5 mL/kg) over 20 to
30 minutes to effect
c. Cats: Calcium gluconate 10%, 94-140 mg/kg (0.94-1.4 mL/kg) over 20 to
30 minutes to effect
Steps to Correct Fluid Imbalances
1. Estimate dehydration deficit: Estimated degree of dehydration (%) × body weight
(kg) × 1000 mL + 12 to 24 hours to replace deficit (Example: 7% dehydrated 10-kg
dog: 0.07 x 10 × 1000 mL = 700 mL replaced over 12 hours = 58 mL/hr)
2. Estimate a maintenance rate of fluids: [(30 × body weight [kg]) + 70] + 24 hours
 3. Estimate ongoing losses (vomiting): Estimated fluid loss over 4 to 6 hours replaced
over the next 4 to 6 hours (total fluid lost ÷ 4 or 6 hours)
4. Calculate fluid rate: Dehydration deficit + maintenance + ongoing losses = total mL/hr
to administer
CRI, Constant rate infusion; IV, intravenous.
For both dogs and cats, fomepizole is the recommended therapy for EG intoxication.
fBolus dosing can lead to respiratory depresson from acute increases in serum ethanol concentrations and
decreases in serum ethanol concentrations below therapeutic levels just before the next dose is administered
osmolality include ethanol and methanol toxicosis. Ethanol, like EG, can also produce
hypocalcemia.93 Other differential diagnoses for acute renal failure include leptospiro-
sis, ibuprofen and other nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug toxicoses, aminoglycoside
antibiotics, hemolytic uremic syndrome, ingestion of soluble oxalate-containing plants
uy a a jo siaquu se teet'sie u aeyiads sau a pue (an)
including Easter lily and tiger lily, have been associated with acute renal failure in cats.
562SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
majority of the dogs was hypercalcemic, which would not be expected in patients with
EG toxicosis. The pathogenesis of grape and raisin toxicosis is not yet understood, nor is
it known if the acute renal failure is secondary to the hypercalcemia and mineralization
of the kidneys or if the kidney failure leads to the hypercalcemia. Other causes of hyper-
calcemia in dogs and cats, including cholecalciferol toxicosis,47.150 will also cause acute
renal failure secondary to mineralization of the kidneys.
Acute renal failure must be differentiated from acute decompensation of chronic renal
failure. Carbamylated hemoglobin concentration has been shown to be useful in making
this differentiation.51.1s5z Additionally, animals with chronic renal failure may be anemic
and in poor body condition. A history of the duration of clinical signs is also helpful. In
children an inherited metabolic disorder, methylmalonic acidemia, has been mistakenly
diagnosed as EG poisoning,'53 and conversely, EG poisoning has been misdiagnosed as
 an inherited metabolic disorder.154 Methylmalonic acidemia has been reported in a cat
but is rare.155
Prevention
The taste of EG has long been thought to be an attractant; however, studies have shown
that unless dogs are water deprived, they usually will not drink antifreeze solutions, and
when given a choice, solutions that contain a lower concentration of EG are preferred.156
 Increasing the awareness of the toxicity of EG will aid in preventing exposure and result
in the earlier diagnosis of toxicity in animals. An antifreeze product containing propylene
glycol, which is relatively nontoxic, has been marketed and may result in fewer cases of
EG poisoning.
Acknowledgment
 The authors are grateful to Sarah Freemyer for her assistance in the preparation of this
chapter.
References
1. Barton J, Oehme F): The incidence and characteristics of animal poisonings seen at Kansas State
University from 1975 to 1980, Vet Hum Toxicol 23:101-102, 1981.
2. Grauer GF, Thrall MAH: Ethylene glycol (antifreeze) poisoning in the dog and cat, I Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 18:492-497, 1982.
3. Thrall MA, Grauer GF, Mero KN: Clinicopathologic findings in dogs and cats with ethylene glycol
intoxication, I Am Vet Med Assoc 184:37-41, 1984.
4. Mueller DH: Epidemiologic considerations of ethylene glycol intoxication in small animals, Vet Hum
Toxicol 24:21-24, 1982.
5. Rowland J: Incidence of ethylene glycol intoxication in dogs and cats seen at Colorado State University
Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Vet Hum Toxicol 29:41-44, 1987
6. Homfeldt CA, Murphy MJ: American Association of Poison Control Centers report on poisonings of
animals, 1993-1994, I Am Vet Med Assoc 212:358-361, 1998.
7. Litovitz TL,Smilkstein L,Felberg L,et al: 1996 annual report ofthe American Association ofthe Poison
Control Centers toxic exposure surveillance system, Am J Emerg Med15:447-500, 1997.
8. Jacobsen D: New treatment for ethylene glycol poisoning (editorial), N Engl I Med 340(11):879-881,
1999.
9. Sienkiewicz J, Kwiecinski H: Acute encephalopathy in ethylene glycol poisoning, Wiadomosci Lekarskie
45(13-14):536-539, 1992.
10. Anonymous: Possble death from drinking ethylene glycol ("Prestone). Queries and minor notes,
JAMA 94:1930, 1940.
11. Geiling EM, Cannon PR: Pathologic effects of elixir of sulfanilamide (diethylene glycol) poisoning.
A clinical and experimental correlation: final report, JAMA 111(10):919-926, 1938.
JLab Clin Med 33:573-584, 1948.
13. Kersting EJ, Nielsen SW: Ethylene glycol poisoning in small animals, I Am Vet Med Assoc 146:113-118,
1965.
Chapter 47 | Ethylene Glycol 563
14. Riddell C, Nielsen SW, Kersting EJ: Ethylene glycol poisoning in poultry, I Am Vet Med AssoC
150(12):1531-1535, 1967.
15. Durham PJ, Sharman JR: Ethylene glycol poisoning in dogs, NZ Vet J 18(4):55-56, 1970.
16. Beckett SD, Shields RP: Treatment of acute ethylene glycol (antifreeze) toxicosis in the dog, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 158:472-476, 1971.
17. Zenoble RD, Myers RK: Severe hypocalcemia resulting from ethylene glycol poisoning in the dog, / Am
Ani Hosp Assoc 13:489 -493, 1977.
18. Osweiler GD, Eness PG: Ethylene glycol poisoning in swine, I Am Vet Med Assoc 160(5):746-749,
1972.
19. Parry MF, Wallach R: Ethylene glycol poisoning, Am I Med 57:143-150, 1974.
20. Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC: Ethylene glycol poisoning in a dog, Mod Vet Pract 58:237-240, 1977.
21. Walton EW: An epidemic of antifreeze poisoning, Med Sci Law 18(4):231-237, 1978.
22. Gordon HL, Hunter JM: Ethylene glycol poisoning, A naesthesiα 37:332-338, 1982.
23. Boermans HI, Ruegg PL, Leach M: Ethylene glycol toxicosis in a pygmy goat, I Am Vet Med Assoc
193(6):694-696, 1988.
             
gycol intoxication in dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 195:73-76, 1989
 25. Amstrup SC, Gardner C, Myers KC, et al: Ethylene glycol (antifreeze) poisoning in a free-ranging
polar bear, Vet Hum Toxicol 31(4):317-319, 1989.
26. Connally HE, Thrall MA, Forney SD, et al: Safety and efficacy of 4-methylpyrazole as treatment for
suspected or confirmed ethylene glycol intoxication in dogs: 107 cases (1983-1995), I Am Vet Med Assoc
209:18801883, 1996.
27. Clark P, Henkel K, Swenson C: What is your diagnosis? Ethylene glycol intoxication, I Small Anim
Pract 38(10):433-450, 1997.
 28. Hutchison TW, Dykeman JC: Presumptive ethylene glycolpoisoning in chickens, Can Vet I 38(10):647,
1997.
29. Eder AF, McGrath CM, Dowdy YG, et al: Ethylene glycol poisoning: toxicokinetic and analytical fac-
tors affecting laboratory diagnosis, Clin Chem 44(1):168-177, 1998.
30. Wisse B, Thakur S, Baran D: Recovery from prolonged metabolic acidosis due to accidental ethylene
gycol poisoning, Am I Kidney Dis 33(2):E4, 1999.
 31. Davis DP, Bramwell KJ,Hamilton RS, et al: Ethylene glycol poisoning: case report ofa record-high level
and a review, I Emerg Med 15(50):653-657, 1997.
32. Kersting EJ, Nielson SW: Experimental ethylene glycol poisoning in the dog, Am I Vet Res 27:574-582,
1966.
 33. Milles G: Ethylene glycol poisoning with suggestions for its treatment as oxalate poisoning, AMA Arch
Pathol 41:631-638,1946.
34. Grauer GF, Thrall MA, Henre BA, et al: Early clinicopathologic findings in dogs ingesting ethylene
glycol, Am I Vet Res 45:2299-2303, 1984.
Metabolism studies in lab animals, Food Cosmet Toxico?9:21-38, 1971.
36. Baud FJ, Bismuth C, Garnier R, et al: 4-Methylpyrazole may be an alternative to ethanol therapy for
ethylene glycol intoxication in man, Clin Toxicol 24(6):463-483, 1986-87.
37. Gessner PK, Parke DV, Williams RT: Studies in detoxification. The metabolism ofI4C-labelled ethylene
glycol, Biochem J79:482-489, 1961.
38. Grauer GF, Thrall M, Henre BA, et al: Comparison of the effects of ethanol and 4-methylpyrazole
on the pharmacokinetics and toxicity of ethylene glycol in the dog, Toxicol Lett 35:307-314, 1987.
 39. Coen G, Weiss B: Oxidation of ethylene glycol to glycolaldehyde by mammalian tissue, Enzymol Biol
Clin 6(4):288-296, 1966.
40. Blair AH, Vallee BL: Some catalytic properties of human liver alcohol dehydrogenase, Biochemistry
5(6):2026-2034, 1966.
41. Chow JY, Richardson KE: The effect of pyrazole on ethylene glycol toxicity and metabolism in the rat,
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 43:33-44, 1978.
42. Chy KL, Murphy RC: On the metabolic acidosis of ethylene glycol intoxication, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
39:39-49, 1977.
Gation in dogs, Am I Vet Res 55:1762-1770, 1994.
44. Berger JR, Ayyar DR: Neurological complications of ethylene glycol intoxication: report of a case,
Arch Neurol 38:724-726, 1981.
45. Bove KE: Ethylene glycol toxicity, Am I Clin Pathol 45:46-50, 1966.
Food Cosmet Toxicol 9:39-55, 1971,
564SECTlON 4 SpecificToxicants
47. Voznesensky AI, Schenkman JB: Inhibition of cytochrome P-450 reductase by polyols has an electro-
static nature, Eur J Biochem 210(3):741-746, 1992.
48. Giermaziak H, Orkisz S: Effects of ethylene glycol on the ultrastructure of hepatocytes, Exp Toxicol
Pathol 47(5):359 -365, 1995.
49. Giermaziak H, Tosik D: Morphometric studies of the hepatocyte mitochondria and endoplasmic
reticulum after acute ethylene glycol poisoning, Exp Toxicol Pathol 48(4):265-268, 1996.
Conn Med 53(9):513-514, 1989.
 51. Capo MA, Sevil MB, Lopez ME, et al: Ethylene glycol action on neurons and its cholinomimetic effects
J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 12:155-159,1993.
52. Jacobsen D, Ovrebo S, Ostborg I, et al: Glycolate causes the acidosis in ethylene glycol poisoning and
is effectively removed by hemodialysis, Acta Med Scand 216:409-416, 1984.
53. De Water R, Noordermeer C, van der Kwast TH, et al: Calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis: effect of renal
ystal deposition on the cellular composition ofthe renal interstitium, A m J Kidney Dis 33(4):761-771,
1999.
54. McMartin K: Are calcium oxalate crystals involved in the mechanism of acute renal failure in ethylene
glycol poisoning? Clin Toxicol 47:859-869, 2009.
55. Dial SM, Thrall MA, Hamar DW: Comparison of ethanol and 4-methylpyrazole as therapies for
ethylene glycol intoxication in the cat, Am J Vet Res 55:1771-1782, 1994.
 56. Scully RE, Galbadine JI, McNeely BV: Case records of the Mass Gen Hosp, case 38-1979, N Engl I Med
30:650-657, 1979.
57. Kramer IW, Bistline D, Sheridan P,et al: Identification ofhippuric acid crystals in the urine of ethylene
gycol-intoxicated dogs and cats, I Am Vet Med Assoc 184(5):584, 1984.
58. Steinhart B: Case report: severe ethylene glycol intoxication with normal osmolal gap—"a chilling
thought, " J Emerg Med 8:583-585, 1990.
 59. Gabow PA, Clay K, Sullvan JB, et al: Organic acids in ethylene glycol intoxication, Ann Intern Med
105:15-20, 1986.
60. Godolphin W, Meagher EP, Sanders HD, et al: Unusual calcium oxalate crystals in ethylene glycol
poisoning, Clin Toxicol16(4):479-486, 1980
61. Thrall MA, Dial SM, Winder DR: Identification of calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals by x-ray
diffraction in urine of ethylene glycol-intoxicated dogs, Vet Pathol 22(6):625-628, 1985.
ria in dogs with ethylene glycol poisoning, Am I Vet Res 46(11):2404-2408, 1985.
63. Jacobsen D, Akesson I, Shefter E: Urinary calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals in ethylene glycol
poisoning, Scand J Clin Lab Invest 42(3):213-234, 1982.
64. Terlinsky AS, Grochowski J, Geoly KL, et al: Identification of atypical calcium oxalate crystalluria
following ethylene glycol ingestion, Am I Clin Pathol76:223-226, 1981.
11(2):379-387, 1996
66. Thrall MA, Grauer GF, Mero KN, et al: Ethanol, 1,3-butanediol, pyrazole, and 4-methylpyrazole ther-
apy in dogs with experimental ethylene glycol intoxication (abstract), Proc Am Soc Vet Clin Pathol,
1982.
 67. Dasgupta A, Blackwell W, Griego J, et al: Gas chromatographic-mass spectrometric identification and
quantitation of ethylene glycol in serum after derivatization with perfluorooctanoyl chloride: a novel
derivative, I Chromatogr B Biomed Appl 666(1):63-70, 1995.
         e      
1769-1770, 1998.
69. Ammar KA, Heckerling PS: Ethylene glycol poisoning with a normal anion gap caused by concurrent
thanol ingestion: importance of the osmolal gap, Am I Kidney Dis 27(1):130-133, 1996.
70. Jacobsen D, Bredesen JE, Eide I, et al: Anion and osmolal gaps in the diagnosis of methanol and
ethylene glycol poisoning, Acta Med Scand 212(1-2):17-20, 1982.
71. Burkhart KK, Kulig KW: The other alcohols, Emerg Med Clin North Am 8:913-928, 1990.
72. Kruse JA, Cadnapaphornchai P: The serum osmole gap, JCrit Care 9(3):18s-197, 1994.
73. Winter ML, Ellis MD, Snodgrass WR: Urine fluorescence using a Wood's lamp to detect the anti-
freeze additive sodium fluorescein: a qualitative adjunctive test in suspected ethylene glycol ingestions,
Ann Emerg Med 19:663-667, 1990.
74. Adams WH, Toal RL, Breider MA: Ultrasonographic findings in dogs and cats with oxalate nephrosis
attributed to ethylene glycol intoxication: 15 cases (1984-1988), / Am Vet Med Assoc 199(4):492-496,
1991.
75. Thrall MA,Grauer GF, Dial SM:Antifreeze poisoning. In Bonagura ID,editor: Kik's current veterinary
therapy Xll, small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
Chapter 47 | Ethylene Glycol 565
76. Thrall MA, Connally HE, Grauer GF: Don't freeze up? Quick response is key in ethylene glycol poison-
ing, Vet Tech 19:557-567, 1998.
77. Neuvonen PUJ, Olkkola KT: Oral activated charcoal in the treatment of intoxications: role of single
and repeated doses, Med Toxicol 3:32-58, 1988.
78. North DS, Thompson JD, Peterson CD: Effect of activated charcoal on ethanol blood levels in dogs,
Am J Hosp Pharm 38(6):864-866, 1981.
79. Bostrom WF, LiT: Alcohol dehydrogenase enzyme. In Jakoby WB,editor: Enzyme basis of detoxifica-
tion, vol I, New York, 1980, Academic Press.
 80. Wacker WEC, Haynes H, Druyan R, et al: Treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning with ethyl alcohol,
JAMA 194:1231-1233, 1965.
81. Peterson CD, Collins AJ, Keane WF: Ethanol for ethylene glycol poisoning (letter), N Engl I Med
305:977, 1981.
82. Peterson CD, Collins AJ,Himes JM, et al: Ethylene glycol poisoning: pharmacokinetics during therapy
with ethanol and hemodialysis, N Engl I Med 304:21-23, 1981.
83. Nunamaker DM, Medway W, Berg P:Treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning in the dog, I Am Vet Med
Assoc 159(3):310-314, 1971.
84. Sanyer JL,Oehme FW, McGavin MD: Systematic treatment of ethylene glycol toxicosis in dogs, Am J
Vet Res 34:527-534, 1973.
85. Penumarthy R,Oehme FW: Treatment of ethylene glycoltoxicosis in cats, Am J Vet Res 36(2):209-212,
1975.
Appl Pharmacol 49:385-392, 1979
veterinary therapy IX: small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1986, WB Saunders.
88. Tarr BD, Winters LJ, Moore MP, et al: Low-dose ethanol in the treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning
Vet Pharmacol Ther 8:254-262, 1985.
89. Thrall MA, Dial SM, Hamar DW, et al: Serum ethanol concentrations in ethylene glycol intoxicated
cats treated with intraperitoneal ethanol, Vet Clin Pathol 17:14, 1988.
90. Maling HM: Toxicology of single doses of ethyl alcohol. In Tremolieres J, editor: International
encyclopedia of pharmacology and therapeutics, vol II, New York, 1970, Pergamon Press
91. Mezey E: Ethanol metabolism and ethanol-drug interactions, Biochem Pharmacol 25:869-875, 1976.
92. Johnson SE,Osborne CA, Stowe CM, et al: Current status of ethylene glycol toxicity in dogs—a review,
Minneotα Vet 19:32-43, 1979.
93. Money SR, Petroianu A, Kimura K, et al: Acute hypocalcemic effect of ethanol in dogs. Alcoholism, Clin
Exp Res 13(3):453-456, 1989.
94. Cox SK, Ferslew KE, Boelen LJ: The toxicokinetics of 1,3 butylene glycol versus ethanol in the treatment
of ethylene glycol poisoning, Vet Hum Toxicol 34(1):36-42, 1992.
   s           
ethanol as therapy for ethylene glycol intoxication in cats, I Vet Emerg Crit Care 20(2):191-206, 2010.
96. Theorell H, Yonetani T: Liver alcohol dehydrogenase-DPN-pyrazole complex: a model of a ternary
intermediate in the enzyme reaction, Biochem Zeitsch 338:537-553, 1963
97. Makar AB, Tephly TR: Inhibition of monkey liver alcohol dehydrogenase by 4-methylpyrazole,
Biochem Med 13:334-342, 1975.
98. Bomstrand R, Ingemansson SO, Jensen M, et al: Normal electroretinogram and no toxicity signs
after chronic and acute administration of the alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitor 4-methylpyrazole to
the cynomolgus monkey (Macaca fascicularis)—a possible new treatment of methanol poisoning
Drug Alcohol Depend 13(1):9-20, 1984.
99. Van Stee EW, Harris AM, Horton ML, et al: The treatment of ethylene glycol toxicosis with pyrazole,
I Pharmacol Exp Ther 192(2):251-259, 1975.
100. Jobard E, Harry P, Turcant A, et al: 4-Methylpyrazole and hemodialysis in ethylene glycol poisoning
I Toxicol Clin Toxicol 34(4):373-377, 1996.
101. Jacobsen D,Ostensen J, Bredesen L, et al: 4-Methylpyrazole (4-MP) is effectively removed by haemodi-
alysis in the pig model, Hum Exp Toxicol 15(6):494-496, 1996.
102. McMartin KE, Collins TD, Hewlett TP: High pressure liquid chromatographic assay of 4-methylpyrazole.
Measurements of plasma and urine levels, J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 22(2):133-148, 1984.
103. Connally HE, Hamar DW, Thrall MA: Inhibition of canine and feline alcohol dehydrogenase activ-
ity by fomepizole, Am I Vet Res 61(4):450-455, 2000.
104. Harry P, Turcant A, Bouachour G, et al: Efficacy of 4-methylpyrazole in ethylene glycol poisoning:
dinical and toxicokinetic aspects, Hum Exp Toxicol 13(1):61-64, 1994.
105. Harry P, Jobard E, Briand M, et al: Ethylene glycol poisoning in a child treated with 4-methylpyrazole,
Pediatrics 102(3):E31, 1998.
566SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
106. Shannon M: Toxicology reviews: fomepizole—a new antidote, Pediatr Emerg Care 14(2):170-172,
1998.
107. Anonymous: Ethylene glycol antidote cleared for marketing (news), Am J Health Syst Pharm 55(2):110,
1998.
108. Baud FJ, Galliot M,Astier A,et al: Treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning with intravenous
4methylpyrazole, N Engl I Med 319(2):97-100, 1988
109. Becker C: Antidotes for methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning—a REAL challenge (editorial)
I Toxicol Clin Toxicol 35(2):147-148, 1997.
110. Brent J, McMartin K, Phillips S,et al: Fomepizole for the treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning. Meth.
111. McMartin KE, Heath A: Treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning with intravenous 4-methylpyrazole,
N Engl I Med 320(2):125, 1989.
112. Porter GA: The treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning simplified (editorial), N Engl I Med 319(2):
109-110, 1988
113. Wiley JF:Novel therapies for ethylene glycol intoxication, Curr Opin Pediatr 11(3):269-273, 1999.
114. Walder AD, Tyler CK: Ethylene glycol antifreeze poisoning. Three case reports and a review of treat-
ment, Anaesthesia 49:964-967, 1994.
115. Buchanan JA, Alhelail M, Cetaruk EW, Schaeffer TH, Palmer RB, Kulig K, Brent J: Massive ethylene
glycol ingestion treated with fomepizole alone—a viable therapeutic option, I Med Toxicol 6:131-134,
2010.
116. Stokes JB IIl, Aueron F: Prevention of organ damage in massive ethylene glycol ingestion, JAMA
243:2065-2066,1980
117. Grauer GF: Fluid therapy in acute and chronic renal failure, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
28(3):609 -622, 1998.
118. Fox LE, Grauer GF, Dubielzig RR,et al: Reversal of ethylene glycol-induced nephrotoxicosis in a dog.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 191(11):1433-1435, 1987.
119. Shahar R, Holmberg DL:Pleural dialysis in the management of acute renal failure in two dogs, I Am Vet
Med Assoc 187(9):952-954, 1985.
120. Crisp MS, Chew DJ, DiBartola SP, et al: Peritoneal dialysis in dogs and cats: 27 cases (1976-1987), I Am
Vet Med Assoc 195(9):12621266, 1989.
121. DiBartola SP, Chew DJ, Tarr MJ, et al: Hemodialysis of a dog with acute renal failure, I Am Vet Med
Assoc 186(12):1323-1326, 1985.
122. Langston CE, Cowgill LD, Spano JA: Applications and outcome of hemodialysis in cats: a review of
29 cases, I Vet Intern Med 11(6):348-355, 1997.
123. Mathews KG, Gregory CR: Renal transplants in cats: 66 cases (1987-1996), I Am Vet Med AssoC
211(11):14321436, 1997.
124. Gregory CR, Gourley IM, Kochin EJ,et al: Renaltransplantation for treatment of end-stage renal failure
in cats, I Am Vet Med Assoc 201(2):285-291, 1992.
125. Nemeth T, Toth J, Balogh L,etal: Principles of renal transplantation in the dog: a review, Acta Vet Hung
45(2):213-226, 1997.
126. Gregory CR, Mathews KG, Aronson LR,et al: Central nervous system disorders after renal transplanta
tion in cats, Vet Surg 26(5):386-392, 1997.
127. Guo C, McMartin KE: Aluminum citrate inhibits cytotoxicity and aggregation of oxalate crystals,
Toxicology 230(2-3):117-125, 2007.
128. Christiansson LK, Kaspersson KE, Kulling PE, et al: Treatment of severe ethylene glycol intoxication
with continuous arteriovenous hemofltration dialysis, J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 33(3):267-270, 1995.
a dog, I Am Vet Med A ssoc 184(12):1513-1514, 1984.
130. Suter RJ: Presumed ethanol intoxication in sheep dogs fed uncooked pizza dough, Aust Vet I 69(1):20,
1992.
131. Hurd-Kuenzi LA: Methanol intoxication in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 183(8):882-883, 1983.
132. Godbold JC Jr, Hawkins BJ, Woodward MG: Acute oral marijuana poisoning in the dog, I Am Vet Med
Assoc 175(10):1101-1102, 1979.
133. Vaden SL, Levine J, Breitschwerdt EB: A retrospective case-control of acute renal failure in 99 dogs,
I Vet Intern Med 11(2):58-64, 1997.
134. Brown CA, Roberts AW, Miller MA, et al: Leptospira interrogans serovar grippotyphosa infection in
dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 209(7):1265-1267, 1996.
Med 35(2):115-124, 1998.
136. Brown SA, Barsanti JA, Crowell WA: Gentamicin-associated acute renal failure in the dog, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 186(7):686-690, 1985.
Chapter 47 | Ethylene Glycol 567
137. Spyridakis LK, Bacia JI, Barsanti JA, et al: Ibuprofen toxicosis in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 189(8):
918-919, 1986.
138. Rivers BJ, Walter PA, Letourneau J, et al: Estimation of arcuate artery resistive index as a diagnostic
tool for aminoglycoside-induced acute renal failure in dogs, Am J Vet Res 57(11):1536-1544, 1996.
139. Holloway S, Senior D, Roth L, et al: Hemolytic uremic syndrome in dogs, I Vet Intern Med 7(4):
220227, 1993.
140. Forrester SD, Troy GC: Renal effects of nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs, Compend Contin Educ
Pract Vet 21(10):910-919, 1999.
141. Adin CA, Cowgill LD: Treatment and outcome of dogs with leptospirosis: 36 cases (1990-1998), I Am
Vet Med Assoc 216(3):371375, 2000.
142. Langston CE: Acute renal failure caused by lily ingestion in six cats, I Am Vet Med Assoc 220(1):49-52,
2002.
143. Tefft KM: Lily nephrotoxicity in cats, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 26(2):149-156, 2004.
144. Hovda L: Common plant toxicities. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors: Textbook of veterinary internal
medicine, ed 5, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders.
145. Gwaltney-Brant S, Holding IK, Donaldson CW,et al: Renal failure associated with ingestion of grapes
or raisins in dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 218(10):1555-1556, 2001.
146. Singleton VL: More information on grape or raisin toxicosis, I Am Vet Med Assoc 219(4):434-436, 2001.
147. Peterson EN, Kirby R, Sommer M,et al: Cholecalciferol rodenticide intoxication in a cat, I Am Vet Med
Assoc 199(7):904-906, 1991.
148. Gunther R, Felice LJ, Nelson RK,et al: Toxicity of a vitamin D rodenticide to dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc
193(2):211-214, 1988.
149. Fooshee SK, Forrester SD: Hypercalcemia secondary to cholecalciferol rodenticide toxicosis in
two dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 196(8):1265-1268, 1990.
150. Rumbeiha WK, Braselton WE, Nachreiner RF, et al: The postmortem diagnosis of cholecalciferol
toxicosis: a novel approach and differentiation from ethylene glycol toxicosis, I Vet Diagn Invest
12(5):426-432, 2000.
151. Vaden SL, Gookin J, Trogdon M, et al: Use of carbamylated hemoglobin concentration to differentiate
acute from chronic renal failure in dogs, Am I Vet Res 58(11):1193-1196, 1997.
152. Heiene R, Vulliet PR, Williams RL, et al: Use of capillary electrophoresis to quantitate carbamylated
hemoglobin concentrations in dogs with renal failure, J Am Vet Res 62(8):1302-1306, 2001.
153. Shoemaker JD, Lynch RE, Hoffman JW, et al: Misidentification of propionic acid as ethylene glycol in
apatient with methylmalonic academia, I Pediatrics 120(3):417-421, 1992.
154. Woolf AD, Wynshaw-Boris A, Rinaldo P,et al: Intentional infantile ethylene glycolpoisoningpresent-
ing as an inherited metabolic disorder, I Pediatrics 120(3):421-424, 1992.
155. Vaden SL, Wood PA, Ledley FD,et al: Cobalamin deficiency associated with methylmalonic acidemia
in a cat, I Am Vet Med Assoc 200(8):1101-1103, 1992.
156. Doty RL, Dziewit JA, Marshall DA: Antifreeze ingestion by dogs and rats: influence of stimulus con-
centration, Can Vet I 47(4):363-365, 2006.
CHAPTER
Grapes and Raisins
48
Michelle S. Mostrom, DVM, MS, PhD, DABVT, DABT
· Raisins, grapes, sultanas, and currants may be toxic to some dogs-no
 apparent dose response exists between the exposure dose and developrment of
renal disease.
· Clinical signs of toxicosis include voniting, anorexia, diarrhea, lethargy,
abdominal pain, oliguria, and subsequent anuria
· Clinical pathologic changes are of acute renal failure and include elevated blood
urea nitrogen and creatinine concentrations, along with hypercalcemia and
hyperphosphatemia
Treatment includes early implementation of gastrointestinal decontamination
euan joddns ol uosasuisod simoy zz ot dn ioj Adeiaur pimy aaissaiaae pue
function. Prognosis for animals with clinical oliguria or anuria is poor and requires
prolonged aggressive supportive care (e.g., hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis)
Histopathologic changes observed in the kidney include proximal renal tubule
degeneration or necrosis (with intact baserment membranes) and tubular debris
or proteinaceous casts in the tubules and collecting ducts. Intracellular and
intralurinal pigrment has been observed in some cases.
Sources
A grape is the fruit of a vine of the genus Vitis. Raisins are dried grapes, and grapes do not
become raisins until their moisture content is reduced to approximately 15%. Raisin colors
can vary as a result of the different drying processes; a dark purple or black raisin is sun-
dried, a light brown raisin is mechanically dehydrated, and yellow raisins are mechanically
dried and treated with sulfur dioxide. Grapes and raisins have been reported to cause poison-
ing in dogs since the mid- tolate 1990s. No confirmed cases of raisin and grape toxicosis have
been described in cats, although there have been anecdotal reports suggesting cats and fer-
rets may be susceptible as well. The toxic syndrome is observed with consumption of varying
amounts of fresh grapes (all types and colors) from stores or private yards, grape crushings,
fermented grapes from wineries, and commercially available raisins.2 A sultana is a white to
pale green, oval, seedless grape variety. The term currant can also refer to a grape or raisin.
Toxic Dose
saas i p is s a ig aat saop u ae aaiaq i siadde aa
to be more likely to cause adverse effects as compared with grapes.! The estimated quantity
569
570SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
of raisins causing toxicity ranges between 0.1 to 1.3 oz/kg (2.8 to 36.4 g/kg) and the estimated
quantity of grapes causing toxicity ranges between 0.7 to 5.3 oz/kg (19.6 to 148 0.4 g/kg).3
Other reports have calculated toxic, and potentially fatal, doses as ranging from 0.16 to
 0.7 oz raisins, as is, per kg of body weight; and four to five grapes, as is, was toxic to an
8.2-kg dog.4 In a review of more than 150 dogs following acute ingestion of Vitis fruits, data
indicate that toxicity increases with increasing amounts ingested; however, some animals
were asymptomatic after ingesting 1 kg of raisins.
Toxicokinetics
The toxic principle have not been identified. Ochratoxin, flavonoids, tannins, polyphe-
nolics, and monosaccharides have all been hypothesized as potential toxic principles; to
date, none has been proven. Toxicities generally have a fairly rapid onset of clinical signs
(generally within 24 hours following ingestion) and probable excretion of a toxin through
the kidneys. There does not appear to be a dose-response relationship between the amounts
of grapes and raisins ingested and the resultant renal lesions, implying some variation in the
number of toxic principles or varying sensitivities in individual dogs.$
Mechanism of Toxicity
The mechanism of toxicity is not known at this time. It appears to involve a nephrotoxic
agent or idiosyncratic reaction leading to hypovolemic shock and renal ischemia.4
clinical Signs
Typical clinical signs include vomiting within 24 hours of ingestion; vomiting may begin
within a few hours of ingestion in some dogs. It is not clear whether the vomiting is due
to some direct effect of the grapes, raisins, or the toxin on the gastrointestinal tract or
whether it is the result of the uremia secondary to renal failure. Partially digested rai-
sins or grapes have been reported in the vomit, fecal material, or both.1-3 Subsequently,
Some of the initial diarrhea observed can be directly due to the high sugar content.
These clinical signs may have a duration of days to weeks after ingestion. Within
24 hours to several days postingestion, dogs may appear dull and dehydrated with oli-
many cases because of a lack of recognition of the problem by the owners and subse-
quent delayed referral to a veterinary facility. The acute renal failure may progress to
severe metabolic abnormalities and anuria, resulting in death or euthanasia as a result
of poor treatment response.
Minimum Database
kalemia, an elevated Ca × P product, and high concentrations of blood urea nitrogen and
creatinine may develop within 24 hours to days after ingestion.2 Mild elevations in alanine
aminotransferase, and hyperamylasemia have also been reported.4
Confirmatory Tests
Because the toxic principles are unknown, an analytic diagnosis cannot be used for rai-
sin and grape poisoning. The diagnosis is based on history of exposure, clinical signs,
and histopathologic findings. Mineral analysis of two kidneys collected from a poi-
soned dog indicated a slightly elevated calcium to phosphorus ratio of 0.12 and 0.29
(normal: <0.1).6
Chapter 48 | Grapes and Raisins  571
Treatment
The ingestion of raisins and grapes in dogs (and perhaps other species due to anecdotal
reports of poisoning in cats and ferrets) should be handled aggressively. Following recent
ingestion, prompt decontamination of the gastrointestinal tract through emesis, lavage,
and activated charcoal is highly recommended. Induction of emesis more than 2 hours
following ingestion may be warranted because Vitis fruits remain in the gut for some time.
Fluid therapy should be administered for a minimum of 48 to 72 hours and serum chem-
istry values monitored for at least 72 hours for indications of acute renal failure.1-3 Careful
aissod juaaand oi aaeiad st imdmo aun pue ainssaid snouaa enua jo duoiuo
fluid overload.4 Other treatments to combat potential renal failure may include furosemide,
 dopamine, mannitol, furosemide, Hz-antagonists, and hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis.4
Prognosis
Clinical signs of ataxia, weakness, and oliguric or anuric renal failure in dogs indicate a
poor prognosis. Aggressive fluid therapy or hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis may be
inadequate to overcome the anuria at this stage. Disseminated intravascular coagulation
has occurred in some dogs during the treatment phase.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Proximal renal tubule degeneration or necrosis associated with an intact basement mem-
brane, along with less severe degeneration of the distal convoluted tubules are described
has been observed in several cases, along with tubular debris or granular to proteinaceous
casts in the tubules and collecting ducts. Some minimal mineralization within the renal
tubules has also been reported. Intracellular and intraluminal pigment, irregular in shape
and golden-brown in color, was observed in several poisoning cases. This pigment did not
stain with Von Kossa (calcium stain) or bile stains, but reacted variably with Prussian blue
(iron stain).6 Several cases of poisoned dogs had vascular lesions involving arteritis in the
colonic lamina propria, myocardium, and aortic adventitia.6
Differential Diagnoses
 Differential diagnoses associated with acute renal failure and tubular necrosis may include
ethylene glycol, heavy metals (e.g., lead, cadmium, arsenic, mercury), antibiotics (e.g.-
aminoglycosides, β-lactams, sulfonamides, tetrac ycline), hemoglobinuria, myoglobinuria,
nonsteroidal antinflammatories, leptospirosis, mushrooms, and cholemic nephrosis. Eth-
ylene glycol-poisoned dogs may display vomiting, anorexia, depression, dehydration, and
values less than 7.3, and calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals in the urine and convoluted
tubules. Lead-poisoned dogs show clinical signs associated with the gastrointestinal tract,
such as vomiting, and the central nervous system, such as tremors, seizures, or depression,
in association with an elevated blood lead level. Cadmium poisoning in dogs is uncommon
and usually is a result of chronic exposure. Clinical signs can be associated with the devel-
opment of anemia and kidney and hepatic failure; affected patients often have high uri-
nary cadmium levels. Arsenic poisoning is uncommon as well, and potentially can be ruled
out by assessing blood or urine (liver and kidney postmortem) arsenic concentrations. An
evaluation of the clinical history could indicate a possible aminoglycoside- or antibiotic-
related renal failure. Hemoglobinuria, myoglobinuria, and cholemic nephrosis could be
 distinguished by pigmented casts in renal tubules and the presence of hepatic lesions to
explain the cholemia or bile pigments in the blood. Further examination for changes in
hemoglobin, creatine phosphokinase, and liver enzymes could differentiate among these
572 SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
latter causes of acute renal failure. Most mushroom poisonings are ruled out based on his-
tory of exposure, and finding mushroom fragments in the vomit or feces.
References
1. Sutton NM, Bates N, Campbell A: Factors influencing outcome of Vitis vinifera (grapes, raisins, currants
and sultanas) intoxication in dogs, Vet Record164:430-431, 2009
raisins in dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1555, 2001.
 3. Eubig PA, Brady MS, Gwaltney-Brant SM, et al: Acute renal failure in dogs after the ingestion of grapes or
raisins: a retrospective evaluation of 43 dogs (1992-2002), I Vet Intern Med 19:663-674, 2005.
4. Mazzaferro EM, Eubig PA, Hackett TB,et al: Acute renal failure associated with raisin or grape ingestion
in 4 dogs, J Vet Emerg Crit Care 14(3):203-212, 2004.
5. Morrow CK, Valli VE, Volmer PA: Renal pathology associated with grape or raisin ingestion in canines: 10
Cases, American Association ofVeterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians46th AnnualProceedings.San Diego,
2003.
6. Morrow CMK, Valli VE, Volmer PA, Eubig PA: Canine renal pathology associated with grape or raisin
ingestion: 10 cases, J Vet Diagn Invest 17(3):223-231, 2005.
CHAPTER
49
Insects--Hymenoptera
Kevin T. Fitzgerald, PhD, DVM, DABVP
·. The medically important groups of Hymenoptera are the Apoidea (bees),
Vespoidea (wasps, hornets, and yellow jackets), and Formicidae (ants).
.These insects deliver their venorm by stinging their victims.
· Bees lose their barbed stinger after stinging and die. Wasps, hornets, and yellow
jackets can sting multiple times.
Most deaths related to Hymenoptera stings are the result of immediate
hypersensitivity reactions, causing anaphylaxis
·Massive envenomations can cause death in nonallergic individuals. The
estimated lethal dose is approximately 20 stings/kg in most mammals.
Anaphylactic reactions to Hymenoptera stings are not dose dependent or related
to the nunber of stings.
· Bee and wasp venoms are made up prirmarily of protein. Conversely, fire ant
venoms are 95% alkaloids.
· Four possible reactions are seen following insect stings: local reactions, regional
reactions, systermic anaphylactic responses, and less commonly a delayed-type
hypersensitivity.
· Clinical signs of bee and wasp stings include erytherma, edema, and pain at the
sting site. Occasionally, animals develop regional reactions.
· Onset of life-threatening anaphylactic signs typically occur within 10 minutes of
the sting
· Dagnosis of bee and wasp stings stems from a history of potential contact
matched with onset of appropriate clinical signs.
·. The composition and lethality of venom is similar between European and
Africanized bees. The main reason for the seriousness of African bee attacks is
high number of stings rather than difference in potency or amount of venor per
bee.
 therapy (antihistarmines, ice or cool compresses, topical lidocaine or corticosteroid
lotions)
· Prompt recognition and initiation of treatment is critical in successful managerment
of anaphylactic reactions to Hymenoptera stings.
· Imported fire ants both bite and sting, and envenomation only occurs through
the sting. Anaphylaxis following imported fire ant stings is treated similarly to
anaphylactic reactions following honeybee and vespid stings.
The majority of Hymenopteran stings are selflimiting events, which resolve in a
few hours without treatment. Because life-threatening anaphylactic reactions can
progress rapidly, all animals stung should be closely monitored and observed.
573
574SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Bees, Wasps, Hornets, Yellow Jackets
Sources
 i s a   r   s a s s 
venomous insects possess the capability to sting using a modified ovipositor found on the
terminal end of their abdomen. The three medically important groups are the Apoidea
(bees, with 20,000 species), Vespoidea (wasps, hornets, and yellow jackets, with 15,000 spe-
cies) and Formicidae (ants, with 15,000 species). Ihe fre ants are considered separately in
this discussion.
The family Apoidae includes the social honeybees, the solitary bees, and bumblebees.
Honeybees are herbivorous and live on nectar and pollen. Wasps, hornets, and yellow jack-
ets (Vespoidae) are predaceous carnivores and live on other insects and sweet substances,
such as sap and nectar. Feeding cues for bees emanate from flowers among which they for-
age. Ihe feeding cue for the vespids comes from flesh and the smell of sugars. There is often
 a great deal of misidentification between bees and their vespid cousins. However,the two
groups differ tremendously in their behavior and body type and can be readily identified.
Honeybees are social insects and build their nests (hives) in hollow trees or other cavities.
 Yellow jackets are usually ground dwellers, whereas the hornets and wasps live in shrubs
and trees, and are not ground nesting. Unlike bees, vespids can be frequently found near
open cans of soft drinks and sweet food and garbage.
The stinger of these insects is another method of identification.l2 Honeybees can only
sting once; they possess a barbed stinger that stays behind in the victim's skin after they
sting. The stinger and the venom sac are pulled out of the bee's abdomen and soon after
the insect dies. Wasp, hornet, and yellow jacket stingers are not barbed and each insect is
more aggressive, whereas bees are generally more docile. However, honeybees vigorously
defend their hives against intruders. Worker honeybees use their venom only in defense of
the colony against invaders, even large mammalian and other vertebrate predators. Queen
honeybees do not sting in defense; they only sting and use venom in the killing of rival
queens. Typically, people and animals are stung accidentally when they step on bees or
otherwise disturb the insects. An exception to this is the aggressive behavior of the more
recently introduced Africanized honeybee. Ihese bees attack more readily than their Euro-
pean and North American counterparts, potentially inflicting hundreds of stings.4.5 If the
offending specimen causing the sting is not available, learning the circumstances of the
stinging incident, looking for the presence of a stinger in a victim, knowing the differences
in body types, and understanding the behavioral differences between bees and wasps can be
jo dsueai e aa giasu auus a ai a u uu
hymenopterans is illustrated in Figure 49-1.
Hymenoptera
Order
Vespoidea
Apoidea
Super-family
Scolioidea
Vespidae
Formicidae
Apidae
Family
(bees)
Vespulae
Polistinae Myrmicinae
Sub-family
(yellow
(wasps)
(imported
jackets,
fire ants)
hornets)
Figure 49-l Classification of the Hymenoptera.
Chapter 49 | Insects—Hymenoptera 575
Toxic Dose
 Most deaths related to Hymenoptera stings are the result of immediate hypersensitivity
reactions causing anaphylaxis. However, death may also occur from severe local reactions,
particularly if involving the airways with subsequent respiratory obstruction. Massive
envenomation, as seen in swarm attacks, can likewise cause death in nonallergic individu-
-a a gssme g sus os aaede s asop eat paea au su un se
 mated lethal dose is approximately 20 stings/kg in most mammals.9.10
H has been estimated that the European honeybee injects 147 mcg of venom per sting,
the Africanized honeybee injects an average of 94 mcg of venom per sting, and most wasps
meter their venom like some venomous snakes and spiders; each Hymenoptera sting delivers
a relatively standard venom volume. Anaphylactic reactions are not dose-related and death
ae  ssan sn e   s as e g in 
s jo isn  s r  on    oi
envenomations is a consequence ofhepatic necrosis, renal degeneration, and cardiac arrest.14
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Toxicity
Hymenoptera venoms are composed of complex mixtures of allergic proteins, active anti-
gens, and peptides.5 Both bee and wasp venoms are made up primarily of protein. Bee
teins, enzymes, and amines.
BeeVenom
The major component of honeybee venom is mellitin, which acts as a detergent to disrupt
cell membranes and liberate biogenic amines and potassium.15.16 Mellitin is a protein that
hydrolyzes cell membranes, alters cellular permeability, and causes histamine release. Mel-
litin is considered the agent most responsible for local pain. In addition, it induces catechol-
amine release, which acts with phospholipase Az to cause intravascular hemolysis. Large
doses of mellitin cause irreversible contraction of the heart and rapid death
Peptide 401 (or mast cell degranulating peptide) causes mast cells to degranulate, releas-
ing histamine and vasoactive amines. Histamine release by bee venom is mainly mediated
 by mast cell degranulation peptide.
Phospholipase A, is the major allergenic component of bee venom and acts in concert
with melitin to cause intravascular hemolysis. Phospholipase Az appears to represent the
major antigen or allergen in bee venom. Phospholipase readily forms antibodies, is the
main allergen in bee venom, and is probably responsible for many anaphylactic deaths.
Hyaluronidase causes changes in cell permeability by altering cell membranes and dis-
rupts collagen, allowing other venom components to penetrate into the victim's tissues; it is
called the *spreading factor" Hyaluronidase is allergenic. The chief enzymes found in bee
venom are hyaluronidase and phospholipase A.
The venom also contains vasoactive amines, such as histamine, dopamine, and norepi-
nephrine, and other unidentifed proteins.7.17
Apamin in bee venom is a neurotoxin that acts on the spinal cord. Adolapin inhib-
is prostaglandin synthetase and has antinflammatory actions, and it has been postulated
that it may be useful in the treatment of arthritis. The two most lethal factors in honey-
 bee venom are phospholipase A, and mellitin. Ihese two peptides account for 70% of the
venom. Mellitin has been shown to produce cardiotoxicity and result in cardiac failure and
 s sd  a   s  a n
the factor most responsible for anaphylactic deaths. The effects of the two venom compo-
nents have not been shown to be synergistic. Furthermore, unlike phospholipase, mellitin
is a poor antigen and antimellitin antibodies are not readily produced. As a result, antive-
nom produced by injection of a whole honeybee venom is not likely to be of much effect in
saving lives of victims massively envenomated by honeybees. The most beneficial research
efforts for saving the lives of massively envenomated victims focus on neutralizing or block-
ing the cardiotoxic effects of mellitin.13
576SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Wasp and Hornet Venom
 The venom of the vespids contains three major proteins that act as allergens and also a wide
variety of vasoactive amines and peptides.8 Mellitin is not found in vespid venom. Ihe
intense pain of vespid stings is due to serotonin, wasp kinins, and acetylcholine. The major
mined. The mastoparans are similar to the mast cell degranulation peptide in bee venom, but
is action is weaker. Phospholipase A may account for some of the coagulation abnormalities
caused by wasp venom. A comparison of Hymenoptera venoms is included in Box 49-1.
Response to Envenomation
Four primary reactions may be seen following a Hymenoptera envenomation. First and
most commonly seen is local pain and swelling. This reaction occurs in all envenomated
(stung) individuals to some degree and is caused by vasoactive components of bee venom
rather than by an allergic mechanism. Second is a larger, regional reaction, mediated by
allergic mechanisms, involving parts of the body in continuity with the sting site. Ihe third
and more severe type of reaction is a systemic, anaphylactic response characterized by
varying degrees of urticaria, angioedema, nausea and vomiting, hypotension, and dyspnea,
caused by an immediate hypersensitivity reaction. This type of reaction occurs in individu-
als who have specific immunoglobulin (Ig) E antibodies to allergenic components of bee
venom and occurs within a few minutes of the sting. The fourth possible reaction is uncom-
mon and consists of skin rashes and serum sickness-like symptoms occurring within 3 days
to 2 weeks after envenomation. This type of response is thought to be mediated by circulat-
ing immune complexes or a delayed hypersensitivity reaction.
The exact incidence of anaphylactic reactions to bee or vespid stings is unknown in
companion animals. In humans the incidence is somewhere between 1% and 3%. Ana-
phylactic signs usually are apparent within
15 minutes of the sting. For dogs, if a severe
 Comparison of
systemic allergic reaction has not occurred
Box 49-1
within 30 minutes, it is unlikely to begin.
Hymenoptera Venom
Anaphylaxis is IgE mediated.17 In indi-
Apids (Bees)
viduals who have previously been sensi-
tized to bee venom, IgE antibodies attach
Phospholipase A
Hyaluronidase
to tissue mast cells and basophils. Once
Mellitin
these cells are activated, the progression
of the cascade reaction increases vasoac-
Apamin
Biogenic amines
tive substances, which stimulate release
Acid phosphatase
of leukotrienes, histamine, and eosinophil
 Mast cell degranulating peptide
chemotactic factor-A. Anaphylactic reac-
Minimine
tions do not depend on the number of
stings. Animals allergic to bee and vespid
Vespids (Wasps, Yellow Jackets,
venom develop a wheal and flare reaction
Hornets)
at the site of the inoculum. The shorter the
 Phospholipase A
interval between the sting and the onset
Hyaluronidase
 of signs, the more severe the anaphylactic
Biogenic amines
reaction will be. A fulminant cascade of
Kinins
reactions can quickly follow initial mild
 Acid phosphatase
clinical signs. Death can occur within sev-
Antigen 5
eral minutes.
 Mast cell degranulating peptide
The accidental introduction of the
Formicides (Fire Ants)
native African bee Apis mellifera scutellata
 Phospholipase
into Brazil in 1957 and its subsequent dis-
placement and hybridization with the long-
Hyaluronidase
Biogenic amines
established European bee Apis mellifera
melliferahasresultedinthehighlyaggressive
 Piperidines
Africanized honeybee. The Africanized
Chapter 49 | Insects—Hymenoptera 577
bees attack in larger numbers, are ready to sting much faster and with much less provoca-
tion, and are more persistent in their attacks than their European counterparts. The Afri-
canized hybrids are better adapted to warmer climates than European bees and as a result
have been very successful and have spread rapidly throughout Latin America. By 1992 the
African hybrid bees crossed the border into the United States and are now found in Texas
Arizona, New Mexico, and southern California. Based on weather and seasonal tempera-
tures, they are predicted to eventually be distributed as far east as North Carolina. Despite
the Africanized bees' tendency to attack and sting more quickly and in much greater num-
bers (victims may be stung by dozens if not hundreds of these bees), the venom of the Afri-
can hybrids is no more toxic than the venom of European varieties. In view of the almost
identical nature of their venom, the greater toxic reaction seen in animals stung by African-
ized hybrids is a direct result of the higher venom dose to the victim because of the greater
number of stings inflicted. Investigations have shown the lethalities of the two venoms to be
indistinguishable, and in fact the venoms of the different species of honeybees are remark-
ably similar in their lethal activity to mice20.23 or in cases in which venoms vary in activity
in regard to body size. The giant honeybee releases more venom per sting compared with
the Asian and dwarf honeybees.
Clinical Signs
Typically, honeybee stings are manifested as localized edema without a systemic reaction.
Unlike venomous spider bites, venom of all Hymenoptera causes some degree of local
swelling and pain, and victims know that they have been stung. Generally the small local
reaction of erythema, edema, and pain at the site of the sting is a self-limiting, non-IgE-
mediated condition, which spontaneously resolves within 24 hours. Occasionally, animals
develop more extensive regional reactions. These more severe regional responses involve
erythema and local edema and may involve an entire extremity. Ihe regional reaction is
thought to occur from local mast cell degranulation and may not develop until up to 24
hours after the envenomation. This reaction is often termed cellulitis; however, infection
rarely follows insect stings. A less common reaction to envenomating stings is edema of
the oropharynx, which can result in compromise of the airways. Fatalities can result from
airway occlusion from stings inside the oral cavity.
-e r  a ou are sus is  pa ss see ss
phylactic reactions. Onset of life-threatening signs occurs rapidly (often within 10 min-
utes of the sting). Although it is not understood, signs of anaphylactic reaction may vary
in severity.24 Mild anaphylactic signs include urticaria, pruritus, and angioedema.25 Other
non-life-threatening signs include vomiting and diarrhea. More serious signs of anaphy-
lactic reaction include the respiratory and cardiovascular systems.26 Wheezing, dyspnea,
cough, and bronchoconstriction?3 may occur and lead to hypoxia and respiratory arrest.
Local upper air way edema can cause congestion of the larynx, epiglottis, and surrounding
tissue. The majority of insect sting fatalities are the result of severe respiratory compromise.
The unusual delayed reactions reported include serum sickness, vasculitis, glomerulo-
nephritis, neuropathy, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and arthritis. 24 Direct toxic
effects of Hymenoptera venom independent of immune mechanisms are venom volume-
e   s      s 
myolysis, hemolysis, and acute renal failure from direct tubular toxicity.25-z9 Myocardial
 infarction has been documented in victims of insect stings.
 Bee and wasp stings typically cause only local redness, erythema, and transient pain in
dogs. Urticaria may or may not accompany the swelling. Dogs may cry out when stung.
and they may rub their mouth and eyes on the ground. These cutaneous reactions appear
quickly and will spontaneously regress.
 Potential allergen mediators of anaphylaxis include phospholipase A, hyaluronidase,
acid phosphatase, and mellitin.1 Vespid venoms share much more similarity in allergens
with other vespids than with bee venoms. This may explain the cross-sensitivity in allergic
bee and wasp venom has been documented in humans.
578SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
The signs of anaphylaxis in dogs include urination, vomiting, defecation, muscular
m uaas are Aesidi suis ez s'samias Aeuy pue unidsan passanda 'ssaueam
15 minutes of the sting and if a systemic reaction has not started within the frst 30 min-
ues, it is unlikely to occur. Fatalities typically occur within 60 minutes of the initial sting.
 Anaphylaxis in cats is manifested by pruritus, salivation, incoordination, and collapse.22.27
chemical mediators that target smooth muscle and blood vessels.
Animals receiving massive envenomations (many stings) are usually febrile and visibly
depressed. Facial paralysis, ataxia, seizures, and neurologic signs may be observed. Dark
brown or red urine, bloody feces, and bloody or dark brown vomitus may also be seen.14.25
A complete blood count may reveal a leukocytosis. Animals may be thrombocytopenic,
particularly if disseminated intravascular coagulation is imminent. Granular casts may be
detected on urinalysis reflecting renal tubular damage as a result of the nephrotoxic nature
of Hymenoptera venom. Acute renal failure can be caused by acute tubular necrosis (the
 result of hemolysis) or direct renal toxic effects of the venom.25s.29 Dogs suffering multiple
stings may develop a secondary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.8 Animals suffer-
ing massive envenomations should be hospitalized and monitored closely. Clinical signs of
insect stings are listed in Box 49-2.
Minimum Database and Confirmatory Tests
Accurate diagnosis of Hymenoptera stings stems from a history of potential contact with
 stinging insects and the clinical signs displayed by the victim. It has been reported that
certain dog breeds (bull terriers, Staffordshire terriers, and boxers) have a higher incidence
 of severe reactions to insect stings.25
The circumstances surrounding the sting episode may reveal clues as to the offending
insect. Yellow jackets are attracted to and are frequently found near open sweet soft drink
cans. Bees usually are not. Honeybees are more commonly found foraging among flowers.
They are often stepped on as they work through clover. Honeybees can sting only once,
and do not lose the stinger. Thus if the attacker is not seen or found, the presence or absence
of a stinger, the conditions surrounding the sting incident, and knowing something of the
different behavior between bees and wasps can be helpful in narrowing the index of suspi-
cion and identifying the stinging insect.6
Other diagnostic aids include skin testing, isolation of specific IgE or IgG antibodies,
assay for histamine release, and actual sting challenges. Most insect stings cause small,
self-limiting local reactions and victims
rarely are taken to veterinary hospitals for
Box 49-2
Clinical Signs of Insect
treatment. Dense fur may mask local clini-
Stings
cal signs of Hymenoptera stings. The true
Mild
incidence of insect stings in companion
Swelling
animals is unknown as many incidents
Urticaria
 probably go unrecognized.
Erythema
Treatment
Pruritus
The majority of small local reactions to
Pain
Severe (anaphylaxis)
honeybee and wasp stings resolve com-
Vomiting
pletely without treatment within a few
Defecation
hours. On account of their dense coats,
Urination
time-consuming and meticulous searches
Swelling
for and removal of embedded stingers in
Muscle weakness
animals should not be attempted. Vespids
do not leave stingers behind. Honeybee
Respiratory depression
Seizures
venom sacs continue to contract even after
the stinging apparatus is torn from the bee's
Death
body and 100% of its contents is delivered
Chapter 49 | Irsects—Hymenoptera 579
within 60 seconds of the sting.30 Victims should be watched closely because animals with
anaphylaxis can deteriorate rapidly, without warning, and catastrophically. Access to car-
More severe, regional reactions and those involving multiple stings should be initially
treated as the small local reactions. However, the animal should be hospitalized and moni-
tored closely for onset of more devastating progression of the envenomation syndrome.
Corticosteroids may benefit these patients (prednisolone sodium succinate 10 mg/kg IV
and followed by prednisolone orally at 1 mg/kg twice daily, then tapered over 3 to 5 days).
An intravenous bolus of normal saline is indicated if hypotension is present. Continuous
intravenous fluid infusion ensuring constant urine output is usually indicated for these ani-
mals. For severe reactions of this type, administration of fluids and electrolytes, correction
of hypovolemia, and prevention of vascular stasis is a cornerstone of therapy. Toxic reac-
and therapy with fluids, corticosteroids, and topicals, and may require vigilant monitoring
of hematologic, cardiac, respiratory, and renal parameters for several days. Animals suf-
fering this type of insect attack may require hospitalization and supportive therapy until
stable. Septicemia is a possible sequela of massive envenomations and administration of
 broad-spectrum antibiotics may be justifed. Most single stings do not become infected.2.10
Because most anaphylactic deaths from insect stings occur within 1 hour of the initial
sting, early aggressive monitoring, treatment, stabilization, and intervention are manda-
tory. Death may ensue quickly if the anaphylactic reaction is not managed expeditiously
animals and when diagnosed, epinephrine 1:1000 (0.1 to 0.5 mL) should be given subcu-
taneously immediately.0.25 Administration can be repeated every 10 to 20 minutes. When
epinephrine must be given intravenously, it must be diluted to 1:10,000 and 0.5 to 1 mL
should be administered. Intravenous epinephrine must be administered cautiously and
slowly infused while the patient is carefully scrutinized for signs of improvement or adverse
effects (arrhythmia). Vigilant monitoring is required of heart rate, heart rhythm, and blood
pressure. Epinephrine stabilizes mast cells and thereby terminates continued propagation
of anaphylaxis. Intravenous fluids are crucial to prevent vascular collapse, and shock vol-
umes of crystalloid solutions (90 mL/kg dog and 60 mL/kg cat) should be given rapidly in
anaphylactic animals. Antihistamines and corticosteroids may need to be administered.
Aggressive airway management may be necessary and intubation equipment and supple-
mental oxygen should be readily available. Dogs displaying discomfort or pain follow-
ing a bee sting may be treated with carprofen (2.2 mg/kg every 12 hours PO) or tramadol
(2-4 mg/kg every 8 hours PO).
Delayed reactions characterized by rashes, serum sicknes, low-grade fever, general
malaise, polyarthralgias, and lymphadenopathy can occur within 2 weeks of the sting.26
Unless the initial sting is witnessed or identified, the actual cause of the reaction may not be
recognized, and the diagnosis of a delayed reaction is easily missed.
 Because of their potential for anaphylaxis and subsequent rapid deterioration and life-
threatening destabilization, all insect stings should be taken seriously. Any animal sustain-
ing multiple stings (massive envenomations) and any animal exhibiting clinical signs of
anaphylaxis should be hospitalized, treated aggressively, and kept for 24 hours following
cessation of signs.
Certain protocols, products, and principles of immunotherapy for insect stings have
been taken from human medicine and applied to dogs who have previously demonstrated
severe systemic reactions.31.32 At present this therapy regimen is not widely available in
veterinary medicine.
Prevention and Prognosis
Bees are attracted to dark colors and strong fragrances. Mammalian sweat seems to agitate
them, attacks can be triggered by CO from the victim's breath, and they are defensively
580SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
on nectar and keeping outdoor eating areas
Box 49-3
Prevention of Insect
and garbage cans clean (because wasps are
Stings
attracted to food waste) lowers an animal's
Avoid scented lotions, soaps, or
risk of being stung. Avoid scented sham-
 poos and soaps for your dog. Do not leave
perfumes.
Avoid large areas of flowering plants.
canned cat or dog food in dishes outside in
 Do not leave open cat food or dog food
warm weather because this may also attract
dishes outside.
hungry wasps. Antihistamines should be
Keep all garbage cans tightly closed.
part of any animal frst aid kit. Animals
 Do not leave open soft-drink cans
that have demonstrated severe or ana-
phylactic reactions following insect stings
outside.
Bees are attracted to dark colors.
should be identified with bee anaphylaxis
Keep picnic foods tightly covered.
identification collar tags. A number of
Quickly dispose of freshly fallen fruit.
ways to decrease insect stings is included
Have only professional exterminators
in Box 49-3.
remove hives and insect nests.
Stinging bees deposit an alarm phero-
mone that triggers other bees to sting at the
same site. The pheromone has an odor that
smells like ripe bananas. Ihe odor stems from isopentyl acetate found both in bananas and
the bee pheromone secretion. This alarm pheromone, when released, signals other bees
where to sting. As a result, bananas must be kept away from bee hives and picnic outings so
as not to attract and upset the bees.10
The prognosis for most victims of insect stings is excellent. Most of these episodes are
self-limiting and will resolve within a few hours without treatment. The majority of deaths
occur within the frst hour, primarily from anaphylaxis. If anaphylactic signs are not appar-
ent within 30 minutes of the sting they are unlikely to occur. Animals suffering from ana-
phylaxis or from severe reactions as a result of multiple stings may be successfully stabilized
if aggressive therapy is instituted early and appropriately applied. These therapies would
involve intravenous volume support, drugs, and intubation with supplemental oxygen.
Many dogs do not seem to learn about insect stings and are repeatedly stung over multiple
summers.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Histopathologic lesions following simple, single, nonreactive local stings are either absent,
undetectable, extremely mild, or nonspecific. Even following fatal anaphylaxis, there are no
uu e ae sa dpeasuu syd
ropsy after suspected fatal anaphylactic reactions, particular attention must be paid to the
larynx for the presence of hyperemia, edema, and hemorrhage.17 Histologic examination
 of the larynx can be helpful in confirming a diagnosis of anaphylaxis. In cases of mass
envenomation, evidence of acute renal tubular necrosis; fatty degeneration of the kidneys,
 liver, and myocardium; presence of hyaline membrane disease; and splenic hemorrhage and
infarction may be documented.15
Tryptase is a mast cell-specific enzyme that is released from mast cells on degranula-
asdan yo sed a zr'sixeadue ig syads ot isoe st li sn u un ol
activity occurs 1 to 2 hours following anaphylaxis, and then declines fairly rapidly with a
half-life of approximately 2 hours. Studies in postmortem human cases have demonstrated
that venom-specific IgE and tryptase were elevated in anaphylactic death but not in other
causes of death. Further studies are needed to establish the usefulness of a serum tryptase
test in animals.
The majority of deaths related to insect stings are the direct result of the immediate
hypersensitivity reaction mediated by IgE and resulting in anaphylaxis. However, death can
occur from severe local reactions (regional) involving airways and resultant respiratory
obstruction. The primary pathologic finding in wasp and bee sting deaths is found in the
respiratory tract, such as massive edema, obstructive secretions, and total collapse or severe
reduction in functional airway diameter. Massive envenomation from swarm stings can
Chapter 49 | Insects—Hymenoptera 581
Box 49-4
Differential Diagnoses
also cause death in nonallergic individuals.
Deaths from multiple stings result from
for Insect Stings
three major mechanisms: direct venom
Infection
toxicity, intravascular hemolysis mediated
Cat fight abscess
by mellitin, and the profound hypotension
Trauma
resulting from massive histamine release.17
 Neoplasia
Together these mechanisms have a cumu-
Allergy
lative, cascading effect, resulting in multi-
Abscessed tooth
organ failure represented by acute tubular
Foreign object
necrosis and renal failure, respiratory dis-
tress, rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinemia,
myocardial cell damage, hepatocellular
necrosis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and hemorrhage. The kidney tubular
degeneration and necrosis comes from direct venom activity against the tubules, renal
hypotension stemming from venom ischemic-toxic effect, and lesions caused by myoglobin
and hemoglobin.33.36
In summary, even with catastrophic fatal systemic responses, there may be little or very
nonspecific histologic evidence on necropsy. As a result, such causes of death are probably
underreported in our companion animals. Insect stings must remain on the list of differ-
entials for a variety of clinical presentations and more specific ways of documenting their
actual incidence in companion animals need to be researched.
The incidence of infection following insect stings is extremely low. The abdomen of
the honeybee is covered with numerous hairs, most of them branched and plumelike, to
which pathogenic bacteria can attach. Vespids lack these hairs. It is known that bees may
be attracted to garbage, which may contarminate these hairs. Potentially, the act of stinging
could inoculate either bacteria from the bee or bacteria from the victim's skin surface under
the epidermis. In addition, scratching because of pruritus commonly associated with insect
stings can cause further traumatic epidermal injury and lead to intradermal implantation of
pathogenic bacteria. Nevertheless, infection following insect stings is rare.
Differential Diagnoses
Because the initial stinging incident is rarely witnessed, and the clinical signs can be noto-
riously nonspecific, a diagnosis of insect sting can be easily missed by both owners and
clinicians. A correct diagnosis depends on a high index of suspicion for possible insect
stings, presenting clinical signs, and attempts to understand the conditions surrounding the
episode. A list of differential diagnoses and potentilook-alikes for insect stings is included
in Box 49-4.
Fire Ants
Sources
Fire ants are members of the order Hymenoptera, family Formicidae, subfamily Myrmici-
nae, and genus Solenopsis. There are native fire ants in the United States, but two imported
species, Solenopsis richteri (the black imported fire ant) and Solenopsis invicta (the red
') iue a paod y au zrauioi a o jo ae (u any pao
richteri) is originally from eastern Argentina and Uruguay.37 Ihe red imported fire ant (S.
invicta) is a native of the Mato Grosso region of Brazil, where its range extends into north-
ern Argentina. Both species appear to have entered the United States on produce through
the port of Mobile, Alabama, the black imported fire ant in about 1918 and the red imported
fire ant species around 1939. The black imported species (S. richteri) has been contained to
a small area of Alabama and Mississippi. However, the red imported fire ant (S. invicta) has
colonized more than 310 million acres in 12 southern states (Alabama, Arkansas, Florida,
Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee,
Texas, and Virginia).38 The red imported fre ant is also found in Puerto Rico. Populations
582SECTION4SpecificToxicants
have recently been found in California, Arizona, New Mexico, and up the eastern coast to
paueiddns yoq s pue any paou an a siasu anepe ai es''a uausem
and interbred with local native ants. Red imported fire ants and their hybrids now account
for more than 90% of ants in some parts of some southern states.
Initially, it was estimated that the spread of the ants would be limited by a minimum
climatic termperature of -12.5° C (10° F).40 However, it appears that the hybrids are more
cold tolerant than the original species. Also the hybrids have been seen to use concrete and
human habitations as heat sumps and successfully overwinter. It is currently estimated that
the ants could expand into areas with a minimum temperature of -17.8° C (0° F). If these
predictions are accurate red imported fre ants and their hybrids could ultimately colonize
at least 25% of the continental United States. These ants are very mobile and have a capacity
to exploit diverse habitats in setting up new colonies, allowing a westward migration rate of
approximately 120 miles per year. Because of their ability to interbreed with native species,
it may take several years before the presence of the new ants is first detected.
Fire ants are aggressive and venomous. They have definite adverse effects on agricul-
ture as their mounds can damage farming equipment and the ants can attack livestock and
food crops. Reports of attacks on livestock and native wildlife (including the decimation
of some ground-nesting birds, turtles, frogs, and arthropod species) are not uncommon.
Accounts of attacks indoors on both companion animals and debilitated humans (nursing
home patients) have become more frequent.
Fire ant workers range in size from 1.8 to 6 mm in length (average 3 to 4 mm).41 Fire
ants are similar in appearance to ordinary, native house and garden ant species. The life
span of worker fire ants is 2 to 6 months. Queens are larger than workers and measure
approximately 1 centimeter in length. Queens also have wings used during the nuptial
flight. Recently, single mounds have been found with 40 to 300 egg-laying queens. Fire ant
mounds measure up to 1 meter in diameter and half a meter in height. In heavily infested
areas, mound density can range from 40 to 200 mounds per acre. Tunnels between mounds
can extend more than 40 meters. A single queen mound may have more than 200,000
worker ants, whereas multiple queen colonies can have more than 500,000 workers. Queens
sue any jo saises mog zt'siean g otdn ioy imoq ad sga ooz ot oot surnpoid jo aqedes ae
exist: fertile females (queens) with wings before mating, winged males, major workers, and
minor (smaller) workers. All fire ants have effcient chemical tracking capabilities, which
allow them to quickly locate food sources. It has been reported that fire ants get to injured
and dead people at automobile accident scenes faster than rescue squads. In addition to
finding food, the major (larger) ants also aggressively swarm and defend their nest and
will sting anything unfortunate enough to disturb their mound. Workers have powerful
mandibles with four teeth. Fire ants contain magnetite, which functions as a compass and
orients them to a north-south axis. The magnetite senses other electric fields and fire ants
have been shown to be attracted to underground power lines.
 Imported fire ants are omnivorous and sting and kill invertebrates as their primary food
source; they also scavenge dead animals and eat plants, ripe fruit, and seeds. Worker ants
ingest sugars, fats, and oils, and return solid food to be fed to the immature brood ants. Fire
u aie u sia uo aie aai uoas aad  g'l aao ues pue isy ae sie
bers before detection. They then sting simultaneously using chemical pheromone cues. The
majority of sting encounters involve worker ants.
Fire ants are named for the burning pain they inflict. The sting of the fire ant is a two-
stage maneuver. Before stinging prey or intruders, the fire ant latches itself on to the victim
with its prominent mandibles and thus anchors by biting. It then tucks up its abdomen
under its body and stings. Ihe nonbarbed stinger of the imported fire ant is a modified
ovipositor, with an associated venom gland at the posterior portion of the abdomen. After
the first sting, while still secured to the victim by its mandibles, the imported fire ant with-
draws the stinger, rotates one step sideways, and stings again. Typically, they sting six or
hornets, fire ants inject their venom slowly. Each sting takes 20 to 30 seconds. As a result,
Chapter 49 | Insects—Hymenoptera 583
the onset of pain is delayed. Humans describe an initial burning sensation, but the majority
 of those stung by fire ants report it is less painful than a bee sting.
ToxicDose
 Imported fre ants represent a significant health hazard for people and animals living in
endemic areas. Sting reactions range from local pustules to anaphylaxis. Anaphylaxis is the
main cause of fatal response to fire ant stings. Anaphylactic reactions are not dose depen-
dent and do not correlate with the number of stings.
Systemic toxic reactions to envenomations by fire ants have been reported after 50 to 100
simultaneous stings.? Fatal toxic reactions have been reported in dogs and other small ani-
have survived hundreds of stings with only supportive therapy. However, there are reports
of death related to direct venom toxicity. In general, death caused by direct venom toxic-
ity following massive envenomations occurs more than 24 hours after the stings, whereas
s a ae  is e so ai sixeee aq ass 
On stinging, each imported fire ant delivers approximately 0.1l mcL of venom and they
can deliver venom in 20 consecutive stings before depleting their venom store.40.43 A lethal
number of fre ant stings has not been reported for mammals. However, most fatalities fol-
lowing fire ant stings are thought to be caused by anaphylaxis and do not depend on the
number of stings.
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Toxicity
Imported fire ant venom differs from the venoms of bees, wasps, and hornets, which are
composed largely of protein-containing aqueous solutions. Fire ant venom is made up
of 95% water-insoluble alkaloid.4344 The alkaloid portion consists primarily of 2,6 di-
substituted piperidines,which have cytotoxic,hemolytic, antibacterial,and insecticidal
properties. The alkaloids produce sterile pustules, but do not induce the IgE response that
is the hallmark of anaphylaxis. The aqueous phase of fre ant venom contains four major
allergenic proteins that are responsible for the specific IgE response of allergic animals. In
addition, the small protein fraction contains hyaluronidase and phospholipase, which may
explain why fire ant venom antigenetically cross-reacts with vespid venom (especially yel-
low jackets). Venoms from the two imported fire ant species are highly cross-reactive. The
piperidine alkaloids found in fire ant venom have local necrotic and hemolytic effects and
are responsible for pain.
The usual response to fire ant stings for most individuals is an immediate development
of a 25- to 50-mm dermal flare. A wheal forms within 1 minute and papules within 2 hours.
Vesicles develop within 4 hours and are first filled with a clear fluid that is cloudy by 8 hours
and then develops into sterile pustules by 24 hours.
The fire ant pustule results from tissue inflammation caused by the venom alkaloids.
The presence of this pustule is almost pathognomonic for the sting of the imported fire ant.
The superficial pustule is infiltrated with activated neutrophils and platelets, with necrosis
at the base in 24 hours.
 A small percentage of those bitten (17%) also develop extensive local reactions adjacent
to the bite, with induration, erythema, and pruritus that may last up to 7 days.37 Large,
regional reactions to fire ant venom have been shown to be mast-cell dependent, IgE-medi-
ated, late-phase reactions. Systemic reactions and direct toxic effects of massive envenom-
ations have also been documented. It has been reported that systemic nonallergic responses
(direct venom effects) often exhibit a large number of pustules, rhabdomyolysis, dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation, and seizures.40 Anaphylactic reactions to fre ant stings
have been observed in both humans and animals. Anaphylactic reactions usually happen
shortly after the sting occurs. Anaphylactic reactions may include general urticaria, cutane-
ous or laryngeal edema, bronchospasm, or cardiovascular collapse. Untreated, these ana-
phylactic reactions can become life threatening. Secondary infection may follow imported
fire ant stings, particularly those involving regional reactions.
584SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Clinical Signs
Reactions to imported fre ant stings range from minor skin lesions to anaphylaxis and
death. Typical stings cause an annoying burning sensation. Three types of local reactions
may be present: a wheal and flare reaction, a sterile pustule, and a large regional reaction.
Local reactions alone occur in nonallergic animals.
The typical local reaction to a sting, the wheal and flare, is followed by immediate pain,
inflammation, and intense pruritus. The wheal and flare reaction usually resolves within
30 minutes to 1 hour. A papule forms and evolves into a fully developed sterile pustule
at the site of the sting within 24 hours. These sterile pustules may last up to 2 to 3 weeks
ritus. Occasionally, the pustules become secondarily infected (usually from self-trauma by
scratching) and can progress from cellulitis to sepsis. By 24 hours, the pustule contains
necrotic tissue with cellular infiltration of lymphocytes, eosinophils, and polymorphonu-
dlear cells. Usually after 72 hours, the epidermis covering the pustule sloughs and then heal-
ing takes place, leaving a scar or macule.
A smaller number of victims display regional reactions at the site of the sting. These
lesions are erythematous, edematous, indurated, and extremely pruritic. Regional reactions
to fire ant stings are mast cell-dependent, IgE-mediated, late-phase reactions. Regional
reactions may lead to enough tissue edema to compromise blood flow to an extremity.
Systermic or anaphylactic reactions are IgE-mediated reactions that involve clinical signs
Occurring remote from the initial sting site. Ihe signs include urticaria, cutaneous or laryn-
geal edema, bronchospasm, and vascular collapse. Most deaths resulting from imported fire
of large reaction sites can also lead to death. The direct toxic effect of the venom of multiple
fre ant stings can result in the death of the victim. In general, deaths caused by anaphylaxis
occur a short time after the sting, whereas deaths caused by venom toxicity occur greater
than 24 hours following the sting. Ihe exact incidence of fre ant anaphylaxis is unknown.
The mechanism of anaphylaxis following fire ant stings is identical to the pathway of ana-
phylaxis from other causes. The systemic reaction to fire ant venom is similar to those expe-
rienced with other Hymenoptera venoms, except the pathognomonic pustule almost al ways
enables identification of the imported fire
ant as the stinging insect. Clinical signs fol-
Box 49-5
Clinical Signs of Fire
lowing fre ant stings are listed in Box 49-5.
Ant Stings
Minimum Database and
Confirmatory Tests
Simple, Local Sting
Wheal and flare
Helpful clinical clues in determining a diag-
 Erythema
nosis of fire ant stings include development
of a classic pustule after 24 hours, actual
Warmth
identification of the stinging insect, and
Pain
Intense itching
the presence of typical fire ant mounds in
the vicinity of the stinging incident. There
Large, Regional Reaction
are no laboratory tests to determine fire
Erythema
 ant exposure. Veterinary clinicians should
Warmth
familiarize themselves with stinging insects
Pain
found in their region.
Itching
Treatment
Anaphylactic Reaction
Urticaria
Currently no treatment has been shown
to be beneficial in preventing or resolving
Cutaneous edema
Laryngeal edema
local reactions, including the characteristic
Bronchospasm
pustules. However, various therapies may
Vascular collapse
provide symptomatic relief. Local sting
reactions may benefit from antihistamines,
Chapter 49 | Insects—Hymenoptera 585
topical corticosteroids, application of cool compresses (water or alcohol), ice, and topical
also been suggested. Some dogs stung by fire ants appear to feel much better after warm
baths. Although widely proposed, topical application of aluminum sulfate and meat tender-
Severe, regional reactions are less commonly encountered, but these should be treated
supportively and therapy may include antihistamines, corticosteroids, analgesics, and
intravenous volume support. Secondary infections to fire ant stings should be treated with
broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Anaphylactic reactions to fire ant stings have been documented both in humans and
animals. They are typically seen not long after the initial sting incident. Anaphylaxis after a
fire ant sting should be treated similarly to anaphylactic reactions seen following honeybee
and vespid stings and may require epinephrine, endotracheal intubation, and the admin-
istration of oxygen, corticosteroids, antihistamines, and supportive fluid therapy. Prompt
recognition and initiation of treatment is crucial in the successful management of ana-
fre ant stings should be hospitalized until stable enough to be released for treatment and
subsequent observation at home. Research is currently being done examining the merits of
Prevention and Prognosis
Reaction to imported fire ant stings is best prevented by avoidance. Yards, exercise areas, and
playing fields must be routinely inspected for the presence of ant mounds. Many attempts
have been made to eradicate fire ants from an area, but none have been shown to be com-
pletely successful. Basic methods currently used are broadcast applications of toxic baits
that are carried back to the mound by workers and fed to the queen, and individual mound
treatments with chemicals to kill the queen and other ants.40 Ihe chemicals used are gener-
ally insecticides and formulated as drenches, granules, dusts, aerosols, or liquid fumigants.
If the queen is not destroyed, she will continue to produce eggs and the treated mound
will recover. Baits used usually contain slow-acting toxicants dissolved in an attractive food
source like soybean oil. The toxicant-containing oil is then absorbed into corn grits, a carrier
that permits easy handling and application. Ihe slow action of the poison allows the work-
ers to carry it back to the mound and feed it to the queen, to immature ants, and to other
workers before they die. Toxic bait eliminates the need to locate mounds because it relies
on foraging workers who bring the bait back and feed the poison to the rest of the colony.
stances are placed in baits to be carried back to the mound to prevent the development of
adult worker ants. A major drawback of these growth regulators is that they act slowly over
days to months. Additionally, they are not specific for fire ants and can have environmental
consequences for other sensitive insects, some of which are beneficial to humans. Other
methods under study for more specific and effective control of fre ants include the use of
various parasites, including nematodes and microsporidians that directly feed on ants and
infect ant blood cells.39
 The prognosis for animals stung by fire ants depends on the nature of the reaction dis-
played following the sting. Simple local reactions are painful and itch, but resolve with
supportive measures and time. Regional reactions require more aggressive therapy, but
typically resolve. Anaphylactic reactions to fire ant stings can be fatal if untreated. Prompt
recognition and initiation of treatment is critical in the successful management of anaphy-
lactic reactions.
Finally, in endemic areas, companion animals should not be left outdoors unsupervised
 for long periods and should be examined often for signs of ant stings. Older, more debili-
tated animals and very young animals should be even more vigilantly observed. Particular
attention should be paid to garbage containers, uncovered food dishes, and outside feeding
areas, all of which may attract ants. Methods of prevention of imported fire ant stings are
listed in Box 49-6.
586SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Box 49-6
Methods of Prevention for Imported Fire Ant Stings
Companion animals must be closely supervised in endemic areas.
Yards, exercise areas, and playing felds must be routinely inspected for ant mounds.
areas.
Garbage containers, outside feeding areas, and uncovered food dishes may attract
ants.
Ant mounds must be vigorously treated (the queen must be killed) for eradication
attempts to be successful.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
The intense inflammatory response and pustule that develops at the fire ant sting site has
been shown to result from potent cytotoxins and hemolytics found in the alkaloid venom
fraction. Ihese toxins cause localized necrosis of the dermis and underlying connective
tissue that creates the characteristic sterile pustule that develops within 24 hours of most
stings.44 In the continental United States, the pustule is only caused by imported fire ant
stings. An erythematous flare follows the sting followed in minutes by a wheal. The wheal-
flare resolves within 2 hours. A central vesicle containing clear fluid begins to form within
4 hours. The fluid becomes cloudy and the pustule appears, generally surrounded by a red
halo and an area of edema.
Histologic studies have demonstrated that imported fire ant venom causes histamine
release at the sting site.44 Edema, painful necrosis, and infltration of histiocytes, plasma
cells, and lymphocytes occurs within minutes. By 24 hours,the pustule contains many poly-
morphonuclear cels, lymphocytes, and neutrophils. At 72 hours, plasma cells and eosino-
phils can also be found. The pustule's central core becomes obliterated, and the pustular
infltrate extends into surrounding necrotic tissue. At this point the pustule fluid is com-
posed of primarily neutrophils and necrotic debris.
The pustule usually heals and resolves spontaneously; however, the intense pruritus may
cause an animal to scratch off the epidermal covering, establishing a microhabitat com-
patible with secondary bacterial infection, which can potentially become systemic. Undis-
turbed pustules resolve unremarkably in 3 to 10 days, leaving a small macule with little
scarring. Secondarily infected stings may leave a significant scar.
Large regional reactions are not uncommon in many Hymenoptera stings. It has been
shown that the size of the wheal-flare response at 20 minutes correlates directly with the
size of the regional reaction at 6 hours. Pathologically, the regional reaction resembles late-
phase IgE-mediated reactions developing after intradermal injections of ragweed or insulin.
These reactions are characterized by development of dense fibrin deposits, with trapping of
edema in the reticular dermis around the pustule. Eosinophils are present in the pustular
fluid. This is not the same as the systemic allergic (anaphylactic) reaction.
 In the United States, fatal anaphylactic reactions to imported fire ant stings are less
frequent than other Hymenoptera stings; however, this may change as the range of the
ants increases.44 Like other Hymenopterans, true anaphylactic reactions to imported fire
ant envenomations do not depend on the number of stings inflicted. Necropsy findings,
although nonspecific, are typical of Hymenoptera-induced pathologic changes. Primary
findings include acute pulmonary changes and cerebrovascular congestion.4 In many cases
congestion can also be seen in the kidneys, liver, spleen, and adrenal glands.
 Other histologic changes following fire ant stings include serum sickness, nephrotic
syndrome, and mononeuritis. Some animals have been reported to have seizures fol-
of histologic reactions occur between imported fre ant venom and the venom of other
Hymenopterans.
Chapter 49 | Irsects—Hymenoptera 587
Differential Diagnosis
Box 49-7
Differential Diagnoses
of Fire Ant Stings
Potential differential diagnoses and pos-
sible look-alikes to imported fre ant stings
Trauma
are listed in Box 49-7. Ihese include any
Infection
conditions leading to immediate swelling,
Allergy
pain, and pruritus. Differential diagno-
 Neoplasia
ses include trauma, infection, neoplasia,
Self-trauma
allergy, self-trauma, or other causes of
Other causes of anaphylaxis
anaphylaxis.
References
1. Tunney FX: Stinging insects. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW, Winchester JF, editors: Clinical manage-
ment of poisoning and drug overdose, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
2. Reisman RE: Insect stings, N Engl I Med 321:523, 1994.
3. Goddard J: Physician's guide to arthropods of medical importance, ed 3, Philadelphia, 200o, WB Saunders.
4. Minton SA, Hechtel HB: Arthropod envenomation. In Averbach PS, editor: Wilderness medicine: man-
agement of wilderness and environmental emergencies, St Louis, 1995, Mosby.
 5. Schmidt JU, Hassen LV: When Africanized bees attack: what you and your clients should know, Vet Med
10:923-928, 1996.
6.
Degrondi-Hoffman G, Hoffman RF: Bee sting dysphagia, A nn Intern Med 130(11):943, 1999.
7. Vetter RS, Visscher PK: Bites and stings of medically important venomous arthropods, Int J Dermat
37:481-496, 1998.
8. Vetter RS, Visscher PK, Camazine S: Mass envenomations by honey bees and wasps, West I Med
170:2223-2227, 1999.
9. Manoquerra AS: Hymenoptera stings. In Ling LJ,et al: Toxicology secrets,2001, Hanley and Belfus.
10. Fitzgerald KT, Flood AA: Hymenoptera stings, Clin Tech Small A nim Pract 21(4):194-204, 2006.
11. Franca FOS, et al: Severe and fatal mass attacks by *killer^ bees in Brazil: clinicopathological studies with
measurement of serum venom concentrations, Q I Med 87:269-282, 1994.
12. Winkler B, et al: Allergen specific immunosuppression by mucosal treatment with recombinant Ves v.
5, a major allergen of Vespula vulgaris venom, in a murine model of wasp venom allergy, Immunology
110:376-385, 2003.
13. Schmidt JO: Toxinology of venoms from the honey bee genus, Apis, Toxicon 33(7):917-927, 1995.
14. Oliveira EC,Pedroso PM,Meirelles AE,etal: Pathological findings in dogs aftermultiple Africanized bee
stings, Toxicon 49:1214-1218, 2007.
15. Banks BEC: the composition of Hymenoptera venoms with particular reference to venom of the hon-
eybee. In Kornalik F, Mebs D, editors: Prague, 1986, Proceedings of the 7th European Symposium on
Animal, Plant and Microbial Toxins.
16. Ownby CL, Powell JR, Jiang MS, et al: Melittin and phospholipase Az from bee (Apis mellifera) venom
cause necrosis of murine skeletal muscle in vivo, Toxicon 35:67-80, 1997.
17. Hahn I, Lewin NA: Arthropods. In Goldfrank LR, et al: Goldfrank's toxicologic emergencies, ed 7, New
York, 2002, McGraw-Hill.
18. Lichtenstein LM, Valentine MD, Sobotka AK: Insect allergy the state of the art, J Allergy Clin Immunol
64:512, 1979.
19. Jones RGA, et al: A novel fab-based antivenom for treatment of mass bee attacks, Am J Trop Med Hyg
61(3):361-366, 1999.
20. Schmidt JO, Yamane S, Matsuura M: Homet venoms: lethalities and lethal capacities, Toxicon 24:950-
954, 1986.
 21. Schumacher MJ, Schmidt JO, Egen NB: Lethality of *killer^ bee stings, Nature 337:413, 1989.
 22. Schumacher MJ, Schmidt JO,Egen NB,et al: Quantity, analysis, and lethality of European and African-
ized honey bee venoms, Am I Trop Med Hyg 43:79-86, 1990
23. Schumacher MJ, Schmidt JO, Egen NB,et al: Biochemical variability of venoms from individual Euro-
pean and Africanized honey bees (Apis mellifira), I Allergy Clin Immuno?90:59-65, 1992.
24. Ludolph-Hauser D, Rueff F, Fries C, et al: Constitutively raised serum concentrations of mast-celltrypt-
ase and severe anaphylactic reactions to Hymenoptera stings, Lancet 357:361-362, 2001.
25. Cowell AK, Cowell RL: Management of bee and other Hymenoptera stings. In Bonagura JD, Kirk RW,
editors: Kirk's veterinarry therapy Xll: small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
 26. Kocer U, et al: Skin and soft tissue necrosis following Hymenoptera sting, I Cutan Med Surg133-135,
2003.
27. Riches KJ, Gillis D, James RA: An autopsy approach to bee sting related deaths, Pathology 34:257-262,
2002.
588SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
28. Antin JP: Fatal anaphylactic reaction of a dog to bee sting, I Am Vet Med A ssoc 142:775, 1963.
 29. Cowell AK, Cowell RL, Tyler RD,et al: Severe systemic reactions to Hymenoptera stings in three dogs,
I Am Vet Med A ssoc 198:1014-1016, 1991.
30. Schumacher M, Treten M, Egen R: Rate and quantity of delivery of venom from honeybee stings,
J Allergy Clin Immunol 93:831, 1994.
31. Baker E: Small animal allergy: α practical guide, Philadelphia, 1990, Lea and Febiger.
32.Weiss K: The little book of bees, Gottingen, 2002, Copernicus.
 33. Hommel D, Bollandard F, Hulin A: Multiple African honey bee stings and acute renal failure, Nephron
78:235-236, 1998.
34. Bresolin NL, Carvalho FL, Goes IC, et al: Acute renal failure following massive attack by Africanized bee
stings, Pediatr Nephrol17:625-627, 2002.
35. Betten DP, Richardson WH, Jong TC, et al: Massive honey bee envenomation induced rhabdomyolysis
in an adolescent, Pediatrics 117:231-235, 2006.
 36. Shimada A, Nakai T, Morita T, et al: Systemic rhabdomyonecrosis and acute tubular necrosis in a dog
associated with wasp stings, Vet Rec 156:320-322, 2005.
37.
Stafford CT: Hypersensitivity to fire ant venom, Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 77:87-95, 1996.
38. Kemp SF, de Shazo RD, Moffitt JE,et al: Expanding habitat of the imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta):
a public health concern, J Allergy Clin Immunol105(4):683-691, 2000.
39. Hoffman DR: Fire ant venom allergy, Allergy 50:535-544, 1995.
40. DeShazo RD, Soto-Aguilar M: Reactions to imported fre ant stings, Allergy Proc 14(1):13-16, 1993.
41. Stafford CT: Fire ant allergy, Allergy Proc 13(1):11-16, 1992.
42. Prahlow JIA, Barnard J A: Fatal anaphylaxis due to fire ant stings, Am I Forensic Med Pathol 19(2):137-142,
1998.
43. Schmidt JO: Chemistry, pharmacology, and chemical ecology of ant venoms. In Pier T, editor: Venoms
of the Hymenoptera, London, 1986, Academic Press, pp 425-508.
44. Lockey RF: The imported fire ant immunopathological significance, Hosp Pract 25(3):109-124, 1970.
45. Bruce S, Tschen EH, Smith EB: Topical aluminum sulfate for fire ant stings, Internat J Derm 23(3):211,
1984.
46. Ross EV Jr, Badame AJ, Dale SE: Meat tenderizer in the acute treatment of imported fire ant stings,
I Amer Acad Derm 16(6):1189 -1192, 1987.
CHAPTER
Ionophores
50
Jeffery O. Hall, DVM, PhD, DABVT
· Ionophores can be present as a contaminant in dog or cat food. Alternatively
 companion anirmnals can be exposed by consurning prermixes or feed designed for
other species.
· Mechanism of toxicity includes disruption of intracellular to extracellular ion
 gradients and disruption of intramitochondria to extramitochondria ion gradients.
· Clinical signs include a neuromuscular paralytic syndrome that progresses in a
caudal to cranial direction.
 Biochemical abnormalities include increases in creatine phosphokinase, lactate
dehydrogenase, aspartate transaminase, and urine protein; myoglobinuria may
or may not occur.
·Confirmatory tests include detection of the ionophore in the diet or tissue
· Treatment includes good supportive care, including possible positive pressure
ventilation.
Prognosis is fair to good, depending on the severity of clinical signs.
· Gross and histologic lesions may include gross paling of skeletal and cardiac
muscles and necrosis of skeletal and cardiac tissue, as well as potential peripheral
neuropathy.
 Differential diagnoses include botulism, tick paralysis, pdlyradiculoneuritis,
myasthenia gravis, organophosphate and carbamate insecticides, macadamia
nuts, and amitraz or macrolide parasiticides (e.g., ivermectin) poisoning.
Sources
Several polyether carboxylic antibiotics (ionophores) are extensively used as anticoccidi-
als in several species and as growth promotants in ruminants. The name ionophore has
suot jodsuenl on Aiqe iaul o asnesaq spunoduos jo dnona siul anouap oi pasn uaaq
across biologic membranes and down concentration gradients. The ion transport capability
is the key to their anticoccidial activities and their antibacterial activities. In ruminants, the
antibacterial effects result in changed ruminal microflora and growth promotant effects.
Although these compounds have proved very effective for therapeutic use as growth pro-
motants in ruminants and as anticoccidial agents, they also have proved to be toxic in a
variety of species. Most cases of small-animal poisonings have resulted from inadvertent
snloq io saxjuand paay ol aimsodxa lad mq 'spooy ies no sop ui saioudouot po uoisnioul
products can also occur.
589
590SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
 Several ionophores are in common use and more will likely gain market approval in the
near future. Generic and trade names of several marketed ionophores are as follows: laidlo-
mycin propionate (Cattlyst), lasalocid (Avotec, Bovatec), maduramicin (Cygro), monensin
(Coban, Rumensin), narasin (Maxiban, Monteban), and salinomycin (Coxistat, Biocox,
Saccox).12 Ihese ionophorous drugs are marketed in finished feed products, in which their
quantities. However, they also are marketed at much higher concentrations in the form of
ussaip doie se asn iy no spaay pausuy oun ux o papuaiu saieuasuos io saxand
on feeds, as well as in sustained-release bolus products.
Because of the variety of concentrations and preparations of products in which iono-
phores are marketed, there are numerous potential sources of exposure to small animals.
Field cases of ionophore poisoning have been reported in which premixes were inadver-
tently included in cat,3 dog,4 and rabbit foods. In another case, dog food was stored in
the same bin that had previously been used to store a monensin premix.7 In Hungary, rab-
 bits were poisoned with high concentrations of narasin in their pellets.8 A dog was also
poisoned by ingestion of a sustained release bolus product.? Thus ionophore poisonings in
Aq aissod o uoeuus anis o siia uxu poog aq pases aq us seue es
ingestion of feeds or premixes intended for other species.
Toxic Dose
Species susceptibility is quite varied to the toxic effects of the ionophores. The toxicity also
is affected by the duration of exposure to ionophores, the daily dose that produces toxic
effects being lower with subacute or chronic exposures than the toxic dose for a single
acute exposure. Table 50-1 summarizes the literature on the toxicity and clinical signs of
several ionophores in small animals. Although toxicity information is available for most
ionophores with regard to dogs and rabbits, very little information is available for cats. No
toxicity studies and only two clinical reports were found for cats.3.10
Toxicokinetics
Although little true kinetic data is available, some toxicokinetic information can be gleaned
from the field cases and premarket safety studies. Ihe onset of clinical signs can be either
acute or somewhat delayed. With acutely toxic concentrations of ionophores, the onset of
sia oas asra  saau e suis  s
dose dependent.
As with the onset of clinical effects, the duration of effects is quite varied. Once iono-
se Suol se io saep may e se al se ioy anuuos Aeu suais [esnuno 'sdois arnsodxa anond
3 months.457.15.6 But persistent effects from peripheral neuropathy have also been reported.10
The duration of clinical signs is thought to correlate with the severity of the clinical signs
at the time exposure was terminated. Because ionophores are lipid soluble and clinical
severity is dose related, it is likely that there is either a long terminal elimination phase
from the tissue compartments or a long period of tissue repair in the more severely
affected animals.
 Ionophores appear to be extensively metabolized and are primarily eliminated in the
feces in dogs.12 Less than 2% of a dose of laidlomycin propionate was eliminated in the urine
as either the parent drug or its metabolites. Dogs metabolize laidlomycin propionate to at
least 11 different metabolites.12 However, it is not known whether the ionophore metabolites
retain any of their ionophore transport capability.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Translocation of ions and disruption of ion gradients are responsible for the therapeutic
 and toxic effects of ionophores.17.18 Translocation of ions across the mitochondria disrupts
Table 50-1
Toxicity of Various lonophores and Resultant Clinical Signs
knophore
Species
Toxic Dose
Clinical Signs
Laidlomycin
Canine
No observed effect:
 propionatell12
2 mg/kg of diet
for 91 days
Canine
Acute: 60 mg/kg:
Labored breathing,
Chronic: 1.5 mg/kg/day
salivation, paleness,
abnormal gait, loss of
peripheral reflexes,
and collapse
Lasalocid4.5.12.29
Canine
 Field cases: 166-210 mg/kg
Muscle weakness,
of dog food (ingestion 
 depression, paresis,
ofapproximately
ataxia, dysuria,
10-15 mg/kg/day)
dyspnea, quadriplegia
Canine
Chronic: 2-year study
No observed effect:
35 ppm (1 mg/kg/day)
Rabbit
Acute LDso: 40 mg/kg
 Maduramicinl4
Canine
 No observed effect:
12 mg/kg of diet for
30 days; 6 mg/kg of
diet for 1 year
Canine
≥24 mg/kg of diet for
Hindlimb weakness,
28 days
stiffness, ataxia,
hindlimb paralysis
Monensin715
Canine
Acute oral LDso: >20 mg/kg
(males); >10 mg/kg
(females)
Canine
≥5 mg/kg for 1 year
Anorexia, weakness,
hypoactivity, weight
loss, labored
 breathing, ataxia
Canine
Field case: 165 mg/kg
Weakness,ataxia,urinary
in dog food
incontinence, paresis
Rabbit
Acute LDso: 41.7 mg/kg
 Narasin6.8.16
Canine
 No observed effect:
1.5 mg/kg of diet for
30 days; 1 mg/kg of
diet for 6 months
Canine
Acute oral LDso: >10 mg/kg Anorexia, leg weakness,
Subacutely toxic:
diarrhea, ataxia,
≥2 mg/kg/day
hypoactivity, depres-
Chronically toxic:
sion, salivation,
≥1 mg/kg/day
labored breathing,
recumbency, weight
loss
Rabbit
Acute oral LDso: 15.5 mg/kg; Anorexia, leg weakness,
Subacutely toxic:
 ataxia, incoordination,
>1 mg/kg/day
hypoactivity
Rabbit
Field cases:
Anorexia, incoordination,
140-150 mg/kg
weakness, paralysis,
in feed; 30 mg/kg
recumbency, diarrhea,
in feed
 opisthotonus, labored
breathing
Salinomycin?
Feline
Field case: 440 mg/kg
Dyspnea, weakness,
in cat food
hyporeflexia, paresis,
 paralysis, recumbency
LDs, Median lethal dose.
592 SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
mitochondrial energy production and causes mitochondrial swelling and fragmenta-
tion.19.21 This loss of energy production is at least partially responsible for the cell death and
tissue necrosis associated with ionophore poisoning.
The translocation of ions across the plasma membrane by ionophores also inhibits the
activity of excitable tissues. Ihe disruption of potassium, hydrogen, calcium, and sodium
concentrations in excitable cells alters resting potentials, action potentials, and contractil-
ity.22-28 In rat neuronal cell cultures, lasalocid causes neuronal cell damage and death but
spares the nonneuronal cells.29 The alteration in excitable tissues can decrease or halt neu-
rologic, cardiac, and skeletal muscle functions.
clinical Signs
 Presenting clinical signs are suggestive of a neurologic or neuromuscular disorder (see Table
50-1). Feed refusal, a common finding in ionophore-poisoned livestock, has not been con-
sistently reported in companion animal poisonings. In acutely toxic ionophore exposures,
there is generally a history of a sudden onset of depression, weakness, and incoordination,
begin in the hindlimbs and progress to include the front limbs. With more chronic lower
exposure rates there can be a more gradual onset of signs.10.12-16 Both the acute and chronic
syndromes progress to include recumbency, paresis, paralysis, loss of reflexes, dyspnea, and
apnea. Even in the presence of quadriplegia, cutaneous sensitivity remains intact. Some
quadriplegic dogs retain the ability to wag their tails and follow movement with their eyes.
Respiratory paralysis is the life-threatening sequela.
Although myocardial necrosis can be found in ionophore-poisoned animals, elec-
trocardiographic (ECG) abnormalities were absent in salinomycin-poisoned cats? and
monensin-poisoned dogs.7 However, one must remember that ECG changes may occur in
ionophore-poisoned animals that develop myocardial necrosis. In addition, the extent and
type of ECGchanges are directly related to the location and severity ofthe myocardial necrosis.
Minimum Database
Clinicopathologic changes have been found to be inconsistent between animals and across
time. Changes associated with ionophore-poisoned dogs include increased creatine phos-
phokinase,lactate dehydrogenase, and aspartate transaminase levels; proteinuria; and myo-
periodically during the evaluations. Although it is inconsistent, increased creatine phos-
 phokinase appears to be the most common alteration identifed in dogs. In a field case of
salinomycin poisoning in cats, one of the seven affected cats had a slight hypokalemia and
leukocytosis,3 but no clinicopathologic abnormalities were noted in the other cats. Thus
-o a u sap auasqe a pe sisu a ae sa edo
phore toxicosis.
Confirmatory Tests
Analytic verification of the presence of an ionophore drug is currently the most valid con-
firmatory test. Ihe most diagnostic analytical test is serum analysis to verify that the drug
is in the body, but currently analytic sensitivities and diagnostic laboratory capabilities do
not permit this type of testing on a routine basis. Thus analytic verification of the presence
of ionophores in the food or stomach contents of live animals and in the food or tissues
(e.g., gastrointestinal contents, feces, bile, liver) of dead animals is the next best option.
Treatment
 In cases of known recent exposure, general decontamination procedures should be
implemented. These procedures include evacuation of the gastric contents by induction
Chapter 50 | lonophores 593
of emesis and administration of activated charcoal along with a cathartic. However, this
may be contraindicated in animals with severe clinical signs, because emesis or admin-
istration of adsorbents could result in aspiration in animals exhibiting the paralytic
effects. When implemented early after exposure, decontamination procedures minimize
the absorption of the drug and thus the potential for clinical effects. Administration of
selenium and vitamin E has been shown to provide some protection against monensin
 In animals with clinical signs of ionophore poisoning, good general supportive care is
the only effective treatment. Nutritional intake must be maintained, and the animal must
be kept warm and hydrated. Recovery has even occurred in animals that developed respira-
tory paralysis by maintaining them on positive-pressure ventilation. In lasalocid-poisoned
dogs that developed apnea, spontaneous respiration returned after 6 to 12 hours.4 Recovery
time was reported to be as long as 50 days in severely affected lasalocid-poisoned dogs. In
contrast, some salinomycin-poisoned animals exhibited clinical signs as long as 7 weeks
after the intoxication or had permanent neurologic effects.3.10
Prognosis
Although recovery occurs with good supportive care, in severely affected animals a fair to
guarded prognosis is advised. For mildly affected animals, a fair to good prognosis is war-
if severe cardiac or skeletal muscle damage has occurred or there is severe neuromuscular
 involvement, the animal may experience some permanent defcits.310
Gross and Histologic Lesions
sd a  a se u sadaqou  s ss
gglay al jo suds aed ao sued e si puny auouu isouu si ieu uosa ssni au
Similar gross lesions have been observed in the skeletal musculature in several ionophore-
poisoned food animal species,6.30 but this finding has not been reported in dogs or cats.
Ionophore-induced microscopic pathologic lesions generally involve the cardiac mus-
culature, skeletal musculature, and peripheral nerves, but in some animals it may be absent.
Although there are limited numbers of reports, dogs tend to have more necrosis of the
skeletal muscles than of cardiac muscle.710.14-16 Cats, on the other hand, have more cardiac
lesions.^ In contrast, rabbits more commonly have histologic lesions in both the skeletal
and cardiac musculature. In both skeletal and cardiac muscle, lesions comprise fibrillar
of cellular repair and fibrosis. In addition to the muscular lesions, vacuolization and degen-
eration of peripheral sensory and motor nerves have been identified.3.12.16
Differential Diagnoses
Most clinical conditions included in a differential with ionophore toxicosis can be ruled
out based on the history and a clinical examination. Absence of ticks and wounds can
aid in ruling out tick paralysis and polyradiculoneuritis. Normal serum mineral con-
centrations can be used to rule out calcium and magnesium abnormalities. Rear-limb
to front-limb progression and rapid onset can be used to rule out myasthenia gravis.
Macrolide parasiticides (i.e., ivermectin) and amitraz poisoning can present as a severe
central nervous system depression, recumbency, or a paralytic syndrome and must be
ruled out by lack of previous exposure. The most difficult differential that must be ruled
out is botulism. Botulism is not common in dogs and cats, but mimics ionophore poison-
ing in many ways. Laboratory analysis that is negative for the organism and toxin serve
to rule out botulism. Other differential diagnoses may include macadamia nut ingestion
 in dogs, bromethalin poisoning, and organophosphate-induced intermediate syndrome
or delayed neuropathy.
594SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
References
1. Bennett K: Compendium of veterinary products, ed 3, Port Huron, Ml, 1995, North American
Compendiums.
2. McDougald LR, Roberson EL: Antiprotozoan drugs. In Booth NH, McDonald LE,editors: Veterinary
pharmacology and therapeutics, ed 6, Ames, 1988, Iowa State University Press.
3. Van Der Linde-Sipman JS, VanDen Ingh TSGAM, Van Nes JJ, et al: Salinomycin-induced polyneuropa-
thy in cats: morphologic and epidemiologic data, Vet Pathol 36:152-156, 1999.
4. Safran N, Aizenberg I, Bark H: Paralytic syndrome attributed to lasalocid residues in a commercial ration
fed to dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 202:1273-1275, 1993.
5. Segev G, Baneth G, Levitin B, et al: Accidental poisoning of 17 dogs with lasalocid, Vet Rec 155:174-176,
2004.
6. Salles MS, Lombardo de Barros CS, Barros SS: Ionophore antibiotic (narasin) poisoning in rabbits
Vet Hum Toxicol 36(5):437-444, 1994.
 7. Wilson JS: Toxic myopathy in a dog associated with the presence of monensin in dry food, Can Vet J
21:30-31, 1980.
8. Osz M, Salyi G, Malik G, et al: Narasin poisoning in rabbits, Vet Bull59:416, 1989 (Abstract 2985).
9. Condon FP, McKenzie RA: Fatal monensin toxicity in a dog after chewing a bovine intra-ruminal slow-
release device, Aust Vet Pract 32(4):179-180, 2002.
10. Pakozdy A, Challande-Kathman I, Doherr M, et al: Retrospective study of salinomycin toxicosis in 66
cats, Vet Med Int, 2010.
11. Syntex: Material safety data sheet, Palo Alto, CA, July 1991, Syntex Inc.
12. Food and Drug Administration: Laidlomycin propionate. NADA Number 141-025, Rockville, MD, 1994,
Freedom of Information Office, Center for Veterinary Medicine.
13. Galitzer SJ, Oehme FW: A literature review on the toxicity of lasalocid, a polyether antibiotic, Vet Hum
Toxicol 26:322-326, 1984.
14. Food and Drug Administration: Maduramicin ammonium. NADA Number 139075, Rockville, MD,
1989, Freedom of Information Office, Center for Veterinary Medicine.
15. Todd GC, Novilla MN, Howard LC: Comparative toxicology of monensin sodium in laboratory animals,
} A ntm Sci 58:15121517, 1984.
16. Novilla MN, Owen NV, Todd GC: The comparative toxicology of narasin in laboratory animals,
Vet Hu Toxicol 36(4):318-323, 1994.
17. Pressman BC: Induced active transport of ions in mitochondria, Proc Nat Acad Sci 53:1076-1083, 1965.
18. Pressman BC: Ionophorous antibiotics as models for biological transport, Fed Proc 27:1283-1288, 1968.
in phospholipid membranes: the effects of ion translocator X-537A on the energy-conserving properties
of mitochondrial membranes,I Membr Biol 18:201-218, 1974.
20. Mitani M, Yamanishi T, Miyazaki Y, et al: Salinomycin effects on mitochondrial ion translocation and
respiration,Antimicrob Ag Chem 9:655-660, 1976.
 21. Wong DT, Berg DH, Hamill RH,et al: Ionophorous properties of narasin, a new polyether monocarbox-
ylic acid antibiotic, in rat liver mitochondria, Biochem Pharmacol 26:1373-1376, 1977.
22. Haeusler G: The effects of the ionophore X-537A (lasalocid) on the heart and on vascular smooth muscle,
Experientia 32:779, 1976 (Abstract).
23. Levy IV, Cohen JA, Inesi G: Contractile effects of a calcium ionophore, Nature 242:461-463, 1973.
24. Lattanzio FA Jr, Pressman BC: Alterations in intracellular calcium activity and contractility of isolated
perfused rabbit hearts by ionophores and adrenergic agents, Biochem Biophys Res Commun 139:816-821,
1986.
(A23187 and X-537A) in spontaneously beating rabbit sino-atrial node cells, Gen Pharmacol 24:49-57,
1993.
26. Devore DI, Nastuk WL: Effects of “calcium jonophore” X537A on frog skeletal muscle, Nature 253:
644-646, 1975.
27. Murakami K, Karaki H, Nakagawa H, et al: The inhibitory effect of X537A on vascular smooth muscle
contraction, Naunyn-Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 325:80-84, 1984.
28. Levy IV, Cohen JA, Inesi G: Contractile effects of a calcium ionophore, Nature 242:461-463, 1973.
29. Safran N, Haring R, Gurwitz D, et al: Selective neurotoxicity induced by the ionophore lasalocid in rat
dissociated cerebral cultures,involvement on the NMDA receptor/channel, Neurotox 17:883-895, 1996.
30. Novilla MN: The veterinary importance ofthe toxic syndrome induced by ionophores, Vet Hum Toxicol
34:66-70,1992.
31. Food and Drug Administration: Lasalocid. NADA Number 096-298, Rockville, MD, 1982, Freedom of
Information Office, Center for Veterinary Medicine.
CHAPTER
51
Iron
Jeffery O. Hall, DVM, PhD, DABVT
'sazay 'speialu io suuenu 'siuaualddns peuoeisaa apnpu sanmos 
iron-EDTA slug and snail baits, hand warmers, and oxygen absorber sachets (for
spoilage prevention).
Toxic dose: less than 20 rmg/kg absorbable elermental iron is generally not systermically
toxic; 20 to 60 mg/kg absorbable elemental iron can be mildly to moderately toxic;
more than 60 mg/kg absorbable elermental iron can cause severe intoxication.
· Iron is a highly reactive metal, when not protein bound, that induces free radical
production and lipid peroxidation in biologic systems.
Clinical signs include gastrointestinal distress, shock, and cardiovascular collapse.
Confirmatory tests include analytical confirmation of serum iron concentrations
that surpass the iron binding capacity.
Treatment should include early gastric decontamination, good supportive care
(fluids, electrolytes, acid-base correction), and chelation therapy.
Prognosis is fair to good depending on the severity of clinical signs
· Gross and histologic lesions include gross erythema or necrosis of the
gastrointestinal mucosa, hepatic swelling, systemic ederma or hemorrhage, and
damage to hepatocytes or vascular epithelium
· Differential diagnoses are garbage intoxication, gastric torsion, caustic or coxrosive
intoxication, snake bite, heat prostration, and bacterial and viral enteritis
ron is an essential mineral, but when a large amount is ingested, it also can be lethal.
This type of acute poisoning occurs primarily in dogs because of their often indiscrimi-
nate eating habits. Although cats are also susceptible to the toxic effects of large doses of
iron, there are no reported cases in the literature. Ingestion of large doses of soluble iron
over whelms the body's protective defense mechanisms and results in free circulating iron,
which causes severe tissue damage.
Sources
Numerous products contain iron in some form, but the more soluble salt forms of iron pose
the greatest risk of toxicosis. This type of soluble iron is commonly found in numerous over-
the-counter multivitamin-mineral preparations, gestational iron supplements, some types of
slug and snail baits (iron-EDTA baits), some types of oxygen absorbing sachets (used in prod-
ucts to prevent spoilage), hand warming pads, and some fortified lawn and garden fertilizers.
Because dietary or nutritional supplements are often sugar coated, dogs may eat large numbers
of tablets. In addition, pet owners frequently think that vitamin or mineral supplements are
not dangerous and leave this type of material in locations where animals can gain easy access.
Although many other products contain iron in some form, its solubility is often so low that
595
596SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
toxicosis would not occur. For example, metallic iron and ferric oxide (rust) are so poorly sol-
uble that they are not considered a threat for a toxic ingestion. This type of insoluble iron may
be the type found in some fertilizers, so identification of the iron's chemical form is important.
Toxic Dose
The dose of soluble, absorbable iron necessary to induce an iron toxicosis in the dog follows
that reported for humans. Ingestion of less than 20 mg/kg is generally not a threat for systemic
intoxication, although a mild gastric upset may occur. With ingestion of 20 to 60 mg/kg, a mild
to moderate intoxication can be expected Ingestion of more than 60 mg/kg is a serious threat
for severe intoxication. Without early intervention, ingestion of greater than 100 mg/kg is poten-
tially fatal. However, it is inportant to remember that these toxic doses are based on soluble,
 bioavailable forms of iron and would greatly overestimate the toxicity of an insoluble iron form.
In evaluating the potential for toxicosis, one must calculate the amount of elemental
iron ingested. This is accomplished by multiplying the amount of the iron salt (mg) by the
percentage of elemental iron (0.10 for 10%). Table 51-1lists the more common salt forms of
iron and their relative percentages of elemental iron. For tablet ingestions, this information
will provide the amount of elemental iron per tablet because most tablets are labeled with
the amount of iron salt per tablet. Because iron ingestion can be underestimated if the label
lists elemental iron instead of iron salt, one must be certain about whether the amount of
iron is listed as the elemental or salt form. In addition, the ferrous salt forms of iron are
more bioactive and more rapidly absorbed, but their overall toxicity is more dependent on
the total soluble concentration of elemental iron.
Toxicokinetics
Because free elemental iron is deleterious to tissue, mammals have mechanisms to bind and
store iron. As iron enters the systemic circulation, it is rapidly bound to transferrin, the pri-
mary iron transport protein. This protein transports iron to the peripheral tissue where iron
is needed Serum transferrin concentrations greatly exceed those necessary to bind iron under
normal physiologic conditions. This reserve binding capacity provides protection against iron
becoming free in systermic circulation. In cases of intoxication, this protein-binding capacity
becomes saturated, thus allowing nonbound
iron to interact with cellular constituents.
Table 51-1
Percentage of Elemental
Cellular iron that is not necessary for pro-
Iron in Common Soluble Iron Salts
duction of proteins is bound into ferritin, an
Percentage of
iron-storage protein of the tissues.3 Chronic
Salt
Elemental lron
exposure to excess iron induces the produc-
tion of additional transferrin and ferritin,
Iron (as ferric salt)
100
but in acute exposures iron can overwhelm
Iron (as ferrous salt)
100
the binding capacity of these proteins.4
Ferric ammonium citrate
15
The kinetics of iron absorption are quite
Ferric chloride
34
Ferric EDTA
complex and do not follow the normal pat-
tern for most nutrients. The overall body
Ferric hydroxide
63
Ferric phosphate
load of iron is regulated at the point of
37
Ferric pyrophosphate
absorption because there is no mechanism
30
 Ferriglycine sulfate
for actively eliminating excess iron. The
16
absorption of iron from the gastric lumen
Ferrous fumarate
33
into the systemic circulation involves a
Ferrous carbonate
48
Ferrous gluconate
tWo-step regulation. First, the iron must be
12
transferred into the gastric mucosal cells.
Ferrous lactate
24
Ferrous sulfate (anhydrous)
37
It is thought that this involves a carrier-
Ferrous sulfate (hydrate)
20
mediated process, but may include mul-
tiple iron transporter proteins. Next the
Peptonized iron
16
iron is either transferred from the mucosal
Chapter 51 | Iron 597
cell into the circulation, or it is lost when the cells are sloughed through normal cellular
turnover.6 It is interesting that much more iron is absorbed into the gastric mucosal cells
than is eventually transferred into the systemic circulation. This retained cellular iron is
Ae s esu is a sasoxa ae ae  se u ua u pn
to sequester the iron into ferritin probably becomes saturated, allowing nonbound iron to
damage the cells and enter systemic circulation, where it is bound to transferrin until that
also becomes saturated. Damage to the gastric mucosal cells may also allow for the direct
entry of iron into systemic circulation, bypassing this normal limiting barrier.
 In nonlethal exposures, the excess iron is sequestered into tissue. Iron elimination from
the body occurs at a fairly constant rate. Even with large doses of iron, there is no increase
in the rate of elimination.7 Thus the excess is stored in the body in ferritin or hemosiderin,
 a mineralized iron deposit in tissues.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Iron is a very reactive transition metal that can change valence states, from ferrous to ferric
and then back to the ferrous form, very rapidly. This is one reason why iron plays a major
role in biologic redox reactions. This same characteristic is responsible for the toxic nature of
nonbound iron. Iron's toxicity centers on its ability to act as and produce free radicals (also
electrons.3 Free radicals seek to scavenge electrons and in doing so produce additional free
radicals. These free radicals can initiate autooxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids (lipid
ue aaep anssi un imsan Aau o aa aa ues uaii aang su s (uoeixad
necrosis. Because free iron is so reactive, the primary tissues that are damaged are those that
have first contact with absorbed free iron: the gastrointestinal, vascular, hepatic, and cardiac
tissues. However, all tissues are susceptible to the toxic effects of free iron.
In addition to direct cellular damage, metabolic disorders can also occur. With severe
systemic tissue damage, coagulopathies can appear. Severe metabolic acidosis is common
because of fluid and electrolyte loss resulting from vascular and gastrointestinal damage,
and from direct mitochondrial damage. Ihe mitochondrial damage, along with decreased
tissue perfusion, causes increases in lactic acid. The direct tissue damage and resultant met-
abolic disruption combine to result in gastrointestinal distress, hepatic necrosis, cardiovas-
cular collapse, and occasionally death.
Clinical Signs
Clinical signs that are commonly reported are associated with gastrointestinal damage, car-
hematemesis, diarrhea, bloody stools, abdominal pain, muscle tremors, shock, and death.1.9.j0
The progression of clinical effects in domestic animals closely follows the four stages described
in humans. The first stage, 0 to 6 hours after ingestion, primarily involves gastrointestinal
upset and depression resulting from damage to the gastrointestinal mucosa. Bloody vomi-
tus or stool can occur in this stage. The second stage, 6 to 24 hours post ingestion, is one of
apparent recovery. The gastrointestinal effects subside, and the animal becomes more alert.
This stage can lead to a false sense of security that the animal is out of danger. The third stage,
12 to 96 hours following ingestion, involves a return of the gastrointestinal effects plus meta-
bolic acidosis, shock, hepatic failure, cardiovascular collapse, coagulation disorders, and in
gastrointestinal obstruction secondary to the fbrosing repair of the gastrointestinal dam-
 age. This stage is not seen as commonly as the other stages, but can occur.
Minimum Database
The database necessary to evaluate an exposure or clinical condition includes estimat-
ing the potential iron exposure and performing a thorough clinical evaluation. However,
598SECTION4SpecificToxicants
estimation of exposure is often difficult because numbers of tablets or amounts can often
should evaluate the total serum iron concentration and serum iron binding capacity (these
tests are often available at most human hospitals and some veterinary clinical pathology
laboratories), and perform complete blood count, serum chemistry profle, and abdomi-
nal radiographs. On abdominal radiographs, precipitated iron or tablets remaining to be
dissolved and absorbed can often be observed, and it is not uncommon for the tablets to
adhere to the gastric mucosa or form a mass that will slowly dissolve and be absorbed over
time.
Confirmatory Tests
Measurements of total serum iron concentration and serum iron binding capacity are the
most reliable tests for the presence of iron poisoning. Systemic poisoning does not occur
until the serum iron binding capacity has been exceeded. Because iron binding capacity
varies greatly among dogs, it is recommended that both serum iron concentration and
serum iron binding capacity be measured. Caution must be observed in the timing of sam-
ple collection because the rate of tablet dissolution can vary and iron has multicompart-
mental kinetics of disposition. Ihus the serum iron concentration can vary greatly in the
frst few hours. It is therefore recommended that serum iron concentration and iron bind-
ing capacity be measured 4 to 6 hours after ingestion. Although serum iron may peak by
6 hours post exposure, one must also remember that masses of tablets will dissolve and be
absorbed over much greater periods of time. Ihese tests should be repeated in 2 to 4 hours
if the results show serum iron concentration below but near the total iron binding capacity.
If there has been a large ingestion or if the patient is clinically symptomatic, earlier serum
iron measurements may be indicated. Iron concentrations greater than 300 to 500 mcg/dL
in properly collected and preserved serum samples where there is no evidence of hemolysis
should raise a concern about a possible iron intoxication.
Treatment
With acute ingestions in asymptomatic animals, gastric decontamination is recommended
clinical signs, or failure of tablets to be removed by induction of emesis, as indicated by den-
sities on abdominal radiographs, are indications for gastric lavage under anesthesia, with
an endotracheal tube in place. A gastrotomy is indicated when radiographic observation
indicates a tablet bezoar or adherent tablets. Activated charcoal is not indicated because it
does not bind iron. In addition, gastric administration of salt solutions to precipitate the
iron and render it nonbioavailable has not been successful.
Careful management of fluid load, electrolytes, and acid-base status, along with symp-
tomatic care, is necessary in the care of an iron-poisoned animal. Fluid replacement is
necessary to combat circulatory shock and fluid loss. The amount of replacement fluids
should be based on replacement of the fluid deficit plus fluids necessary for maintenance.
Electrolytes should be monitored and added to the fluids as necessary to correct deficits.
 Blood gas analysis aids in determining whether treatment is necessary for the correc-
tion of a metabolic acidosis. The use of gastrointestinal protectants, such as sucralfate, is
also indicated in patients that have indications of potential or ongoing gastrointestinal
damage.
 In animals that are experiencing severe toxicosis or in animals that have serum iron in
excess of the iron binding capacity, chelation therapy is indicated. If serum iron binding
capacity is not available, chelation should be considered in cases for which serum iron is
greater than 300 mcg/dL. It is imperative that only clean serum samples be tested for serum
iron, as hemolysis can result in artificially increased readings for serum iron with some
the Animal Poison Control Center has successfully used deferoxamine (Desferal) to chelate
Chapter 51 | lron 599
The patient has
The patient has
The patient has
ingested <20 mg/kg
ingested 20 to 60 mg/kg
ingested <60 mg/kg
elemental iron.
elemental iron.
elemental iron.
The owner should
Decontaminate
Decontaminate
observe the pet at home
for at least six hours.
 Observe the patient for
Administer gastro-
at least six hours.
 intestinal protectants.
Are there clinical signs?
Provide other
symptomatic care.
 Measure serum iron
concentration and total
 iron-binding capacity.
No further treatment
No
Are there clinical signs?
Yes
The serum iron concen-
or monitoring is needed.
The serum iron concen-
tration is ≤500 meg/dL.
 tration is >500 mcg/dL
 or total iron - binding 
capacity is greater than
Administer supportive
Monitor the patient for
the serum iron concen-
and symptomatic care.
 tration and the animal
at least six hours.
is symptomatic.
No
Is there gastrointestinal
Yes
N
obstruction?
re there clinical signs?
Start chelation therapy.
Monitor the patient for 
Recheck the serum iron
four to six weeks.
 concentration after 24
to 48 hours.
Is the serum iron
concentration <300
mcg/dL and are there no
clinical signs?
Yes
No
End chelation therapy.
Continue chelation
therapy.
Figure 5l-l Management of iron toxicosis. (From Albretsen J: The toxicity of iron, an
essential element. Vet Med 82-90, 2006.)
iron (other chelating agents include deferasirox and deferiprone). This chelation agent has
a very high binding affinity for iron. Chelation therapy should be started early in the clini-
cal course of the intoxication because it usually has little benefit when started more than 12
hours after ingestion. Deferoxamine should be given by continuous intravenous (IV) infu-
sion at a rate of 15 mg/kg/hour. Faster rates of infusion are associated with arrhythmias and
 a worsening of existing hypotension. If continuous infusion is not possible, intramuscular
administration of 40 mg/kg every 4 to 8 hours is recommended. However, this method is
not as effective as the IV infusion. Chelation therapy should be continued until the serum
600SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
iron concentration is below either 300 mcg/dL or the measured serum iron binding capac-
ity, whichever is lower.
Prognosis
For most asymptomatic patients that receive early decontamination, the prognosis is good.
However, in animals that are symptomatic the prognosis can range from guarded to good
depending on the severity of the clinical effects, the amount of iron ingested, and how early
chelation and supportive therapies were started.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
 Gross and histologic lesions are primarily the result of damage to the gastrointestinal tract,
necrosis and sloughing of the mucosal epithelium with severe hemorrhage. Damaged vas-
cular epithelium leads to the development of edema, which can occur at any site. In animals
 sisa eda ssi ro ae u aaasqo aq u a edeo e 
range from mild capsular swelling to severe friability and hemorrhage. Histologic lesions
follow the gross lesions and can include cellular swelling and/or necrosis of the mucosal
epithelial cells, myocardial cells, vascular epithelium, and hepatocytes. Vascular leaking and
hemorrhage are also observed.
Differential Diagnoses
 There are not many differential diagnoses to consider if an iron-poisoned dog develops the
full spectrum of clinical effects, but as with most clinical conditions, this spectrum is not
often encountered. Primary considerations include any cause of gastrointestinal distress
that also causes shock, such as garbage intoxication, gastric torsion, caustic or corrosive
intoxication, snake bite, heat prostration, bacterial enteritis, or viral enteritis.
References
1. Greentree WF, Hall JO: Iron toxicosis. In Bonagura JD, editor: Kirk's current veterinary therapy smal
animal practice, ed 12, Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders.
2. Adrian GS, Korinek BW, Bowman BH,et al: The human transferrin gene: 5' region contains conserved
sequences which match the control elements regulated by heavy metals, glucocorticoids, and acute phase
reaction, Gene 49:167-175, 1986.
3. Ponka P, Schulman HM, Woodworth RC: Iron transport and storage,Boca Raton, FL, 1990, CRC Press.
4. McKnight GS, Lee DC, Hemmaplardh D, et al: Transferrin gene expression: effects of nutritional iron
deficiency, I Biol Chem 255(1):144-147, 1979.
 5. Simovich M, Hainsworth LN, Fields PA, etal Localization ofthe iron transport proteins mobilferrin and
DMT-1 in the duodenum: the surprising role of mucin. Am J Hematol 74:32-45, 2003
6. Whebey MS, Cosby WH: The gastrointestinal tract and iron absorption, Blood 22(4):416-428, 1963
7. Smith A, Morgan WT: Haem transport to the liver by haemopexin, Biochem J 1983:47-54, 1979.
8. O'Connell MJ, Ward RJ, Baum H, et al: The role of iron in ferritin- and hemosiderin-mediated lipid
peroxidation in liposomes, Biochem J 229:135-139, 1985.
9. Haldand SL, Davis RM: Acute toxicity in five dogs after ingestion of a commercial snail and slug bait
containing iron EDTA, Austr Vet J 87(7):284-286, 2009.
10. Brutlag AG, Flint CTC, Puschner B: Iron intoxication in a dog consequent to the ingestion of oxygen
absorber sachets in pet food treat packaging, I Med Toxicol 8:76-79, 2012.
CHAPTER
52
[vermectin: Macrolide
Antiparasitic Agents
Katrina L. Mealey, DVM, PhD, DACVIM, DACVCP
·Ivermectin, selamectin, moxidectin, doramectin, eprinomectin, abamectin,
and milbemycin are potential sources of toxicity caused by acidental overdose
or access or when used in susceptible breeds.
Some collies and other herding breeds lack a functional P-glycoprotein that
renders thern more susceptible to the neurotoxic effects of these drugs.
Clinical signs typically include diorientation, ataxia, hyperesthesia,
hypersalivation, vocalization, blindness, recumbency, and coma.
·Most anirnals will recover following appropriate supportive care, but recovery
rmay take hours, days, or even weeks.
vermectin, selamectin, moxidectin, and milbemycin are macrolides (or macrocyclic lac-
tones) that are used to treat a variety of parasitic diseases in dogs and cats.' In the United
States, each of these agents is licensed for use as a heartworm preventive in dogs. In cats,
macrolide antiparasitic agents are licensed for use as heartworm preventives, and some
are licensed for the treatment of otodectes and hookworms, Ancylostoma braziliense and
Ancylostorma fubaeforme. In an extralabel manner, and at doses greatly exceeding the rec-
ommended label dose, macrolide antiparasitic agents are also used to treat scabies, lice,
cheyletiella, demodecosis, gastrointestinal nematodes, and the microfilaria of Diroflaria
imitis. Macrolide antiparasitic agents are generally considered to have a wide margin of
safety.? However, a percentage of collies and other herding breeds harbor a mutation in the
if not all, of these agents.3 It is important to note that at the labeled doses for heartworm
prevention, the macrolide antiparasitic agents are safe for use in herding breeds, even those
dogs with the mutant MDRl genotype. Although toxicosis in nonherding dog breeds and
cats generally results from an extreme overdose (i.e., when a product marketed for livestock
is used off-label in small animals), the author is aware of reports of suspected toxicosis in
a dog (moxidectin) and cat (topical ivermectin) receiving the approved label dose of the
particular macrolide.
 Doramectin and eprinomectin are macrolides approved for use in cattle only.4 The man-
ufacturers of these agents do not recommend their use in other species.
Clinical signs associated with macrolide toxicity reflect the actions of these drugs on the
central nervous system. A specific antidote is not available, but most animals experiencing
s aej aai aad e a  sp asa on asda  siso
portive care is provided.
Sources
Ivermectin (Heartguard, others) is a mixture of 22,23-dihydroavermectin Bja (>80%) and
Bb (<20%), formulated to control a number of internal and external parasites in animals.
109
602SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
H is produced from the fungus Sreptomyces avermitilis and is marketed for dogs and cats
(tablets, chewables, and an otic solution [cats]), with some formulations also containing
pyrantel pamoate. Ivermectin is also marketed for cattle (injectable, pour-on, bolus), swine
(injectable, premix), horses (liquids and pastes), and sheep (drench).
 Moxidectin (Proheart) is approved for use in dogs (tablet, injectable), cattle (pour-on),
and horses (oral gel). Proheart 6 is an injectable, sustained-release (6-month duration)
heartworm prevention product labeled for dogs. Moxidectin products are also available in
Australia, Canada, and Europe. Like ivermectin, moxidectin is used to control many types
of internal and external parasites. Moxidectin is a chemically altered product of Streptormy-
ces aureolacrimosus noncyanogenus.
Selamectin (Revolution) is marketed as a topical solution for use in dogs and cats for
the control of both internal and external parasites. Selamectin, a macrolide antibiotic, is a
fermentation product of Streptomyces avermitilis.!
-ad au i s pue saop u asn i paidde ae sae eo (daau uua
vention of Dirofilaria, and for treatment of some internal parasites. Milbemycin is a fermen-
tation product of Streptomyces hygroscopicus aureolacrimosus.
Doramectin (Dectomax) is marketed as an injectable or pour-on formulation for the
control of endoparasites and ectoparasites in cattle. Doramectin is a fermentation product
of Streptomyces avermitilis.5
Eprinomectin (Eprinex) is marketed as a pour-on formulation for the control of endo-
parasites and ectoparasites in cattle.5
Abamectin (Avert cockroach bait; KraftTM; others) is an environmental insecticide/pes-
ticide that is frequently used for insect control. It is licensed for use on crops, yards, and
within buildings (including homes, offices, and restaurants).
Relatively high concentrations of macrolide antibiotics can be excreted in the feces in
their active form. Toxicosis has occurred in dogs that have ingested the feces of sheep and/
or horses that were treated with some macrolides.
Toxic Dose
Ivermectin is approved for use in dogs and cats for the prevention of dirofilariasis at oral
doses of 0.006 and 0.024 mg/kg, respectively, once a month. Most dogs tolerate oral iver-
  g  sis  aq   i ss
isas ano ane 'spaaq suat ian pue sats anadsa 'sop ao a os st sho
tive to ivermectin and can only tolerate doses up to 0.1 mg/kg, which is sixteenfold higher
than the label dose.38.9 There are numerous reports of ivermectin toxicity in collies and
otherherding breeds receiving“antiparasitidoses of ivermectin(0.2 to0.6 mg/kg).6.0.13
Two Australian shepherd dogs receiving ivermectin at oral dosages of 0.17 mg/kg and
0.34 mg/kg, respectively, developed clinical signs of toxicosis,2 as did an old English sheep-
dog mix that received 0.15 mg/kg ivermectin orally (PO).13 However, at the recommended
dosage for heartworm prevention (0.006 mg/kg per month), ivermectin is safe for all dog
breeds.
Cats generally tolerate dosages of 0.2 to 1.3 mg/kg ivermectin given orally or subcutane-
ously (SQ).114 The apparent no-effect level for oral ivermectin in cats is approximately 0.5
to 0.75 mg/kg of body weight. Toxicosis has been reported in a limited number of cats and
kittens exposed to lower doses (0.30 to 0.40 mg/kg SQ).15
Moxidectin is available in tablet form for monthly oral administration at a dose of 0.003
mg/kg, and as a sustained release injectable formulation at a dose of 0.17 mg/kg admin-
administered orally to dogs at doses 300-fold greater than the label dose without producing
signs of toxicity. However, at 0.09 mg/kg (30x label dose), clinical signs of moxidectin toxi-
cosis were observed in a collie. Furthermore, moxidectin toxicosis has been reported in a
Jack Russell terrier (a breed not known to harbor the MDRl mutation) that consumed the
equine product'6 and a Shetland sheepdog that received an injection of the sustained release
product labeled for use in dogs.
Chapter 52 I Ivermectin: Macrolide Antiparasitic Agents 603
 Milbemycin is available in tablet form for monthly administration at a dose of 2 mg/kg
(cats) and 0.5 mg/kg (dogs).5 Beagles have received doses 200 times greater than the label
dose, with no apparent signs of toxicity. In a study involving collies, hypersalivation, ataxia,
mydriasis, and central nervous system depression were observed in 2 of 5 collies treated
with 5 mg/kg (10× label dose), and 5 of 5 collies treated with 10 mg/kg (20× label dose).17
According to some dermatologists, milbemycin can be used at a dose of 0.5 to 1.6 mg/kg
daily to treat canine demodecosis.'8 However, toxicosis has been reported in dogs with the
MDRI mutation when milbemycin has been used according to this protocol.
According to the manufacturers, selamectin was proven safe when given at 10 times
its recommended dose to puppies and kittens and 5 times its recommended dose when
administered to collies (a 10x topical dose in collies caused ataxia).5.19 Oral administration
of selamectin at the recommended topical dose in young beagle dogs did not cause any
noticeable adverse reactions.l.5 When selamectin was administered orally at dosages of 2.5,
 10, or 15 mg/kg to ivermectin-sensitive collies, only one animal showed ataxia at the 15-mg/kg
exposure dosage (oral dose of 2.5 times the label dose for topical administration). Oral
administration of selamectin to cats at the recommended topical dose (6 mg/kg) caused
salivation and vomiting.l Ihere is one report of a kitten (0.3 kg) that died 8 hours after
receiving a single topical dose of selamectin. However, this young kitten was malnourished
and underweight for its age.
 Doramectin has been used safely for treating spirocercosis in dogs at a dose of 0.4 mg/kg
injected subcutaneously at 2-week intervals for 6 treatments. Beagles treated with this pro-
tocol demonstrated no signs of toxicity.20 However, doramectin toxicosis has been reported
in a collie.21
Limited information exists in the literature on the toxic dose of eprinomectin for
dogs and cats. It is likely that eprinomectin has a safety profle similar to those of other
macrolides.
Toxicokinetics
Up to 95% of ivermectin is absorbed after oral administration in monogastric animals. It
is primarily excreted unchanged in the feces likely by a P-glycoprotein-dependent mecha-
nism. A fraction of the dose is metabolized in the liver through oxidation. The terminal
elimination half-life in MDR1 wild-type dogs is about 2 days.
Bioavailability of selamectin after topical administration to dogs and cats is 5% and
75%, respectively, with peak plasma concentrations occurring in 3 days (dogs) and 15 hours
(cats).l The terminal elimination half-life after topical administration is reported to be
approximately 11 days for dogs and 8 days for cats. These likely represent sustained release
from a depot site, such as the skin, because the terminal half-life after intravenous admin-
istration was shorter.
 Moxidectin is absorbed rapidly after oral administration, with peak plasma concen-
administration is reported to be approximately 19 days.22
Specific pharmacokinetic information regarding milbemycin, doramectin, and eprino-
ose siuaae asau iel ansse oi aqeuosean st ll 'aeeae jou st sies pue sop un uoa
have long elimination half-lives in dogs and cats. Consequently, patients suffering from
jo asinoo patuooid Apey e aimban ke siuae asaul jo auo ol aimsodxa rage sisoixoi
treatment.
Mechanism of Toxicity
The macrolides were originally thought to act as a -aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonist,
 but more recent evidence suggests that the actions of macrolides against parasites and non-
target animals are mediated through glutamate-gated chloride channels in the central ner-
vous system.12 Macrolides bind with high affinity to these channels, triggering the influx
of chloride ions that results in hyperpolarization of the neuron and prevention of action
604SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
potential initiation or propagation.12 The ultimate result is paralysis and death of the target
parasite.
Mammals are generally protected from the effects of macrolides because their central
nervous system, the site of action for macrolides, is generally not exposed to high con-
centrations of these agents.3 Although these agents tend to be highly lipid soluble, which
favors entry into the central nervous system, the mammalian blood-brain barrier prevents
have been shown to be substrates of P-glycoprotein, the product of the MDR1 (ABCBl) gene.
Based on structural similarities, it is suspected that all of the currently available macrolides
are P-glycoprotein substrates. P-glycoprotein, an integral component of the blood-brain bar-
rier, is expressed on the luminal aspect of brain capillary epithelial cells.23 There it functions
as an efflux pump for a large number of substrate drugs (Box 52-1), binding the drug and
transporting it back into the capillary lumen. Animals that lack functional P-glycoprotein,
including MDR1(-/-) knockout mice and herding breeds with the MDRI mutation, accumu-
late much higher (i.e., fiftyfold greater) concentrations of P-glycoprotein substrate drugs in
brain tissue, and are therefore more susceptible to neurologic toxicity from these drugs. In
addition to increased sensitivity to macrolide antiparasitic agents, collies and other herd-
ing breeds harboring the MDR1 mutant genotype have severe neurotoxicity develop after
treatment with standard doses of loperamide (Imodium),24 and are extremely sensitive to
adverse effects caused by standard doses of vincristine and doxorubicin.25
Clearly, functional P-glycoprotein is crucial for protecting mammals from macrolide-
induced neurologic toxicity. P-glycoprotein dysfunction in mammals can be genetic
(involving a polymorphism of the MDR1 gene) or acquired. The MDRI mutation in herding
breeds is a four-base-pair deletion mutation. The frame shift that results from this deletion
prematurely terminated.3 Less than 10% of the P-glycoprotein product is synthesized in
P-glycoprotein dysfunction can occur as a result of drug interactions. A number of drugs
can inhibit P-glycoprotein function (Box 52-2).26 When drugs that inhibit P-glycoprotein
function are administered concurrently with P-glycoprotein substrates (such as macrolide
antiparasitic agents), increased susceptibility to neurologic toxicity can occur. Ketocon-
azole has been shown to inhibit P-glycoprotein function, thereby enhancing CNS penetra-
tion and blunting biliary excretion of P-glycoprotein substrate drugs in MDR1 wild-type
dogs.27Similarly, concurrent administration of the flea preventive spinosad (Comfortis) and
ivermectin (extralabel dose used for treating demodex) has been reported by the FDA to
cause neurologic toxicity (http:// www.fda.gov/AnimalVeterinary/NewsEvents/CVMUpdat
es/ucm047942.htm).
Clinical Signs
an acute overdose, clinical signs may occur within a few hours of administration. How-
ever, in some animals that are being treated daily (i.e., for demodecosis), clinical signs of
toxicity may occur after several days of treatment. Animals are typically depressed and
ization.10.i7 Depending on the dose, the animal may become progressively weaker and then
may become recumbent and possibly comatose. Other reported neurologic signs include
muscle fasciculations, tremors, and seizures. Affected animals may have normal or exag-
menace response and/or pupillary light reflex. Miosis, mydriasis, and strabismus have been
reported.
 Other reported signs in severely depressed dogs include hypothermia, decreased heart
rate, slow shallow breathing, vomiting, mild diarrhea, and sinus arrhythmia. Clinical signs
can persist for several days to several weeks, and the severity of the signs may not correlate
with their persistence.,8.i0.17
Chapter 52 I Ivermectin: Macrolide Antiparasitic Agents 605
Box 52-1
Examples of Drugs That
Confirmatory Tests
 Are Proven P-Glycoprotein Substrates
Ivermectin and other macrolides can be
detected in liver, adipose tissue, or serum
Macrolide Antiparasitic Agents*
to confirm exposure to the drug.2 How-
Ivermectin
ever, there is little correlation between
Selamectin
macrolide concentrations in the blood
 Antineoplastic Agents
and the development of clinical signs
because it is the concentration of drug in
Doxorubicin
Vinca alkaloids
the brain that is of clinical importance.29
Taxanes
Administration of physostigmine (1 mg
Epipodophyllotoxins
intravenously) has been used to tempo-
rarily reverse neurologic clinical signs in
 Immunosuppressants
dogs suffering from ivermectin toxico-
Cyclosporine A
sis.30 Physostigmine is an anticholinester-
Tacrolimus
 ase agent that has been used in humans
Gastrointestinal Drugs
to reverse central nervous system depres-
Loperamide (Imodium)
sion caused by sedative-hypnotics. There-
Ondansetron
fore, response to physostigmine does not
confirm a diagnosis of macrolide toxicosis
Cardiac Drugs
but may support such a diagnosis.
Digoxin
Recently, a DNA-based test has become
Quinidine
available to determine if a dog harbors the
*Others are likely to be substrates but have not yet
mutant MDRI genotype. Anticoagulated
been tested
blood or cheek cells (using a cytology
brush) are obtained from the dog and sub-
mitted to the laboratory.* After extraction
of DNA a fragment containing the site of
the MDRI mutation is amplifed using the
Box 52-2
Examples of Drugs That
polymerase chain reaction and sequenced.
Inhibit P-Glycoprotein Function
Although this test does not confirm a
Cyclosporine A
diagnosis of macrolide toxicosis, it will
Ketoconazole
identify dogs that are at increased risk of
macrolide toxicity.
Verapamil
Tamoxifen
Treatment
There is no specific antidote for treat-
ing patients suffering from macrolide toxicity. In cases of overdoses of macrolide
antiparasitic agents, emesis is indicated if ingestion of the drug has occurred within
2 hours. Repeated doses of activated charcoal plus one or two doses of a cathartic are
recommended because the majority of ivermectin, and possibly other macrolides, are
excreted unchanged in the feces.' Although physostigmine may be of some benefit in
 dogs suffering from ivermectin toxicosis,30 its use is not recommended because it is not
a specific antagonist; it causes only transient improvement in clinical signs and can be
associated with a variety of adverse effects. Furthermore, in one study, dogs with iver-
mectin toxicosis treated with adequate supportive care experienced complete recover-
ies.10 Neostigmine methylsulfate, 25 and 150 mcg, and 5% dextrose, 100 mL, was used
kittens.3l One kitten died, and the second survived after multiple treatments over a
2-day period. Picrotoxin, a GABA antagonist, has been administered to a collie with
*Veterinary Clinical Pharmacology Laboratory, College of Veterinary Medicine, Washington State University, Pull-
man, WA 99164-6610
606SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
ivermectin toxicity, but seizures occurred shortly after its administration.?2 For reasons
Recently the use of intravenous fat or lipid emulsion (ILE) has been demonstrated to
 be beneficial in the treatment of toxicoses involving lipid-soluble drugs such as local anes-
thetics in human patients.33 Because macrocyclic lactones are lipophilic, they constitute
potential targets for ILE therapy. Although ILE has been reported to be effective for a case of
moxidectin toxicity in a Jack Russell terrier (MDRl status not assessed ),16 it was not effec-
tive in treating ivermectin toxicoses in three Australian shepherds that were homozygous
for the MDR1 deletion mutation.34
Appropriate supportive care may include fluid and electrolyte therapy, nutritional sup-
port, and prevention of decubital ulcers because the patient may be recumbent and even
comatose for several days to weeks. Arterial blood gases may be indicated to determine if
ventilatory support is needed because the respiratory center may be affected.
Prognosis
The prognosis for macrolide toxicosis depends largely on the exposure dose. Animals may
 i op a aam eaas uaaa r 's eaaas ep i g ares aidns aa
ered after being comatose for 7 weeks.4 Animals that recover usually have no long-term
sequelae.10
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Macrolide antiparasitic agents do not result in specific lesions.
Differential Diagnoses
Many diseases affect the nervous system and produce clinical signs similar to all or some
of those described for toxicity associated with macrolide antiparasitic agents. Specific toxi-
cants that must be differentiated include lead, anticholinesterase insecticides (e.g., organo-
phosphate and carbamate insecticides), tremorgenic mycotoxins, ethanol, methanol,
ethylene glycol, diethylene glycol, propylene glycol, xylitol, isopropanol, amitraz, and drugs
with central nervous system depressing properties (e.g., opiates, phenothiazines, benzodi-
azepines, and barbiturates).
References
1. Lynn RC: Drugs for the treatment of helminth infections. In Boothe DM, editor: Small animal clinical
pharmacology and therapeutics, ed 1, Philadelphia, 2001, Saunders.
2. Kohler P: The biochemical basis of anthelmintic action and resistance, Int J Parasitol 31(4):336-345,
2001.
3. Mealey KL, Bentjen SA, Gay IM,et al: Ivermectin sensitivity in collies is associated with a deletion muta-
tion of the MDR1 gene, Pharmacogenetics 11(8):727-733, 2001.
4. Dorny P, Demeulenaere D, Smets K, et al: Persistent efficacy of topical doramectin and eprinomectin
against Ostertagia ostertagi and Cooperia oncophora infections in cattle, Vet Rec 147(5):139-140, 2000.
5. Plumb D: Veterinary drug handbook,ed 20, Ames, IA, 2000, Iowa State University Press.
6. Bauck S: Ivermectin toxicity in small animals, Can Vet J 28(9):563, 1987.
Saunders.
Res 48(4):684, 1987.
9. Fassler P, Tranquilli W, Paul A, et al: Evaluation ofthe safety of ivermectin administered in a beef-based
formulation to ivenmectin-sensitive collies, / Am Vet Med Assoc 199(4):457, 1991.
10. Hopper K, Aldrich J, Haskins SC: Ivermectin toxicity in 17 collies, I Vet Intern Med 16:89-94, 2002.
11. Nelson OL, Carsten E, Bentjen SA, et al: Ivermectin toxicity in an Australian Shepherd dog with the
MDR1 mutation associated with ivermectin sensitivity in collies, I Vet Intern Med 17(3):354-356, 2003.
Chapter 52 |Ivermectin:Macrolide AntiparasiticAgents 607
12. Hadrick M, Bunch S, Kornegay I: Ivermectin toxicosis in two Australian shepherds, Am Vet Med AsOC
206(8):1147, 1995.
13. Houston D, Parent J, Matushek K: Ivermectin toxicosis in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 191(1):78, 1987.
14. Lovell R: Ivermectin and piperazine toxicosis in dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
20(2):453, 1990.
15. Frischke H, Hunt L: Suspected ivermectin toxicity in kittens, Can Vet I 32:245, 1991.
JVet Emerg Crit Care 19:181-186, 2009.
 17. Tranquilli WJ, Paul AJ, Todd KS: Assessment of toxicosis induced by high-dose administration of milbe-
mycin oxime in collies, Am I Vet Res 52(7):1170-1172, 1991.
18. Mueller RS, Bettenay SV: A proposed new therapeutic protocol for the treatment of canine mange with
ivermectin, I Am A nim Hosp Assoc 35:77-80, 1999.
19. Jacobs DE: Selamectin—a novel endectoside of dogs and cats, Vet Parasit 91:161-162, 2000.
20. Lavy E, Aroch I, Bark H: Evaluation of doramectin for the treatment of experimental spirocercosis, Vet
Parastt 109:65-73, 2002.
 21. Yas-Natan E, Shamir M, Kleinbart S: Doramectin toxicity in a collie, Vet Rec 153:718-720, 2003.
22. Vanapalli SR, Hung YP, Fleckenstein L: Pharmacokinetics and dose proportionality of oral moxidectin
in beagle dogs, Biopharm Drug Dispos 23(7):263-272, 2002.
23. Nobmann S, Bauer B, Fricker G: Ivermectin excretion by isolated functionally intact brain endothelial
capillaries, Br J Pharmacol 132(3):722-728, 2001.
 24. Sartor LL, Bentjen SA, Trepanier L: Loperamide toxicity in a collie with the MDR1 mutation associated
with ivermectin sensitivity, I Vet Intern Med 18(1):117-118, 2004.
25. Mealey KL, Northrop NC,Bentjen SA: Increased toxicity of P-glycoprotein-substrate chemotherapeutic
agents in a dog with the MDR1 deletion mutation associated with ivermectin sensitivity, 1434, I Am Vet
Med A ssoc 223(10):1453-1455, 2003.
26. Ford JIM: Modulators of multidrug resistance, preclinical studies, Hematol Oncol Clin North Am
9(2):337-361, 1995.
27. Coelho JC, Tucker R, Mattoon J, Roberts G, Waiting DK, Mealey KL: Biliary excretion of technetium-
99m sestamibi in wildtype dogs and in dogs with intrinsic (MDR1 mutation) and extrinsic (ketoconazole
treated) P-glycoprotein deficiency, I Vet Pharmacol Ther 32(5):417-421, 2009.
J 31:221, 1990.
 29. Tranquilli W, Paul A, Seward R: Ivermectin plasma concentrations in colles sensitive to ivermectin-
induced toxicosis, Am I Vet Res 50(5):769, 1989.
vermectin toxicosis, I Vet Pharmacol Therap 10:96, 1987.
31. Muhammad G, Jabbar A, Khan MX, et al: Use of neostigmine in massive ivermectin toxicity in cats, Vet
Human Toxicol 46(1):28-29,2004.
32. Sivine F: Picrotoxin, the antidote to ivermectin in dogs? Veterinary Record 116:195, 1985.
33. Jamaty C, Bailey B, Larocque A: Lipid emulsions in thetreatment of acute poisoning: a systematic review
of human and animal studies, Clin Tox 48:1-27, 2010.
for ivermectin toxicosis in three dogs homozygous for the ABCB1-1D gene mutation, I Vet Emerg Crit
Care (in press).
CHAPTER
Lead
53
Tina Wismer, DVM, DABVT, DABT
 Sources include lead-based paint, solder, sinkers, toys and trinkets, and lead
projectiles.
Lead, a multisystem poison, is a serious human and animal health hazard
 Absorption of lead can be rapid and quite variable depending on its physical and
chemical forrm.
Lead is tightly bound to the surface of red blood cells; it has a wide tissue
distribution and, long terrm, is stored in bone. Excretion of lead occurs primarily
via the wrine.
· Clinical signs include gastrointestinal disturbances and nervous system
dysfunction.
Minimum database should include a complete blood count, radiographs,
 and chernical analysis of tissues (whole blood anternortern; liver and kidney
postmortem).
Treatment can include removal of the source, chelation therapy, gastrointestinal
 protectants, and seizure control.
Sources
Lead toxicosis has been reported in many species of mammals, birds, and reptiles. Lead is
distributed throughout the environment and found in various forms (elemental, inorganic,
and organic). Elemental lead is a heavy, silvery-gray metal that is soft and malleable.2 Inor-
ganic compounds such as metallic lead or lead salts are the most common forms. Inorganic
salt sources include industrial effluents (mostly lead oxide), solder (metallic), lead paint,
and lead containing soldering fluxes. Organic lead (organoleads) includes tetramethyl and
tetraethyl lead. Tetraethyl lead had been widely used as an antiknock agent in gasoline, but
has been phased out by the Environmental Protection Agency.l2
 Dogs and cats can be exposed to lead from many sources: automotive batteries, bone
meal supplements, ceramic glazes (found on pottery, earthenware, bone china, porce-
lain), lead weights (fishing sinkers, curtain weights), lead-based paints (old houses, art-
ist's paints, some agricultural and marine paints), lead solder, putty and caulk, leaded
gasolines, linoleum, electronic equipment, roofing felt, lead arsenate pesticides, and wine
cork covers.3 Lead also may be found in the plastic coating wire. Soil contaminated with
lead can be another source but this is more common in grazing animals.! Lead bullets and
doaaap us lous are ie siuy saun uy io sasseiin on paisatu aq us ros
lead poisoning if the retained bullet is in an acidic environment (synovial joint, area of
inflammation).4
609
610SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Toxic Dose
In dogs, the acute toxic dose of lead is 191 to 1000 mg/kg. The chronic cumulative toxic dose
for dogs is 1.8-2.6 mg/kg/day. Since 1977, household paint can contain no more than 0.06%
(600 ppm) lead by dry weight. However, a chip of lead-based paint the size of a thumbnail
may contain 50 to 200 mg of lead. Because of preventive measures in recent years (e.g..
removing lead from gasoline, banning lead-based paint), the average blood lead level for
children and human adults has decreased.
Toxicokinetics
Lead is absorbed primarily from the gastrointestinal tract. Gastrointestinal absorption of
lead in adult animals varies from 5% to 15% depending on the physical form, whereas young
animals absorb lead more readily, with up to 50% being absorbed.1.6 Organolead is most
readily absorbed, followed by lead salts and then metallic lead.
After ingestion, lead is ionized in the acidic environment of the stomach. Ionization
increases absorption.7 Absorption is also increased in animals with deficiencies of iron,
zinc, vitamin D, or calcium.6 Lead may also be inhaled if the dust is in a fine particulate
state (sanded lead paint). Once deposited in the lungs, lead is almost completely absorbed.8
Dermal absorption of inorganic lead is poor. However, grooming behavior of cats and even
dogs can make a dermal exposure into an oral exposure.&.9
Once absorbed, more than 90% of lead is bound to red blood cells. Unbound lead is
distributed widely with the highest concentrations in bone, teeth, liver, lung, kidney, brain,
and spleen.l7 Lead precipitates as insoluble salts in bone and forms a long-term storage
 depot. Bone remodeling or chelation can release stored lead, resulting in clinical signs long
after the original lead exposure.
Lead is excreted from the body in various ways. A majority of ingested lead is excreted
in the feces without being absorbed.10 If lead is absorbed, it is filtered across the glomeruli
and can accumulate in the renal tubular epithelium. Chelating agents will enhance the uri-
nary excretion of lead. Small amounts of lead are secreted by the pancreas and some lead is
excreted in milk.7 Lead has a triphasic half-life in dogs of 12, 184, and 4591 days.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Lead interferes with multiple processes within the body. It affects various cell types,
enzymes, tissues, and organ systems. Lead competes with calcium ions, resulting in sub-
stitution for calcium in bone. Lead mimics or inhibits many cellular actions of calcium
and alters calcium flux across membranes, ultimately increasing levels of cytoplasmic cal-
neuronal differentiation and synaptogenesis result.13 Increases in intracellular calcium in
the cerebrovascular endothelium disturb microfilaments and/or other cellular components
responsible for the integrity of tight junctions and contribute to cerebral edema.14 A chronic
feeding study in rats demonstrated a significant increase of lead in capillaries and synap-
e pasodond st ln uunshp iaeq ue-ooq e sisains stu sruerq an u saoso
altered lipid composition of membranes may cause a change in membrane permeability.
The increased susceptibility of juvenile animals to lead encephalopathy may be a result of
the diminished ability of immature brain astrocytes to sequester lead.16
Lead's inhibition of calcium flux is responsible for some of its myriad effects on central
and peripheral neurotransmission.! Lead can substitute for calcium in the activation of
protein kinase C, which contributes to lead's amplification of glutamate-induced oxidative
 stress in the brain and other tissues.17 Lead toxicosis can lead to inhibition of cytochrome
P-450, which in turn results in inhibition of tryptophan pyrrolase, increased plasma tryp-
tophan levels, elevations in brain serotonin levels, and ultimately, aberrant neurotransmis-
hormone secretion and increased catecholamine levels.18
Chapter 53 | Lead 61l
Lead may also alter many enzymes via its competing effects with other cations, such as
ferrous iron and zinc. Interruption of zinc-dependent enzyme processes can interfere with
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) production or activity in the CNS.19
 Lead interferes with cellular energy and metabolism in mitochondria. It affects calcium-
sensitive mitochondrial permeability transition pores, which causes mitochondrial depo
larization and the initiation of the cytochrome-c-caspase cascade resulting in apoptosis.2
Lead is especially toxic to the fetus and young animals because it inhibits dendritic arbo-
rization in the brain of the developing animal. Rat studies have demonstrated that lead
exposure may alter the phosphorylation and binding activity of cyclic-AMP response ele-
ment binding protein. This affects development of the hippocampus and cerebral cortex at
certain stages of development.2]
By binding with -SH (sulfhydryl) groups of enzyme systems, lead interferes with
enzymes involved in heme synthesis, such as S-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD)
and ferrochelatase. Lead causes a reduction in glutathione (GSH), and an increase in zinc
protoporphyrin (ZPP), by altering the heme synthesis pathway. This results in red blood
cell abnormalities and anemia.! Damage to membrane-associated enzymes such as sodium-
potassium pumps results in red blood cell fragility and a shortened life span. Ihe basophilic
stippling of red blood cells is caused by accumulated ribosomal RNA aggregates. There is no
degradation or dephosphorylation of RNA by pyrimidine-5'-nucleotidase (P5NT), because
lead inhibits the activity of P5NT.22 Increased serum ALAD levels themselves can be neu-
rotoxic by interfering with GABA transmission.
Lead-induced alterations in synaptic transmission at the neuromuscular junction of vis-
ceral smooth muscle can lead to altered intestinal motility and tone leading to lead colic.23
Lead colic is from spasmodic contractions of the smooth muscles of the intestinal wall.24
Clinical Signs
Dogs and cats with lead poisoning show neurologic and gastrointestinal signs most com-
monly.25 Acute lead poisoning is characterized by anorexia, vomiting, abdominal pain,
behavior changes, ataxia, tremors, hyperexcitability, and seizures.25 Chronic lead poison-
ing is somewhat more vague, with abdominal discomfort, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia,
(cats; rare) reported.25
Lead easily crosses the placenta and is concentrated in breast milk.26 Exposure dur
in experimental animals.28 Prenatal lead exposure can affect reproductive function in the
offspring (prolonged and irregular diestrous, reduced sperm counts),29,30 Multiple animal
studies have demonstrated behavioral abnormalities following intrauterine lead exposure.31
 Mobilization oflead from the maternal skeleton during pregnancy can also result in clinical
signs in the dam.32
Minimum Database
Hematologic abnormalities may occur with lead toxicosis, but none is pathognomonic.
Anemia may develop as lead affects heme synthesis at several enzymatic steps causing a
shortened RBC lifespan and decreased erythrocyte replacement. With acute poisoning,
lead-induced anemia is microcytic and hypochromic; as it becomes more chronic, it often
changes to normochromic and normocytic.? Some lead salts can cause hemolysis.
Basophilic stippling and the presence of large numbers of nucleated red blood cells (5 to
40 per 100 white blood cells) without evidence of severe anemia are suggestive of lead toxi
cosis in small animals.25 Basophilic stippling may be found with other disease processes.25
Leukocytosis is occasionally seen with lead toxicosis. Serum chemistry elevations of
kidney and liver parameters may be seen in acute cases.33 Lead objects are radio-opaque and
can be found in the gastrointestinal tract or less commonly as embedded lead projectiles.
612SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Confirmatory Tests
The diagnosis of lead poisoning is made by measuring whole blood lead levels. Whole
blood is the preferred sample as more than 90% of circulating lead is bound to erythro-
cytes. Although an ideal blood lead level is zero (lead has no biologic value) in most species
blood lead levels above 0.3 to 0.35 ppm (30-35 mcg/dL) indicate significant lead exposure.
With appropriate clinical signs,these levels support the finding of lead toxicosis.725 Blood
lead levels greater than 0.6 ppm (60 mcg/dL) are diagnostic for lead toxicosis.25 Blood lead
levels change rapidly in response to acute lead intake, and blood levels may not necessarily
correlate with severity of clinical signs.
Anemia, nucleated red blood cells, and basophilic stippling suggest lead intoxication but
have other causes, and their absence does not rule out lead poisoning. Other confirmatory
laboratory tests available for the live patient include measurement of erythrocyte ALAD
activity, erythrocyte porphyrin assay, urinary ALA levels, and zinc protoporphyrin levels;
these analyses, however, are rarely offered by veterinary diagnostic laboratories.
Radiographs may reveal radio-opaque lead objects. In chronic lead poisoning radio-
opaque lines can be seen in the metaphyseal regions. For confirmatory testing postmortem,
toxic levels of lead in canine tissues are liver (5-10 ppm, wet weight) and kidney (50-200 ppm
wet weight).34 Generally speaking, lead levels in liver and kidney that exceed 5 ppm wet
weight indicate excessive lead exposure.
Treatment
Treatment of lead toxicosis consists of several steps. Animals should be stabilized first, fol-
lowed by elimination of lead from the gastrointestinal tract, and then chelation therapy if
needed. Symptomatic animals need to be stabilized. Seizuring animals should be treated
with diazepam. Fluid and electrolyte abnormalities secondary to gastrointestinal signs
should be corrected and antiemetics given if needed. If a dermal exposure has occurred,
wash the animal thoroughly with liquid dish detergent and rinse with copious amounts of
water.
Radiographs may be used to determine if there is any lead still in the digestive tract.
Lead should be removed before chelation as many chelating agents may actually enhance
gastrointestinal absorption of lead.25.33 Induce emesis in dogs with hydrogen peroxide or
apomorphine iflead is still in the stomach. Small objects or flakes of paint may be removed
by gastric lavage with tap water or normal saline. Endoscopy or surgery may be employed
to remove larger objects. Activated charcoal does not bind well to heavy metals and is not
recommended.35
Enemas or cathartics may be used to help empty the gastrointestinal tract of lead.
Sulfate-containing cathartics (magnesium or sodium sulfate) may bind with lead to form
lead sulfate, which is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.2s Lead-containing
shot or bullets in or adjacent to synovial joints should be surgically removed.
Various lead chelation agents have been used in domestic animals. Calcium disodium
ethylene diamine tetraacetate (Ca-EDTA), BAL (British-Anti-Lewisite), d-penicillamine
(cuprimine), and succimer (DMSA, Chemet) all have advantages and disadvantages to their
 is a  a ae as    i ) 
monly used chelators in veterinary medicine.
The lead chelator of choice for several decades has been Ca-EDTA and it is the most
effcient parenteral chelating agent. It is used off label in animals. It removes lead from
blood and osseous tissues. Ihe removal of lead from the bone can result in increases in
blood lead levels and precipitate clinical signs during chelation. Ca-EDTA is nephrotoxic.
 Reduced doses must be used in patients with preexisting renal disease.36 Other side effects
include vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, depression, and injection site pain. CA-EDTA may
also bind essential minerals such as zinc, copper, iron, and calcium.37 Dogs are dosed at
100 mg/kg/day for 2 to 5 days. Each dose is divided into four portions and diluted to a final
concentration of 10 mg Ca-EDTA per mL of 5% dextrose before being administered at
Chapter 53 | Lead 613
Table 53-1
The Pros and Cons ofVarious Lead Chelators
Chelator
Pro5
suo
CaEDTA
 Most efficient
Nephrotoxic
Painful injections
Chelates essential minerals
BAL
Removes lead from brain
Nephrotoxic
Painful injections
Penicillamine
Oral
Vomiting
Nephrotoxic
 Chelates essential minerals
DMSA
Oral (rectally if vomiting)
Expensive
Does not chelate essential minerals
Can use with lead in GI tract
different subcutaneous sites. The daily dose of Ca-EDTA should not exceed 2 g per dog to
decrease the risk of nephrotoxicosis.25 The animal is rested for 5 days, and then treatment is
repeated if needed. Improvement is normally seen within 24 to 48 hours. Concurrent zinc
supplementation should be given. The recommended dose for cats is 27.5 mg/kg diluted
in 15 mL of 5% dextrose subcutaneously every 6 hours for 5 days.25 Monitor closely for
nephrotoxicity.35 Sodium EDTA should not be used for chelation, because of the risk of
hypocalcemia.37
British-Anti-Lewisite (BAL or dimercaprol) is used alone or in conjunction with
Ca-EDTA; adsorbs lead from the erythrocytes, removes lead from parenchymatous tis-
sues (particularly the brain), and increases both urinary and biliary excretion of lead;25
and is nephrotoxic and very painful on injection. It is reported that renal toxicity can
be reduced by alkalinization of the urine,3 but BAL should not be used in animals with
hepatic dysfunction.38 Side effcts include vomiting, tachycardia, hypertension, mercap
tan odor to breath, and seizures. Animals are dosed at 3 to 6 mg/kg intramuscularly 3 to
4 times daily.35
 Penicillamine is another lead chelator. Penicillamine has the advantage that it is given
orally and patients can be treated at home. Disadvantages include nephrotoxicity and that
it cannot be started until all lead has been removed from the gastrointestinal tract. It also
binds dietary copper, iron, and zinc. Dogs are dosed at 30 to 110 mg/kg/day PO divided q
6 hours for 7 days followed by 7 days of rest. Cats are given 125 mg/cat PO (not per kg) q
12 hours for 5 days.3s Vomiting is the most common adverse effect. Premedicating with an
antiemetic or by dividing the dose may decrease the gastrointestinal side effects. Penicil-
lamine should not be used in pregnant animals because of teratogenesis.39
Succimer (2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid, DMSA) is an orally administered chelator
 approved for use in children with lead poisoning.40 It is a structural analogue to BAL. Suc-
cimer has been shown to be an effective off-label chelator of lead in animal studies.4l It
has fewer side effects and is more efficacious than penicillamine. Succimer is administered
orally or rectally if the patient is vomiting. It is less likely to cause vomiting, nephrotoxicosis
and does not bind essential minerals such as zinc, copper, calcium, and iron.37 Succimer
Dogs are dosed at 10 mg/kg PO or PR three times daily for 10 days and the dose can be
repeated as needed.37 Combining DMSA with taurine (50-100 mg/kg) increases depleted
blood glutathione (GSH) levels, increases the activity of ALAD, and reduces the blood ZPP
levels to near normal.42 Succimer may be used alone and following EDTA and/or BAL.
Blood lead levels may rise following chelation and this could be caused by either re-
exposure or “"rebound,” which consists of rising blood lead levels because of reequilibra-
tion with the bone. History and environmental investigation may be needed to ensure
re-exposure is not occurring.
614SECTION4SpecificToxicants
Prognosis
Prognosis in most cases is good with an early diagnosis and appropriate therapy. The source
of the lead must be removed from the environment.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Few gross lesions are reported in dogs and cats. Lead objects may be found in the gastro-
intestinal tract. On histopathology, there can be damage to brain capillaries and interstitial
edema of white matter, particularly in the cerebellum and spinal cord, when there are signs
of lead encephalopathy.43 Myelin degeneration within the cerebellum and cerebrum and
bodies may be found in the renal tubular epithelium and degenerative changes may be seen
in the liver and kidney of dogs with chronic lead toxicosis. Intranuclear inclusion bodies are
rare in the hepatocytes of dogs with chronic toxicosis. Swelling of proximal renal tubular
cells occurs early in lead toxicosis followed by tubular dilation, atrophy of the tubular lin-
ing cells, and interstitial fibrosis. Glomerular sclerosis and interstitial scarring develop after
months of lead exposure.38
Differential Diagnoses
Some differential diagnoses for acute lead poisoning includes rabies, canine distemper
other viral encephalitides, toxoplasmosis, hepatic encephalopathy, idiopathic epilepsy, and
gastrointestinal disorders.
Prevention
Dogs and cats can be sentinels for human exposure. Pet owners should be counseled about
the potential for human exposure to lead in the household.45 Local public health officials
may be contacted for more information. If there is no obvious source of exposure, analysis
of water and soil may be needed.
References
1. ATSDR: US Public Health Service, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, Toxicological Pro-
fle for Lead. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, US Department of Health and Human
Services. Atlanta, GA, 2007. Available from http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp.asp?id=96&tid=22.
Accessed 2011.
3.Keogh I: Lead. In Sullivan J,et al: Hazardous materials toxicology, Baltimore, 1992, Williams & Wilkins.
4. Akhtar AJ, Funnye AS, Akanno J: Gunshot-induced plumbism in an adult male, J Nat Med Assoc
95(10):900-986, 2003.
5. ATSDR: Lead toxicity. Environmental alert: Course SS3059, US Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices, Atanta, GA, 2000, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. Division of Health Educa-
tion and Promotion.
6. Mahaffey KR: Nutritional factors in lead poisoning, Nutr Rev 39:353-365, 1981.
7. Schmitz DG: Toxicologic problems. In Reed SM,et al, editors: Equine internal medicine, Philadelphia,
1998, Saunders.
8.Harbison RM: Hamilton and Hardy's industrial toxicology, ed 5, St Louis, 1998, Mosby.
9. Zenz C: Orcupational medicine, ed 3, St Louis, 1994, Mosby-Year Book.
10. Lewis RJ: Hawley's Condensed Chemical Dictionary, ed 14, New York, 2001, Wiley.
11.
Bressler JP, Goldstein GW: Mechanism of lead neurotoxicity, Biochem Pharmacol41:479-484, 1991.
12. Simmons TIB: Lead-calcium interactions in cellular lead toxicity, Neurotoxicology 14:77-86, 1993.
13. Shanne FAX, Kane AB, Young FE, et al: Calcium dependence of toxic cell death: a final common path-
way, Science 206:700, 1979.
14. Hariri RJ: Cerebral edema, Neurosurg Clin North Am 5:687-706, 1994.
15. Struzynska L, Walski M, Gadarmski R: Lead induced abnormalities in blood-brain barrier permeability in
experimental chronic toxicity, Mol Chem Neuropathol 31:207-224, 1997.
Chapter 53 | Lead 615
16. Tifany-Castiglioni E, Sierra EM, Wu JN, et al: Lead toxicity in neuroglia, Neurotoxicology 10:417-443
1989.
17. Naarala JT, Loikkanen J, Ruotsalainen M, et al: Lead amplifies glutamate-induced oxidative stress, Free
Rad Biol Med 19:689-693, 1995.
18. Huseman CA, Varma MM, Angle CR: Neuroendocrine effects oftoxic and low blood lead levels in chil-
dren, Pediatrics 90:186-189, 1992.
19. Gwaltney-Brant SM: Heavy metals. In Hascheck-Hock W, et al, editors: Handbook of toxicologic pathol-
ogy, ed 2, San Diego, 2002, Academic Press.
20. He L, Poblenz AT, Medrano CJ, et al: Lead and calcium produce rod photoreceptor cell apoptosis by
opening the mitochondrial permeability transition pore, I Biol Chem 275:12175-12184, 2000.
21. Toscano CD, McGlothan JL, Guilarte TR: Lead exposure alters cyclic-AMP response element binding
protein phosphorylation and binding activity in the developing rat brain, Dev Brain Res 145:219-228,
2003.
22. George JW, Duncan IR: Pyrimidine-specific 5' nucleotidase activity in bovine erythrocytes: effect of phle-
botomy andlead poisoning, Am J Vet Res 43:17, 1982.
17:287-307,1985
24. Anzelmo V, Bianco P: Gastrointestinal and hepatic effect oflead exposure. In Castellino N, Castellino P,
Sannolo N, editors: Inorganic lead exposure, Boca Raton, FL, 1995, CRC Press.
25. Kowalczyk DF: Lead poisoning. In Kirk RW,editor: Current veterinary therapy IX, Philadelphia, 1986,
Saunders.
26. Hallen IP, Jorhem L, Oskarsson A: Placental and lactational transfer of lead in rats: a study on the lacta-
tional process and effects on offspring, Arch Toxicol 69:596-602, 1995.
method development in a study of lead mobilization during pregnancy, Neurotoxicology 13:825-834,
1992.
28. Schardein JL: Chemically induced birth defects,ed 2, New York, 1993, Marcel Dekker.
29. McGivern RG, Sokol RZ, Berman NG: Prenatal lead exposure in the rat during the third week of gesta-
tion: long-term behavioral, physiological, and anatomical effects associated with reproduction, Toxicol
Appl Pharmacol 110:206-215, 1991.
30. Coffigny H,Thoreux-Manlay A,Pinon-Lataillade G: Effects of lead poisoning of rats during pregnancy
on the reproductive system and fertility oftheir offspring, Human Exp Toxicol 13:241-246, 1994.
31. Rodrigues AL, Rocha JB, Mello CF: Effect of perinatal lead exposure on rat behavior in open-field and
two-way avoidance tasks, Pharmacol Toxicol 79:150-156, 1996.
32. Gulson BL, Jameson CW, Mahaffey KR: Pregnancy increases mobilization of lead from maternal skel-
aton, I Lab Clin Med130:51-62, 1997.
33. Shannon M: Lead. In Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, editors: Haddad and Winchesters clinical
34. Puls R: Mineral levels in animal heaith, Clearbrook, British Columbia, 1988, Sherpa International.
35. Plumb DC: Veterinary drug handbook,ed 7, Ames, IA, 2011, Wiley-Blackwell.
36.Product information: Catcium disodium versenate,edetate calcium disodium injection,Northridge, CA,
2004, 3M Pharmaceuticals.
37. Ramsey D,et al: Use of orally administered succimer (meso-2, 3-dimercaptosuccinic acid) for treatment
of lead poisoning in dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 208:37, 1996.
38. Casteel SW: Lead. In Peterson ME, Talcott PA, editors: Small animal toxicology, ed 2, St Louis, 2006,
Saunders.
39. Linares A, Zarranz J, Rodrigues-Alarcon J: Reversible cutis laxa due to maternal d-penicillamine treat-
ment, Lancet 2:43, 1979.
40. Product information: CHEMET(R) oral capsules, succimer oral capsules, Deerfield, IL, 2005, Ovation
Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
41. Kapoor S,et al: Influence of 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid on gastrointestinal lead absorption and whole
body retention, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 97:525, 1989.
42. Flora SJS, Pande M, Bhadauria S, et al: Combined administration of taurine and meso
2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid in the treatment of chronic lead intoxication in rats, Human Exper Toxicol
23:157-166, 2004
43. Goldstein GW, Asbury AK, Diamond I: Pathogenesis of lead encephalopathy: uptake of lead and reac-
tion of brain capillaries, Arch Neurol 31:382-389, 1974.
44. Jubb KVF, Huxtable CR: Pathology of domestic animals. In Jubb KVF,et al, editors: ed 4, San Diego,
1993, Academic Press.
45. Dowsett R, Shannon M: Childhood plumbism identified after lead poisoning in household pets, N Engt 
Med 331:1661, 1994.
CHAPTER
Lilies
54
Jeffery O. Hall, DVM, PhD, DABVT
 Lilium spp. and Hemerocaiis spp. plants are common ormamentals that
are used as potted holiday houseplants and comrmon constituents of flower
arrangerments.
The true mechanism of toxicity is unknown, but it involves damage to the renal
tubular epithelium resulting in renal failure in cats.
Clinical signs include lethargy, voniting, anorexia, and polyuria followed by
anuria, weakness, and death
Clinicopathologic abnormalities include increases in creatinine and BUN,
isosthenuria, glucosuria, proteinuria, and urinary casts.
· Confirmatory tests include identification of plant exposure, as well as clinical and 
pathologic compatible abnormalities.
pue 'sisamp pmy aaissaiare Area 'uoemjueiuosap Area sapnpu suaueail 
good supportive care. Once anuria develops, dialysis can be used.
Prognosis is fair to good, depending on the timing of treatment initiation.
· Gross and histologic lesions include renal congestion, +/- perirenal edema, and
renal tubular nephrosis with significant tubular casts.
Sources
The first report of Liliurm spp. nephrotoxicity was presented in 1992 and was based on data
generated at the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center (ASPCA-APCC) in Urbana, Il!
The frst report involved Lilium longiflorurm (Easter lily),but further observations now sug
gest that all species of the Liliurm genera and plants in the Hemerocallis genera (day lilies)
should be viewed as potentially nephrotoxic in cats.l7 It is of special note that the only
animal to date that is known to be susceptible to the nephrotoxicity of these plants is the
domestic cat.
 The principal source of Lilium spp. and Hemerocallis spp. exposure in cats is via house-
hold entry of potted ornamental plants and floral arrangements. And since both the leaves
and the flowers are associated with poisoning, corsages of these flowers also pose a risk.
Although outdoor cats could be exposed to these plants in flowerbeds, currently there have
only been reports of lethal indoor ingestions.
The key in first identifying the Liliurm spp. as being toxic stemmed from the fact
that some of these plants are more commonly introduced into houses during specific
holiday seasons. The Easter lily is a common plant introduced into houses from l week
before to 3 weeks after Easter and has resulted in clusters of cases being reported to the
ASPCA-APCC.8 Following these clusters, using past years data, and following up on past
Jo ys yaiu e pey sueid sul iel punoy sem ll 'siean smnoiaand uonj saimsodxa paodan
causing renal damage.
617
618SECTION4SpecificToxicants
Toxic Dose
Species susceptibility to the toxic effects of Liliurm spp. and Hermerocallis spp. lilies is quite
distinct. The toxic effects of these plants have only been manifest in cats. After the original
identification of suspected toxicity, rats, mice, and rabbits were fed plant material at up to
15% of their body weight without any adverse effects.? In addition, cases of ingestion by
dogs have only resulted in gastrointestinal upset, without any renal effects.
'suis lu yo lasuo piden au sies ui siaa lat un pasan se ramo e jo ped i
especially vomiting, likely limits the amount of plant ingestion. It has been found that the
toxin(s) in the Easter lily is in the water-soluble fraction of the plant.?
Toxicokinetics
No true kinetic data are available for the toxin(s) in the Lilium spp. and Hermerocallis spp.
since the toxin(s) have yet to be identified. However, it is likely that the toxic constituent of
the plants is rapidly absorbed. This observation is based on the common finding that early
emesis of the plant material may lessen the clinical effects,β but renal damage still occurs
without other supportive treatment. In addition, clinical signs can begin as early as 5 to 10
minutes post ingestion.
The elimination of the toxin(s) from the body likely occurs within the first 48 hours
although the duration of clinical effects can last for several days. The longer duration of
effects after the toxin(s) are eliminated is the result of acute renal tissue damage and second-
ary effects from the renal failure. Early fluid diuresis initiated before the onset of renal shut-
down and continued for 24 to 72 hours can significantly prevent renal failure-associated
death. Ihese data suggest a relatively rapid elimination of the toxin(s), especially in the
presence of fluid diuresis.
Metabolism of the toxin(s) of Liliurm spp. and Hemerocallis spp. is unknown. But one
potential cause for the sensitivity of cats could be a differing metabolism of the toxin(s), as
compared with dogs, rats, mice, and rabbits, resulting in a toxic metabolite. This would be
supported by the fact that direct application of the water-soluble plant components was not
toxic to cultured feline renal tubular epithelial cells (unpublished data).
Mechanism of Toxicity
The exact mechanism of lily toxicity in cats is not known. However, it is known that it
directly involves damage to the renal tubular epithelium and subsequent renal failure.
Based on clinical field cases, it has been found that the mechanism of toxicity requires
two components to result in the acute renal failure associated with anuria and death. The
first component is the direct action of the plant toxin(s) on the renal tubular epithelium
resulting in cellular damage and an initial polyuric renal failure. Ihe second component
is the development of severe dehydration caused by polyuric renal failure. This is based on
the fact that fluid therapy and fluid diuresis before the onset of the anuric renal failure will
prevent complete renal shutdown from developing.1.35.8
rotoxic. This study identifed changes in the renal tubular epithelium consisting of swollen
mitochondria, megamitochondria, edema, and lipidosis.? However, this study dosed quan-
tities of extracted plant materials that would greatly exceed reported clinical ingestions and
may or may not represent the mechanism in cases of much smaller ingestions.
clinical Signs
Presenting clinical signs can differ, depending on the timing of presentation relative to the
and develop within the first 1 to 3 hours post ingestion. The vomiting and salivation will
Chapter 54 | Lilies 619
last for 2 to 6 hours, but the anorexia and depression last throughout the syndrome. Ihe
next observed clinical signs are the development of polyuria at 12 to 30 hours post inges-
tion, followed by a resulting dehydration at 18 to 30 hours. The polyuria lasts until the onset
of anuria, which can develop by 24 to 48 hours. As the renal shutdown causes buildup of
metabolic waste, the vomiting reoccurs, along with the onset of weakness by 30 to 72 hours.
This is generally followed by recumbency and death. Deaths have been reported to occur
by 3 to 7 days post ingestion. Seizures have also been reported, but they may be a secondary
effect of severe uremia or caused by an extrenmely large ingestion, which would not be seen
with the more typical case presentation.6.9
Minimum Database
Clinical signs and clinicopathologic changes can aid in establishing the clinical phase at
presentation, allowing a more accurate prognosis and treatment regimen. Serum chemistry
profles to identify increases in BUN, creatinine, and potassium are necessary to establish
the current degree of renal effects. In addition, urinalysis for identification of renal casts.
isosthenuria, proteinuria, and glucosuria can be helpful. Early in the syndrome, the renal
cant that cellular detail and nuclei can still be discerned in the cells of the casts. Abnormali-
s odo un san sod s h s a s io s sise a  s
in the serum chemistry parameters do not generally occur until after 18 to 24 hours. Some
cases develop increased aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
later in the syndrome, but this is likely due to the pronounced anorexia and associated
hepatic stress. Increased creatinine kinase was identified in a dosing study with exaggerated
doses compared with field case ingestions.?
Confirmatory Tests
Analytic verification of lily ingestion is currently not available. Ihe most definitive confr
mations are recognition of lily ingestion, compatible clinical syndrome, compatible clinico-
pathologic data, and lesions in the cats that die.
Treatment
In cases of known recent exposure, general decontamination procedures should be inmple-
mented. These procedures include evacuation of the gastric contents by induction of emesis
(the editor is aware of endoscopy being employed to both visualize and remove plant mate-
rial) and administration of activated charcoal along with a cathartic. However, in cases
where significant vomition has already occurred, antiemetics followed by activated char-
coal and a cathartic should be used. When implemented early after exposure, decontami-
nation procedures will minimize the absorption of the toxin(s) and thus the potential for
clinical effects.
 on sn isaq a e o ae p d ag ss   si 
is correction of the dehydration and the use of 2 to 3 times maintenance fluids to cause fluid
diuresis. Fluid diuresis should be maintained for 48 to 72 hours. Ihe exact duration of fluid
diuresis necessary is not known, but before the onset of anuric renal failure, this protocol in
cats has resulted in prevention of the anuric renal failure and survival in the vast majority of
cases. Serum chemistry panels and urinalyses should be run every 12 to 24 hours through-
out the treatment period.
Once anuric renal failure is present, the treatment options are limited. I am personally
aware of two individual cases in which dialysis was performed on cats with lily-associated
renal failure. Both cats survived and regained renal function by 10 and 14 days. How-
 ever, both positive and negative outcomes have been reported for peritoneal dialysis.6.8.-11
Drugs that are normally used to stimulate renal output, such as furosemide, hypertonic
dextrose, thiazides, and mannitol, have not been very successful in cases of anuric renal
620SECTION4SpecificToxicants
failure from lily poisoning. Ihus, peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis are the only poten-
tial treatments once anuria develops.
Prognosis
Prognosis should be based on the severity of effects at the onset of treatment. Early presenta-
tion followed by decontamination and fluid diuresis results in an excellent prognosis. How-
ever, presentation at the point of anuric renal failure warrants a guarded to poor prognosis.
Since so few animals have been treated with dialysis, the true recovery potential is not known.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Gross lesions are consistent with renal effects. Renal congestion and perirenal edema have
been observed. Pulmonary congestion, gastrointestinal congestion, and paleness of the
liver also have been reported and are thought to be secondary to severe uremia from the
anuria and hepatic lipidosis from the anorexia.
Histologic lesions are primarily limited to the renal tissue. Severe renal tubular degen-
eration with luminal accumulation of cellular and proteinaceous debris is common. Col-
lecting ducts are often occluded with casts. Pulmonary edema has been reported in some
ui saimay sio puy oi uooun pou st 1 'shp s oh  ised aaaims pe sis un 'sasm
the renal tubules suggestive of early repair. And, because the basement membrane is not
affected, this is suggestive that dialysis would be successful in allowing return of renal func-
cell vacuolization.6.9 However, in the dosing study serum chemistry analysis did not fnd
increased amylase.?
Differential Diagnoses
 The clinical conditions that would be included in a differential diagnosis with lily poison-
ing include any cause of acute renal failure or gastrointestinal upset early in the syndrome.
Other differential diagnoses may be ethylene glycol poisoning, ingestion of soluble oxa-
late-containing plants, boric acid poisoning, nephrotoxic mushrooms, aminoglycosides,
NSAIDs, leptospirosis, acute presentation of a chronic renal failure, melamine-cyanuric
acid poisoning, infectious renal disease, or metabolic renal disease.
References
1. Hall J: Nephrotoxicity of Easter lily (Lilium longifforum) when ingested by the cat, Proc A nnu Meet Am
Vet Int Med 6:121, 1992.
2. Carson TL, Sanderson TP, Halbur PG: A cute nephrotoxicosis in cats following ingestion oflily (Lilium sp.),
proceedings of the 37th AA VLD meeting, 1994.
3. Groff RM, Miller JM, Stair EL, et al: Toxicoses and toxins. In Norsworthy DG, editor: Feline practice,
Philadelphia, 1993, Lippincott.
4. Gulledge L, Boos D, Wachsstock R: Acute renal failure in a cat secondary to Tiger lily (Lilium tigrinum)
toxicity, Feline Pract 25:38-39, 1997.
5. Hall JO: Lily nephrotoxicity. In August IR, editor: Consultations in feline internal medicine, ed 4, Phila-
delphia, 2001, Saunders.
6. Langston CE: Acute renal failure caused by lily ingestion in six cats, J Am Vet Med A ssoc 220:49-52, 2002.
7. Volmer P: Easter lily toxicosis in cats, Vet Med 94(4):331, 1999.
8. Hall JO: Nephrotoxicity of Easter Lily (Lilium longiforum). In Panter KE, Wierenga TL, Pfister JA, edi-
tors: Poisonous plants: global research and solutions, Wallingford, UK, 2007, CA BI.
9. Rumbeiha WK, Francis JA, Fitzgerald SD, et al: A comprehensive study of Easter lily poisoning in cats,
I Vet Diagn Invest 16:527-541, 2004.
10. Cooper RL, Labato MA: Peritoneal dialysis in cats with acute kidney injury: 22 cases (2001-2006), I Vet
Internal Med25:14-19, 2011.
11. Dorval P, Boysen SR:Management of acute renal failure in cats using peritoneal dialysis a retrospective
study of six cases (2003-2007), JI Fel Med Surg 11:107-115, 2009.
CHAPTER
55
Poisonous Lizards
Michael E. Peterson, DVM, MS
· Poisonous lizards are primarily located in the southwestern United States and
Mexico.
The median lethal intravenous dose (LDs, IV) of the venom is estimated to be
8 mg/kg in humans, 0.5 to 1 mg/kg in mice.
 Clinical signs include sudden onset of pain and bleeding at the bite site and local
swelling. Marked hypotension and cardiac irregularities may be present
The minimur database includes blood pressure, respiratory rate, heart
rate, hematocrit, and total protein. One may need a complete blood count,
coagulation profile, serum chemistries, and electrocardiogram.
Treatment includes the use of crystalloid fluids, pain control, and exploration of
the wound for fractured lizard teeth.
Sources
There are two species of venomous lizards in the world. Both species belong to the
genus Heloderma and are found in the Americas. Two Heloderma (gila monster) spe-
cies, H. suspectum and H. cinctum, are found in the United States in an area extending
from southern Utah through most of Arizona, areas of New Mexico and Nevada, and
a small part of California. They are also found in Sonora, Mexico, west to the Gulf
of California. The other species of Heloderma, H. horridum (the Mexican beaded liz-
Guatemala.1
(ua un  ss yean ues siaisuo ea ie) aie aoq Aaa aie srezi asa
and generally slow moving, but can strike relatively quickly. Iheir tails are blunt and
rounded and may measure one-half of the lizard's total body length. They have tough,
bead-like skin scales, which on gila monsters form a dark reticular pattern on a yellow-
ish-orange background. The head is held low, has a rounded muzzle, and is flat and large.
They have heavy mandibular musculature and a short neck. Ihe feet are handlike and
clawed.
The venom from these lizards is used for defense only because these animals raid bur-
rows and nests, consuming eggs and preying on the young of birds and small mammals.
The venom is excreted from venom glands located on the lower jaw. Ihe venom delivery
apparatus is poorly developed and relies on the grasping and chewing action of the lizard.?2
The venom apparatus consists of bilateral venom glands connected by a venom duct to the
gums at the base of the teeth in the lower jaw. Ihe venom is pulled up along grooves in these
teeth by capillary and chewing action. Gila monsters bite tenaciously, and victims may be
presented for veterinary care with the lizard still firmly attached.
621
622SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Toxic Dose
The low end of the toxic dose for humans has been estimated at 8 mg venom (dry weight).3
The average gila monster has a venom yield of 15 to 20 mg of venom (dry weight). The
intravenous (IV) median lethal dose (LDso) of venom in mice is 0.5 to 1 mg/kg of body
weight. As a point of reference, the IV LDso of western diamondback rattlesnake venom in
mice is 2.18 mg/kg of body weight. The toxic dose for dogs and cats is unknown. Because of
function of the duration of the bite. The author is aware of at least one fatal bite in a 20-kg
dog. The dog was found agonal with the lizard still firmly attached; the duration of the bite
was unknown.
Toxicokinetics
The toxicokinetics have not been extensively studied.
Mechanism of Toxicity
In animal studies, IV administration of Helodermatid venom into dogs and cats induced an
 initial tachypnea followed by a decrease in rate and depth of respiration, and eventual respi-
ratory collapse. Increases in both lacrimation and salivation were noted, coupled with vom-
iting and polyuria. No confirmed evidence of coagulopathy has been identified, although
there still is some suspicion that this may occur. Tachycardia, cardiac irregularities, and
marked hypotension have also been described.4
Heloderma venom contains multiple fractions, which include hyaluronidase, arginine
hydrolase, kallikrein-like enzymes, and phospholipase. Additionally, several other proteins
have been identified. These include a pancreatic secretory protein exhibiting phospholipase
activity, gilatoxin, helothermine, and a toxin that inhibits a contraction response to direct
stimulation of isolated mouse diaphragm.
Hyaluronidase, called the “spreading factor,” facilitates the uptake of the venom by
decreasing the viscosity of connective tissue through catalyzing the cleavage of internal
glycoside bonds of some acid mucoglycosides. Destruction of the hyaluronic acid barrier
permits the other venom components to penetrate deeper into the victim's tissue.6
Arginine hydrolase directs its activity toward hydrolysis of the peptide linkage to which
an arginine residue contributes to a carboxyl group. The exact impact of this venom compo-
nent has not been well defined, but it may have a bradykinin releasing-like effect.
Kallikrein-like enzymes mimic the action of kallikrein by causing vasodilatation,
increased capillary permeability, edema, and contraction or relaxation of extravascular
smooth muscles. These enzymes also attract leukocytes and induce pain when injected
subcutaneously.
 Phospholipase has been identified in many types of venoms and exists as a variety of iso-
enzymes. One action of phospholipase is to uncouple oxidative phosphorylation, thereby
inhibiting cellular respiration. Phospholipase can also contribute to the release of other
active enzymes by causing membrane destruction along with other compounds like hista-
mine, kinin, serotonin, acetylcholine, and slow-reacting substance.
Gilatoxin is an acidic neurotoxic protein. Helothermine depresses the body tempera-
ture in mice that have been injected with this toxin.*
Clinical Signs
Poisonous lizards most commonly affect dogs. They are usually bitten on the lower lip, and
the lizard may still be attached when the dog is presented. Human victims who have experi-
enced previous pit viper bites claim that gila monster bites are more painful.
The pugnacious manner of the bite combined with the aggressive chewing action of the
lizard often cause profuse hemorrhage at the bite site. Additionally, the teeth are brittle and
Chapter 55 | Poisonous Lizards 623
may break off in the wound. Ihese bites are intensely painful and usually reach peak pain
levels within 1 hour after envenomation. This local pain may last for 24 hours. Although
there may be some delay, edema generally occurs when venom has been injected. The area
around the bite site is very tender, and regional lymphangitis can occur. Tissue necrosis is
rare. However, ecchymoses may be evident.
 Inhumans, systemic signs that may develop include weakness, dizziness, nausea, vomiting.
tinnitus, muscle fasciculations, tachycardia, and hypotension. In canine and feline patients
increased respirations, vomiting, polyuria, salivation, lacrimation, and aphonia (in cats only)
can occur.? There is no evidence that the venom has any effect on coagulation. However,
because of the limited database available, this possibility cannot be ruled out. Bolus injection
of Heloderma venom into dogs and cats has been shown to induce tachycardia, hypotension,
and respiratory distress. Pulmonary congestion and edema have also been described.
Minimum Database
Pretreatment laboratory values should be obtained for the following parameters: blood
pressure, respiratory rate, heart rate, hematocrit, and total protein. If the syndrome pro-
gresses or if the patient exhibits evidence of systemic envenomation, this database should
be expanded to include a complete blood count with platelet count, coagulation profle
(e.g., prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, and fbrinogen), serum electrolytes,
electrocardiography, and urinalysis. Any abnormal values should be repeated as often as
needed to monitor the progression of that parameter adequately.
Confirmatory Tests
In the United States no confirmatory tests are commercially available.
Treatment
Extraction of the lizard may be necessary if it is still attached. Placing a prying instrument
between the jaws of the lizard and pushing against the back of the mouth can achieve this
(be aware these lizards are toxic to humans and, it should be noted, federally protected). All
patients bitten by Helodermatids should be hospitalized for several hours and monitored
for evidence of and/or progression of envenomation.
The bite site should be irrigated (not infused) with lidocaine, cleaned, and gently probed
of pathogenic bacteria cultured from reptile mouths, broad-spectrum systemic antibiotics
should be administered.
 There is no specific antivenin available for lizard bites, and treatment consists primarily
of supportive care. Intravenous fluid therapy should be started when hypotension is evi-
dent. Pain control can be obtained with carprofen. In general, nonsteroidal antinflamma-
tory agents, which can affect coagulation factors or platelets, should be avoided. Diazepam
can reduce the need for analgesics.
Prognosis
Prognosis is generally guarded, given the toxicity of the lizard venom.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
 Bleeding bite wounds with possible fractured lizard teeth are the only gross lesions visible.
Differential Diagnoses
Trauma and venomous snakebite are the two primary differential diagnoses.
624SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
References
1. Bogert CM, del Carpo RM: The gila monster and its allies. The relationships, habits, and behavior of the
lizards of the family Helodermatidae, Bull Am Mus Nat Hist 1:109, 1956.
2. Fox H: Anatomy ofthe poison gland of Heloderma. In Loeb L,editor: The venom of Heloderma, Washing-
ton, DC, 1953, Carnegie Institution.
3. Phisalix M: Note sur les effects mortels reciproques des morsures de I'Heloderma suspectum cope et de la
vipera aspis laur et sur les caracte'res diffe'rentiels de leurs venins, Bull Mus Hist Nat Paris 17:485, 1911.
4. Cooke E, Loeb L: General properties and actions ofthe venom of Heloderma, and experiments in immu-
nization. In Loeb L,editor: The venom of Heloderma, Washington, DC, 1953, Carnegie Institution.
5. Alagon AC, Maldonado ME, Julia JZ: Venom from two species of Heloderma horridum (Mexican beaded
lizard): general characterization and purification of N-benzoyl-L-arginine ester hydrolase, Toxicon
20:463-475, 1982.
6. Stybolva Z, Kornalik F: Enzymatic properties of Heloderma suspectum venom, Toxicon 5:139, 1967.
7. Hendon RA, Tu AT: Biochemical characterization ofthe lizard toxin gilatoxin, Biochemistry 20:3517-3522,
1981.
 8. Mochca-Morales J, Martin BM, Possani LD: Isolation and characterization of helothermine, a novel toxin
from Heloderma horridum horridum (Mexican beaded lizard) venom, Toxicon 28:299 -309, 1990.
9. Patterson RA: Smooth muscle stimulating action of venom from the gila monster, Heloderma suspectum,
Toxicon 5:5, 1967.
CHAPTER
Macadamia Nuts
56
Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant, DVM, PhD, DABVT, DABT
Ingestion of macadamia nuts in dogs has been associated with weakness,
depression, vomiting, ataxia, hind limb paresis/paralysis, joint and muscle pain,
and joint swelling.
· The toxin is unknown, and treatment is supportive and symptomatic care.
· Most nuts are high in fat, and large exposures can pose a risk for the
development of gastrointestinal upset and pancreatitis.
· Prognosis is excellent, and signs generally subside within 24 to 48 hours.
Sources
Macadamia integrifolia and Macadaria tetraphylla trees are members of the family Pro-
teaceae that originated in Australia. Ihe trees have been cultivated in the United States,
primarily in Hawai and California, since the late 1800s. The majority of commercial maca-
damia nuts in the United States originate from Hawai. Macadamia nuts contain 75% fat
by weight, of which 80% is monounsaturated. Ingestion of a high-monounsaturated-fat
diet based on macadamia nuts in humans has been shown to lower serum cholesterol and
low-density lipoprotein levels.23 Proteins (27% to 30%) and sugars (6% to 8%) comprise
the majority of the oil-free components of macadamia nuts. One novel protein (MiAMP1)
found in macadamia nuts is being investigated for its potential antimicrobial activity.45
Macadamia nuts are popular snack foods, both as plain nuts and when incorporated
into candies, cakes, and cookies. Ingredients other than macadamia nuts, such as chocolate,
xylitol, and grapes/raisins, may also need to be considered as potential toxicants in cases
where candies or baked goods containing the nuts have been ingested. Macadamia nut
toxicosis has to date only been reported in dogs, who will readily ingest the nuts or products
made from them.6
Toxic Dose
In dogs, ingestion of 2.2 grams of raw or roasted nuts per kilogram of body weight has been
associated with the development of clinical signs.7 Another source out of Australia cited a
toxic dose, from field cases, as being between 0.7 and 4.9 g/kg body weight (5 to 40 nuts for a
20-kg dog). In experimental trials, weakness was associated with doses ranging from 2.4 to
62.4 g/kg, whereas vomiting occurred with doses ranging from 7 to 62.4 g/kg. Based onthese
mumbers, and assuming that a roasted macadamia nut weighs between 2.1 and 3 g (Gwaltney-
Brant, personal observation), the minimum toxic dose of macadamia nuts for dogs is approxi-
mately 1 nut/kg BW. In four dogs experimentally dosed with a slurry of commercially available
macadamia nuts at 20 g/kg, all dogs developed significant clinical signs of toxicosis.6
625
626SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Toxicokinetics
macadamia nuts, serum triglyceride levels peaked in 3 to 8 hours and returned to nor-
mal within 12 hours following dosing,6 which suggests relatively rapid absorption of the
effects seen in the experimental dogs.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Allergic reactions to macadamia nuts have been reported in humans; these allergies are
IgE-driven and are thought to be similar to other nut allergies.? The mechanism of action
clinical Signs
Clinical signs in dogs generally develop within 6 to 24 hours of ingestion of macadamia nuts.
The most common signs from field cases of macadamia nut ingestion by dogs, in descending
order, are weakness (55%), depression (32%) vomiting (21%), ataxia (18%), tremors (18%), and
 ssaum s aoa uaaq ose a auams ue ud as ue pul () eaa
dogs experimentally dosed with macadamia nuts was noted within 6 hours of dosing and was
characterized by diffculty in rising or inability to rise, reluctance to remain in a standing posi-
tion, and/or decreased height when jumping in recovering dogs.6 Some dogs have shown slightly
exaggerated patellar and cranial tibial reflexes. Ataxia and tremors, not recorded in experimental
cases but common in field cases, may have been related to weakness. Ihe weakness peaked by
12 hours, improved greatly within 24 hours, and was completely resolved by 48 hours after dos-
ing. Mild depression developed in most dogs within 3 hours of dosing, peaked at about 8 hours,
and appeared resolved by 24 hours. Hyperthermia peaked by 8 hours with a range of 39.8° C to
40.5° C (103.6° F to 104.9° F) and returmed to normal within 36 hours following dosing.
Minimum Database
Clinical laboratory evaluation of dogs experimentally dosed with macadamia nuts revealed
a marked twofold to fivefold increase in serum lipase by 24 hours and return to normal by
48 hours postdosing.6 Moderate increases in serum triglycerides (125 to 235 mg/dL; normal
20 to 150 mg/dL) were also noted within 6 hours of dosing. Serum alkaline phosphatase had
slight elevations above baseline values (122 to 220 U/L; normal 1 to 88 U/L) that peaked at
24 hours postdosing (293 to 424 U/L) and remained elevated at 48 hours (237 to 308 U/L).
Serum cholesterol and amylase remained unchanged from predosing values.
White blood cell (WBC) counts were elevated in all experimentally dosed dogs (18,400-
26,500 cells/μL) within 24 hours following dosing, primarily because of significant increases
in segmented neutrophils (15,640 to 23,585 cells/μL).6 By 48 hours, the WBC counts of all
but one of the dogs had returned to normal.
Confirmatory Tests
There are no specific tests to confirm exposure to macadamia nuts, so the diagnosis is based
on history of exposure along with consistent clinical findings. Observation of feces may
be beneficial in confirming exposures because many nut fragments pass through the GIT
undigested.
Treatment
In asymptomatic dogs with recent ingestion of macadamia nuts, induction of emesis should
be considered. Emesis may be followed by administration of activated charcoal with a
Chapter 56 | Macadamia Nuts 627
cathartic, although the efficacy of activated charcoal in preventing absorption of the toxic
principle(s) has not been established.
 In most cases, dogs developing clinical signs subsequent to ingesting macadamia nuts
can be managed with symptomatic care at home. Very young, old or debilitated dogs or
dogs with significant preexisting medical conditions, may be best managed by symptom-
atic care and monitoring at a veterinary clinic. Intravenous fluid therapy and antiemetics
may be considered in such dog, or in dogs presenting with signs that are more than mild
aisau snoe a u duuadap sasoixn sao asar ron saea
Prognosis
The prognosis for recovery of dogs that develop clinical signs from ingesting macadamia
B u  s  i   ss n  e a a si 
erinary intervention is expected in the majority of cases.7 Dogs with preexisting medical
conditions or those that have co-ingested other toxicant(s) (e.g., chocolate, xylitol, grapes/
raisins) may have slower or more complicated recoveries.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
logic lesions have been reported.10 Given the transient nature of the clinical effects of maca-
damia nut toxicosis, it is unlikely that significant gross or histopathologic lesions related
strictly to the nuts would be found in intoxicated dogs.
Differential Diagnoses
Other potential toxic causes of rear limb weakness, depression, and hyperthermia might
include bromethalin, metaldehyde, ionophores, salicylates, hops (Humulus lupulus), and
delayed neuropathy or intermediate syndrome associated with organophosphate insecti-
cide exposure. Conditions not related to toxicosis that might have similar signs may include
systemic infection, neoplastic syndromes, myasthenia gravis, coonhound paralysis, polyra-
diculoneuritis, botulism, spinal trauma, and pancreatitis.
References
1. California Rare Fruit Growers Inc: Macadamia fruit facts: http://www.crfg.org/pubs/f/macadamia.html.
1997. Accessed September 13, 2011.
 2. Curb ID, Wergowske G, Dobbs JC,et al: Serum lipid effects of a high-monounsaturated fat diet based on
macadamia nuts, Arch Intern Med 160:1154-1158, 2000.
3. Garg ML, Blake RJ, Willis RB: Macadamia nut consumption lowers plasma total and LDL cholesterol
levels in hypercholesterolemic men, I Nutr 133:1060-1063, 2003.
4. McManus AM, Neilsen KJ, Marcus JP,et al: MiA MP1, a novel protein from Macadamia integrifoliαadopts
a Greek key beta-barrel fold unique amongst plant antimicrobial proteins, I Mol Biol 293:629-638, 1999.
aplant antimicrobial peptide through over-expression of yeast cDNAs, Curr Genet 47(3):194-201, 2005.
6. Hansen SR, Buck W B, Meerdink G, et al: Weakness, tremors and depression associated with macadamia
nuts in dogs, Vet Hum Toxicol 42:18-21, 2000.
7. Hansen SR: Macadamia nut toxicosis in dogs, Vet Med 97:275-276, 2002.
8.
Gwaltney-Brant SM: Garbage ingestion, Clinician's Brief June:45-46, 2007.
9. Herbst RA, Wahl R, Frosch PJ: Specific IgE reactivity and identifcation forpotential allergens in maca-
damia allergy, J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 24(11):1361-1363, 2010.
10.
Sebastian MM: Role of pathology in diagnosis. In Gupta RC, editor: Veterinary toxicology: basic and
clinical principles, New York, 2012, Academic Press, pp 100-1136.
CHAPTER
Mercury
57
John H. Tegzes, VMD, MA, DABVT
Mercury is a naturally occurring metal. There are three prirmary forrms:
elermental, inorganic, and organic, each with its own distinct characteristics.
Elemental mercury can be found in fluorescent lightbulbs, batteries,
thermometers, barometers, lubrication cils, dental amalgams, and pressure-
sensing devices. Inorganic mercury can be found in topical blistering agents,
stool fixatives, latex paints, skin-lightening creams and soaps, laxatives, and old
disinfectant and pesticide formulations. Organic mercury may be found in fish-
based diets. Mercury toxicosis can result from acute high-dose exposures and
from chronic low-dose exposures
· Elermental rmercury is not well absorbed frorm the stomach and will generally not
so samsodxa asop-ualy uaym idanxa uosiad Ayeay e u suuosod asmen
Most forms of mercury are not well absorbed from the skin.
· Inhalation of elermental mercury vapors is the main cause of toxicity, followed
by oral ingestion of inorganic or organic mercury-containing products. Once
absorbed, mercury is directly cytotoxic. Following a one-time exposure, the
gastrointestinal tract, lungs, and kidneys are the primary targets. Chronic
inhalation exposure can cause selective damage to the central nervous systerm.
elimination.
Though renal and neurologic lesions are often irreversible, improvement has
been seen several months after exposure ceases in some cases.
Sources
Mercury is a metal that exists in several physical and chemical forms. It occurs naturally
in the earth's crust as inorganic mercury. Through a natural process of degassing from the
earth's surface, it is released into the atmosphere as mercury vapor.? Mercury also enters the
environment through volcanic activity.
Human activity has generated sources of environmental mercury since Roman times,
when the mining of mercury ore began.' Today, coal burning power stations and municipal
waste incinerators liberate mercury vapor when household and commercial products that
contain mercury are disposed of by this method. Elemental mercury can be found in fluo-
rescent lightbulbs, batteries, thermometers, barometers, lubrication oils, dental amalgams,
and pressure-sensing devices. Inorganic mercury can be found in topical blistering agents,
and pesticide formulations.
629
630SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
From whatever source, mercury vapors emitted into the atmosphere can reside there for
many months and be distributed over vast geographical areas. In fact, mercury contamina-
tion is a worldwide problem.
Once in the atmosphere, mercury vapor is slowly transformed to a water-soluble, inor-
ganic form. Water-soluble inorganic mercury is then precipitated back to the surface and
accumulates in fresh and marine water bodies by direct contamination and through runoff
into rivers and streams. Inorganic mercury is methylated to organic mercury by methano-
genic bacteria, which are present in both fresh and marine waters.!
The methylated, or organic, form of mercury could potentially pose a threat to both
humans and companion animals, such as dogs and cats. Methylated mercury readily enters
the aquatic food chain by first diffusing into forms of zooplankton. Bottom-feeding fish
consume zooplankton. Bottom-feeding fish are eaten by other fish, and mercury continues
orous fish in both fresh and marine waters. In this manner, mercury is biomagnified from
 environmental contamination of water approximately 1 milion-fold by the time it reaches
the top of the aquatic food chain.
saop rn asodxa Aniau po ains euaiod e juasdan arnanau siat paseq-r
and cats. There are many commercial and prescription veterinary diets that contain fish.
Fish oil supplements are also frequently used in therapeutic regimens for a variety of condi-
tions for dogs and cats. However, recent work has shown that commercial human-grade
fish oil supplements contain very low concentrations of mercury, ranging from less than
6 mcg/L to 12 mcg/L.3
Another potential dietary mercury source could occur when food animals are inadver-
tently fed seed grain that has been treated with a methylmercury fungicide. These types
of fungicides have been used on seed destined for planting, but not for seed used as feed.
When the meat from these exposed animals is fed to pets, severe mercury poisoning could
Boq e ng iea au ane ie Au e ui paodan uaaq s oeuans jo adai siu ims
that was accidentally fed treated seed grain. The family members who ate the meat over a
3-month period developed long-term neurologic effects.4
Another potential source of mercury may be from ingestion of folk medicines. Nontra-
ditional remedies may sometimes be used by animal owners on their pets and should be
considered when taking a history in cases with unusual presentations. Some folk medicines
contain inorganic mercury compounds, and some Latin American and Caribbean com-
munities have used elemental mercury in religious and cultural rituals.5 Animals may be
exposed intentionally or inadvertently.
Inhalation of elemental mercury vapors could conceivably happen in pets where mercury
has contaminated a household through broken thermometers, barometers, or fluorescent
lghtbulbs. Poisonings could also potentially occur in pets ingesting products containing
the inorganic mercury forms, such as mercuric chloride (e.g., stool fixatives, latex paint,
laxatives, old disinfectants and pesticides, topical therapeutic agents, and blistering agents).
Toxic Dose
When determining exposure doses in pet animals,it is important to consider whether the
exposures have been acute or chronic. This information can be correlated with data from the
primary literature, as both acute and chronic dosing studies have been performed in cats.
Cats given oral doses of methylmercuric hydroxide at 1.29 and 0.86 mg/kg per day began
exhibiting clinical signs after 15 days of daily exposure.6 Chronic doses of methylmercury
u auisop aiep yo saep oot pue g uaamiaq suis etu panaid Aep iad syau s'o e
this chronic study, a total dose of between 19 and 25 mg/kg was required before clinical signs
were observed.7 In along-term diet study using fish contaminated with methylmercury, cats
did not develop clinical signs or damage to the central nervous system (CNS) when doses
were below 46 mcg/kg/day, even after 1175 to 1227 days.α Clinical signs referable to the ner-
l yim pasop sies un pumoy anam Sn ai ui shuuy sooned aqeiou pue saisas sno
mcg/kg/day for 92 to 119 days and in cats dosed with 74 mcg/kg/day after 276 to 526 days.8.9
Chapter 57 | Mercury 631
It is possible for the veterinary clinician to estimate the mercury exposure from fish
diets. Edible tissues from swordfish and shark can contain 1 mcg/g of mercury, whereas
tuna, trout, pike, and bass can contain about 0.1 to 0.5 mcg/g. Invertebrates, such as shell-
fish, have even lower concentrations.3 Unfortunately, the specific fish and concentrations
included in commercial pet foods are usually not known.
Because there are several possible sources of mercury exposure in companion animals,
it is dificult to determine the toxic dose from chronic, possibly lifelong, exposure. Back-
a ui san ansodxa u y ci puan o see iad o sa asxa pu
may be possible to estimate potential exposure levels.
Toxicokinetics
Mercury poisoning can occur after ingestion, inhalation, injection, or dermal absorption
U saalossip pue shuml au Aq paqosqe st nodea Aioia ar'senimoia jo suuoy smonea jo
the systemic circulation, where it travels to all tissues. It readily crosses the blood-brain
and placental barriers. Excretion is mostly in the urine and feces, though a small amount is
excreted by the lungs.
 Ingested elemental mercury is generally poorly absorbed. Absorption of inorganic mer-
cury depends on its solubility, because soluble inorganic compounds can be suficiently
absorbed orally and cause severe poisoning. Inorganic mercury can also be absorbed by the
lungs after inhalation, and by the skin afer integumentary exposure. Following distribu-
is via the feces and urine.
 Organic mercury is wellabsorbed from the gastrointestinal tract after ingestion. After
absorption, it is carried by erythrocytes to various tissues throughout the body.1l It readily
crosses the blood-brain and placental barriers.! Excretion is primarily in the feces.
Mechanism of Toxicity
 Inhaled mercury vapor is highly diffusible and lipid soluble and readily crosses cell mem-
 branes. Once inside the cell, it is converted to Hgt+ ion (mercuric ion) and is directly cyto-
toxic.l The central nervous system and kidneys are the primary targets.
Inorganic mercury attaches to thiol-containing molecules, such as cysteine and glutathi-
as sixn ai st a ut +i sasaan il 'si so jo aasid ai un esas u 'a
a st Aiau sue m usid ae jo u aen aed au a yo sa
gastrointestinal tract. Chronic exposures lead to kidney dysfunction; the pars recta of the
proximal tubule is the most vulnerable segment of the nephron to toxic injury.12 Through
molecular interactions at nucleophilic sites,13 the Hg++ ion directly damages the epithelial
cells of the proximal tubule, resulting in the failure of solute and water reabsorption.
 Methylmercury also has a high affnity for thiol-containing molecules. Over time,
it is slowly degraded to inorganic mercury, probably by the action of phagocytic cells.!
This conversion results in the presence of inorganic mercury in the kidney, brain, and
other tissues, even when the source of exposure was from organic mercury.l There is
selective damage to the central nervous system that has not yet been explained.1 In
severe poisoning, the peripheral nervous system is also affected. Extensive loss of neu-
ronal cells occurs in the granular layer of the cerebellum, in the visual cortex, and other
focal areas. Consistent with this pathology, clinical signs include ataxia and constriction
of the visual felds.
clinical Signs
Because mercury can affect multiple organ systems, the clinical effects seen are varied.
The clinical presentation also depends on the form of mercury, the concentration, and
whether it is an acute or chronic exposure. In general, the most consistent signs of mercury
632SECTlON 4 SpecificToxicants
poisoning in mammals are anorexia, nervous dysfunction, renal dysfunction, gastrointes-
tinal signs, shock, and death.l4 Nervous signs include ataxia, decreased conscious proprio-
ception,blindness, paresis, trermors, and seizures.14 Gastrointestinal signs include vomiting.
diarrhea, abdominal pain, and hypersalivation.14
e 'suu u rsuoaud pue aeup tumi ianp asnes ues iodea Amau paeu
syndrome of mercurialism has been described after chronic exposures of weeks or more to
mercury vapor. This syndrome is characterized by tremors, erethism, and gingivitis. Ere-
thism is evidenced by extreme shyness, hallucinations, or aggressive behavior.
Clinical signs seen in cats with chronic methylmercury poisoning include anorexia,
ataxia, intention tremors, impaired righting reflex, hypermetria, proprioceptive deficits,
blindness, vertical nystagmus, and tonic-clonic seizures.6.7 In terms of behavior, cats fed
a fish diet were less active than similar cats fed a beef diet. On necropsy, the cats fed the
fish diets had significantly higher brain, kidney, liver, and muscle mercury concentrations.
H was speculated that the mercury content of the fish diet caused the behavior changes.15
Clinical signs seen in dogs with acute mercury poisoning include intermittent or per-
sistent vomiting (with or without blood), diarrhea, ataxia, reluctance to walk, horizontal
nystagmus, and progressive depression with seizure activity.14 After a 7-year exposure to
a daily fish diet, a dog that developed ataxia and behavioral changes slowly improved and
 returned to normal months after the fish diet was withdrawn.16
Minimum Database
 Because mercury can affect multiple organ systems, the minimum database should
include a chemistry profle that includes electrolytes, glucose, BUN, and creatinine to
assess renal function and electrolyte balance; liver transaminases (aspartate and alanine),
alkaline phosphatase, and total bilirubin to assess liver function; and a complete blood
count to assess red blood cell morphology and number. A urinalysis is also indicated to
assess the renal function. In addition to clinical pathology, a thorough neurologic exami-
nation is warranted along with a thorough history to help determine possible sources of
mercury exposure.
Confirmatory Tests
Mercury exposure can be confirmed by measuring whole blood and urine mercury con-
centrations. Urine mercury concentrations are not usually elevated following exposure to
organic mercury, so if the source of exposure is to the organic form, then whole blood
analysis is the preferred sample. Whole blood mercury and urine concentrations exceeding
6.0 ppm and 1.5 ppm, respectively, indicate excessive mercury exposure.
To confirm mercury exposure in deceased animals, liver and kidney samples can be col-
lected and analyzed for mercury. 17 Additionally, brain and skeletal muscle may also contain
elevated concentrations of mercury in animals chronically exposed.15
Histochermical visualization of mercury in tissue can be done when the mercury present
in the tissue is chemically bound to either sulfide or selenide ions.l Histopathology of the
brain and kidneys can often confirm the presence of associated lesions.
Treatment
Decontamination after acute oral exposures to all forms of mercury includes the oral
may be performed before administering activated charcoal. Administering a bulk laxative
to pets ingesting energy-saving lightbulbs and thermometers and following its movement
via radiography are warranted.
 Treatment of acute and chronic exposures to inorganic and organic mercury is largely
Chapter 57 | Mercury 633
salts may precipitate severe gastroenteritis, renal failure, and shock. Intravenous fluid ther-
apy to replace fluids and maintain urine output is indicated, along with the use of gastroin-
testinal protectants and antiemetics.
Chelation therapy may be indicated to enhance mercury excretion after both acute and
chronic exposures. Oral succimer (meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid [DMSA]) is protec-
s u si u s  siaa dau pe a ae a se a
and also increases the urinary excretion of mercury. A suggested dosage of succimer would
be the one recommended for lead poisoning (see Chapter 53). D-Penicillamine may also
be given orally after the intestinal tract has been cleared of inorganic mercury salts. There
is limited data that oral succimer and oral N-acetylcysteine may be effective in decreasing
mercury concentrations in tissues, including the brain, after organic mercury exposure.
Prognosis
Although most of the renal and neurologic lesions produced by mercury toxicosis are irre-
versible, there are reports of improvement once exposure ceases.16 However, several months
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Grossly, gastrointestinal lesions can include gastric ulcers, necrotic enteritis, and colitis,
especially after acute ingestion of mercury salts.18 The kidneys may be pale and swollen.
Histologically, there may be renal tubular cell degeneration and necrosis with protein-
aceous cast formation. Nervous system lesions may be present in the cerebrum, cerebellum.
brainstem, and spinal cord.14 Changes consist of loss of nerve cells with replacement by
reactive and fibrillary gliosis.7 Neuronal necrosis and perivascular cuffing within the cere-
 brum, cerebellum, and brainstem have been reported after chronic methylmercury feeding
studies in cats.6
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses would include other toxic causes of renal tubular disease, such as
acute ethylene glycol toxicosis, and causes that are not toxic in nature, such as infectious
agents like leptospirosis. Nervous system clinical signs may also be caused by other heavy
metals, such as lead, or other nervous system disorders, such as encephalitis and distemper.
The gastrointestinal signs associated with mercury poisoning are nonspecific and differen-
tials can include numerous toxic (e.g., lead, thallium, inorganic arsenic, zinc phosphide,
zinc, vomitoxin) and nontoxic (e.g., pancreatitis, gastrointestinal obstruction, liver disease,
renal disease) causes.
References
1. Qarkson TW: The toxicology of mercury, Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci 34(3):369-403, 1997.
 2. Fitzgerald WF, Clarkson TW: Mercury and monomethyl mercury present and future concerns, Environ
Health Perspect 96:159-166, 1991.
3. Foran SE, Flood JG, Lewandrowski KB: Measurement of mercury levels in concentrated over-the-coun-
ter fish oil preparations, Arch Pathol Lab Med 127:1603-1605, 2003.
4. Davis LE, Kornfeld M, Mooney HS, et al: Methylmercury poisoning: long-term clinical, radiological,
toxicological, and pathological studies of an affected family, A nn Neuro? 35:680-688, 1994.
5. Kosnett MJ: Mercury. In Olson KR, editor: Poisoning and drug overdose,ed 4, New York, 2004, Lange
Medical Books/McGraw-Hill.
6. Davies TS, Nielsen SW: Pathology of subacute methylmercurialism in cats, Am J Vet Res 38(1):59-67,
1977.
7. Munro IC, Moodie A, Willes RF, et al: Toxic effects of methylmercury in the cat, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
22(2):294-295, 1972.
8. Nera EA, Charbonneau SM, Munro IC: Chronic toxicity of methylmercury in the adult cat, Toxicol App?
Pharmacol 23(1):192, 1976.
634SECTION4SpecificToxicants
9. Charbonneau SM, Munro EA, Nera EA, et al: Chronic toxicity of methylmercury in the adult cat, Toxi
cology 5:337-349, 1976.
10. Graeme KA, Pollack CV: Heavy metal toxicity, part I: arsenic and mercury, I Emerg Med 16(1):45-56,
1998.
11. Doi R, Tagawa M: A study on the biochemical and biological behavior of methylmercury, Toxicol App?
Pharmacol 69(3):407-416, 1983.
12. Zalups RK: Molecular interactions with mercury in the kidney, Pharmacol Rev 52(1):113-143, 2000.
13. Yeh J-H, Chung H-M, Ho C-M,et al: Mercury-induced Ca2+ increase and cytotoxicity in renal tubular
cells, Life Sci 74:2075-2083, 2004.
 14. Farrar WP, Edwards IF, Willard MD: Pathology in a dog associated with elevatedtissue mercury concen-
trations, I Vet Diagn Invest 6:511-514, 1994.
15. Houpt KA, Essick LA, Shaw EB,et al: A tuna fish diet influences cat behavior, I Toxicol Environ Health
24:161172, 1988.
16. Hansen JC, Reske-Nielsen E, Thorlacius-Ussing O, et al: Distribution of dietary mercury in a dogs
quantitation and localization of total mercury in organs and central nervous system, Sci Total Environ
78:23-44, 1989.
17. Hansen JC, Danscher G: Quantitative and qualitative distribution of mercury in organs from arctic
sledgedogs: an atomic absorption spectrophotometric and histochemical study of tissue samples from
natural long-termed high dietary organic mercury-exposed dogs from Thule, Greenland, Pharmacol
Toxicol77(3):189-195, 1995.
18. Osweiler GD: Mercury toxicosis. In Osweiler GD, editor: Toxicology, Philadelphia, 1996, Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.
CHAPTER
Metaldehyde
58
Ahna G. Brutlag, DVM, MS
Birgit Puschner, DVM, PhD, DABVT
Metaldehyde, a common molluscicide, is widely used for the control of slugs
and snails.
 The target organ of toxicity is the central nervous systerm. Clinical signs of acute
exposure to rmetaldehyde include trermors, seizures, hyperthermia, salivation,
restlessness, panting, vomiting, and ataxia.
Metaldehyde toxicity results in the disruption of the GABAergic system.
Monoamine oxidase, serotonin or 5-hydroxytryptarmine, and norepinephrine rmay
also be involved in the toxic mechanism.
 Treatrment ains to decontaminate the poisoned anirnal, stabilize vital signs,
control muscle tremors and seizure activity, and correct metabolic acidosis
Accurate diagnosis must be made via careful correlation of data collected from
the history, clinical signs, clinical abnormalities, and toxicologic analysis.
Animals that survive the first 24 hours of intoxication have a good prognosis and
 spontaneous recurrent seizures are not expected.
n the United States, metaldehyde is most commonly encountered as the active ingredient
in slug and snail baits. If ingested, it can result in severe neurologic signs with tremors, sei-
zures, and secondary hyperthermia being the most notable. This common collection of clin-
ical signs has given rise to the informal name for this poisoning: "shake and bake syndrome:"
Poisoning from metaldehyde has been frequently reported in dogs, livestock, horses,
and humans. Dogs often eat baits voraciously, whereas cats in contrast are more selective
in their eating behavior. Although cats are quite susceptible to this agent, few toxicoses
have been documented. Metaldehyde, a tetramer of acetaldehyde, has been used as a mol-
luscicide worldwide for more than 60 years. Preparations of snail baits made in the 1960s
and early 1970s were attractive not only to snails but also to dogs and may account for the
large number of dog poisonings reported during that time period. Such poisonings are
less common now because some formulations are made to be less attractive to dogs. In
some countries other than the United States, it is also used as a solid fuel. In general most
exposures to metaldehyde are acute and require immediate treatment. Dogs and cats can be
exposed to other neurotoxicants that cause similar clinical signs, and only careful correla-
tion and evaluation of data collected from the history, clinical signs, clinical abnormalities,
and chemical analysis will lead to an accurate diagnosis.
Sources
pue sdoi [emo ioaod oi seus pue ss  oi pasn ed si apauaia
household gardens. Baits are commonly available in the form of granules (often dyed),
635
636SECTlON 4 SpecificToxicants
but can also be obtained as liquid, powder, meal, gels/pastes, or pellets that can release
metaldehyde for approximately 10 to 14 days under moderately moist conditions. Baits are
sometimes mixed with other herbicides and pesticides, most commonly with carbamate
insecticides (e.g., carbaryl, 5%). Bran or molasses is commonly added to the bait to increase
its attractiveness to snails and slugs, causing this form of bait to be attractive and palatable
 sistxa shop oi aaloeneum aq shieq jes 1eui dunrmban uonoe A1oiembay 'lam se shop c
some countries and states.2
The concentration of metaldehyde in baits sold for domestic use in the United States is
 generally between 2% and 5%. The product trade names most commonly reported to the Pet
Poison Helpline include Ortho Bug-Geta Snail & Slug Killer (metaldehyde, 3.25%); Ortho
Bug-Geta Plus Snail, Slug, & Insect Killer (metaldehyde, 2% and carbaryl, 5%); Corry's
Sug & Snail Death (metaldehyde, 3.25%); RainTough Deadline Slug & Snail Killer (met-
aldehyde, 4%); Force II Deadline Slug & Snail Killer (metaldehyde, 4%); and Lily Miller
Slug, Snail & Insect Killer Bait (metaldehyde, 2% and carbaryl, 5%).3 Other trade names of
metaldehyde-containing products available in the United States include Antimilace, Ceku-
meta, Meta, Metason, OR-CAL, Slugger Snail & Slug Bait, Ortho Metaldehyde 4% Bait, Slug
Pellets, Slugit Pellets, and Slug-Tox. In Europe baits can contain up to 50% metaldehyde,
and metaldehyde is also used as a fuel in small heating systems, such as camping stoves and
lamps.4 Trade names for metaldehyde fuel are Meta-fuel and Meta-Brennstoff, which are
available in the form of tablets, solid blocks, or powder. In Japan metaldehyde is an ingredi-
ent in color flame tablets that are ignited for entertainment.4
Toxic Dose
Metaldehyde is moderately toxic when ingested. Acute oral median lethal dose (LDso) val-
ues range from 210 to 600 mg/kg of body weight for dogs and 207 mg/kg of body weight for
cats.5-7 To be conservative, decontamination and/or medical observation is typically recom-
mended in healthy adult cats or dogs ingesting more than 1/10 to 1/5 of the lowest reported
LDso. Inhalation exposure is unlikely but can occur with exposure to dusts of commercial
pesticide products. Inhalation LDso values (4 hours) of 203 mg/m?, 203 mg/m?, and 175 to
700 mg/m are reported for rats, mice, and guinea pigs, respectively.&
Toxicokinetics
The solubility of metaldehyde in water is poor, which may limit the rate of absorption; how-
ever, metaldehyde is absorbed intact from the gastrointestinal tract.? In the stomach, met-
aldehyde may undergo some acid hydrolysis to acetaldehyde. The half-life of metaldehyde
at 24° C is 0.75 and 4 hours, in 0.1 and 0.01 mol/L aqueous hydrochloric acid, respectively.10
In 0.18 mol/L physiological gastric hydrochloric acid, metaldehyde is unlikely to hydrolyze
extensively in the stomach before absorption. Once absorbed, the metabolic fate of metal-
dehyde is largely unknown, although a rapid metabolism is suspected. The involvement of
cytochrome P450 enzymes has been suggested because P450 inducers protect against met-
aldehyde toxicity. In mice it was reported that only 8% of an oral dose was excreted unme-
tabolized in urine and feces.! Urinary excretion in dogs dosed with metaldehyde was less
than 1%. The apparent elimination half-life derived from a human metaldehyde poisoning
case was approximately 27 hours.' Although data on elimination kinetics in animals are
not available, it is presumed that the hydrolysis product acetaldehyde is rapidly converted
to carbon dioxide and eliminated via expiration.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Studies have suggested that acetaldehyde is unlikely to be the toxicant in metaldehyde
poisoning since acetaldehyde is extremely unstable and is rapidly oxidized to carbon
lou sm apaaeae um u snis eaaas aq paodns si uuy s sapixo
detected in plasma or urine of metaldehyde-treated dogs or brains of mice poisoned with
Chapter58|Metaldehyde637
metaldehyde.10 Thus, the toxicity of metaldehyde is not mediated by or perhaps is only
partly mediated by the degradation product acetaldehyde. Instead metaldehyde itself may
be the actual toxicant that acts on the y-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic system.
Metaldehyde readily crosses the blood-brain barrier and was detected in the brain, blood,
and liver of mice given metaldehyde orally at toxic and nontoxic doses.b It was also found
in the serum and urine of a human for up to 3 to 4 days following exposure.12 Decreased
brain concentrations of GABA, norepinephrine (NE), and serotonin or 5-hydroxytrypta-
mine (5-HT) and increased monoamine oxidase (MAO) activity were seen in mice dosed
with metaldehyde.14.15 GABA has an inhibitory role in neuronal excitation, and a decrease
in GABA levels may lead to convulsions. Ihe mechanism of disruption of the GABAergic
system by metaldehyde is still unknown, but inhibition of glutamic acid decarboxylase as
the cause of reduction of GABA concentrations is unlikely.1 Depletion of central stores of
NE and 5-HT is correlated with a decreased threshold of convulsions.16 Because MAO is an
important enzyme in the metabolism of NE and 5-HT, these may interact to contribute to
the mode of action, in addition to GABA.
and it is assumed that the muscle tremors often seen in metaldehyde-poisoned animals are
the primary cause of body temperatures in excess of 41° C to 42° C (106° F to 107° F). At
body temperatures of 42° Cto 43° C(107° F to 109° F), cellular necrosis may begin to occur
within a few minutes in all organ systems.17 Hyperthermia may alter electrolyte balances
and metaldehyde is reported to cause severe acid-base derangements. The resulting meta-
bolic acidosis is associated with hyperpnea and central nervous system (CNS) depression.
clinical Signs
 In dogs the main clinical features of metaldehyde poisoning involve the central nervous
system with common signs including muscle tremors, seizures, secondary hyperthermia
(often exceeding 41° C to 42° C or 106° F to 107° F), tachypnea or hyperpnea, tachycardia,
rhea, hyperesthesia, incoordination, and nystagmus. Opisthotonos and convulsions may
3 hours of ingestion of a toxic dose but a longer duration for onset of clinical signs is pos-
sible.1α Convulsions are often continuous, sometimes elicitable by external stimuli in dogs,
sure.19 Animals may recover if narcosis does not become too deep. If the animal survives
the acute period,it may suffer fromliver damage within 2 to 3 days after exposure (although
serious, this is not commonly observed in clinical cases). Liver damage and cirrhosis may
lead to delayed death. However, if the animal has not been lethally poisoned, full recovery
may occur within a few weeks. In one case a dog that survived metaldehyde toxicosis was
 blind initially, but regained normal vision within 3 weeks after exposure.2i
In cats metaldehyde poisoning may cause locomotor signs, dyspnea, hyperthermia,
muscle spasms, mydriasis, and opisthotonos.22 Perhaps more pronounced than in dogs,
nystagmus may develop in cats, and external stimuli may evoke convulsions.Recovery may
take approximately 2 weeks in cats with no sequela. Secondary illness, such as liver disease,
has not been reported in cats.
 Metaldehyde is often used in combination with carbaryl or methiocarb, carbamates that
may cause muscarinic and nicotinic signs in animals upon ingestion. In this type of sce-
nario, the clinical signs may be more complicated.
Confirmatory Tests
Chemical analysis for metaldehyde of the stomach contents (best), serum, urine, and liver is
available at many veterinary diagnostic laboratories. Samples must be kept frozen for analy-
sis. Bait material can also be tested for metaldehyde, and this may add important information.
638SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
Treatment
 There is no antidote for metaldehyde intoxication and, given the potential for severe intoxi-
cation, rapid treatment is critical and should focus on decontamination; controlling hyper-
the development of metabolic acidosis.
Emetics, gastric lavage, and enemas are recommended for removal of metaldehyde from
vival rate and a significant reduction in the duration of treatment.20 Careful evaluation of
each patient is required before a specific method of decontamination is chosen. Emetics are
recommended only in patients that are asymptomatic, with litle risk for developing aspira-
tion pneumonia, and that have recently ingested the material (<1-2 hours). The induction of
ermesis at home is not always advisable due to the rapid onset of CNS stimulation and, often,
is most safely performed in a veterinary setting.
 In cases of very recent ingestion, the induction of emesis may be attermpted at home in
dogs (not cats) by administering fresh 3% hydrogen peroxide (1 mL/pound, PO). If the dog
has not vomited within 5 to 10 minutes and remains asymptomatic, a second dosage may
be administered. Offering a small amount of food prior to the administration of hydrogen
peroxide may increase its effectiveness. Unfortunately, there are currently no safe and effec-
tive at-home emetic agents for cats. Products such as table salt, mustard, and syrup of ipecac
are no longer recommended in any veterinary species.
If emesis cannot be safely induced at home, apomorphine (0.03-0.04 mg/kg, IV, IM, or
place the tablet directly into the subconjunctival sac) may be used in dogs. If subconjuncti-
val apomorphine is used, the subconjunctival sac must be flushed thoroughly after emesis
or protracted vomiting may occur. The use of apomorphine in cats is not recommended due
to poor effcacy and the potential for CNS stimulation. Instead, xylazine (0.44 mg/kg, IM)
or dexmedetomidine may be administered. Reversal with yohimbine (0.1 mg/kg, IM, SQ.
or slowly IV) or atipamezole (Antisedan, 25-50 mcg/kg, IM or IV) should be performed if
severe CNS and/or respiratory depression develop.
Gastric lavage is indicated when massive ingestion has occurred (greater than LDso) or
following a recent (<1-2 hours) ingestion; however,there are two case reports in which a pro-
ductive lavage was performed 36 hours after ingestion due to persistent neurologic signs.19
Following lavage or the induction of emesis, the administration of one dose of activated
charcoal (1-5 grams/kg, PO) with a cathartic such as sorbitol is indicated. In order to reduce
the risk of aspiration, administration via an orogastric tube is advised in any symptom-
atic patient. Due to the lack of evidence for enterohepatic recirculation, multiple doses of
activated charcoal are not typically recommended. Finally, enemas with tepid water can
further help with the decontamination. Anecdotally, this method of decontamination has
been reported to be of great benefit for metaldehyde, specifically.
Controlling tremors and seizures with muscle relaxants and anticonvulsants is critical as
persistent signs can result in severe hyperthermia, rhabdomyolysis with secondary acute renal
failure (rare), and DIC. For tremors, methocarbamol (55-220 mg/kg, IV to effect, repeat PRN;
not to exceed 330 mg/kg/day) is the drug of choice and large doses may be necessary. Diazepam
(0.5-1 mg/kg, IV repeat in 5 minutes if no effect) is the initial drug of choice for seizure control.
 Diazepam has a short duration of action ranging from 20 to 60 minutes and can be repeated if
necessary. If initial diazepam treatment has no effect or seizures continue once the drug wears
off, continuous rate infusion of diazepam or midazolam may be used. Additionally, pheno-
barbital has excellent anticonvulsant properties and is generally recommended to supplement
diazepam. The onset of the drug occurs about 15 to 30 minutes after administration and should
therefore be administered simultaneously with diazepam. In order to effectively load the patient
qu o o ggo as aus e a s io seso a
given IV, especially in cases of severe poisoning. Be alert to the potential development of severe
CNS depression and hypoventilation. As mentioned earlier, metaldehyde degradation may be
regulated by cytochrome P450 enzymes. Phenobarbital is an inducer of hepatic microsomal
Chapter 58 | Metaldehyde 639
enzymes and can be of benefit in metaldehyde poisoning cases by potentially increasing the
or barbiturates are not suficient to control the patient's seizures, inhalant anesthetics may be
used All patients under general anesthesia require endotracheal intubation and ventilation.
Because of the severe hyperthermia resulting from tremors and seizures, direct and
evaporative cooling measures are often needed including ice baths, cold IV fluids, the use
of fans, and application of alcohol to the pinna and paw pads. Cooling measures should be
stopped once the body temperature has been reduced to 39.7° C (103.5° F) to avoid hypo-
thermia and the body temperature should be monitored every 1-2 hours thereafter.
 Intravenous fluid therapy should be instituted to control hyperthermia, maintain perfu-
sion, and prevent or correct dehydration. Fluid administration and control of seizures may
also correct metabolic acidosis that is often seen with metaldehyde poisoning. If venous
blood gas analysis reveals a severe metabolic acidosis (pH <7.1, base excess <-15, HCO <1l
mEq/L), alkalinization therapy with sodium bicarbonate may be required (0.5-1 mEq/kg.
IV slowly over 1-3 hours).
 Intensive laboratory monitoring is required, especially in patients with severe clini-
cal signs. Venous blood gas analysis should be performed to note acid-base disturbances
(especially metabolic acidosis), coagulation parameters should be monitored for the devel-
opment of DIC, renal and electrolyte parameters monitored for the onset of acute renal
failure secondary to rhabdomyolysis, and blood glucose concentrations for the presence
of hyper- or hypoglycemia. Hepatic damage is a rare but possible sequela to metaldehyde
intoxication so hepatic parameters should be rechecked 2 to 3 days following clinical resolu-
tion. Additionally, hepatoprotectants such as SAMe (20 mg/kg, PO q 24 h for 2 weeks) can
be considered.
Prognosis
The prognosis is good if the animal survives the first 24 hours after exposure and receives
treatment as soon as possible. Initially, treatment is directed toward removing metalde-
hyde from the gastrointestinal tract and controlling seizures, hyperthermia, and respiratory
depression. After the acute clinical signs have been controlled, treatment must focus on
minimizing possible liver damage. Death is frequently due to DIC or respiratory failure so
laboratory and clinical monitoring are paramount. In cases where adequate treatment and
monitoring is provided, a full recovery is generally expected within 2 to 3 days.
a uiaan uaus (as) sndaa ss go soad paunond suas sop u
development of epilepsy later in life has been raised as this has been observed in other spe-
cies. In rodent models of epilepsy chemoconvulsant agents were administered in order to
achieve SE of greater than 30 minutes' duration. This duration of SE is typically sufficient
to induce epileptogenesis, resulting in spontaneous recurrent seizures following a latency
zures during childhood have been associated with the development of epilepsy.25 Recent
studies have explored the potential for epileptogenesis in dogs following SE induced by
experiencing SE for greater than 30 minutes' duration (range 0.8 to more than 36 hours)
was monitored for a median of 757 days (range 66-1663 days). None of the dogs in this study
developed spontaneous recurrent seizures following intoxication. Likewise, from a group
of 14 dogs that also suffered SE following intoxications (metaldehyde = 3), none developed
 spontaneous recurrent seizures.27 These studies support the notion that no long-term neu-
rologic sequela are expected following metaldehyde intoxication and that the use of anti-
convulsant medications following discharge is not indicated.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Metaldehyde has a characteristic odor of formaldehyde that may be present in the stomach
contents along with bait material. No consistent and pathognomonic gross or histologic
640SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
hepatic, renal, and pulmonary congestion.28 The lung tissue may show edema and intersti-
tial hemorrhage. Petechial and ecchymotic hemorrhages may be present in the gastrointes-
tinal mucosa. Also, severe subepicardial and subendocardial hemorrhages may be found. In
animals that survive the acute phase of poisoning, degeneration of liver and ganglion cells
in the brain may occur. Most reported necropsy findings date from the 1970s, and only a
few postmortem reports are available. Ihe high survival rate (close to 100% with optimal
treatment) of metaldehyde-poisoned animals is most likely the reason why limited infor-
mation is available on gross and histopathologic lesions. No data on necropsy findings in
cats poisoned with metaldehyde are available.
 In rats poisoned with metaldehyde, necropsy findings may reveal a fracture or disloca-
tion of the vertebrae and subsequent compression of the spinal cord.29 Ihe definitive cause
of the lesion remains unknown, and it may be secondary to posterior paralysis.
Differential Diagnoses
Table 58-1 describes the most important toxicology differential diagnoses and their clini-
cal signs. It is evident that a definite diagnosis of metaldehyde poisoning can be difficult.
One of the crucial clinical signs of metaldehyde poisoning that requires special attention is
hyperthermia because it is not as commonly observed in other neurotoxicoses. In addition
to the listed toxicants, neurotoxic mushrooms, cyanide, neurologic pharmaceuticals (e.g.,
antidepressants, anxiolytics, sleep aids), and illicit drugs should also be considered.
Other differential diagnoses of seizures in small animals include metabolic diseases
(involving hypoglycemia, uremia, and hypocalcemia), neoplasms, thiamine deficiency,
bacterial or viral encephalitis, severe head trauma, and congenital disorders (e.g., hydro-
cephalus, portosystemic shunt, idiopathic epilepsy, and lysosomal storage diseases). Breed
or species predisposition, age of onset, and a complete history are important for each ani-
 mal and will help establish an accurate diagnosis.
Table 58-1
 Differential Diagnoses of Metaldehyde Poisoning
Toxicant
Common Clinical Signs
4-Aminopyridine (avicide)
Acute onset, salivation, tremors, tachycardia, ataxia,
seizures
Amphetamines (commonly pre-
Acute onset, restlessness, hyperactivity, tachycardia,
scribed for ADD/ADHD)
mydriasis, tachypnea, tremors, seizures
Blue-green algae — cyanobacteria Peracute onset, hypersalivation, vomiting, diarrhea,
(anatoxin-A and saxitoxins)
cyanosis,limb twitching, rigors, coma, seizures
Bromethalin (rodenticide)
 Acute or delayed onset (until several days after inges-
tion), muscle tremors, hyperexcitability, hind limb
ataxia, paresis, or paralysis, running fits, seizures
(potentially evoked by external stimuli), vocaliza-
tion (cats)
Chocolate (theobromine) and
 Acute onset, hyperactivity, vomiting, diarrhea, PU/
caffeine
PD, tachycardia, hypertension, ataxia, tachypnea,
muscle tremors, seizures
Hops (Humulus spp.)
Acute onset, severe hyperthermia, tachypnea, panting.
tachycardia, anxiety, vomiting
 Ivermectin and related drugs
Acute or delayed onset, depression, blindness, coma-
tose, seizures
Methionine (urine acidifier)
Acute onset, vomiting, salivation, abdominal pain,
ataxia, seizures, agitation, restlessness, pacing,
hyperactivity, disorientation
Chapter 58 | Metaldehyde 641
Table 58-1
Differential Diagnoses of Metaldehyde Poisoning—cont'd
Toxicant
Common Clinical Signs
Organochlorine insecticides
Acute onset, hypersalivation, tremors, hyperactiv-
(e.g., DDT, lindane)
ity, ataxia, circling, hyperthermia, clonic-tonic
seizures potentially evoked by external stimuli
Organophosphorus and
 Acute onset, acetylcholinesterase depression (blood
carbamate insecticides
and brain), nicotinic, muscarinic and central
nervous system signs
Penitrem A (moldy walnuts
Acute onset, frequent defecation and urination.
and dairy products) and
muscle tremors, ataxia, polypnea, hyperthermia,
roquefortine (blue cheese
seizures (potentially evoked by external stimuli)
and decaying organic matter)
 Pyrethrin and pyrethroid
Acute onset, hypersalivation, anorexia, vomiting,
insecticides
ataxia, depression, muscle tremors, weakness,
dyspnea, seizures, temporary blindness
Sodium chloride (e.g., table salt,
Acute onset, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, ataxia,
play dough)
tremors, seizures, coma, dehydration, hyperther-
mia, tachypnea, tachycardia, blindness
Sodium fluoroacetate
Acute onset, vomiting, diarrhea, frequent urination,
(compound 1080)
restlessness, pulmonary edema, hyperirritability,
running fits, opisthotonos, paddling, tonic-clonic
seizures
Strychnine (rodenticide)
 Acute onset, muscle tremors, extensor rigidity, hyper-
esthesia, opisthotonos, sawhorse stance (tetany),
 seizures (potentially evoked by external stimuli)
Xylitol (in chewing gum, breath
Acute onset, vomiting, signs secondary to hypogly-
mints, dental products, etc.)
cemia (weakness, depression, ataxia, tremors,
collapse, seizures)
Zinc phosphide (rodenticide)
Acute onset, anorexia, vomiting, weakness, lethargy.
tachypnea, pulmonary edema, recumbency, hyper
esthesia, running fits, seizures
References
1. Kitchell RL, Schubert TA, Mull RL, et al: Palatability studies of snail and slug poison baits, using dogs,
JAm Vet Med A ssoc 173(1):85-90, 1978.
2. Firth AMI: Treatment of snailbait toxicity in dogs: literature review, Vet Emerg Crit Care 2(1):25-30, 1992.
3. Shintani S, Goto K,Endo Y,etal: Adsorption effects ofactivated charcoalon metaldehydetoxicity in rats,
Vet Hum Toxicol 41:15-18, 1999.
 4. Pet Poison Helpline. Unpublished data. Pet Poison Helpline and SafetyCallInternational, PLLC, Bloom-
ington, MN. Accessed January 4, 2011.
 5. Hatch RC: Poisons causing nervous stimulation or depression. In Booth NH, McDonald LE, editors:
Veterinary pharmacologyand therapeuticsAmes,IA,1988IowaStateUniversityPress.
6. Booze TF, Oehme FW : An investigation of metaldehyde and acetaldehyde toxicities in dogs, Fund App!
Toxicol6:440-446, 1986.
7. von Burg R, Stout T: Toxicology update-metaldehyde, I Appl Toxicol 11(5):377-378, 1991.
8. Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances (RTECS): Computerized database, Cincinnati OH,
1991, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.
9. Keller KH, Shimizu G, Walter FG, et al: Acetaldehyde analysis in severe metaldehyde poisoning, Vet
Hum Toxicol 33:374, 1991.
10.S
Sparks SE, Quistad GB, Cole LM, et al: Metaldehyde molluscicide action in mice: distribution, metabo-
lism, and possible relation to GABAergic system, Pest Biochem Physiol 55:226-236, 1996.
dehyde toxicity, Vet Hum Toxicol 38(6):454-456, 1996.
642SECTION4SpecificToxicants
12. Moody IP, Inglis FG: Persistence of metaldehyde during acute molluscicide poisoning, Hum Exp Toxicol
11:361-362, 1992.
13. Zaleska MM, Gessner PK: Metabolism of [4C] paraldehyde in mice in-vivo, generation and trapping of
acetaldehyde, I Pharm Exp Ther 224(3):614-619, 1983.
14. Homeida AM, Cook RG: Pharmacologic aspects of metaldehyde poisoning in mice, J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 5:77-81, 1982.
15. Homeida AM, Cook RG: Anticonvulsant activity of diazepam and clonidine on metaldehyde-induced
seizures in mice: effects on brain gamma-amino butyric acid concentration and monoamino oxidase
activity, I Vet Pharmacol Ther 5:187-190, 1982.
16. Kilian M, Frey HH: Central monoamines and convulsive thresholds in mice and rats, Neuropharmacol
ogy 12:681-692, 1973.
17. Morgan RV: Heat prostration. In Morgan RV, editor: Handbook of small animal practice, New York,
1998, Churchill Livingstone.
18. Richardson JA, Welch SL, Gwaltney-Brant SM, et al: Metaldehyde toxicoses in dogs, Compend Contt
Educ Vet 25(5):376-380, 2003.
19. Yas-Natan E, Segev G, Aroch I: Clinical, neurological and clinicopathological signs, treatment and out-
come of metaldehyde intoxication in 18 dogs, I Small A nim Pract 48:438-443, 2007.
 20. Firth AM: Treatment of snail bait toxicity in dogs: retrospective study of 56 cases, I Vet Emerg Crit Care
2(1):31-36, 1992.
21. Bishop CH: Blindness associated with metaldehyde poisoning, Vet Rec 96:438, 1975.
22. Jacquier C: Guerison de deux chats intoxiques au meta, Arch Tierheilk 120:47-50, 1978.
 23. Cavalheiro EA, Leite IP, Bortolotto ZA, et al: Long-term effects of pilocarpine in rats: structural damage
of the brain triggers kindling and spontaneous recurrent seizures, Epilesia 32:778-782, 1991.
 24. Stafstrom CE, Thompson JL, Holmes GL:Kainic acid seizures in the developing brain: status epilepticus
and spontaneous recurrent seizures, Brain Res 65:227-236, 1992
 25. Wallace RH, Marini C,Petrou S,et al: Mutant GABA(a) receptor gamma2-subunit in childhood absence
epilepsy and febrile seizures, Nat Genet 28:49-52, 2001.
26. Jull P, Risio LD, Horton C,et al: Effect of prolonged status epilepticus as a result of intoxication on epi-
leptogenesis in a UK canine population, Vet Rec 169:361-364, 2011.
 27. Zimmermann R, Hulsmeyer VI, Sauter-Louis C,et al: Status epilepticus and epileptic seizures in dogs,
I Vet Intern Med 23:970-976, 2009.
 28. Maddy KT: Poisonings of dogs with metaldehyde in snail and slug poison bait, Calf Vet 29(4):24-25,
1975.
 29. Verschuuren HG, Kroes R, Den Tonkelaar EM, et al: Long-term toxicity and reproduction studies with
metaldehyde in rats, Toxicology 4:97-115, 1975.
CHAPTER
Methanol
59
Karyn Bischoff, DVM, MS, DABVT
·Methanol (rmethyl alcohol) is found in windshield washer fluid, gasoline
antifreeze, rubbing alcohol, Sterno, model airplane fuel, and paint remover. It is
also used as an industrial solvent.
·Methanol toxicosis in most domestic animals is not as severe as in primates, and
blindness does not occur.
 Clinical signs include CNs depression and behavioral abnormalities
Treatment is mainly symptomatic and supportive. Therapy using fomepizole
or ethanol is unlikely to be of benefit and could be harmful in most veterinary
patients, with the exception of primates.
ethanol is commonly found in automotive windshield washer fluid, some gasoline
additives, and other solvents and household products. Although methanol causes
severe acidosis and blindness in humans, other primates, and a few laboratory animals,
clinical signs in most domestic animals are less severe and are similar to ethanol toxicosis.
Sources
Methanol, or methyl alcohol, is a colorless, nearly flavorless solvent with a specifc grav-
ity of approximately 0.80 at 0° C. Methanol is found in automotive products, including
windshield washer fluid, gasoline antifreeze, and alternative fuels. It is a common industrial
solvent and is sometimes present in household products such as paint removers, Sterno,
model airplane fuel, and rubbing alcohol.
Toxic Dose
The toxicity of methanol to humans and other primates is well known, but it is considerably less
toxic to other mammalian species.12 Lethal human toxicosis has been reported at doses as low
as 0.1 mL/kg.? However, the toxic oral dose for methanol in dogs is much higher: approximately
twice that of ethanol.4 The oral median lethal dose (LDso) of methanol in dogs is reported to
 be between 5 and 11.25 mL/kg.14 Methanol toxicosis in mammals other than primates is due
to direct central nervous system (CNS) depressant ffcts and is similar to ethanol toxicosis.4
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Toxicity
Methanol is rapidly absorbed from the digestive tract.l15 Toxic dermal and inhalation expo-
sures have been reported in humans.6 It is believed that half of the dose of methanol is
eliminated by the lungs in dogs. A small amount is eliminated unchanged by the kidneys.7
The rest is metabolized.
643
644SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
Methanol is oxidized in the liver to formaldehyde.' The enzyme responsible for this pro-
mates, and a catalase peroxidase complex predominates in rodents, humans, and possibly
some other species.13.4.9 Formaldehyde is rapidly oxidized to formic acid by formaldehyde
dehydrogenase.4 Formic acid is responsible for the delayed clinical signs of methanol toxi-
cosis in humans and other primates.234.6.8.9 Formic acid causes acidosis directly and indi-
rectly in primates through cytochrome C oxidase inhibition, which interferes with aerobic
metabolism.3.8-12 Inhibition of mitochondrial cytochrome is also responsible for the CNS
effects.3 Formic acid is metabolized relatively rapidly to carbon dioxide and water by an
enzyme system that depends on tetrahydrofolate in most domestic species, but this enzyme
system is deficient in humans and some primates.4 Toxicity of methanol is enhanced in folic
acid-deficient animals.4
clinical Signs
Clinical signs of methanol toxicosis in dogs and other nonprimates are similar to those of
ethanol toxicosis. CNS depression, possibly narcosis, and behavioral changes are the domi-
nant signs. Ihe depressive effects usually last <12 hours and have no residual effects. Metha-
nol is teratogenic in laboratory rodents, causing impairment of neural tube closure.9.13
 The first stage of methanol toxicosis in primates is a brief period of CNS depression or
inebriation, similar to the narcotic effects seen in other species. Primates then undergo a
latent period of 12 or more hours, during which formic acid accumulates to high concen-
trations in the circulation. Ihe second stage is marked by more severe CNS signs and the
beginning of visual disturbances.41ll Primates are the only mammals known to accumu-
aa aaea trssie and o usau goua ae pie  una a
pupillary light reflexes and retinal and optic disk edema are common in methanol-intox-
au t'se anduou u paidan uaaq iou aanr mq sau pue sun pa
nervous and ocular effects associated with formic acid in humans are irreversible in one
tenth to one third of affected patients.36
Minimum Database and Confirmatory Tests
No consistent clinical pathology findings have been reported in nonprimate mammals
exposed to methanol. The osmolal gap can be elevated early, but it decreases as the metha-
 nol is metabolized.3.6 Primates in the second phase of methanol toxicosis have an increased
anion gap and severe metabolic acidosis due to formic acid accumulation.3.6
 Diagnosis of methanol poisoning in small animals is based on clinical signs and a his-
tory of exposure. Methanol concentrations in blood can be determined by gas chromatog-
raphy if required.
Treatment
Treatment of methanol toxicosis in humans is similar to treatment of ethylene glycol toxi-
cosis, and includes antidotal use of fomepizole or ethanol and correction of acidosis.l3.12
Folinic acid is a reduced form of folic acid that is rapidly converted to bioactive folate and is
used during treatment of methanol toxicosis to enhance formic acid metabolism in humans.12
Hemodialysis is also used to rermove methanol and formic acid from the circulation.3.6.12
Treatment of methanol toxicosis in nonprimates is based on detoxification and symp-
tomatic therapy. Dermal exposure should be treated with a mild detergent bath. Activated
charcoal and cathartic treatment are unlikely to be helpful because of the rapid uptake of
methanol from the gastrointestinal tract.6.12 Correct dehydration and any electrolyte abnor-
malities is a necessity. Except in primates, there is no evidence that fomepizole or ethanol
administration is beneficial in methanol toxicosis. Ethanol treatment would likely cause
Chapter 59 | Methanol 645
Prognosis
on the extent of CNS depression. The prognosis in primates is much more guarded, with
human mortality rates reported over 10%.15
Gross and Histologic Lesions
There are no specific lesions associated with methanol poisoning in nonprimate mammals.
Changes reported in humans who died from methanol toxicosis include retinal and optic
 though the optic nerve and other areas of the brain also can be affected.15.17
Differential Diagnoses
Some toxicants that could mimic this clinical presentation include ethanol, ivermectin and
other macrolide antiparasitic agents, ethylene glycol, propylene glycol, diethylene glycol,
2-butoxyethanol, isopropanol, sedatives and tranquilizers, marijuana, xylitol, and amitraz.
References
1. Valentine W M: Short-chain alcohols, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20(2):515-523, 1990.
2. Eells JT: Methanol-induced visual toxicity in the rat, J Pharmacol Exp Ther 257(1):56-63, 1991.
3. Jammalanadaka D, Raissi S: Ethylene glycol, methanol, and isopropyl alcohol intoxication, A m J Med Sct
339(3):276-281, 2010.
4. Wimer WW, Russell JA, Kaplan HL: Alcohol toxicology, Park Ridge, NJ, 1983, Noyes Data Corp.
5. Herd-Kuenzi LA: Methanol intoxication in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 183(8):882-883, 1983.
6. Kraut JA,Kurtz I:Toxic alcohol ingestions: clinical features, diagnosis, and management, Clin I Am Soc
Nephrol 3(1):208-225, 2008.
7. Lund A: Metabolism of methanol and formic acid in dogs, Acta Pharmaco? 4:108-121, 1948.
8. Sullivan-Mee M, Solis K: Methanol-induced vision loss, / Am Optom Assoc 69(1):57-65, 1998.
9. Dorman DC, Dye JA, Nassise MP, et al: Acute methanol toxicity in minipigs, Fund Appl Toxicol
20(3):341-347, 1993.
10. Jacobsen D, Bredesen JE, Eide I,et al: Anion and osmolal gaps in the diagnosis of methanol and ethylene
gycol poisoning, Ata Med Scand 212(1-2):17-20, 1982.
11. McMartin KE, Ambre LJ, Tephly TR: Methanol poisoning in human subjects: role of formic acid accu-
mulation in the metabolic acidosis, Am I Med 68(3):414-418, 1980.
12. Barcelous DG, Bond GR,Krenzelok EP,et al: American Academy of Clinical Toxicology practice guide-
lines on the treatment of methanol poisoning, Clin Toxicol 40(4):415-446, 2002.
13. Medinsky MA, Domman DC: Recent developments in methanol toxicity, Toxicol Lett 82/83:707 -711, 1995.
14. Roe O: Species differences in methanol poisoning, Crit Rev Toxicol 10(4):275-286, 1982.
15. Ley CO, Gali FG: Parkinsonian syndrome after methanol intoxication, Eur Neurol 22(6):405-409, 1983.
16. Andresen H, Schmoldt H, Matschke J, et al: Fatal methanol intoxication with different survival times-
morphological findings and postmortem methanol distribution, Forensic Sci Internat 179(2-3):206-210,
2008.
17. Karayel F, Turan AA, Sav A, et al: Methanol intoxication: pathological changes of the central nervous
systern (17 cases), Am I Forensic Med Pathol 1(1):34-36, 2010.
CHAPTER
Methylxanthines:
60
Caffeine, Theobromine.
Theophylline
Linda K. Dolder, DVM
· Dogs are most commonly poisoned by ingestion of chocolate, caffeine and
weight loss tablets, and cacao bean rmulch.
· Clinical signs observed include acute onset of CNS excitation and cardiac stimulation
(e.g., vomiting, hyperactivity, excitement, trermors, seizures)
· Marked tachycardia, premature ventricular contractions, and arrhythmias are
commonly seen. Hypertension can be seen as well.
Treatment includes evacuation of the gastrointestinal tract, use of activated
charcoal, and cathartics/enemas.
· Diazepam is commonly used to control excitement and seizures.
· Propranolol (or other beta blocker) is used for tachycardia/tachyarrhythmias,
atropine for bradycardia.
affeine, theobromine, and theophylline are methylated xanthine alkaloids of plant ori-
gin commonly found in a variety of foods, beverages, human medical preparations,
and other products around the home. These closely related alkaloids share several pharma-
cologic actions, including stimulation of the central nervous system (CNS); stimulation of
cardiac muscle; relaxation of smooth muscle, most notably bronchial muscle; and diuresis
of the kidney. Toxicosis is most common in dogs ingesting concentrated sources of these
compounds, resulting in acute cardiac and CNS stimulation.
Sources
Caffeine is found in coffee (from the fruit of Coffea arabica) and tea (from the leaves of
Thea sinensis) and is an additive in many soft drinks. In addition to its use as a stimu-
lant in popular beverages, the CNS-stimulating effect of caffine is used in medications to
increase mental alertness. Human cold preparations, analgesics, and diet pills often con-
tain caffeine but can contain other stimulants (examples are ephedrine, guarana, Hoodia
gordoni, 5-hydroxytryptophan). Over-the-counter stimulant tablets can easily cause
small animal toxicosis because they often contain from 100 to 200 mg of caffeine per tablet
(Table 60-1). Caffeine poisoning has also been seen in dogs ingesting herbal medications
containing guarana.
647
648SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Table 60-1
Theobromine occurs naturally in cacao
Selected Sources of
beans (the seeds of Theobroma cacao)and in
Caffeine
chocolate candy and other products manu-
Product
Concentration
factured from these seeds.A few of the most
OTC stimulants
200 mg/tablet
concentrated sources are unsweetened
(i.e., Vivarin)
baking chocolate and cocoa, which often
Dexatrim diet
200 mg/tablet
contain more than 400 mg oftheobromine/
pill
oz. Milk chocolate usually contains from
44 to 60 mg of theobromine/oz.2 The con-
Excedrin
65 mg/tablet
Coffee beans
280-570 mg/oz
centrations of theobromine in other prod-
ucts are listed in Table 60-2. Determining
Coffee
Drip
85-80 mg/5-oz cup
the theobromine content of food products
 30-90 mg/5-oz cup
can be challenging and can change over
Instant
 2-4 mg/5-oz cup
time. There are many websites and programs
Decaffeinated
that can assist the practitioner in determin-
Tea
20-90 mg/5-oz cup
Cola soft drinks
40-60 mg/8 oz
ing the risk to pets (e.g., chocolate toxicity
Chocolate
Often contain
calculator - Veterinary Information Network,
from 2-40 mg
Hershey website, ChocToxVM Lite, Dogs
products
caffeine/oz
and Chocolate Wheel - ASPCA-APCC).
Toxicosis is often associated with the avail-
OTC, over-the-counter.
ability of chocolate products in the home,
especially at holiday times, and often occurs
in dogs consuming large amounts of choc-
Table 60-2
 Selected Sources of
olate. Dogs and other animals may also be
Theobromine
poisoned from ingesting cacao bean hulls
used as landscaping mulch or bedding.34
Concentration
Theophylline is found in tea and in
Product
(z0/8w)
human asthma medications in which it is
Cacao beans
300-1500
used as a bronchodilator. Although these
 Unsweetened
390-450
concentrated preparations may present a
baking
risk, animal poisoning with these products
chocolate
has not been commonly reported.
Cacao powder
400-737
Dark semisweet
135
Toxic Dose
chocolate
Milk chocolate
44-60
The minimum lethal dose of caffeine in the
White chocolate
0.25
dog is 140 to 150 mg/kg of body weight. Cats
Cacao bean hulls
150-255
are slightly more sensitive than dogs, with
Cacao bean mulch
56-900
the minimum lethal dose of caffeine rang-
ing from 100 to 150 mg/kg of body weight.5
Toxicosis is infrequent in cats apparently because of their more selective eating habits.
Theobromine was once used in veterinary practice as a diuretic and cardiac stimulant,
with the therapeutic dose in the dog being 20 mg/kg body weight.6 The LDso of theobro-
mine in dogs ranges from 250 to 500 mg/kg body weight and the LDso in a cat is 200 mg/kg.5
Consequently a 10-kg dog could be poisoned by consuming 2.25 oz of baking chocolate or
20 oz of milk chocolate.7 Dogs can readily eat a toxic dose of chocolate.
Toxicokinetics
sau n o re u sa as ad saa pe nsa ae paqosqe aib s a
it is distributed throughout the organ systems in proportion to body water. Caffeine
crosses the blood-brain barrier and into the placenta and the mammary gland. It is rapidly
metabolized by the liver where microsomal enzymes promote the metabolism of caffeine
by N-demethylation and phase I conjugation reactions. There is evidence that methylxan-
thines are excreted in the bile and then undergo enterohepatic recirculation.7 About 10% of
Chapter 60 I Methylxanthines: Caffeine, Theobromine, Theophylline 649
caffeine is excreted unchanged in the urine. Ihe serum half-life is reported to be 4.5 hours
in the dog.8
ug auqau qiosqe sinou ot Aaexdde ie siaaat userd yad auea sao
chocolate more slowly; however, in humans peak plasma levels from the same amount of
theobromine occur at 3 hours.? As with caffeine, theobromine is metabolized primarily in
the liver. Dogs excrete theobromine slowly; the plasma half-life is about 17.5 hours, a fact
that likely predisposes dogs to theobromine poisoning.& In comparison the theobromine
plasma half-life in humans is between 6 and 10 hours.10
 Peak serum levels of theophylline are reached at 1.5 hours in the dog and cat after inges-
tion of regular-release formulations, and the elimination half-life is 5.7 hours in the dog
and 7.8 hours in the cat. Absorption may be much slower with ingestion of a sustained-
release product, where peak levels may not be reached until 16 hours. Most theophylline
elimination depends on hepatic microsomal enzyme metabolism, and only 10% of a dose is
excreted unchanged in the urine."
Mechanism of Toxicity
 The methylxanthines inhibit cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases and antagonize receptor-
mediated actions of adenosine. These combined actions result in cerebral cortical stimula-
tion and seizures, myocardial contraction, smooth muscle relaxation, and diuresis. Caffeine
appears to stimulate the synthesis and release of catecholamines, especially norepinephrine.
Caffeine stimulates the medullary, respiratory, vasomotor, and vagal centers and the spinal
cord at high doses. In comparison with theobromine, caffeine has less effect on cardiac
stimulation and coronary artery dilation. However, skeletal muscles are stimulated more by
caffeine than by other methylxanthines.12
Clinical Signs and Minimum Database
Caffeine
Onset of clinical signs usually occurs within 2 hours of ingestion; however, with ingestion
tivity, abnormal behavior, and vomiting may be noted. As the syndrome rapidly progresses
panting, strong forceful tachycardia, weakness, ataxia, diuresis, diarrhea, hyperexcitability,
hyperactivity, muscle tremors, and clonic convulsions are common. Heart rate is often more
than 200 beats per minute, and premature ventricular contractions can be noted as well as
develops. Hypertension, cyanosis, and coma can precede death from cardiac arrhythmias
or respiratory failure.
Theobromine
Initial signs can be seen 2 to 4 hours after ingestion and include restlessness, panting, vom-
iting, urinary incontinence (diuresis), and perhaps diarrhea. Polydipsia may be seen as well.
Patients are often brought for treatment in an excited state with marked tachycardia and
hyperthermia. As the syndrome advances during the next few hours, cardiac arrhythmias,
premature ventricular contractions, muscular rigidity, hyperreflexia, ataxia, terminal sei-
zures, and coma are observed. Death may occur 18 to 24 hours after the onset from cardiac
arrhythmias or respiratory failure or may be delayed for several days and then occur sud-
denly from cardiac failure.12 In the author's experience, death caused by respiratory failure
is quite uncommon in chocolate toxicosis.
Theophylline
Nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, mild metabolic acidosis, leukocytosis, and tachycardia
characterize acute theophylline overdose. Serum potassium, phosphorus, and magnesium
concentrations are low, and serum glucose is commonly elevated. In human subjects, severe
650SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
effects, such as seizures, hypotension, or hemodynamically significant dysrhythmias, gener-
ally do not develop unless serum concentrations reach 80 to 100 mg/L.
Confirmatory Tests
Much of the time confirmatory tests will not be done because the history, along with clini-
cal signs, is suffcient to treat the problem and the patient. However, laboratory tests can
 be run to help confirm an exposure, if desired. Elevated levels of the methylxanthines may
 be detected in the stomach contents, plasma, serum, urine, and liver of poisoned animals.
Theobromine may be detected in serum for 3to 4 days after the initial exposure. These com-
pounds are stable in plasma or serum for 7 days at room temperature, 14 days if refrigerated
and 4 months if frozen.? In one report, a serum concentration of 133 mg of theobromine/L
was associated with death in a dog;? however, another dog ingesting cacao powder had a
theobromine concentration of 250 mg/L in the blood and 140 mg/L in the serum.13 The liver
of a dog dying from acute caffeine poisoning contained more than 5000 mg of caffeine/kg
on a wet weight basis.14
Treatment
The goals of treatment for methylxanthine poisoning include (1) sustain basic life support,
(2) decrease further absorption, (3) increase excretion of absorbed alkaloid, and (4) provide
symptomatic relief of seizures, respiratory difficulties, and cardiac dysfunction. There is no
specific antidote for methylxanthine poisoning.
Apresumptive diagnosis is based onahistory of exposure and clinical signs. One should
aeouo "da) amsoxa go junoe an panss inpod jo a au auraap o an
toxicity calculator, Choc ToxVM Lite, etc.), and the time since ingestion.
 Initially the respiratory and cardiac function of the patient should be assessed. If neces-
sary the airway should be secured, and artificial respiration and/or intravenous (IV) fluids
for shock should be provided.
If exposure has occurred within the past 2 hours and clinical signs are not present,
emetics should be used to induce the patient to vomit. Typically, preexisting heart prob-
lems, a history of seizures, or a recent abdominal surgery may alter whether emesis is rec-
ommended. With chocolate ingestions, sometimes this time frame for induction can be
extended out to approximately 6 hours postexposure, because the chocolate can form a ball
in the stomach and it may still be possible to expel the chocolate at that late time. Apomor-
phine will generally produce vomiting quickly (can administer IV, IM, subconjunctival).
Plumb references 0.03 mg/kg IV or 0.04 mg/kg IM or crush a portion of a tablet and dis-
solve with a few drops of water and administer into the conjunctival sac (after vomiting
occurs, rinse sac of the apomorphine).15 Another option is 3% hydrogen peroxide at 1 mL/
pound per os and may repeat once after 15 minutes if vomiting has not occurred.5 In dogs,
bloody vormiting can ocur with use of hydrogen peroxide, though in the author's expe-
rience it is uncommon. In cats, bloody vomiting is more common and the author does
not typically recommend the use of hydrogen peroxide. If, however, the patient is showing
marked excitement, is comatose, or has lost the postural or gag reflex, appropriate sedation,
placement of an endotracheal tube (with the cuff inflated), and gastric lavage could be used
to remove the stomach contents.
The decision to administer activated charcoal is based on the initial dose of methylxan-
thines ingested, the effectiveness of emesis, and what the likely remaining methylxanthine
dose risk is to the patient. Activated charcoal (with sorbitol) is often used to prevent further
absorption and increase excretion. A low-end therapeutic dose of activated charcoal PO
or by stomach tube should be given. Electrolyte abnormalities can occur and monitoring
should be done before and after activated charcoal dosing. If hypernatremia is seen, symp-
tomatic measures are indicated (warm water enemas, low sodium containing fluids, etc.).
 In some very high methylxanthine exposures, repeated activated charcoal doses may be
considered.
Chapter 60 I Methylxanthines: Caffeine, Theobromine, Theophylline 651
IV fluid therapy is often used to maintain adequate renal perfusion, increase urinary
ferred to prevent reabsorption of the alkaloids and their metabolites from the urine across the
 bladder wall. There may be an advantage in catheterizing the urinary bladder in some cases.
Additional treatment of the methylxanthine-poisoned animal is symptomatic. Tremors
can be managed with methocarbamol or diazepam. Seizures and hyperactivity can gener-
ally be controlled with diazepam (0.5 to 2 mg/kg IV) or midazolam (0.1 to 0.25 mg/kg IV,
 IM). However, when seizures are not responsive to diazepam, phenobarbital or other gen-
eral anesthetics/anticonvulsants may be used.
Heart function should be monitored closely. Tachycardia is commonly treated with pro-
an oral beta-blocker, such as metoprolol (Lopressor or Betaloc), at an initial dose of 0.1 mg/kg
repeated three times a day; this dose can be increased up to 0.3 mg/kg if needed. Frequent
premature ventricular contractions in dogs should be treated with lidocaine (without epi-
nephrine) at an initial loading dose of up to 2 mg/kg IV followed by maintenance with an
IV drip at a 0.025 to 0.08 mg/kg per minute infusion rate. Lidocaine should be used with
caution in cats as they are reportedly sensitive to the CNS effects.'5 For the few patients
that have bradycardia, atropine at 0.022 to 0.044 mg/kg given IV, IM, or subcutaneously is
recommended.'5 (Caution: reflex bradycardia can be the result of hypertension. In this situ-
ation, the hypertension should be managed.)
Prognosis
Signs of methylxanthine poisoning usually last for 12 to 36 hours, depending on the dose of
the alkaloid and the effectiveness of decontamination and treatment measures. If effective
oral decontamination is obtained within 2 to 4 hours of ingestion, the prognosis is generally
favorable. However, in animals presenting with severe seizures or arrhythmias, the progno-
sis should be guarded.16
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Gross examination at necropsy may reveal evidence of chocolate material or stimulant
poisoning, although gastroenteritis and congestion of organs has been reported. A severely
irritated gastric mucosa was reported in one fatally poisoned dog.12 A degenerative fibrotic
cardiomyopathy was found in the right atrial appendage of several dogs chronically dosed
with theobromine.17
Differential Diagnoses
Conditions that produce the acute onset of strong cardiac and/or CNS stimulation may
such as strychnine, nicotine, amphetamine, or 4-aminopyridine. Chlorinated hydrocar-
bons, organophosphorus, and carbamate anticholinesterase pesticides; metaldehyde; trem-
as LSD or cocaine; fluoroacetate; or cardioactive glycosides, such as those from Digitalis
spp. or Nerium oleander; as well as guarana, 5-hydroxytryptophan, phenylpropanolamine,
pseudephedrine, and phenylephrine should also be considered.
References
1. Ooms TG, Khan SA, Means C: Suspected caffeine and ephedrine toxicosis resulting from ingestion of an
herbal supplement containing guarana and ma huang in dogs: 47 cases (1997-1999), I Am Vet Med Assoc
218(2):225-229, 2001.
2. Zoumas BL, Kreiser WR, Martin RA: Theobromine and caffeine content of chocolate products, I Food
Sci 45:314, 1980.
652SECTION4SpecificToxicants
3. Drolet R, Arendt TD, Stowe CMI: Cacao bean shell poisoning in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 185(8):902,
1984.
4. Hovda LR, Kingston RL: Cacao bean mulch poisoning in dogs (abstract), Vet Hum Toxicol 36(4):357,
1994.
5. Abretson JC: Methylxanthines. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2004,
Mosby.
 6. Jones LM: Veterinary pharmacology and therapeutics, Ames, IA, 1953, Iowa State College Press.
Urbana, IL, 1994, University of Illinois.
8. Hooser SB: VR Beasley: Methylxanthine poisoning (chocolate and caffeine toxicosis). In Kirk RW, edj-
tor: Current veterinary therapy IX: small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1986, Saunders.
 9. Glauberg A, Blumenthal HP: Chocolate poisoning in the dog, I A m Anim Hosp Assoc 19:246-248, 1983.
theobromine disposition, Clin Pharmacol Ther 37:1415-1424, 1985.
11. Papich MG: Bronchodilator therapy. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy IX: small animat
practice, Philadelphia, 1986, Saunders.
12. Iserson KV: Caffeine and nicotine. In Haddad LM, Winchester JF, editors: Clinical management of pot-
soning and drug overdose, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1990, Saunders.
13. Strachan ER, Bennett A: Theobromine poisoning in dogs, Vet Rec 134(11):284, 1994.
14. Vig MM, Dalvi RR, Kufuor-Mensah E: Acute caffine poisoning in a dog, Compend Contin Educ Pract
Vet 8(2):82-83, 1986.
15. Plumb DC, editor: Veterinary drug handbook,ed 6, Ames, IA, 2008, Wiley-Blackwell.
16. Osweiler GD: Chocolate toxicity. In Tilly LP, Smith FWK, editors: The 5 minute veterinary consult
canine and feline, Baltimore, 1997, Williams & Wilkins.
17. Gans JH, Korson R, Cater MR,et al: Effects of short-term and long-term theobromine administration to
male dogs, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol53:481, 1980.
18. Serafin WE: In Hardman JG, Limbird LE, editors: Goodman and Giiman' the pharmacological basis of
therapeutics, ed 9, New York, 1995, McGraw-Hill.
CHAPTER
Metronidazole
61
Kevin T. Fitzgerald, PhD, DVM, DABVP
·Metronidazole is widely used in humans and animals in the treatment
of protozoal and bacterial infections and is also employed as a therapy for
inflammatory bowel disease
· Metronidazole toxicity is closely dose related, following inappropriately high
doses, inappropriate long-term administration, or both.
· In dogs dosages as low as 60 mg/kg/day may cause neurotoxicity in 3 to 14
days. Cats can show clinical signs with 58 mg/kg given daily. The half-life of
rmetronidazole in most mamrmalian plasma is approximately & hours.
 Clinical signs include anorexia, vomiting, ataxia, trermors, peripheral neuropathies,
and seizures.
 Treatment for metronidazole poisoning includes withdrawal of the drug and
supportive therapy. Diazeparm has shown promise in hastening recovery.
 Prognosis is excellent in rmetronidazole intoxication, with most animals showing 
complete recovery in 14 days.
Sources
The 1950s saw the discovery and biologic testing of the 5-nitroimidazole group. These
drugs have both antiprotozoal and antibacterial effects. In 1959 the effective trichomona-
cidal activity of 1-(β-hydroxy-ethyl) 2-methyl-5-nitroimidazole (metronidazole) was first
reported. Before this time female trichomoniasis patients were treated with a variety of
topical drugs with limited success. A large number of infections became chronic and per-
sisted. Males did not respond at all to topical treatment. Metronidazole proved effective for
these infections and also in treating infections of the protozoan Giardia.
Currently, metronidazole is widely employed in humans and animals for the treatment
of trichomoniasis, giardiasis, amebiasis, and obligate anaerobic bacteria, including Bacte-
roides species.2 Metronidazole has also been shown to be beneficial in the management of
inflammatory bowel disease.3
Toxic Dose
Metronidazole is available as 250- and 500-mg tablets, various strengths of compounded
suspensions (some flavored), and as a 5-mg/mL injectable. Ihe canine recommended oral
dosage for anaerobic bacterial infections is 15 mg/kg every 12 hours.4 Recommendations
for the same microbial infections in cats is a once-daily oral treatment of 10 to 25 mg/kg.
The canine dosage considered effective for infections with the protozoan Giardia is 12 to
15 mg/kg given orally every 12 hours.4 The recommended oral dosage for feline giardial
infections is 17 mg/kg (approximately one third of a tablet per cat) once a day.4 The maxi-
mum daily dosage that is thought to be safe for any species should not exceed 50 mg/kg/day.
653
654SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
There is a strong correlation between dosage and duration of treatment and the time of
onset and severity of clinical signs associated with toxicity. In dogs, doses as low as 60 mg/
kg have been shown to cause neurotoxicity when treated for as short a time as 3 to 14 days.5.6
 Doses of more than 250 mg/kg will show acute signs of poisoning shortly after metronida-
zole therapy is initiated. Most dogs showing neurotoxic signs receive lower dosages over a
prolonged period. Cats have shown clinical signs of metronidazole poisoning at doses of 111
Although fetal abnormalities have not been documented at suggested dosages, metroni-
dazole has been shown to be mutagenic and genotoxic in some species.2? As a result, metro-
nidazole is not recommended for use during pregnancy. Metronidazole is contraindicated
in animals with liver disease, active neurologic diseases, and blood dyscrasias.
Finally, the drug is bitter tasting. Tablets broken up or crushed are generally found to be
unpalatable (particularly by cats). As mentioned, various flavored suspensions (citrus, fish,
and chicken) are presently available through compounding pharmacies. Unfortunately, use
of such flavored medications may actually increase the incidence of poisonings in children
ax usii-isead e yo rn cn isaau Auaisu Au aa asnaq seue pe
that contains a potentially dangerous drug.
Toxicokinetics
Metronidazole is synthesized as pale yellow crystals that are slightly soluble in water and
alcohol. Metronidazole is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, and high concentra-
tions of the drug are achieved in plasma, bone, peripheral tissue, and in the central nervous
-de st esed ue iso ui aziun jo a- a r'(n) aiss
mately 8 hours. The half-life in dogs is 3 to 13 hours. Metronidazole can be found in high
concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid.l
Metronidazole is metabolized in the liver by oxidation and by glucuronide formation. It
is excreted primarily by the kidneys. Urine of some patients may show reddish-brown color
caused by water-soluble pigments derived from the drug. During exposure low concentra-
tions of metronidazole can be found in both saliva and milk.10
Mechanism of Toxicity
The mechanism of action of metronidazole follows four successive steps.12 First, it enters
susceptible organisms (anaerobic or microaerophilic microorganisms and hypoxic or anoxic
cells). Next, the nitro group of metronidazole is reduced by electron transport proteins and
deprives the cell of required reduction mechanisms. Following this reductive activation step,
the reduced intermediate molecule binds to microbial deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), caus-
ing loss of helical structure, strand breakage, and impairment of normal DNA function. Cell
death is caused by this disruption and degradation of the cellular DNA and by the release
of inactive and nonfunctional cellular end products. Ihrough these mechanisms metroni-
dazole kills Giardia, trichomonads, various amebae, and the anaerobic bacteria Bacteroi-
des. Ihe exact nature of metronidazole poisoning remains unknown; however, the types of
adverse neurologic effects caused implicate central vestibular and cerebellar dysfunction.
Finally, metronidazole can produce reactions similar to disulfiram (Antabuse) if given
simultaneously with ethanol. This drug or chemical interaction results in production of
acetaldehyde in the blood. Acetaldehyde is hepatotoxic, cardiotoxic, and arrhythmogenic.
Toxic reactions and fatalities have been reported as a result of metronidazole or ethanol
cClinical Signs
Clinical signs of metronidazole toxicity typically follow prolonged exposure or administra-
tion of inappropriately high doses. Clinical signs and their severity may vary and reflect the
dose given and duration of treatment.
Chapter 6l | Metronidazole 655
glossitis.5.6 The more severe neurotoxic effects observed include ataxia, hypermetric gait,
inability to walk, peripheral neuropathies, spasms of lumbar and hind limb musculature,
dorsiflexion of the tail, vertical nystagmus, head tilt, and seizures.5.6 Many species show neu-
tropenia. Metronidazole causes a sensory axonopathy characterized by sensory ataxia as a
result of large fiber proprioceptive involvement. Neurologic effects in cats tend to implicate
forebrain dysfunction (disorientation and seizures) rather than brainstem involvement.78
Minimum Database and Confirmatory Tests
The most definitive test in diagnosing metronidazole toxicity is establishing blood concen-
trations for the drug. This is not commonly done in private practice, but the test is available
to practitioners. Most diagnoses of metronidazole toxicity rely heavily on a good history,
appearance of clinical signs compatible with the syndrome, absence of other diseases, and
subsequent recovery of the animal after withdrawal of the drug. Early determination of any
and all medications the animal has been given recently is essential. Generally, clinicians
learn from the owner about current or recent use of metronidazole. However, further diag-
nostics, such as complete blood count, biochemical profile, and neurologic imaging such as
computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), may be necessary to rule out
other conditions, such as infection, metabolic disease, other toxins, neurologic disorders, or
neoplasia, which may resemble metronidazole poisoning.
Treatment
Treatment for metronidazole toxicity is generally supportive and includes discontinuation
of the drug. Most animals show total recovery within 14 days of withdrawal of metronida-
zole therapy.2 Ataxic animals must be protected from falling, and anorexic animals must be
identifed and supported appropriately.
Diazepam has been reported as a potentially successful treatment for the neurologic
signs associated with metronidazole poisoning. Diazepam is believed to exert its reversal
of adverse effects by facilitation of the potent inhibitory neurotransmitter -aminobutyric
acid (GABA) within the vestibular system. When diazepam was given (0.43 mg/kg orally
every 8 hours for 3 days), signs of response decreased in 4.25 days in untreated dogs to 13.4
hours in treated dogs.5 In addition, recovery was reduced from 11 days to 38.8 hours in
sis. Metronidazole treatment should be discontinued immediately if any signs of ataxia or
neurologic involvement are observed.
Prevention and Prognosis
Most animals demonstrating signs of intoxication from metronidazole treatment either
received an inappropriate dose, were given the drug for an inappropriate duration, or both.
Subsequently, the single most important safeguard is always double checking dosages and
length of recommended treatment. Furthermore, certain animals—those with existing
cerebral disease, hepatic disorders, pregnant females, and those with preexisting blood dys-
crasias—should not be given metronidazole. Pleasantly flavored, compounded medications
should always be stored safely out of the reach of animals and children. Outdated or unused
medication should never be flushed down the toilet and never discarded in trash cans
where inquisitive animals may blunder across them. Out-of-date drugs can be returned to
pharmacies in some states where they can be destroyed or disposed of properly and not end
up in the environment.
The prognosis for most metronidazole poisonings is excellent. Most animals will recover
totally within 2 weeks. However, those suffering from severe CNS signs may take months to
recover. Animals exhibiting clinical signs when exposed to dosages greater than 250 mg/kg
may show permanent CNS signs; however, this is rare. Withdrawal of the drug, supportive
656SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
care, and the possible use of diazepam will all facilitate the recovery of the animal. A reason-
able prognostic indicator is the dosage the animal received, the duration of the treatment
provided, and the severity of the clinical signs observed.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Histologic examination of brains of dogs with metronidazole poisoning reveals Purkinje cell
loss and axonal degeneration of vestibular tracts.6 Brains of mice treated with toxic metro-
nidazole doses show cerebellar Purkinje cell loss and degenerative changes in the vestibular,
cochlear, deep cerebellar, and olivary nuclei and in the rostral colliculi.2 These nuclei and
their associated tracts help to regulate fine motor control, equilibrium, and hearing. Also,
these nuclei, especially Purkinje cells, exert an inhibitory influence on postsynaptic recep-
tors. The major neurotransmitter of these nuclei is GABA, which is the principal inhibi-
tory neurotransmitter of the CNS. Activation of the GABA receptor by GABA or by GABA
mimetics (such as diazepam) increases chloride conduction of the postsynaptic membrane,
resulting in hyperpolarization. Metronidazole either inhibits the effects of GABA or actively
destroys the cells releasing the neurotransmitter. Whatever the mechanism, it is the GABA-
dependent interactions of the cerebellar and central vestibular system that are affected.
Vestibulocerebellar axonal generation with no loss of neurons has been reported in dogs
given 63 mg/kg/day.6 Although these dogs recovered, the potential exists for permanent,
subclinical damage to neurons and to white matter tracts in all cases of metronidazole poi-
soning. As a result of such permanent changes, animals previously poisoned with metro-
nidazole may be more susceptible to subsequent toxic exposures. Consequently, it is not
paeanl aq siosixoi aozepiuanau jo suis umos auaeu auo seue je papuaoa
with the drug again.
Metronidazole toxicity appears to be a result of a predominantly sensory axonopathy
caused by large fber proprioceptive involvement.13.14 The tracts darmaged by metronida-
the GABA receptor at the postsynaptic membrane results in the ataxia, tremors, seizures,
and neurotoxic effects seen with metronidazole intoxication. It is believed that diazepam
acts to offset the poisoning by competing with metronidazole for receptor sites or directly
stimulating GABA synthesis. Diazepam thus causes an inhibitory effect on excitatory neu-
rons and counters the adverse actions of metronidazole. Typically, MRI abnormalities seen
with metronidazole-induced toxicity are symmetrical and bilateral and involve cerebellar
dentate nuclei, midbrain, dorsal pons (vestibular nucleus, abducens nucleus, and superior
olivary nucleus), the splenium of the corpus callosum, and dorsal medulla. MRI abnormali-
ties have been postulated to be reversible mitochondrial dysfunction in susceptible animals.
Finally, advanced imaging studies have revealed that, except for the most severe cases of
metronidazole toxicity, drug-induced CNS histologic changes resolve following discontinu-
ation of therapy.15.1s MRI performed at the time of clinical signs of poisoning and followed
up by imaging studies performed 6 and 8 weeks after the initial episode demonstrated that
changes first seen in the cerebellum and deep cerebellar nuclei (areas most sensitive to
metronidazole toxicity and the most specific imaging manifestations of such poisoning)
are nearly completely resolved 6 to 8 weeks after cessation of the drug.1 MRI represents yet
another way to diagnose metronidazole toxicity and provides an indication of the severity
of the poisoning episode.20
Differential Diagnoses
Correct diagnosis of metronidazole intoxication may be overlooked if current, recent, or acci-
dental administration of the drug is not uncovered or suspected Differential diagnoses and
potential look-alikes include metabolic disease, infectious disorders of the CNS, neoplasia, and
other subacute or chronic neuropathies (e.g., arsenic, ethanol, mercury, organophosphate- and
carbamate acetylcholinesterase-inhibiting pesticides). Metronidazole must remain within the
clinician's index of suspicion whenever an animal demonstrates sensory ataxia.
Chapter 61 | Metronidazole 657
References
1. Cosar C, Julou L: Activite de 1-(hydroxy-2-ethyl) 1-methyl-2-nitro-5 imidazole vis-a-vis des infections
experimentales a Trichomonas vaginalis, Ann Instit Pasteur (Paris) 96:238-241, 1959.
2.E
 El-Nahas AF, El-Ashmawy IM: Reproductive and cytogenetic toxicity of Metronidazole in male mice,
Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 94:226-231, 2004.
3. Tams TR: Feline inflammatory bowel disease. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy IX, Phila-
delphia, 1986, WB Saunders.
4. Papich MG: Handbook of veterinary drugs, Philadelphia, 2002, WB Saunders.
5. Evans J, et al: Diazepam as a treatment for metronidazole toxicosis in dogs: a retrospective study of 21
cases, I Vet Int Med 17:304-310, 2003.
6. Dow SW , LeCouteur RA, Poss ML,et al: Central nervous system toxicosis associated with metronidazole
treatment of dogs: five cases (1984-1987), I Am Vet Med Assoc 195:365-368, 1989.
 7. Saxon B, Magne M: Reversible central nervous system toxicosis in three cats, Prog Vet Neurol 4:25-27,
1993.
8. Caylor KB, Cassimatis MK: Metronidazole neurotoxicosis in two cats, J Am An Hosp Assoc 37:258-262,
2001.
 9. Bost RG: Metronidazole: mammalian mutagenicity. In Finegold JA, McFazeam JA, Roe FIC, editors
Metronidazole: proceedings of the international metronidazole conference,Montreal,Quebec, 1977,
Canada.
10. Rollo IM: Miscellaneous drugs used in treatment of protozoal infections. In Gilman AG, Goodman LS,
Gilman A,editors: The pharmacological basis of therapeutics, New York, 1980, Macmillan Press.
11. Finegold SM: Metronidazole, A nn Intern Med 93:585-587, 1980.
and practice of infectious disease,ed 3, New York, 1990, Churchill Livingstone.
13. Gallagher EJ: Neurologic principles. In Goldfrank LR,et al: Toxicologic emergencies, New York, 2002,
McGraw-Hill.
14. Bradley WG, Karlsson IJ, Russo ICG: Metronidazole neuropathy, BMJ 2:610-611, 1977.
15. Heaney CJ, Campeau NG, Lindell EP: MR imaging and diffusion-weighted imaging changes in metroni-
dazole (flagyl)-induced cerebellar toxicity, Am I Neuroradiol 24:1615-1617, 2003.
16. Woodruff BK, Wijdicks EF, Marshall WF: Reversible metronidazole-induced lesions of the cereballar
dentate nuclei, N Eng I Med346:68-69, 2002.
17. Cecil KM, Halsted MJ, Schapiro M,et al: Reversible MR imaging and MR spectroscopy in abnormalities
in association with metronidazole therapy, I Comput Assist Tomoyr 26:948-951, 2002.
18. Kim E, Noi DG, Kim EY, et al: MR imaging of metronidazole-induced encephalopathy: lesion distribu-
tion and diffusion-weighted imaging findings, AJNR Am I Neuroradiol 28:1652-1658, 2007.
19. Puri V: Metronidazole neurotoxicity, Neurol India 59:4-5, 2011.
20. Park K, Chung JM, Kim JY: Metronidazole toxicity: sequential neuroaxis involvement, Neurol India
59:104107, 2011.
CHAPTER
Mushrooms
62
Birgit Puschner, DVM, PhD, DABVT
· Mushroom ingestion can occur all year round, but is most frequently
 reported in September and October.
The northeastern United States has the highest incidence of reported
mushroom poisonings in small animals, followed by the western, rmidwestern,
southeastern, and southwestern U.s. regions.
Signs of gastrointestinal distress (e.g. vomiting, diarrhea) are commonly
observed following ingestion of rnushroorns.
Mushrooms can contain a variety of potential toxic substances, capable of
affecting the gastrointestinal tract, nervous system, kidney, and liver.
Treatrment is prirmarily supportive, aimed at decontaminating the patient and
addressing the clinical problems.
Treatment options following exposures to unknown mushrooms in
asymptormatic patients should include consideration of: complete blood work
assessments, decontarmination procedures, and gastrointestinal and liver
protectants.
· A confirmed diagnosis can be difficult, and an accurate diagnosis relies very
 heavily on toxicologic analysis and accurate identification of a wellpreserved
mushroom specimen.
Reporting Mushroom Poisonings
Mushroom poisoning is a real problem in veterinary clinical toxicology because of the high
mortality rate. The most reported and serious mushroom intoxications in small animals are
caused by amanitin-containing mushrooms. Until recently, diagnosis of mushroom poi-
soning was primarily presumptive, and many cases were likely undiagnosed. But recent
advancements in toxicologic analysis allow for a more comprehensive approach to reach a
confirmed diagnosis of mushroom poisoning. This will, over time, help to assess the true
frequency of mushroom poisonings in small animals. In addition, practitioners are encour-
aged to report animal mushroom poisonings to the North American Mycological Asso-
ciation's Mushroom Poisoning Case Registry at http:/www.namyco.org/toxicology/index
html. Reports may be submitted online (http:// namyco.org/toxicology/email_report_form
html) or by mail. The website provides a list of volunteers willing to assist in the identifica-
tion of mushrooms (http://www.namyco.org/toxicology/identifiers.html). The volunteers
are listed by region. Alternatively, many universities and colleges have lists of mycologists
available for assistance.
659
660SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Collection and Identification
There is no simple test to diffrentiate a poisonous from a nonpoisonous mushroom. If a
mushroom ingestion is suspected, thoroughly examine the area where the animal may have
been exposed and collect any mushrooms in the area for identification by an experienced
mycologist. Place the mushrooms in paper, not plastic, bags. The most useful collection
technique is to place the mushroom with cap gills down on a white sheet of paper that has
the site and conditions (e.g., moisture, nearby trees, and substrate) written on it, and then
difficult to obtain a complete sample set of mushrooms if the animal has ranged over a wide
area. Accurate mushroom identification requires consultation with an experienced mycolo
gist. Several important factors aid in this process.
Mushrooms grow on various substrates. A mushroom growing on wood is lignicolous,
one on the ground is terrestrial, one on another plant or animal is parasitic, and one grow-
ing on dung is coprophilous. Knowledge of the substrate helps identify the mushroom and,
if possible, this information should be provided along with the collected specimen. Certain
mushrooms are commonly associated with specific trees. Knowledge of the surrounding
trees can aid in identification ( Table 62-1).
Mushroom spores are also important for identification. The spores are microscopic
and may only be seen as a mass. Before dispersal they may be located under the mush-
room cap in structures that look like a pincushion, sponge, or gills. Some mushrooms do
not have a specific cap and bear their seeds inside the mushroom (Figure 62-1). As the
mushroom matures and the spores ripen, the surface of the mushroom opens and the
spores are blown out, providing a "pufball" Some spores are borne on cap wrinkles or
folds, as in a false morel mushroom (Color Plate 62-1), or inside pits, like in the true morel
mushroom (Color Plate 62-2).
A spore print is also very helpful in identification. A spore print consists of a mass
of spores deposited on white paper. The color of the spores is specific to a species and is
usually listed in most field guides used for identification. Ihe spore print is obtained by
cutting the stem of the mushroom of just under the cap. The mushroom is placed with
the gills or spongy area down on a white sheet of paper. The spores fall out of the cap
and onto the paper to provide the color. Colors include brown, reddish brown, chocolate
brown, white, cream, black, purple-black, green, and yellow. Ihe pattern of the spore
print is not important because it is determined by the shape of a single mushroom and
may vary considerably. If the mushroom has greatly raised edges or is irregular in shape,
a bowl may be placed over the mushroom to get a better concentration of spores (Color
Plate 62-3).
 Mushrooms have many different shapes. Structures with some importance in poison-
ing cases are the annulus, universal veil remnants, volva, and stem and cap shape (Color
 Plate 62-4). Imagine a mushroom as it comes out of the ground as an egg. As it increases
in size, it splits horizontally. In some types of mushrooms the universal veil, or "egg shell,"
that once was the outer surface breaks into smaller and smaller pieces, often sticking to
the surface of the actual mushroom growing underneath. These spots, or splotches, are
called universal veil rernants and are helpful in identifying various species, many of which
are poisonous. Part of that outside veil may separate from the cap and stay with the stem
to form a ring on the stem, called an annulus. The annulus may be large, small, fleshy, or
threadlike, characteristics that are useful for identification. Ihe shape of the stipe (stem)
is important; it may be equal in size from top to bottom, wider at the top, or wider at the
bottom. The stem base may be directly attached to the mycelium and substrate or enclosed
  s     s      e 
a poisonous Armanifa mushroom looks a lot like an edible white button mushroom Agari-
cus, but the Armanita ocreata has white spores, a volva, and an annulus (Color Plate 62-5),
whereas the Agaricus has brown spores and an annulus only. The overall color of the mush-
room is of some importance, but considerable biologic variation makes identification by
color alone unreliable.
Chapter 62 | Mushrooms 661
Table 62-1
Mushrooms Found in Association with Various Trees
Tree Type
Mushroom
Alder
Clitocybe candicans
Clitocybe clavipes
Inocybe dulcamara
Balsam
Gyromitra esculenta
Beech
Amanita citrina
Amanita gemmata
Amanita phalloides
Boletus satanas
Clitocybe candicans
Clitocybe clavipes
Cortinarius orellanus
Cortinarius splendens
Entoloma sinuatum
Inocybe patouillardii
Ramaria formosa
Birch
Amanita citrina
Amanita muscaria
Clitocybe candicans
Clitocybe clavipes
Inocybe dulcamara
Lactarius helvus
Lactarius forminosus
Leccinum atrostipitatum
Leccinum scabrum
Chestnut
Amanita verna
Omphalotus olearius
Fir
Amanita pantherina
Gyromitra esculenta
Inocybe spp.
Suillus lakei
Hornbeam
Amanita phalloides
Cortinarius orellanus
Entoloma sinuatum
Larch
Clitocybe candicans
Fuscoboletinus spectabilis
Suillus cavipes
Madrona
Amanita calyptroderma
Amanita muscaria
Oak
Agaricus xanthodermus
Amanita citrina
Amanita phalloides
Amanita verna
Boletus satanas
Clitocybe clavipes
Cortinarius orellanus
Entoloma sinuatum
Inocybe dulcamara
Lepiota spp.
Omphalotus olearius
Olive
Omphalotus olearius
Pine
Amanita citrina
Continued
662SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Table 62-l
Mushrooms Found in Association with Various
Trees-cont'd
Tree Type
Mushroom
Amanita muscaria
Amanita gemmata
Amanita pantherina
Amanita regalis
Armillaria mellea
Armillaria ponderosa
Armillaria zelleri
Chroogomphus vinicolor
Clitocybe candicans
Cortinarius orellanus
Hebelomacrustuliniforme
Inocybe dulcamara
Lactarius helvus
Ramaria pallida
Suillus brevipes
Suillus granulatus
Suillus luteus
Suillus pictus
Poplar (aspen)
Hebeloma crustuliniforme
Flammulina velutipes
Lactarius controversus
Leccinum insigne
Pleurotus ostreatus
Spruce
Amanita citrina
Amanita regalis
Amanita virosa
Armillaria mellea
Gyromitra esculenta
Lactarius helvus
Ramaria pallida
Data from references 70-73.
A u isan sun a (-i a) s uxn na a  ss
specific clinical presentations, whereas others have nonspecific presentations. Some toxins
are destroyed by cooking, whereas others are stable, which is less of a criterion for small
animals ingesting raw mushrooms in the environment.
Hepatotoxic Mushrooms
Death in amanitin intoxications is caused by acute liver failure. Amanitin-containing
mushrooms are commonly found in North America and have resulted in deaths in dogs
and cats.l2 Arnanita phalloides is also known as the death cap or death angel and is common
in the San Francisco Bay area, the Pacific Northwest, and the northeast. It is often com-
monly found in association with oaks, birch, and pine during wet and warm years. A. phal-
loides has a yellowish-green, smooth cap; white gils; a white veil around the upper part of
the stem; and a white volva. Amanifa ocreafa (see Color Plate 62-5), also called Western
North American destroying angel, is generally found in sandy soils along the Pacific coast
from Baja California, Mexico, to Washington. A. ocreata has a white or cream-colored
Chapter 62| Mushrooms 663
Figure 62-l Mushroom spore surface inside puffball (Calvatia booniana).
cap; white, short gills; a partial veil on a white stem; and a white, thin cup around the base
amanitins. Although infrequently reported, Galerina aufumnalis, Lepiota josserandii, and
Aranita bisporigera have been associated with fatalities in animals and humans in North
America.3
Amanitins
The principal toxins of hepatotoxic mushrooms are amanitins. Although other toxic cyclo-
peptides (amatoxins, virotoxins) and proteins (lectins, toxovirin) have been identified,
they are unlikely to contribute to poisonings.4 Amanitins are bicyclic octapeptides that
are not degraded under acidic conditions in the stomach or by heat and thus pose a risk to
animals and humans in fresh and cooked form. Once ingested, amanitins are taken up by
cells in the gastrointestinal tract where first damaging effects can occur.26 Bioavailability
is considered greatest in humans, followed by dogs, rabbits, and mice. Cats have died from
amanitin poisoning. Amanitins must be suffciently absorbed to result in poisoning. After
reaching the systemic circulation, an organic anion-transporting polypeptide, OATP1B3,
mediates the amanitin uptake into hepatocytes.7 Amanitins well-known toxic mechanism
of action is the binding to and inhibition of nuclear ribonucleic acid polymerase.& The
effects are particularly severe in hepatocytes, but can also be seen in the intestinal mucosa
 and proximal renal tubules. Alpha-amanitin also induces p53-dependent apoptosis, a
excrete aminitins via the bile, but only to a small extent. More than 85% of amanitins are
 eliminated via the kidneys, where subsequent reabsorption by renal tubules can lead to
acute tubular necrosis.
Toxicity and Clinical Signs
The oral LDso for methyl-y-amanitin in dogs is 0.5 mg/kg body weight. In humans, the esti-
mated oral LDso of α-amanitin is 0.1 mg/kg body weight. A single A. phalloides or A. ocreata
can contain lethal concentrations of amanitins.
It is absolutely critical that the veterinarian closely monitor liver and kidney functions
in any animal with possible mushroom exposure to diagnose potentially lethal amanitin
intoxication in a timely manner. Following exposure to amanitin-containing mushrooms.
the poisoned animal will not develop clinical signs of illness for approximately 6 to 12 hours.
664SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Table 62-2
 Mushrooms by Toxin Type
Toxin
Mushroom
Amanitins (cyclopeptides)-
Amanita bisporigera
 Hepatic, gastrointestinal, and renal effects
Amanita ocreata
Amanita phalloides
Amanita verna
Amanita virosa
Conocybe flaris
Galerina autumnalis
Galerina marginata
Galerina venenata
Pholiotina filaris
Coprine type—rare
Boletus luridus
Clitocybe clavipes
Coprinus atramentarius
Coprinus micaceus
Gastrointestinal irritants
Amanita xanthodermus
Amanita volvata
Boletus eastwoodiae
Boletus pulcherrimus
Boletus satanas
Cantharellus floccosus
Chlorophylum molybdites
Entoloma lividum
Hebeloma crustuliniforme
Gomphus floccosus
Laccaria amethystina
Lactarius spp.
Lampteromyces japonicus
Omphalotus illudens
Psalliota campestris
Ramaria formosa
Rhodophyllus rhodopolinus
Rhodophyllus sinuatus
Russula emetica
Scleroderma spp.
Suillus fomentosus
Tricholoma species
Tylopilus felleus
Hydrazines-
Gyromitra ambigua
Gastrointestinal, CNS, and RBC effects
Gyromitra esculenta
Gyromitra gigas
Gyromitra fastigiata
Gyromitra infula
Helvella crispa
Helvella lacunosa
Helvella elastica
Peziza badia
Ibotenic acid and muscimol-
Amanita muscaria
Gastrointestinal and CNS effects
Amanita pantherina
Amanita strobiliformis
Amanita gemmata
Amanita smithiana
Tricholoma muscarium
Chapter 62 | Mushrooms 665
Table 62-2
Mushrooms by Toxin Type-cont'd
Toxin
Mushroom
 Psilocybin and psilocin-
Conocybe spp.
CNS effects
Gymnopilus spp.
Panaeolus spp.
Psilocybe spp.(many)
Stropharia spp.
Muscarine-
Boletus spp.
Cholinergic (peripheral) effects
Clitocybe dealbata
Chlorophyllum molybdites
Clitocybe rivulosa
Clitcybe illudens
Clitocybe truncicola
Entoloma rhodopolium
Inocybe lacera
Inocybe fastigiata
Inocybe patouillardii
Inocybe phaeocomis
Inocybe pudica
Mycena pura
Rubinoboletus spp.
Nephrotoxic
Cortinarius orellanus
Cortinarius speciosissimus
Amanita smithiana
Data from references 67, 68, 70, and 72.
CNS, Central nervous system; RBC, red blood cell.
This latency period oftenleads to a delay of diagnostic and therapeutic intervention, because
the owners do not consult their veterinarian until clinical signs develop. Approximately 6
to 24 hours after exposure, poisoned animals develop abdominal pain, vomiting, and diar-
rhea. After a 12- to 24-hour period of "false recovery,” the terminal phase of fulminant liver
failure develops. At that time, significant elevations in serum aspartate aminotransferase,
alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, and bilirubin are found. Hepatic failure will
become evident clinically and biochemically approximately 36 to 48 hours after exposure.
Hepatocellular damage will lead to coagulopathy, encephalopathy, and renal or multiorgan 
failure at several days after exposure. Severe hypoglycemia as a result of breakdown of liver
glycogen can also occur and is associated with mortality. Of dogs given lethal doses of ama-
Puppies, or dogs that ingest significant amounts of amanitins, can die of amanitin poisoning
within 24 hours but most animals die within several days of exposure.
is ou aq a an sa as un z'r'esou sau a u sa
gross abnormalities. Histopathologic findings include submassive to massive acute hepatic
necrosis, renal proximal tubular epithelial necrosis, and foci of necrosis and inflammation
in the gastrointestinal tract.
Confirmatory Testing
Detection of amanitins in biologic specimens is confirmatory, and these tests are now more
commonly available at veterinary toxicology laboratories. Rapid confirmation of amanitins
in suspect exposures assists in the early recognition of exposure, whereas a negative result
can prevent unnecessary hospitalization.
666SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
If vomitus, gastric lavage fluid, or a suspect mushroom were saved, identification can be
useful, and analysis for amanitins or deoxyribonucleic acid can be performed to determine
[usausel aaes pue azaa ol isaq s! llases iadsns aue u ert'suuee o asuasaid a
contents for further analysis.
 Amanitins are detectable in serum and urine well before any clinical sign of poisoning.
whereas routine laboratory tests such as complete blood cell count and serum chemistry
profiles are unremarkable until liver or kidney damage has occurred. As amanitins are pri-
marily excreted unchanged in urine, urine is a very useful specimen antemortem. In fact,
urine is of diagnostic value for up to 72 hours following exposure.3 In contrast, serum is
only diagnostically useful for a maximum of 24 hours after exposure because of the short
plasma half-life. Plasma and urine amanitin concentrations do not seem to correlate with
the clinical severity or outcome.
Postmortem, liver and kidney samples, along with bile, are suitable for confrmatory
testing. Human cases showed that kidney amanitin concentrations are higher than con-
is best to save both liver and kidney, frozen, for toxicologic analysis. Limited data showed
that analysis of formalin-fixed tissues for amanitin is unreliable; only positive results can be
interpreted; negative results cannot rule out amanitin exposure.
the Meixner or Wieland test, has limitations and cannot be relied on to identify amanitin-
containing mushrooms.14
Treatrment
 Despite the evaluation of numerous therapeutic approaches for animals and humans, the
 pe se a u aiadsa ri si su e jo a ao
dren.5.16 The essential components of treatment are close monitoring, fluid replacement,
and supportive care, as there is no specific antidote. However, optimal management of
animals after ingestion of amanitin-containing mushrooms is still not determined as data
on the clinical effcacy of these recommended treatment approaches do not exist. Rapid
administration of activated charcoal at 1 g/kg orally followed by two to three doses at
0.5 g/kg within 24 hours of exposure is recommended. In the past multidose activated char-
coal over the course of several days was recommended, but recent data no longer supports
this practice.3 At approximately 16 to 24 hours after exposure, intestinal reuptake of ama-
nitins is negligible, making long-term administration of activated charcoal unnecessary. At
that time (16 to 24 hours after exposure), amanitin concentrations have also dropped below
levels considered appropriate to initiate hemodialysis or hemoperfusion.
Because most animals with amanitin poisoning are not presented until 1 to 2 days after
ingestion, therapeutic options are clearly limited at that time. Dextrose, vitamin K, blood
 products, and intravenous (IV) fluids must be considered as beneficial therapeutic agents
for case management.
 Hepatocyte protection with antioxidants and silymarin must also be considered. Silib-
inin (Legalon-SIL), the main component of silymarin (milk thistle extract) is an approved
and effective treatment for amanitin poisoning in humans that reduces the uptake of
amanitins into hepatocytes.17.18 Previous studies in beagles showed that IV administration
of 50 mg/kg silibinin at 5 and 24 hours after intoxication with A. phalloides was effective
and prevented death.19 Commercially available silibinin preparations for small animals
vary in content and bioavailability, are often combined with S-adenosylmethionine, and
are marketed as nutritional supplements to maintain and improve liver function. Clinical
studies documenting the effectiveness of these available supplements in dogs and cats
with amanitin poisoning do not exist. Penicillin antibiotics are also effective in reducing
ss se as  sa  se n
istration of 1000 mg/kg (1 million units = 1000 mg Pen GK) of penicillin G at 5 hours
after dogs were exposed to A. phalloides was protective. Although there is no conclusive
data on the efficacy of N-acetylcysteine in amanitin-poisoned animals, it is known to be
useful in other toxicant-induced hepatic injury, such as acetaminophen poisoning. Thus
Chapter 62 | Mushrooms667
administration of N-acetylcysteine should be considered. Other compounds that may
boost the hepatocyte antioxidant capacities include vitamin E, vitamin C, and zinc. How-
ever, whether any of these antioxidants provide rapid hepatoprotection, as necessary in
an acute, severe amanitin intoxication, is unknown. Draining the gallbladder (via needle)
was a procedure recently employed in an Amanita phalloides intoxicated dog — more
studies need to be done to see how efficacious this treatment really is.
Animal Exposures
 an sis   's's u aan aq sr d u
lethargy and vomiting, followed by rapid development of neurologic signs. There are
numerous publications describing the clinical, clinicopathologic, and postmortem findings
of amanitin poisoning in dogs.1.2z26 There is limited information on the incidents of amani-
         s   
more Armanita verna mushrooms. Ihe horse had meningioangiomatosis, which may have
altered its normal eating behavior.27 Amanitin intoxication was confirmed in two calves
that were found dead without showing any signs of illness prior to death.28 It is inportant
to note that the limited availability of confirmatory testing for amanitins has likely led to
severe underreporting of amanitin poisonings in animals. In fact, because animals are at
much greater risk to be exposed to toxic mushrooms than humans, mushroom poisonings
in animals are likely to be quite common.
Differential Diagnoses
Other toxicants that can results in gastrointestinal upset and hepatic failure in dogs and
cats include microcystins in cyanobacteria, cocklebur, cycad palm, aflatoxin, xylitol
tory and geographic environment of the animal can help to eliminate most of the toxicant
differentials on the list.
Neurotoxic Mushrooms
Hydrazines
Hydrazines are found in false morels, such as Gyrormitra gigas, Gyrormitra esculenta,
Gyromitra infula,Verpa bohemica,Helvella elastica,Helvella crispa,and Helvella lacunosa;
in common brown cup fungi such as the Peziza badia; and likely in several other genera.
False morels are often found under conifers, aspens, and sometimes around melting snow
banks. Gyromitrin (acetaldehyde N-methyl N-formylhydrazone), the compound found in
these mushrooms, is a direct irritant to the gastrointestinal tract. Gyromitrin hydrolysis
in the stomach yields N-methyl-formylhydrazine, which is further metabolized to mono-
methylhydrazine and reactive metabolites. Monomethylhydrazine is partly responsible for
the neurologic signs as it decreases pyridoxal 5-phosphate with subsequent decrease in
Y-aminobutyric acid (GABA) synthesis.29 Pyridoxine is not the total answer because injec-
tion of pyridoxine will terminate some but not all of the clinical signs. Oxidative damage
 to the red blood cells and liver and kidney injury can develop from reactive metabolites.
Toxicity and Clinical Signs
Hydrazines are degraded by heat and drying. Although humans usually eat cooked mush-
rooms, animals eat them raw and can be seriously poisoned by hydrazine-containing
mushrooms. The concentration of gyromitrin varies by species, locality, and season, lead-
ing to considerable variation in the degree of poisoning. In humans, the estimated lethal
dose of gyromitrin is 20 to 50 mg/kg for adults and 10 to 30 mg/kg for children. There is
no data on the toxicity for small animals.
Within 6 to 12 hours of gyromitrin exposure, vomiting and watery diarrhea will begin.
In humans, a delayed onset of clinical signs of 53 hours after exposure has been reported.
The gastrointestinal effects may last up to 2 days in humans. Tremors, weakness, and ataxia
668SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
may also develop inthe frst 2 days. In serious yet rare cases, jaundice, methemoglobinemia,
hemolysis, seizures, and coma (including hepatic coma) can develop several days after
exposure.30 Hemolysis may lead to rhabdomyolysis and impaired renal function (rare).
Diagnostic Workup
As with all suspect mushroom intoxications, identification by an experienced mycologist
to accurately differentiate between false morels (toxic) and edible, true morels. Ihe analysis
of suspect poisonous mushrooms or biologic specimens from animals for gyromitrin or its
toxic metabolites is not routinely available.31 Thus diagnosis is primarily based on mush-
room identification and compatible clinical signs and laboratory abnormalities.
Treatment
Gyromitrin poisoning is managed with supportive care. Decontamination is only
recommended if animals present within a few hours after exposure. As most animals
have vomited voluntarily, inducing emesis is generally not necessary. Activated charcoal
may be given, and the animals must be carefully monitored for electrolyte imbalances,
hemolysis, and methemoglobinemia. Pyridoxine is recommended for serious neurologic
signs in humans, such as seizures and coma, but there are inadequate clinical efficacy
data in animals. In humans, 25 mg/kg of pyridoxine is given intravenously over 15 to 30
Pmous sasop aliel siuated ueuny ut paimsoo seq Aioixoi auixopiiad sy Xep/a oz oi si
affect several organ systems, blood glucose, methemoglobin levels, free hemoglobin, and
hepatic and renal function should be monitored. If serious liver injury has occurred,
 therapeutic measures require the same supportive treatment as described for amanitin
poisoning.
Animal Exposures
There are very few reports of gyromitrin poisoning in the veterinary literature. A
10-week-old dog who chewed on a G. esculenta started to vomit 2 to 3 hours later.32
The dog became lethargic and comatose 6 hours after exposure and died 30 minutes
later. Histopathologic findings included renal tubulonephrosis, periascinar hepatic
degeneration, and erythrophagocytosis. Rabbits poisoned with gyromitrin developed
anorexia, depression, tonic-clonic seizures, hemoglobinuria, proteinuria, bilirubinuria,
decreased urinary pH, and weight loss. Postmortem findings were fatty degeneration of
 the liver and tubular degenerative changes.33
Isoxazoles-Ibotenic Acid and Muscimol
Toxins that have psychotropic properties have been found in Armanita muscaria, Ama-
nita pantherina, Amanita strobiliformis, Amanita gemmata, Amanita smithiana, and
Tricholoma muscariurm. Many of these mushrooms are cosmopolitan species found all
over the United States. Some are used intentionally for recreational purposes. The major
isoxazoles are ibotenic acid and muscimol, which are not degraded by heat. Decarboxyl-
ation of ibotenic acid during drying or digestion can result in the formation of muscimol.
Their neurotoxic properties are based on their ability to cross the blood-brain barrier and
N-methyl-D-aspartate glutamate receptors, whereas muscimol is a potent GABAA agonist.
When muscimol is given to rats, it affects brain serotonin, noradrenalin, and dopamine
levels in a manner similar to that characteristic of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), psilo-
cybin, and mescaline.35
Toxicity and Clinical Signs
Although concentrations of ibotenic acid and muscimol can vary considerably, ingestion
 of a single A. pantheriana can be deadly to a dog.23 In humans, a minimum of 6 mg of
Chapter 62 | Mushrooms 669
muscimol and 30 mg of ibotenic acid result in psychoactive effects.36 A. rmuscaria (Color
) aisaae e s ie ni go (am   ot  u (- ae
to 70 g) fruiting body of A. muscaria can result in intoxication. The reported oral LDso in
mice is 22 mg/kg for muscimol and 38 mg/kg for ibotenic acid.
 In humans, isoxazole poisoning has been termed the “pantherine-muscaria” syn-
 drome. First clinical signs of poisoning appear 30 to 90 minutes after ingestion and
include unsteadiness, drowsiness, confusion, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hallucina-
tions, disorientation in place and time, euphoria or depression, anxiety, and mystical
experiences. In severe cases, coma, convulsions, and respiratory and circulatory collapse
may occur; fatalities can occur but are not common. In most cases there is complete
recovery within 24 hours.37 Anticholinergic effects, such as mydriasis and cycloplegia
and cats, clinical signs of poisoning are disorientation, opisthotonus, paresis, seizures,
paddling, che wing movements, miosis, vestibular signs, respiratory depression, and in
severe cases coma.
Diagnostic Workup
To confirm an isoxazole intoxication, analysis of urine for muscimol and ibotenic acid is
possible.38 The toxins can be detected in urine within 1 hour of ingestion. Severity of intoxi-
cation does not correlate with urinary isoxazole alkaloid levels, as peak clinical signs may
still be present more than 5 hours after peak excretion. Accurate mushroom identification
can aid in the diagnosis.
Treatment
There is no specific antidote or treatment. Atropine is not recommended. Care is generally
symptomatic and supportive, and special attention must be given to medications for seizure
control. As mentioned, muscimol interferes with GABAA receptors. Therefore administra-
tion of GABAergic anticonvulsants such as diazepam, midazolam, or phenobarbital may
result in respiratory or central nervous system depression, and thus the lowest effective
therapeutic dose should be used. Extremely drowsy or unconscious animals have to be
carefully monitored and treated accordingly. In small animals, recoveries are expected
within 24 hours of ingestion and accompanying therapeutic measures including mechani-
cal ventilation during periods of respiratory depression.
Animal Exposures
In the North American Mycological Associations Case Registry, the most commonly
ingested mushrooms by dogs were the A. muscaria and A. pantherina species. The signs
and hyperactivity.
A severe but transient neurologic disorder similar to that seen in humans following
ingestion of A. pantherina developed in three 5-week-old German shepherd puppies. The
exact quantity of poison ingested was unknown.*? A. muscaria ingestion resulted in vomit-
ing, diarrhea, panting, labored breathing, muscle spasms, collapse, cyanosis, and eventual
death in a 4-year-old, 13-kg male Cairn terrier. The dog aspirated vomitus on the way to the
veterinarian, which probably contributed to its death.2i A. pantherina was ingested by a 6-kg
female West Highland white terrier of unknown age.40 The animal vomited several pieces
of mushroom later and was taken to the veterinarian, where the presenting signs included
tachycardia, muscular trermors, incoordination, head pressing, and salivation. Hypercal-
cemia was the only notable serum chemistry abnormality. A dog consumed mushrooms
(thought to be A. rmuscaria or A pantherina) and became disoriented. This dog habitually
ingested mushrooms.41
 A cat ingested a small piece of an owner's stash of dried A. ruscaria and vomited but
eventually recovered.42 Cats with A. panfherina exposures developed sedation within 15 to
30 minutes of exposure, followed by a 4-hour period of muscle spasms and excitement.43
They fully recovered within a day.
670 SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Psilocin and Psilocybin
Mushrooms in the psilocin and psilocybin group are often referred to as "magic mush-
rooms" because of their psychoactive properties. The psychotropic compounds have been
isolated from four genera of mushrooms: Psilocybe, Panaeolus, Gymnopilus, and Conocybe;
some Stropharia species in the United States are also thought to contain this toxin. They are
common in the northwestern and southeastern United States, and many are coprophilic.
The majority of mushrooms contain only psilocybin, but some, such as Psilocybe cyane-
scens, Psilocybe cubensis, and Psilocybe semilanceata, contain psilocybin and psilocin. Both
compounds are classified as schedule I drugs in the United States.
 Psilocybin and psilocin are classic 4-substituted tryptamine hallucinogens. It appears
that psilocybin acts as a prodrug as esterases rapidly convert it to its hydroxyl metabo-
lite psilocin. Psilocin is considered the major pharmacologically active compound derived
from “"magic mushrooms." Although the effect on neurotransmitter systems is not fully
understood, it is known that psilocin's structural similarity to serotonin results in stimula-
tion of serotonin receptors.44 In addition, dimethyltryptamines also have peripheral effects
 by being substrates at the plasma membrane serotonin transporter and the vesicle mono-
amine transporter.45
Toxicity and Clinical Signs
Concentrations of greater than 115 mcg/kg psilocybin result in psychological effects in
humans.46 Psychedelic effects are seen if the psilocybin dose exceeds 8 to 10 mg. Depending
on the concentrations of psilocin and psilocybin, 1 to 20 mushrooms may be required to
produce psychological effects. There is no data on toxicity for dogs or cats.
In humans, a dysphoric hallucinogenic state similar to LSD begins approximately 20
to 30 minutes after ingestion; however, onset of clinical signs may be delayed for up to
3 hours. Clinical signs include an altered state of consciousness, sweating, alterations in
mood, changes in perception of time and space, illusions, visual hallucinations, speech
alterations, compulsive movements, panic attacks, flash-backs, and acute psychoses.47
1 hour. Some nonpsychological effects, such as mydriasis (18 hours), hypertension (18
hours), and drowsiness (24 hours) may persist for longer periods. Nausea and vomiting
uos uqasosd oi annsodxa sop un sass paodan jo oz aiaixndde ui mooo
 'si 's i 1   is   
increased body temperature.48
Diagnostic Workup
 Exposure can be confirmed by detection of psilocin and psilocybin in urine, serum, or gas-
trointestinal contents. The analysis by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry is offered
identification of dried hallucinogenic mushrooms is very difficult. Thus it is especially criti-
cal to submit suspect mushrooms to an experienced mycologist for identification.
Treatment
Inducing emesis may not alter the clinical course. In addition, emetics are recommended
only in patients that are asymptomatic, with little risk for developing aspiration pneumonia,
 and that have recently ingested the mushrooms. Most cases are managed with supportive
care. Patients should be placed in a stimulus-free environment. If severe neurologic signs
occur, diazepam (0.5-1 mg/kg IV, repeat in 5 minutes if no effect) is the initial drug of
choice. Diazepam has a short duration of action ranging from 20 to 60 minutes and can
be repeated if necessary. IV fluid therapy should be instituted to maintain perfusion and to
prevent or correct dehydration.
Animal Exposures
A colt developed pyrexia, tremors of the triceps, dilated pupils, and hyperexcitabil-
ity, followed by recumbency or seminarcosis and generalized weakness. The animal was
Chapter 62 | Mushrooms 671
euthanized 48 hours later. Ihe pasture had large numbers of Psilocybe mushrooms.49 Sei-
zures developed in puppies intraperitoneally injected with 15 mg/kg of pure psilocybin.50 A
dog developed aggression, ataxia, vocalization, nystagmus, seizures, and had an increased
body termperature after ingestion of "magic mushrooms” (species unidentified).48 The dog
had an uneventful recovery on day 3.
Mushrooms Resulting In Gastrointestinal Distress
Muscarine
Mushrooms in the genera Inocybe and Clitocybe spp. contain the highest concentrations of
muscarine, but Entoloma spp., Mycena spp., Boletus spp., Rubinoboletus spp., and A. mus-
dds e u u au a su u e 
are frequently found worldwide in forested areas and grasslands.
Muscarine is thermostable and not degraded by digestive enzymes. As it is a quarter-
nary ammonium compound, it is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and does
not cross the blood-brain barrier. Thus the effects of muscarine on cholinergic receptors
are predominantly peripheral, with smooth muscles, glands, and the cardiovascular system
representing the major targets.
Toxicity and Clinical Signs
In humans, the oral lethal dose of muscarine is estimated between 40 mg and 495 mg.
Based on the muscarine concentrations of between 0.1% and 0.33% (dry weight) in Inocybe
mushrooms usually must contain a minimum of 0.01% muscarine. Therefore ingestion of
A. muscaria, which contains only approximately 0.0003% muscarine, does not lead to a
cholinergic syndrome, but can result in isoxazole poisoning.
Clinical signs of cholinergic overstimulation usually develop between 0.5 and 2 hours
e  i sd    s    
as little as 15 to 20 minutes. A delay in onset of clinical signs appears to be directly related
to the amount of mushroom ingested and its muscarine concentration. Humans with mus-
carine poisoning develop excessive perspiration, lacrimation, and salivation (so-called PSL
syndrome) within 15 to 30 minutes after ingestion. The combination of these symptoms is
diagnostic and is generally seen only with this type of mushroom poisoning.51 The patient
may also develop blurred vision, miosis, vomiting, abdominal pain, increased peristalsis,
watery diarrhea, bradycardia, lowered blood pressure, dyspnea, congested pulmonary cir-
culation, bronchorrhea, urinary incontinence, and nasal discharge. Peripheral vasodilation,
su jo suis eida doaaap soa uaas aq ose au usn pue uoisuaidar pu
overstimulation, including salivation, diarrhea, vomiting, depression, and collapse.52 The
clinical signs—salivation, lacrimation, urination, diarrhea, dyspnea, and emesis—are often
described using the acronym SLUDDE.
Diagnostic Workup
Muscarine can be detected in urine and gastrointestinal contents, but analysis is not rou-
atropine is an important diagnostic parameter.
Treatment
If the animal has not already vomited, emesis is probably indicated. Activated charcoal may
also be of some use, but, because of the rapid onset of clinical signs, decontamination is
often not feasible. Because muscarine causes increased gastric tract peristalsis and diarrhea
in many patients, administration of a cathartic is probably unnecessary. If life-threatening
cholinergic clinical signs occur, atropine should be administered. If there are no signs of
atropinization after a low-dose test dose of atropine, additional atropine may be admin
istered. The end point is not mydriasis but the cessation of respiratory secretions. IV fluid
672SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
therapy should be instituted as needed to maintain perfusion and to prevent or correct
dehydration.
Animal Exposures
A 14-year-old springer spaniel was found eating mushrooms. Coprinus micaceus, Hygrocybe
ceracea, Laccaria laccata, and Inocybe phaeocomis (containing muscarine) were found in
the gastric lavage fluid. Salivation, capillary refill time of more than 3 seconds, drowsiness,
increased intestinal activity, vomiting, diarrhea, body temperature of 36.1° C, and a heart
rate of 100 beats per minute were observed. The dog improved with symptomatic treatment
within 24 hours and was released 48 hours after exposure.52 A 10-year-old Maltese dog ate
5 to 10 Inocybe fastigiata.53 Within 1 hour, the dog developed marked salivation, frequent
vomiting, lacrimation, diarrhea, respiratory difficulty, and weakness. The dog recovered
within 48 hours after a gastric lavage was performed and atropine was given.
Other Gastrointestinal Irritants
Agaricus xanthodermus, Amanita volvata, Boletus satanas,Chlorophyllum molybdites,
Entolora lividum, Gophus floccosus,Lactarius spp.,Lampteromyces japonica,Rhodophyllus
rhodopolius, Rhodophylus sinuatus, Scleroderma spp., and Tricholoma spp. are all mushrooms
that can cause gastrointestinal irritation. This group includes a variety of mushrooms and tox-
 sis s  ad yasd i sas r a , e  l s
most of the mushirooms, the specific toxins are unknown. It is obvious that gastrointestinal
distress is a very common clinical presentation in small animals and that, in most instances,
a specific cause is not identifed. Additionally, not all of the gastrointestinal reactions are
due to mushroom toxins. Occasionally spoiled mushrooms (contaminated by bacteria) are
ingested and cause illness. When evaluating cases of gastrointestinal mushroom "poisonings,"
bacterial infections and other causes for gastrointestinal distress must be included in the list
of differential diagnoses.
 Poisonings by mushrooms of this category are rarely fatal; however, a few fatalities have
been reported in Europe. Nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea occur relatively
soon, within 15 minutes to 2 hours, after ingestion. Weakness, dizziness, paresthesia, tetany,
headache, and sweating have also been reported in humans. Some of these neurologic clini-
cal signs, such as paresthesia and tetany, maybe due to fear and hyperventilation.54 Usually
the clinical signs resolve spontaneously within a few hours, but they may last a day or two.
There are few serious sequelae. It is important to carefully evaluate the lag period between
suspected exposure to mushrooms and onset of gastrointestinal signs: onset is within min-
utes to a few hours with mushrooms in this category, whereas onset is delayed by 6 to
12 hours in potentially lethal amanitin intoxications.
Ormphaiotus iliudens is common in North America and is also known as Jack O'Lantern
mushroorm. The toxin is thought to be illuden S.ss Omphalotus olearius and Lampteromyces
spp. also contain this toxin and have been reported to cause illness. Treatment is generally
limited to rehydration and correction of any electrolyte abnormalities.
C. molybdites, commonly known as the faise parasol, is widespread and can cause signifi-
 cant nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. It is a gray-green, spored mushroom that superficially
looks like the meadow mushroom Agaricus carpestris. The toxin is unknown. Vomiting can
be extensive and hospitalization may be required for fluid and electrolyte replacement.54 A
human case of hypovolemic shock has been reported.56
The chemicals leading to gastrointestinal distress are as diverse as the mechanisms. Alba
trellus species have been shown to contain irritant monoterpenes.57 Gomphus toxicity is due
to norcaperatic acid, anaconitaseinhibitor.Hebeloma crustuliniformecontains thecytotoxic
triterpene hebelomic acid A,59 and Hebelorma vinosophylum contains various cucurbitane
triterpene glycosides.60 Laccaria amethystine contains lectins that may contribute to gastroen-
teritis in a manner similar to that seen with the lectins in castor bean intoxications.6l Russula
and Lactarius species contain marasmane or lactarane sesquiterpenes62; Laetiporus sulphu-
reus and Meripiius species contain phenolethylamines such as tyramine. It is unknown what
specific contribution all these compounds make to gastroenteritis.
Chapter 62| Mushrooms 673
Diagnostic workup
Diagnosis is essentially based on history, clinical signs, mushroom identification, and labo-
ratory abnormalities or lack thereof (i.e., no elevation in liver enzymes). Because for most
sus ien adues Ae aqissod ou si sisheue ux syoads dno st ui sus
parts of the suspect mushroom (vomitus, mushroom pieces, whole mushrooms) should be
saved and submitted for identification. This is critical in reaching a diagnosis.
Treatment
The severity of illness depends on the type of mushroom, amount ingested, and individual
sensitivity. Many cases are self-limiting and resolve without treatment. However, the need
for treatment must be made on a case-by-case basis after careful evaluation and examina-
tion. There are no specific antidotes, and treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Emesis
is generally not needed because most mushrooms in this group result in rapid onset of
vomiting. In fact, administration of antiemetics may be needed. Activated charcoal can be
considered. Administration of IV fluids is important to maintain hydration and electrolyte
full recovery is expected within a few hours to days.
Animal Exposures
Bloody vomiting developed in a cat after ingesting some mushrooms in the owner's yard.63
Several of the mushrooms were presumptively identified as a Russula species. The mush-
rooms had a shellfish odor that may have attracted the animal. The animal was examined
by a veterinarian, but no confirmed diagnosis was made.
A 1-year-old cat ingested part of an unknown species of Agaricus and developed diar-
rhea, disorientation, foaming at the mouth, and vomiting. The amount consumed was
thought to be approximately half of a cap.?l A 7-month-old pet potbellied pig ate a Sclero-
derma citrinum and died 5 hours later.64 Within 20 minutes the pig started vomiting, and
by 1 hour it was depressed, weak, recumbent, hypothermic, tachycardic, and tachypneic, in
addition to having continuous vomiting.
Nephrotoxic Mushrooms
Cortinaria spp. are commonly known as "web-caps" and are diffcult to identify; the edi-
bility of many species is unknown. Ihe presence of the nephrotoxin orellanine has been
confirmed in some Cortinarius mushrooms.6 In addition, these mushrooms also contain
cortinarin, a nephrotoxic cyclopeptide that may contribute to the nephrotoxic effects. Poi-
sonings have been reported in humans, especially in Europe, and there are no reports of
accidental poisonings in dogs or cats. Diagnosis is difficult, because clinical signs may not
appear for 2 to 20 days after ingestion, and orellanine can only be detected for approxi-
mately 24 hours after exposure.66 Onset of signs and severity of illness are dose-dependent.
Animals may exhibit anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, polydipsia, polyuria, abdominal pain,
paresthesia, depression, and renal failure. Decontamination methods are useful if the inges-
tion is recognized in the first few hours. Ihere is no specific antidote and treatment consists
of supportive care for renal failure and gastrointestinal signs. IV fluids, gastrointestinal pro-
tectants, and antiemetics may be used. In humans, chronic hemodialysis is often necessary.
period of renal failure and renal transplantation is necessary only in severe cases.
Armanita smithiana grows along the Pacific coast from British Columbia to California.
H has characteristic Amanita spp. features, such as a white cap, a veil, and a volva, and has
been mistaken for the edible matsutake mushroom ( Tricholorma magnivelare). At this time,
there are no confirmed reports in animals. Poisonings have been reported in humans and
are characterized by gastrointestinal and renal effects.67 In contrast to amanitin poisoning,
there is no liver damage with A. smifhiana intoxication. A. srmifhiana intoxication differs
from orellanine poisoning by a much shorter latency period until renal failure develops.
Typically, initial clinical signs of vomiting, nausea, abdominal pain, and diarrhea develop
674SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
approximately 5 hours after ingestion, but signs may develop earlier. Ihus A. smithuiana
Renal failure develops 1to 4 days after exposure and may require several weeks of hemodi-
alysis before recovery. The toxin is allenic norleucine and routine diagnostic testing is not
available. Thus diagnosis is based on history, clinical signs, and mycologic identification.
Treatment is focused on supportive care for renal failure and gastrointestinal signs, and a
complete recovery is expected within several days to weeks.
Animal Exposures
A cat, guinea pig, and mouse were experimentally given Cortinarius orellanus orally and
clinical signs developed similar to those seen in humans. Ihe tubular epithelium of the
kidney was the primary target.68 Sheep grazing a feld with Cortinarius speciosissimus devel-
oped severe renal damage.69
Conclusions
Today, emergency and critical care clinicians have increasing occasions to treat mushroom
poisonings. Availability of specific toxicology testing will provide much needed data on
the frequency and type of mushroom poisonings in dogs and cats. Toxicology testing will
also help establish confirmed diagnoses, which may ultimately lead to the development of
prognostic markers. There are also gaps in knowledge about the efficacy of treatment regi-
mens for mushroom poisonings in animals. Having confirmed diagnoses will allow better
There are many types of mushrooms that can be ingested by animals and there is the
 eo i ar   sis  aaas  aee r 
rooms collected from the environment or found in stomach contents by nonmycologists is
challenging. Thus it is safest to assume that any mushroom exposure is potentially toxic and
a complete clinical assessment should be performed. Particular attention must be given to
Ackowledgment
I wish to acknowledge the exceptional contribution of David Spoerke, who authored this
chapter for the previous edition of the book.
References
1. Puschner B, Rose HH, Filigenzi MS: Diagnosis of Amanita toxicosis in a dog with acute hepatic necrosis,
JVet Dtag Invest 19:312-317, 2007.
VetPathol OnlineFirst,December 19, 2011.
3. Beug M: NAMA toxicology committee report for 2009. North American mushroom poisonings,
Mclvainea 19:1-5, 2009.
4. Li C,Oberlies NH: The most widely recognized mushroom: chemistry of the genus, Amanita Life Sci
78:532-538, 2005.
5. Himmelmann A, Mang G, Schnorf-Huber S: Lethal ingestion of stored Amanita phallidesmushrooms,
Swiss Med Wkly 131:616-617, 2001.
6. Gundala S, Wells LD, Milliano MT, et al: The hepatocellular bile acid transporter Ntcp facilitates uptake
of the lethal mushroom toxin alpha-amanitin, Arch Toxicol 78:68-73, 2004.
7. Letschert K, Faulstich H, Keller D, et al: Molecular characterization and inhibition of amanitin uptake
into human hepatocytes, Toxicol Sci91:140-149, 2006.
8. Lindell TJ, Weinberg F, Morris PW, et al: Specific inhibition of nuclear RNA polymerase II by alpha-amanitin.
Science 170:447-449, 1970.
9. Arima Y, Nitta M, Kuninaka S,et al: Transcriptional blockade induces p53-dependent apoptosis associated
with translocation of p53 to mitochondria, J Biol Chem 280:19166-19176, 2005.
10. Faulstich H, Fauser U: The course of Amanita intoxication in beagle dogs. In Faulstich H, Kommerell
B, Wieland T, editors: Amanita toxins and poisoning, Baden-Baden, Germany, 1980, Verlag Gerhard
Witzstrock, pp 115-123.
Chapter 62 |Mushrooms 675
11. Harper KA, Smart CD, Davis RM: Development of a DNA-based macroarray for the detection and iden-
tification of A manita species, J Forensic Sci 56:1003-1009, 2011.
12. Filigenzi MS, Poppenga RH, Tiwary AK, et al: Determination of alpha-amanitin in serum and liver by
multistage linear ion trap mass spectrometry, J Agric Food Chem 55:2784-2790, 2007.
13. ThielC,Thiel K,Klingert W,et al: The enterohepatic circulation ofamanitin:kinetics and therapeutical
implications, Toxicol Lett 203:142-146, 2011.
14. Beuhler M, Lee DC, Gerkin R: The Meixner test in the detection of alpha-amanitin and false-positive
reactions caused by psilocin and 5-substituted tryptamines, Ann Emerg Med 44:114-120, 2004.
15. Trabulus S, Altiparmak MR: Clinical features and outcome of patients with armatoxin-containing mush-
room poisoning, Clin Toxicol (Phila)49:303-310, 2011.
16. Enjalbert F, Rapior S, Nouguier-Soule J, et al: Treatment of amatoxin poisoning: 20-year retrospective
analysis, J Toxicol Clin Toxicol40:715-757, 2002.
17. Abenavoli L, Capasso R, Milic N, et al: Milk thistle in liver diseases: past, present, future, Phytother Res
24:1423-1432, 2010.
18. Karlson-Stiber C, Persson H: Cytotoxic fungi—an overview, Toxicon 42:339-349, 2003.
19.Vogel G,Tuchweber B,Trost W,et al Protection by silibinin against Amanita phalloides intoxication in
beagles, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 73:355-362, 1984.
20. Magdalan J, Ostrowska A, Piotrowska A, et al: Benzylpenicillin, acetylcysteine and silibinin as antidotes
in human hepatocytes intoxicated with alpha-amanitin,Exp Toxicol Pathol 62:367-373, 2010.
21. Trestrail JHI: Mushroom poisoning case registry: NAMA report 1994, Mcllvainea 12:68-73, 1995.
22. Tegzes JH, Puschner B: Amanita mushroom poisoning: efficacy of aggressive treatment of two dogs, Vet
Hum Toxicol 44:96-99, 2002.
23. Hunt RS, Funk A: Mushrooms fatal to dogs, Mycologia 69:432-433, 1977.
24. Kallet A, Sousa C,Spangler W: Mushroom (Amanita phalloides) toxicity in dogs, Calif Vet429-11(22):47,
1988.
 25. Liggett AD, Weiss R: Liver necrosis caused by mushroom poisoning in dogs, I Vet Diagn Invest
1:267-269,1989.
26. Cole FM: A puppy death and Amanita-phalloides, Aust Vet I70:271-272, 1993.
27. Frazier K, Liggett A, Hines M 2nd, et al: Mushroom toxicity in a horse with meningioangiomatosis, Vet
Hum Toxicol 42:166-167, 2000.
Diagnost Invest 24(1):241-244, 2012.
 29. Lheureux P, Penaloza A, Gris M: Pyridoxine in clinical toxicology: a review, Eur I Emerg Med12:78-85,
2005.
30. Michelot D, Toth B: Poisoning by Gyromitra esculenta—a review, JAppl Toxicol 1l:235-243, 1991.
 31. Arshadi M, Nilsson C, Magnusson B: Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry determination of the
pentafluorobenzoyl derivative of methylhydrazine in false morel (Gyromitra esculenta) as a monitor for
the content of the toxin gyromitrin, J Chromatogr A 1125:229-233, 2006.
32. Bemard MA: Mushroom poisoning in a dog, Can Vet J 20:82-83, 1979.
33. Niskanen A, Pyysalo H: Short-term peroral toxicity of ethylidene gyromitrin in rabbits and chickens,
Food Cosmet Toxicol14:409-415, 1976.
34. Michelot D, Melendez-Howell LM: Amanita muscaria: chemistry,biology,toxicology, and ethnomycology,
Mycol Res 107:131146, 2003.
35. Konig-Bersin P, Waser PG, Langemann H, et al: Monoamines in the brain under the influence of
18:1-10, 1970.
36. Theobald W, Buch O, Kunz HA,et al: Pharmacological and experimental psychological studies with 2
components of fly agaric (Amanita muscaria), Arzneimittelforschung 18:311-315, 1968.
37. Satora L, Pach D, Butryn B, et al: Fly agaric (Amanita muscaria) poisoning, case report and review,
Toxicon 45:941-943, 2005.
38. Stribrny J, Sokol M, Merova B, et al: GC/MS determination of ibotenic acid and muscimol in the urine of
patients intoxicated with Amanita pantherina, Int J Legal Med 126(4):519-524, 2012.
39. Naude TW,Berry WL:Suspected poisoning of puppies by the mushroom Amanita pantherina, I South
African Vet Assoc 68:154-158, 1997.
40. Shaw M: Reported case of an Amanita pantherina ingestion in a dog. In Trestrail JHI, editor: North
41. Shaw M: Reported case of an Amanita pantherina or muscaria ingestion in a dog. In Trestrail JHI,editor:
North American Mycological Association report, Grand Rapids, MI, 1994, Grand Rapids Poison Center.
tion report, Grand Rapids, MI, 1993, Grand Rapids Poison Center.
43. Ridgway RL: Mushroom (Amanita pantherina) poisoning, I Am Vet Med Assoc 172:681-682, 1978.
676SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
44. Halberstadt AL, Koedood L, Powell SB, et al: Differential contributions of serotonin receptors to the
behavioral effects of indoleamine hallucinogens in mice, I Psychopharmacol 25:1548-1561, 2011.
      a      
tryptamines exhibit substrate behavior at the serotonin uptake transporter and the vesicle monoamine
transporter, I Neural Transm 116:1591-1599, 2009
46. Studerus E, Kometer M, Hasler F, et al: Acute, subacute and long-term subjective effects of psilocybin in
healthy humans: a pooled analysis of experimental studies, Psychopharmacol 25:1434-1452, 2011.
47.Van Amsterdam J, Opperhuizen A,van den Brink W:Harm potential of magic mushroom use:a review,
Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 59:423-429, 2011.
48. Kirwan AP:*Magic mushroom” poisoning in a dog, Vet Rec 126:149,1990.
49. Jones J:*Magic mushroom" poisoning in a colt, Vet Rec 127:603, 1990.
Pharmacol Soc 5:27-33, 1962.
51. Lurie Y, Wasser SP, Taha M,et al: Mushroom poisoning from speciesof genus Inocybe(fiber head mush-
room): a case series with exact species identification, Clin Toxicol (Phila) 47:562-565, 2009.
52. Yam P, Helfer S, Watling R: Mushroom poisoning in a dog, Vet Rec 133:24, 1993.
53. Lee S, Nam SJ, Choi R,et al: Mushroom poisoning by Inocybe fastigiatain a Maltese dog, JAnim Vet Adv
8:708710, 2009.
54.Smith CW: Mushroom poisoning by Chlorophyllum molybdites in Hawai, Hawaii Med J 39:13-14, 1980.
55. Vanden Hoek TL,Erickson T, Hryhorczuk D,etal: Jack olantern mushroom poisoning, Ann Emerg Med
20:559-561, 1991.
56. Stenklyft PH, Augenstein WL: Chlorophyllum molybdites—severe mushroom poisoning in a child,
JToxicol Clin Toxicol 28:159-168,1990
57. Vrkoc J, Budesinsky M, Dolejs L: Phenolic meroterpenoids from basidiomycete Albatrellus ovinus,
Phytochemistry 16:1409-1411, 1977.
 58. Carrano RA, Malone MH: Pharmacologic study of norcaperatic and agaricic acids, I Pharm Sci 56:1611,
1967.
59.
Bocchi M, Garlaschelli L, Vidari G, et al: Fungal metabolites .27. New farnesane sesquiterpenes from
Hebeloma senescens, JNat Prod 55:428-431, 1992.
60. Fujimoto H, Hagiwara H, Suzuki K, et al: New toxic metabolites from a mushroom, Hebeloma vin-
osophyllum. 2. Isolation and structures of Hebevinoside-Vl, Hebevinoside-VIl, Hebevinoside-VIII,
Hebevinoside-IX, Hebevinoside-X, and Hebevinoside-Xi, Chem Pharm Bull 35:2254-2260, 1987.
 61. Guillot J, Genaud L, Gueugnot J, et al: Purification and properties of 2 hemagglutinins ofthe mushroom
Laccaria amethystina, Biochem 22:5365-5369, 1983.
37:2199-2248, 1981.
63. Shaw M: Reported case of Russula ingestion in a cat, In Trestrail JH IIl, editor: North American
Mycological Association report, Grand Rapids, MI, 1986, Grand Rapids Poison Center.
potbellied pig, Vet Human Toxicol 32:329-330, 1990.
65. Frank H, Zilker T, Kirchmair M, et al: Acute renal failure by ingestion of Cortinarius species confounded
with psychoactive mushrooms-a case series and literature survey, Clin Nephrol 71:557-562, 2009.
66. Short AI,Watling R, MacDonald MK,et al: Poisoning by Cortinarius speciosissimus, Lancet 2:942-944,
1980.
67. West PL, Lindgren J, Horowitz BZ: Amanita smithiana mushroom ingestion: a case of delayed renal
failure and literature review, J Med Toxicol 5:32-38, 2009
 68. Michelot D,Tebbet I: Poisoningby members ofthe genus Cortinarius—areview, Mycol Res94:289-298,
1990.
69. Overas J, Ulvund MJ,Bakkevig S,et al Poisoning in sheep induced by the mushroom Cortinarius specio-
sissimus, Actα Vet Scand 20:148-150, 1979.
70.BresinskyA,Besl H:A colouratlasofpoisonousfungi.Ahandbookforpharmacists, doctors andbiologists
London, 1990, Wolfe.
71. Kibby G: Mushrooms and other fungi, New York, 1992, Smithmark.
72.Smith AH, Smith-Weber N: The mushroom hunter's field guide,Ann Arbor, MI, 1980, University of
Michigan Press.
48:332-333, 1993.
CHAPTER
Mycotoxins
63
Patricia A. Talcott, MS, DVM, PhD, DABVT
Aflatoxin
· Aflatoxin residues can be found on moldy food items and in dog food made
with contaminated cereal grain (e.g., corn). The liver is the primary target organ.
· Cormmonly reported clinical signs include weakness, lethargy, depression,
anorexia, vomiting and darrhea, abdominal pain, and icterus.
· Clinical pathologic changes can include elevations in serum hepatic enzymes,
hypoalbuminemia, hyperbilirubinermia, hyperbilirubinuria, hyperamonermia,
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and increased clotting times.
 Confirrmation of exposure includes detection of aflatoxin in the suspect feed; if
large amounts were ingested and the intoxication is acute, detection of residue
in liver collected postrmortem may be possible.
 Treatrment aims are supportive in nature, and prognosis depends on the extent 
 and severity of liver damage.
Vomitoxin (Deoxynivalenol; DON)
·Vormitoxin can be found in dog foods rmade with contarninated cereal grain (e.g..
wheat).
Abrupt onset of refusal to eat preferred feed and vomiting are the most
commonly observed signs in exposed dogs.
· Prognosis is excellent, and clinical signs cease abruptly once the contarninated
food is removed. There are no long-term sequelae.
Penitrem A and Roquefortine
· Penitrerm A and roquefortine can be found in moldy food items and decaying
Organic material, such as compost.
· Both mycotoxins are rapidly absorbed orally and cause excessive salivation,
restlessness, muscle tremors, and seizures.
Either methocarbamol or diazepam is a treatment option, coupled with
appropriate symptomatic and supportive measures.
 Confirmation of exposure can best be accomplished by analysis of vormitus,
lavage washings, gastric contents, serum, and urine.
ycotoxins can cause significant losses in livestock. Because of differences in housing,
feeding, and behavior of dogs and cats, poisonings in these species are muchless com-
mon. Experimentally, however, dogs and cats are also susceptible to these toxins. For the
purposes of this chapter, only those mycotoxins that have actually been reported in clinical
poisoning cases are included.
677
678SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Aflatoxin
Sources
Aflatoxins (the most prevalent of which is aflatoxin B,) are specific chemical compounds
produced by some toxicogenic strains of the Aspergillus group (e.g., Aspergillus flavus,
Aspergillus parasiticus, and Aspergillus normius) of fungi. These fungi grow when the
moisture content of the substrate is 25% to 35% and air temperatures are 24° C to 35° C.
Aflatoxin contamination can be additive in foods, beginning in the preharvest crop and
accumulating further during harvest, drying, storage, and processing. Dogs have been poi-
soned by eating moldy food items (e.g., bread)3.4 or contaminated grains (e.g., corn) used
commercial pet foods have been contaminated with aflatoxins that have led to animal ill-
nesses and death and pet food recalls.7
Toxic Dose
Dogs have been poisoned through the ingestion of dog food containing 100 to 300 ppb of afla-
toxin? or moldy bread that was reported to contain 6.7 or 15 ppm of aflatoxin.34 As observed
 in other species, young males and pregnant females may be more susceptible to the effects of
aflatoxin. Experimentally, cats (oral median lethal dose [LDso] = 0.55 mg/kg) are reported to
be approximately as sensitive as dogs (oral LDso = 0.80 mg/kg) to purified aflatoxin.8
Toxicokinetics
 Following ingestion, aflatoxins are absorbed from the intestine and are largely taken up
by the liver. Metabolic activation of aflatoxin to its 8,9-epoxide by a cytochrome P450 is
necessary for toxicity.? This activation occurs in hepatocytes, proximal renal tubular epi-
thelial cells, and, to a lesser extent, in other cells throughout the body. Ihe highly reactive
8,9-epoxide then binds to and damages macromolecules (including deoxyribonucleic acid
[DNA] and proteins) throughout the cell. Detoxification in the liver occurs largely through
binding to glutathione and some biliary excretion.10
Mechanism of Toxicity
Following cytochrome P450 activation of aflatoxin to its reactive epoxide, binding to vari-
ous intracellular macromolecules (e.g., DNA, ribonucleic acid, and proteins) is thought to
be responsible for injury to and necrosis of hepatocytes and other metabolically active cells.
This damage can ultimately lead to biliary hyperplasia, hepatic fibrosis, and decreased liver
function.8
Clinical Signs
 Dogs are very sensitive to the hepatotoxic effects of aflatoxin, and the clinical signs primar-
ily reflect varying degrees of liver damage. In most reported cases, relatively short exposures
of 1 to several days are thought to be involved, as opposed to the chronic exposures of weeks
to months often seen in livestock and avian species. Acute poisoning with large dietary
concentrations of aflatoxin results in weakness, depression, lethargy, severe gastrointestinal
disturbances (e.g., vomiting and diarrhea), bleeding (sometimes with hemorrhage into the
lumen of the intestine and elsewhere throughout the body), and icterus. Death can occur
suddenly or within several days following the onset of clinical signs. Chronic exposure to
lower levels of aflatoxin can result in anorexia, depression, vomiting, diarrhea, bleeding
disorders (e.g., melena, epistaxis, and hemarthrosis), and icterus.14.6
Minimum Database
A minimum database should include a complete blood cell count, serum chemistry panel
urinalysis, and ammonia and bile acid levels. The most commonly reported alterations are
increases in the serum activity of hepatic enzymes (e.g., alanine aminotransferase, aspar
tate aminotransferase, and alkaline phosphatase). Hypoalbuminemia, hyperbilirubine-
mia, hyperbilirubinuria, and elevations in serum or plasma ammonia concentrations can
Chapter 63 | Mycotoxins 679
also occur. In severely affected dogs, prolongation of bleeding times, thrombocytopenia,
elevation in bile acids, and anemia may be observed.
Confirmatory Tests
The most common confirmatory test is analysis of the suspected contaminated food items
for aflatoxins.! Histologic examination of a liver biopsy sample can be useful to assist in
ruling out other causes of hepatic disease. If the amount of ingested aflatoxin was recent and
very large, liver analysis may be of value. Analysis of fresh liver (50 g) for aflatoxin residue
is offered by some diagnostic laboratories.
Treatment
Treatment aims include prevention of further absorption by identification and removal of
the contaminated feed and supportive care (e.g., maintenance of adequate caloric intake
with a high-quality protein diet and intravenous fluids supplemented with dextrose and
vitamins K, and B,2). Supplementation with liver protectants, such as S-adenosylmethionine,
milk thistle, selenium, and vitamin E, should be highly considered.
Prognosis
In one reported outbreak, approximately 50 dogs ingested food containing aflatoxins for 13
to 17 days. Many died within 48 to 96 hours after the onset of clinical signs, although some
did survive for several weeks to months. A few recovered after the contaminated food was
eliminated.6 Ihe prognosis depends on the extent and severity of the liver damage.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
On gross examination, icterus, widespread petechial and ecchymotic hemorrhages, hepatic
damage (fine red mottling with red to orange discoloration), ascites, and subserosal edema
of the gallbladder may be seen. Microscopically, areas of hepatic necrosis and fatty change
aa eou euaed aa aueauaa jo seae pue sin a go uad r
plasia) were described in a dog following a 1- to 2-week history of aflatoxin exposure. Dogs
that are acutely exposed to high aflatoxin concentrations in the diet often have widespread
hemorrhage and massive hepatic necrosis. As exposure concentrations decline, histologic
lesions vary greatly in severity (e.g., focal hepatocellular or periacinal necrosis, fatty change,
varying degrees of inflammatory changes, megalocytosis, and biliary hyperplasia). Renal
proximal tubular necrosis can also be present.6.12
Differential Diagnoses
Similar clinical signs can occur in dogs suffering from acute or chronic liver disease caused
induced). Some toxic differentials include acetaminophen, microcystin from cyanobacteria
e ue pe n ud oes  end u ad rox (ate una-)
phalloidin from mushrooms.
Vomitoxin (Deoxynivalenol)
Sources
Vomitoxin (deoxynivalenol [DON]), one of many structurally related trichothecene myco-
toxins, has been found in dog foods made with corn, wheat, barley, and oats contaminated
a a nn ais uan o seadde uu errds ny suaorn mm
au eung 'soo ad yo uu a up paean sansand pue saada
tion of the cereal grain typically occurs in the field, and its presence is commonly associated
with times of heavy rainfall and high humidity and delays in harvesting the crop.
Toxic Dose
 b ie poan sem esnan paay 'siauds Aa pue saeaq ausan sen sua u
 5 ppm DON in the feed. Cats showed feed refusal at 7.5 ppm DON.14 Vomiting in dogs
680SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
and cats was reported to be frequent at an 8- to 10-mg/kg concentration range.14 Anecdotal
incidences of vomiting and feed refusal (breeds not specified) have been reported with feed
vomitoxin concentrations of approximately 1 to 4 ppm.
Toxicokinetics
In general, for most species, vomitoxin is thought to be rapidly absorbed in the gastroin-
testinal tract. Metabolism and excretion of DON seems to be species dependent and dif-
fers dramatically between monogastrics and ruminants. Swine metabolize very little of an
absorbed vomitoxin dose and excrete it mainly unchanged through the urine. Ruminants
and poultry, on the other hand, metabolize an orally administered dose of DON both in
the rumen and in the liver. Very little of the parent form or metabolites are excreted via
the milk.
Mechanism of Toxicity
I also can cause gastrointestinal lesions that perhaps can affect the absorption of neces-
     o  o    
immune system abnormalities in various species.
clinical Signs
Clinical signs in exposed animals include an abrupt onset of feed refusal and vomiting, gen-
erally within 2 to 3 hours of ingestion. Diarrhea or abdominal tenderness are not common
features of DON poisoning but can occur.
Minimum Database and Confirmatory Tests
A complete blood cell count, serum chemistry panel, abdominal radiographs or ultrasound,
intestinal biopsies, and fecal analysis can help rule out other causes of anorexia and vomit-
ing. These tests are often not necessary because signs abruptly subside once the contami-
nated food is removed. Exposure is confirmed by analyzing the suspected contaminated
feed. Analysis for DON is per formed by most veterinary diagnostic laboratories.
Treatment and Prognosis
good-quality feed when vomiting has ceased, and basic supportive care (e.g., attending to
the vomiting and diarrhea and any complications that could arise from these problems)
should lead to a favorable prognosis. Few fatalities have been reported in small animals.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
There are no specific gross or histologic lesions, other than perhaps some congestion and
edema of the gastrointestinal mucosal lining.
Differential Diagnoses
Other differentials should include causes of abrupt onset of vomiting, anorexia, and diar-
rhea. Ihese should include viral, bacterial, or parasitic infections, pancreatitis, ethylene
glycol, phenoxy herbicides, arsenic, copper, zinc, lead, zinc phosphide, neoplasia, and
inflammatory bowel disease.
Tremorgens (Penitrem A and Roquefortine)
Sources
 Penitrem A poisoning has been reported in dogs that have ingested moldy food items (e.g.
moldy cheese, bread, and English walnuts). The mold Penicilliurm crustosurm producing
penitrem A has been incriminated most often.5-17 Roquefortine poisoning has also been
reported in dogs following ingestion of moldy food (e.g., moldy blue cheese) or decaying
Chapter 63 | Mycotoxins 681
organic material (e.g., compost pile). Penicillium roquefortii and other Penicilium species
producing roquefortine have been incriminated as sources.18.23
Toxic Dose
A dose of 0.5 mg/kg of purified penitrem A given intraperitoneally to dogs resulted in the
 onset of acute tremors.?4 In one case report, tremors were described in a small-breed dog
following ingestion of one moldy piece of bread.16
Toxicokinetics
Both penitrem A and roquefortine are readily absorbed following ingestion, and both are
excreted principally through the bile.1 Very small amounts are found in the urine.
Mechanism of Toxicity
 The mechanism of toxicity is unknown, but penitrem A may act as an antagonist to central
nervous system glycine production by centrally inhibiting inhibitory neurons, or it may
influence presynaptic neurotransmitter release.16 It is still unclear whether both mycotoxins
are independently toxic, whether they act synergistically, or whether one (roquefortine) is
merely a biomarker for the presence of the other (penitrem A).
Clinical Signs
Clinical signs typically begin to appear within 30 minutes of toxin ingestion, but can be
delayed for several hours (rare). Early signs of restlessness, panting, and excessive saliva-
tion often progress to include mild to moderate whole-body muscle tremors. In high-dose
exposures, the tremors may become severe, and seizure activity is not uncommon. Poi-
soned patients often display hyperresponsiveness to external stimuli (e.g., touch and noise).
Untreated muscle tremors lead to hyperthermia, exhaustion, and dehydration, along with
possible metabolic acidosis (mild) and rhabdomyolysis (rare).
Minimum Database and Confirmatory Tests
The minimum database should include a complete blood cell count, serum chemistry
panel, urinalysis, and acid-base assessment. Exposure to either penitrem A or roquefortine
can be confirmed by analysis of suspect feed or compost, vomitus, gastric lavage washings
or stomach contents; these analytes have also been detected in very low levels in urine and
serum.25.26 Analysis of bile may be rewarding if vomitus or stomach contents are not avail-
able postmortem.19
Treatment
 In asymptomatic animals, decontamination procedures should include induction of emesis
followed by oral administration of activated charcoal and an osmotic cathartic. Symptom-
atic patients should be sedated or anesthetized and gastric lavage performed to remove
the ingested material. This procedure should be followed by instillation of activated char-
coal and a cathartic. Diazepam can be used to control agitation, muscle tremors, or seizure
activity. Methocarbamol (either intramuscularly or intravenously) or barbiturates have
 been used successfully to control tremors and seizures when the patient does not respond
to diazepam. A venous port should be established to provide intravenous fluids for the first
24 hours.
Prognosis
The majority of poisoned patients recovers uneventfully following aggressive therapy
within 24 to 48 hours; however, with excessive exposures, clinical signs can be prolonged
for up to 4 to 5 days.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
No significant gross or histologic lesions have been reported in animals that have died fol-
lowing either penitrem A or roquefortine exposure.
682SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses that should be considered include poisoning with strychnine, metal-
dehyde, theobromine, caffeine, pyrethroids, 1080, nicotine, recreational drugs, mushrooms,
chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticides, bromethalin, or organophosphorus or carbamate
References
Iowa, 1985, Kendal/Hunt Publishing.
2. Wilson DM, Payne GA:Factors affecting Aspergillusflavus group infection and aflatoxin contamination
ricultural significance, San Diego,1994, Academic Press.
3. Bailly JD, Raymond I, Le Bars P,etal: Canine aflatoxicosis: reported case and review ofthe literature, Rev
Med Vet 11:907-914, 1997.
4. Ketterer PJ, Williams ES, Blaney BJ, et al: Canine aflatoxicosis, Aust Vet J 51:355-357, 1975.
5. Bastianello SS, Nesbit IW, Williams MC, et al: Pathological findings in a natural outbreak of aflatoxicosis
in dogs, Onderstepoort I Vet Res 54:635-640, 1987.
toxicosis, and pregnancy toxemia in the bitch, Comp Anim Pract 2(12):13-17, 1988.
 7. Rumbeiha W, Morrison J: A review of class I and class II pet food recalls involving chemical contami-
nants from 1996-2008, I Med Toxicol 7(1):60-66, 2011.
8. Cullen JM, Newberne PM: Acute hepatotoxicity ofafatoxins. In Eaton DL,Groopman JD,editors: The toxt-
cology ofafatoxins: human health, veterinary and agricultural signijficance, San Diego,1994, Academic Press.
9. Eaton DL, Ramsdell HS, Neal GE: Biotransformation of aflatoxins. In Eaton DL, Groopman JD, edi-
tors:The toxicology ofaflatoxins: human health,veterinary and agricultural significance,San Diego,
1994, Academic Press.
10. Hsieh DPH, Wong II: Pharmacokinetics and excretion of aflatoxins. In Eaton DL, Groopman JID, edi-
tors: The toxicology ofaflatoxins: human health, veterinary and agricultural significance,San Diego,1994,
Academic Press.
11. Trucksess MW, Wood GE: Recent methods of analysis for aflatoxins in foods and feeds. In Eaton DL
Groopman JD,editors:The toxicology of aflatoxins: human health,veterinary and agricltural signif
cance, San Diego, 1994, Academic Press.
12. Carlton W W, Szczech GM: Mycotoxicoses in laboratory animals. In Wyllie TD, Morehouse LG, editors:
Mycotoxic fungt mycotoxins, mycotoxicoses, vol 2, New York, 1978, Marcel Dekker.
13. Murphy M: Common animal poisons, Ames, 1996, Iowa State University Press.
14. Hughes DM, Gahl MJ, Graham CH, et al: Overt signs oftoxicity to dogs and cats of dietary deoxynivale-
nol, J An Sci77:693700, 1999.
15. Arp LH, Richard JL: Intoxication of dogs with the mycotoxin penitrem A,I Am Vet Med Assoc
175(6):565-566, 1979.
16. Hocking AD, Holds K, Tobin NF: Intoxication by tremorgenic mycotoxin (penitrem A) in a dog, Aust
Vet J 65(3):82-84, 1988
17. Richard JL, Bacchetti P, Arp LH: Moldy walnut toxicosis in a dog caused by the mycotoxin penitrem A,
Mycopathologia 75(3):55-58, 1981.
18. Puls R, Ladyman E: Roquefortine toxicity in a dog, Can Vet J 29:569, 1988.
19. Lowes NR, Smith RA, Beck BE: Roquefortine in the stomach contents of dogs suspected of strychnine
poisoning in Alberta, Can Vet I 33:535-538, 1992.
 20. Young KL, Villar D, Carson TL,et al: Tremorgenic mycotoxin intoxication with penitrem A and roque-
fortine in two dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 222:52-53, 2003.
 21. Boysen SR, Rozanski EA, Chan DL,et al: Tremorgenic mycotoxicosis in four dogs from a single house-
hold, I Am Vet Med Assoc 221:1441-1444, 2002
22. Naude TW, O'Brien OM, Rundberget T, et al: Tremorgenic neuromycotoxicosis in 2 dogs ascribed to
the ingestion of penitrem A and possibly roquefortine in rice contaminated with, Penicillium crustosum,
J South African Vet Assoc 73:211-215, 2002.
23. Walter SL: Acute penitrem A and roquefortine poisoning in a dog, Can Vet J 43:372-374, 2002.
24. Hayes AW, Presley DB, Neville JA: Acute toxicity of penitrem A in dogs, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
35(2):311-320, 1976.
J Vet Diagn Invest 8:515-518, 1996.
26. Braselton W E, Johnson M: Thin layer chromatography convulsant screen extended by gas chromatogra-
CHAPTER
Nicotine
64
Konnie H. Plumlee, DVM, MS, DABVT, DACVIM
· Pets can be exposed to a variety of nicotine sources such as tobacco products,
insecticides, and smoking cessation aids.
· Onset of clinical signs is rapid
· Clinical signs vary with the dose of nicotine exposure. Vomiting, excitement,
trermors, or convulsions may be evident after low-dose exposures and initially
after high-dose exposures. The patient becomes depressed and a descending
paralysis can occur following high-dose exposures.
· Prognosis is poor with high-dose exposures unless the animal can be stabilized
quickly.
Sources
Animals can be exposed to nicotine from a variety of sources. Tobacco products include
cigarettes, chewing tobacco, cigars, and snuff. Cigarette and cigarette-butt ingestions have
been reported in domestic animals, with the vast majority by dogs, followed by cats, and
occasionally by birds.l Cigarettes have been reported to contain varying levels of nicotine:
ou ui auaia e ioaan auu Aedsip stu gu oe ohoz pue ,u 0 gau oz oi sl u 6
tine content among the various brands of cigarettes. One source reports that a regular cigar
contains five times the amount of nicotine as a cigarette.4 Each gram of moist snuff contains
12.9 to 16.6 mg of nicotine.2 Chewing tobacco is palatable to dogs because it contains flavor-
ing agents, such as honey, molasses, licorice, syrups, or sugar.4
 Other sources of nicotine include smoking cessation aids such as skin patches and gums.
Nicotine patches can contain 7 to 114 mg of nicotine. Gums can contain 2 to 4 mg of nico-
tine per piece.
Nicotine sulfate is present at concentrations of 0.05% to 4% in insecticidal dusts or
sprays and also as a 40% concentrated solution known as Black Leaf 40.6 Nicotine has also
been used as an immobilizing agent for wild animals but has a very narrow margin of safety.
Toxic Dose
Clinical signs have been reported at 1 mg/kg nicotine.! The oral median lethal dose (LDso)
for nicotine in dogs is 9.2 mg/kg.7
Toxicokinetics
Nicotine is a water-soluble alkaloid that is readily absorbed via the gastrointestinal tract,
skin, and mucous membranes. Alkalinization of the stomach increases absorption. In
humans nicotine has a half-life of 2 hours, and excretion is completed by 16 hours after
683
684SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
exposure.4 Nicotine is excreted via the kidneys and is pH dependent. Excretion is decreased
when the urine pH is alkaline.4
Mechanism of Toxicity
At low doses, nicotine mimics acetylcholine and stimulates the postsynaptic nicotinic
receptors of the central nervous system, sympathetic ganglia, parasympathetic ganglia, and
trigger zone and can result in vomition. But at high doses, the initial stimulatory effects are
followed by blockage of the nicotinic receptors caused by persistent depolarization.6.8
Clinical Signs
According to data from the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Ani-
mal Poison Control Center, between 2005 and 2010, 55% of dogs believed to have ingested
tobacco products were vommiting and 25% were ataxic. Lethargy, hypersalivation, bradycar-
dia, and tremors were also commonly reported.
Signs often occur within 1hour of exposure. Animals often vomit spontaneously because
of stimulation of the emetic center.4.5 Other digestive tract effects can include increased sali-
vation and peristalsis and repeated defecation.6 Miosis has been reported in dogs.4
Small doses of nicotine stimulate all autonomic ganglia. Bradycardia results from stimu-
lation of the vagus nerve. Stimulation of the sympathetic ganglia results in peripheral vaso-
constriction. After the nicotinic receptors become blocked as the absorbed dose of nicotine
increases, the heart rate returns to normal and may become elevated. Vasodilation also
occurs following high-dose exposures.
At low-dose exposures and initially after high-dose exposures, stimulation of the central
nervous system results in excitement, tremors, and possibly convulsions. At high doses,
these signs progress to depression. Descending paralysis and depolarizing block of the neu-
romuscular junctions results in paralysis of the diaphragm and chest muscles, which is the
cause of death.6.8
Confirmatory Tests
Urine, gastric contents, kidney,liver, and blood can be tested for nicotine.4
Treatment
No specific antidote for nicotine toxicosis is available. Decontamination by induced emesis
s au ae uos m s a ad a Ps a s 
which aids in decontamination. Activated charcoal decreases further absorption of nico-
tine. Intravenous fluids will hasten elimination from the body. Acidification of the urine can
 be used to increase excretion as long as the animal is not acidotic. Antacids should not be
administered because they can increase nicotine absorption from the stomach.
 The heart rate and blood pressure should be monitored and the animal treated accord-
ingly. Artificial respiration and oxygen therapy are warranted if the animal is suffering from
respiratory paralysis. Seizures can be controlled with diazepam or barbiturates.
Prognosis
Exposures to high levels of nicotine warrant a poor prognosis. Patients that can be stabi-
lized for the first 4 hours after intoxication have a much better chance of survival.4
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Necropsy and histopathologic findings are nonspecific.4
Chapter 64 | Nikotine 685
Differential Diagnoses
At low doses of nicotine and initially after high doses, the animals may exhibit signs similar
to anticholinesterase insecticide poisoning: tremors, bradycardia, miosis, vomiting, hyper-
salivation, and increased defecation. The latter stages of high-dose nicotine poisoning are
similar to those caused by many other depressants.
References
1. Novotny TE, Hardin SN, Hovda LR, et al: Tobacco and cigarette butt consumption in humans and anj-
mals, Tobacco Control 20(Suppl 1):i17, 2011
2. Olson BL, Livingston GK, Potter RH,et al Assessment of salivary cotinine levels in college students using
smokeless tobacco, Biol Monitoring 1:53, 1991.
3. Kaplan B: Acute nicotine poisoning in a dog, Vet Med 63:1033, 1968.
4. Vig MM: Nicotine poisoning in a dog, Vet Hum Toxicol 32:573, 1990.
 5. Saxena K, Scheman A: Suicide plan by nicotine poisoning: a review of nicotine toxicity, Vet Hum Toxicol
27:495, 1985
6. Adams HR:Cholinergic pharmacology autonomic drugs. In Adams HR,editor: Veterinary pharmacology
and therapeutics, ed 7, Ames, 1995, Iowa State University Press.
7. RTECS Registry of toxic effects of chemical substances. National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health, Cincinnati, CD-ROM version, vol 43, Englewood, CO, MICROMEDEX Inc.
8. Manoguerra AS, Freeman D: Acute poisoning from the ingestion of Nicotiana glauca, I Toxicol Clin Toxt-
co19:861, 1982-1983.
CHAPTER
65
Nonsteroidal
Antiinflammatories
Patricia A. Talcott, MS, DVM, PhD, DABVT
Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant, DVM, PhD, DABVT, DABT
· Nonsteroidal antinflarmmatory drugs (NSAIDs) are popular drugs in human
and veterinary medicine that are readily available to the pet population and can
be harmful, if not deadly, to pets with improper use or accidental access.
· Because of species differences in pharmacokinetics, many NsAIDs are more toxic
 in cats and dogs than in humans.
· Gastrointestinal toxicity is the most common adverse effect of NSAID
administration in anirmals.
· Clinical signs include vomiting, depression or stupor, darrhea, anorexia, ataxia
or incoordination, bloody stool and melena, polyuria, polydipsia, tachypnea, and
panting.
· Idiosyncratic hepatopathy is possible with chronic NSAID administration.
The minirnum laboratory database may include a complete blood cell count,
reticulocyte count, chemistry panel, blood gases, cantrast studies, ultrasound,
renal studies, bleeding tirmes, and coagulation panel.
. Therapeutic options include the use of emetics, gastric aspiration and lavage,
activated charcoal, intravenous fluid diuresis, correction of adidemia, gastric acid
reducers, sucralfate, rmisoprostol, blood transfusions, hernoglobin-based oxygen-
carrying solutions, or surgery (if indicated).
·Misoprostol (a prostaglandin E analogue) is a key therapeutic drug for the
prevention of NSAID-induced gastrointestinal lesions.
Sources
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are very popular human and veterinary
drugs, either prescription or sold as over-the-counter medications, and they are readily avail-
able to the pet population through misuse or accidental consumption (Table 65-1). These
drugs are used for the treatment of pain, inflammation, and pyrexia. NSAIDs are classified
according to their chemical structure: salicylates (e.g., aspirin), indoles (e.g., indometha-
cin), propionic acids (e.g., ibuprofen, naproxen, ketoprofen, and carprofen),fenamates (e.g
meclofenamic acid), azole derivatives (e.g., phenylbutazone, tepoxalin, and dipyrone), sul-
fonamides and sulfones (e.g., deracoxib and frocoxib), and oxicams (e.g., piroxicam and
tenoxicam) (Table 65-2)i2 Certain drugs (e.g., diclofenac, ibuprofen, and naproxen) that
have relatively safe profles in humans can induce serious toxicoses in dogs.1-β Metabolism
and half-lives of NSAIDs have species differences, and doses in dogs and cats should not be
687
688SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Table 65-1
Examples of Veterinary and Human Food and Drug Administration-
 Approved Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
Veterinary Approved
Human Approved
(saop) uajondie
Celecoxib
Deracoxib (dogs)
Diclofenac
Diclofenac (horses)
Diflunisal
Etodolac (dogs)
Etodolac
Firocoxib (dogs, horses)
Fenoprofen
 Flunixin meglumine (cattle, horses, swine)
Flurbiprofen
Ketoprofen (horses)
 lbuprofen
 Meclofenamic acid (dogs, horses)
 Indomethacin
Meloxicam (cats, dogs)
Ketoprofen
Naproxen (horses)
Ketorolac
 Phenylbutazone (dogs, horses)
Meclofenamate
Robenacoxib
Mefenamic acid
Tepoxalin (dogs)
Meloxicam
Nabumetone
Naproxen
Oxaprozin
Piroxicam
Rofecoxib
Salsalate
Sulindac
Tolmetin
Table 65-2
Chemical Classification of Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
Oxicams
Piroxicam, meloxicam
Azole derivatives
 Phenylbutazone, tepoxalin
Phenylacetic acid
Diclofenac, diclofenac, eltenac, robenacoxib
Salicylates
Acetylsalicylic acid, diflunisal
 Propionic acids
Carprofen, fenoprofen, ibuprofen, ketoprofen,
naproxen, tiaprofenic acid, vedaprofen
Fenamates
Meclofenamic acid, mefenamic acid, tolfenamic acid
Aminonicotinic acid
Flunixin meglumine
Pyrrolopyrrole
Ketorolac
Naphthylalkanone
Nabumetone
 Indoleacetic acids
 Indomethacin, sulindac, tolmetin, etodolac
Oxindoles
Tenidap
Sulfonamides and sulfones
Deracoxib, firocoxib, mavacoxib, nimesulide
to the toxic effects of ibuprofen; other NSAIDs are discussed separately at the end of the
chapter.
Toxic Dose
The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) Animal Poison
Control Center (APCC) lists ibuprofen as frst in its top 10 incidences of poisonings in
dogs, based on calls received between 2001 and 200s.14 In cats ibuprofen and other NSAIDs
Chapter 65|NonsteroidalAntiinflammatories689
were the seventh most common poisonings reported to the ASPCA APCC during the same
time, with accidental ingestion of chewable formulations designed for dogs being a com-
monscenario.15
 Pharmacokinetic studies of ibuprofen administration in canines revealed that gastric
lesions were produced in dogs given 8 mg/kg/day.3 These lesions were produced by par-
enteral and oral administration, thus revealing that the ulcerogenic action of ibuprofen
is partly systemic. All dogs receiving 16 mg/kg/day of ibuprofen were found to have gas-
tric ulcers on postmortem examination.13 A case report exists of a dog receiving 3 mg/kg
every other day for 6 weeks that died of a perforated gastric ulcer.16 As a single exposure,
 25-125 mg/kg body weight BW of ibuprofen has been associated with gastrointestinal signs
in dogs; ulceration is likely at doses exceeding 50 mg/kg. Doses of more than 100 to 175
mg/kg BW have resulted in renal failure; older dogs or dogs with preexisting renal disease
may develop renal issues at lower doses.14.16 Doses exceeding 400 mg/kg may result in cen-
tral nervous system effects such as depression, seizures, and coma.16 The acute minimum
lethal dose of ibuprofen in dogs is 600 mg/kg, although dogs can die of complications from
renal failure or gastrointestinal perforation at much lower doses. Cats are considered to be
approximately twice as sensitive as dogs to the toxic effects of ibuprofen.
Toxicokinetics and Mechanism of Toxicity
NSAIDs are a group of drugs with very different chemical structures that share many physi-
ologic activities. Ihe analgesic, antipyretic, and antinflammatory actions of NSAIDs are
caused by direct inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX), an enzyme system that catalyzes the
reversible COX inhibition by competing with the substrate arachidonic acid for the active site
of the enzyme.18 Ihus NSAIDs reduce the production of prostaglandins and thromboxane.
NSAIDs differ from glucocorticoids in that glucocorticoids inhibit phospholipase,
which is higher up in the inflammatory cascade. Glucocorticoids therefore inhibit lipoxy-
current use of corticosteroids and NSAIDs has any rational basis?9 Tepoxalin, a newer
veterinary NSAID (no longer sold in the United States), is unique in that it inhibits both
COX exists in two isoforms. Constitutive COX-1 is responsible for physiologic functions
 and is expressed in most tissues. It functions in synthesizing prostaglandins that regulate
normal cell activity. Inducible COX-2 is involved in inflammation. COX-2 is an enzyme
that is rapidly induced at the site of inflammation and is responsible for the production of
tive COX inhibitors, thus contributing to gastrointestinal and renal side effects.9.2023
A group of NSAIDs that inhibit COX-2 selectively is still receiving significant attention
in the human literature,24.27 and COX-2-selective NSAIDs are continually being introduced
into the veterinary market. As previously stated, the selective inhibition of COX-2 may be
the cause of the favorable antinflammatory, analgesic, and antipyretic effects of NSAIDs,
whereas inhibition of COX-1 may result in unwarranted gastrointestinal, renal, and possibly
other side effects. COX selectivity is species specific; for example, meloxicam is considered
to be COX-2 selective in dogs, but not for cats.24 In humans nimesulide,2 meloxicam,26.27
flosulide,28 and etodolac29 apparently produce the therapeutic effects of NSAIDs without
the adverse side effects. In dogs, carprofen, deracoxib, etodolac, firocoxib, meloxicam, and
robenacoxib are considered to be COX-2 selective (or COX-1 sparing) NSAIDs,30.3] and
robenacoxib is COX-2 selective in cats. 32 However, it is important to note that all NSAIDs,
whether they are labeled as COX-1 or COX-2 selective, will alter both pathways in cases of
Excessive exposure. There is information to suggest that many human-approved NSAIDs
are not well metabolized in companion animals; information regarding metabolism and
excretion of many human-approved NSAIDs is not available for dogs and cats.
 NSAIDs are weak acids and are well-absorbed following oral administration.l3 Because
of their different chemical structures, differences in drug distribution and dissolution may
690SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
lead to differences in the bioavailability of these drugs.l2 Because NSAIDs are largely ion-
ized at physiologic pH, they are primarily confined to plasma and extracellular fluid.33
However, the lipid solubility of NSAIDs enhances their penetration of cell membranes, and
the acidic pH of inflamed tissue draws them to target tissue.
Serum protein binding varies among different NSAIDs.34 Many NSAIDs are highly pro-
tein bound, often exceeding a rate of 99% binding to serum albumin.112.3 Therefore the
volume of distribution is small, often less than 10% of body weight. Only the unbound por-
[s u aai ap used jo aen a ee''aane aeioosd si anp a yo uo
animals depends on the rate of protein binding. Plasma protein binding slows the rate of
clearance.133
 In dogs orally administered ibuprofen is rapidly absorbed. Maximum plasma concen-
trations were found % to 3 hours after administration. Ninety-six percent of the drug is
 bound to serum proteins. Ihe elimination half-life of ibuprofen in dogs ranges from 2.5 to
5.8 hours.11.13
 Clearance of NSAIDs varies among species and among individuals within species and
by age.1.2.12.13.35.3 Very young animals (younger than 6 weeks of age) and older patients
metabolize these drugs more slowly and therefore have delayed clearance.2 NSAIDs
are excreted at varying rates, depending on their metabolic pathway and enterohepatic
circulation.9.11,13,39
In contrast to humans, many NSAIDs (e.g., ibuprofen, naproxen, carprofen, indo
methacin, piroxicam, flunixin, and tolfenamic acid) undergo enterohepatic recycling in
demonstrated in plasma; however, high levels were demonstrated in the bile.13 Biliary excre-
tion of NSAIDs allows for reabsorption and repeated exposure and is a critical factor in
the pathogenesis of NSAID-induced small intestinal injury.40 This difference may partially
use of ibuprofen and other NSAIDs.2.9.1.13
Clearance of some NSAIDs (e.g., aspirin and phenylbutazone) requires two phases of
metabolism. Ihe lipid-soluble drug, which is diffcult to excrete, is metabolized to a water-
soluble form that is more easily excreted. Phase I metabolism is catalyzed by enzymes in
the endoplasmic reticulum in hepatocytes. Ihese metabolites are usually more susceptible
 to phase II metabolism than the parent compound. A large molecule (glucuronic acid, glu-
tathione, or sulfate) is added to the metabolite or sometimes to the parent compound. Usu-
ally this renders the drug "inactivated," and it becomes more water-soluble and is readily
excreted in the urine.134 Renal elimination of NSAID metabolites is pH dependent. Drug
elimination usually occurs at a faster rate in allkaline urine.134
Drug interactions can alter the elimination rate of NSAIDs because of changes in hepatic
metabolism or renal excretion. Phenobarbital, a hepatic enzyme inducer, speeds the clear-
ance of NSAIDs, and chloramphenicol and cimetidine, hepatic enzyme inhibitors, delay
the clearance.112z Drug interactions that alter renal elimination usually result when NSAIDs
must compete with other weak acids for renal tubular secretory proteins. Drugs that alter
thoughtfully considered before administering NSAIDs.
Ibuprofen and other NSAIDs have the potential to cause multiorgan toxicities (Table
65-3). Adverse effects involving the gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, liver, and hematopoietic
system have been documented. Risk factors that may predispose animals to side effects and
drug interactions with NSAIDs exist.
Gastrointestinal Adverse Effects
In humans NSAID damage to the gastrointestinal tract most commonly becomes manifest
as ulcers in the stomach and duodenum, and there is some risk of injury in the esophagus,
small bowel, and colon as well.41.47 IThe mechanism of action may not be the same through-
out the gastrointestinal tract.
The causes of the ulcerogenic effects of NSAIDs in the stomach are thought to be
Chapter 65 | Nonsteroidal Antinflammatories 691
Table 65-3
Adverse Reactions to Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
Site
Effect
Gastrointestinal tract
 Decreased appetite, emesis, hematemesis, abdominal pain,
diarrhea, melena, superficial erosions, ulceration, hemor-
rhage, perforation, inflammation, stricture, protein-
losing enteropathy
Kidney
Decreased renal flow, decreased glomerular fltration rate,
fluid and sodium retention, hyperkalemia, azotemia,
acute renal insufficiency, papillary necrosis
Liver
Rise in liver enzymes, icterus
Hemostatic system
Decreased platelet aggregation, increased bleeding time 
Hematopoietic system
Bone marrow depression, aplastic anemia, hemolytic
anemia, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, pancytopenia,
methemoglobinemia
Central nervous system
Depression, seizure, coma, behavioral changes
Immune system
Allergic reactions
From Isaacs IP: Adverse effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in the dog and cat, Aust Vet Practit
26:180-186, 1996.
Gastrointestinal mucosal defense mechanisms are influenced or mediated by prostaglan-
dins, including mucus and bicarbonate secretion, blood flow, epithelial cell turnover and
repair, and mucosal immunocyte function.40.414546 Inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis
leads to a reduction in the ability of the gastrointestinal mucosa to defend itself.
The second mechanism of action is the topical iritant properties of NSAIDs. Epithelial
damage may be related in part to ion trapping, a phenomenon that allows accumulation of
NSAIDs in these cells, and in part to the ability of NSAIDs to decrease the hydrophobic-
ity of the mucous layer in the stomach (the primary barrier to damage induced by acid).46
 Most NSAIDs have been shown to impair gastric mucosal microcirculation and cause gas-
tric mucosal damage.47 After NSAID administration, neutrophils can be attracted to muco-
sal capillaries, where they form thrombi and obstruct capillaries.46.48
Parenteral or rectal administration of NSAIDs has failed to prevent topical mucosal
a e po go anu a pe e as spp s u 
parenterally administered NSAID (e.g., indomethacin or diclofenac) impaired the physico-
chemical barrier against luminal acidity and rendered the mucosa susceptible to injury.52
Oral administration of ibuprofen to rats induces increased bowel permeability.$ In humans
an increased risk of emergency admission to the hospital for colitis caused by inflammatory
bowel disease,particularly among patients with no previous history of this disease, has been
associated with the use of NSAIDs.43
pe ui [esaus si svn jo iaa ais u iso  shop u
ulceration. As described earlier, dogs are more susceptible because of the enterohepatic
recycling of many of these drugs. Enterohepatic recirculation of NSAIDs is of critical
importance in the pathogenesis of NSAID enteropathy. Gastrointestinal ulceration is
due to inhibition of the prostaglandins normally responsible for inhibiting the secretion
of gastrin (prostaglandin Ez [PGEz]) and hydrochloric acid (PGEz and PGI,). NSAIDs
also inhibit the prostaglandins responsible for stimulating the secretion of mucus and
bicarbonate.42.46
 Ibuprofen appears to cause gastric irritation and ulcers more frequently in dogs than in
humans.1-6.l35455 Most NSAID-induced ulcers were found in the pyloroantral region,54
although lesions were also apparent in the cardia, lesser curvature, and fundus and dif-
fusely throughout the stomach.5o Gastric perforation associated with the administration of
ibuprofen has been reported.3
692SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Renal Adverse Effects
In humans analgesic nephropathy is widely acknowledged because of the chronic use of
have little effect on the kidney because of the low renal production of prostaglandins. In the
kidney, vasodilatory prostaglandins modulate vasoconstrictive stimulants (e.g., epineph-
rine and angiotensin Il), which would otherwise impair renal blood flow.
aaieir st pue asn avn eeu go isai a st aeirdau sisae isse
by chronic interstitial nephritis. Other NSAID-related nephrotoxicoses include vasocon-
strictive acute renal failure, acute interstitial nephritis associated with the nephrotic syn-
drome, fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, interactions with antihypertensive and other
 medications, renal papillary necrosis, and chronic renal failure.56.6l
In dogs and cats, renal injury is most commonly seen in overdose situations, but may also
Occur with chronic use at therapeutic levels. Significant renal toxicity can result if NSAIDs
are administered when the animal is volume depleted, is avidly retaining sodium (e.g., con-
experiencing any hypotensive condition, such as anesthesia60-62 or posttraumatic shock,
and animals with significant gastrointestinal disease resulting in dehydration and volume
depletion are also at increased risk.24.20,39
 The concurrent administration of NSAIDs and nephrotoxic medications (e.g., genta-
micin) is contraindicated.63 The concurrent use of two NSAIDs should be avoided, and a
5-7 day "washout" period is sometimes recommended when switching from one NSAID to
another (though few studies have been performed that support this recommendation).64.67
Renal papillary necrosis may occur secondary to NSAID use, especially in dehydrated
Hematologic Adverse Effects
NSAIDs inhibit COX activity in platelets. COX is essential for the formation of thrombox-
ane, a potent vasoconstrictor and stimulus for platelet aggregation. Prolongation of bleeding
times can occur with the use of NSAIDs.28.45.69 With most NSAIDs, the alteration in plate-
let function occurs during the dosing time of the NSAID, but aspirin irreversibly inhibits
platelet function for the lifetime of the platelet, which can result in prolonged bleeding
times many days after aspirin therapy has been discontinued.62 The most important bleed-
ing problems in humans occur in individuals with coexisting coagulopathies or those who
are concomitantly using alcohol or receiving anticoagulant medication.45 NSAIDs should
be used with caution in dogs with bleeding problems (e.g., von Willebrand's disease).20
Hepatic Adverse Effects
Hepatotoxicity can occur following administration of labeled doses of most NSAIDs
[to  aexde y ue sN sueu u gaas xo yo ssaea
cases of drug-induced hepatopathy worldwide. The overall incidence of NSAID-induced
  asdxa susiad o ad sasen auu oi au u san asasp a
of other potentially hepatotoxic drugs increases the risk of NSAID-induced hepatopathy
 As with humans, hepatotoxicity induced by ibuprofen and similar NSAIDs in veterinary
patients is not a common occurrence. A 30-day study in dogs receiving 16 mg/kg/day of
ibuprofen showed no significant biochemical abnormalities, and sulfobromophthalein
retention remained normal. Abnormal postmortem results were confined to ulcerative
lesions in the gastrointestinal tract.3 However, hepatotoxicity has been reported following
the approval of several veterinary NSAIDs.
Hepatic injury from NSAIDs is thought to develop by a variety of mechanisms, and
recent work has shown that genetic polymorphisms in activation and detoxification
enzymes can influence the susceptibility of an individual to drug-induced liver injury.70
Proposed mechanisms of drug-induced liver injury include formation of reactive metabo-
lites that cause hepatocellular injury by binding to cellular macromolecules or disrupting
Chapter 65|Nonsteroidal Antinflammatories693
organelle functions, activation of cellular apoptotic mechanisms, haptenization of hepato-
cellular membrane components that triggers an immune-mediated attack, and release of
Although NSAID-induced hepatopathy can occur after weeks, months, or years of
NSAID use, hepatopathies in dogs are most often seen within the first 3 weeks of NSAID
administration.62 When detected early and the drug discontinued, most patients make full
recoveries, but continued NSAID administration in the face of hepatopathy may lead to
liver failure and death. For patients on chronic NSAID therapy, baseline liver enzyme values
should be obtained, followed by recheck 2 weeks after initiation of NSAID therapy; periodic
rechecks are recommended thereafter.62
Risk Factors
A number of risk factors may predispose animals to the side effects of NSAIDs (Box
65-1). Ihese risk factors parallel published human risk factors. Ihey include high doses
of NSAIDs, decreased renal function, gastrointestinal disease, dehydration, hypovolemia,
hypotension, kidney disease, heart disease, stress, severe trauma, spinal injury, surgery or
anesthesia, age, and drug interactions.12,37.3,4,49.50.5355.57,59.61
Additionally, a possible link between NSAID therapy and acute necrotizing fascitis was
reviewed in the human literature. Group A beta-hemolytic streptococci were isolated in
most of the cases associated with NSAID use.7l Usually the disease process developed spon-
taneously or after minor trauma for which NSAIDs were prescribed for pain. The progres-
sion of the disease was quick, occurring inless than 1 week in most cases. Nearly all patients
required extensive surgical debridement because in most cases intravenously adminis-
tered antibiotics failed to slow the progression of the disease. Ihe authors concluded that
"NSAIDs should be administered with caution, if at all, to patients with inflammatory soft-
tissue lesions, especially if concurrent infection is likely."71
Drug Interactions
NSAIDs can interact with many other drugs (Table 65-4). Clinicians should be aware of
any other medications their patients are receiving. It is not uncommon for veterinarians to
administer corticosteroids and NSAIDs simultaneously. Because corticosteroids have the
potential to induce gastric ulcers and perforation, concurrent use with NSAIDs is likely to
compound the gastrointestinal toxicity.
A study in canines of the use of flunixin and flunixin with prednisolone revealed endo-
scopically apparent gastric lesions after 4 days of flunixin therapy. Lesions occurred much
earlier and were more severe in patients receiving dual medications.72 Additionally, in
 the latter group, lesions consistent with coagulative necrosis of the superficial epithelium
were found in the small intestinal and colonic mucosa. In another reported case, one dog
received a different combination of NSAIDs and corticosteroids for a spinal lesion. The
Box 65-1
Factors Predisposing to Side Effects of Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory
Drugs
High doses of NSAIDs
Kidney disease
Decreased renal function
Heart disease
Gastrointestinal disease
Stress, severe trauma, spinal injury
Dehydration
Surgery, anesthesia
Hypovolemia
Age
Hypotension
Other drugs
From Isaacs JP: Adverse effects of nonsteroidal anti-inlammatory drugs in the dog and cat, Aust Vet Pratit 26:180-
186, 1996.
694SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
Table 65-4
Drug Interactions with Nonsteroidal Antinflammatory Drugs
Drug
Effect
ACE inhibitors
May reduce response to these drugs
Aminoglycosides
Increase risk of renal injury
Beta-blockers
May reduce antihypertensive effect
Cisplatin
Increase risk of cisplatin toxicosis
Corticosteroids
Increase risk of gastrointestinal ulceration and renal injury
Digoxin
Increase risk of digoxin toxicosis if renal function is
decreased
Diuretics
May reduce response to diuretics
Heparin
Increase risk of bleeding
Methotrexate
Increase risk of methotrexate toxicosis
 Oral anticoagulants
Increase anticoagulant effect
Pentosan
Increase risk of gastrointestinal bleeding
From Isaacs IP: Adverse effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in the dog and cat, Aust Vet Practit
126: 180-186, 1996.
ACE, Angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSA ID, nonsteroidal antinflammatory drug.
dog collapsed on the fourth day and was brought to the veterinarian recumbent with
hemorrhagic diarrhea and tetraparesis.73 There is no medical reason to administer cor-
ticosteroids and NSAIDs simultaneously. This practice poses significant risk of severe
consequences.
Because NSAIDs are highly protein bound, they can interact with a number of drugs,
displacing other protein-bound drugs.74 Ihis displacement can result in increased levels
of unbound drugs, which can be clinically important with drugs that have a narrow thera-
peutic index. Drugs of significance in this group are digoxin, oral anticoagulants, and some
cytotoxic agents. NSAIDs have been shown to decrease the effectiveness of diuretics, angio-
tensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and beta-blockers.233,35,38,50.61.66
clinical Signs
The clinical signs of ibuprofen toxicosis in canines (listed in order of decreasing frequency)
are vomiting, depression or stupor, diarrhea, anorexia, ataxia and incoordination, bloody
stool and melena, polyuria, and polydipsia. Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis seems to develop
less often in cats than in dogs, but cats may display tachypnea and panting somewhat more
frequently.16
 Published clinical reports of ibuprofen toxicosis show that one dog had hematemesis
only. Another dog had a history of lethargy, vomiting, and anorexia for 2 weeks and was
dehydrated when brought in.3 A third dog came in with a history of infrequent vomiting
and melena, severe depression, anorexia, weight loss, polyuria, and polydipsia.6 An elevated
      d a gs   
cases of naproxen-induced gastrointestinal perforation.7.76 Collapse and pallor may also
be presenting clinical signs.
 In one canine study, repeated ibuprofen administration resulted in consistent vomit-
ing. In another canine study of ibuprofen, gastrointestinal signs (e.g., frequent vomiting,
eighth week of dosing.13 In this same study, dogs given 16 mg/kg/day for 30 days showed
no overt signs of toxicosis; however, postmortem examination revealed gastric erosions or
m suaed pe isains sisat asau ee'sop al [e u uoeu eusau pue sa
a history of NSAID administration but without clinical signs may nevertheless benefit from
medical intervention.
Chapter65|Nonsteroidal Antinflammatories695
Minimum Database
When ibuprofen toxicosis is suspected, a complete blood cell count, reticulocyte count, chem-
istry panel, and urinalysis should be included in the diagnostic plan. Depending on the extent
of the poisoning, laboratory results may be either within normal reference ranges or abnormal.
In seven canine cases with confirmed gastric ulcerations secondary to NSAID adminis-
tration, all dogs had normocytic, normochromic anemias consistent with short-term blood
loss.55 A reticulocyte count was performed in six dogs, revealing a nonregenerative anemia in
two and mild to moderate regeneration relative to the anemia in the other four. In a dog with
peracute bleeding, the animal may be brought to the veterinarian before there is an adequate
bone marrow response, and the reticulocyte count may be low Ifthere is prolonged bleeding.
oo jo sisoue e joddns u (uqoa pue unae) suaid nas po uoneag
loss anemia. A decrease in both proteins occurs as a result of gastrointestinal bleeding
because both proteins are lost equally.79 Low serum proteins, however, were apparent
in only three of seven dogs with confirmed NSAID-induced gastrointestinal bleeding.95
Serum total protein concentration was normal (6.8 g/dL) in a dog with ibuprofen-induced
gastric perforation.3
Leukocytosis, especially with a left shift, mandates further evaluation for the presence
of a gastrointestinal perforation and peritonitis.7.76 Serum biochermical analyses may be
normal. However, results above the normal reference ranges in blood urea nitrogen (BUN),
of renal toxicosis.80
Abdominal radiographs may show no visible gastrointestinal lesions. However, in
patients with gastrointestinal perforation, radiographs of the abdomen may reveal poor
visualization of the serosal surfaces of the abdominal organs, free gas in the peritoneal
should be used, because barium sulfate suspension is a complication of peritonitis that
results in higher mortality.76
Gastrointestinal imaging by ultrasound can be a quick, noninvasive way to examine
to identify the features of gastric ulceration. These features are thickening of the gastric
wall, possible loss of the normal five-layer architecture, disruption of the mucosa by crater
,  a   sq s g   
“comet-tail" gas artifacts).8 Additionally, abdominal ultrasound can identify fluid accumu-
lation and may help in obtaining fluid (abdominal paracentesis) in a dog in which a perfo-
ration is suggested.s2 Evaluation of this fluid would reveal a purulent exudate.3.83
 Other diagnostic procedures that may be considered include coagulation profiles, plate-
let counts, and bleeding times. In seven dogs with confirmed NSAID-induced ulceration,
coagulation profiles were normal.55 Acquired disorders of platelet dysfunction have been
attributed to NSAID use. Bleeding time can be prolonged, platelet aggregation may be poor
to absent, and thrombocytopenia may be present. These effects are reversible (in contrast to
those caused by aspirin) and last only as long as the NSAIDs are in circulation.?4 However,
ent NSAID administration, bleeding times were normal.&5
Fecal occult blood testing can aid in the diagnosis of gastrointestinal bleeding; however,
false-positive results can occur if red meat has been ingested in the 3 days prior to test-
ing.86 The fecal occult blood test result was negative, however, in a canine study in which
hemorrhagic gastrointestinal lesions were seen on endoscopic examination. The authors
concluded that the blood loss was too small to be detected.85
Confirmatory Tests or Procedures
Serum NSAID concentrations may be used to confirm absorption of the drug following
an unknown exposure or an unknown ingested dose, to evaluate the success of emesis or
696SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
of adsorptive or cathartic therapy, and to monitor symptomatic therapy. Serum ibuprofen
concentrations greater than 130 mcg/mL may fall to less than 10 mcg/mL within 48 hours
in dogs receiving aggressive symptomatic treatment.$
Endoscopy is the most sensitive and specific diagnostic procedure for detecting gastro
duodenal ulcers in patients receiving NSAIDs.3954.5,85 Ulcers, however, may be missed on
endoscopy. Because an anesthetic is required, these patients need to be hemodynamically
stable.
Treatment
For patients presenting soon (<2 hours) following NSAID overdose, therapy may involve
emetics, activated charcoal, and a saline or osmotic cathartic to minimize absorption;
decontamination should be omitted or delayed if there is evidence of significant neurologic
signs or prior vomiting.5.10.16 Because of the long half-life of ibuprofen in dogs and cats,
repeated administration of activated charcoal should be considered in large overdoses.16
Intravenous fluids facilitate perfusion of target organs and help support renal function. In
patients ingesting suficient ibuprofen to be concerned with acute renal injury, or in patients
showing signs of renal insufficiency caused by more chronic NSAID exposure, intravenous
crystalloids should be administered at twice the daily maintenance rate for at least 48 hours;
fluid ins and outs should be monitored closely and fluid rates adjusted accordingly.16 If
renal function tests are normal at 48 hours, fluid rate may be reduced to maintenance rate
for 24 hours and discontinued if renal values remain normal. If renal values elevate, then
diuresis should be continued until renal values stabilize or normalize. Vomiting should be
controlled with an appropriate antiemetic. Patients with perforated gastrointestinal lesions
require surgical intervention.
 Extremely anemic patients may require blood transfusions.5s Specific measurements to
look for in dogs and cats with acute blood loss include acute loss of more than 30% of blood
volume (30 mL/kg), packed-cell volume (hematocrit) of less than 20%, plasma protein con-
centration of less than 3.5 g/dL, and ongoing blood loss.87 In one study, four of seven dogs
that had received NSAIDs required whole blood transfusions because they showed clinical
signs of anemia or continued blood loss.5 A blood replacement therapy, Oxyglobin (Bio-
 pure Corporation, Cambridge, Mass.), offers an alternative to blood for oxygen-carrying
support. This product allows immediate and effcient oxygen delivery to tissues and also has
colloidal properties that allow expansion of circulatory volume. However, this product has
limited availability to U.S. veterinarians.
Neurologic signs should be managed symptomatically.16 Diazepam or a barbiturate may
 ase eisasae eaaan u sase at anias au pas a
mals should be provided with thermoregulation, respiratory support, and general nursing
care as needed.
 The goal of medical therapy in dogs and cats with NSAID-induced gastroduodenal
lesions is to restore the normal mucosal defense mechanisms. Various drug therapies are
recommended to prevent gastroduodenal ulcers or to promote ulcer healing. Drug therapy
may include the use of histamine Hz receptor antagonists (e.g., cimetidine or famotidine), a
proton pump inhibitor (e.g., omeprazole), sucralfate (an aluminum salt of sucrose sulfate),
and misoprostol (a PGE, analogue). Gastrointestinal protectants should be administered
for a minimum of 7-14 days following acute NSAID overdose (exact duration depends on
NSAID, dose ingested, and patient risk factors).16
Many studies have been conducted on the prevention and treatment of gastric and duo
denal ulcers. A study of the effects of cimetidine on aspirin-induced gastric hemorrhage in
oset anpan no suoisat sse jaaaid pou pip juaeai aupia ieul paeaaan so
hemorrhage.8 In the dog, famotidine reduces gastric acid secretion and increases gastric
pH, whereas ranitidine does not.& Furthermore, famotidine has been found to alleviate
the reduction of gastric blood flow caused by the NSAID diclofenac.? For these reasons,
famotidine may be the superior H, receptor antagonist to use in cases of NSAID-induced
gastrointestinal injury.
Chapter 65 | Nonsteroidal Antinflammatories 697
Omeprazole, a proton pump inhibitor, profoundly suppresses gastric acid secretion in
dogs and cats.8991 Pantoprazole and lansoprazole, newer proton pump inhibitors, have been 
shown to have similar effects on gastric acid secretion as omeprazole.&9,92 In humans, stud-
ies have revealed a decrease in gastric and duodenal NSAID-induced ulcers with the use
aozendau iaau Xpns aneieduos e u aamo b'goqased e snsian aozendao jo
aads cn umors uaaq s aozeidao g'ae [ao isuee paiaaid siuae oq mg
healing of NSAID-induced gastric (and perhaps duodenal) ulcers when NSAID use is contin-
ued.96 Omeprazole was successful in treating a dog with NSAID-induced gastric ulcers when
treatment with other medications (e.g., cimetidine, sucralfate, and ranitidine) had failed.54
Sucralfate, an aluminum salt of sucrose sulfate, acts by forming a complex with exposed
proteins on the surface of the ulcer, protecting the ulcer from gastric acid and pepsin. Sucral-
fate may also induce prostaglandin-mediated cytoprotection.97.98 Additionally, sucralfate
adsorbs pepsin and bile acids and can interfere with the absorption of other drugs.979 If
concurrent oral medications are prescribed, staggering the times of drug administration
may be indicated. In a canine study of dogs with NSAID-induced gastric ulceration, five of
six dogs responded positively following the use of cimetidine and sucralfate, and the sixth
 dog responded positively with the use of sucralfate alone.5s This dog had a grossly normal
gastric mucosa when endoscopy was performed 9 days later.
Misoprostol, a PGE, analogue, has been shown to prevent the development of NSAID-
induced gastric and duodenal ulcers and to reduce the risk of their complications as well
H is an appropriate choice for prophylaxis in at-risk patients requiring NSAID therapy.42
In a canine study, misoprostol was discovered to be an appropriate preventive treatment
for NSAID-induced gastrointestinal hemorrhage and ulceration.1oo Notably less gastroin-
testinal hemorrhage and ulceration were documented endoscopically in the misoprostol-
treated dogs. There was notably less vomiting in the treated group. The dose of misoprostol
administered was 2.3 to 5 mcg/kg per os (PO) every 8 hours. Misoprostol dosed at 3 mcg/kg
PO every 12 hours was found to be as effective as 3 mcg/kg PO every 8 hours in preventing
aspirin-induced gastric injury in dogs.10 Because of misoprostol's uterogenic effects, its use
receiving high doses of gentamicin may exacerbate renal dysfunction.102
 Drug doses for all the medications described earlier are listed in Table 65-5.103
Prognosis
The prognosis varies with the dose ingested, severity of signs, and time to initiation of
Table 65-5
Medical Therapy for Dogs and Cats with Nonsteroidal
Antinflammatory Drug-Induced Gastroduodenal Lesions
Drug
Dosage
Cimetidine
10 mg/kg every 6-8 hours IV, IM, PO (with renal failure: 2.5 mg/kg
every 12 hours IV, PO)
Famotidine
0.5 mg/kg every 12-24 hours PO
Ranitidine
Dog: 2 mg/kg every 8 hours IV, PO
Cat: 2.5 mg/kg every 12 hours IV, 3.5 mg/kg every 12 hours PO
Omeprazole
Dog: 20 mg/dog or 0.5-1 mg/kg PO once daily
Cat: 0.7-1 mg/kg PO q24h
Sucralfate
Dog: 0.5-1 g every 8-12 hours PO
Cat: 0.25 g every 8-12 hours PO
Misoprostol
 Dog: 2.5 mcg/kg every 8 hours PO
IV, Intravenous; IM, intramuscular; PO, per os.
698SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
with ibuprofen-induced renal failure had a persistent decrease in creatinine clearance
2 months after the initial therapy.6 Surgical intervention was successful in three cases of
dogs with NSAID-induced gastric perforation.375.76
Gross and Histologic Lesions
In one study, dogs receiving NSAID treatment tended to have pyloroantral ulcers,54 and
tion in a research study involving ibuprofen administration in dogs.13 In another study,
the lesser curvature and fundus and the pyloric antrum were involved, and there were
diffuse lesions throughout the stomach.55 The latter report described lesions consisting
of petechiation, mucosal erosions, small bleeding ulcers, and craterlike ulcers.
Histologically, gastric ulceration is defined as a break in the mucosa with a fbrous
base.42 An erosion is a defect that does not extend that far into the mucosa.16 Renal fail-
ure involving necrosis of the collecting ducts and loop of Henle in dogs anesthetized with
methoxyflurane that were also receiving flunixin has been described.104 Renal papillary
therapy for transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder.105
Differential Diagnoses
The clinical signs and laboratory data can mimic those characteristic of other metabolic
derangements in canines and felines. Ihe rule-out list can include hemorrhagic gastroen-
teritis, hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease), gastrointestinal foreign objects, severe
inflammatory bowel disease, gastrointestinal neoplasia, hemangiosarcoma, anticoagulant
rdenticide toxicosis, ethylene glycol poisoning, hepatic failure, and renal failure. Therefore
a complete history and diagnostic plan are imperative for medical management of these
patients. Owners may have to be asked direct questions about any NSAID administration
because the majority of pet owners do not understand the risk that medications pose to
their pets.
Other NSAIDs
Aspirin
Acetylsalicylic acid was the first synthetic NSAID to be sold commercially. It was synthe-
sized in 1899, but not until 1971 was it discovered that aspirin specifically blocks prostaglan-
din synthesis. Aspirin is readily absorbed from the stomach and upper small intestines of
e uei a siaa ll aaq sqeiu seda sarau us r'sie pue sao
salicylic acid, which is the active form. Salicylic acid is 70% to 90% protein bound (primar-
ily to albumin), significantly less than other NSAIDs.106 Therefore salicylic acid is distrib-
ued to most tissues. Plasma elimination of salicylic acid depends on phase II conjugation
with glucuronic acid. Rates of elimination vary among species, the half-life of salicylates
ranging from 8 hours in the dog to 38 hours in the cat.2106.107
nation in this species. At high doses of aspirin, the capability of the glucuronide conjuga-
tion system is overwhelmed. Thus the rate of drug clearance drops, and the drug begins to
accumulate, leading to toxicity.
By acetylating COX, aspirin irreversibly inhibits the activity of thromboxane and pros
tion. Prostacyclin causes vasodilation, which inhibits platelet aggregation. A dose-related
response permits the use of aspirin to selectively inhibit thromboxane formation. Lower
doses of aspirin result in irreversible acetylation of COX in platelets while still allowing
days may be sufficient to inhibit platelet function in dogs.
Chapter 65 | Nonsteroidal Antinflammatories 699
 oe un pe ins c ude jo sis a o sa   oi
tribute tothe formationof gastroduodenal ulcers.107.1o9A study of10beagle dogsreceiving 250
mg of aspirin three times per day for 30 days revealed that five dogs had gastric lesions (four
ulcerative and one hemorrhagic) after the fourth dosing period (endoscopy was performed 26
hours after the initial medication). In a study comparing ketoprofen, copper and indometh-
acin, prednisolone and cinchophen, and aspirin administration in dogs, the aspirin group
showed significantly more severe gastric lesions.ll Additionally, in another study performed
 in canine arthritic patients that compared aspirin administration and aspirin and misoprostol
-ua deuaonpaises ssat aiqeiou pamous dnana qoisoidosu pue undse ar uoensuue
orrhage and clinical signs of vomiting than the aspirin-only group.oo Fecal ocult blood test
results were generally negative despite endoscopically apparent gastroduodenal hemorrhage.
 Buccal mucosal bleeding times in dogs remained normal in one study.84
Dogs dosed at 25-35 mg/kg PO every 8 hours developed increased fecal hemoglobin
levels and had evidence of gastric ulceration on endoscopy.& Dogs receiving 50 mg/kg PO
every 12 hours developed vomiting and similar dosing resulted in perforating gastric ulcers
within 4 weeks.12 Severe metabolic disturbances (metabolic acidosis, seizures, coma) have
 been associated with aspirin doses of 450 mg/kg or higher in dogs.113 In cats, doses of 100-
110 mg/kg/day have been associated with death within 7 days.12
Because aspirin is an NSAID, renal adverse effects similar to those seen with other NSAIDs
might be expected.106.,1os However, in human medicine, oliguria has rarely been a complica-
tion of salicylate poisoning,l and in veterinary medicine, hepatic injury is more commonly
115
Animal studies suggest that the seizures may be the result of hyperventilation or reduced
brain glucose concentrations.l16 Cerebral edema has been reported on rare occasions.16
 In animals the clinical signs of aspirin toxicosis are attributed to respiratory alkalosis
secondary to hyperpnea, which is then followed by a marked metabolic acidosis, which
is responsible for the majority of the clinical signs.l17 In cats aspirin toxicoses have pri-
marily been the result of overdoses. Reported adverse effects in cats are nausea, vomiting.
depressed respiration, metabolic acidosis, seizures, and coma.2106 Aspirin-induced hepati-
tis has been observed at excessive doses in cats.117
Fluid retention and pulmonary edema have been sequelae of salicylate poisoning in
humans.l16 Because pulmonary capilary wedge pressures remain normal, the edema is con-
sidered noncardiogenic and not the result of fluid overload In sheep, salicylates increased the
rate of pulmonary lymph flow and lymph protein clearance, indicating increased lung vascular
permeability, perhaps as a result of impaired platelet function, a direct toxic effect on capillary
and pulmonary edema, a high anion gap acidosis was noted tobe a predisposing factor.l16
Hyperpyrexia has been a reported common complication of salicylate intoxication in
children. It may be the result of metabolic stimulation caused by the uncoupling of oxidative
phosphorylation, but it may also reflect the illness for which the salicylate was prescribed.
Hyperpyrexia is a very uncommon complication of salicylate poisoning in adults but is a
disorders and should be discontinued in any patient 1 week before surgery to prevent the
risk of excessive bleeding.106 Risk factors are similar to those described for other NSAIDs.
Concurrent administration with other NSAIDs or corticosteroids is contraindicated.
Management of aspirin toxicosis is directed at managing clinical signs, correcting acid-
 base imbalances, and preventing and treating liver injury. In patients with recent aspirin
ingestion, induction of emesis is recommended.l14 Activated charcoal is indicated in the
management of salicylate poisoning to reduce salicylate absorption. It is most effective if it
is administered immediately after ingestion of the salicylate and probably has little effect if
administered 2 hours after exposure.16
 In human patients with salicylate toxicosis, measures are taken to enhance elimina-
tion of the drug if acidemia, impaired consciousness, pulmonary or cerebral edema, 0r
cardiac or renal failure is present. Techniques for increasing elimination of salicylate in
700SECTION4SpecificToxicants
fusion, peritoneal dialysis, hemodialysis, charcoal hemoperfusion, and administration of
repeated doses of activated charcoal. These procedures require close patient monitoring to
prevent circulatory overload, pulmonary edema, dangerous alkalemia and hyperosmolality
or hypernatremia.16 Acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, effectively alkalinizes
the urine, but may exacerbate metabolic acidosis and should not be used.
Gastrointestinal protectants should be initiated as outlined in the Treatment section of
this chapter. One canine study revealed that a group of dogs receiving aspirin and misopro-
stol had notably less gastroduodenal hemorrhage and clinical signs of vomiting than dogs
receiving aspirin alone.100
 Baseline liver enzyme values should be obtained and monitored following large aspirin
overdoses.l4 In general, elevations in liver enzymes will begin within 12-24 hours follow-
ing exposure and will peak approximately 72 hours later. Patients with rapid or severe liver
enzyme elevations should be managed for liver injury (e.g., hepatoprotectants, dextrose,
dietary alterations, etc.).
Published therapeutic doses for aspirin are:103
As an antinflammatory: dog: 10 to 25 mg/kg every 12 hours; cat: 10 to 20 mg/kg every
48 hours
For antiplatelet use: dog: 5 to 10 mg/kg every 24 to 48 hours; cat: 80 mg every 48 hours
Carprofen
Carprofen is a drug of the propionic acid class. Carprofen is COX-2 selective in dogs, but
not in cats.3l The current recommended dose for canines is 2.2-4.4 mg/kg/day PO, intra-
administration in cats at a dose of 4 mg/kg, subcutaneously or intravenously. Carprofen
is extensively and rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract in dogs following oral
ity of an absorbed dose is excreted in the bile and undergoes enterohepatic recirculation.
Although exposures of 25 mg/kg/day for 42 days and 40 mg/kg/day in dogs were reported
to cause no adverse effects in preclinical trials, the ASPCA APCC reports that, based on
overdoses reported in dogs, doses more than 20 mg/kg could result in severe gastrointes-
tinal signs and renal injury may occur at doses of more than 40 mg/kg (mild elevations in
liver enzymes may also occur at this exposure dose).12o According to the ASPCA APCC
database, cats are at risk of gastrointestinal injury at doses of 4 mg/kg or more and doses of
8 mg/kg or more may result in acute renal failure.12 Management of carprofen overdoses is
the same as for ibuprofen overdose: decontamination, gastrointestinal protection, and fluid
diuresis, as indicated by degree of exposure.l14
Carprofen-associated hepatic toxicosis is believed to be idiosyncratic and host depen-
dent.12f Clinical signs associated with carprofen-induced hepatic toxicosis included inappe-
tence, vomiting, and icterus. Biochemical abnormalities included increased serum activity
of hepatic enzymes and hyperbilirubinemia. Liver biopsies in 18 of these dogs revealed
a spectrum of multifocal to extensive hepatocellular necrosis that was characterized by
ballooning degeneration (i.e., vacuolar change), lytic necrosis, and apoptosis. Most dogs
recover uneventfully after discontinuation of carprofen and administration of supportive
care.
Deracoxib
 Deracoxib is a selective COX-2 inhibitor in dogs.122 Deracoxib is rapidly absorbed, with
90% bioavailability and peak plasma levels occurring 2 hours following oral exposure in
dogs.123 Deracoxib is more than 90% protein bound in the serum. Deracoxib is metabo-
lized in the liver and excreted primarily in the feces as a parent compound or one of four
main metabolites. Ihe half-life of deracoxib increases with increasing dosage: at 2-3 mg/kg
Chapter 65 |  Nonsteroidal Antinflammatories  701
the half-life in dogs is 3 hours, and it increases to 19 hours at 20 mg/kg. Deracoxib is
approved for use in dogs of more than 4 pounds at 1-2 mg/kg PO once daily as needed for
arthritis pain and 3-4 mg/kg/day PO for no more than 7 days for postoperative pain.124 It
has also been used off label at 3 mg/kg/day PO for treatment of transitional cell carcinoma
in dogs.125
The most commonly reported adverse effects of deracoxib with therapeutic use are vom-
iting, anorexia, lethargy, and depression.126 Proximal duodenal perforation was reported in
3 dogs following therapeutic dosing of deracoxib at 2-3 mg/kg PO every 24 hours.i27 Two of
the three dogs had received deracoxib per the labeled dosing scheme. A retrospective study
of 29 cases of gastrointestinal tract perforation subsequent to therapeutic use of deracoxib
in dogs revealed that 90% of the dogs had received doses higher than labeled, had received
an additional NSAID or corticosteroid in close temporal association with deracoxib ther-
apy, or both.12z Of those, 20 (69%) died or were euthanized. Ihe authors concluded that
approved dosage regimens should be followed carefully and that deracoxib should be used
cautiously in dogs likely to have gastrointestinal tract injury.
Acute deracoxib overdoses of more than 15 mg/kg may produce significant gastroin-
testinal injury, and doses of more than 30 mg/kg may result in renal injury in dogs.114 In
cats, gastrointestinal injury may be seen at 4 mg/kg or more, whereas 8 mg/kg or more
may result in renal injury. Management of deracoxib overdoses is the same as for ibuprofen
overdose: decontamination, gastrointestinal protection, and fluid diuresis, as indicated by
degree of exposure.
Etodolac
ioj abesop palaqel aul szrlaiel pue spunod ll saop ut asn [eno ioy panoidde st selopon
dogs is 10-15 mg/kg bw PO once daily. In dogs etodolac is rapidly absorbed following oral
administration and undergoes enterohepatic recycling. The plasma half-life of etodolac is
7 hours in fasted dogs and 12 hours in unfasted dogs.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) has been reported in dogs receiving therapeutic doses
of etodolac.129 Dogs with etodolac treatment intervals of less than 6 months prior to the
development of KCS were more than four times more likely to regain tear production than
those with etodolac treatment intervals of 6 months or more. The authors conclude that
monitoring of tear production prior to and during etodolac administration be considered.
Dogs receiving 10 mg/kg BW for 12 months or 15 mg/kg BW for 6 months exhibited
ing greater than 40 mg/kg/day displayed gastrointestinal ulceration, emesis, and weight
loss. Death, accompanied by gastrointestinal and renal problems, was documented in dogs
receiving greater than 80 mg/kg/day. Management of etodolac overdoses is the same as
for ibuprofen overdose: decontamination, gastrointestinal protection, and fluid diuresis, as
indicated by degree of exposure.114
Firocoxib
Firocoxib has been shown to be a highly selective COX-2 inhibitor using in vitro studies
on canine blood.130 Firocoxib has relatively low bioavailability (38%) in dogs when admin-
istered orally, and is 96% protein bound. The half-life of frocoxib in dogs is 7.8 hours.
Firocoxib is approved for oral use in dog for control of pain and inflammation associated
with osteoarthritis and postoperative pain. The recommended dose is 5 mg/kg PO once
daily as needed.
Dosing of adult beagle dogs at 15 and 25 mg/kg/day for 180 days resulted in transient
decreases in serum albumin levels, and gastrointestinal lesions including inflammation and
ulceration were seen inthe 25 mg/kg group.130 Administration of firocoxib to juvenile (10-13
weeks) beagle dogs at 15 and 25 mg/kg/day for 180 days resulted in decreased weight gain,
hepatic lesions, pancreatic edema, duodenal ulceration, and death or euthanasia of 4 out
u sassaeaseuqdaspausp
22 days caused intestinal erosion or ulceration in three out of four dogs. In a clinical study
of dogs with osteoarthritis dosed at 5 mg/kg/day PO for 52 days, 5.1% were withdrawn
702SECTlON 4Specific Toxicants
from the trial because of gastrointestinal side effects.131 The most common adverse effects
of firocoxib reported to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration are vomiting, anorexia,
elevated BUN, and depression.126 Management of acute firocoxib overdoses is the same as
for ibuprofen overdose: decontamination, gastrointestinal protection, and fluid diuresis, as
indicated by degree of exposure.114
Indomethacin
The reported minimum toxic dose in canines of indomethacin is 0.5 mg/kg/day.9 This drug,
like ibuprofen, undergoes extensive enterohepatic recycling.? The effects of indomethacin
on the postoperative course following experimental orthopedic surgery in dogs was stud-
ied.132 At a dose of 25 mg given twice daily, indomethacin was discontinued on day 1 post-
operatively because signs of toxicosis were observed in all the dogs (e.g., lethargy, vomiting,
and bloody stool). All patients had by then received a total dose of 125 mg of indomethacin.
One dog died the fifth day postoperatively. Postmortem examination revealed intestinal
ulcers in all dogs receiving this dose. When indomethacin was administered at a lower
dose (5 mg twice daily) only one dog showed adverse effects (bloody stool on postopera-
tive day 5). All dogs in the study, however, showed evidence of healing intestinal ulcers at
postmortem examination. Because of the narrow margin of safety of indomethacin, any
exposure in dogs or cats merits a minimum treatment of decontamination and gastroin-
testinal protection.
Ketoprofen
 In dogs ketoprofen has been used for short-term anti inflammatory/analgesic use (up to 5
days).2 Ketoprofen caused no adverse effects and was effective in cats at a dose of 2 mg/kg
given subcutaneously, followed by 1 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for 4 days.133 The antipyretic
effect of ketoprofen in cats was rapid and persisted for at least 8 hours but less than 24 hours,
and the authors reported no drug side effects based on clinical observation. The published
dose for dogs is 2 mg/kg, followed by 1 mg/kg/day for 4 to 5 days.38 Exposure doses of keto-
profen greater than 20 mg/kg may be associated with adverse effects. Management of keto-
profen overdoses is the same as for ibuprofen overdose: decontamination, gastrointestinal
 protection, and fluid diuresis, as indicated by degree of exposure.14
Meloxicam
Meloxicam is approved for oral and parenteral (intravenous or subcutaneous) use in dogs
and for subcutaneous use in cats. In dogs, meloxicam is dosed at 0.2 mg/kg BW intravenously
or subcutaneously followed in 24 hours by 0.1 mg/kg/day PO.134 Cat dosing is a one-time
subcutaneous dose of 0.3 mg/kg BW; additional doses are contraindicated.135 In dogs, orally
administered meloxicam has nearly 100% bioavailability when administered with food.136
Meloxicam is approximately 97% protein bound in dogs and cats.135.136 Terminal half-lives
for dogs and cats are 24 and 15 hours, respectively, regardless of route of administration.
In safety studies, dogs were dosed orally at 0.1, 0.3, and 0.5 mg/kg/day for 180 days.
dosed at 0.3 mg/kg/day and one half of dogs dosed at 0.5 mg/kg/day had decreases in red
blood cell counts, and regenerative anemia was identifed in some of the dogs. BUN values
showed increasing trends in two of the high-dose dogs, but values remained within the
reference range. No changes in coagulation parameters were noted during the study.
 In feline efficacy studies, 8.3% of cats administered meloxicam subcutaneously prior to
surgery (onychectomy or onychectomy and surgical neuter) developed elevated posttreat-
ment elevations of BUN (compared with 0% in butorphanol-treated cohorts), and 12.5%
developed posttreatment anemia (compared with 4% in butorphanol-treated cohorts).35
Cats administered 0.9 and 1.5 mg/kg (three and five times the recommended dose) subcu-
taneously once daily for 3 days developed gastrointestinal and renal adverse effects. Cats
given 0.3 or 0.6 mg/kg subcutaneously followed by 0.3 mg/kg/day orally for 10 days devel-
oped severe signs of gastrointestinal and renal injury; one cat in each dose group died on
day 8.
Chapter 65 | Nonsteroidal Antinflammatories 703
Based on the safety studies, it appears that meloxicam has a fairly narrow margin of
safety, especially in cats, so any overdoses should be managed promptly and measures taken
to protect against gastrointestinal and renal injury as described in the Treatment section
previously.
Naproxen
In the dog, naproxen has a half-life of 35 to 72 hours and is eliminated primarily through
the high end of the recommended human juvenile dose) caused gastrointestinal lesions and
u g auo uaaia anam shop uaum se'Paip arenuaaa saop aus pue 'saueuo soroiua
kg/day, gastrointestinal lesions were also common.
Naproxen-associated duodenal ulcer, perforation, and peritonitis were reported in a
dog receiving 22 mg/kg/day for 3 days and 5.5 mg/kg/day for 2 to 3 weeks." A transmural
 pyloric perforation in a 25-kg dog was the result of periodic administration by the owner
of 250 mg of naproxen once or twice daily for several weeks before the dog was brought to
the veterinarian.84 Single acute doses of more than 5 mg/kg BW may result in gastrointes-
tinal toxicity and doses of more than 25 mg/kg have been associated with renal injury in
dogs.1z Acute doses of more than 50 mg/kg may result in neurologic signs. Management of
naproxen overdoses is the same as for ibuprofen overdose: decontamination, gastrointesti-
nal protection, and fluid diuresis, as indicated by degree of exposure.14
Phenylbutazone
Phenylbutazone is not commonly used in dogs anymore. The recommended dose is listed as
14 mg/kg PO three times daily initially (maximum of 800 mg/day regardless of weight) and
then titrate the dose down to the lowest effective dose.33 The average lethal dose reported in
the dog is 150 mg/kg, with an oral median lethal dose (LDso) of 332 mg/kg.
Piroxicam
When administered on an ermpty stomach, piroxicam in dogs is rapidly absorbed and
undergoes enterohepatic recycling.3.139 The mean elimination half-life is 40.2 hours; how-
Ever, ahalf-life of 35 hours inbeagles and a half-life of 74hours in mongrel dogs have been
reported.35
 In a two-phase clinical trial, piroxicam was administered to dogs at a dose of 0.6 mg/kg/
 panu saars aus asau saan snona u panaisue sem p a or se
days only; two 7-day periods with a 3-day wash-out period between treatments; and dis-
continuous administration of 7 days on, 3 days off for four consecutive periods with a 7-day
wash-out period, which was extended to 169 days. Only two dogs experienced gastric upset.
The authors concluded that a discontinuous schedule of piroxicam at 0.6 mg/kg/day in dogs
with no existing diseases involving the gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, or liver may be safe.
However, an almost perforated ulcer in the distal pylorus of a dog after 17 days of piroxi-
cam therapy at a dose rate of 0.8 mg/kg on alternate days has been reported.1'39 Addition-
ally, gastrointestinal reactions in 6 and renal papillary necrosis in 2 of 34 dogs treated with
piroxicam for transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder at 0.3 mg/kg/day has been
sa uaoidnq  se aes al s saspano uernd jo juaaaeu sot'paoda
decontamination, gastrointestinal protection, and fluid diuresis, as indicated by degree of
exposure.l14
Tepoxalin
Tepoxalin is considered a dual inhibitor of arachidonic acid metabolism as it inhibits both
COX and 5-lipoxygenase.141 Tepoxalin is rapidly absorbed following oral administration
and the presence of food enhances bioavailability. The parent compound, tepoxalin, is rap-
idlly converted to an active metabolite that has a half-life of 12-13 hours. Tepoxalin and its
metabolite are almost exclusively eliminated via the bile.
a 0g-ol jo asop [enuun ue je raiel io spumod c soop un asn ioy paaoidde st unexodan
kg PO followed by daily maintenance doses of 10 mg/kg. The most common adverse effects
704SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
u oe jo saso g'eap pue 'ixanue tu aie shop u uexodan m paoa
pue Aep/ay/au 0z jo sasop 1amol :stop un uoneianm slusea ut patmsau shep 0sl 1oy Aep/a
100 mg/kg/day caused gastric irritation. Although safety studies on tepoxalin have sug-
gested a wider margin of safety than some other veterinary NSAIDs, it would be prudent to
manage tepoxalin overdoses in the same fashion as ibuprofen overdoses: decontamination,
 gastrointestinal protection, and fluid diuresis, as indicated by degree of exposure.l14
Conclusion
Because of their antinflammatory, analgesic, and antipyretic properties, NSAIDs have a
role in therapy in dogs and cats. Judicious administration is warranted. Risk factors, elimi-
nation half-lives of the various NSAIDs, and concurrent administration of other medica-
tions should be considered before prescribing any NSAID. Pet owners must be made aware
that over-the-counter NSAID medications can be harmful and even deadly if they are
administered improperly to their pets.
Acknowledgment
The editors wish to acknowledge the exceptional contribution of Dr. Marilyn Mikiciuk, who
authored this chapter for the original edition of the book. Her contribution served as the
foundation for the material appearing in this edition.
References
1. Boothe DMI: Controlling inflammation with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, Vet Med Sept
875883, 1989.
2. Isaacs JP: Adverse effects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in the dog and cat, Aust Vet Pract
26(4):180-186, 1996.
3. Godshalk CP, Roush JK, Fingland RB, et al: Gastric perforation associated with administration of ibu-
profen in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 201(11):1734-1736, 1992.
4. Rubin SI, Papich MG: Clinical uses of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in companion animal
practice. Part II, drugs, therapeutic uses and adverse effects, Camine Pract 15(2):27-33, 1992.
5. Jackson TW, Costin C, Link K, et al: Correlation of serum ibuprofen concentration with clinical signs
of toxicity in three canine exposures, Vet Hum Toxic 33(5):486-488, 1991.
6. Spyridakis LK, Bacia JI, Barsanti JA,et al: Ibuprofen toxicosis in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 188(9):
918-919, 1986.
7. Cosenza SF: Drug-induced gastroduodenal ulceration in dogs, Mod Vet Pract Dec 923-925, 1984.
8. McKellar QA, May SA, Lees P: Pharmacology and therapeutics of non-steroidal anti-infammatory
drugs in the dog and cat: two individual agents, / Small Anim Pract 32:225-235, 1991.
 9. Duggan DE, Hooke KF, Noll RM, et al: Enterohepatic circulation of indomethacin and its role in intes-
tinal irritation, Biochem Pharmacol 25:1749-1754, 1975.
10. Nap RC: Nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in companion animal medicine, Tjdschr
Diergeneeskd 118(Suppl 1):6S-8S, 1993.
11. Scherkl R, Frey HH: Pharmacokinetics of ibuprofen in the dog, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 10:261-265, 1987.
12. Lees P, May SA, McKellar QA: Pharmacology and therapeutics of nonsteroidal anti-infammatory
dugs in the dog and cat. General pharmacology, I Small A nim Pract 32:183-193, 1991.
13. Adams S, Bough RG, Cliff EE,et al: Absorption, distribution, and toxicity of ibuprofen, Toxicol Appl
Phαrmacol15:310-330, 1969.
14. Meadows I, Gwaltney S: The 10 most common toxicoses in dogs, Vet Med101:82-90, 2006.
15. Merola V, Dunayer E: The 10 most common toxicoses in cats, Vet Med 101:339-342, 2006.
17. Willard MD: Diseases ofthe stomach. In EttingerSJ,Feldman EC,editors: Textbook of veterinary nter-
nal medicine, ed 4, vol 2, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders
18. Vane JR, Botting RM: Mechanism of action of anti-inflammatory drugs, Scand Rheumatol 25(Suppl
102):9-21, 1996
19. Maddison JE: Corticosteroids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, Proc Annu Semin Eq Branch
Comp A nim Soc, NZ Vet Assoc 158:91-106, 1994.
Chapter 65|NonsteroidalAntinflammatories705
33(1):38-48, 1996.
21. Masferrer JL, Isakson PC, Seibert K: Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors, Gastroenterol Clin North Am
25(2):363-372, 1996.
22. Brideau C, Kargman S, Liu S, et al: A human whole blood assay for clinical evaluation of biochemical
efficacy of cyclooxygenase inhibitors, Inflamm Res 45:68-74, 1996.
23. Frolich JC: A classification of NSAIDs according to the relative inhibition of cyclooxygenase isoen-
zymes, Trends Pharmacol Sci 18(1):30-34, 1997.
24. Bergh MS, Budsberg SC: The coxib NSAIDs: potential clinical and pharmacological importance in
veterinary medicine, I Vet Intern Med 19:633-643, 2005
25. Famaey IP: In vitro and in vivo pharmacological evidence of selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition by
nimesulide: an overview, Infamm Res 46:437-446, 1997.
26. Engelhardt G: Pharmacology of meloxicam, a new non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug with an
improved safety profile through preferential inhibition of COX-2, Br J Rheumatol 35(Suppl):4-12, 1996.
27. Donnelly MT, Hawkey CJ: Review article: COX-2 inhibitors—a new generation of safer NSAIDs? Ali-
ment Pharmacol Ther 11:227-236, 1997.
 28. Hayllar J, Bjarnason I: Gastroduodenal tolerability of highly specific cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, Ital ]
Gastroenterol 28(Suppl 4):30-32, 1996.
 29. Wallace JL: NSAID gastroenteropathy: past, present and future, Can J Gastroenterol 10(7):451-459,
1996.
30. King IN, Arnaud JP, Goldenthal El, et al: Robenacoxib in the dogs: target species safety in relation to
extent and duration of inhibition of COX-1 and COX-2, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 34:298-311, 2011.
31. Clark TP: The clinical pharmacology of cyclooxygenase-2-selective and dual inhibitors, Vet Clin Small
Antm36:1061-1085,2006
32. Schmid VB, Seewald W, Lees P, King IN: In vitro and ex vivo inhibition of COX isoforms by robena
coxib in the cat: a comparative study, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 33:444-452, 2010.
33. Conlon PD: Nonsteroidal drugs used in the treatment of inflammation, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 18:1115-1131, 1988.
 34. Borga O, Borga B: Serum protein binding on nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs: a comparative
study, I Pharmacokinet Biopharm 25(1):63-77, 1997.
35. Galbraith EA, McKellar QA: Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of piroxicam in dogs, Vet Rec
128:561-565, 1991
36. McKellar QA, Galbraith EA, Simmons RD: Pharmacokinetics and serum thromboxane inhibition of
two NSAIDs when administered to dogs by the intravenous or subcutaneous route, / Small Anim Pract
32:335-340, 1991.
37. Cunningham FM, Lees P: Advances in anti-infammatory therapy, Br Vet J 150:115-134, 1994.
38. Papich MG: Principles of analgesic drug therapy, Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 12(2):80-93, 1997.
39. Pearson SP, Kelberman I: Gastrointestinal effects of NSAIDs, Postgrad Med 100(5):131-143, 1996.
40. Seitz S, Boelsterli UA: Diclofenac acyl glucuronide, a major biliary metabolite, is directy involved in
small intestinal injury in rats, Gastroenterology 115(6):1476-1482, 1998.
41. Hawkey CJ: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug gastropathy: causes and treatments, Scand Gastr0-
enterol 31(Suppl 220):124-127, 1996.
42. Champion GD, Feng PH, Azuma T, et al: NSAID-induced gastrointestinal damage, Drugs 53(1):6-19,
1997.
43. Evans IMM, McMahon AD, Murray FE, et al. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are associated
with emergency admission to hospital for colitis due to inflammatory bowel disease, Gut 40:619-622,
1997.
44. Gutthan SP, Garcia Rodriguez LA, Raiford DS: Individual nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs and
45. Matzke GR:Nonrenal toxicities ofacetaminophen, aspirin, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents
Am I Kidney Dis 28(1 Suppl 1):S63-S70, 1996.
46. Wallace JL: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and gastroenteropathy: the second hundred years,
Gastroenterology 112(3):1000-1016, 1997.
47. Kawano S, Tsuji S, Sato N, et al: NSAIDs and the microcirculation of the stomach, Gastroenterol Clin
North Am 25(2):299 -314, 1996.
48. Strom H, Thomsen MK: Effects of non-steroidal anti-infammatory drugs on canine neutrophil che-
motaxis, I Vet Pharmacol Ther 13:186-191, 1990.
49. Hansen JM, Hallas J, Lauritsen JM, et al: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and ulcer complica-
706SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
 50. Faucheron JL, Parc R: Non-steroidal anti-infammatory drug-induced colitis, Int J Colorect Dis l1:99-
101, 1996.
 51. Peterson WL: The influences of food, beverages and NSAIDs on gastric acid secretion and mucosal
integrity, Yale I Biol Med 69:81-84, 1996.
mucosa after parenteral nonsteroidal anti-inflarmmatory drugs, Gastroenterology 112:1931-1939, 1997.
53. Davies NMI, Wright MR, Russell AS, et al: Effect of the enantiomers of flurbiprofen, ibuprofen, and
ketoprofen on intestinal permeability, J Pharmaceut Sci 85(11):1170-1173, 1996.
54. Stanton ME, Bright RM: Gastroduodenal ulceration in dogs, I Vet Intern Med 3:238-244, 1989.
55. Wallace MS, Zawie DA, Garvey MS: Gastric ulceration in the dog secondary to the use of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, I Am Anim Hosp A ssoc 26:467-472, 1990.
 56. Wen SF: Nephrotoxicities of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, I Formos Med Assoc 96(3):157-171,
1997.
57. Gutthann SP, Garcia Rodriguez LA, Raiford DS, et al: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and the
risk of hospitalization for acute renal failure, Arch Intern Med 156:2433-2439, 1996.
58. de Leeuw PW: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and hypertension, Drugs 51(2):179-187, 1996.
59. Evans AM: Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics ofthe profens: enantioselectivity, clinical impli-
cations, and special reference to S(+)-ibuprofen, I Clin Pharmaco? 36:7S-15S, 1996.
47:129-133, 1996.
61. Murray MD, Brater DG: Effects of NSAIDs on the kidney, Prog Drug Res 49:155-171, 1997.
62. Lascelles BD, McFarland J, Swann HS: Guidelines for safe and effective use of NSAIDs in dogs, Vet Ther
6(3):237-251, 2005.
63. Bessone F: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: what is the actual risk of liver damage? World J
Gastroenterol16(45):56515661, 2010.
 64. Editorial Board: Effects of two non-steroidal anti-infammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and gentamicin on
renal function (comment), Clin Sci (Colch) 91(2):119, 1996.
65. Elwood C, Boswood A, Simpson K,et al: Renal failure after flunixin meglumine administration, Vet Rec
130(26):582-583, 1992.
66. Smitherman P: Intra-operative use of flunixin meglumine, Vet Rec 131(20):471, 1992.
67. Boydell P: Drug combination side effects, Vet Rec 130(14):307, 1992.
68. Rubin SI, Papich MG: Nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary
therapy X, small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
69. Harder S, Thurmann P: Clinically important drug interactions with anticoagulants, Clin Pharmacoki-
net 30(6):416-444, 1996.
 70. Stirnimann G, Kessebohm K, Lauterburg B: Liver injury caused by drugs: an update, Swiss Med Wkly
140:w13080, 2010.
71. Browne BA, Holder EP, Rupnick L:Nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs and necrotizing fascitis, Am
JHealth Syst Pharm 53:265-269, 1996.
72. Dow SW, Rosychuk R, McChesney AE,et al: Effects of flunixin and flunixin plus prednisolone on the
gastrointestinal tract of dogs, Am J Vet Res 51:1131, 1990.
73. Butterworth SJ, Weaver BMQ: Drug combination side effects, Vet Record 130(12):251-252, 1992.
74. Verbeeck RJ: Pharmokinetic drug interactions with nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs, Clin
Pharmacokinet 19:44, 1990.
75. Daehler MH: Transmural pyloric perforation associated with naproxen administration in a dog, I Am
Vet Med Assoc 189(6):694695, 1986.
76. Gfeller RW, Sandors AD: Naproxen-associated duodenal ulcer complicated by perforation and bacte-
ria- and barium sulfate-induced peritonitis in a dog, / Am Vet Med Assoc 198(4):644-646, 1991
77. Mahaffey EA: Disorders of iron metabolism. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy IX, Phila-
delphia, 1986, WB Saunders.
78. Weiser MG: Erythrocyte responses and disorders. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors: Textbook of
veterinary internal medicine, ed 4, vol 2, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
79. Rogers K, Anemia: In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine,ed 4,
vol 2, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
80. Grauer GF, Lane IF: Acute renal failure. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors: Textbook of veterinary
ternal medicine, ed 4, vol 2, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
81. Pennick DG, Matz M, Tidwell A: Ultrasonography of gastric ulceration in the dog, Vet Radiol Ultra-
sound 38:308-312, 1997.
82. Owens JM:Gastrointestinal diagnostic imaging. In Bonagura ID,editor: Kirk's current veterinary ther-
apy X1I1, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
Chapter 65 | Nonsteroidal Antinflammatories 707
Feldman EC,editors: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 4,vol 1, Philadelphia, 1995,WB
Saunders.
84. Feldman BF: Disorders of platelets. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy X, small animal
practice, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
85. Forsyth SF, Guilford WG, Lawoko CRO: Endoscopic evaluation ofthe gastroduodenal mucosa follow-
ing non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug administration in the dog, N Z Vet J44:179-181, 1996.
86. Strombeck DR, Guilford WG: Procedures for the evaluation of pancreatic and gastrointestinal tract
diseases. In Strombeck DR, Guilford WG, editors: Small animal gastroenterology, ed 2, Davis, Calif,
1990, Stonegate Publishing Co.
87. Lagutchik MS: Blood transfusions. In Wingfield WE, editor: Veterinary emergency medicine secrets,
Philadelphia, 1997, Hanley & Belfus.
88. Boulay JP, Lipowitz AJ, Klausner JS: Effect of cimetidine on aspirin-induced gastric hemorrhage in
dogs, Am I Vet Res 47:1744-1746, 1986.
89. Bersenas AME, Mathews KA, Allen DG, Conlon PD: Efects of ranitidine, famotidine, pantoprazole
and omeprazole on intragastric pH in dogs, Am I Vet Res 66:425-431, 2005.
 90. Hata J, Kamada T, Manabe N, et al: Famotidine prevents canine gastric blood flow reduction by
NSAIDs, Aliment Pharmacol Ther 21(Suppl 2):55-59, 2005.
91. Coruzzi G, Bertaccini G: Antisecretory activity of omeprazole in the conscious gastric fistula cat: com-
parison with fammotidine, Pharmacol Res 21(5):499-506, 1989.
92. Coruzzi G, Adami M, Bertaccini G: Gastric antisecretory activity of lansoprazole in different experi-
mental models: comparison with omeprazole, Gen Pharmacol 26(5):1027-1032, 1995.
93. Loeb DS, Ahlquist DA, Talley MJ: Management of gastroduodenopathy associated with the use of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, Mayo Clin Proc 67(4):354-364, 1992.
 94. Ekstrom P, Carling L, Wetterhus S, et al: Omeprazole reduces the frequency of gastroduodenal lesions
and dyspeptic symptoms during NSAID treatment, Gastroenterology 108:A87, 1995.
95. Oddsson E, Gudjonsson A, Thjodleifsson B: Protective effect of omeprazole or ranitidine against
naproxen induced damage to the human gastroduodenal mucosa (abstract), Sand J Gastroenterol
176(Suppl 25):25, 1990.
96. Whalan A, Bader JP, Classen M, et al: Effect of omeprazole and ranitidine on ulcer healing and relapse
rates in patients with benign gastric ulcers, N Engl I Med 320(2):69-75, 1989
97. Tarnowski AJ, Hollander D, Gerglely MS, et al: Comparison of antacid, sucralfate, cimetidine, and
1985.
98. Tarnowski A, Hollander D, Krause WJ, et al: Does sucralfate affect the normal gastric mucosa? Gastro-
enterology 90:893-905, 1986.
99. Pedrazzoli Junior J, de Almeida Pierossi M, Muscara MN,et al: Short-term sucralfate administration alters
potassium diclofenac absorption in healthy male volunteers, Br I Clin Pharmaco? 43(1):104-108, 1997.
100. Murtaugh RJ, Matz ME, Labato MA, et al: Use of synthetic prostaglandin E1 (misoprostol) for pre-
vention of aspirin-induced gastroduodenal ulceration in arthritic dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 202(2):
251256, 1993.
101. Ward DM, Leib MS, Johnston SA, Marini M: The effect of dosing interval on the efficacy of misoprostol
in the prevention of aspirin-induced gastric injury, I Vet Intern Med 17(3):282-290, 2003.
102. Davies CD, Forrester D, Troy GC, et al: Effects of a prostaglandin E1 analogue, misoprostol, on renal
function in dogs receiving nephrotoxic doses of gentamicin, Am I Vet Res 59(8):1048-1054, 1998.
103. Papich M: Table of common drugs: approximate dosages. In Bonagura JD,editor: Kirk's current veterf-
nary therapy Xll, small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
104. Matthews KA, Doherty T, Dyson DH, et al: Nephrotoxicity in dogs associated with methoxyfurane
anaesthesia and flunixin meglumine analgesia, Can Vet I 31:766-771, 1990.
105. Knapp DW, Richardson RC, Chan TCK, et al: Piroxicam therapy in 34 dogs with transitional cell
Garcinoma of the urinary bladder, I Vet Intern Med 8:273, 1994.
106. Davis LE: Clinical pharmacology of salicylates, I Am Vet Med Assoc 176:65, 1980.
107. Kauffman G: Aspirin-induced gastric mucosal injury: lessons learned from animal models, Gastroen-
terology 96:606-614, 1989.
108. Holland M, Chastain CB: Uses and misuses of aspirin. In Bonagura JD, editor: Krk's current veterinary
therapy Xll, small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
109. Guslandi M: Gastric toxicity of antiplatelet therapy with low-dose aspirin, Drugs 53(1):1-5, 1997.
110. Haggert G, McCormick G, Frank P, et al: Temporal pattem of gastric mucosal damage in beagle dogs
dosed daily with aspirin over a four week period (abstract). Proceedings of the I2th A merican College of
Veterinary Internal Medicine Forum, San Francisco, 1994.
708SECTION4SpecificToxicants
111. Brater DC: Clinical pharmacology of NSAIDs, J Clin Pharmacol 28:518-524, 1988.
112. Bischoff K: Toxicity of over-the-counter drugs. In Gupta RC, editor: Veterinary toxicology: basic and
clinical principles, New York, 2007, Academic Press.
113. Villar D, Buck WB: Ibuprofen, aspirin and acetaminophen toxicosis andtreatment in dogs and cats, Vet
Human Toxicol 40(3):156-161, 1998.
114. Gwaltney-Brant SM: Toxicology of pain medications, Proceedings ofthe Central Veterinary Conference
(CVC), Baltimore, MD, 2010.
115. Schubert TA: Salicylate-induced seizures in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 185:1000, 1984.
116.Proudfoot AT: Salicylates and salicylamide. In Haddad LM, Winchester J, editors: Clinical manage-
ment of poisoning and drug overdose, Philadelphia, 1990, WB Saunders.
117. Cribb AE: Adverse effects of NSAIDs. In Dowling PM, editor: Clinical pharmacology, principles and
practice, Monograph Series 982, Western Veterinary Conference, Las Vegas, 1998.
118. McKellar QA, Delatour P, Lees P: Stereospecific pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of carpro-
fen,JVet Pharmacol Ther 17:447-454,1994.
119. McKellar QA, Pearson T: Bogan JA: Pharmacokinetics,tolerance and serum thromboxane inhibition of
Garprofen in the dog, / Small Anim Pract 31:443-448, 1990.
120. Mensching D, Volmer P:Managing acute carprofentoxicosis in dogs and cats, Vet Med104(7):325-333,
2009.
121. MacPhail C, Lappin MR, Meyer DJ, et al: Hepatocellular toxicosis associated with administration of
carprofen in 21 dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 212(12):1895-1901, 1998.
122. Lascelles DX, Blikslager AT, Fox SM, Reese D: Gastrointestinal tract perforation in dogs treated with a
selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor: 29 cases (2002-2003), I Am Vet Med Assoc 227:112-117, 2005.
123. Deramaxx (deracoxib) Chewable Tablets [package insert]: Greensboro, 2006, Novartis Animal Health.
124. Plumb DC: Deracoxib. In Veterinary drug handbook, ed 6, Ames, IA, 2008, Blackwell.
125. McMillan SK, Boria P, Moore GE, et al: Antitumor effects of deracoxib treatment in 26 dogs with tran-
sitional cell carcinoma ofthe urinary bladder, I Am Vet Med Assoc 239(8):1084-1089, 2011.
126. U.S. Food and Drug Administration: Animal & veterinary adverse drug experience reports. Retrieved
01/2012 from 1987-2011, http://www.fda.gov/AnimalVeterinary/SafetyHealth/ProductSafetyInformatio
n/ucm055369.htm.
127. Case JB, Fick JL, Rooney MB: Proximal duodenal perforation in three dogs following deracoxib admin-
istration, I Am A nim Hosp Assoc 46(4):255-258, 2010.
129. Klauss GI, Giuliano EA, Moore CP, et al: Keratoconjunctivitis sicca associated with administration of
etodolac in dogs: 211 cases (1992-2002), I Am Vet Med Assoc 230(4):541-547.
130. Previcox (firocoxib) chewable tablets [package insert]: Duluth, 2007, Merial Ltd.
131. Autefage A, Palissier FM, Asimus E, Pepin-Richard C: Long-term efficacy and safety of firocoxib in the
treatment of dogs with osteoarthritis, Vet Rec 168(23):617.
132. Mbugua SW, Skoglund A, Lokken P: Efects of phenylbutazone and indomethacin on the post-opera-
133. Glew A, Aviad AD, Keister DM,et al: Use of ketoprofen as an antipyretic in cats, Can Vet J37:222-225,
1996.
134. U.S. Food and Drug Administration: Metacam [meloxicam 5 mg/mL solution for injection], Freedom
of Information Summarry, 2003. Retrieved 01/2012 from http://www.fda.gov/downloads/ AnimalVeterin
ary/Products/ ApprovedAnimalDrugProducts/FO1ADrugSummaries/ucm118006.pdf
135. U.S. Food and Drug Administration: Metacam [meloxicam 5 mg/mL solution for injection], Freedom of
Information Summary,2004. Retrieved 01/2012 from http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AnimalV eterinary/
136. U.S. Food and Drug Administration: Metacam [meloxicam oral suspension], Freedom of Information
Summary, 2004. Retrieved 01/2012 from http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AnimalVeterinary/Products/
ApprovedA nimalDrugProducts/FOIADrugSummaries/ucm118008.pdf.
137. Runkel R, Chaplin M, Boost G, et al: Absorption, distribution, and excretion of naproxen in various
laboratory animals and human subjects, I Pharm Sci 61:703-708, 1972.
1973.
139. Thomas Nw: Piroxicam-associated ulceration in a dog, Compend Cont Ed10:1004, 1987.
140. Sumano H, De Vizcaya A, Brumbaugh G: Tolerance and clinical evaluation of piroxicam in dogs, Israel
I Vet Med 51(1):27-29, 1996.
141. U.S. Food and Drug Administration: Zubrin [tepoxalin rapidly-disintegrating tablets for dogs], Free-
dom of Information Summary, 2003. Retrieved 01/2012 from http://www.fda.gov/downloads/ AnimalVe
CHAPTER
Organochlorine
66
Pesticides
Merl F. Raisbeck, DVM, MS, PhD, DABVT
The most likely source of acute organochlorine poisoning in small animals is
improperly stored stockpiles of outdated pesticides. With the exception of a very
few, very limited applications, most organochlorine insecticides have not been
used in rnore than 30 years.
· Clinical signs of organochlorine poisoning are best surmmarized as neurologic.
Poisoned animals become hyperesthetic and exhibit motor tremors and
convulsions. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive in nature.
· Most pesticides of this class are extrermely persistent in body fat. Poisoned
anirnals should be monitored for several weeks for recurrences.
·Most of the modern environmental guidelines ("toxic levels") are based
on theoretical human cancer considerations or on endocrine effects in
nonmammals. Clinicians should be aware when evaluating possible sources of
exposure that such guidelines are very low compared with the exposure required
for clinical poisoning.
Sources
After the introduction of dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) in 1940, a number of
Au ae ara rno saisad se as r paieain aram suos sue paeao
toxic chlorinated organic compounds, the term chlorinated hydrocarbons or organochlorines
(OCs) usually refers to this group of insecticides. Ihe OCs may be classified according to
either their intended principal use (e.g., insecticides, nematocides, and fungicides) or their
chemical structure (e.g., chlorinated aryl hydrocarbons, cyclodiene, diphenyl aliphatics,
and so on). The latter scheme is most useful from the standpoint of mammalian metabo-
lism and toxicology. With only a few exceptions, the OCs are refractory to metabolism and
are lipophilic. As such, they tend to be readily absorbed, but only slowly eliminated and
thus accumulate in humans, domestic animals, and wildlife, and bioconcentrate in the food
chain. Many are suspect or known carcinogens and endocrine disruptors. As a result, the
pue saierdsordoueano au se yns siuaee uaistsiad ssal aq paseidan aralrel uaaq sey sep
pyrethroids. Some exarmples of OCs include aldrin, dieldrin, endrin, lindane, chlordane,
endosulfan, heptachlor, toxaphene, and methoxychlor.
The OCs were heavily used for pest control from the 1950s through the 1970s. Ihus con-
taminated soils or leakage from old dump sites are possible sources of exposure for wildlife
and domestic carnivores, especially given the propensity of the OCs to bioconcentrate in
the food chain. Because one of the few remaining legal applications of the OC is ectopara-
site control, accidental overdose is also a possible source of acute toxicosis. The most likely
source of poisoning in companion animals, however, is old stockpiles of insecticides and
improper waste disposal.
709
710 SECTlON 4 SpecificToxicants
ToxicDose
The acutely toxic dose varies considerably with the specific OC. In general the OCs are less
acutely toxic than organophosphates or carbamates used for similar purposes. For example,
the most potent OCs have a mammalian acute median lethal dose (LDso) of approximately
50 mg/kg body weight, 10-fold to 100-fold larger than the LDso of the carbamate, aldicarb.
most toxic, followed by the aryl hydrocarbons (e.g., lindane and methoxychlor), and finally
by the diphenyl aliphatics (DDT, etc.). Because of their lipophilicity, both oral and dermal
exposures may result in notable systemic effects. Their low volatility usually precludes sig
nificant respiratory exposure unless aerosolized. Most of the OCs have an offensive odor.
Toxicokinetics
After exposure the OCs are rapidly redistributed via plasma lipoproteins to liver, brain, and
other lipid-rich tissues. Adipose tissue serves as a “sink" for the OC, competing with critical
organs, such as the brain, for circulating OC in a fashion similar to the short-acting barbi-
turates. Thus, after acute oral exposure to an OC, the blood concentration peaks and then
declines relatively quickly as redistribution and elimination at first equal and then exceed
absorption. Later, as the OC concentrations in fat exceed those in blood, stored pesticide is
sowly released back into the systemic circulation, and the rate of decline in blood concen-
tration slows dramatically. The initial period, in which both elimination and redistribution
serve to decrease blood concentration, is referred to as the aipha phase. During the later, or
beta, phase, redistribution from adipose tissue tends to sustain circulating levels and greatly
prolongs the half-life. Ihe beta phase half-life of most OCs is measured in months.
Body fat may also serve as a source of OC poisoning. During prolonged low-dose
exposure, the adipose OC concentration increases in a logarithmic manner, eventually
approaching a plateau in which the relationship between tissue concentrations, blood lev-
els, and excretion rates is in equilibrium with uptake. At this point, the total amount of OCs
in the body may be several times greater than a toxic dose, but because it is sequestered in
potentially toxic dose stored in adipose tissue becomes available to the general circulation
and may result in acute intoxication.
Lipophilic compounds, such as the OCs, are readily passed from blood to mammary cell
lipid, which are subsequently secreted as milk fat. Transfer of the OC body burden to milk
fat is ensured by the large perfusion of the mammary gland and the favorable concentration
gradient created by constant synthesis and secretion of milk. Because milk is a major elimi-
nation route of persistent OCs, it is a potential source of exposure for neonates. In practice
the possibility should be considered if a lactating animal has been exposed to an OC.
Metabolism of most OCs contributes little to elimination and may actually produce more
toxic metabolites. For example, the cyclodienes (e.g., heptachlor) are rapidly converted to
their epoxides, and the diphenyl aliphatics are partially dechlorinated, but in both cases the
end product is stable, lipophilic, and at least as toxic as its parent. Metabolites are released
 slowly from the lipid storage depot and transported through the blood to liver, where they
are excreted in the bile. However, after excretion into the intestine, many OCs are reabsorbed.
This enterohepatic recycling also serves to prolong the persistence of the OC in the body.
Mechanism of Toxicity
With the possible exception of DDT, the biochemical and cellular mechanisms of acute OC
insecticide toxicity are incompletely understood in mammals. In suffciently high doses,
most OCs interfere with the axonal transmission of nerve impulses and therefore disrupt
mervous system functions. DDT, specifically, inhibits the mechanism whereby the influx
of sodium is stopped and the outflux of potassium is started during an action potential
Chapter 66 | Organochlorine Pesticides 711
thereby rendering the fber hyperactive. DDT metabolites (specifically mitotane) also
inhibit the output of the adrenal gland by causing selective necrosis of the zona fasciculata
and reticularis.
The mechanisms of action of the other OCs are poorly understood. Dieldrin, aldrin,
and lindane apparently enhance neurotransmitter release at cholinergic synapses and
     s    
chlor and lindane have been shown to inhibit binding of the inhibitory neurotransmitter
y-aminobutyric acid. Clinically, however, all compounds cause intense nervous stimula-
tion and hypersensitivity, a fact that is responsible for the most dramatic signs of acute
poisoning.
A number of nonneurotoxic syndromes have been attributed to some OCs, especially
the polynuclear aromatic OCs, such as polybrominated biphenyls. These syndromes are
particularly likely to occur after long-term chronic exposure. A brief catalog of such effects
includes altered hepatic steroid metabolism, male infertility, bone marrow suppression,
nephrosis, and immunosuppression. However, most of these effects are of only marginal
significance to small-animal practice. Readers interested in chronic OC toxicity are referred
to reviews by Matsumura,' Murphy, and Safe.
clinical Signs
Although a variety of clinical and subclinical toxic effects have been attributed to the OC
insecticides, the clinical signs of acute poisoning are best summarized as neuromuscular.
Signs may begin within a few minutes or may occur as much as 1 to 2 days after exposure
to an acutely toxic dose. Mammals exposed to an acutely toxic dose typically exhibit an
early period of apprehension and hypersensitivity, during which they become increasingly
agitated, incoordinated, and aggressive. Ihis phase in turn is followed by fasciculations of
the head and neck that progressively involve the rest of the body. There may be abnormal
posture, a spastic gait, and continuous chewing movements. Finally, there are tonic-clonic
convulsions that progress to coma and death or that alternate with intermittent periods of
few hours) will probably die. Ihe occurrence of clinical signs may be slowly progressive or
explosive in nature. Other signs may include disorientation, weakness, paresthesia, vomit-
ing, and respiratory depression.
Minimum Database
The diagnosis of acute OC insecticide poisoning hinges on (1) a history of exposure to a
particular OC insecticide; (2) clinical signs as described previously; and (3) demonstra-
tion of diagnostic concentrations of that particular OC or its metabolites in brain, liver, fat,
 or blood. However, tremors or convulsive seizures in animals that have been potentially
exposed to a pesticide and do not exhibit parasympathomimetic signs are sufficient to jus-
tify emergency therapy.
Confirmatory Tests
 Detection of OC residues in blood or tissue does not in itself confirm poisoning. Given the
persistent nature of the OCs, their widespread use in the past, and the incredible sensitivity
of modern analytical instrumentation, it is not unusual to detect OCs in apparently healthy
demonstrating concentrations of a specific OC in a specific tissue consistent with poisoning.
Unfortunately, various tissue concentrations vary with the time since exposure, and critical
concentrations have not been determined for all compounds in all species. Thus in many
instances it is necessary to extrapolate from other species or similar compounds. Table 66-1
712SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Table 66-1
Blood and Tissue Concentrations Associated with Acutely Toxic Effects
Species
punodwo
Concentration
Waterfowl
 Heptachlor epoxide
 40-50 ppm brain
Acute intoxication
Swine
Aldrin
4 ppm brain
Acute intoxication
(dieldrin)
Chicken
Aldrin
3 ppm brain
Acute intoxication
(dieldrin)
Waterfowl
DDE
250 ppm brain
Acute lethality
Human
Dieldrin
0.2 mcg/mL blood
Toxic threshold
Human
Endrin
0.05-0.1 mcg/mL
Toxic threshold
blood
Rat
Endrin
0.05-0.1 mcg/mL
Toxic threshold
blood
Horse
Heptachlor epoxide
 38 ppm brain
Acute intoxication
Waterfowl
 Heptachlor epoxide
3ppmbrain
Acute lethality
Calves
Lindane
15 ppm brain
Acute lethality
Calves
Pentachlorophenol
 40-50 ppm brain
Acute intoxication
Human
Telodrin
0.015 mcg/mL blood Acute intoxication
Human
Toxaphene
4ppm liver
Acute intoxication
DDE, Dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene.
Sample contamination is another common problem in OC diagnosis. Many organic
compounds, such as plasticizers, may interfere with the chermical analysis of OC in tissue.
Thus every effort should be made to collect diagnostic samples from acutely affected ani-
mals in clean glass or metal containers.
Treatment
There are no specific antidotes for OC intoxication. Practical therapeutic regimens are
 based on symptomatic and supportive therapy and on preventing further absorption of the
toxicant. Poisoned animals should be lightly sedated with anesthetics (e.g., barbiturates) or
given muscle relaxants (e.g., methocarbamol) to minimize convulsions. Only the minimum
amount necessary to control convulsions should be given. Phenothiazine tranquilizers, epi-
nephrine, and other adrenergic amines are contraindicated. Phenothiazines tend to lower
the seizure threshold further; the adrenergic amines may result in cardiac arrhythmias
because of the enhanced myocardial sensitivity associated with the OC.
Because many OC insecticides are respiratory depressants, possible additive effects
of anesthetics on respiration should be considered. Supplemental oxygen may be given
through an intranasal tube or an oxygen cage or, if the animal is comatose, via tracheal
intubation. As with any poison that induces convulsions or coma, establishing and main-
taining a patent airway is very important to prevent aspiration. Administration of a small
amount of parenteral nutrition (e.g., electrolytes and dextrose) may be considered if the
animal is unable to eat or drink.
If oral exposure is suspected, the animal should be given an adsorbent, such as activated
charcoal (AC) or cholestyramine, and a saline cathartic. Mineral oil should be given if AC
is not available. Gastric lavage may be useful in some cases. If topical exposure is suspected,
the animal should be thoroughly washed with soap and water, taking care that the individu-
als doing the washing are not themselves exposed to hazardous doses.
Adsorbents should also be considered to prevent enterohepatic recycling of the OC.
Given the biologic persistence of the OC, it is probably wise to continue the use of adsor-
bents for several days to a month after the acute episode to maximize elimination. Because
these compounds are lipid soluble, consideration should be given to the use of IV lipid
Chapter 66 | Organochlorine Pesticides 713
therapy as a treatment option (Intralipid, Liposyn?, Intravenous Lipid Emulsion). Current
dose recommendations for IFE 20% are extrapolated from human medicine (1.5 mL/kg
 bolus IV over 1-3 minutes and then 0.25-0.50 mL/kg/min for 30-60 min) with a goal not to
Exceed 8 mL/kg/day. For patients who are still symptomatic, one author has recommended
considering additional doses of 1.5 mL/kg IV over 30 minutes q4-6h for 24 to 36 hours until
Prognosis
ixoiap Aoimb mou pue paaianai asop aul uo gupuadap poos oi papiena si sisouaoid aul
fication is initiated. Animals that remain comatose for more than a few hours have a poor
dotal treatment have a good prognosis.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
There are no diagnostically useful lesions of OC insecticide intoxication. Some individuals
cellular degeneration and necrosis and renal tubular degeneration have been reported occa-
sionally with certain OCs, but such lesions are more frequently associated with prolonged
exposure than with acute poisoning.
Differential Diagnoses
Convulsive seizures in animals that have possibly been exposed to a pesticide and that do
not exhibit parasympathomimetic signs warrant a tentative diagnosis of OC intoxication
for purposes of emergency therapy. Other differentials, which must be ruled out on the
basis of pathologic changes and chemical analysis, include infectious encephalitis, lead poi-
soning, rabies, eclampsia, canine distemper, and convulsant poisons (e.g., strychnine, met-
 aldehyde, penitrem A and roquefortine, theobromine, caffeine, sodium monofluroacetate 
[1080], nicotine, organophosphates, carbamates).
References
1. Matsumura F, editor: Differential toxicities of insecticides and halogenated aromatics, New York, 1984,
Pergamon Press.
2. Murphy SD: Toxic effect of pesticides. In Klassen C, Amdur M, Doull J, editors: Toxicology: the basic sct-
Ence of poisons, New York, 1986, Macmillan.
3. Safe S: Environmental estrogens: roles in male reproductive tract problems and in breast cancer, Rev Envi-
ron Health 17:249-252,2002.
4. Lee, JA: Advances in toxicology: the use of intra-lipid therapy & high dextrose insulin therapy, Proceed-
ings: ACVIM. Accessed by Veterinary Information Network (VIN).
CHAPTER
Organophosphate
67
and Carbamate
Insecticides
Charlotte Means, DVM, MLIS, DABVT, DABT
 Organophosphate and carbamate insecticides are common pesticides used in
agriculture, around the horme, and on and around dormestic anirnals.
· Both groups of insecticides inhibit acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity.
· Clinical signs of acute poisoning are generally divided into three major categories.
Muscarinic signs include salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, miosis,
bronchospasrn, bradycardia, and ermesis. Nicotinic signs include rmuscle trermors,
ataxia, weakness, and paralysis. Central nervous systerm signs can range from
severe depression to hyperactivity and seizures
· Exposures in dogs and cats to lipophilic organophosphates may lead to an
"intermediate syndrome," characterized mostly by a delayed onset of anorexia,
depression, generalized weakness, rmuscle tremors, ventroflexion of the neck,
and abnormal behavior.
· Blood or brain AChE activity should be assessed and is an excellent screening tool
to determine exposure in clinically affected patients or postmortem.
Treatment options include decontamination, use of atropine sulfate, 2-pyridine
aldoxine rmethyl chloride, diazepam, and respiratory support.
Sources
Organophosphate (OP) insecticides are marketed for control of insects on plants, animals,
soils, and around the house. A few OP products are sold as anthelmintics. Many OPs are
designed to remain on the surface of objects to which they are applied; others are meant
to be absorbed by plants or animals and to become systemic. Labels on the products have
the term phosphate, phos, phoro, or phosphor somewhere in the long chemical name of the
ingredients. Most OPs are insoluble in water and are often formulated with oily vehicles
or organic solvents. Others are sold as dusts, wettable powders, emulsions, or adsorbed
to clay particles. Ihe OPs used to combat fleas are sold as sprays, dips, shampoos, flea
collars, or flea bombs. As newer classes of insecticides are marketed for flea control, OPs are
involved in fewer cases of poisoning associated with intentional applications. Agricultural
uses of OPs are varied, but many are used for control of corn rootworms. Many of these
corn rootworm insecticides are very toxic. As such, agricultural OPs have begun to replace
715
716SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
strychnine as the malicious pesticide of choice for killing dogs in some areas of the United
States.' Baits are often mixed with food items (e.g., meat, bread, carcasses, and tuna fish) in
cases of malicious poisoning.
Carbamate insecticides were designed for purposes similar to those described for OPs
(Color Plate 67-1). Carbamates are similar in structure to physostigmine and neostigmine.
The use of carbamates in flea products is also declining with the advent of safer classes of
insecticides. Carbamates are still used abundantly for household and agricultural applications,
Not all pesticides having the word carbarmate in their chemical name are acetylcholinesterase
(AChE) inhibitors. Care should be taken to obtain the entire chemical name of a product when
working up a possible pesticide exposure. Carbamates, as in the case of OPs, have also gained
in popularity as malicious pesticides of choice. Onset times are often shorter than OPs, and the
poisoned animal may die within yards of the bait. Some carbamates, such as Tres Pasitos, are
imported and sold illegally. This literally means "three steps" and frequently contains aldicarb.
Toxic Dose
The toxicity of the insecticides is as varied as the types of insects they were formulated to
control. Little is known about the lethal doses of OPs and carbamates for dogs and cats. Ihe
median lethal dose (LDso) in rats ranges from less than 1 mg/kg to more than 4 g/kg. There
is also a large species variation in susceptibility. In general cats, fish, and birds seem to be
more susceptible. The indiscriminate tastes of dogs make them likely candidates for insec-
ticide toxicoses, however. Younger animals are usually more susceptible to toxicosis than
mature animals. Because OPs and carbamates have similar mechanisms of action, multiple
exposures to these types of insecticides are usually additive, especially if the longer-acting
OP was encountered before the shorter-acting carbamate.
A general list of carbamates, in order from most to least toxic, includes aldicarb, carbo-
furan, methomyl, propoxur, and carbaryl.
A general list of OPs, from most to least toxic, includes disulfoton, terbufos, phorate,
parathion, chlorpyrifos, fenthion, diazinon, malathion, and tetrachlorvinphos. Chlorpyri-
fos is especially toxic for cats, with an oral minimum lethal dose of 10 to 40 mg/kg.^
Toxicokinetics
Carbamate and OP insecticides may be absorbed through the skin, respiratory tract, or
gastrointestinal tract. Most of the OP insecticides must be metabolized in the body by
cytochrome P450 enzymes or flavin monooxygenase enzymes to become active.3 OP insec-
uq an e eia pae uie ux ue no is aa um pae ae sai
 to the phosphorus atom. Sulfur products are often denoted by a thio in the name of the
insecticide (e.g., phosphorothionate). Sulfur products are inactive until cytochrome P450
enzymes in the liver or other organs (e.g., lungs and brain) replace the sulfur with oxygen.
 In massive exposures, this time lag for activation is not noticeable and may require only 5 to
10 minutes to activate sufficient amounts of OP to cause a toxicosis. OP products that have
oxygen attached to the phosphorus are active as soon as they are absorbed into the body.
Carbamates do not require liver activation and are active cholinesterase (ChE) inhibitors as
absorbed. Typical metabolic routes for OPs and carbamates are the cytochrome P450 routes
hydrolysis (enzymatic and nonenzymatic), and various conjugation mechanisms.45 Distri-
 bution occurs throughout the body. The OPs tend to be more lipid soluble than carbamates.
Therefore OPs are more likely to cross the blood-brain barrier. However, many carbamates
can and do cause dramatic central nervous system (CNS) signs in animals. Metabolites of
OPs and carbamates tend to be primarily eliminated in the urine.
Mechanism of Toxicity
 The OP and carbamate insecticides interfere with the metabolism or breakdown of acetyl-
choline (ACh) at cholinergic sites. ACh is the neurotransmitter found between preganglionic
Chapter 67 | Organophosphate and Carbamate Insecticides 717
and postganglionic neurons of the autonomic nervous system; at the junction of postgan-
glionic parasympathetic neurons in smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, or exocrine glands; at
neuromuscular junctions of the somatic nervous system; and at cholinergic synapses in the
   a aa  ( n  da) a 
down ACh at these sites. It is also located on the surface of red blood cells (RBCs). AChE
has an anionic and an esteratic site in which ACh is temporarily bound until hydrolysis ini-
tially releases choline from the anionic site and then acetate from the “acetylated" esteratic
site. AChE is inhibited by both OP and carbamate insecticides at these cholinergic sites, so
that ACh keeps depolarizing the postsynaptic membrane and cannot be broken down by
synaptic AChE, which is inactive because it is “phosphorylated” or “carbamylated." Depo-
larization of postsynaptic mermbranes begins as a stimulatory process that may progress to
paralysis because repolarization of the membranes is inadequate.
The OP insecticides were designed to emulate the structure of ACh and occupy both
the anionic and esteratic sites of AChE. The OP moiety that fills the anionic site is quickly
hydrolyzed away, leaving the phosphorus atom with multiple attached groups bound to
the esteratic site. In the case of OP insecticides, binding of the phosphorus atom with its
attached groups to the esteratic site of AChE is considered “irreversible” binding because
the half-life may be hours or days compared with the microsecond binding of ACh.34 The
OPs with dimethoxy groups tend to have shorter half-lives than OPs with diethoxy groups.
At some point, the organic carbon groups (i.e., methyl or ethyl) attached to the phosphorus
may be hydrolyzed away and replaced by hydrogen. This makes the bond between the phos-
phorus atom and the esteratic site unbreakable. At this point, the enzyme has undergone
aging" and will never be functional again. The body will have to synthesize new AChE at
the rate of approximately 1% per day.6 The OPs with dimethoxy groups tend to age faster
than OPs with diethoxy groups.3
Carbamate insecticides initially occupy both the anionic and esteratic sites of AchE also.
The moiety attached to the carbonyl structure is quickly hydrolyzed away, leaving AChE "car-
bamylated” at the esteratic site. Carbamylation is considered a “reversible" inhibition of AChE
and has a half-life of approximately 30 to 40 minutes.4 No aging of AchE is possible with
carbamate insecticides. Although the half-life of AChE inhibition by carbamates is shorter
than that of OPs, the time is long enough for clinical signs and sometimes death to occur.
Other esterase enzymes in the body act for the most part as a cushion or prevention
against clinical signs. Most of these enzymes can be inhibited or can hydrolyze OPs and
carbamates without producing any noticeable clinical signs. Arylesterases or type A ester-
consisting of AChE,pseudocholinesterase (pChE), carboxylesterase,and neuropathy target
esterase (NTE), are inhibited. PChE, located in serum, liver, pancreas, and nervous tissue,7
and carboxylesterase (aliesterase), located in serum, liver, muscle, and nervous tissue, can
both be inhibited without causing clinical signs. Inhibition of NTE correlates with a loss of
myelin and axons in the spinal cord approximately 2 to 3 weeks after exposure to some OP
cormpounds. The resulting syndrome is called delayed neuropathy or OP-induced delayed
neurotoxicity. Ihis effect is monitored in a chicken test model before any insecticide can be
registered. Therefore delayed neuropathy is very rare and is reported only occasionally with
exposure to industrial OP chemicals (e.g., tri-o-tolyl phosphate, found in hydraulic fluid).
Death from either OPs or carbamates is associated with respiratory problems resulting
from massive respiratory tract secretions, bronchiolar constriction, intercostal and
 diaphragm muscle paralysis, and respiratory paralysis from CNS effects in the medulla.
clinical Signs
Acute Syndrome
Clinical signs can be grouped under three broad categories: muscarinic, nicotinic, and
CNS signs. Muscarinic signs are usually the frst to appear, followed by nicotinic and then CNS
effects. Usually the progression of signs is hard to differentiate, however. All of the clinical
718SECTlON 4Specific Toxicants
signs listed here are not necessarily seen in every case. Not all OP and carbamate toxicoses
look alike, and the same toxicosis may look much different in different species, at different
doses, with different routes of exposure, or at different stages in the toxicosis. Major systems
in the body that are affected include the pulmonary and gastrointestinal systems and the CNS.
 Onset of clinical signs depends on the dose, formulation, and route of exposure. Massive
oral doses often produce clinical signs within 10 minutes and can cause death easily within
30 minutes. Dermal exposures or ingestion of delayed-release products may take 12 to 24
hours or sometimes longer to produce clinical signs.
Muscarinic Signs
Muscarinic signs are sometimes attenuated by sympathetic stimulation via ganglia. They
include the following: salivation, lacrimation, urination (micturition), defecation (i.e.,
SLUD); anorexia; coughing; miosis; dyspnea; bradycardia; abdominal pain and distress;
and vomiting (emesis).
 In place of the mnemonic SLUD, the mnemonic DUMBELS is also sometimes used to
describe the diarrhea, urination, miosis, bronchospasm (bradycardia), emesis, lacrimation,
and salivation.&
Nicotinic Signs
Nicotinic signs include muscle tremors of the head and then of the general body, generalized
muscle tetany, stiffness (i.e., sawhorse stance), weakness with paresis, and paralysis caused
Tachycardia and mydriasis are possible because of stimulation of sympathetic ganglia with
release of epinephrine and norepinephrine from the postganglionic sympathetic neurons;
this is more likely observed with massive oral exposures.
CentralNervousSystemSigns
CNS signs also occur: anxiety, restlessness, hyperactivity, depression, clonic-tonic seizures,
depressed respiration, and coma.
Intermediate Syndrome
A different syndrome from the classic acute syndrome is sometimes seen in both dogs and
cats, usually with exposure to lipophilic OP insecticides. Prolonged dermal exposure from a
single dose of insecticide, repetitive exposures to low doses of OP or carbamate insecticides,
or a single oral dose of a very lipophilic OP insecticide may produce an intermediate syn-
drome. The intermediate syndrome may follow an acute crisis within 24 to 72 hours or may
be the first syndrome to be noticed after exposure. This syndrome has been associated with
the production of tolerance in cholinergic receptors resulting from prolonged bombardment
with ACh.3 Persistent exposure to the ACh agonist is believed to cause down-regulation of
cholinergic receptors through an internalization of receptors into cells. Muscarinic receptors
are especially prone to down-regulation in tolerance situations.91l Long-term accumulation
of ACh at muscarinic receptors may induce tolerance, causing an intermediate syndrome
that lacks the more dramatic muscarinic signs of the acute syndrome. Nicotinic receptors at
skeletal muscle sites, which cannot develop tolerance to the ACh bombardment, are primar-
ily involved in the intermediate syndrome. Dermal exposure of cats to chlorpyrifos used
around the house has historically been the most common cause of the intermediate syn-
drome. Fortunately, indoor and outdoor residential uses of chlorpyrifos have been canceled
or phased out by the EPA. Often, clinical signs were not apparent until 3 to 10 days after
chlorpyrifos was used. Clinical signs of the intermediate syndrome in dogs or cats include
anorexia, diarrhea, generalized weakness, muscle tremors, abnormal posturing, abnormal
behavior, cervical ventroflexion, depression, and death.2.1z13 Severely affected animals may
have clonic-tonic convulsions. Pupil size in affected animals may range from miotic to myd-
riatic.2 The chlorine groups on chlorpyrifos make it more lipid soluble than many other
OPs. This property may change its toxicokinetics in the body, resulting in a slower stepwise
but persistent lowering of AChE levels in the body. Other very lipophilic OPs with long
Chapter 67 | Organophosphate and Carbamate Insecticides  719
half-lives (e.g., fenthion, dimethoate, chlorpyrifos, and phosmet) have been associated with
a similar intermediate syndrome in humans.14.15 An intermediate syndrome in dogs was
recognized after oral exposure to an insecticide used on roses, probably disulfoton.13 Long-
term dietary exposure to carbaryl has been associated with a similar syndrome in swine.16
Minimum Database
Typically, a history of access to or treatment with an OP or carbamate insecticide within
24 hours before the onset of classic signs of ChE inhibition is enough to begin supportive
treatment. Usually, there is not enough time to wait for a ChE assay before administering
atropine to an animal showing clinical signs of acute OP or carbamate toxicosis. Acute signs
tive ChE inhibitor toxicosis) is an excellent feld test.
The intermediate syndrome requires a thorough work-up of the patient because of its
nondescript clinical signs. A full complete blood cell count, chemistry panel, and electrolyte
values are advisable. A blood ChE assay may lead the clinician to a diagnosis and may also
pasodxa sop u palodai uaaq su sueaioued 'ariou yo suaeai pue sisouoid e isaans
to some of the more lipophilic organophosphate insecticides.
Confirmatory Tests
In a live animal, OP or carbamate insecticide toxicosis can be diagnosed by ChE activity of
heparinized whole blood. Ihis activity is a combination of true AChE activity of RBCs and
pChE activity of serum. The activity of blood ChE differs among species and is reported in
dlifferent units based on the type of enzyme assay used. Because of the difference in species
and enzyme assays, the diagnostic laboratory should provide a normal reference range.
Many laboratories use an Ellman assay on heparinized blood; normal whole blood activities
for most species using this assay are 1 μmol/mL/min or higher. Blood ChE activities that
are less than 50% of normal are suspicious, and activities that are less than 25% of normal
are fairly diagnostic. Blood ChE activities correlate fairly well with brain AChE activities,
but the correlation is not always perfect. Blood should be kept refrigerated to prevent the
loss of enzyme activity. AChE activity can also be depressed when anemia is present; it is
recommended to assess a packed cell volume on blood samples for AChE testing. Diagnosis
in alive animal is also sometimes based on the animal's response to treatment (see later sec-
tion, Suggestive Cholinesterase Inhibitor Toxicosis). Stomach content, vomitus, hair, or sus-
pected baits can also be submitted to the laboratory for an OP or carbamate residue screen.
 In a dead animal, brain ChE can be used to gauge exposure to OP or carbamate insecti-
cides. Usually the brain is cut in half in sagittal sections; one half is frozen for ChE analysis
and the other half is fixed in formalin. Normal brain ChE values again vary with species, but
usually are 1 μmol/g/min or more. Ihe same percentage depressions in ChE activity neces-
sary for diagnosis of blood apply to the brain also. Because OP and carbamate insecticides
are metabolized so rapidly in the body, neither body organs (e.g., liver and kidney) nor
urine are routinely analyzed for insecticides, but such analysis can be done when stomach
content is unavailable. Because chlorpyrifos is more persistent than most OPs, it is some-
times detected in body tissue, such as liver and fat.
Measurements of ChE activity in blood or brain from actual cases of carbamate toxicoses
are sometimes within the normal range and are not depressed. Just as carbamates bind revers-
ibly with AChE in the body, they may also dissociate from AChE or pChE in a blood tube or
brain specimen during transit. Keeping blood refrigerated and brain frozen will help to mini-
mize this dissociation, but ChE inhibition assay results may still be falsely negative with car-
 bamate toxicoses. Some ChE assays also have a long incubation time before enzyme activity
is measured, which can also cause false-negative results for carbamate toxicoses. Carbamate
screens on stomach content are necessary to absolutely rule out carbamate toxicoses associ-
ated with oral ingestions. Some OPs and carbamates do not cross the blood-brain barrier
as readily as others, thereby leading to a possible false-negative result on the brain ChE test.
720SECTlON 4Specific Toxicants
Additional biochemical indices that may be altered include hyperamylasemia, hyper-
lipasemia, hyperglycemia, hypokalemia, acidosis, leukocytosis with or without a left shift,
and increased creatine kinase and aspartate transaminase levels.7
Treatment
Known Organophosphate or Carbamate Toxicosis
Both OP and carbamate toxicoses that produce severe muscarinic signs should be treated
with atropine sulfate. Atropine relieves muscarinic and some CNS-related signs but not
nicotinic signs (i.e., muscle fasciculations, paralysis, and weakness). The initial dose of
atropine for a known OP or carbamate toxicosis is 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg, with one fourth of
this dose given intravenously (IV) and the rest given intramuscularly (IM) or subcutane-
ously (SC) (some individuals administer the entire dose slowly IV). Ihe dose is based on
the severity of the muscarinic signs. Tachycardia is not a contraindication for initial use
of atropine in acute OP or carbamate toxicoses. Repeat doses should be lower (0.1 mg/kg)
and given as needed based on a combination of signs, including heart rate and wet lung
sounds. Pupil size and degree of salivation are indicators of toxicosis but are not life threat-
excessive bombardment by the accumulating ACh and is a specific physiologic antidote for
both OP and carbamate toxicoses. Ihe primary goal of atropine is to control bradycardia
and bronchial secretions.
 In animals poisoned by OP insecticides, AChE can be reactivated with oximes if aging
has not occurred. The oxime in greatest use is 2-pyridine aldoxime methyl chloride (2-PAM;
pralidoxime chloride [Protopam]). Oximes are generally not necessary in carbamate toxi-
coses because the inhibition of AChE is very reversible. The dose is 20 mg/kg (some recom-
mend up to 50 mg/kg) given IM, SC, or very slowly IV according to the product label. Ihe
dose may be repeated once or twice at 12-hour intervals if the previous dose appeared to be
beneficial (i.e., caused relief of some nicotinic signs or loss of anorexia). Do not give more
than three doses if no improvement is noted. Reactivation of ChE may also be monitored by
analysis of heparinized blood. The oxime settles into the unoccupied anionic site of AChE,
and a bond is formed with the OP moiety in the esteratic site. The combination leaves the
reactivated enzyme and is excreted in the urine. Muscarinic, nicotinic, and CNS signs may
all be somewhat ameliorated by 2-PAM.6
Other treatments are mostly symptomatic and should be given after the patient has
been stabilized. An emetic (e.g, 3% hydrogen peroxide or apomorphine in dogs) can be
administered to animals with recent oral ingestions if this is not contraindicated (i.e., by the
presence of mental depression, convulsions, or loss of gag reflex) and if the animal has not
vomited on its own. Activated charcoal mixed with sorbitol is useful for decontamination,
 depending on the amount and toxicity of the compound ingested. Emesis should not be
 induced if highly toxic compounds, like methomyl, were ingested more than % hour earlier
because of the risk of acute onset of seizures. Enterogastric lavage or just gastric lavage may
 be appropriate in some cases if a large amount of poison has been ingested and emesis has
not occurred or induction of emesis is contraindicated. Anesthesia is induced with a short-
 acting barbiturate, and an endotracheal tube is placed before gastric lavage is attempted.
When the stomach has been lavaged several times with water, activated charcoal and a
saline cathartic are left in the stomach. If more than 2 to 3 hours have passed since inges-
tion, the risks of emesis or anesthesia may outweigh the questionable benefit of minimal
recovery of poison from the stomach. 17 Activated charcoal with a saline cathartic or sorbitol
should be administered without emesis or lavage in these cases of delayed presentation.
Animals with dermal exposures are washed with a mild dishwashing detergent (e.g., Dawn)
and water. Ihe individuals bathing the animals should wear protective gloves and aprons.
 The detergent should be rinsed off immediately after lathering the animal to prevent further
absorption of the insecticide. The necessity for fluid therapy to correct possible dehydra-
tion, electrolyte imbalances, and acidosis should be evaluated. Convulsions are treated with
Chapter 67 | Organophosphate and Carbamate Insecticides 721
diazepam or a short-acting barbiturate. Artificial respiration may be necessary in cases of
respiratory paralysis. Seizures and severe hypoxia have priority in the treatment protocol.
The use of antihistamines in cases of ChE inhibition is controversial. Although anti-
histamines, such as diphenhydramine, have some effect against muscarinic signs,β anti-
histamines are not as specific a physiologic antidote as atropine, a muscarinic antagonist.
Diphenhydramine purportedly relieves nicotinic signs in some cases of ChE inhibition.19
This alleged antinicotinic action is not commonly recognized in pharmacology texts"β and,
in addition, antihistamines are listed as contraindicated for the treatment of ChE inhibi-
 tion.20 Because of the potential adverse CNS effects of antihistarmines, diphenhydramine
should probably not be administered when ChE inhibition is present.21
Other drugs that are contraindicated include phenothiazine tranquilizers, opiates, local
anesthetics, aminoglycoside antibiotics, clindamycin, lincomycin, theophylline, and neuro-
muscularblockers.7
Unknown Cholinesterase Inhibitor Toxicosis
Animals frequently are admitted with classic signs of acute ChE inhibition, but the type of
insecticide exposure (OP versus carbamate) is unknown. These animals should be treated
with atropine as described previously for known OP or carbamate toxicoses. The decision
then becomes whether or not to give 2-PAM. Ihe use of 2-PAM has been beneficial in some
carbamate toxicoses, but is definitely contraindicated in carbaryl toxicosis.2.23 Because car-
 baryl is fairly safe (the rat oral LDso is approximately 0.5 g/kg),the chance that an unknown
ChE inhibitor toxicosis is associated with carbaryl is remote. Therefore, in addition to
known OP toxicoses, 2-PAM is recommended for (1) these unknown ChE inhibitor toxico-
ses, (2) ChE inhibitor toxicoses associated with dual exposure to both OP and carbamates,
and (3) severe carbamate toxicoses that do not respond favorably to atropine alone.8
Suggestive Cholinesterase Inhibitor Toxicosis
In animals with suggestive but not classic clinical signs of acute ChE inhibition and no his-
tory of insecticide exposure, a test dose of atropine can be given IV. The test dose should be
low, corresponding to a preanesthetic dose of 0.02 mg/kg. If eyes dilate maximally, heart rate
increases dramatically, or salivation stops within 10 to 15 minutes, the original problem was
not an OP or carbamate toxicosis. If none of the suggestive clinical signs improves signifi-
cantly, the disease is very likely an OP or carbamate toxicosis. A dose of 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg of
atropine can then be administered as described previously. Administration of 20 mg/kg of
2-PAM given IM, SC, or very slowly IV is also advisable. Ifthe high dose of atropine (0.1 to
0.5 mg/kg) was administered first and the problem was not an insecticide toxicosis, the ani-
mal would very likely experience an atropine toxicosis. Excessive atropine use causes hyper-
thermia, redness of the skin, decreased salivation, belligerency, intestinal stasis, and possible
convulsions (i.e., "hot as a pistol, red as a beet, dry as a bone, and mad as a hatter"). Atropine
toxicosis is treated symptomatically with cool water baths, fluids, diazepam, and possibly
physostigmine hydrochloride (which should be reserved for heroic circumstances only).
Intermediate Syndrome
Because the intermediate syndrome lacks the typical muscarinic signs of the acute syn-
drome, atropine is not indicated. Anorexia and neuromuscular weakness are the most dra-
matic problems seen in these animals. Supportive care measures depend on the severity and
duration of the anorexia. Parenteral nutrition or pharyngostomy tubes may be necessary.
Electrolyte imbalances (e.g., hypokalemia) and dehydration if present must be addressed.
The animal should be bathed with a mild detergent and water if the exposure was der-
mal. A ventilator may be required for hypoxemia.13 Typically, AChE values in these animals
are severely depressed. Contrary to the insert information provided with 2-PAM, many of
these animals respond to 2-PAM many days after the initial OP exposure. Unlike atropine,
2-PAM is capable of working at nicotinic skeletal muscle sites (e.g., diaphragm and cervical
muscles) that are primarily affected by the intermediate syndrome. Although 2-PAM has
 been a miracle worker in some of these animals, anecdotal reports of death in some cats
722SECTlON 4SpecificToxicants
following 2-PAM administration have also surfaced. Administration of 20 mg/kg of 2-PAM
 IM or SC is indicated in animals that need heroic intervention. The same dose of 2-PAM
should be repeated once 12 hours later. These animals probably have blood AChE values of
less than 10% of normal. Animals with blood AChE values of more than 25% of normal that
are eating reasonably well on their own will probably survive with supportive care only, and
their AChE values will regenerate during a few weeks of convalescence. Administration of
 2-PAM in some of these less affected animals could speed recovery and cut owner expenses,
but again it carries a risk of an adverse reaction.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends very much on the dose and time of exposure to the insecticide. Because
an animal that seems close to death. On the other hand, many ofthe acute toxicoses progress
so rapidly that the animal is dead before it arrives at the clinic. Anecdotal reports of malicious
cases of carbamate toxicosis document death within a few minutes of ingestion of a bait.
Animals with the intermediate syndrome often respond slowly to supportive care. Owners
may not have the financial resources or the patience to go through days or weeks of support-
ive care. In the absence of aspiration pneumonia or other rare occurrences of brain anoxia,
animals that come through the acute syndrome should experience no chronic problems
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Animals should be examined closely for any signs of excessive parasympathomimetic stim-
ulation, such as excessive salivation on the muzzle or in the trachea and diarrhea in the
perineal area. Hair and stomach contents should be examined for unusual odors that smell
like petroleum products, sulfur, or garlic.6 Internally, often there are no visible gross lesions.
Potential gross lesions include foreign substances in the stomach, diarrhea, an empty blad-
der, or pulmonary edema. Nonspecific petechial hemorrhages associated with an agonal
death may be found on the endocardial and epicardial surfaces. Petechial hemorrhages are
also sometimes seen on the subserosal surface of the gastrointestinal tract. Histologically
only pulmonary edema is likely to be seen. However, even pulmonary edema is not a con-
sistent finding. Pancreatitis is also a rare but potential histologic finding in dogs but not in
cats; it is associated with pChE inhibition of the pancreas.24
Differential Diagnoses
Tremorgenic Mycotoxicoses
 Roquefortine and penitrem A are tremorgenic mycotoxins associated with decaying organic
matter, moldy walnut hulls, and spoiled dairy products. Ihese toxicoses are associated with
muscle tremors, salivation, vomiting, and clonic-tonic convulsions. Differential features are
the lack of miosis and the general absence of respiratory signs.
Amitraz Toxicosis
The client should be questioned about the pet's access to a flea collar and whether the collar
was also formulated for ticks. Typically, dogs with amitraz toxicosis have muscle weakness,
muscle tremors, vomiting, and possible CNS signs. Ihe best differential feature is mydriasis
versus the more typical miosis present with OP and carbamate toxicoses.
Pyrethrin and Pyrethroid Toxicosis
Pyrethrin and pyrethroid toxicoses often are marked by some salivation, muscle tremors
muscle weakness, depression, and possibly seizures. Usually, pyrethroid toxicoses are
aration to the clinic so that the label can be read will help with the differential diagnosis.
Chapter 67|Organophosphate and Carbamate Insecticides723
Cationic Surfactant Toxicosis
Cationic surfactants are components found in some disinfectants, potpourri oils, and der-
mal pet sprays. Generic names include benzalkonium chloride, benzethoniurm chloride, and
cetyipyridinium. These compounds can cause neuromuscular and ganglionic blockade.
Typical clinical signs include vomiting, salivation, muscle tremors, depression, and clonic-
tonic convulsions. Cationic surfactants are more likely to cause oral and gastric irritation
and ulcers than are OP and carbamate insecticides.
Pancreatitis
Pancreatitis lacks the life-threatening respiratory signs characteristic of an acute OP or car-
bamate toxicosis. Amylase and lipase may be elevated in OP or carbamate toxicoses, but
usually not to the same extent as in acute pancreatitis.
Garbage (Endotoxin) Intoxication
Endotoxins may affect multiple systems in the body and mimic many diseases. Typically,
with ChE inhibitions. Endotoxins may cause some CNS depression, but would not cause
seizures.
Blue-Green Algae
Anatoxin-a(s) is produced by some strains of Anabaena spp., a blue-green algae species.
appears to primarily inhibit peripheral cholinsterases and is not likely to cross the blood-
brain barrier.
Muscarinic Mushrooms
Primarily Inocybe spp. and Clitocybe spp. contain muscarine. Muscarine does not cross the
blood-brain barrier. Muscarine binds to muscarinic (ACh) receptors in the parasympa-
thetic nervous system. These mushrooms do not inhibit AChE. Clinical signs are SLUD.
Atropine dislodges muscarine from receptor sites.
References
1. Smith RA, Tramontin RR, Poonacha KB, et al: Carbofuran (Furadan) poisoning in animals, Canine Pract
20(2):8,1995.
2. Fikes ID: Feline chlorpyrifos toxicosis. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, editors: Current veterinary therapy XI:
small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1992, WB Saunders.
3. Sultatos LG: Mammalian toxicology of organophosphorus pesticides, I Toxicol Environ Health 43:271,
1994.
4. Fukuto TR: Mechanism of action of organophosphorus and carbamate insecticides, Environ Health Per-
spect 87:245, 1990.
5. Dorough HW : Metabolism of insecticidal methylcarbamates in animals, I Agric Food Chem 18(6):1015
1970.
baum NE, Lewin NA,editors: Goldfrank's toxicologic emergencies,ed 5, Norwalk, Conn., 1994, Appleton
& Lange.
 7. Fikes JD: Organophosphate and carbamate insecticides, Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20(2):353
1990.
8. Ellenhorn MJ, Schonwald S, Ordog G, et al, editors: Elenhorn's medical toxicology: diagnosisand treat-
ment of human poisoning, ed 2, Baltimore, 1997, Williams & Wilkins.
9. Schwab BW, Costa LG, Murphy SD: Muscarinic receptor alterations as a mechanism of anticholinester-
ase tolerance, Toxic Appl Pharmacol 71:14, 1983.
10. Costa LG, Schwab BW, Murphy SD: Differential alterations of cholinergic muscarinic receptors during
chronic and acute tolerance to organophosphorus insecticides, Biochem Pharmacol 31(21):3407, 1982.
11. Costa LG, Schwab BW, Murphy SD: Tolerance to anticholinesterase compounds in mammals, Toxicol-
ogy 25:79, 1982
12. Levy IK: Chronic chlorpyrifos toxicosis in a cat, I Am Vet Med Assoc 203(12):1682, 1993.
724SECTION4SpecificToxicants
13. Hopper K, Aldrich J, Haskins SC: The recognition and treatment of the intermediate syndrome of
14. De Bleecker J,Lison D, Van Den Abeele K, et al: Acute and subacute organophosphate poisoning in the
rat, Neurotoxicology 15(2):341, 1994.
15. Guadarrama-Naveda M, Calderon de Cabrera L: Intermediate syndrome secondary to ingestion of
chlorpiriphos, Vet Human Toxicol 43(1):34, 2001.
16. Smalley HE, O'Hara PJ, Bridges CH,et al: The effects of chronic carbaryl administration on the neuro-
muscular system of swine, Toxic Appt Pharmacol14:409, 1969.
17. Hansen SR: Management of organophosphate and carbamate toxicoses. In Bonagura JID, Kirk RW,
editors: Current veterinary therapy Xll: small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
18. Babe KS, Serafin WE, et al: Histamine, bradykinin, and their antagonists. In Hardman IG, Limbird LE
Molinoff PB, editors: Goodman and Gilmans the pharmacological basis of therapeutics,ed 9, New York,
1996, McGraw-Hill.
19. Cemmons RM, Meyer DJ, Sundlof SF, et al: Correction of organophosphate-induced neuromuscular
blockade by diphenhydramine, Am I Vet Res 45(10):2167, 1984.
20. Femandez G, Gomez MID, Castro JA: Cholinesterase inhibition by phenothiazine and nonphenothi-
azine antihistaminics analysis of its postulated role in synergizing organophosphate toxicity, Toxic Appt
Pharmacol 31:179, 1975.
21. Blodgett D, Neer TM, Coates JR: How do I treat? Organophosphate toxicity, Prog Vet Neurol 7(2):56,
1996.
22. Natoff IL, Reiff B: Effect of oximes on the acute toxicity of anticholinesterase carbamates, Toxic Appl
Pharmacol 25:569, 1973.
 23. Lieske CN, Clark JH, Maxwell DM, et al: Studies of the amplifcation of carbaryl toxicity by various
oximes, Toxicol Lett 62:127, 1992.
24. Frick TW, Dalo S, O'Leary JF,et al: Efects ofthe insecticide, diazinon, on pancreas of dog, cat and guinea
pig, I Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 7(4):1,1987.
CHAPTER
Oxalate-Containing
68
Plants
Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant, DVM, PhD, DABVT, DABT
There are two types of oxalate-containing plants: those that contain insoluble
oxalates (i.e., calciur oxalate) and those that contain soluble oxalates (ie.,
sodium and potassium oxalate).
 Insoluble calcium oxalates are found in many common household plants.
· Ingestion of these plants typically causes oral, pharyngeal, and upper
gastrointestinal iritation and discomfort. Fatalities are rare and are the result of
airway obstruction.
· Soluble oxalate-containing household plants are much less common; toxicoses
in pets are rare.
·Large oral exposures can lead to vomiting and, if excessive, could potentially lead
to renal impairment.
Introduction
Calcium oxalate crystals are present in a large number of plants, including some used as
food (e.g., spinach contains both soluble and insoluble calcium oxalate [IO] crystals).1 Sev-
eral calcium oxalate-containing plants are toxic, but the degree of toxicity varies depending
 s a  s d ss o jo n  a an 
soluble oxalates have the potential to cause systermic illness, whereas IO-containing plants
are of concern primarily for their local effects on the alimentary tract.2 As with other toxins
found in plant material, the amount of oxalate in plants can vary with individual plants,
growing season, and plant portion.3
Whenever presented with an animal that has been exposed to a plant, it is important to
attempt to positively identify the plant so that appropriate risk assessments may be made.
Because common names may be shared by several unrelated plants, genus and species
names should be obtained whenever possible to avoid confusion.
Insoluble Oxalates
Sources
A wide variety of common house and landscape plants contain IOs in sufficient quantity to
cause clinical signs if chewed on or ingested ( Table 68-1). Many of the IO-containing plants
most commonly associated with ingestion by small animals tend to have broad, often shiny
leaves and do not produce flowers.4 The family Araceae contains a large number of plants
that are popular as ornamentals and that contain IOs. Introduction of these plants to a pet's
environment may result in the pet “exploring" the plant with its mouth, often with painful
consequences.
725
726SECTlON 4SpecificToxicants
Table 68-1
Common Plants Containing Insoluble Calcium Oxalate Crystals2.4
Scientific Name
Common Names
Aglaonema modestum
Chinese evergreen
Alocasia macrorrhiza
 Alocacia, giant elephant ear, giant taro
Anthurium spp.
Flamingo plant
Arisaema triphyllum
Jack-in-the-pulpit
Arum italicum
Arum
Arum maculatum
Cuckoo pint
Caladium bicolor
Caladium, elephant ear
Calla palustris
Wild calla, wild arum 
Colocasia esculenta
Taro, dasheen, cocoyam
Dieffenbachia spp.
Dumb cane, American arum (see Color Plate 27-7)
Epipremmum (Scindapsus) spp.
Devil's ivy, pothos, marble queen, variegated
philodendron, taro vine
Lysichiton americanum
Yellow skunk cabbage
Philodendron spp.
Philodendrons
Pistia stratiotes
Water lettuce, shellflower
Spathiphyllum spp.
Peace lily, white sails
Symplocarpus foetidus
Skunk cabbage
Syngonium podophyllum
Nephthytis
Xanthosoma spp.
Blue tannia, blue taro, caladium, elephant ears,
malanga, tannia, yautia
Zantedeschia aethiopica
Calla lily, arum lily
Toxicity
Despite the fact that even a single bite of IO plants has the potential to cause immediate
and intense clinical signs, many exposures result in no apparent clinical effects in dogs and
cats. The severity of signs depends on the concentration and type of oxalate crystals in the
plant and the extent of exposure. Fortunately, immediate pain often results in cessation of
chewing, limiting exposure. In humans, ingestion of Dieffenbachia leaves has occasionally
been associated with pharyngeal obstruction resulting in potentially fatal respiratory com-
promise.6 Airway obstruction in dogs caused by chewing on oxalate-containing plants has
been reported, and a single case report exists of a dog fatality caused by airway obstruction
following ingestion of Dieffenbachia picta (dumb cane) (see Color Plate 27-7).7& However,
- saeu se pue sop se ns saads ueae leaued aaeraa aasea
plete obstruction from tissue swelling uncommon, most cases of ingestion of IO plants by
these pets are rarely serious or life threatening. One case report associated the development
cats, but attempts to reproduce these clinical effects in experimental felines have not been
successful.2 In canaries, orally administered suspensions of Dieffenbachia leaves resulted in
acute death, but no adverse effects were reported when budgerigars were similarly dosed.10
Mechanism of Toxicity
IO crystals (raphides) resembling dual-pointed needles are arranged and packed in bundles
tip of the idioblast, such as during chewing, allows water to enter the cell, causing swelling
of a gelatinous material surrounding the raphides. This stimulates the forceful propulsion
of the raphides from the cell and into the surrounding environment (Figure 68-1). This
"darting” of alimentary soft tissue by the needlelike crystals is responsible for much of the
discomfort associated with chewing on IO plants. The idioblasts may continue to expel
Chapter 68 | Oxalate-Containing Plants 727
Figure 68-l Raphides being ejected from tip of idioblast, 450x. Inset: Intact idioblast with
a sheaf of raphides (arrow) 100×
raphides for some time after the plant material has been swallowed, extending the irrita-
tion to the throat, esophagus, and stomach. Barbs found on raphides of some species of IO
plants are responsible for prolongation of the irritation from the crystals, and some Aracaed
plants have raphides with grooves that deposit proteolytic enzymes, which activate kinins
and histamines, further potentiating the irritant effect through stimulation of an intense
inflammatory reaction.24
Clinical Signs
The onset of clinical signs from ingestion of IO plants is generally immediate but may be
delayed up to 2 hours follwing exposure.4 Immediate pain on chewing may present as head
shaking, pawing at the mouth, intense drooling, vocalization, depression, and anorexia.
Dysphonia may result if pharyngeal tissues are affected. Erythema, swelling, and edema of
the oral mucosa may occur. In very rare instances, dyspnea may result from severe swell-
ing of the oropharyngeal tissues. If plant material has been swallowed, or if pain is intense,
vomiting or hematemesis may occur. Diarrhea is also possible, depending on the degree
of exposure. Severe vomiting and diarrhea may result in fluid and electrolyte imbalances.
Although reports exist of cardiac arrhythmia, coma, and death in humans, these are rare
occurrences. In most cases signs are expected to be relatively mild and self-limiting, and
veterinary intervention is rarely indicated.
Ocular exposures to IO plants have been reported in humans.1 In these cases, epiphora,
blepharospasm, conjunctivitis, severe pain, and nodularity of the corneal surface (inter-
preted as "very fine needles"embedded in the cornea) have been reported. Permanent ocular
injury has not been reported.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on evidence of exposure and appropriate clinical signs.
Treatment
If massive amounts of plant material have been ingested and the animal is asymptomatic
induction of emesis may be considered. The primary goals of treatment of symptomatic
728SECTlON 4 SpecificToxicants
IO plant exposure are to prevent further exposure, relieve pain and swelling, and pro-
milk; calcium-containing foods, such as yogurt and cottage cheese, are said to aid in
relief of the discomfort from the IO crystals.4 Eugenol (4-alil-2-metoxiphenol) has been
shown to reduce tongue edema caused by Dieffenbachia exposure in mice; its topical
use might be considered if severe oral tissue swelling is present following exposure to
IO-containing plants.13 Antihistamines, analgesics, antispasmodics, or gastrointestinal
protectants such as sucralfate and gastric acid reducers may also be of benefit in cases in
which severe oral or gastric irritation are present. Animals should be monitored at home
for several hours for respiratory compromise, and veterinary care should be sought if
dyspnea develops. Supportive treatment includes management of fluid and electrolyte
abnormalities that may develop subsequent to protracted vomiting. For ocular expo-
an antibiotic.2
Prognosis
 In most cases involving exposure to IO crystals, the prognosis is good and full recovery is
expected with minimal veterinary intervention required. Ocular injuries may take several
weeks to resolve.1l
Gross and Histologic Lesions
In severe cases there may be erythema and edema of the oral cavity, pharynx, esophagus, and
possibly stomach.2 Ocular exposure may result in erythema and edema of the conjunctiva,
scleral injection, and a nodular appearance to the surface of the cornea.!l
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for the clinical effects produced by IOs include corrosive injury (e.g.
allkalis or acids), thermal burns, uremic stomatitis,trauma, and severe periodontal disease.
The transient nature of the signs from IO exposure should aid in differentiating this type of
exposure from more serious conditions.
Soluble Oxalates
Sources
Intoxication by soluble oxalate-containing plants is most commonly associated with live
stock, but companion animals may potentially be affected by ingestion of household or
garden plants containing high levels of soluble oxalates. Rhubarb (Rheurm rhabarbarum) is
a popular garden plant with petioles (stems) used in cooking. Shamrock (Oxalis spp.) is a
houseplant that is especially popular during the March holiday of Saint Patrick's Day in the
United States (Color Plate 68-1).13 [Note: Some species of white clover ( Trifoliurm repens)
are also marketed as *shamrocks"; these plants have little appreciable oxalate content (Color
Plate 68-2).]
Toxicity
Rhubarb stems are edible, but the leaf blades contain approximately 0.28% soluble sodium
and potassium oxalates. No reports of toxicosis from rhubarb in dogs or cats were found
in the literature, but there have been occasional reports of human illness and death follow-
ing ingestion of rhubarb leaves.12 Ingestion of 10 to 20 g of fresh leaves has been reported
to cause immediate vomiting, and renal insufficiency has been associated with ingestion
of 20 to 100 g of fresh leaves. Oxalis species, such as sorrels and dock, have been reported
to contain 7% to 10% soluble oxalates, but the amount of oxalates in shamrocks used as
houseplants has not been established.2 Sheep have developed hypocalcemia following acute
asau se sue iaeus go usaun sur pue saiads sxo go s oo yo uosau
in renal calcium oxalate deposition.14
Chapter 68 | Oxalate-Containing Plants 729
Toxicokinetics
Soluble oxalates are generally well absorbed orally, although co-ingestion of high calcium
foods, such as dairy products, can significantly reduce absorption.
Mechanism of Toxicity
large amounts of soluble oxalates are rapidly absorbed, although hypocalcemia from soluble
oxalate ingestion has only been reported in livestock. In the kidney, calcium oxalate may
precipitate to form large crystals, resulting in renal tubular damage and renal insufficiency.
Oxidative injury caused by generation of free radicals may exacerbate the renal tubular
injur y.14
clinical Signs
Acute ingestion of large amounts of soluble oxalate-containing plant material by dogs or cats
may result in rapid onset of vomiting. This is especially true for rhubarb because of the cathar-
tic effect of anthroquinones within the leaves. Hypocalcemia, if it occurs, is expected within
 a few hours of ingestion and presents as weakness, tetany, and seizures. Ihe development
of acute renal failure may be associated with vomiting, anorexia, lethargy, polydipsia, and
polyuria. Oliguria or anuria may develop. Chronic renal failure caused by chronic low-level
exposure to soluble oxalate plants generally displays a more insidious onset of polyuria, poly-
dipsia, weight loss, anorexia, and vomiting.2
Minimum Database
In symptomatic animals, evaluation of serum biochemistry, electrolytes, and urinalysis are
recommended. Evidence of hypocalcemia should be present within 6 hours after inges-
tion of soluble oxalate plants.2 Elevations in blood urea nitrogen and creatinine can occur
within 4 to 24 hours following ingestion. Urinalysis may reveal the presence of calcium
oxalate crystals in the urine; absence of crystals does not exclude the possibility of an oxa-
late nephrosis.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of soluble oxalate toxicosis is based on history, appropriate clinical signs, and
laboratory confirmation of hypocalcemia or renal insufficienc y.
Treatment
Recent exposure to soluble oxalate-containing plants may be managed by induction of
emesis. Ihe effcacy of activated charcoal in adsorbing oxalates is not known. However,
oral administration of dairy products (e.g., milk, yogurt) may reduce the bioavailability
of the oxalates. Profoundly hypocalcemic animals should be treated with intravenous cal-
cium gluconate as necessary. Animals displaying evidence of renal insufficiency should
be treated with intravenous fluid therapy and general supportive care (e.g., antiemetics,
 gastrointestinal protectants, Hz-antagonists).
Prognosis
of developing severe hypocalcemia and renal failure and have a more guarded prognosis
because response to treatment may be poor.2
Gross and Histologic Lesions
The kidneys from animals acutely affected by soluble oxalates may be enlarged, pale, and
swollen on gross examination. Histologically, the presence of large numbers of intratubu-
lar calcium oxalate crystals and associated tubular degeneration and necrosis would aid in
confirming the diagnosis. In chronic cases, the kidneys may be small, firm, and fibrotic, and
730 SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
histopathological changes could include interstitial fibrosis, loss of nephrons, and scattered
calcium oxalate crystals within the tubules.
Differential Diagnoses
 Differential diagnoses for acute hypocalcemia include eclampsia, ethylene glycol toxicosis,
and hypoparathyroidism. Differential diagnoses for oxaluria and oxalate nephrosis include
toxicosis caused by ethylene glycol or other sources of oxalate (e.g., oxalic acid).
References
 1. Brogren M, Savage GP: Bioavailability of soluble oxalate from spinach eaten with and without milk prod-
ucts, Asiα Pac J Clin Nutr 12:219-224, 2003.
2. Burrows GE, Tyrl RJ: Toxic plants of North America, Ames, 2001, Iowa State University Press.
3. Knight MW, Dorman DC: Selected poisonous plant concerns in small animals, Vet Med92:260-272, 1997.
4. Means C: Insoluble calcium oxalates. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis,
2004, Mosby.
5. Beasley VR, Trammel HL: Incidence of poisonings in smallanimals. In Kirk RW,editor: Current veterinary
therapy X, Philadelphia, 1989, Saunders.
6. Cumpston KL, Vogel SN, Leikin JB,et al: Acute airway compromise after brief exposure to a Dieffenba-
chia plant,  Emerg Med25:391-397, 2003.
7. Loretti AP, da Silva Ilha MR, Riberio RE: Accidental fatal poisoning of a dog by Dieffenbachia picta
(dumb cane), Vet Hum Toxicol 45:233-239, 2003.
8. Peterson K, Beymer J, Rudoff E, O'Brien M: Airway obstruction in a dog after Dieffenbachia ingestion,
JVet Emerg Crit Care 19:635-639, 2009.
9. Arai M, Stauber E, Shropshire CM: Evaluation of selected plants for their toxic effects in canaries, J Am
Vet Med Assoc 200:13291331,1992
10. Muller N, Glaus T, Gardelle O:Extensive stomach ulcers due to Dieffenbachia intoxication in a cat, Tierarzt
Prax Ausq K Kleintiere Heintiere 26:404-407, 1998.
picta Schott in mice, Toxicol43:729-735, 2004.
13. Spoerke DG, Smolinske SC: Toxicity of kouseplants, Boca Raton, FL,1990, CRC Press.
14. Pickerell JA, Oehme F: Soluble oxalates. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis,
2004, Mosby.
CHAPTER
Paraquat
69
Caroline Donaldson, DVM, DABT
Paraquat is a contact herbicide widely used as an agricultural chemical
When used according to the manufacturer's application instructions, paraquat is
a safe compound; however, it is extremely toxic to companion animals and all
mammals when ingested or excessively applied topically.
· Initial signs following oral exposures include severe gastrointestinal distress:
abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea (oral-esophageal-gastrointestinal ulceration
may be present).
Once in the systermic circulation, paraquat is selectively taken up by alveolar
epithelial cells through an energy-dependent carrier mechanism and results in
severe and progressive pulmonary toxicity
 There are no antidotes currently available to effectively treat paraquat poisoning,
and most often ingestions or other absorption of toxic doses leads to death.
Various treatment modalities have been and continue to be tried for paraquat
toxicity with little or only rmoderate success.
Sources
Paraquat (1,1-dimethyl-4,4'-bipyridyl) was first synthesized in 1882, but its herbicidal
action was not discovered until 1959.1 Paraquat dichloride has been marketed commercially
since 1965 and is formulated in many countries. It is a nonselective herbicide and has rapid
contact action when applied as a postemergent herbicide. Paraquat is used as an herbicide,
defoliant, desiccant, and plant growth regulator. It is sold worldwide under the trade names
Cekupat, Dextron X, Dextrone, Gramoxone, Herbaxon, Herboxone, Pillarxone, Pillarquat,
Total, and Toxer and was previously sold under the trade names Esgram, Goldquat, Dexu-
ron, Sweep, and Weedol. It is also known by the code names PP-148 and PP-910.
 The usual paraquat formulation available is as the dichloride salt form. Other forms of
the compound are the cationic form (bipyridylium ion) and the dimethyl sulfate form. To
increase the herbicidal action,it is often formulated with surface-acting agents as an aque-
ous solution. Commercial products are available as granular, solid, and soluble concentrate
preparations. In some commercial preparations paraquat is combined with diquat and sold
under the trade names Actor, Herbaxon, Pregalone, Priglone, and Weedol. In these prepara-
tions paraquat is present as the dichloride or dimethyl sulfate salt and is very stable under
alkaline conditions. It has no appreciable vapor pressure.
Paraquat is one of the most specific pulmonary toxicants known. It has been the subject
of intensive international scrutiny because it has been responsible for severe and often fatal
poisonings in humans. Many countries have effectively banned or severely restricted para-
quat use because of the large number of reported accidental and suicidal fatalities. Diquat,
the analogue of paraquat, is considerably less potent than paraquat as a pulmonary toxicant,
but it may also cause severe acute and chronic poisoning.
731
732SECTION4SpecificToxicants
If used according to the manufacturer's instructions on the label, paraquat is a safe agri-
cultural chemical because with routine agricultural or commercial use little of the diluted
material is absorbed across intact skin or becomes systemic by inhalation of the spray. The
aerosol particles generated are too large to enter into the lower airways. The most common
ailments resulting from inhalation of the aerosol are sore throat and nosebleeds, but sys-
temic toxicity is rare. Injury can become severe if prolonged and excessive contact with the
chemical occurs. Most occupational injuries reported are caused by irritation and corrosive
effects to the mucous membranes, cornea, and skin.
Toxic Dose
In animals, paraquat shows a moderate degree of toxicity. The oral median lethal dose
(LDso) for various species ranges from 22 to 262 mg/kg. Specifically, the oral LDso for
dogs is 25 to 50 mg/kg, and for cats it is 40 to 50 mg/kg.? Most cases of poisoning in
dondu io sids oi ssase eia jenbeied jo uosau Aq pasns ae siee ssao
erly stored or disposed of material, or as a result of malicious poisoning.3 Ingestion of
paraquat in toxic doses causes similar clinical signs and pathologic lesions in humans,
monkeys, rats, dogs, and cats.4 Most of the accidental or suicidal poisonings have been
reported in humans, whereas most of the experimental data on paraquat toxicosis have
come from animal studies.
Paraquat causes rapid leaf desiccation when applied to plants. Photochemical degrada
and 4-carboxyl-1-(methyl) pyridinium chloride are identified products of paraquat photo-
degradation. No cases of residual toxicity have been reported from ingestion of paraquat-
treated plant products in either humans or animals. Once paraquat has reached the soil
absorption by soil components makes it biologically unavailable, and it is then considered
of little toxic consequence to plants or animals.
Toxicokinetics
Oral Absorption
Various studies have shown that in dogs low oral doses of paraquat are rapidly but incom-
pletely absorbed, the peak plasma concentration being attained 75 minutes after dosing.
Dose-dependent data from dogs and whole-body autoradiography suggest that absorption
is facilitated in the small intestine. A liquid formulation enters the small intestine quite rap-
idly, particularly if the stomach is ermpty. Approximately 25% to 28% of the oral paraquat is
absorbed with the remainder excreted unchanged in feces.7
Once absorbed, paraquat is distributed to most organs in the body; the highest con-
centrations are found initially in the kidney, the major organ of elimination, and the lungs.
Paraquat does not bind to plasma proteins. Several organs, significantly the lungs, act as res-
This compartmentalization and subsequent sustained release by the various organs at least
partly accounts for the continued renal excretion of the compound for many weeks after
ingestion.
Pulmonary Absorption
 Paraquat is selectively sequestered in the lung's type I and II alveolar cells and in Clara cells
est paraquat retention; at 4 hours, the concentration is 10 times higher than in other selec-
tive sites, and by 4 to 10 days after exposure paraquat concentrations in the lungs are 30 to
80 times greater than in the plasma.7 Experimental studies have shown a diphasic eflux of
the paraquat in lungs with a rapid-phase half-life of 2.6 minutes and a slow-phase half-life
St pue shun al un jenbeied jo qood aeerois ai siuasaidai aseud mos a 'sanu gs jo
probably responsible for its pulmonary toxicity.
Chapter 69 |Paraquat733
NADPH
GSSG
HO
NADP+
HSD
NADPH
HO2
NAII
02
PQ"
Fe
DNA STRAND
TOXICITY?
PQor
BREAKAGE
HO
PROTEIN
TOXICITY?
DAMAGE
LIPID
TOXICITY?
HYTROPEROXIDF
NADP
GSH
NADPH
GSSG
LIP
ALCOHOI.
Figure 69-l Proposed biochemical mechanism of paraquat toxicity. (Modified from Lewis
CPL, Nemery B: Pathophysiology and biochemical mechanisms of the pulmonary toxicant of
paraquat. In Bismuth C, Hall A, editors: Paraquat poisomirng, New York, 1995, Marcel Dekker.)
Metabolic Transformation and Excretion
Paraquat undergoes cyclic reduction-oxidation reactions to a considerable extent. After
undergoing a single electron reduction in tissues, the resultant free radical is readily oxidized
by molecular oxygen to the parent compound. This leads to an overall excretion of essen-
tially unchanged paraquat in urine after oral administration. Thus most absorbed paraquat is
EKcreted unchanged in the urine within the first 24 hours, even in animals that develop renal
failure. Before the onset of acute renal failure, the clearance of paraquat is higher than that
of creatinine because of net tubular secretion. As renal failure develops, the renal clearance of
paraquat decreases and the plasma halflife increases from less than 12 hours to 120 hours or
Mechanism of Toxicity
The mechanisms of toxic action of paraquat have been extensively studied in animals. Para
quat participates in cyclic reduction-oxidation reactions in biologic systems. Ihe compound
734SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
readily undergoes a single-electron reduction in tissues (plant and animal), forming a free
radical. In an aerobic environment the generated free radical is soon oxidized by molecu-
lar oxygen, generating the superoxide radical (O-). The reoxidized paraquat again accepts
 another electron, and the reaction continues in a catalytic manner (see Figure 69-1).
is saiads le [e u jenbeied go sueuas aui rnu sae anss aum
ied, including humans. Biochemical studies have shown that paraquat is actively taken up
by the alveolar cells through a diamine-polyamine transport system,β where it undergoes
the one-electron reduction described previously. This reaction leads to two partially toxic
consequences. Ihe first is the generation of the superoxide radical, and the second is the
oxidation of cellular nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH), which is the
major source of reducing equivalences for the intracellular reduction of paraquat.
Generation of the superoxide radical can lead to more toxic forms of reduced oxygen,
hydrogen peroxide, and hydroxyl radicals. Hydroxyl radicals have been implicated in the ini-
tiation ofthe membrane damage by lipid peroxidation, depolymerization of hyaluronic acid,
inactivation of proteins, and damage to deoxyribonucleic acid (see Figure 69-1). Ihe result-
ing cellular membrane damage effectively reduces the functional integrity of the cell, affects
eficient gas transport, and damages respiratory exchange, causing respiratory impairment.
In the lung tissue, this toxic damage is further exacerbated by the availability of oxygen.
clinical Signs
Paraquat is an irritant and a vesicant and thus can cause severe local toxicity by topical
exposure; it causes erythema, blistering, irritation, and ulceration of the skin. Eczematous
dermatitis has been reported in paraquat-exposed experimental animals. Direct contact
with concentrated paraquat solutions produces localized discoloration or a transverse band
of white discoloration affecting the nail plate. If paraquat is splashed in the eyes, severe cor-
neal inflammation can occur and proceeds to corneal ulceration and secondary bacterial
infection. In uncomplicated cases full recovery is possible.
Acute poisoning in animals is almost always the result of ingestion of the compound.
The signs of toxicosis vary widely depending on the dose ingested. The course of the disease
can be divided into three phases.
In the initial phase lesions from the caustic action of the herbicide are seen. These
lesions lead to the development of pain associated with the gastrointestinal tract. Vomiting
always occurs in dogs, even in the absence of the emetic additives often found in herbicide
formulations. Ihe corrosive action of the compound can lead to abdominal pain and diar-
rhea. Animals with lesions in the oral cavity and gastrointestinal tract are aphagic and may
require parenteral nutrition. Experimental studies using fber optic esophagogastroscopy
have documented instances of gastric per foration and massive gastrointestinal hemorrhage
following oral paraquat exposures.
 The second phase typically starts the second to third day following ingestion and includes
development of renal failure and hepatocellular necrosis. Renal insufficiency is caused partly
 by hypovolemic conditions resulting from fluid loss (diarrhea and vomiting), and also from
direct renal injury from paraquat itself. Ihe renal injury is generally a pure tubulopathy and
can progressto full recovery without sequel. In some paraquat-poisoned animals, full return
    q a  g a an q o     o
liver lesions seen in these animals are centrilobular hepatocellular necrosis.
 Delayed development of pulmonary fibrosis is the characteristic and hallmark lesion
of the third phase of paraquat poisoning; it is responsible for the poor prognosis in acute
d aus e iae pasau st ui a jo iiam a s adxa un us
quat exposure.
 The acute pulmonary toxicity of paraquat seen in animals occurs in two stages. Ini-
tially, alveolar epithelial cells are severely damaged, and their disintegration results in a
completely denuded alveolar basement membrane. Pulmonary edema sets in, leading to
severe respiratory impairment that usually results in death. Animals that survive this initial
Chapter 69 | Paraquat 735
 u a yo sisoiqy aisaixa ya ui ais aaeaid e ii ssairoid ais aaisa
sue occurs.7
In subacute or chronic paraquat poisoning,low doses caninducehyperplasiaof thetype
 IIl cells through which the lung attempts to repair the damaged epithelium. With ingestion
a roa an u asno sa s saa a inbd go as ut as e jo
and are characterized by cellular and mitochondrial swelling, increased numbers of mito-
chondria, and the appearance of dark granules in the cytoplasm. In these animals intersti-
tial lesions extend inexorably. Ihe diagnosis of pulmonary fibrosis in humans can in fact be
made by pulmonary function testing well before PO, decreases become evident.
 Radiologic changes do not always parall the severity of clinical effects.7 Thus thoracic
radiographs of poisoned animals may be normal, particularly in animals that die acutely
sis leads to refractory hypoxemia, resulting in death over a period of a few days to several
weeks. Various therapeutic modalities, including spontaneous and artificial ventilation,
have little success in delaying the fatal outcome in animals.
 In the final stages of fatal paraquat poisoning, when sepsis has not set in, decerebration
occurs during mechanical ventilation, characterized by an inspired oxygen fraction (FiO)
of 100% and an arterial oxygen tension (PaO) of less than 30 mm Hg.
 In cases of massive ingestion of the compound (>55 mg/kg), animals survive less
than 4 days and die of cardiogenic shock. Acidosis develops in such cases. Alveolitis is
also observed, with clinical signs of acute noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. At nec-
ropsy, lesions are often seen in the gastrointestinal tract, adrenal glands, renal tubules, and
hepatocytes.
Minimum Database and Confirmatory Tests
Paraquat poisoning of companion animals can present as acute or chronic pulmonary
disease. Because treatment is not effective in the chronic stages of the disease, successful
management of paraquat toxicosis requires institution of treatment within hours of the
exposure. Therefore rapid diagnosis is vital for the successful outcome of therapy.
Clinical signs of acute paraquat poisoning include diarrhea, vomiting, andulcerationof
the oral and gastrointestinal tracts. In all cases of acute poisoning, acute respiratory distress
develops because of pulmonary edema. Days to weeks after exposure, progressive respira-
tory insuficiency occurs because of severe pulmonary fibrosis. Radiographic changes are
often minimal and frequently do not correlate with the severity of clinical signs.' One of
enter the chronic stage of the disease do not respond to treatment and eventually die from
respiratory failure. All these factors point to the importance of early diagnosis and treat-
ment of paraquat poisoning.?
Measurement of plasma paraquat concentrations is the most reliable method of assess-
ing the severity and predicting the outcome of paraquat poisoning. However, measurement
of plasma paraquat is not available in most veterinary practices and is rarely performed
Even in teaching institutions. Therefore other reliable methods of detection of paraquat
must be employed.7
The dithionate spot test may detect paraquat in tissue or bait samples. Methods for the
quantification of paraquat have been developed using visible light spectrophotometry and
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. In acute poisoning cases, stomach contents,
vomit, or suspected bait are the samples of choice, and lung and kidney tissue are the organs
ae sinu st oi dn jenbeied ueuo Aeu sades aun dusan ienbeed iog aou jo
ingestion. In chronic poisoning cases, the lung is the sample of choice, but the liver and
kidney may also contain sufficient quantities of the compound for testing to be valuable.
Within 30 hours of oral ingestion, lung tissue contains the highest concentration of the
compound.8
The half-life of paraquat in lung tissue is approximately 30 hours.10 In rats exposed to
paraquat, the compound could be detected only in the lung tissue after 4 days." Because
736SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
may be below the limit of detection in animals that die from pulmonary fibrosis.
Treatment
Treatment of paraquat-poisoned patients must be instituted as early as possible because
delaying treatment often results in fatal outcomes. Although various treatment approaches
have been described by various authors, most of these were designed for human patients.
The validity and relevance of these treatments in companion animals are not well estab-
lished. One promising aspect of these treatments is that they all were developed by studying
the effect in experimental animals.
There is no specific and effective antidote for paraquat poisoning, and measures
designed to enhance the elimination of paraquat from the body have not altered mortality
significantly in human patients. The prognosis is extremely guarded, especially in compan-
ion animal practice, where treatment is frequently delayed.7
Aftention has been given to gastrointestinal decontamination in an attempt to reduce
the absorption of ingested paraquat. Gastric emesis followed by gastric lavage and activated
charcoal administration is mandatory in all cases of acute paraquat exposure. Paraquat
absorption from the gut is often incomplete, but is rapid, as evidenced by the early develop-
ment of peak plasma concentrations. Energy-dependent accumulation of paraquat in lung
tissue and subsequent development of toxicity occur once a crucial plasma concentration
has been reached. This accumulation is time dependent. Therefore every early intervention
procedure available that will reduce adsorption must be enmployed to prevent the rapid rise
in plasma concentration to the critical level. In 1977 the manufacturer of paraquat (Impe-
rial Chemical Industries, Fernhurst, Haslemere, Surrey, England) added a potent emetic to
its liquid and solid preparations because experiments conducted in primates demonstrated
a fivefold decrease in toxicity following emesis. A significant reduction in mortality from
paraquat poisoning after the introduction of this emetic-containing formulation has not yet
been reported for human paraquat exposure cases.
There is little experimental information about the use of gastric lavage alone for the treat-
ment of paraquat poisoning. However, studies have demonstrated that reduced blood levels
levels have any beneficial influence on the outcome of toxicosis is still questionable.
There are obvious drawbacks to the use of these procedures. Ulceration of oropha-
ryngeal and esophagogastric mucosal surfaces because of contact with the concentrated
paraquat is likely to make these procedures hazardous. In addition, unnecessary waste of
a s ae  jda a sa a  a a an
 paraquat poisoning in humans.12 It may also be of limited value in companion animal prac-
tice unless initiated in the first few hours following exposure. Whole-bowel lavage can also
be used soon following ingestion to reduce the amount of paraquat absorbed from the gut.
Administration of oral adsorbents followed by cathartics may reduce the severity of
the disease. The common oral adsorbents used are bentonite, fuller's earth, and activated
charcoal. Of these, activated charcoal is preferred because it is more effective in reducing
mortality than is either fuller's earth or bentonite. In vitro adsorption of paraquat to the
different activated charcoals occurs to a greater degree in the presence of sodium chloride,
suggesting that saline should be used as the carrier vehicle for the activated charcoal.13
aul joddns jou op uonsaaun ienbeied jo sases ueuny u shodai paustqnd jeauan u
efficacy of gastrointestinal decontamination. The relevance of this observation to compan-
ion animal practices is difficult to confirm.
Once gastrointestinal decontamination has been performed, two other possible treat-
ment modalities are still available. The first is to alter the distribution of paraquat in the
 body, and the second is to modify the herbicide's effect on various biologic target organs.
Paraquat is poorly absorbed from the intestinal tract in all animal species. It is not metab-
olized but is excreted unchanged in the urine. Paraquat reaches higher concentrations in
Chapter 69 | Paraquat 737
body tissue than in plasma. This has led to therapeutic interventions aimed at removing
paraquat from blood by increasing its renal clearance or by using extracorporeal elimina-
tion routes.
 Administration of large volumes of fluids to establish and maintain a diuretic urine flow is
 beneficial because the kidney is the major route of paraquat elimination. The increased urine
flow in diuresis will increase the glomerular filtration and tubular secretion of paraquat. Fluid
administration has additional benefits in paraquat poisoning cases because most clinically
affected animals are severely dehydrated because of the gastrointestinal loss of fluids.
Paraquat also causes vasodilatation apart from the fluid losses described earlier. Both
 of these mechanisms can account for a functional adverse component in the early stages
of paraquat-induced acute renal failure. This functional impairment can be corrected by
administering sufficient fluids to cause plasma volume expansion and maintain adequate
renal perfusion, thus allowing maximal clearance of the systemically absorbed and circulat-
ing paraquat.
Diuretics can also be administered to increase urinary flow; however, renal excretion of
paraquat is often not accelerated by diuretics because tubular reabsorption is very limited.
Experimental therapies have been proposed to protect renal tubular cells from the direct
effects of absorbed paraquat. A combination of free superoxide dismutase (SOD), liposo-
 mal SOD, and glutathione peroxidase is being evaluated for this purpose.13
 Peritoneal dialysis is of little value in paraquat poisoning because it dialyzes paraquat
very poorly, even in the presence of elevated paraquat plasma concentrations. Substantial
amounts of paraquat can be cleared by hemodialysis, with as much as 150 mL cleared per
minute.13 However, because plasma concentrations in animals with paraquat poisoning tend
to be low compared with the concentrations in tissue compartments, the actual amount of
paraquat removed by this procedure is clinically insignificant. Another drawback of this
concentrations fall to less than 0.5 mg/L.13
Charcoal hemoperfusion is considered the most efficient extracorporeal procedure for
removing paraquat, offering plasma clearances as high as 170 mL/min. One study using
Hemocol cartridges reported paraquat clearance from plasma at rates between 113 and 156
mL plasma/ min, even when the plasma concentration was only 0.2 mg/L. Hemodialysis
 and hemoperfusion have also been used in series to increase total paraquat removal.13
The aim of all these procedures is to increase the elimination of paraquat from the cir-
culation and to prevent its uptake by pneumocytes. Studies conducted in dogs showed that
the survival time of exposed animals was longer when the animals underwent charcoal
hemoperfusion for 4 hours, beginning 12 hours after ingestion.13
The poor total paraquat body clearance by these methods and the rise in plasma concen-
trations for several hours following the cessation of such therapy can be explained by the
extensive paraquat tissue distribution and its slow and sustained redistribution back into
the circulation following the termination of extracorporeal procedures. One way to over-
cessful in paraquat poisoning cases in which lethal concentrations of the compound have
been ingested. The exact clinical value of this procedure has not been convincingly demon-
strated, although animal studies have shown improved survival rates with this technique.
Continuous arteriovenous hemofiltration is a procedure more easily instituted than
hemodialysis or hemoperfusion. Unfortunately, definitive clinical data on the clinical ben-
efits in humans and animals are lacking.
pue sjuaned ueunu pauosiod-jenbeied jo sisougoid au paaoidu sey ares aaljoddng
holds the same unfulfilled promise in veterinary practice.7 The most useful management
techniques still include protection of the airway, maintenance of cardiovascular circula-
tion, frequent monitoring of vital signs and blood gases, prompt and timely treatment of
secondary infections, adequate pain relief, prevention and management of renal failure,
replacement of blood losses, and treatment of cardiac complications and neurologic signs.
 Supplemental oxygen is contraindicated, even when the animal shows signs of respira-
tory diffculty. Reduction of the oxygen supply has even been attermpted because there is
738SECTION4SpecificToxicants
evidence that a positive relationship exists between the inspired oxygen concentration in
not be a treatment option to a patient who is in impending respiratory failure caused by
pulmonary fibrosis.
 There is no effective antidote available for paraquat poisoning. Research into the mech-
anisms of paraquat toxicity and the development of antidotes has yielded mixed results.
Although efforts to understand the mechanisms of free radical generation, lipid peroxida-
tion, and polyamine-mediated uptake of the compound into tissue have generated produc-
tive information, the development of an effective antidote remains as elusive today as it was
a decade ago
Certain compounds have shown promising results in animal studies if they are admin-
istered prophylactically or immediately following intoxication. Their relevance to a clinical
setting is not established because of the heterogeneity of poisoning cases and the fact that
most of the clinical data is derived from human patients.
The traditional approach to antidote development is to find compounds that detoxify
either the superoxide radical or the subsequently formed toxic intermediates. Compounds
studied so far are SOD or the mimetic enzymes and antioxidants, such as vitamin E, ascor-
bic acid, deferoxamine, selenium, clofibrate, N-acetylcysteine, riboflavin, and niacin. S-ade-
nosylmethionine (Denosyl) may be another antioxidant that could be considered.
Another approach has been to decrease the reduction-oxidation cycling of paraquat by
providing alternative substrates, such as methylene blue, which compete with paraquat for
reduction by NADPH. Another approach has been to inhibit the uptake of paraquat into
alveolar tissue through polyamine uptake pathways. In vitro studies using the uptake inhibi-
tors putrescine and valinomycin have been successful, but in vivo studies have failed to show
antidotal activity.
Other methods employed to reduce the toxic effects of paraquat have included the
reduction of pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis through radiotherapy, and the use of
various immunosuppressant and cytotoxic drugs, such as cyclophosphamide and steroids.
 These techniques have thus far failed to produce significant and consistent beneficial effects
to the patients.
Lung transplantation for replacement of a fibrotic lung has been done in humans with
moderate success whien it is performed after paraquat has been completely eliminated from
the body. The practicality of this procedure in veterinary medicine is questionable.
Prognosis
The prognosis for animals presented with suspected paraquat poisoning can be determined
from the plasma concentration of the compound relative to the time of ingestion. In human
'sisouoid oi siaal ienbered euseld saielan ieul pasn st ueoou e auiipau
Initial plasma concentrations give an indication of prognosis. Ihe urinary concen-
tration of paraquat in the first 24 hours of intoxication also can be used to arrive at a
prognosis. Unfortunately, such basal values are not available in animals and have to be
extrapolated from humans. In human patients, a urinary paraquat concentration of less
than 1 mg/L within the first 24 hours indicates a good prognosis. In patients that die
within the frst 24 hours, urine concentrations ranged from 10 to 10,000 mg/L, and in
those who died later from pulmonary fbrosis the urine paraquat concentrations ranged
from 1 to 1000 mg/L.
adosa ue ss jo auasd al ,sisan jenbeied un u se 'sud ee 
ageal ulcers indicates a grave prognosis. Early development of renal failure and concurrent
acid-base disturbances suggest a poor outlook.? The ability of the animal to excrete para-
quat depends to a large extent on normal renal function. Various studies have pointed out
that the ability of heaithy kidneys to excrete paraquat (a polar compound) is so remarkable
that toxic concentrations can be attained in the lungs only if there is concomitant renal
failure. When such large amounts of paraquat are ingested, however, concurrent multiorgan
failure is likely.
Chapter 69 |Paraquat 739
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Visible lesions are generally confined to the gastrointestinal tract and lung. Erosive stoma-
titis and esophagitis are often seen because of the irritating nature of paraquat. Paraquat
produces its characteristic, but nonspecific, acute to subacute interstitial pneumonia with
fulminating pulmonary edema and hemorrhage. In animals chronically affected, the lungs
may be shrunken and fibrotic because of hyperplasia of the alveolar type II cells and the
fibroplasia superimposed on the earlier exudative changes. Paraquat also causes proximal
renal tubular degeneration and focal centrizonal hepatic degeneration. Diquat, in contrast,
causes cerebral hemorrhage and infarcts and renal tubular degeneration and necrosis in
addition to ulcerative effects in the gastrointestinal tract.
Differential Diagnoses
In the initial phase, paraquat must be differentiated from other gastrointestinal irritant
syndromes marked by abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea; causes of these are caustic
agents (e.g., strong acids or alkalis), zinc phosphide, inorganic arsenic or mercury, lead,
zinc, pancreatitis, and many viral or bacterial agents.3 Because the acute and chronic phases
cal syndrome mimics the signs of many infectious diseases and alpha-naphthyl-thiourea
poisoning (rarely reported).
Current Toxicologic Status
The severe consequences of paraquat exposure and its resulting toxic effects mandate that
early diagnosis and aggressive treatment, coupled with intensive management, are required
if the prognosis for the severely poisoned paraquat patient is to be improved. With the cur-
rent limited effectiveness of treatment protocols for animal paraquat exposures, a focus on
exposure prevention is paramount to prevent continuing companion animal losses from
this highly toxic herbicide.
The author would like to recognize the contributions of the authors from the previous
editions, Dr. Fred Oehme and Dr. Shajan Mannala
References
1. Pond MS: Manifestations and management of paraquat poisoning, Med I A ust 152:256-259, 1990.
2. Onyema HP, Oehme FW: A literature review of paraquat toxicity, Vet Hum Toxicol 26:494-502, 1984.
 3. Cope RB, Bildfell RJ, Valentine BA, et al Seven cases of fatal paraquat poisoning in Portland, Oregon
dogs, Vet Hum Toxicol 46:258-264, 2004.
4. Merck veterinary manual, ed 8, Whitehouse Station, NJ, 1998, Merck & Co.
5. Sade P: Photochemical degradation of paraquat, Nature London 207:515, 1965.
6. World Health Organization: Environmental health criteria 39: paraquat and diquat,Geneva, 1984, World
Health Organization.
7. Cope RB: Helping animals exposed to the herbicide paraquat, Vet Med 99:755-762, 2004.
8. Bischoff K, Brizze-Buxton B, Gatto N,et al: Malicious paraquat poisoning in Oklahoma dogs, Vet Hum
Toxicol 40:151-153, 1998.
9. Shuler CM, DeBess EE,Scott M,et al: Retrospective case seriesof suspected intentional paraquat poison-
ings: diagnostic findings and risk factors for death, Vet Hum Toxicol46:313-314, 2004.
10. Smith LL: The mechanism of paraquat toxicity in the lung, Rev Biochem Toxicol 26:494-502, 1984.
11. Smith P, Heath D: Paraquat, CRC Crit Rev Toxicol 4:411-445, 1987.
12. Meredith T, Vale JA: Treatment of paraquat poisoning: gastrointestinal decontamination. In Bismuth C,
Hall A, editors: Paraquat poisoning, New York, 1995, Marcel Dekker Inc.
13. Pond MS: Treatment of paraquat poisoning In Bismuth C, Hall A, editors: Paraquat poisoning, New
York, 1995, Marcel Dekker Inc.
14. Lewis CPL, Nemery B: Pathophysiology and biochemical mechanisms of the pulmonary toxicant of
paraquat In Bismuth C, Hall A, editors: Paraquat poisoning, New York, 1995, Marcel Dekker Inc.
CHAPTER
70
Atypical Topical
Spot-On Products
Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant, DVM, PhD, DABVT, DABT
· Topical spot-on products are the newest method of insect control for pets.
· Most products are applied between the shoulder blade or striped down the
anirnal's back.
· Most products are labeled for application every 28-30 days.
Topical spot-on products may repel or kill fleas, ticks, or mosquitoes.
Some products prevent flea egg development.
· Most of these products, when used appropriately, present little risk of toxicity to
the pet.
opical spot-on ectoparasiticides are the newest method of insect control for pets, and
have taken alarge part of the market share formerly held by products such as dips, pow-
ders, and sprays. These products are usually designed to be applied between the shoulder
blades or striped down the back of the animal, limiting the ability of the animal to lick the
product off. Most products have little systemic absorption from the skin, but are distributed
over the entire skin surface area of the animal as rapidly as 12 hours following application.
This distribution throughout the lipid layers of the skin provides for prolonged effective-
ness and resistance to loss of efficacy as a result of bathing or wetting. Most products are
designed to be reapplied every 28 to 30 days.
Depending on the formulation, these products have shown efficacy at killing or repel-
ling ectoparasites such as fleas, ticks, mosquitoes, mites, and lice. In addition, some prod-
ucts contain insect growth regulators that prevent the development of flealarvae, effectively
interrupting the flea life cycle. Spot-on products are convenient, economical, easy to use,
relatively long-lasting, and well tolerated by most dogs and cats. The development of newer
insecticides that act against insect-specific biochemical mechanisms has resulted in ecto-
parasiticides that have a high degree of efficacy and much lower mammalian toxicity com-
pared to formerly used pesticides such as organophosphates and carbamates.
Ectoparasiticides
Dinotefuran
Sources
Dinotefuran (N-methyl-N'-nitro-N"-[(tetrahydro-3-furanyl)methyl)]guanidine) is a neonic-
otinoid insecticide. It is formulated in combination with pyriproxyfen as a spot-on flea control
product, and with pyriproxyfen and permethrin as a spot-on flea and tick control product.34
The manufacturer indicates that the products are not to be used on debilitated, aged, medicated,
'ae jo sYaam s8 1o f ueu 1aumoA sanddnd uo 1o sleuue Busimu 1o queuaaid 10
741
742 SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Toxic Dose
In 90-day oral feeding studies in dogs, the no observable adverse effect level (NOAEL) was
307 mg/kg/day, and the lowest observed adverse effect level (LOAEL) was 59 mg/kg/day in
females based on decreased body weight and 862 mg/kg/day in males based on decreased
body weight gain and hemorrhagic lymph nodes.2 The NOAEL for dogs during a l-year
feeding study was 20 mg/kg/day.3 Studies of the dinotefuran-pyriproxyfen spot-on formu-
lation at one, three, and five times the recommended topical dose in adult dogs and 50- to
parameters, behavior, or physical examination.3 Similar results were obtained in a dose trial
at five times the recommended dose on 47- to 55-day-old puppies.
Toxicokinetics
Absorption of dinotefuran following ingestion is more than 90%, and the compound is
widely distributed throughout the body.2 Dinotefuran is primarily excreted via the urine
and 84% to 99% is eliminated in the urine within 24 hours of absorption. Dinotefuran
undergoes minimal biotransformation in the body, with more than 90% being excreted as
the parent compound. Dinotefuran is excreted in the milk and crosses the placenta, with
maximum concentrations in milk and fetal tissues occurring 0.5 hours following maternal
ingestion; by 24 hours following maternal ingestion, concentrations in milk and fetal tissues
are less than detection limits.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Dinotefuran is a contact poison and does not require ingestion by the insect to be effective.?
 Dinotefuran binds irreversibly to insect nicotinic receptors and mimics the effects of ace-
tylcholine, resulting in continuous nerve stimulation, incoordination, tremors, and death of
the insect. At levels used in flea control products, dinotefuran does not bind to mammalian
acetylcholine receptor sites, which accounts for its low mammalian toxicity.
Clinical Signs
Chronic, high-dose exposures to rats and rabbits have produced neurologic signs consis-
tent with effects on the nicotinic cholinergic nervous system, primarily increased motor
activity.3
Systemic signs are unlikely at the levels of dinotefuran used in topical spot-on products
lmsan Aeu sionpond eidon yo uosatun mooo pmous uosau eiuapioe j uaaa 'siad io
 in taste reactions such as hypersalivation, gagging, and vomiting. As with other topically
applied products, individual dermal hypersensitivity reactions may occur, resulting in agi-
tation, pruritus, or pain at the application site. Serious or systemic signs are not generally
expected.
 Cats exposed to the canine dinotefuran spot-on combination formulation containing per-
ors, hyperesthesia, mydriasis, hypersalivation, hyperthermia, and seizures and convulsions.
Minimum Database
Assessment of general health, hydration, and renal function is recommended in all animals
showing signs beyond mild gastrointestinal upset or dermal irritation, as other potential
causes are likely.
Confirmatory Tests
Hair analysis for dinotefuran can be performed at some laboratories but generally is only
useful for confirming exposure to the compound.
Treatment
There is no specific antidote for dinotefuran; treatment for adverse effects is symptom-
atic and supportive. If the exposure is dermal, treatment includes initial stabilization and
bathing with a mild dishwashing detergent. Treatment of ingestion of a topical spot-on
Chapter 70 | Atypical Topical Spot-On Products 743
dinotefuran product should consist of dilution with milk or water. Hypersensitivity skin
reactions could occur with any topical product. In those instances, a bath with a noninsec-
ticidal shampoo and symptomatic care, such as hydrocortisone, antibiotics, or antihista-
mines, is recommended.
Cats developing signs consistent with permethrin toxicosis subsequent to exposure to a
dinotefuran-pyriproxyfen-permethrin product should be managed as outlined in the pyre
throid chapter (see Chapter 73, "Pyrethrins and Pyrethroids").
Prognosis
mild signs should resolve with symptomatic and supportive care.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for reactions to oral exposures (drooling, gagging, etc.) include
corrosive oral injury, exposure to insoluble calcium oxalate-containing plants, and
nontoxicant-related nausea.
Fipronil
Sources
Fipronil (5-amino-1-[2,6-dichloro-4-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]-4-[(1R,S)-(trifluoromethyl)
sulfinyl]-1H-pyrazole-3-carbonitrile) is a phenylpyrazole antiparasitic agent used for fleas
and ticks in dogs and cats.6- Fipronil is available as a topical product for flea and tick con-
trol and in combination with methoprene for additional control of immature flea stages.?
For control of fleas, ticks, and chewing lice, fipronil is also available as a spot-on prod-
uct containing 5.2% cyphenothrin and as a combination product with methoprene and
amitraz.910
Toxic Dose
The reported oral median lethal dose (LDso) in rats for veterinary product formulations is
greater than 5000 mg/kg.1 In chronic feeding studies, the NOAEL for dogs was 0.3 mg/kg/
day for females and 1 mg/kg/day for males, whereas dosages of 1 mg/kg/day in females and
2 mg/kg/day in males resulted in signs of neurotoxicity. 6
Toxicokinetics
Fipronil collects in the oils of the skin and hair follicles and continues to be released over
time, resulting in long residual activity.12 Topically applied, the compound spreads over
the body within 24 hours via translocation. In oral rat studies, 5% to 25% of the parent
compound and metabolites is excreted in the urine, and 45% to 75% is excreted in the
feces.l1
Mechanism of Toxicity
 un oe go s shl er'ise (i) pie rqo- e st i
brates is to interfere with the passage of chloride ions in GABA-regulated chloride channels,
thereby disrupting central nervous system (CNS) activity.78.l Blockade of the GABA recep-
tors by fipronil results in neural excitation.7.1l
Clinical Signs
 There is limited published information detailing adverse effects of fipronil in dogs or cats;
however, clinical effects from the veterinary product would be expected to be mild. Inges-
tions could occur with any dermal product. Extra-label use of fipronil-based sprays on
signs of amitraz toxicosis, including hypersalivation, vomiting, lethargy, hyperglycemia,
bradycardia, and bradypnea (see Chapter 31,"Amitraz").10
744SECTlON 4SpecificToxicants
Cats exposed to the canine fipronil spot-on combination formulation containing
cyphenothrin may present with signs of permethrin toxicosis, including muscle fascicula-
convulsions.s
Minimum Database
Assessment of the hepatic function may be required because the liver is the primary site of
metabolism of fipronil
Confirmatory Tests
Some laboratories can test for fipronil in hair and skin samples. These results can only con-
Treatment
There is no specific antidote for fipronil; treatment for adverse effects is symptomatic and
supportive. If the exposure is dermal, the treatment would include initial stabilization and
bathing with a mild dishwashing detergent. Treatment of ingestion of a topical spot-on
fipronil product should consist of dilution with milk or water.
Hypersensitivity skin reactions could occur with any topical product. In those instances,
abath with a noninsecticidal shampoo and symptomatic care, such as hydrocortisone, anti-
biotics, or antihistamines, is recommended.
Animals showing signs consistent with amitraz overdose following oral exposure to
fipronil-amitraz products should be managed as outlined in Chapter 31, "Amitraz"
Cats developing signs consistent with cyphenothrin toxicosis subsequent to exposure to
a fipronil-cyphenothrin product should be managed as outlined in Chapter 73, “Pyrethrins
and Pyrethroids.
Prognosis
Although published reports of adverse effects of fipronil are limited, in most situations ani-
     oi   o   s
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for reactions to oral exposures (drooling, gagging, etc.) include
corrosive oral injury, exposure to insoluble calcium oxalate-containing plants, and
nontoxicant-related nausea.
Imidacloprid
Sources
Imidacloprid (1-[(6-chloro-3-pyridinyl)-methyl]-N-nitro-2-imidazolidinimine)isa
neonicotinoid of the chloronicotinyl nitroguanidine class.15 Imidacloprid is used with
pyriproxyfen in topical spot-on products to kill all life stages of fleas on dogs and cats
and to prevent and control lice infestations on dogs.'6 The manufacturer states that these
products should be used with caution in debilitated, aged, pregnant, or nursing animals
and kittens less than 8 weeks of age or puppies less than 7 weeks of age. Imidacloprid is
used in combination with permethrin in dog-only spot-on products that control fleas
and ticks. Topical formulations of imidacloprid in combination with moxidectin are used
on dogs and cats to prevent heartworms as well as control fleas, ear mites, and intestinal
nematodes.17
Toxic Dose
 Dermal LDso of technical imidacloprid for rats is more than 5000 mg/kg.15 Dogs fed up to
41 mg/kg of imidacloprid for a year developed increased cholesterol levels and increased
concentration of cytochrome P450. Kittens exposed topically to 5.2 times the recom-
mended dose of an imidacloprid-moxidectin combination developed mydriasis, salivation,
depression, squinting, and poor appetite.'7
Chapter 70|Atypical Topical Spot-OnProducts745
Toxicokinetics
According to the technical profile of the spot-on formulation, topically applied imida-
cloprid spreads rapidly over the skin by translocation.ll The product is not systemically
absorbed, but sequesters in hair folicles and glands where it is shed with sebum. Ingested
 inmidacloprid is quickly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.113 Within 48 hours, 96%
of absorbed imidacloprid is eliminated via urine (70% to 80%) and feces (20% to 30%).
Mechanism of Toxicity
Imidacloprid blocks nicotinergic pathways, which results in a buildup of acetylcholine at
paralysis, and later death.
Clinical Signs
 There is limited published information detailing adverse effects of imidacloprid in dogs or
 cats; however, clinical effects from the veterinary product are expected to be mild. Because
osiod jo suis rzuonaies aaissaxa asnes Au ioeos eno susei salnq si nip a
from imidacloprid are similar to nicotinic signs, including lethargy, vomiting, diarrhea,
hypersalivation, initil tremors, muscle weakness, and ataxia.'5
Animals exposed to oral or topical overdoses of imidacloprid-moxidectin combination
products may develop signs consistent with avermectin toxicosis: mydriasis, depression,
ataxia, tremors, blindness, and coma (see Chapter 52).7
Minimum Database
Assessment of the hydration status and urinary function may be required because the kid-
neys are the primary sites of elimination of imidacloprid.
Confirmatory Tests
Some laboratories cantest for imidacloprid in hair and skin samples. However, these results
can only confirm the exposure because toxic levels in tissues have not been determined.
Treatment
There is no specific antidote for imidacloprid; treatment for adverse effects would be symp-
tomatic and supportive. If the exposure is dermal, the treatment includes initial stabiliza-
applied veterinary imidacloprid product should consist of dilution with milk or water.
Hypersensitivity skin reactions could occur with any topical product. In those instances,
a bath with a noninsecticidal shampoo and symptomatic care, such as hydrocortisone, anti-
biotics, or antihistamines, is recommended.
Animals exposed to moxidectin-containing formulations and showing signs consistent
with macrocyclic lactone toxicosis (e.g., depression, ataxia, mydriasis, blindness, salivation)
should be managed as outlined in Chapter 52, "Ivermectin: Macrolide Antiparasitic Agents."
Prognosis
Although published reports of adverse effects of imidacloprid are limited, in most situa-
tions, animals are expected to recover within 24 to 72 hours with veterinary care.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for reactions to oral exposures (drooling, gagging,etc.) include corro
sive oral injury, exposure to insoluble calcium oxalate-containing plants, and nontoxicant-
related nausea.
Indoxacarb
Sources
Indoxacarb (methyl-(4aS)-7-chloro-2-[methoxycarbonyl-[4-(trifluoromethoxy)-phenyl]car
bamoyl]-3,5-dihydroindeno[1,2-e][1,3,4]oxadiazine-4a-carboxylate) is a pyrazoline-type
746SECTION4SpecificToxicants
insecticide originally developed for use against insect strains that had developed resistance
to organophosphates, carbamates, and pyrethroids.19 In the United States, indoxacarb is reg-
istered for use to control lepidopteran insects on crops, turf grasses, and landscape ornamen-
tals.20 It is also present in ant and cockroach baits and gels at concentrations of 0.05% to 0.6%,
 and at 20% for control of termites.21.2z In the European Union, indoxacarb is approved as a
topical spot-on flea control product for dogs and cats, and, in combination with permethrin,
 as a topical spot-on flea and tick control for dogs only.23.24 The manufacturer states that the
safety of the indoxacarb spot-on product has not been established for dogs or cats less than 8
weeks of age or for dogs weighing less than 1.5 kg or cats weighing less than 0.6 kg.23
Toxic Dose
Insect species vary in sensitivity to indoxacarb because of species differences in uptake and
absorption rates, bioactivation rates, and sodium channel receptors.2 Insect sodium chan-
nels are sensitive to indoxacarb at nanomolar levels whereas mammalian sodium channels
are sensitive to indoxacarb at micromolar concentrations, making indoxacarb more than
1000 times more neurotoxic to insects compared with mammals. Ihe dermal 90-day NOAEL
for rodents is more than 2000 mg/kg/day.26 The oral 90-day NOAEL for dogs is 5 mg/kg/day,
and the 1-year NOAEL is 2.3-2.4 mg/kg/day. The oral 90-day LOAEL for dogs is 19 mg/kg/day
 based on the development of hemolytic anemia; at 18-19 mg/kg/day for 1 year Heinz bodies,
anemia, bone marrow hyperplasia, and increased liver weight were reported.
Toxicokinetics
Following application to the skin of dogs and cats, indoxacarb is detectable in the skin and
hair coat for at least 4 weeks.23 The concentration of indoxacarb in the hair is higher than
the concentration in the skin.27 Dermal absorption of indoxacarb following application at
recommended label doses is at least 19% in dogs and 34% in cats. Bioavailability of indoxa-
carb in a polyethylene glycol vehicle administered orally at a dosage of 0.32 mg/kg was 85%
in dogs and 82% in cats.27 In both dogs and cats, indoxacarb is extensively metabolized in
the liver to multiple metabolites and eliminated primarily through the feces.23.27 In mam-
mals, the rapid metabolic degradation of indoxacarb as well as less efficient bioactivation
of indoxacarb to its active (toxic) metabolite contribute to the low level of neurotoxicity
compared with insects.
Mechanism of Toxicity
 In insects, indoxacarb is absorbed via ingestion with lesser amounts absorbed across the
ent compound.25 Ihe active metabolite binds to and blocks voltage-dependent sodium
channels within the insect nervous system, resulting in paralysis and death of the insect.
In toxicity studies in dogs, indoxacarb induced Heinz bodies and hemolytic anemia
when administered orally at 18-19 mg/kg/day.26 This effect is suspected to be due to a
metabolite of indoxacarb, N-hydroxylarylamine, which causes oxidative damage to red
blood cells.27 Based on in vitro studies, the relative sensitivity of species to the oxidative
effect of this metabolite is: rat is more sensitive than dogs, which are more sensitive than
humans. Because cats have red blood cells that are more sensitive to oxidative injury, one
would expect them to be more sensitive than dogs. Despite humans being less sensitive to
oxidative red blood cell injury from the indoxacarb metabolite, several case reports exist of
of indoxacarb.28.31
Clinical Signs
When indoxacarb is used as a spot-on flea product, the possibility of hypersensitivity
sures to the small amounts of indoxacarb present in ant and cockroach baits is unlikely
Chapter 70 | Atypical Topical Spot-On Products 747
in signs of methemoglobinemia or hemolysis. Signs include cyanosis, chocolate brown
mucous membranes, dyspnea, lethargy, and coma. Seizures secondary to hypoxia may
occur. Rhabdomyolysis was not reported in toxicity studies in animals but has occurred
 in humans with indoxacarb poisoning.3l Acute renal failure has also been reported
in humans, and in most cases was considered to be secondary to hemoglobinemia or
myoglobinemia.28.3]
Minimum Database
For large exposures baseline complete blood cell count and serum chemistry should be
obtained. The hematocrit and plasma should be monitored for the development of hemo-
lytic anemia. Should hemolysis develop, renal values should be closely monitored.
Confirrmatory Tests
Some laboratories can test for indoxacarb in hair samples, although the utility of these tests
in managing the patient is questionable. Additionally, these results can only confirm expo-
sure because toxic levels in tissues have not been determined.
Treatment
There is no specific antidote for indoxacarb; treatment for adverse effects is symptomatic
and supportive. If the exposure is dermal, the treatment includes initial stabilization and
bathing with a mild dishwashing detergent. Treatment of ingestion of a small amount of
indoxacarb product should consist of dilution with milk or water. Hypersensitivity skin
reactions could occur with any topical product. In those instances, a bath with a noninsec-
ticidal shampoo and symptomatic care, such as hydrocortisone, antibiotics, or antihista-
mines, is recommended.
For large oral exposures, early decontamination (emesis induction, activated charcoal
administration) may be performed if the patient has no significant clinical signs or other
contraindications. Patients developing hematologic abnormalities such as hemolytic ane-
mia or methemoglobinemia may require supplemental oxygen for stabilization. If hemo-
s an and oi a st js p su asd si sin  sis
from hemoglobin- or myoglobin-induced injury. Blood transfusions may be necessary for
managing hemolytic anemia. Methemoglobinemia may be managed with methylene blue,
although care must be used in cats so as not to worsen the methemoglobinemia (some clini-
cians consider methylene blue contraindicated in cats because of the difficulty in correctly
titrating the dose).7
Prognosis
The prognosis for dermal exposures is very good. Patients developing hemolysis or myo-
 globinemia secondary to ingestion of indoxacarb are at risk of complications such as acute
renal failure and have a more guarded prognosis.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for reactions to oral exposures (drooling, gagging, etc.) include
corrosive oral injury, exposure to insoluble calcium oxalate-containing plants, and
nontoxicant-related nausea. Differential diagnoses for red blood cell damage include
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, zinc toxicosis, acetaminophen toxicosis, onion or
garlic toxicosis, naphthalene (mothball) toxicosis, chlorate toxicosis, and hydroxyurea
toxicosis
Metaflumizone
Sources
Metaflumizone (2-[2-(4-cyanophenyl)-1-[3-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]ethylidene]-N-[4-(tri-
fluoromethoxy)phenyl]hydrazinecarboxamide) is a novel semicarbazone insecticide that
is related to pyrazoline sodium channel blocker insecticides such as indoxacarb.32 Metaflu-
mizone is used alone in topical flea control products for cats and kittens 8 weeks of age and
748SECTlON4SpecificToxicants
older, and in combination with amitraz in topical flea and tick control products for dogs
and puppies 8 weeks of age and older.33.34 In the United States, both products have been
discontinued by the manufacturer as of September 20, 2011, although existing stocks may
still be marketed.35
Toxic Dose
Metaflumizone has very low acute oral toxicity to mammals, is not irritating to eyes or
skin, and was not considered to possess a potential to induce skin sensitization.36 In dogs,
the lowest NOAEL was 12 mg/kg/day in a 1-year study. Metaflumizone was not found to be
neurotoxic, genotoxic, oncogenic, or teratogenic, or to cause reproductive dysfunction in
studies in rabbits and rats.
In cats a 20% metaflumizone topical product was studied in cats and 8-week-old kit-
tens.37 Single and repeated doses of one, three, and five times the recommended topical
dose had no effect on mortality, body weight, food consumption, clinical findings, physi-
cal and neurologic examinations, or clinical pathologic parameters. Some felines dem-
onstrated transient salivation, but this condition occurred in placebo-treated controls as
well. Cats dosed orally with 10% of the recommended topical dose developed immediate
hypersalivation and head shaking. No other adverse effects were observed following oral
administration.
The metaflumizone-amitraz combination product was studied at single and repeated
doses of one, three, and five times the recommended topical dosage in dogs and was found
to have no effects on clinical findings, heart rate, body weight, food consumption, physi-
cal and neurologic examinations, and macroscopic and microscopic pathologic findings.3
in some dogs at all dose levels but were not dose-related and were considered to be of
nonrenal origin. At dosages three and five times the recommended dosage, mild and tran-
sient hyperglycemia was seen in some adult female dogs, and mild, transient elevations
in leukocytes, neutrophils, and monocytes were seen in some dogs of either sex. Dogs
receiving orally 10% of the recommended topical dose developed immediate salivation and
head shaking, and some displayed decreased activity, decreased body temperature, and
pale oral mucous membranes within 1-2 hours following ingestion. One dog receiving oral
 metaflumizone-amitraz developed ataxia, which resolved within 4 hours of ingestion. Oral
administration of metaflumizone-amitraz had no effect on clinical pathologic parameters.
The signs seen with oral metaflumizone-amitraz are most consistent with the amitraz com
ponent of the product, as the alpha-2 adrenergic agonist can cause sedation, hypothermia,
and ataxia.39
Following its introduction into the marketplace, use of the metaflumizone-amitraz
foliaceus in 22 dogs.40 Although most affected dogs had received several (up to eight) prior
applications of the product without incident, a few developed lesions after the first exposure.
Toxicokinetics
Following topical exposure of cats to 40 mg/kg of metaflumizone, plasma levels remained
less than quantification levels (<50 ng/mL) in five of six cats, and many samples were less
than detection limits of the assay (<1.1 ng/mL).4 The one quantifiable sample had a plasma
metaflumizone concentration of 57.8 ng/mL at 3 days following application. These results
suggest that there is minimal systemic absorption of metaflumizone following topical
application in cats. Hair sarmple analysis showed that metaflumizone was widely distributed
throughout the hair coat within one day of application, reaching maximum concentration
within 24-48 hours of application.
Most dogs treated topically with the minimum recommended dose of 20 mg/kg of
metaflumizone and 20 mg/kg of amitraz had detectable (>1 ng/mL) but not quantifiable
(< 50 ng/mL) levels of metaflumizone.42 At 42 days after application, metaflumizone was
ae ads ri tlu s-a n uilui sa e sho xis yo moy ui aqai
sis showed that metaflumizone was widely distributed throughout the hair coat within
Chapter 70 | Atypical Topical Spot-On Products 749
1 day of application, reaching maximum concentration between 2 and 7 days following
application.
Mechanism of Toxicity
 The insecticidal action of metaflumizone is through voltage-dependent blockade of sodium
channels within the nervous system of susceptible insects.43 Metaflumizone preferentially
binds to the inactivated state of the sodium channel, resulting in near-irreversible blockade
and paralysis of the insect.
Clinical Signs
As with most topical insecticides, dermal irritation may occur in some animals following
application of products containing metaflumizone. Oral exposure may result in hypersali-
vation, gagging, or vomiting. Systemic toxicosis has not been reported with metaflumizone
exposures. Ingestion of the canine metaflumizone-amitraz product may result in signs of
amitraz toxicosis, including lethargy, bradycardia, hypotension, hypothermia, ataxia, and
hyperglycemia (see Chapter 31,"Amitraz").39
Most dogs developing pemphigus foliaceus following exposure to metaflumizone-
amitraz products were more than 6 years of age, female, and more than 20 kg in weight.40
Lesions usually developed within 14 days following product application. Cutaneous lesions
included pustules, erosions, and crusting surrounded by areas of erythema. In one third of
the cases, lesions remained localized to the area of product application or extended away
from the application site to affect the proximal dorsal trunk; approximately one third of
these cases developed systemic signs. In two thirds of the dogs, lesions originated at the
application site but eventually erupted at distant sites at body areas typically associated
with the development of spontaneous pemphigus foliaceus (i.e., ears, face, nose, etc.); three
fourths of these generalized cases developed systemic signs such as lethargy, anorexia, fever,
and lameness.
Minimum Database
Animals showing more than mild skin hypersensitivity following topical exposure should
have baseline serum chemistry and complete blood cell count assessed. Oral exposure to
amitraz-containing products may result in hyperglycemia.
Confirmatory Tests
Some laboratories can test for metaflumizone in hair samples, although the utility of these
tests is questionable. Additionally, these results can only confirm the exposure because toxic
levels in tissues have not been determined. For dogs suspected of developing pemphigus
foliaceus secondary to exposure to the metaflumizone-amitraz product, skin biopsy is war-
ranted to identify the characteristic histopathologic lesions; indirect fluorescent antibody
testing of skin biopsies can assist in diagnosis. Additionally, circulating antikeratinocyte
antibodies may be detectable in those dogs demonstrating the more generalized form of
the disease.40
Treatment
There is no specific antidote for metaflumizone; treatment for adverse effects is symptom-
atic and supportive. If the exposure is dermal, the treatment includes initial stabilization
on metaflumizone product should consist of dilution with milk or water. Hypersensitiv-
ity skin reactions could occur with any topical product. In those instances, a bath with
a noninsecticidal shampoo and symptomatic care, such as hydrocortisone, antibiotics, or
antihistamines, is recommended. Animals showing signs consistent with amitraz overdose
following oral exposure to metaflumizone-amitraz products should be managed as outlined
in Chapter 31.
Treatment for pemphigus foliaceus developing secondary to application of metaflumizone
 armitraz products should include bathing of the application site and administration of topical
750SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
glucocorticoids. For more severe or extensive lesions, oral glucocorticoids and other immu-
nosuppressive drugs such as azathioprine or cyclosporine may be required.40
Prognosis
The prognosis for mild dermal hypersensitivity or oral irritation from exposure to
nosis, assuming prompt veterinary intervention is obtained. Dogs developing localized
pemphigus foliaceus secondary to application of metaflumizone-amitraz products usu-
Paeiauas sudoaaap saop Ie ion t'suais yo uontosan o sisouaand pool e aney ae
pemphigus foliaceus achieved remission, and some dogs required long-term manage-
ment with immunosuppressants, as lesions recurred when immunosuppressant doses
were decreased.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for reactions to oral exposures (drooling, gagging, etc.) include
corrosive oral injury, exposure to insoluble calcium oxalate-containing plants, and
nontoxicant-related nausea. Differential diagnoses for amitraz toxicosis include other CNS
depressants (e.g., antidepressants, opioids, barbiturates, ethylene glycol, propylene glycol,
methanol, ethanol, etc.). Differential diagnoses for metaflumizone-amitraz-associated
pemphigus foliaceus include spontaneous pemphigus foliaceus, thermal burns, chemical
burns, and dorsal solar thermal necrosis.
Insect Growth Regulators
Methoprene
Sources
Methoprene (propan-2-yl(2E,4E)-11-methoxy-3,7,11-trimethyldodeca-2,4-dienoate) is a
 synthetic insect growth regulator and is classified as a terpenoid.45 It is used in topical flea
control products to help break the flea life cycle alone or in combination with adulticide
 products. Methoprene does not kill adult fleas.
Toxic Dose
In dogs the acute oral LDs, is 5000 to 10,000 mg/kg.45 The World Health Organization has
approved methoprene as safe for use in drinking water to control mosquitoes because of
minimal or no risk to humans, animals, or the environment.45
Toxicokinetics
In mammals methoprene is rapidly and completely broken down and excreted, mostly in
the urine and feces.45
Mechanism of Toxicity
Methoprene is a compound that mimics the action of an insect growth regulation
hormone. It is used as an insecticide because it interferes with the normal maturation
process. In a normal life cycle, an insect goes from egg to larva to pupa and eventually
to adult. Methoprene artificially stunts the insects’ development, making it impossible
s, auonpoidan uoiy uau sunjuanand snul pue 'sateis ipe au oi aimeu oi sisasu ioy
Clinical Signs
There is limited published information detailing adverse effects of methoprene in dogs
or cats; however, given the mechanism of action, clinical effects are expected to be
mild. Toxicity concerns from overexposure or ingestion of current topical spot-on
products come primarily from the adulticidal component of the product rather than
Chapter 70 | Atypical Topical Spot-On Products 751
of the inert ingredients. Also, topical hypersensitivity reactions could occur with any
dermal product.
Minimum Database
Assessment of renal and hepatic function may be helpful because the liver and kidney are
the sites of metabolism and elimination of methoprene.
Confirmatory Tests
Some laboratories can test for methoprene in hair and skin samples. However, these results
can only confirm the exposure because toxic levels in tissues have not been determined.
Treatment
If the exposure is dermal, the treatment includes initial stabilization and bathing with a
mild dishwashing detergent. Treatment of ingestion should consist of dilution with milk
or water. Hypersensitivity skin reactions could occur with any topical product. In those
instances, a bath with a noninsecticidal shampoo and symptomatic care, such as hydrocor-
tisone, antibiotics, or antihistamines, is recommended.
Prognosis
Given the mechanism of action, prognosis is good in most cases.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for reactions to oral exposures (drooling, gagging, etc.) include
corrosive oral injury, exposure to insoluble calcium oxalate-containing plants, and
nontoxicant-related nausea.
Pyriproxyfen
Sources
Pyriproxyfen (4-phenoxyphenyl(RS)-2-(2-pyridyloxy)propyl ether) is a broad-spectrum
insect growth regulator with activity against a variety of insects.46 It is used in a variety of
flea control topical spot-on products, alone or in combination with adulticidal insecticides,
including dinotefuran, fpronil, imidacloprid, and pyrethroids.
Toxic Dose
Pyriproxyfen has very low acute oral toxicity in mammals, with LDso values of more than
5000 mg/kg body weight in mice, rats, and dogs.46 Dermal toxicity is similarly low. Chronic
feeding studies resulted in increased liver weights and alterations of plasma cholesterol lev-
els when doses of more than 120 mg/kg/day were fed to rats. Ihe NOAEL level for dogs is
100 mg/kg/day. Very high doses in dogs and rats resulted in mild anemia.
Toxicokinetics
Pyriproxyfen is poorly absorbed orally withlessthan 50% of an ingested dose being absorbed.46
Elimination is primarily (90%) via the feces with 34% to 37% of an administered dose being
eliminated in 48 hours. Ihe primary biotransformation route is via hydroxylation. Ihe lipo-
philic nature of pyriproxyfen results in persistence in skin following bathing or swimming.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Pyriproxyfen acts as a juvenile hormone (JH) mimic, artificially maintaining the regulation
of molting after natural JH levels have dropped; this arrests the development of ova and
immature flea stages, which ultimately die.3 Pyriproxyfen interferes with the development
of flea eggs, larvae, early pupae, and young adult fleas.
Clinical Signs
There is limited published information detailing adverse effects of pyriproxyfen in dogs
or cats; however, given the mechanism of action, clinical effects are mild. Although mild
752SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
anemia has been associated with very high levels of ingestion of pyriproxyfen,46 it is
extremely unlikely that dogs or cats would be exposed to these levels given the amounts
topical spot-on products come primarily from the adulticidal component of the product
rather than pyriproxyfen. Ingestion of any topical products may cause taste reactions, such
as drooling, gagging, and vomiting. Also, topical hypersensitivity reactions could occur as
with any topically applied product.
Minimum Database
Assessment of general health, hydration, and renal function is recommended in all animals
showing signs beyond mild gastrointestinal upset or dermal irritation, as other potential
causes are likely.
Confirmatory Tests
Some laboratories can test for methoprene in hair and skin samples. However, these results
can only confirm the exposure since toxic levels in tissues have not been determined
Treatment
If the exposure is dermal, the treatment includes initial stabilization and bathing with a
or water. Hypersensitivity skin reactions could occur with any topical product. In those
instances, a bath with a noninsecticidal shampoo and symptomatic care, such as hydrocor-
tisone, antibiotics, or antihistamines, is recommended.
Prognosis
Given the very low mammalian toxicity of pyriproxyfen, any signs caused by exposure to
this product would be expected to be mild and self-limiting.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for reactions to oral exposures (drooling, gagging, etc.) include
corrosive oral injury, exposure to insoluble calcium oxalate-containing plants, and
nontoxicant-related nausea.
Acknowledgment
The editors wish to acknowledge the exceptional contribution of Dr. Jill Richardson, who
authored this chapter for the second edition of the book. Her contribution served as the
foundation for the material appearing in this edition.
References
1. Sabnis S, Zupan J, Gliddon M: Topical formulations of metafumizone plus amitraz to treat flea and tick
infestations on dogs, Vet Parasitol 150(3):196-202, 2007.
2.Dinotefuran: PesticideFact Sheet,Washington,DC, 2004,U.S.Environmental Protection Agency Office
of Prevention, Pesticides and Toxic Substances. Retrieved 02/2012 from http://www.epa.gov/opprd001/
factsheets/ dunotefuran.pdf.
 3. Vectrα [technical monograph ], Rutherford, NJ, 2009, Summit VetPharm. Retrieved 02/2012 from http:/
/www.summitvetpharm.com/File/VDP_Tech_Mono_22Jul09_w.pdf.
4. Vectra 3D [technical monograph], Rutherford, NJ, 2009, Summit VetPharm. Retrieved 02/2012 from
http://www.summitvetpharm.com/File/VDP_Tech_Mono_22Jul09_w.pdf.
5. Boland LA, Angles IM: Feline permethrin toxicity: retrospective study of 42 cases, I Feline Med Surg
12(2):61-71, 2010.
6.Fipronil Pesticide Fact Sheet, Washington, DC, 1996, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Office of
Prevention, Pesticides and Toxic Substances.
7. Plumb DC: Veterinary drug handbook, ed 6, Ames, Iowa, 2008, Blackwell Publishing
8. Hainzl D, Cole LM, Casida JE: Mechanisms for selective toxicity of fipronil insecticide and its sulfone
metabolite and desulfinyl photoproduct, Chem Res Toxicol 11(12):1529-1535, 1998.
Chapter 70 | Atypical Topical Spot-On Products 753
9. Parastar Plus [package insert], Greensboro, NC, 2011, Novartis Animal Health. Retrieved 02/12 from
http://www.parastarpluspet.com/parastar_plus/view/downloads/ParastarPlus_ProductInfoSheet.pdf.
10. Certifect Summary of Product Characteristics: European Public Assessment Report, London, England,
document_library/EPAR_-_Product_Information/veterinary/002002/ WC500111238.pdf.
11. Hovda LR, Hooser SB: Toxicology of newer pesticides for use in dogs and cats, Vet Clin Small Anim
32:455-467, 2002.
12. Birckel P, Cochet P, Bernard P, et al: Cutaneous distribution of C-fipronil in the dog and cat following α
spot on administration. Proceedings from the Third World Congress of Veterinary Dermatology, Sep-
tember, 1996, Edinburgh, Scotland.
13. Wismer TA: Novel insecticides. In Plumlee KH, editor: Clinical veterinary toxicology, St Louis, 2003
Mosby.
14. Webster M: Product warning, Frontline, Aust Vet I77:202, 1999.
15. Gervais JA, Luukinen B, Buhl K, Stone D: Imidacloprid technical fact sheet, National Pesticide Informa
tion Center, Oregon State University Extension Services. Retrieved from http://npic.orstedu/factsheets/
imidacloprid.pdf.
16. Advantage II for dogs [package label], Shawnee Mission, KS, 2010, Bayer Animal Health.
17. Advantage Multi for cats [package label], Shawnee Mission, KS, 2010, Bayer Animal Health.
18. Allen TR, Frei T, Leutkemeier H, et al: A 52-week oral toxirity (feeding) study with NTN 33893 technical
in the dog. Unpublished Report no. R 4856, 1989, amendment no. R 4856A, 1992, submitted to WHO
by Bayer AG, Mannheim, Germany. INCHEM Toxicological Evaluations: Imidacloprid, International
Programme on Chemical Safety, Geneva, Switzerland, 1989, World Health Organization.
19. Zhao X, Ikeda T, Yeh JZ, Narahasih T: Voltage-dependent block of sodium channels in mammalian
neurons by the oxadiazine insecticide indoxacarb and its metabolite DCJW, Neurotoxicology 24:83-96,
2003.
20. Provaunt insecticide [product label], Wilmington, DE, 2011, E.1. du Pont de Nemours and Company.
Retrieved 02/2012 from http://www2.dupont.com/Professional_Products/en_US/assets/downloads/pdfs/
PROVAUNT_SL-1603A_0812.pdf.
 e s a n  ra  a  a dl   
Retrieved02/2012from http://www2.dupont.com/Professional_Products/en_US/assets/downloads/pdfs/
ARILON_SL-1672C_020612.pdf.
22. Advion insect granule [product label], Wilmington, DE, 201, E.1. du Pont de Nemours and Company.
Retrieved02/2012from http://www2.dupont.com/Professional_Products/en_US/assets/downloads/pdfs/
H65697.pdf.
23. Activyl Spot-on solution [package leaflet], The Netherlands, 2010, Intervet International BV, Boxmeer.
Retrieved 02/2012 from http://www.emaeuropa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-_Product
Information/veterinary/000163/WC500102510.pdf.
24. Activyl Tick Plus Spot-on solution for dogs [package leaflet], The Netherlands, 2010, Intervet International
BV, Boxmeer. Retrieved 02/2012 from http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/
EPAR_-_Product_Information/veterinary/002234/WC500120993.pdf
insects, Crop Protection 19:537-545, 2000.
26. Indoxacarb: pesticide fact sheet. Washington, DC, 20oo, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Office of
Prevention, Pesticides and Toxic Substances. Retrieved 02/2012 from http//www.epa.gov/opprd001/fact
sheets/indoxacarb.pdf.
27. Activyl Scientifc Discussion, London, England, 2011, European Medicines Agency, EMA/529995/2010.
Retrieved 02/2012 from http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-_Scientific_
Discussion/veterinary/000163/WC500102509.pdf
28. Park JS, Kim H, Lee SW, Min JH: Successful treatment of methemoglobinemia and acute renal failure
after indoxacarb poisoning, Clin Toxicol 49(8):744-746, 2011.
29. Chhabra R, Singh I, Tandon M, Babu R: Indoxacarb poisoning: a rare presentation as methemoglobin-
emia, Indian I A naesth 54(3):239 -241, 2010.
30. Prasanna L, Rao SM, Singh V, Kujur R: Gowrishankar: Indoxacarb poisoning: an unusual presentation
as methemoglobinemia, Indian J Crit Care Med 12(4):198-200, 2008.
31. Jin K: Rhabdomyolysis, methemoglobinemia and acute kidney injury after indoxacarb poisoning, Clin
Toxicol 50(3):227, 2012.
32. Salgado VL, Hayashi JH: Metaflumizone is a novel sodium channel blocker insecticide, Vet Parasitol
150(3):182-189, 2007.
33. Promeris for cats [package insert], Fort Dodge, IA, 2006, Fort Dodge Animal Health.
34. Promeris for dogs [package insert], Fort Dodge, IA, 2006, Fort Dodge Animal Health.
754SECTION4SpecificToxicants
35. American Veterinary Medical Association: Pfizer discontinuing Promeris, I Am Vet Med AssoC
238(12):1542, 2011.
36. Hempel K, Hess FG, Bogi C, et al: Toxicological properties of metaflumizone, Vet Parasitol 150(3):190-
195,2007.
37. Heaney K, Lindahl RG: Safety of a topically applied spot-on formulation of metaflumizone for flea
control in cats and kittens, Vet Parasitol 150(3):233-238, 2007.
for flea and tick control in dogs, Vet Parasitol150(3):225-232, 2007.
39. Hugnet C, Buronrosse F, Pineau X, et al: Toxicity and kinetics of amitraz in dogs, Am J Vet Res
57(10):1506-1510, 1996.
40. Oberkirchner U, Linder KE, Dunston S, et al: Metaflumizone-amitraz (Promeris)-associated pustular
acantholytic dermatitis in 22 dogs: evidence suggests contact drug-triggered pemphigus foliaceus, Vet
Dermatol 22(5):436-448, 2011.
41. DeLay RL, Lacoste E, Delprat S, Blond-Riou F: Pharmacokinetics of metaflumizone in the plasma and
hair of cats following topical application, Vet Parasitol 150(3):258-262, 2007.
42. DeLay RL, Lacoste E, Mezzasalma T, Blond-Riou F: Pharmacokinetics of metaflumizone and amitraz in
the plasma and hair of dogs following topical application, Vet Parasitol 150(3):258-262, 2007.
43. Song W, Silver KS, Du Y, et al: Analysis ofthe action of lidocaine on insect sodium channels, Insect Bio-
chem Mol Biol 41(1):36-41, 2011.
44. Oberkirchner U, Linder K, Olivry T: Recognizing and treating ProMleris-triggered pemphigus foliaceus
in dogs, Vet Med 106(6):284-293, 2011.
45. Ramesh C, et al: Pharmacologic profile of methoprene, an insect growth regulator, in cattle, dogs, and
cats, I Am Vet Med A ssoc 194(3):410-412, 1989.
46. Food and Agricultural Organization, World Health Organization: Pyriproxyfen in drinking water, Guide-
CHAPTER
Petroleum
71
Hydrocarbons
Merl F. Raisbeck, DVM, MS, PhD, DABVT
· The most important toxic effect associated with the petroleum products
commonly ingested by small animals is aspiration pneumonia.
·Low viscosity, high volatility, and low surface tension are physical characteristics
of hydrocarbons that are more likely to produce respiratory disease.
Systermic toxic effects in the CNS and to a lesser extent the liver, heart, and
kidneys are more likely with arormatic or volatile aliphatic compounds.
 Gastric decontamination, especially with emetics, is contraindicated unless there
 is a strong probability of some other, systemic toxicant in the gastrointestinal
tract. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive in nature.
Sources
Petroleum is a highly complex mixture of hydrocarbons. "Petroleum poisoning” is actu-
ally the sum of the toxic effects and interactions of a mixture of disparate compounds.
Although crude oil intoxication occurs in large animals and is a serious environmental
problem, pets are most frequently exposed to refined petroleum products. Ihese include
fuels such as propane, gasoline, kerosene, or diesel oil; solvents such as paint thinner,
engine degreaser, or laboratory chemicals; and lubricants such as motor oil, waxes, or
asphalt. Petroleum-based solvents are used as "inert" carriers for a number of pesticides,
paints, and medications. Petroleum-based chemicals are also the basic feedstock for
products as diverse as plastics and pharmaceuticals. In other words, petroleum hydro-
carbons represent a very diverse group of chemicals that are very widespread throughout
the modern environment.
The precise composition of any specific petroleum product varies with its intended
use and the characteristic process or processes used to produce it. For most of the sim-
pler products like gasoline, the refining process consists largely of differential distilla-
any specific chemical composition. Thus, volatility provides one convenient index with
which to broadly classify petroleum products. Some products, notably fuels with a high
boiling point such as fuel oil, receive little further processing. Others, such as gasoline,
are modifed with a considerable number of additives such as methanol or manganese,
the thermoplastics or organohalide solvents, are chemically modified to such an extent
that their physical, chemical, and toxic properties are quite distinct from petroleum
hydrocarbons as a whole. This last group is not included in this chapter. Conversely,
some hydrocarbons of nonpetroleum origin, such as turpentine or linseed oil, are simi-
lar enough to be considered with petroleum-based solvents of similar physical-chemical
properties.
755
756SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
In people, the most frequent cause of petroleum poisoning involves substance abuse
(e.g., using petroleum products to get "high"). Animals usually exhibit a little more com-
mon sense, but may still sample motor oil or gasoline out of curiosity if it is available.
Inappropriate containers and failure to clean up spills are common sources of exposure to
pets. Pets, especially cats, may ingest significant amounts of gasoline or other petroleum
products via grooming and transdermally after topical exposure. Gasoline or kerosene is
sometimes used in an afttempt to remove sticky material, such as tar, from an animal's coat.
Many folk remedies contain inappropriate types and amounts of petroleum products. For
example, “guard" dogs are sometimes force-fed a mixture of gasoline and smokeless powder
to make them more aggressive.
Toxic Dose
The toxicity of a specific petroleum product theoretically varies with its composition. Given
the huge number of distinct petroleum constituents in common products, it is impossible
to track the toxicity of each individually. Fortunately, however, it is possible to make some
broad generalizations about the toxicity of petroleum hydrocarbons on the basis of simple
physical-chemical properties such as boiling point. Products with very high boiling points,
such as asphalt, mineral oil, or waxes, are relatively nontoxic. As a very loose generalization,
more volatile compounds are also more readily absorbed and thus have greater possibility
for systemic toxicity. More volatile compounds, such as benzene, also tend to be more read-
ily aspirated and thus are more likely to cause chemical pneumonitis ( Table 71-1).
The likelihood of pneumotoxicity is also determined by viscosity and surface tension.
Lower viscosity enhances the penetration of the product into smaller and therefore more
numerous airways. Low surface tension facilitates the spread of hydrocarbons over larger
areas of pulmonary tissues. As little as 0.1 mL of a low-viscosity hydrocarbon such as min-
eral spirits, when aspirated directly into the trachea of dogs, may produce severe pneu-
monitis. In contrast, products with a high viscosity, such as motor oil, have a much more
limited pneumotoxic potential (Box 71-1).
Hydrocarbon solvents, including petroleum distillates, turpentine, etc., are skin and eye
irritants by virtue of their lipid solvent properties and are capable of producing erythema,
dermatitis, and epithelial necrosis. Systemic toxicity should be considered following heavy
 dermal exposure, especially with strong solvents such as gasoline. This is especially impor-
tant in small animals (e.g., pups or kittens), which have a relatively high body surface area
to mass ratio. Again, the relative toxicity of various products by this route of exposure seems
to be inversely proportional to molecular weight and proportional to lipophilicity. Toxicity
is further enhanced by other factors such as long or matted hair that traps the hydrocarbon
against the skin.
Toxicokinetics
Contrary to some older texts, many hydrocarbons are readily absorbed after ingestion.
Studies with a number of different radiolabeled hydrocarbons have demonstrated both
gastrointestinal and percutaneous absorption and subsequent distribution to all major
organ systems. The degree of such absorption was inversely proportional to the molecular
weight of the hydrocarbon involved. High-molecular-weight hydrocarbons, such as grease
or motor oil, are not absorbed to any significant extent, whereas lower-molecular-weight
products, such as gasoline or hexane, are more readily absorbed. Aromatic compounds,
such as benzene, are more readily absorbed than aliphatic hydrocarbons of similar molecu-
lar weight and thus more likely to cause systemic toxicity.
Regardless of the class of compound or route of exposure, respiration is an important
route of elimination for volatile hydrocarbons, once absorbed. Volatile compounds, such
as petroleum ether, are largely cleared within 24 hours; less volatile compounds, such as
motor oil, may remain in the gastrointestinal tract for a considerably longer time. Most ali-
phatic hydrocarbons are degraded to some extent by the liver. Metabolism usually involves
Chapter 7l | Petroleum Hydrocarbons 757
 Table 71-1
Acute Toxicity of Some Commonly Encountered Hydrocarbons
Compound
Dose
Clinical Signs
Acetone
Oral LDso: 5-10 mg/kg
CNS depression, narcosis, coma
Benzene
Oral LDso: 4 mL/kg
CNS depression, narcosis, bone
 marrow suppression
Carbon disulfide
Oral LDso: 5-10 mg/kg
 Tremor, cyanosis, vascular
 Inhalation LCs: 15 mg/L
 collapse, coma
Cyclohexane
Oral LDso: >8 mL/kg
CNS depression, ataxia, narcosis,
coma
Diesel fuel
Oral LDso: 9 mL/kg
Diarrhea, GI upset, possible aspi-
ration pneumonia
Gasoline
Oral LDso: 18 mL/kg
Moderate topical and Gl irritant,
aspiration pneumonia
 Home heating oil
Oral LDso: 18 mL/kg
Relatively nontoxic; diarrhea, GI
 upset if dose is sufficient
 Isopropanol
Oral LDso: 6-13 g/kg
CNS depression, ataxia, acidosis,
coma
Jet fuel A
Oral LDso: >20 mL/kg
Relatively nontoxic; diarrhea, GI
upset if dose is sufficient
Lighter fluid
Oral LDso: 25 g/kg
Aspiration pneumonia, CNS
depression
Motor oil
Oral LDso: >22 mL/kg
Relatively nontoxic; diarrhea, GI
upset if dose is sufficient
Toluene
Oral LDso: 6-8 mL/kg
CNS depression, ataxia, liver and
kidney damage
Turpentine
Minimum lethal dose
 Strong irritant, readily absorbed
(children): 15 mL/kg
 through skin and by inhalation
Xylene
Oral LDso: 4 mL/kg
Strong topical irritant, CNS
depression, tremors, coma
oxidation, rendering the compound more polar and thus more readily excreted, but may
also contribute to the pathogenesis of chronic toxic effects. Aromatic hydrocarbons are
metabolized to phenols or carboxylic acids; conjugated with sulfates, glucuronides, or gly-
cine; and excreted through urine or bile.
Mechanism of Toxicity
As a general rule, the most acute life-threatening effects of petroleum intoxication result
from aspiration pneumonia. Experimental data sugest that the pulmonary injury in aspira-
tion pneumonia results primarily from aspiration and not from gastrointestinal or dermal
absorption. Dogs given 250 mL of kerosene by gavage showed no radiographic evidence of
pulmonary damage, but substantially smaller volumes (less than 1 mL) given intratrache-
ally caused rapid progression of depression, dyspnea, and death. Vomiting often precedes
aspiration; it is not a prerequisite, however, because aspiration can also occur when the
hydrocarbon is initially ingested. Thus the lack of emesis in the history does not preclude the
possibility of aspiration. Pulmonary function should be monitored carefully following any
oral hydrocarbon exposure.
The pneumotoxic potential of any particular hydrocarbon mixture is determined by its
volatility, viscosity, and surface tension. Compounds with viscosities of less than 35 Saybolt
units (SSU) are very likely to be aspirated, whereas compounds with viscosities of greater
than 60 SSU are less likely to cause pneumonia. Gasoline, kerosene, and lighter fluid have
viscosities in the 30 to 35 SSU range and are easily aspirated. Mineral oil (150 SSU), motor
oil (60 to 500 SSU), and paraffin wax almost never cause pulmonary damage.
758SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Petroleum
At a tissue level, pneumotoxic effects of
Box 71-1
petroleum hydrocarbons are mediated by the
Products Listed in Order of
dissolution of the lipid component of cellular
Decreasing Viscosity
membranes in contact with the hydrocarbon.
Tar (most viscous)
This results in swelling and/or necrosis of the
Paraffin wax
cell that in turn provokes inflammation. In
the lung, the end result is edema, broncho-
 Motor oil
spasm, and necrosis of the terminal airways
Fuel oil
Kerosene
and alveoli within a few minutes to an hour of
Mineral spirits
exposure. Ihere may be hemorrhage into the
Gasoline
airways that also compromises respiration.
 Naphtha
Alteration of pulmonary surfactant is another
result of the lipophilicity of petroleum prod-
Hexane (least viscous)
ucts. Loss of pulmonary surfactant increases
the surface tension of the fluid lining of the
alveoli and destabilizes the alveoli, resulting
in atelectasis and collapse of distal airways. Finally, volatile hydrocarbons may displace
sufficient alveolar oxygen to produce acute cyanosis even before pneumonitis becomes
apparent.
Later, inflammation, thrombosis, and emphysema extend the functional damage beyond
tissues in immediate contact with the hydrocarbon. Bacteria may colonize damaged areas,
resulting in further tissue destruction and pneumonia. Uncomplicated lesions typically heal
within 2 weeks of the initial crisis, but there is evidence that subclinical effects remain for
months or years. A retrospective epidemiologic study in human patients demonstrated an
increased incidence of respiratory infections several years following hydrocarbon pneumo-
nitis, and (in a separate study) asymptomatic patients who had experienced hydrocarbon
pneumonitis more than 8 years earlier still had detectable functional abnormalities typical
of small airway disease.
Systemic effects of the petroleum hydrocarbons involve the central nervous system
(CNS) and, to a lesser extent, the liver, kidneys, and heart. Again, the more volatile, lower-
molecular-weight hydrocarbons, such as hexane, are more likely to be involved because they
are more readily absorbed than heavier products, such as kerosene. For the same reason
aromatic compounds, such as toluene or benzene, are more toxic systemically than naph-
thalenes, which are in turn more toxic than aliphatics of similar molecular weight. Absorp-
tion and subsequent systemic toxicity are also greater when hydrocarbons are inhaled as a
vapor rather than ingested.
The principal systemic effect of hydrocarbon intoxication is usually CNS depression.
The acute neurotoxic effects of petroleum hydrocarbons apparently result from a direct
physicochemical interaction between the hydrocarbon and the neuronal membranes of
the CNS. Because this is largely a physical process, clinical signs can become apparent
oia al se uoos se readdesp led isou au io pue annsodxa sri jo sauu u
carbon is cleared from the system. Exceptions to this rule, such as hexane neuropathy,
jo adoss au puonaq ane pue uoneaie soqeiau ro ainsodxa pauoroid anmban aiensm
this discussion.
Hepatic and renal damage have been reported from a percentage of both experimental
and field cases of hydrocarbon poisoning. The mechanism is not clear but probably involves
metabolism by the target organ to a toxic intermediate. Some hydrocarbons are also appar-
ently capable of sensitizing the myocardium to endogenous catecholamines, resulting in
arrhythmias and even complete cardiovascular collapse.
clinical Signs
Human patients report a burning sensation in the mouth and pharynx immediately after
same sensations: slobbering, champing their jaws, shaking their head, and pawing at their
Chapter 7l |Petroleum Hydrocarbons 759
muzzle. Ihis is usually followed by signs of aspiration: choking, coughing, gagging, and
varying degrees of dyspnea. Direct damage to the airway components and bronchospasm
may result in hypoxia. Cyanosis may also develop immediately as alveolar oxygen is dis-
placed by hydrocarbon vapor. Astute observers may note an odor of the hydrocarbon on
the animal's breath. Fever usually occurs in 3to 4 hours, but may occur in less than 1 hour
Or as late as 24 hours after exposure.
Pneumonitis is the most common complication following ingestion of volatile, low-
viscosity, aliphatic petroleum hydrocarbons (e.g., gasoline). The central nervous and gas-
trointestinal systems may also be affected, but death, if it occurs, usually results from the
pulmonary effects. Respiratory involvement, when present, is progressive over the first 24
to 48 hours and then gradually resolves 3 to 10 days following exposure. Signs referable to
the respiratory system usually ocur within a few minutes to 1 or 2 hours. Animals that
Aroendsan doaap o aiaun are uonsaui age simou Zh oi g ioy seiduse uiean
illness.
mals that eventually develop clinical pneumonitis show readily observable radiographic
changes within a few hours of ingestion, thus it is a good idea to radiograph the chest 6
d ae suug odeoey uad a tuseanan araq 'annsdxa isod so ih c
of aspiration pneumonia and consist of fine, perihilar densities and extensive infltrates in
B 1 n  s    e a  s a ' a g d 
an additional few days. Not all animals with radiographic signs of hydrocarbon aspiration
develop respiratory signs, and radiographic changes usually persist past the resolution of
clinical signs.
The irritant properties of petroleum products produce gastroenteritis, vomiting, colic,
and diarrhea after oral exposure. The severity, and indeed even the presence, of such
signs is a function of the dose and the individual hydrocarbon. Heavier, aliphatic hydro-
carbons, such as mineral oil, may produce diarrhea and altered gastrointestinal motility
but little else. Lighter hydrocarbons, such as gasoline, are more likely to produce colic
and vomiting.
The CNS signs of acute hydrocarbon toxicity are similar to those of ethanol inebria-
tion. Intoxicated animals exhibit vertigo, ataxia, and mental confusion. Hydrocarbons
produce depression and narcosis in most cases, but tremors and convulsions have also
been reported. If the dose is high enough, the animal becomes comatose, and coma
may proceed to death without any accompanying respiratory signs. Ihe heartbeat may
be irregular as a result of myocardial sensitization, or complete cardiac collapse may
occur if the animal is stressed. Myocardial sensitization to the effects of catecholamines
may persist for 24 to 48 hours after apparent recovery from the neurologic effects of
intoxication.
Minimum Database
A minimum evaluation of possible petroleum hydrocarbon ingestion includes determi-
nation of vital signs, careful evaluation of respiratory status including oximetry, auscul-
tation of the chest, and a chest radiograph. Ihe clinical signs and radiographic changes
pue suis au ng aqeusinausiu ane sinaid uumaonad jo uoendse ym paneiosse
radiographic changes seen with other forms of aspiration pneumonia. Thus some means
of confirming petroleum hydrocarbon exposure is essential to confirm the diagnosis. It is
also desirable to identify the particular product involved because its volatility and viscosity
affect the prognosis and treatment. Ihis information is most readily available from the his-
tory. The owner should be instructed to bring the container or label to the clinic with the
animal if the product is not a relatively common one like gasoline. It may also be possible
to detect the characteristic odor of petroleum hydrocarbons on the animals breath, a test
often overlooked by clinicians. An inflammatory profile is commonly observed on a com-
plete blood count analysis. Other tests that should be considered include liver and kidney
function panels.
760SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Confirmatory Tests
A simple spot test involves mixing vomitus vigorously with warm water. If gasoline or other
petroleum distillates are present they will float to the surface. Care must be taken to dis-
tinguish between petroleum products and dietary lipids. Most petroleum products lighter
than kerosene, if isolated and absorbed onto a paper towel, evaporate relatively quickly and
forensically but is seldom practical for evaluating the clinical case. If chemical analysis is to
 be conducted, samples should be taken as quickly as practical and frozen in airtight, glass
containers to prevent loss as a result of volatilization.
Treatment
In all cases of uncomplicated (i.e., not contaminated by some other, more toxic substance)
ration. If the amount ingested was small, and especially if the hydrocarbon ingested was
known to be one of the less volatile, more viscous products, such as motor oil or grease, cage
rest and observation may be all that are required. If the volume ingested was substantial and
the product involved was one known to cause systemic toxicity (e.g., hexane, toluene, or
xylene), gastric lavage may be indicated within the first 4 to 6 hours post exposure. Gastric
decontamination may also be indicated, despite the risk of aspiration, if the product was
contaminated with a highly toxic substance such as a pesticide. If lavage is to be attempted,
ics are contraindicated except as an absolute last resort to clear some other highly toxic
constituent, such as a pesticide from the gastrointestinal tract. In any case, the potential
 systemic toxicity of the ingested product must be weighed against the definite potential for
aspiration.
 In the past, mineral oil or vegetable oil was recommended to increase the viscosity of
 petroleum hydrocarbons and thus decrease the risk of aspiration. Oils also produce a mild
catharsis, decreasing the period during which the petroleum product might be absorbed.
the likelihood of aspiration pneumonia, and the use of such oils is no longer recommended.
Respiratory effects should be treated symptomatically. The routine use of antibiotics and
corticosteroids has been questioned. Hydrocarbon pneumonitis is reported to be largely
cheal dose of kerosene, parenteral ampicillin and dexamethasone did not reduce either the
respiratory rate or the presence of radiographic, gross, or microscopic pulmonary lesions.
Corticosteroid use, in another experiment, was associated with increased numbers of posi-
tive lung cultures. Corticosteroids are thus considered contraindicated. Antibiotics should
only be considered if there is evidence of bacterial pneumonia. Supplemental oxygen, con-
tinuous positive airway pressure, and mechanical ventilation should be used as needed.
However, because pneumomediastinum, pneumatoceles, and pneumothorax are com-
mon complications of hydrocarbon pneumonitis, positive pressure systems must be used
with caution. Also, because the lungs are the major route of systemic elimination for many
hydrocarbons, closed or semiclosed systenms should be purged frequently.
Cage rest is indicated, both for its beneficial effects on the healing process and to mini-
mize the effects of excitement-induced catecholamines on hydrocarbon-sensitized myo-
cardium. Likewise, bronchospasm may be treated with β-2 agonists if the myocardium has
been unduly sensitized.
Topical exposures may be treated by gently bathing the animal with warm water and
a mild detergent shampoo. If the hair coat is especially heavy or matted, it may be nec-
essary to clip the contaminated areas to prevent systemic absorption and minimize skin
damage. Symptomatic treatment of petroleum burns may involve the use of topical anti-
bacterial agents as necessary. Highly viscous hydrocarbons (e.g., tar and waxes) may also
 be removed with mild detergents. Because they are not readily absorbed they pose only a
Chapter 7l | Petroleum Hydrocarbons 761
cosmetic problem or a risk of mechanical irritation and are not as critical to remove. Lipo-
philic materials (butter, lard, mechanics' hand cleaner) may also be useful in such cases, but
the use of hydrocarbon solvents is not recommended.
Prognosis
The prognosis depends on the extent and severity of tissue damage. Animals that remain
asymptomatic for 12 to 24 hours require no further follow-up or treatment. If pulmonary
lesions are extensive or if the animal is comatose when presented, the prognosis is guarded
to poor.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
if the animal survives more than 24 hours after exposure. However, these lesions are not
that common, and animals that survive the acute respiratory or neurotoxic effects long
enough to develop recognizable lesions usually recover.
If aspiration has occurred, the principal lesions will be found in the respiratory tract.
There may be ulcerations in the ventral mucosa of the trachea and larger airways. Pul-
monary lesions are bilateral and involve primarily the caudoventral portion. Early lesions
include hyperemia, edema, and hemorrhage into the air ways. Oil may be grossly visible in
the smaller airways. Later, bronchospasm, emphysema, and atelectasis occur. Pneumato-
celes, pneumothorax, and subcutaneous emphysema result from airway collapse. Bacterial
pneumonia occasionally supervenes and may result in abscesses.
Differential Diagnoses
A large number of infectious diseases and toxins may result in respiratory signs similar to
those associated with hydrocarbon aspiration. However, only very acute processes, such as
trauma or chylothorax, exhibit a similar rapidity of onset.
Suggested Readings
Bronstein AC, Spyker DA, Cantilena LR Jr, et al: 2009 Annual Report ofthe American Association of Poison
Control Centers' National Poison Data System (NPDS), Clin Toxicol (Phila) 48:979-1178, 2010.
Kimbrough RD, Reese E: Acute toxicity of gasoline and some additives, Environ Health Perspect
101(Suppl 6);:115-131, 1993.
Lifshitz M, Sofer S, Gorodischer R: Hydrocarbon poisoning in children a 5-year retrospective study, Wilder.
ness Environ Med 1478-1482, 2003.
CHAPTER
72
Propylene Glycol
Karyn Bischoff, DVM, MS, DABVT
 Propylene glycol (PG) is used as automotive antifreeze, in hydraulic fluid
industrial and pharmaceutical solvent, cosmetics, and as an additive in processed
foods.
 Clinical signs following oral exposure are reated to propylene glycol's narcotic
effects and lactic addosis: depression, ataxia, muscle twitching, and seizures.
 Increased numbers of Heinz bodies, reticulocytes, and lower packed cell volumes
occur in animals, particularly felines, exposed to propylene glycol.
 mall animals occasionally have access to automotive solvents. Dogs and cats some-
times obtain access to a garage where there are open containers, or solvents can be
found in an outdoor setting when automobile radiators are drained or fluids leak. The
most toxic radiator fluid is ethylene glycol (see Chapter 47 on Ethylene Glycol), which
s al oi uaqond jusuiis e siuasnd i pue oi sase au auana ste
animal practitioner.
eaaeasaesess
antifreeze. Propylene glycol has other uses ranging from industrial solvent to food additive.
H was once used in semimoist cat foods, some of which contained more than 10% propylene
glycol. However, propylene glycol is no longer used in cat foods because cats are particularly
susceptible to its adverse effects. Toxicosis from large doses of propylene glycol has been
reported in people and various other species.
Sources
Propylene glycol, or 1,2-propanediol, is a stable, colorless, odorless, viscous liquid with a
specific gravity of 1.036. It is an excellent solvent because it is freely miscible with water yet
dissolves hydrophobic substances. Among the glycols, propylene glycol has the lowest tox-
icity.Unlike ethylene glycol, propylene glycol does not cause oxalate nephrosis.Propylene
glycol is classified by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as generally recognized
as safe? except for use in cat foods. Because of these properties, it is used not only as auto-
motive antifreeze, hydraulic fluid, and an industrial solvent, but also as a pharmaceutical
solvent for oral, topical, and injectable preparations; an ingredient in cosmetics; and an
additive in processed foods for human and animal consumption.
Toxic Dose
The oral median lethal dose (LDso) for propylene glycol in dogs is reported to be as low
as 9 mL/kg, although for most laboratory animal species it is approximately 20 mL/kg.25
The toxic concentration in blood in humans is estimated at 100 mg/dL, although metabolic
763
764SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
changes have been reported at blood concentrations as low as 12 mg/dL.6.7 Patients with
 hepatic or renal disease are at increased risk for propylene glycol toxicosis.6.7
Toxicokinetics
Acute propylene glycol toxicosis has occurred in humans, horses, and cattle because of
has also been experimentally produced in cats, dogs, laboratory animals, goats, and chick-
ens.1.3-5.17.21 Propylene glycol is palatable to dogs.22It is absorbed rapidly in the digestive
system.8 Toxic doses can also be absorbed through damaged skin, and toxicosis has been
were associated with adverse effects in dogs.25
 Oral and pulmonary absorption of propylene glycol are rapid and the volume of dis-
paansxa st [osk[a auaadoid go %ss pue %i uaamiag 92'sa sueuq ut x/T s'o st uonql
in the urine as the parent compound or a glucuronide conjugate in humans, and renal
 clearance decreases as dose increases.726.-30 Remaining propylene glycol is oxidized by two
saturable enzymes, hepatic alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase, to D and L
isomers of lactic acid.β L-lactic acid enters the citric acid cycle and is metabolized rapidly. 10
However, D-lactic acid is not readily metabolized, accumulates in plasma, and produces
lactic acidosis.10.3o Propylene glycol concentrates in the central nervous system in humans.5
Propylene glycol has narcotic effects similar to those of ethanol, although it is only about
hours.1 The elimination half-life in mature humans is 1.4 to 5 hours, and 10 to 31 hours in
infants.26.29
Heinz body formation occurs through the interaction of propylene glycol or its metabo-
lite with the sulfhydryl groups on the hemoglobin molecule.1.31.32 The hemoglobin molecule
becomes denatured and adheres to the cell membrane. Cats are particularly sensitive, pos-
sibly because their hemoglobin contains eight sulfhydryl groups and because they have less
ability to conjugate propylene glycol with glucuronide than other domestic species. Heinz
Clinical Signs
Clinical signs of acute propylene glycol poisoning in small animals are related to its narcotic
effects and to lactic acidosis. Most patients present with central nervous system depression
have also been reported in human cases.26.8-10 Muscle twitching is sometimes evident in
cats.21 The author is familiar with a case of malicious poisoning with propylene glycol where
three dogs were found dead. Parenteral overdosing with propylene glycol has been associ-
ated with hypotension in cats and circulatory collapse in dogs and other species.&.0.18.20.28
 jo uoisnu snouaaenun zg'aldoad u paodan st Aimui ieqni ainse oi anp aimey eua
undiluted propylene glycol is associated with hemolysis because of the hyperosmolarity of
the compound.8 Osmotic diuresis and dehydration are also commonly seen with oral and
Topical exposure to propylene glycol has been associated with contact dermatitis due to
hypersensitivity in humans.4 Mucosal irritation has been reported with chronic respiratory
exposure in laboratory rodents.25
Minimum Database
Clinical pathologic findings in animals with propylene glycol toxicosis are consistent with
metabolic acidosis and hyperosmolarity. Animals have an increase in the ion gap, which
correlates with blood lactic acid concentrations.38-1140 Carbon dioxide and carbonic acid
concentrations are low.0 Hypoglycemia has been reported in some animals.! Urine has a
low specific gravity because of osmotic diuresis and casts are sometimes observed.ll1 Blood
Chapter 72 | Propylene Glycol 765
urea nitrogen and creatinine are elevated in people due to proximal convoluted tubular
injury.? The serum is hyperosmolar after intravenous administration, and the increase in
uria has been reported in dogs and other species secondary to hemolysis after high intrave-
Heinz body formation has been reported in cats and horses secondary to ingestion of
of clinical anemia or methemoglobinemia in cats because of chronic dietary exposure to
propylene glycol, although PCVs are mildly reduced 3136.41 However, such exposure could
predispose feline red cells to more severe oxidative damage by other agents, such as acet-
aminophen.17 Experimental dogs fed diets containing 20% propylene glycol had decreased
PCVs, increased reticulocyte counts, increased nucleated erythrocyte counts, and evidence
exposure to propylene glycol.25
Confirmatory Tests
Diagnosis of propylene glycol toxicosis is usually based on a history of exposure. Propyl-
ene glycol can be detected in urine and serum by gas chromatography.9.1z.23 Poisoning was
confirmed using gas chromatography to detect residue in a container found near the three
dogs in the terminal case mentioned previously. Importantly, propylene glycol will produce
a false positive for ethylene glycol on some commercially available ethylene glycol test kits
(refer to Chapter 47, "Ethylene Glycol").
Treatment
 Treatment of acute propylene glycol toxicosis is supportive. Intravenous fluids containing
sodium bicarbonate should be administered as needed to correct dehydration and acidosis.
and any electrolyte abnormalities should be corrective. A horse with propylene glycol toxi-
cosis was treated by gastric lavage to remove remaining material in the stomach, activated
charcoal to adsorb propylene glycol, and given isotonic sodium bicarbonate and dexameth-
asone IV. Blood gas was monitored on an hourly basis.38 Because of rapid gastrointestinal
absorption, gastrointestinal decontamination is unlikely to be beneficial in most cases.
Vitamin C was administered to diminish oxidative damage to erythrocytes in an intoxi-
cated horse.3 However, experimental administration of vitamin C and vitamin E failed to
significantly decrease Heinz body formation in cats fed a diet containing propylene glycol,
and N-acetylcysteine was only slightly beneficial.4l Fomepizole was used in a human patient
given excessive doses of propylene glycol intravenously to decrease the rate of metabolism
(via alcohol dehydrogenase) and production of lactic acid.40 Although of possible use in
veterinary medicine, fomepizole treatment of propylene glycol toxicosis in cats should be
pursued with caution, because it is possible that the parent compound is responsible for the
erythrocyte damage seen in this species.
Prognosis
 The prognosis is highly variable depending on the exposure dose and time interval between
exposure and initiation of treatment. In general, it would be considered guarded to fair.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
There are sometimes no gross or microscopic lesions in animals poisoned with propylene
glycol.l A foul or garlic-ike odor to gastrointestinal contents has been reported in horses
Liver lesions have been reported in horses.35
766SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Differential Diagnoses
Some toxicants that could mimic this clinical presentation include ivermectin and other
macrolide antiparasitic agents, ethylene glycol, methanol, diethylene glycol, 2-butoxyetha
nol, sedatives and tranquilizers, isopropanol, ethanol, xylitol, and amitraz. Other causes of
a hemolytic anemia are zinc, naphthalene-containing mothballs, onions, acetaminophen
copper, and pit viper snakebites.
References
1. Christopher MM, Perman V, Eaton J W: Contribution of propylene glycol-induced Heinz body forma-
tion to anemia in cats, I Am Vet MedAssoc 194(8):1045-1056, 1989.
dosing regimens, I Pharmacol Sci 74(8):876-879, 1985.
3. Dorman DC, Hascheck WM: Fatal propylene glycol toxicosis in a horse, I Am Vet Med Assoc 198(9):
1643-1644, 1991,
4. Ruddick JA: Toxicology, metabolism, and biochemistry of 1,2-propanediol, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
21(1):102-111, 1972
151-162, 1972.
6. Kraut JA, Kurtz I: Toxic alcohol ingestions: clinical features, diagnosis, and management, Clin J A m Soc
Neprhol 3(1):208-225, 2008.
 7. Zar T, Graeber C, Perazella MA: Recognition, treatment, and prevention of propylene glycol toxicity,
Semin Dialysis 20(3):217-219, 2007.
8. Pastemak G: Ethylene/propylene glycol toxicity. In Goldfrank L, editor: Case studies in environmental
medicine 30, San Rafael, CA, 1993, DeLima Associates.
9. Cate JC, Hedrick R: Propylene glycol intoxication and lactic acidosis, N Engl IMed 303(21):1237, 1980.
10. Christopher MM, Eckfeldt H, Eaton JW: Propylene glycol ingestion causes D-lactic acidosis, Lab Invest
60(1):114, 1990.
11.Van de Wiele B, Rubinstein E,et al: Propylene glycol toxicity caused by prolonged infusion of etomidate,
J Neurosurg Anesthesiot 7(4):259 -262, 1995.
sion for the control of refractory cerebral edema, Neurosurgery 38(1):232-233, 1996.
13. Levy ML, Aranda M, Zelman V, et al: Propylene glycol toxicity following continuous etomidate infusion
for the control of refractory cerebral edema, Neurosurgery 37(2):363-371, 1995.
14. Angelini G, Meneghini CL: Contactallergy from propylene glycol, Contact Dermatitis 7(4):197-198, 1981.
15. Fligner CL, Jack R, Twiggs GA,et al: Hyperosmolality induced by propylene glycol, JAMA 253(11):1606-
1609, 1985.
16. MacDonald MG, Getson PR, Glasgow AM, et al: Propylene glycol: increased incidence of seizures in low
birth weight infants, Pediatrics 79(4):622-625, 1987.
17. Bauer MC, Weiss DJ, Perman V: Hematological alterations in kittens induced by 6% and 12% dietary
propylene glycol, Vet Hum Toxicol 34(2):127-131, 1992.
18. Hanzlik PH,Newman HW, Van Winkle W Jr,et al: Toxicity, fate and excretion of propylene glycol and
some other glycols, I Pharmacol Exp Ther 67(12):101-113, 1939.
19. Moon PF: Acute toxicosis in two dogs associated with etomidate-propylene glycol infusion, Lab An Sct
44(6):590-594, 1994.
Exp Ther 44:109-121, 1932.
based antifreeze, I Am Vet Med Assoc 197(12):1599-1602, 1990.
 ad o  s s   e a    xa   
Pediatrics 72(3):353-355, 1983.
23. Kelner MJ, Bailey DN: Propylene glycol as a cause oflactic acidosis, I Anal Toxicol 9(1):40-42, 1985.
24. Lehman AJ, Newman HW: Propylene glycol: rate of metabolism, absorption, and excretion with a
method for estimation in body fluids, I Pharmacol Exp Ther 60:312-322, 1937.
25. Werley MS, McDonald P, Lilly P, et al: Non-clinical safety and pharmacokinetic evaulations of propylene
gycol aerosol in Sprague-Dawley rats and Beagle dogs, Toxicol 287(1-3):76-90, 2011.
26. Brooks DE, Wallace KL: Acute propylene glycol ingestion, Cltn Toxicol 40(4):513-516, 2002.
27. Arulanantham K, Genel M: Central nervous system toxicity associated with ingestion of propylene gly-
col, I Pediatr 93(3):515-516, 1978.
Chapter 72 | Propylene Glycol 767
28. Yu DK, Sawchuk RJ: Pharmacokinetics of propylene glycol in the rabbit, J Pharmacokinet Biopharm
15(5):453-471, 1987.
29. Allegaert K, Vanhaesenbrouck S, Kulo A, et al: Prospective assessment of short-term propylene glycol
tolerance in neonates, Arch Dis Chid 95(12):1054-1058, 2010.
7(3):150, 1993.
31. Weiss D, McClay CB, Christopher MM, et al: Effects of propylene glycol containing diets on acetamino-
phen-induced methemoglobinemia in cats, I Am Vet Med A ssoc 196(11):1816-1819, 1990.
32. Bauer MC, Weiss DJ, Perman V: Hematologic alterations in adult cats fed 6% or 12% propylene glycol,
Am I Vet Res 53(1):69 -72, 1992.
33. Dzanis DA: Propylene glycolunsafe for use in cat foods, FDA Vet 9(1):1-3, 1994.
34. Hickman MA, Rodgers QR, Morris JG: Effects of diet on Heinz body formation in kittens,Amm J Vet Res
50(3):475-478, 1990.
35. Myers VS, Usenik EA: Propylene glycol intoxication of horses, I Am Vet Med Assoc 155(12):1969, 1841.
 36. Gross DR, Kitzman JV, Adams HR: Cardiovascular effects of intravenous administration of propylene
glycol and oxytetracycline and propylene glycol in calves, Am I Vet Res 40(6):783-791, 1979.
37. Martin G, Finberg L: Propylene glycol: a potentially toxic vehicle in liquid dosage form, / Pediatr
77(5):877 -878, 1970.
38. McLanahan S, Hunter J, Murphy M, et al: Propylene glycol toxicosis in a mare, Vet Hum Toxicol
40(5):294-296, 1998.
39. Ivany IM, Anderson DE:Propylene glycol toxicosis in a llama, J Am Vet Med Assoc 218(2):243-244, 2001.
40. Zosel A,Egelhoff E, Heard K: Severe lactic acidosis from iatrogenic propylene glycol overdose, Pharma-
cother 30(2):219, 2011.
41. Hill AS, O'Niell S, Rogers QR, et al: Antioxidant prevention of Heinz body formation and oxidative
injury in cats, Am I Vet Res 62(3):370-374, 2001.
years, Food Cosmet Toxicol 9(4):479-490, 1971.
CHAPTER
73
Pyrethrins and
Pyrethroids
Steven R. Hansen, DVM, MS, DABT, DABVT
Reviewed by Safdar A. Khan, DVM, MS, PhD, DABVT
 Commonly used insecticides available in various household, garden, and pet
fornulations as aerosols, dusts, granules, foggers, sharnpoos, sprays, collars,
dips, and once-a-month concentrated spot-on products for mainly controlling 
fleas, ticks, lice, and mosquitoes.
· Many cormbination products include the have a synergist (piperonyl butoxide;
MGK-264) or an insect growth regulator (IGR) such as methoprene, pyriproxyfen,
hydropene, and fenoxycarb.
· Etofenprox labeled for use in dogs and cats has a similar mechanisr of action
but is classified as a pyrethroid-like insecticide because it is structurally different
from conventional pyrethroids
· Most EPA-approved products labeled for use on dogs and/or cats represent a
relatively low hazard when used per label directions.
· Cats are more sensitive than most other species to pyrethrins and pyrethroids.
Very young, aged, anemic, or debilitated animals may be rmore susceptible to
toxic effects.
· Inappropriate use of concentrated spot-on monthly products containing
permethrin (36%-65%) in cats can often result in generalized tremors, ataxia,
shaking, seizures, and death.
Clinical signs result from allergic, idiosyncratic, and neurotoxic reactions.
 Treatrment is aimed at controlling tremors and seizures in patients with serious
neurologic signs, preventing further systemic absorption and topical contact,
thermoregulation, and supportive care.
Sources
Natural pyrethrum extract contains a mixture of similar compounds and isomers
derived from Chrysanthemum cinerariaefolium and related species. The insecticidal
activity of pyrethrum has been known since at least the mid-1800s. Today, most agricul-
tural production of pyrethrum extract intended for formulation into insecticidal prod-
ucts occurs in East Africa.1 Pyrethrin-containing flea and tick control products for dogs
and cats have been popular for many years because they can rapidly knock down and
kill insects and have a reasonable safety profle. Different pyrethrin formulations may
include the presence of an IGR (methoprene) or a synergist like pipernyl butoxide or
MGK-264.
769
770SECTION4SpecificToxicants
Pyrethroid insecticides are synthetic analogues of pyrethrin compounds that have been,
and continue to be, developed and formulated to provide enhanced stability and potency
on pets and in the environment. Pyrethroids represent a diverse and growing collection of
 synthetic compounds that have a structure and/or mechanism similar to that of natural
alpha-cyano group. Examples of synthetic type I pyrethroid compounds include allethrin,
permethrin, phenothrin, resmethrin, bifenthrin, tefluthrin, and tetramethrin. Examples of
type II pyrethroids include cyfluthrin, cyhalothrin, cypermethrin, cyphenothrin, deltame-
thrin, esfenvalerate, fenvalerate, flumethrin, lambda-cyhalothrin, and tralomethrin.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) approves product labels and
-sa ae su piad pue uad a sid easu le saa
tered for topical and household use on or around dogs and/or cats for flea and tick control.
Other products are registered for environmental and agricultural use for a host of eco-
nomic and annoyance pests. Products containing pyrethrin or pyrethroid insecticides are
readily available through grocery, discount, home improvement, and veterinary locations.
as ynoe u inond asu emdod jsou a suasadan suem u-ios
dip, shampoo, spray, mousse, premise, and other formulations remain available. Consumer
l shsan yoq ro 'sies 'shop to asn rog aiendondde aie simpoid tm tupiehan uoismon
 misuse of dog products on cats with potentially life-threatening consequences.
Toxic Dose
 Toxic doses for pyrethrin and pyrethroid compounds vary substantially and in most cases
are not known in dogs or cats. The rat acute oral median lethal dose (LDso) for technical-
grade pyrethrin isomers is reported to be 260 to more than 600 mg/kg.2 Acute dermal LDso
values for pyrethrins are more than 1350 mg/kg in the rat and more than 4500 mg/kg in
of a few compounds, pyrethroids have acute oral LDso values between 50 and 500 mg/kg
inlaboratory animals. Toxicity of pyrethroids varies similarly; for example, the rat oral LDso
for tefluthrin is 22 mg/kg, whereas that for phenothrin is 10,000 mg/kg.4 Oral LDso of del-
tamethrin in dogs is greater than 300 mg/kg. No clinical signs were observed when dogs
were fed deltamethrin in food at 1 mg/kg per day for 2 years. Although the toxic dose for
permethrin in the cat is unknown, clinical evidence clearly demonstrates a marked sensitiv-
ity in this species. This sensitivity likely also occurs in response to other pyrethroids. Oral
LDso of permethrin in rats ranges from 540 to 2690 mg/kg. The no observable adverse effect
level for permethrin in dogs is 5 mg/kg/day for 96 days.
Although valuable information can be gained from insecticide LDso data when consid-
ered in the context of a diluted final product, the actual toxicity of the complete formulation
in the target species is what is most important. Inert or synergist activity may enhance the
toxicity of a formula. Inert ingredients in insecticidal formulations include solvents, such
as aromatic and aliphatic hydrocarbons, glycols, and alcohols. Synergists, which are for-
mulated to slow an insect's metabolic processes by inhibiting microsomal enzyme activity,
include piperonyl butoxide and N-octyl bicycloheptene dicarboximide (MGK-264). Addi-
tion of synergists in different formulations helps increase their insecticidal activity.
Generally, most products registered for use on dogs and cats represent a relatively low
hazard when used according to label directions in healthy pets. The EPA requires standard-
ized product toxicity testing to determine which signal word must appear on the label. Signal
words, representing the least to the most hazardous compounds, include the terms Caufion,
Warning, and Danger. The signal word is determined based on six acute toxicity studies
and product composition. These studies include tests for acute oral, dermal, and inhalation
toxicity; eye irritation; skin irritation; and skin sensitization. Skin sensitization determines
whether a product is capable of causing an allergic reaction and is not considered when deter-
mining the signal word. The standard battery of acute toxicity tests is based on rat, rabbit,
and guinea pig protocols (not dog or cat protocols). Ultimately the signal word on the label is
 based on the most sensitive test. Previously defined precautionary statements are determined
Chapter 73 | Pyrethrins and Pyrethroids771
by the toxic effects noted on each individual test. For example, "Causes eye injury” is an
EPA-required statement based on the severity of the eye irritation noted in a study in rabbits.
Most animal-registered products display the signal word Caution, which means that the
final product formulation exhibited an acute rat oral LDso of less than 500 mg/kg, thereby
also requiring the statement "harmful if swallowed." A target animal safety study is con-
 ducted in each approved species, which also may trigger specific label requirements.$
One specific toxicosis warrants special comment. Based on the public database of the
American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) Animal Poison Con-
cdlearly for use on dogs only, can result in serious toxicosis when used inappropriately on
cats. Significant adverse reactions in dogs are rare. Based on these cases, dermal applica-
tion of 100 mg/kg permethrin (1 mL of 45% permethrin applied dermally to a 4.5-kg cat), if
untreated, can result in life-threatening toxicosis. The minimum toxic dose is unknown, but
would be expected to be significantly lower. Similarly, case data suggest that some cats that
dosely cohabitate (direct contact while playing, sleeping, or grooming) with dogs are at risk
for permethrin toxicosis when the dog alone was treated appropriately with a permethrin-
containing product. Based on data from these and other cases, cats should be considered
exceptionally sensitive to permethrin compared with dogs, rats, or humans. Permethrin-
based products formulated for dogs can contain anywhere from 0.054% to 65% permethrin.
 Products formulated for cats should contain less than 0.20% permethrin.
Based on a similar review of public database cases, some cats appear sensitive to properly
applied EPA approved spot-on formulations containing 85.7% phenothrin. Clinical signs
 panodan siaa u uia iaos um araaas ssat sheme iou mq iea ae
anu ana ia rn so  padan suis eu ansoa uaad umo
tremors, muscle fasciculation, ear twitching, ataxia, lethargy, trembling, hypersalivation,
pruritis, hiding, and agitation.
Veterinarians should take every opportunity to educate clients on the safe appropriate
(appropriate dose and species) use of pesticides in compliance with label directions. Many
 pesticide regulatory documents and other information on pesticides are available on the
Internet at http:// www.epa.gov/pesticides.
Toxicokinetics
Pyrethrin insecticides are fat-soluble compounds that undergo rapid metabolism and
excretion following oral or dermal exposure. In general, pyrethroids are well absorbed
orally and via inhalation. As a class, pyrethroids exhibit low systemic toxicity following
dermal exposure. Most are rapidly metabolized by ester hydrolysis and via oxidation by
microsomal enzymes in the liver. Rapid hydrolysis of ester linkage in the GI tract results
in low toxicity. Pyrethroids also undergo intradermal metabolism which likely limits the
systemic absorption when applied dermally. They are lipophilic and are therefore rapidly
distributed to the CNS and metabolized quickly, limiting the bioaccumulation and chronic
toxicity. Pyrethroid insecticides have enhanced stability and potency. Carriers, solvents,
and synergists can greatly influence the effect of excess exposure to insecticidal products.
For example, some formulations contain large percentages of alcohols and other solvents,
which can result in profound depression, especially when applied excessively to cats or
small dogs. Synergists, such as piperonyl butoxide and N-octyl bicycloheptene dicarboxi-
mide (MGK-264), are included in some formulations to enhance insecticidal activity. It is
unclear what inmpact these compounds have on the metabolism of xenobiotics in dogs and
cats, especially in situations of overdose. Local dermal irritation, redness, and itching can be
Mechanism of Toxicity
The basic mechanism of action of pyrethrin and pyrethroid insecticides is essentially the
os a o aa an ne aq s  sias a s s s
772SECTION4SpecificToxicants
ion channels of nerves. Under conditions of normal membrane depolarization, the sodium
channels of nerve fibers allow an influx of sodium ions into the nerve axon. Inactivation of
the action potential occurs as sodium ion influx decreases. During the peak of the action
potential potassium channels open, allowing potassium to move out of the cell. The cell
 membrane returns to its normal resting state through the action of energy-dependent
sodium and potassium pumps. Exposure to pyrethrin or pyrethroid compounds prolongs
the period of sodium conductance, which increases the length of the depolarizing action
potential, resulting in repetitive nerve firing. Sensory nerve fibers are more susceptible to
stimulation because of differences in sodium channel kinetics.6
Clinical Signs
 Based on the experience of the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center, clinical signs can
pouaiad io uad o siad go amsa aenoiddeu pue aedodde qq u imsat
insecticides. Such exposures can result in either minor or major clinical signs.
Clinical signs result from immune-mediated hypersensitivity reactions, genetic-based
idiosyncratic reactions, and neurotoxic reactions. Although an understanding of the mech-
anism of the reaction is important when considering a treatment plan, the treatment plan
iself is ultimately designed to meet the specific needs of the patient. This concept can be
summarized simply as "treat the patient and not the poison."
Minor, usually self-limiting, clinical signs include hypersalivation, paw flicking, ear
twitching, hyperesthesia, reduced activity, and single-episode vomiting or diarrhea. Hyper-
salivation, paw flicking, ear twitching, and hyperesthesia are commonly reported and are
caused by topical and oral stimulation of sensory nerves. Vomiting and diarrhea are non-
toxic effects. Although these clinical effects are often self-limiting, pet owners can often be
 greatly alarmed and may describe hyperesthesia as seizure activity.
Topical allergic reactions are relatively common and can be manifested as generalized or
local dermal urticaria, hyperemia, pruritus, and alopecia. Such reactions can occur because
of sensitivity from the active ingredients or from the carrier (inactive ingredients) and are
seen from products with or without the presence of an IGR. Systemic anaphylactic reac-
tions are fairly uncommon but potentially very serious complications and are expressed as
circulatory collapse, respiratory distress, and sudden death. Allergic reactions are often the
result of minimal or appropriate exposure. Dermal reactions are the most common allergic
 manifestation and are not considered serious. Anaphylactic reactions are life threatening.
mended for the animal affected.
 Idiosyncratic reactions are considered the direct result of pyrethrin or pyrethroid neuro-
toxic effects, which occur at much lower doses than expected. Typically, these sensitive animals
represent a small percentage of a normally distributed population. Standard descriptive toxi-
'saaisoo yns go pooal au eaaai o idae ue u sasop paeaexa an sisat aaoro
Future avoidance of pyrethrin or pyrethroid formulations in these animals is important.
True toxic reactions are the result of overdose, inappropriate use or repeated over-appli-
cation of insecticides.7-10 Protracted vomiting and diarrhea, marked depression, ataxia, or
generalized muscle tremors warrant immediate veterinary examination and treatment.
Blindness has also been reported in a significant number of poisoned cats and dogs; this
is generally considered reversible and animals will regain their vision as they improve over
time. If untreated, marked dermal or oral overdose may result in tremors and, rarely, sei-
ucts labeled for use on dogs and can develop muscle tremors, ataxia, shaking, seizures, and
death within hours. Ihese signs can occur within a few hours to a couple of days of expo-
sure and can last for 2 to 3 days. Seizure activity is unusual following pyrethrin exposure
Even at exaggerated doses. Future use of these products in accordance with label instruc-
tions would not be expected to lead to a recurrence. Exceptions would include the situation
in which a very sensitive animal received an exaggerated dose.
Chapter 73 | Pyrethrins and Pyrethroids 773
Minimum Database
The minimum database includes baseline serum chemistries, complete blood cell count,
and urinalysis. These minimal data help to uncover preexisting conditions that can affect
the treatment plan and prognosis. Often a suspected poisoning case is actually the result of
a preexisting disease process. Very young or very old, anemic, sick, debilitated, or stressed
animals may be at higher risk of toxicosis. Heavy flea or tick infestation or other parasitic
diseases may also increase individual risk.
Treatment
Minor side effects, such as hypersalivation, paw flicking, ear twitching, hyperesthesia,
reduced activity, and single-episode vomiting or diarrhea, are usually self-limiting and
require no treatment. If the pet is wet from application of a product, a towel that has been
warmed in a dryer works nicely to warm up and dry a small cat or dog. Consumption of
water or milk may help dilute and rinse product from the mouth, thereby reducing saliva-
tion. Drooling can continue off and on in some cats for a few hours or even for a couple of
days and may require dilution with water or milk again. Thorough brushing may remove
loose hair and reduce grooming in cats.
Allergic reactions most commonly become manifest as hyperemic and pruritic skin. In
these cases,a detergent bath (hand dishwashing product) with copious rinsing in cool water
is usually adequate. Topical vitamin E applied to the affected area of skinlocally may soothe
the skin and reduce inflammation and pruritis. Diphenhydramine, 2 mg/kg IM, IV, or PO q
8 hours for 2 to 3 days, may prove beneficial when topical vitamin E does not yield positive
-auy i paius dois cn paan aq reu spoaisoos saiss io sisa
lactic reactions should be managed aggressively using routine protocols. After bathing, pets
 must be dried completely to avoid chilling.
Activated charcoal administration is not routinely recommended because benefits often
do not outweigh the stress or need for sedation in cats. An exception would be when a topi-
cal spot-on product was administered orally to a cat. In this case activated charcoal can be
administered orally at 2 g/kg body weight within a couple of hours of exposure in an asymp-
tomatic animal. Overuse of activated charcoal in very small or dehydrated animals should
be avoided because of potential of aspiration and adverse effects on sodium homeostasis
resulting in hypernatremia, especially in small breed dogs.
In cases where prolonged seizure activity has occurred without early veterinary inter-
vention, achieving adequate seizure control can be challenging and is often the determin-
ing prognostic indicator. In most cases, control of marked tremor or seizure activity can
be achieved with Robaxin-V (methocarbamol) administered intravenously at a rate of 55
to 220 mg/kg. Administer half the dose rapidly without exceeding a rate of 2 mL/minute,
then pause until the pet begins to relax, and then administer the remainder to effect. Repeat
methocarbamol as needed. A maximum dose of 330 mg/kg per day should not be exceeded.
 In serious cases, diazepam will not produce acceptable seizure control. Other agents suc-
cessfully used to control seizures include barbiturates (watch and correct hypothermia when
using barbiturates), isoflurane following mask induction, and propofol. Propofol, 3 to 6 mg/kg
 IV or 0.1 to 0.6 mg/kg per minute as an IV infusion, can help control severe CNS signs.
Care should be used to avoid oversedation, because complete elimination of random muscle
trembling is not required or liely.l12 There are anecdotal reports indicating that the use of
concentrated lipid emulsion therapy in cats with permethrin toxicosis can help reduce the
duration or severity of clinical effects. However, no studies are available to show safety or
efficacy of this treatment. Lipid solution (20%) can be tried at 1.5 mL/kg IV bolus, then 0.25
mL/kg per minute for 30 to 60 minutes. Repeat in 4 to 6 hours provided no hyperlipemic
serum is present. Discontinue if no significant response is observed after giving 3 doses. Lack
of efficacy, hyperlipemia, hemolysis, embolism, and infection are possible adverse effects.
Once seizure or tremor activity is controlled, topically exposed animals must be thor-
oughly bathed with a liquid hand dishwashing detergent and rinsed with copious amounts
774SECTION4SpecificToxicants
of water at body temperature. Maintenance of a normal body temperature is extremely
inmportant. Severe hyperthermia often results during prolonged tremor or seizure activ-
ity. In contrast, hypothermia often results following bathing or sedative administration.
Hypothermia is as dangerous as hyperthermia because reduced body temperature enhances
nervous activity by slowing sodium channel kinetics. Hypothermia can prolong duration of
clinical signs of pyrethrin/pyrethroid toxicosis. Hyperthermia should be treated if >106° F
to reduce the risk of heat-induced injury or death. Cooling efforts should be discontin-
ued when body temperature reaches 103.5* F to prevent complications with hypothermia.
Adequate nutritional and fluid support also hastens recovery. Administration of atropine
should be strictly avoided because atropine is not antidotal and can produce CNS stimula-
tion in excessive doses.
Prognosis
Early, aggressive treatment often results in a full recovery within 24 to 72 hours. Nervous
system effects are completely reversible on recovery. Unfortunately, pets, especially cats not
Gross and Histologic Lesions
 Pyrethrin and pyrethroid insecticides do not produce identifiable lesions.
Differential Diagnoses
Analysis of hair samples can confirm exposure to specific pyrethroids, especially
permethrin. In cats, hair analysis can confirm permethrin exposure when no exposure
to permethrin was known or when exposure was reported to be to a feline-approved flea
and tick product that contains other insecticides not expected to cause severe neurologic
effects.
Pyrethrin or pyrethroid toxicosis must be differentiated from other neurotoxicant
exposures, including strychnine; metaldehyde; fluoroacetate (1080); 5-fluorouracil;
4-aminopyridine; caffeine; theobromine; amphetamine; cocaine; tremorgenic mycotox-
ins; and organophosphate, carbamate, or organochlorine insecticides. Trauma, endocrine
abnormalities, and neoplasia also warrant consideration.
Animals found dead must be presented to a veterinary clinic or veterinary diagnostic
laboratory for necropsy. Sudden death in cats following exposure to a stressful situation,
such as a bath, can result from decompensated cardiomyopathy or cardiac failure sec-
 ondary to thyroid neoplasia. Other disease processes can similarly complicate diagnosis
and treatment.
Case Report 1
A 1-year-old 4.5-kg castrated male domestic shorthair cat was presented to an emer-
gency clinician for treatment. The cat owner had applied a 1-mL 45% permethrin, 5%
pyriproxyfen spot-on product EPA registered for use only on dogs. The product had been
applied on the cat 4 hours earlier to the dorsal scapular area, where it was thought that
the cat could not groom. Within 4 hours of exposure, the cat developed hypersaliva-
tion, severe tremors, and seizures. At the time of the call to the ASPCA Animal Poison
Control Center, the cat had already been bathed with a hand dishwashing detergent to
remove residual permethrin. Subsequently, diazepam, pentobarbital, and methocarba-
mol were ineffective in controlling seizure activity. The pet owner elected to have the cat
euthanized.
The cat in this case report was exposed to a known permethrin dose of 100 mg/kg. The
second active ingredient was pyriproxyfen, 11 mg/kg, which is an insect growth regulator
Aie amzis aqeieiui o uoissaoid ui dusau juaeanl areaa iixot mo go
is the primary reason permethrin-exposed cats die or are euthanized.
Chapter 73 I Pyrethrins and Pyrethroids 775
Case Report 2
A 5-year-old, 6.8-kg castrated male domestic shorthair cat was presented to a veterinarian
for treatment. The cat owner had applied a 2.5-mL 44% permethrin, 8.8% imidacloprid
lxa sm ies a s s' un so uo auo asn oy panaisiaau taa inpaid uo-iods
ing muscle tremors, had a body temperature of 103° F, and had vomited once. Within 4
hours of exposure, the cat had been bathed in a liquid hand dishwashing detergent and was
administered methocarbamol. The cat fully recovered.
 In this case the cat was topically exposed to 162 mg/kg permethrin and 32 mg/kg imi-
cause adverse effects in cats. Topical decontamination and use of methocarbamol resulted
in a successful outcome.
References
1. Ray D: Pesticides derived from plants and other organisms. In Hayes WJ Jr, Laws ER Jr, editors: Hand-
book of pesticide toxicology, San Diego, 1991, Academic Press.
2. Casida JE, Kimmel EC, Elliott M, et al: Oxidative metabolism of pyrethrins in mammals, Nature 230:
326-327, 1971.
3. Malone JC, Brown NC: Toxicity of various grades of pyrethrum to laboratory animals, Pyrethrum Post
9:3-8, 1968.
4. Thomson W T: Agricultural chemicals, Insecticides, vol 1, Fresno, CA, 1992, Thomson Publications.
5. Environmental Protection Agency: Label review manual, Washington, DC, 1996, EPA Registration Divj-
sion, Office of Pesticide Programs.
6. Hansen S, Villar D, Buck W,etal: Pyrethrins and pyrethroids in dogs and cats, Compend Cont Educ Pract
Vet 16(6):707-713, 1994.
7. Boland LA, Angles JM: Feline permethrin toxicity: retrospective study of 42 cases, I Feline Med Surg
12:61-71, 2010.
8. Malik R,et al: Permethrin spot-on intoxication of cats: literature review and survey of veterinary practi-
tioners in Australia, I Feline Med Surg 12:5-14, 2010.
9. Bradberry S,et al: Poisoning due to pyrethroids, Toxicol Rev 24(2):93-106, 2005.
10. Wolansky MJ, Harril JA: Neurobehavioral toxicology of pyrethroid insecticides in adult animals: a criti-
cal review, Neurotoxicol Teratol30:5578, 2008.
11. Volmer P, Khan S, Knight M, et al: Warning against use of some permethrin products in cats (letter to
editor), I Am Vet Med Assoc 213(6):800, 1998.
12. Richardson J: Permethrin spot-on toxicoses in cats, JVECCS 10(2):103-106, 2000.
CHAPTER
Ricin
74
E. Murl Bailey Jr., DVM, PhD, DABVT
· Ricin is the toxic principle isolated from the castor bean plant, Ricinus
communis (Color Plate 74-l).
· The median oral lethal dose (LDso) is thought to be 20 mg/kg in dogs and cats.
· Clinical signs may be delayed 8 to 24 hours post exposure. Initial signs post
 inhalation include anorexia and respiratory distress, developing into pulmonary
ederna. Oral exposures lead to gastrointestinal signs, including diarrhea,
abdorminal pain, anorexia, and vomiting with or without blood. Seizures are
possible.
· Diagnosis is based on history; physical exarmination findings; biochermical
alterations, with increases in ALT, AST, BUN, and creatinine; and ricin residue
testing.
There are no antidotes, and treatment is largely supportive. Patients exposed
orally should be decontaminated with emesis induction and dosed with activated
 Lesions after oral or intramuscular exposure include hemorrhagic gastroenteritis
and hepatic, renal, and splenic necrosis. Fibrino-purulent pneurmonia, diffuse
necrosis and acute inflarmmation of airways, alveolar flooding with peribronchial
vascular ederna, and purulent mediastinal lymphadenitis are seen following
inhalation exposures.
Sources
Ricin is a naturally occurring toxin isolated from the castor bean plant (Ricinus comrmunis).1-3
million tons of castor beans are processed annually in the production of castor oil for lubrica-
tion and medicinal purposes.1.4
under ambient temperature conditions, but heat labile.25 Heating the compound to 80° C
for 10 minutes or 50° C for 50 minutes effectively inactivates the protein. Ricin has a molec-
ular weight of 66 kDa, which is slightly smaller than albumin, and consists of two chains, A
and B.6.7Two hemagglutinins are associated with ricin, but their significance is unknown.4
Ricin is easily obtained in small or large quantities throughout the world.Itis a potential
terrorist weapon, but not likely a chemical warfare agent because large quantities would
be required in an aerosol form.&-10 It could be used to contaminate food or small bodies
of water, but aerosolization would be required in most potential terrorist or weapons of
mass destruction activities. Ricin has been used for assassination and suicidal activities
in humans." Toxicities have been associated with accidental ingestions of castor beans in
humans, dogs, and horses.12-18 Ricin occurs as a residual product from the plant material
777
778SECTION4SpecificToxicants
after oil extraction, which would require additional purification before use.2.1z.18 The resid-
ual “cake" is used in some parts of the world for fertilizer and cattle feed, but the latter is
used only after heat treatment.2.18 Castor oil does not contain ricin and is used for lubricants
and as an irritant laxative and rodent repellent.7.18
Toxic Dose
The toxic or lethal dose of ricin depends on the species exposed and the route of expo-
sure.7 There is greater than a 100-fold difference between susceptibility of various spe-
cies.13 The oral lethal dose of seed material (assuming 1% to 5% ricin concentration)
  t o on)   =  sis  an r n q s
kg); swine = 1.3 g/kg (13 to 65 mg ricin/kg); rabbit = 0.9 g/kg (9 to 45 mg ricin/kg); and
horse = 0.1 g/kg (1 to 5 mg ricin/kg).27 The reported toxic oral doses of pure ricin are
mouse = 20 mg/kg (LDso); horse = 1 to 5 mg/kg; dog = unknown, but probably similar
to mouse; and in humans it is speculated that the lethal dose is 1.0 mg/kg, but some
authors question if ricin is that toxic to humans.2.7.19
The intravenous toxic doses of ricin have been reported as being 5 mcg/kg (LDso)
for mice, with the minimum lethal dose varying from 0.7 to 2.7 mcg/kg; in humans it
is unknown, but 1 to 10 mcg/kg is the suggested toxic dose, and the MLD in the dog is
16 to 1.75 mcg/kg.2.7.20 The inhalation toxic doses are 3 to 5 mcg/kg (LDso) in mice, and
 21 to 42 mcg/kg is the reported lethal dose in monkeys.7.21 The intraperitoneal LDso
in mice is 22 mcg/kg.7 Subcutaneous or intramuscular toxicity of ricin ranges from 24
mcg/kg (LDso) in mice, 33 to 50 mcg/kg in rats (lethal dose), and 70 mcg/kg is appar-
ently a lethal dose in humans, but an individual receiving an estimated 140 mcg/kg
survived with hospitalization.27
Toxicokinetics
Ricin is a large protein molecule, which is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.?
After an oral exposure, most of the ricin is found in the large intestine 24 hours after inges-
tion, illustrating the limited systemic uptake of the protein.2 Based on mouse toxicity (LDso)
data, approximately 0.025% of the ingested ricin is absorbed following oral administra-
tion, but other work has shown that up to 0.27% of the ingested ricin may be absorbed.
Once absorbed, ricin most likely distributes throughout the extracellular fluid space in the
body.27.22 Ricin appears to be readily absorbed via the inhalation route, but dermal absorp-
tion is unlikely to occur through intact skin.27 Intravenously administered ricin distributes
primarily to spleen, kidneys, heart, and liver, and intramuscularly administered ricin dis-
tributes to draining lymph nodes.2
Mechanism of Toxicity
The B chain of ricin binds to galactoside-containing proteins on cell surfaces, which allows
for the internalization of the A chain by triggering an endocytotic uptake.2713 This is the
probable cause of the 8- to 24-hour latent period associated with ricin and/or castor bean
intoxication because the transport may be slow in some instances.37 The A-chain binds
with the 28S RNA subunit of eukaryotic cells, killing the cell through the inhibition of
protein synthesis.7 Ricin has also been shown to disturb calcium homeostasis in the heart,
 ar an    s e siu e c 
e aemas q s zada u st axa a as sai u
the lesions seen in ricin and/or castor bean intoxications may be due to effects on endothe
to ciliated bronchiolar lining cells, alveolar macrophages, and alveolar lining cells.7 It is of
note that castor beans and leaves also contain a pyridine compound, ricinin, which may
cause neuromuscular weakness as a result of an interference with acetylcholine binding at
nicotinic receptor sites.23
Chapter 74 | Ricin 779
clinical Signs
The clinical signs associated with ricin exposure vary with the dose and route of exposure.
delay of 8 to 24 hours (reported in rats and primates) before the onset of the clinical syn-
drome.724 Anorexia subsequently develops, and there is a progressive decrease in physical
activity, probably caused by developing hypoxemia and the generalized toxic cellular effects
of ricin.7 Respiratory distress starts developing, and there are increased inflammatory cell
counts and increased protein from bronchiolar lavage at 12 hours post exposure. At 18 hours
post exposure, alveolar flooding and pulmonary edema develop, and at 30 hours post expo-
drome has been reported in workers exposed to castor bean dust, but this type of syndrome
has not been reported in animals.27 Postmortem airway and pulmonary lesions associated
with inhalation exposure to ricin include marked to severe fibrino-purulent pneumonia,
diffuse necrosis and acute inflammation of airways, alveolar flooding and peribronchial
vascular edema, acute tracheitis, and marked to severe purulent mediastinal lymphadenitis.
The lung lesions are sufficiently severe to cause death. Adrenalitis and hepatic lesions may
or may not be present.25
 Oral exposure to castor beans has been reported in dogs and humans.12.14.17 It should
be noted that the beans must be broken or masticated for the ricin to be released.12.16 There
may be a latent period of 8 to 24 hours following oral exposures to either ricin or castor
beans. Ihe gastrointestinal signs, which typically develop, include vomiting with or without
 blood, depression, diarrhea (with or without blood), abdominal pain, and anorexia.12,5.16
The initial signs have included localized pain and muscular weakness within 5 hours of
exposure. Fifteen to 24 hours after exposure, high body temperatures, nausea and vomiting,
tachycardia with normal blood pressures, swollen regional lymph nodes, induration at the
injection site, and leukocytosis (26,000/mm?) have developed in these individuals. Forty-
eight hours after exposure, hypotension, tachycardia, and vascular collapse developed in
these individuals. At 72 hours, anuria, vomiting blood, complete AV conduction block, and
a white blood cell count of 33,200/mm? developed in these individuals. Death occurred
very rapidly in spite of heroic resuscitation efforts.
Minimum Database
The development of abnormal organ-specific biochemical values may not occur for 12 to
24 hours after exposure. The minimum database to be developed in cases of suspected
exposure to ricin or castor beans should include serum alanine transaminase (ALT), serum
aspartate transaminase (AST), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), serum creatinine, complete
blood cell count, packed cell volume, and total serum protein.
Confirmatory Tests
Analytical methods exist for ricin, and they are now available at some state veterinary diag-
 e     i o  a 's  s
nine, as a marker.14
Treatment
 There are no currently available postingestion antidotes for ricin, but pre- and postexposure
protocols are being explored. These protocols include prophylactic immunization technol-
ounu apnus sansdxa e  aea n agsaodo as
emesis if indicated, administration of activated charcoal (1 to 5 g/kg in a slurry), a cathartic
(magnesium sulfate [250 mg/kg, PO ] or sorbitol [70%, 1-3 mL/kg, PO]) unless the animal
780SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
already has diarrhea, and the placement of at least one indwelling catheter for fluid therapy
and other supportive medications. Ihe hypotension, which normally develops, should be
epam (0.5 to 1 mg/kg, IV). Sucralfate (0.25 to 1 g, PO, tid) should be used as needed. The
affected animals should be fed a soft, bland diet.
Prognosis
H is interesting to note that in 98 dog cases reported over an ll-year period, clinical signs
developed in 76% of the cases, but only seven died or 7.1% of total cases or 9% of those
cases in which signs developed (three were euthanized for a true case fatality rate of 5%).12
In more than 751 human cases of castor bean ingestion, 14 died, for a 1.8% fatality rate.6
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Lesions caused by ingested ricin or castor beans include hepatic necrosis, splenic necrosis,
lowing intramuscular ricin exposure in humans include severe local lymphoid necrosis,
gastrointestinal hemorrhage, hepatic necrosis, diffuse splenitis, and mild to moderate pul-
monary edema. Similar lesions have been reported in experimental animals.4.21
Differential Diagnoses
The differential diagnoses could be many, depending on the locale. Ihose which should be
included are garbage poisoning, any other intoxications resulting in gastrointestinal distress
mercury, thallium, and deoxynivalenol [DON, vomitoxin] and numerous bacterial, viral
neoplastic, and inflammatory gastrointestinal insults.
References
1. Audi J,Belson M, Patel M, et al: Ricin poisoning a comprehensive review, JAMA 294(19):2342-2351, 2005.
2. Bradberry SM, Dickers KJ, Rice P, et al: Ricin poisoning, Toxicol Rev 22:65, 2003.
3. Doan LG: Ricin: Mechanism of toxicity, clinical manifestation, and vaccine development. A review,
I Toxicol Clin Toxicol 42(2):201-208, 2004.
4. Franz DR, Jaax NK: Ricin toxin. In Sidell FR, Takafuji ET, Franz DR,editors: Medical aspects of chemi-
cal and biological warfare, Washington, DC, 1997, Office of the Surgeon General at TMM Publications,
Borden Institute, Walter Reed Army Medical Center.
5. Spivak L, Hendrickson RG: Ricin, Crit Care Clin 21:815-824, 2005.
6. Bigalke H, Rummel A: Medical aspects of toxin weapons, Toxicology 214:210-220, 2005.
7. Greenfield RA, Brown BR, Hutchins JB, et al: Microbiological, biological and chemical weapons of war-
fare and terrorism, Am I Med Sci 323:326, 2002.
8. Kuca K, Pohanka M: Chemical warfare agents, EXS100:543-558, 2010.
9. Rosenbloom M, Leikin JB, Vogel SN, et al: Biological and chemical agents: a brief synopsis, Am / Therap
95,2002.
10. Schep LJ, Temple WA, Butt GA, Beasley MD: Ricin as a weapon of mass terror—separating fact from
fiction,EnvironInt35:1267-1271,2009
11. Passeron T, Mantoux F, Lacour JP, et al: Infectious and toxic cellulitis due to suicide attempt by subcuta-
neous injection of ricin, Brit I Derm 150:154, 2004.
12. Albretsen JC, Gwaltney-Brant SM, Khan SA: Evaluation of castor bean toxicosis in dogs: 98 cases,
JAAHA 35:229, 2000.
13. Balint GA: Ricin: the toxic protein of castor oil seeds, Toxicol 2:77, 1974.
14. Mouser P, Filigenzi MS, Puschner B,et al: Fatal ricin toxicosis in a puppy confirmed by liquid chroma-
tography/mass spectrometry when using ricinine as a marker, I Vet Diagn Invest 19:216-220, 2007.
15. Palatnick W, Tenenbein M: Hepatotoxicity from castor bean ingestion in a child, Clin Tox 38:67, 2000.
16. Rauber A, Heard J: Castor bean toxicity re-examined: a new perspective, Vet Hum Toxicol 27:498, 1985.
17. Roels S, Coopman V, Vanhaelen P, Cordonnier J: Lethal ricin intoxication in two adult dogs: toxicologic
and histopathologic findings, I Vet Diagn Invest 22:466-468, 2010.
Chapter 74 |Ricin 781
18. Soto-Blanco B,Sinhorini IL, Gorniak SL, et al Ricinus communis poisoning in a dog, Vet Hum Toxicol
44:155, 2002
19. Lim H, Kim HJ,Cho YS: A case ofricin poisoning follwing ingestion of Korean castorbean, Emerg Med
26(4):301-302, 2009.
20. Fodstad O, Johannessen IV, Schjerven L, et al: Toxicity of abrin and ricin in mice & dogs, I Tox Env
Health 5:1073-1084, 1979.
21. Wilhelmsen C, Pitt M: Lesions of acute inhaled lethal ricin intoxication in Rhesus monkeys (Abstract),
Vet Pathol 30(5):482, 1993.
22. Ishiguro M, Tanabe S, Matori Y, et al: Biochemical studies on oral toxicity or ricin. IV. A fate of orally
administered ricin in rats, I Pharmacobio-Dyn 15:147-156, 1992.
23. Burrows GE,Tyrl RJ: Toxic plants of North America, Ames,IA, 2001, Iowa State University Press.
24. Hong IH, Kwon TE, Lee SK,et al: Fetal death of dogs afterthe ingestion of a soil container, Exp Toxicol
Pathol 63:113-117, 2011.
25. Benson JM, Gomez AP, Wolf ML,et al: The acute toxicity, tissue distribution, and histopathology of
inhaled ricin in Sprague Dawley rats and BALB/c mice, Inhal Toxicol 23(5):247-256, 2011.
26.
Griffiths GD, Phillips GJ, Holley I: Inhalation toxicology of ricin preparations: animal models, prophy-
lactic and therapeutic approaches to protection, Inhal Toxicol 19:873-887, 2007.
 27. Nagatsuka T, Uzawa H, Ohsawa I,et al: Use oflactose against the deadly biological toxin ricin, ACS Appl
Mater Interfaces 2(4):1081-1085, 2010.
 28. Ramasamy S,et al: Ricin (a brief summary), Br I Pharmacol 161:721-748, 2010.
CHAPTER
75
Snake Bite: North
American Pit Vipers
Michael E. Peterson, DVM, MS
Pit viper venoms are a complex combination of enzymatic and nonenzymatic
proteins that elicit a wide array of physiological problems.
 Clinical signs can be quite varied and can range from mild to severe localized
tissue reactions at the bite site to severe systermic problems.
A minimum database should include complete blood cell count, serum
chermistry panel, urinalysis, and coagulation profile.
Treatment options, depending on the clinical presentation, may include
hospitalization (minimum of 8 hours), IV fluid therapy, antibiotics, and antivenom.
·Prognosis is highly variable and depends on the toxicity of the venon, dose, bite
site, and victim's response.
Sources
Two families of poisonous snakes, the Elapidae and Crotalidae, populate many portions of
the United States. The Crotalids are represented by the pit vipers and are found throughout
most of the United States. Every state except Maine, Alaska, and Hawaii is home to at least
one species of venomous snake.
 Pit vipers are the largest group of venomous snakes in the United States and are involved
in an estimated 150,000 bites annually of dogs and cats. Approximately 99% of all venom-
ous snake bites in the United States are inflicted by pit vipers. In North America, members
of the family Crotalidae belong to three genera: the rattlesnakes (Crotalus and Sistrurus
spp.) and the copperheads and cottonmouth water moccasins (Agkistrodon spp.).
 Pit vipers can be identified by their characteristic retractable front fangs (Color Plate
a (-s ae ro) saa pe ssou a uamia shd, auisusiea enaea i-s
cal pupils, a single row of subcaudal scales distal to the anal plate, and triangular-shaped
heads (Figure 75-1). Those members of the Crotalus and Sistrurus genera (the rattlesnakes)
cies (C. catalinensis). Agkistrodon species, the copperheads and water moccasins, are found
throughout the eastern and central United States. Copperheads are responsible for the
majority of venomous snake bites to humans in North America because of their proclivity
for living next to human habitation. Water moccasins can be pugnacious and have a greater
tendency to deliver venom when they bite. Rattlesnakes (Crotalus spp., Sistrurus spp.) are
found throughout the continental United States and account for the majority of deaths in
both human and animal victims. Clinicians should become familiar with their regional
indigenous poisonous snake species.
Ninety percent of venomous snake bites occur during the months of April through
October. Two thirds of the bites are inflicted by snakes less than 20 inches in length.
783
784SECTlON 4SpecificToxicants
Heat-sensing "pit"
Nostril
Elliptical pupil
Retractable front fang
Fang sheath
Figure 75-l Anatomy of a pit viper.
The heat-sensing pit located between the eye and the nostril can differentiate a temperature
gradient of 0.003° C at a distance of 14 inches. Ihese snakes can strike approximately one
half of their body length at a speed of 8 ft/second. The number of puncture wounds from
a single bite can be one to six because several ancillary fangs can rotate forward with the
strike. Rattlesnakes do not al ways rattle before striking.
Based on clinical observations, it was once thought that pit viper venom was more toxic
in the hotter months of the year. However, when individual snake venoms were analyzed,
no seasonal variation in patterns of venom proteins was evident over any period of time.
The venom is not considered more toxic in the summer months; however, snakes show
increased aggression and venom yield with environmental warming and an increased pho-
toperiod (as in the spring and summer).? The maximum venom yields occur during the
hottest months of summer.
Pit vipers control the amount of venom that they inject during a bite. The amount of
venom injected depends on the snake's perception of the situation. Initial defensive strikes
are often nonenvenomating. Offensive bites meter a given amount of venom into the victim,
and agonal bites deliver the entire venom load and are therefore the most dangerous. A
decapitated snake head can bite reflexively for up to an hour after decapitation.
Toxic Dose
 The severity of any pit viper bite is related to the volume and toxicity of the venom injected
and to the location of the bite, which may influence the rate of venom uptake. As a gener-
alization, the toxicity of pit viper venoms ranges in descending order from the rattlesnakes
to the water moccasins and then to the copperheads ( Table 75-1). The toxicity of rattlesnake
Chapter 75 I Snake Bite: North American Pit Vipers 785
Table 75-1
Venom Yields of North American Snakes
Snake Species
Dry Weight (mg venom)
LDso IV (mice)
Eastern diamondback (Crotalus adamanteus)
200-850
1.68
Western diamondback (Crotalus atrox)
175-800
2.18
Mojave rattlesnake (Crotalus scutulatus)
75-150
0.23
Eastern coral (Micrurus fulvius)
2-20
0.28
Copperhead (Agkistrodon contortrix)
40-75
10.92
Cottonmouth (Agkistrodon piscivorus)
90-170
4.19
venom varies widely. Nine species and 12
Box 75-1
Examples of Enzymes
subspecies of rattlesnakes have popula-
from Pit Viper Venoms
tions with venoms containing proteins that
Arginine ester hydrolase
are immunologically similar to the potent
Proteolytic enzymes
neurotoxin, Mojave toxin. It is possible for
Thrombin-like enzyme
pit viper venom to be strictly neurotoxic
Collagenase
with virtually no local signs of envenom-
ation. Examples of these venom types are
Hyaluronidase
 Phospholipase Az
certain subpopulations of rattlesnakes:
Mojave rattlesnakes (C. scutulatus), cane-
Phospholipase B
Phosphomonoesterase
brake rattlesnakes (C. horridus atricauda-
Phosphodiesterase
tus), and tiger rattlesnakes (C. tigris).3-5
Acetylcholinesterase
RNAse
Toxicokinetics
DNAse
It may take weeks for all venom fractions
5'-Nucleotidase
NAD-nucleotidase
to be cleared by the body. Because of the
Lactate dehydrogenase
complexity of the venom, the victim's met-
abolic response to the venom components
L-Amino acid oxidase
varies with the species of snake, the volume
of venom injected, and the species of the
bite recipient.
Mechanism of Toxicity
Pit viper venoms are a complex combination of enzymatic and nonenzymatic proteins
(Box 75-1). The primary purpose of the venom is not to kill but rather to immobilize the
prey and predigest its tissue. Ihe venom is derived from modified salivary glands. The
venom is 90% water and has a minimum of 10 enzymes and 3 to 12 nonenzymatic proteins
and peptides in any individual snake. Ihe nonenzymatic components, called the “killing
fraction” have a median lethal dose (LDso) more than 50 times smaller than that of the
crude venom.
More than 60 purified polypeptides have been identifed in crotalid venoms. Approxi-
mately 50 enzymatic crotalid venom fractions have been characterized. Proteolytic
trypsin-like enzymes, which are catalyzed by metals (e.g., calcium, magnesium, and
zinc), are common constituents of pit viper venom and cause marked tissue destruction.
Arginine ester hydrolase is a bradykinin-releasing agent that may adversely affect clot-
ting activity. Thrombin-like enzymes also can mediate increased cloting activity. The
eastern diamondback rattlesnake (C. adarmanteus) venom enzyme, protease H, induces
systemic hemorrhage.6 Five proteolytic toxins from western diamondback rattlesnake
(C. atrox) venom induce hemorrhage by cleaving laminin and the basement mem-
brane at band A.7.s Crotavirin, found in prairie rattlesnake (C. viridis viridis) venom,
is a potent platelet aggregation inhibitor and prevents platelet-collagen interaction by
786SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
binding to collagen fibers. Interference with the platelet-collagen interaction has the
net effect of blocking collagen-mediated platelet functions, such as adhesion, release
afbrinogenemia seen in a patient after western diamondback rattlesnake (C. atrox)
lopathy. The fibrinogenolysis results from indirect activation of plasminogen by vascular
plasminogen activator.10
 Differences in venom within a species induced by the age of the snake are highlighted by
astudy of northern Pacific rattlesnakes (Crotalus viridis organus) in which the adult venoms
were shown to have approximately fivefold higher fbrinogenolytic protease activity. Two
protease bands were identified in juvenile and subadult snakes, and four bands were identi-
fied in adult venom using gel fltration.!l Zinc metalloproteinase with fbrinolytic activity
has been isolated from the venom of copperheads (Agkistrodon contortrix) and is called
fibrolase. A specific fibrolase cleavage site is in the alpha chain of fbrin. The complexity
of the issue of variation of venom components is highlighted by the differences found in
fbrinolysis and complement inactivation of venoms from different blacktail rattlesnakes
(Crofalus molossus rmolossus). In a study of 72 individual blacktail rattlesnake venoms, the
following conclusion was made: there were no venom differences as a function of geo-
graphic distribution; however, individual venom variability was significant enough to be
identified as an important clinical reality.12
Hyaluronidase, present in most venom, catalyzes the cleavage of internal glycoside
bonds and mucopolysaccharides, leading to decreases in the viscosity of connective tis-
sue. Hyaluronidase is commonly called the “spreading factor" since this breakdown facili-
tates the penetration of other venom components into the tissue. Collagenase is also found
in venom, and its major function is to digest collagen, thereby breaking down connective
tissue.
The enzyme phospholipase A is distributed throughout pit viper venoms. This enzyme
catalyzes the hydrolysis of fatty ester linkages in diacyl phosphatides, which form lyso-
phosphatides and release unsaturated and saturated fatty acids. There are many antigeni-
cally different isoenzymes. Some controversy exists about the extent of any neurotoxic
effects that these isoenzymes may possess. Many cellular substances may be released by
this enzyme, including histamine, kinins, slow-reacting substance, serotonin, and acetyl-
choline. The extent of the release of these physiologically active compounds most likely
depends on the ability of phospholipase A to degrade membranes. The enzyme, phospho-
lipase B, may also be present and is responsible for hydrolyzing lysophosphatides. Ihe
phosphodiesterases, such as diester phosphohydrolase, break free the 5'-mononucleotide,
thereby attacking DNA and RNA and derivatives of arabinose. L-Amino acid oxidase cata-
lyzes oxidation of L-alpha-amino acids and L-alpha-hydroxy acids. Ihis is the most active
of the known amino acid oxidases and has been found in all pit viper venoms studied;
it is responsible for the yellow color of the venom. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD)-nucleotidase is found in Agkistrodon but not Crotaius venom. The enzyme cata-
lyzes hydrolysis of nicotinamide N-ribosidic linkages of NAD, forming adenosine diphos-
phate riboside and nicotinamide. Other enzymes that are possibly present in viper venom
include RNAse, DNAse, 5'-nucleotidase, and lactate dehydrogenase. Direct cardiotoxic
effects of venom proteins have been exhibited in some pit viper venoms, particularly the
diamondback rattlesnakes.
A key point is that the envenomation syndrome reflects the complexity of the venom.
The body has to respond to the effects of multiple venom fractions, metabolize each, and
 deal with the resultant myriad of metabolites. In addition to the individual pharmacologic
properties of these proteins and their metabolites, it has been demonstrated that some com-
ponents act synergistically in producing specific effects or reactions. Ihe net effect of this
interaction of venom with the victim's response is a metabolic stew of toxic peptides and
hematotoxic venoms should be reevaluated because some subpopulations of rattlesnakes
possess only neurotoxic venom.
Chapter 75 I Snake Bite: North American Pit Vipers 787
 The average rattlesnake needs 21 days
Box 75-2
Common Signs
to replenish expended venom. Ihe “lethal
of Envenomation
fraction" peptides are the first to regener-
ate. This adds yet another variable to any
Pain
Swelling
given envenomation.
Ecchymosis
Weakness
Clinical Signs
Sloughing tissue
Shock
The onset of clinical signs after a snake
Puncture(s)
bite may be delayed for several hours (Box
Vomiting
75-2). In humans it is estimated that 20%
 of all pit viper bites are nonenvenomating
(i.e., dry), with an additional 25% classified
as mild envenomations. It is for this rea-
Box 75-3
Variables Affecting the
son that so many antidotal treatments are
 Severity of Envenomation
championed, and it also emphasizes the
necessity to rely on scientific evaluation for
Victim
the various treatment modalities proposed.
Body mass
Every pit viper envenomation is dif-
Bite location
ferent for many reasons (Box 75-3). The
Time to medical facility
severity of an envenomation is addition-
Type of first aid applied
ally altered by factors such as species of
Concurrent medications (nonsteroidal
victim, body mass, location of bite, post-
antinflammatory drugs, etc.)
bite excitability, and use of premedica-
tions (e.g., nonsteroidal antinflarmmatory
Snake
drugs in older dogs that may make the dog
Species
more susceptible to clotting defects). The
Size
snake affects the severity of the envenom-
Age of snake
ation by species and size of snake, age of
Motivation for bite
snake, motivation of snake, and degree of
Time since last venom use
venom regeneration since last use (Color
Time of year
Plate 75-3).
Cats are more resistant, on the basis
of milligram of venom per kilogram body
 mass, to pit viper venom than dogs. However, cats are generally presented to veterinary
care facilities in a more advanced clinical condition. This is probably caused by the cat's
smaller body size and the proclivity of cats to play with the snake, thereby antagonizing
it and inducing an offensive strike, often to the torso. Additionally, cats commonly run
off and hide after being bitten before they return home to allow the owner to identify
the injury, thus delaying the time from bite to veterinary care. Because dogs generally
receive more defensive strikes, have a larger body mass, and more frequently seek imme-
diate human companionship after injury, they are more likely to receive medical attention
promptly.
It is possible that a life-threatening envenomation may occur with no local clini-
cal signs other than the puncture wounds themselves. This seems particularly true of
those snake species with primary neurotoxic venoms (Box 75-4). Local tissue reactions
to pit viper envenomation include puncture wounds, one to six from a single bite, which
may be bleeding. Occasionally these fang wounds appear as small lacerations. Rarely,
may ensue with development of progressive edema. Ecchymosis and petechiation may
become evident. Tissue necrosis may occur, particularly in envenomations to areas with-
out a significant subcutaneous tissue mass. The presence of fang marks does not indicate
that envenomation has occurred, only that a bite has taken place. It must be reiterated
that the severity of local signs does not necessarily reflect the severity of the systemic
envenomation.
788SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Systemic clinical manifestations encompass a wide variety of problems, including pain,
weakness, dizziness, nausea, severe hypotension, thrombocytopenia, fasciculations, regional
lymphadenopathy, alterations in respiratory rate, increased clotting times, decreased hemo-
globin, abnormal electrocardiogram, increased salivation, echinocytosis of red cells, cya-
nosis, proteinuria, bleeding (e.g., melena, hematuria, and hematemesis), obtundation, and
convulsions. Not all of these clinical manifestations are seen in each patient, and they are
listed in descending order of frequency as seen in human victinms.
Severe hypotension results from pooling of blood within the shock organ of the species
bitten (i.e., the hepatosplanchnic [dogs] or pulmonary [cats] vascular bed) and fluid loss
be great. A 2-cm increase in the circumference of a human's swelling thigh can incorporate
 one third of the patient's circulating fluid volume.!13 Often this swelling is not edema but
extravascularized blood, resulting from damage to blood vessel walls as a result of swell-
 ing and rupturing of the endothelial cells of the microvasculature, leaving large gaps in the
vessel walls.
The victim's clotting anomalies largely depend on the species of snake involved (Figure
75-2). Coagulopathies range from direct blockage or inactivation of various factors in the
blood and bone marrow ( Box 75-5). A coagulopathy, with prolonged clotting times, develops
in approximately 60% of envenomated patients; by far the most common is hypofibrinogen-
emia. Venom-induced thrombocytopenia
occurs in approximately 30% of enven-
Box 75-4
omations with an untreated nadir usually
Species of
occurring between 72 and 96 hours. Some
Rattlesnakes That Have Populations
venom fractions inhibit platelet adhesion.
Containing Neurotoxin
Other pit viper venoms do not affect clot-
ting itself but rather destroy clots once they
Crotalus durissus durissus
are formed by initiating aggressive fibrino-
Crotalus durissus ferrificus var.
cumanensis
lysis. Syndromes resembling diffuse intra-
vascular coagulation (DIC) are possible
Crotalus durissus ferrificus (Brazil)
Crotalus horridus atricaudatus
with pit viper envenomations.
Myokymia, a type of fasciculation
Crotaluslepidus klauberi
of various muscle groups, is frequently
Crotalus mitcheli mitchellii
Crotalus tigris
reported in humans after bites received by
Crotalus vegrandis
timber rattlesnakes (Crotalus horridus hor-
Crotalus viridis abyssus
ridus) and Western diamondback rattle-
Crotalus viridis concolor
snakes (Crotalus atrax).14
Crotalus scutulatus scutulatus
(venom A)
Minimum Database
Crotalus scutulatus salvini
Sistrurus catenatus catenatus
Monitoring the severity and progression
of the clinical envenomation syndrome
Factor X
Factor Xa
Factor V
Venom A
Prothrombin
Thrombin
Fibrinogen
Fibrin 
(fibrinolysis)
 Fibrin split products
Venom B
Venom C
Figure 75-2 Venom effects on clotting mechanisms.
Chapter 75 | Snake Bite: North American Pit Vipers 789
may be difficult. A tool that has proven
Box 75-5
Pit Viper
useful is the envenomation severity score
Envenomations: Hemostatic Defects
system (Box 75-6). Use of this system more
Consumption coagulopathy
Diffuse vascular damage
patient's condition over time and allows a
DIC-like syndrome
more objective assessment of the patient.15
Localized massive clotting
It is recommended that a severity score be
Hyperfibrinolysis
assessed on entry, 6 hours, 12 hours, and 24
Thrombocytopenia (independent from
hours after initial hospitalization
consumption coagulopathy above)
A complete blood cell count with dif-
Blood vessel injury
ferential, including platelet counts, should
be obtained; red blood cell morphology
along with baseline serum chemistry with
electrolytes should be collected. A coagula-
tion profle should be obtained, including activated clotting times, prothrombin time (PT),
activated partial thromboplastin time (PTT), fbrinogen, and fbrin degradation products.
Urinalysis with macroscopic and microscopic evaluations, including free protein and
hemoglobin and myoglobin, should be performed. An electrocardiogram may be indicated
in animals with significant envenomations. These laboratory tests should be repeated peri-
odically to monitor the progression of the syndrome and/or the effectiveness of therapy.
Significant rhabdomyolysis may also be seen with large increases in creatine phosphoki-
nase and urine myoglobin levels, particularly in envenomations by snakes with potent neuro
toxins (e.g., Mojave, canebreak, and tiger rattlesnakes). Tiger rattlesnake venom (Crotalus
figris) has been characterized as having a low protease activity, no hemolytic activity, and toxins
that have complete immunoidentity with the potent neurotoxins, crotoxin and Mojave toxin.3
Circumferential measurements of the affected body part at, above, and below the bite
site at set time intervals aid in objective monitoring of the progression of the swelling sec-
ondary to many pit viper bites. Transient (within 48 hours) echinocytosis has been reported
in dogs after envenomation, and its presence is an indicator of envenomation. However,
absence of this morphological change is not evidence of lack of envenomation.16
Hypokalemia has been reported subsequent to pit viper envenomations.16 In one series,
potassium levels of less than 3.5 mEq/L were observed in 11% of 97 pit viper envenom-
ated dogs.17 It is postulated that this decrease is secondary to the release of epinephrine by
the patient, inducing serum insulin elevation and thereby driving potassium into the cells.
 This is a transient phenomenon, which corrects with intravenous (IV) fluid and antivenom
administration.
Confirmatory Tests
There are no diagnostic tests that can definitively confirm that a pit viper bite has occurred.
Treatment
Although many frst-aid measures have been advocated for pit viper bite victims, none
-adia id yo dn-moog ua-auot sr aieiou io Aiiqou puaaand oi umos uaaq se
envenomated human patients has revealed that the majority of individuals with perma-
nent loss of motion of the affected area or other negative sequelae had received some form
of traditional first aid (e.g., cut and suck, constriction bands, and so on).19 The primary
rule of first aid is to do no additional harm. One human study followed 147 patients who
had received first aid and 78 who had not; there was no evidence that first-aid treatment
had made any difference in the patients' short-term outcome.2
First-aid measures to be avoided include ice, incision and suction, tourniquets (which
constriction bands quickly become with progressive limb swelling), and hot packs (Box
75-7). Electroshock has been definitively shown to be ineffective in the treatment of pit
790SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
Box 75-6
Snakebite Severity Score System
 Pulmonary System
Signs within normal limits
0
Minimal—slight dyspnea
1
Moderate—respiratory compromise,
2
tachypnea, use of accessory muscles
Severe—cyanosis, air hunger, extreme
3
tachypnea, respiratory insufficiency or
respiratory arrest from any cause
Cardiovascular System
Signs within normal limits
Minimal—tachycardia, general weakness,
 benign dysrhythmia, hypertension
Moderate—tachycardia, hypotension (but
2
tarsal pulse still palpable)
Severe—extreme tachycardia, hypoten-
3
sion (nonpalpable tarsal pulse or systolic
blood pressure <80 mm Hg), malignant
dysrhythmia or cardiac arrest
Local Wound
Signs within normal limits
0
Minimal—pain, swelling, ecchymosis,
erythema limited to bite site
Moderate—pain, swelling, ecchymosis,
2
 erythema involves less than half of
extremity and may be spreading slowly
Severe—pain, swelling, ecchymosis,
erythema involves most or all of one
extremity and is spreading rapidly
Very severe—pain, swelling, ecchymosis,
4
erythema extends beyond affected
extremity, or significant tissue slough
Gastrointestinal System
Signs within normal limits
0
Minimal—abdominal pain, tenesmus
1
Moderate—vomiting, diarrhea
2
Severe—repetitive vomiting, diarrhea, or
3
hematemesis
Hematological System
Signs within normal limits
 Minimal—coagulation values slightly
abnormal, PT <20 sec, PTT <50 sec,
platelets 100,000-150,000/mm?
Moderate—coagulation values abnormal,
2
PT 20-50 sec, PTT 50-75 sec, platelets
50,000-100,000/mm?
Severe—coagulation values abnormal, PT
3
50-100 sec, PTT 75-100 sec, platelets
20,000-50,000/mm?
Chapter 75 | Snake Bite: North American Pit Vipers 791
Box 75-6
Snakebite Severity Score System—cont'd
Very severe—-coagulation values markedly
4
abnormal with bleeding present or the
threat of spontaneous bleeding, including
PT unmeasurable, PTT unmeasurable,
platelets <20,000/mm?
Central Nervous System
Signs within normal limits
0
Minimal—apprehension
1
Moderate—chills, weakness, faintness,
2
ataxia
Severe—lethargy, seizures, coma
3
Total Score Possible
0-20
frst aid in the field are to keep the victim
Box 75-7
First-Aid Measures
calm, keep the bite site below heart level
to Avoid
if possible, and transport the victim to a
1. Ice, cold packs, or sprays
d  a  a
medical intervention. Ihe patient should
2. Incision and suction
3. Tourniquets
be hospitalized and monitored closely for a
4. Administration of aspirin or
minimum of 8 hours for the onset of signs
tranquilizers
of envenomation. A severity score sheet
5. Waiting to see how significant
should be recorded upon entry and at 6
the envenomation is before seeking
hours after hospitalization at a minimum
medical care
for every suspected snake bite victim. Ihis
6. Electroshock
advice cannot be overemphasized because
7. Hot packs
the onset of clinical signs may be signifi-
cantly delayed. One report in a human
victim described resolution of mild swell-
ing over 3 hours, at which time the patient
Box 75-8
Pit Viper
was discharged. The patient returned to the
Envenomation Treatment Outline
emergency department 12 hours later with
severe pain and swelling and a marked
1. Aggressive IV fluid therapy
coagulopathy.23 The effects of snake venom
2. Early IV antivenom administration
are time dependent; any delay in initiat-
3. Monitoring of hemostasis and bio-
ing medical treatment is deleterious to the
chemical profiles
patient and may result in complications
4. Antibiotic administration
that cannot be corrected.
The initial medical response to a snake-
bitten patient is to collect the appropriate
pretreatment laboratory samples and make circumferential measurements at, above, and
below the bite site to allow quantitative monitoring of the progression of swelling. An IV
 catheter should be placed and a crystalloid fluid drip started.
The only proven specific therapy against pit viper envenomation is the administration of
duction abnormalities, and the necrotizing effect of the venom can be dramatically reversed
when antivenom treatment is initiated appropriately (Box 75-8).
 In North America polyvalent antivenom, which is effective against the venoms of all
is made and marketed to the veterinary community by Boehringer-Ingelheim (Ridge-
from Crotalus atrox (Western diamondback rattlesnake), Crotalus adarmanteus (Eastern
792SECTION4SpecificToxicants
diamondback rattlesnake), Crotalus durissus ferrifcus (South American rattlesnake), and
Bothrops atrox (Fer-de-lance). Once a horse attains a certain titer, serum is harvested and
processed to concentrate the antivenom immunoglobulins. The processes used to extract
these proteins result in a final product, which though rich in antibodies, has a very high
equine protein contaminant and albumin component, often in the range of 50%. It is these
proteins that are primarily responsible for the allergic reactions that can be associated with
antivenom use.
Skin testing for allergic reactions to the horse serum is difficult to evaluate in veterinary
patients. Human victims of snake bites were often subjected to cutaneous hypersensitivity
testing before equine origin antivenom was administered. In one study, none of 12 early
antivenom initially will identify those patients who may have an allergic reaction.
Antivenom should be reconstituted with the provided diluent; saline may be added to
completely fill the vial, ensuring that the antivenom is totally submerged to speed recon-
stitution. It can be swirled to facilitate reconstitution. Ihis usually takes between 10 and 15
minutes. Warming the vial to body temperature aids in dissolution into the liquid state.
Overheating can destroy the proteins and cause foaming, which makes it difficult to collect
the antivenom into a syringe. Ihe vial should always be rinsed with saline as a significant
amount of residual antivenom remains.29
Antivenom should be diluted at a ratio of 1 vial to 100 to 250 mL of crystalloid fluids. In
smaller patients, the clinician should adjust the fluid infusion volume to prevent fluid over-
load of the patient. In one report, antivenom labeled with radioactive iodine (13'1) was given
IV, and 85% accumulated at the site of envenomation within 2 hours.3 In contrast there was
a 1.4% local concentration when it was given intramuscularly (IM) and a 5.6% local concen-
tration when given SC. Antivenom should not be injected into the bite site, and its uptake
can be delayed for up to 12 hours when it is given IM. Administration should begin slowly
as an IV infusion. If there is no evidence of an allergic reaction (e.g., nausea, hyperemia of
inner pinna, fluffing of tail, and pruritus), the rate of infusion can be increased. The entire
initial dose should be given within 30 minutes. Ihe patient then should be reevaluated
pue eu adde a aunsn auus uuaua a yon ussand a io
laboratory measurements.
The dose of antivenom necessary is calculated relative to the amount of venom injected,
the body mass of the victim, and the bite site. Bites to the torso, tongue, or intravascular are
severe envenomations that require prompt, aggressive antivenom administration. Smaller
patients may require higher doses of antivenom because the dose of venom per kilogram
body weight of the victim is higher. Multiple vials may be necessary to treat severe enven-
The earlier antivenom is administered, the more effective it is. Ihe package insert advises
using it within the first 4 hours. However, the product is effective as long as active venom
components are found in the bloodstream. Tissue necrosis will not be reversed once it has
occurred, but additional damage may be prevented. Antivenom is extremely effective in
reversing venom-induced coagulation defects. Coagulation defects can be abated several
days after envenomation. If clotting defects continue to be manifest, additional antivenom
should be administered. DIC-like syndromes should be treated with additional antivenom.
Rattlesnake venom thrombinlike enzymes are not inhibited by heparin, and it should not
be administered. Clotting anomalies secondary to envenomations are extremely difficult to
reverse with blood products and transfusions.
Antivenom is extremely effective in reversing most rattlesnake venom-induced throm-
bocytopenias. However, in timber rattlesnake (C. horridus) bites, a platelet aggregating
protein induces thrombocytopenia, which is resistant to antivenom administration even
though PT and PTT are restored.3l Crotalus atrox (Western diamondback rattlesnake)
 venom was detectable in the victim's urine 6 days after envenomation.32
 Patients exhibiting allergic reactions to antivenom can still receive it if needed in
severe envenomations. It can be given as a slow IV drip and piggybacked with diphen-
hydramine and possibly epinephrine. Data in both human envenomation and veterinary
Chapter 75 I Snake Bite: North American Pit Vipers 793
envenomation databases have not identified a significantly higher reaction rate in patients
who have received antivenom previously.17.19 Some veterinary patients have received antive-
nom yearly for several consecutive years without higher rates of reactions.17
Allergic reactions, though rare, are possible when administering antivenom. These can
 become manifest in one of three ways: by true anaphylaxis, an anaphylactoid reaction, and
hydramine IV (small dogs and cats: 10 mg; large dogs: 25 to 50 mg), waiting 5 minutes,
and then restarting the infusion of antivenom at a slower rate. Anaphylaxis is treated by
stopping the infusion of antivenom and administering epinephrine, corticosteroids, and
crystalloid fluid infusion. Patients taking beta-blockers must be monitored very closely.
Beta-blockers may mask the early onset of anaphylaxis, which becomes more difficult to
reverse as the reaction progresses. Delayed serum sickness is rare in dogs and cats.33 This
may be because of the smaller volumes of antivenom administered relative to those given
to human patients. Onset of delayed serum sickness usually occurs 7 to 14 days after antive-
nom administration. If it does occur, treatment consists of antihistamines, often type 1 and
type 2 inhibitors, and/or corticosteroids.
There is debate about the use of colloidal fluids in pit viper-envenomated patients
because leakage of the colloid through damaged vascular walls may pull fluid out of the
vascular space and into areas with rich capillary beds, such as the pulmonary tissue.
 Broad-spectrum antibiotics are recommended in veterinary patients after envenomation
because of the number of pathogenic bacteria found in snakes' mouths and the amount of
local tissue damage at the bite site. This is an area of controversy in the therapy of human
snake bite victims.34.35
 Pain is usually controlled with the antivenom. However, in patients in which no or lim-
ited amounts of antivenom are administered, pain control may require IV narcotics during
the first 24 hours. Fentanyl is preferred and can be administered as a continuous rate infu-
sion (loading dose 2-3 mcg/kg and then 1 mcg/kg per hour). Morphine should be avoided
because of its histamine-releasing activity, which may be confused with the onset of ana-
phylaxis. Nonsteroidal medications compound the risk of developing blood dyscrasias and
clotting anomalies.
The use of corticosteroids in the treatment of pit viper envenomation is not recom-
mended. Treatment of pit viper envenomations with corticosteroids has been repeatedly
advocated, yet the rationale for their use is obscure, and their ultimate therapeutic value
is controversial. Numerous studies have evaluated the effects of treating venomous snake
bites with corticosteroids. Most report a worsening of or no improvement in the patient's
condition.35-48 Some studies have shown dramatic increases in mortality with the use of
corticosteroids.49.50 The proposed detrimental effects of corticosteroids are inhibition of the
victim's natural defenses against the venom, interference with the antivenom, and potentia-
tion of the venom itself. Also, they potentially confound diagnostic testing, altering coagu-
lation and other objective laboratory monitoring measurements useful in evaluating the
clinical progression of the envenomation syndrome. In addition, human clinical trials have
shown no beneficial effects of the treatment of pit viper envenomation with corticoster-
oids.46 Corticosteroids are of little use in a hypotensive crisis and have little if any effect on
the local tissue response to pit viper venom.
Antihistarmines have no effect upon pit viper venom. They do not prevent allergic reac-
tions to subsequent antivenom.
Fasciotomy is not indicated in the dog and cat. Ihe rationale for this procedure is to
combat damage from compartment syndromes, which are extremely rare in dogs and cats
and are not common in humans.5l The theory used to advocate surgical intervention is that
a deep bite injecting venom into the muscle causes that tissue to swell, leading to pressure
mecrosis when the muscle sheath restricts the ability of the tissue to expand. Fasciotomy
is performed to open the muscle sheath, preventing the pressure necrosis. However, most
794SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
 bites are SC, and compartment syndromes are rare. Ihe risks associated with fasciotomy
figurement after surgery with questionable outcomes.52 One report that compared antive-
nom treatment with fasciotomy and debridement revealed 100% survival with antivenom
treatment alone, 80% survival in those treated with antivenom and surgery, 30% survival
with surgery alone, and 30% survival in the untreated controls.53 In patients in whom a
compartment syndrome secondary to pit viper envenomation may develop, administration
of additional antivenom has been demonstrated to lower the IM pressure.54
Excision of the snake bite site is generally ineffective and can be complicated by coagula-
tion defects secondary to the envenomation. Allenss demonstrated that in cats and rabbits
injected with crotalid venoms, excision of the bite area even 5 to 15 minutes after the injec-
tion of venom was "useless" and even when a large mass of skin and muscle around the
 injection site was removed, all the animals died.
Prognosis
The prognosis is highly dependent on the degree of envenomation, location of bite site, and
 individual animal response. The earlier ermergency veterinary care and aggressive treatment
options are sought, the better the outcome.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
There are no specific gross and histologic lesions described for snake bite victims. Tissue
necrosis is commonly seen at the bite site; hemorrhage and edema are consistent changes
observed. Otherlesions seen are highly dependent onthe extent of the toxicity of the venom
(e.g., myocardial lesions, DIC, petechiation, ecchymoses, and renal necrosis).
Differential Diagnoses
Trauma, angioedema (e.g., insect bites and stings), other animal bites, draining abscesses,
and penetrating wounds make up the differential diagnoses for snake bites.
Alternative Antivenoms
A newer antivenom (Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab Ovine, BTG, Brentwood, TN; Cro-
FabAV) was approved for human use by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in late
2000. This antivenom is a purified and lyophilized preparation of ovine Fab immunoglobu-
lin fragments. The ovine IgG molecules are cleaved to discard the inflammatory stimulating
Fc portion of the antibody, retaining only the Fab molecules. Ihe product is affinity purified
and contains negligible amounts of extraneous proteins, such as albumin. Advantages of
(caused by the smaller size of Fab compared with whole IgG), and decreased antigenic
potential, thereby decreasing the risk of possible allergic reactions. Also 99% of the protein
in the vial is antibody fragments against pit viper venom, contrasting with 20% in other
antivenoms. A disadvantage may be the potential need for repeated administration because
the smaller Fab molecules may be more rapidly cleared from the body.
Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab (ovine) antivenom is prepared from the blood of
healthy sheep immunized in groups with one of the following North American crotalid ven-
oms: Crotalus atrox (Western diamondback ratlesnake), C. adarmanteus (Eastern diamond-
back rattlesnake), C. scutulatus scutulatus (Mojave rattlesnake), and Agkistrodon piscivorus
(cottonmouth or water moccasin). A monospecific antivenom is produced from each sheep
group, and these four monospecific antivenoms are then mixed to prepare the final polyva-
lent antivenom. The four immunizing snakes are all North American species and have been
selected to provide the widest inmmune response to the venoms of pit vipers indigenous
to the continent (Western diamondback rattlesnake [Crotalus atrox], Eastern diamondback
Chapter 75 I Snake Bite: North American Pit Vipers  795
rattlesnake [Crotalus adarmanfeus], Mojave rattlesnake [Crotalus scutulatus], and the cotton-
mouth [Agkistrodon piscivorus]. For example, patients with C. helieri envenomation improved
following use of the FabAV product, indicating cross reactivity with this snake's venom.56
In humans the use of CroFab effectively controlled most of the effects of envenomation,
 but some patients experienced either a recurrence of coagulopathy or delayed-onset hema-
totoxicity; usually those patients presented initially with severe coagulopathy.57 A study
in 115 dogs presented with progressive envenomation syndromes from rattlesnake bites
showed an average of 1.25 vials of Crofab antivenom was effective in controlling or revers-
ing clinical signs.58 This antivenom has been successfully used in both feline and equine
patients.
An additional newer antivenom (Polyvalent anti-snake Fabotherapic, Fab, Equine, Insti-
tuto Bioclon, Col. Toriello Guerra, Mexico; Antivipmyn) has been used in Mexico as the
primary antivenom for human victims of pit viper envenomations. Ihis antivenom is made
by hyperimmunizing horses with the venoms of Bothrops asper (Fer-de-lance) and Crotalus
durissus (central American rattlesnake). Ihe hyperimmunized serum is then ultrafiltered
until only Fabz antibody fragments are left. However, in each vial only 20% of this Fab, is
snake venom specific. Results reported in abstract form of a clinical study in 74 dogs bitten
by North American pit vipers showed effectiveness with 4 vials of Antivipmyn antivenom
in correcting clinical signs of envenomation.5? Additionally, a peer-reviewed clinical safety
evaluation in nonenvenomated dogs was published showing an excellent safety profle after
large doses (3 to 6 vials) were administered in a short period of time.60
Vaccine Production
In 2004, Red Rock Biologics, Woodland, California, introduced a vaccine for dogs designed
to protect them against the venom of North American rattlesnake species, except for the
Mojave rattlesnake. The vaccine is also reported to protect dogs against the bite of the cop-
perhead. It is currently recommended to administer the vaccine in two doses 2 to 4 weeks
apart and then annually thereafter. To date there are no peer-reviewed studies on the effi-
cacy of this vaccine. It is important to note that the package insert recommends that even if
your dogreceivedthevaccine,youshould stillconsiderasnakebiteas amedicalemergency
and should immediately seek veterinary care for the pet. Additionally, the manufacturer
states that immunization may not preclude the need for antivenom administration.
References
1. Peterson M, Meerdink G: Venomous bites and stings. In Kirk R, editor: Current veterinary therapy X,
Philadelphia, 1989, Saunders.
2. Gregory-Dwyer V, Bianchi Bosisio A: Righetti P: An isoelectric focusing study of seasonal variation in
rattlesnake venom proteins, Toxicon 24:995-1000, 1986.
28:1447-1455, 1990.
4. Glen J, Straight R: Mojave rattlesnake (Crotalus scutulatus scutulatus) venom: variation in toxicity with
geographical origin, Toxicon 16:81-84, 1978.
5. Glen J, Straight R, Wolt T: Regional variation in the presence of canebreak toxin in Crotalus horridus
venom, Comp Biochem Physiol C Pharmacol Toxicol Endocrinol107:337-346,1994
6. Anderson S, Ownby C: Pathogenesis of hemorrhage induced by proteinase H from eastern diamondback
rattlesnake (Crotalus adamanteus) venom, Toxicon 35:1291-1300, 1997.
7. Retzios A, Markland F: Fibrinolytic enzymes from the venoms of Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix and
Crotalus basiliscus basiliscus: cleavage site specificity towards the alpha-chain of fibrin, Thromb Res
74:355-367, 1994
8. Bjarnason J, Hamilton D, Fox J: Studies on the mechanism of hemorrhage production by five proteolytic
9. Liu C, Huang T: Crovidisin, a collagen binding protein isolated from snake venom of Crotalus viridis,
prevents platelet: collagen interaction, Arch Biochem Biophys 337:291-299, 1997.
10. Budzynski A, Pandya B, Rubin R,et al: Fibrinogenolytic afibrinogenemiaafter envenomationby western
diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox), Blood 63:1-14, 1984.
796SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
11. MacKessy S: Fibrinogenolytic proteases from venoms of juvenile and adult northern Pacific rattesnakes
(Crotalus viridis oreganus), Comp Biochem Physiol B Comp Biochem 106:181-186, 1993.
12. Rael E, Rivas J, Chen T, et al: Differences in fibrinolysis and complement inactivation by venom from
different northem blacktail rattlesnakes (Crotalus molossus moossus), Toxicon 35:505-513, 1997.
13. Russell F: Snake venom poisoning, Great Neck, NY, 1983, Scholium Intermational.
14. Clark R, Williams S, Nordt S, et al: Successful treatment of crotalid induced neurotoxicity with a new
polyspecific crotalid Fab antivenom, Ann Emerg Med 30:54-57, 1997.
15. Dart R, Hulburt K, Garcia R, et al: Validation of a severity score for the assessment of crotalid snakebite,
Ann Emerg Med 27(3):321-326, 1996.
16. Brown D, Meyer D, Wingfield W ,et al: Echinocytosis associated with rattlesnake envenomation in dogs,
Vet Pathol 31:654-657, 1994.
17. Peterson M: Veterinary envenomation database 1984-1994. Unpublished data.
18. Stewart M, Greenland S, Hoffman J: First-aid treatment ofpoisonous snakebite: are currently recommended
procedures justified? Ann Emerg Med 10:331-335, 1981.
19. McNalley J, Dart R, O'Brien P: Southwestern rattlesnake envenomation database (abstract), Vet Hum
Toxicol29:486,1987.
20. Russell F: First aid for snake venom poisoning, Toxicon 4:285-289, 1967.
 21. Johnson E, Kardong K, MacKessy S: Electric shocks are ineffective in treatment oflethal effects of rattlesnake
envenomation in mice, Toxicon 25:1347-1349, 1987.
22. Howe N, Meisenheimer J Jr: Electric shock does not save snakebitten rats, Ann Emerg Med 17:254-256,
1988.
 23. Guisto I:Severe toxicity from crotalid envenomation after early resolution ofsymptoms,Ann Emerg Med
26:387-389, 1995.
24. Russell F, Ruzic N, Gonzales H: Efectiveness of antivenin (crotalidae) polyvalent following injection of
rotalus venom, Toxicon 11:461-464, 1973.
25. Brown J: Effects of pH, temperature, antivenin and functional group inhibitors on the toxicity and enzy-
matic activities of Crotalus atrox venom, Toxicon 4:99-105, 1966.
26. Snyder C, Knowles J, Pickens J, et al: Snakebite poisoning. In Catcott E, editor: Canine medicine, Santa
Barbara, CA, 1968, American Veterinary Publications.
27. Smith M, Ownby C: Ability of polyvalent (crotalidae) antivenin to neutralize myonecrosis, hemorrhage
and lethality induced by timber rattlesnake (Crotalus horridus horridus) venom, Toxicon 23:409 -424, 1985.
28. Malasit P, Warrell D, Chanthavanich P: Prediction, prevention, and mechanism of early (anaphylactic)
antivenom reactions in victims of snakebites, Br Med J 292:17-20, 1986.
29. Vohra R, Kelner M, Clark R: Preparation of crotaline F-ab antivenom (Crofab) with automated mixing
methods: in vitro observations, Clin Tox 47:69-71, 2009.
30.Christopher D, Rodning C: Crotalidae envenomation, South Med I79(2):159-162, 1986.
 31. Bond R, Burkhart K: Thrombocytopenia follwing timber rattlesnake envenomation, Ann Emerg Med
30:40-44, 1997.
32. Ownby C, Reisbecks S, Allen R: Levels oftherapeutic antivenin and venom in a human snakebite victim,
South Med I 89:803-806, 1996.
 33. Berdoulay P, Schaer M, Starr J: Serum sickness in a dog associated with antivenin therapy for snake bite
caused by Crotalus adamanteus, I Vet Emerg Crit Care 15:206-212, 2005.
34. Kerrigan K, Mertz B, Nelson S, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for pit viper envenomation: prospective
controlled trial, World J Sturg 21:369372, 1997.
35. Clark R, Selden B, Furbee B: The incidence ofwound infection following crotalid envenomation, / Emerg
Med 11:583-586, 1993.
1975.
37. Van Mierop L: Snake bite symposium, I Fla Med Assoc 63:101, 1976.
38. Arnold R: Treatment of snakebite, JAMA 236:1843, 1976.
39. Arnold R: Controversies and hazards in the treatment of pit viper bites, South Med I72:902, 1979.
40.
Glen J: Personal communication, Veterans Administration Medical Center, Venom Research Laboratories,
Salt Lake City, June 1990.
41. Gennaro J Jr: Observations on treatment of snake bite in America. In Keegan H, MacFarlane W,editors:
Venomous and poisonous animal and noxious plants of the Pacifc region, Tarrytown, NY, 1963, Pergamon
Press.
42. Schottler W: Antihistamine, ACTH, cortisone and anesthetics in snakebite, Am J Trop Med 3:1083,
1954.
43. Allam M: Comparison of cortisone and antivenin in the treatment of crotaline envenomation. In
Buckley E, Porges N, editors: Venoms, Washington, DC, 1956, American Association for Advancement
of Science
Chapter 75 I Snake Bite: North American Pit Vipers 797
44. RusselF, Emery I: Effects of corticosteroids on lethality of Agkistrodon contortrix venom,Am I Med Sct
241:135, 1965.
45. Russell F: Effects of cortisone during immunization with Crotalus venom. A preliminary report, Toxicon
3:65, 1965.
46. Reid H: Specific antivenin and prednisone in viper bite poisoning: a controlled trial, Br Med J 2:1378,
1963.
47. Cunningham E: Snakebite—role of corticosteroids as immediate therapy in an animal model, Am Surg
45:757, 1979.
48. Wood J: Treatment of snake venom poisoning with ACTH and cortisone, Va Med Monthly 82:130, 1955.
49. Reid H: Snake bite, Part 2. Treatment, Trop Doctor 2:159, 1972.
50. Russell F: Shock following snakebite, JAMA 198:171, 1966.
 51. Mubarak S, Hargens A, Own C, et al: The wick catheter technique for measurement of intramuscular
pressure: a new research and clinical tool, I Bone Joint Surg 58A:1016, 1976.
52. Garfin S, Castilonia R, Mubarak S, et al: Rattlesnake bites and surgical decompression: results using a
laboratory model, Toxicon 22:177-182, 1984.
Sturg 158:543-547, 1989.
 54. Garfin S, Castilonia R, Mubarak S, et al: The effect of antivenin on intramuscular pressure elevations
induced by rattlesnake venom, Toxicon 23:677-680, 1985.
55. Allen F: Mechanical treatment of venomous bites and wounds, South I Med 31:1248, 1938.
56. Bush SP, Green SM, Moynihan JA, et al: Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab (ovine) antivenom is effica-
cious for envenomations by Southern Pacific rattlesnakes (Crotalus helleri), A nn Emerg Med 40:619-624,
2002.
57. Ruha AM, Curry SC, Beuhler M, et al: Initial postmarketing experience with crotalidae polyvalent
immune Fab for treatment of rattlesnake envenomation, Ann Emerg Med 39:609-615, 2002.
 58. Peterson ME, Matz M, Seibold K,et al: A randomized multicentertrial of Crotalidae polyvalent immune
Fab antivenom for the treatment of rattlesnake envenomation in dogs, I Vet Emerg Crit Care 21:335-345,
2011.
59. Seibold K, Wells RJ, Bordeon DJ, et al: Evaluation of an antivenom F(ab') in 74 dogs envenomated by
North American pit vipers (Abstract), I Vet Emerg Crit Care 20(Suppl 1):A13, 2010.
60. Woods C, Young D: Clinical safety evaluation of F(ab'), antivenom (Crotalus durissus - Bothrops asper)
administration in dogs, I Vet Emerg Crit Care 21:565-569, 2011.
CHAPTER
76
Snake Bite: Coral
Snakes
Michael E. Peterson, DVM, MS
· Coral snake venom is primarily neurotoxic, with itle local tissue reaction 
and pain at the bite site
 Clinical signs can be delayed for several hours and can include generalized
weakness, rmuscle fasciculations, paralysis, and respiratory failure.
Hyperfibrinogenemia, leukocytosis, elevated creatinine kinase, burring and
spherocytosis, anemia, and hemoglobinuria can be observed
 Treatment options include hospitalization for a minimum of 48 hours, good
 supportive medical care, and use of antivenom if available.
Sources
Fifty species of coral snakes are found in the New World. Two genera are indigenous to
the United States. The two genera are composed of two species and three subspecies. One
genus is Micruroides (M. euryxanthus-the Sonoran coral snake), which inhabits central
and southeastern Arizona and southwestern New Mexico. Ihe other genus is Micrurus,
with three subspecies: M. fulvius fulvius (Eastern coral snake), M. fulvius tenere (Texas coral
snake), and M. fulvius barbouri (South Florida coral snake)
 The Texas coral snake has a home range extending from southern Arkansas and Louisiana
throughout eastern and west central Texas. Ihe Eastern coral snake inhabits eastern North
Carolina south to central Florida and west to Alabama, Mississippi, and eastern Louisiana
to the Mississippi River. The South Florida coral snake is found in southern Florida and the
northern Florida Keys (Figure 76-1).
North American coral snakes are distinctively colored beginning with a black snout and
an alternating pattern of black, yellow (occasionally white), and red. They can be differen-
tiated from similar looking nonpoisonous snakes by the coral snake's color bands, which
completely encircle the snake's body with the yellow band touching the red band (Color Plate
76-1). This color pattern can be best remembered by the warning that if caution (yellow)
touches danger (red), the snake is a coral snake.
uuan ioy aisas padonanap Aood e pue sauey juony paxy lous aaey saeus [eio
delivery, thereby requiring a chewing action to inject the venom. Their pupils are always
round; they have no facial "heat-sensing" pits, and their heads are not triangular. Ihese
snakes are diurnal. Coral snakes are relatively docile, but will respond aggressively if dis-
turbed, delivering a pugnacious bite. In 85% of human bite cases, the snake has to be shaken
or pulled off, creating a feeling in the victims reminiscent of separating pieces of Velcro.
799
800SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
Sonorancorai snake
Eastercoralsnake
Texas coral snake
Figure 76-l Distribution of coral snakes in the United States.
Veterinary patients occasionally are brought in with the snake still atached. Bites by coral
snakes are relatively rare. In humans coral snakes account for less than 1% of all venomous
snake bites in North America. The majority of coral snake bites occurs during the spring
and fall.
The Sonoran coral snake (Micruroides euryxanthus) is a small burrowing snake
that is relatively innocuous.? No human fatalities have been ascribed to this snake.
There are no reported cases of dog or cat fatalities caused by envenomation by this
snake.
Toxic Dose
The severity of a coral snake bite is related to the volume of venom injected and the size
of the victim. Sixty percent of coral snake bites are nonenvenomating. It is suggested that
this is because of a relatively primitive venom delivery apparatus. Approximately 4 to
5 mg of venom is a human lethal dose. A large coral snake can deliver a venom volume
of up to 20 mg. Ihe length of the snake correlates positively with the snake's venom
yield.3 It is estimated that the human fatality rate caused by coral snake envenomation
approaches 10%.4
Toxicokinetics
Venom uptake can be delayed for many hours and can take 7 to 14 days to clear the body.
One report involving envenomated cats describes clinical improvement by 36 hours, and by
48 hours after the bite, cats were moving their limbs.5
Chapter 76 | Snake Bite: Coral Snakes 801
Mechanism of Toxicity
Coral snake venom is primarily neurotoxic with little local tissue reaction and pain at the
 bite site. Several neurotoxins may be involved and in combination act as nondepolarizing
 postsynaptic neurormuscular blocking agents. The net effect of the neurotoxins is a curare-
like syndrome. Additionally the venom induces central nervous system depression, muscle
paralysis, and vasomotor instability
In dogs there have been reports of the venom causing hemolysis with severe anemia and
marked hemoglobinuria.6 The cause of the red blood cell destruction is poorly understood.
H is speculated that it is due to the effects of phospholipase A and its interaction with red
blood cell membranes.6
 Initial experimental work has indicated that a profound drop in blood pressure occurs
if the venom is rapidly absorbed (such as in an intravenous injection). The rapid drop in
 blood pressure is caused by decreases in cardiac output and aortic pressure in response to
sequestration of venous return in the hepatosplanchnic bed.7
 Other Elapidae venom components, which can cause significant local tissue destruction,
include hyaluronidase, proteinase, ribonuclease, desoxyribonuclease, and phosphodiesterase.
clinical Signs
The onset of clinical signs may be delayed for as much as 10 to 18 hours.14-6 The mean time
from bite to onset of clinical signs in one human report was 170 minutes.1 There are few if any
local signs other than the puncture wounds themselves. Occasionally, local pain and regional
paresthesia may occur. The victim then begins to have alterations in mental status, and gen-
eralized weakness and muscle fasciculations develop. Progression to paralysis of the limbs
and respiratory muscles then follows. These signs are consistent with bulbar dysfunction.
The patient is at risk of impending respiratory failure, with pharyngeal spasms, hypersaliva-
tion, cyanosis, and trismus (spasms of the masticatory muscles). Aspiration pneumonia is
the major complication secondary to marked salivation caused by dysphagia.
Clinical signs of coral snake envenomation reported in dogs are acute central nervous
system depression, emesis, excessive salivation, quadriplegia with decreased spinal reflexes
in all limbs, and respiratory paralysis. Dogs may exhibit intravascular hemolysis, anemia,
hemoglobinuria, and morphological alterations of red blood cells. Also reported in dogs are
hypotension and ventricular tachycardia with pulse deficits. Hemolysis has been reported to
Occur within 72 hours after envenomation.6 Blood-tinged urine and diarrhea may be present.
quadriplegia, central nervous system depression, and reduced nociception. Additionally
anisocoria, absent spinal reflexes in all four limbs, hypothermia, and loss of the cutaneous
trunci reflex have been documented.5 Anal tone and micturition are typically normal. In
one study examining anesthetized cats given 2 mg/kg body weight of Eastern coral snake
(Micrurus fulvius) venom intravascularly, the cats manifested the following signs: drop in
sendsan snoauiuds ou uausod inor  ussandap aredsan anssaid poo
by 3 hours, and an increase in myoglobin release.? Even at this high intravascular dose,
hemoglobinuria was not observed in cats. Hemolysis and hemoglobinuria were not evident
in three clinical cases of envenomated cats.5
 In humans clinical signs of envenomation by the Sonoran coral snake are much less
ness of the bitten extremity) abated within 24 hours, and the patients were asymptomatic
by 4 days after envenomation.10
Minimum Database
Baseline laboratory data should include a complete blood cell count, measurement of electro-
lytes, and serum chemistries. Hyperfibrinogenemia and moderate leukocytosis are reported
abnormalities. Creatine kinase can be greatly elevated. Early elevation of creatine kinase is
802SECTlON 4Specific Toxicants
an indicator that envenomation has occurred. In dogs red blood cell morphological changes
include burring and spherocytosis.6 Canine patients in which coral snake envenomation is
suggested should be monitored for progressing anemia and hemoglobinuria. Radiographs of
the thorax may be indicated because aspiration pneumonia is a major complication of coral
snake envenomation secondary to pharyngeal paralysis
Confirmatory Tests
There are no definitive diagnostic tests to confirm that a coral snake bite and envenomation
have occurred.
Treatment
The best field response to coral snake envenomation is rapid transport to a veterinary medi-
cal facility capable of 24-hour critical care and assisted ventilation. Ihe wound site should
be cleaned with a germicidal soap. Suction is of doubtful benefit. Ihe following first-aid
measures should be avoided: incisions, ice, hot packs, and/or electroshock treatment
First-aid treatment advocated in Australia for elapid bites is the immediate use of a com-
pression bandage. This technique is obviously not applicable to bites of the neck and head.
The compression bandage, such as an elastic or crepe bandage material, is rapidly applied
to the bitten extremity, starting at the bite site and progressing to encompass the entire limb.
The bandage should be wrapped as tightly as one would wrap a sprained ankle. This bandage
should not be removed until primary therapy, specifically antivenom, is administered.
The victim should be hospitalized for a minimum of 48 hours for continuous moni-
toring. Pretreatment blood and urine samples should be collected to establish a clinical
laboratory baseline. Of utmost importance is good supportive medical care along with
an appreciation and anticipation of events that might develop. Ihis includes care of a
paralyzed patient and prevention of aspiration pneumonia. Any evidence of respiratory
ration. Cardiac and pulse oximetry monitoring should be started. Fluid administration
through an intravenous catheter should be given at a maintenance rate.Because the onset
of clinical signs can be delayed for hours, extreme vigilance should be maintained in
monitoring the patient.
The only definitive treatment for coral snake envenomation is administration of antivenom
reactive against coral snake (Micrurus fulvius) venom. Antivenom is effective against the
venom of all North American coral snakes except the Sonoran coral snake."l Currently, there
is no approved coral snake antivenom available in the United States. However, studies have
shown protective cross-reactivity with either the Australian tiger snake (Notechis scutafus)12
or the Mexican coral snake (Micrurus)1z.13 antivenoms in the mouse model. Other South
and Central American coral snake antivenoms do not protectively cross-react with North
American Micrurus species of coral snake venom. At this time the most widely used coral
snake antivenom in the United States is Coralmyn (Instituto Bioclon, Mexico) an Fab2
equine origin product. USDA import permits are needed to stock this antivenom; however,
they are not difficult to acquire.
The earlier antivenom is administered, the more effective it is. Once clinical signs of
coral snake envenomation become manifest, they progress with alarming rapidity and are
difficult to reverse. Ihe venom once bound irreversibly damages the postsynapic neurore-
ceptor. Antivenom treatment is recommended in animals with clinical findings of one or
more fang marks from which blood can be expressed or those with a history of the snake
hanging by its mouth from the victim regardless of the absence of neurological abnormali-
ties. However, there is one report of apparent coral snake envenomation in a patient without
visible fang marks.14
The antivenom is produced by inoculating horses with coral snake venom. Once the
horse develops the desired antibody titer, serum is harvested and processed to concentrate
Chapter 76 | Snake Bite: Coral Snakes 803
final product rich in antibodies. Some antivenom manufacturers (e.g., Instituto Bioclon)
then remove the Fc portion of the whole IgG antibody, resulting in antivenom consisting of
the smaller Fab2 binding fragments.
Antivenom should be reconstituted with the provided diluent. It should not be shaken but
can be swirled to facilitate reconstitution. This usually takes between 10 and 15 minutes.
Warming the antivenom vial to body tenmperature aids in dissolution into the liquid state.
Overheating can destroy the proteins and shaking can cause excessive foaming, which
makes it difficult to collect the antivenom into a syringe.
Skin testing to predict allergic reactions to the antivenom is difficult to evaluate in the
veterinary patient. Human victims of snake bites are often subjected to cutaneous hypersen-
sitivity testing before antivenom is administered.'5 A 1:10 dilution of antivenom at 0.02 mL is
injected intradermally. A positive reaction, manifested by a wheal surrounded by erythema,
Occurs within 30 minutes. Drawbacks to skin testing are that it does not guarantee preven-
tion of a severe reaction, has been shown to be not predictive of subsequent reactions, and
the time it takes to perform delays prompt administration of antivenom. Generally a slow
infusion of the antivenom initially with close monitoring will identify those patients who
and pruritus.
Antivenom should be diluted at a ratio of 1 vial to 100 to 250 mL of crystalloid fluids.
 In smaller patients, the clinician should adjust the volume of fluid infusion to prevent fluid
overload of the patient. In one study in which antivenom labeled with radioactive 13liodine
was given intravenously, 85% of the antivenom accumulated at the site of envenomation
within 2 hours. In contrast there was a 1.4% local concentration when the antivenom was
given intramuscularly and a 5.6% local concentration when it was given subcutaneously.16
Antivenom should not be injected into the bite site, and its uptake can be delayed up to
12 hours when it is given intramuscularly. Administration should begin slowly as an intra-
venous infusion. If there is no evidence of an allergic reaction (e.g., nausea, hyperemia of
the inner pinna, piloerection of tail hair, and pruritus), the rate of infusion can be increased.
The entire initial dose should be given within 30 minutes. The patient must then be reevalu-
 aedide a ausn aouas ueaaa a o uissanand iang o pae
andlaboratory measurements.
The dose of antivenom needed is calculated relative to the amount of venom injected and
the body mass of the victim. Smaller patients require higher doses of antivenom because
the dose of venom per kilogram body weight of the victim is higher. The recommended
initial dose is 1 to 2 vials of antivenom. Repeated doses are administered as indicated by the
progression of the syndrome.6 Multiple vials may be necessary to adequately treat severe
envenomations. The clinician must keep in mind that the dose of antivenom is based on the
amount of venom injected in relation to body mass.
Patients with allergic reactions to the antivenom can still receive the antivenom if
needed. It can be given as a slow intravenous drip and piggybacked with diphenhydramine
and possibly epinephrine. Data in both human and veterinary envenomation databases
have not identified a significantly higher reaction rate in patients who have received antive-
nom previously.7.18 Some veterinary patients have received equine origin antivenom yearly
for several consecutive years.17
Allergic reactions though rare are possible when administering antivenom. These may
become manifest in one of three ways: true anaphylaxis, an anaphylactoid reaction, and
delayed serum sickness. Ihe most common reaction to antivenom is an anaphylactoid
tein, such as a blood transfusion. Anaphylactoid reactions can usually be treated by stopping
the antivenom infusion, administering diphenhydramine IV or SC (1 to 2 mg/kg IM or SC),
waiting 5 minutes, and then restarting the infusion of antivenom at a slower rate.
 Stopping the infusion of antivenom and administering epinephrine, corticosteroids, and
a crystalloid fluid infusion usually is effective in controlling anaphylaxis. Patients taking
 beta-blockers must be monitored very closely. Beta-blockers may mask the early onset of
anaphylaxis, which becomes more difficult to reverse as the reaction progresses.
804SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Delayed serum sickness is rare in dogs and cats. This may be because of the smaller
ness usually occurs 7 to 14 days after antivenom administration. If it does occur, treatment
consists of antihistamines, often type 1 and type 2 inhibitors, and/or corticosteroids.
 If antivenom is not available or if its administration is delayed, supportive care includes
respiratory support. Assisted mechanical ventilation can be used but may have to be ermployed
for up to 48 to 72 hours.19
Broad-spectrum antibiotics are recommended in the veterinary patient after envenom-
ation because of the number of pathogenic bacteria found in snakes mouths. This is an area
of controversy in the therapy of human snake bite victims.2.21 The use of corticosteroids in
the treatment of coral snake envenomation is not generally recommended; the justification
for their use is tenuous at best. Treatment of Sonoran coral snake envenomation at this time
is largely empirical because no specific antivenom is available for this venom.22 General
supportive care and response to clinical manifestations are the mainstays of therapy.
Prognosis
The prognosis is typically guarded and is highly dependent on the site of the bite wound,
degree of envenomation, and time interval between the time of bite and seeking treatment.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
There are no definitive gross or histologic changes that can confirm a coral snake bite.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses include tick paralysis, botulism, macadamia nut ingestion (dog)
bromethalin, ionophore poisoning, delayed neuropathy associated with organophosphate
exposure, acute polyneuritis, iatrogenic drug administration, polyradiculoneuritis, and
myasthenia gravis.
References
1. Kitchens C, Van Mierop L: Envenomation by the eastern coral snake (Micrurus fulvius futvius): a study
of 39 victims, JAMA 258:1615-1618, 1987.
2. Lowe C Jr, Limbacher H: Micruroides euryxanthus,the Sonoran coral snake, AZ Med 8:128, 1961.
3. Fix J: Venom yield ofthe North American coral snake and its clinical significance, South Med J73:737-738,
1980.
4. Parrish H, Klan MI: Bites by coral snakes: report of1 representative cases, Am I Med Sci 253:561-568, 1967.
5. Chrisman C, Hopkins A,Ford S,et al: Acute, flaccid quadriplegia in three cats with suspected coral snake
evenomation, I A m Ani Hosp Assoc 32:343349, 1996.
6. Marks S, Mannella C, Schaer M: Coral snake envenomation in the dog: report of four cases and review of
the literature, I Am Anim Hosp A ssoc 26:629-634, 1990.
7. Ramsey H, Taylor W, Boruchow I, etal: Mechanism of shock produced by an elapid snake (Micrurus f fulvius)
venom in dogs, Am I Physiot 222:782-786, 1972.
and treatment, Hamilton, IL, 1978, Drug Intelligence Publications Inc.
9. Russell F: Bites by the Sonoran coral snake Micruroides euryxanthus, Toxicon 5:39-42, 1967.
10. Weis R, Mclsaac R: Cardiovascular and muscular effects of venom from coral snake, Micrurus fulvius,
Toxicon 9:219-228, 1971
11. Antivenin (Micrurus fulvius) (equine origin) (drug circular), Marietta, PA, 1983, Wyeth Laboratories.
12. Wisniewski M, Hill R, Havey I, et al: Australian tiger snake (Notechis scutatus) and Mexican coral snake
(Micruris species) antivenoms prevent death from United States coral snake (Micrurus fulvius fulvius)
venom in a mouse model, I Toxicol Clin Toxicol 41(1):7-10, 2003.
and South American Micrurus envenomations, / Toxicol Clin Toxicol 42(2):171-178, 2004.
14. Norris R, Dart R: Apparent coral snake envenomation in a patient without visible fang marks, Am I Emerg
Med 7:402-405, 1989.
Chapter 76 I Snake Bite: Coral Snakes 805
15. Malasit P, Warrell D, Chanthavanich P: Prediction, prevention, and mechanism of early (anaphylactic)
antivenom reactions in victims of snakebites, Br Med  292:17-20, 1986.
16. Christopher D, Rodning C: Crotalidae envenomation, South Med I79(2):159-162, 1986.
17. Peterson M: Veterinary envenomation database 1984-1994. Unpublished data.
18. McNalley J, Dart R, O'Brien P: Southwestern rattlesnake envenomation database (abstract), Vet Hum
Toxico29:486, 1987.
19. Kerrigan K, Mertz B, Nelson S, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for pit viper envenomation: prospective,
controlled trial, World I Surg 21:369 -372, 1997.
s u sedso ss asa 
1966.
 21. Clark R, Selden B,Furbee B: The incidence of wound infection following crotalid envenomation, JEmerg
Med 11:583-586, 1993.
22. Russell F, Lauritizen L: Antivenins, Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 60:797, 1966.
CHAPTER
Sodium
77
John H. Tegzes, VMD, MA, DABVT
· Athough hypernatremia is a common clinical pathologic finding in dogs and
cats, hypermatremia caused by sodium poisoning is rare. Sodium poisoning can
occur as a result of excess sodiurm exposure or from water deprivation.
· Sources of sodiurm exposure include modeling dough, homemade and commercial
playdough, cooking salt, bottle sterilizing fluids, water softeners, rock salt, sea
water, and iatrogenic sources, such as hypertonic saline and sodium bicarbonate.
Hypernatremia can be a life-threatening clinical problem following exposures
to paintballs and single/repeated doses of activated charcoal (with or without
sorbitol), particularly in small dogs and cats
 Plasma osmolality is largely influenced by sodium; an increase in sodium will
increase osmolality and cause expansion of the extracellular fluid. As a result,
cellular dehydration occurs. The brain is acutely sensitive to sodium changes. If
fluid replacernent occurs too rapidly, neurons will swell, and cerebral edema may
occur.
·  Neurologic clinical signs are preponderant after sodium toxicity and include
depression, trermors, seizures, and coma.
 Treatment must include the slow, judicious use of fluids while carefully monitoring
the animal's neurologic status. In addition, loop diuretics may help to eliminate
the salt load.
Sources
Hypernatremia, a common electrolyte abnormality, can occur either as a result of excess
salt ingestion, as a consequence of water deprivation, or from a variety of metabolic disor-
ders. Salt poisoning in dogs and cats, however, is rare. In dogs and cats, hypernatremia is
most frequently associated with volume depletion secondary to gastrointestinal losses and
osmotic diuresis and free water loss caused by conditions such as diabetes insipidus or heat
stroke.' In addition to an inciting cause, inadequate water intake appears also to be key to
the development and maintenance of hypernatremia.2
o tes ssaoxa jo uosatut Aq pasnes saop u sisosixoi umos jo shodan may ane arau
sure in dogs is modeling dough used in crafts and some formulations of homemade or
commercial playdough. Other possible sources include cooking salt, bottle sterilizing flu-
ids, water softeners, sea water, salt used to deice roads (rock salt), saline emetics, and the
administration of high sodium-containing drugs, such as sodium bicarbonate.l3 Paintballs
contain a number of osmotically active compounds that can lead to fluid loss within the
807
808SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
 gastrointestinal tract that can result in hypernatremia.4s And either single or repeated
doses of activated charcoal, with or without sorbitol, have also resulted in hypernatremia in
small dogs and cats due to fluid movement into the gut.6
Toxic Dose
The lethal dose of sodium chloride in dogs has been reported to be 4 g/kg body weight
(BW).37 One tsp of table salt is approximately 4.5 g of sodium chloride or 75 mEq of
sodium&; therefore the toxic dose equates to less than 1 tsp of salt/kg BW. Homemade play-
dough formulations can contain close to 8 g of sodium chloride/tbsp and signs of toxicity
have been observed in dogs with doses as low as 2 g of sodium chloride/kg Bw. There have
been numerous cases of paintball toxicities in dogs, though the toxic dose is unknown.
Toxicokinetics
Sodium is readily absorbed by oral and parenteral routes of administration. Excess sodium
results in hypernatremia. Hypernatremia exists whenever the serum sodium concentra-
tion exceeds 156 mEq/L in dogs and 161 mEq/L in cats. Osmolality is the concentration
of ions in a solution. Two tbsp of salt contain approximately 60 g of sodium and will raise
the serum osmolality from 280 mOsm/kg to 410 mOsm/kg in a 50-kg adult human (each
gram of sodium adds 34 mOsm of solute).l.? Because serum osmolality and serum sodium
concentrations are proportional, a similar increase in serum sodium would be expected.?
Salt water has an osmolality of 1000 mOsm/ L, and ingestion of small quantities can lead to
hyperosmolality.19 In subtoxic sodium exposures with adequate renal function, brisk diure.
sis will help eliminate the salt load. Only when the sodium intake exceeds the capacity of the
kidneys to eliminate it does a net gain of sodium and loss of water occur.?
Mechanism of Toxicity
Osmolality of the extracellular fluid is largely influenced by sodium. An increase in sodium
will increase plasma osmolality and will cause expansion of the extracellular fluid.! Water
the intracellular fluid volume and the extracellular fluid volume. This results in cellular
dehydration and vascular expansion. Of all the organ systems, the brain is most susceptible
to cellular and tissue shrinkage as a result of its vascular attachment to the calvaria. Vascu-
lar damage that occurs may result in hemorrhage, hematomas, thrombosis, or infarction.10
The water shift that occurs can also lead to extravasation of fluid into the interstitium of
the lungs, causing pulmonary edema. In addition, during chronic hypernatremia, which
develops over 4 to 7 days, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sodium concentrations increase to par-
allel serum sodium concentrations, and brain intracellular osmolality increases. In the
brain, osmoles other than electrolytes are also present, and these prevent the movement of
water across the neuronal cell membrane into the hypernatremic CSF and plasma. If blood
and CSF sodium concentrations are lowered rapidly because of water consumption or IV
replacement, water will move from plasma and CSF into brain cells, causing them to swell
and resulting in cerebral edema.
clinical Signs
Clinical signs caused by salt poisoning may begin with gastrointestinal signs associated
with local tissue irritation and inflarmmation when the exposure is oral.4.5,9 These include
vomiting and diarrhea. Depending on the chronicity of exposure and degree of hyperna-
tremia, signs associated with the central nervous system are most common.? These include
depression, lethargy, muscular rigidity, tremors, polyuria, polydipsia, myoclonus, hyr-
reflexia, terminal seizures, and coma.24.5.9 Dehydration occurs at the cellular level and
may not be obvious clinically.' Other clinical signs reported in clinical case reports include
Chapter 77 | Sodium 809
dehydration, pyrexia, tachypnea, tachycardia, blindness, irregular heart rhythm, and Q-T
 prolongation on ECG.2 In dogs clinical signs become evident when serum sodium concen-
trations exceed 170 mEq/L.
Minimum Database
Serum sodium and electrolyte measurements are used to determine hypernatremia and
other possible electrolyte and acid-base abnormalities. Additionally, measurements to
assess dehydration and renal function include the packed-cell volume, blood urea nitrogen
(BUN), creatinine, total protein, and urine specific gravity. Physical examination measure-
ments to monitor include the systemic blood pressure, heart rate and rhythm, and capillary
refill time.
Confirmatory Tests
 In the live animal, serum and CSF sodium concentrations will be elevated'2; however, hyper-
natremia occurs for a variety of reasons and is therefore not confirmatory of salt exposure
alone. When an animal is evaluated soon after ingesting alarge salt load, vomitus and stom-
ach contents can be analyzed for sodium and may indicate elevated concentrations and con-
frm exposure. Signs of toxicosis can be seen when serum sodium levels exceed 170 mEq/L,
Salt poisoning may be confirmed postmortem by analyzing cerebral sodium levels.
Concentrations greater than 1800 ppm on a wet weight basis are sufficient for a tentative
diagnosis of sodium toxicosis.12
Treatment
I is important that the proper treatment time be taken to correct hypernatremia. If it is cor-
rected too rapidly, it can cause or worsen cerebral edema and elevate intracranial pressure..9
In general, slow correction of hypernatremia is safest. If the animal's neurologic status wors-
ens after fluid therapy is begun, it is likely that cerebral edema is occurring.' Slow, judicious
administration of D,W IV is recommended,14.5 so that sodium levels decrease at a rate
no greater than 1 mEq/L per hour. Estimated replacement fluid volumes can be calculated
using this formula: water deficit = 0.6 × BW in kg × (1 - normal serum sodium/current
serum sodium).19 Additionally, saline elimination can be augmented by administering a
loop diuretic. Furosemide is a loop diuretic that can be given to dogs and cats at 2.2 to
4.4 mg/kg orally, IV, or intramuscularly one to two times daily. 6
Prognosis
 In humans the prognosis is poor when serum sodium concentrations exceed 170 mEq/L,
although humans have survived after initially having serum sodium concentrations greater
than 190 mEq/L without major sequelae.13 In those people who do survive severe hyper-
natremia, critical care is required until the serum sodium concentration is corrected, and
neurologic signs have resolved. Although there are few reports of severe hypernatremia
figurine made of salt flour. This dog, upon first evaluation, had a serum sodium concentra-
tion of 2ll mEq/L and later peaked with a serum sodium concentration of 217 mEq/L. The
cardiac tachyarrhythmias, and respiratory acidosis.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Gross lesions reported in dogs after acute salt ingestion include hemorrhage of the stom-
ach, small intestine, and colon. Acute renal and hepatic necrosis have been seen on
810SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
histopathologic examination.2 Cerebral edema is commonly reported in various species
after salt poisoning.l? Intracranial hemorrhage, hematomas, thrombosis, and infarction
have been observed in humans.10
Differential Diagnoses
Although hypernatremia is a relatively common clinical pathologic finding, salt poisoning
is rare. It is important that the clinician keep all possible causes of hypernatremia in mind.
Hypernatremia associated with water loss can be caused by pituitary diabetes insipidus,
equate access to water, burns, diarrhea, vomiting, and osmotic diuresis caused by acute
renal failure, chronic renal failure, diabetes mellitus, diuretic use, IV solute administra-
tion, and hypoadrenocorticism.' Hypernatremia associated with salt gain can be caused by
increased salt intake, IV hypertonic fluids, IV sodium bicarbonate, hyperaldosteronism,
and hyperadrenocorticism.1
References
1. Hardy RM: Hypernatremia, Vet Clin N A m 19(2):231-240, 1989.
 2. Khanna C, Boermans HJ, Wilcock B: Fatal hypematremia in a dog from salt ingestion, IAm Anim Hosp
Assoc 33:113-117, 1997.
3. Campbell A, Chapman M: Salt/sodium chloride. In Campbell A, Chapman M, editors: Handbook of
poisoning in dogs and cats, Oxford, 20oo, Blackwell Science.
4.
Donaldson CW: Paintball toxicosis in dogs, Vet Med 98(12):995-997, 2003.
5. King JB, Grant DC: Paintball intoxication in a pug, IVECC 17(3):290-293, 2007.
6. Plumb DC: Veterinary drug handbook,ed 7, Ames, IA, 2011, Iowa State University Press.
Clinical veterinary toxicology, Oxford, 1996, Blackwell Science.
 8. Moder KG, Hurley DL: Fatal hypernatremia from exogenous salt intake: report of a case and review of
the literature, Mayo Clin Proc 65:1587-1594, 1990.
9. Feig PU: Hypernatremia and hypertonic syndromes, Med Clin N Amer 65(2):271-290, 1981.
N Engl I Med 291(1):6-10, 1974.
11. Angelos SM, Smith BP, George LW, et al: Treatment of hypernatremia in an acidotic neonatal calf, J Am
Vet Med Assoc 214(9):1364-1367.
13. Addleman M, Pollard A, Grossman RF: Survival after severe hypermatremia due to salt ingestion by an
adult, Am I Med 78:176-178, 1985.
CHAPTER
Sodium
78
Monofluoroacetate
(1080)
Kathy Parton, DVM, MS
 Sodium monofluoroacetate is a potent pesticide used for predator control.
 Clinical signs of toxicosis include vomiting, salivation, urination, defecation,
and hyperesthesia. Affected dogs commonly display wild running and barking
episodes, and vocalization is a consistent feature in poisoned cats.
Clinical pathologic changes include metabolic addosis, hypocalcemia (ionized),
and elevations in serum citrate concentrations.
Treatrent includes seizure control with barbiturates, fluids with bicarbonate
or acetamide, and symptomatic care. Prognosis for clinically affected patients
without treatrment isgrave.
Rapid onset of rigor mortis with extensor rigidity is often observed postmortem.
 odium monofluoroacetate (fluoroacetate, SMFA, and compound 1080) is a pesticide
used to control rodents and other pests in the United States and worldwide. Commonly
termed 1080, this compound was identified as an effective rodenticide in the 1940s. Fluo-
roacetamide (compound 1081) was developed soon afterward as a less toxic alternative to
1080.1 Both compounds are white, odorless, tasteless, water soluble, and highly toxic poi-
sons.? Fluoroacetate also occurs naturally in a variety of plants in Africa (Dichapetalum
cymosum and Dichapetalum toxicarium), Australia (Acacia georginae,Gastralobium spp,
and Oxylobium spp.), and South America (Palicourea margravi). These and other plants
containing fluoroacetate are known to poison livestock. Because these compounds are toxic
to carnivores, they have been manufactured for the control of predators, such as the coyote
(Canis latrans). At the present time, the use of 1080 is restricted to trained, licensed appli-
cators. Although this restriction is intended to control its release in the environment and
to target specific predators, unintentional poisoning of nontargeted animals occurs. In the
United States the only currently registered use of 1080 is in a livestock protection collar for
sheep and goats. There is no currently registered use of 1081 in the United States.3
Compound 1080 is also an important toxic metabolite associated with the chemothera-
peutic anticancer agent 5-fluorouracil and some fluorinated ethanes that may be toxic when
inhaled.46 Clinical signs associated with the adverse effects of 5-fluorouracil and fluori-
nated ethanes resemble those seen with 1080 toxicity.5.6
Sources
Compound 1080 is manufactured in the United States for use in livestock protection collars
for sheep and goats to control predators. The Environmental Protection Agency has tightly
811
812SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
restricted the use of compound 1080 in these colars. Uses of 1080 and 1081 in rodenticides
have been canceled.3 Evidence suggests that unlicensed operators may use illegally acquired
1080 or 1081 to poison pests or predators.
 Poisoning of pets with 1080 or 1081 may result from the ingestion of poisoned rodent
carcasses, particularly when the gastrointestinal tract is consumed, because rodents require
a relatively high dose of fluoroacetate to be killed. Alternatively, pets may be poisoned
intentionally. In New Zealand large quantities of baits containing 0.08% or 0.15% of 1080
are sprayed aerially to control introduced pests, such as the rabbit and brushtail possum
(Trichosurus vulpecula).7 Secondary poisoning of cats and dogs results from the ingestion
of these dead or dying animals.
Toxicokinetics
Animals have different susceptibilities to 1080 (and 1081) poisoning. Ihe reason for the
wide variation in toxicity is not known. Birds are most resistant to poisoning, followed by
(in order of increasing sensitivity) rodents, primates, horses, rabbits, ruminants, and carni-
vores. Because tissue residues are minimal, the ingestion of muscle from a poisoned carcass
is unlikely to cause toxicity in carnivores; however, ingestion of any part of the gastrointes-
tinal tract containing 1080 bait can result in poisoning. Compound i081 has a slower onset
of action, and animals may display fewer neurologic signs.l The toxic dose of 1080 for dogs
or cats is as little as 0.05 mg/kg body weight (Table 78-1). Ihe quantity of 1081 necessary to
kill dogs, rabbits, and sheep is two to five times more than the i080 dose.!
Fluoroacetate is readily absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract and lungs and through
cuts or abrasions in the skin but is poorly absorbed across intact skin. Compound 1080 is
distributed into soft tissues and organs. It was detected in the milk of ewes fed 1080 baits
at 0.25 mg/kg body weight.8 Fluoroacetate is metabolized to toxic fluorocitrate in the liver.
 Both cormpounds are excreted in the urine. The elimination half-life is ll hours for sheep,
5.5 hours for goats, 9.0 hours for possums, 1.1 hours for rabbits, and 2 hours for mice.8 Ihey
are not known to accumulate in any one tissue.!
Mechanism of Toxicity
The classic theory of 1080 poisoning is the so-called lethal synthesis effect on the Krebs or
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle (Figure 78-1). Fluoroacetate and fluoroacetamide combine
with acetyl coenzyme A (CoA) to form fluoroacetyl CoA, which then combines with oxalo-
acetate to produce fluorocitrate. Fluorocitrate inhibits aconitase and the oxidation of citric
acid, resulting in blockage of the TCA cycle, energy depletion, citric and lactic acid accu-
mulation, and a decrease in blood pH.2 The inhibition of aconitase interferes with cellular
Table 78-1
Toxic Doses of 1080 in Select Species
Oral Lethal Dose
LD50
Species
(mg/kg body weight)
(mg/kg body weight)
Cat
0.3-0.5
0.20 (IV)
Dog
0.06-0.2
0.05-1
Cattle, sheep, and goats
0.15-0.7
0.25-0.5
Horse
0.5-2.75
0.35-0.55
Possum
0.3
Pigs
0.3
0.4-1
Prairie dogs (Cynomys ludovicianus)
0.173
Rabbit
0.8
Rodents (rats and mice)
2-8
IV, Intravenous, LDs, median lethal dose.
Chapter 78 | Sodium Monofluoroacetate (1080) 813
Fluoroacetate +Acetyl-CoA
(or fluoroacetamide)
Fluorocitrate
Fluoroacetyl-CoA
Citrate
Oxaloacetate
cis-Aconitate]
Aconitase
socitrate
Figure 78-l Classic theory: fluoroacetate inhibits aconitase in the Krebs-TCA cycle.
respiration and the metabolism of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins.12 Evidence suggests
that fluorocitrate is converted to 4-hydroxy-frans-aconitate, which binds very tightly to
aconitase, thereby inactivating it.? The end result is an accumulation of citrate, which binds
with serum calcium. The decrease in available ionized calcium has been shown to prolong
the QT interval in electrocardiograms in cats. In addition, evidence suggests that fluo-
rDacetate and/or fluorocitrate inhibits other enzymes including succinate dehydrogenase,
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase, and the neurotransmitter glutamate. The accumulation
of citrate can have an inhibitory effect on phosphofructokinase and acetylcholine produc-
tion.ll Fluorocitrate has been shown to inhibit nitrous oxide production in rats, suggesting
that pain and hyperalgesia may be attenuated.12
Clinical Signs
Clinical signs may appear 30 minutes to as long as 2 to 4 hours after ingestion, depending
on the dose. Ihe variable latent period is a result of the delay in conversion of fluoroacetate
or fluoroacetamide to fluorocitrate and its accumulation to toxic levels. Carnivores display
central nervous system (CNS) excitation and gastrointestinal hyperactivity. Neurologic
signs in dogs include anxiety, frenzied behavior, such as running and howling, and hyper-
esthesia. Carnivores usualy vomit, salivate, urinate, and defecate after ingesting 1080.2
A hypermotile gastrointestinal tract with tenesmus also occurs. Hyperthermia has been
reported in dogs.2 Convulsions begin after a brief period of hyperexcitability. Tonic and
clonic convulsions may occur between periods of frenzied and normal behavior. Dogs in
convulsions leads to respiratory failure. The animal becomes weaker as the cellular energy
supplies decrease. Eventually the animal becomes comatose, and death usually occurs from
Cats may have both cardiac dysfunction and neurologic signs. They may become
depressed or excited, vocalize, and be hyperesthetic to light and touch. Hypothermia (37° C
or 99° F), cardiac arrhythmias, and episodes of bradycardia between convulsions also have
been reported in cats.12.13
Minimum Database
Clinical pathologic findings of hyperglycemia and metabolic acidosis are associated with
1080 poisoning. A twofold increase in serum glucose has been reported.12 In dogs citrate
levels are elevated at least two or more times in serum and heart; however, high levels
are not pathognomonic of 1080 ingestion because citrate is a normal substance of cells.12
814SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Hypocalcemia also has been associated with 1080 poisonings. Research in cats has shown
that ionized calcium rather than total serum calcium is altered.
Confirmatory Tests
A diagnosis of 1080 poisoning is based on the clinical signs, access to the poison, and analy-
sis of the compound in bait or vomitus. Residues of 1080 are most likely to be found in vom-
itus or stomach contents. A minimum of 50 g of vomitus or stomach contents is required for
the analysis. Animals that ingest a minimum lethal dose of 1080 are unlikely to have detect-
able levels in body tissue. However, detectable fluoroacetate levels in urine and kidneys have
been found in dead animals. In experimentally poisoned animals, tissue fluoroacetate levels
were considerably below 100 ppb.14
Treatment
Because of the rapid onset of clinical signs, it is difficult to treat animals after they have
ingested 1080. Often the animal dies before the veterinarian has the chance to examine the
animal.
Recent successes in Australia suggest that treating animals with sodium bicarbonate
with pentobarbital sodium, place an intravenous catheter, and connect it to a saline (0.9%
NaCl) drip. Sodium bicarbonate (8.4% wt/vol) is infused during the next 15 to 30 minutes
through the giving port at the dose rate of 300 mg/kg (3.6 mL/kg) body weight. Alterna-
tively, half of the calculated dose may be given as a bolus and the remainder infused slowly.
The 8.4% sodium bicarbonate solution is approximately equivalent to 1 mEq/mL each of
sodium and bicarbonate. Administration of sodium bicarbonate may worsen hypocalcemia
and cause hypokalemia.16 Ionized calcium and potassium levels should be monitored and
supplemented as required. Decontamination with activated charcoal and a laxative (e.g.,.
sorbitol) is also recommended. In the anesthetized dog, the activated charcoal should be
given through a stomach tube with the animal intubated to prevent aspiration pneumonia.
A recent study in rats questions the efficacy of activated charcoal in 1080 poisoning, but the
authors suggest further investigation is necessary before recommending colestipol as an
alternative sorbent.16 Anesthesia and fluids are maintained until the animal appears to be
recovering (e.g., has no convulsions), usually after about 12 to 24 hours. Animals are gener-
ally discharged within 48 hours after initial examination by the veterinarian.
A successful approach (in New Zealand) uses acetamide in 5% dextrose. The treatment
replaces glycerol monoacetate (monacetin, glyceryl monoacetate [GMA]), used in the
treatment of fluoroacetate poisoning in humans and animals. It may be difficult to obtain
GMA from chemical suppliers, and the intramuscular injections are very painful. The GMA
and acetamide are believed to decrease citrate levels by competing with fluoroacetate. The
dose of acetamide, based on current practice in New Zealand, uses 15 g (approximately 2
tsp) of acetamide in 1 L of 5% dextrose. An emetic is given if clinical signs are absent but this
is controversial given the short latent period and the risk of triggering seizures. Decontami-
nation with activated charcoal and laxatives may be indicated whether or not clinical signs
usually up to 24 hours. The combination of 5% dextrose with acetamide is administered at
an initial dose of 20 to 25 mL/kg body weight over a 60-minute period followed by approxi-
mately 5 mL/kg per hour for the next 12 to 18 hours as needed. For an average size dog (20
kg) a total of 2 L of 5% dextrose containing acetamide is given. This dose is comparable
with experimentally poisoned rats pretreated with acetamide at a dose of 1.25 g/kg that
survived after a toxic dose of fluoroacetate was administered.19 The heart rate may greatly
increase with acetamide treatment. If treating a cat with fluoroacetate poisoning, the dose
should be reduced by at least 75%. A higher dose (10% solution of acetamide in 5% dextrose
at 7 to 10 mL/kg over 30 minutes and then 5 mL/kg every 4 hours for 24 to 48 hours) has
op a u aessaa aq oi sade mq uaanl u  paeoape ua
Chapter 78 | Sodium Monofluoroacetate (1080) 815
Although researchers in New Zealand are pursuing antidotes for 1080 poisoning, no
commercial products have been developed at this writing.20
In countries such as New Zealand and Australia, where the risk of exposure to 1080 is
high, the use of dog muzzles is the best rmeans of preventing dogs from being poisoned.
A well-fitted wire muzzle that prevents the dog from scavenging dead carcasses is money
well spent.
Prognosis
l pue pasaut raot no osot yo umoue au uo supuadap aaeia ot nood st sisouaaid au
severity of clinical signs at initial evaluation. The prognosis is improved with early acet-
'aies aaioddns poog pue juaueanl aeuoqesnq umpos io apie
Gross and Histologic Lesions
 Postmortem findings in carnivores exposed to 1080 are nonspecific. Rigor mortis is rapid in
onset. Hypoxia as a result of convulsions may cause general cyanosis, congestion of visceral
organs, agonal petechial hemorrhages on the myocardium, and pulmonary congestion.
Other findings may include an empty stomach, enteritis, and a flaccid, pale heart in dias-
tole. Histopathologic changes of the brain may include edema and lymphocytic infltration
of perivascular tissue.2
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses associated with convulsions or CNS disorders include strychnine
chlorinated hydrocarbons, lead, hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia, garbage intoxication
(penitrem A and roquefortine), brain injury, cardioglycosides, taxine (Japanese yew), and
methylxanthines. Strychnine-poisoned dogs and cats are extremely sensitive to noise and
other external stimuli, which is uncharacteristic of fluoroacetate poisoning. Ihe strych-
nine-poisoned dog is not likely to show frenzied running behavior or vomit, urinate, and
defecate when poisoned. Chlorinated hydrocarbons may produce hyperthermia and con-
vulsions, but evacuation of the gastrointestinal tract and urination are not typical clinical
signs. Lead poisoning (plumbism) may cause similar CNS signs (convulsions, barking, run-
ning fits, and tremors). Lead poisoning is associated with gastrointestinal pain and vomit-
ing, whereas 1080 intoxication results in rapid evacuation of the gastrointestinal tract and
bladder. The clinical signs of lead poisoning tend to be intermittent and usually follow a
longer course. Ihe other differential diagnoses listed above may cause varying degrees of
CNS stimulation, tremors, gastrointestinal signs, or sudden death; however, the frenzied,
vocalized excitation seen with 1080 poisoning is uncharacteristic.
References
1. Parton K,Bruere AN, Chambers JP: Fluoroacetate. Veterinary clinical toxicology, publication 249, ed 3,
Palmerston North, New Zealand, 2006, Veterinary Continuing Education.
2. Osweiler GD, Carson TL, Buck WB,et al: Clinical and diagnostic veterinary toxicology, ed 3, Dubuque,
IA, 1983, Kendall/Hunt Publishing Co.
3.EPA:Reregistration eligibtity decision (RED) sodium fluoroacetate:prevention pesticides and toxic
substances, EPA 738-5-95-025, Washington, DC, 1995, Environmental Protection Agency.
4. Arellano M, Malet-Martino M, Martino F,et al: The anti-cancer drug 5-fuorouracil is metabolized
by the isolated perfused rat liver and in rats into highly toxic fluoroacetate, Br J Cancer 77(1):79-86,
1998.
5. Keller DA, Roe DC, Lieder PH: Fluoroacetate-mediated toxicity of fuorinated ethanes, Fund Appl Toxicol
30(2):213-219, 1996.
6. Dorman DC: Neurotoxic drugsin dogs and cats In Bonagura ID,editor Kik's current veterinry therapy
xii, Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders.
7. Eason CT: International science workshop on the environmental toxicology ofsodium monofuoroacetate
(1080), Surveillance 22(1):24-25, 1995.
816SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
sodium fluoroacetate (1o80) in relation to its use as a pest control tool in New Zealand, NZI of Ecology
35:1-20, 2011.
9. Lauble H, Kennedy MC, Emptage MH, et al: The reaction of fluorocitrate with aconitase and the crystal
stnucture ofthe enzyme-inhibitor complex, Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 93:13699-13703, 1996.
10. Roy (Shapira) A, Taitelman U, Bursytein S: Evaluation of the role of ionized calcium in sodium fluoro-
acetate (*1080") poisoning, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 56:216-220, 1980.
11. Twigg LE, Parker RW: Is sodium fluoroacetate (1080) a humane poison? The influence of mode of action,
physiological effects, and target specificity, Animal Welfare 19:249-263, 2010.
12. Sun XC, Chen WN, Li SQ, et al: Fluorocitrate, an inhibitor of glial metabolism, inhibits the up-regulation
of NOS expression, activity and NO production in the spinal cord induced by formalin test in rats,
Neurochem Res 34:351-359, 2009.
13. Bosakowski T, Levin AA: Serum citrate as a peripheral indicator of fluoroacetate and fluorocitrate toxicity
in rats and dogs, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 85(3):428-436, 1986.
14. Gammie J: Sodium fuoroacetate poisoning in a cat, Can Vet I 21(2):64, 1980.
15.
Hugghins EJ, Casper HH, Ward CD: Tissue fluoroacetate residues in prairie dogs dosed with low-level
sodium monofluoroacetate, I A ssoc Anal Chem 71(3):579-581, 1988.
16.
Churchill R: 1080 sodium fuoroacetate toxicity in dogs #3796.Control and therapy series,Sydney,1996,
17.Plumb DC: Veterinary drug handbook,ed 6, Ames, IA, 2008, Wiley-John & Sons.
18. Norris WR, Temple WA, Eason CT, et al: Sorption of fluoroacetate (compound 1080) by colestipol,
activated charcoal and anion-exchange resins in vitro and gastrointestinal decontamination in rats, Vet
Hum Toxicol 42(5):269-275, 2000.
19. McLaren J: Treatment of 1080 poisoning in dogs, Vetscrip XII(2):3, 1999.
 20. Gorniak SL, Palmermo-Neto J, Spinosa HS: Effects of acetamide on experimentally induced Palicourea
marcgravii (St Hill) poisoning in rats, Vet Hum Toxicol 36(2):101-102, 1994.
21. Cook CJ, Eason CT, Wickstrom W, et al: Development of antidotes for sodium monofluoroacetate
(1080), Biomarkers 6(1):72-76, 2001.
CHAPTER
79
Spider Envenomation:
Black Widow
Michael E. Peterson, DVM, MS
Jude McNally, RPh, DABAT
Spiders of the genus Latrodectus are typically globose black spiders; females
pumoy ane siapds asaul uauopqe aur uo watred aaueio-pan sseaimoy ue aay
in every state in the United States except Alaska.
 The spider controls the amount of venorn injected into its prey. LDso values range
from 0.43 to 1.39 mg/kg. A single bite can be fatal to companion animals. There
are virtually no local signs of tissue destruction at the bite site.
 Clinical signs can last up to 7 days; however, weakness and some muscle pain
may persist for weeks. These signs include progressive muscle fasciculations,
severe pain, cramping of large muscle masses, abdominal rigidity without 
tenderness, marked restlessness, hypertension, bronchorrhea, regional
numbness, and excessive salivation.
· Minimurn database includes CBC, serum chermistries, urinalysis, and monitoring
of general vital signs including blood pressure.
Treatment may include the use of Acalatro (Latrodectus, equine origin Fab2,
Instituto Biclon, Mexico) antivenom given IV
Sources
Black widow spiders belong to the genus Latrodectus, of which there are five primary spe-
cies residing in the United States. These are L. mactans, L. variolus, L. bishopi, L. hesperus,
and L. geometricus.
Latrodectus mactansis the preponderant species found throughout North America. Lat-
rodectus variolus is found in the eastern United States north to Canada. Latrodectus bishopi,
also known as the red widow, resides in central Florida. Ihe western black widow is Latro-
dectus hesperus. Finally the brown widow of southern Florida is Latrodectus geometricus.
 Black widow spiders are found throughout the continental United States and north into
the southern Canadian provinces. These spiders inhabit funnel-shaped webs in dry, dimly
lit, and secluded places. The web is irregularly shaped, has a tattered “cobwebbed” appear-
ance, and is usually found in corners. The spiders are commonly found around houses
where outside lights help to attract prey insects. Another spider usually quickly reinhabits
web locations if the original inhabitant is displaced.
Male black widow spiders are of little medical importance because they are unable to
penetrate mammalian skin because of the small size of their jaws. Female spiders can be
20 times larger than the males. The females can be up to 2 to 2.5 cm long and are capable of
life-threatening envenomations. These spiders have several common pseudonyms, includ-
ing the shoe button and the hourglass spider. The female can be identified by the hourglass
817
818SECTlON 4 SpecificToxicants
pattern, red or orange in color, on the ventral aspect of her shiny, globose black abdo-
men (Color Plate 79-1). Ihe hourglass becomes more prominent as the spider ages. It is
important to recognize the immature female, which has a colorful pattern of red, brown,
and beige on the dorsal surface of her abdomen, because she is fully capable of deliver-
ing a severe envenomation (Color Plate 79-2). When hatching, these spiders are red, but
with each subsequent molt the black color becomes more extensively distributed. With the
exception of females protecting a tear-shaped, whitish egg sac, these spiders are usually not
aggressive. Black widow spiders bite defensively when the web is disturbed.
Black widow spiders control the amount of venom they inject using striated muscle,
which squeezes the venom glands and injects a metered amount of venom into the victim.
Latrodectus bites do not necessarily indicate envenomation. It is estimated that 15% of bites
in humans are nonenvenomating.2
Several animal species are extremely sensitive to black widow spider venom. Those of
greatest economic importance are camels and horses.3 Cats are very sensitive to the venom,
and deaths are common in envenomated victims. In the dog the toxin provokes severe clini-
cal signs, although they are considered more resistant than cats.4
Toxic Dose
A single bite is fully capable of delivering a lethal dose of venom to companion animals. Evi-
 a seae u ua saids u a asau si n a ie sisans aua
the toxicity of most snake venoms.35 Comparative tests of venoms have demonstrated that
the venom of L. geormetricus (the brown widow) is the most potent of the five species, with a
median lethal dose (LDso) of 0.43 mg/kg body weight. Ihe LDso of the black widow venom
(L. mactans) is 1.39 mg/kg.3 Although there are antigenic differences in these venoms, the
toxic fraction appears to be the same. Ihe differences in median lethal doses of venoms must
reflect differences in the volume percentage of the toxic fraction.3 Although some contro-
gduds u isamo pue une u isauail si Aixoi uouan iei sieadde ii sisixa asian
 The incidence of black widow spider bites in veterinary medicine is unknown. Diagnosis
of Latrodecfus envenomation in domestic animals is rarely made, primarily because of veter-
inary unfamiliarity with the clinical manifestations and rarely are bites observed by owners.
Toxicokinetics
Although the toxicokinetics have not been well delineated, some information is known from
human cases. The average duration of the syndrome in humans is 3 to 6 days.7 Untreated
patients have exhibited clinical signs for a period of 7 days, but weakness and some muscle
s'saam ion isisiad Ae asee pue ued
Mechanism of Toxicity
Black widow spider venom contains no locally acting toxins that provoke a significant
inflammatory reaction at the bite site. There are several toxic components consisting of
five or six biologically active proteins. Ihese include a potent mammalian neurotoxin
called alpha-latrotoxin, which induces neurotransmitter release from nerve terminals.
 Initially the neurotoxin stimulates small end-plate action potentials, but later there is a
block in neurotransmission, most likely caused by depletion of synaptic vesicle contents
aa go uu  isan cn sas ue xa a ui rsu an e
coproteins and/or gangliosides on the neuromuscular synaptic membranes, thus allowing
a channel to form for monovalent cation exchange that locks open. This depolarization
promotes calcium-independent release of the neurotransmitters acetylcholine and norepi-
nephrine (and others) down concentration gradients and then inhibits their subsequent
reuptake.? Acetylcholine, noradrenaline, dopamine, glutamate, and enkephalin systems are
all susceptible to the toxin.10
Chapter 79 |Spider Envenomation:Black widow 819
clinical Signs
The onset of clinical signs usually occurs during the first 8 hours after envenomation. Local
tissue changes are generally absent, and swelling at the bite site is uncommon. Small punc-
ture wounds may be visible, and a mild erythema may develop. These changes are extremely
difficult to see in animal victims because of skin pigmentation and dense hair coats.
Systemic manifestations depend on two sets of variables. Spider-dependent variables
include the size of the spider, motivation of the spider (e.g., quantity of venom it decides to
inject), and time of year (alters venom toxicity). Victim-dependent variables include species
and size of victim (e.g., smaller victims receive a potentially higher dose in terms of mil-
ligrams of venom per kilogram body weight), location of bite, underlying health problerms,
and age of the victim (e.g., pediatric and geriatric victims are more severely aflicted).
Envenomated animals often lose up to 20% of their body weight within the first 24 hours
after the bite. In contrast, in complete starvation (with water deprivation), at most a 12%
 ssaauan sop u paaasqo uao si ssau euian eun t'siso sso liam
adjacent lymph nodes may precede hyperesthesia, progressive muscle pain, and fascicula-
tions in the affected region. Cramping of the muscles of the chest, abdomen, and lumbar
and other large muscle masses is common. Abdominal rigidity without tenderness is a hall-
mark sign of Latrodectus envenomation. Ihe condition is extremely painful in moderate
to severe envenomations. Significant respiratory distress may become evident if muscle
cramping is marked. Marked restlessnes, writhing, and muscular contortions may occur.
sion and tachycardia should be anticipated. In high-risk patients (i.e., those with underlying
health problems or at either end of the age spectrum), these cardiovascular manifestations
may lead to stroke, exacerbation of heart failure, and possibly myocardial ischemia. Signs of
motor restlessness may abate over 10 to 20 hours with the possible onset of paralysis. Death
is usually due to respiratory or cardiovascular collapse.
Cats are extremely susceptible to Lafrodectus venom. In one study, 20 of 22 feline victims
died subsequent to black widow envenomation; there was an average survival time of 115
hours after the bite.4 Paralytic signs may appear early and are particularly marked. Severe
pain is manifested by howling and loud vocalizations. Excessive salivation and restlessness
are common, and vomiting and diarrhea may occur. Muscular tremors, cramping, ataxia,
and inability to stand precede complete paralysis. The body becomes adynamic and atonic.
A Cheyne-Stokes respiratory pattern may develop, and death ensues.
Envenomated pregnant women and animals have shown significant clinical signs; how-
ever, the pregnancies were unaffected. These individuals were treated with antivenom,
which had no negative effects on the fetuses or pregnancies.!l
Minimum Database
The patient's vital signs should be measured frequently during the first 8 to 12 hours in the
hospital. Hypertension is a significant threat. Serum chemistries and a complete blood cell
count should be obtained. Elevations in creatinine phosphokinase can occur along with
leukocytosis and hyperglycemia. Urine production can be decreased, and the urine may
have an elevated specific gravity, possibly accompanied by albuminuria.
Confirmatory Tests
There are no diagnostic tests that can definitively confirm that a black widow spider bite has
Occurred. Cats, however, often vomit up the spider.
Treatment
First aid is essentially of no value in the treatment of Latrodecfus envenomation. Early iden-
tification of bites is difficult unless the event is actually witnessed by the owner. Patients
820SECTlON 4 SpecificToxicants
brought in for veterinary care are usually severely envenomated because the diagnosis
relies on exhibited clinical signs. Iherefore the incidence of “dry” and mild bites is incon-
sequential, and all diagnosed cases should be treated aggressively. The victim should be
hospitalized for a minimum of 48 hours.
The primary treatment for black widow spider envenomation is administration of spe-
cific antivenom (Acalatro [Latrodectus, equine origin Fab2, Instituto Bioclon, Mexico])
[This antivenom is in final FDA trials for human use and can be imported with a USDA
import permit.] This antivenom is supplied in a lyophilized state and reconstitutes rapidly
 into the supplied diluent. Antivenom should be administered by slow intravenous infusion.
Allergic reactions can occur, and anaphylaxis is possible. Diluting the antivenom into a
100-mL saline solution and administering over a 30-minute time frame may decrease the
risk of allergic reactions. Close monitoring of patients receiving beta-blockers is important
because these compounds can mask the initial signs of anaphylaxis, which is more difficult
to control as it progresses. Skin testing may be done, but the results are difficult to interpret
and can be unreliable. The inner ear pinna should be monitored while the antivenom is
sowly administered. If hyperemia develops, the infusion is discontinued, and diphenhy-
dramine (2 to 4 mg/kg SC) is administered. If the allergic manifestations abate, the infusion
of antivenom can then be restarted at a slower rate. If the reaction recurs, the infusion is
stopped, and consultation is sought. True anaphylactic reactions are rare. A human study
of 2062 antivenom-treated patients reported anaphylactic reactions in only 1l recipients
(0.54%), none of which were fatal.12 Ihe veterinary clinician should be prepared to respond
to an anaphylactic reaction by having the appropriate drugs, oxygen, and resuscitation
equipment available before administering the antivenom. The most common reaction to
the antivenom is a complement-mediated anaphylactoid type of reaction, such as occurs
with rapid infusion of a foreign protein (e.g., as occurs not uncommonly with rapid blood
 transfusions). Indicated therapy should not be withheld because of fear of life-threatening
reactions to the antivenom. The risks are low if antivenom is used properly. Antivenom
treatment provides the most permanent and quickest relief of the envenomation syndrome,
usually within 30 minutes of administration. One vial is usually sufficient, but a second vial
may be indicated in severe envenomations. Delayed allergic reactions (serum sickness) are
rare because of the low volume of foreign protein infused.
Extreme care should be taken with the administration of intravenous fluids. There
is a high risk of hypertension developing in these patients as part of the envenomation
syndrome. If specifc antivenom is not available, 10% calcium gluconate has been recom-
mended in the past to aid in abating the muscle cramping and decreasing the severity of the
pain. However, calcium gluconate is no longer recommended for widow spider envenom-
ation. Benzodiazepines are more efficacious than muscle relaxants for treatment of widow
spider envenomation. Unlike the antivenom these drugs do not correct the hypertension or
respiratory distress often seen with this envenomation syndrome.
Prognosis
The prognosis of Latrodectus envenomation is uncertain for several days, and complete
recovery may take weeks.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
shop u panodau saur sioist pue ssaie saisas siouip aniuap ou aie aia
and cats.
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses include acute abdomen, intervertebral disk disease, bromethalin,
and rabies (in cats).
Chapter 79 | Spider Envenomation: Black widow 821
References
1. Hunt GR: Bites and stings of uncommon arthropods. I. Spiders, Postgrad Med70:91-102, 1981.
2. Key GF: A comparison of calcium gluconate and methocarbamol in the treatment of Latrodectism (black
widow spider envenomation), Am I Trop Med Hyg 30(1):273-277, 1981.
3. Rauber A: Black widow spider bites, I Toxicol Clin Toxicol 21(4&5):473-485, 1983-84.
4. Maretic Z: Beobachtungen uber Pathologie und Klinik des Latrodektismus in Istrien (1948-1950), Acta
Trop 8(136), 1951.
5. Kobernick M: Black widow spider bite, Am Fam Physician 29:241-245, 1984.
6. Keegan HC, Hedeen RA, Whittemore FW: Seasonal variation in venom of widow spiders, Am I Trop
Med Hyg 9:477-479, 1960.
7. Russell F: Comparative pharmacology of some animal toxins, Fed Proc 26:193, 1967.
8. Rauber AP: The case ofthe red widow. A review oflatrodectism, Vet Hum Toxicol 22(2):39-41, 1980.
9. Grasso A, Alema S, Rufini S, et al: Black widow spider toxin: effect on catecholamine release and cation
permeability in a neurosecretory cell line (PC12). In Eaker D, Wadstrom T, editors: Natural toxins.
Proceedings ofthe 6th International Symposium on A nimal, Plant and Microbial Toxins, New York, 1979,
Pergamon Press.
10. Knipper M, Madeddu L, Breer H,et al: Black widow spider venom-induced release of neurotransmitters:
somes by multiple components, Neuroscience 19(1):55-62, 1986.
11. Russell FE, Marcus P, Streng JA: Black widow spider envenomation during pregnancy. Report of a case,
Toxicon 17:188-189, 1979.
12. Sutherland SK: Use of antivenin, Med I Aust 2:620-623, 1978.
CHAPTER
80
Spider Envenomation:
Brown Recluse
Michael E. Peterson, DVM, MS
Jude McNally, RPh, DABAT
referred to as violin spiders because of a violin-shaped marking on the dorsum
of the cephalothorax (Color Plate 8O-l). Pets are often bitten when lying down,
trapping the spider between the bedding and themselves.
·A single bite from a brown recluse spider can inflict a lethal envenomation. The
initial bite often goes undetected, but it can develop into a severe dermonecrotic
lesion characterized by erythema, bullae formation, scabbing, and sloughing of 
affected tissue, with very slow healing.
· Severe systemic signs are uncommon. The most prevalent is a hemolytic anemia
with a negative Ccombs' test result.
. The minimum database should include a complete blood cell count, coagulation
profile, serum chemistry panel including electrolytes, and urinalysis.
Treatment can include wound management (cleansing and debridement),
a broad-spectrum antibiotic, corticosteroids, antinflarmmatory drugs, and
analgesics.
· Prognosis is good for anirmals that show only localized necrotic lesions.
 Manifestations of systernic clinical signs require aggressive rmonitoring and
treatrment and a guarded prognosis.
Commonly misdiagnosed in areas with no endemic Loxosceles species. In
humans most mis-diagnosed brown recluse bites are actually methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus(MRsA)lesions.
Sources
The venom from spiders of the genus Loxosceles, fhe most famous being Loxosceles reclusa
-is srsxg go saiads i are ara susosiod sas asis us (raids asan uo)
ders resident in the United States. These spiders inhabit the south and south central states
from Georgia through Texas and north to southern Wisconsin. Several other species live
in the western United States. At least five species indigenous to the United States have been
associated with necrotic arachnidism: L. reciusa, L. rufescens, L. arizonica, L. unicolor, and
L. laeta.! Loxosceles spiders vary in length from 6 to 20 mm. Their long legs allow them to
move rapidly. The range of color found on these spiders runs from gray to orange-red, pale
brown, and dusk. They are commonly called violin spiders because of the violin-shaped
marking on the dorsum of the cephalothorax, with the neck of the violin pointing toward
the abdomen. This feature, however, can be faint depending on the species or when the
spider last molted. These spiders can be differentiated from regular brown garden spiders
823
824SECTlON 4SpecificToxicants
pairs of eyes.
 Loxosceles spiders are nocturnal and are generally active from spring through fall. They
are obviously reclusive and live in dark, secluded locations, such as areas with rocks and
 surface debris. Ihey venture out to prey upon insects and other spiders. These spiders are
often found in and around human habitations. They like warm, undisturbed locations, such
as storage sheds or behind the clothes washer and dryer. Iheir webs have a bluish hue.
ened. Domestic pets are usually bitten when they lie down and trap the spider between the
bedding and themselves.
Toxic Dose and Toxicokinetics
A single bite can inflict a lethal envenomation. The average female Loxosceles spider carries
a venom volume of approximately 0.36 mcL. Factors that appear to influence venom volume
include the sex of the spider (males of equivalent size generate half of the female volume)
and its size (larger, mature spiders can deliver a larger venom volume). Interestingly, pro-
longed periods of abnormal high or low environmental temperatures induce lower venom
volumes.
Mechanism of Toxicity
The primary function of spider venom is to digest an impending meal by enzymatically
destroying the victim's tissue. When fractionated by gel electrophoresis, the venom con-
sists of eight major protein bands and four minor bands. Identified fractions include
hyaluronidase, esterase, alkaline phosphatase, lipase, and 5'-ribonucleotide phosphorylase.
A 32,000-Da protein fraction, sphingomyelinase D, is the primary dermonecrotic factor.2
It is thought that sphingomyelinase D exerts its effect by binding to cell membranes
and chemotactically influencing polymorphonuclear leukocytes.2 Histologically the lesions
resemble the Arthus and Shwartzman phenomena. Ihese reactions can be inhibited in
rabbits by pretreating the victim with nitrogen mustard, which depletes polymorphonu-
clear neutrophils.
Another important mechanism is the inactivation of serum hemolytic complement. The
venom induces rapid coagulation and occlusion of small capillaries, causing subsequent
tissue necrosis.
 The toxin also prolongs the activated partial thromboplastin time, and depletes clotting
factors VIII, 1X, XI, and X11.3
When serum C-reactive protein and calcium are available, sphingomyelinase D has a
subsequent activation of the prostaglandin cascade. Serum amyloid protein is required for
this platelet aggregation to occur.
quently act both as emboli and as inflarmmatory mediators. It is generally believed that the
victim's immune response to Loxosceles venom ultimately determines the severity of the
ensuing lesion.3
clinical Signs
Clinical diagnosis is difficult because of the initially mild appearance of the lesion.4 The
aaun u jo je ai se aa aq pa st aq a jo Aiaas us
the bite site, and the victim's inmmune status. Dogs are highly susceptible to the effects of
the venom.
P e aq  a sas as aq u  g ame aq n a  a
stinging sensation for up to 8 hours after the bite. Subsequent pruritus and soreness develop
as vasoconstriction causes local ischemia. Edema follows with a classic "bull's-eye" lesion
Chapter 80 | Spider Envenomation: Brown Recluse 825
(an erythematous area inside of which is a pale ischemic region that develops a dark
aaaan ssaoid a ure snianina ai (sai tisal al se raan sii
as the effects of gravity come into play, leaving an eccentric lesion with the original center
a   s  o    a a i s 
developing below. Ihe eschar sloughs in approximately 2 to 5 weeks, leaving an indolent
ulcer, which usually does not penetrate into the muscle. Lesions in adipose tissue can be
extensive. Healing is slow, and these ulcers may persist for months, leaving a deep scar. In
humans local swelling and persistent segmental cutaneous anesthesia have resulted from
envenomations to the neck and head region.5
Systemic signs occur less commonly but can be life threatening. The most prevalent sign
is a hemolytic anemia with significant hemoglobinuria, usually beginning within 24 hours
afterenvenomation and persisting forapproximately 1 week.This anemia usually gives a neg
weakness, maculopapular rash, and leukocytosis. In humans the systemic syndrome is often
described as a severe flu-like condition. Hemoglobinuria can induce renal failure. Dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation and thrombocytopenia are possible sequelae. The systemic
reaction is not proportionally related to the local reaction and vice versa.
 In humans despite prominent local signs, no fetal injuries were reported in five women
who were envenomated during their second or third trimester of pregnancy.
Minimum Database
Pretreatment laboratory values should include a complete blood cell count, coagulation
profile (e.g., prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, platelet count, and fibrino-
gen), and a complete serum chemistry panel including electrolytes. Ihe size of the lesion
should be measured. Tests with abnormal values or tests used to monitor the onset of hemo-
lysis or hemoglobinuria (e.g., packed-cell volume, red blood cell count, hemoglobin, visual
serum evaluation, and urinalysis) should be repeated as indicated to monitor the progres-
sion of the syndrome. This is particularly true for tests that reflect systemic manifestations
of envenomation.
Confirmatory Tests
No confirmatory tests are commercially available in the United States.
Treatment
There is no specific antidote. Although there is an antivenom (Reclusmyn, Fab2 equine
origin, produced by the Instituto Bioclon, Mexico), the advanced stage of the syndrome by
the time of diagonsis in veterinary patients generally precludes its effective use. The treat-
ment plan consists of responding to two possible syndromes, local cutaneous lesions and
systemic manifestations of envenomation.
Dapsone (4,4'-diaminodiphenylsulfone), a leukocyte inhibitor, has been shown to be
effective in treating dermal lesions in animal models.4 In experimental studies, animals
received 1 mg/kg dapsone by mouth for 14 days. Ihe remaining ulcer was then allowed to
heal as an open wound. Occasionally a second treatment course of dapsone was indicated.
In humans dapsone may induce hemolysis and Heinz body formation in individuals with
a deficiency in either glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase or methemoglobin reductase.
I may be prudent to obtain a pretreatment hematocrit level and retest the patient in 2
 or 3 days to monitor for a theoretical drug-induced hemolysis. By the time the maturing
dermonecrotic lesion becomes manifest and the animal is brought in for treatment, the
of venom-induced hemolysis.
Results have been generally disappointing, and the procedure is not without complications.
826SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Veterinary patients are frequently not brought to the medical facility until the lesion is well
developed and frank necrosis has occurred. Conservative therapy includes several clean-
ings daily with Burow's solution and hydrogen peroxide. Some debridement may be neces-
sary. One to two atm of hyperbaric oxygen twice daily for 3 to 4 days may be beneficial.4.6
 Broad-spectrum antibiotics are indicated if dapsone is not being administered in the treat-
ment regimen.
 Systemic signs of Loxosceles envenomation are potentially fatal and should be aggres-
sively addressed. Patients exhibiting such signs should be hospitalized for close observa-
tion. Antiinflammatory, antipyretic, and analgesic agents can be useful. Compounds that
affect clotting should be avoided. Systemic corticosteroids have a protective effect on the
red blood cell membrane, thereby inhibiting hemolysis. They should be used only in the
first few days of the syndrome at a rate of 1 to 2 mg/kg per day. Coagulation defects are
tain adequate hydration to protect renal function.
Prognosis
The dermonecrotic lesions often take weeks or months to heal, and a scar typically remains
at the site. Patients exhibiting severe systemic signs generally have a guarded prognosis.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
There are no definitive systemic gross or histologic lesions reported in dogs and cats.
Differential Diagnoses
In humans MRSA lesions are most commonly misdiagnosed as brown recluse spider bites.
Additionally, mycobacterial or other bacterial infection, decubital ulcer, third-degree burn,
and pyoderma mimic the dermonecrotic wound of a spider bite. Systemic signs must be dif-
ferentiated from other causes of hermolytic anemia (e.g., immune mediated, zinc poisoning.
acetaminophen, onion poisoning), snake bite, insect sting, and fever of unknown origin.
References
1. Wasserman GS, Anderson PC: Loxoscelism and necrotic arachnidism, J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 21(4&5):451-
472, 1983-84.
les reclusa) toxin and extracts of venom apparatus, cephalothorax and abdomen, Toxicon 21(3):441-444,
1983.
3. Babcock JL, Marmer DJ, Steele RW: Immunotoxicology of brown recluse spider bites (Loxosceles reclusa)
venom, Toxicon 24(8):783-790, 1986.
Emerg Med 16(9):945-949, 1987.
5. Smith CW, Micks DW : The role of polymorphonuclear leukocytes in the lesion caused by the venom of
the brown spider, Loxosceles recluse, Lab Invest 1:90-93, 1970.
sion versus dapsone and delayed surgical excision, Ann Surg 202(5):657-663, 1985.
CHAPTER
Strychnine
81
Patricia A. Talcott, MS, DVM, PhD, DABVT
·Strychnine is a highly potent, rodenticide still used in many areas of the United
States.
· Dogs are most commonly affected; oral exposures of as little as a few
tablespoons of strychnine-laced bait are enough to cause toxicity.
· Clinical signs include early apprehension, anxiety, and salivation, followed quickly
by the onset of rmuscle spasm, severe extensor rigidity, and convulsions.
· Confirmation of poisoning can be rmade by chemical analysis of vomitus, lavage
washings, and stomach contents; strychnine can sometimes be detected in
serum, urine, liver, or kidney.
 Treatment aims are directed toward preventing further absorption in
asymptomatic patients (emesis or gastric lavage, activated charcoal, and
cathartic); preventing or controlling muscle spasms or seizures (pentobarbital,
diazeparm, or methocarbamol); controlling hyperthermia, hypoxia, and acidosis;
and maintaining adequate urine output (intravenous fluids).
·Prognosis is guarded, depending on exposure dose and extent of delay between
exposure and medical intervention.
There are no specific gross or histologic lesions.
Differential diagnoses include tetanus and pcisonings with metaldehyde,
penitrem A, roquefortine, 4-aminopyridine, nicotine, caffeine, amphetamines,
cocaine, organophosphorus and carbamate insecticides, pyrethrins and
pyrethroids, mushrooms, cyanobacteria (blue-green algae), methylxanthines,
compound 1080, and chlorinated hydrocarbon pesticides.
trychnine-containing baits are commonly used outdoors in many parts of the United
States by homeowners, farm workers, certified applicators, and animal damage control
personnel to control nuisance populations of several species of animals, including ground
squirrels or gophers, meadow and deer mice, moles, prairie dogs, rats, porcupines, chip-
munks, rabbits, and pigeons. As with other rodenticides (e.g., anticoagulant rodenticides,
bromethalin, cholecalciferol, and zinc phosphide), accidental and malicious poisoning of
is not uncommon in many areas of the United States, particularly in states where products
can still be purchased over the counter.
Sources
Strychnine was first used as a rodenticide in Germany in the early sixteenth century. Poi-
sonings in humans occur in suicide attempts, intentional malicious poisonings, or with its
827
828SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
use as an adulterant in heroin and cocaine.2 Strychnine-containing pesticides have been
marketed under a variety of trade names, including Gopher-Go, Milo Bait for Gophers,
Gopher Getter, Orco Gopher Grain Bait, Quick Action Gopher Mix, Force's Mole Killer,
and Force's Gopher Killer. Many strychnine baits are composed of red- or green-colored
grain (e.g., oat, milo, corn, and wheat) containing 0.5% to 1% strychnine sulfate (Color
Plate 81-1). Some restricted-use formulations contain much higher concentrations of the
alkaloid. Some states allow over-the-counter sales of strychnine-containing products
only if strychnine is present at a concentration of 0.5% or less. Liquid formulations have
been historically available in other countries (e.g., Canada). All applications are intended
to be used underground, either inside artificial burrows made with a burrow builder, or
by hand baiting into the main natural burrow runway system, taking care not to cover
the bait with soil.
Toxic Dose
The strychnine alkaloid is isolated from the seeds of Strychnos nux-vomica and S. ignati.
Strychnine sulfate is a white powder that is moderately soluble in water. Strychnine
bait is poorly soluble in water and strongly adheres to soil particles. Its environmental
persistence is not long, and more than 90% disappears from soil within 40 days. Break-
down in soil depends on the presence and growth of particular microbial or fungal soil
organisms.
Strychnine is intensely poisonous to fish, aquatic invertebrates, birds, and mammals
(Table 8l-1). Most confirmed cases of poisoning occur in dogs; cats are infrequently affected.
Ihe reported acute median lethal dose (LDso) of strychnine in dogs and cats is 0.5 to
12 mg/kg and 2 mg/kg, respectively. Depending on the size of the animal and the concen-
tration of strychnine present in the bait, ingestion of only a few tablespoons by a dog or cat
is sufficient to cause death. Secondary poisoning of dogs and cats resulting from ingestion
of strychnine-poisoned rodents can occur but is not commonly reported.
Toxicokinetics
Strychnine is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract (small intestine mostly) and
mucous membranes. Very little protein binding occurs, and strychnine is readily metabo-
lzed by hepatic microsomal enzyme activity to strychnine-N-oxide.3 Anywhere from 1%
to 20% of the original exposure dose is
excreted into the urine unchanged.45
Strychnine has a wide tissue distribu-
Table 81-1
Reported Oral Lethal
tion, and only small amounts (less than
Doses of Strychnine
4 ppm) are ever detected in blood or tis-
Oral Median Lethal
sues at any given time. Elimination of
Dose (LDso)(mg/kg
strychnine is best described by a linear
Species
body weight)
(Michaelis-Menten) model.6
Cat
2.0
Cow
0.5
Mechanism of Toxicity
Dog
0.5-1.2
Glycine is an important inhibitory neu-
Golden eagle
5-10
rotransmitter to motor neurons and
Horse
0.5
Human
interneurons in the spinal cord, brain-
30-60
Mule deer
17-24
stem, and thalamus, and strychnine
effectively blocks the inhibitory action
Pheasant
8.5-24.7
Pig
of glycine on the anterior horn of the
0.5-1
Rainbow trout
2.3
cells of the spinal cord and that of the
Rat
2.2-14
it
42.5
from being released from the Renshaw
Sage grouse
cells.78 This inhibition ultimately leads
Chapter 81 | Strychnine 829
to unchecked neuronal activity, producing highly exaggerated reflex arcs. Mild to severe
muscle spasms result, generally leading to extreme hyperextension of the limbs and body
caused by domination of the more powerful extensor muscle groups. This can ultimately
result in a full tetanic convulsion.
clinical Signs
The primary target organ for strychnine is the central nervous system. Clinical signs gen-
erally develop in poisoned patients within 10 to 120 minutes after ingestion. Ihe sever-
ity of the signs depends on the exposure dose. Clinical signs in animals exposed to low
levels of strychnine may be delayed and mild (e.g., slight ataxia and muscle stiffness),
whereas high doses result in rapid onset of severe muscle spasms or seizures. Initial signs
commonly observed in strychnine-poisoned dogs include a brief (less than 15 minutes)
 prodromal phase of nervousness, apprehension, anxiety, increased respiratory rate, and
Excessive salivation. Ataxia, muscle spasms, and stiffness gradualy develop, generally
beginning with the face, neck, and limb muscles. This stage rapidly develops into gen-
eralized convulsions that are tonic-extensor in nature (i.e., opisthotonos). The neck is
usually arched back, the jaw clamped shut, and the face fixed into a "sardonic grin" These
episodes may last several minutes intermittently, or they may be continuous. Respiration
is obviously impaired during these episodes because of contraction of the diaphragm and
the thoracic and abdominal muscles. Many strychnine-poisoned dogs show an increased
'sou pnot da) uoems Arosuas bumog saposida asai go auanba pue aiaaas
bright light, and touch). This feature, however, is not specific to strychnine and has been
observed in other types of poisonings as well (e.g., metaldehyde, penitrem A, roquefort-
ine, chlorinated hydrocarbons, bromethalin). Typically, in the early phases, the patient is
conscious and aware of its surroundings. Vomiting is not consistently reported in strych-
nine-poisoned patients, but it can be seen, particularly if the strychnine bait has been
mixed with palatable food items in cases of malicious poisoning. Death is a result of respi-
ratory paralysis, most likely caused by hypoxia from impaired respiration, and can occur
as quickly as 10 minutes after ingestion or as late as 24 to 48 hours after ingestion (depend-
ing on the degree of medical intervention). Hyperthermia is commonly observed; this is
a result of the severe muscle contractions.
Minimum Database
In general, there are few specific blood and serum chemistry abnormalities following
strychnine ingestion. At the most, poisoned dogs may display changes compatible with
mild dehydration and a mild metabolic acidosis. A complete blood cell count and serum
chemistry panel is helpful only in ruling out nonstrychnine causes of seizure activity. Rhab-
domyolysis, with subsequent renal failure, has been reported in humans, but has been rarely
observed in poisoned dogs and cats.
Confirmatory Tests
In clinical cases, the presence of strychnine can be confirmed by various analytical meth-
chromatography-mass spectrometry) performed on vomitus or lavage washings (stomach
contents postmortem); it is less commonly performed on serum or urine. Because strych-
nine-poisoned patients may not vomit, the stomach contents are the best tissue to confirm
the presence of the alkaloid. The presence of green- or red-dyed grain in the vomitus, lavage
washings, or stomach contents postmortem should lead the veterinarian to perform some
type of quantitative analysis. However, other types of pesticides have similar appearances
(e.g., bromethalin, 1080, zinc phosphide, cholecalciferol). Liver, bile, or kidney can also be
used to verify the presence of strychnine in tissue collected postmortem, but these are less
likely to yield positive confirmation.
830 SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
Treatment
 The treatment of strychnine-poisoned dogs and cats is initially directed at reducing gastro-
 intestinal absorption of the conmpound and is followed by appropriate supportive care to
reverse the hyperthermia, hypoxia, and acidosis; minimize muscle spasms and convulsive
activity; and maintain adequate renal output. Before the onset of seizure activity, emetics
can be used to evacuate the stomach. Care should be taken with the use of emetics because
this type of sensory stimulation may initiate violent muscle or convulsive activity. A more
sedated and intubated. Administration of activated charcoal followed with a cathartic
should follow either procedure (delay a minimum of 45 minutes if emesis was induced).
Strychnine is very effectively bound to activated charcoal and should be considered a main-
stay in the treatment of poisoned patients.
Typically the more urgent objectives facing clinicians in the treatment of strychnine-
poisoned patients are controlling the convulsions and supporting respiration. Because bar-
biturates have been shown to raise the threshold of spinal reflexes in animals, pentobarbital
has been used successfully clinically to control strychnine-induced convulsions. Pentobar-
bital, like other barbiturate anesthetics, abolishes the spontaneous activity of spinal cord
neurons by acting as a y-aminobutyric acid-mimetic; it should be administered slowly
intravenously (IV) at a dose of 3 to 15 mg/kg or to effect.9 Diazepam, with its muscle relax-
ant, anxiolytic, and anticonvulsant properties, can also be effective in treating strychnine-
poisoned pets (0.5 to 1 mg/kg IV or to effect); it can also be administered as a constant-rate
infusion (0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg, diluted in 5% dextrose in water [D5W]; rate of administration
per hour should be equal to the maintenance needs of the patient).? Methocarbamol can
also be used at a dose of 44 to 220 mg/kg IV, generally not to exceed 330 mg/kg/day.2 Meth-
Ocarbamol causes skeletal muscle relaxation and a secondary sedative effect. Inhalation gas
anesthesia can be used initially to control anxiety or seizure activity. A benefit of this choice
is that the clinician can provide a readily available, controlled source of oxygen. However,
because of the length of time most patients require sedation (24 to 72 hours, or longer),
this choice is highly impractical for the long haul. Respiratory activity should be closely
readily available in animals that are severely compromised.
Intravenous fluids (e.g., Normosol-M and half-strength lactated Ringer's solution
in D5W) should be administered to correct hypovolemia, provide continuous mainte-
nance needs, prevent rhabdomyolysis-induced renal disease (rare), and aid in correcting
the hyperthermia and mild to moderate acidosis. Bicarbonate can be used to correct the
acidosis if traditional fluid therapy is not sufficient; this is not commonly necessary. All
forms of sensory stimulation should be minimized, so patients should be kept in a dimly
lit, quiet area.
Prognosis
Most poisoned patients are treated continuously and aggressively monitored in the hospital
for up to 24-72 hours. Aggressive decontamination procedures, combined with 24-hour
intensive care monitoring, significantly lessen the length of hospital stay and hasten recov-
ery. Unfortunately, because of strychnine's rapid onset, most patients are brought to vet-
erinary facilities late in the progression of the disease, and many die before appropriate
treatment can be initiated.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
No specific gross and histologic lesions have been described in strychnine-poisoned dogs
and cats. Nonspecific changes can include agonal, petechial hemorrhages of the heart and
lung, along with generalized congestion of tissues. Some clinicians have noted extensive
Chapter 8l | Strychnine 831
cortex and brainstem have been reported in humans poisoned with strychnine.6 The exact
cause of this is unclear, but it has been hypothesized that the lesions may be due to poor
cerebral perfusion or cortical seizure activity.
Differential Diagnoses
Strychnine poisoning in dogs and cats can mimic a wide variety of other central nervous
system disorders. These include tetanus and poisoning with metaldehyde, penitrem A,
roquefortine, 4-aminopyridine, theobromine, nicotine, caffeine, anmphetamines, cocaine,
chlorinated hydrocarbons, organophosphorus and carbamate acetylcholinesterase-inhib-
ting insecticides, neurotoxic cyanobacteria, bromethalin, compound 1080, and pyrethrins
and pyrethroids. Similar clinical signs can occur in pets poisoned with Taxus spp. (yew),
Dicentra spp. (bleeding heart and Dutchman's breeches), Cicuta spp. (water hemlock), and
some mushrooms.
References
1. Franz DN: Central neurotransmitters. In Gilman AG, Goodman LS, Rall TW, et al, editors: The pharma
cological basis of therapeutics, ed 7, New York, 1985, Macmillan.
 2. Boyd RE, Spyker DA: Strychnine poisoning: recovery from profound lactic acidosis, hyperthermia, and
rhabdomyolysis, Am I Med 74:507, 1983.
3. Adamson RH, Fouts JR: Enzymatic metabolism of strychnine, I Pharmacol Exp Ther 127:87, 1959.
4.Weiss S, Hatcher RA: Studies on strychnine, J Pharmacol Exp Ther 14:419, 1922
 5. Sgaragli GP, Mannaioni PF: Pharmacokinetic observations on a cases of massive strychnine poisoning.
Clin Toxicol 6:533, 1973.
case, Clin Toxicol 30(2):269,1992.
7. Curtis DR, Duggan A W, Johnston GAR: The specificity of strychnine as a glycine antagonist in the mam-
malian spinal cord, Exp Brain Res 12:547, 1971.
8. Curtis DR, Hosli L, Johnston GAR: A pharmacological study of the depression of spinal neurones by
glycine and related amino acids, Exp Brain Res 6:1, 1968.
9.Plumb DC: Veterinary drug handbook,ed 3, White Bear Lake, Minn.,1999, Pharma Vet Publishing
CHAPTER
Toads
82
Michael E. Peterson, DVM, MS
Brian K. Roberts, DVM, DACVECC
· Colorado River toad (Bufo alvarius) and marine or cane toad (Bufo marinus) are
the most comrmon toads that cause toxicity.
Toxic agents include dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, serotonin, bufotenine,
bufagenins (digitalis-like cormpounds), bufotoxins, and indolealkylamines.
Absorption via the mucous membranes of the oral cavity is rapid
The poison affects the heart (arrhythmias), peripheral vasculature, and central
nervous system. Cinical signs include hypersalivation, pawing at the mouth,
brick-red rmucous mermbranes, hyperthermia, ataxia, collapse, and seizures.
Clinical pathologic conditions include slightly elevated blood urea nitrogen,
hyperkalemia, hypercalcemia, hypophosphatemia, hyponatremia, and
hypochloremia (mild). Sinus tachycardia, sinus bradycardia, and ventricular
arrhythmias are commonly observed.
· No true confirmatory tests exist. Digoxin levels by immunoassay may support
suggested toxicity.
· Treatrment consists of flushing the oral cavity with water, controlling seizures,
documenting or treating any arrhythmias, and supportive care.
· Diferential diagnoses include heat stroke, neuropathies and seizure disorders,
other toxins, such as metaldehyde, theobromine, insoluble oxalate-containing
plants, pyrethrins and pyrethroids, oleander, and anticholinesterase insecticides.
Sources
There are more than 200 species of Bufo toads in the world. Ihese toads have been used for
centuries in religious rituals, witchcraft, and healing. Even today toad excretions are used
by South American and Mesoamerican tribes as fertility enhancers. In the United States the
Food and Drug Administration listed one of the toad excretions, bufotenine, as a schedule 1
substance in 1967 because of "toad licking" and "toad smoking" by drug users.'
The two most common Bufo species that cause poisonings in small animals in the United
States are the cane or marine toad (Bufo marinus) (Color Plate 82-1) and the Colorado
River toad (also known as the Sonoran desert toad) (Bufo alvarius) (Color Plate 82-2).2 The
a us e saads paeau are suzuat ong uisr an pue siura og uaog
poisonings. Colorado, Arizona, Texas, Hawai, and Florida are the principal locations in the
United States where small animals are exposed to toads and suffer from poisonings. Bufo
toads were introduced into the southern states from Hawaii for insect and rodent control.?
The foreign toads have replaced many native species because of their hardiness and prolif-
erative reproductive capabilities.
833
834SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Exposures usually occur during the summer months in the Southeast and during peri-
ods of high humidity or late summer in the Southwest.2 Bufo toad exposures have been
reported throughout the year in Florida (Figure 82-1) except in the month of December.4
Toads are most active after a period of rainfall, especially at dawn, dusk, and evening hours.
All Bufo species have parotid glands on their dorsum that release toxic substances when the
toad is attacked or threatened. These toxins are biologically active compounds.
Toxic Dose
Toxicity truly varies and depends on size and dose. Larger toads have larger parotid glands
and therefore have more voluminous excretions. The most severe clinical signs of toxicosis
are seen in animals with low body weight that have encountered alarge toad for a prolonged
in animals that masticate or hold the toads instead of just biting and then releasing the
go suis eu yo uu an o paan si suaas go y I o asxg pe
intoxication.5
Toxicokinetics
Toxins secreted from the parotid glands of Bufo toads are rapidly absorbed across the
mucous membranes and then enter the systemic circulation.3 The toxins can also be
absorbed through the gastric mucosa following ingestion, through open skin wounds, and
across the conjunctiva. Once the toxins have entered the systemic circulation, the greatest
effects are seen on the heart, peripheral vasculature, and nervous system.' Bufo toads release
many substances that are naturally found in the body, such as the catecholamines, epineph-
rine, norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin; the metabolism of these biologically active
compounds occurs in a manner similar to normal physiology. Examples include catechol-
amine reuptake and metabolism by monoamine oxidase and catechol O-methyltransferase.
Elimination of bufagenins, which are the digitalis-like substances, occurs via first-order
kinetics, and these substances are excreted through the urine.6
Mechanism of Toxicity
The biologically active substances produced by Bufo toads include dopamine, epinephrine,
norepinephrine, serotonin, bufotenine, bufagenins, bufotoxins, and indolealkylamines..3
All Bufo species produce these substances, but there is variation in the quantity of each sub-
stance produced by different toads. For instance, Bufo marinus and Bufo viridis contain the
highest known plasma level of endogenous digitalis-like substances, which are collectively
20-
18
16
sec
14
12
10
Number
8
6
4
2
Month
Figure 82-l Companion animal exposure to Bufo toads (July 1997-July 1998).
Chapter 82 | Toads 835
known as bufadienolides.7 Indolealkylamines have been characterized as similar to the hal-
lucinogen lysergic acid diethylamide.2
Bufotenine, or 5-hydroxydimethyltryptamine, has been definitively identified as a pres-
sor, but there is also evidence that this compound may be a hallucinogen or have a ^psy-
chedelic" effect.l& The hallucinogenic effects of bufotenine may be secondary to the known
systemic pressor activity and oxygen starvation of the optic nerve. Only the Colorado River
toad (Bufo alvarius) releases 5-methoxydimethyltryptamine from the methylation of sero-
tonin; it acts as a true hallucinogen.?
Bufagenins and bufotoxins are cardioactive steroids also known as digitalis-like sub-
stances.7 Ihe bufagenins act like digitalis to inhibit potassium-dependent adenosine tri-
phosphatase, which is the enzyme that allows active transport of sodium out of and
potassium into cells.7 Digitalis-like substances can cause alterations in heart rate and
and supraventricular and ventricular tachycardias. Bufotoxins are vasoconstrictors and add
to the pressor effect of bufotenine to increase systemic vascular resistance.
Although many of the substances released from Bufo toads are known to cause vasocon-
striction and an increase in blood pressure, there has been no documentation to support
this pressor activity.
clinical Signs
Dogs are the most common companion animals affected by amphibian toxins. However,
cats and pocket pets, such as ferrets, can also be exposed to Bufo toads. Most exposed ani-
mals have a history of being outside and are then either seen attacking a toad or found by
the owner hypersalivating, seizing, or disoriented. Many Bufo toads are nocturnal, which is
why many exposures occur at dusk or on evening walks. Bufo toads are most active during
periods of excessive humidity and are often seen in high numbers after a rainstorm.
 The first signs of exposure include brick-red mucous membranes, hypersalivation, pawing at
the mouth, and vocalizing.25 Many owners describe their dogs as "foaming at the mouth"
It is believed that the parotid gland secretions are noxious to mucous membranes and lead
to erythema and ptyalism. Within a few minutes the affected animal can become disoriented,
circle, stumble, and fall.4 Many poisoned dogs also exhibit a blank stare or opisthotonic posture.
Others become tachypneic and anxious and then vomit. Severe toxicosis results in seizure activ-
ity and coma. The elapsed time from exposure to exhibition of signs is only a matter of minutes.
Most toxic effects are seen within 30 minutes to 1 hour after contact with a Bufo toad.
Physical examination findings may include any or all of the following: erythematous
mucous membranes, ptyalism, tachypnea, tachycardia or bradycardia, hyperthermia, and
collapse. Much of the data available in companion animal studies denote cardiac arrhyth-
mias, which range from various degrees of bradycardia and heart block to ventricular
tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation.3
There are also a large number of neurologic abnormalities, such as altered states of
consciousness (e.g., disorientation, stupor, and coma) and varying degrees of ataxia, such
as circling, falling, leaning, listing, and stumbling. Neurologic examination findings may
include nystagmus, midrange or mydriatic pupils with slow pupillary light reflexes, hyper-
esthesia, conscious proprioceptive defects, and status epilepticus.
Of the described physical findings, erythematous mucous membranes, ptyalism, anxi-
ety or shaking, and tachypnea are most commonly noted (Table 82-1). Neurologic abnor-
malities are identifed in more than half of dogs that are naturally exposed to Bufo toads
(see Table 82-1). The most common neurologic signs reported are seizure activity, ataxia
stupor, collapse, and nystagmus.4 Many of the same clinical and neurologic abnormali-
ties described in small-animal exposures have also been identifed in human exposures.
In a 1986 report a 5-year-old boy was brought to the emergency room in status epilepticus
after placing a Bufo toad in his mouth. Initial signs of severe hypersalivation and nausea
occurred within 10 minutes of exposure and then progressed to delirium and seizure activ-
ity. Other findings on examination included slurred speech and left-sided paresis.
836SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
Table 82-1
Physical Examination Findings in Animals Exposed to Bufo Toads
Clinical Signs
Number (94 Cases)
Percentage
Neuropathy (seizures, ataxia, nystagmus, coma)
51
54.26
Brick-red mucous membranes
48
51.06
Ptyalism
39
41.49
Anxiety shaking
25
26.60
Collapsed recumbent
17
18.09
Vomiting
11
11.70
Mydriasis and anisocoria
5
5.32
Minimum Database
Currently, there is no information available on minimum database values for animals that
have sustained natural oral exposure to Bufo toad toxins. In one controlled study, orally
exposed and intravenously (IV) exposed dogs under anesthesia showed moderate increases
in hemoglobin content, packed-cell volume and icterus index, blood glucose, blood urea
nitrogen, alkaline phosphatase, and serum potassium.3 The study also found decreases in
serum sodium, phosphorus, total protein, and white blood cell count.
Patients exhibiting the most serious clinical signs commonly have severe acid-base
abnormalities and hemoconcentration. It is common for comatose patients to present
with symptoms of hypercapnia and a marked respiratory acidosis. Severe metabolic acido-
sis secondary to seizure activity or tremors may develop in certain dogs that are severely
intoxicated.
 Dyspnea secondary to noncardiogenic pulmonary edema has been seen in a few dogs
with severe signs of intoxication. It is believed by one of the authors that this edema may
be secondary to seizure activity, pulmonary hypertension caused by the pressor effects of
the toxins, or acute respiratory distress syndrome. Patients exhibiting any type of increased
effort or crackles should undergo thoracic radiographs once stabilization and oxygen sup-
plementation have been instituted.
Confirmatory Tests
There are no routinely available tests to confirm Bufo toad poisoning. Reports do exist in
toad extracts.1l Intoxicated individuals have elevated serum digoxin levels caused by the
digitoxin-like substances ingested from the toad extracts. Iherefore it is possible that
digoxin serum immunoassays can aid in the diagnosis of Bufo toad poisoning in compan-
ion animals.
Treatment
The most effective therapy for acute intoxication is thorough flushing of the oral cavity with
running water.2-4 If toxicosis is suggested, the mouth should be flushed as soon as possible
unless the affected pet is unconscious or seizing, taking care to flush the mouth in the ros-
tral direction. Owners should be told to perform this procedure at home before traveling to
seek veterinary care. The flushing procedure should be repeated at least two to three times
for 5 to 10 minutes at a time. Once this is completed, the history should be taken and physi-
cal and neurologic examinations performed.
After seizure intervention (when necessary) has been instituted, cardiac rate and
rhythm should be documented by electrocardiogram and analyzed. If bradycardia or heart
block is detected, atropine at a dose of 0.02 mg/kg may be given IV. Atropine may decrease
the amount of salivation and act as a bronchodilator.? It is not a true antidote, although
 some consider it to be one.34 The use of atropine may worsen tachycardia and potentiate
Chapter 82|Toads837
ventricular tachycardia. In such circumstances, atropine is not recommended. Sustained
tachycardia with heart rates of more than 180 beats/min in dogs or 220 beats/min in cats
should be treated with beta antagonists, such as propranolol (0.5 to 0.6 mg/kg given over
5-10 minutes IV ), esmolol (0.5 mg/kg IV) followed by a continuous-rate infusion of 50 to
 200 mcg/kg/min, or atenolol (0.25 to 1 mg/kg orally).23 Treatment for ventricular tachycar-
dia may be accomplished by using lidocaine as a 2 mg/kg IV bolus, which can be repeated
yp to three times, followed by a continuous-rate infusion at a dose of 40 to 75 mcg/kg/min.
Procainamide can also be used for ventricular tachycardias at a dose of 6 to 8 mg/kg given
in an IV bolus, 6 to 20 mg/kg given intramuscularly, or 10 to 40 mcg/kg/min as a continuous
rate infusion. If ventricular arrhythmias do not respond to continuous infusion therapies,
serum magnesium should be evaluated and corrected using magnesium sulfate at a dose of
0.15 to 0.3 mEq/kg IV given over 5 to 10 minutes. Supraventricular arrhythmias have not
been reported, but may occur and respond to beta antagonists or vagal maneuvers.
Because the bufagenins and bufotoxins have effects similar to those of digoxin, treat-
ment with digoxin-specific Fab fragments may be of value. Humans exposed to herbal
compounds containing Bufo extracts exhibit signs similar to digoxin toxicity, such as bra-
dycardia, hypotension, and various arrhythmias. Treatment with digoxin-specific Fab
 q sa q sa- ssas aq s sd asai ui si
the digoxin-like substances and also block the inhibition of sodium-potassium adenosine
phosphatase activity.
Neurologic abnormalities are common, and treatment should be instituted immediately
in patients with seizures using diazepam (0.5 mg/kg IV).4 If seizures or seizurelike activity
persists, pentobarbital (3 to 15 mg/kg IV) may be used In some instances, a continuous-
rate infusion of diazepam at 0.2 to 1.0 mg/kg/hr may be necessary. Propofol at a dose of
0.1 mg/kg/min can also be considered as a constant rate infusion for refractory seizure activ-
ity. Animals with progressing neurologic signs may benefit from short-acting glucocorti-
coids, such as prednisolone sodium succinate (Solu-Delta-Cortef) or methylprednisolone
sodium succinate (Solu-Medrol) at doses of 10 to 20 mg/kg given slowly IV. Furosemide
(2 mg/kg) followed by mannitol (500 to 1000 mg/kg given over 20 minutes) may also be of ben-
efit in animals that have sustained numerous seizures and have a worsening neurologic status.
 In severely affected animals, body temperature, blood glucose levels, and hydration should
be monitored and corrected. Supportive care with IV fluids (Plasma-Lyte A or lactated
Ringer's solution) at maintenance doses of 60 mL/kg/day is recommended for animals that
Pidan sinou  oi Zl aao uaaia eiaoaodau iaio oi spin Ai yo sisisuos Adeau  aso
water baths, and alcohol placed on the foot pads. Once the body temperature has decreased
to 102° F, external bathing may be stopped. If the patient's temperature remains elevated at
more than 105° F despite the aforementioned treatments, a low-dose corticosteroid (dexa-
methasone sodium phosphate, 0.1 mg/kg IV) may be administered.
Patients that are brought in comatose or with respiratory distress or compromise should
or respiratory acidosis,hemoconcentration with hematocrit values more than 60%, and non-
cardiogenic pulmonary edema. In our experience, patients with these documented abnor-
malities have a guarded prognosis. Correction of metabolic acidosis is generally achieved
using a balanced crystalloid IV infusion. Blood pH values ofless than 7.1 should be corrected
using sodium bicarbonate (0.3 × body weight in kg × base deficit) at one fourth of this calcu-
lated dose. Ihe acid-base must be reassessed within an hour after using IV buffers. Patients
suffering from respiratory compromise should receive supplemental oxygen (100%) by mask
or flow-by until the respiratory problems improve or continuous supplemental oxygen (Fio
of 0.4 to 0.6) should be provided. If hypercapnia and respiratory acidosis were diagnosed,
then the clinician should consider providing supplemental positive pressure ventilation until
the acidosis is corrected and the patient is producing adequate ventilatory effort.
Dogs that have noncardiogenic pulmonary edema should be treated symptomatically
with supplemental oxygen, judicious fluid therapy, and furosemide by continuous rate
838SECTlON 4SpecificToxicants
Went home,84.04%
Transferred to RDvM and
then recovered, 10.64%
Died/euthanized，5.32%
Figure 82-2 Outcome of companion animal exposure to Bufo toads (July 1997-July 1998).
infusion (0.0.5 to 1 mg/kg/hr)12 until signs resolve. Furosemide by continuous rate infusion
should be used for as short of a duration as possible because dehydration may occur. Gener-
ally the infusion is provided for 4 to 6 hours.
Prognosis
Based on our experience, affected pets have a favorable prognosis (greater than 90% sur-
vival rate) (Figure 82-2). Cases with guarded to poor prognostic factors include those with
 marked hemoconcentration and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Cerebral edema and hemorrhage were noted in one Philippine study.13
Differential Diagnoses
Many other toxicoses and neuropathies can present with signs similar to those of Bufo toad
intoxication. Primary neuropathies that result in seizures, collapse, and ataxia must be con-
sidered when a limited history is provided by the owners in regard to the environment
tious, immune-mediated, or neoplastic processes; and structural diseases, such as space-
vestibular diseases should be considered.
Because most animals are brought in with acute onset of clinical signs, intoxications
with metaldehyde, theobromine, oleander, insoluble oxalate-containing plants, pyrethrins
and pyrethroids, and anticholinesterase insecticides must be included in the differential
diagnosis until a thorough history of exposure to any of these compounds can be excluded.
Caustic materials, such as various acid and alkali materials, cause severe hypersalivation
and erythematous mucous membranes and should be excluded. Last, heat stroke in hyper-
thermic patients should be ruled out.
References
1. Lyttle T, Goldstein D, Gartz J: Bufo toads and bufotenine: fact and fiction surrounding an alleged psyche-
delic, I Psychoactive Drugs 28(3):267-290, 1996.
2. Peterson ME:Toad venom toxicity. In Tilley LP, Smith WK,editors: The five-minute veterinary consult,
Baltimore, 1997, Williams & Wilkins.
3. Palumbo NE, Perri SF: Toad poisoning. In Kirk RW,editor: Current veterinary therapy VIlI, Philadel-
phia, 1983, WB Saunders.
4. Roberts BK, Aronsohn MA, Moses BL, et al: Bufo marinus intoxication in dogs: 94 cases (1997-1998),
I Am Vet Med A ssoc 216(12):1941-1944, 2000.
5. Sundlof S: Toad poisoning, VEM 5172, Vet Toxicol 115-116, 1993.
6. Booth NH, McDonald LE: Veterinary pharmacology and therapeutics, ed 6, Ames, 1988, Iowa State
University Press.
7. Butler VP, Morris JF, Akizawa T,et al: Heterogeneity and liability ofendogenous digitalis-like substances
in the plasma of the toad Bufo marinus, Am J Physiol 271:R325-R332, 1996.
Chapter 82|Toads839
8. Chamakura RP: Bufotenine—a hallucinogen in ancient snuff powders of South America and a drug of
abuse on the streets of New York City, Forensic Sci Rev 6(1):1-18, 1994.
9.
Davis W, Weil AT: Identity of a new world psychoactive toad, Ancient Mesoamerica 3(1):51-59, 1992.
10.F
Hitt M, Ettinger DD: Toad toxicity, N Engl I Med 314:1517, 1986.
11. Brubacher JR, Ravikumar PJ, Bania T, et al: Treatment of toad venom poisoning with digoxin-specific
Fab fragments, Chest 110:1282-1288, 1996.
12. Wall P: Lasix in ARDS. Proceedings IVECCS VII, Madison, WI, 2000, Omnipress.
13. Eubig PA: Bufo species toxicosis: bigtoad, bigproblem, Vet Med 96(8):594-599,2001.
CHAPTER
Xylitol
83
Matthew S. Mellema, DVM, PhD, DACVECC
· Xylitol is an artificial sweetener that is found in rmany food items (e.g, gurm,
candy), medications (e.g., drugs, children's vitamins), and dental care products
(e.g., toothpaste, mouthwash),.
· Dogs are most commonly affected, though one must be open to the possibility
that other species may be susceptible.
Good history taking by asking whether anyone in the home is a diabetic, using
nicotine gum, or on a low-carbohydrate diet might lead you to suspect xylitol as
a suspect in the clinical disease of a pet.
·Hypoglycemia, hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, and liver failure are potential
problems with xylitol.
 Treatment involves monitoring and correcting the above listed problers, along
with basic symptomatic and supportive care.
he 5-carbon sugar-alcohol sweetener xylitol is a toxin that has received far greater
 attention in veterinary medicine in recent years. This sweetener has become almost
ubiquitous as a food and drug additive in parts of the world where diabetes is highly preva-
lent. The widespread usage of xylitol as a sweetener and its presence (known or unknown)
in the home environment has led to increased exposure risk to this agent in pets. Dogs are
the species in which a toxicologic syndrome has been identified. I am not aware of any pub-
lished reports of toxicity in cats. However, the editor is aware of a cat who developed severe
hypoglycemia and died following ingestion of a xylitol-containing gum. No necropsy was 
performed to rule out other cause of hypoglycemia. Indeed, xylitol has been studied as a
water additive in cats to reduce dental disease, which is of concern as many cat households
are also homes to dogs.
Sources
0 "uma pues pooy jo uosau Aq mooo on Aia isouu ane ponax oi samsoxa auu
therapeutic/dental care products containing it. However, iatrogenic or unintentional expo-
sures are becoming increasingly more likely as is discussed later in this chapter. The two
main sources of xylitol exposures in dogs (foods and dental care products/medications) are
discussed individually in the sections that follow.
Foods
Xylitol has become a widespread additive in food products because of its many beneficial
properties relative to other sweeteners. It contains only 66% of the calories of sugars with
similar levels of sweetness such as sucrose. Xylitol is known to cause very little insulin
841
842SECTlON 4SpecificToxicants
release when administered to human patients and is absorbed slowly from the gastroin-
testinal tract. Xylitol's entry into the cell does not require insulin-dependent carbohydrate
transport and this property allows it to be used effectively as a cellular energy source in dia-
betics regardless of whether there is an absolute deficit in insulin production or a decrease
in insulin signaling. Use of xylitol is expected to reduce ketogenesis in both diabetics and
starving patients, and there is some evidence to support this.? These properties make it a
very attractive option for those seeking a diet low in carbohydrates and with a low glycemic
index.3 Xylitol can be found as the sweetener in a wide array of food products including the
following: (1) low carbohydrate or "low-carb" baked goods and bread products (e.g. Carb
Krunchers breads, rolls, and bagels); (2) low-carb desserts such as brownies; (3) low-carb
tortillas, pita breads, pizza crusts, and breadsticks; (4) low-carb condiments such as syrups
and ketchups; (5) low-carb candies; and (6) low-carb and reduced-calorie chewing gums.
One web site alone (Ihe Low Carb Connoisseur: http://www.low-carb.com/) lists some
 20 different categories of xylitol-sweetened food products. For this reason, I now consider
it essential when taking a history on any dog with acute hypoglycemia or hepatopathy
 to explicitly ask whether anyone in the home is a diabetic, using nicotine gum, or on a
low-carbohydrate diet at present or in the recent past. Although owners may be reluc-
tant at first to answer any questions that tangentially relate to their personal health issues,
one can hope that concern for the well-being of their pet will help them overcome such
reluctance. Veterinary medicine is faced with the additional challenge posed by the United
States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) not requiring that xylitol be listed among the
active ingredients in products to which it is added. Fortunately, in the present environment
the widely touted health benefits of xylitol in humans has resulted in many manufacturers
actively promoting and highlighting the presence of xylitol in their products, but this is not
always the case. Ihe Animal Poison Control Center of the American Society for the Pre-
vention of Cruelty to Animals has reported several cases of xylitol exposure and toxicity in
dogs with a history of eating xylitol-sweetened food products, including muffins, cupcakes,
gum, and cookies.4
Medications/Dental Care Products
Both prescription and over-the-counter (OTC) medications may contain xylitol to enhance
palatability. The growth of certain bacteria can be inhibited by xylitol and this had led to
its widespread use in oral-care products and toothpastes (and the proposed use as a water
additive for cats, discussed previously).5 A similar concern is present in this setting as it was
for food products in that the FDA does not require drug companies to list xylitol among
the active ingredients. Veterinarians using medications that are off-label for use in dogs
must scrutinize and investigate each product to be certain they do not contain xylitol. In
my own practice, xylitol has been discovered to be present in a number of important oral
products that were in use at the time in canine patients including chlorhexidine-containing
oral rinses, the oral moisturizer used to moisten the tongues in our ventilator patients, oral
gabapentin solutions, and oral meloxicam suspensions. The author is aware of a canine
toxicosis following ingestion of an infant toothpaste that was found to contain 35% xylitol
(which was not listed on the label), highlighting the need for veterinarians to be aware that
many oral hygiene products can contain very high concentrations of xylitol. It is sometimes
necessary to contact a poison control center or the company itself to find the concentration
 of xylitol present in any particular product.
One of my graduate students, along with personnel from the University of California-
Davis Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital Pharmacy, recently was tasked with spend-
ing several days going through the shelves at a local pharmacy (Rite Aid) and a local
human hospital pharmacy (Kaiser Permanente) in search of OTC and prescription drugs
containing xylitol. The array of medications available OTC that contained xylitol was both
large and troubling. Similarly, the pharmacists at the human hospital we collaborated
were known to contain xylitol but that were not labeled as such. These pharmacists were
also helpful in pointing out that the energy source in many products used in producing
Chapter 83 丨 Xylitol 843
parenteral nutrition was being shifted from dextrose to xylitol with increasing frequency.
Veterinarians using total or partial parenteral nutrition in their practices need to be vigi-
lant to ensure the components intended for use in canine patients do not contain xylitol.
The full list of medical products that contain xylitol is too lengthy to be given here; rather,
it is prudent for veterinarians to determine whether OTC or off-label drugs contain xylitol
before use.
An additional concern currently under investigation is the prevalence of xylitol in
products manufactured by compounding pharmacies for veterinary use. Many of the
palatability-enhanced base solutions used in compounding contain xylitol because of its
relative safety and beneficial effects in humans. Compounding pharmacy personnel may
be unaware of the risk posed to canine patients unless the veterinarian specifically raises
the concern.
Toxic Dose
The margin of safety for xylitol is quite high in species other than dogs. In humans,
the principal adverse effect is diarrhea caused by xylitol's slow and incomplete absorp-
tion; even this effect requires relatively large amounts to be consumed (>130 g/day).6 In
mice the oral median lethal dose (LDso) is at least 20 g/kg.7 In dogs, both published and
unpublished data suggest that the ingested doses of more than 0.1 mg/kg may lead to
hypoglycemia and that doses of more than 0.5 mg/kg are associated with hepatotoxic-
ity.4 The severity of hepatotoxicity might be idiosyncratic rather than dose dependent
because it has been recognized by veterinarians that there are many dogs ingesting xyli-
tol at doses exceeding 0.5 mg/kg that do not exhibit hepatic disease.8 Xylitol toxicity in
cats has not been reported in the literature (one anecdotal report only) or thoroughly
investigated to my knowledge. Similarly, nearly all that is known about xylitol toxicity
in dogs is based on acute exposures and little is known regarding the toxic potential of
more chronic exposure to lower doses. A few chronic xylitol exposure studies have been
performed in laboratory animals in the former Soviet Union. It is interesting to note
that these studies often observed little or no effect of feeding diets with considerable
 xylitol content to canine subjects, suggesting that genetic background or other factors
may affect susceptibility.
Calculating an exposure dose can be challenging at times. When the exposure is gum,
one must look at the label and determine if xylitol is the first sugar alcohol listed. If the
answer is yes, one should base the dose on the total amount of sugar alcohols per piece of
gum. If the answer is no, one should assume that there is 0.3 g of xylitol per piece of gum.
When the exposure is not gum (like baked goods or powdered xylitol), one should assume
that 1 cup of xylitol weighs approximately 190 g.4
Toxicokinetics
Ingested xylitol is absorbed readily, if incompletely, from the gastrointestinal tract in
most species. Peak plasma levels occur approximately 30 minutes after ingestion.10 Con-
version of xylitol to glucose and ultimately glycogen is possible and occurs in the liver
when this route of utilization is taken.ll Ultimately, the liver is thought to be responsible
for 80% of the metabolism of xylitol.12 Xylitol may be converted to D-xylulose intracel-
lularly. It is anticipated, but not yet demonstrated to my knowledge, that D-xylulose can
be converted to xylulose-5-phosphate, which is an intermediary in the pentose phos-
phate pathway that can lead to substrates that may be used in glycolysis. The pentose
phosphate pathway is involved in the regulation of insulin release and entry of xylitol
metabolites into this pathway seems likely to be involved in the hypoglycemia generat-
 sisn aiixo dox ym aq sua a suasand i ar'shop ui doax yo siaa su
hepatic injury is unknown. It has been proposed that adenosine triphosphatase deple-
tion secondary to xylitol metabolism, increased generation of reactive oxygen species,
or both may be responsible.13
844SECTlON 4 Specific Toxicants
clinical Signs
Clinical signs of xylitol toxicity in dogs may be related to hypoglycemia or hepatopathy
   s  y a se   s a s 
within the first hour following ingestion; however, unpublished reports suggest that the
onset of hypoglycemia may be delayed for as much as 12 to 48 hours depending on the
argy may follow the development of hypoglycemia and rapidly progress to ataxia, collapse,
and seizure activity.13 In other dogs, lethargy and vomiting may develop later (9-72 hours
following ingestion) followed by signs of hepatic dysfunction with associated coagulopathy.
Coagulopathic signs that have been reported in such cases include petechia and ecchymo-
ses as well as gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Gastrointestinal distress such as diarrhea and
intestinal gas production can also occur.
Minimum Database
The four most important components to the minimum database in cases of canine xylitol
toxicity are serial blood glucose measurement, serum biochemistry profle, a coagulation
profile (including partial thromboplastin time [PTT] and activated partial thromboplastin
time [aPTT]), and a persistently high index of suspicion on the part of the clinician. It
seems likely that the number of cases of xylitol toxicity a clinician uncovers is influenced by
how frequently that clinician places it on the list of differentials. Serial blood glucose mea-
the same Somogyi rebound effect, which is observed following the administration of exces-
sive amounts of insulin. Other findings on a chemistry panel in reported cases of xylitol
toxicity include hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia, both of which are consistent with
insulin's known effects on the distribution of those ions and likely a result of the marked
increase in insulin release.
 In those cases in which xylitol ingestion has been associated with hepatopathy, the
clinicopathologic findings have included markers of hepatocyte injury, markers of cho-
been noted in some cases. Increases in bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase have been
observed and suggest a degree of cholestasis may be present in these cases. Moderate
hypoglycemia and prolongation of PTT and aPTT have been noted and interpreted as
resulting from defects in hepatic export and synthesis of glucose and clotting factors,
respectively. Hyperphosphatemia has been suggested to be associated with worsening
prognosis when evident.
 A complete blood cell count may also serve as a component of the minimum database
in cases of suspected xylitol toxicity, but the information gained is likely to be nonspe-
cific. Thrombocytopenia has been noted in some reported cases of xylitol toxicity in dogs.
do  e q  aq    i aa a 
with increased use during the formation of platelet aggregates, which ultimately are unsta-
ble because of defects in secondary hemostasis (which are themselves caused by hepatic
dysfunction).
Confirmatory Tests
Specific confirmatory testing of biologic tissues is rarely attempted in cases of suspected
xylitol exposure or intoxication. Xylitol is metabolized quickly and xylitol accumulation
in tissue is considered unlikely. However, there are labs that can test for the presence
of xylitol in suspect baits/food material and potentially stomach contents from acutely
affected animals. Ihe editor is concerned that xylitol is potentially being used to illegally
kill coyotes and wolves in areas where anticoyote/antiwolf sentiment exists in the general
population. Presumptive diagnosis is based on exposure history and compatible clinico-
pathologic findings.
Chapter 83 | Xylitol 845
Treatment
In acute exposures, the induction of emesis is advised. The use of activated charcoal is rarely
recommended because of its limited ability to bind to xylitol. There is no specific therapy at
present for xylitol intoxication. Supportive measures are indicated in all but the most mildly
affected patients. Hypoglycemia may be managed with parenteral dextrose. Specific treat-
ment protocols have been well described in the literature.& For dogs that ingest 0.1 to 0.5 g/
kg of xylitol, treatment should consist of hospitalization, monitoring glucose levels every 1
odq ioy ueanl pue ‘iatp aieipauoqies-uanu eno ue suiand smo Zh roy simou 7 ol
glycemia. Clinical signs associated with hypoglycemia typically occur when serum glucose
concentrations fall below 60 mg/dL. Intravenous dextrose bolus of a 25% to 50% dextrose
us e um siuasid yuaed a ji aqissd se Ainb se uaaia aq ues a/ s ot z unos
cally significant hypoglycemia. A 2.5% or 5% dextrose constant rate infusion can be started
after the bolus to maintain serum glucose levels.4 Serum electrolyte values should be serially
 monitored (every 4 to 6 hours) to look for severe or progressive reductions in serum con-
centrations of potassium and phosphorus.? Intravenous fluids supplemented with potas-
sium, phosphorus, and dextrose may be required. Ataxic animals should be confined to
reduce injury risk.
greater than 0.5 g/kg of xylitol, even if their serum glucose is normal at presentation; glu-
cose should continuously be monitored every 1 to 2 hours.β The dextrose infusions can be
discontinued after 24 hours if no changes in serum glucose concentrations have occurred.8
For those patients at risk for developing liver disease, administration of liver protectants
and antioxidants such as S-adenosylmethionine, silymarin, N-acetylcysteine, and vitamin
 E should be considered.8 In cases of known or suspected xylitol-induced hepatopathy, sup-
with transfusions of plasma, along with vitamin K, are indicated in actively bleeding ani-
mals or those suspected of having bleeding who also have a progressively declining hema-
tocrit. Plasma transfusion is not definitively indicated in patients with prolonged clotting
times in the absence of evidence of hemorrhage but should be highly considered. Nutri-
tional support and intensive monitoring are advised. Recommendations for the use of the
above listed hepatoprotective agents are based on consensus rather than scientific evidence;
however, it should be noted that no absolute contraindication to their use in this setting is
known. The use of hemoperfusion and plasma exchange in this setting is unknown but may
serve as a treatment option at centers that can offer this option.10
Prognosis
Dogs suffering hypoglycemia alone with minimal liver or other vital organ dysfunction evi-
dent have a good prognosis. The presence of hepatic dysfunction warrants a more guarded
prognosis. In cases of fulminant hepatic failure, a prognosis of guarded to poor is appropri-
ate, depending on the extent of the manifestations.
Gross and Histologic Lesions
In cases of isolated hypoglycemia, few gross or histologic lesions are expected. In cases in
which hepatic failure manifested, severe hepatic necrosis or generalized loss of liver cells
with collapse of the liver's architecture was reported.13
Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses for isolated hypoglycemia include insulin overdose, insulinoma, liver
disease, oral hypoglycemic medication overdose, juvenile hypoglycemia,hypoglycemia of
fasted or starved small- and toy-breed dogs, hunting dog hypoglycemia, hypoadrenocorti-
cism (Addison's disease), or idiopathic causes. Rule-outs for acute hepatic necrosis should
846SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
include other hepatotoxic agents (acetaminophen, aflatoxins, Armanita mushrooms, blue-
sasis snonajun '(sed ohes pue 'sunz pue iaddos oin se yns sena haea aeae uaa
and causes related to sepsis and the systemic inflammatory response syndrome should also
be considered.
References
1. Carke DE: Drinking water additive decreases plaque and calculus accumulation in cats, I Vet Dent 23:2,
2006.
tional symposium on metabolism, physiology, and clinical use of pentoses and pentitols, New York, 1969,
Springer-Verlag, pp 151 -157.
3. Gare F: The sweet miracle of xylitol, North Bergan, NJ, 2003, Basic Health Publications.
4. Dunayer EK: New findings on the effect of xylitol ingestion in dogs, Vet Med 101(12):791, 2006.
5. Cronin JR: Xylitol: a sweet for healthy teeth and more, Altern Complement Ther9:139-141, 2003.
6. Brin M, Miller ON: The safety of oral xylitol. In Sipple HL, McNutt KW, editors: Sugars in nutrition,
New York, 1974, Academic Press, pp 591-606.
7. International Programme on Chemical Safety, World Health Organization: Summary of toxicological
data of certain food additives: WHO food additives series no. 12: xylitol, Geneva, 1977, World Health
Organization. Retrieved from www.inchem.org/documents/jecfa/jecmono/v12je22.htm.
8. Piscitelli CM, Dunayer EK, Aumann M: Xylitol toxicity in dogs, Compendium:CE for Vets, February
2010, E1-E4.
9. Nesterin MF: Xylitol: experimental and clinical investigations conducted in the USSR (review),
Z Ernahrungswiss 19(2):88-94, 1980.
10. Kuzuya T, Kanazawa Y, et al: Stimulation of insulin secretion by xylitol in dogs, Endocrinol 84(2):200-
207, 1969.
11. World Health Organization: WHO Food Additives Series 12: xylitol, Retrieved from www.inchem.org/do
cuments/jecfa/jecmono/v18je16.htm.
12. Froesch ER, Jakob A: The metabolism of xylitol. In Sipple HL, editor: Sugars in nutrition, New York,
1974, Academic Press, pp 241-258.
      r   i   
ingestion in eight dogs, I A Vet Med A ssoc 229(7):1113-1117, 2006.
14. Dunayer EK: Hypoglycemia following canine ingestion of xylitol-containing gum, Vet Hum Toxicol
46(2):87-88, 2004.
CHAPTER
Zinc
84
Patricia A. Talcott, MS, DVM, PhD, DABVT
· Acute zinc poisoning is not an uncommon pcisoning in small-breed dogs, cats,
and pet birds.
· Potential sources include zinc-containing pennies, zinc-containing (i.e., galvanized)
metal objects, zinc oxide ointment (rare), and zinc-containing lozenges (rare).
·Zinc is readily absorbed by the small intestinal mucosa, widely distributed
throughout the body, and excreted in the urine and feces via pancreatic and
biliary excretion.
·Acute onset of gastrointestinal distress along with a hermolytic anemia are the
common presenting problems.
· Signs include vomiting, depression, diarrhea, anorexia, and abdominal pain.
Icterus, hemoglobinemia, and hermoglobinuria are also observed.
· Clinical pathologic changes include a regenerative hemolytic anemia, often
accompanied by an inflammatory leukogram and elevated alkaline phosphatase.
· Dignosis often relies on history of exposure, including supporting evidence 
of radiodense objects within the gastrointestinal tract; cormpatible signs
associated with a hemolytic event; and serum, liver, kidney, and pancreas zinc
concentrations.
Gross and histologic lesions are generally confined to the kidneys (tubular
and pancreas (varying degrees of inflammation, necrosis, and fibrosis). Diffuse
intravascular coagulation (Dlc) is a potential sequela.
Treatrment is primarily supportive in nature, and the prognosis depends on the
ability to control the hernolytic crisis and prevent long-terrm pancreatic, hepatic,
or renal insufficiency, or DIc.
· Metallic foreign bodies should be removed either surgically or endoscopically.
Maintenance of adequate hydration, acid-base status, electrolyte balance, and
support of renal output via intravenous fluid therapy is important.
 Chelators, such as calcium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid or D-penicillamine, are
of questionable value once the source of exposure has been removed.
· Blood transfusions should be considered in severely anemic patients.
 inc is an essential trace element in mammals and is a necessary cofactor in the synthe-
 sis of more than 200 enzymes, which are involved in gene expression, cell division, and
growth. Dietary zinc deficiency can result in dermatitis, poor healing, immunologic defi-
ciencies, poor vision, and abnormal skeletal growth. This chapter focuses on excessive zinc
intake or acute zinc poisoning in dogs and cats. Pennies swallowed by dogs and cats seem
847
848 SECTION 4 Specific Toxicants
to be the most commonly reported source of zinc poisoning. Initial signs are often acute in
onset and mimic viral, parasitic, or bacterial gastrointestinal distress. A hemolytic event fol-
lows, which, if not recognized early, can be fatal. Quantification of serum zinc levels helps
to confirm a diagnosis of zinc poisoning antemortem, whereas liver, kidney, and pancreas
Sources
Almost all cases of zinc poisoning in dogs and cats are a result of oral ingestion. United
States copper-coated pennies (standard weight, 2.5 g) minted after 1982 contain 97.5% zinc.
Canadian pennies minted from 1997 to 2001 consist of 96% zinc. An undefined percentage
of pennies minted in 1982 also contain high zinc concentrations. Small-breed dogs (often
less than 25 pounds?) seem to be the animals most at risk of showing signs of toxicosis
following coin ingestion. Zinc toxicosis in cats is not as common, possibly because of the
more discriminating eating habits of felines compared with those of canines. Other zinc-
containing metallic objects include nuts from transport cages, plumbing nuts, galvanized
cages and nails, staples, fence clips, toys, jewelry, zippers, bra clips, along with a variety of
miscellaneous metallic objects. Zinc oxide ointments and creams can be licked from the
 skin following topical application or may cause problems when a dog chews and swallows
the contents of the tube. Problems seen with this type of exposure are generally only gastro
intestinal in nature. Other sources of zinc include zinc undecylenate-containing DeseneK
products, calamine lotion, suppositories, fertilizers, zinc carbonate and gluconate nutri-
shampoos, and zinc sulfide paints.
Toxic Dose and Toxicokinetics
 A true toxic dose for metallic zinc in dogs and cats has not been established. Ihe oral
median lethal dose (LDso) in dogs has been reported at 100 mg/kg for zinc "salts." Many
patients when brought in for treatment have only one or two pennies in their stomach.
It is unclear whether this represents a true toxic dose because coins can be vomited or
passed in the feces before admission. Ihe approximate normal dietary level of zinc for
dogs is in the 80- to 120-ppm range on a dry-weight basis. The oral dose necessary to
aul jo Hd aul 'tes suz aul jo Aianios au uo puadap oi sieadde sisoixoi suz anu
stomach, and the presence or absence of other food items in the stomach. Phytates pres-
ent in plant material can bind zinc and form insoluble complexes in an alkaline pH. Ihe
acidity of the stomach provides an ideal environment for the quick release of zinc from
metallic objects. Zinc oxide in contrast is a much more stable compound in this environ-
shmsan aensn uonsaun siuauoduos pazquot oi aiensossest Apean jou saop pue quau
in immediate emesis. One report estimated that a toxic dose of zinc in the form of zinc
oxide in dogs was 108 g of zinc.
Less than 50% of dietary zinc is absorbed throughout the small intestine. Zinc absorp-
tion decreases in the presence of dietary phytates and high dietary levels of phosphate
and calcium and increases in the presence of certain amino acids, peptides, or ethylenedi
aminetetraacetic acid (EDTA).4 Excess zinc also interferes with the absorption and use of
copper and iron. Zinc absorbed in the small intestine is carried to the liver in the portal
plasma bound to albumin. Approximately 30% to 40% is extracted by the liver, from which
it is subsequently released back into the bloodstream. Circulating zinc is incorporated into
various extrahepatic tissues, which have different rates of zinc accumulation and turnover.*
The most rapid accumulation and turnover of zinc occurs in the pancreas, liver, kidney,
and spleen. IThe liver is the major organ of zinc metabolism, where metallothionein plays
a significant role. Under normal dietary conditions, zinc homeostasis is primarily con-
trolled by excretion of zinc into the feces. Bile, pancreatic juice, and mucosal cells are
the major routes for endogenous fecal zinc excretion. Small amounts (less than 10%) are
excreted in the urine.4
Chapter 84 | Zinc 849
Mechanism of Toxicity
The mechanism of zinc toxicity is largely unknown. The major organs affected are the red
 blood cells, along with liver, kidney, and pancreas; these are the organs that accumulate the
highest concentrations of zinc following excessive exposure. Severe intravascular hemo-
lysis is the most consistent abnormality observed. Various theories have been proposed
to explain this phenomenon (e.g., inhibition of glutathione reductase and enzymes of the
hexose-monophosphate-shunt pathway leading to oxidative damage), but none has been
experimentally confirmed.
clinical Signs
Signs associated with excessive zinc ingestion may occur shortly after ingestion (less than
2 hours), depending on the form and source of the zinc. Signs may be delayed when
coins are swallowed. Often the ingestion is not observed. Initial signs are typically caused
by the caustic or corrosive properties of the zinc salts and usually involve some gas-
trointestinal distress, such as vomiting, inappetance, depression, lethargy, and diarrhea.
These signs are typically the only ones observed following zinc oxide ingestions. There
may or may not be blood present in the feces. This initial phase clinically mimics a viral
or bacterial gastroenteritis and can be quite severe. Depending on the exposure dose,
within several hours to several days an intravascular hemolysis occurs marked by pale
or yellow discoloration of the mucous membranes, tachycardia, hemoglobinemia and
hemoglobinuria, with continued anorexia, depression, vomiting, and weight loss. Severe
depression, recumbency, seizures, and oliguria and anuria can occur if the hemolytic
event goes unrecognized.
Minimum Database
Blood and urine should always be drawn in cases in which zinc toxicity is suggested
to perform a complete blood cell count (CBC), serum chemistry panel, and urinalysis.
Hemolysis is almost always evident following collection of the serum. Heinz bodies are
commonly reported. A normocytic or macrocytic, hypochromic anemia is commonly
observed. Evidence of bone marrow regeneration (e.g., increased nucleated red blood
cells, basophilic stippling, polychromasia, and elevated reticulocyte count) can be seen
later in the disease process. Mild spherocytosis may be observed as well.2 Leukocytosis
with neutrophilia and a left shift, monocytosis, and lymphopenia are commonly observed.
The platelet count is usually normal or slightly decreased. Biochemical abnormalities
often include mild hyperproteinemia, mild to marked azotemia, elevated alkaline phos-
phatase and alanine aminotransaminase activity, and hyperbilirubinemia. Urinalysis
often reveals marked proteinuria, hemoglobinuria, and bilirubinuria; glucosuria has also
been reported.
Patients should always have a radiographic examination performed for evidence of
radiodense objects in the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract. Absence of radiopaque objects
should not absolutely rule out zinc toxicosis as a differential because many patients vomit
up the objects before admission (or pass them out through the feces).
Confirmatory Tests
Serum zinc concentrations are always elevated in cases of acute zinc poisoning. Blood
should be collected in specific vacutainer tubes designed for trace element analysis. Con-
tamination of some blood collection tubes from the rubber stoppers and leaching of zinc
from platelets and red blood cells requires that blood be collected with a clean venous stick
and stored in the appropriate tube. The blood should be allowed to clot and then spun and
separated into a separate tube (another trace mineral vacutainer or small plastic vial) before
shipping. Normal serum zinc concentrations generally range between 0.70 and 2 ppm in
850SECTlON 4Specific Toxicants
dogs and between 0.50 and 1.10 ppm in cats. Serum zinc levels often exceed 5 ppm in con-
firmed cases of zinc toxicity.
 Postmortem confirmation is based on compatible gross and histologic lesions and on
the presence of elevated zinc levels in liver, kidney, and pancreas. Adequate zinc levels
reported for cats in liver and kidney tissue, respectively, are 25 to 80 ppm and 11 to 25 ppm,
wet weight. Adequate zinc levels reported in dogs for liver and kidney, respectively, are 30
ai u suz noy aui u anexndde au giam iam dd oe oi 9i pue tudd o 0n
pancreas for both dogs and cats is 22 to 60 ppm, wet weight. Any zinc levels notably higher
than these, accompanied by an appropriate history, clinical signs, clinical pathologic data,
and histologic lesions, are compatible with a diagnosis of zinc poisoning.
Treatment
of removal is a clinical judgment call and can include inducing emesis, endoscopy, or gas-
trotomy. Once these objects have been removed from the gastrointestinal tract, serum and
tissue zinc levels drop greatly, providing that the excretory pathways are working effciently
 In one case in a dog in which the initial serum zinc level was 20 ppm, the level dropped to
6.5 ppm 3 days later (following surgical removal of coins from the stomach, intravenous
[IV] fluid therapy, and two blood transfusions), and the level was 4.6 ppm 9 days later (esti-
mated half-life of between 1.8 to 4.2 days). The serum zinc level was back to normal (1.40
ppm) 16 days after initiating treatment. A case describing zinc poisoning ina dog reported
a plasma zinc half-life of 7.6 days following removal of the metallic object, blood transfu-
sion, and fluid therapy.6
 Supportive therapy is essential to a favorable outcome. Various treatment options
include controlling the vomiting, blood transfusions to address the anemia, and balanced
electrolyte IV fluid therapy to maintain hydration status. Continuous monitoring of the
(e.g., blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, liver enzymes, and electrolytes) is essential to assess
the patient's response to treatment. Diffuse intravascular coagulation (DIC), along with
renal, pancreatic, and liver dysfunction, are possible complications that should be addressed
immediately. Anuric renal failure was documented in a 15.4-kg Welsh corgi with a serum
zinc concentration of 90 ppm; the dog had ingested an ornamental brass knob from a toilet
paper holder.7
Chelation therapy has been advocated by some individuals to enhance renal zinc
excretion. Considerations to take into account when deciding to use a chelator include
the serum zinc concentration, the clinical condition and hydration status of the patient,
the degree of excretory organ dysfunction, and whether the zinc-containing object can
be removed from the gastrointestinal tract. Calcium disodium EDTA has been the most
commonly suggested chelator, and the dose for treating zinc-poisoned pets has been
extrapolated from the lead literature (100 mg/kg divided into four SC doses per day and
diluted in 5% dextrose in water to reduce local irritation at the site of injection). Peni-
cillamine, 110 mg/kg/day PO divided every 6 to 8 hours for 1 to 2 weeks or longer, has
also been suggested (extrapolated from treatment recommendations for lead poisoning).
Daily monitoring of the serum zinc concentration should be used to determine the length
 a ae s i a a u a an si aa a n go
chelation therapy, thereby making it a controversial treatment option for zinc-poisoned
patients.
Prognosis
al go Aiaaas a uo spuadap pue papiena si siuaned pauosiod Aiaime roy sisouoid au
anemia and the extent of any liver, renal, or pancreatic insuffciency. Evidence of DIC is not
associated with a favorable outcome. Timely recognition and intervention are the keys to a
successful outcome.
Chapter 84 | Zinc 851
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Gross lesions are nonspecific and can include icterus, dark-stained urine, splenomegaly,
-ad a reqoan pue sis uaoa wm sisndau ean aui sies pue so
acinal to midzonal hepatic necrosis with pigment accumulation. Macrophages within the
atic abnormalities have been described, and the severity of the lesions appears to be time
dependent. Reported lesions include necrosis of the pancreatic duct epithelium, interstitial
inflammatory infltrates, and interstitial fbrosis.&
Differential Diagnoses
Acute zinc poisoning in dogs and cats must be differentiated from other causes of acute
can mimic an acute bacterial, viral, or parasitic infection and a multitude of nonspecific
problems, such as hepatic or renal failure or neoplasia. Other causes of an intravascular
hemolysis include immune-mediated diseases, onion poisoning, mustard poisoning, cop-
per poisoning, acetaminophen or propylene glycol toxicity, naphthalene toxicity, and rattle-
snake bites.
References
1. Sanstead HH: Understanding zinc: recent observations and interpretations, I Lab Clin Med 124:322-327,
1994.
2. Gurnee CM, Drobatz KJ: Zinc intoxication in dogs: 19 cases (1991-2003), JA VMA 230(8):1174-1179, 2007.
3. Breitschwerdt EB, Armstrong PJ, Robinette CL, et al: Three cases of acute zinc toxicosis in dogs, Vet Hum
Toxicol 28(2):109-117, 1986.
4. Abdel-Mageed AB,Oehme FW: A review ofthe biochemical roles, toxicity and interactions of zinc, cop-
per and iron: 1. Zinc, Vet Hum Toxicol 32(1):34-39, 1990.
5. Puls R, editor: Mtneral levels in animal health, Clearbrook, British Columbia, 1994, Sherpa International
 6. Hammond GM, Loewen ME, Blakley BR: Diagnosis and treatment of zinc poisoning in a dog, Vet Hum
Toxicol 46(5):272-275, 2004.
7. Volmer PA, Roberts J, Meerdink GL: Anuric renal failure associated with zinc toxicosis in a dog, Vet Hum
Toxicol 46(5):276-278, 2004.
8. Shaw DP, Collins JE, Murphy MJ: Pancreatic fibrosis associated with zinc toxicosis in a dog, I Vet Diagn
Invest 3:80-81, 1991.
CHAPTER
Zinc Phosphide
85
Michael W. Knight, DVM, DABVT, DABT
Zinc phosphide, a common rodenticide, is dangerous to all animal species
Nontarget intoxication is rmost commonly noted in dogs.
Zinc phosphide reacts chemically in the acid environment of the carnivore
stomach to liberate phosphine gas, which is a dangerous systemic poison.
· A 10-kg dog could be at significant risk following the ingestion of 10 g (~1 tbsp) of
a commercial 2% pelleted bait product
· In the dog, onset to signs of clinical intoxication often occurs less than 1 hour
following ingestion. ln severe cases of intoxication, acute, severe gastrointestinal
distress and hermorrhage, followed by rapid progression to systemic celular
hypoxia, convulsions, and cardiovascular shock, can develop. Death can occur 
within hours following high-dose ingestions.
Treatrment involves decontarmination efforts early in selected cases, followed by
patient stabilization, close systems rmonitoring, and supportive considerations.
· Athough zinc phosphide is very dangerous, a reasonable proportion of dogs
exposed to the bait are able to experience successful recovery following ingestion.
Sources
Zinc phosphide (trizinc diphosphide, ZnsPz) is a metallophosphide that was initially
synthesized in 1740. It was first used as a rodenticide in 19i1 to control field rodents in
Italy and was introduced into the United States around the time of World War II. Zinc
phosphide is a dull to lustrous, gray to black crystal that has a faint, pungent, disagreeable
phosphorous odor. Commercial zinc phosphide is available as a paste, tracking powder, or
grain-based pellet; generally ranges in concentration from 0.5% to 10%; and in the United
States is used primarily for the control of gophers and moles (Color Plate 85-1).2 When kept
in dry, acid-free conditions at up to 40° C (104° F), zinc phosphide is quite stable for at least
2 years, but storage temperatures of more than 50° C (122° F) have been shown to cause
significant deterioration of the bait. 3 The average effective bait life when exposed to wet soil
is approximately 20 days, although the bait may retain some degree of toxicity for several
months in the field, even under substantial rain conditions.34 In a suffciently acid envi-
ronment, zinc phosphide is unstable and hydrolyzes to release phosphine (PH3, hydrogen
phosphide, phosphorus trihydride) gas, a dangerous systemic poison.5
Other metallophosphide poisons, including aluminum phosphide (e.g., Phosfume,
Phostek, Phostoxin, and Fumitoxin; tablets or pellets containing 55% to 60% or more alu-
minum phosphide) and magnesium phosphide (e.g., Magtoxin), are used primarily as grain
fumigants and are less commonly encountered by the veterinary clinician in North America.
s al u pae si saisrdnau asa r  u ra
853
854SECTION 4 SpecificToxicants
fashion as zinc phosphide, as phosphine is the common offending toxin. Zinc phosphide
toxicosis in nontarget animals generally results from accidental ingestion of placed baits.
Although various animal relay (secondary) toxicity research trials have reported no relay
effect, relay toxicosis has been reported from the field in dogs.1.6.7
Toxic Dose
papiebau Aisnoas aq pmous ad e ul apiudsoqd ouiz ot amsodxa paisadsns io paaiasqo Aury
The minimum toxic dose, minimum lethal dose, and median oral lethal dose (LDso) of zinc
phosphide for the dog or cat have not been reported. Various reported animal LDso values
for zinc phosphide include avian spp., 7.5 to 20 mg/kg body weight (BW); rabbit, 8.25 mg/kg
BW; rat, 12 to 40 mg/kg BW; goat, 20 mg/kg BW; and pig,40 mg/kg BW.6.8 Unpublished
work indicates that the dose of zinc phosphide producing toxic effects in dogs lies some-
where between 20 and 40 mg/kg BW.6 In an unpublished trial, a dog dosed with 40 mg/kg
of zinc phosphide died following acute convulsive activity approximately 7 to 8 hours later.?
Fasted dogs may be more tolerant to zinc phosphide intoxication. One source reported that
100 mg/kg of zinc phosphide was lethal in dogs fasted for 24 hours, whereas another source
-m an ui guau apudsoud suz jo syu ooe paias sop pasey ieu paou
est available canine zinc phosphide toxicity data (20 mg/kg BW) as a guideline, a 10-kg
dog could be considered at risk following the ingestion of 10 g of a 2% bait or 6 g of a 3.5%
bait. Some pet species that are unable to vomit (rabbits, rats, hamsters, and gerbils) and
thus forced to retain ingested bait in the stomach should be considered more susceptible to
poisoning. Zinc phosphide should not be used for rodent control near aviary environments
as rodents have been reported to carry bait pieces in their cheek pouches into aviaries and
into avian feeding dishes.10
Toxicokinetics
Zinc phosphide is used as a rodenticide by virtue of its ability to release highly toxic
phosphine gas once the bait has been swallowed. A clinically important physical charac-
teristic of zinc phosphide is its relatively poor ability to hydrolyze in a more neutral pH
environment.2s6.11 In fact, where zinc phosphide is to be used as a fumigant, an acid or
moist environment must be available or supplied for significant hydrolysis and subsequent
phosphine liberation to occur.6 Significant hydrolysis of zinc phosphide with subsequent
phosphine liberation occurs in vitro in a pH solution of 4 or less, whereas phosphine gen-
eration from zinc phosphide was been reported to be negligible in canine gastric contents at
a slightly higher pH of 4.3.12 This important characteristic of zinc phosphide is in contrast to
aluminum phosphide and magnesium phosphide, which are both readily soluble in a neu-
tral pH environment and will hydrolyze in water to release phosphine; thus the preference
Aluminum phosphide and magnesium phosphide readily hydrolyze in neutral (or acid)
pH conditions'3:
2AlP + 6HO→2PH;↑+ 2Al(OH);
MgsP2 + 6HO → 2PHs ↑ + 3Mg(OH)2
Zinc phosphide requires a suficiently acid pH environment for hydrolysis to occur3.
ZnsP2 + 6H → 2PHs↑ + 3Zn++
Zinc phosphide and other metallophosphides are acutely corrosive and as such often
provide a strong, spontaneous vomition effect following ingestion.2 This characteristic of
zinc phosphide can fortunately serve to limit the degree and severity of intoxication in
those animal species that are able to vomit.49 Peracute onset of spontaneous, persistent
Once phosphine is released from zinc phosphide, little is known regarding the detailed
pharmacokinetics of phosphine absorption, distribution, and elimination. Liberated
Chapter 85 | Zinc Phosphide 855
phosphine is readily absorbed into the systemic circulation by inhalation and across the gut
wall.13.1s-17 Most absorbed phosphine is eventually excreted via the lung as the parent com-
pound, although some phosphine is slowly and incompletely oxidized to relatively less toxic
phosphorus oxides and oxyacids (chiefly hypophosphite and phosphite) and excreted in the
urine.2.6.13 Following a single oral dose of zinc phosphide in humans, phosphine in expired
air is negligible after 12 hours, suggesting fairly rapid elimination of parent phosphine from
the body.6 Intact zinc phosphide has also been recovered from the gut wall, blood, liver,
and kidney in humans and in animals.6.13 Absorbed zinc phosphide may remain intact in
the body possibly beyond 24 hours, and may play a role in delayed adverse liver and kidney
effects that are sometimes noted.6 Whether dermal absorption of zinc phosphide occurs to
g'aqiaiau aq ot auos q iuno st inq ieasun st aaiaap suesyuis ae
Mechanism of Toxicity
The corrosive action of intact zinc phosphide on the gastric mucosa accounts for the acute
The systemic toxicity of zinc phosphide (and other metallophosphides) can be
accounted for by the toxicity of phosphine, a colorless, spontaneously flammable, very toxic
gas that is released when zinc phosphide comes into contact with the acid environment
of the carnivore stomach.29 Phosphine combines with surface moisture to produce direct
physical irritant injury to the gastrointestinal and respiratory mucosal surfaces, in addition
to causing oxidative injury to the parenchyma.15.19 Phosphine can freely diffuse into intra-
cellular compartments, and as a highly reactive radical can initiate nucleophilic attack and
reduce vital enzyme systems.'5 Although the exact biochemical mechanism of phosphine
toxicity is still under investigation, in human aluminum phosphide poisoning cases, acute
cardiovascular collapse is a common feature of phosphide intoxication, and severe poison-
ing often induces multiorgan dysfunction and failure.'5 There is evidence that phosphine
interrupts cellular aerobic respiration at the mitochondrial level.15 It has been shown that
inhibition of cytochrome c oxidase complex IV (more dramatic in vitro than in vivo), as
well as a decrease in activity of cytochrome complexes I and II in vivo, do occur.'5 This inhi-
 bition of the electron transport chain results in decreased adenosine triphosphate (energy)
(ROS).15 Phosphine has been shown to reduce the activity of the metalloenzymes catalase
and peroxidase (resulting in reduced ROS scavenging ability), and increasing activity of
superoxide dismutase.'5 Through this combined enzyme disruption and reduced ability
to scavenge, superoxide ion Oz- is dismutased to produce hydrogen peroxide, which in
turn forms the highly reactive hydroxyl radical +OH, resulting in OH-associated oxidative
stress, lipid peroxidation, damage to cell lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids, and ultimately
cell death.6is.2.21 This effect is especially significant in tissues of high oxygen demand
(heart, brain, kidney, and liver) or of high phosphine concentration (lung).l3 Acute collapse
of cell structure and function in individual tissue results in multiple systemic organ failure
and cardiovascular shock and collapse.5.2z Phosphine also denatures mammalian hemoglo-
 bin?3 and has been shown to inhibit acetylcholinesterase in vivo in rats, resulting in defined,
clinical cholinergic toxicity.24
clinical Signs
During a 10-year period (2001-2011), the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals Animal Poison Control Center (APCC) consulted on 773 reliable (agent and
exposure history were confirmed or suspected) zinc phosphide ingestion cases involving
de uo sa tr'te a yo an an ne suis u ura aram ien sop i
mately 80% of these cases were lost to follow-up. In case for which outcome was obtained,
171 dogs either died or were euthanized, and 126 dogs experienced full recovery.l4 Dur-
ing this same 10-year period, the APCC consulted on 19 reliable dog cases of aluminum
phosphide ingestion.14
856SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
The most commonly noted signs in this review included (in relative descending order)
vomition; generalized lethargy, depression, dullness, and weakness; diarrhea; tremor,
agitation, and restlessness; seizure and convulsion; lateral recumbency; abdominal discom-
fort and pain; and death.14 Other notable signs or clinical findings included (no particular
order) retching, hematemesis, bloody diarrhea, and incontinence; ataxia, circling, anxiety,
stiffness and rigidity, paddling, disorientation, hyperesthesia, vocalization, and coma;
miosis, mydriasis, blindness, nystagmus, anisocoria, and photophobia; tachypnea, dyspnea,
pulmonary edema, and cyanosis; tachycardia, bradycardia, pallor, collapse, and shock;
 a     a    
icterus, and facial edema.14
cemia, elevated liver enzymes, hyperbilirubinemia, hypobilirubinemia, and azotemia with
elevated blood urea nitrogen and creatinine; elevated lipase and elevated amylase; hypona-
tremia, hypokalemia, hyperphosphatemia, metabolic acidosis, coagulopathy, thrombocyto-
penia, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). 14
The initial signs of acute vomition may be persistent and hemorrhagic and may be
accompanied by signs that the patient is uncomfortable and irritable when handled.8.14.25
Although most dogs will begin to vomit within 15 to 60 minutes of bait ingestion, onset
of initial signs can be delayed up to 4 hours, and rarely up to 12 to 18 hours or longer.14
With severe intoxications, cardiovascular collapse and death can occur within 3 to
5 hours.914
As phosphine becomes absorbed, cellular hypoxia develops, leading to cardiopulmo
nary, circulatory, and neuromuscular compromise. Apprehension, anxiety, discomfort
and pacing, weakness and ataxia, labored respiration, struggling, convulsion, collapse,
and coma can occur during a relatively short time. Vocalization, frantic behavior, teeth
baring, teeth grinding, abdominal straining, and urinary and bowel incontinence may
occur.
Auscultation may reveal harsh lung sounds and suspected pulmonary edema; cyanosis
may be evident in these cases as well. The abdomen is generally tense and may be distended;
blood may be present on rectal examination; a faint odor of rotten fish or garlic may be
 detected by hospital staff, which indicates a hazard to the staff.7914.25
Minimum Database
Obtain the following analyses:14 15.26.27
1. An electrocardiogram demonstrates nonspecific effects: ventricular tachycardia
supraventricular tachycardia, ventricular premature complexes, supraventricular and
ventricular ectopy, ventricular fibrillation, asystole; atrial fibrillation or flutter bigeminy;
prolonged PR interval, widened QRS interval, ST segment changes, and abnormal T
waves. Echocardiography may assist in determining ventricular function.
2. Assess blood pressure. Circulatory failure is common in more severe cases.
 3. Assess radiographs. Pulmonary edema may be cardiac or noncardiac in origin; pleural
effusion and ascites may be noted in more severe cases.
4. Assess CO-oximetry findings.
5. Assess electrolyte levels: acid base and blood gases, systemic metabolic acidosis,
and respiratory acidosis. Assess chemistry levels: liver, kidney, muscle (including
cardiac).
6. Obtain cormplete blood cell count, platelets, and methemoglobinemia; hemolysis is
possible in severe cases.
 7. Assess coagulation profle for increased clotting times; DIC may be noted in more severe
cases.
 8. Assess urinalysis for color, specific gravity, cell type, protein, glucose, myoglobin, and
hemoglobin.
9. Obtain whole blood cholinesterase (optional)
Chapter 85 | Zinc Phosphide 857
Confirmatory Tests
Gas chromatography and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry are sensitive meth-
     u  ad g  aa r ss
The use of silver nitrate-impregnated paper has been used in human metallophosphide
poisoning cases as a rapid, qualitative screening tool for the presence of phosphine on
gastric contents; diluted gastric content is heated in a flask up to 50° C/122° F for 15-20
minutes, with the impregnated paper positioned over the mouth of the flask; if present,
generated phosphine from the sample will blacken the impregnated paper; hydrogen
sulfde will also blacken silver nitrate paper and can be further differentiated using lead
contents, any suspect bait, vomitus, liver, kidney, and lung should be collcted in an airtight
in gastric contents, liver, and kidney, but are not considered to be a reliable indication of
zinc phosphide poisoning.2 Cholinesterase inhibition has been documented in studies of
metallophosphide-poisoned rats?4 but, to my knowledge, has not been reported in domes-
tic animal zinc phosphide intoxication cases; heparinized whole blood collection from the
live animal or chilled intact eyeball and complete hemisphere of chilled brain postmortem
are generally preferred to assess cholinesterase inhibition in animals.
Treatment
Goals
 In the as-yet asymptormatic patient suspected to have recently ingested zinc phosphide bait,
the clinician's initial consideration is for or against judicious, prompt decontamination
intervention, with the obvious objective being to offset or mitigate a potential phosphine
effect. Once the clinician has enough logistical details on the case (travel time for the client
to the hospital, availability of client transportation, etc.) and because timing is of essence, an
initial decontamination decision can be made, with the follow-up objective being to present
the patient to the hospital for evaluation and management.
It should also be noted that many dogs vomit spontaneously very soon after an inges-
tion of zinc phosphide bait because of the corrosive nature of the metallophosphide on the
gastric mucosa; in so doing, there is some degree of “auto-decontamination” with some
alleviation of the much more serious phosphine effect that can occur.l4 In light of the
extreme and serious nature of phosphine toxicity, however, the veterinary clinician should
not assume that these “self-decontamination" cases are out of danger. No effective antidote
for metallophosphide intoxication exists, and even aggressive clinical management of more
severe cases can be unrewarding.
 In the symptomatic patient, the clinician's objective is to capture, stabilize, and maintain
the patient's respiratory, cardiovascular, neuromuscular, and metabolic systems and to pro-
vide ancillary supportive care until the patient recovers.
Prevention of Phosphine Release from Zinc Phosphide
Throughout the course of zinc phosphide ingestion management, and especially during
the decontamination phase, every precaution must be taken to prevent collateral human
and animal exposure to phosphine gas coming off the patient. Those involved in caring
for the exposed patient must remain vigilant to provide adequate, open ventilation. This is
critical for veterinary staff when instructing the client at home who will likely be unaware
of the associated phosphine hazard, during transport of the patient to the hospital, and
phosphine gas is spontaneously flammable and heavier than air, and detectable by olfac-
tion (faint fishy to garlic odor). Humans are generally unable to detect phosphine until
858SECTION4SpecificToxicants
the ambient concentration reaches approximately 2 ppm, which is above the safe limit for
phosphine exposure (the Environmental Protection Agency cites 1 ppm phosphine as the
upper limit for a brief, 15-minute exposure, or 0.3 ppm exposure for 8 hours).1s,30 Thus a
very large dog that may be recumbent and on the floor of the treatment room could place
 attending staff and other patients in adjacent floor-level enclosures at risk.
Although little research exists regarding a safe, effective procedure that could minimize
phosphine release and subsequent systemic absorption in the veterinary patient following
recent ingestion of zinc phosphide bait, several options exist for consideration by the clini-
cian: (1) emetics—apomorphine or oral 3% hydrogen peroxide USP topical solution in dogs,
(2) oral pH-altering antacid agents, and (3) oral medical grade mineral oil or vegetable
cooking oil.
sd suz sdase ue u sisaa unui upilan Asiaa as st ana
the possible risk of corrosive injury to esophageal mucosa during the emesis procedure.6.18,30
However, once the phosphine off-gas hazard risk has been properly addressed, the much
greater risk to the patient of allowing zinc phosphide bait to remain in the stomach with
subsequent release of a dangerous systemic poison relative to the risk of corrosive injury to
esophageal mucosa must be weighed by the veterinary clinician.
at home (outdoors if at all possible), medical-grade USP 3% hydrogen peroxide, topical
solution, is recommended at a dose of 1 mL per pound BW,31 to a maximum of 60 mL total
[ si sisaa anu oi apixoiad uasoi susn ys aissod y saop ie u an
hydroxyl radical formation in the gastric lumen subsequent to hydrogen peroxide combin-
ing with any available phosphine.32 The use of table salt or syrup of ipecac to induce vomit-
ing should be avoided because of risks associated with systemic hypernatremia and seizure
(salt) and cardiac toxicity (ipecac), but also because ipecac is less prompt and inconsistent
as an emetic in pets.14.2z7 Finally, care must be taken to prevent accidental ingestion of con-
taminated vomitus by other pets or animals in the neighboring environment.
 In lieu of an emesis procedure, the clinician may opt for attempting to minimize phos-
phine release by increasing the gastric pH to more than pH 4 (see Toxicokinetics earlier in
sium hydroxide, aluminum hydroxide, or calcium carbonate are readily available and can
 be effective in rapidly increasing the pH of the gastric environment. Magnesium hydroxide
raises the gastric pH more quickly and higher than does aluminum hydroxide, whereas
aluminum hydroxide provides a more sustained pH change.33 Aluminum hydroxide also
decreases phosphorus absorption by forming insoluble phosphates,33 a desired clini-
cal effect in this case. When available, a combination magnesium hydroxide-aluminum
hydroxide liquid antacid gel (e.g., extra-strength forms of Maalox, Gaviscon, or Mylanta)
is preferred. Consider dosing an antacid gel at 1 mL/pound BW for these purposes (double
the standard dog dose34). Antacid tablets are not as effective in this regard, but could be
crushed and mixed with a small amount of water or milk for administration.35 A dilute
solution (2% to 5%) of sodium bicarbonate has also been recommended elsewhere to
increase gastric pH.925.36 One level teaspoon of baking soda in approximately 3 ounces of
water provides an approximate 5% solution and provides approximately 42 mEq sodium;
hypernatremia risk should be guarded against if considering this approach. These various
 pH-altering approaches have not been tested in the clinical setting of zinc phosphide inges-
tion in animals.
A final, and riskier, intervention measure for consideration is the use of medical-grade
liquid mineral oil (liquid paraffin) or vegetable cooking oil as both have been shown in vitro
to significantly delay the release of phosphine from aluminum phosphide.37 This approach
has not been tested in the veterinary clinical setting to my knowledge and carries an obvi-
to 60 mL, depending on the size of the dog." There is also evidence that dietary lipids may
enhance systemic absorption of intact zinc phosphide in animals.6
Chapter 85 | Zinc Phosphide 859
Gastric lavage using a dilute (1:5000 or greater) potassium permanganate (KMnO4)
solution to attempt oxidation of metallophosphide material to less toxic oxyacids has been
recommended, although this recommendation has not been tested for efficacy or safety,
and KMnO4 may not be readily available in the United States.36 Gastric lavage, if deemed
appropriate for the case, should be approached with caution, and the patient should be
intubated and securely cuffed to minimize risk for phosphine inhalation by the patient, as
well as by staff during the procedure. Oral activated charcoal has been recommended for
 of charcoal aspiration in the severely vomiting patient must be carefully weighed by the
clinician.
Symptomatic and Supportive Management
An intravenous (IV) catheter should be placed as soon as possible in the symptomatic
patient. Any persistent, nonproductive vomiting should be controlled with an antiemetic of
choice. If the patient is in shock, a crystalloid shock dose of 80 to 90 mL/kg/hr as needed for
dogs and 40 to 60 mL/kg/hr as needed for cats, or a synthetic colloid shock dose of 20 mL/
kg/hr as needed for dogs and 10 to 20 mL/kg/hr for cats as needed should be considered.38 If
over dopamine at 1-20 mcg/kg/min or dobutamine at 5-15 mcg/kg/min.26.31 Systemic meta-
bolic acidosis, often severe, is common in most systemic cases, and respiratory acidosis may
be noted. Sodium bicarbonate infusion may be required. Fluid rate should be adjusted to
ensure adequate perfusion while guarding against pulmonary overload.
Oxygen supplementation should be instituted in all cases; assisted breathing may be
required in severe cases. Steroids have been suggested to assist in checking pulmonary cap-
illary leakage and potentiate responsiveness of catecholamines, and low-dose beta agonists
have been recommended to relieve bronchospasm (be aware that albuterol may exacerbate
peripheral hypotension).17.27 Diuretics if used should be administered with caution.40
Agitated or seizing zinc phosphide patients may respond to benzodiazepines (diazepam
1-2 mg/kg IV bolus, then 0.5-1 mg/kg/hr) or midazolam 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IV;3l propofol 1-8
mg/kg IV slowly, then 0.1-0.6 mg/kg/min, titrated to effect (be aware of cardiac effects); a
cardiac-safe gas inhalant; a barbiturate (pentobarbital 5 to 15 mg/kg slowly, then constant-
rate infusion 0.2 to 1 mg/kg/hr [be aware of potential respiratory depression]]; or levetirace-
tam (20-60 mg/kg BW). Methocarbamol 55 to 220 mg/kg IV, up to a maximum of 330 mg/
kg/day, may provide some relief of excessive skeletal muscle activity.31
Electrolytes should be monitored frequently and include ionized magnesium and cal-
cium. Myocardial injury as a direct result of phosphine intoxication is a major focus of
clinical management in human metallophosphide poisoning cases. A correlation has been
made between an acute deficiency of serum magnesium and an increased incidence of car-
al on ein st usau pue trt'sains asin apidsondoeia uq u isae se
integrity of myocardial function.40 There is some evidence that successful correction of
magnesium deficiency may result in an increased survival rate in human metallophosphide
poisoning cases.42 Ihe normal reference range for ionized Mg is 0.42 to 0.55 mmol/L in the
dog and 0.43 to 0.58 mmol/L in the cat.43 Because greater than 99% of total body magne-
sium is intracellular, it may be difficult to determine actual magnesium debt from serum
magnesium levels, and a low-normal serum magnesium level may be indicative of a mag-
nesium deficit.40 The detection of either hypokalermia or hyponatremia should alert the
clinician to the possibility of coexisting hypomagnesemia.40 Mild magnesium deficits may
 be corrected by IV fluids that contain Mg (Plasma-Lyte, Normosol-R), or magnesium chlo-
ride or magnesium sulfate added to 5% dextrose in water (D5W) at an initial dose of 0.75 t0
1 mEq/kg BW/day in dogs.44 For life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias or cardiac arrest,
a magnesium dose of 0.15 to 0.3 mEq/kg in the dog (50 to 100 mg/kg) can be diluted in D5W
or normal saline and administered slowly IV over 5 to 15 minutes to raise the ventricular
fbrillation threshold.44 Excessive IV Mg therapy may result in hypocalcemia, hypotension,
and cardiac conduction abnormalities (arteriovenous and bundle branch blocks), in which
case parenteral calcium gluconate may be required.44
860SECTlON 4 Specifikc Toxicants
Cholinesterase inhibition may play some role in metallophosphide poisoning, as alu-
minum phosphide poisoning in vivo studies in rats has shown a clinically apparent and
statistically significant cholinesterase inhibition effect.24 In these studies atropine and prali-
doxime chloride administration increased the survival rate in treated groups.24 Although
the cholinesterase inhibition question has been addressed in human phosphine exposure
cases4 and has received comment in veterinary zinc phosphide poisoning cases in dogs,12
the question of whether a clinically significant phosphine-associated cholinesterase inhibi-
tion effect occurs in zinc phosphide (or other metallophosphide) veterinary cases remains
to be determined. If cholinesterase inhibition does occur during zinc phosphide intoxica-
tion in domestic animals, research aimed at clinical characterization and management of
this aspect of metallophosphide intoxication might increase the chance for survival in the
veterinary patient.
 In cases in which suspected cholinergic nicotinic or muscarinic effects are apparent in
the poisoned patient, the clinician may consider judicious administration of atropine sul-
fate at 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV slowly while assessing the cardiopulmonary system. If the patient
appears to respond to an initial atropine challenge, then atropine could be carefully titrated
as needed to effect, and cholinesterase recovery may be considered using pralidoxime
chloride (Protopam) at 10-20 mg/kg IV or intramuscularly (IM) every 8-12 hours for 2-3
treatments.46 N-acetylcysteine (NAC, the active ingredient in Mucomyst, Acetadote, etc.)
is a low-molecular-weight precursor to glutathione that can cross cell wall membranes to
replenish intracellular glutathione stores and provide a glutathione substitute, as well as
conjugate directly with various detrimental ROs.2z Reduced glutathione normally present
in healthy tissue scavenges a variety of endogenous and exogenous ROS, thereby sparing
(and detoxifying) cellular macromolecules to maintain normal cell integrity and function.
When glutathione is depleted following tissue injury, ROS bind to cell macromolecules,
potentially leading to death of the cell. Research in rodents indicates that glutathione plays
an important protective role in phosphine-induced cellular oxidative damage, with exog-
enous NAC administration providing increased survival time in animals poisoned with
aluminum phosphide. 2 It has been proposed that NAC might protect the myocardium and
other tissues from cellular hypoxic injury in human metallophosphide poisoning cases and
may have significant cytoprotective effects in the face of acute myocardial injury mediated
Several NAC dosing regimens exist in the veterinary literature, with loading doses rang-
ing from 140 to 280 mg/kg BW given IV or per os (PO), followed by a maintenance dose
of 70 mg/kg, with dosing intervals ranging from every 4 to 8 hours, and from 3 to 17 treat-
ments, depending on the case.3l The margin of safety for NAC is quite good (acute IV lethal
o ar u) a A paiaxa st n pue (ayl to si sao ui aso
5.6 hours in humans).48 NAC general support should begin as soon as possible following
the symptomatic veterinary patient's admission.47
Melatonin, an indolamine hormone secreted by the pineal gland, has been shown
in vitro to block or reduce phosphine-induced oxidative damage in kidney, heart, brain,
 ability to repair damaged biomolecules, and is considered a very effective antioxidant.5l
Melatonin crosses cell membranes with ease and distributes in sufficiently high propor-
tions in the lipid and aqueous phases of the cell, thus effectively protecting macromolecules
against oxidative insults in various compartments of the cell, including the membrane,
cytosol, mitochondrion, and nucleus.5] Melatonin given orally to adult dogs at 1to 1.3 mg/kg
resulted in measurable blood levels in 15 minutes, and levels remained greatly elevated for
at least 8 hours.52 Whether zinc phosphide-intoxicated veterinary patients would benefit
from melatonin administration remains to be determined. Although melatonin appears to
be a relatively safe agent in dogs at relatively high doses,l4 adverse effects of acute melatonin
 administration may include tachycardia and disorientation.4.53
Zinc phosphide veterinary patients generally experience significant pain and discomfort
and should receive proper analgesia continuously during hospitalization and throughout
Chapter 85 | Zinc Phosphide 861
drugs such as a sucralfate (slurry, 1 g PO every 6 to 12 hours), a proton pump inhibitor
such as omeprazole (0.5 to 1 mg/kg PO every 24 hours), or an H-receptor blocker such
as famotidine (0.5 to 1 mg/kg IV, subcutaneously, IM, PO every 12 to 24 hours).31 If blood
work reflects hepatic injury, in addition to NAC support, the patient may be considered
for additional liver-protective agents such as S-adenosylmethionine, milk thistle (silyma-
rin) for 10-14 days, B vitamins, vitamin K, IV dextrose, and dietary manipulation. Severely
affected hepatic patients may benefit from plasma administration.
Prognosis
Dogs remaining asymptomatic for longer than 8 to 12 hours following suspected inges-
tion of zinc phosphide bait typically experience a favorable prognosis. In those dogs that
develop an initial spontaneous vomiting effect, but with no progression of systemic signs
sp asai e a aa si sisod s  oi i aas an a
should be considered for in-hospital supportive care and close monitoring for a mini-
mum of 24 hours, and discharged with a scheduled recheck after 3 to 5 days for pos-
sible delayed-onset liver and kidney injury (rare).14 When moderate to severe multiorgan
compromise develops within the first few hours of exposure, a guarded prognosis should
be offered initially. Prognosis in symptomatic patients that survive past 24 hours may be
upgraded daily. Liver and kidney injury may be delayed from 3 to 5 days in some cases
(rare event).14.27
Gross and Histologic Lesions
Necropsy generally reveals gross hyperemia of all visceral organs and pulmonary edema.
 interstitial edema of the brain myocardium.7.zs Microscopic studies in humans have dem-
onstrated focal myocardial necrosis with mononuclear infltrate and fragmentation of
fibers, inflammation of mitral and aortic valves, desquamated respiratory epithelium with
In a recent equine metallophosphide (aluminum) field case, primary gross necropsy find-
ings included widespread petechial to ecchymotic hemorrhages throughout multiple organ
systems (mesentery, subcutis, tracheal mucosa, lung, epicardium, spleen, kidney, adrenal,
and skeletal muscle). Microscopic findings included pulmonary edema, hepatocellular lipi-
dosis and centrilobular necrosis, central neuronal edema and necrosis, and severe diffuse
adrenal hemorrhage and necrosis.54
Differential Diagnoses
Strychnine rodenticide: presents with acute onset and rapidly progresses to tetanic, exten-
sor rigidity (sawhorse stance and sardonic grin) and convulsions. Strychnine cases tend not
to vomit and are intensely hyperesthetic to stimuli.
Metaldehyde slug and snail bait: present with acute onset and rapid progression to
coarse muscle tremors and seizures. Vomition is common, but gastric corrosion with blood
is less likely, and there is less pulmonary involvement.
in compost piles and spoiled food (variety of dairy and carbohydrate food substrates). It
presents with very rapid onset and marked neuromuscular effect. Vomiting is possible, but
well to management.
Organophosphate or carbamate insecticides: ingestion presents with acute onset and is
rapidly progressive. Signs include vomiting and retching, urine and bowel incontinence,
pulmonary component with harsh lung sounds, dyspnea, tremor, and seizure. Bloody vomi-
tus is less common. Metallophosphide intoxication may mimic zinc phosphide toxicosis.
862SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
4-Aminopyridine (Ampyra, Avitrol): ingestion presents with a clinical picture similar to
zinc phosphide, but hematemesis is not expected.
 Ingestion of heavy metals (arsenic, thallium, and mercury): presents with acute onset,
progressive vomiting with or without blood, painful abdomen, tremor and seizure, and
circulatory shock. Respiratory distress may be noted.
Ingestion of sodium monofluoroacetate (1080): presents with acute onset and rapid
progression to cellular hypoxia, intense distress, delirium, aimless running, respiratory
phide intoxication with a clinical picture reflecting cellular hypoxia; it is difficult to manage
and typically has a poor to grave prognosis. Sodium monofluoroacetate is a restricted-use
pesticide, and is rarely encountered in many practice locations.
 Ingestion of 5-fluorouracil (Efudex): presents with acute onset to severe, intractable sei-
zure, vomiting that is often bloody, and abdominal distress. A respiratory component may
o e u aq an e r Ars ya 'asu ssa aa si iq asad a
antineoplastic prescription ointment.
 Ingestion of serotoninergic and other central nervous system-stimulant medications
and drugs: presents with acute onset of generalized tremor to seizure. Some vomiting may
occur, but typically there is no hemorrhage. Pulmonary involvement is much less than zinc
ough history typically identifies the source of medication and exposure circumstances.
 Ingestion of nonsteroidal antinflammatory analgesics, such as naproxen, piroxicam,
and meloxicam: presents with an onset that is generally not as acute, but significant vomit-
ing occurs early. Hematemesis occurs with high-dose cases, as does moderate abdominal
pain, metabolic acidosis, and seizure. The pulmonary effect is much less pronounced. A
history often reveals the source.
 Ingestion of cycad (sago palm): results in intense, progressive gastrointestinal distress
with or without blood, severe hepatotoxicity, tremor, and seizure (see Color Plate 20-4).
Management is challenging, and prognosis is usually guarded.
References
1. Witmer GW, Fagerstone KA: The use oftoxicants in black-tailed prairie dog management: an overview,
Proceedings ofthe 1Oth Wildlife Damage Management Conference, 2003.
2. Qarkson TW: Inorganic and organometal pesticides. In Hays WJ, Laws ER, editors: Handbook of
pesticide toxicology, vol II, San Diego, 1991, Academic Press.
3. Land Protection: Zinc phosphide, Department of Natural Resources and Mines, Pest Series. The State of
Queensland, PA3, May 2002. Retrieved from www.nrm.qld.gov.au/factsheets/pdf/pest/PA3.pdf.
4. Timm R: Zinc phosphide. In Timm RM, editor: Prevention and control ofwildlijfe damage, Lincoln, 1983,
University of Nebraska, Nebraska Cooperative Extension Service.
5. Index Merck: An encyclopedia of chemicals, drugs, and biologicals, ed 11, Rahway, NJ, 1989, Merck &
Company.
6. World Health Organization, International Programme on Chemical Safety: Phosphine and selected metal
phosphides, environmental health criteria 73, Geneva, 1988. Retrieved from http://www.inchem.org/docu
ments/ehc/ehc/ehc73.htm.
7. Stowe CM, Nelson R, Werdin R,et al: Zinc phosphide poisoning in dogs, J A Vet Med Assoc 173(1):270,
1978.
8. Registry ofToxic Efects of Chemical Substances: Zinc phosphide, Thomson MICROMEDEX, exp 08/2005.
9. Osweiler GD, Carson TL, Buck WB,et al: Clinical and diagnostic veterinary toxicology,ed 3, Dubuque,
lowa, 1985, Kendall/Hunt Publishing Co.
10. Flammer K: Aviculture management. In Harrison GJ, Harrison LR, editors: Clinical avian medicine and
surgery, Philadelphia, 1986, WB Saunders.
Retrieved from http://ace.orst.edu/cgi-bin/mfs/01/pips/zincphos/htm.
12. Fessesswork GG, Stair EL, Johnson BW, et al: Laboratory diagnosis of zinc phosphide poisoning, Vet
Hum Toxicol 36(6):517, 1994.
13. World Health Organization, International Programme on Chemical Safety: Phosphine and selected metal
phosphides, health and safety guide No. 28, Geneva, 1989. Retrieved from http://www.inchem.org/docum
ents/hsg/hsg/hsg028.htm.
Chapter 85 | Zinc Phosphide 863
14. American Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals: Antox database 2001-2011.
15. Anand R, Binukumar BK, Gill KD: Aluminum phosphide poisoning; an unsolved riddle, J Appl Toxicol
ogy 31:449, 2011.
16. Suman RL, Savani M: Pleural effusion—a rare complication of aluminum phosphide poisoning, Indian
Ped36:1161, 1999. Retrieved from http://www.indianpediatrics.net/99nov14.htm.
atA rt15.html.
 18. Rodenberg HD, Chang CC, Watson WA: Zinc phosphide ingestion: a case report and review, Vet Hum
Toxicol 31(6):559, 1989.
19. Gurjar M, Baronia AK, Azim A, et al: Managing aluminum phosphide poisonings, I Emerg Trauma
Shock 4(3):378, 2011.
20. Hsu CH, Quistad GB, Casida JE: Phosphine-induced oxidative stress in Hepa lclc7 cells, Toxicol Sct
46:204, 1998.
21. Pratt SJ: A new measure of uptake: desorption of unreacted phosphine from susceptible and resistant
strains of Tribolium castaneum, J Stored Prod Res 39:507, 2003.
22. Azad A, Lall SB, Mittra S: Effect of N-acetylcysteine and L-NAME on aluminum phosphide induced
cardiovascular toxicity in rats, Acta Pharmacol Sin 22(4):298, 2001.
23. LallSB, Peshin SS, Mitra S: Methemoglobinemia in aluminum phosphide poisoning in rats, Indian J Exp
Btol 38(1):95, 2000.
24. Mittra S, Peshin SS, Lall SB: Cholinesterase inhibition by aluminum phosphide poisoning in rats and
effects of atropine and pralidoxime chloride, Acta Pharmacol Sin 22(1):37, 2001.
25. Casteel SW, Bailey EM: A review of zinc phosphide poisoning, Vet Hum Toxicol 28(2):151, 1986.
 26. Soltaninejad K, Nelson L, Khodakarim N, et al: Unusual complication of aluminum phosphide poison-
ing: development of hemolysis and methemoglobinemia and its successful treatment, Ind Crit Care
Med 15(2):117, 2011.
27. Phosphine. In POiSINDEX System (electronic version). Thomson Reuters (Healthcare) Inc., Greenwood
Village, CO. Retrieved 12/12/2011 from http://www.thomsonhc.com.
28. Tiwary AK, Puschner B, Charlton BR, Filgenzi M: Diagnosis of zinc phosphide poisoning in chickens
29. Morgan S, Niles GA, Edwards WC: Case report-phosphine gas detected in the rumen content of dead
calves, Bovine Pract 34(2):127, 2000.
30. Pepelko B, Seckar J, et al: Worker exposure standard for phosphine gas, Risk Analysis 24(5):1201, 2004.
31. Plumb DC: Veterinary drug handbook, ed 6, Ames, IA, 2008, Blackwell Publishing
32. Nath NS, Bhattacharya I, Tuck AG, et al: Mechanisms of phosphine toxicity, I Toxicol, 2011.
and therapeutics, Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders.
34. Matz ME: Gastrointestinal ulcertherapy. In Bonagura JD, Kirk RW,editors: Current veterinary therapy
Xll, small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
35. Papich MG: Medical therapy for gastrointestinal ulcers. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, editors: Current
veterinary therapy X, small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
36. Metts BD, Stewart NJ: Rodenticides. In Haddad LM, Shannon MW, Winchester JF, editors: Clinical
management of poisoning and drug overdose,ed 3, Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
37. Goswami M, Bindal M, Sen P: Fat and oil inhibit phosphine release from aluminum phosphide—its
clinical implication, Indian J Exp Biol32:647, 1994.
38. Bateman S: Fluid therapy: the basics. Retrieved from http://www.vet.ohio-state.edu/docs/vm700_11/Not
es/basics.html.
39. Barton L: Refractory hypotension, IVECCS 2007 symposium, Veterinary Information Network, 2007.
40. Martin LG, Van Pelt DR, Wingfield WE: Magnesium and the critically ill patient In Bonagura JD, Kirk
RW,editors: Current veterinary therapy Xll, small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
41. Chugh SN, Jaggal KL, Sharma B, et al: Magnesium levels in acute cardiotoxicity due to aluminum
phosphide poisoning, Indian J Med Res {B] 94(December):437, 1991.
42. Chugh SN, Kumar P, Sharma A, et al: Magnesium status and parenteral magnesium sulphate therapy in
acute aluminum phosphide intoxication, Magnesium Res 3/4(7):289, 1994.
43. Jackson CB, Drobatz KJ: Iatrogenic magnesium overdose: 2 case reports, I Vet Emerg Crit Care 14(2):115,
2004.
44. Macintire DK: Metabolic derangements in critical patients, The 2ist ACVIM forum proceedings
Charlotte, NC, 2003.
45. Potter WT, Garry VF, Kelly IT, et al: Radiometric assay of red cell and plasma cholinesterase in pesticide
appliers from Minnesota, Toxicol Appl Pharmacol March 119(1):150, 1993.
46. Fikes JD: Organophosphate and carbamate insecticides, Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20(2):353,
1990.
864SECTION 4SpecificToxicants
47.Acetylcysteine.In: DRUGDEX System (electronic version), Thomson Reuters (Healthcare) Inc.,
Greenwood Village, CO. Retrieved 12/12/2011 from http://www.thomsonhc.com.
48. Food and Drug Administration: N-acetylcysteine, NADA Number 21-539, Rockville, MD, Freedom of
Information Office. Retrieved from www.fda.gov/cder/foi/label/2004/21539_N-acetylcysteine_Ibl.pdf.
49. Hsu CH, Chi BC, Casida JE: Melatonin reduces phosphine-induced lipid and DNA oxidation in vitro
and in vivo in rat brain, I Pinea? Res 32(1):53, 2002.
 50. Hsu CH, Chi BC, Liu MY,et al: Phosphine-induced oxidative damage in rats: role of glutathione, Toxi-
cology 179(102):1, 2002.
 51. Dun-xian T, Reiter RJ, Manchester LC, et al: Chemical and physical properties and potential mecha-
nisms: melatonin as a broad spectrum antioxidant and free radical scavenger, Curr Top Med Chem 2:181,
2002.
52. Ashley PF, Frank LA, Schmeitzel LP, et al: Effect of oral melatonin administration on sex hormone,
prolactin, and thyroid hormone concentrations in adult dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 215(8):1l1, 1999.
53. Melatonin. In DRUGDEX System (electronic version). Thomson Reuters (Healthcare) Inc., Greenwood
Village, CO. Retrieved 12/12/2011 from http//www.thomsonhc.com.
54.
Easterwood L, Chaffin MK, Marsh PS, et al: Phosphine intoxication following oral exposure of horses to
aluminum phosphide-treated feed, I Am Vet Med Assoc 236(4):446, 2010.
Index
A
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), 269,
716-717
AAPCC. See American Association of Poison
N-acetylcysteine (NAC)
Control Centers
for acetaminophen, 426
AAVLD. See American Association of Veterinary
for amanitins, 666-667
Laboratory Diagnosticians
for paraquat, 738
Abamectin, 602
for ricin, 779-780
ABCB1,15, 28, 601, 604
for xylitol, 845
ABCs of critical patient care, 65-69
for zinc phosphide, 860
Absinthe (Wormwood), 340
N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine (NA PQI),
Absorption, 13-14. See also specifc routes;
424
specific toxins
Acetylsalicylic acid (AS), 345
dosage and, 2
ACh. See Acetylcholine
Absorption, distribution, metabolism, and
AChE.See Acetylcholinesterase
excretion (ADME), 13
Achlorhydria,216-217
AC. See Activated charcoal
Acidosis, 441, 545, 548, 830. See also
Acacia georginae, 811
Metabolic acidosis; Respiratory acidosis
ACE inhibitors, 113, 169t, 284t, 694t
DKA, 113, 115
Acepromazine, 95t, 277b
lactic, 55, 416, 527
Acetamide,814
Aconite, 337, 340
Acetaminophen, 56t-57t, 35, 423-430
Acrolein,412-413
blood oxygen and, 68
Acrylonitrile, 524
clinical signs of, 425
Activated charcoal (AC), 51, 78-80
complete blood count for, 55
airway and, 80
confirmatory tests for, 426
for amanitins, 666
differential diagnosis for, 428
for amaryllis, 500
ferrets and, 255-256
for birds, 261
hyperbilirubinemia and, 425-426
for bromethalin, 472, 476
LD for, 423-424
for carbamates, 720-721
lesions from, 427
cathartics and, 80-81
liver and, 255-256,286b
for Compound 1080, 814
mechanism of toxicity of, 424-425
compounds binding to, 80b
methemoglobinemia from, 277-278
for cyanide, 527
minimum database for, 425-426
for DEET, 542
pediatrics and, 218
for EG, 557
prognosis for, 427
for ethanol, 548
1691 'pue uonpoidau
for fipronil, 254-255
sources of, 423
for grapes, 571
testing for, 50
hypernatremia from, 80
toxicokinetics of, 424
for indoxacarb, 747
in toxicology history, 46
for ionophores, 592-593
treatment for, 426-427
for iron, 598
Acetazolamide, 350t-352t
for kalanchoe, 505-506
Acetone, 298, 323, 757t
for lilies, 619
Acetonitrile, 524
for macadamia nuts, 626-627
Acetyl coenzyme A (CoA), 812-813
for mammals, 252
Acetylcholine (ACh), 269, 466, 716-717, 812-813
for mercury, 632
black widow spiders and, 818
for methanol, 644
carbamates and, 269, 716-717
for methylxanthines, 650
homoanatoxin-a and, 537
for muscarine, 671-672
ricin and, 778
for neurotoxins, 538
Page numbers followed by f indicate figures; t, tables; b, boxes.
865
866 Index
Activated charcoal (AC) (Continued)
Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) (Continued)
for nicotine, 684
with blood, 692
for OCs, 712
with gastrointestinal system,
for paraquat,736
691t
for phenobarbital, 449
with kidneys, 692
for phenols, 296
liver and, 692-693
for pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 773
pharmacologic toxicity and, 277, 277b
for ricin, 779-780
risk for, 275-276
for rosemary, 510
from thiacetarsamide, 460-461
for soluble oxalates, 729
Aflatoxins, 9, 678-679
sorbitol and, 79-81
clinical signs of, 678
for strychnine, 830
confirmatory tests for, 679
for tremorgens, 681
differential diagnosis for, 679
for vitamin D, 495
LD for, 678
vomiting and, 80
lesions from, 679
Activated partial thromboplastin time
mechanism of toxicity of, 678
(aPTT), 844
minimum database for, 678-679
Acute toxicity, 4
prognosis for, 679
Adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase),
reproduction and, 169t, 192-193
341, 505
sources of, 678
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 114-115, 471,
toxicokinetics of, 678
473, 524-525
treatment for, 679
S-adenosylmethionine (Denosyl, SAMe), 738,
Africanized bees, 576-577
845,860-861
Agkistrodon spp.,783
ADH. See Alcohol dehydrogenase
β-2-Agonists, 284t
ADME. See Absorption, distribution,
AHPA. See American Herbal Products
metabolism, and excretion
Association
α,-Adrenergic activity, 431
AI. See Artificial insemination
β-Adrenergic agonists, 417
Airborne contaminants, 145
β-Adrenergic antagonists, 56t-57t
Airway, 65-66
β-adrenergic receptors, 313
AC and, 80
ADRs. See Adverse drug reactions
humidifcation of as supportive care, 120
Adsorbents, 712-713, 736
smoke inhalation and, 417
Adverse drug reactions (ADRs), 275-290
ALAD. See &-aminolevulinic acid
classification of, 276-282
dehydratase
diagnosis of, 282-283
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 286
dose and, 276-277
acetaminophen and, 425
clinical characteristics of, 278-279
arsenic and, 460
drug incompatibilities and, 284-285
glucosamine and, 302
with herbal medicines, 337
hand warmers and, 303
hypersusceptibility to, 277
lilies and, 619
idiosyncratic, 279-280, 279b
microcystins and, 535
clinical pharmacology of, 281-282
phenobarbital and, 448
from diazepam, 451
ricin and, 779
liver and, 286-287
Albatrellus spp.,672
pathogenesis of, 280-281
Albendazole, 261
from pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 772
Albuterol, 55
incidence of, 282
Alcohol, 263,298-299
intrinsic toxicity and, 277-278,277b
Alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), 552,
kidneys and, 287-289, 287b
557-558
aminoglycosides and, 287-288
Aldicarb, 716
amphotericin B and, 288
Aldosterone, 113-114
cisplatin and, 288
Algae. See Cyanobacteria
cyclosporine and, 288
Alkaline diuresis, 82
β-lactams and, 288
 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 286,
NSAIDs and, 288-289
448, 535
radiocontrast agents and, 289
Alkaloids, 130t-131t, 193, 336, 507
sulfonamides and, 289
ergopeptine,193
liver and, 285-289, 286b
ergot,193
with mannitol, 476-477
PAs, 337, 341
with NSAIDs, 690-691, 693-694, 694t
pyridine, 343
Index867
Allergens, indoor environmental quality
Y-aminobutyric acid-a (GABAa),102, 316,
and health and, 142-143
669,830
Allethrin, 770
s
Allium sativa,338,342
birds and, 261
Allopurinol, 105
carbamates and, 721
Aloe, 338, 340
geriatrics and, 225
ALP. See Alkaline phosphatase
hypomagnesemia from, 115
Alpha-latrotoxin, 818
kidney ADRs and, 287-288
ALT. See Alanine aminotransferase
muscle weakness from, 102b
Alternaria spp., 155
NSAIDs and, 694t
Aluminum chloride, 263
OPs and, 721
Aluminum hydroxide, 858
reproduction and, 169t, 199
Aluminum phosphide, 853-854
-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD),
Aluminum sulfate, 584-585
611-612
Amanita smithiana, 673-674
Amiodarone, 91t
Amanitins, 50, 663-667, 664t-665t
Amitraz, 431-434
clinical signs of, 663-665
carbamates and, 722
confirmatory tests for, 665-666
clinical signs of, 432
differential diagnosis for, 667
coma from, 103b
exposure to, 667
confirmatory tests for, 432
LD for, 663-665
differential diagnosis for, 432
treatment for, 666-667
fpronil and,743-744
Amaryllis, 499-501
LD for, 431
clinical signs of, 500
mechanism of toxicity of, 431
differential diagnosis for, 501
minimum database for, 432
LD for, 500
OPS and,722
lesions from, 501
prognosis for, 432
mechanism of toxicity of, 500
sources of, 431
minimum database for, 500
toxicokinetics of, 431
prognosis for, 500-501
treatment for, 432
sources of, 499
Ammonia, 60, 263, 294, 412-413, 678-679
toxicokinetics of, 500
Ammonium chloride, 313
treatment for, 500
Amobarbital (Amytal), 311
American Association of Poison Control Centers
Amphetamines, 81, 309
(AAPCC), 26, 525b
clinical signs of, 313
American Association of Veterinary Laboratory
confirmatory tests for, 313
Diagnosticians (AAVLD),125,126b-128b
differential diagnosis for, 314
American Herbal Products Association (AHPA),
hyperexcitability from, 103b
340, 343
LD for, 312
American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
mechanism of toxicity of, 313
to Animals Animal Poison Control Center
 minimum database for, 313
(ASPCA-APCC), 25-27
pediatrics and, 221
arsenic and, 458
 prescription drugs, 312t
lilies and, 617
as recreational drugs, 311-314
NSAIDs and, 688-689
sources of, 311
 pyrethrins/pyrethroids and, 771
toxicokinetics of, 312
for toxicology diagnosis, 46
 treatment and prognosis for, 313
zinc phosphide and, 855
Amphibians, 244
American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and
Amphotericin B, 113-114, 232, 288
Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), 143
Ampicillin, 77, 206, 208b
Amikacin,231
Amygdalin, 524
Y-aminobutyric acid (GABA), 226
Amytal. See Amobarbital
benzodiazepines and, 317-318
Anabaena spp., 534
diazepam and, 450-451
Anabolics, 169t
fpronil and, 743
Analgesics, 35, 585, 727-728, 860-861
isoxazoles and, 668
for detergents, 294
ivermectin and, 232, 603-604
herb-drug interactions with, 350t-352t
lead and, 611
lactation and, 210
metaldehyde and, 636-637
Anaphylaxis,578
metronidazole and, 655-656
from antivenom, 793, 803, 820
mistletoe and, 507
β-blockers for, 803, 820
868Index
Anaphylaxis (Continued)
Antibiotics (Continued)
from Hymenoptera stings, 575-577, 583, 585
for coral snake bites, 804
IgE and, 583
for detergents, 294
Anatoxin-a, 534, 536-538
for fire ant stings, 585
clinical signs of, 537
for Hymenoptera stings, 579
confirmatory tests for, 537
for indoxacarb, 747
differential diagnosis for, 538
lactation and, 210
LD for, 536-537
for lizard envenomation, 623
lesions from, 538
for methoprene, 751
mechanism of toxicity of, 537
for petroleum hydrocarbons, 760
minimum database for, 537
for rodenticides, 444
prognosis for, 538
for smoke inhalation, 419
toxicokinetics of, 537
Antibiotic enterocolitis, 254
treatment for, 538
Anticancer drugs, 169t
Anatoxin-a(s), 536-538
Anticoagulants, 48, 50.See also
carbamates and, 723
Rodenticides
clinical signs of, 537
birds and, 270
confirmatory tests for, 537
diagnostic testing for, 130t-131t
differential diagnosis for, 538
herb-drug interactions with, 350t-352t
LD for, 536537
ion exchange resins and, 78
lesions from, 538
NSAIDs and, 284t, 694t
mechanism of toxicity of, 537
reptiles and, 237
minimum database for, 537
Anticonvulsants, 169t, 447-456, 669. See also
OPs and, 723
specijfic drugs
prognosis for, 538
herb-drug interactions with, 350t-352t
toxicokinetics of, 537
historical, 451-453
treatment for, 538
idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions from,
Ancylostoma spp., 601
280b
Androgens, 169t
Anemia, 109-110
Antidepressants, 35, 56t-57t, 220, 350t-352t.
acetaminophen and, 425
See aiso Tricyclic antidepressants
aplastic, 55, 453
Antidiabetic agents, 350t-352t
arsenic and, 460
Antidiarrheals, 46-47
blood oxygen and, 68
Antidotal therapy, 9
from brown recluse spiders, 825
Antiemetics, 107
complete blood count for, 55
for amaryllis, 500
drug-induced hemolytic, 279-280
for arsenic, 462
Heinz body, 337-338, 765
for Christmas trees, 503
from lead, 612
for holly, 504
from NSAIDs, 696
for rosemary, 510
renal failure and, 562
for soluble oxalates, 729
SVTs from, 91
for vitamin D, 496
Anesthetics, 284t, 693, 721
for zinc phosphide, 859
herb-drug interactions with, 350t-352t
Antifreeze. See Ethylene glycol
lactation and, 210
Antifungals, 169t, 232-233, 350t-352t
for OCs, 712
Antigen-presenting cells (APCs),
OPs and, 721
144-145
 supportive care and, 119-121
Antihistamines, 35, 56t-57t, 579,
Angiotensin-2, 205
584-585, 751
Animal cruelty, 135-136
with antivenom, 793
Anion gap, 54-55, 441
for carbamates, 721
Anionic detergents, 109-110, 264, 292-293
for indoxacarb, 747
Antabuse. See Disulfiram
for IO, 727-728
Antacids, 108, 169t, 496, 684, 858
for OPs, 721
Anthelmintic, 46-47
in toxicology history, 46
Antiarrhythmics, 91t, 350t-352t
urinalysis for, 58-59
Antibiotics, 36. See also specifc drugs
Antihypertensives, 36, 350t-352t
for arsenic, 462
Antinflammatory drugs, reproduction and,
for brown recluse spiders, 825-826
169t
for citrus oil, 514-515
Antimicrobials, 169t, 230-231
for copper, 520
Antioxidants, 418
Index 869
Antiparasitics. See aiso Ivermectin
AS. See Acetylsalicylic acid
arsenic from, 458
Asbestos, 163
reproduction and, 169t
Ascites, 358b-370b
Antipsychotics, 350t-352t
Asctepias tuberosa,344
Antivenom
Ascorbic acid, 313, 427, 738
for black widow spiders, 820
ASHRAE. See American Society of Heating,
for brown recluse spiders, 825
Refrigeration, and Air-Conditioning
for coral snake bites, 802-804
Engineers
for pit viper snake bites, 789-794
Aspartate transaminase (AST), 425, 460, 535,
Anxiolytics, 350t-352t
619, 779
Aortic thromboembolism, 113
ASPCA-APCC.See American Society for the
Apamin, 575
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Animal
APCs. See Antigen-presenting cells
Poison Control Center
Aphanizomenor spp., 534
Aspergillus spp.,678
Aplastic anemia, 55, 453
Aspiration, 36
Aplysiatoxin, 538-539
of petroleum hydrocarbons, 760
Apomorphine, 75-76, 251, 475-476, 638, 858
supportive care for, 86
aPTT. See Activated partial thromboplastin time
of vomitus, 74
Araceae spp., 725
Aspiration pneumonia, 59-60, 66, 77, 466-467,
Aredia. See Pamidronate disodium
670
Arginine hydrolase, 622
Aspirin, 35, 46, 77, 698700
Aristolochia, 340
Association constant (pKa), 14-15
Arrhythmias. See aiso specific types
AST. See Aspartate transaminase
from aconite, 340
Asthma, 145-146
from amphetamines, 313
Atelectasis, 60, 118
from cholecalciferol, 494
Atenolol, 91t
with CO,482
ATP. See Adenosine triphosphate
from cyanide, 525
ATPase. See Adenosine triphosphatase
from digoxin, 277b
Atropine, 132, 169t, 669, 671-672
geriatrics and, 226
for carbamates, 269, 720
from ivermectin, 604
for ChE inhibitor toxicosis, 721
from kalanchoe, 505
for kalanchoe, 505-506
from mistletoe, 507
for OPs, 269, 468, 720
petroleum hydrocarbons and, 758
pregnancy and, 205-206
from phenols, 296
for toad secretions, 836-837
from smoke inhalation, 417
Autonomic nervous system, 215
supportive care for, 91-92
Avian toxicology. See Birds
from toad secretions, 835
Avocado, 241, 255, 265
from zinc phosphide, 859
Avotec. See Lasalocid
Arsenic, 56t-57t, 109-110, 130t-131t, 457-464
Azathioprine, 749-750
clinical signs of, 460-461
Azotemia, 50, 358b-370b, 856
confirmatory tests for, 461
decontamination for, 461
differential diagnosis for, 463
B
gastrointestinal absorption of, 459
Bacteria, 2
LD for, 458-459
 indoor environmental quality and health and,
lesions from, 462-463
155
mechanism of toxicity of, 459-460
Bacteroides spp., 653
 minimum database for, 461
BAL. See British anti-lewisite
prognosis for, 462
Barbital, 311
skin absorption of, 459, 463
Barbiturates, 56t-57t, 102, 103b, 104, 309,
sources of, 457-458
681, 712
toxicokinetics of, 459
clinical signs of, 316
treatment for, 461-462
confirmatory tests for, 316
 Arterial blood gas analysis, 55
diagnostic testing for, 130t-131t
Arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide
differential diagnosis for, 316
(Paco), 86
for euthanasia, 315t
Arterial partial pressure of oxygen (Paoz), 87-88,
LD for, 315
226
mechanism of toxicity of, 316
Arthus phenomenon, 824
minimum database for, 316
Artificial insemination (AI), 188
prescription drugs, 314t
870Index
Barbiturates (Continued)
Biocox. See Salinomycin
for pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 773
Biologic poisons, 2, 36
as recreational drugs, 314-316
Biological variation, toxicity and, 5-6
reproduction and, 169t
Biosis Previews, 21
for rosemary, 510
Biotoxins, 2
as Schedule III drug, 311
Biotransformation
sources of, 314
in pregnancy, 207
for strychnine, 830
of xenobiotics, 16
toxicokinetics of, 315
 phase I and II of, 16-17
treatment and prognosis for, 316
Birds, 259-274
urinalysis for, 5859
anticoagulants and, 270
for zinc phosphide, 859
CBMs and, 269-270
Basal cell carcinoma, 460
CO and, 261-262
Basal ganglia, 486
cooking oils and, 270-271
Batteries, 60, 299-300
copper and, 268
Bee stings, 109-110, 574-581
diagnosis in, 259-260
Benadryl-D. See Diphenhydramine
foods and,264-265
Benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH), 199
heavy metals and, 265-268
Benzene, 413-414, 757t
iatrogenic toxicoses and, 261
Benzimidazoles, 169t
inhalant toxins and,261-262,262b
Benzodiazepines, 35, 309. See also specifc
insecticides and, 269-270
drugs
lead and, 265-268
amphetamines and, 313
management of, 260-261
for black widow spiders, 820
mercury and, 268
clinical signs of, 318
miscellaneous household toxins in, 263-264
coma from, 103b
mycotoxins and, 271
confirmatory tests for, 318
OCs and, 269
differential diagnosis for, 318
OPs and, 269-270
geriatrics and, 225
pesticides and, 268-270
LD for, 317
plants and, 265
mechanism of toxicity of, 317-318
rodenticides and, 270
minimum database for, 318
smoke inhalation and, 261-262
 neurological system and, 102
zinc and, 268
as recreational drugs, 316-318
zinc phosphide and, 270
for seizures, 69
Birth control pills, 221, 300, 350t-352t
sources of, 316-317
Bisphenol A (BPA), reproduction and, 169t,
toxicokinetics of, 317
194-195
trade names for, 317t
Bisphosphonates, 114, 496
treatment and prognosis for, 318
Black widow spiders, 817-822
urinalysis for, 5859
clinical signs of, 819
for zinc phosphide, 859
confirmatory tests for, 819
Benzphetamine, 311
differential diagnosis for, 820
Betaloc. See Metoprolol
LD for, 818
Bethanechol, 107
lesions from, 820
Bicarbonate, 55, 484, 830.See also Sodium
mechanism of toxicity of, 818
bicarbonate
minimum database for, 819
Bifenthrin, 770
prognosis for, 820
Bilberry, 338
sources of, 817-818
Bile, 472, 690, 848
toxicokinetics of, 818
Bile acid, pediatrics and, 217
treatment for, 819-820
Bilirubin, 218, 519. See aiso Hyperbilirubinemia;
Bladder care, as supportive care, 121
Hypobilirubinemia
Blastomycosis, 490-491, 497
hyperbilirubinuria, 678-679
Bleach,48,109-110, 235,297298
Bioactivation,277-278
Bleaches, with chloride,297-298
of bromethalin, 472
β-blockers
herbal medicines and, 349
with amphetamines, 313
Bioassay, 132
for anaphylaxis, 803, 820
Bioavailability, 13. See also specifc
herb-drug interactions with, 350t-352t
toxins
hyperkalemia and, 113
pediatrics and, 218
for hypertension, 68
xenobiotic and, 14
ion exchange resins and, 78
Index 871
β-blockers (Continued)
Botulism (Continued)
for kalanchoe, 505-506
lesions from, 467
NSAIDs and, 694t
mechanism of toxicity of, 466
Blood. See also Transfusions; specific
minimum database for, 467
components
 muscle weakness from, 102b
calcium and, 114-115
prognosis for, 467
cherry red, 482, 526
sources of, 465-466
magnesium and, 115
toxicokinetics of, 466
NSAIDs and, 692
treatment for, 467
OCs and, 712t
Bovatec. See Lasalocid
potassium and, 113-114
BPA. See Bisphenol A
sodium and, 808
BPH. See Benign prostatic hypertrophy
sodium in, 111-113
Bradycardia
 supportive care for, 109-115
from fipronil, 743
Blood glucose, 58, 70-71,111, 837. See also
from metaflumizone, 749
Hyperglycemia; Hypoglycemia
from nicotine, 684
Blood oxygen, 68
from toad secretions, 835
 Blood pressure. See aiso Hypertension;
Bradypnea, 56t-57t, 743
Hypotension
Brain, OCs and, 710
amitraz and, 432
Breathing, 66
coral snake bites and, 801
neurological system and, 101
end-organ damage risk and, 94t
supportive care for, 85
ketamine and, 327
toxins and, 56t-57t
PCP and, 327
BRI. See Building-related illness
pediatrics and, 215
British anti-lewisite (BAL), 462,
for sodium, 809
612-613
supportive care for, 92-94
Brodifacoum, 48, 436, 440t
toxins and, 56t-57t
Bromadiolone, 436, 440t
for zinc phosphide, 856
Bromethalin, 471-478
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 58
clinical signs of, 473
fluid therapy and, 99
confirmatory tests for, 475
PG and, 764-765
diagnostic testing for, 130t-131t
ricin and, 779
differential diagnosis for, 477
for sodium, 809
hindlimb ataxia from, 473, 474f
Blood-brain barrier, 16
hyperexcitability from, 103b
amphetamines and, 312
LD for, 472
anatoxin-a(s) and, 537
lesions from, 477
carbamates and, 719
minimum database for, 473-475
lead and, 610
pathophysiology of, 473
mushrooms and, 723
prognosis for, 477
OPs and, 716, 719
reptiles and, 237-238
Blue-green algae. See Cyanobacteria
rodents and, 253
BMAA. See β-N-methylamino-L-alanine
sources of, 471-472
BNDD. See Bureau of Narcotic and Dangerous
toxicokinetics of, 472
Drugs
trade names for, 471-472
Body, toxins temperature, 56t-57t
treatment for, 475-477
Body fat, OCs and, 710
Bromocriptine, lactation and, 210
Body fluid departments, pediatrics and, 217-218
Brown recluse spiders, 823-826
Body weight
clinical signs of, 824-825
concentration and, 8
confirmatory tests for, 825
dosage and,11f
differential diagnosis for, 826
pregnancy and, 205
LD for, 824
surface area and, 2-3, 3t
lesions from, 826
toxicity and, 49
mechanism of toxicity of, 824
Botetus spp., 671
minimum database for, 825
Borneol, 337, 509
prognosis for, 826
Botulism, 465-470
toxicokinetics of, 824
clinical signs of, 466-467
treatment for, 825-826
confirmatory tests for, 467
Bufadienolides, 505, 834-835
differential diagnosis for, 468
Bufagenins, 834-835
LD for, 466
Buffering, 336
872Index
Bufo spp.See Toad secretions
Carbamates (Continued)
Building materials, 141-142, 147, 148t-151t
muscarinic signs with, 718
Building-related illness {BRI), 140
nicotinic signs with, 718
BUN. See Blood urea nitrogen
prognosis for,722
 Bureau of Narcotic and Dangerous Drugs
reptiles and, 233
(BNDD), 310
sources of, 715-716
Burrow's solution, 825-826
toxicokinetics of, 716
treatment for, 720-722
with known toxicosis, 720-721
Carbamates (CBMs), birds and, 269-270
Cabergoline, 210
Carbamazepine, 280b, 452
Cadmium, 169t
Carbaryl, 716
Ca-EDTA. See Calcium disodium ethylene
Carbofuran, 716
diamine tetraacetate
Carbon dioxide(CO)
Caffeine, 67, 647-652
for CO, 483-484
clinical signs of, 649
for EG, 554
in herbal medicines, 337
Hymenoptera stings and, 579-580
LD for, 648
indoor environmental quality and health
mechanism of toxicity of, 649
and, 142-143
pediatrics and, 221
PG and, 764-765
sources of, 647, 648t
rodenticides and, 441
toxicokinetics of, 648-649
Carbon disulfide, acute toxicity of, 757t
Calcipotriene (Dovonex), 490, 494-495
Carbon monoxide (CO), 56t-57t, 479-488
Calcitonin, 495-496
birds and, 261-262
Calcium, 58, 70-71. See aiso Hypercalcemia;
bood oxygen and, 68
Hypocalcemia
BRI and, 140
blood and, 114-115
clinical signs of, 481-482, 482b
brown recluse spiders and, 824
confirmatory tests for, 482-483
EG and, 552, 555
differential diagnosis for, 486, 486b
hyperkalemia and, 113
LD for, 480
for IO,727-728
lesions from, 485-486
lead and, 610
mechanism of toxicity with, 480-481
vitamin D and, 491, 493, 495
minimum database for, 482-483
Calcium channel blockers, 56t-57t, 70-71, 105,
prevention of, 484, 485b
114, 350t-352t
prognosis for, 484
Calcium disodium ethylene diamine tetraacetate
properties of, 481b
(Ca-EDTA), 267, 612
reported cases of, 484b
Calcium gluconate, 115, 729, 820, 859
smoke inhalation and, 413-414, 416
Calcium oxalate. See Oxalate crystals
sources of, 479-480, 480b
Calcium oxalate monohydrate (COM),
toxicokinetics of, 480-481
358b-370b, 553, 556f
treatment for, 418-419, 483-484
Camphene, in rosemary, 509
Carbonic acid, PG and, 764-765
Camphor, 346-347, 509, 584-585
Carboxyhemoglobin, 88, 416, 480-482
Cannabinoid receptors, 322
Carcinogens, 48, 277-278, 414
Cannabis sativa,321-322
Cardiac arrhythmias. See Arrhythmias
Capsicum spp., 338
Cardiac drugs, 36
Captopril, idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions
Cardiac output, 94-95, 215, 225-226
from, 280b
Cardiovascular drugs, 95t
Carbamates, 56t-57t, 715-724
Cardiovascular system. See aiso
acute syndrome with, 717-718
Heart rate
clinical signs of, 717-719
drugs for, reproduction and, 169t
CNS and, 718
plants and, 371t-395t
confirmatory tests for, 719-720
supportive care for, 91-100
differential diagnosis for, 722-723
arrhythmias and, 91-92
hyperexcitability from, 103b
blood pressure and, 92-94
intermediate syndrome with, 718-719
cardiac output and, 94-95
treatment for, 721-722
CVP and, 92
LD for, 716
fluid therapy for, 95-100
lesions from, 722
heart rate and, 91-92
mechanism of toxicity of, 716-717
Oxygen delivery (DO2) and, 95
 minimum database for, 719
pulse quality and, 92
Index 873
Carica papaya,200
Cestrum dirnum, 490-491
Carpet, 147-152
Chaparral, 341
Carprofen, 286b, 579, 689, 700
Chaste tree, 200
Cassia spp., 345
ChE.See Cholinesterase
Cat.See Methcathinone
ChE inhibitor toxicosis,721
Catalase, 105
Chelation
Catecholamines, 319, 610, 649, 758, 834
for arsenic, 462
Catha edulis, 343
for copper, 520
Cathartics, 78-81, 252
for hypercalcemia, 114
Cationic detergents, 293-294
for iron, 598-600
birds and, 264
for lead, 612, 613t
carbamates and, 723
for mercury, 633
hyperexcitability from,103b
for zinc, 850
muscle weakness from, 102b
Chemical exposures, 36
OPs and, 723
Chemicals, reference texts for, 36-37
Cat's claw, 338
Chemoreceptor trigger zone (CRZ), 106
Cattlyst. See Laidlomycin propionate
Cherry red blood, 482, 526
Caustics.See Corrosives
Chloral hydrate, 59-60, 311
Cayenne, 338
Chloramphenicol, 225, 231, 280b, 285t
CBF. See Cerebral blood flow
Chlordiazepoxide (Librium), 311, 316-317
CBMs.See Carbamates
Chlorhexidine, reptiles and, 235
CCA.See Chromated copper arsenate
Chloride, 70-71
CCS. See Common chemical senses
bleaches with, 297-298
Cefazolin, for smoke inhalation, 419
EG and, 554
Celinski v State, 135-136
ivermectin and, 603-604
Center for Veterinary Medicine, 276
KBr and, 449-450
Central nervous system (CNS)
metabolic alkalosis and, 70
bromethalin and, 473
serum electrolytes for, 55
carbamates and, 716, 718
Chlorinated hydrocarbons, 109-110, 218
Christmas trees and, 502
Chlorine, birds and, 263
CO and, 480
4-Chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid (MCPA),
Compound 1080 and, 813
404
 coral snake bites and, 801
2-Chloro-4-phenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D),
DEG and, 545
402-404
EG and, 552-553, 557-558
Chlorophacinone,436,440t
ethanol and, 548
Chlorophyllum molybdites,672
fipronil and, 743
Chlorothiazide, ion exchange resins and, 78
ivermectin and, 604
Chlorpromazine, with amphetamines, 313
mercury and, 630
Chocolate, 103b, 221,264,648
methanol and, 644
Cholecalciferol, 8b, 35, 489-498
metronidazole and, 654, 656
clinical signs of, 493-494
Opioids and, 102
confirmatory tests for, 494-495
OPs and, 718
differential diagnosis for, 497
petroleum hydrocarbons and, 758
LD for, 491492
sodium and, 808-809
lesions from, 496-497
Central venous pressure (CVP), 92, 94-95, 99
mechanism of toxicity of, 493
Cephaeline, 74-75
minimum database for, 494
Cephalosporins
prognosis for, 496
idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions from, 280b
reptiles and, 238
lactation and, 210
sources of, 490-491
reproduction and, 169t, 199
toxicokinetics of, 492-493
for rodenticides, 444
treatment for, 495-496
Cerebral blood flow (CBF), 104
Cholestyramine (Questran), 78
Cerebral edema, 104, 476, 809-810
Cholinesterase (ChE), 716
Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), 103-104
carbamates and, 719, 723
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 102-103
complete blood count for, 55
bromethalin and, 474
detergents and, 293
DEET and, 542
OPs and, 719, 723
metronidazole and, 654
postmortem examination and, 131
sodium and, 808-809
testing for, 50
Cesamet. See Nabilone
zinc phosphide and, 856, 860
874Index
Christmas cactus, 501
Cleaning products (Continued)
clinical signs of, 501
indoor environmental quality and health and,
differential diagnosis for, 501
142-143, 152
lesions from, 501
as mass exposure contaminant, 163
mechanism of toxicity of, 501
pediatrics and, 221
minimum database for, 501
Clearance, 13,17
prognosis for, 501
of NSAIDs, 690
sources of, 501
of paraquat, 737
Christmas plants, 499-512
pediatrics and, 218
amaryllis, 499-501
CLH. See Hepatic clearance
Christmas cactus, 501
Clindamycin, 721
Christmas trees, 502-503
Clitocybe spp., 671
holly, 503-504
Clofbrate, for paraquat, 738
kalanchoe, 504-506
Clonazepam (Klonopin), 452
mistletoe, 506-508
Clorazepate (Tranxene), 452
poinsettia, 508-509
Clostridium botulinum,465
reptiles and, 241
CNS. See Central nervous system
Christmas trees, 502-503
CO.See Carbon monoxide
clinical signs of, 502-503
CO,. See Carbon dioxide
differential diagnosis for, 503
CoA. See Acetyl coenzyme A
lesions from, 503
Coagulation panel, 59
mechanism of toxicity of, 502
Coban.See Monensin
minimum database for, 503
Cocaine, 51, 56t-57t, 309
preservatives in, 502
clinical signs of, 319
prognosis for, 503
confirmatory tests for, 319
sources of, 502
differential diagnosis for, 320
treatment for, 503
hyperexcitability from, 103b
Chromated copper arsenate (CCA),
LD for, 319
406, 457
mechanism of toxicity for, 319
Chronic toxicity, 4
minimum database for, 319
Chronic toxicosis, from vitamin A, 48
as recreational drug, 318-320
Chronicity factor, 4
sources of, 318319
Chrysanthemu spp,33,769
toxicokinetics of, 319
Cimetidine, 108, 285t
treatment and prognosis for, 319-320
for acetaminophen,427
Codeine, 311
for NSAIDs, 696, 697t
Coffea arabica,647
reproduction and, 169t
Coins
Cinchona spp., 335-336
copper from, 517-518
Cineole, in rosemary, 509
zinc from, 849
Cinnamomum camphora,346
Cold control zones, 160
Ciprofloxacin, for rodenticides, 444
Cold packs, 300
Circulation, 66-69
Colestipol (Colestid), 78
Cirrhosis, arsenic and, 460
Collagenase, 786
Cisplatin, 115, 288, 694t
Colloids, 97-98, 461
Citrus oil, 347, 513-516
Colloid oncotic pressure (COP), 110
clinical signs of, 514
Colon care, as supportive care, 121
confirmatory tests for, 514
Colorfast bleaches, 297
differential diagnosis for, 515
Colostrum, 216
LD for, 513-514
COM. See Calcium oxalate monohydrate
lesions from, 515
Coma
mechanism of toxicity of, 514
from diazepam, 451
prognosis for, 515
from hypermagnesemia, 115
sources of, 513
from imidacloprid, 745
toxicokinetics of, 514
from indoxacarb, 746-747
treatment for, 514-515
from plants, 371t-395t
Cladosporium spp., 155
toxins causing, 103b
Claritin-D. See Pseudoephedrine
Combustion products, 410, 410t, 412b
Claviceps purpurea, 320
Combustion sources, indoor environmental
Clavulanic acid, lactation and, 210
quality and health and, 152-153
Cleaning products, 36, 291-295
Comfortis.See Spinosad
citrus oil in, 513
Comfrey, 341
Index875
Common chemical senses (CCS), 145
Corticosteroids
Complete blood count, 54-55
with antivenom, 793
for EG, 554
for bromethalin, 476
ricin and, 779
for cerebral edema, 104
for xylitol, 844
for citrus oil, 514-515
for zinc phosphide, 856
for corrosives, 295
Compound 1080. See Monosodium
Cushing syndrome from, 277b
fluoroacetate
for fire ant stings, 584-585
Computed tomography (CT), for CO, 486
in herbal medicines, 337
Concentration
for Hymenoptera stings, 579, 584-585
body weight and, 8
for hypercalcemia, 114
in toxicology, 7-12
NSAIDs and, 693, 694t
Confidentiality, 134
for petroleum hydrocarbons, 760
Conium maculatum,337
for pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 773
Conjunctivitis, 466-467, 727
for smoke inhalation, 417
Consciousness, 100
for toad secretions, 837
Contamination, technical, 160
Cortinaria spp., 673
 Control zones, mass exposures and, 159-160
Cottonseed, 200
Controlled Substances Act (CSA), 310
Cough drops (with menthol), 301
Convulsions, 50
Coumafuryl, 436
from fipronil, 743
Coumarin, 195-196, 436
from plants, 371t-395t
COX. See Cyclooxygenase
Cooking oils, birds and, 263, 270-271
Coxistat. See Salinomycin
Coomb's test, for brown recluse spiders,
CPP. See Cerebral perfusion pressure
825
Cranial nerves, mental awareness and, 100-102
Coonhound paralysis, botulism and, 468
C-reactive proteins, brown recluse spiders and,
COP. See Colloid oncotic pressure
824
Copper, 517-522
Creatine kinase, coral snake bites and, 801-802
birds and, 268
Creatinine, 58, 764-765, 779, 809
 clinical signs of, 519
Crotalidae, 783
confirmatory tests for, 519-520
Crotalus spp.,783
differential diagnosis for, 520
Crystalloids
LD for, 518
with antivenom, 792, 803
lesions from, 520
for arsenic, 461
mechanism of toxicity of, 518-519
for cardiovascular system support, 96
minimum database for, 519
for Christmas trees, 503
prognosis for, 520
ECF and, 95-100, 97t
sources of, 517-518
for pit viper snake bites, 791
toxicokinetics of, 518
CRZ.See Chemoreceptor trigger zone
treatment for, 520
CSA.See Controlled Substances Act
Copper storage disease, 520-521
CSF. See Cerebrospinal fluid
Copper sulfate, 518
CT. See Computed tomography
Copperheads. See Pit viper snake bites
Cuprimine. See D-penicillamine
Copulation, reproduction and, 178
Currants. See Grapes
Coral snake bite, 799-806
Current Contents,22
antivenom for, 802-804
Cushing syndrome, 186, 277b
botulism and, 468
Cushing's reflex, 103-104
 clinical signs of, 801
CVP.See Central venous pressure
confirmatory tests for, 802
Cyanide, 523-532
differential diagnosis for, 804
AAPCC and, 525b
geographic distribution of snakes,800f
clinical signs of, 525-526, 526b
LD for, 800
confirmatory tests for, 526-527
lesions from, 804
differential diagnosis for, 530, 530b
mechanism of toxicity of, 801
hypertension and, 68
minimum database for, 801-802
LD for, 524
prognosis for, 804
lesions with, 529-530
sources of, 799-800
mechanism of toxicity of, 524-525
toxicokinetics of, 800
minimum database for, 526-527
treatment for, 802-804
prevention of, 529
Corneal blink reflex, 101
prognosis for, 529
Corrosives, 252, 294-295
smoke inhalation and, 413-414, 416
876 Index
Cyanide (Continued)
Decongestants, 35, 46
sources of, 523-524, 524b
Decontamination, 73-84. See aiso Mass
toxicokinetics of, 524-525
exposures; specifc routes
treatment for, 418-419, 527-529, 529t
with AC, 79-80
Cyanmethemoglobin, 527
for amaryllis, 500
Cyanoacrylate adhesives, 301
for arsenic, 461
Cyanobacteria, 340-341, 533-540
for bromethalin, 472
aplysiatoxin, 538-539
with cathartics, 78-79
BMAA, 538
for citrus oil, 514
coagulation panel for, 59
dermal, 73
cylindrospermopsin, 538
emergency, 160-161
debromoaplysiatoxin, 538-539
with forced diuresis, 81
diagnostic testing for, 130t-131t
gastrointestinal, 73-78
hepatotoxins, 534-536
with gastrotomy, 82
hyperexcitability from, 103b
for hydrazines, 668
lipopolysaccharides, 539
for infection control, 116
lyngbyatoxin-a, 538-539
with ion exchange resins, 78
neurotoxins, 536-538
with ion tapping, 81-82
saxitoxins, 538
for kalanchoe, 505-506
sources of, 533-534
with lipid emulsion, 82
Cyanogens, 503
of mammals, 251-252
Cycad palms, reptiles and, 241
medical, 161
Cyclohexane, acute toxicity of, 757t
for mistletoe, 507
Cyclooxygenase (COX), 689
ocular, 73
Cyclophosphamide, 169t, 738
vomiting for, 251
Cyclosporine
DEET. See N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide
hyperkalemia from, 113
Deferoxamine (Desferal), 105, 264,
hypomagnesemia from, 115
598-600,738
kidney ADRs and, 288
DEG.See Diethylene glycol
liver and, 286b
Dehydration, 95-96
for metaflumizone, 749-750
from KBr, 449-450
P-glycoprotein and, 605b
from PG, 765
Cygro.See Maduramicin
7-dehydrocholesterol, 490
Cylindrospermopsin,538
Delayed neuropathy, 717
Cyproheptadine, lactation and, 210
Delayed serum sickness, 804, 820
Cytochrome P-450
Demerol. See Meperidine
 acetaminophen and, 427
Denosyl. See S-adenosylmethionine
aflatoxins and, 678
Deoxynivalenol. See Vomitoxin
carbamates and, 716
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
EG and, 552-553
carcinogens and, 277-278
geriatrics and, 223-224
enrofloxacin and, 231
herbal medicines and, 337
phospholipase A and, 786
imidacloprid and, 744
Deracoxib, 689, 700-701
metaldehyde and, 636, 638-639
 Dermal exposure/decontamination, 73
OPs and, 716
for amitraz, 432
pediatrics and, 218
of arsenic, 459, 463
pregnancy and, 207
to citrus oil, 513-514
rosemary and, 509-510
to corrosives, 295
Cytochrome-c-caspase, 611, 855
to cyanide, 525
to DEET, 542
D
to DEG,544
to lead, 612
2,4-D. See 2-Chloro-4-phenoxyacetic acid
of mammals, 252
DAP. See Diastolic arterial pressure
of petroleum hydrocarbons, 760-761
Dapsone, for brown recluse spiders, 825
to poinsettia, 508
DART. See Direct analysis in real time
pregnancy and, 205
Dazzle reflex, 100-101
to pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 772
DBCP. See Dibromochloropropane
for smoke inhalation, 418
DDT.See Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane
Desferal. See Deferoxamine
Debromoaplysiatoxin, 538-539
Desmethylbromethalin, 473
Decerebrate posture, 475f
Desoxyribonuclease, in coral snake bites, 801
Index 877
Detergents, 291-295. See aiso Cationic
Diazepam (Valium) (Continued)
detergents; Dishwashing detergent
for rosemary, 510
 anemia from, 109-110
as Schedule IV drug, 311
anionic, 109-110, 264,292-293
for seizures, 69
birds and, 264
sources of, 450
cationic, 293-294
for strychnine, 830
nonionic, 292
for toad secretions, 837
for petroleum hydrocarbons, 760-761
toxicokinetics of, 450-451
Dexamethasone, 476-477, 765
treatment for, 451
Dexmedetomidine, 76
for tremorgens, 69, 681
Dextrose in water (DSW), 97, 830
Dibromochloropropane (DBCP), 169t
DHT, 181-182
Dibutyl phthalate, 301
Diabetes mellitus, 115, 186, 432
DIC. See Diffuse intravascular coagulation;
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 113, 115
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Diagnostic laboratory
Dicamba, 405
capabilities of, 129-131
Dichapetaium spp.,811
effective use of, 125-132
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT),
pitfalls with, 131
709-711
reporting by, 131-132
Diclofenac, 210
samples tested in, 130t-131t
Dicobalt-ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
Diarrhea
(EDTA, Kelocyanor), 527-528
from black widow spiders, 819
diagnostic testing for, 130t-131t
hypomagnesemia from, 115
hypocalcemia and, 114-115
from imidacloprid, 745
iron and, 595-596
from IO, 727
zinc and, 848, 850
from lead, 611
Diefenbachia,36,727-728
from mercury, 631-632
Diesel fuel, acute toxicity of, 757t
from metaldehyde, 637
Dietary supplement adverse events (DSAE), 338
from muscarine, 671-672
 Dietary Supplement and Nonprescription Drug
from NSAIDs, 694
Consumer Protection Act, 336
from paraquat, 735
Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act
from petroleum hydrocarbons, 759
DSHEA),336
from pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 772
Diethylcarbamazine, liver and, 286b
from ricin, 779-780
Diethylene glycol (DEG), 543-546
from sodium, 808-809
clinical signs of, 544
from xylitol, 844
confirmatory tests for, 544
from zinc, 849
differential diagnosis for, 545
from zinc phosphide, 856
LD for, 544
Diastolic arterial pressure (DAP), 93
lesions from, 545
Diazepam (Valium), 450-451
minimum database for, 544
for bromethalin, 477
prognosis for, 545
for carbamates, 720-721
sources of, 543-544
for ChE inhibitor toxicosis, 721
toxicokinetics of, 544
clinical signs of, 451
treatment for, 545
isoxazoles and, 669
N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide (DEET), 541-542
liver and, 286b
clinical signs of, 541
for lizard envenomation, 623
confirmatory tests for, 542
mechanism of action of, 450-451
differential diagnosis for, 542
for metaldehyde, 638-639
LD for, 541
for methylxanthines, 651
mechanism of toxicity of, 541
for metronidazole, 655
minimum database for, 542
for neurotoxins, 538
prognosis for, 542
for nicotine, 684
sources of, 541
nordiazepam and, 317
toxicokinetics of, 541
for NSAIDs, 696
treatment for, 542
for OPs, 720-721
Difenacoum, 436
pregnancy and, 205-206
Difethialone, 436, 440t
for psilocin/psilocybin, 670
Differentiation, 177-178
for pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 773
 Diffuse intravascular coagulation (DIC), 514
reproduction and,169t
from metaldehyde, 637
for ricin, 779-780
from pit viper snake bites, 788
878Index
Diffuse intravascular coagulation (Continued)
Disposition, 13-17
from zinc, 850
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
from zinc phosphide, 856
110-111, 583
Digitalis, 56t-57t, 78, 91, 335-337, 341
Distribution
 Digitoxin, kalanchoe and, 505
pediatrics and, 217-218
Digoxin, 285t
in pregnancy, 205-206
arrhythmias from, 277b
of xenobiotics, 15
complete blood count for, 55
tissue barriers to, 16
geriatrics and, 225
Disulfiram (Antabuse), 654
from herbs, 335-336
Diterpenoid euphorbol esters, 508
for kalanchoe, 506
Dithionate spot test, 735
NSAIDs and, 694t
Diuretics, 35. See aiso Thiazide diuretics
for toad secretions, 837
for bromethalin, 476
 Dihydromorphine, as Schedule 1 drug, 311
for forced diuresis, 81
Dihydrotachysterol, 494-495
herb-drug interactions with, 350t-352t
Diltiazem, 9it,95t
hypokalemia from, 113-114
Dilution effect, 436-439
loop, 113-115, 495-496, 809
Dimenhydrinate, reproduction and, 169t
NSAIDs and, 694t
Dimercaprol, for arsenic, 462
for paraquat, 737
Dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA, Succimer),
potassium sparing, 113
267, 462
for rosemary, 510
for lead, 612-613
DKA.See Diabetic ketoacidosis
Dimethylaminophenol, 528
DMSA. See Dimercaptosuccinic acid
Dinotefuran, 741-743
DNA. See Deoxyribonucleic acid
clinical signs of, 742
DO. See Oxygen delivery
confirmatory tests for, 742
Dobutamine, 67, 95t
differential diagnosis for, 743
Dolasetron, 107
LD for, 742
Domperidone, 107, 207-208
mechanism of toxicity of, 742
DON. See Vomitoxin
minimum database for, 742
Donovan's solution, arsenic from, 458
prognosis for, 743
Dopamine, 95t
pyriproxyfen and, 751
amphetamines and, 313
sources of, 741
in bee venom, 575
toxicokinetics of, 742
black widow spiders and, 818
treatment for, 742-743
for grapes, 571
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (DSS),
reproduction and, 169t
245-246
tachycardia from, 67
Diphacinone, 436, 440t
toad secretions and, 834-835
Diphenhydramine {Benadryl-D), 107
Doramectin (Dectomax), 601-603
for antivenom, 820
Dose/dosage, 1-5.See aiso Lethal dosage
with antivenom, 792-793
absorption and, 2
for carbamates, 721
ADRs and, 276-277
for OPs, 721
clinical characteristics of, 278-279
for pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 773
of antivenom, 792, 803
 reproduction and, 169t
body weight and, 11f
in toxicology history, 46
elimination and,2
Dipyrone, 210, 280b
exposure and, 2-3
Direct analysis in real time (DART), 51-52
in toxicology, 7-12
Dish washing detergent
for vitamin K, 443
for amitraz, 432
of xenobiotics, 47
for carbamates, 720-721
Dose-response assessment,for toxicology
for citrus oil, 514
history, 48
for DEET, 542
Dovonex. See Calcipotriene
for fipronil, 254-255
 Doxorubicin, reproduction and, 169t
for methoprene, 751
Draeger Detector Tubes, 857
for OPs, 720-721
Dronabinol (Marinol), 321-322
for pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 773-774
Drugs. See aiso specijfc drugs
for yomiting, 75
for cardiovascular system, reproduction and,
Disinfectants, 295-298
169t
anemia from, 109-110
diagnostic testing for, 130t-131t
birds and, 263
for gastrointestinal system, 169t
Index879
Disposition (Continued)
Electrolyte imbalance. See aiso specific
herbal medicines and, interactions between,
imbalances
349-353
amaryllis and, 500
hyperexcitability from, 103b
from carbamates, 720-721
hypersensitivity from, 279-280
Christmas trees and, 503
for hypoglycemia, 35
from DEG, 545
incompatibilities with, ADRs and, 284-285
from forced diuresis, 81
interactions with, 283-284
from gastric lavage, 77
with NSAIDs, 693-694, 694t
holly and, 504
muscle tremors from, 103b
from hydrazines, 668
for NSAIDs, 697t
hypomagnesemia from, 115
P-glycoprotein and, 605b
from IO, 727
reproduction and, 198-200
kalanchoe and, 505-506
chronic administration of, 199
lead and, 612
herbal, 200
from methanol, 644
testing for, 50
from methylxanthines, 650
in toxicology history, 46
from OPs,720-721
vitamin D from, 490
poinsettia and, 509
with xylitol, 842-843
SVTs from, 91
Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), 310
zinc and, 850
Drug fever, 279-280
zinc phosphide and, 856, 859
Drug-induced hemolytic anemia, 279-280
Electromyogram (EMG), for botulism, 467
 Drug-induced thrombocytopenia,
Electroshock
279-280
for coral snake bites, 802
 DSAE. See Dietary supplement adverse events
for pit viper snake bites, 789-791
DSHEA. See Dietary Supplement Health and
Elimination
Education Act
dosage and, 2
DSS. See Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate
of herbal medicines, 337
DSW. See Dextrose in water
of lilies, 618
Dysphonia, from IO, 727
in pregnancy, 207-208
of xenobiotics, toxicokinetics of, 17
Emergency decontamination, 160-161
E
Emesis.See Vomiting
Ecchymosis, from rodenticides, 444-445
Emetics
ECF. See Extracellular fluid
for carbamates, 720-721
ECG.See Electrocardiography
for NSAIDs, 696
Echinacea spp,338
for OPs, 720-721
Echinocytosis, from pit viper snake bites,
for paraquat, 736
788-789
for petroleum hydrocarbons, 760
Ecstasy. See
for strychnine, 830
3,4-methylenedioxy methamphetamine
Emetine, 74-75
Ectoparasiticides, 741-754
EMG.See Electromyogram
dinotefuran, 741-743
Enalaprilat, 95t
fpronil, 743-744
Endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs),
imidacloprid, 744-745
183-184,184f
indoxacarb, 745-747
Endotoxins
metaflumizone, 747-750
carbamates and, 723
EDCs. See Endocrine disrupting chemicals
OPs and, 723
EDTA. See Dicobalt-ethylenediaminetetraacetic
Endotracheal intubation
acid
for coral snake bites, 802
EEG.See Electroencephalograph
for fire ant stings, 585
EG.See Ethylene glycol
for Hymenoptera stings, 585
Ejaculates, reproduction and, 178-179
for iron, 598
Elapidae, 783
for smoke inhalation, 418
Electrocardiography (ECG), 54, 59,66
supportive care with, 119-120
for ionophores, 592
End-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO),
for pit viper snake bites, 788
86-87
for toad secretions, 836-837
Enemas
for zinc phosphide, 856
for lead, 612
Electroencephalograph (EEG), bromethaline
for metaldehyde, 638
and, 474-475
Enkephalin, black widow spiders and, 818
880 Index
Enrofloxacin, 285t
Ethylene glycol (EG), 46-47, 50-51, 56t-57t,
reptiles and, 231
551-568
for rodenticides, 444
clinical signs of, 553-554
Enterohepatic recirculation, 14
coma from, 103b
Environment. See Indoor environmental quality
 complete blood count for, 55
and health
confirmatory tests for, 553
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
cytochrome P-450 and, 552-553
25-26, 143
differential diagnosis for, 560-562
CCA and, 457
early abnormalities from, 554
Compound 1080 and, 811-812
ethanol for, 547, 548b, 557-558
insecticides and, 770
hypocalcemia from, 58
lead and, 609
late abnormalities from, 554-555
phosphine and, 857-858
LD for, 552
Environmental tobacco smoke (ETS),
lesions from, 560
142143, 153
marijuana and, 323
EPA.See Environmental Protection Agency
mechanism of toxicity of, 552-553
Ephedra {ma huang), 103b, 341-342
minimum database for, 554-555
Epinephrine,95t
prevention of, 562
for anaphylaxis, 585
prognosis for, 560
for Hymenoptera stings, 579, 585
renal failure from, 108-109
for OCs, 712
serum electrolytes for, 55
pit viper snake bites and, 789
sources of, 551552
tachycardia from, 67
testing for, 50
toad secretions and, 834-835
toxicokinetics of, 552
Eprinomectin (Eprinex), 601-602
in toxicology history, 46
Epsom salts. See Magnesium sulfate
treatment for, 557-560, 561b
Erethism, from mercury, 632
ultrasound for, 60
Ergocalciferol, 489
urinalysis for, 5859
 Ergopeptine alkaloids, reproduction
vitamin D and, 495
and, 193
Etodolac, 689, 701
Ergot alkaloids, reproduction and,193
Etomidate, neurological system and, 102
ER. See Hepatic extraction ratio
ETS. See Environmental tobacco smoke
Erythema,from IO,727
Eugenol, for IO, 727-728
Erythromycin, 107,280b
Euphorbia putcherrima. See Poinsettia
Erythroxylon coca, 318-319
Euthanasia
Escherichia coli, 231
barbiturates for, 315t
Esmolol, 91t
 in mass exposures, 161
Essential oils, 346-348, 346t-347t
Eve.See
Esterase, in brown recluse spiders,
3,4-methylendioxy-N-ethylamphetamine
824
Excretion
Estrogen, 169t, 221, 277b, 350t-352t
 of amphetamines, 312
Estrous cycles, reproduction and,
of arsenic, 459
179-181
of bromethalin, 472
ETCO,. See End-tidal carbon dioxide
of paraquat, 733
Ethanol, 56t-57t, 547-550
pediatrics and, 218-219
clinical signs of, 548
of xenobiotics, 17
coma from, 103b
of zinc, 848
complete blood count for, 55
Exposure, 14, 47. See also Mass exposures; 
confirmatory tests for, 548
specijfic routes; specijfic toxins
differential diagnosis for, 549
assessment of
for EG, 547, 548b, 557-558
for toxicology diagnosis, 46-50
LD for, 547
for toxicology history, 48-49
lesions from, 549
dosage and, 2-3
marijuana and, 323
human poison control centers and, 31-35
mechanism of toxicity of, 548
routes of, 34t
minimum database for, 548
WAPC and, 32t
prognosis for, 548
Extracellular fluid (ECF)
sources of, 547
crystalloids and, 95-100, 97t
toxicokinetics of, 547
sodium and, 111-112, 808
treatment for, 548
supportive care for, 95-100
Ethinamate, as Schedule IV drug, 311
Eyes. See Ocular exposure/decontamination
Index 881
F
First-pass effect, 14
Fab, 506, 794
geriatrics and, 224-225
Fish, mercury in, 630
False parasol, 672
The 5-Minute Veterinary Consutt, 24
Famotidine, 108, 696, 697t, 860-861
Fasciotomy, for pit viper snake bites,
Fixed oils, 336
Flares, 303-304
793-794
Flavonoids
FDA.See Food and Drug Administration
Feces
grapes and, 570
mistletoe and, 507
arsenic and, 459
Flea products. See aiso specifc products
botulism and, 467
pediatrics and, 221
cholecalciferol and, 494
pyrethrins in,769
examination of, 54
Fluconazole, 232-233
zinc and, 849
 Fluid therapy. See also Crystalloids
Felbamate (Felbatol), 280b, 453
for amanitins, 666
Fenbendazole, 235, 261
for arsenic, 462
Fenugreek, 210
for cardiovascular system, 95-100
Ferrets, 255-256
for Christmas trees, 503
acetaminophen and, 255-256
for citrus oil, 514-515
ibuprofen and, 255
for coral snake bites, 802
poison control centers and, 256b
for EG, 557-559
Fertilizers, 36
for fire ant stings, 585
cyanide from, 525
for holly, 504
iron in, 595-596
for Hymenoptera stings, 579, 585
FFP. See Fresh frozen plasma
for hypermagnesemia, 115
Fibrinogenolysis, 785-786
for iron, 598
Fibrolase, 786
for lilies, 619
Filtration, of xenobiotics, 14-15
for lizard envenomation, 623
Finasteride, 199
for macadamia nuts, 627
Fipronil, 743-744
for mercury, 632-633
clinical signs of, 743-744
for metabolic acidosis, 69-70
confirmatory tests for, 743
differential diagnosis for, 744
for metabolic alkalosis, 69-70
for methylxanthines, 651
LD for, 743
for muscarine, 671-672
mechanism of toxicity of, 743
for paraquat, 737
minimum database for, 743
for PG, 765
prognosis for, 744
for poinsettia, 509
pyriproxyfen and, 751
for psilocin/psilocybin, 670
rabbits and, 254-255
for recumbent patient, 98
sources of, 743
for ricin, 779-780
toxicokinetics of, 743
for rosemary, 510
treatment for, 744
for sodium, 809
Fire ant stings, 581-587
for soluble oxalates, 729
clinical signs of, 584, 584b
for strychnine, 830
confirmatory tests for, 584
for toad secretions, 837
differential diagnosis for, 587, 587b
for vitamin D, 496
LD for, 583
for zinc, 850
lesions from, 586
Flumazenil (Romazicon), 318
mechanism of toxicity of, 583
Flunixin, NSAIDs and, 693-694
minimum database for, 584
Fluoride, 130t-131t
prevention of, 585, 586b
Fluoroacetamide, 812-813
prognosis for, 585
Fluoroacetate, 812-813
reptiles and, 244-245
Fluorocitrate, 812
sources of, 581-583
 Fluoroquinolones. See also specifc
toxicokinetics of, 583
drugs
treatment of, 584-585
reproduction and, 169t, 199
Fire salts, 458
5-Fluorouracil, hyperexcitability from,
Fireflies, 245
103b
Fireworks, 303-304
 Focused assessment by sonography in trauma of
Firocoxib, 689, 701-702
the thorax (t-FAST), 86
First-order kinetics, 13
Folinic acid, for methanol, 644
882 Index
Fomepizole
G
for DEG, 545
for EG, 558-559
GABA. See y-aminobutyric acid
for methanol, 644
GABA,. See y-aminobutyric acid-a
for PG, 765
GABA-aminotransferase (GABA-T), 452-453
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 336
Gabapentin (Neurontin), 453
GABA-T. See GABA-aminotransferase
Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
276
Gagging, 101
absinthe and, 340
from indoxacarb, 746-747
from pyriproxyfen, 751-752
fomepizole and, 559
herbal medicines and, 336
Galactoside, 778
PG and, 763
Galactosyltransferase, 208
Garbage
toad secretions and, 833
toxicology diagnosis and, 46
carbamates and, 723
xylitol and, 841-842
OPs and, 723
Foods. See aiso Pet foods
in toxicology history, 46
birds and, 264-265
Garlic, 337-338, 342
reptiles and, 246
anemia from, 109-110
in toxicology history, 46
birds and, 264
with xylitol, 841-842
Gas chromatography, 857
Forced diuresis, 81
Gasoline
Foreign bodies
acute toxicity of, 757t
Christmas trees and, 503
arsenic from, 458
holly and, 504
CO from, 480
ultrasound for, 60
lead in, 609
zinc and, 850
manganese in, 755
Formaldehyde, 153, 644
methanol in, 755
Formic acid, 644
Gastric acid secretion inhibitors, sucralfate and,
Fowler's solution, 458
284t
Foxglove, 341
Gastric lavage
Frank liver necrosis, 463
for arsenic, 461
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP), 66-67, 111
for carbamates, 720-721
from mercury, 631-632
corrosives and, 295
from strychnine, 829
for cyanide, 527
Fruit seeds, reptiles and, 240
for grapes, 571
FSH, 179
for iron, 598
Fungi, indoor environmental quality and health
for lead, 612
and, 155
for metaldehyde, 638
Fungicides, 406-407. See also specifc toxins;
for nicotine, 684
specific types
for OPs, 720-721
arsenic from, 458
for paraquat, 736
CCA,406
for petroleum hydrocarbons, 760
copper from, 518
for PG, 765
mercury from, 630
phenols and, 296
pentachlorophenol, 406
for strychnine,830
reproduction and, 169t, 194-195
for tremorgens, 681
thiram, 406-407
for vomiting,76-77,252
Furnishings
for zinc phosphide, 859
 indoor environmental quality and health and,
Gastroenteritis
141-142
from petroleum hydrocarbons, 759
VOCs from, 148t-151t
from ricin, 780
Furosemide
Gastrointestinal system
ACE inhibitors and, 284t
 absorption in
for bromethalin, 477
of arsenic, 459
for forced diuresis, 81
of bromethalin, 472
for grapes, 571
of DEG, 545
for lilies, 619-620
of lead, 610
reproduction and, 169t
of mercury, 631
thiazide diuretics and, 284t
pregnancy and, 203-204
for toad secretions, 837-838
Compound 1080 and, 812
Fusarium spp., 679
decontamination of, 73-78
Index 883
Gastrointestinal system (Continued)
Glutathione (GSH),424-425,61l, 613
emesis for, 73-74
Glycerol monoacetate (GMA), for Compound
for iron, 598
1080, 814
for paraquat, 736
Glycine, 828-829
for petroleum hydrocarbons, 760
Glycoaldehyde, 552
for vitamin D, 495
Glycogen, pediatris and, 26
drugs for, 169t
P-glycoproteins,15,278,603,605b
EG and, 553
Glycopyrrolate, reproduction and, 169t
iron and, 597
Glycosides, 336
mushrooms and, 671-673
cyanide and, 524
NSAIDs and ADRs with, 690-691
herb-drug interactions with, 350t-352t
paraquat and, 735
kalanchoe and, 505-506
plants and, 371t-395t
reproduction and, 169t
strychnine and, 828
reptiles and, 241-243
 supportive care for, 106-108
SVTs from, 91
vomiting and, 106-108
Glyphosate, 404-405
xylitol and, 843
GMA. See Glycerol monoacetate
Gastrolobium spp., 811
GnRH, 179
Gastrotomy, 82
Gold jewelry, 301
Gauttheria procumbens, 348
Gossypium hirsutum,200
Gentamicin, 219, 231, 419
Granulocytopenia, arsenic and, 460
Geriatrics,223-228
Grapes, 569-572
amitraz and, 432
arsenic from, 458
cardiac output and, 225-226
clinical signs of, 570
 compensatory physiologic responses
confirmatory tests for, 570
and, 226
differential diagnosis for, 571-572
immune system and, 226
LD for, 569-570
liver and, 223-225
lesions from, 571
metabolism and, 226
mechanism of toxicity of, 570
nephrons and, 225
minimum database for, 570
organ-related dysfunction in,223-225
prognosis for, 571
physiological alterations in, 224b
renal failure from,108-109
xenobiotic disposition and, 224b
sources of, 569
Germander, 342
toxicokinetics of, 570
Germicides, 293-294
treatment for, 571
Gestational length, reproduction and, 181
Griseofulvin, 169t, 232, 286b
GFR. See Glomerular filtration rate
GSH. See Glutathione
Gila monster. See Lizard envenomation
Guarana, 342, 647
Gilatoxin, 622
Gyromitra spp. See Hydrazines
Gingivitis, from mercury, 632
Ginkgo biloba, 338
Ginseng,338
H
Glauber's salts. See Sodium sulfate
Hz-antagonists, 571, 696, 729, 860-861
Glomerular fltration rate (GFR), 218-219, 737
HAAs. See Hormonally active agents
Glucocorticoids
HAHs. See Halogenated aryl hydrocarbons
β-2-agonists and, 284t
Hair, arsenic and, 461
LH and, 185
Haldane effect, 480-481
liver and, 286b
Half-life, 13
for metaflumizone, 749-750
of arsenic, 459
NSAIDs and, 284t, 689
of caffeine, 648-649
reproduction and, 169t
of CO, 483
Glucosamine, 301-302
of cyanide, 524-525
Glucose. See aiso Blood glucose; Hyperglycemia;
 of ibuprofen, 690
Hypoglycemia
of ivermectin, 603
for copper, 520
of KBr, 450
EG and, 555
of metaldehyde, 636
xylitol and, 843
of nicotine, 683-684
Glue, 60
of NSAIDs, 219, 687-688
Glue-on nail removers, cyanide in, 524
of paraquat,735-736
Glutamate, 812-813, 818
of phenobarbital, 448
Glutamic acid, 668
of tricyclic antidepressants, 329
884 Index
Half-life (Continued)
Hepatotoxins (Continued)
of xenobiotics, 17
prognosis for, 536
of zinc, 850
toxicokinetics of, 534
Halogenated aryl hydrocarbons (HAHs),
treatment for, 536
reproduction and, 197
Herbal medicines, 335-356
Halothane, 169t, 280b
ADRs with, 337
Hand warmers (with iron), 303
adulteration of,348-349
Hazard, toxicity and, 4-5
chemical constituents in, 336-338
HCN. See Hydrogen cyanide
diagnosis with, 353
HCO, . See Plasma bicarbonate
drugs and, interactions between, 349-353,
Heart rate.See also Arrhythmias
350t-352t
ketamine and, 327
essential oils, 346-348, 346t-347t
PCP and, 327
information sources on, 353-354
pediatrics and, 215
regulations with, 336
from petroleum hydrocarbons, 759
reproduction and, 200
for smoke inhalation, 415-416
safety of, 338-346
supportive care for, 91-92
treatment for, 353
Heartworm, 460-461
Herbicides, 36, 401-408. See aiso specifc toxins;
Heaths, 239-240
specific types
Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
arsenic from, 458
(HVAC), 155-156
dicamba, 405
Heavy metals. See aiso specifc metals
glyphosate, 404-405
birds and, 265-268
pediatrics and, 220
in herbal medicines, 337
pendimethalin, 405
reproduction and, 169t, 194
phenoxyl, 402-404
Hebeloma vinosophyltum,672
prodiamine, 406
Hedeoma putegiodes,348
reproduction and, 169t, 194-195
Heinz body anemia, 337-338, 765
Heroin, 311
Heloderma spp. See Lizard envenomation
Hindlimb ataxia, 473, 474f
Hematologic system.See Blood
Hippeastrum spp. See Amaryllis
Hematomas, 808-810
Histamine, 575, 786
Hematopoiesis, 216
Historical anticonvulsants, 451-453
Hmerocallis spp., 36, 617
History. See Toxicologic history
Hemlock, 337
Holly, 503-504
Hemocol, 737
clinical signs of, 504
Hemodialysis
differential diagnosis for, 504
for cyanide, 529
lesions from, 504
for DEG, 545
mechanism of toxicity of, 503-504
for grapes, 571
minimum database for, 504
for methanol, 644
prognosis for, 504
Hemoglobin, 109-110
reptiles and, 241
CO and, 480-481
treatment for, 504
copper and, 519
Home heating oil, 757t
pediatrics and, 216
Homeopathic drugs, 36
zinc phosphide and, 855
Homoanatoxin-a, 536-538
Hemoglobin saturation (Soz), 88-89
clinical signs of, 537
Hemoglobinemia, 425, 849
confirmatory tests for, 537
Hemoglobinuria, 425, 764-765, 801, 825, 849
differential diagnosis for, 538
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, 14-15
LD for, 536-537
Heparin, 113, 130t-131t, 169t, 694t
lesions from, 538
Hepatic blood flow (Q), 224-225
mechanism of toxicity of, 537
Hepatic clearance (CL), 224-225
minimum database for, 537
Hepatic extraction ratio (ER), 224-225
prognosis for, 538
Hepatotoxins, 534-536
toxicokinetics of, 537
S go sts p
treatment for, 538
confirmatory tests for, 535
Hoodia gordoni, 647
differential diagnosis for, 536
Hookworms, 601
LD for, 534
Hops, 302-303
lesions from, 536
Hormonally active agents (HAAs), 183-184
mechanism of toxicity of, 534-535
Hormones, 36
mushrooms with, 662-667
reproduction and, 169t
Index885
Hornets, 574-581
Hyperadrenocorticism, 99, 113-114, 810
Host-dependent adverse drug reactions. See
Hyperaldosteronism, 810
Idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions
Hyperammonemia, 109
Hot control zones, 159-160
Hyperbaric oxygen, 418, 483, 825-826
HPA. See Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
Hyperbilirubinemia, 425-426, 535, 678-679, 856
HPG. See Hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis
Hyperbilirubinuria, 678-679
5-HT.See Serotonin
Hypercalcemia, 58, 114, 490-491, 493-494, 497
5-HTP. See 5-hydroxytryptophan
Hypercapnia, 77, 415-416, 837
Human poison control centers, 31-38
Hyperexcitability
Humidity
from drugs, 103b
airway and, 120
hypomagnesemia and, 115
indoor environmental quality and health and,
neurological system and, 102
143
from plants, 371t-395t
smoke inhalation and, 414
Hyperfbrinogenemia, 801-802
Hurmuus upuus,302-303
Hyperglycemia, 104
HVAC. See Heating, ventilation, and air
from Compound 1080, 813-814
from fpronil, 743
Hyaluronidase, 575, 622,786, 801, 824
from metaflumizone, 749
Hydralazine, 68, 95t
from metaldehyde, 639
Hydrazines, 664t-665t, 667-671
from xylitol, 844
clinical signs of, 667-668
from zinc phosphide, 856
diagnostic workup for, 668
Hypericum perforatum,338,345
exposure to, 668
Hyperkalemia,112-113, 505-506
toxicity of, 667-668
calcium and, 113
treatment for, 668
from mannitol, 476-477
Hydrocarbons. See Petroleum hydrocarbons
 Hypermagnesemia, 115
Hydrocortisone, 747, 751
Hypernatremia, 82, 476-477, 773, 807
Hydrogen chloride, 412-413
from AC, 80
Hydrogen cyanide (HCN), 523
hypovolemia and, 112
Hydrogen peroxide
from methylxanthines, 650
for bromethalin, 475-476
from zinc phosphide, 858
for brown recluse spiders, 825-826
Hyperparathyroidism, 58, 114-115, 491, 497
for lead, 612
Hyperphosphatemia, 112-115, 856
for metaldehyde, 638
Hyperpigmentation, 460
for vomiting, 64, 74-75, 251, 475-476
Hyperreflexia, 808-809
for zinc phosphide, 858
Hypersalivation
Hydromorphone, 76
from amitraz, 432
Hydroxocobalamin, 527-529
from citrus oil, 514
N-hydroxylarylamine, 746
from Compound 1080, 813
7-hydroxymitragynine, 343
from DEET, 541
5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), 338
from detergents, 293-294
Hymenoptera stings, 573-588
from fpronil, 743
bees, wasps, hornets, and yellow jackets,
from holly, 504
574-581
from indoxacarb, 746-747
classification of, 574f
from lilies, 618-619
clinical signs of, 584
from metaldehyde, 637
clinical signs with, 577-578, 578b
from nicotine, 684
comparison of venoms, 576b
from phenols, 296
confirmatory tests for, 578, 584
from pit viper snake bites, 788
differential diagnosis for, 581, 581b,
from pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 772
587, 587b
from strychnine, 829
fire ant stings, 581-587
from toad secretions, 835
LD for, 575, 583
Hypersensitivity
lesions from, 580-581, 586
from drugs, 279-280
mechanism of toxicity of, 575-577, 583
from fpronil, 743
minimum database for, 578, 584
from imidacloprid, 745
prevention of, 79-580, 580b, 585
from indoxacarb, 746-747
prognosis for, 579-580, 585
from methoprene, 751
sources of, 574, 581-583
from pyriproxyfen, 751-752
toxicokinetics of, 575-577, 583
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis, 140
treatment of, 578-579, 584-585
Hypersusceptibility, to ADRs, 277
886 Index
Hypertension, 68
Hypotension (Continued)
from black widow spiders, 819
from pit viper snake bites, 788
with smoke inhalation, 417
from ricin, 779-780
toxins and, 56t-57t
from rosemary, 509-510
Hyperthermia
toxins, 56t-57t
from amphetamines, 313
toxins and, 56t-57t
from bromethalin, 473
from zinc phosphide, 859
from Compound 1080, 813
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA),
from macadamia nuts, 626
174, 185
from metaldehyde, 637, 639
Hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis (HPG),
sinus tachycardia from, 91
179
from strychnine, 830
Hypothermia
 supportive care for, 105-106
from citrus oil, 514
from toad secretions, 835, 837
from EG, 559
Hyperthyroidism, 115, 186, 226, 350t-352t
ethanol and, 548
Hypertonic dextrose, 619-620
from ivermectin, 604
Hypertonic saline, 97, 104
from metaflumizone, 749
Hyperventilation, 70, 104, 525
from pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 773-774
Hypoadrenocorticism,113
supportive care for, 105-106
Hypoalbuminemia, 205, 678-679
Hypothyroidism, 186, 350t-352t
Hypobilirubinemia, 856
Hypoventilation, 66, 70, 87
Hypocalcemia, 103b, 114-115, 729
Hypovolemia, 58, 95-96, 112, 693
from Compound 1080, 813-814
Hypovolemic shock, 461
from EG, 58
Hypoxemia, 66
hypomagnesemia and, 115
botulism and, 467
from zinc phosphide, 859
respiratory alkalosis and, 70
Hypochloremia, 112-113
sinus tachycardia from, 91
Hypochlorite salts, 297
supportive care for, 86
Hypofbrinogenemia, 788
SVTs from, 91
Hypoglycemia, 109
Hypoxia
from citrus oil, 514
from cyanide, 526
drugs for, 35
from gastric lavage, 77
from metaldehyde, 639
smoke inhalation and, 414-416
microcystins and, 535
PG and, 764-765
seizures with, 70-71
from xylitol, 844
Iatrogenic toxicoses, 261
from zinc phosphide, 856
Ibotenic acid, 664t-665t, 668-669
Hypokalemia, 113-114
Ibuprofen, 35, 46, 688-689
from alkaline diuresis, 82
in bile, 690
hypomagnesemia and, 115
ferrets and, 255
microcystins and, 535
gastrointestinal system and, 691
from pit viper snake bites, 789
half-life of, 690
serum electrolytes for, 55
lactation and, 210
from xylitol, 844
Ice. See 4-Methylaminorex
from zinc phosphide, 856
Ice melts, 303
Hypomagnesemia, 103b, 114-115, 859
Ice packs, 300
Hyponatremia, 112-113, 115, 856
ICP.See Intracranial pressure
Hypophosphatemia, 115, 844
Icterus, 358b-370b
 Idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions, 279-280,
Hypoproteinemia,109
Hypotension
279b
from acepromazine, 277b
clinical pharmacology of, 281-282
from diazepam, 451
from coral snake bites, 801
from cyanide, 525
liver and, 286-287
geriatrics and, 226
pathogenesis of, 280-281
from pyrethrins/pyrethroids772
from Hymenoptera stings, 579
from hypermagnesemia, 115
 Idiosyncratic hypersensitivity, 279-280
I/E. See Inspiratory/expiratory ratio
from mannitol, 476-477
from metaflumizone, 749
IgE. See Immunoglobulin
from mistletoe, 507
ILE. See Intravenous lipid emulsion
NSAIDs and, 693
Hex aquifolium. See Holly
Index 887
Imidacloprid, 407, 744-745
Indoxacarb, 745-747
clinical signs of, 745
clinical signs of, 746-747
confirmatory tests for, 745
confirmatory tests for, 747
differential diagnosis for, 745
differential diagnosis for, 747
LD for, 744
LD for, 746
mechanism of toxicity of, 745
mechanism of action of, 746
minimum database for, 745
minimum database for, 747
prognosis for, 745
prognosis for, 747
pyriproxyfen and, 751
sources of, 745-746
sources of, 744
toxicokinetics of, 746
toxicokinetics of, 745
treatment for, 748
treatment for, 745
Infection control, 115-117
Imidazoles, 232-233
Inhalant toxins, birds and, 261-262, 262b
Immunoglobulin E (IgE), 279-281, 576, 583
 Initial management, 63-72
Immunosuppressants, for paraquat, 738
ABCs of critical patient care, 73-78
Imodium. See Loperamide
of mass exposures, 159
In vitro fertilization (IVF), 188
metabolic assessment and, 75
Indolamine, 860
for seizures and muscle tremors, 75
Indoles, 687-688
with telephone triage, 73
Indomethacin, 702
for toxicologic history, 42b
Indoor environmental quality and health,
at veterinary hospital, 73
139-158. See aiso specific toxins
Inocybe spp., 671
air contaminants, 141b
Insects. See Hymenoptera stings
airborne contaminants and, 145
Insect growth regulators, 750-752. See aiso
asthma and, 145-146
Methoprene
bacteria and, 155
pyriproxyfen,751-752
 biological mechanisms for illness and,
Insecticides, 36, 48.See also Carbamates;
144-146
Ectoparasiticides; Organochlorines;
biology of, 154-155
Organophosphates; Pyrethrins/pyrethroids
bronchial hyperreactivity and, 145-146
birds and, 269-270
building materials and, 141-142, 147
citrus oil as, 513
carpet and, 147-152
hyperexcitability from, 103b
 cleaning products and, 152
reproduction and, 194-195
combustion sources and, 152-153
Insoluble oxalates {IO), 725-728, 727f
disinfectants and, 152
clinical signs of, 727
ETS and, 153
diagnosis of, 727
evaluation of, 156-157
differential diagnosis for,728
formaldehyde and, 153
lesions from, 728
fungi and, 155
mechanism of toxicity of, 726-727
furnishings and, 141-142
prognosis for, 728
human factors in, 142-143
sources of, 725
humidity and, 143
toxicity of, 728
IVCD and, 146
treatment for, 727-728
mold and, 142-143, 154-155
Inspiratory/expiratory ratio (1/E), 87
nitrogen oxide and, 153
Insulin, 113
O, and, 154
 Interceptor. See Milbemycin
office product chemical emissions and,
 Intermediate syndrome, 468
146-147
 Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
 pesticides and, 152
(IPPV), 467
pollutants and, 146-154
International unit (IU), 491
respiratory irritation, 145-146
Intracranial pressure {ICP), 103-104, 476, 809
respiratory irritation and, 145-146
Intravenous lipid emulsion (ILE), 606, 712-713
SO and, 142-143,153-154
Intrinsic toxicity, 277-278, 277b
sources and causes of, 139-143
IO. See Insoluble oxalates
symptoms with, 140b
Iodine, 59-60
temperature and, 143
Ion exchange resins, 78
toxicants and, 291-308
Ion tapping, 81-82
ventilation system and, 143, 155-156
Ionophores, 589-594
xenobiotics and, 144-145
botulism and, 468
indoor environmental quality and health and,
clinical signs of, 591t, 592
humidity and, 143
confirmatory tests for, 592
888Index
Ionophores (Continued)
Ivermectin (Continued)
differential diagnosis for, 593
P-glycoproteins and, 278, 603
LD for, 590
prognosis for, 606
lesions from, 593
reptiles and, 234-235
mechanism of toxicity of, 590
sources of, 601-602
minimum database for, 592
toxicokinetics of, 603
muscle weakness from, 102b
treatment for, 605-606
prognosis for, 593
IVF. See In vitro fertilization
sources of, 589-590
Ivy, 242
toxicity of, 591t
toxicokinetics of, 590
treatment for, 592-593
1
Ipecac syrup, 64, 74-75, 858
Jack O'Lantern mushroom, 672
IPPV. See Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
Jaundice, 358b-370b
Iron, 36, 56t-57t, 595-600
Jet fuel, 757t
anemia from, 109-110
 JH. See Juvenile hormone
birds, 268
Juniperus spp., 502
birds and, 264, 268
Juvenile hormone {JH), 751
clinical signs of, 597
complete blood count for, 55
confirmatory tests for, 598
K
cyanide and, 524-525
Kalanchoe, 504-506
differential diagnosis for, 600
clinical signs of, 505
in hand warmers, 303
confirmatory tests for, 505
LD for, 596
differential diagnosis for, 506
lead and, 610
glycosides and, 505-506
lesions from, 600
LD for, 505
mechanism of toxicity of, 597
lesions from, 506
minimum database for, 597-598
mechanism of toxicity of, 505
prognosis for, 600
minimum database for, 505
sources of, 595-596
prognosis for, 506
toxicokinetics of, 596-597
treatment for, 505-506
treatment for, 598-600, 599f
Kallikrein, 622
Irritant toxins, 412
Kava kava, 342-343
Irritant-associated vocal cord dysfunction
Kayexalate. See Polystyrene sulfonate
(IVCD), 146
KBr. See Potassium bromide
Isoflavones, 192
Kelocyanor. See Dicobalt-
Isoflurane, 169t, 199, 280b
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
Isopropanol, 298-299, 323, 757t
Kelp,458
Isoproterenol, 169t
Keppra. See Levetiracetam
Isoxazoles, 668-669
Keratitis, 466-467
clinical signs of, 668-669
Ketamine
diagnostic workup for, 669
clinical signs of, 327
exposure to,669
confirmatory tests for, 327
toxicity of, 668-669
differential diagnosis for, 328
treatment for, 669
mechanism of toxicity of, 327
Itraconazole, 232-233
minimum database for, 327
IU. See International unit
pregnancy and, 205-206
 IVCD. See Irritant-associated vocal cord
as recreational drug, 326-328
dysfunction
reproduction and, 169t
Ivermectin, 46-47, 601-608
sources of, 326
clinical signs of, 604
toxicokinetics of, 326-327
coma from, 103b
 treatment and prognosis for, 323
confirmatory tests for, 605
Ketoconazole,169t,232-233,286b,605b
differential diagnosis for, 606
α-Ketoglutarate, 528
hyperexcitability from, 103b
Ketoprofen, 702
LD for, 602-603
Khat, 343
lesions from, 606
Kidneys. See aiso Renal failure
mechanism of toxicity of, 603-604
ADRs and, 287-289, 287b
muscle weakness from, 102b
aminoglycosides and, 287-288
neurotoxicity from, 277b
amphotericin B and, 288
Index 889
Kidneys (Continued)
LD.See Lethal dosage
cisplatin and, 288
Lead, 48, 56t-57t, 609-616
cyclosporine and, 288
birds and, 265-268
β-lactams and, 288
clinical signs of, 611
NSAIDs and, 288-289
confirmatory tests for, 612
 radiocontrast agents and, 289
diagnostic testing for, 130t-131t
sulfonamides and, 289
differential diagnosis for, 614
tetracycline and, 289
DMSA for, 462
amitraz and, 432
in gasoline, 609
arsenic in, 459, 461
hyperexcitability from,103b
blood urea nitrogen and creatinine and, 58
LD for, 610
DEG and, 544
lesions from, 614
EG and, 552
2s mass exposure contaminant, 163
mercury and, 631
mechanism of toxicity of, 610-611
metronidazole and, 654
minimum database for, 611
nodularins and, 534-535
muscle weakness from, 102b
NSAIDs and, 690
prevention of, 614
ADRs with, 692
prognosis for, 614
petroleum hydrocarbons and, 758
radiographs for, 59-60
plants and, 371t-395t
reproduction and, 169t, 194
sodium and, 809-810
sources of, 609
thiacetarsamide and, 460-461
testing for, 50
vitamin D and, 495
toxicokinetics of, 610
xenobiotics in, 15-16
treatment for, 612-613
zinc and, 848, 850
Lectins, 507
Kinins, 786
Legalon-SIL. See Silibinin
Klebsiella spp., 231
Legionella pneumophila, 140, 155
Klonopin.See Clonazepam
Lethal dosage (LD), 3-4. See also specific toxins
Kratom, 343
Leukocytosis, 611, 695, 801-802
Levetiracetam (Keppra), 454, 859
Lexicomp, 25
L
LH. See Luteinizing hormone
α-Lactalbumin, 208-210
Librium. See Chlordiazepoxide
β-lactams, 169t, 199, 288
Lidocaine, 91t, 584-585, 836-837
Lactate, 55-58, 415
for lizard envenomation, 623
Lactation
for methylxanthines, 651
analgesics and, 210
pregnancy and, 205
anesthetics and, 210
reproduction and, 169t, 199
 antibiotics and, 210
Lighter fluid, 757t
hypomagnesemia from, 115
Lilies (Lilium spp.), 36, 617-620
lead and, 611
clinical signs of, 618-619
pediatrics and, 219
confirmatory tests for, 619
reproduction and,182-183
differential diagnosis for, 620
rodenticides and, 444
LD for, 618
weak bases and, 209b
lesions from, 620
xenobiotics and, 208-210, 209b
mechanism of toxicity of, 618
Lactic acidosis, 55, 416, 527
minimum database for, 619
Laidlomycin propionate (Cattlyst), 590, 591t 
prognosis for, 620
Lamictal. See Lamotrigine
renal failure from, 108-109
Lamotrigine {Lamictal), 453-454
reptiles and, 240
Larrea tridentate, 341
sources of, 617
Laryngospasm, 77
toxicokinetics of, 618
Lasalocid (Avotec, Bovatec), 590, 591t
in toxicology history, 46
Latrodectus spp.See Black widow spiders
treatment for, 619-620
Lawn savers, 304
Limonene, 509
Laxatives
d-Limonene, 513
for batteries, 300
Linalool, 509, 513
for Compound 1080, 814
Lipase, 824
creams and ointments as, 35
Lipid emulsion, 82
DSS as, 245
Lipoproteins, 710
for mercury, 632
Liquid potpourri, 221-222, 293-294
890 Index
Liver. See aiso Hepatotoxins
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 179
acetaminophen and, 255-256, 424-425
glucocorticoids and, 185
ADRs and, 285-289, 286b
Lycorine, 500
 phenobarbital and, 286
Lymphosarcoma, 58, 497
aflatoxins and, 678
Lyngbya spp., 38-539
amaryllis and, 500
Lyngbyatoxin-a, 538-539
arsenic in, 459, 461
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 309, 311,
copper and, 519
320-321, 668
diazepam and, 451
clinical signs of, 321
EG and, 552-553
confirmatory tests for, 321
felbamate and, 453
differential diagnosis for, 321
Frank liver necrosis, 463
LD for, 320
geriatrics and, 223-225
marijuana and, 323
idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions and,
mechanism of toxicity of, 321
286-287
sources of, 320
metaldehyde and, 637
toxicokinetics of,321
methanol and, 644
 treatment and prognosis for, 321
mushrooms and, 50
nodularins and, 534-535
NSAIDs, ADRs and, 692-693
M
OCs and, 710
 Ma huang. See Ephedra
petroleum hydrocarbons and, 758
Macadamia nuts, 625-628
phenobarbital and, 448-449
botulism and, 468
plants and, 371t-395t 
clinical signs of, 626
ricin and, 779
confirmatory tests for, 626
rodenticides and, 439
differential diagnosis for, 627
sodium and, 809-810
LD for, 625
supportive care for,109
lesions from, 627
thiacetarsamide and, 460-461
mechanism of toxicity of, 626
xenobiotics in, 15-16
minimum database for, 626
xylitol and, 844
muscle weakness from, 102b
zinc and, 848, 850
prognosis for, 627
Liver enzyme tests, 54, 59
sources of, 625
Lizard envenomation, 621-624
toxicokinetics of, 626
clinical signs of, 622-623
treatment for, 626-627
confirmatory tests for, 623
Mace, 344
differential diagnosis for, 623
Macrolides, 604. See also Ivermectin
LD for, 622
 Maduramicin (Cygro), 590, 591t
lesions from, 623
Magnesium, 55, 115, 859; See also
mechanism of toxicity of, 622
Hypermagnesemia; Hypomagnesemia
minimum database for, 623
 Magnesium hydroxide, 496
prognosis for, 623
 Magnesium phosphide, 853-854
to reptiles, 243-244
 Magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts), 79-80, 115,
sources of, 621
476, 779-780
toxicokinetics of, 622
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 486
treatment for, 623
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC),
LOAEL. See Lowest observed adverse effect level
144-145
Lobelia, 343
Mammals
Lobeline, 343
decontamination of, 251-252
Loop diuretics,113-115, 495-496, 809
macrolides and, 604
Loperamide {Imodium), 46-47
toxicology and, 251-258
Lopressor. See Metoprolol
Manganese, 755
Lowest observed effect level (LOEL), 742
Mannitol
Loxosceles spp. See Brown recluse spiders
ADRs with, 476-477
LSD. See Lysergic acid diethylamide
for bromethalin, 476
Lungs
for forced diuresis, 81
arsenic in, 459
for grapes, 571
cancer of, arsenic and, 460
for ICP, 104
mercury and, 631
for lilies, 619-620
metaldehyde and, 639-640
for seizures, 69
ricin and, 779
MAOIs. See Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Index 891
MAP. See Mean arterial pressure
Megaesophagus, 466-467
Marijuana, 51
Meiosis, 177-178
clinical signs of, 315
Melaleuca oil, 348
coma from, 103b
Melarsomine, 460-461
differential diagnosis for, 316
Melatonin, 860
hyperexcitability from, 103b
Meloxicam, 689, 702-703
mechanism of toxicity of, 322
Menace reflex, 100
minimum database for, 315
Mentha putegium,348
as recreational drug, 321-323
Menthol, 584-585
reptiles and,242-243
Meperidine (Demerol), 210, 311
sources of, 321-322
Meprobamate, 311
toxic dose with, 322
mEq/L. See Milliequivalents per liter
toxicokinetics of, 322
Mercury, 56t-57t, 629-634
treatment and prognosis for, 316
birds and, 268
Marinol. See Dronabinol
clinical signs of, 631-632
Mass exposures
confirmatory tests for, 632
control zones and, 159-160
diagnostic testing for, 130t-131t
decontamination for, 159-166
differential diagnosis for, 633
chemical restraint for, 162
DMSA for, 462
commonly encountered contaminants in,
LD for, 630-631
163
lesions from, 633
for deceased animals, 162
mechanism of toxicity of, 631
identification and documentation for, 161
minimum database for, 632
laws and regulations on, 162
prognosis for, 633
for live animals, 160-161
reproduction and, 169t, 194
long-term surveillance for, 164
sources of, 629-630
physical restraint for, 161-162
toxicokinetics of, 631
post-decontamination monitoring for, 164
treatment for, 632-633
PPE for, 163
 Mescaline, 311
service animals in, 162-163
Metabolic acidosis, 50
sheltering of decontaminated animals after,
acid diuresis and, 81
164
alkaline diuresis and, 82
euthanasia in, 161
amphetamines and, 313
human safety and, 159
from cyanide, 527
initial management of, 159
from EG, 553-554
minimizing further contamination for, 160
ethanol and, 548
wastewater management for, 162
fluid therapy for, 69-70
Matches, 303-304
hyperkalemia and, 113
Material safety data sheets (MSDSs), 401-402
from iron, 597
Maxiban. See Narasin
from metaldehyde, 639
Maximum tolerated dose (MTD), 4
PG and, 764-765
MCPA.See 4-Chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic
serum electrolytes for, 55
acid
sodium bicarbonate for, 55, 70
MCPP. See 2-Methyl-4-chlorophenoxypropanoic
supportive care for,111
acid
from toad secretions, 837
MDR1, 601, 604
from zinc phosphide, 856
ME.See Metabolized energy
Metabolic alkalosis, 69-70, 111
Mean arterial pressure (MAP), 93
Metabolism,16.See also specific toxins
Mebendazole,286b
assessment of, 6971
Mechanism-based toxicity. See Pharmacologic
dosage and, 2
toxicity
geriatrics and, 226
Medical decontamination, 161
pediatrics and, 218
Medical records, 133-134
in pregnancy, 207
Medications/medicines. See Drugs
 Metabolized energy (ME), 491
Medicolegal considerations, 133-138
Metaflumizone, 747-750
animal cruelty, 135-136
clinical signs of, 749
confidentiality, 134
confirmatory tests for, 749
medical records, 133-134
differential diagnosis for, 750
pet food contamination, 136-137
LD for, 748
substance abuse, 134-135
mechanism of toxicity of, 749
Meaine,22-23
minimum database for, 749
892Index
Metaflumizone (Continued)
Methoprene (Continued)
prognosis for, 750
mechanism of toxicity of, 750
sources of, 747-748
minimum database for, 751
toxicokinetics of, 748-749
prognosis for, 751
treatment for, 749-750
sources of, 750-751
Metals, 2. See aiso Heavy metals; specijfic metals
toxicokinetics of, 750
as mass exposure contaminant,163
treatment for, 751
Metaldehyde, 50, 56t-57t, 635-642
Methotrexate, 169t, 350t-352t, 694t
clinical signs of, 637
Methoxyflurane, 169t, 199
confirmatory tests for, 637
 Methyl phenobarbital, 311
differential diagnosis for, 640, 640t-641t
2-Methyl-4-chlorophenoxypropanoic acid
hyperexcitability from, 103b
(MCPP), 404
LD for, 636
β-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA), 538
lesions from, 639-640
4-Methylaminorex (Ice), 311
mechanism of toxicity of, 636-637
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), 327,
prognosis for, 639
453
reptiles and, 238-239
3,4-methylenedioxy-N-ethylamphetamine
sources of, 635-636
(Eve), 311
testing for, 50
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
toxicokinetics of, 636
{Ecstasy), 311
treatment for, 638-639
N-methyl-formylhydrazine, 667
Metallophosphides, 853-854
Methylphenidate (Ritalin), 311
Metallothionein, 15-16
Methylprednisolone sodium succinate (Solu-
Metergoline, 210
Medrol),837
Methadone, 311
Methylxanthines, 56t-57t, 67, 647-652
Methamphetamine, 51, 221
clinical signs of, 649-650
Methanol, 299, 643-646
confirmatory tests for, 650
clinical signs of, 644
differential diagnosis for, 651
complete blood count for, 55
from holly, 503
confirmatory tests for, 644
hyperexcitability from, 103b
differential diagnosis for, 645
LD for, 648
ethanol for, 547
lesions from, 651
in gasoline, 755
mechanism of toxicity of, 649
LD for, 643
pediatrics and, 221
lesions from, 645
prognosis for, 651
marijuana and, 323
sources of, 647-648
mechanism of toxicity of, 643-644
toxicokinetics of, 648-649
minimum database for, 644
treatment for, 650-651
prognosis for, 645
Metoclopramide,107, 207-208, 210, 226
sources of, 643
Metoprolol (Lopressor, Betaloc), 651
toxicokinetics of, 643-644
Metronidazole, 653-658
treatment for, 644
clinical signs of, 654-655
Methaqualone (Quaalude), 311
confirmatory tests for, 655
Methcathinone (Cat), 311
differential diagnosis for, 656
Methemoglobin, 88
LD for, 653-654
Methemoglobinemia, 668, 765
lesions from, 656
from acetaminophen, 255-256, 277-278,
mechanism of toxicity of, 654
423-424
minimum database for, 655
from indoxacarb, 746-747
prevention of, 655-656
from phenols, 296
prognosis for, 655-656
Methimazole, 280b, 286b
reproduction and, 169t
Methionine, 304
reptiles and, 231-232
Methocarbamol, 638-639
sources of, 653
Methocarbamol (Robaxin-V), 69, 681, 830, 859
toxicokinetics of, 654
for pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 773
treatment for, 655
Methoprene, 750-751, 769
mg/dL. See Milligrams per deciliter
clinical signs of, 750
MGK-264. See N-octyl bicycloheptene
confirmatory tests for, 751
carboximide
differential diagnosis for, 751
MHC.See Major histocompatibility complex
fipronil and, 743
miAMPl, 625
LD for, 750
Miconazole, 169t
Index 893
Microcystins, 534-536
Mistletoe (Continued)
clinical signs of, 535
sources of, 506-508
confirmatory tests for, 535
treatment for, 507
differential diagnosis for, 536
Mohave toxin, 784-785
LD for, 534
Mold
lesions from, 536
indoor environmental quality and health and,
mechanism of toxicity of, 534-535
142-143, 154-155
prognosis for, 536
2s mass exposure contaminant, 163
toxicokinetics of, 534
Molluscicides. See aiso Metaldehyde
treatment for, 536
reproduction and, 194-195
Microcystis aeruginosa, 340-341
Monensin (Coban, Rumensin), 590, 591t
Micromedex Healthcare Series, 36-37
 Monoamine oxidase, toad secretions and, 834
Midazolam, 76, 651, 669, 859
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), 35,
Milbemycin (Interceptor), 601-603
220,328,338
Milk.See aiso Lactation
Monosaccharides, 570
for bleach, 298
Monosodium fluoroacetate (Compound 1080),
for detergents, 293-294
811-816
for hydrocarbons, 36
bromethalin and, 473
for methoprene, 751
clinical signs of, 813
OCs and, 710
confirmatory tests for, 814
for pine oils, 297
differential diagnosis for, 815
for poinsettia, 509
hyperexcitability from,103b
rodenticides and, 439
lesions from, 815
for soluble oxalates, 729
mechanism of toxicity of, 812-813
for zinc phosphide, 858
minimum database for, 813-814
Milk to plasma ratio (M:P), 209-210, 209t
prognosis for, 815
Milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L), 9
sources of, 81l-812
Milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL), 9
toxic doses of, 812t
Mineral oil, 78
toxicokinetics of, 812
for petroleum hydrocarbons, 760
treatment for, 814-815
for zinc phosphide, 858
Monoterpene hydrocarbons, 509
Minimal toxic dose, 4
Monro-Kellie Doctrine, 102-103
Minimum database, 25. See also specifc
Monteban. See Narasin
toxins
Morinda citrifolia,344
 arterial blood gas analysis and, 55
Morphine, 95t, 311, 335-336, 793
blood glucose and, 58
Mothballs, 304-305
BUN and, 58
birds and, 270
calcium and, 58
Motor oil, 757t
coagulation panel and, 59
Moxidectin (Proheart), 601-603
complete blood count and, 55
M:P. See Milk to plasma ratio
creatinine and, 58
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging
electrocardiography and, 59
MSDSs.See Material safety data sheets
lactate and, 55-58
MTD. See Maximum tolerated dose
liver enzyme tests and, 59
 Multicompartment model, 17
pulse oximetry and, 59
Muscarine, 664t-665t, 671-672
09-6s 'pue sydeiaoipe1
clinical signs of, 671
for toxicology diagnosis, 53-62
diagnostic workup for, 671
ultrasound and, 60
exposure to, 672
urinalysis and, 58-59
toxicity of, 671
vital signs and, 53-54
treatment for, 671-672
Miosis, 101
Muscimol, 664t-665t, 668-669
Misoprostol, 108, 696-697, 697t
Muscle relaxants
Mistletoe, 343, 506-508
herb-drug interactions with, 350t-352t
clinical signs of, 507
for OCs, 712
differential diagnosis for, 508
for strychnine, 830
LD for, 507
Muscle tremors
lesions from, 508
from black widow spiders, 819
mechanism of toxicity of, 507
from citrus oil, 514
minimum database for, 507
control of, 69
prognosis for, 507
from drugs, 103b
reptiles and, 241
from imidacloprid, 745
894Index
Muscle tremors (Continued)
National Center for Complementary and
from KBr, 449-450
Alternative Medicine (NCCAM), 353-354
from macadamia nuts, 626
National Institute for Occupational Safety and
from metaldehyde, 637
Health (NIOSH), 155, 163
from methylxanthines, 651
NCCAM. See National Center for
from pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 772
 Complementary and Alternative Medicine
from sodium, 808-809
NE.See Norepinephrine
from strychnine, 829-830
Nefazodone hydrochloride, 329
from zinc phosphide, 856
Nematocides, 407
Muscle weakness
Nembutal. See Pentobarbital
etiology of, 102b
Neoplasia, 103b
neurological system and, 102
 Neostigmine methylsulfate, 605-606
Mushrooms, 36, 659-676
Nephrotoxic mushrooms, 664t-665t, 673-674
carbamates and, 723
Neriurn oleander,344
collection and identification of, 660-662
Neurogenic inflammation, 145
gastrointestinal system and, 671-673
Neurological system. See also Central nervous
with hepatotoxins, 662-667
system
hyperexcitability from, 103b
muscle weakness and, 102
liver and, 50
supportive care for, 100-105
marijuana and, 323
deteriorating neurological status and,
with neurotoxins, 667-671
102-105
OPs and,723
Neuromuscular blockers, 721
pediatrics and, 220
Neurontin. See Gabapentin
rabbits and, 255
 Neuropathy target esterase (NTE), 717
renal failure from, 108-109
Neuropeptides, 145
reporting poisonings from, 659
Neurotoxins, 536-538
reptiles and, 239
from black widow spiders, 818
by toxin type, 664t-665t
clinical signs of, 537
trees associated with, 661t-662t
confirmatory tests for, 537
Myasthenia gravis, 102b, 468
differential diagnosis for, 538
Mycotoxins, 2, 677-682
LD for, 536-537
aflatoxins, 678-679
lesions from, 538
birds and, 271
mechanism of toxicity of, 537
diagnostic testing for,130t131t
minimum database for, 537
reproduction and, 169t, 192-193
mushrooms with, 667-671
tremorgens, 680-682
prognosis for, 538
vomitoxin, 679-680
toxicokinetics of, 537
Mydriasis, 101, 371t-395t
treatment for, 538
Myelinolysis, 112-113
Newts, 36
Myoclonus, 808-809
Niacin, 738
Myokymia, 788
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), 786
Myristica fragrans,344
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADPH), 734
Nicotine, 683-686
N
birds and, 264
Nabilone (Cesamet), 321-322
clinical signs, 684
N-acetylcysteine (NAC)
confirmatory tests for, 684
for acetaminophen, 426
differential diagnosis for, 685
for amanitins, 666-667
hyperexcitability from, 103b
for paraquat, 738
LD for, 683
for ricin, 779-780
lesions from, 684
for xylitol, 845
mechanism of toxicity of, 684
for zinc phosphide, 860
prognosis for, 684
NaCl. See Sodium chloride
reptiles and, 242
NAD.See Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
sources, 683
NADPH. See Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
toxicokinetics of, 683-684
phosphate
treatment for, 684
Nalorphine, 311
NIOSH. See National Institute for Occupational
Naphthalene. See Mothballs
Safety and Health
Naproxen, 210, 697, 703
Nitrates, 130t-131t, 350t-352t
Narasin (Maxiban, Monteban), 590, 591t
Nitric oxide, 418
Index895
Nitrogen dioxide (NOz), 142-143, 153
Norepinephrine (NE) (Continued)
Nitrogen oxide, 60, 153
caffeine and, 649
Nitroprusside, 68, 95t, 529
metaldehyde and, 637
Nixon, Richard, 310
toad secretions and, 834-835
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), 327, 453
Normosol R, 96
No observed adverse effect level (NOAEL), 4,
NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal antinflammatory
742
NO,. See Nitrogen dioxide
NTE. See Neuropathy target esterase
NOAEL. See No observed adverse effect level
Nutmeg, 344
Nodularins, 534-536
 Nystagmus, 101
clinical signs of, 535
confirmatory tests for, 535
differential diagnosis for, 536
LD for, 534
O.See Ozone
lesions from, 536
Oaks, 242
mechanism of toxicity of, 534-535
 Occupational Safety and Health Administration
prognosis for, 536
(OSHA), 139
toxicokinetics of, 534
OCs.See Organochlorines
treatment for, 536
N-octyl bicycloheptene carboximide (MGK-
Noni juice, 344
264), 769-771
 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Ocular care, as supportive care, 121
(NSAIDs), 687-708
Ocular exposure/decontamination, 34, 73
ADRs with, 690-691, 693-694, 694t
to corrosives, 295
with kidneys, 692
to detergents, 292
liver and, 692-693
to IO, 727
anticoagulants and, 284t
of mammals, 252
blood and, 692
for smoke inhalation, 418
chemical classification of, 688t
to smoke inhalation, 415
clinical signs of, 694
Oculovestibular reflex, 101
confirmatory tests for, 695-696
Offce product chemical emissions, 146-147,
differential diagnosis for, 698
148t-151t
drugs for, 697t
Oils
examples of, 688t
citrus, 347, 513-516
gastrointestinal system and, ADRs with,
clinical signs of, 514
690-691
confirmatory tests for, 514
geriatrics and,223-226
differential diagnosis for, 515
glucocorticoids and, 284t, 689
LD for, 513-514
in herbal medicines, 337, 348-349
lesions from, 515
herb-drug interactions with, 350t-352t
mechanism of toxicity of, 514
hyperkalemia from, 113
prognosis for, 515
kidney, ADRS and, 288-289
sources of, 513
LD for, 688-689
toxicokinetics of, 514
lesions from, 698
treatment for, 514-515
for lizard envenomation, 623
cooking, birds and, 263, 270-271
mechanism of toxicity of, 689-693
essential, 346-348,346t-347t
minimum database for, 695
fixed, 336
pediatrics and, 219
home heating, 757t
prognosis for, 697-698
melaleuca, 348
reproduction and, 169t
mineral, 78
risk factors with, 693
for petroleum hydrocarbons, 760
side effects of, 693b
for zinc phosphide, 858
for smoke inhalation, 418
motor, 757t
sources of, 687-688
pennyroyal, 348
toxicokinetics of, 689-693
pine,263,297
treatment for, 696-697, 697t
sassafras, 348
ulcers from, 277b
vegetable,760
Noradrenaline, 818
volatile, 336
Norepinephrine (NE), 95t
of wintergreen, 348
 amphetamines and, 313
Oleander, 48, 344
in bee venom, 575
Oliguria, 729
 black widow spiders and, 818
Omeprazole, 108, 169t, 697, 697t, 860-861
896 Index
Oncotic pressure, 110
Organophosphates (OPs) (Continued)
Ondansetron, 107, 500
lesions from, 722
One-compartment model, 13, 17
mechanism of toxicity of, 716-717
Onions,264
minimum database for, 719
Opioids, 35, 51, 56t-57t, 310
muscarinic signs with, 718
 agonists, partial agonists, and antagonists,
nicotinic signs with, 718
324t
 pediatrics and, 218
anesthetics and, 284t
prognosis for, 722
carbamates and, 721
reproduction and, 169t
clinical signs of, 325
reptiles and, 233
CNS and, 102
sources of, 715-716
coma from, 103b
toxicokinetics of, 716
confirmatory tests for, 325
treatment for, 720-722
differential diagnosis for, 326
with known toxicosis, 720-721
hyperexcitability from, 103b
Oscilatoria spp., 534
LD for, 323-324
OSHA. See Occupational Safety and Health 
mechanism of toxicity of, 325
Administration
minimum database for, 325
Osmolar gap, 70
OPs and, 721
Osteomalacia, 448
radiographs for, 60
Otodectes, 601
as recreation drugs, 323-326
Outdoor plants, 33
 reproduction and, 169t, 199
Oxalate crystals, 36
sources of, 323
IO, 725-728
toxicokinetics of, 324-325
pediatrics and, 221
treatment and diagnosis for, 325
plants with, 725-730, 726t
Opium, 311
soluble, 728-730
OPs. See Organophosphates
Oxalic acid, 552
Oxaloacetate, 812-813
Oxibendazole, 286b
of paraquat, 732
Oximes, 720
to phenols, 296
Oxygen, in blood, 68
to ricin, 779
Oxygen delivery (DO), 95
Organic poisons, 2
Oxygen therapy, 89-90, 90f. See also Hyperbaric
Organochlorines (OCs), 48, 709-714
oxygen
birds and, 269
for arsenic, 461
blood and tissue concentrations with, 712t
for botulism, 467
clinical signs of, 711
for CO, 483
confirmatory tests for, 71l-712
delivery devices for, 90t
diagnostic testing for, 130t-131t
for Hymenoptera stings, 579
differential diagnosis for, 713
for mercury, 632-633
LD for, 710
for nicotine, 684
lesions from, 713
for OCs, 712
mechanism of toxicity of, 710-711
for paraquat, 737-738
metabolism of, 710
for toad secretions, 837
minimum database for, 711
Oxyhemoglobin, 88, 89f
prognosis for, 713
Oxytocin, 210
sources of, 709
Ozone {O), 154
toxicokinetics of, 710
treatment for, 712-713
Organophosphates (OPs), 56t-57t, 715-724
P
acute syndrome with, 717-718
P5NT. See Pyrimidine-5'-nucleotidase
atropine for, 468
PA.See D-penicillamine
birds and, 269-270
 Packed red cell volume, 216, 809
botulism and, 468
 Paco. See Arterial partial pressure of carbon
clinical signs of, 717-719
dioxide
and CNS, 718
Paint
confirmatory tests for, 719-720
arsenic from, 458
differential diagnosis for, 722-723
lead in, 609
intermediate syndrome with, 718-719
Paintballs, 50, 305, 807-808
treatment for, 721-722
 Palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, 460
LD for, 716
Palpebral reflex, 101
Index897
 2-PAM.See 2-pyridine aldoxime methyl chloride
Pco. See Partial pressure of carbon dioxide
Pamidronate disodium (Aredia), 114, 496
PCP. See Phencyclidine
Panax spp.,338
Pediatrics
Pancreas, 848, 850
absorption and, 216-217
Pancreatitis, 449-450, 723
amphetamines and, 221
Pancytopenia, 277b
antidepressants and, 220
Pantoprazole, 697
birth control pills and, 221
Pao. See Arterial partial pressure of oxygen
calcium oxalate plants and, 221
Papaver somniferum,323,335-336
cleaning products and, 221
Papaya, 200
distribution and, 217-218
Para-aminophenol, 425
excretion and, 218-219
Paracelsus, 48
flea products and, 221
Paralysis, 801. See also Respiratory paralysis
herbicides and, 220
from black widow spiders, 819
lactation and, 219
from hypermagnesemia, 115
liquid potpourri and,221-222
from plants, 371t-395t
metabolism and, 218
tick,102b,468
methylxanthines and, 221
Paraquat,731-740
mushrooms and, 220
clinical signs of, 734-735
NSAIDs and, 219
confirmatory tests for, 735-736
physiological considerations in, 215-216
current toxicologic status for, 739
poison control centers and, 219-222
diagnostic testing for, 130t-131t
pregnancy and, 219
differential diagnosis for, 739
rodenticides and, 219
excretion of,733
silica gel and, 220
hyperexcitability from, 103b
toxicants in, 220b
LD for, 732
toxicology and, 215-222
lesions from, 739
xenobiotics and, 215-222, 216b
mechanism of toxicity of, 733-734, 733f
PEEP. See Positive end-expiratory pressure
metabolism of, 733
Pemphigus foliaceus, 749-750
minimum database for, 735-736
Penicillamine,520,613
 oral exposure of, 732
D-penicillamine (PA, Cuprimine), 267, 612
prognosis for,738
Penicillins, 115, 210, 280b
pulmonary absorption of, 732
Penicillin G, 78, 666-667
radiographs for, 60
Penicillium spp, 155, 680-681
sources of, 731-732
Penitrem, 50, 680-682
toxicokinetics of, 732-733
carbamates, 722
treatment for, 736-738
clinical signs of, 681
WBI for, 77
differential diagnosis for, 682
Parasympatholytic agents, 29, 91
LD for, 681
Parasympathomimetic agents, 29
lesions from, 681
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 493-495, 497
mechanism of toxicity of, 681
Paregoric, 311
minimum database for, 681
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Pcoz), 86
OPs and,722
Partial pressure of oxygen (Po), 87-88
prognosis for, 681
Partial thromboplastin time (PTT), 110-1l1, 441,
sources of, 680-681
789, 824, 844
toxicokinetics of, 681
Parts per billion (ppb), 7-12
treatment for, 681
Parts per million (ppm), 7-12
Pennyroyal oil, 348
Parts per trillion (ppt), 7-12
Pentachlorophenol, 406
Parturition, 182-183
Pentobarbital (Nembutal), 69, 311, 859
PAs. See Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
Pentosan, 694t
Passive transport, 14-15
Pentose phosphate pathway, 843
Pasteurella spp., 231
Peptide, 401, 575
Pathological nystagmus, 101
Peritoneal dialysis, 737
Patient-related adverse drug reactions.See
Permethrin, 103b, 744, 770
 Idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions
Permissive hypercapnia, 66
Paullinia spp.,342
 Personal protective equipment (PPE)
Pausinystalia yohimbe,345-346
level C, 163
PBDEs. See Polybrominated diphenyl ethers
level D, 163
4-PC.See 4phenylcyclohexene
levels A and B, 163
PCBs. See Polychlorinated biphenyls
for mass exposure decontamination, 163
898Index
Perspiration, lacrimation, and salivation (PSL),
pH (Continued)
671
zinc and, 848
Pesticides.See aiso Carbamates; Fungicides;
zinc phosphide and, 858
Herbicides; Insecticides; Monosodium
Pharmacodynamics, 283-284, 284t
fluoroacetate; Organochlorines; Organo-
Pharmacokinetics, 283-284, 285t. See also
phosphates; Pyrethrins/pyrethroids;
specific toxins
Rodenticides
Pharmacologic toxicity, 277, 277b
arsenic from, 458
Phencyclidine (PCP), 51, 309-310
birds and, 268-270
acid diuresis for, 81
complete blood count for, 55
clinical signs of, 327
diagnostic testing for, 130t-131t
confirmatory tests for, 327
in herbal medicines, 337
differential diagnosis for, 328
 indoor environmental quality and health and,
hyperexcitability from, 103b
142-143, 152
LD for, 326
ion exchange resins and, 78
marijuana and, 323
as mass exposure contaminant, 163
mechanism of toxicity of, 327
quantities used in U.S., 402t
minimum database for, 327
reproduction and, 194-196
as recreational drug, 326-328
vomiting from, 402
sources of, 326
 Pet foods. See aiso Ionophores
toxicokinetics of, 326-327
contamination of, 136-137
treatment and prognosis for, 323
vitamin D from, 490-491
Phenmetrazine (Preludin), 311
Pet Poison HELPLINE (PPH), 25-28, 46
Phenobarbital, 448-449
Petechiation, 444-445
clinical signs of, 448-449
Pethidine, 210
diagnosis for, 449
Petroleum hydrocarbons, 36, 755-762. See aiso
geriatrics and, 225
specific types
herb-drug interactions with, 350t-352t
acute toxicity of, 757t
idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions from,
birds and, 264
280b
clinical signs of, 758-759
ion exchange resins and, 78
confirmatory tests for, 760
isoxazoles and, 669
differential diagnosis for, 761
lver ADRs and, 286
LD for, 756
liver and, 286b
lesions from, 761
mechanism of toxicity of, 448-449
mechanism of toxicity of, 757-758
for methylxanthines, 651
minimum database for, 759
for neurotoxins, 538
prognosis for, 761
pediatrics and, 218
solvents of, 756
reproduction and, 169t, 199
sources of, 755-756
as Schedule IV drug, 311 
toxicokinetics of, 756-757
sources of, 448
treatment for, 760-761
toxicokinetics of, 448
viscosity of, 756,758b
treatment for, 449
 Pets Evacuation and Transportation Standards
Phenols, 109-110, 263, 296-297, 507
Act,162
Phenothiazines, 56t-57t, 712
PG. See Propylene glycol
amphetamines and, 313
P-glycoproteins, 15,278,603,605b
carbamates and, 721
pH
coma from, 103b
Compound 1080 and, 812-813
idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions from,
of corrosives, 295
280b
EG and, 555
neurological system and, 102
ethanol and, 548
OPs and, 721
geriatrics and, 226
radiographs for, 59-60
nicotine and, 683-684
reproduction and, 169t
pediatrics and, 216-217
urinalysis for, 5859
phenobarbital and, 448
Phenoxyl herbicides, 402-404
pregnancy and, 206
Phenylbutazone, 225, 280b, 703
SVTs from, 91
4-phenylcyclohexene (4-PC), 147-152
toad secretions and, 837
Phenylephrine, 95t
of urine, 109
β-phenylethylamine, 343-344
vomiting and, 106-107
Phenytoin, 169t, 280b, 451-452
of xenobiotics, 14-15
Phoradendron serotirum,343-344
Index 899
Phoradendron tomentosum. See Mistletoe
Plants (Continued)
Phosgene, 412-413
delirium from, 371t-395t
Phosphine, 855, 857-859
depression from, 371t-395t
Phosphodiesterase, 801
diagnostic testing for, 130t-131t
Phospholipase, 622, 786
gastrointestinal system and, 371t-395t
Phosphorus, 55, 491, 493
hematuria from, 358b-370b
Phthalates, 169t, 194-195
hyperexcitability from, 358b-370b
Physicians'Desk Reference, 41-42
icterus and, 358b-370b
Physostigmine hydrochloride, 721
information summary for, 371t-395t
Phytoestrogens, 193
jaundice and, 358b-370b
Phytolacca spp,344-345
kidneys and, 371t-395t
Phytotoxins, 169t, 193
lver and, 371t-395t
Picrotoxin, 605-606
mydriasis from, 371t-395t
Pine oils, 263, 297
with oxalate crystals, 725-730, 726t
Piper methrysticum,342-343
paralysis from, 371t-395t
Piperazine, 169t
pet-friendly, 396t-398t
Piperonyl butoxide, 513-514, 769
photosensitization and, 371t-395t
Piroxicam, 703
rabbits and, 255
Pit viper snake bites, 783-798
reptiles and, 239-241
age and,786
respiratory paralysis from, 371t-395t
alternative antivenoms for, 794-795
respiratory system and, 371t-395t
antivenom for, 789-794
sudden death from, 371t-395t
clinical signs of, 787-788, 787b
toxicity of, 240b, 266t
clotting effects from,788, 788f
in toxicology history, 46
confirmatory tests for, 789
treatment for, 357
differential diagnosis for, 794
vitamin D from, 490-491
enzymes in, 785b
Plasma
fasciotomy for,793-794
FFP, 66-67, 111
first aid for, 789-791, 791b
hyponatremia and, 112
hemostatic effects of, 789b
paraquat in, 735
hyaluronidase in, 786
proteins in
LD for, 784-785
NSAIDs and, 690
lesions from, 794
xenobiotics and, 15-16
mechanism of toxicity of, 785-787
rodenticides and, 439
minimum database for, 788-789
yolume, pediatrics and, 215
 phospholipase A in, 786
Plasma bicarbonate (HCO;), 554
prognosis for, 794
Plasmalyte, 96
severity of, 787b
Plasticizers, 169t
snake anatomy, 784f
Platelets, 55, 110-111
sources of, 783-784
Play dough, 302
toxicokinetics of, 785
Pleurisy root, 344
treatment for, 789-794
PLR. See Pupillary light reflex
vaccines for, 795
Pneumonia
venom yields of, 785t
aspiration, 59-60, 66, 77, 466-467, 670
pKa. See Association constant
radiographs for, 86
Placenta
supportive care for, 86
arsenic and, 459
Pneumonitis
lead and, 611
hypersensitivity, 140
tricyclic antidepressants and, 329
from petroleum hydrocarbons, 759
xenobiotics and, 205-206
radiographs for, 60
Plants, 36, 357-400. See also specifc plarts and
Poinsettia, 508-509
plantfamilies
clinical signs of, 508
ascites and, 358b-370b
differential diagnosis for, 509
azotemia from, 358b-370b
LD for, 508
birds and, 265
lesions from, 509
cardiovascular system and, 371t-395t
mechanism of toxicity of, 508
clinical signs for, 358b-370b
minimum database for, 508
CNS and, 371t-395t
prognosis for, 509
coma from, 358b-370b
reptiles and, 241
convulsions from, 371t-395t
sources of, 508
cyanide from, 524
treatment for, 509
900Index
Poison control centers, 26
Pregnancy (Continued)
AAPCC, 26, 525b
dermal absorption and, 205
ASPCA-APCC, 25-27
distribution in, 205-206
arsenic and, 458
elimination in, 207-208
lilies and, 617
gastrointestinal absorption and, 203-204
NSAIDs and, 688-689
hypoalbuminemia in, 205
pyrethrins/pyrethroids and, 771
ketamine and, 205-206
for toxicology diagnosis, 46
lead and, 611
zinc phosphide and, 855
lidocaine and, 205
ferrets and, 256b
metabolism in, 207
human, 31-38
pediatrics and, 219
pediatrics and, 219-222
pH and, 206
toxicology diagnosis and, 46
physiological changes during, 204t
veterinary, 27-30
progesterone and, 207
WA PC, 31, 32t, 34t
pulmonary absorption and, 204
Pokeweed, 344-345
reproduction and, 183
Pollutants, 146-154, 169t
rodenticides and, 439, 444
Polybrominated biphenyls, 711
vasopressin and, 205
Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), 197
xenobiotics and, 203-208, 206f
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 163, 197
Preludin.See Phenmetrazine
Polyether carboxylic antibiotics. See Ionophores
Preservatives, in Christmas trees, 502
Polyradiculoneuritis, 102b
 Presystemic elimination, 14
Polysaccharides, 507
Primidone, 169t, 451
Polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate), 505-506
Probenecid, 350t-352t
Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), 261
Procainamide, 91t, 169t, 280b, 836-837
Polyuria
 Prochlorperazine, 107
fluid therapy and, 99
Progesterone, 207
hypomagnesemia from, 115
Progestogens, 169t
from phenobarbital, 448
Proheart.See Moxidectin
from sodium, 808-809
Prolactin, 210
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC), 197-198
Proliferation, 177-178
Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), 87
Propionic acid, 687-688
Potassium, 55, 70-71, 113-114, 554. See also
Propofol
Hyperkalemia; Hypokalemia
neurological system and, 102
Potassium bromide(KBr), 449-450
pregnancy and, 205-206
clinical signs of, 449-450
for pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 773
diagnosis of, 450
reproduction and, 169t
sources of, 449
for toad secretions, 837
toxicokinetics of, 449
for zinc phosphide, 859
treatment for, 450
Propoxur, 716
Potassium phosphate, 114
Propranolol, 91t, 651, 836-837
Potassum sparing diuretics, 113
Propylene glycol (PG), 51, 763-768
Ppb. See Parts per billion
clinical signs of, 764
PPE.See Personal protective equipment
coma from, 103b
PPH. See Pet Poison HELPLINE
confirmatory tests for, 765
Ppm.See Parts per million
differential diagnosis for, 766
ppt. See Parts per trillion
LD for, 763-764
Pralidoxime. See 2-pyridine aldoxime methyl 
lesions from, 765
chloride
marijuana and, 323
Praziquantel, 169t
minimum database for, 764-765
Prednisolone, 495-496, 579, 693-694
prognosis for, 765
Pregnancy
sources of, 763
absorption and, 203-205
toxicokinetics of, 764
ampicillin and, 206, 208b
treatment for, 765
angiotensin-2 and, 205
Propylthiouracil, 280b, 286b
atropine and, 205-206
Prostaglandin Fα, 210
biotransformation in, 207
Proteinase, 801
black widow spiders and, 819
Proteinuria, 788
body weight and, 205
Proteus spp., 231
CO and, 480
Prothrombin time (PT), 110-111, 441, 789
cytochrome P-450 and, 207
Proton pump inhibitors, 696-697, 860-861
Index901
Prussic acid. See Hydrogen cyanide
Pyrethrins/pyrethroids (Continued)
Pseudoephedrine (Claritin-D), 46
 reproduction and, 194-195
Pseudohyperkalemia, 113
reptiles and, 234
Pseudohyponatremia, 112
sources of, 769-770
Pseudomonas spp., 155, 231, 419
synthetic analogs of, 770
Psilocin/psilocybin, 664t-665t, 670-671
toxicokinetics of, 771
clinical signs of, 670
treatment for, 773-774
diagnostic workup for, 670
2-pyridine aldoxime methyl chloride (2-PAM,
exposure to, 670-671
Pralidoxime), 468, 538
toxicity of, 670
for carbamates, 721-722
treatment for, 670
for ChE inhibitor toxicosis, 721
 PSL. See Perspiration, lacrimation, and salivation
for OPs, 721-722
PT.See Prothrombin time
for zinc phosphide, 860
PTFE.See Polytetrafluoroethylene
Pyridine alkaloids, 343
PTH. See Parathyroid hormone
Pyridoxine, 668
PTT. See Partial thromboplastin time
Pyrimidine-5'-nucleotidase (PsNT), 611
Puberty
Pyriproxyfen, 751-752
for females, 179
clinical signs of, 751-752
for males, 177
confirmatory tests for, 752
Public Service health Act, 336
differential diagnosis for, 752
 Pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (PVP), 94-95
LD for, 751
 Pulmonary edema
mechanism of toxicity of, 751
from CO, 485
minimum database for, 752
from cyanide, 525
prognosis for,752
kalandhoe and, 505-506
sources of, 751
from lilies, 620
toxicokinetics of, 751
from mannitol, 476-477
treatment for, 752
from paraquat, 735
Pyrolysis, 409
radiographs for, 59-60
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs), 337, 341
from ricin, 780
Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase, 812-813
from sodium, 808
supportive care for, 86
thiacetarsamide and, 460-461
Q
from toad secretions, 837-838
Qh. See Hepatic blood flow
Pulse
Quaalude. See Methaqualone
supportive care for, 92
Quadriplegia, from coral snake bites, 801
toxins and, 61b
Quaternary ammonium, 293
Pulse oximetry, 54, 59, 88, 416
Questran. See Cholestyramine
Pupillary light reflex {PLR), 100
Quinidine, 91t
Pupils, 101
Quinine,335-336
Purkinje cells, 656
PVC. See Polyvinyl chloride
 Pvcoz. See Venous partial pressure of carbon
R
dioxide
Rabbits, 254-255
 Pvoz. See Venous partial pressure of oxygen
avocado and, 255
PVP. See Pulmonary artery occlusion pressure
fpronil and, 254-255
Pyrantel pamoate,169t
plants and, 255
Pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 56t-57t, 769-776
Rabies, 468
carbamates and, 722
Radiocontrast agents, 289
case reports for, 774-775
Radiographs, 54, 59-60
clinical signs of, 772
for lead, 612
differential diagnosis for, 774-775
for petroleum hydrocarbons, 759
hyperexcitability from, 103b
for pneumonia, 86
LD for, 770-771
for rodenticides, 441-442
lesions from, 774
for smoke inhalation, 417
mechanism of toxicity of, 771-772
for vitamin D, 496
minimum database for, 773
for zinc phosphide, 856
OPs and, 722
Radiopaque toxins, 59-60, 60b
 pediatrics and, 221
RADS. See Reactive airways dysfunction
prognosis for,774
syndrome
pyriproxyfen and, 751
Raisins. See Grapes
902 Index
Ranitidine, 108, 697, 697t
Reproduction (Continued)
Raphides. See Insoluble oxalates
pregnancy and, 183
Rattlesnakes. See Pit viper snake bites
puberty and
RBCs.SeeRed blood cells
in females, 179
Reactive airways, 146
in males, 177
 Reactive airways dysfunction syndrome
relevance of, 174
(RADS),146
selection for, 175-183
 Reactive upper airways dysfunction syndrome
spermatogenesis and, 177-178
(RUDS), 146
toxicology and, 167-202, 168t
Rebound cerebral edema, 476-477
predisposing factors and stressing
Rebound pulmonary edema, 476-477
for, 169t
Receptor-mediated endocytosis, 466
xenobiotics and, 169t, 183-185
Receptor-mediated toxicity. See Pharmacologic
adverse effects of, 191-200
toxicity
Reptiles. See aiso Lizard envenomation;
Recreational drugs, 309-334; Cocaine. See aiso
Snake bites
Ketamine; Lysergic acid diethylamide;
amikacin and, 231
Marijuana; Phencyclidine
amphotericin B and, 232
amphetamines as, 31l-314
anticoagulants and, 237
barbiturates as, 314-316
antifungals and, 232-233
benzodiazepines as, 316-318
antimicrobial drugs and,
opioids as, 323-326
230-231
tricyclic antidepressants as,
avocado and, 241
328-330
bleach and, 235
Recumbent patient
bromethalin and, 237-238
fluid therapy for, 98
carbamates and, 233
positioning of, 117-118
chloramphenicol and, 231
supportive care for, 117-118
chlorhexidine and, 235
Red blood cells (RBCs)
cholecalciferol and, 238
ACh and, 716-717
Christmas plants and, 241
coral snake bites and, 801
cycad palms and, 241
Relay toxicity, 472
enrofloxacin and, 231
Renal failure
fenbendazole and, 235
from EG, 553, 562
fre ant stings and, 244-245
hypokalemia from, 113-114
fireflies and, 245
hypomagnesemia from, 115
fluconazole and, 232-233
from lilies, 619-620
foods and, 246
from mercury, 632-633
fruit seeds and, 240
from soluble oxalates, 729
gentamicin and, 231
 supportive care for, 108-109
glycosides and, 241-243
Reorganization Plan No. 2, 310
griseofulvin and, 232
 Reproduction
heaths and, 239-240
copulation and, 178
holly and, 241
 pue samup
imidazoles and, 232-233
chronic administration of,
itraconazole and, 232-233
199
ivermectin and, 234-235
herbal, 200
ivy and, 242
ejaculates and, 178-179
ketoconazole, 232-233
estrous cycles and, 179-181
lilies and, 240
fetal health and, 183
lizard envenomation to, 243-244
functional development for, 175f,
marijuana and, 242-243
184f
metaldehyde and, 238-239
gestational length and, 181
metronidazole and, 231-232
lactation and, 182-183
mistletoe and, 241
management for, 188-191
mushrooms and, 239
negative outcomes for, 183-185
nicotine and, 242
causes of, 185-191
oaks and, 242
 predisposing factors and stressors for,
OPs and, 233
186-188, 187f
plants and, 239-241
parturition and, 182-183
poinsettia and, 241
physiology for, 176-183
poisonings of, 229-250
 postgonadal sperm maturation and, 178
emergency management of, 229-230
Index 903
Reptiles (Continued)
Rodents (Continued)
pyrethrins/pyrethroids and, 234
rodenticides and, 253-254
ricin and, 241
vitamin D and, 254
rodenticides and, 237-238
warfarin and, 436
smoke inhalation in, 236-237
Rodenticides, 36, 48, 50, 435-446. See
snake bites to, 243
aiso Bromethalin; Cholecalciferol;
toxicants to, 230-246
Monosodium fluoroacetate; Strychnine;
triazoles and, 232-233
Zinc phosphide
vitamin A and, 230
birds and, 270
vitamin D and, 230
bood oxygen and, 68
yews and, 240
clinical signs of, 441
zinc and, 235-236
coagulation panel for, 59
Resins, 336
confirmatory tests for, 442
Respiratory acidosis, 55, 70,113, 837
cyanide as, 523
Respiratory alkalosis, 55, 70, 296
differential diagnosis for, 445
Respiratory paralysis
exposure to, 444
from plants, 371t-395t
hyperexcitability from,103b
from strychnine, 829
LD with, 436-439, 442
 Respiratory system. see aiso Breathing;
lesions from, 444-445
sSUI
mechanism of toxicity of, 440-441
absorption in
minimum database for, 441-442
of arsenic, 459
pediatrics and, 219
of paraquat, 732
prognosis with, 444
pregnancy and, 204
renal failure from, 108-109
plants and, 371t-395t
reproduction and, 169t, 194-196
supportive care for, 85-90
reptiles and, 237-238
for breathing,85
rodents and, 253-254
hypoventilation and, 87
sources of, 436
oxygen therapy for, 89-90, 90f, 90t
toxicity of, 440t
Poz and, 87-88
toxicokinetics of, 439-440
So and, 88-89
trade names for, 437t-439t
ventilometry and, 86
treatment for, 442-444
Resting energy requirements, 122, 122f
vitamin D from, 490
Revolution. See Selamectin
Romazicon. See Flumazenil
Rhabdomyolysis,113, 583, 746-747, 789
Roquefortine, 680-682
Rhinopharyngolaryngitis, 460
carbamates, 722
Rhubarb, 728
clinical signs of, 681
Riboflavin, 738
differential diagnosis for, 682
Ribonuclease, 801
LD for, 681
Ribonucleic acid (RNA)
lesions from, 681
enrofloxacin and, 231
mechanism of toxicity of, 681
 phospholipase A and, 786
minimum database for, 681
Ricin {Ricinus communis), 777-782
OPs and, 722
clinical signs of, 779
prognosis for, 681
confirmatory tests for, 779
sources of, 680-681
differential diagnosis for, 780
toxicokinetics of, 681
LD for, 778
treatment for, 681
lesions from, 780
Rosemary (Rosmarinus offcinalis), 509-510
mechanism of toxicity of, 778
clinical signs of, 510
minimum database for, 779
differential diagnosis for, 510
prognosis for, 780
LD for, 509
reptiles and, 241
lesions from, 510
sources of, 777-778
mechanism of toxicity of, 509-510
toxicokinetics of, 778
minimum database for, 510
treatment for, 779-780
prognosis for, 510
Ringer's solution, 96, 426, 520, 830
treatment for, 510
Ritalin.SeeMethylphenidate
Round spermatids, 177-178
RNA. See Ribonucleic acid
RUDS. See Reactive upper airways dysfunction
Robaxin-V. See Methocarbamol
syndrome
Rodents, 252-254
Rumensin. See Monensin
antibiotic enterocolitis in, 254
Russula spp., 672
904Index
Seizures (Continued)
Saccharide solutions, 78
from lead, 611
Saccox. See Salinomycin
from metaldehyde, 637
from nicotine, 684
Sachets, 595-596
from pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 772-773
S-adenosylmethionine (Denosyl, SA Me), 738,
from ricin, 779-780
845, 860-861
Salamanders, 36
from sodium, 808-809
Salicylates, 56t-57t,
from strychnine, 829
telephone triage and, 65
complete blood count for, 55
from toad secretions, 835, 837
from herbs, 335-336
from zinc phosphide, 856
phenobarbital and, 448
Selamectin (Revolution), 601-603
radiographs for, 60
Selective ER modulators, 192
in white willow, 345
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs),
Saline solutions, 78, 727-728, 820
35,220,328
Salinomycin (Coxistat, Biocox, Saccox), 590, 591t
Salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation
Selenium, 130t-131t, 592-593, 738
Senna, 345
(SLUD), 671, 718, 723
 Septicemia, 579
Salix spp.,335336,345
Serotonin (5-HT), 321, 637,834-835
Salt. See Sodium chloride
Serum chemistry panel, 54
Salt poisoning, 809
Service animals, in mass exposure
SAMe. See S-adenosylmethionine
decontamination, 162-163
Sanitizers,293-294
Sevoflurane, reproduction and, 169t
SAP. See Systolic arterial blood pressure
Sex hormones, herb-drug interactions with,
Saponins, 503
350t-352t
Sassafras oil, 348
Shock
Saw palmetto, 338
from corrosives, 295
Saxitoxins, 538
hypovolemic, 461
Saybolt units (SSU), 757
from phenols, 296-297
SBR.See Styrene-butadiene rubber
Sick building syndrome (SBS), 139-140
SBS. See Sick building syndrome
Silibinin (Legalon-SIL),666-667
Ie 'sp Ianas
Silica gel, 220, 305
Schedule II drugs, 311
Silymarin, 845, 860-861
Schedule III drugs, 311
Simple asphyxiants, 412
Schedule IV drugs, 311
Sinus tachycardia, 91
Schedule V drugs, 311
Sistrurus spp.,783
Schturmbergera truncata.See Christmas cactus
Skin.See Dermal exposure/decontamination
Schwartzman phenomenon, 824
SLUD. See Salivation, lacrimation, urination,
Scopolamine, 107
defecation
 Screening tests, 53
Smelting, arsenic from, 458
kits for, 59
Smoke inhalation, 409-422
Seafood, 458
birds and, 261-262
Secobarbital (Seconal), 311
clinical signs of, 414-415, 416b
Seconal. See Secobarbital
confirmatory tests for, 415-417
Sedatives, in herbal medicines, 337, 348-349
cyanide from, 524
Sedative hypnotics, 56t-57t, 58-59, 119-121
differential diagnosis for, 421, 421b
Seizures, 50
LD for, 411-412
amitraz and, 432
lesions from, 420-421
from amphetamines, 313
mechanism of toxicity of, 412-414
from anaphylaxis, 578
minimum database for, 415-417
from bromethalin, 473
prevention and prognosis for, 419-420
control of, 69
radiographs for, 60
from cyanide, 527
in reptiles, 236-237
from DEET, 541
sources of, 409-411
from detergents, 293-294
toxicokinetics of, 412-414
diazepam for, 451
treatment for, 417-419
from fipronil, 254-255
Snail bait. See Metaldehyde
from fire ant stings, 583
Snake bites, 36.See aiso Coral snake bite; Pit
with hypoglycemia, 70-71
viper snake bites
from kalanchoe, 505
anemia from, 109-110
from KBr, 450
 renal failure from, 108-109
Index 905
Snake bites (Continued)
Solvents (Continued)
to reptiles, 243
 as mass exposure contaminant,
severity score system for, 790b-791b
163
SO, See Sulfur dioxide
of petroleum hydrocarbons, 756
Soz. See Hemoglobin saturation
Sorbitol, 78
Soaps, 291-295
AC and, 79-81
birds and, 264
for carbamates, 720-721
SOD. See Superoxide dismutase
for OPs, 720-721
Sodium, 70-71, 807-810.See aiso
for ricin, 779-780
Hypernatremia; Hyponatremia
Soybeans, 192
in blood, 111-113
Specialized transport, of xenobiotics, 15
clinical signs of, 808-809
Spermatogenesis,177-178
confirmatory tests for, 809
Spermiation, 177-178
diagnostic testing for, 130t-131t
Sphingomyelinase D, 824
differential diagnosis for, 810
Sphygmomanometry, 93
EG and, 554
Spiders, 36. See also Black widow spiders;
LD for, 808
 Brown recluse spiders
lesions from, 809-810
anemia from, 109-110
mechanism of toxicity of, 808
renal failure from,108-109
minimum database for, 809
 Spinal cord disease, muscle weakness from,
prognosis for, 809
102b
serum electrolytes for, 55
Spinosad (Comfortis), 604
sources of, 807-808
Spirulina,340-341
toxicokinetics of, 808
Spleen, 459, 848
treatment for, 809
Spot-on products. See Ectoparasiticides; Insect
Sodium bicarbonate, 807-808
growth regulators
for Compound 1080, 814
Squamous cell carcinoma, 460
for ethanol, 548
SSRIs. See Selective serotonin reuptake
for hypercalcemia, 114
inhibitors
hypernatremia from, 810
SSU. See Saybolt units
for metabolic acidosis, 55, 70
St. John's wort, 338, 345
for PG, 765
Stachybotrys spp., 155
Sodium chloride (NaCl), 807-808
Staphylococcus aureus, 231, 419
birds and, 265
Steroids, 738, 835
for KBr, 450
Stimulants. See aiso Amphetamines
for vomiting, 64, 74-75
in herbal medicines, 348-349
Sodium hypochlorite, 48
herb-drug interactions with, 350t-352t
 Sodium monofluoroacetate. See Monosodium
Storage depots, for xenobiotics, 15-16
fluoroacetate
Strabismus, 100
Sodium nitrite, 527
Strontium aluminate, 301
Sodium peroxide, 298
Strychnine, 50, 827-832
Sodium phosphate, 114
bromethalin and, 473
Sodium sulfate (Glauber's salts), 79-80
clinical signs of, 829
Soluble oxalates, 728-730
confirmatory tests for, 829
clinical signs of, 729
differential diagnosis for, 831
diagnosis of, 729
in herbal medicines, 348-349
differential diagnosis for,730
hyperexcitability from, 103b
lesions from, 729-730
LD for, 828, 828t
mechanism of toxicity of, 729
lesions from, 830-831
minimum database for, 729
mechanism of toxicity of, 828-829
prognosis for,729
minimum database for, 829
toxicity of, 728
prognosis for, 830
toxicokinetics of, 729
rodents and, 254
treatment for, 729
sources of, 827-828
Solu-Medrol. See Methylprednisolone sodium
testing for, 50
succinate
toxicokinetics of, 828
Solvents, 36, 298-299. See also specijfc solvents
treatment for, 830
anemia from, 109-110
Styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR),
citrus oil in, 513
147-152
indoor environmental quality and health and,
Subacute toxicity, 4
142-143
Subchronic toxicity, 4
906 Index
Substance abuse, 134-135. See aiso Recreational
Supportive care (Continued)
sanp
for renal failure, 108-109
of petroleum hydrocarbons, 756
for respiratory system, 85-90
of toad secretions, 833
for breathing, 85
Succimer. See Dimercaptosuccinic acid
hypoventilation and, 87
Succinate dehydrogenase, Compound 1080 and,
oxygen therapy for, 89-90, 90f, 90t
812-813
Pcozand, 86-87
Sucralfate, 107-108
Po, and, 87-88
for copper, 520
Soz and, 88-89
for detergents, 294
yentilometry and, 86
gastric acid secretion inhibitors and, 284t
sedative hypnotics and, 119-121
for IO,727-728
for temperature, 105-106
for NSAIDs, 696-697, 697t
for unconscious, 119-121
reproduction and, 169t
with urinary catheters, 117
for zinc phosphide, 860-861
with vascular catheters, 116-117
Sulfamethoxazole,lactation and, 210
Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias (SVTs), 91
Sulfaquinoxaline, 445
Surface area, body weight and, 2-3, 3t
Sulfonamides
Surfactants, 291
hypersensitivity pathogenesis for, 281f
SVTs. See Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias
idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions from,
Swallowing, 101
280b
Sweetleaf, 338
kidney ADRs and, 289
Sympathomimetics, 91, 210, 350t-352t
liver and, 286b
Symprytu spp,341
phenobarbital and, 448
Systolic arterial blood pressure (SAP), 93
reproduction and, 169t
Sulfur dioxide (SOz)
T
 indoor environmental quality and health and,
142-143, 153-154
Tachycardia
from black widow spiders, 819
smoke inhalation and, 412-413
Sultanas. See Grapes
from coral snake bites, 801
Superglue, 301
from dopamine, 67
Superoxide dismutase (SOD), 105, 737
from epinephrine, 67
Supportive care, 85-124
from sodium, 808-809
airway humidification as, 120
from toad secretions, 835-837
Tachypnea, 56t-57t
anesthetics and, 119-121
bladder care as, 121
Tacrolimus, 60
for blood, 109-115
Tamoxifen, 605b
for cardiovascular system, 91-100
Tannins, 570
arrhythmias and, 91-92
TCA. See Tricarboxylic acid
blood pressure and, 92-94
TCDD. See 23,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
cardiac output and, 94-95
TDM. See Therapeutic drug monitoring
CVP and, 92
Technical contamination, 160
fluid therapy for, 95-100
Tefuthrin, 770
Telephone triage, 42b, 63-65
heart rate and, 91-92
Oxygen delivery (DOz) and, 95
Temperature. See also Hyperthermia;
pulse quality and, 92
Hypothermia
colon care as, 121
indoor environmental quality and health and,
with endotracheal intubation, 119-120
143
for gastrointestinal system, 106-108
pediatrics and, 217
vomiting and,106-108
smoke inhalation and, 414
for hyperthermia,105-106
supportive care for, 105-106
for hypothermia, 105-106
Tepoxalin, 689, 703-704
infection control, 115-117
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD),
for liver, 109
197
for neurological system, 100-105
Tetracycline, 78, 169t, 286b, 289
deteriorating neurological status and,
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), 321-322
102-105
Teucrium chamaedrys, 342
nutrition and, 121-124
t-FAST. See Focused assessment by sonography
ocular care as, 121
in trauma of the thorax
oral care as, 120-121
THC. See Tetrahydrocannabinol
for recumbent patient, 117-118
Thenium closylate, 169t
Index907
Theobromine, 67, 647-652
Toluene, 757t
clinical signs of, 649
TOMES System5, 36-37
LD for, 648
Topical ointments and creams, 35
mechanism of toxicity of, 649
Topical spot-on products. See Ectoparasiticides;
pediatrics and, 221
 Insect growth regulators
sources of, 648, 648t
Toxic, 2
toxicokinetics of, 649
Toxic dose.See Lethal dosage
Theophylline, 56t-57t, 647-652
Toxicants, 2
carbamates and, 721
examples of, 35-37
clinical signs of, 649-650
factors with, 6t
complete blood count for, 55
indoor, 291-308
OPs and, 721
in pediatrics, 220b
sources of, 648
to reptiles, 230-246
toxicokinetics of, 649
response to, 4
Therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM), 283
Toxicity, 2. See also specific types
Thermal decomposition, 409, 411t
biological variation and, 5-6
Thiacetarsamide, 286b, 460-461
body weight and, 49
Thiazide diuretics
hazard and, 4-5
furosemide and, 284t
influencing factors for, 5
for hypercalcemia,114
risk and, 4-5
hypokalemia from, 113-114
of rodenticides, 440t
hypomagnesemia from, 115
Toxicodynamics, 17-19
for lilies, 619-620
Toxicokinetics. See also specifc toxins
 reproduction and, 169t
disposition and, 13-17
Thiram, 406-407
of xenobiotics, 17-19
Thrombocytopenia
Toxicologic decontamination
from aflatoxins, 678-679
Toxicologic history, 39-44
antivenom and, 792
initial telephone contact for, 42b
from citrus oil, 514
key items in, 40b
from drugs, 279-280
sample form for, 43b
from pit viper snake bites, 788, 792
Toxicology,1
thiacetarsamide and, 460-461
calculations for, 7, 7t
from zinc phosphide, 856
concentration in, 7-12
Thromboelastography, 110-111
databases for, 25
Thromboemboli, 103b
diagnosis in, 45-52
Thrombosis, from sodium, 808-810
case presentation for, 45-46
Thromboxane, 692
 clinical presentation for, 50
Thyroxine, 78
exposure assessment for, 47-50
Tick paralysis, 102b, 468
history with, 46-47
Tick products. See also specifc products
minimum database for, 53-62
pyrethrins in,769
physical examination for, 54
Tight building syndrome, 139-140
poison control centers and, 46
Toad secretions, 36, 91, 244, 505, 833-840
postmortem examination for, 51
clinical signs of, 835
specimen collection for, 47t, 51-52
confirmatory tests for, 836
toxidrome approach to, 60
differential diagnosis for, 838
vital signs for, 53-54
exposure to, 834, 834f
dosage in, 7-12
herbal medicines and, 348-349
geriatrics and, 223-228
LD for, 834
history for, 39
lesions with, 838
acetaminophen in, 46
mechanism of toxicity of, 834-835
antifreeze in, 46
minimum database for, 836
antihistamines in, 46
prognosis for, 838, 838f
aspirin in, 46
secretions from, 337
decongestants in, 46
sources of, 833-834
diphenhydramine in, 46
toxicokinetics of, 834
dose-response assessment for, 48
treatment for, 836-838
drugs in, 46 
Tobacco.See also Nicotine
exposure assessment calculations for, 48-49
arsenic from, 458
foods in, 46
birds and, 262
garbage in, 46
ETS, 142-143, 153
hazards in, 46
908 Index
Toxicology (Continued)
Tricyclic antidepressants (Continued)
ibuprofen in, 46
mechanism of toxicity for, 329
lilies in, 46
minimum database for, 330
plants in, 46
prescription drugs, 328t
pseudoephedrine in, 46
as recreational drugs, 328-330
information resources for, 21-26
sources of, 328
Internet resources for, 25-26
toxicokinetics of, 329
journals for, 22b-23b
treatment and prognosis for, 330
mammals and, 251-258
urinalysis for, 58-59
pediatrics and, 215-222
Trimethoprim, 113, 280b, 286b
primary literature on, 21
Triterpenes, 503
reproduction and, 167-202, 168t
Tryptase, 580
predisposing factors and stressing for, 169t
Tumor lysis syndrome, l13-115
secondary literature for, 21-24
Turpentine, 297,757t
tertiary literature for, 24-26
Type A adverse reactions. See Pharmacologic
textbooks for, 24b
toxicity
Toxicosis, 2, 9. See also specifc toxins
Type B adverse reactions. See Idiosyncratic
age and, 28-29
adverse drug reactions
from xenobiotics, 18
Tyramine, 343-344, 672
Toxidrome approach, to toxicology diagnosis, 60
Toxins, 56t-57t. See also Xenobiotics; specifc
toxins
blood pressure and, 54
Ulcers, from NSAIDs, 277b
body temperature, 61b
Ultimate toxicant, 18
hypertension and, 61b
Ultrasound, 60
pulse and, 61b
for EG, 557
respiratory rate and, 56t-57t
for NSAIDs, 695
urine color changes and, 58b
for rodenticides, 441-442
Tracheostomy, 418, 467
Uncaria tomentosa, 338
Tramadol, 579
Unconscious, supportive care for, 11911
Transfusions
Universal antidote, 79
for copper, 520
UpToDate,24
for indoxacarb, 747
Uridine diphosphogalactose, 208
for NSAIDs, 696
Urine
for zinc, 850
bromethalin and, 472
Tranxene. See Clorazepate
color changes of, 58b
Trazodone hydrochloride, 329
pH of, 109
Tremorgens, 680-682
Urinalysis, 54, 58-59
carbamates, 722
for arsenic, 461
clinical signs of, 681
DEET and, 542
69 1oj wedaze
for EG, 555
differential diagnosis for, 682
for zinc phosphide, 856
LD for, 681
Urinary catheters, 117
lesions from, 681
Urine scald preventers, 304
mechanism of toxicity of, 681
minimum database for, 681
OPs and, 722
V
prognosis for, 681
Vaccines, 40-41
sources of, 680-681
for pit viper snake bites, 795
toxicokinetics of, 681
Vaccinium myrtillus,338
treatment for, 681
Valinomycin, 738
Tres Pasitos,716
Valium.See Diazepam
Triazoles, 232-233
Valproic acid, 169t
Tricarboxylic acid (TCA), 812-813
Vascular catheters,116-117
Trichotoma magnivelare, 673-674
Vascular volume, 66-67
Tricyclic antidepressants, 35, 310
Vasodilation
clinical signs of, 330
 from hypermagnesemia, 115
confirmatory tests for, 330
from paraquat, 737
differential diagnosis for,330
Vasopressin, 95t, 205
hyperexcitability from, 103b
Vd. See Volume of distribution
LD for, 329
VDR. See Vitamin D receptor
Index 909
Vegetable oil, 760
Vitis vinifera,338
Venous partial pressure of carbon dioxide
VJIndex.com,23
(Pvcoz), 86-87
VOCs. See Volatile organic chemicals
Venous partial pressure of oxygen (Pvoz), 88
Volatile oils, 336
Ventilation system, 143, 155-156
Volatile organic chemicals (VOCs), 140, 144
Ventilometry, 86
from building materials, 147, 148t-151t
Ventricular dysrhythmias, 91-92
from furnishings, 148t-151t
Ventricular fbrillation, 835, 859
from offce product chemical emissions,
Verapamil, 91t, 605b
148t-151t
Verbinol, 509
sources of, 142t
Veterinary poison control centers, 27-30
Volcanoes, arsenic from, 458
VetPDA,24
Volume of distribution (Vd), 13, 15
Vigabatrin, 452-453
Vomiting, 34-35. See aiso Antiemetics; Emetics
Vinclozolin, 169t
AC and, 80
Vincristine, 169t
from amaryllis, 500
Viscotoxins, 343-344
amitraz and, 432
Viscum atbum,343-344
from anaphylaxis, 578
Vital signs, 53-54, 415-416
apomorphine for, 75-76, 251
Vitamin A
for arsenic, 461
birds and, 261, 264
arterial blood gas analysis for, 55
chronic toxicosis from, 48
 pue uogends
hypercalcemia and, 114
from black widow spiders, 819
reptiles and, 230
botulism and, 467
Vitamin B, 738
for bromethalin, 475-476
for copper, 520
for carbamates, 720-721
cyanide and, 528
from Christmas trees, 502-503
for DEG, 545
from citrus oil, 514
for zinc phosphide, 860-861
from Compound 1080, 813
Vitamin C, 105. See also Ascorbic acid
from copper, 519
for amanitins, 666-667
from cyanide, 525
birds and, 264
for decontamination, 251
for PG, 765
from DEET, 541
Vitamin D, 8, 35, 70-71. See aiso Cholecalciferol
from DEG, 544
birds and, 261
from detergents, 293-294
differential diagnosis for, 492t
dishwashing detergent for, 75
from drugs, 490
ethanol and, 548
forms of, 489
examination and, 54, 64-65
hypercalcemia from, 58, 114, 490-491
gastric lavage for, 76-77, 252
hyperexcitability from, 103b
for gastrointestinal decontamination, 73-74
lead and, 610
for grapes, 571
from plants, 490-491
from herbicides, 220
renal failure from, 108-109
home products for, 75-76
reptiles and, 230
from hydrazines, 668
from rodenticides, 490
hydrogen peroxide for, 64, 74-75, 251
rodents and, 254
from imidacloprid, 745
Vitamin D receptor (VDR), 493
for indoxacarb, 747
Vitamin E, 105
from indoxacarb, 746-747
for amanitins, 666-667
from IO, 727
for ionophores, 592-593
for ionophores, 592-593
for paraquat, 738
ipecac syrup for, 64, 74-75
for xylitol, 845
for iron, 598
Vitamin K, 66-67
from ivermectin, 604
for amanitins, 666
from kalanchoe, 505
coagulation panel for, 59
from KBr, 449-450
for coagulopathies, 111
for lead, 612
from lead, 611
pediatrics and, 219
for lilies, 619
for rodenticides, 253
from lilies, 618-619
rodenticides and, 440, 442
for macadamia nuts, 626-627
for zinc phosphide, 860-861
from macadamia nuts, 626
Vitex agnuscastus, 200
from mercury, 631-632
910 Index
Vomiting (Continued)
Whole-bowel irrigation (WBI), 77-78,736
for metaldehyde, 638
Wine, 458
from metaldehyde, 637
Wintergreen, oil of, 348
from metronidazole, 655
Wolmanized lumber, 406
from mistletoe, 507
Wood glue, 301
from mushrooms, 220
Wood preservatives, 36
NaCI for, 64, 74-75
World Health Organization, 25-26
from nicotine, 684
World Health Organization (WHO), 140
from NSAIDs, 694, 696
Wormwood. See Absinthe
for OPs, 720-721
of outdoor plants, 33
X
from pesticides, 402
from petroleum hydrocarbons, 759
Xanthine dehydrogenase, 485
from phenols, 296
Xanthine oxidase, 485
from pyrethrins/pyrethroids, 772
Xenobiotics, 13. See also specijfc xenobiotics
from pyriproxyfen, 751-752
 absorption of, 13-14
for ricin, 779-780
mechanisms for, 14
from sodium, 808-809
bioavailability and, 14
biotransformation of, 16
from soluble oxalates, 729
 supportive care for, 106-108
phase I and II of, 16-17
from thiacetarsamide, 460-461
defnition of, 204b
veterinary products for, 75-76
disposition of, 13
xylazine for, 76
geriatrics and, 224b
for xylitol, 845
distribution of, 15
from xylitol, 844
tissue barriers to, 16
from zinc, 849
dose of, 47
from zinc phosphide, 856
elimination of, toxicokinetics of, 17
Vomitoxin (Deoxynivalenol, DON), 679-680
excretion of, 17
clinical signs of, 680
exposure to, 14, 47
confirmatory tests for, 680
filtration of, 14-15
half-life of, 17
differential diagnosis for, 680
LD for, 679-680
hepatic biotransformation of, 14
lesions from, 680
indoor environmental quality and health and,
mechanism of toxicity of, 680
144-145
minimum database for, 680
in kidneys, 15-16
prognosis for, 680
lactation and, 208-210, 209b
reproduction and, 192-193
in liver, 15-16
toxicokinetics of, 680
mechanisms of action of, 18-19
treatment for, 680
metabolism of, 16
von Willebrand’s disease, 445
passive transport of, 14-15
pediatrics and, 215-222, 216b
W
pH of, 14-15
placenta and, 205-206
WA PC. See Washington Poison Center
plasma proteins and, 15-16
Warfarin, 169t, 436, 440t
pregnancy and, 203-208, 206f
Warm control zones, 160
reproduction and, 169t, 183-185
Washington Poison Center (WAPC), 31, 32t, 34t
adverse effects of, 191-200
Wasps, 574-581
 specialized transport of, 15
Wastewater management, 162
storage depots for, 15-16
Water
targets for, 18
arsenic in, 457
toxicodynamics of, 17-19
copper from, 518
toxicokinetics of, 17-19
for toad secretions, 836
toxicosis from, 18
Water moccasins. See Pit viper snake bites
ultimate toxicant and, 18
WBI. See Whole-bowel irrigation
Vd of, 15
Weak bases,14, 206, 216b
X-ray.See Radiographs
lactation and, 209b
Xylazine, 76, 169t, 475-476
Web-caps, 673
Xylene, 757t
White matter, 486
Xylitol, 305-306, 841-846
White willow, 345
clinical signs of, 844
WHO. See World Health Organization
confirmatory tests for, 844
Index 911
Xylitol (Continued)
Zinc (Continued)
differential diagnosis for, 845-846
mechanism of toxicity of, 849
drugs with, 842-843
minimum database for, 849
foods with, 841-842
prognosis for, 850
LD for, 843
radiographs for, 59-60
lesions from, 845
reptiles and, 235-236
marijuana and, 323
sources of, 848
minimum database for, 844
testing for, 50
prognosis for, 845
toxicokinetics of, 848
sources of, 841-843
treatment for, 850
toxicokinetics of, 843
Zinc acetate, 520
treatment for, 845
Zinc metalloproteinase, 786
D-xylulose, 843
Zinc phosphide, 853-864
birds and, 270
Y
clinical signs of, 855-856
confirmatory tests for, 857
Yellow jackets, 574-581
differential diagnosis for, 861-862
Yews, reptiles and, 240
hyperexcitability from, 103b
Yohimbe, 345-346
LD for, 854
Yohimbine, 107, 432, 638
lesions from, 861
mechanism of toxicity of, 855
minimum database for, 856-857
Zearalenone, 192-193
prognosis for, 861
Zero-order kinetics, 13
rodents and, 254
Zinc,847-852
sources of, 853
for amanitins, 666-667
toxicokinetics of, 854-855
anemia from, 109-110
treatment for, 857-861
birds and, 268
goals of, 857
clinical signs of, 849
 prevention of phosphine release, 857-859
complete blood count for, 55
symptomatic/supportive management for,
confirmatory tests for, 849-850
859-861
differential diagnosis for, 851
Zinc sulfide, 301
LD for, 848
Zonisamide (Zonegran), 454
lead and, 610-611
Zootoxins, 2
lesions from, 851
Color Plate 7-l Bait (tuna) laced
Color Plate 7-2 Bait laced with strychnine.
with aldicarb. (Photo courtesy of
(Photo courtesy of Birgit Puschner)
Birgit Puschner)
Color Plate 7-3 Meat laced with paraquat. (Photo courtesy of Birgit Puschner)
MRICHENNEL
VARIREVNEE
Color Plate 15-l A German shepherd waits
Color Plate 15-2 A military working puppy
in a kennel at a pet holding area during 
in an extra-large portable kennel. Large
 evacuation processing after the June 10, 1991 openings allow visual monitoring of the
eruption of Mount Pinatubo.(Photo cour-
animal and drainage of water during decon-
tesy of John Fichensehr)
tamination. (Photo courtesy of Kelley Evans)
一
Color Plate 15-3 A, Handler Chris Monroe and animal assisted crisis response dog Pongo
undergo mock decontamination by the U.S. Marine Corps' Chemical Biological Incident
Response Force (CBIRF) during National Level Exercise 2008. B, Service animals may
need to be decontaminated together with their handler or disabled owner. ( Photos cour-
tesy of Kelley Evans)
Color Plate 20-l Chrysanthemum (Chrysanfhemum cinerariifolium). (Photo courtesy of
Forest and KimStarr)
Color Plate 20-2 Heath family (Ericaceae). (Photos courtesy of Forest and Kim Starr)
Color Plate 20-3 Lilies. A, Easter lily. B, Tiger lily. C, Day lily. D, Lily of the valley. (Part
(D) courtesy of Richard Old)
Color Plate 20-4 Cycad (sago) palm.
Color Plate 20-5 Mistletoe (Phoradendron leucarpum). A, Characteristic stem and leaf
pattern. B, Berries. (Photos courtesy of Richard Old)
Color Plate 20-6 English ivy (Hedera helix). A, Leaves. B, Berries.
Color Plate 22-l Christmas or Jerusalem cherry (Solanum sp.).
Color Plate 25-l Marijuana (Cannabis
Color Plate 26-l Coneflower (Echinacea sp.)
sativa). (Photo courtesy of Richard Old)
Color Plate 26-2 Oleander (Nerium oleander).A,Plant.B,Flower.C,Leaves.
Color Plate 26-3 Jimsonweed, thorn apple (Datura stramonium). A, Flower. B, Seed pods.
C,Seeds.
Color Plate 27-l Digitalis sp. (foxglove).
ColorPlate27-2Amsinckia sp.
(Photo courtesy of Roxolana Elliot)
Color Plate 27-3 Asclepias sp. A, Narrow leaf. B, Broad leaf.
Color Plate 27-4 Image of a dog among Brunfelsia (Yesterday-today-and-tomorrow). The
dog developed classic signs of Brunfelsia poisoning.
Color Plate 27-5 Poison hemlock (Conium maculatum). (Photo courtesy of KH Plumlee)
Color Plate 27-6 Bleeding-heart (Dicentra formosa). (Photo courtesy of Richard Old)
Color Plate 27-7 Dieffenbachia, dumb cane (Dieffenbachia sp.).
Color Plate 27-8 Golden pothos
Color Plate 27-9 English ivy (Hedera
(Epipremmum aureum).(Photo courtesy
helix). (Photo courtesy of Richard Old)
Forest & Kim Starr)
B
Color Plate 27-l0 Philodendron (Philodendron sp.). (Photos courtesy of Forest and Kim
Starr)
Color Plate 27-ll Peace lily (Spathiphyllum
Color Plate 27-12 Elderberry (Sambucus
sp.). (Photo courtesy of Forest and Kim Starr)
nigra L.).
A
Color Plate 27-13 A, Immature and mature fruit of black nightshade (Solanurm nigrum).
B, S. armericanum (American nightshade). (Photo courtesy of Richard Old)
Color Plate 27-14 Houndstongue
Color Plate 30-l Facial edema associated with
(Cynoglossum offcinale) dry senes-
 acetaminophen poisoning. (Photo courtesy of
cent plant. (Photo courtesy of Bryan
Nicole Lindstrom)
Stegelmeier)
Color Plate 30-2 Cyanotic oral mucous
Color Plate 36-l An example of a bro-
membranes in a cat with acetaminophen
 methalin-containing rodenticide. (Photo
intoxication.
courtesy of Patricia Talcott)
Color Plate 39-l Amaryllis
Color Plate 39-2 Christmas cactus
(Hippeastrum cultivar "apple blos-
(Schlurmbergera truncata). (Photo courtesy of
som"). (Photo courtesy of TD Brant)
TD Brant)
Color Plate 39-3 Scotch pine
Color Plate 39-4 English holly (llex aquafolium)
(Pinus sylvestris), one of many
with berries.
evergreen varieties that serve as
Christmas trees and are used in
Christmas decorations. (Photo
courtesy of TD Brant)
Color Plate 39-5 Kalanchoe blossfeldiana. (Photo courtesy of TD Brant)
Color Plate 39-6 Poinsettia (Euphorbia
Color Plate 39-7 Rosemary (Rosmarinus
pulcherrima). (Photo courtesy of TD Brant)
officinalis). (Photo courtesy of TD Brant)
B
Color Plate 43-1 A, Blue-green algae (cyanobacteria) bloom (Photo courtesy of Mike
Corcoran). B, Blue-green algae (Oscillatoria sp., photo courtesy of Sandra Morgan).
Color Plate 62-l Mushroom spore surface
Color Plate 62-2 Mushroom cap pitted
folded not pitted (Gyrormitra sp.).
not folded (Mochella esculenta, common
morel).
Color Plate 62-3 Spore print.
Color Plate 62-4 Amanita pantherine.
Color Plate 62-5 Amanita ocreata.
Color Plate 62-6 Amanita
rmuscaria.
Color Plate 67-l Carbofuran granules in stomach contents of a dog.(Photo courtesy of
Patricia Talcott)
Color Plate 68-l Soluble oxalate containing shamrock
plant (Oxalis corniculata). (Photo courtesy of Richard Old)
Color Plate 68-2 White clover (Trifolium repens).
Color Plate 74-l Castor bean plant (Ricinus comrmunis). A, Plant. B, Leaves. C, Seed pods.
D, Seeds.
Color Plate 75-1 Pit viper skull
Color Plate 75-2 The thermal pit of a rattlesnake.
retractable front fangs. Note
Nostril (red arrow), thermal pit (white arrow).
 secondary and tertiary fangs.
(Photo courtesy of the Arizona
Desert Museum, Tucson, Arizona)
B
Color Plate 75-3 Rattlesnake envenomated dog. A, Tissue necrosis 72 hours post-rattlesnake
serial circumferential measurements to monitor progression of swelling on rear leg and head.
(Photo courtesy of Scott Johnson)
Color Plate 76-l Coral snake coloration with black, yellow, and red fully encircling bands.
(Photo courtesy of the Arizona Poison Drug Information Center, Tucson, Arizona)
Color Plate 79-l Mature female black
Color Plate 79-2 Immature black widow
widow spider with egg sac. (Photo
spider, note the coloration. (Photo
courtesy of the Arizona Poison and Drug
 courtesy of the Arizona Poison and Drug
Information Center, Tucson, Arizona)
Information Center, Tucson, Arizona)
Color Plate 80-l Brown recluse (Loxosceles recluse).
Color Plate 80-2 Hobo spider
Note the violin marking on the cephalothorax and
(Tegenaria agrestis). (Photo
the three sets of eyes. (Photo courtesy of Bill Banner)
courtesy of Arizona Poison
 and Drug Information Center,
Tucson,Arizona)
Color Plate 8l-l Strychnine laced grain in bait.
Color Plate 82-l The cane or
(Photo courtesy of Patricia Talcott)
marine toad (Bufo marinus).
ColorPlate 82-2ColoradoRiver toad
Color Plate 85-l Zinc phosphide-laced bait.
(also known as the Sonoran desert toad)
(Photo courtesy of Paul Martin)
(Bufo alvarius).
Conversion Tables
To Convert
Multiply by
To Obtain
Gallons (gal)
3.785
Liters
Gal
3785
Millimeters
Gal
128
Ounces (liquid)
Grams (g)
0.002205
Pounds
Gram
0.035274
Ounces
 Grams per liter
1000
PPM
Grams per liter
10
Percent
Kilograms (kg)
2.2046
Pounds
Liters (L)
0.2642
Gallons
Liters
33.814
Ounces
Liters
2.113
Pints
Liters
1.057
Quarts
Ounces
0.02957
Liters
Ounces
29.573
Milliliters
Ounces
28.35
Grams
PPM
0.001
Grams/L
PPM
1
mg/kg or mg/ L
Percent (%)
10
g/kg
 Pint
0.473
Liter
Pounds
0.4536
Kilograms
Pounds
453.6
Grams
Liquid Equivalents
1 ft (cubed) of water = 7.5 gal = 62.4lb = 28.3 L
1liter (L) = 2.113 pt = 1000 milliter (mL) = 1.0567 qt = 33.8 fl oz = 0.26 gal
1 US gallon = 4 qt = 8 pt = 16 cups = 128 fl oz = 8.337 1b of water = 3.785 L = 37.85 mL =
256 tablespoons (tbsp)
1 quart = 0.9463 L = 2 pt = 32 fl oz = 4 cups = 64 tbsp = 0.25 gal = 946.4 mL
1 pint = 16 fl oz = 2 cups = 473.2 mL = 32 level tbsp = 0.125 gal = 0.5 qt
1 cup = 8 fl oz =  pt = 16 tbsp = 236.6 mL
1 tbsp = 14.8 mL = 3 teaspoons (tsp) = 0.5 fl oz
1 mL = 0.34 fl oz = 0.002 pt
1 tsp = 4.93 L = 0.1667 fl oz = 80 drops
1 US fl oz = 29.57 mL = 2 tbsp = 6 tsp = 0.03125 qt
Temperature Equivalents
degrees Centigrade = (°F - 32) × 5/9
degrees Fahrenheit = (°C× 9/5) + 32
Mixture Ratios
1 mg/g = 1000 ppm
1 fl oz/gal = 75 ppm
1 fl oz/100 gal = 75 ppm
1 pt/100 gal = 1tsp/1 gal
1 qt/100 gal = 2 tbsp/1 gal
Conversion Tables-cont'd
Weight Equivalents
1 ton (US) = 2000 1b = 0.907 metric tons = 907.2 kg
qI 5077 = 8 0001 = 8 901 = u01 211a [
11b = 16 oz = 453.6 g = 0.4536 kg
1 oz (weight) = 28.35 g = 0.0625 1b
1 g = 1000 mg = 0.0353 oz = 0.001kg = 0.002205 1b
milligram (mg) = 0.001 g
1kilogram (kg) = 1000 g = 35.3 oz = 2.205 1b
microgram (mcg) = 10-6 g = 0.001 mg
nanogram (ng) = 10-9 g = 0.001 mcg
picogram =10-12 g
[e 001 u] 8 62e'0 = 8/8u 1 = 1/8u 1 = 8x/8u1 I = [e3 001 u1 z0 1 E100 = %1000'0 = udd 1
water = 8.34 × 10-6
lb/gal = 1 mL/L
1 ppb = 1 mcg/kg or 1 mcg/L or 1 ng/g
1 ppt = 1 picogram/g
1% = 10,000 ppm = 10 g/L = 1 g/100 mL = 10 g/kg = 1.33 oz by weight/gal water = 8.34 
lb/100 gal water
1 L ≈ 0.87987699
quart
Imperial 1 quart
=1.1365225 L
1 L ≈ 1.056688
fluid quart
US 1 fluid quart
= 0.946352946 L
1 L ≈ 1.75975326
pint
 Imperial 1 pint 
= 0.56826125 L
1 L ≈ 0.2641720523
liquid gallon
US 1liquid gallon
=3.785411784 L
1 L ≈ 0.21997
gallon
Imperial 1 gallon
= 4.54609 L
1 L ≈ 0.0353146667
cubic foot
1 cubic foot
=28.316846592 L
1 L ≈ 61.0237441
cubic inches
1 cubic inch
= 0.01638706 L
1 L ≈ 33.8140
customary fluid
 1 customary fluid
= 29.5735295625 mL
ounce US
ounce
1 L ≈ 35.1950
fluid ounces
 Imperial 1 fluid ounce
= 28.4130625 mL
Emergency Hotlines
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center (24-hour service; $65 fee
888-426-4435
may apply)
Pet Poison Helpline (24-hour service; $39 fee may apply)
800-213-6680
Human Poison Control Center (24-hour service; fees may apply to
800-222-1222
veterinarians)
National Pesticide Information Center (free—provide technical
800-858-7378
advice about pesticide products and poisonings)
Chemical Transportation Emergency Center (free—provide
800-424-9300
technical assistance for large pesticide spills)
Adverse Event Reporting/FDA Center for Veterinary Medicine
888-332-8387
(provide assistance on drugs and animal feeds)
Common Conversion Factors
Units Given
Units Wanted
Formula for Conversion
mmol/L
mg/dL
mg/dL = [(mmol/L) × MW]/10
mg/dL
mmol/L
mmol/ L = (mg/dL × 10)/MW
mmol/L
mEq/L
mEq/L = mmol/L x valence
mEq/L
mmol/L
mmol/ L = (mEq/ L)/valence
%
mg/mL
mg/mL = % × 10
cm
inches
inches = cm x 0.3937
inches
cm
cm = inches x 2.54
F
F = [(°C× 9}/5] + 32
F
"℃
℃= [(°F-32)×5]/9
MW, molecular weight (the sum of the atomic weights of a molecule or compound).
(From Silverstein DC, Hopper K: Small Anial Critial Care Medicine, Elsevier, St Louis, 2009.)
Weight-Unit Conversion Factors
1lb = 0.4536 kg
1 kg = 2.2046 1b
1kg =1000 g
1kg = 1,000,000 mg
1g = 1000 mg
1g =1,000,000 mcg
1 mg = 1000 mcg
1 oz = 28.35 g
1g/100 mL = 100%
1 mLwater=1g
(From Silverstein DC, Hopper K: Small Anial Critial Care Medicine, Elsevier, St Louis, 2009.)
Metric Conversions and Abbreviations
Prefix
Number
Weights
Volumes
Lengths
pico
1/1,000,000,000,000 Picogram
Picoliter (pL)
Picometer (pm)
nano
1/1,000,000,000
Nanogram
 Nanoliter (nL)
Nanometer (nm)
micro
1/1,000,000
Microgram (mcg)
Microliter (mcL)
Micron (mcm)
milli
1/1000
Milligram (mg)
Milliliter (mL)
Millimeter (mm)
centi
1/100
Centigram (cg)
Centiliter (cL)
Centimeter (cm)
deci
1/10
Decigram (dg)
Deciliter (dL)
Decimeter (dm)
no prefix 1
Gram (g)
Liter (L)
Meter (m)
kilo
×1000
Kilogram (kg)
Kiloliter (kL)
Kilometer (km)
(From Silverstein DC, Hopper K: Small Anial Critial Care Medicine, Elsevier, St Louis, 2009.)
ConversionFactors
1 milligram
= 1/65 grain
(1/60)
1 gram
= 15.43 grains
(15)
1kilogram
= 2.20 1b
(avoirdupois)
= 2.65 1b
(Troy)
1 milliliter
= 16.23 minims
(15)
1liter
= 1.06 qt
(1+)
= 33.80 fl oz
(34)
1 grain
=0.065 g
(60 mg)
1 dram
= 3.9 g
(4)
1 ounce
= 31.1 g
(30+)
1 minim
= 0.062 mL
(0.06)
1 fluid dram
= 3.7 mL
(4)
1 fluid ounce
= 29.57 mL
(30)
1 pint
= 473.2 mL
(500-)
1 quart
= 946.4 mL
(1000-)
Figures in parentheses are commonly employed approximate values.
(From Bonagura JD: Krk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xllr: Smal Animal Practice, Saunders, St Louis, 2000.)